#  # 

#  O  LI  VER- WENDELL-  HOLME  S  # 


#  * 

#  LIB  R  ARY  4 


ijjjPcr  amplicm 


A  NEW  VARIORUM  EDITION 


OF 


Shak espeare 


EDITED  BY 

HORACE  HOWARD  FURNESS,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.,  L.H.D. 

HONORARY  MEMBER  OF  THE  ‘  DEUTSCHE  SHAKBSPEARE-GESELLSCHAFT  ’  OF  WEIMAR 


The  Merchant  of  Venice 


[. EIGHTH  EDITION ] 


PHILADELPHIA 

J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 


LONDON  :  5  HENRIETTA  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN 


Copyright,  1888,  by  H.  H.  FURNESS. 


S'  N.  v 


Wbstcott  &  Thomson, 
Electrotypers  and  Stereotypers,  Phila. 


Press  of  J.  B.  Lippincott  Company, 

Phila. 


IN  MEM  ORIAM 


35b 


PREFACE 


As  the  volumes  of  this  Edition  are  severally  independent,  it 
has  been  considered  necessary  hitherto  to  repeat  in  the  Preface 
an  explanation  of  its  plan  and  scope.  In  the  present  volume, 
however,  all  needful  information  in  this  regard  has  been  rele¬ 
gated  into  the  Appendix,  where  it  will  be  found  on  pp.  4 66 
et  seq. 

Experience  has  deepened  the  conviction  that  for  an  Edition 
like  the  present  the  befitting  Text  is  that  of  the  First  Folio. 
Accordingly,  that  Text  has  been  again  adopted  for  The  Mer¬ 
chant  of  Venice. 

To  read  and  to  enjoy  Shakespeare,  any  text,  from  the  Shil¬ 
ling  Edition  upwards,  will  suffice.  In  the  familiar  passages  of 
beauty  or  of  wisdom  we  find  no  difficulties ;  the  text  is  every¬ 
where  adequately  the  same. 

But  to  study  Shakespeare  as  we  would  a  Greek  Poet,  dwell¬ 
ing  on  every  line  and  syllable,  weighing  every  phrase  and  every 
word,  then  we  need  a  text  as  near  as  may  be,  in  point  of  time 
at  least,  to  the  author’s  hand.  With  certain  qualifications,  such 
a  text  is  that  of  the  First  Folio. 

Topics,  hitherto  discussed  in  these  Prefaces,  are  now  to  be 
found  set  forth  in  the  Appendix. 

It  is  again  my  high  privilege  to  express  my  thanks  to  my 
Father,  the  Rev.  Dr  Furness,  for  the  translation  of  many  of 
the  selections  from  the  German. 


May,  1888. 


H.  H.  F. 


The  Merchant  of  Venice 


The  ATtors  Names . 


The  Duke  of  Venice. 

Morochus ,  a  Prince,  and  a  Sutor  to  Portia. 

The  Prince  of  Aragon ,  Sutor  alfo  to  Portia. 
Baffanio ,  an  Italian  Lord,  Sutor  likewife  to  Portia. 
Anthonio ,  a  Merchant  of  Venice. 

Salarino , 

Salanio,  \  Gentlemen  of  Venice,  and  Compa- 
Gratiano ,  nions  with  Baffanio. 

Lorenfo,  „ 

Shylock ,  the  rich  lew,  and  Father  of  IeJJica. 


10 


r.  First  given  in  Q3. 

3.  Morochius,  a  Moorish  Prince.  Rowe. 


7.  Salarino]  Solarino.  Rowe. 
10.  Lorenzo.  Rowe. 


11.  Shylock]  Steevens:  Our  author,  as  Dr  Farmer  informs  me,  took  this  name 
from  an  old  pamphlet,  entitled  ‘Caleb  Shillocke  his  prophecie,  or  the  Jewes  Prediction.’ 
London,  printed  for  T.  P.  (Thomas  Pavier),  no  date.  Malone  :  If  Shakespeare  took 
the  name  of  Shylock  from  the  pamphlet  mentioned  by  Dr  Farmer,  it  certainly  was  not 
printed  by  Thomas  Pavier,  to  whom  Steevens  has  ascribed  it,  for  that  prototype  of  Curl 
had  not  commenced  a  bookseller  before  1598.  The  pamphlet  in  question,  which  was 
not  in  Dr  Farmer’s  collection  (nor  do  I  know  where  it  is  to  be  found),  may  have  been 
printed  by  Thomas  Purfoot.  Boswell  :  Mr  Bindley  had  a  copy  of  this  pamphlet,  the 
date  of  which  was  1607.  ‘Therefore,’  says  Knight,  who  quotes  this  note  of  Boswell, 
‘Farmer’s  theory  is  worthless.’  Hunter  ( New  Illust.  i,  307) :  We  collect  that  Shy¬ 
lock  was  a  Levantine  Jew  from  the  name:  Scialac,  which  is  doubtless  the  same  name 
in  a  different  orthography,  being  the  name  of  a  Maronite  of  Mount  Libanus,  who  was 
living  in  1614.  See  Account  of  the  MSS.  in  the  Library  of  France,  1782,  p.  23.  For 
this  very  valuable  reference  I  am  indebted  to  some  pencil  notes  on  this  play  by  the  late 
Mr  F.  G.  Waldron.  Halliwell  (N.  &  Qu.  1st  Ser.  vol.  i,  p.  221) :  Upton,  in  1748, 
remarked  that  Scialac  was  the  generic  name,  and  Shylock  merely  a  corruption.  It  by 
no  means  follows  that  1607  is  the  date  of  the  first  edition  of  Caleb  Shillocke,  merely 
because  Boswell  saw  a  copy  bearing  that  date.  M.  A.  Lower  (N.  6°  Qu.  1st  Ser. 
vol.  i,  p.  184) :  Was  not  Shylock,  a  proper  name  among  the  Jews,  derived  from  the 
designation  employed  by  the  patriarch  Jacob  in  predicting  the  advent  of  the  Messiah, — 
‘  until  Shiloh  come  ’ — (Gen.  xlix,  10)  ?  The  difference  between  Shiloach  and  Shylock 
is  very  trivial  indeed.  But,  after  all,  Shylock  may  have  been  a  family  name  familiar 
to  the  great  dramatist.  In  all  my  researches  on  the  subject  of  English  Surnames, 
however,  I  have  but  once  met  with  it  as  a  generic  distinction.  In  the  Battel  Abbey 
Deeds  occurs  a  power  of  attorney  to  Richard  Shylok  of  Hoo,  co.  Sussex.  The  date 

ix 


X 


THE  ACTORS  NAMES 


Tub  all,  a  lew,  Shilocks  Friend.  12 

Portia ,  the  rich  Italian  Lady. 

13.  the. ..Lady']  an  Heiress  of  great  Quality  and  Fortune.  Rowe,  an  heiress.  Johns, 
a  rich  Heiress.  Cap. 

of  this  document  is  4  July,  1435.  Staunton  :  This  may  have  been  an  Italian  name, 
Scialocca ,  the  change  of  which  into  Shylock  was  natural.  At  all  events,  it  was  a  name 
current  among  the  Jews,  for,  at  the  end  of  an  extremely  rare  tract,  called  ‘  A  Jewes 
Prophesy,  or  Newes  from  Rome  of  two  mightie  Armies,  as  well  footemen  as  horsmen,’ 
1607,  is  a  piece  entitled:  ‘Caleb  Shilock  his  prophesie  for  the  yeere  1607,’  which 
begins  as  follows: — ‘  Be  it  knowne  unto  all  men,  that  in  the  yeare  1607,  when  as  the 
moone  is  in  the  watrye  signe,  the  world  is  like  to  bee  in  great  danger ;  for  a  learned 
Jew  named  Caleb  Shilock  doth  write  that,  in  the  foresaid  yeere,  the  sun  shall  be  cov¬ 
ered  with  the  dragon  in  the  morning,  from  five  of  the  clocke  untill  nine  and  will 
appeare  like  fire,’  &c.  Although  pretending  to  be  a  prophecy  for  the  year  1607,  this 
edition  was  a  reprint  of  a  much  older  copy,  the  date  of  the  predicted  event  being 
altered  to  give  interest  to  the  publication.  Clarendon  :  In  Pepys's  Collection  of  Bal¬ 
lads,  vol.  i,  p.  38,  is  one  with  the  title  ‘  Calebbe  Shillocke,  his  Prophesie :  or  the  Iewes 
Prediction.  To  the  tune  of  Bragandarie.’  The  second  verse  begins,  *  And  first,  within 
this  present  yeere,  Beeing  sixteene  hundreth  seatCnl  The  existence  of  the  name  in 
the  title  of  this  ballad  is  sufficient  to  show  that  it  was  known  in  Shakespeare’s  time. 
Cassel  (Liter atur  u.  Symbolik ,  1884,  p.  384) :  Ock  is  a  termination  found  in  many 
old  languages,  notably  in  the  Irish,  and,  as  it  were,  represents  the  Latin  us.  Shyl  is 
the  Hebrew  name  Schaul;  therefore,  Saulus. 

12.  Tuball]  Karl  Elze  ( Essays ,  p.#383) :  Tubal  and  Chus  are  taken  from  Genesis , 
x,  2  and  6,  without  change. 

13.  Portia]  I  have  seen  it  somewhere  stated,  though  I  cannot  now  remember 
where  or  by  whom,  that  Julius  Csesar  and  the  characters  which  were  grouped  around 
him  seem  to  have  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  mind  of  Shakespeare,  and  that 
there  is  scarcely  one  of  his  plays  wherein  an  allusion  to  them  may  not  be  found.  The 
choice  of  this  present  name  may  be  cited  in  illustration  of  the  truth  of  this,  together 
with  Bassanio’s  direct  allusion  to  Brutus’s  Portia,  in  I,  i,  176. — Ed. 

Th.  Elze  (Sh.  Jahrbuch ,  xiii,  145) :  We  shall  hardly  be  contradicted  when  we 
say  that  every  man  of  the  North,  especially  a  German,  believes  the  ideal  of  Southern 
female  beauty  to  be  a  slender  lovely  figure,  an  oval  face,  a  Grecian  nose,  glowing  dark 
eyes,  and  hair  of  glossy  jet,  flowing  down  over  a  haughty,  Junonian  neck.  It  would 
never  occur  to  any  poet  north  of  the  Alps  in  choosing  an  Italian  heroine  to  represent 
her  otherwise  than  with  jet  black  hair,  nor  could  any  reader  otherwise  imagine  a  Fior- 
mona  or  a  Bianca  Capello.  In  the  most  striking  opposition  to  this  almost  universal 
idea,  Shakespeare  describes  the  Venetian  Portia  as  a  blonde:  ‘her  sunny  locks  Hang 
on  her  temples  like  a  golden  fleece.’  Is  not  this  ‘  die  blonde  Englanderin,’  or  at  least 
a  blonde  maiden  of  the  North?  But  before  we  charge  Shakespeare’s  poetic  fancy 
with  this  carelessness,  we  must  first  look  around  somewhat  more  closely  in  Venice, 
jrhe  great  masters  of  the  Venetian  school  in  the  16th  Century:  Titian,  Giorgione, 
Palma  Vecchio,  Paris  Bordone,  and  others  gave  to  their  Ideal  of  female  beauty  red- 
golden  hair.  Like  these  great  Venetian  painters,  the  great  English  Dramatist  arrays 
the  ideal  creature  of  his  fancy,  not  only  with  all  the  wealth  of  intellectual  and  worldly 
gifts  and  graces,  but  also  with  an  enchanting  ornament  rarely  seen  in  Venice,  sunny 


THE  ACTORS  NAMES 


xx 


Nerriffa ,  her  wayting-Gentlewoman. 

IeJJica ,  Daughter  to  Shy  lock.  1 5 

Gobbo,  an  old  man,  father  to  Lancelot. 

14.  Nerissa,  Confident  to  Portia.  Rowe,  waiting-maid  to  Portia.  Johns,  her  woman. 
Cap. 

blonde  or  red-golden  hair.  Is  this  noteworthy  agreement  of  Shakespeare  with  Titian 
and  Paul  Veronese  a  happy  accident,  or  does  it  not  rest  upon  a  deeper,  more  exact 
knowledge  of  the  people  of  Venice  and  of  their  art?  This  peculiar  appearance  of 
Portia  with  red-golden  or  sunny  blonde  hair,  Shakespeare,  with  deep  knowledge, 
placed  in  contrast  to  the  black  locks  of  her  waiting-gentlewoman,  Nerissa.  That 
Nerissa  has  black  hair  and  is  of  the  generally  accepted  type  of  female  beauty  in  the 
South,  the  Poet  has  indicated  in  the  finest  way,  which  has  not  perhaps  been  generally 
detected — to  wit,  by  her  name.  Nerissa  is  simply  the  Italian  Nericcia  (from  nero), 
and  thereby  signifies  ‘  the  black-haired.’  In  the  same  way  the  name  Nerissa  is  the 
most  excellent  opposite  to  the  name  Biondello  (that  is,  the  fair-haired  youth)  in  The 
Taming  of  the  Shrew ,  which  C.  A.  Brown  has  mentioned  as  a  name  chosen  by  Shake¬ 
speare  with  full  knowledge  of  the  Italian  tongue.  Ruskin  ( Munera  Pulveris ,  p.  89) : 
Shakespeare  would  certainly  never  have  chosen  this  name  had  he  been  forced  to  retain 
the  Roman  spelling.  Like  Perdita,  *  lost  lady,’  or  Cordelia,  *  heart  lady,’  Portia  is 
‘fortune’  lady.  The  two  great  relative  groups  of  words,  Fortuna,  fero,  and  fors — 
Portio,  porto,  and  pars  (with  the  lateral  branch,  op-portune,  im-portune,  opportunity, 
&c.),  are  of  deep  and  intricate  significance;  their  various  senses  of  bringing,  abstract¬ 
ing,  and  sustaining  being  all  centralized  by  the  wheel  (which  bears  and  moves  at 
once),  or  still  better,  the  ball  (spera),  of  Fortune. 

14.  Hunter  ( New  Illust.  i,  309):  Nerissa,  or,  as  Shakespeare  wrote  the  name, 
Nerrissa,  is  to  be  regarded  not  as  a  waiting-maid  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  term,  but 
as  a  young  lady  of  birth  and  rank,  such  persons  being  often  found,  in  the  age  of  Shake¬ 
speare,  attending  on  ladies  of  superior  distinction  and  fortune ;  and  therefore  a  suitable 
match  for  Gratiano,  the  friend  of  Bassanio.  Thus  Magdalene  Dacre,  an  account  of 
whose  life  was  written  by  Richard  Smith,  the  bishop  of  Chalcedon,  a  daughter  of  Loro 
Dacre  of  the  North,  waited  on  the  old  Countess  of  Bedford ;  and  there  are  sixteen 
quarterings  over  the  tomb  of  Catharine  Clippesby,  an  attendant  on  the  Countess  of 
Shrewsbury  of  the  time.  That  Nerrissa,  as  Shakespeare  wrote,  is  the  better  reading 
a  nice  ear  will  perceive  in  this  line,  as  well  as  in  many  others:  ‘Nerissa  [Nerrissa] 
and  the  rest  stand  all  aloof.’ — III,  ii.  There  are  also  passages  in  which  Anthonio,  as 
Shakespeare  appears  to  have  written,  pleases  the  ear  better  than  Antonio,  which  the 
modern  editors  have  chosen  to  substitute.  These,  it  may  be  said,  are  trifling  remarks : 
but  poetry  is  a  luxury,  and  therefore  should  be  as  pure  and  perfect  as  may  be ;  nor  can 
there  be  any  reason  why  we  should  accept  at  the  hands  of  an  editor  a  text  which  is 
even  in  a  slight  degree  worse  than  that  which  the  author  himself  has  bequeathed  to  us. 

15.  Iessica]  Karl  Elze  [Essays,  p.  282):  To  all  appearance  this  is  borrowed 
from  Genesis,  xi,  29,  where  Iscah  of  King  James’s  translation  appears  in  earlier  edi¬ 
tions  of  the  Bible,  in  1549  and  1551,  as  Jesca.  In  the  Hebrew  it  is  Jiscah,  signifying 
a  spy,  or  looker-out.  Has  it  a  reference  to  Shylock’s  warning  to  his  daughter  not  to 
‘  thrust  her  head  into  the  public  street  to  gaze  on  Christian  fools  ’  ? 

16.  Gobbo]  Steevf.ns  :  It  may  be  inferred  from  the  name  of  Gobbo,  that  Shakespeare 
designed  this  character  to  be  represented  with  a  hump  bad  Elze  [Essays,  p.  281) : 


THE  ACTORS  NAMES 


xii 


Lancelot  Gobbo  the  Clowne.  17 

Stephano,  a  Meffenger. 

Iaylor,  and  Attendants. 


1 8.  The  following  have  been  added: 
Leonardo,  servant  to  Bassanio.  Bal¬ 
thazar,  servant  to  Portia.  Theob.  et  seq. 
Salerio,  a  messenger  from  Venice.  Steev. 
Coll.  Wh.  i,  Rife,  (a  friend  to  Antonio 
and  Bassanio.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii). 


19.  Rowe  added:  Senators  of  Venice 
Officers,  Servants  to  Portia. 

Rowe  also  added :  Scene  partly  at 
Venice,  and  partly  at  Belmont,  the  Seat 
of  Portia  upon  the  Continent. 


This  name  reminds  us  vividly  of  the  Gobbo  di  Rialto,  a  stone  figure  which  serves  as  a 
supporter  to  the  granite  pillar,  of  about  a  man’s  height,  from  which  the  laws  of  the 
Republic  were  proclaimed.  This  figure,  as  far  as  we  know,  is  not  mentioned  by 
Coryat.  The  name  of  Gobbo  is  indeed  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Italian  history,  and 
exists  even  now-a-days  as  a  family  name  in  Venice.  [In  Bell’s  Shakespeare’s  Pud. 
(iii,  47,  1864)  are  to  be  found  fanciful  derivations  of  the  names  of  Shylock  and  An 
thonio,  as  well  as  several  Notes  on  certain  words  and  phrases  in  the  Play. — Ed.] 


The  Merchant  of  Venice. 

&zi.3  3 

A6lus  primus.  [Scene  I.] 


Enter  Anthonio ,  Salarino ,  and  Salanio. 


Anthonio. 


N  footh  I  know  not  why  I  am  fo  fad, 

It  wearies  me  :  you  fay  it  wearies  you ; 

But  how  I  caught  it,  found  it,  or  came  by  it, 
What  ftuffe  Jtis  made  of,  whereof  it  is  borne, 


5 


1.  The. ..Venice]  The  Comicall  His¬ 
tory  of.. .Venice.  Qq. 

2.  A ftus  primus.]  Om.  Qq. 

[Scene  I.  Rowe  et  seq. 

[A  Street  in  Venice.  Theob.  et  seq. 
(subs.). 


3.  Salarino]  Salaryno  Q,Q2.  Solarino 
F3F4,  Rowe  +  . 

Salanio]  Solanio  Cap.  Knt. 

s.  on 

borne~\  born  F3F4. 


AcTus  primus]  In  the  Qq  there  are  no  divisions  into  either  Acts  or  Scenes.  In  the 
Ff  the  Acts  alone  are  indicated.  For  the  purposes  of  citation  and  reference  I  have  fol¬ 
lowed  the  division  into  Scenes  most  commonly  adopted,  and  have  indicated  by  brackets 
that  these  divisions  are  not  in  the  Folio.  At  the  beginning  of  each  Scene  throughout 
the  play  Eccles  notes  what,  in  his  judgment,  is  the  sequence  of  time.  The  discussion 
of  ‘The  Duration  of  the  Action’  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix,  p.  332.  In  Charles 
Kean’s  fine  revival  of  this  play  at  the  Princess’s  Theatre  in  1858,  the  curtain  draws 
up  on  a  scene  laid  in  Saint  Mark’s  Place,  with  various  groups  of  Nobles,  Citizens, 
Merchants,  Foreigners,  Water-Carriers,  Flower-Girls,  Sic.,  passing  and  repassing,  while 
a  Procession  of  the  Doge  in  state  crosses  the  Square.  ‘  This  Procession  was  copied 
from  a  print  in  the  British  Museum  by  Josse  Amman,  who  died  in  1591.’ — Ed. 

Enter  . .  .]  A  trifling  difficulty  in  nomenclature  meets  us  on  the  threshold.  Anthonio 
enters  with  two  friends,  whose  names  are  so  nearly  the  same  that  before  fifty  lines  are 
passed  the  compositors  have  fallen  into  a  confusion  over  them,  from  which  they  do 
not  recover  throughout  the  play.  In  the  Folios  and  Quartos  these  names  appear  as 
Salaryno,  Salerino,  Slarino,  Solarino,  Salerio,  Salanio,  Salino,  and  Solanio,  with  ab¬ 
breviations  at  the  beginning  of  the  speeches  correspondingly  variable.  Indeed,  so  great 
does  the  puzzle  become  that  Steevens  added  *  Salerio,  a  messenger  from  Venice,’  as  a 
third  character  in  the  Dramatis  Personce,  and  has  been  followed  therein  by  many  an 
editor,  even  down  to  the  conservative  Cambridge  Edition  and  to  Rolfe.  Capell  was 
the  first  to  attempt  to  solve  the  difficulty,  and,  in  the  belief  that  there  were  but  two 
characters,  he  adopted  Salerino  as  the  name  of  one,  and  Solanio  as  the  name  of  the 


2 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


[Enter  Anthonio,  Salarino,  and  Salanio.] 

other,  ‘  induc’d  ’  thereto,  as  he  said,  ‘  by  convenience  (for,  in  themselves,  they’re  indif¬ 
ferent).’  In  III,  ii,  230,  where  in  Ft  it  is  three  times  printed  Salerio,  Capell  adopts 
this  spelling  as  an  abridged  form  of  Salerino,  which  he  gives  in  full  in  the  stage-direc¬ 
tion.  Knight  approves  of  the  distinction  made  by  Capell,  and  probably  thought  that 
he  adopted  it,  but  he  did  not,  for  he  changed  Salerino  into  Salarino.  Capell’s  abbre¬ 
viations  are  Sol.  and  Sal.  Knight’s  are  Solan,  and  Salar.  Knight,  however,  does  not 
agree  with  Capell  that,  as  to  the  characters  ‘in  themselves,  they’re  indifferent;’  on  the 
contrary,  he  is  of  the  opinion  that  ‘  Salarino  is  decidedly  meant  for  the  liveliest  and 
the  greatest  talker;’  wherein  Verplanck  agrees,  and  urges  that  ‘this  discrimination 
of  character,  even  in  subordinate  parts,  slight  as  it  is,  is  in  Shakespeare’s  manner,  and  is 
lost  by  the  more  equal  alternation  of  the  dialogue  given  by  Steevens.’  Dyce,  Staun¬ 
ton,  and  Delius  have  followed  Knight.  The  discussion  over  Steevens’s  third  cha¬ 
racter,  Salerio,  will  come  more  appropriately  at  his  entrance  in  III,  ii,  230. — Ed. 

5.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  why  Anthonio  is  represented  at  the  outset  as  in  this  melancholy 
mood.  It  is  not  his  wonted  mood,  and  yet  he  scarcely  recovers  from  it  throughout  the 
play.  It  is  so  unusual  that  he  does  not  even  recognize  himself ;  nay,  from  being  the 
shrewd,  long-headed  merchant,  the  ‘  royal  merchant,’  he  had  become  a  very  ‘  Want- 
wit.’  Mrs  Griffith  (p.  51)  would  have  it  that  these  are  ‘the  forebodings  or  presenti¬ 
ments  of  evil,  natural  to  the  human  mind,’  which  can  be  no  more  accounted  for  than 
we  can  account  for  ‘  prophetic  dreams.’  Ulrici  thinks  that  it  is  the  contrast  between 
the  real  and  the  ideal,  and  the  power  of  deceptive  appearances,  which  have  robbed 
Anthonio  of  his  gayety ;  he  feels  that  ‘  his  foreboding  mind  will  one  day  fall  between 
ihe  extremes  of  this  contrast;’  which  I  do  not  understand.  Gervinus  says  that  Antho¬ 
nio  has  the  ‘  malady  of  the  rich,  who  have  been  agitated  and  tried  by  nothing,’  and  that 
he  has  ‘  the  spleen.’  Elze  believes  that  ‘  his  wealth  has  blunted  his  feelings  and  made 
him  effeminate.’  The  anonymous  author  of  Alter  Ego  (Hamburg,  1862,  p.  9)  would  have 
it  that  it  is  the  prospect  of  losing  his  friend  Bassanio  that  so  weighs  down  Anthonio’s 
spirits.  Bassanio  had  promised  to  tell  Anthonio  ‘to-day’  (line  131)  ‘the  name  of  the 
lady  to  whom  he  had  sworn  a  secret  pilgrimage ;’  and  ‘  an  Alpine  load  oppresses  the 
breast  of  Anthonio  as  if  an  irreparable  loss  awaited  him  ’  in  thus  losing  his  dearest 
friend.  Macdonald  (  The  Imagination,  p.  164)  points  out  that  a  melancholy  disposi¬ 
tion  like  Anthonio’s,  ‘  even  if  it  be  not  occasioned  by  any  definite  event  or  object,  will 
generally  associate  itself  with  one ;  and  when  Antonio  is  accused  of  being  in  love,  he 
repels  the  accusation  with  only  a  sad  “  Fie  !  fie  !”  This,  and  his  whole  character,  seem 
to  me  to  point  to  an  old  but  ever-cherished  grief.’  Clarendon  says  that  the  ‘  key-note 
of  the  play’  is  here  struck;  and  that  this  sadness  without  cause  is  a  ‘presentiment  of 
disaster:  “Coming  events  cast  their  shadows  before.”  ’  But  this  play  is  not  a  Tragedy; 
it  is  a  Comedy,  wherein  a  tragic  key-note  would  be  falsely  struck.  Witches  and  a 
blasted  heath,  a  chilly  rampart  and  a  midnight  ghost, — these  are  key-notes ;  but  no 
irretrievable  disaster  is  impending  here.  Moreover,  it  is  not  thus  that  Shakespeare 
deals  with  presentiments ;  he  knew  too  well  the  ‘  lightning  before  death  ’  which  made 
Romeo’s  ‘  bosom’s  lord  sit  lightly  in  his  throne.’  Had  Shylock  actually  cut  the  flesh 
from  off  Anthonio’s  breast,  I  doubt  if  Anthonio  would  have  been  here  introduced  as  so 
weighed  down  with  sadness  as  to  be  a  ‘  Want-wit.’  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the 
true  explanation  is  hinted  at  in  a  short  marginal  note  in  pencil  by  my  lamented  friend, 
Prof.  Allen,  as  follows :  ‘  If  Anthonio  were  not  represented  as  a  melancholy  man  and 
therefore  crotchety,  he  would  not  have  been  so  extravagantly  devoted  to  a  friend,  nor 
would  he  have  signed  to  such  a  bond.’  Shakespeare  foresaw  the  difficulty  of  represent- 


3 


act  i,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 

I  am  to  learne  :  and  fuch  a  Want-wit  fadneffe  makes  of 

mee,  io 

That  I  haue  much  ado  to  know  my  felfe. 

Sal.  Your  minde  is  tofsing  on  the  Ocean, 

There  where  your  Argofies  with  portly  faile  13 

9.  I ani\  As  closing  line  8,  Ktly.  II.  ado]  adoe  QqF2F3.  a-do  F. 

I. ..learne]  Sep.  line,  Q3,  Rowe  et  12.  Sal.]  Salarino.  Q,Q2,  Wh.  Rife, 

seq.  Salar.  Q3,  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo. 

10.  f fiee]  Q2.  Del.  Ktly. 

ing  a  merchant,  royal  among  merchants,  as  executing  a  bond  so  hazardous  in  its  condi¬ 
tion  that  any  child  would  shrink  from  signing  it,  and  therefore  introduced  him  as  of 
so  changeable  a  mood  that  he  was  borne  down  by  a  nameless  melancholy  and  utterly 
unlike  himself;  and  if  to  this  we  add  the  appellation  ‘  Want-wit,’  which  he  gives  him¬ 
self,  we  have  the  elements  of  character  that  are  needed,  in  the  scene  with  Shylock,  to 
give  an  air  of  consistency  in  the  sealing  to  the  bond.  This  melancholy,  then,  is,  after 
all,  a  key-note  of  the  play,  but  not  as  portending  disasters  or  as  preluding  a  tragedy. — 
Ed. 

Hunter  (i,  299) :  In  perusing  this  play  we  should  keep  constantly  in  mind  the  ideas 
which  prevailed  in  England  in  the  time  of  Shakespeare  of  the  magnificence  of  Venice. 
Now,  the  name  calls  up  ideas  only  of  glory  departed — ‘  Her  long  life  hath  reached  its 
final  day;’  but  in  the  age  of  the  poet  Venice  was  gazed  on  with  admiration  by  the  people 
of  every  country,  and  by  none  with  more  devotion  than  those  of  England.  Her  mer¬ 
chants  were  princes,  — her  palaces  were  adorned  with  the  works  of  Titian,  and  she  was, 
moreover,  the  seat  of  all  pleasant  delights — ‘  The  pleasure-place  of  all  festivity,  The 
revel  of  the  world,  the  masque  of  Italy.’  Lewkenor,  Moryson,  and  other  English  travel¬ 
lers  of  the  age  of  Shakespeare,  have  described  Venice,  including  Coryat,  who  speaks  of 
the  palazzos  of  the  merchants  in  the  vicinity  of  the  city,  of  the  Rialto,  and  of  the  Ghetto, 
one  of  the  islands  on  which  the  Jews  lived,  who  were  in  number  five  or  six  thousand. 
He  describes  their  dress;  those  born  in  Italy  wearing  red  hats,  while  the  Eastern  or 
Levantine  Jews  wore  yellow  turbans.  The  impression  which  the  magnificence  of  Ven¬ 
ice  made  upon  this  simple-minded  but  observant  traveller  may  be  judged  of  by  the 
following  passage,  which  will  at  the  same  time  serve  to  show  how  he  became  himself  a 
butt  for  the  sharp  wits  of  his  time,  so  that  his  merit  as  a  traveller  has  been  too  much 
overlooked : — ‘  This  incomparable  city,  this  most  beautiful  Queen,  this  untainted  Vir¬ 
gin,  this  Paradise,  this  Tempe,  this  rich  diadem  and  most  flourishing  garland  of  Chris¬ 
tendom,  of  which  the  inhabitants  may  as  proudly  vaunt  as  I  have  read  the  Persians 
have  done  of  their  Ormus,  who  say  that  if  the  world  were  a  ring  then  should  Ormus 
be  the  gem  thereof, — the  same,  I  say,  may  the  Venetians  speak  of  their  city,  and  much 
more  truly;’  and  he  concludes  with  saying  that  ‘  if  four  of  the  richest  manors  in  Som¬ 
ersetshire,  where  he  was  born,  should  have  been  bestowed  upon  him  if  he  never  saw 
Venice,  he  would  say  that  seeing  Venice  was  worth  them  all.’ 

7.  came  by  it]  See  ‘superfluity  comes  sooner  by  white  hairs,’  I,  ii,  9. 

9.  I  am]  Abbott,  §405,  cites  this  among  other  ellipses  after  will  and  is.  ‘We 
still  retain  an  ellipsis  of  “under  necessity”  in  the  phrase  “  I  am  (yet)  to  learn.”  ’ 

12.  Ocean]  Pronounced  as  a  trisyllable, — Abbott,  §479. 

13.  Argosies]  Murray  (New  Eng.  Did.  s.  v.)  gives  the  forms  of  this  word  in 
the  1 6th  Century  as  ragusye,  arguze  •  from  the  16th  to  17th  Centuries,  argose ;  in  the 


4 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  I,  sc.  i. 


Like  Signiors  and  rich  Burgers  on  the  flood, 

Or  as  it  were  the  Pageants  of  the  fea,  1 5 

Do  ouer-peere  the  pettie  Traffiquers 
That  curtfle  to  them,  do  them  reuerence 


14.  Burger s\  Burgars  Q,Qa. 

on]  of  Anon.  MS  (ap.  Hal.)  Cap. 
conj.  Steev.  Dyce  iii. 

15.  Pageants ]  Pageans  F  . 

16.  Traffiquers]  Traffickers  F3F4. 


17.  curtfie]  curfie  Q,Q2.  courfie  Q3. 
curl  'sy'ng  Allen. 

them,]  them  Q2Q  .  them ,  and 

Ktly. 


17th  ( rhaguse ,  ragosie )  argosea,  argosey,  argozee  ;  from  the  16th  to  the  19th,  argosie ; 
and  says  that  it  is  apparently  an  adaptation  from  the  Italian,  Ragusea,  plural  Ragusee , 
i.  e.  una  ( nave  or  caracca)  Ragusea ,  a  Ragusan  (vessel  or  carack),  best  represented 
by  the  earliest  form  ragusye ;  the  transposition  in  argosea,  arguze,  arguzee,  &c.,  is  no 
doubt  connected  with  the  fact  that  Ragusa  (in  Venetian  Ragusi)  itself  appears  in  16th 
Century  English  as  Aragouse,  Arragouese,  Arragosa.  ‘That  argosies  were  reputed  to 
take  their  name  from  Ragusa  is  stated  by  several  writers  of  the  1 7th  Century ;  and 
the  derivation  is  made  inductively  certain  by  investigations  made  for  us  by  Mr  A.  J. 
Evans,  showing  the  extent  of  Ragusan  trade  with  England,  and  the  familiarity  of  Eng¬ 
lishmen  with  the  Ragusee,  or  large  and  richly-freighted  merchant  ships  of  Ragusa.  No 
reference  to  the  ship  Argo  is  traceable  in  the  early  use  of  the  word.’  Hunter  (i,  323)  : 
With  this  word  Shakespeare  might  have  become  acquainted  in  reading  Marlowe’s  Jew 
of  Malta,  in  which  play  the  word  often  occurs. 

13-18.  Hunter  (i,  324) :  Though  this  passage  pleases  everyone  who  reads  it,  as 
well  by  the  agreeable  flow  of  the  verse  as  by  the  beautiful  image  it  presents  to  the 
mind,  of  a  richly  laden  vessel  with  all  its  sails  unfurled  passing  in  a  stately  manner 
along,  it  is  perhaps  not  perfectly  constnicted.  At  least  we  cannot  be  sure  that  we 
apprehend  what  was  the  real  meaning  of  the  poet,  between  two  meanings  of  which 
the  passage  admits.  It  may  be  that  the  argosies  of  Anthonio  overpeer  at  sea  the  petty 
traffickers,  just  as  the  signiors  and  rich  burghers  do  petty  traffickers  upon  land,  in  which 
case  the  line,  *  Or,  as  it  were  the  pageants  of  the  sea,’  must  be  regarded  as  parenthet¬ 
ical,  and  as  producing  a  slight  interruption  of  the  continuity ;  or  it  may  be  taken  as 
meaning  that  the  argosies  appear  upon  the  sea  like  so  many  signiors  and  rich  burghers, 
bearing  with  them  the  ideas  of  wealth  and  abundance,  and,  as  if  that  was  not  suffi¬ 
cient,  he  compares  them  again  to  ‘  pageants,’  pageant  ships,  gorgeously  decorated,  such 
as  were  exhibited  in  the  shows  of  the  time,  no  longer  confined  to  some  inland  lake  or 
river,  but  the  ‘  pageants  of  the  sea  ’  itself,  so  large  and  so  magnificent  in  all  their  appa¬ 
ratus. 

14.  on  the]  Halliwell  gives  a  page  in  fac  simile  of  extracts  from  a  Common-place 
Book  of  the  17th  Century,  exhibiting  some  unauthorized  alterations  in  the  text  of  Shake¬ 
speare,  and  among  these  alterations  is  *  of  the  ’  in  this  line  instead  of  *  on  the.’  Capell 
suggests  the  same  alteration ;  Steevens  adopted  it,  as  did  Dyce  in  his  third  edition. 
Halliwell  says  that  it  is  not  really  necessary ;  which  is  true,  but  I  think  it  is  really  the 
Better  reading,  as  is  shown  by  the  very  next  line;  just  as  the  argosies  were  ‘the 
Pageants  of  the  sea,’  so  were  they  ‘the  rich  Burgers  of  the  flood.’ — Ed. 

15.  Pageants]  Douce  (i,  250) :  An  allusion  to  those  enormous  machines,  in  the 
shape  of  castles,  dragons,  ships,  giants,  & c.,  that  were  drawn  about  the  streets  in  the  an¬ 
cient  shows  or  pageants,  and  which  often  constituted  the  most  important  part  of  them. 


ACT  I,  sc.  i.] 


THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


5 


As  they  flye  by  them  with  their  wouen  wings.  18 

Salar.  Beleeue  me  fir,  had  I  fuch  venture  forth, 

The  better  part  of  my  affections,  would  20 

Be  with  my  hopes  abroad.  I  fhould  be  ftill 
Plucking  the  graffe  to  know  where  fits  the  winde, 

Peering  in  Maps  for  ports,  and  peers,  and  rodes : 

And  euery  obieCt  that  might  make  me  feare 

Misfortune  to  my  ventures,  out  of  doubt  25 

Would  make  me  fad. 

Sal.  My  winde  cooling  my  broth,  27 


18.  flye\  flie  Qq.  fly  F,. 
their\  theyr  Q2. 

19.  Salar.]  Salanio.  Q,Q2,  Wh.  Cla. 
Rife.  Sala.  F2.  Sola.  F3F4,  Rowe  +  . 
Salan.  Q3,  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Coll.  Cam. 
Glo.  Ktly.  Sol.  Cap.  Solan.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Del. 

me\  mee  Q2. 

venture ]  ventures  Han. 

forth ]  foorth  Qr. 

20.  affections ,]  F2. 


21.  abroad~\  abroade  Q2.  aboard  Tape, 
Han. 

22.  graffe']  graffe,  Qt. 

■winde ]  QAaQ^- 

23.  Peering ]  Piering  Qt.  Piring  Q2. 
Prying  Q3,  Pope,  Han.  Steev.  ’85. 

and  peers ]  for  Peeres  Q  .  and 
piers  Johns,  et  seq. 

27.  Sal.]  Salar.  Qq,  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt,  Sing. 

winde~\  Q,F2. 


17.  Curtsie]  Suggested  by  the  rocking,  ducking  motion  in  the  petty  traffiquers 
caused  by  the  wake  of  the  argosie  as  it  sails  past  them. — Ed. 

21.  still]  That  is,  constantly.  For  other  instances,  see  Abbott,  §  69,  or  Schmidt’s 
Lex. 

22.  grasse]  Johnson  cites  the  following  from  Ascham’s  Toxopkilus  (p.  159,  ed. 
Arber) :  *  When  I  was  in  the  myd  way  betwixt  the  markes  whyche  was  an  open  place, 
there  I  toke  a  fether  or  a  lytle  lyght  grasse,  and  so  well  as  I  could,  learned  how  the 
wynd  stoode,’  &c. ;  and  other  instances  could  be  cited  from  the  same  book,  where  the 
practice  is  frequently  referred  to. — Ed.  Knight  :  Though  sea-weed  is  much  more 
common  than  grass  in  Venice,  there  is  enough  land-vegetation  in  the  gardens  belong¬ 
ing  to  some  of  the  palazzi  to  furnish  the  means  of  this  experiment. 

22.  sits]  Allen:  Sat,  (Imperf.) — by  attraction, — would  be  normal  English.  ‘Sits’ 
(Pres.) — for  greater  vivacity  is  Greek. 

23.  Peering]  Halliwell  suggests  that  Prying  of  Q3  was  adopted  to  avoid  the  jingle 
with  ‘  peers.’  Unfortunately,  on  no  other  occasion  does  the  compositor  of  that  Qto  dis¬ 
play  a  similar  delicacy  of  ear.  In  one  passage,  however,  this  Qto  has  given  us  a  word 
which  several  editors  have  adopted  (see  III,  ii,  1 18,  reine  for  ‘raine  ’),  and  it  is  the  sole 
jewel  in  its  crown. — Ed. 

23.  in]  Equivalent  to  into.  See  Abbott,  §  159. 

23.  rodes]  Clarendon:  That  is,  anchorages.  Cotgrave  gives,  ‘Rade:  f.  A  road, 
an  open  harbor  for  shipping.’  ‘Yarmouth  Roads’  is  the  name  given  to  the  open  sea 
off  Yarmouth,  where  ships  ride  at  anchor.  See  V,  i,  304. 

27.  cooling]  Abbott,  §452,  cites  two  other  half  lines  of  similar  scansion,  viz.: 
‘Thy  kn6e,  |  bussing  |  the  stdnes’ — Cor.  Ill,  ii,  75;  ‘The  smile  |  mdcking  |  the 
sigh  ’ — Cym.  IV,  ii,  54,  and  suggests  that  ‘  the  foot  following  the  emphasized  mono- 


6  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Would  blow  me  to  an  Ague,  when  I  thought  28 

What  harme  a  winde  too  great  might  doe  at  fea. 

I  fhould  not  fee  the  fandie  houre-glaffe  runne,  30 

But  I  fhould  thinke  of  fhallows,and  of  flats, 

And  fee  my  wealthy  Andrew  docks  in  fand,  32 


28.  Ague,\  ague  Qa. 

29.  winde ]  Q,Q2F3. 

might. ..fea']  Q2FfQ3.  at  fea , 
might  do  Qj. 

30.  fandie']  Q2F2Q3. 
houre-]  howre  Q,Q2. 

31.  flats]  flatts  Q2. 


32.  fee]  see !  Ktly  conj. 

Andrew  docks]  Andrew  dockes  Qt. 
Arg'sie  dock'd  Han.  Andrew’s  decks 
Coll.  conj.  Andrew ,  decks  Del.  An¬ 
drew  dock  Ktly.  A  ?idrew  stucke  Gould. 
Andrew  dock’d  Rowe  et  seq. 


syllable  may  (as  an  alternative  to  the  “  pause-accent  ”)  be  regarded  as  quasi-trisyllabic 
[that  is,  that  there  is  an  unconscious  pause  between  the  noun  and  its  participle  (here 
‘wind’  and  ‘cooling’),  and  that  this  takes  the  place  of  a  third  syllable,  whereby  the 
proper  ictus  falls  on  ‘  cooling.’] 

30.  houre-glasse]  Halliwell:  This  illustration  was  a  very  familiar  one  in 
Shakespeare’s  time,  when  the  hour-glass  was  an  almost  invariable  accompaniment  of 
the  pulpit,  fixed  near  it  on  an  iron  stand.  ‘  Hour-glasses  for  the  purpose  of  limiting 
the  length  of  a  sennon  were  coeval  with  the  Reformation,  as  appears  from  the  frontis¬ 
piece  prefixed  to  the  Holy  Bible  of  the  Bishops’  translation,  imprinted  by  John  Day, 
1 569.  In  this  frontispiece,  Archbishop  Parker  is  represented  with  an  hour-glass  stand¬ 
ing  on  his  right  hand.  Clocks  and  watches  being  then  but  rarely  in  use,  it  was  thought 
fit  to  prescribe  the  length  of  the  sermons  of  the  Reformists  to  the  time  of  an  hour,  that 
is,  the  run  of  an  hour-glass.  This  practice  became  generally  prevalent,  and  continued 
to  the  time  of  the  Revolution  in  1688.’ — Notes  to  Reprint  of  the  Fatal  Vespers ,  &c. 
[Halliwell  subjoins  a  wood-cut  of  ‘a  very  fine  example  of  one  still  preserved  in  the 
church  of  St.  Alban’s  in  Wood  Street,  London.’] 

31.  But]  Abbott  (§118):  A  contraction  for ‘by-out,’  and  is  formed  exactly  like 
‘  with-out.’  Hence  ‘  but  ’  means  excepted  or  excepting. 

32.  Andrew]  Knight  :  Johnson  explains  this  (which  is  scarcely  necessary)  as 
‘  the  name  of  the  ship ;’  but  he  does  not  point  out  the  propriety  of  the  name  for  a 
ship,  in  association  with  the  great  naval  commander,  Andrea  Doria,  famous  through  all 
Italy.  [This  guess  seems  to  me  a  little  far-fetched,  but  none  other,  that  I  am  aware 
of,  has  ever  been  given.  I  think  some  proof  is  needed  that  the  Italian  was  ever  trans¬ 
lated  into  English. — Ed.] 

32.  docks]  H.  B.  Sprague  ( Shakespeariana ,  March,  1884,  p.  158):  Change  is 
needless ;  the  meaning  is  more  vivid,  more  Shakespearian,  to  use  the  present  tense, 
‘docks,’  i.  e.  places  itself  in  sand  as  in  a  dock.  [The  alphabet  contains  few  more 
troublesome  letters  than  s,  whose  external  crookedness  is  typical  of  its  internal  nature 
Walker,  long  ago,  showed  us  how  frequently  it  is  interpolated  to  the  marring  of  the 
sense  (see  Oth.  I,  i,  31),  and  suggested  that  it  might  have  originated  in  some  peculiar¬ 
ity  of  Shakespeare’s  handwriting.  It  is  not  unlikely ;  but  in  the  present  play,  which 
vn  the  Folio  was  printed  from  Q2,  and  this  again,  perhaps,  from  a  stage  transcript,  our 
nearness  to  Shakespeare’s  own  hand,  with  its  peculiarities,  is  two  or  three  times 
removed.  May  not  the  confusion  in  this  word  ‘  docks  ’  have  arisen  from  the  ease  with 
which  s  in  the  old  Court  hand  can  be  confounded  with  d?  The  top  of  s  should  turn 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


7 


Vailing  her  high  top  lower  then  her  ribs  33 

To  kiffe  her  buriall  ;  fhould  I  goe  to  Church 
And  fee  the  holy  edifice  of  ftone,  35 

And  not  bethinke  me  ftraight  of  dangerous  rocks, 

Which  touching  but  my  gentle  Veffels  fide 
Would  fcatter  all  her  fpices  on  the  ftreame, 

Enrobe  the  roring  waters  with  my  hikes, 

And  in  a  word,  but  euen  now  worth  this,  4c 

And  now  worth  nothing.  Shall  I  haue  the  thought 
To  thinke  on  this,  and  lhall  I  lacke  the  thought 
That  fuch  a  thing  bechaunc’d  would  make  me  fad  ? 

But  tell  not  me,  I  know  Anthonio 

Is  fad  to  thinke  vpon  his  merchandize.  45 


33.  Vailing ]  Veyling  Qt.  Vayling 

qsq3- 

high  top]  high-top  Steev. 
ribs]  ribs ,  QrQ3F4. 

34.  buriall ;]  buriall.  Q. 

j6.  rocks,]  rockes,  Q,F2.  rocks  ?  Rowe. 


38.  her]  the  Q1#  Pope  +  .  my  Anon, 
(ap.  Cam.) 

39.  roring ]  roaring  QXQ  F4. 

41.  nothing.]  nothing?  Qt. 

42.  lacke]  lack  Q3F3F4> 

43.  bechaundd]  Q  .  be-chanc'd  Q, . 
bechanc'd  FfQ3. 


to  the  right,  the  top  of  d  to  the  left ;  unless  this  turn  be  decided,  it  is  not  difficult  to 
mistake  one  letter  for  the  other,  which  I  think  was  done  here,  and  that  ‘  docks  ’  was 
really  written  dockd. — Ed.] 

33.  Vailing]  Steevens:  We  find  in  Bullokar’s  Expositor,  1621,  ‘  Vaile  bonet.  To 
put  off  the  hatte,  to  strike  saile,  to  giue  signe  of  submission.’  It  signifies  also  to  lower, 
to  let  down.  Thus,  in  Middleton’s  Blurt,  Master- Constable,  1602  [p.  248,  ed.  Dyce]  : 
‘Boy,  tell  my  love  her  love  thus  sighing  spake,  I’ll  vail  my  crest  to  death  for  her  dear 
sake.’  Again,  in  The  Fair  Maid  of  the  West,  by  Heywood,  1631  [p.  56,  ed.  Sh.  Soc.]  : 
‘  It  did  me  good  To  see  the  Spanish  carvel  vail  her  top  Unto  my  maiden  flag.’  [Conf 

*  vailed  lids,’ — Ham.  I,  ii,  70.] 

34.  buriall]  Of  course,  her  burial-place. 

39.  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  records  Lettsom’s  opinion  that  something  is  wanting  between  this 
line  and  the  next,  an  opinion  probably  founded  on  the  difficulty  of  understanding  the 
meaning  of  ‘  this  ’  in  line  40.  ‘  The  meaning  here,’  says  Clarendon,  ‘  is  obscure,  and 
the  construction  abrupt,  if  “this  ”  refers  to  the  spices  and  silks  just  mentioned.  As  the 
text  stands,  the  actor  may  be  supposed  to  complete  the  sense  by  a  gesture,  extending  his 
arms.’  If  this  is  the  only  explanation,  and  I  can  neither  find  nor  offer  any  better,  the 
gesture  as  expressive  of  great  wealth  is,  I  am  afraid,  a  little  weak. — Ed. 

41.  thought]  That  is,  care,  anxiety.  Conf.  ‘pale  cast  of  thought,’  Ham.  III.  i,  85  ; 

•  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,’  Matt,  vi,  34 ;  ‘  M.  Lepidus  .  .  .  who  died  for  thought 
and  griefe  of  heart,’ — Holland’s  Plinie,  Bk  vii,  p.  186. — Ed. 

44.  know]  With  emphasis. — Ed. 

45.  to  thinke]  That  is,  in  thinking.  For  an  interesting  and  highly  useful  collection 
of  instances  where  ‘  to  is  used  in  the  sense  of  “for,”  “about,”  “in,”  “as  regards,”  and, 


8 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 

46 


Anth.  Beleeue  me  no, I  thanke  my  fortune  for  it, 

My  ventures  are  not  in  one  bottome  trufted, 

Nor  to  one  place  ;  nor  is  my  whole  eftate 
Vpon  the  fortune  of  this  prefent  yeere  : 

Therefore  my  merchandize  makes  me  not  fad.  50 

Sola.  Why  then  you  are  in  loue. 

Anth.  Fie,  fie. 

Sola.  Not  in  loue  neither  :  then  let  vs  fay  you  are  fad 
Becaufe  you  are  not  merry  ;  and  ’twere  as  eafie 
For  you  to  laugh  and  leape,and  fay  you  are  merry  55 

Becaufe  you  are  not  fad.  Now  by  two-headed  1 anus , 

Nature  hath  fram’d  ftrange  fellowes  in  her  time  : 

Some  that  will  euermore  peepe  through  their  eyes, 

And  laugh  like  Parrats  at  a  bag-piper.  59 


46.  no,]  no  :  Qx. 

49.  yeere]  Q2Fa. 

51,  53.  Sola.]  Q2Ff,  Rowe+.  Sala. 
Q3.  Sal.  Cap.  Salan.  Mai.  Steev.  Coll. 
Sing.  Ktly.  Solan.  Coll.  iii.  Salar.  Qx 
et  cet. 

51.  Why... are]  Then y' are  Qt. 

52.  fie.]  fie,  away  !  Han. 

53.  neither:]  neither?  Qx.  neither ! 

Ff. 

let  vs]  let's  Pope  +  ,  Steev.  Mai. 


Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Clarke,  Del.  Dyce 
iii,  Huds. 

53>  55-  y°u  arel  you're  Pope  +  ,  Dyce 
iii,  Clarke,  Rife,  Huds. 

54.  and]  Om.  Pope,  Han.  an  Knt. 

56.  Because  you  are]  'Cause  you're 
Han.  Dyce  iii. 

57.  fram'd]  framd  Q2. 

59.  Parrats]  Parrots  F4. 

bag-piper]  bagpyper  Qa.  Pagpiper 

% 


in  a  word,  for  any  form  of  the  gerund  as  well  as  for  the  infinitive,’  see  Abbott,  §  356. 
Conf.  ‘make  moan  to  be  abridged,’  I,  i,  136 ,  post,  and  ‘To  winde  about  my  love,’  &c., 
I,  i,  164;  and  ‘  I  will  not  shame  myself  to  give  you  this,’  IV,  i,  451. 

47.  Knight:  This  was  no  doubt  proverbial, — something  more  elegant  than  ‘all  the 
eggs  in  one  basket.’  Sir  Thomas  More,  in  his  History  of  Richard  III,  has :  ‘  For  what 
wise  merchant  adventureth  all  his  good  in  one  ship  ?  ’ 

48,  49.  is  .  .  .  Vpon]  Allen  suggests  that  there  is  no  ellipsis  here,  but  that  ‘is 
upon’  may  perhaps  be  equivalent  to  exists  upon. 

50.  Shakespeare  was  such  an  absolute  master  over  his  slave,  rhythm,  that  one  is 
tempted  to  doubt  whether  there  be  not  some  subtle  reason,  .other  than  rhythmical,  for 
his  frequent  transpositions,  as  here,  ‘  makes  me  not  sad,’  or  *  touching  but  my  gentle 
vessels  side,’  line  37. — Ed. 

51.  Sola.]  White  speaks  for  the  majority  of  the  editors  in  pronouncing  Qx  to  be 
here  right  in  giving  the  speech  to  Salarino,  ‘as  the  more  loquacious  of  Anthonio’s 
two  friends,  and  just  after  the  entrance  of  Bassanio  he  declares  that  he  had  intended  to 
banter  Anthonio  into  good  spirits.’ 

52.  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  I  have  little  doubt  that  Shakespeare  wrote  ‘ In  love !  fie,  fie!’ 

56.  Janus]  Eccles  :  He  swears  by  that  divinity,  whose  image  exhibits  a  represen¬ 
tation  of  either  kind  of  countenance,  the  laughing  and  the  sad. 

58.  peepe]  Warburton  :  As  in  laughing,  when  the  eyes  are  half  shut. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


9 


And  other  of  fuch  vineger  afpedt,  60 

That  they’ll  not  fhew  their  teeth  in  way  of  fmile, 

Though  Neflor  fweare  the  ieft  be  laughable. 

Enter  Baffanio ,  Lorenfo, and  Gratiano. 

Sola.  Heere  comes  Baffanio , 

Your  moft  noble  Kinfman,  65 

Gratiano,  and  Lorenfo.  Faryewell, 

We  leaue  you  now  with  better  company. 

Sala.  I  would  haue  ftaid  till  I  had  made  you  merry, 

If  worthier  friends  had  not  preuented  me. 

Ant.  Your  worth  is  very  deere  in  my  regard.  70 

I  take  it  your  owne  bufines  calls  on  you, 

And  you  embrace  th’occafion  to  depart. 

Sal.  Good  morrow  my  good  Lor-ds.  (when? 

Baff  Good  figniors  both,  when  fhall  we  laugh?  fay, 

You  grow  exceeding  Arrange  :  muft  it  be  fo?  7 5 


60.  other]  others  Pope  +  . 

vineger ]  vinigar  Q2.  viniger  Q3. 
vinegar  QtF2F4. 

61.  they'll]  theyle  Q2. 

63.  Enter...]  After  line  72,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Clarke,  Huds. 

Lorenfo]  Lorenzo.  Rowe. 

64.  Sola.]  Q2Ff.  Sala.  Q3.  Sal. 
Rowe  +  .  Sol.  Cap.  Solan.  Knt,  Dyce, 
Sta.  Del.  Coll,  iii,  Huds.  Salan.  Qx  et  cet. 


66.  Faryewell]  Fare  ye  well  Q3F3F4. 
Fare  you  well  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Knt, 
Coll.  Sing.  Sta. 

67.  you ]  ye  Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 

68.  Sala.]  Q2F2F3<  Salan.  Q3.  Sola. 
F4,  Rowe  + .  Sal.  Cap.  Salar.  Qt  et  cet. 

71.  bufines  calls ]  bufmejfe  cals  Q  . 

72.  thl]  the  Qt. 

73.  76.  Sal.]  Q2Ff,  Rowe  +  .  Salar. 
Qj  et  cet. 


60.  other]  For  other  instances  of  this  singular  used  as  a  plural,  see  Abbott,  §  12. 

60.  aspect]  For  a  long  list  of  words  in  which  the  accent  was  formerly  nearer  the 
end  than  now,  see  Abbott,  §  490. 

61.  in  way]  For  other  instances  of  the  omission  of  the,  see  Abbott,  §  89. 

62.  N  estor]  Clarendon  :  The  oldest,  and  therefore  presumably  the  gravest,  of 
heroes. 

62.  swear]  Allen  :  Possibly,  sware ;  i.  e.  had  sworn,  or,  should  have  sworn. 

69.  preuented]  Wordsworth  [Sh.  Kncmil.  and  Use  of  the  Bible,  p.  40) :  That  is, 
anticipate.  See  X  Tkess.  iv,  15 :  ‘We  which  are  alive  shall  not  prevent  them  which  are 
asleep.’  Also  Fs.  cxix,  148 :  ‘  Mine  eyes  prevent  the  night-watches.’ 

75.  exceeding]  Rolfe:  This  adverbial  use  is  frequent  in  Elizabethan  writers. 
Shakespeare  uses  *  exceedingly  ’  only  five  times,  in  four  of  which  it  modifies  the  adverb 
well,  while  in  the  fifth  {Ham.  V,  ii,  103)  it  modifies  an  adjective  understood. 

75  strange]  Clarendon  :  In  modern  English  we  should  say :  ‘  You  are  becoming 
quite  strangers.’ 

75.  Must  it  be  so?]  Of  course  the  first,  and  perhaps  the  only,  interpretation  of 
these  words  is  that  they  apply  to  the  infrequency  of  the  intercourse  between  Bassanio 


IO 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


Sal.  Wee’ll  make  our  leyfures  to  attend  on  yours.  76 

Exeunt  Salarino, and  Solanio. 

Lor.  My  Lord  Baffanio,{. ince  you  haue  found  Anthonio 
We  two  will  leaue  you;but  at  dinner  time 

T  pray  you  haue  in  minde  where  we  muft  meete.  80 

Baff.  I  will  not  faile  you. 

Grat.  You  looke  not  well  fignior  Anthonio , 

You  haue  too  much  refpedl  vpon  the  world : 

They  loofe  it  that  doe  buy  it  with  much  care, 

Beleeue  me  you  are  maruelloufly  chang’d.  85 

Ant.  I  hold  the  world  but  as  the  world  Gratiano , 

A  ftage, where  euery  man  muft  play  a  part,  87 


76.  Wee'll]  Weele  Q2Q3> 

77.  Exeunt...]  After  line  81,  Rowe  +  . 

Exeunt...  Solanio]  Exeunt. ..Sa- 

lanio  QjQ3,  Mai.  Steev.  Coll.  Wh.  Cam. 
Exeunt  ..Solar,  and  Sala.  Rowe  +  . 

78.  Lor.]  Lord.  Ff.  Sola.  Rowe  +  . 


78.  you  haue ]  you've  Pope+ ,  Dyce  ii, 
Rife,  Huds. 

81.  you.]  you.  Exit.  Qr. 

84.  doe]  do  Q,F3F4. 

85.  maruelloufly]  meruailoufly  Q,Q2- 
mervelloujly  Q3. 

87.  man]  one  Qt,  Pope  ii. 


and  ‘  the  good  signiors  both,’  but  may  they  not  refer  to  the  leave-taking  of  Salarino  and 
Solanio  ?  As  they  are  close  to  the  door,  or  to  the  palling  of  the  ways,  after  having 
actually  bade  Anthonio  farewell,  Bassanio  sees  how  hopeless  it  is  to  detain  them,  and, 
in  effect,  says,  ‘  Must  you  really  go  now  ?  ’  To  me  this  short  phrase  reads  like  one  of 
the  many  which  Shakespeare  uses  to  supply  the  place  of  stage-directions. — Ed. 

78.  Lor.]  The  misprint  here  in  F2  of  Lord  was  repeated  by  F3  and  F4,  and  still  fur¬ 
ther  sophisticated  by  Rowe,  who  changed  it  to  Sola.,  and  was  therein  heedlessly  fol¬ 
lowed  by  every  editor  down  to  Capell,  and  the  Exeunt  of  Salarino  and  Solanio  trans¬ 
ferred  to  the  end  of  line  81.  Capell,  however,  restored  the  speech  of  Lorenzo,  because, 
as  he  says,  ‘  Lorenzo  enters  with  a  design  of  retiring,  having  executed  the  purpose  he 
came  for,  to  wit — the  finding  of  Anthonio ;  but  such  a  sudden  and  silent  departure  not 
suiting  with  his  companion,  he  is  kept  a  while  ’till  the  other  has  gratify’d  his  passion 
for  talking,  and,  that  done,  repeats  at  [line  115]  his  declaration  in  this  speech,  and 
soon  after  puts  it  in  execution.’ — Ed. 

78.  Anthonio]  One  of  the  numberless  instances  of  the  rhythmical  shortening  of 
polysyllabic  names,  to  which  no  further  reference  will  be  hereafter  made, — perhaps  it 
is  needless  even  here.  See  Abbott,  §  469. — Ed. 

83.  vpon]  Abbott,  §  191 :  In  this  use  of  ‘upon’  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  literal 
meaning  of  ‘respect.’  ‘You  look  too  much  upon  the  world.’  The  ‘upon’  is  con¬ 
nected  with  ‘  respect,’  and  is  not  used  like  our  for  in  ‘  I  have  no  respect  for  him.’ 

84.  loose]  Steevens  considers  this  a  misprint  for  lose,  strangely  enough,  because  no 
one  was  better  acquainted  than  Steevens  with  the  fact,  which  Halliwell  notes,  that  it  is 
merely  the  old  spelling  of  lose,  and  is  of  continual  occurrence.  See  I,  iv,  28. — Ed. 

84.  Wordsworth  (p.  343) :  This  appears  to  be  founded  upon  Matt,  xvi,  25  :  ‘  Who¬ 
soever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it.’  [‘  It  ’  refers  to  the  opinion  of  the  world. — Ed.] 

87.  stage]  Steevens  :  See  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  book  ii :  ‘  She  found  the  world  but  a 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


ll 


And  mine  a  fad  one.  88 

Grati.  Let  me  play  the  foole, 

With  mirth  and  laughter  let  old  wrinckles  come,  90 

And  let  my  Liuer  rather  heate  with  wine, 

Then  my  heart  coole  with  mortifying  grones. 

Why  fhould  a  man  whofe  bloud  is  warme  within, 

Sit  like  his  Grandfire,  cut  in  Alablafter  ? 

Sleepe  when  he  wakes  ?  and  creep  into  the  Iaundies  95 


88.  mine ]  mine's  Han.  Warb. 

89.  Grati.]  Gra.  Qx. 

89,  90.  foole,. ..laughter]  fool. ..laugh¬ 
ter  ;  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

90.  let  old ]  so  let  Han. 


90.  wrinckles ]  wrinkles  Qt.  wrinckes 


92.  heart  ]  hart  Q2.  heat  FaF3. 

94.  Alablafter]  Alabaster  Pope. 

95.  Iaundies]  Jaundies  F3>  Jaundies 
F  .  jaundice  Rowe  ii. 


wearisome  stage  to  her,  where  she  played  a  part  against  her  will.’  Rolfe  :  See  the 
famous  passage :  *  All  the  world’s  a  stage,’  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii. 

88.  sad]  Walker  (iii,  52) :  ‘Sad’  is  grave.  [Unquestionably.  See  post,  II,  ii, 
193:  ‘Well  studied  in  a  sad  ostent  To  please  his  Grandam,’  and  many  another  instance 
given  by  Schmidt. — Ed.] 

89.  foole]  Warburton  :  Gratiano  desires  to  play  the  Fool’s  or  buffoon’s  part 
which  was  a  constant  character  in  the  old  farces ;  from  whence  came  the  phrase,  ‘  to 
play  the  fool.’ 

90.  With]  Here  used  causatively. 

90.  old]  Halliwell  :  Gratiano  here  means  to  refer  to  old  age,  which  he  desire., 
may  be  reached  with  joy  and  laughter;  or  he  is  possibly  merely  alluding  to  the  wrin¬ 
kles  caused  by  mirth,  in  which  case  the  epithet  ‘  old  ’  is  the  common  augmentative. 
‘Some  Dick,  that  smiles  his  cheek  in  years?  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  V,  ii,  465. 

92.  mortifying]  Used  in  its  literal  sense,  like  extravagant  in  Othello,  I,  i,  149,  or 
fantastical  in  Macbeth,  I,  iii,  139,  or,  perhaps  as  ‘mortified  ’  in  the  latter  play,  V,  ii,  5. 
The  belief  that  groans  were  *  mortifying  ’  Shakespeare  shared  in  common  with  his  age ; 
he  refers  to  it  more  than  once.  ‘  Dry  sorrow  drinks  our  blood,’  Rom.  Jul.  Ill,  v, 
58;  ‘a  spendthrift  sigh,  That  hurts  by  easing,’  Ham.  IV,  vii,  128;  ‘sighs  that  cost  the 
fresh  blood  dear,’  Mid.  N.  D.  Ill,  ii,  97 ;  ‘  Look  pale  as  primrose  with  blood-drinking 
sighs,’  2  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii,  63. — Ed. 

94.  Grandsire]  Under  this  respectful  appellation  our  German  brothers  seem  to  have 
detected  some  merry  jest.  Voss,  Schlegel,  Bodenstedt,  and  even  Schmidt,  have  trans¬ 
lated  it  ‘  Grosspapal — Ed. 

94.  Alablaster]  Murray  ( New  Eng.  Diet.] :  The  spelling  in  the  i6th-i7th  Cen¬ 
turies  is  almost  always  ‘  alablaster;’  apparently  due  to  a  confusion  with  arblaster,  a 
cross-bowman,  also  written  alablaster. — Note  on  Oth.  V,  ii,  7. 

95.  Iaundies]  Bucknill  (p.  92) :  In  this  whole  passage  the  intimate  connection 
between  mind  and  body  is  sketched  with  exact  physiological  truth.  Perhaps  the  most 
curious  and  undoubted  instance  of  the  mind’s  influence  in  the  production  of  bodily  dis¬ 
ease,  is  jaundice  caused  by  depressing  emotion.  It  is  not  always  ‘  crept  ’  into,  since  bad 
news  has  frequently  been  known  to  cause  jaundice  in  a  few  hours.  In  Copland’s  Diet, 
of  Medicine  it  is  stated  that  ‘  The  most  common  exciting  causes  of  jaundice  are  the  more 
violent  mental  emotions,’  and  in  the  list  of  these  emotions,  which  he  adds,  he  specially 


12 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


By  being  peeuifh  ?  I  tell  thee  what  Anthonio ,  96 

I  loue  thee,  and  it  is  my  loue  that  fpeakes : 

There  are  a  fort  of  men,  whofe  vifages 
Do  creame  and  mantle  like  a  ftanding  pond, 

And  do  a  wilfull  ftilneffe  entertaine,  100 

With  purpofe  to  be  dreft  in  an  opinion 
Of  wifedome,  grauity,  profound  conceit, 

97.  it  is\  tis  Qq,  Han.  100.  wilfull Jlilneffe~\  wilful Jlilnes 

fpeakes  :~\  fpeakes.  Qx.  102.  grauity~\  grauitie  Qa. 

99.  creame ]  dreavie  Qx. 


includes  ‘peevishness.’  In  Watson’s  Lectures  on  Physic,  that  able  physician  states  that 
among  the  causes  of  jaundice  *  the  pathemata  mentis  play  their  assigned  part ;  fits  of 
anger  and  fear  and  alarm  have  been  presently  followed  by  jaundice.’  This  curious 
medical  fact  Shakespeare  has  here  sketched  with  exact  fidelity.  The  effect  of  wine  on 
the  temperature  of  the  liver,  and  despondency  on  that  of  the  heart,  are  also  unques¬ 
tionably  medical  thoughts.  Rolfe  :  The  only  other  passage  in  which  Shakespeare 
mentions  the  jaundice  the  cause  is,  as  here,  a  mental  one.  See  Tro.  6°  Cress. 
I,  iii,  2. 

96.  In  the  Folio,  the  page  beginning  with  this  line  is  wrongly  numbered  162,  instead 
of  164;  so  also  the  opposite  page  is  163,  instead  of  165;  after  this,  the  pagination  is 
correct. — Ed. 

100.  do]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  ‘  And  who  do.’  Not  unfrequently  in  Shakespeare 
the  pronoun  requires  to  be  mentally  repeated  in  order  to  complete  the  construction. 
See  1  Hen.  IV:  II,  iv,  279 :  ‘We  two  saw  you  four  set  on  four  and  bound  them,  and 
were  masters  of  their  wealth.’  A  somewhat  similar  inaccuracy  occurs  also  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  scene,  108,  109. 

100.  wilfull  stilnesse]  Malone:  That  is,  an  obstinate  silence. 

101.  opinion]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  reputation  for  wisdom.  ‘Opinion’  is  used  in 
the  same  sense  in  line  112. 

102.  grauity]  Halliwell:  This  fine  passage,  observes  Dr  Dodd,  always  puts  me 
in  mind  of  a  remark  made  by  Dryden :  ‘  There  are,  who  wanting  wit,  affect  gravity, 
and  go  by  the  name  of  solid  men ;  and  a  solid  man  is,  in  plain  English,  a  solid,  solemn 
fool.’ 

102.  conceit]  Craik  ( Jul.  Cces.  I,  iii,  162) :  To  conceit  is  another  form  of  our  still 
familiar  to  conceive.  And  the  noun  ‘  conceit,’  which  survives  with  a  limited  meaning 
(the  conception  of  a  man  by  himself,  which  is  so  apt  to  be  oile  of  over-estimation),  is 
also  frequent  in  Shakespeare  with  the  sense,  nearly,  of  what  we  now  call  conception,  in 
general.  Sometimes  it  is  used  in  a  sense  which  might  almost  be  said  to  be  the  opposite 
of  what  it  now  means ;  as  when  Juliet  employs  it  as  the  term  to  denote  her  all-absorb¬ 
ing  affection  for  Romeo,  II,  v,  30.  Or  as  Gratiano  uses  it  here — that  is,  in  the  sense  of 
deep  thought.  So  again  when  Rosaline,  in  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  II,  i,  speaking  of  Biron, 
describes  his  *  fair  tongue  ’  as  ‘  conceit’s  expositor,’  all  that  she  means  is  that  speech  is 
the  expounder  of  thought.  The  Scriptural  expression,  still  in  familiar  use,  ‘  wise  in  his 
own  conceit,’  means  merely  wise  in  his  own  thought,  or  in  his  own  eyes,  as  we  are 
told  in  the  margin  the  Hebrew  literally  signifies.  [Cf.  the  title  of  the  First  Quarto  of 
Rom.  dr5  Jul.  :  ‘  The  Excellent  conceited  Tragedie,’  &c.] 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MER  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


13 


As  who  fhould  fay,  I  am  fir  an  Oracle, 

And  when  I  ope  my  lips,  let  no  dogge  barke. 

O  my  Anthonio ,  I  do  know  of  thefe  105 

That  therefore  onely  are  reputed  wife, 

For  faying  nothing  ;  when  I  am  verie  fare 

If  they  fhould  fpeake,  would  almoft  dam  thofe  eares  108 


103.  fir  an\  F2F3.  fir,  an  F4,  Rowe. 
fir  Qq  et  cet. 

104.  dogge]  dog  QiF3F4. 

105.  thefe\  thofe  QJ(  Pope  +  . 

107.  when\  who  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Knt,  Sta.  Huds. 


107.  I  am ]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
Huds. 

108.  would ]  ’ twould  Coll.  (MS),Ktly, 
Dyce  ii. 

dam]  QjQ2-  dant  Q  .  damme 
F„F„.  doom  Clarke,  damn  F.  et  cet. 

23  4 


103.  who]  Abbott  (§  257,  after  citing  Macb.  Ill,  vi,  42;  Rich.  II:  V,  iv,  8,  and 
Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  ii,  45) :  In  these  passages  it  is  possible  to  understand  an  antecedent  to 

*  who,’  ‘  as,  or  like  (one)  who  should  say.’  In  Early  English  (Morris,  Specimens ,  p. 
xxxii) *  *  als  wha  say  ’  was  used  for  *  as  any  one  may  say.’  Comp,  the  Lat.  quis  after  si, 
nu?n,  &c.  Possibly  an  if  is  implied  after  the  ‘  as  ’  by  the  use  of  the  subjunctive.  Littr6 
explains  ‘  comme  qui  dirait  ’  by  supplying  ‘  celui.’  ‘  II  portait  sur  sa  teste  comme  qui 
dirait  un  turban;  c’est-k-dire,  il  portait,  comme  dirait  celui  qui  dirait  un  turban.’  But 
this  explanation  seems  unsatisfactory,  in  making  a  likeness  to  exist  between  ‘  carrying  ’ 
and  ‘  saying.’  But  whatever  may  be  the  true  explanation  of  the  original  idiom,  Shake¬ 
speare  seems  to  have  understood  who  as  the  relative,  for  the  antecedent  can  be  supplied 
in  all  passages  where  he  uses  it. 

103.  sir  an  Oracle]  White  (ed.  i) :  The  absence  of  a  capital  letter  in  the  ‘sir’  is 
remarkable  in  the  Folio, — which,  in  this  respect,  is  very  carefully  printed, — even  if  not 
in  the  Quartos.  I  believe  the  ‘  sir  oracle  ’  of  the  Quartos  which  has  been  universally 
adopted,  to  be  the  result  of  accident,  and  that  the  change  in  the  Folio  is  intentional 
and  by  authority.  ‘  Sir  Oracle  ’  is  so  awkward  an  effort  in  nomenclature,  and  a  speci¬ 
men  of  so  cheap  a  sort  of  wit,  that  I  for  one  am  quite  willing  to  take  the  testimony  of 
the  authorized  edition,  that  it  is  none  of  Shakespeare’s.  But  being  one  of  those  phrases 
which  save  people  the  trouble  of  thinking  and  finding  words  for  themselves,  it  has  be 
come  almost  a  part  of  the  language ;  and  to  disturb  the  text  would,  under  the  circum 
stances,  be  a  thankless  work  of  supererogation.  [I  think  it  is  a  little  too  severe  to  say 
that  the  phrase  is  popular  because  it  saves  the  trouble  of  thinking  or  of  finding  words. 
There  is  a  certain  pomposity  in  ‘  Sir  Oracle  ’  which  befits  the  character  and  which 
speaks  to  all.  Yet  it  is  this  very  pomposity  which  gives  it  a  disagreeable  tone  and  makes 
me  wish  that  the  Folio  were  right,  which  it  cannot  be,  I  fear,  in  its  present  unrhythmical 
line,  unless  we  suppose,  with  Allen,  that  the  indefinite  article  was  slurred  in  pronun¬ 
ciation  :  ‘I  am,  sir,  ’n  Oracle.’ — Ed.] 

106,  107.  Wordsworth  (p.  241) :  Conf.  ‘Even  a  fool  when  he  holdeth  his  peace 
is  counted  wise ;  and  he  that  shutteth  his  lips  is  esteemed  a  man  of  understanding.’ — 
Prov.  xvii,  28. 

108.  would]  The  omission  of  the  nominative,  when  the  sense  wall  readily  supply 
it,  is  so  common  that  no  change  is  needed  here.  See  Ham.  II,  ii,  67 ;  III,  i,  8 ;  Lear 
II,  ii,  143;  II,  iv,  41;  IV,  ii,  76;  V,  i,  67;  or  Abbott,  §  399.  Collier  (ed.  ii) 
adopted  his  (MS)  change  V  would,  but  doubted  if  change  were  necessary.  Claren¬ 
don  suggests  that  ‘the  clause  “If  they  should  speak,”  equivalent  to  “their  speaking,” 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


14 


Which  hearing  them  would  call  their  brothers  fooles : 

lie  tell  thee  more  of  this  another  time.  1 10 

But  fiili  not  with  this  melancholly  baite 

For  this  foole  Gudgin,  this  opinion  : 

Come  good  Lorenzo ,  faryewell  a  while, 
lie  end  my  exhortation  after  dinner. 

Lor.  Well,  we  will  leaue  you  then  till  dinner  time.  1 1 5 

I  mu  ft  be  one  of  thefe  fame  dumbe  wife  men, 

For  Gratiano  neuer  let’s  me  fpeake. 

Gra.  Well,  keepe  me  company  but  two  yeares  mo, 

Thou  thalt  not  know  the  found  of  thine  owne  tongue. 

Ant.  Far  you  well,  He  grow  a  talker  for  this  geare.  120 


1 12.  foole  Gudgin ]  foole  Gudgion  Ff. 
fool' s  gudgeon  Pope  +  ,  Steev.  Var.  fool- 
gudgeon  Mai.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh. 
i,  Ktly,  Rife,  Huds. 

1 13.  Lorenzo]  Lorenfo  Q2Q3- 
faryewell]  far-well  QJ. 


1 13.  a  while']  arvhile  Coll. 

1 1 6.  dumbe  wife]  dumb-wise  Huds. 

1 18.  mo]  F2F3>  moe  QqF<(  Cam.  Glo. 
Clarke,  Del.  Rife,  more  Rowe  et  cet. 

120.  Far  you  well]  Q2.  Far-well  Q  . 
Fare  you  well  FfQ3.  Fare  well  Pope  + . 


serves  for  subject  to  the  following  verb.’  I  think  the  simpler  way  is  to  suppose  that 
‘they’  is  earned  forward  from  ‘should’  to  ‘would.’ — Ed. 

108.  damn]  Theobald  :  That  is,  That  some  people  are  thought  wise,  whilst  they 
keep  silence ;  who,  when  they  open  their  mouths,  are  such  stupid  praters,  that  the  hear¬ 
ers  cannot  help  calling  them  ‘  fools  ’  and  so  incur  the  judgment  denounced  in  the  Gos¬ 
pel  \_Matt.  v,  32]. 

hi.  melancholly  baite]  Allen  (MS)  suggests  (rightly,  I  think)  that  this  is  a 
genitive  of  apposition ;  it  should  therefore  be  printed  with  a  hyphen,  and  its  meaning 
would  be  this  bait  of  melancholy,  that  is,  this  melancholy  as  a  bait.  The  same  would 
apply  to  ‘foole  gudgin,’  and  so  Malone  printed  it  in  1790.  The  whole  sentence  is, 
then,  ‘  fish  not  with  this  melancholy  as  a  bait  for  this  gudgeon  of  the  fool.’  Eccles, 
however,  prints  fool-gudgeon,  and  evidently  understands  ‘ fool ’  as  an  adjective;  ‘that 
is,’  he  says,  ‘  a  gudgeon  foolish  enough  to  be  taken  with  such  a  bait,’  whereby  the  point 
is  not  given  which  I  think  the  sentence  bears.  It  is  not  the  folly  of  the  gudgeon  that 
is  in  question,  but  that  ‘  this  opinion  ’  is  the  worthless  gudgeon  that  only  fools  care  to 
fish  for.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  also  takes  ‘fool’  as  an  adjective,  and  there  is,  to  be  sure, 
some  warrant  for  it  in  the  similar  phrase  *  fool  multitude,’  post,  II,  ix,  28 ;  but  I  doubt 
if  the  sense  here  admits  of  a  similar  interpretation. — Ed. 

1 16.  dumbe  wise  men]  Walker  (ii,  139):  Write  dumb-wise;  for  ‘dumb  wise 
men’  would  be  pronounced  dumb  wisemen. 

120.  lie]  Allen  (MS) :  That  is,  I  will,  not  I  shall.  Gratiano  thanks  him  for  the 
resolution. 

120.  geare]  Eccles  :  That  is,  ‘  I’ll  grow  a  talker  for  this  time,’  or  ‘upon  this  par¬ 
ticular  occasion.’  Nares  defines  the  word  as  meaning,  in  general,  ‘matter,  subject, 
or  business  in  general ;  often  applied  to  dress  also.’  Dyce  gives  it  three  meanings: 
‘  dress ;  matter  in  hand,  business  [as  in  the  present  instance] ;  stuff.’  Schmidt  divides 
its  meanings  under  two  heads  :  ‘stuff’  [as  in  the  present  instance]  ;  and  ‘affair,  matter. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


15 


Gra.  Thankes  ifaith,  for  filence  is  onely  commendable  1 2 1 
In  a  neats  tongue  driM,  and  a  maid  not  vendible.  Exit. 

Ant.  It  is  that  any  thing  now. 

Baf.  Gratiano  fpeakes  an  infinite  deale  of  nothing, 
more  then  any  man  in  all  Venice,  his  reafons  are  two  125 


121.  ifaith~\  y faith  Q2Q3-  i' faith  F4. 

122.  tongue]  togue  Q2. 
vendible ]  vendable  Q,Q3. 

Exit.]  Exeunt.  Qq. 

123.  It  is  that...  now.]  It  is  that. 


...now?  Ktly.  Is  that... now?  Rowe  et 

cet. 

124.  nothing,]  nothing  Q2. 

125.  are']  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  are  as  Qq 
et  cet. 


business.’  [All  of  which  confirms  the  truth  of  what  Steevens  said  long  ago — that  ‘  it 
is  a  colloquial  expression  perhaps  of  no  very  determinate  import.’  The  sense  demanded 
by  the  context  must  in  each  case  be  our  guide ;  in  B.  and  Fl.’s  The  Scornful  Lady , 
II,  i,  Sir  Roger  says  of  tobacco,  ‘  it  is  notable  stinging  gear  indeed.’  I  am  not  sure 
that  our  colloquial  word  ‘  stuff,’  as  given  by  Dyce  and  Schmidt,  herein  following  John¬ 
son’s  Diet.,  does  not  very  nearly  correspond  to  ‘gear.’ — Ed.]  Halliwell:  It  has 
been  unnecessarily  proposed  to  alter  ‘gear’  to  jeer  or  year ;  and  another  critic  to  fear, 
the  last  one  referring  it  to  the  fear  of  not  knowing  the  sound  of  his  own  tongue.  [See 
also  post,  II,  ii,  159.] 

1 21,  122.  These  two  lines  Abbott,  §  490,  scans  thus:  Thanks  faith,  |  for  silence  | 
is  only  |  command  |  able.  In  a  neat’s  |  tongue  dried  |  and  a  maid  |  not  vend  |  ible. 
The  lines  may  be  some  jingle  current  at  that  time,  but  now  lost. — Ed. 

123.  Johnson:  I  suppose  we  should  read:  ‘Is  that  anything  new?'  Steevens: 
The  sense  of  the  old  reading  is,  Does  what  he  has  just  said  amount  to  anything,  or 
mean  anything  ?  Tyrwhitt:  Anthonio  asks  :  Is  that  any  thing  now  ?  and  Bassanio 
answers,  that  Gratiano  speaks  an  infinite  deal  of  nothing, — the  greatest  part  of  his  dis¬ 
course  is  not  any  thing.  Collier  [whose  text  reads,  ‘It  is  that: — any  thing  now.’] 
says :  This  is  the  reading  of  Q  ,  Q2,  and  Ft,  and  it  is  preserved  in  F2.  Surely,  there¬ 
fore,  we  are  not  warranted  in  altering  the  text  when  a  clear  meaning  can  be  made  out 
of  it.  Antonio’s  observation,  ‘  It  is  that,’  is  addressed  to  Gratiano,  concurring  in  his 
remark  just  before  he  made  his  exit;  and  then  Antonio’s  bad  spirits  return  upon  him, 
and  he  adds,  as  if  weary  of  Gratiano’s  talk,  ‘  any  thing  now.’  This  naturally  leads  to 
Bassanio’s  criticism  upon  Gratiano.  [Collier  gives  the  words  of  the  Qq  and  Ff  cor¬ 
rectly,  but  the  punctuation  is  wholly  his  own ;  there  is  not  even  a  comma  in  the  orig¬ 
inal. — Ed.]  Lettsom  [ap.  Dyce,  ed.  iii]  :  *  It  ’  appears  to  me  a  mere  blunder  for 
‘  /,’  i.  e.  Ay  !  an  ironical  interjection.  As  to  the  rest  of  this  short  speech,  nothing  can 
be  more  awkward  than  ‘  is  that  any  thing  ’  for  ‘  is  there  any  thing  in  that  ?’  and  ‘  now  ’ 
is  worse  than  superfluous.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  said  against  Johnson’s  con¬ 
jecture  new,  that  it  does  not  so  exactly  accord  with  Bassanio’s  phrase,  ‘  an  infinite  deal 
of  nothing.’  It  is,  however,  quite  common  for  speakers  to  wrest  the  meaning  of  a  pre¬ 
ceding  speech  for  the  sake  of  a  retort;  when  this  happens  in  a  written  dialogue,  it  is 
only  an  imitation  of  nature ;  but  it  is  a  fault  in  the  writer  to  prepare  the  way  for  a  retort 
by  previously  introducing  awkward  phraseology.  [I  think  Rowe’s  emendation  must  be 
adopted.  I  can  make  nothing  of  the  original  text,  which  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  see  is 
aided  by  Lettsom’s  change. — Ed.] 

125.  are  two]  It  may  be  that  as  of  the  Qq  is  here  omitted  through  the  compos- 


i6 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


graines  of  wheate  hid  in  two  bufhels  of  chafife  :  you  fhall 
feeke  all  day  ere  you  finde  them,  &  when  you  haue  them 
they  are  not  worth  the  fearch. 

An.  Well  :  tel  me  now,  what  Lady  is  the  fame 
To  whom  you  fwore  a  fecret  Pilgrimage 
That  you  to  day  promis’d  to  tel  me  of? 

Baf.  Tis  not  vnknowne  to  you  Anthonio 
How  much  I  haue  difabled  mine  eftate, 

By  fomething  fhewing  a  more  fwelling  port 
Then  my  faint  meanes  would  grant  continuance : 

Nor  do  I  now  make  mone  to  be  abridg’d 
From  fuch  a  noble  rate,  but  my  cheefe  care 
Is  to  come  fairely  off  from  the  great  debts 
Wherein  my  time  fomething  too  prodigall 
Hath  left  me  gag’d  :  to  you  Anthonio 
I  owe  the  moft  in  money,  and  in  loue, 

And  from  your  loue  I  haue  a  warrantie 
To  vnburthen  all  my  plots  and  purpofes, 

How  to  get  cleere  of  all  the  debts  I  owe. 

An.  I  pray  you  good  Baffanio  let  me  know  it, 


129.  the]  this  Han.  Sing.  Ktly. 

134.  fomething /hewing]  shewing  some¬ 
thing  Pope  + . 

I35-  grant]  graunt  Q2. 

contimiance]  continuance  to 


Rowe. 

136.  mone]  Q2F2. 

138.  off]  ofQ,. 

142.  warrantie ]  Q2Q3* 
145.  An.]  Antho.  Q,. 


126 


I3O 


135 


140 


145 


itor’s  carelessness,  but  it  is  doubtful  if  the  sentence  be  not  a  little  stronger  without 
it. — Ed. 

126.  you  shall]  Abbott,  §  315  :  ‘You  shall  see,  find,’  &c.,  was  especially  common 
in  the  meaning  ‘you  may;’  ‘you  will’  applied  to  that  which  is  of  common  occurrence, 
or  so  evident  that  it  cannot  but  be  seen.  Cf.  Oth.  I,  i,  44. 

129.  the  same]  I  cannot  but  think  that  Hanmer  is  here  right  in  printing  this 
same. — Ed. 

1 3 1  -  That]  It  is  hard  to  say  whether  this  refers  to  ‘lady’  or  ‘pilgrimage.’ — Ed. 

134.  Something]  See  line  139;  Ham.  Ill,  i,  173;  Lear,  I,  i,  20,  or  Abbott,  §  68. 
for  other  instances  of  this  adverbial  use  like  somewhat. 

134.  port]  Steevens  :  External  pomp  of  appearance,  state. 

135.  continuance]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  continuance  of.  Such  omissions  are  fre¬ 
quent  in  Shakespeare.  See  II,  vi,  11 ;  III,  iv,  8;  IV,  i,  406;  and  see  Abbott,  §  394. 

136.  to  be]  See  I,  i,  45. 

139.  time]  Schmidt  defines  this  simply  by  life ;  but  Allen  notes  that  it  is  equiv¬ 
alent  to  bpa,  when  upa  means  the  springtime  of  life,  youth,  manhood. — Ed. 

140.  gag’d]  Halliwell:  That  is ,  pledged;  not  a  contraction  of  engaged. 

145.  it]  That  is,  the  plot  or  purpose. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


17 


And  if  it  ftand  as  you  your  felfe  ftill  do,  146 

Within  the  eye  of  honour,  be  affur’d 
My  purfe,  my  perfon,  my  extreameft  meanes 
Lye  all  vnlock’d  to  your  occafions. 

Baff.  In  my  fchoole  dayes,  when  I  had  loft  one  fhaft  150 
I  fhot  his  fellow  of  the  felfefame  flight 
The  felfefame  way,  with  more  aduifed  watch 
To  finde  the  other  forth, and  by  aduenturing  both,  153 


146.  fland~\  stands  Rowe. 

147.  ajfur’d']  affurd  Q2.  ajfured  Q,. 

149.  unlock'd ]  vnlockt  Qq. 

150.  dayes,  when ]  dayes.  when  Q,. 
I5I»  !52.  felfefame~\  felfe- fame  Qr. 

felfe  fame  Q2Q3- 

153.  the  other  forthl\  the  other  foorth , 


Qz.  the  other,  forth  ;  Han.  the  other  ; 
Cap. 

153.  and  by  aduenturing  ]  by  \  <ent  ’  ring 
Pope  +  .  and,  venturing  Dyce  conj. 

aduenturing ]  aduentring  Qt, 
Cap.  Steev.  ’85,  Mai. 


146.  still]  That  is,  constantly,  always.  Staunton  was,  I  think,  the  first  to  call 
attention  to  this  meaning  of  *  still,’  instances  of  which  are  innumerable  in  Shakespeare. 

147.  eye  of  honour]  Eccles  :  If  it  be  of  such  a  nature  that  honour  may  be  sup¬ 
posed  to  keep  a  continual  watch  over  it,  or,  rather,  perhaps,  if  it  be  such  as  needs  not 
at  any  time  shrink  from  the  view  of  honour.  Clarendon  :  That  is,  within  the  scope 
of  honour’s  vision,  within  the  limits  of  that  which  can  be  regarded  as  honourable. 
Allen  1  Cf.  1  Hen.  IV:  I,  i,  81,  ‘The  theme  of  Honour’s  tongue.’ 

150.  &c.  Steevens:  Compare  Dekker’s  Villanies  discovered  by  Lanthorne  and 
Candlelight :  ‘And  yet  I  have  seen  a  Creditor  in  Prison  weepe  when  he  beheld  the 
Debtor,  and  to  lay  out  money  of  his  owne  purse  to  free  him :  he  shot  a  second  arrow  to 
find  the  first.’  [I  have  searched  in  vain  for  this  passage  in  Grosart’s  edition ;  even  if 
it  could  be  found,  it  would  be  useless;  the  date  of  the  pamphlet  is  1609,  and  therefore 
subsequent  to  the  Mer.  of  Ven.  Steevens  cites  from  the  edition  of  1616,  wherein  it  is 
possible  the  passage  appears. — Ed.]  Douce  cites  a  passage  from  ‘  P.  Crescentius  in 
his  treatise  de  Agricultural  and  another  from  Howell’s  Letters,  where  this  method  of 
finding  an  arrow  is  referred  to ;  and  Collier,  to  the  same  effect,  cites  from  Quips  upon 
Questions,  published  in  1600. 

15 1.  flight]  Ascham,  in  his  Toxophilus  (B.  p.  152,  ed.  Arber),  lays  it  down,  as  a 
rule,  that  ‘  a  perfyte  archer  muste  firste  learne  to  knowe  the  sure  flyghte  of  his  shaftes.’ 
With  this  knowledge  it  would  be  possible,  of  course,  as  Bassanio  says,  to  choose  a  ‘  fel¬ 
low  of  the  selfsame  flight.’  Clarendon  calls  attention  to  another  passage  in  Ascham 
[*-P-  131,  ed.  Arber],  where  this  word  ‘flight’  is  used  in  precisely  ‘the  same  sense 
which  it  has  here :’  *  You  must  haue  diuerse  shaftes  of  one  flight,’  &c. — Ed. 

152.  aduised]  Dyce:  That  is,  deliberate.  [See  II,  i,  48,  and  ‘advice,’  IV, 
ii,  8.] 

153.  To  finde]  Cf.  I,  i,  45. 

153.  forth]  Craik  (Jul.  Cces.  p.  40,  2d  ed.) :  To  find  forth  may,  I  apprehend,  be 
safely  pronounced  to  be  neither  English  nor  sense.  The  ‘  forth  ’  has  apparently  been 
transferred  from  the  preceding  line,  which  was  either  originally  written  ‘  The  same  way 
forth,’  or,  more  probably,  was  so  corrected  after  having  been  originally  written  ‘  The 
selfsame  way.’  Staunton  :  It  may  not  be  English  of  the  present  day,  but  it  was 
a 


i8 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


I  oft  found  both.  I  vrge  this  child-hoode  proofe, 
Becaufe  what  followes  is  pure  innocence. 

I  owe  you  much,  and  like  a  wilfull  youth, 

That  which  I  owe  is  loft  :  but  if  you  pleafe 
To  fhoote  another  arrow  that  felfe  way 
Which  you  did  fhoot  the  firft,  I  do  not  doubt, 


159 


155 


156.  wilfull ]  witless  Warb.  wasteful  Coll.  (MS). 


thought  good  sense  and  good  English  in  the  time  of  Shakespeare.  ‘  Forth  ’  here 
means  out ,  and  with  this  import  it  is  used  in  the  following,  and  in  a  hundred  other, 
instances  :  Com.  of  Err.  I,  ii,  37,  where  we  have  again  the  identical  expression  to 
‘find  forth;’  Two  Gent.  II,  iv,  186  [and  here  in  this  play,  line  153.  See  Schmidt’s 
Lex.] 

153.  Various  expedients  have  been  devised  to  rid  this  line  of  its  superfluous  foot. 
Capell  omits  ‘forth;’  Pope  omits  ‘and’  while  contracting  ‘adventuring’  to  vent' ring; 
Dyce  proposes  to  omit  ‘by’  and  change  ‘adventuring’  to  venturmg ;  Lloyd  (ap.  Cam.) 
proposes  to  substitute  him  for  *  the  other ;’  and  Abbott,  §  466,  would  soften  ‘  other  ’  to 
a  monosyllable.  The  line  is  unquestionably  ungainly  in  length,  but  it  runs  throughout 
smoothly,  and  having  a  pause  after  the  third  foot,  I  imagine  that  Shakespeare’s  ear  was 
satisfied ;  I  doubt  if  there  be  need  of  change. — Ed. 

154.  child-hoode  proofe]  Walker  (iii, p.  53) :  Compare  ‘All  school-days’  friend¬ 
ship,  childhood  innocence,’  Mid.  N.  D.  Ill,  ii,  202.  [For  many  other  instances  where 
the  first  of  two  nouns  may  be  treated  as  a  genitive  used  adjectively,  see  Abbott,  §  22 
or  §  430.] 

155.  pure  innocence]  Dr  Johnson  interprets  ‘pure  innocence’  as  ‘without  dis¬ 
guising  his  former  faults  or  his  present  designs.’  Eccles  :  ‘  I  bring  as  an  example  in 
proof  of  the  probable  success  of  the  proposed  expedient,  one  of  the  practices  of  child¬ 
hood,  because  my  designs,  as  to  everything  to  come,  are  as  innocent  and  harmless  as 
any  of  the  purposes  of  youth  in  this  kind  of  boyish  amusement.’  [I  think  it  is  by  no 
means  certain  that  ‘  pure  innocence  ’  does  not  here  mean  pure  foolishness.  Bassanio 
assuredly  was  aware  how  flimsy  was  his  pretext  for  Anthonio  to  send  more  good  money 
after  bad,  and  that  his  best  argument  was  drawn  from  childish  games,  and  therefore 
does  not  attempt  to  disguise  the  ‘  innocence  ’  (in  its  frequent  meaning  of  childishness , 
foolishness )  of  his  proposal.  Moreover,  the  greater  the  folly  of  the  risk,  the  greater 
the  proof  of  Anthonio’s  friendship  in  assuming  it. — Ed.] 

156.  wilfull  youth]  Heath:  It  has  happened  to  me,  as  it  generally  doth  to  a 
wilful  youth,  I  have  squandered  away  what  I  am  now  a  debtor  for.  Eccles  :  That  is, 

‘  that  which,  like  a  wilful  youth,  I  owe,  is  lost.’  Clarendon  :  *  Wilful  ’  here  means 
obstinate  in  extravagance.  Rolfe:  ‘  Wilful  ’  in  his  prodigality.  Schmidt:  ‘Wilful,’ 
i.  e.  regardless,  reckless,  saucy.  In  the  present  instance,  ‘  like  a  reckless  boy  I  confess 
to  you.’  [It  seems  to  me  that  we  need  but  give  due  weight  to  both  syllables  of  ‘  wil¬ 
ful,’  to  have  a  meaning  ample  to  fit  the  case.  I  doubt  the  correctness  of  Schmidt’s 
interpretation. — Ed.] 

158.  selfe]  Compare  ‘by  self  and  violent  hands,’  Macb.  V,  viii,  70;  ‘I  am  made 
of  that  self  metal  as  my  sister,’  Lear ,  I,  i,  68 ;  or  Abbott,  §  20 ;  or  for  many  other 
instances,  Schmidt’s  Lex.  Clarendon  says  that  this  use  of  ‘self’  is  frequent  in 
Chaucer,  and  prevailed  as  late  as  Dryden’s  time. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


*9 


As  I  will  watch  the  ayme  :  Or  to  finde  both,  160 

Or  bring  your  latter  hazard  backe  againe, 

And  thankfully  reft  debter  for  the  firft. 

An.  You  know  me  well,  and  herein  fpend  but  time 
To  winde  about  my  loue  with  circumftance, 

And  out  of  doubt  you  doe  more  wrong  16; 

In  making  queftion  of  my  vttermoft 
Then  if  you  had  made  wafte  of  all  I  haue : 

Then  doe  but  fay  to  me  what  I  fhould  doe 
That  in  your  knowledge  may  by  me  be  done, 

And  I  am  preft  vnto  it  :  therefore  fpeake.  170 

Baff.  In  Belmont  is  a  Lady  richly  left, 

160.  ayme:"]  ayme  QtQ2.  ayme,  Q3,  165.  doe  more~\  do  to  me  more  Ff,  Rowe. 

Rowe  et  seq.  do  me  now  more  Qq  et  cet. 

161.  hazard  backe~\  hazzard  bake  Q a.  167.  wajle~\  wajl  Qa. 

164.  winde~\  wind  Q2Ff. 


160.  As]  Abbott,  §110:  ‘As,  in  its  demonstrative  meaning  of  so,  is  occasionally 
found  parenthetically  equivalent  to  *  for  sot  See  I,  iii,  76 :  ‘As  his  wise  mother  wrought 
in  his  behalf,’  i.  e.  ‘ for  so  did  his  mother  work.’  [See  also  Ham.  IV,  iii,  58 ;  lb.  IV, 
vii,  159;  lb.  V,  ii,  323.] 

160,  1 61.  Or  .  .  .  Or]  See  Abbott,  §  136.  This  use  of  or  ...  or  is  very  frequent 
in  B.  &  FI.  It  is  almost  superfluous  to  call  attention  to  the  defective  punctuation  in 
line  160.  The  colon  after  ‘ayme’  was  changed  to  a  comma  in  Q3. — Ed. 

164.  To  winde]  That  is,  in  winding.  See  I,  i,  45. 

164.  circumstance]  Halliwell:  This  line  appears  to  have  been  imitated  in 
Cooke’s  play  of  Greene's  Tu  Quoque,  or  The  Cittie  Gallant :  ‘ Old  Geraldine.  You  put 
us  to  a  needless  labour,  sir,  To  run  and  wind  about  for  circumstance;  When  the 
plain  word,  “I  thank  you,”  would  have  serv’d,’  [p.  283,  Dodsley’s  Old  Plays,  ed. 
Hazlitt.  Dyce  ( Gloss.)  defines  ‘circumstance’  by  detail,  as  does  also  Schmidt;  but 
in  Cotgrave  we  find  *  Circuition  de  paroles.  A  circumlocution,  paraphrase,  great  cir¬ 
cumstance  of  words,  a  going  about  the  bush.’ — Ed.] 

170.  I  am]  By  an  error  of  the  press,  this  is  printed  am  I  in  the  Var.  1778,  and  the 
error  is  continued  in  the  Var.  1785.  Mason  (p.  73)  corrected  it,  and  in  doing  so  quoted 
the  phrase  as,  ‘  am  I  prest  to  serve  you,’  taking  no  note  whatever  of  his  own  change 
of  ‘unto’  into  to  serve,  which  the  Cam.  Ed.  accredits  to  him  as  a  conjectural  emenda¬ 
tion.  Was  it  not  a  mere  oversight  ? — Ed. 

170.  prest]  The  best  definition  of  this  word,  which,  although  by  no  means  uncom¬ 
mon  in  early  writers,  is  found  in  Shakespeare  only  here  and  in  Pericles,  IV,  Pro¬ 
logue,  45,  is,  I  think,  obtained  from  Cotgrave,  who  gives  it  as  the  translation  of  the 
same  word  in  French:  ‘Prest :  m.  preste :  f.  Prest,  readie,  full-dight,  furnished,  prepared, 
prouided,  prompt,  neere  at  hand,  quick,  nimble,  fleet,  wight.’  Steevens  gives  several 
instances  of  its  use  in  the  sense  of  ready,  and  says  that  he  could  add  twenty  more ; 
but  Staunton  doubts  (I  think,  needlessly)  whether  it  is  not  used  in  this  present  passage 
in  the  sense  of  bound  or  urged. — Ed. 


20 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  I,  sc.  i. 


And  fhe  is  faire,  and  fairer  then  that  word,  172 

Of  wondrous  vertues,  fometimes  from  her  eyes 
I  did  receiue  faire  fpeechleffe  meffages : 

Her  name  is  Portia ,  nothing  vndervallewd  175 

To  Cato’s  daughter,  Brutus  Portia , 

N  Dr  is  the  wide  world  ignorant  of  her  worth, 

For  the  foure  windes  blow  in  from  euery  coaft 
Renowned  futors  ,  and  her  funny  locks 

Hang  on  her  temples  like  a  golden  fleece,  180 

Which  makes  her  feat  of  Belmont  Cholchos  ftrond, 

And  many  Iafons  come  in  queft  of  her. 

O  my  Anthonio ,  had  I  but  the  meanes 
To  hold  a  riuall  place  with  one  of  them, 

I  haue  a  minde  prefages  me  fuch  thrift,  185 

That  I  fhould  queftionleffe  be  fortunate. 


173.  vertues I]  vertices.  Qx. 
fometimes]  sometime  Theob.  Han. 

Cap. 

174.  receiue"]  receane  Q2. 

175.  Portia,]  Portia;  Qx. 
vndervallewd]  vnder-valew' d  Qx. 


181.  Cholchos]  Colchos  Qx. 

Jlrond ]  strand  Johns.  Steev.  et 

seq. 

182.  come ]  comes  Qx. 

184.  riuall  place]  rival-place  Pope, 
Han. 


172.  fairer]  Eccles  :  The  meaning  is,  that  simply  to  declare  that  she  was  ‘  fair  ’  was 
a  commendation  not  adequate  to  the  perfection  of  her  beauty.  Perhaps  these  words 
are  to  be  considered  as  having  a  relation  to  those  which  follow ;  as  if  she  was  to  be 
esteemed  *  fairer  ’  in  the  possession  of  those  *  wond’rous  virtues  ’  which  adorn  her 
mind,  than  in  that  of  so  many  personal  charms. 

173.  sometimes]  Theobald:  This  should  certainly  be  sometime,  i.  e.  formerly, 
some  time  ago,  at  a  certain  time ;  and  it  appears  by  a  subsequent  scene  that  Bassanio 
was  at  Belmont  with  the  Marquis  de  Montferrat,  and  saw  Portia  in  her  father’s  life¬ 
time.  Farmer:  In  old  English  ‘  sometimes  ’  is  synonymous  with  formerly.  Nothing 
is  more  frequent  in  title-pages  than  * sometimes  fellow’  of  such  a  college.  Claren¬ 
don  :  ‘  Sometimes  ’  and  ‘  sometime  ’  are  often  used  by  Shakespeare  indifferently,  with 
the  signification  formerly,  in  time  past.  See  Rich.  II :  I,  ii,  54,  ‘Thy  sometimes  bro¬ 
ther’s  wife.’  So  also  in  the  Authorized  Version,  Ephesians,  ii,  13  :  ‘Ye  who  sometimes 
were  far  off.’  [Conf.  Oth.  II,  ii,  38:  ‘What  an  eye  she  has!  Methinks  it  sounds 
a  parley  to  provocation ;’  also  Tro.  Cress.  IV,  v,  55  :  ‘  There’s  language  in  her  eye.’] 

176.  To]  Abbott,  §  187  :  To,  even  without  a  verb  of  motion,  means  ‘motion  to  the 
aide  of.’  Hence  ‘  motion  to  and  consequent  rest  near.’  See  ‘  Impostors  to  true  fear,’ 
Macb.  Ill,  iv,  64.  [Thus  in  the  present  passage  Portia  will  be  found  not  inferior  when 
brought  to  the  side  of,  and  compared  with,  Brutus’s  Portia.  So  also  post,  II,  vii,  54. 
‘Being  ten  times  vndervalued  to  tride  gold.’] 

1 81.  strond]  Clarendon  :  This  was  once,  doubtless,  the  pronunciation  of  strand. 
Another  allusion  to  the  expedition  of  the  Argonauts  is  found  in  this  play,  III,  ii,  254. 

185.  minde  presages]  For  many  other  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  relative, 
see  Abbott,  §  244. 


ACT  i,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


21 


Anth.  Thou  knowft  that  all  my  fortunes  are  at  fea,  187 

Neither  haue  I  money,  nor  commodity 
To  raife  a  prefent  fumme,  therefore  goe  forth 
Try  what  my  credit  can  in  Venice  doe,  190 

That  fhall  be  rackt  euen  to  the  vttermofl, 

To  furnifh  thee  to  Belmont  to  faire  Portia. 

Goe  prefently  enquire,  and  fo  will  I 
Where  money  is,  and  I  no  queftion  make 

To  haue  it  of  my  truft,  or  for  my  fake.  Exeunt.  195 


\ Scene  II.] 

Enter  Portia  with  her  waiting  woman  Neriffa. 


Portia.  By  my  troth  N err  iff  a,  my  little  body  is  a  wea- 
rie  of  this  great  world.  3 


188.  Neither ]  Nor  Pope  +,  Steev.  ’85. 

189.  fumme, ]  fumme.  Qt. 

190.  credit  ]  credite  Q2. 

[Scene  II.  Belmont.  Rowe  et  seq. 
[Three  Caskets  are  set  out,  one  of  gold, 
another  of  silver,  and  another  of  lead. 
Rowe  +  .  A  Room  in  Portia’s  House. 


Cap. 

1.  Enter...]  Enter  Portia  and  Nerrissa. 
Rowe  et  seq. 

Neriffa]  Nerriffa  Qq. 

2.  Nerriffa]  Neriffa  F3F4< 

a  wearie~\  awearie  Q2Q3-  weary  F3 
F4,  Rowe  + .  aweary  Cap.  et  seq. 


188.  Neither]  For  many  instances  where  * either ,  neither,  whether,  mother,  brother , 
and  some  other  dissyllables  in  which  the  final  ther  is  preceded  by  a  vowel, — perhaps  in 
some  measure,  all  words  in  ther, — are  frequently  used  either  as  monosyllables,  or  as  so 
nearly  such  that  in  a  metrical  point  of  view  they  may  be  regarded  as  monosyllables,’  see 
Walker,  Vers.  p.  103;  Abbott,  §466;  or  Browne,  p.  10.  Clarendon  says  that 
this  speech  of  Antonio  is  ‘  scarcely  consistent  with  what  he  had  previously  said  ’  (lines 
46—50),  that  his  ‘  whole  estate  ’  was  not  placed  *  upon  the  fortunes  of  this  present  yeere.’ 

188.  commodity]  See  Schmidt,  s.  v.,  for  instances  of  the  use  of  this  word  in  the 
meanings  of  convetiience  (as  in  III,  iii,  32);  of  profit,  advantage ;  of  merchandise  (as 
here) ;  and  of  quantity  of  wares,  parcels. 

193.  presently]  That  is,  at  once,  immediately. 

195.  of]  Abbott,  §168:  *  Of,’  meaning  from,  passes  naturally  into  the  meaning 
resulting  from,  as  a  consequence  of.  Eccles  :  That  is,  either  raise  it  upon  my  credit, 
or  obtain  it  on  account  of  the  affection  entertained  for  me  by  the  lender. 

2.  Lady  Martin  (p.  3 3):  Although  Portia  is  heart-whole,  yet  she  is  not  ‘fancy 
free.’  We  learn  from  Nerissa  that  in  her  father’s  time  there  was  one  visitor,  a  *  Veni- 
tian,  a  scholar,  and  a  soldier,’  whom  Nerissa  considered  of  all  men  the  ‘best  deserving 
a  fair  lady.’  Portia  responds  very  briefly,  but  suggestively :  ‘  I  remember  him  well ; 
and  I  remember  him  worthy  of  thy  praise.’  Often,  no  doubt,  has  she  wondered  why 
he  has  not  presented  himself  among  her  suitors.  Unconsciously,  perhaps,  the  languor 
of  hope  deferred  speaks  in  these  first  words  we  hear  from  her.  The  one  who  she 
thought  might  possibly  have  been  among  the  first  comers,  comes  not  at  all. 

2.  a  wearie]  This  is,  of  course,  meiely  a  compositor’s  uncouth  way  of  setting  up 


22 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Ner.  You  would  be  fweet  Madam  ,  if  your  miferies 
were  in  the  fame  abundance  as  your  good  fortunes  are :  5 

and  yet  for  ought  I  fee,  they  are  as  ficke  that  furfet  with 
too  much,  as  they  that  ftarue  with  nothing ;  it  is  no  fmal 
happineffe  therefore  to  bee  feated  in  the  meane,  fuper- 
fluitie  comes  fooner  by  white  haires,  but  competencie 
hues  longer.  IC 

Portia.  Good  fentences,and  well  pronounc’d. 

Ner.  They  would  be  better  if  well  followed. 

Portia.  If  to  doe  were  as  eafie  as  to  know  what  were 
good  to  doe,  Chappels  had  beene  Churches,  and  poore 
mens  cottages  Princes  Pallaces:  it  is  a  good  Diuine  that  15 
followes  his  owne  inftrudtions;  I  can  eafier  teach  twen- 
tie  what  were  good  to  be  done,  then  be  one  of  the  twen-  17 


5.  abundance ]  aboundance  Q2. 

6.  furfet)  furfeite  Q2. 

7.  8.  it...  therefore)  F2F3,  Knt,  Wh.  i, 
Huds.  Therefore  it  is  no  small  happi¬ 
ness  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  therefore  it 
is  no  mean  happiness  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


it  is  no  mean  happineffe  therefore  Qq  et 
cet. 

9.  but)  and  Han. 

15.  it ]  He  Pope  +  . 

17.  be)  to  be  Qq,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 


awearie.  The  preposition  a,  here  used  as  a  prefix,  conveys  in  this  instance  the  idea 
of  state.  See  Murray’s  New  Eng.  Diet.  s.  v.  11 :  ‘  as  a  live,  a  sleep,  a  work,  ajar, 
a  thirst,  a  blaze,  a  fright,  a  float,  a  stare.  In  these  the  word  governed  by  a  was  orig¬ 
inally  a  noun,  e.  g.  life,  sleep,  work, float  (“on  the  Mediterranean  flote  ” — Temp.  I,  ii, 
234),  but  being  often  the  verbal  substantive  of  state  or  act,  it  has  been  in  modern  times 
erroneously  taken  as  a  verb,  and  used  as  a  model  for  forming  such  adverbial  phrases 
from  any  verb,  as  a-wash,  a-blaze,  a- bask,  a-swim,  a-flaunt,  a-blow ,  a-dance,  a-run, 
a-stare,  a-gaze,  a-howl,  a-tremble,  a-shake,  a-jump.  These  are  purely  modem  and  ana¬ 
logical.’  [We  have  agazed  in  i  Hen.  VI:  II,  iv,  126. — Ed.]  Abbott,  §  24,  p.  35  • 
In  a-weary  it  can  scarcely  be  said  that  weary  is  a  noun.  Rather  ‘  a-weary,’  like  ‘  of- 
walked,’  means  ‘  of-weary,’  i.  e.  ‘  tired  out.’ 

7.  with]  Allen  (MS) :  ‘With’  is  explained  by  ‘in  the  mean’  (in  the  next  linej, 
and  is  equivalent  to  apud,  chez,  by. 

7.  smal]  The  reading  of  the  Qq,  mean,  is  much  to  be  preferred;  in  the  Ff,  as 
Clarendon  says,  the  play  upon  the  word  ‘mean’  is  lost. 

9.  comes  sooner  by]  Wright  [Bible  Word-Book):  To  get,  acquire.  Conf.  ‘  wc 
had  much  work  to  come  by  the  boat.’ — Acts,  xxvii,  16.  ‘Translation  it  is  ...  .  that 
remooueth  the  couer  of  the  well,  that  we  may  come  by  the  water.’ —  The  Translators 
to  the  Reader.  See  also  in  this  present  play,  I,  i,  7,  ‘  how  I  caught  it,  found  it,  or 
came  by  it.’ 

9.  but]  I  cannot  say  that  I  see  the  force  of  this  adversative  ‘  but ;’  Hanmer  changed 
it  to  and,  which  seems  the  more  fitting  word. — Ed. 

ii.  sentences]  Clarendon:  That  is,  maxims.  Allen  (MS) :  Sententice,  yvujcai. 

15.  it  is  a  good  Diuine,  &c.]  Wordsworth  (p.  264):  An  observation  which 
must  find  an  echo  in  every  clergyman’s  breast. 


ACT  I,  sc.  iL]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


23 


tie  to  follow  mine  owne  teaching  :  the  braine  may  de-  18 
uife  lawes  for  the  blood,  but  a  hot  temper  leapes  ore  a 
colde  decree,  fuch  a  hare  is  madneffe  the  youth,  to  skip  20 
ore  the  mefliei  of  good  counfaile  the  cripple  ;  but  this 
reafon  is  not  in  fafhion  to  choofe  me  a  husband  :  O  mee, 
the  word  choofe,  I  may  neither  choofe  whom  I  would, 
nor  refufe  whom  I  diflike,  fo  is  the  wil  of  a  liuing  daugh¬ 
ter  curb’d  by  the  will  of  a  dead  father  :  it  is  not  hard  Ner-  25 

riffa ,  that  I  cannot  choofe  one,  nor  refufe  none. 

Ner.  Your  father  was  euer  vertuous,  and  holy  men  27 


18.  mine ]  my  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

19.  ore]  over  Steev.  Mai.  Sing.  Ktly, 

21.  counfaile]  Q2F2Q3.  counfell  Qx. 

22.  reafon]  Ff,  Rowe,  reafoning  Qq 
et  cet. 

in]  the  Mason. 


22.  fafhion ]  Ff,  Rowe,  the  fu/hion 
Qq  et  cet. 

husband :]  husband;  Q  .  hus 
band,  Q2Q3- 

23,  24.  whom. ..whom]  who. ..who  Qq. 
25-  it  m]  is  it  QqFf  et  cet. 

Nerriffa]  Neriffa  Q,F3F4. 


18.  braine]  Bucknill  (p.  93) :  The  tyranny  of  desire  over  reason  is  here  stated 
physiologically :  the  ‘  blood  ’  in  this  sense  being  always  used  poetically  for  the  prompt¬ 
ings  of  animal  passion.  A  better  knowledge  has  indeed  exploded  the  theory,  and 
attributed  both  reason  and  passion  to  the  brain,  though  to  different  parts  of  it. 

22.  reason  is  not  in]  After  noting  that  the  reading  of  the  Qq:  ‘this  reasoning  is 
not  in  the  fashion,’  has  been  ‘universally’  deemed  correct,  White  adds  that  he  is 
not  ‘  prepared  positively  to  dissent  from  this  decision ;  although,  had  there  been  no  Qq, 
the  text  of  Fx  is  sufficiently  clear  and  sufficiently  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  day  not  to  have  needed  emendation.’  On  the  other  hand,  Clarendon  pro¬ 
nounces  ‘  reason  ’  of  Fx  ‘  a  manifest  error.’  [I  quite  agree  with  White  as  to  the  need¬ 
lessness  of  emendation,  and  am  inclined  to  go  even  farther  and  regard  the  reading  of 
Fx  as  being,  so  far  from  a  ‘  manifest  error,’  the  better  of  the  two.  *  Reason  ’  here  is  not 
ratiocination,  which  is  what  ‘  reasoning  ’  is,  and  what  Portia,  having  stated  merely  facts, 
has  not  attempted,  but  is  used,  as  in  many  another  passage,  in  the  sense  of  speech,  dis¬ 
course,  talk  ;  just  as  it  is  used  later  in  this  very  play,  where  Salarino  says,  ‘  I  reason’d 
with  a  Frenchman  yesterday  ’ — II,  viii,  meaning  simply  ‘  I  talked  with  a  Frenchman.’ 
Thus,  here,  Portia  exclaims,  according  to  Fx,  ‘  But  all  this  talk  will  never  pick  out  a 
husband  for  me.’  The  omission  of  the  indefinite  article,  or  even  the  definite  article, 
in  ‘  in  fashion  ’  for  ‘  in  a  fashion,’  or  ‘  in  the  fashion,’  is  common  enough ;  see  Abbott, 
§§  82,  90. — Ed.]  On  the  meaning  of  the  whole  passage,  Eccles  remarks :  Perhaps 
Portia  designs  to  insinuate  that  maxims  of  prudence,  such  as  those  uttered  at  first  by 
Nerissa,  relative  to  the  insufficiency  of  superabundant  wealth  to  procure  happiness  to 
the  possessor,  and  afterward  expressed  by  herself  upon  the  difference  between  specula¬ 
tive  and  practical  wisdom,  might,  indeed,  be  of  use  to  others,  by  inspiring  them  with 
caution  in  the  choice  of  a  husband,  but  could  afford  no  advantage  of  such  nature  to 
her,  who  is  precluded,  by  the  determination  of  her  father,  from  any  exercise  of  her 
judgment  upon  that  subject. 

24,  25.  wil  .  .  .  will]  Clarendon:  Shakespeare,  more  suo,  plays  upon  the  two 
senses  of  ‘will.’ 


24 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  I,  sc.  ii. 


at  their  death  haue  good  infpirations,  therefore  the  lot-  28 
terie  that  hee  hath  deuifed  in  thefe  three  chefts  of  gold, 
filuer,  and  leade,  whereof  who  choofes  his  meaning,  30 
choofes  you,  wil  no  doubt  neuer  be  chofen  by  any  right¬ 
ly,  but  one  who  you  fhall  rightly  loue  :  but  what  warmth 
is  there  in  your  affedlion  towards  any  of  thefe  Princely 
futers  that  are  already  come  ? 

Por.  I  pray  thee  ouer-name  them,  and  as  thou  namefl  35 
them,  I  will  defcribe  them,  and  according  to  my  defcrip- 
tion  leuell  at  my  affection.  37 


28.  lotterie]  lottry  Q,Q3-  lottrie  Qa. 
lottery  Ff. 

31.  wil... neuer]  no  doubt  you  wil 
neuer  Qx. 

32.  who  you]  who  QI?  Johns.  Cam. 


Glo.  Cla.  Huds.  whom  you  Pope  +  ,  Coll. 
Clarke. 

35.  pray  thee]  prethee  Qx. 
namejl]  na?n,st  Pope-)-. 

36.  defcription]  defcription,  QXQ3F3 F4. 


32.  The  Folio  here  follows  the  Second  Quarto.  Clarendon  adopts  the  First  Quarto 
as  ‘  the  higher  authority.’  I  prefer  it  as  giving  us  the  better  text,  although  this  very  pas¬ 
sage  has  been  cited  by  Furnivall  as  an  instance  of  its  inferiority  to  Q2,  in  so  far  as  it 

*  leaves  out  a  necessary  word.’  ( Forewords  to  Qv  p.  v.)  In  the  text  before  us  ‘  the  lotterie  ’ 
is  nominative  to  ‘  will  no  doubt  neuer  be  chosen,’  and  the  sense  is  that  the  lottery  will 
be  sure  to  fall  on  some  one  whom  Portia  ‘  rightly  loves ;’  and  that  this  is  the  right  mean¬ 
ing,  says  Rolfe,  appears  from  the  question  which  follows :  ‘  What  affection  have  you 
for  any  of  the  suitors  that  are  already  come  ?’  On  the  contrary,  I  think  the  very  point 
of  Nerissa’s  comforting  is  lost  in  the  present  text.  The  very  idea  of  the  lottery  was  a 
holy  inspiration,  the  choice  of  a  husband  is  committed  to  Heaven,  and  he  who  is  the 
right  husband  for  Portia  will  know  how  to  choose  the  right  casket,  he  cannot  choose 
the  wrong  one ;  no  unfit  husband  will  have  the  sterling  qualities  to  choose  the  right 
one.  And  this  is  the  text  of  Q  .  It  reads :  ‘  no  doubt  you  wil  neuer  be  chofen  by 
any  rightly,  but  one  who  fhall  rightly  loue.’  ‘  Who  ’  is  the  nominative,  in  sense  as  well 
as  in  form;  not  the  accusative  (‘who’  is  often  enough  used  for  whom,  but  not  here). 
That  this  is  the  true  meaning  Portia  herself  tells  us,  I  think,  in  plain  words,  where 
she  says  to  Bassanio  (III,  ii,  44),  ‘  If  you  do  love  me,  you  will find  me  out.'  His  capa¬ 
city  to  find  her  is  the  very  test  of  his *  *  rightly  ’  loving  her.  The  punctuation  of  Qx 
should  be  amended  by  a  full  stop  before  the  sentence  I  have  given  above,  thus :  ‘  holy 
men  ....  have  good  inspirations,  therefore  [i.  e.  hence  there  is]  the  lottery  that  he 
hath  devised  ....  whereof  who  chooses  his  meaning  chooses  you.  No  doubt  you  will 
never,’  &c.  As  both  the  Quartos  were  issued  in  the  same  year  and  were  probably 
printed  by  the  same  man,  the  question  of  superiority  is  a  nice  one,  and  can  be  deter¬ 
mined  only  by  a  careful  weighing  of  the  texts.  In  the  present  instance  I  think  the 
scales  turn  decidedly  in  favour  of  Qt. — Ed. 

35.  thee]  For  the  use  of  thou  and  you,  see  Oth.  II,  ii,  275,  in  this  edition,  where 
Skeat’s  general  rule  is  given :  ‘  Thou  is  the  language  of  a  lord  to  a  servant,  of  an 
equal  to  an  equal,  and  expresses  also  companionship,  love,  permission,  defiance,  scorn, 
threatening ;  whilst  ye  is  the  language  of  a  servant  to  a  lord,  and  of  compliment,  and 
further  expresses  honour,  submission,  entreaty.’ — Preface  to  William  of  Palerne,  p. 
xlii.  See  also  Abbott,  §§  231,  232. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


25 


Ner.  Firft  there  is  the  Neopolitane  Prince.  38 

Por.  I  that’s  a  colt  indeede,  for  he  doth  nothing  but 
talke  of  his  horfe,  and  hee  makes  it  a  great  appropria-  40 

tion  to  his  owne  good  parts  that  he  can  fhoo  him  him- 
felfe  :  I  am  much  afraid  my  Ladie  his  mother  plaid  falfe 
with  a  Smyth. 

Ner.  Than  is  there  the  Countie  Palentine.  44 


38.  Neopolitane]  Neapolitane  QxFa. 
Neapolitan  F3.  Neapolitan  F4> 

39.  colt ]  Dolt  Theob.  Han. 

40.  41.  appropriation  to\  appropriation 
zmto  Qx.  approbation  of  Co\\.  ii.  (MS). 

41.  hint]  Om.  Qx. 

42.  afraid]  afeard  QxQa,  Cap.  Cam. 
Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii.  afead d  Q3< 


43.  SmytK\  fmith  Ot. 

44.  Than]  Qa. 

is  there]  there  is  Qx,  Pope  + ,  Cam. 
Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

Countie]  Qa.  County  Qx.  Count 
Pope  + . 

44,  57-  Palentine]  QaFfQ3,  Rowe. 
Palatine  Qt,  Pope  et  seq. 


37.  leuell]  That  is,  aim  at.  It  is  here  the  imperative. 

38.  Neopolitane]  Steevens:  The  Neapolitans,  in  the  time  of  Shakespeare,  were 
eminently  skilled  in  all  that  belongs  to  horsemanship.  Malone  :  Though  our  author, 
when  he  composed  this  play,  could  not  have  read  the  following  passage  in  Florio’s 
translation  of  Montaigne’s  Essaies,  1603,  he  had  perhaps  met  with  the  relation  in  some 
other  book  of  that  time :  ‘  While  I  was  a  young  lad,’  says  old  Montaigne,  ‘  I  saw  the 
prince  of  Salmona,  at  Naples,  manage  a  young,  rough,  and  fierce  horse,  and  show  all 
manner  of  horsemanship ;  to  hold  testons  or  reals  under  his  knees  and  toes  so  fast  as  if 
they  had  been  nayled  there,  and  all  to  show  his  sure,  steady,  and  immoveable  sitting.’ 

39.  colt]  Johnson  :  ‘Colt’  is  used  for  a  witless,  heady,  gay  youngster,  whence  the 
phrase  is  used  of  an  old  man  too  juvenile  that  he  still  retains  his  colt's  tooth. 

40.  appropriation]  Collier  ( Notes  &  Emend,  p.  1 13) :  This  is  altered  by  the 
(MS)  to  approbation  of,  in  the  sense  of  proof, — a  great  proof  of  his  own  good  parts, 
&c.  Approbation  is  not  unfrequently  used  by  Shakespeare  for  probation ;  whereas,  if 
‘  appropriation  ’  were  his  word,  this  is  the  only  place  where  he  has  employed  it.  Singer 
(Sh.  Vind.  p.  32) :  ‘Appropriation  to’  is  equivalent  to  addition  to  his  other  accomplish¬ 
ments.  Nothing  can  be  concluded  from  this  being  the  only  instance  of  Shakespeare’s 
use  of  the  word.  Dyce  called  this  substitution  by  Collier’s  (MS)  ‘  cool,’  but  Collier, 
in  his  Second  Ed.,  adopted  it  and  pronounced  it  ‘excellent.’  In  his  Third  Ed.  he 
silently  relinquished  it  (as  he  relinquished  so  many  other  of  his  (MS)  emendations  in 
his  venerable  age),  and  returned  to  ‘  appropriation.’ — Ed. 

41.  shoo  him  himself]  Qx  omits  ‘him,’  a  common  enough  compositor’s  over¬ 
sight.  Rather  than  present  all  the  more  noticeable  variations  between  Qx  and  Q2  in 
a  dry  and  appalling  table  in  the  Appendix,  I  prefer  to  give  a  few  lines  to  them,  here 
and  mere,  as  they  occur,  on  the  same  page  with  the  text.  In  the  Appendix  (p.  275) 
will  be  found  a  recapitulation  of  many  of  these  variations,  wherefrom  a  conclusion  may 
be  drawn  as  to  the  relative  excellence  of  each  Qto.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  avow  my 
preference  for  Qx,  albeit  on  the  title-page  of  Prsetorius’s  Reprint  of  Q2,  London,  1887, 
it  is  stated  to  be  that  of  ‘  The  Second  (and  better)  Quarto.’ — Ed. 

44.  Countie  Palentine]  Johnson  :  The  Count  here  mentioned  was,  perhaps, 
Albertus  a  Lasco,  a  Polish  Palatine,  who  visited  England  in  our  author’s  lifetime,  was 
eagerly  caressed  and  splendidly  entertained ;  but  running  in  debt,  at  last  stole  away, 


26 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Por.  He  doth  nothing  but  frowne  (as  who  fhould  45 

fay,  and  you  will  not  haue  me,  choofe  :  he  heares  merrie 
tales  and  fmiles  not,  I  feare  hee  will  proue  the  weeping 
Phylofopher  when  he  growes  old,  being  fo  full  of  vn- 
mannerly  fadneffe  in  his  youth.)  I  had  rather  to  be  marri¬ 
ed  to  a  deaths  head  with  a  bone  in  his  mouth,  then  to  ei-  50 
ther  of  thefe  :  God  defend  me  from  thefe  two. 

Ner.  How  fay  you  by  the  French  Lord,  Mounfier 
Le  Boune  ?  53 


46.  and ]  FfQ  .  ifQlt  Pope +  ,  Cam. 
Glo.  Cla.  Huds.  Wh.  ii.  dr5  Q2.  An 
Cap.  et  cet. 

48.  Phylofopher]  Q2.  Philofopher  Q,. 

49.  to  be]  Ff,  Rowe,  be  Qq  et  cet. 


50.  deaths  head]  Deathf-head  Q3- 

52.  Mounfier]  Monfieur  Rowe. 

53.  Boune]  QqF2.  Boun  F3F4,  Rowe  + . 
Bon  Cap.  et  seq. 


and  endeavored  to  repair  his  fortune  by  enchantment.  Malone  :  County  and  Count 
were  synonymous.  The  Count  Alasco  was  in  London  in  1583.  CLARENDON:  The 
visit  of  Albert  a  Lasco,  or  Laski,  took  place  when  our  author  was  still  in  Stratford,  and 
so  long  before  the  production  of  this  play  that  the  allusion  would  be  unintelligible  to 
the  audience.  Halliwell  :  There  was  another  County  Palatine,  who  married  the 
daughter  of  James  I,  and  who  was  a  frequent  spectator  of  the  plays  of  Shakespeare, 
when  they  were  exhibited  before  the  Court ;  but  the  present  allusion,  appearing  in  the 
original  editions,  can  scarcely  be  applicable  to  that  personage,  unless  he  had  visited 
England  previous  to  the  accession  of  his  future  father-in-law. 

45.  as  who]  See  I,  i,  103. 

46.  and]  For  ‘and’  equivalent  to  if,  see  Abbott,  §  101,  and  for  and  if,  see  lb., 
§  105. 

46.  choose]  What  has  frowning  to  do  with  an  alternative  choice  ?  What  is  the 
threat  that  is  here  implied  ?  I  confess  I  do  not  understand  the  connection  of  thought. 
Does  it  mean,  ‘  If  you  will  not  have  me,  I  don’t  care,  take  your  choice  ?’  or  is  it,  ‘  If 
you  will  not  have  me,  let  it  alone  ?’  This  is  the  sense  in  which  Schlegel,  endorsed  by 
Schmidt,  translates  it :  ‘  wenn  ihr  mich  nicht  haben  wollt,  so  lasst’s !’  and  this  same 
sense  Schmidt  retained  when,  in  his  invaluable  Lexicon,  he  gives  the  passage  under  a 
meaning  of  the  verb  to  choose,  as *  *  to  do  at  one’s  pleasure.’  Although  several  other 
instances  are  there  given  under  this  head,  only  two  of  them  seem  to  me  fairly  gei 
mane,  viz:  Tam.  of  the  Sh.  V,  i,  48,  and  Merry  Wives,  I,  i,  316.  In  the  herme 
neutical  torture  to  which  one  always  subjects  a  puzzling  phrase,  it  has  even  occurred  to 
me  that,  modifying  the  punctuation,  it  might  read,  in  view  of  the  Countie’s  black  looks, 

*  If  you  will  not  have  me  choose — ’  i.  e.  if  you  will  not  suffer  me  to  make  trial  of  the 
caskets — take  the  consequences! — Ed. 

47.  weeping  Phylosopher]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  another  Heraclitus. 

49.  to  be  married]  For  the  infinitive  after  ‘I  had  rather,’  see  Oth.  I,  iii,  217,  in  this 
edition ;  or  Abbott,  §  349. 

52.  by]  See  Abbott,  §  145,  for  other  instances  where  ‘by’  means  about,  concern¬ 
ing.  See  also  ‘  That  many  may  be  meant  By  the  foole  multitude,’  II,  ix,  28,  where,  as 
I  think,  ‘  by  ’  is  used  idiomatically  after  ‘  mean,’  and  is,  perhaps,  not  exactly  parallel  to 
the  present  usage. — Ed. 


ACT  i,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  27 

Pro.  God  made  him,  and  therefore  let  him  paffe  for  a 
man,  in  truth  I  know  it  is  a  finne  to  be  a  mocker,  but  he,  55 
why  he  hath  a  horfe  better  then  the  Neopolitans,  a  bet¬ 
ter  bad  habite  of  frowning  then  the  Count  Palentine,  he 
is  euery  man  in  no  man,  if  a  Traffell  fmg,  he  fals  ftraight 
a  capring,  he  will  fence  with  his  own  fhadow.  If  I  fhould 
marry  him,  I  fhould  marry  twentie  husbands :  if  hee  60 
would  defpife  me,  I  would  forgiue  him,  for  if  he  loue  me 
to  madneffe,  I  fhould  neuer  requite  him. 

Ner.  What  fay  you  then  to  Fauconbridge,  the  yong 
Baron  of  England  ? 

Por.  You  know  I  fay  nothing  to  him,  for  hee  vnder-  65 
ftands  not  me,  nor  I  him  :  he  hath  neither  Latine,  French , 


54.  Pro.]  Fa. 

55.  a  fmne\  finne  FaF3.  fn  F  . 

56.  Neopolitans ]  Neapolitans  QjFf. 

58.  Traffell]  Qq.  TarJfellY a.  Tajfell 

F3<  Tajfel  F4,  Rowe,  throstle  Pope  et 
seq. 


58.  fraight ]  Jlraght  Qa. 

62.  Jhould~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han 
Jhall  Qq  et  cet. 

63.  you\  Om.  Cap.  (corrected  in  Er¬ 
rata). 

64.  Baron]  Barron  Qa. 


56,  57.  better  bad]  This  is  not  a  ‘  better-bad  habit,’  as  PIalliwell  thinks,  whose 
note  is,  ‘  better  is  here  used  as  an  intensative,  without  the  usual  implication  of  good¬ 
ness  ;  better  bad,  that  is,  worse but  it  is  a  ‘  better  bad-habit ,’  and  so,  I  think,  it  should 
be  printed  in  a  modernized  text. — Ed. 

58.  Trassell]  All  modern  editions  follow  Pope  in  changing  this  to  throstle,  and  with 
propriety ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  *  trassell  ’  is  a  misprint ;  it  is  merely  the 
phonetic  spelling  of  throstle. — Ed. 

59.  a  capring]  For  other  instances  of  this  prefix  a,  see  Abbott,  §  24. 

62.  should]  Despite  the  editorial  unanimity  with  which  the  shall  of  the  Qq  has  been 
preferred  to  this  *  should,’  I  cannot  but  think  that  the  Folio  is  right,  and  that  in  shall 
some  of  the  sparkle  of  Portia’s  fun  is  lost.  She  is  not  foretelling  the  state  of  her 
affection  for  a  future  husband,  but  her  capacity  to  love  twenty  husbands,  all  of  them 
loving  her  to  madness ;  such  a  multitudinous  love  as  that,  she  would  never  be  able  to 
requite. — Ed. 

65.  say]  Clarendon:  Portia  playfully  uses  the  phrase  ‘say  to’  in  a  different  sense 
from  that  which  Nerissa  meant. 

66.  neither  Latine]  Staunton  :  This  satirical  allusion  to  our  ignorance  in  ‘  the 
tongues’  has  not  yet  lost  all  its  point. 

Proelss  ( Kauf.  von  Ven.  Erlautert,  1875,  P-  128):  It  is  to  be  inferred  from  this 
passage  that,  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  a  knowledge  of  these  three  languages  was  an  in¬ 
dispensable  requisite  of  a  man  of  culture ;  Portia  laughs  at  the  Baron  for  his  ignorance 
of  them.  It  would  have  been  impossible  for  Shakespeare  to  hold  up  to  ridicule  this 
ignorance,  had  he  himself  come  under  the  same  condemnation.  [A  shrewd  remark, 
which  will  neutralize  a  page  at  least  of  Dr  Farmer’s  Essay,  which  was  written  to  prove 
Shakespeare’s  ignorance  of  these  very  languages. — Ed.] 


zb 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  IL 


nor  Italian ,  and  you  will  come  into  the  Court  &  fweare  67 
that  I  haue  a  poore  pennie-worth  in  the  Englijh  :  hee  is  a 
proper  mans  pidfture,  but  alas  who  can  conuerfe  with  a 
dumbe  fhow  ?  how  odly  he  is  fuited,  I  thinke  he  bought  70 
his  doublet  in  Italie ,  his  round  hofe  in  France,  his  bonnet 
in  Germanic,  and  his  behauiour  euery  where. 

Ner.  What  thinke  you  of  the  other  Lord  his  neigh 
bour  ? 

Por.  That  he  hath  a  neighbourly  charitie  in  him,  for  75 
he  borrowed  a  boxe  of  the  eare  of  the  Englijhman,  and 
fwore  he  would  pay  him  againe  when  hee  was  able :  I  77 

67.  wiir\  may  Pope+.  73.  other\  Ff,  Rowe.  Scottijh  Qq  et 

68.  the\  Om.  Rowe.  cet. 

77.  fwore\  fworne  F2. 

67.  you  will]  Abbott,  §  320:  Perhaps  this  means  ‘you  are  willing  and  prepared.’ 

67.  Court]  Clarendon:  You  will  bear  me  witness  that  I  have  but  a  very  small 
stock  of  English. 

69.  proper  mans  picture]  Steevens:  ‘  Proper  ’  means  handsome.  STAUNTON: 
The  word  with  this  import  is  so  common,  that  it  is  needless  to  give  examples ;  they 
maybe  found  in  every  play  of  the  time.  Allen  (MS)  suggests  that  it  should  be 
printed  *  proper  man’s-picture  [wherein  I  agree  with  him ;  in  which  case  I  think  that 
‘  proper  ’  is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  very,  just  as  it  is  in  *  though  our  proper  son  stood 
in  your  action.’ — Oth.  I,  iii,  84. — Ed.] 

71.  doublet  .  .  .  round  hose]  Halliwell:  ‘If  you  aske  why  I  have  put  him  in 
rounde  hose,  that  usually  weares  Venetians,  it  is  because  I  would  make  him  looke  more 
dapper,  and  plump,  and  round  upon  it.’ — Nash’s  Have  with  You  to  Saffron  Walden, 
1596.  Clarendon:  Planche  (Hist,  of  Brit.  Costume,  p.  266)  quotes  from  Stubbs: 
‘The  French  hose  are  of  “two  divers  making;  the  common  sort  contain  length, 
breadth,  and  sideness  sufficient,  and  they  are  made  very  round.”  ’  On  p.  267  Planche 
describes  the  quilted  doublet,  and  adds :  ‘These  bombasted  doublets  formed  a  point  in 
front  ....  to  this  day  the  dress  of  our  friend  Punch,  whose  wardrobe  of  Italian  origin 
dates  as  nearly  as  possible  from  this  identical  period.’ 

73.  other]  Theobald  :  This  word  was  substituted  for  Scottijh  of  the  Qq,  for  fear  of 
giving  offence  to  King  James’s  countrymen.  Capell  (ii,  59) :  1598,  if  not  earlier,  is  the 
date  of  this  play’s  birth ;  at  which  time,  Portia’s  gentle  wipe  upon  Scotland,  and  upon 
France,  her  almost  constant  ally  in  all  her  quarrels  with  England,  in  which  neither  were 
very  fortunate,  sounded  gratefully  enough  in  ears  that  had  very  likely  been  witnesses  [rfc] 
to  some  of  those  ‘  boxes  ’  [line  76],  perhaps  actors  in  them  :  but  things  altering  shortly 
after  upon  the  Scottish  accession,  a  change  of  one  of  the  quoted  words  [Scottish],  in 
way  of  softening,  is  found  in  the  player  editor’s  copy  [i.  e.  Ft]  ;  but  when  made,  or  by 
whom,  we  have  no  foundation  for  guessing.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  In  the  (MS)  Irish  is 
substituted  for  ‘  Scottish.’  ‘  A  suggestion,’  says  Halliwell,  ‘  which  is  at  variance  with 
Portia’s  subsequent  allusion  to  the  Frenchman,  and  which  would  have  been  more  appro¬ 
priate  to  the  first  portion  of  her  reply  had  the  comedy  been  written  after  the  Irish  rebel 
lion  in  1641.’ 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


29 


thinke  the  Frenchman  became  his  furetie,  and  feald  vnder  78 
for  another. 

Ner.  How  like  you  the  yong  Germaine ,  the  Duke  of  80 
Saxonies  Nephew? 

Por.  Very  vildely  in  the  morning  when  hee  is  fober, 
and  moft  vildely  in  the  afternoone  when  hee  is  drunke : 
when  he  is  belt,  he  is  a  little  worfe  then  a  man,  and  when 
he  is  worft,  he  is  little  better  then  a  beaft  :  and  the  worft  85 
fall  that  euer  fell,  I  hope  I  fhall  make  fhift  to  goe  with¬ 
out  him. 

Ner.  If  he  fhould  offer  to  choofe,  and  choofe  the  right 
Casket,  you  fhould  refufe  to  performe  your  Fathers  will, 
if  you  fhould  refufe  to  accept  him.  90 

Por.  Therefore  for  feare  of  the  worft,  I  pray  thee  fet 
a  deepe  glaffe  of  Reinifh-wine  on  the  contrary  Casket, 
for  if  the  diuell  be  within,  and  that  temptation  without,  93 


82.  vildely\  vildlie  Q2.  vildly  Q3- 

83.  vildely ]  vilely  Qx.  vildly  Q2. 
videly  Q3.  widely  Herr. 

85.  and  the~\  QqFf,  Rowe  +  .  and, 


the  Han.  an  the  Cap.  et  cet. 

91.  pray  thee\  prethee  Qx. 

92.  Reini/h-wine~\  Reynijh  WineQxQ3. 
Reynijhe  wine  Q2.  Renni/h-wine  F3F4. 


78.  Frenchman]  Warburton  :  Alluding  to  the  constant  assistance,  or  rather  con¬ 
stant  promises  of  assistance,  that  the  French  gave  the  Scots  in  their  quarrels  with  the 
English. 

79.  for  another]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  for  another  box  on  the  ear.  The  principal 
was  said  to  ‘  seal  to  ’  a  bond ;  his  surety  ‘  sealed  under.’ 

80.  &c.  Johnson  :  Perhaps  in  the  enumeration  of  Portia’s  suitors  there  may  be  some 
covert  allusion  to  those  of  Queen  Elizabeth. 

85.  and]  Equivalent  to  if,  as  noted  by  Capell. 

89,  90.  should]  Abbott,  §  322  :  Should  is  the  past  tense  of  shall,  and  underwent 
the  same  modifications  of  meaning  as  shall.  Hence  should  is  not  now  used  with  the 
second  person  to  denote  mere  futurity,  since  it  suggests  a  notion,  if  not  of  compulsion, 
at  least  of  bounden  duty.  But  in  a  conditional  phrase,  *  If  you  should  refuse,’  there 
can  be  no  suspicion  of  compulsion.  We  therefore  retain  this  use  of  should  in  the  condi¬ 
tional  clause,  but  use  would  in  the  consequent  clause :  ‘  If  you  should  refuse,  you  woidd 
do  wrong.’  On  the  other  hand,  Shakespeare  used  should  in  both  clauses  [as  here]. 

92.  Reinish-wine]  Doubtless  this  wine  is  mentioned  because  of  the  young  German, 
but  Halliwell  gives  an  extract  from  Fynes  Moryson’s  Itinerary,  1617,  in  which  it  is 
said  that  the  Germans  only  ‘sometimes  and  rarely  drinke  Rhenish  wine,’  but  ‘com¬ 
monly  beere.’  In  Arber’s  English  Garner  there  is  an  account  by  Dean  William  Tur¬ 
ner  of  the  different  wines  drunk  in  England  in  1568,  wherein  the  Dean,  who  was  also 
a  Doctor  of  Physic,  says  that  ‘  the  Rhenish  wine  that  is  commonly  drunken  in  gentle¬ 
men’s  houses  and  citizens’  houses  is  commonly  a  year  old  at  the  least,  before  it  be 
drunken :  and  therefore  it  is  older  than  the  common  dared  wine,  which  dureth  not 
commonly  above  one  year.’ — Ed. 


3° 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


I  know  he  will  choofe  it.  I  will  doe  any  thing  Nerriffa 

ere  I  will  be  married  to  a  fpunge.  95 

Ner.  You  neede  not  feare  Lady  the  hauing  any  of 
thefe  Lords,  they  haue  acquainted  me  with  their  deter¬ 
minations,  which  is  indeede  to  returne  to  their  home, 
and  to  trouble  you  with  no  more  fuite,  vnleffe  you  may 
be  won  by  fome  other  fort  then  your  Fathers  impofiti-  100 
on,  depending  on  the  Caskets. 

Por.  If  I  hue  to  be  as  olde  as  Sibilla ,  I  will  dye  as 
chafte  as  Diana :  vnleffe  I  be  obtained  by  the  manner 
of  my  Fathers  will :  I  am  glad  this  parcell  of  wooers 
are  fo  reafonable,  for  there  is  notone  among  them  but  105 
I  doate  on  his  verie  abfence  :  and  I  wifli  them  a  faire  de¬ 
parture.  107 

94.  Nerriffa]  Neriffa  QiF3Iq.  103.  chajle ]  chajl  Q2F^. 

95.  Twill]  tie  Qt.  106.  /  wifh  them ]  F2,  Knt,  Wh.  i, 

97.  determinations ]  determination  Rife,  wish  them  F3F4,  Rowe  +  .  I  pray 

Rowe,  Ktly.  God  grant  them  Qq  ( graunt  QJ  et 

100.  your]  you  F2.  cet. 

96.  the  hauing]  For  other  instances  of  the  preceding  a  verbal  that  is  followed  by 
an  object,  see  Abbott,  §  93. 

97-  determinations]  Allen  (MS) :  One  expects  (even  in  Shakespeare)  determina¬ 
tion,  for  it  means  that  one  determination  which  is  common  to  all ;  and  it  is  strange  to 
have  ‘  home  ’  just  after,  where  homes,  i.  e.  their  respective  homes,  would  be  natural. 
Cf.  ‘leave,’  line  121.  [See  Text.  Notes.] 

100.  sort]  White:  Here  used  in  its  radical  sense;  sors,  a  lot.  Clarendon  :  It  is 
thus  used  in  Tro.  <S°  Cress.  I,  iii,  376.  In  the  present  instance  the  phrase  means — by 
some  other  method  or  manner.  Rolfe  :  It  may  be  as  White  suggests.  [Whereto  I 
also  agree,  but  possibly  White,  having  in  mind  the  phrase  ‘  by  lot,’  may  have  been  influ¬ 
enced  here  by  the  use  of  *  by  some  other  sort.’  Conf.  in  Portia’s  next  speech,  *  by  the 
manner.’ — Ed./] 

102.  Sibilla]  Clarendon  :  Used  erroneously  as  if  it  were  a  proper  name.  So  in 
Tam.  Shr.  I,  ii,  70:  ‘As  old  as  Sibyl.’  But  Shakespeare  speaks  of  ‘nine  sibyls,’ 
1  Hen.  VI:  I,  ii,  56,  and  in  Oth.  Ill,  iv,  74.  Rolfe:  So  Bacon,  in  Colours  of  Good 
and  Evil,  10,  speaks  of  ‘  Sybilla,  when  she  brought  her  three  books,’  and  in  Adv.  of 
Learn,  ii,  23,  33,  of  *  Sybillae’s  books.’  The  reference  here  is  to  the  Cumsean  Sibyl, 
who  obtained  from  Apollo  a  promise  that  her  years  should  be  as  many  as  the  grains 
of  sand  she  was  holding  in  her  hand.  The  story  is  told  by  Ovid,  Afet.  xv. 

103.  chaste]  White:  It  is  to  be  feared  that  a  vicious  and  unfounded  use  of  this 
word,  which  has  long  prevailed,  has  produced  in  some  minds  a  deplorable  confusion 
of  thought.  Chastity  and  continence  are  far  from  being  identical ;  the  one  is  a  virtue, 
the:  other  is  not.  An  honorable  matron  is  as  chaste  as  a  maid ;  Diana  was  no  chaster 
than  Penelope,  and  Portia  as  chaste  after  she  was  Bassanio’s  wife  as  before.  It  is  but 
due  to  our  own  wives  and  mothers  to  say  at  least  so  much  upon  this  passage. 

106.  I  wish]  See  Textual  Notes.  Collier:  The  Qq  were  printed  before  the  Act 


ACT  I,  sc  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


3i 


Ner.  Doe  you  not  remember  Ladie  in  your  Fa-  108 

thers  time,  a  Venetian,  a  Scholler  and  a  Souldior  that 
came  hither  in  companie  of  the  Marqueffe  of  Mount-  no 
f err at  ? 

Por.  Yes,  yes,  it  was  Baffanio,  as  I  thinke,  fo  was  hee 
call’d. 

Ner.  True  Madam,  hee  of  all  the  men  that  euer  my 
foolifh  eyes  look’d  vpon,  was  the  beft  deferuing  a  faire  1 1 5 
Lady. 

Por.  I  remember  him  well,  and  I  remember  him  wor¬ 
thy  of  thy  praife. 

Enter  a  Seruingman. 

Ser.  The  foure  Strangers  feeke  you  Madam  to  take  120 
their  leaue  :  and  there  is  a  fore-runner  come  from  a  fift, 


109.  a  Scholler]  Scholler  Q,. 

1 10.  hither ]  hether  Q2. 

112.  fo  was  hee~\  he  was  fo  Qt,  Pope, 
Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  so  he  was  Steev.  ’85. 

1 18.  praife,]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  Rife. 


praife.  How  now ,  what  newes  ?  Qq  et  cet. 

120.  feeke  you ]  Ff,  Rowe,  feeke  for 
you  Qq  et  cet. 

Madam ]  Madame  Qx.  madda?7i 

q2- 


3  Jac.  I,  c.  21  [1605],  against  using  the  name  of  the  Creator  on  the  stage,  Yet,  else¬ 
where,  the  Folio  has  ‘  God  forbid,’  ‘  God  rest  his  soul,’  and  other  expressions  where  the 
name  of  the  Creator  occurs.  White  :  ‘  I  wish  them  ’  of  Ft  suits  the  occasion  and  Por¬ 
tia’s  lips  better  than  the  reading  of  the  Qq.  Clarendon  reprints  the  Act  of  3  Jac.  I, 
c.  21,  ‘to  restrain  the  abuses  of  Players :  For  the  preventing  and  avoiding  of  the  great 
abuse  of  the  holy  Name  of  God,  in  Stage-playes,  Enterludes,  May-games,  Shews,  and 
such  like,  Be  it  enacted  by  our  Sovereign  Lord  the  Kings  Majesty,  and  by  the  Lords 
Spiritual  and  Temporal,  and  the  Commons  in  this  present  Parliament  assembled,  and 
by  the  authority  of  the  same,  That  if  at  any  time  or  times  after  the  end  of  this  present 
Session  of  Parliament,  any  person  or  persons  do  or  shall  in  any  Stage-play,  Enterlude, 
Sew  [shew],  May-game,  or  Pageant,  jestingly  or  prophanely  speak,  or  use  the  holy  Name 
of  God,  or  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  of  the  Trinity,  which  are  not  to  be 
spoken,  but  with  fear  and  reverence,  shall  forfeit  for  every  such  offence  by  him  or  them 
committed,  ten  pounds :  The  one  moiety  thereof  to  the  Kings  Majesty,  his  Heirs  and 
Successors,  the  other  moiety  thereof  to  him  or  them  that  will  sue  for  the  same  in  any 
Court  of  Record  at  Westminster,  wherin  no  Essoin,  Protection  or  Wager  of  Law  shall 
be  allowed.’  (Statutes  at  Large,  ed.  1695.) 

1 18.  praise]  See  Text.  Notes.  Knight:  The  questions  in  the  Qq  may  well  be 
spared;  they  do  not  belong  to  Portia’s  calm  and  dignified  character.  White:  It  was 
not  Portia’s  way  to  call  out  thus  [as  in  the  Qq]  to  her  attendants  the  moment  they 
showed  themselves  in  her  presence. 

120.  foure]  Hunter  (i,  322) :  The  recovery  of  the  original  play  mentioned  by  Gosson 
would  doubtless  throw  much  light  upon  the  composition  of  The  Mer.  of  Ven.  as  we  now 
have  it.  In  its  present  state  it  seems  to  have  been  subjected  to  correction,  alteration,  and 


32 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  I,  sc.  ii. 


the  Prince  of  Moroco ,  who  brings  word  the  Prince  his  122 
Maifter  will  be  here  to  night. 

Por.  If  I  could  bid  the  fift  welcome  with  fo  good 
heart  as  I  can  bid  the  other  foure  farewell,  I  fhould  be  125 
glad  of  his  approach  :  if  he  haue  the  condition  of  a  Saint, 
and  the  complexion  of  a  diuell,  I  had  rather  hee  fhould 
fliriue  me  then  wiue  me.  Come  Nerriffa ,  firra  go  before ; 
whiles  wee  fhut  the  gate  vpon  one  wooer,  another 
knocks  at  the  doore.  Exeunt.  130 


123.  Maifler]  Q2.  Majler  Qr  et 

cet. 

124.  good ]  good  a  Q2,  Han.  Cam.  Glo. 
Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

125.  farewell ]  farwell  Qt. 

127.  complexion ]  completion  Qt. 


128.  Come']  Come  in  Ktly. 

128-130.  Come. ..doore]  As  verse,  the 

first  line  ending  before,  Knt,  Dyce,  Coll, 
ii.  et  seq.  (Prose,  Coll,  iii.) 

129.  gate]  gates  Q,,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla. 
Rife,  Wh.  ii. 


addition  after  it  had  been  once  completed,  but  doubtless  all  by  Shakespeare’s  own  hand, 
though  one  passage  at  least  remained  not  accommodated  to  the  changes  which  were 
made.  The  passage  is :  ‘  The  four  strangers,’  &c. ;  but  in  all  the  copies,  beginning 
with  the  earliest,  there  were  six,  namely,  the  Neapolitan,  the  County  Palatine,  the 
French  lord,  the  English  lord,  the  Scottish  lord,  and  the  young  German.  It  may  be 
presumed  that  the  number  originally  was  only  four,  and  that  the  two  added  on  a  revisal 
were  the  English  and  Scottish  lords,  the  better  to  please  an  English  audience.  * 

124,  125.  so  .  .  .  as"]  See  Abbott,  §  275,  for  similar  instances  where  we  should  say 
as  ..  .  as. 

126.  condition]  Malone:  That  is,  temper,  qualities.  So,  in  Oth.  IV,  i,  210,  ‘of 
so  gentle  a  condition.’ 

128-130.  Come  .  .  .  doore]  Knight:  We  have  printed  the  conclusion  of  this 
scene  as  verse.  [See  Text.  Notes.]  The  doggerel  line  is  not  inconsistent  with  the 
playfulness  of  the  preceding  dialogue.  Dyce  {Remarks,  p.  52) :  Knight  is  doubtless 
right.  Many  passages  might  be  cited  to  show  that  our  early  dramatists  frequently,  at 
the  end  of  a  scene,  make  a  prose  speech  conclude  with  a  couplet,  the  first  line  of  which 
is  much  shorter  than  the  second.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  consonance  of  *  shrive  me ' 
and  ‘  wive  me  ’  may  have  put  Portia  upon  rhyming  at  her  exit. 

129.  whiles]  Abbott,  §  137  :  ‘Whiles,’  the  genitive  of  while,  means  ‘of,  or  during, 
the  time.’ 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


33 


5 


[Scene  III.] 

Enter  Baffanio  with  Shylocke  the  lew. 

Shy.  Three  thoufand  ducates,  well. 

Baff.  I  fir,  for  three  months. 

Shy.  For  three  months,  well. 

Baff.  For  the  which,  as  I  told  you, 

Anthonio  fhall  be  bound. 

Shy.  Anthonio  fhall  become  bound,  well. 

Baff.  May  you  fted  me  ?  Will  you  pleafure  me  ? 


[Scene  III.  Rowe  et  seq.  ...Venice. 
Pope.  ...a  public  place  in  Venice.  Theob. 
2.  ducates]  ducats  QtF  F+. 

4.  months ]  monetks  Qr.  mouths  F2. 


8 

5-1 1.  Prose,  Pope  et  seq. 

8.  Jled ]  Jlead  Qf. 

pleafure  me  s']  pleasure  me  in  it  ? 
Ktly  conj. 


Enter,  &c.]  Booth  :  Shylock  enters  with  slow,  shuffling  gait;  restless,  half-closed 
eyes,  and  the  fingers  of  his  disengaged  hand  (one  holds  his  staff)  ever  moving,  as  if 
from  the  constant  habit  of  feeling  and  caressing  the  ducats  that  are  passing  through 
them.  Speak  with  a  measured  and  a  rather  gruff  voice. 

Lewes  (p.  1 1 ) :  From  the  first  moment  that  [Kean]  appeared  and  leant  upon  his 
stick  to  listen  gravely  while  moneys  are  requested  of  him,  he  impressed  the  audience, 
as  Douglas  Jerrold  used  to  say,  ‘  like  a  chapter  of  Genesis.’ 

2.  ducates]  Hunter  (i,  324) :  This  is  a  pure  Venetian  piece  of  money,  and  the  name 
is  a  mere  abbreviation  of  Ducatus  Venetorum.  It  was  a  gold  coin,  so  that  a  loan  of 
three  thousand  ducats  must  be  considered  a  very  large  sum,  perhaps  something  nearly 
equivalent  to  a  loan  of  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  pounds,  were  such  a  transaction  to 
take  place  now.  The  ducat  bore  [an  abbreviated  inscription]  ;  which  is  to  be  read  in 
full :  *  Sit  tibi,  Christe,  datus  Quem  tu  regis,  iste  Ducatus.’  Halliwell  :  The  value 
of  the  ducat  varied  indifferent  parts  of  the  Continent.  At  Venice  there  were  ‘two 
sorts  of  duccats,  the  one  currant  in  payment,  which  may  bee  valued  ster.  about  35.  4 d., 
and  the  other  of  banco,  which  may  be  valued  about  4?.  or  4s.  2d.,  as  the  exchange  will 
admit,  the  one  being  twenty  per  cent,  better  than  the  other.’ — Roberts’s  Marchant's 
Mapp  of  Commerce,  1638.  A  ducat  means  literally  a  coin  belonging  to  or  coined  by 
a  duke,  and  the  inscriptions  upon  the  various  impressions  of  it  are  exceedingly  numer¬ 
ous.  Clarendon:  Cotgrave  (ed.  1632)  mentions  many  kinds  of  ducats,  Venetian 
among  them.  He  adds :  *  all  foraine  coynes,  of  whose  value  (often  changed  by  the 
French  Kings)  no  certaine  interpretation  can  be  giuen,  other  then  that  they  hold  a  rate 
much  about  v.  or  vjr.  sterl.  the  peece.’  Coryat,  who  visited  Venice  in  1608,  tells  us 
that  the  ducat  was  worth  4 s.  8 d. —  Crudities,  ed.  1611,  pp.  228,  253.  Rolfe:  The 
value  of  the  Venetian  silver  ducat  was  about  that  of  the  American  dollar. 

5.  the  which]  See  Mach.  Ill,  i,  16,  or  Abbott,  §  270. 

7.  bound,]  Booth  :  Here  a  longer  pause  than  before,  with  a  curious  glance  at 
Bassanio. 

8.  May]  Clarendon  :  *  May,’  in  the  sense  of  can.  Abbott,  §  307  :  Like  the  Ger¬ 
man  mogen.  [Therefore,  I  think  it  is  used  here  rather  in  the  sense  of  *  Are  you  will¬ 
ing  ?’ — Ed.] 

3 


34 


THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i.  sc.  iii. 


Shall  I  know  your  anfwere. 


Shy.  Three  thoufand  ducats  for  three  months, 
and  Anthonio  bound. 


10 


Bajf.  Your  anfwere  to  that. 
Shy.  Anthonio  is  a  good  man. 


Baff.  Haue  you  heard  any  imputation  to  the  con¬ 
trary. 


15 


Shy.  Ho  no,  no,  no,  no  :  my  meaning  in  faying  he  is  a 
good  man,  is  to  haue  you  vnderftand  me  that  he  is  fuffi- 
ent,  yet  his  meanes  are  in  fuppofition  :  he  hath  an  Argo- 
fle  bound  to  Tripolis,  another  to  the  Indies,  I  vnder¬ 
ftand  moreouer  vpon  the  Ryalta,  he  hath  a  third  at  Mexi- 


20 


9,  12.  anfwere]  aunfwere  Q2. 

16.  Shy.]  Shylocke.  Q2. 


17.  fuffient]  fufficient  QqFf. 

19.  Indies ,]  Indies.  F3F4. 

20.  Ryalta]  Qq.  Ryalto  F2F3.  Royalto 


Ho  no,]  No,  no,  F2.  No,  F3F4, 


Rowe+.  Oh  no,  Knt,  Glo.  Cla.  Clarke, 
Wh.  ii. 


13.  g°°d]  Clarendon:  ‘Good’  is  opposed  to  poor  in  Cor.  I,  i,  16:  ‘We  are 
accounted  poor  citizens,  the  patricians  good.’  Rolfe:  That  is,  ‘good’  in  the  com¬ 
mercial  sense,  ‘having  pecuniary  ability  of  unimpaired  credit.’ — Webster’s  Diet. 
Halliwell  :  The  epithet  has  continued  in  use,  in  a  cognate  sense,  to  the  present 
day ;  a  ‘  good  man,’  in  fashionable  slang,  being  one  in  actual  possession  of  his  estate. 
A  person  who  exceeds  another  in  wealth  is  said  to  be  a  better  man  than  the  other. 
[Shylock  is  his  own  best  commentator,  and  fully  explains  the  word  in  his  next  speech. 


17.  suffient]  Booth:  Indicate  by  gesture  (touch  your  palm  or  the  pouch  you 
carry)  what  you  mean.  All  this  is  spoken  deliberately,  not  too  slowly,  and  with  an 
occasional  shrug  of  the  shoulders. 

18.  supposition]  Eccles  :  Are  but  supposed,  the  subject  of  conjecture,  rather  than 
assurance.  Clarendon  :  Because  exposed  to  the  perils  of  the  sea. 

20.  Ryalta]  Staunton:  There  were  in  ancient  Venice  three  distinct  places  prop¬ 
erly  called  Rialto ;  namely,  the  island  at  the  farther  side  of  the  Grand  Canal ;  the 
Exchange  erected  on  that  island ;  and  the  Ponte  di  Rialto,  which  connected  the  island 
with  St.  Mark’s  Quarter.  The  first  of  these  places,  according  to  Darn,  received  the 
name  of  Rialto  on  account  of  its  convenience  to  fishermen,  its  height,  its  contiguity  to 
the  sea,  and  its  situation  m  the  centre  of  a  basin.  If  this  conjecture  be  accurate,  the 
original  name  was  perhaps  Riva  Alta,  a  high  bank-shore,  or  Rilevato,  an  elevated  mar¬ 
gin  ;  since  the  island  was  the  highest,  and  probably  the  oldest,  of  those  in  the  lagune 
to  which  the  Veneti  fled.  Early  in  the  fifth  century  the  church  of  San  Jacopo  was 
erected  on  this  spot,  near  the  fish-market;  and  adjoining  to  it  were  built  the  Fab- 
bricche,  a  series  of  edifices  connected  by  arcades,  employed  as  warehouses  and  custom¬ 
houses  ;  in  the  open  space  opposite  to  which  was  held  the  Exchange.  Sabellicus,  who 
wrote  on  Venetian  history  in  the  seventeenth  century,  states  that  this  ‘  most  noble  piazza  ’ 
was  crowded  from  morning  to  night.  The  part  where  the  merchants  transacted  the 
most  weighty  and  important  affairs  was  near  the  double  portico  at  the  end  of  the  piazza 


ACT  i,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


35 


co;  a  fourth  for  England,  and  other  ventures  hee  hath  21 
fquandred  abroad,  but  fhips  are  but  boords,  Saylers  but 
men,  there  be  land  rats,  and  water  rats,  water  theeues, 
and  land  theeues,  I  meane  Pyrats,  and  then  there  is  the  24 


21.  hath]  hath,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Cam. 
Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

22.  abroad,]  abroad.  Rowe. 

boords]  boards  Qx.  boordes  Q2. 
bsardes  Q  . 

23.  men,]  men;  Q  . 
land~\  lands  Fs. 


23.  land  rats...  water  rats]  Hyphened 
by  Pope. 

23,  24.  water  theeues,  and  land  theeues ] 
land-thieves  and  water-thieves  Coll.  (MS), 
Sing.  (MS),  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Dyce  iii. 

theeues']  theives  F  . 

24.  Pyrats,]  Pyrats ;  F3F4.  Pyrates  ; 
Rowe. 


opposite  San  Jacopo’s  Church,  where  the  Banco  Giro  was  established.  The  following 
is  Coryat’s  description  of  the  Rialto,  or  Exchange,  as  it  appeared  when  he  visited  Ven 
ice :  *  The  Rialto,  which  is  at  the  farthest  side  of  the  bridge  as  you  come  from  St.  Mark’s, 
is  a  most  stately  building,  being  the  Exchange  of  Venice,  where  the  Venetian  gentlemen 
and  the  merchants  doe  meete  twice  a  day,  betwixt  eleven  and  twelve  of  the  clocke  in 
the  morning,  and  betwixt  five  and  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone.  This  Rialto  is 
of  a  goodly  height,  built  all  with  bricke  as  the  palaces  are,  adorned  with  many  faire 
walkes  or  open  galleries  that  I  have  before  mentioned,  and  hath  a  pretty  quadrangular 
court  adjoining  to  it.  But  it  is  inferior  to  our  Exchange  in  London,  though  indeede 
there  is  a  farre  greater  quantity  of  building  in  this  than  in  ours.’ — Crudities,  1611, 
p.  169.  Clarendon  :  ‘  As  it  were,  Rivo  Alto,  a  high  shore  ....  An  eminent  place  in 
Venice  where  Marchants  commonly  meete.’ — Florio,  Ital.  Did.  1611.  The  bridge 
called  Ponte  di  Rialto  was  first  built  in  1591,  but  the  existing  bridge  is  a  more  recent 
structure.  [See  post,  line  hi.] 

20.  Mexico]  See  Th.  Elze,  III,  ii,  284. 

21.  hath]  Note  Theobald’s  judicious  punctuation. — Ed. 

22.  squandred]  Knight  :  In  a  letter  published  by  Waldron,  in  Woodfall’s  ‘  The¬ 
atrical  Repertory,’  1801,  it  is  stated  that  ‘Macklin,  mistakenly,  spoke  the  word  with  a 
tone  of  reprobation,  implying  that  Antonio  had,  as  we  say  of  prodigals,  unthriftly  squan¬ 
der’d  his  wealth.’  The  meaning  is  simply  scattered ;  of  which  Waldron  gives  an  exam¬ 
ple  from  Howell’s  Letters  : *  1  The  Jews,  once  an  elect  people,  but  now  grown  contempt¬ 
ible,  and  strangely  squander’d  up  and  down  the  world.’  In  Dryden’s  Annus  Mirabilis 
we  have  the  same  expression  applied  to  ships  :  ‘  They  drive,  they  squander,  the  huge 
Belgian  fleet.’  Halliwell  :  Still  used  in  Warwickshire,  and,  according  to  Wilbraham, 
p.  80,  still  used  in  Cheshire  in  the  sense  of  scattered,  dispersed. 

23.  24.  water  .  .  .  theeues]  Eccles  :  It  seems  that  these  ought  to  change  places, 

i.  e.  ‘  land  thieves  and  water  thieves,’  for  the  purpose  of  connecting  ‘  water  thieves  ’  with 
‘  pirates.’  Staunton  :  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  reading  in  the  old  copies  was 
a  printer’s  or  transcriber’s  error.  Halliwell  :  Shylock  is  intended  to  speak  somewhat 
disjointedly,  otherwise  one  would  be  induced  to  adopt  the  change  suggested  by  Eccles. 
[See  note  on  ‘warmed  ....  summer,’  III,  i,  57. — Ed.] 

24.  Pyrats]  Halliwell  :  ‘  Water-rats,’  a  jocular  term  for  pirates,  is  not  peculiar  to 
Shakespeare.  [The  instances  cited  are  from  ‘  a  rare  tract :  The  Abortive  of  an  Idle 
Hour,  1620;’  Massinger’s  A  Very  Woman,  1655  [1624  is  probably  its  earliest  date], 
and  land-pirate  in  The  Wandering  Jew  telling  Fortunes,  &c.,  1 649 — all  subsequent  to 
The  Merchant  of  Venic°. — Ed.] 


36 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  I,  sc.  iii. 


perrill  of  waters,  windes,  and  rocks  :  the  man  is  notwith-  25 
Handing  fufficient,  three  thoufand  ducats,  I  thinke  I  may- 
take  his  bond. 

Baf.  Be  affured  you  may. 

lew.  I  will  be  affured  I  may  :  and  that  I  may  be  affu¬ 
red,  I  will  bethinke  mee,  may  I  fpeake  with  Antho-  30 

mo  ? 

Baff.  If  it  pleafe  you  to  dine  with  vs. 
lew.  Yes,  to  fmell  porke,  to  eate  of  the  habitation 
which  your  Prophet  the  Nazarite  coniured  the  diuell  34 

25.  perrill ]  Q2F2F3.  perill  QIQ3.  29,  33,  41.  lew.]  Q2FfQ3.  Shy.  Qx. 

28,  29.  ajfzired ]  ajffurd  Q2.  ajfur’d  30.  mee,']  me ;  Rowe. 

Q3.  34.  Nazarite ]  Nazarit  Q2. 

26.  three  thousand  ducats]  Booth  :  Very  slowly,  as  if  calculating  the  chances 
of  loss  or  gain. 

29.  I  will]  Booth  :  With  emphasis  on  ‘  will,’  and  with  a  chuckle. 

32.  dine]  Halliwell  :  This  invitation  was  of  an  unusual  character  under  any  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  business,  and  intended  evidently  as  a  very  great  compliment. 

33.  porke]  Booth:  Doggett,  doubtless,  made  a  strong  ‘point’  here,  but  be  very 
careful  that  you  do  not ;  a  too  strong  emphasis  or  expression  of  disgust  might  cause  a 
laugh ;  the  whole  speech  must  be  spoken  impressively.  [The  rest  of  this  sentence, 
down  to  ‘  I  will  buy  with  you,’  Dr  Johnson  silently  omitted. — Ed.] 

34.  Nazarite]  Halliwell:  According  to  some  critics,  Shylock  is  here  speaking  in 
contempt  of  Christ,  the  Nazarenes  being  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  as  having  been  in 
low  estimation  with  the  Jews;  but  the  better  interpretation  is  that  the  speaker  wishes 
merely  to  indicate  more  strongly  his  intense  horror  of  pork,  by  recalling  it  to  mind  as 
the  material  into  which  the  devils  were  driven,  thus  ridiculing  Bassanio  by  implying 
how  foolish  he  and  other  Christians  were  in  eating  of  the  flesh  of  the  animal  which 
was  selected  by  their  own  prophet  for  the  proper  habitation  of  evil  spirits.  The  great 
prophet  himself  was  not  regarded  contemptuously  by  the  Jews  of  Venice,  and  Shylock 
would  be  speaking  out  of  character  were  he  to  be  represented  as  ridiculing  him.  A 
Jew  whom  Coryat  met  in  that  city  told  him  ‘that  Christ  forsooth  was  a  great  prophet, 
and  in  that  respect  as  highly  to  be  esteemed  as  any  prophet  amongst  the  Jewes  that 
ever  lived  before  him;  but  derogated  altogether  from  his  divinitie,  and  would  not 
acknowledge  him  for  the  Messias  and  Saviour  of  the  world,  because  he  came  so  con¬ 
temptibly,  and  not  with  that  pompe  and  majestie  that  beseemed  the  redeemer  of  man 
kind.’ — Crudities,  161 1,  p.  215.  [The  use  of  this  word  instead  of  Nazarene  is  at  first 
sight  puzzling.  The  distinction  between  a  ‘  Nazarite  ’  and  a  Nazarene  is  of  the  broad¬ 
est.  Samson  was  a  Nazarite,  and  is  always  correctly  so  called  by  Milton  in  his  Samson 
Agonistes.  And  John  the  Baptist  was  a  Nazarite.  Shylock  must  have  known  perfectly 
well  that  the  Prophet  who  conjured  the  devil  into  the  swine  was  not  a  Nazarite,  but  a 
Nazarene.  While  still  lost  in  questionings  over  the  passage  I  mentioned  the  difficulty 
to  my  friend,  Dr  Thomas  Chase,  late  President  of  Haverford  College,  who  at  once  in 
the  simplest  and  most  obvious  way  solved  it,  in  the  following  note  :  ‘  You  say  well  that 
“  Shakespeare  is  always  right,”  and  he  was  right  in  saying  “  your  prophet  the  Nazarite.” 


ACT  i,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


37 


into  :  I  will  buy  with  you,  fell  with  you,  talke  with  35 

you,  walke  with  you,  and  fo  following  :  but  I  will 
not  eate  with  you,  drinke  with  you,  nor  pray  with  you. 

What  newes  on  the  Ryalta,  who  is  he  comes  here  ? 


Enter  Anthonio. 


Baff.  This  is  fignior  Anthonio. 

lew.  How  like  a  fawning  publican  he  lookes. 


40 


35.  into.']  into?  Theob. 

37>  3^-  pray. . .  here  /]  pray  with  you, 


38.  Ryalta~]  RyaltoQ jQ2Ff.  Rialto 


is  he\  Om.  Rowe. 

41.  [Aside.  Rowe  et  seq. 


that's  flat.  Lans. 


The  word  “  Nazarite  ”  was,  in  his  day,  the  proper  (and  probably  the  only)  appellation  for 
“a  man  of  Nazareth.”  Thus,  in  Tyndale’s  version  (1534),  we  find  “  He  shalbe  called 
a  Nazarite.”  In  the  same  passage  it  is  Nazarite  in  Myles  Coverdale’s  translation 
(1535) ;  Matthews’s  (1537);  Taverner’s  (1539);  Cranmer’s  (1539);  the  Bishops’  Bible 
(1568)  [which  Ginsburg  has  shown  to  be  that  used  by  Shakespeare — Ed.]  ;  in  the 
Geneva  version  (1587) ;  and  in  the  Rheims,  or  Roman  Catholic,  version  (1582).  What 
else  then  could  Shakespeare  call  him  in  the  Mer.  of  Ven.  ?  especially  as  King  James’s 
Version,  in  which,  as  far  as  I  know,  the  word  Nazarene  appears  for  the  first  time,  was 
not  published  till  1611.’ — Ed.] 

41.  publican]  Clarendon:  A  ‘fawning  publican’  seems  an  odd  combination. 
The  Publicani,  or  farmers  of  taxes,  under  the  Roman  government,  were  much  more 
likely  to  treat  the  Jews  with  insolence  than  with  servility.  Shakespeare  perhaps 
remembered  that  in  the  Gospels  ‘  publicans  and  sinners  ’  are  mentioned  together  as 
objects  of  the  hatred  and  contempt  of  the  Pharisees.  Karl  Elze  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  xi, 
276) :  ‘Clarendon’  overlooks  the  fact  that  in  the  parable  related  in  Luke  xviii,  10-14, 
the  Publican  is  represented  as  ‘  fawning  ’  not  on  man,  but  on  God.  Such  humility  and 
contrition  before  God  as  is  there  expressed  in  ‘  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner !’  Shy- 
lock — nay,  the  Mosaic  Law  itself — neither  knows  nor  comprehends ;  there  the  Phari¬ 
see  is  the  exact  representative  of  his  faith.  On  the  other  hand,  Shylock  repeatedly 
refers  to  his  rights,  not  only  as  before  man  but  as  before  God ;  as  before  them  both  he 
stands  upon  his  bond.  ‘  What  judgment  shall  I  dread  doing  no  wrong  ?’  and  ‘  My 
deeds  upon  my  head !’  he  exclaims  in  Act  IV.  So,  too,  Marlowe’s  Barabas  says,  ‘  The 
man  that  dealeth  righteously  shall  live.’  From  this  point  of  view  the  publican  fawning 
on  God  and  begging  for  mercy  was  most  repugnant  to  Shylock,  just  as  Portia’s  exquis¬ 
ite  plea  for  mercy  rebounded  from  him  without  effect.  The  only  objection  which  can 
be  urged  against  this  explanation  is,  that  a  reference  to  the  New  Testament  is  put  in 
the  mouth  of  the  Jew  Shylock ;  but  this  reference  lies  in  the  word  ‘  publican,’  interpret 
‘fawning’  as  we  please.  Allen  (MS) :  Shakespeare  must  have  made  Shylock,  as  a 
>  Jew,  speak  of  a  ‘publican’  as  his  forefathers  did  in  the  New  Testament;  and  yet  the 
epithet  he  used  shows  that  he  conceived  of  him  as  an  English  innkeeper.  In  various 
dialects  (see  Halliwell’s  Archaic  Diet.)  ‘public’  is  equivalent  to  an  inn.  So  in  Scot¬ 
land,  as  in  Scott’s  novels.  So  now  in  Ireland  :  ‘  The  publicans  are  in  terror  at  Father 
Mathew’s  approach.’ — Life  of  Mother  McAuley,  p.  380,  New  York,  1866.  In  Web¬ 
ster’s  Diet.,  under  *  publican,’  in  the  sense  of  innkeeper,  this  very  passage  is  cited. 
White  (ed.  ii) :  A  strange  and  either  heedless  or  ignorant  use  of  ‘publican.’  That 


38 


THE  MERCHANT  CF  VENICE  [act  I,  sc.  iii. 


I  hate  him  for  he  is  a  Chriftian  :  42 

But  more,  for  that  in  low  fimplicitie 

He  lends  out  money  gratis,  and  brings  downe 

The  rate  of  vfance  here  with  vs  in  Venice.  45 

If  I  can  catch  him  once  vpon  the  hip, 

43.  more,]  more  F  . 

Shylock  means  an  innkeeper  is  hardly  possible.  [I  incline  to  agree  with  Elze  that  the 
thought  uppermost  in  Shylock’s  mind  was  the  publican  of  the  parable,  but  cannot  go 
as  far  as  he  does  in  attributing  Shylock’s  contempt  for  humility  to  the  Jewish  race  in 
general.  The  parable  itself  was  told  by  a  Jew. — Ed.] 

42.  for]  For  instances  of  ‘for’  in  the  sense  of  ‘because  of,’  see  Abbott,  §  15 1. 

45.  vsance]  Douce  (i,  251) :  ‘It  is  almoste  incredyble  what  gaine  the  Venetians 
receiue  by  the  vsury  of  the  Jewes,  both  pryuately  and  in  common.  For  in  euerye  citee 
the  Jewes  kepe  open  shops  of  vsurie,  taking  gaiges  of  ordinarie  for  .xv.  in  the  hundred 
by  the  yere :  and  if  at  the  yeres  ende,  the  gaige  be  not  redemed,  it  is  forfeite,  or  at  the 
least  dooen  away  to  a  great  disaduantage :  by  reason  whereof  the  Jewes  are  out  of 
measure  wealthie  in  those  parties.’ — Thomas’s  Historye  of  Italye,  1561,  fol.  76  b. 
[Several  Editors  call  attention  to  the  interchangeable  use  of  interest,  usance,  and  usury, 
and  some  refer  to  Bacon’s  Essay  of  Vsurie.  In  the  opening  sentences  of  that  Essay 
there  is  an  allusion  which  seems  noteworthy,  not  alone  because  of  the  mention  of  the 
*  orange-tawney  bonnets,’  but  because  we  may  infer  that  in  1625,  when  this  Essay  was 
first  published,  the  presence  of  Jews  in  England  was  not  so  unfamiliar  as  on  historical 
grounds  might  be  supposed.  ‘  Many  haue  made  Wittie  Inuectiues  against  Vfurie. 
They  fay,  that  it  is  Pitie,  the  Deuill  fhould  haue  Gods  part,  which  is  the  Tithe.  That 
the  Vfurer  is  the  greatest  Sabbath  Breaker,  becaufe  his  Plough  goeth  euery  Sunday. 
That  the  Vfurer  is  the  Droane,  that  Virgil  fpeaketh  of:  Ignauum  Fucos  Pecus  a  prce- 
fepibus  arcent.  That  the  Vfurer  breaketh  the  Firjl  Law,  that  was  made  for  Man- 
kinde,  after  the  Fall;  which  was,  In  Sudore  VultHs  tui  comedes  Panem  tuum ;  Not, 
In  Sudore  Vultus  alieni.  That  Vfurers  fhould  haue  Orange-tawney  Bonnets,  becaufe 
they  doe  ludaize.  That  it  is  againfl  Nature,  for  Money  to  beget  Money  ;  And  the  like. 
I  say  this  onely,  that  Vfury  is  a  Concejfum  propter  Duritiem  Cordis ;  For  fince  there 
muft  be  Borrowing  and  Lending,  and  Men  are  fo  hard  of  Heart,  as  they  will  not  lend 
freely,  Vfury  muft  be  permitted.’  Bacon  goes  on  to  recommend  that  ‘  Vfury,  in  gen- 
erall  be  reduced  to  Fiue  in  the  Hundred,’  and  frequently  employs  the  word  Interest 
instead  of  Vfury.  See  line  112,  post. — Ed.] 

46.  vpon  the  hip]  Here,  at  IV,  i,  350,  and  in  Oth.  II,  i,  338,  are  the  only  passages 
in  Shakespeare  where  this  phrase  is  found.  Johnson  ( Oth.  II,  i,  338)  says  that  it  is  a 
phrase  from  the  art  of  wrestling,  but  in  his  Diet,  he  derived  it  from  hunting;  with 
more  probability,  says  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  52),  and  cites  several  passages  in  proof,  none 
of  which  seems  to  me  conclusive,  and  one  seems  decidedly  to  point  to  wrestling.  Since 
compiling  the  note  in  Oth.  I  have  found,  in  Notes  dr5  Qu.  vol.  vii,  p.  375,  the  following 
remarks  on  ‘he  phrase  by  W.  R.  Arrowsmith,  which,  with  its  citation  from  Sir  John 
Harington,  settles  its  meaning  beyond  a  peradventure :  ‘  “  On  the  hip,”  at  advantage. 
A  term  of  wrestling.  So  said  Dr  Johnson  at  first ;  but,  on  second  thought,  referred  it  to 

venery,  with  which  Mr  Dyce  consents ;  both  erroneously . The  hip  of  a  chase  is 

10  term  of  woodman’s  craft ;  the  haunch  is.  Moreover,  what  a  marvellous  expression 
tc  say,  A  hound  has  a  chase  on  the  hip,  instead  of  by !  Still  more  prodigious  to  say. 


vcr  I,  sc.  iii.J  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


39 


I  will  feede  fat  the  ancient  grudge  I  beare  him.  47 

He  hates  our  facred  Nation,  and  he  railes 

Euen  there  where  Merchants  moft  doe  congregate 

On  me,  my  bargaines,  and  my  well-worne  thrift,  50 

Which  he  cals  interred:  :  Curfed  be  my  Trybe 

If  I  forgiue  him. 

Baff.  Shylock,  doe  you  heare. 

Shy.  I  am  debating  of  my  prefent  ftore, 

And  by  the  neere  geffe  of  my  memorie  5  5 

I  cannot  inftantly  raife  vp  the  groffe 

Of  full  three  thoufand  ducats  :  what  of  that? 

Tuball  a  wealthy  Hebrew  of  my  Tribe 
Will  furnifh  me;  but  foft,  how  many  months 

Doe  you  defire  f  Reft  you  faire  good  fignior,  60 


47.  ancient ]  auncient  Q2. 
grudge ]  grudg 

50.  well-worne ]  F2F3.  well-wone  Q2. 
well-worn  F4.  well-won  Q,Q3  et  cet. 

51.  interref]  Q2F2.  interejl  Qx. 


53.  Shylock]  Shyloch  Q2. 

55-  gejfe\  QaFa-  guejfe  QIQ3-  guefs 

Fs- 

60.  defire  .■?]  desire  ?  [To  Ant.]  Rowe 
et  seq. 


that  a  hound  gets  a  chase  on  the  hip . To  the  examples  alleged  by  Mr  Dyce,  the 

three  following  may  be  added ;  whereof  the  last,  after  the  opinion  of  Sir  John  Haring- 

ton,  rightly  refers  the  origin  of  the  metaphor  to  wrestling . “  Full  oft  the  valiant 

Knight  his  hold  doth  shift,  And  with  much  prettie  sleight,  the  same  doth  slippe ;  In 
fine  he  doth  applie  one  speciall  drift,  Which  was  to  get  the  Pagan  on  the  hippe :  And 
having  caught  him  right,  he  doth  him  lift,  By  nimble  sleight,  and  in  such  wise  doth 
trippe :  That  downe  he  threw  him,”  &c. — Harington’s  trans.  of  Orlando  Furioso, 
Booke  xlvi,  Stanza  117.’  The  two  other  examples,  cited  by  Arrowsmith,  in  no  wise 
explain  the  phrase,  but  merely  repeat  it ;  and  moreover  they  are  /^/-Shakespearian. 

-Ed. 

51,  52.  Cursed  .  .  .  him]  Booth:  This  in  a  lower  tone,  almost  growled  sotto 
voce.  Turning  your  back  on  Antonio  as  he  enters,  and  pretending  to  be  lost  in  calcu¬ 
lation  of  your  ‘  present  store.’ 

51.  of]  For  other  instances  where  ‘of’  means  as  regards,  concerning,  about,  see 
Abbott,  §  174;  also,  V,  i,  421. 

58.  Tuball]  Cassel  ( Literatur  u.  Symbolik,  1884,  p.  381)  says  that  this  name  is 
not  to  be  found  in  Jewry.  [It  is  no  disgrace  to  be  inferior  to  Shakespeare  in  any  wise, 
not  even  in  the  reading  of  the  Bible ;  in  Genesis  x,  2,  Tubal  is  enumerated  among  the 
sons  of  Japheth,  and  Chus  or  Cush,  afterwards  mentioned  by  Jessica,  is  among  the  sons 
of  Ham.  See  Actors  Names,  ante. — Ed.] 

60.  desire]  This  is  one  of  the  many  instances  cited  by  Walker  (  Vers.  144)  where 
words  ending  in  ire  suffer  dissolution,  as  the  grammarians  call  it.  *  This,  like  many 
other  archaic  modes  of  pronunciation,  occurs  more  frequently  in  Shakespeare’s  eailier 
plays  than  in  his  later,  and  even  in  them  he  is  more  sparing  of  it,  or,  at  any  rate,  ap¬ 
plies  it  to  a  smaller  number  of  words,  than  Marlowe,  Greene,  &c.’  Abbott’s  corre- 


40 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  I,  sc.  iii. 


Your  worfhip  was  the  laft  man  in  our  mouthes.  6 1 

A?it.  Shylocke,  albeit  I  neither  lend  nor  borrow 
By  taking,  nor  by  giuing  of  exceffe, 

Yet  to  fupply  the  ripe  wants  of  my  friend, 

lie  breake  a  cuftome  :  is  he  yet  poffeft  65 

How  much  he  would? 

61.  mouthes\  mouth's  F3. 

62.  albeit^  although  Qx,  Pope  + ,  Cam. 

Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

borrow ]  borrow ,  Qt. 

65,  66.  is  he... he  wou!d~\  Ff,  Rowe, 

Pope,  Han.  are  you  refold  d,  How  much 

sponding  paragraph  is  480 ;  in  Browne’s  Notes,  &c,  that  invaluable  condensation,  see 
p.  15.  Booth:  Here  turn,  and  with  pretended  surprise  at  Anthonio’s  presence, 
uncover,  and  address  him  obsequiously,  but  with  a  touch  of  irony  in  voice  and  face. 

61.  worship]  Morris :  We  retain  the  same  meaning  in  the  title  of  ‘your  worship’ 
(i.  e.  worth-ship),  addressed  to  the  magistrate  on  the  bench. 

63.  By  ...  of]  Abbott,  §  178,  ‘of’  naturally  followed  a  verbal  noun.  In  many 
cases  we  should  call  the  verbal  noun  a  participle,  and  the  ‘  of’  has  become  unintelligible 
to  us.  ‘  Here  stood  he  mumbling  of  wicked  charms,’ — Lear  II,  i,  39.  In  most  cases, 
however,  a  preposition  is  inserted,  and  thus  the  substantive  use  of  the  verbal  is  made 
evident.  As  in  this  present  passage. 

63.  excesse]  Clarendon:  That  which,  when  the  loan  is  repaid,  is  paid  in  excess 
of  the  sum  lent,  i.  e.  interest. 

64.  ripe]  Johnson  :  That  is,  wants  come  to  the  height,  wants  that  can  have  no 
longer  delay.  Perhaps  we  might  read — rife  wants,  wants  that  come  thick  upon  him. 
Malone  :  So  afterwards,  ‘  stay  the  very  riping  of  the  time.’ 

65.  possest]  Steevens:  That  is,  acquainted,  informed.  So  in  Twel.  N.  II,  iii, 
149  :  ‘  Possess  us,  possess  us.’  See  also  post,  IV,  i,  39. 

65,  66.  is  .  .  .  would]  That  ‘  he  ’  in  line  66  is  a  misprint,  is  clear.  As  we  know 
that  this  text  was  printed  from  Q2,  the  misprint  is  probably  due  to  the  compositor’s  mis¬ 
taking  the  ye  in  that  Quarto  for  ‘  he.’  Theobald  changed  ye  into  you,  and  has  been 
followed  by  the  majority  of  editors.  This  involves  the  supposition  that  Anthonio 
breaks  off  in  his  talk  to  Shylock,  and  asks  Bassanio  the  question.  Yet  Bassanio  dees 
not  answer,  and  Shylock,  who  was  doing  all  he  could  to  gain  time,  would,  I  think, 
have  willingly  resigned  the  conversation  to  Bassanio  had  the  chance  occurred.  Nor 
is  it  Bassanio  who  says,  ‘  And  for  three  months,’  but  AnthOnio.  Bassanio  does  not 
speak  for  some  time,  not  until  after  Shylock  has  made  his  offer.  This  address  to  Bas¬ 
sanio  is  therefore  apparently  purposeless ;  nothing  is  called  forth  by  it.  As  a  general 
rule,  this  is  not  Shakespeare’s  style ;  but  it  might  be  urged  that  we  have  it  here,  and 
must  understand  it  as  best  we  can.  Happily,  we  have  a  resource  in  an  appeal  to  Qx. 
The  text  there  reads  :  ‘  are  you  resolu’d  How  much  he  would  haue  ?’  This  is  plain  and 
clear.  The  only  objection  to  it  that  I  can  see  lies  in  the  scansion,  and  this  is  but  trifling 
in  comparison  with  the  objection  to  Q2  with  its  change  of  address,  to  which  no  heed  is 
paid  by  Bassanio ;  and  the  scansion  is  very  far  from  irregular :  a  pause  in  the  third 
foot  is  common  enough.  ‘He  break  ]  a  ciistom;  |  '  |  are  y6u  |  res6lv’d.’  In  the  Fifth 
Act  Gratiano  says,  ‘  That  she  |  did  give  me  |  /  |  whose  p6  |  sy  was.’  There  is  even 


he  would  haue?  Qx.  is  he... ye  would 
Q2Q3,  Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Del.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 
Are  you. ..he  would?  Coll.  (MS),  is  he 
...we  would?  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 
Is  he... you  would?  Theob.  et  cet. 


act  i,  sc.  iii]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  41 

Shy.  I,  I,  three  thoufand  ducats.  67 

Ant.  And  for  three  months. 

Shy.  I  had  forgot,  three  months,  you  told  me  fo. 

Well  then,  your  bond  :  and  let  me  fee,  but  heare  you,  70 

Me  thoughts  you  faid,  you  neither  lend  nor  borrow 


67.  I,  I,]  J,  I,  Qa.  Ay,  ay,  Rowe. 

68.  months ]  moneths  Qx. 

69.  you ]  he  Han. 

70.  and  let]  but  let  F3F4,  Rowe,  and, 


let  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 

71.  Me  thoughts]  QaFf.  Me-though. 
Qx.  Me  thought  Q  .  Methoughts  Rowe, 
Cap.  Methought  Pope  et  cet. 


reason  for  a  pause  in  Anthonio’s  line ;  there  is  a  change  of  thought.  Nor  is  the  scan¬ 
sion  in  line  66  any  more  difficult.  Just  as  in  line  65,  I  will  is  contracted  into  ‘  I’ll,’  so 
here  ‘he  would’  may  be  contracted  into  he'd :  ‘How  much  |  he’d  have?  |  Ay,  ay  | 
three  thou  |  sand  ducats.’  For  the  rest,  resolv'd  is  quite  as  Shakespearian  as *  *  possest.’ 
On  the  whole,  the  text  of  Qx  seems  to  me  preferable  to  that  of  Q2 ;  it  is  perfectly  intel¬ 
ligible,  its  metre  is  irreproachable,  and  it  obviates  a  change  of  address  which  needs 
explanation.  But  Furnivall  pronounces  it  (. Forewords  to  Qt,  p.  v)  ‘  the  [Italics, 
his]  test-passage ’  in  deciding  that  Q2  is  superior  to  Qx.  ‘And  though,’  continues  Fur¬ 
nivall,  ‘you  can  mend  the  metre  without  introducing  yet,  by  printing:  “Are  you 

*  “resolued  how  much  he  would  have?”  yet  few  students  will  doubt  that  the  Heyes 
‘  Quarto  [Q2]  has  Shakspere’s  reading — revisd,  if  not  original, — when  it  makes 
‘  Antonio  turn  to  Bassanio,  and  say  “is  hee  yet  possest  How  much  ye  would?”  This 

*  change  cannot  have  been  a  copier’s  or  printer’s  doing,  but  must  have  been  got 
‘  from  Shakspere  directly  or  thru  his  MS.’  In  a  foot-note :  *  This  may  involve  the 
‘  change  of  Bass,  for  Ant.  in  the  “  And  for  three  months,”  with  Shylock  answering 
‘  Bassanio,  “  I  had  forgot,  three  months,  you  told  me  so,”  and  then  turning  to  Antonio 
‘with  “Well,  then,  your  bond.”  I  prefer  this  change  [first  suggested  by  Capell. — 

*  Ed.],  but  of  course  the  Heyes  text  may  stand  as  it  is.’  Merely  that  the  question  of 
a  change  as  great  as  that  of  a  redistribution  of  speeches  can  be  raised  in  Q2,  is  in  itself 
a  plea  for  the  superior  simplicity  and  clearness  of  the  text  of  Qt.  If,  however,  the 
text  of  Q2  is  to  be  preferred,  I  should  certainly  change  the  ye,  not  into  you,  as  Theo¬ 
bald  changed  it,  but  into  we,  as  suggested  by  Walker  and  adopted  by  Dyce  and 
Hudson. — Ed. 

68.  Ant.]  Capell  (p.  60,  a) :  Had  the  moderns  [by  this  term  all  the  editors  from 
Rowe  to  Johnson  are  designated]  set  the  name  of  Bassanio  here,  the  speech’s  own  fit¬ 
ness,  and  a  word  of  the  line  immediately  answering  it,  had  gone  far  to  have  justify’d 
them :  but  not  quite  far  enough :  for  Antonio  had  learnt  in  conversation,  before  his 
entry,  as  well  the  term  as  the  sum ;  and  the  Jew — whose  brain  is  then  working  upon 
matters  that  break  out  afterwards, — thinks  Bassanio  the  speaker,  and  frames  his  first 
line  accordingly;  his  next  addresses  Antonio,  and  his  whole  speech  is  the  language 
of  one  absent.  [However  broadly  we  may  smile  at  Capell’s  uncouth  style,  if  we  will 
but  have  the  patience  to  penetrate  the  rough  rind,  we  shall  find  the  kernel  generally 
sound  and  at  times  wholesome.  In  this  present  passage  ‘  you  told  me  so  ’  might  have 
been  uttered  deucrucug,  as  the  grammarians  say,  that  is  pointing  to  Bassanio. — Ed.] 

70.  and  let  me  see]  Booth  :  Slowly;  with  a  slight  pause  and  a  searching  look  at 
Antonio. 

71.  Me  thoughts]  This  form  occurs  elsewhere  in  the  Ff  and  Qq;  it  is  found  twice 
in  Clarence’s  dream  in  Rich.  Ill :  I,  iv;  and  also  in  Wint.  T.  I,  ii,  154.  It  is  perhaps 


42 


THE  MEE CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Vpon  aduantage.  72 

Ant.  I  doe  neuer  vfe  it. 

Shy.  When  Iacob  graz’d  his  Vncle  Labans  fheepe, 

This  Iacob  from  our  holy  Abram,  was  75 

(As  his  wife  mother  wrought  in  his  behalfe) 

The  third  poffeffer  ;  I,  he  was  the  third.  77 

73  doe]  did  Rowe.  77.  third."]  third, —  Dyce,  Cam.  Glo. 

75.  Abram]  Abraham  F4,  Roweetseq.  Ktly,  Cla.  Clarke,  Del.  Rife,  Huds.  Wh. 

77.  poJTfeffer]  pojfejfor  Q3-  ii. 

formed,  as  Walker  suggests  (  Vers.  284),  *  by  contagion  from  methinks .’  ‘  Me  thought  ’ 
and  *  me  thoughts’  are  always  printed  as  two  words  in  Fj.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind 
that  the  word  ‘  think,’  in  *  methinks,’  comes  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  thincan,  to  seem, 
to  appear,  and  not  from  thencan,  to  think.  See  notes  in  Ham.  V,  ii,  63. — Ed. 

74.  Iacob]  Ginsburg  (Athenceum,  28  April,  1883) :  Every  item  in  this  remarkable 
dialogue  exhibits  Shakespeare  as  one  of  the  most  original  interpreters  of  the  Bible. 
Jacob  is  selected  because  he  was  not  only  preferred  by  God  himself  to  his  brother 
Esau,  but  because  his  additional  name  was  Israel, — the  name  from  which  Shylock  and 
his  race  obtained  the  appellation  Israelites.  The  paraphrase  ‘  the  eanlings  which  were 
streak’d  and  pied  ’  is  Shakespeare’s  own,  and  beautifully  reflects  the  sense  of  the  orig¬ 
inal.  The  reply  which  he  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Anthonio,  that  it  was  God’s  wonder¬ 
ful  interposition,  and  must  not  be  adduced  as  justifying  foul  play,  shows  that  Shake¬ 
speare  has  not  only  carefully  studied  the  Biblical  narrative,  but  that  he  has  based  it 
upon  the  remark  in  the  margin  against  the  passage  (Gen.  xxx,  37)  in  the  Bishops’ 
Bible  (1568),  which  is  as  follows :  ‘  It  is  not  lawefull  by  fraude  to  seke  recompence  of 
iniurie :  therefore  Moyses  sheweth  afterwarde  that  God  thus  instructed  Jacob.’  ( Gen. 
xxxi,  9.)  But  the  most  remarkable  part  of  this  remarkable  transaction  is  the  crushing 
manner  in  which  the  attempt  ‘  to  clothe  the  naked  villainy  with  old,  old  ends  stolen 
forth  from  Holy  Writ  ’  is  brought  home  to  the  villain.  Shakespeare  makes  Anthonio 
meet  this  device  by  appealing  to  another  Scriptural  event  showing  that  ‘the  devil  can 
cite  Scripture  for  his  purpose.’  But  as  this  fact  is  recorded  in  Matt,  iv,  6,  and  as  Shy- 
lock  the  Jew  does  not  believe  in  the  New  Testament,  Anthonio  is  made  to  address  it 
to  his  Christian  friend  Bassanio.  [In  this  valuable  letter  Ginsburg  shows  from  the  use 
of  the  word  ‘charity’  in  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  IV,  iii,  364,  that  the  version  which  Shake¬ 
speare  used  was  the  Bishops’  Bible  (1568),  the  only  version  of  the  eight  then  extant 
wherein  this  word  is  found ;  all  the  other  seven  read  *  love.’  The  present  passage,  as 
Ginsburg  shows  us,  also  points  to  his  use  of  that  same  version.] 

76.  As]  That  is,  For  so.  See  I,  i,  160. 

77.  third]  Farren  (p.  12):  Actors  have  misunderstood  one  of  the  finest  allusions 
in  the  play.  The  reader  will  remember  the  part  taken  by  Rebecca,  the  wife  of  Isaac 
and  the  mother  of  Jacob,  to  obtain  his  father’s  blessing  for  him  in  preference  to  Esau, 
the  elder  son  ( Gen.  xxvii).  It  was  by  this  act  of  hers  that  Jacob  became  the  third  pos¬ 
sessor;  and  for  this  deceit  Shylock  thinks  her  entitled  to  great  praise,  not  only  as  it 
showed  the  superior  cunning  of  the  woman  on  behalf  of  her  favorite  son,  but  as  it  was 
the  means  through  which  the  greatness  of  the  Israelites  was  accomplished ;  for  it  drove 
Jaco’  to  Laban,  and  from  Jacob  the  whole  of  the  tribes  were  descended.  Shylock, 
therefore,  says  with  great  exultation :  ‘  Ay,  he  was  the  third,’  whereas  the  actors  have 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  43 


Ant.  And  what  of  him,  did  he  take  interred;  ?  78 

Shy.  No,  not  take  intereft,  not  as  you  would  fay 
Directly  intereft,  marke  what  Iacob  did.  80 

When  Laban  and  himfelfe  were  compremyz’d 
That  all  the  eanelings  which  were  ftreakt  and  pied 
Should  fall  as  Iacobs  hier,  the  Ewes  being  rancke, 

In  end  of  Autumne  turned  to  the  Rammes, 

And  when  the  worke  of  generation  was  85 

Betweene  thefe  woolly  breeders  in  the  a6l, 

The  skilfull  fhepheard  pil’d  me  certaine  wands,  87 


80-91.  marke. ..Iacobs]  You  know  the 
story.  Lansdowne. 

80.  did.]  In  the  original,  this  period 
may  be  a  comma. 

81.  were]  was  Q3. 

compremyz' d]  compremyzd  QtQ2. 
comprimyz' d  F2F3>  compremiz' d  Q3. 
comprimiz'd  F^.  compromis'd  Rowe. 

82.  eanelings]  eue lings  F4>  Ewe  lings 
Rowe,  yeanlings  Pope  + . 


83.  hier]  hire  F4> 

84.  In  end]  In  tE  end  Qlt  Pope-f. 
In  the  end  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Cam.  Ktly, 
Glo.  Wh.  ii. 

85.  And]  Then  Han. 

86.  woolly]  wolly  Q2. 

87.  pil’d]  pyld  Q,Q2.  peel'd  Pope  +  , 
Steev.  Mai.  Coll.  Dyce,  Cam.  Del.  Glo. 
Wh.  ii.  pill'd  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 
pile' d  Wh.  i. 


uttered  the  line  as  if  Shylock  doubted  whether  Jacob  were  the  third,  or  a  subsequent  pos¬ 
sessor, — a  point  of  genealogy,  not  only  thoroughly  well  known  to  Shylock,  but  to  every 
Jew  who  has  lived  from  the  time  of  Jacob  to  the  present  hour.  Clarendon  :  That  is, 
reckoning  Abraham  himself  as  the  first.  Booth  :  Antonio  should  break  in,  impatiently. 

79.  Wordsworth  (p.  64) :  The  use  here  made  of  the  history  of  Jacob  and  Laban 
appeared,  I  conclude,  objectionable  to  Mr  Bowdler,  for  he  has  omitted  the  entire  pas¬ 
sage,  amounting  to  thirty-two  lines ;  but  to  me  it  appears  so  far  otherwise,  that  I  ven¬ 
ture  to  cite  almost  the  whole  of  it,  as  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  tact  with  which 
Shakespeare  could  apply  with  perfect  accuracy  a  passage  of  Scripture  open  to  miscon¬ 
ception,  and  yet  divest  its  application  of  all  dangerous  tendency.  A  close  knowledge 
of  the  Bible  maybe  traced  also  in  the  use  of  the  word  ‘falsehood’  [line  106J  for 
knavery  or  dishonesty. 

81.  compremyz’d]  Clarendon:  That  is,  had  come  to  a  mutual  agreement. 

82.  eanelings]  Halliwell  :  Lambs  just  born.  From  the  Anglo-Saxon  eanian, 
to  bring  forth,  and  the  old  English  verb  eane,  of  the  same  meaning.  *  Chordi  agnes, 
lames  eaned  after  their  tyme.’ — Elyote’s  Did.,  1559. 

84.  In  end]  The  definite  article,  which  Q,  adds  here,  is  scarcely  needed ;  it  can  be 
but  slightly  indicated  in  pronunciation.  In  regard  to  ‘  turned,’  Walker  (  Vers.,  p.  40) 
is  inclined  to  think  that  in  all  words,  where  rm,  rn  are  followed  by  -ed,  the  e  in  -ed  is 
not  suppressed. — Ed. 

87.  pil’d]  Knight  :  This  is  usually  printed  peel'd.  The  words  are  synonymous ; 
but  in  the  old  and  the  present  translations  of  the  Bible  we  find  pill'd,  in  the  passage 
jf  Genesis  to  which  Shylock  alludes.  Booth  :  Use  your  staff  to  illustrate  the  acts  of 
peeling  and  sticking  the  wand  in  the  ground. 

87.  me]  For  other  instances  of  this  ethical  dative,  see  Abbott,  §  220,  or  Shake¬ 
speare  passim. 


44 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


And  in  the  dooing  of  the  deede  of  kinde,  88 

He  ftucke  them  vp  before  the  fulfome  Ewes, 

Who  then  conceauing,  did  in  eaning  time  90 

Fall  party-colour’ d  lambs,  and  thofe  were  Iacobs. 

This  was  a  way  to  thriue,  and  he  was  bleft : 

And  thrift  is  bl  effing  if  men  fteale  it  not. 

Ant.  This  was  a  venture  fir  that  Iacob  feru’d  for, 

A  thing  not  in  his  power  to  bring  to  paffe,  95 

But  fway’d  and  fafhion’d  by  the  hand  of  heauen. 

Was  this  inferted  to  make  interred;  good  ? 

Or  is  your  gold  and  bluer  Ewes  and  Rams  ? 

Sky.  I  cannot  tell,  I  make  it  breede  as  faft, 

But  note  me  fignior.  100 

Ant.  Marke  you  this  Baffanio , 

The  diuell  can  cite  Scripture  for  his  purpofe,  102 


90.  eaning ]  yeaning  F3F4,  Rowe  + . 

93.  And]  7 his  Var.  ’21  (misprint). 
blejfing  if  ]  BleJJing,  if  Q  .  bleffing 

if  F4. 

94.  ferVd ]  fer'ud  Q2.  ferud  Q2. 


97.  inferted ]  inferred  Coll.  (MS). 

99.  breede ]  breeds  F2. 

101-106.  [Aside  to  Bass.  Ktly,  Coll. 

102.  diuell ]  Q,F2.  deuill  Q2. 


89.  fulsome]  Latham  ( Johnson’s  Did.,  s.  v.)  says  that  it  is  difficult  to  determine 
in  this  passage  whether  the  root  of  this  word  is  full  or  foul.  Skeat  ( Did .  s.  v.) 
defines  the  word  *  cloying,  satiating,  superabundant,’  and  adds  that  it  is  ‘  not  derived 
from  foul.'  He  does  not  cite  this  passage.  Whatever  its  original  meaning,  its  later 
usage  certainly  conveys  a  meaning  akin  to  foulness,  and  in  the  present  passage  it  seems 
to  be  nearly  synonymous  with  ‘rancke,’  line  83.  See  Oth.  IV,  i,  45. — Ed. 

91.  Fall]  For  other  instances  of  intransitive  verbs  converted  into  transitive  verbs, 
see  Abbott,  §  291. 

92.  Allen  :  These  two  propositions  are  independent ;  the  second  is  equivalent  to 
‘  Jacob  was  the  one  that  received  Isaac’s  blessing.’  Eccles  :  In  Shylock’s  defence  of 
usury,  drawn  from  the  example  of  Jacob’s  conduct,  there  seems  to  be  little  appositeness 
or  ingenuity ;  indeed,  it  is  not  easy  to  discover  in  what  the  parallelism  of  the  two  cases 
consists.  However  exorbitant  the  demands  of  the  money-lender  may  be,  the  utmost 
extent  of  the  profits  accruing  to  him  is  defined  by  mutual  stipulation  between  him  and 
the  borrower;  whereas  the  advantage  obtained  by  Jacob  was  the  result  of  a  stratagem, 
practised  after  the  compact,  of  which  Laban  had  no  suspicion,  and  the  success  of 
which  was  by  no  means  certain.  Moreover,  the  money  is  to  be  considered  as  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  the  lender ;  the  ewes  were  a  part  of  the  possessions  of  Laban ;  in  short,  the 
only  circumstance  of  resemblance  seems  to  be,  a  supposed  earnest  appetite  for  gain 
in  each,  and  a  diligent  exercise  of  the  means  of  obtaining  it ;  and  of  these,  Shylock 
evidently  wishes  to  establish  the  justification  upon  the  authority  of  so  venerable  a 
character.  This  objection  may  appear  in  some  measure  to  have  been  anticipated  by 
Anthonio’s  reply. 

102.  diuell]  Grey  (i,  131) :  See  Matthew  iv,  6,  where  the  devil  quotes  Psalm  xci. 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


45 


An  euill  foule  producing  holy  witneffe,  103 

Is  like  a  villaine  with  a  fmiling  cheeke, 

A  goodly  apple  rotten  at  the  heart.  105 

0  what  a  goodly  outfide  falfehood  hath. 

Shy.  Three  thoufand  ducats,  his  a  good  round  fum. 

Three  months  from  twelue,  then  let  me  fee  the  rate. 

Ant.  Well  Shylocke ,  fhall  we  be  beholding  to  you  ? 

Shy.  Signior  Anthonio ,  many  a  time  and  oft  1  xo 


106.  Transpose,  to  follow  102,  reading 
Or  for  A,  line  105,  Johns,  conj.  (with¬ 
drawn). 

goodly  outfide\  godly  outside  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Huds.  comely  outside 
Bailey. 


108.  then...rate\  then,  let  me  see ;  the 
rate —  Cam.  (Lloyd  conj.  ap.  Cam.)  Glo. 
Cla.  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

109.  beholding ]  beholden  Pope  +  ,  Knt, 
Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 


11,  12.  Booth  :  Hearing  this,  Shylock  shows  his  true  feeling  in  his  face  as  he  turns 
from  them ;  then,  just  loud  enough  for  them  to  hear,  calculates  the  rate,  &c. 

106.  Warburton  :  But  this  is  not  true,  that  falsehood  hath  always  a  goodly  outside. 
Nor  does  this  take  in  the  force  of  the  speaker’s  sentiment,  who  would  observe  that  that 
falsehood  which  quotes  Scripture  for  its  purpose  has  a  goodly  outside.  We  should  there¬ 
fore  read  outside’s  falsehood,  i.  e.  outside  his  falsehood,  Shylock’s.  Heath  (p.  112) : 
These  words  must  be  understood  as  spoken  in  an  ironical,  contemptuous  manner,  by 
which  they  are  peculiarly  applied  and  confined  to  the  instance  which  had  just  then  pre¬ 
sented  itself  to  observation.  They  are  not  intended  to  express  a  general  maxim,  which 
holds  universally ;  so  that  Warburton’s  first  objection  is  beside  the  purpose.  Still  more 
so  is  his  other  objection ;  since  this  is  the  very  circumstance  which  gave  occasion  to  this 
sarcasm,  and  is  particularly  alluded  to  in  it.  Johnson  :  Falsehood,  which,  as  truth 
means  honesty,  is  taken  here  for  treachery  and  knavery,  does  not  stand  for  falsehood 
in  general,  but  for  the  dishonesty  now  operating.  [When  Walker,  whose  library  was 
small,  suggested  ( Crit.  i,  303)  that  ‘  goodly  ’  should  be  godly ,  he  did  not  know  that  sev¬ 
eral  editors  had  followed  Rowe  in  so  reading.  To  me  it  is  a  lectio  certissima  on  its 
own  merits,  even  without  the  many  instances  which  Walker  cites  where  goodly  and 
godly  have  been  interchangeably  misprinted,  or  without,  as  Dyce  suggests,  supposing 
that  it  had  been  caught  by  the  printer  from  the  preceding  line. — Ed.] 

109.  beholding]  See  Abbott,  §  372.  [A  form  very  common  in  our  early  writers. 
We  have  *  beholdingness  ’  in  B.  and  FI.,  The  Faithful  Friends,  IV,  iii,  p.  281,  ed. 
Dyce. — Ed.] 

1 10.  Boaden  (Memoir  of  Mrs  Siddons,  i,  1 19) :  Henderson  set  out  in  the  play  with 
a  reading  which  I  should  recommend  for  effect  to  the  actor,  but  carefully  keep  from  the 

text  of  Shakespeare . The  compound  adverb  many-a-time-and-oft  is  one  of  those 

clustered  pleonasms  which  have  passed  unquestioned  into  common  speech;  absurd 
enough,  like  the  aldermanic  toast,  ‘  a  speedy  peace  and  soon but  it  was  the  phraseol¬ 
ogy  of  Shakespeare,  and  should  never  be  suspected  of  corruption.  Henderson  divided 
it,  for  the  sake  of  strengthening  his  impression,  ‘  Many  a  time? — (as  if  he  had  implied 
many  places }) — ‘and  oft  on  the  Rialto!’  (the  place  where  merchants  most  do  congre¬ 
gate,  and  therefore  that  where  his  vituperation  would  be  most  injurious,)  ‘  you  have 
rated  me.’  I  persuade  myself  that  Shakespeare,  with  our  present  feeling  of  the  value 


46 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


In  the  Ryalto  you  haue  rated  me  1 1 1 

About  my  monies  and  my  vfances  : 

Still  haue  I  borne  it  with  a  patient  fhrug, 

(For  fuffrance  is  the  badge  of  all  our  Tribe.) 

You  call  me  misbeleeuer,  cut-throate  dog,  115 

111.  In']  On  Cap.  conj.  Coll,  ii,  iii.  QtF3F4  et  cet. 

Ryalto]  Rialto  F4.  1 14.  badge]  badg  F4. 

112.  monies]  moneyes  Q2.  1x5.  call]  call'd  Rann,  Coll.  (MS). 

1 14  .fuffrance]  Q2F2Q  .  fufferance 


of  character  upon  the  Royal  Exchange,  would  have  thanked  an  actor  for  a  discrim¬ 
ination  so  emphatic  and  judicious.  Booth  :  Pause  before  turning  to  him,  and  show 
great  self-restraint;  turn  slowly,  and,  beginning  with  rising  inflection  of  voice,  ad¬ 
dress  Antonio  reproachfully.  Rolfe  :  *  Many  a  time  and  oft  ’  is  an  old  phrase  still 
familiar;  equivalent  to  many  and  many  a  time — that  is,  many  times,  and  yet  again 
many  more  times.  Rushton  (Sh.  a  Lawyer ,  p.  49)  points  out  that  Shakespeare 
uses  the  phrase  again  in  1  Hen.  IV:  I,  ii ;  2  Hen.  VI:  II,  i ;  Timon,  II,  i ;  and  in 
Jul.  Cces.  I,  i. 

111.  In  the  Ryalto]  Halliwell:  Shakespeare  uses  indifferently  in,  on,  and  upon 
the  Rialto.  The  Rialto  was,  in  fact,  in  the  general  style  of  its  construction,  very  sim¬ 
ilar  to  the  Bourse  at  Antwerp,  the  model  of  the  original  London  Exchange.  *  The 
foure  square  market-place  of  Rialto  is  compassed  with  publike  houses,  under  the  arches 
whereof,  and  in  the  middle  part  lying  open,  the  merchants  meet.’ — Moryson’s  Itinerary, 
1617.  [See  supra,  line  20.] 

1 12.  vsances]  See  the  quotation  from  Bacon  at  line  45,  supra.  Malone  :  This  term 
occurs  three  times  in  the  sense  of  interest  in  the  present  drama.  Reed  :  ‘  I  knowe  a 
gentleman  borne  to  five  hundred  pounde  lande,  did  never  receyve  above  a  thousand 
pound  of  nete  money,  and  within  certeyne  yeres  ronnynge  still  upon  usurie  and  double 
usurie,  the  merchants  termyng  it  usance  and  double  usance,  by  a  more  clenly  name,  he 
did  owe  to  master  usurer  five  thousand  pound  at  the  last,  borowyng  but  one  thousande 
pounde  at  first,  so  that  his  land  was  clean  gone,  beynge  five  hundred  poundes  inheryt- 
ance,  for  one  thousand  pound  in  money,  and  the  usurie  of  the  same  money  for  so  fewe 
yeres;  and  the  man  now  beggeth.’ — Wylson  on  Usurye,  1572,  p.  32. 

1 1 3.  Still]  That  is,  always. 

1 13.  shrug]  Malone:  So  in  Marlowe’s  Jew  of  Malta  [II,  ii  p.  269,  ed.  Dyce], 
‘  I  learn’d  in  Florence  how  to  kiss  my  hand,  Heave  up  my  shoulders  when  they  call 
me  dog.’ 

1 14.  Halliwell:  According  to  a  memorandum,  the  source  of  which  is  unknown 
to  me,  Shylock  ‘  should  assuredly  wear  a  large  red  cross,  embroidered  upon  his  shoul¬ 
der,  the  Senate  of  Venice  having  passed  an  edict  to  mortify  the  Jews, — many  of  whom 
quitted  their  territory  to  avoid  its  infliction, — that  no  Israelite  should  appear  upon  the 
Rialto  without  the  emblem  or  badge  above  specified.’  [In  Booth’s  Acting  Copy  there 
is  a  stage-direction  here  :  *  Showing  his  yellow  cap.’  In  MS  he  notes :  ‘  I  prefer  the 
yellow  cap  to  the  cross  upon  the  shoulder  which  other  actors  have  worn,  my  Father 
among  them.  Cooke  used  the  cap,  and  said  that  Macklin  also  used  it.’] 

115.  call]  Rann’s  emendation:  ‘Call’d’  is,  to  me,  more  than  plausible.  Shylock 
is  rehearsing  what  Anthonio  has  done  to  him  in  the  past,  and  then  contrasts  it  with  his 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


47 


And  fpet  vpon  my  Iewifh  gaberdine,  116 

And  all  for  vfe  of  that  which  is  mine  owne. 

Well  then,  it  now  appeares  you  neede  my  helpe : 

Goe  to  then,  you  come  to  me,  and  you  fay, 

Shylocke,  we  would  haue  moneyes,  you  fay  fo  :  120 

You  that  did  voide  your  rume  vpon  my  beard, 

And  foote  me  as  you  fpurne  a  ftranger  curre 
Ouer  your  threfhold,  moneyes  is  your  fuite. 

What  fhould  I  fay  to  you  ?  Should  I  not  fay, 

Hath  a  dog  money  ?  Is  it  poflible  125 

A  curre  fhould  lend  three  thoufand  ducats  ?  or 
Shall  I  bend  low,  and  in  a  bond-mans  key 

With  bated  breath,  and  whifpring  humbleneffe,  128 


1 1 6.  fpet]  QqF2,  Cap.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta. 
Wh.  Rife,  spat  Rann.  J 'pit  F3F4  et 
cet. 

120.  moneyes,']  monies,  Q,Q3-  moneys , 
F3F4.  monies  ;  Rowe. 

1 21.  rume ]  rheume  F2. 

123.  threjhold ,]  threshold ;  Rowe. 
moneyes]  money  QJ(  Pope-K 


123.  w]  are  Eccles  conj. 

125.  money]  monies  Ktly. 

126 .  Jhould]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i.  can 
Qq,  Pope  et  cet. 

127.  bond-mans]  bondmans  F^. 

128.  bated]  ’ bated  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 


present  conduct,  ‘  Well  then,  it  now  appears,’  &c.  He  afterward  refers  to  Anthonio’s 
treatment  of  him  in  the  past,  ‘You  that  did  void,’  ‘You  spurn’d  me  such  a  day,’  ‘  You 
call’d  me  dog.’  This  change  occurred  also  to  Allen,  independently. — Ed. 

1 16.  spet]  Dyce:  The  Folio  has  ‘spit’  in  Mens,  for  Meas.  II,  i;  As  You  Like  It, 
III,  ii;  IV,  i;  Tam.  Shr.  Ill,  i;  Wint.  Tale,  IV,  ii,  &c.  &c.  Rolfe:  ‘Spet’  is  used 
by  Milton  in  the  one  instance  ( Comus ,  132)  in  which  he  employs  the  word.  [Halli- 
well,  who  erroneously  refers  the  word  to  Lycidas,  says  that  Milton  himself  wrote  it 
‘spits.’ — Ed.] 

1 1 6.  gaberdine]  Knight:  Shylock  speaks  of  ‘his  Jewish  gaberdine;’  but  inde¬ 
pendently  of  Vecellio’s  assurance  that  no  difference  existed  between  the  dress  of  the 
Jewish  and  Christian  merchants  save  the  yellow  bonnet,  the  word  ‘gaberdine’  conveys 
to  us  no  precise  form  of  garment,  its  description  being  different  in  nearly  every  Diction¬ 
ary,  English  or  foreign.  In  German,  it  is  called  a  rock  or  frock,  a  mantle,  coat,  petti¬ 
coat,  gown  or  cloak.  In  Italian,  palandrano ,  or  great  coat,  and  gavardina,  a  peasant’s 
jacket.  The  French  have  only  gaban  and  gabardine,  — cloaks  for  rainy  weather.  In 
Spanish,  gabardina  is  rendered  a  sort  of  cassock  with  close-buttoned  sleeves.  In  Eng¬ 
lish,  a  shepherd’s  coarse  frock  or  coat.  Halliwell  :  A  kind  of  large,  loose  cloak. 

’  ‘  Furst,  a  gawlberdyne  of  russett  welvett  for  my  lord,  gardytt  with  green  cloth  of  golde, 
and  lyned  with  black  sarsnett.’ — MS  temp.  Hen.  VIII.  ‘  A  gabbardine,  tunica 
casatica  vel  rustica,  a  sort  of  double  mill’d  Kersy,  such  as  was  formerly  given  for 
livery  cloaks ;  vid.  plura  apud  Skinnerum.’ — MS  Gl.  Staunton  :  It  does  not  appear 
that  this  habiliment,  as  worn  by  the  Jews,  was  in  any  respect  different  from  that  in 
ordinary  use. 


48 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  I,  sc.  iii. 


Say  this  :  Faire  fir,  you  fpet  on  me  on  Wednefday  laft ; 

You  fpurn’d  me  fiich  a  day ;  another  time  130 

You  cald  me  dog  :  and  for  thefe  curtefies 
lie  lend  you  thus  much  moneyes. 

Ant.  I  am  as  like  to  call  thee  fo  againe, 

To  fpet  on  thee  againe,  to  fpurne  thee  too. 

If  thou  wilt  lend  this  money,  lend  it  not  [35 

As  to  thy  friends,  for  when  did  friendfhip  take 
A  breede  of  barraine  mettall  of  his  friend  ?  137 


129.  Say  this']  Separate  line,  Steev.  ’93 
et  seq.  (except  Ktly). 

fpet]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt, 
Sta.  Wh.  Rife,  spat  Rowe  ii.  spit  Pope 
et  cet. 

on... lajl]  last  Wednesday  Pope  + , 
Eccles.  Wednesday  last  Cap. 

Wednefday]  wendfday  Qr. 

130.  You]  Your  F2. 

day  ;  another  ]  day  another  Qq. 


I3i-  me  dog]  me  dogge  Q2Q3-  me- — 
dog  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Sing.  Sta. 

134.  fPe QqFf,  Cap.  Knt,  Sta.  Wh.  i, 
Rife,  spit  Rowe  et  cet. 

thee  too ]  thee  to  Qq. 

136.  friends ]  friend  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 

137.  breede  of]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Knt,  Hal. 
Wh.  i.  Del.  Rife,  Huds.  breed  for  Qq 
et  cet. 

barraine]  Q2F2.  barren  Qt. 


129.  From  the  Text.  Notes  it  will  be  seen  that  Steevens  was  the  first  to  resolve  this 
Alexandrine  into  regular  verse.  For  many  other  instances  of  similar  dealing  with  Alex¬ 
andrines,  both  apparent  and  real,  see  Abbott,  §499.  This  scansion,  however,  is 
wholly  for  the  eye. — Ed. 

13 1.  Booth  :  Sarcastically, — with  a  pause  and  a  gulp  before  *  dog,’  as  Kean  is  said 
to  have  uttered  it.  [See  Text.  Notes,  which  show  that  the  credit  of  suggesting  this 
pause  before  *  dog  ’  is  due  to  Capell.  Its  effectiveness,  as  employed  by  Kean,  remains, 
'O  he  says,  still  vivid  in  my  Father’s  memory. — Ed.]  Utter  ‘courtesies’  with  strong 
emphasis — looking  up,  as  you  ‘bend  low,’  with  a  devilish  grin  into  Antonio’s  face. 
Antonio  should  stand  erect,  looking  contemptuously  at  Shylock  till  the  end,  when  he 
moves,  as  if  stung,  a  few  paces  from  his  position,  to  return  and  angrily  reply,  but  not 
too  violently,  yet  sufficiently  to  cause  Shylock  to  pretend  alarm  and  regret  at  the 
‘  storm  ’  he  has  raised. 

137.  breede  of  barraine]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  305) :  Will  ‘barren’ 
metal  ‘breed’?  I  rather  think  the  Poet  wrote  ‘A  breed  of  bearing  metal,’  i.  e.  produ¬ 
cing  an  increase  by  usury,  or  interest.  Consonant  to  this,  you  know,  the  Latins  explained 
interest  thus:  feenus,  feetum  accepti ;  and  the  Greeks  called  it  t6k.oq.  Both  which  ex¬ 
pressions  take  in  our  Poet’s  idea  of  a  ‘  breed.’  Warburton  :  A  breed,  that  is,  interest 
money  bred  from  the  principal.  By  the  epithet  barren ,  the  author  would  instruct  us  in 
the  argument  on  which  the  advocates  against  usury  went,  which  is  this  :  that  money  is 
a  barren  thing,  and  cannot,  like  corn  and  cattle,  multiply  itself.  And  to  set  off  the 
absurdity  of  this  kind  of  usury,  he  put  breed  and  barren  in  opposition.  Pope  having 
said  that  ‘the  old  editions  (two  of  ’em)  have  it,  A  bribe  of  barren  metal,’  Capell 
remarks  that  ‘  this  is  perhaps  a  mistake :  and  that  the  word  which  follows  breed  in  this 
copy  differ’d  from  the  word  he  has  follow’d,  for  this  is  true  of  four  old  ones  :  and  had 
he  been  pleased  to  restore  it,  he  had  purg’d  his  author  of  a  glaring  absurdity  (for  what 
;lse  is — breed  of  things  that  are  barren?)  that  runs  through  all  his  other  editions,  old 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


49 


But  lend  it  rather  to  thine  enemie,  138 

Who  if  he  breake,  thou  maift  with  better  face 
Exa6l  the  penalties.  14c 

Shy.  Why  looke  you  how  you  ftorme, 

1  would  be  friends  with  you,  and  haue  your  loue. 

Forget  the  fhames  that  you  haue  ftaind  nle  with,  143 

139.  Who ]  Then  Eccles  conj.  Qq  et  cet. 

140.  penalties]  Ff,  Knt,Wh.  i.  penalty  141.  looke  you]  Om.  Pope  + . 


and  new : — breed  conveys  in  that  place  it’s  generical  idea,  i.  e.  encrease ;  but  breed  is 
chose  to  express  it  by,  that  it’s  opposition  to  “  barren  ”  may  set  off  and  heighten  the 
unfitness  of  such  usury.’  Farmer  :  Old  Meres  says :  ‘  Usurie  and  encrease  by  gold 
and  silver  is  unlawful,  because  against  nature ;  nature  hath  made  them  sterill  and  bar¬ 
ren,  usurie  makes  them  procreative.’  Holt  White:  The  honour  of  starting  this  con¬ 
ceit  belongs  to  Aristotle.  See  De  Republica,  lib.  i.  Grant  White  (ed.  i)  :  *  Of,’  for 
for  in  the  Qq,  is  not  only  authoritative,  but  very  happy.  4  A  breed  of  barren  metal  ’  is 
an  increase  of  barren  metal ;  but,  in  Lucina’s  name,  what  is  4  a  breed  for  barren  metal  ’  ? 
[White  apparently  found  an  answer  somewhere  to  his  question  before  he  published  his 
Second  Edition,  wherein  he  followed  the  Qq  without  comment.  I  prefer  the  Ff  decided¬ 
ly.  Anthonio  is  merely  repeating  the  very  phrase  of  Shylock,  who  had  just  boasted  that 
he  made  his  gold  and  silver  4  breed  as  fast  ’  as  sheep.  Anthonio’s  contemptuous  use 
of  4  barren  ’  casts  a  slur  on  Shylock’s  well-won  thrift,  which  assuredly  was  felt.  If  the 
reading  of  the  Qq :  4  a  breed  for  barren  metal  ’  is  equivalent  to  4  a  breed  for  the  use  of 
that  which  cannot  breed,’  it  is,  to  me,  much  inferior  to  that  of  the  Ff. — Ed.] 

139.  Who  if  he]  Allen  :  Qui  si fidem  franget ;  a  proof  of  Shakespeare’s  gram¬ 
mar-school  instruction ;  he  translates  as  he  was  taught.  4  Who — he  ’  may  be  taken  as 
one  subject  separated  by  if.  Or  else  4  who  ’  is  used  for  the  From  whom,  which  Shake¬ 
speare  would  have  written  if  he  had  foreseen  how  he  was  to  end.  Abbott,  §  249 : 
The  Supplementary  Pronoun  is  generally  confined  to  cases  where  the  relative  is  sepa¬ 
rated  from  its  verb  by  an  intervening  clause,  and  where,  on  this  account,  clearness 
requires  the  supplementary  pronoun.  The  present  passage  seems  at  first  as  though  it 
could  be  explained  [by  supposing  4  who  ’  to  be  like  which,  when  the  latter  approxi¬ 
mates  the  vulgar  idiom  so  familiar  to  the  friends  of  4  Sairey  Gamp  ’]  ;  but  4  who  ’  is  put 
for  whom,  and  4  exact  the  penalty  ’  is  regarded  as  a  transitive  verb.  [This  explanation 
cannot,  I  think,  be  ranked  among  the  happiest  of  Dr  Abbott’s. — Ed.] 

141.  Blackwood’s  Magazine  (Dec.  1879)  :  When  Shylock  changes  from  reproach 
to  fawning  in  this  speech,  he  [Irving]  comes  close  up  to  Antonio  and  touches  him  on 
the  breast  with  an  air  of  familiar  entreaty.  Antonio  recoils  from  him  with  contemptu¬ 
ous  scorn,  and  Shylock  bows  low,  while  he  winces  at  the  rebuke.  This  has  been  praised 
as  a  fine  stroke  of  truth.  But  is  it  so  ?  Antonio  has  just  told  Shylock  that  he  is  4  as 
,  lilt  e  to  spit  on  him  again,  to  spurn  him  too.’  Would  Shylock,  with  these  words  fresh 
in  his  ears,  forget  himself  so  far  as  to  lay  a  finger  on  the  haughty  merchant,  never 
haughtier  than  at  that  moment  when  asking  a  loan  from  a  man  he  despised.  Again, 
is  such  an  action  conceivable  in  one  who  feels  the  pride  of  race  so  strongly  as  Shy¬ 
lock  ?  For  one  of  4  the  sacred  nation  ’  like  himself  to  touch  the  Christian  merchant 
would,  in  his  mind,  be  viewed  as  nothing  less  than  contamination  and  defilement. 

143.  shames]  Allen  :  Shylock  compares  the  words  of  shame  ( probra )  which 
4 


5° 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Supplie  your  prefent  wants,  and  take  no  doite 

Of  vfance  for  my  moneyes,  and  youle  not  heare  me,  145 

This  is  kinde  I  offer. 

Baff.  This  were  kindneffe. 

Shy.  This  kindneffe  will  I  fhowe, 

Goe  with  me  to  a  Notarie,  feale  me  there 

Your  fingle  bond,  and  in  a  merrie  fport  150 


145.  vfance]  usage  Rowe. 

145,  146.  and. ..offer]  One  line,  Coll. 
Wh.  Walker,  Dyce  iii. 

145.  me ,]  me:  Q3.  me ;  F4. 

146.  This  is]  This  sure  is  Han. 


146.  I  offer.]  I  offer  you.  Ktly.  that  1 
offer  Ktly  conj. 

147.  Baff.]  Q,Q2  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Dyce, 
Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Hal.  Rife.  Ant.  Q3  et  cet. 

This]  Ay,  this  Cap. 


Antonio  had  been  wont  to  utter  against  him,  to  the  spittle  which  he  had  voided 
on  him. 

144.  doite]  Halliwell:  A  Low  Country  coin  in  Shakespeare’s  time  of  exceed¬ 
ingly  small  value,  and  hence  the  term  came  generally  to  be  used  for  a  very  trifle,  f. 
mere  fraction.  According  to  Coryat,  the  Dutch  ‘  use  to  stampe  the  figure  of  a  maide 
upon  one  of  their  coynes  that  is  called  a  doit,  whereof  eight  goe  to  a  stiver,  and  ten 
stivers  do  make  our  English  shilling.’ — Crudities,  1611,  p.  642.  Fairholt  (ap.  Hal¬ 
liwell)  says  that  these  ‘  coins  are  now  of  extreme  rarity,  their  small  intrinsic  value  con¬ 
ducing  to  their  loss ;  and  our  National  collection  contains  no  examples  of  them  .... 
the  meanest  coin  which  received  a  current  stamp  in  the  Middle  Ages.’  Skeat  derives 
it  from  the  ‘  Dutch  duit.  Remoter  origin  unknown.’ 

149.  Dr  M.  Jastrow  (  Young  Israel,  Mai,  1876) :  Does  Shylock  really  intend  to 
carry  out  the  forfeiture  of  his  bond  ?  Hardly ;  he  intends  merely  to  humiliate,  to  tor¬ 
ture  his  enemy,  to  see  him  at  his  feet,  and  then  to  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head  by  a 
magnanimous  revenge.  What  a  triumph  for  the  ‘  dog  ’  that  to  him,  to  the  dog,  the  great 
man  should  owe  his  life.  What  a  degradation,  worse  than  death,  for  the  ‘  royal  mer¬ 
chant,’  to  drag  round  ever  after  like  a  chain,  the  gift  of  his  very  life  at  the  hands  of  a 
Jew !  [Dr  Jastrow  goes  on  to  show  that  it  was  Jessica’s  flight  and  robbery  that  changed 
all  this. — Ed.] 

150.  From  this  line  to  line  172  the  verses  do  not  begin  with  capitals,  but  with  lower 
case,  in  Qa. — Ed. 

150.  Your]  Abbott,  §  219  :  Your,  our,  their,  &c.  are  often  used  in  their  old  signifi¬ 
cation,  as  genitives,  where  we  should  use  *  of  you,’  &c. 

150.  single  bond]  ‘An  obligation,  or  bond,  is  a  deed  whereby  the  obligor  obliges 
himself,  his  heirs,  executors,  and  administrators,  to  pay  a  certain  sum  of  money  to 
another  at  a  day  appointed.  If  this  be  all,  the  bond  is  called  a  single  one,  simplex 
obligatio ;  but  there  is  generally  a  condition  added,  that  if  the  obligor  does  some  par¬ 
ticular  act,  the  obligation  shall  be  void,  or  else  shall  remain  in  full  force :  as  payment 

of  rent ;  .  .  .  .  repayment  of  a  principal  sum  of  money  borrowed  of  the  obligee . 

In  case  this  condition  is  not  performed,  the  bond  becomes  forfeited,  or  absolute  at  law, 
and  charges  the  obligor.’ — Blackstone’s  Commentaries ,  iv,  340.  Lord  Campbell 
says  that  this  *  bond  to  Shylock  is  prepared  and  talked  about  according  to  all  the  forms 
observed  in  an  English  attorney’s  office.  The  distinction  between  a  “  single  bill  ”  and 
a  “  bond  with  a  condition  ”  is  clearly  referred  to.’  For  this  latter  hasty  assertion,  Lord 


ACT  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


5i 


If  you  repaie  me  not  on  fuch  a  day, 

151 

In  fuch  a  place,  fuch  fum  or  fums  as  are 

Expreft  in  the  condition,  let  the  forfeite 

Be  nominated  for  an  equall  pound 

154 

153.  forfeited  forfait e  Qa. 

Campbell  was  properly  criticised  by  Rushton  ( Testamentary  Language ,  p.  51),  and 
the  technical  distinction  pointed  out  bel  ween  ‘  a  single  bond  ’  and  *  a  bond  with  a  con¬ 
dition,’  to  which  latter  class,  I  should  say,  Antonio’s  bond  pretty  decidedly  belongs. 
The  simplest  explanation,  to  me,  is  that  *  single  ’  is  used  neither  in  its  legal  sense  nor 
as  applied  to  the  bond.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  says  that  it  here  means  ‘  no  more  than  mere, 
only,’  and  refers  to  Temp.  I,  ii,  432 :  ‘  What  wert  thou,  if  the  King  of  Naples  heard 
thee?  A  single  thing,  as  I  am  now.’  But  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  means 
4  separate,  alone,’  just  as  it  is  used  in  4  single  combat.’  Shylock  wanted  the  bond  of 
Anthonio,  of  him  alone,  and  hence  4  single '  refers  to  Anthonio,  and  not  to  the  bond. 
Clarendon  says  that  Shylock  means  4  a  bond  with  your  own  signature  alone  attached 
to  it,  without  the  names  of  sureties.’  I  doubt  if  4  single  ’  in  this  sense  can  be  properly 
applied  to  a  bond.  Whatever  difference  the  presence  or  absence  of  sureties  would 
make  in  a  bond  with  such  a  condition  as  Shylock  was  seeking,  the  difficulty  of  find¬ 
ing  sureties  might  make  much  difference  in  the  ease  with  which  Anthonio  could 
execute  it.  Practically,  therefore,  I  agree  with  Clarendon,  merely  withholding,  on 
technical  grounds,  the  application  to  the  bond  of  the  term  ‘single.’  Rolfe  says 
(Skakespeariana,  Jan.,  1886)  that  he  has  sometimes  been  inclined  to  explain  ‘single’ 
here  as  used  craftily  by  Shylock  in  its  technical  sense,  because  Shylock  ‘wants  to  make 
the  “condition”  appear  like  none  at  all, — merely  the  “merry  sport”  he  calls  it;  as  if 
he  had  said,  “  Give  me  your  bond  without  any  condition, — at  least  none  worthy  of  the 
name  or  to  be  legally  enforced, — though  for  the  joke  of  the  thing  we  will  say  that  I 
am  to  have  a  pound  of  your  flesh  if  you  fail  to  pay  up  at  the  appointed  time.”  ’  I 
think  we  need  place  no  limit  to  Shylock’s  craftiness,  and  if  a  legal  acceptation  of  the 
term  4  single,’  as  applied  to  the  bond,  be  here  insisted  on,  Rolfe’s  explanation  is  pat. 
(Rolfe  himself  thinks  that  ‘single’  is  used  as  Clarendon  interprets  it.)  When,  how 
ever,  we  undertake  to  discuss  the  term  4  single  ’  in  its  legal  bearings,  there  is  no  end  to 
the  quiddities  and  quillets  we  may  sound  shrilly  and  to  no  purpose.  Here,  and  in  the 
Trial  scene,  Shakespeare  accepted  what  of  law  there  is,  as  he  found  it  either  in  the  old 
play,  mentioned  by  Gosson,  which  he  rewrote,  or  in  Ser  Giovanni’s  novel,  and  as  far  as  he 
considered  it  effective  for  dramatic  purposes.  It  was  enough  that  the  scene  was  laid  in  a 
far-off  foreign  land,  and  in  former  times,  to  lend  acquiescence  on  the  part  of  his  English 
audiences  in  any  apparent  misuse  of  legal  terms  or  violation  of  legal  procedure. — Ed. 

IS0_I52-  Booth:  Jocosely.  Keep  up  this  expression  and  chuckle  until  Bassanio 
interferes,  then  suddenly  change  it  to  disappointed  rage, — but  only  for  a  moment ;  then, 
at  4  O  father  Abram,’  &c.,  assume  a  look  and  tone  of  pity. 

154.  nominated]  Allen:  Not  notn in atedfor,  but  forfeit-for ,  i.  e.  ‘the  forfeit 
(nominated)  shall  be  for,’  &c.  This,  therefore,  may  be  one  of  Shakespeare’s  frequent 
transpositions.  In  fact, 4  nominated  ’  really  belongs  much  earlier  :  4  and  (in  a  merry 
sport)  let  it  be  nominated,  that  if ...  .  the  forfeit  [shall]  be  for,’  &c.  This  is  the  way 
‘nominated’  is  used  in  IV,  i,  273.  Abbott,  §148:  For  is  nearly  redundant  in  this 
passage.  [Which  I  do  not  think  Abbott  would  have  said  had  Allen’s  interpretation 
occurred  to  him. — Ed.] 


52 


THE  MEE CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Of  your  faire  flefh,  to  be  cut  off  and  taken  155 

In  what  part  of  your  bodie  it  pleafeth  me. 

Ant.  Content  infaith,  lie  feale  to  fuch  a  bond, 

And  fay  there  is  much  kindneffe  in  the  lew. 

Baff.  You  fhall  not  feale  to  fuch  a  bond  for  me, 
lie  rather  dwell  in  my  neceffitie.  160 

Ant.  Why  feare  not  man,  I  will  not  forfaite  it, 

Within  thefe  two  months,  that’s  a  month  before 
This  bond  expires,  I  doe  expert  returne 
Of  thrice  three  times  the  valew  of  this  bond. 

Shy.  O  father  Abram,  what  thefe  Chriftians  are,  165 


156.  it pleafeth~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i.  it 
shall  please  Pope  +  .  pleafeth  Qq  et  cet. 

157.  infaith ]  Q2F2Q3<  ifaith  Q„  Cap. 
in  faith  F3F4  et  cet. 

He-]  yle  Q2. 

158.  the  lew]  a  Jew  or  thee,  Jew  Cap. 
conj. 


1 61.  forfait e]  Q2.  forfel  Qx.  forfeite 
F2.  forfeit  Q3  et  cet. 

164.  valew"]  Q2F2.  value  Qt  et  cet. 

165.  Abram]  QqF2F3,  Wh.  Cam.  Glo. 
Del.  Cla.  Abraham  F4  et  cet. 

thefe]  the  Cap.  (corrected  in  Er¬ 
rata). 


154.  equall]  Clarendon,  Rolfe,  and  Hudson  interpret  this  as  ‘equivalent  for  the 
debt,’  but  I  prefer  Schmidt’s  definition  of  ‘exact,’  ‘just  the  weight,’  where  the  beams 
of  the  scales  are  exactly,  equally  counterpoised,  as  in  Ham.  I,  ii,  13,  ‘In  equal  scale 
weighing  delight  and  dole.’  Elze  ( Jahrbuch ,  xi,  277)  also  adopts  this  view,  and 
appositely  cites  not  only  Portia’s  parallel  use  of  ‘just’  in  IV,  i,  343,  but  also  the  title- 
pages  of  the  First  and  Second  Quartos,  where  Shylock’s  extreme  cruelty  is  mentioned 
in  cutting  a  ‘just  pound’  of  flesh. — Ed. 

155.  faire  flesh]  This  suggests  Shylock’s  darker,  Oriental  hue. — Ed. 

155,  &c.  Salaman  ( Jews  As  They  Are,  p.  215):  Jews  are  commanded  by  their 
immutable  divine  Law  to  love  their  neighbors  as  themselves,  and  to  treat  all  living 
creatures  with  kindness,  mercy,  and  humane  consideration.  When  slaughtering  ani¬ 
mals  required  for  food,  they  are  forbidden  to  torture  them  or  to  subject  them  to  pro¬ 
longed  suffering.  To  mutilate  any  living  creature,  much  less  [Qu.  more  ?]  a  human 
being,  is  strictly  opposed  to  the  merciful  spirit  of  the  Jewish  Law,  as  it  would  be 
abhorrent  to  the  Jewish  nature.  It  may  be  confidently  averred  that  no  Jew  that  ever 
had  existence,  beyond  the  inflamed  imagination  of  a  romancer  or  a  balladmonger,  was 
ever  justly  charged  with  the  abominable  crime  of  animal  mutilation,  or  even  with  the 
barbarous  disposition  to  mutilate  which  is  ascribed  to  Shylock.  The  mere  suggestion 
that  so  horrible  a  desire  might  be  possible,  has  been  viewed  by  all  Jews  as  a  foul  libel 
upon  Jewish  character.  Cruelty  to  the  person  has  never  been  a  Jewish  vice. 

157,  158.  lie  .  .  .  lew]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  These  words  are  addressed  to  Bassanio, 
and  not  to  Shylock ;  consequently,  Bassanio  immediately  answers.  In  the  (MS)  ‘  the 
Jew’  is  changed  to  ‘ thee,  Jew,’  which  might  have  been  right  if  Antonio  had  been 
speaking  to  Shylock.  [See  Text.  Notes. — Ed.] 

165-167.  O  .  .  .  others]  Booth  :  My  Father  uttered  this  as  an  aside,  and  I  rather 
think  he  was  right ;  but  in  that  case  the  tone  and  look  should  express  disgust. 

165.  what]  Abbott,  §  256. 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


53 


Whofe  owne  hard  dealings  teaches  them  fufpedl  166 

The  thoughts  of  others  :  Praie  you  tell  me  this, 

If  he  fhould  breake  his  daie,  what  fhould  I  gaine 
By  the  exadlion  of  the  forfeiture  ? 

A  pound  of  mans  flefh  taken  from  a  man,  1 7° 

Is  not  fo  eftimable,  profitable  neither 
As  flefh  of  Muttons,  Beefes,  or  Goates,  I  fay 
To  buy  his  fauour,  I  extend  this  friendfhip, 

If  he  will  take  it,  fo  :  if  not  adiew, 

And  for  my  loue  I  praie  you  wrong  me  not.  175 

Ant.  Yes  Shy lo eke,  I  will  feale  vnto  this  bond. 

Shy.  Then  meete  me  forthwith  at  the  Notaries, 

Giue  him  diredtion  for  this  merrie  bond,  178 


166.  dealings ]  dealing  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap. 
Sing.  Dyce  iii. 

teaches  them  fufped]  teach  them 
to  suspect  Pope  + . 

167.  Praie]  Fx. 


17 1,  profitable  neither]  or  profitable 
Pope  + . 

172.  Goates,]  Goats.  Rowe. 

174.  it,  fio:]  itfo,  Qx. 


166.  teaches]  For  other  instances  of  this  Northern  Early  English  plural  in  -s,  see 
Abbott,  §  333. 

166.  suspect]  For  other  instances  of  the  omission  of  to  before  the  infinitive,  see 
Abbott,  §  349. 

168.  breake  his  daie]  Halliwell:  The  word  day  was  frequently  used  by  out 
old  writers  in  the  generic  sense  of  time,  and  the  verb  to  break  in  the  sense  of  not  keep¬ 
ing  an  appointment  on  a  contract.  In  the  old  ballad  of  Gemutus,  the  usurer  recom¬ 
mends  his  wife  to  ‘  keep  your  day,’  that  is,  adhere  strictly  to  the  terms  of  your  loans. 
Conf.  Heywood’s  The  Fayre  Maide  of  the  Exchange,  II,  ii,  1 607  :  ‘  If  you  do  break 
your  day,  assure  yourself  That  I  will  take  the  forfeit  of  your  bond.’  [Many  other 
examples  are  given,  and  many  more  could  be  added. — Ed.] 

171.  Walker  (  Vers.  p.  274) :  We  sometimes  find  two  unaccented  syllables  inserted 
between  what  are  ordinarily  the  fourth  and  fifth  [as  here]  or  the  sixth  and  seventh,  the 
whole  form  being  included  in  one  word :  ‘  Is  n6t  |  so  est  ima  |  ble,  pid  |  fita  j  ble 
neither  |  .’  Abbott,  §  495,  to  the  same  effect.  Allen  suggests  the  following  punc¬ 
tuation  :  ‘  Is  not  so  estimable,  profitable,  neither  As,’  &c.  That  is,  perhaps,  is  not  so 
estimable  (i.  e.  profitable)  as  that  of  either  muttons,  beefs,  or  goats. 

172.  Beefes]  Clarendon:  In  1  Hen.  IV:  III,  iii,  199,  the  Prince  calls  Falstaff 
‘  O,  my  sweet  beef!’  Cotgrave  explains  bceuf  to  mean  ‘An  Ox;  a  Beefe;  also  beefed 
The  plural  occurs  in  2  Hen.  IV:  III,  ii,  253.  [Murray  [New  Eng.  Diet.]  gives  the 
plural  as  beeves. — Ed.] 

175.  for  my  loue]  Clarendon:  Not  ‘in  return  for  my  love,’ but  ‘ for  my  love’s 
>  sake.’  [Does  Shylock  mean  *  for  my  love’s  sake,  do  not,  in  this  matter,  impute  un¬ 
worthy  motives  to  me,’  or  (he  has  just  spoken  of  ‘buying  Anthonio’s  favour  ’)  ‘do  not, 
for  my  love’s  sake,  hereafter  maltreat  me  ’  ? — Ed.] 

177.  Booth:  Eagerly. 


54 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  i,  sc.  iii. 


And  I  will  goe  and  purfe  the  ducats  ftraite. 

See  to  my  houfe  left  in  the  fearefull  gard  180 

Of  an  vnthriftie  knaue  :  and  prefentlie 

He  be  with  you.  Exit. 

Ant.  Hie  thee  gentle  lew.  This  Hebrew  will  turne 
Chriftian,  he  growes  kinde. 

Baff.  I  like  not  faire  teames,  and  a  villaines  minde.  185 

Ant.  Come  on,  in  this  there  can  be  no  difmaie, 

My  Shippes  come  home  a  month  before  the  daie. 

Exeunt. 


179.  Jlraite]  Jlraight  Qt. 

180.  See]  Look  Cap.  (corrected  in  Er¬ 
rata). 

fearefull]  fearless  Warb. 

182.  lie]  Tie  F3F4.  I  will  Theob.  ii 
et  seq. 

183.  Hie... lew]  As  closing  line  182, 
Q3,  Pope  et  seq. 


183, 184.  This. ..kinde]  Prose,  Q,Q2Ff. 
Separate  line,  Q3  et  cet. 

183.  This]  The  Qq,  Pope,  Han.  Cap. 
Coll.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Rife,  Huds.  V 
ii. 

184.  growes]  growes  A  Q,. 

1 85 .  teames]  term  a  or  tearmes  or  terms 
QqFf. 


180.  fearefull]  Johnson  :  A  guard  that  is  not  to  be  trusted,  but  gives  cause  of  fear. 
Abbott,  §  3  :  Adjectives,  especially  those  ending  in  full,  less,  ble,  and  ive,  have  both 
an  active  and  a  passive  meaning. 

183.  This,  &c.]  Booth  :  Shylock  overhears  this,  and  grins  at  it  as  a  pleasant  joke, 
and,  moving  slowly  up  the  stage,  turns  as  they  exeunt,  and  looks  after  them  with 
intense  hatred. 

185.  teames]  Johnson:  Kind  words,  good  language.  [Of  course  a  misprint  for 
termes.  But  does  it  mean  no  more  than  ‘  kind  words,  good  language  ’  ?  May  it  not 
refer  to  the  bond  ? — Ed.]  Lloyd  :  The  thoughtful  rejoinder  of  Bassanio  marks 
apprehension,  and  this  is  the  very  cautiousness  that  besteads  him  in  his  venture  on  the 
caskets,  when  he  comments  on  the  deceptiveness  of  ornament,  *  The  seeming  truth, 
which  cunning  time  puts  on  To  entrap  the  wisest.’ 


act  II,  sc.  1]  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


55 


Afius  Secundus.  [ Scene  /.] 


Enter  Morochus  a  tawnie  Moore  all  in  white,  and  three  or 
four  e  followers  accordingly ,  with  Portia , 

Nerriff  a ,  and  their  traine. 

Flo.  Cornets. 


Mor.  Miflike  me  not  for  my  complexion,  5 

The  fhadowed  liuerie  of  the  burnifht  funne, 

To  whom  I  am  a  neighbour,  and  neere  bred. 

Bring  me  the  faireft  creature  North-ward  borne, 

Where  Phoebus  fire  fcarce  thawes  the  yficles, 

And  let  vs  make  incifion  for  your  loue,  10 

To  proue  whofe  blood  is  reddeft,  his  or  mine. 


[Scene  I.  Belmont.  Rowe.  A  Room 
m  Portia’s  House.  Cap. 

i.  Morochus]  Morochius  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 
Prince  of  Morocco.  Cap. 

all  in  white]  all  white  Ff. 

3.  their  traine.]  her  train.  Rowe. 


4.  Flo.  Cornets]  Om.  Qq. 

5.  Mor.]  Moroc.  QZQ3-  Morocho.  Q2. 

6.  burnijht ]  burning  Coll.  (MS). 

8.  Bring  me]  Bring  Qz. 

10.  incifion ]  incyzion  Q3> 


1.  tawnie  Moore]  It  is  well  to  remember  that  it  is  this  phrase  in  this  place  on 
which  stress  is  laid  by  those  who  maintain  that  Othello,  although  a  Moor,  was  not 
black.  Note,  too,  the  misprint  of  the  Ff:  ‘ a  tawnie  Moore  all  white.' — Ed. 

4.  Flo.  Cornets.]  See  Appendix,  p.  274. 

5.  Koenig  ( Ueber  Sh.,  p.  103) :  Conf.  The  Song  of  Solomon,  i,  6:  ‘Look  not  upon 
me,  because  I  am  black,  because  the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me.’ 

6.  burnisht]  Collier,  in  his  Notes,  & c.  (1853,  p.  114),  thinks  that  burning,  of  the 
(MS),  ‘seems  much  more  proper,  when  the  African  Prince  is  speaking  of  his  black 
complexion  as  the  effect  of  the  sun’s  rays.  To  speak  of  the  sun  as  artificially  “  bur¬ 
nished”  is  very  unworthy.’  In  a  Review  of  Collier’s  Notes  in  Blackwood  (Aug.,  1853), 
the  Reviewer  denies  that  the  African  Prince  speaks  thus,  and  asserts  that  ‘  he  is  merely 
throwing  brightness  and  darkness  into  picturesque  contrast, — as  the  sun  is  bright  or 
“burnished,”  so  am  I,  his  retainer,  dark,  or  “shadowed.”’  ‘Shakespeare  speaks  of 
the  sun  as  naturally  burnished ;  and  so  far  is  this  from  being  “  unworthy,”  it  is,  in  the 
circumstances,  highly  poetical.’  Collier,  in  his  ed.  ii,  records  the  reading  of  his  (MS), 
but  is  not  ‘  so  confident  that  “  burnished  ”  is  wrong  as  to  exclude  it  ’  and  adopt  burning. 

7.  whom]  For  other  instances  where  who  personifies  irrational  antecedents,  see 
Abbott,  §  264. 

8.  Bring  me]  Q,  omits  *  me,’  somewhat  to  the  detriment  of  the  metre,  but  not  to 
the  sense;  it  is  probably  merely  a  compositor’s  oversight. — Ed. 

ii.  reddest]  Johnson:  To  understand  how  the  tawny  prince,  whose  savage  dig- 
•ity  is  very  well  supported,  means  to  recommend  himself  by  this  challenge,  it  must  be 


56 


THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  i. 


I  tell  thee  Ladie  this  afpedl  of  mine  12 

Hath  feard  the  valiant,  (by  my  loue  I  fweare) 

The  belt  regarded  Virgins  of  our  Clyme 

Haue  lou’d  it  to  :  I  would  not  change  this  hue,  15 

Except  to  fteale  your  thoughts  my  gentle  Queene. 

13.  feard]  Q2Ff.  fead  d QrQ3-  scar'd  15-  Haue ]  Hath  Qt. 

Stockdale  conj.  to]  too  QxFfQ3. 

14.  bejl  regarded]  best-regarded  Steev. 

remembered  that  red  blood  is  a  traditionary  sign  of  courage.  Thus,  Macbeth  calls  one 
of  his  frighted  soldiers  a  lily-lived d  boy;  again,  in  this  play,  cowards  are  said  to  have 
livers  as  white  as  milk ;  and  an  effeminate  and  timorous  man  is  termed  a  milksop. 
Douce  (i,  254) :  Dr  Johnson’s  observation  derives  support  from  our  English  Pliny, 
Bartholomew  Glantville,  who  says,  after  Isidorus,  *  Reed  clothes  ben  layed  upon  deed 
men  in  remembrance  of  theyr  hardynes  and  boldnes,  whyle  they  were  in  theyr  bloudde.’ 
On  which  his  commentator,  Batman,  remarks  :  ‘  It  appereth  in  the  time  of  the  Saxons 
that  the  manner  over  their  dead  was  a  red  cloath,  as  we  now  use  black.  The  red  of 
valiauncie,  and  that  was  over  kings,  lords,  knights  and  valyaunt  souldiers  :  white  over 
cleargie  men,  in  token  of  their  profession  and  honest  life,  and  over  virgins  and  matrons.’ 
Monck  Mason  (note  on  Fletcher’s  Humorous  Lieutenant,  IV,  iv,  p.  5 1 1,  ed.  Dyce) : 
It  was  the  fashion  in  Fletcher’s  time  for  the  young  gallants  to  stab  themselves  in  the 
arms,  or  elsewhere,  in  order  to  drink  the  healths  of  their  mistresses,  or  to  write  their 
names,  in  their  own  blood.  The  custom  is  particularly  described  in  Jonson’s  Cynthia's 
Revels  [and  mentioned  or  alluded  to  in  innumerable  passages  of  early  writers — Dyce.] 
Morochius  alludes  to  this  practice  in  the  Mer.  of  Ven.  See  Abbott,  §  10,  for  the 
superlative. 

12.  aspect]  For  a  long  list  of  words  where  the  accent  is  nearer  the  end  than  at 
present,  see  Abbott,  §  490. 

13.  feard]  Abbott,  §  291 :  This  is  not  an  intransitive  verb  converted  into  a  transi¬ 
tive  verb.  It  had  the  signification  of  frighten  in  Anglosaxon  and  Early  English. 

16.  steale]  Clarendon  :  Except  I  might  steal  your  affections  by  disguising  myself, 
as  thieves  do.  Koenig  (p.  103) :  Morocco,  in  order  to  counteract  the  judgment  that 
may  be  passed  on  him  for  his  color,  appeals  to  what  is,  to  be  sure,  somewhat  of  an 
internal  quality,  but  which  is  of  a  purely  physical  nature,  and  therefore,  in  reality,  ex¬ 
ternal — namely,  his  blood ;  then  he  refers  to  his  exterior,  and  tells  how  his  *  aspect  ’ 
has  ‘  feared  the  valiant,’  and  how  the  ‘  best  regarded  virgins  of  his  clime  ’  have  fallen 
in  love  with  his  face.  Thus  far  in  six  verses  he  has  mentioned  *  love’  three  times,  and 
twice  his  love  for  Portia,  whom  he  has  just  seen,  evidently  for  the  first  time.  What  he 
calls  ‘  love,’  therefore,  is  nothing  but  a  desire  to  possess  Portia  for  her  wealth  and  her 
fair  reputation, — a  purely  superficial  affection,  not  an  honest  love  down  deep  in  the 
heart.  Then  he  goes  on  to  talk  of  the  devotion  of  true  love,  and  he  declares,  with  a 
jingling  of  his  sabre,  that  to  win  Portia  he  is  ready  to  confront  perils  and  engage  with 
lions  and  bears.  Portia’s  assurance  that  he  stood  as  fair  as  any  other  of  her  suitors 
conveys  to  us,  who  know  what  her  feelings  toward  those  others  are,  a  keen  satire, 
which  becomes  extremely  comic  when  Morocco  thanks  her  for  it.  In  the  choice  itself, 
true  to  his  whole  character,  Morocco  passes  by  the  lead  casket  solely  on  account  of  its 
homely  exterior,  and  hesitates  between  the  silver  and  gold  solely  with  reference  to  his 
wn  merits ;  and  finally  chooses  the  gold  entirely  in  accordance  with  its  exterior  and 


act  ii,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


57 


Por.  In  tearmes  of  choife  I  am  not  folie  led  17 

By  nice  direction  of  a  maidens  eies : 

Befides,  the  lottrie  of  my  deftenie 

Bars  me  the  right  of  voluntarie  choofing  :  20 

But  if  my  Father  had  not  fcanted  me, 

And  hedg’d  me  by  his  wit  to  yeelde  my  felfe 
His  wife,  who  wins  me  by  that  meanes  I  told  you, 

Your  felfe  (renowned  Prince)  than  flood  as  faire 

As  any  commer  I  haue  look’d  on  yet  25 

For  my  affe£lion. 

Mor.  Euen  for  that  I  thanke  you,  27 

17.  Por.]  Portia.  Q2.  22.  wit]  will  Han.  Cap.  Steev. ’85, 

folie ]  foly  Q.QFF, .  foelly  F.,  Rann,  Mai.  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  Coll.  ill. 
folely  Q3.  24.  than \  QIQ2.  then  Fa. 

19.  deflenie ]  Q2.  dejliny  Q,. 


its  inscription,  as  he  wishes  to  have  that  which  all  the  world  desires,  and  more  than  he 
deserves. 

17,  18.  In  tearmes  .  .  .  By  nice]  Conf.  ‘in  way  of  smile,’  I,  i,  61,  and  ‘In  way 
of  marriage,’  line  48  of  this  present  scene,  and  many  other  instances  of  the  o mission 
of  the  definite  article,  in  Abbott,  §§  89,  90. 

17.  tearmes]  Karl  Elze  ( Jahrbuch ,  vi,  166) :  The  terms  for  the  choice  of  the 
caskets  were  devised  to  frighten  off  unworthy  and  unlovable  wooers,  like  the  French 
jumping-jack,  the  German  toper,  and  the  Neapolitan  dilettante  in  the  noble  art  of 
horse-shoeing.  In  plain  prose,  Portia’s  Father  did  not  wish  that  she  should  become  the 
prize  of  a  wooer  who  should  choose  her  for  the  sake  of  her  gold  and  silver,  one  who 
should  in  marriage  seek  outward  show  not  inward  worth,  one  who  should  love  her  for¬ 
tune  not  herself.  And  yet — strange  contradiction ! — Bassanio  it  was  who  set  out  for 
Belmont  on  purpose  to  win  the  ‘  Golden  Fleece ;’  while  to  the  Princes  of  Arragon  and 

of  Morocco,  with  their  royal  wealth,  this  mercenary  motive  could  not  be  imputed . 

We  learn  to  know  afterwards  that  Bassanio,  in  spite  of  his  prodigality  and  too  swelling 
port,  is  at  heart  a  sound,  manly  character,  and  does  not  love  Portia’s  wealth  more  than 
her  very  self. 

1 8.  nice]  Dyce  :  Scrupulous,  precise,  squeamish. 

20.  Bars]  Abbott,  §  198  :  Verbs  of  ablation,  such  as  bar,  banish,  forbid,  often  omu 
the  preposition  before  the  place  or  inanimate  object. 

22.  wit]  Theobald  ( Nichols's  III.  of  Lit.  ii,  305):  I  would  read,  will.  So  in  1, 
ii,  25,  ‘the  will  of  a  dead  father;’  lb.,  line  89,  ‘you  should  refuse  to  perform  your 
Father’s  will;’  lb.,  line  104,  ‘by  the  manner  of  my  Father’s  will.’  Johnson:  I  sup¬ 
pose  we  may  safely  read  will.  Confined  me  by  his  will.  Steevens  :  As  the  ancient 
signification  of  ‘  wit  ’  was  sagacity,  or  power  of  mind,  I  have  not  displaced  the  original 
reading.  Staunton:  ‘Wit’  is  knowledge,  foresight,  wisdom. 

23.  His]  Abbott,  §  218:  His,  her,  &c.  being  genitives  of  he,  she,  &c.,  may  stand 
as  the  antecedent  of  a  relative. 

24.  stood]  The  same  construction  as  *  had  scanted  ’  just  above. 

24.  as  faire]  Clarendon  :  A  reference  to  the  complexion  of  the  Moor. 


58 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Therefore  I  pray  you  leade  me  to  the  Caskets 
To  trie  my  fortune  :  By  this  Symitare 
That  flew  the  Sophie,  and  a  Perfian  Prince 
That  won  three  fields  of  Sultan  Solyman, 

I  would  ore-ftare  the  fterneft  eies  that  looke  : 
Out-braue  the  heart  molt  daring  on  the  earth : 
Plucke  the  yong  fucking  Cubs  from  the  fhe  Beare, 
Yea,  mocke  the  Lion  when  he  rores  for  pray 
To  win  the  Ladie.  But  alas,  the  while 


35 


28 


30 


29.  Symitare ]  Q2Q3-  Semitaur  Qx. 
Symitar  Ff. 


34.  fucking]  suckling  Ktly. 

35.  he]  a  Q2Q3. 


30.  Sophie']  Fj.  Sophy  Qt  et  cet. 


pray]  prey,  Rowe. 

36.  the  Ladie.]  thee,  lady.  Rowe  ii  et 


Prince]  Prince,  Rowe. 


32.  ore-Jlare]  Q2FfQ3,  Rowe,  Cap. 
Knt,  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Rife.  out-Jlare  Qz  et 
cet. 


seq. 


while]  while  !  Pope. 


30.  Sophie]  Johnson  :  Shakespeare  seldom  escapes  well  when  he  is  entangled  with 
geography.  The  Prince  of  Morocco  must  have  travelled  far  to  kill  the  Sophy  of  Persia. 
Tyrrwhitt  :  It  were  well  if  Shakespeare  had  never  ‘  entangled  ’  himself  ‘  with  geog¬ 
raphy  ’  worse  than  in  the  present  case.  If  the  Prince  of  Morocco  be  supposed  to  have 
served  in  the  army  of  Sultan  Solyman  ( the  Second,  for  instance),  I  see  no  geographical 
objection  to  his  having  killed  the  Sophi  of  Persia.  (See  D’Herbelot  in  Solyman  Ben 
Selim.)  Halliwell  :  The  Prince,  however,  clearly  means  to  say  that  he  won  three 
fields  from  Solyman.  Clarendon  :  In  *  The  Table  ’  at  the  end  of  The  History  of  the 
Warres  betweene  the  Turkes  and  the  Persians,  written  in  Italian  by  J.  T.  Minadoi,  and 
translated  by  Abraham  Hartwell,  London,  1595,  we  read :  ‘  Soff,  and  Sofito,  an  auncient 
word  signifying  a  wise  man,  learned  and  skilfull  in  Magike  Naturall.  It  is  growen  to 
be  the  common  name  of  the  Emperour  of  Persia.’  The  first  monarch  who  bore  the 
'  name  was  Ismael  Sophi,  the  founder  of  the  Suffavian  dynasty,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
1 6th  Century.  So  says  Mill  in  his  British  India,  but  Minadoi,  p.  48,  affirms  that  he 
did  rather  renew  it  in  his  own  person.  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  Shakespeare 
was  at  all  careful  of  historical  accuracy ;  but  probably  he  refers,  in  the  next  line,  to  the 
unfortunate  campaign  which  Solyman  the  Magnificent  undertook  against  the  Persians 
in  1535.  [The  ‘Sefi  of  Persia’  is  mentioned  in  Der  Jud  von  Venedig,  performed 
during  Shakespeare’s  lifetime  by  English  comedians  on  the  Continent.  See  Appendix, 
‘  Source  of  the  Plot.’ — Ed.] 

33.  ore-stare]  A  majority  of  editors  have  decided,  and,  I  think,  rightly,  that  Qz  has 
here  decidedly  the  better  word.  Again,  in  line  35,  I  think  ‘  he  ’  of  and  Ff  is  better 
than  the  colloquial  a  of  Q2. — Ed. 

36.  alas,  the  while]  Staunton  :  The  vernacular  phrase  alas,  or  woe  the  while, 
appears  to  have  been  a  parenthetical  ejaculation  of  sorrow,  with  no  more  determinate 
meaning  than  Pistol’s  ‘  lament  therefore,’  or  our  ‘  it’s  sad  to  think.’  It  occurs  again  in 
Hen.  V :  IV,  vii,  78,  and  in  Jul.  Ccbs.  I,  iii,  82.  Rolfe  :  This  expression  seems  orig¬ 
inally  to  have  meant,  ‘Alas  for  the  present  state  of  things !’  but  it  came  to  be  used  as 
indefinitely  as  the  simple  ‘  alas  !’  Clarendon  :  Compare  Ezekiel,  xxx,  2 :  ‘  Woe  worth 
the  day !’ 


actii,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


59 


If  Hercules  and  Lychas  plaie  at  dice 
Which  is  the  better  man,  the  greater  throw 
May  turne  by  fortune  from  the  weaker  hand : 
So  is  Alcides  beaten  by  his  rage, 

And  fo  may  I,  blinde  fortune  leading  me 
Miffe  that  which  one  vnworthier  may  attaine, 
And  die  with  grieuing. 


40 


37 


Port.  You  muft  take  your  chance, 

And  either  not  attempt  to  choofe  at  all, 

Or  fweare  before  you  choofe,  if  you  choofe  wrong 
Neuer  to  fpeake  to  Ladie  afterward 
In  way  of  marriage,  therefore  be  aduis’d. 


45 


48 


38.  man ,]  man  ?  Rowe. 

40.  rage\  Qq  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope  i.  page 


Theob.  et  cet. 

44,  49.  chance ]  chaunce  Q2. 


40.  rage]  Theobald  ( Sh .  Restored,  p.  166) :  Tho’  the  whole  Set  of  Editions  con¬ 
cur  in  this  Reading,  I  am  very  well  assur’d,  and  I  dare  say  the  Readers  will  be  so  too 
anon,  that  it  is  corrupt  at  Bottom.  Let  us  look  into  the  Poet’s  Sentiment,  and  the  His¬ 
tory  of  the  Persons  represented.  If  Hercules  (says  he)  and  Lichas  were  to  play  at  Dice 
for  the  Decision  of  their  Superiority,  Lichas,  the  weaker  Man,  might  have  the  better 
Cast  of  the  Two.  But  how  then  is  Alcides  beaten  by  his  Rage  ?  To  admit  This,  we 
must  suppose  a  Gap  in  the  Poet,  and  that  some  Lines  are  lost  in  which  Hercules,  in  his 
Passion  for  losing  the  Hand,  had  thrown  the  Box  and  Dice  away,  and  knock’d  his  own 
Head  against  the  Wall  for  meer  Madness.  Thus,  indeed,  might  he  be  said,  in  some 
Sense,  to  be  beaten  by  his  Rage.  But  Shakespeare  had  no  such  Stuff  in  his  Head. 
He  means  no  more  than,  if  Lichas  had  the  better  Throw,  so  might  Hercules  himself  be 
beaten  by  Lichas.  In  short  Lichas  was  the  poor  unfortunate  Servant  of  Hercules,  who, 
unknowingly,  brought  his  Master  the  envenom’d  Shirt,  dipp’d  in  the  Blood  of  the  Cen¬ 
taur  Nessus,  and  was  thrown  headlong  into  the  Sea  for  his  Pains.  [Ovid’s  Metam.  ix, 
1 5  5  -  ]  The  Poet  has  alluded  to  some  Parts  of  this  Fable  in  another  of  his  Plays ;  [Ant. 

Cleop.  IV,  xii,  43]  and  there  indeed  a  reasonable  Intimation  is  made  of  Hercules 
worsting  himself  thro’  his  own  Rage.  Can  we  desire  more  than  to  know  this  one  Cir¬ 
cumstance  of  Lichas' s  Quality  to  set  us  right  in  the  Poet’s  Meaning,  and  put  an  End  to 
all  the  present  Absurdity  of  the  Passage  ?  Restore  it,  without  the  least  Scruple,  only 

with  cutting  off  the  Tail  of  a  single  Letter;  So  is  Alcides  beaten  by  his  Page . 

The  very  excellent  Lord  Lansdowne,  in  his  Alteration  of  this  Play,  tho’  he  might  not 
stand  to  make  the  Correction  upon  the  Poet,  seems  at  least  to  have  understood  the  Pas¬ 
sage  exactly  as  I  do;  And  tho’  he  changes  the  Verse,  retains  the  Sense  of  it  in  this 
Manner ;  *  So  were  a  Giant  worsted  by  a  Dwarf.’  Tho’  I  had  made  the  Emendation, 
before  I  thought  to  look  into  his  Lordship's  Performance,  it  is  no  small  Satisfaction  to 
me,  that  I  have  the  Authority  of  such  a  Genius  to  back  my  Conjecture. 

48.  In  way]  See  ‘In  tearmes,’  line  17. 

48.  aduis’d]  Johnson:  Therefore  be  not  precipitant ;  consider  well  what  you  are 
to  do.  ‘  Advis’d’  is  the  word  opposite  to  rash.  [See  I,  i,  152.] 


6o 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ir,  sc.  i. 


Mor.  Nor  will  not,  come  bring  me  vnto  my  chance. 

Por.  Firft  forward  to  the  temple,  after  dinner  50 

Your  hazard  fhall  be  made. 

Mor.  Good  fortune  then,  Cornets. 

To  make  me  bleft  or  curfed’ft  among  men.  Exeunt.  53 

49.  come...vnto\  therefore  bring  me  to  52.  Cornets.]  Om.  Qq. 

I’ope-K  53-  bleff]  bless' t  Steev. ’93. 

vnto~\  to  Qj,  Pope  +  .  curfed'Jl ]  curfedfl  Qf. 

50.  temple~\  table  Ktly. 


49.  Nor  will  not]  For  other  instances  of  double  negatives,  see  Abbott,  §406,  also 
above  I,  ii,  26 :  ‘  nor  refuse  none.’ 

49.  vnto]  here  wisely  followed  Qa,  to  the  improvement  of  the  metre. — Ed. 

50.  temple]  Eccles  :  Where,  1  suppose,  the  oath  she  spoke  of  was  to  be  adminis¬ 
tered  to  the  suitors.  Keightley  {Exp.  p.  149) :  Surely  ‘  temple  ’  has  no  meaning 
here.  Must  not  the  poet  have  written  table  ?  In  Lucrece  (St.  168),  in  the  Var.  Shake¬ 
speare,  ‘Her  sacred  temple ’  is  printed  ‘Her  sacred  tablet  I  am  not  aware  that  any 
critic  has  observed  this  palpable  error.  The  term  table,  it  may  be  observed,  was  much 
more  used  by  our  forefathers  than  by  us.  Clarendon  :  The  mention  of  a  temple 
instead  of  a  church  seems  odd  here.  Perhaps  Portia’s  Roman  name  led  Shakespeare 
momentarily  to  forget  that  she  was  a  Christian,  or  the  mention  of  Hercules  and  Lichas 
may  have  given  his  thoughts  a  classical  turn. 

52.  Good]  Eccles:  Morochius  cannot  mean  that  good  fortune,  as  opposed  to  bad, 
should  make  him  cursed ;  ‘  good  ’  is  here  only  an  epithet  of  respect  applied  to  Fortune 
in  his  address  to  her :  *  Thou,  O  good  Fortune  !  it  will  be  thy  task,  or  office,  to  make 
me  blest,  or,’  See. 

53.  blest]  Steevens:  That  is,  blessed’st.  Walker  ( Crii .  i,  218)  gives  many 
instances,  not  alone  from  Shakespeare,  but  from  the  Elizabethan  poets,  with  whom,  as 
he  says,  the  idiom  is  not  unfrequent,  of  ‘  attaching  terminations  to  one  adjective,  which 
affect  others.’  Thus,  ‘  The  generous  and  gravest  citizens,’ — Meas.  for  Meas.  IV,  vi, 
13 ;  ‘  The  humble  as  the  proudest  sail  doth  bear,’ — Sonn.  lxxx.  We  have  the  adverbial 
termination  in  ‘Why  do  you  speak  so  startingly  and  rash,’ — Oth.  Ill,  iv,  94.  Again, 
the  usage,  whereby  the  latter  of  two  superlatives  copulated  with  and  is  changed  into  a 
positive,  is  frequent  in  Shakespeare  and  his  contemporaries.  Conf.  ‘  The  best  condi¬ 
tion'd  and  umvearied  spirit,’ — Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii,  310.  The  corresponding  section 
in  Abbott  is  398.  Eccles  remarks  that  the  present  passage  will  be  ‘good  sense 
enough,  though  we  should  suppose  “  blest  ”  only  in  the  positive  degree ;’  which  is  true, 
but  the  number  of  instances  alleged  by  Walker  show  that  the  superlative  applies  to 
both  adjectives ;  moreover,  in  this  present  fine,  there  is  the  sound  of  a  superlative  in 
*  blest,’  which  satisfies  the  ear. — Ed. 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MEE  CHAJVT  OF  VENICE 


6f 


[Scene  //.] 

Enter  the  Clowne  alone. 

Clo.  Certainely,  my  confcience  will  ferue  me  to  run 
from  this  lew  my  Maifter  :  the  fiend  is  at  mine  elbow,  3 

[Scene  II.  Venice.  Rowe.  Venice.  A  2.  will]  will  not  Hal. 

Street.  Cap.  3.  Maijler ]  Q2. 

I.  Enter...]  Enter  Launcelot  alone.  mine~\  my  Rowe  i. 

Rowe. 

1.  The  lack  in  the  Qq  of  any  division  into  Acts  and  Scenes  is  made  use  of  by  Ec- 
CLES  to  re-arrange  the  order,  whereby  the  First  Act  ends  with  the  discomfiture  of  the 
Prince  of  Morocco,  and  the  Second  with  that  of  Arragon.  It  is  not  altogether  for  the 
sake  of  sensational  effect  that  he  thus  closes  the  Acts,  but  for  reasons  connected  with 
the  dramatic  time  of  the  action,  reasons  which  will  be  found  more  fully  discussed  in 
the  Appendix.  At  the  first  blush  there  seems  to  be  a  degree  of  propriety  in  this  re-ar¬ 
rangement  ;  in  each  of  the  first  three  Acts  we  have  a  Casket  scene,  with  all  its  attend¬ 
ant  bravery,  and  the  charm  and  fragrance  of  Belmont  dominate  the  Ghetto ;  but  the 
Master  is  wiser  than  all  of  us.  The  play  hereby  becomes  three  different  stories,  at  the 
end  of  each  we  draw  a  long  breath,  instead  of  keeping  our  suspense  locked  up  to  the 
very  close.  Portia  has  just  told  Morocco  that  his  hazard  must  be  made  after  dinner; 
Eccles  accordingly  takes  the  Seventh  Scene  of  Act  Second,  wherein  Morocco  makes 
his  choice,  and  transfers  it  to  this  First  Act,  and  closes  the  Act  with  it.  The  First 
Scene  of  the  Second  Act,  according  to  Eccles,  now  opens  at  Venice,  with  Launcelot 
Gobbo.  ‘  The  particular  time  of  the  day,’  he  says,  *  is  undetermined ;  Bassanio,  how¬ 
ever,  upon  his  entrance,  desires  that  “  supper  may  be  ready  by  five  of  the  clock.”  ’ — Ed. 

1.  Clowne]  Douce  (i,  p.  271):  There  is  not  a  single  circumstance  through  the 
whole  of  this  play  which  constitutes  Launcelot  an  allowed  Fool  or  Jester ;  and  yet  there 
is  some  reason  for  supposing  that  Shakespeare  intended  him  as  such,  from  his  being 
called  a  patch,  a  fool  of  Hagar’s  offspring,  and  in  one  place  the  fool.  It  is  not  reason¬ 
able,  however,  to  conclude  that  a  person  like  Shylock  would  entertain  a  domestic  of 
this  description ;  and  it  is  possible  that  the  foregoing  terms  may  be  designed  merely  as 
synonymous  with  the  appellation  of  clown,  as  in  Love's  Lab.  Lost.  On  the  whole  we 
have  here  a  proof  that  Shakespeare  has  not  observed  that  nice  discrimination  of  cha¬ 
racter  in  his  clowns  for  which  some  have  given  him  credit. 

2.  will  serue]  Eccles  :  He  must  be  understood  to  mean  that  his  conscience  will 
finally  be  induced  to  acquiesce  in,  or  even  be  assistant  to,  his  purpose  of  running  away 
from  the  Jew.  Halliwell  :  The  particle  not,  a  word  frequently  omitted  in  early  edi¬ 
tions  of  plays,  seems  essential  to  the  sense  of  what  follows.  The  fiend  beats  the  con¬ 
science,  but  the  latter  is  represented  as  firmly  inveighing  against  the  desertion  of  his 
master.  Allen  :  Read  either  ‘  will  not  ’  with  Halliwell,  or  ‘  will  forbid ,’  which  is  not 
so  very  remote  from  the  ductus  literarum.  *  Will  not  ’  is  more  plausible  for  modern, 
than  for  Old,  English.  Will,  in  Shakespeare,  is  oftener  equivalent  to  veut,  intends. 
Now  ‘  it  is  clear  (from  what  it  has  been  saying  and  continues  to  say)  that  my  con¬ 
science  intends  to  forbid  my  running  away  ’  is  exactly  consistent  with  the  fact,  as  stated 
by  Launcelot  himself. 


62 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


and  tempts  me,  faying  to  me,  Iobbe ,  Launcelet  Iobbe ,  good 
Launcelet ,  or  good  Iobbe ,  or  good  Launcelet  Iobbe ,  vfe  5 

your  legs,  take  the  ftart,  run  awaie  :  my  confdence  faies 
no  ;  take  heede  honeft  Launcelet ,  take  heed  honeft  Iobbe , 
or  as  afore-faid  honeft  Launcelet  Iobbe ,  doe  not  runne, 
fcorne  running  with  thy  heeles ;  well,  the  moft  coragi-  9 


4.  tempts"]  attempts  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 

4,  &c.  Iobbe]  Q.F2Q3,  Rowe  ii.  Job 
F3F4,  Rowe  i.  Gobbo  Q,,  Pope  et  seq. 
Launcelet]  QqFf.  (Lancelet  Qj.) 


Launcelot  Rowe. 

9.  heeles]  bells  Anon.  ap.  Hal. 

coragious ]  Q2Q3.  couragious  Qt  Ff. 
contagious  Coll.  (MS). 


4.  Iobbe,  &c.]  This  spelling,  repeated  half  a  dozen  times,  is  apparently  one  of  those 
wild  and  inexplicable  freaks  to  which  the  old  compositors  were  subject,  and  familiar 
enough  to  the  readers  of  old  plays.  Or  it  may  be  an  indication  of  the  piecemeal  com¬ 
position  whereby  these  plays  were  set  up.  Launcelot’s  father  enters  a  few  lines  lower 
down,  and  his  name  is  consistently  spelled  Gobbo  throughout ;  and  Launcelot’s  speeches 
are  at  once  indicated  by  Lan.  or  Latin,  for  over  a  hundred  lines,  when,  at  line  143,  they 
are  again  indicated  by  Clo.  (See  the  Text.  Notes  for  the  way  in  which  this  Iobbe  misled 
F3F4  and  Rowe.)  I  am  afraid  we  must  echo  Bottom  :  *  man  is  but  an  ass,  if  he  go  about 
to  expound  this.’ — Ed. 

4.  Launcelet]  White  (ed.i) :  This  invariable  spelling  in  the  QqFf, — the  English 
diminutive  of  Launce, — warrants  the  belief  that  such  was  its  original  form.  But  as  the 
nomenclature  of  the  Dramatis  Personae  is  purely  Italian,  as  the  diminutive  in  that  lan¬ 
guage  is  formed  in  otto,  and  as  the  present  name  has  been  in  the  text  for  a  hundred  and 
fifty  years,  it  is  not  worth  while  to  make  a  change  in  so  trivial  a  matter. 

9.  with  thy  heeles]  Steevens  :  Launcelot  was  designed  for  a  wag,  but,  perhaps, 
not  for  an  absurd  one.  We  may  therefore  suppose  no  such  expression  would  have  been 
put  in  his  mouth  as  our  author  had  censured  in  another  character.  When  Pistol  says, 
‘  he  hears  with  ears,’  Sir  Hugh  Evans  very  properly  is  made  to  exclaim,  ‘  The  tevil  and 
his  tam !  what  phrase  is  this,  he  hears  with  ears  ?  why  it  is  affectations.’  To  talk  of 
running  with  one's  heels  has  scarcely  less  of  absurdity.  It  has  been  suggested  that  we 
should  read  and  point  the  passage  as  follows  :  *  Do  not  run ;  scorn  running ;  withe  thy 
heels i.  e.  connect  them  with  a  withe  (a  band  made  of  osiers),  as  the  legs  of  cattle 
are  hampered  in  some  countries  to  prevent  their  straggling  far  from  home.  I  think 
myself  bound,  however,  to  add  that  in  Much  Ado,  the  very  phrase,  that  in  the  present 
instance  is  disputed,  occurs :  ‘  O  illegitimate  construction  !  I  scorn  that  with  my  heels 
i.  e.  I  recalcitrate,  kick  up  contemptuously  at  the  idea,  as  animals  throw  up  their  hind 
legs.  Such  also  may  be  Launcelot’s  meaning.  [I  do  not  for  a  minute  suppose  that 
Steevens,  that  ‘  Puck  of  Commentators,’  was  serious  when  he  started  this  laughable 
emendation.  I  think  he  chuckled  in  anticipation  over  the  grave  and  didactic  refuta¬ 
tion  which  it  would  receive  from  Malone,  as  it  did.  No  one  knew  better  than  Stee¬ 
vens,  with  his  retentive  memory  and  extensive  reading,  that  the  phrase  was  proverbial ; 
but  the  fiend  was  at  his  elbow,  he  took  a  good  start,  and  has  led  the  commentators  a 
very  pretty  chase  ever  since.  Had  there  been  anything  indelicate  in  the  allusion,  his 
note  would  have  been  signed  Amner  or  Collins ;  as  it  is,  he  says  simply,  *  It  has  been 
suggested,’  and  in  citing  the  passage  from  Much  Ado ,  he  knew  well  enough  that  he 
gave  all  the  explanation  needed. — Ed.] 


act  II,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


63 


ous  fiend  bids  me  pack e,Jia  faies  the  fiend,  away  faies  10 

the  fiend,  for  the  heauens  roufe  vp  a  braue  minde  faies 

the  fiend,  and  run;  well,  my  confcience  hanging  about  12 

10.  fia]  QqFf.  Via  Rowe.  Ktly.  heavens,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Clarke, 

11.  for]  'fore  Coll,  iii  (MS).  Rife,  haven ;  M.  Mason. 

heauens]  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Sta.  II.  roufe]  rofe  F^. 

heavens ;  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Knt,  Sing.  12.  run  ,•]  run.  Rowe. 


10.  fia]  Nicholson  (N.  dr5  Qu.  6th  Ser.  vol.  i,  p.  333) :  Why  was  this  Italian  word 
in  not  uncommon  use  in  Shakespeare’s  England,  and  why  does  Shakespeare  think  it  con¬ 
gruent  to  put  it  into  the  mouth  of  certainly  a  quick-witted  and  town-living,  but  country 
bred,  clown  ?  The  answers,  I  think,  lie  in  the  fact,  told  us  by  Capt.  John  Smith  in  his 
Seaman's  Grammar,  that  via,  or,  as  he  spells  it  by  pronunciation,  vea,  a  nautical  term, 
from  the  Italian,  like  some  others,  was  a  word  of  exhortation  used  by  a  boat’s  crew 
when  redoubling  their  stroke  or  pulling  more  vigorously.  It  was  apparently  spoken 
unanimously,  and,  like  the  paviors’  ‘  Hoh  !’  after  each  stroke,  for  he  gives  it  thus,  ‘  Vea, 
vea,  vea,  vea,  vea,  vea.’  Hence  it  was  doubtless  in  common  use  among  the  Thames 
watermen.  Ibid.  ( lb .  vol.  ii,  p.  305)  :  Since  writing  my  former  note,  I  think  it  right  to 
add  that  I  have  found  ‘  via  ’  was  used  contemporaneously  in  England  to  horses.  Ger- 
vase  Markham,  in  his  Country  Contentments,  1615,  twice  gives  ‘via,  how,  hey’  at  pp. 
40  and  45,  as  terms  of  encouragement  from  their  riders  to  horses.  Also  in  his  Caval- 
aricz,  1617 :  ‘  But  if  you  crie  Hoa,  Ho,  or  Hey,  Hey,  or  Via,  Via,'  &c.  [Halliwell 
had  already  called  attention  to  Markham’s  reference  to  it  in  Cheap  and  Good  Hus 
bandry,  p.  15,  as  a  word  to  be  used  in  encouraging  a  horse.] 

11.  heauens]  Capell  (ii,  60  b):  Signal  changes  in  sense,  made  by  punctuation 
can  rarely  be  lay’d  before  a  reader  in  any  other  way  than  that  we  are  now  taking : — 
‘  for  the  heavens  ’  is  in  all  prior  copies  connected  with  ‘  rouse  ’  &c.,  having  no  point  be¬ 
tween  them ;  and  some  moderns  mark  such  it’s  connection  still  stronger,  by  changing 
fiend's  comma  into  a  semicolon :  How  they  understood  them,  or  whether  they  under 
stood  them  at  all,  matters  not;  pointed  as  they  are  at  this  present,  the  words  have  no 
difficulty ;  and  by  giving  voice  to  this  passage,  through  four  sentences,  we  shall  feel  in 
the  only  cadence  and  run  of  them  the  pointing’s  rectitude :  the  words  are  found  in  the 
mouth  of  some  other  characters  and  (particularly)  in  that  of  Beatrice  at  II,  i,  of  that 
play.  But  what  impropriety,  says  some  objecter,  in  making  the  ‘ fiend'  speak  them ! 
True ;  and  in  that  very  impropriety  lyes  the  wit :  blunders  and  false  conclusions  of  all 
sorts,  join’d  with  numberless  oddities  and  an  innate  honesty,  make  up  this  character; 
some  choice  flowers  in  his  way  the  moderns  rob  him  of  towards  the  speech’s  end,  by 
adopting  the  readings  of  a  quarto.  Gifford  ( Every  Man  Out  of  His  Humour,  II,  i, 
p.  68,  ed.  1816) :  The  words,  ‘for  the  heavens!’  are  merely  a  petty  oath;  and  where 
soever  they  occur,  in  this  manner,  and  by  whomsoever  they  are  spoken,  mean  neither 
more  nor  less  than — by  heaven  !  .  .  .  .  That  no  future  doubts  may  arise  on  the  subject, 
I  will  subjoin  two  or  three  of  as  many  score  examples  which  I  could  instantly  produce ; 
the  first  shall  be  from  Jonson  himself :  ‘  Come  on,  Sir  Valentine,  I’ll  give  you  a  health, 
for  the  heavens,  you  mad  Capricio.’ —  The  Case  is  Altered.  The  second  from  his  old 
enemy  Dekker :  *  A  lady  took  a  pipefull  or  two  (of  tobacco)  at  my  hands,  and  praised 
it,  for  the  heavens!’ — Untrussing  the  Humorous  Poet.  And,  to  conclude,  Tweddle, 
the  drunken  piper  in  Pasquil  and  Katharine,  exclaims,  ‘  I  must  goe  and  clap  my  mis¬ 
tress’  cheekes  (his  tabor)  there,  for  the  heavens.’ 


64 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ii 


the  necke  of  my  heart,  faies  verie  wifely  to  me  .*  my  ho-  1 3 
neft  friend  Launcelet ,  being  an  honeft  mans  fonne,  or  ra¬ 
ther  an  honeft  womans  fonne,  for  indeede  my  Father  did  15 
fomething  fmack,  fomething  grow  too  ;  he  had  a  kinde  of 
tafte  ;  wel,  my  confcience  faies  Lancelet  bouge  not,  bouge 
faies  the  fiend,  bouge  not  faies  my  confcience,  confcience 
fay  I  you  counfaile  well,  fiend  fay  I  you  counfaile  well, 
to  be  rul’d  by  my  confcience  I  fhould  ftay  with  the  lew  20 
my  Maifter,(who  God  bleffe  the  marke)is  a  kinde  of  di- 


1 6.  loo]  to  Q2Q3,  Pope  et  seq. 

17.  tafle]  toft  Q2Q3- 
Lancelet]  Om.  Qjf  Pope  +  . 

17,  18.  bouge]  budge  F3.  budg  F4. 

18,  19.  confcience... well]  conscience... 


ill  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

19.  fiend ...  well]  Fiend  ...ill  Qf, 
Pope  + . 

21.  (who  God ]  Q2Q3.  who  (God  Qt 
et  cet. 


16.  smack]  Eccles:  Of  a  knave,  he  may  be  understood  to  mean.  Whether  we 
take  *  smack  ’  as  signifying  tinctured  or  as  smacking  the  lips ,  with  either  acceptation, 
‘  he  had  a  kind  of  taste  ’  may  agree ;  the  difference  will  not  be  great  respecting  the 
morality  of  old  Gobbo.  To  ‘grow  to  ’  I  suppose  to  have  been  a  cant  phrase,  but  which 
it  seems  not  very  easy  precisely  to  define ;  it  may  be  designed  to  express  a  pretty  strong 
natural  bias  to  knavish  tricks,  cheating  practices;  or  all  taken  together  may  imply 
nothing  more  than  the  old  man’s  original  propensity  to  certain  conjugal  infidelities  as 
opposed  to  his  wife’s  honesty.  Clarendon  :  ‘  Grow  to.’  A  household  phrase  applied 
to  milk  when  burnt  to  the  bottom  of  the  sauce-pan,  and  thence  acquiring  an  unpleasant 
taste.  ‘Grown,’  in  this  sense,  is  still  used  in  Lincolnshire.  (Brogden’s  Diet,  of  Pro¬ 
vincial  Words,  & c.) 

17,  &c.]  Douce  (i,  255)  thinks  it  not  improbable  that  ‘this  curious  struggle  between 
Launcelot’s  conscience  and  the  fiend  might  have  been  suggested  by  some  well-known 
story  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  grafted  ’  on  a  monkish  fable,  which  Douce  proceeds  to  set 
forth,  wherein  a  woman’s  laziness  argues  with  her  conscience  about  getting  up  in  the 
morning  to  go  to  mass.  [How  inexhaustible  and  untiring  was  Shakespeare’s  industry 
in  collecting  materials  wherefrom  to  compose  his  patchwork  plays ! — Ed.] 

19.  fiend  .  .  .  well]  Furnivall  (Forewords  to  Quarto  i) :  Q,  misses  Lancelot’s 
point  by  making  him  say,  ‘  Fiend  say  I  you  counsel  ill,’  where  we  must  [j*V]  have  the 
Heyes  ‘  well,’  to  match  the  *  Conscience  say  I  you  counsell  well,’  and  Lancelot’s  fol¬ 
lowing  the  Fiend’s  advice  by  budging  from  Shylock.  [On  what  compulsion  must  we 
believe  that  logic  or  reason  rules  in  anything  that  is  said  by  Launcelot,  *  whose  nose 
fell  a  bleeding  on  black  Monday  last,  at  six  o’clock  in  the  morning,  falling  out  that 
year  on  Ashwednesday  was  foure  years  in  the  afternoon  ’  ?  It  may  be  that  Q2  is  right, 
but  that  Gobbo’s  words  are  here  illogical  does  not,  I  think,  prove  Q,  wrong ;  certainly 
not  so  wrong  as  that  the  passage  can  be  cited,  as  Furnivall  cites  it,  in  conclusive  proof 
that  Q2  is  the  more  correct  text.  Pope,  Theobald,  Hanmer,  Warburton,  and  Db 
Johnson  all  preferred  in  this  passage  the  text  of  Qt. — Ed.] 

20.  to  be  rul’d]  See  Abbott,  §  356,  for  instances  of  infinitives  indefinitely  used. 

21.  marke]  Glarendon  :  This  phrase  is  used  as  a  parenthetic  apology  for  some 
profane  or  vulgar  word.  Rolfe  :  The  origin  and  meaning  of  it  are  alike  obscure. 
[Prof.  F.  J.  Child  suggests  to  me  that  it  may  have  been  derived  from  the  mark  set 


ACT  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  65 

uell ;  and  to  run  away  from  the  lew  I  fhould  be  ruled  by  22 
the  fiend,  who  fauing  your  reuerence  is  the  diuell  him- 
felfe :  certainely  the  lew  is  the  verie  diuell  incarnation, 
and  in  my  confcience,  my  confcience  is  a  kinde  of  hard  25 
confcience,  to  offer  to  counfaile  me  to  ftay  with  the  lew, 
the  fiend  giues  the  more  friendly  counfaile  :  I  will  runne 
fiend,  my  heeles  are  at  your  commandement,  I  will 
runne. 

Enter  old  Gobbo  with  a  Bafket.  30 


Gob.  Maifter  yong-man,  you  I  praie  you,  which  is  the 
waie  to  Maifter  Iewes  ? 

Lan.  O  heauens,  this  is  my  true  begotten  Father,  who 
being  more  then  fand-blinde,  high  grauel  blinde,  knows 
me  not,  I  will  trie  confufions  with  him.  33 


24.  diueir\  Devil's  Ktly  conj. 
incarnation ]  incar  nail  Qx,  Pope, 

Ec.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  in-carnation  Rann. 

25.  is  a]  Ff,  Knt.  is  but  a  Qq  et  cet. 

26.  lew;]  lew.  Qx. 

28.  commandement ]  command  Qx, 
Cam.  Cla.  Glo.  Wh.  ii.  commandment 
Rowe  et  cet. 


31,  &c.  Maijler ]  Q2.  Majler  Q:  et 
cet. 

31.  yong-man\  F2.  yong  man  Qt. 
young-man  QaQ3F3F4,  Rowe  +  . 

33.  [Aside.  Johns,  et  seq. 

35.  not,]  not;  Q3- 

confufions ]  conclufons  Qx,  Johns. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt. 


upon  idolaters,  in  Ezekiel ',  ix,  6.  In  the  misplaced  parenthesis  before  ‘  who,’  one  of 
the  many  proofs  is  afforded  that  the  Folio  was  printed  from  Q2. — Ed.] 

23.  sauing  your  reuerence]  This  phrase  is  used  in  much  the  same  way  as  ‘  God 
bless  the  mark.’ — Ed. 

24.  diuell]  If  it  be  desirable  to  spoil  this  speech  by  making  sense  of  its  nonsense, 
Keightley’s  emendation,  ‘Devil’s  incarnation’  will  serve  the  turn. — Ed. 

32.  Iewes]  Knight:  [The  Jews’  Quarter]  is  situated  on  the  canal  which  leads  to 
Mestre.  There  are  houses  there  old  enough  to  have  been  Shylock’s,  with  balconies 
from  which  Jessica  might  have  talked;  and  ground  enough  beneath,  between  the 
houses  and  the  water,  for  her  lover  to  stand,  hidden  in  the  shadow,  or  under  a  *  pent¬ 
house.’  Hence,  too,  her  gondola  might  at  once  start  for  the  mainland,  without  having 
to  traverse  any  part  of  the  city. — (M).  [Miss  Martineau? — Ed.] 

34.  sand-blinde]  Capell  :  That  is,  purblind ;  a  vulgar  phrase  for  it,  as  stone-blind 
is  for  those  who  are  quite  so :  Launcelot  finds  a  blind  between  these,  which  he  calls 
‘  gravel-blind.’  Malone  :  So  in  Latimer’s  First  Sermon  on  the  Lord’s  Prayer :  *  The 
Saintis  be  purre-blinde  and  sand-blinde.’  Clarendon:  Cotgrave  has  ‘  Berlue :  f. 
The  being  sand-blind,  or  pur-blind.’  Hales  ( Notes  6°  Essays,  p.  193) :  Probably  the 
sand,  as  has  been  suggested,  is  the  Anglosaxon  sam  (the  Latin  semi,  Greek  i]ju),  as  in 
r am-cwic,  sam-wis,  &c. 

35.  confusions]  Collier  :  The  printer  of  did  not  understand  the  joke  of  Laun¬ 
celot,  which  he  carries  into  effect  immediately  afterward  by  misdirecting  his  father  *  the 

5 


66 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Gob.  Maifter  yong  Gentleman,  I  praie  you  which  is  36 
the  waie  to  Maifter  Iewes. 

Laun.  Turne  vpon  your  right  hand  at  the  next  tur¬ 
ning,  but  at  the  next  turning  of  all  on  your  left ;  marrie 
at  the  verie  next  turning,  turne  of  no  hand,  but  turn  down  40 
indiredtlie  to  the  Iewes  houfe. 

Gob.  Be  Gods  fonties  ’twill  be  a  hard  waie  to  hit,  can 
you  tell  me  whether  one  Launcelet  that  dwels  with  him, 
dwell  with  him  or  no. 

Laun.  Talke  you  of  yong  Matter  Launcelet ,  marke  45 
me  now,  now  will  I  raife  the  waters ;  talke  you  of  yong 
Maifter  Launcelet  ? 

Gob.  No  Maifter  fir,  but  a  poore  mans  fonne,  his  Fa-  48 


38.  vpon]  Ff,  Knt,  Hal.  Sta.  up,  on 
Pope  + .  vp  on  Qq  et  cet. 

39.  alT\  all,  Theob.  et  seq. 

41.  to  the]  vnto  the  Qt,  Johns. 

42.  Be]  By  F4  et  seq. 

43.  whether]  whither  Qt. 

44.  no.]  no  ?  QjF4. 


45.  Launcelet,]  Lancelet?  Q,.  Laun- 
celot  ?  [Aside]  Johns,  et  seq. 

47,  55-  Maifter]  M.  Qx. 

48.  Maifter]  Master,  Rowe  et  seq. 
48-50.  Four  lines,  tnCmg fonne... f ay' t 

...man. ..Hue.  Qx. 


way  to  Master  Jews.’  Clarendon  :  Launcelot  would  not  have  given  a  hard  word 
[like  ‘conclusions’  of  QJ  so  correctly. 

38.  Theobald  calls  attention  to  similar  perplexing  directions  given  by  the  slave 
Syrus  to  the  old  man  Demea  in  Terence’s  Adelphi,  IV,  ii,  42.  There  is  a  feeble 
attempt  at  a  similar  misdirection  in  the  Jud  von  Venedig.  See  Appendix. — Ed. 

40.  of  no  hand]  Abbott,  §165:  ‘Of’  is  here  used  where  we  should  use  on. 

42.  sonties]  Steevens  :  I  know  not  of  what  oath  this  is  a  corruption.  I  meet 
with  ‘  God’s-santy  ’  in  Dekker’s  Honest  Whore  [I,  xii,  p.  315,  ed.  Dodsley].  Again, 
in  The  Longer  thou  Livest  the  more  Fool  thou  Art,  bl.  1.  without  date : *  *  God’s  santie, 
this  is  a  goodly  book  indeed.’  Perhaps  it  was  once  customary  to  swear  by  the  santl, 
i.  e.  health,  of  the  Supreme  Being,  or  by  his  saints,  or,  as  Ritson  observes  to  me,  by 
his  sanctity.  Oaths  of  such  a  turn  are  not  unfrequent  among  our  ancient  writers.  All, 
however,  seem  to  have  been  so  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  crime  of  profane  swearing, 
that  they  were  content  to  disguise  their  meaning  by  abbreviations  which  were  permitted 
silently  to  terminate  in  irremediable  corruptions.  Allen  :  ‘  By  God’s  dear  Saints.’ 

*  Saint  ’  =  (as  in  Scotch)  saunt ;  sauntie  (as  in  Scotch),  diminutive  viroKopiGTiKuq.  Conf. 
By’r  Lakin. 

45.  yong]  Capell  (ii,  61  a):  We  should  observe  from  the  Son’s  young’s,  which 
are  emphatical,  that  ‘  Launcelot  ’  was  his  father’s  name  too :  His  ergo's  the  pro- 
nouncer  should  sound — argo ;  and  he  uses  them  for — talk  logically,  let  us  keep  to 
our  ergo’s. 

48.  Maister]  In  the  Trans,  of  the  New  Shakspere  Soc.,  Part  I,  p.  103,  FuRNIVALL 
gives  a  quotation  from  Smith’s  Commonwealth  of  England  to  show  that  ‘  Master  is  the 
tytle  which  men  giue  to  esquires,  and  other  gentlemen.’ 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


67 


ther  though  I  fay’t  is  an  honeft  exceeding  poore  man, 
and  God  be  thanked  well  to  liue.  50 

Lan.  Well,  let  his  Father  be  what  a  will,  wee  talke  of 
yong  Maifter  Lciuncelet. 

Gob.  Your  worfhips  friend  and  Launcelet. 

Laun.  But  I  praie  you  ergo  old  man,  ergo  I  befeech  you, 
talke  you  of  yong  Maifter  Launcelet.  55 


49.  fay't  ]  Q2FfQ3,  Hal.  Wh.  Rife. 
fay  it  Qx  et  cet. 

51.  a\  he  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
53.  Launcelet]  Ff,  Knt.  Launcelet 


fir  Qq  et  cet. 

55.  Launcelet.]  QIQ2F2F3,  Knt,  Sing. 
Sta.  Wh.  Ktly.  Launcelet?  Q3F4  e 
cet. 


50.  well  to  liue]  The  meaning  of  this  phrase,  which  we  all  understand  at  once  as 
implying  ‘  with  every  prospect  of  a  long  life,’  appears  to  have  escaped  all  the  German 
translators  from  Wieland  down  to  Bodenstedt.  Eschenburg  translates  it  *  noch  ganz 
munter;’  Schlegel,  ‘recht  wohl  auf;’  Max  Moltke,  ‘befindet  sich  recht  wohl;’  and 
Hager,  as  well  as  Schmidt  (to  whom  we  owe  the  Lexicon ),  4  es  geht  ihm  gut.’ — Ed. 

53.  This  line  is  obscure.  I  cannot  see  that  the  reading  of  the  Qtos :  ‘  Launcelet, 
Sir,’  helps  it  much,  if  any.  Steevens  reports  Dr  Farmer  as  of  the  opinion  that  ‘we 
should  read  Gobbo  instead  of  Launcelet;  and  observes  that  phraseology  like  this 
occurs  also  in  LovJs  Lab.  Lost,  V,  ii,  574,  where  Costard  says,  “  Your  servant,  and 
Costard;”  ’  but  this  instance  is  not  parallel;  ‘your  servant’  refers  to  ‘  Pompey,’  the  cha¬ 
racter  Costard  was  acting.  Capell’s  explanation  we  have  just  had,  that  the  Father  and 
Son  bore  the  same  name,  and  that  here  old  Gobbo  refers  to  himself.  Malone’s  expla¬ 
nation,  which  White  also  adopts,  is  perhaps  the  best — that  is,  ‘plain  Launcelot;  and 
not,  as  you  term  him,  master  Launcelot.’ — Ed. 

55.  Knight  :  This  sentence  is  usually  put  interrogatively,  contrary  to  the  punctua¬ 
tion  of  all  \_sic~\  the  old  copies ;  which  is  not  to  be  so  utterly  despised  as  the  modern 
editors  would  pretend.  Dyce  :  So  says  Mr  Knight,  forgetting  that  this  is  a  repetition 
of  Launcelot’s  preceding  interrogation,  ‘Talk  you  of  young  Master  Launcelot?’ 
White:  This  is  imperative,  not  interrogative.  The  misapprehension  of  the  passage 
by  more  than  one  modem  editor  justifies  an  explanation  of  it.  Launcelot  whimsically 
takes  his  father  to  task  for  disrespect  to  himself — Launcelot,  and  says,  in  reply  to  old 
Gobbo’s  statement  of  their  condition  in  life,  ‘  Well,  let  his  father  be  what  he  will,  we 
talk  of  young  Master  Launcelot.’  The  father,  still  unable  to  dub  his  son  ‘  Master,’ 
replies  deprecatingly,  ‘Your  worship’s  friend,  and  Launcelot,’  i.  e.  ‘Ay,  we  speak  of 
your  worship’s  friend,  who  is  Launcelot.’  To  this,  Launcelot,  who  evidently,  like  the 
Gravedigger  in  Hamlet,  understands,  after  a  fashion,  the  Latin  word  he  uses,  rejoins, 

‘  But  I  pray  you,  ergo,  old  man,  ergo,  I  beseech  you,  talk  you  of  young  Master  Laun¬ 
celot,’  i.  e.  ‘  And  therefore,  because  I  am  “  your  worship  ”  and  he  is  my  friend,  you 
should  speak  of  him  as  Master  Launcelot.’  Cambridge  Editors  :  Dyce’s  remark 
that  the  sentence  is  a  repetition  of  the  preceding  interrogation,  seems  conclusive  as  to 
the  sense.  Nothing  is  more  frequent  than  the  omission  of  the  note  of  interrogation  in 
the  older  editions,  apparently  from  a  paucity  of  types.  [I  cannot  see  that  White’s 
explanation  would  not  justify  an  interrogation  quite  as  well  as  an  imperative :  ‘  And 
therefore,  because  I  am  “  your  worship  ”  and  he  is  my  friend,  are  you,  I  beseech  you, 
talking  of  young  Master  Launcelot?’  ‘Of  Launcelot,’  replies  the  old  man,  which 
surely  seems  a  response  fitter  to  a  question  than  to  a  command. — Ed.] 


68 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii.  sc.  ii. 


Gob.  Of  Launcelet ,  ant  pleafe  your  maifterfhip.  56 

Lan.  Ergo  Maifter  Lancelot ,  talke  not  of  maifter  Lance- 
let  Father,  for  the  yong  gentleman  according  to  fates  and 
deftinies,  and  fuch  odde  fayings,  the  fifters  three,  &  fuch 
branches  of  learning,  is  indeede  deceafed,  or  as  you  60 
would  fay  in  plaine  tearmes,  gone  to  heauen. 

Gob.  Marrie  God  forbid,  the  boy  was  the  verie  ftaffe 
of  my  age,  my  verie  prop. 

Lau.  Do  I  look  like  a  cudgell  or  a  houell-poft,  a  ftaffe 
or  a  prop  :  doe  you  know  me  Father.  65 

Gob.  Alacke  the  day,  I  know  you  not  yong  Gentle¬ 
man,  but  I  praie  you  tell  me,  is  my  boy  God  reft  his  foule 
aliue  or  dead. 

Lan.  Doe  you  not  know  me  Father. 

Gob.  Alacke  fir  I  am  fand  blinde,  I  know  you  not.  70 

Lan.  Nay,  indeede  if  you  had  your  eies  you  might 

56.  ant]  an't  Q,F^  et  seq.  Dyce  iii. 

60.  m]  in  Fa.  65.  you  know ]  you  not  know  Dyce  iii, 

62.  verie]  verey  F  .  Ktly. 

64,  65.  Do. ..prop]  As  an  Aside,  Coll.  67.  God]  GOD  Q,Q2. 


57-  Ergo  Maister]  Staunton  :  The  humour  here,  which  consists  in  Launcelot’s 
determination  to  be  dignified  by  the  title  of  master,  and  the  old  man’s  unwillingness  so 
to  honor  him,  is  less  apparent  in  writing  than  in  acting,  where  the  Master  Launcelot 
can  be  rendered  sufficiently  emphatic.  [Theobald  was  the  first  to  change  the  comma 
after  Launcelot  to  a  semicolon;  Collier,  rightly,  I  think,  changed  it  to  a  full  stop. 
Launcelot  has  gained  his  point,  his  father  has  called  him  *  your  mastership.’ — Ed.] 

61.  Montegut  ( Commentaire ,  &c.  p.  461) :  It  is  noteworthy  that  after  a  sort  Laun¬ 
celot  is  a  rustic  bel  esprit ;  a  servant  who  has  picked  up,  here  and  there,  scraps  and 
orts  of  learning.  He  uses  Latin  words,  which  he  places  higgledy-piggledy  in  his  sen¬ 
tences  ;  we  shall  find  him  displaying  a  knowledge  of  palmistry ;  he  criticises  mytho¬ 
logical  expressions  and  metaphors  used  by  the  learned ;  he  plays  on  words  sharply 
enough  to  drive  Lorenzo  mad,  and  loses  no  opportunity  to  discourse.  Before  entering 
the  Jew’s  service  he  must  have  been  the  domestic  of  some  savant  of  the  Renaissance 
or  of  some  canon  of  Venice,  or  have  been  a  choir-boy  under  the  curate  of  the  village 
where  he  was  bom. 

64.  houell-post]  Cotgrave  gives :  Escraigne,  A  little  houell  made  of  poles  set  round 
with  their  ends  meeting  at  the  top,  and  couered  with  turues,  sods,  &c.  so  thicke,  that 
no  weather  can  pierce  it. — Ed. 

65.  you  know]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Not  is  here  omitted  in  the  old  eds.,  but  is  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary :  and  compare  Launcelot’s  next  speech. 

65.  Father]  White:  Twice  Launcelot  calls  Gobbo  father,  and  yet  the  old  man 
does  not  even  suspect  with  whom  he  is  talking;  the  reason  of  which  is  the  ancient 
custom,  almost  universal  among  the  peasantry,  of  calling  all  old  people  father  of 
mother. 


Acr  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


69 


faile  of  the  knowing  me  :  it  is  a  wife  Father  that  knowes  72 
his  owne  childe.  Well,  old  man,  I  will  tell  you  newes  of 
your  fon,  giue  me  your  blefling,  truth  will  come  to  light, 
murder  cannot  be  hid  long,  a  mans  fonne  may,  but  in  the  75 
end  truth  will  out. 

Gob.  Praie  you  fir  ftand  vp,  I  am  fure  you  are  not 
Lancelet  my  boy. 

Lan.  Praie  you  let’s  haue  no  more  fooling  about 
it,  but  giue  mee  your  bleffing :  I  am  Lancelet  your  80 
boy  that  was,  your  fonne  that  is,  your  childe  that 
fhall  be. 

Gob.  I  cannot  thinke  you  are  my  fonne. 

Lan.  I  know  not  what  I  fhall  thinke  of  that:  but  I  am 
Lancelet  the  I ewes  man,  and  I  am  fure  Margerie  your  wife  85 
is  my  mother. 

Gob.  Her  name  is  Margerie  indeede,  lie  be  fworne  if 
thou  be  Lancelet ,  thou  art  mine  owne  flefh  and  blood : 

Lord  worfhipt  might  he  be,  what  a  beard  haft  thou  got ; 
thou  haft  got  more  haire  on  thy  chin,  then  Dobbin  my  90 
philhorfe  has  on  his  taile. 


74.  soft,]  son.  [kneels]  Coll,  [kneels, 
with  his  back  to  Gobbo]  Dyce  iii. 

74,  76.  truth]  trueth  Q,Q2. 

75.  murder]  Murther  Qx.  muder  Qa. 

75,  76.  in  the  end]  at  the  length  Qx, 
Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

76.  out]  not  Ff,  Rowe  et  seq. 

89.  Lord]  Lord!  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

•worfhipt]  worjhip  F4. 

might]  Om.  Cap.  (corrected  in 


Errata). 

89.  got.]  got !  [feeling  the  back  of  his 
head]  Hal.  Dyce  (subs.). 

91.  philhorfe]  Q2  Ff.  pilhorfe  Qx.  phil¬ 
horfe  Q3,  Rowe,  Pope  i,  Mai.  Thill-horse 
Theob  + ,  Steev.  fill-horse  Pope  ii,  Dyce, 
Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii.  fil-horse  Cap. 
phill-horse  Var.  et  cet. 

has]  hafe  or  hafe  Q2. 
taile]  tale  Qx. 


83.  you]  Note  Gobbo’s  respectful  ‘you,’  until  he  recognizes  Launcelot,  and  then 
His  change  to  ‘thou.’ — Ed. 

89.  Lord  .  .  .  be]  Rev.  John  Hunter,  whose  text  reads,  ‘Lord-worshipped,’  ex¬ 
plains  the  phrase  by,  *  He  might  be  a  lord  worshipful,’  and  adds  :  ‘  This  refers  to  the 
supposed  beard,  and  the  arrogated  mastership .’  Hudson  :  This  expression  does  not 
occur  again  in  Shakespeare.  The  Rev  John  Hunter  means,  apparently,  that  he  has 
beard  enough  to  receive  the  title  of  lordship.  But  I  doubt  both  his  printing  and  his 
explanation.  Abbott,  §  313,  interprets  ‘might’  as  an  optative. 

89.  beard]  Staunton  :  Stage  tradition,  not  improbably  from  the  time  of  Shake¬ 
speare  himself,  makes  Launcelot,  at  this  point,  kneel  with  his  back  to  the  sand-blind 
old  Father,  who,  of  course,  mistakes  his  long  back  hair  for  a  beard,  of  which  his  face 
is  perfectly  innocent. 

90,  9 93»  94.  on  ...  on  ...  of  ...  of  ]  Abbott,  §  175  :  Of,  signifying  proxim¬ 
ity  of  any  kind,  is  sometimes  used  locally  in  the  sense  of  on. 


7  o 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Lan.  It  fhould  feeme  then  that  Dobbins  taile  92 
growes  backeward.  I  am  fure  he  had  more  haire  of  his 
taile  then  I  haue  of  my  face  when  I  loft  faw  him. 

Gob.  Lord  how  art  thou  chang’d :  how  dooft  thou  95 
and  thy  Mafter  agree,  I  haue  brought  him  a  prefent ;  how 
gree  you  now  ? 

Lan.  Well,  well,  but  for  mine  owne  part,  as  I  haue  fet 
vp  my  reft  to  run  awaie,  fo  I  will  not  reft  till  I  haue  run  99 


93.  of  his]  on  his  Rowe+,  Steev. 
Mai. 

94.  of  my]  on  my  F3F4,  Rowe  + ,  Steev. 
Mai. 


94.  loft]  Q2.  laft  Qj  et  cet. 

95.  dooft]  Q2F2.  doeft  Qx.  doft  F3  et 
seq. 

97.  gree]  agree  Qt,  Pope  +  ,  Coll. 


91.  philhorse]  Theobald:  This  must  be  restored  ‘  7^z7/-horse ;’  i.  e.  the  Horse 
which  draws  in  the  Shafts,  or  Thill,  of  the  Carriage.  Halliwell:  Theobald’s 
change  is  unnecessary ;  both  phill-horse  and  thill-horse  were  certainly  in  use.  Fill- 
horse,  filler,  the  horse  which  goes  in  the  shafts. — Forby’s  East  Anglia.  White  : 

*  Phill-horse,’  as  a  corruption  of  ‘  ?/A//-horse,’  the  synonym  for  ‘  shaft-horse,’  is  now  in 
common  use  in  the  rural  districts  of  New  England  [and  of  Pennsylvania. — Ed.]. 
Clarendon  :  Shakespeare  uses  ‘  fills  ’  in  Tro.  &•  Cress.  Ill,  ii,  48,  ‘  An  you  draw 
backward,  we’ll  put  you  i’  the  fills.’ 

97-  gree]  For  many  instances  of  dropped  prefixes,  see  Abbott,  §  460. 

98.  set  vp  my  rest]  There  seems  to  be  some  obscurity  in  regard  to  the  origin  of 
this  phrase,  although  there  is  general  agreement  that  it  means *  *  to  be  resolved,  to  be 
determined.’  Steevens  maintained  at  one  time  that  the  expression  is  taken  from  the 
manner  of  firing  a  matchlock,  which  was  so  heavy  that  a  supporter  called  a  rest  was 
fixed  in  the  ground  before  the  piece  was  levelled  to  take  aim.  Collier  adopted  this 
derivation  ‘  in  spite  of  Gifford,’  whose  name  carries  more  weight  than  any  other,  per¬ 
haps,  of  those  who  maintain  that  ‘  the  metaphor  is  taken  from  play,  where  the  highest 
stake  the  parties  were  disposed  to  venture  was  called  the  rest.'  Nares  restricted  ‘the 
play  ’  to  the  ‘  once  fashionable  and  favorite  game  of  Primero ,’  and  said  that  it  meant  to 
stand  upon  the  cards  you  have  in  your  hand,  in  hopes  they  may  prove  better  than  those 
of  your  adversary.  Hence,  *  to  make  up  your  mind,  to  be  determined.’  Keightley  com¬ 
bines  both  definitions,  and  to  that  extent  gives  the  more  plausible  explanation.  He  says 
(. Expositor ,  p.  419)  that  the  phrase  ‘is  derived  from  gaming,  chiefly  from  the  game  of 
Primero.  As  this  game  came  from  Spain,  it  brought,  like  Ombre,  its  terms  with  it,  and 
'*  rest  ”  was  the  Spanish  resto,  which  meant,  not  as  is  usually  supposed,  the  stake,  but  the 
bet  or  wager,  which  appears  to  have  been  made  by  the  players  only.  “  What  shall  we 
play  for? — one  shilling  stake  and  three  rest.” — Florio,  First  Fruites.  The  Spanish 
phrase  for  laying  a  wager,  or  making  a  bet  at  play,  was  echar  el  resto,  put  or  throw 
down  the  sum  betted ;  and  this  became  the  English  set  up  the  rest.  The  reason,  per¬ 
haps,  was  because  this  phrase  was  already  in  use  in  a  military  sense,  as  the  matchlock 
guns,  on  account  of  their  weight  and  mode  of  firing  them,  required  a  rest  or  support.’ 
It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  only  authority  which  Keightley  cites  for  a  Spanish  phrase 
is  an  Italian  Phrase-book,  and  even  the  passage  cited  I  have  been  unable  to  find  in 
Florio’s  First  Fruites,  1578.  Moreover  in  Minsheu’s  Spanish  isict.  1623,  the  phrase 
echar  el  resto  is  not  given  under  either  the  verb  or  the  noun.  Ii>  me  Dialogues  at  thc> 


ACT  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


7i 

fome  ground  ;  my  Maifter’s  a  verie  lew,  giue  him  a  pre-  ioo 
fent,  giue  him  a  halter,  I  am  famifht  in  his  feruice.  You 
may  tell  euerie  finger  I  haue  with  my  ribs :  Father  I  am 
glad  you  are  come,  giue  me  your  prefent  to  one  Maifter 
Baffanio ,  who  indeede  giues  rare  new  Liuories,  if  I  ferue 
not  him,  I  will  run  as  far  as  God  has  anie  ground.  O  rare  105 
fortune,  here  comes  the  man,  to  him  Father,  for  I  am  a 
leu  if  I  ferue  the  lew  anie  longer. 

Enter  Baffanio  with  a  follower  or  two. 

Baff  You  may  doe  fo,  but  let  it  be  fo  hafted  that 
fupper  be  readie  at  the  fartheft  by  fiue  of  the  clocke :  no 

fee  thefe  Letters  deliuered,  put  the  Liueries  to  mak¬ 
ing,  and  defire  Gratiano  to  come  anone  to  my  lodg¬ 
ing. 

Lan.  To  him  Father. 

Gob.  God  bleffe  your  worfhip.  115 

Baff.  Gramercie,  would’ft  thou  ought  with  me. 


102.  my]  your  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

105.  not  him ]  him  not  Rowe  +  . 

108.  Enter...]  Enter  Bassanio  with 
Leonardo,  and  a  follower  or  two  more. 
Theob.  et  seq.  (subs.). 


1 12.  anone ]  anon  Q,F3  et  seq. 

1 13.  [Exit  one  of  his  men.  Q  . 

1 1 6.  would' '/l]  woul'd  F3>  would  F^. 
ought  ]  aught  Knt  et  seq. 


end  of  the  Diet.,  there  is  (p.  26)  a  dialogue  during  a  game  of  primkra,  where  we  find : 

*  Que  ha  de  ser  el  tanto  ?  What  is  the  summe  that  we  play  for  ?  Quatro  reales  y  dies 
y  seis  de  saca.  Two  shillings  stake,  and  eight  shillings  rest.'  Where,  as  we  see,  the 
English  sustains  Keightley,  but  the  Spanish  does  not.  Further  on  occurs *  *  Yo  enbido 
mi  resto.  I  set  my  rest.'  Perhaps  embidar  is  near  enough  to  echar.  See  the  notes 
on  the  phrase  in  Rom.  dr*  Jul.  IV,  v,  6. — Ed. 

103  giue  me]  The  Ethical  Dative.  If  need  be,  see  Abbott,  §  220. 

105.  ground]  Knight  ( Illust .) :  A  characteristic  speech  in  the  mouth  of  a  Vene¬ 
tian.  Ground  to  run  upon  being  a  scarce  convenience  in  Venice,  its  lower  orders  of 
inhabitants  regard  the  great  expanse  of  the  mainland  with  feelings  of  admiration  which 
can  be  little  entered  into  by  those  who  have  been  able,  all  their  days,  to  walk  where 
they  would. — (M.)  [Miss  Martineau  ?] 

III.  to  making]  Abbott,  §  349 :  There  are  many  cases  in  which  the  terminations 
of  the  infinitive  and  present  participle  have  been  confused  together,  and  the  -ing  in 
this  construction  represents  the  old  infinitive  inflection  -en.  Perhaps,  also,  -ing,  as  in 
,  the  present  instance,  was  added  as  a  reminiscence  of  the  old  gerundive  termination 
-ene. 

1 13.  Note  the  stage-direction  of  Qx  as  another  indication  of  its  superiority  over  Q2. 
—Ed. 

1 1 6.  Gramercie]  French , grand  merci. 


72 


THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Gob.  Here’s  my  Tonne  fir,  a  poore  boy.  1 17 

Lan.  Not  a  poore  boy  fir,  but  the  rich  Iewes  man  that 
would  fir  as  my  Father  fhall  fpecifie. 

Gob.  He  hath  a  great  infection  fir,  as  one  would  fay  120 
to  ferue. 

Lan.  Indeede  the  fhort  and  the  long  is,  I  ferue  the 
lew ,  and  haue  a  defire  as  my  Father  fhall  fpecifie. 

Gob.  His  Maifter  and  he(fauing  your  worfhips  reue- 
rence)  are  fcarce  catercofins.  125 

Lan.  To  be  briefe,  the  verie  truth  is,  that  the  lew 
hauing  done  me  wrong,  doth  caufe  me  as  my  Father  be¬ 
ing  I  hope  an  old  man  fhall  frutifie  vnto  you. 

Gob.  I  haue  here  a  difh  of  Doues  that  I  would  beftow  129 


1 17,  1 19,  123,  128.  boy.  ...fpecifie.  ... 
fpecifie.  ... you .]  boy, —  ... specify , —  ... 
specify, —  ...you, —  Theob.  et  seq. 

1 19.  fir]  fir,  QrQ?F4. 

124.  fauing]  favin  F3. 


125.  catercofins ]  cater-cousins  Roweet 
seq. 

127,  128.  Father. ..hope]  Father,  ... 
hope,  Qr. 

128.  frutifie ]  fruitify  Cap.  Hal. 


1 19.  specifie]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Illust.  ii,  306):  Considering  that  Launcelot 
is  here  upon  his  game  and  knocking  all  words  out  of  joint,  Mr  Bishop  imagines  this 
should  be  spicifie.  Just  as  he  a  little  after  says  ‘fruitifie’  ( fruit  and  spice).  [Is  it 
stage  tradition  here  also  which  makes  Launcelot  not  only  interrupt  his  father,  but  turn 
him  swiftly  round,  and  after  the  delivery  of  his  speech  to  Bassanio  turn  him  as  swiftly 
back  again,  and  keep  up  these  gyrations  until  the  amazed  Bassanio  says,  ‘  One  speak 
for  both  ’  ? — Ed.] 

125.  catercosins]  Johnson  [Diet.) :  A  corruption  of  quatre- cousin,  from  the  ridic¬ 
ulousness  of  calling  cousin,  or  relation,  to  so  remote  a  degree.  Clarendon  :  No  such 
phrase  is,  or  apparently  ever  was,  known  in  French  as  *  quatre-cousin.’  This  is  the 
only  passage  in  Shakespeare  in  which  it  occurs.  Halliwell  ( Arch .  and  Prov.  Diet.) 
gives  ‘  caper-cousins  ’  as  a  Lancashire  expression  for  ‘  great  friends.’  This  is  evidently 
a  corruption  of  our  phrase.  The  sense  required  here  is  ‘barely  on  speaking  terms.’ 
Hales  ( Notes  dr5  Essays,  p.  177)  :  Is  it  impossible  that  the  cater  is  connected  with  cate 
or  cake,  cater,  acater,  caterer,  &c.,  and  that  the  word  means  simply  mess-fellow  ?  This 
explanation  has  been  offered  before ;  it  still  requires  confirmation.  [I  do  not  find  the 
word  either  in  Wedgwood,  or  Skeat. — Ed.] 

129.  dish  of  Doues]  C.  A.  Brown  (p.  109) :  The  Merchant  of  Venice  is  a  mer¬ 
chant  of  no  other  place  in  the  world.  Everything  he  says  or  does,  or  that  is  said  or 
done  about  him,  except  when  the  scene  changes  to  Belmont,  is,  throughout  the  play, 
Venetian.  Ben  Jonson,  in  his  Volpone,  gives  no  more  than  can  be  gathered  from  any 
one  book  of  travels  that  has  ever  been  published ;  nothing  but  the  popular  notion  of 
the  city.  Shakespeare,  in  addition  to  the  general  national  spirit  of  the  play,  describes 
the  Exchange  held  on  the  Rialto ;  the  riches  of  the  merchants ;  their  argosies  ‘  From 
Tripolis,  from  Mexico,  and  England;  From  Lisbon,  Barbary,  and  India;’  some  with 
‘silks’  and  ‘spices,’  ‘richly  fraught;’  he  represents  ‘the  trade  and  profit  of  the  city’ 
as  consisting  ‘  of  all  nations ;’  he  talks  familiarly  of  the  ‘  masquing  mates,’  with  theil 


ACT  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


73 


vpon  your  worfhip,  and  my  fuite  is.  1 30 

Lan.  In  verie  briefe,  the  fuite  is  impertinent  to  my 

130.  A.]  is - Qj,  Rowe  et  seq. 

‘torch-bearers’  in  the  streets;  of  ‘the  common  ferry  which  trades  to  Venice,’  where 
Portia  is  to  meet  Balthazar,  after  he  has  delivered  the  letter  to  Doctor  Bellario,  at 
Padua,  the  seat  of  law ;  and  ‘  In  a  gondola  were  seen  together  Lorenzo  and  his  amor¬ 
ous  Jessica.’  All  this  is  written  with  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  place.  So  magical 
is  the  painting,  that  a  lover  of  Shakespeare,  as  he  enters  Venice,  looks  about  him  with 
the  air  of  a  man  at  home,  and  almost  expects  to  see  some  merchants  talking  with  a 
Shylock  on  the  Rialto,  till  he  spies  the  poverty  of  the  people,  and  sighs  to  himself, — 
‘  Alas !  how  changed  since  the  days  of  the  Republic !’  Shakespeare  might  have  read 
of  the  ‘strict  Court  of  Venice’  on  commercial  questions,  and  of  the  reasons  for  such 
strictness;  he  might  also  have  found  authority  in  books  for — ‘You  have  among  you 
many  a  purchased  slave ;’  but  where  did  he  obtain  his  numerous  graphic  touches  of 
national  manners  ?  where  did  he  learn  of  an  old  villager’s  coming  into  the  city  with  a 
‘  dish  of  doves  ’  as  a  present  to  his  son’s  master  ?  A  present  thus  given,  and  in  our 
days  too,  and  of  doves,  is  not  uncommon  in  Italy.  [In  Dixon’s  Story  of  Lord  Bacon's 
Life,  p.  98,  Lady  Anne  Bacon  tells  her  son  Anthony  that  she  sends  him  ‘  xij  pigeons, 
my  last  flight,  and  one  ringdove  beside,  and  a  black  coney  taken  by  John  Knight  this 
day,  and  pigeons,  too,  to-day.’  This  incident  I  am  sure  that  I  have  seen,  in  some 
attempted  proof  that  Bacon  wrote  Shakespeare’s  plays,  cited,  in  conclusive  answer  to 
C.  A.  Brown’s  question,  as  the  genuine  dovecote  whence  issued  Gobbo’s  doves.  I 
mistrust  the  fitness  of  spending  any  time  in  search  for  it.  My  editorial  conscience  is 
rendered  placid  by  the  simple  allusion ;  merely  begging  to  be  allowed  to  remark  that  if 
Bacon  wrote  this  passage,  I  fully  respond  to  Pope’s  estimate  of  Bacon’s  baseness,  and 
find  herein  even  a  lower  depth,  in  thus  introducing  his  Mother  as  a  prototype  of  old 
Gobbo.  One  is  sometimes  inclined  to  say  to  those  who  dispute  the  authorship  of  these 
plays,  as  the  Cockney  did  to  the  eels,  ‘  down,  wantons,  down !’  but  a  little  calm  reflec¬ 
tion  reveals  to  us  that  this  attempt  to  dethrone  Shakespeare,  so  far  from  being  treason, 
or  Use  majestt,  is,  in  fact,  most  devout  and  respectful  homage  to  him.  In  our  sallad 
days,  when  first  we  begin  to  study  Shakespeare,  who  does  not  remember  his  bewilder¬ 
ing  efforts  to  attribute  to  mortal  hand  these  immortal  plays  ?  Then  follows  the  fruitless 
attempt  to  discern  in  that  Stratford  youth,  the  Emperor,  by  the  grace  of  God,  of  all  Lit¬ 
erature.  In  our  despair  of  marrying,  as  Emerson  says,  the  man  to  the  verse,  we  wed 
the  verse  to  the  greatest  known  intellect  of  that  age.  Can  homage  be  more  profound  ? 
But,  as  I  have  said,  this  we  do  when  we  are  young  in  judgement.  The  older  we  grow 
in  this  study,  and  the  farther  we  advance  in  it,  the  clearer  becomes  our  vision  that,  if 
the  royal  robes  do  not  fit  Shakespeare,  they  certainly  do  not,  and  cannot,  fit  any  one 
else.  Wherefore,  I  conceive  that  we  have  here  a  not  altogether  inaccurate  gauge  of 
the  depth,  or  duration,  or  persistence  of  Shakespearian  study,  and,  measuring  by  a  scale 
of  maturity,  or  growth,  in  this  study,  I  have  come  to  look  upon  all  attempts  to  prove  that 
Bacon  wrote  these  dramas,  merely  as  indications  of  youth,  possibly,  of  extreme  youth, 
and  that  they  find  their  comforting  parallels  in  the  transitory  ailments  incident  to 
»  childhood,  like  the  chicken-pox  or  the  measles.  The  attack  is  pretty  sure  to  come, 
but  we  know  that  it  is  neither  dangerous  nor  chronic,  that  time  will  effect  a  cure,  and 
that,  when  once  well  over  it,  there  is  no  likelihood  whatever  of  its  recurrence. — Ed.] 
130.  is]  The  long  dash  following  this  word  in  Q,  is  an  instance  of  the  unusual  care 
with  which  that  edition  was  set  up. — Ed. 


74 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


felfe,  as  your  worfhip  fhall  know  by  this  honeft  old  man,  132 
and  though  I  fay  it,  though  old  man,  yet  poore  man  my 
Father. 

Baff.  One  fpeake  for  both,  what  would  you  ?  135 

Lan.  Serue  you  fir. 

Gob.  That  is  the  verie  defeat  of  the  matter  fir. 

Baff.  I  know  thee  well,  thou  haft  obtain’d  thy  fuite, 

Shylocke  thy  Maifter  fpoke  with  me  this  daie, 

And  hath  prefer’d  thee,  if  it  be  preferment  140 

To  leaue  a  rich  Iewes  feruice,  to  become 
The  follower  of  fo  poore  a  Gentleman. 

Clo.  The  old  prouerbe  is  verie  well  parted  betweene 
my  Maifter  Shylocke  and  you  fir,  you  haue  the  grace  of 
God  fir,  and  he  hath  enough.  145 

Baff.  Thou  fpeak’ft  it  well ;  go  Father  with  thy  Son, 

Take  leaue  of  thy  old  Maifter,  and  enquire 

My  lodging  out,  giue  him  a  Liuerie  148 

143, 150.  Clo.]  Clowne.  Q2Q3-  Lan.  Qt.  148.  out,]  out.  Qt.  out :  Q3F4> 

140.  prefer’d]  Craik  (789,  p.  344) :  ‘To  prefer,’  Reed  observes,  ‘seems  to  have 
been  the  established  phrase  for  recommending  a  servant .’  And  he  quotes  [this  pres¬ 
ent  passage].  But  to  prefer  was  more  than  merely  to  recommend.  It  was  rather  to 
transfer,  or  hand  over.  That  it  had  come  to  imply  also  something  of  promotion,  may 
be  seen  from  what  Bassanio  goes  on  to  say.  The  sense  of  the  verb  to  prefer  that  we 

have  in  Shakespeare,  continued  current  down  to  a  considerably  later  date . At  an 

earlier  date,  again,  we  have  Bacon,  in  the  Dedication  of  the  first  edition  of  his  Essays 
to  his  brother  Anthony,  thus  writing : — *  Since  they  would  not  stay  with  their  master, 
but  would  needs  travail  abroad,  I  have  preferred  them  to  you,  that  are  next  myself/  &c. 

143.  prouerbe]  Staunton  :  The  proverb  referred  to  is  ‘  The  grace  of  God  is  better 
than  riches or,  in  the  Scot’s  form,  is  ‘  God’s  grace  is  gear  enough.’ — [Ray’s  Proverbs , 
p.  295,  ed.  1670, — ap.  Clarendon.] 

145.  enough]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Illust.  ii,  306) :  Now  here,  indeed,  methinks, 
this  is  a  little  too  serious  for  Launcelot ;  and  he  delivers  the  proverb  more  justly  than 
the  Poet  intended.  It  would  be  very  satirical,  both  to  bis  old  and  his  new  master,  with 
relation  both  to  their  religion  and  circumstances ,  if  we  might  imagine  a  small  transposi¬ 
tion  in  the  words :  ‘He  hath  the  Grace  of  God,  Sir,  and  you  have  enough .’  For  Laun¬ 
celot  to  say  the  Jew,  whom  he  thought  a  Devil,  had  the  grace  of  God,  or  that  Bassanio 
had  enough,  whom  he  knew  to  be  a  borrower,  is  very  droll.  And  then  there  is  much 
humour,  too,  in  the  ironical  reply  of  Bassanio :  ‘  Thou  speak’st  it  well.’  Or,  as  we  read 
it :  ‘  Thou  split’st  it  well.’  [This  emendation  Theobald  did  not  allude  to  in  his  subse¬ 
quent  edition ;  but  Warburton,  in  his  edition,  put  it  forth  in  a  note,  and  the  Camb.  Edd. 
have  accorded  its  authorship  to  him,  an  error  for  which  Theobald  should  surely  be  grate¬ 
ful.  Tke  harshness  of  ‘split’st  it’  would  be  much  less  likely  to  offend  Warburton’s 
ear  than  Theobald’s. — Ed.] 


ACT  n,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


75 

More  garded  then  his  fellowes  :  fee  it  done. 

Clo.  Father  in,  I  cannot  get  a  feruice,  no,  I  haue  nere  150 
a  tongue  in  my  head,  well :  if  anie  man  in  Italie  haue  a 
fairer  table  which  doth  offer  to  fweare  vpon  a  booke,  I  152 


149.  garded~\  Qq  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Cap. 
guarded  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 

150.  no,-]  QqFf.  »c/’Roweii  +  .  no! 
Knt,  Hal.  no;  Rowe  i  et  cet. 

haue~\  ha  Qx. 

15 1.  tongue ]  tong  Q2Q3- 

head,  well .•]  Qa.  head:  Well, 


Q3,  Rowei.  head  well:  FaF3.  head  well, 
F  .  head?  well,  Rowe  ii  +  .  head! — 
well ;  Knt,  Hal.  Ktly.  head.  Well,  Qt, 
Cap.  et  cet.  (subs.). 

1 5 1 .  [Looking  on  his  own  hand.  Han. 
...palm.  Johns. 


149.  garded]  Hanmer  ( Gloss.)  :  A  guard,  the  hem  or  welt  of  a  garment;  also,  any 
lace  or  galloon  upon  the  seams  or  borders  of  it.  To  guard,  to  lace  over,  to  adorn. 
Staunton  :  So  called  from  its  guarding  the  stuff  from  being  torn. 

152.  table]  Staunton:  The  table  line,  or  line  of  fortune,  is  the  line  running  from 
the  forefinger,  below  the  other  three  fingers,  to  the  side  of  the  hand.  The  natural  line 
is  the  line  which  curves  in  a  different  direction,  through  the  middle  of  the  palm ;  and 
the  line  of  life  is  the  circular  line  surrounding  the  ball  of  the  thumb.  The  space 
between  the  two  former  lines  being  technically  known  as  the  table.  [Whoever  is 
interested  in  Chiromancy  may  find  diagrams,  ancient  and  modern,  of  the  hand,  and 
abundant  authorities  on  the  subject,  in  Knight,  and  in  Halliwell.  I  have  selected 
Staunton’s  note  as  the  earliest  which  really  gives  all  needful  illustration  of  the  text  in 
shortest  compass. — Ed.] 

152.  table  which  doth]  Warburton  in  his  text  indicated  an  omission  after  these 
words,  and  supplies  the  ‘  lost  sense,’  which  he  says  is  ‘  easy  enough,’  thus  :  ‘  If  any  man 
in  Italy  have  a  fairer  table,  which  doth  promise  good  luck,  I  am  mistaken.  I  durst 
almost  offer  to  swear,’  &c.  Johnson:  ‘Table’  is  the  palm  of  the  hand  extended. 
Launcelot  congratulates  himself  upon  his  dexterity  and  good  fortune,  and,  in  the  height 
of  his  rapture,  inspects  his  hand,  and  congratulates  himself  upon  the  felicities  in  his 
table.  The  act  of  expanding  his  hand  puts  him  in  mind  of  the  action  in  which  the 
palm  is  shown,  by  raising  it  to  lay  it  on  the  book,  in  judicial  attestations.  ‘  Well,’  says 
he, *  *  if  any  man  in  Italy  have  a  fairer  table,  that  doth  offer  to  swear  upon  a  book — .’ 
Here  he  stops  with  an  abruptness  very  common,  and  proceeds  to  particulars.  Heath 
(p.  1 14):  Considering  Launcelot’s  humourous  and  fantastical  language,  the  place  will 
very  well  bear  the  following  interpretation :  ‘  If  any  man  in  Italy  have  a  fairer  table, 
which  pronounces  that  I  shall  have  good  fortune,  with  as  much  assurance  as  if  it  were 
ready  to  swear  it  upon  a  book — .’  Here  the  sentence  breaks  off,  and  we  must  supply 

*  I  am  mistaken,’  or  some  other  expression  of  like  import.  Kenrick  {Rev.  of  Dr 
Johnson,  See.,  p.  50) :  None  of  these  commentators,  though  very  sensible  of  the  break 
in  this  passage,  seems  to  know  where  it  lies ;  but  if  I  might  be  allowed  to  take  the 
most  trifling  liberty  in  the  world  with  the  text,  I  dare  say  the  reader  would  see  the 
whole  meaning  and  propriety  of  it  at  one  view :  ‘  Well,  if  any  man  in  Italy  have  a 
fairer  table ! — Why,  it  doth  offer  to  swear  upon  a  book  I  shall  have  good  fortune, — 
Go  to,’  &c.  Tyrwhitt  :  Launcelot,  looking  into  the  palm  of  his  hand,  breaks  out : 
‘Well;  if  any  man  in  Italy  have  a  fairer  table;  which  doth  offer  to  swear  upon  a  book, 
I  shall  have  good  fortune  ’ — i.  e.  a  table  which  doth  {not  only  promise,  but)  offer  to 
swear  {and  to  swear  upon  a  book  too)  that  I  shall  have  good  fortune.  (He  omits  the 


76 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ir,  sc.  ii. 


fhall  haue  good  fortune;  goe  too,  here’s  a  fimple  line  153 
of  life,  here’s  a  fmall  trifle  of  wiues,  alas,  fifteene  wiues 
is  nothing,  a  leuen  widdowes  and  nine  maides  is  a  flm-  155 
pie  comming  in  for  one  man,  and  then  to  fcape  drow- 

153  fortune  /]  fortune.  Q,.  Rife,  Huds.  a  ' lev en  Cam.  eleuen  O, 

155  a  leuen']  Qa.  a  leven  Q3F2.  a  leaven  et  cet. 

F3F4.  aleven  Hal.  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Dyce  iii,  156.  comming  in]  coming-in  Theob. 

fcape]  efcape  Qx. 


conclusion  of  the  sentence,  which  might  have  been)  I  am  tnuch  mistaken  ;  or,  I'll  be 
hanged,  & c.  Knight  :  The  table  (palm)  which  doth  offer  to  swear  upon  a  book,  is 
not  very  different  from  other  palms ;  but  the  palm  which  doth  offer  to  swear  that  the 
owner  shall  have  good  fortune,  is  a  fair  table  to  be  proud  of.  [Tyrwhitt’s  explanation, 
whose  punctuation  Knight  also  adopted  in  his  text.]  Halliwell  :  Launcelot  means 
to  say :  ‘  Well ;  if  any  man  in  Italy,  who  doth  offer  to  swear  upon  a  book,  have  a  fairer 
table,’  a  vernacular  form  of  speech,  implying  that  no  one  has  a  fairer  table.  [White 
(ed.  i)  adopted  this  explanation.]  Clarendon  :  If  the  text  be  as  Shakespeare  wrote 
it,  Launcelot  seems  to  have  left  the  sentence  imperfect  at  *  table,’  with  an  ellipsis  of 
‘  I’ll  be  hanged,’  or  some  such  phrase.  Rolfe  follows  Johnson’s  punctuation  and 
explanation  as  opposed  to  Tyrwhitt’s,  that  is,  that  it  is  the  man,  not  the  table,  which 
doth  offer  to  swear.  [My  own  decided  preference  is  for  Kenrick’s  punctuation,  and 
for  an  explanation  I  am  indebted  to  a  MS  note  of  Allen’s:  ‘Well,  if  any  man  in  Italy 
have  a  fairer  table  !  which  doth  (equivalent,  as  in  Greek  or  Latin,  to  for  it  doth )  offer 
to  swear,’  &c.  That  is,  there  is  no  hand  so  fair  in  its  indications  of  fortune  as  mine, 
because  it  offers  to  swear  that  I  shall  have  good  luck ;  which  is  virtually  the  same  para¬ 
phrase  as  Kenrick’s,  and  Tyrwhitt’s,  the  difference  being  merely  that  they  apparently 
failed  to  note  that  ‘which’  is  here  used  like  the  Latin  causal  relative. — Ed.] 

153.  fortune]  Malone:  I  am  persuaded  that  the  author  wrote:  ‘I  shall  have  no 
good  fortune.’  These  words  are  not,  I  believe,  connected  with  what  goes  before,  but 
with  what  follows ;  and  begin  a  new  sentence.  Shakespeare,  I  think,  meant  that  Laun¬ 
celot,  after  this  abrupt  speech — Well,  if  any  man  that  offers  to  swear  upon  a  book,  has 
a  fairer  table  than  mine — (I  am  much  mistaken) — should  proceed  in  the  same  manner 
in  which  he  began : — I  shall  have  no  good  fortune ;  go  to ;  here’s  a  simple  line  of  life ! 
&c.  [Malone  did  not  venture  to  adopt  this  in  his  text.  Eccles  did.] 

1 53.  goe  too]  Abbott,  §  185  :  ‘To’  is  still  used  adverbially  in  ‘to  and  fro’  and 
nautical  expressions,  such  as  ‘  heave  to,'  ‘  come  to.'  This  explains  ‘  Go  to.’  ‘  Go  ’  did 
not,  in  Elizabethan  or  Early  English,  necessarily  imply  motion  from,  but  motion  gener¬ 
ally.  Hence,  ‘go  to'  meant  little  more  than  our  stimulative  ‘ come,  come.’ 

153.  simple  line]  Knight:  A  simple  or  complex  line  of  life  were  indications  that 
made  even  some  of  the  wise  exult  or  tremble.  Launcelot’s  ‘  small  trifle  of  wives  ’  was, 
however,  hardly  compatible  with  the  simple  line  of  life.  There  must  have  been  too 
many  crosses  in  such  a  destiny.  CLARENDON:  ‘A  simple  line  of  life,’  i.  e.  ‘a  poor, 
mean  line,’  is  ironical  for  the  converse. 

154.  trifle  of  wiues]  Halliwell  :  *  Long  and  deep  lines  from  the  Mount  of  Venus 

[the  ball  of  the  thumb]  towards  the  line  of  life,  signifieth  so  many  wives . These 

lines  visible  and  deep,  so  many  wives  the  party  shall  have.’ — Saunder’s  Chiromancie. 

155.  a  leuen]  Halliwell:  Aleven  is  a  common  vulgarism  in  Shakespeare’s  time. 
It  is  also  archaic. 


ACT  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


77 


ning  thrice,  and  to  be  in  perill  of  my  life  with  the  edge  157 
of  a  featherbed,  here  are  fimple  fcapes  :  well,  if  Fortune 
be  a  woman,  fhe’s  a  good  wench  for  this  gere :  Father 
come,  lie  take  my  leaue  of  the  lew  in  the  twinkling.  160 

Exit  Clowne. 

BaJJ.  I  praie  thee  good  Leonardo  thinke  on  this, 

Thefe  things  being  bought  and  orderly  beftowed 
Returne  in  hafte,  for  I  doe  feaft  to  night 

My  beft  efteemd  acquaintance,  hie  thee  goe.  165 

Leon.  My  beft  endeuors  fhall  be  done  herein.  Exit.  Le. 

Enter  Gratiano. 

Gra.  Where’s  your  Maifter. 

Leon.  Yonder  fir  he  walkes. 

Gra.  Signior  Baffanio.  170 

Baf.  Gratiano. 

Gra.  I  haue  a  fute  to  you. 

Baff.  You  haue  obtain’d  it. 

Gra.  You  muft  not  denie  me,  I  muft  goe  with  you  to 
Belmont.  175 


160.  twinkling.  ]  twinkling  of  an  eye. 
Qj,  Pope  et  seq. 

163.  beflowed]  beflow'd  QI?  Cap.  et 
seq. 

164.  night]  night,  Qx. 

165.  bejl  ejleemd~\  best-esteemed Theob. 
ii. 

thee]  thee,  Q,Q3- 

goe]  go  Qt.  gon  F2.  gone  F3F4, 

Rowe. 

166.  Exit  Le.]  Exit.  Qt.  Exit  Leon¬ 


ardo.  Q2.  Exit  Leonato.  Ff,  Om.  Rowe. 
After  line  169,  Theob.  et  seq. 

167.  [Scene  III.  Pope,  Han.  Warb 

1 71.  Gratiano.]  Gratiano?  Qx.  Sig¬ 
nior  Gratiano  !  Han. 

172.  a  fute]  fute  Q2. 

1 74.  You]  Nay,  you  Han.  Cap.  Dyce 
iii,  Huds. 

174,  175.  with. ..Belmont]  Separate 
line,  Han.  Cap.  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 


158.  featherbed]  Warburton:  A  cant  phrase  to  signify  the  danger  of  marrying. 

159.  gere]  See  I,  i,  120. 

160.  twinkling]  Every  editor  from  the  days  of  Pope  has  followed  the  completer 
text  of  Qx. 

163.  bestowed]  Of  course,  on  board  the  ship. 

166.  Exit.  Le.]  This  Exit  of  Leonardo,  inserted  before  he  actually  leaves  the  scene, 
indicat  ss  that  the  copy  from  which  the  Folio  was  printed,  and,  in  fact,  the  copy  of  which 
the  Qq  were  transcripts,  had  been  used  as  a  stage-copy. — Ed. 

172.  a  sute]  Again  may  be  noted  the  accuracy  of  Qx. — Ed. 

173.  176.]  you  .  .  .  you  .  .  .  thee]  Abbott,  §  231 :  Mark  the  change  of  pronoun 
as  Bassanio  assumes  the  part  of  a  friendly  lecturer. 

174.  See  Hanmer’s  text  and  division  of  lines  in  Text.  Notes,  which  Dyce  adopts 
because  ‘  this  speech  was,  beyond  all  doubt,  originally  verse.’ 


78 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Baff.  Why  then  you  muft  :  but  heare  thee  Gratiano,  176 
Thou  art  to  wilde,  to  rude,  and  bold  of  voyce, 

Parts  that  become  thee  happily  enough, 

And  in  fuch  eyes  as  ours  appeare  not  faults; 

But  where  they  are  not  knowne,  why  there  they  fhow  1 80 

Something  too  liberall,  pray  thee  take  paine 

To  allay  with  fome  cold  drops  of  modeftie 

Thy  skipping  fpirit,  leaft  through  thy  wilde  behauiour 

I  be  mifconfterd  in  the  place  I  goe  to,  184 


176.  miijl :  but]  Ff.  mujl  but  Q2. 
muf,  but  Q3.  mujl.  But  Qt,  Johns,  et 
seq. 

thee]  me  Q3. 

177.  to. ..to]  Q2.  too. ..too  Qj  et  cet. 

1 79.  faults  ;]  faults  Q2. 

180.  they  are ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Rife. 
thou  art  Qq  et  cet. 


180.  knowne,  why]  knowne.  Why  Qf. 
knowne  ;  why  Q2. 

18 1,  liberall ,]  lib' rail :  Qt. 
pray  thee]  prethee  Q,. 

183.  leaf]  lef  Q,F4. 

184.  mifconferd]  mifconfred  Qq. 
mifconfer1  d  F4,  Hal.  Sing.  Sta.  Wh. 
Ktly.  misconstrued  Rowe  et  cet. 


176.  heare  thee]  Abbott,  §  212 :  Verbs  followed  by  thee  instead  of  thou,  have  been 
called  reflexive.  But,  though  *  haste  thee  ’  and  some  other  phrases  with  verbs  of  motion 
may  be  thus  explained,  and  verbs  were  often  thus  used  in  Early  English,  it  is  probable 
that  ‘  look  thee,'  ‘  hark  thee]  are  to  be  explained  by  euphonic  reasons.  Thee,  thus  used, 
follows  imperatives,  which,  being  themselves  emphatic,  require  an  unemphatic  pronoun. 
The  Elizabethans  reduced  thou  to  thee.  We  have  gone  further,  and  rejected  it  altogether. 

181.  liberall]  Johnson:  That  is,  mean,  gross,  coarse,  licentious.  [Are  not  these 
adjectives,  which  have  been  adopted  by  many  subsequent  editors,  too  strong  for  Bassa- 
nio’s  friendly  remonstrance  ?  Would  not  our  modern  *  free  and  easy  ’  something  better 
correspond  ?  Rolfe  gives  ‘  free,  reckless,’  which  are  certainly  better  than  ‘  licentious  ’ 
in  any  sense. — Ed.] 

181.  paine]  In  printing  a  modernized  text  of  this  play,  I  should  not  hesitate  to 
change  this  to  the  plural,  pains.  Although  Shakespeare  may  have  used  the  singular 
elsewhere  (which  is  doubtful),  the  plural  is  certainly  used  twice  subsequently  in  this 
play,  viz.  IV,  i,  io,  and  V,  i,  201.  And  no  one,  I  think,  can  thoughtfully  examine  the 
instances  given  in  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  233)  of  the  final  s  both  interpolated  and  omitted  in 
the  First  Folio,  without  becoming  convinced  that  an  editor  has  ample  discretionary 
power  in  making  a  change  like  this,  whereby  the  phrase  conforms  to  sense  or  usage. 
Numerous  as  are  the  instances  given  in  Walker’s  thirty  pages  and  more,  the  list  is  by 
no  means  complete.  In  a  note  on  Oth.  I,  i,  31,  two  additional  examples  were  given 
not  noticed  by  Walker,  in  that  play  alone.  See  *  multitudes,’  II,  ix,  35,  post. — Ed. 

182.  cold]  Steevens:  So  in  Ham.  Ill,  iv.  123:  ‘Upon  the  heat  and  flame  of  thy 
distemper  Sprinkle  cool  patience.’ 

182.  modestie]  Allen:  That  is,  moderation  (est  modtis  in  rebus). 

183.  spirit]  For  similar  contractions  into  monosyllables,  see  Walker,  Vers.  64,  or 
Abbott,  §  463,  or  Browne,  p.  12,  §  5. 

184.  misconsterd]  This  form,  for  the  modern  misconstrued,  is  common,  says  Dyce 
( Remarks,  p.  54),  in  our  early  writers.  See  also  the  note  on  conster  of  the  Qq  in  Oth , 
IV,  i,  1 18. 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


79 


And  loofe  my  hopes.  185 

Gra.  Signor  Baffanio ,  heare  me, 

If  I  doe  not  put  on  a  fober  habite, 

Talke  with  refpeft,  and  fvveare  but  now  and  than, 

Weare  prayer  bookes  in  my  pocket,  looke  demurely, 

Nay  more,  while  grace  is  faying  hood  mine  eyes  190 

Thus  with  my  hat,  and  figh  and  fay  Amen : 

Vfe  all  the  obferuance  of  ciuillitie 

Like  one  well  ftudied  in  a  fad  oftent 

To  pleafe  his  Grandam,  neuer  trufb  me  more. 

Baf.  Well,  we  fhall  fee  your  bearing.  195 

Gra.  Nay  but  I  barre  to  night,  you  fhall  not  gage  me 
By  what  we  doe  to  night. 

Baf.  No  that  were  pittie, 

I  would  intreate  you  rather  to  put  on 

Your  boldeft  fuite  of  mirth,  for  we  haue  friends  200 

185.  loofe]  Q2F2.  lofe  Qz  et  cet.  189.  pocket]  pockets  Rowe,  Pope, 

hopes']  hope  Q3>  Theob.  Han.  Johns. 

187.  If  I]  If  F \.  196.  barre]  bar  F^. 

188.  than]  Q,Q2. 


187.  habite]  Eccles:  That  is,  conduct,  behaviour. 

190.  is  saying]  Probably  in  or  a-  has  been  omitted.  See  Abbott,  §  372,  or  White 
(  Words  and  their  Uses,  chap,  xi,  ‘Is  being  done,’  p.  334).  Rolfe  cites  Marsh,  Led. 
on  English  Lang.,  p.  649. 

1 90.  hood]  Malone  :  It  should  be  remembered  that  in  Shakespeare’s  time  they 
wore  their  hats  during  the  time  of  dinner.  Staunton  :  The  practice  of  wearing 
the  hat  at  meals,  and  especially  at  ceremonial  feasts,  was  probably  derived  from  the 
age  of  chivalry.  In  the  present  day,  at  the  installation  banquet  of  the  Knights  of  the 
Garter,  all  the  Knights  Companions  wear  their  hats  and  plumes.  It  appears  to  have 
been  usual  formerly  for  all  persons  above  the  rank  of  attendants  to  keep  on  their  hats 
at  the  dinner -table.  Lilly,  in  his  Autobiography,  gives  an  edifying  account  of  his  woo¬ 
ing  of  his  widowed  mistress,  who  finally  signified  her  acceptance  of  his  suit  by  making 
him  sit  down  with  her  to  dinner  with  his  hat  on.  And  the  custom  may  be  inferred 
from  the  following:  ‘Roger  the  Canterburian,  that  cannot  Say  Grace  for  his  meat  with 
a  low-crowned  hat  before  his  face  :  or  the  character  of  a  prelatical  man  affecting  great 
heighths.  Newly  written  by  G.  T.  Lond.’  As  also  from  the  Recipe  for  Dressing  a 
Knuckle  of  Veal,  sent  by  Dr  Delany  to  Swift :  ‘  Then  skimming  the  fat  off  Say  Grace 
with  your  hat  off.’ 

192.  ciuillitie]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  civilization,  refinement. 

193.  sad  ostent]  Johnson:  Grave  appearance;  show  of  staid  and  serious  beha¬ 
viour.  Steevens  :  ‘  Ostent  ’  is  a  word  very  commonly  used  for  show  among  the  old 
dramatic  writers.  Boswell  :  See  post,  II,  viii,  47. 

200.  suite]  Eccles:  Probably  referring  to  the  ‘sober  habit’  of  line  187. 


8o 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii.  sc.  iii 


That  purpofe  merriment  :  but  far  you  well,  20 1 

I  haue  fome  bufineffe. 

Gra.  And  I  mull  to  Lorenfo  and  the  reft, 

But  we  will  vifite  you  at  fupper  time.  Exeunt. 


[Scene  III] 

Enter  IeJJica  and  the  Clowne. 

Ief.  I  am  forry  thou  wilt  leaue  my  Father  fo, 

Our  houfe  is  hell,  and  thou  a  merrie  diuell 
Did’ft  rob  it  of  fome  tafte  of  tedioufneffe ; 

But  far  thee  well,  there  is  a  ducat  for  thee,  5 

And  Lancelet ,  foone  at  fupper  fhalt  thou  fee 
Lorenzo ,  who  is  thy  new  Maifters  gueft, 

Giue  him  this  Letter,  doe  it  fecretly, 

And  fo  farwell  :  I  would  not  haue  my  Father 
See  me  talke  with  thee.  10 

Clo.  Adue,  teares  exhibit  my  tongue,  moft  beautifull 
Pagan,  moft  fweete  lew,  if  a  Chriftian  doe  not  play  the  12 


201.  far  you  well]  faryewell  Qx.  fare 
you  well  F2  et  seq. 

[Scene  IV.  Pope  + .  Scene  III.  Cap. 
et  seq. 

2.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

3.  merrie ]  Om.  F3F4. 

5.  far ]  Qa.  fare  Qt  et  cet. 

9.  farwell ]  farewell  F2. 


10.  talke ]  in  talke  Qq,  Cap.  Knt,  Col!. 
Hal.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  Cam.  Del.  Glo.  Cla. 
Rife. 

11.  Clo.]  Lance.  Q,.  Clowne.  Q2Q3. 
11, 13,  15.  Adue ]  F2.  AdewQz.  Adiew 

Q2Q3.  Adieu  F3F4  (line  15,  adieu  QJ. 

12.  doe ]  Qq,  Steev.  Mai.  Coll,  i,  Verp. 
Hal.  Clarke,  did  Ff  et  cet. 


3.  hell]  Allen:  A  ‘hell’  to  Jessica  in  her  state  of  ‘strife’  (line  21)  between  her 
love  and  her  religion,  between  duty  to  her  father  and  passion  for  her  lover.  She  is 
now  in  a  morbid  state.  Her  gift  of  a  ducat  to  Launcelot  may  have  been  a  rebellion 
against  her  father’s  maxims  of  thrift,  due  to  this  state,  or  she  may  have  been  so  con¬ 
stituted  as  to  have  an  instinctive  disposition  to  lavishness.  The  reaction,  at  any  rate, 
was  a  most  violent  one. 

6.  soone]  As  this  supper  was  to  be  ready  at  farthest  at  five  of  the  clock,  it  is  not 
impossible  that  ‘  soon  ’  may  be  here  used  in  its  ordinary  sense ;  but  I  think  it  mere 
likely  that  its  meaning  is  the  same  as  in  Oth.  Ill,  iv,  229  and  231 :  at  night-fall,  ‘ad 
primam  vesperam.’ — Ed. 

1 1 .  exhibit]  Eccles  :  My  tears  express  what  my  tongue  should,  if  sorrow  would  per¬ 
mit  it.  Halliwell  suggests  that  the  word  is  one  of  Launcelot’s  blunders  for  prohibit. 
Clarendon  remarks  that  Launcelot  means  inhibit.  [I  prefer  Eccles’s  interpretation. 
—Ed.] 

12, 13.  doe  .  .  .  get]  The  Text.  Notes  show  how  general  has  been  the  preference  for 


act  ii,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 
knaue  and  get  thee,  I  am  much  deceiued  ;  but  adue,  thefe 


Si 


13 


the  change  from  *  do  ’  to  did,  first  started  by  Fa.  Of  course,  if  we  accept  did,  we  must 
suppose  that  ‘get’  is  used  for  beget.  Malone  upholds  F,,  and  maintains  that  Launcelot 
is  not  talking  about  Jessica’s  father,  but  about  her  future  husband.  ‘  I  am  aware,’  he 
adds,  ‘  that  in  a  subsequent  scene  he  says  to  Jessica :  “  Marry,  you  may  partly  hope 
your  father  got  you  not but  he  is  now  on  another  subject.  [In  his  edition  of  1790 
Malone  suggests  that  it  is  the  love-letter  to  Lorenzo  which  starts  the  current  of  Laun- 
celot’s  thoughts.]  Moreover,  a  Christian  may  be  said  to  play  the  knave  if  he  should 
steal  the  Jew’s  daughter,  as  Lorenzo  himself  expresses  it  in  Scene  vi :  “  When  you  shall 
please  to  play  the  thieves  for  wives,”  &c.’  Steevens  suspects  that  the  ‘  waggish  Launce¬ 
lot  designed  this  for  a  broken  sentence,’  and  that  after  ‘  get  thee — ’  there  is  a  subaudi¬ 
tion  of  *  into  trouble,’  or  the  like.  The  subaudition  Cowden-Clarke  supplies  is :  *  get 
thee  for  a  wife.’  Verplanck  asserts  that  it  is  the  poor  joke  conveyed  by  casting  a  slur  on 
Jessica’s  birth  which  has  made  the  reading  of  Fa  popular.  On  the  other  hand,  Monck 
Mason  has  ‘  no  doubt  but  that  did  is  the  true  reading.  Launcelot  is  not  foretelling  the 
fate  of  Jessica,  but  judging  from  her  lovely  disposition  that  she  must  have  been  begot¬ 
ten  by  a  Christian,  not  by  such  a  brute  as  Shylock ;  a  Christian  might  marry  her  with¬ 
out  playing  the  knave,  though  he  could  not  beget  her.’  Halliwell  begins  his  note  by 
saying  that  although  did  has  been  generally  adopted,  he  thinks  it  erroneous,  and  then 
argues  so  earnestly  for  interpreting  *  do  ’  in  the  sense  of  did,  just  as  in  King  John  we 
have  *  waft  ’  for  wafted,  ‘  heat  ’  for  heated,  &c.,  that  at  the  close  of  his  note  he  says  that 
‘unless  “do”  is  a  grammatical  usage  for  did,  the  latter  word  should  be  substituted;’ 
and  that,  on  the  whole,  it  is  most  probable  that  Launcelot  means  to  imply  that  Jessica 
is  too  beautiful  and  good  to  be  the  daughter  of  Shylock,  and  to  this  Jessica  seems  to 
allude  in  the  next  speech  when  she  laments  the  sin  of  ‘  being  ashamed  to  be  my  father’s 
child.’  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  54)  thinks  Launcelot  plainly  means  that  he  cannot  believe 
Jessica  to  be  Shylock’s  daughter;  and  White  adds, ‘beside  this  “get  thee”  had  a  well- 
settled  meaning  in  Shakespeare’s  day.’  [I  also  think  that  did  here  conveys  Launcelot’t 
meaning.  I  very  much  doubt  if  those  who  saw  no  harm  in  Jessica’s  theft  of  her  father’s 
money,  would  have  seen  any  knavery  in  stealing  the  girl  herself.  Moreover,  the  cha¬ 
racter  of  Jessica  is  so  complex,  not  to  say  apparently  inconsistent,  that  at  times  I  air 
almost  tempted  to  think  that  in  her  we  have  an  outcropping  of  the  old  original  play, 
wherein  it  may  perhaps  have  been  that  she  was  not  the  Jew’s  own  daughter.  Can  we 
point  to  a  single  trait  in  her  that  stamps  her  not  only  as  a  daughter  of  Shylock,  bu( 
even  as  a  Jewess  ?  She  is  lavish  of  money  to  Gobbo,  and  profusely  lavish  of  it  on  her 
own  pleasures ;  she  has  fallen  in  love  with  a  gay  Christian,  and  longs  to  change  hei 
religion ;  she  shows  no  respect  for  her  dead  mother,  and  not  an  atom  of  regard  for  her 
living  father;  her  very  complexion  is  not  oriental,  but  fair.  In  the  next  scene  her 
hand  is  spoken  of  as  whiter  than  paper,  and  the  contrast  between  Shylock  and  her  is 
declared  by  Salarino  to  be  greater  than  between  jet  and  ivory.  Lastly,  is  the  Jessica 
out-nighting  Lorenzo  in  moonlit  Belmont  the  same  Jessica  who  can  find  amusement  in 
the  merriment  of  a  Gobbo  ?  In  thus  supposing  Jessica  to  be  no  child  of  Shylock,  I 
confess  the  wish  to  be,  for  Shylock’s  sake,  the  father  to  the  thought.  Of  course  it  is 
’evident,  as  Macdonald  and  others  have  pointed  out,  that  for  dramatic  purposes  the  pro- 
foundest  depths  of  Shylock’s  nature  must  be  stirred  against  Anthonio  and  the  Chris¬ 
tians  ;  and  this  is  done  when  he  believes  that  they  have  induced  his  ‘  own  flesh  and 
blood  to  rebel  ’  against  him. — Ed.] 

6 


82 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  iii. 


foolifh  drops  doe  fomewhat  drowne  my  manly  fpirit : 
adue.  Exit. 

Ief.  Farewell  good  Lancelet. 

Alacke,  what  hainous  finne  is  it  in  me 
To  be  afhamed  to  be  my  Fathers  childe, 

But  though  I  am  a  daughter  to  his  blood, 

I  am  not  to  his  manners  :  0  Lorenzo , 

If  thou  keepe  promife  I  fhall  end  this  ftrife, 

Become  a  Chriftian,  and  thy  louing  wife.  Exit. 


15 


20 


14 .  fomewhat]  fomething  Qq,  Cap. 
Sta.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

16.  Farewell ]  Far  ell  Var.  ’21  (mis¬ 
print). 

17.  hainous\  heynous  QZQ2. 


18.  childe, child?  Rowe-f.  child l 
Steev.  et  seq. 

20.  0]  3  Q2Q3. 

21.  in  YfQ* *- 

22.  Exit.]  Om.  Ff. 


17.  what]  Rolfe  suggests  that  ‘possibly  this  is  one  of  the  instances  in  which 
“  what  ”  is  used  for  what  a,’  and  refers  to  Abbott,  §  86.  [But  by  the  omission  of  a, 

*  sin  ’  becomes  a  collective  noun,  and  suggests  many  an  occasion  when  Jessica  has  been 
ashamed  to  be  her  father’s  child. — Ed.] 

20.  Lorenzo]  Macdonald  ( The  Imagination ,  p.  165):  Into  the  original  story 
upon  which  this  play  is  founded,  Shakespeare  has,  among  other  variations,  introduced 
the  story  of  Jessica  and  Lorenzo ,  apparently  altogether  of  his  own  invention.  [See 
Appendix,  ‘Source  of  the  Plot.’]  What  was  his  object  in  doing  so?  Surely,  there 
were  characters  and  interests  enough  already!  It  seems  to  me  that  Shakespeare 
doubted  whether  the  Jew  would  have  actually  proceeded  to  carry  out  his  fell  design 
against  Antonio,  upon  the  original  ground  of  his  hatred,  without  the  further  incitement 
to  revenge  afforded  by  another  passion,  second  only  to  his  love  of  gold — his  affection 
for  his  daughter ;  for  in  the  Jew,  having  reference  to  his  own  property,  it  had  risen  to 
a  passion.  Shakespeare  therefore  invents  her  that  he  may  send  a  dog  of  a  Christian 
to  steal  her,  and,  yet  worse,  to  tempt  her  to  steal  her  father’s  stones  and  ducats. 

21.  strife]  Eccles  :  This  inward  conflict  of  opposite  affections. 


act  ii,  sc.  iv.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


83 


[Scene  IK] 

Enter  Gratiano ,  Lorenzo ,  Slarino ,  and  Salanio . 

Lor.  Nay,  we  will  flinke  away  in  fupper  time, 

Difguife  vs  at  my  lodging,  and  returne  all  in  an  houre. 

Gra.  We  haue  not  made  good  preparation. 

Sal.  We  haue  not  fpoke  vs  yet  of  Torch-bearers.  5 

[Scene  V.  Pope  +  .  Scene  IV.  Cap.  1.  Salanio.]  Solania.  Ff.  Solanio  and 

et  seq.  Salerino.  Cap. 

Enter. .. Slarino]  Ft.  5.  vs  yet]  as  yet  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

Johns. 


2.  Th.  Elze  (Sk.  Jahrb.  xiv,  p.  167):  Of  the  public  entertainments  and  festivities  of 
the  Venetians,  of  their  political  and  popular  observances,  of  their  theatres,  of  their  re¬ 
ligious  music,  of  their  hunting  and  their  games,  Shakespeare  makes  no  mention,  but 
only  of  a  single  amusement  which  was  peculiarly  Venetian,  and  more  favoured  in  the 
city  of  lagoons  than  anywhere  else.  To  him  who  is  unacquainted  with  the  old  customs 
of  the  Venetians,  it  must  seem  to  be  a  very  extraordinary,  nay  almost  fantastic,  inven¬ 
tion  of  the  Poet  to  represent  Lorenzo  as  slinking  away  with  his  friends  from  a  supper 
whereto  they  had  been  invited  by  Bassanio,  to  go  to  a  masquerade,  when  it  was  not 
even  carnival  time.  Such  an  idea  could  be  conceived  of  in  no  other  country,  not  even 
in  any  other  state  of  Italy,  except  in  Venice,  although  the  custom  of  wearing  masks 
was  at  that  time  very  common ;  but  here  in  Venice  it  was  practised  universally,  and  at 
all  seasons  of  the  year.  It  was  thus  that  the  Doge,  who  appeared  in  public  only  on 
State  occasions,  visited  the  Opera,  attended  by  only  a  single  servant ;  he  was  then  in¬ 
cognito.  The  Officers  of  State  and  the  Magnificoes  appeared  in  masks,  in  the  Recep¬ 
tion  Hall  of  the  Republic,  on  the  evenings  when  new  Ambassadors  were  received. 
Thus,  the  dignitaries  of  the  Church  and  State  wore  at  least  half-masks,  whereby  all 
formal  ceremonials  were  avoided,  and  a  freer,  unforced  intercourse  took  place  instead. 
Thus,  a  Venetian  lady  had  her  mask  at  hand,  just  like  her  fan  and  handkerchief,  as 
Shakespeare  has  intimated  in  Othello  (IV,  ii).  And  thus,  then,  among  the  gay  and 
livelier  young  people,  a  play  with  masks  was  not  unusual.  That  torch-bearers  were 
also  needed  arose  from  the  fact  that  the  streets  were  a  tangle  and  the  street-lighting 
deficient. 

2.  in]  Abbott,  §  161 :  Here  used  for  during  or  at.  See  also  the  many  repetitions 
of  ‘in,’  with  this  sense,  in  V,  i,  1,  &c. 

5.  spoke  vs]  Capell:  This  phrase  may  be — bespoke  us;  but  being  oddly  fol¬ 
low’d  by  ‘  of,’  part  of  it  may  have  been  a  printer’s  mistake  for  as.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii, 
53) :  Until  ‘spoke  us’  can  be  shown  to  be  English,  I  would  read,  with  Pope,  ‘spoke 
as .’  Abbott,  §  220:  ‘Us’  seems  equivalent  to  for  us.  That  is,  ‘spoken  for  ourselves 
about  torch-bearers.’  [Which  does  not  seem  to  me  much  more  intelligible  than  the 
original  phrase.  When,  in  the  preceding  Scene,  for  the  sake  of  a  clown’s  joke  we 
were  all  so  ready  to  change  ‘  do  ’  into  did ,  I  cannot  see  why  we  should  be  in  anywise 
reluctant  here  to  change  ‘  us  ’  into  as,  which  clears  away  all  difficulty  and  gives  us 
English. — Ed.] 

5.  Torch-bearers]  See  Rom.  Jul.  I,  iv,  11, 


84 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  II,  sc.  iv. 


Sol.  ’Tis  vile  vnleffe  it  may  be  quaintly  ordered,  6 

And  better  in  my  minde  not  vndertooke. 

Lor.  ’Tis  now  but  foure  of  clock,  we  haue  two  houres 
To  furnifh  vs  ;  friend  Lancelet  what’s  the  newes. 

Enter  Laucelet  with  a  Lettor.  10 

Lan.  And  it  fhall  pleafe  you  to  breake  vp  this,  fhall  it 
feeme  to  fignifie. 

Lor.  I  know  the  hand,  in  faith  ’tis  a  faire  hand 
And  whiter  then  the  paper  it  writ  on, 

I  the  faire  hand  that  writ.  15 

Gra.  Loue  newes  in  faith. 

Lan.  By  your  leaue  fir. 

Lor.  Whither  goeft  thou  ? 

Lan.  Marry  fir  to  bid  my  old  Mafter  the  lew  to  fup 
to  night  with  my  new  Mafter  the  Chriftian.  20 

Lor.  Hold  here,  take  this,  tell  gentle  IeJJica 


6.  Sol.]  Ff.  Solanio.  Qa.  Salanio. 
Q,.  Salan.  Q3< 

8.  of  clock ]  Q2F,Q3,  Hal.  a  clocke 
Q,F3F4,  Rowe,  a-clock  Pope  +  ,  Steev. 
o'clock  Cap. 

10.  Enter...]  After  line  8,  Qx. 
with  a  letter.]  Om.  Qq. 

11.  Audit fhall]Q3 Ff Q3, Rowe, Pope. 


If  it  Qx.  An  it  shall  Theob.  et  cet. 

II,  12.  fhall  it  feeme]  it  fhall  fame 
QqFf  et  seq. 

14.  whiter]  whither  Fa. 
on,]  on  Q3. 

15.  I]  Ff.  Is  Qq  et  cet. 

16.  Loue  newes ]  Loue  newes ,  Qx. 
Loue,  newes  Q3Q3-  Love-news  Ff  et  cet. 


6.  quaintly]  Dyce  :  Ingeniously,  cleverly,  artfully. 

7.  vndertooke]  For  other  ‘curtailed  forms  of  past  participles  common  in  Early 
English,’  see  Abbott,  §  343. 

11.  breake  vp]  Steevens  :  A  term  in  carving.  So  in  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  IV,  i,  56, 
‘  you  can  carve  Break  up  this  capon.’  [It  would  be  rash  to  assert  that  there  is  no  ref¬ 
erence  here,  in  Launcelot’s  speech,  to  carving,  yet  the  mere  use  of  the  phrase  ‘break  up’ 
is  insufficient  to  sustain  the  assertion.  If  the  gentle  and  elegant  speech  of  Dame  Juliana 
Berners  still  obtained  in  Elizabethan  days,  a  ‘  dere  was  broken,  a  gose  reryd,  a  chicken 
frusshed,'  &c.,  but  ‘break  up’  is  common  enough  in  passages  where  it  cannot  refer  to 
carving,  and  where  it  does  refer  to  opening  a  sealed  letter.  Surely  there  is  no  refer¬ 
ence  to  carving  by  Horatio  when  he  says,  ‘  Break  we  our  watch  up.’  It  is  equally  sure 
that  Leontes  could  have  had  no  such  thought  in  that  solemn  moment  when  the  oracle 
was  received  from  Delphos  and  he  commands :  ‘  Break  up  the  seals,  and  read.’ — Ed.] 

14.  paper  it  writ]  Hanmer  added  ‘paper  that  it  writ,’  an  emendation  which  I  am 
inclined  to  think  is  certissima,  when  it  is  considered  how  easy  it  would  have  been  for 
the  compositor  to  omit  the  that,  if  in  the  MS  it  were  spelled  with  the  Anglosaxon  y, 
and  followed  as  it  is  by  another  word  almost  exactly  like  it.  Dyce  adopted  it  in  his 
text  in  his  Third  Edition,  saying  that,  ‘  without  this  addition,  which  is  Hanmer’s,  the 
accent  (as  Mr  W.  N.  Lettsom  observes)  would  be  placed  wrong  in  the  line.’  Hudson 
ilso  adopted  it. — Ed. 


ACT  ii,  sc.  iv.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


85 


I  will  not  faile  her,  fpeake  it  priuately  :  22 

Go  Gentlemen,  will  you  prepare  you  for  this  Maske  to 
night, 

I  am  prouided  of  a  Torch-bearer.  Exit.  Clowne.  25 

Sal.  I  marry,  ile  be  gone  about  it  ftrait. 

Sol.  And  fo  will  I. 

Lor.  Meete  me  and  Gratiano  at  Gratianos  lodging 
Some  houre  hence. 

Sal.  ’Tis  good  we  do  fo.  Exit.  30 

Gra.  Was  not  that  Letter  from  faire  IeJJica  ? 

Lor.  I  muft  needes  tell  thee  all,  the  hath  diredted 
How  I  fhall  take  her  from  her  Fathers  houfe, 

What  gold  and  iewels  fhe  is  furnifht  with, 

What  Pages  fuite  fhe  hath  in  readineffe :  35 

If  ere  the  lew  her  Father  come  to  heauen, 

It  will  be  for  his  gentle  daughters  fake ; 

And  neuer  dare  misfortune  croffe  her  foote,  38 


23.  Go]  Closing  line  22,  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Knt,  Sing.  Hal.  Dyce  i,  Ktly,  Del. 
Clarke. 

Gentlemen]  Separate  line,  Cap. 
Steev.  Mai.  Knt,  Sing.  Hal.  Dyce  i,  Ktly, 
Del.  Clarke. 

Go  Gentlemen]  QqFf,  Pope.  Go , 
Gentlemen,  Rowe,  Han.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla. 
Wh.  ii.  Go. —  Gentlemen,  Theob.  Warb. 


Johns.  Coll.  Sta.  Dyce  iii,  Rife,  Huds 
As  a  separate  line,  Coll.  Wh.  Cam.  Glo. 
Cla.  Dyce  iii,  Rife,  Huds. 

23.  prepare  you]  prepare  Qt,  Pope  +  . 
this]  th'  Han. 

25.  Exit...]  After  line  22,  or  after  Go 
line  23,  Cap.  et  seq. 

27.  Sol.]  Q2  Ff.  Salan.  Q,Q3. 

30.  Exit.]  Exeunt.  Cap. 


23.  Go  Gentlemen]  The  Textual  Notes  will  show  that  here,  as  in  many  another 
place,  the  correct  arrangement  of  the  lines  is  due  to  Capell. — Ed. 

25.  of  a]  Abbott,  §171:  ‘  Of’  is,  hence,  used  not  merely  of  the  agent,  but  also  of 
the  instrument.  This  is  most  common  with  verbs  of  construction,  and  of  filling;  be¬ 
cause  in  construction  and  filling  the  result  is  not  merely  effected  with  the  instrument, 
but  proceeds  out  of  it.  We  still  retain  of  with  verbs  of  construction  and  adjectives  of 
fulness ;  but  the  Elizabethans  retained  of  with  verbs  of  fulness  also,  as  in  this  present 
passage ;  see  also  ‘  You  are  not  satisfied  Of  these  events,’  V,  i,  324 ;  ‘  Supplied  of  kernes 
and  gallowglasses,’  Macb.  I,  ii,  13. 

29.  Some  houre]  Abbott,  §  21 :  *  Some  ’  being  frequently  used  with  numeral  adjec¬ 
tives  qualifying  nouns  of  time,  as  ‘  some  sixteen  months,’  Two  Gent.  IV,  i,  21,  is  also 
found,  by  association,  with  a  singular  noun  of  time.  As  here ;  see  also  1  some  month 
or  two,’  III,  ii,  10. 

>  32.  needes]  For  other  ‘  adverbs  ending  in  s,  formed  from  the  possessive  inflection 

of  Nouns,’  see  Abbott,  §  25. 

38.  dare]  Rolfe:  Either  the  ‘ subjunctive  used  imperatively’  (see  Abbott,  §  364), 
or  the  Third  Person  of  the  Subjunctive.  [It  might  also  be  the  future  continuing  the 
con  truction  of  the  preceding  line :  ‘  And  ne’er  [will]  dare  Misfortune,’  &c. — Ed.] 


86 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  II,  sc.  iv 


Vnleffe  fhe  doe  it  vnder  this  excufe, 

That  fhe  is  iffue  to  a  faithleffe  lew : 

Come  goe  with  me,  p  ervfe  this  as  thou  goeft, 
Faire  IeJJica  fhall  be  my  Torch-bearer. 


Exit. 


40 


40.  faithlesse]  Clarendon:  Unbelieving.  See  Matt,  xvii,  17;  Mark ,  ix,  19. 

42.  shall]  Abbott,  §315  :  Shall,  meaning  to  owe ,  is  connected  with  ought,  must, 
it  is  destined.  Thus,  here,  ‘  Fair  Jessica  is  to  be  my  torchbearer.’  Hence,  shall  was 
used  by  the  Elizabethans  with  all  three  persons  to  denote  inevitable  futurity  without 
reference  to  ‘  will  ’  (desire).  Eccles  :  It  is  not  rendered  very  apparent  whether  it  was 
designed  that  this  frolic  of  a  masking  party  should  continue  no  longer  than  while  they 
were  absent  from  the  company,  and  that  they  should  return  to  it  in  their  proper  habits, 
or  whether  they  were  to  enter  in  masquerade,  as  a  surprise  to  the  rest  of  Bassanio’s 
guests.  The  circumstance  of  Jessica’s  being  expected  to  accompany  them  in  her  flight 
must  incline  us  to  imagine  the  latter  to  have  been  the  case ;  for,  that  it  was  not  pro¬ 
posed  that  Lorenzo  and  she  should  separate  themselves  from  the  others,  is  sufficiently 
evident  from  what  is  said  of  her  being  ‘  a  torch-bearer,’  and  from  their  being  ‘  to  return 
all  in  an  hour.’  The  manner  of  their  intended  disguise  was,  doubtless,  happily  calcu¬ 
lated  to  favour  the  lady’s  escape,  and,  possibly,  they  had  this  end  in  view  when  the 
masking  scheme  was  first  concerted,  though  that  particular  be  not  expressly  declared. 
From  Gratiano’s  lodging,  the  scene  of  their  rendezvous,  all  matters  being  previously 
settled,  we  may  conclude  they  were  to  proceed  to  supper  with  Bassanio. 


act  ii,  sc.  v.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


87 


f Scene  V.\ 

Enter  lew ,  and  his  man  that  was  the  Clowne. 


lew.  Well,  thou  fhall  fee,  thy  eyes  fhall  be  thy  iudge, 

The  difference  of  old  Shylocke  and  Baffanio ; 

What  IeJJica ,  thou  fhalt  not  gurmandize 

As  thou  haft  done  with  me  :  what  IeJJica  ?  5 

And  fleepe,  and  fnore,  and  rend  apparrell  out. 

Why  IeJJica  I  fay. 

Clo.  Why  IeJJica. 

Shy.  Who  bids  thee  call  ?  I  do  not  bid  thee  call. 

Clo.  Your  worfhip  was  wont  to  tell  me  10 

I  could  doe  nothing  without  bidding. 

Enter  IeJJica. 

Ief.  Call  you  ?  what  is  your  will  ?  13 


[Scene  VI.  Pope  +  .  Scene  V.  Cap.  et 
seq. 

1.  Enter...]  Enter  the  lew  and  Lance- 
let.  Qt. 

2.  Jkall fee]  F2.  fialt  fee  Qx  et  cet. 

4.  Ieffica,]  Qq  Ff.  Jessica  !  Rowe. 

gurmandize]  Q2Ff.  gourmandize  Q  . 


5.  Ieflica?]  Qx.  Ieffica,  Q2Q?. 

6.  apparrell]  Q,.  apparaile  Q2. 

8.  Clo.]  Clowne.  Qq. 

9.  do]  did  Rowe  + . 

10.  11.  As  prose,  Qx,  Pope  et  seq. 

11.  I]  that  I  Qt,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Coll.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 


1 .  Eccles  :  Shylock  appears  just  before  to  have  received  a  summons  to  the  enter¬ 
tainment  provided  for  the  friends  of  Bassanio  before  the  latter  starts  for  Belmont.  After 
Shylock’s  recent  kindness  to  him  and  to  Anthonio,  it  was  naturally  imagined  a  proper 
mark  of  gratitude  to  invite  the  Jew  as  one  of  the  guests.  The  invitation,  according  to 
modern  ideas,  appears  to  have  been  sent  rather  late  to  one  who  was  in  no  special  de¬ 
gree  his  friend.  Lorenzo,  a  little  while  before,  had  taken  notice :  *  ’Tis  now  but  four 
o’clock ;  we  have  two  hours  To  furnish  us.’  Possibly  this  message  might  have  been 
designed  only  to  remind  him  of  a  former  engagement,  and  not  to  invite  him  for  the 
first  time.  [The  difficulty  which  Eccles  encounters  here  arises  from  Shakespeare’s 
use  of  double  time.  See  Appendix,  ‘Duration  of  the  Action.’ — Ed.] 

2.  thy  iudge]  Keightley  (p.  149)  :  It  might  be  better  to  read  ‘  the  judge.’  Even 
at  the  present  day  printers  confound  these  words. 

4.  What]  Clarendon  :  ‘  What,’  ‘  why,’  and  *  when  ’  were  all  used  as  exclamations 
of  impatience. 

4.  gurmandize]  Allen:  Launcelot  had  said  (II,  ii,  101)  that  he  was  ‘famished,’ 
&c. ;  but  this  must  have  been  merely  for  effect,  speaking  to  his  father ;  for  in  his  solil¬ 
oquy  he  makes  no  such  complaint.  On  the  other  hand,  Shylock  must  not  be  taken  too 
literally ;  to  him,  with  his  thrifty  habits,  any  self-indulgence  would  appear  to  be  ex¬ 
cess  ;  and  it  is  not  likely  that,  in  a  household  governed  by  so  strict  and  systematic  a 
master,  anything  like  what  he  complains  of  would  be  allowed. 


88 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  v. 


Shy.  I  am  bid  forth  to  fupper  IeJJica , 

There  are  my  Keyes  :  but  wherefore  fhould  I  go  ?  15 

I  am  not  bid  for  loue,  they  flatttr  me, 

But  yet  lie  goe  in  hate,  to  feede  vpon 
The  prodigall  Chriftian.  IeJJica  my  girle, 

Looke  to  my  houfe,  I  am  right  loath  to  goe, 

There  is  fome  ill  a  bruing  towards  my  reft,  20 

For  I  did  dreame  of  money  bags  to  night. 

Clo.  I  befeech  you  fir  goe,  my  yong  Mafter 
Doth  expedt  your  reproach. 

Shy.  So  doe  I  his. 

Clo.  And  they  haue  confpired  together,  I  will  not  fay  25 
you  fhall  fee  a  Maske,  but  if  you  doe,  then  it  was  not  for 
nothing  that  my  nofe  fell  a  bleeding  on  blacke  monday  27 

22.  l...goe~\  One  line,  Qf. 


18.  Christian]  Steevens:  Shylock  forgets  his  resolution.  In  a  former  scene 
he  declares  he  will  neither  eat,  drink,  nor  pray  with  Christians.  Of  this  circum¬ 
stance  the  poet  was  well  aware,  and  meant  only  to  heighten  the  malignity  of  the 
character,  by  making  him  depart  from  his  most  settled  resolve,  for  the  prosecution  of 
his  revenge. 

18.  Iessica  my  girle]  Booth:  These  are  the  only  words  that  Shylock  speaks 
which  in  the  least  degree  approach  gentleness,  and  they  mean  nothing. 

20.  ill]  Clarendon  :  *  Some  say  that  to  dreame  of  money,  and  all  kinde  of  coyne 
is  ill.’ — Artemidorus,  The  Judgement,  or  Exposition  of  Dreames,  p.  99,  ed.  1606. 
[Probably  on  the  principle  that  dreams  go  by  contraries. — Ed.] 

20.  a  bruing]  For  this  a,  which  still  exists  in  alive,  afoot,  asleep,  see  Abbott, 
§  140;  see  also  §  24,  or  ‘  aweary,’  I,  ii,  2. 

21.  to  night]  Abbott,  §190:  ‘To’  was  used  without  any  notion  of  ‘motion  to¬ 
ward  the  future’  in  to-night  ( last  night).  See  also  2  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii,  31.  So  in 
Early  English,  ‘ to  year ’  for  this  year ;  ‘ to  summer,’  & c.  Perhaps  the  provincial  ‘I 
will  come  the  night,  the  morn,’  &c.,  is  a  corruption  of  this  ‘to.’  It  is,  indeed,  sug¬ 
gested  by  Mr  Morris  that  to  is  a  corruption  of  the  demonstrative.  [And  if  so,  it  well 
explains,  it  seems  to  me,  the  sense,  either  past  or  future,  which  the  provincial  usage 
can  convey. — Ed.] 

24.  Booth  :  Significantly.  Launcelot’s  mistake  should  not  be  too  marked,  as  is  fre¬ 
quently  done ;  it  seems  too  much  like  helping  Shylock  to  his  little  joke. 

25-  And]  The  Globe  and  Clarendon  read  an,  but  the  editors  suggest  that  this 
spelling,  making  ‘  and  ’  equivalent  to  if,  is  of  doubtful  propriety. 

27.  a  bleeding]  Halliwell  :  An  unexpected  bleeding  of  the  nose  was  formerly 
considered  an  omen  that  either  something  wonderful  would  happen,  or  that  some  mis¬ 
chance  would  ensue.  See  examples  quoted  by  Brand.  When  Charles  II  was  con¬ 
cealed  at  Boscobel  House  on  the  Sunday,  ‘  his  majesty,  coming  down  into  the  parlour, 
his  nose  fell  a  bleeding,  which  put  his  poor  faithful  servants  in  a  fright,’  till  he  reas¬ 
sured  them  by  saying  it  was  a  circumstance  of  frequent  occurrence. 


act  ii,  sc.  v.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  89 

laft,  at  fix  a  clocke  ith  morning,  falling  out  that  yeere  on  28 
afhwenfday  was  foure  yeere  in  th’afternoone. 

Shy.  What  are  their  maskes  ?  heare  you  me  IeJJica ,  30 

Lock  vp  my  doores,  and  when  you  heare  the  drum 
And  the  vile  fquealing  of  the  wry-neckt  Fife, 

Clamber  not  you  vp  to  the  cafements  then, 

Nor  thruft  your  head  into  the  publique  flreete 

To  gaze  on  Chriftian  fooles  with  varnifht  faces :  35 


28.  it  hi]  in  the  Qx.  ith'  F3.  i'th ’  F4> 

29.  afhwenfday\  AJhwednefday  F3  et 
seq. 

th'  afternoone~\  thafternoone  Q2.  the 
afternoon  F4. 

30.  What  are  their\  Ff,  Rowe.  What 
are  there  Q2Q3-  What,  are  there  Qx,  Cap. 
Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Huds.  Wh.  ii.  What 


are  these  Pope,  Han.  What!  are  there 
Theob.  et  cet. 

30.  heare  you ]  Heare  Qx. 

32.  J quealing\ J queaking  Qx,  Pope  +  , 
Steev.  Mai.  Coll,  i,  ii,  Hal.  Dyce  i,  Clarke, 
Del. 

Fife. ]  Fiffe  Q2Q3- 


27.  blacke  monday]  Peck  ( Memoirs  of  Milton,  p.  229) :  Black  Monday  is  a 
movable  day.  It  is  Easter  Monday ;  and  was  so  called  on  this  occasion :  ‘  In  the  34 
Edw.  Ill  (1360.)  the  14.  of  April,  &  the  morrow  after  Easter-day,  K.  Edwarde  with 
his  hoast  lay  before  the  cittie  of  Paris ;  which  day  was  full  darke  of  mist  &  haile,  & 
so  bitter  cold,  that  many  men  died  on  their  horses  backs  with  the  cold.  Wherefore 
unto  this  day  it  hath  beene  called  the  Blacke  monday .’ — Stow,  p.  264  b. 

32.  wry-neckt  Fife]  Malone  :  ‘  Prim  a.  nocte  domum  claude ;  neque  in  vias  Sub 
cantu  querulse  despice  tibiae.’ — Horace,  III,  Od.  vii.  Monck  Mason  :  It  appears  from 
hence  that  the  fifes  in  Shakespeare’s  time  were  formed  differently  from  those  now  in 
use,  which  are  straight,  not  wry-necked.  Boswell  :  The  *  fife  ’  does  not  mean  the 
instrument,  but  the  person  who  played  on  it.  So  in  Barnaby  Rich’s  Aphorismes  at  the 
end  of  his  Irish  Hubbub,  1616:  ‘A  fife  is  a  wry-neckt  musician,  for  he  always  looks 
away  from  his  instrument.’  Pye  (p.  72) :  During  Queen  Anne’s  wars  an  old  country 
gentleman,  in  the  Spectator,  expresses  surprise  at  his  son,  in  a  letter  from  the  army, 
mentioning  a  saucy  trumpet  and  a  drum  that  carried  messages.  Knight:  Yet  we  are 
inclined  to  think  that  Shakespeare  intended  the  instrument.  We  are  of  this  opinion 
principally  from  the  circumstance  that  the  passage  is  an  imitation  of  the  lines  in  Hor¬ 
ace,  cited  by  Malone,  in  which  the  instrument  is  decidedly  meant.  But,  independent 
of  the  internal  evidence  derived  from  the  imitation,  the  form  of  the  old  English  flute, — ■ 
the  fife  being  a  small  flute, — -justifies,  we  think,  the  epithet  ‘  wry-neclc’d.’  This  flute 
was  called  the  flute  d  bee,  the  upper  part  or  mouth-piece  resembling  the  beak  of  a  bird. 
And  this  form  was  as  old  as  the  Pan  of  antiquity.  The  terminal  figure  of  Pan,  in  the 
Townley  Gallery,  exhibits  it.  Halliwell  gives  a  wood-cut  of  a  ‘  wry-necked  fife,’ 
copied  by  ‘  Mr  Fairholt  from  a  curious  sculpture  at  Rheims  upon  a  building  of  the  thir¬ 
teenth  century  known  as  La  Maison  des  Musiciens,  in  which  there  is  a  representation 
of  a  musician  with  a  tabor  hung  on  his  neck  who  is  playing  on  a  fife  either  end  of 
which  is  angulated.’  Booth  :  My  father  illustrated  this  by  turning  his  head  as  it  is 
held  when  one  plays  upon  the  fife. 

35.  varnisht  faces]  Halliwell:  ‘  For  varnisht  faces  and  gay  and  painted  cloths, 
Are  but  to  tempt  fooles;  every  man  this  knowes.’ — The  Newe  Metamorphosis,  c.  1600, 


90 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  II,  SC.  v. 


But  ftop  my  houfes  eares,  I  meane  my  cafements,  36 

Let  not  the  found  of  fhallow  fopperie  enter 
My  fober  houfe.  By  Iacobs  ftaffe  I  fweare, 

I  haue  no  minde  of  feafting  forth  to  night : 

But  I  will  goe  :  goe  you  before  me  firra,  40 

Say  I  will  come. 

Clo.  I  will  goe  before  fir. 

Miftris  looke  out  at  window  for  all  this ; 

There  will  come  a  Chriftian  by, 

Will  be  worth  a  Iewes  eye.  45 


36.  fop]  shut  Cap. 

42.  I. ..fir]  Sir,  I  will  go  before  Han. 
I'll... you,  sir.  Walker. 

42,  43.  Prose,  Coll.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Cam. 
Glo.  Del.  Cla.  Rife. 


43.  at]  at  a  Q,,  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han. 
45.  Iewes]  QqF2,  Wh.  i.  Jew's  F3F4, 
Rowe.  Jewes  Ktly.  Jewess'  Pope  et 
cet. 

[Exit  Laun.  Rowe  et  seq. 


MS.  *  The  cortezans  ....  adulterate  their  faces . A  thing  so  common  amongst 

them,  that  many  of  them  which  have  an  elegant  naturall  beauty,  doe  varnish  their  faces 
.  .  .  .  with  these  kinde  of  sordid  trumperies.’ — Coryat’s  Crudities,  1611,  p.  266.  Clar¬ 
endon  :  Shylock  alludes  also  to  Christian  duplicity.  Conf.  Titnon,  IV,  ii,  36 :  ‘  But 
only  painted,  like  his  varnish’d  friends.’  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  54)  refers  to  a  Review  in 
The  Athenceum,  15  March,  1845,  of  Mrs  Merrifield’s  translation  of  Cennini’s  Treatise 
on  Painting,  &c.,  in  which  the  Reviewer  suggests  that  the  painting  of  the  face  was 
practised  by  masqueraders  in  Italy. 

36.  stop]  To  Capell’s  reading  shut  I  can  find  no  reference  throughout  his  Notes, 
Various  Readings ,  or  Errata ;  although  it  is  not  impossible  that  in  that  *  rudis  indi- 
gestaque  moles  ’  some  reference  may  lie  perdu ;  yet,  after  my  search,  I  think  it  unlikely. 
Thus  far  it  is  the  only  uncorrected  misprint  which  I  have  found  in  his  text. — Ed. 

38.  Iacobs  staffe]  Clarendon  :  See  Gen.  xxxii,  10,  and  Heb.  xi,  21.  It  is  in  this 
sense,  no  doubt,  that  Shakespeare  understands  the  phrase,  but  it  was  familiarly  used  in 
the  sense  of  a  pilgrim’s  staff,  because  St  James  (or  Jacob),  the  patron  of  pilgrims,  was 
represented  with  one  in  his  hand.  See  Spenser,  Faerie  Queene,  I,  vi,  35  :  ‘  And  in  his 
hand  a  Iacobs  staffe,  to  stay  His  weary  limbs  upon.’  Booth  :  Speak  these  two  lines 
very  solemnly,  with  a  slight  pause  before  and  after. 

39-  of]  For  many  other  instances  where  we  should  use  for  in  place  of  ‘  of,’  see 
Abbott,  §  174.  Also,  lb.  §  41,  for  examples  of  *  forth  ’  used  ‘  without  a  verb  of  motion 
(motion  being  implied).’ 

45.  Iewes  eye]  Whalley:  ‘It’s  worth  a  Jew’s  eye’  is  a  proverbial  phrase. 
Knight  :  That  worth  was  the  price  which  the  persecuted  Jews  paid  for  immunity 
from  mutilation  and  death.  When  our  rapacious  King  John  extorted  an  enormous  sum 
from  the  Jew  of  Bristol  by  drawing  his  teeth,  the  threat  of  putting  out  an  eye  would 
have  the  like  effect  upon  other  Jews.  The  former  prevalence  of  the  saying  is  proved 
from  the  fact  that  we  still  retain  it,  although  its  meaning  is  now  little  known.  Collier 
(ed.  ii) :  It  may  be  a  question  whether  Shakespeare  did  not  mean  that  Launcelot  should 
merely  repeat  the  phrase,  ‘  with  a  Jew’s  eye,’  leaving  *  Jew6s  ’  to  be  pronounced  as  a 
dissyllable.  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  54):  The  proverb,  in  Shakespeare’s  days,  perhaps, 


act  ii,  sc.  v.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  91 

Shy.  What  faies  that  foole  of  Hagars  off-fpring?  46 

ha. 

Ief.  His  words  were  farewell  miftris,  nothing  elfe. 

Shy.  The  patch  is  kinde  enough,  but  a  huge  feeder :  49 


was  still  pronounced ‘a  Jewes  eye.’  White:  All  the  editors  read  ‘ a  Jew-m’  eye,’ 
none  of  them  having  observed,  or  all  having  forgotten,  that  ‘Jewess  ’  is  quite  a  mod¬ 
ern  word,  ‘Jew’  having  been  applied  of  old  to  Hebrews  of  both  sexes.  It  is  only 
in  the  Scene  but  one  previous  that  Launcelot  calls  Jessica  ‘most  sweet  Jew.’  Dyce, 
after  quoting  this  note  of  White,  adds:  ‘Not  “quite  a  modern  word,”  surely:  “Felix 
came  with  his  wife  Drusilla,  which  was  a  Jewess ,”  Acts,  xxiv,  24  (Tyndale’s  Bible  1525 
or  1526  having  there  the  spelling  “iewes,”  the  Bible  of  1599  and  the  Bible  of  1629  the 
spelling  “  Iewesse ,” — not  to  mention  other  Bibles).’ 

46.  Hagars  off- spring  ?]  Farren  (p.  24) :  This  allusion  is  very  appropriate  to 
the  departure  of  his  servant ;  Hagar  having  been  bondswoman  to  Sarah,  the  wife  of 
Abraham,  and  having  quitted  her,  as  Launcelot  does  Shylock,  under  the  supposed 
grievance  of  too  little  indulgence  ( Genesis ,  xvi). 

47.  ha]  In  a  modernised  text,  should  not  this  be  printed  Hey  ? — Ed. 

49.  patch]  Douce  (i,  257) :  It  has  been  supposed  that  this  term  originated  from 
the  name  of  a  fool  belonging  to  Cardinal  Wolsey,  and  that  his  parti-coloured  dress  was 
given  to  him  in  allusion  to  his  name.  The  objection  to  this  is,  that  the  motley  habit 
worn  by  fools  is  much  older  than  the  time  of  Wolsey.  Again,  it  appears  that  Patch 
was  an  appellation  given  not  to  one  fool  only  that  belonged  to  Wolsey.  There  is  an 
epigram  by  Heywood,  entitled  A  saying  of  Patch  my  Lord  Cardinal’s  foole ;  but  in 
the  epigram  itself  he  is  twice  called  Sexten,  which  was  his  real  name.  In  a  manu¬ 
script  Life  of  Wolsey,  by  his  gentleman  usher,  Cavendish,  there  is  a  story  of  another 
fool  belonging  to  the  Cardinal,  and  presented  by  him  to  the  King.  A  marginal  note 
states  that  *  this  foole  was  called  Master  Williames,  otherwise  called  Patch.'  In  Pley- 
lin’s  History  of  the  Reformation  mention  is  made  of  another  fool  called  Patch  belong¬ 
ing  to  Elizabeth.  But  the  name  is  even  older  than  Wolsey’s  time ;  for  in  some  house¬ 
hold  accounts  of  Henry  the  Seventh  there  are  payments  to  a  fool  named  Pechie  and 
Packye.  It  seems,  therefore,  more  probable  that  fools  were  nicknamed  Patch  from 
their  dress ;  unless  there  happen  to  be  a  nearer  affinity  to  the  Italian  pazzo,  a  word  that 
has  all  the  appearance  of  a  descent  from  fatuus.  But  although  in  the  above  instance, 
as  well  as  in  a  multitude  of  others,  a  patch  denotes  a  fool  or  a  simpleton,  and,  by  cor¬ 
ruption,  a  clown,  it  seems  to  have  been  occasionally  used  in  the  sense  of  any  low  or 
mean  person.  Thus,  in  Mid.  N.  D.  Ill,  ii,  Puck  calls  Bottom  and  his  companions  ‘  a 
a:v  of  patches,  rude  mechanicals,’  certainly  not  meaning  to  compare  them  to  pam¬ 
pered  and  sleek  buffoons.  Knight  :  The  usurper  in  Hamlet,  the  ‘  vice  of  kings,’  was 
*a  king  of  shreds  and  patches.’  It  is  probable  that  in  this  way  the  word  ‘patch’  came 
to  be  an  expression  of  contempt;  just  as  we  say  still,  cross-patch.  Skeat  (s.  v.)  :  The 
supposition  that  ‘  patch  ’  is  a  nickname  from  the  dress  is  most  probably  right.  It  is  in¬ 
dependent  of  Italian  pazzo,  a  fool,  a  madman,  which  is  used  in  a  much  stronger  sense. 
A  derivative  is  patch-ock,  a  diminutive  form  (cf.  bull-oik,  hill-ock) ;  ‘as  very  pat  chokes 
[clowns]  as  the  wild  Irish,’ — Spenser,  View  of  the  State  of  Ireland,  Globe  ed.  p.  636 ; 
this  is  the  word  spelt  ‘pajock’  in  Ham.  Ill,  ii.  S.  L.  Lee  ( The  Academy,  27  Nov 
1880) :  If  further  proof  be  required  to  show  that  Shakespeare  has  portrayed  in  Shy- 
lock  the  humane  side  of  the  Jewish  character,  the  touching  allusion  to  Leah’s  turquoise 


92 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  v. 


Snaile-flow  in  profit,  but  he  fleepes  by  day  50 

More  then  the  wilde-cat  :  drones  hiue  not  with  me, 

Therefore  I  part  with  him,  and  part  with  him 
To  one  that  I  would  haue  him  helpe  to  wafte 
His  borrowed  purfe.  Well  IeJJica  goe  in, 

Perhaps  I  will  returne  immediately;  55 

Doe  as  I  bid  you,  fhut  dores  after  you,  fall  binde,  faft 

finde,  57 


50.  but  he]  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
but  Ff,  Rowe,  and  he  Qq  et  cet. 

56.  Doe  as  Ibid  you]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
Separate  line,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Steev. 
Mai.  Knt,  Sing. 


56.  Doe. ..after you]  One  line,  Qlf  Cap. 
Coll,  et  seq. 

fhut]  shut  the  Pope  +  . 
fajl...fafl]  safe. ..safe  Coll.  (MS). 


should  be  supplemented  by  the  present  passage.  Launcelot  has  arranged  with  Jessica 
for  her  elopement,  and  she,  by  a  series  of  barefaced  falsehoods,  has  evaded  her  father’s 
enquiries  as  to  his  business  with  her.  Jessica  declares  that  his  final  words  are :  ‘  “  Fare¬ 
well,  mistress nothing  more and  induces  Shylock  to  believe  that  Launcelot  is  through¬ 
out  paying  her  merely  the  ordinary  courtesies  of  service.  It  can  only  be  an  appreciative 
kindliness  of  disposition,  which  certainly  could  not  belong  to  a  man  always  *  grinning 
with  deadly  malice  ’  (as  Shylock  has  often,  on  and  off  the  stage,  been  represented),  that 
can  induce  the  Jew  to  reply :  *  The  patch  is  kind  enough,’  and  then  to  add,  half  blam¬ 
ing  himself  having  parted  with  a  servant  who  shows  such  befitting  respect  to  his  beloved 
child,  ‘but  a  huge  feeder,’  &c.  Very  effective  are  the  first  words  of  the  speech  in  their 
pathos,  when  we  remember  how  very,  very  little  Launcelot  at  the  moment  deserved  them, 
or  how  they  were  suggested  by  the  cruel  deceptions  of  the  Jew’s  unworthy  daughter. 
Introduced  where  they  are  in  the  play,  they  are  in  themselves  almost  sufficient  to  prove 
that  Shakespeare  saw  in  Shylock  a  man  ‘  more  sinned  against  than  sinning.’ 

50-  profit]  Eccles  :  In  the  performance  of  those  duties  whence  profit  might  be 
expected  to  arise  to  his  master.  Allen  suggests  that  perhaps  it  might  mean  ‘in 
improvement.  He  is  the  same  ignorant,  awkward  country  lad  he  was.’  For  such 
compounds  as  ‘  snail-slow,’  see  Abbott,  §  430. 

50.  but]  Clearly  a  misprint  for  and ;  caught  by  the  compositor  from  the  preceding 
line. — Ed. 

51.  wilde-cat]  Clarendon:  The  wild  cat,  which  prowls  and  preys  by  night 
sleeps  during  the  day. 

55.  Perhaps  I  will]  Abbott,  §319:  Some  passages  which  are  quoted  to  prove 
that  Shakespeare  used  ‘  will  ’  with  the  first  person,  without  implying  wish,  desire ,  &c.,  do 

not  warrant  such  an  inference . There  is  a  difficulty  in  the  expression  *  perchance 

I  will but,  from  its  constant  recurrence,  it  would  seem  to  be  a  regular  idiom.  Com¬ 
pare  the  following  passages  :  ‘ Perchance,  Iago,  I  will  ne’er  go  home,’ — Oth.  V,  ii,  246 
[of  this  ed.] ;  * Perchance  I  will  be  there  as  soon  as  you,’ — Com.  of  Err.  IV,  i,  39; 
and  this  present  passage.  In  all  these,  *  perchance  ’  precedes,  and  the  meaning  seems 
to  be  in  Shylock’s  speech,  for  instance :  ‘  My  purpose  may,  perhaps,  be  fulfilled,’  and 
‘  my  purpose  is  to  return  immediately,’  or,  in  other  words,  ‘  If  possible,  I  intend  to 
return  immediately.’  In  all  these  cases  the  ‘  perhaps  ’  stands  by  itself.  It  does  not 
qualify  *  will,’  but  the  whole  of  the  following  sentence.  Booth  :  It  would  seem  from 
this  remark  that  Shylock  had  not  perfect  confidence  in  her. 


act  II,  sc.  v.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


93 


A  prouerbe  neuer  ftale  in  thriftie  minde.  Exit.  58 

Ief.  Farewell,  and  if  my  fortune  be  not  croft, 

I  haue  a  Father,  you  a  daughter  loft.  Exit.  60 

56.  dores]  Malone,  whose  name  was  originally  Maloney,  having  made  the  harm¬ 
less,  if  needless,  remark  that  ‘  doors  is  here  a  dissyllable,’  Ritson,  from  whose  acerbity 
ninety  years  have  evaporated  the  cruelty,  observed  that,  *  a  previous  acquaintance  with 
the  Irish  howl  must  be  of  infinite  service  in  the  perusal  of  this  harmonious  edition.’ 
—Ed. 

56,  57.  fast  .  .  .  finde]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  54) :  In  Middleton  the  former  line  of 
the  concluding  couplet  is  frequently  a  short  one ;  in  Shakespeare,  very  seldom.  [See 
Dyce,  I,  ii,  128.]  Dyce  (Notes,  &c.  p.  64):  Collier’s  (MS)  seems  to  have  made  a 
change  ‘for  variation’s  sake.’ — Compare  Cotgrave’s  Diet,  sub  Bon.  ‘ Bon  guet  chasse 
malaventure :  Pro.  Good  watch  preuents  misfortune;  fast  bind,  fast  find,  say  we.’ 
Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  correction  in  the  (MS)  may  only  denote  a  difference  of  reci¬ 
tation.  The  usual  form  occurs  in  Fletcher’s  Spanish  Curate,  II,  ii,  a  better  authority 
than  Cotgrave.  It  also  occurs  in  S.  Rowland’s  Paire  of  Spy- Knaues. 

60.  Oxberry’s  Edition  professes  to  give  *  the  Stage  Business  and  Stage  Directions, 
as  performed  at  the  Theatres  Royal’  ( circa  1820).  In  that  edition  this  scene  closes 
with  an  outburst  of  song  from  Jessica,  as  follows : 

*  Haste,  Lorenzo,  haste  away, 

To  my  longing  arms  repair, 

With  impatience  I  shall  die ; 

Come,  and  ease  thy  Jessy’s  care ; 

Let  me,  then,  in  wanton  play 
Sigh  and  gaze  my  soul  away.’ 


94 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  II,  sc.  vi. 


[Scene  JSL\ 

Enter  the  Maskers ,  Gratiano  and  Salino. 

Gra.  This  is  the  penthoufe  vnder  which  Lorenzo 
Defired  vs  to  make  a  ftand. 

Sal.  His  houre  is  almoft  paft. 

Gra.  And  it  is  meruaile  he  out-dwels  his  houre,  5 

For  louers  euer  run  before  the  clocke. 

Sal.  O  ten  times  fafter  Venus  Pidgions  flye  7 


[Scene  VII.  Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Johns. 
Omit,  Hal.  Dyce,  Huds.  Scene  VI.  Cap. 
et  cet. 

1.  Salino.]  Ff.  Salerino.  Q2Q3,  Cap. 
Salanio.  Rowe+,  Steev.  Salarino.  Qx  et 
cet. 

2,  3.  Prose,  Rowe  +  . 


3,  4.  Defired...  houre"]  One  line,  Wh.  i. 
3.  to  itiake  a]  Om.  Steev.  conj. 

a  Jtand]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Wh.  i.  Jland 
Qq  et  cet. 

7.  Pidgions ]  Q2F2Q3>  pigeons  Qt. 
Widgeons  Warb. 


There  is  really  no  new  Scene  here,  and  no  change  could  be  made  even  on  the  mod¬ 
ern  stage,  but  Shakespeare  indicated  to  his  audience  in  almost  the  only  way  he  could, 
with  his  limited  resources  of  traverses,  by  the  rhyming  couplets  with  which  both  Shy- 
lock  and  Jessica  retire,  that  a  new  paragraph  in  the  Story  was  beginning  and  that  our 
attention  must  be  shifted  to  a  new  group.  We  should  bear  in  mind  that  these  rhyming 
couplets,  mere  jingles  as  they  may  be  to  us,  were  of  importance  to  the  audience  oi 
Shakespeare’s  day.  See  Text.  Notes,  for  the  Editors  who  have  continued  the  Scene. 
—Ed. 

3,  4.  To  cure  the  defective  metre  of  these  two  lines,  when  read  as  one,  Steevens 
proposed  to  omit  ‘to  make  a,’  as  an  evident  interpolation,  and  Grey  (i,  135)  would 
omit ‘  almost,’  because  Gratiano  immediately  says  that  Lorenzo  ‘  out-dwells  his  hour.’ 
[In  view  of  the  shortness  of  life,  I  am  afraid  it  behooves  us  to  forego  the  pleasure  of 
adjusting  the  rhythm  of  fragments  of  lines.  As  long  as  each  fragment  is  in  itself 
rhythmical,  I  doubt  if  Shakespeare  troubled  himself  to  piece  them  together.  It  is  not 
difficult  to  read  these  fragments  thus :  Desi  |  red  us  |  to  make  |  a  stand  ||  His  ho  |  ur’s 
al  |  most  past. — Ed.] 

7.  Venus  Pidgions]  Warburton  detected  a  rich  joke  here  which  had  been  ‘  mur¬ 
der’d  by  the  ignorance  or  boldness  of  the  first  transcribers.’  ‘  The  image  of  Venus’s 
pidgeons  flying  to  seal  the  bonds  of  Love  is  very  odd.’  He  therefore  ‘  doubts  not  but 
Shakespeare  wrote  Venus’  Widgeons.’  *  For,’  he  continues,  in  Ornithology’s  despite, 
‘  Widgeon  is  not  only  one  species  of  Pidgeons,  but  signified  likewise,  metaphorically, 
a  silly  fellow ,  as  Goose ,  or  Gudgeon  does  now.  The  joke  consists  in  the  ambiguity 
of  the  signification.  And  the  calling  love’s  votaries,  Venus's  Widgeons,  is  in  high 
humour.’  Although  the  Bishop’s  ‘high  humour’  failed  to  tickle  Dr  Johnson,  yet 
this  note  so  far  misled  him  that  he  thought  the  pigeons  were  the  ‘  lovers,’  and  ‘  as 
in  poetry  they  were  always  called  turtles  or  doves,  in  lower  language  they  might  be 
called  pigeons .’  Heath  (p.  115)  set  them  both  right.  ‘It  is  not  the  pigeons,’  said  he, 
‘  who  are  understood  to  “  seal  the  bonds  of  love,”  any  more  than  “  to  keep  obliged  faith 
unforfeited but  it  is  Venus  herself  (who  is  drawn  by  them,  and  regulates  their  flight 
according  to  her  own  good  pleasure)  who  is  supposed  to  be  assistant  in  both.’ 


act  II,  sc.  vi.J  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


95 


To  fteale  loues  bonds  new  made,  then  they  are  wont  S 

To  keepe  obliged  faith  vnforfaited. 

Gra.  That  euer  holds,  who  rifeth  from  a  feaft  10 

With  that  keene  appetite  that  he  fits  downe  ? 

Where  is  the  horfe  that  doth  vntread  againe 
His  tedious  meafures  with  the  vnbated  fire, 

That  he  did  pace  them  firft  :  all  things  that  are, 

Are  with  more  fpirit  chafed  then  enioy’d.  15 

How  like  a  yonger  or  a  prodigall 

The  skarfed  barke  puts  from  her  natiue  bay, 

Hudg’d  and  embraced  by  the  ftrumpet  winde  : 

How  like  a  prodigall  doth  fifie  returne  19 


8.  fieale]  Ff,  Rowe,  feale  Qq  et  cet. 

10.  holds, 1  Ff.  holds  :  Qq.  holds.  Rowe. 
13.  m eaf u res ...Jire,~\  meafures ,  ...fire 

QiQ3- 

14  .firfi:]firfi?QtF3F4. 

16.  yonger]  F3.  younger  Qq  F3F4,  Cap. 


Knt,  Wh.  i,  Rife.  Younker  Rowe  et  cet. 

1 8.  Fudg’d].  Hugd  Q1Q2.  Hug’d  F3 
F4.  Hug  fid  Q3F3. 

19.  like  a]  like  the  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Sing. 
Ktly,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Rife. 

doth  Jhe]  Jhe  doth  F3F4,  Rowe. 


9.  obliged]  Clarendon  :  Faith  bound  by  contract. 

11.  sits  downe]  For  other  instances  where  the  preposition  is  omitted,  see  I,  i,  135, 
or  Abbott,  §  394. 

1 2.  vntread]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  tread  in  reverse  order,  retrace.  So  in  King 
John ,  V,  iv,  52  :  ‘We  will  untread  the  steps  of  damned  flight.’  The  allusion  seems 
to  be  to  a  horse  trained  to  perform  various  feats,  such  as  we  now  see  only  in  a  circus. 

16.  yonger]  Although  Shakespeare’s  printers  use  the  form  younker  elsewhere, 
change  is  needless  here.  ‘  Younker  exactly  expresses,’  says  Clarendon,  ‘  the  Greek 
veaviag.'  Henley  calls  attention  to  the  imitation  of  this  passage  by  Gray  in  The  Bard 
in  those  familiar  lines:  ‘Fair  laughs  the  morn,’  &c.  Coleridge  ( Biog .  Lit.  i,  chap,  i) 
criticised  the  imitation  adversely  on  the  ground  that  it  depends  on  the  printer’s  use  of 
small  capitals  (as  in  ‘Youth  at  the  prow,  and  Pleasure  at  the  helm’)  ‘whether  the 
words  should  be  personifications  or  mere  abstractions.’ — Ed. 

17.  skarfed]  Steevens:  That  is,  the  vessel  decorated  with  flags.  So  in  All's  Well, 
II,  iii,  214:  ‘The  scarfs  and  bannerets  about  thee,  did  manfully  dissuade  me  from  be¬ 
lieving  thee  a  vessel  of  too  great  a  burthen.’  Eccles,  from  the  definition  of  ‘  scarf,’ 
both  the  noun  and  the  verb,  in  Johnson’s  Diet.,  thinks  that  the  allusion  is  to  ‘  a  ship 
under  full  sail.’  Clarendon  :  Or  is  it  that  a  ship  in  full  sail  is  compared  to  a  woman 
dressed  in  scarfs  ?  From  the  passage  in  All's  Well,  it  would  seem  that  a  scarf  was  a 
decoration  of  a  pleasure  vessel. 

19.  a]  Collier  :  There  seems  to  be  no  particular  allusion  to  the  Prodigal  Son,  and 
*  a  younker  ’  and  ‘  a  prodigal  ’  are  spoken  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  simile.  Halli- 
well  :  The  particle  the,  if  correct,  is  of  course  used  with  reference  to  the  prodigal 
previously  mentioned.  Clarendon  refers  to  Luke,  xv,  1 1-32,  and  calls  attention  to 
the  text  of  the  Qq,  where  in  line  1 6  it  is  *  a  prodigal,’  and  here  ‘  the  prodigal.’  [To 
me  it  is  immaterial  whether  the  article  be  definite  or  indefinite,  the  allusion  seems  mani¬ 
fest  to  the  Scriptural  Prodigal. — Ed.] 


9 6 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  vi. 


With  ouer-wither’d  ribs  and  ragged  fades,  20 

Leane,  rent,  and  begger’d  by  the  ftrumpet  winde  ? 


Enter  Lorenzo. 


Salino.  Heere  comes  Lorenzo ,  more  of  this  here¬ 
after. 

Lor.  Sweete  friends,  your  patience  for  my  long  a-  25 
bode, 

Not  I,  but  my  affaires  haue  made  you  wait : 

When  you  fhall  pleafe  to  play  the  theeues  for  wiues 
lie  watch  as  long  for  you  then  :  approach 

Here  dwels  my  father  lew.  Hoa,  who’s  within  ?  3c 


20.  ouer-wither1  d]  Ff,  Rowe,  ouer - 
wetherd  Q,Qa.  over-weatherd  Q3  et  cet. 

22.  Enter...]  After  line  24,  Dyce,  Cam. 
Glo.  Cla.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

23.  Salino.]  Ff.  Sal.  QjQ,.  Saler.  Q3> 


29.  you  then  .•]  you.  Come  then ,  Ritson. 
approach ]  approach  ;  Rowe.  Comet 

approach  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

30.  Hoa]  Ff.  Ho  Qt.  Howe  Qa.  Hoe  Q3. 
who’s]  whofe  Qq. 


19.  she]  Steevens:  Surely  the  bark  ought  to  be  of  the  masculine  gender,  other¬ 
wise  the  allusion  wants  somewhat  of  propriety.  This  indiscriminate  use  of  the  per¬ 
sonal  for  the  neuter  at  least  obscures  the  passage.  A  ship,  however,  is  commonly 
spoken  of  in  the  feminine  gender.  White:  But  here  there  is  no  poetical  personifica¬ 
tion  of  the  bark ;  it  is  only  compared  to  a  prodigal.  [Is  there  not  some  corruption  in 
these  lines  ?  There  seems  to  be  something  wrong  in  the  repetition  of *  *  the  strumpet 
wind.’ — Ed.] 

28.  you  shall  please]  See  Abbott,  §  297,  ad  fin. 

29.  Clarendon  considers  Ritson’s  emendation  of  this  metrically-defective  line  as 
more  satisfactory  than  Pope’s. 

30-  Hoa]  White  :  ‘  Ho,’  ‘  hoa,’  and  ‘  how  ’  were  pronounced  alike.  [These  words 
‘  Hoa,  who’s  within,’  are  omitted  in  Oxberry’s  Edition,  and  in  their  place  Lorenzo,  not 
to  be  outdone  by  Jessica,  responds  as  follows  : 


*  My  bliss  too  long  my  bride  denies ; 

Apace  the  wasting  summer  flies ; 

Nor  yet  the  wint’ry  blasts  I  fear, 

Nor  storms  nor  night  shall  keep  me  here. 

‘  What  may  for  strength  with  steel  compare  ? 
O,  love  has  fetters  stronger  far ! 

By  bolts  of  steel  are  limbs  confin’d ; 

But  cruel  love  enchains  the  mind. 


*  No  longer,  then,  perplex  thy  breast ; 

When  thoughts  torment,  the  first  are  best ; 

’Tis  mad  to  go,  ’tis  death  to  stay; 

Away,  my  Jessy,  haste  away.’ 

Shall  we  assume  that  these  *  songs  ’  were  inserted  to  make  up  to  us  the  loss  of  Shake 
speare’s  ‘Tell  me  where  is  fancy  bred,’  which,  in  this  Edition,  is  omitted? — Ed.] 


ACT  ii,  sc.  vi.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 

Ieffica  aboue. 

Ieff.  Who  are  you? tell  me  for  more  certainty, 

Albeit  lie  fweare  that  I  do  know  your  tongue. 

Lor.  Lorenzo,  and  thy  Loue. 

Ief.  Lorenzo  certaine,  and  my  loue  indeed, 

For  who  loue  I  fo  much?  and  now  who  knowes 
But  you  Lorenzo ,  whether  I  am  yours  ? 

Lor.  Heauen  and  thy  thoughts  are  witnefs  that  thou 
art. 

Ief.  Heere,  catch  this  casket,  it  is  worth  the  paines,  40 

I  am  glad  *tis  night,  you  do  not  looke  on  me, 

For  I  am  much  afhamM  of  my  exchange : 

But  loue  is  blinde,  and  louers  cannot  fee  43 


97 

31 

35 


31.  aboue.]  above  in  Boys  Cloths. 
Rowe  et  seq.  (cloaths.  Pope+,  Cap. 
Steev.  Mai.  clothes.  Steev.  ’93). 

36.  who ]  whom  Johns.  Coll.  Wh.  i, 
Clarke,  Huds. 


40.  Heere]  Q2Fa.  Here  Qx. 
it  ir]  tis  Qx. 

41.  lam']  Pm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

42.  ajham'd]  ajhamde  Q2. 


33.  your]  Allen  :  Qu.  that — yt  mistaken  for  yr  ?  Cf.  Rom.  <Sr  Jul.,  *  My  ears  have 
not  yet  drunk  a  hundred  words  Of  that  (Qt)  tongue’s  uttering.’ 

36.  who]  For  manifold  instances  of  *  who  ’  for  whom,  see  Abbott,  §  274. 

38.  thy  thoughts]  Eccles  :  It  is  impossible  that  she,  any  more  than  Heaven  itself, 
to  which  our  hearts  lie  open,  can  in  reality  harbour  a  doubt  of  the  sincerity  of  his  pro¬ 
fessions.  Allen  :  Perhaps  *  my  thoughts.’  In  that  case,  the  meaning  is :  ‘  Not  I  alone 
know  it — Heaven  witnesses  with  my  thoughts.’  Emphasize,  therefore,  and  (as  in  ‘Ye 
cannot  serve  God  and  Mammon  ’).  ‘  Heaven,’  by  the  way,  is  a  compulsory  euphemism 
for  God  (in  answer  to  ‘who  knows  ’). 

40.  Lloyd  :  Elopement,  in  Jessica’s  case,  it  must  be  said,  is  a  virtue ;  and  the  ela¬ 
tion  at  exchanging  freedom  for  degraded  oppression  explains  and  excuses  the  dry  eyes, 
— nay,  laughing  lips — with  which  she  departs.  If  we  care  to  apologize  for  the  casket 
she  carried  off,  we  may  say  she  helped  herself,  perhaps  not  exorbitantly,  to  her  dowry ; 
but  we  shall  do  better  to  mark  the  incident  as  the  last  seal  of  the  truth  worth  laying  to 
heart,  how  utterly  unkindness,  cruelty,  sordidness,  and  distrust  can  at  last  erase  the 
faintest  traces  of  natural  duty  and  affection  in  hearts  that  by  nature  are  disposed  to  be 
their  hallowed  home.  Elze  ( Essays ,  Trans,  p.  92) :  Jessica  appropriates  the  ducats, 
all  of  which  must  necessarily  fall  to  her  after  her  father’s  death,  as  she  is  his  only  child. 
Gervinus  considers  her  to  be  an  ‘  ethereal  being,  naive,  and  inexperienced  as  a  child, 
and  perfectly  unacquainted  with  the  value  of  money.’  This  last  assertion  is,  however, 
contradicted  by  her  own  words  here.  She  tells  her  lover  that  the  casket  is  worth  the 
pains,  and  she  hurries  back  to  ‘  gild  ’  herself  with  more  ducats. 

41.  you]  Eccles:  I  suspect  that  this  should  be,  ‘ yet  do  not  look  on  me,’  the  dark- 
jiess  not  being  sufficient  entirely  to  conceal  the  transformation  of  which  she  is  ashamed. 
Allen  :  Either :  ‘  I’m  glad  (since  ’tis  night)  you  do  not  look  on  me ;’  or :  ‘  I’m  glad  ’tis 
night  (so  that)  you  do  look  on  me.’ 

7 


98 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  II,  sc.  vi. 


The  pretty  follies  that  themfelues  commit, 

For  if  they  could,  Cupid  himfelfe  would  blufh  45 

To  fee  me  thus  transformed  to  a  boy. 

Lor.  Defcend,  for  you  muft  be  my  torch-bearer. 

Ief.  What,  muft  I  hold  a  Candle  to  my  fhames  ? 

They  in  themfelues  goodfooth  are  too  too  light. 

Why,  Jtis  an  office  of  difcouery  Loue,  50 

And  I  fhould  be  obfcur’d. 

48.  fhames']  Jhame  Ff,  Rowe.  Sing.  Ktly.  too-too  Hal.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh. 

49.  too  too ]  too ,  too,  Johns,  too,  too  i,  Rife,  Huds. 

45.  Cupid]  Eccles  :  That  Cupid  does  not  blush  is,  in  a  confused  manner,  consid¬ 
ered  as  the  consequence  of  the  blindness  of  his  votaries,  rather  than  of  his  own. 
Allen  :  For  if  they  could  (and  I  were  Cupid),  Cupid  himself,  &c. 

47.  must]  Abbott,  §314:  This  is  sometimes  used  by  Shakespeare  to  mean  no 
more  than  definite  futurity,  like  our  *  is  to  ’  in  ‘  He  is  to  be  here  to-morrow.’ 

49.  too  too]  Nares  pointed  out  the  intensive  effect  of  this  reduplication,  giving 
instances  from  Holinshed  and  Spenser.  Halliwell  (AA  Soc.  Papers,  1844,  i,  39) 
shows  that  *  too-too  ’  is  a  provincial  word  recognized  by  Ray,  and  explained  by  him 
as  meaning  *  very  well,  or  good,’  and  that  Watson,  a  few  years  afterward,  says  it  is 
‘often  used  to  denote  exceeding .’  In  proof  * that  TOO-TOO,  as  used  by  our  early 
writers,  is  one  word,  denoting  “  exceedingly ,”  and  that  it  ought  to  be  so  printed ,’  Hal¬ 
liwell  gives  twelve  instances  from  the  poets,  from  Skelton  down  to  Hudibras,  and 
refers  to  over  thirty  other  passages  where  the  phrase  is  found.  Hunter  doubts  if  this 
reduplication  be  emphatic.  It  appears  to  him  to  have  been,  in  sense,  neither  more  nor 
less  than  too,  and  he  cites  many  instances  from  prose  writers.  Palsgrave,  he  adds,  has 
beside  to-much,  to-little,  &c.,  to  to  much,  to  to  little,  to  to  great,  to  to  small ,  answering  to 
par  trop  trop  peu,  par  trop  trop  grant,  par  trop  trop  petit.  The  pronunciation  was  too- 
too,  as  appears  by  this  line  of  Constable’s :  ‘  But  I  did  too-too  inestimable  wey  her.’ 
[That  this  accent  can  be  shifted,  see  ‘  Whence  it  appears,  this  too-too  to  frequent.’ — 
Sylvester’s  Du  Bartas,  p.  576,  a,  ed.  1632. — Ed.]  White  thinks  that  it  was  used 
with  intensifying  iteration,  from  the  similar  iteration  of  other  adverbs  and  adjectives  in 
Elizabethan  literature ;  for  instance :  ‘  Thy  wit  dost  use  still  still  more  harmes  to  finde,’ — 
Sidney’s  Arcadia,  ii,  225,  ed.  1603;  ‘While  he  did  live  far,  far  was  all  disorder,’ — lb. 
v,  430;  ‘Your  lesson  is  Far  far  too  long,’ — Astrophel and  Stella,  St.  56,  lb.  p.  537; 
‘  Stop  you  my  mouth  with  still  still  kissing  me,’ — lb.  St.  81,  lb.  p.  547 ;  ‘  Even  to  thy 
pure  and  most  most  loving  breast.’ — Shakespeare’s  Sonn.  1 10.  In  any  case  the  com¬ 
pound  epithet  must  have  originated  in  the  frequent  iterative  use  of  the  word.  [Note 
on  Haiti.  I,  ii,  129,  of  this  edition. — Ed.] 

50.  discouery]  Hunter  (i,  325) :  This  is  a  military  term.  Sir  John  Smith,  in  his 
Instructions  and  Orders  Military,  1595,  p.  51,  speaks  of  ‘great  intelligence  by  discov¬ 
erers  and  espials.’  ‘  Obscured  ’  is  disguised.  Singer  :  I  do  not  think  such  a  sense 
was  thought  of  here.  Abbott,  §  439  :  This  is  often  used  for  uncovering,  i.  e.  unfold, 
whether  literally  or  metaphorically.  ‘  So  shall  my  anticipation  prevent  your  discovery.’ 
— Ham.  II,  ii,  305. 

51.  should]  Abbott,  §323:  ‘Should,’  the  past  tense,  not  being  so  imperious  as 
shall,  the  present,  is  still  retained  in  the  sense  of  ought,  applying  to  all  three  persons. 


act  ii,  sc.  vi.]  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


99 


Lor.  So  you  are  fweet,  52 

Euen  in  the  louely  garnifh  of  a  boy: but  come  at  once, 

For  the  clofe  night  doth  play  the  run-away, 

And  we  are  ftaid  for  at  Baffanio> s  feaft.  55 

Ief.  I  will  make  faft  the  doores  and  guild  my  felfe 
With  fome  more  ducats,  and  be  with  you  ftraight.  5  7 


52.  you  are]  are  you  Qq,  Pope  et 
seq. 

53,  54.  Euen...  run- aw  ay]  Three  lines, 
ending  boy  ...night. ..run-away  Qz. 

53.  louely  garnijh  of  a]  garnish  of  a 


lovely  Coll.  (MS). 

53.  but... once']  Separate  line,  Pope  e* 
seq. 

57.  more]  mo  Q,Q2-  moe  Q3. 

[Exit  from  above.  Theob.  et  seq. 


In  the  Elizabethan  authors,  however,  it  was  more  commonly  thus  used,  often  where  we 
should  use  ought.  As  here :  *  A  torch-bearer’s  office  reveals  the  face,  and  mine  ought 
to  be  hidden.’  See  ‘Should  sunder,’  See., post,  III,  ii,  127. 

53.  louely]  Eccles  :  That  is,  rendered  ‘lovely’  because  she  had  assumed  it. 

54.  run-away]  See  Rom.  Jul.  Ill,  ii,  6.  Clarendon:  The  secret  night  is 
stealing  away. 

55.  56.  Spedding  ( Cornhill  Maga.,  March,  1880) :  The  moral  sensibilities  of  a  mod¬ 
ern  spectator  receive  here  a  little  shock,  from  which  a  judicious  adapter  might  relieve 
him  by  the  omission  of  a  few  lines.  Not  that  I  would  debar  Jessica  from  seeking 
relief  from  her  Jewish  disabilities  by  the  nearest  way.  We  are  all  glad  to  see  her  at 
liberty  to  choose  her  husband  and  her  religion  for  herself ;  to  escape  from  a  house 
which  was  to  her  a  hell,  with  only  the  ‘  merry  devil  ’  Launcelot  to  cheer  it ;  from  a 
father  of  whose  manners  she  was  (not  without  reason  and  to  her  credit,  though  to  her 
regret)  ashamed ;  and  from  the  chance,  should  it  suit  him,  of  having  to  take  *  any  of 
the  stock  of  Barrabas  ’  for  a  husband ;  nor  do  many  of  us  object  to  see  advantage 
taken  by  Antonio  of  the  pressure  which  the  law  enables  him  to  put  on  Shylock  for  the 
purpose  of  securing  a  comfortable  provision  for  her.  But  we  all  feel  that  she  ought  to 
have  left  the  jewels  and  the  ducats  behind ;  and  the  fact  that  Shakespeare  allowed  her 
to  carry  them  off  without  a  hint  of  disapprobation  from  anybody  (there  being  no  dra¬ 
matic  necessity  for  it)  suggests  a  doubt  whether  in  those  early  days  he  was  fully  alive 
to  the  impropriety.  Perhaps  the  easy  morality  of  the  comic  theatre  in  all  such  ques¬ 
tions, — the  large  privilege  which  the  young  lovers  have  always  enjoyed  of  deceiving 
and  overreaching  the  stern  parent, — had  become  so  familiar  as  to  hide  from  him  the 
true  nature  of  the  transaction ;  which  in  so  tragic  a  business  as  Shylock’s  revenge  can¬ 
not  be  regarded  with  the  levity  which  comedy  permits.  But,  however  that  may  be,  I 
cannot  doubt  that  the  effect  would  be  much  better  in  modern  eyes  if  Jessica  were 
allowed  to  escape  without  the  treasure.  The  loss  of  his  daughter  to  her  race  and  faith 
would  supply  Shylock  with  as  fair  a  motive  for  vengeance ;  he  could  make  as  much 
noise  about  it ;  and  the  secret  that  he  really  cared  more  for  the  ducats  than  the  daughter 
would  not  be  forced  upon  the  knowledge  of  his  admirers,  who  regard  paternal  tender¬ 
ness  as  one  of  his  most  conspicuous  virtues.  Two  lines  struck  out  from  Jessica’s  part  in 
the  Sixth  Scene  of  the  Second  Act,  a  few  from  Salanio’s  in  the  Eighth,  and  a  few  more 
in  the  interview  with  Tubal,  would  (without  at  all  disturbing  the  action  of  the  play) 
remove  completely  our  only  remaining  scruple  as  to  the  poetic  justice  of  the  final  ret- 
tlnment. 


loo 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  ii,  sc.  vi. 

53 


Gra.  Now  by  my  hood,  a  gentle,  and  no  lew. 

Lor.  Befhrew  me  but  I  loue  her  heartily. 

For  fhe  is  wife,  if  I  can  iudge  of  her,  6g 

And  faire  fhe  is,  if  that  mine  eyes  be  true, 

And  true  fhe  is,  as  fhe  hath  prou’d  her  felfe : 

And  therefore  like  her  felfe,  wife,  faire,  and  true, 

Shall  fhe  be  placed  in  my  conftant  foule. 

Enter  IeJJica.  65 

What,  art  thou  come  ?  on  gentlemen,  away, 

Our  masking  mates  by  this  time  for  vs  flay.  Exit.  67 

58.  gentle ]  Q2,  Cap.  Gentile  QzFfQ3  66.  gentlemen ]  gentleman  Q2. 

et  cet.  67.  Exit.]  Exit  with  Jessica  and  Sa- 

59.  Bejhrew\  Bejhrow  Q2Q3,  Cap.  lerino.  Cap. 


58.  hood]  Malone  :  Gratiano  is  in  a  masqued  habit,  to  which  it  is  probable  that 
formerly,  as  at  present,  a  large  cape  or  hood  was  affixed.  Steevens  :  He  alludes  to 
the  practice  of  friars,  who  frequently  swore  by  this  part  of  their  habit.  [This  assertion 
Steevens  possibly  took  from  Capell,  who  says :  ‘  The  speaker’s  oath  is  of  monkish  orig¬ 
inal.’]  Halliwell  gives  a  MS  note  by  O.  Gilchrist,  to  the  effect  that « the  allusion  is 
to  the  practice  in  single  combat,  where  the  accused  threw  down  his  hood  as  a  challenge 
against  the  impeachment  of  the  accuser.  See  Holinshed,  vol.  3,  p.  5.’  [As  the  edition 
of  Holinshed  is  not  given,  I  have  searched  my  copy  of  1587  in  vain  for  the  passage. — 
Ed.]  White:  I  had  always  understood  this  ancient  oath  here  and  elsewhere  to  be, 
‘  by  my  self,’  i.  e.  ‘  by  my  estate  ’  — manhood,  kinghood,  knighthood,  or  whatever  the 
hood  or  estate  the  protester  might  be.  Clarendon  :  It  is  found  nowhere  else  in 
Shakespeare. 

58.  gentle]  Johnson  :  A  jest  arising  from  the  ambiguity  of  Gentile,  which  signifies 
both  a  heathen  and  one  well  born. 

59.  Beshrew]  Staunton  :  To  ‘  beshrew  ’  is  to  vnprecate  sorrow  or  evil  on  any  per¬ 
son  or  thing,  to  curse ,  &c.  See  *  Museragno,  a  kinde  of  mouse  called  a  shrew,  deadlie 
to  other  beasts  if  he  bite  them,  and  laming  any  bodie  if  he  but  touch  them,  of  which 
that  curse  came,  I  beshrew  thee.’ — Florio’s  Worlde  of  Wordes,  1598. 

59.  but]  Abbott,  §126:  ‘But’  is  not  adversative,  but  means  ‘if  not,’  after  ‘be- 
ahrew  me,’  &c. 

63.  true]  Elze  ( Essays,  Trans,  p.  94) :  It  is  lucky  that  there  was  no  Brabantio 
near  to  whisper  into  the  confiding  lover’s  ear :  *  She  did  deceive  her  father,  marrying 
thee !’ 

67.  Exit]  Where  is  ‘  die  tragische  Schuld  ’  of  our  German  brothers,  that  relentless 
fate  which  pursues  the  guilty  and  ensures  their  downfall,  here  in  Jessica’s  career  ? 
From  the  hour  of  the  cruel  deception  of  her  father  onward,  smooth  success  is  strewed 
before  her  little  feet,  until  they  trip  into  bliss  and  Belmont  under  patines  of  bright  gold. 
Why  was  a  fate  so  different  allotted  to  poor  Desdemona,  who  yielded  to  her  old  father, 
after  her  first  offence,  all  the  tender  devotion  that  a  married  daughter  can  bestow  ?  I  am 
afraid  the  doctrine  of  ‘  die  tragische  Schuld  ’  in  Shakespeare  needs  patching. — Ed. 


act  ii,  sc.  vi.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


IOI 


Enter  Anthonio. 

68 

Ant. 

Who’s  there  ? 

Gra. 

Signior  Anthonio  ? 

70 

Ant. 

Fie,  fie,  Gratiano ,  where  are  all  the  reft  ? 

’Tis  nine  a  clocke,  our  friends  all  flay  for  you, 

No  maske  to  night,  the  winde  is  come  about, 

Baffanio  prefently  will  goe  aboord, 

I  haue  fent  twenty  out  to  feeke  for  you.  75 

Gra.  I  am  glad  on’t,  I  defire  no  more  delight 
Then  to  be  vnder  faile,  and  gone  to  night.  Exeunt. 

69.  Who's"]  VVhofe  Q2Q3.  follow  line  72,  Han. 

71.  Fie-fie]  Fie ,  Pope  +  .  76.  Gra.]  Om.  Qi(  continuing  to  Anth. 

75.  I. ..you]  Om.  Q,.  Transposed  to  lam]  I'm.  Pope  + ,  Dyce  i;i,  Huds. 


73.  winde]  See  III,  ii,  284,  Th.  Elze. 

75,  76.  The  omission  of  a  whole  line  here  in  Q,,  and  continuing  Gratiano’s  speec/i 
to  Anthonio,  is  an  inexcusable  defect  in  that  edition. — Ed. 


102 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii.  sc.  vii 


[Scene  VII.} 

Enter  Portia  with  Morrocho ,  and  both  tJieir  traines. 

Por.  Goe,  draw  afide  the  curtaines,  and  difcouer 
The  feuerall  Caskets  to  this  noble  Prince : 

Now  make  your  choyfe. 

Mor.  The  firft  of  gold,  who  this  infcription  beares,  5 

Who  choofeth  me,  fhall  gaine  what  men  defire. 

The  fecond  filuer,  which  this  promife  carries, 

Who  choofeth  me,  fhall  get  as  much  as  he  deferues. 

This  third,  dull  lead,  with  warning  all  as  blunt, 

Who  choofeth  me,  muft  giue  and  hazard  all  he  hath.  10 

How  fhall  I  know  if  I  doe  choofe  the  right  ? 


Scene  III.  Belmont.  Rowe.  Scene 
VIII.  Pope  +  .  Scene  VII.  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Sta.  Cam.  Wh.  Scene  VI.  Hal. 
Dyce,  Huds. 

A  Room  in  Portia’s  House.  Flourish. 
Cap. 

1.  Morrocho]  Morrochius.  Rowe  +  . 
Prince  of  Morocco.  Cap. 


4.  [Three  caskets  are  discovered. 
Rowe. 

5.  who]  which  Pope-H,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 
Coll.  iii. 

6.  what]  what  many  Qq,  Rowe  et 
seq. 

6,  8,  10.  In  Italics  Q3. 

1 1 .  This  line  is  repeated  only  in  FtFa. 


The  Scene  which  follows,  marked  in  the  majority  of  modern  editions  Scene  vii,  is 
transposed  by  Eccles  to  the  First  Act,  and  there  termed  Scene  v.  See  II,  ii,  I. 

2.  curtaines]  Keightley  [Exp.  150):  As  in  Scene  ix,  it  is  ‘  curtain.’  I  ascribe 
the  s  to  the  printer. 

5.  who]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  This  is  plainly  an  error  for  which,  occasioned  by  the 

‘Who’s’  which  follow;  and  compare  the  third  line  of  the  speech.  Abbott,  §264: 
Who  personifies  irrational  antecedents . The  slightest  active  force  or  personal  feel¬ 

ing  attributed  to  the  antecedent  suffices  to  justify  who.  Perhaps  in  this  way  we  may  dis¬ 
tinguish  *  The  first  of  gold,  who  this  inscription  bears ;’  ‘  The  second  silver,  which  this 
promise  carries  ’ — that  is,  ‘  the  first  of  gold,  and  it  bears  this  inscription ;  the  second 
(silver),  which  carries,’  & c.  In  the  first  the  material,  in  the  second  the  promise,  is 
regarded  as  the  essential  quality.  (Or  does  euphony  prefer  which  in  the  accented,  who 
in  the  unaccented,  syllables  ?) 

6,  8,  10.  Abbott,  §  501 :  This  trimeter  couplet  is  often  used  by  the  Elizabethan 
writers  in  the  translation  of  quotations,  inscriptions,  &c. 

6.  what  men]  White:  That  the  omission  of  many  is  due  to  accident,  its  presence 
in  the  Qq  and  its  occurrence  in  the  inscription  (which,  of  course,  was  always  the  same) 
when  it  is  read  by  the  Prince  of  Arragon,  are  sufficient  evidence. 

9.  blunt]  Johnson:  That  is,  as  gross  as  the  dull  metal.  Halliwell:  I  should 
read — not  as  gross  as  the  metal  is  dull,  but  as  blunt  as  the  dull  metal  is  gross. 

11.  In  the  Folio  this  line  is  the  last  on  the  page,  with  the  catchwords  *  Por.  The’ 
beneath  it.  At  the  head  of  the  next  page  the  line  is  repeated  (but  with  a  period, 


vct  ii,  sc.  viL]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


103 


Por.  The  one  of  them  containes  my  pidlure  Prince,  1 2 

If  you  choofe  that,  then  I  am  yours  withall. 

Mor.  Some  God  diredt  my  iudgement,  let  me  fee, 

I  will  furuay  the  infcriptions,  backe  againe  :  1 5 

What  faies  this  leaden  casket  ? 

Who  choofeth  me,  muft  giue  and  hazard  all  he  hath. 

Muft  giue,  for  what  ?  for  lead,  hazard  for  lead  ? 

This  casket  threatens  men  that  hazard  all 

Doe  it  in  hope  of  faire  aduantages  :  20 

A  golden  minde  ftoopes  not  to  fhowes  of  droffe, 
lie  then  nor  giue  nor  hazard  ought  for  lead. 

What  faies  the  Siluer  with  her  virgin  hue  ? 

Who  choofeth  me,  fhall  get  as  much  as  he  deferues. 

As  much  as  he  deferues  ;  paufe  there  Morocho,  25 

And  weigh  thy  value  with  an  euen  hand, 

If  thou  beeft  rated  by  thy  eftimation 
Thou  dooft  deferue  enough,  and  yet  enough 
May  not  extend  fo  farre  as  to  the  Ladie : 

And  yet  to  be  afeard  of  my  deferuing,  30 

Were  but  a  weake  difabling  of  my  felfe. 

As  much  as  I  deferue,  why  that’s  the  Lady. 

I  doe  in  birth  deferue  her,  and  in  fortunes, 

In  graces,  and  in  qualities  of  breeding : 

But  more  then  thefe,  in  loue  I  doe  deferue.  35 


13.  withall ]  with  all  Coll.  i. 

18.  hazard  for  lead]  Om.  F3F4,  Rowei. 

19.  threatens  men ]  threatens.  Men 
Rowe  et  seq. 

22.  nor  giue ]  not  giue  Rowe  ii  + . 

ought  ]  aught  Mai. 

25.  deferues  ,•]  deserves  ?  Pope. 


25.  Morocho]  Morrochius.  Rowe  4 
Morocco.  Cap. 

27.  thy]  the  F4,  Rowe  i. 

30.  afeard]  afraid  Q3,  Rowe  +  . 

32.  deferue ,]  deserve —  Rowe. 

35.  deferue]  deserve  her  Cap.  conj. 
Coll,  ii,  Ktly. 


instead  of  an  interrogation,  at  the  end).  That  it  is  merely  a  compositor’s  oversight 
is  shown  by  the  catchwords.  I  have  not  deemed  it  worth  while  to  reproduce  it  here. 
—Ed. 

23.  her]  Allen  :  He  says  ‘  her  ’  of  silver  because  he  already  had  in  mind  ‘  virgin  ’ 
as  its  analogue. 

27.  beest]  Rolfe:  This  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  subjunctive  be.  It  is  the 
Anglosaxon  bist,  2d  pers.  sing.  Pres.  Ind.  of  boon,  to  be. 

35-  deserue]  Capell’s  emendation  ‘deserve  her ’  is,  to  me,  most  certain.  It  is  not 
only  a  repetition  of  the  very  phrase  two  lines  before,  but  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  printer 
was  misled  by  the  ‘  here  ’  in  the  line  following.  Eccles  suggests  two  interpretations  of 
this  line :  *  either  “  more  than  these  deserve ,”  the  word  “  these  ”  being  a  nominative,  or, 


104 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  vii. 


What  if  I  ftrai’d  no  farther,  but  chofe  here  ?  36 

Let’s  fee  once  more  this  faying  grau’d  in  gold. 

Who  choofeth  me  fhall  gaine  what  many  men  defire : 

Why  that’s  the  Lady,  all  the  world  defires  her  : 

From  the  foure  corners  of  the  earth  they  come  40 

To  kiffe  this  fhrine,  this  mortall  breathing  Saint. 

The  Hircanion  deferts,  and  the  vafte  wildes 
Of  wide  Arabia  are  as  throughfares  now 
For  Princes  to  come  view  faire  Portia 

The  waterie  Kingdome,  whofe  ambitious  head  45 

Spets  in  the  face  of  heauen,  is  no  barre 
To  flop  the  forraine  fpirits,  but  they  come 
As  ore  a  brooke  to  fee  faire  Portia. 

One  of  thefe  three  containes  her  heauenly  pidlure. 

Is’t  like  that  Lead  containes  herP’twere  damnation  50 

To  thinke  fo  bafe  a  thought,  it  were  too  grofe 


41.  mortall  breathing ]  Hyphened, 

Dyce. 

42.  Hircanion ]  Hircanian  F2  et  seq. 
vajle]  F2.  vajl  F3F4,  Rowe,  vajlie 

Q2Q3,  Pope  +  .  vajly  Q,  et  cet. 


43.  throughfares\  thoroughfares  Rowe 
+  ,  Dyce  iii. 

45.  waterie ]  watry  Q  . 

46.  Spets']  Qq  Ff,  Cap.  Spits  Rowe  et 
cet. 

50.  containes ]  contain  Rowe  i. 


“more  than  I  deserve  in  these,  in  love  I  do  deserve,”  the  preposition  in  being 
understood.’  As  confirming  the  latter  interpretation,  I  think  we  might  suppose 
that  the  in  has  been  absorbed  in  ‘  then.’  *  But  more  then’  these,  in  love  I  do  deserve 
her. — Ed. 

41.  shrine]  The  use  of  this  word,  instead  of  image,  here  and  in :  ‘for  feature,  lam¬ 
ing  The  shrine  of  Venus,’  Cym.  V,  v,  164,  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  66)  cites  as  instances  of 
‘an  inaccurate  use  of  words  in  Shakespeare.’  Similar  instances  (‘eternal’  for  infernal ) 
we  have  had  in  Ham.  I,  v,  21,  and  Oth.  IV,  ii,  154.  I  am  afraid  Walker  is  right,  but 
it  costs  a  pang  to  give  up  the  lowly  kiss  merely  on  the  shrine  that  holds  the  saint. — 
Ed. 

42.  Hircanion]  Clarendon  :  Hyrcania  was  a  name  given  to  a  district  of  indefinite 
extent  south  of  the  Caspian.  Shakespeare  three  times  mentions  the  tigers  of  Hyrcania : 
3  Hen.  VI:  I,  i,  156;  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  101 ;  Ham.  II,  ii,  428.  In  Holland’s  Plinie, 
viii,  cap.  18,  we  find:  ‘Tygres  are  bred  in  Hircania  and  India.’ 

42.  vaste]  For  many  another  instance  of  the  confusion,  in  the  old  copies,  of  e  and 
ie  final,  see  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  48).  Clarendon  :  Waste,  desolate.  It  has  almost  an 
active  sense  in  Hen.  V:  II,  iv,  105  :  ‘  War  opens  his  vasty  jaws.’  So  ‘  vastness  ’  is  used 
for  desolation  in  Bacon’s  Advancement  of  Learning,  II,  vii,  7  :  ‘  Because  their  excur¬ 
sions  into  the  limits  of  physical  causes  hath  bred  a  vastness  and  solitude  in  that 
tract.’ 

44.  to  come]  For  instances  of  the  omission  and  of  the  insertion  of  ‘to,’  see  Ab¬ 
bott,  §  349. 


act  II,  sc.  vii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


105 


To  rib  her  fearecloath  in  the  obfcure  graue : 

Or  fhall  I  thinke  in  Siluer  fhe’s  immur’d 
Being  ten  times  vndervalued  to  tride  gold ; 

O  finfull  thought,  neuer  fo  rich  a  Iem 
Was  fet  in  worfe  then  gold  /  They  haue  in  England 
A  coyne  that  beares  the  figure  of  an  Angell 
Stampt  in  gold,  but  that’s  infculpt  vpon : 


52 


55 


58 


52.  rib~\  ribb  Q2Q3* 


58.  Stampt  ]  Stamped  Rowe  ii  et  seq. 


52.  rib]  Steevens  :  That  is,  to  enclose.  See  Cym.  Ill,  i,  19 :  ‘  Neptune’s  park, 
ribbed  and  paled  in  With  rocks  unscaleable,  and  roaring  waters.’ 

52.  searecloath]  Clarendon:  See  Cotgrave,  ‘  Cerat :  A  Plaister  made  of  Waxe, 
Gummes,  &c.,  and  certaine  oyles ;  Wee  also,  call  it,  a  cerot  or  seare-cloth.’ 

54.  vndervalued]  Clarendon  :  In  the  beginning  of  Elizabeth’s  reign,  gold  was 
to  silver  in  the  proportion  of  1 1  to  I ;  in  the  forty-third  year  of  her  reign  (i.  e.  1600,  the 
year  in  which  this  play  was  first  printed)  it  was  in  the  proportion  of  10  to  I  ( Encycl . 
Brit.,  Art.  ‘  Coinage  ’).  The  ratio  at  present  is  nearly  15  to  1. 

54-  to]  See  ante,  I,  i,  176. 

57.  coyne]  Knight:  ‘  To  come  now  unto  the  cause  of  the  general  calling  of  our 
Ancestors  by  the  name  of  Englishmen,  and  our  Country  consequently  by  the  name  of 
England.  ....  This  King  [Egbert]  considering  that  so  many  different  names,  as  the 
distinct  Kingdoms  before  had  caused,  was  now  no  more  necessary,  and  that  as  the  peo¬ 
ple  were  all  originally  of  one  Nation,  so  was  it  fit  they  should  again  be  brought  under  one 
name ;  and  although  they  had  had  the  general  name  of  Saxons,  as  unto  this  day  they 
are  of  the  Welsh  and  Irish  called,  yet  did  he  rather  chuse  and  ordain  that  they  should 
be  all  called  English-men,  as  but  a  part  of  them  before  were  called ;  and  that  the  Coun¬ 
try  should  be  called  England.  To  the  affectation  of  which  name  of  English-men,  it 
should  seem  he  was  chiefly  moved  in  respect  of  Pope  Gregory,  his  alluding  the  name 
of  Engelisce  unto  Angel-like.  The  name  of  Engel  is  yet  at  this  present  in  all  the  Teu- 
tonick  Tongue,  to  wit,  the  high  and  low  Dutch,  &c.  as  much  to  say,  as  Angel,  and  if  a 
Dutch-man  be  asked  how  he  would  in  his  Language  call  an  Angel-like-man,  he  would 
answer,  ein  English-man ;  and  being  asked  how  in  his  own  Language  he  would  or  doth 
call  an  English-man,  he  can  give  no  other  name  for  him,  but  even  the  very  same  that 
he  gave  before  for  an  Angel-like-man,  that  is,  as  before  is  said,  ein  English-man,  Engel 
being  in  their  Tongue  an  Angel,  and  English,  which  they  write  Engelsche,  Angel¬ 
like.  And  such  reason  and  consideration  may  have  moved  our  former  Kings,  upon 
their  best  Coin  of  pure  and  fine  Gold,  to  set  the  Image  of  an  Angel,  which  may  b« 
supposed,  hath  as  well  been  used  before  the  Norman  Conquest,  as  since.’ — Verstegan’s 
Restitution  of  Decayed  Intelligence,  &c.  [p.  161,  ed.  1673].  Dyce:  This  gold  coin, 
an  *  angel,’  at  its  highest  value  was  worth  ten  shillings.  Clarendon  :  It  has  supplied 
Shakespeare  with  many  puns. 

58.  insculpt]  Steevens  :  To  ‘  insculp  ’  is  to  engrave.  Douce  :  It  is  here  put  in  oppo¬ 
sition  to  engrave,  and  simply  denotes  to  carve  in  relief.  The  angel  on  the  coin  was 
raised;  on  the  casket  indented.  The  word  insculp  was,  however,  formerly  used  with 
great  latitude  of  meaning.  Eccles  :  It  seems  as  if  Morochius,  at  first  view,  imagined 
that  he  had  found  out  the  subject  of  an  ingenious  and  refined  compliment,  which,  at 
the  next  moment,  he  discovers  to  be  incapable  of  producing  the  effect  he  expected  fr'tn 


io6 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  vii 


But  here  an  Angell  in  a  golden  bed 

Lies  all  within.  Deliuer  me  the  key :  60 

Here  doe  I  choofe,  and  thriue  I  as  I  may. 

Por.  There  take  it  Prince,  and  if  my  forme  lye  there 
Then  I  am  yours. 

Mor.  0  hell  !  what  haue  we  here,  a  carrion  death, 

Within  whofe  emptie  eye  there  is  a  written  fcroule ;  05 

lie  reade  the  writing. 

All  that  gli/lers  is  not  gold , 

Often  haue  you  heard  that  told ; 

Many  a  man  his  life  hath  fold 

But  my  out  fide  to  behold ;  yc 

63.  [Unlocking  the  gold  casket.  Rowe  64-66.  Three  lines,  ending  here,... 

et  seq.  (subs.).  eye... writing.  Cap.  et  seq. 

66.  lie... writing]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 


it.  [Dyce  long  ago  said  ( Remarks ,  p.  96)  that  ‘  except  those  explanatory  of  customs, 
dress,  &c.,  the  notes  of  Douce  are  nearly  worthless;’  which  is  so  true  that  I  never  re¬ 
peat  Douce’s  notes  unless  they  have  been,  in  whole  or  in  part,  used  by  subsequent  edi¬ 
tors  ;  in  that  case  the  scope  of  this  present  edition  requires  their  insertion.  The  above 
note  is  in  point.  Douce  apparently  thought  that  a  distinction  was  made  by  Morocco 
between  relievo  and  intaglio ;  whereas  the  Angell,  lying  all  within,  in  a  golden  bed, 
was  the  portrait  of  Portia,  as  is  pointed  out  by  the  Cowden-Clarkes.  Eccles  also  appa¬ 
rently  fails  to  see  the  meaning. — Ed.] 

60,  61.  key  .  .  .  may]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  167) :  A  rhyme.  ‘Key,’  in  Shakespeare’s 
time,  was  almost  always  pronounced  kay.  Ellis  ( Early  Eng.  Pron.,  p.  957) :  It  is 
not  quite  certain  whether  this  is  meant  for  a  rhyme.  [This  difference  of  opinion  be¬ 
tween  two  excellent  authorities  teaches  us  caution  in  drawing  conclusions  from  the 
abundance  or  the  lack  of  rhymes  in  these  plays. — Ed.] 

63-65.  I  see  no  absolute  necessity  for  changing  the  division  of  the  lines  here.  Surely, 
after  the  broken  line  *  Then  I  am  yours,’  the  time  which  elapses  while  the  Prince  is  open¬ 
ing  the  casket  is  enough  to  make  the  ear  forget  the  exigencies  of  an  iambic  trimeter. — Ed. 

67.  glisters]  Rolfe:  Glisten  does  not  occur  in  Shakespeare  nor  in  Milton.  Id 
both  we  find  ‘  glister  ’  several  times. 

69,  70.  Eccles  is  the  only  editor,  as  far  as  I  know,  who  finds  any  difficulty  here,  ano 
I  sympathize  with  him.  The  general  drift  is  clear  enough,  and  is  contained  in  the  very 
first  line,  in  the  old  proverb ;  but  it  is  not  so  clear  that  many  a  man  has  sold  his  life 
merely  for  the  sake  of  looking  at  gold.  Eccles  thinks  that,  perhaps,  since  gold  pos¬ 
sesses  ‘  no  essential,  inherent  utility  beyond  inferior  metals,  the  extraordinary  fondness 
for  it  may  be  considered  as  arising  from  the  gratification  men  feel  in  looking  at  it 
which  I  doubt.  Perhaps  it  is  enough  to  suppose  that  in  days  when  wealth  was  kept 
locked  up  in  chests,  to  see  the  gold  was  to  own  it.  Or  it  may  be  that  men  are  willing 
to  sell  their  lives  merely  for  the  outside  glitter  of  wealth,  its  gewgaws  and  frippery.  Or 
there  may  be  no  reference  to  gold  at  all ;  as  it  is  the  skull  that  speaks,  it  may  refer  to 
beauty. — Ed. 


act  li,  sc.  vii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


107 


Guilded  timber  doe  wormes  infold:  7 1 

Had  yon  beene  as  wife  as  bold, 

Yong  in  limbs,  in  iudgement  old, 

Your  anfwere  had  not  beene  infcrold , 

Far eyouw ell,  your  fuite  is  cold,  75 

Mor.  Cold  indeede,  and  labour  loft, 

Then  farewell  heate,  and  welcome  froft :  77 

7 1 .  Guilded]  Gilded  Rowe  et  seq.  may  Pope  + .  woods  do  Ktly.  tombs  do 

71.  timber  doe]  Q2F3>  timber  do  QjF^  Johns,  conj.  Cap.  et  cet. 

F4,  Rowe,  Hal.  Timber  doe  Q3.  wood 


71.  Johnson:  ‘Gilded  wood  may  worms  infold’  is  aline  not  bad  in  itself,  but  not 
so  applicable  to  the  occasion  as  that  which,  I  believe,  Shakespeare  wrote :  ‘  Gilded 
tombs  do,’  &c.  A  tomb  is  the  proper  repository  of  a  death's  head.  Capell  (p.  62) : 
‘  Tombs  ’  (or,  as  written  formerly,  tonibes )  we  can  very  readily  imagine,  of  either  printer 
or  copyer,  to  have  been  mistaken  for  ‘  timber :’  but  that  wood  should  be  so,  and,  over 
and  above  that,  may  for  ‘  doe,’  never  enter’d  yet  into  head  that  had  just  conceptions  of 
criticism ;  yet  into  both  those  words  are  timber  and  doe  converted  by  the  second  modern 
[Pope],  and  his  conversion  adher’d  to  by  all  his  successors :  Tombs,  richly  gilded,  are 
the  ornaments  of  many  old  churches  at  this  day.  Steevens  :  Conf.  Sidney’s  Arcadia, 
i :  ‘  But  gold  can  guild  a  rotten  piece  of  wood.’  Malone  :  Dr  Johnson’s  emendation 
is  supported  by  Shakespeare’s  101st  Sonnet :  ‘It  lies  in  thee  To  make  thee  much  out¬ 
live  a  gilded  tomb.’  Knight  :  Without  any  violation  of  grammatical  propriety,  ‘  tim¬ 
ber  ’  might  be  used  as  a  plural  noun.  Gilded  timber  —  timbers  —  coffins  —  do  infold 
worms.  Still  the  original  reading  is  harsh  and  startling.  Staunton  :  If  ‘  timber  ’  is 
right,  then  the  redundant  ‘  do  ’  is  an  interloper,  and  should  be  omitted.  Halliwell  : 
‘  Timber  ’  is  here  a  plural  noun,  and  the  redundant  syllable  is  no  sufficient  reason  for 
adopting  Dr  Johnson’s  plausible  alteration.  It  may  be  questioned  whether  Shakespeare 
is  referring  either  to  a  coffin  or  a  tomb,  but  rather  to  the  gilded  chest  which  contained 
‘  the  carrion  death.’  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Johnson’s  suggestion  of  ‘  tombs  ’  is  counte¬ 
nanced  by  the  (MS),  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  it.  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  ‘  Timber  ’ 
is  a  sheer  misprint. 

73.  Abbott,  §  275  :  It  would  seem  that  ‘  as  ....  so’  are  both  to  be  implied  from 
the  previous  line.  ‘(As)  young  in  limbs,  (so)  in  judgement  old.’ 

74.  Your]  Johnson:  Since  there  is  an  answer  ‘inscrol’d,’  or  written  in  every 
.asket,  I  believe  for  ‘  your  ’  we  should  read  this.  When  the  words  were  written  yr 
and  ys,  the  mistake  was  easy.  Eccles  :  ‘  Your  answer  ’  may  signify,  ‘  such  an  answei 
as  you  have  now  received.’ 

74,  75.  Holt  White  proposed  that  between  these  lines,  ‘All  that  glitters  is  not 
gold  ’  should  be  inserted.  ‘  The  inscription  on  the  gold  casket  will  then  be  comprised 
in  the  same  number  of  lines  which  the  inscription  on  the  silver  one  contains.’ 

77.  Halliwell  :  This  is  a  paraphrastical  inversion  of  the  common  old  proverb : 
‘  Farewell,  frost,’  which  was  used  on  the  absence  or  departure  of  anything  that  was 
.unwelcome  or  displeasing.  ‘Farewell,  frost,  will  you  needes  be  gone,’ — Wapull’s 
Tyde  Taryeth  No  Man,  1576.  ‘Therefore  are  you  so  foule,  and  so,  farewell,  frost.’ — 
Lilly’s  Mother  Bombie,  and  elsewhere. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  vii. 


108 


78 

80 

79.  Exit.]  Exit  with  his  train.  Cornets.  Dyce. 


Portia  adew,  I  haue  too  grieu’d  a  heart 

To  take  a  tedious  leaue  :  thus  loofers  part.  Exit . 

Por.  A  gentle  riddance  :  draw  the  curtaines,  go  : 

Let  all  of  his  complexion  choofe  me  fo.  Exeunt. 


79.  part]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  depart.  Depart  was  also  used  where  we  should 
say  *  part,’  as  in  the  Marriage  Service  *  till  us  do  part  ’  is  a  corruption  of  ‘  till  death  U3 
depart.’ 

79.  Exit.]  M.  D.  Conway  :  Standing  before  the  dull  leaden  casket  which  holds  the 
portrait  of  Portia,  the  unsuccessful  Prince  might  justly  say  to  it :  ‘  Leaden  box,  you  are 
a  lie  !  You  are  not  the  fair  and  honest  setting  for  such  a  pearl  as  Portia!’  The  box 
might  reply :  *  No,  I  am  not  exactly  a  lie,  but  a  stratagem  for  getting  at  the  truth  amid 
a  lying  world.  An  old  man  wanted  his  daughter  to  marry  a  man  who  had  the  wit  to 
look  below  the  surface  of  things.’  ‘Well,’  the  Prince  might  retort,  ‘you  will  succeed 
in  getting  a  deeper  fellow  than  I  am ;  but  you  may  find,  when  Bassanio  has  paid  his 
debts  with  your  gold,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  being  too  deep.’  [See  Cam.  Edd. 
note  on  ‘  Flo.  Cornets  ’  in  line  2  of  the  next  Scene.] 

81.  Johnson:  This  play  having  been  probably  divided  without  authority  by  the 
publishers  of  the  First  Folio,  lies  open  to  a  new  regulation,  if  any  more  commodious 
division  can  be  proposed.  The  story  is  itself  so  wildly  incredible  and  the  changes  of 
scene  so  frequent  and  capricious,  that  the  probability  of  action  does  not  deserve  much 
care;  yet  it  may  be  proper  to  observe,  that,  by  concluding  the  Second  Act  here,  time 
is  given  for  Bassanio’s  passage  to  Be!'”<^ot. 


act  ii.  sc.  viii.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


109 


{Scene  VIII] 

Enter  Salarino  and  Solanio. 

Flo.  Cornets. 

Sal.  Why  man  I  faw  Baffanio  vnder  fayle, 

With  him  is  Gratiano  gone  along ; 

And  in  their  fhip  I  am  fure  Lorenzo  is  not.  5 

Sol.  The  villaine  lew  with  outcries  raifd  the  Duke. 

Who  went  with  him  to  fearch  Baffanios  fhip. 

Sal.  He  comes  too  late,  the  fhip  was  vnderfaile ; 

But  there  the  Duke  was  giuen  to  vnderftand 

That  in  a  Gondilo  were  feene  together  10 

Lorenzo  and  his  amorous  IeJJica. 

Befides,  Anthonio  certified  the  Duke 
They  were  not  with  Baffanio  in  his  fhip. 

Sol.  I  neuer  heard  a  paffion  fo  confufd, 

So  flrange,  outragious,  and  fo  variable,  1 5 


Scene  IV.  Venice.  Rowe.  Scene  IX. 
Pope.  Scene  VI.  Eccles.  Scene  VIII. 
Steev.  Scene  VII.  Hal. 

1.  Salarino]  Solarino  Rowe. 

Solanio]  Salanio  Q2. 

2.  Flo.  Cornets.]  Om.  Qq,  Rowe  +  . 

5.  I am]  Ime  Qx.  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Coll. 
Wh.  i,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 


6.  Sol.]  Salan.  Qt. 

8.  comes ]  Ff,  Rowe,  came  Qq  et  cet. 

10.  Gondilo ]  Gondylo  Qq.  Gondalo 
Rowe.  Gondola  Theob. 

1 1 .  amorous ]  armorous  Qr. 

14,  27,  36,  53.  Sol.]  Salan.  Qt. 

15.  Jlrange,  outragious]  strange-out¬ 
rageous  Dyce  iii. 


2.  Flo.  Cornets.]  Cambridge  Editors  :  This  Stage-direction  Capell  [and  Dyce] 
transferred  to  the  beginning  of  Scene  vii.  Dyce  added  ‘  Comets  ’  at  the  end  of  th< 
Scene  also.  We  have  adopted  the  suggestion,  as  the  Prince’s  leaving  the  stage  woul« 
naturally  be  accompanied  with  the  same  pomp  as  his  entrance. 

10.  Gondilo]  Staunton  and  Halliwell  give  a  long  account  by  Tom  Coryat  ( Crudi 
ties,  p.  170,  1 7 1,  ed.  1611)  of  the  gondola  as  it  was  in  Shakespeare’s  day,  whereby 
it  appears  that  it  differed  little  from  that  of  the  present  time ;  then,  as  now,  ‘  if  the 
passenger  meaneth  to  be  private,  he  may  draw  down’  ‘the  faire  black  cloth,’  ‘and 
after  row  so  secretly  that  no  man  can  see  him.’  Wherefore,  if  Lorenzo  and  the 
amorous  Jessica  were  ‘seen,’  it  was  because  they  chose  to  be,  as  Knight  suggests. — 
Ed. 

14,  &c.  Elze  (Essays,  p.  95) :  This  is  the  only  Scene  in  which  Shylock  might 
appear  in  a  ridiculous  light,  and  the  poet  very  wisely  does  not  bring  it  before  us  on  the 
stage,  but  merely  describes  it  by  hearsay. 

>  15.  strange,  outragious]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  32)  :  Read,  undoubtedly,  strange-out¬ 

rageous  ;  oirwf  ardiruc  ludv/iov.  The  awkwardness  of  the  common  reading  is  tb<£  same 
as  in  Jul.  Cces.  I,  iii,  *  Most  bloody-fiery,  and  most  terrible.’ 


no 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  viii. 


As  the  dogge  lew  did  vtter  in  the  ftreets ;  16 

My  daughter,  O  my  ducats,  O  my  daughter, 

Fled  with  a  Chriftian,  O  my  Chriftian  ducats ! 

Iuftice,  the  law,  my  ducats,  and  my  daughter ; 

A  fealed  bag,  two  fealed  bags  of  ducats,  20 

Of  double  ducats,  ftolne  from  me  by  my  daughter, 

And  iewels,  two  ftones,  two  rich  and  precious  ftones, 

Stolne  by  my  daughter  :  iuftice,  finde  the  girle, 

She  hath  the  ftones  vpon  her,  and  the  ducats. 

Sal.  Why  all  the  boyes  in  Venice  follow  him,  25 

Crying  his  ftones,  his  daughter,  and  his  ducats. 

Sol.  Let  good  Anthonio  looke  he  keepe  his  day 
Or  he  fhall  pay  for  this. 

Sal.  Marry  well  remembred, 

I  reafon’d  with  a  Frenchman  yefterday,  30 

Who  told  me,  in  the  narrow  feas  that  part 
The  French  and  Englifh,  there  mifcaried 
A  veffell  of  our  countrey  richly  fraught : 

I  thought  vpon  Anthonio  when  he  told  me, 

And  wifht  in  filence  that  it  were  not  his.  35 

Sol.  Yo  were  beft  to  tell  Anthonio  what  you  heare. 

17,  18.  0 ]  0  Q2Q3.  Johns,  too!  two  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 

22.  two  Jlones,  two]  two  Ff,  Rowe,  two  36.  Yo]  Ft. 

j*>«ArPope,Theob.  Han.  too, stones, Warb. 

17.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  54) :  Sidney,  Arcadia,  ii,  178  (describing  the  death  of  ‘the 
old  bad  Chremes  ’), — ‘  But  one  thing  was  notable  for  a  conclusion  of  his  miserable  life, 
that  neither  the  death  of  his  daughter,  who  (alas,  poor  gentlewoman !)  was  by  chance 
slain  among  his  clowns,  while  she  overboldly  for  her  weak  sex  sought  to  hold  them 
from  me,  nor  yet  his  own  shameful  end,  was  so  much  in  his  mouth  as  he  was  led  to 
execution,  as  the  loss  of  his  goods  and  burning  of  his  house :  which  often,  with  more 
laughter  than  tears  of  the  hearers,  he  made  pitiful  exclamations  upon.’  [See  also,  Wily 
Beguiled,  in  Appendix.] 

27.  keepe]  For  the  subjunctive  in  subordinate  sentences,  see  Abbott,  §  368. 

30.  reason’d]  Capell:  An  arrant  Gallicism;  us’d,  as  do  the  French  their  Je 
raisonnois,  for — I  talk’d,  simply. 

31.  the  narrow  seas]  See  post.  III,  i,  4. 

36.  Yo  were  best]  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  204) :  Thou  wert,  you  were,  I  was,  &c.  occur 
frequently,  both  in  Shakespeare  and  contemporary  dramatists,  in  places  where  it  is  clear 
they  must  have  been  pronounced  as  one  syllable,  in  whatever  manner  the  contraction 
was  effected.  [See  Ham.  IV,  v,  14 ;  Oth.  I,  ii,  34,  &c.  Walker  cites  2  Hen.  VI: 
V,  i:  ‘You  were  best  to  go  to  bed,  and  dream  again,’  as  under  this  rule,  ‘unless,’  he 
adds,  ‘  Shakespeare  wrote  “  You  were  best  go,”  ’  &c.,  which  gives  a  hint  of  anticipating 
Allen’s  conjecture  here — viz.  ‘You  were  best  tell  Antonio,’  &c.  According  to  Allen 


act  ii,  sc.  viii.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


in 


Yet  doe  not  fuddainely,  for  it  may  grieue  him.  37 

Sal.  A  kinder  Gentleman  treads  not  the  earth, 

I  faw  Baffanio  and  Anthonio  part, 

Baffanio  told  him  he  would  make  fome  fpeede  40 

Of  his  returne  :  he  anfwered,  doe  not  fo, 

Slubber  not  bufineffe  for  my  fake  Baffanio , 

But  ftay  the  very  riping  of  the  time, 

And  for  the  Iewes  bond  which  he  hath  of  me, 

Let  it  not  enter  in  your  minde  of  loue :  45 

Be  merry,  and  imploy  your  chiefeft  thoughts 
To  courtfhip,  and  fuch  faire  oftents  of  loue 
As  fliall  conueniently  become  you  there ; 

And  euen  there  his  eye  being  big  with  teares,  49 

37.  doe]  do't  Heath.  46.  imploy]  employ  Q,F3F4.  apply 

for]  lest  Cap.  (Erratum).  Dodd,  Coll,  ii  (MS). 

42.  Slubber]  Jluviber  Q2Q3-  48.  there  ;]  there.  Q,.  there,  Q2Q3- 

49.  there]  then  Dyce  iii. 

this  is  an  instance  of  the  absorption  of  the  ‘  to  ’  in  the  t  of  ‘  bes/.’  ‘  Bes/1  to,'  he  says, 
‘is  against  the  ear  of  that  age.’ — Ed.]  See  Abbott,  §  230,  for  the  whole  phrase,  with 
‘other  ungrammatical  remnants  of  ancient  usage.’  Also  post,  V,  i,  196;  Lear,  I,  iv, 
93 1  HI,  iv,  99. 

45.  enter  in]  See  Abbott,  §  159,  for  other  instances  of  the  use  of  in  with  verbs 
of  motion;  see  also,  V,  i,  65. 

45.  minde  of  loue]  Johnson  suspects  some  corruption  here.  Heath  (p.  116) : 
There  ought  to  have  been  a  comma  after  ‘  mind the  sense  is :  Let  me  entreat  you  by 
our  mutual  love,  that  you  take  not  the  least  thought  of  it.  Capell  (p.  62) :  It  was 
once  fancy’d  that  another  sense  was  intended,  inconsistent  with  this  pointing;  namely, — 
‘ in  your  mind  that  is  and  should  be  engag’d  by  love  and  love-matters:’  but  as  this 
anticipates  somewhat  the  thoughts  that  follow,  the  other  meaning  (which  moreover 
has  pathos  to  recommend  it)  is  rather  preferable  :  ‘  of  love  ’  is  every  day  us’d  by  us  in 
the  sense  of — for  love’s  sake.  Steevens :  ‘Your  mind  of  love ’  may,  however,  in  this 
instance,  mean  your  loving  mind.  Staunton  :  ‘  Mind  of  love  ’  may  be  correct,  but 
bond  of  love  would  be  more  in  Shakespeare’s  manner,  and  is  countenanced  by  a  pas¬ 
sage  in  Twelfth  N.  V,  i,  159,  where  it  occurs,  and  also  in  Wint.  Tale,  IV,  iv,  584 
Abbott,  §  169,  adopts  Heath’s  interpretation.  Clarendon  adopts  Steevens’s  interpre 
tation,  and  cites  Meas.  for  Afeas.  II,  iv,  179 :  ‘  Such  a  mind  of  honour.’  So,  likewise, 
Rolfe.  [It  is  difficult  to  decide  where  both  interpretations,  Heath’s  and  Steevens’s, 
are  so  evenly  balanced.  The  weight  of  authority,  however,  is  on  the  side  of  Steevens. 
—Ed.] 

46.  imploy]  Dodd  ftp.  Eccles) :  The  sense  seems  here,  evidently,  to  require  we 
should  read  apply. 

48.  conueniently]  Clarendon  :  Fitly,  suitably.  See  Proverbs,  xxx,  8 :  ‘  Feed 

me  with  food  convenient  for  me.’ 

> 

49.  there]  Dyce  :  This  is  repeated  by  mistake  from  the  preceding  line.  [See  Text. 
Notes,  where  Dyce’s  change  had  occurred  to  me  independently. — Ed.J 


1 12 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  viii. 

Turning  his  face,  he  put  his  hand  behinde  him,  50 

And  with  affedtion  wondrous  fencible 
He  wrung  Baffanios  hand,  and  fo  they  parted. 

Sol.  I  thinke  he  onely  loues  the  world  for  him, 

I  pray  thee  let  vs  goe  and  finde  him  out 

And  quicken  his  embraced  heauineffe  55 

With  fome  delight  or  other. 

Sal.  Doe  we  fo.  Exeunt. 

51.  fencible~\  55.  embraced ]  unbraced  Anon.  ap. 

54.  pray  thee~\  prethee  Qt.  Hal. 


55.  embraced]  Warburton  :  This  unmeaning  epithet  would  make  me  choose, 
rather,  to  read  :  enraced,  from  the  French  enraciner.  Johnson  :  When  I  thought  the 
passage  corrupted,  it  seemed  to  me  not  improbable  that  Shakespeare  had  written  en¬ 
tranced,  musing,  abstracted,  moping  melancholy.  But  I  know  not  why  any  great 
efforts  should  be  made  to  change  a  word  which  has  no  incommodious  or  unusual 
sense.  We  say  of  a  man  now  that  ‘  he  hugs  his  sorrows,’  and  why  might  not  Antho- 
nio  embrace  heaviness?  Steevens:  See  post.  III,  ii,  1 15 :  ‘doubtful  thoughts  and 
rash-embrac’d  despair.’ 


ACT  II,  sc.  ix.]  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


ii3 


[Scene  IX.] 

Enter  Nerriffa  and  a  Sendture. 

Ner  .  Quick,  quick  I  pray  thee,  draw  the  curtain  ftrait, 

The  Prince  of  Arragon  hath  tane  his  oath, 

And  comes  to  his  eledlion  prefently.  4 

Scene  IX.  Steev.  Scene  V.  Rowe.  1.  Enter. ..Seruiture]  Enter... Servitor. 
Scene  X.  Pope.  Scene  VII.  Ec.  Scene  QjF^.  Enter... Serviter.  F  . 

VIII.  Dyce.  3.  Arragon]  Arrogon  Qa. 


Scene  ix.]  Freytag  ( Technik  des  Dramas ,  1876,  p.  71,  &c.),  in  dealing  with  rep¬ 
etitions  of  the  same  or  similar  dramatic  situations,  which  must  always  either  afford  some 
agreeable  relief  as  a  foil  to  exciting  scenes,  or  else,  as  the  drama  proceeds,  conduce  to  a 
heightening  of  the  interest,  cites  as  a  happy  instance  of  the  former,  the  drowsiness  of 
Lucius  during  the  conspiracy  in  Act  II  of  Jul.  Cces.,  and  a  repetition  of  his  drowsiness 
in  Act  IV,  in  the  tent  of  Brutus ;  and,  as  an  instance  of  the  latter,  Romeo’s  fatal  duel 
with  Tybalt,  and  his  second  fatal  duel  with  Paris.  ‘  But  Shakespeare  is  not  always 
equally  happy.  The  repetition  of  the  Witches’  incantation  scene  in  Macbeth  adds 
nothing  to  the  dramatic  effect  of  the  tragedy ;  nor  does  the  threefold  choice  of  caskets 
here  in  the  Mer.  of  Ven. ;  the  dramatic  movement  in  the  first  two  elections  is  but 
small,  and  there  is  a  lack  of  exquisite  elegance  in  the  speeches  of  the  first  two  suitors.’ 
‘  But,’  Freytag  adds,  ‘  Shakespeare  could  permit  himself  to  indulge  in  such  rhetorical 
delicacies  because  his  solid,  substantial  public  found  especial  pleasure  in  courtly  ad¬ 
dresses.’  [Freytag  is  not  the  only  offender  in  failing  to  give  Shakespeare  credit  for 
consummate  skill  in  the  mere  artistic  construction  of  his  dramas.  There  is  a  feeling 
abroad  that  Shakespeare’s  success  in  this  regard  was  merely  a  lucky  hit,  a  kind  of 
inspiration,  of  whose  operation  he  himself  was  not  conscious.  Proofs  of  this  are 
afforded  in  the  freedom  with  which  critics  do  not  hesitate  to  rearrange  Shakespeare’s 
scenes.  It  is  strange  that  it  does  not  occur  to  them  that  any  sequence  of  scenes,  as  it 
arranged  itself  in  a  mind  as  through  and  through  dramatic  as  Shakespeare’s,  must  be 
better  than  it  possibly  can  be  in  any  mind  less  dramatic.  If  the  structure  of  any  of 
his  dramas  appear  incomprehensible  to  us,  it  is  our  duty  to  study  until  light  dawns  on 
us.  It  never  occurred  to  Freytag,  able  critic  as  he  is,  that  there  is  in  the  very  frame¬ 
work  of  this  play  a  dramatic  necessity  of  making  three  months  equivalent  to  a  watch 
in  the  night,  and  that  powerful,  essential  aids  to  this  end  are  the  succession  of  days  at 
Belmont,  and  the  succession  of  suitors  which  come  and  go,  and  all  the  weeks  which 
have  to  pass  to  fill  up  three  months,  while  Bassanio  is  journeying  by  night  only  twenty 
miles  from  Venice.  No  soliloquies,  no  dialogues  can  give  to  an  audience  a  ‘realizing 
sense  ’  of  this  flight  of  time  but  the  actual  passing  of  the  events  before  their  eyes  upon 
the  stage.  Yet  of  this  necessity  Freytag  appears  to  have  caught  never  a  hint. — Ed.] 

2.  draw]  Steevens  :  That  is,  draw  it  open.  So  in  an  old  Stage-direction  in  Hen. 
VIII :  *  The  king  draws  the  curtain  and  sits  reading  pensively.’  [It  can  evidently 
n\ean  either  to  open  or  close  the  curtain.  At  the  conclusion  of  this  Scene,  line  88. 
Portia  again  tells  Nerissa  to  ‘draw  the  curtain,’  of  course  to  close  it,  after  Arragon’s 

choice. — Ed.] 

8 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ix. 


114 


Enter  Arragon ,  his  traine ,  and  Portia.  5 

Flor  .  Cornets. 

Por.  Beh  o  Id,  there  ftand  the  caskets  noble  Prince, 

If  you  choofe  that  wherein  I  am  contain’d, 

Straight  fhall  our  nuptiall  rights  be  folemniz’d : 

But  if  thou  faile,  without  more  fpeech  my  Lord,  '  10 

You  muft  be  gone  from  hence  immediately. 

Ar.  I  am  enioynd  by  oath  to  obferue  three  things ; 

Firft,  neuer  to  vnfold  to  any  one 
Which  casket  ’twas  I  chofe  ;  next,  if  I  faile 

Of  the  right  casket,  neuer  in  my  life  1 5 

To  wooe  a  maide  in  way  of  marriage : 

Laftly,  if  I  doe  faile  in  fortune  of  my  choyfe, 

Immediately  to  leaue  you,  and  be  gone. 

Por.  To  thefe  iniundlions  euery  one  doth  fweare 
That  comes  to  hazard  for  my  worthleffe  felfe.  20 

Ar.  And  fo  haue  I  addreft  me,  fortune  now 


6.  Flor.  Cornets]  Om.  Qq. 

9.  Straight  ]  Srraight  Qr. 
rights ]  rites  Pope  et  seq. 

10.  thou ]  you  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

17.  Lajlly~\  Pope  + .  Closing  line 


16,  Cap.  et  seq.  (except  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Rife). 
Separate  line,  Cam.  Glo.  Del.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 
17.  I  doe"]  I  Pope  +  . 

21,  22.  me,  ...hope  :~\  me ;  ... hope :  Q3. 


9.  solemniz’d]  Walker  (  Vers.  p.  194)  called  attention  to  the  shifting  accent  of 
this  word.  Here  and  in  III,  ii,  199,  the  accent  is  the  same,  but  in  Love's  Lab.  Lost, 
II,  i,  42,  it  is  solemnizid.  Abbott,  §491,  thinks  that  the  emphasis  which  -ised  now 
has  is  due  to  the  present  broad  pronunciation  of  i.  Polysyllables  with  this  termination 
‘  generally  have  now  two  accents,  the  principal  accent  coming  first.  But  in  Shake¬ 
speare’s  time  it  would  seem  that  the  i  approximated  in  some  of  these  words  to  the 
French  i,  and,  the  -ed  being  pronounced,  the  i  in  -ised  was  unemphatic.’ 

16,  17.  in  way  ...  in  fortune]  See  I,  i,  61 ;  II,  i,  17 ;  or  Abbott,  §  89,  for  omis¬ 
sion  of  the  definite  article. 

16.  marriage]  A  trisyllable.  See  Walker  (  Vers .  175);  Abbott,  §479. 

17.  Lastly]  The  Cambridge  Editors  rightly  regard  this  word  as  an  inteijectional 
line.  For  other  instances,  see  Abbott,  §511. 

20.  to  hazard]  Clarendon:  Here  a  substantive.  Schmidt  [Lex.)  considers  it 
a  verb.  It  is  not  easy  to  determine,  but  considering  the  frequency  with  which  the  def¬ 
inite  article  is  absorbed  or  elided,  Clarendon’s  view  seepis  the  more  likely. — Ed. 

21.  addrest]  Steevens  :  To  ‘address’  is  to  prepare.  That  is,  I  have  prepared 
myself  by  the  same  ceremonies.  Tyrwhitt  :  I  believe  we  should  read,  *  And  so  have 
I.  Address  me,  Fortune,  now  To  my  heart’s  hope.’  So  in  the  Merry  Wives,  III,  v, 
135,  ‘I  will  then  address  me  to  my  appointment.’ 

21.  fortune,  &c.]  Eccles  :  *  Be  propitious  !’  or  some  such  words,  seem  to  be  under¬ 
stood.  Clarendon  :  That  is,  ‘  May  good  fortune  second  my  heart’s  hope.’  Or,  sup- 


act  ii,  sc.  ix.]  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


US 


To  my  hearts  hope  :  gold,  filuer,  and  bafe  lead.  22 

Who  choofeth  me  muft  giue  and  hazard  all  he  hath. 

You  fhall  looke  fairer  ere  I  giue  or  hazard. 

What  faies  the  golden  cheft,  ha,  let  me  fee  :  2$ 

Who  choofeth  me,  fhall  gaine  what  many  men  defire : 

What  many  men  defire,  that  many  may  be  meant 
By  the  foole  multitude  that  choofe  by  fliow, 

Not  learning  more  then  th  e  fond  eye  doth  teach, 

Which  pries  not  to  thhnterior,  but  like  the  Martlet  30 

Builds  in  the  weather  on  the  outward  wall, 


23,  26.  Italics,  Q  . 

27.  defire, ]  desire —  Rowe. 

many  may]  Many,  may  Rowe. 
may  Pope  +  . 

28.  By  the foole]  Of  the full  Pope,  Han. 
Of  the  fool  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap. 
Steev.  ’85. 


28.  foole  multitude] foole-multitude  QIt 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Ktly. 

30.  pries]  payes  F3<  pays  F4.  pry 
Theob.  Warb. 

pries  not  to]  piize  not  Coll.  (MS). 
th' interior,]  th' interiour ;  Qt,  Han. 
thinteriour,  Qa.  th' inheritour,  Q3> 
but]  Om.  Han. 


posing  the  speaker  to  invoke  the  goddess,  we  might  point  thus  :  ‘  Fortune !  now  To  my 
heart’s  hope.’  Now  let  me  try  my  luck. 

28.  By]  Malone:  That  is,  by  that  many  may  be  meant  the  foolish  multitude 
[which  White  suggested  as  a  possible  reading].  So  in  Plutarch’s  Life  of  Ccesar, 
translated  by  North,  1575:  ‘These  fat  long-heared  men  made  him  not  affrayed,  but 
the  lean  and  whitely-faced  fellows;  meaning  that  by  Brutus  and  Cassius.’  Again, 
in  Sir  Thomas  More’s  Life  of  Edward  the  Fifth,  Holinshed,  p.  1374:  ‘That  meant 
he  by  the  lordes  of  the  queenes  kindred.’  Again,  lb.  p.  1371:  ‘This  meant  he 
by  Catesby,  which  was  of  his  near  secrete  counsaile.’  Again,  Puttenham’s  Arte  of 
Poesie,  1589,  p.  157  :  ‘The  good  old  gentleman  would  tell  us  that  were  children,  how 
it  was  meant  [in  an  enigma]  by  a  furr’d  glove.’  Again,  lb.  p.  161 :  ‘  Any  simple  judge¬ 
ment  might  easily  perceive  by  whom  it  was  meant,  that  is,  by  lady  Elizabeth,  Queene 
of  England.’  [In  this  note  of  Malone  I  have  omitted  the  paraphrase  which  he  care¬ 
fully  gives  after  each  instance  except  the  last,  to  show  the  different  construction  of  the 
present  day.  It  is  strange  that  it  never  seems  to  have  occurred,  either  to  Malone  or  to 
any  one  else  except  Allen,  that  these  instances,  and  they  might  be  greatly  multiplied, 
reveal  the  fact  that  while  we  now  say,  ‘  I  mean  this  epithet  for  you,’  Shakespeare  and 
his  contemporaries  said,  ‘I  mean  this  epithet  by  you.’  Abbott,  §  145,  includes  this 
present  instance  under  the  same  section  with  *  How  say  you  by  the  French  lord,’  I,  ii, 
52.  It  may  be  that  they  are  parallel,  but  to  me  it  seems  simpler  to  hold  it  as  an  idiom 
that  by  was  used  commonly  after  the  verb  to  mean. — Ed.] 

28.  foole  multitude]  Unquestionably,  ‘foole’  here  is  used  adjectively,  and  is  so 
cited  by  Schmidt  {Lex.).  See  ‘foole  gudgin,’  I,  i,  112. —  Ed. 

30.  This  line  is  one  of  those,  of  which  Abbott,  §  495,  gives  several  instances,  where 
*  two  syllables  are  inserted  at  the  end  of  the  third  or  fourth  foot :  ‘Which  pries  |  not  to  | 
th’interwr,  j  but  like  |  the  Mart/?/.’ 

30.  Martlet]  See  Rowe’s  emendation,  Macb.  I,  vi.  4. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  II,  SC.  ix. 


i  t6 


Euen  in  the  force  and  rode  of  cafualtie.  32 

I  will  not  choofe  what  many  men  defire, 

Becaufe  I  will  not  iumpe  with  common  fpirits, 

And  ranke  me  with  the  barbarous  multitudes.  35 

Why  then  to  thee  thou  Siluer  treafure  houfe, 

Tell  me  once  more,  what  title  thou  dooft  beare ; 

Who  choofeth  me  ftiall  get  as  much  as  he  deferues : 

And  well  faid  too  ;  for  who  fhall  goe  about 

To  cofen  Fortune,  and  be  honourable  40 

Without  the  ftampe  of  merrit,  let  none  prefume 
To  weare  an  vndeferued  dignitie  : 

O  that  eftates,  degrees,  and  offices, 

Were  not  deriu’d  corruptly,  and  that  cleare  honour 

Were  purchaft  by  the  merrit  of  the  wearer ;  45 

How  many  then  fhould  couer  that  ftand  bare  ? 

How  many  be  commanded  that  command  ? 

How  much  low  pleafantry  would  then  be  gleaned  48 


32.  force~\  course  Bailey. 

rode)  Qq  Ff.  road  Rowe. 

35.  barbarous ]  barbarious  F  . 
multitudes ]  Walker,  Dyce  iii. 

38,  52,  60.  Italics,  QiQ3. 

39.  too ]  to  Q2Q3. 

41.  merrit ,]  merit?  Rowe. 


44.  and ]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

45.  purchaft ]  purchad d  Qx. 

48.  pleafantry\pezantry  Q^peafantry 
Q2Q3,  Rowe  et  seq. 

48,  5°.  gleaned ...  Pickt)  fanned... 
Gleaned  Daniel. 


32.  force]  Steevens  :  That  is,  the  power.  Allen  :  Perhaps  equivalent  to  in  vi 
et  via ,  exposed  to  the  attack  of. 

35.  multitudes]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  254).  Multitude,  surely;  ‘the  fool  multitude 
that  choose  by  show,’  a  few  lines  above.  [In  this  very  valuable  chapter,  No.  XXXVIII, 
Walker  gives  a  great  number  of  instances  of  the  frequent  interpolation,  and  of  the  fre¬ 
quent  omission,  of  the  final  s  in  the  First  Folio.  So  large  is  the  number  that  Walker 
himself  (p.  237)  says  that  *  the  fact  of  the  same  error  being  so  often  repeated  leads  me 
to  doubt  whether  it  is  an  error  after  all.’  See  ‘gossips,’  III,  i,  7;  ‘flints,’  IV,  i,  35; 
‘Masters,’  IV,  i,  55 ;  ‘  Messengers,’  IV,  i,  116.  Also,  Oth.  I,  i,  31 ;  Lear,  V,  iii,  258.] 

43.  estates]  Not  properly,  but  dignity,  status. 

44.  cleare]  Eccles  :  That  is,  bright,  splendid;  or,  perhaps,  unsullied.  Dyce 
[Gloss.) :  Pure,  innocent,  free  from  evil.  [See  ‘the  clearest  gods,’  Lear,  IV,  vi,  73, 
and  notes. — Ed.] 

J  / 

46.  couer]  Clarendon  :  Wear  their  hats,  as  masters.  See  As  You  Like  Lt,  III, 
iii,  78:  ‘Pray  be  covered.’  [See  also,  III,  v,  51.] 

48.  gleaned]  Johnson  :  The  meaning  is,  How  much  meanness  would  be  found 
among  the  great,  and  how  much  greatness  among  the  mean.  But  since  men  are 
always  said  to  glean  com  though  they  may  pick  chaff,  the  sentence  had  been  more 
agreeable  to  the  common  manner  of  speech  if  it  had  been  written :  ‘  How  much  low 
pleasantry  would  then  be  pick'd ....  how  much  honour  glean'd ,’  &c. 


act  ii,  sc.  ix.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


117 


From  the  true  feede  of  honor  ?  And  how  much  honor 

Pickt  from  the  chaffe  and  ruine  of  the  times,  50 

To  be  new  varnifht  :  Well,  but  to  my  choife. 

Who  choofeth  me  fhall  get  as  much  as  he  deferues. 

I  will  affume  defert  ;  giue  me  a  key  for  this,  53 

49.  And ]  Om.  Pope  +  .  53.  I...this~\  A  Key  for  thit ;  I  zui? 

50.  chaff e~\  chaft  Q2.  assume  defert ,  Han. 

51.  varnifht :~\vemijh'd?  QT.  varnifl;  defert  /]  defert.  Qx. 

Q2.  vanned  Warb. 

50.  chaffe  and  ruine]  Staunton  :  The  same  as  chaff  and  bran.  ‘  Ruin  ’  meant 
refuse,  rubbish.  ‘  But,’  asks  Allen,  *  is  bran  more  rubbish  than  chaff?  Perhaps  “  ruin  ” 
is  the  Latin  ruina,  a  heap,  and  perhaps  the  phrase,  by  hendiadys,  a  heap  of  chaff.’ 

51.  varnisht]  Warburton  :  This  confusion  and  mixture  of  metaphors  makes  me 
think  that  Shakespeare  wrote  vanned,  i.  e.  winnow’d,  purged,  from  the  French  vanner. 
This  alteration  restores  the  metaphor  to  its  integrity.  Steevens  :  Shakespeare  is  per¬ 
petually  violating  the  integrity  of  his  metaphors,  and  the  emendation  proposed  seems  to 
me  to  be  as  faulty  as  unnecessary ;  for  what  is  already  selected  from  the  chaff  needs  not 
be  new  vanned.  I  wonder  Dr  Warburton  did  not  think  of  changing  the  word  ‘  ruin  ’ 
into  rowing,  which  in  some  counties  of  England  is  used  to  signify  the  second  and  infe¬ 
rior  crop  of  grass  which  is  cut  in  autumn.  Heath  (p.  116)  :  The  confusion  of  meta¬ 
phors  was  introduced  by  adding  ‘  ruins  ’  to  ‘  chaff,’  and  it  is  to  the  former  of  these 
words  that  *  new  varnish'd ’  is  adapted.  Eccles  :  The  connection  between  the  ‘  chaff’ 
and  ‘  ruins  ’  is  not  extremely  obvious,  but  *  honour,’  having  been  recovered  thence,  is, 
upon  the  metaphorical  allusion  being  suddenly  dropped,  to  be  considered  in  a  new 
point  of  view,  more  suitable  to  its  true  nature  and  character,  and,  possibly,  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  those  armorial  insignia  and  types  of  nobility,  which,  having  been  painted,  are 
liable  by  time  to  be  sulked  and  defaced,  but,  by  being  new  varnished,  may  be  restored 
to  their  primitive  splendor.  Bailey  (ii,  206)  devotes  six  octavo  pages  to  the  justifica¬ 
tion  of  his  emendations  in  this  passage,  and  no  one  will  think  them  too  many  when  he 
sees  the  alterations  which  Bailey  says  give  a  ‘  clear  meaning  ’  to  Shakespeare  and  ren¬ 
der  Shakespeare’s  metaphorical  language  *  consistent  throughout.’  *  How  much  low 
peasant's  rye  would  then  be  screen'd  From  the  true  seed  of  honour !  and  how  much 
seed  Pick’d  from  the  chaff  and  strewings  of  the  temse,  To  be  new  garner’d  !'  ‘  Temse,’ 
which  appears  to  be  a  land  of  sieve,  Bailey  acknowledges  is  not  to  be  found  in  Shake¬ 
speare,  nor  indeed  in  any  other  writer,  except  in  Tusser,  and  then  only  as  a  compound 
with  ‘  loaf.’  It  also  appears  from  a  book  called  ‘  The  Wheat  Plant,’  published  in  Cin¬ 
cinnati,  in  i860,  that  ‘formerly’  (Bailey  does  not  tell  us  when)  it  was  ‘usual’  (Bailey 
does  not  tell  us  where)  to  sow  rye  and  early  wheat  together ;  the  harvested  grain  was 
termed  meslin.  ‘  It  is  a  probable  supposition,’  concludes  Bailey,  ‘  that  Shakespeare,  in 
forming  his  metaphor,  had  this  meslin  in  his  mind,  and  it  is  pretty  clear  why  he  spoke 
of  peasant's  rye.  It  may  be  added,  that  “peasantry  ”  is  a  word  not  to  be  found  in  his 
dramas.’ — Ed. 

53.  assume]  Schmidt:  That  is,  claim.  [Perhaps  it  is  even  stronger  than  ‘claim.’ 
„  It  is  used,  I  think,  in  its  original  Latin  meaning  of  taking  to  one's  self  ;  just  as  Hamlet 
tells  his  mother  to  *  assume  a  virtue,  if  she  have  it  not,’  or  as  Bassanio  uses  it  in  III, 
ii,  87. — Ed.] 

53.  for  this]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Hanmer,  Ritson,  and  Steevens  were,  I  believe,  right  in 


1 1  s 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  lx. 


And  inftantly  vnlocke  my  fortunes  here. 

Por.  Too  longapaufe  for  that  which  you  finde  there.  55 
Ar.  What’s  here,  the  portrait  of  a  blinking  idiot 
Prefenting  me  a  fcedule,  I  will  reade  it : 

How  much  vnlike  art  thou  to  Portia? 

flow  much  vnlike  my  hopes  and  my  deferuings  ? 

Who  choofeth  me,  fhall  haue  as  much  as  he  deferues.  60 

55.  As  an  aside,  Cap.  57.  fcedule, ~\  fe dule  ?  Q,.  fhedule,  Qa 

56.  [Unlocking  the  silver  casket.  Rowe.  fchedule?  F4< 

here,~\  here  !  Q3.  59.  defer uings~\  deferving  F^,  Rowe. 

portrait  ]  pourtrait  QaQ3.  60.  haue~\  get  Knt,  Dyce  iii. 


regarding  these  words  as  an  interpolation.  [Against  which  I  beg  to  enter  a  deferential 
protest.  To  me,  these  words  are  both  important  and  emphatic.  After  he  has  got  as  fai 
as  to  assume  desert,  Arragon  makes  so  long  a  pause  that  Portia  (although,  perhaps,  in 
an  Aside)  even  calls  attention  to  it.  Now,  while  we  do  not  need  this  pause,  as  we 
frequently  do  need  one,  to  supply  the  lack  of  missing  syllables,  yet  the  line  is  undenia¬ 
bly  broken,  and  in  broken  lines  I  think  that  all  the  requirements  of  rhythm  are  met  if 
both  fragments  run  smoothly.  Of  course,  there  is  a  limit  in  all  things.  It  is  not  to  be 
supposed  that  we  should  accept  fragments  composed  of  four  feet  each.  In  that  case  we 
may  suspect  corruption  and,  perhaps,  set  to  work  at  restoration.  But  here  the  fragments 
are  of  only  three  feet  each,  and  when  joined  together  merely  form  an  Alexandrine ;  and 
however  much  we  may  slur  over  syllables  and  compress  full-grown  words  into  dwarfs, 
yet  Alexandrines  are  to  be  found  in  Shakespeare,  and  Alexandrines  they  will  remain, 
not  alone  to  the  eye,  but  to  an  ear  which  prefers  a  clear  and  clean  enunciation  to  an 
abnormal  one.  Arragon  says,  ‘give  me  the  key  for  this  to  me  the  words  are  indis¬ 
pensable.  We  could  even  better  spare  ‘give  me,’  or  even  ‘  the  key,’  which  is  involved 
in  the  word  ‘  unlock.’  But  there  is  no  necessity  for  any  omission,  and  not  a  syllable 
can  be  spared,  as  I  think.  In  a  modernized  text,  might  it  not  be  proper  to  print  this 
in  a  parenthesis  ?  Unless  this  request  for  the  key  be  parenthetical,  how  are  we  to 
understand  the  construction  ?  This  *  give  ’  is  an  imperative  addressed  to  Portia.  With 
the  customary  punctuation,  ‘  unlock  ’  is  an  imperative  also,  and  is  Portia  to  unlock  the 
casket  ?  If  ‘  give  me  a  key  for  this  ’  be  put  in  a  parenthesis,  then  ‘  unlock  ’  is  future, 
and  in  the  same  construction  with  ‘  I  will  assume  desert.’ — Ed.] 

55.  I  cannot  find  that  any  editor  has  noticed  Capell’s  plausible  reading  of  this  line 
as  an  Aside.  (There  is  no  reference  to  it  in  the  Cam.  Ed.)  It  is  to  me,  beyond  a 
peradventure.  As  addressed  to  Arragon  these  words  have  the  sound  of  twitting  him, 
which  is  not,  to  me,  quite  in  character.  To  be  sure,  it  may  be  said  that  Portia  is  so 
delighted  at  his  failure  that  she  cannot  restrain  her  merriment,  but  the  open  expression 
of  it,  even  to  a  deliberate  fool,  is  not  exactly  in  harmony  with  that  sympathetic  tender¬ 
ness  of  hers  which  was  like  the  gentle  rain  from  heaven. — Ed. 

60.  haue]  Dyce  (ed.  i) :  This  (if  not  an  oversight  of  the  poet)  is  a  mistake  of  the 
scribe  or  printer  for  get ;  see  this  line  [where  it  has  been  previously  given].  White 
(ed.  i) :  But  as  this  line  is  read  from  ‘a  schedule,’  there  is  little  warrant  and  less  need 
to  change  it.  [From  aught  that  the  context  shows,  it  does  not  follow  that  Arragon  did 
read  the  line.  This  very  change  in  phraseology  may  have  been  meant  as  a  hint  to  us 
that  he  was  repeating  it  from  memory. — Ed.] 


act  ii,  sc.  ix.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


119 


Did  I  deferue  no  more  then  a  fooles  head,  61 

Is  that  my  prize,  are  my  deferts  no  better  ? 

Por.  To  offend  and  iudge  are  diftindt  offices, 

And  of  oppofed  natures. 

Ar.  What  is  here  ?  65 

The  jier  feauen  times  tried  this , 

Seauen  times  tried  that  iudement  is, 

That  did  neuer  choofe  amis, 

Some  there  be  that  Jhadowes  kiffe, 

Such  haue  but  a  Jhadowes  bliffe  :  70 

There  be  fooles  aliue  Iwis 
Siluedd  o’ re,  and  Jo  was  this  : 

Take  what  wife  you  will  to  bed, 

I  will  euer  be  your  head : 

So  be  gone ,  you  are  fped .  75 


61,  62.  head, ... prize ,]  head ?.. .prize  ? 

q.q3- 

62.  prize ]  price  Cap.  conj. 

65.  What  is]  What  Qx. 

[Hee  reads.  Qt. 

66.  fier  feauen]  Qa.  fire  feven  Qx. 

67.  iudement]  Qa.  iudgement  Qx. 


70.  lhadowes  bliffe]  shadow’d  Bliss 
Rowe. 

71.  I  wis]  Iwis  Qa. 

75.  be  gone]  be  gone  fir  Ff,  Rowe+, 
Steev.  Mai.  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  farewell,  sir 
Cap.  begone  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Hal.  Wh.  i, 
Sta.  Ktly. 


63.  Eccles  :  There  is  surely  an  obscurity  in  this  reply.  She  seems  to  consider  him 
as  having  offended  by  the  injudicious  choice  he  had  made ;  he  ought  not,  therefore,  to 
assume  the  character  of  a  judge  in  deciding  upon  his  own  merits,  which,  indirectly,  he 
may  be  said  to  do  by  this  indignant  inquiry. 

63.  distinct]  See  Abbott,  §  492,  for  a  list  of  words  in  which  *  the  accent  was 
nearer  the  beginning  than  with  us.’ 

65.  What  is  here  ?]  Again  another  careless  omission  in  Qt. 

71.  Iwis]  Cambridge  Editors:  Mr  Staunton,  in  a  note  to  Tam.  Shr.  I,  i,  men¬ 
tions,  on  Sir  F.  Madden’s  authority,  that  ‘  I  wis  ’  is  undoubtedly  derived  from  the  Saxon 
adverb  ‘  gewis,’  but  in  the  1 3th  century  ‘  ge  ’  was  changed  to  *  y  ’  or  ‘  i,’  and  in  the  latter 
end  of  the  15th  it  was  probably  held  to  be  equivalent  to  the  German  ‘  Ich  weiss.’  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  Shakespeare  spelt  it  *  I  wis,’  and  used  it  as  two  words,  pronoun  and 
verb.  [See  also  Abbott,  §  345.] 

73.  Johnson  :  Perhaps  the  poet  had  forgotten  that  he  who  missed  Portia  was  never 
to  marry  any  woman.  Halliwell  :  The  best  solution  of  this  difficulty  is  to  suppose 
that  the  oaths  were  enjoined  by  Portia,  and  not  by  the  father  who  prepared  the  caskets. 
Clarendon  :  Johnson  is  hypercritical  when  he  finds  fault  with  this  doggerel. 

74.  Clarendon  :  There  is  here,  perhaps,  a  reference  to  the  text :  '  The  husband  is 
the  head  of  the  wife.’ — Ephesians,  v,  23. 

75.  gone]  The  sir  of  Fa,  Boswell  says  was  added  ‘unnecessarily;’  Halliwell 
thinks  because  the  editor  of  that  edition  did  not  ‘  understand  the  metrical  system  fol¬ 
lowed  by  the  author;’  and  Collier  would  ‘prefer  for,  if  it  were  wanted  at  all.’ 


120 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ix. 


Ar.  Still  more  foole  I  fhall  appeare  76 

By  the  time  I  linger  here, 

With  one  fooles  head  I  came  to  woo, 

But  I  goe  away  with  two. 

Sweet  adue,  lie  keepe  my  oath,  80 

Patiently  to  beare  my  wroath. 

Por.  Thus  hath  the  candle  Ting’d  the  moath : 

O  thefe  deliberate  fooles  when  they  doe  choofe, 

They  haue  the  wifdome  by  their  wit  to  loofe. 

Ner.  The  ancient  faying  is  no  herefie,  85 

Hanging  and  wiuing  goes  by  deftinie. 

Por.  Come  draw  the  curtaine  Nerriffa. 

Enter  Meffenger. 

Mef.  Where  is  my  Lady? 

Por.  Here,  what  would  my  Lord  ?  90 


76.  Ar.]  Om.  Q,.  Arrag.  Q2Q3- 
81.  wroath~\  Q,QaFf,  Cap.  Var.  Hal. 
wrath  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns,  roth  Dyce 
i.  wroth  Q3  et  cet. 

[Exit.  Rowe. 


82.  fngd'\fndg,d  Qr.  fcngd  Qa. 

moath ]  Moth  Q^F^. 

84.  the\  their  Q,Q3. 

86.  goes ]  go  Han.  Hal. 


81.  wroath]  Capell  (p.  63) :  This,  and  a  word  that  follows  it,  ‘moath,’  at  the  end 
of  Arragon’s  speech,  are  strange  perversions  of  spelling  (but  authentic  perversions) 
caus’d  by  rime.  But  wroath  is  open  to  yet  another  objection,  after  we  have  discover’d 
that  wrath  is  meant  by  it,  viz.  that  there  is  no  seeming  sense  in  it :  the  best,  and  the 
only  one  (perhaps)  that  invention  can  put  on  it,  is — misfortune  which  wrath  has  brought 
down,  the  wrath  of  the  gods.  Steevens  :  ‘  Wroath  ’  is  used  in  some  of  the  old  books 
for  misfortune  ;  and  is  often  spelt  like  ruth,  which  at  present  signifies  only  pity,  or  sor¬ 
row  for  the  miseries  of  another.  White  :  Wroth  seems  here  to  be  used  somewhat  in 
its  radical  sense,  which  connects  it  with  the  idea  of  suffering.  See  Richardson’s  Diet. 
s.  v.  ‘Wrath.’  Cowden-Clarke :  It  is  an  old  word  for  that  which  causes  writhing: 
‘  misfortune,’  ‘  calamity,’  ‘  disaster.’ 

82.  moath]  This  is,  as  Capell  intimates  in  the  preceding  note,  evidently  a  merry 
rhyme  of  Portia  to  the  ‘oath’  and  ‘wroath’  of  Arragon,  howsoever  these  two  xrrds 
were  pronounced.  I  cannot  find  that  either  Grant  White  or  Ellis  has  anywhere  noted 
this  rhyme,  yet  that  the  former  would  accept  it  as  such  I  have  but  little  doubt. — Ed. 

86.  Halliwell  gives  very  many  references  to  this  proverb,  which,  as  he  truly  says,  is 
‘  so  exceedingly  common.’  In  fact,  its  commonness  might  well  be  presupposed  from 
Nerissa’s  calling  it  ‘the  ancient  saying.’ — Ed. 

87.  curtaine]  Allen  suggests,  metri  gratia,  ‘curtaine  to,'  i.  e.  to  close  it.  Or 
‘ good  Nerissa,’  although  Portia  uses  no  epithet  elsewhere  with  Nerissa. 

88.  Messenger]  Collier,  in  his  first  edition,  inferred  from  Portia’s  address  that 
this  was  a  ‘person  of  rank,’  but  omitted  the  note  in  his  Second  Edition. 

90.  my  Lord  ?]  Tyrwhitt  :  Would  not  this  speech  to  the  servant  be  more  proper 


act  ii,  sc.  ix.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  121 

Mef.  Madam,  there  is  a-lighted  at  your  gate  91 

A  yong  Venetian,  one  that  comes  before 
To  fignifie  th’approaching  of  his  Lord, 

From  whom  he  bringeth  fenfible  regreets ; 

To  wit  (befides  commends  and  curteous  breath)  95 

Gifts  of  rich  value  ;  yet  I  haue  not  feene 
So  likely  an  Embaffador  of  loue. 

A  day  in  Aprill  neuer  came  fo  fweete 
To  ftiow  how  coftly  Sommer  was  at  hand, 

As  this  fore-fpurrer  comes  before  his  Lord.  100 

Por.  No  more  I  pray  thee,  I  am  halfe  a-feard 
Thou  wilt  fay  anone  he  is  fome  kin  to  thee,  102 


91.  a- lighted]  alighted  F+. 

95.  curteous ]  courteous  Q,.  curtious 
Q2.  curious  Q3> 

99.  Sommer ]  Summer  Qx. 

100.  fore-fpurrer ]  fore- spurrier  Cap. 
(Corrected  in  Errata.) 


101.  a-feard ]  Q2FaQ3.  a-feadd  Qt. 
a  feard  F3.  afraid  Pope  + .  afeard  F4 
et  cet. 

102.  Thou  wilt  ]  Thou' It  Pope  + ,  Dyce 
iii,  Huds. 

anone ]  anon  Qx. 


in  the  mouth  of  Nerissa  ? *  *  No,’  replies  Ritson  (p.  53),  4  very  impertinent,  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  her  lady.’  Dyce  (. Remarks ,  p.  55) :  Portia  was  not  herself  of  sufficient  rank 
to  have  *  persons  of  rank  ’  among  her  attendants.  Her  reply  here  is  nothing  more  than 
a  sportive  rejoinder  to  the  abrupt  exclamation  of  the  Messenger.  Compare : 

* Hostess .  O  Jesu!  my  lord,  the  prince. 

P.  Henry.  How  now,  my  lady,  the  hostess.’ — 1  Hen.  IV:  II,  iv. 

4 Groom .  Hail,  royal  prince! 

King  Richard.  Thanks,  noble  peer.' — Rich.  II:  V,  v. 

1  Enter  Peter  with  a  candle. 

Peter.  Where  are  you,  my  Lord? 

Hog.  Here,  my  Lady.' — The  Hogge  hath  Lost  his  Pearle ,  1614,  sig.  H. 

Staunton  :  A  dozen  instances  may  be  cited,  where  a  similar  expression  is  used  by  an 
individual  of  station  to  one  of  very  inferior  rank.  [But  Staunton,  while  citing  those 
already  alleged  by  Dyce,  unfortunately  adds  none  to  them. — Ed.] 

94.  sensible]  Clarendon  :  Evident  to  the  senses,  substantial.  See  Macb.  II, 
>»  36- 

94.  regreets]  Steevens:  That  is,  salutations,  as  in  King  John ,  III,  i,  241. 

95.  commends]  Abbott,  §  451,  gives  this  in  a  list  of  words  used  as  nouns,  to  which 
we  should  at  the  present  time  append  -ation  or  -ition,  -ure  or  -ing. 

96.  yet]  See  Abbott,  §  76,  for  other  instances  of  the  use  of  ‘yet’  before  a  negative, 
meaning  ‘  up  to  this  time.’ 

97.  likely]  Aolfe :  In  the  Yankee  sense  of  promising  [or  good-looking  ? — Ed.]. 

99.  costly]  Allen  suggests  4  costly  a.’  Here  equivalent  to  German  kostiich ,  pre¬ 
cious. 


122 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ii,  sc.  ix. 


Thou  fpend  ft  fuch  high-day  wit  in  praifing  him  :  103 

Come,  come  Nerryffa ,  for  I  long  to  fee 

Quicke  Cupids  Poft,  that  comes  fo  mannerly.  105 


Ner.  Baffamo  Lord,  loue  if 

103.  high-day]  high  day  Qq  F4. 

104.  Nerryffa]  Q2Q3.  Nerriffa  Qt. 

105.  Quicke  Cupids]  Cupid's  quick 
Coll.  (MS). 

106.  Balfanio  Lord,  loue']  Q,Q2 F2F3. 
Baffanio,  Lord,  Love  Q3.  Baffanio  Lord, 


y  will  it  be.  Exeunt. 

love,  F4.  Bassanio  lord,  Lord!  Pope. 
Bassanio,  Lord  Love  !  Theob.  Han.  Coll, 
ii.  Bassanio,  Lord  Love,  or  Bassanio, 
lord  love,  Rowe  et  cet. 

106.  Exeunt]  Exit.  Qx. 


103.  high-day]  Steevens:  So  Merry  Wives,  III,  ii,  69:  ‘he  speaks  holiday.’ 
Eccles  :  It  seems  here  to  have  a  sense  pretty  similar  to  high-flown,  extravagant. 

106.  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Illust.  ii,  307) :  Mr  Pope  certainly  conceives  ‘Bassanio 
lord  ’  to  stand  for  Lord  Bassanio.  I  take  the  liberty  to  alter  the  pointing :  ‘  Bassanio, 
— Lord  Love !  if,’  Sic.  Allen  :  Thus  scan :  Bassa  |  ni6  |  Lord  Ldve  |  if  thy  |  will’t 
hi. 


act  hi,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


123 


Aclits  Tertius . 


\Scene  /.] 

Enter  Solanio  and  Salarino. 

Sol.  Now,  what  newes  on  the  Ryalto  ? 

Sal.  Why  yet  it  hues  there  vncheckt,  that  Anthonio 
hath  a  fhip  of  rich  lading  wrackt  on  the  narrow  Seas; the 
Goodwins  I  thinke  they  call  the  place,  a  very  dangerous  5 

Actus  Tertius]  Om.  Qq.  I.  Salarino]  Solarino  F  ,  Ro\ve  +  . 

1.  Solanio]  Salanio  QJf  Rowe  +  ,  Cam.  2,  &c.  Sol.]  Salan.  Qx.  Solanio  Q2. 

Glo.  Cla.  Now ,]  Now  Q2Q3. 


4.  the  narrow  Seas]  Clarendon  :  The  English  Channel.  In  the  ‘  prologe  of 
the  processe  of  the  Libell  of  Englishe  Policye  ’  [ed.  Hertzberg]  we  find :  *  Cherish 
marchaundyes  keep  th’  amiraltee  That  we  be  maysteres  of  the  narow  see.’  And  again 
of  Calais  and  Dover :  ‘  Keep  thees  two  townes,  sire,  to  your  magestee  As  your  twein 
eyen,  to  keep  the  narow  see.’  Sir  John  Hawkins,  writing  to  Lord  Burghley,  Nov.  30, 
1593,  ‘sends  a  note  of  the  pay  for  the  ships  serving  in  the  Narrow  seas.’ — Calendar 
of  State  Papers ,  1591-1594,  p.  389.  [The  foregoing  extracts  from  the  Libell  of  Eng¬ 
lish  Policy,  Clarendon  takes  from  Hakluyt’s  Voyages,  i,  p.  387,  ed.  1599,  but  they  are 
given  above  from  the  admirably-edited  edition  by  Hertzberg.  In  this  Libell,  which, 
dating  from  1436,  is  probably  the  very  earliest  Protectionist  plea  extant,  there  are  sev¬ 
eral  other  allusions  to  *  the  narowe  see,’  especially  one  which  occurs  just  before  the  first 
example  cited  by  Clarendon,  which,  by  ‘  exhortyng  alle  England  to  keep  the  see  envi- 
roun,  and  namely  the  narowe  see,’  also  shows  that  the  English  Channel  is  unquestion¬ 
ably  meant.  Yet  in  every  instance  the  ‘sea’  is  in  the  singular,  and  not  in  the  plural, 
as  Shakespeare  uses  it.  The  citation  from  Sir  John  Hawkins,  therefore,  is  exactly 
apposite. — Ed.] 

5.  I  thinke  they  call  the  place]  There  is  a  fine  passage  in  /  Hen.  IV:  I,  iii,  241, 
where  Hotspur,  in  his  headlong  fury,  cannot  recall  the  name  of  Berkeley  Castle :  ‘  What 
do  you  call  the  place  ? — A  plague  upon  it — it  is  in  Gloucestershire, — ’Twas  where  the 
madcap  duke  his  uncle  kept — His  uncle  York — where  I  first  bow’d  my  knee  Unto 
this  king  of  smiles,  this  Bolingbroke, — ’Sblood  ! — When  you  and  he  came  back  from 
Ravensburgh.’  So  true  to  nature  is  Hotspur’s  annoyance,  that  I  cannot  divest  myself 
of  the  belief,  first  suggested  to  me  by  my  father,  that  Shakespeare  in  the  hurry  of 
composition,  could  not,  himself,  at  that  instant,  recall  the  name.  Thus  here,  I  was 
inclined  at  first  to  think  that  Shakespeare  might  have  been  himself  a  little  in  doubt  as 
to  the  correctness  of  the  name  ‘  Goodwins,’  but  I  yield  to  the  Cowden-Clarkes  and  to 
Elze,  who  rightly,  as  I  now  think,  interpret  it  as  uttered  by  Salarino  for  the  sake  of  giv¬ 
ing  local  colour,  and  to  make  us  believe  that  we  are  in  Venice,  where  Venetians,  and 
not  Englishmen,  are  speaking.  ‘  By  such  touches  as  these,’  say  the  Cowden-Clarkes, 


124 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  i 


flat,  and  fatall,  where  the  carcafles  of  many  a  tall  fhip,  lye  6 

buried,  as  they  fay,  if  my  goflips  report  be  an  honeft  wo¬ 
man  of  her  word. 

Sol.  I  would  fhe  were  as  lying  a  goffip  in  that,  as  euer 
knapt  Ginger,  or  made  her  neighbours  beleeue  the  wept  io 
for  the  death  of  a  third  husband  :  but  it  is  true,  without 
any  flips  of  prolixity,  or  eroding  the  plaine  high-way  of 
talke,  that  the  good  Anthonio ,  the  honeft  Anthonio ;  6  that 
I  had  a  title  good  enough  to  keepe  his  name  company ! 

Sal.  Come,  the  full  flop.  1 5 

Sol.  Ha,  what  fayeft  thou,  why  the  end  is,  he  hath  loft 
a  fhip. 

Sal.  I  would  it  might  proue  the  end  of  his  Ioffes. 

Sol.  Let  me  fay  Amen  betimes,  leaft  the  diuell  erode  19 

7.  goj/ips  report ]  Q,Ff,  Rowe,  gossip,  9.  lying  a]  a  lying  Qr. 

report.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Clarke,  gojjip  report  13.  honeft  Anthonio;]  Q2.  honeft  An- 

Q2Q  ,  Pope  et  cet.  thonio,  Qt.  honeft  Antho.  Ff. 

honejT\  honft  F2. 


‘  Shakespeare  keeps  perpetually  before  us  the  circumstance  that  the  scene  of  his  play  is 
abroad.’  And,  furthermore,  the  distance  from  Venice  of  this  remote  locality  insensibly 
conveyed  to  the  hearer  the  idea  of  *  Long  Time.’  See  Appendix,  *  Duration  of  Action.’ 
—Ed. 

7.  gossips]  See  Walker,  II,  ix,  35. 

8.  of]  See  Abbott,  §  173,  where  instances  are  given  of  ‘of’  applied  not  merely 
to  the  agent  and  the  instrument,  but  to  any  influencing  circumstance,  in  the  sense  of 
‘  as  regards.’ 

10.  knapt  Ginger,]  Steevens  :  To  ‘  knap  ’  is  to  break  short.  The  word  occurs  in 
The  Common  Prayer  :  ‘  He  knappeth  the  spear  in  sunder.’  Halliwell  :  That  is,  to 
snap,  or  break  off  short.  ‘  Breustb  for  Brouste ;  Broused,  or  knapped  off.’ — Cotgrave. 
‘  He  knapped  the  staffe  of  the  darte  asunder.’ — North’s  Plutarch,  1579.  [Other  in 
stances  of  this  meaning  of  ‘  knap  ’  are  given  by  Halliwell  and  White,  and  I  doubt  not 
many  more  could  be  added.  But,  as  White  truly  remarks,  ‘  ginger  is  a  tough  root ;’ 
and  so  impressed  was  he  with  this  objection,  that  in  his  First  Edition  he  hinted  that  ‘  a 
ginger  cake  must  be  meant,  and  probably  of  the  sort  even  now  called  “ginger  snaps.”  ’ 
In  his  Second  Edition  all  doubts  have  vanished ;  he  says,  without  qualification,  that 
‘  knapp’d  ginger  ’  is  equivalent  to  ‘  snapped  ginger  nuts.’  I  think,  however,  that  Cot- 
grave  will  help  us  to  a  better  definition  of  ‘  knap,’  in  this  present  passage,  than  to  break 
off  short,  a  meaning  it  undoubtedly  bears  in  the  passages  cited  above.  As  the  trans¬ 
lation  of  Ronger  and  its  five  derivatives,  Cotgrave  gives  invariably  *  to  gnawe,  knap  or 
nible  off ;’  so  also  of  Brouter,  Broust,  Brouteur,  &c.,  he  gives  to  ‘  brouze,  knap  or  nible 
off.’  Whence,  I  think,  we  may  be  justified  in  paraphrasing  ‘knapt  ginger’  by  nibbled 
ginger.  That  old  women  were  fond  of  ginger  is  to  be  inferred  from  Meas.  for  Meas. 
IV,  iii,  8,  a  passage  which  I  think  must  have  escaped  White ;  the  reference  there  is  to 
ild  ginger,’  which  is  not  likely  to  mean  ‘  old  ginger  nuts.’ — Ed.] 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


125 


my  praier,  for  here  he  comes  in  the  iikenes  of  a  lew .  How  2C 

now  Shy lock e,  what  newes  among  the  Merchants  ? 

Enter  Shylocke. 

Shy.  You  knew  none  fo  well,  none  fo  well  as  you,  of 
my  daughters  flight. 

Sal.  That’s  certaine,  I  for  my  part  knew  the  Tailor  25 
that  made  the  wings  fhe  flew  withall. 

Sol.  And  Shylocke  for  his  own  part  knew  the  bird  was 
fledg’d,  and  then  it  is  the  complexion  of  them  al  to  leaue 
the  dam. 

Shy.  She  is  damn’d  for  it.  30 

Sal.  That’s  certaine,  if  the  diuell  may  be  her  Iudge. 

Shy.  My  owne  flefh  and  blood  to  rebell. 

Sol.  Out  vpon  it  old  carrion,  rebels  it  at  thefe  yeeres. 

Shy.  I  fay  my  daughter  is  my  flefh  and  bloud. 

Sal.  There  is  more  difference  betweene  thy  flefh  and  35 
hers,  then  betweene  let  and  Iuorie,  more  betweene  your 


20.  myl  thy  Warb.  Theob.  Tohns. 
Steev.  ’85. 

iikenes ]  Misprint. 

21.  Merchants]  Marchanis  Qx. 

22.  Enter...]  After  lew  line  20,  Qx, 
Cap.  et  seq. 

23.  knew ]  know  Q,. 


23,  24.  of  ...flight]  Separate  line,  Q,. 
26.  As  verse,  Qx. 

28.  fledg'd ]  flidge  Q2Q3.  fledge  Cap 
Mai.  ’90. 

33.  yeeres ]  tunes  ?  Rowe  ii. 

34.  bloud ]  my  blood  Q2Q3»  Cap. 

36.  hers ]  Mrs  Qt. 


20.  my  praier]  Warburton:  But  the  prayer  was  [Salarino’s].  We  must  therefore 
read  ‘  thy  prayer.’  Heath  (p.  116):  It  is  somewhat  wonderful  this  reverend  gentle¬ 
man  should  not  have  recollected  that  the  people  pray  as  well  as  the  priest,  though  the 
latter  only  pronounces  the  words,  which  the  people  make  their  own  by  saying  ‘  Amen ' 
to  them.  It  is  after  this  needless  to  add  that  the  Devil,  in  the  shape  of  a  Jew,  could 
not  cross  [Salarino’s]  prayer,  which,  as  far  as  it  was  singly  his,  was  already  ended 
Cabell  (p.  63) :  Meaning  the  prayer  of  his  companion,  which  he  would  make  his 
own  by  saying  ‘  amen  ’  to  it ;  for  this,  in  all  prayers  congregational,  is  the  force  of  that 
formula.  The  changers  of  ‘  my  ’  to  thy  seem  to  have  thought  *  amen  ’  a  conjuring  for¬ 
mula,  that  sanctify’d  the  prayer  and  prevented  the  devil’s  crossing  it.  [Heath  is  right, 
of  course.  ‘  Amen  ’  was  Solanio’s  own  prayer. — Ed.] 

25,  26.  In  Qx  these  two  lines  are  printed  as  verse,  divided  as  they  stand  here  in  the 
Folio.  Although  they  have  been  held  to  be  prose  (and  rightly)  by  all  editors,  yet  they 
are  metric  prose,  and  by  giving  them  as  verse  the  transcriber  of  that  Quarto  shows  a 
more  excellent  ear  than  the  transcribers  of  the  other  texts. — Ed. 

28.  complexion]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  nature,  disposition,  temperament.  Cot- 
grave  translates  the  French  complexion,  thus :  ‘  The  complection,  making,  temper,  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  bodie;  also,  the  disposition,  affection,  humors,  or  inclination  of  the 
mind.’ 


126  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  i. 

bloods,  then  there  is  betweene  red  wine  and  rennifh  :  but  37 
tell  vs,  doe  you  heare  whether  Anthonio  haue  had  anie 
Ioffe  at  fea  or  no  ? 

Shy.  There  I  haue  another  bad  match,  a  bankrout,  a  40 
prodigall,  who  dare  fcarce  fhew  his  head  on  the  Ryalto, 
a  begger  that  was  vfd  to  come  fo  fmug  vpon  the  Mart : 
let  him  look  to  his  bond,  he  was  wont  to  call  me  Vfurer, 
let  him  looke  to  his  bond,  he  was  wont  to  lend  money 
for  a  Chriftian  curtfie,  let  him  looke  to  his  bond.  45 

Sal.  Why  I  am  fure  if  he  forfaite,  thou  wilt  not  take 
his  flefh,  what’s  that  good  for  ? 

Shy.  To  baite  fifh  withall,  if  it  will  feede  nothing 
elfe,  it  will  feede  my  reuenge  ;  he  hath  difgrac’d  me,  and 
hindred  me  halfe  a  million,  laught  at  my  Ioffes,  mockt  at  50 


37.  rennijh~\  rhennijh  F3F4. 

38,  39.  anie  lojfe  at~\  at  lojfe  a  Q,. 

40.  bankrout]  QqFf,  Knt,  Hal.  bank¬ 
rupt  Rowe  et  cet. 

40,  41.  a  prodigall]  for  a  prodigal 
Warb. 

41.  dare']  dares  Rowe  ii  +  . 


41.  Ryalto]  Ryalta  Ff. 

42.  was  vfd]  us'd  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Steev. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

46.  forfaite]  Q2F2.  forfet  Qx.  forfeit 

% 

50.  halfe]  of  half  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns.  Steev.  Var.  Ktly. 


38,  39.  anie  losse  at  sea]  The  text  in  Qt,  *  at  losse  a  sea  or  no,’  is  not  a  very  seri¬ 
ous  blunder ;  it  is  merely  a  transposition  of  words,  instead  of  a  losse  at  sea  ;  and  is  prob¬ 
ably  due  to  the  compositor,  not  to  the  transcriber. — Ed. 

41.  prodigall]  Warburton:  This  is  spoke  of  Anthonio.  But  why  a  ‘prodigal’  ? 
His  friend  Bassanio  had  indeed  been  too  liberal,  and  with  this  name  the  Jew  honours 
him  when  he  is  going  to  sup  with  him :  *  I’ll  go  in  hate  to  feed  upon  The  prodigal  Chris¬ 
tian.’  But  Anthonio  was  a  plain,  reserved,  parsimonious  merchant ;  be  assured,  there¬ 
fore,  we  should  read :  *  a  bankrupt  for  a  prodigal,’  i.  e.  he  is  become  bankrupt  by  sup¬ 
plying  the  extravagancies  of  his  friend  Bassanio.  Johnson  :  There  is  no  need  of 
alteration.  There  could  be,  in  Shylock’s  opinion,  no  prodigality  more  culpable  than 
such  liberality  as  that  by  which  a  man  exposes  himself  to  ruin  for  his  friend.  Ed¬ 
wards  (p.  1 21) :  His  lending  money  without  interest  was  reason  enough  for  the  Jew 
to  call  him  prodigal,  and  this  Shylock  upbraids  him  with  immediately  after. 

42.  was  vsd]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  In  the  (MS)  it  is  ‘  that  was  wont  to,'  consistently 
with  ‘  was  wont  to  call  ’  and  ‘  was  wont  to  lend,’  just  below.  The  poet  may  have  had 
reason  to  vary  the  expression,  although  actors  may  have  reiterated  it. 

49.  disgrac’d]  Allen  :  To  grace  a  person  is  to  show  favour  to  him  by  some  act 
of  kindness  or  help.  To  disgc2.ce,  therefore,  may  be  to  show  ^favour  to  (to  be  un- 
gracious  to)  by  doing  him  some  wrong.  Schmidt  gives  this  passage  under  the  mean¬ 
ing  *  to  dishonour.’  It  would  be  better  placed,  I  think,  under  the  meaning,  of  which 
he  gives  instances,  of  *  to  lower  in  estimation.’  — Ed. 

50.  halfe  a  million]  See  Abbott,  §  198  a,  for  other  instances  of  the  omission  of 
the  preposition  after  some  verbs  and  adjectives  that  imply  value,  worth,  &c. 


act  in,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  127 

my  gaines,  fcorned  my  Nation,  thwarted  my  bargaines,  5 1 
cooled  my  friends,  heated  mine  enemies,  and  what’s  the 
reafon  ?  I  am  a  Iewe  :  Hath  not  a  lew  eyes  ?  hath  not  a 
lew  hands,  organs,  dementions,  fences,  affections,  paffi- 
ons,  fed  with  the  fame  foode,  hurt  with  the  fame  wea-  55 
pons,  fubieCt  to  the  fame  difeafes,  healed  by  the  fame 
meanes,  warmed  and  cooled  by  the  fame  Winter  and 
Sommmer  as  a  Chriftian  is  .*  if  you  pricke  vs  doe  we  not 
bleede?  if  you  tickle  vs,  doe  we  not  laugh?  if  you  poifon 
vs  doe  we  not  die?  and  if  you  wrong  vs  fhall  we  not  re-  60 
uenge?  if  we  are  like  you  in  the  reft,  we  will  refemble  you 
in  that.  If  a  lew  wrong  a  Chriftian ,  what  is  his  humility,  62 

52.  53.  the  reafon]  Ff,  Rowe,  his  57.  Meanes]  medicines  Warb.  conj. 

reafon  Qq  et  cet.  57,  58.  Winter  and  Sommmer]  sum- 

53.  Hath  not]  Hath  nos  Q,.  mer  and  winter  Han. 

54.  dementions ]  Q2.  dimenfions  Qx. 


53.  I  am  a  Iewe]  Hawkins  {Life  of  Kean,  i,  150) :  How  beautifully  did  Kean 
express  these  last  four  words !  A  slight  approach  to  deprecation  on  account  of  his 
unmitigated  injuries  passed  away  in  a  moment  when  he  reflected  that  the  dignity  of  his 
race  must  not  be  hurt  by  his  exciting  commiseration  in  a  Christian.  In  this  single  speech 
he  was  worth,  Hazlitt  states,  ‘  a  wilderness  of  monkeys  that  have  aped  humanity.’ 

54.  affections,  passions]  See  IV,  i,  54,  where  there  is  an  excellent  citation  by 
Steevens  from  Greene’s  Never  Too  Late,  which  shows  that  the  distinction  formerly 
drawn  between  these  two  words  is,  that  ‘  affections  ’  were  objective  and  *  passions  ’  sub¬ 
jective.  ‘  Affections  ’  are  influenced  through  the  eyes,  ‘  passions  ’  are  stirred  from  the 
heart.  Gould  ( The  Tragedian,  p.  75) :  Cooke,  when  he  came  to  the  word  ‘affections,’ 
so  informed  it  with  human  feeling,  so  contrasted  it  with  the  context,  that  it  remains  as 
the  marked  point  of  his  performance. 

57,  58.  warmed  .  .  .  Sommmer]  An  instance  of  the  construction  called  by  the 
old  grammarians  a  chiasm.  (If  under  ‘  warmed  ’  and  ‘  cooled  ’  were  written  ‘  winter  ’ 
and  ‘  summer,’  and  the  words  which  refer  to  each  other  joined  by  a  line,  the  Greek 
letter  chi  would  be  formed.)  It  is  the  same  as  in  I,  iii,  23,  ‘land  rats  and  water  rats, 
water  thieves  and  land  thieves,’  although  it  may  be  doubted  if  the  order  of  the  words 
be  there  correct.’ — Ed. 

62.  humility]  Schmidt  (Lex.) :  That  is,  kindness,  benevolence,  humanity.  Thus, 
‘plant  in  tyrants  mild  humility, — Love's  Lab.  Lost,  IV,  iii,  349;  ‘in  peace  there’s 
nothing  so  becomes  a  man  as  modest  stillness  and  humility,’ — Hen.  V:  III,  i,  4;  ‘I 
thank  God  for  my  humility, — Rich.  Ill :  II,  i,  72.  [This  excellent  distinction  in  the 
use  of  this  word  is  original,  I  think,  with  Schmidt,  and  was  given  first  in  the  Sh.Jahrb. 
(1868)  iii,  346;  where,  furthermore,  by  examining  every  instance  of  Shakespeare’s  use 
of  the  word,  Schmidt  shows  that  humanity  was  always  used  by  Shakespeare  in  the 
sense  of  the  nature  of  man,  and  never  in  our  modern  sense  of  universal  benevolence. 

’  Wherefore,  when  in  the  foregoing  citation  from  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  Collier’s  (MS)  sub¬ 
stituted  humanity  for  ‘  humility,’  Schmidt  considers  it  as  a  conclusive  proof  that  the 
(MS)  was  modern,  almost  modern  enough  to  date  from  our  own  days.  Of  course 


128 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  I 


reuenge?  If  a  CJiriJlian  wrong  a  lew ,  what  fliould  his  fuf-  63 
ferance  be  by  Chriftian  example,  why  reuenge?  The  vil- 
lanie  you  teach  me  I  will  execute,  and  it  fhall  goe  hard  65 
but  I  will  better  the  inftrudlion. 

Enter  a  man  from  Anthonio. 

Gentlemen,  my  maifter  Anthonio  is  at  his  houfe,  and 
defires  to  fpeake  with  you  both. 

Sal.  We  haue  beene  vp  and  downe  to  feeke  him.  70 

Enter  Tuball. 

Sol.  Here  comes  another  of  the  Tribe,  a  third  cannot 
be  matcht,  vnleffe  the  diuell  himfelfe  turne  lew. 

Exeunt  Gentlemen.  74 

64.  by]  by  a  F3F4,  Rowe.  68.  Gentlemen ]  Ser.  Gentlemen  Rowe. 

example,  why  reuenge  ?]  example?  71.  Enter...]  Repeated,  after  line  74, 

why  revenge.  Ff  (subs.).  Q2.  After  line  74,  Coll. 

67.  Enter...]  Enter  a  Servant.  Rowe. 

‘  humility  ’  in  many  cases  has  its  usual  meaning,  but  for  the  present  passage  and  for 
those  cited  above,  Schmidt  has,  I  think,  given  its  true  definition. — Ed.] 

64.  reuenge]  Cowden-Clarke  :  To  those  who,  like  the  present  editors,  can 
remember  Edmund  Kean’s  delivery  of  this  superb  speech  of  wild  wrath  pleading  its 
claim  to  some  show  of  justice,  there  is  excitement  in  recalling  the  wonderful  eyes  flash¬ 
ing  out  their  red  sparkles,  the  body  writhing  from  head  to  foot,  the  arm  thrown  upward 
as  witness  to  the  recorded  oath  of  vengeance.  The  attitude,  as  the  voice,  rose  to  a 
sublime  climax  when  these  words  were  uttered ;  then  there  was  a  drop,  both  of  person 
and  tone,  as  he  hissed  out  the  closing  sentence  of  deep  concentrated  malignity. 

66.  Francois  Victor  Hugo  (p.  41) :  This  sublime  imprecation  is  the  most  eloquent 
plea  that  the  human  voice  has  ever  dared  to  utter  for  a  despised  race.  Whatsoever  be 
the  d£nohment,  it  is  hereby  justified.  Let  Shylock  be  as  implacable  as  he  may,  assur¬ 
edly  he  will  no  more  than  equal  his  instruction.  Even  granting  that  he  obtains  it,  a 
pound  of  Antonio’s  flesh  will  never  outweigh,  in  the  scales  of  reprisal,  the  millions  of 
corpses  heaped  in  the  Christian  shambles  by  a  butchery  of  thirteen  centuries. 

Honigman  (Sh.  Jahrb.  xvii,  221 ) :  Here  it  is  that  Shylock  figures  as  the  deputy  and 
avenger  of  his  whole  shamefully-maltreated  race.  In  his  tones  we  hear  the  protest, 
crying  to  heaven,  of  human  rights  trodden  under  foot,  against  the  love  of  humanity 
paraded  by  the  hypocritical  mouths  of  his  oppressors;  and  if  his  towering  revenge 
mounts  to  fanaticism,  it  is  verily  of  a  different  stamp  to  the  fanaticism  of  usury  and 
greed  which  the  critics  are  fain  to  find  in  his  character. 

71.  Tuball]  Booth  :  Tubal  should  wear  a  yellow  cap, — not  necessarily  of  the  same 

shape  as  Shylock’s.  / 

72,  73.  Collier  (ed.  i) :  This  should  be  spoken  as  Tubal  is  approaching,  and  before 
he  actually  comes  upon  the  stage ;  because  the  instant  that  he  appears,  Shylock  ought 
to  put  the  question  to  him,  ‘  How  now,  Tubal  ?’  &c.  Hitherto  the  entrance  of  Tubal 
has  been  wrongly  placed,  preceding  what  Salanio  says,  and  keeping  Shylock,  who 
must  naturally  be  all  eagerness,  waiting  until  Salanio  has  concluded  his  observation. 
[See  Text.  Notes.] 


act  in,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


129 


Shy.  How  now  Tuball ,  what  newes  from  G  enow  a  ?  haft  75 

thou  found  my  daughter? 


Tub.  I  often  came  where  I  did  heare  of  fter,  but  can¬ 
not  finde  her. 


Shy.  Why  there,  there,  there,  there,  a  diamond  gone 
coft  me  two  thoufand  ducats  in  Franckford,  the  curfe  ne-  80 
uer  fell  vpon  our  Nation  till  now,  I  neuer  felt  it  till  now, 
two  thoufand  ducats  in  that,  and  other  precious,  preci¬ 
ous  iewels  :  I  would  my  daughter  were  dead  at  my  foot,  83 


75.  Genowa]  Geneva  F4.  Genoua 
Rowe. 


77.  Jler]  Ft. 

80.  Franckford, Frankford  QtF  . 


75.  The  Cowden-Clarkes  call  attention  here  to  the  artistic  use  of  indications  of 
Long  Time.  At  the  opening  of  the  scene  Shylock’s  vehement  words  to  Solanio,  and 
Salarino,  give  the  effect  of  Short  Time,  uttered  as  they  seem  to  be  in  the  first  fury  of 
his  discovery  of  Jessica’s  flight,  and  thereby  the  Third  Act  is  linked  to  the  period  of 
the  previous  Acts.  But  here  in  his  talk  with  Tuball  every  sentence  serves  to  aid  an 
impression  of  Long  Time,  and  to  advance  the  period  when  the  date  of  the  bond  shall 
have  expired  and  the  forfeiture  become  due. 

75.  Genowa]  White  (ed.  i)  finds  in  this  spelling  a  proof  that  the  pronunciation 
was  Ge-no'a ,  although  in  the  Tam.  of  the  Shr.,  as  he  notes,  ‘the  rhythm  enables  us  to 
determine  that  the  pronunciation  is  plainly  Gen'o-a .’  He  has  no  note  in  regard  to 
this  in  his  Second  Edition;  I  think  his  inference  is  scarcely  justifiable.  Could  we  not 
equally  well  from  this  spelling  infer  that  the  pronunciation  was,  in  New  England  style, 
Gen-o-way?  In  Howell’s  Instructions  for  Forraine  Travel,  1642,  the  distinction  in 
spelling  between  the  name  of  the  city  and  an  inhabitant  of  it  is  curious.  On  p.  41 
(Arber’s  Reprint )  occurs  the  following:  ‘Having  put  foot  ashoare  in  Genoa,  I  will 
not  wish  him  stay . When  a  Jew  meeteth  with  a  Genoway,  and  is  to  negotiat, 


&c. — Ed. 


77.  Booth  :  Before  replying  to  Shylock’s  questions,  shake  your  head  sorrowfully 
and  speak  slowly. 

83,  &c.  Heinemann  {Shy lock  and  Nathan ,  1886,  p.  10):  What  Hebrew  father  is 
there,  what  Hebrew  mother,  that  does  not  know  these  words  of  Shylock  to  be  false, 
nay,  impossible  ?  How  happens  it  then  that  Shakespeare,  this  greatest  searcher  of  the 
human  heart,  has  erred  so  grievously  in  regard  to  Jews  and  Jewry?  It  is  because  he 
has  overlooked,  and  he  could  not  but  overlook,  one  element  which  has  entered  most 
largely  into  the  history  of  Jewry — viz.  that  ideal  blessing  which  Israel  carried  with  it 
into  its  sorrowful  night  of  exile,  and  to  which  it  has  always  remained  steadfast  and 
true :  its  Doctrine,  its  Religion.  Shakespeare  could  not  know  how,  by  our  Sabbaths 
and  High-days,  a  pure  and  secluded  life  was  cherished  around  our  hearthstones,  which 
blossomed  forth  in  the  narrow  houses  of  the  Jewish  quarter,  and  transfonned  the 
gloomy  Ghetto  into  a  Paradise.  He  could  not  know  how  the  Jew,  albeit  scorned  and 
despised  by  the  outer  world,  retired  to  his  humble  home,  and  there  refreshed  himself 
with  the  strains  which  once  flowed  from  the  harp  of  his  Poet -king,  or  else  strengthened 
himself  with  the  consoling  promises  of  the  Prophets,  or  lost  himself  in  the  intricacies 
of  a  discussion  over  the  Talmud,  or  over  the  deepest  problems  of  humanity,  and  that 
amid  such  an  elevating  and  intellectual  life  he  never  cherished  for  the  outer  world  and 


130 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  1. 


and  the  iewels  in  her  eare  :  would  the  were  hearft;  at  my 
foote,  and  the  duckets  in  her  coffin  :  no  newes  of  them,  85 
why  fo  Panel  I  know  not  how  much  is  fpent  in  the  fearch : 
why  thou  Ioffe  vpon  Ioffe  ,  the  theefe  gone  with  fo 
much,  and  fo  much  to  finde  the  theefe,  and  no  fatisfa- 
£tion,  no  reuenge,  nor  no  ill  luck  ftirring  but  what  lights 


a  my  fhoulders,  no  fighes  but  a 
but  a  my  fhedding. 

Tub.  Yes,  other  men  haue  ill 
heard  in  Genowa? 

84.  would]  Q2Ff.  0  would  Qr,  Pope 
+  .  ’ would  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Knt,  Sing. 
Sta.  Ktly. 

85.  duckets ]  ducats  QqF^. 

85, 86.  them,  whyfo  ?\  Q2F2Q3F3<  them, 
why  fo  :  Qt.  them  ;  why  fo  ?  F  .  them — 
why,  so  !  Johns,  them  ?  Why,  so  ;  Cap. 

86.  hcnv  much  zir]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  what 
Han.  whats  Qq,  Pope  et  cet.  (subs.). 

87.  thou]  then  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Plan. 
Hal.  Wh.  i,  Dyce  iii.  thou —  Coll.  Sing, 


my  breathing,  no  teares  90 
lucke  too,  Anthonio  as  I 

93 

Ktly.  there  !  Lloyd  (ap.  Cam.). 

89,  90.  lights  a]  Q2FfQ3,  Rowe  1. 
lights  cm  Q1(  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii.  lights 
o'  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 

90,  91.  but a]  Q2  FfQ3,  Rowei.  but  of 
Qt,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii.  but  o'  Rowe 
ii  et  cet. 

93.  heard  in]  heard,  is  in  Q3. 

Genowa  ?]  Gencnoay.  Q  .  Genowa, 
F2.  Genowa.  F  .  Genoua.  F4.  Genoua — 
Rowe  et  seq. 


its  scorn  feelings  of  hate,  but  only  of  pity.  Shakespeare  could  never  know  how  the 
Jew,  from  the  heights  of  this  spiritual  life,  looked  down  upon  those  who  could  fetter 
his  body  indeed,  but  never  his  soul. 

85.  coffin]  Honigman  ( Jahrb .  xvii,  p.  222) :  This  passage  is  always  cited  to  prove 
that  the  love  of  gold  had  eradicated  all  human  affection  from  Shylock’s  heart.  This 
opinion  is  wrong  and  exaggerated.  If  the  passage  is  taken  in  connection  with  the  rest 
of  the  dialogue,  it  will  be  found  to  be  merely  a  masterstroke  of  the  poet  in  depicting  as 
powerfully  as  possible  the  unbridled  passion  of  a  volcanic  nature,  like  Shylock’s,  whose 
violence  forces  his  speech  beyond  the  bounds  of  genuine  feeling.  This  language  re¬ 
minds  us  of  the  exaggerated  expressions  of  King  Lear  against  his  daughters.  Reflect 
for  a  minute  on  the  profound  bitterness  of  the  injury  to  the  wounded  old  man :  his 
daughter,  lost  to  all  propriety  or  shame,  had  eloped  with  a  Christian ;  a  thief,  and  her 
own  father  the  victim ;  despising  the  souvenirs  of  her  mother  and  forswearing  her  religion 
— and  for  the  loss  of  such  a  creature  as  this  is  he  to  grieve  ?  Never;  so  low  has  she 
fallen  in  his  esteem  that,  even  were  she  lying  dead  before  him,  regret  for  her  loss  would 
be  far  inferior  to  that  for  the  money  she  had  stolen.  It  is  the  very  strongest  expression 
of  scorn  which  his  wrath  can  suggest. 

86.  why  so  ?]  Is  not  this  better  marked  as  an  interrogation  than  as  an  exclama¬ 
tion  ?  *  Why  is  there  no  news  of  them  ?  after  I  have  spent,  I  know  not  how  much,  in 

the  search.’ — Ed. 

86.  how  much  is]  See  in  Text.  Note  an  unusual  variation  in  the  Folio  from 
the  Qq. 

87.  thou]  I  cannot  find  that  any  of  those  Editors  who  have  here  followed  F,  have 
given  any  reason  for  so  doing.  I  cannot  but  think  that  ‘  thou  ’  is  a  misprint  for  the 
then  of  the  Ff. — Ed. 


act  hi,  sc.  L]  THE  MEE CHANT  OF  VENICE  131 

Shy-  What;  what,  what,  ill  lucke,  ill  lucke. 

Tub.  Hath  an  Argofie  caft  away  comming  from  Tri-  95 
polis. 

Shy.  I  thanke  God,  I  thanke  God,  is  it  true,  is  it  true  ? 

Tub.  I  fpoke  with  fome  of  the  Saylers  that  efcaped 
the  wracke. 

Shy.  I  thanke  thee  good  7 uball,  good  newes,  good  100 
newes  :  ha,  ha,  here  in  Genowa. 

Tub.  Your  daughter  fpent  in  Genowa,  as  I  heard,  one 
night  fourefcore  ducats. 

Shy.  Thou  ftick’ft  a  dagger  in  me,  I  fhall  neuer  fee  my 
gold  againe,  fourefcore  ducats  at  a  fitting,  fourefcore  du-  105 
cats. 

Tub.  There  came  diuers  of  Anthonios  creditors  in  my  107 


94.  What,  what,  what~\  What,  what, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

lucke. lucke?  Q,F4* 

97.  is  it. ..is  it~\  Qt. 

99.  wracke~\  QqFf  (subs.). 


100.  theej  the  Qr. 

101.  here\  Ff.  heere Qq.  where?  Rowe 
et  cet. 

102.  one ]  in  one  QJ}  Cam.  Glo.  Cla. 
Rife,  Wh.  ii. 


97.  God]  Booth  :  Clapping  his  hands  high  in  the  air. 

97.  is  it  true  ?]  Booth  :  Eagerly,  almost  a  shriek.  Tubal’s  answer  should  be 
spoken  quickly. 

98.  escaped]  See  Abbott,  §  198,  for  the  omission  of  the  preposition. 

101.  here]  This  Scene  opens  with  the  rumour,  which  lives  unchecked  on  the  Rialto, 
that  one  of  Anthonio’s  rich  ships  had  been  wrecked  on  the  distant  coast  of  England. 
Shylock  must  have  heard  it,  but  had  evidently  not  allowed  himself  to  trust  it,  and  when 
Salarino  asks  about  it  he  is  too  wily  to  give  the  insolent  young  fellow  an  additional  chance 
to  jeer.  But  when  Tubal  refers  positively  to  the  wreck  of  an  argosy,  thus  verifying  the 
rumour,  Shylock  shrieks  out  ‘  is  it  true  ?’  and  laughs  aloud  at  the  thought  that  the  loss 
which  is  reported  as  fallen  on  Anthonio  has  happened,  not  far  off,  in  England,  but  is 
known  ‘  here  ’  in  Italy,  ‘  in  Genoa.’  Is  this  interpretation  too  forced  ?  If  it  be  not, 
then  we  can  adhere  to  the  authority  of  the  Qq  and  Ff.  But  if  otherwise,  then  I  see 
no  way  for  it  but  to  accept  Rowe’s  text,  and  reading  where,  turn  it  into  a  question,  to 
which,  be  it  observed,  Tubal  makes  no  reply. — Ed. 

102.  Booth  :  Nod  several  times  affirmatively  before  replying,  and  speak  the  line 
slowly,  with  the  least  shade  of  wickedness  in  your  look.  Shylock’s  expression 
gradually  changes  from  joy  to  agony  while  this  line  is  spoken,  therefore  speak  it 
slowly. 

102.  as  I  heard]  Eccles  :  It  may  be  doubted  whether  this  account  by  Tubal  of 
Jessica’s  extravagance  was  intended  by  the  poet  as  truth,  or  as  only  a  vague,  uncertain 
pumour,  with  little  or  no  foundation. 

102.  one  night]  Qr  here  supplies  the  missing  word  in,  which,  although  not  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary,  is  good,  and  will  serve  to  offset  some  of  its  previous  omissions. — Ed. 

107.  Booth:  This  with  a  cheerful  tone,  and  quickly. 


1 32  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ill,  sc.  i. 

company  to  Venice,  that  fweare  hee  cannot  choofe  but  io3 
breake. 

Shy ,  I  am  very  glad  of  it,  ile  plague  him,  ile  torture  iio 
him,  I  am  glad  of  it, 

Tub.  One  of  them  fhewed  me  a  ring  that  hee  had  of 
your  daughter  for  a  Monkie. 

Shy.  Out  vpon  her,  thou  tortured  me  Tub  all,  it  was 
my  Turkies,  I  had  it  of  Leah  when  I  was  a  Batcheler  :  I  1 15 
would  not  haue  giuen  it  for  a  wilderneffe  of  Monkies. 

Tub.  But  Anthonio  is  certainely  vndone. 

Shy.  Nay,  that’s  true,  that’s  very  true,  goe  Tub  all,  fee 
me  an  Officer,  befpeake  him  a  fortnight  before,  I  will 
haue  the  heart  of  him  if  he  forfeit,  for  were  he  out  of  Ve-  120 


108.  to]  vnto  Qt. 

hee]  that  hee  Qt. 

110.  very]  Om.  Rowe+,  Steev. ’85. 
in.  of  it,]  on't.  Qt.  of  it.  Q2  et 
cet. 


1 14.  torturefl]  tortur'fl  Qx. 

1 15.  Turkies ]  Turkis  Ff.  Turquoise 
Rowe. 

1 18.  Tnball]  Om.  Pope-K 

fee ]  see  Var.  ’21  (misprint). 


1 15.  Turkies]  Steevens  :  As  Shylock  had  been  married  long  enough  to  have  a 
daughter  grown  up,  it  is  plain  he  did  not  value  this  turquoise  on  account  of  the  money 
for  which  he  might  hope  to  sell  it,  but  merely  in  respect  of  the  imaginary  virtues  for¬ 
merly  ascribed  to  the  stone.  It  was  said  to  fade  or  brighten  as  the  health  of  the 
wearer  increased  or  grew  less.  To  this  Ben  Jonson  refers  in  his  Sejanus,  I,  i :  ‘  And, 
true  as  turquoise  in  my  dear  lord’s  ring,  Look  well  or  ill  with  him.’  [In  a  note  on 
this  passage  in  Sejanus,  Gifford  says  that  ‘  to  this  supposed  quality  of  the  stone  our  old 
writers  have  innumerable  allusions.’]  Again,  Edward  Fenton,  in  Secrete  Wonders  of 
Nature,  1569  :  ‘  The  Turkeys  doth  move  when  there  is  any  perill  prepared  to  him  that 
weareth  it.’  [There  is  a  long  account  in  Holland’s  Plinie,  ii,  619,  a,  of  Turquoises 
which  ‘  be  found  in  ycie  cliffes  hardly  accessible,’  and  which  *  the  people  of  that  coun¬ 
try  reach  afar  off  with  slings,  and  so  drive  them  down and  it  occurs  in  the  paragraph 
immediately  following  one  which  I  cannot  but  think  that  Shakespeare  once  read,  and 
from  which  he  took  the  allusion  to  ‘one  entire  chrysolite’  in  Oth.  V,  ii,  1 79. — 
Ed.] 

115.  I  had,  &c.]  Le  Tourneur  (1781)  thus  translates:  ‘J“  l’achetai  de  Lee,  6tant 
encore  gargon.’ — Ed. 

116.  Hazlitt  (p.  273) :  We  may  collect  from  a  few  sentences  the  history  of  Shy- 

lock’s  life, — his  descent  and  origin,  his  thrift  and  domesric  economy,  his  affection  for 
his  daughter,  whom  he  loves  next  his  wealth,  his  courtship  and  his  first  present  to  [?] 
Leah,  his  wife !  ‘  I  would  not  have  parted  with  it  ’  (the  ring  which  he  first  gave  her) 

*  for  a  wilderness  of  monkeys  !’  What  a  fine  Hebraism  is  implied  in  this  expression  ! 
Knight  :  Shakespeare  here,  with  marvellous  art,  shows  us  the  betrayed  and  persecuted 
Shylock,  at  the  moment  when  he  is  raving  at  the  desertion  of  his  daughter,  and  panting 
for  a  wild  revenge,  as  looking  back  upon  the  days  when  the  fierce  passions  had  proba¬ 
bly  no  place  in  his  heart. 


act  hi,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


*33 


nice,  I  can  make  what  merchandize  I  will  :  goe  Tuball ,  121 

and  meete  me  at  our  Sinagogue,  goe  good  Tuball ,  at  our 
Sinagogue  Tuball.  Exeunt. 


121.  I  will  :  goe\  Q2FfQ3,  Cap.  Knt. 
/  will  go  :  go  Q,.  I  will :  go  :  go  Pope  + . 
I  will :  go,  go,  Warb.  I  will.  Go,  Coll. 
Hal.  Dyce,  Sta.  Huds.  Wh.  i.  I  will.  Go, 


go,  Johns,  et  cet. 

122, 123.  Sinagogue ]  Q2F2.  Synagogue 
Qj  et  cet. 

123.  Exeunt.]  Om.  F  . 


121.  I  will :  goe]  The  misplaced  colon  here  in  Qz  (‘  I  will  goe  :’)  is  a  typographical 
error,  of  so  common  and  slight  a  kind  that  it  scarcely  deserves  to  be  reckoned  among 
the  variations  which  are  to  be  counted  as  proofs  of  its  inferiority  to  Q  . — Ed. 

122.  Sinagogue]  Clarendon:  Shakespeare  probably  intended  to  add  another 
shade  of  darkness  to  the  character  of  Shylock  by  making  him  still  formally  devout 
while  meditating  his  horrible  vengeance.  Francois  Victor  Hugo  (p.  43) :  The  Jew 
invokes  the  Ancient  of  Days,  who  spoke  unto  Moses  aforetime :  ‘  If  a  man  cause  a 
blemish  in  his  neighbour ;  as  he  hath  done,  so  shall  it  be  done  to  him ;  breach  for 
breach,  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth ;  as  he  hath  caused  a  blemish  in  a  man,  so  shall  it 
be  done  to  him  again.’  In  entering  his  synagogue  Shylock  entrusts  his  hatred  to  the 
safeguard  of  his  Faith.  Henceforward  his  vengeance  assumes  a  consecrated  character. 
His  bloodthirstiness  against  the  Christian  becomes  sacerdotal.  The  expiation  of  Anthonio 
is  but  a  holocaust  offered  to  the  Omnipotent  Avenger.  Shylock  is  bound  by  irrevoca¬ 
ble  vows.  And  when  he  appears  before  the  tribunal  his  bearing  is  the  indomitable 
impassiveness  of  a  priest  about  to  sacrifice  an  expiatory  lamb  to  the  God  of  Sabaoth. 


134 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  u 


[Scene  II.] 

Enter  Baffanio ,  Portia ,  Gratiano ,  and  all  their  traine. 

Por.  I  pray  you  tarrie,  paufe  a  day  or  two 
Before  you  hazard,  for  in  choofing  wrong 
I  loofe  your  companie  ;  therefore  forbeare  a  while, 

There’s  fomething  tels  me  (but  it  is  not  loue)  5 

I  would  not  loofe  you,  and  you  know  your  felfe, 

Hate  counfailes  not  in  fuch  a  quallitie; 

But  leaft  you  fhould  not  vnderftand  me  well, 

And  yet  a  maiden  hath  no  tongue,  but  thought,  9 

[Scene  II.  Rowe.  6.  loofe~\  lofe  Qt. 

1.  traine.]  Traines.  Qt.  traynes.  Q2.  7.  counf ailes... quallitie  counfels ... 

4.  therefore ]  Om.  Pope,  Han.  quality.  Qx. 

2.  Geo.  Fletcher  ( Fraser's  Mag  a.,  May,  1850,  p.  506)  :  Why  at  this  moment  does 
Portia  wish  to  stay  Bassanio  from  election  ?  Because,  though  she  has  no  doubt  what¬ 
ever  of  his  personal  liking  for  her,  and  his  readiness  to  marry  her,  she  feels  not  yet 
assured  that  he  really  does  love  her  with  that  perfect  devotion  which  alone  can  or  ought 
to  content  a  spirit  like  hers  in  such  a  union.  Bassanio,  we  must  observe,  is  no  Romeo, 
quite  a  novice  in  the  world ;  on  the  contrary,  he  is  a  man  of  the  world  and  of  pleasure, 
as  well  as  a  scholar  and  a  soldier.  Nevertheless,  with  the  high  instinct  of  her  noble 
heart  and  intelligence,  she  doubts  not  that  a  man  of  his  endowments  will  not  fail  to 
love  her  truly  if  he  once  but  know  her  thoroughly. 

3.  in  choosing]  Abbott,  §372:  That  is,  ‘in  the  event  of  your  choosing  wrong, 
/  lose  your  company.’ 

7.  This  line  presents  a  noteworthy  proof  that  what  is  so  often  loosely  spoken  of  as 
*  Shakespeare’s  spelling,’  is  merely  that  of  a  compositor.  Here  in  the  Folio  the  spell¬ 
ing  is  archaic  simply  because  the  compositor  followed  his  copy,  which  happened  to  be 
Q2.  In  Qj,  printed  in  the  same  year  with  Q2,  the  spelling  and  punctuation  are,  as  a 
general  rule,  as  modern  as  in  Dyce’s  Third  Edition. — Ed. 

9.  Seymour  :  Does  this  mean  that  she  utters  nothing  but  what  her  heart  suggests, 
and  that,  therefore,  she  ought  not  to  be  misunderstood  ?  or  that,  being  a  maiden,  she 
cannot  speak  freely,  and  must  only  think  ?  I  believe  the  first  is  the  sense.  Claren¬ 
don  :  Portia  means :  ‘  And  yet,  since  a  maiden  may  only  think  and  not  speak  her 
thoughts,  you  will  not  understand  me,  however  long  you  stay.’  A.  Cameron  ( Shake - 
speariana,  Dec.  1886)  gives  a  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  this  line,  with  a  class  com¬ 
posed  chiefly  of  young  women  from  fifteen  to  eighteen  years  of  age,  where  the  first  inter¬ 
pretation  offered  was  that  Portia  loved  Bassanio,  but  felt  herself  restrained  from  telling 
him  so  by  maidenly  modesty  and  social  conventionality.  Thus,  in  The  Temp.  Ill,  i, 
Miranda  feels  the  restraining  force  of  ‘  bashful  cunning  ’  as  much  as  Portia  feels  it,  but, 
being  untrammelled  by  the  acquired  bonds  of  conventionality,  can  say,  ‘  Hence,  bashful 
cunning !  And  prompt  me,  plain  and  holy  innocence  !  I  am  your  wife,  if  you  will 
marry  me.’  A  second  suggestion  was  that  ‘  a  maiden  speaks  just  what  she  thinks, — 
tells  the  plain  truth.’  This  was  considered  to  fit  in  well  with  the  previous  line,  ‘  But 


Acr  m,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


135 


I  would  detaine  you  here  fome  month  or  two 
Before  you  venture  for  me.  I  could  teach  you 
How  to  choofe  right,  but  then  I  am  forfworne, 
So  will  I  neuer  be,  fo  may  you  miffe  me, 


10 


13 


10.  month]  moneth  QrQ2. 

12.  then  I  am]  lam  then  Qt,  Pope  +  , 


Steev.  ’85,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 
13.  be,]  be;  Theob.  et  seq. 


lest  you  should  not  understand  me  well.’  *  And  yet,  why  shouldn’t  you  understand 
me  ?  I’m  telling  you  the  simple,  honest  truth.’  To  this  it  was  objected  that  Portia 
had  just  told  Bassanio,  ‘  There’s  something  tells  me,  but  it  is  not  love,  I  would  not  lose 
you.’  Whereas  it  is  quite  apparent  from  her  whole  speech  and  conduct  that  she  is  pas 
sionately  in  love  with  him.  A  more  general  objection  was  ungallantly  insinuated  by 
the  question :  ‘  Does  a  maiden’s  tongue  always  speak  just  what  is  in  her  thought  ?’  In 
affirmation  only  one  quotation  was  forthcoming, — Rosalind’s  ‘  Do  you  not  know  that 
I  am  a  woman  ?  When  I  think  I  must  speak.’ — As  You  Like  It,  III,  ii,  263.  In 
denial,  Chaucer,  Byron,  and  Allan  Ramsay  were  cited.  From  The  Gentle  Shepherd : 
‘When  maidens,  innocently  young,  Say  often  what  they  never  mean,  Ne’er  mind  their 
pretty,  lying  tongue,  But  tent  the  language  o’  their  e’en.’  Byron  testifies  :  ‘  The  charm¬ 
ing  creatures  lie  with  such  a  grace  There’s  nothing  more  becoming  to  the  face.’  But 
the  Wife  of  Bath  blurted  out :  ‘  Half  so  boldely  can  ther  no  man  Sweren  and  lyen  as 
a  woman  can.’  The  third  interpretation  was  that  Portia  thinks  what  she  would  like 
Bassanio  to  know,  but  is  unable  to  clothe  her  thoughts  with  speech ;  like  the  Laureate’s, 
‘  Oh,  that  my  tongue  could  utter  The  thoughts  that  arise  in  me  !’ — and  that  perhaps  she 
is  even  a  little  lovingly  angry  with  him  for  not  at  once  divining  her  thoughts.  The 
proposer  of  this  view  thought  there  should  have  been  such  perfect  sympathy  of  soul 
between  the  lovers  that,  as  Tennyson  says,  ‘  Thoughts  leapt  out  to  wed  with  thought, 
Ere  thought  could  wed  itself  with  speech ;’  and  that  he  should  have  been  able  to  read 
her  thoughts  as  clearly  as  Venus  read  those  of  Adonis  :  ‘  His  meaning  struck  her  ere 
his  words  begun.’  We  had  to  finish  our  discussion  just  as  we  began  it :  Is  there  any 
generally-accepted  interpretation  of  this  line  ?  [The  most  probable  interpretation  of 
line  8  is,  undoubtedly,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that  which  Fletcher  and  Clarendon  suggest : 
that  Portia  wishes  Bassanio  to  learn  to  know  her  better  before  he  hazards.  But  is  it  not 
also  possible  to  interpret  the  whole  passage,  as  follows :  If  I  beg  you  to  forbear  a  while, 
you  are  not  to  construe  this  wish  into  a  confession  of  love,  and  yet  at  the  same  time 
you  know  it  cannot  be  hate ;  wherefore,  since  I  cannot  explain  myself  more  fully,  but 
am  restricted  to  maiden  meditation,  and  since  I  do  not  wish  you  to  misunderstand  me, 
let  me  beg  you  simply  to  stay  here  a  month  or  two  before  you  choose  ?  Thus  far  Portia 
intended  to  be,  and  was,  absolutely  non-committal.  She  did  not  wish  to  reaffirm  her 
*  fair  speechless  messages  ’  of  aforetime,  and  she  could  not  deny  them.  She  had  had 
‘  no  tongue  ’  then ;  she  had  none  now ;  she  wished  him  simply  to  stay  a  while.  It  seems 
to  me,  that  in  the  somewhat  broken  sentences  may  be  detected  her  maidenly  embarrass¬ 
ment  at  asking  Bassanio  to  pause  ‘a  day  or  two’  (which  as  she  goes  on  grows  into  ‘a 
month  or  two’);  and  ‘lest  he  should  not  understand  her  well’  in  preferring  such  a 
request,  she  urges  her  incapacity  as  a  tongue-tied  maiden  to  explain  herself  more  fully, 
and  can  only  reiterate  her  wish  to  detain  him.  In  the  interesting  discussion  in  Shake- 
speariana,  I  should  be  inclined  to  think  that  ‘  the  first  interpretation  offered  ’  is  the  true 
one. — Ed.] 

10.  some]  See  II,  iv,  29. 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  iii,  sc.  i; 


136 

But  if  you  doe,  youle  make  me  wifh  a  finne, 

That  I  had  beene  forfworne  :  Befbrow  your  eyes,  15 

They  haue  ore-lookt  me  and  deuided  me, 

One  halfe  of  me  is  yours,  the  other  halfe  yours, 

Mine  owne  I  would  fay :  but  of  mine  then  yours, 

And  fo  all  yours ;  0  thefe  naughtie  times 

Puts  bars  betweene  the  owners  and  their  rights.  20 

And  fo  though  yours,  not  yours  (proue  it  fo) 


15.  Befhrow]  Q2F2,  Cap.  Befhrew  Q, 
F3F4,  Rowe  et  cet. 

16.  deuided  ]  Q2F2.  diuided  Q,  et 

cet. 

17.  halfe  your s~\  halfe  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  yours  Cap. 

18.  of]  firfl  Ff,  Rowe,  if  Qq,  Pope 
et  seq. 

19.  yours;]  yours.  Qj. 


19.  O]  0  Q2.  Alas!  Pope  +  . 

20.  Puts]  Put  F2F3,  Rowe  ii  et  seq. 

2 1 .  not  yours]  not  yours,  Rowe  i,  Warb. 
not  yours  ;  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
not  yours. —  Johns,  et  seq.  I'm  not  yours 
Johns,  conj. 

proue]  but  prove  Han. 
it  fo)]  it  not  so!  Cap.  it  so,  Rowe 
+ ,  Steev.  et  seq. 


15.  Beshrow]  Undoubtedly  spelled  as  it  was  pronounced.  Walker  frit,  i,  159) 
says  that  ‘  Shrewsbury  ’  is  still  pronounced  by  some  Shrowsbury. 

16.  ore-lookt]  Eccles  :  That  is,  bewitched  me,  in  allusion  to  the  superstitious 
notion  of  the  influence  of  malignant  and  envious  eyes.  Portia  seems  to  consider  her 
present  agitation  as  the  consequence  of  a  supposed  fascination.  Malone:  So,  in  Merry 
Wives,  V,  v,  87  :  *  Vile  worm,  thou  wast  o’erlook’d  even  in  thy  birth.’ 

17.  the  other]  See  Abbott,  §462,  for  words  contracted  in  pronunciation.  [I  sup¬ 
pose  Portia  in  reality  said  ‘  t’other.’ — Ed.] 

18.  of  mine]  See  Text.  Notes  for  the  correct  reading  of  the  Qq. 

20.  Puts]  For  other  instances  of  this  Northern  plural  form  in  s,  see  Abbott,  §  332. 

21.  yours,  not  yours]  Malone:  The  first  is  a  monosyllable,  and  the  second  a 
dissyllable.  Walker  ( Vers.  137,  138)  gives  many  other  instances  of  this  use  of  the 
same  word  as  a  monosyllable  and  as  a  dissyllable  in  the  same  line  in  Shakespeare  and 
in  his  contemporaries.  See  also  Abbott,  §  480,  who  says  it  is  a  matter  of  taste  which 
‘yours’  should  receive  the  emphasis.  See  also  §§475,  476. 

21.  proue  it  so]  Capell  (p.  63) :  These  words  are,  by  old  editions  of  all  sorts,  put 
in  parenthesis;  their  putting  so  indicates  a  disjunction  or  sentence  apart,  and  the  words 
shew  themselves  a  wish :  a  consistent  wish  they  cannot  be,  without  a  negation ;  and 
exactly  that  negative  which  they  are  now  [see  Text.  Notes]  furnish’d  with,  perfects  the 
verse’s  measure.  Her  last  expressions — ‘  not  yours  ’ — are  look’d  upon  by  the  speaker 
as  expressions  of  ill  omen ;  and  this  wish,  or  this  petition,  is  put  up  to  avert  it :  A 
pause  ensues  upon  it;  and  then  other  expressions,  indicating  a  renewal  of  former 
struggles  between  her  love  and  her  oath,  in  which  the  latter  has  victory  ;  they  are  the 
result  of  her  fears,  that,  in  this  affair  of  the  choice,  ‘  fortune  ’  might  prove  perverse ;  in 
which  case  she  bids  fortune  ‘  go  to  hell  ’  for  her  perverseness ;  for  herself  she  meant 
not  to  hazard  it  by  infringing  her  oath ;  ‘  it  ’  relates  to  the  choice,  which  she  had  then 
been  debating  internally  how  it  should  be  decided,  whether  by  fortune’s  act  or  her  own. 
Heath  (p.  117) :  The  meaning  is,  ‘If  the  worst  I  fear  should  happen,  and  it  should 
prove  in  the  event  that  I,  who  am  justly  yours  by  the  free  donation  I  have  made  you 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


137 


Let  Fortune  goe  to  hell  for  it,  not  I.  22 

I  fpeake  too  long,  but  ’tis  to  peize  the  time, 

To  ich  it,  and  to  draw  it  out  in  length, 

To  ftay  you  from  election.  25 

Baff.  Let  me  choofe, 

For  as  I  am,  I  liue  vpon  the  racke. 

Por.  Vpon  the  racke  Baffanio ,  then  confeffe 
What  treafon  there  is  mingled  with  your  loue. 

Baff.  None  but  that  vglie  treafon  of  miflruft.  30 

Which  makes  me  feare  the  enioying  of  my  loue : 

There  may  as  well  be  amitie  and  life,  32 


22.  goe  to  helT\  pay  the  due  C.  Clarke. 
for  it  ]  Om.  Q3> 

not  I]  not  me  Han. 

23.  peize]  poize  Rowe  i.  peece  Rowe  ii 
+ .  piece  Johns.  Cap.  Ktly,  Dyce  iii,  Wh. 
ii.  peise  Dyce  i,  Del.  Huds.  pause  Coll. 
(MS). 

24.  ich']  F2F3.  eck  Qt.  ech  Qa.  eech  Q3< 


itch  F+.  eche  Rowe  + .  eke  Johns,  et  seq. 
24.  ich  it]  eche  it  out  Pope  ii. 

to  draw  it  out]  to  draw  out  Q,. 
draw  it  out  Ff,  Rowe  i. 

28.  Baffanio,]  Baffanio?  Rowe  ii  et 
seq. 

31.  the  enioying]  th ’  inioying  Qq. 

32.  life]  lief  Daniel. 


of  myself,  should  yet  not  be  yours  in  consequence  of  an  unlucky  choice,  let  fortune  go 
to  hell  for  robbing  you  of  your  just  due,  not  I  for  violating  my  oath.’ 

22.  not  I]  See  Abbott,  §  216,  where  instances  are  given  (among  them,  Ham.  Ill, 
ii,  231,  and  lb.  I,  iv,  54)  of  I,  thou,  and  he  used  for  me,  thee,  and  him,  ‘when  they 
stand  quasi-independently  at  some  distance  from  the  governing  word  or  preposition.’ 

23.  peize]  Steevens  :  From  the  French  peser,  and  therefore  means  to  retard  by 
hanging  weights.  See  Rich.  Ill :  V,  iii,  105.  Henley:  To  ‘peize’  is  to  weigh  or 
balance ;  and  figuratively,  to  keep  in  suspense,  to  delay.  So,  in  Sir  Philip  Sidney’s 
Apology  for  Poetry  :  ‘  Not  speaking  words  as  they  changeably  fall  from  the  mouth,  but 
peyzing  each  sillable.’  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  change  to  pause  of  the  (MS)  is  by  no 
means  required,  although  it  is  very  likely  the  word  of  some  old  performer  in  the  part 
of  Portia.  Keightley  (Exp.  p.  150):  Rowe’s  correction,  piece,  is,  I  think,  right. 
Clarendon  :  The  word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  poise  in  King  John,  II,  i,  575.  Allen 
cites  Arthur  Brooke’s  Romeus  and  fuliet :  *  Which  thing  when  he  had  wayde,  and 
when  he  understoode  That  the  agreement  twixt  them  twayn  was  lawfull,  honest,  good, 
And  all  thinges  peysed  well,’  &c. — line  2927. 

24.  ich]  Halliwell  ;  The  Editors  have  not  noticed  the  readings  of  the  Qq  and 
Ff  here,  which,  though  possibly  misprints  in  this  case,  are  genuine  archaic  forms. 
Eche  from  Anglosaxon  bean,  is  found  in  mediaeval  English ;  and  ich ,  to  eke  out,  is 
givei  by  Kennett  in  MS  Lansd.,  1033,  as  a  provincialism. 

30.  mistrust]  Eccles  :  Possibly,  ‘  mistrust,’  extreme  diffidence,  or  anxiety  as  to  his 
choice,  is  as  destructive  to  his  peace  as  actual  ‘  treason  ’  is  to  the  tranquillity  of  a  state. 

31.  feare  the]  Abbott,  §200,  gives  instances  where  the  preposition  for  is  omitted 
after  ‘  fear  ’  and  other  verbs,  a  simpler  explanation  than  that  of  Eccles,  who  says  that 
not  is  to  be  understood  before  ‘  enjoying,’  like,  as  Allen  suggests,  the  Lat.  vereor  ut. — 
Ed. 

32.  life]  In  one  of  Walker’s  valuable  chapters  he  gives  a  large  .-umber  of  instances 


138 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ill,  sc.  ii. 


’Tweene  fnow  and  fire,  as  treafon  and  my  loue. 

33 

Por. 

I,  but  I  feare  you  fpeake  vpon  the  racke, 

Where 

men  enforced  doth  fpeake  any  thing. 

35 

35.  doth~\  do  or  doe  Qq  et  cet. 

w  here  a  word  has  been  corrupted  by  its  proximity  to  another  word  much  resembling  it, 
either  in  sound  or  spelling.  In  the  present  instance  Walker  suggests  that  the  true  word 
is  league,  and  that  it  was  perverted  by  the  printer  through  its  nearness  to  *  life,’  four 
lines  farther  on.  So  highly  did  Dyce  approve  of  this  suggestion,  that,  conservative  as 
he  professed  to  be,  he  adopted  league  in  his  text  in  his  Third  Edition,  as  did  also  Hud¬ 
son.  It  may  be  right,  but  two  objections  to  it  are  possible.  First :  Is  not  change  need¬ 
less  ?  ‘  Life  ’  may  be  here,  as  in  many  another  case  (see  Schmidt),  equivalent  to  liv¬ 

ing ;  secondly,  and  this  objection  lies  to  not  a  few  of  Walker’s  instances,  are  the  two 
words  so  near  together  that  the  first,  which  is  under  the  compositor’s  eye,  could  have 
been  affected  by  the  second,  which  we  can  scarcely  presume  that  he  has  yet  seen  ? 
Where  the  second  is  affected  by  the  first,  which  has  preceded  it  in  the  mind  of  the 
compositor,  the  case  is  different,  and  several  lines  may  intervene,  even  five  or  six,  espe¬ 
cially  if  they  are  in  the  same  speech.  But  when  the  reverse  is  the  case,  the  nearness 
of  the  second  to  the  first  must  be  close,  closer,  I  fear,  than  in  the  present  instance, 
before  we  can,  I  think,  admit  of  a  substitution  through  proximity. — Ed. 

34,  35.  Hunter  (i,  326) :  It  is  an  admirable  quality  of  Shakespeare’s  free  and  noble 
spirit  that  in  all  questions  of  politics  and  morals  he  is  ever  on  the  side  of  justice  and 
humanity.  He  has  here  given  us  what  is  the  great  argument  against  the  use  of  torture, 
folded  up,  as  his  manner  is,  in  small  space,  fit  to  circulate  from  hand  to  hand,  and  thus 
produce  a  combination  of  sentiment  and  judgement  in  the  whole  community  against 
what  was  a  common  but  iniquitous  practice  of  the  time.  Let  us  observe,  also,  to  the 
honour  of  this  great  teacher  of  truth,  that  such  a  sentiment  as  this,  which  in  the  reign 
of  Victoria  would  find  a  respondent  and  approving  voice  from  all,  in  the  reign  of  Eliza¬ 
beth  would  be  coldly  received  by  those  at  least  who  guided  the  public  counsels  or  con¬ 
ducted  private  examinations,  if  they  found  not  sedition  in  it,  and  matter  for  a  Star  Cham¬ 
ber  inquiry.  At  the  very  time  when  Shakespeare’s  actors  were  repeating  these  words 
at  the  Black  Friars,  or  on  the  Bankside,  the  secret  chambers  of  the  Tower  were  actu 
ally  echoing  the  groans  of  suspected  persons  who  were  subjected  to  this  unreasonable 
mode  of  extorting  information.  Shakespeare  must  have  known  this,  and  I  hope  that 
it  was  because  he  knew  it  that  he  sent  the  thrilling  words  through  the  crowds  that 
resorted  to  his  theatre.  He  has  at  least  taken  care  that  they  should  be  connected  with 
the  idea  of  treason.  [See  lines  29,  30,  and  33.]  Portia  is  throughout  a  little  senten¬ 
tious,  and  in  line  37  gives  a  counterpart  expression  to  one  of  our  English  stock-prov¬ 
erbs  :  ‘  Confess,  and  die.’  I  cannot  quit  this  passage  without  again  calling  attention 
to  the  boldness  as  well  as  to  the  wisdom  of  it.  In  Jardine’s  Essay  on  the  Use  of  Tor¬ 
ture  in  England,  1836,  we  have  sufficient  proof  of  the  frequent  use  of  it  in  the  reigns 
of  Elizabeth  and  James,  but  we  have  not  evidence  that  either  the  Law  or  the  Church 
remonstrated  against  what  he  shows  to  be  a  new  practice  in  England.  Is  it  too  much 
to  claim  for  Shakespeare  that  he  was  the  first  who  raised  his  voice  expressly  against  it, 
and,  heedless  of  the  consequences  to  himself,  showed  the  iniquity  and  the  folly  of  what 
they  were  doing,  to  the  politicians  who  commanded  the  application  of  it  ?  Let  some 
other  person  produce  an  earlier  instance.  I  know  of  none.  [In  Silvayn’s  Orator  (see 
Appendix),  which  contained  a  ‘  Declamation  ’  ‘  of  a  Jew  who  would  for  his  debt  haue 


ACT  III,  9. 

j.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 

13? 

Baff. 

Pi  omife  me  life,  and  ile  confeffe  the  truth. 

Por. 

Well  then,  confeffe  and  liue. 

Baff. 

Confeffe  and  loue 

Had  beene  the  verie  fum  of  my  confeffion  : 

O  happie  torment,  when  my  torturer  4c 

Doth  teach  me  anfwers  for  deliuerance : 

But  let  me  to  my  fortune  and  the  caskets. 

Por.  Away  then,  I  am  lockt  in  one  of  them, 

If  you  doe  loue  me,  you  will  finde  me  out. 

Nerryffa  and  the  reft,  ftand  all  aloofe,  45 

Let  muficke  found  while  he  doth  make  his  choife, 

Then  if  he  loofe  he  makes  a  Swan-like  end, 

Fading  in  mufique.  That  the  comparifon 

May  ftand  more  proper,  my  eye  fhall  be  the  ftreame 

And  watrie  death-bed  for  him  :  he  may  win,  50 

And  what  is  mufique  than  ?  Than  mufique  is 

Euen  as  the  flourifh,  when  true  fubiedts  bowe 

To  a  new  crowned  Monarch  :  Such  it  is, 

As  are  thofe  dulcet  founds  in  breake  of  day,  54 

47.  Then]  (Aside)  Then  Anon.  (ap.  49.  proper]  just  Pope  +  . 

Cam.).  51.  than]  then  Q,Ff. 

loofe]  lofe  Qt.  Than]  Then  Q,Q3  Ff. 

48,  &c.  mufique]  mufcke  Qx.  53.  crowned]  crownd  Qt. 


a  pound  of  the  flesh  of  a  Christian,’  Shakespeare  might  have  found  more  than  one 
illustration  of  the  effects  of  the  *  racked  The  ‘  26  Declamation  ’  reads :  ‘  A  Iudge 
....  caused  two  men  suspected  of  murther  to  be  racked :  they  confesse  the  fact,  and 
are  put  to  death.  Some  certaine  time  after  their  execution,  he  which  was  supposed  to 
be  murthered  returned  home;  whervpon  the  kinsman  of  those  that  were  executed 
accused  the  iudge,  saying,’  &c.  Again,  the  58th  Declamation  is  *  of  a  sorceress,  which 
poysoned  her  son  in  law,  ....  ar.d  is  not  onely  suspected  for  his  death  but  accused  and 
conuinced  thereof ;  wherefore  she  being  laid  vpon  the  racke  ....  accused  her  owne 
daughter,  so  that  she  was  adiudged  to  be  burned  with  her  mother.’  See  also  the  trial 
of  Dr  Lopez,  in  Appendix,  p.  398. — Ed.] 

47.  Swan-like]  See  Douce  (i,  262) ;  or  Oth.  V,  ii,  309,  of  this  Edition. 

48.  Eccles  :  I  cannot  but  think  that  the  cadence  of  the  foregoing  line,  and  the 
pause  in  this,  have  a  fine  effect  in  impressing  the  idea  communicated  to  the  mind. 
Allen  :  The  ‘  the  ’  after  ‘  that  ’  must  be  absorbed.  Thus  scan :  Fading  |  in  Mfi  |  sic. 
That’  |  compa  |  rison. 

52.  flourish]  Clarendon:  At  the  coronation  of  English  sovereigns,  the  moment 
of  putting  on  the  crown  is  announced  by  a  flourish  of  trumpets.  [See  Appendix, 
‘Date  of  the  Play.’ — Ed.] 

54.  dulcet  sounds]  Halliwell:  An  allusion  to  the  custom  of  playing  music 
under  the  windows  of  the  bridegroom’s  bedroom  on  the  morning  of  his  marriage. 


14.0 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  ii. 


That  creepe  into  the  dreaming  bride-groomes  eare,  55 

And  fummon  him  to  marriage.  Now  he  goes 

With  no  leffe  prefence,  but  with  much  more  loue 

Then  yong  Alcides,  when  he  did  redeeme 

The  virgine  tribute,  paied  by  howling  Troy 

To  the  Sea-monfter  :  I  ftand  for  facrifice,  60 

The  reft  aloofe  are  the  Dardanian  wiues  : 

With  bleared  vifages  come  forth  to  view 
The  iffue  of  th’exploit  :  Goe  Hercules, 

Liue  thou,  I  liue  with  much  more  difmay  64 


59.  virgine]  virgin  Qr 

virgine  tribute ]  Virgin-tribute  F3 
F  ,  Rowe+. 

paied ]  payd  Qt.  payed  Q2. 

62.  bleared]  bleated  Johns,  (misprint). 
64.  thou,  I  liue]  thou,  I  liue,  F  F  , 


Rowe  i.  thou,  I  live. —  Johns,  thou,  I 
live ;  Rowe  ii  et  cet.  (subs.). 

64.  much]  Q,F  ,  Wh.  i,  Rife,  much 
much  Q2F2F3,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 
much-much  Dyce,  Sta.  much,  much  Q3, 
Rowe  et  cet. 


57.  presence]  Johnson:  With  the  same  dignity  of  mien. 

57.  more  loue]  Clarendon:  Because  Hercules  rescued  Hesione  not  for  love  of 
the  lady,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  horses  promised  him  by  Laomedon.  Malone  :  See 
Ovid,  Metamorph.  xi,  199  et  seqq. 

60-63.  Hunter  (i,  327):  There  is  something  very  Greekish  in  this;  something 
which  seems  to  show  that  Shakespeare  was  acquainted  with  the  structure  of  the  Greek 
drama,  and  he  shows  his  acquaintance  with  it  at  the  proper  time,  when  Portia  compares 
herself  to  the  virgin  devoted  by  Laomedon  to  the  sea-monster. 

64.  Liue  thou]  Through  an  oversight  the  Cambridge  Editors  attribute  to  Hal- 
liwell  an  assertion  that  Roberts’s  Quarto  reads  then  for  ‘thou;’  whereas  Halliwell 
merely  quotes  Johnson’s  note  as  it  stands  in  the  Variorum  of  1821,  and,  in  fact,  in 
every  Variorum  after  Steevens’s  of  1793,  where  the  note  first  appeared  in  its  present 
shape.  The  Cambridge  Editors  add :  ‘  It  [i.  e.  then]  is  not  so  in  our  copy.’  Nor  is 
it  so  in  mine,  nor,  if  I  am  right,  was  it  so  in  the  copy  of  Dr  Johnson,  in  whose  note, 
as  I  believe,  then  is  a  misprint.  The  point  of  that  note  was  to  call  attention  to  other 
readings  in  this  and  the  following  line,  and  not  to  any  variation  between  thou  and  then. 
—Ed. 

64.  Liue  thou]  See  Abbott,  §  361,  for  other  instances  of  where  the  subjunctive 
is  indicated  by  placing  the  verb  before  the  subject.  See  also  *  Live  Roderigo,’  &c., 
Oth.  V,  i,  17. 

64.  much]  White  (ed.  i) :  The  repetition  ‘much  much’  in  Q2  has  been  universally 
followed.  The  repetition  is  tame  and  prosaic  to  a  degree ;  and  the  fact  that  while  it 
occurs  in  the  edition  from  a  copy  of  which  the  Folio  was  printed,  it  is  omitted  in  the 
Folio  itself,  instead  of  justifying  the  restoration,  proves,  if  it  prove  anything,  that  the 
omission  was  intentional.  Had  the  word  been  found  in  Qt,  but  not  in  Q2,  and  did  it 
enhance  as  much  as  it  deforms  the  beauty  of  the  passage,  its  absence  might  be  reason¬ 
ably  attributed  to  a  mere  perpetuation  of  an  error  left  uncorrected  in  the  copy  furnished 
to  the  printer.  The  pause  which  a  proper  reading  of  the  passage  requires  after  ‘  Live 
thou,  1  live,’  entirely  perfects  the  elocutionary  rhythm  of  the  line ;  and  Shakespeare, 


act  ill,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


I  view  the  fight,  then  thou  that  mak’ft  the  fray. 

Here  Mujicke. 

A  Song  the  whilji  Baffanio  comments  on  the 
Caskets  to  liimfelfe. 

Tell  me  where  is  fancie  bred, 


141 

65 


69 


65.  /]  To  Q,.  within.  Rowe. 

66.  Here  Muficke]  Om,  Qq.  Music  69.  is]  his  Warb. 


who  thought  only  how  his  verse  would  sound  in  an  actor’s  mouth,  not  how  it  would 
look  to  a  critic’s  eye,  often  used  this  freedom.  [Before  putting  forth  his  Second  Edi¬ 
tion,  White  may  have  read  Walker’s  chapter  ( Crit.  ii,  141)  on  the  ‘Omission  of  Re¬ 
peated  Words,’  and  the  numerous  examples  there  given  may  have  converted  him ;  but, 
however  this  may  be,  certain  it  is  that  in  his  later  edition  he  silently  adopts  the  text  of 
Q2.  Yet  is  the  testimony  in  his  First  Edition  valuable  as  showing  that  at  least  this  line 
cannot  be  cited  as  an  unquestionable  proof  of  the  inferiority  of  Qt  to  Q2.  The  full  text 
of  the  two  Quartos  is  as  follows  :  Qt  has,  ‘  Liue  thou,  I  liue  with  much  more  difmay  To 
view  the  fight,  then  thou  that  mak’ft  the  fray.’  Q2  has,  ‘  Liue  thou,  I  liue  with  much 
much  more  difmay,  I  view  the  fight,  then  thou  that  mak’ft  the  fray.’  Although  the 
punctuation  in  both  is  defective,  yet  with  its  bad  punctuation,  Qr  after  all,  gives  a  mean¬ 
ing,  which  can  scarcely  be  said  of  Q2 ;  the  transcriber  of  the  text  for  Q2  gives  us  the 
better  text,  but  he  did  not  understand  it,  and  hence  his  ill-placed  commas.  The  tran¬ 
scriber  of  Qj,  being  more  intelligent  than  the  other,  saw  that  something  was  wrong 
and  did  his  best  to  correct  it,  either  by  punctuation  or  by  changing  ‘  I  ’  to  ‘  To.’  With 
proper  punctuation,  such  as  Rowe  (ed.  ii)  supplied  (see  Text.  Notes),  Q2  gives  us  the 
better  text. — Ed.] 

65.  that  mak’st]  Eccles  :  To  consider  Bassanio  as  a  spectator  of  the  combat  waged 
by  himself,  though  but  metaphorical,  would  be  a  very  unusual  mode  of  thinking  and 
speaking.  The  objection  might  be  obviated  by  a  change  of  this  sort,  *  than  thou  main 
tain'st  the  fray.’ 

69-74.  Rushton  (N.  dr  Qu.  4th,  xii,  p.  304) :  In  the  Euphues  of  Lily  is  the  fol¬ 
lowing:  ‘For  as  by  Basill  the  Scorpion  is  engendred,  and  by  meanes  of  the  sami 
hearb  destroyed  :  so  love,  which  by  time  and  fancie  is  bred  in  an  idle  head,  is  by  time 
and  fancie  banished  from  the  heart :  or  as  the  Salamander  which  being  a  long  space 
nourished  in  the  fire,  at  the  last  quencheth  it,  so  affection  having  taking  holde  of  the 
fancie,  and  living  as  it  were  in  the  minde  of  the  lover,  in  tract  of  tyme  altereth  and 
changeth  the  heate,  and  turneth  it  to  chilnesse  ’  [ Euphues  and  his  England,  1580,  p 
298,  ed.  Arber],  Weiss  (p.  312) :  Portia  bids  the  music  play.  Bassanio  must  be  at¬ 
tempered  to  his  choice ;  the  song’s  key  must  have  an  instinct  for  the  proper  casket’s 
key.  Unconsciously  she  breaks  her  oath ;  for  what  benign  influence  selected  the  song 
that  is  now  sung  ?  Some  star,  whose  tenant  was  her  father  ?  Or  was  it  Nerissa’s  doing, 
who  determined  to  convey  a  hint  to  the  lover  ?  [The  maid  gave  a  hint  in  the  Peco- 
rone. — Ed.]  Or  did  Gratiano  hit  upon  it,  who  had  got  from  Nerissa  a  promise  of  her 
love  if  the  choice  went  to  suit  her  ?  A  hint  indeed  !  It  is  the  very  breadth  of  broad¬ 
ness,  and  a  lover  is  not  dull.  A  song  that  did  good  sexton- service,  for  fancy’s  knell  is 
rung  indeed.  The  strain  reminds  Bassanio  of  notices  in  his  experience :  that  error 
hides  its  grossness  in  ornament ;  vice  assumes  some  mark  of  virtue ;  beauty  is  for  sale 


142 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Or  in  the  heart ,  or  in  the  head :  70 

How  begot ,  how  nourifhed.  Rep  lie,  replie. 

It  is  engendrcd  in  the  eyes , 

With  gazing  fed,  and  Fancie  dies, 

In  the  cradle  where  it  lies  :  74 


70.  Or  in]  In  Johns. 

71.  nourifhed.]  nourifhed  ?  Qq. 

Replie,  replie]  Om.  Rowe.  Reply 

(as  a  stage  direction)  Han.  Johns.  Steev. 
Mai.  ’90,  Huds.  As  a  separate  line,  Pope 


+  ,  Var.  Knt  et  cet. 

72.  engendred]  engendered  Qt. 
eyes]  eye  Qq,  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 

Warb.  Cam. 

73.  fed,]  fed ;  Cap.  et  seq. 


by  weight,  and  is  a  show  which  cunning  puts  on  to  entrap  wise  men ;  in  short,  as  the 
song  says,  fancies  (which  sometimes  in  Shakespeare  mean  genuine  passion,  but  here  it 
hints  only  a  passing  sentiment)  come  by  gazing,  have  no  life  deeper  than  the  eyes 
where  they  are  born.  ‘  So  may  the  outward  shows  be  least  themselves.’  This  fortune- 
hunter,  after  all,  is  Portia’s  counterpart.  The  melody  woven  out  of  air  glides  into  his 
hand,  and  becomes  a  clew  to  bliss.  Oh,  the  woman  thrills !  in  touching  the  lead  his 
hand  has  clutched  her  heart,  and  forces  from  her  words  that  are  outbreaks  of  that 
which  is  everlastingly  the  Woman.  They  assail,  they  challenge  man  to  say  what  is  so 
great  as  love.  This  polished,  clear,  sagacious,  gifted,  balanced  woman  dares  man  to 
say  love  is  not  greatest  of  all. 

69.  where]  Abbott,  by  referring  to  §  136,  apparently  understands  this  as  a  con¬ 
traction  for  whether,  which,  I  think,  it  is ;  as  far  as  the  sense  is  concerned,  it  is  imma¬ 
terial. — Ed. 

69.  fancie]  Steevens  :  Love.  George  Fletcher  [Fraser's  Maga.,  May,  1850, 
p.  507) :  *  Fancy,’  we  must  observe,  in  the  writings  of  Shakespeare,  and  in  the  lan¬ 
guage  of  his  time,  signifies  that  uneasy  season  of  love  which  precedes  the  certainty  of 
its  thorough  requital.  Thus,  in  any  case,  ‘  Fancy  dies  In  the  cradle  where  it  lies,’  since 
it  either  expires  on  finding  itself  hopeless  of  requital,  or  becomes  merged  in  the  perfect 
enjoyment  of  mutual  love.  Clarendon  :  Fancy,  here,  seems  to  be  censured  as  a  feel¬ 
ing  neither  bred  in  heart  nor  in  brain,  but  in  the  eye  only,  penetrating  no  deeper,  and 
lasting  only  while  its  object  is  in  sight. 

71.  Replie,  replie]  Johnson  :  These  words,  in  all  the  old  copies,  stand  as  a  mar¬ 
ginal  direction.  [Capell  printed  this  Song  in  two  stanzas,  which  he  calls  ‘ 1.  V.’  and 
‘  2.  V.,’  and  ‘  reply,  reply  ’  as  the  last  line  of  the  first  stanza,  and  added  this  note :]  For 
this  Song’s  form  the  present  Editor  is  accountable  :  the  words  ‘  reply,  reply  ’  shew  it  to 
be  a  song  in  two  parts,  or  by  two  Voices :  [therefore  Capell’s  ‘  x.  V.’  and  *  2.  V.’  mean 
First  Voice  and  Second  Voice]  follow’d  by  a  Chorus  of  divers  assistant  voices,  which 
‘  all  ’  indicates.  Knight  :  These  words  are  unquestionably  part  of  the  song ;  the 
mutilation  whereof,  in  the  belief  that  the  words  were  a  stage-direction,  is  certainly  one 
of  the  most  tasteless  corruptions  of  the  many  for  which  the  Editors  of  Shakespeare  are 
answerable.  Cambridge  Editors  :  These  words  seem  to  be  required,  as  part  of  the 
song,  by  the  rhythm,  and  (if  we  read  eye  with  the  Qq)  by  the  rhyme  also. 

72.  eyes,]  In  a  modern  text  I  think  there  should  be  a  semicolon  after  this  word, 
which  is,  to  me,  better  in  the  plural  than  in  the  singular ;  the  singular,  common  as  it  is, 
always  conveys  to  me  more  or  less  the  idea  of  mayhem. — Ed. 

74.  Capell  :  The  matter  of  this  song  is  both  pleasing  and  suitable,  and,  in  one 
place,  satirical;  for  the  sentence,  beginning — ‘ard  fancy  dies’  is  expressive  of  love’s 


ACT  III.  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


143 


Let  vs  all  ring  Fancies  knell.  75 

lie  begin  it. 

Dingy  dongy  bell. 

All.  Ding,  dong,  bell. 

Baff.  So  may  the  outward  fhowes  be  lead;  themfelues 
The  world  is  ftill  deceiu’d  with  ornament.  80 

In  Law,  what  Plea  fo  tanted  and  corrupt, 

But  being  feafon’d  with  a  gracious  voice, 

Obfcures  the  fhow  of  euill  ?  In  Religion, 

What  damned  error,  but  fome  fober  brow 

Will  bleffe  it,  and  approue  it  with  a  text,  85 

Hiding  the  grofeneffe  with  faire  ornament : 

There  is  no  voice  fo  fimple,  but  affumes 
Some  marke  of  vertue  on  his  outward  parts ; 

How  manie  cowards,  whofe  hearts  are  all  as  falfe 

As  flayers  of  fand,  weare  yet  vpon  their  chins  90 


76.  Roman  in  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

76,  77.  As  one  line,  Johns.  Cap.  et  seq. 
81.  tanted ]  tainted  QqFf. 

87.  voice\  Qt.  voyce  Q2Q3.  vice  Ff, 


Rowe  et  seq. 

88.  marke]  Om.  Q1# 

his]  its  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

90.  flayers']  Q2Q3.  Knt,  Huds.  flaiers 
Q,.  flayres  F2F3.  flairs  F4,  Rowe  et  cet 


changeableness,  which  has  both  its  birth  in  the  eye  from  one  object,  and  its  extinction 
or  death  from  others.  Eccles  :  This  line  cannot  refer  to  the  eye  or  eyes,  in  which 
fancy  is  engendered,  but  rather  to  the  shortness  of  its  duration,  as  dying  while  still  in 
its  cradle,  i.  e.  in  infancy. 

77.  Halliwell:  This  burthen  was  formerly  a  serious  one,  appropriately  significant 
of  a  knell. 

79.  Johnson:  He  begins  abruptly;  the  first  part  of  the  argument  has  passed  in  his 
mind.  Eccles  :  Or  perhaps  this  line  refers  to  the  subject  of  the  Song;  that  the  objects 
of  fancy  afford  only  that  short-lived  enjoyment  just  alluded  to. 

82.  season’d]  Clarendon:  This  carries  on  the  metaphor  suggested  by  ‘ tainted ' 
in  the  preceding  line. 

85.  approue]  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  That  is,  ratify,  confirm. 

88.  marke]  Through  the  compositor’s  carelessness  this  word  is  omitted  in  Qx ;  it 
can  be  scarcely  called  a  different  text. 

90.  stayers]  Knight:  The  propriety  of  the  image  appears  to  us  to  justify  the 
restoration  of  the  original  word  in  this  passage.  Cowards  in  their  falseness, — their 
assumption  of  appearances  without  realities, — may  be  compared  to  stairs  of  sand, 
which  betray  the  feet  of  those  who  trust  to  them ;  but  we  have  here  cowards  appear¬ 
ing  ready  to  face  an  enemy  with  ‘beards  of  Hercules  and  frowning  Mars;’  they  are 
false  as  stayers  of  sand — banks,  bulwarks  of  sand, — that  the  least  opposition  will  throw 
down, — vain  defences, — feeble  ramparts.  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  55)  calls  attention  to 
the  shifting  and  uncertain  spelling  of  ‘stairs’  in  Taylor’s  Workes,  and  adds  that 


144 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  ii. 


The  beards  of  Hercules  and  frowning  Mars , 

Who  inward  fearcht,  haue  lyu  ers  white  as  milke, 
And  thefe  affume  but  valors  excrement, 

To  render  them  redoubted.  Looke  on  beautie, 
And  you  fhall  fee  Tis  purchaft  by  the  weight, 
Which  therein  workes  a  miracle  in  nature, 

Making  them  lighted:  that  weare  moft  of  it : 

So  are  thofe  crifped  fnakie  golden  locks 
Which  makes  fuch  wanton  gambols  with  the  winde 
Vpon  fuppofed  faireneffe,  often  knowne 
To  be  the  dowrie  of  a  fecond  head, 


IOO 


91 


95 


98.  crifped ]  crispy  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns. 


99.  makes~\  Ff Q3,  Rowe,  maketh  Q, 
Q2.  make  Pope  et  cet. 


Knight’s  ‘  defence  and  explanation  of  “stayers  ”  is  of  more  than  Warburtonian  subtlety, 
and  will  assuredly  never  carry  conviction  to  a  single  Englishman, — though,  perhaps,  it 
may  receive  the  commendation  of  Tieck,  with  his  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  lan¬ 
guage,  and  in  gratitude  for  the  respect  with  which  Mr  Knight  has  treated  his  vagaries.’ 
Hudson,  nevertheless,  retains  the  old  spelling,  and  explains  it  *  in  the  sense  of  props, 
supports,  or  stays.  The  word  is  to  be  pronounced,  here,  as  one  syllable ;  as  “  cowards  ” 
also  is.’  Allen  :  I  wonder  if  there  be  not  here  an  allusion  to  the  mirage  in  the  sandy 


desert  ? 


93.  excrement]  Malone:  That  is,  what  a  little  before  is  called  the  ‘  beard  of 
Hercules.’  See  IVint.  Tale,  IV,  iv,  734.  Staunton  :  A  brave  man’s  beard.  The 
meaning  is, — cowards,  who  inwardly  are  false  and  craven,  by  the  assumption  of  what 
is  merely  the  excrescence  of  true  valour,  think  to  be  considered  indomitable. 

94.  beautie]  Heath  (p.  1 1 7 ) :  By ‘beauty,’  I  apprehend,  is  meant  only  artificial 
beauty,  which  is  procured  by  painting,  and  is  mere  adventitious  show  and  ornament 
superinduced  upon  true  and  real  nature,  like  that  false  hair  the  mention  of  which  im¬ 
mediately  follows.  This  factitious  beauty,  though  purchased  by  weight,  the  more  it  is 
laid  on,  the  more  lightness  it  indicates  in  the  wearer. 

98.  crisped]  Steevens  :  That  is,  curled.  Rolfe  :  Milton  ( Comus,  984)  speaks 
of  ‘  crisped  shades  and  bowers,’  referring  to  the  leaves  waved  and  curled  by  the 
wind. 

99.  Which  makes]  Abbott  (§  247) :  The  relative  (perhaps  because  it  does  not 
signify  by  inflection  any  agreement  in  number  or  person  with  its  antecedent)  frequently 
takes  a  singular  verb,  though  the  antecedent  be  plural. 

100.  Vpon  supposed  fairenesse]  Clarendon  connects  this  with  the  ‘snakie 
golden  locks,’  and  paraphrases  it,  ‘surmounting  fictitious  beauty.’  But  Rolfe  para¬ 
phrases  it,  ‘  on  the  strength  of  their  fictitious  beauty,’  and  thinks  that  it  is  ‘  closely  con¬ 
nected  with  the  preceding  line.’ 

101.  Mrs  Furness  (MS) :  Conf.  Sonnet,  68,  7  :  ‘To  live  a  second  life  on  second 
head,’  where,  in  the  preceding  line,  the  word  ‘  sepulchre  ’  also  occurs. 

101.  dowrie]  Malone:  The  prevalence  of  this  fashion  in  Shakespeare’s  time  is 
evinced  by  the  following  passage  in  an  old  pamphlet,  entitled :  The  Honestie  of  this 


act  in,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


145 


The  fcull  that  bred  them  in  the  Sepulcher. 

Thus  ornament  is  but  the  guiled  fhore 

To  a  moft  dangerous  fea  :  the  beautious  fcarfe 


104 


102 


103.  guiled ]  guilded  Ff.  gilded  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Cap.  guilty  Warb. 


Age,  proving  by  good  Circumstance  that  the  World  was  never  honest  till  now ,  by  Bar- 
nabe  Rich,  1615: — ‘  My  lady  holdeth  on  her  way,  perhaps  to  the  tire-maker’s  shop, 
where  she  shaketh  her  crownes  to  bestow  upon  some  new  fashioned  attire,  upon  such 
artificial  deformed  periwigs,  that  they  were  fitter  to  furnish  a  theatre,  or  for  her  that  in 
a  stage-play  should  represent  some  hag  of  hell,  than  to  be  used  by  a  Christian  woman.’ 
Again,  ibid :  ‘These  attire-makers  within  these  fortie  yeares  were  not  known  by  that 
name;  and  but  now  very  lately  they  kept  their  lowzie  commodity  of  periwigs,  and  their 
monstrous  attires  closed  in  boxes ; — and  those  women  that  used  to  weare  them  would 
not  buy  them  but  in  secret.  But  now  they  are  not  ashamed  to  set  them  forth  upon 
•  heir  stalls, — such  monstrous  mop-powles  of  haire,  so  proportioned  and  deformed,  that 
but  within  these  twenty  or  thirty  yeares  would  have  drawne  the  passers-by  to  stand 
and  gaze,  and  to  wonder  at  them.’  Steevens,  in  a  note  on  Timon,  IV,  iii,  144,  has 
collected  many  references  to  this  practice.  He  says  that  Stowe  informs  us  that 
‘  women’s  periwigs  were  first  brought  into  England  about  the  time  of  the  massacre  of 
Paris.’ 

103.  guiled]  Steevens:  That  is,  treacherous.  * Guiled ’  stands  for  gulling.  Ca- 
pell:  Gilded  [of  the  Ff]  is  a  well-chosen  epithet;  expressing  the  glitter  of  cliffs  and 
rocks,  and  of  the  sea’s  beach,  when  the  sun  lyes  upon  them.  Eccles  :  If  gilded  be 
the  right  word,  it  may,  perhaps,  bear  an  allusion  to  the  golden  locks  just  before  men¬ 
tioned.  Collier  :  The  (MS)  alters  guilded  to  guiling ;  it  may  have  been  the  custom 
to  use  the  word  guiling  in  the  old  Corrector’s  time ;  but  as  Shakespeare  and  other 
writers  of  that  period  often  employed  the  passive  participle  instead  of  the  active,  and 
vice  versd,  we  have  introduced  no  alteration;  by  ‘ guiled ’  Shakespeare  certainly  meant 
guiling, — of  that  there  is  no  question.  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  291):  For  ‘guiled,’  com¬ 
pare  :  ‘  To  me  came  Tarquin  armed ;  so  beguiled  With  outward  honesty,  but  yet  defiled 
With  inward  vice,’  & c. — R.  of  L.  1544.  Still  I  suspect  ‘guiled.’  Lettsom  [foot-note 
to  Walker]  :  I  believe  the  verb  to  guile  was  unknown  to  Shakespeare.  However  that 
may  be,  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  poet  was  thinking  of  Raleigh’s  ‘  Discovery  of  Gui¬ 
ana, ’  and  wrote  guilded.  Clarendon  :  That  is,  full  of  guile,  deception,  treacherous. 
So  IV,  i,  196,  ‘blest,’ — i.  e.  endowed  with  blessing;  and  in  1  Hen.  IV:  I,  iii,  183: 
‘  Revenge  the  jeering  and  disdain’d  contempt  Of  this  proud  King,’  where  ‘  disdain’d  ’ 
means  full  of  disdain.  So  probably  in  Afeas.  for  Meas.  Ill,  i,  1 21 :  ‘the  delighted 
spirit  ’  means  the  spirit  capable  of  delight.  Abbott,  §  294,  gives  a  list  of  participles 
formed  from  adjectives,  and  of  participles  derived  from  nouns,  with  respective  modi¬ 
fications  of  meaning.  Rolfe:  Marsh  (Led.  on  Eng.  Lang.,  p.  655)  gives  examples 
of  ‘  passive  participles  with  active  meaning,’  as  well-spoken,  fair-spoken,  &c.  ‘  Well 

read'  is  similar.  [Clarendon’s  interpretation,  sustained  by  Abbott,  is,  to  me,  unques¬ 
tionably  correct,  and  we  need  not  suppose  that  a  passive  participle  is  here  used  for  an 
active  one.  Just  as  ‘delighted’  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  and  in  Oth.  I,  iii,  320,  means 
’ endowed  with  delights,  ‘deliciis  exornata'  as  Sidney  Walker  gives  it,  so  here  ‘guiled’ 
means  endowed,  infested  with  guiles.  It  is  the  same  construction  in  ‘Your  loop’d  and 
window’d  raggedness,’  Lear,  III,  iv,  31. — Ed.] 


xo 


146 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Vailing-  an  Indian  beautie  ;  In  a  word 


105.  an  Indian  beautie ]  an  Indian 
beauty  F,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  an  Indian 
dowdy  Han.  Deformity  Lansd.  an  In¬ 
dian  :  beauty ,  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  an  In¬ 
dian  feature  Ktly,  Huds.  an  Indian 
beauty  Qq  F2F3,  Steev.  et  cet.  an  Indian 


105 

idol  Cartwright,  an  Indian  gipsy  Walker. 
an  Iftdian  favour  Lettsom.  an  Indian 
swarthy,  or  Indian  sooty  Herr.  a>i  In¬ 
dian  deity  Schmidt,  an  Indian  bosom 
Parry. 


105.  Indian  beautie]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Illust.  ii,  307) :  There  is  a  glaring 
contrast  betwixt  gilded  shore  and  dang'rous  sea;  but  is  there  the  same  betwixt  beauteous 
scarf  and  Indian  beauty  ?  I  suspect  both  the  pointing  and  the  text  wrong.  Read :  ‘  the 
beauteous  scarf  Veiling  an  Indian. — Beauty’s,  in  a  word,  The  seeming  truth  which  cun¬ 
ning  Dames  (or  tires,  or  trims')  put  on,’  &c.  [This  reading,  ‘  Indian ;  beauty’s,’  was 
adopted  by  Harness,  and  Collier’s  (MS)  reads  ‘Indian:  beauty,’]  Capell:  If  we 
lay  stress  upon  ‘Indian,’  we  shall  have  no  occasion  to  back  it  with  the  Oxford  editor’s 
dowdy.  Eccles  :  One  of  the  causes,  no  doubt,  for  suspecting  a  corruption  here  is  that 
the  words  *  beauteous  ’  and  ‘  beauty  ’  come  so  close  together,  but  in  that  the  writer 
might  have  designed  something  like  an  antithesis.  A.  E.  Brae  (W.  6°  Qu.  1852, 
1st,  v,  483)  gives  the  following  reasons  for  retaining  ‘  beautie  ’ :  First,  The  argument 
of  Bassanio  is  directed  against  the  deceptiveness  of  ornament  in  general,  of  which  seem¬ 
ing  beauty  is  only  one  of  the  subordinate  illustrations.  These  illustrations  are  drawn 
from  law,  religion,  valour,  and  beauty ;  all  of  which  are  finally  summed  up  in  the 
passage  in  question,  beginning  ‘  Thus  ornament,’  &c.  Therefore  this  summing  up 
cannot  refer  singly  to  beauty,  no  more  than  to  any  other  of  the  subordinate  illustrations, 
but  it  must  have  general  reference  to  adventitious  ornament,  against  which  the  collected 
argument  is  directed.  Secondly,  The  word  ‘  beauty  ’  is  necessarily  attached  to  ‘  Indian  ’ 
as  designative  of  sex  :  ‘  an  Indian,’  unqualified  by  any  other  distinction,  would  imply  a 
male ;  but  an  *  Indian  beauty  ’  is  at  once  understood  to  be  a  female.  Thirdly,  The  repe¬ 
tition,  or  rather  the  opposition,  of  ‘  beauteous  ’  and  *  beauty  ’  cannot  seriously  be  objected 
to  by  any  one  conversant  with  the  phraseology  of  Shakespeare.  ‘The  beauteous  scarf’ 
is  the  deceptive  ornament  which  leads  to  the  expectation  of  something  beneath  it  better 
than  an  Indian  beauty !  ‘  Indian  ’  is  used  adjectively,  in  the  sense  of  wild,  savage, 

hideous, — -just  as  we,  at  the  present  day,  might  say  a  ‘  Hottentot  beauty ;’  or  as  Shake¬ 
speare  himself  in  other  places  uses  the  word  ‘  Ethiop.’  Blackwood’s  Magazine 
(Aug.  1853) :  We  still  confess  a  partiality  for  the  old  text,  both  in  words  and  in  point¬ 
ing.  ‘  An  Indian  beauty  ’  may  mean  the  worst  species  of  ugliness,  just  as  ‘  a  Dutch  night¬ 
ingale  ’  means  a  toad.  Halliwell  :  Idol  has  been  suggested  for  ‘  beauty.’  Dyce  (ed. 
i) :  [flarness’s  punctuation]  may  be  dismissed  at  once  as  erroneous,  because  it  utterly 
subverts  the  whole  construction  of  the  passage.  The  word  ‘  beauty  ’  in  which  the  diffi¬ 
culty  lies,  would  seem  to  be  a  misprint  caught  from  the  preceding  ‘  beauteous ;’  unless 
we  suppose  (and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  so)  that  ‘  an  Indian  beauty  ’  may  mean — what 
is  a  beauty  among  the  Indians,  but  nowhere  else.  Staunton  :  I  have  always  suspected 
an  error  of  the  press  in  this  passage.  The  printer  appears  to  have  caught  the  word 
‘beauty,’  of  all  others  the  most  inappropriate  here,  from  the  ‘beauteous’  of  the  pre¬ 
ceding  line,  and  permitted  it  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  original  expression ;  but  what 
that  was  must  be  left  to  the  reader’s  sagacity  to  determine.  White:  Ornament,  not 
beauty,  is  here  the  subject  of  Bassanio’s  reflection.  ‘  Indian  ’  is  used  in  a  derogatory 
sense ;  and  the  occurrence  of  ‘  beauteous  ’  and  ‘  beauty  ’  in  the  same  sentence  is  not  at 
all  unlike  Shakespeare’s  manner.  Bailey  (i,  157):  I  propose  to  read  ‘an  Indian's 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


H7 


[105.  Vailing  an  Indian  beautie;] 

blackness ,’  which  expresses  in  the  most  direct  way  what  was  manifestly  in  the  author’s 
mind.  [But  by  the  time  Bailey  reached  his  second  volume  this  manifestness  was 
not  quite  so  manifest.  He  says,  ii,  214]  :  It  has  since  occurred  to  me  that  the  word 
body  would  form  an  emendation  equal  at  least  in  point  of  appropriateness,  and  more 
easily  changed  into  the  received  text.  Keightley  ( Expositor ,  p.  150):  Unless  we 
take  it  ironically — which  is  unworthy  of  the  poet — ‘beauty’  here  is  nonsense.  It 
plainly  owes  its  origin  to  the  preceding  ‘beauteous.’  Hanmer  read  dowdy;  Sidney 
Walker,  gipsy — both  bad.  I  read,  with  the  utmost  confidence,  feature  as  the  only 
word  suited  to  the  place.  [Keightley  had  already  proposed  this,  in  N.  &•  Qu.  1863, 
3d,  iv,  121.]  E.  L.  Swifte  [N.  dr5  Qu.  1863,  3d,  iv,  203) :  Let  me  attempt  to  restore 
the  antithesis  of  the  passage :  ‘  Veiling  an  Indian  Deity,’  the  Oriental  idols  being,  as 
travellers  tell  us,  gaudily  attired  and  awfully  ugly.  [As  White  did  not  himself,  in 
either  of  his  editions,  allude  to  the  explanation  which  he  gave  in  his  Shakespeare' s 
Scholar,  it  is  not  worth  while  to  do  more  than  allude  to  it  here.  In  his  Second  Edition 
he  explains  ‘  Indian  beauty  ’  as  *  one  with  thick  lips  and  a  black  skin.’]  Cowden- 
Clarke  :  It  is  just  possible  that  Shakespeare  may  have  written  ‘  suttee  ’  (spelt,  per¬ 
haps,  ‘  sutie  ’  in  the  MS,  and  the  printer,  being  unacquainted  with  the  word,  made  it 
out  ‘beautie’),  having  met  with  the  name  in  the  works  of  his  day;  as  Diodorus  men¬ 
tions  an  instance  of  a  suttee  three  hundred  years  before  the  Christian  era.  By  the  term 
‘  suttee  ’  is  now  meant  a  Hindoo  woman,  who  performs  the  sacrifice  of  burning  herself 
on  her  deceased  husband’s  funeral  pile ;  but  formerly  it  may  have  been  known  merely 
as  a  name  for  an  Indian  woman.  However,  we  merely  suggest  the  possibility  of 
Shakespeare’s  having  used  the  word  ‘  suttee  ’  here ;  as  we  have  always  taken  the  pas¬ 
sage  as  it  stands  to  be  merely  another  form  of  ‘  a  brow  of  Egypt,’  which  he  employs 
to  signify  a  dark-complexioned,  ill-favoured  woman.  Clarendon  :  Various  guesses 
have  been  made  as  to  the  word  which  we  should  substitute  for  ‘beauty,’  [among 
others]  ‘visage,’  ‘beldam;’  but  it  is  impossible  to  pronounce  positively  which  is  the 
right,  if  any.  Perhaps  ‘  bosom  ’  may  be  better  than  all  these,  if  we  consider  how  a 
scarf  is  worn.  Allen  :  We  require  some  word  like  poisoner,  or  one  that  fascinates, 
or  kills  with  the  evil  eye,  or  the  like.  Shakespeare  must  (in  that  case)  have  read  or 
heard  of  some  such  veiled  danger  to  his  countrymen  in  their  plantations  among  the 
Indians.  It  is  unnecessary  to  confine  one’s  self  to  the  ductus  literarum,  for  ‘beauty’ 
was  probably  brought  down  by  the  compositor  from  the  preceding  line.  Rev.  John 
Hunter:  Montaigne  [Essays,  ii,  12,  Florio’s  Translation)  says  of  beauty:  ‘The  Indians 
describe  it  black  and  swarthy,  with  blabbered  thick  lips,  with  a  broad  and  flat  nose.’ 
[If  Shakespeare  read  this  in  Montaigne,  he  read  it  in  French;  Florio’s  translation  was 
not  published  until  1603.  One  thing  is  clear  to  us  all  in  this  passage,  and  it  is,  that 
the  antitheses  which  have  preceded  must  be  kept  up.  We  have  uniformly  had  the  out¬ 
ward  shows  of  ornament  contrasted  with  the  thing  itself,  the  sham  with  the  reality, 
from  a  gracious  voice  seasoning  a  tainted  plea  down  to  a  beauteous  scarf  ornamenting 
— something  repulsive ;  what  that  something  is  each  student  will  have  to  decide  for  him¬ 
self  ;  for  me,  the  original  suffices.  An  Indian  beauty  is  assuredly  not  an  English 
beauty.  ‘In  the  estimation  of  Europeans,’  says  Sydney  Smith,  in  his  Lectures  on 
Moral  Philosophy,  Lecture  xii,  ‘  part  of  the  beauty  of  a  face  is  the  color  of  the  cheek ; 
not  that  there  is  something  in  that  particular  position  of  red  color,  which,  I  believe,  is 
of  itself  beautiful, — but  habit  has  also  connected  it  with  the  idea  of  health.  An 
Indian  requires  that  his  wife’s  face  should  be  the  color  of  good  marketable  sea-coal ; 
another  tribe  is  enamoured  of  deep  orange ;  and  a  cheek  of  copper  is  irresistible  a 


148 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ill,  sc.  ii. 


The  Teeming  truth  which  cunning  times  put  on 
To  intrap  the  wifeft.  Therefore  then  thou  gaudie  gold, 
Hard  food  for  Midas,  I  will  none  of  thee, 

Nor  none  of  thee  thou  pale  and  common  drudge 
’Tweene  man  and  man  :  but  thou,  thou  meager  lead 
Which  rather  threatnefl  then  doft  promife  ought, 

Thy  paleneffe  moues  me  more  then  eloquence, 


106 


1 10 


1 17 


107.  Therefore  then]  Q2.  Then  Pope  + . 


III.  threatnefl ]  threatenfl  Q2. 


Therefore  Qr  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  et  seq. 

108.  food~\  foole  Q,. 

109.  pale~\  stale  Farmer,  Dyce  iii. 


drudge~\  drudg  F  . 


1 1 2.  paleneffe~\  palenes  Q2.  plainness 
Warb.  Theob.  Han.  Johns.  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  ’90,  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Del.  Rife, 
Huds. 


fourth.’  In  the  foregoing  discussion,  allusion  is  made  by  Brae,  Singer,  and  Dyce  to 
an  Anonymous  edition  of  Shakespeare,  printed  by  Scott  and  Webster  in  1833.  This 
is  one  of  the  many  reprints  of  Harness’s  edition,  wherein  the  note  on  this  passage 
reads : *  *  I  have  deviated  slightly  from  the  Folio,  [where  the  text]  by  no  means  serves 
to  illustrate  the  reflexion  which  Bassanio  wishes  to  enforce.’  Collier’s  (MS)  reads 

*  beauty,’  herein  differing  slightly  from  the  ‘  beauty’s  ’  of  Theobald  and  Harness,  a  dif¬ 
ference  which  escaped  the  notice  of  some  of  the  critics. — Ed.] 

107.  108.  If  in  line  108  Q,  is  inferior  to  Q2  in  printing  foole  for  food,  it  is  superior 
to  Q2  in  line  107  by  omitting  the  ‘then  ’  which  mars  the  metre. 

108.  Midas]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  152)  devotes  a  Chapter  to  Ovid’s  influence  on 
Shakespeare,  and  cites  this  allusion  to  Midas,  and  to  Thisbe,  and  to  Medea  in  Act  V, 
as  among  the  many  examples.  But  I  do  not  find  that  Walker  has  anywhere  noted 
that  it  was  chiefly  Golding’s  Translation  that  was  impressed  on  Shakespeare’s  memory. 
See  note  on  V,  i,  1. — Ed. 

109.  pale]  Farmer:  I  would  rather  give  the  character  of  silver,  ‘Thou  stale,  and 
common  drudge  ’Tween,’  &c.  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  305):  From  this  punctuation  it 
would  seem  that  Farmer  makes  stale  a  substantive.  Halliwell  :  It  may  be  men¬ 
tioned,  that  stale  and  common  appear  together  in  the  context  in  a  passage  in  Hen.  IV; 
and  that  stale  is  misprinted  pale  in  the  first  edition  of  Tro.  and  Cress.  Dyce  (ed.  iii) : 
The  words  stale  and  pale  are  frequently  confounded  by  early  transcribers  and  printers. 
[It  is  the  drudge’s  overwork  between  man  and  man  that  makes  him  ‘pale.’ — Ed.] 

1 12.  palenesse]  Warburton  :  Bassanio  is  displeas’d  at  the  golden  casket  for  its 
gaudiness,  and  the  silver  one  for  its  paleness ;  but,  what!  is  he  charm’d  with  the  leaden 
one  for  having  the  very  same  quality  that  displeas’d  him  in  the  silver  ?  The  poet  cer¬ 
tainly  wrote,  ‘  Thy  plainness this  characterizes  the  lead  from  the  silver,  which  *  pale¬ 
ness  ’  does  not,  they  being  both  pale.  Besides,  there  is  a  beauty  in  the  antithesis 
between  plainness  and  eloquence ;  between  paleness  and  eloquence  none.  So  it  is 
said  before  of  the  leaden  casket:  ‘This  third,  dull  lead,’  &c.  Farmer:  The  ‘pale¬ 
ness  ’  of  lead  is  for  ever  alluded  to.  ‘  Diane  declining,  pale  as  any  ledde,’  says  Stephen 
Hawes.  In  Fairfax’s  Tasso,  we  have — ‘  The  lord  Tancredie,  pale  with  rage  as  lead.’ 
Again,  Sackville  in  his  Legend  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  :  ‘  Now  pale  as  lead,  now 
cold  as  any  stone.’  And  in  the  old  ballad  of  The  King  and  the  Beggar  :  ‘  She  blushed 
scarlet  red,  Then  straight  again  as  pale  as  lead.’  As  to  the  antithesis,  Shakespeare  has 
already  made  it  in  Mid.  N.  D. :  ‘  When,’  says  Theseus,  *  I  have  seen  great  clerks  look 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


T49 

And  here  choofe  I,  ioy  be  the  confequence.  1 1 3 

Por.  How  all  the  other  paflions  fleet  to  ay  re, 

As  doubtfull  thoughts,  and  ralh  i  mb  rac’d  defpaire : 

And  fhuddring  feare,  and  greene-eyed  iealoufle. 

O  loue  be  moderate,  allay  thy  extafle,  1 17 

114-120.  [Aside.  Lansdowne,  Cam.  117.  O...  moderate]  Be  moderate,  love ! 

Glo.  Cla.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.  Han. 

1 16.  Jhuddring ]  Jhyddring  Qq.  O  loue]  Separate  line,  Glo.  Wh.  ii. 

pale ,  I  read  as  much  as  from  the  rattling  tongue  Of  saucy  and  audacious  eloquence.' 
Capell  :  Opposition  between  the  terms  that  compose  it  appearing  manifestly  an  inten¬ 
tion  in  [line  112],  ‘palines’  (the  word  of  the  original  Quarto)  must  have  been  a  cor¬ 
ruption,  and  that  for  plainness ,  in  the  manuscript— plaines.  Malone  :  By  laying  an 
emphasis  on  ‘Thy,’  (‘ Thy  paleness,’  &c.)  Warburton’s  objection  is  obviated.  Though 
Bassanio  might  object  to  silver,  that  *  pale  and  common  drudge ,’  lead,  though  pale  also, 
yet  not  being  in  daily  use,  might,  in  his  opinion,  deserve  a  preference.  A.  E.  Brae 
(N.  dr5  Qu.  1852,  1st,  vi,  59) :  I  am  convinced  that  Warburton’s  suggestion  of  plain¬ 
ness  is  right.  There  is  no  relation  between  ‘  paleness  ’  and  ‘  eloquence,’  in  the  sense 
required  by  the  context.  ‘  Paleness  ’  can  only  move  ‘  more  than  eloquence  ’  when  the 
feeling  to  be  excited  is  compassion ;  but  plainness  has  just  that  sort  of  opposition  to 
eloquence,  which  the  tenour  of  the  passage  requires.  Moreover,  plainness  has  an 
obvious  reference — which  paleness  has  not, — to  the  preceding  line :  *  Which  rather 
threat’nest  than  doth  promise  aught.’  And  it  is  also  an  appropriate  continuation  of 
meagre,  in  the  sense  of  poor,  barren,  unassuming.  Staunton  :  We  admit  Warburton’s 
emendation,  but  demur  to  the  reasoning  by  which  he  sought  to  establish  it.  The  plain¬ 
ness  which  moves  Bassanio  more  than  eloquence  is  clearly  not  alone  the  unpretending 
appearance  of  the  leaden  coffer,  as  Warburton  seems  to  have  thought,  but  the  plain 
speaking  of  the  inscription  on  it, — *  Which  rather  threat’nest,’  &c.,  contrasted  with  the 
tempting  labels  of  its  neighbours.  Bailey  (ii,  215)  not  only  adopts  ‘plainness’  on  the 
score  of  antithesis,  but  ‘being  of  opinion,’  he  says,  ‘that  “eloquence”  is  in  this  case 
exceptionable,  because  utterly  misplaced,  I  propose  that  it  should  be  exchanged  for  a 
word  resembling  it,  which  makes  as  perfect  an  antithesis  as  can  be  desired.  Let  us 
read :  “  Thy  plainness  moves  me  more  than  elegance ,”  and  we  obtain  a  line  which 
perfectly  expresses  all  that  is  wanted.  The  last  word  is  certainly  not  frequent  in  our 
author’s  writings ;  he  uses  it,  in  fact,  only  once  in  his  dramas  ’  [an  error ;  Shakespeare 
uses  ‘  elegancy  ’  in  Love  Lab.  L.,  but  never  elegance.  From  Capell  we  can  infer  with 
what  ease  the  mistake  of  ‘  paleness  ’  for  plainness  might  arise,  and  Brae  and  Staunton 
show  that  threats  lie  in  plainness,  but  not  in  ‘  paleness ;’  and  therefore,  I  think,  War¬ 
burton’s  emendation  should  be  adopted.  The  single  dead  fly  in  this  ointment  is  that 
Capell  is  not  quite  right  in  saying  that  palines  is  the  original  word  in  the  Qto.  Qx  and 
Q3  are  the  same  as  Fx ;  Q2  has  palenes.  Capell’s  own  copy  of  Qt  is  now  before  me, 
wherein  he  has  laboriously  marked  in  red  ink  the  variations  between  it  and  Q2.  In 
the  present  word  ‘  palenesse,’  he  has  erased  the  three  final  letters,  sse,  and  written 
above  them  the  single  letter  s.  The  e  he  has  not  changed  to  i.  The  presumption  is, 
therefore,  that  his  spelling,  palines,  is  an  oversight. — Ed.]. 

1 15.  As]  That  is,  to  wit,  namely.  See  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  127),  or  Abbott,  §  113 
Conf.  Ham.  I,  iv,  25. 

1 17.  O  loue]  To  avoid  an  Alexandrine,  Walker  (  Vers.  268)  and  Abbott  (§512} 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


150 

In  meafure  raine  thy  ioy,  fcant  this  exceffe,  118 

I  feele  too  much  thy  bleffing,  make  it  leffe, 

For  feare  I  furfeit. 

Baf.  What  finde  I  here  ? 

Faire  Portias  counterfeit.  What  demie  God  122 


1 1 8.  raine\  Q2F2.  range  Qx.  reine  Q3- 
rein  Sing.  Coll,  ii,  iii,  Cam.  Glo.  Wh.  ii. 
rain  F3F4,  Rowe  et  cet. 

120 .  fur feit~\  surfeit  me  Steev.  conj. 


surfeit  in't  Anon.  (ap.  Cam.). 

121.  Wkat...I~\  What  do  I find  Han. 
Ha  !  what  find  I  Cap. 

122.  demie  God ]  demy-god  Y  . 


would  read  this  as  an  interjectional  line  by  itself  *  in  spite  of  the  rhyme,’  says  the 
former.  Unquestionably,  there  is  abundant  propriety  in  this  treatment  of  interjections, 
exclamations,  &c.,  but  is  it  not,  after  all,  only  scansion  for  the  eye  ?  The  voice  must  make 
the  pause  whether  the  exclamation  be  in  a  separate  line  or  not.  As  long  as  the  rhythm 
is  smooth,  I  cannot  believe  that  Shakespeare’s  ear  was  offended  by  an  Alexandrine. 
—Ed. 

1 18.  raine]  Johnson:  I  once  believed  Shakespeare  meant  rein.  The  words  ‘rain’ 
and  rein  were  not  in  these  times  distinguished  by  regular  orthography.  There  is  no 
difficulty  in  the  present  reading;  only,  where  the  copies  vary  some  suspicion  of  error  is 
always  raised.  Malone:  ‘Rain’  is  supported  by  ‘It  rain’d  down  fortune  show’ring 
on  thy  head.’ — i  Hen.  IV:  V,  i,  48.  Tollet  :  Compare  the  following,  which  ap¬ 
proaches  very  near  to  the  present  reading,  if  we  adopt  rein:  ‘ — being  chaf’d,  he  can¬ 
not  Be  rein’d  again  to  temperance.’ — Cor.  Ill,  iii,  27.  Collier  (ed.  i) :  It  may  rea¬ 
sonably  be  doubted  whether  we  ought  to  read  ‘  rain  ’  or  rein.  Dyce  {Remarks,  p. 
57):  To  doubt  that  ‘rain’  is  the  right  reading,  appears  to  me  most  z/wreasonable. 
Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  I  was  formerly  for  ‘rain;’  but  Portia,  I  am  convinced,  means  only 
curb  your  joys,  restrain  them,  and  she  therefore  follows  up  the  exclamation  by  ‘  scant 
this  excess.’  Dyce  ( Strictures ,  & c.  p.  66) :  Is  it  usual  to  talk  of  reining  anything  ‘  in 
measure  ’  ?  and  do  not  the  words  ‘  scant  this  excess,’  which  Mr  Collier  adduces  in  sup¬ 
port  of  rein,  distinctly  prove  that  it  is  the  wrong  reading  ?  Clarendon  :  Most  editors 
after  Malone  [among  them  Clarendon. — Ed.]  print  ‘rain;’  but  rein  rests  on  higher 
authority  and  makes  good  sense.  [To  me,  rein  is  much  to  be  preferred.  Portia  adjures 
love  to  be  moderate,  to  allay  its  ecstasy,  to  rein  in  its  joy  by  due  restraint,  lest  she  die 
in  this  excess.  If  rein  be  the  right  word,  then  Q2  comes  nearer  to  it  than  the  range 
of  QJ(  yet  the  latter  is  not  wholly  meaningless.  Clarendon  speaks  of  rein  as  resting 
on  a  ‘  higher  authority  ’  than  that  of  many  modern  editors.  I  find  it  hard  to  considei 
a  compositor  as  of  any  authority  here  whatsoever,  least  of  all,  far  least  of  all,  the  com¬ 
positor  who  set  up  the  Third  Quarto  for  Laurence  Hayes. — Ed.] 

120.  To  complete  the  rhythm  of  this  line  and  the  next,  Steevens  proposed  to  add 
me  after  ‘surfeit.’  Hanmer  and  Capell  both  added  a  syllable  to  line  121.  If  the 
attempt  to  adjust  broken  lines  to  the  full  measure  of  whole  ones  be  not  waste  time, 
then  it  seems  to  me  that  Lettsom’s  conjecture,  given  by  Dyce  (ed.  iii),  of  on't  after 
‘  surfeit,’  is  the  most  plausible.  The  fact  should  never  be  lost  sight  of  that  these  plays 
were  written  to  be  spoken  and  acted,  not  to  be  read  and  studied,  nor  even  printed.  —  Ed. 

122.  counterfeit.]  Steevens  :  A  likeness,  without  comprehending  any  idea  of  fraud. 
[For  other  instances  in  Shakespeare,  see  Schmidt.  Hunter  (i,  328)  gives  an  instance 
from  Harington’s  Life  of  Ariosto,  in  his  translation  of  the  Orlando  :  *  His  counterfeit 
was  taken  by  Tytiano,  that  excellent  drawer,’  &c  j 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  151 

Hath  come  fo  neere  creation  ?  moue  thefe  eies?  123 

Or  whether  riding  on  the  bals  of  mine 

Seeme  they  in  motion  ?  Here  are  feuer’d  lips  125 

Parted  with  fuger  breath,  fo  fweet  a  barre 

Should  funder  fuch  fweet  friends  :  here  in  her  haires 

The  Painter  plaies  the  Spider,  and  hath  wouen 

A  golden  mefh  t’intrap  the  hearts  of  men 

Fafter  then  gnats  in  cobwebs  :  but  her  eies,  130 

How  could  he  fee  to  doe  them  ?  hauing  made  one, 

Me  thinkes  it  fhould  haue  power  to  fteale  both  his 

And  leaue  it  felfe  vnfurnifht :  Yet  looke  how  farre  133 


124.  whether ]  whither  QrQ2. 
bats']  ball's  Qt. 

126.  fuger  breath ]  sugar’d  breath  Pope, 
Han.  sugar-breath  Dyce  iii. 

127.  haires ]  hair  Plan. 

129.  t’ intrap]  tyntrap  Q2.  to  entrap 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Cam. 


Glo.  Cla.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

132.  Me  thinkes]  Me-thinks  Q, 
Me  thinks  F.. 

4 

133.  vnfurnifht]  unfinish'd  Rowo, 
Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Coll,  iii  (MS),  half- 
furnish'd  Anon.  (ap.  Hal.). 


124.  Or  whether]  See  Abbott,  §  136,  for  other  instances  of  the  use  of  ‘whether’ 
after  *  or,’  where  *  we  should  omit  one  of  the  two.’ 

127.  Should]  In  the  sense  of  ought,  as  in  ‘  I  should  be  obscured,’  supra,  II,  vi,  51. 

1 31.  hauing]  Abbott,  §466,  cites  this  as  one  of  the  instances  where  the  v  is  soft¬ 
ened  in  pronunciation  and  the  word  pronounced  as  a  monosyllable.  ‘  It  may  seem 
difficult  for  modern  readers  to  understand  how  the  v  could  be  dropped.  But  it  presents 
no  more  difficulty  than  the  v  in  ever,  overt  See  also  Walker  ( Vers.  103).  [The 
Scotch  find  no  difficulty  in  dropping  the  v  in  have,  love,  brave,  &c.  See  note  on  ‘  pov¬ 
erty,’  IV,  i,  285  ;  and  also  on  ‘riveted,’  V,  i,  188. — Ed.]  Clarendon  :  The  nomina¬ 
tive  is  changed,  leaving  the  words  ‘  having  made  one  ’  without  a  verb  to  follow. 

133.  vnfurnisht]  Johnson:  Perhaps  it  might  be,  ‘leave  himself  unfurnish’d.’ 
Monck  Mason  :  ‘  Unfurnished  ’  must  mean  ‘  unfurnished  with  a  companion  or  fellow.’ 
Conf.  this  passage  in  Fletcher’s  Lover's  Progress  [II,  i,  p.  47,  ed.  Dyce]  where  Alci- 
don  says  to  Claringe,  on  delivering  Lydian’s  challenge :  ‘  You  are  a  noble  gentleman, 
Will’t  please  you  bring  a  friend  ?  we  are  two  of  us,  And  pity  either,  sir,  should  be  un¬ 
furnish’d,’  i.  e.  unfurnished  with  an  antagonist.  Henley  :  Dr  Johnson’s  emendation 
would  altogether  subvert  the  poet’s  meaning.  If  the  artist,  in  painting  one  of  Portia’s 
eyes,  should  lose  both  his  own,  that  eye  which  he  had  painted  must  necessarily  be  left 
unfurnished,  or  destitute  of  his  fellow.  Malone  :  That  is,  it  must  leave  itself  incom¬ 
plete  ;  unaccompanied  with  the  other  usual  component  parts  of  a  portrait — viz.  another 
eye,  &c.  Steevens  :  A  hint  for  this  passage  appears  to  have  been  taken  from  Greene’s 
History  of  Faire  Bellora,  afterward  published  under  the  title  of  A  Paire  of  Turtle 
Doves  :  *  If  Apelles  had  beene  tasked  to  have  drawne  her  counterfeit,  her  two  bright- 
burning  lampes  would  have  so  dazled  his  quicke-seeing  sences,  that  quite  despairing  to 
expresse  with  his  cunning  pensill  so  admirable  a  worke  of  nature,  he  had  been  inforced 
to  have  staid  his  hand,  and  left  this  earthly  Venus  unfinished.’  Bailey  (i,  159) :  ‘  Un¬ 
furnished  ’  seems  exceedingly  vague,  if  not  entirely  destitute  of  sense,  and  could  scarcely 


152 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


The  fubftance  of  my  praife  doth  wrong  this  fhadow  • 

In  vnderprifing  it,  fo  farre  this  fhadow  135 

Doth  limpe  behinde  the  fubftance.  Here’s  the  fcroule, 

The  continent,  and  fummarie  of  my  fortune. 

You  that  choofe  not  by  the  view 
Chance  as  faire ,  and  choofe  as  true  : 

Since  this  fortune  fals  to  you ,  1 40 

Be  content ,  and  feeke  no  new. 

If  you  be  well  pleafd  with  this , 

And  hold  your  fortune  for  your  bliffe , 

Turne  you  where  your  Lady  is, 

And  claime  her  with  a  loiung  kiffe.  145 


Baff  A  gentle  fcroule  :  Faire  Lady,  by  your  leaue, 

I  come  by  note  to  giue,  and  to  receiue, 

Like  one  of  two  contending  in  a  prize 
That  thinks  he  hath  done  well  in  peoples  eies  : 

Hearing  applaufe  and  vniuerfall  fhout,  150 

Giddie  in  fpirit,  ftill  gazing  in  a  doubt 

Whether  thofe  peales  of  praife  be  his  or  no.  152 


135.  vnderprifing  it]  vnderprizing  it 
Qr.  vnderpryfmg  it  Qa.  underprifmg 

F3F4- 

142.  pleafd]  Q2Q3.  pleas’d  Qt.  pleafed 
Ff. 


146.  [Kissing  her.  Rowe.  After  line 
147,  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

1 5 1.  /till... a ]  gazing  still  in  Pope  +  . 

152.  peales ]  pearles  Qt. 


have  proceeded  from  any  writer  who  had  a  passable  command  of  language.  Fortunately, 
there  is  a  word  used  by  Shakespeare  elsewhere,  which  so  exactly  expresses  what  he  evi¬ 
dently  meant  to  say  here,  that  I  have  little  doubt  it  was  the  epithet  which  ‘  unfurnished  * 
has  *  pushed  from  its  stool.’  It  is  unfellowed.  If  I  mistake  not,  to  name  this  emenda 
tion  is  to  ensure  its  reception. 

133.  how]  Abbott,  §46,  gives  the  following  additional  instances  of  the  use  of 
‘how’  for  as: — V.  and  A.  815;  lb.  67;  similarly,  Gascoigne  (M&tzner)  has:  1  How 
many  men,  so  many  minds.’ 

137.  continent]  Dyce:  That  which  contains  anything. 

147.  note]  Halliwell  :  This  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  a  bill  or  note  for  money 
or  anything  lent,  which  is  both  given  and  received,  or,  possibly,  to  an  ordinary  receipt. 
The  metaphor  is  also  carried  out  afterwards,  ‘ — until  confirm’d,  sign’d,  ratified  by  you.’ 
Clarendon  :  To  give  a  kiss  and  receive  the  lady. 

1 5 1.  Pope’s  reading  certainly  gives  a  smoother  rhythm  to  this  line,  and  the  temp¬ 
tation  is  strong  to  adopt  it.  As  the  line  now  stands  there  seems  no  way  but  to  make 
‘  spirit  ’  a  monosyllable  :  ‘  Giddy  in  spirit  |  still  gaz  |  ing  in  |  a  dohbt ;’  where,  in  addi¬ 
tion,  the  accent  falling  on  in  is  objectionable. — Ed. 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


*53 


So  thrice  faire  Lady  ftand  I  euen  fo,  153 

As  doubtfull  whether  what  I  fee  be  true, 

Vntill  confirm’d,  fign’d,  ratified  by  you.  155 

Por.  You  fee  my  Lord  Bafjiano  where  I  ftand, 

Such  as  I  am  ;  though  for  my  felfe  alone 
I  would  not  be  ambitious  in  my  with, 

To  with  my  felfe  much  better,  yet  for  you, 

I  would  be  trebled  twenty  times  my  felfe,  160 

A  thoufand  times  more  faire,  ten  thoufand  times 
More  rich,  that  onely  to  ftand  high  in  your  account, 

I  might  in  vertues,  beauties,  liuings,  friends, 

Exceed  account  :  but  the  full  fumme  of  me 

Is  fum  of  nothing  :  which  to  terme  in  groffe,  165 


156.  fee  my]  F2F3>  fee,  my  F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  Knt.  fee  me  Qq  et  cet. 
Bafliano]  Fa. 

162.  More  rich ,]  Separate  line,  Mai. 
Steev.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Cam.  Glo.  Clarke, 
Cla.  Wh.  ii.  Closing  line  161,  Coll.  Sing. 
Hal.  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.  Rife,  Huds. 
onely']  Om.  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 


165.  fumof  nothing :]  Ff.  (sumrne F3), 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Wh.  Ktly,  Clarke,  Del.  Rife,  fumme 
of fomething ;  Q,Q3-  fume  of  fomething  : 
Q2.  sum  of  something,  Theob.Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Rann,  Hal.  Cam.  Glo. 
sum  of— something,  Cla.  sum  of- — some¬ 
thing ;  Huds. 

terme]  sum  Daniel. 


156.  my]  Assuredly  the  Qq  are  right  here. — Ed. 

162.  More  rich]  To  avoid  the  Alexandrine  which  those  two  syllables,  as  the  line 
stands,  render  inevitable,  Malone  printed  them  in  a  line  by  themselves,  and  he  has  a 
highly  respectable  following.  Collier  accepts  an  Alexandrine,  but  prefers  to  inflict  the 
black  disgrace  on  line  161;  he  therefore  transferred  ‘More  rich’  to  the  end  of  that 
line,  whereby  he  not  only  gained  in  smoothness,  but  by  avoiding  an  awkward  caesura 
after  ‘to,’  he  gives  Abbott  (§  501)  the  chance  to  say  that  the  line,  161,  thus  amended, 
is  only  an  ‘  apparent  Alexandrine  ’  after  all,  and  to  call  it  ‘  a  trimeter  couplet.’ — Ed. 

163.  liuings]  Dyce:  Possessions,  fortune.  [An  ecclesiastical  meaning  of  this 
word  is  not  as  likely  to  occur  to  us  Americans  as  to  an  Englishman. — Ed.] 

165.  sum  of  nothing]  Warburton:  We  should  read  1  some  oi  something,’  i.  e. 
only  a  piece,  or  part  of  an  imperfect  account ;  which  she  explains  in  the  following  line. 
Heath  :  The  common  reading  is,  ‘  sum  of  something.’  The  meaning,  I  apprehend, 
is  this :  The  full  sum  of  me  is  (to  express  myself  in  gross)  the  sum  of  what  may  be 
expected  to  be  found  in  an  unlessoned  girl.  Capell  :  After  telling  us,  in  expressions 
of  great  warmth,  what  she  would  be  if  wishes  could  make  her  such,  and  on  what  ac¬ 
count  she  would  be,  she  descends  with  exquisite  modesty  to  what  she  is ;  and  in  these 
expressions  asserts  a  title  to  ‘  something,’  or  to  be  something,  was  any  estimate  made 
of  her;  and,  that  even  this  may  not  appear  too  much,  the  something  which  she  pre¬ 
tends  to  is  defin’d  and  ascertain’d  by  her  presently  in  terms  of  the  greatest  sweetness. 
Steevens  :  The  purport  of  the  text  [of  the  Qq]  seems  to  be  this :  — the  full  sum  of 
me — Is  sum  of  something;’  i.  e.  is  not  entirely  ideal,  but  amount:  to  as  much  as  can 
be  found  in — ‘an  unlesson’d  girl,’  &c.  Monck  Mason:  I  prefer  the  Fol'o,  as  it  is 


154 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  iL 


Is  an  vnleffoned  girle,  vnfchool’d,  vnpradtiz’d,  166 

Happy  in  this,  fhe  is  not  yet  fo  old 

But  fhe  may  learne  :  happier  then  this,  168 


1 66.  vnleJfoned~\  vnlejjori d QXQ  .  vn- 
leffond  Q2. 

i 68.  happier  then  this~\  Qq.  happier 
then  in  this  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  iii.  more 


happy  then  in  this  Pope  + .  happier  thu  n 
this  in  that  Cap.  Ec.  then  happier  in  this 
Dyce  iii,  Huds.  happier  than  this  Johns, 
et  cet. 


Portia’s  intention  in  this  speech  to  undervalue  herself.  Halliwell  :  The  reading 
of  the  Folio  appears,  at  first  view,  to  be  the  most  obvious;  but  having  regard  to  the 
author’s  fondness  for  a  jingle,  and  to  the  circumstance  that  ‘  nothing  ’  will  scared) 
suit  the  passage  immediately  following  it,  the  other  and  older  lection  may  be  preferred. 
The  sum  (or  whole)  of  me  is  sum  (or  whole)  of  something,  which,  to  term  in  gross, 
&c.  There  should  only  be  a  comma  after  something.  White:  Portia  enumerates,  so 
modestly  and  yet  with  dignity  and  self-respect,  traits  and  conditions  all  of  which  are 
negative.  She  is  an  zmlesson’d  girl,  zmschool’d,  zmpractis’d,  not  yet  so  old  but  she 
may  learn,  not  bred  so  dull  but  she  may  learn,  mistress  of  herself  and  her  belongings 
before,  ‘  but  now  this  house,  these  servants,  and  this  same  myself,  are  yours,  my  lord.’ 
Here,  indeed,  is  sum  of  nothing;  but  how  sum  of  something?  But  even  were  not 
the  first  expression  so  appropriate,  and  the  second  so  inappropriate,  were  their  fitness 
for  the  context  equal,  the  appearance  of  one  in  forty  Quartos  would,  as  against  the 
appearance  of  the  other  in  the  one  authentic  Folio,  only  show  that  an  error,  or  a  passage 
in  an  unrevised  form  had  been  repeated  forty  times.  There  must  be  some  other  reason 
for  deviating  from  the  authorized  text  than  the  mere  preference  of  any  editor,  or  the 
occurrence  of  a  variation  in  other  editions.  Clarendon  :  We  have  retained  the  Qq 
reading,  introducing  a  dash  after  ‘  of.’  We  understand  Portia  to  hesitate  for  a  word 
which  shall  describe  herself  appropriately.  The  Folio  reading,  ‘  nothing,  which  to 
term  in  gross,’  &c.,  would  be  a  singular  anti-climax  if  it  were  not  a  direct  self-contra¬ 
diction.  Hudson  (ed.  iii) :  The  dash  before  something  is  to  indicate  that  the  fair 
speaker  hesitates  for  a  term  with  which  to  describe  herself  modestly,  yet  without  any 
affectation  of  modesty.  Rolfe  :  The  Folio  reading  is  more  in  keeping  with  the  nega¬ 
tive  characteristics  which  follow  than  the  Qq  reading.  Knight,  Singer,  Collier, 
and  Staunton  all  agree  substantially  with  Monck  Mason.  [Whether  we  read  *  some¬ 
thing  ’  or  ‘  nothing,’  I  think  a  dash  should  precede  it.  Then  the  choice  of  the  word 
will  depend  on  the  light  in  which  we  here  regard  Portia.  If  she  is  speaking  with 
deliberation  and  choosing  her  words,  she  probably  said  ‘  sum  of — something,’  which 
clearly  and  rationally  any  sum  whatever  must  imply.  Nor  does  the  expression  lack 
a  certain  archness  in  keeping  with  the  occasion.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  see 
Portia,  brimming  over  with  joy,  and  in  wild,  careless,  exuberant  exaggeration,  wish¬ 
ing  herself  twenty  times  trebled,  and  a  thousand  times  fairer,  and  ten  thousand  times 
richer,  and  in  virtues,  beauties,  livings,  friends  beyond  all  calculation,  then,  I  think,  we 
shall  know  of  a  surety  that  in  such  a  mood  Portia  would  exclaim  that  the  full  sum  of 
"ier  was  the  ‘  sum  of— nothing.’ — Ed.] 

165.  which]  Eccles:  Perhaps  Shakespeare  here,  as  elsewhere,  considered  ‘which’ 
both  as  nominative  and  accusative. 

168,  169.  But]  Abbott,  §  127:  Sometimes  but  follows  an  adjective  qualified  by 
the  negative  with  so,  as  in  the  present  two  instances.  So  Chaucer :  ‘  I  «am  but  dede, 
^—Knights’  Tale,  where,  omitting  the  negative  n,  we  should  say,  ‘I  am  but  dead.’ 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  153 

Shee  is  not  bred  fo  dull  but  the  can  learne ; 

Happieft  of  all,  is  that  her  gentle  fpirit  170 

Commits  it  felfe  to  yours  to  be  diredled, 

As  from  her  Lord,  her  Gouernour,  her  King. 

My  felfe,  and  what  is  mine,  to  you  and  yours  173 

169.  bred]  bread  Dyce  iii,  Rife,  Huds. 

170.  A]  in  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  Wh.  i,  172.  King.]  King,  Rowe. 


168.  happier  then  this]  Capell  pronounces  his  emendation  (‘happier  than  this 
in  that  ’)  ‘  necessary  for  sense  as  for  measure ;’  to  which  Clarendon  assents.  Ma¬ 
lone  tried  to  mend  the  metre  in  the  line  as  it  stands,  by  saying  that  ‘  learn  ’  is  here  a 
dissyllable.  Whereupon  Steevens  :  Till  the  reader  has  reconciled  his  ear  to  the  dis- 
syllabical  pronunciation  of  ‘  learn,’  I  beg  his  acceptance  of  and,  a  harmless  monosyl¬ 
lable  which  I  have  ventured  to  introduce  for  the  sake  of  obvious  metre.  [To  me  it 
seems  clear  that  we  have  here,  in  reality,  but  one  and  the  same  reading  in  all  the  Ff 
and  Qq.  The  ‘  in  ’  of  F2F3F4  is  present  to  the  ear  in  F4  in  the  final  n  sound  of *  *  then,’ 
an  absorption  to  which  the  Elizabethan  ear  was  more  accustomed  than  ours,  so  accus¬ 
tomed,  indeed,  that  the  compositors  of  the  Qq  and  Ft  omitted  the  in  altogether.  If  this 
be  so,  the  full  text  of  the  later  Ff  supplies  all  that  Capell  found  ‘  necessary  for  sense  as 
for  measure,’  without  his  emendation,  which  is  to  my  ear  harsh. — Ed.] 

170.  is]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  emendation  in  of  the  (MS)  is  comparatively  trifling, 
but  happy  and  elegant.  Portia  means  that  she  is  happiest  of  all,  in  as  much  as  her  gen 
tie  spirit  will  in  future  be  directed  by  Bassanio.  White  (ed.  i) :  There  can  be  no 
reasonable  doubt  [of  the  correctness  of  Collier’s  (MS)  emendation].  Portia  first  says 
that  she  is  ‘  happy  in  this,  she  is  not  yet  so  old,’  &c.,  which  is  equivalent  to  ‘  happy  in 
that  she  is  not  yet  so  old,’  &c.  Next,  when  speaking  in  the  comparative,  she  uses  a 
similar  ellipsis  of  *  she  is  not  bred  ’  for  ‘  in  that  she  is  not  bred.’  But  in  the  last  clause 
no  such  ellipsis  can  be  supposed ;  and  yet  the  conditional  form  ‘  in  that  ’  is  required  by 
the  structure  of  the  sentence  and  the  sequence  of  the  thoughts ;  and  it  is  restored  to 
the  text  by  the  correction  of  a  highly  probable  typographical  mistake  of  a  single  letter. 
Clarendon  supports  the  QqFf  by  making  *  Happiest  ’  neuter :  ‘  The  happiest  thing 
of  all  is,’  &c. ;  and  Abbott,  §  404,  explains  the  old  text  by  supposing  an  ellipsis : 

*  Happiest  of  all  is  [it  or  this)’  &c.  [But  both  of  these  methods  are  to  me  unsatisfac¬ 
tory;  a  shifting  of  the  construction  is  always  more  or  less  awkward,  and  to  be  avoided; 
here  it  is  needless  when  we  have  as  trifling  a  change  as  is  offered  by  Collier’s  (MS). — 
Ed.] 

172.  Weiss  (p.  322):  Does  this  language  seem  to  you  slavish  and  old-fashioned? 
And  do  you,  madam,  declare  that  you  never  saw  the  man  yet  for  whom  you  would  so 
demean  yourself?  Then  I  shall  know  that  just  at  present  you  are  not  in  love.  Per¬ 
haps  you  never  have  been ;  for  it  is  the  perfect  language  of  a  woman’s  first  hours  which 
follow  love’s  declaration,  when  she  feels  that  her  life  and  soul  are  to  be  made  complete 
by  marriage.  She  storms  herself  with  questions  never  before  suggested.  What  could 
he  see  in  her  ?  What  has  she  got  to  repay  this  exquisite  flattery,  this  shuddering 
delight  at  being  summoned  out  of  millions  of  her  sex  ?  The  first  impulse  is  to  spill 
the  soul  in  a  libation  to  the  deity  of  the  hour;  let  the  whole  of  it  drench  my  lover ;  let 
me  not  dare  to  reserve  a  portion  to  teach  me  a  first  selfish  lesson.  All,  all  is  yours,  my 
king !  Come,  drain  it  at  the  chalice  of  my  lips  ! 


i5b 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ill,  sc.  ii 


Is  now  conuerted.  But  now  I  was  the  Lord 

Of  this  faire  manfion,  matter  of  my  feruants,  175 

Queene  ore  my  felfe  :  and  euen  now,  but  now, 

This  houfe,  thefe  feruants,  and  this  fame  my  felfe 
Are  yours,  my  Lord,  I  giue  them  with  this  ring, 

Which  when  you  part  from,  loofe,  or  giue  away, 

Let  it  prefage  the  ruine  of  your  loue,  180 

And  be  my  vantage  to  exclaime  on  you. 

Baff.  Maddam,  you  haue  bereft  me  of  all  words, 


Onely  my  bloud  fpeakes  to  you 

in  my  vaines, 

And  there  is  fuch  confufion  in  my  powers, 

As  after  fome  oration  fairely  fpoke 

1 JT\ 
00 

HH 

By  a  beloued  Prince,  there  doth 

appeare 

Among  the  buzzing  pleafed  multitude, 

Where  euery  fomething  being  blent  together, 

188 

1 74.  But  now  I]  I but  now  Pope,  Han. 

even  now  ;  Rowe. 

the  Lord]  the  Lady  Rowe.  Lady 

178.  Lord]  Lords  Q2. 

Pope,  Han. 

179.  loofe]  lofe  Q,. 

175.  mafler]  mistress  Rowe,  Pope, 

182.  Maddam]  Madame  Qt. 

Madam 

Han. 

QsF3F4- 

176.  felfe  :  and  euen  now,]  self,  and 

183.  vaines]  Q2.  veines  Q  . 

174.  conuerted]  Abbott,  §472:  Ed  following  d  or  /  is  often  not  written  (this 
elision  is  very  old),  and  when  written,  often  not  pronounced.  [An  additional  illus¬ 
tration  of  that  absorption  by  the  ear  of  similar  final  sounds  of  which  we  have  just  had 
an  example  in  line  168.  See  also  ‘  riveted,’  V,  i,  188,  and  Shakespeare  passim. — Ed.] 

174,  175.  Lord  .  .  .  master]  Capell:  [Rowe’s  change]  is  injurious;  the  former 
of  these  terms  seeming  to  have  been  chosen  intentionally  to  express  the  greater 
dominion.  Eccles  :  Portia’s  words  will  have  a  more  natural  effect  if  stress  be  laid 
upon  the  pronoun  :  ‘  but  now  /  was  the  lord,’  &c. 

176.  euen  now]  Abbott,  §  38:  *  Even  now,’  with  us,  is  applied  to  an  action  that 
has  been  going  on  for  some  long  time  and  still  continues,  the  emphasis  being  laid  on 
‘  now.’  In  Shakespeare  the  emphasis  is  often  to  be  laid  on  *  even,’  and  *  even  now  ’ 
means  ‘  exactly  or  only  now,’  i.  e.  *  scarcely  longer  ago  than  the  present :’  hence  ‘  but 
now.’  Often  ‘  but  even  now  ’  is  used  in  this  sense :  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  i,  40.  On  the 
other  hand,  both  ‘even  now’  and  ‘ but  now’  can  signify  ‘just  at  this  moment,’  as  in 
the  present  instance.  See  also  V,  i,  296. 

181.  vantage]  Dyce:  Opportunity.  Clarendon:  The  position  of  one  who  is 
‘master  of  the  situation.’ 

183.  Onely]  Abbott,  §420,  refers  to  this  as  an  instance  of  the  transposition  of  the 
adverb.  But  I  doubt  if  it  be  an  adverb  here.  Is  it  not  an  adjective?  Bassanio’s 
tongue  is  silent ;  only  his  blood,  his  blood  alone,  in  his  happy  blushes,  can  speak,  &c. 
It  is,  perhaps,  not  unworthy  of  note,  that  the  spelling,  almost  invariable,  of  this  word, 
'n  the  Folio,  reflects  the  probable  Shakespearian  pronunciation  of  one,  i.  e.  like  the 
present  own. — Ed. 

185.  spoke]  See  Abbott,  §  343,  for  instances  of  curtailed  forms  of  past  participles. 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  157 

Turtles  to  a  wilde  of  nothing,  faue  of  ioy 

Expreft,  and  not  expreft  :  but  when  this  ring  190 

Parts  from  this  finger,  then  parts  life  from  hence, 

O  then  be  bold  to  fay  Baffanio1 s  dead. 

Ner.  My  Lord  and  Lady,  it  is  now  our  time 
That  haue  flood  by  and  feene  our  wifhes  profper, 

To  cry  good  ioy,  good  ioy  my  Lord  and  Lady.  195 

Gra.  My  Lord  Baffanio ,  and  my  gentle  Lady, 

1  wifh  you  all  the  ioy  that  you  can  wifh  : 

For  I  am  fure  you  can  wifh  none  from  me.*  198 

189.  ■wilde']  void  Coll.  conj.  192.  Baffanio’ j]  Baffanio  is  Qx. 

192.  O]  3  Q2. 


194.  our]  Allen  :  I  conjectured  your , — a  very  easy  and  unobjectionable  change, 
considering  that  our  and  your  are  so  frequently  interchanged  in  Shakespeare  and  his 
fellow-dramatists  (cf.  Walker,  Crit.  ii,  7),  and  felt  very  confident  I  was  right,  at  first, 
because  I  referred  ‘our’  to  the  wishes  of  Nerissa  and  Gratiano  for  their  own  connec¬ 
tion  ;  and  that  would  give  a  sense  too  grossly  selfish  to  be  tolerated, — i.  e.  we  wish  you 
joy,  because  your  success  makes  us  successful.  Whereas,  your  indicates  that  the  main 
interest  (in  the  mind  even  of  Nerissa  and  Gratiano)  lay  in  the  wishes  and  hopes  of 
Portia  and  Bassanio ;  that  is,  it  is  now  time  that  we,  who  have  seen  your  hopes  realized, 
should  follow  up  your  mutual  congratulations  (for  which  we  have  been  giving  you  time) 
with  our  wishing  of  joy.  For  ‘  our  ’  is  certainly  emphatic ;  and  the  emphasis  appears 
to  indicate  that  we  are  now  to  do  what  you  have  been  doing  before.  But  it  now 
occurs  to  me,  that  Nerissa  may  be  understood  to  have  a  less  selfish, — in  fact,  a  very 
generous  and  delicate — sentiment  in  her  mind,  and  that  ‘  our  ’  is  the  happiest  expression 
of  it,  viz.  that  she  and  Gratiano  felt  Portia  and  Bassanio’s  cause  to  be  their  own,  (out 
of  affection  and  not  out  of  self-interest,)  and  that  to  indicate  such  unselfish  interest  on 
their  part  they  said  :  We  have  stood  by  and  seen  our  wishes  prosper.  The  objection 
to  this  last  interpretation  (apparently  happy  as  it  may  be)  is,  that  it  makes  the  subordi¬ 
nates  too  patronizing.  It  would  do  very  well  in  the  case  of  parents,  especially  where 
the  parents  had  been  contriving  a  match, — but  not  so  well  in  that  of  even  a  lady  in 
a  rank  so  far  inferior  to  that  of  the  noble  and  world-renowned  heiress.  I  am  still 
inclined,  therefore,  to  adhere  to  my  emendation.  [To  my  thinking,  the  text  needs  no 
change.  The  unselfish  sense  in  which  Prof.  Allen  says  ‘our’  may  be  interpreted,  is 
the  unselfish  sense  in  which  I  think  it  must  be  interpreted,  if  we  catch  here  an  echo 
of  that  heartsome,  fervent  wish  of  Nerissa  with  which  the  Second  Act  closed :  ‘  Bas¬ 
sanio,  lord  Love,  if  thy  will  it  be !’ — Ed.] 

198.  from]  Hanmer:  That  is,  distinct  from  me  and  my  wishes.  Capell:  That 
is,  you  can  wish  for  nothing,  the  obtaining  of  which  would  rob  me  of  joy.  Johnson  : 
That  is,  none  away  frotn  me ;  none  that  I  shall  lose,  if  you  gain  it.  Staunton  : 
Rather,  it  means:  none  beyond  what  I  wish  you.  Abbott,  §  158:  That  is,  none  dif¬ 
ferently  from  me;  none  which  I  do  not  wish  you.  This  is  probably  the  correct  inter¬ 
pretation.  Clarendon  :  Being  all-sufficient  to  each  other,  you  cannot  wish  to  deprive 
me  of  any  joy  to  add  to  your  own.  Rolfe  :  That  is,  none  away  from  me,  since  you 
have  enough  yourselves. 


158 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  iL 


And  when  your  Honours  meane  to  folemnize 

The  bargaine  of  your  faith  :  I  doe  befeech  you  20 c 

Euen  at  that  time  I  may  be  married  too. 

Baff.  With  all  my  heart,  fo  thou  canft  get  a  wife. 

Gra.  I  thanke  your  Lordfhip,  you  gaue  got  me  one. 

My  eyes  my  Lord  can  looke  as  fwift  as  yours  : 

You  faw  the  miftres,  I  beheld  the  maid :  205 

You  lou’d,  I  lou’d  for  intermiffion, 

No  more  pertaines  to  me  my  Lord  then  you  ; 

Your  fortune  flood  vpon  the  caskets  there, 

And  fo  did  mine  too,  as  the  matter  falls  : 

For  wooing  heere  vntill  I  fwet  againe,  210 

And  fwearing  till  my  very  rough  was  dry 


201.  too.]  to.  Qq. 

203.  gaue]  haue  QqFf. 

206.  lou' d for  intermiffion^]  QrQ2F2F3. 
lov'd  for  intermiffion.  Q3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Cam.  Glo.  Wh.  ii.  lov'd for  intermission  ; 
Sta.  loved,  for  intermission  Cla.  lov'd: 
for  intermission  Theob.  et  cet. 

208.  caskets ]  Casket  QIQ3>  Pope  +  , 


Cam.  Glo.  Ktly,  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

209.  too,]  to  Q2Q3. 

210.  heere]  heete  F2.  heatY  3F 4>  Herd 
Rowe  i.  Her  Rowe  ii.  here  Pope  et  seq. 

fwet]  fweat  FjF^. 

21 1.  rough]  Q2Ff.  roofe  Qt.  tongue 
Coll.  (MS). 


202.  so]  Abbott,  §  133 :  ‘  So’  is  used  with  the  future  and  the  subjunctive  to  denote 
provided  that.  See  also  line  217,  post. 

205.  maid:]  White:  Nerissa  was  no  servant-maid,  according  to  modern  notions,  but 
an  attendant  friend,  as  well  born  and  bred,  perhaps,  though  not  as  wealthy,  as  Portia 
herself.  Such  a  relation  was  common  of  old.  It  existed  between  Gratiano  and  Bassanio, 
whose  intercourse  is  that  of  equals,  and  the  former  of  whom  is  evidently  a  gentleman 
in  every  sense  of  the  word.  Bassanio  says  to  him  and  to  Nerissa:  ‘Our  feast  shall  be 
much  honour’d  in  your  marriage.’  [See  PIunter  on  The  Actors’  Names,  ante,  p.  xii.] 

206.  intermission]  Theobald  :  This  passage  has  been  nonsensically  pointed  thro’ 
all  the  Editions.  If  loving  for  intermission  can  be  expounded  into  any  sense,  I  confess 
I  as  yet  am  ignorant,  and  shall  be  glad  to  be  instructed  in  it.  But  till  then  I  must  beg 
leave  to  think  the  sentence  ought  to  be  thus  regulated  :  ‘  You  lov’d,  I  lov’d : — For  In¬ 
termission  No  more  pertains,’  &c.,  i.  e.  standing  idle ;  a  Pause,  or  Discontinuance  of 
Action.  And  such  is  the  signification  of  intermissio  amongst  the  Latines.  STAUNTON 
[see  Text.  Notes]  :  If  ‘intermission’  is  not  used,  as  I  think  it  probably  is,  for  pastime, 
Gratiano  may  mean  ‘  for  fear  of  intermission,’  i.  e.  to  avoid  delay  or  loss  of  time.  [In 
spite  of  Staunton’s  good  plea  for  the  old  text,  I  cannot  but  think  that  Theobald’s  punc¬ 
tuation  and  interpretation  are  right. — Ed.] 

207.  No  more,  &c.]  Staunton  :  I  owe  my  wife  as  much  to  you  as  to  my  own 
efforts.  [To  understand  this  we  must  bear  in  mind  Staunton’s  punctuation  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  line  :  ‘You  lov’d,  I  lov’d  for  intermission;’] 

210.  heere]  Note  in  Text.  Notes  the  evolution  of  here  into  heat. — Ed. 

210.  swet]  For  the  form,  see  Abbott,  §  341. 

21 1.  rough]  Halliwell:  If  the  ordinary  reading  be  incorrect,  perhaps  we  may 


ACT  III,  sc.  iL]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


*59 


With  oathes  of  loue,  at  laft,  if  promife  laft, 

I  got  a  promife  of  this  faire  one  heere 
To  haue  her  loue  :  prouided  that  your  fortune 
Atchieu’d  her  miftreffe. 


215 


212 


Por.  Is  this  true  N err  iff  a  ? 

Ner.  Madam  it  is  fo,  fo  you  ftand  pleas’d  withall. 

Baff  And  doe  you  Gratiano  meane  good  faith  ? 

Gra.  Yes  faith  my  Lord. 

Baff  Our  feaft  fhall  be  much  honored  in  your  mar-  220 
riage. 

Gra.  Weele  play  with  them  the  firft  boy  for  a  thou¬ 
sand  ducats. 

Ner.  What  and  ftake  downe  ? 

Gra.  No,  we  fhal  nere  win  at  that  fport,  and  ftake  225 
downe. 

But  who  comes  heere  ?  Lorenzo  and  his  Infidell  ? 

What  and  my  old  Venetian  friend  Salerio  ?  228 

» 

217.  is  fo,  fo\  Ff,  Rowe,  is,  fo  Qq,  228,  229,  238.  Salerio]  QqFf.  Salanio 

Pope  et  seq.  Rowe  +  .  Solanio  Knt,  Hal.  Dyce,  Sta. 

224-226.  In  sens.  obsc.  Clarke,  Del.  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 


substitute  mouth.  [Let  the  better  spelling  of  Qt  be  noted  in  its  favour.  Is  it  not 
strange  that  this  word  has  not  as  yet  attracted  that  winsome  band  of  readers  who  say 
(as  Grant  White  has  somewhere  said  that  they  say),  ‘  Come,  let’s  sit  down  and  amend 
Shakespeare  ’  ?  HalliwelPs  suggestion  is  good,  but  the  list  of  words  which  can  be 
substituted  for  ‘  rough  ’  is  not  exhausted ;  no  pent-up  Quarto  need  contract  our  powers, 
the  whole  boundless  Dictionary  is  ours. — Ed.] 

220.  shall]  This  means  more,  I  think,  than  the  mere  future. — Ed. 

227.  Infidell]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Must,  ii,  310):  How  comes  it  to  pass,  that 
there  is  no  more  notice  taken  of  Jessica,  and  that  Bassanio  and  Portia  take  no  notice 
of  her  at  all  ?  Was  she  still  in  the  habit  of  a  boy,  and  appeared  as  Lorenzo’s  page  ? 
[Theobald  forgets  Jessica’s  junketings  at  Genoa. — Ed.]  That  there  might  be  no  occa¬ 
sion  of  faking  notice  of  her,  and  hearing  her  story,  which  could  not  be  so  properly  done 
if  Bassanio  [rfc]  had  a  letter  to  deliver  of  such  consequence,  and  that  required  so  much 
haste ;  and  much  less,  if  Bassanio  had  read  it.  But  then  again,  if  she  was  in  man’s 
cloaths,  how  comes  Gratiano  to  say  to  Nerissa — Bid  her  welcome,  without  intimating 
at  least  that  she  was  a  woman  in  man’s  apparel  ?  And  again  is  it  not  a  little  odd  that 
Jessica  [afterwards]  mixes  herself  in  discourse  about  the  Jew  her  father’s  desire  of 
revenge  on  Antonio,  and  still  not  one  civil  word  is  addressed  to  her  by  Bassanio  or 
Portia?  [See  Theobald’s  note,  line  250.] 

228.  Salerio]  The  question  here  is  whether  this  Salerio  represents  a  new  character 
or  is  merely  the  compositor’s  sophistication  of  Solanio  or  Salarino.  Rowe  and  his  fol¬ 
lowers  treated  it  apparently  as  a  mere  misprint,  and  silently  changed  it  to  Salanio. 
Capell  retains  it,  but  believes  it  to  be  an  abbreviation  for  Salerino,  which,  in  the  Stage- 


i6o 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  iii,  sc.  ii. 


Enter  Lorenzo ,  Iejfica ,  and  Salerio. 

Baf.  Lorenzo  and  Salerio ,  welcome  h ether,  230 

If  that  the  youth  of  my  new  intereft  heere 

Haue  power  to  bid  you  welcome  :  by  your  leaue  232 

Scene  III.  Pope  +  .  Salerio  ?  from  Venice.  Q3>  Enter. ..Sale- 

229.  Enter... Salerio.]  Enter. ..Salerio  rino.  Cap. 

a  meffenger  from  Venice  Q,Q2.  Enter...  230.  hether ]  Q2.  hither  Qx  et  cet. 


direction,  he  prints  in  full.  Steevens  and  his  followers  not  only  retain  it  in  the  text, 
but,  induced  by  the  Stage-direction  in  the  Qq,  add  it  as  a  distinct  character  to  the  Dra¬ 
matis  Personae,  in  addition  to  Salanio  and  Salarino.  Knight  changed  it  to  Solanio. 
‘Gratiano,’  he  says,  ‘calls  this  Salerio  “my  old  Venetian  friend;”  and  there  is  no  rea¬ 
son  whatever  for  not  receiving  the  name  as  a  misprint  of  Solanio  or  Salanio.’  ‘  It 
appears  to  us,’  Knight  continues,  *  not  only  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  introducing  a 
new  character,  Salerio,  but  that  the  dramatic  propriety  is  violated  by  this  introduction. 
In  the  First  Scene  of  this  Act  the  servant  of  Antonio  thus  addresses  Solanio  and  Sala¬ 
rino  :  “  Gentlemen,  my  master  Antonio  is  at  his  house,  and  desires  to  speak  with  you 
both.”  To  the  unfortunate  Antonio,  then,  these  friends  repair.  What  can  be  more 
natural  than  that,  after  the  conference,  the  one  should  be  dispatched  to  Bassanio,  and 
the  other  remain  with  him,  whose  “  creditors  grow  cruel  ”  ?  We  accordingly  find  in  the 
Third  Scene  of  this  Act  that  one  of  them  accompanies  Antonio  when  he  is  in  custody 
of  the  gaoler.  In  the  confusion  in  which  the  names  are  printed,  it  is  difficult  to  say 
which  goes  to  Belmont  and  which  remains  at  Venice.  We  have  determined  the  mat¬ 
ter  by  the  metre  of  this  line,  and  of  the  subsequent  lines  in  which  the  name  is  men¬ 
tioned.’  Dyce  agrees  with  Knight  in  regarding  ‘  Salerio  ’  as  a  decided  error, — and  in 
thinking  it  altogether  unlikely  that  Shakespeare  would,  without  necessity  and  in  viola¬ 
tion  of  dramatic  propriety,  introduce  a  new  character,  ‘  Salerio,’  in  addition  to  Solanio 
and  Salarino.  ‘  The  name  of  the  friend  who  remains  at  Venice  is  rightly  given  in  Q  , 
Salarino;’  see  III,  iii,  I.  The  Cambridge  Editors  follow  Steevens  and  add  ‘Salerio’ 
to  the  Dramatis  Personae.  To  Knight’s  and  Dyce’s  objection  that  the  introduction  of 
this  new  character  would  be  in  violation  of  dramatic  propriety,  they  urge  that :  ‘  tried 
by  this  standard  Shakespeare’s  violations  [where? — Ed.]  of  dramatic  propriety  are 
frequent  indeed,  and  it  is  no  part  of  an  Editor’s  duty  to  correct  them.’  [Writing  for  a 
company  of  actors  so  few  in  number  that  an  attendant  cannot  be  spared  for  the  task, 
but  a  Prince  of  Denmark  must  himself  drag  a  dead  body  off  the  stage,  it  does  not  seem 
likely  that  a  prudent  playwright  (whatever  else  he  might  have  been)  would,  without 
excellent  reason,  add  to  the  number  of  the  Dramatis  Personae.  If,  however,  a  new 
character  must  be  introduced  late  in  the  play,  that  playwright  is,  indeed,  poverty- 
stricken  in  nomenclature  who  to  avoid  confusion  can  think  of  no  name  sharply  dif¬ 
ferent  from  any  with  which  the  audience  is  already  familiar.  Furthermore,  granting 
that  a  new  character  is  introduced  here,  at  this  late  day,  when  the  play  is  mere  than 
half  over,  does  it  not  add  to  the  confusion,  or  to  the  patchiness,  to  term  him  ‘  an  old 
friend  ’  ?  Wherefore,  in  view  of  all  the  circumstances,  I  agree  with  Rowe  and  Capell 
in  the  supposition  that  we  have  here  either  Solanio  or  Salarino,  more  likely  the  former, 
and  for  the  reason  given  by  Dyce. — Ed.] 

231.  If  that]  For  that  as  a  conjunctional  affix,  see  Abbott,  §  287. 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


161 


I  bid  my  verie  friends  and  Countrimen  233 

Sweet  Portia  welcome. 

Por.  So  do  I  my  Lord,  they  are  intirely  welcome.  235 

Lor.  I  thanke  your  honor  ;  for  my  part  my  Lord, 

My  purpofe  was  not  to  haue  feene  you  heere, 

But  meeting  with  Salerio  by  the  way, 

He  did  intreate  mee  paft  all  faying  nay 

To  come  with  him  along.  240 

Sal.  I  did  my  Lord, 

And  I  haue  reafon  for  it,  Signior  Anthonio 
Commends  him  to  you. 

Baff.  Ere  I  ope  his  Letter 

I  pray  you  tell  me  how  my  good  friend  doth.  243 

Sal.  Not  ficke  my  Lord,  vnleffe  it  be  in  minde, 

Nor  wel,  vnleffe  in  minde  :  his  Letter  there 
Wil  fhew  you  his  eftate. 

Opens  the  Letter. 

Gra.  Nerriffa ,  cheere  yond  ftranger,  bid  her  welcom.  250 


233.  verie]  Om.  Q3. 

235.  they  ...welcome]  Separate  line, 
Cap.  et  seq. 

intirely]  entirely  Qx. 

242.  I  haue]  haue  Ff. 

for  it]  foSt  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 

Huds. 


243.  [Gives  Bassanio  a  letter.  Theob. 

244.  his]  this  F3F4,  Rowe,  Coll.  ii. 

248.  Opens...]  He  opens...  Qx.  open 

...  Q2Q3.  Bassanio  opens...  Rowe. 

25°,  257.  yond]  Q2Ff.  yon  Qx,  Knt, 
Hal.  Sta.  Cam.  yon'  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 


233.  verie]  Bible  Word-book:  In  the  phrases  ‘very  and  eternal  God;’  ‘very  God 
of  very  God ;’  ‘  art  thou  my  very  son  Esau  ?’  very  has  its  original  sense  of  true ;  from 
French  vrai,  Old  French  verai,  which  again  are  referred  by  Diez  to  the  Lat.  veracus , 
not  verax. 

237.  to  haue  seene]  See  Abbott,  §  360,  for  other  examples  of  the  Complete 
Present  Infinitive. 

240.  along]  See  Abbott,  §  30. 

247.  vnlesse  in  minde]  Eccles  :  Unless  he  is  comforted  and  supported  by  forti¬ 
tude. 

248.  estate]  Bible  Word-book  :  This  word  in  the  Bible  and  Prayer-book,  and  in 
old  writers  generally,  is  not  restricted  to  the  meaning  now  usually  put  upon  it,  but  has 
the  same  breadth  of  signification  which  is  still  given  to  the  word  state.  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth,  in  a  letter  to  Sir  Thomas  Heneage  ( Leycester  Corr.  p.  241),  speaks  of  a  ‘counsell 
of  estate  and  Lord  Bacon  constantly  uses  this  form  of  the  word  in  the  sense  in  which 
it  is  used  in  the  Collect  for  Good  Friday,  ‘  for  all  estates  of  men.’  Latimer  defines  as 
part  of  the  duty  of  a  king,  ‘  To  see  to  all  estates  ;  to  provide  for  the  poor ;  to  see  victuals 
.good  cheap.’ — Semi.  p.  215. 

249.  Opens,  &c.]  See  Appendix,  ‘The  Text,’  p.  275. 

250.  Theobald  :  The  Poet  has  shewn  a  singular  art  here  in  his  conduct  with  rela- 

11 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ill,  sc.  ii 


162 

Your  hand  Salerio,  what’s  the  newes  from  Venice?  251 

How  doth  that  royal  Merchant  good  Anthonio ; 

I  know  he  wil  be  glad  of  our  fucceffe, 

We  are  the  Iafons ,  we  haue  won  the  fleece. 

Sal.  I  would  you  had  won  the  fleece  that  hee  hath  255 

loft. 

For.  There  are  fome  fhrewd  contents  in  yond  fame 
Paper,  ?  258 

255.  I  would']  Would  Pope  +  ,  Huds.  257.  fhrewd]  fhrowd  Qa,  Cap. 

’  Would  Steev.  ’93,  Var.  Knt,  Sing. 

tion  to  Jessica.  As  the  audience  were  already  apprized  of  her  story,  the  opening  it 
here  to  Portia  would  have  been  a  superfluous  repetition.  Nor  could  it  be  done  prop¬ 
erly  while  a  letter  of  such  haste  and  consequence  was  to  be  delivered,  and  on  which 
the  main  action  of  the  play  depended.  Jessica  is,  therefore,  artfully  complimented  in 
dumb  shew ;  and  no  speech  made  to  her,  because  the  Scene  is  drawn  out  to  a  great 
length  by  more  important  business.  [Thus  Theobald  has  answered  his  own  questions 
at  line  227.] 

252.  royal  Merchant]  Warburton:  In  the  beginning  of  the  13th  Century  the 
Venetians  gave  liberty  to  any  subject  of  the  Republic,  who  would  fit  out  vessels,  to 
make  themselves  masters  of  the  isles  of  the  Archipelago,  and  other  maritime  places ; 
and  to  enjoy  their  conquests  in  sovereignty;  only  doing  homage  to  the  Republic  for 
their  several  principalities.  By  virtue  of  this  license,  the  Sanudos,  the  Justiniani,  the 
Grimaldi,  the  Summaripos,  and  others,  all  Venetian  merchants,  erected  principalities  in 
several  places  of  the  Archipelago  (which  their  descendants  enjoyed  for  many  genera¬ 
tions),  and  became  thereby  truly  and  properly  royal  merchants.  Which,  indeed,  was 
the  title  generally  given  them  all  over  Europe.  Johnson  :  This  epithet  was,  in  our 
poet’s  time,  more  striking  and  better  understood,  because  Gresham  was  then  commonly 
dignified  with  the  title  of  the  royal  merchant.  Hunter  ( New  Illust.  i,  308) :  Shake¬ 
speare  did  not  use  this  term  without  having  an  eye  to  the  peculiar  force  of  the  expres¬ 
sion.  This  is  remarked  by  Warburton,  who  does  not  appear  to  have  caught  its  precise 
effect.  A  ‘royal  merchant’  in  the  Middle  Ages  was  a  merchant  who  transacted  busi¬ 
ness  for  a  sovereign  of  the  time.  Thus  King  John  calls  Brand  de  Doway,  *  homo  nos- 
ter  et  dominicus  mercator  noster.’  See  a  protection  granted  to  him,  Rotuli  Selecti 
1834,  p.  23. 

254.  Iasons]  Douce  (i,  264):  The  meaning  is,  Antonio,  with  his  argosie,  is  not 
the  successful  Jason ;  we  are  the  persons  who  have  won  the  fleece. 

255.  I  would  |  you’d  won  |  the  fleece,  |  &c. 

255.  fleece]  Daniel  (p.  37) :  Salerio  brings  the  news  that  all  Antonio’s  ships  have 
been  lost,  and  here,  I  believe,  puns  on  the  words  fleece  and  fleets.  Qy.  print  fleets ,  in 
future,  in  Salerio’s  speech  ? 

257.  shrewd]  Skeat  {Did.  s.  v.) :  Malicious,  wicked ;  cunning,  acute.  The  older 
sense  is  malicious,  mischievous,  scolding  or  shrew-like,  as  in  Mid.  N.  D.  Ill,  ii,  323. 
Middle  English,  schrewed,  shrewed,  accursed,  depraved,  wicked;  ‘ schrewed  folk,’  i.  e. 
wicked  people,  Chaucer.  Schrewed  is,  literally,  ‘  accursed,’  past  participle  of  schrewen, 
to  curse,  beshrew;  and  the  verb  is  formed  from  the  Middle  English  adjective  schrewe, 
evil,  malicious. 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


163 


That  fteales  the  colour  from  BaJJianos  cheeke, 

Some  deere  friend  dead,  elfe  nothing  in  the  world  260 

Could  turne  fo  much  the  conftitution 

Of  any  conflant  man.  What,  worfe  and  worfe  ? 

With  leaue  Baffanic  I  am  halfe  your  felfe, 

And  I  muft  freely  haue  the  halfe  of  any  thing 
That  this  fame  paper  brings  you.  265 

BaJJ.  O  fweet  Portia , 

Heere  are  a  few  of  the  vnpleafant’ft  words 
That  euer  blotted  paper.  Gentle  Ladie 
When  I  did  firft  impart  my  loue  to  you, 

I  freely  told  you  all  the  wealth  I  had  270 

Ran  in  my  vaines :  I  was  a  Gentleman, 

And  then  I  told  you  true  :  and  yet  deere  Ladie, 

Rating  my  felfe  at  nothing,  you  fhall  fee 

How  much  I  was  a  Braggart,  when  I  told  you 

My  ftate  was  nothing,  I  fhould  then  haue  told  you  275 

That  I  was  worfe  then  nothing  :  for  indeede 

I  haue  ingag’d  my  felfe  to  a  deere  friend, 

IngagM  my  friend  to  his  meere  enemie  278 


259.  fleales~\  QqFf,  Rowe,  Cap.  Steev. 
’85,  Sta.  Cam.  Glo.  Rife,  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 
steal  Pope  et  cet. 

Baflianos]  F2. 

264.  I  mujl  freely\  mujl  freely  Ff, 
Rowe.  I  mujl  Q3,  Pope  + ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 
268,  &c.  Ladie~\  Lady  Qq  Ff. 


271.  vaines  .‘...Gentleman,  ]  veins.  .. 
gentleman,  Rowe,  veins,  ...gentleman  ; 
Pope  et  seq. 

vaines ]  Q2.  veines  Qt  et  cet. 

274.  Braggart~\  beggar  F^. 

275.  haue~\  have  F3. 

277.  haue\  had  Allen. 


262.  constant]  Douce  :  Grave.  Clarendon  :  Steady,  even-minded,  self-pos¬ 
sessed.  Craik  ( Jul.  Cces.  II,  iv) :  Firm,  resolute. 

264.  As  this  line  stands  here  in  the  Folio,  it  contains  unquestionably,  to  the  eye  ci 
flesh,  twelve  syllables,  and  is  therefore  (I  turn  pale  while  I  write  it)  an  Alexandrine. 
Pope,  believing  that  there  was  no  way  but  this,  cut  out  ‘  freely  ’  and  breathed  so  after¬ 
wards,  let  us  hope.  Dyce  applauded  the  deed,  and  was  upheld  by  Lettsom,  who 
observed  to  him  that  *  freely  ’  had  ‘  crept  in  here  from  the  fifth  line  below,’ — a  crablike 
feat  which  always  fills  me  with  amaze.  On  the  other  hand,  instructed  by  Abbott, 
§  494, 1  can  only  say, — I  would  request  you, — or  I  would  entreat  you, — not  to  fear,  not 
to  tremble ;  my  life  for  yours.  If  you  think  this  is  a  real  Alexandrine,  it  were  pity  of 
my  life ;  no,  it  is  no  such  thing ;  it  is  only  an  ‘  apparent  Alexandrine it  is  really  a 
respectable  Iambic  pentameter,  like  all  the  rest,  only,  ‘  the  last  foot  contains,  instead 
of  one  extra  syllable,  two  extra  syllables,  one  of  which  is  slurred.  And  V  |  must  fre6  [ 
'ly  have  ]  the  half  |  of  anything .’ — Ed. 

267.  vnpleasant’st]  For  similar  instances  of  this  contraction,  see  Abbott,  §  473. 

278.  meere]  Unqualified.  See  Shakespeare  passim. 


164 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  n. 


To  feede  my  meanes.  Heere  is  a  Letter  Ladie, 
The  paper  as  the  bodie  of  my  friend, 

And  euerie  word  in  it  a  gaping  wound 
Iffuing  life  blood.  But  is  it  true  Salerio , 

Hath  all  his  ventures  faild,  what  not  one  hit, 
From  Tripolis,  from  Mexico  and  England, 
From  Lisbon,  Barbary,  and  India, 

And  not  one  veffell  fcape  the  dreadfull  touch 
Of  Merchant-marring  rocks  ? 


280 


Sal.  Not  one  my  Lord. 

Befides,  it  fhould  appeare,  that  if  he  had 


289 


279.  Heere  A]  Heer ’s  Qt. 

280.  as]  is  Pope,  Han. 

282.  life  blood]  life-blood  Rowe. 

283.  Hath]  Have  Rowe  et  seq. 


283.  what']  what,  Qt  F+. 

284.  and]  from  Rowe  + . 
286.  And]  Has  Eccles  conj. 


fcape]  ’scaped  Pope  ,  Ec. 


280.  as]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  55),  not  knowing  that  he  was  anticipated  by  Pope,  sug¬ 
gested  is.  But  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  says  that  he  prefers  the  old  reading,  and  I  think  he 
speaks  for  all  of  us.  *  The  paper  [being]  as  the  body,’  &c.,  is  one  of  Allen’s  adver¬ 
saria. — Ed. 

282.  Issuing]  Clarendon  :  The  verb  is  generally  neuter,  except  in  the  phrases, 
‘to  issue  an  edict,’  ‘issue  a  proclamation.’ 

284.  Mexico]  Th.  Elze  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  xiv,  178),  after  a  thorough  and  searching 
examination  of  this  play  for  the  purpose  of  detecting  in  it  violations  of  local  manners 
and  customs,  discovers  barely  three  or  four.  The  first  is  the  reason  assigned  for  Bas- 
sanio’s  hasty  departure  at  nine  in  the  evening  (II,  vi,  73),  because  ‘  the  wind  is  come 
about.’  ‘  This  reason  is  not  applicable,’  says  Elze,  *  to  a  passage  through  the  lagoon  to 
the  mouth  of  the  Brenta;  it  applies  only  to  a  seacoast.’  Next,  the  allusion  to  Mexico 
here  and  at  I,  iii,  20,  is  English,  not  Venetian.  •  The  Republic  never  had  any  direct 
communication  with  Mexico,  nor  even  with  America.’  Lastly,  the  organization  of  the 
Court  in  the  Trial  Scene  is  not  exactly  correct.  See  Elze’s  note,  IV,  i,  I,  and  also  Oth. 
I,  ii,  51.  ‘  These,’  he  says  in  conclusion,  ‘  are  all  the  instances  which  I  have  been  able 
to  find  in  the  Merchant  of  Venice  and  in  Othello  that  deviate  from  local  truth.  Little 
enough,  indeed !  And  when  we  consider  that  even  historians,  and  travellers  like  Tom 
Coryat,  rarely  are  free  from  far  worse  errors  of  this  kind,  it  is  astounding  that  the  Poet, 
untrammelled  by  restrictions  laid  on  writers  of  travels,  has  not  often  offended  against 
reality,  but  has  been  so  exactly  true  to  it.  Shakespeare’s  knowledge  of  Venice  and 
of  Padua  seems  inconceivable,  his  fidelity  in  depicting  them,  marvellous  ;  assuredly  it 
may  be  said  that  the  Merchant  of  Venice  and  the  First  Act  of  Othello  have  not  merely 
Venice  for  their  background,  but  are  actually  played  in  the  very  city.’ 

286.  scape]  Rolfe:  Not  to  be  printed  ‘’scape.’  It  is  found  in  prose. 

288.  Eccles  :  The  supposed  universality  of  Anthonio’s  losses  is  not  a  little  injurious 
to  the  probability  of  the  fable. 

289.  should]  It  is  not  easy  to  define  this  ‘  should ;’  as  the  past  tense  of  shall  there 
seems  to  be  somewhat  too  much  compulsion  in  it;  Abbott,  §  324,  suggests  a  verb  shall, 
like  the  German  sollen,  which  means  is  to,  not  quite  ought.  Perhaps  it  is  of  this  shall 


act  hi,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


165 


The  prefent  money  to  difcharge  the  lew,  290 

He  would  not  take  it  :  neuer  did  I  know 
A  creature  that  did  beare  the  fhape  of  man 
So  keene  and  greedy  to  confound  a  man. 

He  plyes  the  Duke  at  morning  and  at  night, 

And  doth  impeach  the  freedome  of  the  ftate  295 

If  they  deny  him  iuftice.  Twenty  Merchants, 

The  Duke  himfelfe,  and  the  Magnificoes 
Of  greateft  port  haue  all  perfwaded  with  him, 

But  none  can  driue  him  from  the  enuious  plea 

Of  forfeiture,  of  iuftice,  and  his  bond.  300 

IeJJi.  When  I  was  with  him,  I  haue  heard  him  fweare 
To  Tuball  and  to  Chus ,  his  Countri-men,  302 

300.  forfeiture ,  of~\  forfeiture  of  F3  302.  Countri-men ]  FIFa.  Country-men 

F4.  QiQ2.  countrey-men  Q  .  countrimen  F3> 

301.  heard  hini\  heard  hiw  Q  .  countrymen  F4. 

that  ‘  should  ’  is  here  the  past  tense.  Rolfe  refers  to  Abbott,  §  322,  where  instances 
are  given  of  ‘  should  ’  as  the  past  tense  of  the  usual  shall ;  he  may  be  right.  The 
Elizabethan  use  of  should  is  to  me  always  difficult  to  analyze.  Compare  Stephano’s 
question  about  Caliban  :  ‘  Where  the  devil  should  he  learn  our  language  ?’ — Ed. 

291.  He]  Note  the  facile  shifting  of  the  subject. — Ed. 

292.  293.  man]  Where  are  our  happy  emenders  of  Shakespeare  that  they  have  nox 
sat  down  before  these  two  lines,  each  ending  (dreadful  thought!)  with  the  same  word? 
What  arguments  founded  on  logic,  propriety,  ductus  literarum,  &c.,  &c.,  might  there 
not  be  alleged  to  prove  that  the  former  line  should  read :  ‘  A  creature  that  did  bear 
the  human  shape  ’ ! — Ed. 

293.  confound]  Clarendon  explains  this  word  by  examples  from  Macb.,  King  John, 
Jeremiah ,  and  Isaiah .  It  somehow  seems  to  me  that  my  Yankee  ears  have,  at  times, 
detected  the  sound  of  a  word,  which  I  thought  was  the  same  as  this,  in  one  of  the 
verses  of  ‘  God  Save  the  Queen,’  on  which  I  have  not  hitherto  supposed  that  Britons 
needed  a  commentary. — Ed. 

295.  impeach  the  freedome]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  denies  that  strangers  have 
equal  rights  in  Venice.  Rolfe:  Compare,  however,  IV,  i,  where  Shy  lock  says:  ‘If 
you  deny  me,  let  the  danger  light  Upon  your  charter  and  your  city’s  freedom,’  as  if 
the  freedom  depended  upon  a  charter,  which  might  be  revoked  by  the  power  that  had 
granted  it.  The  thought  here  may  be  the  same. 

297.  Magnificoes]  ‘The  chiefe  men  of  Venice  are  by  a  peculiar  name  called  Mag- 
nifici,  i.  Magnificoes.’ — Minsheu,  Guide  into  Tongues,  1617,  s.  v.  Magnificent. 

298.  perswaded  with]  Abbott,  §194:  That  is,  argued  with.  Rolfe:  It  is  the 
only  instance  in  which  Shakespeare  joins  ‘  with  ’  to  this  verb. 

299.  enuious]  Dyce:  Malicious. 

302.  Countri-men]  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  1 41 )  calls  attention  to  this  spelling  in  the 
Folio,  as  also  to  puppi-dog,  ladiship,  ladi-bird,  honisuckle,  peniworth,  not  indeed  pecu¬ 
liar  to  it,  being  common  to  all  the  publications  of  that  age,  but  which  he  notes  as  use¬ 
ful  for  the  purposes  of  collation,  &c. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  ill,  sc.  ii. 


x  66 


That  he  would  rather  haue  Anthonie? s  flefh,  303 

Then  twenty  times  the  value  of  the  fumme 

That  he  did  owe  him  :  and  I  know  my  Lord,  305 

If  law,  authoritie,  and  power  denie  not, 

It  will  goe  hard  with  poore  Anihonio. 

Por.  Is  it  your  deere  friend  that  is  thus  in  trouble  ? 

Baff.  The  deereft  friend  to  me,  the  kindeft  man, 

The  beft  condition’d,  and  vnwearied  fpirit  310 

In  doing  curtefies  :  and  one  in  whom 

The  ancient  Romane  honour  more  appeares 

Then  any  that  drawes  breath  in  Italie. 

Por.  What  fumme  owes  he  the  lew  ? 

Baff.  For  me  three  thoufand  ducats.  315 

Por.  What,  no  more  ? 

Pay  him  fixe  thoufand,  and  deface  the  bond  : 

Double  fixe  thoufand,  and  then  treble  that, 

Before  a  friend  of  this  defeription 

Shall  lofe  a  haire  through  Baff  and1  s  fault.  320 

Firft  goe  with  me  to  Church,  and  call  me  wife, 

And  then  away  to  Venice  to  your  friend : 

For  neuer  fhall  you  lie  by  Portias  fide 

With  an  vnquiet  foule.  You  fhall  haue  gold  324 


310.  condition' d,  and~\  condition'd:  A n 
Warb.  Johns,  condition' d,  most  Lansd. 

vnwearied ]  unweary' d  Rowe  +  . 
unwearied' st  Hunter,  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 
316,  317.  One  line,  Qq. 


319.  this]  his  Walker. 

320.  Shall ]  Should  Cap.  Var. 
through ]  through  my  Ff,  Rowe  + , 

thorough  Steev. ’78, ’85,  Sta.  Coll.  iii. 
BaffanoT]  F,. 


310.  vnwearied]  See  II,  i,  53. 

313.  Then  any]  Allen:  Read  ‘Than’  any’  [where  ‘Than'  represents  the  absorp¬ 
tion  of  the  preposition  in.  See  line  168  above]. 

319.  this]  After  seeing  the  many  instances  which  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  219)  has  gath¬ 
ered  from  the  Folio  where  this  and  his  have  supplanted  one  another,  I  think  we  shall 
be  inclined  to  accept  his  change  in  this  passage  of  ‘  this  ’  into  his. — Ed. 

320.  To  aid  the  scansion,  Malone  tells  us  that  ‘hair’  is  used  as  a  dissyllable;  and 

'steevens  printed  ‘thorough.’  , 

320.  Shall]  Boswell  says  that  this  is  ‘ should  in  the  folio  and  quarto  H  [i.  e. 
QJ  ;  shall  in  quarto  R.’  [i.  e.  QJ.  A  serious  misprint;  how  it  arose  it  is  dilricult  to 
say.  Perhaps  Boswell  found  some  note  by  Capell  which  he  misinterpreted.  Capell 
has  should ;  it  is  unusual  for  him  to  adopt  a  reading  differing  from  all  authorib  ^  with¬ 
out  a  word  of  comment,  but  I  can  find  none  here.  As  is  indicated  in  the  Ten  N<Ves, 
the  four  Folios  and  the  three  Quartos  have  all  the  same  word:  ‘shall.’ — Ed. 

321.  Church]  Clarendon  :  Not  ‘  temple,’  as  in  II,  i,  50. 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


167 


To  pay  the  petty  debt  twenty  times  ouer.  325 

When  it  is  payd,  bring  your  true  friend  along, 

My  maid  Nerriffa ,  and  my  felfe  meane  time 
Will  liue  as  maids  and  widdowes  ;  come  away, 

For  you  fhall  hence  vpon  your  wedding  day : 

Bid  your  friends  welcome,  fhow  a  merry  cheere,  330 

Since  you  are  deere  bought,  I  will  loue  you  deere. 

But  let  me  heare  the  letter  of  your  friend. 

Sweet  Baffanio,  my  JJiips  haue  all  mifcarried ,  my  Credi¬ 
tors  grow  cruell ,  my  ejlaie  is  very  low ,  my  bond  to  the  lew  is 
forfeit,  and  Jince  in  paying  it,  it  is  impojjible  I fhould  liue,  all  335 

debts  are  cleerd  betweene  you  and  1 ,  if  I  might  fee  you  at  my 
death :  notwithflanding ,  vfe  your  pleafure,  if  your  loue  doe  not 
perfwade  you  to  come ,  let  not  my  letter. 


Por.  O  loue!  difpach  all  bufines  and  be  gone.  339 


329.  your ]  my  Rowe. 

33°,  331.  In  margin  by  Pope,  Han. 
331.  deere  boughf]  dec^r- bought  Dyce. 
333.  Sweet]  Baff.  [reads]  Sweet  Rowe 
et  seq. 

336.  and  I,]  and  me,  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 
Steev. ’85.  and  I.  Harness  (with  a  dash 


before  notwithstanding). 

336.  fee]  Ff,  Rowe,  Rife,  but  fee  Qq 
et  cet. 

at]  as  Q2. 

337.  death :]  death.  Qx. 

339.  Por.]  Om.  Qt. 

difpach ]  Fj.  dispatch  Qx. 


325.  twenty  times]  White  (ed.  ii) :  In  her  enthusiasm  and  her  love,  Portia  talks 
largely.  In  Shakespeare’s  time  sixty  thousand  ducats  were  equal  to  at  least  one  million 
of  dollars  now. 

330.  cheere]  Steevens:  Countenance.  [Cotgrave  gives  :  Chere  :  f.  The  face,  vis¬ 
age,  countenance,  fauour,  looke,  aspect  of  a  man ;  also,  cheere.] 

331.  Eccles  :  Portia  could  not  possibly  intend  by  these  words  ungenerously  to  remind 
Bassanio  of  the  benefits  she  had  conferred  upon  him.  They  must,  I  think,  relate  to  that 
anxiety  and  distress  of  mind  which  she  had  undergone  during  the  time  that  his  fate  was 
in  suspense ;  possibly,  too,  to  the  grief  she  was  now  about  to  suffer  in  his  absence.  [Not 
only  during  the  time  that  Bassanio’s  fate  was  in  suspense,  but  during  the  time  when  her 
own  fate  hung  on  the  chance  decision  of  her  suitors,  when  her  little  body  was  aweary 
of  the  world. — Ed.] 

S36-  you  and  I]  Abbott,  §205:  Sometimes  euphony  and  emphasis  may  have 
successfully  contended  against  grammar.  This  may  explain  /  in  ‘and  I,’  ‘but  I,’  fre¬ 
quently  used  for  me.  ‘  ’Tween  you  and  I  ’  seems  to  have  been  a  regular  Elizabethan 
idiom.  The  sound  of  d  and  t  before  me  was  avoided.  See  several  examples  in  §  209. 
Harness  :  According  to  the  general  way  of  printing  this  passage,  the  seeing  Bassanio 
at  his  death  has  been  made  the  condition  of  Antonio’s  forgiving  him  his  debt.  Such 
a  want  of  generosity  is  inconsistent  with  the  tenderness  and  nobleness  of  Antonio. 
The  present  punctuation  [see  Text.  Notes]  was  suggested  by  Mr  Charles  Kemble. 

339.  Capell  (ii,  66) :  To  the  exclamation  that  follows  the  letter,  the  name  (Portia) 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  ii 


1 68 


* 


Baff.  Since  I  haue  your  good  leaue  to  goe  away,  340 

I  will  make  haft  ;  but  till  I  come  againe, 

No  bed  fhall  ere  be  guilty  of  my  ftay, 

Nor  reft  be  interpofer  twixt  vs  twaine.  Exeunt. 


343.  Nor]  No  Qr,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  ii. 

Steev.  Mai.  ’90,  Hal.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  343.  twaine ]  tivo  Rowe  i. 


is  prefix’d  in  all  editions  but  one,  Qr ;  it’s  absence  from  that  Quarto,  and  the  absence 
from  every  Quarto  and  Folio  too  of  the  words  that  direct  a  reading  by  the  person  she 
speaks  to,  create  suspicion — that  she  herself  is  the  reader,  for  all  her  ‘  hear,’  having  the 
letter  put  into  her  hands  by  Bassanio,  who  found  himself  incapable  to  obey  her  in  that : 
persons  of  feeling  will  be  apt  to  think,  with  the  editor,  that  there  is  in  this  a  propriety, 
as  well  as  a  good  dramatic  effect,  and  her  instant  exclamation  when  over  does  cer¬ 
tainly  follow  more  naturally  and  with  better  grace  than  at  present.  [It  was  while  at 
the  harmless  drudgery  of  collation,  and  long  before  I  had  read  Capell’s  excellent  note, 
that  I  was  struck  with  the  omission  in  the  Qq  and  Ff  of  any  intimation  that  it  falls  to 
Bassanio  to  read  the  letter,  as  is  his  wont  on  the  stage.  Add  to  this  that  in  Qt  Por¬ 
tia’s  name  is  not  prefixed  to  line  339 ;  although  the  letter  is  in  Italics  and  this  line  in 
Roman,  yet  the  suggestion  was  unavoidable  that  it  is  Portia  who  reads  the  letter.  (Such 
suggestions,  let  me  add,  are  more  likely  to  arise  with  the  full  text  in  view  than  when  it 
is  looked  at  piecemeal  in  Textual  Notes.)  But  Portia  says,  ‘  Let  me  hear  the  letter  of 
your  friend,’  which  is,  doubtless,  the  reason  why  Rowe  inserted  the  Stage-direction  to 
Bassanio  to  read  it.  Whereupon  it  occurred  to  me  that  all  difficulties  would  disappear 
if  Bassanio,  in  obedience  to  Portia,  were  to  begin  the  letter,  and,  when  he  falteringly 
reaches  the  words  ‘  if  I  might  see  you  at  my  death,’  were  to  pause, — unable  to  master 
his  emotion.  Portia  then  tenderly  takes  the  letter  from  him,  finishes  it  aloud,  and,  in 
a  transport  of  agony,  cries,  ‘  O  love  !  dispatch  all  business  and  begone.’ — Ed.] 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


169 


IO 


[Scene  ///.] 

Enter  the  lew ,  and  Solanio ,  and  Anthonio , 
and  the  Iaylor. 

lew.  Iaylor,  looke  to  him,  tell  not  me  of  mercy, 

This  is  the  foole  that  lends  out  money  gratis. 

Iaylor,  looke  to  him.  5 

Ant.  Heare  me  yet  good  Shylok. 
lew.  lie  haue  my  bond,  fp  eake  not  againft  my  bond, 

I  haue  fvvorne  an  oath  that  I  will  haue  my  bond  : 

Thou  call’dft  me  dog  before  thou  hadft  a  caufe, 

But  fince  I  am  a  dog,  beware  my  phangs, 

The  Duke  fhall  grant  me  iuftice,  I  do  wonder 
Thou  naughty  Iaylor,  that  thou  art  fo  fond  1 


Scene  IV.  Pope  +  .  Scene  III.  Rowe 
et  cet. 

I.  Enter... Solanio]  F2F3,  Cap.  Hal. 
Enter... Salarino  Qt,  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. 
Glo.  Clarke,  Cla.  Huds.  Coll,  iii,  Wh.  ii. 
Enter. . .  Salerio  Q2Q3-  Enter. . .  Salanio  F4, 
Steev.  Mai.  Coll,  i,  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly. 
Enter... Solarino  Rowe-K 

3,  5,  12.  Iaylor]  QqFf.  Goaler  Rowe 


+ .  Gaoler  Johns.  Jailor  Cap. 

3.  not  me]  me  not  Rowe  i. 

4.  lends]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Hal.  Wh.  i, 
Rife,  Huds.  lent  Qq  et  cet. 

8.  I  haue]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 

9.  call'djl]  call'Jl  F4,  Rowe  i. 

10.  phangs]  phanges  Q2.  fangs  Qf. 

1 1 .  iuflice,]  iujlice ;  Qt.  Justice.  Rowe. 


1.  Gentleman  {Dram.  Censor,  i,  285) :  In  this  Scene  we  are  certain  our  author 
might  have  very  much  improved  both  characters,  had  extending  them  occurred  to  his 
imagination ;  characters  of  importance  should  never  be  brought  on  for  trifling  purposes. 

3.  Lord  Campbell:  It  appears  from  this  Scene  that  the  action  on  the  bond  had 
been  commenced  and  Antonio  had  been  arrested  on  mesne  process.  In  lines  12,  13, 
Shylock  threatens  the  Jailer  with  an  action  for  *  escape,’  for  allowing  Antonio  to  come 
for  a  short  time  beyond  the  walls  of  the  prison. 

4.  lends]  Collier  :  Now  that  Antonio  is  ruined  and  in  prison,  it  is  more  proper 
for  Shylock  to  speak  in  the  past  with  the  Qq,  than  in  the  present  with  the  Folio.  An¬ 
tonio  has  nothing  now  to  lend.  Halliwell  :  On  the  supposition  that  Shylock  is  here 
speaking  with  a  violent  sneer,  the  present  tense  seems  preferable ;  although,  of  course, 
as  a  strict  matter  of  fact  the  past  tense  is  correct. 

12.  naughty]  Staunton  :  In  the  present  day  this  is  commonly  employed  to  express 
some  venial  or  childish  trespass.  In  old  language  it  bore  a  stronger  meaning,  and  was 
used  indifferently  with  wicked,  bad,  base,  See.  Thus,  Leonato  says  of  the  villain  Bora- 
chio, — ‘this  naughty  man  shall  face  to  face  be  brought  to  Margaret.’ — Much  Ado,  V, 
ii.  And  Gloster,  in  King  Lear,  addresses  the  savage  and  relentless  Regan,  when  she 
plucks  his  beard,  as :  ‘  Naughty  lady.’ 

12,  13.  so  fond  To]  Abbott,  §  281 :  As  sometimes  the  antecedent  and  sometimes 
the  relative  may  be  omitted  without  injury  to  the  sense,  so  in  relative  constructions. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  in,  sc.  iii. 


170 


To  come  abroad  with  him  at  his  requeft.  13 

Ant.  I  pray  thee  heare  me  fpeake. 

lew.  lie  haue  my  bond,  I  will  not  heare  thee  fpeake,  1 5 
lie  haue  my  bond,  and  therefore  fpeake  no  more. 

He  not  be  made  a  foft  and  dull  ey’d  foole, 

To  fhake  the  head,  relent,  and  figh,  and  yeeld 
To  Chriftian  interceffors  :  follow  not, 

He  haue  no  fpeaking,  I  will  haue  my  bond.  Exit  lew.  20 
Sol.  It  is  the  moft  impenetrable  cur  re 
That  euer  kept  with  men. 

Ant.  Let  him  alone, 

He  follow  him  no  more  with  bootleffe  prayers  : 

He  feekes  my  life,  his  reafon  well  I  know;  25 

I  oft  deliuer’d  from  his  forfeitures 

Many  that  haue  at  times  made  mone  to  me, 

Therefore  he  hates  me. 

Sol.  I  am  fure  the  Duke  will  neuer  grant 

this  forfeiture  to  hold.  30 


14.  pray  thee\  prethee  Q,. 

15.  bond,"]  bond :  Qt. 

17.  dulley'd~\  dull-ey'd  Q,. 
25.  life,"]  life ;  Rowe. 


26.  from ]  him  Q  . 

29.  I...Duke~\  Separate  line,  Pope 
seq. 

29,  30.  I...hold~\  Prose,  Ff,  Rowe. 


e.  g.  so  ....  as,  so  ...  .  that ,  &c.,  one  ol  the  two  may  be  omitted.  Thus,  here :  so 
fond  (as)  to  come  abroad,’  &c. 

12.  fond]  Steevens:  That  is,  so  foolish.  Knight:  We  are  inclined  to  think  that 
it  here  means  indulgent,  tender,  weakly  compassionate. 

17.  dull  ey’d]  In  my  copy  of  Qt  there  is  between  these  words  a  hyphen,  faint,  it 
is  true,  but  distinct  enough  to  have  attracted  my  notice,  and  the  notice  of  Capell,  who 
was  not  dull  eyed ;  he  underscored  it  with  red  ink  as  a  varia  lectio.  In  Ashbee’s  faith¬ 
ful  Facsimile  it  may  still  be  detected  as  a  dot.  In  my  copy  of  Grigg’s  photographic 
Facsimile  it  has  vanished. — Ed. 

17.  foole]  Cowden-Clarke  :  By  the  way  in  which  the  Jew  uses  this  term  here, — 
twice  in  this  short  Scene,  and  each  time  in  conjunction  with  benevolence, — Shakespeare 
well  marks  Shylock’s  characteristic  idea,  that  kindness,  compassion,  and  good  feeling 
are  synonymous  with  folly. 

18.  the]  Abbott,  §  92  :  French  influence  is  perceptible  here  in  this  use  of  the  arti¬ 
cle,  instead  of  the  possessive  pronoun. 

22.  kept]  Singer  :  That  is,  dwelt.  In  some  of  the  midland  counties  in  England, 
the  common  dwelling-room  is  still  called  the  keeping-room.  STAUNTON:  To  ‘keep,’ 
in  the  sense  of  to  live  or  dwell,  is  still  preserved  at  the  University;  ‘Where  do  you 
keep  ?'  being  frequently  heard  with  the  meaning  of  ‘  Where  do  you  reside  ?' 

29,  31.  Lord  Campbell:  All  this  has  a  strong  odor  of  Westminster  Hall. 

30.  forfeiture  to  hold]  To  the  instances  which  he  alleges  where  a  noun  and 


171 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 

An.  The  Duke  cannot  deny  the  courfe  of  law  :  31 

31.  law:...  Venice ,]  law,...  Venice :  Theob.  conj.  (subs.),  Cap.  Ec.  Knt,  Sta.  Ktly,  Huds. 

infinitive  are  used  as  subject  or  object,  Abbott,  §  354,  says  that  perhaps  this  present 
example  may  be  added,  *  though  “  forfeiture  ”  may  be  personified,  and  “  grant  ”  used 
like  allow.' 

31,  &c.  Theobald,  in  a  letter  to  Warburton,  dated  1729  (Nichols’s  Illust.  ii,  310), 
suggested  a  comma  after  *  law,’  a  full  stop  after  ‘  Venice,’  and  to  read  ’  Twill  for  ‘  Will.’ 
Warburton  :  As  the  reason  here  given  seems  a  little  perplexed,  it  may  be  proper  to 
explain  it.  If,  says  he,  the  duke  stop  the  course  of  law,  it  will  be  attended  with  this 
inconvenience,  that  stranger  merchants,  by  whom  the  wealth  and  power  of  this  city  is 
supported,  will  cry  out  of  injustice.  For  the  known  stated  law  being  their  guide  and 
security,  they  will  never  bear  to  have  the  current  of  it  stopped  on  any  pretence  of  equity 
whatsoever.  Capell  (ii,  66) :  In  this  division  and  reading  [of  the  Folio],  the  nomi¬ 
native  to  *  impeach  ’  is  ‘  commodity ;’  which,  whatever  sense  shall  be  put  on  it,  cannot 
rationally  be  said — to  impeach  a  State’s  justice.  In  the  next  place,  ‘  denied  ’  is  a  repe¬ 
tition  of  the  term  [two  lines  above],  and  the  relative  by  which  it  is  govern’d  should 
have  reference  (in  course)  to  the  terms  which  ‘  deny  ’  governs,  i.  e.  ‘  course  of  law,’ 
which  are  not  its  reference  under  the  punctuation  [of  the  Folio].  There  are  such 
objections  to  that  punctuation  and  the  former  reading  [‘Will,’  line  34],  that  it  is  not 
seen  by  the  Editor  how  they  can  be  maintained  :  and  as  the  minute  alterations  that  he 
has  made  in  those  articles  [see  Text.  Notes]  remove  both  these  objections,  and  (withal) 
develop  the  speaker’s  reasoning  with  great  clearness,  they  are  given  into  by  him  with 
much  readiness,  and  (’tis  fancy’d)  will  be  by  others.  ‘  For  ’  has  its  common  sense  of — 
by  reason  of ;  and  ‘  commodity  ’  is — commodious  privileges :  and  the  words  in  which 
Antonio  declares  his  reason  why  a  denial  of  law’s  course  would  impeach  the  State’s 
justice,  imply — that  the  State  was  bound  to  let  the  law  have  its  course  with  all  nations, 
as  its  profits  rose  out  of  all.  Malone  :  That  is,  for  the  denial  of  those  rights  to  strangers 
which  render  their  abode  at  Venice  so  commodious  and  agreeable  to  them,  would  much 
impeach  the  justice  of  the  State.  The  consequence  would  be,  that  strangers  would  not 
reside  or  carry  on  traffic  here ;  and  the  wealth  and  strength  of  the  State  would  be  dimin¬ 
ished.  In  The  Historye  of  Italye,  by  W.  Thomas  [1561,  fob  85],  there  is  a  chapter  on 
*  The  libertee  of  straunger’s  in  Venice  ’  [in  which  he  says  :  ‘  A1  men,  specially  strangers, 
haue  so  muche  libertee  there,  that  though  they  speake  very  ill  by  the  Venetians,  so  they 

attempt  nothinge  in  effect  against  theyr  astate,  no  man  shal  control  theim  for  it . 

And  generally  of  all  other  thynges,  so  thou  offende  no  man  priuately,  no  man  shal 
offende  the :  whyche  vndoubtedly  is  one  principall  cause,  that  draweth  so  many 
straungers  thither.’ — ap.  Clarendon].  Knight:  The  construction  of  this  passage,  as 
it  stands  in  all  the  old  copies,  is  exceedingly  difficult;  and  the  paraphrases  of  Warbur¬ 
ton  and  Malone  do  not  remove  the  difficulty.  In  their  reading,  which  is  ordinarily 
followed,  ‘  commodity  ’  governs  ‘  impeach.’  But  *  commodity  ’  is  used  in  the  sense  of 
traffic — commercial  intercourse ;  and,  although  the  traffickers  might  impeach  the  justice 
of  the  State,  the  traffic  cannot.  Capell,  neglected  and  despised  by  all  the  commenta¬ 
tors,  has,  with  the  very  slightest  change  of  the  original,  supplied  a  text  which  has  a 
clear  and  precise  meaning,  and  this  we  have  followed :  The  Duke  cannot  deny  the 
course  of  law  on  account  of  the  interchange  which  strangers  have  with  us  in  Venice; 
if  it  be  denied,  'twill  much  impeach  the  justice  of  the  State.  Collier  (ed.  i) :  The 
srnse  of  these  lines  is  quite  clear,  though  the  construction  may  be  a  little  involved. 
Antonio  says  that  if  the  commodity  or  advantage  which  strangers  enjoy  in  Venice  be 


M2 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 


For  the  commoditie  that  ftrangers  haue  32 

With  vs  in  Venice,  if  it  be  denied, 

Will  much  impeach  the  iuftice  of  the  State, 

Since  that  the  trade  and  profit  of  the  citty  35 

Confifteth  of  all  Nations.  Therefore  goe, 

Thefe  greefes  and  Ioffes  haue  fo  bated  mee, 

That  I  fhall  hardly  fpare  a  pound  of  flefh 

To  morrow,  to  my  bloudy  Creditor.  39 

34.  Will"]  ’  Twill  Theob.  conj.  Cap.  Ec.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

Knt,  Sta.  Ktly,  Huds.  36.  Therefore ]  Thereforr  F^. 

the  State}  his  Jlate  Qz,  Cam.  Glo.  37.  haue}  hath  Q3. 


denied,  that  denial  will  much  impeach  the  justice  of  the  State,  which  derives  its  profit 
from  all  nations.  No  change  of  the  ancient  text  seems  necessary.  Singer  :  It  must 
be  borne  in  mind  that  Antonio  was  a  citizen  of  Venice,  and  Shy  lock  one  of  the 
strangers.  Halliwell  :  The  grammatical  construction  of  this  passage  is  exceed¬ 
ingly  involved,  but  the  meaning  seems  to  be :  for  the  privilege  which  strangers  have 
in  Venice,  if  the  letter  of  the  law  be  denied,  will  call  into  question  the  justice  of  the 
State,  which  derives  its  trade  and  profit  from  commerce  with  all  nations.  Strangers 
were  especially  favoured  in  Venice.  Staunton  :  We  adopt  the  slight  alteration  pro¬ 
posed  by  Capell;  for  the  construction  of  the  original  is  so  perplexed  that  it  seems 
impossible  to  extract  from  that  any  clear  sense.  Possibly,  ‘  For  the  commodity  that 
strangers  have  ’ — is  in  the  same  predicament  with  other  lines  in  these  plays ;  and  being 
intended  by  the  author  to  be  cancelled,  was  carelessly  inserted  by  the  old  printers, 
together  with  the  better  expression  of  the  same  idea  which  follows  it :  ‘  Since  that  the 
trade  and  profit  of  the  city  Consisteth  of  all  nations.’  Without  this  unaccommodating 
line,  the  passage  is  perfectly  logical  and  easy :  ‘  The  duke  cannot  deny  the  course  of 
law  With  us  in  Venice;  if  it  be  denied,  ’Twill  much  impeach  the  justice  of  the  State; 
Since,’  &c.  White  (ed.  i) :  It  is  more  in  Shakespeare’s  free  style  to  repeat  *  deny  ’ 
with  reference  to  another  subject  (i.  e.  ‘  the  commodity,’  &c.),  than  to  write  so  precise 
a  passage  as  Capell’s  text  gives.  Clarendon  :  For  the  refusal  of  the  usual  facilities 
enjoyed  by  strangers  in  Venice  will  bring  in  serious  question  the  justice  of  the  State. 
Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  The  proper  punctuation  of  this  passage  is  very  doubtful.  Allen  : 
Capell  must  be  right.  [The  difficulty  in  this  puzzling  passage  lies  in  determining  to 
what  ‘  it,’  in  ‘  if  it  be  denied,’  refers.  It  can  refer  either  to  *  course  of  law  ’  or  to  ‘  com¬ 
moditie.’  Capell  referred  it  to  the  former;  Malone  to  the  latter;  and  under  these  two 
leaders  all  subsequent  commentators  have,  in  effect,  ranged  themselves.  At  present,  I 
prefer  Malone. — Ed.] 

34.  iustice]  Keightley  (Exp.  p.  1 5 1 ) :  I  am  rather  dubious  of ‘justice,’  and 
should  prefer  interest  or  traffic. 

35.  Since  that]  See  Abbott,  §287;  or  Macb.  IV,  iii,  106;  or  Oth.  I,  i,  75;  or 
Lear,  IV,  vi,  215. 

37-  bated]  Rolfe  :  Reduced,  lowered.  Cf.  ‘bated  breath,’  I,  iii,  128.  It  should 
not  be  printed  'bated ;  it  is  not  a  mere  metrical  contraction  of  abated,  but  a  distinct 
word  (cf.  wake  and  awake,  & c. ),  often  found  in  prose  writers.  See  examples  in  Web¬ 
ster’s  Diet. 


ACT  III,  sc.  iv.]  THE  MER  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


173 


Well  Iaylor,  on,  pray  God  Baffanio  come  40 

To  fee  me  pay  his  debt,  and  then  I  care  not.  Exeunt. 


\Scene  IV?] 

Enter  Portia ,  NernJJa ,  Lorenzo ,  IeJJica ,  and  a  man  of 
Portias. 

Lor.  Madam,  although  I  fpeake  it  in  your  prefence, 

You  haue  a  noble  and  a  true  conceit 

O  f  god-like  amity,  which  appeares  moft  ftrongly  5 

In  bearing  thus  the  ab fence  of  your  Lord. 

But  if  you  knew  to  whom  you  fhew  this  honour, 

How  true  a  Gentleman  you  fend  releefe, 

How  deere  a  louer  of  my  Lord  your  husband, 

I  know  you  would  be  prouder  of  the  worke  10 

Then  cuflomary  bounty  can  enforce  you. 

Por.  I  neuer  did  repent  for  doing  good, 

Nor  fhall  not  now  :  for  in  companions 

That  do  conuerfe  and  wafte  the  timetogether,  14 


40.  on,]  on  ;  F4  et  seq. 

Scene  V.  Pope  +  .  Scene  IV.  Rowe, 
Cap.  et  seq. 

I.  a  man  of  Portias]  a  servant  of  Por¬ 
tia’s.  Rowe. 

3.  your ]  you  F3. 


5.  god- like']  gold-like  Q  . 
mofl]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

7.  fhew]  Jhow  Qa. 

8.  releefe ]  relief  to  Rowe-f . 

12,  13.  for... Nor]  of... And  Pope+. 


5.  amity]  Walker  (  Vers.  201) :  The  i  in  ity  is  almost  uniformly  dropt  in  pronun¬ 
ciation.  [Where  see  many  examples ;  see  also  Abbott,  §  467.  As  Allen  says,  this 
*  amity  ’  is  as  between  Bassanio  and  Anthonio. — Ed.] 

8.  Gentleman]  Clarendon  :  This  is  in  the  dative  case.  We,  in  modern  English, 
use  such  a  dative,  i.  e.  without  the  preposition  to,  only  when  it  comes  between  the  verb 
and  its  accusative,  as  ‘you  send  the  gentleman  relief.’  [See  also  Abbott,  §  394.  for 
the  omission  of  the  preposition  in  relative  sentences;  and  I,  i,  135;  II,  vi,  xi;  and 
IV,  i,  406.] 

9.  louer]  Malone  :  In  Shakespeare’s  time  this  was  applied  to  those  of  the  same 
sex  who  had  an  esteem  for  each  other.  Ben  Jonson  concludes  one  of  his  letters  to  Dr 
Donne  by  telling  him :  ‘  He  is  his  true  lover.’  See  our  author’s  Sonnets,  passim ;  also 
‘bosom  lover,’  line  19  in  this  Scene. 

11.  Eccles  :  Than  such  common  acts  of  bounty  as  you  are  in  the  continual  habit 
of  performing  can  incline  you  to  be.  Clarendon  :  You  would  be  prouder  of  the  work 
’  than  ordinary  benevolence  can  constrain  you  to  be. 

14.  waste]  Halliwell  :  Here  used  in  its  primitive  sense,  to  consume,  spend,  pass, 
not  necessarily  with  any  idea  of  unprohtableness.  Rolfe  :  Cf.  Milton  ( Sonnet  to  Mr 


174 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  iv 


Whofe  foules  doe  beare  an  egal  yoke  of  loue,  15 

There  muft  be  needs  a  like  proportion 
Of  lyniaments,  of  manners,  and  of  fpirit ; 

Which  makes  me  thinke  that  this  Anlhonio 
Being  the  bofome  louer  of  my  Lord, 

Muft  needs  be  like  my  Lord.  If  it  be  fo,  20 

How  little  is  the  coft  I  haue  beftowed 
In  purchafmg  the  femblance  of  my  foule; 

From  out  the  ftate  of  hellifh  cruelty, 

This  comes  too  neere  the  praifing  of  my  felfe,  24 


15.  egal]  F2,  Cap.  Dyce,  Coll.  iii.  egall 
Q2.  equal  Qt  et  cet. 

17.  lyniaments,]  Q2F2Q3.  lineaments, 
QiF3F4-  lineaments  Warb.  Johns. 

19.  In  parenthesis,  Qx. 


19.  bofome  louer ]  bofome-louer  Qt, 
Pope  +  ,  Ktly. 

22.  foule  ,•]  foule ,  Qr  foul  F4. 

23.  cruelty ,]  cruelty.  Rowe,  cruelty  ? 
Pope,  cruelly  !  Coll,  misery.  Qit  Cam. 
Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 


Laivrence) :  ‘Help  waste  a  sullen  day;’  where,  however,  the  idea  of  ‘killing  time’  is 
more  evident  than  here. 

15.  egal]  Steevens  :  Commonly  used  for  equal  in  Shakespeare’s  time.  [See  Text. 
Notes.] 

16.  needs]  See  Abbott,  §  25. 

17.  lyniaments,  of  manners,]  Warburton:  The  wrong  pointing  has  made  this 
fine  sentiment  nonsense;  as  implying  that  friendship  could  not  only  make  a  similitude 
of  manners,  but  of  faces.  The  true  sense  is, — lineaments  of  manners,  i.  e.  form  of  the 
manners,  which,  says  the  speaker,  must  needs  be  proportionate.  Steevens  :  The  poet 
only  means  to  say, — that  corresponding  proportions  of  body  and  mind  are  necessary  for 
those  who  spend  their  time  together.  So  in  2  Hen.  IV:  Hoi.  Why  doth  the  prince 
love  him  so  then?  Fal.  Because  their  legs  are  both  of  a  bigness ,’  See.  Every  one  will 
allow  that  the  friend  of  a  toper  should  have  a  strong  head,  and  the  intimate  of  a  sports¬ 
man  such  an  athletic  constitution  as  will  enable  him  to  acquit  himself  with  reputation 
in  the  exercises  of  the  field.  The  word  ‘  lineaments  ’  was  used  with  great  laxity  by 
our  ancient  writers.  In  The  learned  and  true  Assertion  of  the  Original,  Life ,  &c.  of 
King  Arthur,  translated  from  the  Latin  of  John  Leland,  1582,  it  is  used  for  the  human 
frame  in  general.  Speaking  of  the  removal  of  that  prince’s  bones,  he  calls  them  ‘  Ar¬ 
thur’s  lineaments  three  times  translated ;’  and  again,  ‘  all  the  lineaments  of  them  remain¬ 
ing  in  that  most  stately  tomb,  saving  the  shin  bones  of  the  king  and  queen,’  & c.  Again 
in  Greene’s  Farewell  to  Follie  [vol.  ix,  p.  255,  ed.  Grosart],  ‘Nature  had  so  curiously 
performed  his  charge  in  the  lineaments  of  his  bodie.’  Again  in  Chapman’s  Fifth  Iliad  : 
*  Took  the  weariness  of  fight  From  all  his  nerves  and  lineamehts.’  Again  in  the  Twenty- 
third  Iliad :  ‘  So  overlabour’d  were  His  goodly  lineaments  with  chase  of  Hector.’ 

23.  From  out]  See  Abbott,  §  157. 

23.  cruelty]  I  cannot  but  think  that  misery  of  is  the  purer  text.  Is  it  not  too 
soon  for  Portia  to  know  the  full  depth  of  Shylock’s  ‘  cruelty  ’  ?  The  utter  bankruptcy 
of  a  Royal  Merchant  is  misery  enough. — Ed. 

24.  the  praising]  For  the  substantive  use  of  the  verbal  with  the  before  it  and  of 


act  hi,  sc.  iv.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


*7  5 


Therefore  no  more  of  it  :  heere  other  things 
Lorenfo  I  commit  into  your  hands, 

The  husbandry  and  mannage  of  my  houfe, 
Vntill  my  Lords  returne  ;  for  mine  owne  part 
I  haue  toward  heauen  breath’d  a  fecret  vow, 
To  liue  in  prayer  and  contemplation, 

Onely  attended  by  Nerriffa  heere, 

Vntill  her  husband  and  my  Lords  returne : 
There  is  a  monaftery  too  miles  off, 


30 


25 


33 


25.  heere  other  things']  here  other  things, 
F3F4,  Pope.  Here  are  other  things.  Rowe. 
Hear  other  things.  Thirlby,  Theob.  et 
seq. 


hands,]  hands  F^. 

27.  mannage]  Q2.  manage  Qt. 
29.  fecret ]  sacred  Coll.  (MS). 


26.  Lorenfo]  Q3.  Lorenzo  Qx. 


after  it,  see  Abbott,  §  93,  where  it  is  said  that  it  seems  to  have  been  sometimes  regarded 
as  colloquial. 

24,  25.  This  comes  ...  of  it]  Cowden-Clarke  :  There  is  exquisite  subtlety  and 
refinement  of  modesty  in  this  passage.  There  is  the  delicacy  of  a  mind  that  dreads 
even  to  disclaim  merit  lest  it  seem  to  imply  that  there  exists  merit  to  be  disclaimed ; 
and  there  is  the  sensitiveness  of  a  profound  love,  which  feels  it  a  kind  of  egoism  to 
laud  that  being  who  is  but  another  self. 

25.  heere]  Theobald  :  Portia,  finding  that  her  reflections  come  too  near  self- 
praise,  says,  She’ll  say  no  more  of  that  sort;  but  call  a  new  subject.  This  was  also 
suggested  by  Dr  Thirlby.  [See  Nichols’s  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  225.] 

27.  husbandry]  See  ‘Borrowing  dulls  the  edge  of  husbandry,’ — Ham.  I,  iii,  77; 
and,  ‘There’s  husbandry  in  heaven,’  Macb.  II,  i,  4.  Clarendon:  Stewardship; 
o'lKovofiia  in  the  literal  sense. 

27.  mannage]  See  Abbott,  §  45 1,  for  a  list  of  words  used  as  nouns  by  Shakespeare, 
to  which  ‘  we  should  append  -ation  or  -ition,  -ure  or  -ing.  Almost  all  of  these  words 
come  to  us  through  the  French.’ 

29.  secret]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Sacred,  says  the  old  (MS) ;  perhaps  he  himself  mis¬ 
heard  the  word,  or  perhaps  it  was  a  variation  by  the  actor  whom  he  saw.  There  is  no 
reason  for  disturbing  the  old  text. 

32.  her  husband  and  my  Lords]  Compare  ‘  As  soul  and  body’s  severing,’ — 
Hen.  VIII :  II,  iii,  16;  ‘Shall  be  your  love  and  labour’s  recompense,’ — Rich.  II:  II, 
iii,  62,  cited  by  Abbott,  §  397,  who  says  that  ‘  probably  this  idiom  arises  partly  from 
the  readiness  with  which  a  compound  phrase  connected  by  a  conjunction  is  regarded 
as  one  and  inseparable.’  See  also  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  218),  or  Schmidt  [Lex.  p.  1419, 


§6). 


33.  monastery]  Th.  Elze  (Sh.  Jahrb.  xiii,  p.  143):  Monasteries  there  were  in 
abundance  at  that  time  everywhere  in  Italy,  but  as  it  happens  there  really  was  a  Con¬ 
vent  not  far  from  the  locality  selected  by  the  poet  for  Belmont.  About  three  English, 
or  Italian,  miles  from  Stri,  landwards  from  the  right  bank  of  the  Brenta,  lay  the  village 
of  Saonara.  Here,  in  the  1 6th  Century,  stood  a  Benedictine  Convent,  whose  occupants, 
it  is  true,  in  1558  united  with  the  Nuns  of  the  same  order  at  St  Anna’s  in  Padua,  but  the 
Convent  buildings  survived  down  to  the  present  century.  [Dr  Karl  Elze  maintains  that 
Belmont  must  have  been  on  the  banks  of  the  Brenta ;  and  Th.  Elze,  in  this  learned 


176 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


And  there  we  will  abide.  I  doe  defire  you 

Not  to  denie  this  impofition,  35 

The  which  my  loue  and  fome  neceffity 

Now  layes  vpon  you. 

Lorenf.  Madame,  with  all  my  heart, 

I  fhall  obey  you  in  all  faire  commands. 

Por.  My  people  doe  already  know  my  minde,  40 

And  will  acknowledge  you  and  IeJJica 
In  place  of  Lord  Baffatiio  and  my  felfe. 

So  far  you  well  till  we  fhall  meete  againe. 

Lor.  Faire  thoughts  &  happy  houres  attend  on  you. 

Iefji.  I  with  your  Ladifhip  all  hearts  content.  45 

Por.  I  thanke  you  for  your  with,  and  am  well  pleas’d 
To  wifh  it  backe  on  you  :faryouwell  Iejfica.  Exeunt. 

Now  Balthafer ,  as  I  haue  euer  found  thee  honeft  true, 

So  let  me  finde  thee  ftill  :  take  this  fame  letter, 

And  vfe  thou  all  the  indeauor  of  a  man,  50 

In  fpeed  to  Mantua,  fee  thou  render  this 


34.  we  wilt}  will  we  Qt,  Cam.  Glo. 
Cla.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

37.  layes]  lay  Han.  Hal. 
yoii]  me  Q3- 

41.  acknowledge ]  acknowledge 4. 

43.  So... well]  Q2.  So  fare  you  well 
FfQ3.  And  fo  farewell  Ql(  Cam.  Glo. 
Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

46.  pleas'd ]  'pris'd  Warb.  conj. 

47,  48.  Lines  end  you  :...Baltaser , ... 


true  Walker. 

47.  faryouwell]  farewell  Qt. 

48.  Now  Balthafer]  Separate  line,  Pope 
et  seq. 

Balthafer]  Balthazar  Ff. 
honeji  true ]  honejl-trtie  Dyce,  Cam 
Ktly,  Glo.  Del.  Cla.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

50.  the  indeauor ]  th'  indeuour  Qq, 
Pope  + . 

5 1 .  Mantua ]  Padua  Theob.  et  seq. 


Essay,  narrows  the  locality  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Dolo,  around  which,  from  La  Mira 
to  Stra,  on  both  banks  of  the  Brenta,  the  magnificoes  of  Venice  had,  and  still  have, 
their  palatial  residences.  Belmont,  therefore,  must  be  supposed  to  have  been  not  far 
from  the  high  road  between  Padua  and  Fusina,  because  Lorenzo  met  Salerio  on  the 
road  from  Venice  with  the  letter  from  Anthonio,  and  the  park  gate  where  Portia’s 
coach  awaited  her,  must  have  been  on  or  near  a  highway  fit  for  travel.  Hence,  Th. 
Elze’s  allusion  to  Strk  in  the  extract  which  I  have  just  given. — Ed.] 

48.  thee]  Note  the  instant  change  of  address,  to  a  servant.  Portia  uses  chiefly 
thou  to  Nerrissa,  but  Nerrissa  invariably,  I  think,  addresses  Portia  as  you.  See  I,  ii, 
35-— Ed. 

48.  honest  true]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  23):  Write  honest-true.  See  also  Abbott, 
§  2,  for  parallel  instances  where  ‘two  adjectives  are  combined,  the  first  being  a  kind  of 
adverb  qualifying  the  second.’ 

51.  Mantua]  Theobald  :  ’Tis  evident  to  any  diligent  reader  that  we  must  restore, 
as  I  have  done, — *  In  speed  to  Padua ;'  it  was  there,  and  not  at  ‘  Mantua,’  Bellario 
liv’d.  So  afterwards :  ‘  A  messenger,  with  letters  from  the  Doctor,  new  come  from 


ACT  III,  sc.  iv.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


1 77 


Into  my  cofins  hand,  Do6tor  Belario ,  52 

And  looke  what  notes  and  garments  he  doth  giue  thee, 

Bring  them  I  pray  thee  with  imagin’d  fpeed 

Vnto  the  Tranedl,  to  the  common  Ferrie  55 

52.  cojins]  cofin  Q2.  Ktly,  Del.  Coll,  iii,  Wh.  ii. 

55.  Trane dT\  Traject  Rowe+,  Sing. 

Padua?  And  again  :  ‘  Came  you  from  Padua,  from  Bellario  ?’  And  again :  ‘  It 
comes  from  Padua,  from  Bellario.’  Besides,  Padua,  not  *  Mantua,’  is  the  place  of 
education  for  the  Civil  Law  in  Italy. 

52.  cosins]  Keightley  :  This  word  was  used,  in  its  primitive  sense  of  consan- 
guineus,  of  any  one  that  was  akin. 

54.  imagin’d]  Steevens  :  That  is,  with  celerity  like  that  of  imagination.  So  in 
the  Chorus  before  Hen.  V:  III :  *  Thus  with  imagin’d  wing  our  swift  scene  flies.’ 
Again,  in  Ham.  I,  v,  30:  ‘Wings  as  swift  As  meditation.’  Eccles  :  Here,  however, 
I  incline  rather  to  think  it  is  put  for  imaginable.  Abbott,  §  375  :  The  passive  parti¬ 
ciple  is  often  used  to  signify  not  that  which  was  and  is,  but  that  which  was,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  can  be  hereafter.  In  other  words,  -ed  is  used  for  -able. 

55.  Tranect]  Steevens  :  This  appears  to  be  derived  from  tranare,  and  was  prob¬ 
ably  a  word  current  in  the  time  of  Shakespeare,  though  I  can  produce  no  example  of 
it.  Capell  ( Gloss. ) :  A  Ferry-  or  Passage-boat:  possibly  from  some  provincial  Italian 
Word  of  that  Import,  springing  of — tranare,  to  swim  or  pass  over,  that  does  not  appear 
in  their  Dictionaries.  [In  his  Notes,  p.  67,  Capell  says :]  Of  this  word’s  sense,  and 
derivation  you  have  the  Editor’s  opinion  at  large  in  the  Glossary ;  to  which  integrity 
calls  upon  him  to  add  that  no  example  is  found  of  it :  notwithstanding  which,  the  word 
must  be  adher’d  to,  and  not  it’s  substitute — traject,  a  word  that  has  some  examples,  but 
not  many,  and  signifying — place  of  passage ;  whereas  ‘  tranect  ’  is — vehicle,  and  ex¬ 
plain’d  so  by  the  Poet  himself  in  the  very  words  it  is  follow’d  by.  Malone  :  Twenty 
miles  from  Padua,  on  the  river  Brenta,  there  is  a  dam  or  sluice  to  prevent  the  water  of 
tha';  river  from  mixing  with  that  of  the  marshes  of  Venice.  Here  the  passage-boat  is 
drawn  out  of  the  river,  and  lifted  over  the  dam  by  a  crane.  From  hence  to  Venice 
this  distance  is  five  miles.  Perhaps  some  novel-writer  of  Shakespeare’s  time  might 
have  called  this  dam  by  the  name  of  the  ‘tranect.’  See  DuCange  in  v.  Trana. 
Knight  :  No  other  example  is  found  of  the  use  of  this  word  in  English,  and  yet  there 
is  little  doubt  that  the  word  is  correct.  Tranare  and  trainare  are  interpreted  by  Florio 
not  only  as  to  draw,  which  is  the  common  acceptation,  but  as  to  pass  or  swim  over. 
Thus,  the  ‘tranect’  was,  most  probably,  the  tow-boat  of  the  ferry.  Ibid.  ( Illust .) :  If 
Shakespeare  had  been  at  Venice  (which,  from  the  extraordinary  keeping  of  the  play, 
appears  the  most  natural  supposition),  he  must  surely  have  had  some  situation  in  his 
eye  for  Belmont.  There  is  a  *  common  ferry  ’  at  two  places,  Fusina  and  Mestre.  The 
Fusina  ferry  would  be  the  one  if  Portia  lived  in  perhaps  the  most  striking  situation, 
under  the  Euganean  Hills.  But  the  Mestre  ferry  is  the  most  convenient  medium  be¬ 
tween  Padua  and  Venice.  There  is  a  large  collection  of  canal-craft  there.  It  is  eight¬ 
een  English  miles  from  Padua,  and  five  from  Venice.  Supposing  Belmont  to  lie  in  the 
jilain  N.-W.  from  Venice,  Balthazar  might  cut  across  the  country  to  Padua,  and  mee* 
Portia  at  Mestre,  while  she  travelled  thither  at  a  lady’s  speed. — M  [artineau  ?] .  Hun¬ 
ter  (i,  328):  The  ferries  at  Venice  were  called  traghetti,  trajects,  as  we  learu  from 
Coryat  (Crudities,  \,  210):  ‘There  are  in  Venice  thirteen  ferries  or  passages,  which 


r78 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  HI,  sc.  iv. 


Which  trades  to  Venice  ;  wafte  no  time  in  words,  56 

But  get  thee  gone,  I  fhall  be  there  before  thee. 

Balth.  Madam,  I  goe  with  all  conuenient  fpeed. 

Por.  Come  on  Neriffa ,  I  haue  worke  in  hand 
That  you  yet  know  not  of ;  wee’ll  fee  our  husbands  60 

Before  they  thinke  of  vs  ? 

Nerriffa.  Shall  they  fee  vs  ? 

Portia.  They  fhall  Nerriffa  :  but  in  fuch  a  habit, 

That  they  lhall  thinke  we  are  accomplifhed 

With  that  we  lacke  ;  lie  hold  thee  any  wager  65 

When  we  are  both  accoutered  like  yong  men, 

56.  words']  word  Q3.  65.  that]  what  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Steev.  Mai. 

57.  get  thee]  get  hee  ¥ 3.  66.  accoutered]  apparreld  Qt,  Pope  + . 

58.  [Exit.  Qj.  accoutred  Rowe,  Cap.  et  seq. 


they  commonly  call  Traghetti.’  HalliwelL:  ‘And  that  men  may  passe  speedily, 
besides  this  bridge,  there  be  thirteen  places  called  traghetti,  where  boats  attend  called 
gondole,  which,  being  of  incredible  number,  give  ready  passage  to  all  men.’ — Mory- 
son’s  Itinerary,  i,  77.  ‘Tranect’  is  probably  a  corruption.  Singer:  I  adopt  Rowe’s 
alteration,  which  corresponds  with  traghetto,  as  explained  by  Florio,  in  v.  ‘  a  ferrie,  a 
passage,  or  gozell  over,  or  from,  shore  to  shore and  with  the  Latin  trajectus,  which  is 
quite  in  Shakespeare’s  manner  to  have  in  mind.  Staunton  :  ‘  Tranect  ’  is  probably  a 
misprint  for  traject.  White:  ‘ Traject ’  may  be  correct  on  the  authority  of  Coryat. 
Keightley  (Exp.  152) :  Rowe,  I  think  properly,  reads  Traject.  Collier:  The  (MS) 
makes  no  change,  and  none  is  necessary.  Dyce  and  Clarendon  :  Rowe’s  traject  is, 
perhaps,  the  right  reading.  Cowden-Clarke  :  The  Italian  tranare  or  trainare  also 
means  to  draw  or  drag;  and  it  is  possible  that  the  Venetian  ferry-boat  was  drawn 
through  the  water  by  a  process  still  in  use  in  some  places.  One  of  the  present  Editors 
saw  a  ferry-boat  at  Rotterdam  made  to  traverse  the  stream,  from  the  man  on  board  lay¬ 
ing  hold  of  a  rope  strained  across  the  canal  for  the  purpose.  Karl  Elze  (Essays,  1873, 
p.  279) :  The  ferry  to  Venice  was  at  that  time  at  Fusina,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Brenta. 
The  nonsensical  word  ‘  tranect  ’  proves  that  copyist  and  compositors  possessed  no 
knowledge  of  this  word,  and  still  less  of  the  thing  itself.  Even  the  word  traject,  cor¬ 
rectly  restored  by  Theobald,  is  not  a  genuine  English  word,  otherwise  the  poet  would 
not  have  added  the  explanation,  ‘  the  common  ferry,’  which  he  surely  did,  only  to  make 
the  meaning  clear  to  his  readers  and  hearers.  What  visitor  does  not  here  at  once  recog¬ 
nize  the  Venetian  traghetto  (tragetto)  ?  And  whence  did  the  poet  get  a  knowledge  of 
the  traghetto?  Coryat  is  out  of  the  question,  and  Vecellio,  even  if  we  knew  that 
Shakespeare  had  read  the  book,  which  we  do  not,  has  not  a  word  about  the  traghetto, 
so  that  the  disbelievers  in  an  Italian  journey  of  Shakespeare  cannot  account  for  his 
knowledge  by  any  other  means  than  by  oral  communication.  [Elze  contends,  in  this 
fine  Essay,  on  The  Supposed  Travels  of  Shakespeare,  that  the  simplest  of  all  explana¬ 
tions  of  this  exact  local  knowledge  of  Italy  is  that  Shakespeare  had  himself  journeyed 
thither. — Ed.] 

66.  accoutered]  Although  this  word  has  been  generally  adopted  since  the  days  of 
Capell,  I  am  not  sure  that  apparreld  of  Q,  is  not  the  more  satisfactory  word.  If  Portia 


act  hi,  sc.  iv.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


179 


lie  proue  the  prettier  fellow  of  the  two,  67 

And  weare  my  dagger  with  the  brauer  grace, 

And  fpeake  betweene  the  change  of  man  and  boy, 

With  a  reede  voyce,  and  turne  two  minfing  fteps  70 

Into  a  manly  ftride  ;  and  fpeake  of  frayes 
Like  a  fine  bragging  youth  :  and  tell  quaint  lyes 
How  honourable  Ladies  fought  my  loue, 

Which  I  denying,  they  fell  ficke  and  died. 

I  could  not  doe  withall  :  then  lie  repent,  75 

70.  minfing\  mincing  Qx.  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mah’90.  withal  F4,  Rowe 

75.  wit  hall  qF2F3.  with  all  Rowe  ii  i,  Var.  et  seq. 


had  in  mind  the  Doctor’s  cap  and  gown  which  Dr  Bellario  was  to  send  her,  I  doubt  if 
she  would  speak  of  them  as  accoutrements.  On  the  other  hand,  she  refers,  almost  in 
the  same  breath,  to  her  dagger  and  as  though  she  were  to  be  dressed  like  a  bragging 
Jack.  Hence  I  am  inclined  to  prefer  Q,,  which  obviates  all  difficulties. 

The  Elizabethan  audiences  seemed  to  find  especial  pleasure  in  seeing  female  cha¬ 
racters  disguised  as  men,  to  judge  from  the  lightness  with  which,  throughout  the  drama, 
women  slipped  into  doublet  and  hose.  Rosalind  and  Imogen  occur  to  us  at  once ;  in 
Beaumont  and  Fletcher  there  are  many  more  of  these  disguises  than  in  Shakespeare, 
e.  g. :  Aspatia  in  The  Maid's  Tragedy,  Euphrasia  in  Philaster,  Alathe  in  The  Night- 
Walker,  and  in  Love's  Pilgrimage  Theodosia  retains  her  disguise  from  her  first  entrance 
down  to  the  Fifth  Act,  and  Leocadia  from  her  first  entrance  down  to  the  very  last  scene 
of  the  Fifth  Act. — Ed. 

72.  quaint]  Dyce:  Ingenious,  artful,  clever. 

75.  doe  withall]  In  a  note  on  Meas.  for  Meas.  Steevens,  under  the  pseudonym, 
Collins,  shows  that  this  phrase  was  at  times  used  indelicately.  In  a  note  on  this 
present  passage,  *  Collins  ’  refers  to  his  former  note  with  the  implication  that  Portia  so 
uses  the  phrase  here.  Whereupon  Gifford,  in  a  note  on  Jonson’s  Silent  Woman,  V, 
i,  39,  thus  vindicates  the  phrase,  and  Portia,  with  such  proof  as  has  been  accepted  by  all 
editors  and  commentators  ever  since :  *  In  one  of  the  prettiest  speeches  surely  that  ever 
was  penned,  that  of  Portia  to  Nerissa,  she  describes  the  appearance  she  shall  make  and 
the  language  she  shall  hold  when  “  accoutred  like  a  man.”  The  line  “  I  could  not  do 
withal,”  or  rather,  a  corruption  of  it,  the  commentators,  who  are  always  routing  in  the 
mire  of  impurity,  explain  in  the  most  indecent  manner.  I  will  not  say  of  Portia,  as  ot 
Desdemona,  that  her  “  motion  blushed  at  herself,”  yet  she  was  assuredly  a  woman  of 
modesty,  and  therefore  little  likely  to  use  the  language  of  a  brothel,  or  to  attribute  the 
manners  of  one  to  the  “  honourable  ladies  who  sought  her  love.”  The  fact  is,  that  the 
phrase,  so  shamelessly  misinterpreted,  is,  in  itself,  perfectly  innocent,  and  means  neither 
more  nor  less  than,  I  could  not  help  it.  In  Morte  Arthur,  where  Guinever  is 
accused  of  poisoning  one  of  the  Knights  of  the  Round  Table,  the  King  says  to  her, 
“  None  of  them  will  say  well  of  you,  nor  none  of  them  will  doe  battle  for  you,  and 
tjiat  shall  be  great  slaunder  for  you  in  this  court.  Alas  !  said  the  queen,  I  cannot  doe 
withall,"  (I  cannot  help  it,)  “and  now  I  miss  sir  Launcelot,”  Part  III,  c.  108.  In 
the  trial  of  Udall,  lord  Anderson  says :  “  You  had  as  good  say  you  were  the  author.” 
Udall.  “That  will  not  follow,  my  lord:  but  if  you  think  so,  I  cannot  do  withal"  (I 


180  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  iv. 

And  wifh  for  all  that,  that  I  had  not  kil’d  them  ;  76 

And  twentie  of  thefepunie  lies  lie  tell, 

That  men  fhall  fvveare  I  haue  difcontinued  fchoole 
Aboue  a  twelue  moneth  :  I  haue  within  my  minde 
A  thoufand  raw  tricks  of  thefe  bragging  lacks,  80 

Which  I  will  pradlife. 

Nerrif.  Why,  fhall  wee  turne  to  men  ? 

Portia.  Fie,  what  a  queftions  that  ? 

If  thou  wert  nere  a  lewd  interpreter : 


78.  I  haue]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 

79.  moneth']  month  Qx. 

I  haue]  I've  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 
within]  in  Pope  +  . 


82.  Why]  Om.  Pope-K 

83.  quejlions]  question's  Q,  F3  et  seq. 

84.  nere]  near  Rowe  et  seq. 
interpreter  .•]  interpreter  ?  Rowe. 

interpreter  !  Theob. 


cannot  help  it). — State  Trials,  fol.  vol.  I,  p.  162.  And  in  that  excellent  old  play,  the 
Little  French  Lawyer,  Dinant,  who  is  reproached  by  Clerimont  for  not  silencing  the 
music,  which  endangered  his  safety,  replies  :  “I cannot  do  withal (I  cannot  help  it;) 
“  I  have  spoke  and  spoke ;  I  am  betrayed  and  lost  too.”  I  make  no  apology  for  this 
long  note.  Shakespeare  is  in  every  hand ;  and  it  is  therefore  incumbent  on  all  those 
who  feel  a  due  respect  for  youth  and  innocence,  to  take  every  opportunity  of  removing 
the  impurities  with  which  his  pages  are  wantonly  overcharged.  As  the  sense  of  the 
words  is  now  fully  ascertained,  we  have  a  right  to  expect  that  the  stupid  and  indecent 
comments  of  Collins  and  others  on  it  shall  be  henceforth  omitted.  “  Withal,  the  read¬ 
ing  of  the  old  copies,”  Mr  Malone  tells  us,  “was  corrected"  (corrected,  with  a  ven¬ 
geance  !)  “  to  with  all  by  Mr  Pope.”  Notwithstanding  this  cheering  assurance,  the 
future  editors  of  Shakespeare  will  do  well  to  let  him  speak  his  own  language,  and  to 
print  the  line  as  it  stands  above,  and  as  it  ought  always  to  have  stood :  “  I  could  not  do 
withal.”  ’  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  57) :  Though  after  Gifford’s  decisive  note,  this  phrase 
is  not  likely  to  be  again  misinterpreted,  I  may  cite  the  following  passage  from  Pals¬ 
grave’s  Lesclarcissement  de  la  Lang.  Fr.  1530:  ‘I  can  nat  do  withall,  a  thyng  lyeth 
nat  in  me,  or  I  am  nat  in  faulte  that  a  thyng  is  done,’  Fol.  clxxx  (Table  of  Verbes). 
Halliwell  :  A  very  common  phrase,  equivalent  to  I  could  not  help  it,  it  was  not  my 
fault.  *  If  he  beare  displeasure  agaynst  me,  I  can  nat  do  withal.  Sil  indigne  contrt 
moy,  je  nen  puis  mays.' — Palsgrave,  1530.  The  phrase  occurs  more  than  once  in 
Florio’s  Second Frutes,  1591.  ‘Beare  witnes,  my  masters,  if  hee  dye  of  a  surfet,  I 
cannot  doo  withall;  it  is  his  owne  seeking,  not  mine,’ — Nash’s  Have  with  You  to 
Saffron  Walden,  1596.  See  further  examples  in  Middleton’s  Works,  iv,  26,  ed. 
Dyce;  Webster’s  Works,  iii,  215,  ed.  Dyce.  There  is  a  proverbial  phrase:  ‘to  look 
as  if  one  could  not  do  withal,’  which  has  a  different  signification.  See  instances 
of  it  in  Pick’s  Festurn  Voluptatis,  1639,  p.  37;  Heywood’s  Late  Lancashire  Witches, 
1634. 

78.  That]  For  other  instances  of  the  omission  of  so  before  that,  see  Abbott,  §  283, 
or  Lear,  IV,  vii,  47;  Ham.  IV,  vi,  21 1. 

80.  lacks]  Malone:  In  our  author’s  time,  a  term  of  contempt.  S zz  Much  Ado, 
I,  i,  186. 


act  ill,  sc.  iv.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


1 8 1 

But  come,  lie  tell  thee  all  my  whole  deuice  85 

When  I  am  in  my  coach,  which  ftayes  for  vs 
At  the  Parke  gate  ;  and  therefore  hafte  away, 

For  we  muft  meafure  twentie  miles  to  day.  Exewit. 

85.  my]  my  my  Q2. 


85.  all  my  whole]  Clarendon  :  A  similar  pleonasm  occurs  in  1  Hen.  VI:  I,  i, 
126. 

86.  coach]  Halliwell  :  Coaches  had  become  exceedingly  common  at  the  time 
this  present  Comedy  was  written ;  and  in  1601  was  introduced  into  Parliament  a  bill 
‘  to  restrain  the  excessive  use  of  coaches  within  this  realm  of  England.’  It  should  be 
recollected  that  Portia  is  not  speaking  of  Venice.  In  that  city  there  were  no  coaches. 
See  Coryat’s  Crudities,  1611,  p.  225.  [From  the  following  note  of  Th.  Elze  (Sh. 
Jahrbuch,  xiii,  148),  it  would  seem  that  Shakespeare  is  a  better  authority  than  the  *  Od- 
combian  Legge-stretcher,’  as  Tom  Coryat  called  himself:  ‘In  1562  there  were  coach- 
makers  ( carrozzeri )  in  Venice,  who  with  the  Saddlers  formed  a  branch  of  the  Guild 
of  Upholsterers.  By  a  law  of  Venice  of  8  October  1562  no  coaches  were  allowed  to 
have  silk  cushions  or  covers,  or  any  lavish  expense  of  gold  or  silver,  except  for  the 
handles  of  the  coach-doors,  under  penalty  of  20  ducats  fine  for  every  infraction  of  the 
law.’] 

88.  twentie  miles]  Eccles  :  This  is,  it  may  be  presumed,  nearly  the  whole  dis¬ 
tance  from  Belmont  to  Venice.  Elze  ( Essays ,  p.  279) :  This  may  be  spoken  at  ran¬ 
dom,  and  she  wishes,  perhaps,  by  a  vague  statement  to  conceal  the  true  state  of  things. 
Twenty,  like  forty,  very  frequently  indicates  an  indefinite  number.  It  is  however,  an 
exceedingly  remarkable  coincidence  that  the  distance  between  Venice  and  Dolo  [one 
of  the  possible  localities  of  Belmont]  is  exactly  twenty  Italian  miles,  and  the  Italian 
mile  is  the  same  as  the  English.  Can  Shakespeare  have  known  this,  and  is  his  state¬ 
ment,  after  all,  to  be  taken  literally  ?  [Portia  just  before  speaks  of  telling  ‘  twenty  puny 
lies.’  Halpin  contends  that  Venice  is  only  ten  miles  away,  and  that  ‘  twenty  miles  ’ 
means  to  Venice  and  back  again.  See  ‘  Duration  of  the  Action  ’  in  Appendix. — Ed.] 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iii,  sc.  v 


182 


[Scene  K] 

Enter  Clowne  and  IeJJica. 


Clown.  Yes  truly  ;  for  looke  you,  the  finnes  of  the  Fa¬ 
ther  are  to  be  laid  vpon  the  children,  therefore  I  promife 
you,  I  feare  you,  I  was  alwaies  plaine  with  you,  and  fo 
now  I  fpeake  my  agitation  of  the  matter  :  therfore  be  of  5 

good  cheere,  for  truly  I  thinke  you  are  damn’d,  there  is 
but  one  hope  in  it  that  can  doe  you  anie  good,  and  that  is 
but  a  kinde  of  baftard  hope  neither. 

IeJJica.  And  what  hope  is  that  I  pray  thee  ? 

Clow.  Marrie  you  may  partlie  hope  that  your  father  10 
got  you  not,  that  you  are  not  the  Iewes  daughter. 

IeJ.  That  were  a  kinde  of  baftard  hope  indeed,  fo  the 
fins  of  my  mother  fhould  be  vifited  vpon  me. 

Clow.  Truly  then  I  feare  you  are  damned  both  by  fa¬ 
ther  and  mother  :  thus  when  I  fhun  Scilla  your  father,  I  1 5 


Scene  VI.  Pope  +  .  Scene  V.  Cap.  et 
seq. 

1.  [A  garden.  Cap. 

Enter  Clowne...]  Enter  Launcelot 
.  Rowe. 

2,  &c.  Clo.]  Laun.  Rowe. 

3>  4-  promife  you]  promife  ye  Qt,  Cam. 


Glo.  Cla.  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

5.  be  of]  be  a  Q,Q 2.  be  o'  Cap. 

6.  there  A]  ther  is  Q,. 

8,  12.  baftard  hope]  baflard-hope  F4, 
Rowe. 

15.  I ’fhun]  you  fiurt  Rowe  +  . 

15,  16.  I fall]  you _/b//Rowe. 


4.  feare  you]  For  other  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  preposition,  see  Abbott, 
§200. 

5.  agitation]  Eccles  :  Cogitation  is  probably  the  word  about  which  Launcelot 
blunders  here. 

12.  so]  Staunton:  ‘  So  ’  means  in  that  case. 

12,  &c.]  Charles  Cowden-Clarke  (Sh.  Characters,  p.  406) :  I  have  no  desire  to 
hypercriticise,  or  to  see  more  in  our  poet  than  he  himself  intended ;  but  the  very  circum¬ 
stance  of  Jessica’s  trifling  with  the  Clown  upon  her  conversion  from  the  faith  of  her 
father^  strikingly  harmonizes  with  her  general  tone  of  character.  She  would  have 
turned  Mohammedan,  or  Buddhist,  or  Spinning  Dervish,  or  Spinning  Jenny,  or  spin¬ 
ning  anything,  and  danced  a  polka  at  her  new  faith ;  flimsy,  thoughtless,  and  unstable. 

15.  Scilla]  Malone:  Alluding  to  the  well-known  line  of  a  modern  Latin  poet, 
Philippe  Gualtier,  in  his  poem  entitled  Alexandreis :  ‘  Incidis  in  Scyllam,  cupiens  vitare 
Charybdim.’  Steevens  :  Philip  Gualtier  de  Chatillon  (afterward  bishop  of  Megala) 
was  born  toward  the  latter  end  of  the  12th  Century.  In  the  fifth  book  of  his  heroic 
Poem,  Darius  (who,  escaping  from  Alexander,  fell  into  the  hands  of  Bessus)  is  thus 
apostrophized :  *  Quo  tendis  inertem  Rex  periture  fugam  ?  nescis,  heu  !  perdite,  nescis 
Quern  fugias,  hostes  incurris  dum  fugis  hostem :  Incidis  in  Scyllam,  cupiens  vitare  Cha- 


act  iii,  sc.  v.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


183 


fall  into  Charibdis  your  mother  ;  well,  you  are  gone  both  16 
waies. 

Ief.  I  fhall  be  fau’d  by  my  husband,  he  hath  made  me 
a  Chriftian. 

Clow .  Truly  the  more  to  blame  he,  we  were  Chrifti-  20 
ans  enow  before,  e’ne  as  many  as  could  wel  hue  one  by  a- 
nother  :  this  making  of  Chriftians  will  raife  the  price  of 
Hogs,  if  wee  grow  all  to  be  porke-eaters,  wee  fhall  not 
fhortlie  haue  a  rather  on  the  coales  for  money. 

Enter  Lorenzo.  25 

Ief.  lie  tell  my  husband  Lancelet  what  you  fay,  heere 
he  comes. 

Loren.  I  fhall  grow  iealous  of  you  fhortly  Lancelet , 
if  you  thus  get  my  wife  into  corners  ? 

Ief.  Nay,  you  need  not  feare  vs  Lorenzo ,  Launcelet  30 

and  I  are  out,  he  tells  me  flatly  there  is  no  mercy  for  mee 
in  heauen,  becaufe  I  am  a  Iewes  daughter  :  and  hee  faies 
you  are  no  good  member  of  the  common  wealth,  for 
in  conuerting  Iewes  to  Chriftians,  you  raife  the  price 
of  Porke.  35 

Loren.  I  fhall  anfwere  that  better  to  the  Common- 

21.  enow']  enough  Rowe.  28.  iealous]  iealious  Q2. 

e'ne  ar]  in  as  Q2.  36-38.  An  overlooked  fragment  of  the 

26.  Lancelet]  Launcelet  Q2Q3.  Old  Play  which  Sh.  rewrote.  Ed.  conj. 

27.  comes.]  come?  Q2. 


rybdim.’  The  author  of  the  line  in  question  (who  was  unknown  to  Erasmus)  was  first 
ascertained  by  Galeottus  Martius,  who  died  in  1476,  and  we  learn  from  Henricus  Gan- 
davensis  de  Scriptoribus  Ecclesiasticis  (i.  e.  Henry  of  Gaunt)  that  the  Alexandreis  had 
been  a  common  school-book.  Halliwell  gives  many  examples  of  the  proverbial  use 
of  this  allusion,  which  Vergil  has  made  familiar  to  every  school-boy,  and  adds :  ‘There 
is  an  old  Somersetshire  proverb  of  a  similar  effect :  “  He  got  out  of  the  muxy,  and  fell 
into  the  pucksy.”  ’ 

18.  husband]  Henley:  From  St.  Paul,  1  Corinthians,  vii,  14:  ‘The  unbelieving 
wife  is  sanctified  by  the  husband.’ 

21.  enow]  Clarendon:  ‘Enow’  seems  to  be  generally  used  of  numbers,  enough 
of  quantity.  The  same  distinction  holds  in  some  provincial  dialects  where  both  forms 
are  still  current. 

24.  coales]  Halliwell:  A  ‘rasher  on  the  coals’  was  a  favourite  article  of  food 
in  Shakespeare’s  time,  and  is  mentioned  with  the  red-hemng  as  a  capital  incentive  foi 
the  lover  of  wine  in  Nash’s  Pierce  Penilesse,  1592.  ‘The  mystical  hieroglyphick  cf 
rashers  o’  th’  coals.’ — Decker’s  Gulps  Hornbook,  1609. 

36-41.  See  Appendix,  p.  321. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  v. 


184 

wealth,  than  you  can  the  getting  vp  of  the  Negroes  bel-  37 
lie  :  the  Moore  is  with  childe  by  you  Launcelet ? 

Clow.  It  is  much  that  the  Moore  fhould  be  more  then 
reafon  :  but  if  Ihe  be  leffe  then  an  honeft  woman,  fhee  is  40 
indeed  more  then  I  tooke  her  for. 

Loren.  How  euerie  foole  can  play  vpon  the  word,  I 
thinke  the  beft  grace  of  witte  will  fhortly  turne  into  fi- 
lence,  and  difcourfe  grow  commendable  in  none  onely 
but  Parrats  :  goe  in  firra,  bid  them  prepare  for  dinner  ?  45 

Clow.  That  is  done  fir,  they  haue  all  ftomacks  ? 

Loren.  Goodly  Lord,  what  a  witte-fnapper  are  you, 
then  bid  them  prepare  dinner. 

Clow.  That  is  done  to  fir,  onely  couer  is  the  word.  49 


38.  Moore  w]  Moore’s  Qt. 

42.  the  word ]  a  word  Han. 

44.  onely ]  Om.  Rowe  ii+. 

47.  Goodly-]  Good  Pope  + ,  Coll.  iii. 


Good  my  Anon.  (ap.  Hal.). 

48.  then]  than  Q2. 

49.  That  A]  That's  Q,. 

to  fir]  too  fir  F2  et  seq. 


39.  more]  Steevens:  So  in  The  Fair  Maid  of  the  West,  1631 :  ‘And  for  you 
Moors  thus  much  I  mean  to  say,  I’ll  see  if  more  I  eat  the  more  I  may.’ 

40.  lesse]  Capell  (ii,  68) :  A  change  of  ‘  less  ’  into  more  makes  the  jingle  fuller. 
Halliwell  :  The  original  better  expresses  the  speaker’s  amusing  way  of  blundering. 
Staunton  :  The  quibble  here  on  ‘  more  ’  and  ‘  less,’  petty  as  it  is,  has  been  repeated  in 
Tit.  And. :  ‘  Nurse.  O,  tell  me,  did  you  see  Aaron  the  Moor?  Aaron.  Well,  more  or 
less,  or  ne’er  a  whit  at  all,  Here  Aaron  is,’  &c. 

45.  Elze  ( Essays ,  p.  no):  This  conversation  is  unquestionably  the  prelude  to 
the  penalty  imposed  on  Shylock  in  the  Trial  scene ;  it  gives,  as  it  were,  the  chord 
and  key-note  to  it.  Herein  lies  its  importance,  otherwise  it  would  be  an  idle  excres¬ 
cence.  But  what  is  the  key-note  ?  When  we  remember  Launcelot’s  ridiculous  allu¬ 
sions  to  cheiromancy  and  to  dreams,  it  might  not,  perhaps,  be  easy  to  discern  here  in 
his  talk  with  Jessica  anything  deeper  than  witty  derision  of  Theology  and  the  conver¬ 
sion  of  Jews.  As  far  as  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  is  concerned,  it  is  not  impossible 
that  some  contemporary  incident  may  have  given  point  to  Shakespeare’s  wit  and  fun. 
Be  this,  however,  as  it  may,  the  serious  correlative  to  this  humorous  treatment  of  the 
subject  can  scarcely  be  other  than  that  here,  under  the  jingling  of  the  Clown’s  bells, 
Shakespeare  expresses  his  own  personal  disapproval  of  the  religious  conversion  imposed 
on  Shylock.  And,  moreover,  no  baptism  will  help  the  Jew  in  the  least;  spite  of  his 
assumed  Christianity,  he  is,  and  will  remain,  damned.  To  Shakespeare  the  main 
spring  of  religion  is  the  practice  of  duty  and  morality,  not  dogmas.  Hence,  he  could 
not  possibly  have  approved  of  Shylock’s  treatment,  either  by  the  State  or  by  society. 

47.  Goodly]  Tyrwhitt:  Surely  this  should  be  corrected,  as  it  is  by  Pope.  Far¬ 
mer:  It  should  be:  Good  ye  Lord !  Halliwell:  There  does  not  appear  to  be  any 
clear  necessity  for  alteration.  Allen:  I  have  heard  in  New  England:  ‘O, goody 
Lord  !’  and  ‘  O,  goody  P  (Lord  or  God  euphemistically  suppressed.)  Farmer  may, 
therefore,  be  nearly  right — i.  e.  Goody  Lord  may  be  right. 


act  in,  sc.  v.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  185 

Loren.  Will  you  couer  than  fir  ?  50 

Clozv.  Not  fo  fir  neither,  I  know  my  dutie. 

Loren.  Yet  more  quarreling  with  occafion,  wilt  thou 
fhew  the  whole  wealth  of  thy  wit  in  an  inftant  ;  I  pray 
thee  vnderftand  a  plaine  man  in  his  plaine  meaning  :  goe 
to  thy  fellowes,  bid  them  couer  the  table,  ferue  in  the  55 
meat,  and  we  will  come  in  to  dinner. 

Clow.  For  the  table  fir  ,  it  fhall  be  feru’d  in  ,  for  the 
meat  fir  ,  it  fhall  bee  couered  ,  for  your  comming  in  to 
dinner  fir,  why  let  it  be  as  humors  and  conceits  fhall  go- 
uerne.  Exit  Clowne .  60 

Lor.  O  deare  difcretion,  how  his  words  are  futed, 

The  foole  hath  planted  in  his  memory  62 

50.  than']  then  F4.  61.  futed]  suited  Rowe. 

53.  infant ;]  infant?  Qx. 


50.  couer]  See  II,  ix,  46. 

52.  occasion]  Eccles  :  That  is,  opportunity  afforded  by  another  speaker  to  play 
upon  his  words.  Clarendon  :  Quibbling  on  every  opportunity,  taking  every  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  make  perverse  replies.  Schmidt:  At  odds  with  the  matter  in  question, 
turning  it  into  ridicule  without  reason. 

61.  deare  discretion]  Eccles:  That  faculty  of  the  mind  most  opposite  to,  and 
inconsistent  with,  this  disposition  to  quibble,  for  which  Launcelot  was  so  remarkable. 
Clarendon  :  Faculty  of  discrimination,  which  Launcelot’s  misapplied  words  shewed 
him  to  lack.  See  Ham.  II,  ii,  490 :  *  Well  spoken,  with  good  accent  and  good  discre¬ 
tion.’  Schmidt:  Good  sense,  common  sense,  reason,  wisdom. 

61.  suted]  Johnson:  I  believe  the  meaning  is,  What  a  series  or  suite  of  words  he 
has  independent  of  meaning ;  how  one  word  draws  on  another  without  relation  to  the 
matter.  Monck  Mason  :  Lorenzo  expresses  surprise  that  a  fool  should  apply  his 
words  so  properly.  Eccles  :  I  doubt  whether  Lorenzo  does  not  mean  how  badly , 
rather  than  how  well,  ‘  his  words  are  suited,’  that  is,  in  how  unnatural  a  manner  those 
‘good  words’  were  connected  with  matter  of  so  frivolous  a  character.  Capkll:  To 
Lorenzo’s  reflections  the  reader  is  wish’d  to  pay  some  attention :  after  which,  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  he  may  be  of  opinion  that  the  poet’s  *  play  upon  words,’  which  he  may  have  often 
arraign’d  him  for,  is  less  a  matter  of  choice  in  him  than  of  indulgence  to  what  appears 
from  these  very  passages  to  have  been  the  taste  of  his  times.  Halliwell  :  This  is 
spoken  ironically,  Launcelot’s  words  being  anything  rather  than  ‘  suited,’  or  agreeing 
with  the  context ;  or,  perhaps,  *  suited  ’  may  here  mean  simply  arranged ;  or,  how  they 
are  matched  to  suit  a  perverted  meaning.  Allen  :  Lorenzo  pities  *  discretion  ’  (sound, 
sober  sense,  and  fair  meaning)  for  the  way  in  which  it  is  *  defied  ’  [or  defeated  =  dis¬ 
featured]  by  the  ‘  tricksy  words  ’  [fantastically  suited ,  or  dressed  up]  by  the  fool. 
‘  Suited  ’  is  equivalent  to  either :  First,  dressed-up  (as  an  operation  performed  upon  the 

’  words  themselves),  tricked-out ;  or,  secondly,  matched  (here  ill-matched)  with  the 
matter. 

62.  Allen  suggests  the  excellent  punctuation:  ‘The  fool  hath  planted  in  his  mem- 


i86 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  v. 


An  Armie  of  good  words,  and  I  doe  know  63 

A  many  fooles  that  ftand  in  better  place, 

Garnifht  like  him,  that  for  a  trickfie  word  65 

Defie  the  mattenhow  cheer’ ft  thou  IeJJica , 

And  now  good  fweet  fay  thy  opinion, 

How  doft  thou  like  the  Lord  BaJJiand1  s  wife? 

IeJJi.  Paft  all  expreffing,  it  is  very  meete 
The  Lord  Baffanio  liue  an  vpright  life  70 

For  hauing  fuch  a  bleffing  in  his  Lady, 

He  findes  the  ioyes  of  heauen  heere  on  earth, 

And  if  on  earth  he  doe  not  meane  it,  it  73 


65.  Garnifht~\  Garnijh'd  Qx. 

66.  Defie ]  Defeat  Allen  conj. 
cheedfT\  cherfi  Q2.  fad Jl  Q. 

Pope  + . 

Ieflica,]  Ieffica?  Qx. 

68.  Baffiano’j]  F2. 

70.  Baffanio]  Baflianio  F2. 


73,  74.  meane  it,  it  />]  F2.  mean  it, 
it  Is  F3F4,  Rowe,  Cap.  Steev.  Rann,  Mai. 
Knt,  Wh.  meane  it,  it  in  Qa.  meane,  In 
Q  .  merit  it,  In  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds.  Coll.  iii.  earn  it,  it  Is  Bailey. 
meane  it,  then  In  Q  et  cet. 


ory,  An  army,’  &c.,  and  calls  attention  to  a  corresponding  punctuation  which  he  pro¬ 
poses  in  IV,  i,  383 :  ‘Thou  hast  not,  left,  the  value  of  a  cord.’ — Ed. 

64.  A  many]  Abbott,  §  87  :  A  was  frequently  inserted  before  a  numeral  adjective 
for  the  purpose  of  indicating  that  the  objects  enumerated  are  regarded  collectively  as 
one.  We  still  say  ‘a  score,’  ‘a  fo(u)rt(een)-night.’  The  a  in  ‘a  many  men,’  ‘ a  few 
men,’  is,  perhaps,  thus  to  be  explained.  Compare  ‘This  nineteen  years? — Meas.for 
Meas.  I,  iii,  21,  with  ‘  This  many  summers ,’ — Hen.  VIII ;  III,  ii,  360. 

66.  cheer’st]  According  to  Schmidt’s  Lex.  this  is  the  only  instance  in  Shakespeart 
of  cheer  used  intransitively,  and,  although  this  of  itself  would  not  be  any  reason  for  dis¬ 
carding  it,  yet  when  we  have  a  word  in  Qx  against  which  not  only  no  possible  objec¬ 
tion  can  be  made,  but  which  is  also  a  usual,  familiar  mode  of  address,  I  think  we  may 
be  allowed  to  regard  cherfi  with  suspicion,  especially  when  the  ductus  literarum,  far' ft 
and  cherfi,  suggests  a  probable  misreading. — Ed. 

73.  meane  it]  Halliwell:  This  may  be,  possibly,  an  error  for  ‘ find  it,’  or  some 
word  of  like  import.  Staunton  :  Both  the  Quarto  and  Folio  are  equally  unintelligi¬ 
ble.  What  can  be  made  of  ‘mean  it’  ?  Mean  what?  The  commentators  afford  us 
no  assistance  here,  although  the  sense  is  more  ambiguous  than  in  many  passages  on 
which  they  have  expended  whole  pages  of  comment.  The  allusion  applies  to  the 
belief  that  suffering  in  this  life  is  a  necessary  preparation  for  happiness  hereafter. 
Haply  we  should  read,  ‘  he  do  not  moan,  it  is  In  reason,’  &c.  The  meaning  of  Jessica 
appears  to  be  this  :  It  is  meet  Bassanio  live  virtuously ;  for,  possessing,  with  such  a  wife, 
the  joys  of  Paradise,  he  could  not  plead  suffering  here  as  an  atonement  for  his  errors, 
and,  in  reason,  therefore,  would  be  excluded  from  heaven.  Walker  whose  library 
was  small,  did  not  know,  when  he  conjectured  (Grit,  iii,  no),  *  merit  it,  ’  Tis,’  that  he 
had  been  anticipated  by  Pope  as  far  as  merit  is  concerned.  ‘Merit?  says  Walker,  ‘  in 
the  sense  of  mereri.  The  word  was,  perhaps,  written  merite,  which  comes  nearer  to 
“meane  ”  in  appearance.  At  any  rate,  the  text,  as  it  stands,  is  wrong.’  In  a  foot-rote, 


act  hi,  sc.  v.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


187 

Is  reafon  he  fhould  neuer  come  to  heauen  ? 

Why,  if  two  gods  fhould  play  fome  heauenly  match,  75 


Lettsom,  Walker’s  admirable  editor,  remarks,  after  giving  the  various  readings  of  the 
Qq  and  Ff,  and  after  stating  that  Pope  had  anticipated  Walker,  ‘  I  should  say  that 
Heyes’s  quarto  [QJ  gives  the  unsophisticated  nonsense  of  the  MS  from  which  it  was 
printed ;  Roberts’s  [Qt]  boldly  altered  the  second  it  to  then,  to  gain  an  empty  shadow 
of  sense ;  while  Ft  played  the  same  game  with  the  text  of  Heyes’s  quarto  by  substi¬ 
tuting  is  for  in  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  line.  An  early  transcriber  seems  to 
have  corrupted  merit  into  “  mean  it this  vitiated  all  succeeding  copies.  The  neo¬ 
phyte  Jessica  had  evidently  been  reading  the  parable  of  Lazarus  and  Dives.  She 
preaches  up  a  righteous  life,  with  her  father’s  ducats  in  her  pocket.’  Grant  White: 
Heyes’s  quarto  differs  from  Roberts’s  by  having  it  instead  of  then  ;  a  partial  correction 
which  makes  nonsense,  until  it  is  completed  in  the  Folio  by  changing  'In  ’  to  ‘  Is.’ 
Keightley  :  Here  *  it  ’  seems  to  mean  ‘  to  live  an  upright  life ;’  rather  a  harsh  con¬ 
struction.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  poet  used  ‘  mean  ’  in  the  sense  of  mener ,  Fr.,  yet  it 
seems  to  be  used  so  sometimes  in  Piers  Ploughman.  Clarendon  :  The  reading  of  F, 
is  evidently  a  conjectural  emendation.  There  is  some  corruption  in  this  passage  for 
which  no  satisfactory  emendation  has  been  proposed.  That  of  Pope  is,  perhaps,  the 
most  plausible.  Earn  it,  then,  or  merit  them,  might  be  suggested.  But  we  rather 
require  a  word  with  the  sense  of  appreciate.  Hudson  [reading  merit  it]  :  ‘It’  refers 
to  blessing,  in  the  second  line  above.  Rolfe  :  ‘  Mean  it,’  i.  e.  intend  to  live  an  upright 
life.  [I  have  reserved  Capell  to  the  last,  because  he  gives,  what  is  to  me,  emphati¬ 
cally  the  true  interpretation.  It  was  first  set  forth  in  his  Glossary ,  as  follows  :  ‘  to  mean 
it,  observe  the  Mean,  enjoy  Blessings  moderately,’  and  was  afterward  thus  alluded  to  in 
his  Notes,  p.  68 :  ‘  As  unfit  a  choice  as  the  last  [that  is,  Pope’s  change  of  “  accoutered,” 
in  the  preceding  Scene,  to  apparelled]  is  made  by  the  same  gentlemen  in  this  [present 
passage] ;  but  their  operations  on  this  line  set  them  high  in  the  rank  of  critics ;  for, 
instead  of  weighing  the  speaker’s  reasoning,  and  collecting  (as  had  been  easily  done 
from  that  reasoning)  the  undoubted  and  proper  sense  of  her  “  mean  it,”  change  is  pro¬ 
ceeded  to ;  and  their  phrase  of  alteration  is — merit  it,  In  beginning  their  next  line : 
How  consequential  this  is  to  what  has  preceded,  will  not  escape  the  considerer;  but 
the  present  and  true  reading,  he  will  find  so  abundantly ;  and  though  he  may  see  some 
extravagance  in  the  s»ntiment  that  is  convey’d  by  that  reading,  he  will  not  be  apt  to 
condemn  it,  taking  with  it  the  occasion  and  speaker,  and  it’s  affinity  in  extravagance  to 
the  thought  that  comes  fi-om  her  next.’  The  same  interpretation  occurred  to  Prof.  Cor¬ 
son,  who  says,  in  a  privately-printed  Note,  that  ‘  “  mean  ”  is  the  noun  in  the  sense  of 
middle  between  two  extremes,  as  in  “  golden  mean  ”  (as  a  noun  it  occurs  in  I,  ii,  8 : 
“to  be  seated  in  the  meane”),  and  in  the  passage  before  us  is  used  as  a  verb,  and 
the  pronoun  “it”  is  used  indefinitely,  as  was  very  commonly  done  after  intransitive 

verbs,  and  especially  after  nouns  used  as  verbs . This  passage  therefore  means  that 

“if  on  earth  he  do  not  observe  a  mean  in  his  pleasures,  it  is  reason,”  &c.’  If  this  be 
the  true  interpretation  of  ‘  meane,’  and  I  think  it  is,  it  may  be  noted  to  its  credit  that 
Qt  affords  us  an  irreproachable  text :  *  And  if  on  earth  he  doe  not  meane  it,  then  In 
reason  he  should  neuer  come  to  heauen.’  This  line  occasioned  a  discussion  in  Notes 
>  &=  Qu.  1877,  5th,  viii,  pp.  5,  1  4,  &c.,  which,  perhaps,  let  me  add  in  all  due  humility, 
would  not  have  arisen  had  there  been  a  new  Variorum  Edition  at  that  date,  wherein 
all  the  notes  of  the  Commentators  could  have  been  found  on  the  same  page  with  the 
text  and  its  various  readings. — Ed.] 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  hi,  sc.  v. 


1 88 

And  on  the  wager  lay  two  earthly  women,  76 

And  Portia  one  :  there  muft  be  fomething  elfe 
Paund  with  the  other,  for  the  poore  rude  world 
Hath  not  her  fellow. 

Loren.  Euen  fuch  a  husband  80 

Haft  thou  of  me,  as  fhe  is  for  a  wife. 

Ief.  Nay,  but  aske  my  opinion  to  of  that  ? 

Lor.  I  will  anone,  firfl  let  vs  goe  to  dinner  ? 

Ief.  Nay,  let  me  praife  you  while  I  haue  a  ftomacke  ? 

Lor.  No  pray  thee,  let  it  ferue  for  table  talke,  8«? 

Then  how  fom  ere  thou  fpeakft  ’mong  other  things, 

I  fhall  digeft  it  ? 

Ieffi.  Well,  lie  fet  you  forth.  Exeunt. 


78.  PauncT\  Pawn'd  Qx. 

80.  81.  Euen. ..me]  One  line,  Qx. 

81.  for  a]  for  QxQa. 

82.  to  of]  too  of¥ a  et  seq. 

83.  anone]  anon  Qx. 

85.  pray  thee]  prethee  Qx. 


86.  how  fom  ere]  Fa.  how  fo  mere  Qa. 
how fo  ere  Q  .  howfom  ere  F  .  howfome're 
F  .  howfoere  Qx,  Pope  et  seq. 

’mong]  mong  Qq.  ’ mongjl  F  , 

Rowe. 

87.  digeft]  difgejl  Qq. 


78.  Paund]  Eccles  :  That  is,  staked. 

81.  of  me]  Abbott,  §172:  Of  is  used  metaphorically  with  verbs  of  construction, 
as  in  the  modern — ‘They  make  an  ass  of  me.’ — Twelfth  N.  V,  i,  19.  But  of  is  also 
thus  found  without  verbs  of  construction  [as  here,  and  in  many  other  examples]. 

87.  Note  throughout  this  Scene  the  poverty  of  the  compositor’s  *  case,’  in  the  substi¬ 
tution  of  interrogation  marks  for  periods. — Ed. 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


189 


ASius  Quartus. 


[Scene  /.] 

Enter  the  Duke ,  the  Magnificoes ,  Anthonio ,  Baffanio ,  and 
Gratiano. 


Duke.  What,  is  Anthonio  heere  ? 

Ant.  Ready,  fo  pleafe  your  grace  ? 

Duke.  I  am  forry  for  thee,  thou  art  come  to  anfwere  5 

A  ftonie  aduerfary,  an  inhumane  wretch, 


Actus  Quartus]  Om.  Qq. 

[Scene  I.  Rowe. 

[The  Senate-house  in  Venice.  Theob. 
Venice.  A  Court  of  Justice.  Cap. 

1.  Enter... Magnificoes]  Enter. ..Sena¬ 
tors  Rowe.  Enter,  in  state,  ...Magnificoes, 
Officers  of  the  Court,  &c.,  and  seat  them¬ 


selves;  then,  Enter  Antonio,  guarded. 
Cap. 

2.  Gratiano.]  Gratiano,  at  the  Bar. 
Theob.  Gratiano,  Salerino,  Solanio,  and 
others.  Cap. 

5.  /  am]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

6.  inhumane ]  inhumaine  Q2. 


In  Charles  Kean’s  revival  of  this  play  in  1858,  the  Doge  was  represented  as 
attended  by  six  Senators  in  red ;  the  authority  for  this  is  a  picture  at  Hampton  Court 
Palace,  where  the  Doge  of  Venice  in  state  is  receiving  Sir  Henry  Wootton,  ambassador 
from  James  the  First.  The  picture  is  by  Odoardo  Fialletti,  better  known  as  an 
engraver  than  as  a  painter,  who  was  living  in  Venice  at  the  time. 

Th.  Elze  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  xiv,  178) :  Although  this  Scene  is  correctly  laid  in  a  Court 
of  Justice,  it  is  incorrect  that  Senators  should  appear  as  Judges,  and  the  presence  of  the 
Doge,  as  presiding  officer  at  least,  is  an  anachronism.  If  a  civil  case,  the  proceedings 
would  have  been  before  one  of  the  Supreme  Courts,  of  which,  at  that  time,  Venice  had 
two,  each  composed  of  Forty  Judges,  hence  the  names :  Quarantia  al  civil  vecchia,  dat¬ 
ing  from  1425,  and  nuova,  dating  from  1462.  Over  neither  of  these  did  the  Doge  pre¬ 
side.  But  if  a  criminal  case,  then  it  lay  before  a  Supreme  Court,  likewise  of  Forty 
Judges,  entitled  Quarantia  al  criminal.  Over  this  latter  Court  the  Doge  did  originally 
preside,  but  from  the  time  of  the  Doge  Marco  Cornaro  (1365-67)  his  place  was  supplied 
by  three  Counsellors.  But  who  would  ever  think  of  criticising  Shakespeare,  even  if 
Shakespeare  knew  these  facts,  for  introducing  the  Doge  for  the  sake  of  mere  scenic 
effect  ? 

Hudson  (p.  77) :  The  Trial  Scene,  with  its  tugging  vicissitudes  of  passion  and  its 
hush  of  terrible  expectation, — now  ringing  with  the  Jew’s  sharp,  spiteful  snaps  of  mal¬ 
ice,  now  made  musical  with  Portia’s  strains  of  eloquence,  now  holy  with  Antonio’s  ten¬ 
der  breathings  of  friendship,  and  dashed,  from  time  to  time,  with  Gratiano’s  fierce  jets 
of  wrath  and  fiercer  jets  of  mirth, — is  hardly  surpassed  in  tragic  power  anywhere ;  and 
as  it  forms  the  catastrophe  proper,  so  it  concentrates  the  interest  of  the  whole  play. 

4.  Ready]  The  answer,  to  this  day,  when  cases  are  called  in  Court. 

6,  7.  inhumane  .  .  .  Vncapable]  Abbott,  §442:  Un-  for  modern  in- ;  in-  for 
un-.  We  appear  to  have  no  definite  rule  of  distinction  even  now,  since  we  use 


190 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  1. 


Vncapable  of  pitty,  voyd,  and  empty  7 

From  any  dram  of  mercie. 

Ant.  I  haue  heard 

Your  Grace  hath  tane  great  paines  to  qualifie  10 

His  rigorous  courfe  :  but  fince  he  ftands  obdurate, 

And  that  no  lawful  meanes  can  carrie  me 
Out  of  his  enuies  reach,  I  do  oppofe 
My  patience  to  his  fury,  and  am  arm’d 

To  fuffer  with  a  quietneffe  of  fpirit,  1  5 

The  very  tiranny  and  rage  of  his. 

Du.  Go  one  and  cal  the  lew  into  the  Court. 

Sal.  He  is  ready  at  the  doore,  he  comes  my  Lord. 

Enter  Shylocke. 

Du.  Make  roome,  and  let  him  ftand  before  our  face.  20 

Shylocke  the  world  thinkes,  and  I  thinke  fo  to 

10,  11.  Three  lines,  ending  paines...  Cam.  Ktly,  Glo.  Rife,  Cla.  Wh.  ii.  His 
courfe. ..obdurate  Qx.  Pope  et  cet. 

10.  tane~\  ta'ne  F  .  ta'en  Rowe.  21.  fo  to~\fo  to,  QXQ  .  fo  too  Fs  et  seq. 

18.  He  A]  QqFf,  Cap.  Sing.  Dyce  i, 


MMgrateful,  ingratitude ;  unequal,  inequality .  Un-  seems  to  have  been  preferred  by 
Shakespeare  before  p  and  r,  which  do  not  allow  in-  to  precede  except  in  the  form  im-. 
In-  seems  also  to  have  been  in  many  cases  retained  from  the  Latin,  as  in  the  case  of 
‘  ingratus,’  ‘  infortunium,’  See.  Rolfe  :  Shakespeare  uses  both  incapable  (six  times) 
and  tcncapable  (twice). 

8.  From]  Clarendon  :  Elsewhere  Shakespeare  always  uses  of  as  we  do,  with 
‘void’  and  ‘empty.’  Allen:  We  still  say  ‘clear  from]  ‘free  from .’ 

8.  dram]  Allen  :  Any  very  minute  quantity,  applicable  equally  to  what  is  liquid 
and  to  what  is  solid.  But  as  ‘  mercy  ’  is  spoken  of  afterward  by  Portia  as  liquid,  it  is 
probable  that  Shakespeare,  when  he  here  used  the  word  ‘  dram,’  had  in  his  mind  a 
drop. 

10.  qualifie]  Dyce  :  To  soften,  to  moderate,  to  abate,  to  weaken.  [Cf.  Cassio’s 
‘craftily  qualified’  cup, —  Oth.  II,  ii,  56.] 

11.  obdurate]  See  Abbott,  §490,  for  a  long  list  of  words  wherein  the  accent  is 
nearer  the  end  than  with  us. 

12.  And  that]  See  Abbott,  §  285,  for  other  instances  like  the  present,  where  that 
is  omitted  and  then  inserted,  e.  g.  *  Were  it  not  thy  sour  leisure  gave  sweet  leave,  And 
that  thou  teachest.’ — Son.  39. 

13.  enuies]  Steevens  :  It  here  means  hatred  or  malice.  Knight:  See  Mark, 
xv,  10,  ‘He  knew  that  the  chief  priests  had  delivered  him  for  envy.’ 

16.  tiranny]  Schmidt  (Lex.) :  Cruelty,  injurious  violence. 

19.  Enter]  Booth:  Slowly,  until  in  front  of  the  Duke,  then  bow  to  him.  Show 
great  deference  to  the  Duke  throughout  the  Scene,  Hit  to  none  else,  except,  of  course, 
to  Portia,  while  she  seems  to  favour  your  suit. 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE  191 

That  thou  but  leadeft  this  fafhion  of  thy  mallice  22 

To  the  laft  houre  of  a<5t,  and  then  Tis  thought 
Thou’lt  fhew  thy  mercy  and  remorfe  more  ftrange, 

Than  is  thy  flrange  apparant  cruelty;  25 

And  where  thou  now  exa<5Fft  the  penalty, 

Which  is  a  pound  of  this  poore  Merchants  flefh, 

Thou  wilt  not  onely  loofe  the  forfeiture, 

But  touch’d  with  humane  gentleneffe  and  loue  : 

Forgiue  a  moytie  of  the  principall,  30 

Glancing  an  eye  of  pitty  on  his  Ioffes 
That  haue  of  late  fo  hudled  on  his  backe, 

Enow  to  preffe  a  royall  Merchant  downe ; 

And  plucke  commiferation  of  his  ftate 

From  braflie  bofomes,  and  rough  hearts  of  flints,  35 


22.  mallice~\  Q2.  malice  Qx. 

24.  Thou'lt~\  thowlt  Q2.  Thouw’lt  Q3. 

25.  Jlrange  apparant ]  Jlrange  appa¬ 
rent  F  .  strange-apparent  Walker,  Dyce 
ii. 

26.  Om.  Rowe. 
exadTJf\  exadls  Qq. 

28.  loofe~\  lofe  F4,  Rowe+,  Ec.  Var. 


Knt,  Coll,  i,  ii,  Hal.  Sta. 

29.  humane ]  humaine  Q2.  human 
Rowe. 

30.  moytie\  moiety  F3F4. 

33.  Enow~\  QqFf,  Coll.  Dyce,  Hal. Wh. 
Rife,  Clarke.  Enough  Rowe  et  cet. 

34.  his  Jlate~\  this  Jlates  Q2. 

35.  flint s~\  Qa.  flint  Qx  et  cet. 


24.  remorse]  Pity.  See  Oth.  Ill,  iii,  426  and  532. 

25.  apparant]  Johnson  :  That  is,  seeming ;  not  real. 

26.  where]  Johnson  :  For  whereas.  For  other  instances,  see  Abbott,  §  134. 

28.  loose]  Collier  :  Perhaps  we  ought  to  take  this  in  the  sense  of  release.  Bar¬ 
ron  Field  (Sk.  Soc.  Papers,  iii,  133) :  Certainly,  ‘ Loose ’  is  right.  It  is  a  bond;  and 
to  loose  is  the  correlative  of  to  bind.  See  Matt,  xvi,  19.  But  lose  and  loose  are  the  same 
word,  and  both  are  generally  in  the  old  Editions  loose.  See,  in  this  play,  I,  i,  84.  Hal- 
liwell :  The  spelling  is  of  no  importance.  To  ‘loose,’  to  release,  makes  good  sense; 
but  lose,  that  is,  give  up  in  your  own  loss,  lose  it  by  your  own  will,  seems  the  more 
likely  reading.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  55) :  Shakespeare  would  have  written  ‘  consent  to 
lose,’  or  the  like.  Write  loose,  i.  e.  release,  remit.  The  *  loose  ’  of  Fi  may  be  either 
the  one  or  the  other.  Jonson,  Epigram  lviii,  ‘  And  so  my  sharpness  thou  no  less  dis¬ 
joints,  Than  thou  didst  late  my  sense,  losing  my  points.’  Read  loosing ;  a  play  upon 
words.  [Hereupon  Lettsom,  in  a  foot-note  :  ‘  It  would  seem  from  this  that  the  words 
were  not  merely  spelt,  but  pronounced,  alike.’]  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  That  is,  remit,  release. 

30.  moytie]  Used  by  Shakespeare  to  express  any  portion.  In  1  Hen.  IV:  III,  1, 
96,  it  means  a  third;  and  it  may  also  mean  a  third  in  Lear,  I,  i,  6.  One  of  the  many 
advantages  of  having  the  original  text  before  us  is  that,  as  here,  the  spelling  guides  us 
to  the  scansion.  We  see  at  once  that  moiety  is  a  dissyllable. — Ed. 

33.  Enow]  See  ‘  Christians  enow  before  ’  in  the  preceding  Scene. 

33.  royall  Merchant]  See  III,  ii,  252. 

35.  flints]  See  ‘multitudes,’  II,  ix,  35. 


192 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


From  ftubborne  Turkes  and  Tarters  neuer  traind  36 

To  offices  of  tender  curtefie, 

We  all  expert  a  gentle  anfwer  lew  ? 

lew.  I  haue  poffeft  your  grace  of  what  I  purpofe, 

And  by  our  holy  Sabbath  haue  I  fworne  40 

To  haue  the  due  and  forfeit  of  my  bond. 

If  you  denie  it,  let  the  danger  light  42 

36.  Tarters]  Tartars  Q,Q3F4  et  seq.  40.  Sabbath]  Sabaoth  Qa,  Cap.  Sal- 

39.  lew.]  Shy.  Rowe.  baoth  Q?. 


38.  gentle]  Clarendon  :  A  pun  on  Gentile  is  doubtless  here  intended.  [To  me, 
this  is  doubtful.  I  do  not  forget  how  dearly  Shakespeare  loved  a  pun,  and  how,  at 
times,  its  attractions  are  irresistible  to  him,  or  that,  in  this  very  Scene,  Anthonio  puns 
in  his  dying  farewell  to  Bassanio.  Dr  Johnson  says  that  a  quibble  had  ‘  a  malignant 
power  over  Shakespeare’s  mind,’  and  that  it  was  to  him  ‘  the  fatal  Cleopatra  for  which 
he  lost  the  world,  and  was  content  to  lose  it;’  so  that  I  do  not  object  to  a  pun  here  as 
beneath  the  dignity  of  the  Doge  or  of  the  occasion,  but  because  it  seems  to  mar  the 
gracious  urbanity,  and,  more  than  all,  the  exquisite  tact  of  this  speech,  and  defeat  its 
very  purpose.  The  present  is  not  the  first  occasion  when  the  Doge  has  talked  with 
Shy  lock  about  the  bond,  and  ta’en  great  pains  to  qualify  his  rigorous  course;  and  he 
therefore  must  have  known  Shylock’s  temper  and  temperament  well  enough  by  this 
time  to  be  convinced  that  any  disparaging  allusion  to  the  Hebrew  faith  (which,  as  a  pun, 
this  would  be)  would  instantly  evoke  a  bitter  spirit  of  implacable  antagonism. — Ed.] 

39.  possest]  See  ante ,  I,  iii,  65.  Booth  :  These  first  eight  lines  should  be  spoken 
firmly,  but  with  great  respect  in  tone  and  manner.  At  the  allusion  to  his  oath  by  his 
‘  holy  Sabbath,’  the  right  hand  should  be  raised  with  palm  upward,  and  with  an  incli¬ 
nation  of  the  head. 

40.  Sabbath]  White:  Sabaoth  of  Qa  has  no  such  peculiar  fitness  that  the  word 
of  the  authentic  Edition  should  be  set  aside  for  it ;  for  sabaoth  is  merely  the  Hebrew 
for  hosts  or  armies.  But  it  is  possible  that  Shakespeare  might  have  been  misled  by 
the  expression,  ‘  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth,’  which  occurs  in  the  New  Testament,  into  the 
supposition  that  ‘  sabaoth  ’  signified  something  peculiarly  high  and  holy  to  the  Jews. 
Clarendon  :  The  same  mistake  occurs  in  Bacon’s  Advancement  of  Learning,  Bk.  ii, 
24 :  *  Sacred  &  inspired  Diuinitie,  the  Sabaoth  and  port  of  all  men’s  labours  and  pere¬ 
grinations.’  Spenser  also  confounds  the  signification  of  the  two  words  :  *  But  thence¬ 
forth  all  shall  rest  eternally  With  him  that  is  the  God  of  Sabbaoth  hight :  [O  Thou  great 
Sabbaoth  God,  graunt  me  that  Sabaoth’s  sight.]’ — Faerie  Queene  [Bk.  vii,  c.  8,  vnper - 
fite.  It  is  not  perfectly  clear  to  me  that  Spenser  has  here  confounded  the  two  words. 
Clarendon  does  not  cite  the  line  in  brackets.  But  it  is  a  matter  of  small  moment ;  the 
canto  is  very  ‘  vnperfite,’  and  consists  of  only  eighteen  lines. — Ed.]  Dr  Johnson,  in  the 
First  Edition  of  his  Dictionary,  treated  Sabbath  and  Sabaoth  as  identical  words ;  and 
Sir  Walter  Scott  has,  Ivanhoe,  ch.  x:  ‘The  gains  of  a  week,  ay,  the  space  between 
two  Sabaoths.’  But  the  error  has  been  corrected  in  later  editions. 

41.  due  and  forfeit]  Allen:  Hendiadys;  the  forfeit  which  is  due. 

42.  43.  Gould  ( The  Tragedian,  p.  79) :  These  two  lines  were  given  [by  the  elder 
Booth]  with  an  outreaching  and  arching  motion  of  the  arm  and  hand,  palm  downward, 
like  the  stoop  of  a  bird  of  prey. 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  193 

Vpon  your  Charter,  and  your  Cities  freedome.  43 

You’l  aske  me  why  I  rather  choofe  to  haue 
A  weight  of  carrion  flefh,  then  to  receiue  45 

Three  thoufand  Ducats  ?  lie  not  anfwer  that : 

But  fay  it  is  my  humor ;  Is  it  anfwercd  ? 

What  if  my  houfe  be  troubled  with  a  Rat, 

And  I  be  pleas’d  to  giue  ten  thoufand  Ducates  49 


44.  You’l]  Youle  Q2.  Qj.  Ducats  : ...that  ?  Qa. 

45.  then]  than  F4.  47.  Bid  fay  it  tr]  But,  say,  it  is  Cap. 

46.  Ducats  ? ...  that :]  Ducats  ?  ...that,  anfwercd]  F  . 


43.  Charter,  and  your  Cities  freedome]  White:  Here  Shakespeare  puts  a 
threat  into  Shylock’s  mouth  which  would  have  little  terror  for  the  Doge  of  Venice. 
But,  according  to  his  habit,  he  availed  himself  of  associations  which  were  familiar  and 
significant  to  his  audience. 

46,  47.  lie  .  .  .  humor]  Warburton  :  This  Jew  is  the  strangest  Fellow.  He  is 
asked  a  question ;  says  he  will  not  answer  it ;  in  the  very  next  line  says  he  has  answered 
it,  and  then  spends  the  nineteen  following  lines  to  justify  and  explain  his  answer.  Who 
can  doubt,  then,  but  we  should  read :  *  I’ll  now  answer  that,  By  saying  ’tis,’  &c.  ? 
Heath  :  The  common  reading  means  :  ‘  I  will  not  give  a  direct  answer  to  the  question 
you  ask,  nor  give  you  a  particular  account  of  the  motives  of  my  present  proceeding;  But 
suppose  it  is  my  particular  fancy  to  act  thus ;  Will  you  accept  that  for  an  answer?’  He 
must  be  almost  as  strange  a  man  as  Mr  Warburton  represents  the  Jew,  who  thinks  a 
serious  expostulation  of  a  supreme  magistrate,  on  a  most  extraordinary  proceeding,  in 
any  measure  answered  by  the  person  addressed  telling  him,  ’Tis  my  humour,  or  partic¬ 
ular  fancy,  to  act  thus.  Every  man  of  common  sense  immediately  sees  that  refusing 
to  give  any  answer,  and  the  giving  such  an  answer  as  this,  amount  to  the  same  thing. 
Nor  doth  the  Jew  throughout  the  nineteen  lines  which  follow,  assign  any  other  reason 
for  a  conduct  so  shocking  than  a  settled  hatred  of,  and  antipathy  to,  Anthonio,  which 
is  just  the  same  with  what  he  here  calls  his  ‘  humour,’  and,  therefore,  he  may  be  justly 
said  to  persist  in  his  declared  resolution  not  to  answer  the  Duke’s  question.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  Bassanio  immediately  replies,  ‘  That  is  no  answer.’  Johnson  :  The  Jew  being 
asked  a  question  which  the  law  does  not  require  him  to  answer,  stands  upon  his  right, 
and  refuses ;  but  afterwards  gratifies  his  own  malignity  by  such  answers  as  he  knows 
will  aggravate  the  pain  of  the  enquirer.  I  will  not  answer,  says  he,  as  to  a  legal  or 
/erious  question,  but  since  you  want  an  answer,  will  this  serve  you  ?  Sir  Walter 
Scott  (ap.  Singer) :  The  worthy  Corporal  Nym  hath  this  apology  usually  at  his  fin¬ 
gers’  ends,  and  Shylock  condescends  to  use  his  extravagant  cruelty  as  a  humour,  or 
irresistible  propensity  of  the  mind.  The  word  ‘  humour  ’  is  not  used  in  its  modern  sig¬ 
nification,  but  for  a  peculiar  quality  which  sways  and  masters  the  individual  through 
all  his  actions.  In  Rowland’s  Epigrams,  No.  27  amply  illustrates  this  phrase :  *  Aske 
Humors  why  a  fether  he  doth  weare  ?  It  is  his  humoui  (by  the  Lord)  heele  sweare,’ 
&c.  Halliwell  :  *  Humour  ’  is  probably  here  employed  in  the  sense  attached  to  the 
word  as  commonly  used  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  an  indescribable  exaggeration  of  its 
meaning  as  applied  to  whim,  caprice,  or  any  propensity.  Any  peculiar  quality  or  turn 
of  mind  was  a  *  humour.’ 

13 


194 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


To  hane  it  bain’d  ?  What,  are  you  anfvver’d  yet  ? 
Some  men  there  are  loue  not  a  gaping  Pigge : 
Some  that  are  mad,  if  they  behold  a  Cat : 

And  others,  when  the  bag-pipe  fings  i’th  nofe, 


50 


53 


50.  bain'd"]  baind  Qq.  brain'd  Rowe. 
bane'd  Pope. 


51-  Pigge]  Pk  Q,- 
53.  VtK\  ith  Q2Q3. 


51.  loue]  For  many  other  examples  of  the  omission  of  the  relative,  see  Abbott, 
§  244- 

51.  gaping  Pigge]  Steevens  :  So  in  Webster’s  Dutchess  of  Malfi  [III,  ii,  p.  240, 
ed.  Dyce]  :  *  He  could  not  abide  to  see  a  pig’s  head  gaping ;  I  thought  your  grace 
would  find  him  a  Jew.’  See  Hen.  VIII :  V,  iv,  3  [where  Steevens  interprets  ‘gaping’ 
as  shouting  or  roaring,  and  adds  that  ‘  perhaps  the  “  gaping  pig  ”  mentioned  by  Shy  lock 
has  been  misinterpreted’].  Malone:  By  ‘gaping  pig,’  Shakespeare,  I  believe,  meant 
a  pig  prepared  for  the  table.  So  in  Fletcher’s  Elder  Brother  [II,  ii]  :  ‘  Ask  ’em  any¬ 
thing  Out  of  the  element  of  their  understanding,  And  they  stand  gaping  like  a  roasted 
pig.’  Again,  in  Nashe’s  Pierce  Penilesse  [p.  55,  ed.  Grosart]  (a  passage  which  per¬ 
haps  furnished  our  author  with  his  instance) :  ‘  The  causes  conducting  vnto  wrath  are 
as  diuers  as  the  actions  of  a  man’s  life.  Some  will  take  on  like  a  mad  man,  if  they 
see  a  pigge  come  to  the  table.’  Knight  :  We  are  inclined  to  think  that  Shylock 
alludes  to  the  squeaking  of  the  living  animal.  He  is  particularizing  the  objects  of 
offence  to  other  men ;  and  he  would  scarcely  repeat  his  own  dislike  to  pork,  so  strongly 
expressed  in  the  First  Act.  [Knight  cites  a  passage  from  Donne’s  Devotions,  *  in  which 
the  doctrine  of  antipathies  is  put  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner.’]  Halliwell  quotes 
‘  a  curious  enumeration  of  antipathies  given  in  the  Newe  Metamorphosis,  a  poem  written 
early  in  the  Seventeenth  Century.’  Grant  White  :  Shakespeare  may  have  meant 
either  the  roasted  or  the  living,  squealing  pig ;  and  let  not  the  doubt  which,  disturb  our 
souls. 

53.  bag-pipe]  Warburton  :  This  incident  Shakespeare  seems  to  have  taken  from 
J.  C.  Scaliger’s  Exot.  Exercit.  against  Cardan, — a  book  that  our  author  was  well  read 
in,  and  much  indebted  to  for  a  great  deal  of  his  physics,  it  being  then  much  in  vogue. 
In  his  344  Exercit.,  Sect.  6,  he  has  these  words :  ‘Narrabo  nunc  tibi  jocosam  Sympa- 
thiam  Reguli  Vasconis  Equitis.  Is  dum  viveret,  audito  phormingis  sono,  urinam  illico 
facere  cogebatur.’  And  to  make  this  jocular  story  still  more  ridiculous,  Shakespeare,  I 
suppose,  translated  ‘  phorminx  ’  by  ‘  bag-pipe.’  But  what  I  would  chiefly  observe  from 
hence  is  this,  that  as  Scaliger  uses  the  word  ‘  sympathiam,’  which  signifies,  and  so  he 
interprets  it,  ‘communem  affectionem  duabus  rebus,’  so  Shakespeare  translates  it  by 
‘  affection ;’  which  shows  the  propriety  of  the  full  stop  after  that  word  in  the  next  line. 
Farmer  :  In  an  old  translation  from  the  French  of  Peter  de  Loier,  entitled,  A  Treatise 
of  Spectres,  or  Strange  Sights,  Visions,  &c.,  we  have  this  identical  story  from  Scaliger; 
and,  what  is  still  more,  a  marginal  note  gives  us,  in  all  probability,  the  very  fact  alluded 
to,  as  well  as  the  word  of  Shakespeare :  ‘  Another  gentleman  of  this  quality  lived  of  late 
tn  Devon,  neere  Excester,  who  could  not  endure  the  playing  on  a  bagpipe.'  We  may 
justly  add  that  ‘  affection,’  in  the  sense  of  sympathy,  was  formerly  technical,  and  so 
used  by  Lord  Bacon,  Sir  K.  Digby,  and  many  other  writers.  Malone  :  The  story'  of 
the  Devonshire  gentleman,  I  believe,  first  appeared  in  the  margin  of  De  Loier’s  book 
in  1605,  some  years  after  this  play  was  printed;  but  it  might  have  been  current  in  con¬ 
versation  before,  or  it  may  have  found  its  way  into  some  other  book  of  that  age. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  1.J  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


*95 


Cannot  containe  their  Vrine  for  affe6lion. 
Mailers  of  paffion  fwayes  it  to  the  moode 


54,  55.  Vrine... of ]  QqFf  (. Maijlers 
Q2FJ,  Warb.  Mai.  Var.  Coll,  i,  Wh.  i. 
urine  for  affection.  Masterless  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  urine,  for  affection  ; 
AI aster  of  Johns,  urine  ;  for  affection. 
Mistress  of  Thirlby,  Cap.  Steev.  ’93,  Var. 
’03,  Var. ’13,  Cam.  Glo.  Ktly,  Dyce  iii. 
urine.  For  affection,  Masters  of  Steev.  ’70. 


55 

urine  :for  affections,  Masters  ^Hawkins, 
Steev.  ’  7  8,  ’  85 .  urine  ;  for  affection,  Mas¬ 
ter  of  Rann,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce  i,  ii,  Plal. 
Coll,  ii,  iii,  Sta.  Clarke,  Del.  Wh.  ii. 

55.  fwayes  it]  sways  us  Plan,  sway  it 
Warb.  Hawkins,  Steev.  ’70,  ’78,  ’85,  Mai. 
Var.  Coll,  i,  Wh.  i. 


54,  55.  Cannot  .  .  .  moode]  The  earliest  critical  attempt  at  emending  this  passage 
is  almost  the  best  of  all,  and  in  its  substitution  of  a  comma  after  ‘  affection,’  has  been 
adopted  by  a  large  majority  of  Editors  since,  and  including,  Capell.  In  Nichols’s 
Ulust.  of  Lit.  ii,  225,  there  is,  under  date  of  1729,  the  list  of  changes  which  Dr 
Thirlby  sent  to  Theobald.  The  list  is  a  bare  one;  the  changes  are  proposed  with¬ 
out  comment.  In  it  there  stands,  at  this  passage:  ‘for  affection,  Master  (or  Mistress) 
of  passion,  sways  it,’  &c.  Theobald,  in  his  subsequent  Edition,  speaks  with  praise 
of  this  emendation,  but  does  not  adopt  it.  He  had  mildly  suggested  it  to  Warburton 
in  his  correspondence  (p.  31 1  of  Nichols),  and,  although  Warburton’s  reply  has  not 
been  preserved,  I  cannot  but  think  that  Theobald  was  brow-beaten  out  of  it  by  his 
‘  most  affectionate  friend,’  who,  in  his  own  Edition,  thus  dogmatically  decides  the  ques¬ 
tion  :  ‘  “  Masters  of  passion.”  This  is  certainly  right,’  says  Warburton. *  *  He  is  speak¬ 
ing  of  the  power  of  sound  over  the  human  affections,  and  concludes,  very  naturally,  that 
the  “  masters  of  passion  ”  (for  so  he  finely  calls  the  musicians)  sway  the  passions  or  affec¬ 
tions  as  they  please,  alluding  to  what  the  ancients  tell  us  of  the  feats  that  Timotheus 
and  other  musicians  worked  by  the  power  of  music.  Can  anything  be  more  natural  ?' 
Heath  :  I  have  no  doubt  but  the  old  reading  is  the  genuine  one ;  it  undoubtedly  means : 

*  The  masters  of  passions,  that  is,  such  as  are  possessed  of  the  art  of  engaging  and  man¬ 
aging  the  human  passions,  influence  them  by  a  skillful  application  to  the  particular  lik¬ 
ings  and  loathings  of  the  person  they  are  addressing;  this  is  a  proof  that  men  are 
generally  governed  in  their  conduct  by  those  likings  or  loathings ;  and,  therefore,  it  is 
by  no  means  strange  or  unnatural  that  I  should  be  so,  too,  in  the  present  case.  Ritson 
{Remarks,  p.  54) :  [The  punctuation  of  the  Folio]  is  surely  defensible.  The  meaning 
is,  that  some  men,  when  they  hear  the  sound  of  a  bag-pipe,  are  so  affected  therewith, 
that  they  cannot,  &c.  For  those  things  which  are  masters  over  passion  make  it  like  or 
loath  whatever  they  will.  Malone  (who  also  preferred  the  old  text,  or,  at  least,  merely 
a  colon  after  ‘affection’) :  These  lines  mean,  I  believe, — Cannot,  &c.,  on  account  of 
their  being  affected  by  the  noise  of  the  bag-pipe ;  or,  in  other  words,  on  account  of  an 
involuntary  antipathy  to  such  a  noise.  In  the  next  line,  which  is  put  in  apposition  with 
that  preceding,  the  word  ‘  it  ’  may  refer  either  to  ‘  passion  ’  or  *  affection.’  ‘ It  ’  (‘  sway 
it’),  in  my  opinion,  refers  to  ‘  affection,’  that  is,  to  the  sympathetic  feeling.  Steevens  : 
That  affections  and  passions  anciently  had  different  significations,  may  by  known  from 
the  following  instance  in  Greene’s  Never  Too  Late  [p.  174,  ed.  Grosart.  See  also  III, 
i,  54,  of  the  present  play]  :  ‘  His  hart  was  fuller  of  passions  than  his  eyes  of  affections .’ 
Affections,  as  used  by  Shylock,  seems  to  signify  imaginations  or  prejudices.  A  passage 
somewhat  similar  is  in  Oth.  I,  iii,  251.  Capell:  The  terms  affection  and  passion  are 
of  philosophic  precision,  intimating — the  impressing  and  the  impress’d.  Mistress  has 
its  justness,  being  spoken  of  mind ;  nor  is  the  word  it  sprang  out  of  so  remote  trom  it 


196 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


[54,  55.  for  affection.  Masters  of  passion] 

as  a  modern  reader  will  think,  for  the  form  that  mistress  wears  in  old  books  is  not  un- 
frequently — maistres.  Colman  :  I  must  confess  that  I  cannot  discover  on  what  prin¬ 
ciple  all  the  Editors  since  Theobald  and  Hanmer  have  followed  the  punctuation  of 
Thirlby.  It  is  impossible,  I  think,  for  any  reader  accustomed  to  the  manner  of  our  old 
writers,  not  to  feel  a  certain  harshness  in  the  new  regulation  of  the  text,  or,  indeed,  to 
doubt  for  a  moment  that  the  old  books  gave  the  line  correctly  as  at  that  time  spoken 
on  the  stage,  and  originally  written  by  the  author.  I  never  heard,  excellent  and  very 
Shylock  as  he  is,  Macklin’s  full  stop  in  the  middle  of  the  line  without  a  shock;  and 
the  following  words  of  the  line  not  only  soften  the  expression,  but  are  most  easy  and 
natural.  We  still  apply  the  verb  affect  in  the  same  sense  that  Shylock  here  uses  the 
noun  derived  from  it.  [This  affection,  Colman  thinks,  must  be  sy?npatky  and  it  is 
brought  in  as  a  contrast  to  the  ‘  gaping  pig  ’  and  to  the  4  cat,’  where  antipathy  predom¬ 
inates  ;  the  4  grand  Desideratum,’  therefore,  is  some  word,  or  phrase,  or  line  expressive 
of  an  irresistible  influence  over  our  likings  and  loathings,  as  well  as  governing  the  verb 
‘sways.’  Colman  continues:]  On  the  whole,  therefore,  I  conceive  that  the  original 
punctuation  should  be  maintained,  the  word  Maisters  in  the  old  copies  should  be  read 
Mistress,  and  that  the  imperfection  in  the  sense,  according  to  that  reading,  arises  from 
a  line  or  two  lost  or  dropt  at  the  press,  in  which  the  words  Sympathy  and  Antipathy, 
so  congenial  to  the  argument,  had  most  probably  a  place.  [This  line  Colman  accord¬ 
ingly  supplies,  and  reads  the  passage  thus :]  4  Cannot,  &c.,  for  affection.  Sovereign, 
Antipathy,  or  Sympathy,  Mistress  of  passion,  sways  it,’  &c.  Knight:  Shylock  himself, 
in  a  previous  Scene,  has  distinguished  between  affection  and  passion  [III,  i,  54].  The 
distinction,  indeed,  is  a  very  marked  one  in  the  original  use  of  the  words.  Affection 
is  that  state  of  the  mind,  whether  pleasant  or  disagreeable,  which  is  produced  by  some 
external  object  or  quality.  Passion  is  something  higher  and  stronger — the  suggestive 
state  of  mind — going  to  a  point  by  the  force  of  its  own  will.  The  distinction  is  very 
happily  preserved  in  Greene’s  Never  Too  Late.  Keeping  in  view  this  distinction,  we 
have  a  key  to  this  very  difficult  passage,  whose  meaning  then,  is,  that  affection,  either 
for  love  or  dislike, — sympathy  or  antipathy, — being  the  master  of  passion, — sways  it 
( passion )  to  the  mood  of  what  it  ( affection )  likes  or  loaths.  If  we  were  to  adopt  the 
reading  which  Malone  prefers :  4 Masters  of  passion  sway  it.  See.,  of  what  it  likes,’  See., 
the  second  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  sense,  and  we  ought  to  read — 4  Of  what 
they  like  or  loath.’  Collier  (ed.  i) :  This  passage  has  occasioned  a  good  deal  of  con¬ 
troversy,  but  the  difficulty  seems  to  be  to  find  a  difficulty ;  in  the  old  copies  4  sway  ’  is 
printed  sways,  making  a  false  concord,  the  nominative  case  being  4  masters the  pro¬ 
noun  4  it,’  of  course,  in  both  instances,  agrees  with  4  passion.’  Shylock,  in  the  preced¬ 
ing  lines,  speaks  of  those  who  are  not  ‘masters  of  passion.’  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  57) : 
The  preceding  part  of  the  passage  clearly  shews  that  there  must  be  a  pause  at  4  urine ;’ 
as  also  that  4  for  affection  ’  must  be  connected  with  the  next  line.  Shylock  states  three 
circumstances  :  first,  that  some  men  dislike  a  gaping  pig ;  secondly,  that  some  are  mad 
if  they  see  a  cat ;  thirdly,  that  some,  at  the  sound  of  a  bag-pipe,  cannot  contain  their 
urine;  and  he  then  accounts  for  these  three  peculiarities  on  a  general  principle. 
Knight’s  alteration  [in  reality,  Rann’s, — Ed.]  is  greatly  preferable  [to  Thirlby’s]  be¬ 
cause  it  deviates  from  the  old  Editions  only  by  omitting  a  single  letter.  With  respect 
to  Collier’s  reading,  I  have  further  to  observe,  that  4  Masters  of  passion  ’  (if  we  under¬ 
stand  the  words  in  the  sense  which,  as  his  note  shews,  he  supposes  them  to  bear)  were 
the  very  persons  of  whom  Shylock  would  carefully  avoid  all  mention.  Collier  (ed. 
ii) :  I  formerly  punctuated  this  fine  differently,  but  I  am  now  satisfied  that  I  was  in 


ACT  IV,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


197 


Of  what  it  likes  or  loaths,  now  for  your  anfwer  :  56 

As  there  is  no  firme  reafon  to  be  rendred 
Why  he  cannot  abide  a  gaping  Pigge? 

Why  he  a  harmleffe  neceffarie  Cat  ? 

Why  he  a  woollen  bag-pipe  :  but  of  force  60 


56.  zV]  she  Ktly. 

loaths,]  loathes  •  Qx.  loaths.  F  . 
58,  59.  Pigge  ?...Cat  pig,  ...cat,  Fv 
60.  woollen ]  wollen  F  .  wawling  Cap. 
conj.  swollen  Hawkins,  Steev.  Var. ’03, 


’  1 3,  Sing.  Ktly,  Clarke,  bollen  Dyce,  Coll, 
ii,  iii.  wauling  Huds.  wailing  Cart¬ 
wright.  swelling  Hawkins.  waullen 
Brae,  wilean  or  willne  Oliver  (N.  &  Qu. 
5th,  viii,  63). 


error.  ‘  Affection,’  here  meaning  sympathy,  is  the  nominative  to  ‘  sways,’  *  Master  of 
passion  ’  being,  as  it  were,  in  parenthesis.  The  only  variation  from  the  old  Editions  is 
reading  Master  for  ‘  Masters.’  The  (MS)  makes  no  change.  Staunton  :  The  true 
source  of  the  difficulty,  however,  may  lie  neither  in  *  masters  ’  nor  ‘  affection,’  but  in 
the  comparatively  insignificant  preposition  ‘  of.’  If  ‘  of  ’  is  a  misprint  for  our,  the  pas¬ 
sage  would  run :  ‘  For  affection  Masters  our  passion,  sways  it,’  &c.  [Staunton  notes 
also  that  the  Fx  omits  ‘  it  ’  after  ‘  sways.’  I  think  this  must  be  a  misprint.  The  ‘  it  ’ 
is  present  in  the  copy  of  the  Cambridge  Editors,  in  my  copy,  and  in  Staunton’s  own 
Photo-lithographic  Edition. — Ed.]  Walker,  who  (Crit.  i,  252)  cites  ‘Masters’  in 
this  line  as  an  instance  of  the  interpolated  s  (see  II,  ix,  35),  says,  ‘point  undoubtedly, 
and,  I  think,  read  as  follows :  “  For  affection,  Master  of  passion,  sways  it,”  &c.  At 
any  rate,  there  is  no  necessity,  as  far  as  the  j  is  concerned,  for  reading  maistresse ; 
which  spelling,  moreover,  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  Folio,  as  far  as  I  recollect.’ 
Grant  White:  Change  is  unnecessary,  and  comment  would  seem  superfluous.  The 
Folio  accidentally  omits  ‘  it  ’  [after  ‘  sways.’  I  am  afraid  this  assertion  was  taken,  with¬ 
out  due  verification,  from  Staunton. — Ed.]  The  difficulty  seems  to  have  arisen  entirely 
from  a  misapprehension  of  the  meaning  of  ‘  masters  of  passion ;’  by  which  Shylock  does 
not  mean  men  who  are  able  to  control  the  passions  of  themselves  or  others,  but  such 
agencies  as  those  of  which  he  has  just  been  speaking.  ‘  Passion  ’  is  used  in  its  more 
radical  sense,  and  not  with  reference  to  any  one  of  the  passions,  a  common  use  in 
Shakespeare’s  day.  ‘  Affection  ’  means,  of  course,  ‘  the  being  affected,’  in  this  case, 
by  the  sound  of  the  bag-pipe — also,  of  old,  a  common  use  of  the  word ;  and  thus  the 
masters  of  passion  are  those  things  or  occurrences  that  move  either  the  sympathy  or 
antipathy  of  any  man,  and  ‘  sway  ’  it  to  the  mood  of  what  it  likes  or  loaths.  Keight- 
ley  (Exp.  p.  152) :  For  ‘  Of  what  it  likes,’  &c.,  I  read,  ‘Of  what  she  likes,’  &c. ;  the 
‘it’  was  evidently  caused  by  that  in  the  preceding  line.  Abbott  (p.  481,  Note  10),  in 
regard  to  the  confusion  of  Masters  and  Mistress,  refers  to  Temp.  II,  i,  5,  and  to  ‘Where 
be  thy  mastres,  man  ?  I  would  speak  with  her l — Beau.  &  FI.,  The  Coxcomb,  II,  iii, 
9  [which  is,  perhaps,  scarcely  parallel,  because  the  speaker  is  disguised  as  an  Irish  foot¬ 
man,  and  gabbles  nonsense.  In  the  margin  of  my  copy  of  Dyce’s  Remarks,  Lettsom 
has  written,  with  pencil,  ‘for  affection’s  Master  of  passion,  sways  it,’  &c.  I  follow 
Thirlby,  as  modified  by  Rann. — Ed.]. 

58,  59,  60.  he]  Allen  :  Like  b  pev,  6  6e,  6  tie. 

60.  woollen]  Johnson  :  As  all  the  editors  agree  with  complete  uniformity  in  read¬ 
ing  *  woollen ,’  I  can  hardly  forbear  to  imagine  that  they  understood  it.  But  I  never 
saw  a  ‘  woollen  bag-pipe,’  nor  can  well  conceive  it.  I  suppose  the  author  wrote  wooden, 
meaning  that  the  bag  was  leather,  and  the  pipe  of  wood.  [Heath  made  independently 


198 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i 


Muft  yeeld  to  fuch  ineuitable  fhame,  6 1 

As  to  offend  himfelfe  being  offended : 

61.  fhame~\  sway  Bailey.  himfelf,  F4,  Rowe,  Cap.  Steev.  Sta.  offend, , 

62.  offend  himself e]  QaFaF  Q3.  offend  himfelfe  Q,,  Pope  et  cet. 

the  same  conjecture.]  Capell:  Why,  in  the  rudeness  of  ancient  poverty,  the  bag 
should  not  have  been  of  wool  (that  is — cloth  of  extream  coarseness)  in  some  places, 
the  editor  sees  not.  Robinson  :  Perhaps  it  is  called  *  woollen  ’  from  the  bag  being 
generally  covered  with  woollen  cloth.  Steevens  :  As  the  aversion  was  not  caused  by 
the  outward  appearance,  but  merely  by  the  sound,  I  have  adopted  swollen  in  the  text. 
Ritson  (p.  54) :  It  is  not  unusual  to  see  the  large  skin  or  bladder  of  the  bag-pipe 
covered  with  flannel ;  and,  it  is  possible  the  word  was  only  used  as  a  descriptive  epi¬ 
thet.  Monck  Mason  (p.  76) :  I  consider  swol'n  as  one  of  those  amendments  which 
carry  conviction  the  moment  they  are  suggested.  Douce  (i,  264) :  We  have  here  one 
of  the  too  frequent  instances  of  conjectural  readings ;  but  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  all 
future  editors  will  restore  the  original  ‘  woollen,’  after  weighing  not  only  what  has  been 
already  urged  in  its  support,  but  the  additional  and  accurate  testimony  of  Dr  Leyden, 
who,  in  his  edition  of  The  Complaynt  of  Scotland,  p.  149,  infonns  us  that  the  Lowland 
bagpipe  commonly  had  the  bag  covered  with  woollen  cloth  of  a  green  colour,  a  practice 
which,  he  adds,  prevailed  in  the  northern  counties  of  England.  Collier  (ed.  ii) : 
Bollen  is  from  the  (MS)  and  is  doubtless  the  epithet  of  the  poet,  who  had  used  it  in 
his  Lucrece  [line  1417]  :  ‘Here,  one  being  throng’d,  bears  back,  all  boll’n  and  red.’ 
Bollen  is  swelled  or  inflated.  *  Woollen  ’  is  a  corruption  of  bollen,  of  which  swollen 
is  merely  a  translation.  Dyce  (ed.  ii)  [see  Text.  Notes]  :  In  the  first  place,  what 
writer  ever  used  such  an  expression  as  a  woollen  bag-pipe  in  the  sense  of  a  bag-pipe 
covered  with  woollen  cloth  ?  (Might  he  not,  with  almost  equal  propriety,  talk  of  a  wool¬ 
len  lute  or  a  woollen  fiddle  ?)  And,  in  the  second  place,  can  anything  be  more  evident 
than  that  Shylock  does  not  intend  the  most  distant  allusion  to  the  material  which  either 
composed  or  covered  the  bag-pipe  ?  I  adopt  the  (MS’s)  emendation.  (I  have  repeatedly 
met  with  old  handwriting  in  which  the  initial  b  bore  such  a  resemblance  to  w,  that  a 
compositor  might  easily  have  mistaken  it  for  the  latter.)  Grant  White  :  No  one  who 
has  seen  a  bagpipe,  or  who  knows  that  the  bag  is  generally,  if  not  always,  covered  with 
baize  or  some  other  cloth,  will  think  either  swollen  or  bollen  worth  consideration.  Cam¬ 
bridge  Editors  :  In  an  illuminated  copy  of  an  Office  de  la  Vierge  in  the  library  of 
Trinity  College,  there  is  a  representation  of  a  bagpipe  which  appears  to  be  of  sheepskin 
with  the  wool  on.  We  incline,  however,  to  think  that  Capell’s  conjecture  wawling 
approaches  nearest  the  truth.  Staunton  in  his  Addenda  and  Corrigenda  having 
adduced  in  support  of  the  old  reading,  a  line  from  Massinger’s  The  Maid  of  Honour , 
IV,  iv :  ‘  Walks  she  on  woollen  feet  ?’  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  replied  that  *  “  woollen  bag-pipe  ” 
(if  right)  means  a  bag-pipe  actually  covered  with  woollen  cloth,  while  “  woollen  feet  ” 
is  a  purely  metaphorical  expression .’  Allen  :  The  logic  of  the  passage  requires  an 
indifferent  or  innocent  epithet  (as  in  line  59),  not  wawling  nor  mewling.  [The  dis¬ 
pute  again  burst  forth  in  Notes  Queries,  5th,  vol.  viii,  pp.  4,  63,  182,  423,  but  surely 
the  bulk  of  the  notes  and  comments,  already  given,  is  sufficiently  bollen. — Ed.] 

61.  Must]  For  the  omission  of  the  nominative,  compare  I,  i,  108,  or  see  Abbott, 
§399- 

62.  himselfe]  Staunton:  Modern  editors  point  this  line  :  ‘  As  to  offend,  himself 
being  offended,’  which  renders  it  near  akin  to  nonsense.  [To  the  same  effect,  Walker 


kct  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


199 


So  can  I  giue  no  reafon,  nor  I  will  not,  63 

More  then  a  lodg’d  hate,  and  a  certaine  loathing 
I  beare  Anthonio ,  that  I  follow  thus  65 

A  loofmg  fuite  againft  him  ?  Are  you  anfwered  ? 

Baff.  This  is  no  anfwer  thou  vnfeeling  man, 

To  excufe  the  currant  of  thy  cruelty. 

lew.  I  am  not  bound  to  pleafe  thee  with  my  anfwer. 

Baff.  Do  all  men  kil  the  things  they  do  not  loue?  70 

lew.  Hates  any  man  the  thing  he  would  not  kill? 

Baff.  Euerie  offence  is  not  a  hate  at  firft. 
lew.  What  wouldft  thou  haue  a  Serpent  fting  thee 
twice  ? 

Ant.  I  pray  you  thinke  you  queftion  with  the  lew  :  75 


64.  lodg'd ]  lodgd  Q2.  lodged  Qz. 

66.  loo/ing~\  lofng  Qz. 
him  l]  him  ;  Qz. 

67.  anfwer ]  anfwer,  Qz. 

68.  currant  ]  current  F3F4. 

69.  71,  73.  lew.]  Shy.  Qz. 

69.  anfwer. ]  anfwers  ?  Qa.  anfwers. 


Q3,  Cap.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

70.  things ]  thing  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 

75.  you  thinke ]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope. 
you ,  think,  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns,  you 
think:  Sing,  you,  think  Theob.  i,  et 
cet. 

the  Iew~\  a  Jew  F3F4,  Rowe  + . 


( Crit.  iii,  56),  Keightley  (. Expositor ,  p.  152),  and  Allen.  To  me  also,  this  punc¬ 
tuation,  that  of  F4,  is  the  better,  but  Clarendon  thinks  that  *  both  the  context  and 
the  rhythm  of  the  verse  seem  to  favour  ’  a  comma  after  ‘  offend.’ — Ed.] 

64.  a  certaine]  Allen  :  Dele  *  a,’  and  read  ‘  certain,’  i.  e.  sure,  fixed.  ‘  Certain 
loathing  ’  repeats  *  lodged  hate.’  (The  ‘  a  ’  was  inserted  by  the  compositors  under  the 
impression  that  ‘  a  certain  ’  was  equivalent  to  tic,  quidam,  a  kind  of.) 

66.  a  loosing  suite]  Clarendon  :  A  suit  in  which  I  have  nothing  to  gain.  [Or 
is  it,  a  suit  in  which  I  lose  my  money  ?  Does  not  Shylock  hope  to  gain  the  forfeit  of 
his  bond  ? — Ed.] 

66.  answered  ?]  Booth  :  Bow  to  the  Duke.  At  Bassanio’s  exclamation  draw  your¬ 
self  up,  your  back  toward  him,  and  speak  contemptuously,  without  looking  at  him. 

72.  Eccles  :  This  reply  seems  to  be  somewhat  foreign  to  the  question  of  Shylock ; 
besides,  Bassanio  seems  to  forget  that  the  Jew’s  charge  against  Anthonio,  in  their  first 
interview  after  the  opening  of  the  play,  was  that  he  had  ‘  many  a  time  and  oft  ’  affronted 
him.  Clarendon  :  ‘  Offence  ’  means  resentment  of  the  injured  party  [i.  e.  Subjective] 
as  well  as  the  injury  itself  [i.  e.  Objective].  Bassanio  uses  the  word  in  the  former  sense, 
Shylock’s  reply  alludes  to  the  latter. 

73.  Booth  :  Turn  on  him  sharply. 

75.  Knight:  The  construction  of  this  line  appears  to  us  elliptical, — we  believe  it 
should  be  understood  thus  :  ‘  I  pray  you  think  [if],  you  question  with  the  Jew.’  [For 
me,  a  comma  after  ‘  I  pray  you,’  removes  all  difficulty. — Ed.]  Keightley  {Exp.  p. 
153) :  I  cannot  but  adhere  to  stint  your  for  ‘  think  you,’  as  I  have  given  it  in  my  Edi¬ 
tion.  It  seems  to  me  so  much  more  forcible,  and  more  suited  to  the  calm  resignation 
of  Anthonio ;  while  in  the  other  reading  there  is  something  of  sneer  or  irony  that  is 
unpleasant.  Nothing  was  easier  than  for  the  printer  to  read  stint,  tl  e  more  unusual 


200 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


You  may  as  well  go  ftand  vpon  the  beach,  76 

And  bid  the  maine  flood  baite  his  vfuall  height, 

Or  euen  as  well  vfe  queftion  with  the  Wolfe, 

The  Ewe  bleate  for  the  Lambe  :  79 


77.  baite\  bate  Qq F2.  beat F3F4.  ’ bate 
Theob. 

78.  Or...well~\  Ff,  Rowe,  well  Qa. 
You  may  as  well  QjQ3,  Pope  et  cet. 

79.  The...  Lambe  the  Ewe  bleake  for 
the  Lambe  :  Q2.  Why  he  hath  made  the 


Ewe  bleake  for  the  Lambe  :  Qt.  The  Ewe 
bleate  for  the  Lambe  :  when  you  behold , 
Ff,  Rowe.  When  you  behold  the  ewe  bleat 
for  the  lamb  ;  Han.  Why  he  hath  made 
the  Ewe  bleat  for  the  Lambe  :  Q3  et  cet. 


term,  as  ‘  think,’  and  then  to  make  your  ‘  you  ’  for  the  sake  of  sense,  and  as  they  are 
pronounced  nearly  alike.  However,  judicet  lector.  Booth  :  Shylock  listens  to  all 
this  with  an  expression  of  mockery. 

75.  question]  Steevens  :  That  is,  converse.  To  reason  had  anciently  the  same 
meaning.  Clarendon  :  Remember  you  are  arguing  with  Shylock,  whose  cruel  nature 
is  known. 

77.  baite]  Note  the  ingenious  change  made  by  F  F4,  which,  if  it  were  in  the  editio 
princeps ,  would  find,  probably,  many  an  advocate  whom  nothing  could  persuade  that 
‘  baite  ’  was  the  true  word. — Ed. 

78,  79.  It  is  scarcely  beyond  the  bounds  of  probability  that  these  two  lines  when 
heard  from  the  stage  would  be  adequately  intelligible;  the  connection  of  thought  would 
tide  us  over  the  obstruction :  the  ocean  will  be  governed  by  its  own  laws,  the  wolf  will 
be  true  to  his  cruel  nature,  the  ewe  will  bleat  for  its  lamb,  the  mountain  pines  will  sway 
to  the  tempest ;  the  words  are  uttered,  our  interest  is  absorbed,  the  speech  hurries  for- 
ward,  and  we  see  no  difficulty.  But  with  the  printed  page  before  us  we  see  the  havoc 
with  the  sense  that  some  accident  at  the  printing-press  has  made.  These  lines  have 
evidently  been  fretted  by  a  gust  of  some  kind.  It  was  not,  however,  at  the  press  where 
the  Folio  was  printed ;  there  has  been  even  an  attempt  at  repairing  it  by  the  printers 
of  that  Edition.  The  accident  happened  with  the  unfortunate  Q2,  from  which  the 
Folio  was  printed,  and  the  result  is  another  of  the  many  indications  of  the  haste  with 
which  the  Heyes’s  Quarto  was  issued.  According  to  the  Cambridge  Editors,  Hal- 
liwell  has  seen  a  copy  of  this  Qto.  in  which  line  79  was  omitted  altogether.  In 
Ashbee’s  Facsimile,  the  lines  run  thus :  *  and  bid  the  maine  flood  bate  his  vfuall 
height,  ||  well  vfe  queftion  with  the  Woolfe,  ||  the  Ewe  bleake  for  the  Lambe ||  The 
very  defective  copy,  then,  which  Halliwell  has  seen,  shows  that  there  were  gradations 
in  the  accident,  or  in  the  repairs  of  it.  It  may,  therefore,  have  happened  that  the  copy 
which  the  compositors  of  the  Folio  used,  actually  read  as  the  text  in  the  Folio  gives  it ; 
or  these  same  compositors  may  have  attempted  to  amend  the  passage,  and  considered 
that  they  had  done  their  duty  by  adding,  ‘  Or  euen  as,’  and  by  changing  bleake  into 
‘  bleat.’  However  this  may  be,  we  have,  happily,  Q  to  refer  to,  and  here  again  we 
find  another  proof  of  its  superiority  to  the  copy  of  Q2,  which  the  compositors  of  the 
Folio  used.  Lines  78,  79,  there  read :  ‘  You  may  as  well  vfe  queftion  with  the  Wolfe,  || 
Why  he  hath  made  the  Ewe  bleake  for  the  Lambe :’  This  is  the  text  which  has 
been  adopted,  with  only  two  or  three  exceptions,  by  all  Editors.  In  dealing  with  the 
Quartos  (and  it  might  almost  be  affirmed  of  the  Folios  also)  it  is  necessary  to  specify 
the  particular  copies  which  are  cited,  so  much  do  copies  of  the  same  date  differ.  I 
have  been  particular  just  now  in  speaking  of  the  copy  of  Q2  which  was  used  for  the 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  201 

You  may  as  well  forbid  the  Mountaine  Pines  80 

To  wagge  their  high  tops,  and  to  make  no  noife 
When  they  are  fretted  with  the  gufts  of  heauen : 

You  may  as  well  do  any  thing  moft  hard, 

As  feeke  to  foften  that,  then  which  what  harder  ? 

His  Iewilh  heart.  Therefore  I  do  befeech  you  85 

Make  no  more  offers,  vfe  no  farther  meanes, 

But  with  all  briefe  and  plaine  conueniencie 
Let  me  haue  iudgement,  and  the  lew  his  will. 

Baf.  For  thy  three  thoufand  Ducates  heereis  fix.  89 


80.  Mountaine ]  mountaine  ofQ q. 

81.  no  noife~\  a  noise  Han.  Warb. 

82.  fretted~\fretten  Qq,  Coll.  Sing.  Hal. 
Wh.  i,  Cam.  Glo.  Ktly,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

84.  then\  than  Ff. 


84.  what  harder  ?~\  F2F3,  Wh.i.  what 
harder,  F4,  Rowe,  what's  harder  :  Qq 
et  cet. 

86.  ?nore~\  moe  Q,Q2. 


Folio.  This  copy  was  probably  like  that  in  the  Duke  of  Devonshire’s  library  (which 
was  used  by  Prsetorius  in  his  Reproduction),  and  also  like  that  from  which  Ashbee 
made  his  Facsimile.  But  it  is  clearly  different  from  the  Q2  in  Capell’s  library,  which, 
I  presume,  was  the  one  used  by  the  Cambridge  Editors,  because  they  make  special 
note  of  the  text  in  the  Duke  of  Devonshire’s  copy,  and  say  that  ‘  Lord  Ellesmere’s 
copy  agrees  with  Capell’s  literatim;'  in  Capell’s  Q2,  therefore,  the  lines  must  be 
almost  exactly  as  they  are  in  Qt.  The  copy  of  Qx  which  is  now  before  me,  and  which 
I  have  used  throughout  for  collation,  formerly  belonged  to  Capell,  and  in  it  he  has, 
in  his  painful  chirography,  recorded  the  varies  lectiones  of  Q2  and  of  Q3;  his  only 
note  on  these  lines  is  that  ‘  bleake  ’  is  changed  to  bleat  in  Q3.  This  long  note  on  a 
trifling  matter  must  find  its  justification  in  the  lesson,  which  this  passage  affords,  that 
Quartos  and  Folios  may  all  alike  be  treated  as  proof-sheets,  out  of  which  we  may,  with 
what  power  of  insight  Nature  has  vouchsafed  us,  prepare  our  own  text,  with  an  abound¬ 
ing  charity  for  those  who  do  not  agree  with  us, — which,  in  all  likelihood,  will  comprise 
the  rest  of  mankind. — Ed. 

80.  Pines]  Steevens  :  This  image  seems  to  have  been  caught  from  Golding’s  Ovid 
[1567,  Bk  xv,  p.  195]  :  ‘  Such  noyse  as  Pynetrees  make  what  tyme  the  heady  easterne 
wynde  Dooth  whiz  amongst  them.’ 

St.  to  make]  Abbott,  §  382 :  The  Elizabethan  authors  objected  to  scarcely  any 
ellipsis,  provided  the  deficiency  could  be  easily  supplied  from  the  context.  Thus  the 
present  line  may  be  explained,  by  implying  from  ‘  forbid  ’  a  word  of  speaking,  bid,  and 
not  by  a  double  negative  :  ‘  To  wag  their  high  tops,  and  [bid  them]  to  make  no  noise.’ 
[See  line  168,  post,  ‘no  impediment.’] 

82.  fretted]  Collier  :  There  seems  no  reason  to  abandon  the  form  fretten,  prob¬ 
ably  adopted  by  Shakespeare ;  if  fretten  were  not  the  original  word,  it  is  singular  that 
it  should  be  found  in  both  Qq,  which  were  evidently  printed  from  different  manuscripts. 
Grant  White:  It  is  most  probable  that  Shakespeare  wrote  fretten,  and  that  ‘fretted’ 
>  was  a  printer’s  conformity  to  the  custom  of  the  day;  but  this  canno'  be  assumed  as  abso¬ 
lutely  certain.  See  Abbott,  §  344,  for  other  instances  of  irregular  participial  formations, 
like  fretten. 


202 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


lew.  If  euerie  Ducat  in  fixe  thoufand  Ducates  90 

Were  in  fixe  parts,  and  euery  part  a  Ducate, 

I  would  not  draw  them,  I  would  haue  my  bond  ? 

Du.  How  (halt  thou  hope  for  mercie,  rendring  none  ? 

lew.  What  iudgement  fhall  I  dread  doing  no  wrong? 

You  haue  among  you  many  a  purchaft  flaue,  95 

Which  like  your  Affes,  and  your  Dogs  and  Mules, 

You  vfe  in  abiedt  and  in  flauifh  parts, 

Becaufe  you  bought  them.  Shall  I  fay  to  you, 

Let  them  be  free,  marrie  them  to  your  heires  ? 

Why  fweate  they  vnder  burthens/  Let  their  beds  100 

Be  made  as  foft  as  yours  :  and  let  their  pallats 
Be  feafon’d  with  fuch  Viands  :  you  will  anfwer 
The  flaues  are  ours.  So  do  I  anfwer  you. 

The  pound  of  flefh  which  I  demand  of  him 

Is  deerely  bought,  Tis  mine,  and  I  will  haue  it.  105 

If  you  deny  me  ;  fie  vpon  your  Law, 

There  is  no  force  in  the  decrees  of  Venice; 

I  ftand  for  iudgement,  anfwer,  Shall  I  haue  it  ? 

Du.  Vpon  my  power  I  may  difmiffe  this  Court, 

Vnleffe  Bellario  a  learned  Dodlor,  nu 

96.  your  Affes]  you  Affes  Fa.  105.  Us]  tis  Qt.  as  Q2Q3*  is  Cap. 

97.  parts]  part  Ff,  Rowe  +  .  Mai. ’90,  Steev.  Hal. 

98.  you  bought]  your  bought  F2. 

90-92.  Booth  :  Slowly,  with  great  determination,  in  subdued  tones. 

92.  draw]  Allen  :  We  now  speak  of  drawing  money  only  from  a  bank,  or  place 
of  deposit.  Was  it  then  used  of  accepting  or  receiving  money  in  any  way  ?  *  Draw  ’ 

may  be  equivalent  to  choose,  that  is,  if  offered  at  the  same  time  with  the  bond. 

94.  Booth  :  With  a  look  and  tone  of  surprise. 

95.  Johnson  :  This  argument,  considered  as  used  to  the  particular  persons,  seems 
conclusive.  I  see  not  how  Venetians  or  Englishmen,  while  they  practise  the  purchase 
and  sale  of  slaves,  can  much  enforce  or  demand  the  law  of  ‘  doing  to  others  as  w« 
would  that  they  should  do  to  us.’ 

103.  So  .  .  .  you]  Booth  :  Respectfully  but  firmly,  and  at  line  108,  bow  as 
you  ask. 

109.  Vpon]  Abbott,  §  192:  Upon  from  meaning  superposition,  comes  to  mean  in 
accordance  with  (like  ‘after’),  as  here. 

no.  Bellario]  Johnson:  The  doctor  and  the  Court  are  here  somewhat  unskil¬ 
fully  brought  together.  That  the  Duke  would,  on  such  an  occasion,  consult  a  doctor 
of  great  reputation,  is  not  unlikely;  but  how  should  this  be  foreknown  by  Portia? 
Tyrwhitt  :  I  do  not  see  any  necessity  for  supposing  that  this  was  foreknown  by  Por¬ 
tia.  She  consults  Bellario  as  an  eminent  lawyer,  and  her  relation.  If  the  Duke  had 
not  consulted  him,  the  only  difference  would  have  been,  that  she  would  have  come  into 


act  iv,  sc.  i.j  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  203 

Whom  I  haue  fent  for  to  determine  this,  1 1 1 

Come  heere  to  day. 

Sal.  My  Lord,  heere  ftayes  without 
A  Meffenger  with  Letters  from  the  Dodtor, 

New  come  from  Padua.  1 1 5 

Du.  Bring  vs  the  Letters,  Call  the  Meffengers. 

BaJJ.  Good  cheere  Anihonio.  What  man,  corage  yet :  [  17 


1 1 3.  Sal.]  Saler.  Qx.  Salerio  Q2.  1 16.  Meffenger s]  Meffenger  Qq. 

1 1 6.  Letters,"]  letters  ?  Q2.  Letters.  Q3.  117.  corage]  courage  Qq  F  F4. 

Court  as  an  advocate,  perhaps,  instead  of  a  judge.  Kenrick  {Rev.  of  Johnson's  Ed., 
p.  52) :  Is  it  not  very  natural  to  suppose  that,  after  Bassanio  was  called  away  in  such 
haste  to  Venice,  his  bride  Portia  would  send  a  messenger  to  her  cousin  Bellario,  in 
order  to  ask  his  opinion  of  so  extraordinary  a  case,  or  to  interest  him  in  Anthonio’s 
behalf?  And  can  anything  be  more  probable  than  that  he  should  inform  her,  on  re¬ 
ceiving  such  a  message,  that  he  was  actually  sent  for  to  Venice  on  that  very  account? 
For  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Duke  speaks  as  if  he  had  sent  for  him  some  consider¬ 
able  time  before ;  for  he  says,  ‘  unless  Bellario,  ....  come  here  to-day .’  His  power  of 
dismissing  the  Court  also,  on  his  not  coming,  seems  founded  on  some  physical  or  moral 
impediment,  that  might  very  naturally  occur,  to  prevent  his  arrival  within  the  time ;  so 
that  he  must  be  supposed  either  at  such  a  distance  as  made  it  necessary  to  give  him  a 
considerable  timely  warning,  or  that  the  extraordinary  nature  of  the  cause  might  make 
him  require  so  much  the  more  time  to  prepare  himself  equitably  to  determine  it.  This 
being  the  case,  was  not  here  a  very  apt  foundation  on  which  to  build  Portia’s  plot  of 
officiating  for  the  doctor  ?  which  design  she  no  doubt  concerted  with  him  by  letter,  be¬ 
fore  she  sent  for  the  notes  and  clothes  mentioned  in  III,  v.  And  that  this  was  really 
the  case  seems  evident  from  what  Portia  says  to  Lorenzo  during  the  absence  of  Bassa¬ 
nio,  and  before  she  sends  Balthazar  to  Bellario.  Lorenzo  compliments  her  on  her  noble 
conduct  *  in  bearing  thus  the  absence  of  her  lord.’  A  sufficient  intimation,  I  think,  that 
Bassanio  must  have  been  gone  some  time.  Again,  in  Portia’s  reply  to  this  compliment, 
we  find  her  speaking  very  peremptorily  and  certainly  of  Anthonio’s  deliverance,  and 
of  the  cost  already  bestowed  to  effect  it.  Is  it  reasonable  to  think  that  she  would 
express  herself  thus  confidently  on  a  mere  suggestion  of  her  own  ?  Besides,  what  cost 
could  she  have  bestowed  ?  Her  having  bid  her  husband  pay  the  bond  thrice  over  was 
nothing ;  because  she  could  not  be  sure  the  money  would  be  taken.  Nay,  she  evi¬ 
dently  does  not  intend  to  trust  to  that  acceptance.  It  is  therefore,  I  think,  very  evident 
that  she  had,  even  at  this  time,  concerted  the  scheme  with  her  cousin  Bellario.  It  is 
true  that  the  formality  with  which  Portia  introduces  her  charge  to  Balthazar,  when  she 
sends  him  for  the  notes  and  clothes,  seems  to  favour  the  supposition  that  this  was  the 
first  time  she  had  sent  to  Bellario,  in  which  case  there  would  be  some  grounds  for  Dr 
Johnson’s  remark ;  but  we  must  observe  that  Balthazar  is  now  to  be  entrusted  with  a 
more  important  charge  than  he  had  before  been,  in  merely  carrying  and  bringing  back 
a  letter ;  or,  it  is  not  unlikely,  that  Portia  entrusted  that  business  with  a  servant  of  less 
importance.  [See  Th.  Elze  in  Appendix  :  *  Dr  Bellario ;’  and  Lady  Martin. — Ed.] 

1 1 2.  Booth  :  Shylock  shrugs  his  shoulders,  and  retires  apart  from  the  others. 

1 16.  Messengers]  Another  instance  of  the  superfluous  s  noted  by  W  *  LKER  ( Crit. 
i,  233)  and  alluded  to  II,  ix,  35,  which  see. 


2o 4.  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i 

The  lew  fhall  haue  my  flesh,  blood,  bones,  and  all,  1 1 8 

Ere  thou  (halt  loofe  for  me  one  drop  of  blood. 

Ant.  I  am  a  tainted  Weather  of  the  flocke,  1 20 

Meeteft  for  death,  the  weakeft  kinde  of  fruite 
Drops  earlieft  to  the  ground,  and  fo  let  me ; 

You  cannot  better  be  employ’d  Baffanio , 

Then  to  liue  flail,  and  write  mine  Epitaph. 

Enter  Nerriffa.  125 

Du.  Came  you  from  Padua  from  Bellario  ? 

Ner.  From  both. 

My  Lord  Bellario  greets  your  Grace. 

Baf.  Why  doft  thou  whet  thy  knife  fo  earneftly  ? 

lew.  To  cut  the  forfeiture  from  that  bankrout  there.  130 

Gra.  Not  on  thy  foale  :  but  on  thy  foule  harfh  lew 


1 20.  Weather ]  wether  Steev. 

122.  ear  lie f\  soonest  Cap.  (erratum). 

and]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

[Scene  II.  Pope  +  . 

125.  Enter...]  Enter. ..dress’d  like  a 
Lawyer’s  Clerk.  Rowe. 

127,  128.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 
127.  both.  My  Lord]  Ff.  both,  my 
L.  Q  .  both  ?  my  L.  Q2.  both  :  my  L. 


Q3.  both.  My  Lord,  Rowe,  both  :  my 
lord  Pope,  both,  my  lord  :  Theob.  et  seq. 

130.  forfeiture ]  forfeit  Rowe  ii  +  , 
Dyce  iii,  Coll,  iii,  Huds. 

131.  foale. ..foule]  Fa.  foule. ..foule 
Qq.  foale... foul  F3F4,  Theob.  Warb. 
soal...soul  Rowe,  Johns.  Cap.  Steev. ’85, 
Mai. ’90.  soul!. ..soul  Pope.  sole. ..soul 
Han.  et  cet. 


1 1 8,  1 19.  Booth  :  Shylock  smiles  scornfully,  and  slowly  drawing  his  knife,  at  line 
124,  kneels,  to  whet  it. 

129.  whet]  Murdoch  ( The  Stage,  326) :  When  a  young  man,  acting  Shylock,  Mr 
Forrest  was  in  the  habit  of  carrying  in  his  gaberdine  a  small  whetstone  for  sharpening 
the  knife.  This  I  never  saw,  but  I  was  told  of  it  by  an  old  actor  of  the  Bowery  Thea¬ 
tre,  New  York,  who  vouched  for  its  truth.  Booth  :  Whet  the  knife  on  the  sole  of  the 
shoe, — not  too  rapidly. 

130.  forfeiture]  RlTSON:  Read  forfeit.  It  occurs  repeatedly  in  the  present  seem, 
for  ‘  forfeiture.’  Allen  :  Although  ‘  forfeiture  ’  can  be  scanned,  the  shorter  and  sharpei 
word  is  required  for  Shylock.  (The  several  ts  are  all  most  cuttingly  expressive.) 

13 1.  soale  .  .  .  soule]  Theobald  (in  his  Shakespeare  Restored ,  p.  168, — that  criti¬ 
cism  of  Pope’s  Edition  which  Pope  answered  by  making  ‘  Tibbald  ’  the  original  hero  of 
The  Dunciad )  :  I  dare  venture  to  restore  Him,  from  the  Authority  of  some  of  the  Folio 
Editions ;  tho’  I  am  obliged  at  the  same  Time  to  restore  such  a  Sort  of  Conceit,  and 
Jingle  upon  two  Words,  alike  in  Sound  but  differing  in  Sense,  as  our  Author  ought  to 
have  blush’d  for.  But  be  That  upon  his  own  Head.  If  I  restore  his  Meaning,  and 
his  Words,  he  himself  is  accountable  to  the  Judges  for  writing  them.  ‘Not  on  thy 
SOLE,  but  on  thy  SOUL,  harsh  Jew.’  That  is,  Tho’  thou  thinkest  that  thou  art  whetting 
thy  Knife  on  the  Sole  of  thy  Shoe,  yet  it  is  upon  thy  Soul,  thy  immortal  Part,  that  Thou 
doest  it,  mistaken,  inexorable  Man !  The  bare  intention  of  thy  Cruelty  is  so  unpar¬ 
donable,  that  thou  must  bring  thy  very  Soul  into  Hazard.  I  dare  affirm,  This  is  the 


ACT  IV,  sc.  i  ]  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


205 


Thou  mak’ft  thy  knife  keene  :  but  no  mettall  can, 
No,  not  the  hangmans  Axe  beare  halfe  the  keenneffe 


132 


132.  but  ]  for  Pope  4- . 


132.  mettalT\  fnettell  Q2.  mettle  Q3- 


very  Antithesis  of  our  Author;  and  I  am  the  more  confident,  because  it  was  so  usual 
with  him  to  play  on  Words  in  this  manner ;  and  because  in  another  of  his  Plays  he 
puts  the  very  same  Words  in  Opposition  to  one  another,  and  That  from  the  Mouth  of 
one  of  his  serious  Characters.  See  Rom.  dr3  Jul.  I,  iv,  15  :  ‘You  have  dancing  shoes 
With  nimble  soles ;  I  have  a  soul  of  lead.’  Warburton  :  This  lost  jingle  Mr  Theo¬ 
bald  found  again ;  but  knew  not  what  to  make  of  it  when  he  had  it,  as  appears  by  his 
paraphrase,  [which  Warburton  quotes,  and  exclaims]  Absurd  !  the  conceit  is,  that  his 
soul  was  so  hard  that  it  had  given  an  edge  to  his  knife.  Steevens  :  So  in  2  Hen.  IV: 
IV,  v,  10S  :  ‘  Thou  hid’st  a  thousand  daggers  in  thy  thoughts ;  Which  thou  hast  whetted 
on  thy  stony  heart.’  Eccles  :  To  me,  Theobald  and  Warburton  seem  to  mean  pretty 
much  the  same  thing.  Both  admit  that  the  Jew’s  soul  is  supposed,  by  the  figure,  to  be 
the  instrument  of  rendering  the  edge  more  keen.  The  jingle  may  incline  us  to  an 
opinion  that  the  vulgar,  diphthongal  pronunciation  of  the  word  ‘  soul  ’  was  in  use,  even 
among  polite  speakers,  in  Shakespeare’s  days.  [It  is  possible  that  the  difference  of 
spelling  in  the  Folio  indicates  a  difference  of  pronunciation  between  the  two  words, 
but  with  which  of  the  two  our  modern  pronunciation  better  agrees  it  is  hard  to  decide. 
The  spelling  of  the  same  words  in  Rom.  Jul.  gives  us  no  help,  but  rather  adds  to 
the  perplexity:  ‘You  haue  dancing  fhooes  With  nimble  foies,  I  haue  a  foale  of  Lead;’ 
nor  is  Jul.  Cces.  I,  i,  15,  any  clearer,  where  the  Cobbler  says  that  he  is  ‘a  Mender  of 
bad  foules.’  As  the  present  Irish  pronunciation  is  supposed  to  represent  in  many  words 
the  pronunciation  of  Shakespeare,  it  may  be  that  Eccles,  who  was  an  Irishman,  has 
given  us  the  true  hint,  and  that  soul  was  pronounced  almost  dissyllabically  sowl.  This 
was  confirmed,  I  thought,  by  finding  in  Com.  of  Err.  II,  i,  22  :  ‘  Indued  with  intellectual! 
fence  and  foules  Of  more  preheminence  then  fifli  and  fowles ;’  but  the  strength  of  this 
example  was  immediately  weakened  by  observing  only  a  few  lines  before  it :  ‘  The 
beafts,  the  fifhes  and  the  winged  fowles  Are  their  males  subjects  and  at  their  controules,’ 
which  goes  to  show,  even  if  other  evidence  were  wanting  (which  is  not),  that  fowl  ap¬ 
proached  more  nearly  to  our  pronunciation  of  soul,  than  soul  to  fowl.  On  turning  to 
Ellis  ( Early  Eng.  Pron.,  Part  III,  p.  903),  I  find  that  Gill  ( Logonomia ,  1621,  pp. 
77,  1 17)  gives  sool  as  the  pronunciation  of  ‘sole,’  and  ( lb .  20,  136)  sooul  as  that  of 
*  soul.’  This,  by  making  the  latter  dissyllabic,  would  leave  some  slight  difference  to  be 
detected  by  a  nice  ear.  But  Hodges,  1643,  who,  on  the  score  of  delicacy  of  pronun¬ 
ciation,  is  not  rated  by  Ellis  as  high  as  Gill,  in  his  list  of  words  ‘  alike  in  sound  and 
unlike  both  in  signification  and  writing,’  gives  ‘  the  sole  of  a  shoo,  the  soule  and  body, 
the  soles  of  his  shoos,  he  soleth  his  shoos,  soules  and  bodies  bought  and  sold ,  the  si  00s 
are  sol'd  I  (Ellis,  p.  1021),  wherein  it  is  apparently  intimated  that  there  is  no  difference 
whatever  in  pronunciation.  If  I  remember  rightly,  Mrs  Kemble  gave  to  ‘soul’  the 
slightly  dissyllabic  sound  mentioned  by  Gill,  with  a  narrower  sound  to  the  00,  almost 
like  a  very  broad  aa.  I  once  thought  that  peradventure  the  s  in  ‘  sole,’  in  memory  of 
the  close  connection  between  soles  and  shoes,  might  have  had  the  sound  of  sh  which 
we  still  retain  in  sure,  sugar,  and,  until  recently,  in  sewer.  But  the  search  was  fruit¬ 
less. — Ed.] 

133.  hangmans]  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  An  executioner.  So  in  Fletcher’s  Prophetess, 
III,  i,  Dioclesian,  who  had  stabbed  Aper,  is  called  ‘the  hangman  of  Volusius  Aper;’ 


206 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Of  thy  fharpe  enuy.  Can  no  prayers  pierce  thee? 

lew.  No,  none  that  thou  haft  wit  enough  to  make.  135 

Gra.  0  be  thou  damn’d,  inexecrable  dogge, 

And  for  thy  life  let  iuftice  be  accus’d : 

Thou  almoft  mak’ft  me  wauer  in  my  faith ; 

To  hold  opinion  with  Pythagoras, 

That  foules  of  Animals  infufe  themfelues  1 40 

Into  the  trunkes  of  men.  Thy  currifh  fpirit 

Gouern’d  a  Wolfe,  who  hang’d  for  humane  daughter,  142 

135.  haft]  hoafl  Fa.  138.  faith /] faith,  Rowe. 

136.  inexecrable]  QqF2,  Knt,  Cam.  142  humane]  humaine  Qa. 

Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii.  inexorable  F3F4  et  cet 

and  in  Jacke  Drum's  Entertainment,  Brabant  Junior,  being  prevented  by  Sir  Edward 
from  stabbing  himself,  declares  that  he  is  too  wicked  to  live :  ‘  And  therefore,  gentle 
knight,  let  mine  owne  hand  Be  mine  own  hangman,’  1616;  compare,  too,  a  play  of  a 
much  later  date,  the  Duke  of  Buckingham’s  Rehearsal,  where  Bayes  says :  ‘  I  come 
out  in  a  long  black  veil,  and  a  great  huge  hangman  behind  me,  with  a  furr’d  cap,  and 
his  sword  drawn ;  and  there  tell  ’em  plainly,  that  if,  out  of  good  nature,  they  will  not 
like  my  play,  I’gad,  I’ll  e’en  kneel  down,  and  he  shall  cut  my  head  off.’ — Works,  i, 
p.  21,  ed.  1775. 

1 34.  Scan,  for  the  sake  of  emphasising  the  proper  words :  ‘  Of  thy  |  sharp  knvy.  \  f 
|  Can  n6  |  prayers  pierce  thee  ?' — Ed. 

135.  Booth  :  No — doggedly,  without  looking  up. 

136.  inexecrable]  Malone  :  This  was,  perhaps,  unnecessarily  changed  in  F  .  In 
was  sometimes  used,  in  our  author’s  time,  in  composition,  as  an  augmentative  or  inten¬ 
sive  particle.  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  58) :  Richardson  has  given  ‘  inexecrable  ’  a  place  in 
his  Dictionary.  I  agree  with  Collier  [and  Capell,  too,  Dyce  might  have  added]  in 
considering  it  a  misprint.  Clarendon  :  That  is,  that  cannot  be  execrated  enough. 
Abbott  :  Compare  invaluable.  [Apart  from  the  fact  that  ‘  inexecrable  ’  is  found 
nowhere  else  in  the  language,  inexorable  is  so  very  appropriate  after  Gratiano’s  vain 
prayers,  that  I  cannot  but  think  that  the  former  word  is  a  misprint.  I  do  not  quite  see 
the  parallelism  of  Abbott’s  invaluable  (a  word,  by  the  way,  not  to  be  found  in  Shake¬ 
speare)  ;  a  thing  that  cannot  be  valued  enough  is  invaluable ;  a  thing  that  cannot  be 
execrated  enough  is,  what? — inexecratable ? — Ed.] 

x 37.  for  thy  life]  Capell:  His  meaning  is,  that  as  he  had  before  invok’d  damna¬ 
tion  upon  him,  so  now  he  would  have  ‘justice’  (executive  justice)  take  away  his  ‘life;’ 
though  it  were  in  wrong  and  to  that  justice’s  impeachment.  Eccles  :  Is  it  not  as  likely 
he  may  intend  to  say  that  ‘justice  ’  itself  merits  accusation  for  permitting  a  person  of  so 
unworthy  and  cruel  a  character  any  longer  to  live  ? 

138.  wauer  in  my  faith]  Booth:  Shylock  now  looks  up  at  him  with  mocking 
wonder.  During  the  rest  of  this  speech  he  slowly  takes  from  his  bosom  the  bond,  and 
at  its  close,  points  to  the  seal,  still  kneeling. 

142.  who  .  .  .  slaughter]  Clarendon  says  that  this  is  another  instance  of  what 
is  called  nominativtcs  pendens  in  Latin,  and  refers  to  I,  iii,  139:  ‘Who  if  he  break,’ 
&c.  Abbott,  §  376,  considers  it  a  case  of  Nominative  Absolute.  Steevens  :  This 
allusion  might  have  been  caught  from  some  old  translation  of  Pliny,  whc  mentions  a 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MEE CHANT  OF  VENICE 


207 


Euen  from  the  gallowes  did  his  fell  foule  fleet;  143 

And  whil’ft  thou  layeft  in  thy  vnhallowed  dam, 

Infus’d  it  felfe  in  thee  :  For  thy  deflres  145 

Are  Woluifh,  bloody,  fteru’d,  and  rauenous. 

lew .  Till  thou  canft  raile  the  feale  from  off  my  bond 
Thou  but  offend’ft  thy  Lungs  to  fpeake  fo  loud : 

Repaire  thy  wit  good  youth,  or  it  will  fall 

To  endleffe  ruine.  I  ftand  heere  for  Law.  150 

144.  whil'J!\  whiljl  Q,.  whileji  Q2Q3-  150.  endlejffe\  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i.  care- 

146.  Jleru'd^  Ff,  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  less  Pope,  cureleffe  Qq  et  cet. 
flartid  QtQ2.  Jlarv'd  Q3  et  cet.  heere~\  Om.  Q3> 

Parrhasian  turned  into  a  wolf,  because  he  had  eaten  part  of  a  child  that  had  been  con¬ 
secrated  to  Lycaean  Jupiter.  See  Goulart’s  Admirable  Histories,  p.  390.  [With  what 
ridicule  Steevens  would  have  greeted  this  note  had  it  been  put  forth  by  luckless  Theo¬ 
bald  !  The  passage  referred  to  in  Goulart,  contains  merely  an  account  of  Lycanthropy, 
and  not  a  syllable,  that  I  can  find,  which  has  any  bearing  on  these  words  of  Gratiano, 
except  that  the  word  ‘wolf’  is  common  to  both.  Allen  notes  that  ‘it  is  singular,  that 
while  Gratiano  says  a  wolf,  he  shews  he  is  thinking  of  a  wolvish  man,  a  murderer.’ 
To  me  it  is  so  singular  that  (coupled  with  its  grammatical  difficulty),  I  am  inclined  to 
suspect  that  there  is  some  corruption  here.  If  Mr  S.  L.  Lee  is  correct  (see  his  note¬ 
worthy  article  on  ‘The  Jews  in  England’  in  the  Appendix)  in  surmising  a  connection 
between  this  play  and  the  fate  of  Dr  Lopez,  the  Jew,  who  was  hung  at  Tyburn  in  1594, 
the  allusion  here,  vague  as  it  is,  is  quite  pointed  enough  to  have  been  caught  by  an  audi¬ 
ence  in  whose  minds  the  event  was  so  recent.  It  is  not  inconceivable  that  this  is  one 
of  those  actor’s  additions  which  Hamlet  denounces,  and  this  would  measurably  account 
for  its  grammatical  awkwardness.  The  whole  passage  from  ‘  Thy  currish  spirit,’  line 
141,  to  ‘Infus’d  itself  in  thee,’  line  145,  can  be  omitted  without  injury  either  to  the 
sense  or  to  the  rhythm.  Thus :  ‘  That  souls  of  animals  infuse  themselves  Into  the 
trunks  of  men.  For  thy  desires  Are  wolvish,  bloody,  sterv’d,  and  ravenous.’ — Ed.] 
144.  layest]  Douce:  Is  not  this  a  very  common  misprint  for  lay'dst,  where  the 
pieterite  is  intended  ?  [A  query  which  Allen  aptly  characterizes  as  ‘a  curious  piece 
of  deliberate  bad  grammar.’ — Ed.] 

146.  steru’d]  Collier  :  The  meaning  of  ‘  sterv’d  ’  and  starv’d  is  the  same ;  if  there 

were  a  difference,  it  might  be  fit  to  mark  it  with  a  difference  of  spelling.  Rolfe  :  The 
word  is  the  Anglosaxon  steorfan,  Old  Eng.  sterven  (frequent  in  Chaucer),  Ger.  sterben. 
It  originally  meant  to  die,  but  in  the  latter  part  of  the  16th  Century  came  to  be  used  in 
the  narrower  sense  of  perishing  with  cold, — a  meaning  which  it  still  has  in  the  North 
of  England  (see  also  2  Hen.  VI:  III,  i,  34 3,  &c.) — or  with  hunger.  [How  did  Pope 
pronounce  it  ?  ‘  But  still  the  Great  have  kindness  in  reserve,  Pie  help’d  to  bury  whom 

he  help’d  to  starve.’ — Epistle  to  Dr  Arbuthnot. — Ed.] 

147.  Booth  :  Now  rise,  and,  after  ‘  I  stand  here  for  the  law,’  turn  contemptuously 
from  Gratiano. 

147.  raile]  My  Father  says  that  the  prolonged,  grating,  guttural  tone  of  utter  con¬ 
tempt  with  which  Edmund  Kean  dwelt  on  this  word  has  never  left  his  memory. — Ed 
150.  endlesse]  I  am  by  no  means  sure  that  cureless  of  the  Qq  is  the  better  word 
here. — Ed. 


208 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Dn.  This  Letter  from  Bellario  doth  commend  15 1 

A  yong  and  Learned  Dodtor  in  our  Court; 

Where  is  he  ? 

Ner.  He  attendeth  heere  hard  by 
To  know  your  anfwer,  whether  you’l  admit  him.  155 

Du.  With  all  my  heart.  Some  three  or  four  of  you 
Go  giue  him  curteous  condudt  to  this  place, 

Meane  time  the  Court  fhall  he  are  Bellarioes  Letter. 

YOur  Grace  Jhall  vnderfland that  at  the  receite  of  your 

Letter  lam  very  Jicke :  but  in  the  injiant  that  your  mef-  1 60 

f eager  came ,  in  louing  vijitation ,  was  with  me  a  young  Do¬ 
ctor  of  Rome,  Ids  name  is  Balthafar  :  I  acquained  him  zvith 
the  caufe  in  Controucrfie ,  betweene  the  lew  and  Anthonio 
the  Merchant :  We  turd d  ore  many  Bookes  together :  hee  is 
furnifhed  zvith  my  opinion ,  which  bettred  with  las  owne  lear-  165 

jiing,  the greatneffe  whereof 1 cannot  enough  commend ,  comes 
zvith  him  at  my  importunity ,  to  fill  vp  your  Graces  requefil  in  167 


152.  in  our\  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  to  our 
Qq  et  cet. 

159-171.  Roman,  Q2Q3- 

159.  [Clerk,  [reads]  Cap. 

160.  in  the]  at  the  Rowe  +  ,  Steev. ’85. 


162.  Balthafar ]  Balthazer  Q,Qa. 
acquained]  Fx. 

163.  caufe]  cafe  F3F4,  Rowe. 
165.  bettred]  bettered  Q2Q3 


158,  159.  shall]  Abbott,  §315:  Used  to  denote  inevitable  futurity  without  refer- 
iuce  to  will  (desire).  See  also  ‘  Fair  Jessica  shall  be  my  torch-bearer,’  II,  iv,  42. 

159.  Booth  :  Shylock  gives  deep  attention  to  this  letter,  and  looks  quickly  and  curi¬ 
ously  at  Portia  until  she  is  on  the  dais  R.  H.,  then  he  turns  to  the  Duke. 

159-  receite]  Eccles  :  It  is  probable  that  Bellario  received  the  Duke’s  summons  to 
attend  this  cause  about  the  time,  or  rather,  perhaps,  a  little  before,  his  cousin  made  her 
application  to  him  by  letter.  Whether  the  doctor’s  illness  was  real,  or  pretended,  is  of 
no  moment  to  the  business  of  the  play;  it  is  sufficient  that  it  coincided  better  with  Por¬ 
tia’s  project  that  he  should  be  absent  upon  this  occasion. 

165.  opinion]  Kenrick  (Rev.  of  Dr  Johnson,  p.  52) :  I  have  known  some  spec¬ 
tators  impute  the  device,  by  which  Anthonio  evades  the  penalty  of  the  bond,  to  the 
ingenuity  of  Portia.  Perhaps  this  is  the  case,  indeed,  with  the  audience  in  general. 
But,  as  I  think  it  a  little  out  of  character,  in  a  young  lady  of  her  education,  to  be  so 
well  versed  in  the  quirks  and  quibbles  of  the  law,  so  I  conceive  there  is  sufficient 
reason  given  in  the  play  to  suppose  that  evasion  to  have  been  suggested  by  Bellario. 
For  she  expressly  mentions  to  the  messenger  the  notes  and  clothes.  These  ‘notes’ 
were,  doubtless,  the  brief  or  hints  for  her  pleading.  And  Bellario  says  in  his  letter 
‘  he  is  furnished  with  my  opinion.’ 

167.  fill  vp]  Clarendon:  ‘Up’  intensifies  the  verb  to  which  it  is  attached,  like 
Kara  in  Greek.  ‘  “  As  true  as  Troilus,”  shall  crown  up  the  verse,’ —  Tro.  and  Cress. 
Ill,  ii,  189.  On  the  other  hand,  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  ii,  168,  ‘  up  ’  is  almost  redundant : 
‘  Whether  the  tyranny  be  in  his  place,  Or  in  his  eminence  that  fills  it  up.’ 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


209 


my Jled.  I  befeechyou,  lei  his  lacke  of  years  be  no  impedime  nt  1 68 

to  let  him  lacke  a  reuerend  ejlimation :  for  I  neuer  knewe  fo 
yong  a  body ,  with  fo  old  a  head.  I  leaue  him  to  your  gracious  1 70 

acceptance ,  whofe  trial  Jhall  better  publifh  his  commendation. 


180 


Enter  Portia  for  Balthazar. 

Duke.  You  heare  the  learn’d  Bellario  what  he  writes, 

And  heere(I  take  it)is  the  Dodtor  come. 

Giue  me  your  hand  :  Came  you  from  old  Bellariol  [75 

Por.  I  did  my  Lord. 

Du.  You  are  welcome  :  take  your  place; 

Are  you  acquainted  with  the  difference 
That  holds  this  prefent  queftion  in  the  Court. 

Por.  I  am  enformed  throughly  of  the  caufe. 

Which  is  the  Merchant  heere?  and  which  the  lew? 

Du.  Anthonio  and  old  Shylocke ,  both  ftand  forth. 

Por.  Is  your  name  Shylocke  ?  183 


168.  fled]  Fx.  flead  QqFf. 

172.  Enter...]  Enter  Portia  dress’d  like 
a  Doctor  of  Laws.  Rowe. 

175.  Came ]  come  Qq,  Cam.  Cla.  Glo. 
Wh.  iL 


177.  You  are ]  You're  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 

180.  throughly"]  thoroughly  Steev.  ’85, 
Ktly. 

caufe]  Cafe  F3F4,  Rowe  +  . 


168.  no  impediment]  Clarendon:  That  is,  no  hindrance  to  his  receiving.  So 
jj.tj  is  used  in  Greek,  after  words  signifying  to  ‘  hinder,’  ‘  forbid,’  &c.,  a  usage  which 
sprang  originally  from  a  confusion  of  thought,  similar  to  that  in  line  81  of  the  present 
Scene:  ‘Forbid  ....  to  make  no  noise.’  Schmidt  (p.  1420):  This  is  equivalent 
either  to  ‘  let  his  lack  of  years  be  no  motive  to  let  him  lack,’  or  ‘  be  no  impediment  to 
let  him  have.’ 

171.  whose]  See  Abbott,  §263,  for  other  instances  of  ‘“who”  used  for  “and 
he,”  “  for  he,”  &c.’  Thus  here,  ‘  whose  trial,’  that  is,  ‘for  his  trial.’ 

173.  Bellario  what]  Abbott,  §414:  Instead  of  saying ‘I  know  what  you  are,’ 
in  which  the  object  of  the  verb  ‘I  know’  is  the  clause  ‘what  you  are,’  Shakespeare 
frequently  introduces  before  the  dependent  clause  another  object,  so  as  to  make  the 
dependent  clause  a  mere  explanation  of  the  object.  [One  of  Walker’s  chapters 
( Crit .  i,  p.  68)  is  devoted  to  examples  of  this  redundancy,  which,  as  he  says,  corre¬ 
sponds  to  the  Greek  idiom ;  e.g.  II.  B.  409 :  t]See  yap  Kara  dv/iov  aSsl^eov,  uq  ettoveito.] 

175.  Came]  Portia’s  reply,  ‘I  did,’  as  suggested  by  Clarendon,  shows  that  this  is 
better  than  Come  of  the  Qq. 

177.  place]  Staunton:  In  the  representation  of  this  scene,  pictorially  or  on  the 
stage,  it  seems  never  to  be  remembered  that  Portia,  throughout  the  trial,  appears  as  a 
judge,  not  an  advocate,  and  that  her  proper  place,  therefore,  is  on  the  judgement-seat, 
below  the  Duke’s  throne,  rather  than  on  the  supposed  floor  of  the  Court,  in  front  of  the 
stage.  Booth  :  Portia  goes  to  a  table  on  dais  R.  H.,  facing  the  Duke. 

182.  Booth  :  Antonio  and  Shylock  advance  and  bow  to  the  Duke. 

14 


210 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


lew.  Shylocke  is  my  name. 

Por.  Of  a  ftrange  nature  is  the  fute  you  follow,  185 

Yet  in  fuch  rule,  that  the  Venetian  Law 
Cannot  impugne  you  as  you  do  proceed. 

You  ftand  within  his  danger,  do  you  not? 


Ant. 

I,  fo  he  fayes. 

Por. 

Do  you  confeffe  the  bond? 

190 

Ant. 

I  do. 

Por. 

Then  muft  the  lew  be  mercifull. 

lew. 

On  what  compulfion  muft  I  ?  Tell  me  that. 

193 

187.  impugne\  impunge  Qt.  188.  [To  Anthonio.  Rowe. 

188.  you  not ]  ye  not  Qx. 

1 84.  Booth  :  After  a  look  of  surprise,  he  replies  doggedly. 

185.  Campbell  (p.  60) :  The  trial  is  conducted  according  to  the  strict  forms  of  legal 
procedure.  Portia,  the  Podesta  or  judge,  called  in  to  act  under  the  authority  of  the 
Doge,  first  inquires  if  there  be  any  plea  of  non  est  factum. 

186.  in  such  rule]  Allen:  So  regular. 

187.  impugne]  Steevens:  That  is,  to  oppose,  to  controvert. 

188.  danger]  Tyrwhitt  (Cant.  Tales,  v.  665) :  That  is,  within  his  reach  or  con¬ 
trol.  Henley  :  There  are  frequent  instances  in  The  Poston  Letters  of  the  use  of  this 
phrase  in  the  same  sense ;  whence  it  is  obvious,  from  the  common  language  of  the 
time,  that  to  be  in  debt  and  to  be  in  danger  were  synonymous  terms.  Gifford  (Mas¬ 
singer’s  Fatal  Dowry,  I,  ii) :  That  is,  to  be  in  your  debt,  a  common  expression  in  our 
old  writers.  Malone  :  Again,  in  V.  &=  A.  639 :  *  Come  not  within  his  danger  by  thy 
will.’  Knight  :  The  phrase  is  not  used  by  Portia  in  the  limited  and  secondary  sense 
of  being  in  debt.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  ‘  Within  his  danger  ’  was,  in  Shakespeare’s  time, 
and  long  before,  equivalent  merely  to  indebted  to  him  :  the  phrase  has  no  necessary 
reference  to  the  peril  of  Anthonio’s  position.  Halliwell  :  The  phrase  seems  to  be 
partially  retained  in  the  still  common  proverb,  ‘  out  of  debt,  out  of  danger.’  Staun¬ 
ton  :  Ducange  explains  the  term  as  follows :  Hanger,  quidquid  juri  stricto,  atque  adeo 
confiscation!  obnoxium  est.’  Wedgwood  (s.  v.)  :  To  be  in  the  danger  of  any  one, 
estre  en  son  danger,  came  to  signify  to  be  subjected  to  any  one,  to  be  in  his  power,  or 
liable  to  a  penalty  to  be  inflicted  by  him  or  at  his  suit,  and  hence  the  ordinary  accepta¬ 
tion  of  the  word  at  the  present  day.  *  In  danger  of  the  judgement — in  danger  of  Hell- 
fire.’  Skeat  (s.  v.) :  Old  French,  dangier  (modern  French,  danger ),  absolute  power, 
irresponsible  authority ;  hence,  power  to  harm,  as  in  [the  present  passage.  Gairdner’s 
Index  to  The  Paston  Letters  supplies  us  with  the  following :  *  I  truste  right  well  all  the 
aldermen,  except  Broun  and  sech  as  be  in  his  dawnger.’ — John  Jenney  to  John  Paston, 
vol.  i,  p.  340,  ed.  Gairdner. — Ed.] 

190.  Booth  :  Shylock  darts  a  glance  at  Anthonio. 

192.  must]  Abbott,  §314:  Sometimes  used  by  Shakespeare  to  mean  no  more 
than  definite  futurity,  like  our  ‘  is  to  ’  in  ‘  He  is  to  be  here  to-morrow.’  [See  II,  vi,  47.] 
Somewhat  similar,  without  the  notion  of  compulsion,  is  the  use  of  it  in  [the  present 
passage.  Abbott  is,  of  course,  right  in  saying  that  Portia  uses  *  must  ’  without  any 
notion  of  compulsion,  yet  it  is  exactly  in  that  sense  that  Shylock  takes  it. — Ed.]. 

193.  Booth  :  With  great  assurance,  and  contemptuously  turning  away. 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


21  I 


Por.  The  quality  of  mercy  is  not  Train’d, 
It  droppeth  as  the  gentle  raine  from  heauen 
Vpon  the  place  beneath.  It  is  twice  bleft, 

It  bleffeth  him  that  giues,  and  him  that  takes, 


197 


195 


195.  raine ]  dew  Lansdowne. 


194.  Booth  :  When  Portia  begins  to  speak  she  descends  from  the  dais  and  advances. 
Douce  :  In  composing  these  beautiful  lines  it  is  probable  that  Shakespeare  recollected 
the  following  verse  in  Ecclesiasticus,  xxxv,  20 : * * *  4  Mercy  is  seasonable  in  the  time  of 
affliction,  as  clouds  of  rain  in  the  time  of  drought.’  [There  is  a  tendency,  I  think,  in 
repeating  this  familiar  line,  to  lay  the  chiefest  emphasis  on  4  mercy.’  Is  this  right  ?  In 
reply  to  Shylock’s  demand  for  a  proof  of  his  compulsion  to  be  merciful,  Portia  exclaims 
that  the  very  characteristic  of  mercy  is  that  there  can  be  no  compulsion  in  its  exercise. 
Its  very  nature  is  to  fall  like  the  rain.  Should  not  4  quality,’  then,  receive  the  greater, 
and  4  mercy  ’  a  secondary,  emphasis  ? — Ed. 

In  the  Jahrbuch,  ix,  p.  195,  there  is  a  learned  article  by  Wm.  Koenig,  Ueber  die 
Entlehnungen  Shakespeare' s,'  &c.  In  that  article  (p.  218)  passages  are  cited  from 
Rabelais,  from  Cicero,  from  a  tragedy  by  Leonoro  Verlato,  called  Rodopeia,  and  else¬ 
where,  which  bear  certain  resemblances  to  some  of  the  lines  and  ideas  in  this  speech. 
It  is  not  always  easy  to  take  interest  in  the  detection  of  parallelisms  like  these,  which 
lead  us  nowhither.  In  view  of  Shakespeare’s  myriad-mindedness,  our  wonder  is  not 
that  there  are  so  many,  but  that  there  are  no  more. — Ed.] 

Hazlitt  (p.  274) :  This  speech  about  4  mercy  ’  is  very  well ;  but  there  are  a  thou¬ 
sand  finer  ones  in  Shakespeare.  [See  in  Appendix  Charles  Cowden-Clarke’s  expla¬ 
nation  of  the  unsympathetic  mood  which  seemed  to  rule  Hazlitt  throughout  his  criti¬ 
cism  of  Portia. — Ed.] 

194.  strain’d]  R.  S.  Davies  :  That  is,  confined  by  laws,  restricted  to  a  few  persons. 

4  You  are  as  free  to  use  it  as  any  one.  The  rain  does  not  favour  the  king’s  garden  any 
more  than  the  peasant’s.  It  waters  all  places  alike,  and  mercy  should  descend  as 
equally  and  impartially.’  [I  suppose  this  is  the  best  possible  defence  of  an  erroneous 
interpretation,  which  overlooks  in  4  strain’d  ’  the  answer  to  Shylock’s  question  of  com¬ 
pulsion. — Ed.] 

196.  twice  blest]  Eccles  :  4  Mercy  ’  is  made  both  the  blesser  and  the  blessed.  The 
verb  is  twice  used  in  the  same  general  sense  of,  to  make  happy,  varying  only  from  pas¬ 
sive  to  active.  In  its  first  application,  however,  4  mercy  ’  is  the  representative  both  of 
the  person  who  exercises  that  virtue,  and  also  of  him  who  is  the  object  of  it;  in  its 
second,  it  is  made  a  distinct  agent  from  both,  and  regarded  as  conferring  happiness 
upon  each.  It  may,  perhaps,  help  to  solve  this  perplexity  if  we  consider  4  mercy  ’  as 
personified,  and  4  blest,’  inasmuch  as  she  enjoys  the  power  of  blessing,  i.  e.  of  render¬ 
ing  happy  both  the  giver  and  receiver ;  or  we  may  understand  the  word  4  blest  ’  in  a 
signification  which  it  frequently  bears,  that  of  addressed  or  saluted  with  benediction  ;  in 
the  first  place,  on  the  part  of  him  that  gives  for  the  pleasure  which  he  derives  from 
having  acted  mercifully,  and  again,  on  the  part  of  him  that  takes  for  the  benefit  con¬ 
ferred  by  the  mercy  shown  him.  Seymour  (i,  125) :  Would  not  the  sense  be  better 
expressed  if  we  should  read  ‘twice-blessing’?  Yet  I  cannot  approve  this:  ‘twice- 
blessed  ’  certainly  does  not  mean  blessed  in  repetition,  as  our  actresses  most  vilely  utter 
it,  but  blessed  augmentedly,  blessed  supremely,  or  in  a  great  degree,  as  we  say,  thrice 
happy,  without  any  idea  of  repetition.  ‘Blessed’  here  is  holy.  Allen  refers  to  III, 


212 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


’Tis  mightieft  in  the  mightieft,  it  becomes  198 

The  throned  Monarch  better  then  his  Crowne. 

His  Scepter  fhewes  the  force  of  temporall  power,  200 

The  attribute  to  awe  and  Maieftie, 

Wherein  doth  fit  the  dread  and  feare  of  Kings  : 

But  mercy  is  aboue  this  fceptred  fway, 

It  is  enthroned  in  the  hearts  of  Kings, 

It  is  an  attribute  to  God  himfelfe ;  205 

And  earthly  power  doth  then  fhew  likeft  Gods 

206.  likefi~\  lik'Jl  Qj. 

ii,  103,  ‘the  guiled  shore,’  where,  if  ‘guiled’  means  endowed  with  guiles,  then  ‘blest’ 
may  be  here  equivalent  to  endued  with  the  capacity  to  bless. 

201.  awe  and  Maiestie]  Allen:  ‘  Awe,’ properly,  of  the  subject;  ‘majesty,’ of 
'.he  king,  the  cause  of  ‘  awe.’  By  hendiadys,  both  might  be  taken  together,  equivalent 
to  awful  majesty.  The  subject  ‘dreads  and  fears  ’  the  king,  because  of  that  awe-breed¬ 
ing  majesty  which  is  associated  with  his  tei7iporal  power.  It  is  implied  in  what  follows, 
that  the  God-like  quality  of  7nercy,  on  the  other  hand,  being  seated  in  the  heart  of  the 
king,  evokes  from  the  subject  a  corresponding  affection  of  the  heart,  even  love. 

204.  hearts]  Eccles  :  This,  I  think,  should  be  spoken  with  particular  emphasis. 

206,  207.  Whalley  (p.  65) :  Compare  Tit.  And.  I,  i,  117,  tho’  there  is  a  proba¬ 
bility  it  might  not  come  from  Shakespeare :  ‘  Wilt  thou  draw  near  the  nature  of  the 
gods  ?  Draw  near  them  then  in  being  merciful.’  Which  is  directly  the  sense  and 
words  of  a  passage  in  one  of  Cicero’s  finest  Orations :  ‘  Homines  ad  Deos  nulla  re 
proprius  accedunt  quam  salutem  hominibus  dando.’ — Orat.  pro  Ligar.  sub  fin. 
Malone:  So,  in  King  Edward  III ,  1596,  V,  i,  41 :  ‘And  Kings  approch  the  nearest 
vnto  God  By  giuing  life  and  safety  vnto  men.’  So  Sir  J.  Harrington  [  Orlando  Furioso, 
1591,  B.  xxiv,  st.  30 — Collier ]  :  ‘This  noble  vertue  and  divine,  Doth  chiefly  make  a 
man  so  rare  and  od,  As  in  that  one  he  most  resembleth  God.’  So  Thomas  Achely, 
also  quoted  in  England's  Parnassus ,  under  the  same  head  ‘  Mercie :’  ‘  Then  come 
we  nearest  to  the  gods  on  hie,  When  we  are  farthest  from  extremitie,  Giving  forth  sen¬ 
tence  of  our  lawes  with  Mercie.’  Blackevvay  :  There  is  something  extremely  like 
this  in  the  petition  of  the  Convocation  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  in  1580,  praying  her  to 
pardon  Archbishop  Grindal :  ‘  Nihil  est  tarn  populare  quam  bonitas :  atque  principes  ad 
pnepotentem  Deum  nulla  re  propius  accedunt  quam  offensionibus  deponendis  et  obli- 
viscendis  injuriis,’ — Fuller’s  Church  Hist,  sub  ann.  Hunter  (i,  328) :  It  was  one  of 
the  common-places  of  the  time,  and  might,  no  doubt,  be  found  in  innumerable  writers ; 
but  it  may  be  doubted  whether  it  is  anywhere  exhibited  in  a  manner  so  impressive  as 
here.  Such  sentiments,  so  far  as  they  respect  the  course  of  public  punishments,  it  was 
of  more  importance  to  urge  in  Shakespeare’s  time  than  now ;  when  the  single  mind 
of  the  monarch,  unswayed  by  counsel,  and  with  no  very  determinate  principles,  often 
decided  the  fate  of  persons  convicted  of  crimes,  of  which  a  very  remarkable  instance 
occurred  in  the  time  of  Shakespeare,  when  James  I  secretly  determined  to  save  the  lives 
of  the  Lords  Grey  and  Cobham,  convicted  of  treason,  when  every  one  beside  thought 
that  their  execution  was  certain.  Clarendon  :  It  is  possible  that  Shakespeare  in  writ¬ 
ing  this  passage  intended  to  compliment  Elizabeth,  whose  rule  (whatever  be  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  recent  historians)  was  certainly  held  by  her  subjects  to  be  mild  and  merciful. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  i.]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


213 


When  mercie  feafons  Iuftice.  Therefore  lew,  207 

Though  Iuftice  be  thy  plea,  confider  this, 

That  in  the  courfe  of  Iuftice,  none  of  vs 

Should  fee  faluation  :  we  do  pray  for  mercie,  210 

And  that  fame  prayer,  doth  teach  vs  all  to  render 
The  deeds  of  mercie.  I  haue  fpoke  thus  much 
To  mittigate  the  iuftice  of  thy  plea : 

Which  if  thou  follow,  this  ftridt  courfe  of  Venice 
Muft  needes  giue  fentence  ’gainft  the  Merchant  there.  215 

Shy.  My  deeds  vpon  my  head,  I  craue  the  Law, 

The  penaltie  and  forfeite  of  my  bond. 

Por.  Is  he  not  able  to  difcharge  the  money  ? 

Baf.  Yes,  heere  I  tender  it  for  him  in  the  Court,  219 


214.  courfe\  Court  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 


206.  Gods]  Booth  :  At  the  mention  of  the  sacred  name,  Shylock  bows  reverently, 
which  none  of  the  Christians  do.  Cooke,  when  commended  for  this,  said  it  was  Mack- 
lin’s  ‘  business,’  and,  according  to  my  belief,  Burbage  did  it, — perhaps  at  Shakespeare’s 
suggestion. 

208.  Iustice]  Shylock’s  plea  was ‘judgement,’ not  justice. — Ed. 

210,  21 1.  Blackstone:  Portia,  referring  the  Jew  to  the  Christian  doctrine  of  salva¬ 
tion  and  the  Lord’s  Prayer,  is  a  little  out  of  character.  R.  T.  (Anon.  ap.  Seymour, 
i,  125):  Besides  that  it  is  supposed  the  Lord’s  Prayer  consists  of  expressions  in  use 
among  Jews,  their  Scriptures  abound  with  passages  recommending  mercy,  particularly 
Ecclesiasticus,  xxviii.  Wordsworth  (p.  m) :  The  learned  judge  was  probably  not 
aware  that  the  Lord’s  Prayer  was  not  composed  by  our  Lord  as  containing  anything 
which  would  be  new  and  strange  to  His  disciples,  but  as  putting  together,  in  a  short 
form,  all  that  was  most  valuable  in  the  Jewish  liturgies  already  known  to  them.  See 
Lightfoot,  ii,  159,  439 ;  Grotius  on  S.  Matthew,  vi,  9;  who  also  refers  to  Ecclesiasticus, 
xxviii.  The  Biblical  critics,  therefore,  who,  like  Burkitt,  except  the  particular  clause 
which  Portia  refers  to — viz.  ‘  As  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us,’  from  the 
foregoing  representation  in  regard  to  the  origin  of  the  several  petitions  of  the  Lord’s 
Prayer,  have,  in  all  probability,  made  that  single  exception  without  sufficient  reason. 
Besides,  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  many  of  the  Jews,  though  they  did  not  accept 
Christ  as  their  Messiah,  yet  they  did  accept  Him  as  ‘  a  teacher  come  from  God.’  And 
certainly  it  is  not  correct  to  suppose  that  the  Christian  doctrine  of  salvation  is  not  alsr 
the  doctrine  of  salvation  to  the  faithful  Jew. 

21 1.  that  same  prayer]  Dunlap’s  Life  of  Cooke :  Shakespeare  here  makes  Por¬ 
tia,  in  her  zeal,  quote  the  Lord's  Prayer ,  but  the  great  actor,  by  his  look  and  the  shake 
of  his  head  and  of  his  hand,  gives  a  comment  on  the  text,  by  rejecting  the  application 
to  himself,  or  to  those  of  his  belief. 

,216.  Booth:  After  a  pause.  Henley:  An  imprecation  adopted  from  that  of  the 
Jews  to  Pilate :  *  His  blood  be  on  us,  and  our  children.’ 

216.  Law,]  In  a  modern  text  there  should  be  here  either  a  dash,  as  Allen  suggests, 
or  a  colon,  to  indicate  that  what  follows  in  the  next  line  is  what  the  law  gives  him. — Ed, 


214 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Yea,  twice  the  fumme,  if  that  will  not  fuffice,  220 

I  will  be  bound  to  pay  it  ten  times  ore, 

On  forfeit  of  my  hands,  my  head,  my  heart : 

If  this  will  not  fuffice,  it  muft  appeare 

That  malice  beares  downe  truth.  And  I  befeech  you 

Wreft  once  the  Law  to  your  authority.  225 

To  do  a  great  right,  do  a  little  wrong, 

And  curbe  this  cruell  diuell  of  his  will. 

Por.  It  muft  not  be,  there  is  no  power  in  Venice 
Can  alter  a  decree  eftablifhed  : 

’Twill  be  recorded  for  a  Prefident,  230 

And  many  an  error  by  the  fame  example, 

Will  ruffi  into  the  ftate  :  It  cannot  be. 

lew.  A  Daniel  come  to  iudgement,  yea  a  Daniel.  233 

220.  twice]  thrice  Ritson,  Coll.  iii.  230.  Prefident]  Ff,  Rowe,  precedent 

229.  alter]  altar  Q2.  Qq. 

220.  twice]  Capell  (ii,  70) :  When  Portia,  towards  the  page’s  bottom,  mentions  this 
offer,  she  calls  it — an  offer  of *  *  thrice  ’  the  sum ;  and  this  thrice  is  the  sum  accepted  by 
Shylock ;  from  whence  some  might  be  apt  to  infer  an  error  in  the  term  of  this  passage : 
but  Portia  had  ground  enough  for  her  thrice  from  what  Bassanio  says  afterwards,  and 
the  Jew  (as  was  right)  catches  at  the  term  in  her  offer.  Collier  :  Portia  afterward 
speaks  of  ‘  thrice  thy  money.’  This  may  have  been  a  mere  inadvertence,  a  mishear¬ 
ing,  or  a  misprint.  Clarendon  :  As  Bassanio  offers  ten  times  the  sum,  Portia  is 
authorized  to  offer  thrice  the  sum  in  his  name,  as  omne  majus  continet  in  se  minus. 
Or  Bassanio  here  may  be  supposed  to  offer  twice  the  sum  in  addition  to  his  previous 
tender  of  the  sum  itself;  thrice  the  sum  in  all.  Rolfe:  We  see  no  necessity  for 
bringing  the  two  passages  into  mathematical  agreement. 

224.  truth]  Theobald  (5^.  Restored,  p.  167) :  How  does  Malice  bear  down  Truth 
in  this  process  ?  What  one  circumstance  is  there  in  the  cause  whereby  Truth  or  False¬ 
hood  can  come  into  question  ?  ....  I  make  not  the  least  question  but  our  poet  made  Bas¬ 
sanio  say,  *  That  malice  bears  down  ruth.'  Heath  (p.  121) :  I  apprehend  that  the  word 

*  truth  ’  here  denotes  that  supreme  rule  of  right  and  equity  by  which  all  human  actions 
ought  to  be  directed.  Johnson  :  ‘  Malice  ’  oppresses  honesty ;  a  true  man,  in  old  lan¬ 
guage,  is  an  honest  man.  We  now  call  the  jury  good  men  and  true.  [In  his  Edition, 
Theobald  says  that,  *  upon  more  mature  advice,’  he  believes  ‘  the  text  needs  no  altera¬ 
tion.  Truth  may  mean  here  reason ;  the  reasonable  offers  of  accommodation  which 
we  have  made.’] 

228,  &c.  Booth  :  Shylock’s  face  expresses  joy  and  astonishment.  Portia  utters  *  It 
cannot  be,’  line  232,  with  great  decision ;  lines  233,  234,  Shylock  utters  almost  wildly 
(not  too  loud),  and  kisses  the  hem  of  Portia’s  gown. 

231.  error]  Schmidt  ( Translation ) :  Portia’s  point  of  view  is  not  that  of  the  moral¬ 
ist,  but  of  the  statesman ;  and  ‘  error  ’  is  here  not  a  mistake ,  but  a  departure  from  the 
prescribed  path.  Compare  Oth.  V,  ii,  ‘It  is  the  very  error  of  the  moon;  she  comes 
more  nearer  earth  than  she  was  wont,’  &c. ;  also  Mid.  N.  D.  V,  i,  250. 


act  iv,  sc.  i.j  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


215 


O  wife  young  Iudge,  how  do  I  honour  thee. 

Por.  I  pray  you  let  me  looke  vpon  the  bond. 

lew.  Heere  ’tis  moft  reuerend  Dodtor,  heere  it  is. 

Por.  Shylocke ,  there’s  thrice  thy  monie  offered  thee. 

Shy.  An  oath,  an  oath,  I  haue  an  oath  in  heauen  : 

Shall  I  lay  periurie  vpon  my  foule  ? 

No  not  for  Venice. 

Por.  Why  this  bond  is  forfeit, 

And  lawfully  by  this  the  lew  may  claime 
A  pound  of  flefh,  to  be  by  him  cut  off 
Neereft  the  Merchants  heart  ;  be  mercifull, 

Take  thrice  thy  money,  bid  me  teare  the  bond. 

lew.  When  it  is  paid  according  to  the  tenure. 

234  and  throughout.  Iudge ]  Judg  F^.  237.  offered ]  offer'd  Pope. 

do  /]  I  do  Qq,  Cap.  Coll.  Hal.  240.  No  not~\  Not  not  Q2. 

Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Huds.  Wh.  ii.  246.  tenure\  tenour  Qx. 

235.  let  me~\  Om.  F3F4> 

233.  Theobald  (Nichols,  Illust.  ii,  312) :  There  is  no  fault  in  sense  here;  I  think 
the  pointing  is  not  exactly  as  the  poet  designed  it.  I  like  it  better,  *  A  Daniel !  Come 
to  judgement : — yea,  a  Daniel !’  For  this  reading  not  only  extols  the  advocate,  but 
expresses  the  Jew’s  impatience  for  a  sentence.  [This  was  not  repeated  in  Theobald’s 
Edition. — Ed.]  Hunter  (i,  329) :  One  would  rather  have  expected  to  have  found 
Solomon  in  this  place.  [Solomon  is  added  in  Lansdowne’s  Version. — Ed.]  But  see 
the  Story  of  Susannah  and  the  Elders ;  and  also  Ezekiel,  xxviii,  3,  and  Daniel,  vi,  3 
Wordsworth  (p.  87) :  Daniel,  according  to  the  History  of  Susannah  and  the  Elders, 
v.  45,  was  a  ‘  young  youth  ’  when  he  convicted  the  Elders  ‘  of  false  witness  by  their  own 
mouth.’  His  detection  also  of  the  imposture  of  the  priests  of  Bel,  as  we  read  in  the 
Apocryphal  History  of  Bel  and  the  Dragon,  may  have  contributed  to  suggest  the  pro¬ 
priety  of  the  allusion. 

234.  thee]  Abbott,  §  233  :  Thou  is  the  rhetorical,  you  the  conversational,  pronoun. 
This  explains  the  apparent  liberty  which  Shylock  takes  here. 

236.  Booth  :  With  great  haste  he  draws  forth  both  the  bond  and  his  knife.  Portia 
utters  the  next  line  impressively,  and  Shylock  replies  as  solemnly. 

238-240.  Hawkins  ( Life  of  Kean,  i,  p.  151) :  Kean  replaced  the  conventional,  sol¬ 
emn  severity  of  manner  with  a  tone  of  humour  bordering  on  the  ludicrous ;  it  was  the 
bitter  ironical  joke  of  a  man  who  saw  no  obstacle  standing  between  him  and  the  con¬ 
summation  of  his  cherished  purpose. 

244.  Neerest  .  .  .  heart]  Halliwell:  This  seems,  at  first  sight,  at  variance  with 
what  is  stated  in  the  First  Act :  ‘  To  be  cut  off  and  taken  in  what  part  of  your  body 
pleaseth  me but  it  may  be  presumed  that  the  selection  of  the  part  was  made  by  Shy 
lock  before  the  bond  was  actually  drawn  up. 

244.  be  mercifull]  Booth:  Shylock  shrugs  his  shoulders  and  shakes  his  forefinger 
after  the  Italian  custom.  Line  246  he  speaks  quickly,  preventing  the  act. 

246.  Dunlap’s  Life  of  Cooke  (i,  122) :  The  audience  were  surprised  and  delighted 
by  the  abruptness  of  his  reply  to  Portia’s  request  that  he  would  permit  the  bond  to  be 


235 


240 


245 


2l6 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


It  doth  appeare  you  are  a  worthy  Iudge :  247 

you  know  the  Law,  your  expofition 

Hath  beene  mofb  found.  I  charge  you  by  the  Law, 

Whereof  you  are  a  well-deferuing  pillar,  250 

Proceede  to  iudgement  :  By  my  foule  I  fweare, 

There  is  no  power  in  the  tongue  of  man 
To  alter  me  :  I  ftay  heere  on  my  bond. 

An.  Moft  heartily  I  do  befeech  the  Court 
To  giue  the  iudgement.  255 

Por.  Why  then  thus  it  is  : 
you  muft  prepare  your  bofome  for  his  knife. 
lew.  O  noble  Iudge,  O  excellent  yong  man. 

Por.  For  the  intent  and  purpofe  of  the  Law 
Hath  full  relation  to  the  penaltie,  260 

Which  heere  appeareth  due  vpon  the  bond. 

lew.  ’Tis  verie  true  :  O  wife  and  vpright  Iudge, 

How  much  more  elder  art  thou  then  thy  lookes  ? 

Por.  Therefore  lay  bare  your  bofome. 

lew.  I,  his  breft,  265 

So  fayes  the  bond,  doth  it  not  noble  Iudge  ? 

Neereft  his  heart,  thofe  are  the  very  words. 

Por.  It  is  fo  :  Are  there  ball  ance  heere  to  weigh  the 
flefh  ?  269 

250.  pillar ]  piller  Q2Q3>  268.  It. ..weigh]  One  line,  Cap.  et  seq. 

262,  265,  270,  273,  276.  lew.]  Shy.  (except  Hal.  Sta.). 

Qj.  ballance  heere ]  ballances  hert 

264.  your]  thy  F  ,  Rowe.  Rowe,  scales  Pope  +  . 


torn :  ‘  When  it  is  paid  according  to  the  tenour,’  he  replies,  indicating  a  degree  of 
apprehension  lest  she  should  tear  it,  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  malignant  recognition 
of  the  penalty  due. 

253-  on]  Abbott,  §  180:  Metaphorically  for  in  dependence  on. 

259-261.  Eccles  :  The  intention  and  meaning  of  the  law,  framed  for  the  determi¬ 
nation  of  similar  cases,  is  clearly  applicable  to,  and  strongly  in  favour  of,  Shylock’s 
right  to  exact  the  penalty.  Booth  :  Shylock  watches  the  effect  of  Portia’s  words  on 
the  faces  of  the  Duke  and  Senators. 

263.  more  elder]  For  double  comparatives,  see  Abbott,  §  1 1. 

265.  Booth  :  Shylock  takes  the  bond  eagerly  from  Portia,  and,  when  returning  it 
to  her  after  *  those  are  the  very  words,’  looks  at  Anthonio. 

268.  ballance]  Halliwell  gives  several  instances  where  ‘balance’  was  used  in 
Shakespeare’s  time  as  a  plural  noun.  Clarendon  :  This  is  the  only  instance  where 
it  is  thus  used  by  Shakespeare.  It  is  common  to  find  a  confusion  in  the  Number  of 
nouns  ending  in  a  sibilant.  [See  Oth.  I,  iii,  357;  Walker’s  Vers.  243;  Abbott, 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  217 

lew.  I  haue  them  ready.  270 

Por.  Haue  by  fome  Surgeon  Shylock  on  your  charge 
To  flop  his  wounds,  lead:  he  fhould  bleede  to  death. 
lew.  It  is  not  nominated  in  the  bond  ? 

Por.  It  is  not  fo  expreft  :  but  what  of  that  ? 

’Twere  good  you  do  fo  much  for  charitie.  275 

lew.  I  cannot  finde  it,  Tis  not  in  the  bond. 

270.  [Producing  scales.  Coll.  ii.  273.  It  is  not ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i.  Is 

272.  Jhould ]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Wh.  i.  it  fo  Qq  et  cet. 

do  Qq  et  cet. 


§471.  Difficult  as  is  the  scansion  of  this  line  as  it  stands  in  the  Folio,  I  prefer  it  to 
the  ‘  running-on  ’  scansion  of  Capell,  which  here  strikes  me  as  peculiarly  unhappy.  If 
the  fine  must  be  divided,  I  should  prefer  to  consider *  *  It  is  so  ’  as  the  first  fragment, 
and  supply  any  defect  in  metre  by  a  pause  after  it.  Thus  says  Coleridge  ( Table  Talk, 
p.  80,  ed.  Morley) :  *  Shakespeare’s  rhythm  is  so  perfect  that  you  may  be  almost  sure 
that  you  do  not  understand  the  real  force  of  a  line,  if  it  does  not  run  well  as  you  read 
it.  The  necessary  mental  pause  after  every  hemistich,  or  imperfect  line,  is  always  equal 
to  the  time  that  would  have  been  taken  in  reading  the  complete  verse.’ — Ed.] 

273.  Whether  it  is  better  to  read  this,  despite  the  interrogation  mark,  as  an  assertion, 
with  the  Folio,  or  as  a  question,  with  the  Quartos,  I,  for  one,  cannot  decide.  Booth’s 
Shylock  ‘  places  the  scales  on  the  dais  and  takes  the  bond  from  Portia.’  In  this  case 
Shylock  must  ask,  *  Is  it  so  nominated  ?’  before  he  examines  the  bond.  If  he  examines 
the  bond  first,  he  must  say,  ‘  It  is  not  so  nominated  ’  at  the  conclusion  of  his  examina¬ 
tion  and  as  he  returns  the  bond  to  Portia.  It  is,  however,  immaterial,  and  may  be  safely 
left  to  the  actor. — Ed. 

275.  ’Twere  .  .  .  do]  Abbott,  §  370,  explains  the  irregular  sequence  of  tenses 
here  by  supposing  that  a  present  tense  is  implied :  *  It  were  and  is  good.’  At  the  word 

*  charity,’  says  Booth,  ‘  Shylock  rivets  his  gaze  on  Anthonio  until  he  has  returned  the 
bond  to  Portia,’  which  he  does  while  uttering  line  276. 

276.  Hawkins  ( Life  of  Kean,  i,  152) :  Kean  substituted  a  chuckle  of  transport  for 
the  savage  sneer  with  which  the  line  had  been  rendered  by  Cooke  and  Macklin.  This 
was  a  fine  touch  of  nature.  ‘  The  most  ferocious  and  deadly  passions,’  writes  one  of 
the  critics  in  justification  of  this  innovation,  ‘  relapse  into  an  almost  paroxysm  of  joy 
when  the  victims  are  placed  in  their  power ;  as  the  poet  has  made  death  grin  horribly 
a  ghastly  smile  at  the  prospect  of  an  abundant  food  for  his  savage  appetite.’ 

276.  Lady  Martin  (p.  43) :  At  this  point  I  have  always  felt  in  the  acting  that  my 
desire  to  find  extenuations  for  Shylock’s  race  and  for  himself  leaves  me,  and  my  heart 
grows  almost  as  stony  as  his  own.  I  see  his  fiendish  nature  fully  revealed.  I  have 
seen  the  knife  sharpened  to  cut  quickly  through  the  flesh ;  the  scales  brought  forward 
to  weigh  it ;  have  watched  the  cruel,  eager  eyes,  all  strained  and  yearning  to  see  the 
gushing  blood  welling  from  the  side  *  nearest  the  heart,’  and  gloating  over  the  fancied 
agonies  and  death-pangs  of  his  bitter  foe.  This  man-monster,  this  pitiless,  savage 
nature,  is  beyond  the  pale  of  humanity;  it  must  be  made  powerless  to  hurt.  I  have 
Felt  that  with  him  the  wrongs  of  his  race  are  really  as  nothing  compared  with  his  own 
remorseless  hate.  He  is  no  longer  the  wronged  and  suffering  man ;  and  I  longed  to 
pour  down  on  his  head  the  ‘  justice  ’  he  has  clamoured  for,  and  will  exact  without  pity. 


2l8 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Por.  Come  Merchant,  haue  you  any  thing  to  fay?  277 

Ant.  But  little  :  I  am  arm’d  and  well  prepar’d. 

Giue  me  your  hand  Baffanio ,  fare  you  well. 

Greeue  not  that  I  am  falne  to  this  for  you :  280 

For  heerein  fortune  fhewes  her  felfe  more  kinde 
Then  is  her  cuftome.  It  is  ftill  her  vfe 
To  let  the  wretched  man  out-liue  his  wealth, 

To  view  with  hollow  eye,  and  wrinkled  brow 

An  age  of  pouerty.  From  which  lingring  penance  285 

Of  fueh  miferie,  doth  fhe  cut  me  off : 

Commend  me  to  your  honourable  Wife, 

Tell  her  the  proceffe  of  Antlionids  end  : 

Say  how  I  lou’d  you  ;  fpeake  me  faire  in  death  : 

And  when  the  tale  is  told,  bid  her  be  iudge,  290 

Whether  Baffanio  had  not  once  a  Loue  : 


277.  Come ]  You  Qq,  Coll,  i,  ii,  Cam. 
Glo.  Cla.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

282.  her  cuJlome~\  his  cujlome  Ff. 

286.  fueh ]  fuch  a  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 
Steev.  ’93,  Knt,  Coll,  iii,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 


such  deep  Ktly.  sordid  Lloyd  (ap.  Cam.). 
so  much  Cam.  Edd.  conj.  such-like,  or 
searching  Cla.  conj. 

291.  Loue~\  lower  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 
Dyce  iii,  Huds. 


285.  pouerty]  A  dissyllable,  as  in  the  Scotch  purtye,  at  this  day.  Whenever  v 
comes  between  two  vowels,  Shakespeare’s  printers,  almost  invariably,  use  a  u,  an  indi¬ 
cation,  I  think,  that  the  v  sound  in  such  cases  was,  in  pronunciation  of  the  very  light¬ 
est,  so  light  as  to  be  practically  absent.  That  this  practice  has  survived  in  several  com¬ 
mon  words  is  familiar  enough,  e.  g.  e'er,  ne'er,  de'il,  &c.  Note  also,  the  Scotch  lo'e. 
See  also  note  on  ‘hauing,’  III,  ii,  131,  and  ‘riueted,’  V,  i,  188.  This  fact  explains,  I 
think,  the  confusion  which  is  found  in  the  Folio  in  the  use  of *  *  lie  ’  for  live,  on  which 
Walker  has  a  chapter,  but  does  not  detect  what  I  am  here,  with  much  diffidence, 
proposing  as  its  cause.  The  printers,  accustomed  to  pronounce  live  almost  like  IV e, 
occasionally  even  so  spelt  it.  If  I  am  right  in  thus  suggesting  this  vanishing  sound 
of  v  between  vowels,  we  can  understand  a  pun  of  Mercutio’s,  which  is  otherwise  lost ; 
he  accuses  Benvolio  (III,  i,  12)  of  being  ‘as  soon  moved  to  be  moody  and  as  soon 
moody  to  be  moved.’  Is  it  not  clear  that  he  said  ‘  as  soon  mo’ed  to  be  moody  and  a* 

*non  moody  to  be  mo’ed  ’  ? — Ed. 

286.  sueh  miserie]  The  Textual  Notes  show  the  attempts  that  have  been  made  to 
cure  the  scansion  of  this  line.  Clarendon  would  accent  ‘  misery  ’  on  the  second  sylla¬ 
ble,  citing  as  a  precedent  the  use  of  a  similar  accent  in  King  John,  III,  iv,  35  :  *  And 
buss  thee  as  thy  wife.  Misery’s  love.’  But  Abbott,  §  490,  says  that  this  line  from  King 
John  proves  nothing,  that  the  pause-accent  is  sufficient  to  justify  misery,  and  thinks  it 
more  probable,  wherein  I  quite  agree  with  him,  that  in  the  present  line  the  ‘  a,’  which 
is  supplied  by  F2  has  dropped  out  after  ‘such.’ — Ed. 

289.  speake  me  faire]  An  omission,  not  unusual,  of  the  preposition,  which,  in  this 
tase,  as  the  context  shows,  is  of  In  the  same  phrase,  as  Abbott,  §  200,  points  out,  in 
Rom.  dr3  Jul.  Ill,  i,  158,  ‘  Romeo  that  spoke  him  fair,’  the  preposition  is  to. 

291.  Loue]  Collier  says  that  the  use  of  this  word  in  the  sense  of  lover  is  not  coir 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


219 


Repent  not  yov.  that  you  fhall  loofe  your  friend,  292 

And  he  repents  not  that  he  payes  your  debt. 

For  if  the  lew  do  cut  but  deepe  enough, 

lie  pay  it  inftantly,  with  all  my  heart.  295 

Baf.  Anthonio ,  I  am  married  to  a  wife, 

Which  is  as  deere  to  me  as  life  it  felfe, 

But  life  it  felfe,  my  wife,  and  all  the  world, 

Are  not  with  me  efteem’d  aboue  thy  life. 

I  would  loofe  all,  I  facrifice  them  all  300 

Heere  to  this  deuill,  to  deliuer  you. 

Por.  Your  wife  would  giue  you  little  thanks  for  that 
If  fhe  were  by  to  heare  you  make  the  offer. 

Gra.  I  haue  a  wife  whom  I  proteft  I  loue, 

I  would  fhe  were  in  heauen,  fo  fhe  could  305 


292.  not  you\  but  you  Qq,  Hal.  Cam. 
Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

295.  inJlantly\prefentlyQv  Cam.  Glo. 
Cla.  "Wh.  ii. 


300.  I  fiacrifice~\  Pd  sacrifice  Rowe. 
ay,  sacrifice  Pope  et  seq. 

302,  303.  [Aside.  Hal. 

304.  whom']  who  Qq. 


mon.  As  Anthonio  has  been  once  before  (III,  iv,  19)  styled  the  ‘lover’  of  Bassanio, 
it  seems  extremely  probable  that  that  is  the  true  word  here. — Ed. 

292.  not]  Collier  prefers  this  ‘  not  ’  to  *  but  ’  of  the  Qq  as  perhaps  more  consistent 
with  what  Anthonio  says  above.  Halliwell  :  Either  reading  can  be  supported.  The 
Qq — only  repent,  give  but  a  tear  for  the  loss  of  your  friend ;  the  Ff, — obliterate  me 
from  your  memory,  let  not  my  death  interfere  at  all  with  your  happiness,  and  I  shall 
give  up  my  life  without  a  sigh.  Clarendon  :  Surely  Anthonio  would  wish  his  friend 
to  regret  his  loss.  In  both  lines  ‘repent’  is  used  in  the  sense  of  regret,  sorrow  for ;  as 
in  Mid.  N.  D.  II,  ii,  1 1 1 :  ‘I  do  repent  The  tedious  minutes  I  with  her  have  spent.’ 

295.  instantly]  Synonymous  with  ‘ presently  ’  of  Q,;  see  I,  i,  193,  and  line  404 
of  this  present  scene ;  also  Oth.  V,  ii,  66. — Ed. 

295.  with  all  my  heart]  Clarendon  :  A  jest  like  this  enhances  the  pathos. 
Men  at  the  point  of  death  have  a  natural  tendency  to  beguile  the  misery  of  the  time 
by  playing  upon  words.  Compare  the  death  scene  in  King  John ,  V,  vii.  So  Shake¬ 
speare  makes  Gaunt  jest  on  his  name  in  Rich.  II :  II,  73.  So  also  Sophocles  makes 
Ajax  *  play  nicely  with  his  name,’  line  430. 

297.  Which]  Abbott,  §  266 :  Where  so  dear,  such,  &c.  is  implied  in  the  antece¬ 
dent,  we  may  expect,  as  here,  ‘  which  ’  (§  278)  in  the  relative. 

300,  304.  Dr  Jastrow  (  Young  Israel,  Mai,  1876) :  This  braggadocio  dealing  with 
the  dearest  relationship  of  life  sounds  to  Shylock  like  rank  blasphemy.  He  could  use 
the  half,  or  the  whole,  of  his  wealth  as  a  make-weight  to  his  friendship,  but  to  put  wife, 
or  child,  in  the  balance — at  this  very  hour,  it  sounds  like  sacrilege. 

,  301.  Booth:  Shylock  manifests  impatience  during  these  speeches, — smiles  grimly 

at  mention  of  his  cutting  deep  enough,  and  contemptuously  at  the  Christians’  willing¬ 
ness  to  sacrifice  their  wives  for  friendship ;  give  a  scarcely-audible  sneer  at  each  of 
their  protestations. 


220  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 

Intreat  fome  power  to  change  this  currifh  lew.  306 

Ner.  ’Tis  well  you  offer  it  behinde  her  backe, 

The  with  would  make  elfe  an  vnquiet  houfe.  (ter 

lew.  Thefe  be  the  Chriftian  husbands :  I  haue  a  daugh- 
Would  any  of  the  ftocke  of  Barrabas  310 

Had  beene  her  husband,  rather  then  a  Chriftian. 

We  trifle  time,  I  pray  thee  purfue  fentence. 

Por.  A  pound  of  that  fame  marchants  flefh  is  thine, 

The  Court  awards  it,  and  the  law  doth  giue  it.  314 

307,  308.  Aside.  Hal.  310.  Barrabas]  Bar  abbas  Coll,  i,  iii. 

309.  [Aside.  Rowe  et  seq.  (generally).  313.  marchants~\  merchants  Q q. 

I  haue']  I've  Pope  +  . 


309.  haue]  Allen  :  I  feel  that  Shylock  must  have  said  ‘  I  had  a  daughter.’  A 
similar  misprint  occurs  in  III,  ii,  277  [q.  v.  Text.  Notes]. 

309.  daughter]  The  Second  Quarto  and  the  first  three  Folios  have  no  punctuation 
after  this  word.  The  First  and  Third  Quartos  have  a  comma  (I  am  not  quite  sure  that 
it  is  not  a  full  stop  in  Q  ),  and  are  followed  therein  by  F  ,  Rowe,  and  Pope.  Theobald 
increased  this  comma  to  a  semicolon,  and  has  been  followed,  I  think,  with  but  one  ex¬ 
ception,  by  all  Editors  to  the  present  time ;  Dyce,  in  his  Third  Edition,  puts  a  comma 
and  a  dash  after  it.  It  is  of  no  great  moment,  because  the  sense  is  clear  under  any 
punctuation ;  but  by  introducing  a  semicolon  we  obliterate  an  example  of  what  Walker 
( Crit.  i,  55)  describes  as  ‘an  instinctive  striving  after  a  natural  arrangement  of  words, 
inconsistent  indeed  with  modem  English  grammar,  but  perfectly  authorized  by  that  of 
the  Elizabethan  age.’  Among  many  instances,  Walker  gives  the  following:  ‘No,  no, 
my  lord,  This  milky  gentleness  and  course  of  yours  Though  I  condemn  it  not,  yet, 
under  pardon,  You  are  much  more  at  task  for  want  of  wisdom,’ — Lear,  I,  iv,  335 ; 
‘  But  if  I  thrive,  the  gain  of  my  attempt  The  least  of  you  shall  share  his  part  thereof.’ 
— Rich.  Ill :  V,  iii,  267. — Ed. 

309-3 1 1 .  Booth  :  With  intense  hate  in  look,  and  subdued  tones ;  between  your 
teeth,  as  it  were. 

310.  Barrabas]  Dyce  {Remarks,  p.  59) :  The  word,  I  believe,  was  invariably  made 
short  in  the  second  syllable  by  the  poetical  writers  of  Shakespeare’s  days  :  in  Marlowe’s 
Jew  of  Malta,  ‘  Barriibas  ’  occurs  seventy-eight  times.  Allen  :  Shakespeare  followed 
the  pronunciation  of  his  day,  and  that  was  the  Reuchlinian,  that  is,  he  pronounced  by 
the  Greek,  not  by  the  Latin,  accents,  Bapa/3/3d?.  Clarendon  :  It  is  thus  spelt  in  Tyn- 
dale’s  and  Coverdale’s  versions.  Steevens  :  Our  poet  might  otherwise  have  written  : 
‘  Would  any  of  Barabbas’  stock  had  been  Her  husband,  rather  than  a  Christian !’ 

312.  trifle  time]  Capell:  These  words  seem  to  betray  a  consciousness  in  the  poet 
that  he  had  a  little  wander’d  from  the  to  npenov  of  character,  in  these  several  reflec¬ 
tions  preceding  that  begin  with  one  from  Bassanio :  but  desire  (and  some  necessity 
indeed)  of  throwing  into  his  dialogue  something  that  should  enliven  it  just  at  that 
time,  begat  this  small  trespass ;  which,  the  necessities  of  his  piece’s  nature  consider’d, 
may  be  pardon’d  even  by  the  severest. 

312.  pursue]  See  Abbott,  §  492,  for  a  list  of  words  in  which  ‘the  accent  is  nearer 
the  beginning  than  with  us.’ 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


221 


lew.  Molt  rightfull  Iudge.  315 

Por.  And  you  muft  cut  this  flefh  from  off  his  breaft, 

The  Law  allowes  it,  and  the  Court  awards  it. 

lew.  Moft  learned  Iudge,  a  fentence,  come  prepare. 

Por.  Tarry  a  little,  there  is  fomething  elfe, 

This  bond  doth  giue  thee  heere  no  iot  of  bloud,  32a 

The  words  exprefly  are  a  pound  of  flefh  : 

Then  take  thy  bond,  take  thou  thy  pound  of  flefh,  322 

320.  iot]  iote  Q,Q2.  jot  Fa  et  seq.  Mai.  Steev. ’93,  Coll.  Hal.  Dyce.  Sta. 

322.  Then  take ]  Take  then  Qq,  Cap.  Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

315.  Booth  :  With  back  to  audience,  and  knife  raised  high  above  his  head. 

318.  Booth  :  ‘  Most  learned  Judge  ’  is  uttered  with  an  exultant  voice,  not  too  loud, 
and  ‘A  sentence’  is  spoken  with  a  low  bow  to  the  Duke.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  At  the 
exclamation,  ‘Come,  prepare!’  the  actor  is  directed  by  the  (MS)  to  show  the  scales 
again.  This  may  only  explain  the  manner  of  a  particular  actor,  in  order  to  give 
greater  effect  to  his  paid. 

319-326.  Haynes  ( Outlines  of  Equity,  p.  19) :  The  popular  belief  that  the  law  exacts 
a  literal  fulfillment  of  contracts  has  ever  been  deeply  rooted.  We  trace  it  distinctly  in 
the  drama  and  in  works  of  fiction.  Perhaps  one  of  the  most  remarkable  instances 

is  that  of  Shylock’s  bond . And  how  is  the  intended  victim  rescued?  By  the 

merest  verbal  quibble.  I  should  be  sorry  to  profane  Shakespeare  or  to  approach  the 
creations  of  his  genius  in  the  same  spirit  that  I  should  a  Report  in  Meeson  and  Welsby. 
Considerable  latitude  is  to  be  allowed  to  the  dramatist ;  but  when  I  see  Antonio  saved 
by  a  species  of  construction,  according  to  which,  if  a  man  contracted  for  leave  to  cut  a 
slice  of  melon,  he  would  be  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  his  contract  unless  he  had  stipu¬ 
lated,  in  so  many  words,  for  the  incidental  spilling  of  the  juice,  one  cannot  help  recog¬ 
nizing  in  the  fiction  of  the  immortal  poet  an  intensified  representation  of  the  popular 
faith — that  the  law  regarded  the  letter,  not  the  spirit.  As  to  the  tender  coming  too 
late,  that  was  in  strict  historical  accordance  with  the  law.  At  Common  Law,  if  a  bond 
was  once  forfeited  by  non-payment  of  principal  and  interest  on  the  day  stipulated,  the 
whole  penalty  must  have  been  paid . It  is  clear  that,  had  the  scene  of  Shake¬ 

speare’s  play  been  laid  in  England,  and  not  in  Venice,  the  proper  advice  for  Portia  to 
have  given  would  have  been  to  file  a  bill  in  Chancery.  But  I  confess  I  cannot  say  that 
the  play  would  have  been  improved.  C.  K.  Davis  ( Law  in  Shakespeare,  p.  1 1 7) :  It 
may  be  observed  here  that  the  law  language  of  Shakespeare  is  that  of  the  Common 
Law,  and  not  of  the  Equity  Jurisprudence.  No  word  peculiar  to  Chancery  is,  as  far 
as  I  am  aware,  used  by  him.  Yet  he  wrote  after  the  time  when  Waltham  had  en¬ 
joined  the  Shylocks  of  his  day  from  exacting  their  penalties,  and  compelled  them  to 
take  their  principal ;  after  Wolsey  had  expanded  the  jurisdiction  of  that  Court ;  and 
after  More  had  administered  its  benevolent  justice  in  such  cases.  He  was  contempo¬ 
rary  with  Ellesmere,  and  with  that  memorable  contest  between  the  Couits  of  Equity 
and  Law,  in  which  the  former  insisted  upon  its  power  to  give  relief,  against  the  strict 
letter  of  the  Common  Law,  from  penalties  and  forfeitures,  even  after  judgement.  Had 
Shakespeare  been  a  Chancery  lawyer  he  might  have  caused  an  injunction  to  be  served 
on  Shylock,  and  avoided  the  unsatisfactory  and  quibbling  process  by  winch  Portia  res 
cued  the  Merchant  from  the  knife  of  the  Jew. 


222 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


But  in  the  cutting  it,  if  thou  doft  fhed 
One  drop  of  Chriftian  bloud,  thy  lands  and  goods 
Are  by  the  Lawes  of  Venice  confifcate 
Vnto  the  ftate  of  Venice. 

Gra.  0  vpright  Iudge, 

Marke  lew,  6  learned  Iudge. 

Shy.  Is  that  the  law  ? 

Par.  Thy  felfe  flialt  fee  the  A6t : 

For  as  thou  vrgeft  iuftice,  be  affur’d 
Thou  (halt  haue  iuftice  more  then  thou  defireft. 

Gra.  O  learned  Iudge,  mark  lew,  a  learned  Iudge. 

lew.  I  take  this  offer  then,  pay  the  bond  thrice, 

And  let  the  Chriftian  goe. 

Baff.  Heere  is  the  money. 

Por.  Soft,  the  lew  fhall  haue  all  iuftice,  foft,  no  hafte, 

He  fhall  haue  nothing  but  the  penalty. 

Gra.  O  lew,  an  vpright  Iudge,  a  learned  Iudge. 

Por.  Therefore  prepare  thee  to  cut  off  the  flefh, 

327,  328.  One  line,  Pope  et  seq.  337.  Soft,]  Soft ;  (as  a  separate 

334.  this]  his  Q3,  Cap.  Walker,  Dyce  Cap.  et  seq. 
iii,  Huds.  340.  cut  off  ]  cut  of  Q2. 

323.  the  cutting  it]  See  I,  ii,  96;  III,  iv,  24,  or  Abbott,  §93. 

325.  confiscate]  See  Abbott,  §  342,  for  a  list  of  verbs  ending  in  -te,  -t,  and  - d , 
which,  on  account  of  their  already  resembling  participles  in  their  terminations,  do  not 
add  -ed  in  the  participle  or  past  tense.  Words  like  fniscreate,  consecrate ,  confiscate, 
being  directly  derived  from  Latin  participles,  stand  on  a  different  footing,  and  may 
themselves  be  regarded  as  participial  adjectives,  without  the  addition  of  d. 

326.  Booth  :  Shylock  staggers  backward  and  drops  the  knife. 

329.  Booth  :  In  a  choked  tone  of  amazement  to  the  Duke,  bowing.  His  opinion 
of  Portia  is  now  changed ;  all  he  says  is  addressed  to  the  Duke,  except  ‘  I  am  content,’ 
when  he  looks  steadily  at  Portia. 

334.  this  offer]  Capell  (in  his  note  on  line  220,  having  approved  of  Portia’s  offer 
of  ‘thrice,’  continues) :  The  Jew  (as  was  right)  catches  at  the  term  in  her  offer,  whom 
he  mistakes  for  a  doctor :  who,  being  now  out  of  favour  with  him,  he  calls  it — *  his 
offer'  with  marks  of  signal  displeasure,  when  his  is  utter’d  in  tone,  action,  and  look. 
Steevens  :  Perhaps  we  should  read  his,  i.  e.  Bassanio’s,  who  offers  twice  the  sum. 
Mason  :  This  offer  is  right.  Shylock  specifies  the  offer  he  means,  which  is :  ‘to  have 
the  bond  paid  thrice.’  Malone:  He  means,  I  think,  to  say,  ‘I  take  this  offer  that 
has  been  made  me.’  Bassanio  had  offered  at  first  but  twice  the  sum,  but  Portia  had 
gone  further — ‘there’s  thrice  thy  money,’  &c.  The  Jew  naturally  insists  on  the  larger 
sum.  Allen  :  Capell  must  be  right.  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Malone’s  attempt  to  reconcile 
the  inconsistency  of  the  old  Eds.  is  very  far  from  happy.  [I  much  prefer  his. — Ed.] 

337.  all  iustice]  Allen  :  Namely,  that  wh'ch  is  wholly  justice,  unmixed  with  either 
equity  or  mercy. 


323 

325 

330 

335 

34C 

line) 


act  iv,  sc.  i.J  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


223 


Shed  thou  no  bloud,  nor  cut  thou  leffe  nor  more  341 

But  iuft  a  pound  of  flefh  :  if  thou  tak’ft  more 
Or  leffe  then  a  iuft  pound,  be  it  fo  much 
As  makes  it  light  or  heauy  in  the  fubftance, 

Or  the  deuifion  of  the  twentieth  part  345 

Of  one  poore  fcruple,  nay  if  the  fcale  doe  turne 
But  in  the  eftimation  of  a  hayre  , 

Thou  dieft,  and  all  thy  goods  are  confifcate. 

Gra.  A  fecond  Daniel,  a  Daniel  lew, 

Now  infidell  I  haue  thee  on  the  hip.  350 

Por.  Why  doth  the  lew  paufe,  take  thy  forfeiture. 


342.  tak'fl]  cutjl  Qx,  Cam.  Cla.  Glo. 
Wh.  ii. 

343.  be  tV  ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i.  be't 
but  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ill,  Huds.  be  it  but  Qq 
et  cet. 


345.  Or]  UwTheob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap. 
Of  Ktly. 

deuifion ]  diuifion  Q,Q3. 

346.  doe]  Om.  Pope  +  ,  Steev. ’85. 

350.  thee] you  Qq,  Cap.  Cam.  Cla.  Glo. 

351.  thy]  the  Pope  +  . 


343.  just  pound]  Abbott,  §  14 :  That  is,  exact,  as  in  Latin.  [It  is  a  fust  pound  ’ 
in  the  title-pages  of  the  Qq  and  in  Silvayn’s  Declamation .] 

343.  be  it]  On  rhythmical  grounds  I  prefer  this  reading  to  the  be  it  but  of  the  Qq. 
Be  it  but  must  be  contracted  be't  but,  which  is,  to  me,  cacophonous.  Moreover,  the  bui 
is  scarcely  needed ;  it  comes  with  much  force  two  or  three  lines  further  on,  where  its 
strength  may,  perhaps,  be  a  little  weakened  by  its  anticipation  here. — Ed. 

344.  substance,]  Collier:  Balance  according  to  the  (MS),  which  may  be  right; 
but  as  ‘scale’  is  mentioned  just  afterwards,  we  make  no  change.  Rev.  John  Hunter 
(who  omits  the  comma) :  In  the  amount  of  a  twentieth,  or  even  the  fraction  of  a  twen¬ 
tieth.  The  twentieth  part  of  a  scruple  is  a  grain.  Clarendon  :  That  is,  in  the  mass,  in 
the  gross  weight.  There  is  a  climax  in  Portia’s  threat :  first,  if  it  be  lighter  or  heavier, 
i.  e.  according  to  ordinary  tests ;  then,  if  it  weigh  less  or  more  by  a  single  grain ;  thirdly, 
if  the  scale  be  uneven  by  a  single  hair’s  breadth.  The  turning  of  the  scale  is  estimated 
in  the  first  instance  by  the  eye.  Possibly,  however,  it  may  mean  that  the  weight  of  a 
hair  would  redress  the  balance.  [I  think  it  refers  to  weight. — Ed.] 

351.  pause]  In  this  ‘pause’  does  Shakespeare  intimate  to  us  that  the  balance  is 
trembling  between  Tragedy  and  Comedy?  The  choice  between  them  lies  in  Shy- 
lock’s  power.  Is  he  debating  it  ?  The  end  is  not  yet ;  he  can  yet  make  that  end 
Tragic,  and  I  am  rash  enough  to  say  that  I  am  not  altogether  sure  he  should  not 
so  make  it.  Up  to  this  point  it  cannot  be  said  that  Shylock’s  character  excites  our 
admiration.  Socially,  he  is  grossly  ill-treated,  and  for  that  we  pity  him;  otherwise 
he  is  simply  a  cruel  and  vindictive  creditor,  highly  intellectual,  of  course,  as  all  of 
Shakespeare’s  chief  characters  are,  but  a  persecuted  Jew  he  is  not ;  that,  however,  he 
at  once  becomes,  and  compels  our  sympathy,  when  the  law,  which  ought  to  have  sup¬ 
ported  him,  crushes  him.  Nothing  convinces  me  more  clearly  that  this  is  not  a  ‘  ten- 
denz-drama,’  wherein  is  infused  a  subtle  plea  of  toleration  for  the  Jews,  than  that, 
instead  of  a  Jewish  Tragedy,  Shylock  suffers  it  to  end  as  a  Christian  Comedy.  Shy- 
lock  had  sworn  by  his  holy  Sabbath  to  fulfil  the  bond,  and,  if  the  representative  of  a 


224 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Shy.  Giue  me  my  principal^  and  let  me  goe. 
Baff.  I  haue  it  ready  for  thee,  heere  it  is. 
Por.  He  hath  refus’d  it  in  the  open  Court, 


352 


He  fhall  haue  meerly  iuftice  and  his  bond. 
Gra.  A  Daniel  ftill  fay  I,  a  fecond  Daniel 


355 


I  thanke  thee  lew  for  teaching  me  that  word. 

Shy.  Shall  I  not  haue  barely  my  principall  ? 
Por.  Thou  fhalt  haue  nothing  but  the  forfeiture, 


To  be  taken  fo  at  thy  perill  lew. 

Shy.  Why  then  the  Deuill  giue  him  good  of  it : 


360 


lie  ftay  no  longer  queftion. 


355.  He]  And  Qt. 

358.  haue  barely]  barely  have  Pope  + . 


360.  taken  fo]  Ff.  fo  taken  Qq  et  cet. 
362.  longer]  longer  heere  in  Q  . 


race,  no  perjury  must  taint  his  soul ;  cureless  ruin  has  fallen  on  him ;  his  life  is  gone, 
since  there  is  no  law  for  him  in  Venice;  a  Christian,  worse  than  if  of  the  stock  of 


Barrabas,  claims  his  daughter ;  to  his  ancient  grudge  is  added  the  curse  of  his  nation ; 


since  his  fall,  then,  is  inevitable,  let  him  redeem  his  vow  and  drag  down  Anthouio 
with  him.  Anthonio’s  gushing  blood  will  hide  all  former  stains  on  the  Jewish  gaber¬ 
dine.  When,  therefore,  after  the  ‘  pause  ’  for  making  up  his  mind,  Shylock  drops  the 
knife  to  clutch  the  money,  we  see  that  his  oath  was  hollow,  and  that  he  is  still  will¬ 
ing  to  wear  the  badge  of  sufferance  and  to  be  footed  over  the  threshold  like  a  stranger 
cur.  No  one  of  course  can  say  with  assurance  why  at  this  dividing  of  the  ways  Shake¬ 
speare  decided  in  favour  of  comedy.  If  he  objected  to  the  many  corpses  on  the  stage, 
he  got  well  over  that  aversion  by  the  time  he  had  written  Ha?7ilet.  In  my  secret  heart 
I  like  to  believe  that  Shakespeare  had  fallen  in  love  with  Portia,  as  why  should  he  not, 
with  the  most  perfect  of  his  creations  ?  and  though  he  might  have  thought  that  as  a  work 
of  art  the  play  should  be  a  tragedy,  yet  that  the  vision  of  Portia’s  troubled,  agonised  face 
was  more  than  he  could  bear,  and  her  streaming  eyes  were  more  intolerable  to  him  than 
Anthonio’s  streaming  breast ;  it  is  to  Portia,  in  more  ways  than  one  then,  that  I  hope 
the  Merchant  owes  his  life.  And  as  for  Shylock,  I  find  relief  in  the  assurance,  which 
a  knowledge  of  his  character  as  revealed  on  the  Trial  affords,  that  it  cannot  be  long 
before  his  financial  prospects  are  as  fair  as  ever.  One  half  of  his  present  property, 
which  he  is  allowed  to  retain,  is  probably  a  much  larger  sum  than  he  started  with  in 
life ;  and  the  wide-spread  notoriety  which  will  accrue  to  him  from  this  trial,  and  which 
is  believed  in  these  modern  days  of  advertising  to  be  ‘  the  soul  of  business,’  cannot  but 
stand  him  in  admirable  and  remunerative  stead. — Ed. 

352.  Booth:  After  a  brief  struggle.  Bassanio  offers  the  bag  of  money;  Shylock 
takes  it,  but  Gratiano  seizes  it  from  him. 

354,  355-  Booth  :  As  Portia  says  this  she  descends  from  the  dais,  gives  the  bond  to 
Shylock,  and  goes  to  the  table.  As  Shylock  replies  he  throws  the  bond  at  Anthonio’s 
feet.  Or  Portia  may  throw  the  bond  at  Shylock’s  feet,  who  stamps  on  it  with  impotent 
rage.  When  Portia  says  that  the  law  hath  yet  another  hold  on  him,  Shylock  shows 
great  alarm. 

362.  If  it  were  not  for  the  metre,  the  reading  of  Qt  seems  to  me  an  improvement : 

He  stay  no  longer  here  in  question.’  If  ‘  question  ’  be  pronounced  as  a  trisyllable, 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


225 


Por.  Tarry  lew,  363 

The  Law  hath  yet  another  hold  on  you. 

It  is  enafted  in  the  Lawes  of  Venice,  365 

If  it  be  proued  againft  an  Alien, 

That  by  diredt,  or  indirect  attempts 
He  feeke  the  life  of  any  Citizen, 

The  party  gainft  the  which  he  doth  contriue, 

Shall  feaze  one  halfe  his  goods,  the  other  halfe  370 

Comes  to  the  priuie  coffer  of  the  State, 

And  the  offenders  life  lies  in  the  mercy 
Of  the  Duke  onely,  gainft  all  other  voice. 

In  which  predicament  I  fay  thou  ftandft :  374 

366.  an]  any  Qx.  Steev. ’85,  Mai. ’90. 

370.  feaze]feize  Qt.  371.  coffer~\  cojier  Qt. 

one]  on  QXQ 1?4,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 

and  ‘Tarry,  Jew,’  regarded  as  an  interjectional  line  by  itself,  the  metre  is  smooth 
enough. — Ed. 

364.  P-OLFE  ( Shakespeariana,  p.  33,  Jan.,  1886) :  It  is  a  significant  fact, — to  me  at 
least,  for  I  believe  that  no  commentator  or  critic  has  referred  to  it, — that  the  dramatist, 
after  using  the *  *  bad  law  ’  from  the  old  tale,  makes  Portia  go  on  to  say,  *  The  law  hath 
yet  another  hold  on  you  ’ — namely,  on  account  of  his  having  sought  the  life  of  Antonio. 
Note  at  what  length  this  is  dwelt  upon,  and  how  much  stress  Portia  lays  on  it.  Note 
also  that  this  is  not  in  the  various  forms  of  the  old  story ,  but  is  Shakespeare’s  own  addi¬ 
tion  thereto.  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  added  it  solely  because  he  knew  that  the  original 

*  law  ’  was  ‘  bad  ’  and  was  not  willing  to  rest  his  case  upon  it,  as  a  writer  unfamiliar 
with  legal  matters  would  naturally  have  done.  He  kept  the  ‘  bad  law  ’  for  stage  effect, 
but  added  the  ‘good  law’  to  satisfy  his  conscience  or  his  sense  of  justice.  Rev.  John 
Hunter  :  The  charge  now  to  be  brought  against  the  Jew  is  probably  what  Bellario’s 
letter  refers  to  in  the  words,  *  he  is  furnished  with  my  opinion the  mode  in  which 
Shylock  has  been  already  defeated  appears  to  be  the  suggestion  of  Portia’s  own  in¬ 
genuity  ;  Bellario  stated  that  his  opinion  would  be  ‘  bettered  with  the  young  doctor’s 
learning.’ 

368.  seeke]  See  Abbott,  §  368,  for  instances  of  the  Subjunctive  in  subordinate 
clauses,  denoting  a  purpose. 

369.  contriue]  Staunton:  In  Tam.  of  Sh.  I,  ii,  Shakespeare  for  once  uses  ‘con¬ 
trive  ’  in  its  scholastic  sense  to  consume ,  spend,  and  the  like,  from  the  Latin  contero , 
contrivi.  Here  and  elsewhere  it  means  to  scheme,  to  devise,  to  plot,  and  comes  from 
the  old  French  compound  controuver.  Thus  Jul.  Cces.  II,  iii :  ‘  If  not,  the  fates  with 
traitors  do  contrive ;’  and  Ham.  I,  v :  ‘  Nor  let  thy  soul  contrive  Against  thy  mother 
aught.’ 

370.  seaze]  That  is,  take  possession  of.  The  usual  law  term.  See  Olh.  V,  ii,  443. 

372.  in]  Abbott,  §  163:  This  example  illustrates  the  apparently  capricious  change 

in’ the  use  of  prepositions.  We  should  now  say  ‘  at  the  mercy.’ 

374.  predicament]  Clarendon:  Originally,  a  term  in  logic,  the  Latin  equivalent 
for  category.  Wilson,  Arte  of  Logike,  1567,  has  a  chapter,  ‘  Of  the  Predicaments,  called 
15 


226 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


For  it  appeares  by  manifeft  proceeding,  375 

That  indiredlly,  and  diredtly  to, 

Thou  haft  contriu’d  againft  the  very  life 
Of  the  defendant  :  and  thou  haft  incur’ d 
The  danger  formerly  by  me  rehearft. 

Downe  therefore,  and  beg  mercy  of  the  Duke.  380 

Gra.  Beg  that  thou  maift  haue  leaue  to  hang  thy  felfe, 

And  yet  thy  wealth  being  forfeit  to  the  ftate, 

Thou  haft  not  left  the  value  of  a  cord, 

Therefore  thou  muft  be  hang’d  at  the  ftates  charge. 

Duk.  That  thou  (halt  fee  the  difference  of  our  fpirit,  385 
I  pardon  thee  thy  life  before  thou  aske  it : 

For  halfe  thy  wealth,  it  is  Anthonie? s,  387 


376.  to]  too  F2  et  seq. 

377.  haft]  had  Ff. 

contriu'd  againft]  contriued 
gainft  Qj.  contriued  againft  Q2Q3- 

378.  incur1  d]  incurd  QtQa.  incurd d 

% 


379.  formerly]  formorly  Q2.  formally 
Warb.  conj.  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

385.  fhalt]  may' st  Pope  +  . 
difference]  dffrence  Qz. 
fpirit]  fpirits  Qlf  Cam.  Glo.  Cla. 
Rife,  Wh.  ii. 


in  English  the  most  generall  wordes.’  The  word  must  have  become  very  common,  as 
it  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Nurse  in  Rom.  and  Jul.  Ill,  iii,  86. 

379.  formerly]  Warburton  :  This  danger  was  a  judicial  penalty,  which  the  speaker 
had  just  before  recited,  in  the  very  terms  and  formality  of  the  law  itself;  we  should 
therefore  read  formally.  Clarendon  :  *  Formerly  ’  was  used  in  legal  documents  for 
above. 

380.  Downe]  Anonymous  (ap.  Halliwell) :  This  latter  part  of  Portia’s  address  so 
completely  brings  to  mind  the  conclusion  of  every  sentence  of  single  felony  pronounced 
by  the  clerk  of  the  arraigns,  who  concludes  his  address  to  each  culprit  with,  ‘  Down 
upon  your  knees,  and  crave  the  benefit  of  the  statute,’  that  I  cannot  sometimes  help 
thinking  but  Shakespeare  also  must  have  borne  it  in  mind  when  he  wrote  the  passage. 

381.  Booth  :  Shy  lock  is  about  to  kneel;  Gratiano  holds  him  by  the  shoulder  while 
he  addresses  him,  and  then  drops  him.  When  Shylock  says,  ‘  Nay,  take  my  life,’  and 
so  on,  he  is  still  kneeling,  with  head  very  low,  and  speaks  with  a  trembling,  tearful 
voice.  When  Portia  asks,  ‘What  mercy  can  you  render  him,  Anthonio?’  Shylock 
rises  quickly,  as  if  stung. 

383.  hast  not  left]  Allen:  Not  the  negative  of  hast-left,  but  ‘thou  hast  not, 
remaining,  the  value,’  &c.  See  III,  v,  62. 

385.  shalt]  See  Abbott,  §348,  for  instances  of  the  future  where  we  should  use 
the  Subjunctive. 

385.  our  spirit]  Eccles:  That  is,  my  spirit,  or  the  ‘spirit’  of  us  who  profess  Chris¬ 
tianity  as  opposed  to  thine,  requires  that  our  should  be  pronounced  with  emphasis ; 
‘our  spirits’  (of  the  Qq)  must  signify  your  spirit  and  mine.  Halliwell:  The  sig¬ 
nification  of  the  Qq  reading  suits  less  with  the  dignity  and  position  of  the  speaker. 

3S6,  391.  pardon]  See  Schmidt’s  Lex.  for  parallel  passages  where  it  means  to 
absolve,  to  release,  to  remi* 


ACT  IV,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


227 


The  other  halfe  comes  to  the  generall  ftate,  388 

Which  humbleneffe  may  driue  vnto  a  fine. 

Por.  I  for  the  ftate,  not  for  Anthonio.  390 

Shy.  Nay,  take  my  life  and  all,  pardon  not  that, 

You  take  my  houfe,  when  you  do  take  the  prop 
That  doth  fuftaine  my  houfe  :  you  take  my  life 
When  you  doe  take  the  meanes  whereby  I  liue. 

Por.  What  mercy  can  you  render  him  Anthonio  f  395 

Gra.  A  halter  gratis ,  nothing  elfe  for  Gods  fake. 

Ant.  So  pleafe  my  Lord  the  Duke,  and  all  the  Court 
To  quit  the  fine  for  one  halfe  of  his  goods,  398 

394.  whereby]  wherby  Qr.  398.  quit]  quite  F2. 

396.  Gods  fake]  Godfake  Q2.  for]  from  Han. 


390.  Malone  :  That  is,  the  State’s  moiety  may  be  commuted  for  a  fine,  but  not 
Anthonio’s. 

391.  Nay  .  .  .  all]  Gould  ( The  Tragedian,  p.  74) :  Kean,  after  making  the  audi¬ 
ence  hate  him,  did,  by  one  of  his  sudden  turns  of  power,  and  by  the  pathos  of  his  voice 
in  these  words,  produce  an  entire  revulsion  of  feeling  in  the  listener,  so  that  pity  took 
the  place  of  execration. 

393.  you  take  my  life]  Halliwell  :  ‘  He  that  taketh  away  his  neighbour’s  living, 
slayeth  him.’ — Ecclesiasticus,  xxxiv,  22. 

398-402.  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Must,  ii,  312) :  Dr  Thirlby,  by  a  change  of  these 
lines,  gives  Anthonio  a  much  more  generous  way  of  thinking.  I  will  submit  his  read¬ 
ing  to  you :  ‘  To  quit  their  fine  of  one-half  of  his  goods ;  |  I  am  content  to  let  him  have 
the  other  |  In  use,  to  render  it  upon  his  death  |  Unto  the  gentleman  that  stole  his  daugh¬ 
ter.’  Theobald:  The  Jew  had  forfeited  his  whole  substance;  one  moiety  thereof  to 
go  to  the  State,  and  the  other  to  the  Defendant.  Anthonio  proposes  that  the  State 
should  be  content  with  fining  him  only  that  moiety  which  was  confiscated  to  them ; 
that,  as  to  the  other,  which  Anthonio  might  equally  claim  to  himself,  he  only  desires 
to  hold  the  benefit,  paying  interest  for  it  to  the  Jew  during  his  life ;  and,  upon  the 
Jew’s  demise,  to  have  it  immediately  vested  in  his  Son  and  Daughter.  Johnson  : 
The  terms  proposed  have  been  misunderstood.  Anthonio  declares  that,  as  the  Duke 
quits  one-half  of  the  forfeiture,  he  is  likewise  content  to  abate  his  claim,  and  desires 
not  the  property  but  the  use  or  produce  only  of  the  half,  and  that  only  for  the  Jew’s 
life,  unless  we  read,  as  perhaps  is  right,  ‘upon  my  death.’  Ritson  (p.  55) :  Anthonio 
tells  the  Duke  that  if  he  will  abate  the  fine  for  the  State’s  half,  he  (Anthonio)  will  be 
contented  to  take  the  other,  in  trust,  after  Shylock’s  death,  to  render  it  to  his  daugh¬ 
ter’s  husband.  That  is,  it  was,  during  Shylock’s  life,  to  remain  at  interest  in  Antho¬ 
nio’s  hands,  and  Shylock  was  to  enjoy  the  produce  of  it.  Mason  (p.  76) :  Anthonio’s 
offer  is,  that  he  will  quit  the  fine  for  one-half  of  his  fortune,  provided  that  he  will  let 
him  have  it  at  interest  during  the  Jew’s  life,  to  render  it  at  his  death  to  Lorenzo.  That 
is  the  meaning  of  the  words  to  let  me  have  in  use.  Lewin  ( The  Law  of  Trusts,  6th 
ed.,  1875,  chap,  i,  p.  13) :  That  a  trust  was  anciently  known  as  a  use,  appears  from  the 
Mer.  of  Ven.  Thus,  when  Shylock  had  forfeited  one-half  of  his  goods  to  the  State  to 
be  commuted  for  a  fine,  and  the  other  half  of  his  goods  to  Antonio,  the  latter  offered 


228 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


I  am  content  :  fo  he  will  let  me  haue 
The  other  halfe  in  vfe,  to  render  it 
Vpon  his  death,  vnto  the  Gentleman 
That  lately  dole  his  daughter. 

Two  things  prouided  more,  that  for  this  fauour 
He  prefently  become  a  Chriftian  : 


404 


400 


401.  Vpon\  Until  Han. 


that,  if  the  Court,  as  representing  the  .State,  would  forego  the  forfeiture  of  the  one-half, 
he  (Antonio)  would  be  content  himself  to  hold  the  other  half  in  use,  that  is,  in  trust 
for  Shylock  for  life,  with  remainder,  after  Shylock’s  death,  for  Jessica’s  husband.  This 
interpretation  clears  Antonio’s  character  from  the  charge  of  selfishness  to  which  it  would 
be  exposed  if  he  were  to  keep  the  half  for  his  own  use  during  his  life.  Anonymous 
(cited  by  Halliwell) :  That  is,  in  trust  for  Shylock  during  his  life,  for  the  purpose  of 
securing  it  at  his  (not  my,  as  suggested  by  Johnson)  death  to  Lorenzo.  Some  critics 
explain  in  use,  upon  interest,  a  sense  which  the  phrase  certainly  sometimes  bore,  but 
that  interpretation  is  altogether  inconsistent,  in  the  present  passage,  with  the  generosity 
of  Anthonio’s  character.  In  conveyances  of  land,  where  it  is  intended  to  give  the 
estate  to  any  person  after  the  death  of  another,  it  is  necessary  that  a  third  person  should 
be  possessed  of  the  estate,  and  the  use  be  declared  to  the  one  after  the  death  of  the 
other;  or  the  estate  to  the  future  possessor  would  be  rendered  insecure.  This  is  called 
a  conveyance  to  uses,  and  the  party  is  said  to  be  possessed,  or  rather  seised,  to  the  use 
of  such  an  one,  or  to  the  use  that  he  render  or  convey  the  land  to  such  an  one,  which 
is  expressed  in  law  French  by  the  terms  seisie  al  use,  and  in  Latin,  seisitus  in  usum  ali- 
cujus,  viz.  A.  B.  or  C.  D.  This  latter  phrase  Shakespeare  has  rendered  with  all  the 
strictness  of  a  technical  conveyancer,  and  has  made  Anthonio  desire  to  have  one-half 
of  Shylock’s  goods  in  use,  to  render  it  upon  his  (Shylock’s)  death,  to  Lorenzo ;  which 
is  by  no  means  an  unfrequent  mode  of  securing  a  future  estate ;  and  in  our  author’s  time 
nothing  was  more  common  than  for  A  to  convey  to  B  in  usum,  or  to  the  use  that  he 
should  on  a  certain  day  enfeoff  C,  or  convey  to  C.  Suppose  a  gift  to  A  et  heredibus 
suis,  in  usum,  quod  redderet  B,  and  we  have  the  exact  words  of  Anthonio.  Claren¬ 
don  :  Bassanio  was  wealthy  enough  for  both  himself  and  Anthonio,  and  Shakespeare 
knew  that  Anthonio’s  argosies  were  ‘  richly  come  to  harbour  suddenly.’ 

402.  Booth  :  Shylock  shrinks  at  this ;  and  at  the  word  ‘  Christian  ’  utters  a  short, 
sharp  groan,  staggers  backward,  and  raises  his  right  hand  with  the  palm  upward — face 
also  upraised,  with  a  look  of  utter  despair,  until  the  Duke  has  spoken,  then  collapses. 

404.  presently]  That  is,  at  once.  See  line  295. 

404.  Christian]  Halliwell:  According  to  Coryat’s  Crudities,  1611,  p.  234,  ‘all 
their  goodes  are  confiscated  as  soone  as  they  embrace  Christianity;  and  this  I  heard  is 
the  reason,  because,  whereas  many  of  them  doe  raise  their  fortunes  by  usury,  in  so 
much  that  they  doe  sometimes  not  only  sheare,  but  also  flea  many  a  poor  Christian’s 
estate  by  their  griping  extortion,  it  is  therefore  decreed  by  the  Pope,  and  other  free 
princes  in  whose  territories  they  live,  that  they  shall  make  a  restitution  of  all  their  ill- 
gotten  goods,  and  so  disclogge  their  soules  and  consciences,  when  they  are  admitted  by 
holy  baptisme  into  the  bosome  of  Christ’s  Church.’  It  is  just  possible  there  may  be 
some  connection  between  this  regulation  and  the  termination  of  the  trial  by  Shylock’* 
compelled  recantation  of  his  faith. 


act  iv,  sc.  LJ  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


229 


The  other,  that  he  doe  record  a  gift  405 

Heere  in  the  Court  of  all  he  dies  poffeft 
Vnto  his  fonne  Lorenzo,  and  his  daughter. 

Duk.  He  thall  doe  this,  or  elfe  I  doe  recant 
The  pardon  that  I  late  pronounced  heere. 

Por.  Art  thou  contented  lew?  what  doft  thou  fay?  410 

Shy.  I  am  content. 

Por.  Clarke,  draw  a  deed  of  gift. 

Shy.  I  pray  you  giue  me  leaue  to  goe  from  hence, 

I  am  not  well,  fend  the  deed  after  me,  414 

406.  poffeJT\ possess'd  of  Cap.  conj.  412.  Clarke ]  Clearke  Qf. 

407.  Francois  Victor  Hugo  (p.  48) :  The  reconciliation  decreed  by  the  sentence 
of  the  Judge  is  consecrated  by  the  lawful  union  of  Lorenzo  and  Jessica.  In  marrying 
the  daughter  of  Shylock  to  a  Venetian  gentleman,  Shakespeare  braved  public  opinion, 
which  forbade  as  a  sacrilege  a  misalliance  between  Jewish  blood  and  Christian  blood; 
in  despite  of  furious  prejudice  he  proclaimed  the  equality  of  the  hostile  races,  and  has, 
for  all  time,  united  and  mingled  them  in  the  same  love  as  in  the  same  faith.  Thanks 
to  the  brave  inspiration  of  the  poet,  the  terrible  drama  unfolds  of  itself  into  a  delicious 
comedy.  The  immemorial  animosity  of  the  forefathers  vanishes  on  the  lips  of  infants 
in  the  lispings  of  tenderness.  The  oaths  of  hate,  the  shrieks  of  rage,  the  imprecations 
which  have  resounded  through  ages  of  bitter  generations  die  away  in  a  splendid  night, 
amid  the  balmy  shadows  of  tropical  flowers  and  under  intoxicating  bowers  of  oranges 
and  laurels  in  a  duet  of  kisses. 

410.  say  ?]  Booth  :  Shylock,  thus  addressed,  raises  both  head  and  hands  as  if  about 
to  appeal  to  Portia,  checks  himself,  and  says  very  slowly,  as  head  and  hands  drop,  ‘  I  am 
content.’  His  last  words  are  uttered  plaintively.  As  Shylock  is  leaving  Gratiano  seizes 
his  left  arm,  and  at  the  conclusion  of  the  taunting  speech  with  which  he  addresses  him, 
casts  Shylock’s  hand  from  him.  Shylock  bows  low  to  the  Duke,  and  slowly  totters 
towards  the  door, — he  meets  Anthonio,  and  shrinks  with  abhorrence ;  raises  his  hand 
(as  on  previous  occasions),  which  slowly  descends  upon  the  back  of  his  head  as  it 
droops  upon  his  breast, — falls  against  the  door,  which  slowly  opens.  The  Curtain 
should  be  ‘timed’  to  Shylock’s  exit. 

41 1.  I  am  content]  Rev.  Dr  Kohler  ( Jewish  Advance,  13  Dec.,  1878) :  These 
three  words  might  have  spared  unto  millions  of  Jews  their  lives  and  saved  fearful,  innu¬ 
merable  agonies.  No,  a  thousand  times  no !  Shylock  has  no  Jewish  blood  in  his  veins; 
else  with  that  very  knife  that  was  to  pay  Antonio’s  forfeited  bond  he  would  have  spilled 
it  to  the  very  last  drop. 

41 1.  Hawkins  {Life  of  Kean,  i,  152):  The  sudden  change  of  Shylock’s  whole 
appearance  when  the  cause  turned  against  him ;  the  happy  pause  in  *  I  am - con¬ 

tent,’  as  if  it  almost  choked  him  to  bring  out  the  word ;  the  partial  bowing  down  of  his 
inflexible  will  when  he  said,  ‘I  pray  you  give  me  leave  to  go  from  hence,  lam  not 
well the  horror  of  his  countenance  when  told  of  his  enforced  conversion  to  Chris¬ 
tianity,  and,  to  crown  all,  the  fine  mixture  of  scorn  and  pity  with  which  he  turned  and 
surveyed  the  ribald  Gratiano, — all  exhibited  a  succession  of  studies  to  which  words  fail 
to  do  justice.  He  retired,  as  Shakespeare  intended  he  should  retire,  with  the  audience 
possessed  in  his  favour. 


230 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


And  I  will  figne  it.  415 

Duke .  Get  thee  gone,  but  doe  it. 

Gra.  In  chriftning  thou  fhalt  haue  two  godfathers,  417 

417.  Gra.]  Shy.  Qa.  Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

thou  Jhalt~\  Jhalt  thou  Qq,  Cap. 


414.  George  Fletcher  [Fraser’s  Magazine ,  p.  705,  June,  1850):  Shylock,  then, 
instead  of  losing  his  life  and  all  his  property,  keeps  his  life  and  one-half  of  his  goods. 
Bat  let  us  here  consider  a  little  of  what  value  these  can  be  to  him  in  the  moral  posi¬ 
tion  wherein  he  now  finds  himself.  First,  while  seeking  revenge  for  his  baffled  covet¬ 
ousness,  he  had  received  the  additional  and  deeper  wound  inflicted  on  his  Jewish  love 
of  offspring  by  the  stealing  of  his  daughter.  And  then,  while  pursuing  vengeance  for 
this  latter  injury  above  all,  he  finds  himself  subjected  to  the  last  and  bitterest  grief  and 
humiliadon,  of  consenting  to  abjure  his  faith  and  profess  himself  a  Christian.  Antho- 
nio,  indeed,  with  the  same  want  of  insight  into  Jewish  character  in  general,  and  into  that 
of  Shylock  in  particular,  which  had  made  him  exclaim  on  occasion  of  Shylock’s  pre¬ 
tended  reconciliation :  ‘  This  Hebrew  will  turn  Christian, — he  grows  kind,’  now  pro¬ 
poses,  in  sincere  charity  to  his  defeated  enemy,  and  care  for  his  salvation,  ‘  that  he 
presently  Become  a  Chrisdan believing  in  pure  kindness  and  simplicity  of  heart  that 
such  a  compulsory  profession  might  bring  with  it  a  sincere  conversion.  For,  otherwise, 
this  demand  of  his,  far  from  having  anything  of  a  merciful  character,  would  have  been 
the  greatest  refinement  of  malice  on  his  part;  since,  as  we  see,  its  fulfilment  must  have 
inflicted  on  the  hereditary  religious  pride  and  pertinacity  of  the  Jew  a  refinement  of 
moral  torture  more  dreadful  to  him  far  than  death  itself.  This  part  of  Shylock’s  sen¬ 
tence,  indeed,  is  clearly  meant  by  the  dramatist  as  his  death-blow,  and  therefore  the 
most  merciful  blow  that  could  now  be  dealt  him.  For,  what  motive  has  even  Shylock 
now  to  live  and  get  money  ?  His  *  own  flesh  and  blood  ’  has  ‘  rebelled ;’  and  all  the 
produce  of  his  *  bargains  ’  and  his  ‘  well- won  thrift  ’  is  doomed,  by  this  last  judgement 
upon  him,  still  to  be  inherited  by  this  sole  apostate  daughter  and  her  misbelieving  hus¬ 
band, — by  her  whom  he  regards  as  faithless  alike  to  her  house,  her  nation,  and  her 
God, — and  respecting  whom  he  has  exclaimed  but  a  moment  before,  ‘  Would  any  of 
the  stock  of  Barrabas  Had  been  her  husband,  rather  than  a  Christian !’  The  last  and 
bitterest  infliction,  however,  he  can  escape ; — from  apostasy  in  his  own  person  he  has 
an  alternative, — to  die ; — and  this  is  plainly  what,  at  his  final  exit,  he  is  going  to  do. 
His  inflexibility  is  majestic  to  the  last.  He  sues  not  for  mercy, — he  asks  not  his  own 
life, — he  says,  on  the  contrary,  ‘  Nay,  take  my  life  and  all,  since  you  do  take  The 
means  whereby  I  live.’  If,  then,  he  would  prefer  death  to  beggary,  yet  more,  as  his 
whole  behaviour  through  the  piece  has  shown  us,  would  he  prefer  it  to  apostasy. 
When  he  blankly  utters  the  bare  words,  ‘  I  am  content,’  and  faintly  adds,  ‘  Let  me  go 
hence,  I  am  not  well,’ — we  feel  that  he  is  tottering  to  his  death-bed, — his  only  remain¬ 
ing  refuge, — and  one  of  which  no  auditor  can  wish  to  deprive  him.  Southesk  [Sas¬ 
katchewan,  &c.,  1875,  P-  4°9) :  Are  we  t°  understand  that  Shylock,  Judas-like,  com¬ 
mitted  suicide  when  he  left  the  Court  ?  There  is  something  peculiar  in  his  exclamation, 

4 1  am  not  well.’  A  man  of  his  stern  character  would  have  scorned  to  acknowledge 
any  feeling  of  illness  at  such  a  time,  unless  he  intended  to  end  illness  and  health  alike 
by  ending  his  life.  Besides,  he  would  never  really  have  consented  to  become  a  Chris¬ 
dan,  and  his  ready  acceptance  of  that  condition  showed  that  he  meant  to  break  it,— 
and  for  that  there  was  but  one  way. 


act  iv,  sc.  i.J  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


231 


Had  I  been  iudge,  thou  fhouldft  haue  had  ten  more,  418 

To  bring  thee  to  the  gallowes,  not  to  the  font.  Exit. 

Du.  Sir  I  intreat  you  with  me  home  to  dinner.  420 

Por.  I  humbly  doe  defire  your  Grace  of  pardon, 

I  muft  away  this  night  toward  Padua, 

And  it  is  meete  I  prefently  fet  forth. 

Duk.  I  am  forry  that  your  leyfure  ferues  you  not :  424 


419.  not /o']  Q2FfQ3,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing. 
Ktly.  not  Qt  et  cet. 

420.  with  me  home]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Wh.  i.  home  with  me  Qq  et  cet. 

to]  Om.  Qj. 


421.  doe]  Om.  Qx. 

Grace  of  ]  Graces  Q3,  Han.  Johns 
424.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 


418.  ten  more]  Theobald:  That  is,  a  jury  of  twelve  men.  Steevens:  So  in 
Jonson’s  The  Devil  is  an  Ass,  V,  iii,  ‘  I  will  leave  you  To  your  godfathers  in  law.  Let 
twelve  men  work.’  Malone:  This  appears  to  have  been  an  old  joke.  So  in  A  Dia¬ 
logue  both  fleas  aunt  and  pietifull,  &c.,  by  Dr  W.  Bulleyne,  1564 :  ‘I  did  see  him  aske 
blessinge  to  xii  godfathers. at  ones.’  Capell  :  This  is  an  application  of  English  usages 
to  a  state  that  did  not  observe  them. 

419.  Francois  Victor  Hugo  (p.  46) :  Shylock  is  defeated,  but,  ponder  it  well,  he 
can  be  condemned  only  by  a  tribunal  which  is  higher  than  all  tribunals.  Verily,  it  is 
not  Shylock  that  is  ‘  tarried  ’  by  Portia ;  it  is  the  lex  talionis  that  Portia’s  ‘  tarry  a  little  ’ 
strikes,  it  is  that  rigorous  justice  which  is  only  rigorous  injustice,  it  is  that  vengeful  leg¬ 
islation  which  promulgates  all  the  edicts  of  princes,  and  which  mercilessly  sustains  all 
established  magistracies, — parliaments,  absolutisms,  inquisitions,  star  chambers,  assizes, 
— it  is  that  process  of  reprisal  which  tortures,  mangles,  breaks,  quarters,  hangs,  beheads, 
assassinates  the  assassin,  which  washes  blood  with  blood  and  punishes  the  fault  in  com¬ 
mitting  the  crime.  It  is  not  the  Jew  that  is  sentenced,  it  is  Judaism.  Such  is  the  true 
bearing  of  the  halt  that  is  called.  In  point  of  fact,  Shylock  has  gained  what  is  far  bet¬ 
ter  than  his  own  cause,  he  has  gained  the  cause  of  a  whole  people ;  he  has  reclaimed 
the  ignored  rights  of  his  race,  and  established  them  by  this  condemnation  of  the  code 
of  extermination  which  weighed  them  down. 

419.  bring]  Clarendon:  Used  in  a  double  sense.  The  sentence  [qu.  verdict ?] 
of  a  jury  brought  a  man  to  the  gallows ;  the  godfathers  brought,  i.  e.  accompanied,  a 
convert  to  the  font. 

Exit]  Macdonald  (  The  Imagination,  p.  165) :  I  suspect  Shakespeare  sends  the  old 
villain  off  the  stage  at  the  last  with  more  of  the  pity  of  the  audience  than  any  of  the 
other  dramatists  of  the  time  would  have  ventured  to  arouse,  had  they  been  capable  of 
doing  so.  I  suspect  he  is  the  only  human  Jew  of  the  English  drama  up  to  that  time. 

421.  of  pardon]  See  Abbott,  §  174,  for  instances  of  a  similar  use  of  of;  or  I,  iii, 
54.  Allen  :  Is  not  this  use  of  the  preposition  a  relic  of  the  Nonnan  French  ?  Modern 
French  has  de  with  the  Infinitive  after  a  verb  of  asking :  ‘  Je  vous  prie  de  me  pardon- 
ner’  (although  not  with  a  noun).  The  of  in  these  phrases  is  nearly  equivalent  to  for 
(I  ask  for  pardon).  Here,  again,  the  French  have  de,  and  the  Irish  of  ‘The  boy 
will  be  the  better  of  a  beating.’  (This  Irish  use  of  of  may  have  arisen  either  from  the 
English  of  the  conquerors,  or  from  the  French  idiom,  imported  by  the  Priests  and 
Gentlemen  who  had  received  their  education  at  St.  Omer’s.) 


232 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  i 


Anthonio,  gratifie  this  gentleman.  425 

For  in  my  minde,  you  are  much  bound  to  him. 

Exit  Duke  and  his  traine. 

Baff.  Moft  worthy  gentleman,  I  and  my  friend 
Haue  by  your  wifedome  beene  this  day  acquitted 
Of  greeuous  penalties,  in  lieu  whereof, 

Three  thoufand  Ducats  due  vnto  the  lew 
We  freely  cope  your  curteous  paines  withall. 

An.  And  ftand  indebted  ouer  and  aboue 
In  loue  and  feruice  to  you  euermore. 

Por.  He  is  well  paid  that  is  well  fatisfied, 

And  I  deliuering  you,  am  fatisfied, 

And  therein  doe  account  my  felfe  well  paid, 

My  minde  was  neuer  yet  more  mercinarie. 

I  pray  you  know  me  when  we  meete  againe, 

I  with  you  well,  and  fo  I  take  my  leaue. 

Baff.  Deare  fir,  of  force  I  muft  attempt  you  further, 

Take  fome  remembrance  of  vs  as  a  tribute, 

Not  as  fee  :  grant  me  two  things,  I  pray  you 
Not  to  denie  me,  and  to  pardon  me. 

Por.  You  preffe  mee  farre,  and  therefore  I  will  yeeld,  445 
Giue  me  your  gloues,  lie  weare  them  for  your  fake, 

425.  gratifie ]  great  fie  F2.  443.  as]  Q2Q3,  Sta.  as  a  Q,,  Ff  et 

426.  [Scene  III.  Pope  +  .  cet. 

430.  lieu]  lew  Qx.  lewe  Q2.  things,]  things ;  Rowe,  Pope. 

432.  curteous]  curtious  Q2.  courtious  446.  [To  Ant.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Rife. 
Q3.  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

438.  more]  mere  Anon.  (ap.  Cam.).  them]  'em  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 

425.  gratifie]  Allen  :  Like  xaP'C°liaL>  make  a  gratification,  that  is,  a  present,  a 
reward. 

432.  cope]  Richardson  [Diet.  s.  v.):  Junius  thinks  it  is  from  the  Anglosaxon 
Ceap-an,  to  traffic,  to  exchange;  to  buy  or  sell  (to  pay — Mer.  of  Vent),  and  that  it 
may  have  been  extended  to  any  kind  of  exchange.  Halliwell  :  The  meaning  is, 
evidently, — we  freely  offer  the  ducats  in  return  for  your  ‘  courteous  pains.’  Staun 
TON :  To  cope  seems  to  be  used  here  in  the  sense  of  encounter  or  meet,  and  not  in  that 
of  exchange.  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  To  pay,  to  reward  (see  Richardson’s  Did.).  Schmidt 
(Lex.) :  To  meet,  to  have  to  do  with,  to  encounter.  [The  present  passage  given  in 
illustration.]  Clarendon  :  To  requite,  give  an  equivalent  for. 

432.  withall]  Abbott,  §  196 :  This  emphatic  form  of  with  is  used  for  with  after 
the  object  at  the  end  of  a  sentence. 

446,  447.  Clarendon  :  We  have  inserted  the  Stage  directions,  ‘  To  Ant.,'  ‘  To  Bass.' 
It  seems  natural  that  as  Antonio  had  been  requested  to  *  gratify  ’  his  deliverer,  Portia 
should  take  something  from  him  as  well  as  from  Bassanio,  whose  obligation  was  less ; 


430 


433 


440 


*CT  IV,  sc.  i.]  THE  MER  CHANT  OF  VENICE 

And  for  your  loue  lie  take  this  ring  from  you, 

Doe  not  draw  backe  your  hand,  ile  take  no  more, 

And  you  in  loue  fhall  not  deny  me  this  ? 

Baff.  This  ring  good  fir,  alas  it  is  a  trifle, 

I  will  not  fhame  my  felfe  to  giue  you  this. 

Por.  I  wil  haue  nothing  elfe  but  onely  this, 

And  now  methinkes  I  haue  a  minde  to  it. 

Baf.  There’s  more  depends  on  this  then  on  the  valew, 

The  deareft  ring  in  Venice  will  I  giue  you,  455 

And  finde  it  out  by  proclamation, 

Onely  for  this  I  pray  you  pardon  me. 

Por.  I  fee  fir  you  are  liberall  in  offers, 

You  taught  me  firft  to  beg,  and  now  me  thinkes 
You  teach  me  how  a  beggar  fhould  be  anfwer’d.  460 

Baf.  Good  fir,  this  ring  was  giuen  me  by  my  wife, 

And  when  the  put  it  on,  fhe  made  me  vow 
That  I  fhould  neither  fell,  nor  giue,  nor  lofe  it. 

Por.  That  fcufe  ferues  many  men  to  faue  their  gifts,  464 


233 

447 

450 


447.  [To  Bass.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Rife, 
Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

449.  this  /]  Q2F2F3.  this.  Qt  et  cet. 
454.  depends. ..on]  then  this  depends 


vpon  Qv  Pope,  depends  on  this ,  than  is 
Theob.  on  this  depends  than  is  Han. 
455.  will  /]  I  will  Qj. 

460.  beggar]  begger  Qq. 


and  if  she  had  already  taken  Bassanio’s  gloves  there  would  have  been  less  reason  for 
asking  the  ring.  The  emphatic  ‘  you  ’  closing  line  447,  seems  also  to  bear  out  our  inter¬ 
pretation.  [An  interpretation  which  carries  instant  conviction. — Ed.] 

451.  to  giue]  See  I,  i,  45,  or  Abbott,  §  356. 

454.  then  on  the]  Capell  (ii,  71) :  None  will  be  at  a  loss  for  this  line’s  meaning. 
Might  not  the  word *  *  on  ’  rise  out  of  some  defect  in  the  manuscript,  or  (rather)  blot  in 
it,  and  the  proper  reading  be  this  ?  ‘  There’s  more  depends  on  this  than  the  stone’s 

value the  line  is  clearer  this  way,  and  without  fault  in  the  expression :  the  comma  that 
follows  *  this  ’  belongs  to  moderns,  for  old  editions  have  none  of  it.  [In  Qx  we  have  a 
downright  compositor’s  sophistication,  unless  we  choose  to  make  a  blind  defence  of  the 
line,  and  imagine  that  its  incoherence  indicates  Bassanio’s  stammering  embarrassment, 
—Ed.] 

464.  scuse]  Both  Abbott  (§  460)  and  Clarendon  imply  that  the  full  form  is  excuse. 

*  Scuse,’  which  Shakespeare  uses  elsewhere  only  in  Oth.  IV,  i,  93,  Halliwell  says  is  an 
archaic,  not  a  contracted  form,  and  gives  the  two  following  instances  :  ‘  Ile  devise  some 
scuse,’ — Famous  History e  of  Captaint  Thomas  Stukeley,  1 605  [in  a  prose  speech  by  the 
Page,  line  214,  ed.  Simpson,  where,  in  sooth,  Simpsor.  p'ints  it  ‘  ’scuse  ’],  and  ‘  Pharicles 
.  .>.  .  therefore  trickt  up  his  talke  with  this  cunning  scuse,’ — Greene’s  Mamillia,  1593 
[p.  179,  ed.  Grosart,  where,  strangely  enough,  the  text  reads  not  ‘  scuse,’  but  sense.  At 
whose  door,  Halliwell’s  or  Grosart’s,  lies  the  heinous  charge  of  confounding  en  and  cu, 
is  not  of  pressing  moment,  since,  owing  to  Grosart’s  excellent  Index  to  Greene’s  Works, 


Exeunt. 


234 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


And  if  your  wife  be  not  a  mad  woman, 

And  know  how  well  I  haue  deferu’d  this  ring, 
Shee  would  not  hold  out  enemy  for  euer 
For  giuing  it  to  me  :  well,  peace  be  with  you. 

Ant.  My  L.  Baffanio ,  let  him  haue  the  ring, 
Let  his  deferuings  and  my  loue  withall 
Be  valued  againft  your  wiues  commandement. 


[act  iv,  sc.  1. 
465 


470 


465.  And~\  An  Cap.  et  seq. 

466.  this]  the  Qj,  Pope  +  ,  Cam.  Glo. 
Cla.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

467.  enemy']  enmity  Rowe+. 

469.  My  L.]  Q2Q3.  My  Lord  Q,  et 
cet. 

471.  valued  againjl ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Hal. 


Wh.  valew'd  gainjl  Qt,  Pope+,  Cap. 
Steev.  ’85,  Dyce,  Ktly.  valued  gainjl  Q2. 
valued  ' gainjl  Q3  et  cet. 

471.  wiues ]  wife's  Rowe  et  seq. 

commandement]  Q,F2Q3F3,  Pope 
+  ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Coll,  ii,  Rife,  com- 
maundemeni  Q„ .  commandment  F,  et  cet. 


we  can  find  two  other  examples  of  ‘  souse.’  On  p.  2 10  of  Mamillia,  Pharicles,  *  to  cloake 
the  cause  of  his  care,  coyned  this  pretie  scuse and  as  this  coyning  of  scuses  appears  to 
have  been  a  foible  of  Pharicles,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Halliwell  is  correct  in  the 
former  instance  and  Grosart  wrong.  Again  in  Greene’s  Defence  of  Conny-  Catching, 
1592,  ‘  He  thought  it  good  to  visit  some  other  of  his  wiues  (for  at  that  instant  hee  had 
sixteene  aliue),  and  made  a  scuse  to  his  wife  ....  to  go  into  Yorkshire,’  p.  89. — Ed.]. 

465.  And  if]  Needlessly  changed,  since  the  days  of  Capell,  to  An  if.  Murray,  in 
the  New  Eng.  Did.,  under  And,  as  a  Conditional  Conjunction,  says  :  *  This  conditional 
use  of  and  may  have  originated  from  ellipsis,  as  in  the  analogous  use  of  so,  e.  g.  “  I’ll 
cross  the  sea,  so  it  please  my  lord”  (Shaks.) ;  cf.  “and  it  pleas?;”  or  it  may  be  con¬ 
nected  with  the  introductory  and  in,  “  And  you  are  going  ?”  A  direct  development 
from  the  original  prepositional  sense,  though  a  priori  plausible,  is  on  historical  grounds 
improbable.  Modem  writers,  chiefly  since  Horne  Tooke,  have  treated  this  as  a  distinct 
word,  writing  it  an,  a  spelling  occasionally  found  circa  1600,  especially  in  an'  ' t—and 
it.'  Again,  under  An  =  if,  the  same  excellent  authority  says  :  ‘  In  this  sense  an,  an' ,  is 
rare  before  1600,  when  it  appears  occasionally  in  the  dramatists,  especially  before  it,  as 
an1  't  please  you,  an'  'twere,  &c.  As  the  preceding  sense  was  not  at  this  time  written 
an,  modern  writers  have  made  a  conventional  distinction  between  the  two  forms,  an' 
for  and,  Latin  et,  being  dialectal  or  illiterate,  but  an'  or  an  for  and,  Latin,  si,  archaic, 
or  even  literary.  Except  in  an'  't,  an  is  found  only  once  in  Ft  of  Shakespeare  [‘  Nay 
then  two  treyes,  an  if  you  grow  so  nice,’ — Love's  Lab.  Lost,  V,  ii,  232] ;  but  modern 
editors  substitute  it  for  the  full  and  usual  in  Shakespeare  and  his  contemporaries.  Dia- 
lectally,  the  two  senses  are  alike  an' ;  the  intensified  and  if ,  an  if ,  common  in  the  17th 
Century,  remains  in  the  South-western  dialect  as  nif.' — Ed. 

467.  enemy]  Steevens  :  So  in  Much  Ado,  I,  i,  91 :  ‘I  will  hold  friends  with  you, 
lady.’ 

471.  commandement]  Walker  (Vers.  p.  126):  In  commandment,  payment, 
entertainment,  and  some  other  words  in  -ment,  the  e,  which,  originally,  in  all  such 
words,  preceded  the  final  syllable  (and  which  was  still  in  certain  instances  retained,) 
was  sometimes  pronounced,  and  sometimes  omitted.  In  the  Folio  (and  probably  in  all 
other  books  of  that  time)  the  word  which  we  now  write  commandment,  is,  when  used 
as  a  trisyllable,  printed  command' ment ;  [herein  Walker  is  in  error;  see  Dyce, post] 


act  iv,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


235 


Baff.  Goe  Gratiano ,  run  and  ouer-take  him, 

Giue  him  the  ring,  and  bring  him  if  thou  canft 
Vnto  Anthonios  houfe,  away,  make  hafte.  Exit  Grati. 

Come,  you  and  I  will  thither  prefently, 

And  in  the  morning  early  will  we  both 
Flie  toward  Belmont ,  come  Anthonio.  Exeunt. 

[Scene  II.] 

Enter  Portia  and  N err  iff  a. 

Por.  Enquire  the  Iewes  houfe  out,  giue  him  this  deed, 

And  let  him  figne  it,  wee’ll  away  to  night, 

And  be  a  day  before  our  husbands  home :  4 

474.  Exit...]  Exeunt...  Qx.  I.  Enter...]  Enter  Neriffa.  Qq.  Re- 

[Scene  II.  Street  before  the  Court.  enter...  Theob. 

Cap.  et  seq. 

the  entire  word  being  a  quadrisyllable,  commandement.  So  it  was  pronounced  as  late, 
apparently,  as  1672.  Wallis,  the  grammarian,  lived  1616-1703 ;  the  first  edition  of  his 
grammar  was  published  in  1653;  the  third  in  1672;  from  which  latter  I  quote,  p.  52  : 

‘ - non  dubito  fuisse  quondam  pronuntiatam  [the  e  in  miles,  finely,  advancement, 

&c.]  non  minus  quam  in  voce  commandement  mandatum,  ubi  adhuc  pronunciari  solet.’ 
A  writer  in  The  Saturday  Magazine,  Aug.  17,  1844,  ‘  On  the  Language  of  Uneducated 
People,’  says  that  many  cockneys  still  pronounce  it  thus.  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Here  ‘com¬ 
mandment  ’  is  to  be  read  as  a  quadrisyllable ;  and  so  again  in  a  line  in  1  Hen.  VI:  I, 
iii,  which  the  Folio  gives  thus,  ‘  From  him  I  haue  expresse  commandement,’  &c.  (In 
all  the  other  passages  in  Shakespeare  where  it  occurs  in  his  blank  verse  it  is  a  trisylla¬ 
ble.)  But  the  spelling  of  this  word  in  the  old  copies  goes  for  nothing;  e.  g.  in  King 
John,  IV,  ii,  the  Folio  has :  ‘  Haue  I  commandement  on  the  pulse  of  life  ?’  though 

*  commandement  ’  there  is  a  trisyllable.  And  I  cannot  understand  why  several  of  the 
modern  Editors  should  print *  *  commandeme7it  ’  here  and  in  the  above-mentioned  line 
of  Hen.  VI,  while  in  a  great  number  of  other  words,  which,  if  the  orthography  is  to 
be  suited  to  the  metre,  require  the  addition  of  a  syllable,  they  content  themselves  with 
the  usual  spelling;  for  instance,  they  print  ‘ dazzled!  ‘children,'  ‘England]  ‘ remem¬ 
brance ]  ‘juggler]  ‘  handling]  ‘  enfeebled]  &c.  &c.,  when,  to  be  consistent,  they  ought 
to  have  printed  ‘dazzeled,’  ‘childeren,’  ‘England,’  ‘ rememberance,’  ‘juggeler,’ 

*  handeling,’  ‘  enfeebeled,’  &c.  &c. 

475.  presently]  At  once. 

2.  Cowden-Clarke  :  It  is  worth  noting  how  Shakespeare,  in  his  short  and  appa¬ 
rently  insignificant  Scenes,  makes  them  serve  fullest  dramatic  purpose.  Here,  the 
very  first  thing,  Portia  fulfils  in  careful,  practical,  professional  way,  the  duty  of  convey¬ 
ing  the  deed  to  Shylock  for  signature ;  and  afte.  wards,  by  her  desiring  Gratiano  to 
show  her  clerk  the  way  to  the  Jew’s  house,  the  oopur*unity  for  Nerissa  to  obtain  her 
husband’s  ring  is  naturally  brought  about. 


472 

475 


236  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 

This  deed  will  be  well  welcome  to  Lorenzo.  5 

Enter  Gratiano . 

Gra.  Faire  fir,  you  are  well  ore-tane  : 

My  L.  Baffatiio  vpon  more  aduice, 

Hath  fent  you  heere  this  ring,  and  doth  intreat 
Your  company  at  dinner.  10 

Por.  That  cannot  be  ; 

His  ring  I  doe  accept  mod  thankfully, 

And  fo  I  pray  you  tell  him  :  furthermore, 

I  pray  you  fhew  my  youth  old  Shylockes  houfe. 

Gra.  That  will  I  doe.  15 

Ner.  Sir,  I  would  fpeake  with  you  : 
lie  fee  if  I  can  get  my  husbands  ring 
Which  I  did  make  him  fweare  to  keepe  for  euer. 

Por.  Thou  maift  I  warrant,  we  fhal  haue  old  fwearing 
That  they  did  giue  the  rings  away  to  men ;  20 

But  weele  out-face  them,  and  out-fweare  them  to  : 

Away,  make  hafte,  thou  know’ft  where  I  will  tarry. 

Ner.  Come  good  fir,  will  you  fhew  me  to  this  houfe. 

Exeunt. 

12.  His\  This  Qj,  Pope+,  Steev.  Mai.  17.  [To  Portia.  Pope  et  cet.  Asidt. 

Sing.  Ktly.  Cap. 

/  doe]  do  1  Rowe.  19.  [Aside.  Cap. 

13.  him  .■]  him.  Q,.  23.  houfe.]  houfe?  QXF4. 


8.  aduice]  Steevens  :  That  is,  upon  more  reflection  or  deliberation.  [See  I, 

i,  152.] 

19.  old]  Dyce  ( Gloss?) :  Used  as  an  augmentative  in  colloquial  language,  meaning 
‘  plentiful,  abundant,  great.’  I  believe  I  was  the  first  to  remark  that  the  Italians  use 
(or  at  least  formerly  used)  ‘  vecchio  ’  in  the  same  sense  :  ‘  Perch£  Corante  abbandonava 
il  freno,  E  dette  un  vecchio  colpo  in  sul  terreno,’ — Pulci,  Morg.  Mag.,  C.  xv,  st.  54 ; 
‘  E  so  ch’egli  ebbe  di  vecchie  paure.’ — Id.  C.  xix,  st.  30.  It  is  rather  remarkable  that 
Florio,  in  his  Diet.,  has  not  given  this  meaning  of  ‘  vecchio.’  Collier  :  Shakespeare 
is  full  of  instances  of  this  augmentative  ‘  old  ’  applied  to  words  of  almost  every  de¬ 
scription  ;  it  is  needless  to  cite  instances.  Rolfe  :  Compare  the  slang  phrase  of  oui 
day,  ‘  a  high  old  time.’ 


ACT  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


237 


A  6hts  Quintus. 


[Scene  /.] 

Enter  Lorenzo  and  IeJJica. 

Lor.  The  moone  fhines  bright.  In  fuch  a  night  as  this, 

When  the  fweet  winde  did  gently  kiffe  the  trees, 

And  they  did  make  no  nnyfe,  in  fuch  a  night  4 


Actus  Quintus]  Om,  Qq.  Avenue  to  Portia’s  House.  Cap. 

[Belmont.  Rowe.  A  Grove  or  Green  2.  Two  lines,  Qr. 

place  before  Portia’s  House.  Theob.  4.  nnyfe']  noyfe  Qt. 


Hazlitt  (p.  275) :  The  graceful  winding  up  of  this  play  in  the  Fifth  Act,  after  the 
tragic  business  is  despatched,  is  one  of  the  happiest  instances  of  Shakespeare’s  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  principles  of  the  drama. 

Oechelhaeuser,  whose  eminence  among  German  critics  as  one  who  has  given 
especial  attention  to  Scenic  arrangement  entitles  him  to  a  respectful  hearing,  in  the 
Fourth  Vol.  of  the  Sh.  Jahrbuch,  p.  348,  reviews  a  work  called  Das  Burgtheater,  by 
Heinrich  Laube.  This  work,  written,  as  Oechelhaeuser  says,  by  a  well-known  dram¬ 
atist,  with  a  thorough  knowledge  of  stage  management,  of  independent  character,  and 
of  keen  critical  judgement,  is  of  enduring  value,  and  from  it  the  reviewer  quotes  the 
following,  to  which,  as  he  says,  he  gives  his  unreserved  assent :  The  Mer.  of  Ven.  was 
given  with  an  entirely  new  arrangement  of  the  Acts  and  Scenes.  [Laube  is  speak¬ 
ing  of  the  production  of  the  play  under  his  management  on  the  Vienna  stage  in  1851.] 
The  Scenes  before  Shylock’s  house  constituted  one  Act,  and  the  scattered  wooing 
Scenes  were  likewise  brought  together.  Thereby  the  progress  of  the  whole  was  ren¬ 
dered  smoother  and  more  connected.  The  chief  change,  however,  was  in  the  last  Act. 
The  great  Trial  Scene  evidently  concludes  the  Fourth  Act ;  and  the  Fifth  Act  merrily 
finishes,  at  Belmont,  the  love-affairs  of  the  play,  which  have  long  been  ripe.  The  com¬ 
mentators,  making  a  virtue  of  necessity,  even  applaud  this  finale.  The  real  need  lies 
in  the  demand  for  a  final  Act  wherewith  to  conclude  the  piece  after  the  chief  interest 
of  the  play  is  over.  They  pronounce  a  musical,  lyric  ending  a  virtue,  because  it  sets 
on  a  bright  piece  a  bright,  beautiful  crown.  The  public  thinks  differently.  As  soon 
as  Shylock’s  fate  is  sealed  in  the  Fourth  Act,  the  public  usually  begins  to  arise  and 
prepare  to  leave.  To  it  Shylock’s  case  is  the  main  interest  of  the  play.  In  vain  do 
the  commentators  cry  that  the  Shylock  business  is  only  a  great  episode.  The  public 
heeds  them  not,  but  follows  its  own  impression.  And  this  impression  rests  on  indis¬ 
putable,  Esthetic  laws.  The  discord  between  the  tone  of  the  comedy  and  the  tragic 
tone  of  Shylock’s  fate  cannot  be  denied.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  deadly  agony  of 
that  part  of  the  play  is  not  in  accord  with  a  Comedy ;  or  that  the  Trial  Scene,  with  its 
question  of  life  or  death,  makes  a  far  deeper  impression  than  all  the  rest,  and  that  a 
whole  Act  following  thereon  is,  to  the  audience,  intrusive  and  superfluous.  In  no  ses- 


238 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


[Scene  I.  Enter  I.orenzo  and  Iessica.] 
thetic  sense  are  last  Acts  to  be  used  to  clear  up  a  play ;  the  weaker  cannot  effectively 
follow  the  stronger.  In  a  drama  the  strict  law  of  an  ever-increasing  interest  is  not  to 
be  ignored,  and  commentators  had  much  better  acknowledge  it  instead  of  making  a 
virtue  of  necessity.  No  one  denies  that  this  last  Act,  with  its  beautiful  language,  is 
valuable ;  but  with  all  its  value  as  a  final  Act,  it  is  a  fault  in  composition.  To  render 
this  defect  as  little  conspicuous  as  possible  is  the  work  of  Scenic  arrangement.  We 
begin,  therefore,  on  our  stage,  the  last  Act  with  the  Trial  Scene,  which  occupies  three- 
quarters  of  it.  It  is  followed  by  the  short  Scene  of  the  giving  of  the  rings,  and  then, 
while  music  plays,  the  Scene  changes  to  the  Garden  of  Belmont.  Thus  we  are  pre¬ 
pared  to  resign  ourselves  to  the  repose  of  the  music  and  the  sweet  words  of  the  lovers ; 
we  see, — after  some  free  excisions  of  the  text, — the  whole  company  approach  from 
Venice  by  torchlight ;  in  a  few  minutes  the  jesting  puzzle  of  the  rings  is  solved,  and  the 
end  is  reached  without  our  being  conscious  of  any  jarring  influence  from  the  weaker 
theme  on  the  previous  interest  in  the  play.  Thus,  without  any  intervals  between  Acts 
and  by  a  quick  evolution  of  the  Scenes,  we  carry  home  the  impression  of  a  joyous  play, 
and  are  not  struck  by  any  dissonance  in  the  notes  of  the  chord.  Whoever  has  seen  the 
play  as  thus  arranged  at  our  Burgtheater, — and  during  sixteen  years  I  have  questioned, 
I  know  not  how  many, — has  acknowledged  that  the  awkwardness  of  the  last  Act  is 
quite  concealed,  and  that  in  spite  of  Shylock’s  tragic  fate,  the  impression  is  that  of  a 
pleasant  comedy.  The  text  is  not  changed,  merely  shortened,  and  the  aim  of  our 
mode  of  representation  is  attained  merely  by  a  change  of  Scenes  and  Acts. 

Hunter  [New  III.,  i,  309) :  The  ‘poet’s  pen’  has  nowhere  given  more  striking 
proof  of  its  power  than  in  the  Scene  of  the  Garden  of  Belmont.  We  find  ourselves 
transported  into  the  grounds  of  an  Italian  palazzo  of  the  very  first  class,  and  we  soon 
perceive  them  to  be  of  surpassing  beauty  and  of  almost  boundless  extent.  It  is  not  a 
garden  of  parterres  and  flowers,  but  more  like  Milton’s  *  Paradise,’  full  of  tall  shrubs 
and  lofty  trees, — the  tulip  tree,  the  poplar,  and  the  cedar.  But  it  is  not,  like  Milton’s, 
a  garden  in  which  the  hand  of  Nature  is  alone  visible.  There  are  terraces  and  flights 
of  steps,  cascades  and  fountains,  broad  walks,  avenues,  and  ridings,  with  alcoves  and 
banqueting-houses  in  the  rich  architecture  of  Venice.  It  is  evening;  a  fine  evening 
of  summer,  which  tempts  the  masters  of  the  scene  to  walk  abroad  and  enjoy  the  breezes 
which  ruffle  gently  the  foliage.  The  moon  is  in  the  heavens,  full  orbed  and  shining 
with  a  steady  lustre;  no  light  clouds  disturbing  the  deep  serene.  On  the  green  sward 
fall  the  ever-changing  shadows  of  the  lofty  trees,  which  may  be  mistaken  for  fairies 
sporting  by  the  moonlight ;  where  trees  are  not,  the  moonbeams  sleep  upon  the  bank 

The  distant  horn  is  heard ;  and  even  sweeter  music  floats  upon  the  breeze . For 

the  four  moonlights  in  classical  or  quasi-classical  story  the  poet  did  not  draw  on  bis 
imagination,  but  his  memory.  It  is  not  that  Troilus,  Thisbe,  Dido,  and  Medea  might 
have  done  what  they  did  when  the  moon  was  shining  in  full  splendour,  as  on  that 
night  in  the  Garden  of  Belmont,  but  the  poet  had  read  that  they  did  what  they  are 
described  as  having  done,  in  the  moonlight.  This,  at  least,  is  the  fact  in  respect  of 
three  out  of  the  four,  and  with  respect  to  the  fourth  an  explanation  may  be  given  which 
will  bring  it  within  the  same  category.  The  first  is  Troilus.  [Steevens  was  the  first, 
I  believe,  to  note,  which  he  did  without  further  remark,  that  ‘  the  image  ’  of  Troilus 
mounting  the  Trojan  walls  ‘  is  from  Chaucer’s  Troilus  and  Cresseide,  Book  v,  666. — 
Ed.]  Though  this  is  a  classical  name,  and  the  story  is  a  tale  of  Troy,  yet  cannot  the 
story  be  traced  to  any  of  the  ancient  poets.  [See  Clarendon’s  note,  post.']  It  seems 
to  have  been  to  Chaucer  that  Shakespeare  was  indebted  for  his  knowledge  of  it.  The 


actv,  sc.  i.J  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


239 


[Scene  I.  Enter  Lorenzo  and  Iessica.] 
next  is  Thisbe.  Every  one  remembers  ‘  Quam  procul  ad  lunae  radios  Babylonia  Thisbe 
Vidit.’  [Ovid,  Metatnorphoses,  iv,  99.]  But  for  the  suggestion  of  this  also,  and  even 
of  the  two  which  follow,  it  seems  that  Shakespeare  was  indebted  to  Chaucer;  that,  in 
fact,  the  old  folio  of  Chaucer  was  lying  open  before  him  when  he  wrote  this  dialogue, 
and  that  there  he  found  Thisbe,  Dido,  and  Medea,  as  well  as  Troilus.  It  is  at  least 
certain  that  Thisbe,  Dido,  and  Medea  do  occur  together  in  Chaucer’s  Legend  of  Good 
Women,  which  in  the  folio  immediately  follows  the  Troilus.  Neither  Vergil  not  Ovid 
represents  Dido  as  standing  by  moonlight  ‘  on  the  wild  sea-bank,’  as  she  is  so  pictur¬ 
esquely  depicted  by  Shakespeare,  and  the  idea  of  placing  a  willow  in  her  hand  is  mod¬ 
ern, — ‘  The  willow  worn  of  forlorn  paramours ;’  but  Chaucer,  when  he  speaks  of  Dido, 
says,  ‘  It  fell  upon  a  nyght  Whan  that  the  moone  upreysed  had  her  light,  This  noble 
Quene  unto  her  reste  y-wente ;  She  sigheth  sore,’  &c.  But  the  truth  seems  to  be  that 
Shakespeare  has  transferred  to  Dido  what  he  found  in  Chaucer’s  Legend  concerning 
Ariadne : 

*  And  to  the  stronde  barefote  faste  she  went, 

And  cryed,  “  Theseus,  myn  herte  swete ! 

Where  be  ye,  that  I  may  not  wyth  yow  mete  ? 

And  myghte  thus  with  bestes  ben  yslayne.” 

The  holowe  roches  answerde  her  agayne. 

No  man  she  sawe,  and  yet  shone  the  moone, 

And  hye  upon  a  rokke  she  went  soone 
And  sawe  hys  barge  saylynge  in  the  see. 

Cold  waxe  hire  herte,  and  ryghte  thus  sayde  she : 

“  Meker  then  ye  fynde  I  the  bestes  wilde  !” 

(Hath  he  not  synne,  that  he  hire  thus  begylde  ?) 

She  cried,  “  O  turne  agayne  for  routhe  and  synne, 

Thy  barge  hath  not  al  thy  meyny  ynne.” 

Hire  kerchefe  on  a  pole  styked  shee, 

Ascaunce  that  he  shulde  hyt  wel  ysee, 

And  hym  remembre  that  she  was  behynde. 

And  turne  agayne,  and  on  the  stronde  hire  fynde.’ — 

[Lines  2187-2203,  ed.  Corson.] 

There  can  be  scarcely  a  doubt  that  this  is  the  parent  of  the  image  of  Dido ;  and  the 
merit  of  Shakespeare  consists  in  a  skilful  adaptation,  and  in  having  produced  in  a  few 
strokes  an  effect  superior  to  that  which  the  older  poet  has  produced  with  so  much 
labour,  and  with  no  mean  success.  [Malone  was  the  first  to  recall  Chaucer’s  descrip¬ 
tion  of  Ariadne. — Ed.]  There  remains  only  Medea.  In  the  Medea  of  Chaucer  we  have 
no  moon,  nor  even  the  going  out  at  night  to  gather  herbs.  What  Shakespeare  here 
owes  to  Chaucer  is  the  suggestion  of  the  character.  Seeing  Medea  in  The  Legend  of 
Good  Women,  his  mind  was  directed  to  Ovid,  the  Latin  poet  with  whom  he  seems  to 
have  been  best  acquainted,  and  he  there  found  :  ‘  As  soone  as  that  she  shone  Most  full 
of  light,  and  did  behold  the  earth  with  fulsome  face,  Medea  with  hir  haire  not  trust  so 
much  as  in  a  lace,  But  flaring  on  hir  shoulders  twaine,  and  barefoote,  with  hir  gowr.e 
Ungirded,  gate  hir  out  of  doores  and  wandred  vp  and  downe  Alone  the  dead  time  of 
the  night.’  [Golding’s  Ouid,  p.  83,  ed.  1567.]  I  quote  from  Golding,  because  it  is 
evident  that  Shakespeare  was  accustomed  to  read  Golding,  without  at  all  meaning  to 
insinuate  that  he  might  not  have  gone  at  once  to  the  original,  or  that  he  might  not  have 


24<J 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


Troylus  me  thinkes  mounted  the  Troian  walls,  5 

5.  me  thinkes']  me-thinkesQt.  metkinks  Cam.  Cla.  Trojan  Q3. 

F  .  5-  walls]  wall  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap. 

Troian ]  Troyan  Q, F3F^,  Rowe,  Steev. ’85. 

remembered  in  this  and  the  other  instances  Vergil  or  Ovid  themselves.  [There  is  little 
doubt  in  my  mind  that  Shakespeare  remembered  the  translation  and  not  the  original, 
and  that  he  was  familiar  with  these  pages  of  Golding.  Only  a  few  lines  further  on,  in 
this  very  description,  occurs  that  invocation  which  assuredly  lingered  in  Shakespeare’s 
memory.  The  original  reads  :  ‘  Auraeque,  et  venti,  montesque,  amnesque,  lacusque,  Dique 
omnes  nemorum,  dique  omnes  noctis  adeste.’  Thus  Golding :  ‘  Ye  Ayres  and  windes  :  ye 
Elues  of  Hilles,  of  Brookes,  of  Woods  alone,  Of  standing  Lakes,  and  of  the  Night  ap- 
proche  ye  euerychone.’  Who  does  not  at  once  recall  Prospero’s  invocation:  ‘Ye  elves 
of  hills,  brooks,  standing  lakes  and  groves  ’  ? — Ed.]  I  believe,  however,  that  he  was 
indebted  in  the  first  instance  to  Chaucer ;  and  that  this  is,  perhaps,  the  best  instance 
of  the  Chaucerisms  which  it  is  suspected  lurk  in  greater  abundance  than  is  yet  known 
in  the  writings  of  Shakespeare.  It  is  pleasant  thus  to  trace  the  pedigree  of  favourite 
passages,  and  to  see  one  poet  doing  silent  homage  to  the  genius  of  another.  Steev- 
ens  notes  that  Gower,  in  his  Confessio  Amantis,  has  a  description  of  Medea  by  ‘  sterre 
light.’  Verplanck  :  The  beauty  and  truth  of  this  exquisite  night-scene  need  not  be 
pointed  out  to  the  American  reader,  who  is  familiar  under  his  own  skies  with  such 
moons  pouring  floods  of  liquid  radiance,  and  such  nights  ‘but  little  paler  than  the 
day,’ — such  as  many  an  English  traveller  and  many  a  poet  have  described  with  won¬ 
der  and  delight  when  seen  in  Italy  or  the  East.  It  is  the  intense  feeling  of  reality  in 
this  scene  that,  to  my  mind,  gives  strong  confirmation  of  the  opinion  that  Shakespeare 
had,  at  some  period  prior  to  this  drama,  wandered  under  the  skies  and  moons  of  Italy. 
Still  it  is  not  conclusive.  England  has  her  own  brighter  nights,  which  the  poet’s  fancy 
might  light  up  to  the  golden  star-paved  heavens  and  the  brilliant  moonlight  gazed  upon 
by  lovers’  eyes  from  the  gardens  of  Belmont.  Lloyd  (p.  554,  Singer’s  ed.) :  It  is  worth 
giving  a  note  to  the  hints  this  Act  contains  of  the  stage  management  of  what  is  apt  to 
be  tedious,  a  long  darkened  scene.  In  the  first  speech  we  have,  ‘  The  moon  shines 
bright,’  and  again,  ‘  How  sweet  the  moonlight  sleeps  upon  yon  [sic]  bank,’  but  by  the 
time  that  Portia  enters  to  converse  for  some  time  in  front,  unobserved  by  Lorenzo  and 
his  wife,  the  moon  is  overcast.  ‘When  the  moon  shone,’  says  Nerissa,  ‘we  did  not 
see  the  candle,’  and  consistently  Lorenzo  had  said  just  before,  ‘  Come,  ho,  and  wake 
Diana  with  a  hymn;’  now  Portia,  with  a  parallelism  that  should  have  saved  the  line 
from  a  bad  reading,  exclaims,  *  Peace,  ho,  the  moon  sleeps  with  Endymion,  And  would 
not  be  awakened.’  When  Bassanio  approaches,  however,  the  cloud  again  withdraws. 
‘For.  This  night,  methinks,  is  but  the  daylight  sick,  It  looks  a  little  paler ;  ’tis  a  day, 
Such  as  the  day  is  when  the  sun  is  hid ;’  and  Bassanio  accordingly,  unlike  Lorenzo 
shortly  before,  recognizes  Portia  by  sight,  and  not  by  voice  alone,  and  the  stage  remains 
fully  moonlit  to  the  end. 

2.  In]  See  II,  iv,  2.  Whalley  refers  to  an  imitation  of  this  passage  in  the  old 
Comedy  of  Wily  Beguiled.  See  Appendix,  *  The  Date  of  Composition.’ 

5.  Troylus]  Walker  [Vers.  p.  165):  ‘Troilus’  in  Shakespeare  is  always  a  dis¬ 
syllable.  In  the  Folio  Tro.  and  Cress,  throughout . and  to  a  great  extent  in  the 

old  English  poetry,  it  is  written  Troylus,  as  if  the  name  were  formed  immediately  from 
Troy. 

5.  Troian  walls]  Steevens:  This  image  is  from  Chaucer’s  Troilus  and  Cresstide  : 


act  v,  sc.  i.  ]  THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


241 


And  figh’d  his  foule  toward  the  Grecian  tents  6 

Where  Creffed  lay  that  night. 

Ief.  In  fuch  a  night 
Did  Thisbie  fearefully  ore-trip  the  dewe, 

And  faw  the  Lyons  fhadow  ere  hiiufelfe,  10 

And  ranne  difmayed  away. 

Loren.  In  fuch  a  night 
Stood  Didc  with  a  Willow  in  her  hand 

Vpon  the  wilde  fea  bankes,  and  waft  her  Loue  14 


6.  foule\  soul  out  Allen. 

7.  Creffed]  Creffada Qt.  Cresseid Pope. 
Cressid  Theob.  et  seq. 

11.  dif  nayed~\  QqFf,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns,  dismay'd  Rowe  et  cet. 


14.  wilde~\  wide  Rowe  i. 

waft~\  wav'd  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Hal.  Wh.  i,  Del.  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 


'  Upon  the  wallis  fast  eke  would  he  walke,’ — Bk  v,  666.  Clarendon  :  The  story  of 
Troilus  and  Cressida  was  probably  already  familiar  to  an  English  audience  through  a 
play  on  the  subject,  which  Shakespeare  afterwards  took  for  the  groundwork  of  his 
drama.  Guido  da  Colonna,  about  1260,  worked  up  the  old  Latin  tales,  professedly 
translations  of  Dares  Phrygius  and  Dictys  Cretensis,  but  really  late  forgeries,  into  his 
romance  called  Historia  de  Bello  Trojano,  which  became  immensely  popular,  and  was 
the  basis  of  Chaucer’s  poem  of  Troilus  and  Cresseide. 

13.  Willow]  Steevens  :  This  passage  contains  a  small  instance  out  of  many  that 
might  be  brought  to  prove  that  Shakespeare  was  no  reader  of  the  classics.  ‘And 
why?’  indignantly  asks  Knight.  ‘Because  the  Dido  of  the  classics  is  never  represented 
with  a  willow !  Shakespeare  was  not,  like  many  of  Steevens’s  day  who  had  made 
great  reputations  with  slender  means,  a  mere  transcriber  of  the  thoughts  of  other  men. 
He  has  here  given  us  a  picture  of  the  forsaken  Dido,  which  was  perfectly  intelligible 
to  the  popular  mind.  Those  who  remember  Desdemona’s  Willow-song  need  no 
laboured  comment  to  show  them  that  the  willow  was  emblematic  of  the  misery  that 
Dido  had  to  bear.’ 

14.  wilde  sea  bankes]  The  Fourth  Folio  has  ‘wilde  sea-banks,’  and  this  hyphen 
has  retained  its  place  in  every  edition,  I  think,  since  then,  except  Capell’s,  the  Globe, 
Clarendon,  and  White’s  Second  Edition.  I  think  it  is  wrong.  If  a  hyphen  be  needed 
at  all,  it  should  connect  ‘  wilde  ’  and  ‘sea;’  it  was  the  sea  that  was  wild,  not  the  banks 
Perhaps,  it  was  this  incongruity  which  led  Rowe  in  his  first  edition  to  change  ‘  wild  ’ 
into  wide.  In  my  copy  of  Capell  there  is  a  very  dim  mark  between  ‘  sea  ’  and  ‘  wild,’ 
which  is  possibly  a  hyphen,  but  I  think  not.  Since  writing  this,  I  find  that  Allen  has 
noted  in  his  MS  a  hyphen  where  I  have  suggested  it.  Now,  I  am  sure  it  is  right. - 
Ed. 

14.  waft]  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  57)  thinks  that  in  all  probability  this  is  a  corruption, 
but  gives  another  instance  of  it  elsewhere  than  in  Shakespeare,  as  well  as  the  present 
tense  wafts,  in  Ham.  I,  iv,  61 ;  and  he  also  compares  with  this  form,  saft  for  saved  in 
several  instances  from  Chapman.  Abbott  (§  341),  however,  is  much  more  likely  to  be 
right,  I  think,  in  regarding  it  as  an  instance  of  the  absorption  in  the  final  t,  for  the  sake 
of  euphony,  of  the  -ed  of  the  past  indicative ;  and  in  §  342  he  gives  another  example 
from  King  John,  II,  i,  73 :  ‘A  braver  choice  of  dauntless  spirits  Than  now  the  Eng- 
16 


242 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


To  come  againe  to  Carthage.  15 

Ief.  In  fuch  a  night 
Medea  gathered  the  inchanted  hearbs 
That  did  renew  old  Efon. 

Loren.  In  fuch  a  night 

Did  Ieffica  fteale  from  the  wealthy  Iewe,  20 

And  with  an  Vnthrift  Loue  did  runne  from  Venice, 

As  farre  as  Belmont. 

Ief.  In  fuch  a  night 

Did  young  Lorenzo  fweare  he  lou’d  her  well, 

Stealing  her  foule  with  many  vowes  of  faith,  25 


17.  gathered]  QqFf.  gather'd  Rowe 
et  seq. 

18.  Efon]  A£fon  Rowe. 

23,  27.  In]  And  in  F2,  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 


Steev.  Sing. Walk.  Coll.iii,  Dyceiii,  Huds. 

23,  24,  27,  28.  In... Did]  One  line, 
Mai.  ’90. 

24.  loti'd]  loued  Q,Q2. 


lish  bottoms  have  waft  o’er.’  As  the  textual  notes  show,  Theobald  is  the  first  to  print 
-wav' d. — Ed. 

17.  Medea]  Minto  (p.  387) :  One  of  the  pictures  that  the  moonlight  pours  in  upon 
these  happy  hearts  is  the  sorceress  Medea  gathering  her  enchanted  herbs, — a  conception 
in  the  finest  harmony  with  the  soft  mysterious  light  of  the  moon.  But  the  other  three 
are  pictures  of  sighing,  ill-starred,  forlorn  lovers,  Troilus,  Thisbe,  and  Dido.  The 
moonlight  hours  are  peculiarly  sacred  to  lovers,  and  their  placid  influence  tends  to 
tranquillity  and  sadness.  Happy  successful  love  is  akin  to  sadness ;  it  is  unsatisfied 
sighing  that  raises  tempests  in  the  soul,  and  confident  hope  or  reckless  despair  that 
inspires  to  heroic  deeds.  In  the  moment  of  assured  success  the  lover  may  be  seated 
in  the  highest  pinnacle  of  triumph,  in  rapture  at  having  won  the  world’s  dearest  pos¬ 
session  ;  but  triumph  soon  gives  place  to  more  tranquil  joy,  and  falls  naturally  into  the 
common  pathetic  key  of  love  and  soft  diffused  sadness.  Shakespeare  shows  in  many 
passages  his  deep  feeling  for  the  pathos  and  witchery  of  moonlight,  and  his  delight  in 
music  under  such  circumstances  appears  to  have  been  ecstatic. 

20.  steale]  Could  not  Lorenzo  have  chosen  a  less  suggestive  word  ?  But,  after  all, 
are  there  not  two  distinct,  and  utterly  different,  Jessicas?  This  Jessica,  whose  awaken¬ 
ing  soul  can  be  saddened  by  sweet  music,  is  not  the  Jessica  of  Venice,  gilded  with 
stolen  ducats.  In  this  growth  of  character  is  there  one  of  Shakespeare’s  indications 
of  Long  Time  lying  perdue  ? — Ed. 

23.  In]  White  (ed.  i) :  It  must  be  confessed  that  the  addition  of  And  in  F2  helps 
the  metre,  and  is  not  out  of  place  in  the  concluding  plea  and  rejoinder  of  the  *  night- 
ing;’  but  no  addition  is  necessary,  and,  therefore,  except  upon  authority,  which  F2 
lacks,  none  can  be  admitted.  Collier  (ed.  ii)  says,'  (and  Dyce,  ed.  iii,  repeats  the 
assertion,)  that  it  is  only  in  some  copies  of  F2  that  this  And  is  found.  ‘If  we  are 
authorised,’  he  continues,  *  in  inserting  words  for  any  such  reason,  what  is  to  be  done 
with  the  lines  in  which  Carthage  and  iEson  are  mentioned  where  there  is  a  redundant 
syllable  ?’  ‘  No  alteration  is  necessary,’  says  Boswell  ;  ‘  two  hemistichs  frequently 

occur  at  the  end  of  one  speech  and  the  commencement  of  another.’  [The  *  And  ’  i? 
in  my  copy  of  Fa,  and  also,  apparently,  in  that  of  the  Cambridge  Editors. — Ed.] 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


243 


And  nere  a  true  one.  26 

Loren.  In  fuch  a  night 
Did  pretty  IeJJica  (like  a  little  throw; 

Slander  her  Loue,  and  he  forgaue  it  her. 

Iefji.  I  would  out-night  you  did  no  body  come  :  30 

But  harke,  I  heare  the  footing  of  a  man. 

Enter  MeJJenger. 

Lor.  Who  comes  fo  faft  in  filence  of  the  night  ? 

Mef.  A  friend.  (friend? 

Loren.  A  friend,  what  friend  t  your  name  I  pray  you  35 
Mef.  Stephano  is  my  name,  and  I  bring  word 

28 .  Jhr<nv\  Q2FfQ3,  Cap.  firew  Qt,  Stephano.  Theob. 

Rowe  et  cet.  34.  friend  ?~\  Q2.  friend.  Qx. 

30.  no  body]  nobody  Qt,  Sing.  35.  A  friend, ]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 

32.  Enter...]  Enter  a...  Qq.  Enter  Warb. 

26.  Abbott,  §  510,  would  complete  the  metre  by  reading  never  for  ‘  nere.’  ‘And 
nev  |  er  a  |  true  6ne  |  In  such  |  a  night.’  [But  this  sacrifices  the  emphasis,  which,  I 
think,  must  fall  on  *  true.’  I  prefer  to  let  the  pause  between  the  speeches  complete 
the  metre. — Ed.] 

32.  Hunter  (i,  315) :  The  dramatic  skill  as  well  as  the  poetic  power  of  Shakespeare 
may  be  eminently  illustrated  from  this  Scene.  Delightful  as  such  discourse  in  such  cir¬ 
cumstances  is,  it  must  not  be  too  long  continued,  as  it  conduces  nothing  to  the  business 
of  the  drama.  Yet  the  poet  had  not  delivered  his  whole  mind,  and  he  meant  still 
longer  to  ravish  the  ears  of  young  and  old  with  this  sweet  and  virtuous  discourse.  It 
is  that  he  might  not  seem  inattentive  to  the  business  of  the  Scene,  and  that  the  audi¬ 
ence  might  not  grow  impatient  for  the  progress  of  the  story,  that  he  here  introduces 
the  two  servants  with  intelligence  of  the  approach  of  Portia  and  Bassanio.  This  was 
enough  for  the  purpose.  Orders  are  given  for  preparations  to  receive  them,  and  for  the 
music.  Then  the  dialogue  proceeds. 

33.  in  silence]  Abbott,  §  89 :  The  was  frequently  omitted  before  a  noun  already 
defined  by  another  noun,  especially  in  prepositional  phrases.  See  I,  i,  61 ;  II,  i,  17, 
and  ‘In  number  of  our  friends,’ — -Jul.  Cees.  Ill,  i,  216;  ‘On  most  part  of  their  fleet,’ 
Oth.  II,  i,  28. 

36.  Stephano]  Clarendon  :  Both  here  and  in  line  60  the  accent  is  on  the  second 
syllable.  Shakespeare  had  learned  the  true  pronunciation  when  he  wrote  The  Tempest, 
V,  i,  277  :  ‘Is  not  this  St6phano,  my  drunken  butler?’  Th.  Elze  [Sh.  Jahrbuch,  xiii, 
148) :  The  reproach  of  a  false  accent  in  Stephano,  R6meo,  Desdembna,  Andrdnicus 
loses  its  force  when  we  consider  how  very  common  it  is  in  every  language  to  change 
proper  names  in  form,  in  gender,  and  in  accent.  Livbrno  becomes  Leghorn  in  Eng¬ 
lish,  Livourne  in  French ;  Milano  is  in  English  Milan,  in  German  Mailand ;  Firenze  is 
turned  into  English  Florence,  and  Venezia  itself  is  in  English  Venice,  French  Venise. 

„  German  Venedig.  The  Germanic  races  prefer  an  accent  on  the  penult,  and  hence 
Shakespeare  has  the  same  right  to  say  Stephano,  as  Schiller  has  to  say  Alcala.  It  is 
common  to  hear  English  travellers  speak  of  the  ‘  Chiesa  San  Stephano,’  and  Germans 
scarcely  understand  the  Italian  Rom6o  and  Desdemona. 


244 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


My  Miftreffe  will  before  the  breake  of  day  37 

Be  heere  at  Belmont,  the  doth  ftray  about 
By  holy  croffes  where  file  kneeles  and  prayes 
For  happy  wedlocke  houres.  40 

Loren .  Who  comes  with  her? 

Mef  None  but  a  holy  Hermit  and  her  maid : 

I  pray  you  it  my  Matter  yet  rnturn’d  ? 

Loren.  He  is  not,  nor  we  haue  not  heard  from  him, 

But  goe  we  in  I  pray  thee  IeJJica ,  45 

And  ceremonioufly  let  vs  vs  prepare 

Some  welcome  for  the  Miftreffe  of  the  houfe, 


Enter  Cloivne. 

Clo.  Sola,  fola  :  wo  ha  ho,  fola,  fola. 


49 


37,  47,  75-  MiJlreJJ" r]  mijlris  Qr. 

38.  Belmont ,]  Belmont ;  Q3. 

40.  wedlocke]  wedlockes  Q,. 

43.  it]  Fj.  is  Qt  et  cet. 

rnturn'd ]  Fr. 


44.  we  haue  not ]  have  we  yet  Rowe  + 
46.  vs  vs ]  Fx. 

48.  Enter...]  Enter  Launcelot.  Rowe, 

49.  ha  ho,]  ha,  ho  Qq.  ha,  ho,  F4. 


39.  crosses]  Knight  :  These  holy  crosses  still,  as  of  old,  bristle  the  land  in  Italy, 
and  sanctify  the  sea.  Besides  those  contained  in  churches,  they  mark  the  spot  where 
heroes  were  born,  where  saints  rested,  where  travellers  died.  They  rise  on  the  sum¬ 
mits  of  hills,  and  at  the  intersections  of  roads ;  and  there  is  now  a  shrine  of  Madonna 
del  Mare  in  the  midst  of  the  sea  between  Mestre  and  Venice,  and  another  between 
Venice  and  Palestrina,  where  the  gondolier  and  the  mariner  cross  themselves  in  pass¬ 
ing,  and  whose  lamp  nightly  gleams  over  the  waters,  in  moonlight  or  storm.  The  days 
are  past  when  pilgrims  of  all  ranks,  from  the  queen  to  the  beggar-maid,  might  be  seen 
kneeling  and  praying  ‘  for  happy  wedlock  hours,’  or  for  whatever  else  lay  nearest  their 
hearts ;  and  the  reverence  of  the  passing  traveller  is  now  nearly  all  the  homage  that  is 
paid  at  these  shrines. — M[artineau?] 

42.  Hermit]  Dr  Johnson,  in  his  Edition,  has  here  a  needless  note  to  the  effect  that 
he  could  not  perceive  the  use  of  this  hermit,  of  whom  nothing  is  seen  or  heard  after¬ 
wards.  This  was  never  repeated  in  any  of  the  subsequent  Editions  which  he  issued  in 
collaboration  with  Steevens ;  but  it  was  the  text  for  a  coarse  onslaught  by  Dr  Kenrick, 
in  which  he  called  Dr  Johnson  ‘  a  blockhead,’  and  was  afterwards  berated  for  it  by 
Barclay.  In  thus  becoming  a  part  of  the  history  of  Shakespearian  criticism,  it  has  to 
be  noted  here. — Ed. 

46.  ceremoniously]  I  cannot  find  that  Schmidt,  in  his  invaluable  Appendix,  has 
anywhere  noted  this  kind  of  adverbial  hypallage.  Probably  he  thought  that  having 
collected  many  examples  of  a  similar  interchange  of  adjectives,  the  same  observation 
would  apply  to  adverbs ;  and  so,  in  effect,  it  does.  But  it  is  well  to  note  the  instances 
when  they  occur,  as  Allen,  in  his  MS,  has  done  here,  and  afterwards  in  line  301, 
‘  Your  argosies  Are  richly  come  to  harbour.’  Of  course  the  present  line  means,  ‘  Let 
us  prepare  some  ceremonious  welcome,’  &c. — Ed. 

49.  Staunton  :  Launcelot  is  imitating  the  horn  of  the  courier,  or  *  post,’  as  he  waa 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


245 


Loren.  Who  calls  ?  50 

Clo.  Sola,  did  you  fee  M.  Lorenzo ,  &  M.  Lorenzo ,  fola, 

Lor.  Leaue  hollowing  man,  heere.  (fola. 

Clo.  Sola,  where,  where  ? 

Lor.  Heere  ? 

Clo.  Tel  him  ther’s  a  Poft  come  from  my  Matter,  with  55 
his  home  full  of  good  newes,  my  Matter  will  be  here  ere 
morning  fweet  foule.  57 


51.  M... Lorenzo,]  M.  Lorenzo,  <5^  M. 
Lorenzo  Q2.  M.  Lorenzo,  M.  Lorenzo, 
Qj.  M.  Lorenzo,  and  M.  Lorenza,  F2. 
M.  Lorenzo,  and  M.  Lorenzo,  Q  .  M. 
Lorenzo,  and  Mrs.  Lorenza,  F3F4.  Mr. 
Lorenzo  and  Mrs.  Lorenzo  ?  Rowe  i.  Mr. 
Lorenzo  and  Mrs.  Lorenza  ?  Rowe  ii. 
master  Lorenzo  and  mistress  Lorenza 
Pope  + ,  Cap.  Master  Lorenzo  ?  Master 
Lorenzo,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii.  Master 


Lorenzo  and  Mistress  Lorenzo  Steev.  ef 

cet. 

52.  hollowing]  hollaing  Mai.  hallooing 
Coll. 

57.  morning]  morn  Ktly  conj. 

[Exit  Clo.  Cap.  et  seq. 
fweet  foule]  Given  to  Loren.  Rowe 
et  seq. 

foule]  love  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 


called,  who  always  wore  that  appendage  suspended  from  his  neck.  Halliwell  :  The 
postman’s  horn  is  often  seen  figured  in  the  water-marks  of  paper  of  the  1 7th  Century, 
and  would  appear  to  have  often  been  a  real  horn. 

51.  M.  Lorenzo,  &  M.  Lorenzo]  The  Textual  Notes  will  show  the  evolution  of 
these  words,  through  a  process  of  unnatural  selection,  into  *  Master  Lorenzo  and  Mis¬ 
tress  Lorenzo,’  as  they  now  stand  in  the  majority  of  modern  Editions.  It  has  all  along 
been  clear  that  Fx  was  printed  from  Q2 ;  it  seems  to  me  not  unlikely  that  in  the  faulty 
composition  of  this  Qa,  the  ampersand  is  a  misprint  for  an  interrogation  mark;  this 
ampersand  was  printed  out  in  full  in  F2  and  a  misprint  added,  ‘Lorenza.’  This  acci¬ 
dental  feminine  termination  was  accepted  in  full  faith  by  the  printer  of  F  ,  and  ‘  Mrs 
Lorenza  ’  stood  forth  confessed.  That  the  feeble  joke  is  wholly  the  printer’s,  and  not 
Shakespeare’s,  and  that  Lorenzo  alone  is  called,  is  shown,  I  think  conclusively,  by 
Clarendon,  who  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  line  55  Launcelot  says,  ‘Tell  him ,’ 
not  ‘  Tell  them l — Ed. 

51.  All  that  Launcelot  says  in  this  Scene  is  clearly  prose,  and  is  so  printed  in  all 
editions  except  in  White’s  ed.  ii,  where  this  line  is  divided  after  the  first  ‘  Lorenzo.’ 
But  this  division  arose,  I  am  sure,  from  a  mere  oversight.  That  careful  Editor  printed 
from  the  Globe  Edition,  where,  for  typographical  reasons,  the  line  had  to  be  so  divided, 
and  this  fact  escaped  White’s  notice. — Ed. 

57.  Capell  (ii,  72) :  That  he  [‘  the  first  modem,’  i.  e.  Rowe]  should  not  be  bold 
enough,  nor  any  one  after  him,  to  put  an  Exit  for  the  Clown  [see  Text.  Notes]  when 
he  has  made  his  speech,  is  among  the  wonders  of  their  Editions  :  but  it  rose,  first,  from 
their  not  considering  that  his  continuance  on  the  stage  were  in  the  last  degree  faulty ; 
and,  next,  from  their  having  no  right  conception  of  the  odd,  but  proper,  mode  of  his 
entry:  This,  if  rightly  perform’d,  should  be — with  a  whip  in  his  hand;  with  which 
he  runs  slashing  about,  circling  the  two  people  he  hollows  for  without  once  looking  on 
them ;  and  having  empty’d  his  budget,  goes  out  slashing  as  he  came  in. 

57.  sweet  soule]  As  Walker,  in  his  Article  lxxxv  ( Crit.  ii,  177),  gives  (accord- 


246 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


Lor eji.  Let’s  in,  and  there  expeft  their  comming.  58 

And  yet  no  matter  :  why  fhould  we  goe  in? 

My  friend  Stephe?i ,  fignifie  pray  you  60 

Within  the  houfe,  your  Miftreffe  is  at  hand, 

And  bring  your  mufique  foorth  into  the  ayre. 
flow  fweet  the  moone-light  fleepes  vpon  this  banke, 

Heere  will  we  fit,  and  let  the  founds  of  muficke 

Creepe  in  our  eares  foft  ftilnes,  and  the  night  65 

Become  the  tutches  of  fweet  harmonie  : 

Sit  IeJJlca ,  looke  how  the  floore  of  heauen 

Is  thicke  inlayed  with  pattens  of  bright  gold,  68 


60.  friend)  good  friend  Cap. 

Stephen]  Stephano  Qx  Ff  et  seq. 
fignifie.  ..you]  I  pray  you,  signify, 

Ivtly. 

fignifie']  F2F3.  fignifie ,  F4.  fignifie 
I  Qq  et  cet. 

62.  [Exit  Stephano.  Theob. 


65.  eares ]  eares  ;  Ff,  Rowe  et  seq. 

67.  floore]  vault  as  quoted  by  Hallam. 

68.  inlayed]  inlay' d  Rowe  et  seq. 
pattens]  Q2Q3.  Johns.  Cap.  patients 

Qj.  patterns  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Plan. 
Coll,  patens  Warb.  Hal.  patines  Mai.  et 
cet. 


ing  to  my  count)  about  seventy  instances  in  the  Folio  of  unquestionable  errors  in  the 
assignment  of  speeches,  including  cases  in  which  two  speeches  have  been  confused  or 
the  like,  I  think  we  need  feel  no  hesitation  in  here  following  Rowe,  and  in  giving 
these  two  words  to  Lorenzo. — Ed. 

60.  signifie]  It  is  easy  to  see  how  the  compositor,  following  his  ear,  came  to  omit 
the  7. — Ed. 

63.  sleepes]  Knight:  One  characteristic  of  an  Italian  garden  is  that  its  trees  and 
shrubs  are  grown  in  avenues  and  gathered  into  thickets,  while  the  grass-plots  and  turfy 
banks  are  studded  with  parterres  of  roses  and  other  flowers,  which  lie  open  to  the  sun¬ 
shine  and  the  dews.  The  moonlight  thus  sleeps  upon  such  lawns  and  banks,  instead 
of  being  disturbed  by  the  flickering  of  overshadowing  trees. — M[artineau?] 

65.  in]  See  Abbott,  §  159,  for  instances  of  in  used  with  verbs  of  motion;  also  II, 
viii,  45. 

66.  76.  tutches]  Schmidt  (Lex.) :  The  act  of  the  hand  on  a  musical  instrument. 

68.  pattens]  Warburton  :  We  should  read  patens,  a  round,  broad  plate  of  gold 

borne  in  heraldry;  [‘  This  is  a  mistake,’  says  Hunter  (i,  318),  ‘such  a  plate  of  gold  is 
called  a  bezant.']  the  cover  of  the  sacramental  cup.  Malone  :  A  patine  (from  patina, 
Lat.)  is  the  small  flat  dish  or  plate  used  with  the  chalice  in  the  administration  of  the 
Eucharist.  It  was  commonly  made  of  gold.  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  59) :  By  adopting 
the  gross  misprint  patterns,  Mr  Collier  has  done  much  to  injure  the  picturesqueness  of 
a  passage  which  an  eminent  writer  has  pronounced  to  be  *  the  most  sublime,  perhaps, 
in  Shakespeare.’  [See  Hallam,  post.]  What  are  ‘  patterns  of  gold  ’  ?  and  how  could 
the  1  floor  of  heaven '  be  ‘  inlaid  ’  with  ‘  patterns  ’  ?  The  not  uncommon  word  patten, 
paten,  patin,  or  patine,  means  a  plate.  *  The  Patine  of  a  Chalice,  Calici  operculum, 
patina.’ — Coles’s  Diet.  Hunter  (i,  318):  The  formidable  objection  to  ‘patten’  is 
that  nothing,  at  any  period,  so  called,  can  be  supposed  to  have  been  used  to  represent  a 
star.  To  get  quit  of  this  difficulty  the  word  was  turned  into  patine.  There  is  no  hap 


act  v,  sc.  L]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


247 


[68.  Is  thicke  inlayed  with  pattens  of  bright  gold,] 

piness  or  propriety  in  likening  stars  to  dishes,  not  even  golden  ones.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  pattern  was  the  word  from  the  beginning,  and  that  Lorenzo  was  speaking  of  the 
stars  as  in  their  constellations,  not  individually ;  and  the  constellations  may  not  unsuit¬ 
ably  be  spoken  of  as  patterns,  just  as  we  speak  of  the  pattern  of  mosaic  work,  &c. 
[When  Hunter  printed  the  foregoing  note,  it  is  not  likely  that  he  had  seen  the  R?. 
marks ,  &c.  of  his  friend  Dyce,  which  must  have  been  issued  while  his  own  Illustra¬ 
tions,  See.  were  going  through  the  press.  Though  Dyce,  therefore,  did  not  influence 
Hunter,  Hunter’s  opinion  evidently  impressed  Dyce;  when,  nine  years  later,  Dyce 
issued  A  Few  Notes,  Sic.,  his  tone  is  perceptibly  less  peremptory.  On  p.  66,  after 
citing  Hunter,  he  reiterates  his  belief]  that  patterns  is  ‘a  gross  misprint,’  and  cites  two 
passages  from  Sylvester’s  Du  Bartas  :  ‘  Th’  Almighties  finger  fixed  many  a  million 
Of  golden  scutchions  [the  original  has  ‘platines  dorees  ’ — Dyce]  in  that  rich  pavillion,’ 
—  The  Fourth  Day  of  the  First  Week,  p.  33,  ed.  1641 ;  and  ‘  That  sumptuous  canapy, 
The  which  th’  un-niggard  hand  of  Majesty  Poudred  so  thick  with  shields  [the  original 
has  ‘  escussons  ’ — Dyce]  so  shining  cleer,’  &c. — Id.,  p.  34.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The 
question  here  is  between  patterns  and  ‘pattens:’  the  Rev.  Mr  Dyce  prefers  ‘pattens,’ 
but  cites  no  older  authority  than  Coles’s  Diet.  :  the  Promptorium  Parvulorum  would 
have  been  better,  and  there  he  might  have  found,  *  Patena,  or  pateyne  of  a  chalys.’— 
p.  385,  ed.  Cam.  Soc.  But  the  truth  is,  that  Shakespeare  had  no  such  far-fetched 
allusion :  he  was  thinking  of  the  ‘  patterns  of  bright  gold  ’  which  inlaid  the  floor  of 
heaven.  Mr  Dyce  asks,  *  how  could  the  floor  of  heaven  be  inlaid  with  patterns  ?’  Just 
like  any  other  ornamental  floor  ;  ornamental  floors  are  always  inlaid  with  patterns,  and 
generally  of  stars.  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  repeats  that  Shakespeare  means  that  the  floor  of 
heaven  is  thickly  inlaid  with  plates  or  circular  ornaments  of  gold ;  adduces  the  two  fore¬ 
going  passages  from  Sylvester’s  Du  Bartas  ;  and  adds  that  Mr  Lettsom  observes,  ‘■Pat¬ 
terns  seems  to  me  rather  a  sophistication  than  a  misprint.’  Verplanck  thinks  that 
‘ pattern,  in  its  modern  sense,  for  the  plan  of  a  carpet  or  other  similar  work  (which  alone 
could  give  any  sense  here),  is  more  modern  than  Shakespeare’s  text.’  Clarendon: 
The  ‘  patine  ’  is  the  plate  used  in  the  Eucharist,  and  the  image  is  thus  much  finer  and 
more  suitable  to  ‘  the  floor  of  heaven  ’  than  the  common-place  patterns.  [I  find  a  diffi¬ 
culty  in  accepting  the  usual  interpretation  of  this  passage.  It  certainly  does  seem  that 
‘  orb  ’  refers  to  ‘  patines,’  and  that  the  ‘  patines  ’  are  the  stars ;  and  if  this  reference  is 
not  to  be  evaded,  then  I  yield ;  but  under  the  protest  that  to  compare  merely  luminous 
points,  always  silvery,  to  golden  objects  of  manifest  dimension,  thickly  inlaying  the  floor 
of  heaven  like  a  tessellated  pavement,  is,  to  me,  to  say  the  least,  strained.  The  planets 
at  their  brightest  might  look  like  silver  patines,  but  then  not  enough  of  them  are  visible 
at  any  one  time  thickly  to  inlay  the  skies.  The  very  first  words  of  this  Scene  are,  ‘The 
moone  shines  bright,’  and  if  any  one  impression  of  external  nature  is  given  to  us  up  to 
this  point  deeper  than  another,  it  is  that  the  landscape  is  flooded  with  brilliancy,  so 
bright  that  Medea  could  have  even  selected  from  among  other  flowers  her  enchanted 
herbs.  If  the  ‘  patines  ’  are  the  stars,  here  my  difficulty  culminates.  When  the  moon 
shines  thus  dazzlingly,  as  we  all  know,  the  stars  are  scarcely  visible,  and  those  that 
are  the  brightest  on  moonless  nights  are  but  as  the  ‘smallest  orbs’  now;  not  only, 
moreover,  would  they  be  unlike  patines  of  bright  gold,  but  they  could  not  thickly 
Inlay  the  floor  of  heaven.  Shakespeare  knew,  quite  as  well  as  Sir  Henry  Wotten, 
that  when  ‘  the  Queen  ’  rose  the  ‘  meaner  beauties  of  the  night  ’  were  dimmed.  But 
may  it  not  be  that,  after  all,  the  patines  are  not  the  stars  ?  We  infer  that  they  are 
because  Lorenzo  refers  to  the  stars  in  he  next  line.  But  there  may  well  be  a  full 


248 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  1. 


There’s  not  the  fmalleft  orbe  which  thou  beholdft 

But  in  his  motion  like  an  Angell  lings,  70 

Still  quiring  to  the  young  eyed  Cherubins ; 

Such  harmonie  is  in  immortall  foules, 

But  whilft  this  muddy  vefture  of  decay 

Doth  grofly  clofe  in  it,  we  cannot  heare  it :  74 


71.  young  eyed]  young-ey'd  Rowe  et 
seq. 

Cherubins ]  Cherubims  F3F4,  Rowe 
+  ,  Steev.  Ktly. 

72.  is  in]  listen  Bailey. 
immortall foules]  immortal  sounds 


Theob.  Warb. 

74.  in  it]  Q,Ff.  us  in  it  Rowei.  m 
in  Rowe  ii  + .  it  in  Q2Q,  ee  cet.  in  ours 
Bailey,  on  it  Spence. 

[Enter  Musick  and  Domesticks  of  Por¬ 
tia.  Cap. 


stop  and  a  pause  after  ‘pattens  of  bright  gold,’  before  Lorenzo’s  thoughts  expand 
into  the  music  of  the  spheres.  Are  we  not  all  familiar  with  summer  nights,  when, 
here  and  there,  the  skies  are  thick  inlaid  with  broken  clouds,  like  flaky  disks  of 
curdled  gold  which  slowly  drift  across  the  heavens,  and  veil  at  times  the  brightness 
of  the  moon  ?  Are  not  these  resplendent  tiles  on  heaven’s  floor  *  the  patines  ’  through 
whose  rifts  faint  stars  gleam  forth?  When  Lorenzo  begins  to  speak,  a  mass  of  clouds 
with  golden  iridescent  edges  was  rising  heavenward  and  just  touching  the  silvery 
circle  of  the  moon ;  as  he  finished,  the  light  of  the  moon  was  waning,  half  dimmed 
by  the  first  thin  edges  of  the  fleecy  clouds :  ‘  Diana  is  drowsy  and  must  be  waked.’ 
By  the  time  that  Portia  had  reached  Belmont  the  patines  had  veiled  the  moon,  the 
heavens  were  darkened ;  she  was  greeted  by  the  beams  of  a  candle,  unseen  ‘  when  the 
moon  shone ;’  slumber  had  succeeded  drowsiness  and  the  ‘  moon  sleeps  with  Endymion.’ 
The  clouds  float  onward,  the  patines  of  bright  gold  glide  past, — Bassanio  arrives ;  the 
moon  shines  forth ;  the  ‘  night  is  but  a  little  paler  than  the  day.’  See  Lloyd’s  note, 
line  X,  ajite. — Ed.] 

71.  quiring]  Schmidt  {Lex.) :  To  sing  in  concert,  and  be  tuned  accordingly.  As 
a  verb  only  here,  and  in  Cor.  Ill,  ii,  1 13. 

71.  Cherubins]  An  English  form  of  a  Chaldee  plural,  which  probably  came  to  us 
through  the  French.  See  Oth.  IV,  ii,  73  :  *  Still  ’  in  this  line  is  used,  as  it  very  com¬ 
monly  is,  in  the  sense  of  ahvays,  continually. — Ed. 

74.  Johnson  :  That  this  line  is  corrupt  must  be  allowed,  but  it  gives  reason  to  sus¬ 
pect  that  the  original  was :  ‘  Doth  grossly  close  it  in'  Yet  I  know  not  whether  from 
this  any  thing  better  can  be  produced  than  the  received  reading.  Perhaps  ‘  harmony  ’ 
is  the  power  of  perceiving  hartnony,  as  afterwards  :  Music  in  the  soul  is  the  quality  of 
being  ‘  moved  with  concord  of  sweet  sounds.’  This  will  somewhat  explain  the  old 
copies,  but  the  sentence  is  still  imperfect ;  which  might  be  completed  by  reading :  Such 
harmony  is  in  th'  immortal  soul,  But  while  this  muddy  vesture  of  decay  Doth  grossly 
close  it  in,  we  cannot  hear  it.  Malone  :  ‘  Such  harmony,’  &c.  is  not  an  exclamation, 
but  an  illustration.  The  whole  runs  thus :  ‘  There  is  not  one  of  the  heavenly  orbs  but 
sings  as  it  moves,  still  quiring  to  the  cherubin.  Similar  to  the  harmony  they  make  is 
that  of  immortal  souls ;’  or,  in  other  words,  ‘  each  of  us  has  as  perfect  harmony  in  our 
souls  as  the  harmony  of  the  spheres,  inasmuch  as  we  have  the  quality  of  being  moved 
Dy  sweet  sounds  (as  he  expresses  it  afterwards) ;  but  our  gross  terrestrial  part,  which 
environs  us,  deadens  the  sound,  and  prevents  our  hearing.’  ‘  It  ’  in  *  Doth  grossly  close 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


249 


[74.  Doth  grosly  close  in  it,  we  cannot  heare  it :] 
it  in,’  I  apprehend,  refers  to  ‘  harmony.’  It  may  be  objected  that  as  this  internal  har¬ 
mony  is  not  an  object  of  sense,  it  cannot  be  heard ; — but  Shakespeare  is  not  always 
exact  in  his  language ;  he  confounds  it  with  that  external  and  artificial  harmony  which 
is  capable  of  being  heard.  This  hath  been  imitated  by  Milton  in  his  Arcades,  71 : 
*  che  heavenly  tune,  which  none  can  hear  Of  human  mould,  with  gross  unpurged  ear.’ 
[Had  Malone  looked  into  his  Plato  he  would  not  have  said  that  Milton  had  here  imi¬ 
tated  Shakespeare. — Ed.]  Steevens:  The  passage  may  be  well  explained  by  Hooker 
in  his  Ecclesiastical  Polity,  b.  v.  [published  singly,  in  1597, — Malone]  :  ‘  Touching  musi¬ 
cal  harmony,  whether  by  instrument  or  by  voice,  it  being  but  of  high  and  low  sounds 
in  a  due  proportionable  disposition,  such,  notwithstanding  is  the  force  thereof,  and  so 
pleasing  effects  it  hath  in  that  very  part  of  man  which  is  most  divine,  that  some  have 
been  thereby  induced  to  think,  that  the  soul  itself  by  nature  is  or  hath  in  it  harmony.’ 
For  this  quotation  I  am  indebted  to  Dr  Farmer.  Du  Bois  ( The  Wreath,  p.  60) :  The 
correspondent  passage  in  Plato  is  in  his  tenth  book  De  Republica ;  where  he  speaks 
of  the  harmony  of  the  Spheres,  and  represents  a  Syren  sitting  on  each  of  the  eight 
orbs,  and  singing  to  each  in  its  proper  tone,  while  they  are  thus  guided  through  the 
heavens,  and  consent  in  a  diapason  of  perfect  harmony,  the  Fates  themselves  chanting 
to  this  celestial  music  :  etti  de  ruv  kvkXuv  avrov  avoOev  e<p’  enaorov  f}e/3f/KEvat  ’ZetpTjva 
GVfiTCEpityepouEVTiv,  (puvr/v  piav  leioav  ava  t6vov  ek.  iraouv  Se  burl)  obouv  piav  appoviav 
tvptpuvelv.  [chap,  xiv,  617,  ed.  Hermann.  ‘  Upon  each  of  its  circles  stands  a  siren,  who 
travels  round  with  the  circle,  uttering  one  note  in  tone ;  and  from  all  the  eight  notes 
there  results  a  single  harmony,’ — Davies  and  Vaughan,  p.  413.  For  the  authorities 
concerning  this  doctrine  of  the  harmony  of  the  spheres,  see  Smith’s  Diet.  s.  v.  Pythag¬ 
oras. — Ed.]  Knight  quotes  a  passage  from  Coleridge’s  Remorse,  III,  i ;  and  Clar¬ 
endon  finds  here  reminiscences  of  Job,  xxxviii,  7  :  ‘  The  morning  stars  sang  together.’ 
Elze  in  his  Essay  on  The  Tempest  (p.  7)  thinks  that  this  description  of  the  music  of 
the  spheres  is  taken  from  Montaigne’s  Essay  On  Custom  (book  i,  chap,  xxii),  which, 
as  Elze  confesses,  would  prove  that  Shakespeare  read  it  in  the  original.  Florio’s 
translation  was  not  put  forth  until  1603. 

74.  close  in  it]  Knight  :  The  verb  in  this  case  is  probably  compound — close-in  it. 
[Unquestionably.  There  is  no  need  to  change  the  Folio. — Ed.]  Collier  and  Dyce 
unite  in  referring  ‘  it  ’  to  the  soul,  and  not  to  ‘  harmony.’  [Wherein  the  present  Editor 
entirely  agrees.]  Hallam  (Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  iii,  chap,  iii,  11)  translates  a  passage 
from  Campanella,  De  Sensu  Rerum  (1617  ?),  which  he  says  he  *  can  hardly  read  with¬ 
out  recollecting  the  most  sublime  passage,  perhaps,  in  Shakespeare,’  and  thereupon 
quotes  the  present  lines  67-74.  W.  W.  Lloyd,  whose  Critical  Essays  enrich  Singer’s 
Second  Edition  (in  fact,  these  Essays  constitute  the  best  claim  of  that  Edition  to  the 
student’s  consideration),  sets  forth  at  length,  in  a  letter  to  The  Athenceum,  of  12th 
May,  1877,  the  Platonic  mythus,  and  its  modifications  by  Cicero  in  the  Somnium  Scip- 
ionis,  and  by  Dante,  and  in  the  Timseus  as  far  as  they  are  all  applicable  in  their  asso¬ 
ciations  to  the  elucidating  of  this  present  passage,  and  thus  concludes  :  ‘  We  must  not 
press  Shakespeare’s  grammar  and  construction  too  pedantically.  Here,  as  in  many  an 
ancient  writer,  the  reader,  for  delight,  skips  gaily  along  through  passages  which  convey 
to  him  an  unquestionable  and  perspicuous  sense,  and  is  surprised  and  vexed  to  be 
recalled  by  a  grammarian  who  is  caught  in  mid-thicket  by  thorns  of  syntactical  irreg¬ 
ularity,  and  struggles  vainly  to  disentangle  poetry  and  prose,  and  accommodate  the 
words  to  the  only  meaning  they  can  possibly  have  beer  intended  to  express.  An  inter¬ 
pretation  like  the  following  is,  at  least,  intelligible,  and  forces  nothing  cruelly :  “  Such 


250 


THE  MET  CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


Come  hoe,  and  wake  Diana  with  a  hymne,  75 

With  fweeteft  tutches  pearce  your  Miftreffe  eare, 

And  draw  her  home  with  muficke. 

IeJJi.  I  am  neuer  merry  when  I  heare  fweet  mufique. 

Play  mujicke. 

Lor.  The  reafon  is,  your  fpirits  are  attentiue  :  80 

For  doe  but  note  a  wilde  and  wanton  heard 
Or  race  of  youthful  and  vnhandled  colts, 

Fetching  mad  bounds,  bellowing  and  neighing  loud, 

Which  is  the  hot  condition  of  their  bloud, 

If  they  but  heare  perchance  a  trumpet  found,  85 

Or  any  ayre  of  muficke  touch  their  eares, 

75.  with  <z]  with  him  a  Qx.  78.  lam"]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds 

hymne\  himne  Q2Q3.  79.  Play...]  Muficke  playes.  Qx. 

76.  tutches  pearce~\  Q2.  touches  pierce  85.  but  heare perchance~\  perchance  but 

Qx.  heare  Qx,  Pope  +  ,  Steev. ’85. 


harmony  is  in  the  immortal  souls  of  the  planetary  spheres,  but  this  harmony  we  cannot 
hear  while  the  earthly  vesture  of  decay  closes  in  our  own  souls.”  There  is  technical 
confusion,  no  doubt,  unless  the  good  wit  and  the  familiar  associations  of  the  hearer  can 
be  relied  on  to  catch  the  idea  that  is  just  sufficiently,  in  such  case,  intimated.  That 
which  cannot  be  heard  is  manifestly  the  harmony  of  the  heavenly,  immortal,  animated 
starry  spheres,  and  what  is  closed  in  is,  as  manifestly,  the  grammatical  construction 
apart,  the  human  soul,  immortal  also,  and  in  virtue  of  identical  and  common  participa¬ 
tion  in  the  divinely- given  intelligence  which  is  ascribed,  by  Plato  and  Platonizers  to  the 
stars.  But  as  harmony  is  here  apprehended  as  resident  in  immortal  souls,  it  is  also 
resident  in  the  “  closed-in  ”  human  soul,  and  thus  we  justify  the  reading  as  no  less 
consistent  than  the  conception  which  the  sympathetic  reader  adopts  without  inquiry, 
“  while  the  earthly  vesture  of  decay  closes  in  ”  our  soul  with  its  natural  harmony,  we  are 
incapacitated,  so  long  as  it  is  thus  closed  in,  from  benefit  of  sympathy,  from  hearing 
the  external  harmony  of  the  immortal  souls  of  the  stars.’ 

77-  draw]  Malone  :  Shakespeare  was,  I  believe,  here  thinking  of  the  custom  of 
accompanying  the  last  waggon-load,  at  the  end  of  harvest,  with  rustic  music.  [Heaven 
save  the  mark !  and,  doubtless,  in  the  preceding  line  ‘  pearce  your  Mistresse  eare,’  refers 
to  the  well-known  operation  for  ear-rings  ! — Ed.] 

78.  Cowden-Clarke  :  For  the  sake  of  this  one  line  (a  line  that  was  an  especial 
favourite  with  one  of  the  profoundest  musicians  we  ever  knew),  we  feel  inclined  to  for¬ 
give  Jessica  anything  we  may  have  charged  her  with  elsewhere.  Her  avowal  of  the 
effect  that  music  has  upon  her  shows  her  to  be  capable  of  amelioration ;  and  we  may 
trust  that  this,  her  appreciation  of  a  woman  like  Portia,  and  her  husband’s  loving  influ¬ 
ence,  may  ultimately  soften  her  into  excellence.  But  thus  it  is  that  Shakespeare  ever 
.hrows  in  redeeming  points,  making  his  characters  illustrate  ‘  the  good  and  ill  together  ’ 
that  exist  in  human  nature. 

82.  vnhandled  colts]  Malone:  We  find  the  same  thought,  Temp.  IV,  i,  176: — 
‘  Then  I  beat  my  tabor,  At  which,  like  unback’d  colts,  they  prick’d  their  ears.  Advanced 
their  eye-lids,  lifted  up  their  noses,  As  they  smelt  music.’ 


ACTV,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  251 

You  fhall  perceiue  them  make  a  mutuall  ftand,  87 

Their  fauage  eyes  turn’d  to  a  model!  gaze, 

By  the  fweet  power  of  muficke  :  therefore  the  Poet 

Did  faine  that  Orpheus  drew  trees,  ftones,  and  floods.  90 

Since  naught  fo  ftockifh,  hard,  and  full  of  rage, 

But  muficke  for  time  doth  change  his  nature, 

The  man  that  hath  no  muficke  in  himfelfe,  93 


89.  therefore ]  Thus  Pope,  Han.  92.  for  time']  F,.  for  the  time  Q,  et 

90.  trees]  teares  Ff.  cet. 


87.  make]  See  II,  vii,  44,  or  Abbott,  §  349,  for  the  omission  of  to. 

87.  mutuall]  Clarendon  :  Common.  This  word  is  applied  to  signify  what  is  com¬ 
mon  to  more  than  two  in  Tro.  dr  Cress.  I,  iii,  348 :  *  And  choice,  being  mutual  act  of 
all  our  souls.’  Also,  Mid.  N.  D.  IV,  i,  122  :  ‘  Every  region  near  seem’d  all  one  mutual 
cry.’ 

89.  Poet]  Keightley  (p.  154) :  I  think  we  should  read  this  in  the  plural,  poets , 
as  no  particular  poet  was  regarded  as  the  author  of  this  myth.  [It  is,  nevertheless, 
told  in  Shakespeare’s  favorite  Latin  author,  Ovid,  books  x  and  xi. — Ed.] 

02,  93.  Hunter  (i,  321) :  These  lines  might  open  the  question  of  the  effect  of  music 
on  irrational  animals,  and  the  margins  might  overflow  with  the  discordant  opinions  of 
critics.  For  the  purpose  of  legitimate  annotation  it  is  sufficient  to  show  that  this  was 
the  opinion  of  Shakespeare’s  age,  and  of  the  persons  for  whose  entertainment  he 
wrote ;  and  it  happens  that  we  have  the  testimony  of  a  learned  foreigner,  who  visited 
England  a  little  before  the  time  of  Shakespeare,  that  a  lion  in  the  Tower,  which  is 
described  as  of  extraordinary  size,  afforded  a  remarkable  instance  of  brute  susceptibil¬ 
ity  to  the  power  of  music.  The  traveler  was  Henry  Stephens,  [and  the  passage  is  to 
be  found  p.  65,  De  Vitis  Stephanoru?n,  Amst.,  1683;  in  it  Stephens  describes  how,  on 
a  visit  to  the  Tower,  he  beheld  with  amazement  the  huge  beast  not  only  desist  from 
devouring  his  food,  but  walk  back  and  forth  as  though  dancing  ( tanquam  tripudiantem) 
when  he  heard  by  chance  a  young  boy  play  on  an  organ], 

93,  &c.  Warburton  :  The  thought  here  is  extremely  fine ;  as  if  the  being  affected 
with  music  was  only  the  harmony  between  the  internal  (‘music  in  himself’)  and  the 
external  music  (‘concord  of  sweet  sounds’),  which  were  mutually  affected  like  unison 
strings.  The  whole  speech  could  not  choose  but  please  an  English  audience,  whose 
great  passion,  as  well  then  as  now,  was  love  of  music.  ‘Jam  vero  video  naturam,’  says 
Erasmus,  in  Praise  of  Folly,  ‘ut  singulis  nationibus,  ac  pene  civitatibus,  communem 
quandam  insevisse  Philautiam :  Atque  hinc  fieri,  ut  Britanni,  pneter  alia,  Formam, 
Musicam,  &  lautus  Mensas  proprie  sibi  vindicent.’  Steevens  :  This  present  passage, 
which  is  neither  pregnant  with  physical  and  moral  truth,  nor  poetically  beautiful  in  an 
eminent  degree,  has  constantly  enjoyed  the  good  fortune  to  be  repeated  by  those  whose 
inhospitable  memories  would  have  refused  to  admit  or  retain  any  other  sentiment  or 
description  of  the  same  author,  however  exalted  or  just.  The  truth  is,  that  it  furnishes 
the  vacant  fiddler  with  something  to  say  in  defence  of  his  profession,  and  supplies  the 
coxcomb  in  music  with  an  invective  against  such  as  do  not  pretend  to  discover  all  the 
various  powers  of  language  in  inarticulate  sounds.  Our  ancient  statutes  have  often 
received  the  best  comment  by  means  of  reference  to  the  particular  occasion  on  which 
they  were  framed.  Dr  Warburton  has,  therefore,  properly  accounted  for  Shakespeare’s 


252 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  «. 


[93.  The  man  that  hath  no  musicke  in  himselfe,] 
seeming  partiality  to  this  amusement.  He  might  have  added  that  Peacham  requires 
of  his  Gentleman  only  to  be  able  ‘  to  sing  his  part  sure,  and  at  first  sight,  and  withal 
to  play  the  same  on  a  viol  or  lute.’  Let  not,  however,  this  capricious  sentiment  of 
Shakespeare  descend  to  posterity  unattended  by  the  opinion  of  the  late  Lord  Chester¬ 
field  on  the  same  subject.  In  his  148th  Letter  to  his  son,  who  was  then  in  Venice, 
his  .ordship,  after  having  enumerated  music  among  the  illiberal  pleasures,  adds :  *  If 
you  love  music,  hear  it ;  go  to  operas,  concerts,  and  pay  fiddlers  to  play  to  you ;  but  I 
must  insist  upon  your  neither  piping  nor  fiddling  yourself.  It  puts  a  gentleman  into  a 
very  frivolous  and  contemptible  light ;  brings  him  into  a  great  deal  of  bad  company, 
and  takes  up  a  great  deal  of  time  which  might  be  much  better  employed.  Few  things 
would  mortify  me  more,  than  to  see  you  bearing  a  part  in  a  concert,  with  a  fiddle  under 
your  chin,  or  a  pipe  in  your  mouth.’  Again,  Letter  153:  ‘A  taste  of  sculpture  and 
painting  is,  in  my  mind,  as  becoming,  as  a  taste  of  fiddling  and  piping  is  unbecoming 
a  man  of  fashion.  The  former  is  connected  with  history  and  poetry,  the  latter  with 
nothing  but  bad  company l  Again  :  *  Painting  and  sculpture  are  very  justly  called  lib¬ 
eral  arts ;  a  lively  and  strong  imagination,  together  with  a  just  observation,  being  abso 
lutely  necessary  to  excel  in  either;  which,  in  my  opinion,  is  by  no  means  the  case  with 
music,  though  called  a  liberal  art,  and  now  in  Italy  placed  above  the  other  two ;  a  proof 
of  the  decline  of  that  country.’  Douce  (i,  269) :  Had  the  sentiments  in  Mr  Steevens’s 
note  been  expressed  by  Dr  Johnson,  disorganized  as  he  was  for  the  enjoyment  of  music, 
it  would  not  have  been  matter  to  wonder  at ;  but  that  such  a  man  as  Mr  Steevens,  whose 
ordinary  speech  was  melody,  and  whose  correct  and  elegant  ear  for  poetical  concord  is 
so  frequently  manifested  in  the  course  of  his  Shakespearian  labours,  should  have  shown 
himself  a  very  Timon  in  music,  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  that  he  regarded 
the  speech  in  question  as  a  libel  on  his  great  colleague’s  organization.  He  has  here 
assumed  a  task  which  Dr  Johnson  would,  for  obvious  reasons,  have  declined,  and  with 
the  feeble  aid  of  an  illiberal  passage  from  Lord  Chesterfield’s  Letters.  Monck  Mason  : 
I  doubt,  indeed,  whether  there  be  any  human  being  that  is  totally  insensible  to  the 
powers  of  harmony;  but  if  there  be  any  such,  we  may  naturally  suppose  that  the  same 
sluggish  motion  of  the  blood,  the  same  rigid  texture  of  the  nerves,  the  same  hardened 
construction  of  body  or  mind,  from  whatever  cause  it  may  proceed,  that  makes  them 
incapable  of  harmony,  may  also  render  them  unsusceptible  of  the  finer  feelings  of 
humanity,  and,  of  course,  more  fit  than  the  rest  of  mankind  for  rapine,  premeditated 
murder,  and  such  horrid  crimes  as  require  in  the  perpetrators  a  certain  degree  of  hard¬ 
ness  and  insensibility.  Pye  (p.  76)  :  I  confess  even  I,  who  would  almost  as  soon  stand 
up  to  my  neck  in  water  in  winter  as  sit  out  a  concert,  should  have  no  great  opinion  of 
that  man  who  was  dead  to  the  effect  of  a  pathetic  song  set  to  a  simple  melody.  [It  is 
difficult  to  decide,  as  we  have  had  more  than  once  to  note,  whether  Steevens  is  in  jest 
or  in  earnest.  I  am  by  no  means  sure  that  this  attack  on  music  was  not  a  trap  whereby 
to  lure  some  honest  Goodman  Dull  into  a  defence  of  it.  If  so,  Steevens  was  certainly 
rewarded ;  the  foregoing  notes  are  greatly  abridged ;  and  I  have  omitted  Eccles  alto¬ 
gether, — but  Pye,  the  Poet  Laureate,  alone  would  have  repaid  him.  As  Knight  says, 
‘  the  interest  of  the  dispute  wholly  consists  in  the  solemn  stupidity  with  which  it  is  con¬ 
ducted.’  The  true  light  in  which  to  view  Lorenzo’s  exclamation  is,  I  think,  exactly  put 
by  Cowden-Clarke  :  ‘  That  Shakespeare  promulgated  the  axiom  :  “  The  man  that  hath 
no  music,”  &c.,  as  a  solemnly  delivered  and  deliberately  uttered  dogma,  no  one,  we 
should  think,  would  imagine ;  but  that  it  is  in  consonance  with  the  poetical  creed  as  to 
the  weight  of  refining  influence  in  music,  held  by  men  from  the  remotest  ages,  and  that 


actv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


253 


Nor  is  not  moued  with  concord  of  fweet  founds, 

Is  fit  for  treafons,  ftratagems,  and  fpoyles,  95 

The  motions  of  his  fpirit  are  dull  as  night, 

And  his  affedtions  darke  as  Erobus , 

Let  no  fuch  man  be  trufted  :  marke  the  muficke. 


Enter  Portia  and  Nerriffa. 

Por.  That  light  we  fee  is  burning  in  my  hall :  100 

How  farre  that  little  candell  throwes  his  beames, 

So  fhines  a  good  deed  in  a  naughty  world.  (die  ? 

Ner.  When  the  moone  fhone  we  did  not  fee  the  can  103 


94.  moued~\  Qa.  moou'd  Qx. 

97.  Erobus]  Terebus  Q,Q2.  Tenebris 
Q3.  Erebus  Ff. 

99.  Enter...]  Enter  Nerriffa  and  Por¬ 


tia.  Qf. 

101.  candelT]  Qa.  candle  Qx. 

103,  102.  candle  l]  QaFaF3.  candle. 
Qx  et  cet. 


it  is  precisely  one  of  those  ardent  expressions  inspired  by  the  immediate  hearing  ol 
music,  and  by  the  impressions  and  emotions  it  produces,  no  one  who  has  experienced 
those  impressions  and  emotions  will  doubt.’ — Ed.] 

96.  spirit]  See  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  193),  where  he  says  that  ‘it  may  safely  be  laid 
down  as  a  canon,  that  the  word  “  spirit,”  in  our  old  poets,  whenever  the  metre  does 
not  compel  us  to  pronounce  it  dissyllabically,  is  a  monosyllable.  And  this  is  almost 
always  the  case.’  After  citing  very  many  examples,  of  which  the  present  line  is  one, 
he  sums  up :  *  Perhaps  it  would  be  desirable,  wherever  the  word  occurs  as  a  mono¬ 
syllable,  to  write  it  spright,  in  order  to  ensure  the  proper  pronunciation  of  the  line.  I 
prefer  spright  to  sprite  ;  inasmuch  as  the  latter  invariably  carries  with  it  a  spectral  asso 
ciation ;  although  the  old  writers,  in  those  passages  where  they  write  the  word  mono¬ 
syllabically,  use  sometimes  the  one  form,  sometimes  the  other.’  In  citing  the  present 
line  Walker,  who  trusted  to  his  memory,  writes  notions  for  *  motions,’  or  it  may  be  an 
oversight  of  Lettsom ;  the  recurrence  here  of  the  same  sound  sprite  and  night  seems 
to  have  given  him  pause,  and  he  thinks  that  they  were  not  exactly  the  same ;  in  Thi 
Historye  of  Romeus  and  Juliet  he  finds  instances  where  for  the  sake  of  euphony  it  musl 
be  pronounced,  as  it  is  there  once  spelled,  sprete. — Ed. 

99.  Hunter  (i,  320) :  There  is  a  dramatic  purpose  worthy  of  notice  in  the  words 
which  Portia  utters  when  she  first  appears  upon  the  scene.  They  were  meant  to  con 
nect  the  present  with  the  past ;  the  defeated  attempt  of  Shylock  on  the  life  of  Antho- 
nio  with  the  scenes  of  Belmont;  and  the  spectators  are  thus  led  to  look  upon  Portia 
returning  to  the  house  in  which  the  scene  of  the  caskets  had  been  presented,  crowned 
with  the  honours  of  the  good  deed  she  had  done  in  freeing  the  merchant.  There  is 
also  great  dramatic  skill  shewn  in  the  dialogue  which  now  ensues  between  Portia  and 
Nerissa.  It  is  not  quite  unlike  that  to  which  we  have  been  listening  with  such  charmed 
ears  between  Lorenzo  and  Jessica;  yet  it  is  less  philosophical,  and  so  leads  gently  to 
the  change  from  those  sweet  discourses  to  the  business  of  the  story,  to  which  it  is  now 
necessary  to  proceed. 

102.  Halliwell:  Compare  Matthew,  v,  16:  ‘Let  your  light  so  shine  before  mew 
that  they  may  see  your  good  works,’  &c. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


254 

Por.  So  doth  the  greater  glory  dim  the  leffe, 

A  fubflitute  Urines  brightly  as  a  King  105 

Vntill  a  King  be  by,  and  then  his  ftate 

Empties  it  felfe,  as  doth  an  inland  brooke 

Into  the  maine  of  waters  :  mufique,  harke.  Muficke. 

Ner.  It  is  your  muficke  Madame  of  the  houfe. 

Por.  Nothing  is  good  I  fee  without  refpedt,  1 10 

Methinkes  it  founds  much  fweeter  then  by  day? 

Ner.  Silence  beftowes  that  vertue  on  it  Madam. 

Por.  The  Crow  doth  fing  as  fweetly  as  the  Larke 
When  neither  is  attended  :  and  I  thinke  1 14 

108.  Muficke.]  Om.  Qq.  109.  Madame"]  Madam,  F4> 

109.  your ...  the]  the...yotir  Rowe,  112.  that]  (he  Rowe  ii  +  . 

Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 


102.  naughty]  Cowden-Clarke  :  Formerly  used  with  greater  force  of  meaning 
than  at  present.  [See  III,  iii,  12.]  Here  it  means  ‘evil,’  ‘wicked,’  ‘corrupt;’  yet, 
somehow,  its  lighter  form  of  expression  harmonizes  well  with  the  light-hearted  mood, 
the  condition  of  internal  happiness,  that  possesses  Portia  at  this  moment  of  her  return 
from  having  successfully  fulfilled  a  project  for  rescuing  her  husband’s  friend  from 
peril.  Her  sweet  cheerfulness,  her  readiness  to  find  everything  doubly  bright,  doubly 
melodious,  has  the  exquisite  charm  of  a  spirit  at  ease  with  itself,  from  conscious 
rectitude. 

105.  as]  For  other  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  first  as,  see  Abbott,  §  276. 

no.  respect]  Johnson  :  Not  absolutely  good,  but  relatively  good,  as  it  is  modified 
by  circumstances.  Halliwell  :  Portia  is  told  by  her  attendant  it  is  her  own  music, 
which  she  now  finds  sweeter  than  she  ever  noticed  it  before.  Then  she  says  nothing 
is  good  but  by  looking  upon  it  through  the  circumstances  in  which  it  is  placed,  looking 
with  a  particular  meaning,  a  reflection  of  mind.  She  proceeds  to  say  that  the  crow 
and  the  lark  sing  equally  sweet  when  not  attended ;  that  is,  when  the  mind  is  not  fixed 
particularly  on  them.  It  is  the  proper  time,  and  state  or  preparation  of  mind,  that  gives 
the  charm  its  full  force.  Staunton  :  By  ‘  respect,’  in  this  place,  is  meant  regard,  atten¬ 
tion,  consideration.  When  the  mind  is  pre-engaged,  it  is  influenced  but  little  by  the 
beautiful  in  Nature  or  in  art :  ‘  The  crow  doth  sing  as  sweetly  as  the  lark,  When  neither 
is  attended.'  Craik  ( Jul.  Cces.  IV,  iii,  69) :  Respect  in  Shakespeare  means,  commonly, 
no  more  than  what  we  now  call  regard  or  view.  Thus,  in  Mid.  N.  D.  I,  i,  Lysander 
says  of  his  aunt,  ‘  She  respects  me  as  her  only  son ;’  and  in  II,  i,  Helena  says  to 
Demetrius,  ‘  You,  in  my  respect,  are  all  the  world.’  So,  [in  the  present  line,]  Portia 
means  merely  that  nothing  is  good  without  reference  to  circumstances,  or  that  it  is  only 
when  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  place  and  the  time  that  any  good  thing  can  be  really 
or  fully  enjoyed.  So,  afterwards,  Nerissa  to  Gratiano  :  ‘  You  should  have  been  respect¬ 
ive  that  is,  you  should  have  been  mindful  (of  your  promise  or  oath). 

1 14.  attended]  Abbott,  §200,  regards  this  as  an  instance  of  the  omission  of  the 
preposition  to;  wherein  Clarendon,  Schmidt,  and  Rolfe  agree;  all  hold  it  to  be  equiv¬ 
alent  to  attended  to,  marked.  Clarendon  says :  ‘  The  difference  is  in  the  hearer’s  mind, 
not  in  the  songs  themselves,  and  the  nightingale  is  reputed  the  first  of  songsters,  because 


act  v,  sc.  L]  THE  MEE  CHANT  OF  VENICE 


255 


The  Nightingale  if  fhe  fhould  fing  by  day  1 1 5 

When  euery  Goofe  is  cackling,  would  be  thought 
No  better  a  Mu  Titian  then  the  Wren  ? 

How  many  things  by  feafon,  feafon’d  are 
To  their  right  praife,  and  true  perfection  : 

Peace,  how  the  Moone  fleepes  with  Endimion,  120 

1 17.  Wren  Wren.  Qz.  Renne  ?  Q2.  Coll.  i.  now  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  hoa  !  or 
120.  how]  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt,  ho!  Mai.  et  cet. 


she  sings  at  a  time  when  she  can  best  be  heard,  when  the  hearer’s  attention  is  not  dis¬ 
tracted.’  The  same  view  is  held  by  Halliwell  and  Staunton,  as  is  seen  in  the  preced¬ 
ing  notes.  Nevertheless,  I  venture  to  think  that  a  possible  meaning  of  ‘  attended,’  in 
this  place,  has  been  overlooked.  To  represent  Portia  as  saying  that  the  crow  sings  as 
sweetly  as  the  lark  if  it  is  not  attended  to,  is  to  impute  to  her  a  remark  which,  though 
perhaps  profoundly  true,  is,  I  fear,  not  truly  profound.  Would  it  not  be  quite  as  true 
to  say  that  they  sing  equally  well  if  we  do  not  hear  them  at  all  ?  It  seems  to  me  that 
the  whole  point  of  Portia’s  reflections  is  that  nothing  is  good  without  respect,  and  of 
this  law  she  had  found  an  illustration  in  the  moon  and  the  little  candle,  when  the  less 
glory  is  dimmed  if  attended  by  a  greater  glory ;  or  in  a  substitute  who  is  nothing  if 
attended  by  a  king;  and  again  it  is  the  attendant  circumstances  alone  which  prevent 
the  lark  and  the  crow  from  being  equally  good ;  even  the  nightingale,  if  ill-attended, 
is  no  better  musician  than  a  wren.  She  sums  up  in  saying,  ‘  How  many  things  by  sea¬ 
son  season’d  are.’  It  is  by  its  fit  *  season  ’  that  the  lark  and  the  nightingale  must  be 
‘  attended  ’  in  order  to  receive  ‘  right  praise.’  Wherefore,  I  think,  ‘  attended  ’  is  not, 
oerhaps,  equivalent  to  attended  to,  but  may  be  used  absolutely. — Ed. 

1 15.  Nightingale]  Malone:  So  in  Sonnet  102  :  ‘  As  Philomel  in  summer’s  front 
doth  sing,  And  stops  his  pipe  in  growth  of  riper  days;  Not  that  the  summer  is  less 
pleasant  now,  Than  when  her  mournful  hymns  did  hush  the  night ;  But  that  wild 
music  burdens  every  bough,  And  sweets  grown  common  lose  their  dear  delight.' 

120.  Peace,  how]  Malone:  The  oddness  of  the  phrase:  How  the  moon  would 
not  be  awak’d !’  first  made  me  suspect  the  passage  to  be  corrupt;  and  the  following 
line  in  Rom.  dr5  Jid.  IV,  v,  65  :  1  Peace,  hoa,  for  shame !’  suggested  the  emendation, 
and  appeared  to  me  to  put  it  beyond  a  doubt.  Again,  in  As  You  Like  It,  V,  iv, 
1 31 :  ‘Peace,  hoa!  I  bar  confusion.’  Again,  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  iv,  6:  ‘Hoa! 
peace  be  in  this  place !’  Again,  Ibid.  Ill,  i,  44 :  ‘  Hoa !  peace  here.’  In  Ant.  dr* 
Cleop.  the  same  mistake,  I  think,  has  happened.  Portia  first  enjoins  the  music  to 
cease :  ‘  Peace,  hoa !’  and  then  subjoins  the  reason  for  her  injunction :  ‘  The  moon,’ 
&c.  Tyrwhitt  seems  to  be  of  opinion  that  the  interjection  Ho  was  formerly  used  to 
command  a  cessation  of  noise,  as  well  as  of  fighting.  See  Cant.  Tales,  vol.  iv,  p,  230. 
Boswell  :  The  old  reading,  I  think,  is  right.  How,  as  Johnson  observes,  is  some¬ 
times  used  as  a  mere  affirmative.  Hunter  (i.  319,  foot-note) :  There  is  not  a  more 
inexcusable  defeat  committed  on  the  text  of  Shakespeare  by  any  Editor  than  is  done 
by  Malone  in  this  exquisite  passage.  He  not  only  would  read,  but  actually  prints,  as 
,  his  text :  ‘  Peace,  hoa !’  And  this  because,  as  he  says,  of  the  oddness  of  the  phrase : 
How  the  moon,’  &c.  But  can  any  one  read  the  words  as  they  stand  in  Shakespeare, 
and  not  recognize  in  a  moment  one  of  the  commonest  and  most  intelligible  of  English 
phrases  by  which  we  express  admiration  ?  All  the  beauty  of  the  expression  is  lost  by 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  L 


*  a6 


[ 1 20.  Peace,  how  the  Moone  sleepes  with  Endimion,] 
the  change :  Portia  looks  upwards  and  observes  the  steady,  still,  settled,  and  almost 
imperceptible  motion  of  the  fair  planet  of  the  night,  and  thus  expresses  her  admiration 
of  the  soft  beauty  of  the  scene.  Knight  :  Malone  thinks  that  Portia  uses  the  words 
as  commanding  the  music  to  cease.  This  would  be  a  singularly  unladylike  act  of  Por¬ 
tia,  in  reality  as  well  as  in  expression.  We  apprehend  that,  having  been  talking  some¬ 
what  loudly  to  Nerissa  as  she  approached  the  house,  she  checks  herself  as  she  comes 
close  to  it,  with  the  interjection — ‘ Peace  /’ — equivalent  to  hush ,  and  then  gives  the  poet¬ 
ical  reason  for  being  silent :  How  the  moon  sleeps,’  &c.  *  The  Stage-direction  :  Music 
ceases,  is  a  coincidence  with  Portia’s  Peace  !  but  not  a  consequence  of  it.  Halliwell  : 
The  exclamation  ho  is  constantly  thus  printed  in  old  plays.  The  moon  is  not  now 
shining,  as  appears  from  what  Nerissa  had  previously  said,  and  from  Lorenzo  recogniz¬ 
ing  Portia  by  the  voice ;  she  is  sleeping  with  Endymion,  and  out  of  sight.  Portia  is 
merely  giving  a  playful  reason  for  desiring  silence,  and  the  moon  being  obscured,  she 
says  that  luminary  is  sleeping  with  Endymion  and  would  not  be  disturbed.  Collier 
(ed.  ii) :  Now  seems  to  have  been  misprinted  ‘how’  in  the  old  copies,  and  modern 
Editors,  not  knowing  what  to  do  with  it,  have  usually  converted  it  into  an  interjection, 
ho  !  Portia  is  assigning  a  reason  for  the  cessation  of  the  music,  viz.  because  it  will 
wake  the  moon,  now  sleeping  with  Endymion.  The  emendation  ?iow  is  from  the 
(MS).  Dyce:  I  adopt  Malone’s  alteration,  and  [after  what  Hunter  has  said]  I  am 
forced,  at  the  risk  of  being  tedious,  to  state  fully  the  grounds  of  my  conviction  thal 
Malone’s  is  the  true  reading.  I.  Shakespeare  would  hardly  have  employed  such  a 
phrase  as,  *  How  the  moon  sleeps ,’  &c. ;  he  would  have  interposed  some  adverb  (01 
adverbial  adjective)  between  ‘  how  ’  and  *  the  moon ,’  &c. :  so,  previously,  in  this  Scene 
we  have,  ‘  How  sweet  the  moonlight  sleeps,’  &c.  II.  ‘ Ho  ’  was  often  written  with  the 
spelling  ‘  How;’  and  I  may  add,  that  previously  in  the  present  play  [II,  vi,  30],  where 
Lorenzo  calls  out,  ‘  Ho !  who's  within  ?'  Q2  has,  ‘  Howe  whose  within  ?'  (In  like 
manner  examples  are  not  wanting  of  ‘  Low  ’  being  put  for  Ho ;'  as  in  Hubert’s  Ed¬ 
ward  the  Second,  p.  32,  ed.  1629,  ‘Low  now  (quoth  he)  I  haue  my  heart’s  desire.’) 
III.  That  Portia  is  enjoining  the  musicians  to  be  silent,  is  proved  by  the  Stage-direc¬ 
tions  of  the  old  Eds.  So  in  Jid.  Cces.  I,  ii,  Casca  silences  the  music  with  ‘Peace,  ho  ! 
Ccesar  speaks;’  and  again  [as  in  the  examples  cited  by  Malone].  IV.  It  is  quite  nat¬ 
ural  that  immediately  after  the  command,  ‘Peace,  ho  !'  we  should  have  the  reason  for 
that  command,  viz.  *  The  moon  sleeps,’  &c. ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  (as  Malone 
jays)  an  ‘oddness’  in  ‘Peace’  being  followed  by  a  mere  exclamation,  ‘How  the  moon 
sleeps ,’  &c.  [In  answer  to  Knight]  I  see  no  impropriety  in  a  lady  ordering  her  own 
musicians,  in  her  own  domain,  to  leave  off  playing ;  and  as  to  the  ‘  expression,’ — Mi 
Knight  seems  to  have  forgotten  both  that  on  the  next  page  we  have  ‘  ho  ’  from  the 
mouth  of  Portia,  ‘  A  quarrel,  ho,  already  !’  and  that  ‘  ho ,’  in  our  early  writers,  does  not 
necessarily  convey  the  idea  of  bawling.  It  is  really  difficult  to  believe  that  Mr  Knight 
can  be  serious  when  he  goes  on  to  say,  ‘  Portia,  having  been  talking  somewhat  loudly, 
&c.,  checks  herself  as  she  comes  close  to  the  house,’  & c.  (If  she  speaks  piano,  how 
happens  it  that  Lorenzo  immediately  exclaims,  ‘  That  is  the  voice,  Or  I  am  much 
deceiu’d  of  Portia’?) — and  that  ‘the  Stage-direction  is  a  COINCIDENCE  with  Portia’s 
Peace !’ — a  coincidence  more  surprising  than  any  upon  record.  [The  Text.  Notes 
show  how  decided  is  the  majority  in  favour  of  Malone’s  emendation. — Ed.] 

120.  Moone  .  .  .  Endimion]  Parry  [Longman' s  Modem  Series,  Mer.  of  Ven. 
ad  loc.)  cites,  ‘  In  the  ancient,  poetical,  and  proverbial  language  of  Elis,  people  said : 
“Selene  (the  Moon)  loves  and  watches  Endymion,”  instead  of  “it  is  getting  late;” 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


257 


And  would  not  be  awak’d.  12 1 

Mujicke  ceafes. 

Lor.  That  is  the  voice, 

Or  I  am  much  deceiu’d  of  Portia. 

Por.  He  knowes  me  as  the  blinde  man  knowes  the  125 

Cuckow  by  the  bad  voice  ? 

Lor.  Deere  Lady  welcome  home  ? 

Por.  We  haue  bene  praying  for  our  husbands  welfare 
Which  fpeed  we  hope  the  better  for  our  words, 

Are  they  return’d?  130 

Lor.  Madam,  they  are  not  yet : 

But  there  is  come  a  Meffenger  before 
To  fignifie  their  comming. 

Por.  Go  in  Nerriffa , 

Giue  order  to  my  feruants,  that  they  take  135 

No  note  at  all  of  our  being  abfent  hence, 

Nor  you  Lorenzo ,  IeJJica  nor  you. 

A  Tucket  founds. 

Lor.  Your  husband  is  at  hand,  I  heare  his  Trumpet, 

We  are  no  tell-tales  Madam,  feare  you  not.  140 

Por.  This  night  methinkes  is  but  the  daylight  ficke, 

It  lookes  a  little  paler,  ’tis  a  day, 

Such  as  the  day  is,  when  the  Sun  is  hid.  143 


121.  [Observing  Lor.  and  Jess.  Cap. 
Muficke...]  Om.  Qq. 

125,  126.  Prose,  Ff,  Rowe.  Ending 
lines,  knowes... voice  Qt.  Ending  lines, 
Cuckow. ..voice  Q2Q3  et  cet. 

126.  Cuckow]  Cucko  Qj.  cuckoe  Q2Q3- 
voice  I]  Q2F2.  voice.  Qr. 


128.  husbands  welfare]  husband  health 
Qj.  husbands  healths  Pope  +  ,  Cam.  Glo 
Cla.  Ktly,  Wh.  ii. 

134.  in]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

138.  A  Tucket  founds]  Om.  Qq. 

139.  his ]  a  Rowe  i. 


«  Selene  embraces  Endymion,”  instead  of  “  the  sun  is  setting  and  the  moon  is  rising ;” 
“  Selene  kisses  Endymion  into  sleep,”  instead  of  “  it  is  night.”  ’ — Max  MtlLLER  [Chips 
from  a  Germa7i  Workshop,  ii,  p.  80,  New  York,  1872]. 

120.  Capell’s  Stage-direction  here  is  ‘  observing  Lor.  and  Jesf  from  which  I  infer 
(for  I  can  find  no  note  on  it)  that  he  supposes  the  ‘  moon  ’  and  ‘  Endymion  ’  to  be  applied 
by  Portia  to  the  happy  lovers.  When  Lorenzo  speaks,  line  123,  Capell  has  the  Stage- 
direction  ‘  risbig.' — Ed. 

125.  blinde  man]  Clarendon  :  This  must  refer  to  a  proverb  importing  that  there 
are  cases  in  which  a  blind  man  is  at  no  disadvantage  as  compared  with  any  other  man. 

’  [Moreover,  the  intimation  is  given  us  that  the  moon  is  now  wholly  obscured  and  that 
the  scene  is  quite  dark. — Ed.] 

138.  Tucket]  Steevens:  Toccata,  Italian,  a  flourish  on  a  trumpet. 

17 


258 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


[act  v,  sc.  L 


Enter  Baffanio ,  Anthonio,  Gratiano,  and  their 

Followers.  145 

Baf.  We  fhould  hold  day  with  the  Antipodes, 

If  you  would  walke  in  abfence  of  the  funne. 

Por.  Let  me  giue  light,  but  let  me  not  be  light, 

For  a  light  wife  doth  make  a  heauie  husband, 

And  neuer  be  Baffanio  fo  for  me,  1 50 

But  God  fort  all :  you  are  welcome  home  my  Lord. 

Baff  I  thanke  you  Madam,  giue  welcom  to  my  friend 
This  is  the  man,  this  is  Anthonio , 

To  whom  I  am  fo  infinitely  bound. 

Por.  You  fhould  in  all  fence  be  much  bound  to  him,  155 
For  as  I  heare  he  was  much  bound  for  you. 

Anth.  No  more  then  I  am  wel  acquitted  of. 

Por.  Sir,  you  are  verie  welcome  to  our  houfe : 

It  muft  appeare  in  other  waies  then  words, 

Therefore  I  fcant  this  breathing  curtefie.  160 

Gra.  By  yonder  Moone  I  fweare  you  do  me  wrong, 

Infaith  I  gaue  it  to  the  Iudges  Clearke, 

Would  he  were  gelt  that  had  it  for  my  part, 

Since  you  do  take  it  Loue  fo  much  at  hart.  164 

150.  fo  for ]  fo  from  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  161.  [To  Nerissa.  Rowe. 

Theob.  Han.  Warb.  162,  176,  &c.  hedges']  Judg's  F4. 

1 5 1,  you  are]  fare  Qt.  jyou’ re  Pope +  ,  Clearke]  Clarke  Qq.  Clerk  Y f 4. 
Dvce  iii,  Huds. 


144,  &c.  Guizot  {Notice,  &c.,  p.  5) :  In  thus  depicting  the  reunion  of  Portia  and 
Bassanio,  Shakespeare  has  shown  that  he  is  almost  the  sole  poet  who  has  not  feared  to 
oause  over  a  picture  of  perfect  happiness ;  he  knew  his  own  power  to  fill  up  the  outlines. 

146,  147.  Malone:  If  you  would  always  walk  in  the  night,  it  would  be  day  with 
us,  as  it  now  is  on  the  other  side  of  the  globe. 

148.  light]  Johnson  :  There  is  scarcely  any  word  with  which  Shakespeare  so  much 
delights  to  trifle  as  with  light ,  in  its  various  significations.  Steevens  :  Most  of  the  old 
dramatic  writers  are  guilty  of  the  same  quibble. 

155.  sence]  Walker  ( Vers.  248) :  Is  ‘sense’  in  this  passage  singular  or  plural? 
Clarendon  :  That  is,  in  all  reason.  Compare,  for  this  meaning  of  the  word,  Meas. 
for  Meas.  V,  i,  47  :  ‘  Poor  soul,  She  speaks  this  in  the  infirmity  of  sense.’ 

158.  our  house]  Cowden-Clarke  :  How  delicate  this  little  touch  of  generosity 
and  modesty;  she  has  just  endowed  her  husband  with  her  property. 

160.  breathing  curtesie]  Malone:  This  verbal,  complimentary  form,  made  up 
only  of  breath,  i.  e.  words.  So,  in  Timon.  Ill,  v,  59:  ‘You  breathe  in  vain.’  So,  in 
Macb.  V,  iii,  27  :  ‘  mouth-honour,  breath.’ 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


259 


Por.  A  quarrel  hoe  alreadie,  what’s  the  matter  ?  165 

Gra.  About  a  hoope  of  Gold,  a  paltry  Ring 
That  fhe  did  giue  me,  whofe  Poefie  was 
For  all  the  world  like  Cutlers  Poetry 
Vpon  a  knife  ;  Loue  mee,  and  leaue  niee  noi. 

Ner.  What  talke  you  of  the  Poefie  or  the  valew  :  170 

You  fwore  to  me  when  I  did  giue  it  you, 

That  you  would  weare  it  til  the  houre  of  death, 

And  that  it  fhould  lye  with  you  in  your  graue, 

Though  not  for  me,  yet  for  your  vehement  oaths, 

You  fhould  haue  beene  refpedtiue  and  haue  kept  it.  175 


167.  giue  me]  give  to  me  Steev.  conj. 
Coll,  ii,  iii,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  give  vie ; 
one  Lettsom. 

167, 170.  Poefie] pofie  Q2Q3-  posy  Cap. 
Mai.  ’90,  Steev.  Sing.  Hal.  Dyce,  Cam. 


Glo.  Cla.  Del.  Coll,  iii,  Wh.  ii. 

171.  it  ]  Om.  Q8. 

172.  the  houre~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  i. 
your  houre  Qq  et  cet. 


167.  Capell  (ii,  73)  asserts  that  this  verse  is  ‘purposely  incomplete,  and  of  four 
feet  only,  “me”  being  redundant.’  Steevens  suggested  the  insertion  of  to  after 
‘give;’  it  was  also  added  by  Collier’s  (MS),  and  adopted  by  Dyce.  Keightley 
(. Expositor ,  p.  154)  would  punctuate:  ‘That  she  did  give  me,  whose — poesy  was.’ 
Halliwell  says,  and  truly,  ‘the  sense  absolutely  requires  posy ;  the  spelling  proves 
nothing.’  Abbott,  §  508,  thus  scans  the  line,  as  one  where  a  foot  is  omitted  after  a 
marked  pause:  ‘That  sh6  |  did  give  me,  |  '  |  whose  p6  |  sy  was.’ 

167.  Poesie]  Rolfe:  A  motto  inscribed  on  the  inner  side  of  a  ring.  The  fashion 
of  putting  such  ‘  posies  ’  on  rings  prevailed  from  the  middle  of  the  1 6th  to  the  close 
of  the  17th  century.  Inscriptions  on  the  outside  of  rings  have  been  common  from 
the  old  Greek  and  Roman  times.  In  1624  a  little  book  was  published  with  the  quaint 
title,  Love's  Garland,  or  Posies  for  Rings,  Handkerchiefs,  and  gloves  ;  and  such  pretty 
tokens  that  lovers  send  their  loves.  [Arber,  in  his  English  Garner,  vol.  i,  p.  61 1,  has 
reprinted,  from  Harl.  MS  6910,  a  collection  of  Love  Posies,  many  hundred  in  number 
from  a  MS  written  about  1596. — Ed.] 

169.  knife]  Reed:  Knives,  as  Sir  John  Hawkins  observes, were  formerly  inscribed, 
by  means  of  aqua  fortis,  with  short  sentences  in  distich.  In  Dekker’s  Satiromastix, 
Sir  Edward  Vaughan  says  :  ‘You  shall  swear  by  Phoebus,  who  is  your  poets  good  lord 
and  master,  that  hereafter  you  will  not  hire  Horace  to  give  you  posies  for  rings,  hand- 
kerchers,  or  knives,  which  you  understand  not.’  [Halliwell  gives  several  specimens  of 
this  ‘cutler’s  poetry’  with  wood-cuts.] 

169.  leaue]  Staunton:  And  give  me  not.  So  in  Two  Gent.  IV,  'v,  79:  ‘It 
seems  you  loved  not  her,  to  leave  her  token.’  [See  also  ‘leaue,’  line  191,  and  ‘left,’ 
line  217.] 

172.  the  houre]  That  there  aie  so  many^ws  and  yours  in  this  speech  may  be  a 
reason  against  adding  another  one  (which  the  Qq  have  here),  or  it  may  be  a  reason  in 
favour  of  it.  I  rather  prefer  the  Folio. — Ed. 

175.  respectiue]  That  is,  mindful.  See  Craik,  s.  v.  ‘respect,’  line  no  above. 

’‘Respective  lenity,’  in  Rom.  &  Jul.  Ill,  i,  116,  is  paraphrased,  by  a  majority  of  Edi¬ 
tors,  ‘ considerate  gentleness.’ — Ed. 


2 bo  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 

Gaue  it  a  Iudges  Clearke:  but  wel  I  know  176 

The  Clearke  wil  nere  weare  haire  on’s  face  that  had  it. 

Gra.  He  wil,  and  if  he  liue  to  be  a  man. 

Nerriffa.  I,  if  a  Woman  liue  to  be  a  man. 

Gra.  Now  by  this  hand  I  gaue  it  to  a  youth,  180 

A  kinde  of  boy,  a  little  fcrubbed  boy, 

No  higher  then  thy  felfe,  the  Iudges  Clearke, 

A  prating  boy  that  begg’d  it  as  a  Fee, 

I  could  not  for  my  heart  deny  it  him. 

Por.  You  were  too  blame,  I  muft  be  plaine  with  you,  185 


176.  but  wel  I  know~\  no  God's  my 
Judge  Qq,  Coll,  et  seq.  (except  Rife). 

177.  on's ]  on  his  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Ktly, 
Del. 


178.  and~\  an  Pope  et  seq. 

179.  /,]  If,  Ff,  Rowe.  Ay,  Pope  et 
seq. 

185.  too ]  to  Q2Q3  F4  et  seq. 


176.  wel  I  know]  Collier:  The  Folio,  perhaps  in  consequence  of  the  statute  of 
James  I,  substituted  this  phrase  for  the  Quarto’s. 

178.  and  if]  See  IV,  i,  465. 

1 8 1 .  scrubbed]  Warton  :  It  is  certain  from  the  context  and  from  the  tenour  of  the 
story,  that  Gratiano  does  not  here  speak  contemptuously  of  the  Judge’s  clerk.  He  only 
means  to  describe  the  person  and  appearance  of  this  supposed  youth,  which  he  does  by 
insinuating  what  seemed  to  be  the  precise  time  of  his  age,  that  of  a  young  stripling.  I 
am  therefore  of  opinion  that  Shakespeare  wrote  stubbed.  In  many  counties  it  is  a  com¬ 
mon  provincialism  to  call  young  birds,  not  yet  fledged,  stubbed  young  ones.  But,  what 
is  more  to  our  purpose,  Hearne,  a  plain,  unaffected  writer,  in  the  Preface  to  his  History 
and  Antiquities  of  Glastonbury,  ed.  1722,  says  that  ‘  Saunders  must  be  a  stubbed  boy, 
if  not  a  man,  at  the  dissolution  of  Abbeys,’  &c.  It  therefore  seems  to  have  been  a  com¬ 
mon  expression  for  stripling,  the  very  idea  which  the  speaker  intends  to  convey.  If 
the  emendation  be  correct  here,  we  should  also  change  it  in  Nerissa’s  speech,  line  285. 
Steevens  :  I  believe * * *  4  scrubbed  ’  and  stubbed  have  a  like  meaning,  and  signify  stunted 
or  shrub-like.  So  in  Holland’s  Pliny :  4  But  such  will  never  proue  faire  trees,  but 
skrubs  only.’  [Bk  13th,  chap,  iv,  p.  386.  That  scrub  and  shrub  were  not  exactly  the 
same,  may  be  inferred,  I  think,  from  another  passage  in  Holland’s  Pliny,  where,  in  Bk 
1 2th,  chap,  vii,  p.  362,  we  find  :  ‘  Wee  haue  made  means  to  haue  the  Pepper  tree  grow¬ 
ing  among  vs ;  and  verily  a  little  scrubby  plant  it  is,  or  shrub,  rather.’ — Ed.]  Ver- 
planck  :  We  retain  the  same  use  familiarly  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic  in  4  scrub 
oak,’  a  name  given  from  the  first  settlement  of  the  country  to  the  dwarf  or  bush  oak. 
Grant  White:  But  is  not  ‘scrub  oak’  a  corruption  of  shrub  oak?  and  are  not 

4  scrub  ’  and  ‘  shrub  ’  originally  the  same  word  ?  Halliwell  :  4  Scrubbed  ’  is  used 
here  in  contempt,  the  scornful  way  in  which  Gratiano  talks  of  the  disguised  Nerissa 
increasing  the  humour  of  the  scene.  It  is  unlikely  the  word  should  have  been  twice 
printed  scrubbed  if  that  had  not  been  the  correct  reading.  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  Here 
4  scrubbed  ’  is  generally  explained  stunted;  but  Cotgrave  has  ‘  Marpaut.  An  ill-fauoured 
scrub,  a  little  ouglie  or  swartie  wretch ;’  and  Coles,  4  A  Scrub  (mean  person),  Homo 
misellus,'  and  4  Scrubbed,  squalidus .’ 

185.  too  blame]  Abbott,  §  73:  ‘Too’  is  often  used  in  the  Folio,  in  the  phrase,  4 1 
am  too  blame.’  See  Oth.  Ill,  iii,  244  and  328.  This  is  so  common  in  other  Eliza- 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


261 


To  part  fo  (lightly  with  your  wiues  firft  gift,  186 

A  thing  ftucke  on  with  oathes  vpon  your  finger, 

And  fo  riueted  with  faith  vnto  your  flefh. 

I  gaue  my  Loue  a  King,  and  made  him  fweare 

Neuer  to  part  with  it,  and  heere  he  ftands :  19a 

I  dare  be  fworne  for  him,  he  would  not  leaue  it, 

Nor  plucke  it  from  his  finger,  for  the  wealth 
That  the  world  mafters.  Now  in  faith  Gratiano , 

You  giue  your  wife  too  vnkinde  a  caufe  of  greefe, 

And  ’twere  to  me  I  fhould  be  mad  at  it  195 

Baff.  Why  I  were  belt  to  cut  my  left  hand  off, 

And  fweare  I  loft  the  Ring  defending  it. 

Gre.  My  Lord  Baffanio  gaue  his  Ring  away 
Vnto  the  Iudge  that  beg’d  it,  and  indeede 

Deferu’d  it  too  :  and  then  the  Boy  his  Clearke  200 

That  tooke  fome  paines  in  writing,  he  begg’d  mine, 

188.  fo  riueted']  riveted  Pope  +  ,  Steev.  196.  [Aside.  Theob.  et  seq. 

’85,  Dyce  iii.  riveted  so  Cap.  Steev. ’93,  198.  Gre.]  Ft. 

Var.  Sta.  so  rivetted  Ktly.  200.  too]  to  Qq. 

195.  And]  An  Theob.  et  seq. 


bethan  authors,  that  it  seems  to  require  more  explanation  than  a  simple  confusion 
between  to  and  too.  Perhaps  ‘  blame  ’  was  considered  an  adjective,  and  too  may  have 
been,  as  in  Early  English,  used  for  excessively.  [Even  in  a  modernized  text  it  is  doubt¬ 
ful  if  this  ‘too’  should  not  be  retained. — Ed.] 

188.  so  riueted]  This  line  is  cited  by  Abbott,  §472,  as  one  of  the  examples,  of 
which  we  have  had  many,  of  the  absorption  of  ‘  -ed  following  d  or  t,’  and  it  is  thus 
scanned  by  him :  *  And  s6  |  rivets  |  with  faith  |  unt6  |  your  flesh.’  Dyce  (ed.  iii) : 
The  ‘  so  ’  in  this  line  was  evidently  repeated  by  mistake  from  the  ‘  so  ’  just  above  it,  ir 
the  preceding  line  but  one.  [Wherefore  Dyce  returned*  as  he  so  often  does  in  his  Iasi 
Edition,  to  the  reading  of  Pope.  To  me,  as  good  a  way  as  either  Dyce’s  or  Abbott’s, 
is  to  read  rivet  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  a  monosyllable.  When  v  comes  between  two 
vowels,  its  presence,  as  a  general  rule,  was,  I  think,  merely  suggested,  sometimes  so 
faintly  as  to  be  practically  non-existent.  This  explains  (I  speak  with  diffidence)  the 
reason  why  the  old  printers,  in  such  cases,  always  used  u  for  v.  See  ‘  hauing,’  III,  ii, 
131,  and  ‘pouerty,’  IV,  i,  285. — Ed.] 

194.  too  vnkinde  a]  Abbott,  §462:  Syllables  ending  in  vowels  are  frequently 
elided  before  vowels  in  reading,  though  not  in  writing.  Thus:  ‘You  give  |  your  wife 

|  too  unkind  |  a  cause  |  of  grief.’  [It  is  doubtful  to  me  if  this  elision  is  permissible 
here,  where  ‘  too  ’  is  an  emphatic  word.  Walker’s  suggestion  is  preferable,  and  was 
adopted  by  Dyce.  In  Crit.  i,  87,  the  former  says,  lDele  “a” ;  read  too  -unkind  cause;’ 
as  e.  g.,  Lear,  III,  iv,  ‘  — nothing  could  have  subdued  nature  To  such  a  lowness,  but 
his  finlcind  daughters.’ — Ed.] 

195.  And  ’twere]  See  IV,  i,  465. 

196.  I  were  best]  See  II,  viii,  36. 


262 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


lact  V,  SC.  1. 


And  neyther  man  nor  mafter  would  take  ought  202 

But  the  two  Rings. 

Por.  What  Ring  gaue  you  my  Lord  ? 

Not  that  I  hope  which  you  receiu’d  of  me.  205 

Bajf.  If  I  could  adde  a  lie  vnto  a  fault, 

I  would  deny  it  :  but  you  fee  my  finger 
Hath  not  the  Ring  vpon  it,  it  is  gone. 

Por.  Euen  fo  voide  is  your  falfe  heart  of  truth. 

By  heauen  I  wil  nere  come  in  your  bed  210 

Vntil  I  fee  the  Ring. 

Ner.  Nor  I  in  yours,  til  I  againe  fee  mine. 

Baff.  Sweet  Portia , 

If  you  did  know  to  whom  I  gaue  the  Ring, 

If  you  did  know  for  whom  I  gaue  the  Ring,  215 

And  would  conceiue  for  what  I  gaue  the  Ring, 

And  how  vnwillingly  I  left  the  Ring, 

When  nought  would  be  accepted  but  the  Ring, 

You  would  abate  the  ftrength  of  your  difpleafure? 

Por.  If  you  had  knowne  the  vertue  of  the  Ring,  220 

Or  halfe  her  worthineffe  that  gaue  the  Ring, 

Or  your  owne  honour  to  containe  the  Ring, 

You  would  not  then  haue  parted  with  the  Ring  :  223 


202.  neyther]  Ft.  neither  Qq  Ff. 
209.  Euen\  And  even  Ff,  Rowe. 
212.  Two  lines,  Qq,  Theob.  et  seq. 


218.  nought ]  naught  Q2Q3,  Steev.  Var. 
Coll.  Wh. 

221.  Or  halfe~\  Of  halfe  Qx. 

222.  containe ]  retain  Pope  + ,  Steev. 


214.  Halliwell:  Jingling  lines  similar  to  those  in  this  and  the  next  speech,  no 
fewer  than  nine  ending  with  the  same  word,  are  met  with  in  other  dramatists.  Com¬ 
pare  The  Fayre  Mayde  of  the  Exchange ,  1607  :  ‘ Ferd .  I  have  a  brother,  rival  in  my 
love ;  I  have  a  brother  hates  me  for  my  love ;  I  have  a  brother  vows  to  win  my  love ; 
That  brother,  too,  he  hath  incenst  my  love,  To  gain  the  beauty  of  my  dearest  love ; 
What  hope  remains,  then,  to  enjoy  my  love?  Anthony.  I  am  that  brother  rival  in  his 
love ;  I  am  that  brother  hates  him  for  his  love ;  Not  his,  but  mine ;  and  I  will  have 
that  love,  Or  never  live  to  see  him  kiss  my  love’ — [p.  36,  Ed.  Sh.  6br.].  Walker 
( Or  it.  iii,  58)  adds  the  following:  King  John ,  III,  i,  12-15;  Rich.  Ill:  I,  iii,  292- 
294;  Com.  Err.  I,  ii,  89,  90.  Hales  (quoted  by  Furnivall,  Introduction  to  Gervinus, 
p.  xxxvii,  foot-note)  cites  Edward  III :  II,  i,  where  ‘  the  sun  ’  ends  eight  consecutive 
lines. 

222.  to  containe]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  This  was  used  in  Shakespeare’s  time  for  t» 
retain,  to  which  it  was  altered  in  the  (MS).  This  was  a  change  of  language  intro¬ 
duced  between  the  date  when  the  play  was  written  and  when  the  old  corrector  inserted 
his  emendations, — an  interval  of  about  half  a  century.  Malone  :  See  IV,  i,  54. 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


263 


What  man  is  there  fo  much  vnreafonable, 

If  you  had  pleas’d  to  haue  defended  it  225 

With  any  termes  of  Zeale  :  wanted  the  modeftie 
To  vrge  the  thing  held  as  a  ceremonie : 

Ncrriffa  teaches  me  what  to  beleeue, 

lie  die  for’t,  but  fome  Woman  had  the  Ring? 

BaJJ.  No  by  mine  honor  Madam,  by  my  foule  230 

No  woman  had  it,  but  a  ciuill  Dodtor, 

Which  did  refufe  three  thoufand  Ducates  of  me, 

And  beg’d  the  Ring;  the  which  I  did  denie  him, 

And  fuffer’d  him  to  go  difpleas’d  away : 

Euen  he  that  had  held  vp  the  verie  life  235 

Of  my  deere  friend.  What  fhould  I  fay  fweete  Lady  f 
I  was  inforc’d  to  fend  it  after  him, 

I  was  befet  with  fhame  and  curtefie, 

My  honor  would  not  let  ingratitude 

So  much  befmeare  it.  Pardon  me  good  Lady,  240 


226.  Zeale  .•]  zeale,  Q,. 

227.  ceremonie  .■]  ceremony  ?  Qt. 

230.  mine  honor\  my  honor  Qq,  Cap. 

Mai.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

232.  Which ]  Who  Pope  +  ,  Steev. ’85. 


234.  difpleas'd  away ]  away  difpleafd 

Qx- 

235.  had  held  vp\  did  vphold  Q,,  Pope 
+  ,  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Wh.  ii. 

237.  inforc'd~\  enforc'd  Qt. 


224.  much]  See  Abbott,  §  51,  for  examples  of  ‘  much  ’  ‘  used  as  an  ordinary  adjec¬ 
tive,  like  the  Scotch  mickle.' 

225.  had  pleas’d  to  have  defended]  Abbott,  §360:  It  is  now  commonly  as¬ 
serted  that  such  expressions  as  *  I  hoped  to  have  seen  him  yesterday  ’  are  ungrammat¬ 
ical.  But  in  the  Elizabethan,  as  in  Early  English  authors,  after  verbs  of  hoping,  in¬ 
tending,  or  verbs  signifying  that  something  ought  to  have  been  done,  but  was  not,  the 
Complete  Present  Infinitive  is  used.  We  still  retain  this  idiom  in  the  expression,  *  I 
would  (i.  e.  wished  to)  have  done  it.’  ‘I  ought  (i.  e.  was  bound)  to  have  done  it.’ 

226.  wanted]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  as  to  have  wanted.  This  lax  construction  is 
due  to  the  intervening  parenthesis.  The  following  words  are  grammatically  faulty, 
though  the  general  sense  is  clear.  What  man  would  have  been  so  unreasonably  want¬ 
ing  in  modesty  as  to  urge  you  to  give  up  the  thing  you  held  as  a  sacred  emblem  ? 

226.  modestie]  Allen:  That  is,  moderation.  Cf.  II,  ii,  183. 

227.  ceremonie]  Schmidt  (Lex.)  finds  three  significations  in  which  this  word  is 
used :  First,  external  form,  outward  rite ;  secondly,  any  thing  or  observance  held 
sacred  [as  here]  ;  and  thirdly,  ritual  and  solemn  performance  of  a  sacred  act.  Clar¬ 
endon  :  In  Hakluyt’s  Voyages,  quoted  by  Richardson,  a  crucifix  is  called  a  ceremony. 

231.  ciuill  Doctor]  A  Doctor  of  Civil  Law. 

235.  he]  Clarendon:  ‘He’  is  used,  not  him,  as  if  the  words  ‘the  which  .  .  .  . 
away’  were  merely  parenthetical. 

237.  Allen  :  It  indicates  the  gentleman  and  the  soldier  in  Bassanio,  that  he  does 
not  expose  Anthonio  as  the  one  that  ‘  enforced  ’  him  to  give  the  ring. 


264 


THE  MEE CHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i 


And  by  thefe  bleffed  Candles  of  the  night,  241 

Had  you  bene  there,  I  thinke  you  would  haue  beg’d 
The  Ring  of  me,  to  giue  the  worthie  Dodtor  ? 

Por.  Let  not  that  Dodfor  ere  come  neere  my  houfe, 

Since  he  hath  got  the  iewell  that  I  loued,  245 

And  that  which  you  did  fvveare  to  keepe  for  me, 

I  will  become  as  liberall  as  you, 

He  not  deny  him  any  thing  I  haue, 

No,  not  my  body,  nor  my  husbands  bed  : 

Know  him  I  fhall,  I  am  well  fure  of  it.  250 

Lie  not  a  night  from  home.  Watch  me  like  Argos, 

If  you  doe  not,  if  I  be  left  alone, 

Now  by  mine  honour  which  is  yet  mine  owne, 
lie  haue  the  Dodtor  for  my  bedfellow. 

Nerriffa.  And  I  his  Clarke:  therefore  be  well  aduis’d  255 
How  you  doe  leaue  me  to  mine  owne  protection. 

Gra.  Well,  doe  you  fo  :  let  not  me  take  him  then, 

For  if  I  doe,  ile  mar  the  yong  Clarks  pen. 

Ant.  I  am  th’vnhappy  fubiedl  of  thefe  quarrels. 

Por.  Sir,  grieue  not  you,  260 

You  are  welcome  notwithftanding. 

Baf.  Portia ,  forgiue  me  this  enforced  wrong, 

And  in  the  hearing  of  thefe  manie  friends 

I  fweare  to  thee,  euen  by  thine  owne  faire  eyes  264 


241.  And ]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Wh.  i.  For 
Qq  et  cet. 

242.  thinke']  think ,  Theob.  et  seq.  (ex¬ 
cept  Han.  Wh.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  Rife). 

243.  the]  thee  F2F3< 

251.  Argos]  Q,Q2  F  ,  Rowe.  Argus 
F2  et  cet. 

253.  mine  owne ]  my  own  Pope  + , 
Steev.  Mai.  Knt. 


254.  the]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i.  that  Qq 
et  cet. 

my]  mine  Q2. 

257.  him]  him,  Coll.  Dyce,  Cam.  Glo. 
[Non  recte.  then  ad  tempus  refert,  et  258 
in  sens.  obsc.  explicat. — Ed.] 

260,  261.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 

261.  You  are]  You're  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 
264.  euen]  ev'n  Pope  +  . 


241.  Candles]  Malone:  The  same  expression  is  to  be  found  in  the  Sonnets,  in 
Macbeth,  and  in  Rom.  Sr  Jul. 

242.  I  thinke]  Theobald  inserted  an  unhappy  comma  after  ‘think,’  which  has 
retained  its  place  in  the  majority  of  Editions  to  the  present  day.  White  was  the  first 
to  reject  it  and  restore  the  original.  ‘The  difference,’  says  White  (ed.  i),  ‘though 
slight  in  itself,  is  material  in  point  of  style;  for,  according  to  the  Folio,  “think  ”  has 
for  its  subject  all  the  sentence  that  follows  it;  but  in  the  text  usually  given,  “  I  think  ” 
is  inteijectional,  and  “you  would  have  begged,”  &c.,  is  the  predication.’  I  also  pn  fr.i 
1  And,’  at  the  beginning  of  line  241,  to  For  of  the  Qq. — Ed. 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


265 


Wherein  I  fee  my  felfe.  265 

Por.  Marke  you  but  that  ? 

In  both  my  eyes  he  doubly  fees  himfelfe : 

In  each  eye  one,  fweare  by  your  double  felfe, 

And  there’s  an  oath  of  credit. 

Baf.  Nay,  but  heare  me.  270 

Pardon  this  fault,  and  by  my  foule  I  fweare 
I  neuer  more  will  breake  an  oath  with  thee. 

Anth.  I  once  did  lend  my  bodie  for  thy  wealth, 

Which  but  for  him  that  had  your  husbands  ring 

Had  quite  mifcarried.  I  dare  be  bound  againe,  275 

My  foule  vpon  the  forfeit,  that  your  Lord 

Will  neuer  more  breake  faith  aduifedlie. 

Por.  Then  you  fhall  be  his  furetie  :  giue  him  this, 

And  bid  him  keepe  it  better  then  the  other. 

Ant.  Heere  Lord  Baffanio ,  fwear  to  keep  this  ring.  280 

Baff.  By  heauen  it  is  the  fame  I  gaue  the  Dodlor. 

Por.  I  had  it  of  him  :  pardon  Baffanio , 

For  by  this  ring  the  Dodtor  lay  with  me. 

Ner.  And  pardon  me  my  gentle  Gratiano ,  284 


265.  my  felfe  l\  myself —  Rowe  et  seq. 
267.  my\  mine  FfQ3,  Pope  +  . 

273.  [To  Bass.  Rowe. 

thy"]  Ff,  Rowe,  his  Qq  et  cet. 
wealth~\  weal  Theob.  Warb. 


274.  [To  Por.  Rowe  et  seq. 

husbands  ring ]  husband  Ring 

Qx- 

282.  pardon\  Ff.  pardon  me  Qq  et 

cet. 


268.  double]  Malone  :  Used  in  a  bad  sense  for — full  of  duplicity. 

273.  thy]  White  (ed.  i) :  ‘  Thy  ’  is  plainly  a  corruption.  It  is  possible  that  it  is 
a  misprint  for  the  or  that,  which  had  been  underlined,  and  that  Shakespeare  meant 
Anthonio  to  say  that  he  lent  his  body  for  that  happiness  (i.  e.  of  both  Bassanio  and 
°ortia),  which  else  would  have  miscarried.  [This  is  a  plausible  suggestion;  but  I 
doubt  if  ‘which’  refers  to  ‘wealth.’  Does  it  not  refer  to  the  lending,  to  the  pledge, 
of  which  Antonio’s  body  was  the  forfeit?  The  happiness  of  Portia  and  Bassanio 
would  not  have  been  utterly  and  forever  blasted  by  Anthonio’s  death.  It  was  not  the 
wealth  or  happiness  that  might  have  miscarried,  but  the  risk  which  Anthonio  himself 
personally,  ran  for  the  sake  of  Bassanio. — Ed.] 

273.  wealth]  Theobald  :  I  have  ventured,  against  the  Authority  of  the  Copies,  to 
substitute  weal  here;  i.  e.  for  his  welfare,  benefit.  ‘Wealth  ’  has  a  more  confined  sig¬ 
nification.  Though  I  must  own  that  weal  and  ‘  wealth,’  in  our  author’s  time,  must  be 
in  some  measure  synonymous;  as  they  are  now  in  the  words  Common-weal  and  Com¬ 
monwealth.  Johnson  :  ‘  For  his  wealth  ’  is — for  his  advantage ;  to  obtain  his  happiness. 
‘Wealth’  was,  at  that  time,  the  term  opposite  to  adversity  or  calamity.  Steevens: 

>  So  in  The  Litany  :  ‘  In  all  time  of  our  tribulation ;  in  all  time  of  our  wealth.’ 

276.  My  soule]  Allen  :  A  dearer  pledge  than  ‘  my  body.’ 


2(i6 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


For  that  fame  fcrubbed  boy  the  Doftors  Clarke  285 

In  Hew  of  this,  laft  night  did  lye  with  me. 

Gra.  Why  this  is  like  the  mending  of  high  waies 
In  Sommer,  where  the  waies  are  faire  enough  : 

What,  are  we  Cuckolds  ere  we  haue  deferu’d  it. 

Por.  Speake  not  fo  groffely,  you  are  all  amaz’d  ;  290 

Heere  is  a  letter,  reade  it  at  your  leyfure, 

It  comes  from  Padua  from  Bellario , 

There  you  fhall  finde  that  Portia  was  the  Dodtor, 

Nerriffa  there  her  Clarke.  Lorenzo  heere 

Shall  witneffe  I  fet  forth  as  foone  as  you,  295 

And  but  eu’n  now  return’d :  I  haue  not  yet 
Entred  my  houfe.  Anthonio  you  are  welcome, 

And  I  haue  better  newes  in  ftore  for  you 

Then  you  expedt  :  vnfeale  this  letter  foone,  299 

286.  Hew]  Q2F2.  lieu  Qt.  296.  but  eu'n ]  euen  but  Qq,  Pope  +  , 

this ]  thee  Wh.  i.  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  Cam.  Glo.  Cla.  but  even 

288.  where ]  when  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  Rowe,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Sing.  Ktly. 
Sing.  Ktly,  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  299.  Then ]  than  Q2. 


286.  In  .  .  .  this]  White,  accepting  *  in  lieu  ’  in  its  present  use,  changed  *  this  ’  to 
thee.  Halliwell  considers  the  alteration  ‘  plausible,’  and  also  attributes  the  modern 
meaning  to  *  in  lieu.’  But  Dyce  sets  them  both  right  by  answering  the  former’s  ques¬ 
tion  :  *  What  meaning  has  “  in  lieu  of  this  ”  here  ’  ?  as  follows :  ‘  It  means  “  in  consid¬ 
eration  of  this  (ring).”  Compare,  earlier  in  this  play,  IV,  i,  430,  “in  lieu  (i.  e.  in  con¬ 
sideration)  whereof,”  &c. ;  and  The  Tempest,  I,  ii :  “  Which  was,  that  he,  in  lieu  o’  (i.  e. 
in  consideration  of)  the  premises, — Of  homage,”  &c.’  And  Schmidt  (Lex.  s.  v.)  adds 
four  or  five  more  examples.  White  returned  to  the  original  text  in  his  Second  Edition. 
—Ed. 

288.  where]  Capell  (ii,  73) :  When  may  appear  a  properer  term  in  some  eyes  to 
follow  *  summer  ’  than  ‘  where  :’  but  *  where  ’  heightens  the  comparison ;  for,  with  that, 
this  absurd  summer- mending  is  said,  too,  to  be  of  ‘  ways  ’  that  did  not  want  it  at  any 
time.  [As  White  says,  this  change  to  when  is  *  very  plausible,  but  not  necessary.’  The 
aptness  of  Gratiano’s  simile  is  a  little  obscure.  I  suppose  he  means  that  his  wife  aimed 
at  the  purification  of  his  character  before  it  was  stained. — Ed.] 

296.  eu’n  now]  See  III,  ii,  176.  It  is  not  impossible,  for  grammatical  reasons,  that 
this  line  should  be  punctuated :  *  And,  but  e’en  now  return’d,  I  have  not  yet,’  &c. — Ed. 

298.  Eccles  :  There  is  not,  perhaps,  to  be  found  in  the  dramatic  writings  of  any  poet 
a  more  lame,  awkard  [sic],  and  inartificial  expedient  for  suddenly  bringing  on  a  gen¬ 
eral  satisfaction  in  the  catastrophe,  than  that  which  is  here  had  recourse  to.  How  Por¬ 
tia  should  possess  the  means  of  acquiring  intelligence  respecting  this  happy  reveise  of 
Anthonio’s  fortune  earlier  than  himself,  who  is  just  arrived  from  the  very  same  place, 
is  a  matter  wonderful  to  be  conceived,  and  that  she  should  desire  to  conceal  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  company,  a  circumstance,  in  its  nature  so  singular  and  curious,  is 
little  less  extraordinary. 


actv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


267 


There  you  fhall  finde  three  of  your  Argofies  300 

Are  richly  come  to  harbour  fodainlie. 

You  fhall  not  know  by  what  ftrange  accident 
I  chanced  on  this  letter. 

Antho.  I  am  dumbe. 

Baff.  Were  you  the  Dodlor,  and  I  knew  you  not  ?  305 

Gra.  Were  you  the  Clark  that  is  to  make  me  cuckold. 

Ner.  I,  but  the  Clark  that  neuer  meanes  to  doe  it, 

Vnleffe  he  liue  vntill  he  be  a  man. 

BaJJ.  (Sweet  Do6tor)you  fhall  be  my  bedfellow, 

When  I  am  abfent,  then  lie  with  my  wife.  310 

An.  (Sweet  Ladie)you  haue  giuen  me  life  &  liuing; 

For  heere  I  reade  for  certaine  that  my  fhips 
Are  fafelie  come  to  Rode. 

Por.  How  now  Lorenzo  ? 

My  Clarke  hath  fome  good  comforts  to  for  you.  3 1 5 

Ner.  I,  and  lie  giue  them  him  without  a  fee. 

There  doe  I  giue  to  you  and  IeJJica 
From  the  rich  Iewe,  a  fpeciall  deed  of  gift 
After  his  death,  of  all  he  dies  poffefCd  of. 

Loren.  Faire  Ladies  you  drop  Manna  in  the  way  320 

Of  ftarued  people. 

Por.  It  is  almoft  morning, 

And  yet  I  am  fure  you  are  not  fatisfied 
Of  thefe  euents  at  full.  Let  vs  goe  in, 

And  charge  vs  there  vpon  intergatories,  325 


301.  fodainlie]  suddenly  Rowe. 

313.  Rode~\  Rodes  F2.  Rhodes  F3F4, 
Rowe,  road  Pope  et  seq. 

3X5-  to]  Q2-  too  Qx. 

319.  of.']  off.  Q,. 

323.  I  am]  Ime  Qx.  I'm  Pope  +  , 
Dyce  iii. 


324.  Let  vs]  Let's  Q,. 

325.  vpon]  on  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
intergatories]  F2Q3,  Mai.  Steev. 

Hal.  intergotories  Q,Q2.  interrogatories 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Han.  Johns,  interrogatories 
Theob.  Warb.  intergatories  Cap.  et  cet. 


301.  richly]  See  line  46  of  this  scene. 

31 1.  liuing]  Staunton:  Riches,  resources.  [See  III,  ii,  163.] 

320.  Manna]  Warburton  commended  the  use  of  this  word,  as  peculiarly  appro¬ 
priate,  by  Jessica.  The  unlucky  slip  did  not  escape  Edwards  ( Canons  of  Criticism, 
p.  212),  and  he  did  not  waste  the  chance. 

324.  Of]  See  ‘I  am  provided  of  a  Torch-bearer,’  II,  iv,  25;  Abbott,  §171. 

324.  at  full]  Allen:  Either,  first,  equivalent  to  ‘fully  satisfied;’  or,  secondly,  a 
lotifusio  duarum  locutionum  :  ‘You  are  not  satisfied  [but  would  like  to  know  of  these 
events]  at  full.  (I  lean  to  tne  latter.) 


268 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


And  we  will  anfwer  all  things  faithfully.  326 

Gra.  Let  it  be  fo,  the  firft  intergatory 
That  my  Nerriffa  fhall  be  fworne  on,  is, 

Whether  till  the  next  night  fhe  had  rather  ftay, 

Or  goe  to  bed,  now  being  two  houres  to  day,  330 

But  were  the  day  come,  I  fhould  with  it  darke, 

Till  I  were  couching  with  the  Doctors  Clarke. 

Well,  while  I  hue,  lie  feare  no  other  thing 
So  fore,  as  keeping  fafe  Nerriffas  ring. 

Exeunt.  335 


FINIS. 


327.  intergatory ]  F2Q3,  Mai.  Steev. 
Hal.  intergotory  QtQ2.  interrogotory 
FQQ,  Rowe,  Han.  Johns,  interd gatory 
Theob.  Warb.  inter1  gatory  Cap.  et  cet. 
330.  bed,  now~\  bed  now  Q2.  bed  now, 


QjQ3,  Theob.  et  seq. 

332.  TilT\  That  Qt,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  Glo.  Ktly,  Wh.  ii. 
Doctors']  Om.  Qx. 

334.  In  sens.  obsc. 


325.  intergatories]  Campbell  (p.  62) :  In  the  Court  of  Queen’s  Bench,  when  a 
complaint  is  made  against  a  person  for  a  ‘  contempt,’  the  practice  is  that  before  sentence 
is  finally  pronounced  he  is  sent  into  the  Crown  Office,  and  being  there  ‘  charged  upon 
interrogatories,’  he  is  made  to  swear  that  he  will  *  answer  all  things  faithfully.’ 

327.  intergatory]  In  Praetorius’s  Facsimile  of  Q2  taken  from  the  Duke  of  Devon¬ 
shire’s  copy,  this  word  appears  as  intergory.  Another  instance,  to  be  added  to  IV,  i, 
78,  79,  in  support  of  the  assumption  that  this  defective  copy  is  an  early  impression. — 
Ed. 

329.  Whether]  Contracted  to  whe'r.  See  Walker,  Vers.,  p.  103;  or  Abbott, 
§466. 

334.  Mrs  Jameson  (i,  93) :  Shylock  and  his  machinations  being  dismissed  from 
our  thoughts,  and  the  rest  of  the  dramatis  personcz  assembled  together  at  Belmont,  all 
our  interest  and  all  our  attention  are  riveted  on  Portia,  and  the  conclusion  leaves 
the  most  delightful  impression  on  the  fancy.  The  playful  equivoque  of  the  rings,  the 
sportive  trick  she  puts  on  her  husband,  and  her  thorough  enjoyment  of  the  jest,  which 
she  checks  just  as  it  is  proceeding  beyond  the  bounds  of  propriety,  show  how  little  she 
was  displeased  by  the  sacrifice  of  her  gift,  and  all  are  consistent  with  her  bright  and 
joyous  spirit.  In  conclusion,  when  Portia  invites  her  company  to  enter  her  palace  to 
refresh  themselves  after  their  travels,  and  talk  over  ‘  these  events  at  full,’  the  imagi¬ 
nation,  unwilling  to  lose  sight  of  the  brilliant  group,  follows  them  in  gay  procession 
from  the  lovely  moonlit  garden  to  marble  halls  and  princely  revels,  to  splendour  and 
festive  mirth,  to  love  and  happiness ! 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX 


THE  TEXT 

The  Text  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice  is  derived  from  two  Quartos  and  the  First 
Folio. 

The  earliest  mention  of  the  Play  in  the  Stationers'  Registers  occurs  in  the  following 
entry  (Arber’s  Transcript ,  vol.  iii,  p.  122) : 

mi°  Julit  [1598,  Anno  40“° 

Regine  Elizabeth ] 

James  Robertes  Entred  for  his  copie  vnder  the  handes  of  bothe  the  wardens,  a 
booke  of  the  Marchaunt  of  Venyce  or  otherwise  called  the  Jewe 
of  Venyce.  Prouided  that  yt  bee  not  prynted  by  the  said  James 
Robertes  or  anye  other  whatsoeuer  without  lycence  first  had  from 
the  Right  honorable  the  lord  Chamberlen . vjd 

The  proviso  in  this  entry  is  noteworthy.  The  company  of  actors  to  which  Shake- 
ipeare  belonged  was  known  as  ‘the  Lord  Chamberlain’s  Servants.’  This  ‘booke,’ 
then,  which  Robertes  entered,  must  have  been  a  play  which  was  acted  by  this  company ; 
only  on  this  ground  could  the  Lord  Chamberlain  have  been  interested  in  granting  or 
withholding  his  license.  There  was  no  patent  for  the  exclusive  printing  of  ‘plaie- 
bookes,’  and  it  could  have  been  only  as  the  protector  of  ‘  his  servants’  ’  interests  that 
the  Lord  Chamberlain  could  withhold  the  license.  It  may  be  that  this  caution  on  the 
part  of  the  Wardens  of  the  Stationers’  Company  is  a  tribute  to  the  popularity  of  the 
play,  since  even  the  Wardens  knew  to  what  Company  it  belonged,  or  it  may  be  that 
no  play  was  entered  without  some  kind  of  proof  shown  that  it  was  done  under  author¬ 
ity  ;  although  this,  I  think,  is  doubtful.  Some  of  the  ‘  stolne  and  surreptitious  copies  ’ 
of  which  Heminge  and  Condell  complained,  appear  to  have  been  issued  without  any 
authority. 

How  James  Robertes  obtained  this  book,  which  aroused  the  suspicions  of  the  War¬ 
dens,  must  remain  a  mystery.  *  How  he  caught  it,  found  it,  or  came  by  it,  or  whereof 
it  was  born,  we  are  yet  to  learn.’  Possibly  through  some  friendly  actor,  or  possibly 
James  Robertes’s  reputation,  in  the  estimation  of  the  Wardens,  was  none  of  the  fairest. 
Perhaps  the  cloud  of  a  fine  which  had  been  imposed  on  him  still  hung  over  him.  He 
was  one  of  the  older  Printers  and  Stationers  of  the  city,  and  ought  to  have  been  respect 
able.  Ten  years  before  this  he  had  influence  enough  at  Court  to  obtain  from  the  Queen 
a  patent  for  the  exclusive  printing  of  ‘  Almanackes  and  Pronostycacyons,’  a  remunerative 
branch  of  the  trade,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  size  of  the  annual  editions.  And  four  years 
before,  he  had  purchased  Charlwood’s  estate  in  upwards  of  forty  works,  and  he  had  been 
bold  enough  to  poach  upon  even  the  Queen’s  Printer’s  manor  and  issue  ‘  Catechismes,’ 
„  but  for  this  offence  he  had  been  fined  by  the  Wardens  of  the  Stationers’  Company 
After  this  he  seems  to  have  turned  his  attention  to  ‘  plaie-bookes ;’  for  the  next  time 

271 


272 


APPENDIX 


that  his  name  appears  in  the  Stationers’  Registers,  as  far  as  I  can  discover,  after  the 
note  of  this  fine,  is  in  the  foregoing  entry  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  with  its  cau¬ 
tionary  proviso.  Two  years  later  he  entered  two  other  pieces,  which  were  played  by  the 
same  Company ;  one  was  *  A  morall  of  Clothe  breches  and  veluet  hose,’  and  the  other, 
* The  Allarum  of  London ,’  and  in  both  cases  he  was  enjoined  from  printing  ‘without 
further  and  better  Aucthoritie.’  Wherefore,  in  view  of  all  this,  it  looks  much  as  though 
the  solution  of  the  mystery  of  the  proviso  in  the  foregoing  entry  of  the  Merchant  of 
Venice,  lies  in  mistrust  of  Robertes  and  of  his  lawful  ownership. 

The  ‘  lycence  from  the  Right  honorable  the  lord  Chamberlen  ’  Robertes  apparently 
failed  for  a  while  to  obtain.  That  he  did  eventually  obtain  it  is  to  be  presumed  from 
the  publication  of  the  book  two  years  later;  although  when  it  appeared  there  was  no 
reference  on  the  title-page  to  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s  servants  or  to  any  others,  an 
omission  which  occurs  in  only  about  half  a  dozen  of  all  the  Shakespearian  Quartos, 
and  which  Robertes  himself  was  careful  to  supply  on  the  title-page  of  his  Quarto  of  the 
Midsuiwner  Night's  Dream. 

When  Robertes  at  last  published  his  Quarto,  it  had  the  following  title-page :  The  | 
EXCELLENT  |  Hiftory  of  the  Mer-  |  chant  of  Venice.  |  With  the  extreme  cruelty 
of  Shylocke  |  the  lew  towards  the  faide  Merchant,  in  cut-  |  ing  a  iujl  pound  of  his 
flefh.  And  the  obtaining  |  of  Portia,  by  the  choyfe  of  |  three  Caskets.  |  Written  by 
W.  Shakespeare.  |  (Vignette)  |  Printed  by  J.  Roberts,  1600.  | 

This  has  been  in  recent  times,  by  common  consent,  called  The  First  Quarto. 

If  we  turn  again  to  the  Stationers’  Registers,  we  find  (vol.  iii,  p.  175,  ed.  Arber)  the 
following  entry : 

28  nctobm  [1600,  42  Regine] 

Thomas  haies  Entred  for  his  copie  under  the  handes  of  the  Wardens  and  by  Con¬ 
sent  of  master  Robertes.  A  booke  called  the  booke  of  the  merchant 
of  Venyce . vjd 

An  additional  reason  for  the  supposition  that  Robertes  had  at  last  obtained  due 
authority  from  the  Lord  Chamberlain,  is  that  the  ‘  Consent  of  master  Robertes  ’  is 
deemed  requisite  for  the  validity  of  this  entry.  Without  that  authority  Robertes’s  prop¬ 
erty  in  the  book,  based  merely  on  his  previous  entry,  would  have  been  void,  and  the 
Wardens  would  have  disregarded  his  claim  in  favour  of  Heyes,  who  evidently  pro¬ 
duced  the  permission  of  the  Lord  Chamberlain,  since  no  allusion  is  made  to  the  need 
of  it.  Heyes  was  a  young  *  master  Stacioner,’  and  as  this  was  only  the  second  booh 
he  had  ever  entered,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  he  would  select  not  only  a  populai 
book,  but  one  in  which  his  title  would  be  secure  as  far  as  registering  could  make  it 

The  book  shortly  appeared  with  the  following  title-page :  The  moil  excellent  | 
Hiflorie  of  the  Merchant  |  of  Venice.  |  With  the  extreame  crueltie  of  Shylocke  the 
lewe  |  towards  the  fayd  Merchant,  in  cutting  a  iufl  pound  |  of  his  flefh :  and  the 
obtayning  of  Portia  [  by  the  choyfe  of  three  |  chefls.  |  As  it  hath  beene  ditiers  limes 
atfled  by  the  Lord  |  Chamberlaine  his  Seruants.  |  Written  by  William  Shakefpeare. 
(Vignette)  |  At  London,  |  Printed  by  I.  R.  for  Thomas  Heyes,  |  and  are  to  be  fold 
in  Paules  Church-yard,  at  the  |  figne  of  the  Greene  Dragon.  ]  1600.  | 

This  is  The  Second  Quarto.  , 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  reference  is  made  to  the  company  of  actors ;  and  also  that  it  is 
printed  by  I.  R.,  who  has  been  generally  assumed  to  be  James  Robertes,  but  Halliwell 
thinks  that  this  ‘  supposition  has  been  adopted  without  close  examination,’  and  adds 
that  ‘  some  of  the  probabilities  are  in  favour  of  another  attribution  of  those  initials,  the 
‘  types  used  in  the  two  Editions  belonging,  at  all  events  in  part,  to  different  fonts ;  and 


THE  TEXT 


273 


•  one  positive  coincidence  only  being  to  be  traced  in  the  materials  employed,  viz.  a 
‘  device,  that  might  possibly  have  been  obtained  independently  of  the  type.’ 

The  difficulty  that  meets  us,  in  supposing  that  *  I.  R.’  may  stand  for  some  other  name 
than  James  Robertes,  is  that  there  was  no  other  printer  in  London  at  that  time,  as  far 
as  I  can  find  from  Arber’s  lists,  whose  name  these  initials  would  represent.  James 
Robertes  was  the  only  ‘  I.  R.’  then,  and  for  some  years  afterwards.  Moreover,  as  we 
learn  from  other  entries  in  the  Registers,  it  was  not  unusual  for  a  printer  who  assigned 
his  claim,  to  stipulate  that  he  should  have  the  printing  of  the  book. 

Furthermore,  the  difference  between  the  fonts  of  type  is  by  no  means  conclusive  that 
both  books  were  not  printed  by  the  same  Master  Printer.  As  Arber  shows  (vol.  ii,  p. 
22),  it  was  customary  for  Master  Printers  to  give  out  work  to  Journeymen  Compositors, 
who,  being  for  the  most  part  householders,  set  up  the  copy  at  their  own  homes.  Cer¬ 
tainly  we  may  assume  that  this  would  be  done  in  cases  where  there  was  need  of  haste ; 
and  I  think  it  most  likely  that  that  need  existed  here.  Haste  assuredly  goes  far  to 
explain  the  carelessness  with  which  this  Heyes  Quarto  was  set  up  and  printed.  Frag 
mentary  lines,  which  are  utterly  incomprehensible,  such  as  ‘  the  Ewe  bleake  for  the 
Lambe,’  would  not  have  been  allowed  to  stand  by  any  proof-reader  or  pressman  unless 
haste  could  have  been  pleaded  in  excuse. 

No  second  impression  of  this  Quarto  did  Thomas  Heyes  issue,  and  on  the  8th  of 
July,  1619,  his  son,  Laurence  Hayes,  entered  it  again  on  the  Register,  in  order  to 
revive  the  claim  in  a  book  which  had  been  his  father’s.  Laurence  Hayes  did  not,  how¬ 
ever,  print  it  for  many  years,  not  until  1637.  This  is  The  Third  Quarto,  and  has 
no  intrinsic  value.  It  is  merely  a  careless  reprint  of  a  careless  book,  to  which  we  are 
indebted  for,  I  think,  only  one  real  emendation,  and  that  is  merely  a  change  in  spelling 
on  the  part  of  the  compositor;  it  is  ‘  In  measure  reine  thy  joy,’  III,  ii,  1 18,  which  Sin¬ 
ger,  Collier,  and  the  Cambridge  Editors  prefer  to  ‘  raine  ’  of  the  Second  Quarto.  The 
only  other  contribution  which  this  Third  Quarto  makes  is  in  the  list  of  ‘  The  Actors’ 
Names,’  which  here  appeared  for  the  first  time. 

In  1652  this  play  was  issued  for  a  FOURTH  time  as  a  Quarto,  but  the  late  Mr  Bolton 
Corney  ( Notes  and  Queries,  2d  Series,  vol.  x,  p.  21)  asserted,  from  an  examination  of 
his  own  copy,  that  this  is  merely  the  Third  Quarto  with  a  new  title-page  inserted. 

It  was  reserved  to  Professor  PIales  to  detect  the  one  gleam  of  interest  which  ema¬ 
nates  from  this  Fourth  Quarto.  In  a  communication  to  The  Athenceion,  15  December, 
1877,  and  reprinted  in  his  Notes  and  Essays ,  p.  215  (a  book  which  should  be  in  the 
hands  of  every  Shakespeare  student),  Prof.  Hales  calls  attention  to  the  date  of  this 
Qto,  1652.  ‘It  may  have  been,’  he  says,  ‘a  mere  coincidence, — it  is  undoubtedly  a 
‘  fact  worth  remarking, — that  just  at  the  time  of  this  re-issue  the  Jews  were  beginning 
‘  to  ask  for  re-admission  into  England,  and  the  consideration  of  their  request  to  be  seri  • 
‘  ously  entertained.  It  was  not  till  October,  1655,  that  Manasseh  Ben  Israel  came  over 
‘  in  person ;  not  till  the  following  December  that  the  celebrated  discussion  at  Whitehall 
‘  took  place;  but  for  some  years  previously,  that  earnest  and  able  patriot  had  been  urging 
‘  the  claims  of  his  people  upon  English  consideration.  He  had  petitioned  “  Barebone’s 
‘  Parliament,”  and  still  earlier  the  Long  Parliament . And  the  cause  he  advocated 

*  was  not  without  friends  moved  by  motives  far  different  from  his.  During  the  Dutch 

‘war,  which  began  in  May,  1652,  both  Blake  and  Monk  recommended  the  re-admis- 
‘  sion  of  the  Jews  “  as  a  means  of  damaging  the  commerce  of  Holland,  and  Cromwell 
‘  appeared  favourable  to  it.”  Thus,  just  about  the  time  of  the  republication  of  the 
‘  famous  portrait  of  Shylock,  the  question  of  the  return  of  his  race  was  “  in  the  air,” — 
‘  was  a  kindling  question  if  not  a  burning  one . The  idea  of  a  Jewish  immigration 

18 


274 


APPENDIX 


‘  was  bitterly  resented.  The  clergy,  the  lawyers,  the  populace  were  all  at  one  on  the 

‘  subject . The  old  clamour  against  the  Jewerie  was  revived,  especially  in  the  city, 

‘  where  the  merchants  were  jealous  of  the  wealth  of  the  Hebrews . Amongst  the 

‘  State  Papers  of  the  Restoration  is  a  “  remonstrance  addressed  to  the  King  concerning 
‘  “  the  English  Jews,  showing  the  mischiefs  accomplished  by  them  ....  notwithstanding 

*  “  their  ....  banishment  by  Edward  the  First  at  the  desire  of  the  whole  Kingdom;  yet 
‘  “  they  have  since  returned,  renewed  their  usurious  and  fraudulent  practices,  and  flourish 
‘  “  so  much,  that  they  endeavored  to  buy  St  Paul’s  for  a  synagogue  in  the  late  usurper’s 
‘‘‘time.’'  ....  It  must  be  allowed  that  the  re-exhibition  of  Shylock  in  1652  could 
‘  scarcely  have  tended  to  soften  this  general  disposition.  Whether  William  Leake  had 
‘  any  sinister  intentions  when  he  had  that  Qto  reprinted  there  would  seem  no  means 

‘  of  knowing . There  may  or  may  not  have  been  animus  in  the  man ;  but  he  cer- 

‘  tainly  did  the  Jews  no  good  turn  when  at  such  a  time  he  reissued  the  Merchant  of 
‘  Venice.  For  by  “  the  general  ”  little  heed  is  paid  to  the  profound  skill  and  the  Catho 
‘  lie  humanity  with  which  the  Jew  is  treated  in  that  play ;  ....  it  would  see  in  Shylock 

*  only  an  atrocious  monster,  infamous  for  its  greed,  execrable  for  its  spite.  And  such  a 
‘  figure,  seen  at  such  a  time,  could  scarcely  have  promoted  the  cause  of  the  outcasts  of 

*  Israel.’ 

This  ends  the  series  of  Quartos,  which,  although  four  in  number,  furnish,  in  reality, 
but  two  separate  texts,  the  First,  Robertes’s,  and  the  Second,  Heyes’s. 

For  a  third  text  we  turn  to  The  Folio  of  1623,  and,  if  we  hope  for  novelty,  are  dis¬ 
appointed.  The  text  there  given  is  not  an  independent  one,  but  is  a  reprint  of  Heyes’s 
Quarto,  and  the  inferior  Quarto  at  that. 

In  their  address  ‘  To  the  great  Variety  of  Readers,’  Heminge  and  Condell  lead  us 
to  expect  that  in  the  First  Folio  we  shall  find  Shakespeare’s  own  text,  direct  from  his 
manuscript,  which  had  *  scarse  a  blot ;’  and  yet,  here  in  this  play,  we  know  (as  any 
one  can  prove  for  himself  by  the  Textual  Notes  of  this  Edition)  that  they  have  repro¬ 
duced  the  printed  page  of  the  Second  Quarto. 

The  explanation  is  not  difficult  if  we  do  not  hold  Heminge  and  Condell  to  the  very 
strictest  account,  but  grant  them  a  certain  latitude  of  expression.  A  printed  copy  of  a 
play,  which  had  been  used  at  the  theatre  for  twenty  years,  and  had  changes  of  the  text 
here  and  there,  and  Stage-directions  added,  might  perhaps  pass,  in  the  opinion  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  fellow-actors,  as  quite  adequately  making  good  their  assertion.  Moreover,  it 
may  well  have  been  then  the  custom,  as  it  is  now,  for  compositors  to  charge  less  for 
setting  up  from  printed  copy  than  from  MS.  Why  they  selected  the  poorer  Quarto  we 
cannot  possibly  know  for  certain, — we  can  surmise  that  it  was  because  Thomas  Heyes 
announced  on  his  title-page  that  he  had  followed  the  acting  of  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s 
Servants. 

The  number  of  places  where  the  Folio,  in  varying  from  the  Second  Quarto,  shows 
any  genuine  revision  of  the  text,  is  not  large.  The  most  noticeable  is  where  *  the 
Scottish  lord  ’  of  Queen  Elizabeth’s  time  is  changed  ‘  to  other  lord  ’  of  King  James’s 
(see  notes  on  I,  ii,  73);  and  where,  out  of  deference  to  3  Jac.  I,  c.  21,  the  name  of 
‘God’  is  stricken  out  and  the  phrase  varied,  as  in  I,  ii,  106,  and  V,  i,  176.  Where, 
in  the  Quartos,  Shylock  tells  Gratiano  (IV,  i,  150)  to  repair  his  wit  or  it  will  fall  to 
‘  cureless  ruin,’  the  change  of  the  Folio  to  *  endless  ruin  ’  is,  perhaps,  for  the  better,  but 
is  scarcely  likely  to  have  been  authorized  by  Shakespeare.  The  most  noticeable  dis¬ 
tinction,  however,  between  the  Quartos  and  the  Folio,  and  which  stamps  the  latter  as  a 
Playhouse-copy,  is  in  the  Stage-directions  throughout  the  play  in  reference  to  Music. 
In  the  Folio  a  flourish  of  Cornets  announces  the  arrival,  each  time  that  he  appears,  and 


THE  TEXT 


275 


the  departure,  of  the  Prince  of  Morocco,  and  a  flourish  of  Cornets  heralds  the  Prince 
of  Arragon.  At  all  these  entrances  and  exits  the  Quartos  are  silent.  Whilst  Bassanio 
comments  on  the  Caskets,  both  Quartos  and  Folios  have  the  same  Stage-direction,  but 
the  Folio  adds,  in  the  imperative  mood  of  a  genuine  Stage-copy,  ‘  Here  musicke.’  Al¬ 
though  these  facts  show,  I  think,  conclusively  that  the  First  Folio  is  printed  from  a 
Stage-copy,  they  do  not  give  any  clew  in  discovering  why  its  Editors  preferred  the  Sec¬ 
ond  Quarto  as  a  text  to  print  from.  But  the  Stage-directions  will,  I  think,  again  help 
us  here.  In  the  Fifth  Act,  where  Diana  has  to  be  waked  with  a  hymn,  the  Stage- 
direction  in  the  First  Quarto  is  ‘  Musicke  playes in  the  Second  Quarto  and  First 
Folio  it  is  *  Play  musick,’  unquestionably  the  direction  of  a  Stage-copy.  Again,  when 
Bassanio,  after  the  choice  of  the  Caskets,  receives  Anthonio’s  letter  from  Salerio,  the 
Stage-direction  (III,  ii,  249)  in  the  First  Quarto  is,  ‘  He  opens  the  Letter,’  which  is 
not  the  command  or  direction  of  a  Stage-copy;  nor  is  ‘Opens  the  Letter’  of  the  Folio; 
but  in  the  Second  Quarto  it  is  a  command  to  the  actor — ‘  Open  the  letter.’ 

Thus,  then,  in  none  of  these  instances  do  the  Stage-directions  indicate  that  the  First 
Quarto  was  a  Stage-copy;  whereas,  in  two  of  them,  they  show  that  the  Second  Quarto 
was  a  Stage-copy,  and  hence,  enable  us  to  surmise,  with  some  faint  probability,  the 
reason  why  Heyes’s,  and  not  Robertes’s,  Quarto,  superior  though  the  latter  be  in  punc¬ 
tuation,  in  spelling,  and  in  intelligent  supervision,  was  selected  by  Heminge  and  Con- 
dell  to  be  used  in  printing  the  Folio.  Not  that  there  are  no  indications  in  Robertes’s 
Quarto  that  it  was  transcribed  from  a  Stage-copy ;  but  the  indications  we  find  in  it  are 
common  to  it  and  to  Heyes’s  Quarto.  Both  Quartos  and  the  Folio,  in  the  insertion  of 
Exit ,  anticipate  by  a  line  or  two  the  actual  Exit  of  the  actor,  as  in  II,  ii,  166;  but  it 
is  in  the  Stage-directions  over  and  above  these,  that  we  can,  I  think,  detect  a  longei 
use  as  a  Stage-copy  of  the  original  of  Heyes’s  Quarto. 

I  have  spoken  of  the  First  Quarto,  Robertes’s,  as  better  than  the  Second  Quarto, 
Heyes’s.  The  reasons  therefor  are  to  be  found  in  the  notes  on  the  various  passages  as 
they  occur  in  the  text ;  they  can  be  weighed  to  much  better  advantage  there  than  if 
tabulated  here.  It  is  by  no  means  to  be  supposed  that  Robertes’s  is  uniformly  better 
than  Heyes’s ;  there  are  many  instances  where  it  is  inferior,  much  inferior,  but  these 
instances  are  counterbalanced,  I  think,  by  the  number  and  character  of  the  passages 
where  it  is  superior.  Roughly  speaking,  there  are  a  dozen  instances  of  inferiority  to 
more  than  double  that  number  of  superiority ;  always  thought,  that  I  do  not  refer  to 
mere  typographical  errors,  though  even  on  that  score  the  First  Quarto  is  far  better  com¬ 
posed  than  the  Second  Quarto. 

In  thus  rating  the  First  Quarto  above  the  Second  Quarto,  I  am  countenanced  by 
Collier,  Delius,  and  the  Cambridge  Editors.  The  first  says :  ‘  The  Edition  of 
‘  Robertes’s  is,  on  the  whole,  to  be  preferred  to  that  of  Heyes’s ;’  the  last :  ‘  Qz  seems 
‘  to  have  been  printed  by  a  more  accurate  printer,  or  “  overseen  ”  by  a  more  accurate 
*  corrector  than  Q2,  and  therefore,  cceteris  paribus,  we  have  preferred  the  authority  of 
Qj.’  Grant  White  believes  that  Robertes’s  Quarto  was  a  ‘stolne  and  surreptitious* 
copy,  and,  therefore,  on  moral  grounds,  prefers  Heyes’s  Quarto,  which  received  the 
sanction  of  the  Folio  Editors.  On  the  other  hand,  Fleay  and  Furnivall  prefer  the 
Second  Quarto. 

In  the  following  list  are  the  lines  which  I  have  noted  during  my  collation  as  giving 
indications  more  or  less  pronounced  of  the  superiority  of  Qt,  Robertes,  over  Q2,  Heyes. 
To  many  of  them  I  have  called  attention  in  the  Commentary ;  for  the  rest  reference 
’must  be  had  to  the  Textual  Notes.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  to  another  student,  in  many 
of  these  instances,  the  superiority  of  one  reading  over  another  may  seem  not  merely 


276 


APPENDIX 


fanciful,  but  even  wholly  wanting,  and  second  thoughts  might  show  the  same  to  me ; 
but,  nevertheless,  I  add  the  list  for  the  benefit  of  any  one  who  has  time  to  waste  after 
all  the  duties  of  life  in  ‘  teaching  the  orphan  boy  to  read,  and  the  orphan  girl  to  sew  ’ 
have  been  fulfilled. 

Lines  containing  words  or  punctuation,  wherein  Qz  is  better  than  Qa  : 

I,  ii,  31,  32;  I,  iii,  65,  66;  II,  i,  32,  ‘out-stare’;  II,  i,  35,  he  vs  a;  II,  i,  49,  to  vs 

unto;  II,  ii,  19;  II,  ii,  130,  is - ;  II,  ii,  160;  II,  ii,  172;  III,  i,  25  as  verse; 

III,  i,  102,  in  one  night;  III,  ii,  65  (doubtful) ;  III,  ii,  107,  ‘then’  of  Q2  superfluous; 

III,  ii,  211,  roof;  III,  iv,  23,  misery  vs  cruelty;  III,  iv,  66,  apparreld  vs  accoutered; 

III,  v,  66,  far’st  vs  cher’st ;  III,  v,  73,  ‘  then  ’  for  ‘  it  ’ ;  IV,  i,  79 ;  IV,  i,  362 ;  V,  i,  5 1. 

Lutes  containing  words  or  ptmduation,  wherein  Q,  is  inferior  to  Q3: 

I,  ii,  41 ;  II,  i,  8;  II,  vi,  75  (very  bad) ;  II,  ix,  65 ;  III,  i,  38,  39;  III,  i,  121 ;  III,  ii, 

64,  65;  III,  ii,  88;  III,  ii,  118,  range  vs  raine;  IV,  i,  454. 

In  both  lists  some  errors  are  noted  which  are  purely  typographical,  and  the  lists  make 
no  sort  of  pretence  to  completeness. 

To  sum  up — we  have,  theoretically,  three  texts,  the  two'  Quartos  and  the  Folio ;  but 
the  Folio  followed  Q2 ;  this  leaves  but  two  texts.  The  Quartos,  though  they  were  not 
set  up  from  the  same  copy,  are  yet  almost  identical ;  it  was  only  through  a  compositor’s 
fault  that  a  line  was  omitted  in  the  First  Quarto.  Therefore,  practically,  there  is  but 
one  text.  How  near  this  text  came  to  Shakespeare’s  hand  it  is  impossible  to  say.  It 
is  highly  improbable  that  Robertes  printed  either  his  own  or  Heyes’s  Quarto  direct 
from  Shakespeare’s  manuscript;  at  best  it  could  have  been  but  a  transcript  from  a 
Stage-copy,  and  had  he  used  the  same  transcript  for  Heyes  that  he  used  for  himself, 
there  would  have  been  a  much  closer  resemblance  than  is  observable,  even  making  all 
allowances  for  careless  journeyman-printing  and  for  haste.  I  think  it  therefore  likely 
that  there  were  two  transcripts,  and  that  the  transcriber  of  the  copy  for  the  Second 
Quarto  was  not  only  a  more  illiterate  man,  but  also  one  with  certain  peculiarities  of 
pronunciation  or  spelling,  such  as  the  persistent  use  of  au  for  a,  as  in  graunt,  aun- 
swere,  glauncing,  &c.,  and  in  the  antiquated  ie  for  y.  This  peculiarity  was  undoubt¬ 
edly  in  the  copy,  and  was  not  due  to  the  compositor,  who  would  not  be  likely  to  set  up 
two  types  where  one  alone  was  called  for. 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


2  77 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 

Since  it  is  impossible  to  know,  with  unquestionable  certainty,  the  year  in  which  this 
play  was  written,  it  is  pleasing  to  reflect  that  no  single  line  of  it  depends  on  this  know¬ 
ledge  for  its  wisdom  or  its  wit.  Nevertheless,  great  stress  is  laid  on  the  importance  of 
the  investigation,  and  much  learning  and  time  has  been  expended  in  its  pursuit.  It  is 
not  easy,  I  think,  to  take  interest  in  knowledge  thus  barren,  for,  granting  that  our  calcu 
lations  could  be  made  with  such  nicety  as  that  we  could  discover  even  the  month  and 
the  day, — what  would  it  avail  us?  Would  it  add  a  charm  to  Portia’s  ‘quality  of  mercy,’ 
if  we  knew  that  it  was  written  in  1594, — in  August, — on  the  fifth  day, — on  Wednesday, 
— in  the  afternoon — at  twenty  minutes  past  three  o’clock  ?  Would  it  not  be  quite  as 
profitable  to  speculate  on  the  quality  of  the  paper  on  which  it  was  written  ?  Is  it  any 
tribute  to  Shakespeare’s  genius  that  we  should  busy  ourselves  over  what  is  not  even 
the  setting  of  the  gem,  but  no  more  than  the  jeweller’s  case  in  which  it  is  sent  home  ? 
It  is  not  by  such  facts  as  these  that  we  may  hope  to  find  out  the  man,  Shakespeare. 
If  he  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  plays  themselves,  he  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  dates 
when  he  wrote  them.  And  he  is  not  in  the  Plays  themselves, — if  he  were,  the  plays 
would  fall  to  the  level  of  Ben  Jonson’s  or  of  Francis  Beaumont’s.  It  is  because  Shake 
speare  is  not  there  that  his  plays  are  heaven-high  above  the  plays  of  all  other  dramatists. 
Shylock  is  Shylock ;  he  is  not  Shakespeare  behind  a  mask,  dressed  up  as  Shylock.  Could 
we  at  any  instant  catch  a  glimpse  of  Shakespeare  himself  peeping  through  the  divinity 
that  hedges  his  creations,  that  instant  there  will  be  revealed  a  flaw  in  that  creation. 
Are  there  any  such  flaws  ?  From  the  highest  to  the  lowest  his  characters  are  absolutely 
true  to  themselves,  from  fairest  Portia,  handing  the  leaden  key  to  Bassanio,  to  the 
Carrier,  better  bitten  with  fleas  than  ne’er  a  king  in  Christendom;  nowhere  can  we 
detect  William  Shakespeare.  His  genius,  his  intellect,  is  everywhere,  in  all,  and  through 
all,  from  the  first  line  to  the  last ;  but  he,  the  man,  the  individuality,  is  nowhere.  He 
went  out  of  himself  and  into  his  characters,  leaving  age,  and  sex,  and  idiosyncrasies 
behind.  Therefore  in  prefixing  this  or  that  date  to  any  of  these  Plays,  what  else  is  it 
but  re-arranging  that  Chronological  Table,  which,  by  courtesy,  we  now  call  a  Life  of 
Shakespeare,  and  which  he  who  knows  more  about  it  than  all  the  rest  of  us  styles, 
as  modestly  as  truthfully,  merely  ‘  Outlines  ’  ?  Of  the  real  Life  we  know  absolutely 
nothing,  and  I,  for  one,  am  genuinely  thankful  that  it  is  so,  and  gladly  note,  as 
the  years  roll  on,  that  the  obscurity  which  envelops  it  is  as  utter  and  as  impenetrable 
as  ever. 

At  the  same  time,  this  subject  of  the  Date  of  Composition  has  occupied,  and  profit 
ably  occupied,  the  time  and  attention  of  eminent  Shakespeare  scholars.  It  therefore 
behooves  the  Editor  of  an  edition  like  the  present  faithfully  and  impartially  to  deal 
with  the  subject,  unmindful  of  the  lack  of  interest  in  it  which  he  himself  may  feel. 

Of  positive  external  proof  of  the  Date  of  Composition  we  have  as  the  earliest  date 
one  solitary  fact. 

In  the  year  1598,  when  Shakespeare  was  thirty-four  years  old,  Francis  Meres, 
*  Mailer  of  Arts  of  both  Vniuerfities,’  published  his  Palladis  Tamia.  Wits  Treasury , 
Being  the  Second  Part  of  Wits  Common  wealth ,  and,  in  a  chapter  which  he  calls  ‘A  com- 
paratiue  difcourfe  of  our  Englilh  Poets,  with  the  Greeke,  Latine,  and  Italian  Poets,’  six 
times  mentions  Shakespeare  in  company  with  other  poets,  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  and  Mar¬ 
low,  and  Spenser,  and  others  by  whom  ‘the  Englilh  tongue  is  mightily  enriched,  and 
‘  gorgeouslie  inuelted  in  rare  ornaments  and  refplendent  habiliments and  then  men 


278 


APPENDIX 


tions  him  thus  particularly  in  a  passage  which  has  become  threadbare  and  outworn  in 
the  memory  of  every  student  of  Shakespeare,  and  which  only  necessity’s  sharp  pinch 
compels  me  to  repeat  here  :  *  As  the  foule  of  Euphorbus  was  thought  to  liue  in  Pythag- 

*  oras  :  fo  the  fweete  wittie  foule  of  Ouid  hues  in  mellifluous  and  hony-tongued  Shake - 
‘ fpear e,  witneffe  his  Venus  and  Adonis,  his  Lucrece,  his  fugred  Sonnets  among  his  pri- 
‘  uate  friends,  &c. 

‘  As  Plautus  and  Seneca  are  accounted  the  beft  for  Comedy  and  Tragedy  among 
‘  the  Latines  :  fo  Shakefpeare  among  the  English  is  the  moft  excellent  in  both  lands  for 
the  ftage ;  for  Comedy,  witneffe  his  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  his  Errors,  his  Loue  labors 
loft,  his  Loue  labours  wonne,  his  Midfummers  night  dreame,  and  his  Merchant  of 

*  Venice  :  for  Tragedy,  his  Richard  the  fecond,  Richard  the  third,  Henry  the  fourth, 

*  King  John,  Titus  Andronicus,  and  his  Romeo  and  Iuliet. 

‘  As  Epius  Stolo  faid,  that  the  Mufes  would  fpeake  with  Plauttis  tongue,  if  they 

*  would  fpeake  Latine :  fo  I  fay  that  the  Mufes  would  fpeake  with  Shakefpeares  fine 
‘  filed  phrase,  if  they  would  fpeake  Englifh.’ 

To  no  other  English  poet  does  Meres  give  such  high  praise,  and  of  no  other  drama¬ 
tist  does  he  enumerate  so  many  plays. 

This  is,  chronologically,  the  first  instance  where  Shakespeare’s  name  is  connected 
with  The  Merchant  of  Venice.  It  is  not  the  first  allusion  to  the  play  itself.  That 
allusion,  as  we  have  seen,  is  found  in  Robertes’s  entry  in  the  Stationers'  Registers,  on 
the  22d  of  July  of  this  year.  Meres’s  Wit's  Treasury  was  not  there  entered  by  Cuth- 
bert  Burbie  until  the  7th  of  September,  and  the  actual  appearance  of  the  book  from  the 
press  may  have  been  much  later.  The  date  on  any  title-page  may  mean,  according  to 
Arber,  any  time  between  the  25th  of  March  of  one  year,  and  the  24th  of  March  of  the 
next.  At  any  rate,  ‘  Master  ’  Francis  Meres  must  have  first  composed  and  written  his 
enthusiastic  praise  before  the  book  was  printed,  and  he  probably  did  so  early  in  1598, 
long  before  Robertes  tried  to  print  his  unauthorized  copy. 

Meres’s  allusion  in  1598  may,  therefore,  stand  as  our  earliest,  positive,  External  Proof, 
bearing  on  the  Date  of  Composition.  It  was  Bishop  Percy  ( Reliques ,  &c.,  i,  191 )  who, 
in  1765,  first,  I  think,  called  attention  to  it. 

Just  as  Malone  was  finishing  his  Edition  of  Shakespeare  in  1790,  an  old  folio  account- 
book  of  Philip  Henslowe  was  found  at  Dulwich  College.  The  founder  of  Dulwich  Col¬ 
lege  was  an  actor,  Edward  Alleyn,  a  name  to  be  held  in  reverence  for  all  time ;  not  only 
did  he  found  this  College,  which  he  called  *  The  College  of  God’s  Gift,’  but  he  endowed 
besides  thirty  small  almshouses  in  different  London  parishes.  Alleyn  had  married  the 
step-daughter  of  Philip  Henslowe,  and  was  a  partner  with  his  step-father-in-law  in  the¬ 
atrical  management  during  the  latter’s  life,  and  at  his  death  Alleyn  succeeded  to  most 
of  his  property.  Thus  it  happened  that  Henslowe’s  papers  were  found  with  Alleyn’s 
at  Dulwich  College.  Henslowe  was  evidently  a  shrewd,  active  man  of  business,  and 
although  bred  to  the  trade,  it  is  presumed,  of  a  dyer,  yet  was,  at  one  time,  the  servant  of 
a  well-to-do  widow,  and  was  doubtless  of  unusual  personal  attractions  and  good  quali¬ 
ties,  for  the  servant  married  the  mistress.  In  what  way  Henslowe  became  concerned  in 
theatrical  matters  is  not  known ;  he  appears  to  have  had,  in  addition,  several  other  busi¬ 
ness  ventures,  such  as  Iron  Mines  and  Pawnbroking,  and  in  1592  he  was  the  proprietor 
of  the  Rose  Theatre.  In  this  account-book,  which  Malone  found,  Henslowe  has  set 
down  the  various  sums  which  he  received  from  the  performances  of  plays.  Now, 
although  at  no  time,  I  believe,  did  Henslowe  have  the  management  of  the  company 
of  actors  to  which  Shakespeare  belonged,  which  was,  from  first  to  last,  one  and  the 
same  company,  and  at  the  time  of  Robertes’s  entry  was  called  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


279 


Company,  yet,  for  some  reason  or  other,  possibly,  as  Collier  suggests,  while  the  Globe 
Theatre  was  building,  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s  men  did,  for  two  years,  from  June,  1594, 
to  July,  1596,  unite,  or  at  least  occupy  the  same  theatre  at  Newington  Butts,  with  the 
Lord  Admiral’s  men,  Henslowe’s  Company. 

Here,  then,  are  the  daily  receipts  of  a  man  who  had  a  pecuniary  interest  in  every 
play  which  Shakespeare  either  wrote  or  acted  in  during  two  long  years.  At  last,  if  we 
are  young  and  ardent  in  Shakespeare-study,  we  may  hope  for  some  clear,  well-defiped 
fact  concerning  Shakespeare,  but,  if  we  are  old  and  gray,  we  shall  know  beforehand 
that  the  impenetrable  veil  will  descend;  names  of  actors  and  of  poets,  even  their 
handwriting,  we  have  in  abundance,  but  ‘  the  greatest  name  in  all  literature  ’  ‘  glares 
by  its  absence and,  as  though  the  more  to  tantalize  us,  in  place  of  substance,  which 
a  few  careless  strokes  of  Henslowe’s  pen  would  have  afforded,  we  have  vague  shad¬ 
ows,  misty  intimations  which  we  must  set  our  wits  abroach  to  define.  To  add  to  our 
difficulties,  Henslowe  was,  even  for  those  times,  a  very  illiterate  man ;  his  writing  was 
crabbed  and  illegible,  his  spelling  was  phonetic  (therein  anticipating  some  later  com¬ 
mentators),  and  his  ear  was  not  always  of  the  nicest;  thus,  on  ‘the  6  of  febery,’  he 
records  his  receipts  ‘at  tittus  and  ondronicus.’ 

Malone  extracted  from  this  account-book  of  Henslowe  such  items  as  he  thought 
worthy  of  preservation,  and  printed  them  in  Vol.  I,  Part  ii,  p.  288,  ed.  1790,  and  they 
are  repeated  in  the  Variorum  Editions  down  to  and  including  1821.  They  are,  how¬ 
ever,  inaccurately  reproduced,  which  may  be,  perhaps,  attributed,  as  Collier  suggests,  to 
Malone’s  failing  eyesight.  When  a  new  play  was  performed,  Henslowe  was  wont  to 
record  the  fact  by  inserting  ne ,  the  first  two  letters  of  the  word  new ,  somewhere  in  con¬ 
nection  with  the  item ;  this  ne  Malone  either  overlooked  or  disregarded,  and  thereby 
impaired  the  value  of  his  list ;  and  instead  of  repeating  the  title  of  the  play  as  often  as 
it  occurred,  he  simply  appended  to  its  first  entry  the  number  of  times  which  it  was  sub¬ 
sequently  to  be  found,  and  his  counting  was  not  always  correct,  or  else  mine  is  not. 

However,  the  entire  book  was  deciphered,  and  reprinted  by  ‘  The  Shakespeare  Soci¬ 
ety’  in  1845,  under  the  supervision  of  Collier. 

With  its  value  in  regard  to  other  plays  of  Shakespeare  we  are  not  here  concerned.  It 
is  enough  to  note  that  during  the  two  years  above  mentioned  the  titles  occur  of  plays 
which  are  either  the  same  as  those  of  Shakespeare  or  very  similar  to  his.  All  that  is 
of  present  moment  to  us  is,  that  in  the  Shakespeare’s  Society’s  Reprint,  on  p.  35,  Hens¬ 
lowe  begins  a  new  leaf  in  his  Ledger  as  follows : 

‘/«  the  name  of  God  Amen,  beginninge  at  Newington,  my  Lord  Admeralle  and  my 
Lorde  chamberlen  men ,  as  foloweth.  1594.’ 

The  first  entry  is  ‘  3  of  June,’  and  records  his  receipts  ‘  at  Heaster  and  asheweros,’  and 
so  on,  daily,  until  on  p.  40  we  find  the  following : 

25  of  aguste  1594  ne  Rd  at  the  Venesyon  comodey . Is  vjd 

‘This,’  says  Malone,  ‘is  probably  The  Merchant  of  Venice .’ 

Upon  our  acceptance  or  rejection  of  this  supposition  of  Malone  depends,  as  far  as 
External  Proof  is  concerned,  the  movable  date  of  this  play.  If  we  accept  it,  we  can 
push  back  the  date  four  years  earlier  than  the  1598  of  Meres  and  Robertes. 

In  his  note  ad  loc.  in  the  Reprint,  Collier  is  inclined  to  reject  this  supposition:  ‘  Had 
>  it  been,’  he  says,  *  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  Henslowe  would  probably  have  called  it 
by  that  name;  we  have  already  had  The  Merchant  of  Emden' 


28o 


APPENDIX 


In  view  of  Henslowe’s  lawless  spelling  and  pronunciation,  it  is  almost  rash  to  sa^ 
what  change  a  title  might  not  receive  in  his  accounts ;  but  it  seems  to  me  noteworthy 
(and,  as  far  as  I  know,  it  has  not  been  noticed)  that  in  the  use  of  this  title :  ‘  The 
Venesyon  comodey,’  Henslowe,  barring  an  occasional  vagary  in  spelling,  is  uniformly 
faithful.  It  was  acted  eight  times  before  the  close  of  the  year  and  three  times  in  the 
early  part  of  the  next,  and  it  is  always  recorded  under  the  same  title.  It  is  not  impos¬ 
sible  that  Henslowe  wished  to  avoid  any  confusion  with  that  popular  play,  The  Jew  of 
Malta,  or  with  The  Merchant  of  Emden ;  but  then,  on  the  other  hand,  he  was  liable 
to  confound  ‘The  Venesyon  comodey’  with  what  he  was  pleased  to  write  ‘The  greas 
yon  comodey,’  or  ‘  The  frenshe  comodey,’  so  that  the  uniformity  of  the  title  supports 
the  belief  that  it  was  the  genuine  name  of  one  of  the  many  plays  which  have  been  lost, 
and  in  which  there  was  no  character  of  so  pronounced  a  type  as  Shylock.  At  the  same 
time  i't  is  to  be  remembered  that  during  these  two  years,  in  Henslowe’s  diary,  occur  the 
names  of  several  plays  which  at  that  date  are  supposed  to  be,  in  part  at  least,  Shake¬ 
speare’s, — for  instance,  Titus  Andronicus,  Hamlet,  Taming  of  a  Shrew,  and  Henry  V. 

Of  Internal  Proofs  over  and  above  those  of  style,  and  of  maturity,  there  are  very 
few. 

Malone  believed  that  he  had  discovered  in  the  play  an  allusion  to  a  contemporary 
event  which  was  sufficiently  pronounced,  when  coupled  with  other  facts,  to  enable 
him  to  determine  the  Date  of  Composition.  On  the  passage  in  III,  ii,  where  Portia 
exclaims : — ‘  He  may  win,  And  what  is  music  then  ?  then  music  is  Even  as  the  flourish 
when  true  subjects  bow  To  a  new  crowned  monarch,’  Malone  has  the  following : — 
‘  Shakespeare  is  fond  of  alluding  to  events  of  the  time  he  wrote,  and  the  coronation  of 
‘  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France,  who  was  crowned  at  Chartres  in  the  midst  of  his  true 
‘subjects  in  1594,  (Rheims,  where  that  ceremony  ought  to  have  taken  place,  being 
‘  possessed  by  the  rebels,)  seems  to  have  excited  great  interest  in  England.  The  fol- 
‘  lowing  is  an  extract  from  a  pamphlet  published  on  that  subject,  entitled  “  The  Order 
‘  “  of  Ceremonies  observed  in  the  Anointing  and  Coronation  of  the  Most  Christian 
‘  “  French  King  of  Navarre,  Henry  IIII  of  that  Name,  celebrated  in  our  Lady  Church 
‘  “in  the  Cittie  of  Chartres,  uppon  Sonday  the  27  of  February,  1594.  Faithfully  trans- 
‘  “  lated  out  of  the  French  Coppie,  printed  at  Roan,  by  Commaundment  of  the  said 
‘  “  Lord.  By  E.  A.  London.” 

‘  After  describing  various  parts  of  the  Ceremonial,  the  writer  proceeds  thus : — “  Then 

•  “  the  said  Archbishop,  holding  the  King  by  the  hand,  caused  him  to  sit  down,  saying, 

‘  “  ‘  In  hoc  regni  solio,’  &c . After  him  all  the  other  peeres  kissed  him  ....  say- 

‘  “  ing  thus :  ‘  Vivat  Rex  in  seternum,’  &c.  Then  the  people  gave  a  great  shout,  cry- 
‘  “  ing,  God  save  the  King,  and  immediately  the  harquebuzes  shot  off,  and  after  them 
‘  “  the  great  ordinance,  and  the  trumpets,  cornets,  hautbois,  drommes,  and  other  instru- 

‘  “  ments  sounded ;  and  the  said  Lord  Archbishop  begun,  Te  Deum  laudamus,  &c . 

‘  “  Here  we  are  to  note  that  so  often  as  the  King  returned  ever  so  little  to  the  body  of 
‘  “the  church,  the  people  being  infinite  in  number,  cryed  God  save  the  King;  and  the 

“church  rung  with  theyr  cries,  and  with  harquebuze  shot . The  people  with 

“  great  acclamation  and  signes  of  joy,  cryed  God  save  the  King ;  the  cannons  and 
‘  “  small  shotte  played  their  parts,  the  trumpettes,  drommes,  and  other  instrtwients 

*  “ sounded  and  played."  ’ 

Whence  Malone’s  date  for  this  play  is  1594,  and,  in  order  of  compositioi ',  the 
ninth. 

Steevens  cites  Meres  and  the  Stationers'  Registers ,  and  dates  it  accordingly  1598, 
and  places  it  the  sixteenth  in  ordei  of  composition. 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


281 


Chalmers,  accepting  Farmer’s  suggestion  in  regard  to  Silvayn’s  Orator,  published 
in  1596  (this  suggestion  will  be  dealt  with  in  discussing  the  Source  of  the  Plot), 
believed  that  proof  was  thus  furnished  that  ‘  the  Merchant  of  Venice  may  have  been 
‘  written  either  in  1597  or  in  1596.  From  this  state  of  uncertainty  we  may  be  relieved 
‘  by  attending  to  an  allusion  which  did  not  catch  the  commentator’s  eyes :  The  mer- 

*  chant  exclaims :  “  Nor  is  my  whole  estate  Upon  the  fortune  of  this  present  year.” 
‘  The  question,  then,  is,  what  year  was  it,  which  was  a  year  of  dread  to  traders  ?  Mon- 
‘  day,  the  chronicler,  shall  answer  the  question :  After  taking  notice  of  the  losses  of 
‘  Spain,  from  the  capture  of  Hulst  in  1596,  he  adds:  Then  did  the  “King  of  Spain 
‘  “  dispense  with  himself  for  payment  of  his  debts,  which  made  many  merchants  in 
‘  “  Spain,  Italy,  Antwerp,  Amsterdam,  and  Middleburgh,  to  become  banquerouts," — 
‘  Monday's  Briefe  Chronicle,  1611,  p.  422.  While  the  balance  was  thus  vibrating, 
‘between  the  years  1596  and  1598,  this  curious  fact  fixes  it  for  1597.’ 

Douce  is  non-committal.  If  the  author  of  an  old  Latin  play,  acted  in  1597,  took 
the  incident  of  a  Jew’s  whetting  his  knife  from  Shakespeare,  then  Shakespeare’s  play 
must  have  been  acted  before  that  date.  If  he  took  it  from  the  ballad  of  Gernutus,  then 
Shakespeare  borrowed  from  the  same  source,  and  we  need  a  copy  of  the  play  to  which 
Gosson  alludes  (see  post,  Source  of  the  Plot)  to  set  all  right. 

In  the  opening  of  the  Fifth  Act,  where  Lorenzo  and  Jessica  try  to  ‘  out-night  ’  each 
other,  Whalley  remarked  that  their  speeches,  beginning  ‘In  such  a  night,’  were  imi¬ 
tated  in  the  old  comedy  of  Wily  Beguiled.  The  passage  in  Wily  Beguiled  (p.  365, 
ed.  Hawkins)  is  as  follows: 

Sophos.  See  how  the  twinkling  stars  do  hide  their  borrow’d  shine 
As  half  asham’d,  their  lustre  is  so  stain’d 
By  Lelia's  beauteous  eyes,  that  shine  more  bright 
Than  twinkling  stars  do  in  a  winter’s  night : 

In  such  a  night  did  Paris  win  his  love. 

Lelia.  In  such  a  night,  JEneas  prov’d  unkind. 

Sophos.  In  such  a  night,  did  Troilus  court  his  dear. 

Lelia.  In  such  a  night,  fair  Phyllis  was  betray’d. 

Sophos.  I’ll  prove  as  true  as  ever  Troilus  was. 

Lelia.  And  I  as  constant  as  Penelope. 

Although  this  imitation  does  not,  as  Whalley  says,  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  date  of 
Wily  Beguiled,  yet  ‘  it  proves  it  to  have  been  written  after  Shakespeare’s  Merchant  of 
Venice .’  Whereupon  Malone  said  that  ‘Wily  Beguiled  was  written  before  1596,  being 
‘  mentioned  by  Nashe  in  one  of  his  pamphlets  published  in  that  year.’  If  Malone  is 
right  in  this  reference,  the  Merchant  of  Venice  must  have  been  written  a  year  or  two  at 
least  before  1596.  But  Hales,  a  good  authority,  has  shown  (. Athenceum ,  4  Sept.,  1875) 
that  Malone  was  mistaken;  Nashe’s  words  (in  Have  with  You  to  Saffron  Walden,  p.  158, 
ed.  Grosart)  do  not  refer  to  the  play  of  Wily  Beguiled,  but,  ‘  more  probably,  Nashe’s  phrase 
‘  [“  Wily  Beguily  ”]  is  one  of  those  reduplications  that  are  so  common  in  English,  and 
‘  of  which  Nashe  was  particularly  fond.’  ‘  Dr  Brinsley  Nicholson  ’  (another  good 
authority)  ‘concludes,’  says  Hales, ‘that  the  play  was  written  “in  or  after  1601.”’ 
Fleay,  however,  says  ( Life  and  Work  of  Sh.,  p.  133,  1886) :  ‘About  this  same  time 

*  [July,  1597]  the  play  of  Wily  Beguiled  was  acted.’  For  this  assertion  Fleay  has, 
doubtless,  ample  proof ;  but  I  have  failed  to  find  it,  either  in  Henslowe’s  diary  or  in 
Fleay’s  own  book.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  agreement  is  general  that,  whatever  the  date, 


282 


APPENDIX 


Wily  B eguiled  imitated  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  not  only  in  this  Scene,  but  in  Shylock’s 
outcries  for  his  daughter  and  his  ducats  (see  p.  368,  ed  Hawkins) ;  and  in  still  anothei 
place,  detected  by  Hales  {Athenceum,  17  July,  1875),  where  ‘that  venture  harder  to 
achieve  Than  that  of  Jason  for  the  golden  fleece  ’  recalls  Bassanio’s  speech  in  the  First 
Scene. 

Drake  (vol.  ii,  p.  385)  accepts  Chalmers’s  chronology,  and  on  Chalmers’s 
grounds. 

Skottowe  (vol.  i,  p.  360)  places  the  date,  ‘without  hesitation,’  in  1597.  Shake¬ 
speare's  obligations  to  The  Orator  prove  that  this  play  was  subsequent  to  1596,  and  its 
mention  by  Meres  that  it  was  previous  to  1598. 

Knight4  without  specifying  any  particular  year,  pleads  for  a  much  earlier  date  than 
any  hitherto  assigned,  and  where  all  is  conjecture,  one  may  be  as  liberal  as  the  air. 
After  enumerating  all  the  plays  which  were  written  by  Shakespeare  before  the  17th 
Century,  Knight  asks :  ‘  What  is  the  sum,  then,  of  the  work  which  we  hold  to  have 
‘  been  produced  by  Shakspere  before  the  close  of  the  Ibth  Century?  Nine  Comedies, 
‘  eight  Histories  (taking  the  Second  and  Third  Parts  of  Henry  VI,  as  remodelled  by 
‘  him),  and  three  Tragedies.  The  common  theory  is  that  he  began  to  write  for  the 
‘  stage  in  1591 ;  he  having  been,  as  Mr  Collier  has  unquestionably  proved,  a  large  pro- 
‘  prietor  in  the  Blackfriars’  Theatre  in  1589.  We  ask  that  the  author  of  twenty  plays, 
‘  which  completely  changed  the  face  of  the  dramatic  literature  in  England,  should  be 
‘  supposed  to  have  begun  to  write  a  little  earlier  than  the  age  of  twenty-seven ;  that  we 
1  should  assign  some  few  of  these  plays  to  a  period  antecedent  to  1590.  We  have  rea- 
‘  son  to  believe  that,  up  to  the  close  of  the  1 6th  Century,  Shakspere  was  busied  as  an 
‘  actor  as  well  as  an  author.  It  is  something  too  much  to  expect,  then,  even  from  the 
‘  fertility  of  his  genius,  occupied  as  he  was,  that  he  should  have  produced  twenty  plays 
‘  in  nine  years ;  and  it  is  still  more  unreasonable  to  believe  that  the  consciousness  of 
‘  power,  which  he  must  have  possessed,  should  not  have  prompted  him  to  enter  the  lists 
‘  with  other  dramatists  (whose  highest  productions  may,  without  exaggeration,  be  stated 
‘  as  every  way  inferior  to  his  lowest)  until  he  had  gone  through  a  probation  of  six  or 

*  seven  years’  acquaintance  with  the  stage  as  a  humble  actor.  We  cannot  reconcile  it 
‘  to  probability  that  he  who  ceased  to  be  an  actor  when  he  was  forty,  should  have  been 
‘  contented  to  have  been  only  an  actor  until  he  was  twenty-seven.  Impelled  by  these 
‘  convictions,  we  have  somewhat  pertinaciously  clung  to  the  belief  that  Shakspere,  by 
‘  commencing  his  career  as  a  dramatic  writer  some  four  or  five  years  earlier  than  is  gen 

‘  erally  maintained,  may  claim,  in  common  with  his  less  illustrious  early  contemporaries, 
‘  the  praise  of  being  one  of  the  great  founders  of  our  dramatic  literature,  instead  of  being 
‘  the  mere  follower  and  improver  of  Marlowe,  and  Greene,  and  Peele,  and  Kyd.  With- 
‘  out  sacrificing  anything,  we  hope,  to  this  theory  we  have  endeavoured  in  balancing 
‘  the  evidence  for  the  date  of  this  play,  not  to  be  driven  too  easily  into  the  belief  that  it 
‘  coidd  not  have  been  produced  before  the  ten  last  years  of  the  16th  Century.  But  we 

*  have  given  all  the  evidence  which  we  could  find,  [that  is,  the  Stationers'  Registers 
‘  and  Meres,]  leaving  the  reader  to  decide  for  himself.’ 

Collier  refers  to  Meres,  and  says  that  we  have  no  means  of  knowing  how  long 
oefore  Meres’s  time  the  play  was  written ;  and,  in  connection  with  Malone’s  conjecture 
that  Henslowe’s  Venyson  comodey  was  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  emphasizes  the  fact 
that  Shakespeare’s  Company  was  playing  with  Henslowe’s  Company  at  that  time, — a 
consideration  which  much  influenced  Staunton,  who  thinks  that  there  is  ‘  now  very 
‘  little  doubt  that  the  Merchant  of  Venice  was  -written  and  acted  some  years  before  ’ 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


283 


Halliwell,  while  acknowledging  that  there  is  no  other  certain  information  than 
that  of  the  Stationers’  Registers  and  Meres,  suggests,  on  the  strength  of  the  imitation 
in  Wily  Beguiled,  that  ‘it  was  probably  written  before  the  year  1596.  And  if,  in 
‘  addition  to  this,  there  is  added  the  circumstance  of  several  expressions  which  occur 

*  in  the  Trial  Scene  in  Shakespeare  being  similar  to  others  in  The  Orator,  published 
‘  in  the  same  year,  we  may  arrive  not  unreasonably  at  the  conclusion  that  The  Mer- 
‘  chant  of  Venice  was  a  new  and  favorite  play  in  1596.  Another  slight  indication, 
4  tending  towards  a  similar  conclusion,  may  be  found  in  the  circumstance  that  the  pro- 
4  nunciation  of  Stephano  is  erroneously  given  in  this  Comedy,  but  that  after  Shake- 
‘  speare  had  taken  a  part  in  the  representation  of  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  produced 
‘in  1598,  where  the  same  name  occurs  with  its  correct  accent,  he  altered  the  cadence 
‘  when  he  had  occasion  to  write  it  in  a  subsequent  composition.’ 

C.  Bathurst  ( Remarks  on  the  Differences  in  Shakespeare' s  Versification,  &c.,  Lon¬ 
don,  1857,  p.  57) :  ‘The  Merchant  of  Venice  is  very  natural,  sometimes  excursive,  not 
‘  ratiocinative.  The  verse,  generally,  uniform  and  flowing.  One  weak  ending.  Some 
‘  breaks.  The  speeches,  where  the  speakers  change,  fit  into  the  verse,  but  not  always. 
‘  It  is  remarkably  one  of  those  plays  which  were  written  when  Shakespeare’s  mind  was 
4  at  ease,  original,  and  independent.  Neither  disturbed  by  the  rivalship  of  others,  nor 
‘  stimulated  to  take  pains  to  write  in  a  more  active  and  dramatic  style  than  naturally 
‘  occurred  to  him  in  the  course  of  his  composition.  He  never,  as  I  conceive,  took  pains, 
‘  in  the  cool,  deliberate  way  in  which  most  writers  of  merit  have  done ;  but  he  certainly 
‘  “  lashed  his  sides  with  his  tail,”  as  Longinus  says,  out  of  Homer,  as  to  Euripides,  in 
4  such  plays  as  Macbeth,  and  others  of  his  highest  class. 

‘  This  year  1598  is  something  like  an  epoch,  I  think;  partly  on  account  of  Meres’s 
4  list,  however  uncertain ;  partly,  because,  as  appears  to  me,  there  is  really  a  material 
‘  change  of  style  about  this  time ;  but  also,  because  it  was  in  this  year  that  Ben  Jonson 
‘  came  out,  and  with  a  play  of  great  force  and  popularity,  Every  Man  in  his  Humour, 
4  which  was  likely  to  have  an  effect  on  Shakespeare,  both  directly  and  indirectly,  as 
‘influencing  the  public  taste.’ 

Grant  White,  in  his  First  Edition,  finds  warrant  for  the  decided  opinion  that  this 
play  was  new  in  1594.  ‘  The  play  itself  bears  evidence  that  it  was  written  at  a  time 

‘  when  Shakespeare  had  obtained,  by  observation  and  experience,  the  highest  use  of 
‘  his  powers  as  a  playwright,  and  when  his  faculties  as  a  poet  and  philosopher  were 
‘  approaching  their  grand  maturity,  while  it  yet  betrays  in  every  line  the  ardor  and 
‘  hopefulness  of  youth.  Judged,  therefore,  on  its  own  evidence,  The  Merchant  of  Ven- 
‘  ice  is  one  of  the  earliest  productions  of  Shakespeare’s  middle  period,  and  this  indica- 
4  tion  agrees  well  with  the  external  evidence  which  would  assign  it  to  his  thirtieth  year.’ 
In  his  Second  Edition,  Grant  White  reaffirms  his  belief :  *  At  what  particular  time  before 

*  1598  Shakespeare  did  this  beautiful  piece  of  work  we  can  only  infer  from  the  internal 
4  evidence  of  style  and  versification,  and  from  Henslowe’s  diary.  These  confirm  each 
‘  other.  The  play,  we  may  be  sure,  was  written  in  1594,  when  Shakespeare  was  thirty 
4  years  old.’ 

The  Cowden-Clarkes  come  to  the  same  conclusion,  founded  on  Henslowe’s  diary. 
In  1594,  Shakespeare  was  ‘thirty  years  of  age,  in  the  very  prime  of  intellectual  vigour, 

*  and  we  can  well  imagine  this  fine  play  to  have  been  the  product  of  his  pen  at  that 
period  of  his  life.  There  is  a  strength  of  purpose  in  it  as  a  drama,  a  tone  of  experi- 

‘  ence  in  its  views  of  men  and  life,  a  masterly  treatment  of  character,  and,  withal,  a 
4  wealth  of  romance  about  its  story,  that  mark  it  for  a  composition  on  his  arrival  at 
‘  manly  maturity.’ 


284 


APPENDIX 


Delius,  on  the  faith  of  Henslowe’s  diary  and  the  imitation  in  Wily  Beguiled,  and 
on  the  evidence  of  style  and  versification,  sets  it  down  in  1594. 

Dyce,  in  his  Third  Edition,  thinks  that  it  may  have  been  some  years  on  the  stage 
before  Meres  mentioned  it,  and  that  Malone’s  supposition  about  Henslowe’s  ‘Venesyon 
comodey  ’  is  not  improbable. 

It  is  a  little  uncertain  whether  or  not  the  Clarendon  Editors  accept  the  item  in 
Henslowe’s  diary  as  referring  to  The  Merchant  of  Venice.  They  express  a  judicious 
doubt  as  to  its  identity  with  the  ‘Venesyon  comodey,’  and  yet  they  speak  of  ‘its  first 
production  in  1594’  as  though  it  were  an  established  fact. 

‘  The  Venesyon  comodey,’  they  say,  ‘  may  be  Shakespeare’s  Merchant.  But  consider- 
‘  ing  that  the  dramatists  of  that  time  were  fond  of  laying  their  scenes  in  Italy,  this  iden- 
‘  tification  is  very  uncertain.  There  are,  however,  in  the  play  itself,  indications  which 
‘  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  its  first  composition  was  earlier  than  1598,  such  as  the 
‘  many  classical  allusions,  the  frequent  rhymes,  and  occasional  doggerel  verses.  The 
‘  “fooling”  of  Launcelot,  too,  has  a  strong  resemblance  to  that  of  his  almost  namesake 
‘  in  The  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona.  On  the  other  hand,  the  loftiness  of  thought  and 
‘  expression,  the  grace  and  freedom  of  the  versification  in  general,  point  to  a  later  time, 
‘  and  would  lead  us  rather  to  class  this  play  with  Twelfth  Night,  As  You  Like  It,  and 
‘  Much  Ado  About  Nothing,  than  with  the  earlier  plays,  Love's  Labours  Lost  and  The 
‘  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona.  On  the  whole,  we  incline  to  think  that  the  play  was  in 
‘  great  part  rewritten  between  the  time  of  its  first  production  in  1594  and  its  publication 
‘  in  1600.  The  slight  discrepancies  may  be  due  to  this  cause,  particularly  that  in’  [I, 
ii,  120.  See  Hunter’s  note,  ad  loc.] 

Hudson  inclines  to  1598,  the  date  of  Meres’s  allusion.  ‘How  long  before  that 
‘time,’  he  urges,  ‘the  play  was  written  we  have  no  means  of  knowing;  but,  judging 

*  from  the  style,  we  cannot  well  assign  the  writing  to  a  much  earlier  date.’  As  to 
Henslowe’s  Venesyon  comodey,  Hudson  is  ‘  by  no  means  certain  that  it  refers  to  Shake- 
‘  speare’s  play ;  while  the  workmanship  here  shows  such  maturity  and  variety  of  power 

*  as  argue  against  that  supposal.  It  evinces,  in  a  considerable  degree,  the  easy,  unlabour- 
‘  ing  freedom  of  conscious  mastery ;  the  persons  being  so  entirely  under  the  author’s 
‘  control,  and  subdued  to  his  hand,  that  he  seems  to  let  them  act  and  talk  just  as  they 
‘  have  a  mind  to.  Therewithal,  the  style  throughout  is  so  even  and  sustained ;  the  word 
‘  and  character  are  so  fitted  to  each  other ;  the  laws  of  dramatic  proportion  are  so  well 
‘  observed ;  and  the  work  is  so  free  from  any  jarring  or  falling  out  from  the  due  course 
‘  and  order  of  art ;  as  to  justify  the  belief  that  the  whole  was  written  in  the  same  stage 
‘  of  intellectual  growth  and  furnishing.’ 

On  the  other  hand,  Rolfe  relies  on  Henslowe’s  diary,  and  thinks  ‘  there  is  good 
‘reason  to  believe  that  the  play  was  written  and  acted  as  early  as  1594.’ 

In  Fleay’s  first  published  list  ( New  Shakspere  Society's  Trans.,  Series  I,  p.  10)  of 
the  Succession  of  Shakespeare’s  plays  founded  on  metrical  grounds,  the  date  assigned 
to  the  Merchant  of  Venice  is  1597.  But  in  his  Shakespeare  Manual  (p.  34),  he  says 
that  he  prefers  1596.  ‘  Malone,’  he  there  says,  ‘  identifies  this  play  with  The  Venesyon 

‘  comedy  acted  at  the  Rose  in  x  594.  But  Shakespeare’s  plays  were  not  at  any  time 
‘  acted  there.’  Yet  Fleay  himself  says,  p.  82,  that  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s  men  acted 
at  the  Rose  in  1594;  and  Shakespeare  belonged  to  that  Company,  and  it  acted  his 
plays.  Moreover,  I  cannot  find  that  Malone  says  that  the  ‘Venesyon  comodey’  was 
acted  at  the  Rose ;  his  conjecture  merely  is  affixed  to  Henslowe’s  item,  and  there,  as 
we  have  seen  above,  Henslowe  expressly  states  that  the  performances  were  ‘at  New¬ 
ington,’  where  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s  men  were  playing  with  the  Lord  Admiral’s 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


285 

men.  I  am  afraid  that  Fleay  has  given  hardly  enough  weight  to  these  facts,  or  else 
that  there  is  an  oversight  in  his  statement,  on  p.  82,  that  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s  men 
acted  at  the  Rose. 

However,  in  his  Hist,  of  the  Life  and  Work  of  Shakespeare,  1886,  Fleay  returns 
to  his  former  date,  1597.  ‘Early  in  this  year,’  he  says,  p.  30,  ‘was  almost  certainly 
'  produced  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  founded  on  an  old  play  of  Dekker’s  called  Joseph 
'  the  Jew  of  Venice,  written  c.  1592,  and  acted  in  1594  by  the  Admiral’s  men,  but  not 
‘now  extant.’  Again  on  p.  197  :  ‘  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  or  Jew  of  Venice,  was  no 
‘  doubt  founded  on  an  old  play  called  The  Jew  of  Venice,  by  Dekker.  It  seems  from 
‘  the  title  of  the  German  version  of  this  play  that  the  Jew’s  name  was  Joseph.  The 
‘  name  Fauconbridge  in  I,  ii  (where  Portia’s  suitors  are  enumerated,  compare  Two  Gen- 
‘  tlcmen,  I,  ii)  points  to  a  date  soon  after  John  ;  and  the  “merry  devil”  of  II,  iii,  2, 
‘  a  phrase  never  elsewhere  used  in  Shakespeare,  indicates  contemporaneity  with  The 
1  Merry  Devil  of  Edmonton,  produced  in  the  winter  of  1596.  Again,  the  manifest 
‘  imitations  of  this  play  in  Wily  Beguiled,  which  I  show  elsewhere  to  date  in  the  sum- 
*  mer  of  1597,  give  a  posterior  limit,  which  must  be  decisive.  This  play  has  no  sign 
‘  whatever  of  having  been  altered ;  the  Clarendon  Press  guesses,  founded  on  the  dis- 
‘  crepancy  of  the  number  of  suitors  (iv  for  vi)  are  as  worthless  as  Mr  Hales’s  proof, 
‘referred  to  by  Mr  Halliwell  ( Outlines ,  p.  251)  of  the  date  of  Wily  Beguiled.  The 
‘  conclusive  evidence  of  imitation  in  this  play  is  the  conjunction  of  the  “  In  such  a 
‘  “  night”  lines  with  the  “  My  money,  my  daughter”  iterations  of  Gripe.’  I  think  that 
there  is  another  indication  of  alteration  besides  the  ‘  Clarendon  Press  guesses.’  See 
post,  in  ‘Source  of  the  Plot,’  p.  321. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Fleay  does  not  give  his  authority  for  the  assertion  that  Dek¬ 
ker’s  play  of  the  Jew  of  Venice,  which  was  not  entered  on  the  Stationers'  Registers 
until  1653,  was  written  about  1592,  or,  as  he  says  on  p.  310,  ‘about  1591.’  That  the 
comedy  of  Josephus,  a  Jew  of  Venice,  twice  played  by  the  English  Comedians  in  Dres¬ 
den  in  1626,  might  possibly  be  a  version  of  Dekker’s  Jew  of  Venice  was  first  suggested 
by  Cohn  ( Shakespeare  in  Germany,  p.  cxviii) ;  but  the  assertion  that  it  is  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  and  that  it  was  written  in  1591  or  1592,  is  Fleay’s  own 
surmise.  It  is  also  to  be  regretted  that  Fleay  does  not  cite  the  parallel  passages  in 
Dekker’s  Jew  and  Shakespeare’s  Merchant  in  proof  that  one  was  founded  on  the 
other.  I  believe,  however,  not  an  authentic  line  of  Dekker’s  Jew  has  survived. 
Fleay’s  conjecture  must  therefore  stand  on  its  own  merits.  At  present,  as  far  as  the 
Date  of  the  Composition  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice  is  concerned,  nothing  further  need 
be  said  about  the  identity  of  Dekker’s  Jew  and  the  German  Jud  von  Venedig.  The 
latter  deserves  notice  when  we  come  to  consider  the  Source  of  the  Plot,  and  will  be 
there  treated  in  full. 

In  enumerating  the  Internal  Proofs  mention  should  not  be  omitted  of  Lef.’s  theory 
that  a  close  connection  exists  between  the  date  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice  and  the  fate 
of  Dr  Lopez,  who  was  hanged  at  Tyburn  in  May,  1594.  The  parallelism  is  certainly 
striking  in  some  particulars,  but  the  date,  May,  is  very,  very  close  to  ‘  25  aguste,’  if  we 
are  to  believe  that  the  *  Venesyon  comodey  ’  and  the  Merchant  of  Venice  are  the  same, 
which  Lee  assumes.  See  post,  *  The  Jews  in  England.’ 

In  discussing  the  Date  of  the  Composition  of  Othello,  the  Accounts  of  the  Revels  at 
Court  in  1604  were  of  importance.  The  curious  history  of  that  forgery  of  what  Hal- 
liwell-Phillipps  believes  to  be  a  genuine  record  was  given  at  length  in  Othello,  pp.  347- 
.  357,  and  need  not  be  repeated  here;  where,  whether  forged  or  not,  the  date  1604  can 
have  no  bearing  on  the  Date  of  the  Composition  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice.  However, 


286 


APPENDIX 


merely  as  a  matter  of  curiosity,  it  may  be  noted  that  in  the  forged  pp.  204,  205  cf  the 
Extracts  from  the  Account  of  the  Revels  at  Court,  published  by  the  Shakespeare  Society , 
1842,  occur  the  following  entries : 


By  his  Matis 
plaiers 

By  his  Matis 
players 


[1606] 

On  Shrousunday  A  play  of  the  Marchant  of  Venis 
*  *  *  *  * 

On  Shroutusday  A  play  cauled  The  Martchant  of 
Venis  againe  comauded  by  the  Kings  Matie. 


Shaxberd. 

Shaxbercl 


According  to  a  list  of  the  Order  of  Succession,  founded  on  the  *  Numbers  of  Light 
and  Weak  Endings  in  the  Several  Plays,’  by  Prof.  Ingram  ( New  Shakspere  Soc. 
T rans .,  Series  I,  p.  450),  The  Merchant  of  Venice  stands  ninth. 

To  recapitulate : 

The  Date  of  Composition  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice  is  assigned  by  Malone, 

Staunton,  Grant  White,  Cowden-Clarke,  Delius,  Rolfe,  Lee,  to  .  1594 

By  Halliwell  to  *  before  ’ ;  by  Furnivall  *  about  ’ . 1596 

By  Chalmers,  Drake,  Skottowe,  Fleay . 1597 

By  Steevens,  Bathurst,  Hudson . 1598 

By  Knight  to  no  precise  date,  but  ‘  very  early.’ 

By  Collier,  Dyce  to  ‘some  years  before.’ . 1598 

Clark  and  Wright  (i.  e.  Clarendon)  think  it  ‘was  rewritten  between  1594 
and  1600.’ 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


287 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 

It  is  lightly  seen  that  in  this  play  there  are  two  stories  intertwined,  The  Pound  of 
Flesh,  or,  as  it  is  frequently  styled,  The  Bond  Story,  and  The  Three  Caskets ;  some 
critics,  indeed,  add  a  third,  that  of  Jessica,  but  this,  I  think,  is  an  over-refinement  of 
analysis ;  at  all  events,  there  are  assuredly  two,  and  each  of  them  lends  itself  so  readily 
to  a  symbolical  interpretation,  that  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  them,  more  or  less  dis¬ 
guised,  widely  scattered  and  ascending  even  into  the  early  literature  of  many  nations. 
By  the  story  of  The  Three  Caskets,  a  pious  monk  enforces  the  moral  of  the  deceitful¬ 
ness  of  appearances  and  the  temptations  of  the  human  soul,  in  the  Gesta  Romanorum, 
or  we  may  find  the  Pound  of  Flesh  set  forth  in  the  Mahabharata  as  inculcating  the 
beauty  of  self-sacrifice. 

The  task,  however,  now  before  us  is  to  discover,  if  we  may,  the  shape  in  which  these 
materials  lay  to  Shakespeare’s  hand ;  and  iq  order  to  do  this  not  only  must  our  range 
be  wide,  but  many  a  stray  fragment  must  be  examined  for  possible  finger-marks,  and 
many  a  dust-heap  must  be  sifted. 

From  the  records  which  have  come  down  to  us  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  the  audiences 
of  Shakespeare’s  time  constantly  demanded  novelty  in  the  attractions  of  the  stage.  The 
playwrights  were  kept  busy,  and  must  have  worked  at  a  rate  of  speed  which,  though 
perhaps  not  without  its  parallel  in  Greece,  is,  I  think,  quite  unknown  among  drama¬ 
tists  now-a-days.  Collier  has  made  the  computation,  by  means  of  Henslowe’s  diary 
that  the  audiences  of  that  day  required  a  new  play,  upon  an  average,  every  seven¬ 
teen  or  eighteen  days,  including  Sundays.  In  addition  to  satisfying  this  demand  foi 
novelty,  it  follows  as  of  course  that  the  playwrights  and  poets  had  to  keep  touch  with 
every  gale  and  vary  of  the  public,  and  this  struggle  for  popularity,  which  meant  daily 
bread,  not  unnaturally  fomented  intense  rivalry  between  the  different  companies  of 
actors.  Into  this  scramble  Shakespeare  was  ushered,  it  is  generally  agreed,  in  1591. 
and  in  it  he  continued  about  twenty  years,  and  wrote,  in  whole  or  in  part,  about  forty 
plays — that  is,  on  an  average  for  the  whole  period,  one  every  six  months.  Thus  driven 
by  the  necessity  of  speed  on  the  one  hand,  and  by  anxiety  to  catch  the  popular  fancy 
on  the  other,  is  it  any  wonder  that  Shakespeare  never  stopped  to  devise  a  plot  ?  What 
need  was  there  that  he  should  do  so  ?  The  manager  of  the  company  had  many  an 
old  play  which,  at  one  time  or  another,  had  been  submitted  to  the  test  of  public 
approval,  and  had  been  found  not  lacking  in  qualities  more  or  less  dramatic,  or  in 
points  which  had  caught  the  fancy  of  the  hour,  even  though  it  were  by  no  greater 
charm  than  by  the  dismal  repetition  of  the  word  ‘  Revenge !’  To  such  plays,  if 
selected  for  revision,  a  certain  amount  of  popularity  was  thus  assured  in  advance, 
and  as  for  the  plot, — the  barest  skeleton  sufficed  for  Shakespeare.  He  knew  that  he 
could  remodel  it  into  fair  proportions  and  relume  it  with  life.  Of  all  that  goes  to  make 
up  one  of  his  dramas,  the  plot  in  itself,  in  its  mere  outlines,  is  of  less  importance  than 
any  other  element  in  it.  Of  course,  in  the  nature  of  things,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  after  he  had  selected  the  old  play  to  be  rejuvenated  he  either  adhered  to  it  closely, 
or  refused  hints  from  other  sources.  Old  ballads,  books  of  travels,  histories,  the  gossip 
of  the  day, — all  were  put  under  contribution.  As  Emerson  says  :  ‘  Every  master  has 
‘  found  his  materials  collected,  and  his  power  lay  in  his  sympathy  with  his  people,  and 
1  in  his  love  for  the  materials  he  wrought  in.’ 

And  we  know  the  result. 

>  I  can  find  no  trace  of  any  attempt  to  identify  the  source  of  the  plot  of  this  play  earlier 
than  that  of  Warton,  who,  in  his  Observations  on  the  Fairy  Queen ,  1754,  in  a  foot-note 


288 


APPENDIX 


(p.  128,  ed.  1762),  says  that,  ‘in  all  probability,’  the  story  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice 
*  is  founded  upon  the  following  antient  ballad,’  which  he  ‘  met  with  in  Mus.  Ashmol. 
‘  Oxon.  cod.  impress.  A.  Wood.’  Warton  did  not  give  the  whole  ballad,  but  merely 
the  first  stanza  and  some  of  the  concluding  stanzas.  The  whole  of  it  was  printed  by 
Bishop  Percy  in  The  Connoisseur  for  16  May,  1754;  this  text  he  did  not  follow  subse 
quently,  in  his  Reliques ,  1765,  vol.  i,  p.  191,  but  there  printed  from  an  ancient  black- 
letter  copy  in  the  Pepys  Collection.  There  is  really  no  difference  in  the  texts;  the  few 
variations  here  and  there  might  readily  have  arisen  from  mere  transcription.  Percy’s 
text,  as  in  his  Reliques ,  is  here  given ;  it  has  been  reprinted  by  Editors  more  frequently 
than  the  other : 

A  new  Song,  shewing  the  crueltie  of  Gernutus,  a  Jewe,  who  lending  to  a  mer¬ 
chant  an  hundred  crownes,  would  have  a  pound  of  his  fleshe,  because  he  could  not  pay 
him  at  the  time  appointed.  To  the  tune  of  Black  and  yellow. 

The  First  Part. 

IN  Venice  towne  not  long  agoe 
A  cruel  Jew  did  dwell, 

Which  lived  all  on  ufurie 
As  Italian  writers  tell. 

Gernutus  called  was  the  Jew, 

Which  never  thought  to  dye, 

Nor  never  yet  did  any  good 
To  them  in  ftreets  that  lie. 

His  life  was  like  a  barrow  hogge. 

That  liveth  many  a  day, 

Yet  never  once  doth  any  good, 

Until  men  will  him  flay. 

Or  like  a  filthy  heap  of  dung, 

That  lyeth  in  a  whoard 
Which  never  can  do  any  good, 

Till  it  be  fpread  abroad. 

So  fares  it  with  the  ufurer. 

He  cannot  fleep  in  reft, 

For  feare  the  thiefe  will  him  purfue 
To  plucke  him  from  his  neft. 

His  heart  doth  thinke  on  many  a  wile, 

How  to  deceive  the  poore ; 

His  mouth  is  almoft  ful  of  mucke, 

Yet  ftill  he  gapes  for  more. 

His  wife  muft  lend  a  {hilling, 

For  every  weeke  a  penny, 

Yet  bring  a  pledge,  that  is  double  worth. 

If  that  you  will  have  any. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—GERNUTUS 


289 


And  fee,  likewife,  you  keepe  your  day, 

Or  elfe  you  loofe  it  all : 

This  was  the  living  of  the  wife, 

Her  cow  fhe  did  it  call. 

Within  that  citie  dwelt  that  time 
A  marchant  of  great  fame, 

Which  being  diftrelfed  in  his  need, 

Unto  Gernutus  came : 

Defiring  him  to  Hand  his  friend 
For  twelve  month  and  a  day, 

To  lend  to  him  an  hundred  crownes ; 

And  he  for  it  would  pay 

Whatfoever  he  would  demand  of  him, 
And  pledges  he  fhould  have, 

No  (quoth  the  Jew  with  flearing  lookes) 
Sir,  afke  what  you  will  have. 

No  penny  for  the  loane  of  it 
For  one  yeare  you  fliall  pay ; 

You  may  doe  me  as  goode  a  turne, 

Before  my  dying  day. 

But  we  will  have  a  merry  jeaft 
For  to  be  talked  long; 

You  lhall  make  me  a  bond,  quoth  he, 
That  fliall  be  large  and  ftrong  : 

And  this  fliall  be  the  forfeyture ; 

Of  your  owne  flefhe  a  pound. 

If  you  agree,  make  you  the  bond, 

And  here  is  a  hundred  crownes. 

With  right  good  will !  the  marchant  fays  1 
And  fo  the  bond  was  made. 

When  twelve  month  and  a  day  drew  on 
That  backe  it  fliould  be  payd, 

The  marchant’s  (hips  were  all  at  fea, 

And  money  came  not  in ; 

Which  way  to  take,  or  what  to  doe 
To  thinke  he  doth  begin : 

And  to  Gernutus  ftrait  he  comes 
With  cap  and  bended  knee, 

And  fayde  to  him,  Of  curtefie 
I  pray  you  beare  with  mee. 

My  day  is  come,  and  I  have  not 
The  money  for  to  pay : 

And  little  good  the  forfeyture 
Will  doe  you,  I  dare  fay. 


*9 


2QO 


APPENDIX 


With  all  my  heart,  Gernutus  fayd, 

Commaund  it  to  your  minde : 

In  thinges  of  bigger  waight  then  this 
You  fhall  me  ready  finde. 

He  goes  his  way ;  the  day  once  paft 
Gernutus  doth  not  flacke 

To  get  a  fergiant  prefently ; 

And  clapt  him  on  the  backe : 

And  layd  him  into  prifon  ftrong, 

And  fued  his  bond  withall ; 

And  when  the  judgement  day  was  come, 

For  judgement  he  did  call. 

The  marchants  friends  came  thither  fall. 

With  many  a  weeping  eye, 

For  other  meanes  they  could  not  find, 

But  he  that  day  muft  dye. 

The  Second  Part. 

Of  the  Jews  crueltie ;  Jetting  foorth  the  mercifulnejfe  of  the  Judge  towards  the 
Mar  chant.  To  the  tune  of  Blacke  and  yellow. 

Some  offered  for  his  hundred  crownes 
Five  hundred  for  to  pay ; 

And  fome  a  thoufand,  two  or  three, 

Yet  (till  he  did  denay. 

And  at  the  laft  ten  thoufand  crownes 
They  offered  him  to  fave, 

Gernutus  fayd,  I  will  no  gold, 

My  forfeite  I  will  have. 

A  pound  of  flefhe  is  my  demand, 

And  that  fhall  be  my  hire, 

Then  fayd  the  judge.  Yet  my  good  friend, 

Let  me  of  you  defire 

To  take  the  flefh  from  fuch  a  place, 

As  yet  you  let  him  live ; 

Do  fo,  and  lo !  an  hundred  crownes 
To  thee  here  will  I  give. 

No :  no :  quoth  he,  no :  judgement  here  : 

For  this  it  fhall  be  tride, 

For  I  will  have  my  pound  of  flefhe 
From  under  his  right  fide. 

It  grieved  all  the  companie 
His  crueltie  to  fee 

For  neither  friend  nor  foe  could  helpe 
But  he  muft  fpoyled  bee. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—GERNUTUS 


291 


% 


The  bloudie  Jew  now  ready  is 
With  whetted  blade  in  hand, 

To  fpoyle  the  bloud  of  innocent, 

By  forfeit  of  his  bond. 

And  as  he  was  about  to  ftrike 
In  him  the  deadly  blow : 

Stay  (quoth  the  judge)  thy  crueltie ; 

I  charge  thee  to  do  fo. 

Sith  needs  thou  wilt  thy  forfeit  have. 
Which  is  of  flefh  a  pound : 

See  that  you  fhed  no  drop  of  bloud, 

Nor  yet  the  man  confound. 

For  if  thou  doe,  like  murderer, 

Thou  here  fhalt  hanged  be : 

Likewife  of  flefh  fee  that  thou  cut 
No  more  than  longes  to  thee ; 

For  if  thou  take  either  more  or  lefle 
To  the  value  of  a  mite, 

Thou  fhalt  be  hanged  prefently 
As  is  both  law  and  right. 

Gernutus  now  waxt  franticke  mad, 

And  wotes  not  what  to  fay ; 

Quoth  he  at  laft,  Ten  thoufand  crownes, 

I  will  that  he  fhall  pay ; 

And  fo  I  graunt  to  fet  him  free. 

The  judge  doth  anfwere  make ; 

You  fhall  not  have  a  penny  given; 

Your  forfeyture  now  take. 

At  the  laft  he  doth  demaund 
But  for  to  have  his  owne. 

No,  quoth  the  judge,  doe  as  you  lift 
Thy  judgement  fhall  be  fhowne. 

Either  take  your  pound  of  flefh,  quoth  he, 
Or  cancell  me  your  bond. 

O  cruel  judge,  then  quoth  the  Jew, 

That  doth  againft  me  ftand ! 

And  fo  with  griping  grieved  mind 
He  biddeth  them  fare-well, 

‘  Then  ’  all  the  people  prays’d  the  Lord, 
That  ever  this  heard  tell. 

Good  people,  that  do  heare  this  fong, 

For  trueth  I  dare  well  fay. 

That  many  a  wretch  as  ill  as  hee 
Doth  live  now  at  this  day ; 


APPENDIX 


lg2 


That  feeketh  nothing  but  the  fjoyle 
Of  many  a  wealthey  man, 

And  for  to  trap  the  innocent 
Devifeth  what  they  can. 

From  whome  the  Lord  deliver  me, 

And  every  Chriftian  too, 

And  fend  to  them  like  fentence  eke 
That  meaneth  fo  to  do. 

‘It  may  be  objected,’  says  Warton,  ‘that  this  ballad  may  have  been  written  aftei, 

*  and  copied  from  Shakespeare’s  play.  But  if  that  had  been  the  case,  it  is  most  likely 
‘that  the  author  would  have  preserved  Shakespeare’s  name  of  Shylock  for  the  Jew; 
‘  and  nothing  is  more  likely  than  that  Shakespeare  in  copying  from  this  ballad,  should 

*  alter  the  name  from  Gernutus  to  one  more  Jewish ;  and  by  alteration  of  the  name 
‘  his  imitation  was  the  better  disguised.  Another  argument  is,  that  the  ballad  has  the 
‘  air  of  a  narrative  written  before  Shakespeare’s  play ;  I  mean  that  if  it  had  been 
‘  written  after  the  play,  it  would  have  been  much  more  full  and  circumstantial.  At 
‘  present,  it  has  too  much  the  nakedness  of  an  original.  Besides,  the  first  stanza 
‘  informs  us  that  the  story  was  taken  from  some  Italian  novel.  Thus  much,  therefore, 

*  is  certain,  that  is,  that  Shakespeare  either  copied  from  that  Italian  novel,  or  from  this 
‘  ballad.  Now  we  have  no  translation,  I  presume,  of  such  a  novel  into  English ;  if 
‘  then  it  be  granted,  that  Shakespeare  generally  took  his  Italian  stories  from  their  Eng- 
‘  lish  translations,  and  that  the  arguments  above  concerning  the  prior  antiquity  of  this 

*  ballad  are  true,  it  will  follow  that  Shakespeare  copied  from  this  ballad.’ 

It  is  strange  that  Warton  did  not  see  that  there  was  another  source  from  which 
Shakespeare  could  have  drawn  his  plot,  for  he  goes  on  to  refer  to  an  extract  from  Gos- 
son’s  Schoole  of  Abuse,  apparently  quite  unconscious  of  its  important  bearing  on  the 
question,  which  critics  since  his  time,  and  following  his  lead,  have  found  in  it.  This 
extract  will  be  duly  set  forth  further  on. 

As  I  have  said,  Bishop  Percy  reprinted  the  whole  of  this  ballad,  of  which  Warton 
had  given  but  a  few  stanzas,  in  The  Connoisseur  for  May  1 6,  1754;  at  least  it  is  to  be 
inferred  that  the  anonymous  contributor  was  Bishop  Percy ;  in  the  remarks  on  the  bal¬ 
lad  in  his  Reliques,  Bishop  Percy  repeated  substantially  the  arguments  in  The  Connois¬ 
seur,  which  he  would  not  have  done  had  they  not  been  his  own. 

It  seems  to  be  pretty  generally  conceded,  and  for  the  reasons  adduced  by  Warton, 
that  Gernutus  preceded  Shylock ;  and  Dyce  and  the  Clarendon  Editors  go  so  far 
as  to  say  that  perhaps  Shakespeare  derived  some  hints  from  the  ballad, — which  I  think 
doubtful.  The  points  wherein  there  is  an  agreement,  such  as  whetting  the  knife,  &c., 
ore  commonplace  enough,  and  were  probably  found  in  the  original  story  or  play  which 
was  the  common  source  of  both  ballad  and  comedy.  Knight  agrees  with  Warton 
that  Gernutus  preceded  Shylock,  but  not  because  it  would  otherwise  have  been  *  more 
full  and  circumstantial,’  and  points  in  proof  of  this  to  Jordan’s  Ballad  (see  Appendix, 
post),  which  was  unquestionably  written  after  the  play,  in  1664,  and  yet  is  much  less 
full  and  circumstantial  than  the  old  ballad  of  Gernutus.  But  it  is  in  the  omission  of 
Portia  from  the  old  ballad  that  Knight  finds  the  strongest  confirmation  that  Gernutus 
preceded  the  comedy.  Halliwell,  on  the  other  hand,  inclines  to  the  belief  that  the 
comedy  preceded  the  ballad,  no  copy  of  which,  he  says,  ‘of  the  time  of  Shakespeare 
‘is  known  to  exist;  but  as  it  was  the  common  practice  to  continue  the  republication 
‘  of  such  pieces  during  several  generations,  it  is  possible,  notwithstanding  the  epithet 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— NORTHERN  LORD 


293 


*  new  in  the  title  to  one  copy  of  it,  that  it  may  be  a  reprint  of  a  composition  belonging 

*  to  the  Elizabethan  era.  The  simplicity  of  the  ballad  story,  however,  is  no  proof  of 
‘its  antiquity;  for  several  writers  of  the  17th  Century  were  accustomed  to  adopt  the 
‘  merest  outline  incidents  of  a  novel  or  play,  and  construct  with  them,  often  with  altered 
‘  names,  those  doggerel  songs  which  were  so  popular  amongst  the  lower  classes  up  to  a 
‘  comparatively  recent  period.  On  the  whole,  unless  some  evidence  could  be  adduced 

*  of  the  existence  of  the  ballad  of  Gemutus  in  the  1 6th  Century,  the  probability  seems 
‘  in  favour  of  its  having  been  constructed  either  on  Shakespeare’s  play,  or  on  the  more 
‘  ancient  drama  of  the  Jew,  mentioned  by  Gosson.  The  incident  of  the  Jew  whetting 

*  his  knife  is  one  very  likely  to  have  been  remembered  by  a  writer  who  was  forming  a 

*  ballad  from  his  recollections  of  the  performance  of  the  comedy ;  and  it  is  the  only 
‘  very  remarkable  coincidence  to  be  traced  in  the  two  productions.  It  may,  however, 

‘  be  worth  mentioning  that  the  Jew,  in  the  ballad,  grants  the  loan  without  pecuniary 
‘interest,  and  speaks  of  the  bond  as  a  “merrie  jest.”  The  name  Gemutus  might 
‘  either  have  been  borrowed  from  the  older  play,  or  have  been  suggested  by  that  of  a 
‘personage  introduced  in  the  comedy  of  the  Three  Ladies  of  London,  1584,  where  a 
‘  Jew,  of  a  very  different  character  from  Shylock,  is  introduced,  whose  name  is  Geron- 
‘  tus.  The  writer  of  the  ballad,  indeed,  professes  to  derive  his  tale  from  an  Italian 
‘  source ;  but  little  reliance  can  be  placed  upon  a  statement  of  this  kind  in  a  compo- 
‘  sition  belonging  to  a  class  in  which  deceptive  assertions  of  origin  and  antiquity  are 
‘  of  continual  occurrence.’ 

There  is  one  expression  in  the  ballad  which  seems  to  me  to  indicate  the  antiquity 
either  of  the  ballad  itself  or  of  the  source  whence  it  was  derived,  and  that  is  where 

*  the  wife  ’  calls  her  usurious  means  of  living  ‘  her  cow.’  Hunter  (i,  306)  says  that  the 
application  of  the  word  is  not  peculiar  to  this  ballad,  but  that  a  salt-pit,  in  the  salt  dis¬ 
tricts,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Second,  was  known  by  the  name  Vaeca.  Still,  from 
internal  evidence  and  after  what  has  been  said  above,  I  think  we  may  dismiss  all 
thoughts  that  this  ballad,  whatever  its  date,  in  any  wise  contributed  to  the  Merchant 
of  Venice. 

Before  we  leave  the  region  of  Ballads,  it  is  proper  to  mention  another  whose  claims 
are  put  forward  by  Hunter  (i,  301),  as  follows  : 

‘  It  has  occurred  to  no  one  to  observe  that,  besides  the  ballad  of  Gemutus,  we  have 

*  in  the  popular  literature  of  England  another  ballad  containing  incidents  which  bear  a 
‘  close  resemblance  to  the  part  of  this  play  which  relates  to  the  bond,  as  it  contains  also 
‘  other  incidents  which  are  very  like  the  part  of  Cymbeline  which  relates  to  Posthumus, 
‘  Iachimo,  and  Imogen.  This  ballad  continued  to  be  occasionally  printed,  even  till 
‘  within  the  present  century.  The  copy  which  I  possess  is  entitled  The  Northern 
‘  Lord.  The  verse  is  exceedingly  low  and  groveling,  but  the  story  is  full  of  romantic 
‘  incidents.  This  ballad  is  little,  if  at  all,  known  within  the  range  of  Shakespearian 

*  criticism,  so  that  an  abstract  of  it  may  be  acceptable.  Of  its  age  I  can  pronounce  no 
‘  opinion  which  would  be  of  any  value ;  but  it  appears  to  me  not  of  modern  date,  that 
‘  is,  there  are  expressions  which  seem  to  belong  to  the  earlier  ages  of  the  existing 
‘  ballad-poetry,  and  that  the  incidents  are  too  numerous,  and  of  too  romantic  a  cast,  to 
‘  allow  of  its  being  considered  a  modern  invention. 

‘  A  certain  lord  has  two  daughters,  the  one  “  brown,”  the  other  “  fair.”  A  knight 
‘  who  presents  himself  to  the  father  as  a  suitor  is  informed  that  with  the  brown  he 
‘  will  give  as  a  portion  her  weight  in  gold,  and  that  he  expects  to  receive  her  weight 
in  gold  from  the  person  to  whom  he  gives  the  fairer  daughter.  The  knight,  of 

*  course,  selects  the  beanty,  and  to  raise  the  money  has  recourse  to  a  Jew  usurer,  who 


I 


294  APPENDIX 

‘  supplies  him  with  it,  taking  his  bond  for  the  repayment  at  a  certain  day,  and  in  de- 
‘  fault  he  is  to  lose  several  ounces  of  his  flesh.  They  marry ;  in  due  time  a  son  is  born, 

*  and  time  also  brings  round  the  day  when  the  money  is  to  be  repaid,  or  the  forfeit  taken. 

*  The  knight,  as  the  time  of  repayment  drew  near,  is  not  prepared  with  the  money,  and 

*  the  lady  urges  upon  him,  as  the  only  resource,  that  they  should  fly  beyond  sea.  They 

*  go  to  Germany,  where  the  Emperor,  having  learned  the  circumstances  under  which 
‘  they  had  come  into  his  dominions,  built  for  them  a  “  court,”  and  showed  them  great 
‘respect,  and  the  rather  because  they  came  from  Britain,  “That  blest  land  of  fame.”  ’ 

*  Here  they  lived  for  some  time  in  great  felicity,  till  a  “  Dutch  lord,”  who  was  in  the 

*  Emperor’s  court,  wagered  with  the  knight  a  ton  of  gold  that  he  would  “  enjoy  his  lady 
‘  “  gay,”  and  that  he  would  produce  a  diamond  ring  from  her  finger  in  proof.  The 
‘  Dutch  lord  has  recourse  to  what  is  the  approved  stratagem  on  such  occasions ;  he 
‘  bribes  a  waiting-maid  of  the  lady,  who  steals  the  ring  and  gives  it  to  him.  When 
‘  the  English  knight  sees  the  ring  in  the  stranger’s  possession  he  almost  swoons ;  and 
‘  then,  in  a  state  of  distraction,  flies  to  his  house,  and,  meeting  the  lady,  who  had  come 
‘  to  the  gate  to  welcome  him,  he  throws  her  at  once  headlong  into  the  moat. 

‘  So  cruel  a  murder  shocks  every  one,  and  the  knight  is  brought  to  trial,  convicted, 
‘  and  sentenced  to  death.  While  he  is  awaiting  the  execution  of  his  sentence,  there 

*  suddenly  appears  in  the  Emperor’s  court  another  English  knight  attired  in  green,  who 

*  easily  prevails  upon  the  Emperor  to  grant  a  second  hearing  of  the  case.  At  this  hear- 

*  ing  the  maid  is  brought  to  make  confession  of  her  guilt,  and  the  court  become  struck 
‘  with  the  possibility  that  the  crime  of  murder  may  not  have  been  committed,  as  the 
‘  evidence  went  no  further  than  to  prove  that  the  lady  was  thrown  into  the  moat.  The 

*  life  of  the  knight  is  thus  saved,  and  he  claims  and  receives  from  the  Dutch  lord  the 

*  ton  of  gold  which  he  had  justly  won. 

‘  His  mind  bent  on  revenge,  the  Dutch  lord  sends  information  to  the  Jew  where  his 

*  debtor  was  living.  The  exasperated  Jew  instantly  repairs  to  the  Emperor,  and  claims 
‘  in  his  court,  not  the  money  due  him,  but  the  penalty  of  the  bond.  While  this  claim 
‘  is  under  consideration,  the  green  knight  again  appears ;  mean  as  the  verse  is,  1  short 
‘  specimen  need  not  be  withheld  : 

‘  Said  the  noble  knight  in  green, 

‘  “  Sir,  may  not  your  articles  be  seen  ?” 

‘  “Yes,  that  they  may,”  replied  the  Jew, 

‘  “  And  I  resolve  to  have  my  due.” 

*  Lo,  then,  the  knight  began  to  read  : 

‘  At  length  he  said,  “  I  find,  indeed, 

‘  “  Nothing  but  flesh  you  are  to  have 
‘  Answers  the  Jew,  “  That’s  all  I  crave.” 

‘  The  poor  distressed  knight  was  brought : 

‘  The  bloody-minded  Jew,  he  thought 
‘  That  day  to  be  revenged  on  him, 

*  And  part  his  flesh  from  limb  to  limb. 

‘  The  knight  in  green  said,  “  Mr  Jew, 

*  “  There’s  nothing  else  but  flesh  your  due  , 

*  “  Then  see  no  drop  of  blood  you  shed, 

‘  “  For  if  you  do,  off  goes  your  head  ”  ’ 

1  The  Jew  hereupon  acts  as  Shylock  in  the  play. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— LET! 


295 

*  The  father  now  appears.  The  report  has  reached  him  that  his  daughter  has  been 
‘  drowned  by  her  husband.  He  brings  with  him  “  many  brave  horses,”  one  of  which 

*  is  purchased  of  him  immediately  by  the  green  knight.  The  father  is  clamorous  for 
‘justice,  insisting  that  his  child  must  have  been  murdered,  and  finally  the  knight  is 
‘  brought  out  to  execution  on  his  former  sentence.  At  this  juncture  the  knight  in 
‘  green  again  appears  with  the  steed  which  he  had  purchased,  and,  to  the  surprise  of 

*  every  one,  but  most  of  all  of  the  father,  he  runs  his  sword  through  the  body  of  the 
‘  noble  animal,  and  lays  it  dead  upon  the  place.  The  father  expressing  his  astonish - 

*  ment  at  such  an  act,  the  knight  in  green  argues  with  him  that,  as  he  had  purchased 

*  the  horse,  he  surely  might  do  with  it  what  he  pleased ;  and  then  presses  home  upon 
‘  him  that  he,  having  sold  his  daughter,  the  purchaser  had  an  equally  entire  proprie- 
‘  torship  in  her.  Now  comes  the  denouement.  The  green  knight  retires,  and  re- 

*  appears  in  splendid  female  habiliments,  when  the  father  and  husband  recognize  the 
‘  lady  who  had  been  supposed  to  be  drowned,  and  the  Emperor  “  proclaims  a  universal 
‘  “joy.” 

‘Whether  it  may  ultimately  turn  out  that  this  ballad  is  earlier  than  the  date  of 
‘  this  play  as  an  English  ballad,  and  as  it  is  evidently  in  some  way  connected  with 
‘  two  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  and  has  hitherto  remained  unnoticed,  or  at  least  not 
‘  publicly  noticed,  either  by  the  commentators  on  Shakespeare  or  the  collectors 
‘  of  the  ballad  poetry  of  England,  the  preceding  notice  of  it  will  not  be  though*- 
‘  misplaced.’ 

To  return  once  more  to  Bishop  Percy.  His  note  in  the  Reliques  (vol.  i,  p.  189, 
1765)  is  as  follows: 

‘  In  the  Life  of  Pope  Sixtus  V,  translated  from  the  Italian  of  Greg.  Leti,  by  the 

*  Rev.  Mr.  Farneworth  [p.  401,  ed.  1779],  is  a  remarkable  passage  to  the  following 
‘  effect :  It  was  reported  in  Rome  that  Drake  had  taken  and  plundered  St.  Domingo 
‘  in  Hispaniola,  and  carried  off  an  immense  booty.  This  account  came  in  a  private 
‘  letter  to  Paul  Secchi,  a  very  considerable  merchant  in  the  city,  who  had  large  con- 
‘  cems  in  those  parts,  which  he  had  insured.  Upon  receiving  this  news,  he  sent  for 
‘the  insurer,  Sampson  Ceneda,  a  Jew,  and  acquainted  him  with  it.  The  Jew,  whose 
‘  interest  it  was  to  have  such  a  report  thought  false,  gave  many  reasons  why  it  could 
‘  not  possibly  be  true,  and,  at  last,  worked  himself  into  such  a  passion,  that  he  said, 
‘  “  I’ll  lay  you  a  pound  of  my  flesh  it  is  a  lye.”  Such  sort  of  wagers,  it  is  well  known, 
‘  are  often  proposed  by  people  of  strong  passions,  to  convince  others  that  are  incredu- 
‘  lous  or  obstinate.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  say,  “  I’ll  lay  my  life  on  it 

‘  “  I’ll  forfeit  my  right  hand,  if  it  is  not  true,”  &c.  Secchi,  who  was  of  a  fiery,  hot 
‘  temper,  replied,  “  If  you  like  it,  I’ll  lay  you  a  thousand  crowns  against  a  pound  ot 
‘  “  your  flesh,  that  it  is  true.”  The  Jew  accepted  the  wager,  and  articles  were  imme- 
‘  diately  executed  betwixt  them,  the  substance  of  which  was,  That  if  Secchi  won,  he 
‘  should  himself  cut  the  flesh,  with  a  sharp  knife,  from  whatever  part  of  the  Jew’s 
‘body  he  pleased.  Unfortunately  for  the  Jew,  the  truth  of  the  account  was  soon 
‘confirmed;  and  the  Jew  was  almost  distracted  when  he  was  informed  that  Secchi 
‘  had  solemnly  sworn  he  would  compel  him  to  the  exact  performance  of  his  contract, 
‘  and  was  determined  to  cut  a  pound  of  flesh  from  that  part  of  his  body  which  it  is 
‘  not  necessary  to  mention.  A  report  of  this  transaction  was  brought  to  the  Pope, 

*  who  sent  for  the  parties,  and  being  informed  of  the  whole  affair,  said,  “  When  con- 
‘  “tracts  are  made,  it  is  just  they  should  be  fulfilled,  as  we  intend  this  shall.  Take  a 
‘  “  knife,  therefore,  Secchi,  and  cut  a  pound  of  flesh  from  any  part  you  please  of  the 


296 


APPENDIX 


‘  “Jew’s  body.  We  would  advise  you,  however,  to  be  very  careful;  for  if  you  cut  but 
‘  “  a  scruple,  or  a  grain,  more  or  less  than  your  due,  you  shall  certainly  be  hanged ;  go, 
‘  “  and  bring  thither  a  knife,  and  a  pair  of  scales,  and  let  it  be  done  in  our  presence.” 

*  The  merchant,  at  these  words,  began  to  tremble  like  an  aspen  leaf,  and  throwing  him- 
‘  self  at  his  Holiness’s  feet,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  protested,  “  It  was  far  from  his 
‘  “  thoughts  to  insist  upon  the  performance  of  the  contract.”  And  being  asked  by  the 
‘  Pope  what  he  demanded,  answered,  “  Nothing,  holy  father,  but  your  benediction,  and 

*  “that  the  articles  may  be  torn  in  pieces.”  Then,  turning  to  the  Jew,  he  asked  him, 
‘“What  he  had  to  say,  and  whether  he  was  content?”  The  Jew  answered,  “lie 
‘  “thought  himself  extremely  happy  to  come  off  at  so  easy  a  rate,  and  that  he  was  per- 
‘  “  fectly  content.”  “  But  we  are  not  content,”  replied  Sixtus,  “  nor  is  there  sufficient 

*  “  satisfaction  made  to  our  laws ;  we  desire  to  know  what  authority  you  have  to  lay 
‘  “such  wagers?  The  subjects  of  princes  are  the  property  of  the  state,  and  have  no 

*  “  right  to  dispose  of  their  bodies,  nor  any  part  of  them,  without  the  express  consent 
‘  “  of  their  sovereigns.”  They  were  both  immediately  sent  to  prison,  and  the  governor 
‘  ordered  to  proceed  against  them  with  the  utmost  severity  of  the  law,  that  others 
‘  might  be  deterred,  by  their  example,  from  laying  any  more  such  wagers.  The  Gov- 
‘  ernor,  thinking  to  please  Sixtus,  and  willing  to  know  what  sort  of  punishment  he  had 
‘  a  mind  should  be  inflicted  upon  them,  said,  “  Without  doubt,  they  had  been  guilty  of 
‘  “a  very  great  crime,  and  he  thought  they  deserved  each  of  them  to  be  fined  1000 
‘  “  crowns.”  “  To  be  fined,  each  of  them,  1000  crowns !”  answered  Sixtus.  “  Do  you 
‘  “  think  that  sufficient  ?  What !  shall  any  of  our  subjects  presume  to  dispose  of  his 
‘  “  life  without  our  permission  ?  Is  it  not  evident  that  the  Jew  has  actually  sold  his 

*  “  fife,  by  consenting  to  have  a  pound  of  flesh  cut  from  his  body  ?  Is  not  this  a  direct 
‘  “  suicide  ?  And  is  it  not  likewise  true  that  the  merchant  is  guilty  of  downright,  pre- 
‘  “  meditated  murder,  in  making  a  contract  with  the  other,  that  he  knew  must  be  the 
‘  “  occasion  of  his  death  if  he  insisted  upon  its  being  performed,  as  it  is  said  he  did  ? 
‘“Shall  two  such  villains  be  excused  for  a  simple  fine?”  The  Governor  alleging, 
‘  “  That  Secchi  protested  he  had  not  the  least  design  of  insisting  upon  the  performance 
‘  “of  the  contract,  and  that  the  Jew  did  not  at  all  imagine  he  would  when  he  laid  the 
‘  “  wager,”  Sixtus  replied,  “  These  protestations  were  only  made  out  of  fear  of  pun- 
‘  “  ishment,  and  because  they  were  in  our  presence,  and  therefore  no  regard  ought  to 

*  “  be  had  to  them ;  let  them  both  be  hanged ;  do  you  pass  that  sentence  on  them,  and 
‘  “  we  shall  take  care  of  the  rest.”  In  a  word,  they  were  both  condemned  to  death,  to 
‘  the  great  terror  and  amazement  of  everybody,  though  no  one  durst  open  his  mouth,  or 
‘  call  it  an  unjust  sentence.  As  Secchi  was  of  a  very  good  family,  having  many  great 
‘  friends  and  relations,  and  the  Jew  one  of  the  most  leading  men  of  the  synagogue, 
‘  they  both  had  recourse  to  petitions ;  strong  application  was  made  to  Cardinal  Mon- 
‘  talto,  to  intercede  with  his  Holiness,  at  least  to  spare  their  lives.  Sixtus,  who  did  not 
‘  really  design  to  put  them  to  death,  but  to  deter  others  from  such  practices,  at  last  con- 
‘  sented  to  change  the  sentence  into  that  of  the  galleys,  with  liberty  to  buy  off  that  too 
‘  by  paying  each  of  them  2000  crowns,  to  be  applied  to  the  use  of  the  hospital  (which 

*  he  had  lately  founded),  before  they  were  released.’ 

I  have  here  given  a  much  fuller  extract  from  Leti  than  is  given  by  Percy,  who  thus 
continues  in  reference  to  Farneworth’s  translation  : 

*  The  Editor  of  that  book  is  of  opinion,  That  the  scene  between  Shylock  and  Anto- 
‘  nio  is  taken  from  this  incident.  But  Mr  Warton  has,  with  more  probability,  referred  it 
‘  to  the  [ballad  of  Gemutus\ ,  which  would  seem  to  have  taken  its  rise  from  some  such 
‘  story.  After  all,  we  should  be  glad  to  know  what  authority  Leti,  who  wrote  in  the 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—IL  PECO  RONE 


297 


*  time  of  Charles  II,  had  for  the  foregoing  fact,  or,  at  least,  for  connecting  it  with  the 
‘taking  of  St.  Domingo  by  Drake;  for  this  expedition  did  not  happen  till  1585,  and  it 
‘  is  very  certain  that  a  play  of  the  Jew  was  mentioned  by  Gosson  in  1579.’ 

As  far  as  this  story  of  Secchi  and  Ceneda  is  concerned,  no  one,  I  think,  who  has 
read  that  very  entertaining  farrago  of  improbable  gossip  which  Leti  wrote  as  a  Life 
of  Pope  Sixtus  V,  will  consider  it  as  veracious  history,  or  as  any  othei  than  one  of  those 
pleasing  little  stories  with  which  Leti  lightened  his  pages.  Douce  considers  it  *  a  mere 
‘ fabrication,  grafted  on  one  of  those  that  Leti  had  met  with  on  the  same  subject;’  and 
Halliwell  echoes  the  same  opinion,  adding  that,  ‘  Leti  refers  the  narrative  to  the 

*  time  of  Elizabeth,  but  it  was  neither  written  nor  printed  till  some  time  after  the  death 
‘  of  Shakespeare.’ 

To  Capell  belongs  the  credit  of  having  discovered  a  story  whose  main  features  so 
strongly  resemble  the  story  of  The  Bond  that  it  has  been  widely  accepted  as  the  basis 
of  Shakespeare’s  play.  *  The  Jew  of  Venice ,’  says  Capell  (vol.  i,  p.  63),  ‘  was  a  story 
‘  exceedingly  well  known  in  Shakespeare’s  time ;  celebrated  in  ballads :  and  taken 
‘  (perhaps)  originally  from  an  Italian  book,  intitl’d — “  II  Pecorone the  author  of 
‘  which  calls  himself, — Ser  Giovanni  Fiorentino ;  and  writ  his  book,  as  he  tells  you 
‘  in  some  humorous  verses  at  the  beginning  of  it,  in  1378,  three  years  after  the  death 
‘  of  Boccace :  it  is  divided  into  giornata's,  and  the  story  we  are  speaking  of,  is  in  the 
‘first  novel  of  the  giornata  quanta;  Edit.  1565,  octavo,  in  Vinejia.  This  novel 

*  Shakespeare  certainly  read ;  either  in  the  original,  or  (which  I  rather  think)  in  some 
‘  translation  that  is  not  now  to  be  met  with,  and  form’d  his  play  upon  it.  It  was  trans¬ 
lated  anew,  and  made  publick  in  1755,  in  a  small  octavo  pamphlet,  printed  for  M. 
‘  Cooper :  and  at  the  end  of  it,  a  novel  of  Boccace  (the  first  of  day  the  tenth)  which, 
‘  as  the  translator  rightly  judges,  might  possibly  produce  the  scene  of  the  caskets,  sub- 
‘  stituted  by  the  Poet  in  place  of  one  in  the  other  novel,  that  was  not  proper  for  the 
‘  stage.’ 

Although  we  of  these  latter  days  do  not  agree  with  the  earlier  Editors  in  our  esti¬ 
mate  of  Shakespeare’s  learning,  and  cannot  think  with  Steevens  that  if  Shakespeare 
was  indebted  to  an  Italian  novelist,  *  it  must  have  been  through  the  medium  of  a  trans¬ 
lation,’  yet  there  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  that  a  translation  of  II  Pecorone  existed 
and  was  widely  read,  albeit  no  single  copy  has  survived.  Apparently,  England  was 
flooded  at  that  time  with  translations  of  Italian  stories,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  hot 
indignation  which  their  popularity  and  profusion  excited  in  the  breast  of  admirable 
Roger  Ascham,  who,  in  his  Scholemaster,  1570,  inveighs  most  bitterly  against  the 
introduction  into  England  of  ‘  the  Religion,  the  learning,  the  policie,  the  experience, 
the  maners  of  Italie]  and  then  continues  (p.  78,  ed.  Arber) :  ‘  These  be  the  inchante- 
mentes  of  Circes,  brought  out  of  Ilalie,  to  marre  men’s  maners  in  England ;  much,  by 
example  of  ill  life,  but  more  by  preceptes  of  fonde  bookes,  of  late  translated  out  of 
Italian  into  English,  sold  in  euery  shop  in  London,  commended  by  honest  titles  the 
soner  to  corrupt  honest  maners ;  dedicated  ouer  boldlie  to  vertuous  and  honourable 
personages,  the  easielier  to  begile  simple  and  innocent  wittes.’  Again  (on  p.  81), 
‘There  be  moe  of  these  vngratious  bookes  set  out  in  Printe  within  these  fewe 
monethes,  than  haue  bene  sene  in  England  many  score  yeare  before.’ 

We  need  have  no  compunction,  therefore,  in  supposing  that  Shakespeare  was  famil¬ 
iar  with  Ser  Giovanni  in  English.  The  first  translation,  however,  which  is  known  to 
>  us  is  that  referred  to  by  Capell,  and  of  which  Dr  Johnson,  in  his  Edition,  gives  the 
following  epitome,  which,  with  some  few  changes,  I  much  prefer  to  the  original  literal 


298 


APPENDIX 


translation,  which  they  who  list  can  find  in  Collier’s  Shakespeare  Library,  vol.  ii,  p.  65, 
&c.,  or  in  Hazlitt’s  reprint  of  the  same  : 

There  lived  at  Florence  a  merchant,  whose  name  was  Bindo.  He  was  rich  and 
had  three  sons.  Being  near  his  end,  he  called  for  the  two  eldest,  and  left  them  heirs ; 
to  the  youngest  he  left  nothing.  This  youngest,  whose  name  was  Giannetto,  went  to 
his  father  and  said  :  What  has  my  Father  done  ?  The  father  replied,  Dear  Giannetto, 
there  is  none  to  whom  I  wish  better  than  to  you.  Go  to  Venice  to  your  godfather, 
whose  name  is  Ansaldo ;  he  has  no  child,  and  has  wrote  to  me  often  to  send  you 
thither  to  him.  He  is  the  richest  merchant  amongst  the  Christians;  if  you  behave 
well,  you  will  certainly  be  a  rich  man.  The  son  answered,  I  am  ready  to  do  whatever 
my  dear  father  shall  command ;  upon  which  he  gave  him  his  benediction,  and  in  a  few 
days  died. 

Giannetto  went  to  Ansaldo,  and  presented  the  letter  given  by  his  father  before  his 
death.  Ansaldo  reading  the  letter,  cried  out,  My  dearest  godson  is  welcome  to  my 
arms.  He  then  asked  news  of  his  father.  Giannetto  replied,  He  is  dead.  I  am 
much  grieved,  replied  Ansaldo,  to  hear  of  the  death  of  Bindo ;  but  the  joy  I  feel  in 
seeing  you  mitigates  my  sorrow.  He  conducted  him  to  his  house,  and  gave  orders  to 
his  servants  that  Giannetto  should  be  obeyed,  and  served  with  more  attention  than  had 
been  paid  to  himself.  He  then  delivered  him  the  keys  of  his  ready  money ;  and  told 
him,  Son,  spend  this  money,  keep  a  table,  and  make  yourself  known ;  remember  that 
the  more  you  gain  the  good-will  of  everybody,  the  more  you  will  be  dear  to  me. 

Giannetto  now  began  to  give  entertainments.  He  was  more  obedient  and  courteous 
to  Ansaldo,  than  if  he  had  been  an  hundred  times  his  father.  Everybody  in  Venice 
was  fond  of  him.  Ansaldo  could  think  of  nothing  but  him :  so  much  was  he  pleased 
with  his  good  manners  and  behaviour. 

It  happened  that  two  of  his  most  intimate  acquaintances  designed  to  go  with  two 
ships  to  Alexandria,  and  told  Giannetto  he  would  do  well  to  take  a  voyage  and  see  the 
world.  I  would  go  willingly,  said  he,  if  my  father  Ansaldo  will  give  leave.  His  com¬ 
panions  go  to  Ansaldo,  and  beg  his  permission  for  Giannetto  to  go  in  the  spring  with 
them  to  Alexandria ;  and  desire  him  to  provide  him  a  ship.  Ansaldo  immediately  pro¬ 
cured  a  very  fine  ship,  loaded  it  with  merchandise,  adorned  it  with  streamers  and  fur¬ 
nished  it  with  arms ;  and,  as  soon  as  it  was  ready,  he  gave  orders  to  the  Captain  and 
sailors  to  do  everything  that  Giannetto  commanded.  It  happened  one  morning  early 
that  Giannetto  saw  a  gulph,  with  a  fine  port,  and  asked  the  Captain  how  the  port  was 
called  ?  He  replied,  That  place  belongs  to  a  widow  lady,  who  has  mined  many  gen¬ 
tlemen.  In  what  manner?  says  Giannetto.  He  answered,  This  Lady  is  a  fine  and 
beautiful  woman,  and  has  made  a  law  that  whoever  arrives  here  must  be  her  wooer, 
and  if  he  can  win  her  he  must  take  her  for  his  wife,  and  be  lord  of  all  the  country ; 
but  if  he  cannot  win  her,  he  loses  everything  he  has  brought  with  him.  Giannetto, 
after  a  little  reflection,  tells  the  Captain  to  get  into  the  port.  He  was  obeyed ;  and  in 
an  instant  they  slide  into  the  port  so  easily  that  the  other  ships  perceived  nothing. 

The  lady  was  soon  informed  of  it,  and  sent  for  Giannetto,  who  waited  on  her  imme¬ 
diately.  She,  taking  him  by  the  hand,  asked  him  who  he  was  ?  whence  he  came  ?  and 
.f  he  knew  the  custom  of  the  country  ?  He  answered,  That  the  knowledge  of  that 
custom  was  his  only  reason  for  coming.  The  lady  paid  him  great  honours,  and  sent 
for  barons,  counts,  and  knights  in  great  number,  who  were  her  subjects,  to  keep  Gian¬ 
netto  company.  These  nobles  were  highly  delighted  with  the  good  breeding  and  man¬ 
ners  of  Giannetto ;  and  all  would  have  rejoiced  to  have  him  for  their  lord. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—IL  PECORONE 


299 

The  night  being  come,  the  lady  said,  It  seems  to  be  time  to  go  to  bed ;  and  immedi¬ 
ately  two  damsels  enter  with  wine  and  sweetmeats.  The  lady  entreats  him  to  taste  the 
wine;  he  takes  the  sweetmeats,  and  drinks  some  of  the  wine,  which  was  prepared  with 
ingredients  to  cause  sleep.  He  then  goes  into  the  bed,  where  he  instantly  falls  asleep 
and  never  wakes  till  late  in  the  morning ;  but  the  lady  rose  with  the  sun  and  gave 
orders  to  unload  the  vessel,  which  she  found  full  of  rich  merchandize.  After  nine 
o’clock  the  women  servants  go  to  the  bedside,  order  Giannetto  to  rise  and  be  gone,  for 
he  had  lost  the  ship.  The  lady  gave  him  a  horse  and  money,  and  he  leaves  the  place 
very  melancholy,  and  goes  to  Venice.  When  he  arrives,  he  dares  not  return  home  for 
shame ;  but  at  night  goes  to  the  house  of  a  friend,  who  is  surprised  to  see  him,  and 
inquires  of  him  the  cause  of  his  return  ?  He  answers,  his  ship  had  struck  on  a  rock 
in  the  night,  and  was  broke  in  pieces. 

This  friend  going  one  day  to  make  visit  to  Ansaldo,  found  him  very  disconsolate.  I 
fear,  says  Ansaldo,  so  much,  that  this  son  of  mine  is  dead,  that  I  have  no  rest.  His 
friend  told  him  that  he  had  been  shipwrecked,  and  has  lost  his  all,  but  that  he  himself 
was  safe.  Ansaldo  instantly  gets  up  and  runs  to  find  him.  My  dear  son,  says  he,  you 
need  not  fear  my  displeasure ;  it  is  a  common  accident ;  trouble  yourself  no  further. 
He  takes  him  home,  all  the  way  telling  him  to  be  cheerful  and  easy. 

The  news  was  soon  known  all  over  Venice,  and  every  one  was  concerned  for  Gian¬ 
netto.  Some  time  after,  his  companions  arriving  from  Alexandria  very  rich,  demanded 
what  was  become  of  their  friend,  and  having  heard  the  story  ran  to  see  him,  and  re¬ 
joiced  with  him  for  his  safety ;  telling  him  next  spring  he  might  gain  as  much  as  he 
had  lost  the  last.  But  Giannetto  had  no  other  thoughts  than  of  his  return  to  the  lady ; 
and  was  resolved  to  marry  her,  or  die.  Ansaldo  told  him  frequently  not  to  be  cast 
down.  Giannetto  said  he  should  never  be  happy  till  he  was  at  liberty  to  make  another 
voyage.  Ansaldo  provided  another  ship  of  more  value  than  the  first.  He  again 
entered  the  port  of  Belmonte,  and  the  lady  looking  on  the  port  from  her  bed-chamber, 
and  seeing  the  ship,  asked  her  maid  if  she  knew  the  streamers  ?  The  maid  said,  it 
was  the  ship  of  the  young  man  who  arrived  last  year.  You  are  in  the  right,  answered 
the  lady ;  he  must  surely  have  a  great  regard  for  me,  for  never  any  one  came  a  second 
time ;  the  maid  said,  she  had  never  seen  a  more  agreeable  man.  He  went  to  the  cas¬ 
tle,  and  presented  himself  to  the  lady;  who,  as  soon  as  she  saw  him,  embraced  him, 
and  the  day  was  passed  in  joy  and  revels.  Bed-time  being  come,  the  lady  entreated 
him  to  go  to  rest ;  when  they  were  seated  in  the  chamber,  the  two  damsels  enter  with 
wine  and  sweetmeats ;  and  having  eaten  and  drunk  of  them,  they  retire,  and  immedi¬ 
ately  Giannetto  falls  asleep,  and  the  lady  lay  down  by  his  side ;  but  he  waked  not  the 
whole  night.  In  the  morning  the  lady  rises,  and  gives  orders  to  strip  the  ship.  He 
has  a  horse  and  money  given  to  him  and  away  he  goes,  and  never  stops  till  he  gets  to 
Venice;  and  at  night  goes  to  the  same  friend,  who  with  astonishment  asked  him,  what 
was  the  matter?  I  am  undone,  says  Giannetto.  His  friend  answered,  You  are  the 
cause  of  the  ruin  of  Ansaldo,  and  your  shame  ou§ht  to  be  greater  than  the  loss  you 
have  suffered.  Giannetto  lived  privately  many  days.  At  last  he  took  a  resolution  of 
seeing  Ansaldo,  who  rose  from  his  chair,  and  running  to  embrace  him,  told  him  he  was 
welcome :  Giannetto  with  tears  returned  his  embraces.  Ansaldo  heard  his  tale  :  Do 
not  grieve,  my  dear  son,  says  he,  we  have  still  enough ;  the  sea  enriches  some  men, 
others  it  ruins. 

Poor  Giannetto’s  head  was  day  and  night  full  of  the  thoughts  of  his  bad  success. 
When  Ansaldo  inquired  what  was  the  matter,  he  confessed  he  could  never  be  con¬ 
tented  till  he  should  be  in  a  condition  to  regain  all  that  he  had  lost.  When  Ansaldo 


300 


APPENDIX 


found  him  resolved,  he  began  to  sell  everything  he  had  to  furnish  this  other  fine  ship 
with  merchandise ;  but  as  he  wanted  still  ten  thousand  ducats,  he  applied  himself  to 
a  Jew  at  Mestri,  and  borrowed  them  on  condition  that  if  they  were  not  paid  on  the 
feast  of  St  John  in  the  next  month  of  June,  the  Jew  might  take  a  pound  of  flesh  from 
any  part  of  his  body  he  pleased.  Ansaldo  agreed,  and  the  Jew  had  an  obligation 
drawn,  and  witnessed,  with  all  the  form  and  ceremony  necessary;  and  then  counted 
him  the  ten  thousand  ducats  of  gold ;  with  which  Ansaldo  bought  what  was  still  want¬ 
ing  for  the  vessel.  This  last  ship  was  finer  and  better  freighted  than  the  other  two, 
and  his  companions  made  ready  for  the  voyage,  with  a  design  that  whatever  they 
gained  should  be  for  their  friend.  When  it  was  time  to  depart  Ansaldo  told  Gian- 
netto,  that  since  he  well  knew  of  the  obligation  to  the  Jew,  he  entreated  that  if  any 
misfortune  happened  he  would  return  to  Venice,  that  he  might  see  him  before  he 
died ;  and  then  he  could  leave  the  world  with  satisfaction ;  Giannetto  promised  to  do 
everything  that  he  conceived  might  give  him  pleasure.  Ansaldo  gave  him  his  blessing, 
they  took  their  leave,  and  the  ships  set  out. 

Giannetto  had  nothing  in  his  head  but  to  steal  into  Belmonte;  and  he  prevailed 
with  one  of  the  sailors  in  the  night  to  sail  the  vessel  into  the  port.  It  was  told  the 
lady  that  Giannetto  was  arrived  in  port.  She  saw  from  the  window  the  vessel,  and 
immediately  sent  for  him.  Giannetto  goes  to  the  castle,  the  day  is  spent  in  joy  and 
feasting ;  and  to  honour  him  a  tournament  is  ordered,  and  many  barons  and  knights 
tilted  that  day.  Giannetto  did  wonders,  so  well  did  he  understand  the  lance,  and  was 
so  graceful  a  figure  on  horseback ;  he  pleased  so  much,  that  all  were  desirous  of  having 
him  for  their  lord. 

The  lady,  when  it  was  the  usual  time,  catching  him  by  the  hand,  begged  him  to 
take  his  rest.  When  he  passed  the  door  of  the  chamber,  one  of  the  damsels  in  a 
whisper  said  to  him,  Make  a  pretence  to  drink  the  liquor,  but  touch  not  one  drop. 
The  lady  said,  I  know  you  must  be  thirsty,  I  must  have  you  drink  before  you  go  to 
bed ;  immediately  two  damsels  entered  the  room  and  presented  the  wine.  Who  can 
refuse  wine  from  such  beautiful  hands  ?  cries  Giannetto :  at  which  the  lady  smiled. 
Giannetto  takes  the  cup,  and  making  as  if  he  had  drank,  pours  the  wine  into  his 
bosom.  The  lady  thinking  he  had  drank,  says  aside  to  herself  with  great  joy,  You 
must  go,  young  man,  and  bring  another  ship,  for  this  is  condemned.  Giannetto  went 
to  bed  and  began  to  snore  as  if  he  slept  soundly.  The  lady  perceiving  this,  laid  her¬ 
self  down  by  his  side.  Giannetto  at  once  exclaimed,  Now  I  have  gained  the  trial,  and 
you  must  marry  me.  When  Giannetto  came  out  of  his  chamber  he  was  knighted,  and 
placed  in  the  chair  of  state ;  had  the  sceptre  put  into  his  hand,  and  was  proclaimed 
sovereign  of  the  country,  with  great  pomp  and  splendour;  and  when  the  lords  and 
ladies  were  come  to  the  castle,  he  married  the  lady  in  great  ceremony. 

Giannetto  governed  excellently,  and  caused  justice  to  be  administered  impartially. 
He  continued  some  time  in  this  happy  state,  and  never  entertained  a  thought  of  poor 
Ansaldo,  who  had  given  his  bond  to  the  Jew  for  ten  thousand  ducats.  But  one  day, 
as  he  stood  at  the  window  of  the  palace  with  his  bride,  he  saw  a  number  of  people 
pass  along  the  piazza,  with  lighted  torches  in  their  hands.  What  is  the  meaning  of 
this?  said  he.  The  lady  answered,  They  are  artificers  going  to  make  their  offerings 
at  the  Church  of  St  John,  this  day  being  his  festival.  Giannetto  instantly  recollected 
Ansaldo,  gave  a  great  sigh,  and  turned  pale.  His  lady  enquired  the  cause  of  his  sud¬ 
den  change.  He  said  he  felt  nothing.  She  continued  to  press  with  great  earnestness, 
till  he  was  obliged  to  confess  the  cause  of  his  uneasiness,  that  Ansaldo  was  engaged 
foi  the  money,  that  the  term  was  expired ;  and  the  grief  he  was  in  was  lest  his  fathe' 


SOURCE  CF  THE  PLOT—IL  PECO  RONE 


301 


should  lose  his  life  for  him ;  that  if  the  ten  thousand  ducats  were  not  paid  that  day,  he 
must  lose  a  pound  of  his  flesh.  The  lady  told  him  to  mount  on  horseback,  and  go  by 
land  the  nearest  way,  to  take  some  attendants,  and  an  hundred  thousand  ducats ;  and 
not  to  stop  until  he  arrived  at  Venice ;  and  if  he  was  not  dead  to  bring  Ansaldo  to 
her.  Giannetto  takes  horse,  with  twenty  attendants,  and  makes  the  best  of  his  way  to 
Venice. 

The  time  being  expired,  the  Jew  had  seized  Ansaldo,  and  insisted  on  having  a  pound 
of  his  flesh.  He  entreated  him  only  to  wait  some  days,  that  if  his  dear  Giannetto  arrived, 
he  might  have  the  pleasure  of  embracing  him;  the  Jew  replied  he  was  willing  to  wait, 
but,  says  he,  I  will  cut  off"  the  pound  of  flesh  according  to  the  words  of  the  obligation ; 
Ansaldo  answered,  that  he  was  content. 

Several  merchants  would  have  jointly  paid  the  money;  the  Jew  would  not  harken  to 
the  proposal,  but  insisted  that  he  might  have  the  satisfaction  of  saying,  that  he  had  put 
to  death  the  greatest  of  the  Christian  merchants.  Giannetto  making  all  possible  haste 
to  Venice,  his  lady  soon  followed  him  in  a  lawyer’s  habit,  with  two  servants  attending 
her.  Giannetto,  when  he  came  to  Venice,  goes  to  the  Jew,  and  (after  embracing  An¬ 
saldo)  tells  him  he  is  ready  to  pay  the  money,  and  as  much  more  as  he  should  demand. 
The  Jew  said  he  would  take  no  money,  since  it  was  not  paid  at  the  time  due,  but  that 
he  would  have  the  pound  of  flesh.  Every  one  blamed  the  Jew;  but  as  Venice  was  a 
place  where  justice  was  strictly  administered,  and  the  Jew  had  his  pretensions  grounded 
on  publick  and  received  fonns,  their  only  resource  was  entreaty ;  and  when  the  mer¬ 
chants  of  Venice  applied  to  him  he  was  inflexible.  Giannetto  offered  him  twenty  thou¬ 
sand,  then  thirty  thousand,  afterwards,  forty,  fifty,  and  at  last,  an  hundred  thousand 
ducats.  The  Jew  told  him  if  he  would  give  him  as  much  gold  as  Venice  was  worth, 
he  would  not  accept  it ;  and,  says  he,  you  know  little  of  me,  if  you  think  I  will  desist 
from  my  demand. 

The  lady  now  arrives  in  Venice,  in  her  lawyer’s  dress;  and  alighting  at  an  inn,  the 
landlord  asks  of  one  of  the  servants  who  his  master  was  ?  The  servant  answered,  that 
he  was  a  young  lawyer  who  had  finished  his  studies  at  Bologna.  The  landlord  upon 
this  shows  his  guest  great  civility ;  and  when  he  attended  at  dinner,  the  lawyer  inquir¬ 
ing  how  justice  was  administered  in  that  city ;  he  answered,  justice  in  this  place  is  too 
severe,  and  related  the  case  of  Ansaldo.  Says  the  lawyer,  this  question  may  be  easily 
answered.  If  you  can  answer  it,  says  the  landlord,  and  save  this  worthy  man  from 
death,  you  will  get  the  love  and  esteem  of  all  the  best  men  of  this  city.  The  lawyer 
caused  a  proclamation  to  be  made,  that  whosoever  had  any  law  matters  to  determine, 
they  should  have  recourse  to  him :  so  it  was  told  to  Giannetto  that  a  famous  lawyer 
was  come  from  Bologna,  who  could  decide  all  cases  in  law.  Giannetto  proposed  to 
the  Jew  to  apply  to  this  lawyer.  With  all  my  heart,  says  the  Jew ;  but  let  who  will 
come,  I  will  stick  to  my  bond.  They  came  to  this  judge  and  saluted  him.  Giannetto 
did  not  remember  him ;  for  he  had  disguised  his  face  with  the  juice  of  certain  herbs. 
Giannetto  and  the  Jew  each  told  the  merits  of  the  cause  to  the  judge ;  who,  when  he 
had  taken  the  bond  and  read  it,  said  to  the  Jew,  I  must  have  you  take  the  hundred 
thousand  ducats,  and  release  this  honest  man,  who  will  always  have  a  grateful  sense 
of  the  favour  done  to  him.  The  Jew  replied,  I  will  do  no  such  thing.  The  judge 
answered,  it  will  be  better  for  you.  The  Jew  was  positive  to  yield  nothing.  Upon 
this  they  go  to  the  tribunal  appointed  for  such  judgements ;  and  our  judge  says  to  the 
Jew,  Do  you  cut  a  pound  of  this  man’s  flesh  where  you  choose.  The  Jew  ordered 
»  him  to  be  stripped  naked ;  and  takes  in  his  hand  a  razor,  which  had  been  made  on 
purpose.  Giannetto  seeing  this,  turning  to  the  judge,  this,  says  he,  is  not  the  favour  I 


302 


APPENDIX 


asked  of  you.  Be  quiet,  says  he,  the  pound  of  flesh  is  not  yet  cut  off.  As  soon  as 
the  Jew  was  going  to  begin,  Take  care  what  you  do,  says  the  judge,  if  you  take  more 
or  less  than  a  pound,  I  will  order  your  head  to  be  struck  off ;  and  beside,  if  you  shed 
one  drop  of  blood  you  shall  be  put  to  death.  Your  paper  makes  no  mention  of  the 
shedding  of  blood,  but  says  expressly  that  you  may  take  a  pound  of  flesh,  neither  more 
nor  less.  He  immediately  sent  for  the  executioner  to  bring  the  block  and  axe ;  and 
now,  says  he,  if  I  see  one  drop  of  blood,  off  goes  your  head.  At  length  the  Jew,  after 
much  wrangling,  told  him,  Give  me  the  hundred  thousand  ducats,  and  I  am  content. 
No,  says  the  judge,  cut  off  your  pound  of  flesh  according  to  your  bond ;  why  did  you 
not  take  the  money  when  it  was  offered  ?  The  Jew  came  down  to  ninety,  then  to 
eighty  thousand;  but  the  judge  was  still  resolute.  Giannetto  told  the  judge  to  g.ve 
what  he  required,  that  Ansaldo  might  have  his  liberty ;  but  he  replied,  let  me  manage 
him.  Then  the  Jew  would  have  taken  fifty  thousand ;  he  said,  I  will  not  give  you  a 
penny.  Give  me  at  least,  says  the  Jew,  my  own  ten  thousand  ducats,  and  a  curse  con¬ 
found  you  all.  The  judge  replies,  I  will  give  you  nothing ;  if  you  will  have  the  pound 
of  flesh,  take  it;  if  not,  I  will  order  your  bond  to  De  protested  and  annulled.  The 
Jew  seeing  he  could  gain  nothing,  tore  in  pieces  the  bond  in  a  great  rage;  Ansaldo 
was  released,  and  conducted  home  with  great  joy  by  Giannetto,  who  carried  the  hun¬ 
dred  thousand  ducats  to  the  inn  to  the  lawyer.  The  lawyer  said,  I  do  not  want 
money ;  carry  it  back  to  your  lady,  that  she  may  not  say  that  you  have  squandered  it 
away  idly.  Says  Giannetto,  my  lady  is  so  kind,  that  I  might  spend  four  times  as  much 
without  incurring  her  displeasure.  How  are  you  pleased  with  the  lady  ?  says  the  law¬ 
yer.  I  love  her  better  than  any  earthly  thing,  answers  Giannetto.  Nature  seems  to 
have  done  her  utmost  in  forming  her.  If  you  will  come  and  see  her,  you  will  be  sur¬ 
prised  at  the  honours  she  will  shew  you.  I  cannot  go  with  you,  says  the  lawyer ;  but 
since  you  speak  so  much  good  of  her,  I  must  desire  you  to  present  my  respects  to  her. 
I  will  not  fail,  Giannetto  answered ;  and  now  let  me  entreat  you  to  accept  of  some  of 
the  money.  While  he  was  speaking,  the  lawyer  observed  a  ring  on  his  finger,  and 
said,  if  you  will  give  me  this  ring,  I  shall  seek  no  other  reward.  Willingly,  says 
Giannetto ;  but  as  it  is  a  ring  given  me  by  my  lady,  to  wear  for  her  sake,  I  have  some 
reluctance  to  part  with  it,  and  she,  not  seeing  it  on  my  finger,  will  believe  that  I  have 
given  it  to  a  woman.  Says  the  lawyer,  she  esteems  you  sufficiently  to  credit  what  you 
tell  her,  and  you  may  say  you  made  a  present  of  it  to  me ;  but  I  rather  think  you  want 
to  give  it  to  some  former  mistress  here  in  Venice.  So  great,  says  Giannetto,  is  the  love 
and  reverence  I  bear  to  her,  that  I  would  not  change  her  for  any  woman  in  the  world. 
After  this  he  takes  the  ring  from  his  finger,  and  presents  it  to  him.  I  have  still  a 
favour  to  ask,  says  the  lawyer.  It  shall  be  granted,  says  Giannetto.  It  is,  replied  he, 
that  you  do  not  stay  any  time  here,  but  go  as  soon  as  possible  to  your  lady.  It  appears 
to  me  a  thousand  years  till  I  see  her,  answered  Giannetto ;  and  immediately  they  take 
leave  of  each  other.  The  lawyer  embarked  and  left  Venice.  Giannetto  took  leave  of 
his  Venetian  friends,  and  carried  Ansaldo  with  him,  and  some  of  his  old  acquaintance 
accompanied  them. 

The  lady  arrived  some  days  before ;  and  having  resumed  her  female  habit,  pretended 
to  have  spent  the  time  at  the  baths;  and  now  gave  orders  to  have  the  streets  lined  with 
tapestry ;  and  when  Giannetto  and  Ansaldo  were  landed,  all  the  court  went  out  to  meet 
them.  When  they  arrived  at  the  palace,  the  lady  ran  to  embrace  Ansaldo,  but  feigned 
anger  against  Giannetto,  tho’  she  loved  him  excessively :  yet  the  feastings,  tilts,  and 
diversions,  went  on  as  usual,  at  which  all  the  lords  and  ladies  were  present.  Gian¬ 
netto  seeing  that  his  wife  did  not  receive  him  with  her  accustomed  good  countenance, 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—IL  PECO  RONE 


303 


called  her  and  would  have  saluted  her.  She  told  him  she  wanted  not  his  caresses ;  I 
am  sure,  says  she,  you  have  been  lavish  of  them  to  some  of  your  former  mistresses. 
Gi:  nnetto  began  to  make  excuses.  She  asked  him  where  was  the  ring  she  had  given 
him  ?  It  is  no  more  than  what  I  expected,  cries  Giannetto,  and  I  was  in  the  right  to 
say  you  would  be  angry  with  me ;  but  I  swear  by  all  that  is  sacred,  and  by  your  dear 
self,  that  I  gave  the  ring  to  the  lawyer  who  gained  our  cause.  And  I  can  swear,  says 
the  lady,  with  as  much  solemnity,  that  you  gave  the  ring  to  a  woman  ;  therefore,  swear 
no  more.  Giannetto  protested  that  what  he  had  told  her  was  true,  and  that  he  said 
all  this  to  the  lawyer  when  he  asked  for  the  ring.  The  lady  replied,  you  would  have 
done  much  better  to  stay  at  Venice  with  your  mistresses,  for  I  fear  they  all  wept  when 
you  came  away.  Giannetto’s  tears  began  to  fall,  and  in  great  sorrow  he  assured  her 
that  what  she  supposed  could  not  be  true.  The  lady  seeing  his  tears,  which  were  dag¬ 
gers  in  her  bosom,  ran  to  embrace  him,  and  in  a  fit  of  laughter  showed  the  ring,  and 
told  him  that  she  was  herself  the  lawyer,  and  how  she  obtained  the  ring.  Giannetto 
was  greatly  astonished,  finding  it  all  true,  and  told  the  story  to  the  nobles  and  to  his 
companions;  and  this  heightened  greatly  the  love  between  him  and  his  lady.  He 
then  called  the  damsel,  who  had  given  him  the  good  advice  in  the  evening  not  to 
drink  the  liquor,  and  gave  her  to  Ansaldo  for  a  wife ;  and  they  spent  the  rest  of  their 
lives  in  great  felicity  and  contentment. 

Douce  says  (i,  280) :  ‘  A  part  of  the  novel  in  the  Pecorone  is  most  likely  of  Oriental 
‘  origin,  and  might  have  been  transmitted  to  Ser  Giovanni  from  the  same  source  that 
1  supplied  Boccaccio  and  many  of  the  French  minstrels  with  their  stories,  viz.  the 

*  Crusades.’ 

Skottowe  (i,  321) :  ‘The  similarity  between  the  novel  and  the  play  is  striking.  In 

*  both  the  money  engaged  for  by  the  bond  is  borrowed,  not  for  the  use  of  the  borrower, 
‘  but  to  enable  a  young  man  to  obtain  the  hand  of  a  wealthy  lady  resident  at  Belmont. 
‘  The  forfeiture  of  the  same  portion  of  flesh  is  stipulated  on  failure  of  payment,  and  the 
‘  flesh,  in  both  instances,  is  to  be  taken  from  what  part  of  the  merchant’s  body  pleased 
‘  the  Jew;  who,  in  each  case,  is  offered  ten  times  the  amount  of  his  debt  by  the  person 
‘  for  whom  it  was  contracted.  The  bride,  in  both  cases,  arrives  at  Venice  disguised  as 
‘  a  lawyer,  and  interposes  the  same  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  exaction  of  the 
‘  bloody  penalty.  Both  the  fair  judges  refuse  pecuniary  recompense ;  both  request  from 
‘  the  fingers  of  their  husbands  rings  which  they  themselves  had  given  to  them,  and  the 
‘  same  species  of  badinage  is  the  consequence  of  compliance  when  the  ladies  resume 

*  their  own  characters  at  Belmont.’ 

Spedding  {Corn hill  Maga.,  March,  1880,  p.  282):  ‘I  suppose  nobody  who  reads 
‘  this  story  and  knows  the  play, — two  conditions  which  do  not  seem  to  have  been 
‘  generally  united, — will  doubt  that  Shakespeare  had  either  read  or  heard  it,  and  that 

*  it  was  from  this  ....  that  he  derived  his  idea,  not  only  of  the  forfeiture  of  the  pound 

‘  of  flesh,  but  of  the  entire  train  of  incidents,  and  the  characters  and  relations  of  the 
‘  persons  of  the  drama . The  changes  which  he  introduced  were  only  such  as  the 

*  conversion  of  a  narrative  into  an  actable  play  required.  The  action  had  to  be  brought 
‘  within  compass ;  the  stage  to  be  peopled ;  the  persons  to  speak  and  act,  instead  of 
‘  being  described ;  new  incidents  to  be  invented  or  imported  for  entertainment  and 

*  variety.  But  all  this  he  did  in  careful  conformity  with  the  fundamental  conception 
‘  of  the  several  characters  as  indicated  in  the  old  story.  Giannetto’s  first  two  voyages 

>  *  being  ignored,  the  play  begins  at  once  with  the  preparations  for  the  third,  which 
‘  involves  the  bargain  with  the  Jew ;  whereby,  without  sacrificing  anything  material, 


3°4 


APPENDIX 


‘  the  action  is  considerably  shortened.  The  original  condition  of  the  marriage,  being 
‘  at  once  unpresentable  to  a  Shakespearian  audience  and  irreconcilable  with  the  lady’s 

*  character  as  shown  in  the  sequel,  is  rejected  altogether ;  but,  in  substituting  for  it  the 

*  device  of  the  three  caskets,  care  is  taken  to  preserve  all  the  essential  features  of  the 

*  situation.  Bassanio,  having  run  in  debt  by  living  beyond  his  income,  resolves  to  try 
‘  his  chance  with  a  great  heiress, — a  lady  for  whom  in  her  father’s  time  he  had  con- 

*  ceived  an  affection,  which  he  had  reason  to  believe  was  mutual, — but  who  could  only 

*  be  sought  in  marriage  upon  the  perilous  condition  of  losing  all  if  a  riddle  were  not 

*  rightly  read.  To  furnish  himself  for  the  adventure  he  has  to  borrow  money  from  his 

*  kinsman  and  dearest  friend  and  benefactor,  Antonio ;  who,  in  order  to  supply  him 
'  without  delay,  borrows  it  from  Shylock  on  the  security  of  the  pound  of  flesh.  Thus 
‘  we  have  Bassanio  and  Antonio  essentially  in  the  same  condition  towards  each  other 
« as  Giannetto  and  Ansaldo  when  parting  for  the  final  voyage ;  while  Bassanio,  as  soon 
‘  as  he  has  chosen  the  right  casket,  is  in  exactly  the  same  position  as  Giannetto  after 
‘  the  successful  performance  of  his  appointed  task ;  and  in  all  the  scenes  that  follow 
‘  we  have  only  to  imagine  Giannetto  in  Bassanio’s  place,  and  we  feel  that  he  would 
‘  have  both  spoken  and  acted  in  the  same  way, — that  the  characters  are,  in  fact,  iden- 

*  tical.  So,  again,  the  Ansaldo  of  the  story  and  the  Antonio  of  the  play  are  only  two 

*  portraits  of  the  same  man  by  different  artists,  one  of  whom  sees  further  into  him  than 
the  other.  We  are  not  told  by  the  novelist  that  Ansaldo  suffered  from  a  constitutional 

*  depression  of  spirits,  but  it  probably  occurred  to  Shakespeare  as  necessary  to  account 
‘  for  that  extraordinary  indifference  to  all  mortal  accidents  (the  happiness  of  his  adopted 

*  son  excepted),  which,  in  the  degree  to  which  it  is  carried  in  the  novel,  he  appears  to 
‘  have  thought  impossible  in  nature  after  all,  and  has,  therefore,  shown  in  Antonio 
‘  much  mitigated ;  for  whereas,  Ansaldo,  knowing  himself  to  be  ruined,  signs  the  bond 

*  with  a  clear  presentiment  of  the  consequence,  and  yet  asks  Giannetto  for  nothing 

*  more  than  a  promise  that  he  will  see  him  before  he  dies,  Antonio  when  he  signs, 

*  though  short  of  ready  money  for  the  moment,  is  still  in  the  full  flow  of  his  fortunes, 
‘  and  laughs  at  the  idea  of  being  called  on  to  pay  the  forfeit.  It  is  true  that  when  the 

*  danger  fronts  him,  and  cannot  be  escaped,  he  meets  it  as  patiently,  and  with  as  much 
‘  apparent  indifference,  as  Ansaldo, — making  no  vain  remonstrance,  not  complaining  of 
‘  the  rigour  of  the  law,  but  justifying  its  execution,  and  content  to  die,  provided  only 
‘  that  he  may  see  Bassanio  again  before  he  is  put  to  death.  But  there  is  a  great  differ- 
‘  ence  between  accepting  such  a  fate  with  equanimity  when  it  is  inevitable,  and  delibe 
‘  rately  incurring  it  when  it  is  foreseen  and  may  be  declined. 

‘  Then,  again,  the  absolute  inoffensiveness  of  Ansaldo,  who  does  not  seem  to  have 
‘  uttered  a  harsh  word,  or  entertained  an  unkind  thought  against  anybody, — with  whom 

*  the  very  man  who  is  avowing  his  determination  to  take  his  life,  though  all  Venice  were 

*  offered  him  to  spare  it,  does  not  pretend  any  cause  except  his  being  the  greatest  of  the 

*  Christian  merchants, — seemed  to  make  the  Jew’s  proceeding  too  monstrous  to  be  endur- 
‘  able  by  an  English  audience.  Such  malice  needed  some  provocation  to  make  it  cred- 

*  ible  enough  for  the  human  imagination,  and  a  probable  cause  of  provocation  readily 
‘  offered  itself  in  the  disputes  which  must  have  occurred  on  the  Rialto  between  two 

*  such  men.  A  man  who  would  enforce  his  contract  for  a  pound  of  flesh  in  such  a 
‘  case  was  sure  in  all  his  transactions  to  take  advantages  of  the  helpless,  which  a  lib- 
‘  eral  and  beneficent  merchant  would  be  sure  to  be  disgusted  with  and  interfere  to 
‘  thwart.  On  such  occasions  feelings  would  be  expressed  and  words  uttered  which 

would  not  sting  the  less  for  being  just  and  well  deserved.  And  that  this  was  the 
real  history  of  the  revengeful  hatred  on  one  side,  and  the  contemptuous  dislike  on 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—GESTA  ROMA  NORUM  305 


•  the  other,  we  are  made  to  understand  at  once,  as  soon  as  they  meet,  by  the  irritating 
4  and  sarcastic  speech  of  Shylock  (finding  himself  for  the  first  time  at  an  advantage) 

4  and  the  angry  retort  which  it  provokes  from  Antonio.  This  revelation  of  their 

*  respective  feelings  towards  each  other  shows  ground  enough  for  Shylock’s  malice  to 
4  bring  it  within  the  range,  not  indeed  of  human  sympathy,  which  was  not  intended,  but 
4  of  possibility  in  human  nature.  We  can  imagine  nature  so  diseased  and  perverted  as 

4  to  be  capable  of  it  without  ceasing  to  be  human . If  the  characters  of  Bassanio, 

4  Antonio,  and  Shylock  are  manifestly  and  directly  derived  from  Ser  Giovanni’s  story, 

4  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  lady  of  Belmonte  suggested  the  idea  of  Portia,  every 
'  one  of  whose  qualities,  as  we  see  them  brought  out  in  the  play  by  Shakespeare’s  own 
4  hand, — the  generosity,  the  affection,  the  spirit,  the  intellect,  the  gayety,  and  playful- 
4  ness, — he  found  hints  of  in  the  novelist’s  account  of  the  lady’s  proceedings  between 
4  her  discovery  of  Ansaldo’s  position  and  her  reception  of  him  and  her  husband  at 
4  Belmonte.  What  need,  then,  have  we  to  seek  further,  either  for  the  source  of  the 
4  plot,  or  the  choice  of  the  subject,  or  the  manner  of  its  treatment  ?’ 

Thus  far  we  have  examined  the  Ballad  source  started  by  Warton,  the  Leti  source  by 
Farneworth,  and  the  Pecorone  source  by  Capell,  and  all  of  them  dealing  with  the  Pound 
of  Flesh  or  the  Bond  Story.  Still  harping  on  that,  we  must  now  go  back  to  Tyrwhitt, 
who,  in  the  Variorum  of  1773,  suggested  that  a  4  common  remote  origin  ’  might  be  found 
for  both  the  Bond  and  the  Casket  Stories  in  the  Gesia  Romanorum ,  a  collection  of 
stories  presumably  compiled  towards  the  end  of  the  13th  Century  in  England*  ‘The 
Gesta  Romanorum,  in  its  original  form,’  says  its  admirable  Editor,  Mr  Herrtage,  in  the 
Early  English  Text  Society's  Series,  ‘is  a  collection  of  fictitious  narratives  in  Latin, 
4  compiled  from  Oriental  apologues,  monkish  legends,  classical  stories,  tales  of  chron- 
4  iclers,  popular  traditions,  and  other  sources,  which  it  would  be  now  difficult  and  per- 
4  haps  impossible  to  discover.’ 

Tyrwhitt  was  obliged  to  say  4  remote  ’  origin,  because  4  the  completest  copy  ’  he  had 
ever  seen  (Harl.  2270)  was  not  only  a  MS,  but  in  Latin,  and,  in  Tyrwhitt’s  days,  it 
was  not  to  be  supposed  that,  in  that  form  and  in  that  language,  it  was  either  accessible 
or  intelligible  to  Shakespeare. 

An  English  translation,  however,  did  exist,  and  was  popular  in  Shakespeare’s  time. 
Originally  it  was  printed  by  Wynkyn  de  Worde,  presumably,  according  to  Herrtage,  in 
15 10-15,  and  of  this  issue  but  one  single  copy  survives;  Dr  Farmer  cites  it,  and  Tyr¬ 
whitt  may  have  seen  it,  and  it  is  now  one  of  the  treasures  of  St  John’s  College,  Cam¬ 
bridge. 

The  editions  that  were  popular  in  Queen  Elizabeth’s  reign  were  brought  out  by  one 
Richard  Robinson,  and  to  the  number  of  no  less  than  six  between  1577  and  1601. 
Although  Robinson  speaks  of  having  ‘translated’  the  Gesta  Romanorum,  and  that  it 
was  ‘  by  mee  perused,  corrected,  and  bettered,’  yet  it  is  known  from  the  very  few  copies 
(only  two)  that  survive  of  all  these  six  editions,  that  he  retained  the  same  number  and 
the  same  order  of  the  stories  as  in  Wynkyn  de  Worde.  Now,  in  Wynkyn  de  Worde, 
and  in  Robinson’s  re-issue,  the  Bond  Story  is  not  to  be  found.  The  Casket  Story  is 
there,  but  the  Bond  Story  is  not.f  I  think,  therefore,  we  may  hold  Tyrwhitt  justified 
in  thinking  that  the  Gesta  Romanorum  was  only  a  ‘  remote  ’  source  of  the  Bond  Story. 


*  Oesterley,  as  quoted  by  Herrtage,  p.  xvii. 

t  My  authorities  for  all  that  I  say  about  the  Gesta  Ro?nanorum  are  Warton’s  Hist,  of  Eng.  Poetry, 
1781,  iii,  xlix ;  Douce,  i,  272,  and  the  admirable  exhaustive  Introduction  by  S.  J.  Herrtage,  of  the 
Early  Eng.  Text  Society. 

30 


306 


APPENDIX 


Nevertheless,  an  early  English  version  of  the  Gesta  Ronianorum  containing  this 
Story  does  exist,  but  it  is  a  Manuscript  (Harl.  7333)  of  the  time  of  Henry  the  Sixth, 
about  1440.  This  version  Douce  printed  for  the  first  time,  I  think;  and  he  did  so,  not 
because  he  believed  it  to  be  the  direct  source  of  Shakespeare’s  plot,  but  as  ‘  an  inter¬ 
esting  specimen  of  ancient  English.’ 

It  is  scarcely  worth  while  to  reprint  it  word  for  word  here ;  it  is  readily  accessible  in 
Douce,  in  the  Early  English  Text  Society's  Series,  and  it  is  also  given  entire  in  Halliwell. 
Substantially  it  is  the  same  story  as  in  the  Pecorone,  but  instead  of  the  drugged  wine 
there  was  *  bi-tweene  the  shete  and  the  couerlyte  of  the  bed  a  letter  of  swiche  vertu, 

*  that  who  so  euer  gothe  to  bed  he  shall  anon  falle  in  to  a  dede  slepe.’  This  secret 
was  told  to  the  knight  by  Virgile,  *  the  philesofere,’  whom  he  consulted,  and  the  knight 
exorcised  the  spell  by  removing  the  letter.  The  bribe  of  ‘  an  c.  marke  of  florens,’ 
which  ‘  the  mayde  ’  demanded,  the  knight  had  been  obliged  to  borrow  of  a  marchaunt 

*  in  conducion,  that  yf  thowe  kepe  not  thi  day  of  payment,  hit  shalle  be  lefulle  to  me 

*  for  to  draw  awey  alle  the  flesh  of  thi  body  froo  the  bone,  with  a  sharp  swerde.’  In 
the  charms  of  his  love’s  society  the  knight  ‘  for-gate  the  marchaunt;  and  the  day  of 
‘payment  was  passid  by  the  space  of  xiiij  dayes.’  The  knight  offered  his  creditor 
double  payment,  in  vain.  The  merchant  refused,  even  for  the  wealth  of  the  whole 
city,  to  forgo  the  penalty,  and  ‘  anon  he  made  the  knighte  to  be  I-take,  and  lad  to  the 

*  castell,  and  sette  him  in  a  safe  warde,  abydinge  the  Iustice.’  On  the  trial  the  Judge 
decides  that  as  the  contract  was  made  with  the  knight’s  full  consent,  and  by  his  own 
act,  ‘  he  shal  Resseyve  as  he  servithe ;  and  therefore  this  merchaunt  shalle  haue  cove- 
‘  naunt,  as  lawe  wolle.’  But  the  ‘  damysell  ’  was  not  idle ;  through  spies  she  learned 
that  the  knight  had  fallen  under  the  law,  and  thereupon  *  she  kytte  of  al  the  longe  her 

*  of  hir  hede,  and  cladde  hir  in  precious  clothing  like  to  a  man ;’  and  went  to  the 
palace  and  announced  to  the  Judge  that  she  had  come  to  deliver  the  knight  from  the 
merchant.  After  the  Judge  had  again  expounded  the  law,  the  ‘  damisell  turnid  to  the 

*  marchaunt  and  saide,  “  der  frend,  what  profite  is  it  to  the  that  this  knighte  that 

*  “  stondithe  her  redy  to  the  dome,  be  slayne  ?  it  wer  better  to  the  to  have  monye,  than 
1  “  to  have  him  slayne.”  “  Thou  spekist  al  in  veyne,”  quod  the  merchaunt,  “  for  with 

*  “  oute  dowte  I  wolle  have  the  lawe,  sithe  he  bonde  him  so  frely ;  and  therefor  he 
‘  “  shalle  have  noon  other  grace  than  lawe  wolle ;  for  he  come  to  me,  and  I  not  to 

*  “  him ;  I  desirid  him  not  thereto  a-yenste  his  wille.”  To  the  offer  of  his  “  monye 

*  “  double,”  or  of  any  amount  that  he  chose  to  demand,  the  merchant  replied,  “  thow 
‘  “  harde  me  neuer  seye,  but  that  I  wolde  have  my  covenaunt  kepte.”  “  Sothely,” 
‘  seyde  she,  “  and  thou  shalt,  trowe  me,”  whereupon  she  calls  all  to  witness  how  much 
‘  she  had  offered  and  how  the  merchant  steadily  refused  and  demanded  the  lawe,  “  and 
‘  “  that  likithe  me  moche.  And  therefor,  lordinges,  that  bethe  her,  herithe  me  what  I 
‘  “  shalle  seye.”  She  acknowledges  that  the  knight  had  bound  himself  that  the  “  mar- 
‘  “  chaunt  shulde  have  power  to  kitte  his  fleshe  fro  the  boons,  but  there  was  no  coue- 
‘  “  naunt  made  of  sheding  of  blode ;  there  of  was  nothing  I-spoke.  And  therefor  late 
‘  “  him  set  hond  on  him  anoon ;  and  yf  he  shede  ony  bloode  with  his  shavinge  of  the 
‘  “  fleshe,  for  sothe  then  shalle  the  kynge  have  good  lawe  vpon  him.”  And  when  the 
‘  marchaunt  harde  this,  he  said,  “  yef  me  my  monye,  and  I  foryeve  my  accion.”  “  For 
‘  “  sothe,”  quod  she,  “  thowe  shalt  not  have  00  penye ;  for  a-for  al  this  companye  I 
‘  “  proferid  to  the  al  that  I  myght,  and  thou  forsoke  hit,  and  saydist  withe  a  lowde 

*  “  voyse,  I  shalle  have  my  covenaunte ;  and  therfor  do  thi  beste  withe  him,  but  loke 
‘  “  that  thow  shede  no  blode,  I  charge  the,  for  it  is  not  thin,  ne  no  covenaunt  was  there 
1  “  of.”  Thenne  the  marchaunt  seynge  this,  yede  awey  confus,  and  so  was  the  knightes 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— PERSIAN  MS 


307 


]yf  sauid,  &  no  penye  I-payde.  And  she  yede  home  ayene,  and  dude  of  that  clothinge, 
&  clothid  hir  as  she  was  afor,  like  to  a  woman.  And  the  knighte  yede  home  a-yene; 
4  and  the  damisell  turnid,  and  met  him,  and  askid  howe  he  had  I-spedde,  as  thowhe 
‘  she  had  not  knowen  ther  of.  “  A  !  lady,”  quod  he,  44  this  day  was  I  in  poynt  to  be 
4  “  dede  for  thy  love,  but  as  I  was  in  point  to  be  dampnid,  there  came  in  sodeynlye  a 
4  44  knite,  a  fair  and  wel  I-shape,  the  whiche  I  sawe  neuer  afor;  and  he  deliuerid  me 
4  44  by  his  Excellent  wisdam,  bothe  from  dethe  and  eke  from  payment  of  moneye.” 
4  44  Thenne  were  thow,”  quod  she,  44  vnkynde,  that  woldest  nat  bidde  that  knighte  to 
4  44  mete,  that  so  faire  had  savid  the.”  He  aunswerde  there  to,  &  saide,  that  he  come 
4  sodenly,  and  sodenly  yede.  Thenne  seide  she,  44  knowiste  thow  him,  if  thou  seye 
4  44  him  ?”  44  yee,”  quod  he,  “  Right  wele.”  She  yede  vp,  and  cladde  hir  as  she  dide 

4  afore ;  and  then  she  yede  forthe,  and  the  knighte  knewe  her  thenne  wele,  and  for  Ioy< 

4  fel  dovne  vpon  hire,  and  saide,  44  blessid  be  thow,  &  the  houre  in  the  whiche  I  fyrste 
• 44  knew  the !”  And  he  wepte ;  and  aftir  he  weddid  hir,  and  livid  &  deyde  in  the 
4  service  of  god ;  and  yelde  to  god  goode  sowlis.’ 

In  the  Variorum  of  1793,  Malone  brought  forward  4  a  Persian  manuscript  in  the  pos- 
4  session  of  Ensign  Thomas  Munro,’  at  Tanjore.  The  age  of  the  MS  could  not  be 
determined ;  several  leaves  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  were  lacking.  It  contained 
the  following  story,  translated  by  Mr  Munro  : 

4  It  is  related  that  in  the  town  of  Syria  a  poor  Mussulman  lived  in  the  neighbour- 
4  hood  of  a  rich  Jew.  One  day  he  went  to  the  Jew,  and  said,  44  Lend  me  100  dinars, 
4  44  that  I  may  trade  with  it,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  share  of  the  gain.”  This  Mussul- 
4  man  had  a  beautiful  wife,  and  the  Jew  had  seen  and  fallen  in  love  with  her,  and 
4  thinking  this  a  lucky  opportunity,  he  said,  44 1  will  not  do  thus,  but  I  will  give  thee  a 
4  44  hundred  dinars,  with  this  condition,  that  after  six  months  thou  shalt  restore  it  to 
4  44  me.  But  give  me  a  bond  in  this  form,  that  if  the  term  of  the  agreement  shall  be 
4  44  exceeded  one  day,  I  shall  cut  a  pound  of  flesh  from  thy  body,  from  whatever  part  I 
4  “choose.”  The  Jew  thought  that  by  this  means  he  might  perhaps  come  to  enjoy  the 
4  Mussulman’s  wife.  The  Mussulman  was  dejected,  and  said,  44  How  can  this  be  ?” 
4  But  as  his  distress  was  extreme,  he  took  the  money  on  that  condition,  and  gave  the 
4  bond,  and  set  on  a  journey ;  and  in  that  journey  he  acquired  much  gain,  and  he  was 
4  every  day  saying  to  himself,  “  God  forbid  that  the  term  of  the  agreement  should  pass 
4  “away,  and  the  Jew  bring  vexation  upon  me.”  He  therefore  gave  a  hundred  gold 
4  dinars  into  the  hand  of  a  trusty  person,  and  sent  him  home  to  give  it  to  the  Jew.  But 
*  the  people  of  his  own  house,  being  without  money,  spent  it  in  maintaining  themselves. 
4  When  he  returned  from  his  journey,  the  Jew  required  payment  of  the  money,  and  the 
4  pound  of  flesh.  The  Mussulman  said,  44 1  sent  thy  money  a  long  time  ago.”  The 
4  Jew  said,  “Thy  money  came  not  to  me.”  When  this,  on  examination,  appeared  to 
‘be  true,  the  Jew  carried  the  Mussulman  before  the  Cazi,  and  represented  the  affair. 
4  The  Cazi  said  to  the  Mussulman,  44  Either  satisfy  the  Jew,  or  give  the  pound  of  flesh.” 
4  The  Mussulman  not  agreeing  to  this,  said,  44  Let  us  go  to  another  Cazi.”  When  they 
4  went,  he  also  spoke  in  the  same  manner.  The  Mussulman  asked  the  advice  of  an 
4  ingenious  friend.  He  said,  44  Say  to  him,  Let  us  go  to  the  Cazi  of  Hems.  Go  there, 
4  “for  thy  business  will  be  well.”  Then  the  Mussulman  went  to  the  Jew,  and  said, 
4  “I  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  decree  of  the  Cazi  of  Hems;”  the  Jew  said,  “I  also 
4  44  shall  be  satisfied.”  Then  both  departed  for  the  city  of  Hems.  When  they  pre¬ 
sented  themselves  before  the  judgement-seat,  the  Jew  said,  44  O  my  Lord  Judge,  this 
4  44  man  borrowed  an  hundred  dinars  of  me,  and  pledged  a  pound  of  flesh  from  his  own 


3°8 


APPENDIX 


*  “  body.  Command  that  he  give  the  money  and  the  flesh.”  It  happened  that  the 
‘  Cazi  was  the  friend  of  the  father  of  the  Mussulman,  and  for  this  respect,  he  said  to 
‘  the  Jew,  “  Thou  sayest  true,  it  is  the  purport  of  the  bond;”  and  he  desired  that  they 
‘  should  bring  a  sharp  knife.  The  Mussulman,  on  hearing  this,  became  speechless. 

*  The  knife  being  brought,  the  Cazi  turned  his  face  to  the  Jew,  and  said,  “  Arise,  and 

*  “  cut  one  pound  of  flesh  from  the  body  of  him,  in  such  a  manner,  that  there  may  not 
‘  “  be  one  grain  more  or  less,  and  if  more  or  less  thou  shalt  cut,  I  shall  order  thee  to 
‘  “  be  killed.”  The  Jew  said,  “  I  cannot.  I  shall  leave  this  business  and  depart.” 
‘The  Cazi  said,  “Thou  mayest  not  leave  it.”  He  said,  “O  Judge,  I  have  released 

*  “  him.”  The  Judge  said,  “  It  cannot  be ;  either  cut  the  flesh  or  pay  the  expense  of 
‘  “  his  journey.”  It  was  settled  at  two  hundred  dinars  :  the  Jew  paid  another  hundred, 
‘  and  departed. 

Steevens  :  ‘  To  the  collection  of  novels,  &c.,  wherein  the  plot  of  the  foregoing  play 
‘  occurs,  may  be  added  another,  viz.  from  Roger  Bontemps  en  Belle  Humeur.  In  the 

story  here  related  of  the  Jew  and  the  Christian,  the  Judge  is  made  to  be  Solyman, 
‘  Emperor  of  the  Turks.  See  the  Edition  of  1731,  tom.  ii,  p.  105. 

‘  Perhaps  this  Tale  (like  that  of  Parnell’s  Hermit)  may  have  found  its  way  into  every 
‘  language.’ 

Douce  (i,  278)  says  that  a  similar  story  is  related  in  Gladwin’s  Persian  Moonshee , 
story  13  (which  Plalliwell  gives,  and  which  appears  to  have  been  copied  in  a  transla¬ 
tion  of  ‘  Tales  told  in  the  Deccan,’  as  pointed  out  by  Mr  G.  L.  Gomme  in  The  Athe - 
ncBurn ,  18  Oct.,  1880) :  ‘And  another,  likewise  from  an  Oriental  source,  in  the  British 
‘  Magazine  for  1800,  p.  159.  In  Tyron,  Recueil  de  plusieures  plaisantes  nouvelles,  &c., 
‘  Anvers,  1590,  a  Christian  borrows  500  ducats  of  a  Jew  at  Constantinople  on  condition 
‘  of  paying  two  ounces  of  flesh  for  usury.  At  the  expiration  of  the  term  the  Christian 
‘  refuses  to  pay  more  than  the  principal.  The  matter  is  brought  before  the  Emperor 
‘  Solyman,  who  orders  a  razor  to  be  brought,  and  admonishes  the  Jew  not  to  cut  off 
‘more  or  less  than  the  two  ounces,  on  pain  of  death.  The  Jew  gives  up  the  point. 

‘  The  same  story  occurs  in  the  Tresor  des  rlcreations,  Douay,  1625,  p.  27;  in  Doctce 
‘  nugce  Gaudensij,  Jocosi,  1713,  p.  23;  in  the  Courier  facetieux,  Lyon,  1650,  p.  109; 
‘  in  the  Chasse  ennuy,  Paris,  1645,  p.  49;  in  Corrozet’s  Divers propos  mlmorables,  1577, 
‘  p.  77.’  [Of  this,  also,  Halliwell  gives  a  translation,  which  was  published  in  London, 
1602.  It  is  merely  the  same  old  story.]  ‘It  has  been  imitated  by  Antony  Munday 
‘  in  his  Astrcepho,  &c.,  1580.  Instead  of  the  cutting  off  a  pound  of  flesh,  it  is  agreed 
‘  that  one  of  the  party’s  eyes  shall  be  pulled  out.’ 

It  is  over  eighty  years  ago  that  Douce  collected  these  various  versions,  and  since 
then  here  and  there  others  have  been  added.  SiMROCK  thinks  that  the  conclusion 
that  the  story  is  of  ‘  Oriental  origin  is  too  hasty ;  the  East  has,  in  many  forms,  received 

*  reflex  impressions  from  the  West,  and  has  taken  back,  for  the  fictions  which  it  lent,  a 
‘  rich  return  of  others  transplanted  thence.  The  internal  form  of  the  story  must  decide 
‘  its  origin.’ 

SiMROCK,  again,  thinks  that  the  real  meaning  of  the  story  is  to  represent  the  triumph 
of  the  aquitas  over  the  jus  strictum.  By  the  severe  Roman  law  of  The  Twelve  Tables 
creditors  could  cut  to  pieces  their  debtors  upon  proof  of  their  debt,  and  without  any 
express  provision  when  the  loan  was  made,  and  they  need  be  under  no  restriction  as 
to  the  exact  amount  of  their  slice.  [See  Muirhead,  post. — Ed.]  When,  therefore, 
this  old  law  has  to  be  revived  by  express  agreement,  and  is  further  restricted  to  absolute 
exactness,  then  Simrock  thinks  we  have  the  meaning  of  the  Bond  Story.  ‘  Our  opin- 
‘  ion,’  says  Simrock  (p.  56),  ‘that  the  story  contains  an  old  law  anecdote,  and  one,  too, 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— THE  MAHABHARATA  309 


lull  of  the  most  meaning  and  incident  that  can  exist,  is  supported  by  the  form  of  the 

*  fable  in  the  old  Meistergesang  of  Kaiser  Karls  Recht,  printed  at  Bamberg  in  1493, 
'  the  contents  of  which  are  thus  given  in  the  Old  German  Museum ,  ii,  279  :  “  A  rich 
‘  “  merchant  left  his  whole  possession  to  his  son,  which  he  squandered  in  the  first  year. 

*  “  He  then  borrows  a  thousand  guilders  of  a  Jew,  to  try  his  fortune  abroad.  The  con- 
‘  “  dition  is  the  one  already  known.  He  returns  with  great  gain,  but  does  not  find  the 
‘  “Jew  at  home,  and  so  overstays  the  time;  at  least,  the  Jew  maintains  that  he  has  not 
‘  “  fulfilled  the  contract,  because  the  time  has  elapsed.  They  conclude  to  travel  to  the 

*  “  Emperor  Charles  (this  must  be  Charlemagne)  that  he  may  decide  the  dispute.  On 
‘  “the  road  the  merchant  falls  asleep  on  his  horse,  and  runs  over  and  kills  a  child  who 
‘  “  was  in  the  way.  The  child’s  father  proclaims  him  for  a  murderer,  and  follows  him, 

*  “to  make  good  his  accusation,  to  the  Emperor’s  court.  Here  the  merchant  is  taken 
‘  “  into  custody,  but  by  a  new  misfortune  falls  out  of  the  window,  and  kills  an  old 
‘  “  knight  who  was  sitting  below  on  a  bench.  The  son  of  this  knight  now  comes  for- 
‘  “  ward  as  plaintiff  against  the  merchant,  so  that  the  Emperor  has  three  causes  to 
‘  “decide.  The  dispute  with  the  Jew  is  settled  in  the  well-known  manner;  the  claim 
‘  “  as  to  the  child  he  settles  in  a  less  satisfactory  way.  ‘  Let  him  beget  thee  another.’ 
‘  “  *  Nay,’  said  the  man,  ‘  I  will  rather  say  nothing  more  of  my  loss.’  He  advises  the 
‘  “  son  of  the  old  knight,  as  the  most  satisfactory  manner  of  avenging  his  father,  to  go 

*  “  up  into  the  chamber,  have  the  merchant  placed  upon  the  bench,  and  the  young  man 
‘  “  may  then  fall  upon  him  and  kill  him.  But  the  young  knight  fears  he  may  miss  him, 
‘  “  and  so  gives  up  his  claim  to  vengeance.”  ’ 

M.  D.  Conway  (  The  Wandering  Jew,  1881,  p.  128)  maintains  that  the  chief  features 
of  the  story  have  a  deep  meaning  and  lie  at  the  very  foundations  of  our  moral  nature. 
‘  Side  by  side,  in  all  ages  and  races,  have  struggled  with  each  other  the  principle  of 

*  Retaliation  and  that  of  Forgiveness.’  The  following  legend  was  related  to  him  by  a 
Hindu  as  one  he  had  been  told  in  his  childhood  :  ‘  The  chief  of  the  Indian  triad,  Indra, 
‘  pursued  the  god  Agni.  Agni  changed  himself  into  a  dove  in  order  to  escape ;  but 
‘  Indra  changed  himself  to  a  hawk,  to  continue  the  pursuit.  The  dove  took  refuge 
‘  with  Vishnu,  second  person  of  the  triad,  the  Hindu  Saviour.  Indra,  flying  up,  de- 
‘  manded  the  dove ;  Vishnu,  concealing  it  in  his  bosom,  refused  to  give  up  the  dove. 
‘  Indra  then  took  an  oath,  that  if  the  dove  were  not  surrendered  he  would  tear  from 
‘Vishnu’s  breast  an  amount  of  flesh  equal  to  the  body  of  the  dove.  Vishnu  still 
‘  refused  to  surrender  the  bird,  but  bared  his  breast.  The  divine  hawk  tore  from  it  the 
‘  exact  quantity,  and  the  drops  of  blood, — the  blood  of  a  Saviour, — as  they  fell  to  the 
‘  ground  wrote  the  Scriptures  of  the  Vedas.  The  earliest  version,  probably  B.  c.  300, 
‘  is  the  story  in  the  Mahabharata  (  Vana  pa?~va)  of  the  trial  of  the  best  of  mankind, 
‘  King  Usinara.  Indra  and  Agni,  wishing  to  test  his  fidelity  to  the  laws  of  righteous- 
‘  ness,  assume  the  forms  of  falcon  and  pigeon.  The  latter  (Agni),  pursued  by  the  for- 
‘  mer  (Indra),  seeks  and  receives  the  king’s  protection.  The  falcon  demands  the 
‘  pigeon,  and  is  refused  on  the  ground  that  it  is  written  that,  to  kill  a  twice-born  man, 
‘  to  kill  a  cow,  and  to  abandon  a  being  that  has  taken  refuge  with  one,  are  equal  sins. 
‘  This  is  a  quotation  from  the  laws  of  Manu.  The  falcon  argues  that  it  is  the  law  of 
‘  nature  that  it  shall  feed  on  pigeons,  and  a  statute  against  nature  is  no  law.  He  (the 

*  falcon)  will  be  starved,  consequently  his  mate  and  little  ones  must  perish,  and  thus,  in 
‘  preserving  one,  the  king  will  slay  many.  The  falcon  is  offered  by  Usinara  other  food, 

<  — a  boar,  bull,  gazelle, — but  the  falcon  declares  that  it  is  not  the  law  of  its  nature  to 
‘,eat  such  things.  The  king  then  declares  that  he  will  not  give  up  the  pigeon,  but  he 
1  will  give  anything  else  in  his  power  which  the  falcon  may  demand.  The  falcon 


APPENDIX 


3io 

‘  replies  that  he  can  only  accept  a  quantity  of  the  king’s  own  flesh  equal  in  weight  to 
‘  the  pigeon’s  body.  Usinara  gladly  accedes  to  this  substitution.  Balances  are  pro- 

*  duced,  and  the  pigeon  is  placed  in  one  scale.  The  king  cuts  off  a  piece  of  his  flesh 

*  that  appears  large  enough,  but  is  insufficient ;  he  cuts  again  and  again,  but  still  the 

*  pigeon  outweighs  his  piled-up  flesh.  Finally,  all  his  flesh  gone,  the  king  gets  into  the 
‘  scale  himself.  The  two  gods  then  resume  their  divine  shape,  announce  to  Usinara 

*  that  for  the  sacrifice  he  has  made  he  will  be  glorified  in  all  worlds  throughout  eter- 
3nity,  and  the  king  ascends  transfigured  into  heaven.’  [Many  variations  of  this  legend 
have  been  collected  by  the  learned  author,  and  are  duly  set  forth  in  the  highly  interest¬ 
ing  volume  from  which  the  foregoing  extract  is  taken,  but  lack  of  space  forbids  more 
than  this  reference  to  them  here.] 

But  however  interesting  all  these  stories,  and  their  geographical  distribution,  may 
be  in  an  archaeological  view,  surely  their  connection  with  Shakespeare’s  Shylock  and 
Anthonio  is  the  thinnest  gossamer.  I  have,  nevertheless,  thought  it  my  duty,  in  an 
edition  like  the  present,  to  give  them  all,  or  allusions  to  them,  seeing  that  various  edi¬ 
tors,  commentators,  and  critics  have  at  times  laid  stress  on  one  or  other  of  them,  or  at 
least  alluded  to  them  with  approbation,  as  possible  sources  of  the  Plot. 

There  remains  one  other  book  to  which  reference  has  been  made  several  times,  and 
in  which  two  or  three  points  of  resemblance  have  been  detected,  which  are  so  emphatic 
that,  as  we  have  seen  by  the  allusions  in  the  preceding  pages,  the  date  of  this  volume 
has  much  influenced  several  editors  in  fixing  the  date  of  Shakespeare’s  comedy. 

It  was  Dr  Farmer  who  first  called  attention  to  this  book,  whereof  the  long  title 
runs  thus  :  The  Orator  :  Handling  a  hundred  feuerall  Difcourfes,  in  forme  of  Decla¬ 
mations  :  Some  of  the  Arguments  being  drawne  from  Titus  Liuius  arid  other  ancient 
Writers,  the  refl  of  the  Authors  owne  inuention  :  Part  of  which  are  of  matters  hap¬ 
pened  in  our  Age.  Written  in  French  by  Alexander  Siluayn,  and  Englifhed  by  L.  P. 
London.  Printed  by  Adam  Islip,  1596.  The  initials  L.  P.  stand,  as  the  Dedication 
shows,  for  Lazarus  Piot,  which  again,  according  to  Ritson,  stands  for  Anthony  Munday. 

This  volume  is  of  more  than  usual  attractiveness,  whereof  but  little  intimation 
is  given  in  the  title.  It  consists  of  a  number  of  incidents,  historical  and  imaginary, 
involving  in  the  mere  statement  questions  of  morality  on  which  much  can  be  said 
for  both  sides ;  the  questions  are  not  of  that  chop-logic  nature  which  at  one  time  was 
the  delight  of  Schoolmen,  and  which  Rabelais  ridiculed  in  his  books  at  St  Victor  : 
utrum  Chimtzra  in  vacuo  bombinans  possit  comedere  secundas  intentiones,  but  many 
of  them  are  questions  which  have  an  interest  even  at  the  present  day,  such  as,  for 
instance,  ‘  Declamation  81,  Of  a  Chirurgion,  who  murthered  a  man  to  see  the  mouing 
of  a  quicke  heart,’  wherein  some  of  the  arguments  of  the  advocates  of  vivisection  are 
duly  set  up  and  overthrown.  Other  ‘  Declamations  ’  are  referred  to  at  III,  ii,  34,  and 
again  in  the  account  of  the  Jud  von  Venedig,  post.  The  Declamation,  however,  which 
in  many  particulars  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  Shylock’s  speech  in  the  Trial  Scene, 
is  the  Ninety-fifth,  and  is  as  follows  : 

Declamation.  95.  , 

Of  a  jfew ,  who  would  for  his  debt  haue  a  pound  of  the  flejh  of  a 

Chriflian. 

A  lew  vnto  whom  a  Chriflian  Marchant  ought  nine  hundred  crownes,  would  haul 
fumtnoned  him  for  the  fame  in  Turckie  :  the  Merchant,  becazife  he  would  not  be  dtp 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— SILVA  YN' S  ORATOR 


credited,  promifed  to  pay  the  /aid  fumme  within  the  tearme  of  three  months,  and  if  he 
paied  it  not,  he  was  hound  to  gitte  him  a  pound  of  the  flefi  of  his  bodie.  The  tearme 
being  pafl  fome  fifteene  daies ,  the  lew  refufed  to  take  his  money,  and  demaunded  the 
pound  of  flefh  :  the  ordinarie  Iudge  of  that  place  appointed  him  to  cut  a  iufl  pound 
of  the  Chriflian' s flefh,  and  if  he  cut  either  more  or  leffe,  then  his  owne  head fhould  be 
fmitten  off:  the  lew  appealed  from  this  fentence,  vnto  the  chief e  iudge,  faying  : 

Impoffible  is  it  to  breake  the  credite  of  trafficke  amongft  men  without  great  detriment 
vnto  the  Commonwealth :  wherefore  no  man  ought  to  bind  himfelfe  vnto  fuch  coue- 
nants  which  hee  cannot  or  wil  not  accomplifh,  for  by  that  means  fhould  no  man  feare 
to  be  deceaued,  and  credit  being  maintained,  euery  man  might  be  allured  of  his  owne; 
but  fince  deceit  hath  taken  place,  neuer  wonder  if  obligations  are  made  more  rigorous 
&  ftrict  then  they  were  wont,  feeing  that  although  the  bonds  are  made  neuer  fo  ftrong, 
yet  can  no  man  be  very  certaine  that  he  fhal  not  be  a  lofer.  It  feemeth  at  the  firft 
fight,  that  it  is  a  thing  no  leffe  ftrange  then  cruel,  to  bind  a  man  to  pay  a  pound  of  the 
flefh  of  his  bodie,  for  want  of  money :  Surely,  in  that  it  is  a  thing  not  vfuall,  it  appear- 
eth  to  be  fomewhat  the  more  admirable,  but  there  are  diuers  others  that  are  more 
cruell,  which  becaufe  they  are  in  vfe  feeme  nothing  terrible  at  all :  as  to  binde  al  the 
bodie  vnto  a  mod  lothfome  prifon,  or  vnto  an  intollerable  flauerie,  where  not  only  the 
whole  bodie  but  alfo  al  the  fences  and  fpirits  are  tormented,  the  which  is  commonly 
practifed,  not  only  betwixt  thofe  which  are  either  in  feet  or  Nation  contrary,  but  alfo 
euen  amongft  thofe  that  are  all  of  one  feet  and  nation,  yea  amongft  neighbours  and 
kindred,  &  euen  amongft  Chriftians  it  hath  ben  feene,  that  the  fon  hath  imprifoned  the 
father  for  monie.  Likewife  in  the  Roman  Commonwealth,  fo  famous  for  laws  and 
armes,  it  was  lawfull  for  debt,  to  imprifon,  beat,  and  afflict  with  torments  the  free  Citti- 
zens  :  How  manie  of  them  (do  you  thinke)  would  haue  thought  themfelues  happie,  if 
for  a  fmall  debt  they  might  haue  ben  excufed  with  the  paiment  of  a  pound  of  their 
flesh  ?  Who  ought  then  to  maruile  if  a  lew  requireth  fo  fmall  a  thing  of  a  Chriftian, 
to  difeharge  him  of  a  good  round  fumme  ?  A  man  may  aske  why  I  would  not  rather 
take  filuer  of  this  man,  then  his  flefh :  I  might  alleage  many  reafons,  for  I  might  fay 
that  none  but  my  felfe  can  tell  what  the  breach  of  his  promife  hath  coft  me,  and  what 
I  haue  thereby  paied  for  want  of  money  vnto  my  creditors,  of  that  which  I  haue  loft 
in  my  credit :  for  the  miferie  of  thofe  men  which  efteeme  their  reputation,  is  fo  great, 
that  oftentimes  they  had  rather  indure  anything  fecretlie  then  to  haue  their  diferedit 
blazed  abroad,  becaufe  they  would  not  be  both  fhamed  and  harmed.  Neuertheleffe,  1 
doe  freely  confeffe,  that  I  had  rather  lofe  a  pound  of  my  flefh,  then  my  credit  fhould 
be  in  any  fort  cracked :  I  might  alfo  fay  that  I  haue  need  of  this  flefh  to  cure  a  friend 
of  mine  of  a  certaine  maladie,  which  is  otherwife  incurable,  or  that  I  would  haue  it  to 
terriffie  thereby  the  Chriftians  for  euer  abufing  the  Iewes  anie  more  hereafter :  but  I 
will  onelie  fay,  that  by  his  obligation  he  oweth  it  me.  It  is  lawfull  to  kill  a  fouldior  if 
he  come  vnto  the  warres  but  an  houre  too  late,  and  alfo  to  hang  a  theefe  though  he 
fteale  neuer  fo  little :  is  it  then  fuch  a  great  matter  to  caufe  fuch  a  one  to  pay  a  pound 
of  his  flefh,  that  hath  broken  his  promife  manie  times,  or  that  putteth  another  in  danger 
to  lofe  both  credit  &  reputation,  yea  and  it  may  be  life  and  al  for  greife  ?  were  it  not 
better  for  him  to  lofe  that  which  I  demand,  then  his  foule,  alreadie  bound  by  his 
faith  ?  Neither  am  I  to  take  that  which  he  oweth  me,  but  he  is  to  deliuer  it  me :  And 
efpeciallie  becaufe  no  man  knoweth  better  then  he  where  the  fame  may  be  fpared  tc 
the  leaft  hurt  of  his  perfon,  for  I  might  take  it  in  fuch  a  place  as  hee  might  thereby 
’happen  to  lofe  his  life :  what  a  matter  were  it  then,  if  I  fhould  cut  of  his  [head],  fup 


312 


APPENDIX 


pofing  that  the  fame  would  weigh  a  iuft  pound,  although  it  were  with  the  danger  of 
mine  owne  life  ?  I  beleeue  I  thould  not ;  becaufe  there  were  as  little  reafon  therein, 
as  there  could  be  in  the  amends  wherevnto  I  fhould  be  bound :  or  els  if  I  would  cut 
off  his  nofe,  his  lips,  his  eares,  and  pull  out  his  eies,  to  make  of  them  altogether  a 
pound,  fhould  I  be  fuffered  ?  Surely  I  thinke  not,  becaufe  the  obligation  dooth  not 
fpecifie  that  I  ought  either  to  chufe,  cut,  or  take  the  fame,  but  that  he  ought  to  giue 
me  a  pound  of  his  flefh.  Of  euery  thing  that  is  fold,  he  which  deliuereth  the  fame  is  to 
make  waight,  and  he  which  receiueth,  taketh  heed  that  it  be  iuft :  feeing  then  that 
neither  the  obligation,  cuflome,  nor  law  doth  bind  me  to  cut,  or  weigh,  much  leffe  vnto 
the  aboue  mentioned  fatisfaction,  I  refufe  it  all,  and  require  that  the  fame  which  is  due 
fhould  bee  deliuered  vnto  me. 


The  Chri/tians  Anfwere. 

It  is  no  ftrange  matter  to  here  thofe  difpute  of  equitie  which  are  themfelues  mod 
vniuft ;  and  fuch  as  haue  no  faith  at  all,  defirous  that  others  fhould  obferue  the  fame 
inuiolable,  the  which  were  yet  the  more  tollerable,  if  fuch  men  would  bee  contented 
with  reafonable  things,  or  at  the  leaft  not  altogether  vnreafonable  :  but  what  reafon  is 
there  that  one  man  fhould  vnto  his  own  preiudice  defire  the  hurt  of  another  ?  as  this 
lew  is  content  to  lofe  nine  hundred  crownes  to  haue  a  pound  of  my  flefh,  whereby  is 
manifeftly  feene  the  antient  and  cruell  hate  which  he  beareth  not  only  vnto  Chriftians, 
but  vnto  all  others  which  are  not  of  his  se<5t :  yea,  euen  vnto  the  Turkes,  who  ouer- 
kindly  doe  fuffer  fuch  vermine  to  dwell  amongft  them,  feeing  that  this  prefumptuous 
wretch  dare  not  onely  doubt,  but  appeale  from  the  iudgement  of  a  good  and  iuft  Iudge, 
&  afterwards  he  would  by  fophifticall  reafons  prooue  that  his  abhomination  is  equitie : 
trulie  I  confeffe  that  I  haue  fuffered  fifteene  daies  of  the  tearme  to  paffe,  yet  who  can 
tell  whether  he  or  I  is  the  caufe  thereof,  as  for  me  I  thinke  that  by  fecret  meanes  he 
hath  caufed  the  money  to  bee  delaied,  which  from  fundry  places  ought  to  haue  come 
vnto  me  before  the  tearm  which  I  promifed  vnto  him ;  Otherwife,  I  would  neuer  haue 
been  fo  rath  as  to  bind  my  felfe  fo  ftrictly ;  but  although  he  were  not  the  caufe  of  the 
fault,  is  it  therefore  faid,  that  he  ought  to  bee  fo  impudent  as  to  goe  about  to  prooue  it 
no  ftrange  matter  that  he  fhould  be  willing  to  be  paied  with  mans  flefh,  which  is  a  thing 
more  natural  for  Tigres,  then  men,  the  which  alfo  was  neuer  heard  of ;  but  this  diuel! 
in  fhape  of  a  man,  feeing  me  oppreffed  with  neceffitie  propounded  this  accurfed  obliga¬ 
tion  vnto  me.  Whereas  hee  alleageth  the  Romanes  for  an  example,  why  doth  he  not 
as  well  tell  on  how  for  that  crueltie  in  afflicting  debtors  ouer  greeuoufly,  the  Common¬ 
wealth  was  almoft  ouerthrowne,  and  that  fhortly  after  it  was  forbidden  to  imprifon  men 
any  more  for  debt.  To  breake  promife  is,  when  a  man  fweareth  or  promifeth  a  thing, 
the  which  he  hath  no  defire  to  performe,  which  yet  vpon  an  extreame  neceffitie  is 
fomewhat  excufable ;  as  for  me,  I  haue  promifed,  and  accomplifhed  my  promife,  yet 
not  fo  foone  as  I  would ;  and  although  I  knew  the  danger  wherein  I  was  to  fatisfie  the 
crueltie  of  this  mifcheeuous  man  with  the  price  of  my  flefh  and  blood,  yet  did  I  not 
flie  away,  but  fubmitted  my  felfe  vnto  the  difcretion  of  the  Iudge  who  hath  iustly 
repreffed  his  beafllineffe.  Wherein  then  haue  I  falfefied  my  promife,  is  it  in  that  I 
would  not,  (like  him)  difobey  the  iudgement  of  the  Iudge  ?  Behold  I  will  prefent  a 
part  of  my  bodie  vnto  him,  that  he  may  pay  himfelfe,  according  to  the  contents  of  the 
iudgement,  where  is  then  my  promife  broken  ?  But  it  is  no  maruaile  if  this  race  be  fo 
obflinat  and  cruell  againft  vs,  for  they  doe  it  of  fet  purpofe  to  offend  our  God  whom 
they  haue  crucified ;  and  wherefore  ?  Becaufe  he  was  holie,  as  he  is  yet  fo  reputed  of 
this  worthy  Turkifh  nation:  but  what  fhall  I  fay?  Their  own  bible  is  full  of  their 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— CURSOR  MUNDI  313 

/ebellion  again  ft  God,  againft  their  Priefts,  Iudges,  &  leaders.  What  did  not  the  verie 
Patriarks  themfelues,  from  whom  they  haue  their  beginning  ?  They  fold  their  brother, 
and  had  it  not  been  for  one  amongft  them,  they  had  flaine  him  euen  for  verie  enuie.  How 
manie  adulteries  and  abhominations  were  committed  amongft  them  ?  How  manie  mur- 
thers  ?  Abfalon  did  not  he  caufe  his  brother  to  be  murthered?  Did  he  not  perfecute 
his  father  ?  Is  it  not  for  their  iniquitie  that  God  hath  difperfed  them,  without  leauing 
them  one  onlie  foot  of  ground  ?  If  then,  when  they  had  newlie  receiued  their  law 
from  God,  when  they  faw  his  wonderous  works  with  their  eies,  and  had  yet  their  Iudge^ 
amongft  them,  they  were  fo  wicked,  What  may  one  hope  of  them  now,  when  they  hau; 
neither  faith  nor  law,  but  their  rapines  and  vfuries  ?  And  that  they  beleeue  they  do  * 
charitable  work,  when  they  do  fome  great  wrong  vnto  anie  that  is  not  a  Jew  ?  It  may 
pleafe  you  then  mod  righteous  Iudge  to  confider  all  thefe  circumftances,  hauing  pittie 
of  him  who  doth  wholly  fubmit  himfelfe  vnto  your  iuft  clemencie ;  hoping  thereby  to 
be  deliuered  from  this  monfters  crueltie. 

The  reader  will  readily  recognize  the  parallels  to  the  Jew’s  argument :  ‘  It  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  break  the  credit  of  trafick  amongst  men  without  great  detriment  to  the  Com¬ 
monwealth  ;’  to  his  reference  to  ‘  binding  the  body  vnto  an  intolerable  slavery,’  and  to 
the  passage :  4  A  man  may  ask  why  I  would  not  rather  take  silver  of  this  man,’  &c. 

In  his  Preface  to  The  Legends  of  the  Holy  Rood  ( Early  Eng.  Text  Soc.,  1871),  Dr 
Morris  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  one  of  the  legends  *  we  get  the  story,  so  well 
known  to  us  all,  in  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  of  the  merchant  and  the  pound  of  flesh.’ 
The  Legend  thus  referred  to  is  from  the  Cursor  Mundi,  which  Dr  Morris  subse¬ 
quently  printed  in  extenso. 

Miss  L.  Toulmin  Smith,  in  an  admirable  note  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  New  Shak 
spere  Society  in  April,  1875,  shows  that  this  story  in  the  Cursor  Mundi,  dating  as  it 
does  from  about  the  end  of  the  13th  Century,  is  the  very  earliest  reference  to  the  Bond 
Story  in  English.  Miss  Smith  gives  the  following  paraphrase  of  it : 

‘A  Christian  goldsmith  in  the  service  of  Queen  Eline  (mother  of  Constantine) 
*  owed  a  sum  of  money  to  a  Jew ;  if  he  could  not  pay  it  by  a  certain  term  he  was 
4  to  render  the  weight  of  the  money  wanting  in  his  own  flesh.  The  day  came,  the 
4  money  was  unpaid,  the  Jew  would  have  his  judgement,  and  came  to  the  court  of 
‘  Queen  Eline,  where  Benciras  and  Ansiers,  two  messengers  who  had  been  sent  by 
‘  Constantine  to  beg  his  mother  to  seek  for  the  Holy  Cross,  were  sitting  as  judges. 
‘  The  Jew  bore  a  sharp  knife  in  his  hand,  the  Christian  stood  naked  before  them,  but 
4  the  Jew  would  not  hear  of  ransom, — no  more  than  a  rush !  Benciras  and  Ansiers 
4  promise  the  Jew  he  shall  have  right  judgement,  and  ask  how  he  will  treat  the  man  if 
4  he  be  adjudged  to  him.  44  How  ?”  said  the  Jew,  44  the  worst  that  I  can  or  may  by  my 
4  '■  law.  I  shall  first  put  out  his  eyes,  then  have  his  hands  that  he  works  with,  tongue, 
4  44  and  nose,  and  so  on  till  I  have  my  covenant.”  The  judges  answer,  44  It  seems  you 
4  44  will  not  spare  him,  take  his  flesh,  he  grants  you  that,  so  that  you  save  his  blood ;  if 
4  44  he  lose  a  drop  of  blood  the  wrong  is  on  you ;  though  his  flesh  were  bought  or  sold, 
4  44  he  never  thought  to  sell  his  blood.”  The  Jew  swore  at  this ; 

4  Then  said  the  Jew,  44  by  Saint  Drightin 
4  44  Me  think  the  worse  part  is  mine, 

4  44  To  take  the  flesh  if  I  assay 
4  44  Then  the  blood  will  run  away ; 

4  44  Fordon  ye  have  me  with  your  dome 
4  44  That  ye  Romans  brought  from  Rome 


3H 


APPENDIX 


‘  “  Curses  therefore  may  they  have 
‘  “  All  that  such  a  dome  me  gave !” 

‘  Then  said  Benciras,  “  All  has  heard  you  abuse  us  in  your  ire,  the  queen  has  sent  us 
‘  “  here  to  do  righteousness,  and  we  have  told  you  truth.”  The  Queen,  being  sure 
‘  that  the  Christian  was  safe,  bade  them  adjudge  the  Jew  to  give  up  to  her  all  his 
‘  goods  and  that  he  should  lose  his  abusive  tongue.  The  Jew  found  this  so  keen  a 
‘judgement  that  he  cried  out,  “I  would  rather  tell  you  where  your  Lord’s  rood-tree  lies 

*  “  than  be  thus  condemned,”  and  Queen  Eline  forgives  him  on  condition  of  his  show- 
‘  ing  where  the  cross  is  hid,  which  he  does.’ 

Chronologically,  the  next  appearance,  as  it  seems,  of  the  Bond  Story  is  in  a  MS 
(Harl.  7322),  in  Latin  indeed,  but  written  in  England,  for  the  benefit  of  preachers.  It 
was  discovered  by  T.  Wright  after  he  had  published  his  Latin  Stories  for  the  Percy 
Society,  and  is  given  by  Halliwell  at  the  end  of  the  translation  of  Simrock’s  notice  of 
the  present  play :  ‘  The  scene  of  the  tale  is  laid  in  Denmark : — In  Dacia  erat  quidam 
‘  homo  habens  duos  filios,  quorum  senior  est  maliciosus  et  parcus,  junior  autem  non 
‘  tantum  liberalis  sed  prodigus.  Cum  autem  junior  hospitalitati  omnia  quae  habuit 

*  expendisset,  accidit  ut  duos  homines  peterent  ab  eo  hospitium.  Ille  autem,  quan- 
‘  quam  nihil  haberet  unde  honeste  eos  reciperet,  propter  tamen  verecundiam  eos 
‘  recepit.  Cum  autem  nihil  haberet  unde  cibaria  eis  pararet  praeter  unam  vaccam, 

*  earn  occidit.  Deficiente  igitur  pane  et  potu,  fratrem  seniorem  adivit,  subsidium  ab 

*  eo  requirens ;  qui  respondit  se  sibi  nihil  penitus  daturum,  nisi  emeret.  Contestante 
‘  autem  juniori  se  nihil  habere,  respondit  senior,  ‘  Immo,’  inquit,  ‘  carnem  tuam  habes, 
‘  vende  mihi  ad  latitudinem  manus  mese  de  carna  tua  in  quibus  et  in  quadruplum 

ubicunque  voluero  recipere.’  Junior  parvipendens  pepigit  cum  eo,  testibus  adhibi- 
‘  tis.  Modus  autem  et  istius  patriae  est  sic  vel  alibi  sub  quavis  falsitate  scripti  vel 
‘  chirographi  ita  nisi  sub  teste  licet  emere  vel  vendere.  Recedentibus  igitur  hospiti- 

*  bus  et  consumptis  cibariis,  pactum  poposcit  senior  frater.  Negat  junior,  et  adductus 
‘  est  coram  rege,  et  sententiatus  coram  juniore  ut  ad  locum  suppliciorum  deducatur, 
‘  et  accipiat  senior  tantum  de  carne  quantum  pactum  est  vel  in  capite  vel  circa  cor. 
‘  Misertus  autem  sui  populus  eo  quod  liberalis  erat,  nunciaverunt  filio  regis  quae  et 
‘  quare  haec  facta  fuerant,  qui  statim  misericordia  motus,  induit  se,  et  palefridum 
‘  ascendens  secutus  est  miserum  ilium  sic  dampnatum ;  et  cum  venisset  ad  locum 
‘  supplicii,  videns  eum  populus  qui  ad  spectaculum  confluxerant,  cessit  sibi.  Et  alio- 
‘  quens  filius  regis  fratrem  ilium  seniorem  crudelem,  et  dixit  ei :  ‘  Quid  juris  habes  in 
‘  isto  ?’  Respondit :  ‘  Sic,’  inquit,  ‘  pacti  sumus,  ut  pro  cibariis  tantundem  de  carne 

*  sua  mihi  daret,  et  condempnatus  est  ad  solutionem  per  patrem  tuum  regem.’  Cui 
‘  filius  regis,  ‘  Nihil,’  inquit,  *  aliud  petis  nisi  carnem  ?’  Respondit,  ‘  Nihil.’  Cui 
‘  filius,  *  Ergo  sanguis  suus  in  carne  sua  est ;’  et  ait  filius  isti  condempnato,  *  Da  mihi 
‘  sanguinem  tuum,’  et  statim  pepigerunt,  insuper  fecit  sibi  condempnatus  homagium. 
‘  Tunc  dixit  filius  regis  fratri  seniori,  ‘  Modo  cape  ubicunque  volueris  carnem  tuum ; 

sed  si  sanguis  meus  est,  si  ex  eo  minimam  guttam  effunderis,  morieris.’  Quo  viso, 
recessit  senior  confusus,  et  liberatus  est  junior  per  regem.’ 

Concerning  the  source  of  the  second  story,  The  Choice  of  Three  Caskets ,  there  is  less 
diversity  of  opinion  than  in  regard  to  The  Bond  Story. 

Dr  Farmer  was  the  first  to  show  its  similarity  to  a  tale  in  the  Gesta  Romanorurn, 
and  asserted  that  Shakespeare  had  ‘  closely  copied  some  of  the  language  ’  in  the  latter ; 
the  copying,  I  think,  can  be  applied  only  to  the  mottoes  on  the  caskets,  which  would 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—GESTA  ROMA  NORUM  315 


be  likely  to  retain  much  of  their  phraseology  wheresoever  found,  and  even  of  these 
Shakespeare  did  not  ‘  copy  ’  all  three. 

In  what  was  stated  above  in  regard  to  the  Gesta  Romanorum  in  connection  with  the 
Bond  Story,  it  will  be  remembered  that  an  English  translation  was  printed,  circa  1510- 
15,  by  Wynkyn  de  Worde.  This  translation  contained  only  forty-three  stories  out  of 
the  hundred  and  more  found  in  other  MSS ;  among  them,  though  the  Bond  Story  was 
lacking,  this  of  the  Three  Caskets  was  given.  As  it  was  this  translation  which  Rich¬ 
ard  Robinson  issued  in  six  editions  between  1577  and  1601,  ‘by  mee  perused,  cor¬ 
rected,  and  bettered,’  it  is  likely  that  it  was  in  one  of  Robinson’s  re-issues  that  Shake¬ 
speare  read  the  story,  if  he  used  it  at  all  as  the  source  of  his  Plot.* 

Robinson’s  version  is  reprinted  in  Collier’s  Shakespeare1  s  Library,  ii,  102.  It  is  The 
Thirty-second  Historie.  There  is  small  interest  for  us  in  the  beginning  of  it,  wherein 
it  is  told  that  there  was  ‘  a  mightie  Emperor,  named  Anselme,’  who  dwelt  in  Rome, 
and  how,  for  the  sake  of  confirming  peace  and  good-will,  it  was  decided  that  the  Empe¬ 
ror’s  son  should  marry  the  daughter  of  the  *  King  of  Ampluy.’  It  then  proceeds  as 
follows :  *  Therefore  when  the  letters  of  covenant  and  compact  were  sealed,  the  king 

*  furnished  a  faire  ship,  wherein  he  might  send  his  daughter  with  many  noble  knights, 
‘  ladyes,  and  great  riches,  unto  the  emperour,  for  to  have  his  sonne  in  marriage. 

*  Now  when  they  were  sayling  in  the  sea  toward  Rome,  a  storme  arose  so  extremee- 
‘  lye  and  so  horribly,  that  the  ship  all  to  brast  against  a  rock  of  stone,  and  they  were 
‘  all  drowned,  save  onely  that  yong  lady,  which  fixt  her  hope  and  heart  so  firmely  on 

*  God,  that  she  was  saved.  And  about  three  of  clocke  the  tempest  ceased,  and  the 
‘  lady  drave  foorth  over  the  waves  in  the  broken  ship,  which  was  cast  up  againe,  but 
‘  an  huge  whale  followed  after,  readie  to  devoure  both  the  ship  and  her ;  wherefore 
‘  this  faire  yong  lady  when  night  came,  smote  fire  with  a  stone,  wherewith  the  ship 
‘  was  greatly  lightened,  and  then  the  whale  durst  not  adventure  toward  the  ship,  for 

*  feare  of  the  light.  At  the  cock-crowing,  this  yong  lady  wras  so  weary  of  the  great 

*  tempest  and  trouble  of  the  sea,  that  she  slept,  and  within  a  little  while  after  the  fire 

*  surceased,  and  with  that  came  the  whale  and  devoured  this  virgin.  But  when  she 
‘  wakened  and  found  her  selfe  swallowed  up  in  the  whale’s  belly,  shee  smote  fire,  and 
‘  within  a  little  while  shee  wounded  the  whale  with  a  knife  in  many  places,  and  when 
‘  the  whale  felt  himselfe  wounded,  according  to  his  nature,  he  began  to  swim  to  land. 

‘  There  was  at  that  time  dwelling  in  that  country  an  earle  that  was  a  noble  man, 
named  Parris,  the  which  for  his  recreation  walked  by  the  sea  shore,  and  as  he  was 

*  walking  thus,  he  saw  where  the  whale  was  comming  towards  the  land,  wherefore  he 

*  turned  home  againe,  and  gathered  many  strong  men  and  came  thither  againe,  and 
‘  caught  the  whale,  and  wounded  him  very  sore,  and  as  they  smote,  the  mayden  that 
'  was  in  his  belly  cried  with  an  high  voice  and  said,  O  gentle  friends  have  mercie 
1  and  compassion  on  me,  for  I  am  a  kings  daughter  and  a  true  virgin  from  the  houre 

*  of  my  birth  unto  this  day.  When  the  earle  heard  this  he  wondred  greatly  and 
'  opened  the  side  of  the  whale  and  tooke  her  out.  And  when  she  was  thus  delivered, 

*  shee  told  him  forthwith  whose  daughter  she  was,  and  how  shee  had  lost  all  her  goods 
‘  in  the  sea,  and  how  shee  should  have  beene  married  unto  the  emperour’s  sonne.  And 

*  According  to  a  ‘  Table  of  the  Stories’  in  the  Gesta  Romanorum,  given  in  Herrtage’s  edition  for 
the  Early  English  Text  Society,  p.  xxix,  this  story  is  the  Ninety-ninth  in  the  Anglo-latin  Text,  MS, 
Harl.  2270;  the  Sixty-sixth  in  the  English  Version,  MS,  Harl.  7333;  the  Thirty-second  in  W.  de 
Worde’s  edition  ;  and  the  Hundred  and  Ninth  in  Latin  Printed  Editions.  I  think  it  well  to  note  this, 
because  different  Editors  cite  different  editions.  Tyrwhitt  quoted  from  Harl.  2270,  Warton  from 
the  Latin  Printed  Edition,  as  did,  likewise,  Douce,  and  it  was  from  Harl.  7333  that  the  Bond  Story 
was  given  above. — Ed. 


316 


APPENDIX 


‘  when  the  earle  heard  this  hee  was  right  glad,  wherefore  hee  comforted  her  the  more, 
<  and  kept  her  still  with  him  till  she  was  well  refreshed.  And  in  the  meane  time  he 
‘  sent  messengers  to  the  emperour,  giving  him  to  know  how  the  kings  daughter  wa* 
‘ saved. 

‘  Then  was  the  emperour  right  glad  of  her  safety  and  comming,  and  had  great  com- 
1  passion  on  her,  saying :  Ah  faire  lady,  for  the  love  of  my  sonne  thou  hast  suffered 
‘  much  woe,  neverthelesse  if  thou  be  worthie  to  be  his  wife,  soone  shall  I  prove. 

‘  And  when  he  had  thus  said,  he  commanded  to  bring  forth  three  vessels,  the  first 

*  was  made  of  pure  gold,  beset  with  precious  stones  without,  and  within  full  of  dead 
‘  mens  bones,  and  thereupon  was  ingraven  this  posey :  Whoso  chooseth  me  shall  finde 
‘  that  he  deserveth. 

•  The  second  vessel  was  made  of  fine  silver,  filled  with  earth  and  wormes,  and  the 

*  superscription  was  thus :  Whoso  chooseth  me  shall  finde  that  his  nature  desireth. 

‘  The  third  vessel  was  made  of  lead,  full  within  of  precious  stones,  and  the  super- 
‘  scription,  Who  so  chooseth  me  shall  finde  that  God  hath  disposed  to  him. 

‘  These  three  vessels  the  emperour  shewed  to  the  maiden  and  said,  Lo,  here  daugh- 
‘  ter,  there  be  faire  vessels,  if  thou  choose  one  of  these,  wherein  is  profit  to  thee  and  to 
‘  other,  then  shalt  thou  have  my  sonne :  but  if  thou  choose  that  wherein  is  no  profit  to 
‘  thee  nor  to  none  other,  soothly  thou  shalt  not  marrie  him. 

‘  When  the  mayden  saw  this,  she  lift  up  her  hands  to  God  and  said  :  Thou,  Lord, 

*  that  knowest  all  things,  grant  me  grace  this  houre  so  to  choose,  that  I  may  receive 
‘  the  emperours  sonne.  And  with  that  she  beheld  the  first  vessell  of  gold,  which  was 
‘  engraven,  and  read  the  superscription,  Who  so  chooseth  me,  &c.,  saying  thus  :  Though 

*  this  vessel  be  full  precious  and  made  of  pure  gold,  neverthelesse  I  know  not  what  is 
‘  within,  therefore  my  deare  lord,  this  vessel  will  I  not  choose. 

‘  And  then  she  beheld  the  second  vessel  that  was  of  pure  silver,  and  read  the  super- 
‘  scription,  Who  so  chooseth  me  shall  finde  that  his  nature  desireth.  Thinking  thus 
‘  within  her  selfe,  If  I  choose  this  vessel,  what  is  within  it  I  know  not,  but  well  I  wot 
1  there  shall  I  finde  that  nature  desireth,  and  my  nature  desireth  the  lust  of  the  flesh, 
‘  therefore  this  vessel  will  I  not  choose.  When  she  had  seene  these  two  vessels,  and 
‘  given  an  answere  as  touching  them,  shee  beheld  the  third  vessell  of  lead,  and  read  the 
‘  superscription,  Who  so  chooseth  me,  shall  finde  that  God  hath  disposed.  Thincking 
‘  within  her  selfe  this  vessel  is  not  passing  rich,  nor  throughly  precious :  neverthelesse, 

*  the  superscription  saith :  Who  so  chooseth  mee,  shall  finde  that  God  hath  disposed  : 

*  and  without  doubt  God  never  disposeth  any  harme,  therefore  now  I  will  choose  this 

*  vessell,  by  the  leave  of  God. 

‘  When  the  emperour  saw  this,  hee  said,  O  faire  mayden  open  thy  vessell,  and  see 
'  if  thou  hast  well  chosen  or  no.  And  when  this  yong  lady  had  opened  it,  shee  found 
‘  it  full  of  fine  gold  and  precious  stones,  like  as  the  emperour  had  told  her  before. 

‘  And  then  said  the  emperour,  O  my  deere  daughter,  because  thou  hast  wisely 
chosen,  therefore  shalt  thou  marry  my  sonne.  And  when  he  had  so  said,  he  ordained 
‘  a  marriage,  and  married  them  together  with  great  solempnitie  and  much  honour,  and 
‘  they  lived  peaceably  a  long  time  together.’ 

In  the  Latin  Printed  Editions,  one  of  which  Warton  used,  pasties  or  loaves  are  sub¬ 
stituted  for  the  ‘  vessels.’ 

According  to  Warton  (iii,  xlix,  ed.  1781),  the  ‘remote  but  original  source’  of  this 
story  is  one  which  is  told  by  the  hermit  Barlaam  to  King  Avenamore  (in  which  the 
‘vessels’  or  'pasties’  are  called  arcellce),  written  in  Greek  about  the  year  800  by 
Joanues  Gat.  a^cenus,  a  Greek  monk  of  St  Saba  in  Syria,  and  translated  into  Latin 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— BARLAAM  AND  JOSAPHAT  317 


before  the  1 3th  Century,  entitled  Barlaam  and  Josaphat.  The  Greek  text,  according 
to  Clarendon  is  published  in  the  Jahrbiicher  der  Litcratur ,  vol.  xxvi,  p.  42.  The 
principal  story  of  Barlaam  and  Josaphat  is  told  with  no  little  dry  humour  by  Dunlop 
(pp.  35-40,  ed.  1845),  who  says  that  its  ‘many  beautiful  parables  and  apologues  bear 
evident  marks  of  an  Oriental  origin.’  They  were  incorporated,  according  to  Warton, 
in  the  Speculum  Historiale  of  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  who  wrote  about  the  year  1290. 
Thence  they  trickled,  with  more  or  less  purity,  into  the  Cento  Novelle  Antiche  (Nov. 
lxv),  thence  into  the  somewhat  turbid  pool  of  Boccaccio’s  Decatneron ,  into  the  Golden 
Legend,  and  finally  into  the  Gesta. 

Warton  gives  a  translation,  from  the  original  Greek  of  Barlaam  and  Josaphat,  of 
the  conclusion  of  the  story.  For  the  beginning  we  are  indebted  to  Clarendon,  as  fol¬ 
lows  :  ‘  A  certain  rich  and  glorious  king,  attended  by  the  officers  of  his  court,  is  riding 
‘  with  regal  pomp  in  a  gilt  chariot,  when  he  is  met  by  two  men  of  mean  appearance  in 

*  squalid  and  threadbare  garments.  The  king  descends  from  his  chariot  and  salutes 
‘  them.  His  courtiers  are  disgusted,  and  remonstrate  with  him  through  the  medium 

*  of  the  king’s  brother.  They  are  then  taught  a  lesson  of  the  folly  of  judging  by 
‘  external  appearances.’  [Warton  thus  concludes :]  ‘  The  king  commanded  four  chests 
‘  to  be  made ;  two  of  which  were  covered  with  gold,  and  secured  by  golden  locks,  but 
‘  filled  with  the  rotten  bones  of  human  carcasses.  The  other  two  were  overlaid  with 
‘  pitch,  and  bound  with  rough  cords ;  but  replenished  with  precious  stones  and  the 
‘  most  exquisite  gems,  and  with  ointments  of  the  richest  odour.  He  called  his  nobles 
‘  together,  and,  placing  these  chests  before  them,  asked  which  they  thought  the  most 
‘  valuable.  They  pronounced  those  with  the  golden  coverings  to  be  the  most  precious, 

*  supposing  they  were  made  to  contain  the  crowns  and  girdles  of  the  king.  The  two 
chests  covered  with  pitch  they  viewed  with  contempt.  Then  said  the  king,  I  pre- 

‘  sumed  what  would  be  your  determination ;  for  ye  look  with  the  eyes  of  sense.  But 
‘  to  discern  baseness  or  value,  which  are  hid  within,  we  must  look  with  the  eyes  of  the 

*  mind.  He  then  ordered  the  golden  chests  to  be  opened,  which  exhaled  an  intolerable 
‘stench,  and  filled  the  beholders  with  horror.’  ‘In  the  Metrical  Lives  of  the  Saints ,’ 
adds  Warton,  ‘written  about  the  year  1300,  these  chests  are  called  four  fates,  that  is, 
‘  four  vats,  or  vessels.’ 

Warton  says  that  ‘  a  like  story  ’  is  in  the  Confessio  Amantis,  and  believes  that  Gower 
copied  it  from  the  foregoing;  and  Gower’s  beginning  the  story  (liber  v,  p.  203,  ed. 
Pauli) :  ‘  In  a  cronique  this  I  rede,’  gives  colour  to  the  belief.  But  Clarendon  suggests 
(wherein,  I  think,  all  will  fully  agree)  that  this  cannot  be ;  ‘  for,’  as  they  say,  *  not  only 
‘  are  the  details  different,  there  being  two  caskets  instead  of  four,  and  both  of  the  same 
‘  external  appearance,  but  the  moral  lesson  sought  to  be  conveyed  is  entirely  dissimilar. 
‘  It  is  told  of  a  king  whose  officers  complained  that  their  promotion  was  not  in  propor- 
‘  don  to  their  service.  To  prove  to  them  that  it  was  all  of  fortune,  the  king  adopted 
‘  the  device  of  making  his  coffers  so  exactly  alike  that  no  one  could  tell  one  from  the 

*  other.  The  one  was  filled  with  fine  gold  and  precious  stones,  the  other  with  straw 
‘  and  rubbish.  The  courtiers  were  asked  to  choose,  and  of  course  their  choice  fell 
‘  upon  the  latter.  The  contents  of  the  other  were  then  d'splayed,  and  the  moral 
‘  follows  : 

‘  Lo,  saith  the  king,  now  may  ye  s 9, 

‘  That  there  is  no  defaulte  in  me ; 

*  Forthy  my  self  I  woll  acquit 
*  ‘  And  bereth  ye  your  owne  wit 

‘  Of  that  fortune  hath  you  refuse'!.’ 


APPENDIX 


318 

After  finishing  this  story  Gower  goes  on  to  tell  another,  of  which  the  moral  is  about 
the  same,  or,  as  he  expresses  it,  ‘  Somdele  to  this  matere  like,’  concerning  ‘  Frederike, 
of  Rome,  that  time  emperour,’  who  put  to  the  test  the  faith  of  two  ‘  beggers  ’  (one  of 
whom  trusted  in  God,  and  the  other  in  the  king)  by  means  of  *  two  pastees,’  in  one 
of  which  was  a  capon,  and  in  the  other  a  ‘  great  richesse  of  floreins.’  This  version, 
Sir  Frederic  Madden  says,  according  to  Clarendon,  came  from  the  Chronicle  of  Laner- 
cost,  compiled  about  the  year  1346,  wherein  the  beggars  are  blind. 

A  form,  in  which  this  version  of  the  story,  in  its  essential  features,  viz.  where  for¬ 
tune  or  the  will  of  God  is  the  arbiter,  is  to  be  found  also  in  the  Gesta,  Chapter  109,  of 
the  Latin  Printed  Editions,  and  is  thus  given  by  Douce  (i,  277) :  ‘A  smith  had  lost  a 
‘  chest  of  money,  which  being  carried  by  the  sea  to  the  shores  of  a  distant  country, 
‘  was  taken  up  by  an  inn-keeper,  who,  not  suspecting  that  it  contained  anything,  threw 
‘  it  carelessly  aside.  Having  occasion  one  day  for  some  fuel  to  warm  his  guests,  he 
‘  broke  up  the  chest,  and  finding  the  money,  laid  it  by  safely,  till  some  one  should 

*  arrive  to  claim  it.  The  smith  soon  afterwards  appeared ;  and  having  publicly 
‘  declared  his  loss,  the  inn-keeper  resolved  to  ascertain  if  it  were  the  will  of  Provi- 
‘  dence  that  he  should  make  restitution.  He  therefore  caused  three  pasties  to  be 

*  made ;  the  first  he  filled  with  earth,  the  second  with  dead  men’s  bones,  and  the  third 

*  with  money.  He  then  invited  the  smith  to  dinner,  and  gave  him  the  choice  of  the 
‘  pasties.  The  smith  fixed  on  those  with  the  earth  and  bones,  and  relinquished  the 
‘  others.  The  host  now  concluded  that  it  was  not  the  will  of  Heaven  that  he  should 
‘  restore  the  money ;  he  therefore  called  in  the  blind  and  the  lame,  opened  the  other 
‘  pasty  in  their  presence,  and  divided  the  treasure  between  them.’  (I  can  find  no  such 
story  in  Herrtage’s  edition  of  the  Gesta,  wherein  Chap.  109  of  the  Latin  Editions  is 
tabulated  as  the  same  as  Robinson’s  Thirty-second  Historie,  given  above  from  Collier’s 
Reprint.) 

The  source  of  these  versions  is  evidently  the  same  as  of  that  version  which  Boccaccio 
gives  in  The  First  Story  of  the  Tenth  Day.  Boccaccio,  Gower,  and  the  Chronicle  of 
Lanercost  are  all  so  nearly  contemporaneous  that  it  is  not  easy  to  decide  from  whose 
hands  we  receive  the  earliest  version. 

Dr  Johnson  gives  Boccaccio’s  story  at  full  length.  Dunlop  (p.  239,  ed.  1845)  gives 
an  abbreviation,  which  is  amply  sufficient :  *  A  noble  Italian,  called  Ruggieri,  entered 
‘  into  the  service  of  Alphonso,  King  of  Spain.  He  soon  perceives  that  his  majesty  is 

*  extremely  liberal  to  others,  but  thinking  his  own  merits  not  sufficiently  rewarded,  he 
‘  asks  leave  to  return  to  his  own  country.  This  the  king  grants  after  presenting  him 
‘  with  a  fine  mule  for  his  journey.  Alphonso  directs  one  of  his  attendants  to  join  him 
‘  on  the  road,  to  note  if  he  make  any  complaint  of  the  treatment  he  had  received,  and, 
‘  if  he  should,  to  command  his  return.  The  mule  having  stopped  in  a  river  and  refus- 
‘  ing  to  go  on,  Ruggieri  said  she  was  like  the  person  who  gave  her.  Ruggieri  being 

*  in  consequence  brought  back  to  the  capital,  and  his  words  reported  to  the  king,  he  is 

*  introduced  into  the  presence  of  his  majesty  and  asked  why  he  had  compared  him  to 
‘the  mule.  “Because,”  replied  Ruggieri,  “the  mule  would  not  stop  where  it  ought. 

‘  “  but  stood  still  when  it  should  have  gone  on ;  in  like  manner  you  give  where  it  is 
‘  “  not  suitable,  and  withhold  where  you  ought  to  bestow.”  On  hearing  this,  the  king 
‘  carries  him  into  a  hall,  and  shows  him  two  shut  coffers  ’  [the  rest  I  give  from  Payne’s 
admirable  translation  for  The  Villon  Society ]  *  and  said  to  him  in  presence  of  many, 
‘  “  Messer  Ruggieri,  in  one  of  these  coffers  is  my  crown,  the  royal  sceptre  and  orb, 
‘  “  together  with  many  goodly  girdles  and  ouches  and  rings  of  mine,  and,  in  fine,  every 

“  precious  jewel  I  have;  and  the  other  is  full  of  earth.  Take,  then,  one,  and  be  that 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— JESSICA.  GOSS  ON 


319 


‘  “which  you  shall  take  yours;  and  you  may  thus  see  whether  of  the  twain  hath  been 
‘  “ungrateful  of  your  worth,  myself  or  your  ill-fortune.”  Messer  Ruggieri,  seeing  that 

*  it  was  the  king’s  pleasure,  took  one  of  the  coffers,  which,  being  opened  by  Alphonso’s 

*  commandment,  was  found  to  be  that  which  was  full  of  earth ;  whereupon,  quoth  the 
‘  king  laughing,  “Now  can  you  see,  Messer  Ruggieri,  that  that  I  tell  you  of  your  for- 
‘  “  tune  is  true ;  but  certes  your  worth  meriteth  that  I  should  oppose  myself  to  her 

*  “  might.  I  know  you  have  no  mind  to  turn  Spaniard,  and  therefore  I  will  bestow 
‘“upon  you  neither  castle  nor  city  in  these  parts;  but  this  coffer,  of  which  fortune 
‘  “  deprived  you,  I  will  in  her  despite  shall  be  yours,  so  you  may  carry  it  off  to  your 
‘  “  own  country,  and  justly  glorify  yourself  of  your  worth  in  the  sight  of  your  country- 
‘  “men  by  the  witness  of  my  gifts.”  Messer  Ruggieri  accordingly  took  the  coffer,  and 

*  having  rendered  the  king  those  thanks  which  sorted  with  such  a  gift,  joyfully  returned 

*  therewith  to  Tuscany.’ 

‘  Quaere,’  says  Douce  as  a  final  word  (ii,  276),  ‘  if  the  general  construction  of  all 
‘  these  stories  have  not  been  borrowed  from  the  trick  related  to  have  been  put  by  Pro- 

*  metheus  on  Jupiter  with  the  two  bull-skins  filled  with  flesh  and  bones  ?’ 

The  elopement  of  Jessica  and  her  theft  of  jewels  has  been  construed  into  a  third 
subsidiary  plot,  and  its  origin  traced  by  Dunlop  (p.  254)  to  the  Fourteenth  Tale  of 
Massuccio  di  Salerno,  who  flourished  about  1470:  ‘It  is  the  story  of  a  young  gentle- 

*  man  of  Messina,  who  becomes  enamoured  of  the  daughter  of  a  rich  Neapolitan 

*  miser.  As  the  father  kept  his  child  perpetually  shut  up,  the  lover  has  recourse  to 

*  stratagem.  Pretending  to  set  out  on  a  long  journey,  he  deposits  with  the  miser  a 
‘  number  of  valuable  effects,  leaving,  among  other  things,  a  female  slave,  who  prepos- 
‘  sesses  the  mind  of  the  girl  in  favour  of  her  master,  and  finally  assists  in  the  elope- 
‘  ment  of  the  young  lady,  and  the  robbery  of  her  father’s  jewels,  which  she  carries 

‘  along  with  her . It  is  not  improbable  that  the  avaricious  father  in  this  tale,  the 

‘  daughter  so  carefully  shut  up,  the  elopement  of  the  lovers  managed  by  the  interven- 
‘  tion  of  a  servant,  the  robbery  of  the  father,  and  his  grief  on  the  discovery,  which  is 
‘  represented  as  divided  between  the  loss  of  his  daughter  and  ducats,  may  have  sug- 
‘  gested  the  third  plot  in  Shakespeare’s  drama, — the  love  and  elopement  of  Jessica  and 
‘  Lorenzo.’ 

Thus  far  we  have  been  dealing  with  the  plot  of  this  play  as  if  it  were  a  mosaic, 
which  Shakespeare  had  combined  into  one  group  by  gathering  its  diverse  elements 
from  diverse  sources,  and  he  has  been  greatly  praised  for  showing  so  much  dramatic 
and  artistic  skill  in  the  combination.  But  Warton  in  the  last  century  supplied  us  with 
a  hint,  which  admits  the  possibility  that  Shakespeare  was  indebted  for  the  framework 
at  least  of  this  drama  to  an  older  play,  in  which  the  Bond  Story  and  the  Casket  Story 
were  already  combined. 

The  note  in  which  Warton  calls  attention  to  the  Ballad  of  Gernutus  concludes 
with :  ‘  I  shall  only  add  that  it  appears  from  Gosson’s  Schoole  of  Abuse,  printed  in 
‘  1579,  that  the  character  of  a  cruel  and  covetous  Jew  had  been  exhibited  with  good 
‘  applause  before  Shakespeare’s  Shylock  appeared.’  (See  p.  292,  ante.) 

Gosson,  who  had  been  himself  a  writer  of  plays,  and  even  an  actor,  was  evidently  a 
serious-minded  young  man :  the  ‘  disorder  in  every  playhouse  ’  greatly  offended  him 
and  before  his  twenty-sixth  year  he  published,  in  1579,  ‘  The  Schoole  of  Abufe,  contein- 
‘  ing  a  plesaunt  inuectiue  against  Poets,  Pipers,  Plaiers,  Iesters  and  such  like  Cater- 

*  pillers  of  a  Commonwelth ;  Setting  vp  the  Flagge  of  Defiance  to  their  mischieuous 


APPENDIX 


320 

exeicise,  and  ouerthrowing  their  Bulwarkes,  by  Prophane  Writers,  Naturall  reason, 

‘  and  common  experience  :  A  discourse  as  pieasaunt  for  Gentlemen  that  fauour  learn- 
‘  ing,  as  profitable  for  all  that  wyll  follow  vertue.  By  Stephan  Gosson,  Stud.  Oxon.’. 
It  was  dedicated,  but  without  permission,  ‘To  the  right  noble  Gentleman,  Master 
‘  Philip  Sidney  Esquier,’  but  Master  Sidney  was  thereat  by  no  means  pleased,  and, 
according  to  a  letter  of  Spenser’s  to  Gabriel  Harvey,  Gosson  ‘was  for  hys  labor 
‘scorned;  if  at  leaste  it  be  in  the  goodnesse  of  that  nature  to  scorne.’  We,  at  least, 
should  be  grateful  for  this  dedication,  in  that  to  the  indignation  stirred  up  by  it  and  by 
the  book  itself  we  probably  owe  Sidney’s  Apologie  for  Poetrie.  As  is  to  be  expected 
from  the  title  of  his  book,  Gosson’s  hand  falls  heavily  on  the  ‘  Caterpillers ‘  Cookes,’  he 
says,  *  did  neuer  shewe  more  crafte  in  their  iunckets  to  vanquish  the  taste,  nor  Painter* 

‘  in  shadowes  to  allure  the  eye,  then  Poets  in  Theaters  to  wounde  the  conscience,’  and 
as  for  the  Players,  they  ‘  are  the  Basiliskes  of  the  world,  that  poyson,  as  well  with  the 

*  beame  of  their  sighte,  as  with  the  breath  of  their  mouth.’  After  many  pages  of  this 
lashing  he  relents,  and  acknowledges  that  there  are  some  players  that  are  *  sober,  dis- 
‘  creete,  properly  learned  honest  householders,’  and  so  also  he  confesses  (p.  40,  ed. 
Arber)  that  ‘  some  of  their  Playes  are  without  rebuke :  which  are  as  easily  remembered 
‘  as  quickly  reckoned.  The  twoo  prose  Bookes  plaied  at  the  Belsauage,  where  you 
‘  shall  finde  neuer  a  woorde  without  wit,  neuer  a  line  without  pith,  neuer  a  letter 

*  placed  in  vaine.  The  lew  and  Ptolomc,  showne  at  the  Bull,  the  one  representing  the 
‘  greedinesse  of  worldly  chusers,  and  bloody  mindes  of  Usurers  :  The  other  very  liuely 

*  discrybing  howe  seditious  estates,  with  their  owne  deuises,  false  friendes,  with  their 
‘  own  swoordes,  and  rebellious  commons  in  their  owne  snares  are  ouerthrowne :  neither 

*  with  Amorous  gesture  wounding  the  eye :  nor  with  slouenly  talke  hurting  the  eares 
‘  of  the  chast  hearers.’ 

At  last  we  seem  to  have  encountered  something  substantial.  Here  is  a  play,  in  which 
first,  the  chief  character  is  a  Jew;  secondly,  in  which  the  choice  of  the  caskets  is 
adumbrated  in  the  ‘  greedinesse  of  worldly  chusers,’  and  thirdly,  where  the  ‘  bloody 
mindes  of  Usurers  ’  may  be  typified  in  Shylock ;  small  wonder,  indeed,  that  so  many 
critics  and  editors  have  set  up  their  rest  on  ‘  the  Jew,  mentioned  by  Gosson  ’  as  the 
immediate  Source  of  the  Plot  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice. 

Douce  refers  to  the  ‘mistake  that  has  been  committed  by  those  who  speak  of 
‘  Shakespeare’s  imitations  of  the  sources  of  this  play,  and  who  forget  that  one  on  the 
‘  same  subject  had  already  appeared,  and  which  might  have  furnished  him  with  the 
‘  whole  of  the  plot.’  Again,  in  referring  to  Tyrwhitt’s  conjectures  concerning  the 
Gesta  Romancrum ,  Douce  says :  ‘  He  also  had  forgotten  the  elder  drama  mentioned 

*  by  Gosson.’ 

Steevens  :  ‘  It  is  therefore  not  improbable  that  Shakespeare  new-wrote  his  piece, 

*  on  the  model  [of  Gosson’s  lew],  and  that  the  elder  performance,  being  inferior,  was 
‘  permitted  to  drop  silently  into  oblivion.’ 

Skottowe  (i,  330)  thinks  the  loss  of  Gosson’s  lew  is  ‘justly  a  subject  of  regret,  for 

*  as  it  combined  within  its  plot  the  two  incidents  of  the  bond  and  the  caskets,  it  would, 
‘  in  all  probability,  have  thrown  much  additional  light  on  Shakespeare’s  progress  in  the 
‘  composition  of  his  highly-finished  comedy.’ 

But  Knight  holds  back ;  he  thinks  that  Skottowe  ‘  somewhat  leaps  to  a  conclusion  ’ 
that  Gosson’s  Jew  was  the  original  of  Shylock.  ‘  As  all  we  know  of  this  play,’  he 
continues,  ‘  is  told  us  by  Gosson,  it  is  rather  bold  to  assume  that  it  combined  the  two 
‘  incidents  of  the  bond  and  the  caskets.  The  combination  of  these  incidents  is  per- 
‘  haps  one  of  the  most  remarkable  examples  of  Shakespeare’s  dramatic  skill . The 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— GOSS  ON 


321 


‘rude  dramatists  of  1579  were  not  remarkable  for  the  combination  of  incidents.  It 

*  was  probably  reserved  for  the  skill  of  Shakespeare  to  bring  the  caskets  and  the  bond 
‘  in  juxtaposition.  We  cannot  absolutely  deny  that  Gosson’s  play  might  have  furnished 

*  our  poet  with  the  whole  of  the  plot ;  but  it  is  certainly  an  abuse  of  language  to  say 
‘  that  it  did  furnish  him,  because  the  Jew  shown  at  the  Bull  deals  with  “  worldly 

*  “  chusers  ”  and  the  “  bloody  mindes  of  Usurers.”  ’ 

Singer  (2d  ed.,  1856) :  ‘  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  Shakespeare,  as  in  other  instances, 

*  availed  himself  of  this  ancient  piece.’ 

Collier,  after  quoting  Gosson,  says  :  ‘  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  a  theatrical  per¬ 
formance  should  have  existed,  anterior  to  the  time  of  Shakespeare,  in  which  the  sep- 
‘  arate  plots  were  united ;  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  some  novel  had  been  published 
‘  which  gave  the  same  incidents  in  a  narrative  form.’ 

Halliwell  refers  to  the  fact,  derived  from  the  Stationers'  Registers ,  that  the  Mer¬ 
chant  of  Venice  was  originally  also  entitled  the  Jew  of  Venice ,  and  then,  after  quoting 
Gosson’s  reference  to  the  Jew,  continues :  ‘  The  coincidence  of  this  description  with 
‘  the  subject  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice  is  so  remarkable,  that  when  we  add  to  it  the 

*  identity  of  title,  little  doubt  can  fairly  remain  that  the  play  mentioned  by  Gosson  in 

‘1579  contained  similar  incidents  to  those  in  Shakespeare’s  play,  and  that  it  was,  in 
‘  all  probability,  the  rude  original  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice . That  Shakespeare 

*  adopted  any  of  the  dialogue  of  this  ancient  composition  is  highly  improbable,  but  that 

*  he  may  have  been  indebted  to  it  for  the  general  outline  of  the  structure  of  his  plot, 
‘  and  that  the  title  also  was  originally  adopted  from  it,  may  be  admitted  without  much 

*  fear  of  incurring  a  serious  error.’ 

Staunton  :  ‘  The  expression  worldly  chusers  is  so  appropriate  to  the  choosers  of  the 
caskets,  and  the  bloody  mindes  of  usurers  so  applicable  to  the  vindictive  cruelty  of 
Shylock,  that  it  is  very  probable  Shakespeare  in  this  play,  as  in  other  plays,  worked 
upon  some  rough  model  already  prepared  for  him.’ 

Clarendon  :  *  It  is  clear  the  plot  of  a  play  [as  described  by  Gosson]  must  have 

*  been  essentially  the  same  as  that  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  and  that  we  have  here 
‘  combined,  if  not  for  the  first  time,  the  two  stories  of  the  caskets  and  the  pound  of 
‘  flesh,  which  had  previously  a  separate  existence  in  many  forms.’ 

Delius  is  inclined  to  think  with  Knight  that  the  description  in  Gosson  is  too  vague 
tc  authorize  so  bold  an  assumption  as  that  the  Merchant  of  Venice  was  founded  on  the 
Jew. 

Rolfe  thinks  it  probable  that  the  plots  of  the  two  dramas  were  ‘  essentially  the 
‘  same,’  and  that  Shakespeare  ‘  worked  upon  some  rough  model  already  prepared  for 

*  him.’ 

Grant  White  (2d  ed.) :  ‘  This  play  [Gosson’s  Jew~\,  manifestly,  Shakespeare  worked 
'  over  into  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  as  we  have  it.’ 

In  this  general  agreement  I  beg  to  be  included,  and,  while  accepting  fully  the 
improbability  of  Shakespeare’s  having  adopted  any  of  his  predecessor’s  dialogue,  I 
think  it  not  unlikely  that  here  and  there,  in  two  places  at  least,  we  may  discern  in 
the  dialogue  traces  of  the  old  play.  One  of  these  is  noted  by  Hunter.  The  Serving- 
man  in  the  second  scene  tells  Portia  that  *  the  four  strangers  ’  wish  to  take  leave  of 
her,  whereas  six  strangers  have  been  enumerated ;  and  Hunter  suggests  that  in  the 
first  draught  of  the  play  there  were,  perhaps,  but  four.  See  I,  ii,  120. 

Again,  I  think  we  have  an  outcropping  of  the  old  play  in  Lorenzo’s  unpleasant 
banter  with  Launcelot.  Lorenzo’s  allusion  is  not  explained  by  anything  whatsoever 
in’  the  course  of  the  story;  it  serves  no  purpose  (albeit  Daniel  does  allude  to  it  in  his 
21 


APPENDIX 


322 

computation  of  time);  it  has  ‘neither  wit,  manners,  nor  modesty,’  but  is  an  unsightly 
excrescence  which,  I  trust,  is  to  be  thus  accounted  for. 

Finally,  Edward  Scott  ( Athenaeum ,  2  July,  1881)  has  discovered,  in  an  unpub¬ 
lished  letter  of  Spenser,  an  allusion  which  corroborates  the  supposition  that  Gosson’s 
Jew  is  the  prototype  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice.  The  letter  is  from  Spenser  to  his 
friend  Gabriel  Harvey,  wherein  ‘  he  signs  himself  thus :  “  He  that  is  fast  bownde  vnto 
‘  “  the  in  more  obligations  then  any  marchant  in  Italy  to  any  Jewe  there.”  This  letter 
‘  was  a  reply  to  one  from  Harvey,  dated  1579,  and  enclosed  a  whimsical  bond  between 

‘  the  two  friends  in  allusion  to  the  bond  of  the  Jew . It  is  evident,  I  think,  that 

‘  Spenser  and  Harvey  had  lately  together  paid  a  visit  to  the  Bull,  had  enjoyed  the 
'  representation  of  this  piece,  the  Jew,  and  it  had  made  such  an  impression  on  their 
‘  minds  that  their  correspondence  at  this  time  is  full  of  allusions  to  it.’ 

Although  in  the  foregoing  pages  nearly  everything  is  given  that  has  been  supposed 
to  have  contributed  to  Shakespeare’s  Plot,  there  yet  remains  a  Tragedy  which,  it  has 
been  claimed,  influenced  him  more  or  less  in  the  composition  of  the  play. 

This  tragedy,  which  naturally  occurs  to  every  one,  is  Marlowe’s  Jew  of  Malta  ;  the 
mere  similarity  of  the  titles  suggests  some  parallelisms  at  least.  It  was  probably  written 
about  1589  or  1590,  according  to  Collier,  whom  Dyce  quotes  without  dissent;  and 
was  very  popular,  to  judge  from  the  frequency  with  which  it  occurs  in  Henslowe’s 
diary.  The  part  of  the  Jew,  named  Barabas,  was  ‘presented  by  so  unimitable  an  actor 
as  Master  Alleyn,’  as  we  learn  from  the  Dedication  by  Heywood,  who,  in  1633,  put 
forth  the  first  edition.  From  the  play  itself  we  learn  that  the  actor  wore  an  artificial 
nose,  presumably  of  extraordinary  proportions.  Of  the  character  itself,  Charles  Lamb 
says  ( Specimens  of  Dram.  Poet.),  ‘  Marlowe’s  Jew  does  not  approach  so  near  to  Shake- 
‘  speare’s  as  his  Edward  the  Second  does  to  Richard  the  Second.  Shylock,  in  the 
‘  midst  of  his  savage  purpose,  is  a  man.  His  motives,  feelings,  resentments,  have 
‘  something  human  in  them.  “  If  you  wrong  us,  shall  we  not  revenge  ?”  Barabas 
‘  is  a  mere  monster,  brought  in  with  a  large  painted  nose  to  please  the  rabble.  He 
‘  kills  in  sport,  poisons  whole  nunneries,  invents  infernal  machines.  He  is  just  such 
‘  an  exhibition  as,  a  century  or  two  earlier,  might  have  been  played  before  thp  Lon- 
‘  doners  by  the  Royal  Command,  when  a  general  pillage  and  massacre  of  the  Hebrews 
‘  had  been  resolved  on  in  the  cabinet.’ 

‘  Marlowe,’  says  Dyce  ( Works,  i,  xxi),  ‘  violated  the  truth  of  nature,  not  so  much 
‘  from  his  love  of  exaggeration,  as  in  consequence  of  having  borrowed  all  the  atro- 
‘  cities  of  the  play  from  some  now-unknown  novel,  whose  author  was  willing  to  flatter 
‘  the  prejudices  of  his  readers  by  attributing  almost  impossible  wickedness  to  a  son  of 

‘  Israel . That  Shakespeare  was  well  acquainted  with  this  tragedy  cannot  be 

‘  doubted  ;  but  that  he  caught  from  it  more  than  a  few  trifling  hints  for  the  Merchant 
‘  of  Venice  will  be  allowed  by  no  one  who  has  carefully  compared  the  character  of 

*  Barabas  with  that  of  Shylock.’ 

Elze,  whose  opinions  are  always  entitled  to  a  respectful  hearing,  maintains  with 
earnestness  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  vi,  133,  1871)  that  ‘the  prototype  of  Shylock,  beyond  all 

•  conjecture,  is  to  be  found  in  Marlowe’s  Jew  of  Malta,  without  which,  in  all  probabil- 
‘  ity,  the  Merchant  of  Venice  would  never  have  been  written.’  Elze  is  not  to  be  under¬ 
stood  as  asserting  that  Shakespeare  copied  Marlowe;  on  the  contrary,  Shakespeare 
observed  Barabas  in  order  to  know  what  to  avoid  in  Shylock.  After  giving  an  epitome 
of  Marlowe’s  play,  Elze  continues  (p.  137):  ‘Can  there  be  any  doubt,  after  all  this, 

that  we  have  here,  if  not  the  prototype,  at  least  the  germ  and  suggestion  of  Shylock  ? 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— JEW  OF  MALTA 


323 


'  To  such  a  master  of  the  human  heart  as  Shakespeare  the  temptation  was  irresistible 
1  to  transform  this  Barabas  into  a  genuine  Jewish  usurer,  and  out  of  this  mouthing  and 
‘  impossible  criminal  to  create  a  real,  live  man,  with  human  motives,  passions,  and 

*  actions.  Barabas,  of  all  men,  was  the  one  best  suited  to  be  the  claimant  in  a  lawsuit 

*  over  a  pound  of  flesh ;  in  his  avarice  and  in  his  thirst  for  revenge  for  the  long  series 
‘  of  wrongs  he  stood  forth  not  only  as  the  inexorable  enemy  of  the  Christians,  but  also 
‘  through  his  daughter  supplied  the  opportunity  of  bringing  him  into  relationship  of  a 
‘  different  kind  with  the  Christian  world.  Accordingly,  we  cannot  doubt  but  that  Mar- 
‘  lowe’s  Barabas  and  his  daughter  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  true  starting-point  of  Shake 

‘  speare’s  play.  The  novel  in  the  Pecorone  not  only  leaves  the  character  of  the  Jew 

*  wholly  undeveloped,  but  also  makes  no  allusion  to  any  daughter.’ 

Ward  [Hist.  Eng.  Dram.  Lit.,  1875,  i,  *88)  is  inclined  to  go  farther  than  Elze: 
‘  Between  Shylock  and  Barabas  there  is  doubtless  a  very  marked  difference ;  but  that 
‘  the  two  plays  are,  so  far  as  their  main  subject  is  concerned,  essentially  written  in  the 

*  same  spirit,  I  cannot  hesitate  in  affirming.  It  is,  I  am  convinced,  only  modern  read- 
‘  ers  and  modem  actors  who  suppose  that  Shakespeare  consciously  intended  to  arouse 
‘  the  sympathy  of  his  audience  on  behalf  of  the  Jew.  The  sympathy  which,  notwith- 
‘  standing,  is  aroused,  is  in  truth  merely  the  adventitious  result  of  the  unconscious  tact 

*  with  which  the  poet  humanized  the  character.  In  both  Shakespeare’s  and  Marlowe’s 
‘  plays  the  view  inculcated  is,  that  on  the  part  of  a  Jew  fraud  is  the  sign  of  his  tribe, 

*  whereas  on  the  part  of  Christians  counter-fraud,  though  accompanied  by  violence,  is 

*  worthy  of  commendation.  This  I  cannot  but  regard  as  the  primary  effect  of  the 

*  whole  of  either  play ;  but  just  as  Shakespeare,  in  working  out  character  and  action, 

*  could  not  fail  incidentally  to  indicate  his  consciousness  of  a  counter-argument  ad 
‘  Christianos,  so  Marlowe  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Barabas  the  following  plea  in  defence 
‘  of  his  conduct :  “  It’s  no  sin  to  deceive  a  Christian.  For  they  themselves  hold  it  a 
‘  “  principle :  Faith  is  not  to  be  kept  with  heretics ;  But  all  are  heretics  that  are  not 
‘  “Jews;  This  follows  well.”  Apart,  however,  from  the  much  grosser  developement  of 

*  the  evil  tendencies  of  the  Jew  in  Marlowe,  the  caricature  (for  such  it  is)  of  Barabas 
‘  is,  in  general,  far  more  coarsely  drawn  than  the  character  of  Shylock  in  Shakespeare. 
‘  As  to  other  resemblances,  I  will  not  dwell  on  the  similarity  of  the  situation  between 
‘  father  and  daughter  in  the  two  plays,  which  is  essential  to  the  conception  of  either. 
‘  But  it  seems  worth  while  to  enumerate  certain  passages  too  closely  approaching  one 
‘  another  to  have  done  so  by  accident,  which  have  occurred  to  me  in  reading  Marlowe’s 
‘  play : 

Jew  of  Malta,  I,  i :  First  appearance  of  Bar.  He  enumerates  his  argosies. 

Mer.  of  Ven.  I.  iii :  First  appearance  of  Shyl.  He  enumerates  the  argosies  of  Ant. 


Jew  of  Malta,  I,  i :  ‘  These  are  blessings  promised  to  the  Jews, 

And  herein  was  old  Abraham’s  happiness,’  &c. 

Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  iii :  Passage  about  Jacob,  with  a  reference  to  Abraham,  ending : 

‘  This  was  a  way  to  thrive,  and  he  was  bless’d ; 

And  thrift  is  blessing,  if  men  steal  it  not.’ 


few  of  Malta,  I,  ii :  ‘You  have  my  goods,  my  money  and  my  wealth,  &c. 
....  You  can  request  no  more  ’ 

(Unless  you  wish  to  take  my  life). 

Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i :  Greatly  improved  in  Shylock’s  speech : 

‘  Nay,  take  my  life  and  a  1,’  &c. 


324 


APPENDIX 


Jew  of  Malta,  lb.  :  ‘  What,  bring  you  Scripture  to  confirm  your  wrongs  ?’ 
Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  iii :  *  The  devil  can  cite  Scripture  for  his  purposes.’ 


few  of  Malta,  II,  i :  ‘  Oh  my  girl, 

My  gold,  my  fortune,  my  felicity  .... 

Oh,  girl,  oh,  gold,  oh,  beauty,  oh,  my  bliss.’ 

Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  viii :  ‘  My  daughter ! — 0  my  ducats  ! — O  my  daughter !  .  . 

Justice  !  the  law !  my  ducats,  and  my  daughter !  ’  * 


Jew  of  Malta,  II,  ii :  Barabas  and  Slave  (against  hearty  feeders  in  general). 

Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  v :  Shylock  and  Launcelot  Gobbo. 

*  There  are  several  other  parallel  passages  (some  not  very  striking)  in  Waldron  s 
‘  edition  of  Ben  Jonson’s  Sad  Shepherd,  p.  209  seq. ;  among  them  the  following  speech 

*  of  Barabas,  to  which  I  need  not  apply  the  Shakespearian  parallel :  “  I  learned  in  Flor- 
‘  “  ence  how  to  kiss  my  hand,  Heave  up  my  shoulders  when  they  call  me  dog,  And 

*  “  duck  as  low  as  any  barefoot  friar.”  ....  The  number  of  these  parallel  passages 

*  might  be  perhaps  increased.  They  prove,  as  it  seems  to  me,  conclusively  that  Mar- 
‘  lowe’s  Jew  of  Malta  was  present  to  Shakespeare’s  mind  when  he  wrote  his  Merchant 
‘  of  Venice .’  [Ward  then  proceeds  to  show  the  immeasurable  superiority  of  the  Jeu 
of  Shakespeare  to  that  of  Marlowe.] 

Swinburne  (p.  15 1) :  In  the  Merchant  of  Venice  there  is  hardly  a  single  charactei 
from  Portia  to  old  Gobbo,  a  single  incident  from  the  exaction  of  Shylock’s  bond  to  the 
computation  of  hairs  in  Launcelot’s  beard  and  Dobbin’s  tail,  which  has  not  been  more 
plentifully  beprosed  than  ever  Rosalind  was  berhymed.  Much  wordy  wind  has  also 
been  wasted  on  comparison  of  Shakespeare’s  Jew  with  Marlowe’s ;  that  is,  of  a  living 
subject  for  terror  and  pity  with  a  mere  mouthpiece  for  the  utterance  of  poetry  as  mag¬ 
nificent  as  any  but  the  best  of  Shakespeare’s. 

In  the  preceding  pages,  in  *  The  Date  of  Composition,’  mention  was  made  of  the 
record  in  Henslowe’s  Diary  of  a  *  new  ’  play,  called  by  that  illiterate  manager  ‘  the 
Venesyon  comodey,’  acted  on  the  25  August,  1594. 

This  Venetian  comedy,  Fleay  assumes  to  be  a  lost  play  of  Dekker’s,  which  he  calls 
Joseph  the  Jew  of  Venice ;  on  this  play  Fleay  asserts  {Life  and  Work  of  Sh.,  pp.  30, 
197)  that  the  Merchant  of  Venice  was  founded.  (It  was  not  entered  in  the  Stationers’ 
Registers  until  9  Sept.,  1653,  as  given  by  Fleay,  p.  360,  and  there  the  title  is  simply 
The  Jew  of  Venice).  I  cannot  find  that  Fleay  anywhere  supplies  the  proof  of  this 
identity  of  ‘the  Venesyon  comodey’  with  Dekker’s  Jew  of  Venice,  or  any  proof,  other 
than  in  the  similarity  of  the  title  as  given  in  Robertes’s  entry,  that  the  Merchant  of 
Venice  was  founded  upon  either. 

In  an  old  German  Almanac,  published  in  1626,  there  is  a  MS  list  of  performances  by 

*  the  English  Comedians  ’  at  the  Dresden  Court.  This  list  was  printed  for  the  first 
time,  I  think,  by  Cohn  in  his  valuable  Shakespeare  in  Germany,  1864,  p.  cxv;  it 
appears  from  it  that  on  the  13th  of  July  and  on  the  5th  of  November  of  that  year,  1626, 
a  comedy  was  given  called  Josephus,  a  Jew  of  Venice,  which  Cohn  surmised  to  be  the 
same  as  that  contained  in  a  MS  in  the  Imperial  Library  in  Vienna,  and,  from  a  descrip¬ 
tion  which  he  received  from  the  Librarian  in  that  city,  he  inferred  it  to  be  a  ‘  mix- 

*  There  is  a  strong  resemblance  to  both  these  passages  in  Ben  Jonson’s  The  Case  is  Altered,  V. 
ii. —  Ward. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—DER  JUD  VON  VENEDIG  325 


*  ture  of  Shakespeare’s  Merchant  of  Venice  and  Marlowe’s  Jew  of  Malta?  *  It  is  also 
‘  possible,’  adds  Cohn,  *  that  this  play  is  a  version  of  Thomas  Dekker's  Jew  of  Venice, 
‘which  appears  to  be  irrecoverably  lost.’  In  1611,  ‘A  German  comedy,  The  Jew  of 
Venice,  from  the  English,’  was  acted  in  Halle  by  the  English  Comedians  ( Cohn,  p. 
lxxxix),  and  as  this  is  the  very  title  of  Shakespeare’s  play  given  in  Robertes’s  entry  on 
the  Stationers’  Registers,  Cohn,  with  praiseworthy  zeal,  claims  for  this  performance, 
and  for  Halle,  the  honour  of  ‘  the  earliest  authentic  evidence  that  one  of  Shakespeare’s 

*  masterpieces  had  been  performed  during  the  poet’s  lifetime  in  Germany ;’  but  by  the 
time  Cohn  had  reached,  in  his  history,  the  records  of  1626  and  of  ‘ Josephus  the  Jew 

of  Venice,’  he  had  grown  more  cautious,  and  his  faith  that  the  German  and  the  Eng¬ 
lish  Jews  were  twins,  or  even  cater-cousins,  was  somewhat  shaken;  and  he  circum¬ 
spectly  surmises,  as  we  have  seen,  that  Joseph  may  have  been  Shakespeare’s  Shylock 
and  Marlowe’s  Barabas  rolled  into  one,  or  even  Dekker’s  lost  wanderer ;  at  any  rate 
he  wisely  refrained,  where  all  is  vague,  from  any  positive  assertion. 

In  18S4,  Johannes  Meissner,  in  Vienna,  printed  the  MS,  alluded  to  by  Cohn,  of 
Josephus,  the  Jew  of  Venice,  from  the  Imperial  Library,  and  prefaced  it  with  a  highly 
interesting  account  of  the  English  Comedians  in  Germany  in  those  early  times.  This 
MS  dates  from  the  17th  Century,  ‘probably  from  the  second  half  of  the  century;’  but 
Meissner  traces  it  back,  under  slight  variations  in  title,  or  rather  ‘  under  the  various 
descriptions  given  of  it  by  spectators,’  to  1674,  in  Dresden;  to  1651,  by  the  Dresden 
Comedians,  in  Prague;  to  1626,  by  Green’s  troupe,  in  Dresden;  to  i6n,in  Halle, 
and,  finally,  in  1608,  to  Green’s  troupe,  in  Graz.  The  whole  story  presents  an  exceed¬ 
ingly  valuable  chapter  in  Dramatic  History,  but  naturally  it  is  much  more  interesting 
to  Germans  than  to  us.  It  is  to  the  presence  in  Germany  of  these  English  strolling 
players,  with  their  garbled  versions  of  plays  of  which  they  retained  the  whiff  and  wind 
from  the  London  stage,  that  Germany  owes  the  first  germ  of  its  Drama  of  to-day.  In 
accepting  from  Germany  the  fine  volumes  of  the  German  Shakespeare  Society,  let  us 
quench  our  blushes  in  the  thought  that  they  are  but  the  repayment  to  us  of  a  debt. 

What  is  with  Cohn  a  bare  surmise,  viz.  that  in  Josephus ,  the  Jew  of  Venice,  we  may 
have  Dekker’s  lost  play,  becomes,  if  I  understand  him  aright,  a  conviction  to  Fleay, 
and  hence,  as  we  have  seen  above,  his  assertion  that  Josephus  was  Dekker’s  play,  and 
that  Dekker’s  play  was  the  ‘  Venesyon  comodey’  of  1594,  and  that  the  Venetian  com¬ 
edy  was  the  foundation  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice.  It  therefore  behooves  us  to  exam¬ 
ine  well  this  German  play,  which,  thanks  to  Meissner,  can  now  be  satisfactorily  done.* 

Thus  runs  the  title:  Comocdia  Genandt  Pass  Wohl  Gesprochene  Uhrtheil  Eynes 
IVeiblichen  Studenten  oder  Der  Jud  Von  Venedig ;  or,  in  English,  A  Comedy  called 
The  Righteous  Judgement  of  a  Girl  Graduate,  or  the  Jew  of  Venice.  The  Dramatis 
Personse  are :  King  of  Cyprus ;  Prince  of  Cyprus,  in  love  with  Ancilletta ;  Duke  of 
Venice;  Barrabas,  a  Jew,  afterwards  Joseph;  Florello,  a  Counsellor  of  Venice;  An¬ 
cilletta,  his  daughter,  beloved  of  the  Prince ;  Grimaldi,  Santinelli,  Ancilletta’s  lovers ; 
Pickleherring,  servant  to  the  Prince ;  Franciscina,  maid  to  Ancilletta  and  beloved  by 
Pickleherring;  the  Prince’s  Steward,  Counsellors,  &c. 

The  play  opens  at  the  palace  in  Cyprus,  where  the  young  Prince  begs  his  father  to 
banish  the  Jews,  who  have  by  their  tricks  and  usury  gained  enormous  wealth  and  beg¬ 
gared  the  Cypriotes  of  all  classes,  both  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low ;  moreover,  worse 
things  are  to  be  feared  from  them  than  beggary, — ‘  we  know  what  they  lately  did  at 

*  Malta.  It  may  well  happen  that  they  betray  this  kingdom  to  the  Turks.’  (It  is  not 

*  Genbe  ( Geschichte  der  Sh'n  Dramen  in  Deutschland,  1870,  p.  409)  gives  a  short  synopsis  of  it, 
which  is  good  as  far  as  it  goes. 


APPENDIX 


126 

worth  while  to  emphasize  by  comments  the  various  parallelisms  as  they  arise,  which 
recall  either  Marlowe’s  Jew  of  Malta  or  The  Merchant  of  Venice.  A  parallelism  is 
supposed  to  be  indicated  by  quotation  marks.)  The  old  King  grants  his  son’s  request, 
and  orders  are  issued  for  the  banishment  of  the  Jews  and  the  confiscation  of  their 
goods,  which  evil  stroke  is  due  to  the  Prince,  and  supplies  the  motive  for  the  hatred 
of  him  by  Barrabas.  Pickleherring  enters.  This  character  is,  perhaps,  the  most 
prominent  in  the  play,  and  presents  a  study  of  the  manners  and  refinement  of  the 
times,  which  may  be  curious,  but  is  certainly  repulsive.  It  is  inconceivable  that  such 
language  and  actions  could  ever  have  been  tolerated  in  public.  What  this  favorite 
character  says  is  not  fun  but  filth.  There  is  nothing  in  the  whole  range  of  the  old  Eng¬ 
lish  drama  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  and  I  will  confess  to  many  a  quagmire,  that  is 
not  sweet  and  wholesome  beside  this  Pickleherring’s  disgusting  vileness.  Towards 
the  end  of  the  play  he  is  somewhat  less  outrageous,  partly  perhaps  because  there  is  an 
end  to  all  things,  and  that  end  was  reached  in  the  earlier  Scenes ;  and  partly  because 
whatever  similarity  is  to  be  noted  between  this  play  and  Shakespeare’s  Merchant  is 
more  pronounced  towards  the  conclusion. 

Pickleherring  enters  and  presents  certain  petitions  to  the  King,  of  which  only  one 
is  translateable.  It  is  ‘from  a  dead  fellow  who  was  standing  before  a  door,  and 
another  fell  from  the  roof  and  killed  him,  and  now  the  dead  fellow  petitions  that  the 
other  be  put  to  death  too.’  The  petition  was  granted  by  commanding  ‘the  fellow 
who  fell  from  the  roof  to  stand  underneath  and  the  dead  man’s  friend  to  go  up  and  fall 
down  on  him  and  kill  him.’  In  Silvayn’s  Orator,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  p.  310, 
is  supposed  to  have  influenced  the  speech  of  Shylock  before  the  Court,  the  27th 
‘  Declamation  ’  is :  ‘Of  him  that  falling  downe  from  the  top  of  his  house  slew  another 
‘  man,  against  whom  the  sonne  of  the  slaine  man  demandeth  iustice ;’  the  Judge  decides 
‘  that  the  said  plaintife  should  ascend  vp  to  the  top  of  the  same  house,  and  throwing 
‘  himselfe  downe  vpon  the  defendant  should  kill  him  if  he  could.’  The  date  of  the 
‘  Venesyon  comodey  ’  is  1594;  the  date  of  the  Orator  is  1596 ;  if  the  subject  of  the 
foregoing  petition  be  taken  from  The  Orator,  can  the  Venesyon  comodey  and  the  Jud 
von  Venedig  be  the  same  ? 

The  Prince  decides  to  go  to  Venice,  not  only  to  see  that  city  in  the  lovely  spring 
weather,  but  to  form  an  alliance  with  it  against  the  Turks,  although  there  is  not  much 
danger  to  be  apprehended  from  them,  because  they  had  been  ‘  lately  ’  so  terribly  de¬ 
feated  by  ‘Sefi  of  Persia’  (Meissner  notes  that  this  battle  took  place  in  August,  i6og). 
The  King  parts  reluctantly  with  his  son,  and  hesitates  to  expose  the  heir  of  the  throne 
to  the  raging  sea  in  a  few  *  boards  ’  nailed  together. 

The  Jew  is  sent  for,  and  the  decree  of  confiscation  and  banishment  announced  to 
him  by  the  Prince.  He  pleads  in  vain  for  permission  to  remain,  but  the  Prince  is  inex¬ 
orable  ;  he  must  depart  penniless  on  the  morrow  with  his  wife  and  children. 

In  the  last  Scene  of  this  Act  the  Jew  returns  disguised  as  an  old  soldier,  with  a  patch 
over  one  eye,  and  requests,  and  obtains,  permission  to  go  to  Venice  in  the  same  ship  with 
the  Prince.  In  a  soliloquy  the  Jew  vows  vengeance  on  the  tyrannical  Christian,  and  if 
he  can  find  no  other  means  of  killing  the  Prince,  he  has  secreted  enough  gold  and 
jewels  about  his  person  to  bribe  some  banditti  to  assassinate  him.  Though  not  printed 
as  verse,  the  Act  closes  with  a  rhymed  couplet :  I’ll  find  some  means  to  regain  my  pelf, 
The  Prince  shall  die,  I’ll  kill  him  myself. 

In  the  next  Act  we  are  in  Florello’s  house  in  Venice,  and  Santinelli  and  Grimaldi 
are  wooing  Ancilletta.  Florello  insists  upon  his  daughter’s  making  choice  of  one  oi 
other,  but  she  protests  that  she  cannot  choose,  they  are  both  so  excellent,  and  ‘  rehearses 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—DER  JUD  VON  VENEDIG  327 


their  admirable  qualities the  one  is  noble  and  the  other  of  good  family,  the  one  is 
handsome  and  the  other  finely  fonned,  the  one  is  rich  and  the  other  not  poor ;  one  is 
friendly,  the  other  magnanimous,  &c.  &c. ;  where  qualities  are  so  evenly  divided  she 
cannot  decide ;  they  must  wait  a  year,  and  whichever  during  that  time  makes  himself 
more  agreeable,  him  she  will  espouse.  The  lovers  must  perforce  acquiesce,  and  after 
Ancilletta  has  gone  decide  that,  to  kill  time,  they  will  make  merry  during  the  Carnival. 

The  Prince,  Pickleherring,  and  the  disguised  Jew  reach  Venice  in  safety,  and  while 
they  are  talking  over  the  adventures  of  the  voyage  they  see  Ancilletta  and  her  maid, 
Franciscina,  approach  on  their  way  to  church,  and  the  Prince  falls  at  once  in  love  with 
the  mistress,  and  Pickleherring  with  the  maid.  The  Prince  orders  Pickleherring  tc 
follow  them  and  find  out  where  they  live  and  who  is  the  Father  of  the  lady ;  when 
the  clown  returns  he  tells  the  Prince  that  the  Father  lives  *  in  the  Broad  street,  on  the 
‘  right  hand,  on  the  left  side.’ 

The  Second  Act  also  closes  with  a  rhyming  couplet,  but  as  Pickleherring  utters  one 
of  the  lines,  it  is  untranslateable. 

In  the  Third  Act,  Ancilletta  reveals  to  Franciscina  how  deeply  she  is  enamoured 
with  the  Prince,  and  Franciscina  acknowledges  that  she  is  just  as  deeply  in  love  with 
Pickleherring;  all  four  contrive  to  meet  in  the  street,  and  mutual  vows  are  exchanged 
all  round,  in  the  course  of  which  we  discover  from  the  style  of  Franciscina’s  conversa¬ 
tion  that  she  and  Pickleherring  are  well  matched.  The  plot,  whereby  future  interviews 
are  to  be  had,  is  devised  by  Ancilletta,  who  is  to  tell  her  Father  on  her  return  that  she 
has  had  a  fainting  fit  in  the  street ;  thereupon  she  will  take  to  her  bed,  and  grow  worse 
and  worse,  and  Franciscina  is  to  bring  her  a  newspaper  wherein  there  is  the  advertise¬ 
ment  (which  the  Prince  is  to  insert)  of  a  celebrated  French  Doctor.  This  Doctor,  she 
will  tell  her  Father,  that  she  must  see,  and  will  keep  on  telling  him  until  the  Prince, 
disguised  as  a  Doctor,  is  sent  for,  and  her  continued  illness  will  afford  continued  oppor¬ 
tunities  for  interviews,  and  for  becoming  better  acquainted  with  her  Father.  The  Scene 
closes  in  rhyme,  but  it  is  Franciscina  who  this  time  has  the  last  word,  and,  like  Pickle¬ 
herring’s,  it  is  equally  untranslateable. 

The  Jew  now  appears  in  fine  array;  he  has  made  a  good  use  of  his  time  and  talents, 
and  is  already  richer  than  he  was  in  Cyprus.  He  exults  in  his  advantage  over  the 
Prince,  in  that  he  has  thrown  off  his  disguise,  but  the  Prince  must  still  remain  incog¬ 
nito  until  the  arrival  of  his  credentials,  which  were  to  follow  him.  Of  old  he  was 
called  Barabas ;  he  has  now  assumed  the  name  of  Joseph.  It  is  true,  he  says,  I  am 
not  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  but  just  wait,  my  Prince ;  let  me  only  get  you  in  my  clutches, 
and  I’ll  be  the  Joseph  who  will  help  you  into  your  grave. 

The  Doctor’s  cap  and  gown,  which  the  Prince  must  don,  together  with  his  false 
beard,  Pickleherring  hires  from  the  Jew  Joseph,  and  is  so  peremptory  in  his  demand 
that  the  Jew  has  no  time  to  sprinkle  poison  in  them  as  it  occurred  to  him  to  do.  The 
Third  Act  closes  in  prose. 

Ancilletta’s  plot  succeeds.  The  Prince  is  called  in,  and  appears  disguised  as  a 
French  Doctor  and  talks  broken  German  in  the  presence  of  the  Father,  but  when  the 
latter  is  called  away  the  lovers  renew  their  vows  of  fidelity. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Prince’s  remittances  from  Cyprus  have  not  yet  arrived.  Pickle¬ 
herring  is  therefore  dispatched  to  the  Jew  to  borrow  two  thousand  ducats.  When  the 
Jew  is  apprised  of  the  request,  he  utters,  according  to  the  Stage  direction,  ‘very  slowly’ 
( langsahrn  aussgesprochen)  ‘two  thousand  ducats  is  a  great  sum.’  Whereupon  Pickle¬ 
herring  replies :  Who  said  anything  about  two  thousand  ducats  ?  he  doesn’t  want  two 
thousand  ducats,  but  only  2000  ducats  (spoken  very  fast). 


328 


APPENDIX 


When  the  Prince  meets  Joseph  at  the  appointed  hour  to  receive  the  money,  the  lattei 
is  already  prepared  with  the  bond,  whereby  the  Prince  is  to  bind  himself  to  repay  to  the 
pious  Jew  Joseph,  within  one  month  at  the  farthest,  the  aforesaid  two  thousand  ducats 
without  defalcation,  but  if  otherwise,  then  the  pious  Jew  Joseph  is  hereby  empowered 
to  cut  a  ‘just  pound  of  flesh’  from  whatsoever  part  of  the  Prince’s  body  it  pleaseth 
him.  That  is  a  remarkable  bond,  says  the  Prince,  who  would  ever  let  his  body  be 
maimed  for  the  sake  of  money  ?  what  do  you  mean,  with  your  pound  of  flesh  ?  and 
why  don’t  you  exact  the  customary  interest  ?  I  am,  replies  the  Jew,  everywhere  known 
as  the  pious  Jew  Joseph.  That  name  I  wish  to  keep,  and  to  that  end  I  take  no  interest 
from  any  one,  least  of  all  from  a  stranger,  and  for  so  short  a  term ;  but  in  order  that  the 
bond  may  not  fail  through  insufficiency,  I  have  inserted,  instead  of  interest,  this  pound 
of  flesh,  seeing  that  I  need  the  one  as  little  as  the  other. 

Prince.  Why  didn’t  you  exact  some  other  penalty  than  flesh,  if  there  is  no  trickery 
here? 

Jew.  The  thought  just  occurred  to  me,  upon  my  word.  Sir,  you  are  very  suspicious. 
You  won’t  trust  me,  and  yet  I,  on  your  mere  name,  must  trust  you  for  two  thousand 
ducats. 

Prince.  But  to  cut  a  pound  of  flesh  out  of  one’s  body — that  requires  circumspection. 

jfew.  Oh,  very  well  sir;  if  you  won’t  trust  me,  I’ll  keep  both  the  money  and  the 
bond.  ‘  But  just  think,  what  could  I  do  with  a  pound  of  flesh.’  We  are  forbid  by 
our  laws  to  eat  flesh  of  any  kind,  and  should  I  undertake  to  eat  human  flesh  ? 

Prince.  Then  I  have  no  treachery  to  fear  ? 

Jew.  I  swear  by  the  God  of  my  fathers  that  the  pound  of  flesh  is  mere  verbiage. 

The  Prince  signs  the  bond,  and  after  his  exit  the  Jew  says  he  has  signed  this  bond, 
and  ‘Venice  is  a  state  where  strangers  are  well  received  and  can  collect  their  debts;’ 
at  any  rate,  should  he  fail  to  get  the  pound  of  flesh,  he  will  give  the  Prince  such  a 
slash  with  a  poisoned  knife  that  he’ll  not  want  anything  more.  There  is  no  rhyming 
couplet  at  the  end  of  the  Fourth  Act. 

The  Fifth  Act  opens  with  an  interview  between  Florello  and  Ancilletta,  in  which 
the  Father  objects  to  any  further  employment  of  the  French  Doctor,  on  account  of  the 
mystery  which  hangs  round  him,  and  forbids  Ancilletta  to  leave  the  house  during  his 
absence  at  the  Council.  No  sooner,  however,  had  he  gone  than  Ancilletta  determines 
to  seek  her  lover  through  the  streets,  and  for  that  purpose  dispatches  Franciscina  to  the 
Jew  for  two  students’  costumes,  in  which  she  and  her  maid  can  wander  everywhere 
unrecognized. 

In  the  next  Scene  the  Prince’s  two  thousand  ducats  are  all  gone,  mostly  lost  at  play, 
and  Pickleherring  has  to  apply  to  the  Jew  for  a  thousand  more.  The  Jew  says  that  what 
he  has  already  lent  comprises  almost  his  whole  fortune,  but  *  I  will  go  to  my  neighbour 
and  get  enough  to  help  your  master.’  Ay,  do  so,  replies  Pickleherring,  *  you  are,  my 
Jew,  the  quintessence  of  all  Hebrews;’  you  are  only  a  Jew,  but  better  than  a  Christian, 
especially  than  one  who  is  not  so  good  as  you  are.  The  Jew  departs,  and  returns,  not 
with  the  money,  but  with  bailiffs,  who  arrest  the  Prince  and  carry  him  off.  Pickleher¬ 
ring  storms  at  the  Jew,  and  while  words  are  high  the  Scene  at  the  back  opens  and  dis¬ 
closes  the  Duke  in  council  with  Florello,  Santinelli,  and  Grimaldi.  The  Duke  learns 
the  cause  of  the  uproar,  and  commands  the  Jew  to  produce  the  Prince.  As  the  Prince 
enters  the  Duke  is  much  struck  with  his  neble  bearing,  and  Florello  feels  for  him  a 
strange  compassion.  The  Prince  acknowledges  his  signature  to  the  bond,  and  the  Jew 
demands  the  penalty.  But,  says  the  Duke,  addressing  the  Jew,  ‘do  you  feel  no  com¬ 
passion’  for  this  comely  youth?  you  call  yourself  the  pious  Jew;  you  show  no  piety  now. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—DER  JUD  VON  VENEDIG  329 


Look  you,  Jew,  the  two  thousand  ducats  which  he  owes  you,  I  will  lend  him.  But 
I  am  not  content  therewith,  the  Jew  replies,  I  will  prove  my  right  to  be  called  the 
pious  Jew  Joseph  by  living  up  to  strict  justice,  and  will  not  yield  one  hair’s  breadth 
from  it.  The  time  is  up,  he  has  not  paid  me,  and  *  I  will  have  nothing  but  my  judge¬ 
ment.’ 

Florello.  The  Jew  is  stiff-necked  and  immoveable,  we  must  find  a  way  to  help  this 
young  man  without  violating  justice.  Harkye,  Jew,  you’ll  be  content  if  I  give  you  a 
thousand  ducats  in  lieu  of  your  judgment,  just  to  help  out  this  young  nobleman  ? 

Jew.  No,  not  for  one  second.  It  is  my  duty  to  give  taxes  and  money  to  my  gracious 
masters,  and  not  they  to  me.  I  hold  myself  fast  and  immoveable  by  my  promised 
pledge,  and  will  in  no  wise  let  myself  be  diverted  from  it. 

Prince.  Look  to  it,  Jew,  lest  you  be  punished  for  your  cruelty. 

Duke.  Who  are  those  people  that  are  coming  in  ? 

Florello.  It  appears  to  be  a  young  gentleman  with  his  servant. 

Duke.  Inquire  out,  who  he  is  and  what  he  wants ;  it  seems  as  though  he  had  some 
business  here. 

Enter  Ancilletta  and  Franciscina  disguised. 

Pickleherring.  I  say,  stubbed  [Rurizer]  Sir,  who  are  you  ? 

Ancilletta.  I  am  a  student  \_Studiosus~\  from  Badua.  I  pray  you  pardon  me,  my 
lords,  if  I  disturb  this  trial.  Doctor  Camillo  sends  me  hither,  and  begs  to  be  excused 
for  being  incapacitated  to  appear,  but  since  he  has  understood  that  an  extraordinary 
lawsuit  was  pending,  he  instructed  me  as  to  what  I  should  say  in  the  matter  in  his 
behalf. 

Duke.  You  are  welcome,  young  man,  assume  the  duties  of  your  Master.  You  will 
achieve  the  greatest  honour  if  you  can  devise  any  relief  for  this  defendant,  and  he  him¬ 
self  will  be  indebted  to  you  for  all  time. 

Ancilletta.  Are  not  two  thousand  ducats  in  controversy? 

Jew.  Yes,  he  owes  them  to  me. 

Ancilletta.  And  what  is  the  pledge  ?  a  pound  of  flesh  to  be  cut  from  his  body. 

Jew.  That  is  all  I  ask. 

Ancilletta.  Let  me  hear  the  bond.  [  The  Jew  reads  it.]  Do  you  confess  it  all  ? 

Prince.  Yes,  my  signature  proves  it. 

Ancilletta.  The  affair  is  all  right. 

Pickleherring.  How  about  the  pound  of  flesh  ? 

Duke.  Camillo  is  a  wise  man,  he  must  direct  us  to  a  judgment  whereby  we  can  at 
once  clear  up  this  tangled  business. 

Ancilletta.  I  do  not  see  how  we  can  get  at  the  Jew ;  wherefore,  Jew,  cut  the  guaran¬ 
tied  pound  of  flesh  out  of  his  body. 

Jew.  Sacra  Justia,  Sancta  Justitia !  a  second  [anderer]  Daniel,  a  second  Daniel ! 

Pickleherring.  Rascally  Jew,  thievish  coward  !  Master,  let  them  know  that  you're 
a  Prince,  perhaps  they’ll  let  you  off. 

Prince.  Rather  will  I  die  than  disobey  my  Father. 

Pickleherring.  Then  say  you’re  a  hog,  Jews  can’t  eat  that. 

Jew.  Hold  on,  Christian,  now  I  will  pay  you  an  old  debt,  which  perhaps  you  have 
forgotten.  [Draws  a  sharp  knife,  and  is  about  to  cut. 

Pickleherring.  If  you  spoil  my  Master’s  side,  I’ll  take  a  bigger  piece  out  of  you. 

[ Makes  a  hinge  at  the  Jew 

Jew.  What  are  you  about,  Pickleherring  ?  Let  me  alone. 

Ancilletta.  Hold! 


33° 


APPENDIX 


Pickleherring.  Jew,  you  must  hold  up ! 

Ancilletta.  Be  quiet,  both  of  you !  Jew,  the  bond  expieialy  states  a  pound  of  flesh ; 
if  you  cut  more  or  less  by  a  single  grain,  and  shed  only  one  drop  of  blood,  you  are 
guilty  of  death  and  have  lost  your  life. 

Jew.  How,  gracious  Sir ;  how  is  it  possible  to  cut  living  flesh  without  shedding 
blood,  and  how  can  I  do  it? 

Duke.  You  have  heard  the  decision,  conform  to  it  or  await  your  punishment. 

Pickleherring.  Sacra  Justitia,  Sancta  Justitia !  a  second  Daniel ! 

Jew.  Why,  gracious  Sir,  it  was  all  mere  banter.  Do  you  suppose  that  I  would  give 
away  so  much  money  for  a  pound  of  flesh  ?  what  should  I  do  with  it  ?  I  was  not  in 
earnest ;  I  only  wanted  to  scare  him.  If  I  am  paid  my  two  thousand  loaned  and  my 
thousand  besides,  which  you  promised  me,  I  am  content,  and  will  willingly  release 
him. 

Duke.  Just  a  little  while  ago  you  would  take  nothing  but  the  pound  of  flesh ;  but 
because  you  did  not  at  once  accede,  you  shall  now  have  neither  flesh  nor  money. 

Jew.  You  cannot  thus  deprive  me  of  my  two  thousand  ducats,  therefore  let  them  be 
paid  to  me  so  that  I  can  go  home  to  my  house. 

Florello.  Neither  from  us  nor  from  the  stranger  shall  you  receive  a  stiver. 

Duke.  If  you  won’t  go  home  without  your  money,  you  shall  be  hurried  to  prison  to 
teach  you  to  take  such  bonds  from  people. 

Pickleherring.  Sacra  Justitia,  Sacra  Justitia !  a  second  Daniel,  a  second  Daniel !  You 
mouse-head  !  \_He  gives  him  the  finishing  stroke  (Dat  ipsi  colaphum). 

Jew.  O  ye  Christians,  ye  unrighteous  Judges,  you  help  only  each  other,  and  rob  the 
poor  Jews  of  their  own ! 

Duke.  What  does  the  rascal  say  ?  Quick  there,  thrash  him  and  thrust  him  forth. 

\_He  is  beaten  off  the  stage. 

Duke.  Now  you  are  clear  of  your  debt  and  your  pledge,  but  this  young  man  you 
have  greatly  to  thank,  through  his  cleverness  the  Jew  was  paid  and  you  were  set  free. 
Such  friendship  can  be  repaid  only  by  unending  gratitude. 

The  Prince  expresses  his  willingness  to  testify  his  gratitude  with  his  life,  and  hopes 
that  the  Studiosus  will  some  day  come  to  Cyprus,  which  the  Studiosus  promises  to  do; 
and  in  order  that  the  bond  of  friendship  may  be  strengthened,  she  begs  Florello  to  act  the 
part  of  a  Father  and  to  recommend  her  to  the  Prince’s  safekeeping  in  the  strongest  possible 
terms.  Florello  joins  their  hands  and  tells  the  Prince  to  receive  the  Student  from  him 
as  though  from  a  Father,  and  to  love  the  Student  with  all  his  heart,  for  he  has  done  you 
such  a  service  that  if  you  desert  him  let  heavenly  grace  desert  you ;  but  if  you  live  fast- 
bound  and  united  to  him,  let  all  heavenly  blessings  hover  over  you.  Ancilletta  throws 
off  her  disguise,  confesses  that  she  did  not  come  from  Dr  Camillo,  and  thanks  her 
Father  for  having  betrothed  her  to  her  lover.  Florello  repudiates  the  betrothal,  but  at 
last  consents,  just  as  the  Prince’s  Steward  arrives  and  the  Prince’s  incognito  is  at  an 
end.  The  Prince  takes  Ancilletta,  and  Pickleherring  Franciscina.  The  Duke  wel¬ 
comes  the  Prince,  and  on  the  spot  concludes  an  offensive  and  defensive  alliance  with 
Cyprus,  and  bursts  into  rhyme  as  the  curtain  falls : 

In  ties  of  friendship  close  is  noble  Cyprus  bound, 

The  Prince  a  lovely  bride  has  here  in  Venice  found, 

We  keep  our  peace  at  home  and  all  our  foes  can  scare. 

The  smiles  of  Heaven  are  ours,  so  let  the  Turk  beware ! 

Whether  or  not  this  wretched,  wretched  stuff  is  the  ‘  Venesyon  comodey,’  or  an 


SOURCE  OF  THE  FLOT—DER  JUD  VON  VENEDIG  331 


adaptation  of  it,  cannot,  of  course,  with  our  present  information  be  decided.  To  say 
that  it  is  the  Jew  of  Venice  by  Dekker  shows  not  the  least  possible  respect  to  Dekker’s 
memory.  Meissner  suggests  that  if  it  really  be  Dekker’s  play,  a  reason  may  be  found 
for  the  long  delay  in  publishing  it  in  England  (it  was  not  entered  on  the  Stationers' 
Registers  till  1653),  in  the  fact  that  the  MS  was  travelling  around  in  Germany.  It 
cannot  have  been  Gosson’s  play ;  there  is  not  a  trace  of  the  ‘  greediness  of  worldly 
choosers.’  Can  it  possibly  have  been  the  play  on  which  Shakespeare  modelled  the 
Merchant  of  Venice  ?  I  cannot  imagir.e  that  any  one  will  seriously  maintain  it.  The 
solitary  striking  resemblance  to  be  fbund  is  in  the  exclamation :  ‘  a  Daniel,  a  second 
Daniel but  this  is  far  more  likely  to  have  been  copied  from  Shakespeare  than  that 
Shakespeare  copied  it.  If  the  dates  of  Silvayn’s  Orator ,  1596,  and  of  the  ‘late’  battle 
with  the  Turks,  1605  (p.  326)  be  accepted  as  Internal  Proofs  of  the  date  of  the  Play, 
the  whole  question  is  settled  at  once ;  but,  however  desirable  it  might  be  to  settle  it 
thus  decisively,  we  must  remember  that  such  allusions  might  have  been  added  01 
inserted  at  any  time.  They  prove,  however,  conclusively  that  this  particular  version 
of  the  play,  and  the  only  version  we  possess,  is  over  ten  years  subsequent  to  the  date 
of  the  Venesyon  comodey,  and  over  five  years  later  than  the  Quartos  of  the  Merchant 
of  Venice.  I  find  it  impossible  to  believe  that  Fleay  would  ever  have  asserted  that  it 
was  the  foundation  of  Shakespeare’s  play  had  he  ever  read  it.  It  is  the  positiveness 
of  Fleay’s  assertion,  and  the  high  position  which  Fleay  holds  among  Shakespeare 
scholars,  that  have  made  it  seem  at  all  worth  while  to  devote  so  much  space  to  it. 

The  conclusion,  therefore,  of  the  whole  subject  of  the  Source  of  the  Plot  is,  that 
The  Merchant  of  Venice  was  founded  on  the  play  mentioned  by  Gosson,  and  that  on 
the  one  or  the  other  the  Italian  novel  of  II  Pecorcne  exercised  decided  influence,  with 
a  possible  reading  by  Shakespeare  of  Silvayn’s  Orator. 


332 


APPENDIX 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION 

There  have  been  at  least  three  attempts  to  calculate  the  days  and  hours  during 
which  the  events  of  this  play  occur.  The  first  is  by  Eccles,  in  1805,  who  makes  certain 
changes  in  the  arrangement  of  the  Scenes  and  n.  ‘he  division  into  Acts  in  the  first  half 
of  the  play ;  his  computation  of  time  will,  therefore,  to  that  extent  differ  from  any  other. 
He  does  not  end  his  First  Act  with  the  interview  between  Anthonio,  Bassanio,  and 
Shylock,  but  extends  it  into  Act  II,  so  as  to  include  the  arrival  of  the  Prince  of  Mo¬ 
rocco.  The  First  Scene  of  our  Act  II  is,  therefore,  the  Fourth  Scene  of  Eccles’s  Act  I, 
and  then,  having  Morocco  in  hand,  he  thinks  that  the  Prince  should  proceed  to  his 
choice  of  the  caskets  without  delay,  and  therefore  he  transposes  what  is  our  Seventh 
Scene  of  that  Second  Act  (containing  Morocco’s  failure)  to  follow  this  Fourth  Scene. 
Eccles’s  First  Act,  therefore,  has  five  Scenes,  the  two  additional  Scenes  being  respect¬ 
ively  II,  i,  and  II,  vii.  His  Act  II  begins  with  Gobbo’s  soliloquy,  and  all  the  subse¬ 
quent  Acts  and  Scenes  follow  as  in  other  editions.  The  reasons  he  gives  for  these 
changes  are  twofold :  First,  in  no  other  way  can  he  harmonize  the  indications  of  time ; 
and,  secondly,  for  dramatic  effect ;  each  Act  of  the  first  three  contains  a  trial  scene  of 
the  Caskets. 

His  computation  of  time  is,  then,  as  follows : 

The  First  Day  is  consumed  in  the  first  three  Scenes  of  Act  I.  It  begins  in  the 
forenoon  before  dinner,  to  which  meal  frequent  reference  is  made ;  and  as  a  messenger 
brings  word  that  the  Prince  of  Morocco  ‘  will  be  here  to-night ,’  the  day  is  supposed  to 
close  with  his  arrival,  and  the  Second  Day  begins  with  his  interview  with  Portia. 
This  interview  cannot  be  on  the  night  of  his  arrival,  because  Portia  tells  him  that  his 
hazard  shall  be  made  after  dinner.’  It  therefore  begins  a  new  day,  whose  close  sees 
Morocco’s  discomfiture. 

Eccles  now  encounters  the  difficulty  of  disposing  of  the  long  pause  in  the  action 
which  apparently  has  to  take  place  while  Anthonio’s  bond  to  Shylock  is  running  its 
three  months’  course.  These  months  Bassanio  must  spend  somewhere,  either  at  Ven¬ 
ice  or  at  Belmont.  Eccles  compromises.  Obstacles  to  Bassanio’s  departure  may  have 
arisen  which  keep  him  at  Venice  long  beyond  his  original  intention,  and  when  he  does 
at  last  reach  Belmont  ‘  it  will  be  highly  proper  to  imagine  that,  won  by  the  charms  of 
‘  his  mistress’s  society,  he  may  be  induced  to  defer,  for  a  considerable  time  after  his 
‘  arrival  there,  the  determination  of  his  fate.’  Eccles  recognizes  the  fact  that  by  hasten¬ 
ing  Bassanio’s  departure  before  nine  o’clock,  ‘  when  the  wind  had  come  about,’  as  An¬ 
thonio  said,  a  day  might  be  saved  and  Bassanio  start  for  Belmont  just  as  Morocco  was 
leaving,  but  this  would  involve  a  three  months’  state  of  suspense  at  Belmont;  and 
Eccles  wisely  relinquished  it,  as  ‘fraught  with  no  little  degree  of  improbability.’ 

Wherefore  Eccles  supposes  a  considerable  time  to  have  elapsed  before  he  begins  a 
new  day,  the  Third,  with  the  Second  Act,  and  Launcelot  Gobbo’s  soliloquy.  *  The 
‘  time  of  the  day  is  undetermined ;  Bassanio,  however,  upon  his  entrance  desires  that 
‘  “  supper  may  be  ready  by  five  of  the  clock.”  ’  And  this  day  continues  until  Bassanio 
sets  sail  at  nine  o’clock  at  night  for  Belmont. 

The  next  morning,  the  Fourth  Day,  Salarino  and  Salanio  meet  and  describe  Shy- 
lock’s  frenzy  over  the  loss  of  his  ducats  and  his  daughter  (II,  viii). 

As  Belmont  *  lay  at  no  very  great  distance  from  Venice,’  ‘  it  may  well  be  considered  ’ 
that  Bassanio  reaches  there  on  this  same  day. 

How  much  time  certainly  elapses  after  Bassanio’s  arrival  and  the  Scene  between 
Salanio,  Salarino,  and  Shylock  (III,  i)  Eccles  cannot  decide,  but  as,  before  its  close, 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION—. E COLES 


333 


Shylock  asks  Tubal  to  ‘bespeak  an  officer  a  fortnight  before ,’  he  supposes  that  this, 
the  Fifth  Day,  is  about  that  length  of  time  before  the  Scene  where  Bassanio  makes 
choice  of  the  caskets  (III,  ii). 

That  choice  is  made  on  the  Sixth  Day,  in  the  forenoon.  The  marriage  ceremony 
takes  place;  Bassanio  leaves  for  Venice;  Portia  commits  the  charge  of  her  house  to 
Lorenzo  and  Jessica,  and  follows  Bassanio  to  Venice;  and  Lorenzo  and  Jessica  pass 
their  merry  jests  with  Launcelot — all,  according  to  Eccles,  before  dinner-time,  which 
we  know  was  about  noon.  In  the  afternoon  of  this  Jay  the  Scene  shifts  to  Venice, 
and  Shylock  refuses  Anthonio’s  appeals.  This  must  be  the  day  before  the  trial,  be¬ 
cause  Anthonio  says  that  *  his  griefs  and  losses  have  so  bated  him  that  he  shall  hardly 
spare  a  pound  of  flesh  to-morrow  to  his  bloody  creditor.’ 

The  Seventh  and  last  day  opens  in  the  Court  of  Justice  in  Venice;  and,  after  the 
trial,  very  late  at  night,  Portia  reaches  Belmont,  followed  by  Bassanio. 

As  will  be  seen  by  the  foregoing  Journal,  the  greatest  obstacle  encountered  by 
Eccles,  and,  indeed,  by  all  who  examine  the  subject  critically,  is  to  account  for  the 
term  of  three  months  during  which  the  Jew’s  bond  runs.  By  his  transposition  of 
Scenes  Eccles  gains  somewhat  in  ease  in  the  general  computation  of  time,  but  no 
mere  shifting  of  Scenes  will  obliterate  the  three  long  months,  and  Eccles,  with  evi¬ 
dent  reluctance,  is  forced  to  suppose  that  Bassanio  remains  in  Venice  until  that  term 
has  nearly  expired. 

Professor  Wilson’s  theory,  or,  as  he  calls  it,  his  ‘  great  discovery,’  that  Shakespeare 
makes  use  of  two  different  computations  of  time,  by  one  of  which  time  is  protracted 
and  oy  the  other  contracted,  was  set  forth  at  length  in  Othello  (p.  358  et  seq.),  and 
need  not  be  repeated  here.  Unfortunately,  Wilson  did  not  apply  his  theory  to  this 
play,  and  we  therefore  can  have  no  such  brilliant  exposition  of  its  application  as  we 
had  in  the  tragedy  last  mentioned. 

No  sooner  had  Wilson  announced  his  discovery  than  the  Rev.  N.  J.  Halpin  asserted 
that  he  had  independently  made  the  same  discovery,  and  by  way  of  proof  at  once  issued 
a  small  volume  entitled  The  Dramatic  Unities  of  Shakespeare,  Dublin,  1 849 ;  in  it  he 
pronounced  his  theory  identical  with  Wilson’s,  and  proceeded  to  apply  it  to  The  Mer¬ 
chant  of  Venice.  His  application,  however,  does  not,  I  think,  substantiate  the  claim 
to  identity  of  theory ;  indeed,  a  careful  examination  of  his  book  leads  me  to  believe 
that,  so  far  from  lighting  upon  the  same  discovery,  Halpin  did  not  even  clearly  com¬ 
prehend  what  Wilson’s  discovery  really  was.  The  mere  title  of  his  book  shows  his 
bias ;  he  seems  anxious  to  prove  that  Shakespeare  duly  observed  the  Three  Unities,  and 
that,  when  dealing  with  the  Unity  of  Time,  Shakespeare  rightly  adhered  to  a  limit,  longer, 
it  is  true,  than  Aristotle’s  twenty-four  hours,  but  logically,  and  naturally,  better.  What 
the  duration  of  this  limit  is,  Halpin  thinks  that  Shakespeare  has  himself  told  us  where 
lago  says  of  Cassio,  that  *  He’ll  watch  the  horologe  a  double  set ,’  that  is,  according 
to  Italian  computation,  forty-eight  hours.  Therefore,  Shakespeare’s  Unity  of  Time, 
according  to  Halpin,  is  within  forty-eight  or  fifty-six  consecutive  hours.  ‘  By  this  lim- 
‘  itation,  transactions  which,  according  to  our  experience  in  life,  would  naturally  occupy 
‘  weeks  or  months,  nay  years,  are  dramatically  drawn  within  the  compass  of  a  few  con- 
‘  secutive  hours ;  just  as  the  almost  interminable  views  of  the  landscape  are  represented, 
‘  in  all  verisimilitude,  on  the  uniform  plane  surface  of  canvas.  Indeed,  Shakespeare 
‘  appears  to  have  done  for  time  what  the  painter  has  done  for  space. — thrown  it  into 
‘  perspective,  and  given  to  the  remote  and  to  the  near  its  proper  and  distinctive  place, 
‘  colouring,  and  character.’ 


334 


APPENDIX 


It  is  one  thing  to  undertake  to  harmonize  what  Wilson  calls  Shakespeare’s  ‘  Long 
Time  and  Short  Time,’  but  it  is  a  much  harder  task  to  have  to  prove  that  the  Long 
Time  is,  dramatically,  no  longer  than  forty-eight  hours,  which  is  what  Halpin  now 
undertakes ;  and  it  is  not  surprising  that  thus  heavily  handicapped,  with  this  additional 
weight,  he  should  stagger  and  succumb. 

Halpin  asserts  that  the  dramatic  time  of  this  play  is  compressed  to  within  less  than 
the  forty-eight  hours,  viz.,  within  thirty-nine  consecutive  hours. 

The  proof  is  as  follows,  as  much  as  possible  in  his  own  language : 

‘  The  transaction  naturally  divides  itself  into  two  distinct  periods, — and  the  interval 
‘  between  them. 

‘  i.  The  first  period  ranges  from  the  opening  of  the  action  and  the  borrowing  of 
‘  Shylock’s  money  to  the  embarkation  of  Bassanio  for  Belmont. 

‘  2.  The  second  includes  the  time  between  his  arrival  at  Belmont  and  his  return  to 
‘  it,  with  Anthonio,  after  the  trial. 

‘  3.  And  the  interval  between  these  two  periods  is  concurrent  with  the  time  of  the 
‘  bond,  whatever  that  may  be.  Let  us  now  examine  each  period  of  visible  action  by 
•  the  dates  exactly  laid  down  in  the  text ;  and  then  fix  the  interval  by  the  same 
rule.’ 

We  all  agree  that  the  play  opens  before  dinner,  ‘  say  at  eleven  o’clock  in  the  fore¬ 
noon,’  and  since  Halpin  assumes  that  Bassanio,  as  soon  as  he  has  *  touched  the  ducats,’ 
begins  to  make  rapid  preparations  for  his  journey,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  computing 
the  time  up  to  the  hour  of  embarkation  at  nine  P.  M.,  which  period  is  *  exactly  limited 


‘  to  ten  consecutive  hours,  viz : 

‘  From  the  opening  of  the  action  to  dinner-time . I  hour 

‘  From  dinner-time  (12  o’clock)  to  supper  (5  o’clock)  ...  5  hours 

*  From  supper  to  the  embarkation  (9  o’clock) . 4  hours 

‘  First  Period . 10  hours 


‘  The  Second  Period  of  action  begins  with  Bassanio’s  arrival  at  Belmont,  and  end. 
‘  with  his  return  to  it,  with  Antonio,  after  the  trial.’ 

In  the  Second  Scene  of  Act  Third,  Halpin  assumes  that  Bassanio  has  his  first  inter¬ 
view,  in  the  capacity  of  a  suitor,  with  Portia ;  and  ‘  the  dialogue  shows  there  has  been 
‘  no  delay  betwefen  the  announcement  of  his  arrival  and  his  waiting  on  the  lady.  She 
‘  prays  him  to  pause,  to  tarry, — but  he  is  too  impatient  to  let  a  moment  interpose  be- 
‘  tween  his  arrival  and  the  decision  of  his  fortune.’ 

‘  Considering  the  very  early  hours  which  our  forefathers,  from  the  highest  rank  to  the 
‘  lowest,  were  used  to  keep  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  it  is  not  too  early,’  says  Halpin,  *  tc 

*  assign  this  Scene  and  the  departure  of  Bassanio  for  Venice  to  about  eight  o’clock  in 

*  the  morning.’ 

From  what  Portia  says  to  Nerissa  in  regard  to  their  journey,  that  *  we  must  measure 
‘  twenty  miles  to-day,’  Halpin  infers  that  Venice  and  Belmont  are  ‘  but  ten  miles  apart,’ 

*  and  that  the  distance  might  be  easily  traversed,  with  a  pair  of  horses  to  her  coach,  in 
‘  a  couple  of  hours.  Taking,  then,  eight  o’clock  A.  M.  for  the  time  of  the  Casket  scene, 

*  and  allotting  four  hours  for  the  marriage  ceremony,  the  preparations  for  the  journey, 

*  and  the  journey  itself,  Portia  may  have  arrived  at  Venice  by  noon,  and  taken  her  place 
‘  in  court  after  the  trial  had  been  begun.’ 

As  soon  as  the  trial  is  over,  which  takes  only  the  time  of  its  representation,  Portia 
sets  out  on  her  return  to  Belmont,  and  the  whole  party  reassemble  in  Portia’s  garden 
‘  at  the  final  close  of  the  dramatic  action,  at  no  later  hour  than  about  two  o'clock  of  the 
‘  morning  after  the  trial;  that  is  to  say,  the  Second  Portion  of  the  visible  action  cannot 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION— HALPIN 


33S 


have  occupied  more  time  than  between  eight  o’clock  A.  M.  of  one  day,  and  two  o’clock 
in  the  forenoon  of  the  succeeding,  that  is  to  say,  in  eighteen  consecutive  hours.' 

Thus  Halpin  disposes  his  two  periods,  and,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  we  may 
grant  his  arrangement,  though  not  without  much  lifting  of  eyebrows,  and  shrugging 
of  shoulders,  here  and  there. 

Now  comes  the  Third  Period,  the  interval  between  the  two,  the  interval  within 
which  lies  the  term  of  the  three  months’  bond.  This  interval,  so  Halpin  expresses  it 
as  his  ‘conviction,’  is  ‘really  but  a  single  night ;  that  night,  to  wit,  which  intervenes 
‘  between  Bassanio’s  embarkation  and  his  arrival  at  Belmont.’  ‘  And  that,  conse- 
‘  quently,  the  received  period  of  the  bond  is  an  illusory  period.’ 

Halpin  then  proceeds  to  prove  that,  as  Jessica’s  flight  from  Venice  was  contempora¬ 
neous  with  Bassanio’s  embarkation,  and  as,  furthermore,  she  arrived  at  Belmont  shortly 
after  Bassanio  had  reached  there,  the  interval  between  the  two  periods  was  from  nine 
in  the  evening  of  one  day  to  eight  in  the  morning  of  the  next,  the  day  on  which  the 
bond  expires,  and  was,  therefore,  eleven  hours. 

Thus  we  have  ten  hours  for  the  First  Period ;  eighteen  hours  for  the  Second,  and 
eleven  for  the  Interval  between  the  two.  In  all,  thirty-nine  hours. 

But  how  about  the  bond?  We  seem  to  get  no  light  on  the  solution  of  that  three 
months’  puzzle.  If  only  we  can  ignore  that,  our  path  is  plain  as  way  to  parish  church. 
But,  unfortunately,  Halpin  does  not  ignore  it.  I  say  ‘  unfortunately  ’  because,  in  solv¬ 
ing  it,  he  betrays,  I  fear,  that  he  has  failed  to  comprehend  Shakespeare’s  art  in  deal¬ 
ing  with  time,  and  that  instead  of  detecting,  with  Wilson,  Shakespeare’s  legerdemain, 
he  has,  no  less  than  Eccles,  fallen  a  victim  to  it.  Instead  of  accepting  the  drama  as 
it  stands  and  endeavoring  to  reconcile  its  apparent  discrepancies,  Halpin  introduces  a 
device  which,  while  it  certainly  helps  out  Halpin,  not  only  throws  a  deeper  shade  on 
Shylock,  but,  in  my  opinion,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  degrades  the  whole  play ;  and  for  which 
I  cannot  see  that  he  has  a  tittle  of  evidence. 

‘The  bond,’  says  Halpin  (p.  35),  ‘upon  which  ostensibly  the  money  is  lent  is  a  bond 
‘  for  “  three  thousand  ducats  at  three  months that  upon  which  it  is  really  advanced 
‘  is  a  bond  substituted  for  the  former,  through  the  affected  good  nature  and  kindliness 
‘  of  Shylock.  The  first  was,  of  course,  the  ordinary  mercantile  bond  of  the  country, 
bearing  the  usual  interest,  payable  at  a  certain  specified  date,  and,  doubtless,  subject 
‘  to  the  usual  penalty  of  double  the  amount  on  forfeiture.  Of  the  second,  we  know 
‘  little  or  nothing  beyond  the  penalty  on  forfeiture, — “  a  pound  of  flesh,”  &c.  It  is  a 
‘“merry  bond”  drawn,  signed,  and  sealed  in  “a  merry  sport.”  It  bears  no  interest, 
‘  indeed,  but  we  are  left  in  ignorance  of  the  sum  really  advanced,  or  of  the  time  and 

*  place  when  and  where  it  should  become  payable.  The  Jew’s  own  description  of  the 
‘  instrument  is  in  the  following  ambiguous  terms : — seal  me  there  Your  single  bond ; 
‘  and  in  a  merry  sport  If  you  repay  me  not  on  such  a  day,  In  such  a  place,  such  sum 
‘  or  sums  as  are  express’d  in  the  condition,  let  the  forfeit  Be  nominated,  for,  &c.  To 
‘  lure  the  merchant  more  effectually  into  his  snare,  the  Jew  represents  this  proffer  as  an 
‘  act  of  disinterested  kindliness.  And  further,  to  disarm  Antonio  and  Bassanio  of  all 
‘  suspicion,  he  sneers  at  the  absurdity  of  their  supposing  that,  in  any  case,  he  would 
‘  think  of  exacting  the  forfeiture.  A  penalty  like  this  was  not,  with  due  time  for 
‘  preparation,  likely  to  be  incurred ;  still  less,  under  such  professions,  to  be  enforced. 

*  The  terms  are  agreed  to,  and  Shylock  proceeds  alone  [Italics  are  mine.  This  over- 
‘  sight  on  the  part  of  Halpin  is  inexplicable]  to  give  the  notary  “  directions  for  this 
‘  “  merry  bond.”  Antonio,  in  his  reliance  on  the  Jew’s  reasoning  and  assurances,  signs 
’•and  seals  the  instrument,  perhaps  without  examination ;  and  the  deed  being  legally 


336 


APPENDIX 


*  drawn  up,  and  the  penalty  not  unprecedented,  he  must  abide  the  consequences  of  his 
own  rash  act. 

‘  Correct,  however,  in  its  technical  forms,  as  this  “  merry  bond  ”  may  have  been,  we 
‘  yet  know  that  in  some  respects  it  was  fraudulent  in  its  substance ;  for,  at  the  trial, 
‘  Shylock  is  charged  with  having  “ Indirectly  and  directly  too  Contrived  against  the 
‘  “  very  life  of  the  defendant.”  Directly ,  by  proceeding  with  knife,  scales,  and  weights 

*  to  exact  the  fatal  forfeiture ;  and  indirectly ,  no  doubt  by  some  fraudulent  contrivance 
‘in  the  deed.  What  could  this  fraud  have  been?  Comparing  the  date  of  the  exe- 
‘  cution  of  the  bond  with  the  date  of  its  expiring,  we  are  led  to  the  irresistible  conclu- 
‘  sion,  that  the  fraud  lay  either  in  the  omission  of  any  date  or  period  at  all,  or  the  sub- 
‘  stitution  of  a  false  one ;  and,  in  the  latter  case,  we  must  suppose  it  was  payable, 
‘  according  to  a  very  usual  practice  among  merchants,  at  sight  or  on  demand.  This 
‘  view  entirely  reconciles  the  apparent  discrepancy  between  the  actual  time  of  Bas- 

sanio’s  journey  to  Belmont  and  the  time  of  the  bond’s  arrival  at  maturity.’  Halpin 

hen  goes  on  to  prove  that  Anthonio  never  was  a  bankrupt  at  all.  He  learns  at  Bel 
mont,  within  twenty-four  hours  after  signing  the  bond,  that  his  ships  have  come  in 
‘Nothing  but  surprise  could  have  reduced  him  to  a  state  of  forfeiture;  and  nothing 
‘  could  have  reduced  him  to  such  a  surprise,  except  the  fact  that  the  bond  was  uncon- 
‘  ditionally  payable  on  demand  or  at  sight.' 

Although  this  pure  invention  of  a  second,  fraudulent  bond  to  which  Anthonio  tamely 
and  silently  submits  is  fanciful  enough  and  wide  enough  of  the  mark  of  revealing  Shake¬ 
speare’s  art,  yet  in  dealing  with  the  ‘  protractive  allusions,’  Halpin  shows  even  more 
clearly  that  he  failed  to  appreciate  Wilson’s  ‘  discovery.’  Instead  of  accepting  these 
allusions  as  intentional  blinds,  creating  a  false  show  of  time,  Halpin  goes  to  work  to 
show  that  they  are  all  mistakes,  not  on  Shakespeare’s  part,  but  on  ours,  for  supposing 
them  to  be  what  in  reality  they  are  not ;  we  think  that  they  refer  to  the  three  months’ 
bond,  whereas,  says  Halpin,  they  refer  to  the  substituted  bond,  payable  in  a  day.  In 
the  conference  between  Shylock  and  Tubal,  Halpin  acknowledges  that  Tubal  has  been 
to  Genoa,  ‘  but  it  does  not  appear  that  he  went  thither  in  quest  of  Shylock’s  daughter.’ 
‘  Tubal  is  a  manifest  liar,’  continues  Halpin ;  *  he  reports  the  loss  of  one  of  Anthonio’s 
‘  argosies,  ....  but  we  know  (at  the  last)  that  Anthonio  has  sustained  no  loss  at  all, — ■ 

*  no  wreck, — and  that  Tubal’s  story  is  a  falsehood  invented  for  the  nonce.  Again,  if  by 
‘  his  speech,  as  given  in  all  the  editions,  Tubal  means  to  say  that  Jessica  had  “spent  in 
‘  “  Genoa,  as  he  heard,  one  night,  fourscore  ducats,”  we  know  also  he  must  be  a  liar ; 
‘  for  Jessica  was  not  in  Genoa  at  all.  In  fact,  she  had  not  reached  many  miles  from 
‘  Venice  when,  between  that  city  and  Belmont,  she  and  her  lover  were  overtaken  by 
‘  Salerio,  who  was  hastening  to  acquaint  Bassanio  with  the  news  of  Anthonio’s  misfor- 
‘  tune.’  But,  rightly  regarded,  Tubal  is  not  the  liar  that  he  seems ;  he  is  more  sinned 
against  than  sinning;  he  is  a  victim  of  punctuation,  so  it  appears  from  Halpin,  who 
says  that  in  Tubal’s  speech:  ‘Your  daughter  spent  in  Genoa,  as  I  heard,  one  night,’ 
&c.,  the  words  ‘  in  Genoa  ’  should  be  in  parentheses,  as  they  were  in  answer  to  Shy- 
lock’s  ‘  where  ? — in  Genoa  ?’  and  were  just  added,  ‘  in  order  to  answer,  ere  he  forgot.’ 
‘  Your  daughter  spent — (in  Genoa) — as  I  heard,’  &c.  Shylock’s  instruction  to  Tubal 
to  ‘  bespeak  him  an  officer  a  fortnight  before,’  suggests  to  Halpin  ‘  nothing  more  than 
‘  ‘he  extreme  impatience  of  the  cruel  creditor  to  glut  his  revengeful  animosity  with  the 
‘  utmost  certainty  and  with  the  shortest  delay.’ 

Jessica’s  report  of  what  she  had  heard  her  Father  swear  to  Tubal  and  to  Chus  about 
his  eagerness  for  Anthonio’s  flesh,  Halpin  explains  by  saying  that  Jessica  is  referring  to 
‘  conversations  prior  to  the  bond.  ....  Since  the  day  on  which  the  bond  was  con- 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION— DANIEL 


337 


*  tracted  she  has  never  been  at  home  so  as  to  overhear  any  of  her  Father’s  conver- 
'  sations  with  his  countrymen  on  the  subject.  In  fact  she  has  had  but  a  single  inter- 
1  view  with  him  between  that  day  and  her  elopement,  and  having  ourselves  been  ear 
‘  and  eye  witnesses  to  that  interview,  we  know  that  no  such  conversation  took  place 
‘  between  her  Father  and  his  countrymen  on  that  occasion.’ 

Anthonio’s  speech  that  he  should  ‘  hardly  spare  a  pound  of  flesh  To-morrow ’  to  his 
bloody  creditor,  Halpin  pronounces  a  *  miscalculation  of  the  Merchant,  not  the  poet ;’ 
Anthonio  may  have  thought  that  he  would  not  have  been  brought  to  trial  until  ‘  to¬ 
morrow,’  &c. 

Unless  a  theory  which  we  believe  to  be  erroneous  bids  fair  to  become  popular,  and 
we  fear  the  spread  of  contagion,  it  seems  to  be  a  sad  waste  of  time  or  labour  to  refute 
it.  No  such  fear  need  be  anticipated  from  this  theory  of  Halpin.  There  is  no  likeli¬ 
hood  that  a  convert  will  be  found  to  this  thimblerigging  device  of  a  substituted  bond, 
which  its  author  never  would  have  started,  I  think,  had  he  had  an  inkling  of  Professor 
Wilson’s  ‘  dual  time.’  It  is  well  to  note  it  as  an  inexplicable  vagary  of  a  clever  scholar, 
and  there  an  end. 

In  1879,  Mr  P.  A.  Daniel  contributed  to  The  New  Shakspere  Society  a  Titne- 
Analysis  of  the  Plots  of  Shakspere' s  Plays,  and,  of  course,  therein,  a  *  time-analysis  ’ 
of  the  present  play.  He  followed  the  usual  arrangement  of  Acts  and  Scenes,  and, 
therefore,  does  not  go  step  by  step  with  Eccles.  The  latter,  as  we  have  seen,  allotted 
Seven  Days  to  the  action ;  the  Seventh  and  last  day  he  devoted  to  the  trial  and  to  the 
return  to  Belmont.  Of  this  day  Daniel  makes  two, — one  for  the  trial,  and  one  for  the 
return  to  Belmont, — on  the  ground  that  when  Nerissa  returns  her  ring  to  Gratiano  she 
says  that  the  Doctor’s  clerk  was  with  her  ‘  last  night.’  Otherwise,  Daniel’s  compu¬ 
tation,  as  far  as  the  number  of  days  is  concerned,  is  the  same  as  Eccles’s.  In  regard 
to  the  disposition  of  the  three  months,  however,  there  is  this  difference :  Eccles  sup¬ 
poses  that  Bassanio  remains  chiefly  at  Venice;  and  Daniel,  that  Bassanio  sojourns  at 
Belmont. 

Daniel’s  computation  is  as  follows  : 

Day  1.  Act  I.  Interval — say  a  week. 

Day  2.  Act  II,  i-vii.  Interval — one  day. 

Day  3.  Act  II,  viii  and  ix.  Interval — bringing  the  time  to  within  a  fortnight  01 
the  maturity  of  the  bond. 

Day  4.  Act  III,  i.  Interval — rather  more  than  a  fortnight. 

Day  5.  Act  III,  ii-iv. 

Day  6.  Act  III,  v-Act  IV. 

Days  7  and  8.  Act  V. 

It  is  needless  to  remark  that  Daniel  does  not  believe  in  Shakespeare’s  art  of  dealing 
with  time  as  set  forth  by  Wilson. 

Daniel’s  disposition  of  the  three  months’  term  must  be  told  in  his  own  words : 

‘  In  Act  III,  Sc.  i  (Day  No.  4)  we  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  all  but  a  fortnight  of 

*  the  three  months  of  the  bond  had  expired.  [Shy lock  had  told  Tubal  to  bespeak  him 

*  an  officer  “a  fortnight  before.”]  More  than  a  fortnight’s  interval,  therefore  (allowing 
for  Salerio’s  journey,  and  the  time  passed  by  him  in  Venice  after  the  arrest,  during 

‘  which  the  chief  citizens  interceded  with  Shylock  on  behalf  of  Anthonio),  must  be 
‘  supposed  between  Sc.  i  and  Sc.  ii-iv  of  this  Act.  So  far  all  is  clear;  the  difficulty  is 
‘  to  account  for  Bassanio’s  proceedings  since  his  arrival  at  Belmont.  We  cannot  fix 

‘  the  time  of  his  arrival  with  precision ;  but  granting  the  first  week’s  interval,  spent  in 

93 


33o 


APPENDIX 


‘  Venice  in  preparing  for  his  journey,  and  his  arrival  at  Belmont  on  the  second  day 
‘  after  his  embarkation,  we  still  are  but  nine  days  from  the  signing  of  the  bond,  and 
‘  now,  when  he  makes  his  choice  of  the  caskets,  more  than  three  full  months  of  the 
*  bond  have  expired.  We  allowed  Morocco  a  week  in  which  to  make  his  suit  to  Por- 
‘  tia ;  to  Arragon  we  could  only  afford  one  day;  but  Bassanio  has  taken  the  uncon- 
‘  scionable  time  of  some  twelve  weeks  !  And  yet  when  he  at  last  determines  to  risk 
‘  his  fortunes  in  the  choice  of  the  caskets,  Portia  addresses  him  with,  “  I  pray  you 

‘  “  tarry ;  pause  a  day  or  two . I  would  detain  you  here  some  month  or  two  Before 

‘  “you  venture  for  me,”  &c.  This  speech  apart,  however,  we  need  not  find  much  diffi- 
'  culty  in  allowing  for  a  somewhat  lengthy  sojourn  at  Belmont  of  Bassanio  and  his 
‘  suite.  The  dialogue  between  him  and  Portia  is  that  of  two  persons  who,  by  long 
‘  intercourse,  are  mutually  certain  of  each  other’s  love,  and  tremble  lest  fate  should 
‘  divide  them.  It  is  certain,  also,  that  Bassanio  is  no  new-comer,  for  he  refers  to  the 
‘  time — “  When  I  did  first  impart  my  love  to  you,”  &c.,  and  the  mere  sound  of  this 
‘  line  carries  us  back  a  long  way  into  time  past.  We  must  suppose — and  the  poet 
‘  intended  we  should  suppose — that  Bassanio  has  been  following  Antonio’s  advice, 
‘and  staying  “ the  very  riping  of  the  time”  (II,  viii,  43).  And  Portia  and  he  have 
‘  not  been  alone  in  their  wooing ;  Gratiano  has  been  hard  at  it  too,  wooing  till  he  sweat 
‘again,  and  “at  last”  Nerissa  has  promised  him  her  hand  if  Bassanio  achieve  her 
‘  mistress.’ 

Daniel’s  computation  bears  the  mark  of  conscientious  fidelity;  his  weakest  point,  I 
think,  is  where,  for  the  sake  of  proving  Bassanio’s  prolonged  stay  at  Belmont  before 
choosing  the  casket,  he  is  forced  to  disregard,  or  to  obliterate,  Portia’s  entreaty  to  Bas 
sanio  to  ‘  pause  a  day  or  two,’  and  that  she  would  ‘  detain  him  some  month  or  two 
before  he  ventured ;’  which,  considering  that,  according  to  Daniel,  Bassanio  had  been 
there  already  two  full  months,  betokens  in  Portia  a  kindly,  hospitable  nature,  to  say  the 
least.  As  Daniel  most  truly  says,  ‘  there  is  not  much  difficulty,  this  speech  apart,' — 
a  dangerous,  although  a  very  convenient,  freedom  to  take  in  nice  calculations.  For 
the  rest,  if  Wilson’s  theory  of  Shakespeare’s  Double  Time  be  correct,  it  would  seem  as 
if  with  Daniel  every  illusion  of  Shakespeare’s  legerdemain  had  succeeded,  except,  per¬ 
haps,  Daniel’s  failure  to  note  that  Bellario  said  in  his  letter  to  the  Duke,  that  he  had 
‘  turned  o’er  many  books  ’  with  the  young  Doctor.  Still,  as  so  much  of  that  letter  was 
fabricated,  Daniel  may  have  thought  that  this  was  a  fabrication  also ;  albeit,  it  is  not 
without  importance  if  considered  as  an  intentional  indication  of  prolonged  time. 

The  Cowden-Clarkes  are  the  only  Editors  who  have  adopted  Wilson’s  Double 
Time.  Not  only  have  they  noted  indications  of  it  in  this  present  play,  but  in  their 
extremely  valuable  Shakespeare  Key  (which  every  Shakespeare  student  should  own) 
they  have  collected  the  instances,  which  they  consider  proofs  of  it,  in  all  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  Plays. 

It  seems  to  me  that  whatever  Professor  Wilson  says  of  the  Double  Time  in  Othello 
is  applicable  to  the  Double  Time  in  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  and  that  Shakespeare’s 
consummate  art  is  shown  here  no  less  than  there.  Wilson  claimed  for  Shakespeare 
originality  in  the  use,  or  in  the  invention,  of  this  art.  Original  it  unquestionably  was, 
as  far  as  Shakespeare’s  knowledge  of  it  was  concerned,  but  I  think  it  can  be  shown 
that  the  same  art  was  employed  in  The  Agamemnon,  by  Shakespeare’s  greatest  prede¬ 
cessor  in  Tragedy. 

In  Othello,  through  this  art,  we  accept  as  perfectly  natural  the  gradual  change  of 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION 


339 


intense  love  to  a  murderous  frenzy  of  jealousy,  all  within  the  space  of  thirty-six  hours. 
Days  and  weeks  are  compressed  into  minutes  and  hours,  not  only  without  our  detecting 
any  improbability,  but  with  a  full  faith  that  events  have  followed  their  natural,  orderly 
course. 

Here  in  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  by  the  same  thaumaturgy,  three  months  are  to  be 
compressed  into  as  many  days,  a  harder  task  than  in  Othello,  in  so  far  as  the  limit  is 
fixed.  At  the  very  outset  we  are  told  that  the  bond  is  to  be  for  so  much  money  ‘  and 
for  three  months .’  There  is  no  attempt  to  weaken  the  impression.  As  soon  as  it  is 
firmly  fixed,  then  Shakespeare  begins  at  once  to  ‘hurl  his  dazzling  spells  into  the 
spongy  air.’  He  knew,  none  better,  that  just  as  soon  as  the  ducats  were  pursed,  Bas- 
sanio,  swift  as  the  thoughts  of  love,  must  fly  to  Portia.  Did  not  Bassanio  know,  had 
he  not  himself  told  Anthonio,  that  the  wide  world  knew  Portia’s  worth,  and  the  four 
winds  blew  in  from  every  coast  renowned  suitors  ?  Could  he  afford  to  risk  an  hour’s 
delay  ?  In  that  longing  sigh,  ‘  Oh,  my  Anthonio,’  did  he  not  breathe  his  soul  out 
for  the  means  to  hold  a  rival  place  with  the  many  Jasons  ?  As  soon,  therefore,  as 
he  has  received  the  means  from  Shylock,  he  comes  before  us  full  of  eager,  bustling 
haste, — supper  must  be  ready,  at  the  very  farthest,  by  five  of  the  clock, — letters  must 
be  delivered, — his  servant  must  make  purchases  and  stow  them  aboard, — he  must 
return  in  haste, — he  must  go  for  Gratiano  to  come  at  once  to  his  lodging, — and  then 
after  all  the  commissions,  full  of  feverish  impatience,  he  bids  his  servant, — ‘  hie  thee, — 
go.’  But  —  and  here  we  catch  the  first  glimpse  of  Shakespeare’s  spell — the  three 
months  have  begun  to  run,  and  against  the  swift  current  of  Bassanio’s  haste  there  must 
be  some  check.  Bassanio  tells  his  servant  to  *  put  the  liveries  to  making.’  This  takes 
time.  Liveries  are  not  made  in  a  day.  Next,  Bassanio  tells  Launcelot  that  Shylock 
had  spoken  with  him  that  very  day  about  Launcelot’s  change  of  masters.  This  sounds 
as  though  Bassanio  and  Shylock  had  met  casually  in  the  street ;  surely  they  would  not 
mingle  the  business  of  signing  such  a  bond  and  of  handing  over  so  large  a  sum  of 
money  with  discussing  the  qualities  of  servants.  But  these  two  checks  will  serve  well 
enough  for  the  thin  edge  of  the  wedge ;  and  Bassanio’s  eager  haste  returns  again,  and 
he  excuses  himself  to  Gratiano  on  the  plea  that  he  has  ‘business.’  In  this  bustling, 
feverish,  hurrying  mood  we  leave  him,  and  do  not  see  him  or  hear  him  again  until  he 
has  reached  Belmont,  and  is  entreating  Portia  to  let  him  choose,  to  let  him  to  his  for¬ 
tune  and  the  caskets,  for,  as  he  is,  he  ‘  lives  upon  the  rack .’  What  man  is  there,  whose 
blood  is  not  snow-broth,  but  knows  that  Bassanio  has  sped  to  Belmont  with  all  speed 
of  wind  and  tide. 

But  Shakespeare’s  magic  will  be  busy  with  us  before  we  see  Bassanio  again.  Nearly 
a  fourth  of  the  play  is  carried  on  (herein  revealing  Shakespeare’s  art  in  the  mere  con 
struction  of  his  dramas),  and  days  and  weeks  and  months  must  pass  before  us,  con¬ 
suming  the  time  of  the  Bond. 

A  new  interest  is  excited.  Jessica  and  her  fortunes  are  introduced.  Time  obliterates 
Shylock’s  antipathy  to  eating  with  Christians.  We  are  taken  to  Belmont  to  see  the 
Prince  of  Morocco  and  watch  his  choice  of  the  casket.  We  are  brought  back  to  Ven¬ 
ice  to  find  Shylock  so  publicly  furious  over  the  loss  of  his  ducats  and  his  daughter  that 
‘  all  the  boys  in  Venice  follow  him.’  Rumours,  too,  are  in  the  air  of  the  loss  of  Anthonio’s 
ships.  Salarino  talked  with  a  Frenchman  about  it  ‘  yesterday.’  Again  we  are  taken  to 
Belmont;  by  this  mere  shifting  of  scenes,  back  and  forth,  from  Belmont  to  Venice,  and 
from  Venice  to  Belmont,  is  conveyed  an  impression  of  the  flight  of  time.  The  deliberate 
fool,  the  Prince  of  Arragon,  fails  in  his  choice,  and  departs.  Lest  we  should  be  too 
much  absorbed  in  all  this  by-play  and  lose  our  interest  in  Bassanio,  we  are  told  imme- 


340 


APPENDIX 


diately  after  Arragon  has  left  that  a  young  Venetian  has  alighted  at  the  gate.  We  are 
not  told  outright  that  it  is  Bassanio,  yet  we  know  that  he  is  on  the  way,  and  it  must  be 
he.  But  before  we  actually  see  him,  fresh  from  Venice  as  we  know  he  is,  although  it 
is  so  long  since  we  saw  him  and  so  much  has  happened,  more  spells  must  be  woven 
round  us ;  there  must  be  the  very  riping  of  the  time. 

One  is  always  conscious  that  between  the  Acts  of  a  play  a  certain  space  of  time 
elapses.  To  convey  this  impression  is  one  of  the  purposes  for  which  a  drama  is  divided 
into  Acts.  Thus  here,  after  merely  intimating  that  Bassanio  has  reached  Belmont,  an 
entr’acte  artfully  intervenes,  and  when  the  curtain  again  rises  we  are  all  the  more  ready 
to  accept  any  intimations  of  the  flight  of  time  which  may  be  thrown  out.  Accordingly, 
when  the  Third  Act  opens  with  Salanio’s  question :  *  What  news  on  the  Rialto  ?’ 
Salarino  replies  that  *  it  yet  lives  there  unchecked ’  that  Anthonio  has  lost  a  ship. 
Furthermore,  the  wreck  has  taken  place  not  on  any  sea-coast  near  at  hand,  from 
which  communication  could  be  speedy,  but  on  the  remote  Goodwins,  almost  as  far  off 
as  it  could  be,  within  the  limits  of  Europe;  even  for  rumour  to  reach  Venice  from  so 
remote  a  quarter  implies  much  time ;  it  could  be  brought  only  by  slow  argosies  01  heavy 
carracks,  and  days  and  weeks  might  elapse  before  any  arrived  direct  from  the  scene 
of  the  disaster,  and  for  many  a  long  day  the  rumour  might  live  unchecked.  Much 
more  time  was  implied  to  an  Elizabethan  audience,  in  this  distance  between  the  Good¬ 
wins  and  Venice,  than  it  is  to  us. 

Then  Shylock  enters,  still  so  deeply  cut  by  his  daughter’s  flight  that  his  first  words 
are  reproaches  to  Salarino  and  Salanio  for  being  privy  to  it;  but  evidently  his  first 
ebullition  has  cooled,  and  time  has  brought  some  self-control.  It  must  have  been  days, 
nay,  weeks.  Have  not  Anthonio’s  bearing  and  deportment  undergone  a  gradual  change 
that  only  time  can  bring  about  ?  Shylock  says,  that  Anthonio  scarce  dare  show  his 
head  on  the  Rialto;  this  is  not  the  work  of  hours,  but  of  days,  perhaps  weeks. 
Anthonio’s  smug  air  upon  the  mart  is  spoken  of  as  a  thing  long  past :  *  he  that  was 
used  to  come  so  smug  upon  the  mart.’  Then  comes  in  with  startling  effect,  ‘  let  him 
look  to  his  bond.'  By  this  one  allusion  the  three  months  shrink ;  we  feel  the  first 
cold  chill  of  Anthonio’s  fast-approaching  peril,  and  this  impression  is  deepened  with 
every  repetition  of  the  allusion  by  Shylock :  ‘  let  him  look  to  his  bond  !  He  was  wont 
[again,  how  long  ago  that  seems  !]  to  call  me  usurer.  Let  him  look  to  his  bond  !  he 
was  wont  to  lend  money  for  a  Christian  courtesy.  Let  him  look  to  his  bond !’  This 
is  one  of  the  masterstrokes  of  art  in  the  play.  Except  one  fleeting  allusion  to  it  by 
Salarino,  we  have  heard  nothing  of  the  bond.  We  have  watched  Jessica  elope  with 
her  lover,  and  gilded  with  ducats  glide  out  of  sight  in  a  gondola,  the  Prince  of  Morocco 
has  come  and  gone,  the  Prince  of  Arragon  has  strutted  forth  and  back,  the  Rialto,  with 
its  busy  life  and  whispered  rumours  of  Anthonio’s  losses,  has  passed  before  us  day  after 
day,  week  after  week,  the  smug  merchant  has  broken  down,  and  now  all  of  a  sudden 
looms  up  the  fateful  bond,  and  its  term  is  shrivelling  as  a  scroll.  To  deepen  this 
impression  of  the  Long  Time  that  has  elapsed,  Tubal  returns  from  his  weary  quest 
after  Jessica;  he  tells  Shylock  that  he  often  came  where  he  heard  of  her;  he  must  have 
kept  moving  from  place  to  place,  because  Shylock  groans  over  the  money  that  was 
spent  in  the  search.  Then,  too,  another  of  Anthonio’s  ships  has  been  cast  away 
coming  from  Tripolis,  much  nearer  home  than  the  Goodwins ;  and  some  of  the  ship¬ 
wrecked  sailors  have  reached  Genoa,  nay,  have  even  talked  with  Tubal.  There  is  no 
hope  for  Anthonio  now,  his  bankruptcy  is  sure ;  and  so  close  has  the  limit  come  that 
Tubal  must  go,  and  go  at  once,  to  secure  an  officer  for  Anthonio’s  arrest;  within  a  fort¬ 
night  the  term  will  have  expired  and  the  bond  be  forfeit. 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION 


34i 


The  minute-hand  that  has  recorded  for  us  so  many  varied  events  is  fast  catching  up 
with  the  hour-hand. 

There  is  no  entr’acte  now.  We  are  taken  at  once  to  Belmont,  at  last  to  meet  Ba» 
sanio  in  happy  torment,  full  of  eagerness  and  haste,  fresh  from  Venice,  unwilling  tc 
piece  the  time  or  stay  one  minute  from  his  election.  With  the  success  of  Bassanio’s 
hazard  and  with  the  winning  of  his  prize,  the  only  obstacle  to  the  completion  of  the 
full  term  of  the  bond  disappears.  There  is  no  longer  need  of  further  delay.  Time’s 
steeds  may  now  be  fiery-footed  and  gallop  apace.  Yet  even  at  this  last  minute  two  more 
spells  from  the  past  are  to  be  cast  around  the  present,  and  our  imaginations  must  untread 
again  the  long  weeks  that  have  passed  since  the  bond  was  signed.  Salerio  brings 
word  from  Venice  that  morning  and  night  Shylock  is  plying  the  Duke  for  justice,  and 
that  twenty  merchants,  the  Duke  himself,  and  the  magnificoes,  have  been  pleading 
with  the  Jew  for  mercy.  And  Jessica,  too,  who  left  Venice  when  Bassanio  left  it,  has 
reached  Belmont  after  her  merry  junketings  at  Genoa,  (which  we  accept  without  ques¬ 
tioning  their  possibility,)  and  adds  a  masterstroke  of  legerdemain  by  saying  that  she 
had  heard  her  Father  swear  to  Tubal  and  to  Chus  that  he  would  rather  have  Anthonio’s 
flesh  than  twenty  times  the  value  of  the  bond.  We  never  stop  to  think  that  she  left 
Venice  within  a  few  hours  after  the  signing  of  the  bond,  and  had  seen  her  Father  but 
once,  and  then  for  only  a  few  minutes.  Her  words  summon  up  pictures  of  many  a 
discussion  between  the  three  old  usurers  in  the  seclusion  of  Shylock’s  house,  and  tell 
plainly  enough  of  the  gradual  hardening  of  Shylock’s  heart.  Thus  the  mighty 
magician  ‘winds  him  into  us  easy-hearted  men,  and  hugs  us  into  snares;’  and  so  com¬ 
pletely  entangled  are  we  that  there  is  no  jar  now  when  Anthonio’s  letter  says  that  his 
ships  have  all  miscarried,  his  creditors  grow  cruel,  his  estate  is  very  low,  and  his  bond 
to  the  Jew  forfeit ! 

The  minute-hand  is  on  the  stroke  of  the  hour.  But  one  more  fleeting  impression 
and  the  hammer  falls.  Anthonio  says  that  his  griefs  and  losses  have  so  bated  him  that 
he  will  hardly  have  a  pound  of  flesh  to  spare  for  his  ‘  bloody  creditor  to-morrow .’  The 
royal  Merchant’s  gaunt  and  haggard  looks  tell  of  many  a  weary  week,  and  the  bond 
expires  to-morrow ! 

Although  it  was  necessary  that  Portia  should  hasten  to  Venice  as  rapidly  as  Bassanio, 
yet  some  time  must  be  given  to  her  to  master  her  brief ;  she  might  have  done  it  while 
on  the  ferry,  after  receiving  Bellario’s  notes  and  garments  from  Balthasar  at  the  Tra- 
ject,  and  probably  did  do  so ;  but  Bellario’s  letter  to  the  Duke  supplies  the  requisite 
time,  if  any  be  needed,  in  our  imagination,  by  saying  that  he  and  the  young  Doctor 
‘  had  turned  over  many  books  together,’  evidently  a  faithful  and  prolonged  consultation, 
ending  in  an  ‘  opinion,’  the  result  of  laborious  and  learned  research. 

How  long  the  home  journey  from  Venice  to  Belmont  lasted,  whether  it  took  one 
day  or  two  days,  is  a  matter  of  small  moment.  Nothing  was  at  stake,  no  art  is 
demanded,  nothing  has  to  be  smoothed  away ;  we  need  neither  Long  Time  nor  Short 
Time.  For  aught  that  concerns  the  dramatic  action,  it  might  have  taken  a  month.  All 
that  is  needed  is  that  Portia  should  reach  home  first,  and  that  Bassanio  should  follow 
hard  after.  When  Nerissa  tells  Gratiano  that  the  Doctor’s  Clerk  had  been  in  her  com¬ 
pany  ‘  last  night,’  she  had  already  given  Gratiano  the  ring,  or  was  in  the  act  of  handing 
it  to  him ;  the  jest  was  revealed,  her  eyes  were  dancing  with  merriment,  and  he  would 
know  in  a  flash  that  what  was  true  of  last  night,  be  it  in  Belmont  or  Venice,  was  equally 
true  of  every  night  since  she  had  been  born. 

> 

It  is  to  Dr  W.  W.  Goodwin,  of  Harvard  College,  that  I  owe  the  suggestion  that  in 


342 


APPENDIX 


The  Agamemnon  an  illustration  might  be  possibly  found  of  a  treatment  of  Dramatic 
Time  similar  to  Shakespeare’s  Double  Time.  In  representing  the  arrival  of  Agamem 
non  at  Argos  within  a  few  hours  of  the  fall  of  Troy,  Aschylus  has  been  charged  by 
many  an  Editor  with  a  violation  of  the  Unity  of  Time.  Dr  Goodwin  suggested  that  a 
solution  of  the  difficulty  might  be  traced  in  the  Herald’s  speech  to  the  Chorus.  It  is 
greatly  to  be  regretted  that  a  pressure  of  many  duties  has  kept  these  pages  from  being 
enriched  with  Dr  Goodwin’s  promised  investigation  of  the  question,  and  that  the  task 
has  therefore  fallen,  instead,  to  my  unskilful  hands.  • 

In  the  first  place,  if  there  be  in  The  Agamemnon  a  violation  of  the  Unity  of  Time, 
Aeschylus  committed  ft  either  wittingly  or  unwittingly.  To  say  that  he  committed  it 
unwittingly  is  almost  unthinkable.  From  the  very  structure  of  a  Greek  tragedy,  a 
downright  violation  of  the  Unity  of  Time,  during  the  continued  presence  of  the  Chorus, 
would  be  a  defect  glaring  alike  to  auditors  and  author;  if  to  our  eyes  there  appears  to 
be  such  a  violation,  the  presumption  is  strong,  so  strong  as  to  amount  almost  to  a  cer¬ 
tainty,  that  the  defect  lies  in  our  vision,  not  in  the  play  itself. 

This  apparent  violation,  then,  yEschylus  must  have  committed  wittingly ;  and  if  so, 
an  analysis  of  the  tragedy  will  show,  I  think,  that  in  dealing  with  time  he  waved  over 
his  audience,  with  a  master’s  art,  the  same  magician’s  wand  that  Shakespeare  wields, 
and  that  by  subtle,  fleeting  impressions  of  the  flight  of  time  a  false  show  of  time  is 
created,  which  is  accepted  by  us  for  the  real.  We  must  remember  that  in  listening  to 
Shakespeare  or  to  AEschylus  we  are  subject  to  their  omnipotent  sway,  and  that  when 
they  come  to  us  *  with  fair  enchanted  cup,  and  warbling  charms,’  we  are  powerless  to 
*  fence  our  ears  against  their  sorceries.’ 

The  opening  Scene  of  The  Agamemnon  reveals  the  tired  Watchman  on  the  Palace 
top  at  Argos.  Of  a  sudden  he  sees  on  the  distant  horizon  the  flash  of  the  fire  on  Mt 
Arachnaeum,  the  signal  that  Troy  is  taken. 

The  Chorus  enters,  and  the  Watchman  hastens  to  tell  Clytemnestra. 

When  the  Queen  enters,  and  is  asked  by  the  Chorus  to  tell  how  long  it  is  since  the 
city  had  fallen,  she  replies  that  ‘  it  was  this  night,  the  mother  of  this  very  day  ’  (Tyf 
vvv  TEKOvarjg  <puc  Tbs’  evtypdvTjQ,  Myu,  line  279). 

The  Chorus,  knowing  how  far  it  is  from  Troy,  and  how  many  days  and  nights  must 
pass  in  journeying  thither,  expresses  surprise  that  the  news  could  travel  so  fast ;  where¬ 
upon  Clytemnestra  explains  that  it  was  through  the  aid  of  Hephaistos ;  a  fire  was  lit 
on  Ida,  then  on  the  Hermsean  crag  of  Lemnos,  then  on  Mount  Athos,  and  so  on,  till 
the  great  beard  of  flame  ’  flashed  on  the  roof  of  the  Atreidae,  and  ‘  this  very  day  the 
Achseans  hold  Troy  ’  (T polav  'Axaioi  tt)S'  Igovcf  kv  fjpepa,  line  320). 

The  opening  hour  of  the  Tragedy  has  struck.  It  is  the  morning  after  the  night  dur 
ing  which  Troy  was  taken.  The  release  of  the  weary  Watchman  from  his  sleepless 
years,  Clytemnestra’s  description  of  the  speed,  the  speed  of  light,  with  which  the  bea¬ 
con-fires  had  brought  the  news,  her  rejoicings  over  the  end  of  the  warriors’  hardships, 
all  emphasize  it.  No  impression  with  regard  to  Anthonio’s  three  months’  bond  is  con¬ 
veyed  more  clearly  than  that  here,  in  Argos,  it  is  but  a  few  hours  since  Troy  had  fallen. 

*  The  voyage  from  Troy  to  the  bay  of  Argos,’  says  Dr  Goodwin,  in  a  letter,  ‘  would 
‘  now  be  a  good  day’s  journey  for  a  fast  steamship.  So  I  think  we  are  entitled  to  at 
‘  least  a  week  of  good  weather  for  the  mere  voyage,  leaving  out  the  storm  and  the 
‘  delays.’  That  much  time,  then,  will  it  take  Agamemnon  to  reach  his  home,  if  he 
starts  within  an  hour  after  he  has  conquered  Troy.  But  the  drama  has  begun,  the 
Chorus  is  on  the  stage,  and  before  it  leaves  the  stage  Agamemnon  must  arrive,  here  in 
Argos,  and  yet  all  traces  of  improbability  must,  if  possible,  be  concealed. 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION— AESCHYLUS 


343 


The  time  during  which  the  Chorus  is  on  the  stage  is  yEschylus’s  Short  Time,  and 
corresponds  to  Bassanio’s  journey  from  Venice  to  Belmont.  riEschylus’s  Long  Time  is 
Agamemnon’s  week’s  voyage  from  Troy  to  Argos,  corresponding  to  Anthonio’s  three 
months’  bond.  The  same  power  that  can  compress  three  months  at  Venice  into  one 
day  at  Belmont,  must  expand  a  few  hours  at  Argos  into  a  se’en  nights’  voyage  from 
Troy. 

The  task  in  The  Agamemnon  is  the  reverse  of  the  task  in  The  Merchant  of  Venice. 
Shakespeare  must  compress  a  long  term  into  a  short  one,  while  /Eschylus  must  dilate  a 
short  time  into  a  long  one.  Shakespeare  presents  to  us  the  spy-glass,  and  bids  us  see 
what  is  distant  close  at  hand ;  while  ^Eschylus  reverses  the  glass,  and  what  is  but  an 
arm’s  length  from  us  recedes  to  the  verge  of  the  horizon. 

To  a  certain  extent  and  for  many  purposes,  what  Shakespeare  can  effect  by  Acts  and 
the  shifting  of  Scenes,  yEschylus  can  bring  about  by  means  of  the  Chorus.  Yet  here 
it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  the  Chorus  can  help  him ;  nothing  that  the  Chorus  could  say 
would  lessen  the  shock  to  our  sense  of  the  fitness  of  things  if  Agamemnon  himself 
were  to  be  brought  at  once  upon  the  scene.  Old  Argive  citizens  compose  this  Chorus ; 
they  have  remained  here  quietly  in  Argos ;  of  Agamemnon,  or  of  his  journey,  they  can 
tell  us  nothing. 

Of  a  sudden  Clytemnestra  sees  a  Herald  hastening  from  the  shore.  In  thus  introdu 
cing  a  Herald,  art  is  shown.  Heralds  always  travel  in  advance  of  their  lords,  and  this 
Herald,  as  far  as  we  know,  may  possibly  have  left  Troy  before  its  fall.  That  it  is  a  Her¬ 
ald  from  the  Argive  king  we  feel  sure,  and  having  accepted  the  fact  of  his  presence,  we 
sink  into  a  receptive  mood  for  any  impression  which  his  story  can  impart.  But  while 
he  is  yet  at  a  distance,  Clytemnestra  sees  that  he  is  travel-stained  with  dust  and  grime.* 
Thus  is  the  spell  begun,  the  magician  is  at  work.  We  accept  the  Herald  without  a  shade 
of  suspicion ;  what  can  be  more  natural  than  that  he  should  have  travelled  with  extreme 
haste  ?  The  thrill  of  joy  at  the  sight  of  one  who  can  bring  us  news  is  heightened  by 
waving  olive  branches,  the  pledges  of  peace  and  victory,  which  he  bears  aloft.  Thus 
artfully  is  the  Herald  announced  before  he  enters  on  the  stage ;  when  at  last  he  does 
enter  and  breaks  out  into  a  thrilling  greeting  of  his  home,  criticism  is  forgotten  in  joy 
and  sympathy. 

We  must  remember,  and  we  cannot  too  deeply  remember,  that  both  The  Agamemnon 
and  The  Merchant  of  Venice  were  written,  not  to  be  studied  and  pored  over,  line  by  line, 
and  analyzed  sentence  by  sentence,  but  to  be  acted ;  to  be  communicated  by  the  speak¬ 
ing  voice  to  the  hearing  ear  and  interpreted  by  the  quick  thought.  It  is  by  a  repetition 
of  faint,  fleeting,  subtle  impressions,  felt  but  scarcely  heeded  at  the  time,  that  a  deep, 
abiding  effect  may  be  at  last  produced.  The  ‘  snowflake  on  the  river  ’  may  be  but  ‘  a 
moment  there,  then  gone  for  ever ;’  yet  let  but  enough  fall  and  the  stream  is  locked  in 
frost. 

What  need  to  hurry  with  our  questionings  how  the  Herald  came  hither;  he  stands 
before  us,  and  his  story  will  tell  us  all. 

In  order  to  appreciate  the  delicacy  with  which  /Eschylus  smooths  away  the  objec¬ 
tions  to  this  speedy  appearance  of  the  Herald,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  every  allu¬ 
sion  to  the  flight  of  time  since  the  hour  that  Troy  has  fallen,  however  light  and  evan- 


*  Thus  I  prefer  to  paraphrase  the  Ka<ris  irijAoG  |uVoupos  Sufiia  «onr ;  although  it  may,  and  per¬ 
haps  ought  to,  refer  to  the  dust  raised  by  the  Herald  as  he  hurries  forward.  I  think  it  no  disgrace 
to  confess  that  I  know  of  no  harder  Greek  to  master,  with  every  aid  that  Notes  and  Translations 
can  yield,  than  The  Agamemnon,  and  those  who  know  it  best  will  be  most  tolerant,  I  am  sure,  of 
jny  version  or  perversion. 


344 


APPENDIX 


escent  the  allusion  may  be,  helps  to  make  that  hour  recede  into  the  past ;  and,  for  my 
purpose,  I  think  I  may  be  permitted  to  claim  every  possible  impression  which  I  can 
detect,  of  this  nature,  however  fleeting,  and  then  to  multiply  its  effect  on  Grecian  ears 
many  times  over.  How  clearly  must  it  not  have  spoken  to  those  ears,  when  it  caD 
penetrate  even  my  adder’s  sense ! 

Thus,  when  the  Herald  in  his  first  speech  (lines  523  et  seq)  says  that  Agamemnon 
must  be  welcomed  back,  who  has,  with  the  crowbars  of  the  just  gods,  levelled  Troy  to 
the  ground,  with  all  its  towers  and  fanes,  and  that  all  earth’s  seed  lies  scattered  on 
the  ground,  is  not  Time’s  thievish  progress  intimated  here  ?  Can  walls,  and  towers, 
and  temples  be  toppled  over  in  a  minute  ?  Can  harvests  be  burnt,  and  acres  ploughed 
up,  for  leagues  around,  in  an  hour  ?  Lost  in  the  thought  of  these  great  tasks  and  of 
the  mighty  victory,  we  never  stop  to  count  the  days ;  but  the  succession  of  pictures 
creates  the  flight  of  time,  and  the  hour  of  Troy’s  fall  begins  to  recede. 

Too  much,  however,  is  not  demanded  of  us  at  once ;  the  Chorus  here  speaks ;  and 
then  Clytemnestra  exults  in  the  assurance  that  the  beacon-fires  are  true,  and  we  are 
gently  prepared  for  Agamemnon’s  approach  by  the  message  which  the  Chorus  is  to 
deliver  when  he  arrives,  telling  him  of  her  fidelity  during  his  absence.  Hereupon  the 
Chorus  asks  after  Menelaus,  and  the  Herald  reluctantly  confesses  that  his  fate  is  un¬ 
known.  The  Chorus  presses  for  a  more  exact  reply,  and  asks  whether  he  set  sail  with 
all  the  rest  of  the  fleet  and  then  left  them,  or  whether  a  storm  snatched  him  away,  but 
the  Herald  only  ambiguously  replies  that  it  was  even  so.  The  Chorus  returns  to  the 
point,  and  asks  what  rumours  there  were  about  him  in  the  fleet,  among  the  sailors. 

*  No  one  knows  anything  about  him,’  replies  the  Herald ;  ‘  the  sun,  the  nourisher  of  the 

*  earth,  alone  can  tell  his  fate.’ 

It  seems  needless  to  point  out  how  insidiously,  up  to  this  point,  the  passage  of  time 
has  been  worked  in  by  a  succession  of  pictures,  every  one  of  which  is  suggested  by  a 
word  or  phrase  which  could  not  have  fallen  unheeded  on  Grecian  ears.  Troy  has  been 
conquered ;  and  burnt ;  and  razed  to  the  ground ;  and  reduced  to  a  desolate  ruin ;  the 
Greeks  have  divided  the  spoils ;  and  allotted  the  trophies  to  be  hung  up  in  temples 
(577);  the  armies  have  been  gathered  together;  and  embarked  in  their  fleet;  and  have 
advanced  on  their  voyage ;  and  been  overtaken  by  a  storm ;  and  after  the  storm  sufficient 
time  has  elapsed  for  the  fleet  to  be  collected ;  their  losses  counted ;  and  ‘  rumours  to  live 
unchecked  ’  as  to  the  fate  of  their  companions. 

(And  Troy  fell  only  last  night  /) 

Trusting  to  the  effect  already  produced,  the  Poet  advances  more  boldly.  Moreover, 
on  the  emotion,  the  uncritical  emotion,  excited  in  his  auditors  by  the  absorbing  interest 
of  the  Tragedy  he  has  a  right  to  count.  « 

Urged  by  the  Chorus,  the  Herald  hereupon  describes  this  frightful  storm  which  fell 
upon  the  fleet 1  by  night ’  (line  653  et  seq.),  when  fire  and  sea  combined  against  it,  and 
Thracian  blasts  dashed  all  the  ships  together ;  and  ‘  when  the  fair  light  of  the  sun  arose, 
we  saw  the  /Egean  Sea  enamelled  like  a  meadow  (avdovv)  with  the  drowned  corpses 
of  sailors  and  of  Greeks.’ 

To  all  the  previous  indications  of  the  flight  of  time,  which  were  but  delicate,  artful 
hints,  there  must  be  now  added  the  explicit  description  of  a  night  of  storm,  when  the 
fleet  was  well  on  its  way  (the  blasts  came  down  from  Thrace),  and  the  next  morning 
afterwards  when  the  sun  shone  bright  and  clear. 

Is  not  the  goal  won  ?  The  days  of  gloom,  the  night  of  storm,  the  smiling  morrow, 
have  passed  before  us ;  we  have  lived  through  them  all,  and  the  journey  from  Troy  to 
Argos  is  accomplished.  To  Grecian  eyes  has  not  every  league  been  measured  * 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION— ^ESCHYL US 


345 


Not  to  disturb  this  impression,  but  to  deepen  it  by  repose,  the  Chorus  breaks  in  with 
four  Strophes  and  four  Antistrophes,  wherein  no  allusion  to  the  journey  is  found, — that 
is  left  as  something  fixed  and  settled;  but  it  anathematizes  Helen,  and  at  the  close,  so 
far  away  have  our  thoughts  been  carried  that  any  allusion  to  the  journey  from  Troy  to 
Argos  seems  like  a  thrice-told  tale ;  that  journey  has  become  a  fact  around  which  no 
shadow  of  mistrust  can  cling. 

Thus  heralded,  thus  prepared  for,  Agamemnon  enters,  and  the  task  is  done.  After 
the  spells  that  have  been  woven  around  us,  we  find  no  more  violation  of  probability  in 
Agamemnon’s  appearance,  from  Troy,  at  that  minute  than  in  the  expiration  of  the  three 
months’  Bond  within  the  hour  after  Bassanio  has  chosen  the  leaden  casket ;  and  is  there 
a  man,  who,  when  sitting  at  the  play,  can  say  with  truth  that,  on  tha*  score,  he  ever  felt 
a  jar? 

I  do  not  think  it  is  claiming  too  much  thus  to  urge  that  the  two  greatest  dramatic 
poets  of  the  world  used  a  kindred  skill  in  producing  kindred  dramatic  effects.  If  we 
find  those  effects  in  their  dramas,  their  hands  put  them  there,  and  to  imagine  that  we 
can  see  them  and  that  the  mighty  poets  themselves  did  not,  is  to  usurp  a  position 
which  I  can  scarcely  conceive  of  any  one  as  willing  to  occupy. 


346 


APPENDIX 


LANSDOWNE’S  VERSION 

There  have  been  in  the  history  of  this  play  two  noteworthy  Revivals ;  the  first  by 
Macklin  and  the  second  by  Kean.  Although  on  the  score  of  genius  no  comparison 
between  the  two  actors  can  be  made,  yet  the  revival  by  Kean  did  not  imply,  perhaps, 
as  great  a  revolution  of  popular  feeling  as  the  revival  by  Macklin.  It  is  one  thing  to 
elevate  and  refine,  to  convert  *  snarling  malignity  ’  into  the  ‘  depositary  of  the  vengeance 
of  a  race,’  but  it  is  another  and  a  bolder  flight,  I  suggest,  to  transform  a  character,  as 
Macklin  transformed  Shylock,  from  the  grimacings  of  low  Comedy  to  the  solemn  sweep 
of  Tragedy.  This  was  Macklin’s  achievement,  and  the  best  way  to  estimate  its  pro¬ 
portions  is  to  examine  the  Thing  which  had  supplanted  Shakespeare.  To  turn  back 
and  read  the  page  in  the  history  of  the  Drama  is  a  depressing  duty.  Our  cheeks  grow 
hot  enough  with  shame  over  Dryden,  or  Shadwell,  or  Otway,  or  when  *  Tate  put  his  hook 
into  the  nostrils  of  the  Leviathan but  all  is  as  nothing  to  the  sight  of  Shylock  drink¬ 
ing  to  his  ‘  Mistress,  Money,’  and  shouting  a  toast  to  *  Interest  upon  Interest,’  or  to  the 
desecration  of  Portia’s  refined  mouth  by  the  objections  put  into  it,  to  her  German  suitor. 

In  estimating  this  Version,  which  held  sway  for  more  than  a  generation,  two  facts, 
at  least,  we  should  remember. 

First,  that  it  was  written  in  ‘  the  teacup  times  of  hood  and  hoop,  while  yet  the  patch 
was  worn,’  and  that  in  those  Dark  Ages  of  the  Drama,  as  in  all  ages,  *  the  drama’s 
laws,  the  drama’s  patrons  give,’  and  the  men  and  women  behind  the  footlights  merely 
respond  to  the  men  and  women  before  the  footlights ;  and,  Secondly,  that  it  is  scarcely 
to  be  called  a  modern  version.  Let  us,  at  least,  push  the  odium  as  far  back  as  possi¬ 
ble.  The  Fourth  Folio  was  only  fifteen  years  old  when  George  Granville  wrote  this 
Jew  of  Venice ;  and  Rowe,  the  first  real  Editor  of  Shakespeare,  did  not  issue  his  edi¬ 
tion  until  eight  years  afterwards.  If  due  weight  be  given  to  these  two  considerations, 
I  think  we  shall  be  inclined  to  leniency,  and  even  wonder,  perhaps,  that  as  much  of 
Shakespeare  as  we  find  here  was  left  untouched. 

Although  it  may  fairly  be  called  an  uncommon  book,  it  would  be  a  waste  of  space 
to  reprint  the  whole  of  its  forty-seven  quarto  pages  here ;  extracts  erring  on  the  side  of 
fulness,  and  containing  all  the  passages  where  Shakespeare  is  improved,  must  suffice. 

This  Version  by  George  Granville,  Viscount  Lansdowne  (he  was  only  thirty- 
three  years  old  when  he  wrote  it),  appeared  in  1701,  and  held  the  stage  for  exactly 
forty  years.  It  bore  the  following  title :  The  Jew  of  Venice.  A  Comedy.  As  it  is 
Acted  at  the  Theatre  in  Little- Lincoln s- Inn-Fields,  by  His  Majesty's  Servants.  Lon 
don,  Printed  for  Ber.  Lintott  at  the  Post-House  in  the  Middle  Temple-Gate,  Fleetstreet 
1701. 

Hereupon  follows :  ‘  Advertisement  to  the  Reader.  The  Foundation  of  the  following 
Comedy  being  liable  to  some  objections,  it  may  be  wonder’d  that  any  one  should  make 
Choice  of  it  to  bestow  so  much  labour  upon ;  But  the  judicious  Reader  will  observe  so 
many  Manly  and  Moral  Graces  in  the  Characters  and  Sentiments,  that  he  may  excuse 
the  Story  for  the  sake  of  the  Ornamental  parts.  Undertakings  of  this  kind  are  justi¬ 
fied  by  the  Examples  of  those  Great  Men  who  have  employ’d  their  Endeavours  the 
same  Way.  The  only  dramatique  attempt  of  Mr.  Wallet  was  of  this  Nature,  in  his 
alterations  of  The  Maid's  Tragedy ;  To  the  Earl  of  Rochester  we  owe  Valentinian  ; 
To  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  The  Chance;  Sir  William  Davenant  and  Mr  Dryden 
unitei  n  restoring  The  Tempest ;  Troilus  and  Cresida,  Timon,  and  King  Lear  were  the 
works  of  three  succeeding  Laureats.  Besides  many  others  too  numerous  to  mention,’  &c 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


347 


1 

4 


Then  we  have  : — 

Prologue. 

The  Ghosts  of  Shakespear  and  Dryden  arise  Crown'd  with  Lawrel. 
Written  by  Bevill  Iiiggons,  Esq; 

Dry.  This  radiant  Circle,  reverend  Shakespear,  view ; 

An  Audience  only  to  thy  Buskin  due. 

Shakes.  A  Scene  so  noble,  antient  Greece  ne’er  saw, 

Nor  Pompey's  Dome,  when  Rome  the  World  gave  law. 

I  feel  at  once  both  Wonder  and  Delight, 

By  Beauty  warm’d,  transcendently  so  bright, 

Well,  Dryden ,  might’st  thou  sing;  well  may  these  Hero’s  fight. 

Dry.  With  all  the  outward  lustre  which  you  find, 

They  want  the  nobler  Beauties  of  the  Mind. 

Their  sickly  Judgments,  what  is  just,  refuse. 

And  French  Grimace,  Buffoons,  and  Mimicks  choose; 

Our  Scenes  desert,  some  wretched  Farce  to  see; 

They  know  not  Nature,  for  they  tast  not  Thee. 

Shakes.  Whose  stupid  Souls  thy  Passion  cannot  move, 

Are  deaf  indeed  to  Nature  and  to  Love. 

When  thy  ^ Egyptian  weeps,  what  eyes  are  dry ! 

Or  who  can  live  to  see  thy  Roman  dye. 

Dryd.  Thro’  Perspectives  revers’d  they  Nature  view, 

Which  give  the  Passions  images,  not  true. 

Strephon  for  Strephon  sighs ;  and  Sapho  dies, 

Shot  to  the  soul  by  brighter  Sapho' s  Eyes ; 

No  Wonder  then  their  wand’ring  Passions  roam, 

And  feel  not  Nature,  whom  th’  have  overcome. 

For  shame  let  genial  Love  prevail  agen, 

You  Beaux  Love  Ladies,  and  you  Ladies  Men. 

Shakes.  These  crimes  unknown,  in  our  less  polisht  Age, 

Now  seem  above  Correction  of  the  Stage ; 

Less  Heinous  Faults  our  Justice  does  pursue, 

To  day  we  punish  a  Stock-jobbing  Jew. 

A  Piece  of  Justice,  terrible  and  strange ; 

Which,  if  pursued,  would  make  a  thin  Exchange. 

The  Laws  Defect  the  juster  Muse  supplies, 

Tis  only  we,  can  make  you  Good  or  Wise, 

Whom  Heav’n  spares  the  Poet  will  chastise. 

These  Scenes  in  their  rough  Native  Dress  were  mine; 

But  now  improv’d  with  nobler  Lustre  shine ; 

The  first  rude  Sketches  Shakespear' s  Pencil  drew, 

But  all  the  shining  Master-stroaks  are  new. 

This  Play,  ye  Criticks,  shall  your  Fury  stand, 

Adorn’d  and  rescu’d  by  a  faultless  Hand. 

Dryd.  I  long  endeavour’d  to  support  thy  Stage 
With  the  faint  Copies  of  thy  Nobler  Rage, 

But  toyl’d  in  vain  for  an  Ungenerous  Age. 

They  starv’d  me  living;  nay,  deny’d  me  Fame, 

And  scarce  now  dead,  do  Justice  to  my  Name. 


348 


APPENDIX 


Wou’d  you  Repent  ?  Be  to  my  Ashes  kind, 

Indulge  the  Pledges  I  have  left  behind. 

[A  foot-note  in  the  Second  Edition,  1713,  referring  to  the  last  two  lines,  says  that 
‘  the  Profits  of  this  Play  were  given  to  Mr  Dryden’s  Son.’] 

Dramatis  Personae. — Men:  Bassanio,  Mr  Betterton;  Antonio,  Mr  Verbruggen; 
Gratiano,  Mr  Booth;  Lorenzo,  Mr  Baily;  Shy  lock,  Mr  Dogget;  Duke  of  Venice,  M' 
Harris. 

Women  :  Portia,  Mrs  Bracegirdle ;  Nerissa,  Mrs  Bowman ;  Jessica,  Mrs  Porter 


Act  I.  Scene  i. 

Anto.  I  hold  the  World  but  as  a  Stage,  Gratiano , 

Where  every  Man  must  play  some  certain  Part, 

And  mines  a  serious  one. 

Grat.  Laughter  and  Mirth  be  mine, 

Why  should  a  Man,  whose  blood  is  warm  and  young, 

Sit  like  his  Grandsire,  cut  in  Alablaster ! 

Sleep,  when  he  wakes,  and  creep  into  the  Jaundice, 

By  being  peevish !  I  tell  thee  what,  Antonio  ! 

I  love  thee,  and  it  is  my  Love  that  speaks ; 

There  are  a  sort  of  Men,  whose  Visages 
Do  cream  and  mantle,  like  a  standing  Pond ; 

And  do  a  willful  Stillness  entertain, 

Screwing  their  Faces  in  a  politick  Form, 

To  cheat  Observers  with  a  false  Opinion 
Of  Wisdom,  Gravity,  profound  Conceit ; 

As  who  should  say,  I  am,  Sir,  an  Oracle, 

Oh  my  Antonio  !  I  do  know  of  these, 

Who  therefore  only  are  reputed  Wise, 

For  saying  nothing ;  But  more  of  this 
Another  time.  Let  you  and  I,  Lorenzo, 

Take  a  short  turn :  Once  more,  my  Friends,  be  merry, 

All  have  their  Follies ;  merry  Fools  are  best 
Lorenzo,  come,  Sir  Gravities,  farewell, 

I’ll  end  my  Exhortation  after  Dinner.  [Exeunt  Grat.  and  Lorenz. 
Bass.  Gratiano  speaks  an  infinite  deal  of  nothing,  &c. 

[And  so  on,  without  change,  down  to  line  140J] 

Bass.  To  you,  Antonio, 

I  owe  the  most  in  Money  and  in  Love, 

Anto.  My  Friend  can  owe  me  nothing;  we  are  one. 

The  Treasures  I  possess,  are  but  in  trust, 

For  him  I  love.  Speak  freely  your  Demand, 

And  if  it  stand,  as  you  your  self  still  do, 

Within  the  Eye  of  Honour,  be  assur’d 
My  Purse,  my  Person,  my  extreamest  Means, 

Are  all  my  Friend’s. 

[Here  follow  lines  1  go- 162 .] 

Anto.  You  know  me  well,  and  herein  spend  but  time, 

To  wind  about  my  Love  with  Circumstance. 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


349 


Believe  me  my  Bassanio,  ’tis  more  wrong 
Thus  to  delay  the  Service  of  your  Friend 
Than  if  you  had  made  waste  of  all  I  have ; 

Is  this  to  be  a  Friend  ?  With  blushing  Cheek, 

With  down-cast  Eyes,  and  with  a  faltring  Tongue 
We  sue  to  those  we  doubt :  Friendship  is  plain, 

Artless,  familiar,  confident,  and  free, 

Ask  then  as  you  would  grant,  were  yours  the  Power, 

Were  yours  the  Power,  so  would  I  ask  of  you; 

No  longer  hesitate.  Give  me  to  know 
What  you  would  have  me  do,  and  think  it  done. 

Bass.  Then  briefly  thus.  In  Belmont  is  a  Lady 
Immensely  rich,  and  yet  more  fair  than  rich, 

And  vertuous  as  she’s  fair;  sometimes  from  her  Eyes 
I  have  receiv’d  kind  speechless  Messages. 

Her  Name  is  Portia ;  You  have  heard  her  Fame, 

From  the  four  Corners  of  the  World ;  the  Winds 
Blow  in,  from  every  Coast,  adoring  Crowds ; 

The  watry  Kingdom,  whose  ambitious  Head 
Spets  in  the  Face  of  Heaven,  is  no  Bar 
To  semulous  Love,  as  o’er  a  Brook  they  come 
To  Anchor  at  her  Heart ;  Her  sunny  Locks 
Hang  on  her  Temples,  like  a  golden  Fleece, 

For  which  these  many  Jason's  sail  in  Quest. 

O  my  Antonio,  had  I  but  the  Means 
To  hold  a  Rival-Place  with  one  of  ’em. 

Anto.  The  Means  be  thine,  if  I  can  find  the  Means, 

My  present  Fortunes  are,  thou  know’st,  at  Sea. 

No  Money,  nor  Commodity  is  left  me 
To  raise  immediate  Sums.  Therefore  go  forth, 

Try  what  my  Credit  can  in  Venice  do, 

It  shall  be  rack’d  even  to  the  uttermost 
To  furnish  thy  Desires  :  Nay,  no  set  Speech 
Of  formal  Thanks,  which  I  must  blush  to  hear. 

Go,  presently  enquire.  And  so  will  I, 

Where  money  is;  In  Friendship,  who  receives, 

Obliges,  by  Acceptance,  him  that  gives.  Exeunt. 

Scene  changes  to  Belmont.  Enter  Portia  and  Nerissa. 
Port.  In  short,  Nerissa,  my  little  Body  is  weary  of  this 
Great  World. 

Neriss.  It  might  indeed,  if  your  Wants  were  as  great  as  your 
Plenty. 

For  aught  I  see,  they  are  as  sick,  who  surfeit 
With  too  much,  as  those  who  starve  with  too  little ; 

From  whence  I  conclude,  that  Happiness  is  seated  in 
The  Mean :  Superfluity  brings  Care,  Care  both 
Robs  us  of  our  Time,  and  shortens  our  Days, 

*  But  Competency  is  the  easiest  and  the  longest  Liver. 

Port.  Good  Sentences,  and  well  pronounc’d. 


35° 


APPENDIX 


Neriss.  They  would  be  better,  if  well  follow’d. 

Port.  It  is  a  good  Divine,  who  follows  his  own  Teaching ; 

I  could  easier  instruct  Twenty,  what  were  good  to  do, 

Than  be  one  of  the  Twenty,  to  follow  my  own  Instruction. 

The  Brain  may  devise  Laws  for  the  Blood ;  but  the  hot 
Part  will  be  sure  to  get  the  better  of  the  cold ;  but  what 
Is  all  this  to  my  choosing  a  Husband  ? 

[And  so  on,  as  in  the  original,  down  to  line  30,  ‘  chooses  you. 
Neriss.  I  have  Superstition 

Enough  to  believe  the  Benefit  Lot  is  destin’d  for 
The  best  Deserver. 

Love  is  at  best,  but  a  Lottery  to  all, 

Your  Case  looks  different,  but  is  in  Effect  the  same 
With  the  rest  of  the  World ;  For  it  is  Fortune  that 
Always  decides - 

And  now  pray  discover  to  whom  of  this  Retinue  of  Suitors 
Stand  your  Affections  most  inclined. 

Never  was  Woman  so  surrounded  as  you  are. 

Port.  Penelope  was  but  a  poor  Princess  to  Portia, 

But  come,  out  with  your  List ;  Read  me  the  Names, 

And  according  as  I  describe,  guess  at  my  Inclinations. 

Neriss.  What  a  long  List  is  here !  Alas  for  poor  Men,  that 
Among  so  many,  but  one  can  be  happy  ! 

Port.  Alas  !  for  poor  Woman  !  that  when  she  might  have  so 
Many,  she  must  have  but  one ;  but  come,  a  Truce 
To  moral  Reflections  :  Read,  read. 

Neriss.  Imprimis,  here  in  the  Front,  stands  Monsieur  le  Comptt 
Your  French  Lover. 

Port.  Of  himself,  thou  mean’st;  He  has  more  Tricks  than 
A  Baboon :  If  my  Bird  sings,  he  strait  falls  into  a  capering ; 

He  will  fence  with  his  own  Shadow;  nor  is  his  Tongue 
Less  nimble  than  his  Heels ;  I  would  as  soon  marry 
My  Squirrel,  or  my  Monkey. 

Neriss.  What  think  you  then  of  your  Englishman,  he  comes  next. 
Port.  The  Frenchman’s  Ape  :  No,  give  me  an  Original, 

Whatever  it  be.  The  Ape  of  an  Ape  must  needs  be  a  strange  Monster. 
Neriss.  Myn  Heer  van  Gutts,  the  Dutchman,  how  like  you  him  ? 
Port.  Very  vilely  in  the  Morning,  when  he  is  sober,  and 
More  vilely  in  the  Afternoon,  when  he  is  drunk ; 

At  best,  he  is  worse  than  a  Man ;  and  at  worst,  no  better 
Than  a  Beast :  I  will  do  anything,  Nerissa,  e’re  I’ll 
Be  marry’d  to  a  Sponge. 

Neriss.  For  anything  I  find,  this  Lottery  is  not  likely  to  be 
Fair  drawn :  For  if  he  should  choose  the  right  Casket, 

You’ll  refuse  to  perform  your  Father’s  Will. 

Port.  Therefore,  I  prithee,  set  a  Bumper  of  Rhenish 
Dn  the  contrary  Casket,  for  if  the  Devil  be  within, 

A.nd  the  Temptation  without,  I  know  he  will 
Choose  it. 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


3*1 


La  Seignora  Gutts  !  oh  hideous  !  what 
A  Sound  would  there  be  in  the  Mouth  of  an 
Italian  ? 

Enter  Servant. 

Serv.  Some  of  the  Strangers,  Madam,  desire  to  take 
Their  Leaves  :  And  there  are  others  just  arriv’d,  and 
Alighting  at  the  Gate. 

Port.  Would  some  one  would  come,  to  whom  I  could  bid 
Welcome,  as  heartily,  as  I  can  bid  all  these  Farewel. 

There  is  a  Man,  Nerissa,  such  a  Man ;  But  what  we  wish, 

Either  never  arrives,  or  is  always  longest  in  coming : 

Fellow,  go  before :  Nerissa,  come !  Whilst  we  shut 
Out  one  Lover,  another  knocks  at  the  Gate. 

Neriss.  This  Lottery  will  certainly  be  drawn  full.  Exeunt. 

[  The  next  Scene  adheres  to  the  original  with  but  trifling  changes  down  to  line  145 
Shylock  repels  any  imputation  of  Anlhonio's  honesty  :  ‘  When  a  man  is  rich,  we  say 
He  is  a  good  man,  As  on  the  contrary,  when  he  has  nothing  we  say  a  Poor  Rascal ; 
'tis  the  Phrase,  ’tis  the  Phrase.’  He  omits  the  pun  on  ‘  Pyrats,’  and  closes  his  refusal 
to  eat  or  drink  or  pray  with  Christians  by  the  assertion  :  *  that’s  flat.’  lie  passes  over 
the  account  of  facob  and  Laban  with  ‘  You  know  the  Story.’  Anthonio  omits  line  ioj 
‘  A  goodly  apple  rotten  at  the  heart.’] 

Shyl.  And  you’ll 

Not  hear  me, — were  this  offer  kind  ? 

Bassa.  This  were  Kindness. 

Shyl.  This  Kindness  will  I  show ;  nay,  more,  I’ll  take 
Antonio's  single  Bond :  And  that  we  may  henceforth 
Be  Friends,  no  Penalty  will  I  exact 
But  this,  meerly  for  Mirth - 

If  you  repay  me  not  on  such  a  Day,  in  such  a  Place, 

Such  Sum  or  Sums  as  are  express’d —  Be  this 
The  Forfeiture. 

Let  me  see,  What  think  you  of  your  Nose, 

Or  of  an  Eye —  or  of —  a  pound  of  Flesh 
To  be  cut  off,  and  taken  from  what  Part 
Of  your  Body —  I  shall  think  fit  to  name, 

Thou  art  too  portly,  Christian ! 

Too  much  pamper’d —  What  say  you  then 
To  such  a  merry  Bond  ? 

Anto.  The  Jew  grows  witty;  I’ll  seal  to  such  a  Bond, 

And  say  there  is  much  Kindness  in  the  Jew. 

Bassa.  You  shall  not  seal  to  such  a  Bond — 

There  is  some  Trick,  some  farther  Fetch  in  this ; 

You  shall  not  seal  to  such  a  Bond  for  me. 

Anto.  Fear  not,  my  Friend,  within  two  months,  that  is 
A  month  before  the  Bond  expires,  I  expect  Returns 
Of  thrice  three  times  the  value  of  this  Bond. 

Shyl.  O  Father  Abraham,  what  these  Christians  are  ! 

Whose  own  hard  Dealings  teaches  ’em  to  suspect 
The  Truth  of  others.  Pray  tell  me,  should  he  fail 


352 


APPENDIX 


His  Day —  what  should  I  get  by  the  Exaction 
Of  the  Penalty  ?  A  Pound  of  Man’s  Flesh  ? 

Not  to  be  sold  nor  eaten - 

To  buy  his  Favour  I  propos’d  these  Terms, 

Such  as  I  thought  could  bear  no  wrong 
Construction ;  but  since  you’re  so  suspicious 
Fare  you  well.  [going. 

Anto.  Stay,  Shylock ,  I  will  seal  as  you  propose. 

Shyl.  Then  meet  me  at  the  Notary’s, 

Give  him  Directions  to  prepare  the  Bond, 

In  the  meantime,  I’ll  fetch  the  Duccats, 

See  to  my  House,  least  some  unthrifty  Knave 

Be  on  the  Guard  !  Christian,  thy  Hand 

I’ll  presently  be  with  you.  Exit  Jew. 

Anto.  Thou’rt  now  a  very  gentle  Jews. 

This  Hebrew  will  turn  Christian,  he  grows  kind. 

Bassa.  I  like  not  yet  the  Terms, 

A  Villain,  when  he  most  seems  kind, 

Is  most  to  be  suspected. 

Anto.  There  is  not  the  least  Danger,  nor  can  be, 

Or  if  there  were,  what  is  a  pound  of  Flesh  ? 

What  my  whole  Body,  every  Drop  of  Blood, 

To  purchase  my  Friend’s  Quiet !  Heav’n  still  is  good 
To  those  who  seek  the  Good  of  others  :  Come,  Bassanio, 

Be  chearful,  for  ’tis  lucky  Gold  we  borrow. 

Of  all  the  Joys  that  generous  Minds  receive, 

The  noblest  is,  the  God-like  Power  to  give.  Exeunt. 

[  This  closes  Act  I.  As  will  be  seen  by  the  Dramatis  Personce,  Morocco,  Arragon, 
Gobbo,  Salarino,  Salanio,  and  Tubal  are  all  omitted.  With  II,  v,  14,  ‘  I  am  bid  forth 
to  supper,  Jessica,’  Lansdowne  begins  his  Act  II,  and,  omitting  Gobbo,  adheres  to  the 
original doi.cn  to  line 57,  when,  with  ‘Fast  bind,  fast  find,’  Shylock  exit.  Jessica  then 
says  .•] 

Jess.  Alas  !  what  Sin  is  it  in  me 
To  be  asham’d  to  be  my  Father’s  Child  ? 

But  how  can  he  be  said  to  have  given  me  Life, 

Who  never  suffer’d  me  to  know, 

What  ’tis  to  live.  O  Lorenzo  ! 

Keep  but  thy  Word  to  Night,  and  thou  shalt  be 
A  Father,  and  a  Husband  both  to  me.  Exit. 

[Enter  Lorenzo  and  Gratiano.  The  former  repeats,  substantially,  his  words  in  II, 
iv,  32-40 :  ‘  She  hath  directed  How  I  shall  take  her,’  &c.,  whereto  Gratiano 
replies  .•] 

Young,  handsome,  willing,  with  Gold  and  Jewels  to  Boot! 

Plague  on’t,  when  shall  I  have  such  Luck  ? 

Enter  Jessica,  in  the  Balcony. 

Jess.  Who  are  you?  Tell  me  for  more  Certainty, 

Albeit  I  swear  that  I  do  know  your  Voice, 

I  love  the  Repetition  of  thy  Name. 

[  With  trifling  verbal  alterations  to  line  y8.  ] 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


353 


Grot.  Now,  by  my  Soul,  a  Gentile,  and  no  Jew, 

She  robs  her  Father  with  a  Christian’s  Grace. 

Lor.  Beshrew  me,  but  I  love  her  from  my  Soul ! 

For  she  is  Fair,  or  else  my  Eyes  are  false ; 

And  true  she  is.  What  Proofs  could  she  give  more  ? 

And  Oh  she’s  kind ;  she  loves  me,  and  I  love, 

A  greater  Bliss,  scarce  Heav’n  it  self  can  boast 
Than  mutual  Love. 

Enter  Jessica  shutting  the  Door  after  het . 

Jess.  Shut  Doors  after  you ;  fast  bind,  fast  find, 

These  were  his  last  Words ;  Thus  I  avoid  the 
Curse  of  Disobedience !  Be  thou  shut  till  I 
Open  thee. 

Lor.  So  whilst  old  Laban  snor’d  in  Bed, 

Jacob  with  sprightly  Rachel  fled. 

Jess.  His  Gold,  and  Gems  of  Price  they  took, 

And  eke  the  Flower  of  every  Flock.  [ Holds  up  a  Bag. 

Lor.  But  not  one  precious  thing  was  there 
That  could  with  Jessica  compare. 

Enter  Antonio. 

Ant.  Fy,  Fy,  my  Friends,  why  do  you  loyter  thus  ? 

Gratiano  and  Lorenzo,  for  Shame  make  haste : 

Bassanio  frets,  that  you  are  wanting, 

He  has  sent  twenty  times  to  look  you  out. 

Grat.  Matters  of  State,  Antonio,  Matters  of  State, 

A  Rape  and  a  Robbery :  Matters  of  State, 

Matters  of  State,  Antonio. 

Ant.  Away,  away,  for  Shame.  [Exit. 

Lor.  Farewel,  Gratiano :  Excuse  me  to  Bassanio.  x 

Come  Jessica,  this  must  be  your  way  and  mine.  [ Exeunt 

Grat.  Jew,  Turk  and  Christian  differ  but  in  Creed ; 

In  ways  of  Wickedness,  they’re  all  agreed : 

None  upwards  clears  the  Road.  They  part  and  cavil, 

But  all  jog  on — unerring  to  the  Devil.  [. Exeun* 

Scene  opens,  and  discovers  Bassanio,  Antonio,  Shy  lock,  and  ethers,  sitting,  as  at  an 
Entertainment.  Music k playing  :  During  the  Music k,  Gratiano  enters,  and  lakes  his 
Place. 

Anto.  This  to  immortal  Friendship ;  fill  it  up — 

Be  thou  to  me,  and  I  to  my  Bassanio, 

Like  Venice  and  her  Adriatick  Bride, 

For  ever  link’d  in  Love. 

Bassa.  Thou  joyn’st  us  well :  And  rightly  hast  compared ; 

Like  Venice  on  a  Rock,  my  Friendship  stands 
Constant  and  fix’d ;  but  ’tis  a  barren  Spot ; 

Whilst  like  the  liberal  Adriatick,  thou 
With  Plenty  bath’st  my  Shoars — 

My  Fortunes  are  the  Bounty  of  my  Friend. 

Anto.  My  Friend’s  the  noblest  Bounty  of  my  Fortune 
Sound  every  Instrument  of  Musick  there, 

33 


354 


APPENDIX 


To  our  immortal  Friendship.  [All  drink.  Laud  Musick. 

Bassa.  Let  Love  be  next,  what  else  should 
Follow  Friendship  ? 

To  Love,  and  to  Love’s  Queen ;  my  charming  Portia , 

Fill ;  till  the  rosy  Brim  reflects  her  Lips ; 

Then  Kiss  the  Symbol  round  : 

Oh,  in  this  Lottery  of  Love,  where  Chance 

Not  Choice  presides :  Give,  give,  ye  Powers,  the  Lot, 

Where  she  her  self  would  place  it :  Crown  her  Wish, 

Tho’  Ruin  and  Perdition  catch  Bassanio  ; 

Let  me  be  wretched,  but  let  her  be  blest.  [Drink,  and  Musick  again. 

Grat.  Mine’s  a  short  Health  :  Here’s  to  the  Sex  in  general ; 

To  Woman;  be  she  Black,  or  Brown,  or  Fair; 

Plump,  Slender,  Tall,  or  Middle-statur’d — 

Let  it  be  Woman ;  and  ’tis  all  I  ask.  [Drink  again,  Musick  a -  *cfore. 

Skyl.  I  have  a  Mistress,  that  out-shines  ’em  all — 

Commanding  yours — and  yours  tho’  the  whole  Sex : 

O  may  her  Charms  encrease  and  multiply ; 

My  Money  is  my  Mistress  !  Here’s  to 

Interest  upon  Interest.  [Drinks. 

Anto.  Let  Birds  and  Beasts  of  Prey  howl  to  such  Vows, 

All  generous  Notes  be  hush’d ;  Pledge  thy  self,  Jew : 

None  here  will  stir  the  Glass —  [All  Rise. 

Nor  shall  the  Musick  sound :  O  Bassanio  ! 

There  sits  a  Heaviness  upon  my  Heart 
Which  Wine  cannot  remove ;  I  know  not 
But  Musick  ever  makes  me  that. 

Bassa.  The  Reason  is  your  Spirits  are  attentive,  &c. 

[Hereupon  follows  what  Lorenzo  says  to  Jessica  about  music  in  V,  i,  80-98,  and 
ends  with  the  words  :  ‘  Mark  the  Music,’  and  this  ‘  Music  ’  which  Bassanio  requested 
his  friends  to  mark,  turns  out  to  be  a  Masque  composed  by  Lord  Lansdowne,  called 
Pelevs  and  Thetis,  and  consists  of  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  lines  of  dreary  inan¬ 
ities,  wherein  certain  stanzas  appear  to  have  been  special  favorites  of  his  lordship, 
thus  : 


Thetis.  Accursed  Jealousy ! 

Thou  Jaundice  in  the  Lover’s  Eye 

Thro’  which  all  objects  false  we  see; 

Accursed  Jealousy ! 

Again : 

But  see  !  the  mighty  Thund’rer’s  here, 

Tremble,  Peleus,  tremble,  fly. 

The  Thunderer !  the  mighty  Thunderer ! 

Tremble,  Peleus,  tremble,  fly. 

These  are  so  good  that  his  lordship  thought  they  would  bear  repeating,  and  after  serv¬ 
ing  their  turn  from  the  mouth  of  Thetis  they  are  repeated  as  a  Chorus.  If  Antonio 
knew  that  Bassanio  had  this  Masque  in  preparation,  we  need  find  no  difficulty  in 
accounting  for  that  ‘ Heaviness  ’  which  sat  upon  Antonio's  heart,  beyond  the  power  of 
‘  wine  to  remove .’  The  last  we  see  of  Peleus  and  Thetis  they  are  warbling  a  duet , 
whereof  the  refrain  cannot  be  judiciously  gainsaid : 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


355 


Be  true,  all  ye  Lovers,  whate’re  you  endure, 

Tho’  cruel  the  Pain  is,  how  sweet  is  the  cure !’ 

Hereupon  the  play  is  resumed  by  Antonio's  exclaiming  .*1 
With  such  an  Air  of  true  Magnificence, 

My  noble  minded  Brother  treats  his  Friends ; 

As  hardly  has  been  known  to  Italy. 

Since  Pompey  and  Lucullus  entertain’d ; 

To  frame  thy  Fortunes  ample  as  thy  Mind, 

New  Worlds  should  be  created. 

Enter  Servant. 

Serv.  The  Master  of  the  Ship  sends  word  the  Wind  is 
Come  about :  And  he  desires  you  would  haste  Aboard. 

Bassa.,  turning  to  AntoI\  Oh  my  lov’d  Friend !  till  now  I  never  knew 
The  Pangs  of  parting  Friendship. 

At  distance  I  have  tasted  of  the  Pain, 

When  the  rude  Morn  has  sunder’d  us  away, 

To  our  Repose :  But,  by  my  Soul,  I  swear 
Even  then  my  Eyes  would  drop  a  silent  Tear, 

Repugnant  still,  to  close,  and  shut  out  thee. 

Anto.  You  go  for  your  advantage,  and  that  Thought 
Shall  keep  Antonio  comforted. 

Bassa.  The  Traject  is  from  hence  to  Belmont  short, 

And  Letters  may  come  daily :  Such  Intercourse 
Is  all  the  Cordial  absent  Friends  enjoy : 

Fail  not  in  that.  Your  trouble  shall  be  short, 

I  will  return  with  the  best  speed  I  can. 

Anto.  Be  not  too  hasty,  my  Bassanio  neither; 

Slubber  not  Business  for  my  sake,  my  Friend, 

But  stay  the  very  ripening  of  thy  Love. 

Be  gay,  assiduous,  and  employ  such  Arts, 

As  best  incline  the  Fair:  Love  is  not  seiz’d,  but  won; 

Hard  is  the  Labour;  You  must  plant  and  prune, 

And  watch  occasion  just :  This  Fruit  is  nice, 

’Twill  promise  Wonders,  and  grow  fairly  up; 

Seem  hopeful  to  the  Eye,  look  ripe,  and  then 
A  sudden  Blast  spoils  all. 

Enter  another  Servant. 

Serv.  The  Master  of  the  Ship  has  sent  agen. 

Bassa.  One  more  Embrace :  To  those  who  know  not  Friendship 
This  may  appear  unmanly  Tenderness; 

But  ’tis  the  Frailty  of  the  bravest  Minds. 

Anto.  I  ask  but  this,  Bassanio  ; 

Give  not  your  Heart  so  far  away, 

As  to  forget  your  Friend. 

Come,  is  all  ready  ?  I  must  hasten  you. 

Grat.  If  you  were  ready  to  part, 

’Tis  all  we  stay  for  now. 

Bassa.  Shylock,  thy  Hand,  be  gentle  to  my  Friend, 

Fear  not  thy  Bond,  it  shall  be  justly  paid, 


556 


APPENDIX 


We  soon  shall  meet  again, 

Always,  I  hope,  good  Friends. 

Oh  my  Antonio  !  ’tis  hard,  tho’  for  a  Moment, 

To  lose  the  Sight  of  what  we  love. 

Shyl.  aside .]  These  two  Christian  Fools  put  me  in  mind 
Of  my  Money :  Just  so  loath  am  I  to  part  with  that. 

Bassa.  Gratiano,  lead  the  way:  Shy  lock,  once  more  farewel. 
We  must  not  part,  but  at  the  Ship,  Antonio  : 

Lovers  and  Friends,  should  they  for  Ages  stay, 

Would  still  find  something  left,  that  they  would  say.  \_Exeunt. 


Act  III.  Scene  i. 

Enter  Portia,  Bassanio,  Nerissa,  Gratiano,  and  their  Train.  Nerissa  ana  Gratiano 

discourse  apart. 

Bass.  Why  if  two  Gods  should  play  some  Heavenly  match 
And  on  the  Wager  lay  two  earthly  Beauties, 

And  Portia,  one,  there  must  be  something  more 
Pawn’d  with  the  other;  for  the  poor  rude  World 
Has  not  her  Equal :  But  alas,  the  while 
Should  Hercules  and  Lychas  play  at  Dice 
Who  were  the  better  Man  ?  The  greater  throw 
Might  turn  by  Fortune  from  the  weaker  Hand ; 

So  were  a  Gyant  worsted  by  a  Dwarf 
And  so  may  I,  having  no  Guide  but  Chance, 

Miss  that,  which  one  unworthier  may  obtain. 

And  dye  with  the  Despair. 

Port.  Therefore  forbeare  to  chuse,  pause  for  a  while 
Before  you  hazard;  for  in  chusing  wrong 
You  lose  for  ever;  Therefore,  I  pray  forbear 
For  something  tells  me,*  but  it  is  not  Love, 

I  would  not  lose  you ;  I  could  teach  you 
How  to  chuse  right :  But  then  I  am  forsworn, 

So  will  I  never  be 

Yet  should  you  miss  me 

I  should  repent  that  I  was  not  forsworn ; 

For  oh,  what  heavier  Curse  for  Perjury 

Could  Heav’n  provide,  than  losing  all  my  Hope  ? 

I  speak  too  much ;  tho’  Thought  will  have  no  bound, 

A  Virgin’s  Tongue  should  shame  to  hint  a  Thought, 

At  which  a  Virgin’s  Cheek  should  blush. 

Think  it  not  Love,  yet  think  it  what  you  please, 

So  you  defer  a  Month  or  two, 

For  fain  I  would  detain  you  as  a  Friend, 

Whom  as  a  Lover  I  might  lose,  / 

Should  you  persist  to  venture  the  rash  throw. 

’Tis  better  still  to  doubt,  and  still  to  hope. 

Than  knowing  of  our  Fates,  to  know 
That  we  have  lost  for  ever. 

Bassa.  Doubt  is  the  worst  Estate :  ’Tis  better  once 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


357 


To  die,  than  still  to  live  in  Pain. 

Desire  is  fierce,  nor  brooks  the  least  delay. 

Fortune  and  Love  befriend  me :  I’m  resolv’d ; 

My  Life,  and  all  my  Earthly  Happiness 

Sits  on  the  Chance :  Where  may  I  find  the  Casket ! 

Port.  Yet,  let  me  persuade  you :  If  for  your  self 

You  cannot  fear,  tremble  for  her - 

For  her,  to  whom  you  have  so  often  sworn, 

More  than  your  self,  you  love  her.  Think !  oh  Think ! 

On  Portia's  Fate :  Who  may  not  only  lose 
The  Man,  by  whom  she  wishes  to  be  won, 

But  being  lost  to  him,  remain  expos’d 
To  some  new  Choice ;  another  must  possess 
What  Chance  denies  to  you.  O  fatal  Law ! 

Lost  to  each  other  were  a  cruel  Doom, 

But  ’tis  our  least  Misfortune ;  I  may  live 
To  be  enjoyed  by  one  I  hate.  And  you 
May  live  to  see  it. 

Bassa.  To  love,  and  to  be  lov’d,  yet  not  possess 
No  greater  Curse  could  be,  but  what  thou  fear’st, 

Yet  I  will  on :  With  double  Flames  I  burn, 

Knowing  that  Portia  loves  me ;  all  my  fear 
Was  for  her  Love :  Secure  of  that  I  go 
Secure  of  the  Reward :  Lead  me  to  the  Caskets. 

Port.  Away  then,  and  find  out  where  Portia's  lock’d. 

Thy  Courage  is  an  Omen  of  Success 

If  Love  be  just,  he’ll  teach  thee  where  to  chuse. 

Nerissa,  show  him,  since  he  is  resolv’d, 

The  rest  all  stand  aloft,  while  Musick  plays 
That  if  he  lose,  like  Swans  we  may  expire, 

In  softest  Harmony ;  but  if  he  win 
Ah  what  is  Musick  then 

[. And  so  on  to  line  63,  ‘The  issue  of  the  Exploit.  Goe  Hercules.’] 
Love  that  inflames  thy  Heart  inspire  thy  Eyes, 

To  chuse  aught  where  Portia  is  the  Prize. 

[Portia  and  the  rest  stand  at  a  distance  observing  soft 
Musick.  Till  re-enter  Bassanio  in  each  Hand  a  Casket. 

Bassa.  Who  chuses  me,  shall  get  what  he  deserves, 

The  like  Inscription  bears  this  Silver  Casket. 

Shall  get  what  he  deserves ;  who  chuse  by  outward  show, 

Entic’d  by  gilded  Baits  and  flattering  Forms, 

Who  look  not  to  th’  Interiour :  But  like  the  Martlet, 

Build  in  the  Weather  on  the  outward  Wall, 

Even  in  the  force  and  Road  of  Casualty, 

What  may  their  Merit  be  ?  agen  let  me  consider. 

[  Walks  about  thinking. 

Grat.  Take  the  Gold,  Man,  or  the  Silver :  plague  on’t 
Would  I  were  to  chuse  for  him. 

Bass.  Shall  get  what  he  deserves :  Let  none  presume 


358 


APPENDIX 


Without  the  Stamp  of  Merit  to  obtain. 

Oh  that  Estates,  Degrees  and  Offices, 

Were  not  deriv’d  Corruptly :  and  that  clear  Honour 
Were  purchas’d  by  the  Merit  of  the  Wearer, 

How  many  then  would  cover  who  stand  bare ! 

How  many  be  commanded,  who  command ! 

How  much  low  Peasantry  would  then  be  glean’d 
From  the  true  seed  of  Honour !  And  how  much  Honour 
Pickt  from  the  Chaff  and  ruine  of  the  Times, 

To  be  new  varnisht :  Let  me  not  be  rash, 

There  yet  remains  a  Third  :  well  will  I  weigh 
E’er  I  resolve.  [Exit 

Grat.  Take  the  Gold,  I  say ;  pox  on  Lead ;  what  is  it  good 
For,  but  to  make  Bullets,  ’tis  the  image  of 
Death  and  Destruction. 

Re-enter  Bassanio  with  a  Casket  of  Lead 
Bass.  The  World  is  still  deceiv’d  with  Ornament ; 

In  Law  what  Plea  so  tainted  or  corrupt, 

But  being  season’d  with  a  gracious  voice, 

And  cover’d  with  fair  specious  Subtleties 
Obscures  the  show  of  Reason.  In  Religion 
What  darn’d  Error,  but  some  sober  brow 
Will  bless  it,  and  approve  it  with  a  Text. 

There  is  no  Vice  so  artless,  but  assumes 
Some  Mark  of  Vertue  on  its  outward  Parts 
Hiding  the  Grossness  with  fair  Ornament. 

How  many  Cowards  with  Livers  white  as  Milk 
Have  Backs  of  Brawn,  and  wear  upon  their  Chins 
The  Beards  of  Hercules  and  frowning  Mars, 

Look  even  on  Beauty ;  what  are  those  crisped  Locks 
That  make  such  wanton  Gambols  with  the  Wind  ? 

What,  but  the  Dowry  of  a  Second  Head : 

The  Skull  that  bred  ’em  in  the  Sepulcher. 

Thus  Ornament  is  as  a  beauteous  Scarf 
Veiling  Deformity.  Therefore  thou  gawdy  Gold 
Hard  Food  for  Midas,  I  will  none  of  thee. 

Nor  none  of  thee,  Silver,  thou  Common  Drudge 
’Twixt  Man  and  Man.  But  thou,  thou  meager  Lead, 

Which  rather  threaten’st,  than  do’st  promise  ought, 

Thy  sullenness  moves  more  than  Eloquence. 

And  here  I  fix :  Joy  be  the  Consequence. 

Grat.  Undone,  undone :  I’ll  not  stand  to’t,  Nerissa,  lb 
Chuse  for  myself. 

Port.  [Aside.]  How  all  the  other  Passions  fleet  to  An 
As  doubtful  Thoughts,  and  rash,  embraced  Despair, 

Tormenting  Fears,  and  Green-ey’d  Jealousy. 

O  !  Love  !  be  moderate ;  allay  this  Extacy. 

In  measure  pour  thy  Joy,  stint  this  excess  : 

I  feel  too  much  thy  Blessing,  make  it  less, 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


35o 


For  fear  I  surfeit. 

Bass.  What  find  I  here  ?  [  Opening  the  casket. 

The  Portraiture  of  Portia. 

What  Demi-God  has  come  so  near  Creation,  move  these  Eyes ! 

Or  whether  riding  on  the  Balls  of  mine, 

Seem  they  in  Motion  ?  Here  are  sever’d  Lips 
Parted  with  sweetest  Breath  :  The  very  odour 

Seems  there  express’d,  and  thus  invites  the  Taste !  [Hissing  the  Picture 
And  here  agen,  here  in  her  lovely  Hair, 

The  Painter  plays  the  Spider,  and  has  woven 
A  golden  Snare,  to  catch  the  Hearts  of  Men : 

But  then  her  Eyes  ! 

How  could  he  gaze  undazled  upon  them, 

And  see  to  imitate :  Let  me  peruse  the  Motto. 

Reads. Who  chuses  me;  let  him  whose  Fate  it  is, 

Turn  to  the  Fair,  and  claim  her  with  a  Kiss. 

A  gentle  Schrole ;  fair  Lady,  by  your  Leave, 

I  come  by  note,  to  give  and  to  receive, 

Like  one  of  two  contending  for  a  Prize, 

Who  thinks  he  has  done  well,  looks  round  to  mark 
(Hearing  applause  and  universal  Shout) 

Whether  those  Peals  of  Praise  are  meant  to  him 
So  stands  Bassanio ;  full  of  Hopes  and  Fears, 

Still  anxious  what  to  trust,  and  what  believe, 

Till  you  confirm  his  hopes. 

Port.  Had  Choice  decided,  and  not  only  Chance : 

As  Fortune  has  dispos’d  me,  so  had  I. 

Myself,  and  what  is  mine,  to  you  and  yours 
Is  now  converted.  But  now  I  was  the  Lady 
Of  this  fair  Mansion,  Mistress  of  these  Servants, 

Queen  o’er  my  self,  even  now,  and  in  a  Moment 
This  House,  these  Servants,  and  my  self  their  Queen, 

Are  yours,  my  Lord.  I  plight  ’em  with  this  Ring, 

Which  when  you  part  from,  lose  or  give  away, 

Let  it  presage  the  Ruin  of  your  Love 
And  stand,  as  a  Record,  that  you  were  false, 

A  follower  of  my  Fortunes  not  of  me, 

And  never  meant  me  fair. 

Bassa.  Dye  first,  Bassanio ,  My  Mistress,  and  my  Queen, 

As  absolute  as  ever  shall  you  reign, 

Not  as  the  Lord,  but  Vassal  of  your  Charms, 

Not  as  a  Conqueror,  but  Acquisition. 

Not  one  to  lessen,  but  enlarge  your  Power ; 

No  more  but  this,  the  Creature  of  your  Pleasure, 

As  such  receive  the  passionate  Bassanio, 

Oh  there  is  that  Confusion  in  my  Powers, 

As  Words  cannot  express :  But  when  this  Ring 
Parts  from  this  Finger,  then  part  Life  from  thence ; 

Then  say,  and  be  assured,  Bassanio' s  dead. 


j6o 


APPENDIX 


[Gratiano  and  Nerissa  seem  in  earnest  disptUe. 

Grat.  I  say,  a  Bargain’s  a  Bargain,  and  I  will  have  Justice. 

Neriss.  I  say,  we  drew  Stakes. 

Grat.  That  was  only  in  Case  I  had  lost,  Child. 

Port.  A  Dispute  between  our  Friends !  What’s  the  matter,  Cozen  ? 

Grat.  I’ll  tell  you,  Madam,  the  Matter  in  short,  and  you  shall  be 
Judge; 

I  happen’d  to  say  to  this  Lady,  that  it  was  her  Destiny  to 
Have  me ;  she  consented  to  put  it  to  Tryal,  and  agreed 
To  be  determined  by  the  Choice,  my  Friend  should  make 
If  he  had  you —  I  should  have  her ;  and  here 
Stand  I  to  claim  her  Promise. 

Port.  Is  this  true,  Nerissa  ? 

Nerissa.  Ay !  but  he  recanted ;  and  said  afterwards,  he 
Would  chuse  for  himself. 

Grat.  Why  sure  so  I  can,  now  I  know  the  right  Casket. 

What  sort  of  a  Tramontane,  do  you  take  me  to 
Be  ?  You  are  gone  that  way  too,  as  I  take  it. 

Neriss.  Then  Madam,  all  my  Hope  is,  that  you  won’t  let 
Me  keep  my  Word. 

Grat.  ’Tis  false,  to  my  certain  Knowledge  she  hopes 
Otherwise — Nerissa  !  we’ll  play  with  ’em  the  first 
Boy  for  1000  Ducats. 

Neriss.  Methinks  this  looks  like  the  last  Act  of  a  Play. 

All  Parties  are  agreed ;  there  remains  nothing  but 
To  draw  the  Curtain,  and  put  out  the  Lights. 

Grat.  A  good  hint,  my  Love  :  Let  you  and  I  make  our  Exit 
About  that  same  last  Act,  as  you  call  it. 

Bassa.  I  rejoice,  Gratiano,  that  my  good  Fortune 
Thus  included  yours. 

Oh  that  Antonio  knew  of  our  Success, 

It  would  o’re-joy  him.  Prithee  Gratiano, 

Send  a  special  Messenger  to  Venice, 

To  inform  him  of  our  Fortunes — 

Shylock  shall  now  be  paid,  my  Friend  is  safe, 

And  Happiness,  on  every  side  surrounds  us. 

[Gratiano  going  out,  meets  Lorenzo,  Jessica,  and  a 
Servant  from  Antonio  entring. 

Grat.  Lorenzo,  and  his  pretty  Infidel, 

Salerio  too,  Antonio's  Servant;  If  I  mistake  him  not, 

Look  here,  Bassanio  ;  here  is  News  from  Venice. 

Bassa.  Lorenzo,  Welcome  !  Salerio  too !  what  News 
From  my  Antonio  ?  Oh,  ’tis  the  best  of  Friends ! 

Y’are  welcome  hither.  By  your  Leave,  my  Love, 

Tho’  my  interest  here  be  yet  but  young,  I 

Take  upon  myself  to  bid  my  Friends  most  welcome 

Port.  So  do  I  my  Lord. 

\_And  so  on,  with  a  few  verbal  changes,  and  omissions,  among  the  latter  Jes 
sica’s  speech  about  her  father,  and  Tubal  and  Chus,  dcnvn  to  line  328I] 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


t6i 


Port.  Will  live  as  Maids  and  Widows.  Let  none  reply 
For  I  will  have  it  thus. 

Bassa.  O  Love !  O  Friendship ! 

Was  ever  Man  thus  tortured ! 

Grat.  What,  not  one  quarter  of  an  hour  to  pack  up 
My  Baggage  ? 

Ner.  Whereabouts  is  the  last  Act  now  Gratiano  ? 

Grat.  Faith  Child,  I  have  the  Part  ready 
If  I  might  have  leave  to  play  it. 

Port.  Away  ye  Triflers. 

Nay  then  Bassanio  I  must  thrust  you  from  me : 

’Tis  hard  for  both  to  be  divided  thus 
Upon  our  Wedding-day.  But  Honour  calls, 

And  Love  must  wait.  Honour,  that  still  delights 
To  tyrannize  o’er  Love.  Farewel,  my  Lord, 

Be  chearful  in  this  Tryal :  As  you  prove, 

Your  Faith  in  Friendship,  I  shall  trust  your  Love. 

[She  conducts  him  to  the  Door.  Exit  Bass.,  Grat. 

Loren.  Madam,  if  you  knew  to  whom  you  show  this  Honor, 

How  true  a  Lover  of  your  Lord ! 

Port.  I  never  did  repent  of  doing  good ; 

Nor  shall  I  now ;  But  we  have  much  to  do 
In  other  things ;  Therefore  to  you,  Lorenzo , 

And  to  this  Lady,  whose  pardon  I  should  crave, 

For  having  stood  so  much  unnoted  by  me, 

I  will  commit  as  to  my  Lord’s  best  Friends, 

The  Husbandry,  and  Conduct  of  my  House 
Until  my  Lord’s  Return:  For  my  own  part 
I  hr.ve  to  Heav’n  breath’d  a  secret  Vow, 

To  live  in  Prayer  and  Contemplation, 

Only  attended  by  Nerissa  here, 

Until  her  Husband  and  my  Lord  come  back. 

There  is  a  Monastery  two  miles  off 
And  there  we  will  abide.  I  do  desire  you 
Not  to  deny  this  Imposition,  which 
My  Love  and  some  Necessity 
Now  lays  upon  me. 

I.oren.  Madam  with  all  our  Hearts ; 

We  will  observe  your  Pleasure. 

Port.  Come  on,  Nerissa  ;  I  have  Work  in  hand 
That  thou  yet  know’st  not  of.  Balthazar , 

Thou  art  honest;  so  let  me  find  thee  still. 

Follow  me  in ;  I  have  some  short  Directions 

For  you  all.  [ Exeunt . 

[  The  next  Scene  is  a  combination  of  the  Third  and  First  Scenes  of  Act  III.  It  is 
laid  in  *  a  Prison  in  Venice,’  and  opens  with  Shylock's  command  to  the  Jailer  :  ‘  Jailer, 
*  looke  to  him,  Tell  not  me,’  &c.,  and  so  on,  for  about  twenty  lines  of  the  original.  Shy- 
Iqck  says  he'll  not  be  made  a  ‘  soft  relenting  Fool,’  instead  of  ‘  dull-eyed,’  and  instead 
of  leaving ,  after  saying  in  line  20 ,  ‘  I  will  have  my  Bond,’  he  remains ,  and  Anthonie 


362 


APPENDIX 


asks  :  ‘  Thou  wilt  not  take  my  Flesh ;  what’s  that  good  for  ?’  Shylock  replies  in  the 
familiar  passage  in  III,  i,  ‘  To  bait  fish  withal,’  and  continues  to  the  end  of  it  wit  i 
scarcely  a  variation  ;  instead  of  saying  Anthonio  ‘mocked  at  his  gains,’  he  says,  ‘re¬ 
pin’d  at  his  gains,’  and  at  the  close  :  *  The  Charity  you  practise  I  will  Imitate :  And  1 
shall  go  hard,  but  I  will  improve  By  the  instruction.’  Whereupon  .•] 

Anto.  Thou  art  the  most  impenetrable  Curr 
That  ever  kept  with  Men. 

Shyl.  My  Daughter  too !  None  knew  so  well  as  you  of  my 
Daughters  flight.  Why  there,  there,  there  is  a 
Diamond  gone,  cost  me  2000  Ducats  in  Frankfort. 

A  Ring  too,  it  was  my  Turkis ;  I  had  it  of  Leah 
When  I  was  a  Batchelour;  besides  Gold,  and  many  other 
Precious  Jewels.  Would  my  Daughter  were  dead 
At  my  Foot,  so  the  Jewels  were  in  her  Ears. 

Would  she  were  Hears’d,  so  the  Ducats  were  in  the 
Coffin.  No  News,  and  I  know  not  how  much 
Spent  in  the  Search :  Loss  upon  Loss.  The  Theif  {sic"]  gone 
With  so  much,  and  so  much  to  find  the  Theif; 

And  no  Satisfaction,  no  Revenge :  But  thou  art 
Caught,  and  thou  shalt  pay  the  whole  Theif ’s  bill. 

Thou  who  wast  wont  to  lend  out  money  for  a  Christian 
Curtesy ;  Thou  Christian  Fool,-  pay  thy  Debts  : 

Jaylor,  I  say,  look  to  him.  [  Thrusts  him  after  the  Jailor  and  Exeunt. 

[  The  Fourth  Act  opens  with  the  Trial  Scene.  The  variation  in  the  first  146  lines 
is  wholly  in  omissions.  Anthonio' s  speech  {ll.  9-/6)  is  omitted,  as  also  is  Shylock' s 
anszver  to  the  Duke  {ll .  pi— 66) ;  also  Shylock' s  discomfiture  of  Bassanio  (ll.  68-74) 
At  line  75  Anthonio  says  .•] 

I  pray  you  think  you  question  with  a  Jew 
You  may  as  well  expostulate  with  Wolves; 

You  may  as  well  go  stand  upon  the  Beach, 

And  bid  the  Waves  be  still,  and  Winds  be  husht ; 

You  may  as  well  forbid  the  Mountain  Pines 
To  wag  their  Tops  and  dance  about  their  Leaves, 

When  the  rude  Gusts  of  Heav’n  are  whistling  round 
As  seek,  &c. 

[  When  Shylock,  at  line  108,  asks  :  ‘Shall  I  have  it?’  the  Duke  replies .] 

The  Court  will  first  advise.  Here  is  a  Letter 
From  fam’d  Bellario,  which  does  much  commend 
A  young  and  learned  Doctor  in  our  Court, 

Whose  Wisdom  shall  direct  us.  Where  is  he  ? 

Call  in  the  Council. 

[Anthonio’ s  speech,  ‘  I  am  a  tainted  wether  of  the  flock,’  & c.,  is  omitted.  At  line 
148,  Shylock  says  .•] 

Thou  but  offends  thy  Lungs  to  speak  so  loud. 

Thy  Curses  fall  on  thy  own  Head,  for  thus 
Ensnaring  thy  best  Friend,  thou  didst  it,  and  not  I. 

I  stand  for  Law.  Thy  Prodigality  brought  him 
To  this. 

Bass.  Inhumane  Dog ! 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


361 


Offic.  Room  for  the  Council  there. 

Enter  Portia  disguis'd  like  a  Lawyer ,  Nerissa 
like  her  Clerk,  with  Bagg  and  Papers. 

Duke.  Take  your  Place. 

Are  you  acquainted  with  the  Difference 
Which  holds  the  present  Question  in  the  Court  ? 

Port.  I  am  instructed  fully  in  the  Case,  &c. 

[  To  line  18J,  Portia's  speech  is  improved,  as  follows .  ] 

The  Quality  of  Mercy  is  not  strain’d ; 

It  drops  as  does  the  gentle  Dew  from  Heav’n 
Upon  the  Place  beneath :  It  is  twice  blest, 

It  blesses  him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes 
Tis  mightiest  in  the  mightiest :  It  becomes 
The  Crown’d  Monarch,  better  than  his  Crown 
It  is  the  first  of  sacred  Attributes, 

And  Earthly  Power  does  then  seem  most  Divine, 

When  Mercy  seasons  Justice.  I  have  spoke  thus  much 
To  mitigate  the  Rigour  of  thy  Plea ; 

For  if  thou  followest  this  strict  Course  of  Law 
Then  must  Antonio  stand  condemn’d. 

[  From  this  line  to  line  271  the  improvements  are  trifling.  Shylock  exclaims  :  •  A 
Daniel,  a  Daniel :  So  ripe  in  Wisdom  And  so  young  in  years !  A  second  Solomon.’ 
But  in  Antonio's  dymg  speech  the  opportunity  is  too  good  to  be  thrown  away,  and 
Shakespeare' s  ‘  rough  native  dress  ’  is  made  by  his  lordship  to  1  shine  with  nobler  lustre,’ 
as  follows  s’] 

An  Age  of  Poverty,  from  which  lingering  Penance 
She  kindly  cuts  me  off :  Once  more  farewell : 

Grieve  not  my  Friend,  that  you  thus  lose  a  Friend, 

For  I  repent  not  thus  to  pay  your  Debt 

Even  with  my  Blood  and  Life :  Now  do  your  Office, 

Cut  deep  enough  be  sure,  and  whet  thy  Knife 

With  Keenest  Malice ;  for  I  would  have  my  Heart  seen  by 

My  Friend. 

Shyl.  Doubt  it  not,  Christian ;  thus  far  I  will  be  Courteous. 

Duke.  Antonio,  is  this  all  thou  hast  to  say  ? 

Anto.  ’Tis  all. 

Bassa.  Stand  off,  I  have  a  word  in  his  behalf, 

Since  even  more  than  in  his  Avarice, 

In  Cruelty,  this  Jew’s  insatiable ; 

Here  stand  I  for  my  Friend.  Body  for  Body, 

To  endure  the  Torture.  But  one  pound  of  Flesh 
Is  due  from  him ;  Take  every  piece  of  mine, 

And  tear  it  off  with  Pincers.  Whatever  way 
Invention  can  contrive  to  torture  Man, 

Practice  on  me :  Let  but  my  Friend  go  safe, 

Thy  Cruelty  is  limited  on  him  ; 

Unbounded  let  it  loose  on  me :  Say,  Jew, 

>  Here’s  Interest  upon  Interest  in  Flesh ; 

Will  that  content  you  ? 


APPENDIX 


Anto.  It  may  him,  not  me. 

Bassa.  Cruel  Antonio. 

Anto.  Unjust  Bassanio.  \_Jnv  laughs. 

Bassa.  Why  grins  the  Dog  ? 

Shyl.  To  hear  a  Fool  propose :  Thou  shallow  Christian  ! 

To  think  that  I’d  consent :  I  know  thee  well, 

When  he  has  paid  the  Forfeit  of  his  Bond, 

Thou  canst  not  chuse  but  hang  thy  self  for  being 
The  Cause :  and  so  my  Ends  are  serv’d  on  both. 

Proceed  to  Execution. 

Bassa.  Then  thus  I  interpose. 

[Draws  and  stands  before  Antonio :  The  Jew  starts  back. 
Antonio  interposes .] 

Anto.  Forbear  Bassanio ,  this  is  certain  Death 
To  both. 

Bassa.  In  one,  both  die :  Since  it  must  be, 

No  matter  how. 

Duke.  Before  our  Face  this  Insolence !  And  in  a  Court 
Of  Justice.  Disarm  and  seize  him. 

Port.  Spare  him,  my  Lord ;  I  have  a  way  to  tame  him. 

Hear  me  one  word. 

Shyl.  Hear,  hear  the  Doctor :  Now  for  a  Sentence 
To  sweep  these  Christian  Vermin,  coupled 
To  the  Shambles.  O  ’tis  a  Solomon ! 

Port.  Hark  you,  Shylock,  I  have  view’d  this  Bond, 

And  find  it  gives  thee  not  one  drop  of  Blood ; 

The  Words  expressly  are — A  Pound  of  Flesh, 

No  more.  Take  thou  that  Flesh, 

But  in  the  cutting  it,  if  thou  dost  shed 

One  drop  of  Christian  Blood,  thy  Lands  and  Goods 

Are,  by  the  Laws  of  Venice,  mark  you  me, 

Confiscate  to  the  State.  [Shylock  starts  surprized. 

Shyl.  Humph. 

Bassa.  O,  upright  Judge  !  Mark,  Jew.  O  learned  Judge  ! 

Forgive,  most  potent  Duke,  and  Reverend  Seigniors, 

That  thus  enforc’d  by  my  Despair - 

Duke.  We  do  forgive  thee,  and  admire  thy  Virtue 
More  than  we  blame  thy  Passion.  But  proceed. 

Port.  Shylock,  thy  self  shall  see  the  Act, 

And  Letter  of  the  Law :  For  as  thou  urgest  Justice. 

[From  this  line  330,  for  the  rest  of  the  Act,  the  original  is  followed,  tvith  here  and 
there  the  change  of  a  word,  or  an  omission  of  a  line  or  two  ;  of  improvements,  the  fol 
losving  are  the  most  noticeable  .•] 

Duke.  Get  thee  gone;  but  do  it.  [Exit  Shylock. 

Port.  Clerk,  draw  a  deed  of  gift.  [  The  Duke  and  Court  rise. 

Dtike.  Antonio,  I  rejoice  at  this  Conclusion  ; 

And  I  congratulate  with  you  Bassanio, 

Your  Friends  escape:  You  will  dc  well 
To  gratify  that  learned  Councellor 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


365 


For  in  my  Mind  you  both  are  in  his  Debt. 

[Exit  Duke  with  his  Train,  the  Court  breaking  up. 

Bassa.  Let  me  embrace  the  Man,  by  whom  my  Friend 
Has  Life :  For  in  that  Life  I  live — 

3000  Ducats  due  on  Shylock's  Bond 
I  freely  offer  to  requite  your  Pain. 

[Portia  refuses  them  and  asks  for  the  ring,  which  Bassanio  withholds,  but  makes  no 
allusion  to  its  being  the  gift  of  his  wife,  presumably  because  reference  to  the  marriage 
ceremony  was  omitted  after  the  Casket  Scene.  After  Portia  and  Nerissa  have  left, 
Antonio  says:"] 

My  Lord  Bassanio,  let  him  have  the  Ring ; 

Let  his  Deservings,  and  my  Love  withal, 

Be  valu’d  against  every  other  Scruple. 

Bassa.  Prithee  Gratiano,  run  and  overtake  him  : 

Give  him  the  Ring ;  and  bring  him,  if  thou  can’st, 

To  my  Antonio' s  House - away,  make  haste.  [ Exit  Gratiano. 

Once  more,  let  me  embrace  my  Friend,  welcome  to  Life, 

And  welcome  to  my  Arms,  thou  best  of  Men : 

Thus  of  my  Love  and  of  my  Friend  possess’d 
With  such  a  double  Shield  upon  my  Breast,  v 

Fate  cannot  pierce  me  now,  securely  blest.  j 

[As  they  go  off,  Portia  and  Nerissa  re-enter ;  Gratiano  follows,  and  presents  the 
Ring ;  he  then  undertakes  to  show  Shylock's  house  to  Nerissa,  and  the  Act  closes  as 
follows  /] 

Grat.  Come  on,  Sir ;  The  first  Cause  I  have  to  split, 

You  shall  have  all  my  Practice. 

Neriss.  That  may  be  sooner  than  you  dream  of, 

Sir,  I  follow  you. 

So  many  Shapes  have  Women  for  Deceipt, 

That  every  Man’s  a  Fool,  when  we  think  fit. 

[Exeunt. 

[Act  V  opens  with  Lorenzo  and  Jessica.^ 

Loren.  The  moon  shines  bright.  In  such  a  Night  as  this 
Did  pensive  Troilus  mount  the  Trojan  Wall, 

Sighing  his  Soul  towards  the  Grecian  Tents, 

Where  beauteous  Cressid  lay - 

[  The  allusion  to  Thisbe  is  omitted,  and  Jessica  refers  to  Dido.  Lorenzo  replies  with 
Medea,  and,  the  reference  to  Jessica's  stealing  from  Venice  being  omitted,  Jessica  refers 
to  Lorenzo.  At  line  4.0  Jessica  says  she  hears  a  footing,  and  Portia  enters  with 
Nerissa .] 

Port.  That  light  we  see  is  burning  in  my  Hall. 

Loren.  ’Tis  sure  the  voice  of  Portia. 

Port.  He  knows  me  as  the  Blind  Man  does  the  Cuckow, 

By  the  bad  Voice.  Lorenzo,  .s  it  you  ? 

Loren.  Madam,  you  are  most  welcome. 

Port.  We  have  been  praying  for  my  Lords  Success, 

Who  fares  we  hope  the  better  for  our  Pray’rs : 

Is  he  return’d  ? 

Loren.  Madam,  not  yet.  But  here  are  Letters  from  him, 


366 


APPENDIX 


Will  give  a  good  Account  of  his  Proceeding, 

And  that  he  will  be  here  to  night ; 

We  were  walk’t  out  to  wait  his  Coming. 

Port.  Give  Order  to  my  Servants,  that  Urey  take 
No  Note  at  all  of  our  being  absent  hence ; 

And  let  our  Musick  play,  and  every  thing 
So  direct  as  we  were  here  in  formal  Expectation 
Of  his  return - 

This  Night  methinks  is  but  the  Day-light  sick ; 

It  looks  a  little  paler.  ’Tis  a  Day, 

Such  as  the  Day  is  when  the  Sun  is  hid. 

Enter  Bassanio,  Antonio,  Gratiano,  and  Followers. 

Bass.  We  should  hold  day  with  the  Antipodes, 

If  you  would  walk  in  Absence  of  the  Sun  ? 

My  Portia ,  this  was  kind  to  meet  me  thus. 

Port.  O  never  more  let  any  Cause  of  Grief 
Divide  my  Lord  and  me. 

[Gratiano  runs  to  Nerissa,  who  discourse  apart. 

Bass.  Nothing  can :  Here,  Madam,  is  my  Friend, 

Let  me  present  him  to  you :  This  is  Antonio 
Whom,  if  you  love  Bassanio,  you  must  love. 

Port.  I  should  behold  him  with  a  jealous  Eye, 

Who  has  so  large  a  Share  in  my  Lord’s  Heart. 

To  Ant .]  Having  his  Leave,  you’ll  not  deny  me  yours, 

To  make  a  third  in  Friendship :  I  doubly  joy 
That  you  are  safe  and  here. 

Anto.  I  thank  you,  Madam. 

Port.  Play  all  our  Instruments  of  Musick  there, 

Let  nothing  now  be  heard  but  sounds  of  Joy, 

And  let  those  glorious  Orbs  that  we  behold, 

Who  in  their  Motions,  all  like  Angels  sing, 

Still  Quiring  to  the  blew-ey’d  Cherubinis, 

Join  the  Chorus;  that  in  Heav’n  and  Earth 

One  universal  Tune  may  celebrate 

This  Harmony  of  Hearts.  Soft  Stilness,  and  the  Night 

Become  the  Touches  of  Sweet  Harmony.  [Music. 

Grat.  By  yonder  Moon  and  Stars,  I  swear  you  wrong  me, 

By  Heav’n,  I  gave  it  to  the  Lawyer’s  Clerk. 

Port.  A  quarrel !  what,  already  ? 

[As  in  the  original,  substantially,  the  variations  chiefly  omissions,  down  to  line  266.] 
Port.  Let  not  that  Man,  whoe’er  he  is,  come  near  me : 

Since  he  has  got  the  Jewel  that  I  priz’d, 

I  shall  become  as  liberal  as  you, 

And  nothing  can  deny  the  Man  that  has  it. 

A  Ring  it  was  of  wondrous  Mystery, 

And  Sanctify’d  by  Charms  to  rivet  Love : 

Whoever  has  it,  has  the  sure  Command 
Of  me,  my  Person,  and  of  all  that’s  mine : 

The  dire  Enchantment  was  so  strongly  wrought ; 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


367 


One  Mind  directs  us,  and  one  Bed  must  hold  us : 

Know  him  I  shall,  I  must;  nay,  I  will  know  him 
I  feel  the  Effects  already,  Watch  me  like  Argos , 

If  you  do  not,  if  I  be  left  alone, 

Now  by  my  Honour,  which  is  yet  entire, 

That  Man  and  I  are  one. 

Neriss.  Just  such  a  Ring  was  mine : 

Methinks  I  love  that  Lawyer’s  Clerk  already, 

Just  as  I  love  myself. 

Bass  a.  Forgive  me  this  first  Fault; 

I’ll  trust  thy  Honour  above  any  Charms : 

My  Love  is  built  upon  Esteem  so  strong, 

As  cannot  doubt  your  Virtue. 

Grat.  I  am  not  quite  so  liberal  of  good  Thoughts ; 

But  this  I’ll  say,  if  I  can  catch  this  Clerk, 

His  Pen  shall  split  for’t. 

Anto.  I  am  the  unhappy  Subject  of  this  Quarrel 

By  my  Perswasion - 

Port.  Sir,  grieve  not  you ; 

You’re  welcome  notwithstanding. 

[  Walks  about  as  in  a  Passion, 

Bassa.  But  hear  me,  Portia  ; 

Pardon  this  Error;  by  my  Soul,  I  swear, 

By  what  is  dearer  to  me  than  my  Soul, 

Your  precious  self - 

Anto.  I  dare  be  bound  for  him.; 

My  Life  upon  the  Forfeit,  that  your  Lord 
Shall  never  more  break  Faith. 

Port.  You  have  been  oft  his  Surety,  and 
Have  paid  for’t  dearly. 

Anto.  No  more  than  I  am  well  acquitted  of. 

Port.  Then  be  his  Surety  still :  Here  is  a  Ring, 

Of  the  same  Virtue,  and  so  qualify’d 
With  equal  Spells.  This  only  can  retrieve 
With  Counter-Magick  what  the  other  lost. 

Antonio ,  give  him  this :  But  make  him  swear 
To  keep  it  better. 

Anto.  Here,  Lord  Bassanio  :  Swear  to  keep  this  Ring. 
Bassa.  By  Heav’n !  [ Starts. 

This  is  the  same  I  gave  the  Lawyer. 

Port.  Why  so  it  is ;  I  had  it  from  him :  You  see 
How  quick  an  Operation  is  in  Magick, 

We  have  met  already. 

Bassa.  Met !  how  have  you  met ! 

Neriss.  Met —  why  by  Art  Magick,  to  lie  together ; 

Ask  that  same  scrubbed  Boy,  the  Lawyer’s  Clerk. 

Grat.  Why  this  is  worse  and  worse. 

Bassa.  Antonio  !  this  was  your  doing. 

Anto.  Take  your  Revenge,  and  kill  me. 


[Angrily. 


368 


APPENDIX 


Bassa.  I  am  answer’d - Is  it  then  true  ? 


And  can  it  be  ?  That  by  the  secret  Workings 
Of  Mystick  Words,  and  Spells,  and  dire  Compounds, 

Potions  and  Invocations  horrible, 

Nature  can  be  so  led  ?  What  then  is  Virtue  ? 

And  what  Security  has  Love  or  Reason, 

Thus  subjected  to  every  Hell-born  Hagg 
Who,  by  such  Conjurations  can  dis-join 
United  Hearts  ?  Uniting  the  Averse ! 

How,  wretched  Man !  how  can’st  thou  boast  free  Will  ? 

If  this  in  very  deed  be  true.  I’ll  not  suppos’t - 

But  then  that  Ring!  How  could  she  have  it:  ’Tis  Witchciaft! 
Damn’d,  damn’d  Witchcraft;  And  I  will  fathom  Hell, 

But  I  will  find  a  Fiend  shall  Counter-work 

The  Devil  that  has  done  this.  [Portia  and  Nerissa  laugh. 


Port. 

Neriss. 


Grat.  Is  this  true,  Nerissa !  are  we  then  two  Scurvy 
Cuckcolds  by  Art  Magick ! 

Port.  Ha,  ha,  ha;  Well;  since  you  grow  so  serious, 

I  will  be  serious  too :  Read  this  Bassanio, 

The  Adventures  writ  at  large :  Look  not  so  sullen ;  Lord, 

But  read  it.  Lorenzo  here  and  Jessica 

Can  witness  for  me  :  I  set  out  almost 

As  soon  as  you.  And  am  but  even  now  return’d, 

I  have  not  yet  enter’d  my  House :  But 
For  farther  Proof,  Clerk,  give  Lorenzo 
The  Writings  sign’d  by  Shylock. 

Neriss.  I’ll  give ’em  without  Fee ;  Here  Lorenzo, 

Here  is  a  Deed  of  Gift  to  you  and  Jessica, 

Of  all  the  Jew,  your  Father,  dies  possess’d  of. 

Loren.  See  Jessica,  is  this  his  hand  ? 

Jess.  ’Tis  his  own  signing. 

Loren.  What  Prodigy  is  this  ? 

Bassa.  I  am  struck  dumb  with  wonder. 

Grat.  Was  Portia  then  the  little  Smerking  Lawyer, 

And  Nerissa  the  Clerk  ?  I’ll  never  forgive  such  a 
Trick.  Art-Magick  do  you  call  it? 

Neriss.  Nay,  but  Gratiano. 

Grat.  Away,  away.  [. Dispute  aside. 

Port.  Antonio !  Here  are  Letters  too  for  you ; 

Ask  me  not  yet,  by  what  strange  Accident 
They  fell  into  my  Hands —  but  read  ’em. 

Bass.  Amazement  has  bereft  me  of  all  Words. 

Ant.  Why  here  I  read,  for  certain,  that  my  scatter’d  Ships, 

Are  safely  all  arriv’d  at  Rhodes , 

With  their  whole  Cargo. 

Port.  Doubt  it  not,  Antonio.  ’Tis  most  true, 

Virtue  like  yours ;  such  Patience  in  Adversity, 


LANSDOWNE'S  VERSION 


3&9 


And  in  Prosperity  such  Goodness, 

Is  still  the  Care  of  Providence. 

Ant.  My  Life  and  Fortunes  have  been  all  your  Gift ; 

Dispose  ’em,  and  command  ’em,  Madam, 

As  you  please.  [Gratiano  and  Nerissa  advance. 

Neriss.  What  can  you  bear  no  Jests,  but  of  your  own 
Making  ? 

Grat.  You  have  so  scar’d  me  with  your  Art  Magick, 

That  I  shall  scarce  be  a  true  Man  these  two  Days ; 

But  therein  lies  my  Revenge :  And  so  shake 
Hands  from  this  Day  forwards. 

As  the  most  precious  of  all  Gems,  I  swear ! 

Nerissa' s  Ring  shall  be  Gratiano' s  Care. 

Port.  All  look  amaz’d,  in  every  Face  I  see 
A  thousand  Questions :  ’Tis  time  we  should  go  in, 

There  will  I  answer  all :  Cease  your  Astonishment, 

My  Lord ;  by  these  small  Services  to  you 
And  to  your  Friends,  I  hope  I  may  secure 
Your  Love;  which,  built  upon  meer  Fancy, 

Had  else  been  subjected  to  Alteration. 

With  Age  and  Use  the  Rose  grown  Sick  and  Faint, 

Thus  mixt  with  friendly  Sweets,  secures  its  Scent. 

Bassa.  The  Sweets  of  Love  shall  here  forever  blow ; 

I  needs  must  Love,  rememb’ring  what  I  owe. 

Love,  like  a  Meteor,  shows  a  short-liv’d  Blaze, 

Or  treads  thro’  various  Skies  a  wandring  Maze, 

Begot  by  Fancy ;  and  by  Fancy  led ; 

Here  in  a  Moment,  in  a  Moment  fled ; 

But  fixt  by  Obligations,  it  will  last ; 

For  Gratitude’s  the  Charm  that  binds  it  fast.  [Exeunt  omnes 

24 


370 


APPENDIX 


ACTORS 

When  Collier  published  his  History  of  English  Dramatic  Poetry  in  1831,  he  men¬ 
tioned  (vol.  i,  p.  430)  a  MS  Elegy  on  the  Death  of  Richard  Burbadge,  consisting  of 
eighty-six  lines,  wherein  allusion  was  made  to  the  performance  by  Burbadge  of  certain 
characters  in  the  plays  of  Shakespeare  and  of  others.  The  Shakespearian  characters 
thus  specified  were  Hamlet,  Lear,  and  Othello.  This  MS  then  belonged  to  Haslewood, 
and  is  now  in  the  Huth  Library. 

When,  five  years  later,  Collier  printed  his  New  Particulars  regarding  the  JVorks  of 
Shakespeare ,  he  mentioned  (p.  27)  a  second  MS,  belonging  to  Heber,  and  then  went 
on  to  say :  ‘  I  have  since  met  with  a  third  copy  of  the  same  Elegy,  in  which  the  list 
‘  of  characters  is  enlarged  ....  to  no  fewer  than  twenty,  of  which  twelve  are  in  plays 
‘  of  Shakespeare.’ 

This  third  copy  Collier  afterwards  printed  in  full,  in  his  Memoirs  of  Actors  (Shake¬ 
speare  Society,  1846,  p.  52),  and  also  in  the  Second  Edition  of  his  History  of  English 
Dramatic  Poetry  (1879,  v°b  hi,  p.  299).  The  lines  are  increased  from  eighty-six  to 
one  hundred  and  twenty-four,  and  the  number  of  Shakespearian  characters  from  three 
to  twelve.  To  account  for  this  enlargement,  Collier  suggests  that  perhaps  ‘  the  author 
‘  had  not  intended  in  the  first  instance  to  give  Burbadge’s  characters,  because  they 
‘  were  matters  of  notoriety  at  the  time,  although  he  afterwards  thought  fit  to  introduce 
‘  them,  in  order  to  render  his  tribute  more  complete.’ 

These  lines  Ingleby  has  not  admitted  to  his  Centurie  of  Prayse,  and  Miss  Toulmin 
Smith  (p.  132,  2d  ed.)  says  that  the  original  of  them  has  ‘  not  yet  come  to  light.’  The 
inference,  therefore,  is  that  doubts  attach  to  their  genuineness.  It  is  proper  that  this 
fact  should  be  stated ;  the  Elegy,  as  given  by  Collier,  is  our  sole  authority  for  the  tra¬ 
dition  that  Burbadge  was  not  only  the  original  actor  of  Shylock,  but  that  he  wore  a 
red-haired  wig. 

It  is  thus  entitled :  *  A  Funeral  Elegy,  on  the  death  of  the  Famous  Actor, 
Richard  Burbadge,  who  died  on  Saturday  in  Lent ,  the  13th  of  March,  1618  and 
the  lines  which  relate  to  Shylock,  all  that  concern  us  here,  are  as  follows : 

*  Heart-broke  Philaster,  and  Amintas  too, 

‘  Are  lost  forever;  with  the  red-hair’d  Jew, 

*  Which  sought  the  bankrupt  merchant’s  pound  of  flesh, 

‘  By  woman-lawyer  caught  in  his  own  mesh, 

*  What  a  wide  world  was  in  that  little  space, 

‘  Thyself  a  world — the  Globe  thy  fittest  place !’  &c. 

The  next  actor  whose  name  is  associated  with  Shylock  is  Thomas  Dogget.  He 
appears  in  the  Dramatis  Personae  prefixed  to  Lansdowne’s  Version.  Of  his  interpre¬ 
tation  of  the  part  I  can  find  no  details  whatever;  we  can  infer  that  it  was  comic 
from  the  fact  that  Dogget  was  a  comic  actor,  and  it  is  difficult  to  imagine,  considering 
the  text  that  was  used,  how  it  could  have  received  any  other  interpretation.  We  fre¬ 
quently  hear  it  asserted  that  ‘  Shylock  ’  was  at  one  time  acted  as  a  comic  part,  an  asser¬ 
tion  which  should  not  be  made  without  qualification ;  it  was  not  Shylock,  but  a  thing 
called  ‘  Shylock  ’  in  Lansdowne’s  Version.  There  is  no  ground  for  the  belief  that  Shy¬ 
lock  was  ever  presented  on  the  stage  in  a  comic  light.  To  assert  it  is  to  imply  that 
Lansdowne’s  *  Shylock  ’  and  Shakespeare’s  Shylock  are  identical. 

Downes,  the  Prompter  at  the  Theatre  in  Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields  for  over  forty  years, 
gives  us,  in  his  Roscius  Anglicanus  (p.  52,  ed.  Knight),  the  earliest  description  of  Dog- 


A  CTORS—DOGGE  T.  MA  CKLIN 


371 


get.  Downes  was  fond  of  high-sounding  words  :  to  say  that  an  actress  left  off  acting 
when  she  was  married  is  far  too  homespun  for  Downes ;  from  him  we  learn  that  ‘  by 
force  of  Love  she  was  erept  the  stage in  an  Opera  called  The  British  Enchanters 
(Lord  Lansdowne’s,  by  the  way),  ‘making  Love,’  says  Downes,  ‘the  Acme  of  all  Ter¬ 
restrial  Bliss,  infinitely  arrided  both  sexes  and  pleas’d  the  Town ;’  wherefore  we  may 
be  puzzled,  but  not  startled,  by  learning  that  ‘  Mr  Dogget,  On  the  Stage,  he’s  very  Aspect- 
‘  abund,  wearing  a  Farce  in  his  Face;  his  Thoughts  deliberately  framing  his  Utterance 
‘  Congruous  to  his  Looks  :  He  is  the  only  Comick  Original  now  Extant :  Witness,  Ben, 
‘  Solon,  Nikin,  The  Jew  of  Venice,  &c.’ 

Colley  Cibber  was  the  personal  friend,  and  at  one  time  partner,  of  Dogget,  and  gives 
{Apology,  &c.,  p.  287)  an  account  of  his  acting,  to  which  high  praise  is  accorded.  ‘  In 
‘  dressing  a  character  to  the  greatest  exactness,  he  was  remarkably  skilful ;  the  least 
‘  article  of  whatever  habit  he  wore  seem’d  in  some  degree  to  speak  and  mark  the  dif- 

‘  ferent  humour  he  presented . His  greatest  success  was  in  characters  of  lower 

‘  life . In  songs,  and  particular  dances  too,  of  humour,  he  had  no  competitor.’ 

Lansdowne’s  Version  continued  on  the  stage  forty  years,  but  to  the  credit  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  taste,  be  it  noted,  it  does  not  appear  to  have  been  popular. 

At  the  end  of  that  time  there  happened  to  be  in  London  an  actor  of  some  eminence 
who  had  discernment  enough  to  perceive  the  dramatic  capabilities  of  Shylock,  and  who 
determined  to  try  the  verdict  of  the  public.  He  was  an  Irishman  named  McLaughlin, 
but  this  name  had  been  dropped,  with  his  brogue,  on  coming  to  London,  and  converted 
into  the  less  guttural  Macklin.  Macklin  was  attached  to  the  Drury  Lane  Company, 
and  in  1741  persuaded  Fleetwood,  the  manager,  to  revive  Shakespeare’s  Merchant  oj 
Venice. 

Of  this  important  event  in  the  stage  history  of  the  Play  we  have  accounts  by  Kirk- 
man  and  by  Cooke,  both  substantially  the  same.  The  former  better  describes  the 
opposition  encountered  by  Macklin  before  the  performance ;  the  latter  the  performance 
itself. 

Kirkman  {Memoirs  of  Charles  Macklin,  1799,  vol.  i,  p.  256) :  During  the  rehearsal 
of  the  play  Mr  Macklin  did  not  let  any  person,  not  even  the  players,  see  how  he  intend¬ 
ed  to  act  the  part.  He  merely  repeated  the  lines  of  the  character,  and  did  not,  by  so 
much  as  one  single  look,  tone,  gesture,  or  attitude,  disclose  his  manner  of  personating 
this  cruel  Israelite.  The  actors  declared  that  Macklin  would  spoil  the  performance ; 
and  Mr  Quin  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  would  be  hissed  off  the  stage  for  his  arro¬ 
gance  and  presumption.  Nay,  even  the  manager  himself  expostulated  with  him  con¬ 
cerning  the  propriety  of  his  persevering  in  his  intention  of  having  The  Merchant  of 
Venice  represented  in  opposition  to  the  judgement  of  so  eminent  a  personage  as  Lord 
Lansdowne ;  to  the  opinion  of  Mr  Quin  and  the  rest  of  the  actors ;  and,  indeed,  to  the 
voice  of  the  public,  who  had  so  often  testified  their  approbation  of  the  noble  Lord’s 
play.  Thus  did  Mr  Fleetwood  argue  with  Macklin,  and  strenuously  urge  him  to  aban¬ 
don  his  resolution.  His  character  as  an  actor  might  (he  said)  be  materially  injured  by 
a  perseverance  in  his  determination,  and  ultimately  by  a  failure  in  the  performance  of 
the  part ;  but  Mr  Macklin,  supported  throughout  by  his  sound  sense  and  acute  discrim¬ 
ination,  continued  firm  to  his  purpose,  and  had  The  Merchant  of  Venice  announced  for 
representation  on  the  14th  of  February. 

On  the  first  night  of  the  representation,  no  sooner  were  the  doors  of  the  theatre 
opened  than  the  house  was  crowded  in  every  part.  Some  came  from  motives  of  pleas¬ 
ure,  some  to  express  their  disapprobation ;  some  to  support  the  actor,  and  a  great  num¬ 
ber  appeared  merely  to  gratify  their  curiosity. 


372 


APPENDIX 


Before  the  curtain  rose  the  manager  appeared  in  the  green-room  in  great  distress. 
The  actors  were  anticipating  the  reception  that  awaited  them,  and  indulging  themselves 
in  malicious  remarks  upon  the  headstrong  conduct  of  Macklin.  It  is  impossible  for  us 
to  describe  the  feelings  of  poor  Shylock  at  this  precise  juncture. 

[The  rest  is  better  told  by  Cooke,  who  professes  to  give  it  in  Macklin’s  own 
words : — ] 

Cooke  ( Life  of  Macklin,  1806,  p.  92,  2d  ed.) :  The  long-expected  night  at  last 
arrived,  and  the  house  was  crowded  from  top  to  bottom  with  the  first  company  in  town. 
The  two  front  rows  of  the  pit,  as  usual,  full  of  critics,  ‘who,  sir’  (said  the  veteran), 
‘  I  eyed  through  the  slit  in  the  curtain,  and  was  glad  to  see  there,  as  I  wished,  in  such 
a  cause,  to  be  tried  by  a  special  jury.  When  I  made  my  appearance  in  the  green¬ 
room,  dressed  for  the  part,  with  my  red  hat  on  my  head,  my  piqued  beard,  loose  black 
gown,  &c.,  and  with  a  confidence  I  never  before  assumed,  the  performers  all  stared  at 
one  another,  and  evidently  with  a  stare  of  disappointment.  Well,  sir,  hitherto  all  was 
right, — till  the  last  bell  rung;  then,  I  confess,  my  heart  began  to  beat  a  little;  how¬ 
ever,  I  mustered  up  all  the  courage  I  could,  and,  recommending  my  cause  to  Provi¬ 
dence,  threw  myself  boldly  on  the  stage,  and  was  received  by  one  of  the  loudest  thun¬ 
ders  of  applause  I  ever  before  experienced. 

‘  The  opening  Scenes  being  rather  tame  and  level,  I  could  not  expect  much  applause ; 
but  I  found  myself  well  listened  to,— I  could  hear  distinctly  in  the  pit  the  words,  “  Very 
well, — very  well,  indeed  ! — This  man  seems  to  know  what  he  is  about,”  & c.  See.  These 
encomiums  warmed  me,  but  did  not  overset  me, — I  knew  where  I  should  have  the  pull, 
which  was  in  the  Third  Act,  and  reserved  myself  accordingly.  At  this  period  I  threw 
out  all  my  fire ;  and,  as  the  contrasted  passions  of  joy  for  the  Merchant’s  losses,  and 
grief  for  the  elopement  of  Jessica,  open  a  fine  field  for  an  actor’s  powers,  I  had  the 
good  fortune  to  please  beyond  my  warmest  expectations.  The  whole  house  was  in  an 
uproar  of  applause,  and  I  was  obliged  to  pause  between  the  speeches,  to  give  it  vent,  so 
as  to  be  heard.  When  I  went  behind  the  scenes  after  this  Act,  the  manager  met  me 
and  complimented  me  very  highly  on  my  performance,  and  significantly  added  :  “  Mack¬ 
lin,  you  was  right  at  last.”  My  brethren  in  the  green-room  joined  in  his  eulogium,  but 
with  different  views.  He  was  thinking  of  the  increase  of  his  treasury ;  they  only  for 
saving  appearances,  wishing  at  the  same  time  I  had  broke  my  neck  in  the  attempt. 
The  Trial  Scene  wound  up  the  fulness  of  my  reputation :  here  I  was  well  listened  to ; 
and  here  I  made  such  a  silent,  yet  forcible,  impression  on  my  audience,  that  I  retired 
from  this  great  attempt  most  perfectly  satisfied. 

‘  On  my  return  to  the  green-room,  after  the  play  was  over,  it  was  crowded  with  nobil 
ity  and  critics, who  all  complimented  me  in  the  warmest  and  most  unbounded  manner; 
and  the  situation  I  felt  myself  in,  I  must  confess,  was  one  of  the  most  flattering  and 
intoxicating  of  my  whole  life.  No  money,  no  title  could  purchase  what  I  felt;  and 
let  no  man  tell  me  after  this  what  Fame  will  not  inspire  a  man  to  do,  and  how  far  the 
attainment  of  it  will  not  remunerate  his  greatest  labours.  By  G — ,  sir,  though  I  was 
not  worth  fifty  pounds  in  the  world  at  that  time,  yet,  let  me  tell  you,  I  was  Charles  the 
Great  for  that  night.’ 

A  few  days  afterwards  Macklin  received  an  invitation  from  Lord  Bolingbroke  to  dine 
with  him  at  Battersea.  He  attended  the  rendezvous,  and  there  found  Pope  and  a  select 
party,  who  complimented  him  very  highly  on  the  part  of  Shylock,  and  questioned  him 
about  many  little  particulars  relative  to  his  getting  up  the  play,  & c.  Pope  particularly 
asked  him  why  he  wore  a  red  hat  ?  and  he  answered,  because  he  had  read  that  Jews 
in  Italy,  particularly  in  Venice,  wore  hats  of  that  colour.  ‘  And  pray,  Mr  Macklin,’ 


A  CTORS — MA  CKLIN 


373 


said  Pope,  *  do  players  in  general  take  such  pains  ?’  *  I  do  not  know,  sir,  that  they  do ; 

but  as  I  had  staked  my  reputation  on  the  character,  I  was  determined  to  spare  no  trou¬ 
ble  in  getting  at  the  best  infojmation.’  Pope  nodded,  and  said,  ‘It  was  very  laudable.’ 

Macklin  took  this  play  for  his  benefit  on  the  nineteenth  night,  and  had  an  overflow 
ing  audience ;  several  noblemen  of  the  first  distinction  took  what  is  commonly  called 
gold  tickets ;  and  Lord  Bolingbroke  made  him  a  present  of  twenty  guineas.  The  play 
had  a  successful  run  through  the  whole  of  the  season,  and  for  many  seasons  afterwards ; 
it  established  his  reputation  as  an  actor,  and  not  a  little  added  to  his  discernment  as  a 
critic  in  reviving  a  piece  which,  perhaps,  except  for  his  research,  might  have  been  lost 
to  the  stage  for  ever. 

Kirkman  (vol.  ii,  p.  427) :  Several  years  before  his  death,  Mr  Macklin  happened 
to  be  in  a  large  company  of  ladies  and  gentlemen,  among  whom  was  the  celebrated 
Mr  Pope.  The  conversation  having  turned  upon  Mr  Macklin’s  age,  one  of  the  ladies 
addressed  herself  to  Mr  Pope,  in  words  to  the  following  effect :  ‘  Mr  Pope,  when  Mack¬ 
lin  dies,  you  must  write  his  epitaph.’  ‘  That  I  will,  madam,’  said  Pope ;  ‘  nay,  I  will 
give  it  now 

‘  Here  lies  the  Jew 
That  Shakespeare  drew.’ 

The  whole  company  highly  approved  of  this  epitaph,  and  Mr  Macklin  has  often 
related  this  anecdote  in  our  hearing  with  great  glee ;  and  a  more  just,  comprehensive, 
and  concise  inscription  never  was  written. 

Gentleman  (. Dramatic  Censor,  1770,  i,  291) :  There  is  no  doubt  but  Mr  Macklin 
looks  the  part  of  Shylock  as  much  better  than  any  other  person  as  he  plays  it ;  in  the 
level  scenes  his  voice  is  most  happily  suited  to  that  sententious  gloominess  of  expres¬ 
sion  the  author  intended;  which,  with  a  sullen  solemnity  of  deportment,  marks  the 
character  strongly;  in  his  malevolence  there  is  a  forcible  and  terrifying  ferocity;  in 
the  Third  Act  scene,  where  alternate  passions  reign,  he  breaks  the  tones  of  utterance 
and  varies  his  countenance  admirably;  in  the  dumb  action  of  the  Trial  Scene,  he  is 
amazingly  descriptive. 

[Macklin  is  supposed  to  have  been  born  in  May,  1690.  If  this  were  so,  he  was  nigh 
his  hundredth  year  when,  in  May,  1789,  he  undertook  to  play  Shylock  once  more. 
Although  his  exact  age  cannot  be  determined,  it  is  undeniable  that  at  this  time  he  was 
extremely  old,  and  that  the  thread  of  life  was  stretched  beyond  the  limit  when  it  is 
pleasant  either  to  hold  it,  or  to  behold  it.  Of  this  attempt  Cooke  gives  the  following 
account :] 

His  last  appearance  on  the  Stage  was  on  the  7th  of  May,  1789,  in  Shylock  for  his 
own  benefit.  The  Manager,  Fleetwood,  had  Mr  Ryder  under-study  the  part,  ready 
dressed  to  supply  Macklin’s  deficiencies  if  necessary. 

When  Macklin  had  dressed  himself  for  the  part,  which  he  did  with  his  usual 
accuracy,  he  went  into  the  Green-Room,  but  with  such  ‘lack-lustre’  eyes,  as  plainly 
indicated  his  inability  to  perform,  and  coming  up  to  Mrs  Pope  said,  ‘  My  dear,  are  you 
to  play  to-night  ?’ — ‘  Good  God !  to  be  sure  I  am,  Sir.  Why,  don’t  you  see  I  am 
dressed  for  Portia  ?’ — ‘  Ah  !  very  true ;  I  had  forgot.  But  who  is  to  play  Shylock  ?’ 
The  imbecile  tone  and  the  inane  look,  with  which  this  last  question  was  asked,  caused 
a  melancholy  sensation  in  all  who  heard  it.  At  last  Mrs  Pope,  rousing  herself,  said, 
‘  Why  you,  to  be  sure ;  are  not  you  dressed  for  the  part  ?’  He  then  seemed  to  recol¬ 
lect  himself,  and,  putting  his  hand  to  his  forehead  pathetically  exclaimed,  ‘  God  help 
me — my  memory,  I  am  afraid,  has  left  me.’ 


374 


APPENDIX 


He,  however,  went  upon  the  Stage  and  delivered  two  or  three  speeches  of  Shy- 
lock  in  a  manner  that  evidently  proved  he  did  not  understand  what  he  was  repeating. 
After  a  while,  he  recovered  himself  a  little  and  seemed  to  make  an  effort  to  rouse 
himself;  but  in  vain — Nature  could  assist  him  no  further;  and,  after  pausing  some 
time,  as  if  considering  what  to  do,  he  came  forward,  and  told  the  audience,  ‘  That  he 
now  found  he  was  unable  to  proceed  in  the  part,  and  hoped  they  would  accept  Mr 
Ryder,  as  a  substitute,  who  was  already  prepared  to  finish  it.’  The  audience  accepted 
his  apology  with  mingled  applause  of  indulgence  and  commiseration — and  he  retired 
from  the  stage  for  ever.  [He  lived  eight  years  longer,  until  1797.] 

[P.  405]  :  All  the  succeeding  Shylocks,  though  just  and  pleasing  portraits  of  the 
character,  wanted  the  original  firmness  and  colouring  of  Macklin’s  pencil.  There 
was,  besides  his  judgment  which  went  to  the  study  of  every  line  of  it,  such  an  iron- 
visaged  look,  such  a  relentless,  savage  cast  of  manners,  that  the  audience  seemed  to 
shrink  from  the  character,  nor  could  they  recover  the  true  tone  of  their  feelings  till 
the  merchant  was  liberated  from  the  fangs  of  such  a  merciless  creditor.  Cooke  seems 
to  be  nearest  the  original  of  any  we  have  seen. 

Lichtenberg,  whose  notices  of  the  actors  and  actresses  whom  he  saw  in  London  are 
all  too  short,  gives  us  in  a  few  sentences  a  vivid  description  of  Macklin.  His  letter  is 
dated  the  2d  of  December,  1775  (  Vermischte  Schriften,  iii,  266,  Gottingen,  1867): — 
I  have  seen  the  Shylock  of  Macklin,  so  well  known  for  his  high  deserts,  his  law¬ 
suit,  and  his  physiognomy.  [This  lawsuit  was  brought  by  Macklin  against  certain  citi¬ 
zens,  who,  in  their  opposition  to  him  as  an  actor,  behaved  so  riotously  one  evening  that 
they  obliged  the  manager  to  discharge  Macklin  before  they  would  allow  the  play  to 
proceed.  Macklin  gained  his  suit,  and  was  awarded  exemplary  damages.  In  this 
lawsuit  the  public  took  extraordinary  interest,  involving,  as  it  did,  the  right  to  hiss  an 
actor,  on  which  point  Lord  Mansfield  decided  that,  ‘  Every  man  that  is  at  the  play¬ 
house  has  a  right  to  express  his  approbation  or  disapprobation  instantaneously,  accord¬ 
ing  as  he  likes  either  the  acting  or  the  piece.  That  is  a  right  due  to  the  theatre, — an 
unalterable  right, — they  must  have  that.’ — Ed.]  You  know  that  the  announcement 
of  Macklin  as  Shylock  sounds  as  attractively  on  the  play-bill  as  Garrick  in  Hamlet. 
It  was  the  evening  on  which  he  appeared  for  the  first  time  after  his  suit  was  decided 
When  he  appeared  he  was  received  with  great  applause,  thrice  given,  each  time  lasting 
a  quarter  of  a  minute.  It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  sight  of  this  Jew  suffices  to 
awaken  at  once,  in  the  best -regulated  mind,  all  the  prejudices  of  childhood  against  this 
people.  Shylock  is  none  of  your  petty  cheaters,  who  can  talk  for  an  hour  over  the 
excellence  of  a  pinchbeck  watch-chain.  He  is  slow,  calm  in  his  impenetrable  cun¬ 
ning,  and  when  he  has  the  law  on  his  side  he  is  unflinching,  even  to  the  extreme  of 
malice.  Picture  to  yourself  a  somewhat  strong  man,  with  a  sallow,  harsh  face  and  a 
nose  which  is  by  no  means  lacking  in  any  one  of  the  three  dimensions,  a  long  double 
chin  or  dewlap;  and  in  making  his  mouth,  Nature’s  knife  seems  to  have  slipped  and 
gone  all  the  way  to  his  ears,  at  least  on  one  side,  so  it  seemed  to  me.  His  cloak  is 
black  and  long,  his  pantaloons  also  are  long  and  broad,  and  his  hat  three-cornered  and 
red,  probably  in  accordance  with  the  style  of  the  Italian  Jews.  The  first  words  which 
he  utters  are  spoken  slowly  and  deliberately :  ‘  Three  thousand  ducats .’  The  th  and 
the  s  twice  occurring  and  the  last  s  after  the  t  have  a  lickerish  sound  from  Macklin’s 
lips,  as  if  he  were  tasting  the  ducats  and  all  that  they  can  buy ;  this  speech  creates 
for  the  man,  upon  his*  first  appearance,  a  prepossession  which  is  sustained  throughout. 
Three  such  words,  thus  spoken  and  at  the  very  first,  reveal  a  whole  character.  In  the 
Scene  in  which  he  first  misses  his  daughter  he  appears  hatless,  with  hair  all  flying, 


ACTORS— KEAN 


375 


some  of  it  standing  up  straight,  a  hand’s  breadth  high,  just  as  if  it  had  been  lifted  up 
by  a  breeze  from  the  gallows.  Both  hands  are  doubled  up,  and  his  gestures  are  quick 
and  convulsive.  To  see  a  man  thus  moved,  who  had  been  hitherto  a  calm,  deter¬ 
mined  villain,  is  fearful. 

Boaden  ( Life  of  Kemble,  i,  440) :  As  I  paid  much  attention  to  Macklin’s  perform¬ 
ances,  and  personally  knew  him,  I  shall  endeavor  to  characterize  his  acting  and  dis¬ 
criminate  it  from  that  of  others.  If  Macklin  really  was  of  the  old  school,  that  school 
taught  what  was  truth  and  nature.  His  acting  was  essentially  manly, — there  was 
nothing  of  trick  about  it.  His  delivery  was  more  level  than  modern  speaking,  but 
certainly  more  weighty,  direct,  and  emphatic.  His  features  were  rigid,  his  eye  cold 
and  colourless;  yet  the  earnestness  of  his  manner,  and  the  sterling  sense  of  his 
address,  produced  an  effect  in  Shylock  that  has  remained  to  the  present  hour  unrival¬ 
led.  Macklin,  for  instance,  in  the  Trial  Scene,  ‘stood  like  a  Tower,’  as  Milton  has 
it.  He  was  ‘not  bound  to  please ’  any  body  by  his  pleading;  he  claimed  a  right, 
grounded  upon  Law,  and  thought  himself  as  firm  as  the  Rialto.  To  this  remark  it 
may  be  said, ‘You  are  here  describing  Shylock.’  True;  I  am  describing  Macklin. 
[This  was  written  eleven  years  after  Kean’s  first  appearance  as  Shylock,  but  Boaden 
makes  no  allusion  to  him.  Boaden  was  an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  Kemble,  whose 
school  of  acting  differed  widely  from  that  of  Kean.] 

Macklin’s  interpretation  of  Shylock  appears  to  have  been  the  standard  until  the 
appearance  of  Edmund  Kean  in  1814;  of  this  appearance  I  shall  give  the  accounts 
both  of  Dr  Doran,  and  of  Kean’s  biographer,  Hawkins.  If  there  is  repetition,  it  can 
do  no  harm.  The  story  is  in  itself  so  dramatic  that  custom  cannot  stale  it. 

Doran  {Their  Majesties'  Servants,  2d  ed.,  1865,  p.  428) :  Howard  died  [Kean’s 
elder  son,  to  whom  he  was  passionately  attached,  and  who  lived  but  five  years]  and 
Kean  played,  danced,  sorrowed,  and  hoped, — for  the  time  at  which  he  was  to  go  up 
to  London  was  at  hand;  and  thither  they  went,  at  the  close  of  the  year  1813.  When 
that  season  of  1813-14  opened,  Drury  was  in  a  condition  from  which  it  could  be 
relieved  only  by  a  genius ; — and  there  he  stood  in  that  cold  hall,  a  little,  pale,  restless, 
dark-eyed  man,  in  a  coat  with  two  or  three  capes,  and  nobody  noticed  him  !  In  Cecil 
Street  his  family  were  living  on  little  more  than  air ;  and  he  was  daily  growing  sick, 
as  he  stood,  waiting  in  that  hall,  for  an  audience  with  the  manager,  and  subject  to  the 
sneers  of  passing  actors.  Even  Rae,  handsome  and  a  fool,  affected  not  to  know  him, 
though  they  had  played  together,  when  Rae’s  mother  was  matron  at  St  George’s  Hos 
pital ;  and  they  had  acted  together  at  the  Haymarket  in  1 806,  when  Rae  led  the  busi 
ness  and  Kean  was  but  a  supernumerary !  Arnold  treated  him  superciliously,  with  a 
4 young  man  /’  as  he  condescended  to  speak  and  put  him  off.  Other  new  actors 
obtained  trial  parts,  but  there  was  none  for  that  chafed,  hungry  little  man  in  the  capes. 
Even  drunken  Tokely,  like  himself,  from  Exeter,  could  obtain  a  ‘  first  appearance,’ 
but  Kean  was  put  off.  Stephen  Kemble  played  Shylock,  and  failed !  why  not  try  a 
new  actor?  The  Committee  did  so,  and  Mr  Huddart,  from  Dublin,  went  on  as  Shy¬ 
lock,  and  was  never  heard  of  more.  And  the  poor  stroller  looked  through  the  dark¬ 
ness  of  that  miserable  passage  the  while,  and  murmured, 4  Let  me  but  get  my  foot 
before  the  floats,  and  I'll  show  them — !’ 

The  permission  came.  Would  he, — no  he  must  play  Richard.  ‘Shylock,  or 
nothing !’  was  his  bold  reply.  He  was  afraid  of  the  littleness  of  his  figure  (which 
he  had  heard  scoffed  at)  being  exposed  in  the  ‘  trunks  ’  of  Glo’ster.  He  hoped  to 
hide  it  under  the  gown  of  Shylock.  The  Jew,  or  nothing !  The  young  fellow,  he 


376 


APPENDIX 


was  but  six-and-twenty,  was  allowed  to  have  his  way.  At  the  one  morning  rehearsal, 
he  fluttered  his  fellow-actors,  and  scared  the  manager,  by  his  independence  and  origi¬ 
nality.  *  Sir,  this  will  never  do !’  cried  Raymond,  the  acting  manager.  *  It  is  quite 
an  innovation ;  it  cannot  be  permitted.’  *  Sir,’  said  the  poor,  proud  man ;  ‘  I  wish  it 
to  be  so ;’  and  the  players  smiled,  and  Kean  went  home,  that  is,  to  his  lodgings,  in 
Cecil  Street,  on  that  snowy,  foggy  26th  of  January,  1814,  calm,  hopeful,  and  hungry. 
*  To-day,’  said  he,  ‘  I  must  dine .’ 

Having  accomplished  that  rare  feat,  he  went  forth  alone  and  on  foot.  ‘  I  wish,’  he 
remarked  ‘  I  was  going  to  be  shot !’  He  had  with  him  a  few  properties  which  he  was 
bound  to  procure  for  himself,  tied  up  in  a  poor  handkerchief,  under  his  arm.  His  wife 
remained  with  their  child  at  home.  Kean  tramped  on  beneath  the  falling  snow,  and 
over  that  which  thickly  encumbered  the  ground — solid  here,  there  in  slush — and  bye 
and  bye,  pale,  quiet,  but  fearless,  he  dressed  in  a  room  shared  by  two  or  three  others, 
and  went  down  to  the  wing  by  which  he  was  to  enter.  Hitherto  no  one  had  spoken 
to  him,  save  Jack  Bannister,  who  said  a  cheering  word;  and  Oxberry,  who  had  ten¬ 
dered  him  a  glass  and  wished  him  good  fortune.  *  By  Jove  !’  exclaimed  a  first-rater, 
looking  at  him,  *  Shylock  in  a  black  wig !  Well ! !’  In  the  good  old  times  the  wig 
was  of  a  Judas  colour. 

The  house  could  hold,  as  it  is  called,  ^600 ;  there  was  not  more  than  a  sixth  of  that 
sum  in  front.  Winter  without,  his  comrades  within,  all  was  against  him.  At  length 
he  went  on,  with  Rae  as  Bassanio,  in  ill-humour,  and  groups  of  actors  at  the  wings  to 
witness  the  first  scene  of  a  new  candidate.  All  that  Edmund  Kean  ever  did  was 
gracefully  done;  and  the  bow  which  he  made  in  return  to  the  welcoming  applause 
was  eminently  graceful.  Dr  Drury,  the  head-master  of  Harrow,  who  took  great  inter¬ 
est  in  him,  looked  fixedly  at  him  as  he  came  forward.  Shylock  leant  over  his  crutched 
stick  with  both  hands;  and,  looking  askance  at  Bassanio,  said,  ‘Three  thousand 
ducats?’  paused,  bethought  himself,  and  then  added,  ‘Well?’  He  is  safe!  said  Dr 
Drury. 

The  groups  of  actors  soon  after  dispersed  to  the  green-room.  As  they  reached  it, 
there  reached  there,  too,  an  echo  of  the  loud  applause  given  to  Shylock’s  reply  to  Bas- 
sanio’s  assurance  that  he  may  take  the  bond, — ‘  I  will  be  assured  I  may  !’  Later  came 
the  sounds  of  the  increased  approbation  bestowed  on  the  delivery  of  the  passage  end¬ 
ing  with,  ‘  and  for  these  courtesies,  I’ll  lend  you  thus  much  moneys.’  The  Act  came 
to  an  end  gloriously ;  and  the  players  in  the  green-room  looked  for  the  coming  among 
them  of  the  new  Shylock.  He  proudly  kept  aloof ;  knew  he  was  friendless ;  but  felt 
that  he  was,  in  himself,  sufficient. 

He  wandered  about  the  back  of  the  stage,  thinking,  perhaps,  of  the  mother  and  child 
at  home ;  and  sure,  now,  of  having  at  least  made  a  step  towards  triumph.  He  wanted 
no  congratulations ;  and  he  walked  cheerfully  down  to  the  wing  where  the  scene  was 
about  to  take  place  between  him  and  his  daughter,  Jessica,  in  his  very  calling  to  whom, 
‘Why  Jessica!  I  say’ — there  was,  as  some  of  us  may  remember,  from  an  after- night’s 
experience,  a  charm,  as  of  music.  The  whole  Scene  was  played  with  rare  merit;  but 
the  absolute  triumph  was  not  won  till  the  Scene  (which  was  marvellous  in  his  hands) 
in  the  Third  Act  between  Shylock,  Solanio,  and  Salarino,  ending  with  the  dialogue 
between  the  first  and  Tubal.  Shylock’s  anguish  at  his  daughter’s  flight ;  his  wrath  at 
the  two  Christians  who  make  sport  of  his  anguish ;  his  hatred  of  all  Christians,  gener¬ 
ally,  and  of  Antonio  in  particular ;  and  then  his  alternations  of  rage,  grief,  and  ecstasy, 
as  Tubal  relates  the  losses  incurred  in  the  search  of  that  naughty  Jessica,  her  extrava¬ 
gances,  and  then  the  ill-luck  that  had  fallen  on  Antonio, — in  all  this  there  was  such 


ACTORS— KEAN 


3  77 


originality,  such  terrible  force,  such  assurance  of  a  new  and  mighty  master,  that  the 
house  burst  forth  into  a  very  whirlwind  of  approbation.  ‘  What  now  ?’  was  the  cry  in 
the  green-room.  The  answer  was,  that  the  presence  and  the  power  of  the  genius  were 
acknowledged  with  an  enthusiasm  which  shook  the  very  roof.  How  so  select  an 
audience  contrived  to  raise  such  a  roar  of  exultation,  was  a  permanent  perplexity  to 
Billy  Oxberry. 

Those  who  had  seen  Stephen  Kemble’s  Shylock,  and  that  of  Huddart,  this  season, 
must  have  by  this  time  confessed  that  the  new  actor  had  superseded  both.  He  must 
himself  have  felt  that,  if  he  had  not  yet  surpassed  Cooke,  and  Henderson,  and  Macklin, 
he  was  tending  that  way ;  and  was  already  their  equal.  Whatever  he  felt,  he  remained 
reserved  and  solitary ;  but  he  was  now  sought  after.  Raymond,  the  acting  manager, 
who  had  haughtily  told  him  his  innovations  ‘would  not  do,’  came  to  offer  him  oranges. 
Arnold,  the  stage-manager,  who  had  young-manned  him,  came  to  present  him,  ‘sir!’ 
with  some  negus.  Kean  cared  for  nothing  more  now  than  for  his  Fourth  and  last  Act ; 
and  in  that  his  triumph  culminated.  His  calm  demeanour  at  first ;  his  confident  appeal 
to  justice ;  his  deafness  when  appeal  is  made  to  him  for  mercy ;  his  steady  joyousness 
when  the  young  lawyer  recognizes  the  validity  of  his  bond;  his  burst  of  exultation 
when  his  right  is  confessed ;  his  fiendish  eagerness  when  whetting  the  knife ; — and 
then  the  sudden  collapse  of  disappointment  and  terror,  with  the  words, — *  Is  that — the 
Law  ?’ — in  all,  was  made  manifest  that  a  noble  successor  to  the  noblest  of  the  actors 
of  old  had  arisen.  Then,  his  trembling  anxiety  to  recover  what  he  had  before  refused ; 
his  sordid  abjectness,  as  he  finds  himself  foiled  at  every  turn;  his  subdued  fury;  and, 
at  the  last  (and  it  was  always  the  crowning  glory  of  his  acting  in  this  play),  the  with¬ 
ering  sneer,  hardly  concealing  the  crushed  heart,  with  which  he  replied  to  the  jibes  of 
Gratiano,  as  he  left  the  court ; — all  raised  a  new  sensation  in  an  audience,  who  acknow¬ 
ledged  it  in  a  perfect  tumult  of  acclamation.  As  he  passed  to  his  dressing-room,  Ray¬ 
mond  saluted  him  with  the  confession  that  he  had  made  a  hit ;  Pope,  more  generous, 
avowed  that  he  had  saved  the  house  from  ruin. 

And  then,  while  Bannister  was  dashing  through  Dick,  in  The  Apprentice,  I  seem  to 
see  the  hero  of  the  night  staggering  home  through  the  snow,  drunk  with  delicious 
ecstasy,  all  his  brightest  dreams  realized,  and  all  his  good  impulses  surging  within  him. 
He  may  be  in  a  sort  of  frenzy  as  he  tells  of  his  proud  achievement ;  but,  at  its  very 
wildest,  he  exclaims  :  *  Mary,  you  shall  ride  in  your  carriage,  yet !’  and  taking  his  son, 
Charles,  from  the  cradle,  swears  he  *  shall  go  to  Eton ;’  but  therewith  something  over  • 
shadows  his  joy,  and  he  murmurs,  ‘  If  Howard  had  but  lived  to  see  it !’  .  .  .  . 

His  audiences  rose  from  one  of  ;£ioo  to  audiences  of  ,£600;  and  £ 20  a  week 
rewarded  efforts,  for  far  less  than  which,  he  subsequently  received  £50  a  night.  He 
was  advanced  to  the  dignity  of  having  a  dressing-room  to  himself.  Legislators,  poets, 
nobles,  thronged  his  tiring-room,  where  Arnold  took  as  much  care  of  him  as  if  on  his 

life  hung  more  than  the  well-being  of  the  theatre . And  old  Nance  Carey  turned 

up,  to  exact  £50  a  year  from  her  not  too  delighted  son . He  played,  in  this  first 

season,  Shylock  fifteen  times,  Richard  twenty-five,  Hamlet  eight,  Othello  ten,  Iago 
eighc,  and  Luke  four ;  and  in  those  seventy  nights  the  delighted  treasurer  of  Drury 
Lane  struck  a  balance  of  profit  to  the  theatre  amounting  in  round  numbers  to  ,£17,000. 

F.  W.  Hawkins  ( Life  of  Kean,  1869,  vol.  i,  p.  124) :  The  26th  of  January  at 
length  arrived.  Morning  dawned  upon  a  miserable,  dreary  aspect;  a  heavy  fall  of 
snow  which  had  taken  place  a  few  days  previous  was  melting  away  before  a  sudden 
and  unexpected  thaw ;  a  drizzling  rain  kept  falling  the  whole  day ;  and  a  cloudy  atmo 
sphere,  hiding  the  sun  from  view,  projected  a  melancholy  gloom  over  the  whole  me- 


378 


APPENDIX 


tropolis.  The  one  morning  rehearsal  of  The  Alerchant  of  Venice  had  been  fixed  for  1 2 
o’clock,  and  precisely  at  the  appointed  time  Kean  made  his  appearance  at  the  theatre. 
The  rehearsal  was  proceeded  with.  A  bombshell  exploding  in  the  midst  of  the  slender 
company  could  not  have  startled  them  more  than  the  thoroughly  original  interpretation 
which  Kean  gave  to  each  line  of  his  part.  Raymond,  the  acting  manager,  protested 
against  the  ‘  innovation,’  as  he  termed  it.  *  Sir,’  returned  Kean,  proudly,  ‘  I  wish  it  to 
be  an  innovation.’ — ‘  It  will  never  do,  depend  upon  it,’  remarked  the  stage  manager, 
with  a  patronizing  air  that  was  excessively  galling. — ‘Well,  sir,’  rejoined  Kean,  ‘per¬ 
haps  I  may  be  wrong;  but  if  so,  the  public  will  set  me  right.’  Notwithstanding  the 
bold  originality  in  question,  his  rehearsal  was  remarkably  ineffective;  and  the  per¬ 
formers,  taking  his  intentional  tameness  as  a  criterion  of  what  the  public  performance 
would  be,  predicted  his  failure  with  energetic  liberality.  The  rehearsal  concluded, 
Kean  returned  home  to  enjoy  with  his  wife  the  unusual  luxury  of  a  dinner.  He 
remained  at  home  until  six  o’clock,  when  the  striking  of  the  church  clocks  warned  him 
that  it  was  time  to  depart.  Snatching  up  a  small  bundle  containing  the  few  necessaries 
with  which  he  was  bound  to  provide  himself,  he  kissed  his  wife  and  infant  son,  and 
hurriedly  left  the  house.  ‘  I  wish,’  he  muttered,  ‘  I  was  going  to  be  shot.’  With  his 
well-worn  boots  soaked  with  the  slush,  he  slunk  in  at  the  stage  door,  and  proceeded 
to  a  small,  dilapidated  dressing-room  in  the  remotest  part  of  the  house,  occupying  it 
in  common  with  three  or  four  of  the  secondary  actors.  He  quickly  exchanged  his 
dripping  threadbare  apparel  for  the  more  comfortable  gaberdine  of  Shylock,  slipped 
his  feet  into  the  traditional  Venetian  slippers,  and  taking  a  little  black  wig  from  his 
little  bundle,  adjusted  it  to  his  head,  heedless  of  or  inattentive  to  the  astonishment 
depicted  on  the  faces  of  his  companions.  Nevertheless,  they  did  not  attempt  to  ex¬ 
postulate  with  him ;  the  reserved  manner  he  had  invariably  maintained  rendered  that 
out  of  the  question;  but  the  news  spread  like  wildfire,  that  the  little  man  in  the  capes 
had  rejected  the  conventional  red  wig.  Arnold  lamented  such  extraordinary  conduct ; 
Raymond  tapped  his  forehead  significantly  when  he  heard  of  ‘  the  black  wig.’  Both 
kept  aloof.  Not  so  Bannister  and  Oxberry.  The  former,  with  his  characteristic  good 
nature,  came  to  give  him  an  encouraging  word ;  Oxberry,  with  a  closer  eye  to  business, 
to  give  him  a  glass  of  brandy  and  water.  Gratefully  accepting  both,  he  issued  from 
the  dressing-room,  and,  proud  in  the  consciousness  of  the  approaching  triumph,  walked 
slowly  to  the  wings,  where  he  was  heartily  greeted  by  Dr  Drury.  Peeping  through 
the  eyelet-hole  in  the  curtain,  he  surveyed  a  dreary,  hopeless  aspect.  The  announce¬ 
ment  of  ‘  Mr  Kean,  from  Exeter,’  carried  with  it  no  charm ;  another  addition  to  the 
list  of  failures,  for  which  the  public  were  indebted  to  the  discrimination  of  the  mana¬ 
gers,  was  anticipated ;  and  ‘  there  was  that  sense  of  previous  damnation  which  a  thin 
house  inspires.’  The  boxes  were  empty;  there  were  about  fifty  people  in  the  pit, 
‘  some  quantity  of  barren  spectators  and  idle  renters  being  thinly  scattered  to  make  up 
a  show.’  Undaunted  by  the  discouraging  aspect  of  affairs,  he  awaited  the  decisive 
U'.oment. 

The  cherished  hope  of  twenty  years  is  realized.  He  is  before  the  floats  of  Drury- 
Lane,  and  is  going  to  show  them  what  an  obscure  strolling  player  can  do.  His  fine 
Italian  countenance,  the  lightness  of  his  step,  the  piercing  brilliancy  of  his  eye,  the 
expressiveness  of  his  gesture,  and  the  buoyancy  and  perfect  self-possession  of  his  man¬ 
ner,  impress  the  scanty  audience  in  his  favour.  His  personal  disadvantages  are  so 
great  that  it  is  at  once  evident  that  a  success  can  only  be  achieved  by  sheer  excellence, 
exposed  to  the  discriminating  test  of  the  understanding.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  he  will  pass  triumphantly  through  the  rigid  severity  of  the  ordeal.  There  is  an 


A  C  TORS— KEAN 


379 


animating  soul  in  all  he  says  and  does,  which  at  once  gives  a  high  interest  to  his  act¬ 
ing,  and  excites  those  emotions  which  are  always  felt  in  the  presence  of  genius — a 
union  of  power  with  a  fine  sensibility.  It  is  giving  fire  to  his  eye,  energy  to  his  tones, 
such  a  variety  and  expressiveness  to  all  his  gestures  that  you  might  have  said,  ‘  his 
body  thinks.’ 

The  Scene  begins.  The  manner  in  which  he  acknowledges  the  applause  usually 
accorded  to  a  stranger  is  a  study  for  a  painter.  There  is  nothing  of  the  sullen  gaol 
delivery  common  to  the  traditional  Shylocks  of  the  stage ;  a  vague  expectation  is 
excited.  He  takes  up  his  position,  leans  across  his  cane,  and  looks  askance  at  Bas- 
sanio  as  he  refers  to  the  three  thousand  ducats.  ‘  He  is  safe,’  cried  Dr  Drury.  The 
Scene  goes  on.  *  I  will  be  assured  I  may  ’  is  given  with  such  truth,  such  significance, 
such  beauty,  that  the  audience  bursts  into  a  shower  of  applause ;  then ! — as  he  himself 
expressed  it,  ‘  then,  indeed,  I  felt,  I  knew,  I  had  them  with  me.’ 

In  that  part  where,  leaning  on  his  stick,  he  told  the  tale  of  Jacob  and  his  flock  with 
the  garrulous  ease  of  old  age  and  animation  of  spirit  that  seems  borne  back  to  the  olden 
time,  and  the  privileged  example  in  which  he  exults,  he  shows  them  that  a  man  of 
genius  has  lighted  on  the  stage.  His  acting  here  is  all  a  study.  There  is  one  present 
who  notes  with  delight  ‘  the  flexibility  and  indefiniteness  of  outline  about  it,  like  a  fig¬ 
ure  with  a  landscape  background;  Shy  lock  is  in  Venice  with  his  money-bags,  his 
daughter,  and  his  injuries ;  but  his  thoughts  take  wing  to  the  East ;  his  voice  swells 
and  deepens  at  the  mention  of  his  sacred  tribe  and  ancient  law,  and  he  dwells  with 
joy  on  any  digression  to  distant  times  and  places,  as  a  relief  to  his  rooted  and  vindic¬ 
tive  purposes.’  The  audience  is  then  stirred  to  enthusiasm  by  the  epigrammatic  point 
and  distinctness  with  which  he  gives  the  lines  :  ‘  Hath  a  dog  money  ?  Is  it  possible  A 
cur  can  lend  three  thousand  ducats  ?’  &c. 

The  Act  drop  falls ;  all  doubts  as  to  a  splendid  success  have  been  removed.  In  the 
interval  between  this  and  his  appearance  in  the  Fifth  Scene  of  the  Second  Act,  there 
was  an  obvious  disposition  on  the  part  of  those  who  had  previously  contemned  him  to 
offer  their  congratulations ;  but,  as  if  divining  their  intentions,  he  shrank  from  obser¬ 
vation,  and  only  emerged  from  his  concealment  as  the  scene  came  on  between  Shylock 
and  Jessica,  in  his  very  calling  to  whom,  1  Why,  Jessica,  I  say,’  there  was  a  charm  as 
of  music.  [Hawkins  here  quotes  much  of  the  foregoing  extract  from  Dr  Doran,  and 
thus  concludes :] 

With  every  limb  trembling  from  excitement,  the  hero  of  the  night  returned  to  his 
damp  and  threadbare  apparel ;  and,  having  received  with  a  hurried  carelessness  the 
congratulations  offered  to  him,  he  waited  on  Arnold  in  the  manager’s  room.  He  was 
formally  informed  that  their  expectations  had  been  exceeded.  To  Kean,  the  announce¬ 
ment  was  quite  superfluous.  In  an  almost  frenzied  ecstasy  he  rushed  through  the  wet 
to  his  humble  lodging,  sprang  up  the  stairs  and  threw  open  the  door.  His  wife  ran  to 
meet  him ;  no  words  were  required,  his  radiant  countenance  told  all ;  and  they  mingled 
together  the  first  tears  of  true  happiness  they  had  as  yet  experienced.  He  told  her  of 
his  proud  achievement,  and  in  a  burst  of  exultation  exclaimed,  *  Mary,  you  shall  ride 
in  your  carriage,  and  Charley,  my  boy,’  taking  the  child  from  the  cradle  and  kissing 
him,  ‘  you  shall  go  to  Eton,  and  ’ — a  sad  remembrance  crossed  his  mind,  his  joy  was 
overshadowed,  and  he  murmured  in  broken  accents, — ‘  Oh,  that  Howard  had  lived  to 
see  it ! — but  he  is  better  where  he  is.’ 

Hazlitt  ( Characters  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays ,  1817,  p.  276):  When  we  first  went 
to  see  Mr  Kean  in  Shylock,  we  expected  to  see  what  we  had  been  used  to  see,  a  de- 
crepid  old  man,  bent  with  age  and  ugly  with  mental  deformity,  grinning  with  deadly 


38° 


APPENDIX 


malice,  with  the  venom  of  his  heart  congealed  in  the  expression  of  his  countenance, 
sullen,  morose,  gloomy,  inflexible,  brooding  over  one  idea,  that  of  his  hatred,  and  fixed 
on  one  unalterable  purpose,  that  of  his  revenge.  We  were  disappointed,  because  we 
had  taken  our  ideas  from  other  actors,  not  from  the  play.  There  is  no  proof  there 
that  Shylock  is  old,  but  a  single  line,  *  Bassanio  and  old  Shylock,  both  stand  forth,’ — 
which  does  not  imply  that  he  is  infirm  with  age, — and  the  circumstance  that  he  has 
a  daughter  marriageable,  which  does  not  imply  that  he  is  old  at  all.  It  would  be  too 
much  to  say  that  his  body  should  be  made  crooked  and  deformed  to  answer  to  his 
mind,  which  is  bowed  down  and  warped  with  prejudices  and  passion.  That  he  has 
but  one  idea,  is  not  true ;  he  has  more  ideas  than  any  other  person  in  the  piece ;  and 
if  he  is  intense  and  inveterate  in  the  pursuit  of  his  purpose,  he  shows  the  utmost  elas¬ 
ticity,  vigour,  and  presence  of  mind  in  the  means  of  attaining  it.  But  so  rooted  was 
our  habitual  impression  of  the  part  from  seeing  it  caricatured  in  the  representation,  that 
it  was  only  from  a  careful  perusal  of  the  play  itself  that  we  saw  our  error.  The  stage 
is  not,  in  general,  the  best  place  to  study  our  author’s  characters  in.  It  is  too  often 
filled  with  traditional  common-place  conceptions  of  the  part,  handed  down  from  sire 
to  son,  and  suited  to  the  taste  of  the  great  vulgar  and  the  small.  *  ’Tis  an  un¬ 
weeded  garden ;  things  rank  and  gross  do  merely  gender  in  it !’  If  a  man  of  genius 
comes  once  in  an  age  to  clear  away  the  rubbish,  to  make  it  fruitful  and  wholesome, 
they  cry,  ‘  ’Tis  a  bad  school;  it  may  be  like  nature,  it  may  be  like  Shakespeare,  but  it 
is  not  like  us.’  Admirable  critics !  [Hazlitt  is  here  apparently  making  amends  for 
his  earlier  opposition  to  Kean.  I  doubt  if  in  a  more  deliberate  mood  he  would  have 
rated  the  stage  thus  low  as  an  interpreter  of  Shakespeare.  Clearly  he  was  vexed  that 
Macklin’s  interpretation  had  held  possession  of  him  so  long,  and  his  vexation  is  a  suffi¬ 
cient  excuse  for  his  mixing  up  quotations  from  Hamlet  and  Othello,  and  for  mistaking 
Bassanio  for  Anthonio. 

In  The  Music  of  Nature,  by  William  Gardiner,  is  the  following  valuable  record 
of  the  quality  of  Edmund  Kean’s  voice.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  record  is 
so  brief  and  that  more  passages  are  not  noted.  Such  a  record  as  this  transmits  to  pos¬ 
terity  a  more  vivid  sense  of  an  actor’s  power,  and  of  one  of  the  secrets  thereof,  than 
pages  of  praise  as  vague  as  it  is  lavish  can  convey : — 

[P.  57].  Musically  speaking,  he  is  the  best  orator,  who,  to  his  natural  speaking  voice, 
unites  the  upper  and  lower  voices,  that  is,  the  voce  de  testa  and  the  voce  de  petto.  Mr 
Kean  possesses  these  qualifications  in  the  highest  degree.  He  has  at  his  command 
the  greatest  number  of  effects,  having  a  range  of  tones  from  F  below  the  line  to  F 
above  it — 


1  ez_ j 

£ 

/Sr  h 

1 

^  F"  1 

l 

- <5; 

- - 2? 

- ~  L - 1 

the  natural  key  of  his  voice  being  that  of  Bb,  a  note  lower  than  Talma’s.  His  hard 
guttural  tone  upon  G  is  as  piercing  as  the  third  string  of  a  violoncello ;  whilst  his  mezzo 
and  pianissimo  expressions  are  as  soft  as  from  the  voice  of  a  woman.  He  has  three 
distinct  sets  of  tones ;  as  if  he  occasionally  played  upon  a  flute,  clarionet,  and  bassoon, 
which  he  uses  as  the  passion  dictates.  In  the  Scene  with  Lady  Anne  [Rich.  Ill . 
I,  ii]  his  notes  are  of  the  most  touching  and  persuasive  kind,  often  springing  from  the 
harmonies  of  his  natural  voice,  which  he  elicits  with  exquisite  delicacy.  We  instance 
the  peculiar  softness  of  the  following  expressions : 


A  CTORS—IR  VING 


38t 


You  mock  me,  mo  -  ther.  Re  -  mem  -  ber. 


But  the  same  voice,  when  moved  with  a  ruder  stroke,  gave  the  yell  and  choked 
utterance  of  a  savage  [Shylock,  I,  iii,  46]  : 

|\ 

_ _ _  e 


His  tones  of  furious  passion  are  deep-seated  in  the  chest,  like  those  of  the  lion  and 
tiger;  and  it  is  his  mastery  over  these  instinctive  tones  by  which  he  so  powerfully 
moves  his  audience.  At  times  he  vomits  a  torrent  of  words  in  a  breath,  yet  avails 
himself  of  all  the  advantages  of  deliberation.  His  pauses  give  a  grandeur  to  his  per¬ 
formance,  and  speak  more  than  words  themselves  [  Shy  lock,  IV,  i,  240]  : 


ft 

a 

tJ  # 

fl  it 

a 

==  r 

1 

— 1 — 1 — 1 — i — t  -  i'— hd" 

— 1 — H- 

— 1 — 

m-  & 

- =1 - - , - 

■  j  -J  - 

+  w  *  * — 

•  •  /"F 

_ " 

Oh  .  .  . 

Hawkins  ( Life  of  Kean,  i,  342) :  [When  Dowton  acted  Shylock]  the  great  point 
of  novelty  consisted  in  the  introduction  of  some  Jewish  friends  into  the  court,  and 
when,  on  being  told  that  one  of  the  conditions  of  his  release  was  his  becoming  a  Chris¬ 
tian,  Shylock  fell  fainting  in  their  arms,  and  in  this  state  was  carried  off,  the  tittering 
which  had  been  excited  from  the  Scene  with  Tubal  was  exchanged  for  roars  of 
laughter.  Dowton  was  deeply  mortified,  and  anathematized  Kean,  Shylock,  and 
the  audience  with  all  the  vigour  of  a  ‘  good  hater.’  He  never  boasted  of  his  Shylock 
again ! 

The  Theatre  (December,  1879,  p.  292) :  Irving  evidently  believes  that  Shake¬ 
speare  intended  to  enlist  our  sympathies  on  the  side  of  the  Jew,  and  the  conception  is 
embodied  in  a  manner  altogether  new  to  the  stage.  The  fierceness  associated  with  the 
character  since  Macklin  appeared  in  it  is  not  absent.  Except  in  the  scene  with  Tubal, 
where  passion  will  out,  the  bearing  of  this  Shylock  is  distinguished  by  a  comparatively 
quiet  and  tranquil  dignity, — perhaps  we  ought  rather  to  say  the  superb  dignity  of  the 
Arabian  race.  The  whole  force  of  an  ‘  old,  untainted  religious  aristocracy  ’  is  made 
manifest  in  his  person.  He  feels  and  acts  as  one  of  a  noble  but  long-oppressed  nation, 
as  a  representative  of  Judaism  against  the  apostate  Galilean,  as  an  instrument  of  ven¬ 
geance  in  the  hands  of  an  offended  God.  In  point  of  intelligence  and  culture  he  is 
far  above  the  Christians  with  whom  he  comes  into  contact,  and  the  fact  that  as  a  Jew 


382 


APPENDIX 


he  is  deemed  far  below  them  in  the  social  scale  is  gall  and  wormwood  to  his  proud 

and  sensitive  spirit . Exhibited  in  this  light,  not  so  much  as  a  man  grievously 

wronged  in  his  own  person  as  a  representative  of  a  great  but  oppressed  tribe,  Shylock 
acquires  on  the  stage  what  Shakespeare  evidently  intended  to  impart  to  the  character, — 
a  sad  and  romantic  interest,  an  almost  tragic  elevation  and  grace. 

In  Mr  Irving’s  performance,  as  in  the  play,  Shylock  appears  under  three  different 
aspects.  First  of  all  he  is  the  usurer,  then  the  outraged  father,  and  finally  the  venge¬ 
ful  creditor.  Mr  Irving’s  appearance  is  in  harmony  with  this  view  of  the  part.  He 
comes  forward  as  a  man  between  fifty  and  sixty  years  of  age,  infirm  enough  to  need 
the  support  of  a  stick,  with  an  iron-gray  wisp  of  beard,  and  wearing  a  sober  brown 
gaberdine,  an  Oriental  shawl  girdle,  and  a  close-fitting  black  cap  with  a  yellow  line 
across  it.  The  law  of  Venice,  it  may  be  remembered,  required  Jews  living  in  that  city 
to  wear  a  red  hat  as  a  distinctive  sign  of  their  tribe,  but  in  this  instance  an  actor  may 
well  be  pardoned  for  dispensing  with  historical  accuracy.  A  picturesque  background 
is  at  the  outset  provided  for  this  striking  figure  by  a  view  of  the  Palace  of  St  Mark, 
with  a  quay  on  which  porters  are  landing  bales  of  merchandise.  Mr  Irving’s  acting 
here  is  studiously  quiet  in  tone,  but  full  expression  is  given  to  the  religious  fervour  of 
the  Jew,  the  sense  of  wrong  which  rankles  in  his  bosom,  the  undercurrent  of  sarcasm 
in  his  affected  humility,  and  the  cynical  humour  which  breaks  forth  in,  *  I  will  be 
assured  I  may,’  and  other  passages.  It  is  as  he  utters  the  words, — ‘  Antonio  shall 
become  bound, — well  ?’  that  the  idea  of  vengeance  crosses  his  mind.  In  the  Scene 
where  the  loan  is  agreed  upon  we  have  a  fine  illustration  of  the  text;  the  Jew  touches 
Antonio  on  the  heart,  and,  seeing  the  merchant  recoil  from  him,  apologizes  for  his  error 
by  a  bow  in  which  we  can  perceive  all  the  bitterness  induced  by  the  hard  distinction 
drawn  between  Christian  and  Jew.  The  background  of  the  Scene  of  Jessica’s  elope¬ 
ment  is  formed  of  Shylock’s  house  at  night,  with  a  bridge  over  the  canal  which  flows 
by  it,  and  with  a  votive  lamp  to  the  Virgin  on  the  wall.  There  a  barcarolle  is  sung  by 
some  Venetians  in  a  gondola,  and  a  number  of  masqueraders  rush  merrily  past.  The 
noise  having  subsided,  the  curtain  drops,  to  be  raised  again  a  few  moments  afterwards, 
— a  pleasing  innovation, — to  exhibit  Shylock  returning  without  any  suspicion  of  Jes¬ 
sica’s  treachery  to  his  plundered  and  deserted  home.  The  Scene  which  follows  the 
discovery  of  Jessica’s  flight  is  sustained  by  Mr  Irving  with  great  power.  His  reason 
seems  to  reel  under  the  heavy  blow  it  has  received,  and  the  brief  allusion  to  his  dead 
wife  is  full  of  pathos  and  tenderness.  The  father  is  here  more  visible  than  the  usurer. 
Then  comes  the  fierce  thirst  for  revenge  which  follows  the  news  of  Antonio’s  ill-for¬ 
tune.  By  the  time  of  the  Trial,  however,  the  storm  has  subsided  into  a  dead  calm. 
Bidden  to  appear  in  the  Duke’s  Court, — a  fine  mediaeval  chamber,  with  portraits  of 
Venetian  dignitaries  of  times  gone  by  on  the  walls,  and  with  a  crowd  of  deeply-inter¬ 
ested  spectators,  including  Tubal  and  other  Jews,  at  the  back, — he  slowly  and  gravely 
comes  in.  The  tone  in  which  he  replies  to  the  appeals  for  mercy  is  even  more  signifi¬ 
cant  than  are  his  words.  He  stands  there  like  a  figure  of  Fate, — pitiless,  majestic, 
implacable.  The  hour  of  vengeance  has  at  length  struck,  and  he  will  not  be  balked 
of  his  prey.  There  is  no  necessity  for  deference  now ;  the  law  is  on  his  side.  His 
lace  wears  a  hard,  set  expression,  relieved  at  long  intervals  by  a  glance  of  bitter  hate 
towards  Antonio,  or  a  faint  smile  of  triumph.  Nor  is  this  superb  calm  less  conspicuous 
when  the  cause  turns  against  him.  The  scales  drop  from  his  hands,  but  that  is  all.  For 
a  time  he  seems  to  be  turned  to  stone,  to  be  as  immovable  as  a  statue.  The  Christian, 
as  might  have  been  expected,  has  again  conquered.  Eventually,  crushed  by  the  condi¬ 
tions  on  which  his  life  is  spared,  he  stalks  w  ith  a  heavy  sigh  from  the  Court,  only  stop- 


A  CTORS—B  OOTH  383 

ping  to  cast  a  look  of  deep  pity  at  the  ribald  youth  who  is  barking  like  a  cur  at  his 

heels. 

[The  only  introduction  that  the  following  letter  needs  is  the  statement  that  it  was 
written  to  the  Editor  with  no  thought  of  publication,  but  was  merely  the  continuance 
of  a  verbal  discussion  and  the  vindication  of  a  position  then  maintained.  It  seems, 
however,  to  supplement  so  well  the  suggestions,  from  the  same  hand,  in  the  Commen¬ 
tary  on  the  foregoing  pages,  that  at  the  request  of  the  Editor,  it  is  here  printed,  with 
the  permission  of — ] 

Edwin  Booth  :  My  notion  of  Shylock  is  of  the  traditional  type,  which  I  firmly 
believe  to  be  ‘  the  Jew  which  Shakespeare  drew.’  Not  the  buffoon  that  Dogget  gave 
according  to  Lord  Lansdowne’s  Version,  but  the  strongly  marked  and  somewhat  gro¬ 
tesque  character  which  Macklin  restored  to  the  stage,  and  in  which  he  was  followed 
by  Cooke,  by  Edmund  Kean,  and  by  my  Father.  ’Tis  nonsense  to  suppose  that  Shy- 
lock  was  represented  in  other  than  a  serious  vein  by  Burbadge,  merely  because  he 
‘  made  up,’  doubtless  after  some  representation  of  Judas,  with  red  hair  to  emphasize 
the  vicious  expression  of  his  features.  Is  there  any  authority  for  the  assertion  which 
some  make  that  he  also  wore  a  long  nose  ?  What  if  he  did  ?  A  clever  actor  once 
played  the  part  of  Tubal  with  me,  and  wore  red  hair  and  a  hook’d  nose.  He  did  not 
make  the  audience  laugh ;  ’twas  not  his  purpose ;  but  he  looked  the  very  creature  that 
could  sympathize  with  Shylock.  His  make  up  was  admirable.  He’s  the  son  of  the 
famous  John  Drew,  and  is  an  excellent  actor,  now  a  leading  member  of  Daly’s  Com¬ 
pany.  Let  Burbadge  have  the  long  nose,  if  you  will,  but  I  am  sure  that  he  never 
under  Shakespeare’s  nose  made  the  character  ridiculous.  No,  not  till  Lansdowne’s  bas¬ 
tard  came  did  the  Jew  make  the  unskilful  laugh  and  the  judicious  grieve.  From  that 
time,  perhaps,  until  Macklin  restored  the  original  method  of  representing  the  character, 
it  was  treated  as  a  ‘  low  comedy  ’  part.  I  doubt  if  Macklin  or  Cooke  wore  red  wigs 
for  Shylock, — but  no  matter,  Burbadge  did,  and  neither  was  he  nor  were  they  funny. 
If  Edmund  Kean  was  the  first  to  wear  black  hair  when  red  was  the  usual  color  worn 
at  that  time,  ’tis  easily  accounted  for,  when  you  reflect  that  he  was  very  poor  and  prob¬ 
ably  had  a  very  limited  stock  of  stage  ‘  props  ’ — he  doubtless  had  no  other  old  man’s 
wig  (except  a  white  one  for  Lear)  and  the  ‘  black  bald  ’  did  service  for  Sir  Giles  Over¬ 
reach,  and  several  other  elderly  gentlemen  besides  Shylock.  I  know  that  such  was  my 
Father’s  case,  and  also  mine  in  my  strolling  days.  I  believe  that  Burbadge,  Macklin, 
Cooke,  and  Kean  (as  did  my  Father)  made  Shylock  what  is  technically  termed  a  ‘cha¬ 
racter-part,’ — grotesque  in  ‘  make  up,’  and  general  treatment,  not  so  pronounced,  per¬ 
haps,  as  my  personation  has  been  sometimes  censured  for.  I  think  Macready  was  th6 
first  to  lift  the  uncanny  Jew  out  of  the  darkness  of  his  native  element  of  revengeful 
selfishness  into  the  light  of  the  venerable  Hebrew,  the  Martyr,  the  Avenger.  He  has 
had  several  followers,  and  1  once  tried  to  view  him  in  that  light,  but  he  doesn’t  cast  a 
shadow  sufficiently  strong  to  contrast  with  the  sunshine  of  the  comedy, — to  do  which 
he  must,  to  a  certain  extent,  be  repulsive,  a  sort  of  party  that  one  doesn’t  care  to  see 
among  the  dainty  revellers  of  Venice  in  her  prime.  Antonio’s  liver-trouble  is  gloom 
enough  for  them,  but  to  heighten  the  brilliancy  for  us  a  heavier  cloud  is  necessary,  and 
it  takes  the  form  of  Shylock, — ‘  an  inhuman  wretch,  uncapable  of  pity,  void  and  empty 
From  any  dram  of  mercy.’  It  has  been  said  that  he  is  an  affectionate  father  and  a 
faithful  friend.  When,  where,  and  how  does  he  manifest  the  least  claim  to  such  com¬ 
mendation?  Tell  me  that,  and  unyoke  !  ’Twas  the  money  value  of  Leah’s  ring  that 
he  grieved  over,  not  its  associations  with  her,  else  he  would  have  shown  some  affection 


384 


APPENDIX 


for  her  daughter,  which  he  did  not,  or  she  would  not  have  called  her  home  ‘  a  hell, 
robbed  and  left  him.  Shakespeare  makes  her  do  these  un-Hebrew  things  to  intensify 
the  baseness  of  Shylock’s  nature.  If  we  side  with  him  in  his  self-defence,  ’tis  because 
we  have  charity,  which  he  had  not ;  if  we  pity  him  under  the  burthen  of  his  merited 
punishment  ’tis  because  we  are  human,  which  he  is  not, — except  in  shape,  and  even 
that,  I  think,  should  indicate  the  crookedness  of  his  nature.  His  refusal  to  accept 
thrice  the  amount  he  loaned  seems  to  have  given  some  critics  the  idea  that  as  a  great 
Avenger  of  his  wronged  people  he  rises  above  all  selfish  considerations,  but  had  he 
accepted,  what  a  lame  and  impotent  conclusion  it  would  have  been  !  No,  this  other 
un-Jewlike  action  was  necessary  for  stage-effect. 

Do  not  forget,  while  you  read  the  poet’s  plays,  that  he  was  a  player,  and,  mark 
you !  a  theatrical  manager  with  a  keen  eye  to  stage-effects ;  witness  the  ‘  gag  ’  of 
Shylock’s  sharpening  the  knife, — a  most  dangerous  ‘  bit  of  business,’  and  apt  to  cause 
a  laugh ;  be  careful  of  that  1  point.’  Would  the  heroic  Hebrew  have  stooped  to  such 
a  paltry  action  ?  No,  never,  in  the  very  white-heat  of  his  pursuit  of  vengeance !  But 
vengeance  is  foreign  to  Shylock’s  thought;  ’tis  revenge  he  seeks,  and  he  gets  just 
what  all  who  seek  it  get, — ‘  sooner  or  later,’  as  the  saying  is.  Had  his  motive  been 
the  higher  one,  Shakespeare  would  have  somehow  contrived  his  success  without  doubt ; 
but  Shylock  had  grown  too  strong  for  him.  ’Tis  said,  you  know,  that  he  had  to  kill 
Mercutio,  else  the  merry  fellow  would  have  killed  the  tragedy;  so  Shylock  would  have 
killed  the  comedy  had  he  been  intended  to  typify  Vengeance.  The  storm-cloud  of  his 
evil  passions  having  burst,  he  is  forgotten  in  the  moonlight  of  fair  Portia’s  gardens. 

Gentleman  {Dram.  Censor,  i,  296) :  Mrs  Woffington,  whose  deportment  in  a 
male  character  was  so  free  and  elegant,  whose  figure  was  so  proportionate  and  delicate, 
notwithstanding  a  voice  unfavourable  for  declamation,  must,  in  our  opinion,  stand  fore¬ 
most  as  Portia;  her  first  Scene  was  supported  with  an  uncommon  degree  of  spirited 
archness ;  her  behaviour  during  Bassanio’s  choice  of  the  caskets  conveyed  a  strong  pic¬ 
ture  of  unstudied  anxiety ;  the  trial  scene  she  sustained  with  amiable  dignity,  the  speech 
upon  mercy  she  marked  as  well  as  anybody  else ;  and,  in  the  Fifth  Act,  she  carried  on 
the  sham  quarrel  in  a  very  laughable  manner;  to  sum  up  all:  while  in  petticoats  she 
showed  the  woman  of  solid  sense  and  real  fashion;  when  in  breeches,  the  man  of 
education,  judgement,  and  gentility. 

Mrs  Clive  was  a  ludicrous  burlesque  on  the  character ;  every  feature  and  limb  con¬ 
trasted  the  idea  Shakespeare  gives  us  of  Portia ;  in  the  spirited  scene  she  was  clumsy, 
and  spoke  in  the  same  strain  of  chambermaid  delicacy  she  did  Lappet  or  Flippanta ;  in 
the  grave  part,  she  was  awkwardly  dissonant ;  and,  as  if  conscious  she  could  not  get 
through  without  the  aid  of  trick,  flew  to  the  pitiful  resource  of  taking  off  the  peculiarity 
of  some  judge  or  noted  lawyer ;  from  which  wise  stroke  she  created  laughter  in  a  scene 
where  the  deepest  attention  should  be  preserved,  till  Gratiano’s  retorts  upon  the  Jew 
work  a  contrary  effect. 

Boaden  ( Life  of  J.  P.  Kemble,  i,  326)  :  It  was  compensation  rich,  and  rich  enough, 
to  hear  from  the  lips  of  Mrs  Siddons  the  triumphant  delirium  of  joy  when  Bassanio  had 
chosen  the  right  casket. 

According  to  the  Jahrbuch,  xii,  p.  212,  it  appears  that  about  1780  Shylock  was 
given  as  a  serious  character  by  Reinecke  for  the  first  time  on  the  German  stage,  and, 
to  judge  from  a  contemporary  account,  his  interpretation  must  have  been  much  the 


A  C  T ORS — REINE  CKE 


385 


same  as  Macklin’s.  In  a  notice  of  a  later  performance  in  Mannheim  by  Reinecke,  1 
find  a  curious  contemporary  criticism  referred  to  by  Gen6e  (p.  272),  to  the  effect  that 
the  public  were  not  satisfied  with  the  scarcely  perceptible  Jewish  accent  with  which 
Reinecke  spoke  the  part,  and  the  partial  failure  of  the  play  was  attributed  to  this  cause. 
The  public  demanded  that  the  Jewish  accent  should  be  very  decided  and  sustained 
throughout.  Gen6e  agrees  with  the  public  of  that  day,  if  I  understand  him  aright. 

The  prevalence  of  this  practice  of  imparting  a  foreign  accent  to  Shylock’s  words,  I 
find  confirmed  in  the  caution  against  its  extreme  use  which  Oechelhauser  ( Einleitung , 
p.  22)  deems  it  proper  to  give ;  *  especially,’  as  he  says,  ‘  since  Shakespeare  and  his 
‘  translator,  Schlegel,  have  adequately  indicated,  by  the  turn  of  expression,  phraseology, 

*  &c.,  the  Jewish  mode  of  speech.  It  is  only  in  moments  of  extreme  excitement,  as 
‘  Rotscher  explains,  that  a  more  emphatic  dialectic,  and,  in  especial,  a  Jewish,  colour- 
‘  ing  is  permissible.  Charles  Kean  pronounced  Shylock’s  words  wholly  free  from  any 
‘  trace  of  dialect ;  this  is  carrying  it  too  far.’ 

The  passage  in  Rotscher,  to  which  Oechelhauser  refers,  is  evidently  to  be  found  in 
his  Charactergebilde  (Dresden,  1864,  p.  53),  where,  it  is  said,  that  ‘the  actor  who  per- 
‘  sonates  Shylock  must  keep  in  view  the  intimation  of  the  Poet  and  show  the  stamp 

*  of  Shylock’s  nationality,  particularly  in  the  pronunciation,  but  the  actor  must  never 
‘  deviate  into  an  absolute  copy  or  counterfeit  of  the  Jewish  speech.  A  delicate  shade 
‘  must  be  shown  between  a  stamp  of  nationality  and  the  Jewish  tone  and  style  of  the 
‘  lower  classes.  If  the  actor  fails  to  indicate  any  Jewish  element  at  all,  the  character 
‘  will  lose  its  deepest  basis.  Shylock  will  then  stand  on  a  plane  above  his  national 

*  characteristics . It  is  natural,  however,  that  when  he  is  deeply  moved,  in  moments 

*  of  wild  wrath,  the  national  peculiarities  will  be  more  unrestrained  and  ring  out  more 
‘  clearly  than  in  moments  of  brooding  cunning  or  calculating  deliberation.  In  the  for- 

*  mer  the  natural  man  is  revealed  involuntarily,  in  the  latter  he  is  under  the  restraints 

*  induced  by  Christian  intercourse.’ 

Can  it  be  that  it  is  the  use  of  the  word  ‘  monies  ’  which  has  induced  the  belief  among 
our  German  brothers  that  Shylock  ‘  talks  Jewish  ’  ?  It  is  impossible  to  recall  any  other 
word  or  phrase  which  can  hint  at  such  a  supposition ;  and  even  the  use  of  this  word  by 
Shylock  fails  to  help  us  when  we  hear  his  *  monies  ’  spoken  of  by  a  Grecian  Senator  in 
Timon  of  Athens.  The  knot  is  too  intrinse  for  me  to  unloose.  If  it  were  not  for  its 
antiquity,  as  indicated  in  the  criticism  on  Reinecke,  we  might  infer  that  the  adoption 
of  this  Jewish  accent  was  due  to  the  suggestions  of  Schlegel  (see  Extract  from  Schlegel, 
post),  wherein  Rotscher  is  anticipated.  But  evidently  Schlegel  merely  followed  the 
public  opinion  of  his  day  and  the  practice  of  the  stage. 

As  was  quoted  in  regard  to  Lansdowne’s  Version,  *  the  drama’s  laws  the  drama’s 
patrons  give;’  and  German  actors  must  bow  to  the  decision  of  the  German  public;  but 
I  cannot  forbear  remarking  that  any  such  practice  on  our  stage  would  be  abhorrent. 
Undoubtedly,  it  would  mark  the  Jew,  but  it  would  mark  a  Jew  of  the  lowest  class, 
socially  and  intellectually,  to  which  class  Shylock  does  not  belong ;  its  befitting  accom¬ 
paniments  would  be  three  old  hats  and  a  spasmodic  cry  of  ‘  Old  Clo’.’  The  smallest 
hint  of  a  Jewish  accent  would  be  monstrous  and  revolting  here,  where,  between  native 
Jews  and  Christians  of  the  educated  classes,  there  is  no  difference  whatever  in  language 
or  pronunciation  to  be  detected. 

25 


386 


APPENDIX 


COSTUME 

Shylock 

Douce  (i,  251):  Shylock’s  dress  should  be  a  scarlet  hat  lined  with  black  taffeta . 
This  is  the  manner  in  which  the  Jews  of  Venice  were  formerly  distinguished.  See 
Saint  Didier,  Histoire  de  Venise.  In  the  year  1581  they  wore  red  caps  for  distinction’s 
sake,  as  appears  from  Hakluyt’s  Voyages,  p.  179,  ed.  1589;  and  also  from  Lord  Veru- 
lam,  in  his  Essay  on  Usury.  [See  note  on  ‘  usance,’  I,  iii,  45.] 

Collier  ( New  Particulars,  &c.,  1836,  p.  38.  Foot-note  to  Jordan’s  Ballad,  where 
reference  is  made  to  Shylock’s  nose.  See  p.  462  of  this  Appendix) :  I  have  little 
doubt  that  the  part  of  Shylock  was  originally  played  in  a  false  nose  as  well  as  a  false 
beard.  Of  old,  it  was  the  custom  so  to  dress  Jews  and  usurers  on  the  stage;  we  know 
that  such  was  the  case  with  Barrabas,  in  Marlowe’s  Jew  of  Malta,  before  1593,  in  which 
Ithamore  exclaims  :  ‘  Oh,  brave  master,  I  worship  your  nose  for  this ;’  and  Rowley,  in 
his  Search  for  Money,  1609,  speaks  in  express  terms  of  ‘the  artificial  Jew  of  Malta’s 
nose.’ 

Hunter  (i,  307) :  Shylock  was  a  Levantine  Jew  [see  Hunter’s  grounds  for  this 
assertion,  p.  ix,  Actors’  Names,  ante],  and,  therefore,  on  the  stage,  if  it  is  intended 
that  strict  regard  shall  be  paid  to  propriety  in  matters  of  costume,  he  ought,  according 
to  Coryat,  to  appear  in  a  yellow  turban.  [See  Halliwell,  post.] 

Knight  :  Vecellio  expressly  informs  us  that  the  Jews  differed  in  nothing,  as  far  as 
regarded  dress,  from  Venetians  of  the  same  professions,  whether  merchants,  artisans, 
&c.,  with  the  exception  of  2.  yellow  bonnet,  which  they  were  compelled  to  wear  by  order 
of  the  government.  In  confirmation  of  the  assertion  in  Hakluyt’s  Voyages  [mentioned 
by  Douce]  that  Jews  wore  red  caps  for  distinction’s  sake,  we  remember  to  have  met 
somewhere  with  a  story  that  the  colour  was  changed  from  red  to  yellow,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  a  Jew  having  been  accidentally  taken  for  a  cardinal !  Yellow  has  always 
been  in  Europe  a  mark  of  disgrace.  Tenne  (i.  e.  orange)  was  considered  by  many 
heralds  as  stainant.  The  Jews  in  England  wore  yellow  caps  of  a  peculiar  shape  as 
early  as  the  reign  of  Richard  I.  As  late,  also,  as  the  year  1825  an  order  was  issued 
by  the  Pope  that  ‘  the  Jews  should  wear  a  yellow  covering  on  their  hats,  and  the  women 
a  yellow  riband  on  the  breast,  under  the  pain  of  severe  penalties.’ — Vide  Examiner, 
Sunday  newspaper,  Nov.  20th,  1825. 

Halliwell  (p.  321) :  Coryat,  in  his  Crudities,  ed.  1 6 1 1 ,  p.  230,  says:  ‘I  was  at 
the  place  where  the  whole  fraternity  of  the  Jews  dwelleth  together,  which  is  called 
the  Ghetto,  being  an  iland ;  for  it  is  inclosed  round  about  with  water.  It  is  thought 
there  are  of  them  in  all  betwixt  five  and  sixe  thousand.  They  are  distinguished  and 
discerned  from  the  Christians  by  their  habites  on  their  heads ;  for  some  of  them  doe 
weare  hats  and  those  redde,  onely  those  Jews  that  are  borne  in  the  Westerne  parts  of 
the  world,  as  in  Italy,  &c.,  but  the  Easterne  Jewes,  being  otherwise  called  the  Levant¬ 
ine  Jewes,  which  are  borne  in  Hierusalem,  Alexandria,  Constantinople,  &c.,  weare  tur- 
bents  upon  their  heads,  as  the  Turkes  doe;  but  the  difference  is  this  :  the  Turkes  weare 
white,  the  Jewes  yellow.  By  that  word  turbent  I  understand  a  rowle  of  fine  linnen 
wrapped  together  upon  their  heads,  which  serveth  them  instead  of  hats  whereof  many 
have  bin  often  wome  by  the  Turkes  in  London.’  On  p.  232,  speaking  of  the  Jews 
when  at  the  synagogue,  Coryat  observes  that  *  every  one  of  them,  whatsoever  he  be, 
man  or  childe,  weareth  a  kinde  of  light  yellowish  vaile,  made  of  linsie  woolsie  (as  I 
take  it)  over  his  shoulders,  something  worse  than  our  coarser  Holland,  which  reacheth 
a  little  beneath  the  middle  of  their  backes.’ 


COSTUME— ANTHONIO.  PORTIA 


387 


Edwin  Booth  (MS) :  My  costume  for  Shylock  was  suggested  by  one  of  a  group  of 
Oriental  figures  in  a  picture  by  Gerome  (‘  The  Nautch  Girl,’  I  think  it  was  called).  It 
consists  of  a  long,  dark -green  gown,  trimmed  at  the  edge  of  the  skirt  with  an  irregular 
device  of  brown  colour.  A  dark-brown  gaberdine,  with  flowing  sleeves  and  hood,  lined 
with  green  and  trimmed  as  the  gown.  A  variegated  scarf  about  the  waist,  from  which 
depends  a  leather  pouch.  Red  leather  pointed  shoes,  and  hat  of  orange-tawny  colour, 
shaped  somewhat  like  the  Phrygian  cap,  but  with  a  rim  of  about  two  inches,  turned  up. 

Head  grey  and  pretty  bald ;  beard  of  same  colour  and  quite  long.  Ear-rings  and 
several  finger-rings,  one  on  the  thumb  and  one  on  forefinger;  a  long  knotted  staff. 
Complexion  swarthy ;  age  about  sixty,  I  judge,  from  what  is  said  of  it  by  one  of  the 
young  gallants  when  he  is  bemoaning  the  loss  of  his  daughter,  but  ’tis  difficult  to  deter¬ 
mine  the  years  of  such  natures. 

[Irving’s  costume  is  somewhat  described  on  p.  382.] 

Anthonio 

E.  W.  Godwin  ( The  Architect,  3  April,  1875,  p.  196):  Antonio,  with  whom  we 
may  class  Shylock  and  Tubal,  for  the  difference  between  them  was  only  in  the  colour 
of  their  caps,  would  be  attired  like  any  other  merchant,  i.  e.  in  doublet,  trunk  hose, 
stockings  and  shoes,  old  men  wearing  over  all  a  gown  reaching  to  the  heels,  with 
sleeves  tight  in  lower  arm  and  loose  above.  The  gown  was  fastened  in  front,  from  top 
to  bottom,  with  buttons  and  buttonholes  sewn  in  braids,  and  the  skirt  was  open  at  the 
sides,  fastened  by  four  or  five  buttons  at  the  bottom,  likewise  on  braids.  It  was  girded 
at  the  waist  with  a  silk  sash,  having  small  tassels  depending  in  front.  Over  the  dress, 
gowned  or  not,  was  worn  a  large  cape  or  short  cloak  of  silk  or  brocade,  light  or  heavy 
according  to  the  season,  with  a  collar  as  before  mentioned.  Round  the  neck  the  mer¬ 
chant  wore  a  ruff,  and  ruffs  again  appear  at  the  wrists.  The  cap  was  sometimes  high 
and  hat-shaped,  with  a  narrow  brim,  and  sometimes  flat  and  largely  projecting,  like  the 
modern  Scotch  cap.  Like  the  nobles  and  gentlemen,  they  indulged  in  the  luxury  of 
gloves.  [Portia  asks  Anthonio  for  his  gloves. — Ed.]  The  Jew  was  distinguished  from 
the  Christian  by  being  compelled  to  have  his  cap  made  of  a  tawny-yellow  material, 
sometimes  so  tawny  as  to  appear  almost  like  a  faded  red. 

Portia 

Godwin  :  Portia  would  do  her  shopping  probably  at  Padua,  and  would  therefore 
follow  the  fashions  of  the  mainland.  The  chief  difference  we  have  to  note  is  the 
absence  of  the  square-cut  body.  High-necked  bodies,  with  fine  cambric  ruffs,  was  the 
every-day  attire  usually  worn  by  Paduan  ladies  of  noble  birth.  On  state  occasions,  on 
festivals,  and  at  receptions,  the  dress,  though  still  high  on  the  shoulders,  was  open  in 
front,  terminating  at  a  point  a  little  above  the  waist.  There  is  also  a  marked  differ¬ 
ence  to  be  observed  between  the  dress  of  a  maiden  and  that  of  a  married  woman,  and 
there  is  no  question  that  the  Paduan  ladies  (wives  or  not)  indulged  in  a  considerably 
extensive  wardrobe.  So,  too,  there  was  more  than  one  mode  of  dressing  the  hair  (false 
hair  was  by  no  means  unusual).  In  some  cases  it  was  crimped,  parted  in  the  middle, 
brought  round  to  the  back  over  the  ears,  and  rolled  up  a  la  grec ;  in  others  it  fell  loosely 
down  the  back  an  naturel,  confined,  however,  at  the  poll  by  a  delicately-wrought  band 
or  tiara  of  goldsmith’s  work ;  but  the  more  usual  plan  was  to  arrange  the  front  hair  in 
massive  curls,  assuming  somewhat  the  form  of  a  couple  of  low  horns,  and  carried 
down  each  side  in  smaller  curls  to  the  ears,  the  hair  behind  being  strained  (sometimes 
crimped)  and  fastened  up  into  a  plait,  with  strings  of  pearls  interwoven.  From  this 
plait  depended  the  veil,  which  sometimes  also  appears  to  have  covered  the  head  up  to 


3^8 


APPENDIX 


a  point  between  the  horned  curls  or  rolls,  over  which  it  could  be  raised  like  a  double 
hood.  The  veil  itself  was  also  worn  in  various  ways,  and  as  it  was  often  arranged 
with  the  utmost  grace  and  made  of  the  finest  material, — a  sort  of  silken  gauze, 
enriched  with  gold,  interwoven  and  even  sometimes  embroidered  and  decorated 
further  with  pearls  and  gems, — its  lovely  film-like  effect,  like  an  iridescent  mist  over 
the  rich  materials  of  the  gown,  can  be  better  imagined  than  described.  The  gown, 
with  the  exception  already  noted,  was  cut  like  the  Venetian  dress,  and  was  made  of 
silk,  brocade,  gold  cloth,  or  costly  velvet.  Over  the  shoulders  was  worn  a  chain, 
usually  of  gold  set  with  jewels,  and  suspending  a  large  jewel  or  cross.  The  pouch  or 
gipciere  worn  at  the  girdle  was  not  quite  yet  abandoned,  and  Portia  may  wear  one  or 
not  as  she  pleases.  Gowns  with  the  skirt  open  up  the  front  and  with  loose  hanging 
sleeves  were  also  used  by  the  *  Sposa  di  Padoua.’  Rings  were  worn  on  the  first,  third, 
and  fourth  fingers.  Earrings  of  pearls  and  jewels  appear,  and  sometimes  we  see  a 
string  of  pearls,  one  end  attached  to  the  ear  and  the  other  looped  up  to  the  back  hair. 
The  veil  is  occasionally  omitted,  and  a  stiff  semi-circular  collar  of  lace  is  seen  standing 
up  behind  the  neck  and  reaching  as  high  as  the  poll.  Portia’s  stockings  would  be  of 
silk  or  the  finest  thread  worked  with  clocks  and  even  open  seams.  Her  shoes,  of 
slipper  form,  would  be  of  morocco,  or  of  velvet  embroidered  with  gold,  cork  being 
used  for  the  soles.  On  her  journey  to  Venice  she  would  use  a  velvet  mask  or  visor, 
and  gloves  highly  perfumed  and  embroidered  with  gold  or  silver.  A  pocket  looking- 
glass,  with  ladies  of  rank,  was  not  an  uncommon  possession,  and  was  sometimes  set 
in  the  back  of  the  fan,  which  was  usually  made  of  nine  or  more  ostrich  feathers,  the 
handle  set  with  pearls  and  jewels  and  fastened  to  the  end  of  the  girdle-chain,  if  the 
lady  was  married.  The  pocket  handkerchief  was  of  large  size  and  of  fine  cambric, 
having  an  embroidered  border,  and  a  tassel  at  each  corner.  Finally,  on  going  abroad 
ladies  wore,  in  the  winter  and  later  autumn,  a  mantle  or  pelisse  over  the  gown,  reach¬ 
ing  to  below  the  knee,  open  in  front  to  the  neck,  and  with  long,  loose,  open,  hanging 
sleeves.  Over  this  came  the  veil,  and  a  round  velvet  hat,  with  a  broad  brim,  completed 
the  costume,  whose  chief  glory  consisted  in  its  richly  embroidered  or  woven  or  cut 
patterns. 

Civil  Doctor 

Knight:  Vecellio  also  furnishes  us  with  the  dress  of  a  Doctor  of  Laws,  the  habit 
in  which  Portia  defends  Antonio.  The  upper  robe  was  of  black  damask  cloth,  velvet, 
or  silk,  according  to  the  weather.  The  under  one  of  black  silk,  with  a  black  sash,  the 
ends  of  which  hang  down  to  the  middle  of  the  leg ;  the  stockings  of  black  cloth  or 
velvet;  the  cap  of  rich  velvet  or  silk. 

Godwin  :  The  D.  C.  L.  of  Padua  wore  a  tight  doublet,  silk  belt,  trunk  hose,  and 
stockings,  all  of  black ;  velvet  in  winter,  silk  in  summer.  Over  these  he  put  on  his 
official  robe  or  gown,  ungirdled,  having  an  upright  collar  and  long,  capacious  open 
sleeves  reaching  nearly  to  the  ground.  This  was  made  of  velvet,  silk,  or  damask, 
covered  with  rich  pattern,  cut,  embroidered,  or  woven,  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
material.  (All  the  patterns  cut  on  velvet  or  in  brocade  and  damask  were  large.  I 
have  seen  none  which  could  be  drawn  within  less  compass  than  twelve  inches  square.) 
On  his  head  he  wore  a  tolerably  high  cap,  made  with  a  narrow  brim  and  a  flat  top,  and 
on  his  feet  were  seen  the  usual  slipper-shoes.  His  clerk  would  wear  a  black  c  oth 
doublet,  trunks,  stockings,  and  ruffs,  but  no  robe  or  gown. 

Nerrissa 

Godw :  Nerissa,  ‘the  waiting-maid,’ — or  as  we  should  now  call  her,  the  lady's 
maid, —  must  be  dressed  as  the  confidential  servant  of  a  noble  and  wealthy  lady, 


COSTUME— JESSICA.  DOGE 


389 


neither  too  rich  nor  yet  too  poor.  There  will  still  be  the  ruffs  at  neck  and  wrists,  but 
of  less  delicate  material  than  those  on  Portia ;  the  skirt  of  her  gown  will  be  shorter 
than  her  ladyship’s,  and  there  will  be  an  absence  of  ornament,  except,  perhaps,  as  a 
border  to  the  dress.  She  must  wear  a  ring  or  two,  and  from  her  girdle  would  hang  a 
pouch  and  huswife.  She  would  also  have  a  short  veil  of  plain  lawn  or  cambric,  which 
she  might  use  as  a  hood,  pinned  under  the  chin. 

Jessica 

Knight:  Jewish  females,  Vecellio  says,  weie  distinguished  from  Christian  women 
by  their  being  ‘highly  painted ’  and  wearing  yellow  veils,  but  that  in  other  respects 
their  dresses  were  perfectly  similar. 

Edwin  Booth  (MS)  :  Jessica  should  wear  a  yellow  sash  or  veil  of  the  same  colour 
is  Shylock’s  cap. 

Godwin  :  As  the  daughter  of  a  rich  merchant  of  Venice,  Jessica  would  be  dressed 
in  the  ordinary  costume  of  a  Venetian  gentlewoman.  A  tightly-fitting  body,  square- 
cut  neck  before  and  behind,  waist  high  at  the  sides  and  coming  down  low  to  a  point 
both  before  and  behind ;  the  body  laced  across  a  stomacher ;  frilled  shoulder-pieces ; 
sleeves  loose  above,  and  tightly  fitting  to  lower  arm ;  lawn  or  cambric  ruffs  at  the 
wrist;  flowing  skirt;  a  necklet  of  pearls;  slipper-shaped  shoes,  raised  on  sloping 
chopines ;  front  hair  arranged  in  short  massive  curls  on  forehead,  the  rest  strained  back 
and  done  up  in  plait,  from  which  depended  the  veil,  that  in  the  costume  of  a  Jewess 
would  be  yellow.  The  dress  was  of  no  particular  colour,  and  the  skirt  underneath 
was  open  in  front,  and  tied  together  at  intervals. 

Doge 

Knight:  Caesar  Vecellio  describes  at  some  length  the  alterations  made  in  the  Ducal 
dress  by  several  princes,  from  the  close  of  the  twelfth  century  down  to  that  of  the  six¬ 
teenth,  the  period  of  the  action  of  the  play  before  us ;  at  which  time  the  materials  of 
which  it  was  usually  composed  were  cloth  of  silver,  cloth  of  gold,  and  crimson  velvet, 
the  cap  always  corresponding  in  colour  with  the  robe  and  mantle.  Coryat,  in  his 
Crudities ,  says :  ‘  The  fifth  day  of  August  being  Friday  ....  I  saw  the  Duke  in  some 
of  his  richest  ornaments . He  himself  then  wore  two  very  rich  robes,  or  long  gar¬ 

ments,  whereof  the  uppermost  was  white  cloth  of  silver,  with  great  massy  buttons  of 
gold ;  the  other  cloth  of  silver  also,  but  adorned  with  many  curious  works  made  in 
colours  with  needlework.’  Howell,  in  his  Survey  of  the  Signorie  of  Venice,  London, 
1651,  after  telling  us  that  the  Duke  ‘always  goes  clad  in  silk  and  purple,’  observes, 
that  ‘  sometimes  he  shows  himself  to  the  public  in  a  robe  of  cloth  of  gold  and  a  white 
mantle ;  he  hath  his  head  covered  with  a  thin  coif,  and  on  his  forehead  he  wears  a 
crimson  kind  of  mitre,  with  a  gold  border,  and,  behind,  it  turns  up  in  the  form  of  a 
horn ;  on  his  shoulders  he  carries  ermine  skins  to  the  middle,  which  is  still  a  badge  of 
the  Consul’s  habit;  on  his  feet  he  wears  embroidered  sandals  [Vecellio,  a  much  better 
authority,  says  ‘slippers’ — Knight],  tied  with  gold  buttons,  and,  about  his  middle,  a 
most  rich  belt,  embroidered  with  costly  jewels,  in  so  much,  that  the  habit  of  a  Duke, 
when  at  festivals  he  shews  himself  in  the  highest  state,  is  valued  at  about  100,000 
crowns. 

Godwin  ( The  Architect,  London,  3  April,  1875) :  The  Doge’s  dress  consists  of  an 
ermine  cape  or  tippet  reaching  to  the  elbow,  shaped  with  a  slight  upright  collar,  entirely 
open  from  the  throat  downwards,  and  having  six  large  buttons  on  the  left  edge.  These 
buttons  were  sometimes  very  costly,  and  always  important  features.  Under  the  cape 
appears  a  robe  or  cloak  with  a  train,  which  is  borne  by  one  of  the  Doge’s  esquires. 


39° 


APPENDIX 


The  robe  is  covered  with  a  large  rich  pattern  of  conventional  branch  and  leaf,  and  a 
similar  pattern  is  seen  on  the  gown,  which  nearly  touches  the  ground,  and  has  large 
open  sleeves  reaching  below  the  knee,  is  trimmed  with  fur,  is  open  down  the  front 
and  gathered  in  at  the  waist  by  a  belt.  On  the  head  was  worn  the  curious  horn-shaped 
biretta,  and  beneath  this  a  closely-fitting  white  cap,  coming  down  under  it  so  as  to 
cover  the  ears  and  the  back  of  the  head.  Strings  were  attached  to  the  front  edges  of 
this  cap,  sometimes  tied  under  the  chin,  but  often  allowed  to  hang  loose.  The  every¬ 
day  biretta  was  of  red  velvet,  with  a  deep  border  of  gold  embroidery.  The  state  one 
had  jewelled  borders,  and  crests  of  gold  knobs  or  jewels  on  the  top  of  the  border,  and 
edging  the  central  line  or  seam  from  the  front  to  the  back.  Whatever  the  colour  of  the 
robe,  the  biretta  must  be  of  the  same  colour  and  material,  except  only  its  deep  gold 
border  or  band. 

Bassanio,  Solanio,  dr’c. 

Knight:  ‘Young  lovers,’  says  Vecellio,  ‘wear  generally  a  doublet  and  breeches  of 
satin,  tabby,  or  other  silk,  cut  or  slashed  in  the  form  of  crosses  or  stars,  through  which 
slashes  is  seen  the  lining  of  coloured  taffeta ;  gold  buttons,  a  lace  ruff,  a  bonnet  of  rich 
velvet  or  silk  with  an  ornamental  band,  a  silk  cloak,  and  silk  stockings,  Spanish  mo¬ 
rocco  shoes,  a  flower  in  one  hand  and  their  gloves  and  handkerchief  in  the  other.’ 
This  habit,  he  tells  us,  was  worn  by  many  of  the  nobility,  as  well  of  Venice  as  of  other 
Italian  cities,  especially  by  the  young  men  before  they  put  on  the  gown  with  the  sleeves, 
‘  a  comito,’  which  was  generally  in  their  eighteenth  or  twentieth  year. 

Godwin:  Bassanio,  as  a  noble  of  Venice,  would  be  dressed  in  doublet,  trunk  hose 
to  below  the  knee,  stockings  and  shoes,  and  over  all,  in  the  house,  a  houpelande, 
with  hanging  sleeves  of  much  the  same  shape  as  that  worn  in  the  15th  century.  But 
abroad  he  would  change  the  over-garment  for  the  large-sleeved  gown  or  toga.  The 
cream  of  the  aristocracy — that  is,  the  chiefs  or  heads  of  the  leading  families — adopt, 
commonly,  crimson  for  the  colour  of  the  underdress,  and  black  for  the  gown.  Gloves, 
having  stiff  wrist-bands  attached,  are  worn  or  carried  in  the  hand,  and  the  cap  is  a 
plain,  round,  flat-topped,  limp  sort  of  pork-pie  hat.  The  gown  was  shaped  at  the  neck 
so  as  to  produce  a  stand-up  collar,  and  over  one  shoulder  was  worn  the  long,  narrow 
strip  which  distinguished  nobles  and  magistrates — altogether  not  a  very  picturesque 
costume.  Solanio,  Salarino,  Gratiano,  and  Lorenzo  may  be  attired  in  eminently  pic¬ 
turesque  dresses.  The  long  gown  reaching  to  the  feet,  with  its  ugly  baggy  sleeves, 
forms  no  part  of  the  ordinary  Venetian  habit.  The  scholars  and  young  gentlemen 
wore  short  cloaks  with  collars,  slashed  doublets  thick  set  with  buttons  down  the 
front,  slashed  sleeves,  rather  easy  in  the  upper  part,  but  tight  on  the  forearm,  slashed 
trunk  hose,  with  three  or  four  buttons  at  the  side  of  the  knee,  stockings,  and  light, 
slipper-like  shoes.  Round  the  neck  they  wore  ruffs  like  those  adopted  by  all  Western 
Europe  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  1 6th  century.  The  hat  or  cap  was  a  tall  bag-like 
structure  with  a  stiff  narrow  rim.  They  wore  ruffs  at  the  wrist,  and  carried  swords. 

Morocco.  Arragon 

Godwin  :  The  Prince  of  Morocco  would  wear  a  loose  and  full  white  cotton  gown 
with  capacious  sleeves  and  high  neck,  girded  with  a  sash  of  delicate  crape-like  mate¬ 
rial  full  of  coloured  stripes  and  gold,  the  ends  of  which  were  deeply  fringed  and  hung 
as  low  as  the  knee.  On  his  head  he  would  wear  a  spotlessly  white  turban,  shaped 
like  a  small  pillow,  bound  round  the  centre  with  a  broad  band.  The  skirt  of  his  dress 
would  be  tucked  through  his  girdle,  hanging  therefrom  in  irregular  and  graceful  folds 
nearly  to  the  ground.  On  his  legs  red  morocco  buskins,  and  his  shoes  of  leather  of 


COSTUME— MAGNIFICOES,  &*C. 


39 1 


Mother  colour,  both  often  richly  embroidered  with  gold  and  silver.  Large  rings  of 
gold  depend  from  his  ears,  and  across  his  breast  glitters  his  leathern  sword-belt,  loaded, 
I  might  almost  say,  clogged,  with  precious  stones.  The  Prince  of  Arragon  would  be 
dressed  like  a  noble  in  the  Court  of  the  King  of  Spain.  The  most  important  points 
to  be  noticed  is  the  shortness  of  the  trunks,  which  are  only  just  visible  below  the 
doublet,  the  short  cloak,  and  the  increased  length  of  the  skirt  of  the  doublet.  Ruffs 
appear  round  the  neck  and  wrists,  and  on  the  head  a  tall  bag-like  hat  with  very  nar¬ 
row  brim.  The  cloak  was  usually  of  ‘purple’  (crimson)  silk  or  velvet,  lined  with 
costly  material,  sometimes  richly  embroidered  with  gold.  It  was  worn  occasionally 
with  a  hood,  and  was  often  wrapped  round  the  breast  in  a  careless-looking,  but  emi¬ 
nently  artistic,  manner. 

Magnificoes,  &=c. 

Knight  :  The  Chiefs  of  the  Council  of  Ten,  who  were  three  in  number,  wore  ‘  red 
gowns  with  long  sleeves,  either  of  cloth,  camlet,  or  damask,  according  to  the  weather, 
with  a  flap  of  the  same  colour  over  the  left  shoulder,  red  stockings,  and  slippers.’  The 
rest  of  the  Ten,  according  to  Coryat,  wore  black  camlet  gowns  with  marvellous  long 
sleeves,  that  reach  almost  down  to  the  ground. 

The  ‘  Clarissimoes  ’  generally  wore  gowns  of  black  cloth  faced  with  black  taffeta, 
with  a  flap  of  black  cloth  edged  with  taffeta,  over  the  left  shoulder ;  and  ‘  all  these 
gowned  men,’  says  the  same  author,  ‘  do  wear  marvellous  little  black  caps  of  felt,  with¬ 
out  any  brims  at  all,  and  very  diminutive  falling  bands,  no  ruffs  at  all,  which  are  so 
shallow,  that  I  have  seen  many  of  them  not  above  a  little  inch  deep.’  The  colour  of 
their  under-garments  was  also  generally  black,  and  consisted  of  *  a  slender  doublet 
made  close  to  the  body,  without  much  quilting  or  bombast,  and  long  hose  plain,  with¬ 
out  those  new-fangled  curiosities  and  ridiculous  superfluities  of  panes,  pleats,  and  other 
light  toys  used  with  us  Englishmen.  Yet,’  he  continues,  ‘they  make  it  of  costly  stuff, 
well  beseeming  gentlemen  and  eminent  persons  of  their  places,  as  of  the  best  taffetas 
and  satins  that  Christendom  doth  yield,  which  are  fairly  garnished  also  with  lace  of  the 
l>est  sort.’ 

Gobbo 

Godwin  :  Launcelot  Gobbo,  as  the  Jew’s  servant,  would  not  be  a  servant  in  livery, 
but  would  have  a  plain  doublet,  not  unlike  a  Norfolk  shirt  in  general  outline,  trunks, 
stockings,  shoes,  and  a  high  cap  with  a  narrow  brim.  As  Bassanio’s  servant,  he  would 
be  in  livery  like  Leonardo,  or  Balthazar  and  Stephano,  servants  to  Portia,  whose  doub¬ 
lets  would  be  covered  with  guards,  or  braids  and  buttons  set  very  closely  together. 

Old  Gobbo  would  wear  a  kind  of  blouse  with  turn-over  collar,  cut  down  to  the  waist 
in  front  and  tied  together  with  two  or  three  bows.  The  skirt  would  be  open  at  the 
sides,  belted  round  the  waist  with  a  leathern  strap,  and  beneath  it  would  appear  the 
ends  of  loose  breeches,  bare  knees,  turn-over  coarse  stockings,  and  tied  shoes.  The 
neck  and  throat  were  bare. 

Richard  Grant  White  ( Introduction ,  p.  144) :  The  Merchant  of  Venice  has 
never  been  put  on  the  stage  in  the  costume  of  the  time  at  which  it  was  written ;  and 
gorgeous  as  that  costume  was,  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  much  would  be  gained 
by  absolute  correctness  in  this  particular.  Should  the  Duke  and  Magnificoes  enter  in 
their  cumbrous  and  all-enveloping  mantles,  with  their  queer  little  bird’s  nests  of  caps 
perched  upon  gray  and  bearded  heads,  the  grave  Antonio  with  a  bonnet  like  an 
inverted  porringer  shadowing  his  melancholy  countenance,  Bassanio  with  one  half  a 
yard  high,  taller  before  than  behind,  and  puffed  out  like  a  pillow  with  bombast,  which 


392 


APPENDIX 


also  swelled  his  fantastically  decorated  breeches  to  an  enormous  size,  Portia  in  the  stiff 
and  clumsy  skirt  and  stomacher  of  a  Venetian  lady  of  rank  of  that  day,  formidable 
with  bristling  ruffs,  and  with  her  hair  engineered  into  two  little  conical  turrets  of  curls 
upon  her  forehead,  one  over  each  eye, — it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  splendour  and  faith 
fulness  of  the  scene  would  be  forgotten  in  its  absurdity,  and  that  the  audience  would 
explode  in  fits  of  uncontrollable  laughter  as  the  various  personages  came  upon  the 
stage.  Any  Italian  costume,  rich,  beautiful,  and  sufficiently  antique  to  remove  the  action 
out  of  the  range  of  present  probabilities,  will  meet  the  dramatic  requirements  of  this 
play;  but  the  orange-tawny  bonnet,  that  mark  of  an  outcast  race,  ought  not  to  be 
missed  from  the  brow  of  Shylock. 

Godwin  :  We  must  remember  that  the  officials  in  a  Venetian  Court  kept  their  hats 
on  in  presence  of  the  Doge,  that  the  manners  of  the  period  were  characterized  by 
courtesy  combined  with  a  stately,  dignified  action,  and  that  what  we  call  stiffness  of 
manner  was  then  regarded  as  quite  the  correct  thing.  But  modern  actors  and  actresses 
rarely  hold  the  mirror  high  enough  to  reflect  the  mien,  deportment,  or  bearing  of  the 
men  and  women  of  a  past  age.  The  air  or  look  of  gentlemen  and  ladies  during  the 
great  period  of  the  Renaissance  can  be  ascertained  from  the  documents  and  the  pic¬ 
tures  of  the  time,  and  if  an  actor  fails  to  reproduce  it  he  is  not  fitted  to  play  in  the 
comedies  of  the  great  dramatist  of  that  period.  Correctness  of  costume,  and  scenery, 
and  properties,  and  furniture  is  all  very  well,  but  if  through  it  all  we  see  19th-century 
action,  modern  style,  the  mode  of  Robertsonian  society,  or  the  special  graces  and 
charms  which  are  the  delight  of  our  own  time,  but  which  would  have  been  looked 
upon  as  antics,  or  at  the  least  as  bad  form,  in  the  Courts  of  Philip  or  Elizabeth,  then 
the  picture  must  be  discordant,  and  the  dramatic  representation  woefully  incomplete. 
[It  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  there  is  one  requisite  which  Godwin  has 
overlooked,  and  that  is,  that  the  characters  should  all  talk  in  Italian. — Ed.] 

Scenery 

Edward  W.  Godwin  [The  Architect,  London,  27  March,  1875) :  The  architectural 
scenery,  divided  between  Venice  and  Belmont,  may  be  said  to  consist  at  most  of  five 
Scenes,  viz. :  Venice:  i,  A  street  or  public  place.  2,  The  street  before  Shylock' s  house. 
3,  A  court  of justice.  Belmont:  4,  A  grand  hall.  3,  A  garden.  The  short  Third 
Scene  of  the  Second  Act  contains  nothing  but  what  might  just  as  well  be  said  on  the 
doorstep  of  Shylock’s  house  as  inside  a  room ;  so  that  this  may  be  included  in  the 
Scene  numbered  2  in  the  above  list. 

So,  too,  I  see  scarcely  any  reason  why  the  talk  between  Portia  and  Nerissa  in  I,  ii, 
or  in  III,  iv,  should  not  have  happened  in  the  grand  hall  or  apartment  where  the  cas¬ 
kets  are  placed.  If  there  were  choice  flowering  shrubs  placed  in  this  room,  so  that  the 
lady  and  her  maid  might  busy  themselves  about  them  while  they  are  conversing,  and 
if  a  corridor  at  the  back  of  this  hall  led  from  some  other  part  of  the  house  into  the 
garden,  so  that  one  might  pass  the  hall  of  the  caskets  without  necessarily  entering  it, 
there  is  nothing  in  the  text  inconsistent  with  these  two  Scenes  being  located  in  the 

same  room  as  the  more  important  Casket  Scenes . If  we  wish  still  further  to 

abridge  our  stock  of  scenery,  the  Scenes  Nos.  1  and  2  may  be  easily  made  one,  and 

we  shall  thus  have  brought  the  play  into  the  compass  of  four  set  Scenes . It  is 

essential  first  of  all  that  the  Scene-painter  should  bear  well  in  mind  that  in  1590  Ven¬ 
ice  was  neither  a  city  of  palaces  nor  a  city  of  ruins,  and  that  along  her  canals  and 
streets  two  great  styles  of  art,  broadly  speaking,  prevailed,  and  a  third  was  gradually 
usurping  the  place  of  both ;  these  three  styles  were  the  Byzantine,  the  Gothic,  and  the 


COSTUME— SCENER  V 


393 


Renaissance . Photographs  of  the  old  houses  of  Venice  are  so  common  and  so 

readily  to  be  had,  that  the  only  difficulty  left  to  a  Scene-painter  is  the  archaeological 
one — that  of  recognizing  any  deductions  or  additions  in  detail  that  may  have  been 
made  to  any  mediaeval  house  since  1590.  Moreover,  the  red  brick  of  Venice  is  full 
of  such  charming  colour,  and  the  weather  stains  upon  the  stone  and  marble  give  such 
delicious  tone  to  these  materials,  that  one  hesitates  to  write  a  word  that  would  tend  to 
dispel  the  vision.  But  yet,  if  we  desire  to  realize  the  Venice  of  Shakespeare,  we  shall 
have  to  cover  most  of  the  brick  with  veneer  of  marble,  either  plain  or  in  coloured  dia¬ 
per,  or  with  stucco  decorated  with  painted  diapers,  and  the  few  exceptions  to  this  rule 
would  be  the  very  smallest  and  poorest  houses  and  the  earliest  of  the  Byzantine  works. 
....  Another  point  for  the  Scene-painter  to  bear  in  mind  is,  that  the  streets  and  open 
places  were  usually  paved  with  red  brick  arranged  in  simple  patterns,  and  most  com¬ 
monly  in  that  known  as  herring-bone.  A  third  very  important  thing  to  remember  in 
connection  with  the  Venice  of  the  merchant  Antonio  is  the  universality  of  applied  col¬ 
our  as  distinguished  from  the  parti-coloured  construction  adopted  by  the  rest  of  Western 
Europe.  The  coloured  marble  pattern  on  the  Ducal  Palace  was  by  no  means  a  solitary 
example . In  houses  of  less  pretension  the  stucco  was  painted  in  two  or  three  sim¬ 

ple  earth  colours,  with  small  diapers.  [Godwin  gives  diagrams  of  the  setting  of  these 
several  Scenes,  and  also  a  list  of  Venetian  buildings  which  might  be  used  as  guides  in 
depicting  the  architecture.  For  the  Trial  Scene  he  selects  the  Sal  a  dcllo  Scrutinio  in 
the  Ducal  Palace,  and  refers  the  Scene-painter  to  photographs ;  the  setting  of  this  Scene 
he  pronounces]  one  of  the  most  difficult  problems  among  the  scenic  questions  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  plays.  We  have  to  maintain  the  dignity  of  the  strict  Court  of  Venice,  to  find 
room  not  only  for  the  Doge  and  the  Magnificoes,  but  for  officials  who  might  attend  as 
senators,  magistrates,  doctors  of  law,  &c. ;  we  have  to  provide  for  a  crowd  of  lawyers, 
— some  of  them  young  men, — so  that  Portia  may  not  appear  too  singular;  we  must  not 
forget  the  question,  *  Which  is  the  merchant  here  and  which  the  Jew  ?’  showing  that 
both  plaintiff  and  defendant  were  absorbed  in  the  two  opposing  crowds  of  Christians 
and  Israelites,  and  we  must  remember  that,  although  the  secret  tribunal  of  the  Council 
of  Ten  had  its  fearful  power  somewhat  curtailed  in  1582,  its  servants  were  still  to  be 
seen  watching  and  listening  wherever  two  or  three  were  gathered  together.  Under 
these  circumstances  I  again  propose  a  diagonal  set  for  this  Scene  [where  the  left  side 
of  the  angle  is  taken  up  with  the  raised  platform  for  the  Doge  and  Magnificoes ;  in 
front  of  it  the  lawyers’  table,  at  which,  in  the  very  centre  of  the  stage,  stands  Portia ; 
to  her  left  and  in  front  of  her  stands  Antonio ;  on  her  right,  at  the  end  of  the  lawyers’ 
table,  in  advance  of  Antonio,  and  the  nearest  character  to  the  footlights,  stands  Shy- 
lock.  Bassanio’s  position  is  on  the  platform,  among  the  nobles  around  the  Doge.] 

The  fittings  should  be  of  sumptuous  carved  wood  almost  covered  with  gilding . 

The  table  for  the  lawyers  might  have  a  rich  cover  of  crimson  velvet  reaching  to  the 
floor,  but  cut  up  at  the  angles  and  fastened  by  a  number  of  long  loops  of  gold  lace  or 
braid,  as  may  be  seen  in  pictures  of  the  time.  On  the  table  we  might  see  the  folios  of 
the  statutes  of  Venice  with  their  magnificent  binding  and  gilded  clasps ;  inkstands  of 
bronze,  chased  and  moulded  of  circular  form  and  of  about  the  size  of  the  common  lead 
office-inkstand  of  the  present  day ;  the  portfolios  of  the  lawyers  and  learned  doctors. 
12  to  18  inches  square,  beautifully  worked  in  leather.  The  deed  or  bond  would  be  on 
a  small  strip  of  vellum,  well  creased  and  tearable  at  the  creases ;  the  scales  were  just 
the  same  as  we  have  now.  Shylock,  being  a  merchant  in  jewels  and  precious  metals, 
would  have  probably  brought  his  own  private  scales ;  [He  says  that  he  has  them  ready, 
. — Fd.]  the  knife  was  doubtless  the  glaive-shaped  instrument  then  common;  the  lettei 


394 


APPENDIX 


was  folded  longwise,  with  the  direction  in  one  corner,  tied  with  silk  and  sealed.  [For 
the  Casket  Scene  Godwin  also  recommends  a  diagonal  set,  with  an  arcade  on  both 
sides ;  on  one  side  is  an  ascending  staircase,  and  a  corridor  leading  to  the  garden  on 
the  other,  near  the  back  a  platform  for  the  caskets ;  from  the  arches  are  hung  curtains 
having  large  patterns  in  broad  stripes,  like  those  preserved  in  the  Kensington  Mu¬ 
seum.]  In  looking  at  the  furniture  of  the  time  we  shall  find  that  the  candles  or  lights 
were  held  in  sconces  of  repoussl  metal,  brackets  and  lamps  suspended  from  the  ceil¬ 
ing.  Chinese  porcelain  vases  for  flowers,  some  carved  and  gilded  chests,  a  table  and 
chair  of  the  same  description,  cabinets,  Limoges  enamels,  mirrors,  majolica,  lapis  lazuli 
cups,  crystals,  Eastern  rugs,  a  movable  clock,  Murano  glasses,  antique  statues,  and  a 
parrot  or  some  love-birds  in  a  cage  or  on  a  stand  may  be  brought  in  to  help  the  Scene. 
Among  the  musical  instruments  we  may  have  the  violin,  tambourine,  harp,  and  theorbo, 

all  illustrated  in  Poliphilus,  and  some  specimens  to  be  seen  at  South  Kensington . 

But  whether  a  theatrical  manager  does  or  does  not  attend  to  these  things ;  whether  he 
wishes  to  do  right,  or  whether,  owing  to  profound  ignorance  respecting  the  manners, 
customs,  and  general  surroundings  of  any  past  time  which  distinguishes  the  modern 
stage  and  its  ‘  patrons,’  he  thinks  it  a  matter  of  very  small  moment,  one  thing  he  must 
Jo,  and  that  is  provide  three  caskets.  Now  for  these  things,  the  style  which  was  the 
most  costly  and  the  most  sumptuous  in  the  lifetime  of  Lady  Portia’s  father  was  that 
introduced  from  Damascus,  and  which  has  always  gone  under  the  name  of  damas¬ 
cened  work.  Iron  or  steel  caskets,  most  elaborately  wrought  with  sharp  mouldings 
and  carvings,  were  covered  on  the  plain  surfaces  with  rich  ornament  pressed  in  of  gold 
or  silver,  and  in  the  examples  before  us  the  sides  of  the  caskets  might  be  panelled,  and 
in  each  panel  repousse  work  of  gold  and  silver  for  two  of  them,  and  cast  work  of  lead 

for  the  third . Portia’s  counterfeit  would  be  probably  enclosed  in  a  flat,  wide  frame 

of  the  same  style  of  art,  or  of  walnut  inlaid  with  rich  patterns  of  ivory,  mother-of-pearl, 
lapis  lazuli,  &c. 

The  Fifth  Act,  and  indeed  the  whole  episode  of  the  rings,  might  be  very  well  omitted 
in  modern  stage  representation. 

[In  Collier’s  English  Dramatic  Poetry  (vol.  iii,  p.  170,  second  edition)  there  is  a 
sentence  which  is  to  me  profoundly  true  : — ‘  We  decidedly  concur  with  Malone  in  the 
general  conclusion,  that  painted  moveable  scenery  was  unknown  on  our  early  stage , 
and  it  is  a  fortunate  circumstance  for  the  poetry  of  our  old  plays,  that  it  was  so ;  the 
imagination  of  the  auditor  only  was  appealed  to,  and  we  owe  to  the  absence  of  painted 
canvas  many  of  the  finest  descriptive  passages  in  Shakespeare,  his  contemporaries,  and 
immediate  followers.  The  introduction  of  scenery ,  we  apprehend,  gives  the  date  to  the 
commencement  of  the  decline  of  our  dramatic  poetry .’ — Ed.] 


JEWS  IN  ENGLAND 


395 


JEWS  IN  ENGLAND 

From  the  fact  that  the  Jews  were  expelled  from  England  by  Edward  the  First  in 
1290,  and  were  not  permitted  to  return  until  1650,  under  Cromwell,  it  has  been  inferred 
that  Shakespeare  could  have  acquired  no  personal  knowledge  of  them  unless  he  had 
obtained  it  abroad.  That,  however,  he  might  have  had  opportunities  of  seeing  them 
in  London  has  been  for  a  long  time  suspected ;  not  only  does  Bacon  refer  to  them 
familiarly,  but  in  Coryat’s  Crudities  (vol.  iii,  p.  303,  ed.  1776)  we  have  one  clear 
assurance  that  Jews  in  his  day  were  born  and  bred  in  England.  When  in  Constan 
tinople,  in  1608,  Coryat  narrates  at  length  his  visit  to  ‘the  house  of  a  certaine  English 
*  lew,  called  Amis,  borne  in  Crootched  Friers  in  London,  who  hath  two  sisters  more 
‘  of  his  owne  Ievvish  Religion,  commorant  in  Galata,  who  were  likewise  borne  in  the 
‘  same  place.’ 

Furthermore,  that  a  certain  Dr  Lopez,  a  Jewish  resident  of  London,  had  been  exe¬ 
cuted  in  1594  for  treasonable  practices,  was  known  from  Stowe’s  Annals  ;  but  the  first 
to  call  attention  to  a  possible  connection  between  the  notoriety  of  this  execution  and 
the  appearance  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice  was,  I  think,  Frederick  Hawkins,  in  an 
article  on  Shylock  and  other  Stage  Jews,  which  appeared  in  The  Theatre,  November, 
1879.  As  an  investigation  of  Dr  Lopez’s  case  did  not  come  within  the  scope  of  his 
article,  Mr  Hawkins  restricted  himself  to  the  simple  statement  that  ‘  it  was  amidst  the 
excitement  induced  by  the  supposed  iniquities  of  Dr  Lopez  ....  that  The  Merchant 
of  Venice  appeared,’  and  briefly  rehearsed  the  most  prominent  incidents  connected  with 
the  trial. 

In  the  following  February,  1880,  S.  L.  Lee,  in  the  Gentleman' s  Magazine,  set  forth  the 
result  of  an  examination,  apparently  thorough,  of  the  State  Papers  at  the  time  of  Lopez’s 
trial,  in  an  article  called  The  Original  Shylock,  whereof  a  condensation  is  here  given : 

S.  L.  Lee:  On  the  evidence  of  contemporary  records  we  can  safely  assert  that  Jews 
were  residing  in  England  throughout  Shakespeare’s  life-time,  and  that  opportunities  of 
more  or  less  intimate  intercourse  with  them  were  for  many  years  open  to  him. 

We  need  not  go  very  far  to  find  two  important  pieces  of  evidence  to  show  that  at 
the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  presence  of  Jews  in  this 
country  was  acknowledged  by  the  highest  authorities.  In  the  State  Papers  relating  to 
the  marriage  of  Katharine  of  Arragon  with  Arthur,  Prince  of  Wales,  we  are  told  that 
Henry  VII  had  a  long  interview  with  a  Spanish  envoy  to  discuss  the  presence  of  Jews 
in  England.  [The  foot-notes  wherein  the  author  cites  his  authorities  are  not  here 
reprinted,  through  lack  of  space. — Ed.]  Similarly,  in  a  very  rare  tract  descriptive  of 
English  society,  and  evidently  written  within  the  first  quarter  of  the  seventeenth  cen¬ 
tury,  we  are  informed  that  ‘  a  store  of  Jewes  we  have  in  England ;  a  few  in  Court ; 
many  i’  th’  Citty,  more  in  the  Countrey.’  These  witnesses  can  leave  little  doubt  of 
the  fact  that  Jews  were  known  here  before  their  formal  re-admission  under  Cromwell, 
and  many  disconnected  notices  in  addition  can  be  produced  to  prove  it  in  fuller  detail. 
Indeed,  from  a  great  mass  of  private  correspondence  we  are  enabled  to  trace  the  for¬ 
tunes  of  a  Jewish  family,  named  Lopez,  living  in  England  near  the  beginning  of  the 
second  quarter  of  the  sixteenth  century. 

This  discovery  promises  to  throw  light  on  contemporary  stage  history.  It  is  cer¬ 
tainly  significant  that,  rarely  as  the  Jew  has  made  his  appearance  on  the  English  stage, 
he  was  the  hero  of  no  less  than  three  plays  [Gosson’s  ‘  Jew  showne  at  the  Bull,’  Mar¬ 
lowe’s  Barrabas,  and  Shakespeare’s  Shylock],  all  written  and  produced  within  the  same 
fifteen  years,  and  that  during  these  very  years  a  Jewish  doctor — Roderigo  Lopez  by 


396 


APPENDIX 


% 

name  (the  head  of  the  family  to  which  we  have  referred) — held  a  very  prominent 
position  in  London  and  at  Court,  and  shared  with  actors  an  intimacy  with  those  noble¬ 
men  who  were  the  warmest  patrons  of  the  drama.  It  is,  perhaps,  a  more  remarkable 
circumstance  that  in  the  same  year,  and  just  before  the  earliest  form  of  The  Merchant 
of  Venice  was  first  produced,  this  Jew  became  the  victim  of  what  bears  all  the  appeal 
ance  of  a  Court  intrigue,  and  through  his  trial  and  execution  brought  his  family  and 
faith  into  such  notoriety  that  one  theatrical  manager  at  least  found  it  to  his  advantage 
to  utilize  it.  In  a  more  minute  examination  of  this  man’s  public  and  private  relations 
than  has  yet  been  attempted,  we  intend  to  inquire  if  any  grounds  exist  on  which  we 
may  (within  the  limits  of  historical  probability)  establish  a  connection  between  his 
career  and  the  creation  and  development  of  Shakespeare’s  Jew. 

[The  early  history  of  Lopez  is  hidden  in  obscurity.  All  authorities,  however,  are 
agreed  that  he  was  descended  from  a  Spanish  Jewish  family.  There  are  records  of 
two  of  that  name,  one  in  1515,  and  the  other  in  1550,  and  both  doctors ;  the  latter  was 
known  to  be  a  *  Jewe  borne.’  The  supposition  is  reasonable  that  they  were  of  the 
same  family;  it  is  not  unlikely,  then,  that  Roderigo  was  born  in  England;]  and  as  in 
the  year  1594  he  is  represented  in  a  contemporary  engraving  and  in  written  documents 
as  being  well  advanced  in  years,  we  may  place  the  date  of  his  birth  between  1520  and 
1530.  He  probably  obtained  his  medical  education  (as  was  the  usual  custom)  at  some 
Southern  university.  But  he  returned  to  England  comparatively  early  in  life,  and 
joined  the  recently  formed  College  of  Physicians.  He  rapidly  gained  reputation  in 
‘his  faculty.’  In  1569  he  was  selected  to  read  the  Anatomy  Lectures  of  the  year 
and  in  1575  his  name  appears  almost  at  the  head  of  the  list  of  the  chief  doctors  of 
London,  quoted  by  Stowe.  Some  years  before  he  had  married  a  Jewess  named  Sarah 
who  apparently  had  wealthy  relations  in  Antwerp,  and  he  soon  became  the  father  of  a 
large  family  of  daughters. 

Lopez,  who  numbered  among  his  patients  the  chief  statesmen  of  the  day,  was  for  a 
long  time  attached  to  the  household  of  Lord  Leicester.  With  the  Earl  he  lived  on 
terms  of  great  intimacy,  *  being  withal  a  man  very  observant  and  officious,  and  of  a 
pleasing  and  appliable  behaviour.’  But  the  connection  is  noticeable  on  other  grounds. 
While  Lopez  was  attending  him  professionally,  Leicester  frequently  summoned  to  Ken¬ 
ilworth  a  number  of  actors,  many  of  whom  came  from  the  neighbouring  town  of  Strat¬ 
ford,  and  he  subsequently  incorporated  the  chief  of  them  by  special  license  as  ‘  the  Earl 
of  Leicester’s  company  of  servants  and  players.’  [To  this  company,  under  its  various 
titles,  Shakespeare  belonged  throughout  his  career. — Ed.]  At  the  head  of  them  stood 
James  Burbadge,  a  fellow-townsman  of  Shakespeare,  whose  son  Richard  became  the 
dramatist’s  most  intimate  friend.  The  invention  of  the  kind  of  beard  that  has  been 
for  centuries  a  stage-tradition  with  Shylock  is  attributed  to  him,  and  in  this  detail  he 
seems  to  have  imitated,  to  judge  from  a  portrait  of  the  day,  the  Jewish  physician,  to 
whom  his  father  doubtless  had  previously  introduced  him  on  one  of  the  occasions  when 
all  three  were  enjoying  Leicester’s  hospitality. 

In  1586,  Lopez  became  sworn  physician  to  Queen  Elizabeth.  The  promotion  gave 
him  new  prominence  in  political  society. 

In  1590,  Lopez  obtained  an  additional  claim  to  public  attention.  A  foreigner,  flee 
ing  from  the  wrath  of  King  Philip  of  Spain,  sought  protection  at  the  Court  of  St  James. 
An  illegitimate  connection  of  the  royal  family  of  Portugal,  he  had,  on  the  death  of  the 
king  in  1580,  laid  claim  to  the  throne,  and  gathered  round  him  a  large  body  of  adhe¬ 
rents . The  Duke  of  Alva  was  despatched  to  put  an  end  to  him,  but  the  pretender 

was  fortunate  enough  to  escape,  about  1588,  to  England. 


JEWS  IN  ENGLAND— L  EE 


397 


In  London  he  was  received  with  wild  enthusiasm.  The  Spanish  fever  was  at  its 
height,  and  so  long  as  it  lasted  the  refugee  was  sure  to  be  the  popular  idol.  His  real 
name  was  the  ordinary  Portuguese  one  of  Antonio  Perez,  but  he  was  known  popularly 
as  King  Antonio,  and  references  to  him  as  to  a  royal  personage  abound  in  contempo 

rary  records . Antonio,  in  spite  of  his  extravagant  pretensions,  was  a  person  of 

singularly  small  intelligence.  Portuguese  was  the  only  language  he  could  speak  or  in 
which  he  could  correspond.  An  interpreter  was  therefore  required  before  he  could 
maintain  any  regular  intercourse  with  his  new  friends.  Among  the  courtiers  Lopez 
was  famed  for  a  more  or  less  intimate  knowledge  of  five  European  languages,  and  he 
was  accordingly  invited  by  the  Queen  and  Essex  to  come  to  Antonio’s  assistance.  The 
doctor  complied  with  the  invitation,  and  from  that  date  he  was  closely  associated  in  the 

public  mind  with  their  hero  Antonio . At  first  all  went  well,  ....  but  before  two 

years  had  passed  the  intercourse  [between  Essex  and  Lopez  and  Antonio]  showed 
itself  to  be  wanting  in  harmony.  Lopez  was  old,  and  his  health  had  begun  to  fail. 
He  grew  irritable,  and  endured  with  impatience  Essex’s  impetuosity.  His  enthusiasm 
for  Antonio  was  cooling,  whose  conduct  was  characterized  by  intense  arrogance  and 
by  an  incapacity  to  show  gratitude.  Sharp  words,  therefore,  occasionally  passed  be¬ 
tween  Antonio  and  his  chief  adviser.  The  young  courtiers  took  the  part  of  their  for¬ 
eign  protegi,  and  seized  the  opportunity  of  taunting  the  doctor  with  his  religious  pro¬ 
fession,  the  number  of  his  daughters,  and  his  anxiety  to  see  them  matched  to  wealthy 
suitors.  [In  1592,  Essex  endeavoured  to  make  Lopez  a  political  tool  in  a  Spanish 
intrigue,  and  Lopez  revealed  the  plan  to  the  Queen,  who  told  Essex  that  she  regarded 
it  ‘  as  a  mean  expedient.’]  Essex,  angry  at  this  betrayal  of  his  confidence,  retaliated 
by  advising  Antonio  to  treat  with  less  forbearance  the  doctor’s  uncertain  temper,  and  to 
complain  of  his  irritability  to  the  Queen.  [Lopez,  not  to  be  outdone,  divulged  to  Anto¬ 
nio  some  professional  secrets  *  which  did  disparage  to  Essex’s  honour this  led  to  an 
open  rupture,  and  Antonio  sided  with  the  Earl.]  This  gross  act  of  ingratitude  so 
enraged  Lopez  that  it  is  said  he  swore  an  oath  that  he  would  have  his  revenge. 

With  Antonio’s  followers  Lopez  had  always  been  on  very  good  terms.  Some  were 
of  Jewish  descent,  and  had  often  stayed  with  him  at  his  house  in  London.  Their 
master’s  temperament  had  proved  as  little  agreeable  to  them  as  to  the  doctor.  [Of  this 
discontent  the  Spanish  emissaries  of  King  Philip  took  advantage,  and  secretly  offered 
large  rewards  to  have  Antonio  assassinated.  Lopez  was  drawn  into  the  plot,  and 
50,000  crowns  were  guaranteed  to  him  if  he  would  undertake  to  be  the  instrument, 
whereupon  Lopez  incautiously  declared  that  *  Don  Antonio  should  die  the  first  illness 
that  befel  him.’]  But  another  plot  was  hatching  of  still  greater  importance.  If  Don 
Antonio,  the  impostor,  was  Philip’s  enemy,  much  more  so  was  Queen  Elizabeth,  the 

heretic . As  soon  as  Lopez  had  been  inveigled  into  the  minor  plot,  the  conspirators 

revealed  to  him  the  greater . Lopez  declared  that  he  had  received  too  many  favours 

from  Elizabeth  to  allow  him  to  listen  to  the  villanous  proposal,  and  returned  no  further 
answer.  But  aware  that  any  disclosure  on  his  part  would  balk  him  of  his  revenge  on 
Antonio,  he  made  no  open  communication  of  the  conspiracy,  and  contented  himself 
with  letting  drop  vague  hints  of  the  Spanish  king’s  designs  in  Elizabeth’s  presence, 
who  so  little  understood  them  that  she  charged  Lopez  with  breach  of  courtesy  in 
speaking  of  such  matters  before  her.  [A  letter  addressed  to  one  of  the  conspirators 
fell  into  the  hands  of  Essex,  and  as  the  offender  was  staying  at  the  time  with  Lopez, 
suspicion  fell  on  the  doctor;  whereupon]  Essex  obtained  permission  to  examine  his 
papers,  but  with  so  unsatisfactory  a  result  that  Elizabeth  told  Essex  that  ‘  he  was  a 
rash  and  temerarious  youth  to  enter  into  a  matter  against  the  poor  man  which  he  could 


398 


APPENDIX 


not  prove.’  But  the  rumour  ran  among  the  courtiers  that  *  like  a  Jew  he  had  burned 
all  his  papers  a  little  before.’ 

The  rebuff  Essex  had  received  roused  him  to  more  vigorous  exertions.  Those 
already  accused  were  further  examined,  and  they  were  threatened  with  the  ‘  manacles  ’ 
unless  they  returned  the  answers  their  questioners  were  seeking  to  obtain.  So  plausible 
a  story  was  thus  concocted  that  Lopez  was  implicated  beyond  all  chance  of  extrication, 
and  Essex  declared  to  his  friends  that  he  could  make  the  whole  business  *  as  clear  as 
the  noon-day.’  Little  more  than  a  week,  therefore,  after  Lopez’s  first  accusation,  Lon 
don  was  startled  by  the  news  that  ‘  old  Dr  Lopez  is  in  the  Tower  for  intelligence  with 
the  King  of  Spain.’ 

Four  weeks  later  the  trial  took  place.  In  the  interval,  Lopez,  to  avoid  the  rack, 
had,  after  many  vehement  denials,  confessed  that  he  was  aware  of  the  twofold  plot. 
Shortly  after,  Essex  obtained  a  commission  from  the  Queen  to  preside  at  the  trial,  in 
conjunction  with  the  Lord  Mayor  and  others  of  Her  Majesty’s  advisers.  The  case  for 
the  Crown  was  confided  to  Solicitor-general  Coke,  and  the  Guildhall  was  prepared  for 
the  scene  of  the  proceedings. 

From  the  first,  feeling  in  the  City  rose  high  against  the  Doctor.  He  was,  the  report 
went,  of  a  religious  profession  that  fitted  him  for  any  ‘  execrable  undertaking.’  The 
preservation  of  the  two  lives  that  had  seemed  so  nearly  threatened  was  attributed  to  a 
miraculous  intervention  of  Providence.  Antonio  received  every  mark  of  sympathy 
from  the  citizens.  The  law-officers  pressed  to  the  full  the  advantage  that  these  senti¬ 
ments  gave  them.  Coke  laid  especial  stress  on  the  fact  that  Lopez  was  a  Jew.  This 
‘perjured  and  murdering  traitor  and  Jewish  doctor,’  he  said,  ‘is  worse  than  Judas  him¬ 
self.’  His  judges  spoke  of  him  as  ‘ that  vile  Jew ;’  and  ‘wily  and  covetous,’  ‘mer¬ 
cenary  ’  and  ‘  corrupt,’  were  the  mildest  of  the  epithets  that  assailed  him. 

Lopez  saw  the  futility  of  a  long  defence.  He  merely  asserted  that  he  had  much 
belied  himself  in  his  confession  ‘to  save  himself  from  racking.’  But  the  statement 
had  no  weight  with  his  judges :  *  a  most  substantial  jury  found  him  guilty  of  all  the 
treasons,  and  judgment  was  passed  with  the  applause  of  the  world.’  Even  Sir  Robert 
Cecil,  Lopez’s  former  friend,  acquiesced  in  the  justice  of  the  verdict. 

But  the  result  of  the  trial  does  not  seem  to  have  been  universally  satisfactory.  The 
Queen  refused  to  sign  the  death-warrant,  and  the  judges  who  had  been  excluded  from 
the  case  did  not  advise  in  the  matter.  For  more  than  seven  weeks  after  the  trial 
Lopez  remained  in  the  Tower,  and  it  was  not  till  one  of  Essex’s  partisans  had  been 
raised  to  the  Bench  as  Lord  Chief  Justice  that  the  Queen  was  induced  to  proceed  with 
the  execution  of  the  sentence.  On  his  representation  that  ‘  much  scandal  and  dis¬ 
honour  would  ensue  ’  from  further  delay,  she  signed  the  necessary  orders  for  the  hang¬ 
ing  of  Lopez  at  Tyburn. 

At  the  gallows  the  Doctor  made  an  endeavour  to  address  the  vast  mob  that  had  col¬ 
lected  to  see  him  die,  but  his  first  utterances  were  interrupted  with  the  crudest  jeers. 
Exasperated  by  the  treatment  he  received  from  the  unruly  crowd,  he  contented  him¬ 
self  with  crying  out,  before  the  hangman  adjusted  the  noose,  that  he  loved  the  Queen 
and  Antonio  as  well  as  he  loved  Jesus  Christ.  The  irony  called  forth  loud  peals  of 
laughter,  and  as  the  bolt  fell  the  people  shouted,  ‘  He  is  a  Jew !’  The  excitement  that 
his  death  created  was  not  allowed  by  the  Government  to  subside  immediately.  No 
less  than  five  official  accounts  of  Lopez’s  treason,  with  many  semi-official  pamphlets, 
were  prepared  for  publication,  to  keep  the  facts  of  this  important  case  well  before  the 
public  mind. 

No  one  living  in  London  at  the  time  could  have  been  ignorant  of  Lopez’s  history  and 


JEWS  IN  ENGLAND— LEE 


399 


fate,  and  it  cannot  surprise  us  that  the  caterers  for  public  amusements  gave  expression 

to  the  popular  sentiments  respecting  him . The  entries  in  Henslowe’s  diary  inform 

us  that  The  Jew  formed  the  subject  of  no  less  than  twenty  representations  between 
May,  1594,  and  the  end  of  that  year . Barrabas,  in  Marlowe’s  Jew  of  Malta,  ren¬ 

ders  with  great  faithfulness  the  bitter  hate  that  the  Hebrew  had  for  the  Christian,  but 
even  a  greater  fidelity  to  Jewish  customs  is  expressed  in  another  characteristic  of 
Barrabas.  He  is  fond  of  quoting  foreign  languages.  His  French  is  passable,  but  the 

jargon  he  more  frequently  indulges  is  a  mixture  of  Spanish  and  Italian . To  whom 

Marlowe  was  specially  indebted  for  this  knowledge  cannot  be  determined,  but,  as  he 
never  travelled,  we  may,  with  great  probability,  attribute  it  to  some  Jew  residing  in  Lon¬ 
don  at  the  time,  perhaps  to  some  member  of  Lopez’s  family,  if  not  to  Lopez  himself. 

But  however  that  may  have  been,  there  can  be  no  doubt  at  all  that  circumstances 
connected  with  the  Jewish  doctor’s  career  reached  the  ears  of  Shakespeare.  Through¬ 
out  the  year  of  the  execution  the  dramatist  was  living  in  London,  and  opportunities 
were  open  to  him  of  hearing  fuller  details  than  those  in  the  popular  reports.  He  was 
on  terms  of  considerable  intimacy  with  Essex’s  friend  Southampton,  and  it  is  not  im- 
„  possible  that  he  formed  some  acquaintance  at  the  same  time  with  the  Earl  himself.  In 
their  company  he  may  not  unfrequently  have  met  the  Doctor. 

[In  conclusion,  Lee  refers  to  certain  important  points  connected  with  the  story  of 
Lopez  and  The  Merchant  of  Venice  which  he  finds  :  first,  in  the  name  Antonio ;  sec¬ 
ondly,  in  the  date  of  Henslowe’s  ‘Venesyon  comodey,’  which  Lee  supposes  to  be  the 
first  rough  draft,  whose  existence  was  surmised  by  Hunter,  brought  out  hastily  in 
August,  within  three  months  of  Lopez’s  execution  in  May.  Thirdly,  *  in  their  devo¬ 
tion  to  their  family,’ says  Lee, ‘the  two  Jews  closely  resemble  each  other.  Neither 
Lopez  nor  Shylock,  in  good  fortune  or  in  bad,  fail  to  exemplify  the  Jewish  virtue  of 
domesticity.’  Perhaps  the  less  emphasis  that  is  laid  on  this  point  in  Shylock’s  case  the 
better,  and  for  alluding  to  it  at  all  Mr  Lee  is  responsible,  not  the  Editor.  Fourthly 
and  lastly,  the  reference  to  the  rack,  which  is  noteworthy ;  Gratiano’s  reference  to  the 
twelve  jurymen  to  send  Shylock  to  the  gallows ;  and  in  the  allusion  also  by  Gratiano  to 
the  wolf  who  was  hanged  for  human  slaughter,  to  which  attention  was  called  ad  loc.] 

That  we  have  succeeded  in  discovering  the  actual  original  of  Shylock  we  are.  not  pre¬ 
sumptuous  enough  to  imagine.  Our  knowledge  of  Lopez  is  only  fragmentary,  and  it 
is  quite  possible  that  had  we  the  means  of  learning  their  characters  and  lives,  Lopez’s 
cousin,  his  Jewish  friend  Geronimo,  and  any  of  the  ‘  other  divers  kinsmen  here,’  to 
whom  Coke  referred  at  the  Doctor’s  trial,  would  present  as  striking  a  likeness  to  Shy¬ 
lock  as  Roderigo  himself.  What  we  may  fairly  claim  to  have  proved  is  that  Jews  were 
residing  in  England  in  Shakespeare’s  day,  and  that  the  Jew  of  Venice  bears  evidence 
of  having  had  a  contemporary  prototype.  We  have  placed,  at  least  beyond  all  reason¬ 
able  doubt,  the  fact  that  one  Jew  of  England  came  into  considerable  prominence  while 
the  dramatist  was  growing  up  to  manhood,  and  that  he  was  treated  with  great  indignity 
because  of  his  religious  belief  towards  the  end  of  his  remarkable  career,  which  closed 
only  a  few  months  before  The  Merchant  of  Venice  appeared ;  and  we  have  shown  what 
grounds  there  are  for  believing  that  Shakespeare  and  Burbadge  came  into  contact  with 
this  famous  Jew. 


400 


APPENDIX 


A  DRAMATIC  REVERIE 

In  The  Monthly  Chronicle,  November,  1838,  there  is  to  be  found  an  article  called  Shy 
lock,  A  Critical  Fancy.  This  *  Fancy  ’  had  been  suggested,  so  said  the  writer,  by  an  article 
which  had  appeared  some  time  previously  in  another  magazine,  entitled  ‘  A  Lawyer’s 
Criticism  on  Shakespeare,’  in  which  the  assertion  was  made,  half  in  jest,  half  in  earn¬ 
est,  that  the  distress  in  The  Merchant  of  Venice  *  tons  chiefly  upon  an  embarrassment 
with  which  no  lawyer  can  seriously  sympathize,’  and  that  Anthonio’s  difficulties  *  arise 
entirely  from  his  gross  oversight  in  not  effecting  an  insurance  upon  his  various  argosies. 
He  should  have  opened  a  set  of  policies  at  once  upon  the  Rialto,  where  marine  assur¬ 
ance  was  perfectly  well  understood.’  The  writer  in  The  Monthly  Chronicle  then  goes 
on  to  fancy  what  Shylock  might  have  said  had  he  been  better  prepared  with  physio¬ 
logical  knowledge  to  meet  the  quibble  in  regard  to  flesh  without  blood,  &c. 

The  writer,  anonymous  in  the  Chronicle,  now  turns  out  to  have  been  the  late  Rich¬ 
ard  Hengist  Horne.  The  ‘Fancy,’  much  amplified,  has  been  kindly  lent  to  the 
Editor,  in  the  original  MS,  by  the  present  owner,  Mr  Harry  Edwards,  of  New  York. 
The  additions  to  Shakespeare’s  Scene  are  in  blank  verse,  and  show  great  vigour.  It 
appears  that  this  ‘Fancy’  was  submitted  to  a  public  test  in  1850,  at  Sadler’s  Wells, 
when  that  theatre  was  under  the  management  of  Mr  Phelps.  On  the  1 6th  of  May  a 
performance  was  given  in  ‘aid  of  the  Grand  Exhibition  of  1851,’  and  a  portion  of 
Henry  VIII  was  acted ;  it  was  followed  by  ‘  Shylock,  A  Scene  from  The  Merchant 
of  Venice,’  wherein  the  part  of  Shylock  was  undertaken  by  Mr  R.  H.  Home  himself, 
and  Portia  by  Miss  Glynn. 

On  the  first  page  of  the  MS  is  the  following  note  by  the  author : 

‘  It  is  not  for  a  moment  intended,  in  the  present  alteration  of  a  Scene  from  The  Mer- 
*  chant  of  Venice,  either  to  follow  the  example  of  those  who  so  grossly  mangled  the 
‘  Acting  Copies  of  Shakespeare  some  years  ago,  nor  to  suggest  that  presumption  to 
‘  others.  It  is  simply  attempted  to  embody  in  action,  on  a  special  occasion,  a  dramatic 
‘  speculation  as  to  what  might  have  passed  through  Shylock’ s  mind  on  listening  to  cer 
‘  tain  parts  of  Portia’s  line  of  defence,  supposing  the  same  trial  (granting  all  other 
‘  circumstances)  had  occurred  in  Venice  in  the  present  century. 

*  The  idea  of  this  Scene  was  first  put  forth  in  an  early  number  of  a  monthly  journal 
'  conducted  some  years  ago  by  Sir  E.  Bulwer  Lytton  and  Sir  David  Brewster.’ 

Then  follows:  Shylock  in  1850.  A  Dramatic  Reverie.  By  R.  H.  Horne.  Act 
IV.  Scene — The  Court  of  Justice.  [  The  Fourth  Act  opens  as  usual,  and  continues 
as  acted  dozen  to  the  following  speech,  line  319:] 

Portia.  Tarry  a  little — there  is  something  else. 

This  bond  doth  give  thee  here  no  jot  of  blood. 

The  words  expressly  are  ‘  a  pound  of  flesh.’ 

Take  then  thy  bond  ! — take  thou  thy  pound  of  flesh; 

But,  in  the  cutting  it,  if  thou  dost  shed 
One  drop  of  Christian  blood,  thy  lands  and  goods 
Are  by  the  laws  of  Venice  confiscate 
Unto  the  State  of  Venice. 

Shylock.  Peace,  false  Judge  ! 

There’s  no  such  thing  as  flesh  devoid  of  blood ! 

Flesh  is  made  up  of  vessels,  and  they’re  filled 
With  blood  alone, — nay,  blood  is  liquid  flesh. 

Oh,  thou  false  Judge  !  Most  treacherous,  wicked  Judge ! 


A  DRAMATIC  REVERIE 


401 


Send  to  your  butcher  for  your  daily  meal — 

What  will  you  say  if  he  do  sell  a  pound 

Of  skin  and  empty  veins  ?  Till  you  can  show  me 

Flesh  that  is  bloodless,  be’t  what  kind  it  may, 

My  claim  is  good  ;  one  flesh  alone  exists, 

And  that  hath  blood,  for  each  includes  the  other. 

Doth  all  your  wisdom  in  a  quibble  end 
Like  bubbles,  blown  by  Law  ? 

[  The  Duke  and  the  Magnijicoes  look  confounded. 

Portia  stands  troubled  and  perplexed. 

Portia.  Yet - fear  the  Law  ! 

Shylock.  This  bond  holds  blood ! — out  on  your  cullender  wits  ! 

If  Laws  be  folly,  all  are  fooled  by  them. 

I  am  your  fool  in  suffering  these  delays. 

But  he  is  mine,  by  wisdom  and  by  law. 

A  Jew  may  be  the  dog 

That’s  hated  by  a  Christian’s  charity, 

But  not  the  dupe  of  words  ! 

Bassanio.  O  Jew,  forbear ! 

Shylock.  Forbear! — I  came  here  to  be  paid  a  debt. 

Bassanio.  Lash  not  thyself  to  fury,  like  a  beast ! 

Shylock.  ’Tis  ye  who  have  lashed  me  thus  :  I’ll  have  my  bond  ! 

Trifle  no  more — there  is  no  power  in  Venice 
To  alter  a  decree  established ; 

Said  not  the  Doctor  so  ? — then  was  he  wise, 

But  afterwards  he  spake  as  doth  a  fool ; 

Nay  worse;  he  damned  his  soul  with  lies,  to  save 
That  Christian  beast  who  spat  upon  my  beard. 

[  The  Court  is  thrown  into  utter  perplexity,  and  remain  r ilent. 
Portia.  \_After  a  troubled  pause]  The  Jew  shall  have  all  justice; 

Therefore  prepare  thee  to  cut  off  the  flesh ; 

Yet,  Shylock,  see  thou  cut  not  less  nor  more 
But  just  a  pound  of  flesh ;  if  thou  tak’st  more 
Or  less,  than  just  a  pound,  be  it  so  much 
As  makes  it  light  or  heavy  in  the  substance 
Or  the  division  of  the  twentieth  part 
Of  one  poor  scruple ; — nay,  if  the  scale  do  turn 
But  in  the  estimation  of  a  hair, 

Thou  diest,  and  all  thy  goods  are  confiscate. 

Shylock.  [  With  deadly  bitterness ]  I’ll  not  take  more ;  I’ll  take  it  by  degr.os 
Therefore  not  more, — since  thou’d’st  be  so  exact ; 

Be  not  thou  hasty,  treacherous  young  Judge ; 

I  am  not  bound  to  take  it  all,  at  once. 

Bassanio.  O  villanous  Jew !  thou’d’st  torture  him  to  death ! 

Shylock  [ calmly ]  If  in  some  days  after  the  half  be  paid, 

He  chance  to  die — that  is  no  fault  of  mine; 

My  bond  doth  say  a  pound ;  but  doth  not  say 
That  I  must  take  the  whole  immediately. 

We’re  not  compell’d  to  ruin  thus  our  debtors. 

26 


402 


APPENDIX 


I’ll  take  it  by  instalments — would  you  jeer  me? 

Old  Shy  lock  hath  his  jest ! 

Portia.  But  since  the  whole 
Is  offered  and  not  taken,  thou  canst  have 
No  claim  hereafter. 

Shylock.  I  do  claim  all,  now. 

Portia.  Take  then  the  pound  of  flesh  and  blood,  fierce  Jew! 

But  see  you  spill  not  aught  that  is  not  yours. 

Shylock.  Why  must  I  have  this  care — look  ye  to  that ; 

It  is  the  very  nature  of  all  flesh 

When  cut  to  bleed ;  and  here  my  bond  declares 

That — from  the  Christian  breast  of  one  who  scoffs 

At  me,  my  tribe,  and  ever  used  to  mock 

My  prosperous  dealings,  I  shall  forthwith  cut 

A  pound  in  forfeit !  No  more  words, — prepare  ! 

Portia.  His  wasted  blood  shall  yet  bring  ruin  on  thee. 

Shylock.  Let  ruin  come  ! — so  I  can  once  behold 
That  streaming  breast,  I  care  not  if  his  blood 
Swell  to  a  second  Galilean  Sea, 

And  with  its  humming  and  abhorrent  surge 
Sweep  away  Venice  !  Now !  now !  stand  aside ! 

Duke  [rising].  Restrain  him! — sure  some  devil  speaks  in  him !  [A 'l  rise. 
Keep  back  the  bearded  vulture ! 

Portia  [_as  by  a  sudden  thought\.  The  ruin  thou  deftest  shall  fall  upon  thee! 
Thy  vengeance  be  thy  sentence,  e’en  by  the  bond 
Which  thou  so  fiercely  urgest !  By  its  terms, 

Purport,  and  stratagem,  thou  seek’st  the  life 

Of  a  Venetian  citizen;  for  which  crime 

The  Law  unwinds  itself  from  that  man’s  neck 

And  with  a  terrible  and  just  recoil 

Springs  back  on  thee  !  Shylock !  one  half  thy  goods 

Are  forfeit  to  Antonio !  The  other  half 

Comes  to  the  privy  coffer  of  the  State, 

And  thine  offending  life  lies  in  the  mercy 
Of  the  Duke  only. 

Gratiano.  O  upright  Judge !  mark,  Jew  ! — O  learned  Judge  ! 

Shylock.  Is  that  the  law  ? 

Portia.  Thyself  shalt  see  the  act. 

For,  as  thou  urgest  justice  be  assured 

Thou  shalt  have  justice  more  than  thou  desirest. 

[Shylock  drops  the  scales  and  knife. 
Gratiano.  O  learned  Judge  !  Mark,  Jew ; — a  learned  Judge ! 

Shylock.  I  take  his  offer  then, — pay  the  bond  thrice 
And  let  the  Christian  go. 

Bassanio.  Here  is  the  money. 

Portia.  Soft. 

The  Jew  shall  have  all  justice,  —soft ! — no  haste. 

Shylock.  Give  me  my  principal,  and  let  me  go. 

Bassanio.  I  have  it  ready  for  thee ;  here  it  is. 


LAW  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE 


403 


Portia.  He  hath  refused  it  in  the  open  Court ; 

He  shall  have  merely  justice. 

Shylock  [ drawing  out  his  bond ]  Shall  I  not  barely  have  my  principal  ? 
Portia.  Thou  shalt  have  nothing. 

Shylock.  Why  then  the  devil  give  him  good  of  it. 

I’ll  stay  no  longer  question. 

Portia.  Tarry,  Jew. 

The  law  hath  yet  another  hold  on  you. 

Duke.  That  thou  shalt  see  the  difference  of  our  spirit, 

I  pardon  thee  thy  life  before  thou  ask  it ; 

For  half  thy  wealth,  it  is  Antonio’s ; 

The  other  half  comes  to  the  general  state, 

Which  humbleness  may  drive  into  a  fine. 

Portia.  Ay,  for  the  State ;  not  for  Antonio. 

Shylock  \dropping  his  bond~\.  Nay  take  my  life  and  all,  pardon  not  that; 
You  take  my  house,  when  you  do  take  the  prop 
That  doth  sustain  my  house ;  you  take  my  life 
When  you  do  take  the  means  whereby  I  live. 

[The  rest  of  the  Scene  adheres  to  the  original  text,  except  that  the  Stage-direction 

reads,  Exit  Shylock  wildly\. 


LAW  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE 

It  is  only  within  recent  times  that  special  attention  has  been  bestowed  upon  the 
Legal  Principles  involved  in  the  Trial  Scene,  or  in  Shakespeare’s  dealing  with  the 
forms  of  Legal  Procedure.  As  long  as  Shylock  was  held  to  be  a  wolfish,  bloody, 
inexorable  dog,  it  made  but  little  difference  how  he  was  defeated  or  his  victim  saved ; 
a  Jew  had  no  rights  which  a  Christian  was  bound  to  respect.  Even  charming,  gen¬ 
tle  Mrs  Inchbald  believed  that  Shakespeare’s  purpose  in  writing  the  play  was  to 
‘hold  up  the  Jew  to  detestation,’  and  such  undoubtedly  was  the  general  impression 
created  by  the  ‘  snarling  malignity  ’  of  Macklin’s  Shylock.  But  when  Edmund  Kean, 
in  1814,  revealed  a  Jew  almost  more  sinned  against  than  sinning,  and  one  who  simply 
bettered  the  instruction  of  Christian  example,  the  ‘  pit  rose  at  him  ’  and  a  revulsion  of 
feeling  began.  From  that  hour  a  reaction  in  favour  of  Shylock  set  in,  until  now  it  is 
generally  agreed  that  up  to  a  certain  point  he  was  the  victim  of  a  downright  quibble, 
and  that  even  on  the  third  point,  that  of  conspiracy,  his  conviction  was,  perhaps,  of 
doubtful  propriety. 

Chronologically,  the  earliest  voice,  as  far  as  I  know,  which  was  raised  in  defence  of 
Shylock  and  in  denunciation  of  the  illegality  of  his  defeat  is  that  of  an  Anonymous 
Contributor  to  a  volume  of  Essays  by  a  Society  of  Gentlemen  at  Exeter,  printed  in 
1792.  The  Essay  is  called  ‘An  Apology  for  the  Character  and  Conduct  of  Shylock,’ 
and  is  signed  ‘  T.  O.’  The  Essayist’s  plea  for  Shylock  is,  that  if  his  character  is  cruel 
it  was  made  so  by  ill-treatment ;  that  the  derision  with  which  his  daughter’s  flight  was 
treated  was  calculated  to  embitter  the  sweetest  nature,  let  alone  that  of  an  outcast  of 
society ;  that  his  Mosaic  law  authorized  him  to  exact  ‘  an  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a 
tooth ;’  that  money-making  was  the  sole  occupation  the  laws  suffered  him  to  follow ; 
'that  he  knowingly  violated  no  divine  or  human  law ;  and,  finally,  the  Essayist  depicts 
an  imaginary  performance  of  the  play  by  Hebrews  in  a  future  so  far  ahead  that  Shake- 


404 


APPENDIX 


speare  is  but  a  traditionary  *  old  British  bard ,’  and  reproduces  a  criticism  of  the  acting 
which  appeared  the  following  morning  in  the  columns  of  The  Jebusite  Morning  Post,  or 
The  Jerusalem  Daily  Advertiser.  The  criticism  begins  thus :  *  On  the  fourth  day  of 
the  first  week  in  the  month  of  Nisan  was  represented  the  tragedy  of  “  Shylock,”  writ¬ 
ten  by  Nathan  Ben  Boaz.  The  plot  is  borrowed  from  an  old  British  bard,  who  flour¬ 
ished  about  the  beginning  of  the  17th  century  of  their  sera;  and  who  composed  it 
under  the  influence  of  the  spirit  of  inveterate  malice  against  our  nation  for  which,  in 

that  and  many  preceding  ages,  the  Europeans  were  notorious . Shylock,  the  hero 

of  the  drama,  is  represented  as  an  exemplary  follower  of  the  law,  and  as  having 
acquired  a  considerable  property  by  adhering  to  that  precept,  which  enjoins  lending  to 
the  stranger  upon  usury.'  The  critic  then  proceeds  to  relate  the  various  indignities 
which  are  heaped  on  Shylock,  under  which  he  ‘  would  have  sunk  but  for  the  conso¬ 
lation  he  received  from  Antonio’s  having  forfeited  his  bond.’  .  .  .  .  ‘  Shylock  expects  to 
show  the  world  an  example  that  a  son  of  Abraham  is  not  to  be  wronged  and  trampled 
on  with  impunity.  His  firmness  and  patriotic  sentiments  on  the  Trial  deserve  the  high¬ 
est  commendation.  His  resentment  though  severe  is  just ;  he  had  endured  irreparable 
wrongs,  and  had  a  right  to  expect  the  most  exemplary  vengeance  for  their  atonement. 
The  law,  however,  on  which  he  founds  his  claim,  is  evaded  by  shameful  sophistry. 
Shylock  is  permitted  to  take  the  pound  of  flesh,  but  is  warned  at  the  same  time  that 
if  he  sheds  “  one  drop  of  Christian  blood  his  lands  and  goods  are  confiscate  to  the 
State,  by  the  laws  of  Venice.”  But  how  can  we  suppose  its  legislators  could  have 
foreseen  and  obviated  the  fulfilling  of  so  singular  a  contract  as  that  between  the  Mer¬ 
chant  and  Shylock  ?  that,  in  their  great  wisdom,  they  could  enact  a  decree  by  which  a 
man  is  allowed  to  take  his  debtor’s  forfeiture,  yet  is  punished  for  not  performing  an 
impossibility  in  taking  it  ?  Can  we  imagine  that  Shylock’s  notary  could  have  drawn, 
or  himself  have  signed,  such  a  bond  that  fairly  admitted  such  an  interpretation  or 
incurred  such  a  penalty?  Yet  on  this  absurd,  perverted  construction  of  a  plain  con¬ 
tract  is  Shylock  condemned. 

*  Another  quibble  of  equal  weight  is  urged  against  him ;  that  having  a  right  to  cut 
from  the  Merchant’s  breast  a  pound  of  flesh,  and  a  pound  only,  if  he  took  more  or  less 
than  that, — even  the  minutest  particle, — he  should  suffer  death ;  as  if  the  spirit  of  the 
bond  did  not  clearly  imply  that  he  was  limited  to  take  no  more  than  a  pound  !  Shy¬ 
lock  is  found  guilty  of  death  by  this  curious  exposition  of  the  Venetian  laws.’  .... 
The  condition  that  he  become  a  Christian  he  complies  with,  ‘but  at  the  inhuman 
proposal  not  an  eye  was  to  be  seen  unmoistened  with  tears  in  our  theatre.’  .  ...  ‘  On 
examining  Shakespeare’s  numerous  commentators,  and  other  records  of  the  times,  it 
appears  that  no  censure  was  ever  cast,  no  unfavourable  sentiment  entertained  of  the 

unjust  judge,  the  injurious  merchant,  the  undutiful  daughter,  and  prodigal  lover . 

What  an  idea  does  this  give  of  the  English  nation  when  such  sentiments  cauld  be 
applauded  !  What  a  striking  instance  does  it  afford  of  the  lax  state  of  morality !’.... 
*  The  sudden  yet  natural  death  of  the  benevolent  Merchant  is  well  imagined.  The 
turbulent  frenzy  of  the  judge,  brought  on  by  the  recollection  of  his  corrupt  decision, 
and  the  tender  melancholy  of  the  daughter,  who  bewails  her  misconduct  too  late,  are 
equally  affecting,  and  demonstrate  the  author’s  perfect  knowledge  of  the  human  heart. 
The  moral  sense  may  be  a  while  suppressed  or  perverted,  but  conscience,  some  time  01 
other,  will  resume  its  dominion  and  severely  punish  the  violators  of  her  laws.’ 

Twenty-five  years  later,  Hazlitt  spoke  a  good  word  for  Shylock,  but  so  far  from 
seeing  that  he  was  the  victim  of  a  legal  quibble,  Hazlitt  expressly  referred  to  the 
‘  sound  maxims  of  jurisprudence  ’  which  characterized  the  trial. 


LA  W  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE 


405 

Mrs  Jameson,  with  a  vision  clearer  than  Hazlitt’s,  speaks  of  Portia’s  eagerness  to 
save  Antonio  by  any  appeal  rather  than  by  *  the  legal  quibble  with  which  her  cousin 
Bcllario  has  armed  her.’ 

Campbell,  in  1838,  was  the  first  among  Editors  to  maintain  openly  that  Shylock 
was  an  ill-used  man,  with  nothing  unnatural  in  his  character,  and  that  he  was  over¬ 
come  ‘only  by  a  legal  quibble.’ 

In  the  same  year,  1838,  C.  A.  Brown  espoused  Shylock’s  cause,  and  discerned  in 
the  play  a  plea  for  toleration  not  alone  of  the  Jews,  but  of  all  others ;  yet  1  e  failed 
to  notice  any  legal  ill-treatment  of  Shylock. 

Charles  Knight,  too,  speaks  bravely  for  him,  but  makes  no  allusion  to  the  quibble 
other  than  in  quoting,  without  comment,  the  paragraph  by  Mrs  Jameson,  wherein  she 
refers  to  it. 

Horne’s  Dramatic  Reverie,  which  immediately  precedes  the  present  topic,  should 
not  be  overlooked  in  tracing  the  developement  of  the  belief  that  Shylock  was  the  vic¬ 
tim  of  illegality,  although  in  that  striking  modification  of  the  Trial  Scene,  Shylock 
appeals  not  so  much  to  a  law  of  the  land  as  to  a  law  of  language,  and  it  is  there 
tacitly  conceded  that  on  the  last  point,  that  of  indirectly  conspiring  against  the  life  of 
a  Venetian  citizen,  he  was  justly  condemned. 

In  chronological  order,  Haynes  (from  whose  Lectures,  under  the  title  of  Outlines 
of  Equity,  an  extract  is  given  at  IV,  i,  319)  must  here  follow;  the  exact  date  I  can¬ 
not  give.  The  American  Reprint  of  his  volume,  published  in  1858,  affords  no  clue 
whatsoever  as  to  the  date  of  the  English  original,  but,  for  the  present  purpose,  1852- 
58  is  near  enough.  Lord  Cranworth  is  mentioned  by  Haynes  as  the  Chancellor  of  the 
day,  and  his  tenure  of  the  great  seal  was  during  these  years. 

In  order  to  account  for  the  knowledge  of  law  as  shown  in  these  plays,  Malone,  nigh 
a  hundred  years  ago,  conjectured  (ed.  1790,  i,  104)  that  Shakespeare,  on  leaving  the 
Grammar  School,  had  been  placed  in  the  office  of  some  country  attorney  or  the  sene¬ 
schal  of  some  manor  court.  In  the  process  of  time  this  suggestion  became  more  and 
more  widely  accepted,  until,  in  1859,  at  the  request  of  Collier,  Lord  Campbell  exam 
ined  the  plays  throughout  for  the  purpose  of  arriving  at  some  decision,  and  his  fina 
admission  is  that  such  a  view  as  conjectured  by  Malone  may  be  right,  and  that  while 
there  is  weighty  evidence  for  it,  there  is  nothing  conclusive  against  it.  Although  Lord 
Campbell  professes  to  have  read  all  the  plays  with  some  care  for  the  purpose  of  detect¬ 
ing  the  legal  references  in  them,  and  has  made  several  notes  on  The  Merchant  of  Ven¬ 
ice,  the  legal  principles  involved  in  the  Trial  Scene  do  not  seem  to  have  attracted  his 
serious  attention;  he  says  explicitly  that  ‘the  trial  is  duly  conducted  according  to  the 
strict  forms  of  legal  procedure.’ 

In  1872,  there  appeared  in  The  Albany  Law  Journal  the  Report  of  a  decision  ot 
the  Supreme  Court  of  New  York,  on  Appeal,  of  the  case  of  Shylock  v.  Antonio.  The 
bare  statement  of  the  title  indicates  plainly  enough  that  this  ‘  Report  ’  is  a  travestie,  and 
as  such,  pure  and  simple,  it  cannot  yield  sufficient  interest  to  justify  its  reproduction 
here.  But  it  is  more  than  a  mere  travestie  :  the  statement  of  the  points  of  law  involved 
is  lucid  and  the  law  controlling  them  is  well  taken ;  it  ought  not,  therefore,  to  be  over¬ 
looked  because  of  the  form  in  which  its  wisdom  is  presented.  Anthonio  could  pun  in 
his  dying  farewell  to  Bassanio,  and  he  has  read  his  Shakespeare  to  little  purpose  who 
does  not  know  that  in  the  channels  fretted  in  the  cheeks  the  tears  of  sorrow  and  of 
mirth  find  alternate  course.  Moreover,  this  *  Report’  is  of  importance  historically,  inas¬ 
much  as  it  anticipates  some  of  the  points  which  were  afterwards  brought  forward  by 
one  of  the  most  eminent  of  German  Professors  of  Jurisprudence  in  a  pamphlet  which 


406 


APPENDIX 


has  had,  and  is  still  having,  wide-spread  popularity  throughout  Europe,  and  in  which 
the  treatment  of  Shylock  in  the  Trial  Scene  is  used  as  an  illustration. 

In  the  following  abstract  of  the  ‘  Report’  I  have  omitted  many  local  and  temporary 
allusions ;  the  date  of  the  number  of  the  Law  Journal  in  which*  it  appeared  is  the 
Thirtieth  of  March,  p.  193;  and  it  may  be  added  that  in  a  later  number  of  this  same 
Journal  (27  December,  1879,  p.  502)  the  author  is  stated  to  be  Esek  Cowen,  Esq., 
of  Troy,  New  York. 

The  case  is  set  forth  with  due  formality,  and  the  opinion  by  the  Court  is  thus  given : 

In  order  fully  to  understand  this  case,  it  will  be  necessary  to  refer  to  certain  facts, 
not  very  material,  perhaps,  to  its  final  determination.  The  defendant,  Antonio,  is  an 
Italian  merchant,  doing  an  extensive  business  in  the  city  of  New  York  as  an  importer. 
Prior  to  the  transactions  which  resulted  in  this  suit  he  had  been  remarkably  successful, 
had  made  much  money,  which  he  spent  in  a  princely  manner,  and  stood  well  in  soci¬ 
ety,  in  spite  of  a  tendency  to  mental  unsoundness.  We  say  ‘mental  unsoundness,’ 
though  there  is  no  direct  proof  on  the  subject,  because  it  seems  to  be  conceded  that  he 
lent  money  to  his  friends  without  interest,  which  would,  in  most  business  circles,  be 
considered  evidence  to  warrant  a  commission  de  lunatico.  He  had  a  sporting  friend 
of  the  same  nationality,  by  the  name  of  Bassanio,  who,  having  been  completely 
‘cleaned  out’  (as  the  vile  phrase  is)  by  a  season  at  Saratoga,  conceived  a  novel 
method  of  restoring  his  fortunes.  It  seems  that  an  eccentric  resident  of  Venango 
county,  Pennsylvania,  having  made  a  large  fortune  by  speculations  in  oil  lands,  left 
the  whole  of  it  to  his  daughter  on  condition  that  she  should  take  for  her  husband  the 
suitor  who  should  prove  most  proficient  in  the  ancient  and  noble  game  of  ‘  Thimble 
Rig.’  As  Bassanio  had  been  accustomed  to  witness  this  game  at  horse-races,  he  felt 
confident  that  if  he  had  an  opportunity  he  could  tell  in  which  box  the  ‘  little  joker  ’ 
was.  But  he  had  no  money  to  take  him  to  Venango  county,  and  no  acquaintance 
with  railroad  officials  sufficiently  intimate  to  justify  him  in  asking  for  a  pass.  In  this 
extremity  he  applied  to  the  defendant  for  a  loan.  Antonio  would  gladly  have  com¬ 
plied,  but  just  before  he  had  invested  every  dollar  he  could  raise  in  contraband  goods 

and  vessels  for  running  the  Southern  blockade . The  two  friends  then  applied  to 

the  plaintiff,  a  gentleman  of  the  Hebrew  persuasion,  for  a  loan  of  3000  dollars  upon 
Antonio’s  credit.  For  several  reasons  the  plaintiff  was  little  inclined  to  look  upon  the 
defendant  with  favour.  Besides,  his  unjustifiable  habit  of  lending  money  without 
interest,  which,  as  Shylock  very  properly  observed,  had  a  tendency  to  ‘  lower  the  rate 
of  usance,’  Antonio  chewed  tobacco  freely,  and  expectorated  with  great  carelessness 
upon  all  objects  in  his  vicinity.  Indeed,  it  appeared  in  evidence,  without  objection, 
that  the  defendant  had  frequently  spit  upon  Shylock’s  ‘Jewish  gaberdine.’  The  Court 
is  not  exactly  certain  as  to  what  a  *  gaberdine  ’  is ;  no  definition  was  attempted  by  either 
counsel  upon  the  argument ;  but  we  may  safely  assume  that  it  is  a  garment  which  is  not 
improved  by  contact  with  tobacco,  and  such  incidents  will  go  far  to  excuse,  if  they  do 
not  justify,  the  somewhat  vindictive  manner  in  which  the  suit  was  prosecuted.  The 
plaintiff,  however,  at  the  time  of  this  application,  concealed  his  feelings  and  told  Anto¬ 
nio  that  he  would  charge  him  no  interest,  but  would  merely  take  a  bond  conditioned 
to  the  effect  that,  if  the  loan  was  not  paid*  when  due,  the  borrower  would  forfeit  a 
pound  of  flesh  nearest  his  heart.  Bassanio  pretended  to  demur,  but  Antonio  was  con¬ 
fident  that  the  loan  would  be  paid  when  due ;  and  this  somewhat  singular  business 
transaction  was  concluded  as  above  stated.  Bassanio  went  to  Venango  county, 

guessed  the  right  box,  and  married  the  heiress.  Antonio’s  fate  was  far  different . 

His  ships  were  sunk  by  the  blockading-squadron.  And  when  Bassanio  returned  from 


LA  W  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE 


407 


his  wedding-tour,  he  found  all  Antonio’s  effects  sold  out  by  the  sheriff  and  numerous 
executions  returned  unsatisfied.  He  found,  too,  that  the  plaintiff  had  already  com¬ 
menced  this  action  to  enforce  the  forfeiture  on  the  bond.  As  soon  as  the  cause  was  at 
issue,  ....  all  parties  agreed  to  accept  as  referee  a  young  and  unknown  lawyer  by  the 
name  of  Balthazar,  which  arrangement  was  the  more  singular,  as  he  does  not  appear 
to  have  been  a  relative  of  any  of  the  judges. 

And  just  here  arises  one  of  the  most  curious  questions  of  the  case.  It  is  asserted 
by  the  counsel  for  the  appellant  that  this  referee  was  in  fact  a  woman  ;  that  her  maiden 
name  was  Mary  Jane  Portia,  and  that  she  was  the  same  oleaginous  heiress  whom  Bas- 
sanio  had  just  married;  and  the  decision  itself  furnishes  the  strongest  internal  evidence 
that  it  is  the  work  of  one  of  that  pernicious  sex  which  *  brought  sin  into  the  world  and 
all  our  woe,’  and  has  been  bringing  sinners  into  the  world  ever  since  with  a  similar 
disregard  of  consequences. 

In  this  case  the  facts  were  conceded  by  all  the  parties,  and  after  a  tender,  in  open 
court,  of  three  times  the  amount  of  the  debt  had  been  made  and  refused,  this  referee 
of  uncertain  sex  proceeded  to  pronounce  judgement.  His  (or  her)  conclusions  of  law 
were  as  follows  : 

1st.  That  the  bond  was  valid,  and  that  the  plaintiff  was  entitled  to  his  pound  of 
flesh. 

2d.  That  he  was  entitled  to  exactly  a  pound  of  flesh,  neither  more  nor  less,  and  not 
to  a  drop  of  blood ;  and  that  if  he  drew  blood,  or  took  a  grain  of  flesh  more  or  less 
than  a  pound,  he  would  be  guilty  of  murder. 

3d.  That  under  an  ancient  and  obsolete  ordinance  of  the  city  of  New  York,  passed 
in  the  time  of  Peter  Stuyvesant,  the  plaintiff  was  liable  to  capital  punishment  ‘for 
practising  against  the  life  of  a  Christian.’ 

4th.  That  he  could  only  escape  this  punishment  by  giving  half  his  fortune  to  his 
daughter  (who  had  just  married  a  Christian)  and  by  turning  Christian  himself. 

On  hearing  the  latter  portion  of  this  decision,  the  plaintiff  felt  a  considerable  abate¬ 
ment  of  his  enthusiasm  and  inquired  in  a  tremulous  tone,  ‘  if  that  was  the  law.’  On 
being  assured  that  it  was,  he  offered  to  take  the  amount  of  his  bond  and  discontinue 
without  costs ;  to  which  proposition  this  astonishing  referee  replied  that  the  plaintiff  had 
forfeited  all  claim  to  his  money  by  refusing  it  in  open  court !  The  plaintiff  being  with¬ 
out  counsel,  no  stay  of  proceedings  was  obtained ;  and  the  decree  of  the  referee  was 
carried  into  effect,  the  plaintiff  being  baptized,  we  presume,  by  the  sheriff  of  the  city 
and  county  of  New  York.  Upon  a  subsequent  appeal  the  judgement  was  affirmed  by 
the  General  Term,  and  the  plaintiff  appealed  to  this  Court. 

Upon  hearing  the  first  conclusion  of  law  announced  by  the  referee,  the  plaintiff 
exclaimed  in  his  delight,  ‘  O !  wise  young  judge !  A  Daniel  come  to  judgment !’  and 
during  the  remainder  of  the  decision,  one  Gratiano,  a  sort  of  ‘  next  friend  ’  of  the 
defendant,  made  the  court-house  ring  with  cries  of  *  A  Daniel !  A  Daniel  come  to 
judgment !’  It  is  the  unanimous  opinion  of  this  court  that  these  allusions  to  the 
lamented  Webster,  from  whichever  side  they  proceeded,  were  most  unfortunate. 
Nothing  could  be  more  unlike  the  calm,  clear  judgement  of  that  lawyer  and  statesman 
than  this  truly  feminine  decision,  half-civil  decree,  half-criminal  sentence,  and  the 
other  half  commutation  of  punishment.  No  part  of  it  bears  the  slightest  semblance 
to  any  principle  of  law  or  equity  ever  recognized  in  a  civilized  country. 

The  first  conclusion  of  law,  though  apparently  in  favor  of  the  plaintiff,  was  utterly 
erroneous  for  two  reasons:  1st,  It  is  well  settled  that,  when  a  bond  contains  a  condition 
’  that  is  unreasonable  and  absurd,  it  will  be  considered  as  good  only  for  the  sum  actually 


408 


APPENDIX 


secured  or  lent  on  the  faith  of  it.  As  in  the  familiar  case  where  a  party,  in  consider¬ 
ation  of  a  sum  of  money,  agreed  to  give  the  price  of  the  twenty-fourth  nail  in  a  horse’s 
shoe,  at  the  rate  of  a  penny  for  the  first  nail,  two  for  the  second,  and  so  on  in  geo¬ 
metrical  progression.  This  bond  was  not  only  unreasonable,  but  provided  for  the  com¬ 
mission  of  a  capital  crime,  and  was  clearly  void  under  the  principle  to  which  I  have 
adverted.  2d,  The  bond  was  extinguished  by  the  tender  of  the  amount  of  the  loan 
which  it  was  given  to  secure.  This  Court  has  explicitly  decided  that  a  tender  of  the 
debt,  even  after  it  is  due,  extinguishes  all  collateral  securities.  Kortright  v.  Cady ,  2 1 
N.  Y.  343,  and  the  tender  at  the  trial  was  sufficient  to  cancel  the  bond  if  it  ever  pos¬ 
sessed  any  validity. 

But,  if  the  referee’s  first  proposition  of  law  is  sound,  the  second  becomes  a  stupendous 
absurdity.  It  is  a  familiar  rule  of  construction  that  the  right  to  do  a  certain  act  confers 
the  right  to  the  necessary  incidents  of  that  act.  The  referee  holds  that  the  plaintiff  had 
a  right  to  cut  off  a  pound  of  the  defendant’s  flesh.  Now  as  no  one  can  cut  an  exact 
pound  of  flesh  to  a  grain,  as  no  one  can  do  it  without  drawing  blood,  it  seems  too  plain 
for  argument  that  the  parties  could  have  intended  no  such  restrictions,  and  the  Court 
had  no  right  to  supply  them.  If  the  bond  was  valid,  the  plaintiff  could  have  subjected 
himself  to  no  penalty  by  simply  taking  what  it  gave  him. 

We  have  not  before  us  the  statute  referred  to  in  the  third  conclusion  of  the  referee, 
but  we  have  great  doubts  whether  the  plaintiff,  upon  any  reasonable  construction  of  its 
terms,  could  be  held  liable  for  taking  a  bond  voluntarily  signed  by  the  defendant.  It 
does  not  seem  to  us  that  this  was  ‘  practising  against  the  life  ’  of  the  defendant,  within 
the  meaning  of  the  law . 

The  pretence  that  the  plaintiff  had  forfeited  his  debt  by  the  refusal  of  the  tender  was 
extremely  shallow.  Nothing  is  better  settled  than  that  a  tender  does  not  extinguish  the 
debt ,  but  only  things  collateral  thereto,  such  as  interest . But  the  climax  of  usurpa¬ 

tion  and  cruelty  was  to  come.  The  plaintiff  was  not  only  required  to  despoil  himself 

for  his  daughter’s  benefit,  but  to  embrace  Christianity  for  his  own . It  is  certainly 

difficult  for  us  to  see  how  any  benefit  could  arise  to  the  Christian  Church  if  all  the 
criminals  in  the  land  were  compelled  to  adopt  that  religion  at — if  the  expression  is 
admissible — the  point  of  the  halter.  We  do  not  mean  to  deny  the  power  to  the  legis¬ 
lature  to  prescribe  the  union  of  the  criminal  with  some  religious  body  as  a  penalty  for 
crime.  If  coupled  with  the  obligation  of  hearing  two  average  sermons  a  week,  we 

are  not  prepared  to  say  that  the  punishment  would  not  be  exemplary . And 

here  we  pause  to  set  ourselves  right  before  the  public.  Absorbed  in  our  arduous 
duties,  we  can  pay  but  little  attention  to  general  literature,  but  we  read  the  public 
prints,  and  we  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that  this  case  has  created  much  interest  in  the 
minds  of  the  community.  If  we  are  rightly  informed,  the  facts  have  formed  the  basis 
of  a  powerful  drama,  which  has  lately  been  placed  upon  the  stage,  and  the  conduct  of 
the  referee  has  been  loudly  applauded  by  audiences  unlearned  in  the  law,  who  doubtless 
saw  in  her  the  embodiment  of  the  classical  idea  of  justice — namely,  a  woman  with  her 
eyes  completely  blinded. 

To  prevent  any  misunderstanding,  therefore,  we  assert  most  positively  that  our  decis¬ 
ion  upon  this  point  is  not  influenced  by  the  feeling  which  seems  to  have  actuated  one 
of  the  witnesses,  who  objected  to  the  conversion  of  the  daughter  of  the  plaintiff,  Miss 
Jessica  Shylock,  upon  the  ground  that  *  the  making  of  so  many  new  Christians  would 
raise  the  price  of  pork.’  The  Court  is  of  the  opinion  that,  in  moderation,  a  pork  diet 
ts  both  healthful  and  invigorating,  and  that  sausages,  when  their  origin  is  not  involved 
in  tor*  much  obscurity,  are  a  ‘  dish  fit  for  a  judge.’ 


LA  W  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE— IHERING 


409 

But,  if  we  know  our  own  hearts,  we  would  not  allow  a  slight  advance  in  the  price 
of  a  favourite  esculent  to  stand  in  the  way  of  the  genuine  conversion  of  the  humblest 
Hebrew  in  the  land.  And  in  this,  we  believe  that  we  speak  the  sentiment  of  the 
American  people,  even  outside  of  Chicago  and  Cincinnati ;  while  in  those  two  cities, 
the  fact  that  such  a  fulfilment  of  Scripture  would  tend  to  raise  the  price  of  pork 
would  doubtless  be  considered  the  strongest  possible  reason  for  the  conversion  of  the 
whole  world.  To  their  citizens  no  two  events  could  appear  more  desirable  than  that 
4  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  should  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,’  and 
that  ‘prime  mess’  should  go  up  a  dollar  a  barrel.  Personal  motives,  therefore,  have 
nothing  whatever  to  do  with  our  decision.  It  is  the  law  of  the  land  and  our  own  feel¬ 
ings  of  duty  that  call  upon  us  to  relieve  the  plaintiff  from  his  unfortunate  position.  We 
have  thus  disposed  of  the  questions  raised  by  this  appeal,  but  we  cannot  close  without 

a  word  of  warning  to  Mrs  Bassanio . The  result  of  the  whole  matter  is  that  .... 

the  entire  decree  of  the  referee  must  be  reversed  ....  All  the  judges  concurring, 
ordered  accordingly. 

The  question  of  the  Law  of  the  Trial  Scene  was  again  brought  forward  in  this  same 
Journal  (16  January,  1875,  p.  45)  in  a  communication  from  Emporia,  Kansas,  signed 
4  W.  A.  R.,’  wherein  it  was  maintained  that  the  downright  unsoundness  of  the  law 
which  ruled  against  Shylock’s  Bond  rendered  the  claim  that  Bacon  wrote  the  play 
4  most  pretentious  and  unfounded.’  Whereupon,  in  reference  to  Shakespeare’s  share 
of  responsibility  for  the  unsound  law,  the  Editor  of  The  Albany  Law  Journal  thus 
judiciously  comments :  4  Many  considerations  must  here  be  taken  into  account.  For 
4  instance,  the  Scene  is  laid  in  Venice,  and  we  are  not  to  assume  without  positive  proof 

4  that  the  Venetian  Law  was  similar  to  the  Common  Law  of  England . It  is  evi- 

4  dent  from  the  spirit  of  the  play  that  the  judge  regarded  the  contract  as  void,  even 
4  civilly,  and  he  doubtless  adopted  the  legal  fiction  of  so  strictly  construing  the  con- 
4  tract  as  that,  without  nominally  declaring  it  void,  he  practically  nullified  it.  This 

4  case  may  then  be  an  evidence  of  Shakespeare’s  legal  ingenuity . In  considering 

4  Shakespeare’s  law,  we  must  always  take  into  account  the  conditions  of  time,  place, 
4  and  circumstance,  and  how  much  is  intended  for  dramatic  effect.’ 

In  1872,  there  appeared  in  Germany  a  remarkable  book  by  Dr  Ihering,  called  The 
Struggle  for  Law ,  which,  before  two  years  had  elapsed,  had  been  translated  nine¬ 
teen  times,  and  into  sixteen  different  languages.  With  the  subject  of  the  book  itself 
we  are  not  here  concerned ;  it  suffices  to  say  that  its  central  idea  may  be  tersely  ex¬ 
pressed  in  a  saying  of  Kant,  which  the  learned  author  quotes  in  the  Preface  to  his 
Eighth  Edition,  and  which,  as  he  says,  he  had  not  seen  when  he  wrote  the  book : 
4  Whosoever  prefers  to  be  a  worm  must  not  complain  if  he  is  trodden  under  foot.’  But 
what  is  of  moment  to  us  is,  that  in  the  course  of  his  treatise,  Prof.  Ihering  strongly 
condemns  the  treatment  of  Shylock.  Although  in  the  substance  of  his  remarks  the 
learned  professor  had  been  anticipated  (all  unconsciously  by  him),  yet  the  prominence 
of  his  position  and  the  great  popularity  of  his  book  gave  an  emphasis  to  Shylock’s  ill- 
treatment  which  it  had  not  hitherto  received.  Two  opponents  to  Ihering  appeared ; 
the  first,  A.  Pietscher,  Landsgericht-Prlsident,  in  a  brochure  entitled  Jurist  and  Poet ; 
in  which,  in  a  bold,  dashing  way,  it  is  acknowledged  that  Portia  treated  the  Jew  unfairly, 
but  the  meeting  of  trickery  with  trickery  is  justified ;  a  second,  who,  it  would  be,  per¬ 
haps,  more  correct  to  say  followed  Ihering,  rather  than  was  called  forth  by  him,  is 
Prof  Dr  Kohler,  whose  book  bears  the  title,  Shakespeare  before  the  Forum  of  Juris 


4io 


APPENDIX 


prudence;  wherein  there  is  no  attempt  to  show  that,  by  the  use  of  legal  phraseology,  it 
is  to  be  inferred  that  Shakespeare  had  spent  some  years  of  his  life  in  a  lawyer’s  office, 
but  it  is  maintained  that  in  Shakespeare’s  works,  as  in  no  other  poet’s,  there  live  and 
stir  the  grand  ideas  of  abstract  justice,  the  elemental  principles  of  law,  coeval  with 
man’s  nature,  and  which  the  history  of  the  world,  in  all  nations,  reveals  as  in  a  process 
of  evolution.  The  Merchant  of  Venice ,  as  disclosing  the  evolution  of  the  Law  of 
Debtor  and  Creditor,  was  selected  as  an  example  by  the  learned  jurist,  who,  in  oppo¬ 
sition  to  Ihering,  believes  that,  viewed  from  loftier  ground,  the  treatment  of  Shylock 
is  in  harmony  with  the  growth  or  development  of  the  truest  justice.  The  book  is 
especially  interesting  in  its  history  of  the  realistic  interpretation  of  the  law  of  the  XII 
Tables,  to  which  appeal  is  frequently  made  by  critics,  in  justification  of  Shylock’s 
attempt  to  regard  human  flesh  as  an  equivalent  for  a  debt ;  but  I  am  forced  to  select 
only  those  extracts  from  all  three  authors,  Ihering,  Pietscher,  and  Kohler,  which  have 
impressed  me  as  best  illustrating  the  legal  treatment  of  Shylock  on  the  Trial. 

The  extracts  are  as  follows,  beginning  with  Dr  Rudolf  von  Ihering  (Professor  at 
Gottingen:  Der  Kampf  uni s  Recht,  Wien,  18S6,  8te  Aufl.,  p.  58) : 

It  is  hatred  and  revenge  that  take  Shylock  to  court  to  get  his  pound  of  flesh  from 
the  body  of  Anthonio,  but  the  words  the  poet  puts  into  Shylock’s  mouth  are  just  as  true 
as  from  the  mouth  of  any  other.  It  is  the  language  which  an  injured  sense  of  right 
always  speaks  in  all  times  and  in  all  places ;  the  force,  not  to  be  shaken,  of  the  con¬ 
viction  that  law  must  for  ever  remain  law ;  the  lofty  strain  and  pathos  of  a  man,  con¬ 
scious  that  he  pleads  not  merely  for  his  own  person,  but  for  the  enacted  law. 

‘  I  crave  the  law.’  In  these  four  words  Shakespeare  has  marked  the  true  relation 
of  law  in  its  subjective  sense  to  law  in  its  objective  sense,  and  the  significance  of  the 
struggle  for  law,  in  a  way  that  no  philosopher  learned  in  the  law  could  have  done  more 
strikingly.  With  these  words  the  case  is  at  once  changed,  and  it  is  not  the  claim  of 
Shylock  which  is  on  trial,  but  the  law  of  Venice.  To  what  mighty,  gigantic  propor¬ 
tions  does  not  the  figure  of  Shylock  dilate  as  he  utters  these  words !  It  is  no  longer  the 
Jew  demanding  a  pound  of  flesh;  it  is  Venice  herself  that  knocks  at  the  door  of  the 
court, — his  rights  and  the  rights  of  Venice  are  one;  with  his  rights,  the  rights  of 
Venice  are  struck  down.  And  when,  under  the  weight  of  the  decision  of  a  Judge 
who  nullifies  law  by  a  miserable  quibble,  Shylock  succumbs,  and,  the  butt  of  bitter 
scorn  and  jeers,  totters  away  with  trembling  knees,  who  can  help  feeling  that  in  his 
person  the  law  of  Venice  also  is  broken  down,  that  it  is  not  Shylock  the  Jew  who 
staggers  off,  but  the  typical  figure  of  the  Jew  of  the  Middle  Ages,  that  pariah  of  society, 
who  cried  for  law  in  vain  ?  The  mighty  tragedy  of  his  fate  lies  not  in  the  denial  of 
his  right,  but  in  that  he,  a  Jew  of  the  Middle  Ages,  has  faith  in  the  law, — we  might 
say,  just  as  if  he  were  a  Christian ! — a  faith  firm  as  a  rock  which  nothing  can  shake, 
and  which  the  Judge  himself  sustains ;  until  the  catastrophe  strikes  him  like  a  thunder¬ 
bolt,  shivering  his  delusion  to  atoms,  and  teaching  him  that  he  is  nothing  but  the  de¬ 
spised  mediaeval  Jew,  whose  rights  are  in  the  same  breath  acknowledged,  and,  by  fraud, 
denied. 

[In  the  foregoing,  where  reference  is  made  to  the  nullification  of  the  law  by  a 
‘miserable  quibble’  of  the  Judge,  Ihering  has  the  following  foot-note:]  It  is  just  here 
that  in  my  opinion  the  deep  tragic  interest  lies  which  Shylock  wrings  from  us.  He 
is  indeed  cheated  out  of  his  rights.  So  at  least  must  a  jurist  regard  the  case.  The 
Poet  of  course  is  free  to  make  his  own  jurisprudence,  and  we  do  not  regret  that  Shake¬ 
speare  has  done  it  here,  or  rather  that  he  has  kept  the  old  story  unchanged.  But 
when  the  jurist  undertakes  to  criticise  it,  he  cannot  say  otherwise  than  that  the  bond 


LA  W  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE— IHE RING 


411 


waa  in  ’tself  null  and  void,  in  that  its  provisions  were  contrary  to  good  morals ;  the 
Judge,  therefore,  on  this  very  ground  should  from  the  very  first  have  denied  it.  But 
since  he  did  not  so  deny  it,  since  the  ‘  second  Daniel  ’  acknowledged  its  validity,  it 
was  a  wretched  quibble,  a  disgraceful,  pettifogging  trick,  to  withhold  from  the  plaintiff 
the  right  to  draw  blood  after  the  right  had  been  granted  to  take  the  flesh.  Just  as 
well  might  a  Judge  acknowledge  the  right  of  entry  on  land,  but  forbid  the  right  to 
make  footprints,  because  this  was  not  expressly  stipulated.  One  might  almost  believe 
that  this  drama  of  Shylock  had  been  played  in  the  most  ancient  days  of  Rome ;  for  the 
authors  of  the  Twelve  Tables  held  it  necessary,  in  reference  to  the  maiming  {in  partes 
secare)  of  a  debtor  by  his  creditors,  to  declare  expressly  that  the  creditors  should  be 
unrestricted  as  to  the  size  of  the  piece  to  be  taken.  {Si  plus  minusve  secuerint,  sine 
fraude  esto  !  1 

[The  extract  which  follows  is  from  the  Preface  to  the  Eighth  edition  of  the  Kampf 
urn's  Recht,  wherein  the  strictures  of  Pietscher  and  Kohler  are  discussed.  Chrono¬ 
logically,  therefore,  it  should  follow  instead  of  precede  these  strictures,  but  as  what  I 
have  selected  is  merely  explanatory  of  Dr  Ihering’s  own  view,  it  is  better  inserted  here.] 

(P.  xi.)  What  I  maintained  in  my  first  edition  is  not,  that  the  Judge  was  bound  to 
acknowledge  the  validity  of  Shylock’s  bond,  but  that  after  that  validity  had  been  ac¬ 
knowledged,  he  had  no  right  afterwards,  in  the  enunciation  of  the  judgement,  to  nullify 
it  by  a  contemptible  quibble.  The  Judge  was  free  to  pronounce  Shylock’s  bond  valid 
or  invalid.  He  pronounced  it  valid,  and  Shakespeare  represents  the  case  as  if,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  law,  he  could  not  have  decided  otherwise.  No  one  in  Venice  doubted  the 
validity  of  the  bond ;  the  friends  of  Anthonio,  Anthonio  himself,  the  Doge,  the  Court, 
all  were  unanimous  that  the  Jew  had  the  law  on  his  side.  And  in  absolute  trust  in 
his  right,  acknowledged  by  all,  Shylock  appeals  to  the  Court  for  aid,  and  the  ‘  wise 
Daniel,’  after  in  vain  attempting  to  induce  the  vindictive  creditor  to  renounce  his  claim, 
recognizes  that  claim  as  valid.  And  now  after  the  decree  of  the  Court  has  been  pro¬ 
nounced,  after  every  doubt  of  the  right  of  the  Jew  has  been  overruled  by  the  Judge 
himself,  and  not  a  word  of  dissent  is  uttered,  after  the  whole  assembly,  the  Doge  in¬ 
cluded,  have  admitted  that  inevitable  claim  of  the  law, — then,  when  the  successful 
suitor,  in  full  assurance  of  his  cause,  is  about  to  take  what  the  sentence  of  the  Court 
has  authorized,  he  is  balked  by  that  very  same  Judge,  who  had  solemnly  recognized 
his  right,  by  an  objection,  a  quibble  too  wretched  and  worthless  to  merit  any  serious 
refutation.  Is  there  ever  flesh  without  blood  ?  The  Judge  who  admitted  Shylock’s 
right  to  cut  a  pound  of  flesh  from  the  body  of  Anthonio,  by  that  very  admission  recog¬ 
nized  Shylock’s  right  to  the  blood  inseparable  from  the  flesh;  and  he  who  has  a  right 
to  cut  a  pound,  may,  if  he  pleases,  take  less.  Both  rights  are  denied  to  the  Jew;  he 
must  take  the  flesh  without  blood,  and  he  must  take  a  just  pound,  neither  more  nor 
less.  Have  I  said  too  much  in  affirming  that  the  Jew  is  cheated  out  of  his  right  ?  To 
be  sure  it  is  done  in  the  interest  of  Humanity,  but  does  wrong,  committed  in  the  inter¬ 
est  of  Humanity,  cease  to  be  wrong  ?  And  if  ever  the  end  sanctifies  the  means,  why 
was  not  the  wrong  committed  betimes  in  the  sentence, — why,  not  until  after  the  sen¬ 
tence,  was  it  first  revealed  ? 

A.  Pietscher  (Landgerichts-Priisident :  Jurist  und  Dichter ,  Dessau,  1881,  p.  13): 
In  truth  there  is  nothing  genuinely  tragic  about  Shylock.  Hence  the  poet  called  the 
piece,  not  The  Jew,  but  The  Merchant,  of  Venice,  and  termed  it  a  Comedy,  not  a 
Tragedy.  He  knew  nothing  of  the  modern  sympathy  with  a  ‘persecuted  race,’  and 
surely  Shylock  was  not  regarded  by  him  as  typical  of  one.  He  needed  for  his  drama 
a  usurer,  not  a  Jew, — confessions  of  faith  or  nationalities  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 


412 


APPENDIX 


central  idea  of  the  piece, — and  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  his  day  he  took  him 
very  naturally  from  the  race  of  Jews.  Then,  to  be  sure,  Shylock  became  for  him  not 
merely  the  ‘usurer,’  but  a  mortal  and  a  Jew  with  human  passions  and  the  character¬ 
istics  of  his  race. 

(P.  16.)  When  the  Jew  has  demanded  ‘What  judgement  shall  I  dread,  doing  no 
wrong  ?’  he  must  be  driven  from  this  pharasaical  pretext.  It  is  doing  him  an  unmer¬ 
ited  honour  to  impute  to  him  the  will,  at  any  dictate  of  mercy,  to  put  an  end  to  the 
contest  between  his  legal  rights  and  the  baseness  of  his  claim.  For  once  this  flinty 
heart  must  be  made  to  feel  that  he  himself  may  need  mercy,  and  all  other  means  must 
be  exhausted  before  proceeding  to  use  his  own  weapons  against  him.  If  Ihering  finds 
Shylock  typical,  let  us,  too,  find  him  typical.  He  typifies  all  who  mercilessly  insist 
upon  their  rights.  All  such  are  admonished  that  there  are  other  and  higher  duties 
than  maintaining  one’s  rights,  and  our  jurists  are  herein  instructed  who  call  a  legal 
contest  for  justice,  a  duty . Even  Shylock  demands  the  law,  he  ‘  stands  for  judge¬ 

ment,’ — we  have  seen  how  this  imposes  upon  Ihering, — but  we  know  well  enough  how 
hollow  these  high-sounding  words  are,  and  that  the  man  cares  nothing  for  the  law, 

but  only  that  by  means  of  it  he  may  feed  his  hatred,  and  above  all  his  greed . 

It  is  the  wretched  envy  of  a  business  rival  that  instigates  him.  And  when  this  *  man 
of  law  ’  invokes  ‘  his  deeds  upon  his  head,’  and  his  bold  invocation  is  answered,  it  is 
brought  home  to  every  one  that  whoever  pursues  his  own  rights  in  violation  of  the  dic¬ 
tates  of  ‘  mercy,’  is  himself  crushed  by  merciless  Right. 

(P.  19.)  I  am  much  afraid  that  Anthonio  would  have  had  to  succumb,  if  Ihering 
had  been  of  his  counsel.  His  only  plea  was  turpis  causa  ;  if  that  would  not  carry  him 
through,  he  would  have  given  up  his  client.  But  his  chance  of  making  this  plea  good, 
before  the  Doge  and  the  Senate,  was  small ;  they  had  probably  from  the  first  noticed 
that  in  this  case  an  abominable  design  lay  concealed  under  legal  forms,  but  they  could 
not  have  known  how  these  latter  were  to  be  evaded.  I  believe  that  I  dare  assert  that 
at  that  time  in  Venice  the  consideration  that  ‘  a  contract  against  morals  was  void  ’  was 
not  yet  recognized  or  regarded  as  a  valid  plea.  For  this  consideration,  or  more  prop¬ 
erly  its  recognition  in  law,  belongs  only  to  the  higher  grades  of  culture,  and  always 
even  then  depends  on  the  prevailing  estimate  of  what  is  immoral,  and  its  full  sig¬ 
nificance  and  worth  will  have  to  remain,  I  suppose,  a  pious  wish. 

(P.  21.)  Ihering  is  particularly  hostile  to  the  way  in  which  Portia  deals  with  Shy¬ 
lock,  which  he  terms  quibbling  and  pettifogging. 

For  my  part,  commend  me  to  our  Portia,  who,  in  true  woman’s  fashion,  does  not 
allow  herself  to  be  in  the  least  disconcerted  by  the  pathetic  appeal :  ‘  If  you  deny  me, 
fie  upon  your  law !  There  is  no  force  in  the  decrees  of  Venice;’  but  steadily  regarding 
the  present  case  alone,  takes  no  thought  whatever  of  any  dangerous  consequences. 
[Portia  never  heard  this  appeal;  it  was  made  before  she  entered  the  Court. — Ed.]  If 
the  law  of  Venice  is  so  bad  that  it  will  help  a  scoundrel  to  ruin  an  honest  man,  it  is 
worthless  and  does  not  deserve  the  least  consideration.  When  a  man  stands  in  peril 
of  his  life  he  does  not  stop  to  choose  his  weapon, — the  first  is  the  best,— and  just  so 
in  the  present  case,  it  may  be  permissible  to  meet  chicanery  with  chicanery,  pettifogging 
with  pettifogging.  Did  it  really  escape  our  learned  jurist,  what  the  poet  with  sovereign 
humour  has  scourged  with  joyous  jest,  that  a  legal  contest,  if  it  is  a  fight,  is  subject  to 
all  the  chances  of  a  fight,  and  that  in  it  often  enough  cunning  must  be  overcome  by 
cunning?  To  observe  it  maybe  unwelcome,  but  it  maybe  observed,  nevertheless, 
every  day  in  courts  of  justice.  A  lawsuit  is  therein  like  a  duel  or  a  fight,  and  the  talk 
is  of  ‘  winners  ’  and  ‘  losers.’  When  Portia’s  plea  that  flesh  and  not  blood  is  in  the 


LA  W  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE— PIETS  CHER 


413 


bargain,  is  met  by  Ihering  with  the  replication  that  blood  is  implied,  and  that  the  plea 
is  frivolous,  he  may  be  met  with  the  rejoinder  that  bargains  of  this  nature  are  to  be 
strictly  interpreted,  and  in  doubtful  points  against  him  in  whom  the  power  lay  of  mak¬ 
ing  the  terms  of  the  agreement  more  explicit.  And  so  it  could  go  on  with  surrejoinders 
and  rebutters  for  a  good  long  while.  But  is  it  really  ‘  a  wretched  quibble  ’  which  is 
here  used  against  Shylock ?  What  was  the  Jew  after?  The  life  of  Anthonio.  There 
is  not  the  least  doubt  of  that.  For  the  pound  of  flesh  in  itself  he  cared  not  a  jot.  Well, 
then,  why  did  he  not  have  that  stated  clearly  in  his  bond?  He  dared  not;  and  hence 
he  used  the  ambiguous  phrase,  *  a  pound  of  flesh.’  And  to  his  own  words  he  is  now 
kept.  Is  that  unjust  ? 

The  discomfiture  of  the  Jew  is  not  the  lamentable  downfall  of  a  hero ;  it  is  the  vic¬ 
tory  of  cunning  by  greater  cunning;  the  rogue  is  caught  in  his  own  snare.  No  tears 
need  fall ;  there  can  be  here  only  the  smiling  satisfaction  of  a  genuine  comedy.  But 
why  did  not  the  prudent  man  anticipate  the  possibility  of  the  objection  which  Portia 
afterwards  actually  made  ?  Or  else  why  did  he  not  consult  a  jurist  who  could  have 
told  him  that  the  Twelve  Tables  of  Rome  had  contemplated  exactly  that  possibility 
(si  plus  minusve  secuerint  sine  fraude  esto),  and  that,  since  the  laws  of  Venice  had 
not  yet  attained  to  that  wise  prevision  in  the  interest  of  revengeful  creditors,  it  would 
be  necessary  to  stipulate  expressly  for  it  in  the  bond  ?  The  clever  man  was  not  clever 
enough,  and  a  cleverer  overcame  him. 

Nevertheless,  it  is  to  be  unhesitatingly  admitted  that  the  wound  which  law  and  right 
received  in  the  victory  over  Shylock  is  not  healed, — a  wound  received  at  the  hands  of 
Shylock,  not  Portia ;  it  is  only  skinned  over.  To  overcome  cunning  with  cunning,  to 
take  advantage  of  an  opponent’s  weakness,  cannot  be  termed  executing  justice.  ^?"the 
Jew  had  been  more  careful,  the  Merchant  would  have  been  lost.  But  even  this  point 
Shakespeare  did  not  overlook.  Through  the  mouth  of  Portia  he  shows  [that  ‘  the  law 
hath  yet  another  hold’  on  Shylock].  Here,  then,  at  last  comes  forth  the  violated 
majesty  of  abstract  law,  punishing,  crushing  him  who  dared  presume  to  make  law  aid 
wrong.  The  violation  of  private  rights  yields  place  to  the  deeply  outraged  State  of  Ven¬ 
ice  that  now  demands  atonement  for  itself.  And  so  the  Jew,  because  he  stood  upon  his 
law,  gets  more  law  than  he  desired,  a  different  law  from  that  for  which  he  hoped. 

Dr  Joseph  Kohler  (Professor  in  Wurzburg:  Shakespeare  vor  deni  Forum  der  Juris- 
prudenz,  Wurzburg,  1883,  p.  6) :  In  point  of  fact,  the  Trial  Scene  is  no  Jurisprudence 
unto  itself,  it  is  no  ideal  imaginary  farce,  inserted  merely  to  serve  poetic  purposes ;  it  is 
rather  a  typical  representation  of  the  developement  of  Law,  in  all  ages ;  it  bears  within 
it  the  Quintessence  of  the  Present  and  Future  of  Law,  it  contains  a  Jurisprudence  pro¬ 
founder  than  ten  Pandects,  and  opens  to  us  a  deeper  insight  into  the  history  of  Law 
than  all  the  legal  histories  from  Savigny  to  Ihering. 

Dr  Kohler  enters  at  once  on  the  discussion  of  the  validity  of  Shylock’s  bond,  which, 
he  maintains,  is  to  be  regarded  not  in  the  light  of  the  jurisprudence  of  to-day,  but  of 
that  period  when  debtors  could  be  forced  to  pay  with  their  flesh.  Qui  non  habet  in 
aere,  luat  in  cute.  He  then  proceeds,  by  a  review  of  the  comparative  jurisprudence 
of  all  nations,  to  prove  that  the  cruel  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  which  gave  to  cred¬ 
itors  the  right  to  cut  up  debtors,  and  whereof  Shylock’s  bond  was  the  legitimate 
descendant,  has  received  from  the  earliest  times  a  realistic  interpretation ;  and  thus 
concludes  [p.  19]  :  Hence  we  see  that  the  holding  of  the  body  of  the  debtor  as 
security  for  the  debt  is  an  institution  of  universal  application,  and  where  by  chance  it 
is  modified  and  assumes  a  milder  type,  we  are  not  to  ascribe  it  tc  superior  culture,  but 
to  an  inferior  estimate  of  the  rights  of  property. 


4H 


APPENDIX 


(P.  71.)  This  developement  from  the  barbarous  practices  of  ancient  times  to  milder 
forms  was  gradual,  it  did  not  take  place  all  at  once,  there  were  many  intermediate 
steps  before  the  idea  of  right  was  fully  recognized.  Before  the  law  reached  the  point 
of  rendering  null  and  void  such  contracts  as  that  of  Shylock,  there  had  to  be  a  reac¬ 
tion  against  them  in  the  popular  mind,  not  on  the  score  of  legality,  but  on  the  score 
of  morality  and  social  decency.  Long  before  the  law  branded  as  illegal  the  execution 
of  such  practices  against  insolvent  debtors,  popular  opinion  regarded  such  practices, 
even  when  countenanced  by  the  law,  as  disgraceful  and  inimical  to  the  interests  of 
society.  There  is  many  a  practice  even  now  interdicted  in  good  society  of  which  the 
law  takes  no  cognizance.  Literary  thieving,  long  before  the  idea  of  an  author’s  rights 
was  legally  acknowledged,  was  held  to  be  disgraceful,  and  at  this  very  day,  plagiarism, 
that  infringes  no  author’s  rights,  is  nevertheless  utterly  condemned  throughout  the  lit¬ 
erary  world ;  and  when,  in  the  course  of  legislation,  the  successful  attack  against  usury 
had  not  been  effected,  the  usurer  was  none  the  less  excluded  from  respectable  society, 
and  usury  was  regarded  as  degrading. 

(P.  78.)  He  is  a  hero  who,  for  the  sake  of  a  high  ideal,  disinterestedly  challenges 
society ;  but  he  who  tramples  under  foot  the  dictates  of  society,  only  in  order  to  drain 
the  cup  of  law  for  his  own  selfish  interests,  is  a  pariah,  who  outrages  himself  because 
he  rates  his  own  interests  higher  than  decency  and  honesty,  and  thereby  opposes  those 
conditions  whereunder  alone  a  well-ordered  society  can  exist.  This  is  Shylock’s 
position. 

(P.  79.)  When  Shylock  says  that  he  ‘can  give  no  reason,  nor  he  will  not,  more 
than  a  lodged  hate  and  a  certain  loathing  that  he  bears  Anthonio,’  he  utters  the  most 
shameless  profanation  which  the  sanctity  of  justice  can  experience,  far  more  disgrace¬ 
ful  than  any  violation  of  the  law ;  it  is  an  abuse  of  law  by  means  of  law,  an  abuse 
which  paralyzes  law ;  it  is  a  degradation  of  law,  and  a  degradation  of  a  court  of  jus¬ 
tice  into  a  tool  of  the  lowest  aims.  Must  the  court  yield  the  law  to  Shylock  ?  What 
a  tragic  situation !  Almost  the  most  tragic  of  all  situations,  I  think,  is  that  of  a  judge 
who  sees  himself  the  tool  of  an  infamous  scoundrel,  an  aider  and  abettor  in  an  act  of 
atrocious  infamy,  and  with  no  loophole  of  escape. 

(P.  80.)  In  this  tragic  situation  the  play  reaches  its  highest  point,  the  dramatic  ten¬ 
sion  has  reached  that  strain  to  which  some  solution  must  immediately  succeed.  May 
not  justice,  we  ask  anxiously,  just  for  this  one  time  yield  a  little,  and  give  his  dues  to 
the  hard-hearted  creditor  ?  Shakespeare  has  answered  us  through  Portia.  Even  the 
ancient  Celtic  law-book,  the  Senchus  Mor,  announced  that  ‘  there  are  three  periods  at 
which  the  world  is  worthless ;  the  time  of  a  plague ;  of  a  general  war ;  and  of  the 
dissolution  of  express  contracts!  Hence  there  is  no  escape :  judgement  must  be  given 
against  Anthonio.  There  is  the  valid  deed,  a  right  pushed  d  Poutrance  by  a  creature 
who  knows  no  remorse,  no  human  ruth, — like  Junius  Brutus,  the  judge  must  veil  his 
face  and  sacrifice  Anthonio.  We  all  know  the  way  in  which  the  second  Daniel  solved 
it ;  we  all  feel  light-hearted  at  the  sunny  ray  which  pierced  that  deadly  gloom,  just  as 
when  the  Devil,  to  whom  a  soul  has  been  covenanted,  loses  his  game  and  is  bilked 
of  his  prey.  But  can  the  solution  be  justified  at  the  Forum  of  Jurisprudence,  where 
we  must  deal  not  with  an  ideal  metaphysical  justice,  but  with  actual,  human  justice  ? 
It  seems  that  this  must  be  answered  in  the  negative.  [Kohler  then  proceeds  to  apply 
the  tests  of  the  law,  such  as  ornne  majus  in  se  continet  minus,  &c.,  and  also  condemns 
Pietscher’s  expedient  of  meeting  cunning  with  cunning,  and  concludes  that,  apparently, 
Iheiing’s  position  is  irrefragable,  and  yet  asks  how  is  it  possible  that  our  feelings  so 
deceive  us  that,  when  we  see  the  play  on  the  stage,  our  legal  conscience  receives  no 


LA  W  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE— KOHLER 


415 


pricks?  The  answer  to  this  he  finds  in  that  inner  consciousness  of  what  is  right  and 
just  in  the  breast  of  the  judge],  that  instinct  for  the  right  in  the  soul  of  the  judge 
which  has  not  fully  worked  itself  out  into  open  acknowledgement,  and  is  still  lying 
perdu  in  the  ostensible  reasons  of  the  wise  Daniel. 

The  age  in  which  the  time  of  the  play  is  cast  is  when,  in  the  course  of  the  develope- 
ment  of  law  and  right,  such  a  bond  as  Shylock’s  was  opposed  not  merely  to  public 
sentiments  of  morality  and  decency,  but  to  law  and  equity.  Personal  mutilation  of 
insolvent  debtors  was  already  beginning  to  be  repugnant  to  the  judicial  mind  as  some¬ 
thing  rude,  and  as  beyond  the  pale  of  civilized  law,  and  no  longer  to  be  granted  as  of 
unquestionable  right.  Thus  it  was  that  a  process  was  in  operation  which  belongs  to 
the  growth  of  legal  life, — that  process,  namely,  whereby  the  lawyer  accepts  the  princi 
pies  which  obtained  at  former  times,  and  moulds  them  anew.  [Kohler  then  traces  the 
growth  of  various  legal  ideas,  now  everywhere  accepted,  by  means  of  this  process  of 
absorption,  whereby  the  public  sentiment  of  what  is  right  finds  expression  through 
the  judges,  whose  hearts  are  quickened  by  the  pulses  of  the  people,  and  a  judicial 
conscience  is  created  which  judges  are  bound  not  only  to  obey,  but  also  to  interpret.] 

(P.  88.)  At  last  we  can  see  the  springs  which  set  in  motion  the  sentence  of  the 
wise  Daniel ;  the  sentence  is  good,  but  its  premises  are  bad ;  which  is,  after  all,  much 
to  be  preferred  to  a  bad  sentence  with  good  premises ;  let  us  only  have  good  sentences, 
and  good  reasons  will  soon  follow.  Such  has  been  the  way  of  the  world  from  the  earliest 
times.  Long  before  the  rights  of  an  inventor  were  formulated  into  laws,  the  sentiment 
prevailed  of  a  right  of  property  in  what  is  immaterial,  and  at  this  day  in  England  and 
in  France  [and  in  America — -Ed.]  we  hear  of  property  in  names,  and  signs,  and  trade¬ 
marks.  It  is  not  difficult  to  demonstrate  that  such  judicial  construction  is  untenable ; 
but  is  it  sound  policy,  at  the  dictates  of  German  pedantry,  to  throw  overboard  precious 
goods  which  do  not  happen  to  have  been  secured  in  befitting  cases?  Are  we  justified 
in  spilling  the  precious  contents  because  the  cask  is  ugly  and  offensive  to  the  eye  of  a 
jurist  ?  Irregular  judicial  premises  are  often,  although,  of  course,  not  always,  the  lad¬ 
der  on  which  the  consciousness  of  legal  right  mounts  ever  higher.  Such  irregular 
premises  urge  themselves  on  the  judge  most  especially  when  some  rigid  inflexible  legal 
dictum  has  survived  from  ancient  times,  and  like  a  ruin  of  the  past  no  longer  harmo¬ 
nizes  with  to-day.  Such  a  dictum  no  jurisprudence  in  the  world  would  dare  openly 
oppose,  but  the  comedy  is  eminently  respectable  whereby  it  is  evaded  in  a  thousand 
byways.  I  will  not  express  an  opinion  as  to  the  justification  of  this  proceeding.  I 
neither  praise  it  nor  blame  it ;  I  maintain  it  only  as  a  fact  in  the  universal  history  of 
evolution,  which  proves  through  all  ages  the  developement  of  law  and  right,  in  the 
Orient  as  well  as  in  the  Occident. 

(P.  90.)  It  is  a  trial  of  world-wide  fame  which  the  Poet  unfolds  before  us;  it  bears 
the  victory  of  a  refined  consciousness  of  law  and  right  over  the  dark  night  which 
weighed  heavily  from  of  old  on  the  courts, — a  victory  concealed  behind  pretexts,  which 
assumes  the  mask  of  false  springs  of  action,  because  it  is  necessary ;  but  it  is  a  victor}-, 
a  great,  a  powerful  victory,  a  victory  not  alone  in  this  particular  case,  but  a  victory  in 
the  history  of  law  and  right ;  it  is  the  sun  of  progress  which  once  more  casts  its  quick¬ 
ening  beams  on  the  judicial  bench,  and  the  kingdom  of  Sarastro  triumphs  over  the 
powers  of  night.  And  when  Shylock  succumbs,  it  is  not,  as  Ihering  supposes,  under 
the  weight  of  a  false  sentence,  but  it  is  because  the  voice  of  the  second  Daniel  has 
reached  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  heart  of  the  usurer,  who  is  after  all  a  man,  and 
crumbles  to  ruin  a  whole  laborious  structure  of  logic.  If  he  felt  that  his  rights  were 
violated,  why  did  he  not,  with  all  the  keenness  of  his  analytic  intellect,  dissipate  into 


416 


APPENDIX 


thin  air  the  false  pretexts  of  the  wise  and  righteous  Daniel?  We  forsooth  can  do  it 
albeit  we  are  jurists  far  less  skilled  and  formal  than  Shylock.  But  from  the  very  first 
in  his  inmost  heart  he  knew  that  his  aim  was  through  and  through  unrighteous,  but  he 
believed  it  to  be  concealed  and  assured  by  the  legislation  of  the  day ;  he  believed  that 
he  had  a  charm  against  every  possible  legal  or  logical  attempt  to  evade  his  plea,  fie 
knew  that  he  had  ventured  on  a  slippery  path,  where  right  and  wrong  join  hands,  and 
where  it  needed  but  the  least  jar  to  bring  him  to  grief ;  he  foresaw  that  the  judge 
would  use  every  possible,  conceivable  evasion  to  avoid  the  execution  of  the  Law,  and 
what  he  foresaw  was  verified. 

(P.  95.)  As  a  lawyer  there  is  yet  one  thing  lying  heavy  on  my  heart.  Was  no  in¬ 
justice  done  to  Shylock  in  not  only  denying  his  bond,  but  in  condemning  him,  and  in 
condemning  him  almost  to  the  destruction  of  his  means  of  life  ?  Grant  that  Shylock 
had  sought  the  life  of  Anthonio,  he  had  at  least  sought  it  by  legal  forms,  by  judicial 
procedure ;  and  he  sought  it  under  an  appeal  to  law  that  was  still  formally  recognized 
as  law,  albeit  that  the  popular  conscience  of  law  and  right  had  already  superseded  it. 
Such  a  one  can,  with  as  little  propriety,  be  deemed  punishable  for  an  attempt  to  kill  as 
a  creditor  could  be  pronounced  guilty  of  an  attempt  at  false  imprisonment  who  should 
bring  suit  after  the  cause  of  action  had  ceased  to  exist,  or  at  least  had  ceased  to  exist 
in  the  opinion  of  many,  but  not  of  all,  lawyers.  In  this  regard,  there  has  been  an  in¬ 
justice;  but  such  an  injustice  is  founded  on  universal  history,  it  is  a  universal  necessity; 
and  in  the  admission  of  this  element,  Shakespeare,  as  an  historian  of  law  and  right, 
has  surpassed  even  himself.  No  progress  in  the  world,  although  it  be  the  progress  of 
law  and  right,  is  possible  without  injustice  to  the  individual ;  every  great  advance  taken 
by  society  is  made  over  corpses,  just  as  every  health-giving  walk  costs  the  lives  of  many 
an  innocent  little  creature.  Shylock’s  non-suit  and  subsequent  punishment  are  needed 
to  crown  the  victory  gained  by  the  new  conception  of  law  and  right. 

(P.  99.)  And  just  as  we  hail  the  conclusion  of  Faust  with  joyful  huzzas,  and  exult 
in  the  defeat  of  the  Devil  for  all  his  contract  sealed  with  blood,  so  we  greet  with  huzzas 
the  bond  of  Shylock  torn  to  shreds ;  and  when  he  totters  off  bent,  bowed,  and  with 
knocking  knees,  we  know  of  a  surety  that  Justice  has  shed  abroad  its  beams,  and  the 
goblins  of  night,  that  have  hitherto  fluttered  round  a  wretched  tallow  candle,  hence¬ 
forth  will  hide  in  their  gloomy  recesses.  The  victory  over  Shylock  reveals  the  higher 
potency  of  human  law,  just  as  the  victory  over  the  Devil  reveals  the  higher  potency 
of  divine  law ;  the  Devil  remains  black  even  when  he  steps  before  the  court  with  his 
paper  and  blood,  and  Shylock  remains  a  foe  to  Law  even  when  he  boasts  of  his  parch¬ 
ment  and  seal.* 

*  The  Law  of  the  XII  Tables,  which  is  supposed  to  permit  the  mutilation  of  insolvent  debtors, 
has  been  so  frequently  cited  in  connection  with  Shylock's  claim,  that  it  is  perhaps  as  well  to  note 
that  doubts  have  been  cast  on  the  correctness  of  this  interpretation  of  the  ancient  Roman  Law.  Dr 
James  Muirhhad,  of  Edinburgh,  shows  ( Historical  Introduction  to  the  Private  Law  0/  Pome,  18S6, 
pp.  202  et  set/.)  that  the  phrase  in  that  Law,  capite poenas  dato,  does  not  refer  to  death  or  slavery,  but 
was  used  in  opposition  to  bona  ;  and  that  the  debtor  paid  the  penalty  with  his  person,  in  his  services, 
in  contradistinction  to  his  means.  ‘  But  for  the  mistaken  notion,’  says  Dr  Muirhead,  *  that  a  cred¬ 
itor  was  entitled  after  the  expiry  of  the  three  months  to  put  his  debtor  to  death, — of  which  there  is 
not  a  single  instance  on  record, — it  is  unlikely  that  so  many  would  have  thought  of  imputing  to  the 
partis  secanto  such  an  inhuman  meaning  as  that  a  plurality  of  creditors  might  cut  the  body  of  their 
addictus  in  pieces,  and  each  take  a  share.’  The  whole  difficulty  lies,  so  thinks  Dr  Muirhead,  in  the 
arrangement  of  the  provisions  of  the  XII  Tables,  and  he,  therefore,  with  great  ingenuity,  solves  it 
by  a  slight  re-arrangement,  whereby  the  plurality  of  creditors,  referred  to  by  Aulus  Gellius  (from 
whom  we  derive  our  fullest  account  of  this  Law),  is  made  to  apply  only  to  the  special  case  where 
‘  co-heirs  take  proceedings  against  a  debtor  of  their  predecessor’s  and  the  explanation  of  the  whole 
question  is,  that  '  where  there  was  but  one  creditor  ....  the  debtor  definitely  became  his  creditor’s 


LAW  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE— DOYLE 


417 


In  The  Overland  Monthly  for  July,  1S86,  there  appeared,  as  a  letter  addressed  to 
Mr  Lawrence  Barrett,  an  article  by  Mr  John  T.  Doyle,  entitled  ‘  Shakespeare's 
Law — The  Case  of  Shylock.’  It  supplies  information  in  regard  to  the  legal  procedure 
of  the  Trial  Scene  which  I  have  searched  for  in  vain  elsewhere,  and  presents  Portia's 
conduct  of  the  Trial  in  a  light  certainly  novel.  The  substance  of  it  is  as  follows : 

John  T.  Doyle:  The  Trial  Scene  has  always  seemed  inconsistent  with  Shake¬ 
speare’s  supposed  legal  learning,  for  the  proceedings  in  it  are  such  as  never  could  have 
occurred  in  any  court  administering  English  law.  Save  in  the  fact  that  the  Scene  pre¬ 
sents  a  plaintiff,  a  defendant,  and  a  judge — characters  essential  to  litigation  under  any 
system  of  procedure — there  is  no  resemblance  in  the  proceedings  on  the  stage  to  any¬ 
thing  that  could  possibly  occur  in  an  English  court  or  any  court  administering  English 
law.  No  jury  is  impanelled  to  determine  the  facts,  no  witnesses  called  by  either  side ; 
on  the  contrary,  when  the  court  opens,  the  Duke  who  presides  is  already  fully  informed 
of  the  facts,  and  has  even  communicated  them  in  writing  to  Bellario,  a  learned  judge 
of  Padua,  and  invited  him  to  come  and  render  judgement  in  the  case ;  and  the  extent 
of  his  power  was  to  adjourn  the  court  unless  the  Doctor  arrived  in  season.  Such  an 
occurrence  as  this,  we  all  know,  could  never  take  place  in  a  court  proceeding  accord¬ 
ing  to  English  methods . From  my  boyhood  I  regarded  it  as  an  instance  of  the 

failure  of  the  cleverest  men  (not  themselves  lawyers)  to  introduce  a  lawsuit  into  fiction 
without  violating  the  common  rules  of  procedure.  To  make  the  situation  dramatic 
they  invariably  make  it  impossible.  I  concluded  that  the  failure  of  others  might  be 
excused,  when  even  Shakespeare  missed  it.  Subsequent  experience  convinced  me, 
however,  that  he  did  not  miss  it,  after  all.  This  is  how  it  happened. 

In  1851-52,  I  passed  several  months  in  the  neighbouring  Republic  of  Nicaragua. 
It  was  at  that  time,  perhaps,  the  least  known  and  least  frequented  of  the  Spanish- 
American  States.  Originally  explored  and  colonized  by  an  expedition  from  Panama, 
its  communications  with  Europe  and  all  the  outer  world  were  maintained  almost 
wholly  from  the  Pacific  side  of  the  continent ;  its  commerce  was  insignificant,  travel 
never  reached  it,  and  it  had  probably  kept  up  the  customs  and  practices  in  vogue 
under  the  Spanish  rule  with  less  variation  than  any  of  the  cdlonies.  The  affairs  of  the 
company  I  represented  having  become  considerably  entangled  by  the  transactions  and 
omissions  of  the  former  agent,  I  found  myself,  ere  long,  involved  in  half  a  dozen  law¬ 
suits,  the  proceedings  of  which  gave  me  a  new  light  on  the  Shylock  case.  To  explain 
this,  I  will  briefly  relate  what  occurred  in  the  first  of  them.  The  course  of  the  others 
was  similar. 

‘  free-bondman,  ....  but  where  co-heirs  were  concerned,  as  bondage  and  service  to  all  of  them 
‘  would  have  been  inconvenient,  if  not  impossible,  when  they  were  not  to  continue  to  possess  the 
‘  inheritance  in  common,  the  debtor  was  sent  over  Tiber  and  sold  as  a  slave,  and  the  price  got  for 
‘  him  divided  amongst  them.  If  one  or  other  got  more  than  his  fair  share,  no  harm  was  done,  for 
‘  the  disproportion  would  eventually  be  redressed  by  an  action  of  partition.’  Dr  Muirhead’s  re¬ 
arrangement,  is  as  follows  : — ‘  Tertiis  nundinis  addicitor.  Capite  poenas  dato.  Si  plures  sunt,  trans 
Tiberim  peregre  venum  danto  :  partis  secanto.  Si  plus  minusve  secuerint,  se  fraude  esto.’  *  On  the 
third  market-day  there  shall  be  a  decree  of  addiction.  The  addictus  shall  then  pay  the  penalty  with 
his  person.  If  there  be  several  creditors  to  whom  he  is  awarded,  let  them  sell  him  beyond  Tiber  and 
divide  the  price.  If  any  of  them  have  got  more  or  less  than  his  fair  share,  this  shall  not  prejudice 
them.’  Dr  Kohler  advocates  the  old  orthodox  interpretation  of  this  law,  and  alleges  in  support 
of  his  view  an  imposing  array  of  comparative  jurisprudence  in  which  he  is,  as  Dr  Muirhead  says, 
‘  profoundly  versed  ;’  it  is,  therefore,  only  just  to  add  that  Dr  Kohler  refers  (p.  8)  to  the  attempts 
which  have  been  made  to  give  a  milder  interpretation  to  this  Law,  and  that  he  believes  them  to  be 
utterly  wrong.  Of  course  his  remark  does  not  apply  to  Dr  Muirhead,  whose  volume  had  not  then 
been  published.  It  is  to  Mr  J.  Foster  Kirk  that  I  am  indebted  for  having  my  attention  called  to 
this  interesting  and  learned  book  by  Dr  Muirhead. — Ed. 

27 


418 


APPENDIX 


Business  having  brought  me  to  the  city  of  Grenada,  i  was  one  day  accosted  on  the 
street  by  a  dapper  little  man,  carrying  an  ivory-headed  cane,  who,  calling  me  by  name, 
said,  ‘El  alcalde  le  llatna  ’ — •  The  alcalde  sends  for  you.’  I  thought  the  invitation 
rather  wanting  in  courtesy,  and,  to  pay  like  with  like,  intimated  that  I  was  busy  then, 
without  saying  whether  I  would  wait  on  His  Honor  or  not.  The  little  man  simply 
repeated  his  message  and  left.  A  person  present,  seeing  that  I  showed  no  disposition 
to  move,  then  informed  me  that  the  dapper  little  man  with  the  cane  was  an  alguazil, 
and  that,  by  his  verbal  notice,  I  had  been  legally  summoned  to  the  alcalde’s  court,  to 
which  I  was  recommended  to  go  without  unnecessary  delay.  I  accordingly  repaiied 
at  once  to  the  court-room  in  the  juzgado ,  as  directed. 

Proceedings  of  some  sort  were  going  on  at  the  moment,  but  the  alcalde  suspended 
them,  received  me  very  courteously,  and  directed  some  one  present  to  go  and  call  Don 
Dolores  Bermudez,  the  plaintiff,  into  court.  The  substance  of  Mr  Bermudez’s  com¬ 
plaint  against  the  company  was  then  stated  to  me,  and  I  was  asked  for  my  answer  to 
it.  I  sent  for  my  counsel,  and  the  company’s  defence  was  stated  orally.  The  contract 
out  of  which  the  controversy  arose  was  produced,  and  perhaps  a  witness  or  two  were 
examined,  and  some  oral  discussion  followed;  those  details  I  forget,  for  there  was 
nothing  in  them  that  struck  me  as  strange.  There  was,  in  fact,  little  if  any  dispute 
about  the  facts  of  the  case,  the  real  controversy  being  as  to  the  company’s  liability  and 
its  extent.  We  were  finally  informed  that  on  a  given  day  we  should  be  expected  to 
attend  again,  when  the  Judge  would  be  prepared  with  his  decision. 

At  the  appointed  time  we  attended  accordingly,  and  the  Judge  read  a  paper  in  which 
all  the  facts  were  stated,  at  the  conclusion  of  which  he  announced  to  us  that  he  pro¬ 
posed  to  submit  the  question  of  law  involved  to  Don  Buenaventura  Selva,  a  practising 
lawyer  of  Grenada,  as  a  ‘jurisconsult,’  unless  some  competent  objections  were  made  to 
him.  I  learned  then  that  I  could  challenge  the  proposed  jurisconsult  for  consanguin¬ 
ity,  affinity,  or  favor,  just  as  we  challenge  a  juror.  I  knew  of  no  cause  of  challenge 
against  him;  my  counsel  said  he  was  an  unexceptionable  person;  and  so  he  was 
chosen,  and  the  case  was  referred  to  him.  Some  days  after,  he  returned  the  papers  to 
the  alcalde  with  his  opinion,  which  was  in  my  favour,  and  the  plaintiff’s  case  was  dis¬ 
missed. 

In  the  course  of  the  same  afternoon,  or  the  next  day,  I  received  an  intimation  that 
Don  Buenaventura  expected  from  me  a  gratification — the  name  in  that  country  for 
what  we  call  a  gratuity — and  I  think  the  sum  of  two  hundred  dollars  was  named. 
This  did  not  harmonize  with  my  crude  notions  of  the  administration  of  justice,  and  I 
asked  for  explanations.  They  were  given  in  the  stereotyped  form  used  to  explain 
every  other  anomaly  in  that  queer  country,  ‘ Costumbre  del  pais l  I  thought  it  a  cus¬ 
tom  more  honoured  in  the  breach  than  in  the  observance,  and  declined  to  pay.  I 
found  out  afterwards  that  this  was  a  mistake ;  that  under  their  system  of  administration 
the  Judge  merely  ascertains  the  facts,  and  as  to  the  law  and  its  application  to  the  case 
reference  is  had  to  a  jurisconsult,  or  doctor  of  the  law ;  and  that  he,  after  pronouncing 
his  decision,  is  entitled  to  accept  from  either  party — in  practice  always  from  the  suc¬ 
cessful  one — a  ‘  quiddam  honorarium ,’  or  gratification,  his  service  to  the  court  being 
gratuitous,  just  as  that  of  an  amicus  cwrice  is  with  us. 

With  this  experience,  I  read  the  case  of  Shylock  over  again,  and  understood  it  bet¬ 
ter.  It  was  plain  that  the  sort  of  procedure  Shakespeare  had  in  view,  and  attributed 
to  the  Venetian  court,  was  exactly  that  of  my  recent  experience.  The  Trial  Scene 
opens  on  the  day  appointed  for  hearing  judgement ;  the  facts  had  been  ascertained  at 
a  previous  session,  and  Bellario  had  been  selected  as  the  jurist  to  determine  the  law 


LAW  IN  THE  TRIAL  SCENE— DOYLE 


419 


applicable  to  them.  The  case  had  been  submitted  to  him  in  writing,  and  the  Court 
was  awaiting  his  decision.  The  defendant,  when  the  case  is  called,  answers  as  is  done 
daily  in  our  own  courts  :  ‘  Ready,  so  please  your  Grace.’  Shylock  is  not  present.  In  a 
common  law  court  his  absence  would  have  resulted  in  a  nonsuit,  but  not  so  here ;  he 
is  sent  for,  just  as  my  adversary  was,  and  comes.  After  an  ineffectual  attempt  to  move 
him  to  mercy,  the  Duke  intimates  an  adjournment  unless  Bellario  comes,  and  it  is 
then  announced  that  a  messenger  from  him  is  in  attendance ;  his  letter  is  read,  and 
Portia  is  introduced.  Bellario’s  letter  excuses  his  non-attendance  on  the  plea  of  ill¬ 
ness,  and  proposes  her,  under  the  name  of  Balthazar,  as  a  substitute.  ‘  I  acquainted 
him  with  the  cause  of  the  controversy,’  &c.,  and  ending,  'I  leave  him  to  your  gracious 
acceptance ,  whose  trial  shall  better  publish  his  commendation.’  The  Duke,  of  course, 
had  the  right,  so  far  as  concerned  himself,  to  accept  the  substitution  of  Balthazar  for 
Bellario ;  but  Shylock,  I  take  it,  would  have  had  the  right  to  challenge  the  substitute ; 
and  perhaps  it  is  to  avoid  this,  by  disarming  his  suspicions,  that  all  Portia’s  utterances 
in  the  case,  until  she  has  secured  his  express  consent  to  her  acting,  are  favourable  to 
him.  Thus:  ‘Of  a  strange  nature  is  the  suit  you  follow,  Yet  in  such  rule  that  the 
Venetian  law  Cannot  impugn  you  as  you  do  proceed;’  and  again,  after  her  splendid 
appeal  for  mercy :  ‘  I  have  spoken  thus  much,  To  mitigate  the  justice  of  thy  plea, 
Which,  if  thou  follow,  this  strict  court  of  Venice  Must  needs  give  sentence  ’gainst  the 
merchant  here.’ 

Shylock  would  have  been  mad  to  object  to  a  judge  whose  intimations  were  so  clearly 
in  his  favour.  He  first  pronounces  her  ‘  A  Daniel  come  to  judgement !  yea,  a  Daniel !’ 
This  does  not,  however,  amount  to  an  express  acceptance  of  her  as  a  substitute ;  it  is 
but  an  expression  of  high  respect,  consistent,  however,  with  a  refusal  to  consent  to  the 
proposed  substitution.  She  carries  the  deception  still  further,  pronounces  the  bond 
forfeit,  and  that  *  Lawfully,  by  this  the  Jew  may  claim  A  pound  of  flesh,  to  be  by  him 
cut  off  Nearest  the  merchant’s  heart;’  and  again  pleads  for  mercy. 

The  poor  Jew,  completely  entrapped,  then  ‘  charges  her  by  the  law  to  proceed  to 
judgement .’  Antonio  does  the  same,  and  both  parties  having  thus  in  open  court 
accepted  her  as  such,  she  is  fairly  installed  as  the  Judex  substitutus  for  Bellario,  and 
almost  immediately  afterwards  suggests  the  quibble  over  the  drop  of  blood  and  the  just 
one  pound  of  flesh,  on  which  Antonio  escapes. 

To  complete  the  parallel  to  my  Nicaragua  experience  above  recounted,  we  find,  after 
the  trial  is  over  and  the  poor  discomfited  Jew  has  retired  from  the  court,  the  Duke 
says  to  the  defendant,  whose  life  has  been  saved  by  Portia’s  subtlety,  ‘  Antonio,  gratify 
this  gentleman,’  &c. ;  and  Bassanio  offers  her  the  three  thousand  ducats  which  were 
the  condition  of  the  bond. 

One  difficulty  yet  remained  in  the  case,  which  the  above  explanation  did  not  touch, 
and  which  to  me  was  still  a  stumbling-block,  viz. :  In  the  play  the  action  is  promoted 
by  Shylock  to  enforce  against  Antonio  the  penalty  of  his  bond ;  it  concludes  with  a 
judgement  against  the  plaintiff  that  his  estate  be  forfeited,  one-half  to  the  common¬ 
wealth,  the  other  to  the  defendant,  and  that  his  life  lie  at  the  mercy  of  the  Duke. 
Justice,  perhaps,  but  excessively  raw  justice,  such  as  we  would  think  could  only  be 
meted  out  in  the  court  of  a  Turkish  cadi,  who  fines  the  plaintiff,  imprisons  the  de¬ 
fendant,  and  bastinadoes  the  witnesses.  Yet  a  few  years  since  I  met  with  a  case  in  a 
Mexican  court  involving  just  as  marked  a  departure  from  all  our  notions  of  the  proper 
course  of  justice  as  this.  A  question  arose  in  this  city  as  to  the  disposition  of  the 
egtate  of  a  gentleman  who  died  at  Mazatlan,  where  he  had  been  slain  in  an  encountei 
with  his  partner,  while  discussing  in  anger  the  state  of  their  accounts.  There  had 


APPENDIX 


420 

been  a  trial  over  the  case  in  Mexico.  The  surviving  partner  put  forward  claims  before 
our  court,  which  caused  me,  in  behalf  of  the  next  of  kin  of  the  deceased,  to  send  to 
Mexico  for  a  complete  transcript  of  the  judgement-record  there.  [Mr  Doyle  here  gives 
an  account  of  the  official  inquiry  as  to  the  cause  of  death  before  the  alcalde,  who]  con¬ 
ducted  the  trial  with  pretty  evident  partiality  to  the  survivor,  whom,  at  the  conclusion 
of  it,  he  acquitted.  [Thereupon,  after  some  intermediate  proceedings],  the  Fiscal,  on 
behalf  of  the  State,  intervenes,  and  appeals  to  the  Supreme  Court.  There  the  wit¬ 
nesses  are  re-examined ;  they  contradict  each  other  badly,  and  break  down . The 

judgement  below  is  then  reversed,  the  defendant  sentenced  to  death,  and  the  alcalde, 
before  whom  the  trial  had  been  had  below,  is  sentenced  to  a  fine  of  5 100  for  his  par¬ 
tiality  and  misconduct. 

After  reading  this  record  it  occurred  to  me  that,  in  a  court  proceeding  according  to 
such  methods  as  these,  a  judgement  against  the  plaintiff  of  forfeiture  of  life  and  goods 
might  be  supposed,  even  in  an  action  on  a  bond,  without  grossly  violating  probability ; 
and  it  seems  to  me  that  Shakespeare  was  acquainted  (however  he  acquired  the  know¬ 
ledge)  with  the  modes  of  procedure  in  tribunals  administering  the  law  of  Spain,  as 
well  as  with  those  of  his  own  country;  if  like  practice  did  not  obtain  in  Venice,  or  if 
he  knew  nothing  of  Venetian  law,  there  was  no  great  improbability  in  assuming  it  to 
resemble  that  of  Spain,  considering  that  both  were  inherited  from  a  common  source, 
and  that  the  Spanish  monarchs  had  so  long  exercised  dominion  in  Italy. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— ROWE.  HALL  AM 


421 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS 

Rowe  {Some  Account  of  the  Life,  &c.,  of  Mr.  William  Shakesfear,  1709,  p.  xix)  : 
To  these  I  might  add  that  incomparable  Character,  Shylock  the  Jew,  in  The  Merchant 
of  Venice;  but  tho’  we  have  seen  that  Play  Receiv’d  and  Acted  as  a  Comedy,  and  the 
Part  of  the  Jew  perform’d  by  an  excellent  Comedian,  yet  I  cannot  but  think  it  was  de¬ 
sign’d  Tragically  by  the  Author.  There  appears  in  it  such  a  deadly  Spirit  of  Revenge, 
such  a  savage  Fierceness  and  Fellness,  and  such  a  bloody  designation  of  Cruelty  and 
Mischief,  as  cannot  agree  either  with  the  Stile  or  Characters  of  Comedy.  The  Play  it 
self,  take  it  all  together,  seems  to  me  to  be  one  of  the  most  finish’d  of  any  of  Shake- 
spear's.  The  Tale  indeed,  in  that  Part  relating  to  the  Caskets,  and  the  extravagant 
and  unusual  kind  of  Bond  given  by  Antonio,  is  a  little  too  much  remov’d  from  the 
Rules  of  Probability :  But  taking  the  Fact  for  granted,  we  must  allow  it  to  be  very 
beautifully  written.  There  is  something  in  the  Friendship  of  Antonio  to  Bassanio 
very  Great,  Generous,  and  Tender. 

Charles  Gildon  ( Remarks  on  the  Plays  of  Shakespeare,  Rowe’s  edition,  vol.  vii, 
p.  321,  1710) :  The  Ignorance  that  Shakespear  had  of  the  Greek  Drama  threw  him 
on  such  odd  Stories  as  the  Novels  and  Romances  of  his  time  cou’d  afford,  and  which 
were  so  far  from  being  natural  that  they  wanted  that  Probability  and  Verisimilitude, 
which  is  absolutely  necessary  to  all  Representations  of  the  Stage.  The  Plot  of  this 
Play  is  of  that  Number.  But  the  Errors  of  the  Fable  and  the  Conduct  are  too  visible 
to  need  Discovery.  This  Play  has  receiv’d  considerable  Advantages  from  the  Pen  of 
the  honorable  George  Granville,  Esq. 

The  Character  of  the  Jew  is  very  well  distinguish’d  by  Avarice,  Malice,  implacable 
Revenge,  &c.  But  the  Incidents  that  necessarily  show  those  Qualities  are  so  very 
Romantic,  so  vastly  out  of  Nature,  that  our  Reason,  our  Understanding  is  everywhere 
shock’d ;  which  abates  extremely  of  the  Pleasure  the  Pen  of  Shakespear  might  give 
us.  This  is  visible  in  Shylock' s  speech  to  the  Doge,  for  all  the  while  that  Distinction 
of  Character,  which  is  beautiful  and  otherwise  pleases  you,  the  Incredibility  of  such  a 
Discourse  to  such  a  Prince,  and  before  such  a  Court  of  Judicature,  has  so  little  of 
Nature  in  it,  that  it  is  impossible  to  escape  the  Censure  of  a  Man  of  Common  Sense. 
The  Character  of  Portia  is  not  everywhere  very  well  kept,  that  is,  the  Manners  are  not 
always  agreeable  or  convenient  to  her  Sex  and  Quality ;  particularly  where  she  scarce 

preserves  her  Modesty  in  the  Expression . Tho’  there  are  a  great  many  Beauties 

in  what  our  modern  Gentlemen  call  the  Writing  in  this  Play,  yet  it  is  almost  every¬ 
where  calm,  and  touches  not  the  Soul,  there  are  no  sinewy  Passions,  which  ought 
everywhere  to  shine  in  a  serious  Dramatic  Performance,  such  as  most  of  this  is. 

Dr  Johnson  :  Of  The  Merchant  of  Venice  the  style  is  even  and  easy,  with  few 
peculiarities  of  diction,  or  anomalies  of  construction.  The  comic  part  raises  laughter, 
and  the  serious  fixes  expectation.  The  probability  of  either  the  one  or  the  other  story 
cannot  be  maintained.  The  union  of  two  actions  in  one  event  is,  in  this  drama,  emi¬ 
nently  happy.  Dryden  was  much  pleased  with  his  own  address  in  connecting  the  two 
plots  of  his  Spanish  Friar,  which  yet,  I  believe,  the  critic  will  find  excelled  by  this 
play. 

Hallam  ( Introduction  to  the  Literature  of  Europe,  1837,  vol.  ii,  chap,  vi)  :  The 
'Merchant  of  Venice  is  generally  esteemed  the  best  of  Shakespeare’s  comedies . 


422 


APPENDIX 


In  the  management  of  the  plot,  which  is  sufficiently  complex  without  the  slightest  con¬ 
fusion  or  incoherence,  I  do  not  conceive  that  it  has  been  surpassed  in  the  annals  of  anj 
theatre.  Yet  there  are  those  who  still  affect  to  speak  of  Shakespeare  as  a  barbarian; 
and  others  who,  giving  what  they  think  due  credit  to  his  genius,  deny  him  all  judge¬ 
ment  and  dramatic  taste.  A  comparison  of  his  works  with  those  of  his  contemporaries, 
— and  it  is  surely  to  them  that  we  should  look, — will  prove  that  his  judgement  is  by  no 
means  the  least  of  his  rare  qualities.  This  is  not  so  remarkable  in  the  mere  construc¬ 
tion  of  his  fable,  though  the  present  comedy  is  absolutely  perfect  in  that  point  of  view ; 
and  several  others  are  excellently  managed,  as  in  the  general  keeping  of  the  characters 
and  the  choice  of  incidents.  If  Shakespeare  is  sometimes  extravagant,  the  Marstons 
and  Middletons  are  seldom  otherwise.  The  variety  of  characters  in  The  Merchant  of 
Venice,  and  the  powerful  delineation  of  those  upon  whom  the  interest  chiefly  depends ; 
the  effectiveness  of  many  scenes  in  representation ;  the  copiousness  of  the  wit,  and  the 
beauty  of  the  language,  it  would  be  superfluous  to  extol ;  nor  is  it  our  office  to  repeat  a 
tale  so  often  told  as  the  praise  of  Shakespeare.  In  the  language  there  is  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  a  metaphysical  obscurity  which  soon  became  characteristic ;  but  it  is, 
perhaps,  less  observable  than  in  any  later  play.  The  sweet  and  sportive  temper  of 
Shakespeare,  though  it  never  deserted  him,  gave  way  to  advancing  years,  and  to  the 
mastering  force  of  serious  thought.  What  he  read  we  know  but  very  imperfectly ;  yet, 
in  the  last  years  of  the  century,  when  five  and  thirty  summers  had  ripened  his  genius, 
it  seems  that  he  must  have  transfused  much  of  the  wisdom  of  past  ages  into  his  own 
all-combining  mind.  In  several  of  the  historical  plays,  in  The  Merchant  of  Venice, 
and  especially  in  As  You  Like  It,  the  philosophic  eye,  turned  inward  on  the  mysteries 
of  human  nature,  is  more  and  more  characteristic. 

Thomas  Campbell  ( Remarks ,  &c.,  1838,  p.  xxxv) :  In  the  picture  of  the  Jew  there 
is  not  the  tragic  grandeur  of  Richard  III ;  but  there  is  a  similar  force  of  mind,  and  the 
same  subtlety  of  intellect,  though  it  is  less  selfish.  In  point  of  courage  I  would  give 
the  palm  to  Shylock,  for  he  was  an  ill-used  man  and  the  champion  of  an  oppressed 
race ;  nor  is  he  a  hypocrite,  like  Richard.  In  fact,  Shakespeare,  whilst  he  lends  him¬ 
self  to  the  prejudices  of  Christians  against  Jews,  draws  so  philosophical  a  picture  of  the 
energetic  Jewish  character,  that  he  traces  the  blame  of  its  faults  to  the  iniquity  of  the 
Christian  world.  Shylock’s  arguments  are  more  logical  than  those  of  his  opponents, 
and  the  latter  overcome  him  only  by  a  legal  quibble.  But  he  is  a  usurer  and  lives  on 
the  interest  of  lent  moneys ;  and  what  but  Christian  persecution  forced  him  to  live  by 
these  means  ?  But  he  is  also  inhuman  and  revengeful.  Why  ?  because  they  called 
him  dog,  and  spat  upon  his  Jewish  gaberdine.  They  voided  their  rheum  upon  him, 
and  he  in  return  wished  to  void  his  revenge  upon  them.  All  this  is  natural,  and  Shy- 
lock  has  nothing  unnatural  about  him.  His  daughter  Jessica  is  a  very  faithful  picture 
of  a  love-inclined  young  woman ;  betraying  the  Oriental  warmth  of  her  race,  together 
with  their  craftiness.  But  she  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  true  sample  of  a  Jewish  daugh¬ 
ter,  for  among  no  people  are  the  ties  of  domestic  life  held  more  sacred  than  among  the 
Hebrews. 

Throughout  this  whole  piece  there  is  a  flow  of  incident  and  richly-imagined  lan¬ 
guage  that  bears  us,  on  a  spring-tide  of  interest,  to  the  settlement  of  the  plot  in  the 
Trial  Scene,  which  is  a  drama  in  itself.  Yet  there  Shakespeare  does  not  forsake  us,  as 
a  vulgar  writer  would  have  done.  On  the  contrary,  he  prolongs  our  voluptuous  sym¬ 
pathy,  in  the  union  of  the  happy  characters,  by  a  little  pleasantry  about  the  rings  and 
by  a  moonlight  serenade  of  music.  Our  imaginations  retire  from  the  play  soothed  and 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— EDINBURGH  REVIEW.  SNIDER  423 


gratified,  and  perhaps  with  more  hints  to  our  understanding  respecting  the  charity 
which  we  owe  to  the  Jews  than  Shakespeare  has  ventured  to  insinuate. 

Edinburgh  Review  (1840,  vol.  lxxi,  p.481):  In  The  Merchant  of  Venice  the 
poetical  elevation  is  obtained  by  a  migration  into  a  foreign  and  southern  region ;  the 
tideless  bosom  of  the  Adriatic  reflects  the  Venetian  palaces,  the  pine  trees  and  fountains 
and  terraces  of  Portia’s  villa,  and  the  deep-blue  sky  of  the  Italian  clime.  But  every¬ 
where,  in  the  garden  or  the  Doge’s  hall,  on  the  little  ‘  campo  ’  of  the  Rialto,  or  beneath 
the  penthouse  that  projects  from  the  Jew’s  den,  we  feel  that  we  are  still  in  the  world, 
among  men  jostling  one  another  on  the  crowded  highway  of  life  and  hurrying  towards 
the  common  goal.  Here  action  is  in  its  appropriate  place ;  and  here,  therefore,  adven¬ 
ture  and  surprise  are  accumulated  upon  each  other;  the  drama  invades  the  domain  of 
the  romantic  novel,  but,  unlike  most  usurpers,  ameliorates  the  region  into  which  it  has 
intruded.  During  four  acts  of  the  play  we  are  hurried  from  one  crisis  to  another ; 
each  of  the  two  leading  plots  is  in  itself  improbable  and  even  revolting ;  but  the  harsh¬ 
ness  of  each  balances  and  conceals  that  of  the  other.  Poetical  fancy,  likewise,  wedded 
to  the  charm  of  love,  disguises  the  story  of  the  caskets ;  while  that  of  the  pound  of 
flesh  is  ennobled  at  once  by  variety  and  unsurpassed  truth  of  character,  by  the  most 
vigorous  strokes  of  passion,  and  by  a  temperate  judgement  which  is  the  most  admirable 
feature  of  the  piece.  At  length  the  perplexities  and  dangers  are  overcome  ;  love  and 
hatred  have  both  received  their  reward,  and  most  poets  would  have  dropped  the  cur¬ 
tain  on  their  characters.  But  Shakespeare  saw  that  something  was  still  wanting.  If 
the  play  had  closed  there,  it  would  have  deserved  to  be  called  a  tragi-comedy  in  a 
reproachful  sense  of  the  term ;  it  would  have  been  a  play,  in  which  it  was  impossible 
either  by  reflection  or  by  the  surer  test  of  feeling,  to  determine  which  of  the  two 
opposed  aspects  of  life  was  intended  to  be  exhibited  as  the  prominent  one.  The  main 
action  of  the  piece  in  both  its  branches  had  touched  the  very  frontier  of  that  region 
within  which  it  was  designed  to  move.  The  scenes  at  Belmont  had  been  prevented 
from  becoming  tragic  by  mere  accident ;  the  judgement-scene  is  really  and  sublimely 
tragic,  in  everything  except  the  artifice  which  gives  the  turn  to  its  catastrophe.  The 
feeling  which  genuine  comedy  should  leave  on  the  mind,  the  perception  of  those  rela¬ 
tions  of  man  to  higher  powers  which  make  his  very  weakness  the  fountain  of  happi¬ 
ness  and  reconciliation,  is  assuredly  not  that  which  rests  on  the  mind  as  we  retire 
slowly  from  the  piazza  of  St  Mark,  still  agitated  by  the  perils  of  the  trial,  and  perhaps 
not  less  moved  by  the  blow  which  has  smitten  down  into  broken-hearted  abasement 
Shylock’s  whole  soul,  his  intellectual  strength,  his  bitterly  pregnant  humour,  his  He¬ 
brew  devotion,  and  his  hatred  for  those  who  have  oppressed  and  insulted  his  nation 
and  his  name.  The  Fifth  Act,  forming  what  Coleridge  in  similar  instances  calls  ‘  a 
lyrical  movement,’  gradually  and  gently  relieves  the  heart  from  its  oppression.  A 
sportive  love  trick,  introduced  purposely  in  the  preceding  scene,  furnishes  its  materials ; 
the  tragic  ideas,  removed  to  a  distance,  serve  but  to  heighten  the  new  impression  by 
contrast,  and  thus  justify  for  themselves  the  place  they  hold ;  and  the  drama  closes  in 
music  by  moonlight,  amidst  the  placid  gladness  of  rescued  innocence  and  united  love. 

D.  J.  Snider  ( System  of  Shakespeare' s  Dramas,  St  Louis,  1877,  vol.  i,  p.  305) :  The 
general  movement  of  the  play  lies  in  the  conflict  between  the  Right  of  Property  and 
the  Existence  of  the  Individual,  and  in  the  Mediation  of  this  conflict  through  the  Fam¬ 
ily,  which  owes  its  origin  in  the  present  case  to  that  same  individual  whom  it  rescues. 
’That  is,  the  Family,  represented  by  Portia,  the  wife,  returns  and  saves  the  man  who 


424 


APPENDIX 


aided,  by  his  friendship  and  generosity,  to  bring  it  into  being.  All  the  characters  o  1 
the  play,  though  possessing  peculiarities  of  their  own,  must  be  seen  in  their  relation  to 
this  fundamental  theme  of  the  work. 

There  are  three  central  movements,  which  may  be  named  in  order :  The  Conflict, 
the  Mediation,  the  Return.  Of  the  first  movement  there  are  two  threads,  showing, 
respectively,  the  Property-conflict  and  the  Love-conflict,  though  the  former  is  raised  to 
the  highest  spiritual  significance  by  the  underlying  religious  element.  These  two 
threads,  moreover,  are  interwoven  in  the  subtlest  manner;  still,  an  analysis  has  to  tear 
them  apart  temporarily.  In  the  first  thread  the  antagonists  are  Antonio,  the  Christian, 
and  Shylock,  the  Jew.  Antonio  is  the  centre  of  a  group  of  five  friends,  who,  in  a  vari¬ 
ety  of  ways,  ingraft  themselves  upon  the  action ;  around  Shylock  also  are  to  be  placed 
his  daughter,  Jessica,  his  clownish  servant  Gobbo, — both  of  whom  are  leaving  him  and 
going  over  to  his  opponents, — and  his  friend  Tubal.  The  contrast  between  the  two 
men  in  their  personal  relations  is  this  :  Antonio  is  the  object  of  the  warmest  friendship, 
while  Shylock  is  disrupting  his  own  family, — driving  away  daughter  and  servant.  The 
second  thread  unfolds  the  Love-conflict,  which  has  here  three  phases,  represented  by 
Portia,  Jessica,  and  Nerissa.  The  second  Movement, — the  Mediation, — has  the  same 
two  threads  :  the  Property-conflict  is  brought  to  a  successful  conclusion  by  Portia,  dis¬ 
guised  as  a  lawyer ;  the  Love-conflict  has  ended  in  all  three  cases  with  a  happy  solu¬ 
tion,  namely,  marriage.  But  both  friends  and  lovers  have  been  torn  asunder  in  the 
performance  of  their  various  functions ;  hence  the  Third  Movement  will  be  the  Return, 
which  brings  all  to  Belmont, — the  blissful  abode  of  harmony. 

(P.  307.)  The  Collision  which  supplies  the  nerve  of  the  play  may  be  stated,  in  a 
general  form,  to  be  between  Christianity  and  Judaism.  But  mark !  it  is  not  between 
these  religions  as  dogmatic  systems  of  Theology,  but  as  realized  in  the  practical  life  of 

men . We  desire  to  lay  stress  upon  an  important  fact.  Shakespeare  has  nowhere, 

in  any  of  his  dramas,  made  religion,  as  such,  the  principal  motive.  This  was  no  doubt 
intentional  on  his  part,  for  no  man  understood  the  concrete  nature  of  religion — religion 
as  determining  the  conduct  of  mankind — better  than  he.  In  this  form  he  uses  it  con¬ 
tinually.  But  to  make  men  die  for  an  abstract  principle  of  Theology,  Shakespeare 
utterly  refused, — and  he  was  right. 

(P.  313.)  Put  a  man  in  the  world  with  this  notion:  ‘I  am  the  favorite  of  the  Al¬ 
mighty  ;  the  rest  of  mankind  is  only  so  much  material  to  make  money  out  of,  which  I 
can  use  as  I  please,’  and  you  have  Shylock.  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  the  Poet 
paints  him  as  penetrated  with  the  morality  of  the  Old  Testament.  He  tells  the  story 
of  Jacob’s  deceiving  Laban,  as  Scriptural  proof  that  his  end  was  justifiable  :  *  This  was 
the  way  to  thrive,  and  he  was  blest ;  And  thrift  is  blessing,  if  men  steal  it  not.’  Note 
that  only  one  exception  is  made, — no  stealing;  everything  else  is  allowable.  The  reason 
is  manifest.  Theft  would  annihilate  property,  and,  with  the  destruction  of  it,  his  end 
also  must  perish,  for  that  end  itself  is  Property.  Hence  his  motto  is :  Thrift,  but  no 
Theft. 

(P.  316.)  Let  us  now  take  up  the  second  thread, — the  Love-conflict, — in  which 
Portia  is  the  main  figure,  supported,  however,  by  Nerissa  and  Jessica.  Portia  is  the 
third  great  character  of  the  play,  and  in  importance  stands  quite  on  a  par  with  Antonio 
and  Shylock.  Her  function  is  mediatorial ;  in  fact,  she  may  be  called  the  grand 
mediatrix  of  the  entire  drama.  In  her  we  see  the  instrumentality  by  which  the  main 
results  of  the  drama  are  brought  about.  Through  her  courtship  by  Bassanio,  Antonio 
comes  into  the  power  of  the  Jew  by  means  of  the  loan.  At  her  house  all  the  person¬ 
ages  of  the  play  assemble,  and  the  wooing  is  done.  Moreover,  she  accomplishes  the 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— SNIDER 


425 


rescue  of  Antonio,  which  is  the  main  mediation  of  the  poem.  The  great  principle  o( 
which  she  is  the  bearer  may  be  termed  the  Right  of  Subjectivity.  She  asserts  the 
validity  of  the  Internal  and  Spiritual  against  the  crushing  might  of  externality;  but  she 
does  not  deny  the  Right  of  the  Objective  in  its  true  limitation.  Only  when  this  Ob¬ 
jective  becomes  destructive  of  its  end  and  self-contradictory,  as  in  the  case  when  the 
Law  was  about  to  murder  Antonio,  does  she  place  a  limit  to  it  and  invoke  a  higher 
principle.  Her  struggle  is  with  legality  and  prescription  asserting  themselves  in 
spheres  where  they  do  not  belong;  but,  in  relations  where  this  contradiction  no  longer 
appears,  she  is  the  most  ethical  of  women.  In  the  Family  her  subordination  is  com¬ 
plete, — indeed,  devout.  We  shall  see  that  all  her  acts  have  one  end  and  one  impel¬ 
ling  motive, — devotion  to  her  husband,  an  absolute  unity  with  his  feelings  and  inter¬ 
ests;  in  other  words,  subordination  to  the  Family.  She  vindicates  the  Right  of  Sub¬ 
jectivity  for  herself,  in  order  that  she  may  obtain  the  one  whom  she  really  loves, — 
without  which  principle,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  the  true  existence  of  the  Family  is 
impossible. 

(P.  325.)  Shylock  ranks  as  one  of  the  most  perfect  characterizations  in  Shake¬ 
speare.  How  complete  in  every  respect !  How  vividly  does  he  rise  up  before  us  ! 
Not  merely  his  physical  appearance,  but  his  entire  spiritual  nature  stands  forth  in  the 
plainest  lineaments.  In  fact,  we  feel  as  if  we  knew  him  better  than  we  could  possibly 
have  done  in  real  life.  The  Poet  has  laid  open  the  most  hidden  recesses  of  character, 
has  portrayed  him  in  the  most  diverse  relations,  with  a  truth  and  fulness  unapproached 
and  unapproachable.  We  ask  ourselves,  Whence  this  completeness,  this  richness,  this 
concreteness,  of  characterization  ?  If  we  wish  to  see  the  infinite  difference  upon  the 
same  subjects,  compare  Shylock  with  the  best  efforts  of  other  dramatists.  Take 
L’Avare,  by  Moli^re.  Placed  by  the  side  of  Shylock,  how  meagre  and  unsatisfactory  ! 
Can  we  get  at  the  ground  of  this  extraordinary  superiority  ?  First,  we  should  say  that 
Shylock  is  something  more  than  mere  avarice ;  he  has  a  deeper  motive  in  his  nature, 
and  his  greed  for  gain  is  only  one  of  its  manifestations.  "It  is  true  that  his  end  in  life 
is  Thrift,  as  before  stated,  but  that  end  is  the  offspring  of  his  moral  and  spiritual  being, 
— of  his  religion.  Everything  goes  back  to  this  centre.  Shylock  is  a  Jew, — one  of  the 
‘  peculiar  people.’  In  all  his  actions  this  deepest  principle  of  his  faith  and  his  con¬ 
sciousness  wells  out ;  given  the  motive,  he  marches  logically  to  its  consequences.  Thus 
we  have  arrived  at  an  absolute  spiritual  unity  in  the  man.  The  second  reason  for  the 
transcendent  excellence  of  this  characterization  is  the  breadth  which  it  exhibits.  The 
activities  of  Shylock  embrace  quite  the  totality  of  Life.  We  see  him  in  his  family,  in 
business,  in  civil  relations,  in  social  relations,  in  morality,  in  religion.  We  behold  him 
brought  into  contact  with  every  essential  form  of  society ;  and  he  acts  in  them,  brings  his 
principle  to  the  test  through  them.  Nor  is  he  plunged  into  them  from  the  outside,  but 
is  brought  into  living  relation  with  them.  Hence  the  concreteness,  the  perfection,  the 
complete  individualization  of  character.  But  it  is  different  with  DAvare.  How  lim¬ 
ited  is  the  range  of  the  piece  in  this  respect !  Harpagon  almost  descends  to  the  com¬ 
mon  miser, — cut  off  from  the  world  in  obscurity,  dirt,  and  rags, — holding  fast  to  his 
money-bags.  His  niggardliness  in  his  household,  his  tyranny  in  his  family,  and  an 
example  of  his  extortionate  usury  express  quite  all  that  we  see  of  him.  This  is  not 
Shylock,  who  is  exhibited  in  many  more,  and  also  far  more  important,  relations, — 
who  sees  the  world  and  grapples  with  it  in  all  its  essential  forms ;  this  is  what  gives 
content  and  concreteness  to  his  character.  Hence  the  Harpagon  of  Molidre  is  empty, 
— almost  like  an  abstract  personification  of  avarice ;  in  fact,  it  is  a  meagre  caricature 
compared  with  the  Shylock  of  Shakespeare.  But  it  gives  occasion  to  many  laughable 


426 


APPENDIX 


incidents  and  situations ;  this  was  what  Moli^re  wanted ;  he  sought  for  predicaments 
more  than  for  characters. 

(P.  328.)  But  does  Portia  really  give  any  hint  to  Bassanio  which  of  the  caskets  tc 
choose  ?  It  will  be  recollected  that  it  was  forbidden  her  in  her  father’s  will  to  tell  this 
secret.  A  suspicious  circumstance  is  the  introduction  of  a  song  during  the  choice  of 
Bassanio,  which  the  previous  choosers  did  not  have  the  benefit  of.  Hence  one  is 
inclined  to  scrutinize  closely  the  meaning  of  the  song.  It  is  somewhat  enigmatic,  yet 
its  general  purport  may  be  slated  to  be :  ‘  Do  not  choose  by  the  eye, — by  the  glittering 
outside, — for  it  is  the  source  of  all  delusion.’  Hence  Portia,  after  observing  with  the 
greatest  care  all  the  formalities  of  her  father’s  will,  breaks  it  just  at  the  point  of  its  con¬ 
flict  with  her  subjective  right.  This  is  done  so  delicately  by  her  that  it  is  scarcely  per¬ 
ceived  ;  still,  it  is  none  the  less  real.  Thus  she  stands  here  as  the  grand  bearer  of  the 
Right  of  Subjectivity,  in  its  special  form  of  Love  versus  Obedience,  to  the  will  of  the 
parent. 

(P.  338.)  To  aid  the  readers  who  may  desire  to  grasp  these  results  in  the  more 
difficult,  yet  more  precise,  forms  of  philosophical  statement,  the  following  summary  is 
given :  The  collision  is  between  Antonio  and  Shylock,  and  is  mediated  by  Portia.  Its 
logical  basis  is  the  contradiction  between  the  Objective  as  realized  in  the  institutions  of 
Reason,  and  the  Subjective  as  the  individual  side  of  man.  The  former  undertakes  to 
crush  the  latter,  through  which  alone  it  had  existence,  for  it  is  posited  by  the  Subject¬ 
ive;  hence  it  becomes  contradictory  of  itself,  and  is  negated.  The  Subjective,  since 
it  is  not  universal,  is,  in  its  turn,  a  new  self-contradiction,  and,  hence,  a  negation  of 
itself, — which  results  in  its  subsuming  itself  under  the  Objective.  So  Portia  asserts  the 
Right  of  Subjectivity  only  to  end  in  subordinating  herself  to  one  of  the  forms  of  object¬ 
ive  reality, — the  Family. 

Hudson  ( Introduction  to  The  Merchant  of  Venice ,  Boston,  1879,  p.  54) :  Critics 
have  too  often  entertained  themselves  with  speculations  as  to  the  Poet’s  specific  moral 
purpose  in  this  play  or  that.  Wherein  their  great  mistake  is  the  not  bearing  in  mind 
that  the  special  purposing  of  this  or  that  moral  lesson  is  quite  from  or  beside  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  Art.  Nevertheless  a  work  of  Art,  to  be  really  deserving  the  name,  must  needs 
be  moral,  because  it  must  be  proportionable  and  true  to  Nature;  thus  attuning  our 
inward  forces  to  the  voice  of  external  order  and  law ;  otherwise  it  is  at  strife  with  the 
compact  of  things ;  a  piece  of  dissonance ;  a  jarring,  unbalanced,  crazy  thing,  that  will 

die  of  its  own  internal  disorder . As  to  the  moral  temper  of  The  Merchant  of 

Venice,  critics  have  differed  widely,  some  regarding  the  play  as  teaching  the  most  com¬ 
prehensive  humanity,  others  as  caressing  the  narrowest  bigotries  of  the  age.  This  dif¬ 
ference  may  be  fairly  taken  as  an  argument  of  the  Poet’s  candour  and  even-handedness. 
A  special  pleader  is  not  apt  to  leave  the  hearers  in  doubt  on  which  side  of  the  question 
he  stands.  In  this  play,  as  in  others,  the  Poet,  I  think,  ordered  things  mainly  with  a 
view  to  dramatic  effect ;  though  to  such  effect  in  the  largest  and  noblest  sense.  And 
the  highest  praise  compatible  with  the  nature  of  the  work  is  justly  his,  inasmuch  as  he 
did  not  allow  himself  to  be  swayed  either  way  from  the  right  measures  and  proportions 
of  Art.  For  Art  is,  from  its  very  nature,  obliged  to  be  ‘without  respect  of  persons.’ 
Impartiality  is  its  essential  law,  the  constituent  of  its  being.  And  of  Shakespeare  could 
it  least  of  all  be  said  : — ‘  he  narrow’d  his  mind,  And  to  party  gave  up  what  was  meant 
for  mankind.’  He  represented  men  as  he  had  seen  them.  And  he  could  neither  repeal 
nor  ignore  the  old  law  of  human  nature,  in  virtue  of  which  the  wisest  and  kindest  of 
men  are  more  or  less  warped  by  social  customs  and  prejudices,  so  that  they  come  to  do. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— SHYLOCK 


427 


and  even  to  make  a  merit  of  doing,  some  things  that  are  very  unwise  and  unkind ; 
while  the  wrongs  and  insults  which  they  are  thus  led  to  practise  have  the  effect  of 
goading  the  sufferers  into  savage  malignity  and  revenge.  Had  he  so  clothed  the  latter 
with  gentle  and  amiable  qualities  as  to  enlist  the  feelings  all  in  their  behalf,  he  would 
have  given  a  false  view  of  human  nature,  and  his  work  would  have  lost  much  of  its 
instructiveness  on  the  score  of  practical  morality.  For  good  morals  can  never  be 
reached  by  departures  from  truth.  A  rule  that  may  be  profitably  remembered  by  all 
who  are  moved  to  act  as  advocates  and  special  pleaders  in  what  they  think  a  good 
cause. 

[For  the  sake  of  convenience  I  have  attempted  to  classify  the  following  Extracts 
under  their  several  subjects. — Ed.] 

Shylock 

Hazlitt  ( Characters  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays,  1817,  p.  269) :  In  proportion  as  Shy¬ 
lock  has  ceased  to  be  a  popular  bugbear  ‘  baited  with  the  rabble’s  curse,’  he  becomes  a 
half-favourite  with  the  philosophical  part  of  the  audience,  who  are  disposed  to  think 
that  Jewish  revenge  is  at  least  as  good  as  Christian  injuries.  Shylock  is  a  good  hater ; 
‘  a  man  no  less  sinned  against  than  sinning.’  If  he  carries  his  revenge  too  far,  yet  he 
has  strong  grounds  for  *  the  lodged  hate  he  bears  Anthonio,’  which  he  explains  with 
equal  force  of  eloquence  and  reason.  He  seems  the  depository  of  the  vengeance  of 
his  race ;  and  though  the  long  habit  of  brooding  over  daily  insults  and  injuries  has 
crusted  over  his  temper  with  inveterate  misanthropy,  and  hardened  him  against  the 
contempt  of  mankind,  this  adds  but  little  to  the  triumphant  pretensions  of  his  enemies. 
There  is  a  strong,  quick,  and  deep  sense  of  justice  mixed  up  with  the  gall  and  bitter¬ 
ness  of  his  resentment.  The  constant  apprehension  of  being  burnt  alive,  plundered, 
banished,  reviled,  and  trampled  on  might  be  supposed  to  sour  the  most  forbearing 
nature,  and  to  take  something  from  that  ‘  milk  of  human  kindness  ’  with  which  his 
persecutors  contemplated  his  indignities.  The  desire  of  revenge  is  almost  inseparable 
from  the  sense  of  wrong ;  and  we  can  hardly  help  sympathizing  with  the  proud  spirit 
hid  beneath  his  Jewish  gaberdine,  stung  to  madness  by  repeated  undeserved  provoca¬ 
tions,  and  labouring  to  throw  off  the  load  of  obloquy  and  oppression  heaped  upon  him 
and  all  his  tribe  by  one  desperate  act  of  ‘  lawful  ’  revenge,  till  the  ferociousness  of  the 
means  by  which  he  is  to  execute  his  purpose,  and  the  pertinacity  with  which  he  adheres 
to  it,  turn  us  against  him;  but  even  at  last,  when  disappointed  of  the  sanguinary  revenge 
with  which  he  had  glutted  his  hopes,  and  exposed  to  beggary  and  contempt  by  the  let 
ter  of  the  law  on  which  he  had  insisted  with  so  little  remorse,  we  pity  him,  and  think 
him  hardly  dealt  with  by  his  judges.  In  all  his  answers  and  retorts  upon  his  adver¬ 
saries  he  has  the  best,  not  only  of  the  argument,  but  of  the  question,  reasoning  on 
their  own  principles  and  practice.  They  are  so  far  from  allowing  any  measure  of 
equal  dealing,  of  common  justice  or  humanity  between  themselves  and  the  Jew,  that 
even  when  they  come  to  ask  a  favour  of  him,  and  Shylock  reminds  them  [of  their 
treatment  of  him],  Anthonio,  his  old  enemy,  instead  of  any  acknowledgement  of  the 
shrewdness  and  justice  of  the  remonstrance,  which  would  have  been  preposterous  in  a 
respectable  Catholic  merchant  in  those  times,  threatens  him  with  a  repetition  of  the 
same  treatment.  After  this,  the  appeal  to  the  Jew’s  mercy,  as  if  there  were  any  com¬ 
mon  principle  of  right  and  wrong  between  them,  is  the  rankest  hypocrisy  or  the  blind¬ 
est  prejudice. 

Skottowe  {Life  of  Shakespeare,  etc.,  1824,  vol.  i,  p.  325) :  Shylock  is  abhorred 
an  i  execrated ;  but  the  skill  of  the  poet  has  endued  him  with  qualities  which  preserve 


428 


APPENDIX 


him  from  contempt.  His  fierceness,  cruelty,  and  relentlessness  are  dignified  by  intel¬ 
lectual  vigour.  His  actions  are  deliberate,  they  are  the  emanations  of  his  bold  and 
masculine  understanding.  Let  the  art  with  which  he  negotiates  his  bond  be  contem¬ 
plated;  consider  his  coolness,  his  plausible  exaggeration  of  the  dangers  to  which 
Antonio’s  property  is  subjected ;  his  bitter  sarcasms  and  insulting  gibes ;  all  efforts  of 
the  mind  to  induce  a  belief  of  his  indifference  and  to  disguise  his  real  design ;  follow 
him  into  court,  behold  him  maintaining  his  superiority  in  argument,  unmoved  by  insult 
and  unawed  by  power,  till  disappointment  leaves  him  nothing  to  contend  for  and  an¬ 
guish  stops  his  speech,  and  then  let  his  claims  to  intellectual  distinction  be  decided  on. 

C.  A.  Brown  {Shakespeare1  s  Autobiographical  Poems ,  1838,  p.  276) :  Toleration  is 
an  intolerable  word,  never  used  by  our  poet,  unless,  possibly,  in  a  disapproving  manner, 
under  cover  of  Dogberry’s  ignorance, — ‘  most  tolerable,  and  not  to  be  endured.’  To 
call  it  therefore  in  kindlier  words, — respect  for  another’s  sincere  opinions, — has  hitherto 
made  but  slow  progress  in  the  world ;  though,  bereaved  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  it 
might  have  been  slower.  No  argument  in  its  favour  could  be  more  complete,  or  put  in 
a  stronger  light,  than  that  which  we  find  here.  Shylock,  a  usurer,  a  suspicious  father, 
and  altogether  a  bad  man,  compels  us  to  grant  him  a  portion  of  our  involuntary  good¬ 
will,  solely  on  account  of  his  being  persecuted  for  constancy  in  his  creed ;  and,  thwarted 
in  his  hopes  of  a  hateful  revenge,  we  look  at  his  ominous  scales,  balance  his  injuries 
against  his  rancour,  and  cannot  forbear  granting  him  our  pity  when  he  is  defeated. 
How  careful  the  author  has  been  to  maintain  our  fellow-feeling,  and  to  make  Shylock’s 
religion  meet  persecution  at  every  step  !  Not  only  Antonio  is  his  reviler, — he  runs  the 
gauntlet  of  abuse  through  Venice;  his  daughter  forsakes  and  robs  him  because  of  his 
religion ;  wherever  he  turns,  his  misfortunes  are  a  subject  of  exultation ;  and  his  fall  is 
hailed  with  insulting  open  triumph.  His  claim  to  be  enrolled  among  his  fellow-beings, 
in  that  powerful  language,  ‘  Hath  not  a  Jew  eyes  ?’  &c.  has  nothing  urged  against  it, 
nor  could  a  word  be  said  in  denial,  yet  his  claim  is  allowed  by  none,  and  he  is  never 
treated  with  a  show  of  respect  until  he  is  feared.  We  acknowledge  his  right,  and  we 
are  glad  to  see  him  at  last,  by  any  resource,  treated  with  respect ;  we  only  recoil  at  his 
appalling  vengeance.  On  the  other  hand,  Antonio  is  a  man  justly  honoured  for  every 
virtue,  with  one  exception, — a  want  of  charity,  a  good  feeling,  a  decent  behaviour 
towards  a  fellow- creature,  purely  because  he  is  an  unbeliever.  The  religious  animosity 
of  Shylock  was  no  more  than  retaliation.  Antonio,  indeed,  may  have  had  reason  to 
accuse  Shylock  of  extortion ;  but  his  calling  him  ‘  misbeliever  ’  and  *  dog,’  spitting  on 
him,  and  spurning  him,  force  us  instantly  to  side  with  the  usurer  against  the  Christian 
of  unblemished  fame.  When  reminded  of  these  injuries,  the  virtuous  merchant  is 
ready  to  repeat  them,  so  unconscious  is  he  of  acting  with  injustice.  Representing  the 
persecutor,  on  all  other  points  truly  estimable,  and  the  persecuted  in  no  degree  esti¬ 
mable,  yet  entirely  unanswerable  in  his  defence,  puts  personal  merit  out  of  the  ques¬ 
tion,  and  places  the  argument  on  the  broadest  principle,  including  the  worst  as  well  as 
the  best  among  believers  and  infidels.  Shakespeare  strove  to  alleviate  the  bitter  per¬ 
secutions,  not  only  towards  the  Jews,  but  towards  all  others.  Catholics  and  Protestants, 
though  the  burnings  in  Smithfield  existed  no  more  in  his  day,  were  fearfully  hateful  to 
each  other,  when  good  men  were  contaminated  by  evil,  and  worse  men  by  revenge, 
rendering  the  persecutor  blind  to  his  want  of  charity,  and  giving  all  the  truth  of  rea¬ 
soning  to  the  persecuted,  however  unreasonable  might  be  the  creed  to  the  more  power¬ 
ful  party.  For  the  benefit  of  those  who  could  apply,  or  might  hereafter  apply,  Antonio 
and  Shylock  to  themselves,  Shakespeare  portrayed  them.  Should  any  one  think  the 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— SHYLOCK 


429 


application  was  unthought  of  and  accidental,  let  him  contend  that  wheat  grows  into 
nourishment  by  chance,  or  try  what  philosophic  works  he  can  write  by  chance. 

W.  W.  Lloyd  (p.  550) :  In  the  case  of  Bassanio  the  mind  glides  pretty  easily 
over  extravagance  by  confidence  in  his  nature  and  motives,  but  many  have  been  stag¬ 
gered  by  what  is  only  another  enunciation  of  the  same  principle,  in  the  flight  of  Jessica 
with  her  father’s  ducats  and  jewels.  A  chief  difficulty  has  arisen  from  the  maudlin 

sentimentality  that  has  been  bestowed  on  the  murderous  Jew . Shylock  is  ready  to 

impute  his  disgraces  to  antipathy  to  his  race  and  envy  of  his  gains,  but  the  poet  leaves 
us  in  no  uncertainty  that  his  gains  were  those  of  a  usurer,  in  the  sense  which,  under 
any  dispensation  of  political  economy,  involves  at  least  dishonesty,  dishonour,  cruelty, 
and  fraud.  The  arts  by  which  a  victim  is  enmeshed  and  ruined  by  a  usurer  are  even 

now  not  obsolete ;  and,  under  defective  laws,  might  have  flourished  tenfold . The 

Jew  is  the  very  impersonation  of  avarice,  meanness,  and  cruelty,  as  Antonio  of  gener¬ 
ous  and  sympathetic  liberality,  and  the  hellish  intention  of  his  treacherous  bond  is 
already  patent. 

(P.  551.)  The  plea  of  the  Jew,  in  exacting  forfeiture  of  the  bond,  is  the  epitome 
of  the  very  history  and  genius  of  Judaism  regarded  from  its  most  unfavourable  side, 
bigoted  reliance  in  the  fulfilment  of  precept  by  the  letter,  and  disregard  of  spirit  and 
purpose,  and  obstinate  claim  of  privilege  by  interpretation  of  terms  in  covenant  or 
bond,  to  the  neglect  of  the  foregone  intention  of  the  bond,  in  subjection  to  which  alone 
it  can  be  reasonably  valid.  All  are  familiar  with  the  spirit  of  Pharisaism  to  claim 
privilege  by  natural  descent  from  the  favoured  Abraham,  and  to  disallow  in  others  the 
value  of  the  very  qualities  to  which  the  favour  of  Abraham  was  ascribed ;  to  cleanse 
the  outside  of  the  platter  and  to  be  scrupulous  of  days  and  meats,  but  take  little  thought 
of  the  impurities  of  the  heart.  Those  only,  however,  can  have  full  conception  of  the 
degradation  of  the  human  mind  by  slavery  to  written  text,  who  have  had  some  glimpses 
of  the  Rabbinical  literature  that  is  a  monument  of  a  tyranny  in  comparison  with  which 
Egyptian  bondage  was  enfranchisement.  The  iron  of  this  slavery  has  entered  into  the 
very  soul  of  Shylock,  and  his  appeal  to  his  bond,  as  identified  with  justice,  embodies 
the  very  soul  and  being  of  ceremonialism.  The  bond  is  signed,  is  sealed,  is  admitted, 
and  he  rests  upon  it  as  on  a  rock ;  borne  out  by  this,  he  fears  no  judgement,  as  doing 
no  wrong.  The  word  of  law  is  to  him  sanctity,  and  he  has  no  sense  of  the  ends  for 
which  law  was  framed.  So  he  has  an  oath  in  heaven,  he  has  sworn  by  the  sacred  Sab¬ 
bath  ;  bonds  and  obligations  again  invalid,  by  incongruity  of  purport,  with  all  the  ends 
for  which  oaths  are  sacred.  Such  oaths  are  air,  such  bonds  are  waste  paper;  even  the 
very  rights  of  nature  and  paternity  are  dissolved  by  cruelty  and  malice,  and  no  amount 
of  wealth  can  purchase  the  happiness  or  power  of  which  the  moral  conditions  are  for¬ 
feit;  the  ark  of  his  trust  and  veneration  is,  like  the  gilded  casket,  but  a  painted  sepul¬ 
chre,  and  within  are  dead  men’s  bones. 

Giles  ( Human  Life  in  Shakespeare,  1868,  p.  124):  But  when  the  sense  of  loss 
and  the  sense  of  wrong  arise  in  harder  natures  [than  in  Lear  ind  Othello]  ;  when  the 
heart  does  not  bleed  out  of  wounded  affection,  but  is  bitter  with  the  gall  of  vindictive 
pride;  when  the  sense  of  loss  and  the  sense  of  wrong  merge,  but  do  not  lose  their 
personal,  their  individual  consciousness  in  an  abstract  fierceness  which  gathers  into  the 
embrace  of  its  detestation  whole  centuries  of  loss  and  wrong  inflicted  on  millions  of  a 
race,  and  this  detestation  is  concentrated  into  an  impassioned  antipathy  such  as  hered¬ 
itary  persecution  can  excite  and  the  most  energetic  inheritor  of  enmity  can  feel ;  or 


43° 


APPENDIX 


when  the  loss  and  wrong  experienced  are  not  traced  to  the  weakness  of  the  victim 
himself  and  to  the  vices  of  his  injurers,  but  are  made  the  crime  of  the  human  species, 
— when  such  conditions  of  hatred  are  embodied  and  expressed  we  have  the  characters 
of  Shylock  and  of  Timon.  These  men  do  not  move  pity,  but  awaken  terror.  Shylock 
is  inwardly  a  dark  nature ;  also  he  is  inwardly  a  strong  nature.  In  purpose,  will,  and 
passion  he  is  a  man  of  energy ;  and,  by  the  bigotry  of  society,  his  energy  is  restricted 
to  one  mode  of  power, — the  power  of  money.  Money  engages  his  activity,  but  does 
not  exhaust  his  being.  To  have  potency,  he  must  have  money.  Having  any  amount 
of  money,  he  may  still  be  trodden  on  as  a  reptile ;  but  wanting  money,  he  is  a  reptile 
without  a  sting.  Contempt  is  around  him,  as  the  light  of  day ;  he  breathes,  as  he 
walks,  an  atmosphere  of  odium ;  but  the  light  does  not  shame  him ;  the  atmosphere 
does  not  sicken  him ;  he  has  the  stout  vitality  of  a  proud  constitution,  and  though  he 
cringes,  and  bows,  and  smiles,  and  seems  as  servile  as  a  dog,  mean  as  his  scorners 
think  him,  their  lowest  idea  of  him  is  reverence  itself,  compared  with  his  highest  idea 
of  them.  The  lords  of  Venice  may  call  the  Jew  a  slave,  but  he  is  an  aristocrat  in 
every  drop  of  his  blood ;  and  more  value  does  he  set  on  any  drop  that  trickles  in  a 
Hebrew  beggar’s  veins  than  the  richest  streams  they  can  boast  of  from  their  upstart 
sires.  They  may  use  foul  words  to  him,  but  that  is  their  own  discredit ;  they  may  spit 
on  him,  but  that  is  their  infamy,  and  not  his ;  he  cannot  give  them  blow  for  blow,  but 
he  can  give  them  bigotry  for  bigotry;  he  refuses  their  doctrine,  he  willingly  accepts 

their  example . Christians  represent  all  who  have  done  the  worst  to  his  people  in 

any  age,  on  any  soil ;  his  personal  foes  stand  before  him  for  all  that  is  worst  even  in 
Christians ;  and  one  man  he  has  in  the  fangs  of  his  power  whom  he  deems  the  worst 
of  his  foes.  Here  is  a  wrath,  which  might  fill  the  hollow  globe  that  holds  the  stars, 
conveyed  into  a  single  point, — the  anger  of  many  generations  condensed  into  one 
heated  bolt,  against  one  devoted  head.  The  evil  done  to  his  people  and  to  himself  he 
cannot  here  repay ;  but  he  will  prove  that  he  has  the  disposition  to  repay  it  with  more 
of  usury  than  the  most  greedy  miser  ever  craved,  dreamed,  or  imagined.  Shylock’s 
law  with  the  Christians  is  the  law  of  enmity ;  he  is  zealous  to  obey  it,  to  make  it  per¬ 
fect  in  revenge ;  for  him  revenge  is  sanctity ;  and  to  immolate  Antonio,  as  the  fulfil¬ 
ment  of  it,  assumes  the  merit  and  the  glory  of  solemn  and  sacrificial  righteousness. 
But  as  the  hating  passions,  however  provoked,  react  ever  with  misery  on  the  individual 
who  indulges  them,  so  the  contrivances  of  Shylock  for  the  torture  of  others  accomplish 
only  the  destruction  of  himself. 

Rev.  John  Hunter  (p.  xv) :  Shakespeare,  the  interpreter  of  nature  and  humanity, 
felt  that  the  prejudices  against  the  Jews  were  cruelly  immoderate.  He  could  not, 
indeed,  represent  the  Jew  of  Venice  as  magnanimous  or  in  any  respect  amiable,  for 
this  would  have  been  inconsistent  with  the  general  character  of  the  Jews,  and  would 
have  been  so  opposed  to  popular  prejudice  that  the  public  representation  of  the  play 
would  not  have  been  tolerated ;  but  while  he  had  prepared  avarice,  malignity,  and 
cruelty,  as  the  colours  with  which  he  meant  to  portray  the  Jew  of  Venice,  he  saw  that 
Shylock’s  moral  deformity  might  be  in  great  measure  justly  attributed  to  the  influence 
of  social  circumstances,  and  he  felt  that  the  Jew,  even  in  a, temper  of  malignity,  might 
convincingly  show  to  Christians  that  their  persecuting  spirit  impressed  on  his  tribe  the 
character  which  the  Jews  bore  in  society.  Shylock,  accordingly,  is  a  man  whose  intel¬ 
lectual  power  is  not  to  be  despised,  a  man  who  can  deeply  feel,  and  powerfully  expos¬ 
tulate  against,  the  indignity  to  which  he  is  subjected.  He  cannot  be  allowed  any 
Christian  advocate  among  the  dramatis  persona,  but  he  himself  can  forcibly  demon- 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— SHYLOCK 


431 


strate  that  it  is  far  more  reasonable  in  him  to  act  according  to  what  was  said  ‘  by  them 
of  old  time  ’ — ‘  an  eye  for  an  eye  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth  ’ — than  it  is  for  Christians  to 
boast  of  the  excellence  of  that  gospel  charity  which  their  conduct  habitually  violates. 
And  herein  was  the  dramatist  a  faithful  and  skilful  monitor  to  professing  Christians. 
Had  the  Jew  been  enabled  to  resent  in  proper  time,  and  with  proper  impunity,  any 
wrongs  that  might  have  been  inflicted  upon  him,  his  resentment  would  have  had  vent, 
and  might  have  left  his  heart  capable  of  charity ;  but  he  had  to  endure,  without  retali¬ 
ation,  injury  and  insult,  time  after  time,  until  his  heart  became  hardened  as  a  stone  that 
would  whet  keenly  the  knife  of  vengeance  should  legal  justice  ever  give  him  an  oppcr 
tunity  of  obtaining  redress. 


J.  W.  Hales  (  The  Athenceum ,  15  Dec.,  1877) :  By  ‘the  general’  little  heed  is  paid 
to  the  profound  skill  and  the  catholic  humanity  with  which  the  Jew  is  interpreted. 
‘  The  general  ’  sees  only  a  monster,  and  hisses  and  hates.  A  more  careful  eye  observes 
that  this  monster  is  accounted  for, — that  the  great  poet  is  considering  the  problem  how 
such  ossifications  come  to  be.  He  is  ‘anatomizing’  Shylock,  seeing  ‘what  breeds 
about  ’  his  ‘  heart.’  ‘  Is  there  any  cause  in  nature  that  makes  these  hard  hearts  ?’  The 
Christian  who  looks  frankly  and  faithfully  at  this  work  will  not  find  matter  for  exulta¬ 
tion  or  for  ridicule,  but  only  for  shame  and  sadness.  Shylock  had  been  made  the  hard, 
savage,  relentless  creature  we  see  him  by  long  and  cruel  oppression.  He  inherited  a 
nature  embittered  by  centuries  of  insult  and  outrage,  and  his  own  wretched  experience 
had  only  aggravated  its  bitterness.  *  Sufferance  ’  had  been,  and  was,  the  badge  of  all 
his  tribe ;  it  was  his  badge.  As  fetters  corrode  the  flesh,  so  persecution  corrodes  the 
heait.  Shakespeare,  truly  detesting  this  dreadful  being,  yet  bethinks  him,  we  say,  how 
he  became  so.  He  was  once  a  man, — at  least,  his  breed  was  once  human ;  and  Shake¬ 
speare,  no  less  than  the  supreme  creative  genius  of  our  own  age,  recognized  in  the  Jew 
splendid  capacities  and  powers,  however,  so  far  as  he  knew  the  race,  misapplied  and 
debased ;  was  no  less  fascinated  by  a  character  of  such  singular  force  and  ineradicable 
nationality. 

Hudson  (p.  72) :  As  avarice  was  the  passion  in  which  Shylock  mainly  lived,  the 
Christian  virtues  which  thwarted  this  naturally  seemed  to  him  the  greatest  of  wrongs. 

With  these  strong  national  traits  are  interwoven  personal  traits  equally  strong. 
Thoroughly  and  intensely  Jewish,  he  is  not  more  a  Jew  than  he  is  Shylock.  In  his 
hard,  icy  intellectuality  and  his  dry,  mummy-like  tenacity  of  purpose,  with  a  dash,  now 
and  then,  of  biting,  sarcastic  humour,  we  see  the  remains  of  a  great  and  noble  nature, 
out  of  which  all  the  genial  sap  of  humanity  has  been  pressed  by  accumulated  injuries. 
With  as  much  elasticity  of  mind  as  stiffness  of  neck,  every  step  he  takes  but  the  last 
is  as  firm  as  the  earth  he  treads  on.  Nothing  can  daunt,  nothing  disconcert  him; 
remonstrance  cannot  move,  ridicule  cannot  touch,  obloquy  cannot  exasperate  him; 
when  he  has  not  provoked  them,  he  has  been  forced  to  bear  them ;  and  now  that  he 
does  provoke  them,  he  is  hardened  against  them.  In  a  word,  he  may  be  broken ;  he 
cannot  be  bent. 

(P.  74.)  Thus  his  religion,  his  patriotism,  his  avarice,  his  affection,  all  concur  to 
stimulate  his  enmity ;  and  his  personal  hate  thus  reinforced  overcomes  for  once  his 
greed,  and  he  grows  generous  in  the  prosecution  of  his  aim.  The  only  reason  he  will 
vouchsafe  for  taking  the  pound  of  flesh  is,  ‘  if  it  will  feed  nothing  else,  it  will  feed  my 
revenge ;’  a  reason  all  the  more  satisfactory  to  him,  forasmuch  as  those  to  whom  he 
gives  it  can  neither  allow  it  nor  refute  it ;  and  until  they  can  rail  the  seal  from  off  his 


432 


APPENDIX 


bond,  all  their  railings  are  but  a  foretaste  of  the  revenge  he  seeks.  In  his  eagerness  to 
taste  that  morsel  sweeter  to  him  than  all  the  luxuries  of  Italy,  his  recent  afflictions — the 
loss  of  his  daughter,  his  ducats,  his  jewels,  and  even  the  precious  ring  given  him  by 
his  departed  wife — all  fade  from  his  mind.  In  his  inexorable  and  imperturbable  hard¬ 
ness  at  the  trial  there  is  something  that  makes  the  blood  to  tingle.  It  is  the  sublimity 
of  malice.  We  feel  that  the  yearnings  of  revenge  have  silenced  all  other  cares  and 
all  other  thoughts.  In  his  rapture  of  hate  the  man  has  grown  superhuman,  and  his 
eyes  seem  all  aglow  with  preternatural  malignity.  Fearful,  however,  as  is  his  passion, 
he  comes  not  off  without  moving  our  pity.  In  the  very  act  whereby  he  thinks  to 
avenge  his  own  and  his  brethren’s  wrongs,  the  national  curse  overtakes  him.  In 
standing  up  for  the  letter  of  the  law  against  all  pleadings  of  mercy,  he  has  strength¬ 
ened  his  enemies’  hands,  and  sharpened  their  weapons,  against  himself;  and  the  terrible 
Jew  sinks  at  last  into  the  poor,  pitiable,  heart-broken  Shylock. 

Early  in  the  play,  when  Shylock  is  bid  forth  to  Bassanio’s  supper,  and  Launcelot 
urges  him  to  go,  because  ‘  my  young  master  doth  expect  your  reproach,’  Shylock 
replies,  *  So  do  I  his.’  Of  course  he  expects  that  reproach  through  the  bankruptcy  of 
Antonio.  This  would  seem  to  infer  that  Shylock  has  some  hand  in  getting  up  the 
reports  of  Antonio’s  ‘  losses  at  sea;’  which  reports,  at  least  some  of  them,  turn  out  .false 
in  the  end.  Further  than  this,  the  Poet  leaves  us  in  the  dark  as  to  how  those  reports 
grew  into  being  and  gained  belief.  Did  he  mean  to  have  it  understood  that  the  Jew 
exercised  his  cunning  and  malice  in  plotting  and  preparing  them  ?  It  appears,  at  all 
events,  that  Shylock  knew  they  were  coming  before  they  came.  Yet  I  suppose  the 
natural  impression  from  the  play  is,  that  he  lent  the  ducats  and  took  the  bond  on  a 
mere  chance  of  coming  at  his  wish.  But  he  would  h  >  ./  grasp  so  eagerly  at  a  bare 

possibility  of  revenge,  without  using  means  to  turn  it  into  something  more.  This 
would  mark  him  with  much  deeper  lines  of  guilt.  Why,  then,  did  not  Shakespeare 
bring  the  matter  forward  more  prominently  ?  Perhaps  it  was  because  the  doing  so 
would  have  made  Shylock  appear  too  deep  a  criminal  for  the  degree  of  interest  which 
his  part  was  meant  to  cany  in  the  play.  In  other  words,  the  health  of  the  drama 
as  a  work  of  comic  art  required  his  criminality  to  be  kept  in  the  background.  He 
comes  very  near  overshadowing  the  other  characters  too  much,  as  it  is.  And  Shy- 
lock’s  character  is  essentially  tragic ;  there  is  none  of  the  proper  timber  of  comedy 
in  him. 

Frederick  Hawkins  ( The  Theatre ,  Nov.,  1879,  p.  194) :  The  sympathy  enjoyed 
Dy  Shylock  is  designedly  aroused  in  the  interest  of  the  great  but  downtrodden  race  he 
represents.  The  man  who  exhausted  worlds  and  then  imagined  new,  whose  mind  was 
such  that  at  times  he  seemed  to  touch  some  awful  secret  of  the  Cosmos,  whose  works 
are  lighted  up  by  wisdom,  generosity,  and  tenderness, — such  a  man  could  have  had  no 
share  in  an  outburst  of  vulgar  envy  and  fanaticism.  He  saw  the  Jews  as  they  were, 
and  so  seeing  them  wrote  The  Merchant  of  Venice  in  order  to  exhibit  one  of  their 
number  at  a  disadvantage  as  a  direct  result  of  the  unreasoning  prejudice  against  them. 
He  more  than  counteracted  with  one  hand  what  he  seemed  to  do  with  the  other.  In 
availing  himself  of  the  greatest  popular  madness  of  his  time  he  sought  to  appease  it. 
His  play  might  have  been  regarded  as  an  attack  upon  the  Jews,  but  in  reality  it 
defended  them.  Much  of  the  true  significance  of  the  play  is  to  be  appreciated  only 
by  those  who  read  between  the  lines,  for  even  if  Elizabethan  audiences  and  readers 
had  been  well-disposed  towards  the  Jews,  the  dramatist  was  too  great  a  master  of  his 
art  to  preach  his  moral.  No  pains  appear  to  have  been  spared  to  dignify  the  character 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— SHYLOCK 


43j 


of  Shy  lock.  The  whole  force  of  an  old  untainted  religious  aristocracy  is  breathed  in 
some  of  his  speeches.  He  is  filled  with  a  generous  enthusiasm  for  his  sacred  tribe  and 
ancient  law.  His  avarice,  a  vice  forced  on  him  by  circumstances,  is  relieved  by  gleams 
of  an  originally  noble  nature.  He  has  so  deep  a  veneration  for  the  memory  of  his  dead 
wife  that  *  a  wilderness  of  monkeys7  would'  not  compensate  for  the  loss  of  the  ring  she 
had  given  him  in  youth.  He  is  tenderly  attached  to  his  daughter,  whom  he  leaves  in 
charge  of  his  house  and  his  keys.  Many  of  the  graces  of  intellect,  too,  are  engrafted 
upon  him,  as  may  be  seen  from  his  wealth  of  ideas  and  the  felicitous  language  in 
which  they  are  expressed. 

(P.  195.)  In  the  Trial  Scene  Shylock’s  reason  seems  to  have  been  shaken  by  the 
flight  of  his  daughter ;  and  the  knowledge  that  Antonio  has  assisted  her  to  get  away,  a 
circumstance  often  overlooked,  may  account  in  some  measure  for  the  increased  malig¬ 
nity  he  here  displays  towards  the  Merchant. 

[The  foregoing  view,  that  in  The  Merchant  of  Venice  we  have  a  ‘  plea  for  toleration,’ 
evoked  a  discussion  in  the  next  number  of  The  Theatre  (December,  1879),  which  I 
should  like  to  transfer  to  these  pages,  but  lack  of  space  restricts  me  merely  to  a  para 
graph  here  and  there.  Mr  Spedding’s  contribution  I  give  in  full,  not  only  for  the  sake 
of  the  clarum  et  venerabile  nomen,  but  for  the  sound,  wholesome  truths  which,  as  I 
think,  it  sets  forth.] 

Theodore  Martin:  I  can  find  no  trace  of  any  ‘plea  for  toleration.’  Nobody  in 
the  play  urges  anything  in  the  nature  of  such  a  plea.  Jew  and  Christian  are  alike 
intolerant.  ....  Even  after  the  discipline  of  suffering  and  peril  which  had  brought  him 
face  to  face  with  death,  Antonio  seeks  to  force  upon  Shylock  a  renunciation  of  his  faith, 
not  from  any  belief  that  this  could  operate  a  change  in  his  convictions  or  in  his  cruel 
nature,  but  in  the  very  harshest  spirit  of  intolerance.  Everybody  in  the  court,  the 

Duke  himself,  indeed,  seems  to  think  this  a  most  proper  and  reasonable  demand . 

While  I  cannot  think  that  a  plea  for  religious  liberty  was  in  Shakespeare’s  thoughts  in 
writing  this  play,  I  frankly  admit  that  it  indirectly  inculcates  the  un-wisdom  of  religious 
persecution  in  the  mischief  it  works  upon  the  persecutors  as  well  as  upon  the  perse¬ 
cuted . Only  in  Portia  is  the  sweet  and  humble  spirit  of  Christianity  illustrated. 

....  Save  in  the  words  which  fell  from  Portia,  there  is  not  in  the  play,  to  my  mind,  a 
trace  of  any  recognition  of  the  great  doctrine  of  religious  toleration.  That  Shakespeare 
held  by  that  doctrine  as  stoutly  as  man  ever  did,  I  can  have  no  doubt,  but  I  see  no 
symptom  of  an  intention  to  expound,  or  even  to  illustrate  it.  ‘  I  cannot  find  it  in  the 
bond.’ 

An  Actor  :  The  tendency  of  the  play  is  undoubtedly  to  show  that  ‘  the  worst  pas¬ 
sions  of  human  nature  are  nurtured  by  undeserved  persecution  and  obloquy.’  How 
far  this  tendency  was  a  matter  of  deliberate  design  we  shall  never  know,  but  Mr  Haw¬ 
kins’s  arguments  are  hardly  overthrown  by  the  fact  that  the  principle  of  religious  tole¬ 
ration  is  not  expressly  enforced  in  the  text. 

F.  J.  Furnivall:  Had  a  plea  for  toleration  been  Shakespeare’s  object,  would  he 
have  clinched  the  argument  that  Shylock  uses  with  that  *  shall  we  not  revenge  ?’  the 
claim  that  Jews  had  a  right  to  turn  devils  as  freely  as  Christians  had  ?  Was  there  no 
noble  Jew  in  history,  no  suffering  one,  specially  no  woman,  in  romance,  through  whom 
he  could  have  put  forth  his  plea  more  effectively  than  through  Shylock?  Assuredly 

there  were  many. 

28 


434 


APPENDIX 


Frank  Marshall  :  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  Shakespeare  had  any  especial 
views  with  regard  to  the  removal  of  Jewish  disabilities  in  his  portrayal  of  the  character 
of  Shylock.  Shakespeare  was  not  a  doctrinnaire ;  he  was  essentially  a  dramatist,  and 
possessed  in  a  greater  degree  than  any  other  author  the  faculty  of  entering  into  the 
feelings  of  the  characters  which  he  introduced  into  his  plays. 

Israel  Davis  :  Shakespeare  was  too  thoroughly  an  artist  to  write  a  play  with  a 
moral  purpose.  In  regard  to  the  essence  of  a  drama,  he  was  guided  irresistibly  by  a 
keen  appreciation  of  the  real  nature  of  men’s  thoughts  and  feelings.  Shylock  is  an 
interesting  character,  not  evil  by  nature,  but  made  evil  by  the  treatment  to  which  he 
has  been  subjected.  The  moral  suggests  itself,  that  if  the  Jew  had  been  treated  in  a 
better  way  he  would  have  been  a  better  man;  and  Shakespeare  cannot  have  been 
unconscious  that  he  preached  that  moral,  although  the  purpose  of  his  play  was  to 
preach  no  lesson,  but  to  describe  human  life . It  was  a  greater  step  for  Shake¬ 

speare,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  to  create  the  Shylock  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice 
than  for  George  Eliot,  in  our  own  times,  to  imagine  the  Mordecai  of  Daniel  Deronda. 

David  Anderson  :  I  see  no  reason  why  the  Jewish  race  should  be  ashamed  of 
Shylock ;  and  I  venture  to  suggest  that  at  the  period  of  the  play  there  may  have  been 
hundreds  of  such  characters  in  the  cities  and  towns  of  Italy.  Save  for  his  revengeful 
spirit,  the  Jew  compares  favourably  with  the  other  principal  characters  of  the  play. 

James  Spedding:  The  best  contribution  I  can  offer  to  this  discussion  is  the  expres 
sion  of  an  old  man’s  difficulty  in  accepting  these  new  discoveries  of  profound  moral 
and  political  designs  underlying  Shakespeare’s  choice  and  treatment  of  his  subjects. 
I  believe  that  he  was  a  man  of  business, — that  his  principal  business  was  to  pro¬ 
duce  plays  which  would  draw.  I  believe  that  he  took  the  story  of  the  caskets  and  of 
the  pound  of  flesh  because  he  thought  he  could  combine  them  (I  forget  whether  he 
found  them  together  or  put  them  together)  into  a  good  romantic  comedy  that  was 
likely  to  succeed ;  and  I  think  he  managed  it  very  well.  But  if,  instead  of  looking 
about  for  a  story  to  ‘  please  ’  the  Globe  audience,  he  had  been  in  search  of  a  subject 
under  cover  of  which  he  might  steal  into  their  minds  ‘  a  more  tolerant  feeling  towards 
the  Hebrew  race,’  I  cannot  think  he  would  have  selected  for  his  hero  a  rich  Jewish 
merchant  plotting  the  murder  of  a  Christian  rival  by  means  of  a  fraudulent  contract, 
which  made  death  the  penalty  of  non-payment  at  the  day,  and  insisting  on  the  exac¬ 
tion  of  it.  In  a  modern  Christian  audience  it  seems  to  be  possible  for  a  skilful  actor  to 
work  on  the  feelings  of  an  audience  so  far  as  to  make  a  man  engaged  in  such  a  busi¬ 
ness  an  object  of  respectful  sympathy.  But  can  anybody  believe  that,  in  times  when 
this  would  have  been  much  more  difficult,  Shakespeare  would  have  chosen  such  a  case 
as  a  favourable  one  to  suggest  toleration  to  a  public  prejudiced  against  Jews?  A  law¬ 
yer  retained  to  defend  a  man  who  has  kicked  his  wife  to  death  will  try  to  prove  that 
his  client  was  an  injured  husband,  and  had  served  her  right,  and  this  may  succeed  with 
a  jury  that  have  had  experience  of  conjugal  provocations.  But  if  his  business  were  to 
plead  for  a  mitigation  of  the  severity  of  the  law  against  husbands,  he  would  surely 
keep  his  injured  friend’s  case  as  far  out  of  sight  as  he  could.  I  do  not  believe,  in  fact, 
that  Shakespeare,  either  in  choosing  the  subject  or  treating  it,  was  thinking  about  Jew¬ 
ish  grievances  or  disabilities  at  all  either  way.  What  he  had  to  think  about  was,  how 
he  could  introduce  into  a  comedy,  without  putting  everything  out  of  tune,  an  incident 
so  shocking,  and  a  project  so  savage,  that  ‘the  imagination  almost  refuses  to  approach 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— PORTIA 


435 


<t.’  And  I  think  he  managed  this  also  very  skilfully,  by  first  depriving  Shylock  of  all 
pretence  of  grievance  or  excuse,  which  was  done  by  the  offer  of  all  the  money  due 
him  upon  his  bond,  with  twice  as  much  more  to  compensate  him  for  the  very  short 
time  he  had  had  to  wait  for  it  beyond  the  appointed  day, — an  offer  which  leaves  him 
without  any  conceivable  motive  for  preferring  the  pound  of  flesh  except  the  worst, — 
and  then  dismissing  him  with  a  punishment  very  much  lighter  than  he  deserved. 


Macdonald  {The  Imagination,  1883,  p.  125) :  There  is  for  every  one  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  characters  the  firm  ground  of  humanity,  upon  which  the  weeds,  as  well  as  the 
flowers,  glorious  or  fantastic,  as  the  case  may  be,  show  themselves.  His  more  heroic 
persons  are  the  most  profoundly  human.  Nor  are  his  villains  unhuman,  though  inhu¬ 
man  enough.  Compared  with  Marlowe’s  Jew,  Shylock  is  a  terrible  man  beside  a 
dreary  monster,  and,  as  far  as  logic  and  the  lex  talionis  go,  has  the  best  of  the  argu¬ 
ment.  It  is  the  strength  of  human  nature  itself  that  makes  crime  strong.  Wicked¬ 
ness  could  have  no  power  of  itself ;  it  lives  by  the  perverted  powers  of  good.  And  so 
great  is  Shakespeare’s  sympathy  with  Shylock  even,  in  the  hard  and  unjust  doom  that 
overtakes  him,  that  he  dismisses  him  with  some  of  the  spare  sympathies  of  the  more 
tender-hearted  of  his  spectators.  Nowhere  is  the  justice  of  genius  more  plain  than  in 
Shakespeare’s  utter  freedom  from  party-spirit,  even  with  regard  to  his  own  creations. 
Each  character  shall  set  itself  forth  from  its  own  point  of  view,  and  only  in  the  choice 
and  scope  of  the  whole  shall  the  judgement  of  the  poet  be  beheld.  He  never  allows 
his  opinion  to  come  out  to  the  damaging  of  the  individual’s  own  self-presentation.  He 
knows  well  that  for  the  worst  something  can  be  said,  and  that  a  feeling  of  justice  and 
his  own  right  will  be  strong  in  the  mind  of  a  man  who  is  yet  swayed  by  perfect  selfish¬ 
ness.  Therefore  the  false  man  is  not  discoverable  in  his  speech,  not  merely  because 
the  villain  will  talk  as  like  a  true  man  as  he  may,  but  because  seldom  is  the  villainy 
clear  to  the  villain’s  own  mind. 


Portia 

Hazlitt  ( Characters  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays,  1 81 7,  p.  273) :  Portia  is  not  a  very  great 
favourite  with  us;  neither  are  we  in  love  with  her  maid,  Nerissa.  Portia  has  a  certain 
degree  of  affectation  and  pedantry  about  her,  which  is  very  unusual  in  Shakespeare’s 
women,  but  which,  perhaps,  was  a  proper  qualification  for  the  office  of  a  *  civil  doctor,’ 
which  she  undertakes  and  executes  so  successfully.  The  speech  about  Mercy  is  very 
well;  but  there  are  a  thousand  finer  ones  in  Shakespeare.  We  do  not  admire  the 
scene  of  the  caskets,  and  object  entirely  to  the  black  Prince  Morochius.  We  should 
like  Jessica  better  if  she  had  not  deceived  and  robbed  her  father;  and  Lorenzo,  if  he 
had  not  married  a  Jewess,  though  he  thinks  he  has  a  right  to  wrong  a  Jew.  The  dia¬ 
logue  between  the  newly-married  couple  by  moonlight  in  Act  V  is  a  collection  of 
classical  elegancies.* 


,v 


♦Charles  Cowden-Clarke  (Shakespeare- Characters,  London,  1863,  p.393):  I  have  always 
legretted  that  Hazlitt  set  down  that  passage.  It  has  been  often  quoted;  and,  as  his  staid  opinion, 
it  has  awakened  a  natural  opposition  to  him  on  the  part  of  those  critics  who  could  better  perceive 
the  true  beauties  of  Portia’s  character  than  they  knew  of,  or  could  discern,  the  variable  moods  of 
Hazlitt’s  temperament.  Every  one  who  knew  him  would  feel  convinced  that  he  penned  these  words 
under  some  temporary  fit  of  spleen,  some  wayward,  momentary  feeling  of  petulance  againot  high¬ 
bred  women.  Hazlitt  was  very  sensitive — personally  sensitive — on  the  score  of  women’s  liking 
toward  himself;  and  he  occasionally  made  some  curious  mistakes,  such  as  many  men  who  are  at 
once  self-diffident  and  self-confident,  intellectually  proud  and  constitutionally  shy  (for  all  the  quali- 
ties  are  perfectly  compatible),  often  do  make  about  women  and  women’s  preferences.  Even  in  his 
writings  these  peculiarities  are  plainly  perceptible.  Turn  to  his  Essay  ‘  On  Great  and  Little  Things,’ 
where  he  professes  his  admiration  for  ‘humble  beauties, servant-maids  and  shepherd-girls  ;’  his  own 


43<> 


APPENDIX 


Mrs  Jameson  ( Characteristics  of  Women ,  2d  ed.,  1833,  vol.  i,  p.  66) :  Portia,  Isa 
bella,  Beatrice,  and  Rosalind  may  be  classed  together,  as  characters  of  intellect, 
because,  when  compared  with  others,  they  are  at  once  distinguished  by  their  mental 
superiority.  In  Portia  it  is  intellect  kindled  into  romance  by  a  poetical  imagination. 

....  The  wit  of  Portia  is  like  attar  of  roses,  rich  and  concentrated . As  women 

and  individuals,  as  breathing  realities,  clothed  in  flesh  and  blood,  I  believe  we  must 
assign  the  first  rank  to  Portia,  as  uniting  in  herself  in  a  more  eminent  degree  than  the 
others,  all  the  noblest  and  most  lovable  qualities  that  ever  met  together  in  woman. 

Portia  is  endued  with  her  own  share  of  those  delightful  qualities  which  Shakespeare 
has  lavished  on  many  of  his  female  characters ;  but,  besides  the  dignity,  the  sweetness, 
and  tenderness  which  should  distinguish  her  sex  generally,  she  is  individualized  by 
qualities  peculiar  to  herself;  by  her  high  mental  powers,  her  enthusiasm  of  tempera¬ 
ment,  her  decision  of  purpose,  and  her  buoyancy  of  spirit.  These  are  innate ;  she  has 
other  distinguishing  qualities  more  external,  and  which  are  the  result  of  the  circum¬ 
stances  in  which  she  is  placed.  Thus  she  is  the  heiress  of  a  princely  name  and  count¬ 
less  wealth;  a  train  of  obedient  pleasures  have  ever  waited  round  her;  and  from 
infancy  she  has  breathed  an  atmosphere  redolent  of  perfume  and  blandishment. 
Accordingly,  there  is  a  commanding  grace,  a  high-bred,  airy  elegance,  a  spirit  of  mag¬ 
nificence  in  all  that  she  says  and  does,  as  one  to  whom  splendour  had  been  familiar 
from  her  very  birth.  She  treads  as  though  her  footsteps  had  been  among  marble  pal¬ 
aces,  beneath  roofs  of  fretted  gold,  o’er  cedar  floors  and  pavements  of  jasper  and  por¬ 
phyry — amid  gardens  full  of  statues,  and  flowers,  and  fountains,  and  haunting  music. 
She  is  full  of  penetrative  wisdom,  and  genuine  tenderness,  and  lively  wit ;  but  as  she 
has  never  known  want,  or  grief,  [not  when  her  father  died  ? — Ed.]  or  fear,  or  disap¬ 
pointment,  her  wisdom  is  without  a  touch  of  the  sombre  or  the  sad ;  her  affections  are 
all  mixed  up  with  faith,  hope,  and  joy ;  and  her  wit  has  not  a  particle  of  malevolence 
or  causticity. 

(P.  72.)  We  are  not  told  expressly  where  Belmont  is  situated ;  but  as  Bassanio  takes 
ship  to  go  thither  from  Venice,  and  as  we  find  [Portia]  afterwards  ordering  horses  from 
Belmont  to  Padua,  we  will  imagine  Portia’s  hereditary  palace  as  standing  on  some 
lovely  promontory  between  Venice  and  Trieste,  overlooking  the  blue  Adriatic,  with  the 
Friuli  Mountains  or  the  Euganean  hills  for  its  background,  such  as  we  often  see  in  one 
of  Claude’s  or  Poussin’s  elysian  landscapes.  In  a  scene,  in  a  home  like  this,  Shake¬ 
speare,  having  first  exorcised  the  original  possessor,  has  placed  Portia;  and  so  endowed 
her  that  all  the  wild,  strange,  and  moving  circumstances  of  the  story  become  natural, 
probable,  and  necessary  in  connection  with  her.  That  such  a  woman  should  be  chosen 
by  the  solving  of  an  enigma  is  not  surprising ;  herself  and  all  around  her,  the  scene, 


words,  declaring,  too,  that  he  '  admires  the  Clementinas  and  Clarissas  at  a  distance/  while  th« 
Pamelas  and  Fannys  of  Richardson  and  Fielding  make  the  blood  tingle.’  But  at  the  very  time 
that  he  tries  to  exalt  the  ignorant  charmers,  he  permits  the  reader  to  perceive  that  they  provok* 
him  with  their  inapprehensiveness.  And  in  another  Essay,  entitled  ‘  On  the  Disadvantages  of  Intel¬ 
lectual  Superiority,’  he,  with  much  bitterness,  takes  up  the  opposite  side  of  the  question,  saying, 
where  he  is  speaking  of  the  wooing  of  men  of  letters,  ‘  Women  of  education  may  have  a  glimpse  of 
their  meaning,  may  get  a  clue  to  their  characters ;  but  to  all  others  they  are  thick  darkness.  If  the 
mistress  smile  at  their  ideal  advances,  the  maid  will  laugh  outright.'  Here  we  find  that  the  pretty 
ignorants  had  lost  their  fascination  for  him  ;  that  he  saw  through  their  insufficiency  to  form  the  solid 
and  permanent  delight  of  a  man  of  intelligence;  whereas,  when  he  wrote  that  line,  ‘  Portia  is  not  a 
very  great  favourite  with  us/  the  Fannys  and  the  Pamelas  chanced  to  be  in  the  ascendant.  His 
imagination  was  beguiling  him  with  some  image  of  captivating  simpletonism  ;  frequently  and  oddly 
confounded  with  simplicity ,  when  he  asserted  that  ‘  Portia  has  a  certain  degree  of  affectation  and 
pedantry  about  her.’ 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— POR  TIA 


437 


the  country,  the  age  in  which  she  is  placed,  breathe  of  poetry,  romance,  and  enchant 
ment. 

(P.  74.)  But  all  the  finest  parts  of  Portia’s  character  are  brought  to  bear  in  the  Trial 
Scene.  There  she  shines  forth  all  her  divine  self.  Her  intellectual  powers,  her  ele¬ 
vated  sense  of  religion,  her  high  honorable  principles,  her  best  feelings  as  a  woman,  are 
all  displayed.  She  maintains  at  first  a  calm  self-command,  as  one  sure  of  carrying  her 
point  in  the  end ;  yet  the  painful,  heart-thrilling  uncertainty  in  which  she  keeps  the 
whole  court,  until  suspense  verges  upon  agony,  is  not  contrived  for  effect  merely ;  it  is 
necessary  and  inevitable.  She  has  two  objects  in  view :  to  deliver  her  husband’s  friend, 
and  to  maintain  her  husband’s  honour  by  the  discharge  of  his  just  debt,  though  paid 
out  of  her  own  wealth  ten  times  over.  It  is  evident  that  she  would  owe  the  safety 
of  Antonio  to  anything  rather  than  to  the  legal  quibble  with  which  her  cousin  Bel- 
lario  has  armed  her,  and  which  she  reserves  as  a  last  resource.  Thus  all  the  speeches 
addressed  to  Shylock  in  the  first  instance  are  either  direct  or  indirect  experiments  on 
Iris  temper  and  feelings.  She  must  be  understood  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  as 
examining  with  intense  anxiety  the  effect  of  her  own  words  on  his  mind  and  counte¬ 
nance  ;  as  watching  for  that  relenting  spirit  which  she  hopes  to  awaken  either  by  reason 
or  persuasion.  She  begins  by  an  appeal  to  his  mercy,  in  that  matchless  piece  of  elo¬ 
quence  which  falls  upon  the  heart  like  “  gentle  dew  [sis']  from  heaven,” — but  in  vain. 
She  next  attacks  his  avarice.  Then  she  appeals  in  the  same  breath  both  to  his  avarice 
and  his  pity. 

All  that  she  says  afterwards — her  strong  expressions,  which  are  calculated  to  strike  a 
shuddering  horror  through  the  nerves — the  reflections  she  interposes — her  delays  and 
circumlocution  to  give  time  for  any  latent  feeling  of  commiseration  to  display  itself, — all, 
all  are  premeditated  and  tend  in  the  same  manner  to  the  object  she  has  in  view. 
Thus :  ‘  You  must  prepare  your  bosom  for  his  knife,’  ‘  Therefore  lay  bare  your  bosom.’ 
These  two  speeches,  though  addressed  apparently  to  Antonio,  are  spoken  at  Shylock, 
and  are  evidently  intended  to  penetrate  his  bosom.  In  the  same  spirit  she  asks  for  the 
balance  to  weigh  the  pound  of  flesh,  and  entreats  of  Shylock  to  have  a  surgeon  ready. 

So  unwilling  is  her  sanguine  and  generous  spirit  to  resign  all  hope,  or  to  believe  that 
humanity  is  absolutely  extinct  in  the  bosom  of  the  Jew,  that  she  calls  on  Antonio,  as  a 
last  resource,  to  speak  for  himself.  His  gentle,  yet  manly  resignation — the  deep  pathos 
of  his  farewell,  and  the  affectionate  allusion  to  herself  in  his  last  address  to  Bassanio — 
are  well  calculated  to  swell  that  emotion  which,  through  the  whole  scene,  must  have 
been  labouring  suppressed  within  her  heart. 

At  length  the  crisis  arrives,  for  patience  and  womanhood  can  endure  no  longer,  and 
when  Shylock,  carrying  his  savage  bent  ‘  to  the  last  hour  of  act,’  springs  on  his  victim 
— ‘  A  sentence !  come,  prepare !’  then  the  smothered  scorn,  indignation,  and  disgust 
bursl  forth  with  an  impetuosity  which  interferes  with  the  judicial  solemnity  she  had  at 
first  affected ;  particularly  in  the  speech  :  *  Therefore  prepare  thee  to  cut  off  the  flesh,’ 
&c.  But  she  afterwards  recovers  her  propriety,  and  triumphs  with  a  cooler  scorn  and 
a  more  self-possessed  exultation. 

It  is  clear  that,  to  feel  the  full  force  and  dramatic  beauty  of  this  marvellous  scene, 
we  must  go  along  with  Portia  as  well  as  with  Shylock ;  we  must  understand  her  con¬ 
cealed  purpose,  keep  in  mind  her  noble  motives,  and  pursue  in  our  fancy  the  undercur¬ 
rent  of  feeling  working  in  her  mind  throughout.  The  terror  and  the  power  of  Shy- 
lock’s  character, — his  deadly  and  inexorable  malice, — would  be  too  oppressive ;  the  pain 
,  and  the  pity  too  intolerable,  and  the  horror  of  the  possible  issue  too  overwhelming,  but 
for  the  intellectual  relief  afforded  by  this  double  source  of  interest  and  contemplation. 


438 


APPENDIX 


I  come  now  to  that  capacity  for  warm  and  generous  affection,  that  tenderness  of  heart, 
which  render  Portia  not  less  lovable  as  a  woman  than  admirable  for  her  mental  endow¬ 
ments.  The  affections  are  to  the  intellect  what  the  forge  is  to  the  metal ;  it  is  they  which 
temper  and  shape  it  to  all  good  purposes,  and  soften,  strengthen,  and  purify  it.  What 
an  exquisite  stroke  of  judgement  in  the  poet,  to  make  the  mutual  passion  of  Portia  and 
Bassanio,  though  unacknowledged  to  each  other,  anterior  to  the  opening  of  the  play ! 
Bassanio’s  confession  very  properly  comes  first,  and  prepares  us  for  Portia’s  half- 
betrayed,  unconscious  election  of  this  most  graceful  and  chivalrous  admirer.  Our 
interest  is  thus  awakened  for  the  lovers  from  the  very  first ;  and  what  shall  be  said 
of  the  Casket  Scene  with  Bassanio,  where  every  line  which  Portia  speaks  is  so  worthy 
of  herself,  so  full  of  sentiment  and  beauty,  and  poetry,  and  passion  ?  Too  naturally 
frank  for  disguise,  too  modest  to  confess  her  depth  of  love  while  the  issue  of  the  trial 
remains  in  suspense,  the  conflict  between  love  and  fear  and  maidenly  dignity  causes 
the  most  delicious  confusion  that  ever  tinged  a  woman’s  cheek,  or  dropped  in  broken 
utterance  from  her  lips. 

(P.  83.)  A  prominent  feature  in  Portia’s  character  is  that  confiding,  buoyant  spirit 
which  mingles  with  all  her  thoughts  and  affections.  And  here  let  me  observe,  that  1 
never  yet  met  in  real  life,  nor  ever  read  in  tale  or  history,  of  any  woman,  distinguished 
for  intellect  of  the  highest  order,  who  was  not  also  remarkable  for  this  trusung  spirit, 

this  hopefulness  and  cheerfulness  of  temper . In  the  Casket  Scene  she  fears  indeed 

the  issue  of  the  trial,  but  while  she  trembles,  her  hope  is  stronger  than  her  fear. 

(P.  86.)  Her  subsequent  surrender  of  herself  in  heart  and  soul,  of  her  maiden  free¬ 
dom,  and  her  vast  possessions,  can  never  be  read  without  deep  emotion ;  for  not  only 
all  the  tenderness  and  delicacy  of  a  devoted  woman  is  here  blended  with  all  the  dig¬ 
nity  which  becomes  the  princely  heiress  of  Belmont,  but  the  serious,  measured  self- 
possession  of  her  address  to  her  lover,  when  all  suspense  is  over  and  all  concealment 
superfluous,  is  most  beautifully  consistent  with  the  character.  It  is,  in  truth,  an  awful 
moment,  that  in  which  a  gifted  woman  first  discovers  that,  besides  talents  and  powers, 
she  has  also  passions  and  affections ;  when  she  first  begins  to  suspect  their  vast  import¬ 
ance  in  the  sum  of  her  existence ;  when  she  first  confesses  that  her  happiness  is  no 
longer  in  her  own  keeping,  but  is  surrendered  for  ever  and  for  ever  into  the  dominion 
of  another !  The  possession  of  uncommon  powers  of  mind  are  so  far  from  affording 
relief  or  resource  in  the  first  intoxicating  surprise — I  had  almost  said  terror — of  such 
a  revelation,  that  they  render  it  more  intense.  The  sources  of  thought  multiply  beyond 
calculation  the  sources  of  feeling ;  and,  mingled,  they  rush  together,  a  torrent  deep  as 
strong.  Because  Portia  is  endued  with  that  enlarged  comprehension  which  looks 
before  and  after,  she  does  not  feel  the  less,  but  the  more :  because  from  the  height  of 
her  commanding  intellect  she  can  contemplate  the  force,  the  tendency,  the  conse¬ 
quences  of  her  own  sentiments, — because  she  is  fully  sensible  of  her  own  situation, 
and  the  value  of  all  she  concedes, — the  concession  is  not  made  with  less  entireness 
and  devotion  of  heart,  less  confidence  in  the  truth  and  worth  of  her  lover,  than  when 
Juliet,  in  a  similar  moment,  but  without  any  such  intrusive  reflections, — any  check  but 
the  instinctive  delicacy  of  her  sex, — flings  herself  and  her  fortunes  at  the  feet  of  her 
lover :  *  And  all  my  fortunes  at  thy  foot  I’ll  lay,  And  follow  thee,  my  lord,  through  all 
the  world.’  In  Portia’s  confession,  which  is  not  breathed  from  a  moonlit  balcony,  but 
spoken  openly  in  the  presence  of  her  attendants  and  vassals,  there  is  nothing  of  the 
passionate  self-abandonment  of  Juliet  nor  of  the  artless  simplicity  of  Miranda,  but  a 
consciousness  and  a  tender  seriousness  approaching  to  solemnity,  which  are  not  less 
touching. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— PORTIA 


439 


(P.  92.)  And  in  the  description  of  her  various  suitors  in  the  first  scene  with 
Nerrissa,  what  infinite  power,  wit,  and  vivacity !  She  half  checks  herself  as  she  is 
about  to  give  the  reins  to  her  sportive  humour :  ‘  In  truth,  I  know  it  is  a  sin  to  be  a 
mocker.’  But  if  it  carries  her  away,  it  is  so  perfectly  good-natured,  so  temperately 
bright,  sc  lady-like,  it  is  ever  without  offence ;  and  so  far,  most  unlike  the  satirical 
poignant,  unsparing  wit  of  Beatrice,  ‘  misprising  what  she  looks  on.’  In  fact,  I  can 
scarcely  conceive  a  greater  contrast  than  between  the  vivacity  of  Portia  and  the  vivacity 
of  Beatrice.  Portia,  with  all  her  airy  brilliance,  is  supremely  soft  and  dignified ;  every¬ 
thing  she  says  or  does  displays  her  capability  for  profound  thought  and  feeling  as  well 
as  her  lively  and  romantic  disposition;  and  as  I  have  seen  in  an  Italian  garden  a  foun¬ 
tain  flinging  round  its  wreaths  of  showery  light,  while  the  many-coloured  Iris  hung 
brooding  above  it,  in  its  calm  and  soul-felt  glory ;  so  in  Portia  the  wit  is  ever  kept  sub¬ 
ordinate  to  the  poetry,  and  we  still  feel  the  tender,  the  intellectual,  and  the  imaginative 
part  of  the  character  as  superior  to,  and  presiding  over,  its  spirit  and  vivacity. 

C.  A.  Brown  (p.  279) :  Portia  is  a  greater  favourite  with  me  than  with  Hazlitt ;  but 
I  do  not  think  her  quite  so  amiable  as  she  is  described  by  Mrs  Jameson.  Laying  down 
the  law,  in  which  Portia  seems  to  rejoice,  cannot  be  perfectly  amiable,  though  it  were 
in  a  male  counsel ;  for  then  we  could  feel  no  more  than  admiration  at  his  professional 
talents.  It  is  true,  circumstances  forced  her  into  that  situation ;  and,  feudal  lady  as 
she  was,  she  executes  her  task  thoroughly.  All  she  does  is  consistent ;  yet  I  much 
question  if  she  does  not  experience  a  triumphant  delight  while  she  detains  the  Court 
in  suspense.  Shakespeare  has  done  much  in  softening  the  objection ;  but,  somehow, 
it  could  not  be  entirely  overcome. 

W.  W.  Lloyd  (p.  552) :  In  some  respects  Portia  has  always  appeared  to  me  the 
most  wonderful  of  all  Shakespeare’s  feminine  creations.  The  part  she  was  to  play  in 
the  Scene  of  the  Trial  gave  the  leading  condition  of  her  character,  the  possession  of 
the  highest  intellectual  endowments  that  are  compatible  in  woman,  with  the  age  and 
the  susceptibilities  for  tender  and  romantic  love.  The  power  of  the  poet,  however,  is 
less  wonderful,  even  in  the  wondrous  Trial  Scene,  than  in  the  exhibition  of  the  blend¬ 
ing  of  the  logical  and  intellectual  element  in  the  very  web  of  rapture  and  passion 
when  Bassanio  stands  before  the  caskets.  A  spirit  of  inference,  a  sequence  of  deduc 
tion,  run  through  the  very  confusion  of  her  agitated  hopes,  and  govern  and  correct  by 
apprehensive  standards  the  comparisons  that  crowd  upon  her  imagination.  In  her, 
meet  and  adjust  themselves  all  the  perfections  of  all  the  other  less  perfect  characters 
of  the  play.  She  is  as  sympathetic  as  Anthonio,  but,  with  equal  abhorrence  of  cruelty, 
she  avoids  an  outbreak  of  vituperation  against  the  Jew,  and  zealously  gives  him  every 
chance  of  retiring,  appealing  first  to  the  finer  chords  of  humanity,  and,  when  these  fail 
,  to  respond,  to  the  coarser  motives  of  lucre ;  and  when  the  Duke,  with  precipitateness 
which  he  has  afterwards  to  qualify,  remits  part  of  the  fine,  she  reserves  the  rights  of 
Anthonio,  ‘  Ay,  for  the  State,  not  for  Anthonio,’  not  merely  by  way  of  sustaining  her 
assumed  character  of  legal  accuracy,  but  to  allow  him  the  opportunity,  which  he  only 
employs  when  she  still  more  directly  furnishes  him  the  cue,  to  render  some  proportion 
of  mercy.  Nay,  I  may  here  add,  in  her  first  declaration  of  the  consequences  of  shed¬ 
ding  a  drop  of  Christian  blood,  she  names  only  the  forfeiture  of  lands  and  goods. 
Whenever  again  the  play  is  worthily  represented,  I  believe  that,  during  the  intermedi¬ 
ate  speeches,  the  changing  demeanour  of  Shylock  would  give  reason  to  apprehend 
that,  as  he  had  already  subjected  avarice  to  revenge,  he  would  even  have  risked  all 


440 


APPENDIX 


to  glut  his  cruel  purpose,  and  that  it  is  therefore  that  Portia  now  adds  other  conse¬ 
quences,  *  Thou  diest,  and  all  thy  goods  are  confiscate,’  and  so  pursues  his  sentence  to 
the  end.  In  the  novel  the  Jew’s  defeat  turns  entirely  on  the  matter  of  the  blood-shed¬ 
ding,  which,  in  itself,  is  little  better  than  a  quibble ;  Shakespeare  wisely  retained  and 
put  this  first  to  degrade  the  literal  principle  of  the  Jew  to  the  uttermost,  by  exhibiting 
him  foiled  at  the  weapons  of  his  own  cunning,  when  wielded  with  simplicity  and 
straightforwardness ;  but  the  dignity  of  the  moral,  which  is  that  of  Portia’s  character, 
required  and  supplied  the  more  substantial  reference  to  criminality  of  murderous  intent. 

Rev.  John  Hunter  (p.  xviii) :  There  is,  indeed,  a  methodical  style  in  the  expres¬ 
sion  even  of  Portia’s  most  impassioned  thoughts,  which  has  induced  some  critics  to 
impute  to  her  a  degree  of  affectation  unusual  in  Shakespeare’s  delineations  of  female 
character ;  but  we  believe  that  the  dramatist  has  herein  observed  a  most  judicious  con¬ 
sistency,  and  that  the  language  in  which  Portia  describes  her  emotions  is  not  less  indic¬ 
ative  of  genuine  feeling  for  containing  some  reflex  of  that  peculiar  aptitude  of  minu 
which  she  displays  in  the  Trial  Scene.  There  she  is  methodical  amidst  all  her  excite¬ 
ment  of  anxiety  for  the  honour  of  her  husband . Though  the  appeals  by  which  she 

endeavours  to  make  the  Jew  relent  are  characterized  by  an  observance  of  formal  argu¬ 
ment,  we  should  remember  that  she  is  all  the  while  actuated  by  intense  solicitude  in  the 
utterance  of  these  appeals. 

Mrs  F.  A.  Kemble  ( Atlantic  Monthly ,  June,  1876) :  I  chose  Portia,  then  as  now 
my  ideal  of  a  perfect  woman, — 

*  The  noble  woman  nobly  planned, 

‘To  warn,  to  comfort,  and  command; 

‘  The  creature  not  too  bright  or  good 
‘  For  human  nature’s  daily  food  ; 

‘  For  transient  sorrows,  simple  wiles, 

‘  Praise,  blame,  love,  kisses,  tears,  and  smiles 

the  wise,  witty  woman,  loving  with  all  her  soul,  and  submitting  with  all  her  heart  to  a 
man  whom  everybody  but  herself  (who  was  the  best  judge)  would  have  judged  her 
inferior ;  the  laughter-loving,  light-hearted,  true-hearted,  deep-hearted  woman,  full  of 
keen  perception,  of  active  efficiency,  of  wisdom  prompted  by  love,  of  tenderest  unself¬ 
ishness,  of  generous  magnanimity ;  noble,  simple,  humble,  pure ;  true,  dutiful,  religious, 
and  full  of  fun ;  delightful  above  all  others,  the  woman  of  women. 

Hudson  (p.  65) :  Being  to  act  for  once  the  part  of  a  man,  it  would  seem  hardly  pos¬ 
sible  for  her  to  go  through  the  undertaking  without  more  of  self-confidence  than  were 
becoming  in  a  woman ;  and  the  student  may  find  plenty  of  matter  for  thought  in  the 
Poet’s  so  managing  as  to  prevent  such  an  impression.  For  there  is  nothing  like  osten¬ 
tation  or  conceit  of  intellect  in  Portia.  Though  knowing  enough  for  any  station,  still 
it  never  once  enters  her  head  that  she  is  too  wise  for  the  station  which  Providence  or 

the  settled  order  of  society  has  assigned  her . Portia’s  consciousness  of  power  does 

indeed  render  her  cool,  collected,  and  firm,  but  never  a  whit  unfeminine ;  her  smooth 
command  both  of  herself  and  of  the  matter  she  goes  about  rather  heightens  our  sense 
of  her  modesty  than  otherwise ;  so  that  the  impression  we  take  from  her  is,  that  these 
high  mental  prerogatives  are  of  no  sex ;  that  they  properly  belong  to  the  common  free- 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS -  PORTIA 


441 


hold  of  woman  and  man.  Some  of  her  speeches,  especially  at  the  trial,  are  evidently 
premeditated ;  for,  as  any  good  lawyer  would  do,  she  of  course  prepares  herself  in  the 
case  beforehand ;  but  I  should  like  to  see  the  masculine  lawyer  that  could  premeditate 
anything  equal  to  them. 

(P.  68.)  How  nicely  Shakespeare  discriminates  things  that  really  differ,  so  as  to 
present  in  all  cases  the  soul  of  womanhood,  without  a  particle  of  effeminacy !  and  how 
perfectly  he  reconciles  things  that  seem  most  diverse,  pouring  into  his  women  all  the 
intellectual  forces  of  the  other  sex,  without  in  the  least  impairing  or  obscuring  their 
womanliness ! — all  this  is  not  more  rare  in  poetry  than  it  is  characteristic  of  his  work¬ 
manship.  Thus  Portia  is  as  much  superior  to  her  husband  in  intellect,  in  learning,  and 
accomplishment,  as  she  is  in  wealth ;  but  she  is  none  the  less  womanly  for  all  that. 
Nor,  which  is  more,  does  she  ever  on  that  account  take  the  least  thought  of  inverting 
the  relation  between  them.  In  short,  her  mental  superiority  breeds  no  kind  of  social 
displacement,  nor  any  desire  of  it.  Very  few  of  the  Poet’s  men  are  more  highly 
charged  with  intellectual  power.  While  she  is  acting  the  lawyer  in  disguise,  her  speech 

and  bearing  seem  to  those  about  her  in  the  noblest  style  of  manliness . Yet  to  us, 

who  are  in  the  secret  of  her  sex,  all  the  proprieties,  all  the  inward  harmonies  of  her 
character,  are  exquisitely  preserved. 

Lady  Martin  ( Shakespeare's  Female  Characters,  1885,  p.  30  et  seq.) :  To  know 
how  Portia  has  been  able  to  accomplish  [the  rescue  of  Bassanio’s  friend]  we  must  go 
back  to  her  youth.  I  think  of  her  as  the  cherished  child  of  a  noble  father, — a  father 
proud  of  his  child’s  beauty,  and  of  the  promise  which  he  sees  in  her  of  rare  gifts,  both 
of  mind  and  heart.  These  gifts  he  spares  no  pains  to  foster.  He  is  himself  no  ordi¬ 
nary  man.  He  anticipates  the  danger  to  which  the  beautiful  and  wealthy  heiress  may 
be  exposed;  and  it  was  by  one  of  those  ‘good  inspirations’  which,  as  Nerissa  says, 
‘  holy  men  have  at  their  death,’  that  he  fixed  upon  the  device  of  the  three  caskets, 
‘  whereof  who  chooses  his  meaning  chooses  ’  his  beloved  daughter.  From  the  first  his 
aim  has  been  to  train  her  to  succeed  him  in  his  high  position.  With  this  view  he  has 
surrounded  her  with  all  that  is  beautiful  in  art  and  ennobling  in  study,  and  placed  hei 
in  the  society  of  scholars,  poets,  soldiers,  statesmen,  the  picked  and  noblest  minds  of 
her  own  and  other  lands.  Amid  this  throng  of  honoured  guests,  not  the  least  honoured, 
we  may  be  sure,  was  the  learned  ‘  cousin,  Dr  Bellario.’  This  cousin  of  hers  we  may 
suppose  to  have  been  a  constant  visitor  at  princely  Belmont,  and,  indeed,  to  have  been 
her  instructor  in  jurisprudence,  a  not  unfitting  branch  of  the  future  heiress  of  Belmont’s 
education.  One  can  imagine  how  the  girl  Portia  would  rush  to  him  for  help  in  her 
youthful  perplexities.  Perhaps  they  have,  even  in  these  early  days,  *  turned  over  many 
books  together.’  Her  father  may  have  seen  with  pleased  surprise  the  bias  of  her  mind 
toward  such  studies ;  and  this,  as  well  as  her  affection  for  her  learned  teacher,  may 
have  led  him  to  take  her  to  some  of  the  famous  trials  of  the  day,  so  that  when  her  own 
hour  of  trial  comes,  when  heart  and  head  must  alike  be  strong,  and  her  self-possession 
is  taxed  to  the  uttermost,  she  knows  at  least  the  forms  of  the  court,  and  through  no 
technical  ignorance  would  be  likely  to  betray  herself.  If  this  were  not  so,  how  could 
she,  however  assured  of  her  power  to  overcome  the  Jew,  have  dared  to  venture  into  the 
presence  of  such  an  assembly  as  that  ‘  great  court  of  Venice,’  where  any  failure  would 
have  been  disastrous,  not  merely  to  herself,  but  to  Bellario  ? 

....  During  the  time,  brief  as  it  can  be  made,  of  the  preparations  for  the  marriage 
ceremony,  Portia  will  have  heard  all  the  particulars  of  the  ‘  merry  bond ;’  she  will  have 
discovered  that  money  alone,  however  squandere  1,  cannot  shake  the  ol  durate  Jew’s 


442 


APPENDIX 


determination.  Accustomed  b)  her  peculiar  training  to  look  with  a  judicial  mind  upon 
serious  matters,  she,  after  many  questionings  about  its  terms,  hits  by  a  happy  instinct,  as 
I  believe,  upon  the  flaw  in  the  bond.  She  will  say  nothing  of  this  to  Bassanio,  but 
hurries  him  away  with  her  wealth  to  use  as  his  own ;  and  then  herself  hastens  towards 
Venice,  after  despatching  a  messenger  to  Bellario  with  a  letter  informing  him  of  hei 
approach,  as  well  as  of  her  belief  that  she  has  found  a  flaw  in  the  bond,  and  requesting 
his  presence  at  the  trial.  We  find  her  before  her  departure  in  the  brightest  spirits,  feel¬ 
ing  virtually  assured  of  success,  and  even  jesting  in  her  new  happiness  with  Nerissa. 
This  state  of  mind,  it  appears  to  me,  could  not  have  been  possible  had  Portia  known 
what  was  before  her.  She  is  at  ease,  because  she  is  sure  of  the  full  sympathy  of  her 
friend  and  cousin,  Bellario,  and  counts  with  confidence  on  his  presence  in  Venice  to 
take  the  lead  in  court. 

In  the  play  we  see  that  Portia  sends  Balthazar  to  Dr  Bellario,  and  bids  him  wait  loi 
her  at  ‘  the  traject.’  But  either  her  mind  must  have  changed,  or  she  must  have  met 
messengers  from  Bellario  on  the  road,  who  tell  her  of  his  illness  and  inability  to  help 
her  in  person.  Consequently  she  hurries  on  to  Padua;  but  when  they  meet — for  that 
they  do  meet  is  certain — all  her  first  joyful  anticipations  receive  a  woeful  shock.  She 
finds  her  dear  old  friend  grievously  sick.  What  is  to  be  done  ?  There  is  no  help 
near;  no  time  to  be  lost!  The  Jew  ‘plies  the  Duke  at  morning  and  at  night.’  Bel- 
lario’s  aid,  she  learns,  has  been  summoned  already  by  the  Duke  as  a  last  resource.  In 
this  extremity,  with  no  other  help  at  hand,  Bellario  no  doubt  proposes  that  Portia  shall 
go  in  his  stead,  recommended  by  him  as  a  *  young  Doctor  of  Rome,’  then  visiting  him. 
This  must  be  done  or  all  is  lost.  Bellario  confirms  her  belief  as  to  a  flaw  in  the  bond, 
and  furnishes  her  with  his  ‘  own  opinion  ’  upon  all  the  points  of  law  most  vital  to  the 
question.  They  ‘  turn  o’er  many  books  together,’  and  Portia  proceeds  to  Venice  fur¬ 
nished,  as  Bellario  writes  to  the  Duke,  with  the  Doctor’s  opinion,  ‘  which,  bettered  with 
his  own  learning  (the  greatness  whereof  I  cannot  enough  commend),  goes  with  him, 
at  my  importunity,  to  fill  up  your  Grace’s  request  in  my  stead.’  All  this  suggests  to  me 
that  Portia’s  eye  had  been  the  first  to  see  the  flaw  in  the  bond,  and  that  her  own 
impression  had  been  confirmed  by  the  great  lawyer. 

Grave  and  anxious  must  have  been  her  thoughts  as  she  crossed  the  lagoons  by  ‘  the 
common  ferry  that  trades  to  Venice.’  Hers  was  not  a  mind,  however,  to  shrink  before 
difficulty ;  and,  confirmed  as  she  had  been  by  the  opinion  of  the  great  Doctor  of  Laws, 
she  feels  sure  of  success,  if  she  can  but  be  true  to  herself  and  ‘forget  she  is  a  woman.’ 
All  the  gay  light-heartedness  with  which  she  started  from  Belmont  has  vanished  under 
this  unexpected  aspect  of  affairs.  With  what  trepidation,  with  what  anxious  sense  of 
responsibility  must  she  find  herself  engaged  in  such  a  task,  the  mark  for  every  eye ! 
Nothing  but  her  deep  love  and  grateful  happy  heart  could  sustain  her  through  such  a 
trial.  To  cease  to  be  a  woman  for  the  time  is  not  so  hard,  perhaps,  to  one  who  has  all 
he  •  life  been  accustomed  to  a  position  of  command  and  importance ;  but,  in  the  pecu- 
lia.  circumstances  of  this  case,  the  effort  must  have  been  one  of  extreme  difficulty. 

[If  the  desire  assail  us  to  knit  up  the  ravell’d  sleave  of  Portia’s  early  life,  we  must 
not  forget  the  gay  and  pretty  web  that  Mrs  Cowden-Clarke  has  woven  in  her  Girl¬ 
hood  of  Shakespeare' s  Heroines. — Ed.] 

Nerrissa 

Mrs  Jameson  (p.  104) :  Nerissa  is  a  good  specimen  of  a  common  genus  of  charac¬ 
ters  ;  she  is  a  clever,  confidential  waiting-woman,  who  has  caught  a  little  of  her  lady’s 
elegance  and  romance ;  she  affects  to  be  lively  and  sententious,  falls  in  love,  and  makes 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— JESSICA 


443 


ncr  favour  conditional  on  the  fortune  of  the  caskets,  and,  in  short,  mimics  her  mistress 
with  good  emphasis  and  discretion.  Nerissa  and  the  gay,  talkative  Gratiano  are  as 
well  matched  as  the  incomparable  Portia  and  her  magnificent  and  captivating  lover. 

Jessica 

C.  A.  Brown  (p.  280) :  I  cannot  see  that  Jessica  is  intellectual  or  kind-hearted. 
Her  eulogy  on  Portia,  appropriately  dashed  with  her  new-fledged  piety,  is  elegantly 
cold,  like  a  dedication;  and  her  classical  moonlight  talk  with  Lorenzo,  though  very 
elegant,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  affections,  and  is  more  a  proof  of  ready  wit  and  a 
good  education  than  of  intellect. 

Jessica,  the  pretty  Jewess, — I  beg  pardon,  ‘Mistress  Lorenzo,’  the  Christian, — hasher 
character,  such  as  it  is,  hit  off  by  a  few  masterly  strokes.  Beauty  is  her  best  recom¬ 
mendation.  I  imagine  she  is  small  of  stature ;  a  little  plump,  with  a  delicate  hand 
and  foot,  and  remarkable  for  a  well-turned  ankle.  Her  eye  is  full  and  lustrous ;  there 
is  great  richness  in  her  lips,  especially  when  she  smiles ;  she  has  a  profusion  of  glossy 
black  ringlets ;  and  there  is  a  touch  of  slyness  in  addition  to  her  native  expression  of 
countenance.  To  these  charms,  she  possesses,  we  know,  an  arch  and  pleasant  style 
of  chatting,  well  suited  to  the  hours  of  dalliance.  Here  she  is  at  home ;  even  more 
than  when  she  talks  with  her  ‘  merry  devil  ’  Launcelot.  But  when  she  has  to  speak  as 
a  lady,  which  she  seldom  attempts,  we  perceive  a  constraint,  arising  from  her  former 
recluse  life,  and  perhaps  from  a  poorness  in  her  ideas  where  her  inclinations  are  not 

her  prompters . When  at  Belmont  she  speaks  of  her  father  as  of  a  person  in  whose 

company  she  once  happened  to  be ;  the  first  words,  *  When  I  was  with  him,’  are  pain¬ 
fully  unfeeling  to  those  inclined  to  sympathize  for  a  father  whom  she  has  robbed ;  but 
there  were  none  such  in  the  company,  because  the  man  was  a  Jew,  and  she  knew  that 
opinion  was  in  her  favour.  With  one  of  firmer  intellect,  even  in  those  days,  fashion 
would  not  have  confounded  wrong  with  right ;  but  Jessica  was  born  to  be  cajoled  by 
fashion.  She  could  lose  ‘  fourscore  ducats  at  a  sitting,’  and  exchange  a  turquoise  ring 
for  a  monkey,  as  unconcernedly  as  she  stole  them  from  a  Jew,  because  she  could 
reconcile  them  all  to  the  fashion  of  the  day. 

Giles  (p.  147) :  Shakespeare  has  done  the  grandest  justice  to  this  elemental  force 
of  affection  in  woman’s  nature.  He  presents  it  to  us  in  every  mode  of  beauty  and 
truth.  In  his  less  serious  plays,  all  the  characters  whom  he  intends  for  lovable  have 
not  only  graces  and  charms,  but  natural  femininely  sensibilities.  One  exception  there 
is, — which  not  even  Shakespeare  can  make  me  like, — and  that  is  the  pert,  disobedient 
hussy  Jessica.  Her  conduct  I  regard  as  in  a  high  degree  reprehensible ;  and  those 
who  have  the  care  of  families  must,  I  think,  feel  as  I  do.  She  was  a  worthless  minx, 
and  I  have  no  good  word  to  say  of  her.  If  the  fellow  who  ran  away  with  her  had, 
like  old  Pepys,  left  a  diary  behind  him,  I  am  quite  sure  that  we  should  learn  that  his 
wife  turned  out  an  intolerable  vixen.  She  stifishly  forgot  the  duty  of  a  daughter  when 
she  should  have  most  remembered  it.  Why  should  she,  a  maiden  of  Israel,  leave  her 
poor  old  father,  Shylock,  alone  in  the  midst  of  his  Christian  enemies  ?  What  if  he 
was  wrong?  The  more  need  he  had  of  her.  What  if  most  wrong?  Even  then, 
even  in  the  madness  of  defeated  vengeance,  in  the  misery  of  humbled  pride,  when 
regarded  as  most  guilty,  when  there  was  nothing  in  the  world  for  him  but  contempt 
without  pity,  the  child  of  his  home — his  only  child — should  have  had  in  her  woman’s 
heart  a  shelter  for  her  scorned  father.  But  was  she  not  a  good  girl  ?  Did  she  not 
turn  Christian  ?  Well,  as  to  her  turning  Christian,  I  view  the  matter  as  honest  Gobbo 


444 


APPENDIX 


did ;  it  merely  increased  the  number  of  pork-eaters.  Besides,  she  turned  Christian  for 
a  husband.  Changes  of  religion  for  husbands,  or  with  them,  may  do  for  the  children 
of  kings ;  it  is  not  to  be  commended  in  the  children  of  the  people. 

Hudson  (p.  62) :  Jessica’s  elopement,  in  itself  and  its  circumstances,  puts  us  to  the 
alternative  that  either  she  is  a  bad  child  or  Shylock  is  a  bad  father.  And  there  is 
enough  to  persuade  us  of  the  latter;  though  not  in  such  sort  but  that  some  share  of  the 
reproach  falls  to  her.  For  if  a  young  woman  have  so  bad  a  home  as  to  justify  her  in 
thus  deserting  and  robbing  it,  the  atmosphere  of  the  place  can  hardly  fail  to  leave  some 
traces  in  her  temper  and  character. 


Antonio 

Rev.  John  Hunter  ( Introductory  Remarks ,  Longmans’  Series,  London,  1872,  p. 
xiv) :  Antonio  is  a  good  man, — a  man  whom  we  love  for  his  high  integrity,  his  disin¬ 
terested  liberality,  his  devoted  friendship ;  but  his  rashness  in  signing  the  bond  sug¬ 
gested  to  the  dramatist  the  propriety  of  characterizing  him  as  deficient  in  worldly  pru¬ 
dence,  and  too  easy  and  unwary  in  his  dealings  with  mankind.  It  was  certainly 
through  simplicity,  though  not  what  Shylock  calls  ‘  low  simplicity,’  that  Antonio  con¬ 
demned  interest;  it  was  through  simplicity  that  he  thought  lightly  of  the  condition 
stipulated  in  the  bond ;  he  was  imprudent  in  allowing  himself  to  forget,  or  in  failing 
to  exert  himself  that  he  might  be  prepared  for,  the  day  of  payment ;  he  was  incautious 
in  venturing  the  whole  of  his  wealth  in  argosies  upon  the  ocean.  That  he  was  a  rich 
merchant  we  may  suppose  to  have  been  owing  more  to  patrimonial  inheritance  than  to 
his  own  mercantile  sagacity  and  success.  That  he  should  be  found  unable,  though  a 
wealthy  man,  to  lend  three  thousand  ducats,  was  necessary  to  give  occasion  for  the 
bond ;  and  the  inability  is  made  to  arise  out  of  that  incautiousness  by  which  Shake¬ 
speare  has  so  consistently  characterized  him. 

Bassanio 

W.  W.  Lloyd  ( Critical  Essay,  Singer’s  2d  ed.,  1856,  p.  546):  In  coarser  terms, 
from  a  less  favourable  point  of  view,  Bassanio  has  lived  like  a  prodigal,  run  in  debt 
with  his  friends,  and  now  coolly  proposes  to  his  chief  creditor  to  make  a  serious  addi¬ 
tion  to  his  debt,  on  the  speculation  that  it  will  give  him  a  chance  to  pay  all  by  that  very 
precarious,  as  well  as  undignified,  resort  of  making  up  to  an  heiress.  How  is  it  that  in 
reading  the  play  we  never  withdraw  our  sympathies  from  the  hero  of  transactions  that 
affect  us  in  common  life  with  the  unpleasant  associations  of  dissipation,  imprudence, 
impudence,  and  meanness  ?  The  reason,  I  apprehend,  is  partly  because  we  are  read¬ 
ing  a  romance,  and  we  accept  the  compatibility  of  whatever  phenomena  the  poet 
chooses  to  group  in  the  moral  as  in  the  material  world.  Portia  has  faith  that  the  lot¬ 
tery  of  the  caskets  will  give  her  infallibly  the  husband  who  deserves  her,  and  we  are 
not  disposed  to  check  agreeable  sympathy  with  the  generous  liberality,  in  mind  and 
purse,  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice  by  any  mistrust,  shabby  it  would  seem  to  us,  of  the 
desert  of  his  friends  or  the  co-operation  of  natural  chances  with  his  free  intentions.  Cha¬ 
racter  gives  confidence ;  truth  is  bondsman  for  troth.  We  believe  Bassanio  on  the  same 
ground  that  Antonio  does ;  we  approve  of  the  consent  of  Antonio  on  the  same  grounds 
that  made  Bassanio  think  it  not  wrong  to  ask  it.  The  character  of  an  act  or  a  proceed¬ 
ing  is  founded  at  last  on  the  motive,  and  the  motive  is  the  man,  and  poetry  and  romance 
are  allowed  to  invent  perfections  of  humanity  that  may  yet  be  unattainable ;  and  thus 
in  a  poetic  drama  we  admire  and  sympathize  with  a  debt-burdered  suitor  to  a  wealthy 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— GRATIA  NO.  LAUNCELOT  445 


lady,  because  there  is  no  moral  impossibility  in  the  nature  of  things,  of  such  a  suit,  even 
when  the  contingencies  of  dowry  are  recognized,  being  in  truth  unsordid, — though,  prac¬ 
tically  speaking,  it  will  usually  be  a  fool  who  allows  himself,  or  herself,  to  think  it  can  be 
otherwise.  In  brief,  we  look  on  with  unhesitating,  unalarmed  confidence  in  the  power 
of  a  pure  spirit  of  unselfishness  to  pass  untainted  through  the  very  dens  and  haunts  of 
selfishness,  and  to  vindicate  its  purity  in  a  transaction  which  only  selfishness  makes 
wrong.  Soundness  at  heart  in  a  recipient  makes  imprudence  prudent,  and  our  faith  is 
made  happy  when  Bassanio,  who  has  nothing  either  to  give  or  hazard,  chooses  the 

casket  of  least  promising  exterior . Even  in  setting  forth  his  project  to  Antonio, 

the  leading  tone  of  his  description  makes  her  wealth  but  one  accessory  of  her  attrac¬ 
tions,  and,  as  a  lover  should,  he  passes  on  with  more  fervour  to  observe — ‘  and  she  is 
fair,’  and  yet  again  to  the  crowning  praise  which  no  lover  of  Portia  could  overlook  and 
be  worthy, — ‘  and  fairer  than  that  word,  of  wondrous  virtues.’  Hence  we  confide  most 
absolutely  in  the  ingenuousness  of  Bassanio,  and  if  he  appears  to  engage  his  friend 
somewhat  inconsiderately  to  a  bond,  or  even  to  the  merest  transaction  with  Shylock, 
we  are  prepared  to  ascribe  this  to  the  eagerness  of  a  lover  who  has  such  cause  to  love 
as  encouragement  from  Portia. 

G  RAT ian o 

Charles  Cowden-Clarke  {Shakespeare-  Characters ;  Chiefly  those  Subordinate , 
1863,  p.  402) :  Gratiano  is  a  most  delightful  and  most  natural  character.  He  is  one 
of  those  useful  men  in  society  who  will  keep  up  the  ball  of  mirth  and  good-humour, 
simply  by  his  own  mercurial  temperament  and  agreeable  rattle ;  for  he  is  like  a  bab¬ 
bling  woodside  brook,  seen  through  at  once,  and  presenting  every  ripple  of  its  surface 
to  the  sunbeams  of  good-fellowship.  If  a  picnic  were  proposed,  Gratiano  would  be 
the  man  for  the  commissariat  department ;  and  the  wines  shall  be  unimpeachable  in 
quantity  as  well  as  quality;  the  ladies  shall  lack  no  squire  of  dames,  and  the  men  no 
stimulus  to  keep  their  gallantry  from  rusting.  And,  what  is  better  than  all,  if  a  friend 
be  in  adversity,  Gratiano  will  champion  him  with  good  words  and  deeds,  if  not  with 
the  most  sagacious  counsel.  He  would  no  doubt  talk  a  man  off  his  legs ;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  Shakespeare  brings  him  as  a  relief  against  the  grave  men,  Antonio  and  Bassanio, 
who,  being  both  anxious  on  account  of  worldly  cares,  resent  his  vivacity,  and  they  are 
at  all  events  as  peevish  as  he  is  flippant  and  inconsiderate.  Bassanio  says  of  Gratiano, 
that  he  *  speaks  an  infinite  deal  of  nothing.’  The  best  of  it  is,  that  Bassanio  himself 
advances  no  claim  to  be  the  censor  of  his  lively  companion ;  for,  in  comparison  with 
him,  he  is  dull  in  capacity ;  and  the  very  observation  just  quoted  follows  one  of  th< 
most  agreeable  and  sensible  speeches  in  the  play,  made  by  ‘  the  infinite-deal-of-noth- 
ing’  Gratiano.  Shakespeare  has  made  the  best  apology  for  the  Merchant  and  his 
friend ;  but  his  own  love  of  cheerfulness  with  good  temper  could  not  fail  to  throw 
liberally  into  Gratiano’s  scale,  and  he  has  nowhere  produced  a  better  defence  of  natu¬ 
ral  vivacity.  Moreover,  he  has  not  made  Gratiano  selfishly  boisterous,  indulging  his 
own  feelings  only ;  he  first  manifests  a  solicitude  for  Antonio’s  lowness  of  spirits,  and 
then  he  rallies  him.  These  are  the  small  and  delicate  lights  thrown  into  his  characters 
that  render  them  exhaustless  as  studies,  and  give  us  that  indefinable,  rather,  perhaps, 
that  unrecognized  and  unconscious,  interest  in  all  they  say  and  do,  and  which,  to  the 
same  extent,  appears  to  be  the  almost  undivided  prerogative  of  Shakespeare  alone. 

Launcblot 

C.  A.  Brown  (p.  281) :  My  notion  of  Launcelot,  as  I  have  seen  him,  has  not  been 
reflected  from  the  stage.  ‘  The  patch  is  kind  enough ;’  yet  he  is  amazingly  wrapped 


446 


APPENDIX 


up  in  himself,  and  his  soliloquies  are  intense  on  that  darling  subject.  An  obtrusive  fea¬ 
ture  in  his  character  is  the  conceit  in  his  skull  that  he  is  better  than  he  should  be. 
Having  been  called  by  one  who  did  not  see  him  ‘  master  ’  and  *  young  gentleman,’  he 
insists,  over  and  over  again,  on  his  being  1  young  master  Launcelot,’  and  at  last  styles 
himself  ‘  the  young  gentleman.’  All  this,  like  everything  he  says,  is  a  mixture  of 
vanity  and  drollery, — on  the  latter  he  stakes  his  fame  as  a  wit.  Nature  never  formed 
a  more  egregious  coxcomb, — he  is  Lord  Foppington  in  low  life,  as  far  as  his  imbecility 
can  reach.  In  the  same  strain  he  talks  of  his  ‘  manly  spirits  ’  and  of  the  Jew’s  having 
*  done  him  wrong,’  as  if  he  and  his  master  were  on  an  equality.  No  doubt  his  solace 
as  a  servant  was,  that  he  must,  sooner  or  later,  owing  to  his  intrinsic  merit,  come  to 
excellent  fortune.  He  spells  his  fate  on  his  palm;  where,  though  neither  coronet 
nor  mastership  offers  itself  to  his  imagination,  there  is  something  of  equal  value  to  the 
young  animal, — ‘  eleven  widows,  and  nine  maids,  is  a  simple  coming-in  for  one  man.’ 

His  jokes  are  generally  failures,  but,  coming  from  him,  they  are  laughable . [The 

banter  between  him  and  Lorenzo  gives  the  latter  occasion  to  observe],  ‘  How  every  fool 
can  play  upon  a  word !’  which,  together  with  what  follows,  may  be  mistaken  for  a  self- 
condemnation,  made  at  hazard,  on  the  part  of  Shakespeare.  By  no  means ;  the  diffi¬ 
culty  is  to  play  well  upon  a  word ;  besides,  as  Launcelot  then  and  afterwards  proves, 
the  poverty  of  a  jest  may  be  enriched  in  a  fool’s  mouth,  owing  to  the  complacency 
with  which  he  deals  it  out ;  and  because  there  are  few  things  which  provoke  laughter 
more  than  feebleness  in  a  great  attempt  at  a  small  matter. 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS 

A.  W.  Schlegel  (vol.  ii,  p.  169) :  The  Merchant  of  Venice  is  one  of  Shakespeare’s 
most  perfect  works :  popular  to  an  extraordinary  degree,  and  calculated  to  produce  the 
most  powerful  effect  on  the  stage,  and  at  the  same  time  a  wonder  of  ingenuity  and  art 
for  the  reflecting  critic.  Shylock  the  Jew  is  one  of  the  inconceivable  master-pieces  of 
characterization  of  which  Shakespeare  alone  furnishes  us  with  examples.  It  is  easy  for 
the  poet  and  the  player  to  exhibit  a  caricature  of  national  sentiments,  modes  of  speak¬ 
ing,  and  gestures.  Shylock,  however,  is  everything  but  a  common  Jew;  he  possesses 
a  very  determinate  and  original  individuality,  and  yet  we  perceive  a  light  touch  of  Juda¬ 
ism  in  everything  which  he  says  and  does.  We  imagine  we  hear  a  sprinkling  of  the 
Jewish  pronunciation  in  the  mere  written  words,  as  we  sometimes  still  find  it  in  the 
higher  classes,  notwithstanding  their  social  refinement.  In  tranquil  situations  what  is 
foreign  to  the  European  blood  and  Christian  sentiments  is  less  perceivable,  but  in  pas¬ 
sion  the  national  stamp  appears  more  strongly  marked.  All  these  inimitable  niceties 

the  finished  art  of  a  great  actor  can  alone  properly  express . The  letter  of  the  law 

is  Shylock’s  idol ;  he  refuses  to  lend  an  ear  to  the  voice  of  mercy,  which  speaks  to  him 
from  the  mouth  of  Portia  with  heavenly  eloquence ;  he  insists  on  severe  and  inflexible 
justice,  and  it  at  last  recoils  on  his  own  head.  Here  he  becomes  a  symbol  of  the  gen¬ 
eral  history  of  his  unfortunate  nation . The  danger  that  hangs  over  Antonio  till 

towards  the  conclusion  of  the  Fourth  Act,  and  which  the  imagination  is  almost  afraid 
to  approach,  would  fill  us  with  too  painful  an  anxiety  if  the  poet  did  not  also  provide 
for  our  entertainment  and  dissipation.  This  is  particularly  effected  by  the  Scenes  at 
the  country-seat  of  Portia,  which  transport  the  spectator  into  quite  another  sphere. 
And  yet  they  are  closely  connected,  by  the  concatenation  of  causes  and  effects,  with 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS—  ULRIC1 


447 


the  main  business :  the  preparations  of  Bassanio  for  his  courtship  are  the  cause  of 
Antonio’s  subscribing  the  dangerous  bond ;  and  Portia  again,  by  means  of  the  advice 
of  her  cousin,  a  celebrated  counsel,  effects  the  safety  of  the  friend  of  her  lover.  But 
the  relations  of  the  dramatic  composition  are  still  here  admirably  observed  in  another 
manner.  The  trial  between  Shylock  and  Antonio,  though  it  proceeds  like  a  real  event, 
still  remains  an  unheard-of  and  particular  case.  Shakespeare  has,  consequently,  asso¬ 
ciated  with  it  a  love-intrigue  not  less  extraordinary ;  the  one  becomes  natural  and  prob¬ 
able  by  means  of  the  other.  A  rich,  beautiful,  and  clever  heiress,  who  can  only  be 
won  by  the  solving  of  a  riddle ;  the  locked  caskets ;  the  foreign  princes  who  come  to 
try  the  adventure;  with  all  this  wonderful  splendour  the  imagination  is  powerfully 
excited.  The  two  Scenes  in  which  the  Prince  of  Morocco,  in  the  language  of  Eastern 
nyperbole,  and  the  self-conceited  Prince  of  Arragon,  make  their  choice  of  the  caskets, 
merely  raise  our  curiosity  and  give  employment  to  our  wits ;  in  the  Third  Act,  where 
the  two  lovers  stand  trembling  before  the  inevitable  choice,  which  in  one  moment  must 
unite  or  separate  them  for  ever,  Shakespeare  has  lavished  all  the  seductions  of  feeling, 
all  the  magic  of  poetry.  We  share  in  the  rapture  of  Portia  and  Bassanio  at  the  fortu¬ 
nate  choice ;  we  easily  conceive  why  they  are  fond  of  each  other,  for  they  are  both 
deserving  of  love.  The  Trial  Scene,  with  which  the  Fourth  Act  is  occupied,  is 
alone  a  perfect  drama,  concentrating  in  itself  the  interest  of  the  whole.  The  knot  is 
now  untied,  and  according  to  the  common  ideas  of  theatrical  satisfaction,  the  curtain 
might  drop.  But  the  poet  was  unwilling  to  dismiss  his  audience  with  the  gloomy  im¬ 
pressions  which  the  delivery  of  Antonio,  accomplished  with  so  much  difficulty,  con¬ 
trary  to  all  expectation,  and  the  punishment  of  Shylock,  were  calculated  to  leave 
behind ;  he  has,  therefore,  added  the  Fifth  Act  by  way  of  a  musical  after-piece  in  the 
piece  itself. 

Ulrici  {Shakespeare1  s  Dramatic  Art,  ii,  p.  121,  Bohn’s  Ed.  1876,  trans.  by  L. 
Dora  Schmitz) :  As  regards  the  lawsuit  between  Antonio  and  the  Jew,  there  can,  as  1 
think,  be  scarcely  any  doubt  that  its  meaning  and  significance  coincide  with  the  old 
legal  maxim :  Summum  jus  summa  injuria.  Every  one  who  knows  the  maxim  and 
its  legal  significance  will  unconsciously,  when  witnessing  the  celebrated  Trial  Scene,  be 
struck  with  its  applicability  here.  For  the  maxim  merely  maintains  that  an  acknow¬ 
ledged  and  positive  law  turns  into  its  opposite  and  becomes  a  wrong  when  carried  to 
the  extreme  point  of  its  limited  nature  and  one-sided  conception,  and  when  driven  to 
its  extreme  consequence.  Shylock  holds  fast  to  the  law :  forbearance,  gentleness,  kind¬ 
liness,  and  all  the  lovely  names  which  greet  the  happy  on  the  threshold  of  life  and 
accompany  them  on  their  paths,  he  has  never  known ;  injustice,  harshness,  and  con¬ 
tempt  stood  around  his  cradle,  hate  and  persecution  obstructed  every  step  of  his  career. 
With  convulsive  vehemence,  therefore,  he  clutches  hold  of  the  law,  the  small  morsel 
of  justice  which  cannot  be  withheld  even  from  the  Jew.  This  legal,  formal,  external 
justice  Shylock  obviously  has  on  his  side,  but  by  talcing  and  following  it  to  the  letter, 
in  absolute  one-sided  ness,  he  falls  into  the  deepest,  foulest  wrong,  which  then  neces¬ 
sarily  recoils  ruinously  upon  his  own  head.  The  same  view  of  the  dialectic  and 
double-edged  nature  of  justice,  which  is  here  set  forth  in  its  utmost  subtilty,  is,  how¬ 
ever,  I  think,  also  exhibited  in  manifold  lights  and  shades  throughout  the  other  parts 
of  the  play.  The  determination  of  Portia’s  father,  which  deprives  her  of  all  participa¬ 
tion  in  the  choice  of  a  husband,  is  indeed  based  upon  paternal  right,  but  this  very  right 
— even  though  justified  by  the  best  intentions  of  anxious  affection — is  again,  at  the 
same  time  a  decided  wrong,  and  Portia  has  good  reason  for  complaining :  ‘  O,  these 


448 


APPENDIX 


naughty  times  Put  bars  between  the  owners  and  their  rights.’  Who  would  have  cast  a 
stone  at  her  had  she  broken  her  vow,  and  guided  her  well-beloved,  amiable,  and 
worthy  lover  by  hints  and  intimations  in  making  the  right  choice  ?  The  wrong,  which 
is  here  again  contained  within  what  is  in  itself  right,  would  have  fallen  with  tragic 
force,  had  not  accident — in  the  form  of  a  happy  thought,  as  in  the  lawsuit — led  to  a 
happy  result.  Jessica’s  flight  and  her  marriage  in  opposition  to  her  father’s  will  is, 
according  to  generally  recognized  principles,  a  flagrant  wrong.  And  yet,  who  would 
condemn  her  for  withdrawing  herself  from  the  power  and  rights  of  such  a  father,  of 
whom  she  is  justly  ashamed,  and  to  obey  whom  truly  is  a  matter  of  impossibility  to  her 
conscience  and  to  her  innocent  heart  ?  Here,  again,  therefore,  we  find  a  point  of  right 
at  strife  with  the  demands  of  morality  and  asserting  itself  emphatically ;  Shakespeare 
himself  brings  it  forward  clearly  enough  in  Act  II,  Sc.  iii,  and  still  more  so  in  Act  III, 
Sc.  v,  in  the  conversations  between  Launcelot  and  Jessica.  The  penalty  which  the 
Court  imposes  upon  the  Jew,  and  by  which  he  is  compelled  to  sanction  the  marriage  of 
his  daughter  with  Lorenzo,  also  neutralizes  the  conflicting  elements  more  in  an  exter¬ 
nal  and  accidental  manner  than  by  true  and  internal  adjustment.  Lastly,  right  and 
wrong  are  no  less  carried  to  their  extreme  points,  and  consequently  placed  in  a  bal¬ 
ancing  state  of  uncertainty,  in  the  quarrel  between  the  two  loving  couples  about  the 
rings  which  they  had  parted  with,  in  violation  of  their  sworn  promises — a  scene  with 
which  the  play  closes.  Here,  again,  we  have  a  sufficiently  distinct  reflex  of  the  maxim, 
Summum  jus  summa  injuria  ;  here  again  right  and  wrong  are  brought  to  such  straits, 
are  driven  to  such  extremes,  that  the  two  are  no  longer  distinct,  but  pass  over  directly 
one  into  the  other.  Thus  we  see  that  the  meaning  and  significance  of  the  many, 
apparently,  heterogeneous  elements  are  united  in  one  point :  they  are  but  variations  of 
the  same  theme. 

(P.  126.)  Shakespeare,  as  I  think,  has  clearly  enough  intimated  that  he  does  not  in 
any  way  consider  Shylock  a  tragic  character.  Shylock’s  conduct,  in  general,  makes 
rather  a  decidedly  comic  impression,  and  particularly  in  the  scene  of  the  outburst  of  his 
sorrow  and  rage  at  the  elopement  of  his  daughter  and  the  loss  of  his  ducats,  which 
alternates  in  the  sharpest  contrast  with  his  diabolical  expressions  of  joy  at  the  losses 
experienced  by  Antonio.  His  very  behaviour  at  the  Trial  Scene  has  somewhat  the 
flavour  of  comedy,  because  his  whole  being,  his  appearance,  his  manner  of  expressing 
himself  in  word  and  gesture,  are  obviously  described  intentionally  in  such  a  way  as 
always  to  verge  upon  caricature.  And  if  the  punishment  which  overtakes  him  is, 
nevertheless,  offensive  to  our  finer  feelings,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  scene  of  the 
play  is  laid  in  tire  sixteenth  century,  and  that  Shylock  forfeits  our  pity  owing  to  his 
inhuman,  almost  devilish,  wickedness  and  hardness  of  heart,  and  has  lost  all  claim  to 
humane  treatment.  Moreover,  owing  to  the  desultory,  irregular  manner  in  which  the 
sentence  is  pronounced,  we  feel  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  all  the  points  will  be  strictly 
adhered  to. 

Gervinus  {Commentaries,  vol.  i,  p.  326;  trans.  by  Miss  F.  E.  Bunnett,  1863) :  We 
could  after  our  own  fashion  say  in  a  more  abstract  and  pretentious  form,  that  the  inten¬ 
tion  of  the  poet  in  The  Merchant  of  Venice  was  to  depict  the  relation  of  man  to  prop¬ 
erty.  The  more  commonplace  this  might  appear,  the  more  worthy  of  admiration  is 
that  which  Shakespeare,  in  his  embodiment  of  this  subject,  has  accomplished  with 
extraordinary,  profound,  and  poetic  power. 

(P.  329.)  Thus  has  Shakespeare,  in  the  poem  before  us,  represented  a  genuine 
brotherhood  between  the  pictures  he  sets  forth  of  avarice  and  prodigality,  of  hard  usury 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— HEINE 


449 


and  inconsiderate  extravagance,  so  that  the  piece  may  just  as  well  be  called  a  song  of 
rue  friendship. 

(P.  333.)  Portia  is  superior  to  all  circumstances;  that  is  her  highest  praise:  she 
would  have  accommodated  herself  to  any  husband,  for  this  reason  her  father  might 
have  felt  himself  justified  in  prescribing  the  lottery. 

(P.  334.)  Between  both,  Portia  and  Antonio,  stands  Bassanio,  the  friend  of  one, 
the  lover  of  the  other,  utterly  poor  between  two  boundlessly  rich,  ruined  in  his  circum¬ 
stances,  inconsiderate,  extravagant  at  the  expense  of  his  friend.  He  seems  quite  to 
belong  to  the  parasitical  class  of  Antonio’s  friends.  In  disposition  he  is  more  inclined 
to  the  merry  Gratiano  than  to  Antonio’s  severe  gravity ;  he  appears  on  the  stage  with 
the  question :  ‘  When  shall  we  laugh  ?’  and  he  joins  with  his  frivolous  companions  in 
all  cheerful  and  careless  folly.  This  time  he  borrows  once  more  three  thousand  ducats, 
to  make  a  strange  Argonautic  expedition  for  the  Golden  Fleece,  staking  them  on  a 
blind  adventure,  the  doubtful  wooing  of  a  rich  heiress.  His  friend  breaks  his  habit 
of  never  borrowing  on  credit;  he  enters  into  an  agreement  with  the  Jew  upon  the  bloody 
condition,  and  the  adventurer  accepts  the  loan  with  the  sacrifice.  And  before  he  sets 
forth,  even  on  the  same  day  and  evening,  he  purchases  fine  livery  for  his  servants  with 
this  money,  and  gives  a  merry  feast  as  a  farewell,  during  which  the  daughter  of  the 
invited  Jew  is  to  be  carried  off  by  one  of  the  free-thinking  fellows.  Is  not  the  whole, 
as  if  he  were  only  the  seeming  friend  of  this  rich  man,  that  he  might  borrow  his 
money,  and  only  the  seeming  lover  of  this  rich  lady,  that  he  might  pay  his  debts  with 
her  money? 

(P.  336.)  When  Bassanio  perceives  the  portrait  he  divines  indeed  his  happiness, 
but  he  ventures  not  yet  to  hope  it,  and,  in  spite  of  his  agitation,  he  seems  absorbed  only 
with  the  work  of  art. 

(P.  339.)  Shylock  is  the  contrast,  which  we  hardly  need  explain;  although  indeed, 
in  this  age  of  degeneration  of  art  and  morals,  lowness  and  madness  could  go  so  far  as 
to  make  a  martyr  on  the  stage  of  this  outcast  of  humanity.  The  poet  has  certainly 
given  to  this  character,  in  order  that  he  may  not  sink  quite  below  our  interest,  a  per¬ 
ception  of  his  pariah  condition,  and  has  imputed  his  outbursts  of  hatred  against  Chris¬ 
tians  and  aristocrats  partly  to  genuine  grounds  of  annoyance.  Moreover,  he  has  not 
delineated  the  usurer  from  the  hatred  of  the  Christians  of  that  time  against  all  that  was 
Jewish,  else  he  would  not  have  imparted  to  Jessica  her  lovely  character. 

(P.  342.)  Thus  delicately  feminine,  Jessica  has  no  scruples  of  conscience  to  steal 
herself  the  ducats  and  the  jewels  of  her  father.  A  new  relation  to  possession  it 
brought  to  view  in  this  nature;  it  is  that  of  the  inexperienced  child,  who  is  quite  unac¬ 
quainted  with  the  value  of  money,  who  innocently  throws  it  away  in  trifles,  having 
learned  in  her  paternal  home  neither  domestic  habits  nor  economy.  In  this,  Lorenzo 
is  only  too  congenial  with  her,  although  he  would  have  her  believe  that  he  was  as  a 
man  what  Portia  is  as  a  woman ;  Antonio,  who  knows  them  better,  takes  both  under 
his  guardianship,  and  manages  their  inheritance  for  them. 

Heine  ( Sammtliche  Werke,  Philadelphia,  1856,  vol.  v,  p.  324):  When  I  saw  this 
Play  at  Drury  Lane,  there  stood  behind  me  in  the  box  a  pale,  fair  Briton,  who  at  the 
end  of  the  Fourth  Act,  fell  to  weeping  passionately,  several  times  exclaiming,  ‘  The 
poor  man  is  wronged  !’  It  was  a  face  of  the  noblest  Grecian  style,  and  the  eyes  were 
large  and  black.  I  have  never  been  able  to  forget  those  large  and  black  eyes  that  wept 
for  Shylock ! 

When  I  think  of  those  tears  I  have  to  rank  The  Merchant  of  Venice  with  the  Trag- 
29 


45° 


APPENDIX 


edies,  although  the  frame  of  the  Piece  is  decorated  with  the  merriest  figures  of  Masks, 
of  Satyrs,  and  of  Cupids,  and  the  Poet  meant  the  Play  for  a  Comedy.  Shakespeare 
intended  perhaps,  for  the  amusement  of  ‘the  general,’  to  represent  a  tormented  Were¬ 
wolf,  a  hateful,  fabulous  creature  that  thirsts  for  blood,  and  of  course  loses  his  daughter 
and  his  ducats,  and  is  ridiculed  into  the  bargain.  But  the  genius  of  the  Poet,  the 
Genius  of  Humanity  that  reigned  in  him,  stood  ever  above  his  private  will ;  and  so  k 
happened  that  in  Shylock,  in  spite  of  all  his  uncouth  grimacings,  the  Poet  vindicates 
an  unfortunate  sect,  which,  for  mysterious  purposes,  has  been  burdened  by  Providence 
with  the  hate  of  the  rabble  both  high  and  low,  and  has  reciprocated  this  hate —  not 
always  by  love. 

But  what  do  I  say  ?  The  genius  of  Shakespeare  rises  above  the  little  squabble  of 
two  religious  sects,  and  the  Drama  shows  us  neither  Jew  nor  Christian  exclusively,  but 
oppressor  and  oppressed,  and  the  mad,  bitter  exultation  of  the  latter  when  they  can  pay 
back  to  their  haughty  tormentors  with  interest  the  shames  they  have  suffered.  There  is 
not  the  slightest  trace  in  this  Play  of  a  religious  difference,  and  Shakespeare  shows  us 
in  Shylock  only  a  man  whom  Nature  bids  to  hate  his  enemy,  as  in  Antonio  and  his 
friends  the  Poet  by  no  means  describes  the  followers  of  that  Divine  teaching  which 
commands  us  to  love  our  enemies.  When  Shylock  says  to  the  man  who  wants  to  bor¬ 
row  money  of  him,  *  Still  have  I  borne  it  with  a  patient  shrug,’  &c.,  Antonio  replies,  ‘  I 
am  as  like  to  call  thee  so  again,  to  spet  on  thee  again,  to  spurn  thee  too.’ 

Where  here  is  the  love  of  a  Christian?  Verily,  it  would  have  been  a  satire  on 
Christianity  had  Shakespeare  meant  to  represent  it  in  the  persons  who  are  enemies  to 
Shylock,  and  who  are  hardly  worthy  to  unloose  the  latchets  of  his  shoes.  The  bank¬ 
rupt,  Antonio,  is  a  poor-spirited  creature,  without  energy,  without  strength  enough  to 
hate,  or,  of  course,  to  love,  with  the  heart  of  a  worm,  whose  flesh  is  really  worth  nothing 
else  but  *  to  bait  fish  withal.’  He  never  pays  back  the  three  thousand  ducats  to  the 
cheated  Jew.  Bassanio,  too,  never  returns  him  his  money,  and  the  fellow  is  a  down¬ 
right  ‘  fortune-hunter,’  as  an  English  critic  calls  him ;  he  borrows  money  to  ‘  show  a 
more  swelling  port  ’  with,  and  to  capture  a  rich  heiress  and  a  fat  marriage-portion. 

As  for  Lorenzo,  he  is  an  accomplice  in  a  most  infamous  burglary,  and  under  Prussian 
laws  he  would  have  been  condemned  to  fifteen  years  in  the  penitentiary,  and  to  be 
branded,  and  to  stand  in  the  pillory,  for  all  his  sensibility  to  the  alluring  charms,  not 
only  of  stolen  ducats  and  jewels,  but  of  moonlit  landscapes  and  of  music.  As  to  the 
other  noble  Venetians  who  appear  on  the  scene  as  the  comrades  of  Antonio,  they  do 
not  seem  to  hate  money  very  much,  and  for  their  poor  friend,  when  he  is  in  ill  luck, 
they  have  nothing  but  words,  coined  air.  Our  good  pietist,  Franz  Horn,  here  makes 
the  very  watery,  but  very  correct,  remark  :  *  The  question  very  reasonably  occurs :  How 
was  it  possible  that  Antonio  could  be  reduced  to  such  a  condition?  All  Venice  knew 
and  esteemed  him ;  his  good  acquaintance  knew  all  about  the  terrible  bond,  and  that 
the  Jew  would  not  remit  a  tittle  of  it.  Nevertheless,  they  let  day  after  day  pass,  until 
at  last  the  three  months  are  over,  and  with  them  all  hope  of  deliverance.’  It  would 
have  been  easy  enough  for  those  good  friends,  whole  troops  of  whom  the  princely  mer 
chant  appears  to  have  had  around  him,  to  contribute  the  sum  of  three  thousand  ducats 
to  save  a  human  life — and  such  a  life !  but  anything  of  that  sort  would  have  been 
rather  inconvenient,  and  so  nothing,  nothing  whatever,  is  done  by  these  dear,  good 
friends,  just  because  they  are  only  so-called  friends,  or,  if  you  please,  only  half  or  three- 
quarters  friends.  They  pity  the  excellent  merchant  who  gave  them  such  fine  dinners, 
uncommonly,  but  with  due  regard  to  their  own  ease  they  denounce  Shylock,  as  only 
heart  and  tongue  can  when  no  danger  is  involved,  and  then  probably  think  they  have 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— HEINE 


45i 


fulfilled  the  duty  of  friendship.  Much  as  we  must  hate  Shylock,  we  can  hardly  blame 
him  if  he  has,  as  he  well  may  have,  a  little  contempt  for  these  people . 

In  truth,  with  the  exception  of  Portia,  Shylock  is  the  most  respectable  person  in  the 
whole  Play.  He  loves  money,  he  does  not  hide  this  love — he  cries  it  out  aloud  in  the 
marketplace,  but  there  is  something  that  he  prizes  above  money ;  satisfaction  for  a  tor¬ 
tured  heart — righteous  retribution  for  unutterable  shames ;  and  although  they  offer  him 
the  borrowed  sum  tenfold,  he  rejects  it,  and  the  three  thousand,  ay  and  ten  times  three 
thousand,  ducats  he  would  not  regret  if  he  can  but  buy  a  pound  of  his  enemy’s  flesh 
therewith. 

Ay,  Shylock  does  indeed  love  money,  but  there  are  things  which  he  loves  still  more, 
among  them  his  daughter,  ‘  Jessica,  my  girl.’  Although  he  curses  her  in  his  rage,  and 
would  see  her  dead  at  his  feet  with  the  jewels  in  her  ears  and  the  ducats  in  the  coffin, 
he  loves  her  more  than  ducats  and  jewels.  Debarred  from  public  intercourse,  out¬ 
cast  from  Christian  society,  and  thrust  back  upon  a  narrow  domestic  life,  to  the  poor 
Jew  there  remains  only  devotion  to  his  home,  and  this  is  manifested  in  him  with  the 
most  touching  intensity.  When  in  the  Trial  Scene,  Bassanio  and  Gratiano  declare 
their  readiness  to  sacrifice  their  wives  for  their  friend,  Shylock  says  to  himself,  not  aloud, 
but  aside  :  ‘  These  be  the  Christian  husbands;  I  have  a  daughter;  Would  any  of  the 
stock  of  Barrabas  Had  been  her  husband,  rather  than  a  Christian !’ 

Upon  this  passage,  upon  these  few  words  spoken  aside,  we  base  the  sentence  of 
condemnation  that  we  must  pass  on  the  fair  Jessica.  It  was  no  unloving  father  whom 
she  forsook,  whom  she  robbed,  whom  she  betrayed. — Shameful  treachery !  She  even 
makes  common  cause  with  the  enemies  of  Shylock,  and  when  at  Belmont  they  say 
all  manner  of  evil  things  about  him,  Jessica  never  casts  down  her  eyes,  her  lips  never 
lose  colour,  but  she  says  the  worst  of  her  father. — Horrible  fault !  She  has  no  heart, 
but  only  a  light  mind.  She  wearies  of  the  secluded,  ‘  sober  ’  house  of  the  embittered 
Jew,  that  seems  to  her  at  last  a  hell.  She  has  an  ear  only  for  the  stirring  drum  and 
wry-necked  fife.  Did  Shakespeare  intend  here  to  pourtray  a  Jewess  ?  In  sooth,  no. 
He  paints  only  a  daughter  of  Eve,  one  of  those  pretty  birds  who,  as  soon  as  they  are 
fledged,  flutter  away  to  their  dear  little  hushands.  So  Desdemona  follows  the  Moor, 
so  Imogen  follows  Posthumus.  It  is  the  way  with  woman.  In  Jessica  there  is  observ¬ 
able  a  certain  hesitating  modesty,  which  she  cannot  overcome,  at  putting  on  boy’s 
clothes.  In  this  particular  we  may  perhaps  recognize  a  trait  peculiar  to  her  race,  and 
which  lends  to  its  daughters  so  wonderful  a  charm . 

(P.  332.)  What  Mrs  Jameson  says  of  Portia,  contrasted  with  Shylock,  is  not  only 
beautiful,  it  is  true.  If  we  regard  the  latter  in  the  usual  light  as  the  representative  of 
the  stern  Jew,  hostile  to  all  Art,  Portia,  on  the  contrary,  represents  that  after-bloom  of 
Greek  Art  which,  in  the  16th  centuiy,  impregnated  the  world,  from  Italy  out,  with  its 
delightful  fragrance,  and  which  we  at  the  present  day  love  and  treasure  under  the  name 
of  ‘  the  Renaissance.’  Portia  is  at  the  same  time  the  representative  of  the  serene  good 
fortune  which  is  the  opposite  of  the  gloomy  lot  that  Shylock  represents.  What  a  rosy 
bloom,  what  a  ring  of  purity,  is  there  in  all  her  thoughts  and  speeches  !  How  warn; 
with  joy  are  her  words,  how  beautiful  all  her  images,  mostly  borrowed  from  mythology ! 
How  sad,  on  the  contrary,  how  incisive  and  repulsive,  are  the  thoughts  and  speeches  of 
Shylock,  who  uses  only  Old  Testament  similitudes  !  His  wit  is  spasmodic,  caustic;  his 
metaphors  he  seeks  among  the  most  repulsive  objects,  and  even  his  words  are  discords 
crashed  together,  shrill,  hissing,  acrid.  As  are  the  persons,  so  are  their  abodes.  As 
we  see  how  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  who  will  suffer  in  his  *  sober  house  ’  the  like¬ 
ness  neither  of  God  nor  of  man,  the  created  image  of  God,  even  stopping  up  the  ears 


452 


APPENDIX 


thereof,  the  casements,  that  into  it  the  sounds  of  shallow  foppery  may  not  enter, — so  we 
see,  on  the  other  hand,  the  costly,  tasteful  villeggiatura  life  in  the  beautiful  palace  at 
Belmont,  where  all  is  light  and  music,  where,  among  pictures,  marble  statues,  and  lofty 
laurel  trees,  the  suitors  in  their  brilliant  array  wander,  meditating  on  the  love-riddle, 
and  from  amid  all  this  splendour  Signora  Portia  shines  forth  like  a  goddess,  ‘  Her 
sunny  locks  Hanging  on  her  temples.’ 

By  such  a  contrast  the  two  chief  persons  of  the  drama  are  so  individualized  that  one 
might  swear  they  are  not  the  work  of  a  poet’s  fancy,  but  real  human  beings,  born  of 
woman.  Indeed,  as  neither  time  nor  death  can  touch  them,  they  are  more  alive  than 
the  ordinary  creatures  that  Nature  makes.  The  immortal  blood,  eternal  poesy,  pulsates 
in  their  veins.  When  thou  comest  to  Venice  and  wanderest  through  the  Doge’s  palace, 
thou  knowest  very  well  that  neither  in  the  Senate  Chamber  nor  upon  the  Giant  Stairs 
wilt  thou  meet  Marino  Faliero; — in  the  Arsenal  thou  wilt,  ’tis  true,  be  reminded  of  old 
Dandolo,  but  in  none  of  the  gilded  galliots  wilt  thou  seek  the  blind  hero ; — if  thou  seest 
at  one  corner  of  the  street  Santa  a  serpent  hewn  in  stone,  and  at  another  corner  the 
winged  lion  with  the  head  of  the  serpent  in  his  claws,  there  comes,  perhaps,  the 
remembrance  of  the  proud  Carmagnole,  yet  only  for  a  moment;  but,  far  more  than 
of  all  such  historical  persons,  thou  thinkest  in  Venice  of  Shakespeare’s  Shy  lock,  who 
is  still  alive,  while  those  others  have  long  mouldered  away  in  the  grave;  and  on 
the  Rialto  thine  eye  looks  for  him  everywhere,  and  thou  thinkest  he  must  be  found 
there,  behind  some  pillar,  in  his  Jewish  gaberdine,  with  his  cautious,  calculating  face, 
and  every  now  and  then  thou  fanciest  that  thou  hearest  his  grating  tones :  ‘  Three  thou¬ 
sand  ducats, — well.’ 

At  least  I,  wandering  hunter  after  dreams  that  I  am,  I  looked  round  everywhere  on 
the  Rialto  to  see  if  I  could  not  find  Shylock.  I  could  have  told  him  something  that 
would  have  pleased  him — namely,  that  his  cousin,  Herr  von  Shylock  in  Paris,  had 
become  the  mightiest  baron  in  Christendom,  invested  by  her  Catholic  Majesty  with 
that  Order  of  Isabella  which  was  founded  to  celebrate  the  expulsion  of  the  Jews  and 
Moors  from  Spain.  But  I  found  him  nowhere  on  the  Rialto,  and  I  determined  to  seek 
my  old  acquaintance  in  the  Synagogue.  The  Jews  were  just  then  celebrating  their  Day 
of  Atonement,  and  they  stood  enveloped  in  their  white  talars,  with  uncanny  motions 
of  the  head,  looking  almost  like  an  assemblage  of  ghosts.  There  the  poor  Jews 
had  stood,  fasting  and  praying,  from  earliest  morning ; — since  the  evening  before  they 
had  taken  neither  food  nor  drink,  and  had  previously  begged  pardon  of  all  their 
acquaintances  for  any  wrong  they  might  have  done  them  in  the  course  of  the  year, 
that  God  might  thereby  also  forgive  them  their  wrongs — a  beautiful  custom,  which, 
curiously  enough,  is  found  among  this  people,  strangers  though  they  be  to  the  teaching 
of  Christ. 

Although  I  looked  all  round  the  Synagogue,  I  nowhere  discovered  the  face  of  Shy¬ 
lock.  And  yet  I  felt  he  must  be  hidden  under  one  of  those  white  talars,  praying  more 
fervently  than  his  fellow-believers,  looking  up  with  stormy,  nay  frantic  wildness,  to 
the  throne  of  Jehovah,  the  hard  God-King !  I  saw  him  not.  But  towards  evening, 
when,  according  to  the  Jewish  faith,  the  gates  of  Heaven  are  shut,  and  no  prayer 
can  then  obtain  admittance,  I  heard  a  voice,  with  a  ripple  of  tears  that  were  never 
wept  by  eyes.  It  was  a  sob  that  could  come  only  from  a  breast  that  held  in  it  all  the 
martyrdom  which,  for  eighteen  centuries,  had  been  borne  by  a  whole  tortured  people. 
It  was  the  death-rattle  of  a  soul  sinking  down  dead  tired  at  heaven’s  gates.  And  I 
seemed  to  know  the  voice,  and  I  felt  that  I  had  heard  it  long  ago,  when,  in  utter 
despair,  it  moaned  out,  then  as  now,  ‘Jessica,  my  girl !’ 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— HEBLER.  KREYSSIG 


453 


Hebler  [Shakespeare' s  Kaufmann  von  Venedig,  1854,  p.  66)  cites  the  following 
words  of  Luther,  which  have  been  frequently  quoted  by  subsequent  German  commen¬ 
tators  (and  they  may  be  well  cited  again  as  an  illustration  of  the  intense  prejudice 
against  the  Jews) :  ‘  Know,  then,  thou  dear  Christian,  that,  next  to  the  Devil,  thou 
canst  have  no  bitterer,  fiercer  foe  than  a  genuine  Jew,  one  who  is  a  Jew  in  earnest. 
The  true  counsel  I  give  thee,  is  that  fire  be  put  to  their  synagogues,  and  that,  over 
what  will  not  burn  up,  the  earth  be  heaped  and  piled,  so  that  no  stone  or  trace  of  them 
be  seen  for  evermore.’ 

F.  Kreyssig  (  Vorlesungen  uber  Shakespeare ,  Berlin,  1862,  vol.  iii,  p.  358) :  To 
these  two  bizarre  fables  Shakespeare  joins  the  principal  incidents  of  a  wanton  tale  of 
abduction  from  Masuccio  di  Salerno.  He  moulds  into  one  the  stories  of  the  daughter 
of  the  King  of  Apulia  and  the  bride  of  Gianetto,  lets  the  suitors  choose  the  caskets, 
devotes  himself  to  the  noble  character  of  the  merchant  who  sacrifices  himself  for  his 
friend,  takes  the  light,  hot  blood  of  Lorenzo  and  Jessica  into  the  service  of  poetic  just¬ 
ice, — and  then  lets  the  sun  of  his  genius  rise  upon  this  chaos  of  odd  entanglements 
and  incredible  fictions.  Under  its  beams  the  sharp  outlines  of  the  Piece  are  softened 
into  lines  of  beauty,  contradictions  are  reconciled,  the  little  poetic  world  gains  its  due 
proportions,  its  own  perspective  and  colouring.  The  Actual  is  nowhere  copied,  and  yet 
its  inner,  essential  laws  are  not  violated.  The  facts  indeed  belong  to  the  fabulous ;  all 
the  firmer  and  the  more  real  is  the  soil  out  of  which  the  motives  and  characters  spring ; 
and  in  applying  ourselves  to  work  through  the  ever-involved  details  to  a  point  of  view 
commanding  the  whole,  we  are  compensated  at  every  step  for  the  difficulty  of  the  jour¬ 
ney  by  an  abundance  of  single  beauties.  It  is  as  if  we  were  seeking  the  spot  where 
we  may  see  the  whole,  in  some  charming,  thickly-overgrown  park.  The  path  leads  us, 
by  artificial  windings,  through  green,  fragrant  woods.  Lovely  pictures  open  on  the 
right  and  on  the  left,  side-paths  are  lost  in  the  shrubberies ;  flowers  and  fruits  tempt  us 
to  linger  and  enjoy  them.  We  have  no  fatigue,  no  weariness  to  fear,  but  we  must  take 
care  to  mark  the  way,  lest  in  the  beautiful  labyrinth  we  miss  our  goal.  But,  metaphor 
aside,  in  few  of  his  Pieces  does  Shakespeare  play  hide-and-seek  with  his  readers  and 
commentators  as  happily  as  here.  The  wisdom  everywhere  introduced,  cropping  out 
in  the  action  and  in  the  scenes,  allures  us,  in  a  peculiar  degree,  to  seek  ever  more 
curiously  for  a  *  moral  ’  in  the  Play. 

(P.  367.)  At  the  conclusion  of  Bassanio’s  choice  the  finely  balanced  character  of 
Portia  is  fully  shown  in  her  exquisite  address  to  her  lover.  Shakespeare  here  pourtrays 
the  ideal  woman,  made  for  practical  life,  for  lasting  happiness,  material  and  spiritual. 
She  is  neither  the  ethereal  original  of  a  higher,  lost  humanity,  nor  the  alluring,  deceit¬ 
ful  form  behind  which  a  malignant  fate  lurks  for  its  victim.  Equally  removed  from 
the  lofty  beauty  of  a  Urania  and  from  the  treacherous  charm  of  a  Pandora,  Portia 
dwells  in  the  happy  medium,  where  spiritual  and  sensuous  life  unite  in  health,  strength, 
and  beauty.  Juliet’s  enthusiastic  heroism  would  be  foreign  to  her.  We  may  imagine 
that  she  would  have  cut  short  the  Balcony  Scene  with  some  sharp  witticism,  unless, 
perhaps,  she  would  have  declined  altogether  to  enjoy  the  night  air  except  in  congenial 
company.  Wherein  an  Othello  was  lacking  she  would  very  soon  have  discovered,  and 
Cassio  might  have  relied  upon  a  calm  hearing.  Even  Shakespeare’s  choice  heroes, 
Henry  and  Percy,  would  have  had  to  mend  their  manners  somewhat  to  stand  before 
her  refined  taste.  She  is  the  personification  of  the  fact  that  the  finest  ornament  ol 
social  and  domestic  life,  and  its  nobler  moral  well-being,  are  in  the  hands  of  woman,  as 
it  is  hers,  when  she  is  not  equal  to  that  office,  to  destroy  its  bloom  irrevocably.  Portia 


454 


APPENDIX 


tells  the  secret  of  woman’s  true,  happy  influence  in  the  marriage  state  when  she,  the 
prudent,  the  cultivated,  the  much-wooed,  gives  herself  up  to  the  fortunate  suitor  with 

these  words :  * - but  the  full  sum  of  me  Is  sum  of  nothing,  which  to  term  in  gross, 

Is  an  unlessoned  girl,’  &c.  (Ill,  ii.).  And  these  words  immediately  find  their  full  con¬ 
firmation.  Far  removed  from  the  false  demand  for  exclusive  devotion,  her  love  keeps 
open  eye  and  ear  for  duty,  even  though  its  summons  should  come  at  the  most  unseason¬ 
able  hour.  Her  whole  behaviour  is  a  protest  againt  that  comfortless  idea  of  domestic 
virtue  which  sacrifices  the  respectability  of  husband  and  father,  according  to  the  degree 
of  selfishness  with  which  it  postpones  the  claims  of  friendship  and  fatherland  to  the 
only  business  of  increasing  the  res  familiaris.  Not  for  a  moment  does  she  hold  back 
the  husband  she  has  just  won  from  the  duty  he  owes  to  his  friend.  She  does  even 
more.  Exalted  above  all  trivial  considerations  by  the  gravity  of  the  occasion,  she  ven¬ 
tures  to  test  her  woman’s  wit  in  this  deadly  crisis.  In  her  noble  speech  upon  the 
blessedness  of  mercy  the  earnestness  and  tenderness  of  her  woman’s  nature  are  pro¬ 
foundly  impressive.  But  with  her  sound,  practical  sense  she  does  not  expect,  by  this 
poesy,  to  gain  the  victory  in  the  hard  world.  As  wise  and  keen  as  she  is  tender¬ 
hearted,  she  does  not  hesitate  to  fight  the  foe  with  his  own  weapons.  And  then, — 
surest  sign  of  a  sound  understanding, — in  the  jubilee  of  success  all  excitement  is  toned 
down  to  the  quiet  grace  of  a  genial,  arch  humour.  A  due  sense  of  proportion  is  the 
groundwork  of  her  character.  This  appears  most  emphatically  in  the  conversation 
with  Nerissa,  in  which,  without  any  apparent  necessity  for  it,  Shakespeare  engages  her 
as  she  returns  home  from  her  successful  enterprise  :  *  Nothing  is  good,  I  see,  without 
respect.’  And  again  :  *  How  many  things  by  season  season’d  are  To  their  right  praise 
and  true  perfection !’  This  is  away  of  thinking  essential  to  a  healthy  view  of  practical 
life.  It  completes  here  one  of  the  most  beautiful  pictures  of  womanhood  which  the 
Poet  has  created,  not  exactly  for  its  poetical  and  ideal  charm,  but  for  its  true  and  har¬ 
monious  development. 

(P.  374.)  In  Lorenzo  and  Jessica  we  descend  a  step  still  lower.  Here  the  humour 
breaks  out  into  reckless  excess.  The  whole  relation  between  them  could  not  but  have 
appeared  immoral  and  repulsive,  if  the  Poet  had  not  reconciled  us  to  it  aesthetically  by 
two  equally  effective  means  which  justify  to  our  feelings  the  happy  ending.  First  of 
all,  this  hot  love,  athirst  only  for  pleasure,  certainly  violates  the  law.  But  it  violates  it 
by  disregarding  a  blood-relationship  which  stands  out  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  majesty  of 
the  law  :  Jessica  has  good  reasons  for  feeling  ashamed  of  being  her  father’s  child,  and  for 
calling  herself  a  daughter  of  his  blood,  not  of  his  heart.  Her  father’s  house  has  been 
a  hell  to  her ;  later  on,  it  becomes  evident  enough  that  she  was  a  mere  addition  to  the 
old  man’s  money  and  wealth,  perhaps  only  a  burdensome  addition.  So,  without  scru¬ 
ple,  she  takes  from  that  hell  the  stones  with  which  to  pave  the  way  to  her  heaven. 
Only  one  trait  has  she  inherited  from  her  forefather,  Jacob — practical  sense.  She 
knows  excellently  well  that  one  cannot  live  on  love  alone,  and  she  has  evidently  not 
been  brought  up  to  practise  any  extraordinary  generosity.  It  is  not  without  significance 
that  Shakespeare  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Lorenzo,  the  bold  child  of  fortune  and  pleas¬ 
ure,  that  fine  praise  of  music,  that  sweet  language  of  the  heart,  the  mysterious  tie  bind¬ 
ing  together  the  world  of  thought  and  the  world  of  feeling.  Thus  the  haughty  levity 
of  the  cavalier  receives  the  consecration  of  Beauty,  and  the  success  which  circumstances 
accord  to  his  bold  adventure  is  made  poetically  possible,  although  it  is  strictly  without 
moral  grounds. 

(P.  381.)  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  in  our  opinion,  was  written  neither  to  glorify 
friendship,  nor  to  condemn  the  usurer,  nor,  finally  to  represent  any  moral  idea,  rich 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— KARL  ELZE 


455 


and  manifold  as  are  the  moral  allusions  which  the  thoughtful  reader  carries  away  with 
him,  together  with  the  aesthetic  enjoyment  of  this  work  of  Art.  The  essential  and 
definite  aspect  of  life  here  illustrated  admonishes  us  that  lasting  success,  sure,  practical 
results  can  be  secured  only  by  a  just  estimate  of  things,  by  prudent  use  and  calm  endur¬ 
ance  of  given  circumstances,  equally  far  removed  from  violent  resistance  and  cowardly 
concession.  Strong  feeling  and  clear,  good  sense  hold  the  scales  in  the  pervading  cha¬ 
racter  of  the  whole  Drama;  fortune  helps  the  honest  in  so  far  as  they  boldly  and  wisely 
woo  its  favour ;  but  rigid  Idealism,  although  infinitely  more  amiable  and  estimable,  shows 
itself  as  scarcely  less  dangerous  than  hard-hearted  selfishness. 

Karl  Elze  ( Essays ,  1871;  translated  by  Miss  L.  Dora  Schmitz,  London,  1874, 
p.  90) :  Shylock’s  relation  to  his  daughter  is  a  point  where  least  can  be  said  in  his 
excuse.  The  ossification  of  his  mind  and  feelings,  his  selfishness  and  bitterness,  have 
also  entered  his  family  life,  and,  like  corrosive  acids,  have  eaten  and  destroyed  it. 
While  his  co-religionists  are  wont  to  hold  family  ties  in  high  estimation,  and  to  keep 
their  domestic  life  in  a  certain  patriarchal  holiness,  so  as  to  escape  from  the  pressure 
of  the  outer  world,  Shylock,  according  to  Jessica,  makes  his  home  a  hell.  He  does 
not  succeed  in  leaving  harshness,  avarice,  hatred,  and  revenge  out  of  doors,  and  in 
being  gentle,  kind,  and  generous  within  the  bosom  of  his  family;  it  is,  indeed,  an 
almost  impossible  task.  Can  the  early  death  of  his  wife  have  contributed  to  this  ? 
But  the  remembrance  of  her  attaches  only  to  the  turquoise  which  she  has  given  him. 
If  we  may  infer  Shylock’s  conjugal  love  from  his  paternal  love,  there  can  be  as  little 
said  of  the  one  as  of  the  other,  and,  consequently,  we  can  scarcely  suppose  that  had 
Leah  lived  longer  she  would  have  exercised  a  softening  and  ennobling  influence  upon 
her  husband’s  character.  His  ducats,  and  his  jewels,  and  the  feeling  of  revenge  against 
his  Christian  oppressors  have  so  completely  taken  possession  of  his  heart,  that  there  is 
not  even  the  smallest  space  left  for  conjugal  or  paternal  love.  Jessica  is  nothing  to 
him  but  the  keeper  of  his  house  and  the  guardian  of  his  treasures.  She  leads  the  life 
of  a  prisoner;  she  is  to  shut  the  ears  of  the  house,  and,  according  to  Oriental  custom, 
is  not  allowed  to  put  her  head  out  of  the  window  to  gape  at  ‘  varnished  ’  Christian  fools, 
who  are  an  abomination  to  her  father.  That  she  should  possess  any  claim  to  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  life  Shylock  never  dreams ;  his  withered  soul  never  supposes  that  hers  is  ex¬ 
panding  in  youthful  excitement  and  desire.  Why  does  he  not  surround  her  life  with 
at  least  such  ornaments  and  finery  as  young  girls  are  accustomed  to  regard  as  a  great 
part  of  their  happiness  ?  Why  does  he  not  place  her  under  the  motherly  care  of  a 
companion,  instead  of  leaving  her  completely  to  herself  at  home  while  he  goes  about 
his  money  transactions  ?  Why  ?  From  greed,  selfishness,  and  hard-heartedness.  The 
want  of  fatherly  feeling  on  his  part  necessarily  produces  a  want  of  filial  feeling  on  hers. 
She  indemnifies  herself  by  a  confidential  relation  with  the  servant,  who  is  a  kind-hearted 
creature  and  a  merry  devil  (‘  the  patch  is  kind  enough,’  says  Shylock),  and  thus  makes 
the  domestic  hell  somewhat  endurable;  besides,  he  serves  her  as  postilion  d'amozir. 

(P.  105.)  From  the  beginning  Antonio  has  abused  and  ill-treated  the  Jew,  but  this 
is  the  only  stain  on  his  character.  Otherwise  he  is  distinguished  by  gentleness,  benev¬ 
olence,  and  kind-heartedness,  and  it  cannot  be  conceived  that  his  hatred  of  the  Jew 
would  amount  to  such  cruelty,  and  this  at  the  very  moment  when,  in  regal'd  to  the  con¬ 
fiscation  of  the  Jew’s  property,  he  gives  an  unmistakable  proof  of  his  generosity.  His 
demand  for  the  conversion  arises,  in  all  probability,  from  an  entirely  different  motive, 
and  we  shall  hardly  err  in  seeking  it  in  the  general  religious  conviction  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  according  to  which  none  but  believers  in  Christianity  could  partake  of  salvation 


456 


APPENDIX 


and  eternal  blessedness.  That  the  Jews  are  eternally  lost  is  known  even  to  Marlowe's 
Barabas,  who  says :  ‘  I  am  a  Jew,  and  therefore  am  I  lost.’  It  is  well  known  that  this 
conviction  rose  to  the  belief  that  it  was  a  meritorious  work  to  assist  the  non-Christians 
to  the  blessings  of  Christianity,  even  against  their  own  wish,  by  forcing  them  to  become 
converts.  From  this  point  of  view  Antonio’s  demand  and  the  Doge’s  action  appear  in 
a  different  light,  and  it  is  easily  understood  that  they  should  regard  the  proposed  con¬ 
version  as  a  proof  of  mercy  as  well.  They  intended  to  save  Shylock’s  soul  from  eter¬ 
nal  perdition.  There  is  no  need  of  further  discussion  to  show  how  this  doctrine  of  the 
Romish  Church  contained  the  germ  of  the  most  terrible  fanaticism,  and  how  it  went 
hand  in  hand  with  the  fiercest  hatred  of  Jews  and  heretics ;  proofs  of  this  may  be 
found  in  almost  every  page  of  the  history  of  the  Middle  Ages.  ‘  At  the  time  of  the 
great  European  persecution  of  the  Jews,  in  the  year  1349,’  says  Menzel  in  his  History 
of  the  Gertnans,  ‘  all  the  Jews  in  Strasburg  who  refused  to  kiss  the  crucifix,  nine  hun¬ 
dred  in  number,  were  burned  on  one  huge  pile  of  wood  :  the  Brandgasse  or  Rue  Bril- 
lie  still  bears  its  name  in  memory  of  this  terrible  scene.  Only  children  were  spared, 
and  they  were  baptized  before  the  eyes  of  their  parents.  Eleven  hundred  Jews  escaped 
death  by  kissing  the  cross  and  becoming  Christians.’  The  Jews,  therefore,  had  only 
the  choice  between  conversion  and  death,  exactly  as  Shakespeare  has  shown  in  his 
play.  The  public  of  that  day  saw  no  objection  to  the  enforced  conversion,  but  rather 
found  it  quite  correct,  and  considered  it  a  merciful  punishment.  Those  who  found 
pleasure  in  Marlowe’s  Jew  of  Alalta  must  have  revelled  in  Shylock’s  despair  and  Gra- 
tiano’s  mockery.  ‘  To  undo  a  Jew  is  charity  and  not  sin,’  says  Ithamore  in  Marlowe, 
at  the  end  of  the  Fourth  Act. 

(P.  hi.)  If  Shakespeare,  from  his  broader  and  more  tolerant  religious  standpoint, 
disapproved  of  the  enforced  conversion  of  Jews,  why  did  he  make  it  a  condition  in 
Shylock’s  case  ?  The  Jew  might,  of  course,  have  come  off  with  the  fine  only,  even 
had  it  been  heavier.  The  contrasts  in  the  play,  designed  as  a  comedy,  would  then 
have  been  less  harsh,  and  the  stage  effect  would  scarcely  have  been  less.  However, 
as  has  been  said,  Shakespeare  considered  a  dramatic  poem  as  a  mirror,  not  a  kaleido¬ 
scope  ;  it  is  nowhere  his  custom  to  embellish  or  to  suppress ;  he  gives  us  the  world 
and  history  as  they  are,  even  at  the  risk  of  every  now  and  then  resembling  a  natural¬ 
istic  landscape-painter;  nay,  he  possesses  an  undeniable  predilection  for  sharp  and 
definite  outlines,  even  although  they  are  not  always  within  the  confines  of  the 
beautiful.  Moreover,  his  public  wished  above  all  things  to  see  Shylock  crushed, 
just  as  in  Lessing’s  Nathan  the  Patriarch  insists  upon  having  the  Jew  burned. 
Nay,  it  seems  questionable  whether  we  ourselves  would  approve  of  a  representa¬ 
tion  of  the  play  in  which  the  condition  of  baptism  were  omitted  for  once,  by  way 
of  trial. 

Ibid.  ( Shakespeare  Jahrbuch,  1873,  vol.  viii,  p.  59) :  This  drama  is  impregnated,  in 
an  inimitable  manner,  with  a  thoroughly  Italian  air,  with  an  aroma  of  Italy,  more  read¬ 
ily  felt  than  analyzed  and  defined.  All  is  fresh  and  true  to  nature  to  a  degree  that  can¬ 
not  be  surpassed.  Byron,  who  considered  it  essential  that  the  Poet  should  write  from 
his  own  observation  and  experience,  and  could  not  himself  write  but  upon  this  condi¬ 
tion,  although  he  lived  several  years  in  Venice  never  succeeded  in  attaining  to  this 
perfect  truth  to  nature.  Shakespeare,  with  incomparable  art  gives  us  slight  allusions  and 
hints,  apparently  insignificant  particulars,  which  suggest  trains  of  thought  leading  our 
sympathies  in  a  certain  way  and  giving  the  imagination  a  direction  to  a  determined  aim. 
By  these  means  we  are  transported,  without  being  aware  of  it,  completely  into  an  Ital 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— KARL  ELZE 


457 


ian  atmosphere,  and  in  the  Fifth  Act  into  the  enjoyment  of  an  Italian  night,  which 
could  not  be  more  vivid  were  we  actually  there  on  the  spot.  We  are  led  into  the  bus¬ 
tle  of  the  Bourse  on  the  Rialto,  and  we  see  in  the  distance  the  gondola  which  is  bear¬ 
ing  Jessica  away  with  her  lover.  To  appreciate  the  art  and  beauty  of  Shakespeare  in 
this  respect  we  have  only  to  compare  The  Merchant  of  Venice  and  Ben  Jonson’s  Vol- 
pone ,  the  scene  of  which  is  also  laid  in  Venice.  Jonson  shows  a  thorough  knowledge 
of  the  Italian  tongue  and  of  Italian,  and  especially  Venetian,  manners  and  localities. 
He  lays  on  the  local  colouring  as  thick  as  one’s  hand,  but  it  is  everywhere  the  work 
of  a  book-learned  student  aiming  with  evident  self-satisfaction  to  display  the  learning 
patched  up  from  books  ad  hoc.  One  sees  the  design  throughout,  and  is  put  out  of  tune. 
Jonson  imagines  he  is  making  his  personages  genuine  Italians  by  making  them  speak  a 
great  deal,  and  wherever  possible,  in  Italian  phrases,  about  the  institutions,  manners, 
and  localities  of  their  native  land.  Thus  we  hear  them  tell,  in  a  motley  medley,  of 
Avocatori,  Mercatori,  Commendatori,  Notario ,  of  the  Piazza  San  Mark ,  Zan  Fritada, 
sforzato,  ciarlitani,  scarloccios,  the  mat  caduco ;  vertigine  in  the  head,  moscadelli, 
unguento ,  osteria,  Pantalone  di  Besogniosi,  ragion  del  Stato,  Procuratia,  the  Scrutineo , 
canaglia,  tremorcordia ,  Signiory  of  the  Sanita,  saffi,  the  Forty ,  the  Ten,  the  Lazaretto, 
Bolognian  sausages,  Piscaria,  the  monastery  of  San  Spirito,  the  grand  Canale,  &c. ;  all 
the  Italian  poets  are  introduced  by  name :  Petrarca,  Tasso,  Dante,  Guarini,  Ariosto, 
Aretin,  and  Cieco  di  Hadria — ‘I  have  read  them  all,’  says  (in  the  name  of  the  poet?) 
Lady  Politick  Would-be.  Had  Ben  Jonson  wished  to  be  thoroughly  logical,  he  should 
have  gone  a  step  further,  and  made  his  Italians  speak  Italian,  as  Chapman  does  in  his 
Alphonsus  with  the  German  princess  Hedwig.  But,  instead  of  this,  they  are  often  not 
true  to  their  parts,  betraying  by  their  speech  their  acquaintance  with  the  Cock-pit,  with 
Smithfield  Fair  and  Fleetstreet;  the  native  sixpence  is  found  (II,  i)  in  one  and  the  same 
line  with  the  Italian  moccinigo  and  Bagatine,  which  is  a  blunder  from  Jonson’s  own 
point  of  view ;  he  should  at  least  have  avoided  English  local  colour.  It  is,  so  to  speak, 
the  negative  side  of  local  colouring  when  the  Poet  uses  nothing  that  in  respect  of  the 
locality  disturbs  the  illusion  of  the  hearer  or  reader.  Jonson’s  whole  treatment  is 
purely  from  the  outside,  wherein  the  Poet  is  lost  in  the  Philologist,  and  it  is  remarkable 
that  he  could  have  reckoned  upon  the  knowledge  and  intelligence  of  his  Public ;  his 
hearers  must  have  listened  with  open  mouths ;  he  ought  to  have  furnished  Volpone,  as 
well  as  his  Masques,  with  explanatory  annotations.  How  utterly  different  is  Shake¬ 
speare’s  way !  Here  and  there  he  lets  his  characters  still  be  English,  although  this  is 
hardly  observable  in  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  but  he  breathes  into  them  Italian  souls, 
Italian  passion,  Southern  glow  and  enjoyment  of  life.  While  Shakespeare  treats  cos¬ 
tume  and  scenery  only  incidentally,  Jonson,  especially  in  the  scenes  where  English 
travellers  are  introduced,  actually  enlarges  our  knowledge  of  travelling  as  it  was  in  his 
day.  We  learn  that  an  English  traveller  had  to  have  a  ‘  license,’  that  he  presented 
himself,  as  at  this  day,  to  my  lord  the  Ambassador,  that,  above  all  things,  he  must 
‘  have  the  languages ,’  such  is  the  standing  phrase ;  Sir  Politick  gives  as  the  reason  of 
his  travelling  to  Venice  that  he  wanted  ‘to  learn  the  language’  (II,  i);  we  learn 
further  that  in  Venice  one  must  go  about  with  a  silver  fork,  and  finally  that  Lady 
Would-be  in  Venice  learned  ‘  tires,  fashions,  and  behaviour'  from  the  courtesans,  just 
as  at  the  present  day  the  ugliest  fashions  are  set  by  the  Parisian  demi-monde. 

Such  is  Jonson’s  local  colouring  compared  with  Shakespeare’s.  One  may  safely 
say,  that  it  would  have  been  better  in  this  respect,  as  in  all  else,  for  Jonson’s  poetry 
if  lie  had  had  no  more  Greek  and  Latin — Italian  included — than  his  friend  Shake¬ 
speare. 


453 


APPENDIX 


Dr  Bellario 

Th.  Elze  (, Shakespeare  Ja/./buch ,  1878,  xiii,  149) :  When  in  the  Pecorone  the 
much-married  mistress  of  Belmonte,  after  the  celebration  of  the  marriage  festivities, 
appears  like  a  Dea  ex  machina  in  the  disguise  of  a  young  judge  fresh  from  his  studies 
in  Bologna,  and  saves  poor  Ansaldo  from  his  mortal  peril,  we  acquiesce  in  the  old  fairy 
tale,  as  it  might  almost  be  termed,  without  any  demur.  In  The  Merchant  of  Venice , 
on  the  contrary,  according  to  our  present  ideas,  a  similar  denouement  appears  at  first 
sight  fantastic,  unsatisfactory,  nay,  childish.  The  charming  Portia,  who  becomes  even 
before  her  wedding-night  a  *  grass  widow,’  suddenly  conceives  the  girlish,  romantic 
plan  of  saving,  under  the  disguise  of  a  judge,  the  life  of  the  noble  friend  of  her  newly- 
wedded  lord,  and — Shakespeare  here  avails  himself  of  the  convenient  vicinity  of  Bel¬ 
mont  to  Padua — she  deems  it  all-sufficient  to  provide  herself  with  the  counsel  and  the 
garments  of  her  cousin,  Bellario,  a  highly-respected  lawyer  in  Padua.  She  has  not 
withal  the  slightest  knowledge  of  Dr  Bellario’s  having  been  summoned  by  the  Duke  to 
Venice  for  this  very  case.  This  unexplained,  lucky  accident  comes  to  her  aid,  and  so 
she  suddenly  appears  as  his  substitute  and  deputy  before  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
Republic  in  the  Doge’s  palace,  over  which  the  Doge  himself  presides.  Here  she 
appears,  not  with  the  legal  opinion  of  her  cousin  as  a  kind  of  Crown  lawyer,  or  of  the 
Law  Faculty  in  Padua,  but  as  a  veritable  and  downright  judge.  Such  a  proceeding  in 
a  State  having  a  clearly-defined  system  of  legal  procedure — which  was  emphatically 
true  of  Venice  at  that  period — seems,  at  least  to  the  reader  of  the  present  day,  almost, 
if  not  quite,  incomprehensible.  But  if  we  accept  this  too  as  an  echo  of  earlier  mediaeval 
law  (as  in  the  story  of  the  Pecorone'),  there  remains  only  this  alternative :  Either  Por¬ 
tia’s  whole  plan,  with  its  accidental  coincidence  with  Bellario’s  being  summoned  by  the 
Doge,  is  a  poorly-contrived,  improbable  fable,  and  therefore  scarcely  worthy  of  a  great 
dramatist, — or  an  expedient  of  this  kind  must  have  appeared  to  the  poet  and  to  nis 
contemporaries  as  not  at  all  out  of  the  way,  nay,  quite  natural  and  customary,,  at  least 
in  Venice.  This  latter  is  possible  only  in  case  there  were  at  that  time  in  Padua  men 
whose  position,  reputation,  and  public  weight  in  the  Venetian  State  were  of  such  a 
nature  that  they  could  furnish  an  original  for  Dr  Bellario.  Then,  assuredly,  this  cha¬ 
racter  in  The  Merchant  will  present  nothing  remarkable  or  incredible  to  any  one. 

Shakespeare  brings  this  Dr  Bellario  plainly  and  distinctly  before  us,  without  intro¬ 
ducing  him  personally,  by  a  few  allusions  and  by  the  appearance  of  his  substitute, 
even  Portia  herself  disguised  as  Dr  Balthazar.  He  is  an  elderly  man  (‘  old  Bellario,’ 
as  he  is  called),  ‘  a  learned  Doctor  ’  of  Laws,  erudite,  famous  everywhere,  highly 
respected  by  the  Doge  and  Signorie,  and  often  called  on  to  counsel  and  to  decide ;  in 
complicated  civil  cases  an  experienced,  sharp-witted  barrister;  in  criminal  cases  (for 
parties  ‘standing  in  danger’)  an  eloquent  advocate,  and  in  all  respects,  by  everybody, 
held  in  highest  confidence  and  esteem. 

Now,  since  Shakespeare  laid  the  time  of  the  action  of  this  play  in  his  own  days,  he 
had  this  advantage :  That  at  that  very  time  there  was  living  in  Padua  a  professor  in  the 
University  there  whose  characteristics  fully  and  entirely  corresponded  to  all  these  quali¬ 
fications  and  requisites  in  the  play.  Ottonello  Discalzio,  born  in  1536  of  a  distin¬ 
guished  patrician  family,  which  at  an  earlier  period  had  produced  a  celebrated  jurist  of  the 
same  name,  was  at  that  time  the  most  eminent  Professor  of  Law,  especially  of  Civil  Law,  in 
the  University  of  Padua.  Profound  knowledge,  acuteness,  and  eloquence  pre-eminently 
distinguished  him.  The  Government  of  the  Republic  continually  consulted  him,  and 
heaped  him  with  honours,  commissions,  and  embassies.  For  the  extraordinary  services 
which  he  thus  rendered  to  the  State  he  received  the  conspicuous  distinction  of  the 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— Dk  BELLARIO 


459 


Order  of  San  Marco.  The  Emperor  of  Germany  also  made  him  a  Knight  und  a 
Pfalzgraf,  and  other  Princes  their  counsellor.  Various  invitations  to  take  up  his  resi¬ 
dence  at  foreign  courts  he  declined.  Many  a  defendant  in  civil  cases  he  rescued  from 
the  perils  of  legal  procedure ;  for  more  than  twenty  years  he  was  the  kindly  protector 
and  friend  of  the  German  law-students  in  Padua.  In  the  seventy-first  year  of  his  age, 
in  1 607,  he  died  in  Padua.  Upon  the  monuments  erected  to  his  memory  by  his  widow 
in  the  Church  of  the  Eremites,  and  by  the  law-students  in  the  Church  of  St  Anthony, 
he  is  termed  :  ‘  Primarius  juris  civilis  interpres — ‘  eximia  juris  utriusque  scientia  et 
admirabili  disputandi  ac  dicendi  acumine  et  copia  excellens,  patriae  in  konoribus,  lega- 
tionibus  consilliisque  utilissimus,  privatorum  in  judiciis  pericula  singulari  eloquentia 
propulsans.’  We  need  not  indicate  how  admirably  the  words  of  these  inscriptions  fit 
Dr  Bellario,  and  even  Shakespeare’s  very  words.  Let  the  name  Bellario  be  substituted 
for  Discalzio,  and  even  to  scholars  the  actual  existence  of  the  former  is  rendered  cred¬ 
ible.  And  no  one  can  justly  argue  that  Shakespeare  could  not  have  had  as  thorough  a 
knowledge  of  this  distinguished  contemporary  of  his,  this  Discalzio,  as  of  the  country 
r.n  the  Brenta  between  Padua  and  Venice. 

We  do  not  desire  to  ascribe  to  the  personality  which  has  just  been  depicted  more 
influence  on  Shakespeare’s  work  than  it  really  has.  It  may  well  be  that  in  all  times 
and  among  all  peoples  there  have  been  Jurists  of  like  wisdom,  character,  and  repute  to 
Ottonello  Discalzio,  but  only  one,  occupying  in  Venice  such  a  position  as  his,  can  be 
regarded  and  accepted  as  the  prototype  of  Bellario.  If  we  imagine  Bellario  as  filling 
a  position  like  Discalzio’s,  then  it  is  easily  conceivable  that  Portia,  knowing  her  cousin’s 
reputation  and  high  position  with  the  Doge  and  Signorie,  could  presume  that  in  a  case 
of  such  importance  and  notoriety  as  that  of  Shylock  versus  Antonio,  he  would  be  called 
on  for  an  opinion,  and  perhaps  even  be  summoned  to  Venice.  Her  surmise  proves  cor¬ 
rect,  and  thereby  her  plan  succeeds.  Thus,  by  a  side-light  from  Discalzio,  Bellario 
emerges  from  the  twilight  of  romantic  invention  into  the  clear,  bright  light  of  real  life, 
and  Portia’s  adventure,  from  a  novelistic  freak  of  a  girl,  becomes  an  intelligible  and  sen¬ 
sible  act. 

[In  his  concluding  section  Th.  Elze  describes  the  University  of  Padua  at  the  close 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  when  so  great  was  the  University’s  reputation  everywhere  that 
there  were  at  that  time  representatives  of  twenty-three  nations  among  its  students. 
From  the  lists  of  these  students  it  appears  ‘  that  not  a  few  Englishmen  took  up  their 
abode  in  Padua  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  for  the  purpose  of  study,  and  all  of  whom 
assuredly  must  have  visited  Venice  also;  and  it  is  also  to  be  inferred  that  the  number 
of  English  travellers  who  visited  the  city  of  the  Doges  must  have  been  much  larger 
than  is  commonly  supposed.  Hereby  is  disclosed  another  source,  not  hitherto  noticed, 
whence  a  knowledge  of  Venetian  manners  and  customs  reached  England.  And  if  it 
has  been  hitherto  impossible  to  prove  that  Shakespeare  drew  his  knowledge  of  Venice 
md  Padua  and  the  region  around  from  personal  observation,  it  is  quite  possible  to  sup 
pose  that  he  obtained  it  by  word  of  mouth,  either  from  Italians  living  in  England,  c: 
from  Englishmen  who  had  pursued  their  studies  in  Padua.’ 

Among  the  names  that  Th.  Elze  gives  may  be  noticed  two  Danes — one,  Rosenkranz, 
in  1587-89,  and  another,  Giildenstern,  in  1603.  A  list  is  given  from  the  Records  ar 
Padua,  extending  from  September,  1591,  to  October,  1594,  during  which  time  twenty- 
five  English  students  were  matriculated.  Thus  in : 

1591,  on  29  Nov.,  D.  Thomas  Sackavillus,  nobilis,  Anglus — cum  naevo  sub  dextra 
aure.  [A  birthmark  or  scar  is  always  itemized.  This  is,  as  Th.  Elze  notes,  the  sor 
of  the  author  of  the  Mirror  for  Magistrates .] 


460 


APPENDIX 


1592.  22  Jan.,  D.  Franc.  Tusser,  Anglus — cum  cicatrice  in  suprema  parte  pollicis 
sinistri. 

15  Sept.,  D.  Ricard.  Sands,  Anglus — cum  parva  cicatrice  in  facie. 

1593.  21  Nov.,  D.  Fynes  Morison,  Anglus — cum  cicatrice  sub  oculo  dextro ; 

and  others ;  but  the  foregoing  are  names  which  become  afterwards  familiar  to  all  Shake¬ 
speare  students.] 

W.  Oechelhauser*  ( Shakespeare's  Dramatische  Werke,  Weimar,  1877,  p.  14): 
Passive,  inactive  roles  like  Antonio’s  generally  require  less  attention  to  by-play.  But 
the  great  Trial  Scene  is  an  exception ;  here  by-play  in  the  circle  of  his  friends  is  indis¬ 
pensable  on  the  part  of  Antonio.  And  furthermore,  as  the  Poet  has  given  Antonio  but 
few  words  to  say,  he  must  in  dumb  show  fully,  and  warmly,  express  his  gratitude  to 
Portia,  which  is  unfortunately  much  neglected  by  Actors.  Portia,  too,  must  emphasize 
this  by-play,  lest  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Trial,  Antonio,  on  whose  fate  the  whole  plot 
turns,  should  become  too  completely  overshadowed. 

(P.  16.)  Bassanio’s  situation  in  the  exciting  Trial  Scene  must  not  be  forgotten  by  the 
actor  for  a  moment ;  morally  regarded,  he  suffers  greater  torture  than  Antonio,  who 
suffers  only  for  himself.  On  this  account,  at  every  step  of  the  Trial,  Bassanio  must 
pourtray  in  all  possible  ways  through  by-play  his  distress  and  anxiety,  as  well  as  his 
boundless  joy  over  the  deliverance  of  his  friend,  hard  as  it  may  be  in  a  scene  which 
fills  an  entire  long  Act.  The  highest  expression  of  his  sympathy  for  Antonio  (the  full 
significance  whereof  is  rarely  appreciated)  lies  in  the  words,  ‘  Antonio,  I  am  married 
to  a  wife,’  &c.  Here,  at  the  moment  when  every  hope  for  Antonio’s  relief  appears  to 
have  vanished,  expression  must  be  given  in  the  most  impressive  way  to  the  intensest 
anguish,  but  most  actors  regard  this  passage  only  as  the  occasion  for  the  roguish  remarks 
of  Portia  which  follow.  Generally  too  little  is  made  of  Bassanio’s  thanks,  and  Anto¬ 
nio’s  also,  to  Portia,  so  that  an  almost  cold,  frosty  sound  is  imparted  to  Bassanio’s  grace¬ 
ful  words.  In  the  final  scene  at  Belmont,  where  he  again  enters  the  realm  of  love  and 
happiness,  Bassanio’s  earnest  and  dignified  vindication  in  regard  to  the  ring  gives  us  the 
pleasing  and  distinct  idea  of  a  pure  and  noble  character,  deserving  of  his  good  fortune. 

(P.  21.)  Shakespeare  in  his  Shylock  did  not  cater  to  the  blind  hatred  of  the  Jews 
prevalent  in  his  time,  but  stood  forth  with  large-hearted  boldness  for  the  oppressed,  and 
threw  upon  the  persecutors  of  the  Jews  their  well-merited  share  in  producing  the 
extreme  degeneracy  of  the  people  to  which  Shylock  belongs. 

The  conclusion  of  the  Trial  Scene  is  a  special  confirmation  of  my  idea  that  in  the 
characterization  the  typical  Jew,  as  such,  should  by  no  means  predominate  over  the 
typical  miser.  When  the  Doge  announces  the  confiscation  of  half  of  Shylock’s  property, 
Shylock  breaks  out  into  passionate  complaints,  declaring  his  money  to  be  his  life ;  but 
when  his  becoming  a  Christian  is  made  the  condition  of  his  retaining  the  other  half,  he 
simply  says :  ‘  I  am  content.’  Money  is  more  tc  him  than  his  faith,  the  miser  is 
stronger  than  the  Jew.  But  this  trait  belongs  to  the  individual,  not  to  the  race,  for  in 
the  world’s  history  no  people  but  just  the  Jews  have  with  greater  decision  and  energy 
subordinated  every  earthly  consideration  to  their  devotion  to  their  faith,  notwithstanding 
centuries  of  terrible  persecution  and  their  innate  thirst  for  gold.  The  miser  in  Shylock 
has  sprung  up  on  common  human  soil ;  only  his  cunning,  his  hatred,  his  thirst  for 
revenge  on  his  Christian  oppressors  reflect  the  representative  of  degenerate  Judaism. 

*  Especial  attention  is  bestowed  by  Oechelhauser  in  the  Introduction  of  each  play  in  his  transla¬ 
tion  (which  is  an  adaptation  of  Schlegel  and  Tiecli  *s)  on  the  costume,  on  the  scenery,  or  stage-set¬ 
ting,  and  particularly  on  directions  to  actors. 


JORDAN'S  BALLAD  461 

Greed  for  gold  and  hatred  of  Christians  are  the  springs  of  his  actions,  and  upon  their 
working  the  character  of  Shylock  is  formed. 

(P.  23.)  In  his  brief  appearance  in  the  Second  Act  with  Jessica  and  Launcelot, 
where  he  puts  no  restraint  upon  himself,  Shylock  shows  himself  as  the  dirty  miser, 
always  the  cross  domestic  tyrant  who  has  made  the  house  *  a  hell  ’  to  his  daughter. 
No  word  of  love  or  kindness  to  his  child,  only  the  command  to  keep  the  doors  fastened 
and  not  go  to  the  window  to  see  the  maskers  pass.  The  tender  farewell  of  his  daugh¬ 
ter  that  many  actors  represent  him  as  taking  is  in  obvious  opposition  to  the  design  of 
the  Poet,  and  not  only  do  the  subsequent  outbreaks  of  heartless  rage  give  the  lie  to  it, 
but  it  would  cast  a  sad  reflection  upon  Jessica’s  character.  On  the  contrary,  Shylock 
should  be  represented  as  turning  his  back  on  Jessica  at  his  departure  without  any  leave- 
taking.  Jessica  says  expressly  she  is  not  the  daughter  of  his  heart.  She  loves  him 
not,  because  she  is  not  loved. 


JORDAN’S  BALLAD 

As  this  Ballad  has  been  frequently  cited  by  Editors  and  Commentators,  it  must  find 
a  place  in  this  volume.  Its  chief  interest  lies  in  the  proof  which  it  yields  that  an  argu¬ 
ment  for  age  cannot  be  judiciously  founded  merely  on  the  extreme  simplicity  of  the 
ballad  style — the  ground,  it  will  be  remembered,  on  which  several  critics  claimed  a  high 
antiquity  for  the  ballad  of  Gernutus.  Incidentally,  it  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  Shylock, 
with  red  hair  and  a  hooked  nose,  in  the  days  halfway  between  Burbadge  and  Dogget. 
It  was  first  reprinted  by  Collier  ( New  Particulars,  p.  38),  who  prefaced  it  as  follows  : 
‘  After  the  death  of  Burbadge  in  1619-20,  I  do  not  recollect  any  trace  of  the  per- 

*  formance  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice  until  Lord  Lansdowne  revived  the  play  in 

*  1701,  with  alterations.  So  much  does  Shakespeare’s  production  seem  to  have  been 

*  forgotten  in  1664,  that  Thomas  Jordan  made  a  ballad  of  it,  and  printed  it  as  an  orig 

*  inal  story  (at  least  without  any  acknowledgement)  in  his  Royal  Arbor  of  Loyal 

‘  Poesie  in  that  year . Jordan  felt  authorized  to  take  such  liberties  with  the  story 

*  that  he  has  represented  the  Jew’s  daughter,  instead  of  Portia,  as  assuming  the  office 

*  of  Assessor  to  the  Duke  of  Venice  in  the  Trial  Scene,  for  the  sake  of  saving  the  life 
‘  of  the  Merchant,  with  whom  she  was  in  love.  Here,  also,  he  describes  Shylock  as 
‘  having  a  red  beard,  and  mentions  some  other  particulars  of  his  dress  and  appearance, 
‘  regarding  which  he  doubtless  spoke  from  the  custom  of  the  stage,  Jordan  having  himself 
‘  been  an  actor  before  the  temporary  suppression  of  theatres  by  the  Puritans,  though  he 
‘  could  hardly  have  seen  Burbadge.’  [I  have  followed  the  text  given  by  Halliwell  (p. 
321),  which  bears  evidence  of  being  reprinted  with  closer  fidelity  than  that  by  Collier.] 

The  Forfeiture ,  a  Romance  ;  tune — Dear,  let  me  now  this  evening  dye. 

1.  You  that  do  look  with  Christian  hue, 

Attend  unto  my  sonnet, 

I’le  tell  you  of  as  vilde  a  Jew, 

As  ever  wore  a  bonnet. 

No  Jew  of  Scotland  I  intend, 

My  story  not  so  mean  is : 

This  Jew  in  wealth  did  much  transcend 
Under  the  States  of  Venice. 

2.  Where  he  by  usury  and  trade, 

Did  much  exceed  in  riches ; 

His  beard  was  red ;  his  face  was  made 
Not  much  unlike  a  witches. 


462 


APPENDIX 


His  habit  was  a  Jewish  gown, 

That  would  defend  all  weather ; 

His  chin  turn’d  up,  his  nose  hung  dowr 
And  both  ends  met  together. 

3.  Yet  this  deformed  father  had 

A  daughter  and  a  wise  one, 

So  sweet  a  virgin  never  lad 
Did  ever  set  his  eyes  on. 

He  that  could  call  this  lady  foul 
Must  be  a  purblinde  noddy ; 

But  yet  she  had  a  Christian  soul 
Lodg’d  in  a  Jewish  body. 

4.  Within  the  city  there  did  live, 

If  you  the  truth  will  search  on’t, 

One  whose  ill  fate  will  make  you  grieve, 
A  gallant  Christian  Merchant ; 

Who  did  abound  in  wealth  and  wit, 

In  youth  and  comely  feature, 

Whose  love  unto  a  friend  was  knit 
As  strong  as  bonds  of  nature. 

5.  A  gentleman  of  good  renown, 

But  of  a  sinking  fortune, 

Who  having  no  estate  of ’s  own, 

Doth  thus  his  friend  importune : 
Friend,  lend  me  but  one  thousand  pound 
It  shall  again  be  paid  ye, 

For  I  have  very  lately  found 
A  fair  and  wealthy  lady. 

6.  The  Merchant  then  makes  this  reply : 

Friend,  I  am  out  of  treasure, 

But  I  will  make  my  credit  flye, 

To  do  my  friend  a  pleasure. 

There  is  a  Jew  in  town  (quoth  he), 

Who,  though  he  deadly  hate  me, 

Yet  cause  my  wealth  is  strong  at  sea, 
This  favour  will  not  bate  me. 

7.  When  they  were  come  unto  the  Jew, 

He  did  demand  their  pleasure  : 

The  Merchant  answers,  I  of  you 
Would  borrow  so  much  treasure. 

The  Jew  replies,  you  shall  not  ha't, 

If  such  a  summe  would  save  ye, 
Unless  in  three  moneths  you  will  pay’t. 
Or  forfeit  what  I’de  have  you  (sic). 

8.  If  at  the  three  moneths  end  you  do, 

As  you  shall  sign  and  seal  to’t, 

Not  pay  the  money  which  is  due, 

Whereere  I  have  a  minde  to’t, - - 

lie  cut  a  pound  out  of  your  flesh. 

The  Merchant  is  contented, 

Because  he  knew  in  half  that  time, 

His  shipping  would  prevent  it. 

9.  Ill  news  by  every  ship  comes  in, 

His  ships  are  drown’d  and  fired ; 

The  Jew  his  forfeiture  doth  win, 

For  three  moneths  are  expired. 

He  is  arrested  for  the  debt ; 

The  Court  must  now  decide  it : 

The  flesh  is  due,  and  now  the  Jew 
Is  ready  to  divide  it. 


MUSIC 


463 


10.  The  Merchant’s  friend  that  had  the  gold, 

Now  being  richly  married, 

Offer’d  the  summe  down  three  times  told. 
To  have  his  friend’s  life  spared. 

’T  would  not  be  took,  but  strait  steps  in 
One  in  Doctor’s  apparel, 

Who,  though  but  young,  doth  now  begin 
Thus  to  decide  the  quarrel. 

11.  Jew,  we  do  grant  that  by  the  law, 

A  pound  of  flesh  your  due  is, 

But  if  one  drop  of  blood  you  draw, 

We’l  show  you  what  a  Jew  is : 

Take  but  a  pound,  as  ’twas  agreed, 

Be  sure  you  cut  no  further, 

And  cut  no  less,  lest  for  the  deed 
You  be  arraign’d  for  murther. 

12.  The  Jew  inrag’d  doth  tear  the  bond, 

And  dares  not  do  the  slaughter. 

He  quits  the  Court,  and  then  ’twas  found 
The  Doctor  proves  his  daughter, 

Who  for  the  love  she  long  time  bore, 
From  a  true  heart  derived, 

To  be  his  wife,  and  save  his  life, 

This  subtle  slight  contrived. 

13.  The  Court  consent  and  they  are  wed ; 

For  hatching  of  this  slaughter 
The  Jew’s  estate  is  forfeited, 

And  given  to  his  daughter. 

She  is  baptiz’d  in  Christendome, 

The  Jew  cryes  out  he’s  undone ; 

I  wish  such  Jews  may  never  come 
To  England,  nor  to  London. 


MUSIC 

All  that  glisters  is  not  gold,  <5 r>c. 

Act  II,  Scene  vii,  Lines  67-75. 

Alfred  Roffe  ( Handbook  of  Shakespeare  Music ,  London,  1878,  p.  45):  A  duet 
taken  from  this  scroll  was  composed  by  Mr  Charles  Horn,  and  sung  in  the  Merry  Wives 
when  that  play  was  musically  performed  many  years  ago. 

Tell  me  where  is  fancy  bred,  <5 re. 

Act  III,  Scene  ii,  Lines  69-78. 

Roffe  :  Besides  the  well-known  setting  of  this  song,  in  the  duet  form,  by  S/R  John 
Stevenson,  it  has  at  least  four  other  settings.  The  earliest  I  have  as  yet  become  aware 
of  is  a  solo  by  Dr  Arne,  which  was  sung  in  Twelfth  Night  by  the  celebrated  Mrs 
Clive.  I  am  informed  that  the  play  was  revived  at  Drury  Lane  Theatre,  on  January 
17,  1741,  when  Olivia  was  personated  by  Mrs  Clive.  Dr  Arne’s  setting  of  this  song 
for  Olivia  is  in  the  key  of  D  minor,  and  is  elegant  and  pensive  in  its  character.  It  is 
reprinted  in  Mrs  Caulfield’s  collection,  and  only  there,  that  I  am  aware  of.  The  bur¬ 
den,  ‘  Let  us  all  ring  fancy’s  knell,’  has  here  been  omitted  by  the  Doctor ;  it  could  not 
have  been  felt  to  be  in  any  sort  of  harmony  with  such  a  person  as  the  love-lorn  lady 
of  Twelfth  Night. 

Another  of  the  settings  is  by  Mr  R.  J.  S.  Stevens ,  and  is  for  the  comparatively  very 


464 


APPENDIX 


unusual  combination  of  three  sopranos  and  a  tenor.  The  composition  is  decidedly  out 
of  the  strict  glee  category,  inasmuch  as  it  possesses  an  instrumental  bass.  In  the  sec¬ 
ond  movement  the  effect  of  the  ‘knell  ’  is  assigned  to  this  instrumental  bass,  so  that  Mr 
Stevens’s  work,  in  this  case,  is  rather  to  be  considered  as  an  accompanied  quartet  than 
as  a  glee.  Mr  William  Linley  has  set  these  words  as  a  dialogue  duet  for  first  and 
second  attendant,  with  a  chorus  in  three  parts  for  sopranos  and  base.  Then  there  is  a 
setting  by  Mr  John  Hatton,  concerning  which  it  may  interest  amateur  ladies  to  be  told 
that  it  was  sung  by  Miss  Poole,  with  a  chorus  of  fe7nale  voices  only,  in  The  Merchant 
of  Venice.  The  composition  is  in  two  movements,  the  first  an  andante  con  ?noto  up  ta 
the  word  ‘  reply.’  *  Let  us  all  ring  fancy’s  knell  ’  forms  an  allegro  movement.  The 
chorus  is  written  in  three  parts,  for  soprano,  mezzo-soprano,  and  contralto  voices.  The 
whole  together  would,  as  I  conceive,  form  a  very  pleasing  addition  to  the  somewhat 
limited  repertory  of  ladies’  music. 

The  New  Shakspere  Society  ( List  of  Songs,  &c.,  Series  VIII,  Miscellanies,  No 
3,  p.  28)  adds  the  following : — 

Rev.  L.  Richmond,  about  1810  or  1820.  Round. 

M.  Bartholomew  (Mrs  Mounsey),  Part  Song.  Soprano,  Alto,  Tenor,  Bass. 
Novello. 

G.  A.  Macfarren,  1869.  Part  Song.  S.,  A.,  T.,  B.  Novello. 

B.  Luetzen,  1877.  Duettino.  Brighton. 

C.  Pinsuti,  about  18S0.  Part  Song.  A.,  T.,  T.,  B.  Novello. 

C.  Pinsuti.  The  same  arranged  for  S.,  C.,  T.,  B. 

J.  G.  Calcott,  1883.  Part  Song.  S.,  S.,  C.  Novello. 

In  such  a  night  as  this,  &*c. 

Act  V,  Scene  i,  Lines  2-29. 

New  Shakspere  Society  : — 

Sir  A.  S.  Sullivan,  1865.  Duet  for  Soprano  and  Tenor,  introduced  in  the  Cantata 
of  Kenilworth. 

How  sweet  the  moonlight  sleeps  upon  this  bank,  dvc. 

Act  I,  Scene  v,  Lines  63-77. 

Roffe  (p.  47) :  There  have  been  at  least  six  pieces  of  music  connected  with  these 
parts  of  Lorenzo’s  beautiful  address  to  Jessica.  One  of  these  is  a  setting  for  three 
voices,  with  a  distinct  pianoforte  accompaniment,  constituting  it  rather  a  trio  than  a  glee. 
It  is  the  composition  of  Mr  M.  P.  King.  A  second  setting,  in  the  form  of  a  little  duet 
for  soprano  voices,  was  by  Mr  Charles  Dignum.  This  duet  is  to  be  found  in  a  vol¬ 
ume  of  Mr  Dignum’s  miscellaneous  vocal  compositions,  the  date  about  1800  (?).  Both 
these  settings  are  confined  to  the  four  lines  63-66.  There  is  also  a  pleasing  duet  to 
these  lines,  set  by  Mr  Thomas  Hutchinson,  in  or  about  1807.  It  is  written  for  a 
soprano  and  a  tenor. 

Mr  John  Percy  (the  composer  of  *  Wapping  Old  Stairs’)  has  set  these  words  in  the 
solo  form.  Mr  Percy’s  composition,  if  without  any  very  marked  character,  has  a  cer¬ 
tain  degree  of  elegance,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  see  the  expediency  of  some  peculiar  deal¬ 
ings  with  the  words.  For  instance,  stopping  at  the  first  two  lines  and  a  half,  *  How 
sweet  the  moonlight  sleeps  upon  this  bank  !  Here  will  we  sit,  and  let  the  sounds  of 
music  Creep  in  our  ears,’  the  composer  proceeds  with  the  following  lines  from  Twelfth 
Night  ( with  alterations ) : — ‘  Oh !  it  comes  o’er  me  like  the  gentle  south,  That  o’er  the 
violet  breathes,  and  charms  the  soul.’  After  this  the  other  line  and  a  half  of  Loren- 


MUSIC  465 

zo’s  speech  are  admitted,  with  two  additional  syllables,  thus : — '  Soft  stillness  and  the 
night  Do  well  become  the  touches  of  sweet  harmony.’ 

Again,  not  many  years  ago,  appeared  a  setting  from  Lorenzo’s  speech  by  Miss  E 
Naylor,  as  an  accompanied  duet.  This  composition  has  two  movements,  the  first  clos¬ 
ing  at  the  words  ‘  Become  the  touches  of  sweet  harmony,’  while  the  second  is  an  alle¬ 
gro >,  written  to  the  last  three  lines  of  Lorenzo’s  same  speech,  specially  addressed  to 
the  musicians  when  they  enter — *  Come,  ho,  and  wake  Diana,’  &c. 

Finally,  in  1866,  in  the  notice  of  a  performance  by  Mr  Henry  Leslie’s  choir,  we  are 
told  of  a  part-song,  composed  by  Mr  Leslie  himself,  to  Shakespeare’s  lines — ‘  How 
sweet  the  moonlight  sleeps  upon  this  bank !’  It  appears  that  the  choir  gained  an  encore 
in  this  part-song. 

New  Shakspere  Society  adds  the  following: — 

Sir  A.  S.  Sullivan ,  1865.  Recitative  for  Tenor  before  the  Duet  for  Soprano  and 
Tenor,  introduced  into  the  Cantata  of  Kenilworth. 

T.  Blanchard.  Song. 

J.  G.  Calcott,  1883.  Part  Song.  S.,  C.,  T.,  B.,  B.  First  sung  by  Leslie’s  choir, 
Feb.  2,  1883. 

J.  G.  Calcott,  1883.  The  same  arranged  as  a  Trio.  S.,  S.,  C. 

For  do  but  note  a  wild  and  wanton  herd,  &*c. 

Act  V,  Scene  i,  Lines  81-98. 

Roffe  :  There  is  a  song  on  these  words  composed  by  Mr  T.  Cooke,  and  sung  by 
Mr  Braham  in  the  operatized  Taming  of  the  Shrew.  The  opening  is  in  recitative,  and 
there  is  an  air  of  varied  movements.  The  close  is  made  upon  the  words — ‘  Let  no 
such  man  be  trusted.’ 

New  Shakspere  Society:  See  Geneste’s  English  Stage,  ix,  418. 

Miss  Helen  A.  Clarke  ( Shakespeariana ,  January,  1888,  p.  17) :  The  Merchant  of 
Venice  has  been  turned  into  an  Opera  by  a  modern  Italian,  Signor  Petrella,  and  is 
said  to  possess  merit.  This  play,  however,  as  far  back  as  1787,  fell  into  the  clutches 
of  one  of  the  insatiable  army  of  mediocre  German  composers,  J.  A.  Just,  and  was  per¬ 
formed  at  Amsterdam,  let  us  hope  for  the  first  and  last  time. 

[When  this  play  was  produced  in  Philadelphia  in  1878  with  extraordinary  mag¬ 
nificence,  under  the  management  of  W.  D.  Gemmill,  the  Song  in  Oxberry’s  Edition 
4  My  bliss  too  long  my  bride  denies,’  II,  vi,  30,  was  set  to  music  by  Mr  Simon  Hass - 
ijiR,  and  published  as  a  Serenade- Barcarole,  with  Solo  and  Chorus .] 

3° 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK,  &c. 

In  this  Edition  the  attempt  is  made,  to  give,  in  the  shape  of  Textual  Notes,  on  the 
same  page  with  the  Text,  all  the  Various  Readings  of  The  Tier  chant  of  Venice ,  from  the 
First  Quarto  to  the  latest  critical  Edition  of  the  play ;  then,  as  Commentary,  follow 
the  Notes  which  the  Editor  has  thought  worthy  of  insertion,  not  only  for  the  purpose 
of  elucidating  the  Text,  but  as  illustrations  of  the  history  of  Shakespearian  criticism. 
In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  discussions  of  subjects,  which  on  the  score  of  length 
could  not  be  conveniently  included  in  the  Commentary. 

The  List  of  Editions  Collated  in  the  Textual  Notes,  is  as  follows : 


The  First  Quarto  ( Roberts )  .  . 

The  Second  Quarto  ( Heyes .  Ash- 

bee’s  Facsimile) 

The  First  Folio  . 

The  Second  Folio 

The  Third  Quarto . 

The  Third  Folio  . 

The  Fourth  Folio  . 

Rowe  (First  Edition) . 

Rowe  (Second  Edition) . 

Pope  (First  Edition)  . 

Pope  (Second  Edition)  .  . 

Theobald  (First  Edition) 

Theobald  (Second  Edition)  .  . 

Hanmer . 

Warburton  . 

Johnson . 

Capell  . 

Johnson  and  Steevens . 

Johnson  and  Steevens . 

Johnson  and  Steevens . 

Malone . 

Steevens  . 

Rann  . 

Reed’s  Steevens  . 

Eccles . 

Reed’s  Steevens  . 

Boswell’s  Malone . 

Knight . 

Collier  (First  Edition) .  . 

Halliwell  (Folio  Edition) 

Singer  (Second  Edition) 

Dyce  (First  Edition) . 

Collier  (Second  Edition) 

466 


[Qx] . 

1600 

[QJ . 

1600 

py . 

1623 

[FJ . 

1632 

[Q3] . 

1637 

[*3] . 

1664 

[FJ . 

1685 

[Rowe  i] 

1709 

[Rowe  ii] 

1714 

[Pope  i] 

1723 

[Pope  ii] 

1728 

[Theob.  i]  .  . 

1733 

[Theob.  ii]  .  . 

1740 

[Han.] 

1744 

[Warb.] 

1747 

[Johns.] 

1765 

[Cap.] 

..  (?) 

1766 

[Steev.  ’73]  .  . 

1773 

[Steev.  ’78]  .  . 

1778 

[Steev.  ’85]  .  . 

1785 

[Mai.] 

1790 

[Steev.] 

1793 

[Rann] 

..  (?) 

1794 

[Var.  ’03]  .  .  .  . 

1803 

[Ec.] . 

1805 

[Var. ’13]  .. 

1813 

[Var.]  .  .  .  . 

1821 

[Knt]  .  .  .  . 

1841 

[Coll,  i] 

1842 

[Hal.] 

•  •  *  • 

1856 

[Sing,  ii]  .  . 

1S56 

[Dyce  i] 

1857 

[Coll,  ii] 

1858 

PLAN 

OH 

THE  WORK 

467 

Staunton  . 

#  . 

[Sta.]  . 

1858 

R.  Grant  White  (First  Edition) 

•  • 

[Wh.  i]  . 

1861 

Cambridge  (Clark  and  Wright) 

•  • 

[Cam.] 

1863 

Globe  (Clark  and  Wright)  .  . 

•  • 

[do.]  . 

1864 

Keightley  . 

•  • 

[Ktly]  . 

1864 

Charles  and  Mary  Cowden-Clarke 

[Clarke]  . 

(?) 

1864 

Dyce  (Second  Edition)  .  . 

•  • 

[Dyce  ii] . 

1866 

Clarendon  (Clark  and  Wright) 

•  • 

[Cla.]  . 

1869 

Delius  (Third  Edition) .  . 

[Del.]  . 

1872 

Dyce  (Third  Edition)  .  . 

[Dyce  iii] . 

00 

•— i 

Collier  (Third  Edition) 

•  • 

[Coll,  iii] . 

1877 

Hudson . 

[Huds.]  . 

1879 

Rolfe . 

[Rife]  . 

1883 

R.  Grant  White  (Second  Edition) 

•  . 

[Wh.  ii]  . 

1883 

In  the  Textual  Notes  the  symbol  Ff  indicates  the  agreement  of  the  Second, 
Third,  and  Fourth  Folios.  The  agreement  of  the  three  Quartos  is  indicated  by  Qq. 

The  omission  of  the  apostrophe  in  the  Second  Folio,  a  peculiarity  of  that  edition,  is 
not  generally  noted. 

The  sign  +  indicates  the  agreement  of  Rowe,  Pope,  Theobald,  Hanmer,  War- 
burton,  and  Johnson. 

When  Warburton  precedes  Hanmer  in  the  Textual  Notes,  it  indicates  that  Han- 
MFR  has  adopted  a  suggestion  of  Warburton’s. 

The  words  et  cet.  after  any  reading  indicate  that  it  is  the  reading  of  all  other  editions. 

The  words  et  seq.  indicate  the  agreement  of  all  subsequent  editions. 

The  abbreviation  (suds.)  indicates  that  the  reading  is  substantially  given,  and  that 
immaterial  variations  in  spelling,  punctuation,  or  stage  directions  are  disregarded. 

Coll,  (ms)  refers  to  Collier’s  annotated  Second  Folio. 

An  Emendation  or  Conjecture  which  is  given  in  the  Commentary  is  not  repeated  in 
the  Textual  Notes;  nor  is  conj.  added  to  any  name  in  the  Textual  Notes  unless  it  hap¬ 
pens  to  be  that  of  an  editor,  in  which  case  its  omission  would  be  misleading. 

The  colon  is  used  as  equivalent  to  ‘  namely.’ 

All  citations  of  Acts,  Scenes,  and  Lines  in  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Macbeth,  Hamlet,  Lear, 
and  Othello  refer  to  this  edition  of  those  plays ;  in  citations  from  other  plays  the  Globe 
Edition  is  followed. 

I  have  not  called  attention  to  every  misprint  in  the  Folio.  The  Textual  Notes  will 
show,  if  need  be,  that  they  are  misprints  by  the  agreement  of  all  the  Editors  in  their 
correction. 

Nor  is  notice  taken  of  the  first  Editor  who  adopted  the  modern  spelling,  or  who  sub¬ 
stituted  commas  for  parentheses,  or  changed  ?  to  ! . 

Otherwise,  even  insignificant  variations  in  spelling  and  punctuation  in  the  Quartos 
and  Folios  are  recorded,  that  every  aid  may  be  supplied  not  alone  for  comparing  the 
Texts  in  general,  but  for  deciding  from  which  text  the  Folio  was  printed. 

Hitherto,  before  going  to  press,  I  have  verified  the  collation,  in  the  Textual  Notes, 
of  all  the  Editions.  In  the  present  volume  this  verification  has  been  restricted  to  the 
collation  of  the  Quartos  and  Folios. 

Again  be  it  urged  in  palliation  of  the  obtrusive  First  Person  Singular,  that  the  mon¬ 
archical  ‘  we  ’  implies  the  semblance  of  an  authority  which  it  is  the  farthest  removed 


468 


APPE-NDIX 


from  the  Editors  wish,  to  claim ;  moreover,  the  impression  in  him  is  ineradicable,  thai 
the  Editorial  ‘we’  when  it  stands  for  only  one  wee  editor  smacks  ineffaceably  of  the 
Three  Tailors  of  Tooley  Street.  As  long  as  the  notes  of  other  editors  are  given  on  the 
same  page  with  his,  the  greater  glory  will  dim  the  less,  and  his  inland  brook  will  be 
lost  in  the  main  of  waters. 

I  cannot  but  think  that  some  of  the  most  valuable  notes  in  the  foregoing  pages  are 
to  be  found  under  the  name  of  Allen.  They  are  the  marginalia  of  the  late  Professor 
George  Allen,  from  whose  daughters  I  lately  received  several  plays  thus  annotated, - 
a  precious  gift.  It  scarcely  need  be  added  that  they  were  written  with  no  view  to  publi¬ 
cation,  but  are,  what  their  fragmentary  style  reveals,  the  jottings,  for  his  own  use  merely, 
of  a  keen  critic,  accustomed  by  a  life-long  study  of  Greek  to  the  close  analysis  of 
thought  and  language.  How  much  these  brief  notes  have  lost  through  the  lack  of 
their  authors  revision  cannot  but  be  sadly  apparent  to  all  who  recall  the  wide  range 
of  Professor  Allen’s  learning. 

Again  for  this  Play,  as  for  Othello,  Mr  Edwin  Booth  kindly  furnished  me  with  a 
Prompt-book,  wherein  he  had  noted  his  interpretations;  they  are  to  be  found  duly 
recorded  in  the  Commentary. 

A  work  in  six  volumes,  called  Discoveries  in  Hieroglyphics,  &c.  by  Robert  Dever 
ell  was  published  in  London  in  1813,  and  again,  a  second  edition  in  1816.  In  this 
work  Hamlet ,  Lear,  Othello,  and  the  present  play  are  reprinted  with  explanatory  notes 
and  wood-cuts.  But,  as  was  mentioned  in  Othello,  the  interpretations  are  the  witless, 
almost  incoherent,  ravings  of  a  pure  lunatic ;  to  have  cited  them  only  to  raise  a  laugh, 
and  they  could  be  cited  for  no  other  purpose,  would  have  been  simply  heartless. 

The  List  of  Books,  from  which  citations  have  been  made  at  first  hand,  is  here 
given,  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  setting  them  forth  in  chronological  order,  and  as  a 
means  of  identification.  To  save  space  in  the  Commentary  the  volumes  are  generally 
cited  with  extreme  brevity.  It  may  be  added  that  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the 
List  represents  all  the  volumes  that  have  been  fruitlessly  examined  for  stray  notes  of 
value ;  were  all  included  the  List  would  be  twice,  if  not  thrice,  as  large.  A  list  of 
Dictionaries  is  added,  for  the  sake  of  convenient  chronological  reference : 


Ascham  :  Scholemaster  (Arber)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  157  j 

Gosson  :  Schole  of  Abuse  ( Arber) . 1579 

Silvayn:  The  Orator  . 1596 

Meres:  Palladis  Tamia  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1598 

Goulart:  Admirable  Histoires  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1620 

Holland:  Translation  of  Plinie' s  Natural  History  ..  ..  ..  1635 

Ascham:  Toxophilus  (Arber)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1640 

Howell  :  Instructions  for  Forraine  Travel  (Arber)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1642 

Lansdowne:  The  Jew  of  Venice  (2d  ed.,  1713)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1701 

Gildon  :  Remarks,  &c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1710 

Theobald:  Shakespeare  Restored  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1726 

Peck  :  New  Memoirs  of  Milton  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1 740 

Colley  Cibber:  Apology .  .1740 

UPTON  :  Observations,  &r>c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1746 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK 


469 


WHALLEY  :  Enquiry  into  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1748 

Grey  :  Critical,  Historical,  and  Explanatory  Notes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1754 

Warton  :  Observations  on  The  Fairy  Queen  (2d  ed.,  1762)  .  .  .  .  .  .  1754 

The  Connoisseur  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  1754 

Blackstone’s  Commentaries  . 1765 

Edwards:  Canons  of  Criticism  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1765 

Percy:  Reliques  of  Ancient  English  Poetry  ..  .  ..  ..  ..  1765 

Heath  :  Revisal  of  Shakespeare' s  Text  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1765 

KENRICK:  Review  of  Johnson  . 1765 

Tyrwhitt  :  Observations,  &c . 1766 

Farmer  :  Essay  on  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  .  .  1767 

Gentleman  :  Dramatic  Censor  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  177° 

Mrs  Griffith:  Morality  of  Shakespeare' s  Drama  ..  ..  ..  ..  1775 

Coryat’s  Crudities  (2d  ed.) . 1776 

Capell’s  Notes,  &c . 1779 

Farneworth  \  Leti' s  Life  of  Sixtus  V . 1779 

Le  Tourneur:  Shakespeare,  traduit  de  I’Anglois,  Paris  .  .  .  .  .  .  1781 

Warton  :  History  of  English  Poetry,  vol.  iii  .  .  .  .  .  1781 

Ritson:  Remarks,  &c . 1783 

Davies  :  Dramatic  Miscellanies  .  .  ..  ..  1784 

Monck  Mason:  Comments,  &>c . 1785 

Downes:  Roscius  Anglicanus  (ed.  Waldron;  ed.  Knight,  1887)  ..  ..  1789 

Essays  by  a  Society  of  Gentlemen,  Exeter .  .  .  1 796 

Du  BoiS :  The  Wreath  . 1 799 

Chalmers  :  Supplemental  Apology ..  ..  ..  . .  ..  ..  ..1799 

Kirkman  :  Memoirs  of  Mac klin  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1799 

E.  H.  Seymour:  Remarks,  &c . 1805 

Cooke:  Life  of  Macklin  (2d  ed.)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  .  .  1806 

Douce:  Illustrations  of  Shakespeare,  Sfc .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1807 

Pye  :  Comments  on  the  Commentators  .  1807 

Dunlap  :  Life  of  Cooke,  London . 1813 

R.  Deverell:  Discoveries  in  Hieroglyphics,  &*c.  (2d  ed.,  1816)  .  .  .  .  1813 

A.  W.  Schlegel:  Lectures,  trans.  by  Black,  London . 1815 

Coleridge:  Biographia  Literaria .  .  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..1817 

Drake:  Shakespeare  and  His  Times  ..  ..  .  ..  1817 

Hazlitt:  Characters  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays,  &*c.  ..  ..  ..  ..  1817 

Nichols:  Literary  Illustrations,  &-V.,  vol.  ii  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1817 

Oxberry  :  Acting  Edition . (circa)  1820 

Horn:  Shakespeare' s  Schauspiele  erlautert,  Leipzig  ..  ..  ..  ..  1823 

Skottowe  :  Life  of  Shakespeare . 1824 

Boaden:  Life  of  J.  P.  Kemble  . 1825 

Roaden  :  Memoirs  of  Mrs  Siddons  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  1827 

Harness:  Shakespeare's  Dramatic  Works  .  ..  183c 

Collier:  History  of  English  Dramatic  Poetry  (ed.  ii,  1879)  •  •  •  •  •  •  1831 

Galt:  Lives  of  the  Players  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1831 

Simrock:  Quellen  des  Shakespeare's,  Berlin  .  .  .  .  .  1831 

Mrs  Jameson  :  Characteristics  of  Women  .  .  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1832 

Farren  :  Essay  on  Shylock  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1833 

Collier  :  New  Facts,  &c.  .  .  .  .  . *835 


470 


APPENDIX 


Collier  :  New  Particulars ,  &*c . .  1836 

Gardiner  :  Music  of  Nature  (Boston  Reprint) . 1837 

Hallam  :  Bitroduction  to  the  Literature  of  Europe  (New  York,  1866)  .  .  1837 

Thomas  Campbell:  Dramatic  Works  of  Shakespeare . 1838 

C.  A.  Brown:  Shakespeare's  Autobiographical  Poems . 1838 

Collier  :  Further  Particulars ,  <5rc.  . 1 839 

Shakespeare  Society:  Revels  Book . 1842 

Lewin  :  Law  of  Trusts  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  •  •  1842 

Collier:  Shakespeare  Library  (Hazlitt’s  ed.,  1875) . 1843 

Dyce:  Remarks,  &c.  ,  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  •  •  .  .  -  .  1844 

Dunlop:  History  of  Fiction  (ed.  ii)  . 1845 

Shakespeare  Society  \  Henslowe's  Diary  . 1845 

Hunter  :  New  Illustrations,  &c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1 845 

Shakespeare  Society:  Memoirs  of  Actors  . 1846 

Verplanck  :  Shakespeare' s  Works,  New  York . 1847 

Halpin  :  Dramatic  Unities  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  •  .  1849 

Rev.  Sydney  Smith  :  Lectures  on  Moral  Philosophy  (New  York)  .  .  .  .  1850 

Marlowe:  Jew  of  Malta  (ed.  Dyce)  . 1850 

Collier  :  Notes  and  Emendations  .  .  . 1852 

Singer:  Shakespeare' s  Text  Vindicated  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1853 

Dyce:  Few  Notes,  &c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1853 

Hebler  :  Kaufmann  von  Venedig,  Bern  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1854 

Lamb:  Specimens  of  Dramatic  Poetry  (Bohn’s  ed.)  ..  ..  ..  ..  1854 

W.  S.  Walker:  Shakespeare' s  Versification  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1854 

R.  G.  White:  Shakespeare  Scholar  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1854 

Heine:  Sam?ntliche  Werke,  Philadelphia  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  1856 

Collier:  Seven  Lectures  of  Coleridge,  &c.  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  1856 

Bathurst:  Remarks  on  the  Differences  in  Shakespeare' s  Poetry ,  6°<r.  .  .  1857 

Haynes:  Outlines  of  Equity  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1858 

Charles  Kean:  Acting  Edition . 1858 

G.  L,  Craik  :  English  of  Shakespeare  (ed.  ii),  London  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1859 

Dyce:  Strictures,  &*c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1859 

Walker:  Critical  Examination  of  the  Text,  &°<r.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1859 

Lord  Campbell:  Shakespeare' s  Legal  Acquirements,  New  York  ..  ..  1859 

S.  Jervis:  Proposed  Emendations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  i860 

Dr  J.  C.  Bucknell:  Shakespeare' s  Medical  Knowledge  .  .  .  .  .  .  i860 

Anon  :  Alter  Ego.  Eine  Studie  zu  Shakespeare' s  Kaufmann,  Hamburg  .  .  1862 

F.  Kreyssig  :  Vorlesungen  iiber  Shakespeare,  Berlin  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1862 

S.  Bailey:  The  Received  Text  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1862 

C.  Cowden-Clarke  :  Shakespeare  Characters,  Cfc.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1863 

Gervinus:  Commentaries,  trans.  by  F.  E.  Bunnett  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1863 

W.  Bell:  Shakespeare's  Puck  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1864 

H.  Theo.  Roetscher  :  Charactergebilde . 1864 

A.  Cohn  :  Shakespeare  in  Gerjnany  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1864 

Bishop  Wordsworth  :  Shakespeare  and  the  Bible . 1864 

W.  R.  Arrowsmith  :  Shakespeare' s  Editors,  &c . 1865 

Dr  Doran  :  Their  Majesties  Servants  .  .  .  ,  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1865 

R.  Cartwright  :  New  Readings . 1866 

W.  W.  Skeat:  William  of  Palerne  (E.  E.  T.  Soc.)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1867 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK 


47i 


G.  C.  Lichtenberg  :  Vermischte  Schriften,  Gottingen . 1867 

THOS.  KE1GHTLEY :  Shakespeare  Expositor  . 1867 

Guizot  :  CEuvres  Computes  de  Shakespeare,  Paris  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1868 

H.  Giles  :  Human  Life  in  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1868 

T.  R.  Gould:  The  Tragedian  .  .  .  .  .  •  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1868 

W.  L.  Rushton  :  Shakespeare’s  Testamentary  Language  .  .  .  .  .  .  1869 

E.  MoNTfeGUT:  CEuvres  Completes  de  Shakespeare,  Paris  .  .  .  .  .  .  1869 

Ellis  :  Early  English  Pronunciation  (E.  E.  T.  Soc.)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1869 

F.  W.  Hawkins  :  Life  of  Edmund  Kean  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1869 

R.  Gen£e  :  Geschichte  der  Shakespeare' schen  Dramen,  Leipzig  .  ,  .  .  1870 

E.  A.  Abbott:  Shakespearian  Grammar .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1870 

P.  A.  Daniel:  Notes  and  Emendations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1870 

James  Gairdner:  The  Paston  Letters . 1872 

Fr.  V.  Hugo:  CEuvres  Completes  de  Shakespeare,  Paris  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1872 

Rev.  John  Hunter  :  Merchant  of  Venice  . 1872 

Ruskin:  Munera  Pulveris,  New  York  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1872 

W.  Koenig:  Ueber  Shakespeare,  Leipzig  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1873 

Karl  Elze:  Essays,  trans.  by  Miss  Schmitz,  London  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1874 

Minto:  Characteristics  of  English  Poets  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1874 

R.  Proelss  :  Kaufmann  von  Venedig,  Leipzig  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1875 

Earl  of  Southesk:  Saskatchewan  . 1875 

A.  W.  WARD:  History  of  English  Dramatic  Poetry  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  1875 

G.  H.  Lewes  :  On  Actors  and  the  Art  of  Acting .  .  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1875 

J.  Weiss  :  Wit,  Humour,  and  Shakespeare,  Boston  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1876 

H.  Ulrici:  Shakespeare' s  Dramatic  Art,  trans.  by  Miss  Schmitz  .  .  .  .  1876 

F.  G.  Fleay  :  Shakespeare  Manual  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1876 

G.  FREYTAG:  Technik  des  Dramas  (ed.  iii),  Leipzig . 1876 

W.  Oechelhauser  :  Der  Kaufmann  von  Venedig,  Weimar . 1877 

D.  G.  Snider:  System  of  Shakespeare' s  Dramas,  St  Louis  .  .  .  .  .  .  1877 

R.  Morris  :  Legends  of  the  Holy  Rood  (E.  E.  T.  Soc.) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1878 

A.  Roffe:  Handbook  of  Shakespeare  Music,  London  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1878 

W.  HERTZBERG:  Libell  of  Englishe  Policie  . 1878 

Edwin  Booth  :  Prompt-Book  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice  .  .  .  .  .  .  1878 

H.  Fritsche:  Der  Kaufmann  von  Venedig,  erklart,  Berlin  .  .  .  .  .  .  1878 

S.  J.  Herrtage:  Gcsta  Romanorum  (E.  E.  T.  Soc.)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1879 

C.  M.  INGLEBY:  Centurie  of  Prayse  . 1879 

The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  The  Shakespeare  Key . 1879 

J.  G.  Herr  :  Scattered  Notes,  &c.,  Philadelphia  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1879 

J.  E.  Murdoch  :  The  Stage,  Philadelphia  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1880 

A.  C.  SWINBURNE:  A  Study  of  Shakespeare  . 1880 

M.  D.  Conway:  The  Wandering  Jew . 1881 

A.  Pietscher:  Jurist  und  Dichter,  Dessau  . 1881 

C.  K.  Salaman  :  Jews  as  they  Are,  London  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1882 

F.  F.  Heard:  Shakespeare  as  a  Lawyer,  Boston.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1883 

Geo.  Macdonald  :  The  Lmagination,  Boston . 1883 

Jos.  Kohler:  Shakespeare  vor  dem  Forum  der  Jurisprudent,  Wurzburg  .  .  1883 
J.  Meissner  :  Die  Englische  Commoedianten,  &■ V.,  Wien  .  .  .  .  .  .  1884 

C.  K.  Davis  :  Law  in  Shakespeare,  St  Paul  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1884 

T.  Parry  :  Merchant  of  Venice,  Longmans’  Series  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  1884 


472 


APPENDIX 


J.  W.  Hales  :  Notes  and  Essays  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1884 

D.  P.  Cassel:  Litteratur  nnd  Symbolik,  Leipzig  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1884 

IIalliwell-Piiillipps  :  Outlines  of  the  Life  of  Shakespeare  (ed.  v)  . .  .  .  1885 

Lady  Martin:  Shakespeare's  Female  Characters  ..  ..  ..  ..  1885 

H.  Heinemann:  Shylock  und  Nathan,  Frankfurt,  A.  M.  . 1886 

R.  G.  White:  Studies  in  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1886 

J.  Payn  :  Boccaccio  (Villon  Society)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1886 

J.  Muirhead  :  Hist.  Introd.  to  the  Private  Law  of  Rome,  Edinburgh  .  .  ,  1886 

F.  G.  Fleay:  Life  and  Works  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1886 

R.  v.  Ihering  :  Der  Kampf  urn's  Recht  (ed.  viii),  Wien  .  .  .  .  .  ,  1886 

Prof.  H.  Corson  :  Privately  Printed  Notes  . n.  d. 

R.  S.  Davies  :  Act  IV,  Scene  i  (Brown’s  Series),  Hull . n.  d. 

F.  J.  Furnivall:  Forewords  to  Q,  <Sr*  to  Q3  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  n.  d. 

J.  D.  Morell  :  Merchant  of  Venice,  London  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  n.  d. 

Rev.  D.  Morris  :  Merchant  of  Venice  (Collins’  Eng.  Classics) . n.  d. 

W.  C.  Russell:  Representative  Actors . n.  d 


DICTIONARIES 

Cooper’s  Latin  Dictionary . *573 

Florio:  His firste  Fruites  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1578 

Baret’s  Alvearie . 1580 

Fi.orio’s  Worlde  of  Wordes . 1598 

Cotgrave:  Dictionarie  of  the  French  and  English  Tongues  .  .  .  .  .  .  1611 

Minsheu:  Guide  Into  Tongues . 1617 

Bullokar  :  English  Expositor  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  1621 

MlNSHEU’s  Spanish  Dictionary  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  1623 

Nares  :  Glossary  (ed.  Halliwell  and  Wright,  1867)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  1822 

Richardson’s  Dictionary . 1838 

IIalliwell’s  Archaic  Dictionary  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  1847 

Eastwood  and  Wright:  Bible  Word  Book  . 1866 

Wedgwood:  Dictionary  of  English  Etymology  (2d  ed.)  ..  ..  ..  1872 

Schmidt:  Shakespeare  Lexicon  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1874 

Latham’s  Johnson . 1882 

Skeat:  Etymological  Dictionary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  1882 

Murray’s  New  English  Dictionary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1884 


Journals  : 

I  he  Academy 
The  Architect 
The  AthencEum 
Blackzvood's  Magazine 
Albany  Law  Journal 
Cornhill  Magazine 
Edinburgh  Review 
Erasers  Magazine 
Gentleman' s  Magazine 
Jewish  Advance 


Jahrbucher  der  deutschen  Shakespeare 
Gesellschaft 
Monthly  Chronicle 
New  Shakspere  Society 
Notes  and  Queries 
Overland  Monthly 
Shakespeariana 
Temple  Bar  / 

The  Theatre 
Young  Israel 


INDEX 


PAGE 

a-,  as  a  prefix . 27 

Absorption  of  -ed . 156 

Accoutered  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  178 

Actor,  An,  on  Shylock  .  .  .  .  433 

Address  =  to  prepare . 1 1 4 

Advice  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  236 

Advised  =  deliberate  •  ,  .  .  1 7,  59 

Affection  . 195 

Affections,  passions . 127 

Alabaster,  spelling  of  .  .  .  .  1 1 

Alas,  the  while  . 58 

Aleven  .  .  . .  .  .  .  .  76 

Anderson,  D.,  on  Shylock  .  .  .  .  434 

And  if . 234 

Angel,  a  coin . 1 05 

Anon,  defence  of  Shylock  .  .  .  .  404 

Anthonio’s  sadness .  2 

Appropriation . 25 

Approve  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  144 

Argosy,  derivation  of  .  .  .  .  3 

As  =  for  so .  19.42 

As  =  to  wit . 149 

Assume  . 117 

Attended,  used  absolutely  .  .  .  .  254 

Aweary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  21 

Bag-pipe  . 194 

Balance  . 216 

Barlaam  and  Josaphat  .  .  .  .  317 

Barrabas  . 220 

Bated  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  172 

Beholding  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  45 

Bellario,  original  of . 458 

Beshrew  . 100 

Beshrow  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  136 

Bible  used  by  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  42 

Black  Monday  . 89 

Blest . 60 

Boaden  on  Macklin . 375 

noccaccio  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  318 


Bond,  single  .  . 

•  • 

pa gw 

•  50 

Booth  on  Shylock 

•  • 

•  383 

Break  his  day 

•  • 

•  53 

Break  up 

•  • 

.  84 

Breed  of  barren  metal 

•  • 

.  48 

Brown  on  Shylock  .  . 

•  • 

.  428 

“  on  Portia 

•  • 

•  439 

“  on  Jessica 

•  • 

•  443 

“  on  Launcelot 

•  • 

.  445 

Burbadge,  Elegy  on  .  . 

•  • 

.  370 

But,  after  negative  adj. 

•  • 

.  154 

By,  after  to  mean 

•  • 

•  ns 

Campbell,  Lord,  on  Trial  Scene 

•  405 

Campbell,  T.,  Criticism 

.  422 

Caskets,  source  of  .  . 

•  314 

Cater-cousins .  . 

Ceremony 

C.  C.-Clarke  on  Hazlitt 

.  435 

“  on  Jessica 

.  182 

“  on  Gratiano 

•  445 

C.  C.-Clarke,  Mrs,  on  Portia’s  girlhood  442 

Charter 

•  193 

Cheer . 

.  167 

Cheer’st 

.  186 

Cherubins 

.  248 

Circumstance 

.  19 

Civility 

•  79 

Clear . 

.  n6 

Clive,  Mrs,  as  Portia  .  . 

•  384 

Close  in  it  .  .  .  . 

.  249 

Coach . . 

.  181 

Come  by 

.  22 

Commandement 

•  234 

Commodity  .  . 

.  172 

Complexion  .  . 

.  125 

Composition,  Date  of 

•  277 

Compremyzed 

•  43 

Conceit  =  conceive  .  . 

.  12 

Condition  =  temper  .  . 

•  32 

473 


INDEX 


PAGE 

PAGE 

Confound  . 

165 

Eanlings 

43 

Confusions 

65 

Eccles  on  Duration  of  Action 

•  • 

332 

Constant  . 

163 

-ed,  absorption  of 

156 

Contain  =  retain 

262 

Edinburgh  Review,  Criticism 

•  • 

423 

Continent 

152 

Egal . 

174 

Contrive 

225 

Elze,  Karl,  Criticism 

•  • 

455 

Cope  .  .  . 

232 

“  Shakespeare  and  Jonson. 

457 

Costume,  Shylock 

•  • 

386 

Elze,  Th.,  on  Dr  Bellario  .  . 

•  • 

458 

“  Anthonio,  Portia  .  . 

•  • 

387 

Enow  and  enough 

183,  191 

“  Civil  Doctor,  Nerrissa 

•  • 

388 

Equal  — exact 

52 

“  Jessica,  Doge 

•  • 

389 

Error . 

214 

“  Bassanio,  &c. 

•  • 

390 

Estate  —  state . 

i6r 

“  Gobbo,  &c. 

•  • 

39i 

Estates  . 

116 

Counterfeit . 

150 

Ethical  Dative 

43.  7i 

Countri-men  (spelling) 

•  • 

165 

Even  now  =  exactly  now 

•  • 

156 

Cover  . 

185 

Ewe  bleate,  &c. 

200 

Cover,  wearing  the  hat 

•  • 

1 16 

Excrement . 

144 

Cowen,  Shylock  v.  Anthonio 

. . 

406 

Eye  of  honour 

17 

Crisped  .  .  .  .  • 

•  • 

144 

Cursor  Mundi 

313 

Fall,  transitive 

44 

Cutler’s  poetry 

259 

False  hair . 

144 

Fancy  . 

142 

Danger 

210 

Fameworth,  Source  of  Plot 

•  • 

295 

Daniel  on  Duration  of  Action 

•  • 

337 

Fear —  frighten 

56 

Dare . 

85 

Fear,  omission  of  for 

137, 

182 

Date  of  Composition 

•  • 

277 

Fearful,  active  and  passive  .  . 

•  • 

54 

Davis,  C.  K.,  on  the  Bond  .  . 

•  • 

221 

Fia  — via 

63 

Davis,  Israel,  on  Shylock  .  . 

•  • 

434 

Find  forth . 

17 

Day,  break  his 

53 

Fleece  =  fleets,  a  pun 

•  • 

162 

Decline  of  Dramatic  Poetry 

•  • 

394 

Flight  .  . 

17 

Desire,  pronounced  dissoluti 

•  • 

39 

Folios,  The . 

274 

Discovery  . 

98 

Fond . 

170 

Discretion 

185 

Fool,  an  adj . 

"5 

Disgrace 

126 

Formerly  . 

226 

Dish  of  doves 

72 

Four  strangers 

•  • 

31 

Distance  from  Belmont  to  Venice 

.  • 

181 

Fretted  . 

•  • 

201 

Dogget  as  Shylock  .  . 

370 

Frey  tag  on  Repetition 

•  • 

”3 

Doit . 

5o 

Fulsome 

44 

Double  —  duplicity  .  . 

265 

Furnivall  on  Shylock 

•  • 

433 

Double  negative 

60 

Do  withal  .  .  .  .  .  . 

179 

Gaberdine 

116 

Dowton  as  Shylock  .  . 

38i 

Gardiner  on  Kean’s  voice  .  . 

•  • 

380 

Doyle  on  the  Trial  Scene  .  . 

•  • 

417 

Gear . 

14,  77 

Dram  .  . 

190 

Genitive  of  apposition  (melancholy 

Draw  (the  curtains)  .  . 

•  ■ 

”3 

bait) 

•  • 

Ducat,  the  value  of  .  . 

33 

Genitive  of  apposition  (childhood 

Dulcet  sounds 

•  • 

139 

proof )  . 

•  • 

18 

Duration  of  Action  .  . 

332 

Genowa 

•  • 

129 

INDEX 


475 


Gentle  =  gentile,  a  pun 

PAGE 

IOO 

Gemutus 

288 

Gervinus,  Criticism  .  . 

448 

Gesta  Romanorum  .  . 

305 

Gildon,  Criticism 

421 

Giles  on  Shylock 

429 

“  on  Jessica 

443 

Ginger 

124 

Gobbo,  origin  of  name 

xi 

Gondilo 

109 

Goodwins,  The 

123 

Gossips 

124 

Gosson,  Schole  of  Abuse 

319 

Go  to . 

76 

Gower’s  Confessio  Amantis 

317 

Grammercie  .  . 

71 

Gratify 

232 

Gree . 

70 

Guard  =  embroider  .  . 

75 

Guiled .  . 

145 

Hales  on  Fourth  Qto 

273 

“  on  Wily  Beguiled 

281 

“  on  Shylock 

431 

Hallam,  Criticism 

421 

Hangman 

205 

Hats  worn  at  dinner .  . 

79 

Having,  a  monosyllable 

151 

Hawkins,  Life  of  Kean 

377 

“  on  Dr  Lopez 

395 

“  on  Shylock 

432 

Haynes  on  the  Bond 

221 

Hazlitt  on  Shylock  .  . 

427 

“  on  Portia 

435 

Hear  thee 

78 

Heavens,  for  the 

63 

Tlebler  quotes  Luther 

453 

I  feels,  with  thy 

62 

Heine,  Criticism 

449 

Henslowe’s  Diary 

278 

Heyes’s  Stationers’  Entry 

272 

High-day 

122 

Hip,  on  the  .  . 

38 

His,  as  an  antecedent 

57 

Hood,  by  my  .  . 

IOO 

Home’s  Dramatic  Reverie 

400 

How  =  as 

152 

Hudson,  Criticism 

426 

Hudson  on  Shylock  .  . 

PAGE 

431 

“  on  Portia 

•  • 

440 

“  on  Jessica  ,  . 

•  • 

444 

Humility 

•  • 

127 

Hunter,  John,  on  Shylock  .  . 

•  • 

43° 

“  on  Portia 

•  . 

440 

“  on  Anthonio  .  . 

•  v 

444 

Husbandry . 

175 

Hyrcanian . 

•  • 

104 

i  dropped  in  -ity 

173 

Ich  =  eke  . 

137 

Ihering  on  the  Trial  Scene  .  . 

408 

Impeach 

165 

In  =  into 

5 

In,  with  verbs  of  motion 

hi 

Indian  beauty 

146 

Inexecrable  .  . 

206 

Infinitive  after  /  had  rather 

26 

Infinitive  and  pres.  part,  confused 

7i 

In  lieu  . 

266 

Insculpt 

105 

Instantly  =  presently  .  . 

219 

Intergatories  .  . 

268 

Intermission  .  . 

158 

Internal  proofs  of  Date 

280 

Irving  as  Shylock 

381 

Issuing,  used  actively 

164 

Iwis 

119 

Jacks  .  . 

180 

James’s  Act  to  restrain  Abuses 

3i 

Jameson,  Mrs,  on  Portia 

436 

“  on  Nerrissa  .  . 

442 

Jason  .  . 

162 

Jaundice 

11 

Jessica,  origin  of  name 

xi 

Jessica,  source  of  story  of  .  . 

319 

Jewish  accent  in  Shylock  .  . 

385 

Jew  of  Malta 

322 

Jew’s  eye  . 

90 

Jews’  orange-tawny  bonnets  .  . 

38 

Jobbe  =  Gobbo 

62 

Johnson,  Dr,  Criticism 

421 

Jordan’s  Ballad 

461 

Jud  von  Venedig 

324 

Just  pound 

223 

INDEX 


476 


PAGE 

Kean  .  .  .  •  .  .  .  .  .  .  375 

Kemble,  Mrs,  on  Portia  .  .  .  .  440 

Kept . 170 

Key  rhyming  with  may  .  .  .  .  106 

Knapt . 124 

Kohler  on  the  Trial  Scene  .  .  .  .  413 

Kreyssig,  Criticism . 453 


Lamb,  Charles,  on  Marlowe’s  Jew .  .  322 


Lansdowne’s  Version  .  .  .  .  346 

Launcelot  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  62 

Law  in  Trial  Scene . 403 

Leave  =  give  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  •  259 

Leti,  Gregorio  . 295 

Liberal  . 78 

Lichtenberg  on  Macklin  .  .  .  .  374 

Lieu  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  266 

Likely  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  121 

Lineaments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  174 

Line  of  life . 76 

Livings  . 153 

Lloyd  on  Shylock . 429 

“  on  Portia  . 439 

“  on  Bassanio . 444 

Loose  =  lose  ..  ..  ..  10,191 

Lopez,  Dr  .  .  .  .  .  .  206,  395 

Lover . 173 

Luther  on  Jews  . 453 

Macdonald  on  Shylock  .  .  .  .  435 

Macklin  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  371 

Mahabharata  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  309 

Magnificoes . 165 

Mark,  save  the ;  origin  of  phrase  .  .  64 

Marlowe’s  Jew  .  .  .  .  .  .  322 

Marriage,  a  trisyllable  .  .  .  .  1 14 

Marshall  on  Shylock  .  .  .  .  434 


Martin,  Theo.,  on  Shylock  .  .  .  .  433 

Martin,  Lady,  on  Portia  .  .  .  .  441 

Martlet  . 115 

Masking  in  Venice  .  .  . .  .  .  83 

Massuccio  di  Salerno  .  .  .  .  319 

Master  of  passion . 195 

May  =>  can  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  33 

Mean  by,  an  idiom  .  .  .  .  .  .  115 

Mean  it  . 186 

Medea  242 

Meer . 163 


PAGE 

Melancholy  bait  .  .  .  .  . .  14 

Meres,  Palladis  Tamia  ,  .  .  .  277 

Me  thoughts  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  41 

Mexico  . 164 

Mind  of  love  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  X 1 1 

Misconstered  .  ,  .  .  .  .  .  .  78 

Moath,  a  rhyme  . 120 

Modesty  =  moderation  .  .  78,  263 

Monastery  .  .  175 

Mortifying  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  II 

Much  much . 140 

Muirhead  on  the  Law  of  XII  Tables  416 

Music . 463 

Music  in  his  soul  . 251 

Must  =  the  future . 218 

Mutual  . 251 

My  lord,  used  jocosely  .  .  .  .  121 

Narrow  seas,  the  . 123 

Naughty  .  169,  254 

Nazarite  . 36 

Needs .  85,  174 

Neither  =  monosyllable  .  .  .  .  2 1 

Nerrissa,  spelling  of  .  .  .  .  .  .  xi 

Nice . 57 

Nominated  .  .  .  •  .  .  .  .  51 

Northern  Lord,  The  ballad  of  the  .  .  293 

Note . 152 

Ocean,  a  trisyllable .  3 

Oechelhauser  on  the  Acting  .  .  460 

O’erstare  . 58 

Of  =  for  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  90 

Of  =  resulting  from  .  .  .  .  .  .  21 

Of,  with  verbs  of  fulness  .  .  .  .  85 

Old,  augmentative  .  .  .  .  IX,  236 

Omission  of  a  line  in  Q,  .  .  .  .  101 

Onely,  spelling  of . 156 

Or. ..or  . 19 

Oracle,  an . 13 

Orange-tawny  bonnets  .  .  38,  46 

Orelook  .  .  /  .  .  .  .  .  .  136 

Ostent  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  79 

Other  =  others  .  .  .  .  .  .  9 

Other  substituted  for  Scottish  .  .  28 

Outcropping  of  Old  Play  .  .  31,  321 

Overland  Monthly  .  .  . .  .  .  417 


INDEX 


PAGE 

PAGE 

Padua,  English  Students  at  .  . 

•  • 

459 

Quaint  . 

•  • 

179 

Pain . 

•  • 

78 

Quaintly  . 

•  • 

84 

Pale . 

148 

Qualify 

•  • 

190 

Paleness  . 

•  • 

148 

Quarto,  First . 

,  a 

271 

Parallelisms  .  . 

•  • 

211 

“  Second 

,  # 

272 

Pardon  . 

226, 

231 

Quartos,  Third  and  Fourth  .  . 

•  , 

273 

Part  =  depart . 

•  . 

108 

Question 

•  , 

200 

Passion 

•  • 

195 

Passions 

127 

Rack  .  . 

138 

Patch  .  . 

91 

Raine  or  rein . 

150 

Patines 

246 

Ready  . 

189 

Peace  how 

255 

Reason  —  talk . 

23. 

no 

Pecorone,  11  .  . 

•  • 

298 

Red  Cross,  the  badge  of  suffirance 

•  • 

46 

Peep . 

8 

Regreets  . 

121 

Peize . 

137 

Reinecke  as  Shylock  .  .  1 

•  • 

385 

Perhaps  I  will 

92 

Relative  omitted 

20 

Persian  MS  •  . 

307 

Remorse  — pity 

191 

Persuaded  with 

165 

Respect  . 

254 

Phillhorse  . 

70 

Respective . 

259 

Pietscher  on  the  Trial  Scene 

•  . 

411 

Rest,  set  up  my 

70 

Pig . 

194 

Rialto  .  . 

34 

Piled  — peeled 

43 

Ripe . 

40 

Pirates,  a  pun 

35 

Riveted,  a  dissyllable 

•  • 

261 

Plot,  Source  of 

287 

Robertes,  Stationers’  Entry  .  . 

•  • 

271 

Plural,  Northern  E.  E.  in  s  .  . 

53. 

136 

Round  hose  .  . 

28 

Poetry,  Cutler’s 

259 

Rowe’s  Criticism 

421 

Port . 

.  • 

16 

Royal  merchant 

162,  191 

Portia,  a  blonde 

X 

Ruin  and  chaff 

117 

Portia,  derivation  of  name  .  . 

•  . 

xi 

Posy  .  . 

259 

j,  final,  interpolated  .  . 

78,  1 16 

Poverty,  a  dissyllable 

•  • 

218 

Sabbath 

192 

Prayer 

125 

Sad . 

11 

Predicament . 

225 

Salanio,  Salarino 

•  • 

1 

Prefer . 

74 

Salerio,  a  new  character 

•  • 

159 

Presence 

140 

Sand-blind 

65 

Presently  =  immediately 

21, 

228 

Scape  .  .  . 

164 

Prest  .  . 

19 

Scarfed  . 

95 

Prevented . 

9 

Scenery  . 

392 

Prodigal 

126 

Schlegel,  Criticism  .  . 

•  • 

446 

Profanity,  3  Jac.  I,  c.  21 

•  • 

3i 

Scrubbed  . 

•  • 

260 

Proper  —  very  .  . 

28 

Scuse  . 

233 

Proximity,  substitution  through 

•  . 

137 

Scylla . 

182 

Publican 

37 

Seas,  the  narrow 

123 

Pun,  fleets  —  fleece  .  . 

162 

Seize . 

225 

“  gentle  =  gentile 

•  . 

192 

Self,  an  adj . 

•  • 

18 

“  on  heart . 

219 

Sensible 

121 

“  on  light . 

258 

Sentences  —  maxims  .  . 

22 

“  pirates  .  . 

35 

Set  up  my  rest 

70 

478 


INDEX 


PAGE 

PAGE 

Shall . 

208 

Termination  affecting  several  adjec- 

Shall  — may  .  . 

16 

tives 

60 

Shall  =  owe  .  . 

•  . 

86 

The,  omitted  .  . 

9 

Should 

98, 

IS*. 

164 

The,  preceding  a  verbal 

30 

Should,  Shakespeare’s  use  of 

29 

The  Text 

271 

Shrewd 

162 

This,  misprint  for  his 

166 

Shrine  =  image 

104 

Thou,  when  used 

24, 

176 

Shylock,  derivation  of 

ix 

Thought  =  anxiety 

7 

Shylock  v.  Anthonio .  . 

406 

Thy  and  the  confounded 

87 

Sibilla  .  . 

30 

Time  =  life 

16 

Silvayn’s  Orator 

31° 

To,  omitted  .  . 

53, 

104 

Single  bond  .  . 

So 

To  =  for,  about,  in,  &c. 

7 

Sixtus  V 

29S 

To-night 

88 

Skottowe  on  Shylock 

427 

Too  blame 

260 

Smack 

64 

Too  too 

98 

So...as  =  as...as 

32> 

169 

Torture 

138 

So  omitted  before  that 

180 

Touches 

246 

So  =  provided  that  .  . 

158 

Tranect 

177 

Sole  •  •  •  •  •  • 

204 

Translations  of  Italian  novels 

297 

Solemnized,  accent  .  . 

1 14 

Trassell 

27 

Some,  with  nouns  of  time 

85 

Troylus,  a  dissyllable 

240 

Something  =  somewhat 

16 

Tubal,  costume 

128 

Sometime  =  formerly .  . 

20 

“  origin  of  name 

X 

Sonties 

66 

Tucket 

257 

Soon  =  nightfall 

80 

Twenty  miles 

181 

Sophy  . 

58 

Twice  blest  .  . 

21 1 

Sort  =  a  lot 

3° 

Snider,  Criticism 

423 

Ulrici,  Criticism 

447 

Speak  fair 

218 

Unfurnished  .  . 

I5i 

Spedding  on  Jessica  .  . 

99 

Unpleasant’st .  . 

163 

“  on  Shylock 

434 

Unwearied 

166 

Spet . 

47 

Upon  .  . 

10 

Spirit,  a  monosyllable 

78,  253 

Usance 

38,  46 

Squandered  =  scattered 

35 

Used,  was 

126 

Stairs  of  sand  .  . 

143 

Statute  3  Jac.  I,  c.  21 

3i 

Vailing 

7 

Stephano 

243 

Vailing  an  Indian  beauty 

146 

Sterved 

207 

Varnished  faces 

89 

Still  =  constantly 

5,  17,  46 

Vaste  .  . 

104 

Strond,  pronunciation 

20 

Venice,  glory  of 

3 

Suited . 

185 

Verbal,  substantive  use  of 

174 

Sum  of  nothing 

153 

Very  — true 

161 

Superfluous  s  .  . 

203 

Via . 

63 

Supposition  .  . 

34 

Swan-like 

139 

Waft . 

241 

Ward  on  Marlowe’s  Jew 

323 

Table  =  the  palm 

75 

Waste . 

173 

Tawny  Moor  .  . 

55 

Wealth 

265 

INDEX  479 


PAGE 


Well  to  live . 67 

Whalley  on  Wily  Beguiled  .  .  ..  281 

What,  an  exclamation  .  .  .  .  87 

Where  =  whether  .  .  .  .  .  .  141 

Whiles  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  32 

Whither  =  whe’re  .  .  .  .  .  •  268 

Who,  antecedent  implied  .  .  .  .  13 

Who,  misprint  for  which  .  .  .  .  102 

Who  =  whom  . 97 

Whose  =  and  he  .  .  .  .  .  .  209 

Withal,  to  do  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  179 

Woffington,  Mrs,  as  Portia  .  .  .  .  384 

Wolf . 206 


pag  a 

Woolen  . 197 

Worship  =  worthship  .  .  .  .  40 

Wroath  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  120 

Wry-neck’t  fife  .  .  .  .  .  .  89 

Yet,  before  a  negative  .  .  .  .  12 1 

You  and  I  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  167 

You,  when  used  .  .  .  .  24,  176 

Younker  . 95 

Your,  dissyllable  .  .  .  .  .  .  136 

Yours,  monosyllable .  .  .  .  136 

You  were  =  monosyllable  ..  ..  IIO 


t 


PHILLIPS  ACADEMY 


3  1867 


00044  4385 


WiELLS  BINDERY 
ALTHAM,  MASS. 

MAR.  1954 


