M«S  COLLEGE  LRC 


3   1404  00  206  301    1 


1/ 


t 


4 


■^s 


(David  ©.oAAc^ay  ££ibfta/aj 


PR 

2753 
F5 
v.  3 


«? 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2012  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University-Idaho 


http://archive.org/details/newvariorumediti11shak 


/ 


Hamlet 


A  NEW  VARIORUM  EDITION 


OF 


Shakespeare 


EDITED   BY 


HORACE  HOWARD   FURNESS,  Ph.D.,  LL.D. 

HONORARY   MBMBBR   OP   THB    '  DEUTSCHE    SH AKBSPHARB-GBSBLLSCH AFT ' 

OF   WHIMAK 


Hamlet 

VOL.   I 


TEXT 


[SIXTEENTH    EDITION] 


PHILADELPHIA  &  LONDON 
J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 


Copyright,   1 877,  by  J.  B.  Lippincott  Company,, 


Copyright,   1905,  by  Horace  Howard  Furness. 


Copyright,  1918,  by  Horace  Howard  Furness,  Jr. 


Whstcott  &  Thomson,  Lippincott's  Press, 

Electrotyfiers,  Phila.  Phila. 


PREFACE 


The  plan  of  the  preceding  volumes  of  this  edition  has  been  fol- 
lowed in  the  preparation  of  the  present  volumes.  It  is  modified 
only  by  the  necessity  of  making  the  impossible  attempt  to  condense 
within  a  certain  number  of  pages  a  whole  literature. 

Of  the  imperfect  success  which  has  crowned  the  labour  no  one  can 
be  so  fully  aware  as  the  Editor.  Nevertheless,  the  work  is  given  to 
the  public  in  the  trust  that  it  will  furnish  some  facilities  to  the  study 
of  this  great  poem,  and  aid  in  preparing  the  way  for  better  editions 
than  this. 

The  First  Volume  contains  The  Text,  with  a  collation  of  the  texts  of 
the  Quartos  and  Folios,  and  of  some  thirty  modern  editions,  together 
with  Notes  and  Comments  from  the  Editors  whose  texts  are  collated, 
and,  added  to  these,  such  verbal  and  grammatical  criticisms  from 
other  quarters  as  seemed  to  be  valuable ;  in  some  instances,  notes  are 
given  that  have  little  or  no  value,  except  as  hints  of  the  progress  or 
of  the  madness  of  Shakespearian  criticism. 

As  a  general  rule,  in  the  Commentary  preference  is  given  to  verbal 
over  aesthetic  criticism.  Whenever  editors  whose  texts  are  collated 
have  indulged  in  aesthetic  suggestions,  these,  in  the  main,  have  been 
retained.  But  in  other  cases  aesthetic  criticisms  have  been  reserved 
for  Volume  II,  except  where  the  notes  were  of  too  brief  and  frag- 
mentary a  character  to  be  separated  from  the  context. 

This  difference  in  the  treatment  of  verbal  and  aesthetic  criticism 

is  observed  solely  with  reference  to  the  arrangement  of  the  mass 

of  material,  not  because  aesthetic  criticism  is  inferior  in  value  to 

verbal.     Indeed,  does  not  the  value  of  the  latter  depend  in  many 

cases  more  or  less  directly  upon  the  former? 
A* 


VI  PREFACE 

There  is  a  disposition  abroad  to  disparage  xsthetic  criticisms  of 
Shakespeare.  An  excellent  edition  of  the  Poet,  now  issuing  from  the 
press,  discards  it  wholly ;  the  editor,  whose  opinions  are  entitled  to 
great  respect,  regarding  it  as  an  impertinence,  and  stigmatising  it  gene- 
rally as  'sign-post  criticism.'  Unquestionably,  there  has  been  much 
commenting  upon  Shakespeare,  which,  ignoring  the  humblest  intel- 
ligence in  the  reader,  is  flat,  stale,  and  unprofitable,  a  nuisance  and  a 
weariness  of  the  flesh.  But  shall  we  ignore  the  possible  existence 
of  a  keener  insight  than  our  own  ?  Is  the  gift  of  reading  between  the 
lines,  so  essential  to  the  appreciation  of  dramatic  literature,  universal? 
Have  the  generality  of  us  eyes  to  see  what  is  there  written  ?  Who 
can  fail  to  be  enlightened  and  delighted  with  such  fine  criticism  (as 
is  given  in  Volume  II,  p.  167)  of  the  very  first  scene  of  this  tragedy, 
and  which  the  Editor  regrets  did  not  come  to  his  notice  in  time  to  be 
inserted  in  the  Commentary,  where  it  vitally  belongs  ?  Are  we  not  to 
listen  eagerly  and  reverently  when  Coleridge  or  Goethe  talks  about 
Shakespeare  ?  Can  we  fail  to  prize  the  flashes  of  light  (all  too  few) 
thrown  here  and  there  upon  Shakespeare  by  Charles  Lamb,  that 
genius,  wasted  in  the  India  House,  whom,  had  England  known 
the  gift  of  God,  she  would  have  pensioned  bountifully  and  set  to  re- 
cording the  thoughts  these  plays  evoked  in  him,  that  we  might  be 
brought  into  nearer  communion  with  the  great  Poet  than,  with  all 
our  laborious  verbal  criticism,  we  have  yet  been  able  to  reach? 

To  be  sure,  such  commentators  as  these,  and  Schlegel,  and  Haz- 
litt,  and  Mrs  Jameson,  and  Christopher  North,  and  Garrick  (such 
acting  as  his  was  aesthetic  criticism  of  a  high  order)  are  rare,  and  ex- 
ception may  be  made  in  favour  of  all  master-minds  like  these.  But 
the  present  Editor,  in  full  memory  of  the  many  weeks  and  months 
spent  in  reading  criticisms  on  Hamlet,  fully  agrees  with  a  keen  and 
eloquent  critic  in  Blackwood' }s  Magazine  (more  likely  than  not, 
Thomas  Campbell)  when  he  says :  '  We  ask  not  for  a  picture  of  the 
4  whole  landscape  of  the  soul,  nor  for  a  guide  who  shall  point  out  all  its 

*  wonders.     But  we  are  glad  to  listen  to  every  one  who  has  travelled 

*  through  the  kingdoms  of  Shakespeare.  Something  interesting  there 
4  must  be  even  in  the  humblest  journal ;  and  we  turn  with  equal  pleasure 
'  from  the  converse  of  those  who  have  climbed  over  the  magnificence 


PREFACE  Vll 

'  of  the  highest  mountains  there,  to  the  lowlier  tales  of  less  ambitious 
4  pilgrims,  who  have  sat  on  the  green  and  sunny  knoll,  beneath  the 
•whispering  tree,  and  by  the  music  of  the  gentle  rivulet.* 

Moreover,  the  present  Editor  freely  acknowledges  the  great  inter- 
est he  has  taken  in  witnessing  the  power  of  Shakespeare's  genius  as 
shown  in  its  stimulating  effect  upon  minds  of  a  high  order.  In  the 
endeavour  to  solve  the  mystery  of  Hamlet,  the  human  mind,  not  only 
in  its  clear  radiance  but  in  the  sad  twilight  of  its  eclipse,  has  been 
subjected  to  the  most  searching  analysis.  This  ideal  character, 
Hamlet,  has  been  assumed  to  be  very  nature,  and  if  we  fail  to  reach 
a  solution  of  the  problem  it  presents,  the  error  lies  in  us  and  in  our 
analysis;  not  in  Shakespeare.  Such  have  been  the  revelations  of 
the  wisdom  and  genius  of  the  First  of  Poets  found  in  the  works 
which  attempt  to  ravel  all  this  matter  out,  and  from  which  extracts 
have  been  made  in  the  second  of  these  volumes,  that  the  present 
Editor  was  not  long  in  making  up  his  mind  to  bear  patiently,  for 
the  sake  of  these,  the  sea  of  troubles  (sign-post  criticisms)  that  he 
has  been  compelled  to  encounter  in  the  prosecution  of  his  work. 
To  appreciate  what  is  beautiful  is  one  thing;  to  be  informed  of 
what  it  is  that  delights  us  is  a  different  and  an  added  pleasure. 
To  vary  the  language  of  another:  'The  worth  of  [Shakespeare] 
'must  rise  as  his  grandeurs  are  comprehended,  and  our  joy  in 
'his  harmony  and  beauty  will  be  heightened  the  more  fully  he  is 
1 understood. 

* "  I  grieve  net  that  ripe  knowledge  takes  away 

*  The  charm  that  [Shakespeare]  to  my  boyhood  bore, 
*  For  with  the  insight  cometh  day  by  day 
'  A  greater  bliss  than  wonder  was  before." ' 

The  Editor  has  availed  himself  of  the  liberty  to  form  his  own  text 
afforded  him  by  the  fact  that  the  texts  of  all  the  ancient  authoritative 
editions  are  virtually  printed  on  the  same  page.  He  has  followed  no 
other.  If  his  text  appears  to  follow  the  Cambridge  Edition,  it  is 
merely  because  that  edition  has  been  used  to  print  from. 

It  has  been  his  settled  principle,  as  it  was  that  of  Dr  Johnson: 
•that  the  reading  of  the  ancient  books  is  probably  true,  and  there- 


Vlii  PREFACE 

'fore  not  to  be  disturbed  for  the  sake  of  elegance,  perspicuity,  or 
'mere  improvement  of  the  sense.  For  though  much  credit  is  not 
*  due  to  the  fidelity,  nor  any  to  the  judgement  of  the  first  publishers, 
'  yet  they  who  had  the  copy  before  their  eyes  were  more  likely  to 

'  read  it  right  than  we  who  read  it  only  by  imagination My 

'  first  labour  is  always  to  turn  the  old  text  on  every  side,  and  try  if 
'  there  be  any  interstice  through  which  light  can  find  its  way.  .  .  •  „ 
'  I  have  adopted  the  Roman  sentiment,  that  it  is  more  honourable 
'to  save  a  citizen  than  to  kill  an  enemy,  and  have  been  more 
'careful  to  protect  than  to  attack.' 

A  list  of  editions  collated  in  the  Textual  Notes,  and  an  explana- 
tion of  the  abbreviations  and  symbols  there  employed  will  be  found 
at  the  close  of  the  Appendix. 

In  the  Second  Volume  is  given,  first:  a  Reprint  of  the  Quarto  of 
1603.  This  earliest  Quarto  differs  from  the  rest  so  materially  that 
a  full  or  intelligible  record  of  its  various  readings  in  the  form  of 
foot-notes  is  simply  impossible.  In  a  note  on  '  The  Date  and  the 
TexV  will  be  found  an  account  of  the  different  theories  respecting 
its  origin. 

Then  follows  The  Hystorie  of  Hamblet,  the  story  on  which,  per- 
haps, was  founded  either  this  tragedy  or  the  lost  original  drama 
which  Shakespeare  afterward  changed  to  its  present  shape. 

After  this  comes  a  translation  of  a  curious  old  German  tragedy 
called  Fratricide  Punished,  or  Prince  Hamlet  of  Denmark,  An 
account  of  it  will  be  found  in  a  short  prefatory  note. 

Then  come  the  English  Critics,  and  a  discussion  of  the  one  great 
insoluble  mystery  of  Hamlet's  sanity.  Without  for  one  moment 
wishing  to  assume  the  responsibility  of  umpire,  the  present  Editor 
thinks  it  no  more  than  right  to  call  attention  to  one  fact  which  it 
seems  to  him  should  be  kept  in  view  on  entering  upon  this  dis- 
cussion— viz.  where  the  testimony  of  experts  is  invoked,  and  their 
testimony  is  unanimous,  the  speculations  and  opinions  of  others, 
laymen  and  inexpert,  cannot  be  expected  to  carry  much  weight.  In 
courts  of  justice,  every  day,  the  testimony  of  experts  is  accepted 
in  cases  involving  liberty  or  confinement,  life  or  death,  and   we 


PREFACE  IX 

cannot,  it  is  submitted,  be  so  inconsistent  as  wholly  to  rule  out 
that  testimony  here.  If,  therefore,  we  listen  to  experts  at  all,  we 
can  hardly  refuse  our  assent  to  their  unanimous  verdict.  Despite 
all  this,  the  present  Editor's  opinion,  which,  after  what  he  has 
just  said,  he  cannot,  as  a  layman,  expect  to  have  any  value,  and 
which,  in  view  of  the  magnitude  of  the  discussion,  he  would  be 
the  last,  as  an  Editor,  to  set  forth  at  length,  is  that  Hamlet  is 
neither  mad,  nor  pretends  to  be  so.  And  in  view  of  the  fact  that 
he  has  faithfully  read  and  reported  all  the  arguments  on  that  side, 
the  Editor  begs  the  advocates  of  the  theory  of  feigned  insanity  to 
allow  him,  out  of  reciprocal  courtesy,  to  ask  how  they  account  for 
Hamlet's  being  able,  in  the  flash  of  time  between  the  vanishing  of 
the  Ghost  and  the  coming  of  Horatio  and  Marcellus,  to  form,  horror- 
struck  as  he  was,  a  plan  for  the  whole  conduct  of  his  future  life? 

Then  follow  Notes  on  The  Names  and  Characters,  on  the  Duration 
of  the  Action,  on  Garrick's  Version,  and  on  Actors'  Interpretations ; 
it  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  in  this  last  department  our  accounts 
of  how. great  actors  spoke  are  so  meagre.  As  Cibber  says  of  Bet- 
terton:  'Pity  it  is  that  the  momentary  Beauties  flowing  from  an 
'harmonious  Elocution  cannot,  like  those  of  Poetry,  be  their  own 
'Record:  That  the  animated  Graces  of  the  Player  can  live  no 
'longer  than  the  instant  Breath  and  Motion  that  presents  them, 
'or  at  best,  can  but  faintly  glimmer  through  the  Memory  or  im- 
'  perfect  Attestation  of  a  few  surviving  Spectators.  Could  how  Bet- 
'  terton  spoke  be  as  easily  known  as  what  he  spoke,  then  might  you 
'see  the  Muse  of  Shakespeare  in  her  Triumph,  with  all  her  Beau- 
'ties,  rising  into  real  Life,  and  charming  the  Beholder.  But,  since 
'  this  is  so  far  out  of  the  reach  of  description,  how  shall  I  show 
'you  Betterton?' 

Next  comes  the  German  Criticism, 

With  the  rashness  of  ignorance,  the  present  Editor,  in  laying  out 
his  plan  for  this  edition,  proposed  to  himself  to  preface  it  with  an 
essay  upon  the  remarkable  literature  which  this  great  drama  has 
created  in  Germany.  His  idea  was  to  give  the  views  of  all  the  wri- 
tings on  Hamlet  which  have  appeared  down  to  the  present  time  in 
that  country, — of  a  1,  that  is,  which  he  could  procure.     But,  in  the 


X  PREFACE 

work  of  preparation  for  such  an  essay,  after  going  carefully  through 
what,  at  a  rough  and  moderate  computation,  amounts  to  some  two 
thousand  pages  and  upwards,  he  finds  himself, — no  surprising  dis- 
covery,— quite  unequal  to  the  task.  The  sense  of  his  incompetency 
is,  however,  greatly  relieved  by  the  one  very  clear  conviction  with 
which  he  emerged  from  the  metaphysical  atmosphere :  the  proposed 
essay,  could  it  be  written,  would  utterly  defeat  a  purpose  to  be  kept 
religiously  in  view  in  the  preparation  of  this  edition  of  Hamlet, — 
namely,  compression.  It  would  far  exceed  in  bulk  all  the  rest  of 
the  volumes.  The  Editor  therefore  must  restrict  himself  to  a  simple 
statement  of  the  principles  by  which  he  has  been  guided  in  the 
selection  of  extracts  from  the  German  critics. 

First:  All  unfavourable  criticism  of  fellow-critics  is  excluded  as 
much  as  possible.  Although  our  German  friends  are  somewhat  jeal- 
ous of  their  well-deserved  reputation  as  a  nation  of  thinkers,  they 
sometimes  seem,  individually,  very  much  disposed  to  grudge  one  an- 
other a  share  in  that  distinction.  The  propriety  of  the  exclusion 
observed  is  obvious.  To  confound  Goethe,  Schlegel,  or  Tieck  is 
one  thing,  to  elucidate  Shakespeare  is  another.  It  is  curious  to 
observe  how  much  of  Shakespearian  criticism, — and  this  applies  to 
English  as  well  as  German, — is  devoted  to  hostile  criticism  of  fellow- 
critics,  living  and  dead.  It  is  submitted  that  this  it  is,  and  not 
'  sign-post  criticism '  alone,  which  has  tended  to  bring  disrepute  on 
this  branch  of  literature,  'I  know  not,'  says  Dr  Johnson,  'why 
'  our  editors  should  with  such  implacable  anger  persecute  their  pre- 
decessors. 01  vsxpo)  fiij  ddxvouew,  the  dead,  it  is  true,  can  make 
'no  resistance,  they  may  be  attacked  with  great  security;  but,  since 
'  they  can  neither  feel  nor  mend,  the  safety  of  mauling  them  seems 
'greater  than  the  pleasure;  nor,  perhaps,  could  it  much  misbecome 
'us  to  remember,  amidst  our  triumphs  over  the  nonsensical  and 
' senseless ',  that  we  likewise  are  men;  that  debemur  morti,  and,  as 
'Swift  observed  to  Burnet,  shall  soon  be  among  the  dead  ourselves.' 

Second :  The  selection  is  confined  as  closely  as  possible  to  one 
point :  the  character  of  Hamlet.  It  has  been  hardly  possible  to  ob- 
serve this  rule  with  absolute  strictness.  Tieck' s  theory  in  regard  to 
Ophelia's  relationship  to  Hamlet  bears  so  intimately  upon  the  cha- 


PREFACE  XI 

racter  of  both,  and  has  made  so  deep  an  impression  upon  the  popular 
mind,  as  to  demand  its  insertion  here. 

Lastly  :  Whatever  has  been  found  that  is  strikingly  original,  although 
not  of  necessity  true,  has  been  included  among  these  extracts ;  such  as 
the  wonderful  connection  which  Karpf  imagines  he  has  discovered 
between  the  *  courtier's  kibe'  and  Thor's  frozen  toe,  and  Flathe's 
opinions  concerning  the  family  of  Polonius.  Of  course  the  reader 
will  not  suppose  where  no  bracketed  exclamation-marks  appear,  that 
all  these  criticisms  or  commentaries  are  adopted  by  the  present  Edi- 
tor; and  this  remark  the  Editor  wishes  most  emphatically  to  apply 
to  all  the  comments  and  notes,  English  and  German,  throughout 
these  volumes.  He  has  an  especial  aversion  to  that  cheap  and  easy 
way  of  expressing  dissent,  or,  as  it  most  commonly  reads,  contempt. 
He  can  recall  but  one  instance  of  its  use,  and  even  there  it  would 
have  been  avoided  could  the  structure  of  the  sentence,  condensed 
to  save  space,  have  left  the  paternity  of  the  note  unambiguous. 
Those  who  read  or  study  these  volumes  may  be  safely  trusted  to  dis- 
cover for  themselves  the  wisdom  or  the  folly  of  the  critics,  and  the 
Editor  gladly  forgoes  the  pleasure  of  displaying  how  much  wiser  he 
is  than  those  whom  he  cites. 

The  endeavour,  in  all  honesty,  has  been  to  select  from  every  author 
the  passages  wherein  he  appears  to  most  advantage,  and  wherein  also 
he  contributes  his  best  thought  to  the  elucidation  of  the  great  tragedy. 
At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  confessed,  there  has  been  a  little  amuse- 
ment had,  now  and  then,  in  citing  passages  where  our  admirable 
friends  stumble  and  fall  in  the  interpretation  of  words,  as  when 
Gerth  states  that  slings  (in  the  'slings  and  arrows  of  outrageous 
1  fortune ')  are  the  cables  with  which  buoys  are  attached  to  sunken 
anchors  or  are  placed  to  indicate  hidden  reefs  or  shoals. 

Notwithstanding  these  trivial  deductions,  no  one  who  has  made 
any  acquaintance  with  the  labours  of  Shakespeare  students  in  Ger- 
many can  fail  to  be  impressed  by  the  excellence  they  show  even  in 
the  department  of  verbal  criticism.  It  is  too  late  a  week  with 
Schmidt's  Lexicon  and  a  dozen  Shakespeare  Yearbooks  on  our 
shelves  to  cast  any  slurs  on  German  Shakespeare  criticism.  Were 
such  the  intention,  German  criticism  could  well  endure  them  with 


XH  PREFACE 

equanimity.  For  the  indefatigable  labour,  the  keen  analysis,  the 
sympathetic  and  loving  appreciation  which  characterise  the  treat- 
ment of  Shakespeare  by  German  men  of  letters,  command  the 
warmest  admiration.  Their  devotion  to  this  tragedy  in  particular 
is  impressive.  Everywhere  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of 
their  land  commentators  on  it  arise;  not  only  at  the  prominent 
centres  of  culture,  but  in  towns  and  villages,  whose  names  English- 
speaking  people  have  perhaps  never  heard  of,  do  these  writers  spring 
up.  Even  while  the  Editor  is  closing  his  labours,  two  more  volumes 
on  Hamlet  have  been  added  to  the  list.  Although  it  would  be  a 
comfort  to  think  that  he  had  collected  all,  yet, — Rusticus  exspectat, 
6°^.  Verily,  given  a  printing-press  on  German  soil  (and  the  print- 
ing-press is  indigenous  there),  and,  lo !  an  essay  on  Ha?nlet.  Let 
Germans  themselves  ridicule  this  devotion  if  they  will.  No  man 
born  to  the  inheritance  of  the  language  of  Shakespeare  can  regard 
it  otherwise  than  with  respectful  admiration  and  pride,  or  fail  to 
welcome  the  aid  which  it  contributes  to  an  enlightened  apprecia- 
tion of  the  great  Poet.  We  all  hold  ourselves  partakers  of  his 
glory,  and  such  fine  adoration  of  our  household  divinity  we  accept 
as  a  flattering  tribute  to  ourselves. 

And  what  a  tribute  is  it  to  Shakespeare's  genius !  Here,  at  last, 
we  may  venture  to  set  a  limit  to  his  imagination.  Not  even  he  could 
have  imagined  such  a  fame.  No  one  of  mortal  mould  (save  Him 
'whose  blessed  feet  were  nailed  for  our  advantage  to  the  bitter 
'cross')  ever  trod  this  earth,  commanding  such  absorbing  interest 
as  this  Hamlet,  this  mere  creation  of  a  poet's  brain.  No  syllable 
that  he  whispers,  no  word  let  fall  by  any  one  near  him,  but  is 
caught  and  pondered  as  no  words  ever  have  been,  except  of  Holy 
Writ.  Upon  no  throne  built  by  mortal  hands  has  ever  'beat  so 
fierce  a  light*  as  upon  that  airy  fabric  reared  at  Elsinore. 

In  Shakespeare's  allusions  to  Wittenberg  the  Germans  have 
found  a  direct  intimation  that  Hamlet  was  written  with  especial 
reference  to  their  own  nation;  and  Freiligrath  struck  a  keynote, 
which  found  an  echo  in  all  hearts,  when  he  exclaimed:  'Germany 
'is  Hamlet.'  Lessing,  that  most  healthy  and  earnest  of  German 
scholars,   '  the  Englishman  born  in  Germany ',  was  the  first,  now 


PREFACE  Xlil 

more  than  a  hundred  years  ago,  to  announce  to  his  countrymen 
the  advent  of  Shakespeare.  His  masterly  criticisms  of  the  Ham- 
burg Theatre,  written  in  the  interest  of  the  great  English  Poet, 
levelled  Voltaire  and  the  French  school  of  taste,  and  opened  the 
path  ten  years  later  for  the  extraordinary  success  that  attended 
Brockmann's  Hamlet.  The  enthusiasm  which  Brockmann  inspired 
in  this  character  was  unprecedented  in  Germany,  and  can  be 
paralleled  only  by  Mr  Irving' s  recent  success  in  London.  Fine 
steel  engravings  appeared,  representing  different  scenes  of  the  trag- 
edy; silver  medals  were  struck  in  honour  of  the  popular  actor, 
and,  what  was  before  unheard  of  on  the  Berlin  stage,  he  was  called 
before  the  curtain  after  the  play. 

The  enthusiasm  for  Hamlet,  thus  kindled,  has  not  died  out  to  this 
day.  Goethe's  interpretation,  everywhere  as  widely  known  as  the 
play  itself,  quickened  the  popular  admiration  by  apparently  reliev- 
ing the  tragedy  of  its  painful  mystery ;  and  although  there  are  not 
wanting  keen  critics  who  dissent  from  Goethe's  interpretation  of 
Hamlet's  character,  yet  as  a  piece  of  criticism  it  filled  Lord  Ma 
caulay  'with  wonder  and  despair/  and  still  underlies  most  of  the 
theories,  English  and  German,  that  have  since  appeared. 

The  last  theory  of  Hamlet's  character,  which  has  arrested  specia 
attention  in  Germany  by  the  bold  and  animated  way  in  which  it 
has  been  set  forth  by  its  chiefest  expounder,  Werder,  was  first 
proposed  in  strong  terms  by  Klein*  It  sweeps  aside  every  vestige 
of  Goethe's  explanation,  with  all  theories  akin  to  it.  It  affirms 
Hamlet  to  be  a  man  of  action,  never  at  a  loss,  never  wavering, 
taking  in  at  once  the  position  of  affairs,  adjusting  himself  thereto 
with  admirable  sagacity,  and  instantly  acting  with  consummate  tact 
as  occasions  require.  A  theory  so  directly  opposed  to  all  accepted 
ideas  of  Hamlet  claims  a  full  exposition.  It  has  been  found  im- 
possible, in  justice,  to  compress  it  into  a  narrower  space  than  it 
occupies  in  the  Appendix. 

The  Editor  is  well  aware  that  he  incurs  some  hazard  in  thus 
selecting  extracts  from  the  German  essayists.  If  he  has  unwittingly 
committed  any  injustice,  and  omitted  to  notice  theories  for  which 
their  authors  claim  originality,  he  can  only  plead  innocence  of  in- 


XIV  PREFACE 

tention,  and  the  difficulty  he  has  found  in  fathoming  the  precise 
meaning  of  metaphysical  treatises,  dive  as  deeply  as  he  might  into 
1  the  depths  of  his  consciousness.' 

German  actors  and  stage-managers  have  long  felt  a  want  unknown 
in  English-speaking  lands.  There  are  probably  not  three  theatres 
in  Germany  that  use  the  same  translation  or  adaptation  of  Shake- 
speare. To  meet  this  want  of  uniformity,  a  selection  of  the  dramas 
was  issued  by  Eduard  and  Otto  Devrient,  a  name  that  will  ensure 
everywhere  a  respectful  attention  to  all  suggestions  thus  endorsed, — 
suggestions,  be  it  understood,  never  the  crude  conceits  of  the  mo- 
ment, but  practically  tested  during  many  years  of  highly-famed 
practice  on  the  stage.  In  their  rendition  of  Hamlet  by  the  Messrs 
Devrient,  it  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  for  scenic  representation  the 
First  Quarto  has  been  proved  by  them  to  be  more  effective  than 
the  Second  Quarto  or  Folio,  which  is  the  basis  of  the  ordinary  act* 
ing  copies.  Over  thirty  years  ago  Hunter  in  England  and  Rapp 
in  Germany  maintained  the  higher  dramatic  power  of  the  First 
Quarto  over  the  Second  Quarto  in  the  order  of  the  scenes  and  in 
its  general  effectiveness.  But  it  was  reserved  for  the  Messrs  Dev- 
rient to  put  these  theories  to  the  test  with  the  best  possible  result, 
as  they  say,  and  as  their  fame  warrants  the  belief. 

The  claim  for  Hamlet's  youth,  urged  by  the  Messrs  Devrient, 
deserves  attention.  Hamlet  as  a  youth  of  nineteen  or  twenty  cer- 
tainly possesses  a  charm  which  can  hardly  belong  to  the  maturer  age 
of  thirty;  besides,  this  idea  of  him  reconciles  many  discrepancies 
which  have  set  commentators  at  variance.  It  accords  with  his  wish 
to  return  to  Wittenberg;  witn  the  election  of  his  uncle  over  him 
as  king  by  the  nobles;  and  it  also  lessens  the  age  of  the  Queen 
and  our  disgust  at  the  mutiny  in  a  matron's  bones.  A  discussion 
of  this  question  will  be  found  in  the  notes  on  V,  i,  153.  This 
puzzle  about  Hamlet's  age  arises,  to  a  large  extent,  it  is  submitted, 
from  our  losing  sight  of  Shakespeare's  method  of  dealing  with 
the  dramatic  element  of  time, — a  method  whereby  in  the  most 
artful  manner  he  conveys  two  opposite  ideas  of  its  flight :  swiftness 
and  slowness ;  by  one  series  of  allusions  we  receive  the  impression 
that  the  action  of  the  drama  is  driving  ahead  in  storm,  while  by 


PREFACE  XV 

another  series  we  are  insensibly  beguiled  into  the  belief  that  it 
extends  over  days  and  months.  Attention  was  called  to  this  won- 
drous art  of  Shakespeare's  by  both  Halpin  and  Christopher 
North,  at  about  the  same  time;  the  former  admirably  analyzed, 
with  reference  to  it,  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  and  the  latter  re- 
vealed its  working  in  the  case  of  Macbeth  and  Othello.  If  we 
turn  to  this  present  play  of  Hamlet,  we  see  how  throughout,  wher- 
ever time  comes  in  as  an  element,  we  are  subject  to  Shakespeare's 
glamour  and  gramarye.  Horatio  is  introduced  to  us  as  one  famil- 
iar with  all  the  every-day  occurrences  in  Denmark,  the  gossip  of 
the  court,  the  cause  of  the  post  haste  and  rummage  in  the  land ; 
in  the  next  scene,  on  the  very  same  day,  Hamlet  greets  him  with 
such  surprise  that  we  get  the  impression  that  he  is  fresh  from 
Wittenberg;  if  we  stop  to  think,  we  remember  that  he  came  to 
see  the  old  king's  funeral,  and  that  took  place  nearly  two  months 
before,  and  in  that  time  he  might  well  have  learned  all  the  polit- 
ical news;  but  then  he  must  have  been  about  the  court,  and  it  is 
a  little  strange  that  Hamlet  had  not  met  him.  As  spectators  of 
the  play,  we  do  not  stop  to  think  this  out,  but  accept  without 
question  each  impression  that  the  poet  intends  to  make  on  us. 
Again,  Polonius,  who  assuredly  knew  the  latest  item  of  court 
gossip,  seems  as  much  surprised  at  Ophelia's  account  of  Hamlet's 
strange  behaviour  as  Ophelia  herself;  it  was  evidently  a  new  thing 
to  him,  and  yet  when  he  goes  directly  to  the  King,  the  latter  has 
been  so  long  cognisant  of  Hamlet's  'transformation1  that  he  had 
sent  for  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern  to  help  him  find  out  its 
cause;  and  Polonius,  too,  speaks  of  Hamlet's  'lunacy'  as  a  fact 
well  known  and  of  long  standing;  and  the  very  next  day  after 
this  Hamlet  has  a  second  interview  with  Ophelia,  when  she  asks 
him  how  he  does  'this  many  a  day,'  and  tells  him  that  she  has 
remembrances  of  his  which  she  has  longed  long  to  re-deliver. 
Again,  Hamlet  tells  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern  that  He  has 
'of  late  foregone  all  custom  of  exercises.'  In  the  last  scene 
Hamlet  tells  Horatio  that  he  has  been  in  'continual  practice  of 
4 late.'  These  are  not  inconsistencies.  They  are  not  oversights 
on  the  part  of  Shakespeare.    They  belong  to  the  two  series  of 


XVI  PREFACE 

times,  the  one  suggestive  and  illusory,  and  the  other  visible  and 
explicitly  indicated.  Halpin  calls  them  the  protractive  series  and 
the  accelerating  series.  Christopher  North  calls  them  Shake- 
speare's 'two  clocks.'  As  another  instance  of  the  way  in  which 
the  long  time  is  adroitly  insinuated  in  this  Play,  note  the  passage, 
where  Claudius  describes  to  the  Queen  the  events  that  have  fol- 
lowed the  death  of  Polonius:  'the  people  are  muddied,  thick, 
'and  unwholesome  in  their  thoughts  and  whispers,'  which  of 
course  was  the  work  not  of  an  hour  nor  of  a  day,  but  perhaps  of 
weeks;  it  must  have  taken  some  time  for  this  knowledge  to  have 
reached  the  king's  ears ;  then  Laertes  has  '  returned  in  secret 
'from  France,  feeds  on  his  wonder,  keeps  himself  in  clouds.' 
This,  too,  consumes  time,  and  the  very  time  which  we  feel,  with- 
out stopping  to  compute  it,  is  necessary  for  Laertes  to  gather  the 
populace  to  his  side  and  mature  his  plans  for  rebellion.  From 
what  we  here  learn,  Laertes  may  have  returned  from  France 
weeks  before,  and  yet  when  he  bursts  into  the  King's  presence 
and  demands  his  father,  the  short  time  which  is  essential  for 
keeping  up  the  tension  of  the  passion  comes  into  play,  and  we 
get  the  impression  that  Laertes  has  just  landed  and  has  rushed  in 
hot  haste  to  the  King's  palace.  And  so  vivid  is  this  impression 
that  Laertes  is  always  held  up  by  critics  and  commentators  as  an 
example  to  Hamlet  in  the  speed  with  which  he  sweeps  to  avenge 
his  father's  death;  whereas,  as  we  see  from  this  speech  of  Clau- 
dius, Laertes  may  have  been  almost  as  dilatory  as  Hamlet,  and 
may  have  allowed  'buzzers'  day  after  day  'to  infect  his  ears,'  or 
kept  himself  'in  clouds'  for  weeks.  The  short  time  is  again 
thrust  upon  us  by  showing  us  Laertes  ignorant  of  Ophelia's  in- 
sanity. Apparently,  Laertes  has  not  even  taken  the  time  to  go 
to  his  own  home  after  landing  from  France.  And  these  instances 
may  be  multiplied,  doubtless,  by  any  attentive  reader  of  the  trag- 
edy. Indeed,  is  not  the  whole  theory  of  Hamlet's  procrastination 
to  a  large  extent  due  to  this  '  legerdemain '  of  Shakespeare's  in 
the  matter  of  time?  There  are  not  wanting  critics  who,  counting 
off  the  days  on  only  one  of  'Shakespeare's  clocks/  conclude 


PREFACE  XVU 

the  whole  action  within  a  week  or  ten  days, — scant  room  for  pro- 
crastination, where  the  killing  of  a  king  is  the  aim.  As  Chris- 
topher North  says:  'Shakespeare,  in  his  calmer  constructions, 
'shows  in  a  score  of  ways,  weeks,  months;  that  is  therefore  the 
1  true  time,  or  call  it  the  historical  time.  Hurried  himself,  and 
1  hurrying  you,  on  the  torrent  of  passion,  he  forgets   time ;   and  a 

1  false  show  of  time,  to  the  utmost  contracted,  arises If 

'any  wiseacre  should  ask,  "How  do  we  manage  to  stand  the 
£{t  known  together-proceeding  of  two  times ?"  the  wiseacre  is  an- 
'swered,  "We  don't  stand  it, — for  we  know  nothing  about  it. 
'"We  are  held  in  a  confusion  and  a  delusion  about  the  time." 
'  We  have  effect  of  both,— distinct  knowledge  of  neither.  We 
'have  suggestions   to    our  Understanding  of  extended   time, — we 

'have  movements  of  our  Will  by  precipitated  time If  you 

'ask  me, — which  judiciously  you  may, — what  or  how  much  did 
'the  Swan  of  Avon  intend  and  know  of  all  this  astonishing  leger- 
'demain,  when  he  sang  thus  astonishingly?  Was  he,  the  juggler, 
'juggled  by  aerial  spirits, — as  Puck  and  Ariel?    I  put  my  finger  to 

'my  lip,  and  nod  to  him  to  do  the  same A  good-natured 

Juggler  has  cheated  your  eyes.  You  ask  him  to  show  you  how 
'he  did  it.  He  does  the  trick  slowly, — and  you  see.  "Now, 
'"good  Conjurer,  do  it  slowly  and  cheat  us.1*  "I  can't.  I 
'"cheat  you  by  doing  it  quickly.  To  be  cheated,  you  must  not 
'"see  what  I  do;  but  you  must  think  that  you  see."  When  we 
'inspect  the  Play  in  our  closets,  the  Juggler  does  his  trick  slow- 
My.  We  sit  at  the  Play,  and  he  does  it  quick.'  Just  as  Shake 
Speare  has  dealt  with  the  time  of  the  whole  tragedy  he  has  dealt 
with  the  age  of  Hamlet;  in  the  earlier  scenes  he  is  in  the  very 
hey-day  of  primy  nature,  but  the  effect  of  the  fearful  experience 
which  he  undergoes  is  to  quicken  and  stimulate  mightily  his 
powers  of  thought, — to  ripen  his  intellect  prematurely.  Therefore 
at  the  close,  as  though  to  smoothe  away  any  discrepancy  between 
his  mind  and  his  years,  or  between  the  execution  of  his  task  and 
his  years,  a  chance  allusion  by  the  Grave-digger  is  thrown  out, 
which,  if  we  are  quick  enough  to  catch,  we  can  apply  to  Ham* 
let's  age,  and  we  have  before  us  Hamlet  in  his  full  maturity. 


XV111  PREFACE 

In  the  selection  of  French  Criticisms  which  follow  the  German,  it 
may  be  thought  strange  that  no  reference  is  to  be  found  to  Ducis's 
version  of  Hamlet, — that  unlucky  butt  for  English  and  German 
ridicule.  No  extracts  would  do  it  justice,  and  to  insert  the  whole 
was  impossible.  But  would  it  not  be  well,  between  our  fits  of 
laughter  over  it,  to  recall  the  year  in  which  it  first  appeared  ? 
In  1769  the  first  German  translation  of  Hanilet  was  only  three 
years  old,  and  Lessing  almost  single-handed  was  in  the  thick  of 
his  battle-royal  with  the  French  school  of  art,  then  supreme  in 
Germany,  and  of  which  Ducis's  Haifilet  is  no  unfair  representa- 
tive in  the  main  features;  seven  years  later,  Brockmann,  the  idol 
of  the  German  stage,  played  Hamlet  at  first  in  Heufeld's  ver- 
sion, in  which  Laertes  is  omitted  and  Hamlet  is  the  prosperous 
successor  of  Claudius  (afterwards,  it  is  true,  Brockmann  acted 
Schroeder's  version,  which  is  nearer  the  original,  although  Ham- 
let survives  the  King's  attempt  to  poison  him,  and  the  fencing- 
scene  is  omitted).  And  at  that  time,  on  the  English  stage,  Gar- 
rick  and  his  '  showmen '  were  '  drawing  about '  Lear  with  Nahum 
Tate's  'hook  in  the  nostrils  of  the  Leviathan.'  It  is  to  be  ap- 
prehended that  no  German  nor  English  tongue  dare  wag  in  rude 
noise  at  Ducis,  who,  after  all,  did  not  assume  to  translate  Shake- 
speare, but  merely  adapt  him.  From  the  French  point  of  view 
(and  is  it  not  unreasonable  to  demand  that  a  Frenchman  should 
have  any  other?)  it  is  not  difficult  to  regard  Ducis's  version  as 
a  powerful  drama;  and  we  know  that  in  the  hands  of  Talma  its 
effect  was  signal. 

There  now  remains  the  agreeable  duty  to  record  the  names  ot 
those  from  whom  I  have  received  aid. 

At  the  very  outset,  however,  it  is  with  sorrow  that  I  am  reminded 
that  Professor  Allen,  upon  whom  in  years  past  I  leaned  so  heavily, 
and  to  whom  it  was  a  pleasure  to  be  indebted,  has  joined  the 
group  of 

'  Precious  friends,  hid  in  death's  dateless  night.' 

Hid  he  lived,  many  an  error  now  lurking  in  these  volumes  would 


PREFACE  XIX 

have  been  detected  and  obliterated.  I  am  reconciled  to  their 
presence,  since  they  show  how  much  I  have  been  indebted  to 
him  in  the  past. 

My  cordial  thanks  are  hereby  extended  to  J.  Payne  Collier,  esq., 
Mr  Albert  Cohn,  Professor  Corson,  Joseph  Crosby,  esq.,  Rev.  F. 
G.  Fleay,  Prof.  Dr  Elze,  F.  J.  Furnivall,  esq.,  Dr  Hering,  Rev. 
H.  N.  Hudson,  Dr  Kellogg,  Dr  Ray,  W.  J.  Rolfe,  esq.,  William 
Lowes  Rushton,  esq.,  S.  Timmins,  esq.,  Richard  Grant  White, 
esq.,  Justin  Winsor,  esq.,  and  William  Aldis  Wright,  esq. 

My  especial  acknowledgements  are  due  to  Dr  C.  M.  Ingleby  for 
valuable  suggestions  prompted  by  his  keen,  critical  taste  and  varied 
learning,  and  for  stray  notes  and  readings  which  might  otherwise 
have  escaped  my  notice;  to  A,  I.  Fish,  esq.,  for  the  valuable  con- 
tribution he  has  made  to  Hamlet  literature  in  the  English  Part  of 
the  Bibliography ;  and  to  J.  Parker  Norris,  esq.,  for  his  selections 
in  reference  to  Actors'  Interpretations •,  and  for  numberless  acts  of 
thoughtful  kindness ;  and  to  Mr  L.  F.  Thomas,  the  reader  of  the 
proofs,  the  excellent  representative  of  a  class  to  whom  authors  are 
under  deep  though  often  unacknowledged  obligations. 

There  yet  remain  three:  to  my  father,  Rev.  Dr  Furness,  I  am 
indebted  for  all  the  translations  from  the  German  (except  the 
Bestrafte  Brudermord)  in  the  Second  Volume ;  the  mere  statement 
of  this  debt  reveals  my  utter  bankruptcy  in  adequate  expressions 
of  gratitude.  More  is  his  due  than  more  than  all  can  pay.  Be 
it  remembered,  that  I  alone  am  responsible  for  the  selection  of 
the  extracts. 

To  my  sister,  Mrs  A.  L.  Wister,  for  the  fine  translation  of  Frei- 
ligrath's  Deutschland  ist  Hamlet. 

And  to  Mrs  Furness  for  the  Index  in  the  First  Volume  and 
the  Table  of  Contents  in  the  Second. 

In  conclusion,  let  me  add  that  I  do  not  flatter  myself  that  this 
is  an  enjoyable  edition  of  Shakespeare;  I  regard  it  rather  as  a 
necessary  evil, — so  evil  that  I  should  sometimes  question  the  pro- 
priety of  its  existence  were  it  not  that  I  am  encouraged  by  the 
words  of  Dr  Johnson,  for  whose  Preface  to  his  edition  of  Shake- 
speare   advancing  years    add    only  increasing   admiration.      'Let 


XX  PREFACE 

'him,'  says  Dr  Johnson,  'that  is  yet  unacquainted  with  the 
'powers  of  Shakespeare,  and  who  desires  to  feel  the  greatest 
'pleasure  that  the  drama  can  give,  read  every  play,  from  the  first 
'scene  to  the  last,  with  utter  negligence  of  all  his  commentators. 
'When  his  fancy  is  once  on  the  wing,  let  it  not  stoop  at  cor- 
'rection  or  explanation.  When  his  attention  is  strongly  engaged, 
'let  it  disdain  alike  to  turn  aside  to  the  name  of  Theobald  and 
•of  Pope.  Let  him  read  on  through  brightness  and  obscurity, 
'through  integrity  and  corruption;  let  him  preserve  his  compre- 
'hension  of  the  dialogue  and  his  interest  in  the  fable.  And 
'when  the  pleasures  of  novelty  have  ceased,  let  him  attempt  ex 
'actness  and  read  the  commentators.'  H.  H.  F. 

March,  1877. 


Hamlet. 


DRAMATIS    PERSON^1 

Claudius,  King  of  Denmark. 

Hamlet,  son  to  the  late,  and  nephew  to  the  present,  King. 

Fortinbras,  Prince  of  Norway. 

Polonius,  Lord  Chamberlain. 

Horatio,  friend  to  Hamlet. 

Laertes,  son  to  Polonius. 

Voltimand, 

Cornelius, 

rosencrantz,3 

~  >  Courtiers. 

GUILDENSTERN, 
OSRIC, 

A  Gentleman, 
A  Priest. 

^ARCELLUS'l  Officer, 
Bernardo,   J 

Francisco,  a  soldier. 

Reynaldo,  servant  to  Poloniiifc. 

Players. 

Two  Clowns,  grave-diggers. 

A  Captain. 

English  Ambassadors. 

Gertrude,  Queen  of  Denmark,  and  mother  to  Hamlet. 
Ophelia,  daughter  to  Polonius. 

Ijords,  Ladies,  Officers,  Soldiers,  Sailors,  Messengers,  and  other 

Attendants. 

Ghost  of  Hamlet's  Father. 

Scene  :   Elsinore? 

1  Dramatis  Persons]    First  given  by  Rowe. 

2  Rosencrantz]  Theob.    Roseneraus.  Rowe.    Rosencraus.  Pope,  Jen.    Rosin 
Crosse.  Han. 

3  Elsinore]    Mai.     Elsinoor.  Rowe +.     Elsinour.  Cap.     Elsineur.  Steev.     Den 
mark.  Glo-f . 


THE    TRAGEDY    OF 

Hamlet 

PRINCE    OF    DENMARK 


ACT  I 

Scene  I.     Elsinore.     A  platform  before  the  castle. 
Francisco  at  his  post.     Enter  to  him  Bernardo. 
Bey.     Who's  there  ? 

Act  i]    Actus  Primus.  Ff.  Francisco...]  Dyce.  Francisco  upon... 

Scene  I.]   Sccena  Prima.  Fs.     Scaena  Cap.  Enter  Barnardo  and  Francifco,  two 

Prima.  F2F4.     Scena  Prima.  F3.  Centinels.  QqFf  (Bernardo  Q4)  Rowe  +  . 

Elsinore.]  Cap.  Francisco  on  guard.  Sta. 

A  platform ]  Mai.     An  open  I — 5.     Who's He\   Two  lines,  the 

Place  before  the  Palace.   Rowe,  Pope.  first   ending  unfold    Cap.    Steev.   Var. 

A  Platform  before  the  Palace.  Theob.  + .  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  White,  El. 

Platform  of  the  Castle.  Cap.  1.    Who's']   Whofe  Qq. 

Scene  I]  GlLDON  {Remarks,  &c,  1709,  p.  404) :  This  scene,  I  have  been  assured, 
Sh.  wrote  in  a  Charnal  House,  in  the  midst  of  the  Night.  Seymour  (p.  138)  :  This 
whole  scene  appears  unnecessary  to  the  design  and  conduct  of  the  play,  and  might 
with  advantage  be  omitted.  The  hand  of  Sh.  is  visible  in  it  occasionally,  but  it  is 
part  of  that  undigested  plan  which  is  manifest  throughout  the  play.  [Seymour  finds 
the  same  fault  in  Macbeth  and  Lear.  Ed.] 

Cambridge  Editors  :  In  this  play  the  Acts  and  Scenes  are  marked  in  the  Ff  only 
as  far  as  II,  ii,  and  not  at  all  in  the  Qq. 

1.  Who's  there]  Coleridge  (p.  148) :  That  Shakespeare  meant  to  put  an  effect 
in  the  actor's  power  in  these  very  first  words  is  evident  from  the  impatience  expressed 
by  the  startled  Francisco  in  the  line  that  follows.  A  brave  man  is  never  so  per- 
emptory as  when  he  fears  that  he  is  afraid.  Tschischwitz  finds  a  •  psychological 
motive '  in  thus  representing  Bernardo  as  so  forgetful  of  all  military  use  and  wont  as 
to  challenge  Francisco  who  is  on  guard.  Evidently  Bernardo  is  afraid  to  meet  the 
Ghost  all  alone,  and  it  is  because  he  feels  so  unmanned  that  his  last  words  to  Fran- 
cisco are  to  bid  Horatio  and  Marcellus  make  haste.  [For  other  instances  of  irregu- 
larities in  metre,  which  may  be  explained  by  the  custom  of  placing  ejaculations, 
appellations,  &c.  out  of  the  regular  verse,  see  Abbott,  \  512.  Ed.] 

3 


4  HAMLET  [act  I,  sc.  i. 

Fran.     Nay,  answer  me ;  stand,  and  unfold  yourself.  2 

Ber.     Long  live  the  king ! 
Fran.     Bernardo  ? 

Ber.     He.  5 

Fran.     You  come  most  carefully  upon  your  hour. 
Ber.     Tis  now  struck  twelve ;  get  thee  to  bed,  Francisco. 
Fran.     For  this  relief  much  thanks ;  'tis  bitter  cold, 
And  I  am  sick  at  heart. 

Ber.     Have  you  had  quiet  guard  ? 

Fran.  Not  a  mouse  stirring.         10 

4.     Bernardo  ?]  Barnardo  ?  FxFaF3.  7.     struck]  Jlrooke   Qq.    Jlrook    Fg, 

Barnardo.  QqF^.  Cap. 

6.  carefully]  chearfully  FF,  twelve]  twelfe  Q2QV 

7.  now  struck]   new-struck.    Steev.  7,  8,  23.     '  Tis]  Tis  Fa. 
conj.  El.  Heussi.  10.    guard  P]  guard.  F  . 

2.  me]  Jennens  :  This  is  the  emphatic  word.  [Hanmer  printed  it  in  italics.  Ed.] 
Francisco,  as  the  sentinel  on  guard,  has  the  right  of  insisting  on  the  watch-word, 
which  is  given  in  Bernardo's  answer. 

3.  king]  Malone  supposed  this  sentence  to  have  been  the  watch-word,  but  Pye 
(p.  308)  believes  that  it  corresponds  to  the  former  usage  in  France,  where,  to  the 
common  challenge  Qui  vive  ?  the  answer  was  Vive  le  Roi,  like  the  modern  answer, 
1 A  friend.'  And  Delius  points  out  that  shortly  afterwards  to  the  same  challenge 
Hor.  and  Mar.  give  a  different  response. 

6.  upon  your  hour]  Clarendon:  An  unusual  phrase,  meaning  'just  as  your 
hour  is  about  to  strike.'  Compare  Rich.  Ill:  III,  ii,  5;  IV,  ii,  115;  Meas.  for 
Meas.  IV,  1,  17.  As  Fran,  speaks  the  clock  is  heard  striking  midnight.  [See 
Abbott,  \  191 ;  Macb.  Ill,  i,  16;  V,  iii,  7.] 

7.  now]  Dyce  :  Is  not  the  sense  the  same  whether  we  read  new  or  '  now  '  ? 

8.  much]  Abbott,  §51:  Much,  more,  is  frequently  used  as  an  ordinary  adjective 
like  the  Scotch  mickle,  and  the  Early  English  muchel. 

9.  heart]  Hunter  (ii,  212) :  As  no  particular  reason  appears  for  the  melancholy 
of  this  insignificant  personage,  it  is  probable  that  the  poet  meant  by  this  little  artifice  to 
prepare  the  minds  of  the  spectators  for  a  tragical  story.  Such  a  remark  at  the  open- 
ing of  a  play  disposed  their  minds,  unconsciously  perhaps  to  themselves,  to  the 
solemnity  of  thought  and  feeling  which  suited  the  awful  scenes  soon  to  be  unfolded. 
STRACHEY  (p.  24):  The  key-note  of  the  tragedy  is  struck  in  the  simple  preludings  of 
this  common  sentry's  midnight  guard,  to  sound  afterwards  in  ever-spreading  vibra- 
tions through  the  complicated  though  harmonious  strains  of  Hamlet's  own  watch 
through  a  darker  and  colder  night  than  the  senses  can  feel. 

10.  Not  a  mouse  stirring]  Coleridge  (p.  148) :  The  attention  to  minute 
sounds, — naturally  associated  with  the  recollection  of  minute  objects,  and  the  more 
familiar  and  trifling,  the  more  impressive  from  the  unusualness  of  their  producing 
any  impression  at  all, — gives  a  philosophic  pertinency  to  this  image ;  but  it  has  like- 
wise its  dramatic  use  and  purpose.  For  its  commonness  in  ordinary  conversation 
tends  to  produce  the  sense  of  reality,  and  at  once  hides  the  poet,  and  yet  approxi- 


act  I,  sc.  i.J  HAMLET  5 

Ber.     Well,  good  night.  II 

If  you  do  meet  Horatio  and  Marcellus, 
The  rivals  of  my  watch,  bid  them  make  haste. 

Fran.     I  think  I  hear  them. — Stand,  ho !     Who  is  there  ? 

Enter  Horatio  and  Marcellus. 

Hor.  Friends  to  this  ground. 

Mar.  And  liegemen  to  the  Dane.      15 

Fran.  Give  you  good  night. 

Mar.  O,  farewell,  honest  soldier : 

11 — 13.     As  in  Qq.    Prose,  Ff,  Rowe.  +  ,  Mob.   QqFf  (after  line  13),  et  cet. 
14.     Stand,  ho]  Stand  ho  Qq.   Stand  15.     liegemeri\  Leige-men  Fx,  Leedge- 

F  .  men  QaQ,.    Leegemen  Q4QS« 

ho]      Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt,  16,  18.      Give  you]  Om.  Q'76. 

Sing.  Ktly,  Del.  16 — 18.      O,  farewell... night]    Cap. 

Who  is],    who's  FT,  Rowe,  Pope.  Two  lines,  QqFf,  Rowe+. 
Enter...]  Dyce,  White,  Sta.  Glo.  16.     soldier]  fouldiers  Qq. 

mates  the  reader  or  spectator  to  that  state  in  which  the  highest  poetry  will  appear, 
and  in  its  component  parts,  though  not  in  the  whole  composition,  really  is  the  lan- 
guage of  nature.  If  I  should  not  speak  it,  I  feel  I  should  be  thinking  it ; — the  voice 
only  is  the  poet's, — the  words  are  my  own. 

13.  rivals]  Warburton  :  That  is,  partners  [which  is  the  word  used  here  in 
Qx. — White.]  Ritson  :  Thus,  in  Heywood's  Rape  of  Lucrece,  1636:  *  Tullia. 
Aruns,  associate  him.  Arwts.  A  rival  with  my  brother  in  his  honours.'  And  in 
The  Tragedy  of  Hoffman,  1631  [II,  iii,  p.  29.  Reprint  1852],  'And  make  thee  rival 
in  those  governments.'     See  also  rivality  in  Ant.  &  Cleop.  Ill,  v,  8.     Warner 

(  Var.  1821)  :  Read  • Horatio,  and  Marcellus  The  rival  of  &c.  because  Hor. 

is  a  gentleman  of  no  profession,  and  there  is  but  one  person  in  each  watch.  Cal- 
DECOTT:  See  corrival,  I  Hen.  IV;  I,  iii,  207,  and  IV,  iv,  31.  Wedgwood  :  Lat. 
rivalis,  explained  in  different  ways  from  rivus,  a  brook ;  by  some  from  the  struggles 
between  herdsmen  using  the  same  watercourses;  by  others  as  signifying  those  who 
dwell  on  opposite  sides  of  the  stream.  Clarendon:  This  is  the  only  passage  of 
Sh.  in  which  the  word  is  employed  in  its  earlier  and  rarer  sense  [as  given  by  War- 
burton]. 

14.  Coleridge  (p.  148) :  Observe  the  gradual  transition  from  the  silence  and  the 
still  recent  habit  of  listening  in  Francisco's  •  I  think  I  near  them,' — to  the  more 
cheerful  call  out,  which  a  good  actor  would  observe,  in  the  *  Stand  ho  !  Who  is 
there  ?' 

16.  Give")   Caldecott  :  That  is,  May  He,  who  has  the  power  of  giving,  so  dis- 
pense ;  or,  I  give  you  good  night,  like  the  Latin  dare  salutem.     Clarendon  :  The 
more  probable  ellipsis  is  '  God  give  you.'     We  do  not  find  the  complete  phrase  *  I 
give  you  good  night,'  but  we  have  many  examples  of  '  God  give  you  good  even, 
as  Rom.  &  ful.  I,  ii,  56,  and  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  IV,  ii,  84.     The  omission  of  '  I 
before  such  words  as  '  pray '  is  not  a  parallel  case.     [Compare  '  the  owl  .  .  .  Which 
gives  the  stern'st  good-night,'  Macb.  II,  ii,  3. — Ed  ] 
I* 


6  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  I 

Who  hath  relieved  you  ? 

Fran.  Bernardo  hath  my  place.  17 

Give  you  good  night.  [Exit, 

Alar.  Holla!  Bernardo! 

Ber.  Say, — 

What,  is  Horatio  there  ? 

Hor.  A  piece  of  him. 

Ber.     Welcome,  Horatio ;  welcome,  good  Marcellus.  20 

Mar.     What,  has  this  thing  appear'd  again  to-night  ? 

17.  Who  hath]  who  has  Q'76.  Coll.  Dyce  i. 

hath  my],     ha's  my  FxFa.     has  18,19.     Say, ... there  ?]  Cap.  One  line, 

my   F3F4,   Rowe+,    Coll.      Dyce,    El.  QqFf. 

White,  Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  Mob ..  21.     Mar.]    Hora.    Qq,  Cap.    Steev. 

18.  [Exit.]  Exit  Fran,  or  Francifco.  Rann,  Var.  Cald.  Coll.  Sing.  Hud. 
QqFf.  What,   has]     What,    ha's    Q3Q. 

Bernardo  /]  Bernardo,— Theob.         FXF3.      What  ha's  QAQS. 
Warb.  to-night?]    to    night?     Qq.    to 

Say,]    fay    Q4Qg.      Say.    Knt,  night.  Ff  {to  Night  FJ. 

19.  A  piece]  Warburton  :  He  says  this  as  he  gives  his  hand  [to  this  effect  War- 
burton  inserted  a  stage-direction].  Heath  and  Steevens  :  It  is  merely  a  humorous, 
cant  expression.  Tschischwitz  :  The  philosophic  Horatio  conceives  the  personality 
of  man,  in  its  outward  manifestation  merely,  as  only  a  piece  of  himself.  Moltke  : 
It  is  not  without  significance  that  Sh.  makes  Horatio  return  a  different  answer  to 
this  question  than  did  Bernardo.  The  latter  by  his  reply  of  '  He '  implies  that  he  is 
present  body  and  soul  (for  he  and  Marcellus  have  no  longer  any  doubt ;  they  have 
already  seen  the  apparition  with  their  own  eyes) ;  whereas  Horatio  by  his  answer 
implies  that  owing  to  his  incredulity  he  is  not  wholly  present,  that  he  is  not  there 
with  his  body  and  soul,  but  that  he  had  undertaken  to  share  the  watch  with  the  cor- 
poreal part  only  of  his  entire  individuality.  Moberly:  As  we  say,  'scmething 
like  him.' 

20.  Coleridge  (p.  149) :  The  actor  should  be  careful  to  distinguish  the  expecta- 
tion and  gladness  of  Bernardo's  '  Welcome,  Horatio !'  from  the  mere  courtesy  of  his 
'  Welcome,  good  Marcellus !" 

21.  Whether  this  should  be  spoken  by  Mar.  or  Hor.  has  occasioned  discussion. 
Capell  (i,  122)  asks,  ■  Can  it  be  imagined  that  the  same  person,  who,  but  a  line  or  two 
after,  calls  the  apparition  "  this  dreaded  sight,"  should,  in  this  line,  call  it  "  this 
thing"  ?  The  levity  of  the  expression,  and  the  question  itself,  are  suited  to  the  un- 
believing but  eager  Hor.'  Collier  gives  it  to  Hor.,  because  Hor.  had  come  pur- 
posely to  inquire  about  the  Ghost.  Tschischwitz  :  Mar.  is  a  firm  believer  in  the 
Ghost,  and  the  allusion  to  it  as  a  « thing '  betokening  contempt  and  doubt  can  come 
only  from  the  skeptic,  Hor.  Hudson  :  There  is  a  temperate  skepticism  well  befitting 
&  scholar  in  this  speech  of  Horatio's.     On  the  other  hand,  Elze  advocates  Mar. 

Horatio,  being  the  invited  guest,  remains  in  the  background,  attentive  and  expect- 
ant, while  Marcellus  is  more  forward  in  his  zeal  to  convince  Horatio  of  the  truth  oi 
his  story.'     White  :   Horatio  does  not  yet  believe  that  the  Ghost  appeared  at  all. 
21.  again]  Coleridge  (p.   149):   Even  the  word  'again'  has  its  credibilizin^ 


kcr  I,  sc.  i.J  HAMLE  T  J 

Ber.     I  have  seen  nothing. 

Mar.     Horatio  says  'tis  but  our  fantasy, 
And  will  not  let  belief  take  hold  of  him 

Touching  this  dreaded  sight,  twice  seen  of  us ;  25 

Therefore  I  have  entreated  him  along 
With  us  to  watch  the  minutes  of  this  night, 
That  if  again  this  apparition  come, 
He  may  approve  our  eyes  and  speak  to  it. 

Hor.     Tush,  tush,  'twill  not  appear. 

Ber.  Sit  down  awhile ;  30 

And  let  us  once  again  assail  your  ears, 
That  are  so  fortified  against  our  story, 
What  we  two  nights  have  seen. 

23.     our]  a  Q.Qc-  28.     apparition]  apparifion  QaQ,. 

fantasy]  fantafie  F,Qq.    phan-  30.      Tush,  tush,]  Om.  Q'76. 

tafte  F2F3F4.  awhile]    a    while    Q3Q3Q5FaF3 

25.     sight]  spright  Warb.  conj.  F4.    a-while  Ff. 

26,27.    along  With  us  to]  Knt.  along,  33.     two    nights    have]     Ff,    Rowe, 

With  us  to  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Var.    along  Johns.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 

With  us,  to  Ff,  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Cald.  Coll.  Dyce,  El.  White,  Sta.  Ktly,  Del.  Huds 

El.  White,    along,  With  us,  to  Rowe  i.  have  two  nights  Qq  et  cet. 

27.     minutes]  minuts  QaQ3Q.. 

effect.  From  speaking  of  '  this  thing '  Mar.  rises  into  '  This  dreaded  sight,'  which 
immediately  afterwards  becomes  '  this  apparition,'  and  that,  too,  an  intelligent  spirit 
that  is  to  be  spoken  to. 

23.  fantasy]  Clarendon  :  Both  this  word  and  '  fancy '  are  commonly  used  by  Sh. 
in  the  sense  of  imagination.  The  former  is,  however,  found  in  the  modern  sense 
of  whim,  caprice  in  Oth.  Ill,  iii,  299. 

25.  dreaded]  Francke:  Conf.  1  Hen.  VI:  IV,  v,  8,  *  unavoided  danger.' 

26.  along]  Abbott,  \  30 :  Perhaps  we  ought  (to  the  advantage  of  the  rhythm) 
to  place  a  comma  after  '  along.'  [See  III,  iii,  4,  where  the  verb  of  motion  is 
omitted;  as  in  'Let's  along,'  which  Abbott  says  is  'still  a  common  Americanism;' 
it  is  probably  local  rather  than  common;  I  have  never  heard  it. — Ed.] 

27.  minutes]  Steevens  :  See  Ford,  The  Fancies  Chaste  and  Noble,  V,  i :  •  Ere 
the  minutes  of  the  night  warn  us  to  rest.' 

29.  approve]  Johnson  :  Add  a  new  testimony  to  that  of  our  eyes.     Caldecott  : 
To  approove  or  confirme.     Ratum  habere  aliquid. — Baret's  Alvearie.     TSCHISCH 
WITZ :  Exactly  corresponding  to  the  Ital.  approvare. 

31,  32.  assail,  fortify]  Elze:  Appropriate  in  the  mouth  of  a  soldier. 

33.  What . .  .  seen.]  Hanmer  gives  this  line  to  Mar. ;  and  Jennens  follows  him, 
thus  explaining  the  change :  Mar.  begins  eagerly  to  tell  the  story  to  Hor.,  who,  having 
already  heard  his  version,  interrupts  him  by  saying  that  he  will  now  hear  Bernardo's. 
Caldecott  :  Supply  '  With '  or  By  relating  before *  What.'  Keightley  reads  ■  With 
what'     Clarendon:  A  comma  is  usually  placed  after  'story,'  and  the  construction 


8  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Hoy,  Well,  sit  we  down, 

And  let  us  hear  Bernardo  speak  of  this. 

Ber.     Last  night  of  all,  35 

When  yond  same  star  that's  westward  from  the  pole 
Had  made  his  course  to  illume  that  part  of  heaven 
Where  now  it  burns,  Marcellus  and  myself, 
The  bell  then  beating  one, — 

Enter  Ghost. 

Mar.     Peace,  break  thee  off;  look,  where  it  comes  again !     40 

33.     sit  we]  lets  Q'76.  39.     one, — ]  one —  Rowe.  one.  QqFf. 

36.      When]  Whon  Fa.  [Castle-bell  tolls  one.   Ingleby. 

yond]  yon  FF.  Enter    Ghost.]    Qq.     Enter   the 

36,  41.     that's]  thats  QqF3.  Ghost  after   off,  line  40,   Ff,    Rowe  +  . 

36.  westward]  weajlward  Q2Q3.  After   line   40,  Steev.    Var.  Cald.  Knt, 

37.  to  illume]  Steev.  /'  illume  Q2Q3  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  White,  Sta.  Enter 
Q4Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  the  Ghost  armed.  Coll.  (MS). 

White,  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  Huds.    f  illumin  40.  Two  lines,  Ff,  Rowe,  +  . 

Qg.     to  enlighten  Q'76.  off]  of  Q/^F,. 

39.     beating]  tolling  Coll.  (MS). 

is  as  if  '  let  us  tell  you'  had  been  used  instead  of  '  let  us  assail  your  ears.'  It  is  an 
instance  of  what  the  Greek  grammarians  called  oxv[JLa  npog  to  o7//LLcuv6fievov.  But 
we  may  omit  the  comma,  and  take  'what  .  .  .  seen'  as  an  epexegesis  of  'story.' 
[See  Abbott,  g  252.] 

33.  sit  we]  Abbott,  \  361,  considers  this  so-called  imperative  in  the  first  person 
plural  as  the  subjunctive,  i.  e.  '  suppose  we  sit  down?'  '  what  if  we  sit  down  ?'  Com- 
pare '  Break  we  our  watch  up,'  line  168  of  this  scene. 

35.  Coleridge:  In  the  deep  feeling  which  Ber.  has  of  the  solemn  nature  of  what 
he  is  about  to  relate,  he  makes  an  effort  to  master  his  own  imaginative  terrors  by  an 
elevation  of  style, — itself  a  continuation  of  the  effort, — by  turning  off  from  the  ap- 
parition, as  from  something  which  would  force  him  too  deeply  into  himself,  to  the 
outward  objects,  the  realities  of  nature,  which  had  accompanied  it.  This  passage 
seems  to  contradict  the  critical  law  that  what  is  told  makes  a  faint  impression  com- 
pared with  what  is  beholden ;  for  it  does  indeed  convey  to  the  mind  more  than  the 
eye  can  see ;  whilst  the  interruption  of  the  narrative  at  the  very  moment  when  we 
are  most  intensely  listening  for  the  sequel,  and  have  our  thoughts  diverted  from  the 
dreaded  sight  in  expectation  of  the  desired,  yet  almost  dreaded,  tale, — this  gives  all 
the  suddenness  and  surprise  of  the  original  appearance. 

36.  star]  Clarke  :  Nothing  more  natural  than  for  a  sentinel  to  watch  the  course 
of  a  particular  star  while  on  his  lonely  midnight  watch ;  and  what  a  radiance  of 
poetry  is  shed  on  the  passage  by  the  casual  allusion  ! 

Hudson  :  Of  course  the  north  star  is  meant,  which  appears  to  stand  still  while  the 
other  stars  in  its  neighborhood  seem  to  revolve  around  it. 

37.  illume]  Clarendon  :  Not  used  elsewhere  by  Sh. 

39.  beating]  Staunton:  'Tolling*  of  Qx  perhaps  imparts  additional  sol  em  niiy 
lo  this  impressive  preparation  for  the  appearance  of  the  spectre. 


act  I,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  9 

Ber.     In  the  same  figure,  like  the  king  that's  dead.  41 

Mar.     Thou  art  a  scholar;  speak  to  it,  Horatio. 

Ber.     Looks  it  not  like  the  king  ?  mark  it,  Horatio. 

Hor.     Most  like ;  it  harrows  me  with  fear  and  wonder. 

Ber.     It  would  be  spoke  to. 

Mar.  Question  it,  Horatio.  45 

Hor.     What  art  thou,  that  usurp'st  this  time  of  night, 
Together  with  that  fair  and  warlike  form 
In  which  the  majesty  of  buried  Denmark 

41.  A^^.]Ar«^QqFaF3F4-  F,Fa-  ./&"*/«  Q'76. 

43.  Om.  Q4QS.  45.     to\  too  Fx. 

Look:  it~\  Lookes  a  QaQ,-     Looke  Question]  Speakc  to  Qq,  Pope-t-, 

it  Fa.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cal. 

44.  harro7us~\  horrowes  Qq.  harrowes  46.     usurp'st]  ufurpejl  Q' '7 '6. 

41-44.  Coleridge:  Note  the  judgement  displayed  in  having  the  two  persons 
present,  who,  as  having  seen  the  Ghost  before,  are  naturally  eager  in  confirming 
their  former  opinions, — whilst  the  skeptic  is  silent,  and,  after  having  been  twice  ad- 
dressed by  his  friends,  answers  with  two  hasty  syllables, — '  Most  like,' — and  a  con- 
fession of  horror.  O  heaven  !  words  are  wasted  on  those  who  feel,  and  to  those  who 
do  not  feel,  the  exquisite  judgment  of  Sh.  in  this  scene,  what  can  be  said?  Hume 
himself  could  not  but  have  had  faith  in  this  Ghost  dramatically,  let  his  anti-ghostism 
have  been  as  strong  as  Samson  against  other  ghosts  less  powerfully  raised. 

42.  scholar]  DOUCE :  Exorcisms  were  performed  in  Latin,  and  therefore  only 
by  scholars.  Reed  :  Thus  Toby  in  Beau,  and  Fl.'s  Night  Walker  II,  i, — <  Let's  call 
the  butler  up,  for  he  speaks  Latin,  And  that  would  daunt  the  devil.'  In  like  manner 
the  honest  butler  in  Addison's  Drummer  recommends  the  steward  to  speak  Latin  to 
the  ghost  in  that  play.  Tschischwitz  :  Evil  spirits  were  not  exorcised  by  the  sign 
of  the  cross  alone,  but  cried  out  to  the  exorciser  the  Latin  hexameter  Signa  te  signa, 
temere  me  tangis  et  angis,  a  verse  which  being  a  palindrome  reveals  its  diabolic 
origin.  Moltke:  See  Much  Ado  II,  i,  264:  '  I  would  to  God  some  scholar  would 
conjure  her.' 

44.  harrows]  Steevens  :  Compare  Milton  :  •  Amazed  I  stood,  harrow' d  with  grief 
and  fear.' — Comus,  565.  Caldecott  :  It  is  natural  that  the  surprise  and  terror  of 
the  speaker  should  bear  some  proportion  to  the  degree  of  his  former  confidence  and 
incredulity.  Clarke  :  Horatio's  previous  levity  makes  his  subsequent  awe,  and 
trembling,  and  paleness  seem  like  the  effects  of  our  own  awe-stricken  imaginations. 
Wedgwood  :  Harrow !  a  cry  of  distress ;  Old  French,  hare !  harau  !  Crier  haro 
sur,  to  make  hue  and  cry  after.  Bohem.  hr  !  hrr  !  interjection  of  excitement  (fre- 
mentis),  hurrah  !  Old  High  German,  haren,  to  cry  out.  A  harrowing  sight  is  one 
which  leads  to  the  exclamation  harrow  ! 

45.  It  would]  Clarendon  :  There  was,  and  is,  a  notion  that  a  ghost  cannot  speak 
till  it  has  been  spoken  to.  [See  Macb.  I,  v,  19;  Ham.  Ill,  iii,  75  ;  V,  i,  77,  or  Ab 
BOTT,  \  329.  Ed.] 

46.  usurp'st]  Moberly  :  Zeugma :  the  Ghost  invades  the  night  and  assumes  the 
form  of  the  king. 


I O  HAMLET  [act  I,  sc.  i. 

Did  sometimes  march  ?  by  heaven  I  charge  thee,  speak ! 

Mar.     It  is  offended. 

Ber.  See,  it  stalks  away !  50 

Hor.     Stay !  speak,  speak !  I  charge  thee,  speak  !  [Exit  Ghost. 

Mar.     Tis  gone,  and  will  not  answer. 

Ber.     How  now,  Horatio  !  you  tremble  and  look  pale  ; 
Is  not  this  something  more  than  fantasy  ? 
What  think  you  on't  ?  55 

Hor.     Before  my  God,  I  might  not  this  believe 
Without  the  sensible  and  true  avouch 
Of  mine  own  eyes. 

Mar.  Is  it  not  like  the  king  ? 

Hor.     As  thou  art  to  thyself; 
Such  was  the  very  armour  he  had  on  60 

When  he  the  ambitious  Norway  combated ; 
So  frown'd  he  once,  when,  in  an  angry  parle, 

49.  march?']  Q'76.  march,  Q2Q3-  55.  you  on' t]  you-ont  Q2Q3-  you  of 
march:  Q4QsFf.                                                  U  Q4QS,  Pope  +  ,  Steev.  Var.  Cal. 

by  heaven]  Om.  Q'76.  56.     Before.... believe]     I    could    not 

thee,]  Rowe.     thee  QqFf,  Pope.  believe  this  Q'76. 

50.  stalks]  flaukes  Qq.  not]  nor  F2. 

51.  speak,  speak !]    speak;    Pope  +  ,  57.     true]  try V  Warb. 
Cap.                                            N  60.     very]  Om.  FaF3F4 

[Exit    Ghost.]    Exit   the   Ghost  61.     he]  Om.  Ff. 

FxFa.  62.    frownd]  f round  ¥. 

53.  Horatio]  Corson  :  '  Horatio '  should  be  uttered  with  an  unequal  upward 
wave,  expressing  the  triumph  of  the  speaker  in  the  confirmation  of  his  report. 

55.  on't]  For  instances  of  the  use  of  *  on  '  in  the  sense  of  about,  where  we  should 
use  of,  see  Abbott,  §  181.  Moberly  thinks  that  the  preposition  seems  to  be  really 
'  on '  here,  not  the  on  which  is  a  mispronunciation  of  the  word  of.    See  also  I,  i,  89 ; 

IV,  v,  194;  Macb.  I,  iii,  84. 

56.  might]  See  Abbott,  \  312,  for  other  instances  of  'might'  used  in  the  sense 
of  '  was  able '  or  '  could.' 

57.  sensible]  For  instances  of  adjectives,  especially  those  ending  mful,  less,  ble, 
and  ive,  which  have  both  an  active  and  a  passive  meaning,  see  Abbott,  \  3 ; 
Walker  (Crit.  i,  179,  183).     See  also  Macb\  II,  i,  36,  and  note. 

57.  avouch]  See  Abbott,  §  451,  for  instances  of  substantives  of  similar  forma 
tion.     Clarendon  :  This  substantive  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  Sh.     See  also 
•cast,'  I,  i,  73;  '  hatch,'  ' disclose,'  III,  i,  166;  'remove,'   IV,  v,  77 ;  'supervise,' 

V,  ii,  23.     [Also  '  repair,  V,  ii,  206.] 

60.  armour]  Was  this  the  very  armour  that  he  wore  thirty  years  before,  on  the 
day  Hamlet  was  b^rn  (see  V,  i,  135-140)  ?     How  old  is  Horatio? 

62.  parle]  Heussi  erroneously  supposes  that  this  word  signifies  a  physical 
combat.     Clarendon    (Note   on    Rich.   II:   I,  i,  192):   'Parle'    and  parley  arc 


act  I,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  II 

He  smote  the  sledded  Polacks  on  the  ice.  63 

Tis  strange. 

63.  smote]  f mot  QQF^JF^.  F4.     Pole-axe  Rowe.     Poluck  Pope  +  , 

sledded  ]JlcadedQi\,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Sing.  El. 
Polacks]    Mai.    pollax    Q3Q3Q..  64.     '  Zi'j    strange.]    y  Tis    strange — 

Pollax    Q,lr1Fa.      Polax    F  .      Poleaxe  Rowe  +  .    Om.  Seymour. 

identical,  meaning   '  conference,'  with  a  view  to  a  peaceful    settlement  of  differ- 
ences. 

63.  sledded  Polacks]  German  commentators  have  found  more  difficulty  in  this 
phrase  than  the  English.  TlECK  supposes  (and  so  translates)  that  the  king  '  dashed 
his  sliding  Pole  axe  on  the  ice.'  '  Sledded?  he  adds, '  according  to  a  license  frequent 
in  Sh.,  stands  for  '  sledding,'  which  Tieck  mistook  for  '  sliding.'  The  folly  of  this 
interpretation  and  its  errors  were  exposed  by  Delius.  But  the  spelling  of  the  Qq 
sleaded,  and  the  lack  of  a  capital  P  in  pollax,  together  with  its  Roman  letters  (proper 
names  in  the  old  copies  being  usually  printed  in  Italics),  still  presented  inexplicable 
difficulties.  Friesen  inclined  to  Tieck,  believing  it  more  '  conceivable  that  the  king 
dashed  down  on  the  ice  his  sleaded  battle-axe  (whatever  that  might  be)  than  that  he 
struck  an  enemy  or  smote  him  to  the  ground,  for  in  this  case  the  king's  visor  would 
have  been  down,  and  Horatio  could  not  have  seen  the  frown  on  his  face.'  Wherefore, 
he  concludes,  there  is  greater  likelihood  of  finding  verbal  obscurities  in  Sh.'s  text  than 
downright  nonsense.  Elze  and  Delius  follow  the  English  commentators,  and  scout 
the  idea  of  '  poleaxe.'  The  former  follows  Pope,  on  the  ground  that  Polack  is  gen- 
erally found  in  the  singular,  and  refers  to  the  Polish  king,  just  as  'the  Dane '  is  used 
in  line  15  of  this  scene.  Tschischwitz  also  follows  Pope,  because  the  plural 
Polacks  would  signify  the  whole  Polish  army,  and  it  would  be  monstrous  to  suppose 
that  the  whole  army  could  travel  in  sleighs ;  the  '  sledded  Polack '  is  therefore  merely 
the  Polish  king,  who,  and  who  alone,  had  come  to  the  conference  on  a  sled.  If  the 
word  *  Poleaxe  *  be  adopted,  insuperable  difficulties  attend  the  interpretation  of 
*  sledded.'  If  it  mean  sledged,  it  refers  to  a  battle-axe,  to  which  a  war-club  (Old 
North  German  sleggja)  has  been  added,  and  the  words  '  on  the  ice '  are  used  instead 
of  the  more  natural  phrase  on  the  ground  to  indicate  that  the  parle  took  place  on 
some  frozen  neutral  river.  Leo  {Notes  and  Queries,  November  19,  1864) : 
'I  always  regarded  'sleaded,'  or,  as  the  modern  editors  read,  'sledded,'  as 
nonsense.  What  a  ridiculous  position  it  must  have  been  to  see  a  king,  in  full 
armour,  smiting  down  a  sledded  man,  i.  e.  a  man  sitting  in  a  sledge !  It  would 
rather  not  have  been  a  king-like  action.  And  it  vas,  of  course,  not  a  remarkable, 
not  a  memorable,  fact,  that  in  the  cold  Scandina  ian  country  in  winter-time,  people 
were  found  sitting  in  a  sledge;  nobody  would  \ave  wondered  at  it, — perhaps  more 
at  the  contrary.  When  the  king  frowned  in  £n  angry  parle  he  must  have  been  pro- 
voked to  it  by  an  irritating  behaviour  of  the  adversary,  and  Horatio,  remembering 
the  fact,  will  also  bear  in  mind  the  cause  of  it,  and  so,  I  suppose,  he  used  an  epithet 
which  points  out  the  provoking  manner  of  the  Polack ;  and,  following  as  much  as 
possible  the  fonn  "  sleaded,"  I  should  like  to  propose  the  word  sturdy,  or,  as  it  would 
have  been  written  in  Shakespeare's  time,  sturdier  Moltke  believes  that  he  has 
discovered  the  correct  reading  on  aesthetic  as  well  as  philological  grounds ;  Sh. 
wishe-  tfi  portray  to  us  the  character  of  the  deceased  king,  which  must  be  full  of 


1 2  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Mar.     Thus  twice  before,  and  jump  at  this  dead  hour,  65 

With  martial  stalk  hath  he  gone  by  our  watch. 

Hor.     In  what  particular  thought  to  work  I  know  not ; 

65.  jump]jufl  Ff+Jen.  Cald.  Knt,  66.  hath  he]  he  hath  Thecb.  Warb. 
Sing.  Dyce  i,  Ktly,  Del.  ii.                               Johns. 

jump  at  this  dead]  at  the  fame  hath  he  gone  by]  he  passed  through 

Q'76.  Q,,  Sta. 

dead]  J ami  F2F3F 4,Rowe.  dread  67.    particular]  perticular  Q2Q3Qv 

Anon.*  thought  to]  it  Coll.  (MS). 

66.  stalk]  Jlau.i'e  Qq. 

grandeur  and  dignity.  Such  rage  as  Tieck's  interpretation  implies  would  be  most 
unseemly;  besides,  by  dashing  down  his  poleaxe,  he  would  disarm  himself,  which 
would  be  silly.  The  idea,  therefore,  conveyed  by  the  word  '  smite '  must  be  per- 
sonal to  the  king;  it  must  be  some  gesture,  not  a  blow  delivered  on  an  enemy.  What, 
therefore,  more  natural  than  that  he  should  strike  his  Poleaxe  violently  on  the  ice, 
just  as  any  honest  citizen  is  wont  by-way  of  emphasis  to  strike  his  fist  on  the  table  ? 
"  Sledded  "  is  a  sophistication  of  the  printers,  and  the  correct  text  is  his  leaded  pole- 
axe, i.  e.  his  poleaxe  loaded  with  lead  ;  or  his  edged  poleaxe,  i.  e.  sharpened ;  or,  for 
aught  to  the  contrary,  his  sledged  poleaxe.  This  emendation  of  Moltke's  Clarendon 
pronounces  an  anticlimax ;  Sh.  having  mentioned  '  Norway  '  in  the  first  clause  would 
certainly  have  told  us  with  whom  the  '  angry  parle '  was  held.  Curiously  enough, 
this  emendation  of  Moltke's  has  been  anticipated  not  by  a  German,  but  by  an 
Englishman.  In  the  Athen&um,  3d  April,  1875,  C.  Eliot  Browne  gives  some 
notes  on  Hamlet  by  the  Earl  of  Rochester,  1761,  and  on  the  present  passage  is  the 
following:  'Sleaded  agrees  with  an  axe,  but  not  with  a  man;  and  signifies  loaded 
with  lead.  .  .  .  The  king  was  then  in  an  angry  parle  (which  can't  signify  fighting), 
and  because  he  could  not  have  his  will  most  furiously  struck  his  loaded  or  heavy 
battle-axe  into  the  ice.'  Johnson  :  '  Polack  '  is  the  name  of  an  inhabitant  of  Poland. 
Polaque  is  French.  As  in  Davison's  translation  of  Passeratius's  Epitaph  on  Henry 
III  of  France,  published  by  Camden :  '  This  little  stone  a  great  king's  heart  doth 
hold,  Who  ruled  the  fickle  French  and  Polacks  bold.'  Malone:  The  corrupted 
form  in  the  Qq  shows  that  Sh.  wrote  '  Polacks.'  Since,  as  Dyce  adds,  the  singular 
is  afterwards  spelled  in  this  play  '  Polacke,'  '  Pollacke,'  '  Poleak,'  '  Pollock.'  and 
'  Polake.'  Steevens  preferred  the  singular,  because  we  cannot  well  suppose  that  in 
a  parley  the  king  belaboured  many,  as  it  is  not  likely  that  provocation  was  given  by 
more  than  one,  or  that  on  such  an  occasion  he  would  have  condescended  to  strike  a 
meaner  person  than  a  prince.  Boswell  :  May  not  Poleax  be  put  for  the  person 
who  carried  the  pole-axe,  a  mark  of  rank, — as  we  should  talk  at  the  present  day  '  of 
the  gold  stick  in  waiting.''  '  He  sent  a  great  and  glorious  duke,  one  of  them  that 
held  the  golden  pole-axe,  with  his  retinue,'  &c. — Milton's  Brief  Hist,  of  Moscovia. 

65.  jump]  Malone  :  In  the  folio  we  sometimes  find  a  familiar  word  substituted 
for  the  more  ancient.  Steevens  :  'Jump'  and  just  were  synonymous  in  Sh.'s  time. 
Jonson  refers  to  jump-names,  i.  e.  names  that  suit  exactly.  '  Your  appointment  was 
jumpe  at  three.' — Chapman's  May-Day.  Halliwell  :  Jump  is  rather  more  ex- 
pressive, implying  coincidence  of  time  to  the  very  second.     [See  V,  ii,  362.] 

67    thought]  Steevens:  What  particular  train  of  thinking  to  follow. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


HAMLET 


13 


, 


But,  in  the  gross  and  scope  of  my  opinion, 
This  bodes  some  strange  eruption  to  our  state. 

Mar.     Good  now,  sit  down,  and  tell  me,  he  that  knows, 
Why  this  same  strict  and  most  observant  watch 
So  nightly  toils  the  subject  of  the  land, 
And  why  such  daily  cast  of  brazen  cannon, 
And  foreign  mart  for  implements  of  war ; 
Why  such  impress  of  shipwrights,  whose  sore  task 


70 


75 


68.  gross  and]  Om.  Q'76. 
~tny]  mine  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Var. 

I    Cald^oll.  El.  White,  Sta.  Huds. 

69.  eruption]  erruption  Fx. 

70.  Good  now ',]  Pray  Q'76. 


72.  subject]  subjects  Pope  +  . 

73.  why]  with  Qq. 
cast]  cojl  Qq,  Jen. 
brazen]  brazon  QaQ3F,F  . 


70.  Good  now]  Johnson  {Diet.) :  In  good  time :  a  la  bonne  heure.  A  gentle 
exclamation  of  entreaty.  Coleridge  :  How  delightfully  natural  is  the  transition  to 
the  retrospective  narrative !  And  observe,  upon  the  Ghost's  reappearance,  how  much 
Horatio's  courage  is  increased  by  having  translated  the  late  individual  spectator  into 
general  thought  and  past  experience, — and  the  sympathy  of  Mar.  and  Ber.  with  his 
patriotic  surmises  in  daring  to  strike  at  the  Ghost;  whilst  in  a  moment,  upon  its 
vanishing,  the  former  solemn  awe-stricken  feeling  returns  upon  them  :  see  lines  143, 
144.  Abbott,  \  13:  'Gunnow'  (good  now)  is  still  an  appellative  in  Dorsetshire. 
CORSON  :  '  Good  '  is  a  vocative,  and  '  now '  belongs  to  •  sit  down.' 

72.  toils]  Clarendon  :  Causes  to  toil.  Many  verbs  which  we  only  use  as  in- 
transitive were  used  in  Shakespeare's  time  also  as  transitive;  e.g.  *  to  fear,' '  to  learn/ 
*  to  cease,'  '  to  remember ;'  and  some  which  we  only  use  as  transitive  were  used  as 
intransitive  also;  e.g.  *  to  show,'  *  to  want,' '  to  look.'  [See Macb.  II,  iv,  4;  Abbott, 
§290,  for  a  list  of  transitive  verbs  formed  from  nouns  and  adjectives;  thus  'pale,' 
I,  v,  90.] 

72.  subject]  Jennens  :  A  noun  of  multitude.  Clarendon  :  See  I,  ii,  33 ;  Meas 
for  Meas.  Ill,  ii,  145.   [Lear,  IV,  vi,  1 10.]   Thus,  too,  •  the  general,'  Ham.  II,  ii,  416. 

74.  mart]  Clarendon  :  Market,  marketing,  purchasing.  In  Tarn,  of  Shrew,  II, 
i,  329,  it  means  a  mercantile  expedition. 

75.  impress]  Whalley  :  Judge  Barrington  ( Obs.  on  the  more  Ancient  Statutes,  p. 
300)  infers  from  this  passage  that  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  shipwrights  as 
well  as  seamen  were  forced  to  serve.  Douce  {Lear,  IV,  vi,  87 — Var.  1793)  incon- 
sequently  denies  Barrington's  conclusion,  by  affirming  that/rm-money  was  given  to 
soldiers  when  they  were  retained  in  the  king's  service,  and  that  it  merely  indicated 
that  they  were  to  hold  themselves,  at  all  times,  in  readiness  to  serve.  The  term  is 
taken  from  the  French  *  prest,'  ready,  and  is  so  written  in  Henry  VII's  Book  of 
Household  Expenses.  The  word  is  here  used  in  its  ordinary  signification,  as  shown 
by  the  Concordance.  Lord  Campbell  (p.  103) :  Such  confidence  has  there  been  in 
Shakespeare's  accuracy,  that  this  passage  has  been  quoted  both  by  text-writers  and 
by  judges  on  the  bench  as  an  authority  upon  the  legality  of  the  press-gang,  and  upon 
the  debated  question  whether  shipwrights,  as  well  as  common  seamen,  are  liable  to 
be  pressed  into  the  service  of  the  royal  navy.  Tschischwitz,  however,  will  not 
toler?te  the  idea  of  impressment,  which  he  says  is  an  injustice  of  wholly  modern 

2 


J 


1 4  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  L 

Does  not  divide  the  Sunday  from  the  week ;  76 

What  might  be  toward,  that  this  sweaty  haste 

Doth  make  the  night  joint-labourer  with  the  day ; 

Who  is't  that  can  inform  me  ? 

j   Hor.  That  can  I ; 

At  least  the  whisper  goes  so.     Our  last  king,  80 

Whose  image  even  but  now  appear'd  to  us, 

Was,  as  you  know,  by  Fortinbras  of  Norway, 

Thereto  prick'd  on  by  a  most  emulate  pride, 
^     Dared  to  the  combat ;  in  which  our  valiant  Hamlet — 
I     For  so  this  side  of  our  known  world  esteem'd  him —  85 

Did  slay  this  Fortinbras ;  who  by  a  seal'd  compact, 
I      Well  ratified  by  law  and  heraldry, 

76.  Does']  Do's  FIF2.     Dos't  F3F4.  83.     emulate]  emulant  Seymour. 
78.     Doth  make]  Makes  Q'76.                          84.     combat]  fight  Pope  +  . 

joint -labourer]  ioint  labour  Q  .  86.     a]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

81.     even  but]  but  even  Warb.  Johns.  87.     and]  of  Warb.  Han. 

appeared]  appeal d  Q .  heraldry]  herald}'  Q2Q,. 

origin,  and  that  the  word  must  be  imprest  (Ital.  impresto),  equivalent  to  'handsel,' 
and  of  common  usage  in  England  aforetime ;  and  thus  it  stands  in  his  text. 

77.  toward]  Dyce.  In  a  state  of  preparation,  forthcoming,  at  hand.  See  V,  ii, 
352.  [See  Rom.  &■*  Jul.  I,  v,  120.  Florio  gives:  ' Prefagiare :  to  perceiue  a  thing 
that  is  toward  before  it  come.'  Ed.] 

81.  but]  See  Abbott,  \  130,  and  Macb.  V,  viii,  40. 

82.  Fortinbras]  Latham  {Athenaum,  27  July,  1872)  shows  that  this  is  a  corrupt 
French  form,  equivalent  to  Fierumbras  or  Fierabras,  which  is  a  derivative  from 
ferri  brachium  ;  by  translating  brachium,  side,  we  have  Ironside,  or,  in  Icelandic, 
famsidha,  a  name  actually  applied  to  one  of  the  old  Norse  Sea-kings.  All  that  the 
learned  critic  contends  for  is  that  such  names  are  in  some  small  sense  historical,  i.  e. 
that  they  have  their  origin  in  distorted  history,  rather  than  in  arbitrary  fiction. 

83.  emulate]  Clarendon  :  Emulous.     Not  elsewhere  in  Sh. 

84.  the]  Abbott,  §  92 :  i.  e.  the  combat  that  ends  all  dispute.  Or  see  Macb. 
V,  ii,  4. 

86.  Clarendon  pronounces  this  line  an  Alexandrine ;  but  Abbott  ($  469)  re- 
duces it  to  a  line  of  five  feet  by  scanning  '  this  Fortinbras '  as  one  foot.  [See  Macb. 
IV,  ii,  72.] 

86.  compact]  Clarendon  :  Always,  whether  substantive  or  adjective,  accented  by 
Sh.  on  the  last  syllable,  except  in  1  Hen.  VI:  V,  iv,  163.  For  lists  of  words  with 
accents  differing  from  present  use,  see  Abbott,  \\  490, 492.  Elze  refers  to  the  com- 
pact made  between  Collere  and  Horvendile  in  The  Hystorie  of  Hamblet,  Appendix, 
Vol.  II,  p.  92. 

87.  law  and  heraldry]  Capell  (i,  122) :  The  forms  of  both  the  common  law  and 
vhe  law  of  arms  having  been  duly  observed.  Steevens  erroneously  cites  Upton  as 
giving  this  phrase  ar  an  instance  of  hendiadys,  meaning  the  heraldic  law,  which  ii 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


HAMLET 


*5 


Did  forfeit,  with  his  life,  all  those  his  lands 

Which  he  stood  seized  of,  to  the  conqueror; 

Against  the  which  a  moiety  competent 

Was  gaged  by  our  king ;  which  had  return'd 

To  the  inheritance  of  Fortinbras, 

Had  he  been  vanquisher;  as,  by  the  same  covenant 

And  carriage  of  the  article  design'd, 

His  fell  to  Hamlet.     Now,  sir,  young  Fortinbras, 

Of  unimproved  mettle  hot  and  full, 


90 


95 


88.  those]  thefe  Qq. 

89.  of]  on  Ff,  Rowe,  White,  Huds. 
in  Coll.  (MS). 

90.  Against]  Again  Jen. 

91.  returned]  returne  Qq,  Pope, 
Theob.  Warb.  Han.  Cap.  remained  Coll. 
(MS). 

93.  vanquisher;]  vanquisher,  Ff. 
van-quijht ;  Qg*. 

the  same]  that  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Johns. 

covenant]    Cou'nant  Ff.     comart 


Qq,  Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  co-man  Qg*, 
Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Dyce  ii. 
compact  Q'76,  Heath,  Hunter. 

94.  article  designed]  article  dej] eigne 
Q3Q  .  articles  def eigne  Q  .  Articles  de- 
figne  Q  .  Article  defigne  Ft.  articles 
design'd  Pope  + ,  Jen.  article  then  sign' a 
Coll.  (MS),  articles'  design  White, 
Huds. 

95.  sir]  Om.  Pope  4- . 

96.  unimproved]  inapproved  Q  , 
Sing,  ii,  Ktly.     unapproved  Anon.* 


may  be  possibly  (though  I  doubt  it;  CLARENDON  says  it  is  '  a  kind  of  hendiadys'), 
but  the  only  example  Upton  gives  from  Sh.  is  from  Ant.  &  Cleop.  IV,  ii,  44. 
MOBERLY  :  Law  would  be  wanted  to  draw  up  accurately  the  contract,  heraldry  to 
give  it  a  binding  force  in  honour;  as  the  court  of  chivalry  'has  cognizance  of  con- 
tracts touching  deeds  of  arms  or  of  war  out  of  the  realm.' 

89.  seized]  Clarendon:  Possessed  of.  Cotgrave :  Saisi :  seised,  layed  hold 
on,  possessed  of.     [The  customary  legal  term  at  the  present  day.  Ed.] 

90.  moiety]  Clarendon  :  Used  generally  for  any  portion.  In  1  Hen.  IV:  III, 
i,  96,  it  means  a  third. 

91.  return'd}  Earl  of  Rochester  (1761,  Athenceum,  3  April,  1875) :  These 
lands  could  have  no  return,  that  had  never  been  turned  or  moved  from  the  primitive 
owner.     Read,  enured. 

93.  covenant]  Malone,  Dyce  :  Co-mart  of  the  Qq  is  a  joint  bargain,  a  word 
of  Shakespeare's  coinage.  A  mart  signifying  a  great  fair  or  market ;  he  would  not 
have  scrupled  to  have  written  to  mart,  in  the  sense  of  to  make  a  bargain.  Steevens  : 
He  has  not  scrupled  so  to  write  in  Cym.  I,  vi,  151.  White:  Co-mart  is  a  singular 
phrase,  which  implies  a  trading  purpose  not  well  suited  to  a  royal  combat  for  a 
province.  Heath,  Hunter  and  Bailey  prefer  compact.  Abbott,  \  494 :  One  of 
these  syllables  is  slurred;  see  'funeral,'  I,  ii,  176. 

94.  carriage]  Johnson  :  That  is,  the  import  of  the  article  formed  or  drawn  up 
between  them.  White:  In  FT  an  s  after  'article'  seems  manifestly  omitted.  The 
meaning  is  the  carrying  out  of  the  design  of  the  articles  between  the  two  kings. 

96.  unimproved]  Johnson's  definition  of  this  word  as  '  not  regulated  or  guided 
by  knowledge  or  experience '  is  denied  by  Gifford,  who  says  that  it  means  just  the 
contrary.     See  note  on  reprove  (in  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  III,  ii,  p.  88),  which 


1 6  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Hath  in  the  skirts  of  Norway  here  and  there  97 

Shark'd  up  a  list  of  lawless  resolutes, 
For  food  and  diet,  to  some  enterprise 

That  hath  a  stomach  in't;  which  is  no  other —  100 

n  ^    As  it  doth  well  appear  unto  our  state — 

But  to  recover  of  us,  by  strong  hand 
And  terms  compulsative,  those  foresaid  lands 


98.     lawless]  laweleffe  Q2Q3-   lawlejfe  101.     As]  And  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Cald. 

Q4Q5.      Landlefe    FxFaF3.      Landlefs  Knt. 

F  +  ,  Steev.   Cald.  Var.   Knt,   Dyce  i,  103.     compulsative]  compulfatory Qq, 

Del.  Mob.  Warb.   Cap.  Jen.   Steev.  Var.   Sing,  i, 

100.     is]  Om.  Q4QS.  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

has  the  same  sense  as  improve.  This  last  word  Nares  defines  by  '  to  reprove  or 
refute;  as  from  improbo,  Latin.1  Singer  (ed.  1)  cites  Florio:  •  Improbare,  to  im- 
prooue,  to  impugn,'  hence  '  unimproved '  means  unimpeackcd,  unquestioned.  In  his 
ed.  2,  Singer  adopted  Qx  '  as  the  idea  excited  by  young  Fortinbras  is  of  one  animated 
by  courage  at  full  heat,  but  at  present  untried, — the  ardour  of  inexperience.'  Staun- 
ton apprehends  that  insatiable,  ungovernable  is  meant,  as  in  Chapman,  Iliad,  Book 
xi, — '  the  King  still  cride,  Pursue,  pursue,  And  all  his  unreproved  hands  did  blood 
and  dust  embrue.'  Dyce  follows  Gifford,  and  Clarendon  inclines  to  the  definition 
of  Singer  (ed.  2),  untutored. 

98.  Shark'd]  Steevens  :  Picked  up  without  distinction,  as  the  shark-fish  collects 
his  prey.  Nares  :  Collected  in  a  banditti-like  manner.  The  verb  to  shark  is  nearly 
equivalent  to  the  modern  verb  to  swindle. 

98.  list]  Hunter  (ii,  214) :  Sight  of  Qx,  though  now  accounted  a  vulgarism,  is 
here  the  better  word. 

98.  lawless]  Tschischwitz  :  The  reading  of  the  Ff  is  certainly  the  better ;  had 
'  lawless '  been  meant,  the  more  usual  word  outlaws  would  have  been  used.  No 
young  noble  warrior  like  Fortinbras  would  have  made  common  cause  with  outlaws* 
but  with  the  landless  the  case  was  different ;  indeed,  he  himself  belonged  to  that 
category. 

98.  resolutes]  For  inflected  participles  and  adjectives,  see  Abbott,  \  433;  and 
Macb.  I,  ii,  60,  '  Norways'  king.' 

99.  food  and  diet]  Theobald  (Nichols,  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  558) :  Is  not  « food  and 
diet '  a  mere  tautology  ?  Read, '  For  food ;  and  dieted  to  some,'  &c,  i.  e.  trained  up. 
[This  was  not  repeated  in  his  edition.  Ed.]  Moberly  :  For  no  pay  but  their  keep. 
Being  landless,  they  have  nothing  to  lose,  and  the  war  would  at  the  worst  feed  them. 

100.  stomach]  Johnson  :  Constancy,  resolution.  Dyce  :  Stubborn  resolution 
or  courage.  Caldecott  :  The  redundancy  of  '  food  and  diet '  may  have  been  em- 
ployed for  the  purpose  of  fixing  in  the  mind  the  continuation  of  the  metaphor  in  the 
use  of  the  word  '  stomach,'  here  put  in  an  equivocal  sense,  importing  both  courage 
and  appetite.     The  same  play  on  the  word  is  in  Two  Gent.  I,  ii,  68. 

101.  state]  Delius  :  This  does  not  in  Sh.  refer  merely  to  geographical  limits, 
but  to  the  government. 

102.  108.  But]  Abbott,  §  127:  In  the  sense  of  except,  where  we  should  use 
than. 


\ct  I,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  1 7 

So  by  his  father  lost ;  and  this,  I  take  it, 

Is  the  main  motive  of  our  preparations,  105 

The  source  of  this  our  watch,  and  the  chief  head 

Of  this  post-haste  and  romage  in  the  land. 

Ber.     I  think  it  be  no  other  but  e'en  so. 
Well  may  it  sort,  that  this  portentous  figure 
Comes  armed  through  our  watch,  so  like  the  king  1 10 

That  was  and  is  the  question  of  these  wars. 

Hot.     A  mote  it  is  to  trouble  the  mind's  eye. .    9  /=£ 
In  the  rhrjsTnigh  and  palmy  state  of  Rome,  ^C^s-tJl^ 

107.  romage]  Romadge  Q2.     Rome-         Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.    Steev.    Cald.  Var. 

°#  %Q.A%  Knt- 

108 — 125.     Ber.     /   think. ..country-  112.     mote]  moth  QaQ3Q4,  Jen.  Cald. 

men.]  Om.  Ff.  Knt,  Del. 

108.  e'en   so]    enfo   Q3Q3-     euen  fo  113.   palmy] JlouriJJiing  Q'76,  Rowe. 

107.  romage]  Wedgwood  (s.  v.  Rummage) :  Two  words  seem  confounded. 
I.  Rummage,  the  proper  stowing  of  merchandise  in  a  ship;  from  Du.  ruttt,  Fr. 
rum,  the  hold  of  a  ship.  Hence  to  rummage,  to  search  among  the  things  stowed 
in  a  given  receptacle.  2.  But  in  addition  to  the  foregoing  the  word  is  sometimes 
used  in  the  sense  of  racket,  disturbance  [as  here  in  Hamlet],  In  this  sense  it  may 
be  a  parallel  form  with  rumpus.  CALDECOTT  connects  it  with  '  Romelynge,  privy 
myoterynge.     Ruminacio,  mussitacio.' — Prompt.  Parv. 

108-125.  Knight  explains  the  omission  of  these  lines  in  the  Ff  on  the  ground 
that  Shakespeare  probably  suppressed  this  magnificent  description  of  the  omens 
which  preceded  the  fall  of  '  the  mightiest  Julius '  after  he  had  written  Jul.  Cas. 
Hunter  (ii,  214)  :  I  wonder  that  the  commentators  should  have  overlooked  so 
obvious  an  origin  of  this  passage  as  Lucan's  description  (Pharsalia,  lib.  i)  of  the 
prodigies  which  preceded  the  death  of  Caesar.  We  have  the  tenantless  graves,  the 
sheeted  dead  seen  on  the  streets,  the  stars  with  trains  of  fire,  and  the  moon's  eclipse. 
It  is  of  little  moment  to  ask  if  Lucan  had  been  translated  when  Sh.  wrote  Hamlet. 
The  earliest  published  translation,  I  believe,  is  that  by  Sir  Arthur  Gorges,  1614. 

108.  be]  Abbott,  §  299 :  As  a  rule  it  will  be  found  that  be  is  used  with  some 
notion  of  doubt,  question,  thought,  &c. ;  I,  in  questions,  as  in  III,  ii,  100;  V,  i, 
94  ;  and  2,  after  verbs  of  thinking,  as  in  the  present  case.  Very  significant  is  this 
difference  in  '  I  think  my  wife  be  honest,  and  think  she  is  not,'  Oth.  Ill,  iii,  384. 

109.  sort]  Johnson  :  The  cause  and  effect  are  proportionate  and  suitable. 

112.  mote]  Malone  [King  John,  IV,  i,  92):  The  modern  spelling  of  moth. 

Thus,  ' they  are  in  the  aire,  like  atomi  in  sole,  mothes  in  the  sonne.' — Preface 

to  Lodge's  Incarnate  Devils,  1596.     Also,  '  Festucco,  a  little  sticke,  a  fease-strawe, 
a  tooth-picke,  a  moth,  a  little  beame.' — Florio,  1598. 

113.  state]  Wilson  [Blackwood's  Mag.,  Aug.  1849,  p.  252):  Write  henceforth 
and  for  ever  '  State '  with  a  towering  capital.  ...  It  is  for  the  Republic  and  City 
what  Realm  or  Kingdom  is  to  us, — at  once  place  and  indwelling  Power.  '  State,' — 
properly  Republic, — here  specifically  and  pointedly  means  Reigning  City.  The 
Ghosts  walked  in  the  City, — not  in  the  Republic.   .  .  .  Every  hackneyer  of  this 

2*  B 


1 8  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

A  little  ere  the  mightiest  Julius  fell, 

The  graves  stood  tenantless,  and  the  sheeted  dead  115 

Did  squeak  and  gibber  in  the  Roman  streets ; 

As  stars  with  trains  of  fire  and  dews  of  blood, 

115.  tenantless]  tennatlijfe  QaQ3-  in]  Ay,  stars  with. ..Did  darken  e'en,  a\ 
and]    Om.    Pope,   Theob.    Han.         Ay,  stars   with.. .Did  enter   in,   or  Ay 

Warb.  stars  with...Dyd  darkening.   Leo   (N. 

116.  streets  :]   Line  marked  as  omit-         6°  Qu.  19  Nov.  '64). 

ted  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Sing,  i,  White,  Ktly,  117.     As. ..blood,]     Stars    shon    with 

Cam.  Huds.  Trains   of  Fire,  Dews    of  Blood  fell, 

117 — 120.     Transferred  by  Tsch.  to  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.     Om.  P.ann. 

follow  countryman,  line  125.  and  dews]  shed  dews  Harness. 

117.  118.     As  stars  with... Disasters 

phrase, — State, — as  every  man  alive  hackneys  it  [by  using  it  in  the  sense  of  con- 
dition], is  a  ninefold  Murderer!  He  murders  the  Phrase;  he  murders  the  Speech; 
he  murders  Horatio;  he  murders  the  Ghost;  he  murders  the  Scene;  he  murders  the 
Play;  he  murders  Rome;  he  murders  Shakespeare;  and  he  murders  Me.' 

114.  mightiest]  Abbott,  $  8:  The  superlative,  like  the  Latin  usage,  sometimes 
signifies  ve?y,  with  little  or  no  idea  of  excess. 

116.  Jennens  :  Perhaps  a  line  has  been  omitted  here,  by  mistake,  somewhat  like 
the  following:  'Tremendous  prodigies  in  heav'n  appear'd.'  Hunter  (ii,  2,  15) 
suggests,  '  In  the  heavens  above  strange  portents  did  appear.' 

117,  118.  Malone:  When  Sh.  had  told  us  that  the  'graves  stood  tenantless,'  &c, 
which  are  wonders  confined  to  the  earth,  he  naturally  proceeded  to  say  (in  the  line 
now  lost)  that  yet  other  prodigies  appeared  in  the  sky ;  and  the  phenomena  he  ex- 
emplified by  adding,  '  As  [i.  e.  for  instance]  stars  with  trains,'  &c.  I  suspect  that 
the  words  '  As  stars '  are  a  corruption,  and  that  the  lost  words,  as  suggested  by  the 
passage  in  ful.  Cas.  II,  ii,  which  describes  the  prodigies  preceding  his  death,  con- 
tained a  description  of  'fiery  warriors  fighting  in  the  clouds?  or  of  '  brands  burning 
bright  beneath  the  stars.'  What  makes  me  believe  that  the  corruption  lies  in  '  As 
stars'  is  the  disagreeable  recurrence  of  '  stars'  in  the  next  line.  Perhaps  Sh.  wrote  : 
Astres  with  trains  of  fire — and  dews  of  blood  Disastrous  dimm'd  the  sun  !  'Astre' 
is  an  old  word  for  star;  see  Diana,  a  collection  of  poems,  printed  circa  1580.  [See 
also  Florio,  lStella:  a  starre,  an  aster,  a  planet.'  Ed.]  Knight  rather  favors 
Malone's  emendation,  and  thinks  that  it  gets  rid  of  the  difficulty.  Caldecott  finds 
no  difficulty  in  conceiving  the  meaning  of  the  passage  as  it  stands,  reading  or  under- 
standing it  thus :  *  The  graves  opened,  the  dead  were  seen  abroad  [spectacles  such] 
as,'  &c.  Mitford  [Gent.  Mag.,  Feb.  1845):  This  line  has  merely  got  out  of  its 
place;  there  is  nothing  wanting.     Transpose  it  to  follow  line  121,  and  read,  'As 

stars  with blood,  Are  harbingers  preceding,'  &c.    A.  E.  B  [RAE]  (JV.  <5r>  Qu., 

24  Jan.  1852):  It  is  only  by  the  occurrence  of  such  difficulties  as  the  present, 
which,  after  remaining  so  long  obscure,  are  at  last  only  resolvable  by  presup- 
posing in  Sh.  a  depth  of  knowledge  far  exceeding  that  of  his  triflers,  that  his 
wonderful  and  almost  mysterious  attainments  are  beginning  to  be  appreciated.  In 
the  present  case  he  must  not  only  have  known  that  the  fundamental  meaning  of 
astf  is  a  spot  of  light,  but  he  must  also  have  taken  into  consideration  the  power  of 
dii  in  producing  an  aosolute  reversal  in  the  meaning  of  the  word  to  which  it  may 
be  prefixed.     Thus,  service  is  a  benefit,  disservice  is  an  injur}',  while  unservice  (did 


act  i,  sc.  i]  HAMLET  19 

Disasters  in  the  sun  ;  and  the  moist  star,  1 18 

118.     in]  veiTd  Rowe  +  .    dim'd C&p.  Mai.  Harness. 


such  a  word  exist)  would  be  a  negative  mean  between  the  two  extremes.  Similarly, 
if  aster  signify  a  spot  of  light,  a  name  singularly  appropriate  to  a  comet,  disaster 
must,  by  reversal,  be  a  spot  of  darkness,  and  'disasters  in  the  sun'  no  other  than 
what  we  should  call  spots  upon  his  disk.  Read,  therefore,  'Asters  with  trains  of 
fire,'  &c.  SlNGER  (ed.  2) :  As  it  has  been  conjectured  that  a  line  has  been  here 
lost,  perhaps  we  might  read  :  'And  as  the  earth,  so  portents  filVd  the  sky,  Asters,  with 
trains  of  fire,'  &c.  Disaster  is  used  as  a  verb  in  Ant.  &°  Cleop.  II,  vii,  18,  and  it  has 
therefore  been  conjectured  that  we  should  read  Disastering  here.  Collier  think* 
that  these  lines  are  probably  irretrievably  corrupt,  but  that  there  is  no  sufficient  reason 
for  supposing  a  line  to  have  been  lost,  adding,  '  We  shrewdly  suspect  that  the  error 
lies  merely  in  the  word  "  Disasters,"  which  was  perhaps  misprinted,  because  it  was 
immediately  below  "  As  stars,"  and  thus  misled  the  eye  of  the  old  compositor.  We 
do  not  imagine  that  Sh.  used  so  affected  and  unpopular  a  word  as  astres  or  asters? 
W.  W.  Williams  proposes  :  *  Astres  with  trains  of  fire  and  dews  of  blood,  Did  over- 
cast the  sun,'  &c.  STAUNTON  awards  some  plausibility  to  Malone's  emendation, 
and  considers  Astres  or  Asters  as  an  acceptable  conjecture,  but  conceives,  with 
Collier,  that  the  cardinal  error  lies  in  '  Disasters,'  which  conceals  some  verb  import- 
ing the  obscuration  of  the  sun;  for  example,  'Asters  with  trains  of  fire  and  dews  of 
blood  Distempered  the  sun,'  or  '  Discoloured  the.  sun.'  Dyce  pronounces  the  passage 
hopelessly  mutilated,  and  in  his  2d  ed.  terms  Leo's  alterations  '  most  wretched,'  and 
also  gives  a  MS.  emendation  by  Boaden,  supplying  the  missing  line  thus :  •  The 
heavens,  too,  spoke  in  silent  prodigies  ;  As,  stars,'  &c.  White  says  that  a  preceding 
line,  or  even  more  than  one,  has  been  lost.  Clarke:  Bearing  in  mind  that  Sh.  uses 
'  as '  many  times  with  markedly  elliptical  force,  and  in  passages  of  very  peculiar 
construction,  we  do  not  feel  so  sure  that  the  present  one  has  suffered  from  omission. 
It  may  be  that  the  sentence  is  to  be  understood,  '  As  there  were  stars  of  fire,  &c, 
so  there  were  disasters  in  the  sun,'  &c.  Fahius  Oxoniensis  (AT.  6°  Qu.,  7  Jan. 
1865) :  Read,  *  As  stars  (z*.  e.  while  stars)  ...  or,  '  And  stars  .  .  .  Disastrous  dimmed 
the  sun.'  Duane  (AT.  &>  Qu.,  3d  S.  viii,  30  Sept.  '65)  :  '  I  am  convinced  Sh. 
wrote,  '  Did  usher  in  the  sun.'  This  makes  sense  of  the  whole  passage ;  it  is 
metrical,  and  it  produces  a  line  in  analogy  with  the  line  '  did  speak  and  gibbei. 
The  words  did  usher  might  be  readily  mistaken  for  *  Disasters,'  and  the  compositor's 
eye  may  have  caught  the  word  'stars'  in  the  line  above.  Keightley  {Expositor)  : 
Perhaps  for  '  disasters '  we  might  read  distempers  :  '  distemperatures  of  the  sun,'— 
I  Hen.  IV:  V,  i.  Massey  (  The  Secret  Drama  of  Shakespeare's  Sonnets,  ed.  ii,  1872, 
Supplement,  p.  46)  inserts  lines  1 21-125  between  lines  116  and  117,  and  asserts  that 
'it  must  he  admitted  that  we  recover  the  perfect  sense  of  the  passage  by  this  insertion.' 
There  is  no  eclipse  of  either  sun  or  moon  mentioned  in  Jul.  Cas.,  and  its  men- 
tion here,  Massey  infers,  must  point  to  some  actual,  recent  instance.  The  Astronomer 
Royal,  being  applied  to,  replied  by  showing  that  there  was  an  eclipse  of  the  moon 
on  20  February,  1598,  and  one  of  the  sun,  almost  total,  on  6  March  following. 
Hence  Massey  infers  that  this  year  is  the  date  of  the  composition  of  Hamlet,  and 
that  in  this  passage  Sh.  pointed,  by  the  eclipse  of  the  moon,  to  the  death  or  deposi- 
tion of  Queen  Elizabeth,  who  had  an  attack  of  '  special  sickness  at  the  time.'  More- 
over, '  disasters  in  the  sur  '   Massey  thinks,  might  have  been  '  sun-spots '  which  Sh. 


20  HAMLET  [act  I,  sc.  i. 

Upon  whose  influence  Neptune's  empire  stands, 

Was  sick  almost  to  doomsday  with  eclipse:  120 

And  even  the  like  precurse  of  fierce  events, 

As  harbingers  preceding  still  the  fates 

And  prologue  to  the  omen  coming  on, 

Have  heaven  and  earth  together  demonstrated 

121.    fierce]  fearce  Q  .    feare  Q2Q,.  123.     omen  coming}   omen'd  Coming 

fear* 'd  Coll.  conj.  Theob.  Han.  Johns. 

1  noted,'  and  so  '  pluralized  [sic]  the  phenomenon.'  Moberly  agrees  with  Malone 
in  supplying  the  missing  line  from  the  corresponding  passage  in  yul.  Cas.,  if  a  line 
be  really  lost.  Clarendon:  Sh.  had  probably  in  his  mind  the  passage  in  North's 
Plutarch,  Jul.  Cces.  p.  739  (ed.  1631) :  '  Certainly,  destinie  may  easier  be  foreseene 
then  auoided,  considering  the  strange  and  wonderfull  signes  that  were  said  to  be 
seene  before  Caesars  death.  For,  touching  the  fires  in  the  element,  and  spirits  run- 
ning vp  and  downe  ii.  the  night,  and  also  the  solitary  birds  to  be  seene  at  noon 
daies  sitting  in  the  great  market  place,  are  not  all  these  signes  perhaps  worth  the 
noting,  in  such  a  wonderful  chance  as  happened  ?'  Plutarch  also  relates  that  a  comet 
appeared  after  Caesar's  death  for  seven  nights  in  succession,  and  then  was  seen  nc 
more,  that  the  sun  was  darkened  and  the  earth  brought  forth  raw  and  unripe  fruit. 

118.  moist  star]  Malone  :  That  is,  the  moon.  See  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii,  1.  Voss 
refers  to  Matthew,  xxiv,  29.  Moltke  cites  parallel  references  from  Mid.  N.  D.  II, 
1,  162;  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii,  427 ;  Rich.  Ill :  II,  ii,  69 ;  Lear,  V,  iii,  19  ;  Rom.  &>  Jul. 
I,  iv,  62.  Tschischwitz  discusses  the  claims  of  various  philosophers  to  the  dis- 
covery of  the  dependence  of  the  tides  upon  the  moon. 

121.  precurse]  Clarendon  :  Only  found  here  in  Sh.,  though  he  uses  '  precurrer ' 
(Thorn,  dr>  Tur.  6),  and  'precursor'  (Temp.  I,  ii,  201).  It  includes  everything 
that  preceded  and  foreshadowed  the  fierce  events  that  followed. 

121.  fierce]  Warburton  explains  this  as  terrible;  Steevens,  as  conspicuous, 
glaring,  and  cites  in  proof  Timon,  IV,  ii,  30;  Hen.  VIII:  I,  i,  54;  Caldecott, 
bloody  and  terrible,  as  elsewhere  it  means  extreme,  excessive,  citing  King  John,  V, 
vii,  13,  and  Jonson's  Sejanus,V ,  x  (p.  140,  ed.  Gifford),  'O  most  tame  slavery,  and 
fierce  flattery.' 

122.  harbingers]  See  Macb.  I,  iv,  45. 

122.  still]  Constantly,  always.  See  II,  ii,  42;  Rom.  &  yul.  II,  ii,  172,  174. 
V,  iii,  106 ;  Macb.  V,  vii,  16;  and  Abbott,  \  69. 

123.  omen]  Theobald:  'Prologue'  and  'omen'  are  synonymous,  whereas  Sh. 
means  that  these  phenomena  are  forerunners  of  the  events  presaged  by  them,  and 
such  sense  the  addition  of  a  single  letter  gives.  Upton  says  that  the  '  omen  '  is  the 
event  itself,  which  happened  in  consequence  of  the  omens,  and  cites  Virgil,  A£n.  i, 
349.  Heath  expressed  the  same  idea  in  the  phraseology  of  a  grammarian  :  '  Omen,' 
by  metonymy  of  the  antecedent  for  the  consequent,  is  here  put  for  the  event  pre- 
dicted by  the  omen.  Farmer  appositely  cited  a  distich  from  Heywood's  Life  of 
Merlin  :  '  Merlin,  well  vers'd  in  many  a  hidden  spell,  His  countries  omen  did  long 
since  foretell.' 

124.  demonstrated]  Pk.ius  :  This  word  is  accented  on  the  first  syllable  also 
in  Hen.  V:  IV,  ii,  54. 


Acri.sc.  i.]  HAMLET  21 

Unto  our  climatures  and  countrymen.  1 25 

Re-enter  Ghost. 

But  soft,  behold  !  lo,  where  it  comes  again  ! 

I'll  cross  it,  though  it  blast  me. — Stay,  illusion! 

If  thou  hast  any  sound,  or  use  of  voice, 

Speak  to  me ; 

If  there  be  any  good  thing  to  be  done  HO 

That  may  to  thee  do  ease  and  grace  to  me, 

Speak  to  me ; 

If  thou  art  privy  to  thy  country's  fate, 

Which,  happily,  foreknowing  may  avoid, 

0,  speak!  135 

125.     climatures]     climature     Dyce  Spreading  his  Arms.  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

conj.  White,  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  129,  130.     Speak  ..done']  Pope.    One 

countrymen.]      contrimen.      Q^.  line,  QqFf. 

countrymen Jen.  131,  132.     One  line,  Ff,  Rowe. 

Re-enter    Ghost.]     Cap.     Enter  134,  135.     One  line,  Ff,  Rowe,  Sta. 

Ghofl.  Qq,  White.     Enter  Ghoft  againe.  134.    foreknowing]       foreknowledge 

Ff.  Coll.  (MS). 

127.     [It  fpreads  his  armes.  Qq,  El.  135.     speak!]  speak! Rowe  +  . 

Om.  Ff.     He  fpreads  his  arms.    Q'76. 

125.  climatures]  Clarendon  :  Possibly  used  for  those  who  live  under  the  same 
climate.  Otherwise  it  would  be  better  to  read  '  climature '  with  Dyce.  The  French 
climature  appears  to  be  a  modern  word  in  that  language,  for  it  is  not  found  in  Cot- 
grave,  and  Littre  gives  no  early  example  of  its  use. 

127.  White:  The  stage  direction  of  the  Qq  may  be  a  misprint  for  'He  spreads/ 
&c,  indicating  Horatio's  action  in  his  attempt  to  stay  the  Ghost.  '  His'  might,  of 
course,  refer  to  the  Ghost  through  'it;'  but  there  seems  to  be  no  occasion  for  the 
Ghost  to  make  such  a  gesture. 

127.  cross]  Blakeway  :  Whoever  crossed  the  spot  on  which  a  spectre  was 
seen  became  subject  to  its  malignant  influence.  Among  the  reasons  for  supposing 
the  Earl  of  Derby  (who  died  1594)  to  have  been  bewitched  is  the  following:  'On 
Friday  there  appeared  a  tall  man  who  twice  crossed  him  swiftly;  and  when  the  Earl 
came  to  the  place  where  he  saw  this  man,  he  first  fell  sick.' — Lodge's  Illustrations 
of  British  History,  vol.  iii,  p.  48. 

129,  132,  135.     See  I,  i,  1,  and  Abbott,  \  512. 

131.  ease]  Tschischwitz  quotes  Simrock  {Mythologie,  p.  488,  ed.  2) :  «  A  ghost 
can  be  not  infrequently  laid,  especially  when  a  living  person  accomplishes  that  for 
him  which  he,  when  alive,  should  have  himself  accomplished.' 

134.  happily]  Nares  and  Clarendon  consider  this  as  equivalent  to  haply; 
TSCHISCHWITZ  and  Hudson,  as  equivalent  to  luckily.  The  latter  says :  ■  Which 
happy  or  fortunate  foreknozvledge  may  avoid  :'  a  participle  and  adverb  used  in  the 
3ense  of  a  substantive  and  adjective.  The  structure  of  this  solemn  appeal  is  almost 
tdertical  with  that  of  a  very  different  strain  in  At  You  Like  It,  II,  iv,  33-42. 


22  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Or  if  thou  hast  uphoarded  in  thy  life  136 

Extorted  treasure  in  the  womb  of  earth, 

For  which,  they  say,  you  spirits  oft  walk  in  death, 

\TJie  cock  crows. 
Speak  of  it ;  stay,  and  speak  ! — Stop  it,  Marcellus. 

Mar.     Shall  I  strike  at  it  with  my  partisan  ?  140 

Hor.     Do,  if  it  will  not  stand. 

Bcr.  Tis  here ! 

Hor.  'Tis  here ! 

Mar.     'Tis  gone  !  {Exit  Ghost. 

We  do  it  wrong,  being  so  majestical, 

138.    you]  your  Qq.  After  speak  !  line  139,  Cam.  Cla. 

[The  cock  crows.]  Qq.    Om.  Ff.  140.     at]    Om.    Qq,   Pope   i,  Jen. 

After  line  137,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.     After  of  Tsch. 

it;  line  139,  Cap.     After  132,  Glo.  Mob.  142.     [Exit  Ghost.]  Om.  Qq. 

136.  uphoarded]  Steevens:  'If  any  of  them  had  bound  the  spirit  of  gold  by 
any  charmes  in  caves,  or  in  iron  fetters  under  the  ground,  they  should,  for  their  own 
soules  quiet  {which  questionlesse  else  would  whine  up  and  down),  if  not  for  the  good 
of  their  children,  release  it.' — Decker,  Knighfs  Conjuring. 

138.  they  say]  Clarke:  There  is  great  propriety  in  the  use  of  these  wortls  in 
the  mouth  of  Horatio,  the  scholar  and  the  unbeliever  in  ghosts. 

138.  spirits]  For  the  monosyllabic  pronunciation  of  this  word,  see  Walker 
{Crit.  i.  193,  205),  quoted  in  Macb.  IV,  i,  127.     Also  Abbott,  \  463;  and  I,  i,  161. 

139.  Cock  crows]  Dyce  {Few  Notes,  &c,  p.  134):  The  cock  used  to  crow 
when  Garrick  acted  Hamlet,  and,  perhaps,  also  when  that  part  was  played  by  some 
of  his  successors ;  but  now-a-days  managers  have  done  wisely  in  striking  the  cock 
from  the  list  of  the  Dramatis  Personam.  Mitford  {Cursory  Notes,  &c,  p.  43):  It 
is  said  in  the  life  of  one  of  the  actors,  I  think  of  George  Cooke,  that  on  one  occa- 
sion not  fewer  than  six  cocks  were  collected  in  order  to  summon  the  spirit  to  his 
diurnal  residence,  lest  one  cock,  like  one  single  clock,  might  not  keep  time  exactly, 
when  the  matter  was  of  importance. 

139,  141.  Steevens  is  unwilling  to  believe  that  the  speeches  '  Stop  it,  Marcellus,' 
and  '  Do,  if  it  will  not  stand,'  are  correctly  given  to  Horatio,  who,  as  a  scholar,  must 
have  known  the  folly  of  attempting  to  commit  any  act  of  violence  on  a  shadow ;  he 
therefore  proposes  to  give  them  to  Bernardo,  whose  first  impulse,  as  an  unlettered 
officer,  would  be  to  strike  at  what  offends  him.  •  The  next  two  speeches,  "  'Tis 
here!"  "'Tis  here!"  should  be  allotted  to  Mar.  and  Ber.,  and  the  third,  "  'Tis 
gone !"  to  Hor.  As  the  text  now  stands,  Mar.  propcses  to  strike  the  Ghost  with  his 
partisan,  and  yet,  afterwards,  is  made  to  descant  on  the  indecorum  and  impotence 
of  such  an  attempt. 

140,  partisan]   See  Rom.  &  Jul.  I,  i,  66. 

141,  142.  Do  .  .  .  gone  Y]  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  261) :  To  avoid  the  broken  line: 
'Tis  gone !'  which  here  seems  to  me  irregular,  arrange  '  Do '  as  belonging  to  line 

140,  reading  '  If  V  will  not  .  .  .  gone !'  as  one  line. 


act  i,  8C\  L]  HAMLET  23 

To  offer  it  the  show  of  violence ; 

For  it  is,  as  the  air,  invulnerable,  145 

And  our  vain  blows  malicious  mockery. 

Ber.     It  was  about  to  speak,  when  the  cock  crew. 

Hor.     And  then  it  started  like  a  guilty  thing 
Upon  a  fearful  summons.     I  have  heard, 

The  cock,  that  is  the  trumpet  to  the  morn,  1 50 

Doth  with  his  lofty  and  shrill-sounding  throat 
Awake  the  god  of  day,  and  at  his  warning, 
Whether  in  sea  or  fire,  in  earth  or  air, 
The  extravagant  and  erring  spirit  hies 

145.     For  it  is, ,]  //  is  ever  Q'76.  Rowe. 

150.      morn~\     tnorne    Qq.     day    Ff,  154.  extravagant']  extra-vacate  Grey. 

145.  invulnerable]   Malone:  See  Macb.  V,  viii,  9,  and  King  John,  II,  i,  252. 

150.  cock]  Farmer:  Bourne  of  Newcastle,  in  his  Antiqtiities  of  the  Common 
People,  informs  us :  '  It  is  a  received  tradition  among  the  vulgar,  that  at  the  time  of 
cock-crowing  the  midnight  spirits  forsake  these  lower  regions  and  go  to  their  proper 
places.  Hence  it  is  that  in  country  places,  where  the  way  of  life  requires  more 
early  labour,  they  always  go  chearfully  to  work  at  that  time.'  And  he  quotes  some 
lines  from  the  first  hymn  of  Prudentius,  Ad  Gallicinium  :  *  Ferunt,  vagantes  daemonas, 
Laetos  tenebris  noctium,  Gallo  canente  exterritos  Sparsim  timere,  et  cedere.  Hoc 
esse  signum  praescii  Norunt  repromissae  spei,  Qua  nos  soporis  liberi  Speramus  ad- 
ventum  Dei.'  Douce  quotes  from  another  hymn,  said  to  have  been  composed  by 
Saint  Ambrose,  and  formerly  used  in  the  Salisbury  service  :  '  It  contains  the  follow- 
ing lines,  which  so  much  resemble  the  speech  of  Hor.  that  one  might  almost  suppose 
Sh.  to  have  seen  them  :  "  Preco  diei  jam  sonat,  Noctis  profundae  pervigil ;  Nocturna 
lux  viantibus,  A  nocte  noctem  segregans.  Hoc  excitatus  Lucifer  Solvit  polum 
caligine  ;  Hoc  omnis  errorum  chorus  Viam  nocendi  deserit.  Gallo  canente  spes 
redit,"  '  &c.  Steevens  :  Philostratus,  giving  an  account  of  the  apparition  of  Achilles's 
shade  to  Apollonius  Tyanaeus,  says  that  it  vanished  with  a  little  glimmer  as  soon  as 
the  cock  crowed. —  Vit.  Apol.  iv,  16.  Coleridge  :  No  Addison  could  be  more  care- 
ful to  be  poetical  in  diction  than  Sh.  in  providing  grounds  and  sources  of  its  pro- 
priety. But  how  to  elevate  a  thing  almost  mean  by  its  familiarity,  young  poets  may 
learn  in  this  treatment  of  the  cock-crow. 

153.  sea]  Johnson:  According  to  the  pneumatology  of  that  time,  every  element 
was  inhabited  by  its  peculiar  order  of  spirits.  The  meaning  therefore  is,  that  all 
spirits  extravagant,  wandering  out  of  their  element,  whether  aerial  spirits  visiting 
earth,  or  earthly  spirits  ranging  the  air,  return  to  their  station,  to  their  proper  limits, 
in  which  they  are  confined.  We  might  read : — *  at  his  warning  Th'  extravagant  and 
erring  spirit  hies  To  his  confine,  whether  in  sea,  or  air,  Or  earth,  or  fire.  And  of,' 
&c.     But  change  is  unnecessary. 

154.  extravagant]  Steevens:  Thus,' — they  took  me  up  for  a  'stravagant.'— 
Nobody  and  Somebody,  1 598.  The  same  effect  is  given  to  'Aurora's  harbinger'  in 
Mid.  N.  D.  Ill,  ii,  381.     Clarendon  cites  Oth.  I,  i,  137. 

154.  erring]   Steevttns:  That  is,  wandering.     Thus,  Telemachus  calls  Ulysses 


24  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  l 

To  his  confine;  and  of  the  truth  herein  155 

This  present  object  made  probation. 

Mar.     It  faded  on  the  crowing  of  the  cock. 
<  Some  say  that  ever  'gainst  that  season  comes 
>  (Wherein  our  Saviour's  birth  is  celebrated, 

The  bird  of  dawning  singeth  all  night  long;  160 

And  then,  they  say,  no  spirit  dare  stir  abroad, 
W^i  he  nights  are  wholesome,  then  no  planets  strike, 

157.  oft']  at  Q'76.  Q3Q4-     darejlirre  Q  .    dares  Jlir  Q'76, 

158.  say] /ayes  Ff.  Cap.  Jen.   Steev.  Var.   Coll.    El.     dare 

160.  The]  This  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  walke  Qx,  Ktly.  can  walke  Ff,  Johns. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Del.  El.  Ktly.  Knt,  Sing.   Dyce  i,  White,  Del.     dares 

161.  then]  Om.  F2F3F4.  7//a/^  Rowe.     7ualks  Pope  + . 
dare  stir]  Cold.    darej2urreQ2  1 61.     abroad]  abraode  Q2Q,. 

'  My  erring  father.' — Chapman's  Odyssey,  lib.  iv.  '  Erring  Grecians  we,  From  Troy 
returning  homewards.' — lb.  lib.  ix.  Clarendon:  In  WicliPs  version  of  Jude,  13, 
the  planets  are  called  '  erringe  sterris.' 

155.  confine]  Clarendon:  The  same  accent  occurs  in  Temp.  IV,  i,  121 ;  King 
John,  IV,  ii,  246.     Accent  on  first  syllable  in  Rich.  II:  I,  iii,  137. 

156.  probation]  Clarendon:  Proof.  Cotgrave  gives,  'Probation:  A  proba- 
tion, proofe.'     Conf.  Oth.  Ill,  iii,  365. 

158.  'gainst]  Abbott,  §  142:  Used  metaphorically  to  express  time.  See  III,  iv. 
50 :  '  as  against  the  doom,'  i.  e.  as  though  expecting  doomsday. 

158.  season]  Moltke:  This  passage,  in  connection  with  Francisco's  remark, 
1  'Tis  bitter  cold,'  I,  i,  8,  and  then  with,  *  But  two  months  dead,'  I,  ii,  138,  and  lastly 
with, '  Sleeping  within  my  orchard,'  I,  v,  59,  intimates  to  us  in  the  clearest  manner 
the  time  of  year  in  which  Sh.  wishes  us  to  conceive  the  opening  of  this  tragedy — 
namely,  in  winter,  but  a  little  before  Advent ;  for,  two  months  previously,  about 
September,  the  older  Hamlet  could  have  taken  his  after-dinner  nap  in  the  open  air. 
Caldecott  (in  a  note  on  'the  morn,'  line  166)  says,  that  the  almost  momentary 
appearance  of  the  Ghost,  and  the  short  conversations  preceding  and  subsequent  to  it, 
could  not  have  filled  up  the  long  interval  of  a  winter's  night  in  Denmark,  from 
twelve  till  morning.  Knight  asks,  How  do  we  know  it  was  a  winter's  night  ? 
Francisco,  indeed,  says  '  'tis  bitter  cold;'  but  even  in  the  nights  of  early  summer  in 
the  north  of  Europe,  during  the  short  interval  between  twilight  and  sunrise,  '  the  air 
bites  shrewdly.'  That  this  was  the  season  intended  by  Sh.  is  indicated  by  Ophelia's 
flowers.  Her  pansies,  her  columbines,  and  her  daisies  belong  not  to  winter,  and  her 
'  coronet  of  weeds '  were  the  field  flowers  of  the  latter  spring  hung  upon  the  willow 
in  full  foliage,  '  That  shows  its  hoar  leaves  in  the  glassy  stream.'  Knight  might  have 
added  that  the  reference  to  '  the  dew  of  yon  high  eastern  hill '  is  also  inappropriate 
to  midwinter. 

161.  dare  stir]  White:  A  much  inferior  reading  to  that  of  Ff. 

162.  planets]  Nares  :  The  planets  were  supposed  to  have  the  power  of  doing 
ludden  mischief  by  their  malignant  aspect,  which  was  conceived  to  strike  objects. 
Clarendjn  cites  Tit  And  II,  iv,  14,  and  Cor.  II.  ii,  117      We  still  have  'moon- 


act  |,  sc.  L]  HAMLET  25 

No  fairy  takes,  nor  witch  hath  power  to  charm, 
So  hallow'd  and  so  gracious  is  the  time. 

Hor.     So  have  I  heard,  and  do  in  part  believe  it.  165 

But  look,  the  Morn,  in  russet  mantle  clad, 
Walks  o'er  the  dew  of  yon  hiflh  ^^gternJiill. 
Break  we  our  watch  up ;  and  by  my  advice, 
Let  us  impart  what  we  have  seen  to-night 

161.    fairy']  Faiery  F,F,.  166,  167.     Om.  Coll.  (MS). 

takes]  talkes  FfFa.     talks  FF.  167.    yon"\   yon1    Cap.    yond1    Coll. 

nor]  no  F  ,  Rowe+,  Cap.  El.  White. 
164.     hallowed]  hollow 'd  F2.  eastern]    eaflward  Qq,  Warb. 

the]    that   Qq,  Jen.   Coll.  El.  Cap.  Jen.  El.  Glo.  + . 
White,  Moltke.  168.     advice]  aduife  Qq. 

struck.'  [Thus  Florio  :  Assiderare  :  to  blast  or  strike  with  a  planet,  to  be  taken. — 
Ed.] 

163.  takes]  Dyce:  To  bewitch,  to  affect  with  malignant  influence,  to  strike  with 
disease.  See  Merry  Wives,  IV,  iv,  32.  Clarendon  :  The  adjective  '  taking,'  for 
infectious,  occurs  in  Lear,  II,  iv,  160.  And  'taking,'  as  a  substantive  in  the  sense 
of  infection,  is  found  in  Lear,  III,  iv,  58. 

164.  gracious]  Caldecott  :  Partaking  of  the  nature  of  the  epithet  with  which  it 
is  associated,  with  *  blessedness ;'  participating  in  a  heavenly  quality,  of  grace  in  its 
scriptural  sense;  not  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used  in  King  John,  III,  iv,  81. 
Frequently,  in  Sh.,  it  does  not  mean,  as  has  been  interpreted,  graceful,  elegant,  win- 
ning, pleasing  simply,  but  touched  with  something  holy,  instinct  with  goodness. 

165.  in  part  believe]  Clarke  :  This  assent  of  Horatio's  to  so  imaginative  a  creed 
is  peculiarly  appropriate,  coming,  as  it  does,  immediately  upon  a  supernatural  appear- 
ance, when  his  mind  is  softened  to  impressions,  and  is  prepared  to  admit  the  possi- 
bility of  spiritual  wonders.  Moberly  :  A  happy  expression  of  the  half-sceptical, 
half-complying  spirit  of  Shakespeare's  time,  when  witchcraft  was  believed,  antipodes 
doubted. 

166.  167.  Hunter  (ii,  216) :  It  must  have  been  in  emulation  of  these  lines  that 
Milton  wrote,  '  Now  morn  her  rosy  steps  in  th'  eastern  clime  Advancing,  sowed  the 
earth  with  orient  pearls.' — Par.  Lost,  v,  1.  We  have  the  same  characteristics  of 
morning  in  both.  'Russet,'  rosy;  '  eastern  hill,'  eastern  clime;  'the  dew,'  orient 
pearls.  Strachey  (p.  27) :  We  are  brought  out  of  the  cold  night  into  the  warm 
sunshine,  and  we  realize,  in  this  lyrical  movement,  that  harmony  of  our  feelings 
which  it  was  one  of  the  objects  of  the  Chorus  to  produce  in  the  Greek  Tragedy. 

167.  eastern]  Warburton  pronounced  in  favor  of  eastward.     Steevens  denied 

its  superiority,  and  cited,  ' Ulysses  still  An  eye  directed  to  the  eastern  hill.'' — 

Chapman's  Odyssey,  lib.  xiii.  Staunton  prefers  '  eastern '  as  more  in  accord- 
ance with  the  poetical  phraseology  of  the  period.  Thus  Spenser  charmingly  ushers 
in  the  morn,  '  —  cheareful  Chaunticlere  with  his  note  shrill  Had  warned  once,  that 
Phcebus'  fiery  Car  In  haste  was  climl  ing  up  the  Eastern  Hill,  Full  envious  *hai 
Night  so  long,  his  room  did  fill.' 

168.  Break  we]  See  I,  i,  33. 


26 


HAMLET 


Unto  young  Hamlet ;  for,  upon  my  life, 
This  spirit,  dumb  to  us,  will  speak  to  him. 
Do  you  consent  we  shall  acquaint  him  with  it, 
As  needful  in  our  loves,  fitting  our  duty  ? 

Mar.     Let's  do't,  I  pray ;  and  I  this  morning  know 
Where  we  shall  find  him  most  conveniently.  \Exetint. 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
170 


175 


Scene  II.     A  room  of  state  in  the  Castle. 

Fl&urish.    Enter  the  King,  Queen,  Hamlet,  Polonius,  Laertes,  Voltimand, 
Cornelius,  Lords,  and  Attendants. 

King.     Though  yet  of  Hamlet  our  dear  brother's  death 


170.    young]  yong  Qp F * 

for,  upon  my  life,]  perhaps  Q'76. 
172,  173.     Om.  Coll.  (MS). 

172.  shall]  do  Rowe  ii. 

173.  duty?]  duty.  Qq  (duety.  Q4). 

174.  Let's]  Let  Fx. 

175.  conveniently.]    convenient   Qq, 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Dyce  ii,  Tsch. 

A  room...]    Cap.  substantially.     The 
Palace.  Rowe  +  . 
Flourish.]  Om.  Ff. 


Enter...]  Mai.  Enter  Claudius, 
King  of  Denmarke,  Gertrad  the  Queene, 
Counfaile :  as  Polonius,  and  his  Sonne 
Laertes,  Hamlet,  Cum  Alijs.  Qq.  Enter 
Claudius  King  of  Denmarke,  Gertrude 
the  Queene,  Hamlet,  Polonius,  Laertes, 
and  his  Sifter  Ophelia,  Lords  Attendant. 
Ff  (Attendants  FaF  ,  Lords,  Attendant? 

I.     King.]  Claud.  Qq. 


170.  Hamlet]  Coleridge  (p.  151):  Note  the  unobtrusive  and  yet  fully  adequate 
mode  of  introducing  the  main  character,  '  young  Hamlet,'  upon  whom  is  transferred 
all  the  interest  excited  for  the  acts  and  concerns  of  the  king  his  father. 

171.  dumb]  Tschischwitz  quotes  from  Simrock  (p.  488)  that  only  those  per- 
sons have  any  influence  over  spirits,  who  are  themselves  guileless,  such  as  Priests, 
young  scholars,  &c.     This  essential  qualification  Horatio  attributes  to  Hamlet. 

173.  loves]  Clarendon  (Note  on  Rich.  II:  IV,  1,315):  The  plural  is  fre- 
quently used  by  Sh.  and  writers  of  the  16th  and  17th  centuries  when  designating 
an  attribute  common  to  many,  in  cases  where  it  would  now  be  considered  a  solecism. 
Thus  '  sights,'  Lear,  IV,  vi,  35;  Rich.  Ill :  IV,  i,  25 ;  Timon,  I,  i,  255 ;  Pericles,  I, 
i,  74  ;  so  '  loves,'  '  consents,'  Two  Gent.  I,  iii,  48,  49;  •  wills  '  in  Hen.  VIII :  III,  i, 
68;  see  also  Ham.  I,  ii,  14,  250,  253;  II,  ii,  14;  IV,  vii,  30;  Macb.  Ill,  i,  121. 

173.  dut}']  Hudson:  These  last  three  speeches  are  admirably  conceived.  The 
speakers  are  in  a  highly  kindled  state ;  when  the  Ghost  vanishes,  their  terror  pres- 
ently subsides  into  an  inspiration  of  the  finest  quality,  and  their  intense  excitement, 
as  it  passes  off,  blazes  up  in  a  subdued  and  pious  rapture  of  poetry. 

Scene  II.]  Coleridge:  The  audience  are  now  relieved  by  a  change  of  scene 
to  the  royal  court,  in  order  that  Ham.  may  not  have  to  take  up  the  leavings  of  ex- 
haustion. In  the  king's  speech,  observe  the  set  and  pedantically  antithetic  form  of 
the  sentences  when  touching  that  which  galled  the  heels  of  conscience, — the  strain 
of  unaignified  rhetoric, — and  yet  in  what  follows  concerning  the  public  weal,  » 
cert    n  appropriate  majestv      Indeed  was  he  not  a  royal  brother? 


,  jl   act  I,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET 

i 

The  memory  be  green,  and  that  it  us  befitted 
To  bear  our  hearts  in  grief  and  our  whole  kingdom 
To  be  contracted  in  one  brow  of  woe, 
Yet  so  far  hath  discretion  fought  with  nature 
That  we  with  wisest  sorrow  think  on  him, 
Together  with  remembrance  of  ourselves. 
/Therefore  our  sometime  sister,  now  our  queen, 
The  imperial  jointress  of  this  warlike  state, 
J  Have  we,  as  'twere  with  a  defeated  joy,— - 
With  one  auspicious  and  one  dropping  eye, 
With  mirth  in  funeral  and  with  dirge  in  marriage, 


27 
2 


10 


2.  us  befitted]  fitted   Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Warb. 

3.  dear]  bathe  Coll.  (MS)  El. 
6.     wisest]  wiser  Seymour. 

8.     sometime]  fotnetimes  Ff,  Rowe. 


9.     of]  to  Qq,  Glo. 
11,  12,  13.     Om.  Coll.  (MS). 

1 1 .  one... one]  an. ..a  Qq,  Glo.  + ,  Hal. 

12.  dirge]  dirdge  Q2Q  . 


2.  that]  Tschischwitz  :  The  simpler  form  'that'  was  used  instead  of  the  fuller 
form  '  though  that,'  just  as  in  French  after  quoique  subordinate  clauses  are  introduced 
by  que.     [See  also  Abbott,  g  284.] 

2.  befitted]  Steevens  :  Perhaps  Sh.  elliptically  wrote  'and  us  befitted,'  i.  e.  <  and 
that  it  befitted  us.'  Seymour  (ii,  141):  Read, 'The  memory's  green;  and  it  be- 
fitted us.'  The  greenness  of  the  memory  is  not  hypothetic,  but  real,  and  the  proper 
mood  of  the  verb  could  not  be  mistaken,  if,  for  '  though,'  we  substitute  as. 

4.  woe]  Clarendon  :  Mourning  brow.  See  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  V,  ii,  754 ;  '  the 
mourning  brow  of  progeny.'  For  similar  phrases,  see  IV,  vi,  19;  Lear,  I,  iv,  306, 
'brow  of  youth '=  youthful  brow;  Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  viii,  42,  '  mind  of  love'  = 
loving  mind;  and  I  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iii,  8^,  '  brow  of  justice.' 

10.  defeated]  Clarendon  :  Disfigured,  marred.     See  Oth.  I,  iii,  346. 

11.  auspicious  ...  dropping]  Steevens:  Seethe  same  thought  in  Wint.  7'au, 
V,  ii,  80.  It  is  only  the  ancient  proverbial  phrase,  '  To  cry  with  one  eye  and  laugh 
with  the  other.'  Malone  says  that  dropping  may  mean  depressed  or  cast  down ; 
there  could  be  little  hesitation  in  rejecting  this  interpretation  had  not  White  so  far 
adopted  it  as  to  substitute  in  the  text  drooping  in  place  of  '  dropping,'  '  considering,' 
he  says,  '  the  sense  required,  the  distinction  made  between  "  drop  "  and  "  droop  "  in 
Shakespeare's  day  as  in  our  own,  and  remembering  how  common  an  error  is  the 
reduplication  of  the  wrong  letter  in  both  type-setting  and  chirography.'  Francke 
refers  to  the  Homeric  phrase,  daupvdev  ye/.aaaoa,  Iliad,  vi,  484,  and  to  Odyssey,  xix, 
471,  and  Sophocles,  Electra,  1920. 

12.  mirth  . . .  dirge]  Moberly  :  The  studied  antitheses  repeated  over  and  over  in 
this  speech  give  it  a  very  artificial  appearance.  The  king's  politic  and  parliamentary 
reasons  for  marrying  the  queen  remind  us  of  the  similar  motives  which  an  eminent 
writer  supposes  to  have  influenced  Henry  VIII  in  his  prompt  remarriages. 

13.  dole]  Sandys  [Sh.  Illust.  by  the  Dialect  of  Cornwall,  Sh.  Soc.  Papers,  vol. 
iii,  p.  25       A  person  in  grief  is  said  in  Cornwall  to  be  bedoled 


28  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  il 

In  equal  scale  weighing  delight  and  dole, —  13 

Taken  to  wife ;  nor  have  we  herein  barr'd 

Your  better  wisdoms,  which  have  freely  gone  15 

With  this  affair  along.     For  all,  our  thanks. 

Now  follows,  that  you  know,  young  Fortinbras, 

Holding  a  weak  supposal  of  oui  worth, 

Or  thinking  by  our  late  dear  brother's  death 

Our  state  to  be  disjoint  and  out  of  frame,  20 

Colleagued  with  this  dream  of  his  advantage, 

He  hath  not  fail'd  to  pester  us  with  message, 

Importing  the  surrender  of  those  lands 

Lost  by  his  father,  with  all  bonds  of  law, 

16.  along.  For. ..thanks]  Johns.  Colegued  Q.  Collegued  Q^  Co-leagueu 
along:    {for. ..thanks.")    Pope,    Theob.         Cap. 

Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.     along  {for  all  21.     this]  the  Ff,  Knt,  Coll.    Dyce. 

our  thankes)    Qq.      along,  for  all  our  Sta.  White,  Ktly,  Del. 

thankes.  Ff,  Rowe  his]  this  Coll.  (MS). 

17.  folloivs,...know,]     Theob.      fol-  24.     with]  by  Pope  +  . 
lowes...knowe  Qq.    followes,...know  Ff,  bonds]  bands  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 
Rowe,  Pope.  Jen.  Steev.  Cald.  Var.  Coll.  El.  White, 

21.     Colleagued]     Coleagued     Q3Qy         Huds. 

14.  to  wife  ;]  See  Macb.  IV,  ill-,  10. 

14.  barr'd]  Caldecott:  Excluded,  acted  without  the  concurrence  of.  Claren- 
don cites  Cymb.  I,  i,  82,  where  it  means  '  thwarted.' 

17.  that  you  know,]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  261):  Sh.  can  never  have  written  any- 
thing so  harsh  and  obscure  as  this.  Point,  *  Now  follows  that  you  know :  young 
Fortinbras,'  &c.  If,  indeed,  this  correction  has  not  been  made  already,  as  I  think  it 
has.     [Theobald  made  it  (Sh.  Rest.  p.  5),  using  a  comma  instead  of  a  colon.] 

20.  disjoint]  For  other  instances  of  the  omission,  in  participles,  of  ed  after  d  or 
t,  see  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  324)  and  Abbott,  \  342.  also  •  deject,'  III,  i,  155;  'bloat, 
III,  iv,  182;  'hoist,'  III,  iv,  207:  'distract,'  IV,  v,  2;  also  Macb.  Ill,  vi,  38. 

21.  Colleagued]  From  the  definition  of  the  word  'Collogue,  blanditiis  tentare,' 
given  by  Skinner,  Theobald  suggested  collogue,  that  is,  '  he  being  flattered,  imposed 
on,  cajoVd  by  the  dream  of  his  Advantage;'  he,  however,  did  not  adopt  it  in  his  text, 
but  Hanmer  did.     See  Abbott,  p.  16,  '  Colleagued'  for  Co-leagued. 

21.  dream]  Warburton  :  He  goes  to  war  so  unprepared  that  he  has  no  allies 
but  a  dream,  with  which  he  is  confederated.  Clarendon  :  With  this  imaginary 
superiority  for  his  only  ally. 

22.  pester]  See  Macb.  V,  ii,  23.  Walker  (Crit.  ii.  351) :  To  pester  a  place  or 
person,  for  to  crowd,  tc  throng  them ;  to  be  in  a  person's  way. 

22.  message]  See  Macb.  II,  iv,  14;  V,  i,  22.  Walker  (Vers.  253):  Surely 
'message'  in  the  singular  is  not  grammar.  [Walker  would  print  message'';  the 
apostrophe  indicating  the  plural.]     See  also  Abbott,  §  471. 

23    Importing]  Abbott,  p.  16:  Used  for  importuning. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


29 


To  our  most  valiant  brother.     So  much  for  him. 
Now  for  ourself,  and  for  this  time  of  meeting; 
Thus  much  the  business  is ;  we  have  here  writ 
To  Norway,  uncle  of  young  Fortinbras, — 
Who,  impotent  and  bed-rid,  scarcely  hears 
Of  this  his  nephew's  purpose, — to  suppress 
His  further  gait  herein ;  in  that  the  levies, 
The  lists  and  full  proportions,  are  all  made 
Out  of  his  subject;  and  we  here  dispatch 
You,  good  Cornelius,  and  you,  Voltimand, 
For  bearers  of  this  greeting  to  old  Norway, 
Giving  to  you  no  further  personal  power 
To  business  with  the  king  more  than  the  scope 


25 


.SO 


35 


25.  [Enter  Voltemand  and  Corne- 
lius. Ff.  (Voltimand  F3F3F4).  Om.  Qq. 

26.  meeting ;]  meeting,  Qq.  meeting 
F,F  F  .  meeting.  Cap.  Steev.Var.  Knt, 
Coll.  White. 

29.     bed-rid]  bedred  Qq. 

3 1 .     gait  ]  Cap.    gate  QqFf,  Rowe  + , 

Jen. 

herein  ;  in]    Theob.  heerein,  in 

QaQ3Q4.     herein,  in  Q$,  Coll.  El.White. 

herein.  In  Ff. 

the!  he  FF. 
J  34 

33.     subject']  fubjects  Q'76,  Rowe  +  , 


Jen.  El.  Quincy  (MS). 
^.     here]  now  Q'76. 

34.  Voltimand]      Valtemand     Qq. 
Voltemand  Ft. 

35.  For  bearers]    For  bearing   Ff, 
Rowe,  Knt. 

For   bearers   of   this    greeting] 
Ambajfadors  Q'76. 

36.  37.     Giving  to  you. ..To  business] 
Who  have...  Of  treaty  Q'76.     Giving  to 

you...  Of  treaty  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

more  than]  than  does  Seymour. 


29.  bed-rid]  Clarendon  :  Earle  gives  the  following  doubtful,  but  ingenious, 
etymology  of  this  word  :  '  The  Saxons  called  a  sorcerer  "  dry :"  . .  .  out  of  this  word 
a  verb  was  made,  "  be-drian,"  to  bewitch  or  fascinate.  .  .  .  The  participle  of  this  verb, 
"  be-drida,"  a  disordered  man,  has,  by  a  false  light  of  cross  analogy,  generated 
the  modern  "  bed-ridden,"  a  half-sister  of  "  hag-ridden."  '  {Philology  of  the  English 
Tongue,  p.  22.)  The  etymology  commonly  given  explains  it  of  one  who  is  carried 
or  rides  on  a  bed.  'Bed-rid'  occurs  in  Wint.  Tale,  IV,  iv,  412.  Moberly  :  If 
Earle's  derivation  be  rejected,  and  the  connection  with  ride  still  assumed,  we  must 
suppose  that  from  the  idea  of  a  '  ridden '  or  trained  horse  comes  the  more  general 
one  of  '  accustomed  to,'  and  thence  '  perpetually  on,'  the  bed.  Compare  the  way 
in  which  rfioq  is  used  in  Homer  and  Herodotus  simply  to  mean  '  a  place  '  (ra  ZnvOeuv 
ffiea). 

31.  gait]   Nares  :  Here  used  metaphorically,  for  proceeding  in  a  business. 

32.  proportions]   Elze  :  Contingents,  as  in  Hen.  V :  I,  ii,  137  and  304. 

33.  subject]  See  I,  i,  72.  That  this  is  used  absolutely,  see  Lear,  IV,  vi,  107, 
'  see  how  the  subject  quakes.' 

35.  For]  Thec^ald  (Sh.  Pest.  p.  7)  shrewdly  conjectured  '  our  bearers;'  it  accords 
with  the  regal  style,  and  the  same  misprint  of  '  for '  for  our  occurs  in  Ff  in  I,  v,  156. 
'  we'll  shift  for  grounc3 


30  HAMLET  [act  I,  sc.  ii 

Qi  these  dilated  articles  allow. 

Farewell,  and  let  your  haste  commend  your  duty. 

Cor.  \ 

y  j  >      In  that  and  all  things  will  we  show  our  duty.  40 

King.     We  doubt  it  nothing ;  heartily  farewell. — 

\Exeunt  Voltima?td  and  Cornelius. 

38.     Of]  Which  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  40.     Cor.   Vol.]   Volt.    Ff,    Rowe-S 

Warb.  Jen. 

dilated']  delated  Qq,  Glo.  + .    re-  41.     it  nothing]  in  nothing  F  ,  Rowe, 

lated  Qt,  Sing.  i.  Pope  i. 

allow.]     allows.      Johns.      Jen.  [Exeunt...]  Exit...  FxFaF .    Om. 

White,  Ktly.     allow.  [Give  them.  Coll.  Qq. 

(MS). 

38.  dilated]  Caldecott  :  The  tenor  of  these  articles  set  out  at  large.  Claren- 
don :  According  to  Minsheu,  '  delate '  is  only  another  form  of  '  dilate,'  meaning  '  to 
speak  at  large.'  Compare  'defused'  and  'diffused.'  Bacon  uses  'delate'  in  the 
sense  of  '  carry,'  '  convey.' 

38.  allow.]  Malone  says  Sh.  should  have  written  allows,  and  that  many 
writers  fall  into  this  error,  when  a  plural  noun  immediately  precedes  the  verb. 
Steevens  asserts  that  all  such  defects  in  Sh.  were  merely  the  errors  of  illiterate 
transcribers  or  printers.  Caldecott  boldly  maintains  that  Sh.  was  fully  justified, 
in  cases  like  the  present,  by  the  usage  of  the  best  scholars  and  writers  of  the  time, 
and  gives  instances  from  Queen  Elizabeth's  Seneca,  and  King  James's  Reylis  and 
Cautelis  of  Scottis  Poesie,  from  Puttenham's  Arte  of  English  Poesie,  and  Daniel's 
Apologie  for  Rytne ;  and,  further,  that  this  usage  was  proper  because  the  ear  abhors 
the  cacophony  of  an  accumulation  of  ss,  more  especially  in  poetry,  whose  prov- 
ince is  to  please  the  ear,  not  offend  it.  Knight  says  that  the  use  of  the  plural 
verb  with  the  nominative  singular,  a  plural  genitive  intervening,  can  scarcely  be 
detected  as  an  error.  '  The  truth  is,  that  it  is  only  within  the  last  half  century  that 
the  construction  of  our  language  has  attained  that  uniform  precision  which  is  now 
required.  ...  It  is  remarkable  that  the  very  commentators,  who  were  always  ready 
to  fix  the  charge  of  ignorance  of  the  rudiments  of  grammar  upon  Sh.,  have  admitted 
the  following  passage  in  a  note  to  2  Hen.  IV  by  that  elegant  modern  scholar,  T. 
Warton  :  "  Beaumont  and  Fletcher's  play  contains  many  satirical  strokes  against 
Heywood's  comedy,  the  force  of  which  are  entirely  lost  to  those  who  have  not  seen 
that  comedy."  '  Elze  ingeniously  suggests  that  'allow'  may  be  in  the  subjunctive, 
and  Tschischwitz  roundly  asserts  that  it  is,  '  because  it  is  preceded  by  the  idea 
of  comparison  implied  by  "  than,"  which  in  Old  English  and  Anglo-Saxon  usually 
governed  the  subjunctive.'  Abbott  gives  this  as  an  instance  of  confusion  of  agree- 
ment by  proximity  (§  412).  For  many  instances  (which  Dyce  with  truth  says  might 
be  multiplied  without  end)  of  apparent  lack  of  agreement  between  the  nominative 
and  the  verb,  see  Abbott,  \  332  et  sea.  ;  Macb.  II,  i,  61,  and  Ham.  Ill,  ii,  194;  III, 
lii,  14. 

39.  duty]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  277):  Perhaps  service;  at  any  rate  'duty'  is 
wrong. 

41.  nothing"1    Tschis  :hwitz      Here  used   adverbially  and   like   something,  in 


Acri.ac.ft.]  HAMLET  3 1 

And  now,  Laertes,  what's  the  news  with  you?  42 

You  told  us  of  some  suit;  what  is't,  Laertes? 

You  cannot  speak  of  reason  to  the  Dane, 

And  lose  your  voice  ;  what  wouldst  thou  beg,  Laertest  45 

That  shall  not  be  my  offer,  not  thy  asking  ? 

The  head  is  not  more  native  to  the  heart, 

The  hand  more  instrumental  to  the  mouth, 

Than  is  the  throne  of  Denmark  to  thy  father. 

What  wouldst  thou  have,  Laertes  ? 

Laer.  D_read  my  lord.  50 

Your  leave  and  favour  to  return  to  France, 
From  whence  though  willingly  I  came  to  Denmark, 

42.  And]  Om.  Q'76.  Cap. 

45.  lose]  loose  FxFaF3.  50.    Dread  my]  Afy  dread  Qq,  Pope-r, 

47.  native]  motive  Bubier  conj.*  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Coll.  Sing. 

49.  is. ..to]  to. ..is  Warb.  Han.  Johns.  Ktly.     My  dear  Q' '76. 

similar  cases,  analogous  to  the  Greek  [iqdev,  e.g.  Mqdev  Oavdrov  fiolpav  kirevxov  Tolofie 
PapwOelc  jEschyl.  A  gam.  [1384,  ed.  Klausen].  Clarendon  cites  Twelfth  Night, 
II,  iii,  104;    Cor.  I,  iii,  III. 

42-45.  you  .  .  .  thou]  Abbott,  \  235  :  The  king,  as  he  rises  in  his  profession  of 
affection  to  Laer.,  passes  from  you  to  thou,  subsequently  returning  to  you.  [See 
Macb.  V,  iii,  37.  Ed.] 

42.  Coleridge  (p.  151):  Thus  with  great  art  Sh.  introduces  a  most  important 
but  still  subordinate  character,  first,  Laertes,  who  is  yet  thus  graciously  treated  in 
consequence  of  the  assistance  given  to  the  election  of  the  late  king's  brother,  instead 
of  his  son,  by  Polonius. 

47.  head]  Warburton  could  not  conceive  what  this  line  means;  but  after 
changing  '  head  '  to  blood  he  pronounced  the  sentiment  just  and  pertinent,  and  the 
expression  '  extremely  fine.  For  the  heart  is  the  laboratory  where,'  &c.  &c.  Han- 
mer  adopted  the  emendation.  Heath  (p.  522) :  There  is  not  more  natural  affinity 
and  strict  connection  between  the  head  and  heart,  though  the  former  contrives  the 
means  by  which  the  purposes  of  the  latter  are  executed.  The  king  considers  him- 
self the  heart  and  Polonius  the  head. 

47.  native]  Steevens  :  The  head  is  not  formed  to  be  more  useful  to  the  heart, 
the  hand  is  not  more  at  the  service  of  the  mouth,  than  my  power  is  at  your  father's 
service.  Caldecott  :  The  principal  parts  of  the  body  are  not  more  natural, 
instrumental,  or  necessary  to  each  other  than  is  the  throne  natural  to,  and  a 
machine  acted  upon  and  under  the  guidance  of,  your  father.  Delius  :  'Native' 
expresses  a  connection  that  is  congenital ;  •  instrumental,'  one  that  is  mechanical. 
Clarendon  refers  to  IV,  vii,  181,  and  a  similar  sense  of  'native'  in  AlPs  Well,  I, 
1,  238. 

51.  leave  and  favour]  Caldecott:  Your  kind  permission.  Two  substantives 
with  a  copula  being  here  used  for  an  adjective  and  substantive;  an  adjective  sense 
is  given  to  a  substantive. 


32  HAMLET  [act  I,  sc.  ii 

To  show  my  duty  in  your  coronation, 

Yet  now,  I  must  confess,  that  duty  done, 

My  thoughts  and  wishes  bend  again  toward  France  55 

And  bow  them  to  your  gracious  leave  and  pardon. 

King.     Have  you  your  father's  leave  ? — What  says  Polonius  ? 

Pol.     He  hath,  my  lord,  wrung  from  me  my  slow  leave 
By  laboursome  petition,  and  at  last 

Upon  his  will  I  seal'd  my  hard  consent ;  60 

I  do  beseech  you,  give  him  leave  to  go. 

King.     Take  thy  fair  hour,  Laertes  ;  time  be  thine, 
And  thy  best  graces  spend  it  at  thy  will ! — 
But  now,  my  cousin  Hamlet,  and  my  son, — 

55.  toward]  towards  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.         And  my  best  graces  ;  spend  Johns,  conj 

57.  Two  lines  Ff.  62.     thine,']    thine;    Theob.    Warb. 
Polonius']  Pollonius  Fx.  Johns,     thine !  Cald. 

58.  He  hath]  Hath  Q3Q3-  63.    graces]  graces;  Q'76,  Rowe  +  , 
lord,]  lord:  Ff.    '  Pope,  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  White. 

58,  59.     wrung. ..petition]  by  labour-  [Exit  Laertes.  Anon.  conj. 
tome  petition,  Wrung  from  me  my  slow             64.     Hamlet,  and]   Hamlet. — Kind 
leave;  Rowe  +  .                                                   Warb. 

58 — 60.     wrung... cons ent :]  Om.  Ff.  son, — ]    son —    Rowe.     fonne 

59.  at  last]  at  the  last  Pope-K  Qq.    fonne  ?  Ff. 

62.  63.     be  thine. ..spend]    is   thine, 

53.  coronation]  Staunton  :  As  an  instance  of  the  minute  attention  with  which 
the  finished  play  was  elaborated  from  the  early  sketch,  it  may  be  noteworthy  that,  in 
Q  ,  the  motive  of  Laertes's  visit  is  said  to  be  his  desire  to  attend  the  late  king's 
funeral.  But  it  evidently  occurred  to  Sh.  that  the  acknowledgement  of  such  an 
object  was  as  little  consistent  with  the  character  of  Laertes  as  it  would  be  palatable 
to  the  living  monarch,  and,  accordingly,  in  the  augmented  piece  the  reason  given 
by  Laertes  for  his  coming  is  more  courtier-like. 

56.  pardon]  Clarendon  :  Leave  to  depart.  So  in  III,  ii,  303.  It  is  equivalent 
to  '  leave '  in  Cymb.  I,  iv,  46,  and  3  Hen.  VI;  IV,  i,  87. 

57.  Polonius]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  32) :  A  critic  who  should  suggest  that  «  Polo 
nius '  was  a  corruption  of  Apollonius  would  perhaps  •  make  much  laugh,'  as  Man 
Friday  says ;  yet  I  know  not  that  it  is  more  strange  than  '  Laertes '  and  fifty  other 
similar  names  in  our  old  plays. 

63.  graces]  Caldecott  :  May  the  exercise  of  thy  fairest  virtues  fill  up  thy  time, 
which  is  wholly  at  thy  command. 

64.  cousin]  Clarendon:  This  word  was  used  to  denote  'uncle*  and  'aunt,' 
*  nephew '  and  '  niece,'  as  well  as  in  the  modern  sense.  Compare  Twelfth  Night,  I, 
iii,  5,  where  it  means  'niece,'  and  III,  iv,  68,  where  it  means  'uncle.' 

64.  and]  Warburton  suggested  '  Kind  my  son,'  or,  as  we  now  say,  '  Good 
iny  son,'  whereby,  Warburton  thinks,  a  pertinence  is  gained  for  Hamlet's  reply, 
which  it  otherwise  lacks. 


act  i,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  33 

Ham.  [Aside]  A  little  more  than  kin,  and  less  than  kind.     65 

65.     [Aside]  Warb. 

65.  [Aside]  The  propriety  of  this  '  aside,'  which  was  first  marked  by  Warburton, 
and  has  been  adopted  by  every  succeeding  editor,  is  denied  by  Moltke  for  the  fol- 
lowing reasons  :  There  is  no  other  instance  in  Shakespeare's  plays  where  the  hero  is 
first  introduced  with  such  a  very  brief  soliloquy;  secondly,  no  one  plays  upon  words 
when  speaking  to  one's  self;  thirdly,  Sh.  invariably  strikes  the  keynote  of  his  dramas 
at  the  very  outset.  In  this  instance,  after  having  in  the  first  scene  made  us  take  sides 
with  Hamlet  against  the  King,  and  after  having  still  further  fostered  this  feeling  of 
sympathy  for  the  one  and  dislike  for  the  other  by  the  King's  hypocritical  speech 
from  the  throne,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  this  opposition  between  the  two 
should  be  emphasized,  and  that  Hamlet  himself  should  be  shown,  not  only  as  per- 
fectly aware  of  it  himself,  but  as  equally  determined  that  the  King  himself  should 
be  aware  of  it.     All  these  objects  fail  if  the  speech  be  spoken  aside. 

65.  kin  .  .  .  kind]  Hanmer  :  Probably  a  proverbial  expression  for  a  relationship 
so  confused  and  blended  that  it  was  hard  to  define  it.  Johnson  supposes  '  kind '  to 
be  here  the  German  word  for  child.  That  is,  •  I  am  more  than  cousin  and  less  than 
son.'  This  conjecture  Steevens  properly  disposes  of  by  requiring  some  proof  that 
1  kind '  was  ever  used  by  any  English  writer  for  child.  He  adds :  A  jingle  of  the 
same  sort  is  found  in  Mother  Bombie,  1594,  ' —  the  nearer  we  are  in  blood,  the  fur- 
ther we  must  be  from  love,  the  greater  the  kindred  is,  the  less  the  kindness  must  be.' 
Again,  in  Gorboduc,  1561,  'In  kinde  a  father,  but  not  kindelynesse.'  As  'kind,' 
however,  signifies  nature,  Hamlet  may  mean  that  his  relationship  had  become  an 
unnatural  one,  as  it  was  partly  founded  on  incest.  '  Kind '  is  used  for  nature  in 
Jul.  Qes.y  Ant.  6°  Cleo.,  Rich.  II,  and  Tit.  And.  So,  too,  we  have  'kindness,'  i.  e. 
unnatural,  in  Ham.  II,  ii,  609.  Malone  gives  substantially  the  best  paraphrase :  '  I 
am  a  little  more  than  thy  kinsman  (for  I  am  thy  step-son),  and  am  somewhat  less 
than  kind  to  thee  (for  I  hate  thee,  as  being  the  person  who  has  incestuously  married 
my  mother).  Steevens  says  that  it  was  the  King  who  was  '  less  than  kind  ;'  so  also 
does  Caldecott,  who  somewhat  darkly  interprets  (yet  Moberly  quotes  it  approv- 
ingly) :  More  than  a  common  relation,  having  a  confusedly  accumulated  title  of  rela- 
tionship, you  have  less  than  benevolent,  or  less  than  even  natural,  feeling;  by  a  play 
upon  •  kind'  in  its  double  use  and  double  sense — its  use  as  an  adjective,  signifying 
benevolent ;  and  its  sense  as  a  substantive,  signifying  natttre.  We  have  '  unkind'  in 
this  sense  in  Ven.  &°  Ad.  204.  '  Surely,'  says  Knight,  '  Hamlet  applies  these  words 
to  himself.  The  King  has  called  him,  "  My  cousin  Hamlet."  He  says,  in  a  sup 
pressed  tone,  "  A  little  more  than  kin," — a  little  more  than  cousin.  The  King  adds, 
"and  my  son."  Hamlet  says,  "  less  than  kind;" — I  am  little  of  the  same  nature 
with  you.'  Singer  follows  Steevens  and  Caldecott  in  applying  these  words  to  the 
King.  '  By  "  less  than  kind  "  Hamlet  means  degenerate  and  base.  "  Going  otit  of 
kinde,  (says  Baret,)  which  goeth  out  of  kinde,  7vhich  doth,  or  worketh  dishonour  to  his 
kindred.  Degener:  Forlignant." — Alvearie,  K.  59.  "  Forligner"  says  Cotgrave, 
"  to  degenerate,  or  grow  out  of  kind,  to  differ  in  conditions  from  his  auncestors."  That 
less  than  kind  and  out  of  kind  have  the  same  meaning  who  can  doubt  ?'  Collier 
aptiy  cites  the  following :  '  I  would  he  were  not  so  near  to  us  in  kindred,  then  sure 
he  would  be  nearer  in  kindness.' — Rowley,  Search  for  Money,  1609,  sig.  B.  (re- 
printed for  the  Percy  Society).     Elze  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  probably  in  no 


34  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

King.     How  is  it  that  the  clouds  still  hang  on  you  ?  66 

Ham.     Not  so,  my  lord ;  I  am  too  much  i'  the  sun. 

67.     so~\fo  much  Qq.  F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  White,    in  the  fonne 

V  the  sun\  Cap.     V  th'  Sun  Ff         Qq.     ithy  Sun  F2.     in  the  Sun  Q'76. 

other  work  is  the  word  •  kind  '  used  so  frequently  and  so  unambiguously  as  in  The 
Tragedie  of  Gorboduc.  White  and  Hudson  follow  Steevens,  Caldecott,  and  Singer 
in  referring  these  words  to  the  King.  The  former  paraphrases :  In  marrying  my 
mother,  you  have  made  yourself  something  more  than  my  kinsman,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  have  shown  yourself  unworthy  of  our  race,  our  kind.  Coleridge:  This 
playing  on  words  may  be  attributed  to  many  causes  or  motives ;  as,  either  to  an  exu- 
berant activity  of  mind,  as  in  the  higher  comedy  of  Sh.  generally;  or  to  an  imitation 
of  it  as  a  mere  fashion,  as  if  it  were  said, — '  Is  not  this  better  than  groaning  ?' — or 
to  a  contemptuous  exultation  in  minds  vulgarized  and  overset  by  their  success,  as  in 
the  poetic  instance  of  Milton's  Devils  in  the  battle;  or  it  is  the  language  of  resent- 
ment, as  is  familiar  to  every  one  who  has  witnessed  the  quarrels  of  the  lower  orders, 
where  is  invariably  a  profusion  of  punning  invective,  whence,  perhaps,  nicknames 
have  in  a  considerable  degree  sprung  up :  or  it  is  the  language  of  suppressed  passion, 
and  especially  of  a  hardly-smothered  personal  dislike.  The  first  and  last  of  these 
combine  in  Hamlet's  case ;  and  I  have  little  doubt  that  Farmer  is  right  in  suppos- 
ing the  equivocation  carried  on  in  the  expression,  '  too  much  i'  the  sun,'  or  son. 

67.  i'  the  sun]  Johnson  :  A  probable  allusion  to  the  proverb :  *  Out  of  heaven's 
blessing  into  the  warm  sun.'  Farmer  suggested  that  a  quibble  was  here  intended 
between  '  sun '  and  son.  Caldecott  :  Adopting  this  suggestion  of  Farmer's,  the  pas- 
sage must  mean,  •  I  have  too  much  about  me  of  the  character  of  expectancy,  at  the 
same  time  that  I  am  torn  prematurely  from  my  sorrows,  and  thrown  into  the  broad  glare 
of  the  sun  and  day ;  have  too  much  of  the  son  and  successor  and  public  staging  without 
possession  of  my  rights,  and  without  a  due  interval  to  assuage  my  grief.'  But  a  closer 
observer,  (continues  Caldecott),  here  says  :  '  One  part  of  Farmer's  suggestion  is  right , 
Hamlet  means  that  he  had  not  possession  of  his  rights  ;  but  there  was  no  quibble  ; 
the  allusion  is  to  the  proverb  referred  to  by  Johnson,  which  means,  •  to  be  out  of 
house  and  home,'  or,  at  least,  to  be  in  a  worse  temporal  condition  than  a  man  was, 
or  should  be.  Thus  in  Lear,  II,  ii,  168,  and  ' —  they  were  brought  from  the  good 
to  the  bad,  and  from  Goddes  blessyng  (as  the  proverbe  is)  in  to  a  warme  sonne.' — 
Preface  to  Grindal's  Profitable  Doctrine,  1555.  And  again, '  By  such  art  he  thought 
to  have  removed  him,  as  we  say,  out  of  God's  blessing  into  the  warm  sun.' — 
Raleigh's  Hist,  of  the  World,  1677.  His  being  deprived  of  his  right,  i.  e.  his  suc- 
cession to  the  kingdom,  Hamlet  might  therefore  call  '  being  too  much  i'  the  sun.' 
Knight:  There  is  no  quibble.  His  meaning  is  explained  by  the  old  proverb. 
Staunton:  Hamlet  may  mean,  «I  am  too  much  in  the  way;  a  mote  in  the  royal 
eye;'  but  his  reply  is  purposely  enigmatical.  Dyce  [Gloss,  s.  v.  heaven's  benediction, 
&c.) :  The  proverbial  expression  alluded  to  by  Johnson  is  found  in  various  authors, 
from  Heywood  down  to  Swift ;  the  former  has,  '  In  your  running  from  him  to  me,  yee 
runne  Out  of  God's  blessing  into  the  warme  sunne.' — Dialogue  on  Proverbs,  Workes, 
sig.  G  2  ver.  1598;  and  the  latter:  ' Lord  Sparkish.  They  say,  marriages  are  made 
in  heaven;  but  I  doubt,  when  she  was  married,  she  had  no  friend  there.  Neverout. 
Well,  she's  got  out  of  God's  blessing  into  the  warm  sun.' — Polite  Conversation, 
Dialogue  I,  Works,  vol.  ix,  p.  423.     Ray  gives  as  its  equivalent,  Ab  equis  ad  asinos. 


act  i,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  35 

Queen.     Good  Hamlet,  cast  thy  nighted  colour  off,  68 

68.     nighted}  nightly  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  White,  Tsch.     nightlike  Coll.  (MS). 

— Proverbs,  p.  192,  ed.  1768.  Hudson  inclines  to  Farmer's  suggestion,  and  adas: 
•Perhaps  there  is  the  further  meaning  implied,  that  he  finds  too  much  sunshine 
of  jollity  in  the  Court,  considering  what  has  lately  happened.'  In  Much  Ado, 
II,  i,  331,  Beatrice  says  of  herself,  'I  am  sun-burned,'  and  this  phrase  Hunter 
(i.  250)  ingeniously  explains,  and  gives  it  a  signification  akin  to  the  present  passage. 
' "  To  be  in  the  sun,"  "  to  be  in  the  warm  sun,"  "  to  be  sun-burned,"  were  phrases,' 
says  Hunter,  ■  not  uncommon  in  the  time  of  Sh.,  and  for  a  century  later,  to  express 
the  state  of  being  without  family  connections,  destitute  of  the  comforts  of  domestic 
life.  There  must  have  been  some  reason  for  this  association  of  discomfort  with  whaj 
is  generally  considered  comfort,  at  least  among  northern  nations,  and  this  reason  is 
found  in  the  old  English  version  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-first  Psalm,  in 
which  occurs  the  passage,  "  So  that  the  sun  shall  not  burn  thee  by  day,  nor  the  moon 
by  night;"  and  as  this  psalm,  in  the  earlier  Rituals  of  the  Church,  was  used  in  the 
Churching  of  Women,  it  followed  that  the  matron  who  was  surrounded  by  her  hus- 
band and  children  was  one  who  had  received  the  benediction  that  the  sun  shoula 
not  burn  her,  while  the  unmarried  woman,  who  had  received  no  such  benediction,  came 
to  be  spoken  of  by  those  who  allowed  themselves  to  use  such  jocular  expressions  as 
one  "  still  left  exposed  to  the  burning  of  the  sun,"  or,  as  Beatrice  says,  "  sun-burned." 
When  the  translation  of  the  Scriptures  was  revised,  in  the  reign  of  James  I,  the 
word  "  smite  "  was  substituted  in  this  verse  for  "  burn,"  probably  on  account  of  these 
ludicrous  associations ;  and  for  the  same  reason,  on  the  last  revision  of  the  Liturgy, 
this  psalm  was  left  out  of  the  service  altogether.  In  the  first  and  original  use  of  this 
phrase,  then,  it  denoted  the  state  of  being  unmarried ;  thus  Beatrice  uses  it.  It  then 
expanded  so  as  to  include  the  state  of  those  who  were  without  family  connections  of 
any  kind ;  thus  Hamlet  uses  it.  It  expanded  still  wider  and  included  the  state  of 
those  who  have  no  home,  and  thus  it  is  used  in  Lear,  II,  ii,  168.  And  it  seems  to  have 
expanded  wider  still,  and  to  have  been  sometimes  used  for  any  species  of  destitution,  or 
distress,  or  evil.  Hamlet  therefore  means,  "  I  have  lost  father  and  mother;  you  heap 
upon  me  the  terms  '  cousin '  and  '  son,'  but  I  find  myself  forlorn,  with  none  of  the 
comforts  remaining  which  arise  out  of  the  charities  of  kindred." '  Ingenious  as 
this  explanation  of  Hunter's  is,  it  applies  with  more  force  to  the  phrase  used  by 
Beatrice  than  to  that  used  by  Hamlet ;  we  have  no  examples  given  us  that  '  to  be  in 
the  sun  '  was  ever  thus  understood,  and  for  it  we  must  take  Hunter's  unsupported 
assertion.  Nicholson  (JV.  &*  Qu.  25  May,  1867)  thus  paraphrases:  Ham.  turns 
off  the  King's  query  with  an  apparently  courtly  compliment, — Nay,  my  lord,  I  am 
too  much  in  the  sunshine  of  your  favour,  where  I  show  but  as  a  shadow  (too  muclj 
am  I  in  that  sunshine  which  I  detest) ;  deposed  by  you  as  heir  and  successor  to  th« 
throne  on  which  by  God's  providence  I  was  placed,  I  am  now  gone  to  the  world ; 
instead  of  being  in  clouds  and  rain,  amid  sorrow  and  tears  for  my  dead  father  and 
king,  I  find  myself  in  the  midst  of  marriage  festivities  and  carousings.  Moberly 
thinks  the  proverb  may  have  meant  that  a  person  loses  all  special  advantages,  and 
is  reduced  to  light  and  sunshine,  which  are  the  common  inheritance  of  all. 

68.  nighted]  For  the  general  rule  that  participles  formed  from  an  adjective  mean 
'made  of  (the  adjective),'  and  derived  from  a  noun,  mean  '  endowed  with,  or  like 
(the  noun),' see  Abbott,  §  294. 


36 


HAMLET 


[act  i,  sc.  ii 


And  let  thine  eye  look  like  a  friend  on  Denmark. 

Do  not  for  ever  with  thy  vailed  lids  70 

Seek  for  thy  noble  father  in  the  dust. 

Thou  know'st  'tis  common ;  all  that  lives  must  die, 

Passing  through  nature  to  eternity. 

Ham.     Ay,  madam,  it  is  common. 

Queen.  If  it  be, 

Why  seems  it  so  particular  with  thee  ?  75 

Ham.     Seems ',  madam  ?  nay,  it  is  ;  I  know  not  seems. 
Tis  not  alone  my  inky  cloak,  good  mother, 
Nor  customary  suits  of  solemn  black, 
Nor  windy  suspiration  of  forced  breath, 

No,  nor  the  fruitful  river  in  the  eye,  80 

Nor  the  dejected  haviour  of  the  visage, 
Together  with  all  forms,  modes,  shows  of  grief, 


70.     vailed]  veyled  FXF2.     veiled  F 
F  ,  Rowe+,  Jen. 

72.  common  /]  Theob.  common,  Ft, 
Rovve,  Pope,  Han.  common, —  Dyce, 
White,  Sta.     common  Qq. 

lives']  live  F2F  F  ,  Rowe  + ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

74.  it  be,]  Q5.  it  be  Q,Q3Q4-  it  be  ; 
Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

77.     my  inky]  this  mourning  Q'76. 


77.  good  mother]  coold  mother  Q2Q3- 
could  /mother  Q.Q-. 

78.  solemn]  fole?nbe  Q2Q3- 

81.  haviour]  'haviour  Pope  + ,  Cap. 

82.  modes]  Cap.  moodes  Q2Q3Q4- 
Moods  FfQ  ,  Rowe+,  Jen.  Knt,  Coll. 
El.  Glo.  +  . 

shows]  Steev.  Jltewes  FXF2. 
Jhews  F3F4,  Rowei,  Mai.  chapes  Q2Qr 
Jliapes  Q4Q5>Cap.  Jen.Tsch.  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 


70.  vailed]  Johnson  :  With  cast-down  eyes.  Steevens  :  See  Mer.  of  Ven.  I, 
i,  28. 

72.  common]  Seymour  :  Point  thus  :  '  Thou  know'st — 'tis  common — all  thai 
live,'  i.  e.  'Thou  knowest  this  truth, — nay,  it  is  known  to  all  men — it  is  '  a  common 
proof.' 

74.  common]  Caldecott  :  Similar  examples  of  frailty,  connected  with  such  an 
event,  are  the  things  or  occurrences  that,  he  would  have  it  inferred,  were  common. 
Clarendon  :  We  have  '  common '  and  '  particular '  opposed  to  each  other  in  the 
very  difficult,  and  probably  corrupt,  passage  of  2  Hen.  IV :  IV,  i,  94 ;  and  '  partic- 
ular '  opposed  to  '  general '  in  Tro.  &  Cress.  I,  iii,  340.  Coleridge  :  Here  observe 
Hamlet's  delicacy  to  his  mother,  and  how  the  suppression  prepares  him  for  the  over- 
flow in  the  next  speech,  in  which  his  character  is  more  developed  by  bringing  for- 
ward his  aversion  to  externals,  and  which  betrays  his  habit  of  brooding  over  the 
world  within  him,  coupled  with  a  prodigality  of  beautiful  words,  which  are  the 
half-embodyings  of  thought,  and  are  more  than  thought,  and  have  an  outness,  a 
reality  sui  generis,  and  yet  contain  their  correspondence  and  shadowy  affinity  to  the 
images  and  movements  within.  Note  also  Hamlet's  silence  to  the  long  speech  of 
the  King  which  follows,  and  his  respectful,  but  general,  answer  to  his  mother. 

81.  haviour]   For  a  list  of  dropped  prefixes,  see  Abbott,  $  460. 

82.  modes]   Knight:   Mood  [of  the  QqFf]   perhaps  here  signifies  something 


act  i,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  37 

That  can  denote  me  truly  ;  these  indeed  scan, 

For  they  are  actions  that  a  man  might  play  ; 

But  I  have  that  within  which  passeth  show ;  85 

These,  but  the  trappings  and  the  suits  of  woe. 

King.     Tis  sweet  and  commendable  in  your  nature,  Hamlet, 
To  give  these  mourning  duties  to  your  father; 
But,  you  must  know,  your  father  lost  a  father ; 
That  father  lost,  lost  his ;  and  the  survivor  bound  90 

In  filial  obligation  for  some  term 
To  do  obsequious  sorrow ;  but  to  persever 

$3.     denote]  denote  Q2Q3Q..    deuoute  87.     Hamlet, ]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

Q  .  90.      That]  The  F.. 

indeed]  may  Pope.  lost,  lost  his]    his   Pope,   Han. 

85.     within]   Within  F,F2F3.  Warb.  Seymour. 

passeth]   paffes  Qq,  Cap.  Cam.  92.     sorrow]  forrowes  Q4QS« 

87.     Two  lines,  Ff.  persever]    perfevere    Q'76,    F  , 

sweet  and]  Om.  Seymour.  Rowe+,  Jen.  Coll.  i,  El.  White,  Huds. 

beyond  the  mere  manner  of  grief, — the  mariner  as  exhibited  in  the  outward  sadness. 
The  forms  are  the  ceremonials  of  grief, — the  moods  its  prevailing  sullenness ;  the 
shows  its  fits  of  passion.  Hunter  (ii,  217):  Moods  and  'modes'  form  a  various 
reading  well  worthy  of  attention.  In  Qf,  in  support  of  moods,  the  King  just  before 
said  to  Ham. :  '  What  mean  these  sad  and  melancholy  moods  ?'  Dyce  :  Nothing 
can  be  plainer  than  that  Ham.,  throughout  this  speech,  is  dwelling  entirely  on  the 
outward  and  visible  signs  of  sadness. 

82.  shows]  Dyce  (ed.  2) :  I  once  felt  inclined  to  adopt  shapes,  since  in  the 
third  line  after  this  we  have  'passeth  show'' ;  but  'forms'  and  'shapes'  would  be 
tautological.  [Moreover,  the  '  show '  in  line  85  is  an  intentional  and  emphatic 
repetition  of  the  ♦  shows  '  in  this  line.  Ed.] 

85.  passeth]  Corson:  The  older  form  ['passeth']  not  only  suits  the  tone  of 
the  passage  better,  but  the  two  s's  and  the  sh  in  '  passes  show  '  coming  together  are 
very  cacophonous.  Seymour  (ii,  144)  :  Ham.  in  this  scene  is  impatient,  fretful 
and  sarcastic ;  every  reply  is  in  contradiction  of  what  is  said  to  him.  It  is  not  till 
he  comes  to  this  line  that  he  is  actuated  by  tender  sentiment. 

87.  commendable]  Clarendon  :  The  accent  is  on  the  first  syllable,  as  in  Cor. 
IV,  vii,  51.  On  the  second  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  i,  in.  To  avoid  the  alexandrine,, 
Abbott,  \  490,  accents  commendable,  and  scans  '  'Tis  sweet  and  |  command  |  able 
in  I  your  na  |  ture,  Hamlet.' 

87.  Hamlet]  Tschischwitz  :  The  names  of  persons  addressed  are  very  fre- 
quently not  counted  in  the  number  of  feet  in  a  verse. 

90.  lost,  lost]  Steevens  :  Your  father  lost  a  father,  i.  e.  your  grandfather,  which 
lost  grandfather  also  lost  his  father.  Abbott,  \  246  :  An  ellipsis  of  '  that'  (relative) 
before  the  participle,  '  That  father  (who  was)  lost,'  &c. 

92.  obsequious]  Johnson  :  Referring  to  obsequies,  or  funeral  ceremonies. 
Steevens:  See  Tit.  And.  V,  iii,  152.  Collier  (ed.  2) :  In  Mer.  Wives,  IV,  ii,  2, 
it  means  observant ;  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  II,  iv,  28,  it  means  dutiful. 

92.  persever]  Gifford  (Dyce's  Ren-arks,  &c,  p.  204) :  So  this  word  was- 
4 


38  HAMLET  [act  I,  SC.il 

In  obstinate  condolement  is  a  course 

Of  impious  stubbornness;  'tis  unmanly  grief; 

It  shows  a  will  most  incorrect  to  heaven,  95 

A  heart  unfortified,  a  mind  impatient, 

An  understanding  simple  and  unschool'd ; 

For  what  we  know  must  be  and  is  as  common 

As  any  the  most  vulgar  thing  to  sense, 

Why  should  we  in  our  peevish  opposition  100 

Take  it  to  heart  ?     Fie !  'tis  a  fault  to  Heaven, 

A  fault  against  the  dead,  a  fault  to  Nature, 

To  Reason  most  absurd,  whose  common  theme 

Is  death  of  fathers,  and  who  still  hath  cried, 

From  the  first  corse  till  he  that  died  to-day,  105 

'  This  must  be  so.'     We  pray  you,  throw  to  earth 

This  unprevailing  woe,  and  think  of  us 

As  of  a  father ;  for  let  the  world  take  note, 

93,94.     is  a  course  Of]  dares  exprefs  105.     corse~\   courfe  Qq.      Coarfe  Ff, 

An  Q'76.  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

94.  'tis]  Om.  Pope  +  .  106.     'This. ..so"]   Quotation,  Pope. 
96.     a    mind]    or   minde    Qq,    Cap.              107.     unprevailing]  unavailing 'Plan. 

Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  108.    for  let]  and  let  Q: '76. 

103.  absurd]  abfur'd  F2F  . 

anciently  written  and  pronounced.  See  Abbott,  $  492,  for  list  of  words  in  which 
the  accent  is  nearer  the  beginning  than  with  us.  See  also  '  cdmplete,'  I,  iv,  52; 
and  'secure,'  I,  v,  61;  '  ploner,'  I,  v,  163;  '  enginer,'  III,  iv,  206;  '  dbscure,' 
IV,  v,  207. 

93.  condolement]  Heath  (p.  523) :  That  is,  self-condolement,  nourishing  our 
own  grief.     Caldecott  holds  it  to  be  merely  the  expressions  of  grief. 

95.  incorrect]   Caldecott:  Contumacious  towards. 

98.  what]  For  the  relative  use  of  '  what,'  see  Abbott,  §  252. 

99.  any  the  most]  Francke  :  Compare  '  any  the  rarest,'  Cymb.  I,  iv,  65 ;  and 
'  one  the  wisest,'  Hen.  VIII :  II,  iv,  48.  For  the  transposition  of  adjective  phrases, 
see  Abbott,  \  419  a;  and  Macb.  Ill,  vi,  48.     Clarendon  refers  to  Abbott,  §  18. 

99.  to  sense]  Caldecott:  That  is, 'addressed  to  sense;  in  every  hour's  occur- 
rence offering  itself  to  our  observation  and  feelings.' 

104.  who]  For  instances  of  '  who '  personifying  irrational  antecedents,  see 
Abbott,  \  264. 

105.  till  he]  Abbott,  \\  184,  206:  '  Till'  is  a  preposition,  and  'he'  is  used  for 
him. 

107.  unprevailing]  Malone:  Used  of  old  for  unavailing.  'He  may  often 
prevail  himself  of  the  same  advantages  in  English.' — Dryden,  Essay  on  Dram. 
Poet  ry.  Tschischwitz  :  Here  used  in  its  medical  sense,  like  the  Latin,  '  praeva- 
iere,'  e.g.  prsevalet  contra  serpentium  ictus,  in  Pliny.  Clarendon:  See  Rom.  &* 
Jul.  Ill,  iii,  60,  where  it  is  used  in  the  sense  referred  to  by  Malone. 


act  i,  BC,  ii-1  HAMLET  39 

You  are  the  most  immediate  to  our  throne, 

And  with  no  less  nobility  of  love  IIO 

Than  that  which  dearest  father  bears  his  son 

Do  I  impart  toward  you.     For  your  intent 

112.     toiuarJ]     towards     Ff,     Roue,  112.     you.      For]  you   for  Qq. 

Calcl.  Knt. 

109.  immediate]  STBEVENS  having  said  that  the  crown  of  Denmark  was 
elective,  Blackstone  (in  a  note  which  is  not  given  among  the  other  notes  by 
him  in  vol.  xii  of  the  Sh.  Soc.)  agrees  with  him,  adding:  Though  it  must  be 
customary,  in  elections,  to  pay  some  attention  to  the  royal  blood,  which  by  degrees 
produced  hereditary  succession.  Why,  then,  do  the  rest  of  the  commentators  so 
often  treat  Claudius  as  an  usurper,  who  had  deprived  young  Hamlet  of  his  right 
by  heirship  to  his  father's  crown  ?  Hamlet  calls  him  drunkard,  murderer,  and 
villain  ;  one  who  had  carried  the  election  by  low  and  mean  practices ;  had  '  Popp'd 
in  between  the  election  and  my  hopes — ;'  had  '  From  a  shelf  the  precious  diadem 
stole,  And  put  it  in  his  pocket;'  but  never  hints  at  his  being  an  usurper.  Mis  dis- 
content arose  from  his  uncle's  being  preferred  before  him,  not  from  any  legal  right 
which  he  pretended  to  set  up  to  the  crown.  Some  regard  was  probably  had  to  the 
recommendation  of  the  preceding  prince  in  electing  the  successor.  And  therefore 
young  Hamlet  had  'the  voice  of  the  king  himself  for  his  succession  in  Denmark  ;' 
and  he  at  his  own  death  prophesies  that  '  the  election  would  light  on  Fortinbras, 
who  had  his  dying  voice,'  conceiving  that  by  the  death  of  his  uncle  he  himself  had 
been  king  for  an  instant,  and  had  therefore  a  right  to  recommend.  When,  in  the 
fourth  Act,  the  rabble  wished  to  choose  Laertes  king,  I  understand  that  antiquity 
was  forgot,  and  custom  violated,  by  electing  a  new  king  in  the  lifetime  of  the  old 
one,  and  perhaps  also  by  the  calling  in  a  stranger  to  the  royal  blood.  Elze:  It  is 
not  exactly  consistent  with  this  elective  character  that  the  queen  should  be  called 
*  the  imperial  jointress  of  this  warlike  state.'  Marshall  (p.  16)  :  Perhaps  the  com 
parative  youth  of  Ham.,  and  the  fact  that  the  kingdom  was  threatened  by  the  Nor- 
wegians, were  the  reasons  which  induced  the  royal  councillors  to  place  the  sceptre 
in  the  hands  of  Claudius. 

no.  nobility]  Warburton  :  Magnitude.    Johnson  :  Rather  generosity.    Heath. 
Eminence  and  distinction. 

110-112.  with  .  .  .  impart]  Theobald:  The  king  had  declared  Hamlet  his  im- 
mediate successor,  and  with  that  declaration  he  imparts  as  noble  a  love,  &c.  Read, 
therefore,  •  with't  no  less  nobility,'  &c.  Hanmer  adopted  this  suggestion.  Johnson 
siys  'impart'  is  impart  myself ,  communicate  whatever  I  can  bestow ;  and  Heath 
and  Capell  both  approve  of  this  interpretation.  Mason  (p.  374)  :  '  To  impart 
toiuara"  a  person  is  not  English.  Moreover  '  impart'  is  never  neuter.  Read,  there- 
fore, '  and  still  no  less  nobility  of  love '  instead  of  '  with  no  less,'  &c. ;  or  else  read 
'  Do  I  my  part  toward  you '  instead  of  '  do  I  impart.'  Delius  suggests  that  Sh. 
probably  regarded  '  no  less  nobility  of  love '  as  the  object  of  '  impart,'  and  forgot, 
owing  to  the  intermediate  clause,  that  he  had  written  '  with  no  less.'  Badham  {Cam- 
bridge Essays,  1856,  p.  272)  believes  all  difficulties  removed  by  a  slight  transposition, 
thus :  '  And  with  nobility  no  less  of  love,'  &c.  The  nobility  that  he  grants  him  is 
that  of  heir-presumptive.  Dyce  pronounces  this  reading  of  Badham's  '  very  improper.' 
Whit  would  he  have  said  had  he  seen  Tschischwitz's  reading,  which  substitutes  7t>u 


4-0  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc  ii, 

In  going  back  to  school  in  Wittenberg, 

It  is  most  retrograde  to  our  desire ; 

And  we  beseech  you,  bend  you  to  remain  115 

Here,  in  the  cheer  and  comfort  of  our  eye, 

Our  chiefest  courtier,  cousin,  and  our  son. 

Queen.     Let  not  thy  mother  lose  her  prayers,  Hamlet ; 
I  pray  thee,  stay  with  us ;  go  not  to  Wittenberg. 

Ham.     I  shall  in  all  my  best  obey  you,  madam.  120 

King.     Why,  'tis  a  loving  and  a  fair  reply ; 
Be  as  ourself  in  Denmark. — Madam,  come  ; 
This  gentle  and  unforced  accord  of  Hamlet 
Sits  smiling  to  my  heart ;  in  grace  whereof, 
No  jocund  health  that  Denmark  drinks  to-day,  125 

113.  in  Wittenberg]  to  Wittenberg  119.  pray  thee~\  pray  ' thee  Q  (Ash- 
Q4Q5,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  bee's  Facs.).    prythee  Ft.   prethee  F2F3. 

114.  retrograde]  retrogard  Q2Q3Q4-  prithee  F4,  Rowe.    pr'ythee  Pope  +  . 
tetrogradQ.     retrogarde  F2F  .  120.     Two  lines  Ff. 

115.  bend]  beg  Anon.  MS.*  121.      Why]  Om.  Q'76. 

118.  mother]  Brother  Y ^  124.     to]  at  Han.     on  Ritson. 
lose]  loose  Qq. 

for  'with,'  that  is,  I  wis    (as   in  Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  ix,  68,  for  the  old  'y-wiss'), 
meaning  assuredly  ?     Keightley  would  read, '  Mine  do  I  impart  toward  you,'  &c. 

113.  Wittenberg]  M alone:  The  university  of  Wittenberg,  as  we  learn  from 
Lewkenor's  Discourse  on  Universities,  1600,  was  founded  in  1502  by  Duke  Fred- 
erick, the  son  of  Ernestus  Elector:  'which  since  in  this  latter  age  is  growen  famous 
by  reason  of  the  controversies  and  disputations  there  handled  by  Martin  Luther  and 
his  adherents.'  Ritson  :  Sh.  may  have  learned  of  this  university  from  The  Life  of 
Iacke  Wilton,  1594,  or  The  Hy story  of  Doctor  Faustus,  of  whom  the  second  report 
is  said  to  be  '  written  by  an  English  gentleman,  student  at  Wittenberg,  an  university 
of  Germany  in  Saxony.'  Boswell  :  Or  from  Marlowe's  Doctor  Faustus,  or  a  mul- 
titude of  other  publications  of  that  period.  Elze  :  Sh.  had  to  send  the  Dane  Hamlet 
to  some  northern  university,  and  probably  none  other  was  so  well  known  to  him  or 
to  his  audience  as  Wittenberg. 

114.  retrograde]  Tschischwitz  :  A  word  borrowed  from  astrology.  When  the 
planets  were  retrograde,  that  is,  when  they  were  going  away  from  the  earth's  orbit, 
they  were  under  certain  circumstances  hostile  to  human  plans. 

119.  Abbott,  \  456,  scans  this  line  either  by  reading,  'I  pray  thee  stay'  as  one 
foot:  'I'  being  redundant  as  far  as  sound  goes,  and  'pray  thee'  contracted  to 
prithee ;  or  'Wittenberg'  may  receive  but  one  accent,  as  coming  at  the  end  of  a 
>.ine ;  as  '  Horatio,'  in  I,  i,  43,  or  '  Ophelia,'  V,  i,  230.     See  §  469. 

120.  shall]  See  I,  iv,  35;  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  57;  Abbott,  \  315. 

124.  to]  Steevens  :  Near  to,  close  to,  next  to,  my  heart.  Delius  :  '  To'  is  con- 
nected, by  attraction,  with  '  smiling.' 

125.  drinks]  Johnson:  The  king's  intemperance  is  very  strongly  impressed; 
everything  that  happens  to  him  gives  him  occasion  to  drink. 


iCri.SC.  ».]  HAMLET  41 

{j 
But  the  great  cannon  to  the  clouds  shall  tell,  126 

And  the  king's  rouse  the  heavens  shall  bruit  again, 

Re-speaking  earthly  thunder. — Come  away. 

[Flourish.     Exeunt  all  but  Hamlet. 

Ham.     O,  that  this  too  too  solid  flesh  would  melt, 

126.  tell]  tell  it  Han.      ^  Hamlet.  Ff. 

127.  rouse']  row/e  Qq.     Rouce,  Vf.  129.     Scene  III.  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
/teavens]    heauen   QqF4,    Rowe,         Jen. 

Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Cald.  too  too  solid]  too-too-solid 'Theob. 

Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White,  Cam.  Warb.  Cap.      too-too  solid  Pope,  Dyce, 

bruit]  brute  Qq.     bruite  FxFa.  Huds.     too,  too  solid  Jen.  Coll.  i,  Del. 

128.  Re-speaking]  Hyphen,  F^    Be-  El.  White,  Hal. 
speaking  Ktly.  solid]      /allied     Qq.      sullied 

Flourish.]  Om.  Ff.  Anon.* 

Exeunt...]       Exeunt.       Manet 

127.  rouse]  Wedgwood:  The  radical  sense  of  the  word  is  shown  in  Piatt 
Deutsch  ruse,  rusie,  noise,  racket,  disturbance ;  German  rauschen,  to  rustle,  roar,  to 
do  things  with  noise  and  bustle.  Rausch  is  a  flare-up,  a  sudden  blaze;  the  same 
word  is  metaphorically  applied  to  excitation  from  drink.  Piatt  Deutsch  runsk,  Old 
Norse  russ,  Dutch  roes,  tipsiness.  When  transferred  to  the  cognate  sense  of  a  full 
glass  or  bumper,  English  rouse  was  not  unnaturally  supposed  to  be  contracted  from 
carouse  (German  garaus),  with  which  it  has  a  merely  accidental  resemblance— 
Rouse,  noise,  intemperate  mirth.     [See  I,  iv,  8.] 

127.  bruit]  See  Macb.  V,  vii,  22.  Staunton:  This  plainly  imports  not  simply 
a  deep  draught,  but  the  accompaniment  of  some  outcry,  similar,  perhaps,  to  our 
*  hip,  hip,  hurrah  !' 

129.  too  too]  Nares  pointed  out  the  intensive  effect  of  this  reduplication,  giving 
instances  from  Holinshed  and  Spenser,  and  adding  that  it  is  common.  Halliwell 
(Sh.  Soc.  Papers,  1844,  i,  39)  showed  that  'too-too'  is  a  provincial  word  recognized 
by  Ray,  and  explained  by  him  as  meaning  '  very  well  or  good,'  and  that  Watson  a 
few  years  afterwards  says  it  is  '  often  used  to  denote  exceeding?  In  proof  '  that  too- 
TOO,  as  used  by  our  early  writers,  is  one  word,  denoting  "  exceedingly"  and  that  it 
ought  to  be  so  printed?  Halliwell  gives  from  the  poets  twelve  instances,  from  Skelton 
down  to  Hudibras,  and  refers  to  over  thirty  other  passages  where  the  phrase  ir, 
found,  extending  from  Promos  and  Cassandra  to  Young's  Night  Thoughts.  [Aftei 
all,  Halliwell  did  not  so  print  it  in  his  edition.]  HuNTEk  doubts  if  this  reduplica- 
tion be  emphatic.  It  appears  to  him  to  have  been  in  sense  neither  more  nor  less 
than  too,  and  he  cites  many  instances  from  prose  writers.  Palsgrave,  he  adds,  has 
beside  to-much,  to-little,  &c,  to  to  much,  to  to  great,  to  to  little,  to  to  small,  answering 
to  par  trop  trop  peu,  par  trop  trop  grant,  par  trop  trop  petit.  The  pronunciation 
was  too-to6,  as  appears  by  this  line  of  Constable's :  '  But  I  did  too-too  inestimable 
wey  her.'  That  the  phrase  was  used  with  intensifying  iteration,  White  thinks  is 
clear  from  instances  like  the  present,  and  from  the  similar  iteration  of  other  adverbs 
and  adjectives  in  the  literature  of  Shakespeare's  day.  For  instance  :  '  Thy  wit  dost 
use  still  still  more  harmes  to  finde,' — Sidney's  Arcadia,  ii,  p.  225,  ed.  1603;  'While 

he  did  live  far  far  was,  all  disorder, — lb.  v,  p.  430;  ' your  lesson  is  Far  fat  too 

\ong  to  learne  iV  without  bocke,' — Astrophel  and  Stella,  St.  56,  lb.  p.  537  ;  '  Stop  you 


42  ^\  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc  ii. 

Thaw,  and  resplve  itself  into  a  dew  !  1 30 

Or  that  the  Everlasting  had  not  flx'd 

His  canon  'gainst  self-slaughter!     O  God!     O  God! 

132.     canon]    Q'03.  cannon   QqFf,              132.      O  God  !  O  God/]   6  Gcd,  God, 

R  nve,  Pope,  Jen.  Q2Q3>     0  God,  God,  Q4.      O  God,  God, 

self-slaughter]  feale  Jlaughter         Q  .     O  God !    God !   Jen.   El.    Glo.-f, 

Qq.  Mob.    Om.  Q'76. 

my  mouth  with  still  still  kissing  me,' — lb.  St.  81,  lb.  p.  547;  'Even  to  thy  pure 
and  most  most  loving  breast,' — Sh.  Son.  no.  In  any  case  the  compound  epithet 
must  have  originated  in  the  frequent  iterative  use  of  the  word.  Staunton  thinks 
that  the  present  instance  must  be  regarded  as  an  exception  to  Halliwell's  rule.  Here 
the  repetition  of  too  is  not  only  strikingly  beautiful,  rhetorically,  but  it  admirably 
expresses  that  morbid  condition  of  the  mind  which  makes  the  unhappy  prince  deem 
all  the  uses  of  the  world  but  '  weary,  stale,  flat  and  unprofitable.'  Halliwell  notes 
that  his  copy  of  Fa  reads  'too- too,'  with  the  hyphen. 

129-159.  Coleridge:  This  tcedium  vita  is  a  common  oppression  on  minds  cast 
in  the  Hamlet  mould,  and  is  caused  by  disproportionate  mental  exertion,  which 
necessitates  exhaustion  of  bodily  feeling.  Where  there  is  a  just  coincidence  of 
external  and  internal  action,  pleasure  is  always  the  result ;  but  where  the  former  is 
deficient,  and  the  mind's  appetency  of  the  ideal  is  unchecked,  realities  will  seem 
cold  and  unmoving.  In  such  cases  passion  combines  itself  with  the  indefinite  alone. 
In  this  mood  of  his  mind  the  relation  of  the  appearance  of  his  father's  spirit  in 
arms  is  made  all  at  once  to  Hamlet :  it  is — Horatio's  speech,  in  particular — a  perfect 
model  of  the  true  style  of  dramatic  narrative;  the  purest  poetry,  and  yet  in  the 
most  natural  language,  equally  remote  from  the  inkhorn  and  the  plough. 

129.  solid  flesh]  Moberly  :  The  base  affinities  of  our  nature  are  ever  present 
to  Hamlet's  mind.  Here  he  thinks  of  the  body  as  hiding  from  us  the  freshness, 
life,  and  nobleness  of  God's  creation.  If  it  were  to  pass  away,  silently  and  sponta- 
neously, like  the  mist  on  a  mountain-side,  or  if,  curtain-like,  we  might  tear  it  down 
by  an  act  of  violence,  it  may  be  that  we  should  see  quite  another  prospect ;  at  any 
rate,  the  vile  things  now  before  us  would  be  gone  for  ever. 

'130.  resolve]  Steevens  :  This  means  the  same  as  dissolve.  Nares  cites:  'I 
could  be  content  to  resolve  myself  into  tears,  to  rid  thee  of  trouble.' — Lyly's 
Euphues,  p.  38.  Caldecott  :  '  To  thaw  or  resolve  that  which  is  frozen,  regelo.' 
Baret's  Alvearie. 

132.  canon]  Theobald  first  pointed  out  that  this  did  not  refer  to  a  piece  of 
artillery,  but  to  a  divine  decree.  Hunter  (ii,  218) :  This  is  an  unhappy  word  to  use 
here.  I  fear  the  truth  is  that  the  noise  of  the  cannon  in  the  King's  speech  was  still 
ringing  in  the  Poet's  ears.  Grant  White  ( The  Galaxy,  Oct.  1869)  :  Here  and  in 
Cym.  Ill,  iv,  77-80,  there  is  a  particular  assertion  of  the  existence  of  a  specific  pro- 
l.ibition  of  suicide  by  Divine  law.  Sh.  may  have  known  the  Bible,  as  he  knew  all 
other  things  in  his  day  knowable,  so  much  better  than  I  do  that  I  may  not  without 
presumption  question  what  he  says  with  regard  to  it.  But  I  have  not  been  able  to 
discover  any  such  specific  prohibition.  Wordsworth  {Shakespeare 's  Knowledge  and 
Use  of  the  Bible,  p.  149)  :  Unless  it  be  the  Sixth  Commandment,  the  'canon '  must 
be  one  of  natural  religion. 

132.  slaughter]  Corson:  The  ending  -er  of  'slaughter'  shomd  be  read  as  an 


act  I,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  43 

How  weary,  stale,  flat  and  unprofitable 
Seem  to  me  all  the  uses  of  this  world ! 

'ie  on't!  O  fie!  'tis  an  un weeded  garden  135 

That  grows  to  seed ;  things  rank  and  gross  in  nature 
Possess  it  merely.  '  That  it  should  come  to  this ! 
But  two  months  dead !  nay,  not  so  much,  not  two ; 
So  excellent  a  king ;  that  was,  to  this, 
Hyperion  to  a  satyr ;  so  loving  to  my  mother,  14c 

133.  weary]  ivary  Qq.  Qq.     meerly :  thatQ'j6. 

134.  Seem]  Seenic  Qq.  Seemes  FXF,,.  137.  come  to  this]  come  thus  Qq, 
Seems  FF,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  i.                      Pope. 

135.  Fie  on't!  O  fie !]    Om.  Q'76.  138.     not  two  ;~\  Theob.  ii.     not  two ; 
O  fie]   ah  fie  Qq,   Cap.    Jen.         QqFf.      not  two, —  Rowe+  ( — Warb.), 

Glo.  +  .      Oh  fie,  fie  FXF7.      Oh  fie  Y^  Jen. 

Pope  +  .  139,  140.     that. .. satyr :]  Om.  Q'76. 

I36-    gross]   grofe  Q2Q3Q4-  14°-     satyr]  fatire  Q2Q3Q4-     Satyr e 

137.     merely.       That]     meerely   that  Q  FxFaF  . 

internal  extra  syllable.  And  every  reader  would  feel  the  want  of  the  second  '  O,'  on 
which  to  dwell  before  uttering  '  God  '  with  a  strong  aspiration. 

135.  O  fie]  Elze  :  In  Fx  the  emphatic  iteration  of  exclamations  is  very  frequent, 
and  is  probably  due  to  the  pathos  of  the  actors.  Corson  :  '  Ah,'  of  the  Qq,  does 
not  express  the  feeling  of  the  speaker  so  well  as  the  '  Oh '  of  the  Ff. 

135.  garden]  Corson  (p.  10)  :  There  should  be  no  comma  after  '  garden,'  as  the 
relative  clause  is  not  used  simply  as  an  additional  characterization  of  an  unweeded 
garden,  but  as  an  inseparable  part  of  the  whole  characterization — an  important  dis- 
tinction that  should  be  made  in  pointing. 

137.  merely]  Completely.  See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  152.  Hudson:  Observe  how 
Hamlet's  brooding  melancholy  leads  him  to  take  a  morbid  pleasure  in  making  things 
worse  than  they  are. 

140.  Hyperion]  Farmer  {Essay,  &c,  p.  37,  note,  ed.  ii)  says  that  this  name  is 
used  by  Spenser  with  the  same  error  in  quantity.  Caldecott  adds,  that  not  only  did 
our  old  poets  totally  disregard  the  quantity  in  this  instance,  but  the  moderns  also  have 
made  it  altogether  subservient  to  their  convenience;  and  quotes  Mitford  as  saying 
that,  '  Spenser  has  Iole,  Pylades,  Caphareus,  Rcetean.'  Gascoigne,  in  his  Ultimum 
Vale:  *  Kind  Erato  and  wanton  Thalia.'  Gray,  in  his  Progress  of  Poetry:  l  Hyperion's 
march  and  glittering  shafts  of  War.'  Clarendon  :  Sh.  always  accents  the  antepe- 
nult of  the  name  of  this  god,  whom  he  identifies  with  the  sun,  as  in  Homer's  Odyssey, 
i,  8.  Abbott,  $  501  :  A  trimeter  couplet,  with  an  extra  syllable  [sa/j/r]  on  the  first 
trimeter.     It  might  almost  be  regarded  as  separate  lines  of  three  accents. 

140.  to  a  satyr]  Matzner  (ii,  289) :  The  comparison  of  one  object  with  another 
becomes  the  expression  of  the  relation  thereto  in  a  qualitative  or  quantitative  regard. 
The  object  introduced  by  to  forms  the  measure  for  the  comparison.  Clarendon: 
So  in  Cymb.  Ill,  iii,  26,  and  Ham.  I,  v,  52;  III,  i,  52. 

140.  satyr]  Warburton  (followed  by  White)  thinks  that  Pan  is  here  meant, 
the  brother  of  Hyperion,  or  Apollo.  Elze  says  he  does  not  know  what  authority 
Wai burton  has  for  this  relationship,  wl  ich,  moreover,  cannot  be  referred  to  here 
bf  cause  of  the  indefinite  article,  '  a  satyr.'     [Elze  forgets  that  Pan,  as  well  as  Apollo, 


44  HAMLET  [act  l.  sc.  ii 

That  he  might  iiOt  beteem  the  winds  of  heaven  141 

Visit  her  face  too  roughly.     Heaven  and  earth  ! 

Must  I  remember  ?  why,  she  would  hang  on  him, 

As  if  increase  of  appetite  had  grown 

By  what  it  fed  on ;  and  yet,  within  a  month, —  145 

Let  me  not  think  on't, — Frailty,-  thy  name  is  woman  ! — 

A  little  month!  or  ere  those  shoes  were  old  (j^o^^^  \ 

With  which  she  follow'd  my  poor  father's  body, 


O/v 


141.  m  igh  t  not  beteem  ]  per  m  it  ted  n  ot 
Q'76,  Rowe,  Pope,  Warb.  would  not 
let  e'en  Theob.  i.  might  not  let  e'en 
Theob.  ii,  Han.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen. 

beteem']  Mai.  beteeme  Qq,  Bos. 
leteene  FxFa.  bete  en  F  .  between  F  . 
permit  Southern  MS.  (ap.  Coll.). 

142.  143.    Heaven. ..why,]  Om.  Q'76. 

143.  remember  ?]  Rowe.  remember, 
Qq.     remember:  Ff. 

would]  JJiould  Qq.  ufed  to 
Q'76. 

144.  increase]  encreafe  FxFaF  ,  Cap. 

145.  and]  Om.  Pope  +  . 


145.  month, — ]  month,  QaQ,Q.. 
moneth,  Q  .     month  ?  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

146.  on't]  Om.  Pope-f. 

147.  month  !]  Rowe.  month  QaQ~> 
month.  QQ.  month:  Q'76.  month; 
Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Dyce,  El.  Sta.  White.  Huds.  month, 
Ff,  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 

ere]  eWe  Q'76.  e' 'er  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

shoes]  flioos  F  .  JJiooes  Qq,  Fx 
FaF  ,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 

148.  followed]  Rowe.  followed  Qq 
Ff,  Johns. 


was  said  to  be  the  son  of  Jupiter ;  but  his  objection  on  the  score  of  the  indefinite 
article  is  sound.  Ed.] 

141.  beteem]  Steevens:  This  word  occurs  in  Golding's  Ovid,  1587,  and  from 
the  corresponding  Latin  word  (dignatur,  bk.  x,  line  157)  must  necessarily  mean,  to 
vouchsafe,  deign,  permit,  or  suffer ;  'Yet  could  he  not  beteeme  The  shape  of  anie 
other  bird  then  egle  for  to  seeme  ?'  Nares  :  Spenser  uses  it  in  the  same  sense  :  '  So 
would  I  (said  th'  enchanter),  glad  and  faine  Beteeme  to  you  this  sword.' — Faerie 
Queene,  II,  viii,  19.  Also  in  Mid.  N.  D.  I,  i,  131.  Collier  (ed.  i)  :  In  this  pas- 
sage, from  Mid.  N.  D.,  the  word  is  used  in  a  different  sense,  being  the  provincial 
word  teem,  which  is  still  used  for  pour  out  in  the  north  of  England.  Moberly  • 
Here  it  is  used  causatively :  '  He  would  not  allow  it  to  be  beseeming.' 

147.  or  ere]  Matzner  (iii,  446) :  A  strengthening  of  the  notion  of  time  is  given 
by  ever  {/er,  ere),  (comp.  Germ.yV),  which  in  this  case  usually  preserves  the  old 
form,  or.  Thus,  King  fohn,  IV,  iii,  20,  and  V,  vi,  44.  Clarendon  :  See  Temp. 
I,  ii,  11,  and  line  183  of  this  scene.     Also  Macb.  IV,  iii,  173,  or  Abbott,  \  131. 

147.  shoes]  Ingleby  (JV.  &°  Qu.  2  Feb.  1856)  finds  an  inappropriateness  and  an 
incongruity  in  Hamlet's  making  the  antiquity,  or  wear  and  tear,  of  his  mother's 
shoes '  the  measure  of  her  grief,  and  accordingly  suggests  shows  for  '  shoes.'  Com- 
pare line  82,  where  '  shows  of  grief  is  defined  by  Hunter  to  be  '  mourning  apparel,' 
nay,  by  Hamlet  himself,  to  be  '  the  trappings  and  the  suits  of  woe.'  What,  then, 
are  the  shows  with  which  Gertrude  followed  her  husband's  body  to  the  grave  but 
•customary  suits  of  solemn  black?'  What  were  her  Niobe's  tears  but  '  th'  fruitful 
-iver  in  the  eye?'  What  were  these  but  the  'forms  and  shows  of  grief?'  Let  the 
text  be  thus  paraphrased,  'Before  my  mother's  "mourning-weeds"  (2  Hen.  VI) 
were  worn  out,  -he  doffed  them  for  the  wedding-gear.     Oh  !  wicked  speed,'  &c. 


i 


act  I,  sc.  u.j    VVy  HAMLET  J-  /       45 

Like  Niobe,  all  tears  ; — why  she,  even  she, —  ^     * 

O  God  !  a  beast,  that  wants  discourse  of  reason,  '  1 50 

Would  have  mourn'd  longer, — married  with  my  uncle, 

My  father's  brother,  but  no  more  like  my  father  \^ 

Than  I  to  Hercules.     Within  a  month  ?  \{-t<^y 

Ere  yet  the  salt  of  most  unrighteous  tears  (  ^f 

Had  left  the  flushing  in  her  galled  eyes,    u<  ?»H'«*«j  c     l  155 

149.  tears ; — ivhy]     Steev.      teares,         Knt,  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Ktly. 
why  Qq.      teares.      Why    Ff.      tears —  152.     but]  Om.  Pope. 
Why  Rowe  +  .                                                             153.     Hercules.~\  Hercules,  Qq. 

even  she,]  Om.  Qq.  month?]    Ff    {Moneth  ?    FJ. 

150.  O  God]  O  Heaven  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  month,  Q2Q3Q4,  Jen.  Ktly.  month  I 
Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly.         Rowef.    moneth,  Q  .  month;  The  rest. 

151.  7w7//  «y]  w////  ;////*<?  Ff,Rowe  + ,  155.     in]  of  Ff,  Rowe, Cald.  Knt,  Sta. 

150.  discourse  of  reason]  Johnson  {Diet.):  Discourse.  The  act  of  the  under- 
standing, by  which  it  passes  from  premises  to  consequences.  Gifford  (note  on 
Massinger's  Unnatural  Combat,  Works,  vol.  i,  p.  148,  ed.  1813)  :  It  is  very  diffi- 
cult to  determine  the  precise  meaning  which  our  ancestors  gave  to  discotirse,  or  to 
distinguish  the  line  which  separated  it  from  reason.  Perhaps  it  indicated  a  more 
rapid  deduction  of  consequences  from  premises  than  was  supposed  to  be  effected  by 
reason ; — but  I  speak  with  hesitation.  .  .  .  Whatever  be  the  sense,  it  frequently 
appears  in  our  old  writers,  by  whom  it  is  usually  coupled  with  reason  or  judgement, 
which  last  would  seem  to  be  the  more  proper  word.  .  .  .  •  Discourse  of  reason '  is  sc 
poor  and  perplexed  a  phrase,  that  [in  Ham.  I,  ii,  150]  I  should  dismiss  it  at  once 
for  what  I  believe  to  be  the  genuine  reading:  '  discourse  and  reason.'  Boswell: 
The  text  may  be  supported  by  numerous  examples.  The  very  same  phrase  is  used 
in  Tro.  cV  Cress.  II,  ii,  116.  In  the  preface  to  Davys's  Reports :  'And  this  idea  I 
have  conceived  of  him,  not  out  of  mine  own  imagination,  or  weak  discourse  of 
reason;'  and  Saville's  Tacitus's  Agricola,  1591,  p.  242:  'Agricola,  though  brought 
up  in  the  field,  upon  a  naturall  wit,  and  discourse  of  reason,'  cap.  ix.  Hamlet  him- 
self explains  the  phrase  in  IV,  iv,  36.  Caldecott  adds,  Oth.  IV,  ii,  153,  '  dis- 
course of  thought.'  Singer  (ed.  2):  'Discourse  of  reason'  means  ratiocination. 
Brutes  have  not  this  reasoning  faculty,  though  they  have  what  is  instinct  and  memory. 
Hamlet  opposes  the  discursive  power  of  the  intellect  of  men  to  the  instinct  o\ 
brutes.  Dyce  (Gloss.)  cites  :  '  There  was  no  discourse  of  reason  strong  enough  to 
diuert  him  from  thinking  that  he  was  betrayed.' — A  Tragi- comicall  History  of  ov* 
Times,  &c,  p.  34,  1627. 

151.  with]  See  Abbott,  \  194. 

154.  unrighteous]  Badham  (p.  282) :  The  Queen's  tears  were  not  unrighteous, 
but  every  way  due;  and  though  it  may  be  urged  that  they  were  hypocritical,  we  learn 
nothing  of  the  kind  from  Sh. ;  nor  is  it  conceivable  that  where  there  was  so  much 
that  deserved  to  be  called  by  the  worst  names,  Hamlet  should  be  made  to  select 
such  a  trifle  as  the  mere  feigning  of  sorrow  as  something  most  unrighteous.  I  have 
little  doubt  that  Sh.  wrote,  '  moist  and  righteous  tears.' 

155.  flushing]  Hudson  :  This  refers  to  the  redness  of  the  eyes,  caused  by  what 
Sh.  elsewhere  calls  '  eye-offending  brine.'  Clarendon  :  'Yo  flush  is  still  used  fransi< 
tivelj ,  meaning,  to  fill  with  water. 


4t>  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

She  married.     Oh,  most  wicked  speed,  to  post  156 

With  such  dexterity  to  incestuous  sheets ! 

It  is  not,  nor  it  cannot  come  to  good ; — 

But  break  my  heart,  for  I  must  hold  my  tongue  t 

Enter  Horatio,  Marcellus,  a^BERNARDO. 

Hor.     Hail  to  your  lordship  ! 

Ham.  I  am  glad  to  see  you  well ;       160 

Horatio, — or  I  do  forget  myself. 

Hor.     The  same,  my  lord,  and  your  poor  servant  ever. 
Ham.     Sir,  my  good  friend ;  I'll  change  that  name  with  y  ou ; 

157.  incestuous]  incejlious  Qq.  1 60,  161.     I. ..myself?]  One  line.  Qq, 

158.  cannot]  canmot  F  .  Jen. 

159.  b?-eak  my]  QqFxFaF3.  break,  161.  Horatio, — ]  Theob.  Horatio, 
my  ¥v  et  cet.  QqFf.    Horatio  ?  Pope.    Horatio  !  Ktly. 

Marcellus,  and  Bernardo.]    do]  Om.  Q'76. 

Barnardo  Q'76.     Barnard,  and  Marcel-  162.     Two  lines.  Ff. 

lus.  Ff.  163.     Two  lines.  Ff. 

160.  Scene  iv.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

155.  galled]  Clarendon:  That  is,  sore  with  weeping.  Compare  Rich.  III. 
IV,  iv,  53;  and  Tro.  and  Cress.  V,  iii,  55. 

157.  dexterity]  Warburton's  idea  that  this  means  simply  '  quickness '  also 
occurred  to  Walker,  who  (Crit.  ii,  242)  says:  'I  cannot  help  suspecting  that  Sh. 
wrote  celerity?  '  Surely  not,'  says  Dyce  (ed.  2).  Clarendon  pronounces  in  favour 
of  celerity,  not  adroitness,  as  in  1  Hen.  IV:  II,  iv,  286.  Tschischwitz  :  To  say 
that  •  dexterity  '  means  celerity,  involves  an  intolerable  pleonasm  when  connected  with 
1  wicked  speed.'  Sh.  had  clearly  in  mind  the  Italian  destrezza,  which  contains  the 
idea  of  deceit,  and  consequently  of  a  haste  or  of  an  artifice  which  is  morally  wrong. 

158.  cannot]  Clarendon:  Observe  the  double  negative  so  frequent  in  older 
English  writers.  The  latest  instance  of  it  we  have  noticed  in  any  careful  writer  is 
in  Congreve's  Love  for  Love,  iv,  4.     [See  III,  ii,  190.] 

159.  heart]  Corson:  'Break'  is  a  subjunctive,  not  an  imperative,  and  'heart' 
is  a  subject,  not  a  vocative. 

159.  tongue]  Tschischwitz:  Observe  well  that  Hamlet  is  forced  by  his  piety 
to  maintain  this  silence  in  presence  of  the  courtiers  under  all  circumstances,  even 
after  the  appearance  of  the  Ghost.  It  is  not  until  his  heart  really  breaks  that  he 
breaks  this  silence  also,  and  gives  Horatio  permission  to  proclaim  what  has  happened. 

160.  well]  Collier  (ed.  2)  :  The  (MS)  omits  'well.'  It  spoils  the  line,  and  is 
not  mere  surplusage,  for  how  was  Hamlet  thus  early  to  know  whether  Horatic  were 
1  well '  or  not.   [Collier  omits  it  in  his  text.] 

161.  forget  myself]  Seymour  (ii,  147)  :  This  may  mean:  'Or  I  have  lost  the 
knowledge  even  of  myself.'' 

163.  change  that  name]  Johnson  :  I'll  be  your  servant,  you  shall  be  my  friend. 
Caldecott:  That  is,  reciprocally  use:  I'll  put  myself  on  an  exact  level  with  you. 
Halliwell  :  Hamlet  means  that  he  will  change  the  name  Horatio  has  given  him- 
Belf,  that  of  pf  or  servant,  to  good  friend;  or  perhaps  as  Johnson  explains  it. 


act  I,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  47 

And  what  make  you  from  Wittenberg,  Horatio  ? — 

Marcellus?  165 

Mar.     My  good  lord, — 

Ham.     I  am  very  glad  to  see  you. — \To  Ber.~\     Good  even, 
sir. — 
But  what,  in  faith,  make  you  from  Wittenberg? 

Hor.     A  truant  disposition,  good  my  lord. 

Ham.     I  would  not  hear  your  enemy  say  so,  170 

Nor  shall  you  do  mine  ear  that  violence, 
To  make  it  truster  of  your  own  report 
Against  yourself;  I  know  you  are  no  truant. 
Rut  what  is  your  affair  in  Elsinore  ? 

165.  Marcellus  f\   Cap.     Marcellus.  168.     in  faith]  Om.  Q'76. 
QqFf.     Marcellus! — Rowe  +  ,Jen.                     169.     good  my]  my  good  Q'76. 

166.  lord, — ]  Rowe.  lord.  QqFf.  170.  hear]  heare  Qq.  have  bt, 
lord—  lord!  Ktly.     lord?  Cam.  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing.  White. 

167.  you.  Good  even,  sir.]  El.  you,  171.  mine]  my  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Glo.  +  . 
{good  euen  fir)  Q2Q3Q4-    you  (good  euen  172.     make]  take  F2F3F4> 

fir)  Q  .    you  :  good  euen  fir.     Ff  (even,  make  it  truster]   be  a  witnefs 

F4).  Q'76. 

[To   Ber.]   White,  Cam.   Huds.  174.     Elsinore]  Mai.    Elfonoure  Qq. 

Om.  the  rest.  Elfenour  FfF2F3,  Cap.     Elfenoore  F4. 

even]  morning  Han.  Warb.  Elsinoor  Rowe+. 

168.  what]  Om.  F4. 

164.  make]  Johnson:  A  familiar  phrase  for,  What  are  you  doing  ?  Steevens: 
See  As  You  Like  It,  I,  i,  31.  Nares  :  Very  frequently  used  by  Sh.  See  Ham.  II, 
ii,  264.  Tschischwitz  :  It  still  corresponds  with  '  rnachen,'  in  our  phrase  of  cour- 
teous greeting:  'Was  machen  Sie?'  Keightley  (Expositor,  p.  286):  I  suspect 
that  here,  and  in  a  following  line,  and  in  II,  ii,  266,  we  should  read  '  makes '  with 
an  ellipsis  of  be.     The  answers  seem  to  indicate  it. 

167.  even]  Johnson  :  There  is  no  need  of  Hanmer's  change.  Between  the  first 
and  eighth  scene  of  this  act  a  day  must  pass ;  and  how  much  of  it  is  over  there  is 
nothing  to  determine.  The  King  has  held  a  council.  It  may  as  well  be  evening  as 
morning.  Steevens  :  The  change  might  be  justified  by  I,  i,  174.  Tyrwhitt: 
Good  even  or  den  was  the  usual  salutation  from  noon,  the  moment  that  good  morro-w 
became  improper ;  from  the  course  of  the  incidents,  precedent  and  subsequent,  the 
day  may  here  be  well  supposed  to  be  turned  of  noon.  [See  Rom.  &"  Jul.  II,  iv, 
98.]  White  (Sh.  Scholar,  p.  409) :  This  is  addressed  to  Bernardo,  whom  Hamlet 
does  not  recognize. 

170.  hear]  Dyce:  The  next  line  proves  the  reading  of  Ff  to  be  erroneous. 
Hunter  (ii,  219)  :  The  reading  of  the  Ff  is  better,  even  if  it  had  not  the  effect  of 
obviating  the  disagreeable  recurrence  of  the  sounds  'hear  and  'ear.'  Corson  also 
thinks  the  Ff  more  euphonious. 

171.  that]  For  instances  of  'that '  used  for  such,  see  Abbott,  $  277 ;  and  I,  v,  48. 

172.  truster]  For  instances  of  suffixes  appended  to  nouns  for  the  purpose  of  sig- 
nifying the  agents,  see  Abbott,  §  443;  also  I,  v,  163;  III,  iv,  206. 


4-8  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

We'll  teach  you  to  drink  deep  ere  you  depart.  175 

Hor.     My  lord,  I  came  to  see  your  father's  funeral. 

Ham.     I  pray  thee,  do  not  mock  me,  fellow-student ; 
I  think  it  was  to  see  my  mother's  wedding. 

Hor.     Indeed,  my  lord,  it  follow'd  hard  upon. 

Ham.  /Thrift,  thrift,  Horatio!  the  funeral  baked-meats        180 
Did  coldly  furnish  forth  the  marriage  tables. 
Would  I  had  met  my  dearest  foe  in  heaven 

175.     to  drink  deep]  for  to  drinke  Qq.  178.     see]  Om.  Qq. 

here  to  drink  Q'76.  1 79.    follow'd}  followed  QqF,,  Cald. 

1 7 7.  I  pray  thee]  I  pre  thee  Q2Q3-     /  White,    followeth  F2¥J?A. 

prelhee  Q4Q$y  Cam.     I  pry  thee  F2.      /  180.    fwieral  baked-meats"]  funeral- 

prithee  F  F ,  Rowe.     Ipr'ythee  Pope  + ,  bak'd-meals  Ktly. 

Jen.  Sta.  181.     marriage     tables]      marriage 

student]  ft udient  QSQ3-  tables  Ktly. 

177.  pray  thee]  Corson:  This  reading  of  Ff  suits  the  required  deliberateness 
of  the  expression  better.     There  is  an  earnest  entreaty  meant. 

180.  baked-meats]  Collins:  It  was  anciently  the  general  custom  to  give  a  cold 
entertainment  to  mourners  at  a  funeral.  In  distant  counties  this  practice  is  continued 
among  the  yeomanry.  See  The  Tragique  Historie  of  the  Faire  Valeria  of  London, 
1598:  '  His  corpes  was  with  funerall  pompe  conveyed  to  the  church,  and  there  sol- 
lemnly  enterred,  nothing  omitted  which  necessitie  or  custom  could  claime;  a  sermon, 
a  banquet,  and  like  observations.'  Again,  in  the  old  romance  of  Syr  Legore,  no 
date :  '  A  great  feaste  would  he  holde  Upon  his  quenes  mornynge  day,  That  was 
buryed  in  an  abbay.'  Malone  :  See,  also,  Hayward's  Life  and  Raigne  of  King 
Henrie  the  Fourth,  1599,  p.  135  :  'Then  hee  [King  Richard  II]  was  obscurely  in- 
terred,— without  the  charge  of  a  dinner  for  celebrating  the  funeral.'  DOUCE  :  This 
practice  was  certainly  borrowed  from  the  ccena  feralis  of  the  Romans,  alluded  to  in 
Juvenal's  5th  Satire  and  in  the  Laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  It  consisted  of  the 
offering  of  a  small  plate  of  milk,  honey,  wine,  flowers,  &c.  to  the  ghost  of  the 
deceased.  In  the  North  this  feast  is  called  an  arval  or  arvil-supper  ;  and  the  loaves 
that  are  sometimes  distributed  among  the  poor,  arval-bread.  John  Addis,  Jun. 
(Ar.  dr»  Qu.  9  Feb.  '67)  cites  an  apposite  passage  from  Massinger:  'The  same  rose- 
mary that  serves  for  the  funeral  will  serve  for  the  wedding.' — Old  Law,  IV,  i. 
Tschischwitz  :  This  is  one  word.  See  Chaucer  {Cant.  Tales,  v.  344):  '  With- 
outen  bake  mete  never  was  his  house.'  The  combination  of  a  funeral  and  a  mar- 
riage feast  contained  nothing  repugnant  to  the  ancient  Northern  mind.  At  the  end 
of  cap.  14  of  Frithiof  s  Saga,  it  is  related  that  Frithiof  prepared  a  sumptuous  feast, 
to  which  came  all  his  followers,  and  thereupon  was  held  the  funeral  feast  of  Hiing 
the  King,  and  likewise  the  marriage  feast  of  Frithiof  and  Ingiborg.  Here  in 
Hamlet  what  was  so  abhorrent  was  that  the  widow  should  have  married  so  quickly. 
Clarendon:  We  have  'bakemeats'  in  Gen.  xl,  17. 

182.  met]  Tschischwitz:  Note  how  averse  Hamlet  afterwards  is  to  killing  his 
*  dearest  foe,'  his  uncle,  lest  he  should  send  him  to  heaven. 

182.  clearest]  The  notes  of  Horne  Tooke,  Singer,  Caldecott,  Dyce,  and 
Craik  on  this  word  are  given  in  full  in  Rom.  6°  Jul.  V,  iii,  32.     Tooke  derived  its 


alt  i,  sc.  ii.j  HAMLET  49 

Or  ever  I  had  seen  that  day,  Horatio !  183 

My  father, — methinks  I  see  my  father. 

Hor.     O  where,  my  lord  ? 

Ham.  In  my  mind's  eye,  Horatio.  185 

Hor.     I  saw  him  once ;  he  was  a  goodly  king. 

Ham.     He  was  a  man,  take  him  for  all  in  all, 
I  shall  not  look  upon  his  like  again. 

183.  Or  ever  L  had]  Ere  I  had  ever  185.      0  where]  Where  Qq,  Cap.  Jen 
Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce    i,  White.          Mai.  Steev.  Cald.  Sing.  i. 

Ere  ever  I  had  Coll.  Sing,  ii,  El.  Sta.  id6,  187.     he. ..He]  a... A  Qq. 

Ktly.     EWe  I  had  Q'76.  187.    for]  from  Theob.  i. 

184,  185.  My. ..where]  One  line,  in  a//,]  in  all :  Ff.  in  all... 
Steev.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly.  Ktly. 

1 84.  father,—]  father  /—  Glo.  + .  1 88.     I  shall]  Ifhould  FaF3F4,  Rowe. 

two  opposite  meanings  from  the  single  Anglo-Saxon  word  derian,  to  hurt,  thence 
deriving  our  word  dear  =r\ot  cheap  (when  the  season  dereth  the  crops,  causing  a 
dearth) ;  hence  what  is  not  cheap  is  precious,  valued ;  whence  comes  the  secondary 
meaning  of  dear  =  beloved.  In  this  passage  'dearest'  has  reverted  to  its  original 
meaning  of  hurtful,  mischievous.  This  plausible  derivation,  or  rather  explanation, 
of  the  two  distinct  and  contrary  meanings  of  the  word  has  been  followed  by  Rich- 
ardson in  his  Dictionary,  and  by  the  edd.  above  named,  except  Craik,  who  detected 
Tooke's  error  in  tracing  the  word,  in  both  its  meanings,  to  one  root,  by  showing 
that  the  word  dear  =  high-priced,  precious,  beloved,  is  the  Anglo-Saxon  deore,  dure, 
d$>re,  from  the  verb  deoran  or  dyran,  to  hold  dear,  to  love.  Craik  thus  explains 
the  different  senses  which  the  word  assumes :  the  notion  properly  involved  in  it  of 
love  having  first  become  generalized  into  that  of  a  strong  affection  of  any  kind, 
thence  passes  on  into  that  of  such  an  emotion  the  very  reverse  of  love,  or  as 
Clarendon  concisely  states  it :  '  dear '  is  used  of  whatever  touches  us  nearly  either 
in  love  or  hate,  joy  or  sorrow.  Matzner  (i,  196)  gives  a  list  of  two  hundred 
and  thirty-five  words  which  had  originally  different  forms  (and  of  course  different 
meanings),  but  which  now  are  found  in  only  one  form;  among  them  (i,  206)  is 
dear,  with  the  different  original  forms  pointed  out  by  Craik.  See  •  dear  soul,'  III 
ii,  58. 

183.  Or  ever]  Corson  (p.  10)  prefers  the  text  of  Ff  as  better  suiting  the  re- 
quired deliberateness  of  the  expression.     See  line  147. 

185.  where]  For  a  list  of  monosyllables  frequently  pronounced  as  dissyllables, 
see  Walker,  Vers.  136,  and  Abbott,  g  480. 

185.  mind's  eye]  JENNENS :  Thus,  'E/x^eip^uev  rolq  bfj./j,aai  rfjq  ipvxvC- — I 
Epistle  of  St.  Clement,  cap.  19.  Steevens  :  See  R.  of  L.  1426.  Also  Chaucer, 
Man  of  Law e:  Tale  [line  454]  :  «  But-if  it  were  with  eyen  of  his  mynde.'  Malone: 
See  Sonn.  113,  1 . 

188.  I  shall]  Steevens:  According  to  Holt,  Sir  Thomas  Samwell  proposes: 
'Eye  shall '  as  more  in  the  true  spirit  of  Sh.  Douce  (ii,  204)  pronounced  the  emen- 
dation elegant,  and  adduced  1  Corinth,  ii,  9,  yet  confessed  that  the  ear  would  fail  to 
perceive  the  force  of  it. 

5  d 


50  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

Hor.     My  lord,  I  think  I  saw  him  yesternight. 

Ham.     Saw  ?  who  ?  190 

Hor.     My  lord,  the  King  your  father. 

Ham.  The  King  my  father ' 

Hor.     Season  your  admiration  for  a  while 
With  an  attent  ear,  till  I  may  deliver, 
Upon  the  witness  of  these  gentlemen, 
This  marvel  to  you. 

Ham.  For  God's  love,  let  me  hear.  195 

Hor.     Two  nights  together  had  these  gentlemen, 
Marcellus  and  Bernardo,  on  their  watch, 
In  the  dead  vast  and  middle  of  the  night, 

190.     Saw?  who  ?]  Saw,  who?  Qq,  193.     may]   Om.  Pope  +  . 

El.  White.     Saw  who?  Q'76,  Sing,  ii,  195.     marvel]  wonder  Q'7 6. 

Dyce,  Coll.  ii,  Sta.  Del.  Ktly,    Huds.  For  God's  love,]  Pray  Q'76. 

Saw!  whom?  Johns.  Coll. (MS).  God's]  Gods  Qq.    Heauens  Ff, 

192.  Season]  Defer  Q 7 6.  Rowe  +  ,  Cald.  Knt. 

for]      but      Q'76,  Theob.+              198.     vast]    waft   Q2Q3Q4FX.  wafle 

(-Han.).  F2F3F4'    Rowe,    Pope,    Theob.  Han. 

193.  attent]  attentiue  Q4QSF3F4>  Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  Cald.  Knt,  El.  waist 
Pope  +  ,  Sta.  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Tsch. 

190.  who]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  Notwithstanding  the  (MS),  it  may  be  doubted 
whether  Sh.  did  not  write  'who.'  Clarendon:  Sh.  very  generally  uses  who  for 
the  accusative.  Dyce  {Remarks,  &c,  p.  205)  :  The  right  punctuation  is  doubtless 
'  Saw  who  ?'  {i.  e.  whom)  ;  nor  do  I  recollect  any  performer  of  Ham.  who  under- 
stood the  words  but  as  a  single  question;  no  pause  of  astonishment  was  made 
between  '  Saw '  and  '  who '  by  the  two  Kembles,  Kean,  and  Young, — none  is  made 
by  Macready  and  the  younger  Kean. 

192.  Season]  Johnson:  That  is,  temper  it.  Clarendon:  As  in  I,  iii,  81 ;  II, 
i,  28 ;  III,  ii,  199 ;  and  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  197. 

192.  admiration]  Clarendon:  Astonishment,  as  in  III,  ii,  311,  and  Rev. 
xvii,  6. 

193.  attent]  Clarendon  :  This  only  occurs  in  one  other  passage  in  Sh. :  Peri- 
cles, III  (Gower),  1 1.  Spenser  uses  it  as  a  substantive :  '  And  kept  her  sheepe  with 
diligent  attent.' — F.  Qu.  vi,  9,  37. 

193.  may]  For  the  various  shades  of  meaning  in  which  can,  may,  might,  are 
used,  see  Abbott  (g§  307-309).     See  I,  iv,  51. 

195.  God's]  White:  The  conformity  of  the  Ff  to  the  statute  3  Jac.  I  is  so  com- 
mon in  this  play  that  hereafter  it  need  not  be  noticed. 

198.  vast]  M alone:  By  waist  is  meant  nothing  more  than  middle.  So,  m 
Marston's  Malecontent,  1604:  '  'Tis  now  about  the  immodest  waist  of  night?  i.e. 

midnight.     Again,  in  The  Puritan,  1607  :  ' ere  the  day  be  spent  to  the  girdle? 

See  Minsheu's  Diet.  161 7:  lWast,  middle,  or  girdle-steed.'  Collier:  'Vast' is 
used  in  the  same  sense  in  Tempest,  I,  ii,  327,  where  '  vast  of  night '  means  the  vacancy 
or  void  of  night,  an  d  the  phrase  here  means  t^e  silent  vacancy  of  midnight.     To 


ACTi.sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  51 

Been  thus  encounter'd.     A  figure  like  your  father, 

Armed  at  point  exactly,  cap-a-pe,  200 

Appears  before  them,  and  with  solemn  march 

Goes  slow  and  stately  by  them ;  thrice  he  walk'd 

By  their  oppress'd  and  fear-surprised  eyes, 

Within  his  truncheon's  length ;  whilst  they,  distill'd 

200.     Armed  at  point']  Amid  at  all  By  them  thrice  Ff,  Rowe. 
points  Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  203.    fear-surprised  ~\  Hyphen,  Ft. 

Dyce  i,  El.  White,  Huds.  204.     his]  this  Q4Q5- 

cap-a-pe]  Capapea  Q3Q3.     Cap  distill'd]  Q5.    di/lifd  Q2Q3Q4 

apea   Q4Q5.      Cap  a   Pe  Ff.     Cap  ape  beJliVd  Ff.    beJliWd  F,,  Knt.     beJlilPd 

Q'76.  F  F4.     be-stiWd  Rowe.     bestiWd  Cald 

202.     stately  by  them;  thrice]  Jlately:  bechilPd  Coll.ii(MS). 

take  wast  of  Q  in  the  sense  of  waist,  or  middle  of  a  person,  is  to  impute  mere 
tautology  to  Sh.,  instead  of  the  fine  meaning  of  deserted  emptiness  and  stillness  of 
midnight.  White  :  Perhaps  we  should  read  waste.  But  in  either  case  the  sense 
remains  the  same, — the  dead  void ;  and  '  vast '  seems  to  have  been  used  substantively 
in  this  sense  by  Sh.,  if  not  by  his  contemporaries.  Clarendon:  It  here  means 
emptiness ;  the  time  when  no  living  thing  is  seen.  We  have  it  also  in  the  sense  of 
an  empty  space  in  Wint.  Tale,  I,  i,  33.  '  Wast,'  i.  e.  '  waste,'  is  in  origin  the  same 
word  as  '  vast,'  and  has  the  same  sense.  There  is,  of  course,  an  easy  pun  on  wast* 
and  waist,  but  it  is  not  probable  that  Sh.  meant  to  make  one  in  this  place. 

200.  at  point]   See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  135. 

201.  Appears]  Clarke:  This  speech  shows  notably  Shakespeare's  use  of  tnc 
past  and  present  tenses  in  narration. 

204.  distill'd]  Knight  [See  Text.  Notes]  :  To  still  is  to  fall  in  drops  ; — they  were 
dissolved, — separated  drop  by  drop.  'Almost  to  jelly.'  Collier  [Notes,  &c,  p. 
433):  Neither  '  distill'd'  nor  bestiWd  can  be  satisfactory;  but  it  is  apparent  that 
'  bestill'd'  of  FT  was  a  misprint  for  bechiWd.  Bernardo  and  Marcellus  were  almost 
chilled  to  jelly  by  their  apprehensions,  •  the  cold  fit  of  fear '  having  come  powerfully 
upon  them.  Dyce  [Notes,  &c,  p.  135) :  Is  there  not  something  strange  in  such  an 
expression  as  '  human  bodies  chilled  almost  to  jelly  by  fear?'  (I  doubt  if  the  verb 
still  (to  fall  in  drops,  melt)  ever  was,  or  could  be,  used  with  the  augmentative  prefix 
be.)  According  to  the  Qq,  they  melted,  dissolved  almost  to  jelly  with,'  &c.  A  pas- 
sage of  Claudian  (De  Sexto  Cons.  Hon.  v,  345),  '  liquefactaque  fulgure  cuspis  Can- 
duit,  et  subitis  fluxere  vaporibus  enses,'  is  thus  rendered  by  Addison,  '  Swords  by 
the  lightning's  subtle  force  distiird.'  Singer  (ed.  2) :  So  also  in  Sylvester's  Du 
Bartas  (ed.  4,  p.  764),  '  Melt  thee,  distill  thee,  turne  to  wax  or  snow.'  Collier 
(ed.  2) :  Jelly  becomes  jelly  only  by  being  'bechill'd;'  and  when  it  is  argued  that 
'  distill'd '  may  mean  melted,  it  is  forgotten  that  Horatio  does  not  say  that  his  com- 
rades were  melted  to  'jelly,'  for  jelly  is  no  longer  jelly  when  melted,  but  that  they 
were 'bechill'd  to  jelly ;'  it  is  jelly,  because  it  has  been  'bechill'd.'  Besides,  Sh. 
never  uses  'distill'd'  (often  as  it  occurs  in  his  plays)  as  melted,  but  as  extracted; 
and  even  in  this  very  tragedy,  and  in  this  very  Act,  he  speaks  of  a  '  leperous  distil- 
ment '  as  procured  by  distillation  from  '  cursed  hebenon.'  Therefore  we  feel  morally 
certain  that  Shakespeare's  word  here  was  'bechill'd.'     Bailey  (i,  47)  dissents  from 


$2  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc  ii 

Almost  to  jelly  with  the  act  of  fear,  205 

Stand  dumb,  and  speak  not  to  him.     This  to  me 

In  dreadful  secrecy  impart  they  did ; 

And  I  with  them  the  third  night  kept  the  watch ; 

Where,  as  they  had  deliver'd,  both  in  time, 

Form  of  the  thing,  each  word  made  true  and  good,  210 

The  apparition  comes.     I  knew  your  father ; 

These  hands  are  not  more  like. 

Ham.  But  where  was  this  ? 

Mar.     My  lord,  upon  the  platform  where  we  watch'd. 

Ham.     Did  you  not  speak  to  it  ? 

205.     the   act   of]    their  Q'76.      th'  Whereas  QqFf. 
rffecl  of  Warb.  210.     thing ,]  thing ;  Fi. 

207.     In. ..did /]    They  did  impart  in  21 1,     apparition]     Apparifton    Q  Q. 

dreadful  fecrefie,  Q'76.  Q4. 

209.      Where,    as]     Where    as   Q'76.  213.     watch'd]  watch  Q2Q,. 

Collier  on  physical  grounds.  '■Solids  cannot  be  chilled  into  gelatine.'  '  It  is  the 
exclusive  privilege  of  liquids  (and  liquids  only  of  a  certain  description)  to  be  cooled 
down  into  that  tremulous  substance.  Hence  the  true  reading  seems  to  stare  us  in 
the  face:  "whilst  they  dissolved  Almost,"  &c.'  'It  may  deserve  mentioning  that 
when  the  chilling  effects  of  any  passion  are  chiefly  in  view,  it  is  the  blood  which 
is  usually  described  by  Sh.  as  the  seat  of  the  refrigeration.'  In  view  of  the  fact 
that  Sh.  has  several  times  used  the  word  'thrill'  to  express  the  effect  of  terror, 
Bailey  suggests  '  a  plausible  reading,'  so  he  says,  for  the  present  passage :  '  while 
they  both  thrill  d?  '  Or,'  if  the  prefix  be  should  be  prefixed,  we  might  read  '  whik 
they  bethriWd.'1  HUDSON  :  '  Distill'd  (meaning  to  fall  in  drops,  to  melt)  is  a  verj 
natural  and  fit  expression  for  the  cold  sweat  caused  by  intense  fear.  Corson  :  '  Be- 
stil'd  '  seems  to  be  used  as  a  strong  form  of  '  still'd,'  as  the  next  line  shows.  I  get 
no  meaning  out  of  '  distill'd.' 

205.  act]  Johnson:  'Fear'  was  the  cause,  the  active  cause,  that  'distill'd'  them 
by  the  force  of  operation  which  we  strictly  call  act  in  voluntary,  and  power  in  invol- 
untary, agents,  but  popularly  call  act  in  both.  Tschischwitz  :  Here  used  like  the 
Latin  actus,  and,  like  it,  is  passive,  not  active.  Compare  '  fertur  magno  mons  impro 
bus  actu ' — Virgil;  so  also  the  Italian  atto. 

207.  dreadful]  For  adjectives  which  have  both  an  active  and  a  passive  meaning, 
see  Abbott,  \  3.  Thus  'sensible,'  I,  i,  57  (also  passive  in  Macb.  II,  i,  36) ;  '  plaus- 
ive'  (passive),  I,  iv,  30.     See  also  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  78). 

207.  impart  they  did]  Clarendon  :  This  inversion  gives  formality  and  solemnity 
to  the  speaker's  words. 

209.  time]  Francke:  After  this  word  and  is  omitted  by  asyndeton.  See  also 
Lear,  I,  i,  51. 

214.  speak]  Steevens  has  a  long  note  to  prove  that  this  is  the  emphatic  word 
here,  and  not  'you.'  'By  what  particular  person,  therefore,  an  apparition,  which 
exhibits  itself  only  for  the  purpose  of  being  urged  to  speak,  was  addressed,  could  be 


iCTi.sc.  ii.]  HAMLE1  53 

Hor.  My  lord,  I  did, 

But  answer  made  it  none;  yet  once  methought  215 

It  lifted  up  it  head  and  did  address 

216.     it]  QiQgQ^F.,  White,  Cla.  Ktly.     his  Q,,  Sta.     its  QSF,Q'76F4,  et  cet. 

of  no  consequence.     Be  it  remembered  likewise  that  the  words  are  not  as  lately  pro- 
nounced upon  the  stage  :  "  Did  not  yon  speak  to  it  ?''  ' 

216.  it  head]  Craik  (Note  on  Jul.  Ges.  I,  ii,  124):  The  word  its  does  not 
occur  in  the  authorized  translation  of  the  Bible;  it  is,  however,  found  in  Sh.  There 
is  one  instance  [the  only  one,  according  to  RoLFE,  where  it  is  not  spelled  it's,  with 
an  apostrophe]  in  Mens,  for  Mens.  I,  ii,  4.  Hut  the  most  remarkable  of  the  plays 
in  this  particular  is  probably  Wint.  Tale ;  where  in  I,  ii,  151-158,  we  have  as  many 
as  three  instances  in  a  single  speech  of  Leontes ;  again  in  I,  ii,  266,  and  III,  iii. 
46.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  the  following  instances  in  Fx  of  the  use  of  it  in 
possessive  sense,  where  we  now  use  its:  Wint.  Tale,  II,  iii,  178;  III,  ii,  101  ; 
King  John,  II,  i,  160,  161,  162 ;  Lear,  I,  iv,  235  (l>is) ;  the  passage  '  that  nature  which 
contemnes  it  origin,'  in  Lear,  IV,  ii,  32,  is  not  in  Ff ;  but  Qx  has  ith  and  Q2  it.  There 
is  also  one  passage  in  our  English  Bible,  Levit.  xxv,  5,  in  which  the  reading  of  the 
original  edition  is  '  of  it  own  accord.'  The  modern  reprints  give  '  its.'  [Rolfe 
adds:  In  the  Geneva  Bible,  1579,  we  have  'it  owne  accorde,'  in  Acts,  xii,  10.] 
Trench  (English  Past  and  Present)  doubts  whether  Milton  has  once  admitted  its 
into  Paradise  L^ost,  '  although,  when  that  was  composed,  others  frequently  allowed 
it.'     But  he  does  use  it   occasionally,  e.g.   'The  mind  is  its    own  place.' — Par. 

Lost,  i,  254;  and  ' falsehood  .  .  .  returns  Of  force  to  its  own  likeness.' — Lb.  iv, 

813.  [Rolfe  :  See  also  Hymn  on  the  Nativity,  106.]  Generally,  however,  he 
avoids  the  word,  and  easily  does  so  by  personifying  most  of  his  substantives;  it  is 
only  when  this  cannot  be  done  that  he  reluctantly  accepts  the  services  of  the  little 
parvenu  monosyllable.  Bacon  has  frequently  his  in  the  neuter.  Trench  notices 
the  fact  of  the  occurrence  of  its  in  Rowley's  Poems  as  decisive  against  their  genuine- 
ness. The  modern  practice  is  the  last  of  three  distinct  stages  through  which  the 
language  passed,  as  to  this  use  of  its,  in  the  course  of  less  than  a  century.  First, 
we  have  his  serving  for  both  masculine  and  neuter;  secondly,  we  have  his  restricted 
to  the  masculine,  and  the  neuter  left  with  hardly  any  recognized  form ;  thirdly,  we 
have  the  defect  of  the  second  stage  remedied  by  the  frank  adoption  of  the  hereto- 
fore rejected  its.  And  the  most  curious  thing  of  all  in  the  history  of  the  wcrd  its 
is  the  extent  to  which,  before  its  recognition  as  a  word  admissible  in  serious  com 
position,  even  the  occasion  for  its  employment  was  avoided  or  eluded.  This  is  very 
remarkable  in  Sh.  The  very  conception  which  we  express  by  its  probably  does  net 
occur  once  in  his  works  for  ten  times  that  it  is  to  be  found  in  any  modern  writer. 
So  that  we  may  say  the  invention  or  adoption  of  this  form  has  changed  not  only  our 
English  style,  but  even  our  manner  of  thinking.  The  Saxon  personal  pronoun  was, 
in  the  nominative  singular,  He,  masculine;  LLeo,  feminine;  LLit,  neuter.  He  we  still 
retain ;  for  Lied  we  have  substituted  She,  apparently  a  modification  of  Seo,  the 
feminine  of  the  demonstrative ;  Hit  we  have  converted  into  //  (though  the  aspirate 
is  still  often  heard  in  the  Scottish  dialect).  The  genitive  was  Hire  for  the  feminine 
(whence  our  modern  Her),  and  His  both  for  the  masculine  and  the  neuter.  It  is  to 
be  understood,  of  course,  that  its,  however  convenient,  is  quite  an  irregular  forma- 
5* 


54  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

Itself  to  motion,  like  as  it  would  speak;  217 

But  even  then  the  morning  cock  crew  loud, 

And  at  the  sound  it  shrunk  in  haste  away 

And  vanish'd  from  our  sight. 

Ham.  Tis  very  strange.  220 

Hor.     As  I  do  live,  my  honour'd  lord,  'tis  true, 

And  we  did  think  it  writ  down  in  our  duty 

To  let  you  know  of  it. 

217.     like]  Om.  Q'76.  222.     writ  down  in]  then  Q'76. 

221.     honoured]      honourable     F2F4,  223,224.     To. ..but]  One  line,  Seymour. 

Rowe.     honorable  F .  223.     of]  Om.  Q'76. 

tion ;  the  /  of  it  (originally  hit)  is  merely  the  sign  of  the  neuter  gender,  which  does 
not  enter  into  the  inflection,  leaving  the  natural  genitive  of  that  gender  (hi,  his) 
substantially  identical  with  that  of  the  masculine  (he,  he-s,  his). 

To  the  foregoing  Rolfe  adds  the  following  instances  of  its  in  F  :  Te7np.  I,  ii, 
95;  lb.  I,  ii,  393;  2  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii,  393;  Hen.  VIII:  I,  i,  18.  //,  or  yt,  pos- 
sessive is  found  in  Fx  in  fourteen  passages.  The  following  are  not  mentioned  by 
Craik:  Temp.  II,  i,  163;  2  Hen.  IV:  I,  ii,  131  ;  Hen.  V:  V,  ii,  40;  Rom.  6°  Jul. 
I,  iii,  52;  Timon,  V,  i,  151 ;  Ham.  I,  ii,  216;  lb.  V,  i,  209;  Ant.  &>  Cleo.  II,  vii, 
49;  lb.  II,  vii,  53;  Cym.  Ill,  iv,  160.  Rolfe  concludes:  No  argument  in  regard 
to  the  date  of  the  plays  can  be  based  upon  the  occurrence  of  these  various  forms  of 
the  possessive  its.  We  find  all  three  in  some  of  the  earliest  plays,  two  different 
forms  in  the  very  same  play;  and  its  in  Hen.  VIII,  which,  according  to  White,  is 
the  latest  of  the  plays.  The  simple  fact  is,  that  Sh.  wrote  in  the  early  part  of  that 
transitional  period  when  its  was  beginning  to  displace  his  and  her  as  the  possessive 
of  it,  and  that  just  at  that  time  the  forms  it  and  its  were  more  common  than  its, 
though  this  last  was  occasionally  used  even  before  the  end  of  the  16th  century.  See 
Wright's  Bible  Word-Book,  and  Marsh,  Lectures  on  Eng.  Lang.,  First  Series,  p. 
397.  [See  also  Matzner,  i,  296,  and  Mommsen,  Rom.  6°  Jul.,  p.  22.  Indeed, 
this  whole  note  ought  to  have  been  given  in  the  Variorum  ed.  of  Rom.  6°  Jul. 
I,  iii,  52,  but  my  only  apology  for  this  and  similar  omissions  in  that  volume  is 
the  terror  with  which  the  endless  pages  in  prospect  inspired  me  in  those  early 
days;  and  I  have  not  outgrown  it  yet.  Ed.] 

217.  like  as  it  would]  As  if.  See  II,  i,  91,  95;  III,  iv,  135;  Macb.  I,  iv,  11 ; 
or  Abbott,  $  107,  or  Matzner,  ii,  128,  and  iii,  494. 

218.  even]  Just,  exactly.     See  Abbott,  \  38,  or  Schmidt,  (s.  v.)  4. 

219.  shrunk]  Warton.  It  is  a  most  inimitable  circumstance  in  Sh.  to  make  the 
Ghost,  which  has  been  so  long  obstinately  silent,  and  of  course  must  be  dismissed 
by  the  morning,  begin  or  rather  prepare  to  speak,  and  to  be  interrupted  at  the  very 
critical  time  of  the  crowing  of  a  cock.  Another  poet,  according  to  custom,  would 
have  suffered  his  Ghost  tamely  to  vanish  without  contriving  this  start,  which  is  like 
a  start  of  guilt, — to  say  nothing  of  the  aggravation  of  the  future  suspense,  occasioned 
by  this  preparation  to  speak  and  to  impart  some  mysterious  secret.  Less  would  havfl 
been  eypected  had  nothing  been  promised. 

221.  As]  See  Matzner,  iii,  493,  /?/?;  and  for  the  old  preterite  'writ'  in  the  next 
tine,  see  lb.  i,  368. 


act  i,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  55 

Ham.     Indeed,  indeed,  sirs,  but  this  troubles  inc. 
Hold  you  the  watch  to-night  ? 

Mar-  I  1*7     A  1      A 

r> ,      f  We  do,  my  lord.  225 

Hani.     Arm'd,  say  you  ? 

Mar.  \ 

Ber    )  Arm  d,  my  lord. 

Ham.  From  top  to  toe  ? 


Mar.  \ 
„     '  \      My  lord,  from  head  to  foot. 


Ham.     Then  saw  you  not  his  face? 

Hor.     0,  yeSjjnyMor^a^Ji^  beavei 

Ham.     What,  look'd  he  frowningly?  230 

Hor.     A  countenance  more  in  sorrow  than  in  anger. 

Ham.     Pale,  or  red  ? 

224.  Indeed,  indeed]  Indeede  Qq,  230,  231.  What... more]  One  line, 
Pope,  Jen.  Seymour.                                            Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt  i,  Coll.  Sing. 

225.  226,  227.     Mar.  Ber.]  Cap.  Dyce,         El.  White,  Ktly. 

Sta.  Del.  Glo.  +  .     All.  Qq.     Both.  Ff,  230.      What,]  Ft.      What  Qq.     Hem 

Rowe  +  .  Qx,  Sta. 

227-229.     My. ..not]  One  line,  Steev.  he]  he,  Sta. 

Cald.  Bos.  Knt  i.  232.     Pale,]  Pale  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.-f , 

227.  My  lord,]  Om.  Q'76.  Mob. 

228.  face?]  face.  Q2Q3< 

226.  Arm'd]  Knight.  This  passage  is  sometimes  read  and  acted  as  if  it  applied 
to  the  manner  in  which  Hor.  and  Mar.  were  to  hold  their  watch ;  and  we  have 
somewhere  seen  a  criticism  which  notes  line  228  as  a  memorable  example  of  an 
abrupt  transition.  Without  doubt  it  is  asked  with  reference  to  the  Ghost.  Hamlet  an- 
ticipates the  re-appearance  of  the  figure  when  he  asks,  line  225,  and  proceeds  to  those 
minute  questions  which  carry  forward  the  deep  impressions  of  truth  and  reality  with 
which  everything  connected  with  the  supernatural  appearance  of  the  Ghost  is  invested 

229.  beaver]  Florio  {A  Worlde  of '  Wordes,  1598)  gives:  Bauiira,  the  chin  peec< 
of  a  caske  or  head-peece.  Bullokar  [English  Expositor,  1616)  defines:  Beaner 
In  armour  it  signifieth  that  part  of  the  helmet  which  may  bee  lifted  vp,  to  take  breath 
the  more  freely.  Douce  (i,  439)  shows  that  it  is  frequently  used  to  denote  the 
whole  helmet,  as  in  3  Hen.  VI:  I,  i,  12,  and  gives  representations  of  the  helmel 
and  its  parts;  as  also  Knight  at  2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  i,  120.  Worcester  cites  Stephen- 
son as  deriving  it  from  Fr.  buvoir,  because  it  enabled  the  wearer  to  drink.  The 
definitions  of  Richardson  and  Wedgwood  are  not  borne  out  by  references  to  Sh. 
Hunter  (ii,  219)  :  Some  say  it  ought  to  be  'he  wore  his  beaver  down,'  but  Sh.  has 
the  authority  of  one  who  ought  to  know  something  concerning  what  belongs  to 
knights  and  chivalry  :  •  they  their  bevers  up  did  rear.' — Faerie  Queene,  IV,  vi,  25. 

231.  Pale  or  red]  Corson  :  The  meaning  is  marred  without  the  comma  of  F 
after  •  Pale.'  Hamlet  must  be  supposed  to  utter  '  Pale  '  as  a  thing  of  course,  pale- 
ness being  he  conventional  idea  attached  to  a  ghost.     The  word  should  be  uttered 


Longer,  longer. 


56  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

Hor.     Nay,  very  pale. 

Ham.  And  fix'd  his  eyes  upon  you? 

Hor.     Most  constantly. 

Ham.  I  would  I  had  been  there. 

Hor.     It  would  have  much  amazed  you.  235 

Ham.     Very  like,  very  like.     Stay'd  it  long  ? 

Hor.     While  one  with  moderate  haste  might  tell  a  hundred. 

Mar. 

Ber. 

Hor.     Not  when  I  saw't. 

Ham.  His  beard  was  grizzled  ?  no  ? 

235,  236.  It...like,~]  One  line,  Cap.  238.  Mar.  Ber?)  Cap.  Both.  Qq. 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt  i,  Coll.  White.             All.  Ff. 

23^>    237.      very. ..haste]     One    line,  239.     savSt]  did  see  it  Seymour. 

Cap.  Mai.  239.    grizzled?  no?]    Cap.  grifsVd, 

236.  Very  like,  very  like]  Very  like  no.  Q2Q3»  grifs'ld,  no.  Q  .  grijfeld, 
Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  El.  no.    Q$.      grijly  ?   no.    Ft>    Cald.    Knt. 

236.  Stay'd  it]  Did  it  stay  Seymour.         grijly?  F2F3F4,  Rowe  + .    grijled  ?  Q'76, 

237.  moderate]  modern  Knt  i  (a  mis-  Jen.  grisVd?  no.  Warb.  grizzled, — 
print—  N.  &°  Qu.\  Jan.  '51).  no?  Dyce,  Sta.  Mob. 

hundred]  hundreth  Qq. 

with  a  falling  inflection,  and  then  '  or  red '  added,  after  a  pause,  with  a  certain 
anxious  impatience  :  Pale,  was  he  ?  or  red  ;  how  was  it?  In  other  words,  he  hasn't 
the  two  ideas,  '  pale '  and  '  red,'  in  his  mind  at  once ;  when  he  first  speaks  he  has 
only  that  of '  Pale,'  on  which  his  voice  rests.  He  then  adds,  somewhat  impatiently, 
'  or  red  ?'     A  semicolon  would  mark  the  division  better  than  a  comma. 

236.  like]  Clarendon:  See  II,  ii,  336.  This  use  of  '  like'  instead  of  'likely' 
has  become  provincial.  Congreve  ( Way  of  the  World,  IV,  iv)  puts  it  into  the 
mouth  of  the  rustic,  Sir  Wilfull. 

239.  grizzled]  Moberly  :  The  meaning  seems  to  be  *  grisly'  =■=  foul  and  disordered. 
Probably  Hamlet's  meaning  in  asking  the  question  was  to  find  whether  his  father 
showed  signs  of  a  violent  death,  like  Gloster,  in  2  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii,  175;  but  he 
repels  the  supposition  at  once,  as  being  unwilling  to  connect  personal  violence  with 
the  thought  of  his  father. 

239.  grizzled?  no?]  As  You  Like  It  {Gent.  Maga.  1760,  vol.  Ix,  403): 
'  No '  appears  to  have  been  given  very  improperly  to  Ham.  The  question  is  de- 
signed to  try  how  far  Hor.  has  observed  the  Ghost.  Ham.  therefore  proposes  the 
question  of  a  beard  of  a  different  colour  to  that  of  his  father's.  To  which  Hor., 
giving  a  negative  to  the  question,  describes  the  beard  as  it  really  was.  [This  ingeni- 
ous suggestion  carries  probability  almost  sufficient  to  justify  its  adoption  in  the  text; 
for  two  reasons — First.  After  an  affirmative  question  we  instinctively  anticipate  the 
inswer  yes,  not  '  no,'  which  would  more  naturally  follow  a  negative  question  : 
His  beard  was  not  grizzled  ?'  Secondly.  It  is  eminently  characteristic  of  the  pre- 
cise Horatio  (e'en  the  justest  man  Ham.  had  ever  found)  to  draw  a  nice  distinction 
o«  ween  'grizzled'  and  'sable  silvered.'  He  had  been  most  exact  in  his  estimate 
cf  the  time  the  Ghost  stayed,  and  he  would  be  equally  exact  even  as  to  the  co^ur 


act  I.  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  57 

Hor.     It  was,  as  I  have  seen  it  in  his  life,  240 

A  sable  sitvcrM. 

Ham.  I'll  watch  to-night; 

Perchance  'twill  walk  again. 

Hor.  I  warrant  it  will. 

Ham.     If  it  assume  my  noble  father's  person, 
I'll  speak  to  it,  though  hell  itself  should  gape 
And  bid  me  hold  my  peace.     I  pray  you  all,  245 

If  you  have  hitherto  conceal'd  this  sight, 
Let  it  be  tenable  in  your  silence  still, 

240.  as]  Om.  F  F4,  Rowe.  Sing.  White,   Sta.   Ktly.     war'nt  Cap. 

241.  /'//]    F,    Rowe  +  ,    Sing,     ii,         Jen. 

White,  Sta.  Huds.     He  F,^.     Pie  Fj.  246.     concert  d]  concealed  Y^^. 

I  will  Qq,  et  cet.  247.     be  tenable  in~\  require  Q'76. 

241,    242.       I'll. ..again]       As     one  tenable]   treble  F,F4>   Rowe-t-, 

line,  Ff,  Rowe +  ,  White,  Huds.  Cald.    Knt    i.      trebble    F,F,.      ten'ble 

241.  night]  nigh  Q2Q3-  Warb.     tabled  Nicholson  (withdrawn).-" 

242.  walk]  wake  Fx.  tenable  .  .  .  still]      treble  . . .  no7v 
warrant]   Qt,  Steev.      warn't  Warb.  conj.  (withdrawn). 

Qq.     warrant  you    Ff,    Rowe  -I- ,   Bos. 

and  texture  of  the  beard.  Ed.]  Corson,  however,  strongly  upholds  Ff ;  he  says: 
Hamlet  is  subjecting  his  friends  to  a  searching  examination,  and  when  he  asks  the 
question,  '  His  Beard  was  grisly  ?'  he  adds,  with  decision,  '  no,'  as  though  he  had 
caught  them  on  this  point.    '  No '  should  be  read  with  a  strong  downward  inflection. 

241.  I'll]  Corson:  This  is  strongly  emphatic,  and  it  can  be  better  made  so  in 
4  I'll'  of  the  Ff  than  '  I  will'  of  the  Qq.  It  seems,  too,  that  the  abbreviated  form 
suits  better  Hamlet's  off-hand  mode  of  speech  with  his  friends. 

242.  warrant]  For  instances  of  words  composed  of  two  short  syllables  contracted 
in  pronunciation  into  monosyllables  see  Walker,  Vers.  65  ;  or  Abbott,  §  463. 

244.  gape]  Staunton  :  It  here,  perhaps,  signifies  yell,  howl,  roar,  &c,  rather 
than  yawn  or  open,  as  in  Hen.  VIII :  V,  iv,  3.  Clarendon:  And  so,  perhaps,  'a 
gaping  pig.' — Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  54. 

247.  tenable]  Caldecott  and  Knight  (ed.  i.)  defend  the  misprint  of  Ff. 
Both  paraphrase  it :  *  Impose  a  threefold  obligation  of  silence ;'  and  in  proof  that 
this  was  a  favorite  scale  or  measure  with  Sh.,  Caldecott  adds  some  examples,  which 
Mrs  Clarke's  Concordance  will  more  than  treble.  White  :  We  might  have  had 
some  trouble  in  correcting  the  misprint  of  the  Ff,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  Qq. 
Bailey  (i,  51)  objects  to  '  tenable '  on  three  grounds  :  First.  *  Tenable  in  silence '  is 
scarcely  English;  no  ordinary  combination  of  circumstances  requires  it.  Second. 
It  does  not  express  the  meaning  here  intended.  Ham.  enjoins  that  the  matter  be 
held  in  silence,  not  holdable  in  silence ;  the  latter  is  a  common  condition  of  all  intelli- 
gence. Thirdly.  '  Tenable '  is  nowhere  to  be  found  in  Sh. ;  •  intenible  '  occurs  once, 
and  singularly  enough  in  an  active  sense — incapable  of  holding,  not  incapable  of 
being  held.  Furthermore,  in  addition  to  these  three  reasons,  the  point  of  the  line 
is  lost  if  the  right  word,  '  treble,'  be  excluded.  Ham.  is  addressing  his  three  com- 
panions, and  he  lays  upon  all  three  a  solemn  injunction :  '  Let  it  be  treble  in  your 


58  JIAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

And  whatsoever  else  shall  hap  to-night 

Give  it  an  understanding,  but  no  tongue ; 

I  will  requite  your  loves.     So  fare  you  well ;  250 

Upon  the  platform,  'twixt  eleven  and  twelve, 

I'll  visit  you. 

All.  Our  duty  to  your  honour. 

Ham.     Your  loves,  as  mine  to  you  ;  farewell. 

\_Exeiint  all  but  Hamlet. 
My  father's  spirit  in  arms  !  all  is  not  well ; 

I  doubt  some  foul  play  ;  would  the  night  were  come  !  255 

Till  then  sit  still,  my  soul ;  foul  deeds  will  rise, 
Though  all  the  earth  o'erwhelm  them,  to  men's  eyes.       [Exit. 

248.     whatsoever]   what  fomeuer  Q2  253.      [Exeunt.. . Hamlet. ]  Glo.     Ex- 

Q3.     what  what  foeuer  Q4.  eunt.    Manet    Hamlet.     Q'76.     Exeunt 

else  shall  hap]  shall  befall rPope  + .  Hor.    Mar.    and    Ber.     Cap.       Exeunt. 

250.  requite]  require  F3F4.  (after  line  252)  QqFf. 

fare]  farre  Q3Q3-  254-     spirit    in     arms  /]     fpirit    in 

you]  ye  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Knt,  armes  ?  FXF2F  .    fpirit  [in  amies')  Qq. 

Dyce,  White,  Sta.  Huds.  fpirit  in  arms,  Q'76.     spirit !  in  arms  ! 

251.  eleven]  a  leauen  Q2Q,Q..  Whalley,  Rann. 

252.  duty]  duties  Qx,  White,  Huds.  256.    foul]  fonde  Q2Q3» 

honour]  horn  or  Q  .  rise,  Though... them,  to]  Johns. 

253.  loves]  love  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  rife  Though... them  to  Qq.  rife,  Though 
Han.  Knt,  Sta.  ...them  to  Ff,  Mai.    rife,  Though.. .them 

farewell.]  so  fare  you  well.  Seym.        from  Q'76.     rise,  (  Tho' ...them)  to  Pope. 

silence  still,'  i.  e.  Let  all  three  of  you  continue  to  preserve  silence  respecting  it.  *  Sh. 
probably  wrote,  "  Let  it  be  in  your  treble  silence  still."  '  Compare  Cym.  V,  v,  388  : 
1  Your  three  motives  to  the  battle,'  i.  e.  the  motives  of  you  three,  not  your  motives 
three  in  number.  Clarendon  :  Regard  it  as  a  secret  which  ought  to  be  kept. 
See  Walker,  Crit.  i,  183;  or  Abbott,  g  3. 

252.  duty]  White:  That  there  is  a  mere  omission  of  the  final  s  appears  both  by 
Hamlet's  reply,  '  Your  loves,'  and  by  the  usage  of  Shakespeare's  time.  I  think  the 
reading  here  of  Qx  is  of  little  or  no  importance,  so  variable  is  our  old  typography  as 
to  the  final  s  in  such  words. 

253.  loves]  Staunton  :  The  hurried  repetition,  '  your  loves,  your  loves,'  of  Qf 
well  expresses  the  perturbation  of  Hamlet  at  the  moment,  and  that  feverish  impa- 
tience to  be  alone  and  commune  with  himself  which  he  evinces  whenever  he  is 
particularly  moved.  Corson  :  Love  is  better  than  '  loves  '  of  the  Qq.,  as  being 
opposed  to  '  duty ;'  love  should  be  uttered  with  a  slow  and  deliberate  downward 
wave :  Your  love,  I  ask ;  I  don't  wish  you  to  act  from  a  sense  of  duty  alone ;  I  ask 
your  love  in  the  matter.  Qf  throws  light  on  the  true  meaning.  Hamlet,  though 
always  princely,  is  impatient  of  certain  conventional  courtesies.     [See  note  on  '  loves,' 

I»ii  1730 

257.  to  men's  eyes]  Corson:  It  is  questionable  as  to  whether  this  phrase 
should  be  connected  with  '  rise  '  or  with  '  o'erwhelm.'  A  reader  finds  it  awkward  to 
connect  it  with  '  rUe.'     The  omission  of  the  comma  in  Fx  after  '  them,'  thus  con 


\ct  l,  sc.  iii.j  HAMLET  59 

Scene  III.     A  room  in  Polonius's  house. 

Enter  Laertes  and  Opukua.       I  *  *  ^"  'f 

Lacr.     My  necessaries  are  embark'd  ;  farewell ; 
And,  sister,  as  the  winds  give  benefit 
And  convoy  is  assistant,  do  not  sleep, 
But  let  me  hear  from  you. 

OpJi.  Do  you  doubt  that  ? 

Laer.     For  Hamlet,  and  the  trifling  of  his  favour,  5 

Hold  it  a  fashion,  and  a  toy  in  blood, 

Scene  in.]  Scene  v.  Pope  +  .  uoy  is  affiflant ;  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Jen. 

A  room...]  An  apartment. ..Pope.  conuay,in  afsijlant  Q2Q  Q ..  conuay,in 

...house.]  ...Apartment.   Cap.  affiflant,  Q.    convey  in  affiflant,  Q  76. 

Ophelia.]   Ophelia  his  Sister.  Qq.  3.      sleep]    slip   Theob.    conj.    (with- 

I.     e?nbark\l~\Q\\>.  inbarckt  Q2Q3Q4-  drawn). 

imbarkt  Q.     imbark 7  F 't¥ 't.     inibark'd  5.    favour}  fauours  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

FF,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Plan.  Cald.  Knt,  Sta. 
3.     convoy  is  assistant,"]  Theob.    con- 

necting  it  with  'o'erwhelm,'  makes  equally  good  sense,  and  adapts  the  construction 
of  the  sentence  better  to  its  vocal  expression. 

Scene  hi.]  Coleridge:  This  scene  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  Shakespeare's 
lyric  movements  in  the  play,  and  the  skill  with  which  it  is  interwoven  with  the 
dramatic  parts  is  peculiarly  an  excellence  of  our  poet.  You  experience  the  sensa- 
tion of  a  pause  without  the  sense  of  a  stop. 

1.  embark'd]  Corson  :  As  applied  to  things,  imbarttt  or  inbark't  seems  prefer- 
able to  '  embark'd.' 

2.  as]  Abbott,  $  109 :  We  almost  always  apply  as,  like  because,  to  the  past  and 
the  present ;  Sh.  often  uses  it  of  the  future,  in  the  sense  of  '  according  as.'  In  the 
present  passage  a  modern  reader  would  at  first  naturally  suppose  '  as '  to  mean  since, 
or  because,  but  the  context  shows  it  means  '  according  as.7 

2.  benefit]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  94)  :  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  words  benefit 
and  beneficial,  in  our  old  writers,  almost  uniformly  involve  the  idea  of  a  benefactor, 
which  has  since  been  dropped,  except  in  cases  where  the  context  implies  that  idea, 
1  g.  conferring  or  receiving  a  benefit. 

3.  convoy]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  conveyance.     See  Airs  Well,  IV,  iv,  10. 

5.  trifling]  Caldecott  :  That  is,  gay  and  thoughtless  intimation. 

6.  fashion]  Clarendon  :  That  wh?ch  is  changeable  and  temporary.  See  Lyly's 
Euphues,  ed.  Arber,  p.  81  :  'Tush  Philautus  was  liked  for  fashion  sake,  but  neuer 
loued  for  fancie  sake.' 

6.  toy]  That  is,  caprice,  as  in  Rom.  6°  Jul.  IV,  i,  119:  'inconstant  toy.'  Sh. 
uses  this  word,  as  Staunton  says  {King  John,  I,  i,  232),  with  great  latitude.  See 
its  use  in  I,  iv,  75.  Clarendon:  A  pastime  and  fancy,  not  a  deep  affection.  See 
Oth.  I,  iii,  269. 

6.  blcod]  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  Disposition,  inclination,  temperament,  impulse.  [See 
line  116   )f  tMs  scene,  and  III,  ii,  64.] 


bO  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

A  violet  in  the  youth  of  primy  nature,  7 

Forward,  not  permanent,  sweet,  not  lasting, 
The  perfume  and  suppliance  of  a  minute ; 
No  more. 

Opli.     No  more  but  so  ? 

Laer.  Think  it  no  more  ;  ic 

For  nature  crescent  does  not  grow  alone 
In  thews  and  bulk ;  but,  as  this  temple  waxes, 

7.  youth  of  primy]  youth  and  prime  IO.  No  more.]  No  more —  Warb. 
vf  Q'76.                                                                but  no  more  Coll.  (MS). 

8.  Forward]  Froward  FXF2.  No  more]  Mo  more  Q  . 
sweet,  not]  the!'  sweet,  not  Rowe+ .  so  ?]  Rowe.     so.  QqFf. 

tweet,  but  not  Cap.  Ktly.  1 1       crescent]  crej[fant  QqFxF2F  . 

9.  The  perfume  and]  The  (reading  12      bulk]  bulkes  Qq. 

The. ..No  more,  as  one  line)  Ff,  Rowe.  this]  his  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,     tht 

minute;]   minute  Qq.     minute?         Han. 
Fx.     minute:  Q'76. 

7.  primy]  Nares  :  Early,  belonging  to  the  spring ;  perhaps,  peculiar  to  this  passage. 

8.  Forward]  Caldecott  :  Early,  ripe  before  due  season  ;  and  thence  having  in 
it  the  principles  of  premature  decay. 

8.  To  aid  the  scansion  of  this  line  different  expedients  have  been  devised  (see 
Text.  Notes).  Mommsen  {Perkins- Shakespeare,  Berlin,  1854,  pp.  360,  496)  throws 
the  accent  on  the  second  syllable  of  '  lasting,'  as  we  sometimes  find  it  in  words 
which  are  now  paroxytone;  e.g.  semblance,  marchant,  &c.  To  pronounce  it  as  a 
trochee,  lasting,  is  against  the  Shakespearian  usage  of  admitting  a  trochee  only  after 
a  pause.  But,  Elze  asks,  Why  cannot  both  the  last  two  feet  be  trochees :  •  sw6et 
not  I  lasting'?  Abbott  and  Clarendon  prolong  «  sweet '  into  a  dissyllable  (|  484, 
and  see  Macb.  I,  ii,  5).  Moberly  finds  the  solution  in  '  permanent.'  •  The  mean- 
ing of  this  word  induces  a  slight  pause,  and  so  gives  it  the  time  of  an  additional 
syllable.'  [In  other  words,  the  voice  of  an  intelligent  reader  cures  instinctively 
such  defects  in  metre;  if  they  be  defects.] 

9.  suppliance]  Johnson  :  It  is  plain  that  perfume  is  necessary  to  exemphiy  the 
idea  of  sweet,  not  lasting.  With  the  word  suppliance  I  am  not  satisfied,  and  yet 
dare  hardly  offer  what  I  imagine  to  be  right.  I  suspect  that  soffiance,  or  some  such 
word,  formed  from  the  Italian,  was  then  used  for  the  act  of  fumigating  with  swee: 
scents.  Mason  :  An  amusement  to  fill  up  a  vacant  moment.  Steevens  :  What  was 
supplied  us  for  a  minute.     It  is  found  in  Chapman's  ninth  Iliad. 

10.  so?]  Corson  [who  prefers  the  punctuation  of  the  QqFf]:  This  speech  is 
certainly  meant  to  express  Ophelia's  submissiveness  to  her  brother's  opinion,  not  to 
question  the  correctness  of  it. 

1 1-14.  For  .  .  .  withal]  Tschischwitz  transposes  these  lines  to  follow  line  32, 
because,  as  he  alleges,  they  afford  not  the  slightest  explanation  to  '  Think  it  no 
more,'  and  because  they  have  been  evidently  inserted  in  the  wrong  place  through 
some  blunder,  and  are  intelligible  only  when  restored  to  their  proper  order,  as  he 
deems  it. 

12.  thew^l  Rolfe  (Cr  uk's  Jul  Cas.  I,  iii,  81)  :  That  is,  muscular  powers ;  as  in 


act  i,  sc.  iii.]  HAMLET  01 

The  inward  service  of  the  mind  and  soul 

Grows  wide  withal.      Perhaps  he  loves  you  now ; 

And  now  no  soil  nor  cautel  doth  besmirch  15 

The  virtue  of  his  will ;  but,  you  must  fear, 

His  greatness  weigh'd,  his  will  is  not  his  own  • 

13.     and]  Om.  Q  .  Rovve. 

15.  soil  nor]  foyle   nor   F,F _.     foil  1 6.     fear,]   feare,    Qq.    feare    F,J*#. 
nor  F  ,  Rowe.     soil  of  Warb.     soil,  or  fear  FF,  Rowe.     fear ;   Ktly. 
Heath.  17.     weighed]     wayd    Q2Q3-       waid 

16.  will]    feare    F,F..    >zr    F3F4,  Q4Q$. 


all  the  three  instances  in  which  Sh.  uses  the  word  (the  third  is  2  Hen.  IV:  III,  ii,  276). 
It  comes  from  the  Saxon  theow  or  theoh,  whence  also  thigh,  and  must  not  be  con- 
founded with  the  obsolete  thews  =  manners,  or  qualities  of  mind,  which  is  from  the 
Saxon  theaw.  This  latter  thews  is  common  in  Spenser,  Chaucer,  and  earlier  writers; 
the  former  is  found  very  rarely  before  Shakespeare's  day.  It  occurs  (as  cited  by 
Nares)  in  Turbervile's  Ovid's  Epistles,  1567  :  '  the  thews  of  Helens  passing  form.' 
In  the  earlier  version  of  Layamon"1  s  Brut,  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  (verse 
6361):  '  Monnene  strengest  of  maine  and  of  theawe  of  alle  thissere  theode '  (of 
men  strongest  of  main,  or  strength,  and  of  sinew,  of  all  this  land).  But  Sir  F. 
Madden  remarks  (III,  471)  :  'This  is  the  only  instance  in  the  poem  of  the  word 
being  applied  to  bodily  qualities,  nor  has  any  other  passage  of  an  earlier  date  than 
the  sixteenth  century  been  found  in  which  it  is  so  used.'  Tschischwitz  :  The  s  is 
probably  not  a  sign  of  the  plural,  but  a  derivative  affix  for  th,  whence  we  may  infer 
in  abstract  theovth,  denoting  growth,  in  later  English  thewth. 

12.  this]  Corson  (p.  12):  'His'  of  Ff  stands  for  'nature':  as  nature's  temple 
grows,  the  service  within  widens.     There  is  a  metaphor  implied. 

12.  temple]  See  Macb.  II,  iii,  64;  R.  of  L.  719,  and  1172,  in  proof  of  Calde- 
cott's  remark  that  this  is  never  but  on  grave  occasions  applied  to  the  body. 

13.  inward  service]  Caldecott  :  As  the  body  increases  in  bulk,  the  duties 
calling  forth  the  offices  and  energies  of  the  mind  increase  equally.  Moberly  : 
'Av£avo/j.£V(i)  r£>  aufiart  avvai^ovrai  ml  al  <pp£veq. — Herodotus,  iii,  134. 

14.  Grows]  Hudson  :  The  passage  would  seem  to  imply  that  Hamlet  is  not  so 
old  as  he  is  elsewhere  represented  to  be. 

15.  cautel]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  Craft,  deceit.  '  Cautelle :  A  wile,  cautell,  sleight ; 
a  craftie  reach,  or  fetch,  guilefvl  deuise  or  endeuor ;  also,  craft,  subtiltie,  trumperie, 
deceit,  cousenageS — Cotgrave.  Clarendon:  Only  used  elsewhere  by  Sh.  in  L.  C. 
303.  Rushton  (Sh.'s  Testamentary  Language,  p.  43) :  Sh.  may  have  written  these 
lines  remembering  the  following  passage  from  Swinburn's  Treatise  on  Wills,  1590: 
•  There  iz  no  cautele  under  heaven,  whereby  the  libertie  of  making  or  revoking  his 
testament  can  be  utterly  taken  away,' — p.  61.  Again  Laertes  says,  line  20, '  He  may 
not  carve  for  himself,'  and  according  to  Swinburn,  '  it  is  not  lawful  for  legataries 
to  carve  for  themselves,  taking  their  legacies  at  their  own  pleasure,'  &c. — p.  50. 

16.  virtue]  Johnson  :  It  here  seems  to  comprise  both  excellence  and  power,  ana 
may  be  explained  the  pure  effects.  Mason  :  His  virtuous  intentions.  Staunton  : 
It  here  seems  to  import  essential  goodness  ;  as  we  speak  of  the  virtues  of  herbs,  &c. 

16.  will]   Caldecott  :  The  Ff  contain  a  clear  misprint  by  the  eye  catching  and 
giving  the  same  word  twice. 
6 


62  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

For  he  himself  is  subject  to  his  birth; 

He  may  not,  as  unvalued  persons  do, 

Carve  for  himself,  for  on  his  choice  depends  20 

The  safety  and  health  of  this  whole  state, 

And  therefore  must  his  choice  be  circumscribed 

Unto  the  voice  and  yielding  of  that  body 

Whereof  he  is  the  head.     Then  if  he  says  he  loves  you, 

It  fits  your  wisdom  so  far  to  believe  it  2$ 

As  he  in  his  particular  act  and  place 

May  give  his  saying  deed ;  which  is  no  further 

Than  the  main  voice  of  Denmark  goes  withal. 

18.  Om.  Qq.  21.     lhis]Qq,  Coll.  Glo.  +  ,  Mob.    the 

19.  unvalued]  inferior  Q'76.  Ff  et  cet. 

20.  Carve  for]  Craue  for  Q4QS-    Be-  whole]  weole  FT. 
stow  Q'76.  24.     he  is  the]  he's  Pope-i-. 

21.  safety]  fafty  QQQ3-  fafetie  Q.  26.  particular  act  and  place]  pecu- 
fanclity  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Cald.  liar  Seel  and  force  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  pe- 
Knt.  sanity  Theob.  conj.  Han.  Johns.  culiar  act  and  place  Pope  + .  particular 
Cap.  White,    safety  Sing.  sect  and  force  Cald.    peculiar  sect  and 

health]  the  health   Warb.   Jen.         place  White. 
Steev.  Var.  Dyce,  Sta.  Del.  Huds. 

20.  Carve]  Clarke  (Note  on  '  Carver,'  Rich.  II:  II,  iii,  144).  Sh.  uses  the 
verb  to  '  carve  '  very  expressively  to  signify  '  hew  recklessly'  and  to  '  select  selfishly.' 

21.  safety]  Theobald  (Sh.  Best.  p.  22)  conjectured  that  'sanctity'  of  Ff  should 
be  sanity,  because  the  welfare,  preservation  of  the  state  was  in  some  degree  con- 
cerned by  Hamlet's  choice  of  a  wife.  Theobald  calls  attention  to  the  same  mis- 
print of  one  word  for  the  other  in  II,  ii,  208,  and  Macb.  IV,  iii,  144.  Walker 
(Crit.  iii,  88,  also  Vers.  159)  makes  the  same  conjecture:  '  Sanity  must  surely  be 
the  right  reading ;  sanctity,  at  any  rate,  is  absurd.  Frequentius,  ut  sape  fit,  pro 
rariori ;  the  pulpit  having  familiarized  sanctity  to  men's  minds.'  Both  Dyce  and 
Abbott,  \  484,  agree  with  Walker.  The  latter  says  that  the  present  line  could  not 
be  scanned  without  prolonging  both  '  health  '  and  '  whole.'  '  Such  a  double  pro- 
longation is  extremely  improbable,  considering  the  moderate  emphasis  required. 
More  probably,  Theobald's  suggestion  is  right.'  Malone:  The  editor  of  Fx, finding 
the  metre  defective,  in  consequence  of  the  article  being  omitted  before  '  health,' 
instead  of  supplying  it,  for  '  safety '  substituted  a  word  of  three  syllables.  Collier  : 
'  Safety '  was  often  of  old,  as  here,  pronounced  as  a  trisyllable. 

21.  this]  Corson  (p.  12):  The  of  Ff  is  better  than  'this;'  'state'  being  used 
abstractly. 

26,  27.  As  .  .  .  deed]  Caldecott  [see  Text.  Notes]  :  As  he,  in  that  peculiar  rank 
and  class  that  he  fills  in  the  state,  and  the  power  and  means  thereto  annexed,  may 
enable  himself  to  give  his  professions  effect.  Collier  :  Sect  and  force  may  be 
strained  into  a  meaning,  but  '  act  and  place  '  require  no  such  effort.  The  latter  is  the 
reading  of  the  (MS)  also.  White:  What  tolerable  sense  has  either  Q2  or  Ff  in  con- 
nection wi'h  the  context  ?  Ff  manifestly  corrects  two  errors,  but  makes  one — '  force ' 
(or place.      Sect '  is  class,  lank,  or,  in  the  slang  of  society,  set.    So  in  Lear,  V,  iii,  18. 


alt  i,  sc.  iii.]  If  AM  LET  63 

Then  weigh  what  loss  your  honour  may  sustain, 

If  with  too  credent  ear  you  list  his  songs,  30 

Or  lose  your  heart,  or  your  chaste  treasure  open 

To  his  unmaster'd  importunity. 

Fear  it,  Ophelia,  fear  it,  my  dear  sister, 

And  keep  you  in  the  rear  of  your  affection, 

Out  of  the  shot  and  danger  of  desire.  _^  35 

The  chariest  maid  is  prodigal  enough,  JA 

If  she  unmask  her  beauty  to  the  moon ; 

Virtue  itself  'scapes  not  calumnious  strokes ; 

The  canker  galls  the  infants  of  the  spring 

Too  oft  before  their  buttons  be  disclosed,  40 

And  in  the  morn  and  liquid  dew  of  youth 

Contagious  blastments  are  most  imminent. 

29.  weigh\  way  Q2Q3Q..  Rowe  +  ,  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Del. 
whaf\  that  FF,  Rowe.  36,  38,  and  39  begin  with  quotation 

30.  too]  two  FaF  .  marks,  Qq. 

31.  lose]  loofe  QqF4>  37.     beauty]  beaty  Fa. 

chaste]  chajl  QqFx,  Cap.  39.     galls']  gaules  Qq.      Galls,  bJ. 

32.  unmaster 'd]  vnmajlred  QqFtF3  infants]  infant  Q4Q<FaF  F  , 
F  .     unmaflered  F  ,  Rowe.                               Rowe. 

34.     keep  you  in]    keepe  within   Ff,  40.     their]  the  Ff,  Rowe. 

30.  credent]  Clarendon  :  Not  used  elsewhere  by  Sh.  in  this  sense.  It  means 
•  credible,'  in  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii,  142. 

32.  unmaster'd]  Johnson  :  Licentious.  Rather,  says  Seymour,  not  kept  in  sub- 
jection by  the  austere  virtue  of  Ophelia. 

34.  rear]  Johnson  :  Do  not  advance  so  far  as  your  affection  would  lead  you. 

36.  chariest]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  Most  scrupulous.  Wedgwood:  Anglo-Saxon, 
cearig  (from  cearian,  to  care),  careful.  Dutch,  karigh,  sordidus,  parcus,  tenax. — 
Kilian,  Diet.  Teutonico-Lat.  German,  karg,  niggardly.  Moberly  :  The  meaning 
conveyed  by  the  superlative  is  •  a  maid  who  is  far  gone  in  chariness,'  that  is,  '  one 
who  is  really  chary.'  [Hudson  in  his  forthcoming  ed.  will  read  Th'  unchariest 
maid':  on  the  ground  that  '"chariest"  gives  altogether  too  weak  a  sense  to  suit 
either  the  character  of  the  speaker  or  of  the  occasion.'  Ed.] 

39.  canker]  Patterson  (Nat.  Hist,  of  Insects,  &c,  p.  34) :  The  canker  (Lozo- 
tcenia  rosana)  chooses  for  its  domicile  'the  fresh  lap  of  the  crimson  rose,'  and  lives 
among  the  blossoms,  preventing  the  possibility  of  their  further  development. 

39.  infants]   Caldecott  :  See  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  I,  i,  101. 

40.  buttons]  Wedgwood:  French,  bouton,  a  button,  bud,  any  small  projection, 
from  bouter,  to  push,  thrust  forwards,  as  rejeton,  a  rejected  thing,  from  rejeter,  &c. 
It  is  remarkable  that  Chaucer,  who  in  general  comes  so  close  to  the  French,  always 
translates  bouton,  the  rosebud,  in  the  Roman  de  la  Rose,  by  bothum,  and  not 
Dy  button. 

42.  blastments]  Clarendon  :  Only  here  in  Sh.  Coleridge  uses  it  in  the  last 
scene  of  Zapolya,  p.  265  :  '  Shall  shoot  his  blastments  on  the  land.' 


64  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iii 

Be  wary  then ;  best  safety  lies  in  fear ; 
Youth  to  itself  rebels,  though  none  else  near. 

Op/i.     I  shall  the  effect  of  this  good  lesson  keep,  45 

As  watchman  to  my  heart.     But,  good  my  brother, 
Do  not,  as  some  ungracious  pastors  do, 
Show  me  the  steep  and  thorny  way  to  heaven, 
Whilst,  like  a  puff'd  and  reckless  libertine, 
Himself  the  primrose  path  of  dalliance  treads  50 

45.  effect]  effects  Pope  +  .  While,  like   a   Jen.      While  as  a   Sey- 

46.  As  watclunan  to]  About  Q'76.  mour.      Whiles,  like  a  Glo.  Cla.  Mob 
watchman]     Q2Q3-       watchmen  49.     puff'd  and  reckless~\  Om.  Q'76. 

Q  Q  Ff,  Rowe,  Jen.  Knt  i.  reckless]  careless    Pope,  Theob. 

my]  Om.  Q'76.  Han.  Johns. 

48.  steep]  Jlep  Q2Q3-  49,  50.     libertine,  Himself]  libertine 

49.  Whilst,  like  a]  Theob.      Whiljl         Him/elf,  Ff. 

like  a  Ff.     (  Whilejl  F3)    Rowe,  Pope,  50.     Himself.  .  .  treads]     Thyself.  .  . 

Han.    Whiles  a  Qq.    Whilst,  he  a  Warb.         tread 'st  Seymour. 

43.  best]  The  not  uncommon  omission  of  the  article  before  superlatives  is 
perhaps  to  be  explained,  according  to  Abbott,  $  82,  by  the  double  meaning  of 
the  superlative,  which  means  not  only  '  the  best  of  the  class,'  but  also  '  very 
good.' 

43.  safety]  Francke:  See  Macb.  Ill,  v,  32.  Also  Velleius  Paterculus,  ii,  218: 
irequentissimum  initium  esse  calamitatis  securitatem.  Elze  :  See  Tro.  6°  Cress.  II, 
ii,  14 :  •  the  wound  of  peace  is  surety,  Surety  secure.' 

44.  Clarendon  :  In  the  absence  of  any  tempter,  youth  rebels  against  itself,  i.  e. 
the  passions  of  youth  revolt  from  the  power  of  self-restraint ;  there  is  a  traitor  in 
the  camp. 

44.  though  .  .  .  near]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  predicate  verb,  see 
Matzner,  ii,  43,  though  I  can  find  no  parallel  instances  in  the  conjunctive  clauses 
there  noted.     Clarendon  appositely  cites  Cymb.  IV,  iv,  23. 

45.  Coleridge:  You  will  observe  in  Ophelia's  short  and  general  answer  to  the 
long  speech  of  Laertes  the  natural  carelessness  of  innocence,  which  cannot  think 
such  a  code  of  cautions  and  prudences  necessary  to  its  own  preservation. 

47.  ungracious]  Clarendon  :  Graceless.     So  1  Hen.  IV:  II,  iv,  490. 

47.  pastors]  Tschischwitz  does  'not  scruple  to  change'  this  to  the  sing. 
*  pastor,'  parsing  the  first  '  Do '  as  the  auxiliary  verb  to  the  second,  as  well  as  to 
'show,'  while  'Himself  remains  in  grammatical  agreement  with  what  has  pre- 
ceded. 

47-50.  pastors  .  .  .  Himself]  See  III,  ii,  181,  for  a  construction  the  reverse  of 
this:  a  plural  relative  and  a  singular  antecedent.  Abbott,  $415:  'Himself  .  .  . 
treads '  is  for  '  Whiles  you  tread.'  The  construction  is  changed  by  change  of 
thought. 

49.  puff'd  and  reckless]  Caldecott  :  Bloated  and  swollen,  the  effect  of  excess ; 
and  heedless  and  indifferent  to  consequences.  '  Ignavus,  inefficax,  recheiesse.' — 
Ortus   Vocab.  15 14. 

50    primrose]   See  Macb.  II,  iii,  17. 


act  i,  sc.  iii.]  HAMLET  65 

And  recks  not  his  own  rede. 

Lair.  O,  fear  me  not.  5  1 

I  stay  too  long ;  but  here  my  father  comes. 

Enter  POLONIUS. 

A  double  blessing  is  a  double  grace ; 
Occasion  smiles  upon  a  second  leave. 

(Pol.     Yet  here,  Laertes  !     Aboard,  aboard,  for  shame!  55 

The  wind  sits  in  the  shoulder  of  your  sail, 
And  you  are  stay'd  for.     There ;  my  blessing  with  thee ! 
And  these  few  precepts  in  thy  memory 

\Laying  his  hand  on  Laertes's  head. 
Look  thou  character.  \Give  thy  thoughts  no  tongue,  J 

51.  recks]  Pope,    reakes  QqFa,  Cald.  57.     stay'd]  Jlaid  Fu    flayed  Q2Q3 
reaks  FtF  F  ,  Rowe.     reck'st  Seymour.          Jlaied  Q4Q5- 

his]  thine  Seymour.  for.     There;]  Theob.  for,  there 
rede]   Sing.  ii.     reed  Qq,  Pope,         Qq.     for  there :  Ff.    for  there.  Rowe, 

Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Jen.  Coll.  ii.  reade         Pope. 

FfF2,  Cald.     read  F  F,  Rowe,  Johns.                       my. ..thee]  Separate  line  (reading 

Cap.    Steev.  Var.    Knt,  Coll.  i,  Dyce,         My. ..you),  Theob.  Johns. 

White,  Huds.  blessing]  blessings  Jen. 

52.  Scene  vi.   Pope+,Jen.  thee]  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Glo.  Dyce 
Enter   Polonius.]     Cap.  After         ii,  Huds.    you  Ff,  et  cet. 

reed  Qq.     After  not  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Laying...]    Theob.    Om.    QqFf 

53.  [Kneeling  to  Polonius.  Cap.  Cap.  Glo. +  . 
55.     Aboard,    aboard]     Get   aboard  59.     Look]    See    Ff,    Rowe+,   Cald 

Pope,  Han.  Knt,  Dyce,  White,  Sta.  Del.  Huds. 

51.  rede]  Collier  :  Cares  not  for  his  own  counsel  or  advice.  '  Read  '  was  used 
of  old  both  as  a  substantive  and  a  verb.  Clarendon  :  It  is  not  used  elsewhere  in 
Sh.     See  Chaucer,  Cant.  Tales,  1216:  '  Ther  was  noon  other  remedy  ne  reed.' 

51.  fear]  For  other  instances  of  its  use  as  'fear  for,'  see  III,  iv,  7;  IV,  v,  118; 
and  Schmidt,  Sh.  Lex.  Abbott,  $200:  So  also  the  preposition  is  omitted  aftei 
1  deprive,'  I,  iv,  73. 

52.  stay]  Moberly  :  Laertes  seems  to  think  that  Ophelia's  spirited  reply  ii 
giving  the  conversation  a  needless  and  inconvenient  turn  ;  for  that  for  sisters  to 
lecture  brothers  is  an  inversion  of  the  natural  order  of  things. 

53.  double]   Delius  :   Laertes  had  already  taken  leave  of  his  father. 
57.  There ;]   In  this  punctuation  all  succeeding  edd.  have  followed  Theobald, 

who  could  see  no  reference  which  '  there,'  as  punctuated  in  the  Ff,  could  have,  ex- 
cept it  be  to  the  'shoulder'  of  the  sail.  Corson  upholds  the  Ff: — 'there,'  certainly 
means  at  the  port,  where  the  ship  is  all  ready  to  sail,  and  the  attendants  are  waiting 
for  him.     See  the  83d  line. 

59.  Warburton  :  Sh.  had  a  mind  to  ornament  his  scenes  with  these  fine  lessons 
of  social  life ;  but  his  Polonius  was  too  weak  to  be  the  author  of  them,  though  he 
was  pedant  enough  to  have  met  with  them  in  his  reading,  and  fop  enough  to  get 
them  by  heart,  and  retail  them  for  his  own.     Capell  (i,  124)  :  'This  observation' 

of  Warburton's]  '  is  not  ill-grounded ;  for  the  moment  he's  at  the  end  of  his  lesion, 
6*  E 


66  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

Not  any  unproportion'd  thought  his  act.  60 

Be  thou  familiar,  but  by  no  means  vulgar. 
The  friends  thou  hast,  and  their  adoption  tried, 

62.      The\   Thofe  Qq,  Jen.  Glo.  +  .  tion  Ktly  conj. 

adoption]  a  doption  Q2Q3-     adap-  62.     tried~\  tride  FXF2.     tr'Sd  F  F 

we  are  regal'd  with  a  style  very  different,  and  flowers  of  speech  is  his  way.'  Cal- 
DECOTT:  These  golden  precepts  very  ill  accord  with  the  character  and  intellect 
imputed  to  Polonius  in  the  rest  of  the  play,  where  he  appears  to  be  what  Hamlet 
calls  hirn,  a  'tedious  old  fool,'  a  '  wretched  rash  fool,'  'a  foolish  prating  knave.' 
Knight  adds  :  '  It  is  remarkable  that  in  Qx  the  "  precepts  "  are  printed  with  inverted 
commas,  as  if  they  were  taken  from  some  known  source;  or,  at  any  rate,  as  if 
Polonius  had  delivered  them  by  an  effort  of  memory  alone.'  Dyce  [Remarks,  &c.  p. 
207) :  Not  at  all  'remarkable.'  In  the  Qq  (except  QJ,  a  speech  of  the  Queen,  IV, 
v,  17-20,  is  '  printed  with  inverted  commas.'  [See  textual  notes  on  lines  36,  38,  39, 
of  this  scene.  Ed.]  In  various  other  early  plays  the  Gnomic  portions  are  so  dis- 
tinguished [Dyce  here  cites  many  examples  from  early  poetry  of  thus  marking 
maxims ;  he  might  have  descended  to  much  later  times.  Warburton,  in  his  edition 
of  Sh.,  uniformly  keeps  the  custom.  Ed.].  Hunter  (ii,  219) :  Polonius  is  the  dull, 
prosing  politician  of  the  time.  There  is  probably  much  personal  satire  in  the  cha- 
racter. It  was  the  practice  of  those  politicians  to  deliver  maxims  to  their  children, 
to  be  their  guide  in  life.  Thus  Lord  Burghley  left  ten  admirable  precepts  of  worldly 
prudence  to  his  son  Robert,  afterwards  Earl  of  Salisbury,  which  may  be  read  in  the 
Desiderata  Ctiriosa;  and  in  The  Harleian  Miscellany 'is  a  letter  from  Sir  Henry  Sydney 
to  Philip  his  son,  containing  divers  lessons  of  prudence  delivered  in  a  didactic  form. 
That  there  was  some  individual  nobleman  more  particularly  pointed  at  in  the  cha- 
racter of  Polonius  I  can  entertain  no  doubt,  nor  that  some  attentive  observer  of  the 
men  of  those  times  will  one  day  trace  the  Poet  home.  Could  it  be  the  Lord  Cham- 
berlain ?  Prynne  alludes  to  the  practice  of  bringing  living  noblemen  upon  the  stage, 
and  names  particularly  the  Lord  Admiral,  the  Lord  Treasurer,  and  Count  Gondomer. 
as  persons  with  whom  the  stage  had  made  free.  Rushton  [Shakespeare' 's  Euphuism, 
[).  46) :  The  advice  of  Euphues  to  Philautus  is  probably  the  origin  of  these  few 
precepts  of  Polonius.  For  line  59,  see  Euphues  : — '  Be  not  lavish  of  thy  tongue.' 
Lines  64,  65,  thus  Euphues  : — '  Eveiy  one  that  shaketh  thee  by  the  hand,  is  not 
joined  to  thee  in  heart.'  Lines  66,  67,  Euphues  : — '  Be  not  quarrellous  for  every 
light  occasion :  they  never  fight  without  provoking,  and  once  provoked  they  never 
cease.'  Line  68,  Euphues  :  '  It  shall  be  there  better  to  hear  what  they  say,  than  to 
speak  what  thou  thinkest.'     [See  also  II,  ii,  86;  and  French,  in  Appendix,  p.  239.] 

59.  character]  Clarendon  :  Used  with  the  accent  either  on  the  first  or  second 
syllable.  As  a  substantive,  with  the  latter  accent,  it  is  found  in  Rich.  Ill :  III,  i, 
81 ;  as  a  verb,  in  Two  Gent.  II,  vii,  4.  [R.  of  L.  807.]  Caldecott :  The  verb  has 
the  accent  on  the  first  syllable  in  Son.  122,  2. 

60.  unproportioned]  Clarendon  :  Unsuitable,  not  in  harmony  with  the  occasion. 

61.  vulgar]  Clarendon:  Common.  See  Twelfth  N.  Ill,  i,  135,  where  '  vulgar 
proof '  =  common  experience  ;  as  '  vulgar  tongue  '  =  common  language. 

62.  The]   Corson:  The  use  of  'them  '  in  next  verse  makes  'The'  preferable  10 
Those,'  which  serves  to  strengthen  the  pleonasm. 

62.  hast]    Seymour  (ii,  153):  'Hast'  is  not  hades,  but  the  aux;l;ary  verb, — 


act  i,  SC.  ui.]  HAMLET  57 

Grapple  them  to  thy  soul  with  hoops  of  steel, 

But  do  not  dull  thy  palm  with  entertainment 

Of  each  new-hatch'd,  unfledged  comrade.     Beware  65 

Of  entrance  to  a  quarrel  ;  but,  being  in, 

Bear't,  that  th'  opposed  may  beware  of  thee. 

Give  every  man  thine  oar,  but  few  thy  voice; 

Take  each  man's  censure,  but  reserve  thy  judgement. 

Costly  thy  habit  as  thy  purse  can  buy,  70 

But  not  express'd  in  fancy ;  rich,  not  gaudy ; 

63.     them  to]  them  vnto  Qq,  El.   unto  65.     comrade]  courage  Qq. 

Seymour.  67.     Bear't]  Bear  it  Steev.Var.  Cald. 

hoops']  hooks  Tope  +  ,  Cap.  Stecv.  opposed]    oppofer    Q.Q-,    Johns. 

Var.  Sing.  Jen.  Mai.  Steev. 

65.     new-hatcJCd]  Tope,    new  hatcht  68.     thine  ear]  thy  eare  Qq,  Glo.  +  , 

Qq.     unhatcJi't  Ff,  Rowe.  Mob. 

the  friends  whom,  and  the  adoption  of  them,  thou  hast  tried  and  proved.  Claren- 
don gives  the  simplest  explanation  :  '  and  whose  adoption  thou  hast  tried ;'  but 
Delius  explains  '  and  their  adoption  tried '  as  a  participial  parenthesis  :  when  thou 
hast  put  their  adoption  to  the  test.  Tschischwitz  also  (followed  by  Moberly)  pro- 
nounces this  clause  a  participle,  or  nominative,  absolute,  and  cites  Malzner,  iii,  85. 

63.  hoops]  Malone:  'Grapple'  strongly  supports  Pope's  reading,  hooks.  See 
Minsheu  :  '  To  hook  or  grapple,  viz.  to  grapple  and  to  board  a  ship.'  It  may  be  also 
observed,  that  hooks  are  sometimes  made  of  steel,  but  'hoops'  never.  Steevens  : 
We  have,  however,  a  '  hoop  of  gold '  in  2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iv,  43.  Pye  [Comments,  &c 
p.  311) :  I  believe  hoops  are  at  least  as  often  made  of  steel  as  hearts  are,  or  as  fore- 
heads are  of  brass.  Singer  :  '  Hoops '  is  an  evident  misprint  for  hooks.  Grappling- 
hooks  is  a  familiar  term,  but  who  ever  heard  of  grappling  with  '  hoops '  of  steel  ? 
White:  It  is  far  from  improbable  that  'hooks'  is  right.  Clarendon:  Pope's 
reading  makes  the  figure  suggested  by  '  grapple '  the  very  reverse  of  what  Sh.  in- 
tended; grappling  with  hooks  is  the  act  of  an  enemy  and  not  of  a  friend. 

64.  dull]  Johnson  :  Do  not  make  thy  palm  callous  by  shaking  every  man  by  the 
hand.  Caldecott  :  Compare  Tro.  &°  Cres.  II,  iii,  201,  '  stale  his  palm.'  Walker 
(i,  306)  :  Dulls  occurs  thirteen  lines  below;  may  not  Sh.  have  written  stale ?  Clar- 
endon :  Compare  Cym.  I,  vi,  106:  'hands  Made  hard  with  hourly  falsehood.' 
[Compare  also  Ham.  V,  i,  67.] 

65.  comrade]  Badham  [Cam.  Essays,  1856,  p.  282)  :  This  is  the  trashy  correc- 
tion made  by  later  Qq  \_sic]  for  the  original  reading,  courage.  Perhaps  Shakespeare's 
word  was  court-ape.  Clarendon  :  The  accent  is  on  the  last  syllable,  as  in  1  Hen. 
IV:  IV,  i,  96.  In  Lear,  II,  iv,  213,  it  is  on  the  first.  [See  Ingleby,  note  on  line 
74.  Ed.] 

69.  censure]   Steevens:  Opinion.     See  I,  iv,  35 ;  III,  ii,  25. 

70.  costly]  Tschischwitz  :  The  construction  is :  Costly  thy  habit  buy,  as  thy 
puise  can.     Abbott,  \  276:    The  first  as  is  sometimes  omitted.     See  II,  ii,  201 

•  old  as  I  am.' 

71  fancy]  Moberly  :  Not  marked  or  singular  in  device,  but  with  a  quiet  cosui. 
Bess,  suggestive  of  habitual  self-respect. 


68 


HAMLE7 


[act  i,  sc.  iil 


For  the  apparel  oft  proclaims  the  man ; 

And  they  in  France  of  the  best  rank  and  station 

Are  most  select  and  generous,  chief  in  that. 


72 


74.  Are...lhaf\  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen. 
Rann,  Steev.'93,  Var.'o3,  Var.'i3,  Cald. 
Sing,  i,  Harness,  Campbell,  Hazlitt,  De- 
lius,  Clarke,  Chambers,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 
Or  of  a  moflfelecl  and  generous,  chief e  in 
that  Q2Q,.  Ar  of  a  mojl  Jelecl  and  gen- 
erous, cheefe  in  that  Q  .  Are  of  a  mojl 
Jelecl  and  generous,  chiefe  in  that  Q  . 
Are  of  a  mojl  Jelecl  and  generous  cheff 
in  that  Ff,  and  (reading  chief)  Knt, 
Corn.  Verp.  Coll.  i,  Glo.  + ,  Mob.  Are 
most  select,  and  generous,  chief  in  that 
Steev.'73.    Are  most  select,  and  generous 


chief,  in  that  Steev.  '78,  '85.  Are  of 
a  most  select  and  generous  chief,  in  thai 
Mal.Var.  Are  most  select,  and  generous 
chief  in  that  First  Am.  Ed.  '96.  Are 
most  select  and  generous  chief  in  that 
Dyce  i,  Hal.  Are  of  a  most  select  and 
generotis  choice  in  that  Coll. (MS),  Coll. 
ii,  El.  Ktly.  Are  most  select  and  gen- 
erous;  chief  in  that  Sing,  ii,  Chas.  Kem- 
ble.  Are  most  select  and  generous  in 
that  White.  Are  of  a  most  select  and 
generous  sheaf  in  that  Sta. 


74.  Are. ..that]  Steevens  :  '  Chief  may  be  used  adverbially,  a  practice  common 
in  Sh. :  '  chiefly  generous.'  I  would  more  willingly  read,  \  Select  and  generous,  are 
most  choice  in  that.'  Ritson  {Remarks,  &.c.  p.  193):  The  nobility  of  France  are 
select  and  generous  above  all  other  nations,  and  chiefly  in  the  point  of  apparel ;  the 
richness  and  elegance  of  their  dress.  Malone:  May  we  suppose  that  'chief  of 
the  Ff  is  a  word  borrowed  from  heraldry  ?  They  in  France  approve  themselves  to 
be  of  a  most  select  and  generous  escutcheon  by  their  dress.  Chef,  in  heraldry,  is  the 
upper  third  part  of  the  shield.  See  Minsheu.  This  is  very  harsh ;  yet  I  hardlv 
think  that  the  words  'of  a'  could  have  been  introduced  without  some  authority 
from  the  MS.  '  Generous  '  =generosus.  *  Chief,'  however,  may  have  been  used  as  a 
substantive,  for  note  or  estimation.  Knight  :  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  go  to  her- 
aldry for  an  explanation  of  the  word  :  we  have  it  in  composition,  as  in  mischief  and 
the  now  obsolete  bonchief.  '  Chief,'  literally  the  head,  here  signifies  eminence,  supe- 
riority. Those  of  the  best  rank  and  station  are  of  a  most  select  and  generous 
superiority  in  the  indication  of  their  dignity  by  their  apparel.  Collier  (ed.  1) : 
The  meaning  perhaps  is :  '  Are  of  a  most  select  and  generous  rank  and  station, 
chiefly  in  that.'  Dyce,  in  his  Remarks,  &c.  p.  206,  while  approving  of  Collier's 
rendering  of  '  chief  in  that'  ('  the  words  can  be  used  here  in  no  other  sense  '  than 
chiefly  in  that),  objects  to  the  violent  ellipsis  which  is  implied  by  inserting  'rank 
and  station  '  after  •  select  and  generous,'  and  adds :  '  During  the  many  hours  which 
I  have  spent  (perhaps  wasted)  in  collating  early  dramas,  I  have  known  four  or  five 
editions  of  a  play,  though  differing  from  each  other  materially  elsewhere,  yet  coin- 
cide in  some  one  most  erroneous  reading  (which  was  corrected  by  a  fortunately 
extant  MS) :  the  text  of  that  particular  place  having  been  once  vitiated,  the  corrup- 
tion had  been  retained  in  all  the  subsequent  impressions.  Such  is  evidently  the 
case  here  (where  there  is  unluckily  no  MS  Hamlet  to  refer  to)  ;  and  the  probability 
seems  to  be,  that  the  strangely  impertinent  words,  "  of  a,"  found  their  way  into  the 
line,  while  the  eye  of  the  transcriber  or  compositor,  glancing  away  from  it  for  a 
moment,  was  arrested  by  "  of  the  "  immediately  above.'  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  «  Choice' 
was  formerly  not  unfrequently  spelt  choise,  and  the  longy  led  to  the  misprinting  of 
choice,'  first,  chiefe,  and  afterwards  cheff.  The  (MS)  substitutes  '  choice,'  and  the 
whole  difficulty  is  removed,  for  Polonius  says  that  the  French  are  *  of  a  most  select 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  HAMLET  69 

Neither  a  borrower  nor  a  lender  be  ;  75 

For  loan  oft  loses  both  itself  and  friend, 

75.  lender  be~\  lender  boy  Qq.  Qq.     love  Q'76. 

76.  loan]  Loane  F_.     lone  Ff.     /0/<<?  76.     /^5^]   /00/«  Qq. 

ind  generous  choice'  in  all  matters  relating  to  dress.  White  [see  this  line  and  the 
next  above  it  in  Q,,  Appendix,  p.  47.  Ed.]  :  Here  [in  QJ  I  believe  that  we  have  not 
only  the  obvious  misprint  of  '  gencrall '  for  '  generous,'  and  the  interpolation  of  '  of 
a,'  which  all  editors  have  supposed,  but  the  accidental  repetition  in  the  second  line 
of  '  chief  in  the  first, — a  kind  of  misprint  which  often  occurs  in  the  old  texts  of 
these  plays.  The  two  errors  last  named  were  perpetuated  (as  errors  sometimes  unac- 
countably are),  although  '  chief  in  the  first  line  was  changed  to  '  best.'  This  reading 
of  White's  the  Cambridge  Editors  {Preface,  viii)  approve  of  as  'probably'  what 
Sh.  had  *  originally  written ;'  the  corruption  in  Qx  and  Qa  which,  they  say,  is  clearly 
due  to  an  error  in  the  transcript  from  which  both  were  copied,  may  have  arisen 
from  Shakespeare's  having  « given  between  the  lines,  or  in  the  margin,  "  of," 
"chief,"  meaning  these  as  alternative  readings  for  "in"  and  "best"  in  line  73. 
The  transcriber  by  mistake  inserted  them  in  line  74.'  Staunton  :  The  slight 
change  of  sheaf  for  *  chiefe '  or  '  cheff,'  a  change  for  which  we  alone  are  answer- 
able, seems  to  impart  a  better  and  more  poetic  meaning  to  the  passage  than  any  vari- 
ation yet  suggested;  and  it  is  supported,  if  not  established,  by  the  following  extracts 

from  Ben  Jonson  :  ' Ay,  and  with  assurance,  That  it  is  found  in  noblemen  and 

gentlemen  Of  the  best  sheaf? — The  Magnetic  Lady,  III,  iv.  '  I  am  so  haunted  at 
the  ^ourt  and  at  my  lodging  with  your  refined  choice  spirits,  that  it  makes  me  clean 
of  another  garb,  another  sheaf? — Every  Man  Out  of  His  Humour,  II,  i.  INGLEBY 
[N.  <5j°  Qu.  13  Sept.  1856)  strongly  upholds  Staunton's  sheaf  in  the  sense  of  a 
clique,  class,  or  set  in  fashionable  society.  ■  And  for  this  meaning  we  must  have  re- 
course to  Euphuism.  If  sheaf  be  Shakespeare's  word,  it  is  not  the  only  instance  of 
Euphuism  in  Polonius's  speech.  In  line  65,  courage  of  the  Qq  is  Euphuistic  for  a 
gallant.  It  is  so  used  by  Scott  in  7he  Monastery,  and  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  that 
prince  of  Euphuists,  Sir  Piercie  Shafton.  Archers  spoke  of  "  arrows  of  the  first 
sheaf,"  and  the  Euphuists  appropriated  the  metaphor,  and  called  their  friends  "  gen- 
tlemen of  the  first  sheaf."  Every  archer  of  this  day  has  his  best  set  (a  set  =12 
arrows);  and  every  archer  of  Shakespeare's  day  had  his  first  sheaf  (a.  sheaf  =24 
arrows).  Thus  :  "  In  my  time,  it  was  the  usual  practice  for  soldiers  to  choose  their 
first  sheaf  of  arrows,  and  cut  those  shorter  which  they  found  too  long,"  &c. — Dis- 
cotirse  on  Weapons?  Ingleby  then  cites  the  passages  from  Ben  Jonson  afterwards 
cited  by  Staunton,  and  concludes  his  note  with  the  expression  of  his  belief  that  the 
metaphor  in  the  present  case,  as  well  as  in  Every  Man  Out  of  His  Humour,  was 
taken,  not  wholly  from  archery,  but  from  husbandry.  H.  C.  K.  [N.  6°  Qu.  II  Oct. 
1856)  upholds  the  Ff,  and  explains  cheff  as  a  measure  by  which,  according  to  Skin- 
ner, cloth  and  fine  linen  were  sold.  TSCHISCHWITZ  thinks  that  the  uniformity  of  the 
QqFf  in  the  reading  '  of  a'  is  an  insuperable  objection  to  any  change  or  omission 
in  that  direction.  The  only  suspicious  words  in  the  line  are  '  in  that '  at  the  end  of 
it,  because,  as  he  says,  we  should  rather  expect  them  to  be  written  '  therein.'  '  In 
that '  he  believes  to  be  the  beginning  of  another  line,  of  which  the  conclusion  is 
lost,  but  which  expressed  in  substance  •  In  that  they  clothe  themselves  simply.' 
Accordingly,  in  his  text  the  line  is :  In  that  their  show  denies  extravagance.     Mo- 


70  HAMLET  [act  i,  SC.  iii.  W 

And  borrowing  dulls  the  edge  of  husbandry.  JJ 

This  above  all :  to  thine  own  self  be  true, 

And  it  must  follow,  as  the  night  the  day, 

Thou  canst  not  then  be  false  to  any  man.  80 

Farewell ;  my  blessing  season  this  in  thee  ! 

Laer.     Most  humbly  do  I  take  my  leave,  my  lord. 

Pol.     The  time  invites  you  ;  go,  your  servants  tend. 

Laer.     Farewell,  Ophelia,  and  remember  well 
What  I  have  said  to  you. 

Oph.  Tis  in  my  memory  lock'd,  85 

And  you  yourself  shall  keep  the  key  of  it. 

Laer.     Farewell.  [Exit. 

Pol.     What  is't,  Ophelia,  he  hath  said  to  you  ? 

Oph.     So  please  you,  something  touching  the  Lord  Hamlet. 

77.     And]   A  F2F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope.  85.  to  you]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

dulls  the  edge]  dulleth  edge  Q2Q_.  in]  Om.  F  . 

dulleth  the  edge  Q4QS<  87.  [Exit.]     Exit    Laertes.     QqFf. 

79.     the  day]  to  day  Q'76.  (Laer.  Ff.) 

82.     do  I]  I  do  Q'76.  88.  hath]   Om.  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 

8"$.     invites']      inuefls     Qq,     Theob.  Han. 

Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  El.  Tsch.  89.  Lord]  L.  FXF2F3. 


berly  follows  Malone  in  interpreting  '  chief  as  the  upper  part  of  an  heraldic  shield. 
Keighti.ey  :  A  word  even  more  appropriate  than  Steevens's  '  choice '  would  have 
been  taste.     J.  Beale  (JV.  <5r»  Qu.  4  Sept.  1875)  suggested  chiefs. 

77.  husbandry]   Malone:  Thrift,  economical  prudence.     [See  Macb.  II,  i,  4.] 

79.  night]  Warburton,  on  the  ground  that  the  image  presented  in  this  simile 
should  be  one  of  cause  and  effect,  substituted  light  for  •  night.'  It  is  needless  to  add 
r\at  his  reasoning  has  convinced  no  one  up  to  this  present.  Ed. 

81.  season]  Johnson:  It  is  more  than  infuse,  as  Warburton  interprets  it;  it  is 
>o  to  infix  it  that  it  may  never  wear  out.  Cai.DECOTT  :  Give  a  relish  to,  quicken,  it ; 
or  it  may  be,  keep  it  alive  in  your  memory ;  as  things  preserved,  and  by  spicery  kept 

from  a  state  of  dissolution,  are  said  to  be  seasoned.     SlNGER  :  '  To  season to 

temper  wiselie,  to  make  more  pleasant  and  acceptable. — Baret,  Alvearie.  Elze  :  It 
means  rather  to  ripen.  Moberly  :  Make  these  thoughts  familiar  to  you.  Hudson  : 
Used,  apparently,  in  the  sense  of  ingrain ;  the  idea  being  that  of  so  steeping  the 
counsel  into  his  mind  that  it  will  not  fade  out. 

83.  invites]  Theobald  preferred  invests,  supposing  the  term  was  military,  and 
that  it  meant  'besieges,  presses  upon  you  on  every  side.' 

83.  tend]  Johnson  :  Your  servants  are  waiting  for  you. 

86.  key]  Caldecott  :  Thence  it  shall  not  be  dismissed  till  vou  think  it  needless 
to  retain  it. 

89.  So]  In  conditional  sentences,  according  to  Matzner,  iii,  458,  so  is  used 
instead  of  if  chiefly  where  the  condition  is  of  a  restrictive  nature,  and  expresses  a 
reservation,  like  (but  not  always)  the  Lat.  modo,  dum,  dummodo. 

89    *.he]  For  unemphaHc  monosyllables  in   emphatic  places  and  accented,  see 


ACT  i.  sc.  iii.l  HAM  LET  71 

Pol.    Marnr,  well  bethought;  90 

Tis  told  me,  he  hath  very  oft  of  late 

Given  private  time  to  you,  and  you  yourself 

Have  of  your  audience  been  most  free  and  bounteous; 

If  it  be  so — as  so  'tis  put  on  me, 

And  that  in  way  of  caution — I  must  tell  you,  95 

You  do  not  understand  yourself  so  clearly 

As  it  behoves  my  daughter  and  your  honour. 

What  is  between  you  ?  give  me  up  the  truth. 

Oph.     He  hath,  my  lord,  of  late  made  many  tenders 
Of  his  affection  to  me.  100 

Pol.     Affection  !  pooh  !  you  speak  like  a  green  girl, 
Unsifted  in  such  perilous  circumstance. 
Do  you  believe  his  tenders,  as  you  call  them  ? 

Oph.     I  do  not  know,  my  lord,  what  I  should  think. 

Pol.     Marry,  I'll  teach  you  ;  think  yourself  a  baby,  105 

That  you  have  ta'en  these  tenders  for  true  pay, 
Which  are  not  sterling.     Tender  yourself  more  dearly  ; 

94.  'tis]  it  is  F  ,  Rowe.     it  is,  F4.  Ff.    puh  !  Rowe  +  . 

gS.  you  ?  give. ...truth.]    Q'76.    you  102.    Unsifted']  Ungifted  Rochester. 

giue... truth,  QsQr    you giue... truth.  Q4  105.   Tit]    lie   FXF2.     f'/eFV.     1 

Q.    you,  giue. ..truth?  Ff,  Rowe.  ivill  Qq,  Cap. 

101,     103.    Affection — tenders]    Ital.  106.  these]  his  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt. 

by  Sta.  107.  sterling] JlarlingY 'J? '9¥  .    start- 


101.  pooh/]    Coll.     puh,  Qq.     puh.         lingY, 


Abbott,  g  457,  where  it  is  said  that  the  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  capable  of 
more  emphasis  than  with  us. 

92.  private]  Caldecott  :  Spent  his  time  in  private  visits  to  you.  Delius  :  The 
time  which  he  had  at  his  own  disposal. 

94.  put]  Caldecott  :  Suggested  to,  impressed  on.  Clarendon  :  See  Twelfth 
N.  V,  i,  70;  Macb.  IV,  iii,  239;  Meas.for  Meas.  IV,  ii,  120.     [Ham.  V,  ii,  370.] 

101.  green]  Nares:  Inexperienced,  unskilful,  still  found  in  green-horn,  thus 
also  '  greenly,'  in  IV,  v,  79. 

102.  unsifted]   Warburton  :  Untried,  untempted. 
102.  circumstance]  Delius  :  A  collective  noun. 

106.  tenders]  Moberly:  In  the  Dutch  war  of  1674,  Pepys  tells  us  that  many 
English  seamen  fought  on  the  enemy's  side,  and  were  heard  during  an  action  to  cry, 
'  Dollars  now ;  no  tickets,'  the  latter  being  the  only  pay  they  had  received  in  then 
own  service.  This  seems  to  explain  the  opposition  intended  here  between  'tenders ' 
and  •  true  pay.' 

107.  tender  yourself]  Malone:  Regard  with  affection.  Caldecott:  This 
was  anciently  used  as  much  in  the  sense  of  regard  or  respect,  as  it  was  in  that  of 
offer.  *  And  because  eche  lit?  thing  tendreth  his  like.' — Preface  to  Drant's  Horace, 
1566. 


72  HAMLET  |act  i,  sc.  iii, 

Or — not  to  crack  the  wind  of  the  poor  phrase, 
Running  it  thus — you'll  tender  me  a  fool. 

OpJi.     My  lord,  he  hath  importuned  me  with  love  1 10 

In  honourable  fashion. 

Pol.     Ay, fashion  you  may  call  it;  go  to,  go  to. 

Op/i.     And  hath  given  countenance  to  his  speech,  my  lord, 
With  almost  all  the  holy  vows  of  heaven. 

Pol.     Ay,  springes  to  catch  woodcocks.     I  do  know,  115 

When  the  blood  burns,  how  prodigal  the  soul 

108,   109.    not... thus]    In  parenthesis  109.  tender]  render  F. 

Q3Q3,  Theob.  1 12.  call it]    calVt  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii. 

108.  not... phrase]    In  parenthesis  Q  Huds. 

Qs,  Pope.  113.  to  his]  to  it  in  his  Coll.  (MS). 

109.  Running]  Coll.  conj.  Wrong  113,  114.  my  lord. ..heaven]  Rowe. 
Qq.    Roaming  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  El.         One  line,  QqFf. 

Wronging  Pope,  Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  114.  almost... holy]    all  the    Ff,  Knt, 

Coll.  i,  Sing.      Wringing  Warb.  Theob.  Sing,     almost  all  the  Rowe. 

Han.  Cap.  115.  springes]  fprings  Q2Q3Q4F3FV 

you'll]  youle  Q4Q5-  116.  prodigal]  prodigally  Q'76. 

109.  Running]  This  emendation,  which  is  Collier's  conj.,  afterwards  corrob- 
orated by  his  (MS),  Dyce  said  he  had  long  been  convinced  of.  White  calls  it 
'almost  obvious,'  and  Clarendon  adopts  it  as  more  in  accordance  with  the  figure 
in  the  preceding  line.  Pope's  emendation  Johnson  supported,  believing  that  wrong- 
ing had  reference  not  to  the  phrase,  but  to  Ophelia,  the  •  it '  being  the  redundant  '  it ' 
common  enough  in  poetry,  as  in  Pope's,  '  To  sinner  it  or  saint  it.'  Theobald  (Sh. 
Rest.  p.  25)  conjectured  ranging,  i.  e.  you,  behaving  yourself  with  so  much  careless- 
ness and  liberty,  wvl1  bring  me  into  contempt,  &c.  Heath  referred  wronging  to  the 
'  poor  phrase,'  for  •  whoever  cracks  the  wind  of  anything  may  surely  be  said  with 
propriety  to  wr^np  ir  abuse  it.'  Warburton  preferred  wringing,  i.  e.  not  farthei 
to  crack  the  vind  of  the  phrase  by  twisting  or  contorting  it.  Caldecott  para- 
phrases the  h  f  by :  •  ranging  so  far,  becoming  so  wildly  excursive,  and  running  into 
so  many  senses  of  the  word  tender.'  Badham  (Cam.  Essays,  1856,  p.  283)  :  Per- 
haps some  readers  will  think  with  me  that  wrong  is  a  corruption  of  worrying.  The 
same  description  of  persons  will  probably  read  in  line  118  •  extinct  in  birth '  instead 
of  '  extinct  in  both.'  Keightley  :  '  To  wrong  it  thus '  is  most  probably  correct. 
We.  might  read, — supposing  the  allusion  to  be  to  a  horse, —  To  run,  as  in,  You  run 
this  humour  out  of  breath,  Com.  of  Err.  I,  i.  Corson  :  The  Ff  are  probably  right; 
Polonius  has  reference  to  his  varying  application  of  the  word  '  tender.' 

115.  woodcocks]  Nares  :  Proverbial  for  a  simpleton;  probably  from  the  ease 
with  which  woodcocks  suffer  themselves  to  be  caught  in  springes  or  snares.  The 
phrase  here  means  '  arts  to  entrap  simplicity.'  Clarendon  :  Compare  Gosson, 
Apologie for  the  Schoole  of  Abuse,  p.  72  (ed.  Arber)  :  'When  Comedie  comes  vpon 
..he  Stage,  Cupide  sets  vpp  a  Springe  for  Woodcockes,  which  are  entangled  ere  thty 
descrie  the  line,  and  caught  before  they  mistruste  the  snare.'  Harting  (p.  229)  : 
The  woodcock  for  some  unaccountable  reason  was  supposed  to  have  no  brains,  and 
the  name  of  this  bird  became  a  synonym  for  a  fool. 

116.  prodigal]  For  instance;-,  of  the  free  use  of  adjectives  as  adverbs,  see  ABBOTr,  \  I. 


lOTl,8C.iiL]  HAMLET  73 

Lends  the  tongue  vows;  these  blazes,  daughter,  117 

Giving  more  light  than  heat,  extinct  in  both, 

Even  in  their  promise,  as  it  is  a-making, 

You  must  not  take  for  fire.     From  this  time  120 

117.   Lends']  Giues  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  119.  their]  the  Warb. 

blazes]  bavin    blazes    Nicholson  1 20.  lake]  take't  Q4Q-. 

(AI.&3  Qu.  19  Dec.  1868).  From  this   time]   For  this  time 

daughter]       oh     my    daughter  daughter  Ff,  Rowe. 
Pope  + .    gentle  daughter  Cap. 

117.  Malone  and  White  believe  that  some  epithet  to  'blazes'  has  been  omitted. 
Coleridge  (p.  153) :  A  spondee  has,  I  doubt  not,  dropped  out  of  the  text.  Either 
insert  Go  to  after  '  vows,'  or  read,  '  these  blazes,  daughter,  mark  you?  Sh.  never 
introduces  a  catalectic  line  without  intending  an  equivalent  to  the  foot  omitted  in 
the  pauses,  or  the  dwelling  emphasis,  or  the  diffused  retardation.  I  do  not,  however, 
deny  that  a  good  actor  might  by  employing  the  last-mentioned  means,  namely,  the 
retardation  or  solemn  knowing  drawl,  supply  the  missing  spondee  with  good  effect. 
But  I  do  not  believe  that  in  this  or  any  other  of  the  foregoing  speeches  of  Polonius, 
Sh.  meant  to  bring  out  the  senility  or  weakness  of  that  personage's  mind.  In  the 
great  ever-recurring  dangers  and  duties  of  life,  where  to  distinguish  the  fit  objects 
for  the  application  of  the  maxims  collected  by  the  experience  of  a  long  life  requires 
no  fineness  of  tact;  as  in  the  admonitions  to  his  son  and  daughter,  Pol.  is  uniformly 
made  respectable.  But  if  an  actor  were  even  capable  of  catching  these  shades  in 
the  character,  the  pit  and  the  gallery  would  be  malcontent  at  their  exhibition.  It  is 
to  Hamlet  that  Pol.  is,  and  is  meant  to  be,  contemptible,  because  in  inwardness  and 
uncontrollable  activity  of  movement,  Hamlet's  mind  is  the  logical  contrary  to  that 
of  Pol.,  and  besides  Ham.  dislikes  the  man  as  false  to  his  true  allegiance  in  the 
matter  of  the  succession  to  the  crown.  Walker  (  Vers.  p.  206)  gives  ten  or  twelve 
instances  from  Sh.  and  other  dramatists,  among  them  the  present  passage,  in  proof 
of  his  assertion  that  'daughter'  is  sometimes  a  trisyllable.  *  It  is  observable,'  he 
adds,  •  that  in  almost  all  these  instances  there  is  a  pause — in  at  least  half  of  them  a 
full  stop — after  daughter.  What  was  the  original  form  of  the  word?  Compare 
dvy&TTjp.  In  Chaucer,  as  far  as  I  am  acquainted  with  him,  it  is  uniformly  a  dissylla- 
ble.' In  a  foot-note  Lettsom  asks :  •  Quere,  when  did  the  guttural  become  mute  in 
this  word  ?  When  pronounced,  it  would  have  facilitated  a  trisyllabic  pronunciation.' 
Moberly  adopts  one  of  Coleridge's  suggestions,  and  thinks  that  the  strong  irony  on 
the  word  '  vows,'  which  is  spoken  with  a  laugh  of  contempt,  makes  it  occupy  the 
time  of  three  syllables. 

118.  both]   See  Badham  in  note  on  line  109 

119.  a-making]  White:  There  is  no  purer  or  more  logically  correct  English 
than  the  idiom  a-making,  a- doing,  a-building,  &c.  Ben  Jonson  says  in  his  Grammar, 
ii,  cap.  3  :  '  Before  the  participle  present  a  and  an  have  the  force  of  a  gerund, — 
"  There  is  some  great  tempest  a-brewing  against  us."  '  For  instances  of  the  prefix  a 
before  adjectives  and  participles  used  as  nouns,  see  Abbott,  \  24  (2) ;  also  I,  v,  19; 
Macb.  V,  v,  49. 

120.  Corson  upholds  the  Ff.  « It  may  be  that  "  For  this  "  =  For[th]  this,  the  th 
of  Forth  being  absorbed.  The  verse  of  the  Ff  scans  better  than  that  of  the  Qq ;  in 
the  latter  "  fire"  must  be  made  dissyllabic,  and  "  From  "  a  heavy  syllable.     It  will 

7 


74 


HAMLET 


[act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Be  somewhat  scanter  of  your  maiden  presence , 

Set  your  entreatments  at  a  higher  rate 

Than  a  command  to  parley.     For  Lord  Hamlet, 

Believe  so  much  in  him,  that  he  is  young, 

And  with  a  larger  tether  may  he  walk 

Than  may  be  given  you ;  in  few,  Ophelia, 

Do  not  believe  his  vows ;  for  they  are  brokers, 

Not  of  that  dye  which  their  investments  show, 

But  mere  implorators  of  unholy  suits, 

Breathing  like  sanctified  and  pious  bawds, 


121 


125 


130 


121.  somewhai~\  fomething  Qq,  Cap. 
Cam.  Cla. 

your]  thy  Johns. 
maiden  presence]    maiden-pres- 
ence Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 

122.  entreatments]   intreatments  Qq, 
Pope  +  ,  Jen.     intraitments  Warb. 

123.  parley]  parle  Qq. 

125.  tether]  tider  Q2Q3-     teder  Q4Q5- 
tedder  Q'76. 

may   he]    he    may    Theob.    ii, 


Warb.  Johns. 

128.  that  dye]  Q'76,  Han.  that  die 
Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Bos.  Cald. 
Coll.  Sing.  El.  Mob.  the  eye  Ff,  Rowe, 
Cald.  Knt.     that  eye  White. 

129.  mere]  Om.  Seymour. 
implorators]  imploratotors  Q2Q3« 

implorers  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

130.  bawds]  Theob.  Pope  ii,  Han. 
bonds  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope  i  +  ,  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  i,  Sta.  Ktly,  Mob. 


be  observed,  too,  that  this  speech  is  characterized  by  the  double  endings,  as  Bathurst 
styles  them,  and  the  Ff  verse  is  more  in  keeping  with  them.' 

122.  entreatments]  Johnson:  It  means  here  company,  conversation,  French 
entretien.  Clarke  :  The  entreaties  you  receive  for  granting  an  interview.  Clar- 
endon :  '  Parley '  in  the  next  line  seems  to  point  to  the  sense  of  preliminary  nego- 
tiations, and  so  solicitations. 

126.  in  few]  For  adjectives  used  as  nouns,  even  in  the  singular,  see  Abbott,  \  5. 
See  also  'the  general,'  II,  ii,  416. 

127.  brokers]  MALONE:  This  meant,  in  old  English,  a  bawd  or  a  procuress. 
[See  Cotgrave :  Maqtiignonner,  To  play  the  Broker,  also  to  play  the  bawd.  Ed.J 

128.  dye]  Caldecott,  Knight,  White,  Corson,  follow  the  Ff.  The  first  thus 
paraphrases  :  '  Of  the  cast,  or  character,  that  character  of  purity,  which  their  garb. 
or  assumed  expression  of  passion,  bespeaks.'  Knight  adduces,  Temp.  II,  i,  55, 
'  eye  of  green,'  to  show  that  an  eye  was  used  to  express  a  slight  tint.  Dyce  asks 
if  our  early  writers  ever  use  '  eye '  by  itself  to  denote  colour  ?  White  cites,  as  an 
instance  in  the  affirmative,  from  '  the  old  translations  of  the  Bible '  :  '  And  the  eye 
of  manna  was  as  the  eye  of  bdellium.' — Numbers  xi,  7 ;  later  translations  substitut- 
ing '  colour '  for  '  eye.'  Staunton  thinks  '  eye  '  may  possibly  be  right.  Moberly  : 
Not  of  the  real  stamp  which  their  vesture  seems  to  show. 

130.  bawds]  Theobald:  What  idea  can  we  form  of  a  'breathing  bond,'  or  of 
its  being  sanctified  ox  pious.  As  amorous  vows  have  just  been  called  '  brokers,'  and 
*  implorers  of  unholy  suits,'  the  plain  and  natural  sense  suggests  an  easy  emendation  : 
bawds.  And  this  correction  is  strengthened  by  the  concluding  phrase,  •  the  better 
to  beguile.'  Mason  (p.  376)  •  Pol.  has  called  Hamlet's  vows  '  brokers '  but  two 
ttnes  before,  a  word  synonymous  co  bawds,  and  the  very  title  that  Sh.  gives  to  Pan 


act  I,  sc.  iii.J  IfAMLET  75 

The  better  to  beguile.     This  is  for  all :  131 

I  would  not,  in  plain  terms,  from  this  time  forth, 
Have  you  so  slander  any  moment's  leisure, 

131.  beguile]  beguide  Q2Q3-  Q3Ff»  Rowe,  Coll.  i,  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Glo. 

133.  slander]  squander  Co\\.  ii  (MS).  +  ,  Ktly,  Mob.,    moments  QQ.    mo- 

moment's]    Pope,      moment   Q3         ments'  Coll.  ii  (MS). 

darus  ;  '  implorators  of  unholy  suits '  is  an  exact  description  of  a  bawd.  All  such 
of  them  as  are  crafty  in  their  trade  put  on  the  appearance  of  sanctity,  and  are  '  not 
of  that  dye  that  their  investments  shew.'  Collier's  (MS)  also  substitutes  'bawds.' 
Singer  pronounces  bonds  nonsense.  White  says  that  the  '  context  does  not  leave  a 
question  as  to  the  propriety  of  Theobald's  emendation, — "  bawds  "  having  probably 
been  spelled  bauds?  On  the  other  hand,  the  advocates  of  the  Ff  are  as  follows : 
Warburton,  after  sneering  at  Theobald,  paraphrases  :  Do  not  believe  Hamlet's 
amorous  vows  made  to  you  ;  which  pretend  religion  in  them  {the  better  to  beguile) 
like  those  sanctified  and  pious  vows  {or  bonds')  made  to  heaven.  Heath  pronounces 
the  sense  of  bonds  unexceptionable,  and  interprets  thus :  Vows,  uttered  in  the  sem- 
blance of  sanctified  and  pious  engagements,  such  as  have  marriage  for  their  object. 
Malone  follows  Heath,  and  affirms  that  by  bonds  were  meant  the  bonds  of  love. 
Seymour  (ii,  155):  '  His  vows  are  implorators  breathing  like  bonds  {i.e.  similar 
bonds,  or  sanctified  vows)  to  those  which  are  breathed  by  implorators  of  unholy  suits.' 
Caldecott  :  Like  the  protestations  of  solemn  contracts  entered  into  with  all  the 
formalities  and  ceremonies  of  religion.  [Dyce  (ed.  i)  pronounces  this  note  of  Cal- 
decott's  '  quite  as  silly  as  Malone's.']  Staunton  :  *  At  one  time  we  were  strenu- 
ously in  favour  of  Theobald's  alteration ;  we  are  now  persuaded  the  Ff  are  right.' 
Clarke  :  We  cannot  help  believing  bonds  to  be  right,  because  Sh.  uses  the  word 
elsewhere  to  signify  '  pledged  vows,'  '  plighted  assurances  of  faith  and  troth ;'  see 
Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  vi,  6;  Tro.  dr3  Cress.  V,  ii,  156.  Keightley  {Expositor,  p.  287)  : 
The  whole  passage  is  merely  a  poetic  periphrasis  of  seduction  under  promise  of 
marriage ;  and  had  the  word  been  Sounding,  not  •  Breathing,'  there  would  probably 
have  been  no  mistake.  Corson  :  Bonds  makes  good  sense.  The  general  term, 
bonds,  suggested,  no  doubt,  by  '  brokers,'  is  used  for  the  more  special  term,  '  vow?,.' 
'  Breathing  '  refers  back  to  '  they,'  standing  for  '  vows ;'  bonds,  involving  the  idea  of 
'vows,'  should  not  receive  the  stress,  in  reading,  which  should  be  given  to  'pious.' 
Moberly  :  Like  law  papers  headed  with  religious  formulae.  So  policies  of  insur- 
ance begin,  even  at  the  present  day,  with  the  words,  '  In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.' 
Shakespeare's  bankrupt  family  had  sad  experience  of  such  documents. 

133.  slander]  Johnson:  I  would  not  have  you  so  disgrace  your  most  idle 
moments,  &c.  Moberly  :  The  meaning  is,  '  Do  not  misuse  any  moment  of  leisure,' 
as,  conversely,  you  have  'misused our  sex,'  means  'you  have  slandered  it.' — As  You 
Like  it,  IV,  ii,  205. 

133.  moment's]   Dyce  {Remarks,  p.  209)  :  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  print 

1  moment's.'     Would  Shakespeare  have  employed  such  a  ridiculous  inversion  when 

leisure  moment'  suited  the  metre  as  well?     Abbott,  §§  22,  430,  however,  adopts 

moment-leisure,'  and  gives  it  as  one  of  many  instances  of  noun- compounds  where 

;he  first  noun  may  be  treated  as  a  genitive  used  adjectively.     See  II,  ii,  464;  III,  i, 

156.    Claben~»on:  In  the  reading  of  the  Ff.  'moment'  must  be  taken  as  an  adjec- 


7  6  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iv 

As  to  give  words  or  talk  with  the  Lord  Hamlet. 
Look  to't,  I  charge  you  ;  come  your  ways.  135 

OpJi.     I  shall  obey,  my  lord.  \Exeunt. 


Scene  IV.     The  platform. 

Enter  Hamlet,  Horatio,  and  MARCELLUS. 

Ham.     The  air  bites  shrewdly ;  it  is  very  cold. 

135.  come~\  and  so  come  Seymour,    so  The     platform.]    tjteev.       The 
how,  come  Coll.  ii  (MS).                                  Platform  before  the  Palace.  Rowe. 

ways']  wayes  Q2Q3Q4FX.     waies  and]  Om.  Ff. 

Q.     way  F2F3F4,  Rowe  + .  I.  shrewdly']  shroudly  Qq.    shrew 'dly 

135,136.  L00L. .shall]  One  line,  Cap.  F2F3F4. 

136.  Oph.  /...lord.]  Om.  Seymour.  it  is  very  cold.~\  is  it  very  cold?  F 
Scene  iv.]  Cap.  Om.  Ff.    Scene  hi.  F3,  Knt  i.     it  is  very  cold  ?  FF4> 

Rowe.     Scene  vii.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 


tive.     This  is  very  common  when  the  first  substantive  is  the  name  of  a  place,  as  in 
'  Lethe  wharf,'  I,  v,  33. 

135.  ways]  For  instances  of  the  genitive  of  nouns  used  adverbially,  see  Matzner, 
i,  389  (a). 

Scene  iv.]  Coleridge:  The  unimportant  conversation  with  which  this  scene 
opens  is  a  proof  of  Shakespeare's  minute  knowledge  of  human  nature.  It  is  a  well- 
established  fact,  that,  on  the  brink  of  any  serious  enterprise,  or  event  of  moment, 
men  almost  invariably  endeavor  to  elude  the  pressure  of  their  own  thoughts  by 
turning  aside  to  trivial  objects  and  familiar  circumstances ;  thus  the  dialogue  on  the 
platform  begins  with  remarks  on  the  coldness  of  the  air,  and  inquiries  obliquely 
connected,  indeed,  with  the  expected  hour  of  the  visitation,  but  thrown  out  in  a  seem- 
ing vacuity  of  topics,  as  to  the  striking  of  the  clock,  and  so  forth.  The  same  desire  to 
escape  from  the  impending  thought  is  carried  on  in  Hamlet's  account  of,  and  moral 
ising  on,  the  Danish  custom  of  wassailing;  he  runs  off  from  the  particular  to  the 
universal,  and  in  his  repugnance  to  personal  and  individual  concerns,  escapes,  as  it 
were,  from  himself  in  generalisations,  and  smothers  the  impatience  and  uneasy  feel- 
ings of  the  moment  in  abstract  reasoning.  Besides  this,  another  purpose  is  answered ; 
— for  by  thus  entangling  the  attention  of  the  audience  in  the  nice  distinctions  and 
parenthetical  sentences  of  this  speech  of  Hamlet's,  Sh.  takes  them  completely  by 
surprise  on  the  appearance  of  the  Ghost,  which  comes  upon  them  in  all  the  sudden- 
ness of  its  visionary  character.  Indeed,  no  modern  writer  would  have  dared,  like 
Sh.,to  have  preceded  this  last  visitation  by  two  distinct  appearances, — or  could  have 
contrived  that  the  third  should  rise  upon  the  former  two  in  impressiveness  and 
solemnity  of  interest.  But  in  addition  to  all  the  other  excellences  of  Hamlet's 
speech  concerning  the  wassail-music, — so  finely  revealing  the  predominant  idealism, 
the  ratiocinative  meditativeness  of  his  character, — it  has  the  advantage  of  giving 
nature  and  probability  to  the  impassioned  continuity  of  the  speech  instantly  directed 
r  the  Ghost.  The  momentum  had  been  given  to  his  mental  activity;  the  full  cur- 
rent of  the  thoughts  and  words  had  s;t  in,  and  the  very  forgetfulness,  in  the  fervor 


act  I,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  yj 

I  lor.     It  is  a  nipping  and  an  eager  air.  2 

Ham.     What  hour  now  ? 

Hor.  I  think  it  lacks  of  twelve. 

Mar.     No,  it  is  struck. 

Hor.     Indeed  ?      I  heard   it  not ;    it  then   draws   near  the 
season  5 

Wherein  the  spirit  held  his  wont  to  walk. 

\A  flourish  of  trumpets,  and  ordnance  shot  offy  within 

2.  a]  Om.  Qq.  Indeed  I Ff,  Jen.     /Q'76,  Rowe  +  . 

an]  Om.  F  F4«  5-  it   then]  then    it  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 

hour]  hower  Fx.  Dyce,  Glo.  Mob. 

4.  is]  hd's  FF.     has   Rowe  i.     has  6.  wont  to]  wonted  Heussi. 

not  Rowe  ii.  [A  flourish ]    Mai.  after  Cap. 

struck]   Jirooke    QqFxFa.     Jlrook  A  florish  of  trumpets  and  2.  peeces  goes 

F  ,  Cap.  of.  Qq  (off  Q4QS) Trumpets  and 

4-7.  No. ..lord?]   Three  lines  ending  Guns.  Q'76.     Om.  Ff.     Noise  of  war- 

not. ...spirit... lord ?  Ktly.  like  Musick  within.  Rowe+. 

5.  Indeed?   I]  Cap.     Indeed;  I  Qq. 

of  his  argumentation,  of  the  purpose  for  which  he  was  there,  aided  in  preventing 
the  appearance  from  benumbing  the  mind.  Consequently,  it  acted  as  a  new  impulse, 
— a  sudden  stroke  which  increased  the  velocity  of  the  body  already  in  motion, 
whilst  it  altered  the  direction.  The  co-presence  of  Hor.,  Mar.,  and  Ber.  is  most 
judiciously  contrived;  for  it  renders  the  courage  of  Ham.,  and  his  impetuous  elo- 
quence, perfectly  intelligible.  The  knowledge, — the  unthought-of  consciousness, — 
the  sensation, — of  human  auditors, — of  flesh  and  blood  sympathists, — acts  as  a  sup- 
port and  a  stimulation  a  tergo,  while  the  front  of  the  mind,  the  whole  consciousness 
of  the  speaker,  is  filled,  yea,  absorbed,  by  the  apparition.  Add,  too,  that  the  appari- 
tion itself  has  by  its  previous  appearances  been  brought  nearer  to  a  thing  of  this 
world.  This  accrescence  of  objectivity  in  a  Ghost,  that  yet  retains  all  its  ghostly 
attributes  and  fearful  subjectivity,  is  truly  wonderful. 

1.  it  is]  Dyce  [Remarks,  &c.  p.  209):  The  reading  of  Ft  would  greatly 
favour  the  opinion  of  those  critics  who  contend  that  the  madness  of  Ham.  was  real, 
not  assumed ;  no  man  in  his  sound  senses,  just  after  remarking  that  the  air  bites 
shrewdly,  would  inquire  if  it  were  very  cold.  White:  The  reading  of  the  Ft  is 
not  entirely  unworthy  of  consideration,  because  Shakespeare's  purpose  might  well 
have  been  to  suggest  that  state  of  the  atmosphere  between  midnight  and  sunrise 
when  the  air  bites  shrewdly,  although  it  is  not  very  cold.  Horatio's  reply  is  not 
that  it  is  cold,  but  that  the  air  has  this  quality.  However,  that  the  Qq  are  right  is 
shown  in  the  first  scene. 

2.  eager]  Wedgwood:  French,  aigre,  eager,  sharp,  biting;  Lat.,  acer,  sharp, 
severe,  vehement,  ardent. 

5.  Indeed. ..season]  Seymour  (ii,  156):  This  line  is  overloaded.  'I  heard  it 
not '  is  implied  in  '  indeed.'     Read  :  Indeed  ?  why  then  it  does  draw  near  the  hour  ! 

6.  wont]  Abbott,  \  5  :  This  is  a  corruption  from  woned,  from  the  verb  •  wonye, 
Early  English,  wunian,  Anglo-Saxon,  '  to  dwell.' 

6.  ordnance]   Collier  (ed.  2)  :  Perhaps  [in  explanation  of  the  Qq]  the  theatre 
had  only  two  pieces  belonging  to  it.     Ben  Jonson,  in  his  « Execration  against  Vulcan? 
7* 


73  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 

What  does  this  mean,  my  lord  ?  7 

Ham.     The  king  doth  wake  to-night  and  takes  his  rouse, 
Keeps  wassail,  and  the  swaggering  up-spring  reels ; 

7.  What. ..my  lord /]  Om.  in  Steev-         Huds. 

ens's  reprint  of  Q  .  9.  swaggering]  staggering  Ktly  conj. 

8.  wake~\  walke  Q.Q-'  tip-spring   reels']    vp-fpring   reeles 
rouse]  'rouse  Cap.                                       Qq.     vpfpring   reeles   FxFa.      upfpring 

9.  wassaif\  Dyce.  waff  ell  Qq.  waff  els  reels  FF,  Rovre.  upstart  reels  Pope, 
Ff,   Cald.   Knt.     wassel  Rowe+,  Cap.         Han. 

Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  White,  Ktly, 

speaking  of  the  burning  of  the  Globe  Theatre  in  1613,  tells  us  that  the  calamity  was 
caused  by  the  discharge  of  '  two  poor  chambers.' 

8.  wake]  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  To  hold  a  late  revel.  So,  in  poets  of  a  much  earlier  date, 
we  find  the  words  watch  and  watching  employed  as  equivalent  to  '  debauch  at  night.' 

8.  rouse]  Gifford  (  The  Duke  of  Milan. — Massinger,  vol.  i,  p.  237,  ed.  1805)  : 
A  '  rouse '  was  a  large  glass  ('  not  past  a  pint,'  as  Iago  says)  in  which  a  health  was 
given,  the  drinking  of  which  by  the  rest  of  the  company  formed  a  carouse.  Bar- 
naby  Rich  is  exceedingly  angry  with  the  inventor  of  the  custom,  which,  however, 
with  a  laudable  zeal  for  the  honour  of  his  country,  he  attributes  to  an  Englishman, 
who,  it  seems,  'had  his  brains  beat  out  with  a  pottlepot'  for  his  ingenuity.  There 
could  be  no  rouse  or  carouse  unless  the  glasses  were  emptied.  In  process  of  time 
both  these  words  were  used  in  a  laxer  sense.  They  are  used  in  their  primal  and 
appropriate  signification  in  '  I've  ta'en,  since  supper,  A  rouse  or  two  too  much,'  &c. — 
Knight  of  Malta.  This  proves  Johnson  and  Steevens  are  wrong  :  a  rouse  has  here 
a  fixed  and  determinate  sense.  As  we  should  now  say, '  a  bumper  or  two  too  much.' 
[See  I,  ii,  127.] 

9.  wassail]   Festivity,  a  drinking-bout.     See  Macb.  I,  vii,  64. 

9.  up-spring]  Four  explanations  have  been  proposed.  First :  Pope  (followed 
by  Hanmer)  referred  it  to  the  King,  and  changed  it  into  upstart ;  Johnson  re- 
tained '  up-spring,'  but  adopted  in  a  paraphrase  Pope's  emendation,  '  a  blustering 
upstart.'  Nares  adds  the  definition  :  '  one  insolent  from  sudden  elevation.'  Singer 
also  prefers  this  interpretation.  Second :  Steevens  started  the  correct  explanation 
when  he  showed  by  the  following  passage  from  Chapman's  Alphonsus,  that  the 
'  up-spring '  was  a  German  dance  :  '  We  Germans  have  no  changes  in  our  dances. 
An  Almain  and  an  upspring,  that  is  all.'  Elze  confirmed  it  when,  in  his  edition  of 
Chapman's  Alphonsus  [p.  144],  he  showed  that  this  '  up-spring '  was  '  the  "  Hiipfauf," 
the  last  and  consequently  the  wildest  dance  at  the  old  German  merry-makings.  See 
Ayrer's  Dramen,  ed.  by  Keller,  iv,  2840  and  2846:  "  Ey,  jtzt  geht  irst  der  hupfTauff 
an.  Ey,  Herr,  jtzt  kummt  erst  der  hupfTauff."  No  epithet  could  therefore  be  more 
appropriate  to  this  drunken  dance  than  Shakespeare's  "  swaggering."  I  need  hardly 
add  that  "up-spring"  is  an  almost  literal  translation  of  the  German  name.  Staun- 
ton, while  assuming  that  '  up-spring '  refers  to  a  dance,  understands  '  reels  '  as  a  plural 
noun,  qualified  by  '  up-spring.'  [I  have  always  supposed  it  to  be  a  verb,  in  the 
same  construction  as  '  keeps.'  Ed.]  Third  :  Steevens,  in  his  note  on  •  rouse,'  having 
quoted  from  Decker's  GuVs  Hornbook  :  *  Teach  me,  thou  soveraigne  skinker,  how 
to  take  the  German's  upsy  freeze,  the  Danish  rousa,'  &c,  Caldecott  inferred  that 
the  '  up-spring'  dance  might  be  like  the  '  upsy  freeze,'  both  connected  with  the  music 
ana  not  of  a  German  debauch.     Badh  \M  (Cambridge  Essays,  1856,  p.  283)  went 


4C1   i.  SC  W.]  HAMLET  79 

And  as  he  drains  his  draughts  of  Rhenish  down,  10 

The  kettle-drum  and  trumpet  thus  bray  out 
The  triumph  of  his  pledge. 

Hor.  Is  it  a  custom  ? 

Ham.     Ay,  marry,  is't ; 
But  to  my  mind,  though  I  am  native  here 
And  to  the  manner  born,  it  is  a  custom  1 5 

10.  drains']  (/reifies  FXF2.    tahesCY'jG.  Seymour. 

11.  bray  out]  proclaim  Q'76.  14.   But]  And  Ff,  Knt. 

12.  Is  it]  It  is  F2.  native]  a  native  Han.  ii. 

13.  is't:]   is't;  of  an  antique  date;  15.  born]  borne  Q<|FxF0. 

a  step  farther,  and  would  substitute  for  *  up-spring '  in  the  present  line,  upsy  freeze. 
1  Not  that  I  know,'  he  adds,  '  what  upsy  freeze  is,  or  whence  it  is  derived,'  but  frorr 
Steevens's  citation  '  it  is  evident  that  it  was  a  species  of  drinking.'  '  Up-spring,'  he 
says,  '  cannot  be  a  dance  (as  if  the  descendants  of  the  Berserker  would  interpolate 
their  serious  drinking  with  such  a  frivolous  thing  as  a  dance!),  nor  can  it  mean 
upstart — i.  e.  Hamlet's  uncle  (a  likely  epithet  to  be  uttered  before  two  persons,  and 
that  when  he  has  not  yet  seen  the  Ghost,  and  has  no  other  feeling  towards  his  uncle 
but  one  of  vague  aversion!).'  Fourth:  Keightley  {Expositor,  p.  288)  says  that 
it  is  •  used  collectively  for  the  risers  from  the  table,  a  mode  of  expression  not  yet 
obsolete.' 

11.  kettle-drum  J  Douce  (ii,  205)  :  Thus  Cleaveland  in  his  Fuscara,  or  the  Bee 
Errant :  '  Tuning  his  draughts  with  drowsie  hums  As  Danes  carowse  by  kettle- 
drums.' 

12.  triumph]  Caldecott:  This  may  be  the  victory  consequent  upon  the  accept- 
ance of  the  challenge  to  this  '  heavy-headed  revel,'  or  it  may  be  only  its  pageant  and 
scenic  display.     Delius  :  It  is  here  the  bitterest  irony. 

12.  custom]  Caldecott:  The  royal  custom  in  Denmark  near  the  date  ot  this 
play  may  be  seen  in  Howell's  Letters;  'The  King  [Christian  IV.,  who  reigned 
from  1588  to  1649]  feasted  my  Lord  once,  and  it  lasted  from  eleven  of  the  clock 
till  towards  evening;  during  which  time  the  King  began  thirty-five  healths.  .  .  . 
The  King  was  taken  away  at  last  in  his  chair.'  [Caldecott  cites  several  other 
authorities  to  the  same  effect.]  Hunter  (ii,  221)  :  The  English,  in  the  Tudor 
reigns,  appear  to  have  been  a  remarkably  sober  people,  and  the  introduction  of  the 
vice  of  drunkenness  is  attributed  by  contemporary  writers  to  the  connection  with  th> 
Netherlands. 

14,  15.  native  .  .  .  manner  born]  Rushton  (S/i.  Illust.  by  Old  Authors,  i,  47) : 
In  the  manumission  by  Henry  VIII  of  two  villeins  the  following  words  are  used: 
1  We  think  it  pious  and  meritorious  with  God  to  manumit  Henry  Knight,  a  taylor, 
and  John  Herle,  a  husbandman,  our  natives,  as  being  born  within  the  manor  of  Stoke 
Clymmysland.' — Barr.  Stats.  276.  Flamlet,  therefore,  may  speak  of  Denmark,  or 
Elsinore  as  the  manor,  himself  as  ?tativus,  to  the  manor  born,  and  the  '  heavy-headed 
revel '  as  a  custom  incident  to  the  manor.  l  Manor '  is  here  used,  probably,  in  a 
double  sense,  as  in  Love's  Lab.  I,  i,  208,  where  it  is  contrasted  with  manner.  It  is  of 
little  importance  whether  the  word  be  spelt  manner  or  manor,  the  mention  of  one 
would  suggesl  the  other,  which  is  idem  sonans,  but  different  in  meaning. 


80  HAMLET  [act  I,  sc.  iv 

More  honour'd  in  the  breach  than  the  observance.  16 

This  heavy-headed  revel  east  and  west 
Makes  us  traduced  and  tax'd  of  other  nations ; 
They  clepe  us  drunkards,  and  with  swinish  phrase 

17-36.    This... faulty   In  the  margin,  revell,  east  and  west ;    Makes  Pope  i. 

Pope    ('perhaps   as   being  thought  too  revell,  east  and  west,  Makes  Pope  ii  +  , 

verbose'),  Han.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

17-38.  This. ..scandal.']  Om.  Ff,Rowe,  revel  east  and  west,  Makes  Warb.    revel. 

Pope,  Han.  east  and  west  Makes  Coll.  El.  Sta.  White. 

17.  revel]  reueale  Q2Qy     reuelle  Q4.  18.  traduced]  tradujl  Q2Q3- 

reuell  Q  .  tax'd]  Pope,     taxed  Qq. 

17,  18.  revel  east  and  west  Makes]  Qq.  19.  clepe]  clip  Qq,  Pope  i. 

16.  Dyce  {Remarks,  p.  210)  :  I  once  heard  an  eminent  poet  maintain  that  this 
line,  though  it  has  passed  into  a  sort  of  proverbial  expression,  is  essentially  non- 
sense :  '  how.'  said  he,  '  can  a  custom  be  honoured  in  the  breach  /"  Compare  the 
following  line  of  a  play  attributed  to  Jonson,  Fletcher,  and  Middleton  :  '  He  keeps 
his  promise  best  that  breaks  with  hell.' — The  Widow,  III,  ii.  Mitford  {Gent. 
Maga.  Feb.  1845) :  The  meaning  is:  « It  is  a  custom  that  will  more  honour  those 
that  break  it  than  those  who  observe  it ;'  '  honoured '  is  put  for  honourable,  and 
transferred  to  the  subject.  Hunter  (ii,  221) :  We  may  regard  Sh.  as  again  making 
an  effort,  like  that  in  Oth.  II,  iii,  79  (and  efforts  by  a  genius  such  as  his  are  not  lost), 
to  free  his  countrymen  from  so  baneful  a  vice. 

17.  east  and  west]  Johnson:  That  is,  'makes  us  traduced  east  and  west  oi 
other  nations.'     [Not  as  Warburton  says,  '  this  revel  from  morn  till  night.'] 

17-38.  As  these  lines  are  not  in  Qx,  Malone  supposes  that  they  were  omitted  out 
of  deference  to  Anne  of  Denmark,  the  queen  of  James  I.  Knight,  on  the  other 
hand,  ingeniously  conjectures  that  they  were  added  in  Q2  in  order  to  qualify  the 
harsh  description  of  royal  riot  in  lines  8-12.  A  trait  of  Shakespeare's  character  may 
be  herein  indicated :  he  would  not  suppress  the  lines  offensive  to  royalty,  because 
the  description  given  in  them  was  true ;  he  only  made  it  less  severe  by  adding  a 
tolerant  exposition  of  the  mode  in  which  one  ill  quality  destroys  the  lustre  of  many 
good  ones.  After  the  queen's  death  the  passage  was  omitted  in  the  Ff.  Elze  be 
lieves  that  they  were  erased  by  Sh.,  but  restored  by  the  printer  of  Q2  in  order  tc 
justify  his  title-page,  wherein  it  was  stated  that  the  play  was  '  enlarged  to  as  much 
again  as  it  was,'  and  is  inclined  to  believe  them  spurious. 

18.  of]  For  other  instances  of  *  of  used  for  by,  see  III,  i,  154;  IV,  ii,  12;  Macb. 
Ill,  vi,  27,  or  Abbott,  §  170. 

19.  clepe]   From  the  Anglo-Saxon,  cleopian,  to  call.     See  Macb.  Ill,  i,  93. 

19.  drunkards]  Steevens  :  And  well  our  Englishmen  might;  for  in  1604  the 
following  mention  is  made  of  a  Dane  in  London,  in  Looke  to  it :  For  He  Stabbe  yt 
[by  Samuel  Rowlands,  p.  21,  ed.  Hunterian  Club]  :  '  You  that  will  drinke  Reynaldo 
vnto  death  :  The  Dane,  that  would  carowse  out  of  his  Boote.' 

19.  swinish]  Hunter  (ii,  221)  :  This  seems  to  allude  to  some  parody  on  the 
style  of  the  kings  of  Denmark,  which  bore  allusion  to  this  habit.  Clarendon  : 
Could  Sh.  have  had  in  his  mind  any  pun  upon  '  Sweyn,'  which  was  a  common  name 
of  the  kinps  of  Denmark  ? 


%CT  I,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  8 1 

<%**-   ■ 

Soil  our  addition  ;  and  indeed  it  takes  20 

From  our  achievements,  though  perform'd  at  height, 

The  pith  and  marrow  of  our  attribute. 

So,  oft  it  chances  in  particular  men, 

That  for  some  vicious  mole  of  nature  in  them, 

As,  in  their  birth, — wherein  they  are  not  guilty,  25 

Since  nature  cannot  choose  his  origin, — 

By  the  o'ergrowth  of  some  complexion, 

Oft  breaking  down  the  pales  and  forts  of  reason, 

Or  by  some  habit  that  too  much  o'er-leavens 

The  form  of  plausive  manners  ;  that  these  men, —  30 

23.  So,  oft']  Theob.  So  oft  Qq,  Pope,  27.  the]  Pope,  their  Qq,  Knt,  Coll. 
Han.  Cap.                                                          White,  Del. 

men,]  men  ;  Cap.  complexion]  complextion  QaQ,. 

20.  addition]  Caldecott  :  Disparage  us  by  using  as  characteristic  of  us,  terms 
that  impute  swinish  properties,  that  fix  a  swinish  '  addition '  or  title  to  our  names. 
[See  Macb.  I,  iii,  106.  Ed.] 

21.  at  height]  Caldecott:  To  the  utmost.  [An  instance  of  the  absorption  of 
the  definite  article ;  '  at'  height,  i.  e.  at  the  height.  Thus  also  '  with  blood,'  I,  v,  65. 
See  Allen's  note,  Rom.  &■*  Jul.  p.  429.  Abbott,  \  90,  considers  the  as  simply 
omitted.  Ed.] 

22.  pith  . . .  attribute]  Johnson  :  The  best  and  most  valuable  part  of  the  praise 
that  would  otherwise  be  attributed  to  us. 

24.  mole]  Heath  :  A  blemish  of  any  kind,  exactly  corresponding  to  '  stamp  of 
one  defect,'  in  line  31.  M ALONE:  Compare  :  For  marks  descried  in  men's  nativity 
Are  nature's  faults,  not  their  own  infamy.' — R.  of  L.  538.  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest. 
p.  33)  suggested  mould,  i.  e.  '  when  nature  is  unequally  and  viciously  moulded,  when 
any  complexion  is  too  predominant.'  But  he  did  not  repeat  it  in  his  edition.  SlL- 
berschlag  (Morgenblatt,  No.  47,  i860,  p.  1 109)  adduces  this  passage  as  one  of  the 
proofs  that  King  James  is  designated  under  the  character  of  Hamlet,  and  that  the 
'  vicious  mole  of  nature '  referred  to  James's  aversion  to  the  sight  of  a  drawn  dagger, 
which  was  supposed  to  be  derived  from  the  shock  his  mother  experienced,  before  his 
birth,  at  seeing  Rizzio  assassinated. 

25.  As]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  127)  :  As  is  here  used,  I  think,  not  in  the  sense  of  for 
instance,  but  in  that  of  namely,  to  wit ;  it  expresses  an  enumeration  of  particulars, 
not  a  selection  from  them  by  way  of  example.  This  is  a  frequent — perhaps,  indeed, 
the  one  exclusive — signification  of  as  when  employed  in  this  construction  ;  as  in  3 
Hen.  VI:  V,  vii,  7.  'Two  Cliffords, as  the  father  and  son.'  This  is  the  true  con- 
struction of  as  in  a  number  of  passages,  where  it  has  been,  or  is  likely  to  be,  mis- 
taken for  the  modern  usage. 

26.  his]  See  I,  ii,  216. 

27.  complexion]  Singer  :  This  formerly  meant  the  constitutions  or  affections  of 
the  body.  Clarendon  :  In  the  old  medical  language  there  were  four  complexions 
or  temperaments ;  the  sanguine,  melancholy,  choleric,  and  phlegmatic. 

30.  plauj've]   M alone  :  Gracious,  pleasing,  popular. 


82 


HAMLET 


Carrying,  I  say,  the  stamp  of  one  defect, 
Being  nature's  livery,  or  fortune's  star, — 
Their  virtues  else — be  they  as  pure  as  grace, 
As  infinite  as  man  may  undergo — 
Shall  in  the  general  censure  take  corruption 
From  that  particular  fault ;  the  dram  of  eale 
Doth  all  the  noble  substance  of  a  doubt 
To  his  own  scandal. 


[act  i,  sc.  i% 
31 


35 


32.  star]    starre    Qq.       scar  Theob. 
Pope  ii  4- . 

23.   Their]  Theob.  Pope  ii.     His  Qq, 
Pope  i. 

36,  37.  the  dram  of  eale. ..of  a  doubt] 
Q2Q3,  Bos.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  White,  Hal. 
the  dram  of  eafe...of  a  doubt  Q4Q5-  the 
dram  of  Base. ..of  worth  out,  Theob. +  , 
Cap.  Steev.  '73,  '78,  '85,  Rann.  the 
dram  of  base. ..oft  corrupt  Anon.  conj. 
ap.  Rann.  the  dra?7i  of  base... of  ten  dout, 
Steev.'93,  Var.'o3,  Var.'i3,  Verp.  Huds. 
i,  Clarke,  the  dra7ne  [i.  e.  dream]  of 
ease,  The  noble  substance  of  a  doubt, — 
doth  all  Becket.  the  dram  of  ale... over 
dough  or  oft  a-dough  Jackson,     the  dram 


of  ill... often  dout,  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  El. 
the  dram  of  lead. ..of  a  ducat  Ingleby 
conj.  or  the  dram  of  evil... of  a  cour- 
tier Keightley  conj.  (withdrawn).*  the 
dram  of  eale... oft  endoubt  Nicholson 
conj.*  the  dram  of  cake... so  adapt  Bul- 
lock conj.*  the  dram  of  earth. ..so 
adapt  Bullock  conj.  (withdrawn).*  the 
dram  of  base. ..overcloud  Lloyd  conj.* 
the  dram  of  base... of  ten  drown  Taylor 
conj.  MS.*  the  dram  of  ease. ..oft  work 
out  Smyth  conj.  MS.*  the  dram  of  ill 
...of  a  doubt  Heussi. 

38.  scandal.]  J candle.  Q9Q3-     fcan 
dall.  Q4<     scandal —  Ktly,  Heussi. 


30.  that  these  men]  Caldecott  :  '  It  happens,'  or  something  to  that  effect,  must 
be  supplied  before  these  words. 

32.  nature. ..star]  Clarendon:  A  defect  which  is  either  natural  or  accidental, 
Ritson  :  Star  signifies  a  scar  of  that  appearance, — it  is  a  term  of  farriery.  Theo- 
bald (Sh.  Best.  p.  34)  :  Is  fortune  presumed  to  give  a  'star,'  where  she  means  dis- 
grace ?  I  should  much  rather  suppose  it  an  ensign  of  her  favour,  than  designed  to 
set  a  mark  of  Infamy.  Read  scar;  and  so  the  sense  of  the  whole  passage  hangs 
together. 

33.  Their]  Clarendon  :  After  all,  Sh.  may  have  inadvertently  written  his. 

34.  undergo]  Johnson  :  As  large  as  can  be  accumulated  upon  man. 

35.  censure]  Dyce:  Judgement,  opinion.     See  I,  iii,  69. 

36-38.  dram. ..scandal]  Theobald:  The  Tenour  of  this  Speech  is,  that  let  to.cn 
have  never  so  many,  or  so  eminent,  Virtues,  if  they  have  one  Defect  which  accom- 
panies them,  that  single  Blemish  shall  throw  a  Stain  upon  their  whole  Character, 
and  not  only  so,  but  shall  deface  the  very  Essence  of  all  their  Goodness,  to  its  own 
Scandal ;  so  that  their  Virtues  themselves  will  become  their  Reproach.  I  have  ven- 
tured to  conjecture  :  '  The  dram  of  base  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  of  worth  out 
To  his  own  scandal.'  The  dram  of  base,  i.  e.  the  least  alloy  of  baseness  cr  vice. 
Sh.  frequently  uses  the  adjective  of  quality  instead  of  the  substantive  of  the  thing. 
Elsewhere  speaking  of  worth,  Sh.  delights  to  consider  it  as  a  Quality  that  adds 
Weight  to  a  person.  See  All's  Well,  III,  iv,  31,  and  *  From  whose  so  many  weights 
of  baseness  cannot   A  dram  oi    worth  be  drawn.' — Cym.  Ill,  v,  88.     Heath:  I 


act  i,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  83 


[36.  '  The  dram  of  eale,'  &c] 
should  rather  suspect  Sh.  might  have  written  'The  dram  of  base  Doth  all  the  noble 
lubstance  oft  eat  out,'  &c.  But  granting  a  little  farther  departure  from  the  printed 
text,  I  should  think  it  still  more  probable  that  the  true  reading  is :  '  Doth  all  the 
noble  substance  soil  with  doubt.'  That  is  :  A  dram  of  base  alloy  stains  all  the  noble 
substance  of  his  virtues  with  the  suspicion  that  they  are  mere  tinsel  appearances  only, 
ami  not  of  the  true  sterling  standard.  Capell  [Notes,  &c.  i,  126),  after  citing  Heath 
with  approval,  adds, '  But  it  should  seem,  from  the  comment  that  the  same  author  makes 
upon  his  second  amendment,  that  the  line  stands  in  need  of  a  substantive,  following 
•of  to  perfect  the  sense  of  it.  And  this,  in  truth,  is  the  light  in  which  the  editor 
has  view'd  the  corruption  all  along;  that  some  word  was  slipt  out  of  the  copy,  and 
'■out'  changed  to  4a  doubt'  by  the  printer's  ingeniousness :  the  vacancy  cannot  be 
fill'd  better  than  by  the  word  in  possession;  and  the  line  may  be  cur'd  of  it's  bald- 
ness by  no  very  great  licence,  the  change  of  'all'  into  eat;  after  which,  the  comment 
that  has  been  given  above  [Heath's]  is  both  a  just  and  a  perfect  one.'  [Which  means 
that  Capell  would  read  the  line  '  Doth  eat  the  noble  substance  of  worth  out?  In 
Capell's  list  of  ■  Various  Readings  of  Hamlet '  he  cites  the  reading  of  Qx  thus  :  of  eale 
40. a.  (f.  ill).  This,  I  presume,  indicates,  what  the  Cam.  Edd.  ascribe  to  him,  the  con- 
jecture of  ill  for  '  eale.'  Hereby  Capell  anticipated  Jennens,  who  merely  states  that 
he  ventures  to  read  :  '  The  dram  of  ill  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  of  good  out,  To 
his  own  scandal.']  In  the  Var.  of  1773,  Steevens  says  :  '  Mr  Holt  reads,  The  dram 
of  base  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  oft  adopt,  &c.  I  would  read  Doth  all  the  noble 
substance  {i.  e.  the  sum  of  good  qualities)  oft  do  out.''  '  To  do  a  thing  out  is  to  efface^ 
or  obliterate  anything  in  drawing.'  Perhaps  we  should  say,  '  To  its  own  scandal.' 
[  Vide  infra,  Steevens,  1793.]  Davies  [Dramatic  Misc.  1784,  iii,  10)  :  The  very  tri- 
fling alteration  of  adding  a  letter  to  one  word,  and  the  changing  two  letters  for  one 
in  another,  will  restore  to  us  the  original  reading,  '  The  dram  of  base  Doth  all  the 
noble  substance  oft  work  out,'  &c.  When  I  read  this  proposed  emendation  to  the 
reverend  and  learned  Mr  Robertson,  he  not  only  concurred  with  me,  but  assured 
me  he  had  himself  made  the  same  amendment.  The  apostle  James  hath  a  senti 
ment  very  similar  to  the  present  passage;  'For,  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole 
law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all.'  [In  the  Var.  1785,  S[tephen] 
W[eston]  proposes  the  same  emendation.  Ed.]  Mason  (1785) :  I  offer  as  an  amend- 
ment (which  is  at  least  as  near  the  old  text  as  any  yet  proposed,  and  which  is  sup- 
ported by  line  35),  '  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  of  't  corrupt.'  Malone  (1790) : 
'  The  dram  of  base  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  of  worth  dout,  To,'  &c.  To  dou\ 
signified  in  Shakespeare's  time,  and  yet  signifies  in  Devonshire  and  other  western 
counties,  to  do  out,  to  efface,  to  extinguish.  Thus  they  say, '  dout  the  candle,  dout  th< 
fire,'  &c,  just  as  don  signifies  do  on  [or  doff,  do  off — Steevens].  '  Dout'  having 
been  written  by  the  transcriber  dotibt,  and  the  word  '  worth  '  having  been  inadver- 
tently omitted,  probably  the  line,  in  the  copy  for  the  press,  stood  :  Doth  all  the  noble 
substance  of  doubt.  The  editor  or  printer  of  the  Qq,  finding  the  line  too  short,  in- 
serted the  indefinite  article,  without  attending  to  the  context.  Theobald's  insertion 
of  worth  is  fully  justified  by  his  citation  from  Cymbeline.  [Malone,  in  Var.  1785, 
proposed  '  By  his  own  scandal ;'  but  did  not  repeat  it  in  his  own  edition.  Ed.] 
Steevens  [1793.  Vi&  supra,  Steevens,  1773]  :  I  now  think  we  should  read  :  '  The 
dram  of  base  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  oiten  dout,'  &c,  for  surely  it  is  needless  tc 
say — '  the  no' 7e  substance  of  worth  dout,'  because  the'idea  of  worth  is  comprehended 


84  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


[36.  •  The  dram  of  eale,'  &c] 
in  the  epithet  noble.  N.  B.  This  improvement  I  owed,  about  four  years  ago,  to  the 
late  Rev.  Henry  Homer.  Rann  (1794?):  'Doth  all,  &c.  oft  corrupt:  oft  work 
out :  eat  out :  By  it's  own  scandal.'  MARTINUS  SCRIBLERUS  {Explanations  and 
Emendations  of  Some  Passages  in  the  Text  of  Shakespeare,  Edinburgh,  1814)  :  I 
suppose  there  was  a  shifting  of  types  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  line,  and  read  thus: 
'  The  dram  of  doubt  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  oft  anneal  To, J  &c.  That  is,  the 
dram  of  doubtful  or  base  metal  doth  often,  in  the  operation  of  annealing,  cause  the 
whole  substance  to  become  durably  as  base  as  itself.  Whether  this  emendation 
will  be  made  out  by  a  comparison  with  the  processes  used  in  the  arts,  I  know  not, 
as  everything  connected  with  chemical  science,  or  any  branch  of  philosophy,  ap- 
peareth  to  me  too  insignificant  to  bestow  upon  it  one  moment's  attention.  Zachary 
Jackson  says  that  he  has  endeavored  to  give  the  passage  some  sense,  but  cannot 
speak  with  that  perfect  confidence  which  he  does  in  reference  to  *  most  of  my  restora- 
tions.' Boswell  (1821)  :  A  clear  meaning  is  afforded  by  Holt's  emendation,  if  we 
take  '  substance '  as  a  nominative  :  '  The  noble  substance  doth  oft  bring  disgrace 
upon  itself  by  adopting  the  dram  of  base.'  If  this  interpretation  be  rejected,  I 
would  prefer  to  suppose  that  doubt  means  to  bring  into  doubt  or  suspicion,  as  to  fear 
means  to  create  fear  ;  to  pale  is  to  make  pale.  Yet  I  prefer  Holt's  change.  Calde- 
COTT  merely  enumerates,  with  approval,  the  various  changes  which  preceding  edd. 
have  made,  and  which  he  adopts.  [See  Text.  Notes.]  Singer  (ed.  i) :  '  The  dram  of 
bale  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  often  doubt  To,'  &c.  I  see  no  reason  why  dout 
should  be  substituted  for  '  doubt.'  Boswell's  interpretation  of  'doubt'  is  just.  I  have 
ventured  to  read  bale  (z.  e.  evil)  as  nearer  to  the  reading  of  the  first  edition.  Stearns 
(Sh.  Treas.  p.  373)  adopted  this  reading  of  Singer's,  and  explains  it  as  a  reference 
to  the  commerce  in  drugs,  in  which  a  great  deal  of  adulteration  is  practiced ;  for 
the  word  bale  we  have  now  only  the  word  alloy.  Collier  :  It  is  easy  to  see  how 
'  ill '  might  be  misprinted  eale,  and  '  often  dout '  of  a  doubt ;  the  compositor  having 
taken  the  passage  by  his  ear  only  :  indeed,  a  stronger  proof  of  the  kind  could  hardly 
be  pointed  out.  Delius  :  '  The  dram  of  bale  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  off  and 
out  To,'  &c.  In  the  old  edd.  'off'  is  constantly  used  for  of,  just  as  doubt  for  dout. 
In  MS  andout,  run  into  one  word,  would  be  readily  mistaken  for  a  doubt,  especially 
if  an  abbreviation  were  used  instead  of  and.  The  sense  is :  The  dram  of  evil  doth 
off  [i.  e.  puts  off]  and  doth  out  \i.  e.  puts  out]  all  the  noble  substance,'  &c.  A.  E. 
B[rae]  (A7".  &  Qu.  21  Feb.  1852) :  Eafe  and  eale  so  nearly  resemble  each  other, 
and  the  subsequent  transition  to  bafe  is  so  extremely  obvious,  and  so  consistent 
with  the  sense,  that  there  can  hardly  be  any  plausible  ground  for  the  rejection 
of  base  in  favour  of  ill.  Moreover,  base  is  the  natural  antagonist  of  '  noble '  in  the 
next  line.  Now,  in  what  way  does  '  the  dram  (i.  e.  an  indefinitely  small  quantity,  as 
gram  is  used  now-a-days)  of  base '  affect '  all  the  noble  substance '?  Sh.  says  it  renders 
it  doubtful  or  suspicious.  '  Doubt '  in  this  place  is  not  a  verb,  but  a  noun  substan- 
tive. The  chief  hindrance  now  to  a  perfect  meaning  consists  in  the  restriction  of 
1  doth  '  to  a  mere  expletive.  Let  this  restriction  be  removed,  by  conferring  upon 
*  doth '  the  value  of  an  effective  verb,  and  the  difficulty  disappears  :  thus,  '  the  base 
doth  doubt  to  the  noble,'  i.  e.  imparts  doubt  to  it,  or  renders  it  doubtful.  We  say  a 
man's  good  actions  do  him  credit ;  why  not  also,  his  bad  ones  do  him  doubt  ?  There 
r  ~>w  remains  '  of  a'  to  be  amended.  I  suggest  offer ;  it  is  almost  identical  (in  sound 
at  least)  with  the  original,  and  it  materially  assists  in  giving  a  much  clearer  applies- 


act  l,  sc.  iv.J  HAMLET  85 


[36.  'The  dram  of  eale,'  &c] 

►  ion  to  the  last  line.  For  these  reasons,  but  especially  for  the  last,  I  adopt  offer,  as 
a  verb  in  the  infinitive  ruled  by  '  doth,'  in  the  sense  of  causing  or  compelling.  Thus 
the  meaning  of  the  passage  becomes  '  The  base  doth  the  noble  offer  doubt  to  his 
own  scandal,'  that  is,  causes  the  noble  to  excite  suspicion,  to  the  injury  of  its  own 
character.  H.  F.  (JV.  6°  Qu.  6  March,  1852):  Read  'dram  of  base. ..often  dull 
To  his,'  &c,  merely  a  substitution  of  letters.  Periergus  Bibliophilus  (Al.  &* 
Qu.  17  Aug.  1852):  As  the  least  deviation  from  the  old  copies,  I  prefer  'The 
dram  of  base  Doth,  all  the  noble  substance  o'er,  a  doubt,  To  his  own  scandal,' 
i.  e.  doth  cast  a  doubt  over  all  the  noble  substance,  bring  into  suspect  all  the  noble 
qualities  by  the  leaven  of  one  dram  of  baseness.  Singer  (ed.  ii) :  Most  probably 
Sh.  wrote :  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  oft  adoubl.'  Using  the  word  adoubt  for 
doubt  in  its  active  sense  of  to  bring  into  doubt  or  suspicion.  We  have  numerous 
old  words  of  similar  form,  and  in  Latin  dubito  is  written  addubito  by  Cicero  and 
others.     It  is  evident  that  dout  could  not  have  been  the  word,  for  the  meaning  is 

•  The  dram  of  base  renders  all  the  noble  substance  doubtful  or  suspicious,'  not  that  it 
extinguishes  it  altogether.  I  read  base  as  suggested  by  Q  ,  from  its  more  direct  oppo- 
sition to  noble.  [Singer's  text  follows  Q2Q3,  except  that  base  is  substituted  for  '  eale.'] 
Dyce  (ed.  i) :  '  Often '  [in  Steevens's  reading]  is  very  questionable,  because,  in  all 
probability,  '  of  in  the  Qq  is  a  mistake  for  '  oft ;'  and  secondly,  as  Lettsom  observes 
to  me,  'the  words  "  To  his  own  scandal"  are  fatal  to  the  reading  "  dout,"  for  if 
that  alteration  be  right  they  are  superfluous.  A  verb,'  he  adds,  '  I  should  think 
must  lurk  under  the  corruption  "  a  doubt  "  or  "  doubt,"  with  the  signification  of  turn, 
pervert,  corrupt,  or  the  like.  Shakespeare's  meaning  evidently  is  that  a  little  leaven 
leavens  the  whole  lump — that  one  vice  will  ruin  an  otherwise  perfect  character.' 
Mason's  conjecture  was  unknown  to  the  Rev.  J.  MlTFORD  when  he  wrote  to  me  as 
follows  :  '  I  would  read  "  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  oft  corrupt."  '  In  the  Devon- 
shire dialect,  to  '  eale'  is  to  reproach  ;  it  may  be  asked,  then,  Did  Sh.  (who  occa- 
sionally has  provincialisms)  write  here  '  the  dram  of  eale '  in  the  sense  of  '  the  dram 
0/"  reproach  '  ?  for  my  own  part,  I  hardly  think  so.  White  :  I  leave  this  grossly-cor- 
rupted passage  unchanged,  because  none  of  the  attempts  to  restore  it  seem  to  me  to 
be  even  worth  recording,  and  I  am  unable  to  better  them.  But  it  has  occurred  to 
me  that  perhaps  the  corruption  lurks  in  a  part  of  the  passage  hitherto  unsuspected, 
and  that  '  Doth '  is  either  a  misprint  of  '  Hath,'  or  has  the  sense  of  '  accomplishes.' 
F.  A.  Leo  (N.  <2t°  Qu.  27  Dec.  1862)  :  'Eale,'  in  its  real  form,  must  have  con- 
tained a  sense  opposite  to  '  noble,'  and  for  that  purpose  I  find  no  better  word  than 
vile.  'A  doubt'  I  understand  as  a  misprint  for  a  draught;  for  Ham.  had  just 
spoken  about  drinking,  and  had  just  used  the  word  '  draughts.'  After  that  I  should 
like  to  change  the  word  '  Doth'  into  Turns.  Nichols  [Notes  on  Sh.  i,  25)  :  Eale 
is  the  old-fashioned  mode  of  spelling  ail=  ailment,  pronounced  ale.  '  Doth  '  is  not 
the  auxiliary  verb,  but  the  verb  itself,  the  3d  pers.  sing.  pres.  tense  of  to  do,  which  here 
means :  '  to  make  anything  what  it  is  not,'  as,  '  to  do  him  dead  ' — so  in  Johnson. 
1  Doubt '  is  the  means  whereby  that  change  is  effected,  of  and  by  formerly  being 
used  indifferently  as  a  sign  of  the  ablative.     Hence  the  text  of  Q2Q,  means  that 

*  the  dram  of  eale  will,  by  a  doubt  (*'.  e.  by  the  doubt  that  it  will  create  as  to  a  man's 
sincerity)  do  {i.  e.  convert)  all  this  noble  substance  to  his  own  scandal,  laying  him 
open  to  the  charge  of  hypocrisy.  [Nichols  repeated  this  note  substantially  in  The 
Athenceum,  iff  \ug.  1866.  Ed.1     Ingleby  {ap.  Staunton)  :  <  Of  a  doubt'  is  a  mis- 


86  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc  iv. 


[36.  '  The  dram  of  eale,'  &c] 
print  for  derogate.  First,  they  have  the  same  number  of  letters.  Secondly,  they 
have  the  o,  a,  d,  and  /  in  common.  Thirdly,  derogate  is  the  only  verb  that  at  the 
same  time  completes  the  sense  and  preserves  the  metre.  Staunton  :  Ingleby's 
suggestion  is  ingenious,  but  may  not  the  construction  have  been  this :  '  The  dram 
of  base  (or  ill,  or  bale,  or  lead,  or  whatsoever  word  the  compositor  tortured  into 
'eale,'  or  'ease')  doth  [i.e.  doeth,  z&orhelh)  all  the  noble  substance  of  a  pound 
to  its  own  vileness '  ?  We  by  no  means  pretend  that  pound  was  the  actual  word 
misrendered  '  doubt ;'  it  is  inserted  merely  because  it  occurs  in  opposition  to 
*  dram '  in  a  line  of  Quarles's  Emblems,  b.  ii,  E  7, — '  Where  ev'ry  dram  of  gold 
contains  a  pound  of  dross,' — and  because  it  is  extremely  probable  some  such  ant  ithesi? 
was  intended  here.  So  in  Spenser's  Eaerie  Queene,  b.  i,  c.  iii,  s.  30 : — '  A  dram  of 
sweete  is  worth  a  pound  of  sowre.'  Swynfen  Jervis  {Proposed  Emendations,  &c. 
i860,  p.  23):  Read,  The  dram  of  evil  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  oft  outdo,  To, 
&c.  Compare  Cor.  II,  i,  150;  'So  heavenly  love  shall  outdo  hellish  hate.' — Par. 
Lost. ;  '  Wherein  the  graver  had  a  strife  With  nature,  to  outdo  the  life.' — Jonson. 
In  Chambers's  Household  Sh.  is  the  following  note  :  '  We  have  adopted  "  oft  subdue  " 
[for  "  of  a  doubt  "],  suggested  by  Mr  Swynfen  Jervis,  and  thus  supported  : — Son.  iii, 
6;  and  AWs  Well,  V,  iii,  217.'  Bailey  (ii,  2):  For  'eale'  read  evil ;  for  'of  a 
doubt '  read  oft  weigh  down.  '  Weigh,  in  some  of  the  old  copies  of  Hamlet,  is 
spelt  way.'  Compare  Rich.  Ill :  V,  iii,  153  ;  Timon  V,  i,  154.  Corson  (Jottings,  &c. 
p.  13,  1874)  :  All  the  difficulty  of  the  passage  is  removed,  I  think,  by  understanding 
'  noble,'  not  as  an  adjective,  as  all  the  commentators  have  understood  it,  qualifying 
'  substance,'  but  as  a  noun  opposed  to  '  eale,'  and  the  object  of  '  substance,'  a  verb 
of  which  '  doth '  is  its  auxiliary.  Thus  :  '  the  dram  of  eale  doth  all  the  noble,  sub- 
stance of  (z.  e.  '  with,'  a  sense  common  in  the  English  of  the  time)  '  a  doubt  (which 
works)  '  to  his  own  scandal.'  '  Substance '  is  used  in  the  sense  of  '  imbue  with  a  cer- 
tain essence;'  'his'  is  a  neuter  genitive,  standing  for  'noble,'  and  =  ' its.'  The 
dram  of  ill  transubstantiates  the  noble,  essences  it  to  its  own  scandal.  (In  regard  to 
the  uses  of  'of  and  'to,'  see  Abbott,  \\  171,  186.)  The  use  of  'substance,'  in 
the  sense  of  '  essence,'  was,  of  course,  sufficiently  common,  and  had  been  for  more 
than  two  centuries,  to  justify  the  interpretation  given.  In  Macb.  I,  v,  48,  we  have 
'  sightless  substances '  = '  invisible  essences,'  '  sightless '  being  used  objectively.  '  Be- 
ing of  one  substance  with  the  Father.' — Book  of  Common  Prayer.  Chaucer,  in  The 
Prologe  of  the  Nonne  Prestes  Tale  (1.  14S09  of  Tyrwhitt's  edition,  1.  16289  of 
Wright's),  uses  the  word  to  express  the  essential  character  or  nature  of  a  man.  The 
Host  objects  to  the  Monk's  Tale,  as  being  too  dull  for  the  occasion;  and,  that  the 
fault  may  not  be  thought  to  lie  in  himself,  says,  '  And  wel  I  wot  the  substance  is  in 
me,  If  eny  thing  schal  wel  reported  be.'  That  is,  I  am  so  substanced,  so  constituted, 
so  tempered,  such  is  my  cast  of  spirit,  that  I  can  appreciate  and  enjoy,  as  well  as  the 
next  man,  a  good  story  well  told.  Whether  '  substance '  can  be  found,  in  this  sense, 
as  a  verb,  matters  not.  The  free  functional  application  of  words  which  character- 
ized the  Elizabethan  English,  allowed,  as  every  English  scholar  knows,  of  the  use 
of  any  noun,  adjective,  or  neuter  verb,  as  an  active  verb.  This  interpretation  I 
communicated  in  the  main  to  N.  &*  Qu.  [4  Oct.  7.862]  ;  but  I  did  not  then  recog- 
nize an  important  element  in  it,  that  the  pronoun  '  his '  is  a  neuter  genitive,  standing 
for  'noble'  used  as  a  noun.  Arrowsmith  (Shakespeare's  Editors,  &c.  1865,  p.  6) 
thus  quote;   the  passage :  '  The  dram  of  base  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  often 


iCTi.sc.  iv.j  HAMLET  87 


[36.  ■  The  dram  of  eale,'  &c] 
draw  To,'  Sec.  Halliwell  :  This  passage  appears  to  be  hopelessly  corrupt,  no 
emendation  yet  proposed  being  in  the  least  degree  satisfactory,  nor  have  I  any  plausi- 
ble suggestion  of  my  own  to  offer.  Dyce  (ed.  ii) :  The  dram  of  evil  Doth  all  the 
noble  substance  oft  debase  To  &c.  For  this  reading,  now  inserted  in  the  text,  I 
alone  am  answerable.  Clarke  :  That  doubt  and  '  dout '  were  often  printed  the  one 
for  the  other,  and  that  the  two  words  afforded  scope  for  quibbling  play  upon  them, 
is  seen  by  ths  opening  jest  in  A  C.  Merry  Talys,  1567  :  '  I  never  harde  tell  of  more 
doutes  but  twayn,  that  is  to  say,  dout  the  candell  and  dout  the  fyre.'  II.  D.  (Atke- 
naum,  18  Aug.  1866)  :  Hamlet  so  emphatically  insists  that  one  little  drop  always 
corrupts  the  whole  mass  that  he  would  not  wind  up  by  saying  it  often  does  so.  Read, 
therefore,  *  The  dram  of  ill  Doth... overdout?  Elze  (Athenaum,  1 1  Aug.  1866)  thinks 
a  very  near  approach  to  the  text,  together  with  an  unobjectionable  sense,  may  be  had 
by  reading  •  the  dram  of  evil... often  daub  To  '  &c.  J.  D.  M.  {Athenaeum,  24  Nov. 
1866)  :  The  sentence  is  simply  incomplete.  I  would  put  a  dash  after  '  scandal.'  If 
completed,  it  might  read  '  To  his  own  scandal  taint?  Keightley  {Expositor,  288)  : 
I  read  evil  for  '  eale,'  and  for  '  of  a  doubt '  out  0'  doubt,  or  perhaps,  '  out  of  a  doubt.' 
The  sentence,  we  may  see,  is  not  complete,  and  it  should  also  be  recollected  that 
the  language  of  the  whole  speech  is  involved,  as  if  the  speaker  were  thinking  of 
something  else,  and  merely  talking  against  time.  Cartwright  {New  Readings  in 
Sh.,  &c.  1866,  p.  37) :  For  '  eale '  read  leaven,  for  '  of  a  doubt,'  of  a  dough.  Prow- 
ett  (.A/,  &  Qu.  25  Sept.  1869)  :  Is  it  not  possible  that  there  was  such  a  word  as 
'  eale,'  and  that  it  was  identical  with  the  '  esil '  in  V,  i,  264,  meaning  vinegar  ?  In  that 
case  Sh.  may  perhaps  have  written  '  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  over-clout.'  In  the 
next  scene,  the  posseting  of  the  blood  by  poison  is  described  like  •  eager  droppings 
into  milk.'  Thus  Sh.  here  means  that  the  small  quantity  of  vinegar  or  other  acid 
matter  over-clouts,  or  curdles  over,  the  whole  of  the  substance  to  which  it  is  added, 
so  as  to  impart  its  own  scandalous  character  to  that  substance.  He  has  just  used 
the  word  '  o'erleavens.'  Clout,  to  clot  or  curdle,  is  a  well-known  provincial  expres- 
sion. The  unfamiliar  word,  clout,  was  mistaken  by  the  eye  for  dout,  and  over,  by 
the  ear  for  '  of  a.'  The  Writer  of  the  Article  on  Shakespearian  Glos- 
saries in  the  Edinburgh  Review  {N.  &>  Qu.  23  Oct.  1869) :  Evil  is  used  by 
Elizabethan  writers,  and  by  Sh.  himself,  as  a  monosyllable,  and  it  might,  then,  by  a 
mistake  of  the  ear,  easily  have  been  written  as  pronounced :  eale.  Again,  the  verb 
dout  is  used  not  only  in  its  literal  sense  of  do  out,  but  in  the  secondary  meaning  of 
obscure,  eclipse,  prevent  the  manifestation  of,  as  by  Laertes  in  IV,  vii,  192.  This 
secondary  sense  very  much  does  away  with  the  force  of  Lettsom's  objection  to  dout. 
Read,  then,  '  The  dram  of  e'il  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  often  dout  To  '  &c.  W. 
M.  Rossetti  [N.  &  Qu.  30  Oct.  1869) :  Maplett,  in  his  Green  Forest,  1567,  says: 
'  The  ele  being  killed  and  addressed  in  wine,  whosoever  chaunceth  to  drinke  of  that 
wine  so  used  shall  ever  afterward  lothe  wine.'  May  not  wine  thus  treated  have 
been  technically  termed  eel  (eale)?  Read,  then:  The  dram  of  eel  Doth,'  &c,  i.e. 
the  dram  of  eel-dressing  (vitiated  wine)  doth  often  doubt  (bring  into  suspicion  and 
disrepute)  the  noble  substance  (of  pure  wine)  to  the  scandal  of  the  said  substance. 
On  further  reflection  (N.  6°  Qu.  4  Dec.  1869),  a  simpler  meaning  for  'the  dram  of 
eale '  may  be  assigned,  viz. :  '  An  extremely  small  weight,  or  quantity,  even  the  six- 
teenth part  of  an  ounce,  of  the  eel-fish,'  taking  dram  in  its  quantitative  sense.  J. 
Wetherill  [Athenczum,  20  Nov.  1869)  suggests  'The  dram  of  eHl  Doth  all  the 


88  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iv 


[36.  '  The  dram  of  eale,'  &c] 
noble  substance  oft  traduce  To  his  own  scandal,'  because  Bacon,  in  his  Ninth  Essay, 
says  that  '  as  infection  spreadeth  upon  that  which  is  sound  and  tainteth  it,  so  this 
evil  eye  traduceth  even  the  best  actions  thereof,  and  turneth  them  into  an  ill  odour.* 
Rushton  {Shakespeare'' s  Euphuism,  p.  93,  187 1 )  :  •  Dram  of  eale  '  may  be  a  misprint, 
or  abbreviation,  of  dram  of  hellebore,  or '  <?/k-bore,'  which  old  authors  speak  of  as  being 
very  poisonous ;  Gosson,  Schoole  of  Abuse,  1579,  says:  'One  dramme  of  Eleborus 
ransackes  every  vein.'  DANIEL  {Notes,  &c.  1870,  p.  73)  :  I  propose — '  the  bran  of 
meal  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  of  it  doubt :  So  this  one  scandal....'  If  the  four 
mysterious  letters,  eale,  may  be  formed  by  the  addition  of  an  m  into  the  word 
meale  (the  old  spelling  of  meal),  the  change  of  the  preceding  word,  '  dram,'  to  bran 
is  obvious,  and  we  have  a  sentence  singularly  in  accordance  with  the  argument  of 
Hamlet's  speech,  which  he  illustrates  by  the  homely  simile  of  bran  doubting  or  dis 
crediting  all  the  noble  substance  of  the  meal.  If  the  bran  of  meal  be  accepted,  the 
change  of  '  of  a '  to  of  it  hardly  needs  apology.  In  So,  the  S  being  next  the  T  in  the 
printer's  '  case,'  the  error  would  be  easily  accounted  for.  His  and  this  are  so  fre- 
quently confounded  in  the  old  copies,  that  no  one  would  hesitate  to  correct  wnere  the 
sense  of  a  passage  required  the  change.  The  corruption  of  one  into  '  own  '  probably 
arose  from  the  similarity  in  sound  of  the  two  words.  The  simile  of  bran  and  meal 
seems  to  have  been  a  favorite  one  with  Elizabethan  writers.  Sh.  uses  it  twice  else- 
where, in  Cym.  IV,  ii,  27  ;  Cor.  Ill,  i,  322.  Hudson  (1870)  :  '  The  dram  of  vile  Doth 
all  the  noble  substance  oft  abate  To,'  &c.  I  prefer  vile  as  more  likely  to  have  been  mis- 
printed '  eale,'  and  I  have  ventured  to  change  '  of  into  oft,  and  •  a  doubt'  into  abate, 
which  was  often  used  by  old  writers  in  the  sense  of  cast  down  or  depress.  Perhaps 
attaint  would  give  a  slightly  more  congruous  sense.  Miles  {Review  of  Hamlet,  p. 
16,  1870) :  •  The  dram  of  ill  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  throw  in  doubt '  seems  to 
be  the  meaning  of  the  line.  Robert  Roaster  {Sunday  Dispatch,  Phila.  12  Jan. 
1873)  :  For  'often  dout'  read  oft  endow,  the  final  /  of  '  dout'  was  inserted  by  the 
printer,  misled  by  the  occurrence  of  the  letter  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  line. 
Endow  was  often  used  in  Shakespeare's  time  for  endue,  which  is  rendered  by  Bailey 
'  to  supply,'  '  to  qualify.'  The  meaning  then  is  The  dram  of  base  doth  often  qualify 
all  the  noble  substance  To  its  own  scandal.  Moberly  :  The  passage  must  surely  be 
read  :  '  The  dram  of  ill  Doth  all  the  noble  substance  ever  dout  To,'  &c.  Hudson's 
forthcoming  edition  will  read,  '  The  dram  of  leaven  Doth  all  the  noble  substance 
of  'em  sour  To,'  &c,  a  reading  suggested  by  a  passage  in  Bacon's  Henry  the  Seventh  : 
*  And  as  a  little  leaven  of  new  distaste  doth  commonly  soure  the  whole  lumpe  of 
former  merites,  the  King's  wit,'  &c.  F.  J.  Furnivall  suggests  oft  adote  in  place 
of  '  of  a  doubt,'  because  adote  meant  both  to  grow  silly  and  to  drive  silly.  For  the 
latter  sense,  see  Gower's  Confessio  Amantis,  III,  ii,  as  quoted  in  Matzner's  Worter- 
buch,  '  The  most  wise  ben  otherwhile  of  love  adoted,'  i.  e.  made  fools,  besotted. 
John  Davies  {N  6°  Qu.  11  Mar.  1876)  repeats  Dyce's  remark,  that  'eale,'  with 
'  the  meaning  of  reproach,  is  still  used  in  the  western  counties.' 

Strachey  (p.  44) :  Hamlet's  generalizations  are  really  drawn  from  the  excessive 
brooding  over  his  own  character  and  circumstances,  and  only  afterwards  applied  to 
the  men  and  things  about  him.  It  is  plainly  he  himself  who  is  the  original  of  this 
his  description  of  the  man  in  whom  either  nature  or  circumstances  have  unduly 
developed  some  one  tendency  of  the  character,  to  the  injury  of  the  proper  and 
rational  balance  and  harmony  of  the  whole ;  and  who,  in  consequence  of  this  one 


kct  i,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  89 

Enter  Ghost. 

Hor.  Look,  my  lord,  it  comes  ! 

Ham.     Angels  and  ministers  of  grace  defend  us ! — 
Be  thou  a  spirit  of  health  or  goblin  damn'd,  40 

Bring  with  thee  airs  from  heaven  or  blasts  from  hell, 
Be  thy  intents  wicked  or  charitable, 

Enter  Ghost.]    After  line  38,  Dyce,  38.  it]  where  it  Q'76. 

Sta.  Clark,  Huds  ii.     ...armed  as  before.  42.  intents]  events  Ff,  Rowe.    advent 

Coll.  (MS).  Warb. 

defect,  for  which  he  is  not  responsible,  and  should  rather  be  pitied  than  blamed,  is 
looked  on  with  disparagement  by  the  world,  however  excellent  all  his  other  qualities 
may  be. 

39.  In  Davies's  Dram.  Misc.  (iii,  29)  an  account  is  given  from  Cibber  of  Better- 
ton's  acting  in  this  scene;  Betterton  was  taught  by  Sir  William  Davenant,  who  had 
seen  Taylor,  one  of  the  original  performers  of  Hamlet  [see  V,  ii,  274]  :  '  He  opened 
the  scene  with  a  pause  of  mute  amazement;  then,  rising  slowly  to  a  solemn,  trem- 
bling voice,  he  made  the  Ghost  equally  terrible  to  the  spectator  and  himself;  and, 
in  the  descriptive  part  of  the  natural  emotions  which  the  ghastly  vision  gave  him, 
the  boldness  of  his  expostulation  was  still  governed  by  decency ;  manly,  but  not 
braving ;  his  voice  never  rising  to  that  seeming  outrage  or  wild  defiance  of  what  he 
naturally  revered.'  Booth  said :  '  When  I  acted  the  Ghost  with  Betterton,  instead 
of  my  awing  him,  he  terrified  me.  But  divinity  hung  round  that  man.'  On  the 
other  hand,  Macklin,  after  the  first  line,  spoke  the  rest  of  the  address  calmly  but  re- 
spectfully, and  with  a  firm  tone  of  voice,  as  from  one  who  had  subdued  his  timidity 
and  apprehension.  Booth,  says  Davies,  has  never  been  surpassed  in  his  acting  of 
the  Ghost;  his  slow,  solemn,  and  undertone  of  voice,  his  noiseless  tread,  as  if  he  had 
been  composed  of  air,  created  a  powerful  impression.  Hunter  (ii,  222) :  ■  The  idea 
of  surprise  predominates  over  the  idea  of  apprehension.  He  did  not  mean  that  he 
needed  protection  in  the  presence  of  so  gracious  a  figure,  and  the  exclamation  must 
be  understood  to  escape  him  almost  involuntarily.  A  pretty  long  pause  should  ensue 
after  it  is  spoken,  to  allow  him  to  recollect  himself.'  A  stage  direction  [Pause~\  is 
added  after  this  line  by  Collier  (ed.  ii),  with  the  note :  This  minute  stage  direction, 
showing  the  particular  manner  of  the  old  actor  of  the  character  of  Hamlet,  ought  to 
be  preserved,  and  is  from  the  (MS).  It  seems  natural  that  the  performer  should 
'  pause '  to  recover  breath  after  this  exclamation,  and  before  he  tremblingly  proceeds 
to  question  the  Ghost.  We  believe  that  the  modern  practice  on  our  stage  has  been 
uniform  in  this  respect, — possibly  from  the  oldest  tradition.  [See  Lichtenberg's 
account  of  Garrick,  in  the  Appendix.  Ed.] 

40.  health]  Clarendon  :  A  healed  or  saved  spirit. 

42.  intents]  Nichols  (i,  27)  advocates  '  events '  of  Ff,  in  the  sense  of  '  coming 
forth.'  *  The  Ghost  had  already  appeared  twice, — this  was  the  third  time  of  hi* 
coming  forth?  Corson  :  The  reading  of  the  Ff  is  better  than  that  of  the  Qq. 
Events  is  equivalent  to  issues.  The  meaning  is,  not  that  Hamlet  attributes  any 
intents '  to  the  Ghost,  but  that  the  Ghost's  appearance  is  to  him  prognostic  of  cer- 
tain issues  or  events;  'thy'  is  the  personal,  and  not  the  possessive,  adjective  pro- 
noun; in  other  words,  it  is  used  objectively. 
8* 


90  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 

Thou  comest  in  such  a  questionable  shape 

That  I  will  speak  to  thee ;  I'll  call  thee  Hamlet, 

King,  Father ;  Royal  Dane,  O,  answer  me  !  45 

Let  me  not  burst  in  ignorance ;  but  tell 

Why  thy  canoniz'd  bones,  hearsed  in  death 

Have  burst  their  cerements ;  why  the  sepulchre, 

45.  Father ;  Royal  Dane,  O]  Anon.  47.  canonized... death]    bones   hears' d 

father,    royal  Dane,   o   Qq.      Father,  in  canonized  earth  Han. 

Royal  Dane:   OYi  et  cet.  48.  cerements']    cerments    FT.     Cear- 

0]  Oh,  oh  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  merits  F2F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 

47.  canoniz 'd]  canonized  Glo.  +  ,Mob. 

43.  questionable]  Theobald  :  That  is,  to  be  conversed  with,  inviting  question, 
as  in  Macb.  I,  iii,  43.  Caldecott:  '  So  doubtful,  that  I  will  at  least  make  inquiry 
to  obtain  a  solution.' 

45.  Royal  Dane]  Pye  (p.  312) :  The  change  of  punctuation  proposed  in  the 
following  anonymous  observation,  published  in  the  St.  James's  Chronicle,  15  Oct. 
1 76 1,  is  so  convincing  that  I  shall  without  hesitation  adopt  it:  '[To  put  a  colon 
after  "  Dane"]  seems  to  be  a  strange  climax  (if  not  an  anti-climax).  But  a  slight 
alteration  in  the  pointing  will  remove  all  objections,  preserve  the  beauty  of  the 
climax,  and  perhaps  give  an  additional  force  to  the  whole  passage.  Thus,  "  I'll  call 
thee  Hamlet,  King,  Father, — Royal  Dane,  O  answer  me."  The  climax  naturally 
and  beautifully  ends  with  the  endearing  appellation  of  "  Father."  He  then  addresses 
the  Ghost  by  the  general  appellation,  "  Royal  Dane,  O  answer  me."  '  This  seems 
the  criticism  of  no  mean  critic,  [ivlr  Edwin  Booth  has  informed  me  that  his  father 
always  spoke  the  line  thus,  and  that  he  himself  has  always  so  spoken  it.  I  believe 
Mr  Irving  has  also  adopted  it.  To  me  it  is  unquestionably  the  true  reading,  and  I 
have  not  hesitated  to  punctuate  the  text  accordingly.  Ed.] 

47.  canoniz'd]  Warburton  :  Bones  over  which  the  rites  of  sepulture  have  been 
performed,  or  which  were  buried  according  to  the  canon.  Blakeway  :  The  accent 
is  on  the  second  syllable.     [See  Walker,  Vers.  197  ;  Abbott,  g  491.] 

47-50.  Johnson  has  a  long  note  on  these  lines,  called  forth  by  Warburton's 
superfluous  change  of  '  hearsed  in  earth'  and  sums  up  the  whole  sentence  in : 
'  Why  dost  thou  appear,  whom  we  know  to  be  dead  ?'  Heath  (p.  531) :  By  the  ex- 
pression hearsed  in  death  is  meant,  shut  up  and  secured  with  all  those  precautions 
which  are  usually  practised  in  preparing  dead  bodies  for  sepulture,  such  as  the  wind- 
ing-sheet, shroud,  coffin,  &c.  So  that  death  is  here  used,  by  a  metonymy  of  the 
antecedent  for  the  consequent,  for  the  rites  of  death,  such  as  are  generally  esteemed 
due,  and  practised  with  regard  to  dead  bodies. 

48.  cerements]  Clarendon  :  Qt  here  reads  '  ceremonies.'  As  this  copy  is  prob- 
ably derived  from  short-hand  notes  taken  at  the  play,  it  would  seem  to  show  that 
'  cerements  '  was  pronounced  as  a  trisyllable.  [Does  it  not  rather  show  that  '  cere- 
monies '  was  pronounced  as  a  trisyllable  :  •  cer'monies  ?'  and  is  it  not  an  additional 
proof  of  what  Staunton  and  Walker  affirm  in  reference  to  the  monosyllabic  pro- 
nunciation of  cere  in  ceremony,  ceremonious,  ceremonials  ?  See  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  36. 
Ed.]  See  Cotgrave :  •  Cerat :  A  Plaister  made  of  Waxe,  Gummes,  <&c,  and  cei- 
taine  oyles     wee  also,  call  it,  a  Cerot  or  Searecloth.' 


act  i,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  9 1 

Wherein  we  saw  thee  quietly  in-urn'd, 

Hath  oped  his  ponderous  and  marble  jaws,  50 

To  cast  thee  up  again.     What  may  this  mean, 

That  thou,  dead  corse,  again,  in  complete  steel, 

Revisits  thus  the  glimpses  of  the  moon, 

Making  night  hideous ;  and  we  fools  of  nature 

49.  in-urn'd]  enur/i'd  Fs.     interred        Revifitjl  FaF  .     Revisifst  F   et  cet. 
Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  El.     inmured  Anon.*  53.  glimpses']  glimfes  QaQ3Q4» 

53.  Revisits]  Fx,  Cald.    Reuifites  Qq.  54.  we]  us  Theob.  Pope  ii+,  Jen. 

49.  in-urn'd]  Dyce:  In  my  Few  Notes,  &c,  p.  137,  I  remarked:  'Perhaps  the 
reading  of  the  Qq  is  preferable,  because  in-urn'd  implies  that  the  body  had  been  re- 
duced to  ashes,' — a  remark  which  I  now  wish  to  recall.  Compare  Cor.  V,  vi,  145, 
146.     Clarendon  :  ■  Urn  '  is  used  for  'grave  '  in  Hen.  V :  I,  ii,  228. 

52.  complete]  Accented  on  the  first  syllable.  See  Walker,  Vers.  292;  Crit. 
ii,  21  :  Abbott,  \  492.  Douce  :  It  is  accented  on  the  second  syllable  in  King  John, 
II,  i,  433,  434. 

52.  steel]  Steevens  :  Probably  Sh.  introduced  the  Ghost  in  armour  for  the  sake 
of  greater  solemnity ;  though  it  was  really  the  custom  of  the  Danish  kings  to  be 
buried  in  that  manner.  Vide  Olaus  Wormius,  cap.  vii :  ' .  . .  postquam  . . .  rex  collem 
sibi  .  .  .  extruxisset,  cui  post  obitum  regio  diademate  exornatum,  armis  indutum,  in- 
ferendum  esset  cadaver.' 

53.  Revisits]  Walker  [Crit.  ii,  128) :  Quare,  in  cases  where  st  would  produce 
extreme  harshness,  and  where  at  the  same  time  the  old  copies  have  s,  whether  we 
ought  not  to  write  the  latter?     [The  text  which  I  have  adopted  is  my  answer.  Ed.] 

53.  glimpses]  Hunter  (ii,  223) :  The  scene  is  thus  made  more  picturesque  by 
introducing  the  moon  sending  forth  her  beams  on  the  platform,  either  through  in- 
terstices of  dark  clouds,  or,  what  is  more  probable,  through  the  openings  among  the 
battlements. 

54.  we]  Theobald,  Caldecott,  and  Clarendon  say  that  in  strict  grammar  us 
should  be  here  used;  but  Walker  [Crit.  i,  58)  evidently,  as  Lettsom  notes,  con- 
nects '  we  fools '  with  '  That,'  and  so  does  Moberly  in  his  excellent  paraphrase : 
*  What  may  it  mean  that  we  with  our  blind  nature  (are  made)  so  horribly  to  shake 
our  composure  of  spirit  with  thoughts  beyond  the  reach  of  our  souls  ?'  adding ;  '  This 
random  connexion  of  the  clause  suits  well  with  the  headlong  impetuosity  of  the 
speech.'  On  the  same  grammatical  grounds  Tschischwitz  reads,  '  So  horridly  do 
shake.'  Abbott,  \  216,  thus  explains  'and  we ' :  After  a  conjunction  and  before  an 
infinitive  we  often  find  /,  thou,  &c,  where  in  Latin  we  should  have  '  me,'  '  te,'  &c. 
The  conjunction  seems  to  be  regarded  as  introducing  a  new  sentence,  instead  of 
connecting  one  clause  with  another.  Hence  the  pronoun  is  put  in  the  nominative, 
and  a  verb  is,  perhaps,  to  be  supplied  from  the  context.  So,  too,  we  have  '  we '  for 
us  in  III,  ii,  231,  since  it  stands  quasi-independently  at  some  distance  from  the  gov- 
erning word,  '  touches.' 

54.  fools]  Warburton  :  Intimating  that  we  are  only  kept  (as  formerly  fools  in 
a  great  family)  to  make  sport  for  nature,  who  lies  hid  only  to  mock  and  laugh  at  uz 
for  our  vain  searches  into  her  mysteries.     Mason  (p.  378)  :  A  paraphrase  of  the 


92  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 

So  horridly  to  shake  our  disposition  55 

With  thoughts  beyond  the  reaches  of  our  souls  ? 
Say,  why  is  this  ?  wherefore  ?  what  should  we  do  ? 

\Ghost  beckons  Hamleu 

Hor.     It  beckons  you  to  go  away  with  it, 
As  if  it  some  impartment  did  desire 
To  you  alone. 

Mar.  Look,  with  what  courteous  action  60 

It  waves  you  to  a  more  removed  ground ; 
But  do  not  go  with  it. 

Hor.  No,  by  no  means. 

Ham.     It  will  not  speak ;  then  I  will  follow  it. 

Hor.     Do  not,  my  lord. 

Ham.  Why,  what  should  be  the  fear  ? 

55.  horridly]  horribly  Theob  + .  61.  waves']    wafts   Ff,    Rowe,    Cald. 

56.  the  reaches]  thee ;  reaches  Ff.  Knt. 

57.  [Ghost  beckons  Hamlet.]  Ghofl  to  a  more]  off  to  a  Johns, 
beckens  Hamlet.    Ff.     Beckins.    Q3Q^  more  removed]  remote  Q'76. 
Beckons.  Q4QS«  Om.  Cap.  Steev.  Knt.  62.   [Holding  Hamlet.  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

58.  beckons]  beckins  Q2Q3-  beckens  63.  /  will]  will  I  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
F8F3F4.  Coll.  Dyce  i,  White,  Sta. 

60.  courteous]  curteous  Q2Q3Q4F  . 

common  expression,  natural  fools.  Clarendon  :  Playthings  of  nature,  completely 
under  her  influence.     See  Meas.  for  Meas.  Ill,  i,  II. 

55.  disposition]   Mood.     See  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  113. 

57.  wherefore]  See  Walker,  Vers.  1 11,  for  instances  where  the  accent  in  this 
word  is  shifted  at  pleasure  from  one  syllable  to  another;  see  Rom.  <5^  Jul.  II,  ii, 
62.     Also  Abbott,  \  75,  for  the  use  of  •  why.' 

61.  waves]  Dyce:  Although  the  Ff  here  and  in  line  78  have  'wafts,5  but 
'  waves '  in  line  68,  yet  undoubtedly  Sh.  in  these  three  places  used  the  same  form  of 
the  word ;  and  as  the  Qq  in  all  three  places  have  *  waues,'  they  surely  are  to  be  fol- 
lowed. Clarendon  :  Either  word  means  *  beckon,'  and  both  are  used  by  Sh.  So 
we  have  a  double  form  of  '  graff '  and  '  graft.' 

61.  removed]  Cambridge  Editors  :  Steevens  says, '  Fx  reads  remote.''  We  have 
not  been  able  to  find  this  reading  in  any  copy  of  that  edition  which  we  have  con- 
sulted. Sir  Frederic  Madden  has  kindly  collated  for  us  the  four  copies  in  the  British 
Museum,  all  of  which  have  '  removed.'  This  is  also  the  reading  of  Capell's  copy, 
of  Malone's,  and  of  two  others  to  which  we  have  had  access,  and  it  is  the  reading 
in  Mr  Booth's  reprint.     [It  is  also  the  reading  in  my  copy  of  F,.  Ed.] 

64.  should]  See  Abbott,  \  328,  for  instances  of  '  should '  denoting  a  statement 
not  made  by  the  speaker,  like  sollen  in  German.  Clarendon  refers  to  Alacb.  I,  iii, 
45,  as  a  parallel  instance,  but  Abbott,  \  323,  seems  to  interpret  the  use  of  'should' 
it  that  line  more  correctly,  and  is  so  cited  in  the  Var.  ed. 


act  I,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  93 

I  do  not  set  my  life  at  a  pin's  fee ;  65 

And  for  my  soul,  what  can  it  do  to  that, 

Being  a  thing  immortal  as  itself? 

It  waves  me  forth  again;  I'll  follow  it. 

Hor.     What  if  it  tempt  you  toward  the  flood,  my  lord, 
Or  to  the  dreadful  summit  of  the  cliff  70 

That  beetles  o'er  his  base  into  the  sea, 
And  there  assume  some  other  horrible  form, 
Which  might  deprive  your  sovereignty  of  reason 

65.  set. ..fee']  value  my  life  Q'76.  72.  assume-]  affumes  Ff. 

fee;]  fee,  Qq.    fee?  F3F4.  horrible]    horrable    Q3Q3-     Ora. 

69.  toward]  towards  Q.Q--  Q'76. 

flood]  floods  Q'76.  73.  deprive]  deprave  Warb.  Han. 

70.  summit]  Rowe.  fomnet  Qq.  Son-  your. ..reason]  you  of  your  sove- 
net  Ff.     border  Q'76.                                         raign  reason  Coll.  (MS),    of  sovereignty 

cliff]  cleefe  Qq.      Cliffe  FIF2F  .  your  reason  Hunter. 

71.  beetles]  bellies  Q2Q3.    bellels  Q4QS- 

73.  deprive]  Johnson  :  In  this  place  it  signifies  simply  to  take  away.  So  alsc 
Dyce  interprets  it  in  '  deprives  our  own  sight.' — Beau.  &  Fl.  The  Maid  in  the  Mill, 
IV,  iii,  8.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  261):  That  is,  depose  reason  from  her  throne  in 
your  mind.  '  Deprive '  is  here  synonymous  with  depose.  Lettsom  [Foot-note  to 
the  foregoing)  :  I  have  observed  two  examples  of  this  use  of  the  word  in  R.  of  L. 
1 186  and  1752.  Again,  '  And  join  together  to  deprive  my  breath.' — Woman  KilPd 
with  Kindness,  Dodsley  vii,  p.  261  ;  •  What  son,  what  comfort  that  she  [Fortune) 
can  deprive  ?' — Marston,  Antonio  &>  Mellida,  Part  i,  III,  i.  Abbott,  \  200 :  '  De- 
prive,' meaning  to  '  take  away  a  thing  from  a  person,'  like  '  rid/  can  dispense  with 
*  of  before  the  impersonal  object.  This  explains  the  present  passage  :  '  which  might 
take  away  your  controlling  principle  of  reason.'  Compare  also  the  tendency  (§  290) 
to  convert  neuter  verbs  into  active  verbs.     See  also  I,  iii,  51. 

73.  sovereignty  of  reason]  Warburton  :  The  same  as  sovereign  or  supreme 
reason.  Thus,  'At  once  to  betray  the  sovereignty  of  reason  in  my  soul.' — King  Charles, 
Ikon  Basilike.  Capell  (i,  126)  :  Deprive  you  of  the  command  of  your  reason,  of 
that  sovereignty  which  you  now  exercise  over  it.  Steevens  :  The  phrase  does  not 
signify,  to  deprive  your  princely  mind  of  rational  powers,  but  to  take  away  from  you 
the  command  of  reason,  by  which  man  is  governed.  Gifford  (Jonson's  New  Inn, 
p.  352,  ed.  1816) :  •  Sovereignty'  here  is  merely  a  title  of  respect,  and  the  whole 
phrase  means  neither  more  nor  lts*s  than  to  deprive  your  lordship,  or  your  honour, 
or  your  highness,  of  reason.  [Aliquando  dormitat,  &c.  As  Hunter  says,  Hamlet 
was  no  sovereign.  Ed.]  Caldecott  :  Dispossess  the  sovereignty  of  your  reason. 
So  that  he  throws  his  image  forcibly  before  his  reader,  Sh.  leaves  it  to  him  to  arrange 
his  pronouns  and  articles,  and  grammatically  thread  his  meaning.  Compare  '  nobility 
of  love,'  I,  ii,  no.  For  instances  where  pronominal  and  other  adjectives  are  placed 
before  a  whole  compound  noun  instead  of,  as  they  strictly  should  be,  before  the 
second  of  the  two  nouns,  see  Abbott,  g  423.  So  '  your  cause  of  distemper,'  III. 
ii,  321 ;  '  H;s  means  of  death,'  i.  e.  *  the  means  of  his  death.' — IV,  v,  207.  *  My 
better  part  of  man.' — Macb.  V,  viii,  18. 


94  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 

And  draw  you  into  madness  ?  think  of  it ; 

The  very  place  puts  toys  of  desperation,  75 

Without  more  motive,  into  every  brain 

That  looks  so  many  fathoms  to  the  sea 

And  hears  it  roar  beneath. 

Ham.  It  waves  me  still. — 

Go  on ;  I'll  follow  thee. 

Mar.     You  shall  not  go,  my  lord. 

Ham.  Hold  off  your  hands !         80 

Hor.     Be  ruled ;  you  shall  not  go. 

Ham.  My  fate  cries  out, 

And  makes  each  petty  artery  in  this  body 
As  hardy  as  the  Nemean  lion's  nerve.  \Ghost  beckom. 

Still  am  I  call'd  ? — Unhand  me,  gentlemen  ; 

[Breaking  from  them. 
By  heaven,  I'll  make  a  ghost  of  him  that  lets  me ;  85 

74.  draw]    drive   Walker    (Crit.   iii,  81.   [They  struggle.  Coll.  (MS). 
262).                                                                          82.  artery]  Q'76.    arture  Q2Q3-    ar 

it;]   Cap.     it,  Qq.     it?  Fx.     it.  tyre  Q4<    attire  QSF4>     Artire  FXF2F3. 
F2F3F4,  Rowe  +  .  this]  his  F3F4. 

75-78.    The  very. ..beneath.]  Om.  Ff,  83.  As  hardy]  Hardy  Cap. 

Rowe.  Nemean]  Nemeon  Q2Q3.  Nemian 

78,  79.  It.. .thee.]  One  line,  Ff,  Rowe  FfFa. 
+ ,  Jen.  Sing.  El.  Ktly,  Del.  Huds.  [Ghost  beckons.]  Mai.     Om.  Qq, 

78.  waves]    wafts   Ff,    Rowe,    Cald.  Ff,  Glo. -f ,  Mob. 
Knt.  84.  am  I]  I  am  Q'76. 

And. ..Go  on]  One  line,  Coll.  i,  calPd?]    F2F3F4,    Rowe,    Pope, 

White.  Han.  Cap.  Cald.    cald,  Qq.    caVd?  Fx. 

So.  of]  of  Q2Q3Q4.  calPd.    Johns.   Jen.   Coll.  White,   Glo. 

hands]    hand  Ff,    Rowe,   Pope,  Cla.  Mob.    calVd :  or  calTd  ;  The  rest. 

Han.  Breaking....]    Rowe.      Om.    Qq, 

81.  Hor.]  Mar.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Ff,  Cap.  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

75.  toys]  Freaks.  See  'inconstant  toy,'  Rom.  6°  Jul.  IV,  i,  119.  Hunter  (11, 
223)  :  An  allusion  to  what  many  persons  feel  when  on  lofty  heights,  a  desire  of 
throwing  themselves  headlong. 

75-76.  The  .  .  .  beneath]  Delius  (Sh.  Lex.  p.  182) :  The  substance  of  these 
lines  Sh.  afterwards  introduced,  much  enlarged  and  elaborated,  into  King  Lear,  just 
as  he  introduced  into  yul.  Cces.  a  passage  that  had  been  erased  from  the  first  scene 
of  Hamlet.     This  probably  accounts  for  the  omission  of  these  lines  in  the  Ff. 

83.  Nemean]  Capell  (i,  126) :  This  accentuation  has  its  examples,  and  in  Sh. 
himself,  see  Love's  Lab.  IV,  i,  90. 

85.  lets]  Steevens:  Among  our  old  writers,  'let'  signifies  to  prevent  or  hinder. 
It  is  still  current  in  the  law.  Clarendon:  Compare  Romans,  i,  13,  and  2  Thessa 
lontans,  ii,  7. 


ACT    I,  SC.  V.J 


HAMLET 


95 


I  say,  away! — Go  on;  I'll  follow  thee.  06 

[Exeunt  Ghost  and  Hamlet. 
He  waxes  desperate  with  imagination. 
Let's  follow ;  'tis  not  fit  thus  to  obey  him. 
Have  after. — To  what  issue  will  this  come  ? 


Hor. 
Mar. 
Hor. 
Mar. 
Hor. 
Mar. 


Something  is  rotten  in  the  state  of  Denmark. 
Heaven  will  direct  it. 

Nay,  let's  follow  him.     [Exeunt. 


90 


0-<a^l) 


Scene  V.     Another  part  of  the  platform. 

Enter  Ghost  and  Hamlet. 

Ham.     Whither   wilt   thou    lead   me?    speak;    I'll    go    no 

further. 
Ghost.  Mark  me. 
Ham.  I  will. 

Ghost.  My  hour  is  almost  come, 


56.  on]  one  Q.QS- 

[Exeunt....]  Exit...  Qq. 
87.  waxes]  grows  Q'76. 

imagination]  imagion  Q2Q,. 
91.  Heaven]  Heaven's  Coll.  (MS). 
direct  it]   dif cover  it  Q'76.     de- 
tect it  Farmer. 

Scene  v.]  Cap.    Scene  viii.  Pope+, 
Jen. 


Another  part....]    Cap.   (substan- 
tially.)    A  more  remote  part...   Theob. 
Enter...]  Re-enter...  Pope  +  . 
1.    Whither]     Q'76.       Whether    Qq, 
Where  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  ii, 
Dyce,  White,  Del.  Huds.  Glo.  Mob. 

further]  farther  Coll.  El.  White. 


2.  hour]  houre  Qq. 
our  F„. 


hower  F..    non- 


89.  Have  after]  Clarendon:  Like  'have  with  you.'  See  Rich.  Ill :  111,  11, 
92.  In  Foxe's  narrative,  Latimer  said  to  Ridley  on  their  way  to  the  stake,  '  Have 
after,  as  fast  as  I  can  follow.' 

91.  it]  Clarendon:  That  is,  the  issue. 

91.  Nay]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  let  us  not  leave  it  to  Heaven,  but  do  something 
ourselves. 

Stage  Direction]  Owing  to  the  length  of  time  that  elapses  before  the  companions 
of  Ham.  rejoin  him,  Delius  thinks  it  unlikely  that  the  dialogue  with  the  Ghost  took 
place  on  the  same  Platform  where  Ham.  broke  loose  from  his  friends.  TscmscHWlTZ 
changes  the  scene  to  'A  Wilderness,'  because  •  Ham.  must  have  followed  the  Ghost 
a  long  distance,  since  he  refuses  to  go  farther.  His  question  also,  "  Whither  wilt 
thou  lead  me?"  shows  that,  despite  his  courage,  horror  is  beginning  to  creep  over 
him ;  and  at  the  close  of  the  scene  the  Ghost  speaks  from  under  the  ground.'  The 
earliest  change  in  this  stage  direction  that  I  can  find  is  in  Schroeder's  adaptation 
of  the  play  for  the  Hamburg  theatre,  in  178 1.  Here  the  scene  is  laid  in  '  A  Grave- 
yard with  th4  Church  in  the  background? 


96  HAMLET  |  act  I,  SC  v. 

When  I  to  sulphurous  and  tormenting  flames  3 

Must  render  up  myself. 

Ham.  Alas,  poor  ghost ! 

Ghost.     Pity  me  not,  but  lend  thy  serious  hearing  5 

To  what  I  shall  unfold. 

Ham.  Speak  ;  I  am  bound  to  hear. 

Ghost.     So  art  thou  to  revenge,  when  thou  shalt  hear. 

Ham.     What  ? 

Ghost.     I  am  thy  father's  spirit ; 
Doom'd  for  a  certain  term  to  walk  the  night,  10 

And  for  the  day  confined  to  fast  in  fires, 

3.  sulphurous']  fulphrus  Q2Q3-  ful-         Seymour.      What !   Sta.     Hear  what  t 

phrous  Q4Q5-    fulpherous  F  .  Ktly. 

5,6.  Pity... unfold.]  Prose,  Q4Q5-  II.  to  fast  in]  too  fast  in  Warb.     to 

5.  thy]  my  Qg.  lasting  Heath,  Sing,  ii,  Coll.  ii  (MS). 

6.  Speak]  Om.  Seymour.  to  fasting    Jackson,    fast   in   Ingleby 
hear.]  here,  Q4.  [Once  a  Week,  30  Aug.  '64). 

7.  when]  what  Q'76.  fires]  fire  Cald. 

8.  What  ?]    Revenge  !   what  ?  how  ? 

6,  7.  Speak  .  .  .  hear]  Douce  :  These  words  are  turned  into  ridicule  in  The 
Woman  Hater,  Beau,  and  Fl.  vol.  i,  p.  37,  ed.  Dyce. 

6.  bound]  Delius  :  Hamlet  uses  the  word  in  the  sense  of  ready  addressed  [past 
part,  of  Old  Norse  buinn, — see  Wedgwood],  the  Ghost  uses  it  as  the  past  participle 
of  the  verb  to  bind. 

11.  to  fast  in]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  p.  45)  conjectured  that  we  should  read 
roast,  but  afterwards  in  his  correspondence  with  his  '  most  affectionate  friend,' 
Warburton  (see  Nichols,  Lit.  Hist.  vol.  ii,  p.  559),  he  said,  '  sed  facti  pcenitet?  and 
suggested  instead,  confined  fast ;  presumably  he  withdrew  them  both,  since  he  does 
not  allude  to  them  in  his  ed.,  where  he  says:  The  expression  is  purely  metaphorical, 
for  fasting  could  be  no  great  punishment  for  a  Spirit.  According  to  the  Roman 
Ca^olic  religion,  fasting  purifies  the  soul  here,  as  the  fire  does  in  the  Purgatory  here 
alluded  to ;  the  soul  must  be  purged  either  by  fasting  here  or  by  burning  hereafter. 
Heath  and  Johnson  both  conjectured  to  lasting,  which  the  former  considered  jus 
tified  by  the  next  line,  the  meaning  being :  fires  which  were  to  last  till  the  purgation 
was  completed ;  and  which  the  latter  interpreted  as  unremitted  and  unconsumed. 
Collier's  (MS)  has  the  same.  Smith  [cited  by  Steevens]  :  Chaucer  has  a  similar 
passage  with  regard  to  the  punishments  of  hell,  Persones  Tale,  p.  291,  ed.  Tyrwhitt, 
4to :  '  And  moreover  the  misese  of  helle  shall  be  in  defaute  of  mete  and  drink.' 
Steevens:  Nash,  m  Pierce  Penniless  his  Supplication  to  the  Devil,  1595,  has  the 
same  idea  :  •  Whether  it  be  a  place  of  horror,  stench  and  darkness,  where  men 
see  meat,  but  can  get  none,  or  are  ever  thirsty,'  &c.  So  likewise  at  the  conclusion 
of  an  ancient  pamphlet  called  The  Wyll  of  the  Devyll,  bl.  1.  no  date :  '  Thou  shalt 
lye  in  frost  and  fire  With  sicknesse  and  hunger?  &c.  But  for  the  foregoing  ex- 
amples I  should  have  supposed  we  ought  to  read,  '  to  7vaste  in  fires.'  Mason  :  As 
spirits  were  supposed  to  feel  tht  same  desires  and  appetites  that  they  had  on  earth, 


act  I,  sc.  v.]  HAMLET  gy 

Till  the  foul  crimes  done  in  my  days  of  nature 

Are  burnt  and  purged  away.     But  that  I  am  forbid 

To  tell  the  secrets  of  my  prison-house, 

I  could  a  tale  unfold  whose  lightest  word  15 

Would  harrow  up  thy  soul,  freeze  thy  young  blood, 

.Make  thy  two  eyes,  like  stars,  start  from  their  spheres, 

Thy  knotted  and  combined  locks  to  part 

And  each  particular  hair  to  stand  an  end, 

Like  quills  upon  the  fretful  porpentine :  20 

But  this  eternal  blazon  must  not  be 

13.  that  I  am]  being  Seymour.  20.  fretful]  fretfullY 'IFaF3.   fearefull 

18.  knotted]  knotty  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Qq,  Jen.  Tsch. 

Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Cald.  porpentine]  porcupine  Q1 76,  Rowe 

19.  an  end]  on  end  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Mai.  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll. 
Steev.    Cald.    White,    Dyce    ii,    Huds.          Sing.  El.  Sta.  Clarke,  Hal. 

an-end  Bos.  Coll.  El.  Del. 

to  fast  might  be  considered  as  one  of  the  punishments  inflicted  on  the  wicked.  Dyce 
(ed.  i. ):  If  the  old  text  be  wrong,  and  certainly  the  passages  in  Chaucer,  &c,  as 
given  above,  do  not  fully  establish  it,  Steevens's  conj.  of  waste  in  is  perhaps  the 
most  probable  alteration  yet  proposed.  [This  remark  about  Steevens's  conj.  is 
omitted  in  Dyce  (ed.  ii),  and  citations  from  Chaucer,  &c.  alone  are  given.]  White  : 
These  fires  were  those  of  Purgatory,  in  which  the  Ghost  was  confined  for  the  day 
only,  and  so  were  not  lasting  in  any  sense.  '  Fast'  may  be  used  here  in  its  radical 
sense  of  religious  observance,  and  without  any  allusion  to  abstinence  from  food,  or 
there  may  be  a  reference  to  the  old  notion  contained  in  the  extract  from  Chaucer. 
Tschischwitz  :  Lasting  cannot  be  right,  because  the  Ghost  was  in  Purgatory,  nor 
is  to  fast  in  any  better,  since  the  old  king  wanders  about  outside  his  'prison-house,' 
and  could,  if  he  chose,  satisfy  his  hunger.  Clearly,  the  true  opposite  to  '  walk ' 
is  what  I  have  adopted  in  my  text,  'confined  fast.'      [See  Theobald  supra.  Ed.] 

14.  burnt  and  purged]  Farmer  :  Thus  Gawain  Douglas,  in  his  translation  of 
ALn.  vi,  740,  says  that  '  it  is  a  nedeful  thing  to  suffer  panis  and  torment,  .  .  .  some 
in  the  wyndis,  sum  under  the  watter,  and  in  the  fire  uthir  sum.  Till  the  mony  vices 
Contrakkit  in  the  corpis  be  done  away  And  purgit.' 

17,  18.  Make  .  .  .  start  .  .  .  to]  For  the  omission  and  insertion  of  '  to  '  in  the 
same  sentence,  see  Abbott,  §  350,  and  I,  v,  178. 

19.  an  end]  For  instances  of  nouns,  adjectives,  and  participles  with  the  prefix  a, 
see  Abbott,  §  24,  where  it  is  shown  that  a  represents  some  preposition,  as  'in,'  '  on,' 
'of,'  &c,  contracted  by  rapidity  of  pronunciation,  and  takes  an  n  before  a  vowel  for 
euphony.  See  also  \  182,  and  of  this  play,  I,  iii,  119  ;  II,  ii,  466  ;  III,  i,  165  ;  III, 
iv,  122  ;  and  Macb.  V,  v,  49.  Eastwood  and  Wright  {Bible  Word-Book,  p.  2): 
This  prefix  a-  or  an-  is  generally  said  to  be  a  corruption  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  particle 
on-,  but  more  probably  the  two  are  essentially  identical,  and  only  different  dialectical 
forms  of  the  same.  In  many  instances  the  two  forms  remain  side  by  side,  as  in  aboard 
and  on-board,  aground  and  on  ground. 

21.  eternal]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  62)  proposes  infernal,  and  cites  it  among  instances 
9  G 


9S  HAMLET  [act  I,  sc 

To  ears  of  flesh  and  blood.     List,  list,  O,  list !  22 

If  thou  didst  ever  thy  dear  father  love — 

Ham.     O  God ! 

Ghost.     Revenge  his  foul  and  most  unnatural  murder.  25 

Ham.     Murder  ? 

Ghost.     Murder  most  foul,  as  in  the  best  it  is, 
But  this  most  foul,  strange,  and  unnatural. 

Ham.     Haste  me  to  know't,  that  I,  with  wings  as  swift 
As  meditation  or  the  thoughts  of  love,  30 

May  sweep  to  my  revenge. 

Ghost.  I  find  thee  apt ; 

And  duller  shouldst  thou  be  than  the  fat  weed 

22.  List,  list"]  list  Hamlet  Ff  (Hamle  Haft,  haft  me  Ft.  Hafte,  hafte  me  Y% 
F3),  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  White,  Del.  F3F4. 

23.  love — ]  Rowe.     loue.  QqFf.  29.  Haste... swift']  Two  lines,  Ff. 

24.  God]  Heaven  FfQ'76,  Rowe  +  ,  know't]  know  it  Ff,  Rowe  4,  Jen, 
Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt.     know  Pope. 

26.  murder  ?]  Murther  ?  Ff.     Mur-  that]  what  Pope  ii. 
ther.  Qq.    murder  !  Q6*  Sing,  ii,  Dyce,  /]  Om.  Ff. 

Sta.  Ktly,  Glo. +  ,  Huds.  Mob.  31.  sweep]  Jlye  Q'76. 

29.  Haste  me]  Q5.    Haft  me  Q2Q3Q4.  32.  shouldst]  ftwuldeft  Q4Q5- 

of  '  an  inaccurate  use  of  words  in  Sh.,  some  of  them  owing  to  his  imperfect  scholar- 
ship (imperfect,  I  say,  for  he  was  not  an  ignorant  man,  even  on  this  point),  and 
others  common  to  him  with  his  contemporaries.' 

21.  blazon]  Caldecott:  *  Such  promulgation  of  the  mysteries  of  eternity  must 
not  be  made  to  beings  of  a  day.'  Wedgwood:  i.  To  blow  abroad,  to  spread 
news,  to  publish.  2.  To  portray  armorial  bearings  in  their  proper  colours.  Moberly  : 
'  A  blaze  '  is  a  white  mark  upon  a  horse ;  whence  to  blaze  trees  is  to  notch  them  with 
an  axe,  so  as  to  mark  the  way  back.  To  c  blazon,'  therefore,  means  properly  to 
mark  out ;  hence  •  to  reveal.' 

24.  O  God!]  Seymour  (ii,  159)  considers  this  as  an  unnecessary  interpolation  of 
some  actors;  so  also  the  Ghost's  repetition  of  •  Murder'  in  line  27. 

27.  For  this  line  Tschischwitz  substitutes  the  two  corresponding  lines  of  Qr. 

30.  meditation]  Warburton  :  This  word  is  consecrated  by  the  mysticks  to  sig- 
nify that  flight  of  mind  which  aspires  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  supreme  Good.  Sc 
that  the  two  most  rapid  things  in  nature  are  here  employed :  the  ardency  of  divine 
and  human  passion  in  an  enthusiast  and  a  lover.  Johnson  :  This  is  so  ingenious 
that  I  hope  it  is  just.  Caldecott  :  That  is,  *  as  the  course  and  process  of  thought 
generally.'     We  have  '  I'll  make  him  fly  swifter  than  meditation,'  in  the  Prologue  ta 

Wily  Beguiled.     It  was  not  improbably,  therefore,  a  common  saying. 

31.  sweep]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  p.  50)  conjectured  swoop,  not  only  from  the 
fitness  of  the  word,  but  from  its  use  in  Macb.  IV,  iii,  219.  He  did  not  repeat  the 
conj.  in  his  edition. 

32.  shouldst]  For  instances  of  '  should '  where  we  now  use  would,  see  Abbott, 
$32*   or  Macb   ITI,  vi,  19. 


mt  i,  sc.  v.]  HAMLET  99 

That  roots  itself  in  ease  on  Letrte  wharf, 

Wouldst  thou  not  stir  in  this.     Now,  Hamlet,  hear: 

Tis  given  out,  that,  sleeping  in  my  orchard,  35 

A  serpent  stung  me ;  so  the  whole  ear  of  Denmark 

Is  by  a  forged  process  of  my  death 

Rankly  abused;  but  know,  thou  noble  youth, 

The  serpent  that  did  sting  thy  father's  life 

33.  roots']  rootes  Qq.     rots  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.   Sing.   Dyce  i,  White,  Sta.   Ktly, 

Pope,  Han.  Cap.  Steev.  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce  Del.  Huds. 

i,  Sta.  Del.  Clarke.  35.  orchard]  garden  Q'76. 

Lethe]    Lethe's    Q'76,    Rowe+,  36.  so]  Om.  Pope. 

Jen.  38.  know,  thou]   knowe  thou  QqFxFa 

35-  'Tis]  Q'76.       Tis  Qq.      It's   Ff,  F3.     know  thou,  Q'76. 

Rowe.  39.  life]  heart  Q'76. 
my]    mine   Ff,    Bos.    Cald.    Knt, 

32.  fat  weed]  Tschischwitz:  If  Sh.  had  any  particular  plant  in  mind,  it  must 
have  been  the  asphodel,  with  its  numerous  bulbs,  thick  sown  over  the  meadows  of 
the  lower  regions.  Lucian  (nepl  nevOovc,  5)  thus  introduces  this  plant  in  connection 
with  the  Lethean  draft :  nepaiuOevrac  d£  rijv  Xluvtjv  be  to  elauf  2.eifio>v  VTrodexrrai 
fieyacf  ro  aaQocttlUf)  Karatyvroc,  nal  ttotov  iivi/fiye  iroMfiLov. 

32,34.  shouldst.. .Wouldst]  Anon.  {Misc.  Obs.  1752,  p.  17):  As  the  passage 
stands,  we  must  read  it  with  a  note  of  interrogation,  and  even  then  it  is  scarce  passa- 
ble. Transpose  the  '  shouldst '  and  the  '  Wouldst :'  •  And  duller  wouldst  thou  be,'  &c. 
This  is  pertinent  and  natural,  and  we  find  the  Ghost  speaks  a  little  more  to  the  purpose. 

33.  roots]  Capell  (i,  127)  :  The  moderns  have  sunk  a  great  beauty  by  not 
following  the  Ff;  for  in  *  roots'  is  an  idea  of  action  that  diminishes  the  compari- 
son's beauty,  which  consists  in  maction.  Steevens  (quoted  by  Dyce  in  his  ed.  i) 
paraphrases  Capell,  and  adds:  This  dull  root  pluck'd  from  Lethe  flood.' — The 
Humorous  Lieutenant,  IV,  iii,  Beau.  &  Fl.  vol.  vi,  ed.  Dyce.  Caldecott  :  We  have 
the  phrase  ['rot']  again  in  Ant.  6°  Cleo.  I,  iv,  47 :  'To  rot  itself  with  motion.' 
Knight:  Whiter,  in  his  Etymological  Diet.,  speaking  of  this  passage,  in  connection 
with  the  theory  of  ease  belonging  to  the  idea  of  being  earthed — fixed,  resting — 
says,  '  It  is  curious  that  Sh.  uses  ease  as  connected  with  a  term  which  most  strongly 
expresses  the  idea  of  being  fixed  in  a  certain  spot,  or  earth.'  White  :  The  Qq  are 
confirmed  by  the  passage  from  Ant.  6°  Cleo.  If  in  the  one  case  the  flag  rots  itself 
with  motion,  it  seems  clear  that  in  the  other  it  must  root  itself  with  ease.  The  oppo- 
sition of  '  roots '  to  '  stir '  in  the  next  line  also  supports  this  reading.  Staunton  • 
It  is  difficult  to  determine  which  expression  deserves  the  preference. 

33.  Lethe]  For  instances  of  the  conversion  of  one  part  of  speech  into  another, 
especially  in  the  case  of  rivers,  see  Abbott,  \  22.  [See  '  moment's  leisure,'  I,  iii, 
133.]  For  the  omission  of  the  article  before  the  names  of  rivers,  see  Koch,  ii,  \ 
169;  Matzner,  iii,  158. 

37.  process]  Clarendon  :  This  has  here,  perhaps,  the  sense  of  an  official  nar- 
rative, coming  nearly  to  the  meaning  of  the  French  prods  verbal.  By  a  proclama- 
tion, dated  18  Aug.  1553,  it  was  forbidden,  without  licence,  'to  prynte  any  bookes, 
matter,  ballet,  ryme,  interlude,  processe,  or  treatyse.' — The  English  Drama  and 
Stage  (Roxburghe  Library),  p.  17. 


roo 


HAMLET 


[act  i,  sc.  v. 


Now  wears  his  crown. 

Ham.  Omy  prophetic  soul ! 

My  uncle  ? 

Ghost.     Ay,  that  incestuous,  that  adulterate  beast, 
With  witchcraft  of  his  wit,  with  traitorous  gifts, — 
O  wicked  wit  and  gifts,  that  have  the  power 
So  to  seduce ! — won  to  his  shameful  lust 
The  will  of  my  most  seeming-virtuous  queen ; 

0  Hamlet,  what  a  falling-off  was  there ! 
From  me,  whose  love  was  of  that  dignity 
That  it  went  hand  in  hand  even  with  the  vow 

1  made  to  her  in  marriage ;  and  to  decline 
Upon  a  wretch,  whose  natural  gifts  were  poor 
To  those  of  mine ! 

But  virtue,  as  it  never  will  be  moved, 

Though  lewdness  court  it  in  a  shape  of  heaven, 


40  ^ 


45 


So 


40,  41.  O  my. ..uncle  ?]  Walker  (  Vers. 
290),  Sing,  ii,  Dyce,White,  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 
One  line,  QqFf,  et  cet. 

41.  My]  mine  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing, 
ii,  Dyce  i,  White,  Sta.  Ktly,  Del. 

uncle?]  Q2Q3Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Vncle :  Q.  Vncle.  Q.  uncle  I 
Qg  *  et  cet. 

Ay... adulterate]  Incestuous,  adul- 
terate Seymour. 

43.  witchcraft]  witchraft  Q.F2. 

wit]  Pope.  wits  QqFf,  Rowe, 
Jen.  Cald. 

with]  hath  FXF2F  .  rtWF4,Rowe. 
43-  gift**—]  gifts*  QqF3-     gutffs.  Fs. 


gifts.  F2.    gifts  Y^. 

44,  45.    O... seduce]  In  parenthesis  F  . 

44.  wit]  wits  Q'76. 

45.  seduce  !]  f educe  ?  FxF2F3. 

to  his]  to  to  this  Ft.     to  this  F2. 

46.  seeming-virtuous]  Hyphen,Theob. 
[seeming)  virtuous  Jen. 

47.  a]  Om.  Qq. 

50.  marriage;  and  to]  marriage,  to 
Ingleby. 

52,53.  To  those... moved,]  Pope.  One 
line,  QqFf,  Rowe. 

52.  mine  I]  mine,  surpasses,  almost, 
thinking.  Seymour. 


40.  prophetic]  Hudson  :  Hamlet  has  divined  the  truth  before.  Moberly  :  My 
very  soul  abhorred  the  murderer,  even  when  I  knew  not  the  crime. 

42.  Ay]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  262)  thinks  this  '  Ay '  should  be  duplicated,  and  the 
first  should  end  line  41.     See  also  Art.  lxxix,  vol.  ii. 

42.  adulterate]  Clarendon  :  Like  '  emulate,'  I,  i,  83,  for  emulous.  See  Lover's 
Com.  175. 

48.  that]   See  Abbott,  \  277,  for  other  instances  of  •  that'  used  for  such. 

52.  To]  Clarendon:  Compared  to.     See  I,  ii,  140 ;  III,  i,  52. 

52.  those  of  mine]  Clarendon:  An  inaccurate  construction,  like  one  found  in 
Bacon,  Advancement  of  Learning,  i,  7,  §  6,  p.  55,  ed.  Wright:  'And  for  his  gov- 
ernment civil,  though  he  did  not  attain  to  that  of  Trajan's,'  &c. 

53.  virtue]  For  instances  of  the  noun  absolute  ('  virtue '  has  here  no  verb),  see 
Abbott,  \  417 


\CT  I,  SC.  V.] 


HAMLET 


IOI 


So  lust,  though  to  a  radiant  angel  link'd, 
Will  sate  itself  in  a  celestial  bed, 
And  prey  on  garbage. 

But,  soft !  methinks  I  scent  the  morning  air ; 
Brief  let  me  be.     Sleeping  within  my  orchard, 
My  custom  always  in  the  afternoon, 
Upon  my  secure  hour  thy  uncle  stole, 
With  juice  of  cursed  hebenon  in  a  vial, 


55 


60 


55.  lust,]  but  Qq. 

angel]  Angell  F,F3F3.    Angle  Qq. 

56,  57.    Will.. .garbage.]  One  line,  Ff, 
Rowe. 

56.  sate]  fort  Qq,  Tsch.    feat  F '3F \. 

56.  57.  bed.  And]  bed,  Then  sink  to 
misery,  and  Seymour. 

57.  prey]  pray  Qf±Q. 
on]  in  F3F4. 

garbage.]  garbage —  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Warb. 

58.  scent]  fentQQF^. 
morning]    mornings    Ff,  Rowe, 

Knt. 


58.  morning  air]  morning-air  Ktly. 

59.  within  my  orchard]   in  my  Gar 
den  Q'76. 

my]  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Dyce  ii,  Glo. 
+ ,  Mob.     mine  The  rest. 

60.  in]  of  Qq,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 

61.  secure]  secret  Johns. 

hour]  hower  Ft.     how  re  Fa. 
stole]  to  meflole  Q'76. 

62.  hebenon]  Hebona  Qq.  heben  Tsch. 
vial]  viall  Qq.     Violl  FXF2.     vioi 

FF  . 

3  4 


56.  sate]  Tschischwitz  :  The  reading  of  Qq  makes  excellent  sense,  even  with- 
out changing  *  in '  to  from.  '  Even  in  a  celestial  bed  lust  will  separate,  detach 
itself,  &c.?  Not  only  '  link'd,'  but  also  '  prey,'  shows  sort  to  be  the  emphatic  word. 
It  is  small  wonder  if  German  commentators  prefer  •  sate '  to  sort,  but  Englishmen, 
before  whose  vision  the  enormous  breadth  of  their  own  almost  square  beds  must  have 
instantly  arisen,  ought  to  have  conceived  the  right  idea  of  separation  in  bed. 
Moreover,  *  sate  itself  cannot  be  connected  with  •  prey  on  garbage  '  on  physiological 
grounds. 

59.  orchard]   See  Rom.  &°  Jul.  II,  i,  5. 

60.  custom]  Instances  are  given  in  the  Var.  '21  to  show  that  an  •  after-dinner 
sleep'  [Meas.for  Meas.  Ill,  i,  33)  was  in  general  customary. 

60.  in]  Clarendon  :  A  somewhat  similar  use  of  the  preposition  of  in  the  Qq, 
occurs  in  Lovers  Lab.  I,  i,  43.     For  the  use  of  of,  see  Abbott,  §  176. 

61.  secure]  Walker  (  Vers.  292) :  Accent  on  the  first  syllable,  as  in  Oth.  IV,  i, 
72,  and  as  'complete'  in  Ham.  I,  iv,  52.  Staunton  (Note  on  Lear,  IV,  i,  20) : 
Careless,  unguarded.  Thus,  in  Sir  T.  More's  Life  of  Edward  V :  l  When  this  lord 
was  most  afraid,  he  was  most  secure;  and  when  he  was  secure,  danger  was  over  his 
head.'  Again,  Judges,  viii,  II  :  '  And  Gideon  .  .  .  smote  the  host:  for  the  host  was 
secure.' 

62.  hebenon]  Grey  (ii,  287) :  This  stands,  by  metathesis,  for  henebon,  that  is, 
henbane,  of  which  fhe  most  common  kind  (Hyoscyamus  niger)  is  certainly  narcotic, 
and  perhaps  if  taken  in  a  considerable  quantity  might  prove  poisonous.  Pliny  [Nat. 
Hist.  lib.  xxv,  cap.  4)  states  that  the  oil  made  from  the  seeds  of  this  plant,  instilled 
into  the  ears,  will  injure  the  understanding.  Steevens  :  So,  in  Drayton,  Barons 
Wars,  p.   51  :    'The  pois'ning  henbane   and  the  mandrake  drad.'     Again,  in  the 

9* 


I O  2  HAMLE  T  [act  i,  sc.  v  . 

And  in  the  porches  of  my  ears  did  pour 

The  leperous  distilment ;  whose  effect 

Holds  such  an  enmity  with  blood  of  man  65 

That  swift  as  quicksilver  it  courses  through 

The  natural  gates  and  alleys  of  the  body ; 

And  with  a  sudden  vigour  it  doth  posset 

63.  my]  Qq,  Jen.  Glo.  + ,  Mob.    mine         Rowe. 

The  rest.  64,65.  effect  Holds]  eff 'eels  Hold Q'76. 

64.  leperous]  leaprous  Q2Q3QA.  leaper-  67.  alleys]  Han.     allies  QqFf. 
ous  FXF2.     leaporous  F3>     leprous  Q-F4,  68.  posset]  poffeffe  Qq. 

Philosopher 's  Fourth  Satire  of  Mars,  by  Anton,  1616  :  *  The  poison' d  henbane,  whose 
cold  juice  doth  kill.'     The  word  is  written  differently  in  Marlowe's  Jew  of  Malta 

(  Works,  p.  164,  ed.  Dyce)  :  ' the  blood  of  Hydra,  Lerna's  bane,  The  juice  of 

hebon,  and  Cocytus'  breath.'  Douce  :  In  the  English  edition  by  Batman  on  Bar 
tholom&us  de  Proprietatibus  Rebus,  the  article  for  the  wood  ebony  is  entitled,  *  Of 
Ebeno,  cap.  52.'  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  dropping  into  the  ears  should  occur, 
because  Sh.  was  perfectly  well  acquainted  with  the  supposed  properties  of  the  hen- 
bane, as  recorded  in  Holland's  translation  of  Pliny,  and  elsewhere,  and  might  apply 
this  mode  of  use  to  any  other  poison.  Caldecott  :  The  medical  professors  of 
Shakespeare's  day  believed  that  poison  might  be  introduced  into  the  system  through 
the  ears ;  the  eminent  surgeon,  Ambroise  Pare,  Shakespeare's  contemporary,  was 
suspected  of  having,  when  he  dressed  the  ear  of  Francis  II,  infused  poison  into  it. 
Dr  Sherwen  informs  us  that  in  Gower's  Confessio  Amantis  the  couch  of  the  god  of 
sleep  was  made  '  Of  Hebenus,  that  sleepie  tree.'  Singer  :  The  French  word 
hebenin,  applied  to  anything  made  from  ebony,  comes  indeed  very  close  to  the 
hebenon  of  Sh.  Elze  :  If  the  citation  from  Marlowe  be  correct,  it  might  be  better 
to  read  the  line :  '  With  juice  of  cursed  hebon  in  a  phial.'  Or  perhaps  should  we 
not  conjecture  that  hemlock  was  intended  here?  Beisley  (Sh.'s  Garden,  p.  4) : 
'  Hebenon'  might  have  been  originally  written  enoron,  one  of  the  names  at  that  time 
of  Solanum  maniacum ,  called  also  deadly  nightshade,  a  more  powerful  poison  than 
henbane.  Tschischwitz  :  The  hebona  of  the  Qq  can  be  only  a  mistaken  substitu- 
tion of  the  Spanish  and  Italian,  ebano ;  French,  ebene ;  Latin,  ebenus  and  hebenus. 
Probably  the  -on  of  '  hebenon '  was  caused  by  the  following  '  in,'  so  that  we  may 
suppose  that  originally  the  word  here  was  heben,  the  only  correct  etymological  form, 
although  it  was  sometimes  incorrectly  written  hebon.  Moberly  :  Not  surely  ebony 
(Diospyros),  the  fruit  of  which  is  often  edible;  but  henbane,  or  Hyoscyamus,  which 
is  a  strong  narcotic  poison.  It  does  not  indeed  produce  any  leprous  symptoms ;  but 
the  belief  of  its  doing  so  would,  on  the  theory  of  signatures,  be  founded  on  the 
clammy  appearance  of  the  plant. 

65.  with  blood]    An  instance  of  the  absorption  of  the  definite  article;  see  I, 
iv,  21. 

66.  courses]  Hudson  :  Sh.  here  implies  as  much  as  was  then  known  touching 
the  circulation  of  the  blood. 

68.  vigour]  Staunton  :  This  may  be  right ;  but  rigour  seems  more  suitable  to 
the  context,  and  more  accordant  with  the  supposed  effects  of  narcotics  formerly. 
68.  posset]   Clarendon  :  The  only  instance  in  Sh.  of  its  use  as  a  verb. 


fcCI  I,  sc.  v.] 


HAMLET 


IO3 


And  curd,  like  eager  droppings  into  milk, 

The  thin  and  wholesome  blood ;  so  did  it  mine ; 

And  a  most  instant  tetter  bark'd  about, 

Most  lazar-like,  with  vile  and  loathsome  crust, 

All  my  smooth  body. 

Thus  was  I,  sleeping,  by  a  brother's  hand 

Of  life,  of  crown,  of  queen,  at  once  dispatch'd ; 

Cut  off  even  in  the  blossoms  of  my  sin, 

Unhousel'd,  disappointed,  unaneled; 


70 


75 


69.   eager~\  Aygre  Ff.     aigre  Knt. 

71.  bark'd']  barckt  Q3Q3>  barhtQQ. 
bakd  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt  i. 

72.  lazar-like]  Lazerlike  Qq. 

75.  of  queen]  and  QueeneYi  (Queen 
F3F4),  Rowe,  Knt,  Del. 

dispatch'd]  despotfd  Co\\.  (MS). 

76.  blossoms]   blossom  White ;    Dyce, 
and  Ktly  conj. 

sin]  sins  Ktly  conj. 

77.  Unhousel'd]    Theob.      Vnhuzled 


QiQy      Vnnuzled    Q4Q5-       Vnhouzzled 
Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

77.  disappointed]  nnanointed  Pope, 
Han.  Warb.  Cap.  unappointed  Theob. 
Jen. 

unaneled]  Pope,  vnanueld  Q2 
Q  .  vn-anueld  Q4C»  •  vnnaneld  Ff, 
Rowe.  nn-aneaVd  Q'76.  unaneaTd 
Theob.  Han.  Johns.  Cap.  andunknelVd 
Juvenis  (Gent.  Mag.  xlvi,  267). 


69.  eager]  Clarendon  :  Cotgrave  gives  :  •  Aigre :  Eagre,  sharpe,  tart,  biting, 
sower.'  Earl  of  Rochester  (1761,  cited  by  C  E.  Browne,  Athenaum,  3  April, 
1875):  The  word  egar  is  a  substantive,  and  not  an  adjective:  it  being  a  general 
English  name  for  acids  of  all  kinds.  Had  the  original  words  been  '  eager  drop- 
pings into  milk,'  alluding  to  the  making  of  sillibubs,  the  thought  would  have  been 
inverted ;  for  the  milk  does  not  curdle,  but  is  curdled  by  the  acid  it  is  milked  upon. 
Read,  therefore,  '  like  egar,  dropping  into  milk.'' 

71.  instant]  Hudson:  Used  in  the  Latin  sense  of  instans,  urgent,  importunate, 
itching.     Clarendon  :  Instantaneous,  as  in  II,  ii,  493. 

75.  dispatch'd]  Warburton  :  In  the  sense  of  bereft.  Dyce  (Few  Notes,  &c, 
p.  139)  :  DespoiPd  of  Coll.  (MS)  conveys  merely  the  idea  of  deprivation,  while 
'dispatch'd'  expresses  the  suddenness  of  the  bereavement.  Clarendon:  Sh.  would 
scarcely  have  used  this  word  with  •  crown  '  and  '  queen '  if  he  had  not  first  used  it 
with  'life.'  The  phrase  'dispatch  of  life'  does  not  occur  again;  we  have,  how- 
ever, 'dispatch  his  nighted  life,'  in  Lear,  IV,  v,  12. 

77.  Unhousel'd]  Pope  :  That  is,  without  the  sacrament  being  taken.  Theo- 
bald :  From  the  old  Saxon  word  for  the  sacrament :  husel.  Spenser  calls  the  sac- 
ramental fire  the  housling  fire. 

77.  disappointed]  Theobald  :  Read  unappointed,  i.  e.  no  reconciliation  to 
Heaven,  no  appointment  of  penance  by  the  Church.  As  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  Ill,  i, 
60.  Johnson  :  '  Disappointed '  is  the  same  as  unappointed,  and  may  be  properly 
explained  unprepared ;  a  man  well  furnished  with  things  necessary  for  any  enter- 
prise is  said  to  be  well  appointed.  Boucher  ( Gloss,  of  Archaic  and  Provincial 
Words,  s.  v.  Anyeal)  [cited  by  B.  J.  S.  N.  &>  Qu.  1  Jan.  1853]  :  A  clear  and 
consistent  meaning  consonant  with  Shakespeare's  manner  will  be  given  to  the 
passage  if,  instead  of  '  disappointed,'  we  substitute  unassoiled,  i.  e.  without  absolu 


104  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  v. 

No  reckoning  made,  but  sent  to  my  account 

With  all  my  imperfections  on  my  head ; 

Oh,  horrible !  oh,  horrible  !   most  horrible  !  8q 

Y 

78.  reckoning]  reckmng  Qq.  80.   Given    to    Ham.     Rann,    Verp. 

79.  With  all]   Withall  Q2Q3<  Huds.  Sing,  ii,  El.  Ktly. 

80.  Oh... oh]  Ff.     0...3  Q2Q3. 

Hon.  It  must  be  allowed  that  no  instance  can  be  given  of  the  word  unassoiled,  but 
neither  does  any  other  instance  occur  to  me  of  ■  unhouseled '  except  here.  Hunter 
(ii,  224) :  Perhaps  unassoiled  may  have  been  the  word,  which  is  equivalent  to  un- 
absolved. 

77.  unaneled]  Pope:  No  knell  rung.  Theobald:  According  to  Skinner, 
AneaFd  is  unctus,  so  that  '  unaneal'd '  must  signify  unanointed,  not  having  the  ex- 
treme unction.  Jennens  :  It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  Sh.  wrote  here  unanoiPd. 
To  anoil  was  a  phrase  in  common  use,  meaning  to  anoint.  See  James,  v,  14,  in  the 
Rhemish  Test.  1582,  and  the  notes  on  the  passage,  which  prove  that  anoil  and 
anoint  were  words  indifferently  used  at  that  time.  Tyrwhitt  :  '  So  when  hee  was 
howseled  and  eneled,  and  had  all  that  a  christian  man  ought  to  have.' — Morte 
c?  Arthur,  vol.  iii,  p.  350  (ed.  T.  Wright).  Nares  :  'The  extreme  unction  or 
anelynge,  and  confirmacion,  he  sayed,  be  no  sacraments  of  the  church.' — Sir  Thomas 
Morels  Works,  p.  345.  Caldecott  :  In  the  advertisement  to  his  notes,  Stephen 
Weston  quotes  Sophocles,  Antigone,  107 1:  hjioipov,  ciK-epiCTov,  avdoiov  vekvv,  and 
adds,  h[ioipov}  disappointed  or  unprovided,  unportioned,  unprepared  with  sacrifices 
for  the  infernal  gods ;  avooiov,  unhouseled,  without  the  sacrament  or  holy  rites ; 
mcrepicrovf  unaneled,  without  the  holy  oil  or  the  honours  of  burial. 

80.  Johnson  :  It  was  ingeniously  hinted  to  me  by  a  very  learned  lady  ['  probably 
Mrs  Montagu' — Cam.  Edd.]  that  this  line  seems  to  belong  to  Hamlet,  in  whose 
mouth  it  is  a  proper  and  natural  exclamation ;  and  .who,  according  to  the  practice  of 
the  stage,  may  be  supposed  to  interrupt  so  long  a  speech.  Knight  :  It  was  always 
spoken  by  Garrick,  in  his  character  of  Hamlet,  as  belonging  to  the  Prince,  according 
to  stage  tradition.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  (MS),  who  was  usually  very  attentive  to 
such  matters,  made  no  change.  White,  Staunton,  and  Dyce  think  it  probable 
that  this  line  should  be  given  to  Hamlet,  but  do  not  venture  to  change  the  text  of 
all  the  old  copies.  Keightley  says,  '  beyond  question '  it  belongs  to  Hamlet. 
Clarke  thinks  that  it  •  markedly  belongs  to  the  Ghost,  if  it  were  only  on  account 
of  their  triple  iteration,  which  is  so  completely  consistent  with  the  previous  threefold 
"  List,  list,  oh,  list !"  and  the  subsequent  solemn  repetition  of  "  Swear !"  ' 

80.  Oh]  Corson  :  A  distinction  should  be  made  between  the  emotional  interjec- 
tion, '  Oh,'  and  the  '  O,'  vocative.  It  can  be  seen,  I  think,  that  the  distinction  was 
intended  in  the  Ff,  although  it  is  not  invariable.  But  in  a  modernized  text  consist- 
ency requires  that  the  distinction  should  be  made,  as  it  is  one  that  is  observed  in 
modern  orthography.  It  is  a  distinction,  too,  not  merely  factitious,  as  might  be  sup- 
posed, but  based  on  good  ground.  •  There  is  a  difference  between  "  O  sir !"  "  O 
King!"  and  "  Oh  !  sir,"  '•  Oh  !  Lord,"  both  in  sense  and  pronunciation.  As  to  the 
■sense,  the  O  prefixed  merely  imparts  to  the  title  a  vocative  effect ;  while  the  Oh 
conveys  some  particular  sentiment.  And  as  to  the  sound,  the  O  is  enclitic ;  that  is 
In  say,  it  has  no  accent  of  its  own,  but  is  pronounced  with  the  word  to  which  it  is 


ACT  I,  SC.  V.] 


HAMLET 


105 


If  thou  hast  nature  in  thee,  bear  it  not; 
Let  not  the  royal  bed  of  Denmark  be 
A  couch  for  luxury  and  damned  incest. 
But,  howsoever  thou  pursuest  this  act, 
Taint  not  thy  rnjjid,  nor  let  thy  soul  contrive 
Against  thy  mother  aught ;  leave  her  to  heaven, 
And  to  those  thorns  that  in  her  bosom  lodge, 
To  prick  and  sting  her.     Fare  thee  well  at  once ! 
The  glow-worm  shows  the  matin  to  be  near, 
And  'gins  to  pale  his  uneffectual  fire ; 


81 


85 


90 


84.  horvsoever]  hmvfomeuer  Qq. 
pursuest]  purfues  Qq. 

85.  Taint]   Tain't  Q3Q3Q4. 
contrive]  defign  Q'76. 


86.  aught]  ought  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Cap. 

89.  matin]  matine  QqFf.  morning 
Q'76. 


attached,  as  if  it  were  its  unaccented  first  syllable.  The  term  Enclitic  signifies  "  re- 
clining on,"  and  so  the  interjection  O  in  "  O  Lord  "  reclines  on  the  support  afforded 
to  it  by  the  accentual  elevation  of  the  word  "Lord."  So  that  "O  Lord"  is  pro 
nounced  like  such  a  dissyllable  as  alight,  alike,  away  ;  in  which  words  the  metrical 
stroke  could  never  fall  on  the  first  syllable.  Oh!  on  the  contrary,  is  one  of  the 
fullest  of  monosyllables,  and  it  would  be  hard  to  place  it  in  a  verse  except  with  the 
stress  upon  it.  Thus,  in  Wordsworth  :  "  But  she  is  in  her  grave, — and  oh,  The  dif- 
ference to  me!"  ' — Earle's  Philology  of  the  English  Tongue,  2d  ed.  pp.  191,  192. 
83.  luxury]   Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Lasciviousness,  its  only  sense  in  Sh. 

89.  matin]  Elze:  Drake  in  his  Sh.  and  his  Times,  ii,  414,  prints  matins  in  his 
citation  of  this  passage.  The  rare  occurrence  elsewhere  of  'matin'  is  sufficient  to 
arouse  suspicion,  and  one  is  tempted  to  change  it  to  matins  here.  Clarendon  :  We 
can  find  no  other  instance  of  its  use  in  the  present  sense. 

90.  his]  Halliwell:  Strictly  speaking,  'his'  should  be  her,  the  female  only 
giving  the  light. 

90.  uneffectual]  Warburton  :  Shining  without  heat.  Steevens  :  Rather,  fire 
that  is  no  longer  seen  when  the  light  of  morning  approaches.  Compare  Per.  II,  iii, 
43.  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  The  former  explanation  is,  I  apprehend,  the  true  one.  Com- 
pare Nash  :  • the  ostrich,  the  most  burning-sighted  hud  of  all  others,  insomuch 

as  the  female  of  them  hatcheth  not  hir  egs  by  covering  them,  but  by  the  effectual 
raies  of  hir  eies,'  &c. —  The  Vnfortunate  Traveller,  &c,  1594,  sig.  II  4.  See 
Abbott,  \  442,  for  the  use  of  un-  and  in- ;  and  Macb.  IV,  iii,  123. 

90.  fire]  Douce  (ii,  224)  :  It  was  the  popular  belief  that  ghosts  could  not  endure 
the  light,  and  consequently  disappeared  at  the  dawn  of  day.  This  superstition  is 
derived  from  our  northern  ancestors,  who  held  that  the  sun  and  everything  that  con- 
tained light  ox  fire  had  the  property  of  expelling  demons  and  spirits  of  all  kinds. 
With  them  it  seems  to  have  originated  in  the  stories  that  are  related  in  the  Edda 
concerning  the  battles  of  Thor  against  the  giants  and  evil  demons,  wherein  he  made 
use  of  his  dreadful  mallet  of  iron.  .  .  .  Many  of  the  transparent  precious  stones 
were  supposed  to  have  the  power  of  expelling  evil  spirits,  and  the  flint  and  othei 
stones  found  in  the  tombs  of  the  northern  nations,  and  from  which  fire  might  be  ex 


I06 


HAMLET 


[act  I,  SC.  V 


Adieu,  adieu,  adieu  !  remember  me.  [Exit. 

Ham.     O  all  you  host  of  heaven  !  0  earth  !  what  else  ? 
And  shall  I  couple  hell  ?     Oh,  fie !     Hold,  hold,  my  heart ; 
And  you,  my  sinews,  grow  not  instant  old, 
But  bear  me  stiffly  up.     Remember  thee  ? 
Ay,  thou  poor  ghost,  while  memory  holds  a  seat 
In  this  distracted  globe.     Remember  thee? 
Yea,  from  the  table  of  my  memory 
I'll  wipe  away  all  trivial  fond  records, 
All  saws  of  books,  all  forms,  all  pressures  past, 


95 


91.  Adieu,  adieu,  adieu  !]  Adiew, 
adiew,  adiew,  Qq.  Adue,  adue,  Ham- 
let: Ff  (Adieu,adieu,FF).  Farewel, 
Q'76.  Adieu,  adieu!  Hamlet,  Rowe, 
Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing,  ii,  Dyce  i,  White, 
Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  Del.  Clarke. 
[Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

93.  Oh,  fie  !  Hold,  hold,  my]  Oh,  hold 
my  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Johns.  0  fie  ! 
Hold,  Rowe,Warb.  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Coll.  (MS).     Hold,  hold,  my  Cap. 


IOO 


93.  Hold,   hold,  my]    hold,  hold  mv 
■Q2Q3-     hold,  my  Q4.     hold  my  QgFf. 
95.  stiffly]  fwiftly  Qq.  fironglyQ'jS. 

95,  97.  thee?]  thee,  Qq.    thee  !  Q'76, 
Warb. 

96.  while]  whiles  Qq. 

100.  saws]  fawe    Q  .    faw  Q  .  reg 
ijlers  Q'76. 

all  pressures]  and prejfures  Q' 70. 
pressures]  prefures  Fv 


tracted,  were  imagined  to  be  efficacious  in  confining  the  manes  of  the  dead  to  their 
proper  habitations.     They  were  called  Thor's  hammers. 

91.  Adieu]  Clarke:  The  reading  of  the  Qq  confirms  our  view  of  the  triple 
iteration  with  which  the  Ghost's  diction  was  marked  in  Shakespeare's  conception  of 
it,  although  he  may  have  seen  fit  to  modify  it  on  revisal.  Corson  :  The  addressing 
his  sod  by  name  at  the  conclusion  of  his  speech  is  more  effective  from  its  familiarity 
than  the  third  repetition  of  '  adieu.' 

92.  Coleridge  :  I  remember  nothing  equal  to  this  burst  unless  it  be  the  first  speech 
of  Prometheus,  in  the  Greek  drama,  after  the  exit  of  Vulcan  and  the  two  Afrites. 
But  Sh.  alone  could  have  produced  the  vow  of  Ham.  to  make  his  memory  a  blank 
of  all  maxims  and  generalized  truths,  that  '  observation  had  copied  there,' — followed 
immediately  by  the  speaker  noting  down  the  generalized  fact,  line  108. 

93.  Oh,  fie]  Capell  omitted  these  words,  *  as  impertinent  in  the  highest  degree.' 
Steevens  suspected  that  they  were  an  interpolation,  because  they  hurt  the  measure, 
and  were  of  an  almost  ludicrous  turn.  MlTFORD,  also  [Gent.  Maga.  1845,  p.  583), 
believed  that  they  should  be  removed,  and  Dyce  (ed.  ii)  pronounced  their  omission 
as  probably  right.     Boswell  defended  them  because  they  occur  again  in  II,  ii,  564. 

97.  globe]  Clarendon  :  Here  Hamlet  puts  his  hand  upon  his  head. 

98.  table]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  tablet.     Compare  All's  Well,  I,  i,  106. 

99.  fond]  That  is,  foolish.     See  Rom.  6°  Jul.  Ill,  iii,  52. 

99.  records]  Walker,  Vers.  133,  shows  by  examples  that  the  accent  in  the  verb 
is  variable,  but  in  the  noun  it  is  on  the  last  syllable.  In  recorder  it  is  on  the  first. 
See  also  Abbott,  g  490. 

100.  saws]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Sayings,  maxims. 

100.  pressures]    Dyce  (Gloss.)  :    Impressions, — as  of  a  seal;  see  III,  ii,  23. — 


ACT  I,  SC.V.]  HAMLE1  107 

That  youth  and  observation  copied  there;  1CI 

And  thy  commandment  all  alone  shall  live 

\\  [thin  the  book  and  volume  of  my  brain, 

Unmix'd  with  baser  matter;  yes,  by  heaven! 

O  most  pernicious  woman  !  10$ 

O  villain,  villain,  smiling,  damned  villain ! 

My  tables,  meet  it  is  I  set  it  down, 

104.  yes]  yes,  jw  Ff.  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  107.  My   tables,']    My    Tables,  my 
Sing.  Ktly.  Tables :  Ff,  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

105.  pernicious]  prenicious  Q4.    per  set  if\fet  Q'76. 
nicious  and  perfidious  Coll.  ii  (MS). 

Clarendon.  Bailey  (ii,  9) :  Postures  or  some  other  word  ought  to  be  substituted 
for  *  pressures.'  We  cannot  consistently  speak  of  impressions  on  the  mind  being 
copied  in  the  mind. 

105.  pernicious]  Collier  (ed.  2):  The  (MS)  adds  and  perfidious.  The  two 
words,  '  pernicious '  and  perfidious,  looking  like  each  other,  perhaps  the  old  printer, 
having  composed  the  first,  fancied  he  had  composed  both,  and  thus  omitted  a  very 
striking  and  appropriate  epithet. 

107.  tables]  Farmer  :  '  See, — and  in  the  midst  of  the  sermon  pulles  out  his 
tables  in  haste,  as  if  he  feared  to  loose  that  note.' — Hall,  in  his  character  of  The 
Hypocrite.  Steevens  :  So,  in  the  Induction  to  The  Malcontent,  1604:  'I  have 
most  of  the  jists  of  it  [a  play]  here  in  my  table-book.'  Again,  in  Antonio 's  Revenge, 
Bulardo  draws  out  his  writing-tables,  and  writes — 'Retort  and  obtuse,  good  words, 
very  good  words.'  Boswell:  See  2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  i,  201.  Douce  :  These  tables 
were  sometimes  made  of  slate,  in  the  form  of  a  small  portable  book,  with  leaves  and 
clasps.  ...  In  the  Middle  Ages,  the  leaves  of  these  table-books  were  made  of  ivory. 
Hunter  (ii,  225)  :  This  expression  is  the  first  in  which  we  have  anything  like  the 
unsettling  of  the  intellect,  and  what  follows,  to  the  end  of  the  scene,  can  scarcely  be 
reconciled  to  an  opinion  of  the  perfect  sanity  of  Hamlet,  except  on  the  supposition 
that  even  now  he  began  to  put  on  the  appearance  of  madness,  which  is  not  likely. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  light  and  sportive  sallies  which  follow 
are  not  absolutely  out  of  nature,  even  if  we  suppose  him  sane,  very  powerful  events 
not  producing  their  natural  effect  at  once.  Some  hours  commonly  intervene  before 
the  mind  is  awakened,  as  it  were,  to  a  sense  of  the  change  which  has  taken  place, 
and  during  the  interval  men  do  act,  not  unfrequently,  strangely  and  fantastically. 
When,  they  begin  to  consider,  then  they  begin  to  act  in  a  manner  correspondent  to 
their  situation  and  character.  Brae  (JV.  <5t°  Qu.  13  Mar.  1852)  denies,  what  Cole- 
ridge asserts  (see  line  92),  that  Ham.  noted  down  in  his  tables  '  that  one  may  smile, 
and  smile,  and  be  a  villain.'  «  This  jotting  down  by  Ham.,  upon  a  real,  substantial 
table,  of  one  of  those  "  generalized  truths,"  which  he  had  just  excluded  from  the 
table  of  his  memory,  would  be  too  great  a  literalizing  of  the  metaphor?  It  is  not 
this  most  trite  reflection  :  '  That  one  may  smile,'  &c.  that  Ham.  wishes  to  set  down. 
No,  it  is  the  all-absorbing  commandment  contained  in  the  last  line  of  the  Ghost's 
speech.  There  is  one  continued  apostrophe  from  line  105  to  •  So,  uncle,  there  you 
are,'  line  tio,  broken  only  parenthetically  by  line  107  while  Ham.  is  getting  forth 


io8 


HAMLET 


[ACT  I,  SC.  V 


That  one  may  smile,  and  smile,  and  be  a  villain  ; 

At  least  I'm  sure  it  may  be  so  in  Denmark. —         \_Writing. 

So,  uncle,  there  you  are. — Now  to  my  word ; 

It  is  :  '  Adieu,  adieu  !  remember  me.' 

I  have  sworn't. 

Hor. 

Mar. 

Mar.  [wit/iiit]  Lord  Hamlet ! 

Hor.  \withhi\  Heaven  secure  him ! 

Ham.     So  be  it ! 


[withiti]  My  lord,  my  lord  ! 


1 10 


109.  Pm]  I  am  Qq,  Steev.  Cald.Var. 
Coll.  Sing.  El.  White. 

[Writing.]  Rowe.     Om.   QqFf. 
Opposite  line  III,  Sing,  ii,  Ktly. 

Ill,  112.  It... sworn 't.]  One  in  Ff, 
Rowe. 

III.  It  is~\  Separate  line,  Cap. 

111,  112.  ' Adieu... sworn 7]  One  line, 
Cap. 

112.  1 have  sworn '/.]  Pve  sworn  it — 
Pope  4- ,  Jen.  Pve  sworn't,  as  a  separate 
line,  Walker. 

sworn't"]  sworn  it  Mai. 


113.  Scene  ix.  Pope  +  ,Jen. 

Hor.  Mar.  [Within]  Ff.  Bora. 
Qq,  Pope  +  .  Hor.  [within]  Cap.  Steev. 
Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Dyce, 
White.     Hor.  [without]  Sta. 

Mar.  [within]  Cap.  Mar.  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.     Mar.  [without]  Sta. 

Hor.  [within]  Cap.  Hor.  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe-f,  Jen.     Hor.  [without]  Sta. 

Heaven]  Heauens  Qq. 

114.  Ham.]  Mar.  Ff,  Rowe-f,  Cald. 
Mar.  [within]  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  El. 
White,  Del.  Huds.  Mar.  [without]  Sta. 


and  preparing  the  tables.  Line  108  is  an  admirative  comment  upon  line  106,  and 
1  So,  uncle,  there  you  are,'  is  equivalent  to  the  common  exclamation,  even  at  the 
present  day,  expressive  of  misdeeds,  or  intentions,  unexpectedly  brought  to  light. 
It  is  by  no  means  uncommon  for  a  sentence  expressive  of  wonder  or  incredulity  to 
begin  with  That,  as  in  line  108;  we  have,  in  Cym.  I,  i,  63,  '  That  a  king's  children 
should  be  so  convey' d  !'  The  best  possible  stage-direction  is  given  by  Sh.  himself 
when  he  makes  Ham.  exclaim  '  Now  to  my  word,'  or,  now  to  my  memorandum, 
alluding  to  the  purpose  for  which  he  had  to  get  his  tables  forth.  Wherefore  punc- 
tuate thus  :  after  'set  it  down,'  a  full  stop;  after  '  and  be  a  villain,'  a  note  of  ad- 
miration ;  the  stage-direction  [  Writing]  to  be  removed  two  lines  lower  down. 
To  this  emendation  of  Brae's,  Ingleby  added  the  stage-direction  •  Having  kissed 
the  tables,'  after  '  sworn't,'  line  112.      White  thinks  that  waxen  tables  were  used  as 

late  as  the  Elizabethan  period;    see  Janua  Linguarum,  1650 :  ' now-a-daies 

we  write  .  .  .  with  a  writing  pin  in  table-books,  that  it  may  be  cancelled  and  blotted 
out  by  turning  the  pin  the  wrong  end  downward.'  Elze  :  Hamlet  is  hereby  repre- 
sented as  a  thinker  and  a  scholar  in  opposition  to  the  man  of  action. 

108.  smile]  Moberly  :  As  the  king  had  recently  done,  when  he  called  Hamlet 
his  son. 

no.  word]  Steevens:  An  allusion  to  the  watch-word,  given  every  day  in  mili- 
tary service.  QuiNCY  {MS  Corrections  in  F4,  p.  31):  Ward  is  substituted  for 
•  word,'  referring  probably  to  the  solemn  duty  which  Ham.  had  just  undertaken. 

114.  So  be  it]  Capell  (i,  128)  upholds  the  distribution  of  speeches  according  to 


act  I,  sc.  v.J  HAMLET  TO9 

Hor.  [within]     Illo,  ho,  ho,  my  lord!  115 

Ham.     Hillo,  ho,  ho,  boy  !  come,  bird,  come. 

Enter  HORATIO  and  MARCELLUS. 

Mar.     How  is't,  my  noble  lord  ? 

115.   Hor.  [within.]   Cald.     Hor.  Ff,  1 16.  bird]  and  Qq.     boy  Pope. 

Rowo  +  .    Mar.]  Qq,  Cam.    Mar.  [with-  Enter...]    Cap.       After   sworn' 7 

vi]  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.      I/or.  line  1 12,  QqFf,  Jen.     After  lord !  line 

[without]  Sta.  113,  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cam. 

the  Qq, '  for  the  best  reasons  possible,'  as  he  says,  because  •  Illo,  ho,'  '  is  too  light  for 
Hor.,  who  is  a  man  of  education  and  gravity ;  and  there  is  something  highly  solemn 
and  proper  in  making  Ham.  say  the  amen  to  a  benediction  pronounc'd  on  himself. 
Having  done  it,  he  assumes  in  an  instant  the  levity  that  was  proper  to  cover  him,  and 
answers  to  the  call  of  Mar.  in  his  own  falconer's  language.'  Corson,  on  the  other 
hand,  advocates  the  distribution  of  the  Ff :  '  Mar.  seconds  Horatio's  prayer  with  his 
"  So  be  it ;"  Hor.  then,  as  Hamlet's  bosom  friend,  uses  the  falconer's  call,  which 
would  have  been  too  familiar  on  the  part  of  Mar.,  and  Ham.,  in  his  excitement, 
responds  in  the  same  language.'  Tschischwitz  believes  that  this  refers  to  Hamlet's 
decision  to  assume  an  antic  disposition,  which  is  immediately  put  in  practice  in  his 
hawking  answers.  [If  the  exclamation  be  Hamlet's,  which  is  doubtful,  is  it  neces- 
sary to  suppose  that  it  is  a  response  to  Marcellus's  benediction  ?  May  it  not  refer 
to  the  conclusion  of  Hamlet's  writing  in  his  tables  ?  Ed.] 

115.  Coleridge:  This  part  of  the  scene  after  Hamlet's  interview  with  the  Ghost 
nas  been  charged  with  an  improbable  eccentricity.  But  the  truth  is,  after  the  mind 
has  been  stretched  beyond  its  usual  pitch  and  tone,  it  must  either  sink  into  exhaus- 
tion and  inanity,  or  seek  relief  by  change.  It  is  thus  well  known  that  persons  con- 
versant with  deeds  of  cruelty  contrive  to  escape  from  conscience  by  connecting 
something  of  the  ludicrous  with  them,  and  by  inventing  grotesque  terms  and  a  certain 
technical  phraseology  to  disguise  the  horror  of  their  practices.  Indeed,  paradoxical 
as  it  may  appear,  the  terrible,  by  a  law  of  the  human  mind,  always  touches  on  the 
verge  of  the  ludicrous.  Both  arise  from  a  perception  of  something  out  of  the  com- 
mon order  of  things — something,  in  fact,  out  of  its  place ;  and  if  from  this  we  can 
abstract  danger,  the  uncommonness  will  alone  remain,  and  the  sense  of  the  ridicu- 
lous be  excited.  The  close  alliance  of  these  opposites, — they  are  not  contraries, — 
appears  from  the  circumstance,  that  laughter  is  equally  the  expression  of  extreme 
anguish,  and  horror,  as  of  joy ;  as  there  aie  tears  of  sorrow  and  tears  of  joy,  so  there 
is  a  laugh  of  terror  and  a  laugh  of  merriment.  These  complex  causes  will  naturally 
have  produced  in  Ham.  the  disposition  to  escape  from  his  own  feelings  of  the  over- 
whelming and  supernatural  by  a  wild  transition  to  the  ludicrous, — a  sort  of  cunning 
bravado,  bordering  on  the  flights  of  delirium.  For  you  may,  perhaps,  observe 
Hamlet's  wildness  is  but  half  false ;  he  plays  that  subtle  trick  of  pretending  to  act 
only  when  he  is  very  near  really  being  what  he  acts. 

116.  ho]  Clarendon:  See  Latham's  Falconry,  p.  47  (ed.  1615),  '  Crying  with  a 
lowd  voice,  Howe,  howe,  howe.' 

116.  come,  bird,  come]   Hanmer  :  This  is  the  call  which  falconers  use  to  their 

hawk  in  the  air,  when  they  would  have  him  come  down  to  them. 
10 


no 


HAMLET  [act  I,  sc.  v. 

What  news,  my  lord  ?  117 


Hor. 

Ham.     0,  wonderful ! 
Hor.     Good  my  lord,  tell  it. 

Ham.  No  ;  you  will  reveal  it. 

Hor.     Not  I,  my  lord,  by  heaven. 

Mar.  Nor  I,  my  lord.  120 

Ham.     How  say  you,  then ;    would  heart  of  man  once 
think  it  ? 
But  you'll  be  secret? 

'   >  Ay,  by  heaven,  my  lord. 

Ham.     There's  ne'er  a  villain  dwelling  in  all  Denmark 
But  he's  an  arrant  knave. 

Hor.     There  needs  no  ghost,  my  lord,  come  from  the  grave    125 
To  tell  us  this. 

Ham.  Why,  right ;  you  are  i'  the  right ; 


117.  Hor.  What  news,  my  lord?~\ 
Om.  Q4Q5. 

118.  Ham.]  Hora.  Q4QS. 

118,  119.  0,...No ;]  One  line,  Steev. 
Bos.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White, 
Ktly.  0...tell  it.  One  line,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Glo.  Mob. 

119.  you  will~\  you1 1  Fx.  you'' 11  F2F 
F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  El. 
Dyce,  White,  Sta.  Huds.  Glo. 

121,  122.  How... secret]  Prose,  Mob. 

121.  it?]  it,  Qq. 

122.  secret?]  fecret.  Qq,  Coll.  El. 
White,  secret —  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing. 


Ktly. 

122.  Hor.  Mar.]  Booth.  QO.    Both. 
Q4Q5Ff. 

Ay,  by  heaven]  As  death  Q'76. 
my  lord.]  Om.  Qq. 

123.  There 's... Denmark]  Two  lines, 

Qq. 

ne'er]  F8.  nere  Fs.  ne're  F 
F  .     neuer  Qq,  Jen. 

125,  126.    There... this]  Prose,  Ff. 

126.  you  are]  you're  Dyce  ii. 

V  the]  Cap.  r  U?  Ff,  Pope  +  , 
White,  in  the  Qq,  Rowe,  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 


121.  once]  Clarendon:  Ever.     See  Ant.  &*  Geo.  V,  ii,  50. 

123.  Denmark]  Seymour  (ii,  162) :  Hamlet  begins  these  words  in  the  ardour 
of  sincerity  and  confidence ;  but,  suddenly  alarmed  at  the  magnitude  of  the  dis- 
closure he  is  going  to  make,  not  only  to  Horatio,  but  to  another  besides,  he  breaks 
off  hastily  :  'There's  ne'er  a  villain  in  all  Denmark'  that  can  match  (perhaps  he 
would  have  said)  my  uncle  in  villainy;  and  then  recollecting  the  danger  of  such  a 
declaration,  he  pauses  for  a  moment  and  then  abruptly  concludes  :  «  but  he's  an 
arrant  knave.'  Moberly  :  Hamlet  turns  his  words  off  into  a  strange  and  baffling 
jest,  as  a  kind  of  refuge  from  the  horror  which  would  else  overmaster  him,  with  a 
feeling,  at  the  same  time,  that  this  will  be  the  best  way  to  defeat  enquiry. 

125.  needs. ..  come]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  to  before  the  infinitive, 
see  Abbott,  \  349. 


act  I,  sc.  v.]  HAMLET  1 1 1 

And  so,  without  more  circumstance  at  all,  127 

I  hold  it  fit  that  we  shake  hands  and  part ; 

You,  as  your  business  and  desire  shall  point  you; 

For  every  man  hath  business  and  desire,  130 

Such  as  it  is ;  and  for  my  own  poor  part, 

Look  you,  I'll  go  pray. 

Hor.     These  are  but  wild  and  whirling  words,  my  lord 

Ham.     I'm  sorry  they  offend  you,  heartily ; 
Yes,  faith,  heartily. 

Hor.  There's  no  offence,  my  lord.  135 

Ham.     Yes,  by  Saint  Patrick,  but  there  is,  Horatio, 

129.  desire]  defires  Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.  Coll.  (MS). 

130.  hath]  hds  F,.  has  F3F3F4,  134,  135.  Pm...  Yes]  One  line,  Steev. 
Rowe-f,  Jen.  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Bos.  Cald.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White,  Del. 
Glo.  Mob.  Huds. 

131.  my]  mine  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  134.  Pm]  lam  Qq,  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 
Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Glo.  Del.  Huds.  Mob.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White,  Del. 

132.  Look  you,  Pll]  I  will  Qq,  Pope  offend]  offended  F '  F 4,  Rowe. 

+  ,   Jen.    El.     Look  you,  I  will  Cap.  135.   Yes, faith,]  Yes,  Pope  +  .   ' Faith , 

Steev.  Var.  Cap. 

133.  whirling]  Theob.  zuhttrling  Qq,  136.  Horatio]  my  Lord  Ff,  Rowe  +  , 
Warb.     hurling  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Cald.  Knt. 

Cald.  Knt,  Sing,     windy  Q'76.    hurting 

127.  circumstance]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Detail.  Clarke:  Circumlocution.  See  III, 
i,  1 ;  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  i,  154. 

132.  go  pray]  Clarendon:  Compare  the  phrases,  'go  seek,'  II,  i,  101 ;  'go 
sleep,'  Temp.  II,  i,  190 ;  'go  kindle,'  Two  Gent.  II,  vi,  19;  'go  watch,'  Merry 
Wives,  I,  iv,  7 ;  '  come  view,'  Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  vi,  43. 

136.  Saint  Patrick]  Warburton  :  At  this  time  all  the  whole  northern  world 
had  their  learning  from  Ireland ;  to  which  place  it  had  retired,  and  there  flourished 
under  the  auspices  of  this  saint.  But  it  was,  I  suppose,  only  said  at  random.  Cal- 
DECOTT:  As  Sh.  gave  the  living  manners,  customs,  and  habits  of  thinking  of  his 
own  country  to  those  of  all  ages  and  countries  that  he  introduced  upon  the  stage,  he 
would  little  hesitate  to  make  any  stranger  invoke  the  name  of  a  saint  familiar  and 
popular  in  his  own.  Tschischwitz  :  If  Sh.  had  wished  to  be  historically  correct, 
he  would  have  made  a  Dane  swear  by  St.  Ansgarius.  But  since  the  subject  con- 
cerned an  inexpiated  crime,  he  naturally  thought  of  St  Patrick,  who  kept  a  Purga- 
tory of  his  own.  See  The  Honest  Whore  [pt.  2,  I,  i,  p.  330,  Dodsley  ed.  1825, 
where  the  text  reads,  *  St.  Patrick,  you  know,  keeps  Purgatory,'  and  not  as  the  learned 
German  quotes  :  '  keeps  his  Purgatory.'  Ed.]  Moberly  :  Saint  Patrick,  the  patron 
saint  of  all  blunders  and  confusion. 

136.  Horatio]  Corson:  The  'my  lord'  (of  the  Ff)  in  Hamlet's  speech  :s  a  re- 
ort  to  the  '  my  lord '  in  Horatio's  speech,  and  has  an  effect  which  is  lost  in  the  Qq 
ext. 


1 1  2  HAMLET  [act  i,  sc.  v 

And  much  offence  too.     Touching  this  vision  here,  137 

It  is  an  honest  ghost,  that  let  me  tell  you  ; 

For  your  desire  to  know  what  is  between  us, 

O'ermaster't  as  you  may.     And  now,  good  friends,  140 

As  you  are  friends,  scholars,  and  soldiers, 

Give  me  one  poor  request. 

Hor.     What  is't,  my  lord  ?  we  will. 

Ham.     Never  make  known  what  you  have  seen  to-night 

'  \      My  lord,  we  will  not. 
Mar.  /         y 

Ham.  Nay,  but  swear't. 

Hor.  In  faith,       145 

My  lord,  not  I. 

Mar.  Nor  I,  my  lord,  in  faith. 

Ham.     Upon  my  sword. 

Mar.  We  have  sworn,  my  lord,  already. 

137.  too.      Touching]     Rowe.      too:  142,    143.   Give. ..lord '/]     One     line, 

touching  Q'76.     too,  touching  Ff,  Knt.  Steev.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing. 

to,  touching  Qq.  143.  we  wilt]  Ora.  Pope  +  .    Mar.  We 

here,]  heere,  or  here,  Qq.    heere  :  will  Coll.  (MS). 

oxhere:¥i.    here — Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  145.  Hor.  Mar.]  Booth.  Q2Q3.    Both. 

Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Steev.Var.  Sing.  Dyce,  Q4Q5Ff. 

Sta.  White,     here.  Knt.  145,   146.  In  faith,...!.]    Cap.     One 

140.  O'ermaster't]  Oremaflret  Q2Q.  line,  QqFf,  Rowe +,  Jen.  Mai.  Sta.  Huds. 
O'er-master,  Rowe  ii.  Overmaster  it  147.  We  have]  We've  Pope,  Han. 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Steev.  Var.  Knt.  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

137.  offence]  Delius:  Hamlet  purposely  misunderstands  his  friends' words,  in 
order  to  evade  their  enquiries.  At  first  he  pretends  that  his  words  have  given  offence, 
whereas  his  friends  have  merely  found  them  vague;  and  when  they  reply  that  there 
is  no  offence,  he  takes  •  offence '  in  a  wider  sense  as  a  '  crime,'  and  refers  it  to  the 
ciime  of  his  uncle  that  had  just  been  divulged  to  him. 

137.  too]  Capell  (i,  128) :  The  most  emphaticall  word  in  this  sentence  is 
'  too.'  Corson  :  There  should  be  only  a  comma  after  this  word.  Hamlet  re- 
fers to  the  wrong  which,  he  has  just  learned,  had  been  done  his  father:  'Yes,  by 
Saint  Patrick,  but  there  is,  my  Lord,  And  much  offence  too,  touching  this  Vision 
here.' 

138.  honest]  Hudson  :  Hamlet  means  that  it  is  a  real  Ghost,  just  what  it  ap- 
pears to  be,  and  not  '  the  Devil '  in  '  a  pleasing  shape,'  as  Horatio  had  apprehended 
it  to  be. 

141.  soldiers]  Walker  {Vers.  175):  Pronounced  dissolute*. 

147.  sword]  Upton  (p.  61,  n.)  :  He  swears  them  on  his  sword,  very  soldier-like, 
Xbrl  agreeable  to  the  ancient  custom  of  his  country.     Jordanes  in  his  Gothic  History 


act  I,  sc.  v.|  HAMLET  H3 

Ham.     Indeed,  upon  my  sword,  indeed.  148 

Ghost.     [Beneath"]  Swear. 

148.  Indeed... indeed.}     In     deed. ..in         Ghoft   cries    vnder   the    Stage.     Ghoft. 
deed  Sta.  Sweare.  Qq.    Gho.  Sweare.    Ghofl  cries 

149.  Ghost.  [Beneath]  Swear.']  Cap.         under  the  Stage.  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,Jen. 

mentions  this  custom.  Ammianus  Marcellinus  relates  the  same  ceremony  among 
the  Huns.  Johnson  :  Garrick  produced  me  a  passage,  I  think,  in  Brantdme,  from 
which  it  appeared  that  it  was  common  to  swear  upon  the  cross  which  the  old  swords 
always  had  upon  the  hilt.  Douce  (ii,  229)  :  In  consequence  of  this  practice,  the 
name  of  Jesus  was  sometimes  inscribed  on  the  handle  or  some  other  part.  Nares  : 
The  singular  mixture  of  religious  and  military  fanaticism  which  arose  from  the 
Crusades  gave  rise  to  the  extraordinary  custom  of  taking  a  solemn  oath  upon  a 
sword.  In  a  plain,  unenriched  sword,  the  separation  between  the  blade  and  the 
hilt  was  usually  a  straight  transverse  bar,  which,  suggesting  the  idea  of  a  cross, 
added  to  the  devotion  which  every  true  knight  felt  for  his  favorite  weapon,  and  evi- 
dently led  to  this  practice;  of  which  the  instances  are  too  numerous  to  be  collected. 
The  sword  or  the  blade  were  often  mentioned  in  this  ceremony  without  reference  to 
the  cross.  It  is  ludicrously  referred  to  in  1  Hen.  IV:  II,  iv,  371.  Dyce  [Gloss.) : 
The  custom  of  swearing  by  a  sword  prevailed  even  among  the  barbarous  worshippers 
of  Odin  :  '  The  Scythians  commonly  substituted  a  sword  as  the  most  proper  symbol 
to  represent  the  supreme  god.  It  was  by  planting  a  spear  in  the  middle  of  a  field 
that  they  usually  marked  out  the  place  set  apart  for  prayers  and  sacrifices ;  and  when 
they  had  relaxed  from  their  primitive  strictness,  so  far  as  to  build  temples  and  set  up 
idols  in  them,  they  yet  preserved  some  traces  of  the  ancient  custom  by  putting  a 
sword  in  the  hands  of  Odin's  statues.  The  respect  they  had  for  their  arms  made 
them  also  swear  by  instruments  so  valuable  and  so  useful,  as  being  the  most  sacred 
things  they  knew.  Accordingly,  in  an  ancient  Icelandic  poem,  a  Scandinavian,  to 
assure  himself  of  a  person's  good  faith,  requires  him  to  swear,  "  by  the  shoulder  of 
a  horse,  and  the  edge  of  a  sword."  This  oath  was  usual  more  especially  on  the  eve 
of  some  great  engagement ;  the  soldiers  engaged  themselves  by  an  oath  of  this  kind 
not  to  flee,  though  their  enemies  should  be  never  so  superior  in  number.' — Mallet's 
Northern  Antiquities,  &c,  transl.  by  Percy,  vol.  i,  p.  216,  ed.  1770.  [For  many 
instances  of  oaths  taken  upon  swords,  see  Farmer,  Steevens  and  Caldecott.  Ed.] 
Knight  :  We  have  little  doubt  that  Sh.  was  aware  of  the  peculiar  custom  of  the 
Gothic  nations,  and  did  not  make  Hamlet  propose  the  oath  merely  as  a  practice  of 
chivalry. 

147.  already]  Hudson:  The  oath  they  have  already  sworn  is  ' in  faith.''  But 
this  has  not  enough  of  ritual  solemnity  in  it  to  satisfy  Hamlet. 

148.  Indeed]  Staunton  :  The  meaning  of  Hamlet  unquestiona'bly  is,  Not 
in  words  only,  but  in  act,  in  form;  upon  the  cross  of  my  sword,  pledge  your- 
selves. 

149.  Coleridge  :  These  subterraneous  speeches  of  the  Ghost  are  hardly  defen- 
sible ;  but  I  would  call  your  attention  to  the  characteristic  difference  between  the 
Ghost,  as  a  superstition  connected  with  the  most  mysterious  truths  of  revealed  re- 
ligion,— and  Shakespeare's  consequent  reverence  in  his  treatment  of  it, — and  the 

foul  earthy  witcheries  and  wild  language  in  Macbeth. 
10*  H 


114  HAMLET  [act  i,  so  v. 

Ham.     Ah,  ha,  boy  !    say'st  thou  so  ?   art  thou  there, 

true-penny? —  1 50 

Come  on ;  you  hear  this  fellow  in  the  cellarage ; 
Consent  to  swear. 

Hor.  Propose  the  oath,  my  lord. 

Ham.     Never  to  speak  of  this  that  you  have  seen. 
Swear  by  my  sword. 

Ghost.     [Bencatli]  Swear.  155 

Ham.     Hie  et  ubique  ?  then  we'll  shift  our  ground. — 

150,  151.  Ah,  ha, ...cellar age. ~\  Prose,  153.  seen.~\    FgF4,    Walker,    Corson. 

Ff,  Rowe.  feene.  FXF2.   feene  Q2Q,.    feene,  Q.Q.. 

150.  Ah]  Ha   Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.         seen,  Rowe  et  cet. 

Var.    Cald.    Knt,  Coll.  Sing.   El.  Ktly,  155,  161,  182.   [Beneath]  Cap.     Om. 

Del.  Huds.  QqFf. 

so?]  Q'76.    fo,  Qq.    fo.  Ff.  156.  Hie]  Hie  Qg. 

151.  on;  you  hear]  one  you  here  Yx.  et]  est  Rowe  ii. 
cellarage"]   Sellerige  Qq.    feller-  ubique  ?]  vbique,  Qq. 

edge  Fx.  felleridge  F2F  .     Celleridge  F  ,  our]  for  Ff,  Rowe.     Om.  Sey- 

Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  mour,  reading  then... gentlemen,  as  one 

152.  the  oath]  my  oath  F3F4,  Rowe.  line. 

150.  true-penny]  Steevens  :  This  word,  as  well  as  some  of  Hamlet's  former 
exclamations,  we  find  in  The  Malcontent,  1604.  Collier  :  This  word  is  also  found 
in  Nash's  Almond  for  a  Parrot.  It  is  (as  I  learn  from  some  Sheffield  authorities) 
a  mining  term,  and  signifies  a  particular  indication  in  the  soil  of  the  direction  in 
which  ore  is  to  be  found.  Hence  Hamlet  may  with  propriety  address  the  Ghost 
under  ground  by  that  name.  Forby  (  Vocab.  of  East  Anglia) :  Hearty  old  fellow  ; 
staunch  and  trusty;  true  to  his  purpose  or  pledge.  Halliwell  suspects  that  it 
was  sometimes  applied  to  a  sexton,  therefore  very  appropriate  here.  Upton  (p. 
9,  note)  :  '  The  Vice,'  in  our  old  Moralities,  was  used  to  make  fun  with  the  Devil, 
and  he  had  several  trite  expressions,  as,  '  I'll  be  with  you  in  a  trice,'  'Ah,  ha,  boy, 
are  you  there  ?'  &c.  And  it  was  great  entertainment  to  the  audience,  to  see  their 
old  enemy  belaboured  in  effigy.  Now,  Ham.  is  resolved  to  break  the  subject  of 
the  discourse  to  none  but  Hor. ;  to  others  he  intends  to  appear  as  a  sort  of  madman, 
he  therefore  now  addresses  the  Ghost  as  The  Vice  does  the  Devil,  at  the  same  time  he 
wishes  the  sentinels  to  imagine  that  this  was  a  shape  the  Devil  had  put  on ;  and  in 
H>  "j  575,  he  is  somewhat  of  this  opinion  himself.  This  manner  of  speech  was  what 
the  audience  were  well  acquainted  with ;  and  it  takes  off  in  some  measure  from 
the  horror  of  the  scene. 

153.  seen]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  263)  :  The  inversion  [by  putting  only  a  comma 
after  'seen']  is  anti-Shakespearian.  Corson  :  Horatio  asks  Hamlet  to  propose  the 
oath,  which  he  does,  namely  :  '  Never  to  speak  of  this  that  you  have  seen,'  and  then, 
having  done  so,  he  tells  them  to  swear  by  his  sword,  which  is  additional. 

156.  Hie  et  ubique]  Tschischwitz  :  The  repetition  of  the  oath,  the  shifting  of 
the  ground,  and  the  Latin  phrase  are  taken  from  the  ceremonies  of  conjurors.  SlL- 
BERSCHLAO  (Aforgenblatt,^o.  47,  i860,  p.  1 1 13):  It  is  highly  probable  the  conclu- 


act  i,  sc.  v.]  HAMLET  1 1  5 

Come  hither,  gentlemen, 

And  lay  your  hands  again  upon  my  sword, 

Never  to  speak  of  this  that  you  have  heard ; 

Swear  by  my  sword.  1 60 

Ghost.     \Bencat1i\  Swear. 

Ham.     Well  said,  old  mole  !  canst  work  i'  the  earth  so  fast  ? 
A  worthy  pioner ! — Once  more  remove,  good  friends. 

Hor.     O  day  and  night,  but  this  is  wondrous  strange ! 

Ham.     And  therefore  as  a  stranger  give  it  welcome.  165 

157-160.    Come. ..sword]    As    in    Ff.  161.  Swear.]    Sweare  by  his  sword. 

End  lines,  hands. ..speak. ..sword.  Cam.  Qq,    Theob.   Warb.    Johns.    Cap.    Jen. 

Ecld.  conj.  Steev.  Cald.  Var.  Sta. 

158,159.  sword... hear d ;~\  Fx, Walker,  162.  canst]  canst  thou  Q'76. 

Corson,  /word. . ..heard :  FaF  F  .  sword.  earth]  ground  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Cald. 

...heard,  Rowe+.  sword .-...heard,  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  White,  Huds. 

et  cet.  163.  pioner !]   Dyce,  El.  White,  Sta. 

159,  160.  Never... sword]  These  lines  Del.  Glo. +  .    Pioner,  Q2Q  FxFaF  .    Pi- 

are  transposed  in  Qq,  Jen.  Steev,  Var.  oner  Q4QS-  Pioneer,  F4,  Rowe.  pioneer  t 

and  Sing.     In  Cap.   also,  but  lines   157  Pope  et  cet. 

-160  end:  hands... by  my  szvord... heard,  good  friends]  Om.  Seymour. 

Cap.  is  followed  by  Ktly.  friends]  friend  F2F  F  ,  Rowe. 

159.  this  that]  this  which  Rowe  ii+.  1 65.  give]  bid  FF,  Rowe. 
heard]  heard  to-night  Seymour. 

sion  of  this  scene  is  a  remnant,  word  for  word,  of  the  earlier  tragedy  by  Shake- 
speare's predecessor ;  and  this  little  snatch  of  Latinity  upholds  this  view.  The 
dramatic  predecessors  of  Shakespeare  were  very  fond  of  interlarding  their  pieces 
with  such  little  snatches  of  Latin,  and  Shakespeare  yielded  to  the  practice  only  in 
his  very  earliest  plays,  not  in  his  later  ones.  Therefore,  from  the  use  of  these  little 
phrases  alone  we  might  infer  that  Shakespeare  retained  all  of  these  concluding  lines 
from  the  earlier  drama,  perhaps  from  no  other  reason  than  that  the  scene  had  become 
a  popular  favorite. 

158.  upon  my  sword,]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  263)  was  the  first  to  advocate  this 
punctuation  of  Fx ;  and  Corson  says :  '  The  true  meaning  is  indicated  by  the 
comma  after  "  sword."  The  "  swear  by  my  sword"  is  but  a  repetition  of  the  same 
idea.'  Walker  adds  :  •  The  Ghost's  "  Swear  by  his  sword  " — if  this  reading  bs 
correct — is,  as  it  were,  an  echo  of  Hamlet's  words.'  In  the  textual  notes  the  punc- 
tuation of  those  editors  alone  is  given  who  have  followed  the  arrangement  of  the  Ff. 

163.  pioner]  Nares:  A  pioneer;  an  attendant  on  an  army,  whose  office  is  to 
dig,  level,  remove  obstructions,  form  trenches,  and  do  all  works  executed  with  un- 
warlike  tools,  as  spades,  &c.  Dyce  [Gloss.) :  They  are  generally  soldiers  who,  on 
account  of  misconduct,  had  been  degraded  to  the  office.  [For  the  spelling,  see 
Walker,  Vers.  217  ;  Crit.  iii,  263  ;  Abbott,  \  492.   Also  I,  ii,  172 ;  III,  iv,  206.  Ed.] 

165.  welcome]  Warburton  :  Receive  it  to  yourself;  take  it  under  your  own  roof; 
as  much  as  to  say  :  Keep  it  secret.     Alluding  to  the  laws  of  hospitality.     Mason  : 
Hamlet  means  merely  to  request  that  they  would  seem  not  to  know  it, — to  be  unac- 
quainted with  it.     Caldecott  :  Receive  it  courteously  and  compliantly.     Claren 
DON  :  Receive      without  doubt  or  question. 


n6 


HAMLET 


[ACT  I,  SC.  V, 


There  are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  Horatio,  166 

Than  are  dreamt  of  in  your  philosophy. 

But  come ; 

Here,  as  before,  never,  so  help  you  mercy, 

How  strange  or  odd  soe'er  I  bear  myself,  170 

As  I  perchance  hereafter  shall  think  meet 

To  put  an  antic  disposition  on, 

That  you,  at  such  times  seeing  me,  never  shall, 

With  arms  encumber'd  thus,  or  this  head-shake, 

Or  by  pronouncing  of  some  doubtful  phrase,  175 

As  '  Well,  well,  we  know,'  or  '  We  could,  an  if  we  would,' 


107.  your]  our  Ff,  Rowe,  Han.  Cald. 
Knt,  White,  Dyce  ii. 

167.  168.  Than... come  ;]  Han.  One 
line,  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.Coll.  El. White. 

168.  169.  come  ;  Here~\  Om.  Seymour. 

169.  Here~\  Swear  Pope  ii,  Bailey. 
swear  here  Ktly,  reading  But.. . mercy . 
as  one  line. 

170-172.  How. ..on]  In  parenthesis, 
Pope  i. 

170-178.  How...note~\  In  parenthesis, 
Qq. 

170.  soe*  er]  fo  ere  Ff.    Jo  mere  Qq. 

1 71-172.  As... on]  In  parenthesis,  Ff, 
Pope  + . 

171.  meet]  Jit  So  quoted  by  Theob. 
(Sh.  Best.  p.  59). 


173.  times]  time  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap. 
174-178.    With. ..out]  In  parenthesis, 

Cap. 

174.  this  head-shake]  Theob  this 
head  JJiake  Qq,  Pope,  thus,  headjhake 
Ff,  Rowe.  head  thus  Jliak't  Q'76,  Jen. 
thus  head  shake  Cald.  Knt. 

!75-  Or]  Nor  Mai.  (Var. '85)  conj. 
(withdrawn). 

176,  177.  As. ..might]  Prose,  Cap. 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Sing.  Huds. 

176.  Well,  well,]  well,  Ff,  Rowe  +  , 
Cald.  Knt. 

176,  177.  an  if. ..an  if]  Han.  and 
if.. .and  if  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  and  if... 
orifQ,rj6.    an. .. those  ;  An  if  Seymour. 


167.  your]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  7;  iii,  264)  prefers  our.  White  :  This  reading  of 
the  Qq  is  the  poorer,  but  commoner.  Clarendon  :  For  this  colloquial  and  familiar 
use,  see  III,  ii,  3;  III,  ii,  117;  IV,  iii,  21-24;  Ant'  &  Cleo.  II,  vii,  29.  Corson: 
Hamlet  and  Horatio  had  been  fellow-students  at  the  University ;  this  may  explain 
the  use  of  '  our.'  Or  it  would  be  better,  perhaps,  to  understand  Hamlet  as  using  it 
in  the  general  sense  of  human  philosophy,  which  is  limited  in  its  scope.  Why  he 
should  say  'your,'  does  not  appear.     [It  is  used  ethically.    See  'me,'  II,  ii,  414.  Ed.] 

172.  antic]  Clarendon:  Disguised,  as  in  Rom.  &  Jul.  I,  v,  54.  Moberly: 
A  counterfeit  madness  such  as  Hamlet  afterwards  uses.  The  word  '  antic  '  means 
first  'old-fashioned;'  then  '  quaint,'  'capricious,'  and  the  like.  In  much  the  same 
way  '  modern  '  means  '  ordinary.' 

173.  such]  Corson  :'  Such  times  seeing '  is  harsh.  The  Ff  text  is  better.  Abbott, 
\  470,  in  scanning  this  line  contracts  '  seeing'  rather  than  'never.' 

174.  encumber'd]   Moberly:  Folded  thus  in  s  gn  of  wisdom. 

174.  head-shake]  Corson:  According  to  the  Ff,  'shake'  is  a  verb,  having 
*  shall '  as  its  auxiliary  '  — with  arms  encumbered  thus,  or  thus  (suiting  the  action  to 
tiie  wcrds),  head  shake.' 

175.  of]  For  instances  of  'of  following  verbal  nouns,  see  Abbott,  \  178. 


ACT  I,  SC.  V.] 


HAMLET 


117 


Or  '  If  we  list  to  speak,'  or  '  There  be,  an  if  they  might'  177 

Or  such  ambiguous  giving  out,  to  note 

That  you  know  aught  of  me ;  this  not  to  do, 

So  grace  and  mercy  at  your  most  need  help  you,  180 

Swear. 

Ghost.     \_Be)icatJi\  Swear. 

Ham.     Rest,  rest,  perturbed  spirit ! — So,  gentlemen, 
With  all  my  love  I  do  commend  me  to  you ; 
And  what  so  poor  a  man  as  Hamlet  is  185 

May  do,  to  express  his  love  and  friending  to  you, 
God  willing,  shall  not  lack.     Let  us  go  in  together ; 
And  still  your  fingers  on  your  lips,  I  pray. 
The  time  is  out  of  joint ; — O  cursed  spite, 


177.  they]  there  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 
Cald.  Knt. 

178.  giving]  givings  Warb. 

out,  to  note]  Mai.  conj.  (Var. 
'85).  Steev.  out,  to  note)  [See  line 
170]  Qq.  out  to  note,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope 
i.     out  to  note  Mai. 

to  note]  denote  Theob.  Pope  ii 
+  ,  Cap.  Jen.  El.  to-note  Porson  conj. 
MS.* 

1 79-1 81.  this... Swear.]  Knt.  this... 
doe :  So. ..you :  Sweare.  Ff.  this  doe 
fweare,  So. ..you.  Qq,  Mai.  this  you 
m  ust  five  a  r.  So... you  Q '  7  6 .  this  do  ye 
swear.    So. ..you!   Swear.  Pope  +  ,  Cald. 


This  do  you  swear,  So... you  !  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  This  not  to  do,  swear  ;  So. ..you  f 
Bos.      ' 

182.  [They  kiss  the  hilt  of  Hamlet's 
sword.  White,  Huds. 

183.  Rest,  rest,]  Rest,  Seymour. 
[They  swear.]  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

184.  I  do]  Om.  F2F3F4.   do  /Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 

186.  friending]  friend/hip  Q'76. 

187.  God. ..lack.]     Shall  never  fail 
Q'76. 

Let  us  go  in]  Lefs  go  Anon.* 
together]  Om.  Han. 

188.  pray.]  Rowe.    pray,  QqFf. 


177.  There  be]  Dyce:  Hamlet  means,  '  There  be  persons,  who,  if  they  were  at 
liberty  to  speak.' 

178.  giving  out]  Clarendon:  Profession.     See  Meas.for  Meas.  I,  iv,  54. 
178.  to  note]   Caldecott  :  The  grammar  here  is  defective,  and  its  construction 

embarrassed  :  [Swear]  here  as  before,  never, — that  you  never  shall, — by  pronouncing 
some  doubtful  phrase  or  the  like,  [do  aught]  to  mark  or  denote,  &c  Clarendon  : 
The  '  to  '  is  superfluous  in  the  construction,  which  follows  '  never  shall.'  Compare 
Cor.  V,  iii,  123 ;  and  Merry  Wives,  IV,  iv,  57. 

180.  most]  See  Macb.  V,  iv,  12,  and  Abbott,  $  17,  for  instances  of  more  and 
most  used  for  great  and  greatest. 

183.  perturbed]  Clarke:  There  is  an  effect  of  pathos  in  these  few  murmured 
soothing  words,  coming  as  a  climax  and  close  to  the  scene. 

185.  Hamlet]  Clarke:  It  is  noteworthy  that  Hamlet  frequently  speaks  of  him- 
self in  the  third  person ;  which  is  characteristic  of  the  philosophic  man, — reflective, 
thoughtful,  given  to  moralize  and  speak  in  the  abstract. 

186.  friending]  Clarendon:  Friendliness.     Not  found  elsewhere  in  Sh. 


1 1 8  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  i. 

That  ever  I  was  born  to  set  it  right ! —  190 

Nay,  come,  let's  go  together.  \Exeunt. 


ACT  II 
Scene  I.     A  room  in  Polonius's  house. 

Enter  Polonius  and  Reynaldo. 

Pol.     Give  him  this  money  and  these  notes,  Reynaldo. 

Rey.     I  will,  my  lord. 

Pol.     You  shall  do  marvellous  wisely,  good  Reynaldo, 
Before  you  visit  him,  to  make  inquiry 
Of  his  behaviour. 

Rey.  My  lord,  I  did  intend  it. 

Pol.     Marry,  well  said,  very  well  said.     Look  you,  sir, 
Inquire  me  first  what  Danskers  are  in  Paris, 

Jy. 

190.  set]  fee  FF.  uelons  Q.     maruels  Fx.     marvels  Y  2t 

Act  11.  Scene  i.]  Q'76.     Actus  Se-  F4.    marvelous  Sing,  ii,  Ktly.    marvelPs 

cundus.  Ff.  Dyce. 

A  room...]  An  Apartment...  Rowe.  3.  wisely,]  wifely  Qq.  wifely  :  FXF9F  . 

Enter.. .Reynaldo.]   Cap.      Enter  old  4.  to  make  inquiry]  Q'76.     to  make 

Polonius,  with   his   man   or   two.    Qq.  inquire  Qq,  Glo.  + ,  Mob.  you  make  in- 

Enter.. .Reynoldo.  Ff+.  quiry   Ff,    Cald.     make   you    inquiry. 

1.  this"]  his  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  Rowe. 

these~\  these  two  Q4Q5»     those  ¥  J?  6.  Marry... sir,]  Two  lines,  Ff,  Rowe. 

F4,  Rowe.  Marry,~\  Mary  Q2Q3Q4- 

1,  3,   15.    Reynaldo]    Reynoldo    Ff,  7-  Danskers]  Dantz 'ckers  Cap.  (cor- 

Rowe  +  ,  Cald.  reded  in  MS*). 

3.  marvellous']  meruiles  Q2Qv     mar- 

190.  right]  Seymour  (ii,  164) :  Ham.  does  not  lament  that  the  disjointed  time 
is  to  be  set  right  by  him,  but  that  he,  .  .  .  whose  duty  it  of  necessity  becomes  to  set 
the  time  right,  should  have  been  born. 

3.  shall]  For  instances  of  *  shall'  for  will,  see  III,  h,  317;  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  57, 
and  Abbott,  §  315. 

3.  marvellous]  For  instances  of  adjectives  used  as  adverbs,  see  I,  iii,  116;  III, 
ii,  288,  and  Abbott,  \  1. 

4.  inquiry]  Clarendon  adopts  the  Qq  reading,  and  justifies  it  on  the  thoroughly 
Shakespearian  usage  of  various  parts  of  speech  as  nouns,  such  as  '  avouch,'  I,  i,  57; 
'  disclose,'  III,  i,  166.     For  many  other  examples,  see  Abbott,  $  451. 

7.  Danskers]   Capell  (i,  128)  :   Danske,  for  Denmark,  occurs  often  in  Albion' 
England 


act  ii.  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  1 19 

And  how,  and  who ;  what  means,  and  where  they  keep ; 

What  company,  at  what  expense ;  and  finding 

By  this  encompassment  and  drift  of  question  10 

That  they  do  know  my  son,  come  you  more  nearer 

Than  your  particular  demands  will  touch  it ; 

Take  you,  as  'twere,  some  distant  knowledge  of  him, 

As  thus,  '  I  know  his  father  and  his  friends, 

And  in  part  him.'     Do  you  mark  this,  Reynaldo  ?  15 

Rcy.     Ay,  very  well,  my  lord. 

Pol.     'And  in  part  him  ;  but,'  you  may  say,  '  not  well ; 
But  if't  be  he  I  mean,  he's  very  wild, 
Addicted'  so  and  so;  and  there  put  on  him 

What  forgeries  you  please ;  marry,  none  so  rank  20 

As  may  dishonour  him ;  take  heed  of  that ; 
But,  sir,  such  wanton,  wild,  and  usual  slips 
As  are  companions  noted  and  most  known 
To  youth  and  liberty. 

9.  at]  Om.  F  ,  Rowe  i.    and  Cald.  i.  14.  As]  And  Ff. 

11,12.  nearer   Than]    Cap.      neerer  14, 15, 17-19.  Quotation  first  indicated 

Then   QqFt.      neere    Than    F2.      near  by  Cap. 

Then    F.      near     Then    Q'76.     near,  17.  him;  but,'  you]   Cap.     him,  but 

Then  F  ,  Rowe.     near;   Then  Pope  +  .  yott  QqFf.     him — but  you  Rowe+. 

nearer;  Then  Jen.  Ktly.  18.  ift]  y'ft  Qq.     if  it  Q'76. 

12.   particular... touch]      perticuler...  19.  Addicted'  so  and  so]  Sta.  Huds. 

tuck.  Q2Q3Q,.  Addicted  so  and  so'  Cap.  et  cet. 

12.  touch]  vouch  Seymour. 

8.  keep]   Dyce  {Gloss.) :  To  live,  to  dwell. 

10.  encompassment  and  drift]  Caldecott  :  Winding  and  circuitous  course. 

11.  more  nearer]  For  instances  of  double  comparatives,  see  Abbott,  §11. 
Clarendon  :  •  Neere '  of  F2  shows  that  the  double  comparative  was  growing  obso- 
lete in  1632.  Keightly  believes  all  difficulty  to  be  removed  by  following  Jennens* 
reading.  Moberly  :  By  these  natural  and  circuitous  inquiries  you  will  get  nearer 
the  point  than  you  possibly  could  by  a  direct  question.  [Pol.  repeats  this  same 
idea  in  lines  65,  66.  For  other  instances  of  double  comparatives,  see  III,  ii,  291 ; 
III,  iv,  157;  V,  ii,  121.  Ed.] 

12.  it]  See  Abbott,  $  226,  for  instances  of 'it'  used  indefinitely,  as  the  object  of 
a  verb,  without  referring  to  anything  previously  mentioned,  and  seeming  to  indicate 
a  pre-existing  object  in  the  mind  of  the  person  spoken  of,  •  or  in  the  mind  of  the 
speaker,  as  in  this  instance,'  Clarendon  adds. 

13.  Take]   Delius  :  Assume  the  appearance  of  having  some  distant,  &c. 

22.  slips]  Clarendon:  Compare  Oth.  IV,  i,  9.  Perhaps  Sh.  had  the  other 
sense  of  the  word  in  his  mind,  as  in  2  Hen.  IV:  III,  ii,  214:  'graft  with  crab-tree 
Blip.' 

24.  To  youth]   Delius  :  This  qualifies  '  companions.' 


1 20  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  i. 

Rey.  As  gaming,  my  lord. 

Pol.     Ay,  or  drinking,  fencing,  swearing,  quarrelling,  25 

Drabbing ;  you  may  go  so  far. 

Rey.     My  lord,  that  would  dishonour  him. 

Pol.     Faith,  no ;  as  you  may  season  it  in  the  charge. 
You  must  not  put  another  scandal  on  him, 

That  he  is  open  to  incontinency ;  30 

That's  not  my  meaning ;  but  breathe  his  faults  so  quaintly 
That  they  may  seem  the  taints  of  liberty, 
The  flash  and  outbreak  of  a  fiery  mind, 
A  savageness  in  unreclaimed  blood, 
Of  general  assault. 

Rey.  But,  my  good  lord, —  35 

Pol.     Wherefore  should  you  do  this  ? 

24.  lord.]  lord —  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  31.  faults']  fauls  Q  . 

25,  26.  Ay. ..far.']  Cap.    The  first  line  quaintly]  quently  Qq. 

ends  at  swearing,  in  QqFf,  Rowe-f,  Jen.  34,  35.  A  savageness. ..assault.]  One 

Dyce  ii,  Huds.     At  drabbing ;  Ktly.  line,  Ff. 

28.  no]  Om.  Qq.  34.  unreclaimed  ]    vnreclamed  QaQ, 

30.  That]  Than  Ktly.  Q4.     unreclaimed  Ff. 

31.  breathe]  breath  QqF^F^,  Rowe,  35.  lord, — ]  lord —  Pope.  Lord.  Qq 
Cap.  Ff,  Rowe. 

25.  fencing]  This  is  bracketed  by  Warburton  as  '  an  interpolation.'  Johnson  : 
A  too  diligent  frequentation  of  the  fencing-school,  a  resort  of  violent  and  lawless 
young  men.  Malone:  I  suppose  it  means  piquing  himself  on  his  skill  in  the 
use  of  the  sword,  and  consequently  quarrelling  and  brawling.  •  The  cunning  of 
Fencers  [is  now]  applied  to  quarrelling.' — Gosson,  Schoole  of  Abuse,  1579,  p.  46, 
ed.  Arber. 

28.  season]  See  I,  ii,  192. 

29.  another]  Theobald  (Sh.  Restored,  p.  61),  on  the  ground  that  there  could 
be  no  second  scandal  without  a  first  (and  Polonius  implies  that  '  Drabbing '  is  no 
scandal),  conjectured  an  utter  for  '  another.'  And  this  emendation  was  adopted  by 
Han.  Warb.  Johns,  and  Elze.  But  Theobald,  in  his  edition,  withdrew  it,  because 
Sh.  uses  '  other '  in  the  same  way  elsewhere ;  as  in  Rich.  II:  I,  i,  33,  and  Macb. 
IV,  iii,  90.  Malone:  That  is,  a  very  different  and  more  scandalous  failing:  ha- 
bitual incontinency.  Moberly  :  A  deeper  kind  of  scandal ;  much  as  aXkaq  means 
*  particularly,'  and  aXkog  bdirtjg,  in  the  Odyssey,  '  an  out-of-the-way  or  foreign 
traveller.' 

31.  breathe]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  To  utter,  to  speak;  see  also  line  44. 

31.  quaintly]   Dyce  (Gloss.):  Ingeniously,  cleverly,  artfully. 

34.  unreclaimed]  Clarendon  :  Cotgrave  has  '  Adomestiquer :  To  tame,  reclaim, 
make  gentle.'     A  term  of  falconry. 

34.  savageness  .  .  .  assault]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  A  wildness  in  untamed  blood,  to 
which  all  young  men  are  liable. 


4CTII,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  121 

Rev.  Ay,  my  lord,  36 

I  would  know  that. 

Pol.  Marry,  sir,  here's  my  drift, 

And  I  believe  it  is  a  fetch  of  warrant ; 
You  laying  these  slight  sullies  on  my  son, 

As  'twere  a  thing  a  little  soil'd  i'  the  working,  40 

Mark  you, 

Your  party  in  converse,  him  you  would  sound, 
Having  ever  seen  in  the  prenominate  crimes 
The  youth  you  breathe  of  guilty,  be  assured 
He  closes  with  you  in  this  consequence :  45 

1  Good  sir,'  or  so,  or  '  friend,'  or  '  gentleman,' 
According  to  the  phrase  or  the  addition 

36,  37.  Ay,.. .that."]    Arranged  as   in  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.     One    line,   QqFf,   Rowe  +  ,   Jen.  42.  you  would]  you1  Id  Johns. 

Huds.  43.  seen  in]  feene.     In  FIFa.    feen 

36.  lord]  good  lord  Cap.  In  F3F4. 

38.  warrant]  witQq,  Pope +  , Jen.  El.  prenominate]    prenominat    Q2Q, 

39.  sullies]  /allies  Q3Q3,  Pope,    ful-  Q4. 

leyes  FfF2F  .  44.  breathe]   Rowe  ii.     breath  QqFf, 

40.  Vthe]  VtK'  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  with  Rowe  i,  Theob.  i,  Cap.  speak  Pope,  Han. 
Qq.  45.  He  closes]   Will  strait  close  Seym. 

41.  42.  Mark... sound,]     Mai.      One  consequence]  cofequence  Q  . 
line,    QqFf,    Rowe  +  ,   Cap.    Jen.    Sta.  46.  or  so]  In  parenthesis,  Qq,  Jen. 
Mark  you  added  to  line  40  by  Ktly.  or  so,  or]  or  Sir,  or  Han.    or  sire, 

41.  you,]  you  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  or  Warb.  forsooth,  or  Johns,  conj.  or  so 
Jen.  forth,Steev.  (Var.'78)  conj.  (withdrawn). 

42.  converse,]  converfe ;    Ff,  Rowe,  'gentleman,']  Gentleman.  Ff. 
Pope.  47.  or]  and  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt. 

him]   he  Q'76,  Pope  ii,  Theob.  addition]  addijlion  Q2Q3* 

36.  Ay]  For  instances  of  monosyllabic  exclamations  taking  the  place  of  a  whole 
foot,  see  Abbott,  g  482,  and  IV,  vii,  60;  '  O,'  IV,  iv,  65 ;  III,  i,  49. 

38.  fetch  of  warrant]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  A  warranted,  sanctioned,  or  approved 
artifice  or  device.  Clarendon  :  The  fetch  of  wit  of  the  Qq  is  •  a  cunning  con- 
trivance,' and  makes  as  good  sense  as  the  reading  of  the  Ff,  with  which  compare 
•passages  of  proof,'  IV,  vii,  113.  In  Lear,  II,  iv,  90,  'fetches'  mean  pretexts, 
excuses. 

40.  As  .  . .  working]  Caldecott  :  As  having  in  his  commerce  with  the  world 
unavoidably  contracted  some  small  blemishes. 

42.  converse]  Clarendon  :  Conversation.  See  Oth.  Ill,  i,  40,  where  it  is  ac- 
cented as  here. 

42.  him]  For  instances  where  'him'  is  put  for  he,  by  attraction  to  whom  under- 
stood, for  he  whom,  see  Abbott,  \  208. 

45.  closes  .  .  .  consequence]  Caldecott:  Falls  in  with  you  into  this  con 
elusion. 

47.  addition]  TrtK     See  I,  iv,  20;  Macb.  I,  iii,  106. 
11 


122 


HAMLET 


[act  ii,  sc.  i 


Of  man  and  country. 

Rey.  Very  good,  my  lord. 

Pol.  And  then,  sir,  does  he  this, — he  does, — what  was  I 
about  to  say  ?  By  the  mass,  I  was  about  to  say  something ; 
where  did  I  leave?  51 

Rey.  At  '  closes  in  the  consequence,'  at  t  friend  or  so,'  and 
'gentleman.' 

Pol.     At  '  closes  in  the  consequence,'  ay,  marry ; 
He  closes  with  you  thus  :  '  I  know  the  gentleman ;  55 

I  saw  him  yesterday,  or  t'other  day, 

Or  then,  or  then,  with  such,  or  such,  and,  as  you  say, 
There  was  he  gaming,  there  o'ertook  in's  rouse, 
There  falling  out  at  tennis ;'  or  perchance, 

I I  saw  him  enter  such  a  house  of  sale,'  60 
Videlicet,  a  brothel,  or  so  forth. 

See  you  now; 


'tother¥¥A. 
3   4 


Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  El. 
54.   Pol.]  Reynol.  F,.     Pelon.  F^ 
55-  closes  with  you  thus~\   closes  thus 

Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.  El.  Glo.  Cla. 

56.  t'other]  tother  ¥z¥, 
th'  other  Qq. 

57.  Or    then,   or    then,]     Or    then, 
Pope  + . 

or  such]  andfuch  Ff,Rowe  +  ,Knt. 

58.  he]  Ff.  a  Qq.  a'  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 
gaming,  there]  gaming  there,  Qq. 
o'ertook]  or  too  he  Qq. 

in's]  in  his  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Knt, 


49-51.  And  then. ..leave  ?]  Prose  first 
by  Mai.  Three  lines,  ending  fay  ?... 
fomething,...leaue  ?  Qq.  Three  lines, 
ending  this  ? ...fay  ? ...leave ?  Ff.  End- 
ing was  I. .  .say. ..leave?  Cap.  Ending  this  ; 
...say ? '...something,.. .leave f 'Jen.  Ending 
he  does. ..say  ?... leave  ?  Knt.  Ending  he 
does... I  was. .. leave  ?  Coll.  El.  Dyce, 
White,  Ktly,  Del.  Ending  he  does.. .mass 
...leave  ?  Sta. 

49.  does  he  this — he  does]  does  he  this  ? 
He  does:  Ff  {do's  FF).  doos  a  this, 
a  doos,  Q2Q,.     doos  a  this,  a  doos  :  Q.Q.' 

50.  By  the  mass]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe  +  , 
Cap.  Knt. 

something]  nothing  ¥2¥ '  F '  ,  Rowe. 

52,  53.  At... gentleman.']   Prose,  Glo. 

Two  lines,  the  first  ending  consequence  : 

in    Ff,    Cald.    Knt,   Sing.    Coll.    Dyce, 

White, Sta.   The  first  ending/V-zWz^Ktly. 

at' friend... gentleman.']  Om.  Qq, 

50.  mass]  Collier  :  Omitted  in  the  Ff,  because  it  is  an  oath.  The  Ff  are  fai 
from  consistent  in  this  particular. 

51.  leave]  Clarendon  :  Leave  off.  So  in  2  Hen.  VI;  III,  ii,  333.  [See  III,  iv,  66.] 

52.  53.  friend  .  .  .  gentleman]  Elze  :  For  this  unmistakable  interpolation  we 
are  probably  indebted  to  some  actor  who  wished  to  repeat  the  laughable  gestures 
which  accompanied  it. 

58.  o'ertook]  Ciarendon  •  That  is,  by  intoxication.  One  of  the  many  euphem- 
isms f     '  drunk.' 


Ktly. 

59 
60 


There]   Their  F2F  . 
stcch]  fuch  or fuch  Q.Q.- 
sale]  faile  FXF2.    fail  Y^^. 
62 .    Videlicet. . . now]    Cap. 
line,  QqFf.  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Mai. 
61.    Videlicet]   Videlizet  Q2Q3QV 
so  forth]  so  forsooth  Warb. 


61, 


One 


a.  i  ii.  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  I  23 

Your  bait  of  falsehood  takes  this  carp  of  truth  ; 

And  thus  do  we  of  wisdom  and  of  reach, 

With  windlasses  and  with  assays  of  bias,  65 

By  indirections  find  directions  out; 

So,  by  my  former  lecture  and  advice, 

Shall  you  my  son.     You  have  me,  have  you  not? 

Rey.     My  lord,  I  have. 

Pol.  God  be  wi'  you  ;  fare  you  well. 

63.  falsehood    takes]   faijlwod    takes  67.  advice"]  aduife  Qq. 

Q'76.    faljhood,  takes  Ff.    falfltovd  take  69.  be  wV  you]   Cap.   buy  ye  Qq(yee 

Q2Q3-    Jal/hood:  takeQQ.  QQ}'     hty  you  Y t¥ JP r     V  w'  you  F4, 

carp]  carpe  Qq.     cape  Ff.  Rowef.       b 'w  you   Jen.      V    wV  you 

65.  windlasses]  windleffes  QqFxF2F  .  Sing.  Dyce, White,  Ktly.  hew? ye  Cam. 
windlaces  F  ,  Rowe+.  Jare  you]  far  ye  Qq  (yee  Q4Q5). 

assays]  ejfays  Q'76.  fare  ye  Q'76,  Cam. 

66.  indirections]  indirecls  Q.Q.- 

64.  of  reach]  Clarendon  :  Far-sighted.  See  I,  iv,  56.  Compare  '  we  of  taste  and 
feeling.' — Love's  Lab.  Lost,  IV,  ii,  30.    Abbott,  \  168  :  'Of  here  means  by  means  of. 

65.  windlasses]  Nares:  Metaphorically,  art  and  contrivance,  subtleties;  e.g. 
'  Which,  by  slie  drifts,  and  windlaces  aloof,  They  brought  about.' — Mirror  for 
Magistrates,  p.  336.  Windlaies  is  used  by  Fairfax,  for  sudden  turns;  whether  he 
meant  this  word  or  another,  is  not  quite  clear :  perhaps,  rather,  windings: — '  The 
beauties  faire  of  shepherd's  daughters  bold,  With  wanton  windlaies  runne,  turne, 
play,  and  passe.' — Tasso,  xiv,  34.  Hunter  (ii,  226)  :  Windlaces  is  used  in  a  sense 
now  forgotten.  We  find  it  in  Golding's  Ovid,  the  seventh  book,  the  book  in  which 
Sh.  was  so  well  read  :  '  — like  a  wily  fox  he  runs  not  forth  directly  out,  Nor  makes  a 
windlasse  over  all  the  champion  fields  about,'  &c.  It  is  also  used  by  Bishop  Hacket. 
Edinburgh  Review  [Shakespearian  Glossaries,  July,  1869)  :  In  Shakespeare's 
day,  windlace,  literally,  a  winding,  was  used  to  express  taking  a  circuitous  course, 
fetching  a  compass,  making  an  indirect  advance,  or,  more  colloquially,  beating  about 
the  bush  instead  of  going  directly  to  a  place  or  object;  and  in  this  sense  it  exactly 
harmonizes  with  the  other  phrase  used  by  Polonius  to  express  the  same  thing, — 
1  assays  of  bias,' — attempts  in  which,  instead  of  going  straight  to  the  object,  we  seek 
to  reach  it  by  a  curved  or  winding  course,  the  bias  gradually  bringing  the  ball  round 
to  the  Jack.  Thus,  in  Golding's  Ovid  :  '  The  winged  God  .  . .  Continued  not  directly 
forth,  but  gan  me  down  to  stoupe,  And  fetched  a  windlasse  round  about.'  Claren- 
don :  Also  Lily's  Euphues  and  his  England  (ed.  Arber),  p.  270:  'I  now  fetching 
a  windlesse,  that  I  myght  better  haue  a  shoote,  was  preuented  with  ready  game.' 

65.  assays  of  bias]  Clarendon:  A  metaphor  from  the  game  of  bowls,  in 
which  the  player  does  not  aim  at  the  Jack  (or  *  mistress,'  as  it  was  called  in  Shake- 
speare's time)  directly,  but  in  a  curve,  so  that  the  bias  brings  the  ball  round.  'Assays 
of  bias '  are  therefore  indirect  attempts. 

66.  indirections]  Clarendon  :  Indirect  methods.  We  find  out  indirectly,  says 
Polonius,  what  we  wish  to  know  directly.     See  Jul.  Ca?s.  IV,  iii,  75. 

69.  God  be  wi'  you]  See  Macb.  Ill,  i,  43,  or  Walker  (  Vers.  228). 

69.  fare  you  well]  Tschischwitz  :  Although  the  double  leave-taking  is  quite 


\  24  HAMLET     ,  [act  11,  sc.  i 

Key.  Good  my  lord !  70 

Pol.  Observe  his  inclination  in  yourself. 

Rey.  I  shall,  my  lord. 

Pol.  And  let  him  ply  his  music. 

Rey.  Well,  my  lord. 

Pol.     Farew  ell !  [Exit  Reynaldo. 

Enter  Ophelia. 

How  now,  Ophelia  !  what's  the  matter  ? 


u 

70.   Good  my  lord !]  Dyce.     Good  my  [Enter  Ophelia.]  Sing.  ii.      Be 

Lord.  QqFf,  Coll.    White.      Good  my         fore  Farewell!  QqFf.     Enter  Ophelia, 


Oph.     Oh,  my  lord,  my  lord,  I  have  been  so  affrighted !        75 

o.   Good  my  lord  !]  Dyce.     Good  my  [Entei 

■d.  QqFf,  Coll.    White.      Good  my  fore  Farewel 

Lord —  Rowe+.    But,  my  good  lord, —  hastily.  Cap. 

Cap.  conj.  [Notes,  i,  19).  74.  How. ..matter]  One  line,  Ff. 

71.  in]  e'en  Han.  Warb.  75.   O,  my  lord,]   Alas,   Ff,  Rowe  +  , 

74.  [Exit  Reynaldo.]  Exit  Rey.  Qq  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Ktly, 

(after  lord).     Exit  Ff  (after  lord).  Del.  Huds.     Alas,  my  lord.  Cald. 
Scene  ii.]  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

in  keeping  with  the  loquacity  of  Polonius,  we  are  justified,  nevertheless,  in  expecting 
a  reply  from  the  departing  servant.  I  have  therefore  given  the  words  '  God  be  wi' 
you '  (which,  by  the  contraction  of  with  into '  wi','  express  a  certain  condescension) 
to  Polonius,  and  '  fare  you  well '  to  Reynaldo. 

70.  Good  my  lord]  Dyce  :  Reynaldo  has  previously  said  '  Very  good,  my  lord,' 
and  he  afterwards  says,  *  Well,  my  lord,'  but  the  present  speech  is  not  therefore  to 
be  pointed  «  Good,  my  lord.'     Compare  II,  ii,  521. 

7 1 .  in  yourself]  Johnson  :  Perhaps  this  means,  in  your  own  person,  not  by 
spies.  Capell  (i,  129)  :  '  In  yourself  is  put  for — observe  of  yourself,  or  with  your 
own  eyes ;  for  he  had  been  lesson'd  before  to  pick  up  his  '  inclination '  from  others. 
C.  (in  Var.  1821) :  The  temptations  you  feel,  suspect  in  him.  Caldecott  :  It  seems 
no  more  than  •  of  or  by  yourself,'  and  as  if  the  word  '  in '  had  been  altogether 
omitted.  He  was  at  first  to  discover  Laertes's  inclination  by  enquiry  from  others  ; 
but  now  to  find  them  out  by  personal  observation.  Tschischwitz  :  I  find  it  hard 
to  persuade  myself  that  '  in '  is  anything  more  than  a  misprint,  which  arose  from  the 
last  syllable  of  the  preceding  word.  A  change  of  'in'  into  then  could  be  easily 
made  except  for  the  uniformity  of  the  old  copies.  CLARENDON  :  Possibly  it  means, 
Conform  your  own  conduct  to  his  inclinations. 

73.  music]  Clarke  :  Let  him  go  on,  to  what  tune  he  pleases ;  let  him  conduct 
himself  in  any  style  and  at  any  rate  he  chooses.  Hudson  :  Eye  him  sharply,  but 
do  it  slyly,  and  let  him  fiddle  his  secrets  all  out.  Vischer  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  ii,  p. 
149) :  Here  we  have  the  key  to  the  whole  scene.  His  son  may  gamble,  drink, 
swear,  quarrel,  drab,  enter  houses  of  sale,  videlicet,  brothels,  only — let  him  ply  his 
music  :  true  cavalier-breeding  ! 

74.  matter]  Moberly  :  There  is  a  wonderfully  fine  contrast  between  the  prolix 
slyness  of  Polonius's  attempt  to  find  out  what  had  better  be  unknown,  and  the  scene 
of  distracting  and  passionate  misery  which  shows  how  Hamlet's  soul  has  been  shat- 
ered  by  an  unsought-for  revelation. 

75.  affrighted]   Eckhardt  {Vorlesungen  tiber  Hamlet.     Aarau,   1853,  p.  96): 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.J 


HAMLET 


1*5 


Pol.     With  what,  i'  the  name  of  God  ? 

Oph.     My  lord,  as  I  was  sewing  in  my  closet, 

Lord  Hamlet,  with  his  doublet  all  unbraced; 

y 

No  hat  upon  his  head ;  his  stockings  foul'd, 
Ungarter'd,  and  down-gyved  to  his  ancle ; 


76 


80 


76.  i'the]  Cap.  ft/i  Qq,  Jen.  in  the 
Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  White,  Ktly. 

i'  thc.God ?]  Om.  Q'76. 
God]  Heaven  Ff,  Rowe-f,  Cap. 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

77.  seiving]  Warb.  /owing  QqFf. 
reading  Q'76. 

closet]  clojfet  Qq.  chamber  Ff, 
Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.White, 
Huds. 


78.  Lord]  Prince  Q'76. 

79.  stockings]  Jlockins  Qq. 
fourd]  fouled  Qq.     loofe  Q'76, 

Theob.  +  . 

80.  down-gyved]  downe gyued  QaQ- 
downe  gyred  Q4Q^  downe  giued  FI# 
downe-gyved  Fa.  down-gyred  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  El.  down-hided 
Petri  [Archivf.  n.  Sprachen,  1849,  v°l 
vi,  p.  93)- 


The  supposition  that  Hamlet  went  to  Ophelia  directly  after  the  interview  with  the 
Ghost  is  incorrect,  and  for  the  following  reasons :  first,  the  interview  between  Po 
lonius  and  Reynaldo  implies  that  some  little  time  has  elapsed  since  the  departure  ol 
Laertes  for  Paris ;  secondly,  during  this  time  Ophelia  has  returned  Hamlet's  letters, 
and  denied  him  access ;  her  father  asks  her,  '  Have  you  given  him  any  hard  words 
of  late  ?'  The  letter  which  Polonius  reads  to  the  King  must,  therefore,  have  belonged 
to  a  period  before  the  opening  of  the  drama.  Ophelia  had  strictly  obeyed  her  father's 
commands,  and  returned  all  Hamlet's  letters.  Thirdly,  Polonius  goes  at  once  to  the 
King,  and  yet,  when  he  speaks  to  him  of  Hamlet,  the  King  already  knew  of  Ham- 
let's (feigned)  insanity,  and  therefore  must  himself  have  seen  the  Prince  before 
Ophelia  saw  him.  Fourthly,  between  the  close  of  the  first  act  and  the  present 
scene,  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern  must  have  been  summoned  on  account  of 
Hamlet's  changed  demeanor,  and  of  the  King's  suspicions  which  that  demeanor 
had  aroused. 

77.  closet]  Clarendon  :  A  private  apartment.  Hence  the  King's  private  secre- 
tary was  called  '  clerk  of  the  closet.'     See  III,  ii,  315;  and  King  John,  IV,  ii,  267. 

78.  unbraced]  Clarendon  :  Unfastened.  Compare  Jul.  Cces.  I,  iii,  48 ;  and 
II,  i,  262. 

79.  foul'd]  Cambridge  Editors  :  Theobald  reads  loose  on  the  authority,  as  he 
says,  ■  of  the  elder  Qq.'  It  is  not  the  reading  of  any  of  the  first  six,  but  of  those 
of  1676,  1683,  1695,  and  1703.  Had  Capell  been  aware  of  this,  he  would  scarcly 
have  designated  Theobald's  mistake  as  a  '  downright  falsehood.'  Theobald  at  the 
time  of  writing  his  Sh.  Restored  knew  of  no  Quarto  earlier  than  that  of  1637  (Sh. 
Rest.  p.  70),  and  it  is  just  possible  that  some  copy  of  this  edition  (Q6)  from  which 
that  of  1676  was  printed  may  have  had  the  reading  'loose.'  [The  Cam.  Edd.  refer 
to  a  note  on  III,  iv,  59,  where  they  give  two  different  readings  in  two  different  copies 
of  Q^  'a  heaven-kissing'  in  Ingleby's  copy,  and  'a  heaue,  a  kissing,'  in  Capell's 
copy.  This  variation  in  copies  of  the  same  date  has  long  been  known  to  exist  in 
the  older  Qq,  but,  1  confess,  I  was  not  prepared  to  find  much  variation  in  later  Qq  of 
the  same  date-  In  no  less  than  twenty-four  instances,  however,  I  have  found  that 
x£\y  copy  ui  K£  70  ditters  trom  that  of  the  Cam.  Edd.,  as  recorded  in  their  notes.  Ed.] 

ii* 


1 26  HAMLET  [act  h.  sc.  i 

Pale  as  his  shirt;  his  knees  knocking  each  other;  8 1 

And  with  a  look  so  piteous  in  purport 

As  if  he  had  been  loosed  out  of  hell 

To  speak  of  horrors,  he  comes  before  me. 

Pol.     Mad  for  thy  love  ? 

Oph.  My  lord,  I  do  not  know,  8; 

But  truly  I  do  fear  it. 

Pol.  What  said  he  i 

Oph.     He  took  me  by  the  wrist,  and  held  me  hard ; 
Then  goes  he  to  the  length  of  all  his  arm, 
And  with  his  other  hand  thus  o'er  his  brow, 
He  falls  to  such  perusal  of  my  face  90 

As  he  would  draw  it.     Long  stay'd  he  so; 
At  last,  a  little  shaking  of  mine  arm, 

82.  piteous]  pittious  Qq.  pitious  FXF4.  87.  and  held  me  hard]  Om.  FaF  t  , 

pitteous  F2F  .  Rowe. 

84.  horrors,  he~\  horrors:  he Ff,Rowe,  91.  As  he]  As  a  Qq. 

Jen.     horrors;  thus  he  Pope  +  .   horrors  Long]    Longtime  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

there,  he  Anon.*  Ktly. 

85,  86.  My  lord. ..it.']  One  line,  Ff,  92.  mine]  my  FaF3F4,  Rowe,  Pope  i. 
Rowe.  Han.     his  Pope  ii. 

80.  Ungarter'd]  Nares  :  It  was  the  regular  amorous  etiquette,  in  the  reign  of 
Elizabeth,  for  a  man  professing  himself  deeply  in  love  to  assume  a  certain  negligence 
in  dress.     His  garters,  in  particular,  were  not  to  be  tied  up.     See  As  You  Like  Zt, 

HI,  ii,  398. 

80.  down-gyved]  Theobald  interprets  his  reading,  down-gyred,  as  'rolled 
down  to  the  ancle,'  and  derives  gyred  from  yvpti,  to  bend,  to  round.  Heath  gives 
the  true  definition  of  '  down-gyved ' :  fallen  down  to  the  ancle,  after  the  fashion  of 
gyves,  or  fetters. 

82.  purport]  Walker  (iii,  264) :  Pronounce  '  purport,'  not '  piteous.' 

82,  83.  so  . . .  As]  See  Abbott,  §  275;  and  II,  ii,  177;  or  Macb.  I,  ii,  43. 

84.  Keightley  completed  the  rhythm  of  this  line  by  the  insertion  of  in  aftei 
«  comes.'  Abbott,  \  478,  makes  the  second  syllable  of  *  horrors '  a  foot  by  itself  on 
the  principle  that  '  er  [or  or]  final  seems  to  have  been  sometimes  pronounced  with  a 
kind  of  "  burr,"  which  produced  the  effect  of  an  additional  syllable.'  A  process 
which  neither  my  tongue  nor  my  imagination  can  compass.  Why  not  let  Ophelia's 
strong  emotion  shudderingly  fill  up  the  gap  ? 

90.  perusal]  Clarendon:  Examination.  See  Rom.  <5r»  Jul.  V,  iii,  74;  Rich. 
II;  III,  iii,  53;   Tro.  &>  Cres.  IV,  v,  232.     [Also,  Ham.  IV,  vii,  137.] 

91,  95.  As]  See  I,  ii,  217. 

91.  stay'd]  Abbott,  \  507 :  As  ed  is  pronounced  after  i  and  u,  so  it  might  be 
after  y  in  '  stayed,'  but  the  effect  would  be  painful.  The  pause  after  •  it f  must  supply 
ibt  extra  syllable. 

92.  shaking]  Tschischwitz  :  A  verbal  s  ibstantive;  is  made  is  understood. 


ACTii.sc.  i.J  HAMLET  i*7 

And  thrice  his  head  thus  waving  up  and  down, 

He  raised  a  sigh  so  piteous  and  profound 

As  it  did  seem  to  shatter  all  his  bulk  9.5 

And  end  his  being ;  that  done,  he  lets  me  go ; 

And  with  his  head  over  his  shoulder  turn'd 

He  seem'd  to  find  his  way  without  his  eyes  ; 

For  out  o'  doors  he  went  without  their  help, 

And  to  the  last  bended  their  light  on  me.  IO0 

Pol.     Come,  go  with  me  ;  I  will  go  seek  the  king. 
This  is  the  very  ecstasy  of  love ; 
Whose  violent  property  fordoes  itself 
And  leads  the  will  to  desperate  undertakings, 
As  oft  as  any  passion  under  heaven  105 

That  does  afflict  our  natures.     I  am  sorry, — 

94.  piteous']  pittious  QqFx.      hideous         adoors   F3F4,  Rowe. 

F3F3F4,  Rowe.  99-  help]  helpe  FfF,.     helps  Q2Q3Q4, 

95.  As]  That  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Cald.  Knt,         Cap.  Jen.    Mai.    Steev.  Cald.    i,    Cam 
Coll.  Dyce,  El.  Sta.  White,  Del.  Huds.  helpes  Q$. 

96.  that  done,]  Then  Pope  +  .  101.   Come]  Om.  Ff,  Cald.  Knt. 
me]  Om.  FaF  F  .  103.  fordoes]  forgoes  Q4QS,  Warb. 

97.  shoulder]fhoulders Q4QsFf, Rowe.  105.  passion]  paffions  Qq. 

99.  <?  doors]  Theob.      adoores  Q2Q3«  106.  sorry, — ]    Cap.     forrie,   QqFf. 

a  doores  Q  .    of  doores  Q  .    adoresFtF3.         sorry ;  Rowe  +  .     sorry.  Glo. +  ,  Mob. 

95.  bulk]  BoswELL:  This  is  not,  I  think,  all  the  body,  but  the  breast.  Pettorata, 
in  Florio,  is  explained,  'a  shock  against  the  breast  or  bulk.1  [Dyce  (Gloss.)  also 
cites  this  definition  of  Pettorata  from  Florio,  but  neither  the  word  nor  definition  is 
in  my  copy  of  Florio,  1598.  Malone  cites  R.  of  Lucrece,  467,  *  her  heart  Beating 
her  bulk,1  and  Rich.  Ill:  I,  iv,  40,  '  my  panting  bulk,'  but  defines  '  bulk '  by  '  all 
the  body.'  Ed.]  Singer  :  '  The  Bulke  or  breast  of  a  man.' — Baret's  Alvearie. 
Dyce  (Gloss.) :  '  The  Bulke  of  the  bodie.  Tronc,  buste.' — Cotgrave.  Clarendon 
also  cites  Cotgrave :  '  Buste,  the  whole  bulke  or  bodie  of  a  man,  from  his  face  to  his 
middle.'     [Minsheu  gives  :  '  Pechuguera,  the  whole  bulke  of  the  breast.'  Ed.] 

ioo.  Miles  (Review  of  Hamlet,  p.  28) :  We  are  not  permitted  to  see  Hamlet  in 
this  ecstasy  of  love,  but  what  a  picture !  How  he  must  have  loved  her,  that  love 
should  bring  him  to  such  a  pass ! — his  knees  knocking  each  other ! — knees  that  had 
firmly  followed  a  beckoning  ghost !  There  is  more  than  the  love  of  forty  thousand 
brothers  in  that  hard  grasp  of  the  wrist, — in  that  long  gaze  at  arm's  length, — in  the 
force  that  might,  but  will  not,  draw  her  nearer !  And  never  a  word  from  this  king 
uf  words  !     His  first  great  silence, — the  second  is  death  ! 

102.  ecstasy]  Alienation  of  mind,  madness.  See  III,  i,  160 ;  III,  iv,  74;  138, 
139;  Macb.  Ill,  ii,  22;  IV,  iii,  170. 

103.  fordoes]  Steevens  :  To  destroy.  Nares:  For  has  here  its  negative  power. 
Clarendon  :  Like  the  German  ver,  it  is  also  sometimes  intensive,  as  in  '  forgive,' 
*  forwearied,'  '  forspent.'  [It  is  so  used  in  the  past  participle  of  this  very  verb  «o 
Mid.  I7,  D.  V,  i,  381,  'with  weary  task  fordone.' — Ed.] 


128  HAMLET  [act  ii,  SC.  t 

What,  have  you  given  him  any  hard  words  of  late  ?  107 

Opli.     No,  my  good  lord,  but,  as  you  did  command, 

I  did  repel  his  letters,  and  denied 

His  access  to  me. 

Pol.  That  hath  made  him  mad.  1 10 

I  am  sony  that  with  better  heed  and  judgement 

I  had  not  quoted  him.     I  fear'd  he  did  but  trifle 
4jsxeant  to  wreck  thee ;  but  beshrew  my  jealousy ! 

By  heaven,  it  is  as  proper  to  our  age 

To  cast  beyond  ourselves  in  our  opinions]  115 

As  it  is  common  for  the  younger  soi 

To  lack  discretion.]   Come,  go  we  to  the  king; 

111.  lam]  /'w  Pope +  , Dyce  iijluds.  113.  wreck]  Han.     wrack  QaQ3F3F4< 
heed]  heede  Q2Q3Q4.    /peed  Ff,         Rowe,    Pope,  Theob.    Cap.    Jen.   Sing, 

Rowe,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  White,     wracke  Q4Q5FtF2. 

112.  quoted"]  coted  Qq.     coated  Q1*]  6.  beshrew]  bejhrow  Qq,  Cap. 
noted  Warb.     quoited  W.  &  D.  ( Gent.             1 14.  By  heaven?]   It  seemes  FxFa     It 
Mag.  xlvi,  p.  512).  seems  F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 

fear'd]  feare  FXF9.    fear  F3F4.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Del. 

did  but  trifle]  trifTd Pope  +  .  117.  we]  with  me  Q'76. 

no.  access]  Clarendon:  Accented  on  the  second  syllable  in  Macb.  I,  v,  42. 
in.  heed]  Theobald  preferred  speed  oi  the  Ff,  in  the  sense  either  of  success, 
fortune  (frequent  in  Sh.),  or  of  celerity. 

112.  quoted]  M.  Mason:  Invariably  used  by  Sh.  in  the  sense  of  to  observe. 
Malone  :  '  Quoter,  To  quote,  or  marke  in  the  margent,  to  note  by  the  way.' — Cot- 
grave.  Dyce  [Gloss.) :  To  note,  to  mark, — formerly  pronounced,  and  often  written. 
cote.     See  Rom.  &>  Jul.  I,  iv,  31. 

113.  wreck]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  This  is  one  of  the  places  where  the  old  spelling 
of  '  wreck,'  wrack  (observed  by  some  modern  editors,  as  if  we  ought  to  return  to 
the  loose  and  uncertain  orthography  of  our  ancestors),  produces  confusion.  It  is 
not  quite  clear  whether  Pol.  means  wrack,  in  the  sense  of  cast  away,  or  rack,  in 
the  sense  of  tortured ;  we  have  taken  it  in  the  former,  as  the  most  probable.  Upton 
(p.  209) :  Read :  '  rack  thee,'  i.  e.  vex  and  grieve  thee. 

113.  beshrew]  Dyce  (Gloss):  To  curse, — but  a  mild  form  of  imprecation,  ==' a 
mischief  on.' 

114.  proper]  Clarendon:  Appropriate.     Compare  2  Hen.  IV:  I,  iii,  32. 

115.  cast]  Johnson:  This  is  not  the  remark  of  a  weak  man.  The  vice  of  age 
is  too  much  suspicion.  Men  long  accustomed  to  the  wiles  of  life  cast  commonly 
beyond  themselves,  let  their  cunning  go  farther  than  reason  can  attend  it.  This  is 
always  the  fault  of  a  little  mind,  made  artful  by  long  commerce  with  the  world. 
Moberly  :  To  forecast  more  than  we  ought  for  our  own  interests.  CLARENDON : 
To  *  contrive,'  '  design,'  '  plan.'  Compare  Spenser's  Fairy  Queen,  i,  5,12:  •  Of  ail 
attonce  he  cast  avengd  to  be.'  Cotgrave  translates  Fr.  minuter,  l  to  deuise,  cast,  01 
lay  the  first  project  of  a  designe.' 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


129 


This  must  be  known ;  which,  being  kept  close,  might  move 

More  grief  to  hide  than  hate  to  utter  love. 

Come.  [Exeimt.   120 


Scene  II.    A  room  in  the  castle. 
Flourish.    Enter  Kinc,  Queen,  Rosencrantz,  Guildenstern,  and  Attendants. 
King.     Welcome,  dear  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern  ! 


118.  which']  w  Fx. 

119.  than  hats']  hate,  than  Han',  than 
haste  Anon.* 

120.  Come.]  Om.  Ff.  Rowe+,  Knt, 
Coll.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  El.  Sta.  White,  Ktly, 
Glo.  Huds.  Mob. 

Scene  ii.]  Scena  secunda.  Ff  (Scaena 
FJ.    Scene  hi.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

A  room...]  Cap.  The  Palace. 
Rowe. 

Flourish.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 

Rosencrantz,]  Mai.  Rofencraus 
Qq.  Rofincrane,  Fx.  Rofmcroffe,  FaF3, 
Pope.  Rofmcrofs,F  .  Roseneraus,Rowe. 


Rosincrantz,  Theob. 

Guildenstern]  Q'76.  Guylden- 
fterne  Qq^.  Guildenfterne  Fx.  Guil- 
denltare  F,F  F  . 

and  Attendants.]  Om.  Qq.  Cum- 
alijs.  FjFjj.  cum  aliis.  FF.  Lords  and 
other  Attendants.  Rov/e  +  . 

I,  33,  34.  Rosencrantz]  Mai.  Rofen> 
craus  Qq.  Rofincrance  Fx.  Rofincros 
F2.  Rofincrofs  F3F4.  Roseneraus 
Rowe. 

Guildenstern]  Q'76.  Guylden- 
Jlerne  Qq.  Guildenjlerne  Fx.  Guilden* 
Jlare  F3F3F4. 


Il8,  119.  WARBURTON:  That  is,  this  must  be  made  known  to  the  King,  for  (being 
kept  secret)  the  hiding  of  Hamlet's  love  might  occasion  more  mischief  to  us  from  him 
and  the  Queen,  than  the  uttering  or  revealing  of  it  will  occasion  hate  and  resent- 
ment from  Hamlet.  The  poet's  obscure  expression  seems  to  have  been  caused  by 
his  affectation  of  concluding  the  scene  v/ith  a  couplet.  Heath  :  The  concealment 
of  it  may  be  attended  with  consequences  productive  of  greater  calamity  than  the 
displeasure  can  possibly  be  with  which  the  disclosing  it  may  be  received.  Calde- 
COTT :  At  the  close  of  an  act,  or  when  the  scene  is  shifted,  and  there  is  a  pause  in 
the  action  of  the  drama,  it  was  the  usage  of  our  dramatists,  down  to  the  middle  of 
the  last  century,  not  simply  to  divert  attention  from  the  main  object,  as  here,  by  the 
introduction  of  a  couplet  or  rhymes,  but  to  make  the  subject  of  such  couplet  foreign 
altogether  to  the  interests  of  the  drama,  an  unconnected  flourish,  and  that,  not  un- 
frequently,  a  labored  and  florid  simile.  Such  a  custom  in  Sh.,  so  far  from  being 
what  Warburton  calls  it,  was  the  very  opposite  of  '  affectation ;'  not  to  have  done  it 
occasionally  would  have  been  an  affectation  of  singularity.  Clarendon  :  In  the 
couplets  which  conclude  scenes  the  sense  is  frequently  sacrificed  to  the  rhyme.  The 
sense  here  seems  to  be — Hamlet's  mad  conduct  might  cause  more  grief  if  it  were 
hidden  than  the  revelation  of  his  love  for  Ophelia  would  cause  hatred,  /.  e.  on  the 
part  of  the  King  and  Queen.  Yet  the  Queen  afterwards  expresses  her  approval  of 
the  match,  III,  i,  38.  Compare  also,  V,  i,  231-234.  -Tschischwitz  cannot  per- 
suade himself  that  the  author  of  the  Sonnets  and  of  Venus  6°  Adonis  could  have 
composed  lines  so  faulty  in  logic  and  style  as  these,  and  he  therefore  thinks  that  even, 
sticklers  for  the  authorized  text  will  pardon  him  for  changing  line  119  into  '  More 
grief  to  him,  than  hate  to  us  their  love.'   He  also  marks  *  Ophelia  exit'  after  line  117. 

I.  Rosencrantz]  Thornbury  {JV.  cV  Qu.  5  Aug.  187 1) :  A  Danish  nobleman 

I 


1 30  HAMLET  [act  ii,  SC.  ii. 

Moreover  that  we  much  did  long  to  see  you,  2 

The  need  we  have  to  use  you  did  provoke 

Our  hasty  sending.     Something  have  you  heard 

Of  Hamlet's  transformation ;  so  I  call  it,  J 

Sith  nor  the  exterior  nor  the  inward  man 

Resembles  that  it  was.     What  it  should  be, 

More  than  his  father's  death,  that  thus  hath  put  him 

So  much  from  th'  understanding  of  himself, 

I  cannot  dream  of.     I  entreat  you  both,  10 

That,  being  of  so  young  days  brought  up  with  him 

2.  Moreover. ..much]  Besides  that  we  6.  Sith  nor]  Since  riot  Ff,  Rowe  + 

Q'76.  Jen.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,   Sing.  Sta.  Ktly, 

4.  have  you]  you  have  Q'76,  Theob.  Del.  Since  nor  Steev.  Mai.  Dyce,  Huds. 
Warb.  Johns.  10.  dream]  deeme  FXF2.     deem  FF, 

5.  I  call]  call  Qq,  Glo.  +  ,  Mob.  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Sing,  ii,  Ktly. 

of  this  name  attended  the  Danish  ambassador  into  England  on  the  ascension  of 
James  I.     [Steevens  says  it  was  an  ambassador.  Ed.] 

2.  Moreover  that]  Moberly  :  Over  and  above  that  we  longed  to  see  you.  On 
the  other  hand,  'more  above,'  in  line  125,  means  'moreover.'  Clarendon:  Besides 
that.     Hudson  :  I  do  not  recollect  another  instance  of  these  words  thus  used. 

5.  transformation]  On  the  pronunciation  of  the  final  ion  as  a  dissyllabic,  see 
Walker,  Vers.  230;  Abbott,  §  479,  and  V,  ii,  217. 

6.  Sith]  Moberly  :  The  oldest  meaning  of  this  difficult  word  may  be  seen  from 
the  Fairy  Queen  (iii,  io,  33),  *  he  humbly  thanked  him  a  thousand  sith,'  literally, 
«a  thousand  steps'  (Matzner,  i,  p.  390  [?  410]).  Hence,  apparently,  'sithen  the 
fathers  died,'  in  Wickliffe's  Bible,  means  '  from  the  time  when ;'  the  preposition 
being  omitted,  as  in  many  English  phrases  even  now.     Then  come  the  absolutes 

*  sith,  sithence,  since,'  as  in  line  12  below.  Lastly,  the  adverb  becomes  a  causative 
conjunction;  on  the  principle  that  '  propter  hoc  '  may  be  practically,  though  loosely, 
expressed  by  '  post  hoc'  That  is,  '  Sin  thou  are  righteous  judge  '  means  •  following 
on  the  fact  that  thou  art  a  righteous  judge.'  Clarendon  :  Marsh  [Lectures  on  the 
English  Language,  pp.  584-5S6)  says,  that  in  the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  century 

*  good  authors  established  a  distinction  between  the  forms,  and  used  sith  only  as  a 
logical  word,  an  illative,  while  sithence  and  since,  whether  as  prepositions  or  as 
adverbs,  remained  mere  narrative  words  confined  to  the  signification  of  time  a/ter.y 
Sh.,  it  is  clear,  did  not  observe  this  distinction,  whether  we  take  the  quartos  or  the 
folios  to  represent  his  exact  text.     [See  IV,  iv,  45.] 

8,  9.  put. ..from]  Clarendon:  Compare  Rom.  6°  Jul.  Ill,  v,  107. 

10.  dream  of]  Caldecott  :  Deem  of,  that  is,  the  just  estimate  of  himself  I 
cannot  judge  of,  or  comprehend.  White  :  Sh.  not  improbably  wrote  as  it  stands 
in  the  Ff.     Clarendon  :  The  of  is  superfluous,  as  in  Rich.  Ill :  I,  iii,  6. 

11.  of  so  young]  Abbott,  §  167  :  •  Of,'  applied  to  time,  in  cases  like  the  present, 
means  from.  So  still  *  of  late.'  Compare  '  Of  long  time  he  had  bewitched  them.' 
'—Acts,  viii,  11.    [See  also  Matzner,  ii,  221. — Ed.] 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


13* 


And  sith  so  neighboured  to  his  youth  and  humour,  12 

That  you  vouchsafe  your  rest  here  in  our  court 

Some  little  time;  so  by  your  companies 

To  draw  him  on  to  pleasures,  and  to  gather  1$ 

So  much  as  from  occasion  you  may  glean, 

Whether  aught  to  us  unknown  afflicts  him  thus, 

That,  open'd,  lies  within  our  remedy. 

Queen.     Good  gentlemen,  he  hath  much  talk'd  of  you, 
And  sure  I  am  two  men  there  are  not  living  20 

To  whom  he  more  adheres.     If  it  will  please  you 
To  show  us  so  much  gentry  and  good  will 
As  to  expend  your  time  with  us  awhile 
For  the  supply  and  profit  of  our  hope, 

Your  visitation  shall  receive  such  thanks  25 

As  fits  a  king's  remembrance. 

Ros.  Both  your  majesties 

Might,  by  the  sovereign  power  you  have  of  us, 


12.  silh]  Qq,  Jen.  Glo.  + ,  Mob.  fince 
Ff,  Rowc  et  cet. 

neighboured]  nabored  Q3Q3' 
neighbored  Q  .     neighboured  Q$. 

humour]  havour  Q  .  hauior  Q7 
Q  .  hau  r  Q4  (hauer  Ashbee's  facs.). 
'havour  Warb.  haviourjen.  El.  Glo.  + , 
Mob. 

13.  vouchsafe]  voutfafe  Q3Q3QA> 

16.  occasion]    occafions  Ff,  Rowe+, 
Cald.  Knt,  Sta.  Del. 


17.  Whether. .. thus  ^   Um.   Ff.    If.,. 
thus,  Rowe  +  . 

aught]  Han.     ought  Qq. 

18.  open'd]  Om.  Q'76. 
20.  are]  is  QaQ3. 

22.  gentry]  gentleness  Q'76. 

23.  expend]    extend  QAQ5,   Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.     employ  Q'76. 

27.  sovereign]  foveraigin  F  . 

of  us]   over  us  Q'76.     o'er  us 
Mason. 


12.  humour]  Corson  :  There  is  more  force  in  this  word  than  in  haviour.  It 
must  be  taken  in  its  earlier  sense  of  '  temper  of  mind/  *  disposition.' 

13.  That]  Delius  :  «  That'  is  redundant. 

13.  rest]  Caldecott:  That  you  please  to  reside. 

14.  companies]  See  I,  i,  173. 

17.  Whether]  To  be  pronounced  as  a  monosyllable.  See  Walker,  Vers.  103; 
and  Abbott,  §  466;  Macb.  I,  iii,  in  ;  Ham.  Ill,  ii,  193. 

22.  gentry]  Warburton  :  Complaisance.  Singer  :  '  Gentlemanlinesse,  or  gen- 
trie,  kindelinesse,  naturall  goodnesse.  Generositas.' — Baret's  Alvearie.  See  V, 
li,  109. 

24.  supply  and  profit]  Caldecott:  In  aid  and  furtherance.  Hudson:  The 
feeding  and  realizing. 

24.  hope]  Johnson  :  That  the  hope  which  your  arrival  has  made  may  be  com- 
pleted by  the  desired  effect. 

27.  of]  Abbott,  §  174 :  •Of*  here  means  over;  as  in  line  283  it  means  on,  and 
in  III,  ii,  59,  about. 


132 


HAMLET 


[act  ii,  sc.  il. 


Put  your  dread  pleasures  more  into  command  28 

Than  to  entreaty. 

GiriL  But  we  both  obey, 

And  here  give  up  ourselves,  in  the  full  bent  30 

To  lay  our  service  freely  at  your  feet, 
To  be  commanded. 

King.    Thanks,  Rosencrantz  and  gentle  Guildenstern. 

Queen.    Thanks,  Guildenstern  and  gentle  Rosencrantz ; 
And  I  beseech  you  instantly  to  visit  35 

My  too  much  changed  son. — Go,  some  of  you, 
And  bring  these  gentlemen  where  Hamlet  is. 

Guil.     Heavens  make  our  presence  and  our  practices 
Pleasant  and  helpful  to  him ! 

Queen.  Ay,  amen ! 

[Exeunt  Rosencrantz,  Guildenstern,  and  some  Attendants. 


Enter  Polonius. 

Pol.    The  ambassadors  from  Norway,  my  good  lord. 
Are  joyfully  return'd. 

King.    Thou  still  hast  been  the  father  of  good  news. 

Pol.     Have  I,  my  lord  ?    Assure  you,  my  good  liege, 
I  hold  my  duty  as  I  hold  my  soul, 


40 


29.  to]  into  Ktly. 

But  we]  We  Ff,  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce 
i,  Del. 

31.  service"]  fervices  Ff,  Cald.  Knt, 
Del. 

32.  To  be  commanded."]  Om.  Q4QS, 
Pope  +  . 

36.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

too  much]  too-much  FaF3,  Pope. 
too  much  changed]  Hyphens  in- 
serted by  Cap.  Dyce,  Ktly,  Huds. 

^«]^Ff,Ro\ve+ Jen.  Sing.  Ktly. 


37.  these]  the  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt. 
.  39.  Ay,]Cap.  /Qq.  Om.Ff,Rowe+, 
Cald.  Knt.  Sta.    Amen,  Ktly. 

[Exeunt  Rosencrantz...]  Exeunt 
Ros.  and  Gui.,  Attendants  with  them. 
Cap.  Exeunt  Ros.  and  Guyld.  Qq. 
Exeunt.  Ff  (after  him.  Exit.  Fx). 

40.  The]  TV  QqF„  Pope +,  Jen.  Coll. 
Sing.  White,  Ktly,  Dyce  ii. 

43.  [Aside  to  the  King.  Anon  * 

Assure  you]  I  ajfure  Qq,  Jen. 
Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 


29.  But]  Delius:  This  'but*  is  redundant;  there  is  no  opposition  here  to  what 
Rosencrantz  has  said.  It  is  needless  to  retain  it  for  the  sake  of  rhythm,  because  the 
time  of  an  extra  syllable  is  made  up  by  the  pause  between  the  speeches. 

30.  bent]  Johnson  {Much  Ado,  IV,  i,  188):  'Bent*  is  used  by  Sh.  for  the 
utmost  degree  of  any  passion  or  mental  quality.  The  expression  is  derived  from 
archery ;  the  bow  has  its  bent  when  it  is  drawn  as  far  as  it  can  be.     [See  Ham.  Ill, 

ii,  3&7-1 

38    Heavens]  Clarendon:  Compare  Ant.  6°  Cleo.  I,  ii,  64. 

42   still]  See  I,  i,  122. 


J 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  133 

Both  to  my  God  and  to  my  gracious  king;  45 

And  I  do  think,  or  else  this  brain  of  mine 
Hunts  not  the  trail  of  policy  so  sure 
As  it  hath  used  to  do,  that  I  have  found 
The  very  cause  of  Hamlet's  lunacy. 

King.     Oh,  speak  of  that ;  that  do  I  long  to  hear.  50 

Pol.     Give  first  admittance  to  the  ambassadors ; 
My  news  shall  be  the  fruit  to  that  great  feast. 

King.     Thyself  do  grace  to  them,  and  bring  them  in. — 

[Exit  Polonius. 
He  tells  me,  my  dear  Gertrude,  he  hath  found 
The  head  and  source  of  all  your  son's  distemper.  55 

Queen.     I  doubt  it  is  no  other  but  the  main, — 
His  father's  death,  and  our  o'erhasty  marriage. 

45.  and]  one  Ff,  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  newes  FtTr     news  F3F4,  Rowe,  Cal<Ji 

47.  sure]  be/ure  F3F4>  52.  to]  of  Johns. 

48.  it  hath]  I  have  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt.  53.  [Exit  Polonius.]  Rowe.  Om. 
it  has  Q'76.   '  QqFf. 

50.  that;  that]  Cap.  that,  that  QqFf,  54.  my  dear  Gertrude]  Cap.  mydeere 
Rowe +  ,  Jen.                                                     Gertrard   Q2Q3-      my  decree:    Gertrud 

do  I]  doe  I Q2Q3Q5.    I  do  FXF3F4,  QQ.    myfweet  Queene,  that  Ff  ( Queen 

R.owe,  Pope,  Han.  Johns.  Jen.  Knt.     /  ^3^4)'  Rowe  +  ,  Cald.  Knt,  /Dyce  i,  Sta, 

doe  Fa.  White,  Del.  Huds. 

52.  fruit]  fruite  QaQy     frute   Q4-  57-  o'erhasty]  haflie  Qq  {hafly  Q4). 

45.  and]  Knight  :  The  reading  of  the  Ff  means  that  Polonius  holds  that  his 
duty  to  his  king  is  an  obligation  as  imperative  as  his  duty  to  his  God,  to  whom  his 
soul  is  subject.  Dyce  {Strictures,  &c.,  187)  truly  says  that  the  attempts  to  explain 
the  error,  one,  of  the  Ff,  have  proved  unsuccessful.  HUDSON :  I  hold  my  duty  both 
to  my  God  and  to  my  king,  as  I  do  my  soul. 

47.  trail]  Johnson  :  The  course  of  an  animal  pursued  by  the  scent. 

51.  first]  Moberly:  Thus  Polonius  gains  the  opportunity  of  studying  a  brief  and 
pointed  exordium,  the  only  fault  in  which  is  its  being  altogether  needless  and  mis- 
placed. 

52.  fruit]  Johnson  :  The  dessert  after  the  meat.  Caldecott  (see  Textual  Notes) : 
By  news  must  be  meant  the  talk  or  leading  topic  at,  &c.  Hunter  (ii,  227) :  The  Ff 
may  suggest  the  true  reading :  nuts.  We  still  say,  '  It  will  be  nuts  to  him,'  where  a 
person  has  to  hear  something  that  will  please  him.  The  allusion  to  a  banquet  is 
kept  up.     Tschischwitz  adopts  this  emendation  of  Hunter's. 

54.  Gertrude]  White:  This  smacks  less  of  the  honeymoon  than  the  text  of 
the  Ff. 

56.  main]  Caldecott  :  The  chief  point.  See  Tro.  cV  Cres.  II,  iii,  273.  •  These 

flaws,  Are  to  the  main  as  inconsiderable,'  &c. — Par.  Reg.  iv,  454.     Staunton  :  An 

ellipsis, — in  being  understood : — '  no  other  but  in  the  main.'     Clarendon  :  '  Main ' 

is  used  without  a  substantive  following  in  2  Hen.  VI:  I,  i,  208. 
12 


1 34  HAMLET  [act  II.  sc.  ii 

King.    Well,  we  shall  sift  him. —  58 

Re-enter  Polonius,  with  Voltimand  and  Cornelius. 

Welcome,  my  good  friends  I 
Say,  Voltimand,  what  from  our  brother  Norway  ? 

Volt.     Most  fair  return  of  greetings  and  desires.  60 

Upon  our  first,  he  sent  out  to  suppress 
His  nephew's  levies,  which  to  him  appeared 
To  be  a  preparation  'gainst  the  Polack, 
But  better  look'd  into,  he  truly  found 

It  was  against  your  highness ;  whereat,  grieved  65 

That  so  his  sickness,  age,  and  impotence 
Was  falsely  borne  in  hand,  sends  out  arrests 
On  Fortinbras ;  which  he,  in  brief,  obeys, 
Receives  rebuke  from  Norway,  and,  in  fine, 
Makes  vow  before  his  uncle  never  more  70 

To  give  the  assay  of  arms  against  your  majesty. 
Whereon  old  Norway,  overcome  with  joy, 
Gives  him  three  thousand  crowns  in  annual  fee 

58.  Scene  iv.  Pope+,  Jen.  58.  my]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

Re-enter....]  Theob.     Enter  Po-  59.    Voltimand]  Voltemand  Qq.    Vol- 

lonius,   Voltimand,   and   Cornelius.    Ff  tu??iand  Fx. 

(Voltumand,  Fx).     Enter  Embaffadors.  63,  75.  Polack]  Pollacke  Qq.  Poleak 

Qq.   After  line  57,—  QqFf  and  the  rest,  Fx.     Polak  F2F3F4. 
except   Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Del.  Huds.  73.  three]  three/core  Qq,Theob. Johns. 

Mob.  Jen.  Tsch. 

58.  Welcome]  Walker,  (ii,  254,  Omissions  in  Consequence  of  Absorption) :  He 
is  addressing  the  ambassadors  for  the  first  time  after  their  return  from  Norway.  I 
think  the  occasion  absolutely  demands, '  Welcome  home?  &c.  And  [thus  it  is]  in 
line  85. 

60.  desires]  Delius  :  The  kind  wishes  for  the  health  of  the  Norwegian  king. 

61.  first]  Caldecott:  Audience,  or  opening  of  our  business.  Clarendon:  At 
the  first  expression  of  the  ambassadors'  request. 

64.  truly]  Clarendon  :  This  adverb  belongs  in  sense  to  '  was,'  not  to  *  found.' 
See  Mid.  N.  D.  I,  i,  126. 

65.  It]  Delius  :  This,  as  well  as  *  look'd  into/  refers  to  *  levies,  but  the  singular 
is  used  through  attraction  to  the  nearer  noun :  *  preparation.' 

67.  borne  in  hand]  Deceived,  deluded.  See  Macb.  Ill,  i,  80.  Dyce  (Gloss.)  i 
Amused  with  false  pretences. 

67.  sends]  For  ellipsis  of  nominative,  see  Abbott,  §  399;  and  III,  i,  8. 

71.  assay  of  arms]  Proof,  trial.     See  'assay  of  art,'  Macb.  IV,  iiiy  143. 

73.  three  thousand]  Theobald  preferred  the  Qq  because  the  larger  sum 
seems  a  much  more  suitable  gift  from  a  king  to  his  own  nephew  than  so  poor  a  pit- 
tance as  three  thousand  crowns.     Heath  adduces  in  favor  of  the  Ff  the  greater 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  135 

And  his  commission  to  employ  those  soldiers, 

So  levied  as  before,  against  the  Polack ;  75 

With  an  entreaty,  herein  further  shown,  [Gives  a  paper. 

That  it  might  please  you  to  give  quiet  pass 

Through  your  dominions  for  this  enterprise, 

On  such  regards  of  safety  and  allowance 

As  therein  are  set  down. 

King,  It  likes  us  well,  80 

And  at  our  more  consider'd  time  we'll  read, 
Answer,  and  think  upon  this  business. 
Meantime  we  thank  you  for  your  well-took  labour; 

76.  shown]JJione  Qq.  think  upon  an  answer  to  Han. 

[Gives  a  paper.]   Mai.     Om.  Qq  S3,  thank]  take  Ff.   (Sic  in  Cam.  Ed. 

Ft.     Letter.  Coll. (MS).  thanke  in  my  Fx,  Booth's  Rep.,  and  Sta. 

78.  this]  his  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt.  Fhotolith.) 

80.  therein]  herein  Q'76.  well-took]      well-look' t      FaF3F4, 

81.  consider'd]  conftdered  Qq.  Kowe. 

82.  Answer,  and  think  upon]    And 

commercial  value  of  money  in  those  earlier  ages,  and  thinks  it  probable  that  in  the 
poor  kingdom  of  Norway,  in  Hamlet's  time,  the  king's  whole  revenue  might  scarce 
amount  to  so  large  a  sum.  Hunter  (ii,  228) :  The  reading  of  Qx  is  one  proof, 
amongst  others,  either  that  the  editors  of  Fx  did  not  disdain  the  assistance  of  QJf  im- 
perfect as  it  is,  or  that  Qx  has  preserved  readings  which  the  editors  of  Fx  had  other 
reasons  for  knowing  to  be  genuine. 

773/ fee]  RlTSON:  The  king  gave  his  nephew  a.  feud,  or  fee  (in  land),  of  that 
yeany  value. 

ffgj  safety  and  allowance]  Clarendon  :  Terms  securing  the  safety  of  the 
country  and  regulating  the  passage  of  the  troops  through  it. 

5^#  It  likes]  Abbott  (§  297) :  An  abundance  of  impersonal  verbs  is  a  mark  of 
an  early  stage  in  a  language,  denoting  that  a  speaker  has  not  yet  arrived  so  far  in 
development  as  to  trace  his  own  actions  and  feelings  to  his  own  agency.  There  are 
many  more  impersonal  verbs  in  Early  English  than  in  Elizabethan,  and  many  more 
in  Elizabethan  than  in  modern  English.  See  'Well  be  (it)  with  you,'  II,  ii,  362, 
III.  iv,  173;  V,  ii,  63.  Matzner  (iii,  174)  gives  the  same  phrase:  'It  likes  us 
well,'  from  King  John,  II,  i,  533,  with  the  following  explanation :  '  The  dative  in 
Germanic  verbs  passes  completely  into  the  accusative  where  the  consciousness  of 
the  language  abandons  the  substitute  for  the  dative  by  the  periphrasis  with  /<?.' 
fi^ounds !  I  was  never  so  bethumped  with  words  since  first  I  called  my  brother's 
lather,  dad.'— Ed.] 

BlJ  consider'd]  Caldecott  :  When  we  have  more  time  for  considering.  For 
Instances  of  an  indefinite  and  apparently  not  passive  use  of  passive  participles,  see 
Abbott,  §  374. 

B2/ Answer]  Anon.  {Misc.  Obs.  1752,  p.  19) :  The  king  is  here  made  to  say 
that  he  would  give  an  answer  to  an  affair  before  he  had  considered  it.  Read :  "And 
think^upon  and  answer  to,  this  business.'     [See  Hanmer,  in  Textual  Notes.] 

^3  well-took]  The  reading  of  F3F3F4  suggested  to  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  j>.  191) 


136 


HAMLET 


[ACT  II,  sc.  & 


Go  to  your  rest;  at  night  we'll  feast  together; 

Most  welcome  home  !  \Excunt  Voltimand  and  Cornelius. 

Pol.  This  business  is  well  ended. —  85 

My  liege,  and  madam,  to  expostulate 


85.  [Exeunt  Vol.  and  Cor.]  Cap. 
Exeunt  Embaffadors.  Qq.  Exit  Am- 
baf.  Ff. 


85.  welt\  very  well  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald. 
Knt 


■well-luck' d  as  passing  a  sort  of  compliment  on  the  address,  skill,  and  good-fortune 
of  Cor.  and  Volt.     But  he  did  not  repeat  the  conjecture  in  his  edition. 

84.  feast]  Johnson  :  The  king's  intemperance  is  never  suffered  to  be  forgotten. 

86.  Johnson  :  Polonius  is  a  man  bred  in  courts,  exercised  in  business,  stored  with 
observation,  confident  in  his  knowledge,  proud  of  his  eloquence,  and  declining  into 
dotage.  His  mode  of  oratory  is  truly  represented  as  designed  to  ridicule  the  prac- 
tice of  those  times,  of  prefaces  that  made  no  introduction,  and  of  method  that  em- 
barrassed rather  than  explained.  This  part  of  his  character  is  accidental,  the  rest  is 
natural.  Such  a  man  is  positive  and  confident,  because  lie  knows  that  his  mind  was 
once  strong,  and  knows  not  that  it  is  become  weak.  Such  a  man  excels  in  general 
principles,  but  fails  in  the  particular  application.  He  is  knowing  in  retrospect,  and 
ignorant  in  foresight.  While  he  depends  upon  his  memory,  and  can  draw  from  his 
repositories  of  knowledge,  he  utters  weighty  sentences,  and  gives  useful  counsel ; 
but  as  the  mind  in  its  enfeebled  state  cannot  be  kept  long  busy  and  intent,  the  old 
man  is  subject  to  sudden  dereliction  of  his  faculties;  he  loses  the  order  of  his  ideas, 
and  entangles  himself  in  his  own  thoughts,  till  he  recovers  the  leading  principle,  and 
falls  again  into  his  former  train.  This  idea  of  dotage  encroaching  upon  wisdom  will 
solve  all  the  phenomena  of  the  character  of  Polonius.  Caldecott  :  Nothing  can 
be  more  easily  conceivable  or  intelligible  than  the  '  idea  of  dotage  encroaching  upon 
wisdom';  but  does  this  apply  to  Polonius?  To  be  extinguished,  talent  or  faculty 
must  first  have  existence.  Now  we  have  nothing  that  directly  goes  to  establish  the 
fact  of  his  having  at  any  time  a  clear  and  commanding  intellect.  Almost  everything 
has,  on  the  contrary,  an  opposite  bearing ;  for  the  very  quality  relied  upon  by  Dr 
Johnson  appears  to  us  to  be  that  which  most  strongly  indicates  imbecility  of  mind, 
viz.  having  the  memory  stored  with  sage  rules  and  maxims,  fit  for  every  turn  and 
occasion,  without  the  faculty  of  making  effective  use  of  them  upon  any.  In  Polo- 
nius's  general  conduct,  unmixed  folly  or  dotage  is  visible  at  every  turn.  Moeerly  : 
In  estimating  this  character  we  should  do  well  to  remember  that  the  use  of  language 
like  that  of  Polonius  would  not  in  Shakespeare's  euphuistic  days  argue  the  complete 
folly  that  it  would  at  the  present  time.     [See  also  I,  iii,  59.  Ed.] 

86.  expostulate]  Caldecott  :  To  show  by  discussion,  to  put  the  pros  and  cons, 
to  answer  demands  upon  the  question.  *  Pausanias  had  now  opportunity  to  visit  her 
and  to  expostulate  the  favorable  deceit,  whereby  she  had  caused  his  jealousie.'— 
Stanley's  Aurore,  1650,  p.  44.  Hunter  (ii,  228) :  « Expostulate '  is  of  rare  occur- 
rence. It  occurs  in  A  Brief  Relation  of  the  Shipwreck  of  Henry  May,  1593,  in- 
corporated in  Captain  Smith's  book  on  Virginia :  *  How  these  isles  came  by  the 
name  of  the  Bermudas, ...  I  will  not  expostulate,  nor  trouble  your  patience  with 
these  uncertain  antiquities/  p.  172.  It  means,  to  inquire,  and  when  it  is  an  inquiry 
from  a  superior  in  a  state  of  displeasure,  we  get  at  once  to  what  is  the  present  sig- 
nification of  the  world.     Thus,  in  the  manuscript  book  of  Anecdotes  collected  by  Sir 


act  ii.  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  137 

What  majesty  should  be,  what  duty  is,  87 

Why  day  is  day,  night  night,  and  time  is  time, 

Were  nothing  but  to  waste  night,  day,  and  time. 

Therefore,  since  brevity  is  the  soul  of  wit,  90 

And  tediousness  the  limbs  and  outward  flourishes, 

I  will  be  brief.     Your  noble  son  is  mad : 

Mad  call  I  it ;  for,  to  define  true  madness, 

What  is't  but  to  be  nothing  else  but  mad  ? 

But  let  that  go. 

Queen.  More  matter,  with  less  art.  95 

Pol.     Madam,  I  swear  I  use  no  art  at  all. 
That  he  is  mad,  'tis  true ;  'tis  true  'tis  pity, 
And  pity  'tis  'tis  true;  a  foolish  figure; 
But  farewell  it,  for  I  will  use  no  art. 

Mad  let  us  grant  him  then  ;  and  now  remains  IOO 

That  we  find  out  the  cause  of  this  effect, 
Or  rather  say,  the  cause  of  this  defect, 
For  this  effect  defective  comes  by  cause. 
Thus  it  remains  and  the  remainder  thus. 


6.  since]  Ora.  Qq.  97.  he  is]  hee>s  Q7Q3Q+'     &''*  Qs« 

brevity  is]  brevity's  Pope  + .  mad,  'tis]  mad,  is  Cap. 

91.  limbs]  lines  Theob.  conj.  (with-  98.  'tis  'tis]  it  is  Ff,  Rovve,  Pope, 

drawn).  is,  'tis  Han. 

93^  iff]  it?  Q'76.  99.  farewell  it]  farewell,  wit  Anon  * 

94.  mad?]    mad,  QaQr      mad.  Ff,  101.  the]  the  the  ¥ 9. 

Rowe,  Pope,  Ktly.     mad:  Cap.  Knt,  104.  thus.]   thus  Qq,   Rowe,   Pope, 

Coll.  White.  Han.  Jen. 

Nicholas  L' Estrange,  there  is  one,  No.  77,  in  which  the  master  of  the  house,  hearing 
a  noise  and  disturbance,  '  comes  and  expostulates  the  cause.'  Clarendon  :  So  in 
Two  Gent.  Ill,  i,  251.     Sh.  also  uses  the  word  in  its  modern  and  legitimate  sense. 

90.  wit]  Johnson  [Note  on  line  382) :  'Wit'  was  not  in  Shakespeare's  time  taken 
either  for  imagination  or  acuteness,  or  both  together,  but  for  understanding,  for  the 
faculty  by  which  we  apprehend  and  judge.  Those  who  wrote  of  the  human  mind 
distinguished  its  primary  powers  into  wit  and  will.  STAUNTON :  Wisdom.  Clar- 
endon: Knowledge.     So  Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  i,  18. 

91.  flourishes]  Walker  {Vers.  66) :  A  dissyllable. 

93.  Mad  call  I  it]  Moberly  :  '  It  is  of  no  use  to  explain  how?  This  shrewd 
remark  is  one  of  many  that  Polonius  draws  from  his  repositories  of  knowledge,  and 
from  that  former  wisdom  on  which  dotage  is  rapidly  encroaching. 

96.  art]  Delius:  The  Queen  uses  « art '  in  reference  to  Polonius's  stilted  style; 
the  latter  uses  it  as  opposed  to  truth  and  nature. 

100.  and  now]  For  ellipses  of  there,  see  Abbctt,  §  404. 

12* 


1 38  HAMLET  [act  ir,  sc.  ii. 

Perpend.  105 

I  have  a  daughter,— have  while  she  is  mine, — 

Who  in  her  duty  and  obedience,  mark, 

Hath  given  me  this ;  now  gather  and  surmise.  {Reads, 

1  To  the  celestial,  and  my  soul's  idol,  the  most  beautified  Ophelia} — 

105.  Perpend.]  Separate  line,  Qq,  108.  [Reads.]  Q'76.  The  Letter. 
Han.  Ending  line  104  in  Ff,  Rowe+,  Ff.  Om.  Qq,  Cap.  He  opens  a  Letter, 
Jen.  Sta.     confcder.  Q'76.                                 and  reads.  Rowe+. 

105,106.  Perpend. ...mine]  One  line,  109-112.  '  To.. .these,' &c]  In  Italics, 

Ktly.  Qq. 

106.  while]   whirjl  FXF3F4.     whilfl  109.  'To.. .Ophelia.']  Italics,  Ff. 

F2,  Rowe+,  Knt,  Dyce,  White,  Del.  beautified]      beatified     Theob. 

Huds.  Warb.  Cap. 

104,  105.  Thus  . . .  Perpend]  Maginn  (p.  240) :  The  metre  would  be  right,  and 
the  technical  arrangement  of  the  style  more  in  character,  if  we  read :  ' Thus  it  re- 
mains :  remainder  thus  perpend.' 

105.  Perpend]  Clarendon:  Like  'gather  and  surmise,' this  is  used  in  accord- 
ance with  Polonius's  pedantic  style.     See  As  You  Like  It,  III,  ii,  69. 

109.  Alfred  Roffe  (N.  6°  Qu.  5  Oct.  1861)  gives  a  list  of  no  less  than  nine 
metrical  and  musical  adaptations  of  this  letter  of  Hamlet's.  One  of  them,  in  date 
about  1800,  '  Composed  for  and  dedicated  to  Miss  Abrams  by  Michael  Kelly,'  is  as 
follows : '  Doubt  (O  most  beautified),  that  the  stars  are  fire,  Doubt  (my  soul's  idol),  that 
the  sun  doth  move,  Doubt  that  eternal  Truth  may  prove  a  liar,  But,  sweet  Ophelia, 
never  doubt  I  love.  My  mind  no  skill  in  these  fond  numbers  owns,  Yet  these  de- 
clare I  love  thee  best,  most  best,  And  though  no  Muses  reckon  up  my  groans,  These 
lines  may  shelter  in  thy  snowy  breast.' 

109.  beautified]  Theobald  objected  to  this  word,  because  of  its  two  meanings, 
viz.  artificial  and  natural  beauty ;  the  first  would  be  manifestly  inappropriate  here, 
and  the  second  Sh.  has  used  in  Two  Gent.  IV,  i,  55,  and  would  not,  therefore,  here 
call  it  a  '  vile  phrase.'  He  therefore  substituted  beatified,  which  is  less  of  an  anti- 
climax than  '  beautified,'  after  '  Celestial  and  soul's  idol,'  and  which,  moreover, 
would  be  the  more  likely  to  excite  the  Roman  Catholic  Polonius  to  anger,  since  it  is 
almost  peculiarly  applied  to  the  Virgin  Mary.  Capell  (i,  130)  prefers  beatified,  be- 
cause of '  its  concordance  with  "  celestial"  and  " idol,"  and  because  the  passage  de- 
mands it,  which  is  certainly  verse.'  Accordingly,  he  reads  lines  109  to  112,  inclu- 
sive, as  verse,  dividing  at '  idol'  (which,  metri gratis,  he  reads  ' fair  idol '), '  Ophelia,' 
'beautified'  (which  he  reads  ' that  beatify'd'),  'these.'  Johnson:  'Beautified' 
seems  to  be  a  vile  phrase  for  the  ambiguity  of  its  meaning.  Steevens  :  Nash  dedi- 
cates his  Christ's  Tears  over  Jerusalem,  1594,  '  To  the  most  beautified  lady,  the  lady 
Elizabeth  Carey.'  Nares:  A  common  word  in  those  times,  particularly  in  the 
addresses  of  letters.  The  examples  wherein  a  person  is  said  to  be  •  beautified '  with 
various  endowments  seem  hardly  apposite.     Caldecott:   That  is,  accomplished, 

• metricall  speach  ...  by  Art  bewtified  and  adorned,  and  brought  far  from  the 

primitiue  rudenesse.' — Puttenham's  Arte  of  English  Poesie,  1589  [p.  39,  ed.  Arber]. 
DYCE  (Gloss.)  :  By  'beautified'  (which,  however  'vile  a  phrase,'  is  common  enough 
in  oui  early  writers)  I  believe  Hamlet  meant  beautiful,  and  not  accotnplished, 


act  n,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  139 

That's  an  ill  phrase,  a  vile  phrase;     beautified1  is  a  vile  1 10 
phrase ;  but  you  shall  hear.     Thus : 
[Reads.']  *  In  her  excellent  white  bosom,  these1  &c. 
Queen.     Came  this  from  Hamlet  to  her  ? 
Pol.     Good  madam,  stay  awhile ;  I  will  be  faithful. 

[Reads."]  *  Doubt  thou  the  stars  are  fire  ;  11$ 

Doubt  that  the  sun  doth  move ; 
Doubt  truth  to  be  a  liar ; 
But  never  doubt  I  love. 
O  dear  Ophelia,  I  am  ill  at  these  numbers.     I  have  not 
art  to  reckon  my  groans ;  but  that  I  love  thee  best,  0  most  120 
best,  believe  it.    Adieu. 

*  Thine  evermore,  most  dear  lady,  whilst  this 
machine  is  to  him,  Hamlet/ 

HO.  vile]  vilde  FxFaF3.  112.   [Reads.]  Dyce.     Om.  QqFf. 

111.  phrase ;  but]  phrafe,  but  Qq.  excellent  white]  excellent-white 
but. ..Thus]  Separate  line,  Ktly.         Walker,  Dyce  ii,  Del. 

in,  112.   hear.     Thus;  '  In]    Mai.  &c]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt. 

from  Jen.  substantially,    heare :  thus  in  1 15.  [Reads.]  Reading,  Rowe.    Let 

Qq.     heare  thefe  in  Ff.      hear — These  ter.  Qq.     Om.  Ff. 

/oRo\ve+.  hear; — TheseinCap.  hear.  115,123.  In  Italics,  Ft. 

These.  InKnt.  hear  this ;  TwTsch.  conj.  115,118.  In  Italics,  Qq. 

in.  Thus]  Corson  :  It  would  seem  that  the  first '  these'  in  theFf  is  right,  the 
second  being  a  mere  repetition  for  emphasis ;  so  that  all  that  is  wanting  in  the  F  is 
a  colon  after  '  heare.'  '  These  in  her  excellent  white  bosom,  these :'  The  expres- 
sion is  evidently  directive  or  optative,  and  given  as  an  introduction  to  * Doubt  thou, 
the  Starres  are,  etc.  There  is  a  studied  oddness  in  the  letter,  as  is  shown  by  the 
subscription.  Malone  :  I  have  never  met  with  '  these '  both  at  the  beginning  and 
the  end  of  the  superscription  of  letters. 

112.  In]  Abbott,  §  159  :  *  In,'  like  the  kindred  preposition  on  (Chaucer  uses  '  in 
a  hill '  for  *  on  a  hill '),  was  used  with  verbs  of  motion  as  well  as  rest.  We  still  say 
<  he  fell  in  love,'  &c.     See  V,  ii,  70.     See  Storffrich,  Appendix,  Vol.  II. 

112.  bosom]  Steevens  {Two  Gent.  III.  i,  250) :  Women  anciently  had  a  pocket 
in  the  fore  part  of  their  stays,  in  which  they  not  only  carried  love-letters  and  love- 
tokens,  but  even  their  money  and  materials  for  needle-work. 

118.  doubt]  Clarke:  In  the  first  three  lines  'doubt'  is  used  in  the  sense  of 
have  a  misgiving,  have  a  half-belief,  and  in  the  fourth  line,  in  the  sense  of  disbelieve, 

120.  reckon]  Delius:  To  number  metrically,  or  scan. 

123.  to  him]  Caldecott  :  That  is,  belongs  to,  obeys  his  impulse;  so  long  as  he 
Is  a  'sensible,  warm  motion,'  Meas.  for  Meas.  Ill,  i,  120.  Clarendon  :  Hamlet's 
letter  is  written  in  the  affected  language  of  euphuism.     Compare  Cym.  V,  v,  2^3' 

124.  Hamlet]  Cambridge  Editors  :  In  Q4  and  Q  this  word  is  by  mistake 
printed  not  at  the  end  of  the  letter,  but  opposite  to  the  first  line  of  Polonius's  speech. 
[A  proof  that  Q4  was  printed  from  Qa  or  Q  .     In  these,  the  line  :  '  Thine  euermore 


140  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  ii 

This  in  obedience  hath  my  daughter  shown  me ; 

And  more  above,  hath  his  solicitings,  125 

As  they  fell  out  by  time,  by  means,  and  place, 

All  given  to  mine  ear. 

King.  But  how  hath  she 

Received  his  love  ? 

Pol.  What  do  you  think  of  me  ? 

King.     As  of  a  man  faithful  and  honourable. 

Pol.     I  would  fain  prove  so.     But  what  might  you  think,   1 30 
When  I  had  seen  this  hot  love  on  the  wing, — 
As  I  perceived  it,  I  must  tell  you  that, 
Before  my  daughter  told  me, — what  might  you, 
Or  my  dear  majesty,  your  queen  here,  think, 
If  I  had  play'd  the  desk  or  table-book,  135 

124.  shown]  JJiowne  Qq.  JhewydYi,  130.  think,"]  Cap.  thinke  Qq,  Johns. 
Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Del.                          think?  Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen. 

125.  above]  aboue  Y v  about  Qq.  131.  this]  hisY3YA,  Rowe, Pope,  Han. 
above,  hath]  concerning  Q'76.  wing, — ]  wing,  QaQ  Ff.  wing? 
solicitings]  foliciting  Ff.                       Q^Qs* 

127,  128.  But. .. love  ?]     Cap.       One  132.  I  must.. .that]  In  parenthesis,Qq. 

line,  QqFf.  134.  your]  you  Fa. 

mod  deere  Lady,  whilft  this  machine  is  to  him,'  filled  up  the  breadth  of  the  page, 
and  '  Hamlet '  was  forced  into  the  line  below  :  [Hamlet.  In  Q4  the  last  line  of  the 
letter  is  merely  'machine  is  to  him/  and  although  there  was  abundance  of  room  for 
the  insertion  of  '  Hamlet,'  yet  the  printer  followed  copy  and  retained  it  in  the  line 
below.  Q  was  printed  from  Q  ,  and  kept  up  the  blunder.  Ed.] 
125.  more  above]  Johnson:  Moreover,  besides. 

125.  solicitings]  Caldecott  perceives  a  difficulty  in  the  grammar  or  construe* 
tion  in  the  reading  both  of  Ff  and  Qq.  It  is  strange  that  he  failed  to  see  that '  hath ' 
in  this  line  is  in  the  same  construction  as  'hath'  in  the  preceding  line. 

126.  by]  Abbott,  §  145:  From  meaning  near,  'by*  here  seems  to  mean  with. 
See  II,  ii,  186. 

133.  perceived]  Moeerly  :  There  is  much  humor  in  the  old  man's  inveterate 
foible  for  omniscience.  He  absurdly  imagines  that  he  had  discerned  for  himself 
all  the  steps  of  Hamlet's  love  and  madness ;  while  of  the  former  he  had  been 
unaware  till  warned  by  some  friends ;  and  the  latter  did  not  exist  at  all. 

135.  play'd]  Keightley:  Perhaps  ptyd,  as  pretending  to  be  occupied. 

135-137.  Warburton:  If  either  I  had  conveyed  intelligence  between  them  and 
been  the  confident  of  their  amours ;  or  had  connived  at  it,  only  observed  them  in 
secret,  without  acquainting  my  daughter  with  my  discovery;  or,  lastly,  been  negligent 
in  observing  the  intrigue,  and  overlooked  it;  what  would  you  have  thought  of  me? 
Malone:  The  first  line  may  mean,  if  I  had  locked  up  this  secret  in  my  own  breast, 
as  closely  as  it  were  confined  in  a  desk  or  table-book.  Moberly  paraphrases  this 
same  line  5  If  I  had  just  minuted  the  matter  down  in  my  own  mind. 

135.  table-book]  Nares  :  The  same  as  table ;  memorandum-book. 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  14* 

Or  given  my  heart  a  winking,  mute  and  dumb,  1 36 

Or  look'd  upon  this  love  with  idle  sight ; 

What  might  you  think  ?     No,  I  went  round  to  work, 

And  my  young  mistress  thus  I  did  bespeak: 

1  Lord  Hamlet  is  a  prince,  out  of  thy  star;  140 

This  must  not  be ;'  and  then  I  prescripts  gave  her, 

That  she  should  lock  herself  from  his  resort. 

Admit  no  messengers,  receive  no  tokens. 

Which  done,  she  took  the  fruits  of  my  advice ; 

And  he  repulsed,  a  short  talc  to  make,  145 

Fell  into  a  sadness,  then  into  a  fast, 

136.  a    winking]     a    working    Qq,  above  thy  fphere  Q'76. 
Theob.  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.     -work-  141.  prescripts]   Qq,   Cap.   Jen.  Var. 

ing  Pope.  El.  Cam.  Cla.    precepts  Ff  et  cet. 

139.  my  young  mistress]  In  parenthe-  142.  his]  her  Q2Q3. 

sis,  Fj.  144,  145.  she  took. ..And  he]  see  too.., 

thus]  this  Q^QS.  For,  he  Warb. 

did  bespeak]  charg'dQ'jS.  1 45.  repulsed ',   a]     repulfcd.      A    Ff. 

140.  prince,  out]  prince  : — out  Steev.  repelPd,  a  Q2Q3.  repeFd.  a  Q4.  reperd, 
'85.  a  Q  .     repelled,  a  Jen.  El.     repulsed,  a 

cut  of  thy   star]     out   of  thy         Dyce.     repulsed,  a  White. 
Jlarre    Q4Q5FX.      out    of   thy  fphere  I46.  Fell  into]  Fell  to  Pope  +  . 

FaF  F  ,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 

136.  winking]  Clarendon:  Connivance,  as  in  Hen.  V:  V,  ii,  332.  In  Cym. 
II,  iv,  89,  '  two  winking  Cupids '  mean  two  blind  Cupids,  two  Cupids  with  their  eyes 
shut.     So  Acts,  xvii,  30. 

138.  round]  Steevens:  Roundly,  without  reserve,  as  in  III,  i,  183;  III,  iv,  5. 
Caldecott:  As  here  used,  it  cannot  be  more  correctly  interpreted  than  by  the  re- 
verse of  its  literal  meaning,  i.  e.  without  circuity.  In  this  sense,  and  senses  nearly 
allied  to  it,  this  word  is  used  with  great  latitude.  Dyce  (Gloss.)  gives  eight  different 
uses  of  round.  Clarendon:  The  adjective  is  here  used  for  the  adverb,  as  in 
Bacon's  Essay,  vi :  'A  shew  of  fearfulnesse,  which  in  any  businesse  doth  spoile  the 
feathers,  of  round  flying  up  to  the  mark.'     See  Abbott,  §  60. 

139.  bespeak]  For  the  use  of  the  prefix  be-,  see  Abbott,  §  438. 

140.  star]  Boswell:  'Out  of  thy  star'  is  'placed  above  thee  by  fortune.'  We 
have  '  fortune's  star,'  I,  iv,  32.  Collier  :  '  Star'  is  probably  to  be  taken  as  destiny. 
Sincer  :  In  Twelfth  Night,  II,  v,  156,  we  have  'in  my  stars  I  am  above  thee.' 
White  :  Sphere  is  at  once  a  plausible  reading  and  a  gloss.  Staunton  :  Lord 
Hamlet  is  a  prince  beyond  the  influence  of  the  star  which  governs  your  fortunes. 
Bailey  (ii,  6):  Substitute  0  for  t,  and  you  have  'out  of  thy  soar.'  It  is  not  to  be 
concealed  that  Sh.  does  not  elsewhere  employ  soar  as  a  noun. 

141.  prescripts]  Malone:  He  had  ordered,  charged,  Ophelia  to  lock  herself  up 
from  Hamlet;  see  I,  iii,  135. 

144.  fruits]  Johnson:  She  took  the  fruits  of  advice,  when  she  obeyed  advice; 
the  advice  was  then  made  fruitful. 

146-150.  Warburton  :  The  ridicule  of  this  character  is  here  admirably  sustained* 


142 


HAMLET 


[act  11,  SC.  ii. 


Thence  to  a  watch,  thence  into  a  weakness, 
Thence  to  a  lightness,  and  by  this  declension 
Into  the  madness  wherein  now  he  raves 
And  all  we  mourn  for. 

King.     Do  you  think  'tis  this  ? 

Queen.  It  may  be,  very  likely. 

Pol.     Hath  there  been  such  a  time,  I  'Id  fain  know  that, 
That  I  have  positively  said  '  'tis  so,' 


147 


150 


147.  watch]    ivaih    QSQ3-     watching 
Pope  + ,  Cap.     watch  ;  and  Ktly. 

thence  into]  then  into  Q'76.   and 
thence  into  Maginn. 

148.  a]  Om.  Qq. 

149.  wherein]  whereon  Ff,  Cald.  Knt. 

150.  all  we  mourn]  all  we  wail  Ff, 


Rowe+,  Cap.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Dyce  i,  White,  Del.  Huds.  we  all  wail 
Coll.(MS),  Ktly. 

151.  'tis  this]  this  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
Cam.  Cla. 

lively]  like  Qq,  Jen.  Cam.  Cla. 

152.  Pld]  Pde  Ff.     /  would  Qq. 


He  would  not  only  be  thought  to  have  discovered  this  intrigue  by  his  own  sagacity, 
but  to  have  remarked  all  the  stages  of  Hamlet's  disorder,  from  his  sadness  to  his 
raving,  as  regularly  as  his  .physician  could  have  done;  when  all  the  while  the  mad- 
ness was  only  feigned.  The  humor  of  this  is  exquisite  from  a  man  who  tells  us,  with 
a  confidence  peculiar  to  small  politicians,  that  he  could  find :  « Where  truth  was  hid, 
though  it  were  hid  indeed  Within  the  centre.' 
147.  watch]  Caldecott:  A  sleepless  state. 

147.  148.  thence  into  . . .  lightness]  Although  Walker  ( Vers.  20)  suggests 
that  here  «  weakness '  and  *  lightness '  be  pronounced  as  trisyllables,  yet  he  adds :  I 
rather  suspect  that  we  should  write,  '  thence  to  a  weakness,  thence  Into  a  lightness.* 
Abbott,  §  483,  while  conceding  the  possibility  that '  weakness '  is  a  trisyllable,  yet 
thinks  that '  the  repeated  "  thence  "  may  require  a  pause  after  it,  which  might  excuse 
the  absence  of  an  unaccented  syllable.' 

148.  lightness]  Clarendon  :  Lightheadedness.    Compare  Oth.  IV,  i,  280. 

149.  madness]  Clarke:  Sh.  intended  Hamlet  should  be  deeply  moved  by 
Ophelia's  unexplained  repulse  of  him,  coming  immediately  upon  the  shock  he  re- 
ceives from  the  Ghost's  revelation,  and  he  seizes  upon  the  one  as  affording  apparent 
cause  for  his  disturbance  of  mind  arising  out  of  the  other,  and  as  giving  plausible 
and  ostensible  ground  for  the  madness  which  he  assumes,  and  by  which  he  wishes 
to  be  believed  to  have  been  seized.  Polonius's  deduction  and  his  report  to  the  King 
and  Queen  of  that,  and  Hamlet's  condition,  are  precisely  what  the  prince  desired 
should  successively  accrue  from  his  own  behaviour.  This  all  appears  to  us  to  be  in 
favor  of  our  opinion  with  regard  to  Hamlet's  feigned  insanity. 

150.  all  we]  Abbott,  §  240:  A  feeling  of  the  unemphatic  nature  of  the  nomi- 
natives we  and  they  prevents  us  from  saying  *  all  we.'  [For  another  instance  of  a 
transposed  pronoun,  see  V,  ii,  14.  Ed.] 

150.  for]  Delius  :  The  relative  which  must  be  supplied  from  the  foregoing 
*  wherein.' 

151.  this]  Corson:  The  reading  of  F,, ' 'tis  this,'  suits  better  what  precedes,  and 
the  reply  of  the  Queen  that  follows. 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 43 

When  it  proved  otherwise  ? 

King,  Not  that  I  know. 

Pol.     [Pointing  to  his  head  and  shoulder']     Take  this  from 

this,  if  this  be  otherwise.  155 

If  circumstances  lead  me,  I  will  find 
Where  truth  is  hid,  though  it  were  hid  indeed 
Within  the  centre. 

King.  How  may  we  try  it  further? 

Pol.     You  know,  sometimes  he  walks  four  hours  together 
Here  in  the  lobby. 

Queen.  So  he  does,  indeed.  160 

155.  [Pointing...]  Theob.  Pope  ii.  ending  fometimes...hecrc...lobby.  Ff, 
Om.  QqFf,  Cap.  Bel.  Rowe. 

this,  if... otherwise ;]  this;   if...  159.  four]  foure  QqFxFa.  for  Han. 

otherwife,  Fx.     this,  if..otherwifc,  F3F  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  ii  (MS). 

F4,  Rowe,  Pope.  160.  docs]  dooes  Q3Q3>     hays  F,.    has 

158.  further]  farther  Coll.  White.  FaF3F4»  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt. 

159,  160.    You.. lobby.]    Three   lines, 

156,  157.  will. ..were]  For  instances  of  the  irregular  sequence  of  tenses,  see 
Abbott,  §  371,  and  '  did  see.. .Would  have  made,'  II,  ii,  490-495  ;  also,  *  I  know.. .my 
joys  were,'  IV,  iii,  66-67. 

158.  centre]  Tschischwitz  :  Despite  the  reading  of  Qx,  I  nevertheless  believe 
that  by  '  centre  '  is  meant  the  middle  of  the  palm  of  the  hand,  a  point  important  in 
palmistry.  Clarendon:  Sh.,  like  Bacon,  held  to  the  Ptolemaic  system  of  astron- 
omy.    See  Tro.  &  Cres.  I,  iii,  85.     Compare  Tit.  And.  IV,  iii,  12. 

159.  four]  M alone:  I  formerly  was  inclined  to  adopt  Tyrwhitt's  proposed 
emendation  of  for  [anticipated  by  Hanmer],  but  have  now  no  doubt  that  the  text  is 
right.  The  expressions,  •  four  hours  together,'  'two  hours  together,'  &c,  appear  to 
have  been  common.  So  in  Lear,  I,  ii,  170;  Wint.  T.  V,  ii,  148.  Again  in  Web- 
ster's Duchess  of  Malfi  [ed.  Dyce  i,  260]  :  '  She  will  muse  four  hours  together.' 
Collier  (ed.  2) :  It  is  not  likely  that  Polonius  would  specify  precisely  how  long 
Hamlet  walked  in  the  lobby,  and  the  (MS)  reads  for.  White  :  The  obvious  read- 
ingfor  has  occurred  to  many  critical  readers;  and  to  modern  taste  this  would  seem 
an  improvement.  But  similar  phrases  are  of  common  occurrence  in  old  books. 
Staunton  :  '  Four '  here,  as  in  Cor.  I,  vi,  84,  and  elsewhere,  appears  a  mere  collo- 
quialism, to  signify  some,  or  a  limited  number,  as  forty  is  frequently  used  to  express 
a  great  number.  Clarendon  :  So  in  Puttenham's  Arte  of  English  Poesie  (p.  307, 
ed.  Arber) :  '  laughing  and  gibing  with  their  familiars  foure  houres  by  the  clocke/ 
Elze  {Shakespeare-  Jahrbuch,  Bd.  xi.)  has  collected  many  instances  from  Elizabethan 
writers  of  the  use  of  four  and  forty,  and  forty  thousand  to  express  an  indefinite 
number,  and  probably,  with  his  unwearied  industry,  he  could  find  forty  more.  Pie 
also  shows  that  this  usage  is  not  confined  to  England,  but  is  common  in  German. 
Hamlet  says  he  loved  Ophelia  more  than  '  forty  thousand  brothers,'  V,  i,  257. 

160.  does]  Knight:  The  Ft  means  has  done. 


144 


HAMLET 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Pol.    At  such  a  time  I'll  loose  my  daughter  to  him; 
Be  you  and  I  behind  an  arras  then ; 
Mark  the  encounter ;  if  he  love  her  not, 
And  be  not  from  his  reason  fall'n  thereon, 
Let  me  be  no  assistant  for  a  state,  1 65 

But  keep  a  farm  and  carters. 

King.  We  will  try  it. 

Queen.    But  look  where  sadly  the  poor  wretch  comes 
reading. 

Pol.    Away,  I  do  beseech  you,  both  away ; 
I'll  board  him  presently.— 

[Exeunt  Ki?ig,  Queen>  and  Attendants. 


Enter  HAMLET,  reading. 

Oh,  give  me  leave; 
How  does  my  good  Lord  Hamlet  ? 


170 


162.  Be"]  Let  Quincy  (MS),  Anon. 
{Misc.  Obs.). 

an  arras]   an  Arrs    Fa.      the 
Arras  Q'76. 

162,  163.  arras  then;  Mark]  arras 
then,  Marke  QqFf  {Mark  F4).  arras  ; 
then  Mark  Sta.  arras  then  To  mark 
Ktly. 

1 66.  Bnf\  And  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Cald. 
Knt. 

167.  Scene  v.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 
But. ..wretch"]  One  line,  Ff. 

168.  you,  both]  you  both  Qq.    you 


bothy  Anon.* 

169.  board]  bord  Q2QiQa*     hoard  F, 
F2F3QS,  Cald.  Knt. 

Exeunt...]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen, 
White,  Glo.  + ,  Mob.  After  away  ;  line 
168,  Qq.  After  leave;  Cap.  et  cet.  (Exit... 
QqFf). 

Enter...]  Dyce,  Coll.  ii,  Sta. 
Glo.  + ,  Mob.  Del.  Huds.  After  try  it, 
line  166,  QqFf,  et  cet. 

reading]  reading  on  a  Booke.  Ff. 
169,  170.  Oh,.. .Hamlet]  One  line,  Ff, 
Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Cam. 


161.  loose]  Tschischwitz  :  Polonius  had  forbidden  his  daughter  to  have  any 
intercourse  with  Hamlet. 

162.  arras]  Nares  :  The  tapestry  hangings  of  rooms,  so  called  from  the  town  of 
Arras,  where  the  principal  manufactory  of  such  stuffs  was.  There  was  often  a  very 
large  space  between  the  arras  and  the  walls. 

167.  wretch]  Dyce  [Gloss.) :  A  term  of  endearment. 

169.  board]  Reed:  Accost,  ad.dress  him,  as  in  Twelfth  Night,  I,  iii,  60. 

169.  presently]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Immediately.     See  Rom.  &■»  Jul.  IV,  i,  95. 

169.  Oh,  give  me  leave]  Cambridge  Editors:  Capell  supposed  these  words  to 
be  addressed,  not  to  Hamlet,  but  to  the  King  and  Queen,  whose  Exeunt  he  placed 
after  these  words.  His  arrangement  has  been  followed  by  all  subsequent  editors, 
till  we  ventured,  in  the  Globe  edition  [anticipated  by  Grant  White.  Ed.]  to  recur  to 
the  old  order.  These  words  are  more  naturally  addressed  to  Hamlet  than  to  the 
King  and  Queen,  with  whom  Polonius  had  been  previously  conversing.  Dyce 
transferred  the  entrance  of  Hamlet  to  follow  the  Examt  of  the  King  and  Queen. 


act  ir,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  145 

Ham.    Well,  God-a-mcrcy.  171 

Pol.     Do  you  know  me,  my  lord  ? 
Ham.     Excellent  well ;  you  are  a  fishmonger. 
Pol.     Not  I,  my  lord. 

Ham.     Then  I  would  you  were  so  honest  a  man.  175 

Pol.     Honest,  my  lord  ? 

Ham.     Ay,  sir ;  to  be  honest,  as  this  world  goes,  is  to 
be  one  man  picked  out  of  ten  thousand. 

17X.    Well,  God-a-mercy]     Excellent  1 76.  lord?]  lord.  Qq.     lord  I  Dyce, 

well  Q'76.     Well,  Godo"  mercy  Theob.  Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

Warb.  Johns.  177,  178.  Ay,  sir... thousand.]    Two 

173.  Excellent]    Excellent,   excellent  lines,  the  first  ending  goes,  Qq,  Jen. 

Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  White.  178.  man]  Om.  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 

you  are]  y^are  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

White,    you're  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Huds.  ten]    tenne  Q2Q3Q4.      two   Ff, 

you... fishmonger]  One  line,  Cap.  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt. 

line  169.  As  in  Qx,  he  is  made  to  enter  earlier,  it  is  possible  that  he  was  in  sight  of 
the  audience,  though  so  intent  on  his  book  as  not  to  observe  the  presence  of  others. 
173.  fishmonger]  Whiter  (p.  152,  foot-note)  cites  a  passage  from  Jonson's 
Masque  at  Christmas  (vol.  vii,  p.  277,  ed.  Gifford),  where  Venus,  who  is  represented 
as  a  deaf  tire-woman,  says  that  she  was  '  a  fishmonger's  daughter.'  '  Probably,  it 
was  supposed,'  adds  Whiter,  •  that  the  daughters  of  these  tradesmen,  who  dealt  in  so 
nourishing  a  species  of  food,  v/ere  blessed  with  extraordinary  powers  of  conception.' 
Hence  he  infers  some  such  allusion  by  Hamlet.  Gifford,  in  his  note  on  this  pas* 
sage  in  Jonson, says:  'This  alludes  to  the  prolific  nature  of  fish.  The  jest,  which, 
such  as  it  is,  is  not  unfrequent  in  our  old  dramatists,  needs  no  further  illustration.' 
Malone:  Perhaps  a  joke  was  here  intended.  *  Fishmonger'  was  a  cant  term  for  a 
tuencher.  In  Barnabe  Rich's  Irish  Hubbub  :  *  Senex  fornicator,  an  old  fishmonger.' 
Coleridge  :  That  is,  you  are  sent  to  fish  out  this  secret.  This  is  Hamlet's  own 
meaning.  G.  M.  Zornlin  (Sh.  Soc.  Papers,  vol.  iii,  p.  157)  supposes  this  word  to 
have  been  used  in  a  figurative  sense,  perhaps  somewhat  as  we  should  now  apply  the 
word  ferret,  or  as  a  dealer  in  baits,  and  that  it  contains  an  intimation  that  Hamlet 
was  aware  of  Polonius's  being  engaged  in  some  underhand  policy,  •  and  that  he 
knew  Ophelia  v/as  to  play  her  part  in  it  is  evident  from  the  caution  which  follows 
respecting  her,  which  the  old  man  loses  sight  of  in  his  joy  at  hearing  his  daughter 
alluded  to.'  Moberly  :  Probably  the  meaning  may  be :  *  You  deal  in  wares  that 
will  not  bear  the  sun;'  that  is,  that  Polonius  has  a  daughter,  and  that  all  women  are 
as  faithless  and  unchaste  as  his  mother,  so  that  the  least  trial  overthrows  them. 
TlECK  {Kritische  Schriften,  iii,  262) :  When  this  word  is  spoken  the  sense  may  be 
made  so  obvious  that  one  can  hardly  miss  it :  *  I  would  you  were  so  honest  a  man- 
but — you  are  a  fleshmonger.'  You  are  a  pander,  not  so  honest  a  man  as  a  fish* 
monger.  Hamlet  casts  in  the  teeth  of  Polonius  that  he  made  opportunities  for  him 
and  his  daughter,  and  the  following  speech :  '  For  if  the  sun,'  &c.  is  only  a  continu- 
ation of  the  expression  of  Hamlet's  contempt  for  both  father  and  daughter.  Friesen 
{Briefe  uber  Hamlet,  1864,  p.  287)  supposes  that  this  rather  refers  to  Polonius's 
share  in  providing  opportunities  for  Claudius  and  the  Queen,  during  the  old  king's 
13  K 


146  HAMLET  [act  ii,  SC.  ii. 

Pol.     That's  very  true,  my  lord. 

Ham.     For  if  the  sun  breed  maggots  in  a  dead  dog,  180 
being  a  good  kissing  carrion, — Have  you  a  daughter  ? 

iSo.  Ham.]  Ham.  [reads]  Sta.White.  et  cet. 
Pretending  to  read.  Huds.  181.  carrion, — ]  carrion.  Qq. 

181.  good    kissing    carrion~\     QqFf,  Have. ..daughter?]  Separate  line, 

Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Cald.   Knt,  Coll.  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 
El.  Heussi.    God,  kissing  carrion^Nzxb. 

lifetime.  Doering  [Shakespeare'' s  Hamlet,  &c.  1 865,  p.  51)  refers  it  to  Polonius's 
aid  in  promoting  the  marriage  of  Claudius  and  the  Queen.  See,  also,  Gerth's 
extraordinary  proverb  in  his  note  on  this  passage  in  Appendix,  Vol.  II. 

180.  sun]  Tschischwitz  (Sh.  Forsch.  i,  63)  finds  a  parallel  to  this  thought  ia 
Giordano  Bruno  (vol.  ii,  246),  where  the  philosophy  is  taught  that,  'sol  et  homo 
generant  hominem.'  Ingleby  (Sh.  Hermeneutics,  p.  159)  gives,  as  a  curious  illustra- 
tion of  Hamlet's  simile,  a  passage  from  St  Augustine,  De  fide  et  symbolo,  §  10: 
Debent  igitur  intueri  qui  hoc  putant,  solis  huius  radios,  quern  certe  non  tanquam 
creaturam  Dei  laudant  sed  tanquam  Deum  adorant,  per  cloacarum  foetores  et  quae* 
cumque  horribilia  usquequaque  diffundi  et  in  his  operari  secundum  naturam  suam, 
nee  tamen  inde  aliqua  contaminatione  sordescere,  cum  visibilis  lux  visibilibus  sordi- 
bus  sit  natura  coniunctior. 

181.  good  kissing  carrion]  Warburton  :  This  strange  passage,  when  set  right, 
will  be  seen  to  contain  as  great  and  sublime  a  reflection  as  any  the  poet  puts  into  his 
hero's  mouth  throughout  the  whole  play.  We  will  first  give  the  true  reading,  which 
is  this :  For  if  the  Sun  breed  maggots  in  a  dead  dog,  Being  a  God,  kissing  carrion—. 
As  to  the  sense,  we  may  observe  that  the  illative  particle  [for]  shows  the  speaker  to 
be  reasoning  from  something  he  had  said  before ;  what  that  was  we  learn  in  these 
words,  to  be  honest,  as  this  world  goes,  is  to  be  one  picked  out  often  thousand.  Having 
said  this,  the  chain  of  ideas  led  him  to  reflect  upon  the  argument  which  libertines 
bring  against  Providence  from  the  circumstance  of  abounding  evil.  In  the  next 
speech,  therefore,  he  endeavors  to  answer  that  objection,  and  vindicate  Providence, 
even  on  a  supposition  of  the  fact,  that  almost  all  men  were  wicked.  His  argument 
in  the  two  lines  in  question  is  to  this  purpose :  But  why  need  we  wonder  at  this 
abounding  of  evil?  For  if  the  sun  breed  maggots  in  a  dead  dog,  which,  though  a 
God,  yet  shedding  its  heat  and  influe?tce  upon  carrion — .  Here  he  stops  short,  lest 
talking  too  consequentially  the  hearer  should  suspect  his  madness  to  be  feigned,  and 
so  turns  him  off  from  the  subject  by  enquiring  of  his  daughter.  But  the  inference 
which  he  intended  to  make  was  a  very  noble  one,  and  to  this  purpose.  If  this  (says 
he)  be  the  case  that  the  effect  fellows  the  thing  operated  upon  \carrion~\,  and  not 
the  thing  operating  [a  God"],  why  need  we  wonder  that  the  supreme  cause  of  all 
things  diffusing  its  blessings  on  mankind,  who  is,  as  it  were,  a  dead  carrion,  dead  in 
original  sin,  man,  instead  of  a  proper  return  of  duty,  should  breed  only  corruption 
and  vices  ?  This  is  the  argument  at  length,  and  is  as  noble  a  one  in  behalf  of 
Providence  as  could  Come  from  the  schools  of  divinity.  But  this  wonderful  man 
had  an  art  not  only  of  acquainting  the  audience  with  what  his  actors  say,  but  with 
what  they  think.  The  sentiment,  too,  is  altogether  in  character,  for  Hamlet  is  per- 
petually moralizing,  and  his  circumstances  make  this  reflection  very  natural.  The 
same  thought,  something  diversified,  as  on  a  different  occasion,  Sh.  uses  again  in 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 47 


[181.  'good  kissing  carrion.'] 
Mms.  for  Mens.  II,  ii,  163-168,  which  will  serve  to  confirm  these  observations. 
And  the  same  kind  of  expression  is  in  Cymb.  Ill,  iv,  164,  '  Common-kissing  Titan.' 
Johnson  :  This  is  a  noble  emendation,  which  almost  sets  the  critic  on  a  level  with 
the  author.  Malone:  Hamlet  has  just  remarked  that  honesty  is  very  rare  in  the 
world.  To  this  Polonius  assents.  The  prince  then  adds,  that  since  there  is  so  little 
virtue  in  the  world,  since  corruption  abounds  everywhere,  and  maggots  are  bred  by 
the  sun,  even  in  a  dead  dog,  Polonius  ought  to  take  care  to  prevent  his  daughter 
from  walking  in  the  sun,  lest  she  should  prove  a  breeder  of  sinners ;  for,  though  con 
ception  in  general  be  a  blessing,  yet  as  Ophelia  (whom  Hamlet  supposes  to  be  as 
frail  as  the  rest  of  the  world)  might  chance  to  conceive,  it  might  be  a  calamity.  The 
maggots  breeding  in  a  dead  dog  seem  to  have  been  mentioned  merely  to  introduce 
the  word  conception,  on  which  word,  as  Steevens  has  observed,  Sh.  has  played  in 
King  Lear ;  and  probably  a  similar  quibble  was  intended  here.  The  word,  how- 
ever, may  have  been  used  in  its  ordinary  sense,  for  pregnancy,  without  any  double 
meaning.  The  slight  connection  between  this  and  the  preceding  passage  and  Ham- 
let's abrupt  question, '  Have  you  a  daughter  ?'  were  manifestly  intended  more  strongly 
to  impress  Polonius  with  the  belief  of  the  prince's  madness.  Perhaps  this  passage 
ought  rather  to  be  regulated  thus  :  '  being  a  god-kissing  carrion?  i.  e.  a  carrion  that 
kisses  the  sun.  The  participle  being  naturally  refers  to  the  last  antecedent,  dog. 
Had  Sh.  intended  that  it  should  be  referred  to  sun,  he  would  probably  have  written, 
*  he  being  a  god,'  &c.  We  have  many  similar  compound  epithets  in  these  plays. 
Thus,  in  Lear,  II,  i,  9,  Curan  speaks  of  '  ear-kissing  arguments.'  Again,  more  ap- 
positely, in  the  play  before  us,  III,  iv,  59,  ■  heaven-kissing.'  Again,  in  R.  of  L. 
1370,  'cloud-kissing.'  However,  the  instance  quoted  from  Cymb.  by  Warburton 
seems  in  favor  of  the  regulation  that  has  been  hitherto  made;  for  here  we  find  the 
poet  considered  the  sun  as  kissing  the  carrion,  not  the  carrion  as  kissing  the  sun. 
So,  also,  in  I  Hen.  IV:  II,  iv,  113,  'Didst  thou  never  see  Titan  kiss  a  dish  of 
butter?'  The  following  lines,  also,  in  the  historical  play  of  King  Edward  III,  1596, 
which  Sh.  had  certainly  seen,  are,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  adverse  to  the  regula- 
tion I  Have  suggested :  '  The  freshest  summer's  day  doth  soonest  taint  The  loathed 
carrion,  that  it  seems  to  kiss.'  Whiter,  whose  opinions  deserve  respect,  fails  to 
make  a  clear  explanation  of  the  text  of  QqFf,  which  he  upholds.  He  says  (p.  149) 
that  Sh.  considers  the  '  blessed  breeding  sun '  as  the  Good  principle  in  the  fecundity 
of  the  earth,  and  that  in  the  present  passage  the  train  of  thought  in  Hamlet's  mind 
is  somev/hat  thus :  There  is  so  little  honesty  left  in  the  world,  the  world  has  become 
so  degenerate,  that  even  what  is  bad  becomes  worse  by  contact  with  what  is  good. 
The  Sun  itself,  though  a  Good,  and  in  general  the  source  of  what  is  excellent,  be 
comes  the  origin  of  corruption  ;  we  find  this  Good,  by  contact  with  carrion,  breeding 
maggots.  Why,  therefore,  may  not  Ophelia  herself  become  tainted,  and  become  a 
hreeder  of  sinners  ?  Let  her  not  walk  in  the  sun, — keep  her  removed  from  all  possi- 
bility of  contamination, — even  from  communication  with  those  natures  which  in  gen- 
eral appear  possessed  of  good  and  virtuous  principles.  Dread  the  consequences  of  ex- 
posing her  to  the  temptation  of  the  world.  Coleridge  :  These  purposely  obscure  lines, 
I  rather  think,  refer  to  some  thought  in  Hamlet's  mind,  contrasting  the  lovely  daughter 
with  such  a  tedious  old  fool,  her  father,  as  he,  Hamlet,  represents  Polonius  to  himself: 
'  Why,  fool  as  he  is,  he  is  some  degrees  in  rank  above  a  dead  dog's  carcass  j  and  if 


* 48  HAMLET  [act  ii,  SC.  ii. 


[181.  'good  kissing  carrion.'] 
the  sun,  being  a  god  that  kisses  carrion,  can  raise  life  out  of  a  dead  dog,  why  may 
not  good  fortune,  that  favors  fools,  have  raised  a  lovely  girl  out  of  this  dead-alive 
old  fool  ?'  The  subsequent  passage,  line  384,  is  confirmatory  of  my  view  of  these 
lines.  CALDECOTT :  As  it  would  be  too  forced  a  sense  to  say  that  Sh.  calls  the  sun 
*  a  good  kissing  carrion,'  we  have  nothing  better  to  offer  than  that  this  passage  may 
mean  that  the  dead  dog  is  good  for  the  sun,  the  breeder  of  maggots,  to  kiss  for  the 
purpose  of  causing  putrefaction,  and  so  conceiving  or  generating  anything  carrion- 
like, anything  apt  quickly  to  contract  taint  in  the  sunshine ;  good  at  catching  or 
drawing  the  rays  or  kisses  of  'common  kissing  Titan.'  Mitford  (Gent.  Maga, 
1845):  Read  'carrion-kissing  god,'  formed  like  heaven- kissing,  cloud-kissing,  &c. 
Knight  :  The  carrion  is  good  at  kissing,  ready  to  return  the  kiss  of  the  sun, — '  com- 
mon kissing  Titan,' — and  in  the  bitterness  of  his  satire  Hamlet  associates  the  idea 
with  the  daughter  of  Polonius.  Collier  :  '  Good '  could  hardly  have  been  a  mis- 
print for  Cod,  as  in  the  latter  case  it  would  most  likely  have  been  written  with  a  cap- 
ital letter.  Delius  (ed.  i) :  Hamlet  calls  the  dog,  in  which  the  sun  breeds  maggots, 
a  good,  kissing  carrion,  alluding  to  the  confiding,  fawning  manner  of  the  dog  towards 
his  master.  If  the  sun  breed  maggots  in  the  dead  dog,  which,  when  alive,  was  so 
trusting,  what,  says  Hamlet  in  his  bitterness  and  to  annoy  Polonius, — what  could  net 
the  sun  breed  in  the  delicate  Ophelia?  who,  therefore,  ought  not  to  expose  herself  to 
it.  [This  is  omitted  in  the  ed.  of  1871.  Ed.]  Dyce:  I  give  Warburton's  emen- 
dation, which,  if  overpraised  by  Johnson,  at  least  has  the  merit  of  conveying  some- 
thing like  a  meaning.  That  not  even  a  tolerable  sense  can  be  tortured  out  of  the 
original  reading  we  have  proof  positive  in  the  various  explanations  of  it  by  its  ad- 
vocates. Collier  (ed.  2) :  The  (MS)  evidently  gave  up  the  passage  as  inexplicable, 
and  put  his  pen  through  the  lines  1S0-185.  Maginn  (p.  246) :  Hamlet,  in  his  affec- 
tation' of  craziness,  proceeds  to  hint  that  the  consequences  of  exposing  a  young  lady 
to  the  temptations  of  persons  in  high  rank,  or  of  warm  blood,  may  be  dangerous,  and 
couples  the  outr'e  assertion  that  the  sun  can  breed  maggots  with  a  reference  to  Polo- 
nius's  daughter.  Let  her  not  put  herself  in  the  peculiar  danger  to  which  I  allude, 
and  to  which  her  father's  performing  the  part  of  a  fishmonger  \i.  e.  a  purveyor  of 
loose  fish]  may  lead.  The  sun  is  a  good-kissing  carrion, — (carogne — it  is  a  word 
which  occurs  elsewhere  in  Sh.  Quickly,  in  the  Merry  Wives,  is  called  a  carrion, 
&c), — a  baggage  fond  of  kissing.  In  Hen.  IV,  Prince  Hal  compares  the  sun  to  a 
fair  hot  wench  in  flame-colored  taffeta ;  and  if  the  sun  can  breed  maggots  in  a  dead 
dog,  who  knows  what  may  happen  elsewhere  ?  White  :  The  correction,  which  is 
almost  of  the  obvious  sort,  was  made  by  Warburton,  who  improved  the  occasion  in 
a  small  sermon.  This  speech  of  Hamlet's  has  an  intimate  connection  in  thought 
and  in  expression  with  his  next ;  the  thought  being  one  which  his  madness,  real  or 
affected,  may  excuse,  but  upon  which  it  is  not  pleasant  to  dwell,  much  less  to  expa- 
tiate. Staunton  :  We  adopt  the  now  almost  universally  accepted  correction  of  War- 
burton.  At  the  same  time  we  dissent,  toto  ccelo,  from  the  reasoning  by  which  he  and 
other  commentators  have  sought  to  connect  the  sentence  in  which  it  occurs  with 
what  Hamlet  had  previously  said.  The  circumstance  of  the  prince  coming  in  read- 
ing, that  he  evinces  the  utmost  intolerance  of  the  old  courtier's  interruptions,  and 
rejoices  in  his  departure,  serve,  in  our  opinion,  to  show  that  Sh.  intended  the  actor 
should  manifest  his  wish  to  be  alone,  after  the  lines  177,  178,  in  the  most  unmis- 
takable manner,  by  walking  away  and  appearing  to  resume  his  study  j  that  then, 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 49 


[1S1.  *  good  kissing  carrion.'] 
finding  Polonius  still  watching  him,  he  should  turn  sharply  round  with  the  abrupt 
question,  '  Have  you  a  daughter?'  It  is  this  view  of  the  stage  business  which 
prompted  us  to  print  the  passage  above  [line  1S0.  For  .  .  .  carrioti\  as  something 
read,  or  affected  to  be  read,  by  Hamlet, — an  innovation — if  it  be  one  (for  we  are 
ignorant  whether  it  has  been  suggested  previously) — that  will  the  more  readily  be 
pardoned,  since  the  passage,  as  usually  exhibited,  has  hitherto  defied  solution. 
Heussi  :  *  Kissing  '  is  used  in  a  passive  Sense;  a  contrast  is  drawn  between  carrion 
and  bad  men.  The  former  is  praised,  because  the  dead  dog  is  a  carrion  that  fulfils 
all  requirement  of  carrion,  whereas  men  are  inferior  to  that  which  they  should  be, 
Tschischwitz:  The  meaning  is  clear.  If  the  sun,  a  good  being,  condescends  so  far  as 
to  kiss,  &c.  [He  therefore  transposes  the  words  in  the  text, '  being  a  good/  and  reads  a 
good  being.  Ed.]  Hudson  :  God  is  probably  right.  A  great  deal  of  ink  has  been  spent 
in  trying  to  explain  the  passage;  but  the  true  explanation  is,  that  it  is  not  meant  to 
be  understood.  Hamlet  is  merely  bantering  and  tantalizing  the  old  man.  Moberly  : 
Warburton's  explanation  is  excellent.  Clarendon:  There  can  be  little  doubt  of 
the  truth  of  Warburton's  emendation.  Corson  :  The  defect  in  this  passage  is  due 
to  one  thing,  and  one  thing  only,  and  that  is,  to  the  understanding  of  'kissing'  as 
the  present  active  participle,  and  not  as  the  verbal  noun.  In  the  following  passages 
the  present  active  participle  is  used  :  ■  Life's  but  a  walking  shadow,'  Macb.  V,  v,  24; 
'Look,  here  comes  a  walking  fire,'  Lear,  III,  iv,  no;  'the  dancing  banners  of  the 
French,'  King  John,  II,  i,  308;  'my  dancing  soul  doth  celebrate  This  feast,'  Rich. 
II:  I,  iii,  91 ;  'laboring  art  can  never  ransom  nature,'  AWs  Well,  II,  i,  116;  'more 
busy  than  the  laboring  spider,'  2  Hen.  VI;  III,  i,  339;  'And  let  the  laboring  bark 
climb  hills  of  seas,'  Oth.  II,  i,  184;  'thy  parting  soul,'  1  Hen.  VI :  II,  v,  115;  'parting 
guest,'  Tro.  cV  Cres.  Ill,  iii,  166;  'a  falling  fabric,'  Cor.  Ill,  i,  247;  'this  breathing 
world,'  Rich.  Ill;  I,  i,  21;  'O  blessed  breeding  sun,'  Tim.  of  Ath.  IV,  iii,  I.  But 
in  the  following  passages  the  same  words  are  verbal  nouns  used  adjectively:  'a 
palmer's  walking-staff,'  Rich.  II:  III,  iii,  151;  'you  and  I  are  past  our  dancing 
days,'  Rom.  6°  Jul.  I,  v,  29 ;  '  you  ought  not  walk  Upon  a  laboring  day,'  Jul.  Cces. 
I,  i,  4;  'Give  him  that  parting  kiss,'  Cymb.  I,  iii,  34;  'what  store  of  parting  tears 
were  shed?'  Rich.  II:  I,  iv,  5;  'the  falling  sickness,'  Jul.  Cces.  I,  ii,  252;  'scarce 
a  breathing  while,'  Rich.  Ill:  I,  iii,  60;  'it  is  the  breathing  time  of  day  with  me,' 
Ham.  V,  ii,  165.  And  now  we  are  all  ready  for  '  kissing.'  In  the  following  passages 
it  is  the  participle:  'A  kissing  traitor,'  Love's  L.  L.  V,  ii,  592;  Cymb.  Ill,  iv,  164; 
'  O,  how  ripe  in  show  Thy  lips,  those  kissing  cherries,  tempting  grow,'  Mid.  N.  D, 
III,  ii,  140.  '  Kissing,'  in  the  last  passage,  might  be  taken  for  the  verbal  noun, 
meaning,  for  kissing,  or,  to  be  kissed;  but  it  must  here  be  understood  as  the  parti- 
ciple. Demetrius  speaks  of  the  lips  of  Helena  as  two  ripe  cherries  that  kiss,  or 
lightly  touch  each  other.  But  to  say  of  a  pair  of  beautiful  lips,  that  they  are  good 
kissing  lips,  would  convey  quite  a  different  meaning, — a  meaning,  however,  which 
nobody  would  mistake;  'kissing,'  in  such  expression,  is  the  verbal  noun  used  adjec- 
tively, and  equivalent  to  'for  kissing.'  And  so  the  word  is  used  in  the  present  pas- 
sage in  Hamlet.  That  is,  a  dead  dog  being,  not  a  carrion  good  at  kissing  (which 
would  be  the  sense  of  the  word  as  a  present  active  participle),  but  a  carrion  goo&  for 
kissing,  or,  to  be  kissed,  by  the  sun,  that  thus  breeds  a  plentiful  crop  of  maggots 
therein,  the  agency  of  'breed'  being  implied  in  'kissing.'     In  reading  this  speech, 

the  emphasis  should  be  upon  'kissing,'  and  not  upon  'carrion,'  the  idea  of  which 
13  * 


«50 


HAMLET 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Pol.     I  have,  my  lord. 

Ham.  Let  her  not  walk  i*  the  sun;  conception  is  a 
blessing ;  but  not  as  your  daughter  may  conceive : — Friend, 
look  to  't. 

Pol.  How  say  you  by  that  ?  [Aside]  Still  harping  on 
my  daughter ;  yet  he  knew  me  not  at  first ;  he  said  I  was  a 
fishmonger ;  he  is  far  gone,  far  gone ;  and  truly  in  my  youth 


185 


184.  but  not  as]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap. 
Steev.  '85,  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta. 
White,  Clarke,  Del.  Glo.  Mob.  but  as 
Qq,  Mai.  et  cet. 

conceive: — ]  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta. 
White,  conceaue,  Qq.  conceive.  Ff, 
Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Glo.  Mob.  conceive: 
Cap.  Steev.  '85.  conceive, —  Mai.  Steev. 
Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Cam.  Cla. 

186-190.  How. ..lord]  Verse,  ending 
daughter  ...fishmonger  ...youth ...  love ... 
again. ..lord.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 


186-190.  How... again."]  *  Aside'  by 
Cap.  Bos.  Coll.  El.  Sta.  White,  Glo.  +  , 
Dyce  ii. 

Still. ..again.]    First  marked  as 
'Aside'  by  Jen. 

187,  188.  he  said. ..he]  a  /aid.  ..a  Qq. 
but /aid. ..he  Q'76. 

187-190.  yet  he. ..again.]  'Aside'  by 
Pope  +  . 

188.  far  gone,  far  gone,]  farre  gone 
Qq,  Pope-f ,  Jen.  Cam.  Cla. 


last  word  is  anticipated  in  'dead  dog;'  in  other  words,  'kissing  carrion'  should  be 
read  as  a  compound  noun,  which,  in  fact,  it  is,  the  stress  of  sound  falling  on  the 
member  of  the  compound  which  bears  the  burden  of  the  moaning.  The  two  words 
might,  indeed,  be  hyphened,  like  '  Kissing-comfits,'  in  Merry  PVives,V,  v,  19.  The 
life-awakening  power  of  the  sun  is  expressed  in  the  following  passages,  which  com- 
mentators have  not  quoted,  I  believe,  in  illustration  of  the  passage  in  Hamlet :  '  By 
the  fire  That  quickens  Nilus'  slime,'  Ant.  &>  Cleo.  I,  iii,  69 ;  '  Your  serpent  of  Egypt 
is  bred  now  of  your  mud  by  the  operation  of  the  sun :  so  is  your  crocodile,'  II,  vii, 
26.  [This  note  is  so  exhaustive  and  so  conclusive  that,  although  the  interpretation 
which  it  offers  has  been  anticipated  by  Caldecott,  I  have  nevertheless  given  it  almost 
at  full  length.  Ed.] 

183.  sun]  Petri  (Archivf.  n.  Sprachen,  vol.  vi,  1849,  p.  94) :  This  phrase  must 
not  be  taken  too  literally;  it  means  merely  in  solem  et pulverem  prodire,  i.  e.  mingle 
with  the  world,  without  any  special  reference  to  the  sun-god. 

183.  conception]  Steevens:  There  is  a  quibble  here,  similar  to  that  in  Lear, 
I,  i,  12,  between  'conception,'  understanding,  and  'conceive,'  to  be  pregnant. 
Mcberly:  Understanding  is  a  blessing;  but  if  you  leave  your  daughter  unre- 
strained, she  will  understand  what  you  would  not  like.  Corson  :  He  says  what 
he  does  to  make  the  old- man  uneasy,  meaning  that  though  conception  is  a  bless- 
ing in  the  legitimate  way,  it  wouldn't  be  as  his  daughter  might  conceive, — out  of 
wedlock. 

186.  by  that]  For  instances  of  'by,'  meaning  '  about,' '  concerning,'  see  Abbott, 

$145. 

186-190.  Still . . .  again]  Maginn  (p.  244) :  Is  not  this  dialogue  in  blank  verse  ? 

This  speech  of  Polonius's  certainly  is.  [Maginn  then  divides  the  lines  at  'on,' 
« first,'  *  is,'  reading  the  next  two  lines,  'Far  gone,  far  gone;  and  truly  in  my  youth 
I  suffered  much  extremity  for  love.'] 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 5 1 

I  suffered  much  extremity  for  love;  very  near  this.     I'll 
speak  to  him  again. — What  do  you  read,  my  lord?  190 

Ham.    Words,  words,  words. 

Pol.    What  is  the  matter,  my  lord  ? 

Ham.     Between  who  ? 

Pol.     I  mean,  the  matter  that  you  read,  my  lord. 

Ham.  Slanders,  sir ;  for  the  satirical  rogue  says  here  that  195 
old  men  have  grey  beards,  that  their  faces  are  wrinkled, 
their  eyes  purging  thick  amber  .and  plum-tree  gum,  and 
that  they  have  a  plentiful  lack  of  wit,  together  with  most 
weak  hams ;  all  which,  sir,  though  I  most  powerfully  and 
potently  believe,  yet  I  hold  it  not  honesty  to  have  it  thus  200 
set  down ;  for  you  yourself,  sir,  should  be  old  as  I  am,  if  like 
a  crab  you  could  go  backward. 

190,  192.  lord?]  Lord.  Qq.  lock  F3F4. 

193.  who?']  who.  Qq.     whom  ?  Yj?%  198.  mosf]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt. 

F4,  Ro\ve  +  ,  Coll.  White.  201.  you  yourself]  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt. 

194.  that  you  read]  you  meane  FjF2.  Coil.  Dyce,  Sta  White,  Huds.  you  your 
you  mean  FF,  Cald.   you  read  Rowe.  felfe  Ff   {'/elf  F  F^).     your  f elf e  Qq. 

195.  rogue]  flave  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cald.  yourself  Pope  et  cet. 

Knt,  Dyce  i,  Del.  should  be  old]  /hall grow  old Qq, 

197.  and  plum-tree]  &•*  plum-tree  Qa  Cap.  Jen.  Cam.  shall  be  as  old  Rowe+, 
Q3QA*  or  Plum-Tree  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  Steev.  Cald.  shall  be  but  as  old  Han. 
White.  shall  grow  as  old  Mai.    should  grow  Sta. 

198.  lack]   lacke  Qq.      locke  FxFa. 

189.  extremity]  Moberly:  It  may  have  been  so;  but  one  rather  suspects  that 
Polonius's  love-reminiscences  are  like  those  of  Touchstone  in  As  You  Like  It, 
II,  iv. 

192.  matter]  Clarendon  :  See  line  95.  Hamlet  purposely  misunderstands  the 
word  to  mean  *  cause  of  dispute,'  as  in  Twelfth  Night,  III,  iv,  172. 

193.  who]  For  instances  of  neglect  in  the  inflection  of  who,  9ee  Macb.  Ill,  iv, 
42 ;  and  Abbott,  §  274. 

195.  satirical  rogue]  Warburton  :  He  refers  to  Juvenal,  Sat.  x,  188.  Farmer  : 
There  was  a  translation  of  this  satire  by  Sir  John  Beaumont,  elder  brother  of  the 
famous  Francis;  but  I  cannot  tell  whether  it  was  printed  in  Shakespeare's  time. 
Clarendon  :  It  is  at  least  as  probable,  without  attributing  to  Sh.  any  unusual  amount 
of  originality,  that  he  invented  this  speech  for  himself. 

201.  for  yourself]  Moberly  :  The  natural  reason  would  have  been, '  For  some 
time  I  shall  be  as  old  as  you  arcnow'  (and,  therefore,  I  take  such  sayings  as  prolep- 
tically  personal).  But  Hamlet  turns  it  to  the  opposite.  Corson:  It  is  not  likely 
that  Sh.  meant  that  Hamlet  should  talk  nonsense  here,  but  rather  that  he  should, 
express  himself  in  a  way  to  puzzle  the  old  man.  It  would  seem  that  *  old '  is  used,, 
not  as  opposed  to  '  young,'  but  as  denoting  age  in  general.  So  that  the  expression! 
re;tlly  means,  '  you  yourself,  sir,  should  be  young  as  I  am,  if,'  &c. 

201.  should]  Clarendon:  For  would,  as  in  III,  ii,  291.    See  Abbott,  §  322-. 


*  52  HAMLET  [ACTii,sc.fi. 

Pol.  [Aside]  Though  this  be  madness,  yet  there  is 
method  in't. — Will  you  walk  out  of  the  air,  my  lord  ? 

Ham.     Into  my  grave  ?  205 

Pol.  Indeed,  that  is  out  o'  the  air. — [Aside]  How  pregnant 
sometimes  his  replies  are  !  a  happiness  that  often  madness 
hits  on,  which  reason  and  sanity  could  not  so  prosperously 
be  delivered  of.  I  will  leave  him,  and  suddenly  contrive 
the  means  of  meeting  between  him  and  my  daughter. — M}'  210 
honourable  lord,  I  will  most  humbly  take  my  leave  of  you. 

Ham.  You  cannot,  sir,  take  from  me  any  thing  that  I 
will  more  willingly  part  withal ;  except  my  life,  except  my 
life,  except  my  life. 

203.  [Aside]  First  marked  by  Johns.  207.  often  madness]   madness    <iflen 

203,204.  Though.. . lord  ?]  Prose,  Qq.  Jen. 

Three  lines,  ending  madneffe...walke...  208.  reason  and  sanity]  Reafon  and 

lord?,  Ff.     Two  lines,  the  first  ending  Sanitie  Fx.     reafon  and  fanclily  Qq. 

in't  Rowe+,  Jen.  sanity  and  reason  Pope  + . 

203.  there  is]  there's  Rowe+,  Mai.  208,209.  so  prosperously  be]  so  hap- 
Steev.  Cald.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds.  pily  be  Q'76.  be  So  prosperously  Pope+. 

204.  in't]  in  it  Steev.  Cald.  Knt.  209    I  wilt]  Til  Pope +  . 

205.  grave  ?]  grave.  Qq,Theob.Warb.  209, 210.  and  suddenly. .Mm]  Om.Qq. 
Johns.  Glo.  +  .  209.  suddenly]  fodainely  FtF a. 

206-211.    Indeed. ..you.]   Prose,   Qq.  210,  211.  My. ..humbly]   My  lord,  I 

Eleven  irregular  lines,  ending  ayre,...  will  Qq. 

are?...happinejre...on,...not...of...him,..,  21 1.  most  humbly]  humbly  Knt. 

meeting.. .daughter.. .humbly. ..you*      Ff.  212.  sir]  Orii.  Qq. 

Nine,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  213.  will]  will  not  Qq. 

206.  Pol.]  Pol.  [Aside]  White.  213, 214*  except  my  life]  Three  times,. 
that  is]  thafs  Qq,  Jen.Cam.  Cla.  Qq.  except  my  life,  my  life.  Ff,  Rowe, 
d  the]  oth'  Ff  (0'  th'  Fx)  of  the  Knt.     except  my  life.  Pope  +  .     except 

Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Cam.  Cla.  my  life,  except  my  life,  my  life  Cald. 

[Aside]  Marked  first  by  Cap.  [Aside]  except. ..life.  White,  Huds. 

205.  grave]  Corson;.  Hamlet's  replies  to  those  persons  whom  he  dislikes  or 
despises,  the  King,  Polonius,  and  the  courtiers,  are  characterized  by  their  literalness. 

206.  pregnant]  Steevens  :  Ready,  dexterous,  apt.  Nares  :  Ingenious,  full  of 
art  or  intelligence.  Caldecott  :  Big  with  meaning.  *  Quick  and  pregnant  capaci- 
ties.'— Puttenham's  Arte  of  Poesie,  p.  154. 

213.  withal]  For  instances  of  the  emphatic  form  of  with  at  the  end  of  a  sentence, 
see  Abbott,  §  196. 

213.  except  my  life]  Coleridge  :  This  repetition  strikes  me  as  most  admirable. 
Collier  (ed.  2) :  Perhaps  these  repetitions  sometimes  originated  merely  with  the 
actors.  Staunton  :  To  us  it  is  evident  that  here,  as  in  other  places,  the  iteration, 
—a  well-known  symptom  of  intellectual  derangement, — is  purposely  adopted  by 
Hamlet  to  encourage  the  belief  of  his  insanity.  He  never  indulges  in  this  cuckoo* 
note  unless  with  those  whom  he  distrusts.  Clarke  :  Not  only  is  this  iteration  a 
part  of  Hamlet's  feigned  insanity,  but  it  is  profoundly  pathetic,  as  conveying  that  im» 


ACT  XI,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


Pol.     Fare  you  well,  my  lord. 
Ham.    These  tedious  old  fools! 


*53 
21S 


Enter  ROSENCRANTZ  and  GUILDENSTERN. 


Pol.    You  go  to  seek  the  Lord  Hamlet ;  there  he  is. 

Ros.     [To  Polonius']     God  save  you,  sir !         [Exit  Polonius. 

Guil.     My  honoured  lord  ! 

Ros.     My  most  dear  lord !  220 

Ham.   My  excellent  good  friends !    How  dost  thou,  Guild- 
enstern  ? — Ah,  Rosencrantz  ?     Good  lads,  how  do  ye  both  ? 

Ros.     As  the  indifferent  children  of  the  earth. 

Guil.     Happy,  in  that  we  are  not  over-happy; 
On  Fortune's  cap  we  are  not  the  very  button.  225 

Ham.    Nor  the  soles  of  her  shoe  ? 

Ros.     Neither,  my  lord. 


216.  Enter...]  As  in  Cap.  Enter 
Guylderfterne,and  Rofencraus.  Qq  (after 
line  214).  Enter  Rofincran  and  Guil- 
denflerne.  Ft.  Enter  Rofincros  and 
Guildenftar.  F3F3F,  (Guildenftare.  FJ. 
After  line  217,  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

217.  the  Lord]  my  Lord  Ff,  Rowe, 
Knt.     lord  Pope  + . 

218.  Scene  vi.  Pope +,  Jen. 
[To  Polonius]  Mai. 

[Exit    Polonius.]    Cap.      Exit. 
Pope  +  ,  Jen.  (after  line  217).  Ora.  QqFf. 

219.  My]  Mine  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt, 
Coll.  Dyce  i,  El.  Sta.  White,  Del. 

221,  222.  My. ..both']  Verse,  first  line 
ending  Guildenstem,  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 


221.  excellent]  extent  QgQ?  exelent  Q4. 

222.  Ah]  Q'76.  A  Qq.  Oh  Ff, 
Rowe+. 

ye]  you  Qq,  Cap.  Cam.  Cla. 

224.  225.  Happy... button.]  Arranged 
as  by  Han.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending 
top,  Q°i'     Prose,  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Sta. 

over-happy ;  On  Fortune's  cap 
we]  Han.  over-happy :  on  Fortune's 
Cap,  we  Ff,  Rowe+.  euer  happy  on 
Fortunes  lap,  We  Qq  {cap  Q'76). 

225.  On]  Of  Anon .* 

226.  soles]  Soales  F,FaF3.     Soals  F4. 
shoe  /]  Shoo  ?  Fs.     Shooe  ?  F3F3 

F^,  Rowe.     Jhooe.  Qq.     shooes  ?  Coll. 
(MS). 


pression  of  utter  life-weariness  which  besets  Hamlet  throughout.  Miles  (p.  31) : 
This  triple  wail  arrests  our  sympathy  just  as  it  is  about  to  side  with  Polonius,  by 
reminding  us  of  the  insignificance  of  the  pain  Hamlet  inflicts  when  weighed  against 
the  torture  he  endures. 

216.  Maginn:  Would  it  not  be  better,  'Thou  tedious  old  fool!' — it  is  plain 
that  Hamlet  is  thinking  only  of  the  troublesome  old  man  who  has  been  pestering 
him. 

217.  there  he  is]  Miles  (p.  31):  The  Premier's  advance  of  Rosencrantz  and 
Guildenstern  to  cover  his  own  retreat  is  exceedingly  humorous.  This  speech  is 
accented  just  as  if  he  had  said,.  •  You  go  to  seek  the  devil ;  there  he  is  /'  [Exit. 

222.  ye]  Corson  :  There  seems  to  be  a  certain  playfulness  in  '  ye/  which  is  not 
\n  you  of  Qq. 

223.  indifferent]  Capell  (i,  131) :  Middling.    Staunton  :  Medium,  average. 


'54 


HAMLET 


[act  12,  sc.  ii. 


Ham,     Then  you  live  about  her  waist,  or  in  the  middle 
of  her  favours? 

Guil.     'Faith,  her  privates  we.  230 

Ham.     In  the  secret  parts  of  Fortune?    Oh,  most  true; 
she  is  a  strumpet.     What's  the  news  ? 

Ros.  None,  my  lord,  but  that  the  world's  grown  honest. 

Ham.     Then  is  Doomsday  near;  but  your  news  is  not 
true.     Let  me  question  more  in  particular;  what  have  you,  23$ 
my  good  friends,  deserved  at  the  hands  of  Fortune,  that  she 
sends  you  to  prison  hither  ? 

Guil.     Prison,  my  lord  ? 

Ham.     Denmark's  a  prison. 

Ros,    Then  is  the  world  one.  240 

Ham*    A  goodly  one;  in  which  there  are  many  confines, 
wards,  and  dungeons ;  Denmark  being  one  o'  the  worst. 

Ros.    We  think  not  so,  my  lord. 

Ham.    Why,  then  'tis  none  to  you ;  for  there  is  nothing 
either  good  or  bad,  but  thinking  makes  it  so ;  to  me  it  is  a  245 
prison. 

Ros.     Why,  then  your  ambition  makes  it  one;  'tis  too 
narrow  for  your  mind. 

Ham.    O  God,  I  could  be  bounded  in  a  nut-shell,  and 
count  myself  a  king  of  infinite  space,  were  it  not  that  I  250 
have  bad  dreams. 


228.  waist]  Johns,  wafl  Qq.  ivajle 
Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap. 

229.  favours  ?]  Pope,  fauors.  Qqt 
favour  ?  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  White. 

230.  her]  in  her  Pope  ii  +  . 

232.  What's  the]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald. 
Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Glo.  +  .  What 
Qq,  et  cet. 

news  ?]  newes  P  QqFg.     newes. 
F„F,>     news.  F.. 

2      3  4 

233.  that]  Om.  Qq. 

234.  but]  fure  Q'76. 


235-263.  Letme...attended.]¥i.  Om. 
Qq. 

238.  lord?]  Ff,  Rowe,  Jen.  Knt. 
lord!  Pope,  et  cet. 

242.  <?'  the]  Dyce.  o'  th'  Ff.  of  the 
Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing, 
El.  Sta.  Ktly,  Del. 

244,  245.  Why. ..so;]  Two  lines  of 
verse,  the  first  ending  nothing?  Walker 
(Crit.  i,  19). 

251.  dad]  had  Mai, 


229.  favours]  White:  Considering  the  context,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
s  of  the  Qq  is  a  mere  superfluity.  *  Favour '  has  here  two  senses,  one  of  which  is 
person,  figure,  to  express  which  it  was  used  in  the  singular,  never  in  the  pluraL 

241.  confines]  Clarendon:  Places  of  confinement.  See  L  i,  155.  The  word 
generally  means  boundaries,  limits. 

251.  bad]  Nowhere,  I  believe,  is  there  any  allusion  to  Malone's  reading:  had. 
There  is  none  in  his  First,  or  Second  Appendix,  nor  in  the  Variorum  of  1821.    It  even 


act  ii.  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 55 

Guil.  Which  dreams,  indeed,  are  ambition ;  for  the  very 
substance  of  the  ambitious  is  merely  the  shadow  of  a  dream. 

Ham.     A  dream  itself  is  but  a  shadow. 

Ros.     Truly,  and  I  hold  ambition  of  so  airy  and  light  a  255 
quality  that  it  is  but  a  shadow's  shadow. 

Ham.  Then  are  our  beggars  bodies,  and  our  monarchs 
and  outstretched  heroes  the  beggars'  shadows.  Shall  we  to 
the  court  ?  for,  by  my  fay,  I  cannot  reason. 

Ros.  Guil.     We'll  wait  upon  you.  260 

Ham.  No  such  matter ;  I  will  not  sort  you  with  the  rest 
of  my  servants ;  for,  to  speak  to  you  like  an  honest  man,  I 
am  most  dreadfully  attended.  But,  in  the  beaten  way  of 
friendship,  what  make  you  at  Elsinore  ? 

259.  the  court']  Cap.     th*  Court  Ff.  264,  352.  Elsinore]  Mai.     Elfonoure 
fay]  Pope,    fey  Ff.                              Qq.     Elfonower  Fx.    Elfinooer  F2.    El- 

260.  Ros.  Guil.]  Cap.     Both.  Ff.  ftnoore  F3F4. 
264.  friendship,]  friendfliip^  FaF  F4. 

escaped  the  almost  unerring  scrutiny  of  the  Cam.  Edd.,  who  recorded  it,  it  is  true, 
but  as  the  conjecture  of  an  anonymous  critic.  It  is  probably  a  typographical  error, 
—a  happy  one,  it  must  be  confessed;  much  can  be  said  in  its  favor.  Ed. 

253.  shadow  of  a  dream]  Johnson:  Sh.  has  accidentally  inverted  the  ex- 
pression of  Pindar,  that  the  state  of  humanity  is  CKtae  bvap,  the  dream  of  a 
shadow.  ['E:rd/zcpo4  ■  ri  5s  rtg;  ri  <F  ov  rict  onia$  bvap  avdpunoQ. — Pythia,  viii,  135 
(ed.  Schneidewin).    But,  as  Collier  says,  Sh.  applies  it  only  to  the  *  ambitious.'  Ed.] 

257.  beggars  bodies]  Coleridge:  I  do  not  understand  this;  and  Sh.  seems  to 
have  intended  the  meaning  to  be  not  more  than  snatched  at. — •  By  my  fay,  I  cannot 
reason.'  Caldecott  :  At  this  rate,  and  if  it  be  true  that  lofty  aims  are  no  more  than 
air,  our  beggars  only  have  the  nature  of  substance  ;  and  our  monarchs  and  those  who 
are  blazoned  so  far  abroad  as  to  be  thought  materially  to  fill  so  much  space,  are,  in 
fact,  shadows,  and  in  imagination  only  gigantic.  Hudson  :  Hamlet  loses  himself  in 
the  riddles  he  is  making.  The  meaning,  however,  seems  to  be :  our  beggars  can  at 
least  dream  of  being  kings  and  heroes ;  and  if  the  substance  of  such  ambitious  men 
is  but  a  dream,  and  if  a  dream  is  but  a  shadow,  then  our  kings  and  heroes  are  but 
the  shadows  of  our  beggars.  BUCKNILL  (p.  76) :  If  ambition  is  but  a  shadow,  some- 
thing beyond  ambition  must  be  the  substance  from  which  it  is  thrown.  If  ambition, 
represented  by  a  king,  is  a  shadow,  the  antitype  of  ambition,  represented  by  a  beggar, 
must  be  the  opposite  of  the  shadow,  that  is,  the  substance.  Moberly  :  If  ambition 
is  the  shadow  of  pomp,  and  pomp  the  shadow  of  a  man,  then  the  only  true  substantial 
men  are  beggars,  who  are  strict  of  all  pomp  and  of  all  ambition. 

258.  outstretched]  Delius  :  Hamlet  is  thinking  of  the  strutting  stage  heroes. 

259.  fay]  Clarendon  :  A  corruption  probably  of  the  French  foi,  which  in  its 
earlier  forms  was  feid,feit,  fey,  fe.  Or  it  may  be  an  abbreviation  of  •  faith.*  Corn-. 
pare  Rom.  6°  Jul.  I,  v,  124. 

263.  attended]  Delius:  My  retinue,  my  service,  is  detestable.  Hudson:  Prob- 
ably referring  to  the  '  bad  dreams '  already  spoken  of. 


156 


HAMLET 


[ACT  II,  sc.  ii. 


Ros.    To  visit  you,  my  lord ;  no  other  occasion.  265 

Ham.  Beggar  that  I  am,  I  am  even  poor  in  thanks ;  but 
I  thank  you  ;  and  sure,  dear  friends,  my  thanks  are  too  dear 
a  halfpenny.  Were  you  not  sent  for?  Is  it  your  own 
inclining?  Is  it  a  free  visitation?  Come,  deal  justly  with 
me  ;  come,  come ;  nay,  speak.  270 

Guil.    What  should  we  say,  my  lord  ? 

Ham.  Why,  any  thing,  but  to  the  purpose.  You  were 
sent  for ;  and  there  is  a  kind  of  confession  in  your  looks, 
which  your  modesties  have  not  craft  enough  to  colour.  I 
know  the  good  king  and  queen  have  sent  for  ycu.  275 

Ros.    To  what  end,  my  lord  ? 

Ham.  That  you  must  teach  me.  But  let  me  conjure  you, 
by  the  rights  of  our  fellowship,  by  the  consonancy  of  our 


266.  even]  euer  Qq. 

268.  a  halfpenny]  of  a  halfpenny 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns,  at  a  halfpenny 
Han.  Cap. 

269.  Come,  deaf]  come,  come,  deale  Qq, 
Jen.  Steev.Var.  Cald.  Coll.  Sing.  El. 
White,  Ktly,  Del. 

272.   Why]    Om.  Qq,   Pope  +  ,  Cap. 


Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Ktly. 

272.  any  thing,  but]  Q'76.   anything 
but  Qq.     any  thing.    But  Ff,  Knt. 

purpose.    You]  purpofe you  Q'  7  6. 

273.  of]  Om.  FtF2. 

278.  our  fellowship]  your  felloufhip 
F3F4.     our  fellowfJiips  Q'76. 


263.  beaten]  CaldecotT:  The  plain  track,  the  open  and  unceremonious 
course. 

266.  Beggar]  Elze  :  Hamlet  likes  to  represent  himself  as  a  very  poor,  insignifi- 
cant, and  uninfluential  person. 

267.  thanks]  Tschischwitz  :  My  thanks,  which  are  insincere,  are  worth  no 
more  than  your  false  protestations  of  friendship ;  nevertheless,  in  thanking  you,  I 
give  you  too  much,  since  you  deserve  to  be  treated  as  rogues.  Moberlv  :  You 
have  had  to  buy  my  *  beggarly  thanks '  too  dear  by  taking  so  much  trouble  as  to 
come  here. 

268.  a  halfpenny]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  259)  :  Until  it  can  be  shown  that « dear  & 
halfpenny '  is  English,  I  should  certainly  prefer  *  dear  at  a  halfpenny.'  Claren- 
don :  There  is  no  need  of  change.  Compare  Chaucer,  Cant.  Tales,  8875  :  « dere 
y-nough  a  jane '  (/.  e.  a  coin  of  Genoa) ;  and  12723,  *  deere  y-nough  a  leeke.'  Also, 
« too  late  a  week,'  As  You  Like  It,  II,  iii,  74. 

272.  but]  Staunton  :  That  is,  only  to  the  purpose.  Clarke  :  It  here  signifies 
'  only  let  it  be ;'  while  it  includes  the  effect  of  '  except,'  and  therefore  conveys  the 
covert  sarcasm  felt  by  Hamlet. 

274.  modesties]  Delius  :  A  jocose  style  of  address,  like  « your  majesties.' 
Elze  :  It  is  simply  the  plural  of  the  abstract  noun,  in  accordance  with  a  usage  com- 
mon to  Sh.  and  all  English  writers.  See  '  I  am  doubtful  of  your  modesties.' — Tarn, 
of  Sh.,  Ind.,  i.  94.     [See  I,  i,  173.] 

278.  consonancy]  Clarendon:  See  line  n  of  this  scene. 


ACT  XI.  sail]      0Uy^  HAMLET  \tf 

youth,  bv  the  obligation  of  our  ever-preserved  love,  and  by 
what  more  dear  a  better  proposer  could  charge  you  withal,  be  280 
even  and  direct  with  me,  whether  you  were  sent  for,  or  no. 

Ros.     [Aside  to  Giiili]  What  say  you  ? 

Ham.    [Aside]  Nay,  then  I  have  an  eye  of  you. — If  you 
love  me,  hold  not  off. 

Guil.    My  lord,  we  were  sent  for.  285 

/Heat!..     I  .wilt-tell  you  why ;  so  shall  my  anticipation  pre- 

279.  ever-preserved]  ever  preferred  282.  [Aside  to  Guil.]  Glo.  +  ,  Dyce 
Q'76.                                                               ii,  Huds.    To  Guildcn.  Theob.  et  cet. 

280.  could]  can  Qq.  Om.  Del. 

charge]  change  Qj.  283,  284.  Ham.  Nay. ..off.]  Om.  Jen. 

you  withal]  youth  withal  White.  283.  [Aside]  Steev.     Om.  Del. 

281.  no.]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Han.  Jen.  of  you. — ]  Coll.  of  you  :  FfQ2. 
Ktly,  Cam.  Del.  Huds.    no  ?  Fopc,  et  of  you  ?  Q,.     cfyou,Q4Q- 

cet. 

279,280.  by... withal]  Tschisckwitz  :  The  addition  of  *  withal'  ought  to  have 
revealed  to  modern  editors  the  error  of  the  old  text ;  no  explanation  is  offered  by 
them  of  the  use  of  two  prepositions  for  one  object.  It  is  evident  that,  after  using 
« by* -three  times,  the  climax  is  reached  only  by  using  it  as  a  substantive  in  the  last 
clause;  the  sense  therefore  is :  « with  what  more  dear  " by"  a  better  proposer  could 
charge  you.'  [Thus  the  pure  English  of  William  Shakespeare  is  amended  by  Benno 
Tschischwitz !  Ed.] 

280.  proposer]  Caldecott  :  An  advocate  of  more  address  in  shaping  his  aims, 
who  could  make  a  stronger  appeal. 

282.  What  say  you  ?]  Delius  :  Perhaps  this  question  is  addressed  to  Hamlet, 
in  order  to  gain  time  and  evade,  if  possible,  a  direct  answer.  Furthermore,  I  doubt 
if  Sh.  intended  Hamlet's  reply  to  be  spoken  as  an  Aside.  Nowhere  does  Hamlet 
take  much  pains  to  conceal  the  distrust  with  which  he  regards  these  false  friends, 
and  he  does  not  hesitate  here  to  let  them  see  that  he  has  an  eye  on  them. 

283.  an  eye  of  you]  Steevens  :  A  glimpse  of  your  meaning.  Caldecott  : 
An  eye  upon  or  after  you;  a  sharp  lookout.  ['OP  is  used  for  on.  See  II,  ii, 
27.  Ed.] 

286.  prevent]  Caldecott:  That  is,  be  beforehand  with  your  discovery,  and  the 
plume  and  gloss  of  your  secret  pledge  be  in  no  feather  shed  or  tarnished.  Claren- 
don :  That  is,  anticipate,  and  so  stop.  Hudson  :  Hamlet's  fine  sense  of  honor  is 
well  shown  in  this.  He  will  not  tempt  them  to  any  breach  of  confidence ;  by  telling 
them  the  reason,  he  will  forestall  and  prevent  their  disclosure  of  it. 

286.  Straciiey  (p.  53) :  This  speech,  like  all  others  of  the  same  kind  throughout 
the  rest  of  the  play,  is  in  prose.  That  the  inferior  interlocutors  in  the  dialogue 
speak  in  prose  also  is,  of  course,  sufficiently  explained  by  the  natural  tendency  of 
every  man  to  carry  on  a  conversation  in  the  tone  which  the  chief  speaker  gives  it. 
But  why  Hamlet  himself  speaks  prose  is  explained  by  comparing  his  prose  with  his 
verse  speeches.  We  then  find  that  he  always  returns  to  verse  as  the  language  of 
his  practical  life,  whether  in  relation  to  feeling  or  to  action ;  whereas,  while  he 
speaks  prose,  he  is  uttering  the  thoughts  of  the  bystander  and  looker-on,  contemplat* 

H 


1 58  HAMLET  [ACT  11,  SC.  ii. 

vent  your  discovery,  and  your  secrecy  to  the  king  and  queen  287 
moult  no  feather.  I  have  of  late, — but  wherefore  I  know  not, 
— lost  all  my  mirth,  forgone  all  custom  of  exercises ;  and  in- 
deed it  goes  so  heavily  with  my  disposition  that  this  goodly  290 
frame,  the  earth,  seems  to  me  a  sterile  promontory ;  this  most 
excellent  canopy,  the  air,  look  you,  this  brave  o'erhanging 
firmament,  this  majestical  roof  fretted  with  golden  fire, — why, 

287 ,288.  discovery ; and... queen  moult]  Cap.  (Corrected  in  Errata). 

'ifcovery of "...Queen :  moult  Yi.  discovery  290.  heavily']  heavenly  Ff. 

of.. .queen.   Moult  Knt.  292.  overhanging]  ore-hanged  Q,Q-» 

288.  feather.     I]  Pope,    feather :  J  derchanging  Jen. 

Q'76,  Rowe.    feather ;  I  QqFf.  293.  firmament]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald. 

289.  exercises]  exercife  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,         Knt  i. 

ing,  or  aiming  at  contemplating,  the  world,  with  the  cold  passionless  eye  of  the 
intellect.  I  say  aiming  at  contemplating,  for  Hamlet  is  too  young  and  ardent,  and 
his  griefs  are  too  fresh,  for  his  skepticism  to  become  the  real  habit  of  his  soul ;  and, 
accordingly,  we  see  a  bitter  self-consciousness  working  up  through  it  at  every  mo- 
ment. Still,  in  as  far  as  it  is  the  looking  on  of  a  spectator,  and  not  the  participa- 
tion of  an  actor,  it  is  passionless,  at  least  in  form, — the  reading  out  of  a  book,  rather 
than  the  utterance  of  living  speech. 

287.  discovery]  Abbott,  §  439  :  This  is  often  used  for  uncovering,  i.  e.  unfold, 
whether  literally  or  metaphorically.  Here  *  render  your  ^-closure  needless  by 
anticipation.' 

289.  lost]  Warburton  :  This  is  artfully  imagined  to  hide  the  true  cause  of  his 
disorder  from  the  penetration  of  these  spies. 

289.  exercises]  Tieck  {Krit.  Schriften,  iii,  280) :  We  must  not  take  too  liter- 
ally what  Hamlet  says  here,  else  it  contradicts  what  he  says  to  Horatio,  V,  ii,  198, 
that  he  had  been  in  continual  practice  since  Laertes  went  into  France. 

291.  promontory]  Moberly  :  Thrust  out  into  the  dread  ocean  of  the  unknown, 
and  as  barren  as  the  waves  themselves. 

292.  brave  o'erhanging]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  38)  thinks  these  words  should  be 
hyphened.  The  Folio's  omission  of  *  firmament'  probably  originated  in  the  similar 
commencements  firmament,  fretted. 

293.  firmament]  Knight  :  Using  '  o'erhanging '  as  a  substantive,  and  omitting 
1  firmament,'  the  sentence  is,  perhaps,  less  eloquent,  but  more  coherent.  The  air  is 
the  canopy;  the  o'erhanging;  the  majestical  roof.  Here  there  are  three  distinct 
references  to  the  common  belief  of  the  three  regions  of  air.  Ben  Jonson,  in  his 
description  of  the  scenery  of  the  Masque  of  Hymen,  has  this  passage  :  'A  cortine  of 
painted  clouds  .  .  .  opening,  revealed  the  three  regions  of  air;  in  the  highest  of 
which  sat  Juno,  .  .  .  her  feet  reaching  to  the  lowest,  where  was  a  rainbow,  and  within 
it  airy  spirits,  their  habits  . .  .  resembling  the  several  colours  caused  in  that  part  of  the 
air  by  reflection.  The  midst  was  all  of  dark  and  condensed  clouds?  &c.  The  '  canopy,' 
%ve  believe,  is  the  lowest  region  of  '  colors  caused  by  reflection;'  the  'o'erhanging,' 
the  midst  of  'dark  and  condensed  clouds;'  the  'majestical  roof  fretted,'  &c.,  the 
highest,  where  Juno  sat.  The  air,  in  its  three  regions,  appears  to  Hamlet  no  other 
thing  '  than  a  foul  and  pestilent  congregation  of  vapors.'     If  this  interpretation  be 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


*59 


it  appears  no  other  thing  to  me  than  a  foul  and  pestilent , 
congregation  of  vapours.    What,  3J2J£C^  Cj£jy°rk  fc  P^"  !  ?95 
how  noble  in  reason !  how  infinite  in  faculty !  in  form  and 
moving,  how  express  and  admirable !  in  action,  how  like  an 
angel !  in  apprehension,  how  like  a  god !  the  beauty  of  the 
world !  the  paragon  of  animals !    And  yet,  to  me,  what  is  this 
quintessence  of  dust  ?  man  delights  not  me ;  no,  nor  woman  300 
neither,  though  by  your  smiling  you  seem  to  say  so. 
Ros.     My  lord,  there  was  no  such  stuff  in  my  thoughts. 


294.  appears]  appeares  Fx.  appeared 
F2F3F4.  appeareth  Q3Q3,  Jen.  Coll.  El. 
appearth  Q4QS» 

no  other  thing  to  me  than]  no- 
thing to  me  but  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  El. 

295.  What  a  piece]  What  peece  Qq. 
man]  Q^Q'76,  Dyce  ii.   a  man 

QqFf  et  cet. 

296.  faculty]  Ff,  Rowe,  Bos.  Knt, 
Dyce  i,  Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Del.  Mob.  faculties 
Qq  et  cet. 

296-299.  The  only  punctuation  in  Qq 
is  reaf on,.,  f acuities,.. .moouing,...ac?ion, 


...apprehenfion,...God  :... world ;...Anni- 
males ;  In  the  Ff, — Reaf on  ? ...faculty  f 
...admirable  ?  ...Aclion,...Angel  ?... appre- 
henfion,.. .God  P. ..world,.. .Animals  ; 
298.  apprehension]  apprehensions] en, 
how... god]  Om.  Q'76. 

300.  no]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen. 
Mai.  Steev.  Cald. 

woman]  women  Q2Q3> 

301.  seem]  fee  me  F2  (a  manifest  mis- 
print). 

[Ros.  smiles]  Coll.  ii. 


correct,  the  word  'firmament,'  which  is  applied  to  the  heavens  generally,  was 
rejected  by  Sh.  as  conveying  an  image  unsuited  to  that  idea  of  a  part  which  is  con- 
veyed by  the  substantive, '  overhanging? 

293.  fretted]  Malone  :  See  Son.  xxi.  Clarendon  :  From  A.  S.  frcetwian,  to 
adorn.  Compare  Cymb.  II,  iv,  $8.  l  Fret '  is  an  architectural  term,  which  Sh.  em- 
ploys in  a  looser  sense.  Bacon,  in  the  following  passage,  uses  it  more  strictly :  *  For 
if  that  great  workmaster  had  been  of  an  human  disposition,  he  would  have  cast  the 
stars  into  some  pleasant  and  beautiful  works  and  orders,  like  the  frets  in  the  roofs  of 
houses ;  whereas  one  can  scarce  find  a  posture  in  square,  or  triangle,  or  straight  line, 
amongst  such  an  infinite  number.' — Adv.  of  Learning,  ii,  14,  §  9. 

295.  man]  Walker  (Cril.  i,  91)  gives  this,  amongst  others,  as  an  instance  of 
the  interpolation  of  a  in  Fx.  Dyce  (ed.  2) :  The  Qq  have:  '  What  peece  of  worke 
is  a  man,' — the  '  a'  having  been  shuffled  out  of  its  place.  In  the  Ff,  instead  of  the 
proper  transposition,  a  second  'a'  was  inserted :  *  What  a  piece  of  worke  is  a  man.* 
The  Quarto  of  1637  has,  «  What  a  piece  a  worke  is  man  1'     [See  line  386.] 

297.  express]  Clarendon  :  Exact,  fitted  to  its  purpose,  as  the  seal  fits  the  stamp. 
In  Hebrews,  i,  3,  *  express  image '  is  the  rendering  of  xaPaKT^lP' 

299.  paragon]  Clarendon  :  Cotgrave  renders  the  French  word  by  '  A  paragon, 
or  peereless  one;  the  perfection,  or  flower  of;  the  most  complete,  most  absolute,  most 
excellent  peece,  in  any  kind  whatsoeuer.'     See  Two  Gent.  II*  iv,  146. 

300.  quintessence]  Clarendon  :  A  term  in  alchemy,  signifying  the  subtle  es- 
sence which  remained  after  the  four  elements,  earth,  air,  (ire,  and  water,  had  been 
removed  from  any  substance. 


V 


*\ 


V 


1 60  HAMLET  [act  ix,  sc  ii 

Ham.    Why  did  you   laugh,  then,  when  1  said  'man 
delights  not  me '  ? 

Ros.    To  think,  my  lord,  if  you  delight  not  in  man,  what  305 
lenten  entertainment  the  players  shall  receive  from  you; 
we  coted  them  on  the  way ;  and  hither  are  they  coming,  to 
offer  you  service. 

Ham.     He  that  plays  the  king  shall  be  welcome;  his 
majesty  shall  have  tribute  of  me;  the  adventurous  knight  3 10 

303.  you']  yes  Qq.  quoted  Jen.  conj. 

then]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe-K  307.  hither]  /tether  Qq. 

306.  lenten]  Q'76.    Lent  on  QqFf.  are  they]  are  the  Q.QS^ 

307.  coted]  coated  Ff,Ca\d.  met Qrj6,  3  JO.  of  me]  on  me  Qq. 
accosted    Rowe  +  ,    Jen.      'costed   Cap. 

306.  lenten]  Steevens:  Sparing,  like  the  entertainments  given  in  Lent. 
Collier  :  Such  entertainment  as  players  met  with  in  Lent,  when  they  were 
often  not  allowed  to  perform.  This  explanation  Dyce  (Gloss.)  pronounces  erro- 
neous. Halliwell:  Our  ancestors  seem  to  have  used  this  adjective  constantly  in 
a  sense  of  deterioration.  Cotgrave  defines  '  Amoureux  de  caresme :  A  Lenten  louer ; 
a  bashfull,  modest,  or  maidenly  woer;  one  thats  afraid  to  touch  his  mistresse.' 

307.  coted]  Steevens:  Overtook.  In  The  Return  from  Parnassus,  1606:  *  marry 
we  presently  coted  and  outstript  them.'  *  In  the  laws  of  coursing,'  says  Toilet,  *  a 
cote  is  when  a  greyhound  goes  endways  by  the  side  of  his  fellow,  and  gives  the 
hare  a  turn.'  Nares  :  To  pass  by,  to  pass  the  side  of  another.  It  was  a  common 
sporting  term.  '  Each  man  .  .  .  notes  "Which  dog  first  turns  the  hare,  which  first 
the  other  coats.' — Drayton,  Polyolb.  xxiii,  p.  11 15.  Caldecott- cites  from  Golding's 
translation  of  Ovid,  Met.  B,  x :  '"With  that  Hippomenes  coted  her'  (where  the 
original  has  'preterit').  Dyce  (Gloss.)'.  Compare  what  Rosencrantz  afterwards 
says  of  these  players,  III,  i,  17:  *  certain  players.  We  o'er-raught  (overtook,  over- 
passed) on  the  way.'  Anonymous  (New  Shakespearian  Interpretations.  Edin. 
Rev.  Oct.  1872) :  Cote,  in  the  language  of  venery,  is  applied  to  a  brace  of  grey- 
hounds slipped  together  at  the  stag  or  hare,  and  means  that  one  of  the  dogs  outstrips 
the  other  and  reaches  the  game  first.  Thus  we  find  in  Turbervile :  *  In  coursing  at 
a  Deare,  if  one  Greyhound  go  endwayes  by  [that  is  beyond]  another,  it  is  accoumpted 
a  Cote.'  Again,  '  In  coursing  at  the  Hare,  it  is  not  materiall  which  dog  kylleth  her 
(which  hunters  call  bearing  of  an  Hare),  but  he  that  giveth  most  Cotes,  or  most 
tumes,  winneth  the  wager.  A  Cote  is  when  a  Greyhound  goeth  endwayes  by  his 
fellow  and  giveth  the  Hare  a  turn  (which  is  called  setting  a  Hare  about),  but  if  he 
coast  and  so  come  by  his  fellow,  that  is  no  Cote.  Likewise,  if  one  Greyhound  doe 
go  by  another,  and  then  be  not  able  to  reach  the  Hare  himselfe  and  turne  her,  this 
is  but  stripping,  and  no  Cote.'  To  cote  is  thus  not  simply  to  overtake,  but  to  over- 
pass, to  outstrip,  this  being  the  distinctive  meaning  of  the  term.  Going  beyond  is 
the  essential  point,  the  term  being  usually  applied  under  circumstances  where  over- 
taking is  impossible, — to  dogs  who  start  together  and  run  abreast  until  the  cote  takes 
place.  So  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern,  having  coted  the  players  in  their  way, 
reach  the  palace  first,  and  have  been  for  some  time  in  conversation  with  Hamlet 
before  the  strolling  company  arrives. 


act  II,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 6l 

shall  use  his  foil  and  target;  the  lover  shall  not  sigh  gratis;  311 
the  humorous  man  shall  end  his  part  in  peace;  the  clown 
shall  make  those  laugh  whose  lungs  are  tickle  o*  the  sere, 

311,  sigh\  ftng  QQ.  313.  tickle]  Sta.  conj.  Nicholson,  Cla. 

312,  313.  the  clown. ..sere,]  Om.  Qq,         Mob.     tickled Ff  et  cet. 

Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Johns.  J  the]  a'  th'  Fx.     atV  FaF3F4. 

312.  humorous]  Caldecott:  The  fretful  or  capricious  man  shall  vent  the  whole 
of  his  spleen  undisturbed.  Staunton  :  Not  the  funny  man,  or  jester, — he  was  termed 
'  the  clown,' — but  the  actor  who  personated  the  fantastic  characters,  known  in  Shake- 
speare's time  as  '  humourists,'  and  who,  for  the  most  part,  were  represented  as 
capricious  and  quarrelsome.  Delius  :  Such  characters  as  Faiilconbridge,  Jaques, 
and  Mercutio.     The  ■  clown  '  is  next  referred  to. 

313.  tickle  o'  the  sere]  Capell  [Gloss,  s. v.  sere):  Tickled,  or  delighted  with  the 
dry  jokes  of  the  character  spoken  of.  Steevens  :  That  is,  those  who  are  asthmatical, 
and  to  whom  laughter  is  most  uneasy.  This  is  the  case  (I  am  told)  with  those 
whose  lungs  are  tickled  by  the  sere  or  serum.  Malone  :  The  word  '  sere '  I  am 
unable  to  explain,  and  suspect  it  to  be  corrupt.  Perhaps  we  should  read  :  •  tickled 
o'  the  scene,1  i.  e.  by  the  scene.  Douce  :  The  same  expression  occurs  m  Howard's 
Defensative  against  the  poyson  of  supposed  prophecies,  1620:  'Discovering  the 
moods  and  humors  of  the  vulgar  sort  to  be  so  loose  and  tickle  of  the  seare,'  &c, 
fol.  31.  Every  one  has  felt  that  dry  tickling  in  the  throat  and  lungs  which  excites 
coughing.  Hamlet's  meaning  may  be,  '  the  clown  shall  convert  even  their  coughing 
into  laughter.'  White  :  The  whole  speech  is  ironical,  and  here,  as  in  his  famous 
directions  to  the  players,  Hamlet  is  severest  upon  the  Clown,  who,  he  says,  will  have 
to  be  content  with  such  semblance  of  laughter  as  comes  from  those  who  are  tickled 
not  by  his  jokes,  but  by  a  dry  cough, — '  o'  the  sere.'  Staunton  :  Correctly,  per- 
haps, •  tickle  o'  the  sere.'  It  appears  to  signify  those  easily  moved  to  the  expression 
of  mirth.  Halliwell  :  Light  of  the  seare  is  equivalent  to  light-heeled,  loose  in 
character.  Tickle  of  the  sear,  wanton,  immodest.  In  the  present  passage  it  means 
those  whose  lungs  are  wanton,  or  excited  to  laughter  by  coarse  ribaldry.  See  the 
following  (cited  by  Steevens) :  '  She  that .  .  .  wyll  abyde  whysperynge  in  the  eare, 
Thynke  ye  her  tayle  is  not  lyght  of  the  seare.' — Commune  Secretary  and  Jalowsye, 
n.'d.  [ed.  Hindley,  vol.  i,  p.  41].  Nicholson  {N.  &>  Qu.  22  July,  1871) :  The 
sere,  or,  as  it  is  now  spelt,  sear  (or  scear)  of  a  gun-lock  is  the  bar  or  balance-level 
interposed  between  the  trigger  on  the  one  side,  and  the  tumbler  and  other  mechanism 
on  the  other,  and  is  so  called  from  its  acting  the  part  of  a  serre,  or  talon,  in  gripping 
that  mechanism  and  preventing  its  action.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  paul  or  stop-catch.  When 
the  trigger  is  made  to  act  on  one  end  of  it,  the  other  end  releases  the  tumbler,  the 
mainspring  acts,  and  the  hammer,  rlint,  or  match  falls.  Hence  Lombard  (1596),  as 
quoted  in  Halliwell'.'j  Archaic  Diet.,  says,  '  Even  as  a  pistole  that  is  ready  charged 
and  bent  will  flie  off  by-and-by,  if  a  man  do  but  touch  the  seare?  Now  if  the  lock 
be  so  made  of  purpose,  or  be  worn,  or  be  faulty  in  construction,  this  sear,  or  grip, 
may  be  so  tickle  or  ticklish  in  its  adjustment  that  a  slight  touch  or  even  jar  may  dis- 
place it,  and  then,  of  course,  the  gun  goes  off.  Hence  '  light,'  or  '  tickle  of  the 
sear'  (equivalent  to,  like  a  hair-trigger),  applied  metaphorically,  means  that  which 
can  be  started  into  action  at  a  mere  touch,  or  on  the  slightest  provocation,  or  on 

what  ought  to  be  no  provocation  at  all.    Clarendon  :  The  real  meaning  is  just  the  re- 
14*  L 


162  HAMLET  [act  ii,  so  it 

and  the  lady  shall  say  her  mind  freely,  or  the  blank  verse 
shall  halt  for 't.     What  players  are  they  ?  315 

Ros.     Even  those  you  were  wont  to  take  such  delight 
in,  the  tragedians  of  the  city. 

Ham.     How  chances  it  they  travel  ?  their  residence,  both 
in  reputation  and  profit,  was  better  both  ways. 

Ros.     I  think  their  inhibition  comes  by  the  means  of  the  320 
late  innovation. 

314.  blank~\  black  Q2Q3-  318.  travel]  trauaile  QqF,F?. 

316.  such]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt,  319.  was]  were  Anon.* 
Dyce  i,  Glo.  320.  the  means']  means  Johns. 

317.  in,  the]  in  the  FXF2F  .  321.  innovation.]     innovation?     Ft, 

318.  they]  the  Q4Q5-  Rowe. 

verse  of  '  those  to  whom  laughter  is  most  uneasy.'  In  old  matchlock  muskets  the  sear 
and  trigger  were  in  one  piece.  This  is  proved  by  a  passage  from  Barret's  Theorike 
and  Practike  of  Modern  Warres,  1598,  p.  33  [35]  :  '  drawing  down  the  serre  with 
the  other  three  fingers.'  He  has  given  directions  for  holding  the  stock  between  the 
thumb  and  forefinger.  It  is  clear  that  Hamlet  did  not  anticipate  much  from  the  wit 
of  the  clown,  or  from  the  players  generally. 

314.  lady]  Johnson:  The  lady  shall  have  no  obstruction,  unless  from  the  lame- 
ness of  the  verse.  Henderson  :  The  lady  shall  mar  the  measure  of  the  verse  rather 
than  not  express  herself  freely  or  fully.  Seymour:  If  the  lady,  through  affectation 
of  delicacy,  should  suppress  anything,  her  omission  will  be  detected  in  the  lameness 
of  the  metre. 

317.  city]  Delius  :  By  «city'  Shakespeare's  public  at  once  understood  London. 

318.  travel]  Malone:  A  technical  word,  for  which  we  have  substituted  stroll. 
320.  inhibition]  '  What  "  inhibition  "  ?'  asks  Theobald  {Nichols,  Lit.  Hist,  ii, 

562).  'If  Rosencrans  meant  to  answer  Hamlet's  question  closely,  methinks  it 
should  be  itineration.''  This  is  not  repeated  in  Theobald's  ed.  Johnson  :  Hamlet 
inquires  not  about  an  '  inhibition,'  but  an  '  innovation ;'  the  answer  probably  was  : 
— '  I  think  their  innovation,'  that  is,  their  new  practice  of  strolling,  '  comes  by 
means  of  the  late  inhibition.'  Steevens  :  Any  change  in  the  order  of  the  words 
is  quite  unnecessary.  Rosencrantz  means  that  their  permission  to  act  any  longer  at 
an  established  house  is  taken  away  in  consequence  of  the  new  custom  of  introdu- 
cing personal  abuse  into  their  comedies.  Several  companies  of  actors  in  the  time 
of  Sh.  were  silenced  on  account  of  this  licentious  practice.  Malone  :  Sh.  could 
not  mean  to  charge  his  friends,  the  old  tragedians,  with  the  new  custom  of  introdu- 
cing personal  abuse,  but  rather  must  have  meant,  that  the  old  tragedians  were  in- 
hibited from  performing  in  the  city  and  obliged  to  travel  on  account  of  the  miscon- 
duct of  the  younger  company.  And  he  could  not  have  directed  his  satire  at  those 
young  men  who  played  occasionally  at  his  own  theatre.  Jonson's  Cynthia's  Reveh 
and  Poetaster  were  performed  there  by  the  Children  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  chapel  in 
1600  and  1601 ;  and  Eastward  Hoe  by  the  Children  of  the  Revels  in  1604  or  1605. 
I  have  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  the  present  dialogue  was  pointed  at  the  choir  boys 
of  St  Paul's,  whc  in  1601  acted  two  of  Marston's  plays:  Antonio  and  Mellida,  and 


*ct  li,  sc.  ii.J  HAMLET  1 63 


[320.  ■  inhibition.'] 
Antonio's  Revenge.  Many  of  Lyly's  plays  were  represented  by  them  about  the  same 
time;  and,  in  1607,  Chapman's  Bussy  d'Ambois  was  performed  by  them  with  great 
applause.  It  was  probably  in  this  and  some  other  noisy  tragedies  of  the  same  kind 
that  they  '  cried  out  on  the  top  of  question,  and  were  most  tyrannically  clapped  for  it.' 
The  licentiousness  of  the  stage  is  noticed  in  a  letter  from  Mr  Samuel  Calvert  to  Mr 
Winwood,  28  March,  1605,  which  might  lead  us  to  infer  that  the  words  found  only 
in  the  Folio  were  added  at  that  time :  '  The  plays  do  not  forbear  to  present  upon  the 
stage  the  whole  course  of  this  present  time,  not  sparing  the  king,  state,  or  religion, 
in  so  great  absurdity  and  with  such  liberty  that  any  would  be  afraid  to  hear  them.' — 
Memorials,  ii,  54.  Or  the  words  in  the  Folio  might  have  been  added  in  1612,  in 
which  year  Heywood's  Apologie  for  Actors  was  published,  containing  the  following 
passage,  which  leads  us  to  infer  that  the  little  eyases  were  the  persons  guilty  of  the 
late  innovation,  or  practice  of  introducing  personal  abuse  on  the  stage :  '  Now  to 
speake  of  some  abuse  lately  crept  into  the  quality,  as  an  inueighing  against  the  State, 
the  Court,  the  Law,  the  Citty,  and  their  gouernements,  with  the  particularizing  of 
priuate  mens  humors  (yet  alive)  Noble-men  &  others.  I  know  it  distastes  many ; 
neither  do  I  any  way  approue  it,  nor  dare  I  by  any  meanes  excuse  it.  The  liberty 
which  some  arrogate  to  themselues,  committing  their  bitternesse,  and  liberall  inuec- 
tiues  against  all  estates,  to  the  mouthes  of  Children,  supposing  their  iuniority  to  be  a 
priuiledge  for  any  rayling,  be  it  neuer  so  violent,  I  could  aduise  all  such,  to  curbe 
and  limit  this  presumed  liberty  within  the  bands  of  discretion  and  gouernment.  But 
wise  and  iuditial  Censurers,  before  whom  such  complaints  shall  at  any  time  hereafter 
come,  wil  not  (I  hope)  impute  these  abuses  to  any  transgression  in  vs,  who  haue 
euer  been  carefull  and  prouident  to  shun  the  like.'  Caldecott  thinks  that  they 
were  obliged  to  travel  because  of  the  license  granted  to  a  new  description  of  actors, 
who  had  met  with  the  most  extravagant  applauses  and  success.  Collier  says, 
that  this  passage  probably  refers  to  the  limiting  of  public  theatrical  performances 
to  the  two  theatres,  the  Globe  on  the  Bankside,  and  the  Fortune  in  Golden  Lane, 
in  1600  and  1601.  The  players,  by  a  'late  innovation,'  were  'inhibited,'  or  for- 
bidden, to  act  if»  or  near  '  the  city,'  and  therefore  travelled,'  or  strolled,  into  the 
country.  See  Collier's  Hist,  of  Engl.  Dram.  Poetry  and  the  Stage,  i,  311. 
Clarendon  doubts  the  validity  of  Steevens's  explanation  of  the  '  inhibition,'  and 
thinks  that  the  '  late  innovation '  does  not  clearly  refer  to  the  introduction  of  per- 
sonal abuse  on  the  stage,  and  adds  the  following  conclusive  note :  For  a  very  long 
period  there  had  been  a  strong  opposition  in  the  city  to  theatrical  performances.  In 
March,  1 573-4,  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Corporation  declined  to  license  a  place  for 
them  within  the  city.  In  1575  players  were  again  forbidden  to  act  there,  and  in 
consequence,  in  1576,  the  Blackfriars  Theatre  was  built  without  the  limits  of  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  city.  In  1581  the  Lord  Mayor  was  ordered  to  allow  performances 
in  the  city  by  certain  companies  of  actors  on  week  days  only,  being  holidays ;  but 
his  inhibition  must  have  remained  still  in  force,  because  in  the  following  year,  1582, 
the  Lords  of  the  Council  pray  the  Lord  Mayor  to  revoke  his  inhibition  against  play- 
ing on  holidays.  In  1589  Lord  Burleigh  appears  to  have  directed  the  Lord  Mayor 
to  silence  the  players  of  the  Lord  Admiral's  and  the  Lord  Strange's  companies  for 
introducing  matters  of  state  and  religion  upon  the  stage.  To  this  apparently  Nash 
alludes  in  his  Return  of  the  renowned  Cavaliero  Pasquile  of  England,  published  in 
1589.     In  this  year,  also,  proposals  were  made  to  appoint  two  commissioners  to  act 


*  64  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 

Ham.     Do  they  hold  the  same  estimation  they  did  when  322 
I  was  in  the  city  ?  are  they  so  followed  ? 
Ros.     No,  indeed,  they  are  not. 

322.  Do  they']  Do  the  Q4QS-  324.  they  are]  are  they  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Glo.  +  . 

with  the  Master  of  the  Revels  for  the  purpose  of  examining  and  licensing  every 
play,  and  so  restraining  the  abuses  of  the  actors.  About  the  year  1590  the  Children 
of  St  Paul's  were  silenced,  and  the  interdict  was  apparently  not  removed  till  about 
1600.  In  1597  the  Lord  Admiral's  players  were  restrained  for  a  time  from  playing 
in  consequence  of  having  brought  out  Nash's  Isle  of  Dogs,  a  play  in  which  per- 
sonal satire  was  probably  introduced,  and  for  which  the  author  was  imprisoned.  In 
1 601  a  letter  was  addressed  by  the  Lords  of  the  Council  to  certain  Justices  of  the 
Peace  in  the  county  of  Middlesex  in  which  the  actors  at  the  Curtain  Theatre,  Shore 
ditch,  are  charged  with  satirising  living  persons  and  introducing  personalities  into 
their  plays.  It  is  difficult,  therefore,  to  see  at  what  precise  period  the  explanation 
offered  by  Steevens  could  be  true.  In  1604  the  indulgence  of  the  actors  in  personal 
abuse  could  hardly  be  called  an  •  innovation  ;'  on  the  contrary,  it  was  a  practice 
from  which  the  stage  had  never  been  entirely  free.  If  we  were  to  add  to  the  con- 
jectures upon  this  point,  we  should  be  disposed  to  suggest  that  the  '  innovation'  re- 
ferred to  was  the  license  which  had  been  given  on  30  Jan.  1603-4  to  the  Children  of 
the  Queen's  Revels  to  play  at  the  Blackfriars  Theatre  and  other  convenient  places. 
The  Blackfriars  Theatre  belonged  to  the  company  of  which  Sh.  was  a  member, 
formerly  the  Lord  Chamberlain's  and  at  this  time  His  Majesty's  servants.  The 
popularity  of  the  Children  may  well  have  driven  the  older  actors  into  the  country 
and  so  have  operated  as  an  '  inhibition,'  though  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word  no 
formal  '  inhibition '  was  issued.  If  by  •  inhibition '  Sh.  merely  meant,  as  we  think 
most  probable,  that  the  actors  were  practically  thrown  out  of  employment,  it  seems 
also  likely  that  by  '  innovation  '  he  meant  the  authority  given  to  the  Children  to  act  at 
the  xegularly  licensed  theatres.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind,  in  reference  to  this,  that 
nothing  is  said  either  of '  inhibition  '  or  '  innovation '  in  Qx,  1603,  but  that  the  sentence 
containing  both  is  first  introduced  in  Q2,  1604.  It  is  to  the  interval,  therefore,  that 
we  must  look  for  the  explanation.  In  offering  this  conjecture  we  have  not  lost  sight 
of  the  fact  that,  after  all,  remembering  how  chary  Sh.  is  of  contemporary  allusions, 
no  special  occurrence  may  be  hinted  at,  although  in  what  follows  in  the  Folio  edition 
a  satire  upon  the  Children's  performances  was  clearly  intended.  In  Chalmers's 
Farther  Account  of  the  Early  English  Stage  (Var.'2l,  iii,  423-429)  will  be  found 
a  list  of  payments,  at  sundry  times  during  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  to  the  Children  of 
Paul's,  Westminster,  Windsor,  and  the  Chapel  Royal,  and  an  enumeration  of  the 
plays  performed  by  them  and  by  the  Children  of  the  Revels  from  1571  to  1633. 
The  quotation  cited  by  Malone  from  Heywood  shows,  indeed,  that  the  Children 
indulged  in  personalities,  but  not  that  any  '  inhibition '  was  the  consequence.  Be- 
sides, it  refers  to  a  subsequent  date.  Fleay  (Sh.  Manual,  p.  41):  This  is  not 
necessarily  to  be  applied  to  the  first  order  of  the  Privy  Council  for  the  restraint 
of  the  immoderate  use  of  playhouses  (made  22  June,  1600),  for  this  order  proved 
meffectual;  but  rather  to  their  second  order,  made  31  Dec,  1601.  The  Fortune 
and  The  Globe  were  allowed  to  remain  open ;  the  others  were  closed,  owing  to  the 
personal  allusions  indulged  in  by  some  of  the  companies.    [See  note  III,  ii,  267.  Ed.] 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 1>5 

I  Ham,     How  comes  it?  do  they  grow  rusty?  325 

j^r    Ros.     Nay,   their   endeavour  keeps  in  the  wonted  pace; 
XO^       but  there  is,  sir,  an  aerie  of  children,  little  eyases,  that  cry 

yout  on  the  top  of  question  and  are  most  tyrannically  clapped  328 

325-345.  Ham.  How... load  too. ~\  Om.  327.  eyases]  Theob.    Yafes  Ff,  Rowe, 

Qq.  Pope,  Cald. 

327.  aerie]  ayrie  Ft.     ayry  Fa.     airy  328.  question]      the      question     Cap. 

F.F  ,    Rowe,    Pope.     Aiery   Theob. -f,  truncheon  or  cushion  Bell  (Sh.'s  Puck, 

Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Steev.  Knt.  iii,  163). 

327.  aerie]  Steevens  :  This  refers  to  the  young  singing  men  of  the  chapel  royal, 
or  St  Paul's,  of  the  former  of  whom  perhaps  the  earliest  mention  occurs  in  an 
anonymous  Puritanical  pamphlet,  1569,  entitled  The  Children  of  the  Chapel  Stript 
and  Whipt :  4  Plaies  will  neuer  be  supprest,  while  her  maiesties  unfledged  minions 
flaunt  it  in  silkes  and  sattens.  They  had  as  well  be  at  their  popish  seruice  in  the 
deuils  garments,'  &c.  Again,  ibid :  *  Euen  in  her  maiesties  chapel  do  these  pretty 
upstart  youthes  profane  the  Lordes  day  by  the  lasciuious  writhing  of  their  tender 
limbes,  and  gorgeous  decking  of  their  apparell,  in  feigning  bawdie  fables  gathered 
from  the  idolatrous  heathen  poets,'  &c.  Concerning  the  performances  and  success 
of  the  latter  in  attracting  the  best  company,  I  also  find  the  following  passage  in  fack 
Drum's  Entertainment,  or  Pasquil  and  /Catherine,  1 60 1  : 

'  I  saw  the  children  of  Pozules  last  night ; 
And  troth  they  pleas'd  me  pretty,  pretty  well, 
The  apes,  in  time,  will  do  it  handsomely. 

I  like  the  audience  that  frequenteth  there 

With  much  applause:  a  man  shall  not  be  choak'd 
With  the  stench  of  garlick,  nor  be  pasted 
To  the  balmy  jacket  of  a  beer-brewer. 
Tis  a  good  gentle  audience,'  &c. 

It  is  said  in  Richard  Flecknoe's  Short  Discourse  of  the  English  Stage,  1664,  tnat 
1  both  the  children  of  the  chappel  and  St  Paul's,  acted  playes,  the  one  in  White- 
Frier's,  the  other  behinde  the  Convocation-house  in  Paul's ;  till  people  growing  more 
precise,  and  playes  more  licentious,  the  theatre  of  Paul's  was  quite  supprest,  and  that 
of  the  children  of  the  chappel  converted  to  the  use  of  the  children  of  the  revels.' 
Wedgwood  :  An  eagle's  nest.  From  French  aire,  an  airie,  or  nest  of  haukes. — 
Cotgrave. 

327.  eyases]  Dyce  {Gloss.) :  Young  hawks,  just  taken  from  the  nest.  *  Niais  : 
A  neastling,  a  young  bird  taken  out  of  a  neast ;  hence  a  youngling,  nouice,'  &c. — 
Cotgrave.  Capell:  These  children  were  so  called  from  their  eagerness,  and  their 
flying  at  game  above  them. 

328.  top  of  question]  Johnson  :  They  ask  a  common  question  in  the  highest 
note  of  the  voice.  Steevens  :  Question  here  signifies  conversation,  dialogue.  The 
meaning  therefore  is  :  Children  that  perpetually  recite  in  the  highest  notes  of  voice 
that  can  be  uttered.  M.  Mason  :  When  we  ask  a  question,  we  generally  end  the 
sentence  with  a  high  note.  These  children,  therefore,  declaim,  through  the  whole 
of  their  parts,  in  the  high  note  commonly  used  at  the  end  of  a  question,  and  are  ap- 
plauded for  it.  Elze  :  •  Question,'  as  Steevens  has  said,  means  frequently  in  Sh 
conve-  ration,  dialogue.     The  '  top  of  the  question'  therefore  means  the  top  of  con 


106  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 

for't;  these  are  now  the  fashion,  and  so  berattle  the  com- 
mon stages — so  they  call  them — that  many  wearing  rapiers  330 


ither.     A. 


iare  afraid  of  goose-quills,  and  dare  scarce  come  th 

329.  berattle']  be-rattle  F3F4.    be  ratle  Fa.     be-ratled 

versation  ;  namely,  that  point  where  the  dialogue  is  most  lively,  where  question  and 
answer  follow  each  other  stroke  on  stroke,  and  the  speakers  are  the  most  excited. 
These  '  little  eyases,'  therefore,  continually  cry  out  as  though  they  were  at  the  very 
height  of  conversation.  STAUNTON :  The  phrase,  derived  perhaps  from  the  defiant 
crowing  of  a  cock  upon  his  midden,  really  meant,  we  believe,  like — '  Stood  chal- 
lenger on  mount  of  all  the  age,'  to  crow  over  or  challenge  all  comers  to  a  conten- 
tion. In  line  424,  Hamlet  uses  the  phrase,  '  cried  in  the  top,'  where  it  evidently 
means  crowed  over.  Again,  in  Armin's  Nest  of  Ninnies,  the  author,  alluding  to 
fencers  or  players  at  single  stick,  talks  of  '  making  them  expert  till  they  cry  it  up  in 
the  top  of  question.'  [p.  55,  Sh.  Soc.  vol.  x.]  White:  To  '  cry  in  the  top '  seems 
rather  to  mean  to  assume  superiority ; — as  afterwards  Hamlet,  speaking  of  people 
who  set  him  down  about  the  play  from  which  he  quotes,  says  their  judgments  '  cried 
in  the  top '  of  his.  I  can  conjecture  no  specific  origin  of  the  phrase.  It  might  well 
have  been  formed  on  the  mere  general  force  of  the  words  which  compose  it.  Wel- 
LESLEY  [Stray  Notes,  6°r.,  1865,  p.  33) :  '  Question '  is  not  conversation,  dialogue,  but 
the  old  word,  still  in  use  in  other  languages,  for  the  rack.  The  pulleys  were  strained, 
and  the  witnesses  hoisted  to  the  utmost  height,  till  the  desired  confession  was  elicited ; 
and  so  the  phrase,  '  top  of  question,'  came  to  be  metaphorically  applied  ;  as,  for  in- 
stance, to  the  highest  stretch  of  the  voice  or  the  utmost  force  of  an  argument.  The 
top  of  the  bent  [III,  ii,  367]  was  a  phrase  of  the  same  kind,  borrowed  from  those  bows 
which  were  not  bent  by  hand,  but  by  a  rack.  •  These  bows  .  .  .  were  bent  only  by  a 
man's  immediate  strength,  without  the  help  of  any  bender  or  rack  that  are  used  with 
others.' — Wilkins's  Mathematical  Magick.  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  Recite  at  the  very  highest 
pitch  of  the  voice.  Wellesley's  explanation  is  wrong.  Tschischwitz  :  I  am  con- 
vinced that  this  phrase  in  the  MS  was :  that  cry  on  the  top,  out  of  question?  that  is, 
iftey  cry  at  the  highest  pitch  of  the  voice,  where  it  is  wholly  inappropriate.  [And 
even  so  is  the  text  amended.  Ed.]  Clarke:  That  is,  pipe  out  their  parts  at  the  top 
of  their  shrill  infantine  voices.  Clarendon  :  Probably,  to  speak  in  a  high  key, 
dominating  conversation.     For  '  question  '  in  this  sense,  see  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  70. 

328.  tyrannically]  Caldecott  :  That  is,  receive  outrageous,  extravagant  ap- 
plause. Clarendon  :  The  tyrant's  part  in  the  old  plays  was  a  noisy  one.  See 
Mid.  N.  D.  I,  ii,  31.  Compare  Beau,  and  Fl.,  The  Knight  of  the  Burning  Pestle. 
V,  i,  '  And  thou  hadst  but  seen  little  Ned  of  Aldgate,  drum  Ned,  how  he  made  it 
roar  again,  and  laid  on  like  a  tyrant.' 

329.  fashion]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  67) :  The  emendation  of  faction  we  owe  to 
Mr  Hughs;  it  implies  that  those  children  were  not  only  in  fashion,  but  had  a  faction 
made  by  the  town  in  their  favor.  [Has  a  copy  of  the  edition  by  '  the  accurate  Mr 
Hughs'  ever  been  found?     See  Vol.  II,  p.  35.  Ed.] 

330.  stages]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  67)  conjectured  stagers,  that  is,  professed 
Actors,  to  whom  a  degree  of  cowardice  might  be  imputed,  which  Sh.  would  never 
have  imputed  to  gentlemen  spectators.  Heath  thought  highly  of  this  emendation 
alth-ugh  Theobald  did  not  adopt  it  in  his  text. 

331.  goose-quills]  Caldecott:  Lampoons.    Elze  :  This  refers  to  *  the  writers, 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.J  HAMLET  1 67 

Ham.  What,  are  they  children?  who  maintains  'em? 
how  are  they  escoted  ?  Will  they  pursue  the  quality  no 
longer  than  they  can  sing  ?  will  they  not  say  afterwards,  if 
they  should  grow  themselves  to  common  players, — as  it  is  335 
most  like,  if  their  means  are  no  better, — their  writers  do  them 
wrong,  to  make  them  exclaim  against  their  own  succession  ? 

Ros.     Faith,  there  has  been  much  to-do  on  both  sides, 

332.   "em]  them  Cap.  Steev.Var.  Cald.  Rovve,  Knt.     like,  most,  Cap.    like  most 

K.nt,  Coll.  El.  Sta.  Del.  will,  Anon.*     like-most  Corson. 

334.  sing  ?~\  In  Italics,  Johns.  336.  no]    not   Fa,    Cap.    Cald.    Coll. 
say  afterwards,]  say  afterwards  ?  White. 

Johns.  337.  succession  ?]     Pope    ii,    Theob. 

335.  players,]  players  ?  Pope  i.  Succeffion.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope  i,  Johns.  Jen. 

336.  most  like,]   Pope,     like  mofl  Ff,  338.  to-do]  Huds.     to  do  Ff  et  cet. 

in  line  336.  Moberly  :  These  young  hawks  make  such  a  noise  on  the  common 
stage,  that  true  dramatists,  whose  wit  is  as  strong  and  keen  as  a  rapier,  are  afraid  to 
encounter  these  chits,  who  fight,  as  it  were,  with  a  goose-quill. 

^^^.  escoted]  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  Paid.  '  Escot,  A  shot.  .  . .  Escotter,  Euery  one  to 
pay  his  shot,  &c. — Cotgrave.  Tschischwitz  :  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  Sh.  used 
so  uncommon  a  word  as  •  escoted '  when  the  common  one,  maintains,  was  ready  to 
his  use.  'I  therefore  believe  that  the  true  word  is  escorted?  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest. 
p.  68)  calls  attention  to  what  he  calls  the  '  self-contradiction '  here,  in  making  Ham- 
let show  a  knowledge  of  their  singing  after  '  he  had  professed  himself  a  stranger '  to 
them. 

333-  quality]  Johnson  :  Will  they  follow  the  profession  of  players  no  longer 
than  they  can  keep  the  voices  of  boys?  So  also  in  line  412.  Malone  :  So  in  Gos- 
son's  Schoole  of  Abuse  (p.  39,  ed.  Arber),  1579 :  '  I  speake  not  this,  as  though  euerye 
one  [of  our  players]  that  professeth  the  qualitie  so  abused  him  selfe.'  Gifford 
(Ma^singer's  Roman  Actor,  Works  ii,  339) :  '  Quality,'  though  used  in  a  general 
sense  for  any  occupation,  calling,  or  condition  of  life,  yet  seems  more  peculiarly  ap- 
propriated, by  our  old  writers,  to  that  of  a  player.  See  also  The  Picture,  vol.  iii,  p. 
141.  Clarendon:  So  in  Two  Gent.  IV,  i.  58,  '  in  our  quality,'  i.e.  in  our  profes- 
sion of  brigands. 

335  common  players]  Staunton  :  As  we  now  term  them,  •  strolling  players.' 
•  I  prefix  an  epithite  of  common^  to  distinguish  the  base  and  artlesse  appendants  of 
our  Citty  companies,  which  often  times  start  away  into  rusticall  wanderers,  and  then 
(like  Proteus)  start  backe  again  into  the  Citty  number.' — J.  Stephens,  Essayes  and 
Characters,  1 61 5,  p.  301.  n?> 

338.  to-do]  Hudson  :  This  is  the  same  as  ado.  Corson  :  '  In  place  of  this  to- 
do,  the  King's  English  accepted  a  composition,  part  French,  part  English,  and  hence 
the  substantive  ado? — Earle's  Philology  of  the  Engl.  Tongue,  ed.  2,  p.  420. 

338.  both  sides]  Tschischwitz  finds  this  speech  obscure,  because  it  seems  as 
though  it  were  a  reply  to  what  Hamlet  has  just  said,  whereas,  so  he  says,  it  merely 
resumes  the  connection  of  thought  which  was  broken  by  Hamlet's  questions  about 
the  childr~~.  He  therefore  thinks  that  logic  demands  the  insertion  of  Hamlet's 
speech,  lines  332-337,  after  '  clapped  for  't.' 


1 68  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 

and  the  nation  holds  it  no  sin  to  tarre  them  to  controversy ; 
there  was  for  a  while  no  money  bid  for  argument,  unless  340 
the  poet  and  the  player  went  to  cuffs  in  the  question. 

Ham.     Is't  possible  ? 

Giril.     Oh,  there  has  been  much  throwing  about  of  brains. 

Ham.     Do  the  boys  carry  it  away  ? 

Ros.  Ay,  that  they  do,  my  lord;  Hercules  and  his  load  too.  345 

Ham.  It  is  not  very  strange ;  for  my  uncle  is  king  of 
Denmark,  and  those  that  would  make  mows  at  him  while 
my  father  lived  give  twenty,  forty,  fifty,  a  hundred  ducats 
a-piece,  for  his  picture  in  little.    'Sblood,  there  is  something 

339.  them]  them  on  Theob.  conj.  Pope         Dyce  i,  Sta.  Glo.  Mob. 
ii  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  347.  mows]   mowes  Ff.     mouths  Qq, 

345.  load]   club  Theob.  conj.  (with-         Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 

drawn).  348.  fifty]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta. 

346.  very  strange ;  for]  Q'76.  very  a]  Qq,  Cap.  Cam.  Cla.  an  Ff 
Jlrange,for  Qq.  flrange:for  Ff,  Pope  + ,         et  cet. 

Cald.    Knt,  Dyce   i,   Sta.  White,  Del.  349.  'Sblood]  s'bloud  Qq.     Om.  Ff, 

flrange  for  F 2F .  flrange,  for  F4,  Rowe.         Rowe +  ,  Knt. 
my]    mine    Ff.    Rowe+,   Knt, 

339.  tarre]  Nares  :  To  set  on,  and  encourage  in  an  attack,  particularly  in 
reference  to  dogs.  Wedgwood  :  The  origin  seems  to  be  an  imitation  of  the  sound 
of  a  dog  snarling,  used  for  the  purpose  of  setting  the  animal  on  to  fight. 

340.  argument]  Delius  :  That  is,  the  plot  of  the  drama,  which  must  be  selected 
and  treated  in  reference  to  the  taste  of  the  public,  if  the  stage-directors  are  to  bid 
money  for  it ;  the  public  in  the  meanwhile  only  caring  to  see  those  dramas  wherein 
the  dialogue  (the  '  question ')  is  well  seasoned  with  warfare,  i  cuffs' 

343.  brains.]  Caldecott  :  Sharp  and  nice  discussion. 

345.  Hercules]  Warburton:  They  not  only  carry  away  the  world,  but  the 
world-bearer  too;  alluding  to  the  story  of  Hercules  relieving  Atlas.  Steevens: 
The  allusion  may  be  to  the  Globe  theatre,  the  sign  of  which  was  Hercules  carrying 
the  Globe.  Malone  :  I  suppose  Sh.  meant  that  the  boys  drew  greater  audiences 
than  the  elder  players  of  the  Globe  theatre.  Collier  (ed.  2) :  In  Qt  there  are  suf- 
ficient traces  of  this  part  of  the  scene  to  enable  us  to  be  certain  that  it  was  acted 
when  the  play  was  originally  produced ;  it  was  omitted,  therefore,  for  some  unex- 
plained reason  in  1604,  and  restored  entire  in  1623. 

346.  strange]  Johnson  :  I  do  not  wonder  that  the  new  players  have  so  suddenly 
risen  to  reputation ;  my  uncle  supplies  another  example  of  the  facility  with  which 
honor  is  conferred  upon  new  claimants. 

347.  mows]  Nares  :  A  distortion  of  the  face,  made  in  ridicule.  See  Cymb.  1, 
vi,  41,  and  Psalm  xxv,  15,  old  ed.  [now  erroneously  changed  to  'mouths.' — Claren- 
don]. Clarendon:  In  Mid.  N.  D.  Ill,  ii,  238,  we  have  'mouths.'  In  fact,  in 
the  phrase  '  to  make  mouths,'  '  mouths  '  is  a  corruption  of  '  mows,'  the  original  word. 
See  also  IV,  iv,  50. 

349.  in  little]  Steevens  :  In  miniature. 

349.  'Sblood]  Clarendon  :    God's  blood ;    one  of  the  many  forms  of  oath  bv 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  I O9 

in  this  more  than  natural,  if  philosophy  could  find  it  out.  350 

\_Flouris1i  of  trumpets  within. 

Guil.     There  are  the  players. 

Ham.     Gentlemen,  you  are  welcome  to  Elsinore.     Your 
hands,    come ;    the   appurtenance    of    welcome   is    fashion 
and  ceremony ;  let  me  comply  with  you  in  this  garb,  lest 
my  extent  to  the  players,  which,  I  tell  you,  must  show  355 
fairly   outwards,    should    more   appear   like    entertainment 

350.  [Flourish...]  Cap.  A  Florifli.  353.  appurtenance]  apportenance  '^ 
Qq.     Flourifh  for  the  Players.  Ff.                   Qg. 

351.  There. ..players.]    Shall  we  call  354.  comply]  complement  Han. 

the  players?  Q'76.  this]  the  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Cald. 

353.  hands,]  hands.  Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Knt,  Sta. 

Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Sta.  Ktly,  354,  355.  lest  my]  let  me  Q3Q3-     let 

Del.     hands  Q2Q3.  my  QQ. 

come]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt,  Dyce,  356.  outwards]  Qq,  Cam.  Cla.     out 

Sta.  White,  Huds.    come  then  Qq  et  cet.  ward  Ff,  Rowe  et  cet. 

the  elements  of  the  Eucharist.  See  II,  ii,  505,  and  '  God's  bread,'  Rom.  <5r»  yul. 
Ill,  v,  175. 

353.  appurtenance]  Clarendon  :  Proper  accompaniment. 

354.  comply  with]  Steevens  :  This  is  again  apparently  used  in  the  sense  of  to 
compliment  in  V,  ii,  178.  Caldecott:  That  is,  compliantly  assume  this  dress  and 
fashion  of  behaviour.  Singer  :  Hamlet  has  received  his  old  school-fellows  with 
somewhat  of  the  coldness  of  suspicion  hitherto,  but  he  now  remembers  that  this  is 
not  courteous.  He,  therefore,  rouses  himself  to  give  them  a  proper  reception : 
*  Come,  then,  the  appurtenance  of  welcome  is  fashion  and  ceremony ;  let  me  EMBRACE 
you  in  this  fashion,  lest,'  &c.     That  to  comply  with  was  to  embrace  will  appear  from 

the  following  passages  in  Herrick :  ' witty  Ovid,  by  Whom  faire  Corinna  sits ; 

and  doth  comply  With  Yvorie  wrists,  his  Laureat  Head,'  &c. — [Hesperides,  p.  279, 
ed.  1846]  ;  also,  'And  then  a  Rug  of  carded  wooll,  Which,  .  .  .  seem'd  to  comply, 
Cloudlike  the  daintie  Deitie.' — [/#.  p.  224.]  White:  In  my  judgement  'comply 
with'  (not  •  comply'  alone)  has  here,  and  in  V,  ii,  178,  merely  the  sense  of  « com- 
pliment.' Staunton  :  Let  me  fraternize  or  conjoin  with  you  in  the  customary 
mode;  not  '  Let  me  compliment.^  To  comply  literally  means  to  enfold.  CLAREN- 
DON: Use  ceremony  with  you  in  this  fashion.  [An  interpretation  which  applies 
equally  well  to  V,  ii,  178.] 

354.  this  garb]  Corson  :  The  reading  of  the  Ff  makes  the  better  sense,  where 
1  the '  is  used  generically. 

355.  extent]  Caldecott  :  The  degree  of  courtesy  dealt  out.  Collier  (ed.  2) : 
Is  there  not  room  to  doubt  here  whether  '  extent '  has  not  been  misprinted  for  ostentt 
a  word  Sh.  not  unfrequently  uses  in  the  sense  of  external  show  ?  We  have  no 
authority  for  the  change,  but  the  word  ■  extent '  is  not  very  intelligible  here,  though 
it  may  be  reconciled  to  a  meaning.  Clarendon  :  Condescension ;  the  behaviour 
of  a  superior  to  an  inferior  when  he  makes  the  first  advances.  See  '  extend '  in  AW . 
Well,  III,  vi,  73. 

is 


I  JO  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  n. 

than  yours.  You  are  welcome;  but  my  uncle-father  and  357 
aunt-mother  are  deceived. 

Guil.     In  what,  my  dear  lord  ? 

Ham.  I  am  but  mad  north-north-west ;  when  the  wind  360 
is  southerly,  I  know  a  hawk  from  a  handsaw. 

361.  hawk\  Hauke  Q2Q3Q4-  Hawke  hand-faw  Q/X-  hernshaw  Han.  Cap. 
Q-Ff.  heronsew  Anon.* 

handsaw]      hand  faw     Q2Q3- 

358.  aunt-mother]  Daniel  (p.  75) :  Read  mother-aunt.  Hamlet's  mother  had 
become  his  aunt,  just  as  his  uncle  had  become  his  father. 

360.  north-north-west]  Francke:  Perhaps  the  meaning  is:  Great,  powerful 
tempests  in  the  moral  world,  apparitions  from  the  mysterious  Hereafter,  can  make 
me  mad,  can  crush  my  reason ;  but  such  people  as  you  are,  who  come  around  me 
with  sweet  phrases  and  mock  friendship,  I  have  yet  wit  enough  to  elude. 

361.  handsaw]  WARBURTON:  Hanmer's  alteration  serves  to  show  us  the  origin 
of  the  proverb  which  was  a  common  one  in  Shakespeare's  day.  Capell  (i,  133) : 
The  speaker's  meaning  is  that  opportunity  did  not  serve  for  his  purpose ;  when  it 
did,  it  would  be  seen  he  had  his  right  senses.  Nares  :  Hernshaw,  heronshaw,  or 
hernshew  is  a  heron  or  hern.  'As  when  a  cast  of  falcons  make  their  flight,  At  an 
hernshaw,  that  lyes  aloft  on  wing.' — Spenser,  Fairie  Queene,  VI,  vii,  9.  '  To  know 
a  hawk  from  a  hernshaw?  was  certainly  the  original  form  of  the  proverb.  But  the 
corruption  had  taken  place  before  the  time  of  Sh.  It  is  handsaw  in  Ray's  Proverbs, 
p.  196,  ed.  1768.  White:  I  suspect  that  in  Shakespeare's  time  the  corrupted  phrase 
had,  to  general  acceptation,  lost  its  original  meaning,  and  that  the  comparison  was 
supposed  to  be  between  the  tool  called  a  hawk  and  a  handsaw.  There  was,  and  I 
believe  there  still  is,  a  hooked  cutting  tool  called  a  hawk.  Halliwell  :  No  evi- 
dence in  support  of  the  supposition  that  '  handsaw '  is  a  corruption  of  hernshaw  has 
been  produced ;  the  phrase  always  occurs  in  this  form.  It  is  not  necessary  to  believe 
that  the  supposition  is  correct,  the  wildest  incongruities  being  often  found  in  pro- 
verbial phrases  of  this  description.  It  is  suggested  by  C.  W.  H.  in  the  Athenaum 
(30  December,  1865),  that  Sh.  might  have  become  acquainted,  through  North's  Plu- 
tarch, with  the  significations  attached  by  the  ^Egyptians  to  the  hawk  and  heron  re- 
spectively,— the  former  was  the  emblem  of  the  North  wind,  and  the  latter  of  the  South 
wind.  '  Hamlet,  though  feigning  madness,  yet  claims  sufficient  sanity  to  distinguish 
a  hawk  from  a  hernshaw  when  the  wind  is  southerly ;  that  is,  in  the  time  of  the 
migration  of  the  latter  to  the  north,  when  the  former  is  not  to  be  seen.'  J.  A.  G. 
(iV.  &°  Qu.  6  July,  1867)  suggests  anser,  'the  generic  name  for  our  domestic  water- 
fowl.' J.  A.  Picton  {N.  6°  Qu.  30  Nov.  1872)  suggests  that  '  hawk '  may  refer,  not 
only  to  the  bill-hook,  mentioned  by  White,  but  also  to  a  plasterer's  instrument  so 
named.  Clarendon  :  In  Suffolk  and  Norfolk  '  hernsew  is  pronounced  '  harnsa,' 
from  which  to  '  handsaw '  is  but  a  single  step.  For  the  following  explanation  of  the 
earlier  part  of  this  obscure  passage,  we  are  indebted  to  Mr  J.  C.  Heath,  formerly 
Fellow  of  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge :  '  The  expression  obviously  refers  to  the  sport 
of  hawking.  Most  birds,  especially  one  of  heavy  flight  like  the  heron,  when  roused 
by  the  falconer  or  his  dog,  would  fly  down  or  with  the  wind,  in  order  to  escape. 
When  the  wind  is  from  the  north,  the  heron  flies  towards  the  south,  and  the  spectator 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 7 1 

Enter  Polonius. 

Pol.     Well  be  with  you,  gentlemen  ! 

Ham.  Hark  you,  Guildenstern  ; — and  you  too  ; — at  each 
ear  a  hearer :  that  great  baby  you  see  there  is  not  yet  out 
of  his  swaddling  clouts.  365 

Ros.  Happily  he's  the  second  time  come  to  them  ;  for, 
they  say,  an  old  man  is  twice  a  child. 

Haui.  I  will  prophesy  he  comes  to  tell  me  of  the 
players  ;  mark  it. — You  say  right,  sir;  o'  Monday  morning; 
'twas  so,  indeed.  370 

Pol.     My  lord,  I  have  news  to  tell  you. 

Ham.  My  lord,  I  have  news  to  tell  you.  When  Roscius 
was  an  actor  in  Rome, — 

362.  Scene  VII.  Pope  +  .  Players.  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

363.  too;— at]  FsFaF3.  to,atQ,Q3F4.  369.  it.— You]  Johns,  it:  You  Q' 76. 
to,areQAQ5.   too,  at  Q'76,  Rowe+,  Jen.  it,  You  Q2Q3.     it,  you  Q4Q5Ff,   Rowe, 

364.  you   see  there  is~\  as  you  fee  is  Pope,  Cald. 

Q4Q5.  *']  Cap.     a  Qq.    for  a  F.F.F,. 

365.  swaddling]  fwathing  Ff,  Rowe  for  on  F4>  Rowe  +  .  for  o'  Cald.  Sta. 
i,  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  El.  Dyce  i,  Sta. White,         White,  Del. 

Del.     swathling  Rowe  ii  + .  morning;]  Cap.  morning  QQ? 

366.  Happily]  Haply  F,  Rowe+,  Jen.  morning  Q4Q5Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Cald. 
Jen.  Cald.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White,  Ktly,         Sta. 

Huds.  370.  so]  then  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.   Steev. 

he's]  he  is  Qq,  Cap.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

368.  prophesy  he]  prophecy,  he  Q2Q3-  372,  373.  Ham.  My. ..Rome]  Two 
prophecy  that  he  Q  .    prophecie  that  he  lines,  Ff,  Rowe+. 

Qg.    Prophefte.  Hee  Fv  Knt.    Prophefie,  372.  Roscius]  Roffius  Qq,  Ff. 

He  F2F3F4,  Rowe  +  .  prophesy  :  he  Cap.  373.  was]  Om.  Ff,  Cald. 

Sing.  Rome, — ]  Rome —    Ff.     Rome 

369.  players ;]  players,    Q2Q3,  Han.  Qq. 

may  be  dazzled  by  the  sun,  and  be  unable  to  distinguish  the  hawk  from  the  heron. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  wind  is  southerly,  the  heron  flies  towards  the  north, 
and  it  and  the  pursuing  hawk  are  clearly  seen  by  the  sportsman,  who  then  has  his 
back  to  the  sun,  and  without  difficulty  knows  the  hawk  from  the  hernsew.  A  curious 
reader  may  further  observe  that  a  wind  from  the  precise  point  north-north-we3t 
would  be  in  the  eye  of  the  sun  at  half-past  ten  in  the  forenoon,  a  likely  time  for 
hawking,  whereas  "  southerly ''''  includes  a  wider  range  of  wind  for  a  good  view.' 
[I  have  heard  the  emendation  suggested  of  handschuh,  the  German  for  glove,  but 
cannot  remember  that  I  have  ever  seen  it  in  print.  Heath's  explanation  sets  the 
question  at  rest,  if  '  handsaw '  be  a  corruption  of  hernsew.  Ed.] 

366.  Happily]  Abbott,  §  42  :  This  word,  which  now  means  '  by  good  hap,'  was 
sometimes  used  for  *  haply,'  i.  e,  '  by  hap,'  just  as  '  success  '  was  sometimes  *  good,'  at 
other  times,  '  ill.' 

369,  370.  You  . . .  indeed]  Hudson  :  This  is  spoken  in  order  to  blind  Pclonius 
as  to  what  they  have  been  talking  about. 


I72  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 

Pol.     The  actors  are  come  hither,  my  lord. 

Ham.     Buz,  buz !  375 

Pol.     Upon  my  honour, — 

Ham.     Then  came  each  actor  on  his  ass, — 

Pol.     The  best  actors  in  the  world,  either  for  tragedy, 
comedy,  history,  pastoral,  pastoral-comical,    historical-pas- 
toral, tragical-historical,  tragical-comical-historical-pastoral,  380 
scene  individable,  or  poem  unlimited ;  Seneca  cannot  be  too 

376.  my]  mine  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  pastoral]  Pajlorall  Comicall,  Hijloricall 
Dyce,  Sta.  Pajlorall    Q2Q3.     Pajloricall-Comicall- 

honour, — ]     honour —     Rowe.  Hijloricall- Pajlorall  Ff,  Rowe. 

honor.  QaQ^Q^F^.     honour.  QFF.  380.  tragical-historical,  tragical-corn' 

377.  Then. ..ass, — ]  As  a  quotation,  ical-historical-flastoral]Om.Qq,Tope  +  t 
Johns.  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  Cap.  Jen. 

came]  can  Ff.  381.  scene]  ft  erne  QAQ5-    Scane  FaF  . 

ass, — ]  AJfe —  Ff.     AJfe.  Qq.  individable]  Jen.    indeuidible  Qa 

378.  The  best]  — the  best  Huds.  Q  .  indeuidable  Q4QS«  indivible  Ff.  un- 

379.  380.  pastoral-comical,  historical-  dividable  Rowe  +  ,Cap.   indivisible  Cald. 

373.  actor]  Tschischwitz  :  The  fun  here  consists  in  Hamlet's  mentioning  an 
actor  before  the  officious  Polonius  can  utter  the  word. 

375.  Buz]  Johnson  :  Mere  idle  talk,  the  buz  of  the  vulgar.  Steevens  :  Only 
interjections  employed  to  interrupt  Polonius.  Jonson  uses  them  often  for  the  same 
purpose,  as  well  as  Middleton  in  A  Mad  World,  my  Masters.  Blackstone  :  It 
was  an  interjection  used  at  Oxford,  when  any  one  began  a  story  that  was  generally 
known  before.  Douce  (ii,  231) :  This  expression  may  continue  to  exercise  the  skill 
of  the  critics,  if  they  are  disposed  to  pursue  the  game  through  the  following  mazes : 
'Anno  DCCCXL  Ludovicus  imperator  ad  mortem  infirmatur,  cujus  cibus  per  XL 
dies  solummodo  die  dominica  dominicum  corpus  fecit.  Cum  vidisset  dsemonem 
astare,  dixit  buez,  buez,  quod  sigmftczt  foras,  foras.' — Alberici  monachi  trium  fontium 
Chronicon,  Leips.  1698.  Ducange,  under  the  article  Buzi,  says,  '  Interpretatur 
despectus  vel  contemptus.     Papias  (Ab  Hebraico  Bus  vel  bouz,  sprevit).' 

377.  Then  . . .  ass]  Johnson  :  This  seems  to  be  the  line  of  a  ballad.  Elze  :  At 
all  events,  it  contams  biting  ridicule  of  Polonius,  who  has  just  said  that  '  The  actors 
are  come  hither — upon  my  honour  !' 

381.  individable]  Delius  :  This  refers  to  dramas  that  carefully  observed  the 
Unity  of  Place  ;  '  poem  unlimited '  refers  to  those  that  disregarded  such  restrictions. 
Tschischwitz  :  In  the  license  granted  in  1603  to  the  Globe  Company,  permission  is 
given  '  freely  to  use  and  exercise  the  Arte  and  facultie  of  playing  Comedies,  Trage- 
dies, Histories,  Enterludes,  Moralls,  Pastoralls,  Stage  plaies  &  such  other  like.'  To 
this  last  description, '  stage  plaies,'  I  suppose  the  '  poem  unlimited  '  belonged,  which, 
I  presume,  was  an  extemporised  piece. 

381.  Seneca  . . .  Plautus]  Steevens:  The  tragedies  of  Seneca  were  translated 
into  English  by  Thomas  Newton  and  others,  and  published  first  separate,  at  different 
times,  and  afterwards  all  together  in  1 581.  One  comedy  of  Plautus,  viz.  the  Me~ 
ncchtiP  wa>  likewise  translated  and  published  in  1595.     Prefixed  to  a  map  of  Cam 


act  li,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 7$ 

heavy,  nor  Plautus  too  light.  For  the  law  of  writ  and  the  382 
liberty,  these  are  the  only  men. 

Ham.     O   Jephthah,  judge   of  Israel,   what   a   treasure 
hadst  thou  !  385 

382,  383,  light.     For. ..liberty,   these]  384.    O  Jephthah. ..Israel]    As  a  quo- 

Theob.     light  for. .. liberty :    thefe   Qq.  tation,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.   Steev.  Var.   Cald 

light,   for.. .liberty.      Thefe    Ff,    Rowe,  Sing.  Ktly,  Del. 

Pope,     light  for.  ..liberty ;  thefe  Q'76.  384,  &c.    Jephthah}   Cald.      Jephtha 

382.  writ]    wit   Q'76,    Rowe,   Pope,  Han.    Ieptha  Qq.    Jephta  FIF2.    Jephta 

Theob.  Han.  Warb.  F3F4,  Rowe+. 

382,  383.  the  liberty]  liberty  Q'95. 

bridge,  in  the  Second  Part  of  Brannii  Civitates,  &c.,  is  an  account  of  the  Univer- 
sity, by  Gulielmus  Soonus,  1575.  In  this  curious  memoir  we  have  the  following 
passage:  'Januarium,  Februarium,  et  Martium  menses,  ut  noctis  toedix  fallant  in 
spectaculis  populo  exhibendis  ponunt  tanta  elegantia,  tanta  actionis  dignitate,  ea 
vocis  et  vultus  moderatione,  ea  magnificentia,  ut  si  Plautus,  aut  Terentius,  aut  Seneca 
revivisceret  mirarentur  suas  ipsi  fabulas,  majoremque  quam  cum  inspectante  popul. 
Rom.  agerentur,  voluptatem  credo  caperent.     [See  III,  ii,  93.] 

382.  writ  .  .  .  liberty]  Capell  (i,  133)  :  This  means,  pieces  written  in  rule,  and 
pieces  out  of  rule.  Malone:  '  Writ'  is  used  for  writing  by  Shakespeare's  contem- 
poraries. Thus,  in  77/1?  Apologie  of  Pierce  Pennilesse,  by  Nashe,  1593:  'For  the 
lowsie  circumstance  of  his  poverty  before  his  death,  and  sending  that  miserable  writte 
to  his  wife,'  &c.  Again,  in  Bishop  Earle's  Character  of  a  mere  dull  Physician,  1638  : 
1  Then  follows  a  writ  to  his  drugger  in  a  strange  tongue,'  &c.  Caldecott:  '  For  the 
observance  of  the  rules  of  the  drama,  while  they  take  such  liberties  as  are  allowable, 
they  are  the  only  men.'  Collier  :  The  meaning  probably  is,  that  the  players  were  good, 
whether  at  written  productions  or  at  extemporal  plays,  where  liberty  was  allowed  to  the 
performers  to  invent  the  dialogue,  in  imitation  of  the  Italian  commedie  al  improviso. 
See  Hist,  of  Engl.  Dram.  Poetry,  iii,  393.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  265):  Read  wit. 
'  Writ '  for  composition  is  not  English.  It  is  as  if  we  should  say,  the  laws  of  poem 
for  the  laws  of  poetry,  or  talk  of  so  and  so  being  contrary  to  the  genius  of  ode,  mean- 
ing the  genius  of  lyrical  composition.  The  passages  quoted  by  the  Var.  commenta- 
tors are  utterly  irrelevant.  The  same  erratum  occurs,  Jul.  Cas.  Ill,  ii,  225 :  '  For 
I  haue  neyther  writ  nor  words,  nor  worth.'  Clarendon  :  Probably  the  author  did 
not  intend  that  we  should  find  a  distinct  meaning  in  Polonius's  words.  Corson  : 
The  Qq  and  Ff  connect  in  construction,  *  for  the  law  of  writ  and  the  liberty,'  with 
Seneca  and  Plautus,  and  not  with  '  these  are  the  only  men/  which  evidently  refers  to 
the  actors  he's  talking  about.  •  Liberty  '  should  be  construed  with  '  law ;'  the  law 
and  the  liberty  of  writ  [writing].  And  'law'  and  'liberty'  seem  to  refer,  respec- 
tively, to  '  heavy '  and  '  light.'  This  respective  construction  is  frequent  in  Sh.  See 
Macb.  I,  iii,  60,  61 ;  Ham.  Ill,  i,  151 ;  Wint.  Tale,  III,  ii,  160-162;  Ant.  b*  Cleo. 
Ill,  ii,  15-18;  IV,  xv,  25,  26;  Com.  of  Err.  II,  ii,  11 2-1 17;  Temp.  I,  ii,  335,  336; 
Mid.  N.  D.  Ill,  i,  98-101. 

384.  Jephthah]  Steevens  communicated  to  Dr  Percy  the  old  song  from  which 

Hamlet  quotes,  and  it  appeared  in  the  second  edition  of  Percy's  Reliques  in  1757. 

There  are  two  entries  of  this  ballad  on  the  Registers  of  the  Stationers'  Company :  in  1567 

-6a,  •  Alexandre  lacye '  was  licensed  to  print  '  a  ballet  intituled  the  songe  of  Jesphas 

15* 


1 74  HAMLET  [act  II,  sc.  ii. 

Pol.     What  treasure  had  he,  my  lord  ?  386 

Ham.     Why, 

1  One  fair  daughter,  and  no  more, 

The  which  he  loved  passing  well.' 
Pol.  [Aside]     Still  on  my  daughter.  390 

Hani.     Am  I  not  i'  the  right,  old  Jephthah  ? 
Pol.     If  you  call  me  Jephthah,  my  lord,  I  have  a  daughter 
that  I  love  passing  well. 

Ham.     Nay,  that  follows  not. 

Pol.     What  follows,  then,  my  lord?  395 

Ham.     Why, 

'As  by  lot,  God  wot/ 
and  then,  you  know, 

386.  What  treasure]   Walker,  Dyce  390.   [Aside]  Cap. 

ii,  Huds.    What  a  treafure  QqFf  et  cet.  392-394.  Pol.  If... not. J  Om.  Q.Q-. 

387-389.    Why... we 7/.']    Cap.  (subs.)  392.  you]  thou  Jen. 

Prose,  Qq.    Two  lines,  Ff,  Rowe  +  .    As  396,397.    Why. ..wot,']    Mai.   (subs.) 

a  quotation,  Pope +  .  Prose,  QqFf,  Jen.     by. ..wot,  as  a  quota- 

387.  Why,  'One]  Cap.     Why  one  Qq  tion,  Pope+,  Cap. 

Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  398,  399.  know,  'It]  know  it  Qq. 

Dowg*her  at  his  death.'     [Arber's  Transcript,  i,  355.    *His  death '  is  a  clerical  error 

for  'her  death.'     Collier,  in  vol.  xiii,  p.  169,  Sh.  Soc.  Publications,  seems  to  doubt 

if  this  be  the  same  ballad  as  that  quoted  by  Hamlet.  Ed.]     The  second  entry  is 

1  Jeffa  Judge  of  Israel,'  p.  93,  vol.  iii,  Dec.  14,  1624.     Halliwell  gives  a  facsimile 

of  ' A  proper  new  ballad,  intituled,  Jepha  yudge  of  Jfrael?  of  which  the  first  stanza 

runs  as  follows : 

'  I  read  that  many  yeare  agoe, 
When  Jepha  Judge  of  Jsrael, 
Had  one  fair  Daughter  and  no  more, 
whom  he  loved  so  passing  well. 
And  as  by  lot  God  wot, 
It  came  to  passe  most  like  it  was, 
Great  warrs  there  thould  be, 

and  who  should  be  the  chiefe,  but  he,  but  he.' 

Copies  of  this  ballad  differ  slightly  from  each  other,  says  Halliwell.  Malone  refers 
to  Latin  tragedies  on  this  subject  by  Christopherson,  1546,  and  by  Buchanan,  1554, 
and  thinks  it  had  probably  been  introduced  on  the  English  stage.  Ccllier  shows 
from  Henslowe's  Diary  (pp.  220,  221,  222,  and  223)  that,  in  1602,  Dekker  and 
Chettle  were  paid  for  a  tragedy  they  were  writing  on  the  story  of  Jephthah,  and  that 
the  subject,  therefore,  was  popularly  known  by  means  of  ballads  and  the  stage. 

386.  What  treasure]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  89)  cites  Fx  as  containing  another  in- 
stance, like  II,  ii,  295,  of  a  interpolated:  'What  treasure,'  surely  for  grammar's 
Bake. 

394.  Nay  .  .  .  not]  Zornlin  (Sh.  Soc.  Tapers,  vol.  iii,  p.  157)  :  It  follows  not 
that  you  are  lika  Jephthah,  ir  loving  your  daughter, — but  in  your  shameful  sacri- 
fice of  her. 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 75 

1  It  came  to  pass,  as  most  like  it  was,' —  399 

the  first  row  of  the  pious   chanson  will  show  you   more ; 
for  look,  where  my  abridgements  come. — 

Enter  four  or  five  Players. 

You  are  welcome,  masters ;  welcome  all.     I  am  glad  to  see 

399.  'It. .was?]  As  a  quotation,  Pope.  401.  abridgements  comt]  Ff,  Rowe  +  , 

400.  pious  chanson']  Qq,  Jen.  Pons  Cald.  Knt.  abridgement  comes  Qq  et 
Ck  mfon  Ff>  Cald.     Pans  Chanfon  FF  cet. 

F.  Kubrick  Q'76,  Rowef.  Pont-chan-  Enter...]  Enter  the  Players.  Qq.    Ei>- 

sons  Han.  Cap.  ter  certain  players,  usher'd.  Cap. 

401.  where]  Om.  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  402.    You  are]    Y'are  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 

399.  It  came  to  pass]  Mouerly  :  '  As  he  had  a  daughter,  of  course  he  got 
into  a  scrape,'  is  the  inference  suggested. 

400.  pious  chanson]  Pope  explained  the  reading  of  Ff  as  the  name  of  '  old 
ballads  sung  on  bridges.'  Steevens  defines  'pious  chansons'  as  ballads  containing 
some  scriptural  history,  sung  about  the  streets,  and  the  '  first  row '  is  the  first  column 
of  the  roughly  printed  sheet.  Nares  thinks  the  reading  of  the  Ff  apparently  non- 
sense. Shakespeare  intended,  perhaps,  to  mix  French  and  English,  but  both  seem  to 
have  been  corrupted  by  the  players  and  printers.  Singer  (ed.  1)  really  decides  the 
question  by  an  appeal  to  Qt,  where  the  corresponding  phrase  is  '  the  firft  verfe  of  the 
godly  Ballet'  [line  1016].  But  Hunter  {New  Illust.  ii,  232)  opened  the  question 
again  by  advocating  the  reading  of  the  F  ,  on  the  score  of  its  being  the  latest  intention 
of  the  poet,  and  the  proper  one.  *  In  fact,  in  France,  the  trivial  ballad,  such  as  that  re- 
ferred to,  is  called  in  ordinary  discourse  a  pons  chanson,  or  a  chanson  du  Pont  Neuf 
"  Vaudevilles,  ou  Chanson  du  Pont  Neuf,  les  chansons  communes  qui  se  chantent 
parmi  le  peuple  avec  une  grande  facilite,  et  sans  art :  Trivialis  cantilena" — Dic- 
tionnaire  de  Trevoux,  s.  v.  Chanson.''  In  reply  to  Hunter,  Knight  [ap.  Dyce]  perti- 
nently asks :  '  A  popular  ballad  is  called  even  in  modern  dictionaries  a  chanson  du 
Pont  Neuf, — but  where  is  the  authority  for  Pons  Chanson  ?'  [According  to  Littre, 
the  secondary  meaning  of  Pont- Neuf  is :  '  Chanson  populaire  sur  un  air  tres-connu, 
e.  g.  II  sait  tous  les  ponts-neufs  qui  courent  les  rues.'  (In  this  sense  it  is  not 
printed  with  capital  letters.)  But  nowhere  does  he  give  such  a  phrase  as  pons 
chansons  nor  chanson,  used  absolutely  when  meaning  the  specific  chansons  du  pont- 
neuf  Ed.] 

401.  myj  *Iunter  [New  Illust.  ii,  233) :  'My'  does  not  necessarily  refer  back 
to  the  speaker,  but  may  be  used  ethically.  Corson  :  It  is  so  used  in  the  Ff  read- 
ing; in  that  of  the  Qq  it  is  used  objectively. 

401.  abridgements]  Johnson:  He  calls  the  players  afterwards  [line  507]  the 
brief  chronicles  of  the  time;  but  I  think  he  now  means:  those  who  will  shorten 
my  talk.  Steevens  (Note  on  Mid.  N.  D.  V,  i,  39) :  By  abridgement  Sh.  may  mean 
a  dramatic  performance,  which  crowds  the  events  of  years  into  a  few  hours.  Dyce 
(Gloss.) :  In  this  place  it  is  applied  to  the  players,  as  being,  I  presume,  the  persons 
wno  represent  an  abridgement.  Clarendon:  Hamlet  uses  the  word  in  a  double 
sense.     The  players  by  entering  abridge  his  talk. 


176      '  HAMLET  [act  11,  sc.  it 

ye   well.      Welcome,    good    friends. — O,    my   old    friend ! 
Thy  face  is  valanced  since  I  saw  thee  last ;  comest  thou  to 
beard  me  in  Denmark  ? — What,  my  young  lady  and  mis-  405 
tress !     By  'r  lady,  your  ladyship  is  nearer  to  heaven  than 
when  I  saw  you  last,  by  the  altitude  of  a  chopine.     Pray 

403.  ye]  Dyce  ii.  Huds.  you  Han.  406.  ByW  Lady]  Byrlady  Fx.  Ber- 
thee  QqFf  et  cet.                                                  lady  F2F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.    by  lady 

my]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  Q2Q3Q4-    my  Ladie  Q  .    Ferlady  Theob. 

Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White,  Ktly.  Warb.  Johns. 

404.  Thy]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Knt,  Dyce,  ladyship]  LordJJiip  F3F4,  Rowe. 
Sta.  Huds.  Glo.  Cla.  Mob.  Why,  thy  to  heaven]  heaven  Ff,  Rowe  +  , 
Qq  et  cet.  Knt,  Dyce  i. 

valanced]  valancl   Q3Q,.      va-  407.  chopine]  Choppine  Ff.    chioppine 

lanc'd  Q4QS«     valiant  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.         Pope  +  .     chapin  Jen. 
Knt,  Sta. 

404.  valanced]  M alone  :  That  is,  fringed  with  a  beard.  The  valance  is  the 
fringes  or  drapery  hanging  round  the  tester  of  a  bed.  Caldecott  :  That  is,  is  be- 
come manly  and  fierce,  as  in  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii,  150,  'bearded  like  the  pard.' 
STAUNTON  :  Compare  the  advice  of  Iago  to  Roderigo ; — •  Follow  thou  the  wars ;  defeat 
thy  favour  with  an  usurped  beard,'  i.  e.  assume  a  martial  aspect ;  and  also  the  context 
in  Hamlet's  speech,  •  comest  thou  to  beard  me  in  Denmark  ?'  where  the  point  is  lost 
without  the  fierceness  implied  by '  valiant.'  Clarendon  :  •  Valiant '  is  probably  a  mere 
misprint.  Wedgwood  :  Supposed  to  be  from  the  stuff  having  been  made  at  Valencia 
or  Valence. 

406.  By'r]  Pronounced  beer  (Walker,  Vers.  p.  191). 

406.  ladyship]  Clarendon  :  In  Shakespeare's  time,  and  till  after  the  restoration 
of  Charles  II,  female  parts  were  played  by  boys.  (Compare  Two  Gent.  IV,  iv,  165.) 
Probably  the  first  woman  who  ever  appeared  on  the  English  stage  played  Desde- 
mona,  on  Saturday,  6  December,  1660.  [Who  that  actress  was  has  not  been  ascer- 
tained;  a  Mrs  Hughs  acted  this  part,  in  this  company,  in  1663,  and  to  her  may 
belong  the  honour;  although  the  received  tradition  is  that  it  is  due  to  Mrs  Saunder- 
son,  afterwards  Mrs  Betterton.  The  gross  absurdity  of  entrusting  to  boys,  and  even 
to  men,  the  r6les  of  women  is  well  hit  off  in  the  doggerel  '  Prologue,  to  introduce  the 
first  woman  that  came  to  act  on  the  stage :' 

'  Our  women  are  defective,  and  so  sized 
You'd  think  they  were  some  of  the  guard  disguised : 
For,  to  speak  truth,  men  act,  that  are  between 
Forty  and  fifty,  wenches  of  fifteen  ; 
With  bone  so  large,  and  nerve  so  incompliant, 
When  you  call  Desdemona,  enter  Giant.' 

iTie  apology  was  once  made  to  Charles  II  for  unpunctuality  in  beginning  a  play, 
tl.at  'the  queen  was  not  shaved.'     See  Var.  of  1821,  vol.  iii,  p.  129.  Ed.] 

407.  chopine]  Thelwall  (Grey's  Notes,  &c,  ii,  291)  thinks  this  is  the  Scotch 
w  »rd  for  a  quart  measure.  Vide  Jamieson,  s.  v.  Chapin.  Reed:  Tom  Coryat,  in 
hii.  Crudities,  161 1,  p.  262,  calls  them  chapineys,  and  gives  the  following  account 
of  them :  •  There  is  one  thing  used  of  the  Venetian  women,  and  some  others  dwell 
ing  in  the  cities  and  townes  subject  to  the  signiory  of  Venice,  that  is  not  to  bo 
cbserved  (I  thinke)  amongst  any  other  women  in  Christendome :  which  is  common 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  I  77 

God,  your  voice,  like  a  piece  of  uncurrent  gold,  be   not     408 
cracked  within  the  ring. — Masters,  you  are  all  welcome. 

in  Venice,  that  no  woman  whatsoever  goeth  without  it,  either  in  her  house  or  abroad, 
a  thing  made  of  wood  and  covered  with  leather  of  sundry  colors \  some  with  white, 
some  redde,  some  yellow.  It  is  called 'a  chapiney,  which  they  wear  under  their  shoes. 
Many  of  them  are  curiously  painted ;  some  also  of  them  I  have  seen  fairely  gilt :  so 
uncomely  a  thing  (in  my  opinion)  that  it  is  pitty  this  foolish  custom  is  not  cleane 
banished  and  exterminated  out  of  the  citie.  There  are  many  of  these  chapineys  of  a 
great  height,  even  half  a  yard  high,  which  maketh  many  of  their  women  that  are  very 
short,  seeme  much  taller  than  the  tallest  women  we  have  in  England.  Also  I  have 
heard  it  observed  among  them,  that  by  how  much  the  nobler  a  woman  is,  by  so  much 
the  higher  are  her  chapineys.  All  their  gentlewomen  and  most  of  their  wives  and 
widowes  that  are  of  any  wealth,  are  assisted  and  supported  eyther  by  men  or  women, 
when  they  walke  abroad,  to  the  end  they  may  not  fall.  They  are  borne  up  most  com- 
monly by  the  left  arme,  otherwise  they  might  quickly  take  a  fall.'  Malone  :  Minsheu 
defines  '  Chapin  de  muger,  a  womans  shooes,  such  as  they  use  in  Spaine,  mules,  or  high 
corke  shooes?  There  is  no  synonymous  word  in  the  Italian.  Boswell  said  that  ciop- 
pino  is  in  Veneroni's  Dictionary,  but  Dyce  (Gloss.)  says  that  none  of  the  Italian  Dic- 
tionaries in  his  possession  contain  the  word.  [It  is  not  in  Baretti.  Singer  says  that  it  is 
recorded  under  the  title  of  zoccolo,  which,  however,  means  simply  a  sandal,  or  patten.] 
Douce  :  In  Raymond's  Voyage  through  Italy,  1648,  we  find:  'This  place  [Venice] 
is  much  frequented  by  the  walking  may  poles,  I  meane  the  women.  They  weare 
their  coats  halfe  too  long  for  their  bodies,  being  mounted  on  their  chippeens,  (which 
are  as  high  as  a  man's  leg),  they  walke  between  two  handmaids,  majestickly  delibe- 
rating of  every  step  they  take.  This  fashion  was  invented  and  appropriated  to  the 
noble  Venitian  wives,  to  bee  constant  to  distinguish  them  from  the  courtesans,  who 
goe  covered  in  a  vaile  of  white  taffety.'  The  choppine,  or  some  kind  of  high  shoe, 
was  occasionally  used  in  England.  Bulwer,  in  his  Artificial  Changeling  [1653], 
complains  of  this  fashion  as  a  monstrous  affectation,  and  says  that  his  countrywomen 
therein  imitated  the  Venetian  and  Persian  ladies.  In  Sandys's  travels,  1615,  there  is 
a  figure  of  a  Turkish  lady  with  chopines ;  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  Venetians 
borrowed  them  from  the  Greek  Islands.  Singer  :  Perhaps  Hamlet  may  have  some 
allusion  to  the  boy  having  grown  so  as  to  fill  the  place  of  a  tragedy  heroine,  and  so 
assumed  the  cothurnus ;  which  Puttenham  described  as  'high  corked  shoes,  or  pan- 
tofles,  which  now  they  call  in  Spaine  and  Italy  Shoppini.1  [Singer  misunderstood 
the  passage  in  Puttenham  (see  Arber's  Rep.  p.  49),  which  is  as  follows :  '  the  actors 
[of  the  parts  of  great  Princes]  ware  vpon  their  legges  buskins  of  leather  called 
Cothurni,  and  other  solemne  habits,  and  for  a  speciall  preheminence  did  walke  vpon 
those  high  corked  shoes  or  pantofles,  which,'  &c.  At  a  Jewish  wedding  in  Jerusa- 
lem at  which  I  was  present,  in  1856,  the  young  bride,  aged  twelve,  wore  chopines 
at  least  ten  inches  high.  Ed.] 

409.  ring]  Johnson  :  Cracked  too  much  for  use.  Douce  :  There  was  a  ring  on 
the  coin,  within  which  the  sovereign's  head  was  placed ;  if  the  crack  extended  from 
the  edge  beyond  this  ring,  the  coin  was  rendered  unfit  for  currency.  [To  the  same 
effect,  also,  Gifford,  note  on  Jonson's  The  Magnetic  Lady,  Works,  vol.  vi,  p.  76.] 
Such  pieces  were  hoarded  by  the  usurers  of  the  time  and  lent  out  as  lawful  money. 
TVus,  Roger  Fenton,  in  his  Treatise  of  Usury,  161 1,  p.  23  :  A  poore  man  desireth  a 

M 


I 78  HAMLET  [act  11,  sc.  it 

We'll  e'en  to  't  like  French  falconers,  fly  at  any  thing  we  410 
see ;  we'll  have  a  speech  straight ;  come,  give  us  a  taste  of 
your  quality ;  come,  a  passionate  speech. 

First  Play.     What  speech,  my  good  lord  ? 

Ham.     I  heard  thee  speak  me  a  speech  once,  but  it  was 
never  acted  ;  or,  if  it  was,  not  above  once ;  for  the  play,  I  re-  415 
member,  pleased  not  the  million;  'twas  caviare  to  the  general ; 

410.  e'en  td't\  Ro we.   ento't  Qq.   e'ne  413.  good\    Om.    Ff,    Rowe,    Steev. 

toU  Ff.  Bos.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  White, 

French]    friendly    Qq,     Pope,  Glo.  Ktly,  Mob. 

Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  416.  caviare]  Johns,  cauiary  Qq,  Jen. 

falconers']  Fankners  Q2Q.  Fauk-  El.     Cauiarie  Fx.     Cavitary  F2F  F  .     a 

ners  Q4Q5-     Faulconers  Ff,  Rowe+.  caviary   Q'76.      Caviar   Rowe+.     ca- 

413,  446,  &c.     First   Play.]    1   Play.  viarie  Cald.  Knt  i. 
Ff.      Player.  Qq. 

goldsmith  to  lend  him  such  a  summe,  but  he  is  not  able  to  pay  him  interest.  If  such 
as  I  can  spare  (saith  the  goldsmith)  will  pleasure  you,  you  shall  have  it  for  three  or 
foure  moneths.  Now,  hee  hath  a  number  of  light,  dipt,  crackt  peeces  (for  such  he 
useth  to  take  in  change  with  consideration  for  their  defects  :)  this  summe  of  money 
is  repaid  by  the  poore  man  at  the  time  appointed  in  good  and  lawfull  money.  This 
is  usurie.'  And  again,  'It  is  a  common  custome  of  his  [the  usurer's]  to  buy  up 
crackt  angels  at  nine  shillings  the  piece.  Now  sir,  if  a  gentleman  (on  good  assur- 
ance) request  him  of  mony,  Good  sir,  (saith  hee,  with  a  counterfait  sigh)  I  would 
be  glad  to  please  your  worship,  but  my  good  mony  is  abroad,  and  that  I  have,  I  dare 
not  put  in  your  hands.  The  gentleman  thinking  this  conscience,  where  it  is  subtilty, 
and  being  beside  that  in  some  necessity,  ventures  on  the  crackt  angels,  some  oi 
which  cannot  flie,  for  soldering,  and  paies  double  interest  to  the  miser  under  the 
cloake  of  honesty.' — Lodge's  WifsMiserie,  1596.  Caldecott  :  Another  sense  is 
also  meant :  a  voice  broken  in  consequence  of  licentious  indulgence. 

410.  French]  Capell  (i,  133)  :  The  French  are  remarkably  irregular  in  all  feats 
of  sporting  even  at  this  day.  Steevens  :  Toilet  mentions  that  Sir  Thomas  Browne 
{Miscellany  Tracts,  p.  1 16)  says  that  'the  French  seem  to  have  been  the  first  and 
noblest  falconers  in  the  western  part  of  Europe,'  and  afterwards  (p.  1 18),  adds 
Clarendon,  he  (Sir  Thomas  Browne)  mentions  a  falcon  of  Henry  of  Navarre, 
'  which  Scaliger  saith,  he  saw  strike  down  a  buzzard,  two  wild  geese,  divers  kites,  a 
crane  and  a  swan.'  *  The  phrase  here,  "  fly  at  any  thing  we  see,"  may  not,  therefore, 
*»ave  been  intended  to  express  contempt.' 

414.  me]  An  ethical  dative,  like  'inquire  me  first  what  Danskers,'  &c,  II,  i,  6; 
also  compare  Rom.  <Sr»  Jul.  Ill,  i,  6 :  'he  claps  me  his  sword.'  Schmidt  {Lex. 
5.  v.  'I')  says  of  this  dative,  that  although  superfluous  as  to  the  general  sense,  it 
imparts  a  lively  color  to  the  expression.  Matzner  (ii,  211),  with  keener  analysis, 
defines  it  as  a  personal  pronoun  of  the  first  or  second  person,  used,  in  familiar  or 
jocose  style,  to  denote  the  subjective  interest  which  the  speaker  or  the  person  ad- 
dressed feels  in  some  allusion  to  a  circumstance  which  objectively  is  regarded  as 
accomplished  independently  of  that  interest.     See  also  V,  i,  157. 

416.  caviare]   Reed:  Giles  Fletcher,  in  his  Russe  Commonwealth,  1591,  says,  in 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 79 

but  it  was, — as  I  received  it,  and  others,  whose  judgements  417 
in  such  matters  cried  in  the  top  of  mine, — an  excellent  play, 
well  digested  in  the  scenes,  set  down  with  as  much  modesty 
as  cunning.     I  remember,  one  said  there  were  no  sallets  in  420 

417.  received}  conceived  Coll.  (MS).  Ff,  Rowe,  White,     was  no  ialts  Pope  i. 
judgements']  judgement  Ff,  Rowe         was  no  salt  Pope  ii  + ,  Jen.  El.   Coll.  ii 

4-,  Cald.  Sta.  (MS),     were  no  salts  Cap. 

420.  were  no  sallets]  was  no  Sallets 

Russia  they  have  '  divers  kinds  of  fish  :  the  Bellouga  and  Bellougina,  .  .  .  the  Osi- 
trina  and  Sturgeon.  ...  Of  the  roes  of  these  four  kinds  they  make  very  great  store 
of  Icary  or  Caviary.'  Ritson  {Remarks,  &c.,  p.  199) :  Hamlet  means  that  the  play, 
like  the  pickled  sturgeon,  was  a  delicacy  for  which  the  multitude  has  no  relish. 
Douce  (Illust.  &c,  ii,  236)  :  This  word  has  been  frequently  mispronounced  caveer 
on  the  stage;  but  the  following  line  from  Sir  J.  Harrington's  33d  Epigram,  book  iii, 
leaves  no  uncertainty  in  the  matter :  '  And  caveare,  but  it  little  boots. .  . .'  Caviar 
was  formerly  a  considerable  article  of  commerce  between  England  and  Russia. 
Nares  :  In  Shakespeare's  time  it  was  a  new  and  fashionable  delicacy,  not  obtained 
nor  relished  by  the  vulgar,  and  therefore  used  by  him  to  signify  anything  above  their 
comprehension. 

416.  the  general]  Malone:  Lord  Clarendon  (Book  v,  p.  530)  uses  this  word  to 
signify  '  the  people'  in  the  same  manner  it  is  used  here.  Caldecott  :  In  Galateo 
of  Manners,  p.  29,  1576,  we  have  the  moste  used  in  the  same  sense. 

418.  cried  in  the  top]  Warburton  :  That  is,  whose  judgement  I  had  the  highest 
opinion  of.  JOHNSON  :  I  think  it  means  only,  that  were  higher  than  mine.  Heath  : 
Whose  judgement,  in  such  matters,  was  in  much  higher  vogue  than  mine.  Steevens  : 
Perhaps  it  means  only  :  whose  judgement  was  more  clamorously  delivered  than  mine. 
We  still  say  of  a  bawling  actor,  that  he  speaks  on  the  top  of  his  voice.  Henley  : 
To  over-top  is  a  hunting  term  applied  to  a  dog  when  he  gives  more  tongue  than  the 
rest  of  the  cry.  To  this,  I  believe,  Hamlet  refers,  and  he  afterwards  mentions  a  cry 
of  players.  CALDECOTT :  Proclaimed  not  merely  in  addition  to  my  voice  and  cen- 
sure, but  with  a  tone  of  authority  that  mine  could  not  sound.  Clarendon  :  Hen- 
ley's explanation  of  the  metaphor  is  probably  right.  But  it  is  the  superior  authority 
or  value  of  the  judgements,  not  the  greater  loudness  with  which  they  were  delivered, 
that  is  indicated  here. 

419  modesty]  Warburton :  Simplicity.  Dyce  (Gloss.):  Moderation.  Tschisch- 
witz:  In  rhetorical  phraseology,  'modesty'  is  evrafjia.  Cic.  De  Off.  lib.  I,  xl,  142, 
ed.  Orelli :  '  Sed  ilia  est  evrai-ia,  in  qua  intelligitur  ordinis  conservatio.  Itaque,  ean- 
dem  nos  modestiam  apellemus,  sed  definitur  a  Stoicis,  ut  modestia  sit  scientia  rerum 
earum  quce  agerentur  aut  dicentur,  loco  suo  collocandarum.^  Thus,  also,  'modesty 
of  nature'  [III,  ii.  18]  means  that  symmetrical  harmony  by  which  the  acts  of  every- 
day life  are  made  to  fit  the  situation,  that  '  temperance  and  smoothness  in  the  very 
torrent,  tempest,  and  the  whirlwind  of  passion '  to  which  '  modesty'  can  be  applied, 
as  in  Pliny,  vi,  20,  71  :  modestia  qusedam  aquarum.  Did  Sh.  really  not  understand 
Latin  ? 

420.  sallets]  Heath  :  This  is  spoken  in  approbation,  not  in  disparagement,  ol 
the  play.     The  sense  is :  it  wanted  the  high  seasoning  of  loose  ribaldry  and  luscious 


l8o  HAMLET 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


the  lines  to  make  the  matter  savoury,  nor  no  matter  in  the  421 
phrase  that  might  indict  the  author  of  affection ;  but  called 
it  an  honest  method,  as  wholesome  as  sweet,  and  by  very 
much  more  handsome  than  fine.     One  speech  in  it  I  chiefly 
loved ;  'twas  ^Eneas's  tale  to  Dido ;  and  thereabout  of  it  es-  425 

422.  indict']  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  424.  speech]  cheefe  Speech  F,.  chief t 
Glo.  + ,  Huds.  Mob.    indite  QqFf  et  cet.         fpeech    Fa.     chief  fpeech    F3F4,  Rowe, 

affection]  affeclation  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt. 

Han.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  in  it]  in't  Qq. 

White,  Ktly,  Glo.  Del.  Huds.  425.  Mneas's]   Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

but]  but  /Johns,  conj.  Aeneas  Q2Q.    ^Eneas  Q  Q  Ff.    Apneas' 

423.  424.    as    wholesome... fine]   Om.  Pope  et  cet. 

Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  tale]  talke  Qq,  Cap. 

double  meanings.  GiFFORD  defends  Pope's  reading,  on  the  strength  of  a  line  in 
one  of  Jonson's  Epigrams  ( Works,  vol.  viii,  p.  177)  :  '  I  have  no  salt,  no  bawdry  he 
doth  mean ;'  and  pronounces  '  sallets '  as  akin  to  nonsense.  Singer  :  '  Salt '  was 
probably  intended.  '  Salt,  a  pleasaunt  and  merrie  word,  that  maketh  folks  to  laugh, 
and  sometimes  pricketh.' — Baret.  Dyce  :  In  spite  of  Gifford's  note,  I  think  the 
alteration  to  salt  a  hasty  one — '  sallets,'  i.  e.  salt  (ribald)  words  and  allusions  (see 
Richardson's  Dictionary  for  the  etymology  of  salad  or  sallet).  Collier  (ed.  2) : 
The  (MS)  has  'salt,'  perhaps  wrongly,  though  sallets  or  salads  seems  not  easily  un- 
derstood. The  allusion  may  have  been  particular  and  temporary.  Clarendon  : 
Pope  was  probably  not  aware  that  fragrant  and  piquant  herbs  were  mixed  with  the 
salad. 

422.  indict . .  .  affection]  Steevens  :  That  is,  convict  the  author  of  being  a  fan 
tastical,  affected  writer.  In  Love's  Lab.  V,  i,  4,  *  witty  without  affection'  i.  e.  affec- 
tation. Malvolio  is  called  'an  affectioned  ass'  in  Twelfth  Night,  II,  iii,  160.  Cal- 
decott  :  From  the  use  of  the  Latin,  it  seems  that  the  English  word  was  first  intro- 
duced. •  Thy  maner  of  wrytynge  is  dark  with  over  moche  curyosyte.  Stylus  tuus 
affectione  obscuratur  nimia.' — Horman's  Vulgaria,  I53°« 

424.  handsome  than  fine]  Delius  :  « Handsome '  denotes  genuine,  natural 
beauty — *  fine,'  artistic,  labored  beauty.  Clarke  :  In  this  passage  [from  line  420] 
Sh.  is,  in  his  own  subtle  vein  of  quiet  hum:*,  satirising  the  foppery  of  give-and-take 
criticism. 

425.  thereabout]  Clarendon:  A  substantive,  like  'whereabout,'  in  Macb.  II, 

i,  58. 

425.  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  p.  72) :  I  should  suspect  this  play  referred  to  by 
Hamlet  to  be  Shakespeare's  from  one  reason  only;  and  that  is,  from  its  subject. 
There  is  scarce  a  play  throughout  all  his  works,  in  which  it  was  possible  to  introduce 
the  mention  of  them,  where  he  has  not  by  simile,  allusion,  or  otherwise,  hinted  at 
the  Trojan  affairs ;  so  fond  was  he  of  that  story.  Pope  (ed.  2) :  This  whole  speech 
of  Hamlet  is  purely  ironical ;  he  seems  to  commend  this  play  to  expose  the  bombast 
of  it.  Who  was  its  author  is  not  come  to  my  knowledge.  Warburton  :  I  think 
that  Hamlet  spoke  with  commendation  to  upbraid  the  false  taste  of  the  audience  of 
that  time,  wl'.:/.  would  not  suffer  them  to  do  justice  to  the  simplicity  and  the  sublime 
:>f  this  production.     And  I  reason,  first,  from  the  character  Hamlet  gives  of  tbe 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  l8l 


[425.  /Eneas's  tale  to  Dido.] 
play  from  whence  the  passage  is  taken.  Secondly,  from  the  passage  itself.  And, 
thirdly,  from  the  effect  it  had  on  the  audience.  Firsts  they  who  suppose  the  passage 
was  given  in  order  to  be  ridiculed  must  needs  suppose  that  what  Hamlet  says  in 
lines  418-426  was  purely  ironical,  and  the  strangest  irony  ever  was  written.  '  It 
pleased  not  the  multitude.'  This  we  must  conclude  to  be  true,  however  ironical  the 
rest  be.  Now  the  reason  given  of  the  designed  ridicule  is  the  supposed  bombast. 
Whereas  bombast,  we  know,  at  that  time  took  with  the  multitude.  But  Hamlet  tells 
why  it  displeased  them  :  that  there  was  no  salt  in  the  lines,  nor  affected  style.  Now 
it  could  not  be,  if  this  play  displeased  on  account  of  the  bombast,  that  they  whom 
it  displeased  should  give  this  reason  for  their  dislike.  All  these  inconsistencies  dis- 
appear if  we  take  Hamlet  as  speaking  his  genuine  sentiments,  as  thus:  The  play,  I 
remember,  pleased  not  the  multitude,  and  the  reason  was  its  being  written  on  the 
rules  of  the  ancient  drama;  to  which  they  were  entire  strangers.  But  in  my  opinion 
and  in  that  of  others  of  better  judgement  than  mine,  it  was  an  excellent  play,  well 
digested  in  the  scenes,  i.  e.  where  the  three  unities  were  well  preserved.  Set  down 
with  as  much  modesty  as  cunning,  i.  e.  where  not  only  the  art  of  composition,  but 
the  simplicity  of  nature,  was  carefully  attended  to.  But  these  qualities,  which  gained 
my  esteem,  lost  the  public's.  For  /  remember,  one  said,  There  was  no  salt  in  the 
lines  to  make  the  matter  savory,  i.  e.  there  was  not,  according  to  the  mode  of  that 
time,  a  fool  or  clown,  to  joke,  quibble,  and  talk  freely.  Nor  no  matter  in  the  phrase 
that  might  indite  the  author  of  affection,  i.  e.  nor  none  of  those  passionate,  pathetic 
love-scenes,  so  essential  to  modern  tragedy.  But  he  called  it  an  honest  method,  i.  e. 
he  owned,  however  tasteless  this  method  of  writing,  on  the  ancient  plan,  was  to  our 
times,  yet  it  was  chaste  and  pure ;  the  distinguishing  character  of  the  Greek  drama. 
I  need  only  make  one  observation  on  all  this;  that,  thus  interpreted,  it  is  the  justest 
picture  of  a  good  tragedy,  wrote  on  the  ancient  rules.  2.  A  second  proof  that  this 
speech  was  given  to  be  admired  is  from  the  intrinsic  merit  of  the  speech  itself,  which 
contains  the  description  of  a  circumstance  very  happily  imagined,  namely  :  Ilium  and 
Priam's  falling  together,  with  the  effect  it  had  on  the  destroyer.  Now  this  circum- 
stance, illustrated  with  the  fine  similitude  of  the  storm,  is  so  highly  worked  up  as  to 
have  well  deserved  a  place  in  Virgil's  second  book  of  the  ALneid,  even  though  the 
work  had  been  carried  on  to  that  perfection  which  the  Roman  poet  had  conceived. 
3.  The  third  proof  is,  from  the  effects  which  followed  on  the  recital.  Hamlet,  his 
best  character,  approves  it ;  the  player  is  deeply  affected  in  repeating  it ;  and  only 
the  foolish  Polonius  tired  with  it.  The  player  changes  color,  and  the  tears  start  from 
his  eyes.  But  our  author  was  too  good  a  judge  of  nature  to  make  bombast  and  un- 
natural sentiment  produce  such  an  effect.  But  if  any  one  will  still  say  that  Sh.  in- 
tended to  represent  a  player  unnaturally  and  fantastically  affected,  we  must  appeal 
to  Hamlet,  that  is,  to  Sh.  himself  in  this  matter;  who,  on  the  reflection  he  makes 
upon  the  player's  emotion,  in  order  to  excite  his  own  revenge,  gives  not  the  least  hint 
that  the  player  was  unnaturally  or  injudiciously  moved.  On  the  contrary,  his  fine 
description  of  the  actor's  emotion  shows  he  thought  just  otherwise.  And  indeed 
had  Hamlet  esteemed  this  emotion  anything  unnatural,  it  had  been  a  very  improper 
circumstance  to  spur  him  to  his  purpose.  That  which  supports  the  common  opinion 
concerning  this  passage  is  the  turgid  expression  in  some  parts  of  it,  which,  they 
think,  could  never  be  given  by  the  poet  to  be  commended.  We  shall,  therefore,  in 
the  nert  place  examine  the  lines  most  obnoxious  to  censure,  and  see  how  much, 
16 


1 82  HAMLE1  [act  II,  sc.  S 


[425.  i^Eneas's  tale  to  Dido.] 

illowing  the  charge,  this  will  make  for  the  induction  of  their  conclusion.  [See 
lines  451  and  473.]  Now  whether  these  be  bombast  or  not  is  not  the  question  ;  but 
whether  Sh.  esteemed  them  so.  That  he  did  not  so  esteem  them  appears  from  his 
having  used  the  very  same  thoughts  in  the  same  expressions  in  his  best  plays,  and 
given  them  to  his  principal  characters,  where  he  aims  at  the  sublime ;  as  in  the  fol- 
lowing passages:  Troilus  ( Tro.  <5r»  Cres.V,  iii,  40-42)  far  outstrains  the  execution 
of  Pyrrhus's  sword  in  the  character  he  gives  of  Hector's.  Cleopatra  {Ant.  6°  Cleo. 
IV,  xv,  44)  rails  at  fortune  in  the  same  manner.  But  another  use  may  be  made  of 
these  quotations ;  a  discovery  of  this  recited  play,  which,  letting  us  into  a  circum- 
stance of  our  author's  life  (as  a  writer)  hitherto  unknown,  was  the  reason  I  have 
been  so  large  upon  this  question.  I  think,  then,  it  appears  from  what  has  been  said 
that  the  play  in  dispute  was  Shakespeare's  own,  and  that  this  was  the  occasion  of 
writing  it.  He  was  desirous,  as  soon  as  he  had  found  his  strength,  of  restoring  the 
chasteness  and  regularity  of  the  ancient  stage,  and  therefore  composed  this  tragedy 
on  the  model  of  the  Greek  drama,  as  may  be  seen  by  throwing  so  much  action  into 
relation.  But  his  attempt  proved  fruitless,  and  the  raw,  unnatural  taste,  then  preva- 
lent, forced  him  back  again  into  his  old  Gothic  manner.  For  which  he  took  this 
revenge  upon  his  audience.  Capell  :  Among  the  very  few  plays  of  that  time  that 
have  not  been  seen  by  the  editor  is  one  that  bears  the  title, '  Dido,  queen  of  Carthage? 
in  which  one  might  be  apt  to  expect  the  speech  in  question ;  the  cast  of  Thomas 
Nash's  production  is  widely  different.  Malone  :  I  formerly  thought  that  these  lines 
were  extracted  from  some  old  play,  of  which  it  appeared  to  me  probable  that  Mar- 
lowe was  the  author ;  but  whatever  Shakespeare's  view  in  producing  them  may  have 
been,  I  am  now  decidedly  of  opinion  they  were  written  by  himself,  not  in  any  former 
unsuccessful  piece,  but  expressly  for  the  play  of  Hamlet.  It  is  observable  that  what 
Warburton  calls  «  the  fine  similitude  of  the  storm,'  is  likewise  found  in  our  poet's 
Venus  6°  Adonis.  Steevens  :  The  praise  which  Hamlet  bestows  on  this  piece  is 
certainly  dissembled,  and  agrees  very  well  with  the  character  of  madness,  which, 
before  witnesses,  he  thought  it  necessary  to  support.  The  speeches  before  us  have 
so  little  merit  that  nothing  but  an  affectation  of  singularity  could  have  influenced 
Warburton  to  undertake  their  defence.  The  poet,  perhaps,  meant  to  exhibit  a  just 
resemblance  of  some  of  the  plays  of  his  own  age,  in  which  the  faults  were  too  gen- 
eral and  too  glaring  to  permit  a  few  splendid  passages  to  atone  for  them.  The 
player  knew  his  trade,  and  spoke  the  lines  in  an  affecting  manner,  because  Hamlet 
had  declared  them  to  be  pathetic,  or  might  be  in  reality  a  little  moved  by  them. 
The  mind  of  the  prince,  it  must  be  confessed,  was  fitted  for  the  reception  of  gloomy 
ideas,  and  his  tears  were  ready  at  a  slight  solicitation.  It  is  by  no  means  proved 
that  Sh.  has  employed  the  same  thoughts  clothed  in  the  same  expressions  in  his  best 
plays.  If  he  bids  the  false  huswife  Fortune  break  her  wheel,  he  does  not  desire  her 
to  break  all  its  spokes  ;  nay,  even  its  periphery,  and  make  use  of  the  nave  afterwards 
for  such  an  imvieasurable  cast.  Though  if  what  Warburton  has  said  should  be 
found  in  any  instance  to  be  exactly  true,  what  can  we  infer  from  thence  but  that 
Sh.  was  sometimes  wrong  in  spite  of  conviction,  and  in  the  hurry  of  writing  com- 
mitted those  very  faults  which  his  judgement  could  detect  in  others?  Warburton  is 
inconsistent  in  his  assertions  concerning  the  literature  of  Sh.  In  a  note  on  Tro.  &* 
Cres.  he  affirms  that  Shakespeare's  want  of  learning  kept  him  from  being  acquainted 
with  Homer;  and  yet  in  this  instance  would  suppose  him  capable  of  producing  a 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 83 


[425.  JEneas's  tale  to  Dido.] 
complete  tragedy  written  on  the  ancient  rules ;  and  that  the  speech  before  us  had 
sufficient  merit  to  entitle  it  to  a  place  in  the  second  book  of  Virgil "s  sl'lneid. 
Steevens  afterwards  discovered  a  copy  of  this  play  of  Dido,  queen  of  Carthage, 
referred  to  by  Capell,  and  asserted  that  it  did  not  furnish  Sh.  with  more  than  a  gen- 
eral hint  for  his  description  of  the  death  of  Priam,  &c,  unless  a  correspondence  be 
perceived  to  Shakespeare's  line  451  in  'And  with  the  wind  thereof  the  king  fell 
down,'  and  to  line  458  in  '  So  leaning  on  his  sword  he  stood  stone  still.'  The  ex- 
tracts which  Steevens  gives  will  be  found  in  Fleay's  note,  further  on ;  of  them 
Steevens  says  that  surely  the  greater  part  is  more  ridiculous  than  even  Shakespeare's 
happiest  vein  of  burlesque  and  parody  could  have  made  it.  Ritson  believes  that  the 
admiration  of  the  play  expressed  by  Hamlet  was  genuine,  and  that  this  is  probably 
an  extract  from  one  of  Shakespeare's  early  productions.  He  then  adds  :  The  verses 
recited  are  far  superior  to  those  of  any  coeval  writer ;  the  parallel  passage  in  Mar- 
lowe and  Nash's  Dido  will  not  bear  the  comparison.  Possibly,  indeed,  it  might 
have  been  his  first  attempt,  before  the  divinity  that  lodg'd  ivithin  him  had  instructed 
him  to  despise  the  tumid  and  unnatural  style  so  much  and  so  unjustly  admired  in  his 
predecessors  or  contemporaries,  and  which  he  afterwards  so  happily  ridiculed  in  '  the 
swaggering  vaine  of  Ancient  Pistol.'  Seymour  (ii,  172)  agrees  with  Ritson,  and 
Pye  (p.  314)  agrees  with  Seymour.  Coleridge:  This  admirable  substitution  of 
the  epic  for  the  dramatic  diction  of  Shakespeare's  own  dialogue,  and  authorized 
too,  by  the  actual  style  of  the  tragedies  before  his  time  (Porrex  <5r»  Ferrex,  Til. 
And.,  &c),  is  well  worthy  of  notice.  The  fancy  that  a  burlesque  was  intended 
sinks  below  criticism ;  the  lines,  as  epic  narrative,  are  superb.  In  the  thoughts,  and 
even  in  the  separate  parts  of  the  diction,  this  description  is  highly  poetical;  in  truth, 
taken  by  itself,  that  is  its  fault  that  it  is  too  poetical ! — the  language  of  lyric  vehe- 
mence and  epic  pomp,  and  not  of  the  drama.  But  if  Sh.  had  made  the  diction 
truly  dramatic,  where  would  have  been  the  contrast  between  Hamlet  and  the  play  in 
Hamlet  ?  Schlegel  {Led.  on  Dram.  Lit.  ii,  197) :  This  extract  must  not  be  judged 
of  by  itself,  but  in  connection  with  the  place  where  it  is  introduced.  To  distinguish 
it  as  dramatic  poetry  in  the  play  itself,  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  rise  above  its 
dignified  poetry  in  the  same  proportion  that  the  theatrical  elevation  does  above 
simple  nature.  Hence  Sh.  has  composed  the  play  in  Hamlet  altogether  in  senten- 
tious rhymes  full  of  antitheses.  But  this  solemn  and  measured  tone  did  not  suit  a 
speech  in  which  violent  emotion  ought  to  prevail,  and  the  poet  had  no  other  expe- 
dient than  the  one  of  which  he  made  choice :  overcharging  the  pathos.  The  lan- 
guage of  the  speech  in  question  is  falsely  emphatical ;  but  yet  this  fault  is  so  mixed 
up  with  true  grandeur  that  a  player,  practised  in  calling  forth  in  himself  artificially 
the  imitated  emotions,  may  certainly  be  carried  away  with  it.  Besides,  it  will  nardly 
be  believed  that  Sh.  knew  so  little  of  his  art  as  not  to  be  aware  that  a  tragedy  in  which 
iEneas  had  to  make  a  lengthened  epic  relation  of  a  transaction  that  happened  so 
long  before  as  the  destruction  of  Troy  could  neither  be  dramatical  nor  theatrical. 
Caldecott  :  These  warm  commendations  of  Hamlet  cannot  be  other  than  the  real 
sentiment  of  Sh.  From  whatever  quarter  the  fragment  came,  it  affords  a  decisive 
proof  of  Shakespeare's  taste  in  this  department  of  the  drama.  He  may  here  have 
chosen  to  give  his  conception  of  the  true  and  just  swell  of  tragedy.  Hunter  (ii, 
234) :  Is  it  possible  that  Sh.,  who  knew  so  well  what  belongs  to  poetry  and  the 
dramatic  art,  can  have  approved  of  a  wearisome  speech  like  this,  its  bombast  phrases, 


1 84  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


[425.  jEneas's  tale  to  Dido.] 
Its  empty  declamation,  and  with  at  least  two  anti-climaxes  as  palpable  as  can  any- 
where be  found  ?  There  is  but  one  redeeming  clause  [lines  461-465].  But  even 
this,  as  the  reader  cannot  but  perceive,  sinks  «is  it  proceeds,  and  becomes  common- 
place and  inharmonious.  His  objection  to  the  phrase,  *  mobled  queen,'  might  of 
itself  prove  that  the  poet,  if  he  seemed  /a  anything  which  he  said  to  commend,  spoke 
ironically,  for  a  more  unhappy  expression  could  scarcely  have  occurred.  Probably 
it  was  the  play  of  Dido  *-b<at  he  meant  to  ridicule.  Strachey  (p.  55),  speaking  of 
the  extracts  from  Dido,  Queen  of  Carthage,  given  by  Steevens,  says :  '  Though  there 
is  not  a  line,  hardly  a  thought  of  them,  the  same  as  the  passage  which  the  player 
recites,  and  which  is  of  course  Shakespeare's  own,  still  the  style  is  so  like,  that  the 
audience  would  probably  have  been  reminded  of  Marlowe's  play,  and  so  have  ex- 
perienced the  sensation  of  hearing  real  men  quoting  a  real  play ;  nay,  if  they  re- 
tained only  a  general  recollection  of  the  original,  might  have  supposed  that  the 
quotation  was  actually  from  Marlowe's  tragedy.'  Elze  :  From  all  that  we  know 
of  Shakespeare's  treatment  of  his  own  works,  it  seems  in  the  highest  degree  im- 
probable, not  only  that  he  should  have  introduced  here  his  own  composition,  but 
that  he  should  have  praised  it  also.  Rightly  to  understand  this  passage,  it  is  essen- 
tial that  we  should  lose  sight  of  the  person  of  the  poet,  and  separate  his  opinion 
from  the  praise  of  Hamlet.  It  is  clear  that  in  this  speech  the  keynote  of  that  school 
of  learned  poets  is  struck  that  was  hostile  to  Shakespeare's  naturalistic  style.  .  .  . 
By  making  Hamlet  so  enthusiastic  in  his  admiration  of  a  drama  that  was  moulded 
on  the  learned,  pathetic,  and  classic  model,  Sh.  evidently  wished  to  give  us  an  insight 
into  his  hero's  studious  and  pre-eminently  ideal  character.  A  side-thrust  is  at  the 
same  time  unmistakably  given  to  Shakespeare's  opponents ;  in  effect  he  thus  appeals 
to  them :  ■  Behold,  it  is  such  folk  as  my  Hamlet  that  admire  you ;  such  folk  is  it  that 
you  educate  with  your  poetry.'  Delius  :  This  drama,  if  there  really  were  such  a 
one,  and  if  it  had  not  been  composed  for  the  nonce  to  suit  Hamlet's  purpose,  could 
have  been  written  by  no  one  but  Sh.  himself,  and  the  praise  of '  modesty '  and  '  cun- 
ning '  must  have  been  meant  in  seriousness.  Fleay  (  On  the  Extract  from  an  Old 
Play  in  Hamlet.  Macmillan's  Maga.  Dec.  1874,  p.  135)  :  Marlowe's  play  was  finished 
by  Nash,  after  Marlowe's  death  in  1593,  and  published  in  1594.  It  is  for  the  most 
part  written  in  Marlowe's  style,  with  some  minor  interpolations  by  Nash.  In  Act 
II,  sc.  i,  which  is  far  the  weakest  in  the  play,  and  does  least  to  advance  the  plot, 
there  are  several  peculiarities.  1.  Priamus  is  used  for  the  name  of  the  king  of  Troy 
eight  times,  Priam  three  times  only.  Elsewhere  in  the  play  the  form  of  Priam  is 
used  exclusively.  2.  The  name  Alexander  is  given  to  Helen's  lover ;  in  other  parts 
of  this  play,  and  in  Marlowe's  other  works,  he  is  called  Paris.  3.  At  the  end  of 
y^Eneas's  tale  there  is  a  stage-direction  [Exeunt  omnes\,  although  Ascanius  remains 
on  the  stage  and  talks  to  Venus  and  Cupid,  who  then  come  in.  This  double  ending 
to  a  scene  implies  double  authorship,  or  one  author  working  at  two  distinct  times. 
It  is  a  common  phenomenon ;  in  Sh.,  for  instance,  we  find  it  in  Tro.  6°  Cres.  and  in 
Macb.  4.  The  whole  of  the  scene  is  inferior  in  workmanship,  in  characterization, 
in  theatrical  requirements,  in  poetical  power.  All  the  '  iEneas's  tale '  part  could  be 
cut  out  and  not  missed.  This  scene,  then,  for  the  above  reasons,  is  unlike  Marlowe's 
work  in  the  rest  of  the  play ;  it  is  equally  unlike  the  other  plays  of  his  writing.  We 
may  confidently  assign  the  greater  part  of  it  to  Nash,  if  not  the  whole.  But  it  was 
in  1594  that  Sh.  revised  the  Her    VJt  in  which  Marlowe  had  written  a  great  part, 


act  ii.  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 85 


[425.  iEneas's  tale  to  Dido.] 

and  ne  might  naturally  expect  to  have  the  revision  of  this  play  also  committed  to 
him.  He  was  on  indifferent  terms  with  Nash  at  this  time.  What  could  be  more 
likely  than  that  he  should  write  a  scene,  or  a  portion  of  one,  to  show  how  much  better 
tie  would  have  done  the  editing  of  the  play?  He  chooses,  naturally  enough,  that 
scene  in  which  Nash  has  shown  the  greatest  weakness,  and  writes  as  nearly  in  the 

Marlowe  rhythm  as  he  can [Page  136.]  I  hold,  then,  that  the  object  which 

Sh.  had  in  view  in  introducing  this  speech  into  Hamlet  was  to  expose  the  weakness 
ii  his  opponent  Nash  as  a  playwright,  and  to  utilize  a  piece  of  work  which  he  had 
lying  idle  by  him.  When  he  wrote  Hamlet  he  seems  to  have  been  just  entering  that 
cynical  state  which  has  been  noted  by  Hallam  as  a  characteristic  of  his  third  period. 
...  In  considering  this  point  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  this  speech  is  contained 
in  the  earliest  form  of  the  published  Hamlet,  so  that  it  was  an  integral  part  of  the 
play  in  its  first  state.  This  is  important  so  far  that  when  the  revised  Hamlet  was 
produced,  Nash  was  certainly  no  longer  alive,  and  Sh.  was  not  the  man  to  exult 

over  a  dead  enemy [Page  137.]  We  will  now  compare  some  parts  of  the  tale 

of  ./Eneas  as  told  by  Sh.  and  by  Nash,  with  a  view  to  show  that  they  are  rival  pro- 
ductions.    Nash  describes  Pyrrhus  thus  : 

'  At  last  came  Pyrrhus,  fell,  and  full  of  ire. 
His  harness  dropping  blood,  and  on  his  spear 
The  mangled  head  of  Priam's  youngest  son. 
And  after  him  his  band  of  myrmidons 
With  balls  of  wildfire  in  their  murderous  paws, 
Which  made  the  funeral  flame  which  burnt  fair  Troy.' 

Shakespeare's  is  more  expanded.  Compare  lines  430-442.  Nash  gives  this  narra- 
tive of  Priam's  death  : 

'  And  at  Jove's  altar  finding  Priamus, 
About  whose  withered  neck  hung  Hecuba 
Folding  his  hand  in  hers,  and  joindy  both 
Beating  their  breasts  and  falling  on  the  ground  ; 
He  with  his  falchion's  point  raised  up  at  once, 
And  with  Megaera's  eyes  stared  in  their  face, 
Threatening  a  thousand  deaths  at  every  glance. 

****** 
Not  moved  at  all,  but  smiling  at  his  tears, 
The  butcher  while  his  hands  were  yet  held  up 
Treading  upon  his  breast,  struck  off  his  hands. 
At  which  the  frantic  queen  leapt  on  his  face, 
And  in  his  eyelids  hanging  by  the  nails 
A  little  while  prolonged  her  husband's  life. 
At  last  the  soldiers  pulled  her  by  the  heels, 
And  swung  her  howling  in  the  empty  air, 
Which  sent  an  echo  to  the  wounded  king, 
Whereat  he  lifted  up  his  bed-rid  limbs 
And  would  have  grappled  with  Achilles'  son, 
Forgetting  both  his  strength  and  want  of  hands : 
Which  he  disdaining  whiskt  his  sword  about, 
And  with  the  wind  thereof  the  king  fell  down; 
Then  from  the  navel  to  the  throat  at  once 
He  ripped  old  Priam.' 

Compare  Sh.,  lines  446-452.     That  these  passages  were  written  in  direct  rivalry  » 
manifest;  the  superior  power  and  excellence  of  the  Sh.  portions  is  equally  manifest; 
*nd  when  we  rrmember  that  the  splendid  simile  of  the  storm  and  the  description  of 
16* 


1 86  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 

pecially,  where  he  speaks  of  Priam's  slaughter.  If  it  live  in  426 
your  memory,  begin  at  this  line ;  let  me  see,  let  me  see ; 

1  The  rugged  Pyrrhus,  like  th'  Hyrcanian  beast,' — 
'tis  not  so ;  it  begins  with  '  Pyrrhus.' 

'  The  rugged  Pyrrhus, — he  whose  sable  arms,  430 

'  Black  as  his  purpose,  did  the  night  resemble 

'  When  he  lay  couched  in  the  ominous  horse, — 

'  Hath  now  this  dread  and  black  complexion  smear'd 

1  With  heraldry  more  dismal ;  head  to  foot 

1  Now  is  he  total  gules;  horridly  trick'd  435 

1  With  blood  of  fathers,  mothers,  daughters,  sons, 

1  Baked  and  impasted  with  the  parching  streets, 

426.  where]  when  Qq.  433.  this]    his   Q'76,    Rowe-t-,   Jen. 

427-429.  see;... Pyrrhus']  Cap.   Prose,  Sing.  El.  Ktly. 

QqFf,  Rowe  4- ,  Jen.  434.  heraldry"]  heraldy  Qq. 

428.  th?  Hyrcanian]  Th"1  ircanian  dismal ;  head  to  foot]  difmall 
Qq.  the  Hyrcanian  F,  Rowe, Cap.  Steev.  head  to  foole,  Qq.  difmall  head  to  foot 
Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Dyce  i,  Q'76. 

Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  Del.  Cla.  435.  total  gules]  totall  Gules  Qq.     to 

429.  'tis  not  so]  Cap.  tis  not  fo  QaQ3-  take  Geulles  FIF2.  to  take  Geules  FF. 
tis  not  Q4Qg.     It  is  not  so  Ff,  Rowe+,         total  geules  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 

Jen.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Glo. +  .  trick'd]  trickt  QqF  ,  Rowe+. 

431.  his]  he  F2F3.  437.  Baked]  Ba'k  F4. 

432.  he]  his  FaF4.  impasted]  empafled  Q2Q3,  Jen. 
the  ominous]  th1  omynous  QaQ3.  embafled  Q4Q5- 

th1  ominous  Q.Q--  streets]  fires  Pope-f . 

Hecuba  are  also  in  the  Sh.  speech,  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  that  he  meant  these 
lines  for  mere  bombast.  I  do  not  quote  the  Hecuba  part,  as  there  is  nothing  corre- 
sponding to  it  in  Nash,  and  it  is  in  every  one's  hands.     The  finest  bit  in  Nash  is  the 

picture  of  Pyrrhus : 

'  So  leaning  on  his  sword  he  stood  stone  still, 
Viewing  the  fire  wherewith  rich  Ilion  burnt ;' 

and  this  Sh.  has  capped  with  lines  458-466.     There  is  a  moral  certainty  that  these 

passages  are  competitors  for  popular  favor On  all  grounds  alike,  then,  I  hold 

that  this  scene  was  written  by  Sh.  in  1594,  as  a  supplement  to  Marlowe's  unfinished 
play,  in  competition  with  Nash,  and  that  it  was  introduced  by  him  into  the  first 
draught  of  Hamlet  in  1601  or  thereabouts. 

435.  gules]  Steevens:  This  signifies  red  in  the  barbarous  jargon  of  heraldry. 
Also  in  Timon,  IV,  iii,  59.  Wedgwood  :  From  the  red  color  of  the  mouth. 
Gzieule,  the  mouth,  throat,  gullet.  GLOSSARY  of  Terms  Used  in  British  Heraldry  : 
Perhaps  from  the  Persian  ghul,  a  rose;  if  so,  it  was  probably  introduced  by  the 
Crusaders. 

435.  trick'd]  Malone  :  That  is,  •  painted,  smeared.'  Clarendon  :  In  heraldry 
a  'trick'  is  a  description  in  drawing,  opposed  to  'blazon,'  a  description  in  words. 
Delius  :  '  Trick'd,'  like  the  following  participles,  '  bak'd '  and  '  impasted,'  belongs  to 
gules,'  not  to  '  he.' 

437    impasted]  Caldecott:  See  Rich.  II:  III,  ii,  154.     All  terms  and  phrases 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


I87 


1  That  lend  a  tyrannous  and  damned  light 

'To  their  lords'  murder;  roasted  in  wrath  and  fire, 

*  And  thus  o'er-sized  with  coagulate  gore,  440 
1  With  eyes  like  carbuncles,  the  hellish  Pyrrhus 

'  Old  grandsire  Priam  seeks.' 
So,  proceed  you. 

Pol.     'Fore  God,  my  lord,  well  spoken,  with  good  accent 
and  good  discretion.  445 

First  Play.  '  Anon  he  finds  him 

1  Striking  too  short  at  Greeks  ;  his  antique  sword, 

'  Rebellious  to  his  arm,  lies  where  it  falls, 

'  Repugnant  to  command  ;  unequal  match'd, 

'  Pyrrhus  at  Priam  drives;  in  rage  strikes  wide;  450 

*  But  with  the  whiff  and  wind  of  his  fell  sword 

1  The  unnerved  father  falls.     Then  senseless  Ilium, 

1  Seeming  to  feel  this  blow,  with  flaming  top 

'  Stoops  to  his  base,  and  with  a  hideous  crash 

'  Takes  prisoner  Pyrrhus'  ear ;  for,  lo  !  his  sword,  455 


438.  That']   Than  Q^$. 

and]  and  a  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Ktly,  Del.  Cam. 
Huds. 

439.  their  lords'  murder]  Cap.  their 
Lords  murther  Qq.  their  vilde  Murthers 
FIF3F3.  their  vile  Murthers  F,  Cald. 
Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  Del.  Huds.  the  vile 
Murthers  Rowe.  murthers  vile  Pope  + . 
their  lord's  murder  Jen.  et  cet. 

in]  in  a  Rowe  i. 

440.  o'er-sized]  ore-cifed  Qq,  Pope. 
442,  443.    Old. ..you]  Coll.     One  line, 

Qq,  Cap. Jen.  Steev.Var.Cald.  Sing.  Ktly. 

442.  grandsire]  gransire  Pope,Theob. 

443.  So,  proceed  you.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe 


+  ,  Knt. 

444.  'Fore  God]  Foregod  Qq. 

447.  antique]  Pope,  anticke  QqFxFa. 
antick  FF,  Rowe. 

448.  to  his]  in  his  Rowe  ii. 

449.  match'd]  matcht  Qq.  match  Ff, 
Rowe,  Cald.  match  !  Theob.  conj. 
(withdrawn). 

452.  falls... Ilium]  falls  down  sense- 
less.    Ilium  Theob.  conj.  (withdrawn). 

Then  senseless  Ilium]  Om.  Qq. 

453.  this]  his  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt. 

454.  base]  Bace  Ff. 
hideous]  hiddious  Qq. 

455,465,469.  Pyrrhus']  Apostrophe, 
Pope. 


in  this  fragment  parallel  with  passages  in  Sh.  tend  to  prove  that  it  was  Shakespeare's 
own  composition. 

437-439.  streets  .  .  .  murder]  Anon  {Misc.  Obs.  1752,  p.  21):  Rather  read, 
*  the  parching  fires  That  lend  a  treacherous  and  damned  light  To  the  vile  murtherer* 
i.  e.  the  streets  being  in  flames  afford  a  treacherous  light.  Treacherous  because  they 
betray  their  masters  to  the  destroying  Pyrrhus. 

439.  lords']  Delius  :  '  Lords' '  is  better  than  lord's,  since  Priam's  death  is  not 
represented  till  afterwards,  and  should  not  be  anticipated  here. 

440.  o'er-sized]  Caldecott  :  Covered  as  with  glutinous  matter 
451.  But]  Delius:  Here  equivalent  to  merely. 


1 88  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  iL 

1  Which  was  declining  on  the  milky  head  456 

1  Of  reverend  Priam,  seem'd  i'  the  air  to  stick; 
'  So,  as  a  painted  tyrant,  Pyrrhus  stood, 
'  And,  like  a  neutral  to  his  will  and  matter, 

*  Did  nothing.  460 
1  But  as  we  often  see,  against  some  storm, 

'A  silence  in  the  heavens,  the  rack  stand  still, 

'  The  bold  winds  speechless  and  the  orb  below 

'  As  hush  as  death,  anon  the  dreadful  thunder 

1  Doth  rend  the  region;  so  after  Pyrrhus'  pause  465 

'  Aroused  vengeance  sets  him  new  a-work  ; 

1  And  never  did  the  Cyclops'  hammers  fall 

*  On  Mars  his  armour,  forged  for  proof  eterne, 

457.  reverend r]  reuerent  Qq.  F2F3F4?    Rowe+.      A  ro  wfedYx.     A 

458.  painted"]  Om.  FF,  Rowe.  roused  Theob.  ii,Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen. 

459.  And,  like]  Like  Qq.  And  UVd  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  El.  Ktly, 
FF.  Huds. 

2     3 

neutral]  Newtrall  QqFxF2F .  466.  a-work]  a-worke   Yx.     a  worke 

459, 460.  And.,  .nothing.]  One  line, Ff.  QqF2.     a  work  FF.     a1  work  Cap 

462.  rack]  racks  Q76.  wrack  Theob.  467.   Cyclops'']  Apostrophe,  Theob. 
conj.  (withdrawn).  468.  Mars  his  armour]  Q'76,  Pope  +  , 

463.  winds]  wind  Q1 7 6.  Jen.  Dyce,  Sta.  Del.    Mars  his  Armours 

465.  region;  so]  Theob.  ii.  region.  Ff,  Rowe.  <Marses  Armor  Qq,  Mai. 
So  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  i.  region,  Mar's  armours  Knt.  Mar's  armout 
so  Qq,  Glo.  + ,  Mob.  Cap.  et  cet. 

466.  Aroused]  Coll.      A  rowfed  Qq 

456.  declining]  Caldecott:  This  use  of  the  word,  which  is  frequent  in  Sh., 
I  have  not  observed  in  any  contemporaiy.  See  also  I,  v,  50.  [Elsewhere  Caldecott 
adduces  this  as  an  argument  in  favor  of  the  belief  that  this  extract  is  Shakespeare's 
own  composition.     See  his  note  on  line  437.] 

458.  painted]  Malone  :  Sh.  was  probably  here  thinking  of  the  tremendous  per- 
sonages often  represented  in  old  tapestry,  whose  uplifted  swords  stick  in  the  air,  and 
do  nothing.     Df.lius  :  The  simile  is  amplified  in  Macb.  V,  viii,  25-27. 

459.  neutral]  Clarendon  :  Not  standing  '  between  his  will  and  matter.'  But 
indifferent  to  both.     So  '  neutral '  is  opposed  to  •  loyal,'  in  Macb.  II,  iii,  106. 

460.  For  single  lines  of  two  or  three  accents  interspersed  amid  ordinary  verses,  see 
Abbott  (§§  511,  512) ;  so,  too,  II,  ii,  540,  557,  563;  III,  iii,  78;  and  Macb.  I,  ii,  20. 

462.  rack]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  A  mass  of  vapoury  clouds.  So  Bacon's  Sylva  Sylva- 
rum,  §  115,  p.  32,  ed.  1658.  'The  winds  in  the  upper  region,  which  move  the 
clcuds  above  (which  we  call  the  rack).' 

464.  hush]  For  other  instances  of  the  conversion  of  one  part  of  speech  into 
another,  see  Abbott,  §  22. 

465.  region]  C  ..arendon  :  Originally  a  division  of  the  sky  marked  out  by  the 
Roman  augurs.  In  later  times  the  atmosphere  was  divided  into  three  regions,  upper, 
middle,  and  lower.     By  Sh.  the  word  is  used  to  denote  the  air  generally. 

466.  a-work]  See  I,  v,  19. 


act  II,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 89 

1  With  less  remorse  than  Pyrrhus'  bleeding  sword 

*  Now  falls  on  Priam.  470 
'  Out,  out,  thou  strumpet,  Fortune !     All  you  gods, 

*  In  general  synod  take  away  her  power; 

*  Break  all  the  spokes  and  fellies  from  her  wheel, 

'  And  bowl  the  round  nave  down  the  hill  of  heaven 
1  As  low  as  to  the  fiends  !'  475 

PoL     This  is  too  long. 

Ham.  It  shall  to  the  barber's,  with  your  beard. — Prithee, 
say  on;  he's  for  a  jig  or  a  tale  of  bawdry,  or  he  sleeps; 
say  on  ;  come  to  Hecuba. 

471.  strumpet,    Fortune']    Hyphened,  476.  too]  two  Y  . 

Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  477.  to  the]  to  yth  FrFa.     to  th'  F,J?i, 

473.  fellies]  follies  Q2Qr    folles   Q4<  Rowe  + ,  White. 
fellowesQ$.  Fallies  FXF9F3.  felloes  Q'76. 

471.  Dryden  {Preface  to  Troilus  and  Cressida,  1679) :  What  a  pudder  is  here 
kept  in  raising  the  expression  of  triffling  thoughts.  Would  not  a  man  have  thought 
that  the  Poet  had  been  bound  Prentice  to  a  Wheel-wright  for  his  first  Rant?  and  had 
followed  a  Ragman,  for  the  clout  and  blanket,  in  the  second  ?  Fortune  is  painted 
on  a  wheel ;  and  therefore  the  writer  in  a  rage,  will  have  Poetical  Justice  done  upon 
every  member  of  that  Engin ;  after  this  execution  be  bowls  the  Nave  downhill, 
from  Heaven  to  the  Fiends:  (an  unreasonable  long  mark  a  man  would  think;)  'tis 
well  there  are  no  solid  Orbs  to  stop  it  in  the  way,  or  no  Element  of  fire  to  consume 
it ;  but  when  it  came  to  the  earth,  it  must  be  monstrous  heavy,  to  break  ground  as 
low  as  to  the  Center.  His  making  milch  the  burning  eyes  of  Heaven  was  a  pretty 
tollerable  flight  too ;  and  I  think  no  man  ever  drew  milk  out  of  eyes  before  him :  yet 
to  make  the  wonder  greater,  these  eyes  were  burning.  Such  a  sight  indeed  were 
enough  to  have  rais'd  passion  in  the  Gods,  but  to  excuse  the  effects  of  it,  he  tells  you 
perhaps  they  did  not  see  it.  [This  passage  is  criticised  not  as  Shakespeare's,  but  as 
1  written  by  some  other  poet.'  Ed.] 

473.  fellies]  Clarendon:  *  Iantes  :  The  fellowes  of  a  wheele;  the  peeces  (of 
wood)  whereeof  the  ring,  or  the  rime  consists.' — Cotgrave. 

478.  jig]  Steevens  :  A  jig  was  not,  in  Shakespeare's  time,  only  a  dance,  but  a 
ludicrous  dialogue  in  metre,  and  of  the  lowest  kind,  like  Hamlet's  conversation 
with  Ophelia  [III,  ii,  105-115].  In  The  Hog  hath  lost  his  Pearl,  1614,  one  of  the 
players  comes  to  solicit  a  gentleman  to  wri'e  a  jig  for  him.  Many  of  these  jigs  are 
entered  in  the  Stationers'  Company: — 'Philips  his  Jigg  of  the  Slyppers,'  1595; 
■  Kempe's  Jigg  ot  the  Kitchen-stuff  Woman,'  1595.  Malone:  So,  also,  in  the  Pro- 
logue to  Fletcher's  Love's  Pilgrimage  [misquoted;  it  should  be  the  Fair  Maid  of  the 
Inn — Collier's  Hist.  Eng.  Dram.  Poetry,  iii,  380]  :  *  A  jig  shall  be  clapp'd  at,  and 
every  rhyme  Prais'd  and  applauded,'  &c.  A  jig  was  not  always  in  the  form  of  a 
dialogue ;  it  signified  a  ludicrous  metrical  composition,  as  well  as  a  dance.  So  in 
Florio :  '  Frottola,  a  countrie  gigge,  or  round,  or  countrie  song,  or  wanton  verse.' 
Collier  (Hist.  Eng.  Dram.  Poetry,  iii,  380)  :  We  have  no  extant  specimen  of  any 
such  performance.    It  seems  to  have  been  a  ludicrous  composition  in  rhyme,  sung,  or 


[90  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  it 

First  Play.     *  But   who,    O,  who   had    seen   the   mobled 

queen, — '  480 

Ham.     '  The  mobled  queen  ?' 
Pol.     That's  good  ;  '  mobled  queen  '  is  good. 

480.  who,   O,  who]  who,  O  who,  Ff.  Tsch.  conj. 

who,  a  woe,  Qq.     who  alas  Q'76.    who,  480.  queen,  —  ]  Theob.      Queene,  Qf 

a    woe !    Cap.      who,   ah    woe !    Jen.  Q3Q.4'       Queene.   Q,F2.      Queen.    FXF  . 

Steev.  Var.  Queen  ?  F  ,  Rowe,  Pope. 

480,481,482.  mobled]    Mobled  F2F  481.  queen?]   queene.  Qq.      queene  I 

F4.    inobled¥v    mobbled Dry den,White.  Q'76,  Cap.  Ktly. 

ennobPd  Cap.      mabled  Mai.     ignobled  482.  mobled. ..good.]  Om.  Qq. 

said,  by  the  clown,  and  accompanied  by  dancing  and  playing  upon  the  pipe  and 
tabor.  Singer:  Giga,  in  Italian,  was  a  fiddle  or  crowd.  Hence  jig  (first  written 
gigge,  though  pronounced  with  g  soft,  after  the  Italian)  was  a  ballad  or  ditty  sung  to 
a  fiddle.  Dyce  {Note  on  Prologue  to  Fair  Maid  of  the  Inn) :  More  persons  than 
one  were  sometimes  employed  in  a  jig;  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  per- 
formance  was  of  considerable  length,  lasting  even,  on  some  occasions,  for  an  hour. 
Clarendon  :  See  Cotgrave,  '  Farce  :  f.  A  (fond  and  dissolute)  Play,  Comedie,  or 
Enterlude ;  also,  the  Iyg  at  the  end  of  an  Enterlude,  wherein  some  pretie  knauerie 
is  acted.'  [See  Chappell  {Popular  Music  of  the  Olden  Time,  p.  495),  where  the 
tune  is  given  of  The  King's  Jig,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  one  of  the  tunes 
to  which  Charles  II  danced.  Collier  says  that  some  of  Tarleton's  jigs,  both  music 
and  words,  survive  in  MS.] 

480.  mobled]  Warburton:  That  is  veiled.  Sandys  [Travels,  i,  69,  ed.  1637 — 
Clarendon],  speaking  of  the  Turkish  women,  says:  'their  heads  and  faces  are  so 
mabled  m  fine  linen  that  nothing  is  to  be  seen  of  them  but  their  eyes.'  Upton  (p. 
299) :  This  designedly  affected  expression  seems  to  be  formed  from  Virg.  sEn.  ii,  40  : 
MagnS.  comitante  caterva,  i.  e.  mob-led  Queen.  Farmer  :  '  The  moon  does  mobble 
up  herself.' — Shirley's  Gentleman  of  Venice.  Holt  White  :  It  is  nothing  but  a 
depravation  of  muffled.  '  Mobbled  nine  days  in  my  considering  cap.' — Ogilby's 
Fables.  Malone:  A  few  lines  lower  we  are  told  that  she  had  '  a  clout'  upon  her 
head.  To  mab  (in  the  North  pronounced  mob),  says  Ray,  in  his  Diet,  of  North 
Country  Words,  is  'to  dress  carelessly.  Mabs  are  slatterns?  COLERIDGE:  A  mob- 
cap  is  still  a  word  in  common  use  for  a  morning- cap,  which  conceals  the  whole  head 
of  hair,  and  passes  under  the  chin.  It  is  nearly  the  same  as  the  night-cap,  that  is,  it 
is  an  imitation  of  it,  so  as  to  answer  the  purpose  ('  I  am  not  drest  for  company'),  and 
yet  reconciling  it  with  neatness  and  perfect  purity.  Delius  :  The  real  meaning 
which  Sh.  attached  to  it  here  is  still  doubtful ;  that  an  unusual  word  was  intended  is 
plain,  both  from  Hamlet's  objection  to  it  and  Polonius's  approval  of  it.  G.  H.  of 
S.  (Ar.  6°  Qu.  23  July,  1864)  suggests  maddled,  a  word  in  use  in  Yorkshire,  mean- 
ing not  absolutely  mad,  but  bewildered  almost  to  madness. 

482.  good]  Warburton  :  Sh.  has  judiciously  chosen  Polonius  to  represent  the 

false  taste  of  that  audience  which  has  condemned  the  play  here  reciting.     When  the 

actor  comes  to  the  finest  and  most  pathetic  part  of  the  speech,  Polonius  cries  out, 

This  is  too  long.'    And  yet  this  man  of  modern  taste,  who  stood  all  this  time  perfectly 

anmoved  -with  the  forcible  imager}'  of  the  relator,  no  sooner  tears,  amongst  many 


ACT  II,  SC.  li.J 


HAMLET 


IQI 


First  Play.     'Run    barefoot    up   and    down,    threatening 
the  flames 
*  With  bisson  rheum  ;  a  clout  about  that  head 
1  Where  late  the  diadem  stood  ;  and  for  a  robe,  485 

1  About  her  lank  and  all  o'er-teemed  loins, 
1  A  blanket,  in  the  alarm  of  fear  caught  up  ; 
1  Who  this  had  seen,  with  tongue  in  venom  steep'd, 
1  'Gainst  Fortune's  state  would  treason  have  pronounced ; 
1  But  if  the  gods  themselves  did  see  her  then,  490 

'  When  she  saw  Pyrrhus  make  malicious  sport 
1  In  mincing  with  his  sword  her  husband's  limbs, 
1  The  instant  burst  of  clamour  that  she  made, — 
1  Unless  things  mortal  move  them  not  at  all, — 
'  Would  have  made  milch  the  burning  eyes  of  heaven       495 
1  And  passion  in  the  gods.' 


483.  Threatening  the  Jlames]      One 
line,  Ff. 

Jlames]Jlame Ff,Rowe,Cald.  Knt. 

484.  bisson  rheum]  F  .    Bifon  rehume 
Q2Q  .  Bifon  rhumeQ4Q  .  Bijfon  Rheume 

123 

about']  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Sta. 

vpon  Qq  et  cet. 

486.  all  0' er-teemed]    all-61  er-teemed 
Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

487.  alarm]  alarme  Qq.    alarum  Ff, 
Rowe,  Knt. 


489.  state]  State,  Ff,  Rowe. 

pronounced  :]  pronounjl ;  Q2Q3« 
pronounc* d ;  Q4Q5«  pronounced  ?  Ff, 
Rowe. 

492.  husband 's]  husband  Q2Q3- 

494.  things]    thing;    Q4    (Ashbee's 
Facs.). 

move]  meant  FF,  Dryden. 
at]  Om.  F3F4,  Rowe. 

495.  milch]  melt  Pope,  Han. 

496.  passion  in]  passioned  Han.  Cap. 
passionate  Coll.  (MS)  El. 


good  things,  one  quaint  and  fantastical  word,  put  in,  I  suppose,  purposely  for  this  end, 
than  he  professes  his  approbation  of  the  propriety  and  dignity  of  it.  Moberly: 
Polonius  praise^  the  epithet  to  make  up  for  his  blunder  in  objecting  to  the  length. 

484.  bisson]  Wedgwood  :  Blind,  properly  near-sighted.  Dutch,  '  bij  sien  pro- 
pius  videre,' — Kilian.  Clarendon:  In  Cor.  II,  i,  70,  it  means  '  blind.'  Here  it  is 
rather,  « blinding.'  '  Beesen  '  is  given  by  Brogden,  in  Provincial  Words,  as  still 
current  in  Lincolnshire.  [See  also  notes  on  its  derivation  by  F.  J.  V.  and  John 
Addis,  in  N.  &■»  Qu.  15  March,  1873;  and  19  April,  1873.  Ed.] 

486.  o'er-teemed]  Clarendon  :  Exhausted  by  child-bearing. 

495.  milch]  Steevens  :  Drayton  has  *  exhaling  the  milch  dew.' — Polyolbion, 
xiii,  171.  Douce:  •  Milche-hearted,'  in  Hulaet's  Abecedarium,  1552,  is  rendered 
lemosus ;  and  in  Bibliotheca  Eliota,  I545>  we  ^n&  *  lemosi,  they  that  wepe  lyghtly.' 
Staunton:  Moist. 

496.  passion]  Singer  :  Would  have  moved  them  to  sympathy  or  compassion. 
Elze:  According  to  Mommsen  [Perkins-Sh.  p.  367),  passionate  had  even  in  Shake- 
speare's days  an  antiquated  sound,  and  for  this  reason  it  would  appear  more  appro- 
priate here. 


192 


HAMLET 


[act  11,  sc.  ii. 


Pol.     Look,  whether  he  has  not  turned  his  colour  and  497 
has  tears  in 's  eyes. — Pray  you,  no  more. 

Ham.     Tis  well ;  I'll  have  thee  speak  out  the  rest  soon. 
— Good  my  lord,  will  you  see  the  players  well  bestowed  ?  50c 
Do  you  hear,  let  them  be  well  used,  for  they  are  the  abstracts 
and  brief  chronicles  of  the  time ;  after  your  death  you  were 
better  have  a  bad  epitaph  than  their  ill  report  while  you  live. 

Pol.     My  lord,  I  will  use  them  according  to  their  desert. 

Ham.     God's  bodykins,  man,  much  better!     Use  every  505 
man  after  his  desert,  and  who  should  'scape  whipping  ?    Use 
them  after  your  own  honour  and  dignity ;  the  less  they  de- 
serve, the  more  merit  is  in  your  bounty.     Take  them  in. 

Pol.     Come,  sirs. 

Ham.     Follow  him,  friends  ;  we'll  hear  a  p)ay  to-morrow.  5 10 
[Exit  Polonins  with  all  the  Players  but  the  First. 


497.  whether]  Mai.  where  QqFf, 
Rowe.  if  Pope,  Han.  whe're  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  whe'r  Cap.  Jen.  Del. 
whir  Dyce,  Sta. 

498.  has  tears]  has  not  tears  Han. 
in's]  in  'his  White,    in  his  Ktly. 
Pray  you]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce. 

prethee  Qq.    Prithee  or  Pr'ythee  et  cet. 

499.  the  rest]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt, 
Dyce,White,  Glo.  Huds.  the  rejl  of  this 
Qq  et  cet. 

501.  you  hear]  ye  heare  FXF2.  ye  hear 
F3F4,  Rowe,  White. 

abstracts]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  El.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  White,  Ktly,  Del. 
Huds.     abjlracl  Qq  et  cet. 

503.  live]  lived  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cald. 
Knt,  Del. 

504.  506.  desert]  defart  FIF2. 

505.  God's  bodykins]  Godsbodikins 
F2F3.    Gods  bodkin  Qq,  Coll.  El.    Odd's 


bodikins  Johns.  Gocfs-bodikin  Cap. 
God's  bodikin  Cald.  Del.  Odd's  bodi- 
kin  Steev.  Var.  Knt. 

505.  much]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald. 
Knt,  Dyce,  White. 

God's. ..man]  Om.  Q'76. 

506.  should]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  El.  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Del.  Glo 
Ktly.    JJiall  Qq  et  cet. 

510.  hear]  here  QQ. 

[Exit...]  Dyce,  Sta.  Del.  Huds. 
Glo.  + .  Exit  Polon.  (after  line  509)  Ff, 
Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  White.  Exeunt  Pol.  and 
Players,  (after  Elsinore,  line  520)  Qq. 
Exeunt  Polonius,and  Players,  (after  not, 
line  519)  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Exit  Pol. 
with  some  of  the  Players,  (after  line 
509)  Bos.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Ktly. 
As  they  follow  Pol.,  Ham.  detains  and 
steps  aside  with  1  Player.  White. 


498.  no  more]  Caldecott  :  Then,  when  he  exhibits  the  perfection  of  his  art, 
shows  that  he  enters  into  and  feels  his  character, — then  to  urge  that  the  actor  should 
cease  to  exercise  it,  seems  again  to  be  in  the  character  of  a  •  great  baby  in  swaddling 
clouts.' 

501.  abstracts]  Clarendon:  Always  used  by  Sh.  as  a  substantive. 

503,  504.  you  were  better  have]  Clarendon:  It  were  better  that  you  had. 
See  King  John,  IV,  iii,  94;  Oth.  V,  ii,  161.  Originally,  doubtless,  the  pronouns 
were  datives,  but  from  their  position  before  the  verb  they  slipped  into  nominatives, 
as  « Thou.' 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


1 93 


— Dost  thou  hear  me,  old  friend ;  can  you  play  The  Murder  511 
of  Gonzago? 

First  Play.     Ay,  my  lord. 

Ham.     We'll  ha't  to-morrow  night.     You  could,  for  a 
need,  study  a  speech  of  some  dozen  or  sixteen  lines,  which  515 
I  would  set  down  and  insert  in't,  could  you  not? 

First  Play.     Ay,  my  lord. 

Ham.  Very  well.  Follow  that  lord;  and  look  you 
mock  him  not.  [Exit  First  Player^] — My  good  friends,  I'll 
leave  you  till  night;  you  are  welcome  to  Elsinore.  520 

Ros.     Good  my  lord. 

Ham.     Ay,  so,  God  be  wi'  ye !     [Exeunt  Rosencrantz  and 
Guildenstern.~\ — Now  I  am  alone. 
Oh  what  a  rogue  and  peasant  slave  am  I ! 


511,  514,  518.  [Aside  to  Player.  Sta. 

512.  Gonzago]  Gonzaga  Johns. 

514.  ha't]  hate  QaQ3.  hattt  Q4Q, 
Jen.  have  it  Q  1703,  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 
Coll.  Sing.  El.  Ktly,  Del.  haveU  Q'76, 
Knt,  Sta.  Huds. 

514.  515.  for  a  need]  for  need  Qq. 

515.  dozen]  dofen  FxFa.  dofen  lines 
Qq,  Cap. 

or  sixteen]  Om.  Q'76. 

5 1 6.  *«'/,]  Qq,Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  + . 
irit  ?  Ff  et  cet. 

you]  ye  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  White. 
519.  [Exit  First  Player.]  Dyce.    Exit 
Player.  Reed  (1803).     Om.  QqFf. 

[To  Ros.  and  Guild.  Johns.  Jen. 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El. 


Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly. 

520.  till]  tell  Q0Q3 

[Exeunt  Players.  Coll.  (MS;. 

521.  Good  my]  Good,  my  Cap. 
[Exeunt.    Q2Q3Ff.     Exit  Q4Q5 

Manet  Hamlet.  Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen. 

522.  Scene  viii.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 
God  he  wV  ye]  god  f  «/'  ye  F 

God  buy  'ye  FTFaF3.  God  buy  to  you 
Qq.  God  by  w1  ye  Rowe+,  Jen.  Dyce, 
White,  Huds.  {good  Rowe).  God  be 
w?  you  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Cald.  Knt, 
Sta.  Ktly.  Good  bye  to  you  Bos.  Good 
bye  you  Coll. 

[Exeunt...]  Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
Del.  Huds.     After  line  521,  Cap. 
I  am]  am  /Q'76. 


515.  dozen  or  sixteen  lines]  See  III,  ii,  178. 

519.  mock]  Clarke:  Hamlet,  like  the  true  gentleman  that  he  is,  feels  that  he 
has  been  betrayed  into  treating  the  old  courtier  with  something  of  impatience  and 
discourtesy ;  therefore  he  bids  the  actor,  whom  he  knows  to  be  naturally  and  pro- 
fessionally disposed  to  waggery,  not  forget  himself  to  Polonius  on  the  strength  of 
the  example  just  given. 

522.  alone]  Clarke:  The  eagerness  shown  by  Hamlet  to  be  left  in  peace  by 
himself  appears  to  be  a  main  evidence  of  his  merely  acting  a  part  and  assuming 
madness ;  he  longs  to  get  rid  of  the  presence  of  persons  before  whom  he  has  resolved 
to  wear  a  show  of  insanity.  Alone,  he  is  collected,  coherent,  full  of  introspection. 
That  he  is  neither  dispassionate  nor  cool  appears  to  be  the  result  of  his  unhappy 
source  of  thought,  not  the  result  of  derangement ;  he  is  morally  afflicted,  not  men- 
tally affected. 

523.  peasant  slave]   It  is  shown  by  Furnivall  in  N.  6°  Qu.  12  April  and  3 

17  N 


1 94  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  ». 

Is  it  not  monstrous  that  this  player  here, 

But  in  a  fiction,  in  a  dream  of  passion,  525 

Could  force  his  soul  so  to  his  own  conceit 

That  from  her  working  all  his  visage  wann'd ; 

Tears  in  his  eyes,  distraction  in's  aspect, 

A  broken  voice,  and  his  whole  function  suiting 

With  forms  to  his  conceit?     And  all  for  nothing !  530 

For  Hecuba  ? 

What's  Hecuba  to  him,  or  he  to  Hecuba, 

That  he  should  weep  for  her?     What  would  he  do, 

Had  he  the  motive  and  the  cue  for  passion 

That  I  have?     He  would  drown  the  stage  with  tears  535 

525.  fction]fxion  QqFr.  530.  conceit?]  conceit;  Qq.     conceit^ 

526.  own]  whole  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Del.         Q'76. 

527.  his  visage~\  the  vifage  Qq.  nothing/"]    Cap.      nothing?  Ff, 
wann'd']    wand  Qq.      warned         Rowe  +  ,Jen.     nothing,  Qq.     nothing: 

Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.    Han.    Cald.  Han. 

Knt  i.  531.  For  Hecuba  ?]  For  Hecuba.  Qq. 

528.  in's]  ins  F2.    in  his  Qq,  Pope+ ,  For  Hecuba  !  Cap.     Om.  Seymour. 
Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  El.  Ktly.  532.  to  Hecuba]  to  her  Qq,  Jen. 

529.  and]  an  Q2Q3-  533'  the  cue  for]  that  for  Qq. 

May,  1873,  that  it  was  possible  for  Sh.  to  have  seen  in  the  flesh  some  of  the  bond- 
men or  4  peasant  slaves  '  of  England. 

527.  wann'd]  Steevens  upheld  warm'd,  because  the  effort  to  shed  tears  and  the 
unusual  exertion  in  a  passionate  speech  would  warm  and  flush  the  face ;  no  actor 
can  grow  pale  at  will,  and  even  if  he  could  there  is  nothing  in  the  fragment  to  make 
him.  Malone  effectually  silenced  all  this  by  referring  to  Polonius's  speech,  line 
497.  Clarendon  :  We  have  had  an  instance  of  a  verb  formed  from  an  adjective 
in  '  pale,'  I,  v,  90,  where  it  is  transitive. 

529.  function]  Caldecott:  That  is,  each  power  and  faculty, — the  whole  ener- 
gies of  soul  and  body.  '  Nature  within  me  seems  In  all  her  functions  weary  of  her- 
self.'— Sams.  Agon.  596,  i.  e.  using  the  term  that  imparts  « performance  or  the  doing 
of  a  thing '  for  '  the  power  or  faculty  by  which  the  thing  is  done.'  Clarendon  : 
The  whole  action  of  the  body.     See  Macb.  I,  iii,  140. 

530.  conceit]  Clarendon  :  Conception,  idea  (of  the  character  he  was  person- 
ating).    [See  also  III,  iv,  114;  IV,  v,  43.] 

534.  cue]  Wedgwood  :  The  last  words  of  the  preceding  speech,  prefixed  to  the 
speech  of  an  actor  in  order  to  let  him  know  when  he  is  to  come  on  the  stage.  From 
the  letter  Q,  by  which  it  was  marked.  •  Q,  a  note  of  entrance  for  actors,  because  it 
is  the  first  letter  of  quando,  when,  showing  when  to  enter  and  speak.' — C.  Butler, 
Eng.  Gram,  1634,  in  N.  &"  Qu.  5  Aug.  1865.  Minsheu  explains  it  somewhat  dif- 
ferently :  '  A  qu,  a  term  used  among  stage-players,  a  Lat.  qualis,  i.  e.  at  what  manner 
of  word  the  actors  are  to  begin  to  speak,  one  after  another  hath  done  his  speech, 
The  French  term  is  replique. 


4CTIl,SC.ii.]  HAMLET  I  95 

And  cleave  the  general  ear  with  horrid  speech,  536 

Make  mad  the  guilty  and  appal  the  free, 

Confound  the  ignorant,  and  amaze  indeed 

The  very  faculties  of  eyes  and  ears. 

Yet  I, 

A  dull  and  muddy-mettled  rascal,  peak, 

Like  John-a-dreams,  unpregnant  of  my  cause, 

And  can  say  nothing ;  no,  not  for  a  king, 

Upon  whose  property  and  most  dear  life 

A  damn'd  defeat  was  made.     Am  I  a.coward?  545 

537-  appaf\  appall  Rowe.    appale  Q2  540,541.  Yet. ..a  nil]  Yet  I,  a  Seymour. 

Q3.     appeale  Q4QS-     apaleYi.  540,543.   Yet... sal]    Yet  I  say  Pope, 

539,  540.    The...  Yet  I,]  As  in  Johns.  Han.  (Pope  gives  /omitted   passage   in 

One  line,  QqFf,  Rowe,  Theob.  Warb.  footnote.) 

Jen.  Bos.  Coll.  El.  Sta.  White,  Ktly.  541.  muddy-mettled']  Hyphen,  F2F9F3. 

539.  facilities]  faculty    Ff,   Rowe+,  542.    yohn-a-dreams]  yohn  a-deames 

Cald.  F*F3F4'  Rowe- 

eyes   and  ears]    ears   and    eyes  545-549-   coward ?... this  ?]    Commas 

Johns.  throughout  in  Qq. 

537.  free]  Caldecott:  Free  from  offence,  guiltless.    [See  '  free  souls,' III,  ii,  231.] 

541.  peak]   Singer:  To  mope,  to  act  foolishly  and  with  irresolution. 

542.  John-a-dreams]  STEEVENS:  That  is,  John  of  dreams,  which  means  only 
yohn  the  dreamer ;  a  nickname  for  any  ignorant,  silly  fellow.  Thus  the  puppet 
thrown  at  during  Lent  was  called  yack-a-lent.  and  the  ignis-fatuus,  yack-a-lanthorn. 
yohn-a-droynes,  however,  if  not  a  corruption  of  this  nickname,  seems  to  have  been 
some  well-known  character,  as  I  have  met  with  more  than  one  allusion  to  him. 
So,  in  Have  with  you  to  Saffron  Walden,  by  Nash,  1596:  'The  description  of  that 
poor  yohn-a-droynes  his  man,  whom  he  had  hired,'  &c.  yohn-a-Droynes  is  like- 
wise a  foolish  character  in  Whetstone's  Promos  and  Cassandra,  1578.  Collier  :  It 
is  rather  a  nickname  for  a  sleepy,  apathetic  fellow.  The  only  mention  yet  met  with 
of  John-a-dreams  is  in  Armin's  Nest  of  Ninnies,  1608  (see  Sh.  Soc.  vol.  x,  p.  49)  : 
1  His  name  is  John,  indeede,  saies  the  cinnick ;  but  neither  John  a  nods,  nor  John  a 
dreames,  yet  either  as  you  take  it.'  John-a-droynes  was,  in  all  probability,  a  different 
person. 

542.  unpregnant]  Johnson  :  Not  quickened  with  a  new  desire  of  vengeance ; 
not  teeming  with  revenge.  Clarendon  :  Having  no  living  thoughts  within  relating 
to  my  cause.  In  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  i,  12,  '  pregnant  in  '  is  used  for  'filled  with 
knowledge  of.' 

544.  property]  Clarendon  :  This  appears  here  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of  '  own 
person.'  Compare  '  proper  life,'  in  V,  ii,  66.  Or  possibly  it  may  mean  his  '  kingly 
right.'  The  commentators,  by  their  silence,  seem  to  take  it  in  the  ordinary  modern 
sense,  which  can  hardly  be.  [I  suppose  it  refers  to  his  crown,  his  wife,  everything, 
in  short,  which  he  might  be  said  to  be  possessed  of,  except  his  life.  'Property'  is 
used  in  its  ordinary  modern  sense  in  Merry  Wives,  III,  iv,  10.  Ed.] 

545.  defeat]  Varburton:   Destruction.     Steevens  :  This  word  is  very  licen- 


I 96  HAMLET  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 

Who  calls  me  villain  ?  breaks  my  pate  across  ?  546 

Plucks  off  my  beard,  and  blows  it  in  my  face  ? 

Tweaks  me  by  the  nose  ?  gives  me  the  lie  i'  the  throat, 

As  deep  as  to  the  lungs  ?  who  does  me  this  ? 

Ha!  550 

'Swounds,  I  should  take  it ;  for  it  cannot  be 

But  I  am  pigeon-liver'd,  and  lack  gall 

To  make  oppression  bitter  ;  or  ere  this 

I  should  have  fatted  all  the  region  kites 

549,  550.  this  ?  Ha  /]  this,  ha  ?  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Ktly,  Huds.    Om.  Pope-i  . 
Sta.  551.  ' *  Swounds... it /]   Why  I... it ;  Fx 

550.  Ha  /]  Separate  line,  Steev.  It  F2,  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing, 
begins  line  551,  QqFf  {Hah,  Q3Qr  Why  should  I  take  it?  F3F4,  Rowe. 
Hah!   Q4Q5.      Ha?   Ff),  Rowe,  Cap.  Yet  I should  take  it—  Pope  + . 

Jen.  Mai.,  and  ends  line  549,  Coll.  Dyce,  554.  have"}  a  Q2Q3- 

tiously  used  by  the  old  writers.  Thus,  in  Middleton's  Anything  for  a  Quiet  Life  : 
'  I  have  heard  of  your  defeat  made  upon  a  mercer.'  Chapman's  Revenge  for  Hon* 
our;  '  he  might  meantime  make  a  sure  defeat  On  our  good  aged  father's  life.'  Isle  of 
Gulls,  1606  :  '  my  late  shipwreck  has  made  a  defeat  both  of  my  friends  and  treasure.' 
Malone  :  See  Ham.  V,  ii,  58,  for  the  word  used  in  the  same  sense.  [See  also  I, 
ii,  10.] 

549.  me]  See  Abbott,  §  220,  for  instances  of  'me'  instead  of  for  me,  in  virtue 
of  its  representing  the  old  dative. 

550.  Ha!]  Elze  ingeniously  suggests  that  this  was  a  substitution  either  by  the 
Censor  or  by  the  actors  themselves,  for  the  objectionable  oath,  '  'Swounds;'  and  that 
both  exclamations  in  the  same  place  cannot  be  right.  The  fact  that  Qf  reads  '  Sure,' 
renders  it  not  impossible  that  the  coarser  oath  was  substituted  for  the  milder  one  by 
the  actors. 

552.  But]  Abbott  (g  122^:  '  It  cannot  be  (that  I  am  otherwise  than  a  coward),' 
i.e.  'it  cannot  be  that  I  am  courageous;  on  the  contrary  [but  adversative),  I  am 
pigeon-liver'd.' 

552.  pigeon-liver'd]  White:  It  was  supposed  that  pigeons  and  doves  owed 
their  gentleness  to  the  absence  of  gall.  '  A  Milk-white  Doue  .  . .  About  whose  Necke 
was  in  a  Choller  wrought  "  Only  like  me  my  mistress  hath  no  gall."  ' — Drayton's 
Ninth  Eclogue.  Clarendon  :  '  Gall '  is  here  used  metaphorically  for  '  courage ;' 
so  Tro.  &■»  Cres.  I,  iii,  237.     [See  Harting's  Ornithology  of  Sh.  p.  185.] 

553.  oppression]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  It  is  transgression  in  the  (MS),  but  '  oppres- 
sion '  is  no  doubt  the  proper  reading.  Hamlet  is  alluding  to  his  own  lack  of  gall, 
and  to  '  oppression '  being  bitter  to  himself.  The  old  annotator  seems  to  have  thought 
that  the  hero  was  referring  to  transgression  on  the  part  of  others,  which  he  lacked 
gall  to  make  bitter  to  them.  Dyce:  Hamlet  means  he  lacks  gall  to  make  him  feel 
the  bitterness  of  oppression.  Singer  [Shakespeare 's  Text  Vindicated,  p.  264)  pro- 
poses aggression,  a  conjecture  which  the  Cam.  Edd.  mark  as  'withdrawn.'  I  gladly 
accept  the  fact  on  their  testimony. 

554.  region]  See  line  465. 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


With  this  slave's  offal ;  bloody,  bawdy  villain  ! 
Remorseless,  treacherous,  lecherous,  kindless  villain 
0,  vengeance ! 

Why,  what  an  ass  am  I !     This  is  most  brave, 
That  I,  the  son  of  a  dear  father  murder'd, 
Prompted  to  my  revenge  by  heaven  and  hell, 
Must,  like  a  whore,  unpack  my  heart  with  words, 
And  fall  a-cursing,  like  a  very  drab, 
A  scullion ! 


197 
555 


560 


555.  offal;  bloody, ~\  off  all :  bloudy, 
Q'76.  0 fall,  bloody,  Qq.  Offall,  bloudy  : 
a  Ff  {bloody:  F/J. 

556.  Remorseless.. .villain  !]  Om.  Jen. 
(a  misprint?) 

557.  0,  vengeance  /]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  + , 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  El. 

558.  Why,]  Why  Qq.  Who?  Ff, 
Cald.     Om.  Knt. 

This]    I  fure,  this   Ff,   Rowe. 
Ay,  sure,  this  Cald.  Knt,  Del.  Ktly. 

559.  a  dear  father  murder'd]  Johns. 
a  deere  murthered  Q2Q3,  Jen.  Cald.  a 
deere  father  murthered  Q4QS-  «  dear 
father   murthered   Pope-K     the  Deere 


murthered  FjF,.     the   dear   murtherea 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  White,  Hal. 

562-565.  And  fall... play]  Cap.  Three 
lines,  ending  foh.  ...heard,... play,  Qq 
Three  lines,  ending  Drab,...Braine.  ... 
Play,  Ff,  Rowe-K  Four  lines,  ending 
drab, ... f oh  I... heard t... play,  Johns.  Jen. 
El. 

562,  563.  drab,  A  scullion]  drabbe ; 
a  flallyon  QaQ3-  drabbe ;  a  flallion 
Q  .  drabbe;  flallion  Q  .  drab — A 
stallion  Pope,  Jen.  drab — A  cullion 
Theob.  Han. 

And. ..scullion]  One  line,  Ktly. 


554,  555.  I  .  .  .  offal]  Sievers  (Archivf.  n.  Sprachen,  vol.  vi,  1849,  p.  12)  main- 
tains that  here  Hamlet's  plan  is  revealed,  which  is,  not  revenge,  not  murder,  but  to 
bring  Claudius  to  judgement  and  legal  execution  as  a  criminal,  upon  whose  gibbeted 
carcass  the  region  kites  can  fatten. 

556.  kindless]  Johnson:  Unnatural.  Singer:  We  have  ' kindly '  for  natural, 
i.  e.  accordance  with  kind,  elsewhere.  Hudson  :  Observe  how  Hamlet  checks  him- 
self in  this  strain  of  objurgation,  and  then,  in  mere  shame  of  what  he  has  done, 
turns  to  ranting  at  himself  for  having  ranted. 

559.  father]  Jennens:  There  seems  to  be  no  necessity  for  this  word  here;  or 
rather  it  is  tautology.  Boswell:  The  dear  murthered  for  the  dear  person  murthered 
is  very  far  from  being  a  harsh  ellipsis.  Knight  pronounces  the  text  of  the  Ff  •  a 
beautiful  reading,'  and  White  declares  it  '  a  fine  form  of  speech,  which  needs  no 
support,  and  which  we  have  had  before  in  this  play :  I,  iii,  67  ;'  adding  that  the  text 
of  Q2  is  '  inferior  in  both  thought  and  rhythm.'  Halliwell  :  The  '  dear  departed  ' 
is  still  a  common  phrase,  and  the  ellipsis  in  the  Ff  was,  I  suspect,  in  consonance 
with  the  phraseology  of  Shakespeare's  time. 

561.  Must]  Tschischwitz  finds  a  profound  meaning  in  this  use  of  '  must,'  where 
he  would  expect  do  to  be  used.  It  indicates  the  necessity,  so  he  affirms,  that  was 
laid  on  Hamlet  to  act  just  as  he  does. 

562.  a-cursing]  See  Abbott,  §  24,  and  Macb.  V,  v,  49. 

563.  scullion]  Theobald  was  persuaded  that  Sh.  wrote  cullion,  i.  e.  a  stupid, 

heartless,  white-livered  fellow;  as  in  Lear,  II,  ii,  36;  2  Hen.  VI:  I,  iii,  43. 

17* 


198 


HAMLET 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Fie  upon 't !  foil !     About,  my  brain  !     Hum,  I  have  heard 

That  guilty  creatures,  sitting  at  a  play,  565 

Have,  by  the  very  cunning  of  the  scene, 

Been  struck  so  to  the  soul  that  presently 

They  have  proclaim'd  their  malefactions ; 

For  murder,  though  it  have  no  tongue,  will  speak 

With  most  miraculous  organ.     I'll  have  these  players  570 

Play  something  like  the  murder  of  my  father 

Before  mine  uncle ;  I'll  observe  his  looks : 


564.  foh  !]  Om.  Han.  Seymour. 

About,  my  brain  /]  Theob.  About 
my  Braine.  Ff  {Brain.  FF),  Rowe. 
About  my  braines ;  Q2.  About  my 
braues ;  Q  .  About  my  braines,  Q4Q-' 
about  my  brain —  Pope  i.  about  my 
brain ! —  Pope  ii,  Coll.  i.  About,  my 
brains.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt, 
Sing.  Coll.  ii,  Sta.  Ktly. 

Hum]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cald. 


Knt,  Coll.   i,   Dyce,   Sta.  White,    Dei. 
Ktly,  Glo.  Huds. 

564.  I  have]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
Huds. 

565.  sitting]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb. 

567.  struck  so  to]  Jlrooke  fo  to  QqFx 
F2.     struck  unto  Rowe  ii. 

570.  Til  have  these  players]  Pll  ob- 
serve his  looks,  Pope  i  (a  misprint). 


564.  About]  Johnson  :  Wits,  to  your  work  !  Brain,  go  about  the  present  busi 
ness.  Steevens,  after  citing  '  My  brain  about  again !  for  thou  hast  found  New 
projects  now  to  work  on,'  from  Heywood,  Second  Part  of  The  Iron  Age,  1632, 
strangely  enough  agrees  with  Monk  Mason  in  thinking  it  to  be  a  sea-phrase,  mean- 
ing, '  be  my  thoughts  shifted  into  a  contrary  direction.'  Hunter  (ii,  235) :  It  should 
be  '  About  't,  my  brains !'  that  is,  set  about  composing  the  lines  which  the  players 
were  to  add  to  The  Murder  of  Gonzago. 

564.  brain]  Cambridge  Editors  :  Capell  quotes  '  braves '  as  the  reading  of  Q  . 
His  own  copy  has  '  braines.'  That  in  the  British  Museum  reads  *  braues.'  [As  does 
also  Ashbee's  Facsimile.  Ed.] 

564.  Hum]  Hunter  (ii,  235) :  This  is  evidently  intended  to  be  the  first  con- 
ception of  the  design  to  try  the  conscience  of  the  King  with  the  play.  This  inter- 
jection of  consideration,  deliberation,  shows  it.  Yet  Hamlet  had  already  settled 
with  the  players  that  they  should  speak  some  verses  interpolated  in  The  Murder  of 
Gonzago.  This  inconsistency  is  not  justified  by  alleging  Hamlet's  inconsistency  of 
character.  In  fact,  the  interjection  ought  not  to  be  there,  as  it  makes  prospective  what 
is  evidently  retrospective. 

565.  play]  Steevens  :  A  number  of  these  stories  are  collected  together  by  Hey- 
wood in  his  Apology  for  Actors.  [See  Sh.  Soc.  vol.  vii,  p.  57.]  Todd  gives  one 
from  A  Warning  for  Faire  Women,  1599;  and  Clarendon  refers  to  Massinger's 
Roman  Actor,  II,  i  [vol.  ii,  p.  351,  ed.  Gifford,  1805],  for  a  similar  example  there 
cited. 

567,  presently]  Clarendon:  Immediately,  as  in  line  169. 
569.  speak]  Elze:  See  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  122-126.     Clarendon:  See  Rich.  II. 
!,  i,  104. 


alt  ii,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  1 99 

I'll  tent  him  to  the  quick ;  if  he  but  blench, 

I  know  my  course.     The  spirit  that  I  have  seen 

May  be  the  devil ;  and  the  devil  hath  power  575 

To  assume  a  pleasing  shape ;  yea,  and  perhaps 

Out  of  my  weakness  and  my  melancholy, 

As  he  is  very  potent  with  such  spirits, 

Abuses  me  to  damn  me.     I'll  have  grounds 

More  relative  than  this.     The  play's  the  thing  580 

Wherein  I'll  catch  the  conscience  of  the  king.  \Exit 

573.  tenf\  rent  F2F  F  .  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

he  but]   a  doe  Qq.     he  do  Q'76,  575.  and  the  devil]  and  the  dealeQ3Q3. 

Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  576.    To  assume]  T' assume  Rowe  + 

574.  The]  This  Johns.  Jen.  Coll.  El.  White,  Dyce  ii,  IIucls 

575.  be  the  devil]  be  the  Diuell  FfFa.  580.  relative]  relevant  Mason. 
be  a  deale  Q2Q_.     be  a  diuell  Q4QS,  Cap. 

573.  tent]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  To  search  with  a  tent,  which  was  a  roll  of  lint  for 
searching  or  cleansing  a  wound  or  sore. 

573.  blench]  Steevens  :  Shrink,  or  start.  Hunter  (ii,  236) :  Flinch.  The 
meaning  is  shown  in  Wase's  translation  of  the  Cynegeticon  of  Gratius,  1654  :  'if 
one  set  up  a  piece  of  white  paper,  it  will  make  the  deer  blench,  and  balk  that  way,' 
p.  77.  Halliwell:  Sh.  seems  to  use  'blench'  in  the  sense  of  to  wink,  to  glance. 
'And  thus  thinkende  I  stonde  still  Without  blenchinge  of  mine  eie.' — Gower,  ed. 
1554,  f.  128. 

.  575.  devil]  Coleridge:  See  Sir  Thomas  Browne: — 'I  believe  .  .  .  that  these 
apparitions  and  ghosts  of  departed  persons  are  not  the  wandering  souls  of  men,  but 
the  unquiet  walks  of  devils,  prompting  and  suggesting  us  unto  mischief,  blood,  and 
villainy,  instilling  and  stealing  into  our  hearts,  that  the  blessed  spirits  are  not  at  rest 
in  their  graves,  but  wander  solicitous  of  the  affairs  of  the  world.' — Relig.  Med.  pt. 
i,  sec.  37. 

579.  Abuses]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Deceives,  imposes  upon. 

579.  58°-  I'M  •  •  •  tnis]  Marshall  (A  Study  of  Hamlet,  p.  153)  states  that  Ik 
ving,  before  speaking  this  sentence,  takes  out  the  tablets  wherein  he  had  recorded 
his  uncle's  guilt,  and  by  a  significant  gesture  indicates  that  '  this '  refers  to  them. 

580.  relative]  Johnson  :  Nearly  related,  closely  connected.  Clarendon  :  To 
the  purpose.     The  word  is  not  known  to  exist  elsewhere  in  this  sense. 


200 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  i 


ACT  III 


Scene  I.     A  room  in  the  castle. 


Enter  King,  Queen,  Polonius,  Ophelia,  Rosencrantz,  and  Guildenstern, 

King.     And  can  you,  by  no  drift  of  circumstance, 
Get  from  him  why  he  puts  on  this  confusion, 
Grating  so  harshly  all  his  days  of  quiet 
With  turbulent  and  dangerous  lunacy  ? 

Ros.     He  does  confess  he  feels  himself  distracted,  5 

But  from  what  cause  he  will  by  no  means  speak. 

Guil.     Nor  do  we  find  him  forward  to  be  sounded  , 
But,  with  a  crafty  madness,  keeps  aloof, 
When  we  would  bring  him  on  to  some  confession 
Of  his  true  state. 

Queen.  Did  he  receive  you  well  ?  10 

Ros.     Most  like  a  gentleman. 

Guil.     But  with  much  forcing  of  his  disposition. 


Act    in.    Scene    i.]    Q'76,  Rowe. 
Om.  QqFf. 

A  room  in  the  castle]  Mai.  The 
Palace.  Rowe  +  .  Another  room  in  the 
same.  Cap. 

Rosencrantz,  and  Guildenstern.]  Cap. 
Rofencraus,  Guyldenfterne,  Lords.  Qq. 
Rofincrance,  Guildenftern,  and  Lords. 
Fx.  Rofincros,  Guildenftar,  and  Lords. 
F8F  F  (Guildenftare,  F  ).  Roseneraus... 
Rowe. 

1.  circumstance]  conference  Qq,  Pope 


+  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.Var.  Coll.  Sing.  El. 
Ktly. 

2.  confusion]  confesion  Rowe  ii.  con- 
fession Pope  (in  margin). 

6.  he  wilt]  a  will  Qq. 

7-10.  Nor. ..state.]  Continued  to  Ros. 
by  Jen. 

10.  state]  ejlate  Q'76,  Jen. 

11.  like  a  gentleman]  civilly  Q' J 6. 
Most]    With   courtesy  most  Sey- 
mour. 


I.  circumstance]  Caldecott:  That  is,  introduction  and  shaping  of  topics  and 
facts.  Clarendon  :  '  Drift  of  circumstance  '  means  roundabout  method.  *  Drift ' 
occurs  in  II,  i,  10,  and  •  circumstance,'  in  this  sense,  in  I,  v,  127,  and  the  two  words 
in  Tro.  &>  Cres.  Ill,  iii,  113,  114. 

3.  Grating]  Clarendon:  Compare  Ant.  &  Cleop.  I,  i,  18.  Elsewhere  in  Sh. 
\he  verb  is  used  intransitively. 

7.  forward]  Caldecott:  Disposed,  inclinable. 

8.  keeps]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  nominative,  see  Abbott,  ^  399, 
and  II,  ii,  67;  IV,  i,  10. 

8.  crafty  madness]  Delius  :  Like  'mad  in  craft,'  III,  iv,  185. 
12.  disposition]  Moberly  :  But  with  apparent  unwillingness  all  the  time.  Thk 
scene,  as  well  as  II,  ii,  shows  that  Guild,  has  more  discrrnment  than  Ros. 


ACT  in,  sc.  I.]  HAMLET  201 

Ros.     Niggard  of  question,  but  of  our  demands  13 

Most  free  in  his  reply. 

Queen.  Did  you  assay  him 

13,   14.    Niagara     of... of   our... Most  Warb.  Jen. 
fne\  Unapt  to... of  our...  Mojl  free  Q'76.  14,  15.  Did... pastime  ?~\  One  line,  Qq 

Most  free  of. ..to  our. ..Niggard  Han.  El.  Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.  Sta.  Huds. 
Heussi.    Most  free  of... of  our...  Niggard  14.  assay]  invite  Q'76. 

13.  Niggard]  WARBURTON :  This  is  given  as  the  description  of  the  conversation 
of  a  man  whom  the  speaker  found  not  forward  to  be  sounded ;  and  who  kept  aloof 
when  they  would  bring  him  to  confession  :  but  such  a  description  can  never  pass  but  at 
cross  purposes.  Shakespeare  certainly  wrote  it  just  the  other  way  [see  Textual  Notes]. 
That  this  is  the  true  reading,  we  need  but  to  turn  back  to  the  preceding  scene,  for 
Hamlet's  conduct,  to  be  satisfied.  Mason  :  Warburton  forgets  that  by  question,  Shake- 
speare does  not  usually  mean  interrogatory,  but  discourse;  yet  in  whichever  sense  the 
word  be  taken,  this  account  given  by  Ros.  agrees  but  ill  with  the  scene  between  him 
and  Ham.  as  actually  represented.  Malone  :  Slow  to  begin  conversation,  but  free 
enough  in  his  answers  to  our  demands.  Guild,  has  just  said  that  Ham.  kept  aloof 
when  they  wished  to  bring  him  to  confess  the  cause  of  his  distraction  :  Ros.  therefore 
here  must  mean,  that  up  to  that  point,  till  they  touch'd  on  that,  he  was  free  enough  in  his 
answers.  Hunter  (ii,  236)  :  According  to  Warburton's  reading,  the  account  is  that 
which  the  lords  must  have  rendered  of  their  interview  with  Hamlet,  if  they  meant 
to  report  it  truly.  Warburton's  emendation  has  not  had  justice  done  to  it  by  other 
commentators,  but  we  find  it  confirmed  by  Qx.  Staunton  :  Unless  '  question '  is 
admitted  to  mean  argument,  Warburton's  emendation  yields  a  truer  description  of 
Hamlet's  bearing  towards  his  schoolfellows  than  that  afforded  by  the  old  text. 
TsCHISCHWITZ  finds  an  insuperable  objection  to  Warburton's  emendation  because  it 
would  represent  Hamlet  as  not  '  gentlemanlike '  in  asking  many  questions  and  nig- 
gard in  replying.  ■  It  is  manifest  that  Rosencrantz  here  merely  gives  utterance  to  a 
rule  of  good  manners.'  Clarke  :  If  it  be  borne  in  mind  that  Sh.  employs  '  of  very 
variously,  and  that  he  occasionally  uses  the  word  '  question '  to  signify  '  inquisition,' 
«  cross-examining,'  it  appears  to  be  evident  that  here  '  niggard  of  question '  ellipti- 
cally  expresses  '  sparing  of  speech  when  we  cross-examined  him ;'  and  if  it  be 
remembered  how  peculiarly  Sh.  sometimes  employs  the  possessive  case,  we  think  it 
will  be.  perceived  that  here  '  of  our  demands '  is  employed  to  express  '  of  demands 
respecting  ourselves.'  Thus,  then,  we  take  the  whole  speech  to  mean — '  He  was 
sparing  of  speech  when  we  questioned  him :  but  of  demands  respecting  ourselves 
he  was  very  free  in  return  :'  which  interpretation  completely  tallies  with  the  circum- 
stances as  they  really  occurred.  Clarendon  :  Ros.  and  Guild,  were  completely 
baffled,  and  Ham.  had  the  talk  almost  to  himself.  Perhaps  they  did  not  intend  to 
give  a  correct  account  of  the  interview. 

13.  of  our  demands]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  ■ Of '  is  altered  to  to  in  the  (MS),  but 
needlessly,  because  '  of  has  here  the  force  of  on.  Clarendon  :  '  Of  may  be  written 
either  by  attraction  from  the  previous  '  of,'  or  it  may  be  u:ed  for '  on,'  as  in  Marlowe'? 
yew  of  Malta,  IV,  iv  :  'Of  that  condition  I  will  drink  ii  up.'  [See  Abbott,  §  173, 
which  may  perhaps  apply  to  this  use  of  ■  of.'  Ed.] 

14.  as?  ay]  Caldecott:  Try  his  disposition  towards. 


202 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  L 


To  any  pastime  ?  1 5 

Ros.     Madam,  it  so  fell  out  that  certain  players 
We  o'er-raught  on  the  way ;  of  these  we  told  him, 
And  there  did  seem  in  him  a  kind  of  joy 
To  hear  of  it ;  they  are  about  the  court 

And,  as  I  think,  they  have  already  order  20 

This  night  to  play  before  him. 

Pol.  'Tis  most  true  ; 

And  he  beseech'd  me  to  entreat  your  majesties 
To  hear  and  see  the  matter. 

King.     With  all  my  heart ;  and  it  doth  much  content  me 
To  hear  him  so  inclined. —  25 

Good  gentlemen,  give  him  a  further  edge, 
And  drive  his  purpose  on  to  th'  se  delights. 

Ros.     We  shall,  my  lord. 

\_Exeitnt  Rosericrantz  and  Guildenstern. 

King.  Sweet  Gertrude,  leave  us  too ; 

For  we  have  closely  sent  for  Hamlet  hither, 
That  he,  as  'twere  by  accident,  may  here  30 


15.  To]  unto  Han. 

1 6.  Madam]  Please  your  majesty  Sey- 
mour, ending  lines  15,  16,  majesty,.. .we, 
and  reading  upon  for  on,  line  1 7. 

so]  Om.  Johns. 

17.  d*  er-raught]  ore-raught  Qq.  ore- 
wrought  FTF2.  0 ,  re-took  FF4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.     o'er  rode  Warb. 

19.  about]  heere  about Qq.  hereabout 
Q'76,  Jen.  El. 

24.  and...me~\  And  much  content  Sey- 
mour, reading  23,  25.  To. ..inclined  as 
two  lines,  ending  heart... inclined. 

24-27.  With. ..delights.]  Pope.  Five 
lines,  ending  hart, ...  me, ...  inclin 'd...  edge, 
...delights.  Qq.     Four  lines,  ending  me 


Gentlemen, ...on... delights,  Ff,  Rowe. 
Four  lines,  ending  heart ;... inclined. — 
...edge,. ..delights.  Cap.  Ktly. 

27.  drive. ..on  to~\  driue...into  Qq, 
Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  urge 
him  to  Q'76. 

28.  [Exeunt...]  Cap.  Exeunt  Ros. 
&  Guyl.  Qq.     Exeunt.  Ff. 

Gertrude']  Gertrard  Qq. 
too~\  two  Qq. 

29.  hither]  hether  Qq. 

30.  he]  we  Jen. 

here]  heere  Qq.    there  Ff,  Rowe. 
30,  31.  here  Affront    Ophelia]    meet 
Ophelia  here  Q'76. 


17,  o'er-raught]  Johnson:  Over-reached,  that  is,  overtook. 

20    order]  Clarendon  :  We  should  now  use  the  plural. 

23.  matter]  Delius  :  There  is  a  tinge  of  contempt  in  the  use  of  this  word. 

26.  edge]  Keightley  {Expositor,  p.  291) :  Here  *  edge'  seems  used  in  a  pecu 
liar  sense,  as  the  substance  of  egg,  to  urge,  incite. 

27.  on  to]  Although  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  p.  81)  advocated  this  reading,  yet  in 
both  of  his  editions  he  followed  the  Qq. 

29.  closely]  Dyce  ( Gloss. ) :  Secretly,  privately. 


ACT  ill,  sc.  i.] 


HAMLET 


203 


Affront  Ophelia.  31 

Her  father  and  myself,  lawful  espials, 

Will  so  bestow  ourselves  that,  seeing  unseen, 

We  may  of  their  encounter  frankly  judge, 

And  gather  by  him,  as  he  is  behaved,  35 

If  't  be  the  affliction  of  his  love  or  no 

That  thus  he  suffers  for. 

Queen.  I  shall  obey  you. — 

And  for  your  part,  Ophelia,  I  do  wish 
That  your  good  beauty  be  the  happy  cause 

Of  Hamlet's  wildness ;  so  shall  I  hope,  your  virtue  40 

Will  bring  him  to  his  wonted  way  again, 
To  both  your  honours. 

Oph.  Madam,  I  wish  it  may.     [Exit  Queen. 

Pol.     Ophelia,  walk  you  here. — Gracious,  so  please  you, 
We  will  bestow  ourselves.  [To  Ophelia.']   Read  on  this  book; 


31.  Affront  Ophelia.']  Separate  line, 
Johns.  Begins  line  32,  QqFf,  Rowe+, 
Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Coll.  i,  El.  Ktly. 

Ophelia.  ]  Ophelia,  and  join  con- 
verse with  her.  Seymour. 

32.  lawful  espials]  Om.  Qq,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  El. 
Ktly. 

33.  Will]   Wee'le  Qq. 
unseen]  and  unfeen  Q'76. 

34.  frankly]  franckly  Q2Q3-  franckely 
Q4.    frankely  FfFa.     Om.  Q'76. 

36.  the  affliction]  Q'76.  th?  affliction 
QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.  El.  White, 
Dyce  ii,  Huds. 


36.  no]  no,  F4.     no.  FxFaF  . 

38.  for  your]  for  my  Q.QS>  Pope  + , 
Cap.  El. 

39,40.  beauty... virtue]  Walker,  beau- 
ties...virtues  QqFf  et  cet. 

40.  shall]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

4 1 .  Will]  May  Pope  + . 

[Exit  Queen.]  Theob.  Om.  QqFl. 
43,  44.  here. ..ourselves]     here,  whilft 
we  {If  fo  your  majefly  Jliall pleafe)  re- 
tire conceal* d  Q'76. 

43.  here.]  heere,  Q2Q3-    hecre :  Q4QS- 
please  you]  pleafe  ye  Ff,  Rowe  + 

44.  [To  Ophelia.]  Johns. 


31.  Affront]  Johnson:  To  meet  directly. 

32.  lawful  espials]  Steevens  :  Spies.  Caldecott  :  Spies  justifiably  inquisi 
tive.  Singer  :  '  An  espiall  in  warres,  a  scoutwatch,  a  beholder,  a  viewer.' — Baret 
Elze  :  These  words  are  superfluous,  injurious  to  the  metre,  and  imply  a  justification 
unworthy  of  a  king. 

39,  40.  beauty.  .  .virtue]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  252):  Surely  Sh.  wrote  beauty 
[-tie],  and  perhaps  also  virtue.  [The  'it'  in  Ophelia's  reply  seems  to  support 
Walker's  emendation  so  strongly  that  I  have  not  hesitated  to  adopt  his  reading.  Of 
course  '  it '  may  be  differently  construed.  Ed.  ! 

43.  Gracious]  Elze:  Compare  •  High  and  mighty,'  IV,  vii,  43,  and  the  Dedi- 
cation to  Venus  and  Adonis.  Clarendon:  Of  'gracious,'  thus  used  without  a  sub. 
Btantive,  we  can  find  no  other  example. 

44.  bestow]  Dyce  [Gloss.) :  To  stow,  to  lodge,  to  place.     See  IV,  iii,  12. 


204  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  i. 

That  show  of  such  an  exercise  may  colour  45 

Your  loneliness.     We  areoft  to  blame  in  this, — 

(Tis  too  much  proved, — fchat_with ^  devo^n/sjvisage 
And  pious  action  we  do  sugar  o'er 
The_^e^Hnmself. 

King,     Oh,  'tis  too  true  ! 
[Aside]   How  smart  a  lash  that  speech  doth  give  my  con- 
science! 50 
The  harlot's  cheek,  beautied  with  plastering  art, 
Is  not  more  ugly  to  the  thing  that  helps  it 
Than  is  my  deed  to  my  most  painted  word. 
O  heavy  burthen ! 

Pol.     I  hear  him  coming;  let's  withdraw,  my  lord.  55 

[Exeunt  King  and  Polonius. 

Enter  Hamlet. 


< 


t/l     Ham.     To  be,  or  not  to  be, — that  is  the  question: 
t  — ' — 

46.  lonehness~\  lowhnes  Q2Q,.     lowli-         Glo.  + ,  Del. 

nejfe  Q4Q5«  S1*  plastering"]  plajlring  Qq.   plai/f- 

We  are~\  We're  Pope  + ,  Jen.  Dyce  ring  Fx.    plaijlring  F2F  .   plajliring F  . 

ii,  Huds.  52.  ugly]  ougly  Q2Q3Q4- 

to  blame]  too  blame  QqFTF2.  54.   0... burthen]  Om.  Seymour. 

48.  sugar]  /urge  Ff.     Suger  Rowe,  55.  Pol.]  Erased  in  Coll.  (MS). 
Pope.  lefs]  Om.  Qq. 

49,  50.  O... smart]  One  line,  Cap.  [Exeunt...]  Cap.  Exeunt.  Ff. 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Coll.  i,  White.  Om.    Qq.      Exeunt    all    but   Ophelia. 

49.  'tis  too]  'tis •  Ff.    it  is  but  too  Han.         Rowe+. 

50.  [Aside]  Pope  +  ,  Coll.  El.  White,  56.  Scene  11.  Pope  +  . 

Ktly,  Huds.     Before  O,  tis  too  true  I  or  Enter  Hamlet.]   Ff.     After  bur- 

as  including  the  whole  speech,  Cap.  Jen.         then,  line  54,  Qq. 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta. 

47.  too  much]  Johnson  :  It  is  found  by  too  frequent  experience. 

47.  visage]  Bailey  (ii,  341) :  Can  anything  be  more  preposterous  than  to  talk 
of  sugaring  over  the  devil  with  a  visage  ?  What  Sh.  meant  to  say  is  clear  enough  : 
we  too  often  disguise  the  devil  himself  with  devout  looks  and  pious  acts.  To  express 
this,  read  :  '  with  devotion's  vizard  .  .  .  we  do  figure  o'er,'  &c. 

48.  action]  Singer  :  This  indicates  that  it  was  a  book  of  prayers,  which  agrees 
with  Hamlet's  '  Nymph,  in  thy  orisons.' 

52.  to]  See  I,  ii,  140. 

53.  painted]  Caldecott  :  Falsely  colored.  Clarendon  :  Fictitious,  disguised. 
Compare  King  John,  III,  i,  105. 

56.  Johnson  :  Of  this  celebrated  soliloquy,  which  bursting  from  a  man  distracted 
with  contrariety  of  desires,  and  overwhelmed  with  the  magnitude  of  his  own  pur- 
poses, is  connected  rather  in  the  speaker's  mind  than  on  his  tongue,  I  shall  en- 


act  Hi,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  205 


[56.  To  be,  or  not  to  be.] 
deavor  to  discover  the  train,  and  to  show  how  one  sentiment  produces  another. 
Hamlet,  knowing  him.-elf  injured  in  the  most  enormous  and  atrocious  degree,  and 
seeing  no  means  of  redress  but  such  as  must  expose  him  to  the  extremity  of  hazard, 
meditates  on  his  situation  in  this  manner :  Before  I  can  form  any  rational  scheme 
of  action  under  this  pressure  of  distress,  it  is  necessary  to  decide  whether,  after  our 
present  state,  we  are  to  be,  or  not  to  be.  That  is  *he  question,  which,  as  it  shall  be 
answered,  will  determine  whether  'tis  JiohJer,  and  more  suitable  to  the  dignity  of 
reason,  to  suffer  the  outrages  of  fortune  patiently,  or  to  take  axms-against  them,  and 
by  opposing  end  them,  though  perhaps  with  thp  Inss  nt  lifp.  If  to  die  were  to  sleep, 
no  more,  and  by  a  sleep  to  end  the  miseries  of  our  nature,  such  a  sleep  were  devoutly 
to  be  zvished ;  but  if  to  sleep  in  death  be  to  dream,  to  retain  our  powers  of  sensibility, 
we  must  pause  to  consider  in  that  sleep  of  death  what  dreams  may  come.  This  con- 
sideration makes  calamity  so  long  endured ;  for  who  would  bear  the  vexations  of 
life,  which  might  be  ended  by  a  bare  bodkin,  but  that  he  is  afraid  of  something  in 
unknown  futurity  ?  This  fear  it  is  that  gives  efficacy  to  conscience,  which,  by  turn- 
ing the  mind  upon  this  regard,  chills  the  ardor  of  resolution,  checks  the  vigor  of 
enterprise,  and  makes  the  current  of  desire  stagnate  in  inactivity.  We  may  suppose 
that  he  wr  aid  have  applied  these  general  observations  to  his  own  case,  but  that  he 
discovered  Ophelia.  Malone  :  Dr  Johnson's  explication  of  the  first  five  lines  of 
this  passage  is  surely  wrong.  Hamlet  is  not  deliberating  whether  after  our  present 
state  we  are  to  exist  or  not,  but  whether  he  should  continue  to  live,  or  put  an  end  to 
his  life;  as  is  pointed  out  by  the  second  and  the  three  following  lines,  which  are 
manifestly  a  paraphrase  on  the  first :  '  Whether  'tis  nobler  in  the  mind  to  suffer,  &c, 
or  to  take  arms.'  The  question  concerning  our  existence  in  a  future  state  is  not  con- 
sidered till  the  tenth  line :  '  To  sleep !  perchance  to  dream  !'  &c.  See  R.  of  L.  1 154. 
Coleridge  :  This  speech  is  of  absolutely  universal  interest, — and  yet  to  which  of 
all  Shakespeare's  characters  could  it  appropriately  have  been  given  but  to  Hamlet  ? 
For  Jaques  it  would  have  been  too  deep,  and  for  Iago  too  habitual  a  communion 
with  the  heart ;  which  in  every  man  belongs,  or  ought  to  belong,  to  all  mankind. 
Lamb  ( Works,  vol.  iii,  p.  88.  London,  1870) :  How  far  the  very  custom  of  hear- 
ing anything  spouted,  withers  and  blows  upon  a  fine  passage,  may  be  seen  in  those 
speeches  from  Hen.  V.,  &c,  which  are  current  in  the  mouths  of  schoolboys,  from 
their  being  to  be  found  in  Enfield's  Speaker,  and  such  kind  of  books.  I  confess 
myself  utterly  unable  to  appreciate  that  celebrated  soliloquy  in  Hamlet,  beginning, 
*  To  be,  or  not  to  be,'  or  to  tell  whether  it  be  good,  bad,  or  indifferent ;  it  has  been 
so  handled  and  pawed  about  by  declamatory  boys  and  men,  and  torn  so  inhumanly 
from  its  living  place  and  principle  of  continuity  in  the  play,  till  it  has  become  to 
me  a  perfect  dead  member.  CALDECOTT,  criticising  Dr  Johnson,  says  that  the  train 
of  thought  is  obvious  enough;  it  is  only  the  grammatical  thread  that  technically 
may  call  for  some  unwinding.  He  denies  that  any  doubt  is  here  raised  by  Hamlet 
as  to  a  future  state  of  existence, — Hamlet  is_  questioning  solely  what  the  condition 
of  such  existence  is  to  be^  «.  A-desira-lo.  be  out  of  the  wprld  Js-xtfte~<^4h^ -most-- 
sirnpgly-TnarVpd  features  of  Hamlet's  character.  It Js  the  first  wish  he  utters  when 
alone :  I,  ii  129.  But  he  is  then  restrained  from  anything  beyond  a  wish  for  suicide 
by  religious  scruples.  The  inclination  now  returns  upon  him  more  forcibly  (having 
more  cause  for  such  an  impulse),  and  the  prohibition  of  Heaven  does  not  enter  inte 
consideration.  It  is  here  only,  what  he  shall  change  his  life  for.  This  is  the  lan- 
18 


206  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  i. 


[56.  To  be,  or  not  to  be.] 
guage  and  subject  of  a  man's  mind  who  is  nearer  death,  than  he  who  only  wishes 
that  it  were  lawful  to  kill  himself.'  Hunter  (ii,  236) :  This  soliloquy  is  placed  in 
Qx  at  the  beginning  of  what  is  now  Act  II.  It  stands  there  most  appropriately.  We 
have  seen,  at  the  close  of  Act  I,  the  state  of  Hamlet's  mind  immediately  on  having 
received  the  dread  information  and  the  solemn  command  of  the  Ghost ;  we  are  next 
presented  with  what  was  the  state  of  his  mind  after  a  few  days'  reflection.  He 
enters  solus,  in  a  meditative  mood,  and  the  subjects  of  his  meditations  are  among  the 
most  awful  which  can  engage  mortal  thoughts.  This  is  to  show  his  natural  mind. 
Then  follows  the  dialogue  with  Ophelia,  which  is  intended  to  show  us  his  artificial 
mind, — that  idle,  wandering  folly  which  he  assumed,  the  better  to  accomplish  his 
object.  I  can  conceive  nothing  more  dramatically  proper  than  this.  It  prepares  for 
all  the  succeeding  action  in  which  the  natural  and  the  artificial  Hamlet  are  so  wildly 
combined.  Why  there  was  a  change  in  the  arrangement,  or  by  whom  it  was  made, 
I  can  no  more  explain  than  I  can  account  for  many  other  things  connected  with  the 
publication  of  these  dramas.  But  that  the  play  is  greatly  injured  by  the  change  1 
feel  a  confident  conviction;  for  not  only  is  this  soliloquy  wanting  in  the  place  most 
appropriate  to  it,  but  it  is  now  found  in  a  place  not  suitable  to  it.  Such  meditations 
as  these  are  not  such  as  were  likely  to  arise  in  the  mind  of  one  who  had  just  con- 
ceived a  design  by  which  he  hoped  to  settle  a  doubt  of  a  very  serious  kind,  and 
who  must  have  been  full  of  curiosity  about  the  issue  of  his  plot.  If  this  speech 
is  to  indicate  deliberation  concerning  suicide,  or  is  even  allied  to  suicide,  such  de- 
liberation is  surely  out  of  place  when  curiosity  was  awake,  and  his  mind  deeply  in- 
tent on  something  that  he  must  do.  To  be  sure,  the  hypothesis  of  Inconsistency  will 
explain  all;  but  then  it  will  explain  anything.  Another  very  material  effect  is  pro- 
duced by  the  change  in  the  point  at  which  this  solus  speech  is  introduced.  The  line, 
'  But  look  where  sadly  the  poor  wretch  comes  reading?  immediately  precedes  his 
entry,  when,  supposing  himself  to  be  unobserved,  he  gives  utterance  to  the  musings 
of  his  mind.  See  also  Qx.  It  is  thus  manifest  that  the  poet's  intention  was  that 
these  should  be  meditations  of  Hamlet  on  something  which  he  found  written  in  a 
book  which  he  holds  in  his  hand,  a  book  which  spoke  of  the  evils  of  life,  of  death, 
their  cure,  of  futurity,  of  the  question  of  being  or  not  being  when  we  have  shuffled  off 
this  mortal  coil,  and  that  what  he  says  arises  out  of  the  argument  in  the  book  before 
him,  and  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  thoughts  springing  up  in  his  own  mind.  [See  note, 
line  60.]  'To  be,  or  not  to  be:  ay,  there's  the  point,'  as  it  is  in  the  Quarto,  is  equiva- 
lent to,  '  You,  the  author,  are  discussing  the  question  of  what  shall  be  hereafter;  you 
have  a  great  and  mighty  subject  in  hand.'  And  the  words  as  we  now  have  them, 
'  To  be,  or  not  to  be, — that  is  the  question,'  are  much  the  same,  if  we  regard,  as  we 
may,  'question'  as  equivalent  to  theme,  argument,  or  subject.  [There  is  also  an 
analysis  of  this  soliloquy  to  be  found  in  Goldsmith's  Works  (vol.  iii,  p.  316,  Lon- 
don, 1854),  which  attempts  to  prove  that  it  is  'a  heap  of  absurdities,  whether  we 
consider  the  situation,  the  sentiment,  the  argumentation,  or  the  poetry.'  This  essay 
and  five  others  have  been  included  in  Goldsmith's  works  on  the  strength  of  their 
having  appeared  in  The  British  Magazine  during  the  years  1 761,  1762,  and  1763, 
but  no  one,  I  think,  can  read  them,  certainly  the  one  in  question,  without  agreeing 
with  the  editor  of  the  edition,  Peter  Cunningham,  *  that  they  are  not  by  Goldsmith.' 
The  needless  attempt,  however,  has  been  made  gravely  to  refute  this  essay  in  Hack* 
ett's  Notes  and  Comments  on  Shakespeare,  New  York,  1863,  pp.  13-59.     For  Ger- 


act  oi,  sc.  i.J  HAMLET  207 

Whether  'tis  nobler  in  the  mind  to  suffer  57 

The  slings  and  arrows  of  outrageous  fortune, 
Or  to  take  arms  against  a  sea  of  troubles, 

58.  slings']    sling   Campbell,      stings  Obs.  1752). 

Anon.  [Misc.  Obs.  1752),  Hoffa,  Walker.  59.  a  sea  of]  assail  of  Warb. 

arrows]    harrows    Anon.    [Afisc. 


man  criticisms  on  this  soliloquy,  see  Ziegler,  TlECK,  Rohrhach,  ROmeun  (foot- 
note), in  the  Appendix,  Vol.  II.] 

58.  slings]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  16)  :  Sti/rgs  is  undoubtedly  the  true  reading.     [See 
Gerth's  extraordinary  interpretation  of  this  word  in  Appendix,  Vol.  II.] 

59.  sea]  Pope:  Perhaps  siege,  which  continues  the  metaphor  of  '  slings,'  '  arrows,' 
4  taking  arms,'  and  represents  the  being  encompassed  on  all  sides  with  troubles 
Theobald  :  Or  one  might  emend  nearer  the  traces  of  the  text :  '  th'  assay  of 
troubles '  [Singer  has  no  doubt  that  this  was  the  word],  or  •  a  'say  of  troubles,'  i.  e. 
the  attempts,  attacks,  &c.  But  perhaps  any  change  is  unnecessary,  considering 
Shakespeare's  freedom  in  combining  metaphors,  and  that  a  '  sea '  is  used  to  signify 
a  vast  quantity,  multitude,  or  confluence  of  anything.  The  prophet  Jeremiah,  in 
chap.  Ii,  42,  calls  a  prodigious  army,  a  sea.  yEschylus  is  frequent  in  the  use  of  this 
metaphor:  Septem  contra  Thebas  [lines  64  and  114,  ed.  Dindorf  ].  Besides,  a  '  sea 
of  troubles '  among  the  Greeks  grew  into  proverbial  usage :  KaK&v  daXaooa.  So  that 
the  phrase  means  the  troubles  of  human  life,  which  flow  in  upon  us,  and  encompass 
us  round,  like  a  sea.  Hanmer  :  Assailing  would  preserve  the  propriety  of  the 
metaphor.  Johnson  :  Sh.  breaks  his  metaphors  often,  and  in  this  desultory  speech 
there  was  less  need  of  preserving  them.  Caldecott  :  This  mode  of  speaking  is 
proverbial,  and  has  been  so  in  all  ages  and  in  all  languages;  neither  can  any  meta- 
phor be  conceived  more  apt  than  that  of  the  sea,  to  convey  the  idea  of  an  over- 
whelming mass.  With  the  closest  analogy  we  say,  a  flood  of  transport,  a  torrent  of 
abuse,  a  peck  of  troubles.  Sh.  uses  it  everywhere  and  in  every  form  ;  and  the  in 
tegrity  of  his  metaphor  is  that  which  he  least  thinks  of.  Garrick  ( Oration  in 
Honor  of  Shakespeare' s  jubilee)  :  Shakespeare's  terms  rather  than  his  sentences  are 
metaphorical ;  he  calls  an  endless  multitude  a  sea,  by  a  happy  allusion  to  the  per- 
petual succession  of  wave  on  wave ;  and  he  immediately  expresses  opposition  by 
'  taking  up  arms,'  which,  being  fit  in  itself,  he  was  not  solicitous  to  accommodate  to 
his  first  image.  This  is  the  language  in  which  a  figurative  and  rapid  conception 
will  always  be  expressed.  A.  E.  B[rae]  (N.  &  Qu.  vol.  vi,  23  Oct.  1852) :  To 
take  arms  against  a  sea  neither  presents  an  intelligible  idea  in  itself,  nor  assists  in 
carrying  on  the  general  allusion  to  offensive  and  defensive  warfare.  '  Slings '  and 
'  arrows '  are  figurative  of  armed  aggression,  against  which  to  have  recourse  to  arms 
in  opposition  is  a  natural  sequence  of  idea ;  but  if  these  arms  are  to  be  directed 
against  a  sea  of  troubles,  the  sequence  is  broken,  and  the  whole  allusion  becomes 
obscure  and  uncertain.  But  the  whole  image  is  that  of  a  posse  of  evils  thronging  to 
assail  us  in  this  life, — a  mortal  coil,  as  it  is  afterwards  called,  in  opposition  to  the 
immortal  coil  after  death  of  ills  we  know  not  of, — this  attack  we  may  put  an  end  to, 
or  '  shuffle  off,'  by  taking  arms  against  it,  scilicet,  '  a  bare  bodkin  !'  Thus  the  very 
necessity  of  the  context  plainly  exacts  some  word  expressive  of  tumultuous  attack ; 
and  sue?  e  word  we  obtain,  bearing  precisely  that  meaning,  by  the  slight  alteration 


208  HAMLET    '  [act  hi,  sc.  l 


[59.  ■  sea  of  troubles.'] 
of  'a  sea'  into  assay.  It  is  singular  that  lexicographers,  amongst  the  several  defini- 
tions they  have  ascribed  to  it,  should  have  failed  to  include  that  one  peculiar  mean- 
ing,— charge  or  onset, — which  renders  it  so  appropriate.  See  II,  ii,  71.  But  by 
Spenser  the  word  is  most  frequently  used,  and  its  meaning  most  plainly  indicated. 
See  Faerie  Queene,  V,  ii;  V,  xi.  As  to  the  probability  of  substitution,  an  equally 
close  approximation  exists  between  assay  and  '  a  sea'  as  between  asters  and  '  as  stars;' 
nor  is  it  at  all  certain  that  even  in  sound  the  vowels  a  and  e  were  so  distinctive  in 
those  days  as  in  our  own.  The  probability  is  still  greater  if  it  were  spelt,  as  was 
often  the  case,  with  one  s.  Assay  has  all  the  meaning  of  Pope's  conjecture,  with 
the  added  sense,  peculiar  to  itself,  of  thronging  or  simultaneous  onset.  Thus,  too, 
in  III,  iii,  69,  'make  assay'  receives  great  force  and  beauty  if  interpreted,  'throng 
to  the  rescue.'  [Although  A.  E.  B.  was  anticipated  by  Theobald,  yet  his  defence 
is  so  vigorous  that  I  have  not  scrupled  to  insert  it;  it  is  doubtful  whether  his 
definition  will  apply  to  II,  i,  65.  Ed.]  Bailey  (i,  28)  maintains  that  Sh.  never 
could  have  written  anything  so  inconsequent  as  lines  59  and  60 :  '  Hamlet  proposes 
to  himself  the  question  whether  he  shall  or  shall  not  continue  to  live ;  but  in  pro- 
ceeding to  amplify  it  he  performs  the  operation  which  is  called  changing  a  child  at 
nurse,  i.  e.  he  substitutes  a  totally  different  question — namely,  whether  he  shall  con- 
tinue to  bear  his  wrongs  patiently,  or  shall  fight  against  them  and  put  them  down  ? 
It  is  as  if  my  neighbor  Lepidus,  whilst  deliberating  whether  he  should  remain  in  his 
present  house  or  quit  it,  were  to  say  :  "  To  remain  or  to  quit  ?  That  is  the  question ; 
whether  it  is  better  for  me  to  continue  to  endure  rattling  windows,  &c,  or  to  call  in 
the  carpenter,  and  so  put  an  end  to  these  annoyances."  ' — vol.  ii,  p.  305.  Accordingly, 
Bailey  believes  that  logic  is  vindicated,  and  the  true  text  restored,  by  reading  '  to 
take  arms  against  the  seat  of  troubles,  And  by  a  poniard,  or  by  deposing,  end  them.' 
Or  the  line  *  intrinsically,  or  considered  by  itself,  might  be  restored  by  reading,  "  to 
take  arms  against  a  host  of  troubles;"  although  the  principal  fault  of  the  passage 
would  remain  unaffected.' — p.  306.  Staunton  :  As  Sh.  has  already  furnished  us 
with  'a  sea  of  joys,'  'a  sea  of  glory,'  'a  sea  of  conscience,'  'a  sea  of  wax,'  'a  sea 
of  care,'  any  emendation  is  very  questionable.  Halliwell  cites :  '  Whatsoever  it 
be  (which  hardly  at  the  length  can  be  depainted)  that  after  a  sea  of  troubles  we 
enjoy  in  this  life,'  &c. —  The  Passenger  of  Benvenuto,  161 2.  Keightley  (who  in- 
clines to  Pope's  conj.)  says  that  this  is  almost  a  solitary  instance  of  the  figurative 
use  of  'sea'  by  Sh.  Hackett  (p.  51) :  The  'sea'  here  is  the  heart, — the  fountain 
of  existence,  and  it  is  compared  in  its  agitated  condition  to  a  *  sea  of  troubles.' 
'  The  analogy  between  the  sea,  with  its  ebb  and  flow,  through  rivers,  channels,  and 
creeks,  and  the  heart,  by  whose  impulse  the  blood  courses  through  the  veins  and 
arteries,  must  be  obvious  to  every  one  upon  reflection.'  Sh.  frequently  compares 
the  heart  to  a  '  sea.'  Ingleby  (Sh.  Hermeneutics,  p.  88) :  One  consideration  of 
the  highest  importance  has  been  entirely  ignored.  When  Ham.  talked  of  ending 
his  sea  of  troubles,  or,  as  he  afterwards  describes  it,  shuffling  off  his  mortal  coil, 
he  had  a  covert  consciousness,  a  conscience,  in  fact,  which  stayed  the  hand  he  would 
have  raised  against  his  own  life ;  viz.  that  this  so-called  ending  and  shuffling  off 
Mras  a  mere  delusion,  just  as  much  so  as  repelling  the  advancing  waves  of  the  sea 
with  shield  and  spear.  Is  not  the  metaphor  then  sound  and  whole  ?  If  there  be 
an  incongruity  in  the  notion  of  taking  arms,  offensively  or  defensively,  against 
the  sea,  is  there  not  just  as  great  an  incongruity  in  using  a  bare  brdkin  against 


act  in,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  209 

And  by  opposing  end  them  ?     To  die, — to  sleep, —  6c 

No  more ;  and  by  a  sleep  to  say  we  end 

The  heart-ache,  and  the  thousand  natural  shocks 

That  flesh  is  heir  to, — 'tis  a  consummation 

60.  them  f\  Pope,    them,  QaQ3.  them:  61.  more /]  more,  QaQ3-    more  :  Q4Q5 

Q  Q  Ff.     them.  Rowe,  Han.  Cap.  F3F3F4.     more?  Cap.  Ayscough. 

60,61.  die, — to  sleep, — No]  Pope,    die  63.  to, — ]  Cap.  too;  Qq.  to;  Rowe  +  , 

iojleepe  No  Qq.     dye,tofleepeNo¥xY2.  Jen.  Cald.    too?¥x.    to?  YJF^.    to.  F,. 

t/^,  to  Jleep  No  F3F4,  Rowe.     die ;  to  to  ?—  Sta. 
sleep;  No  Cap.  aY<?  .•  to  sleep;  No  Glo.  + . 

the  soul, — the  immortal  part  which  (as  Raleigh  has  it)  '  no  stab  can  kill '  ?  [In 
proof  that  the  metaphor  in  question  is  consistent,  and  has  all  the  external  evidences 
of  authenticity,  Ingleby  cites  a  passage  from  Ritson's  Memoirs  of  the  Celts  (p.  118), 
which  is  itself  a  translation  of  one  in  y£lian,  to  the  effect  that  the  Celts  in  the  wan- 
tonness of  their  bravery  '  oppose  the  overwhelming  sea,'  and  '  taking  arms  rush 
upon  the  waves,'  '  in  like  manner  as  if  they  were  able  to  terrify  or  wound  them.'] 

60.  end  them]  Sebastian  Evans  {Footnote  in  Ingleby's  Sh.  Hermeneutics,  p. 
92)  would  omit  the  pronoun  after  '  end,'  understanding  by  that  word  die. 

60.  sleep]  Theobald  :  This  seems  to  be  sneered  at  by  Beau.  &  Fl.  in  their 
Scornful  Lady  [II,  i,  Works,  vol.  iii,  p.  25,  ed.  Dyce].  Douce  (ii,  238) :  There  is 
a  good  deal  on  this  subject  in  Cardanus's  Comforte,  1576,  a  book  which  Sh.  had 
certainly  read.  In  fol.  30  it  is  said  :  '  In  the  holy  scripture,  death  is  not  accompted 
other  than  sleape,  and  to  dye  is  sayde  to  sleape.'  Hunter  (ii,  243) :  This  seems  to 
be  the  book  which  Sh.  placed  in  the  hands  of  Hamlet,  and  the  following  passages 
seem  to  approach  so  near  to  the  thought  of  this  soliloquy  that  we  cannot  doubt  that 
they  were  in  Shakespeare's  mind  when  he  put  this  speech  into  the  mouth  of  Hamlet  : 
*  How  much  were  it  better  to  follow  the  counsel  of  Agathius,  who  right  well  com- 
mended death,  saying,  that  it  did  not  only  remove  sickness  and  all  other  grief,  but 
also,  when  all  other  discommodities  of  life  did  happen  to  man  often,  it  never  would 
come  more  than  once.  Seeing,  therefore,  with  such  ease  men  die,  what  should  we 
account  of  death  to  be  resembled  to  anything  better  than  sleep?  Moste  assured  it  is 
that  such  sleeps  are  most  sweet  as  be  most  sound,  for  those  are  the  best  where  in  like 
unto  dead  men  we  dream  nothing.  The  broken  sleeps,  the  slumber,  and  dreams  full 
of  visions,  are  commonly  in  them  that  have  weak  and  sickly  bodies.' — Book  ii. 
Clarendon  :  These  resemblances  to  Cardan  are  not  very  striking. 

61.  more]  Knight:  Surely  the  doubt  [indicated  by  Capell's  '?']  whether  death 
and  sleep  are  identical  comes  too  early ;  the  reasoning  proceeds  to  assume  that  they 
are  the  same.  In  line  65  comes  the  doubt—'  perchance  to  dream.'  The  '  no  more  ' 
is  nothing  more. 

61.  to  say  we]  Bailey  (i.  42)  thinks  that  'to  say'  here  breaks  the  train  of 
thought,  and  has  nothing  to  do  where  it  is  placed.  '  By  simply  expunging  "  say  we  n 
every  one  will  be  sensible  how  greatly  the  passage  is  improved,  and  that  the  introduc- 
tion of  saying  is  a  sheer  impertinence  which  could  not  have  proceeded  from  the 
clear  head  of  our  great  dramatist.'  But  for  metre's  sake  a  foot  must  be  supplied, 
which  will  be  appropriate  in  sound,  form,  and  sense — this  foot  Bailey  thinks  is  to 

he  found  in  straightway. 

18*  O 


2IO  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  i. 

Devoutly  to  be  wish'd.     To  die ; — to  sleep ; — 

To  sleep  !  perchance  to  dream  !  ay,  there's  the  rub ;  65 

For  in  that  sleep  of  death  what  dreams  may  come, 

When  we  have  shuffled  off  this  mortal  coil, 

64.  wished.      To]  wi/Jit  to  Qq.  die,  to  sleep ;    To  sleep  :  Glo.  + . 
64,65.    To... sleep  !]  Cap.  dietojleepe,  66.  come,]  come  QsQ.     come?  Q.QS- 

ToJleepc,Qc{Ff.   die, — to  sleep ;  To  sleep  !  67.  we  have]    he  have  F2.     he  hath 

Knt,   Dyce.      die,  to  sleep; — To  sleep,         ^ J?4. 

Sta.      die,— to  sleep,— To  sleep;    Ktly.  shuffled]  fhufflel 'd F 'SF ',. 

65.  rub]  Clarendon:  A  term  of  bowls,  meaning  a  collision  hindering  the  bowl 
in  its  course. 

66.  what  dreams]  Hunter  (ii,  239) :  Sh.  seems  to  have  been  deeply  impressed 
with  a  feeling  of  the  misery  of  uneasy  dreams  ;  we  see  it  in  Clarence,  and  more 
awfully  in  Richard;  we  have  also  in  his  plays  the  effect  of  pleasant  dreams.  [The 
accent  in  reading  should  be  laid  on  '  what.'  It  is  the  kind  of  dreams  from  which 
Hamlet  here  recoils,  not  from  the  mere  fact  of  dreaming ;  the  horror  at  that  suppo- 
sition is  expi-essed  in  line  65.  Ed.] 

67.  coil]  Warburton  :  Tunnoil,  bustle.  Heath  :  The  incumbrance  of  this 
mortal  body.  Steevens  :  Compare  A  Dolfull  Discours  of  Two  Strangers,  &c,  pub- 
lished by  Churchyard,  among  his  Chippes,  1575  :  '  Yea,  shaking  off  this  sinfull  soyle 
Me  thincke  in  cloudes  I  see,'  &c.  M.  Mason  (p.  383)  agrees  with  Heath  in  referring 
this  to  the  body,  this  'covering  of  flesh,'  and  is  persuaded  that  we  should  read  'mor- 
tal spoil?  which  is  the  same  word  as  the  slough  which  the  snake  casts  every  year.  In 
sense  it  means  the  same  as  '  the  case  of  flesh,'  in  Bonduca  [IV,  iv,  p.  82,  Beau.  &  Fl. 
Works,  ed.  Dyce]  ;  and  again,  'a  separation  Betwixt  this  spirit  and  the  case  of  flesh.' 
—  The  Elder  Brother  [IV,  iii,  p.  262,  Beau.  &  Fl.  Works,  ed.  Dyce]  ;  but  the  most 
complete  parallel  is  '  this  muddy  vesture  of  decay.' — Mer.  of  Ven.  V,  i,  64.  Calde- 
cott  :  It  is  here  used  in  each  of  its  senses  :  turmoil,  or  bustle,  and  that  which  entwines 
or  wraps  round.  Snakes  generally  lie  like  the  coils  of  ropes  ;  and,  it  is  conceived, 
that  an  allusion  is  here  had  to  the  struggle  which  that  animal  is  obliged  to  make  in 
casting  his  slough.  Hunter  (ii,  240)  :  He  was  thinking  of  the  coil  of  a  rope. 
With  this  expression  '  shuffled  off'  better  coheres.  Singer:  It  is  remarkable  that 
under  garbuglio,  which  corresponds  in  Italian  to  our  '  coil,'  Florio  has  '  a  pecke  of 
troubles,'  of  which  Shakespeare's  '  sea  of  troubles  '  may  be  only  an  aggrandised  idea. 
Elze  :  With  what  reason  can  turmoil  or  noise  be  termed  mortal  ?  And  how  can 
we  shuffle  off  a  mortal  noise  ?  We  are  convinced  that  under  '  coil '  is  concealed  an 
error  which  we  can  remedy  by  an  almost  imperceptible  change,  if  instead  of  '  coil ' 
we  read  vail.  Vail  means  a  covering,  an  integument,  and  our  body  is  the  mortal 
covering  or  integument  which  we  must  shuffle  off  in  order  to  enter  on  the  life  be- 
yond. In  Botany  vail  is  the  envelope,  the  chalypter  of  mosses,  which  enfolds  the 
fructifying  organs  and  which  is  burst  by  them,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  it  was 
used  generally  for  the  envelope  of  buds.  We  do  not  venture  to  assert  that  Sh.  knew 
this  meaning  of  the  word,  but  we  know  with  what  keen  looks  he  must  have  exam- 
ined nature.  Beyond  a  doubt,  clay  would  be  better,  but  it  would  harmonise  less 
with  the  received  text.  Elze  {Shakespeare- fahrbuch,  vol.  ii,  p.  362)  advocates  the 
substitution  of  soil  for  '  coil,'  which  word  he  found  in  the  Dolfull  Discours,  quoted 


act  in,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  211 

Must  give  us  pause ;  there's  the  respect  68 

That  makes  calamity  of  so  long  life; 

For  who  would  bear  the  whips  and  scorns  of  time,  70 

by  Steevens.  Elze  supports  his  conjecture  very  ably,  but  it  is  needless.  '  Shuffle ' 
decides ;  a  coil  may  be  said  to  be  shuffled  off,  but  soil  would  be  shaken  off.  Hudson  : 
As  Wordsworth  has  it :  '  the  fretful  stir  unprofitable,  and  the  fever  of  the  world.'  In 
N.  dr»  Qu.  23  Feb.  '56,  Ingleby  started  the  question  of  how  far  the  popular  in- 
terpretation of  '  coil,'  as  the  body,  is  justified  ;  the  discussion  was  continued  by  '  X.' 
on  the  15  March  following,  who  maintained  that  in  every  instance  where  the  word 
is  used  by  Sh.  it  means  turmoil,  tumult ;  and  in  a  second  communication  to  the 
same  journal  on  the  nth  Oct.,  the  same  correspondent  pertinently  asks  whether  the 
contrast  be  not  intended  between  '  coil '  and  ■  quietus.'  Ingleby  replied  (8  Nov. 
'56)  that  the  interpretation  of  body  for  '  coil '  was  a  popular  error,  not  his,  and  that 
it  perhaps  arose,  as  suggested  to  him  by  a  correspondent,  from  a  confusion  on  the 
part  of  the  public  between  the  present  passage  and  Colossians,  iii,  9,  with  a  reference 
also  to  2  Corinthians,  v,  1-5.  H.  T.  Riley  (8  Nov.  '56,  also)  has  no  doubt  that 
'  coil '  refers  to  the  body,  and  that  it  was  probably  suggested  by  Romans,  vii,  24.  The 
coil  received  its  quietus  on  18  Sept.  '58,  by  '  A.  M.  of  Greenock,'  who  cites  a  deriva- 
tion of  the  word  from  the  Gaelic  cochul,  meaning  the  scaly  integument  which  clothes 
the  lower  limbs  of  a  mermaid  [!].  Ingleby,  however,  in  his  excellent  Sh.  Hermeneu- 
iics  (p.  88,  footnote),  says  that  the  analogies  are  too  strong  in  favor  of  the  'mortal 
coil'  being  what  Fletcher,  in  Bonduca,  calls  the  '  case  of  flesh.'  [Caldecott's  inter 
pretation,  that  '  coil '  is  used  in  both  senses,  seems  to  me  the  true  one.  Ed.] 

68,  69.  Must . . .  life  ;]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  p.  265) :  Arrange  metri gratia,  if  not 
also  to  the  heightening  of  the  effect,  as  three  lines,  ending  '  pause.',  •  calamity ', 
■  life.'. 

68.  pause]  Caldecott  :  Stop  our  career,  occasion  reflection.  Moberly  :  This 
word  is  foi  obvious  reasons  made  to  take  up  the  time  of  three  syllables  in  pronuncia- 
tion ;  so  correction  is  needless. 

68.  respect]  Warburton  :  Consideration,  motive.  Singer  :  This  is  Shake- 
speare's most  usual  sense  of  the  word. 

70.  time]  Warburton  :  The  evils  complained  of  are  not  the  product  of  time  or 
duration  only,  but  of  a  corrupted  age  or  manners.  We  may  be  sure  that  Sh.  wrote 
'  of  th1  time.'  Johnson  :  '  Whips '  and  '  scorns '  have  no  great  connection  with  one 
another,  or  with  time.  Though  at  all  times  scorn  may  be  endured,  the  times  that  put 
men  ordinarily  in  danger  of  whips  are  very  rare.  If  « whips '  be  retained,  read : 
'whips  and  scorns  of  tyrants.*  But  I  think  that  quip  [anticipated  by  Grey  (ii, 
295).  Ed.],  a  sneer,  a  sarcasm,  is  the  proper  word.  I  propose,  but  not  confidently, 
4  the  quips  and  scorns  of  title.1  [These  conjectures  of  Johnson's  were  omitted  in  the 
Variorum  of  1793  and  subsequent  ones.  Ed.]  Steevens:  I  think  we  might  venture 
to  read,  '  whips  and  scorns  o1  the  times?  i.  e.  times  satirical  as  the  age  of  Sh.,  which 
probably  furnished  him  with  the  idea.  Hunter  (ii,  240) :  *  Time  '  is  used  by  early 
writers  as  equivalent  to  the  modern  expression,  The  Times.  Taylor  the  Water  Poet 
has:  'mock'd  in  rhyme,  And  made  the  only  scornful  theme  of  Time*  Sh.  himself 
seems  to  use  time  in  the  same  manner  in  Rich.  Ill:  IV,  iv,  106.  Clarendon  : 
Compare  Southwell,  Saint  Peter's  Complaint,  stanza  v,  1.  4  [p.  12,  ed.  Grosart]:  '  The 
scorn?  of  Tims,  the  infamy  of  Fame.' 


2 1 2  HAMLET  [act  III,  SC.  i. 

The  oppressor's  wrong,  the  proud  man's  contumely,  71 

The  pangs  of  disprized  love,  the  law's  delay, 

The  insolence  of  office,  and  the  spurns 

That  patient  merit  of  the  unworthy  takes, 

When  he  himself  might  his  quietus  make  75 

With  a  bare  bodkin  ?  who  would  fardels  bear, 

f 

71.  proud]  proude  Qq.  poore  FXF2.  75.  When  he]  When  Q4QS-  When 
poor  F3F4,  Rowe,  Cald.  as  Q'76. 

72.  pangs']  pang  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  quietus]  quietas  Q2Q3Q4. 
Johns.  76.  who  would  fardels]  who'd  these 

disprized  love,   the]    Cald.    Knt,  fardels  Walker,  White,  Huds. 
Sing.  Sta.  Huds.     difpriz'd  love,  the  Ff.  fardels']   these  Fardles  Ff,  Cald. 

defpiz'd  love,  the  Q2Q3.     office,  and  the  Knt,  Ktly,  Del. 
Q  Q  .     despised  love,  the  Rowe  et  cet. 

71.  proud]  Caldecott:  The  contumely  the  proud  man  offers  is  more  in  accord- 
ance with  the  train  of  thought  than  that  which  the  poor  man  suffers.  [In  the  enum- 
eration of  these  ills,  is  it  not  evident  that  Sh.  is  speaking  in  his  own  person  ?  As 
Johnson  says,  these  are  not  the  evils  that  would  particularly  strike  a  prince.  Ed.] 

72.  disprized]  Grey  (ii,  295)  :  For  mis-prized.  White:  This  is  a  misprint,  or, 
more  probably,  a  sophistication.  [A  love  that  is  disprized  falls  more  frequently  to 
the  lot  of  man,  and  is  perhaps  more  hopeless  in  its  misery,  than  a  love  that  is  de- 
spised. As  Corson  says,  '  perhaps  a  disprized  or  undervalued  love,  a  love  that  is 
only  partially  appreciated  and  responded  to,  would  be  apt  to  suffer  more  pangs  than 
a  despised  love.'  After  all,  this  passage  is  merely  one  of  the  numberless  puzzles 
in  the  text  of  Sh. ;  scarcely  is  the  ink  dry  which  has  marked  out  a  certain  reading 
before  reason  and  probability  seem  to  shift  to  the  side  of  the  rejected  reading; 
and  to  avoid  unending  vacillation  an  editor  must  fall  back  on  the  safe  and  sound 
rule:  durior  lectio  prceferenda  est ;  which  applies  here.  Ed.] 

75.  quietus]  Steevens  :  This  is  the  technical  term  for  the  acquittance  which 
every  sheriff  [or  accountant]  receives  on  settling  his  accounts  at  the  Exchequer. 
Compare  Webster,  Duchess  of  Malfi  [I,  i,  vol.  i,  p.  198,  Works,  ed.  Dyce]  :  'And 
'cause  you  shall  not  come  to  me  in  debt,  Being  now  my  steward,  here  upon  your 
lips  I  sign  your  Quietus  est.'  Hunter  (ii,  241)  :  'The  law's  delay  '  suggested  this 
reference  to  the  Exchequer.  Elsewhere  Sh.  uses  other  Exchequer  terms.  In  Sonnet 
126,  12,  we  find  quietus  and  four  other  words  which  may  be  considered  Exchequer 
terms  within  the  compass  of  two  lines. 

76.  bare  J  Malone  :  This  does  not  perhaps  mean  '  by  so  little  an  instrument  as  a 
dagger,'  but  '  by  an  unsheathed  dagger.'  Clarendon  :  Sh.  may  have  had  the  former 
meaning  in  mind.     [Assuredly.  Ed.] 

76.  bodkin]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  p.  85) :  I  know  that  this  is  generally  intei 
preted  to  mean  any,  the  least  weapon  that  can  be.  'Tis  true,  this  exaggerates  the 
thought  in  that  particular ;  but  I  can  scarce  suppose  that  the  little  implement  is  here 
meant  with  which  women  separate  and  twist  over  their  hair.  I  rather  believe  that 
the  word  here  signifies,  according  to  the  old  usage  of  it,  a  dagger.  Thus  Chaucer: 
'  rTulius]  in  the  capitoil  anoon  him  hent<?  This  false  Brutus,  and  his  other  foon,  And 
stoked   him  wiiV   boydekyns    anoon.' — The   Monkes   Tale   [line   714,  ed.   Morris]. 


act  in,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  213 

To  grunt  and  sweat  under  a  weary  life,  JJ 

But  that  the  dread  of  something  after  death, 

The  undiscover'd  country  from  whose  bourn 

No  traveller  returns,  puzzles  the  will,  80 

77.  grunt]  groan  Q'76,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  ered  Ff.      That  undiscover'd  Pope  K 
life,"]  life?   Q4QS»  Pope,  Theob.  79.  bourn']    Cap.       bourne    Pcpe  + 

Warb.  borne  QqFjF.,,  Han.  Jen.     Born  F3F4, 

79.    The  undiscovered]  The  undifcov-  Rowe. 

Steevens  :  A  small  dagger.  Thus,  • —  Out  with  your  bodkin,  Your  pocket-dagger 
your  stiletto.' — Beau.  &  Fl.,  Custom  of  the  Country  [II,  iii,  Works,  p.  424,  ed.  Dyce]. 
Again,  in  Sapho  and  Phao,  1591  :  ' — a  desperate  fray  between  two,  made  at  all 
weapons,  from  the  brown  bill  to  the  bodkin.'  Hunter  (ii,  241)  :  Reginald  Scot 
{Discovery  of  Witchcraft,  fol.  1665,  p.  198,  first  printed  in  the  time  of  Elizabeth) 
plainly  distinguishes  a  dagger  from  a  bodkin. 

76.  fardels]  Nares  :  A  burden.  [Thus,  in  Acts,  xxi,  15:  'after  these  days  we 
trussed  up  our  fardels  and  went  vp  to  Jerusalem.' —  Version  of  1581.  Ed.]  Collier 
(ed.  1):  'These  fardels'  is  clearly  wrong  on  every  account.  Hunter  (ii,  242): 
1  These  fardels  '  refer  to  the  evils  just  specified,  and  the  text  should  so  read.  Wal 
Ker  (Crit.  iii,  266)  :  The  Ff  reading  is  'perhaps  right.'  Contract  'who  would'  to 
who  'Id.  Lettsom  {footnote  to  foregoing) :  This  contraction  is  not  necessary  for 
the  metre,  see  Walker  (  Vers.  p.  ,101) :  '  —  an  extra  syllable  is  not  admissible  in  the 
body  of  the  line,  except  when  it  comes  immediately  after  a  pause,  namely,  a  short 
extra  syllable  after  the  fourth  or  sixth  syllable  of  the  line.'  White:  The  reading 
of  the  Qq  loses,  with  the  pronoun  '  these,'  the  essential  thought :  that  the  crosses 
which  Hamlet  has  just  enumerated  are  the  fardels.     Corson  also  upholds  the  Ff. 

77.  grunt]  Johnson  :  This  can  scarcely  be  borne  by  modern  ears.  {Note  on 
'  hugger-mugger,'  IV,  v,  80.) :  If  phraseology  is  to  be  changed  as  words  grow  un- 
couth by  disuse,  or  gross  by  vulgarity,  the  history  of  every  language  will  be  lost. 
Steevens:  In  Stanyhurst's  Virgil,  1582,  'supremum  congemuit'  is  given  ' — for 
sighing  it  grunts.'  Again,  in  Turberville's  Ovid,  • —  round  about  I  heard  Of  dying 
men  the  grunts.' — Epist.  xiv,  Hypermnestra  to  Lynceus.  To  the  ears  of  our  ances- 
tors it  probably  conveyed  no  unpleasing  sound :  thus  Chaucer,  '  But  never  gront  he 
at  no  strook  but  oon.' — The  Monkes  Tale,  line  718,  ed.  Morris.  Compare  fid.  Cas. 
IV,  i,  22.  Knight  :  The  players  in  their  squeamishness  always  give  us  groan  ;  and 
if  they  had  not  the  terror  of  the  blank  verse  before  them,  they  would  certainly 
inflict  perspire  upon  us.  STAUNTON :  See  Armin's  Nest  of  Ninnies  [p.  26,  ed. 
Sh.  Soc]  :  ' — how  the  fat  fooles  of  this  age  will  gronte  and  sweat  under  this  massie 
burden,'  &c. 

79.  The]  Keightley  {Exp.  292) :  I  read  '/«  the.'  If  any  one  refuses  his  as- 
sent to  this  very  slight  addition  to  the  text,  and  which  for  the  first  time  gives  it  sense, 
I  must  leave  him  to  his  own  devices. 

79.  bourn]  Nares  :  A  limit,  a  boundary. 

80.  returns]  The  apparent  oversight  contained  in  the  assertion  that  no  traveller 
returns  from  that  bourn,  when  Hamlet  had  himself  seen  and  talked  with  such  a 
traveller,  Theobald  endeavors  to  explain  away  by  showing  that  the  Ghost  comes 
only  f-otr  Purgatory,  not  from  the  last  and  eternal  residence  of  souls  in  bliss  o» 


214  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc  i. 

And  makes  us  rather  bear  those  ills  we  have  8 1 

Than  fly  to  others  that  we  know  not  of? 

Thus  conscience  does  make  cowards  of  us  all, 

And  thus  the  native  hue  of  resolution 

Is  sicklied  o'er  with  the  pale  cast  of  thought,  85 

And  enterprises  of  great  pith  and  moment 
&      /  -^  0  J  \ 

81.  ills']  illesYJ*^.  85.  Is. ..thought]  Shews  fuk  and  pale 

83.  of  us  all]  Om.  Qq.  with  thought  Q'76. 

84.  native  hue]  healthful. face  Q'76.  sicklied]  fickled  Q<\. 

hue]  hiew  Qq.    hew  FtF2.  86.  pith\  pitch  Qq,  Jen.  El.  Cam.  Cla. 

misery.  Farmer  :  This  has  been  cavilled  at  by  Lord  Orrery  and  others,  but  without 
reason.  The  idea  of  a  traveller  in  Shakespeare's  time  was  of  a  person  who  gave  an 
account  of  his  adventures.  Steevens  :  Compare,  *  Qui  nunc  it  per  iter  tenebricosum, 
Illuc  unde  negant  redire  quenquam.' — Catullus.  Douce  :  No  translation  of  Catullus 
into  English  is  known  to  have  been  made.  Both  writers  may  have  casually  adopted 
the  same  sentiment.  Malone  (anticipated,  however,  by  Gentleman,  in  the  Dra- 
matic Censor,  i,  23,  1770)  asserts  that  Sh.  meant  that  from  the  unknown  regions 
of  the  dead  no  traveller  returns  with  all  his  corporeal  powers,  such  as  he  who  goes 
on  a  voyage  of  discovery  brings  back.  The  Ghost  being  '  invulnerable  as  the  air,' 
was  consequently  incorporeal.  Schlegel  {Lectures,  &c.  ii,  196,  footnote) :  Sh.  wished 
purposely  to  show  that  Ham.  could  not  fix  himself  in  any  conviction  of  any  kind 
whatever.  Roffe  (p.  31):  According  to  that  philosophy  which  the  Spiritualist 
believes  to  have  been  Shakespeare's,  Ham.  was  perfectly  correct  in  using  this  phrase- 
ology. Surely  there  is  no  skepticism  in  Ham.,  nor  inadvertency  in  Sh. :  a  departed 
spirit  appears  to  the  spiritual  eyes  of  the  man,  and  not  to  his  natural  eyes ;  conse- 
quently does  not,  and  cannot,  overpass  'the  bourn  '  which  separates  the  spiritual  and 
causal  world  from  the  natural  and  effect  world.  Coleridge  silences  the  question 
for  ever :  '  If  it  be  necessary  to  remove  the  apparent  contradiction, — if  it  be  not 
rather  a  great  beauty, — surely  it  were  easy  to  say  that  no  traveller  returns  to  this 
world,  as  to  his  home  or  abiding-place.'  Hartley  Coleridge  {Essays  and  Mar- 
ginalia, i,  170)  :  I  will  not  say  that  an  apparition  might  not  confirm  the  faith  of  an 
Hereafter,  where  it  pre-existed,  but  where  that  faith  was  not,  or  was  neutralised  by 
an  inward  misery,  implicated  with  the  very  sense  of  being,  its  effect  would  be  but 
momentary  or  occasional, — a  source  of  perplexity,  not  of  conviction, — throwing 
doubt  at  once  on  the  conclusions  of  the  understanding  and  the  testimony  of  the 
senses,  and  fading  itself  into  the  twilight  of  uncertainty,  making  existence  the  mere 
shadow  of  a  shade. 

8^.  cowards]   Blakeway:  Compare  Rich.  Ill :  I,  iv,  138. 

84.  native  hue]  Hunter  (ii,  242)  :  This  was  no  doubt  red.  Clarendon:  Nat- 
ural  colour.     Compare  Love's  Lab.  IV,  iii,  263. 

85.  thought]  Hunter  :  'Thought'  is  melancholy,  whose  hue  was  pale,  Mid.  N. 
D.  I,  i,  15.  Clarendon:  Care,  anxiety.  See  IV,  v,  182.  'An  alderman  of  London 
was  put  in  trouble,  and  dyed  with  thought,  and  anguish.' — Bacon,  Henry  VII,  p. 
230.     [Compare  '  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow.' — Matt,  vi,  34.] 

86.  pith]  Ritson  :  I  prefer  '  pitch,'  with  an  allusion  to  pitching  or  throwing  the 
bar  —a  manly  exercise,  usual  in  country  villages.    Staunton:  We  suppose  'pitch' 


4CT  in,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  21 J 

With  this  regard  their  currents  turn  awry  87 

And  lose  the  name  of  action.     Soft  you  now  ! 
The  fair  Ophelia? — Nymph,  in  thy  orisons 
Be  all  my  sins  remember'd. 

OpJi.  Good  my  lord.  90 

How  does  your  honour  for  this  many  a  day? 

Ham.     I  humbly  thank  you  ;  well,  well,  well. 

OpJi.     My  lord,  I  have  remembrances  of  yours, 
That  I  have  longed  long  to  re-deliver ; 
I  pray  you  now,  receive  them. 

Ham.  No,  not  I;  95 

87.  currents}  currants  FXF2F  .  well, —  Pope,  you,  well; — Theob.Warb. 
awry]  away  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Cald.         you  ;  well,  indifferent  well.  Seymour. 

Knt.  94.  long]    Om.   Q'76.      much    Pope, 

88.  [Seeing  Oph.  Rowe +  .    ...with  a         Han. 

book.  Johns.  95.  you  now,]  FfF3F  ,  Cap.  you  now 

89.  Ophelia  ?]  Ophelia,  Qq.  Ophelia:  QqF4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Sing.  Ktly.  you, 
Cap.  Steev.Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.     Ophe-         now  Theob.  et  cet. 

lia  !  Han.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  Glo.  + ,  Huds.  No,  not   I]    No,  no   Ff,    Rowe, 

orisons]  orizons  QqFI#     Horizons  Cald.  Knt,  Sta.     No  Pope  +  . 

FaF  F  .     oraisons  Rowe,  Pope,  Jen.  95,  96.  No. ..aught.]  Cap.     One  line, 

90.  remembered.]  remembred ?  Q'76.  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Knt,  Sta. 

92.  you;  well,  well,  zvell.]  you  well.  95.  /;    /]    //   You    do    mislahe  ;    I 

Q2Q  .  you  ;  well.  Q4Q5-  you,  well.  Han.         Seymour. 
Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  El.     you  ; 

refers  to  the  pitch  or  summit  of  the  falcon's  flight,  and  '  great  pitch  and  moment ' 
means  *  great  eminence  and  import.'  [Staunton  followed  the  Ff,  although  he  said  he 
preferred  the  Qq.  Ed.]  Cambridge  Edd  :  In  this  doubtful  passage  we  have  re- 
tained the  text  of  Qq,  although  the  player's  Quartos  of  1676,  1683,  1695,  and  1703 
have,  contrary  to  their  custom,  followed  the  Ff,  which  may  possibly  indicate  that 
'pith'  was  the  reading  according  to  the  stage  tradition.  Clarendon:  For  'pitch,' 
see  Twelfth  Night,  I,  i,  12;  Rich.  II:  I,  i,  109.  «  Pitch'  seems  more  appropriately 
joined  to  '  moment '  than  '  pith.'  We  have  had  •  pith  and  marrow '  already,  I,  iv, 
22.  Whether  we  read  •  pitch  '  or  '  pith,'  there  is  an  equally  sudden  change  of  meta- 
phor in  '  current.'     See  line  59. 

87.  awry]  Corson  :  *  Turn  away '  expresses  more  of  an  entire  change  of  current, 
which  is  Hamlet's  idea,  than  does  '  turn  awry.'' 

88.  Soft  you  now]  Caldecott  :  A  gentler  pace !  have  done  with  this  lofty 
march.     Clarendon  :  Hush,  be  quiet.     Compare  Much  Ado,  V,  i,  207. 

89.  Nymph]  Halliwell:  It  has  been  doubted  if  the  title  of  'Nymph,'  applied 
to  any  other  than  a  water-deity,  were  in  use  in  Shakespeare's  time.  It  occurs, 
however,  applied  to  the  heroine,  in  Lodge's  romance  of  Rosalyndc,  1590. 

89.  orisons]  Johnson  :  This  is  a  touch  of  nature.  Hamlet,  at  the  sight  of 
Ophelia,  does  not  immediately  recollect  that  he  is  to  personate  madness,  but  makes 
her  an  address  grave  and  solemn,  such  as  the  foregoing  meditation  excited  in  his 
thoughts. 


1 1  6  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  i 

I  never  gave  you  aught.  96 

Oph.     My  honour'd  lord,  I  know  right  well  you  did ; 
And  with  them  words  of  so  sweet  breath  composed 
As  made  the  things  more  rich ;  their  perfume  lost, 
Take  these  again  ;  for  to  the  noble  mind  100 

Rich  gifts  wax  poor  when  givers  prove  unkind. 
There,  my  lord.  *__ 

Ham.     Ha,  ha !  are  you  honest  ?   tJh^+JL^ 

97.  /  know]    Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  rich,   theit  perfume  lost,   Q2Q  .     ric/t, 

Cald.  Knt,  Coll.White,  Huds.  you  know  then  perfume  left;  FXF2F  .     rich,  than 

Qq  et  cet.  perfume  left ;  F4.     rich  :  that  perfume 

99.  the  things]  thefe  things  Qq,  Jen.  lost,  Rowe+. 
rich ;  their  perfume  lost,]  Q4QS» 

92.  well]  Moberly  :  •  Well '  becomes  twice  over  a  dissyllable  by  ironical  modu- 
lation. 

96.  aught]  Dowden  (p.  139)  :  As  things  were,  Ham.  quickly  learned,  and  the 
knowledge  embittered  him,  that  Oph.  could  neither  receive  great  gifts  of  soul,  nor 
in  return  render  equivalent  gifts.  There  is  an  exchange  of  little  tokens  between  the 
lovers,  but  of  the  large  exchange  of  soul  there  is  none,  and  Ham.  in  his  bitter  mood 
can  truthfully  exclaim  :  '  I  never  gave  you  aught.' 

97.  I  know]  Corson  :  Ophelia's  meaning  is,  The  remembrances  you  gave  me 
may  have  been  trifles  to  you,  such  trifles  as  left  no  impression  on  your  mind  of  your 
having  given  them;  but  /know  right  well  you  did,  as  they  were  most  dear  to  me  at 
the  time.     '  I '  should  be  read  with  a  strong  upward  circumflex. 

99.  lost]  Daniel  (p.  75) :  The  Ff  give  a  very  good  reading,  or  qy.  reft.  In 
the  next  line  read,  *  Take  them  again.' 

102.  There,  my  lord]  Marshall  (p.  28) :  At  this  point,  just  as  Oph.  is  going 
to  force  back  on  Ham.  the  sweet  remembrances  of  his  love,  the  fussy  old  Polonius, 
who  has  been  fidgeting  behind  the  arras,  anxious  to  see  the  result  of  his  most 
notable  device,  pops  his  head  out,  and  in  so  doing  drops  his  chamberlain's  staff. 
Ham.  hears  the  noise,  and  instantly  suspects  the  truth,  that  he  is  being  made  the 
object  of  an  artfully  devised  scheme  to  entrap  him  into  some  confession  of  his 
secret. 

103.  Richardson  [Essays,  &c,  fifth  ed.,  1797,  p.  102)  :  Hamlet's  air  and  manner 
here  should  not  be  perfectly  grave  and  serious.  Nor  is  there  anything  in  this  dia- 
logue to  justify  the  tragic  tone  with  which  it  is  frequently  spoken.  Let  Ham.  be 
represented  as  delivering  himself  in  a  light,  airy,  unconcerned,  and  thoughtless 
manner,  and  the  rudeness,  so  much  complained  of,  will  disappear.  Coleridge: 
Here  it  is  evident  that  the  penetrating  Ham.  perceives,  from  the  strange  and  forced 
manner  of  Oph.,  that  the  sweet  girl  was  not  acting  a  part  of  her  own,  but  was  a 
decoy ;  and  his  after-speeches  are  not  so  much  directed  to  her  as  to  the  listeners  and 
spies.  Such  a  discovery  in  a  mood  so  anxious  and  irritable  accounts  for  a  certain 
harshness  in  him ; — and  yet  a  wild  upworking  of  love,  sporting  with  opposites  in  a 
wilful  self-tormenting  strain  of  irony,  is  perceptible  throughout.  '  I  did  love  you 
once;' — '  I  lov'd  you  not;' — and  particularly  in  his  enumeration  of  the  faults  of  the 


\ct  in,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  21 J 

Oph.     My  lord  ? 

Ham.     Are  you  fair  ?  10$ 

Oph.     What  means  your  lordship? 

104.  lord ?~\  Cap.     lord.  QqFf.     lord —  Rowe-f  ,  Jen. 

Bex  from  which  Oph.  is  so  free,  that  the  mere  freedom  therefrom  constitutes  her 
character.  Note  Shakespeare's  charm  of  composing  the  female  character  by  the 
absence  of  characters,  that  is,  marks  and  out-jottings.  Lamb  (iii,  95,  ed.  1870) :  All 
the  Hamlets  that  I  have  ever  seen,  rant  and  rave  at  Oph.  as  if  she  had  committed 
some  great  crime,  and  the  audience  are  highly  pleased,  because  the  words  of  the 
part  are  satirical,  and  they  are  enforced  by  the  strongest  expression  of  satirical  in- 
dignation of  which  the  face  and  voice  are  capable.  But  then,  whether  Ham.  is 
likely  to  have  put  on  such  brutal  appearances  to  a  lady  whom  he  loved  so  dearly,  is 
never  thought  on.  The  truth  is,  that  in  all  such  deep  affections  as  had  subsisted 
between  Ham.  and  Oph.  there  is  a  stock  of  supererogatory  love  (if  I  may  venture 
to  use  the  expression),  which  in  any  great  grief  of  heart,  especially  where  that 
which  preys  upon  the  mind  cannot  be  communicated,  confers  a  kind  of  indulgence 
upon  the  grieved  party  to  express  itself,  even  to  its  heart's  dearest  object,  in  the 
language  of  a  temporary  alienation ;  but  it  is  not  alienation,  it  is  purely  a  distraction, 
and  so  it  always  makes  itself  to  be  felt  by  that  object;  it  is  not  anger,  but  grief 
assuming  the  appearance  of  anger, — love  awkwardly  counterfeiting  hate,  as  sweet 
countenances  when  they  try  to  frown ;  but  such  sternness  and  fierce  disgust  as  Ham. 
is  made  to  show  is  no  counterfeit,  but  the  real  face  of  absolute  aversion, — of  irrecon- 
cilable alienation.  It  may  be  said  he  puts  on  the  madman ;  but  then  he  should  only 
so  far  put  on  this  counterfeit  lunacy  as  his  own  real  distraction  will  give  him  leave ; 
that  is,  incompletely,  imperfectly ;  not  in  that  confirmed,  practised  way,  like  a  master 
of  his  art,  or,  as  Dame  Quickly  would  say,  'like  one  of  those  harlotry  players.' 
Hazlitt  (p.  no) :  Hamlet's  conduct  to  Oph.  is  quite  natural  in  his  circumstances. 
It  is  that  of  assumed  severity  only.  It  is  the  effect  of  disappointed  hope,  of  bitter 
regrets,  of  affection  suspended,  not  obliterated,  by  the  distraction  of  the  scene  around 
him  !  Amidst  the  natural  and  preternatural  horrors  of  his  situation,  he  might  be 
excused  in  delicacy  from  carrying  on  a  regular  courtship.  When  his  *  father's  spirit 
was  in  arms,'  it  was  not  the  time  for  the  son  to  make  love  in.  He  could  neither 
marry  Oph.,  nor  wound  her  mind  by  explaining  the  cause  of  his  alienation,  which 
he  durst  hardly  trust  himself  to  think  of.  It  would  have  taken  him  years  to  come 
to  a  direct  explanation  on  the  point.  In  the  harassed  state  of  his  mind  he  could, 
not  have  done  otherwise  than  he  did.  His  conduct  does  not  contradict  what  he 
says  of  his  love  for  her  when  he  sees  her  grave.  Vischer  (Krit.  Gauge,  p.  102) 
conjectures  that  Ham.  suspects  that  the  Queen  is  eavesdropping,  and  that  what  he 
says  here  is  aimed  at  her.     ' 

103.  honest]  STAUNTON:  That 'honest'  in  this  dialogue  is  equivalent  to  chaste 
or  virtuous,  it  would  be  superfluous  to  mention,  but  that  some  critics,  in  their  stric- 
tures on  the  conduct  of  Hamlet  in  the  present  scene,  appear  to  have  forgotten  it. 
The  beginning  recalls  to  mind  some  passages  in  Shirley's,  The  Royal  Master, 
IV,  i :  '  King.  Are  you  honest  ?  Theo.  Honest !  King.  I  could  have  used  the 
name  of  chaste  Or  virgin ;  but  they  carry  the  same  sense.' — [  Works,  vol.  iv,  p.  156, 
td.  Dyce.]  Ci>vj;ndon  :  See  Winter's  Tale  II,  i,  68  and  76. 
19 


218 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  L 


Ham.     That  if  you    be    honest  and  fair,  your   honesty  107 
should  admit  no  discourse  to  your  beauty. 

Oph.  Could  beauty,  my  lord,  have  better  commerce 
than  with  honesty?  no 

Ham.  Ay,  truly ;  for  the  power  of  beauty  will  sooner 
transform  honesty  from  what  it  is  to  a  bawd  than  the  force 
of  honesty  can  translate  beauty  into  his  likeness ;  this  was 
sometime  a  paradox,  but  now  the  time  gives  it  proof.  I 
did  love  you  once.  115 

Oph.     Indeed,  my  lord,  you  made  me  believe  so. 

Ham.  You  should  not  have  believed  me;  for  virtue 
cannot  so  inoculate  our  old  stock  but  we  shall  relish  of  it ; 
I  loved  you  not. 

Oph.     I  was  the  more  deceived.  120 

Ham.     Get  thee  to  a  nunnery ;  why  wouldst  thou  be  a 


107.  your  honesty]  you  Qq,  Pope  +  , 
Mai.  Steev. 

109.  commerce"]  comerfe  QaQ3.     com- 
erce  Q,FrF2F .     converse  Anon.* 

1 10.  with]  your  Ff. 

113.  into]  in  Q5<     to  Q'76. 
his]  its  Pope  +  .     Ws  Cap. 

114.  so?netime]fometimes  F  F4,  Rowe, 
Pope. 


118.  inoculate]    innocculate  F.     in- 


occulate  F_F 


23' 


inocualte  F„.     euocutat 
4 


Q2Q3.  euacuat  Q  .  euacuate  Q  .  evacu- 
ate Q'70,  Jen. 

119.  I  loved  you  not.]  I  did  love  you 
once.  Rowe  ii ;  Pope,  in  the  margin. 

121.  to]  Om.  Qq. 

121,  129,  137,  140,  149.  nunnery] 
Nunry  Qq. 


107,  108.  honesty  ...  beauty]  Johnson:  The  true  reading  seems  to  be:  'you 
should  admit  your  honesty  to  no  discourse  with  your  beauty.'  This  is  the  sense 
evidently  required.  Caldecott  :  '  If  you  really  possess  these  qualities,  chastity 
and  beauty,  and  mean  to  support  the  character  of  both,  your  honesty  should  be 
so  chary  of  your  beauty  as  not  to  suffer  a  thing  so  fragile  to  entertain  discourse, 
or  to  be  parleyed  with.'  The  lady,  'tis  true,  interprets  the  words  otherwise, 
giving  them  the  turn  that  best  suited  her  purpose.  Singer  :  '  Honesty  may  be 
corrupted  by  flattering  discourse  addressed  to  beauty.'  Ham.  remarks  respecting 
women  generally.  Clarendon  :  Hamlet  says  that  honesty  or  virtue,  personified 
as  the  guardian  of  beauty,  should  allow  none,  not  even  himself,  to  discourse  with 
the  latter. 

114.  the  time]  The  present  age.     See  Macb.  I,  v,  61. 

116  and  120.  Mrs  Jameson  (i,  275) :  Those  who  ever  heard  Mrs  Siddons  read 
Hamlet  cannot  forget  the  world  of  meaning,  of  love,  of  sorrow,  of  despair,  conveyed 
in  these  two  simple  phrases.  Here  and  in  lines  155,  156,  are  the  only  allusions  to 
herself  and  her  own  feelings  in  the  course  of  the  play ;  and  these,  uttered  almost 
without  consciousness  on  her  own  part,  contain  the  revelation  of  a  life  of  love,  and 
disclose  the  secret  burthen  of  a  heart  bursting  with  its  own  unuttered  grief. 

118.  it]  Delius     This  refers  to  *  old  stock.' 


ACT  in,  sc.  I.]  HAMLET  2  1 9 

breeder  of  sinners  ?  I  am  myself  indifferent  honest ;  but  yet 
I  could  accuse  me  of  such  things  that  it  were  better  my 
mother  had  not  borne  me  ;  I  am  very  proud,  revengeful, 
ambitious;  with  more  offences  at  my  beck  than  I  have  125 
thoughts  to  put  them  in,  imagination  to  give  them  shape, 
or  time  to  act  them  in.  What  should  such  fellows  as  I  do 
crawling  between  heaven  and  earth  ?  We  are  arrant  knaves 
all ;  believe  none  of  us.  Go  thy  ways  to  a  nunnery. 
Where's  your  father  ?  1 30 

Oph.     At  home,  my  lord. 

Plant.     Let  the  doors  be  shut   upon  him,  that  he  may 
play  the  fool  no  where  but  in's  own  house.     Farewell. 

124,  125.   revengeful,   ambitions']    re-  Sing.  Ktly,  Glo.  Dyce  ii,  Cla. 
vengefull.    Ambitious,  FXF3F  .  129.  all]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

124.  borne]   born  F2F  .  132,  133.   Let. ..house.]  Two  lines,  the 
126.  in,  imagination  to]  in  imagina-  first  ending  him,  Qq. 

Hon,  to  Ff,  Rowe.  133.  no  where]  no  way  Ff,  Cald.  Knt. 

128.  heaven    and  earth]    earth    and  in's]  in  his  Ktly. 

heaven  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 

125.  beck]  Steevens  :  That  is,  always  ready  to  come  about  me.  Caldecott: 
With  more  vitious  dispositions,  like  evil  genii  at  my  elbow,  and  ready  at  a  nod  to 
start  into  act,  than  can  be  distinctly  conceived.  Collier  (ed.  2)  :  The  (MS)  has 
back ;  one  word  may  have  been  easily  mistaken  for  the  other.  Walker  (Crit.  iii. 
266)  makes  the  same  emendation,  and  Lettsom,  in  a  footnote,  adds,  •  not  meaning, 
I  suppose,  that  Hamlet  is  loaded  with  offences  ;  that  would  require  "  on  my  back !" 
but  that  he  is  the  leader  and  disposer  of  a  whole  host  of  offences.' 

126.  in]  WarburtoN:  A  word  is  dropped  out;  read  '  in  name.''  This  was  the 
progress.  The  offences  are  first  conceived  and  named,  then  projected  to  be  put  in 
act,  then  executed.  Heath  :  I  see  no  business  the  naming  hath  to  do  in  this  prog- 
ress.    Johnson  :  '  To  put  a  thing  into  thought,'  is  to  '  think  on  it.' 

130.  father]  Grant  White  ( The  Case  of  Hamlet  the  Younger,  The  Galaxy, 
April,  1870,  p.  540)  :  There  is  no  warrant  for  the  opinion  that  Ham.  had  discovered 
that  the  King  and  Pol.  were  overhearing  him,  which  indeed  is  suggested  only  as  a 
support  to  the  indefensible  assumption  that  Ham.  being  good  at  heart,  his  conduct 
must  have  been  always  thoroughly  estimable  and  consistent;  whereas  there  are  no 
graver  offences  nor  grosser  errors  than  those  into  which  men  fall  for  lack  of  resolu 
tion.  Marshall  (A  Study  of  Hamlet,  p.  28) :  Ham.,  before  condemning  Oph.  as 
an  accomplice  in  the  contemptible  trick  of  spying  on  him,  wishes  to  put  Aer  to  the 
plain  proof;  he  therefore  turns  round  and  holds  out  his  hand  towards  her;  she,  for- 
getting her  part,  and  thinking,  poor  girl,  that  he  is  going  to  take  her  to  his  breast  and 
forgive  her,  flies  across  to  him ;  he  checks  her  with  his  outstretched  hand,  and,  hold- 
ing hers,  looks  straight  into  her  eyes,  as  only  one  who  loves  Iier  has  a  right  to  look 
into  a  maiden's  eyes,  and  solemnly  asks  her  the  question:  'Where  is  your  father?' 
She  falters  out  her  first  lie.  Then  indignation  takes  the  place  of  sorrow  witk 
Ham. 


220 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  i. 


Oph.     [Aside]  Oh,  help  him,  you  sweet  heavens  ! 

Ham.  If  thou  dost  marry,  I'll  give  thee  this  plague  for  135 
thy  dowry :  be  thou  as  chaste  as  ice,  as  pure  as  snow,  thou 
shalt  not  escape  calumny.  Get  thee  to  a  nunnery,  go ;  fare- 
well. Or,  if  thou  wilt  needs  marry,  marry  a  fool ;  for  wise 
men  know  well  enough  what  monsters  you  make  of  them. 
To  a  nunnery,  go  ;  and  quickly  too.     Farewell.  140 

Oph.     [Aside]  O  heavenly  powers,  restore  him  ! 

Ham.  I  have  heard  of  your  paintings  too,  well  enough  ; 
God  has  given  you  one  face,  and  you  make  yourselves 
another;  you  jig,  you  amble,  and  you  lisp,  and  nickname 
God's  creatures,  and  make  your  wantonness  your  ignor-   14$ 


134,  141.   [Aside]  Ed. 
!35-  P^gue]  plage  QA. 
137-  go]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Ktly. 

140.  too]  to  Qq. 

141.  O]  Om.  Qq,  Pope +  ,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  El.      Ye  Ktly. 

142.  paintings]  prat  lings  F  .  prat- 
ling  F2F  F  ,  Rowe.  painting  Pope  +  . 
pratt lings  Cald.  Knt  i. 

too]  Om.  Qq. 

143.  God]  Nature  Q'76. 

has]    Ff,    Rowe  +  ,    Dyce,  Glo. 
Huds.     hath  Qq  et  cet. 

face]  pace  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt  i. 


143.  yourschss]  your felues  Q  .  your 
f'fa  Q&fU-  your  felfe  FtFa.  your 
felf  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

144.  jig]  Q'76.     gig  Qq.     gidge  Ff. 
you  amble]  6°  amble  Qq,  Jen. 
lisp,]    Q'76,F4.     lifpe,   F.F.F . 

lift  Qq. 

and  nickname]   you   nickname 
Qq. 

145.  God's]  Heavens  Q'76. 

145,  146.  wantonness  your  ignorance] 
ignorance  your  wantonness  Anon.* 

your  ignorance]   ignorance  Qq, 
Jen. 


139.  monsters]  Delius  :  Compare  Oth.  IV,  i,  63. 

142.  paintings]  Collier  :  As  Barron  Field  observes  to  me:  '  Hamlet  does 
not  mean  that  he  had  heard  that  Ophelia  painted,  but  that  women  were  in  the  habit 
of  painting  themselves.  Throughout  the  scene  he  speaks  generally.'  Steevens  : 
See  Drayton's  Mooncalf  [Works, p.  173,  b.  ed.  1748],  where  these  destructive  aids 
to  beauty  are  satirised.  Douce  (ii,  241):  Compare  Isaiah,  iii,  16.  In  defence  of 
the  Ff,  it  has  not  been  noticed  that  'lisp'  seems  to  refer  to  pratt  lings,  as  'jig'  and 
«  amble  '  do  to  pace.     Collier  (ed.  2) :  The  (MS)  sustains  the  Qq. 

144.  nickname]  Wedgwood:  Ekename  or  nekename,  agnomen.  —  Prompt. 
Parv.  Ekename,  from  eke,  in  addition,  besides ;  nickname,  as  a  name  given  in 
derision,  from  Fr.  faire  la  nique,  to  jeer,  or  Ger.  necken,  to  tease.  But  the  great 
variety  of  forms  looks  more  like  a  series  of  corruptions  of  a  common  original,  which 
being  no  longer  understood  has  been  accidentally  modified  or  twisted  in  order  to 
suit  the  meaning.  Such  an  original  may  perhaps  be  found  in  Lap.  like  itamm, 
Fin.  liika  nimi,  Esthon.  liig  nimmi,  a  by-name,  surname,  the  first  element  of  which 
in  the  three  languages  signifies  an  excess  of,  beside. 

145.  ignorance]  Johnson:  You  mistake  by  wanton  affectation,  and  pretend  to 
mistake  by  ignorance.  White  :  I  do  not  quite  apprehend  the  meaning  of  this 
passage ;  but  it  seemr.  to  imply  that  the  women  affected  a  pretty,  innocent  ignorance 


act  in,  sc.  i.]  TfAMLET  221 

ance.     Go  to,  I'll  no  more  on't;    it  hath  made    me    mad.   146 
I  say,  we  will  have^  no  more  marriages ;  those  that  are  mar- 
ried already,  all  buTor^_shall  live;  the  rest  shall  keep  as 
ihey  are.     To  a  nunnery,  go.  [Exit. 

Oph.     Oh,  what  a  noble  mind  is  here  o'erthrown  !  150 

The  courtier's,  scholar's,  soldier's,  eye,  tongue,  sword ; 
The  expectancy  and  rose  of  the  fair  state, 
The  glass  of  fashion,  and  the  mould  of  form, 

146.  Go  to]  goe  to  Q2Q3Q4.  Go  too  151.  scholar's,  soldier's]  Qv  Han. 
Ff.  Goe  Fa.  Go  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Sing,  ii,  Coll.  ii,  Sta.  White,  Ktly,  Huds. 
Han.                                                                      foldier 's,  fcholar 's,  QqFf  et  cet. 

on't]  oft  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  scholar's,']     fchollers,     Q2Q3Q4- 

of  it  Sing,  ii,  Ktly.  Scholers,  Q  .    Schollers  :  Fx.  Schollers  ? 

147.  no  more  marriages]  no  mo  mar-  F3.  Schollars ?¥  .  Scholars!  F  ,  Rowe, 
riage  Qq.  Om.  Jen.  (a  misprint?) 

148.  live]  Om.  FaF3F4.  152.  expectancy]     expeclanfte     FEF3. 

149.  [Exit.]  Exit  Hamlet.  Ff.  expectation  Qq,  Jen. 

150.  overthrown]  othrowne  Q.Q.. 

as  a  mask  for  their  wantonness.     Moberly  :  Use  ambiguous  words,  as  if  you  did 
not  know  their  meaning. 

148.  one]  Malone:  His  step-father.  Coleridge:  Observe  this  dallying  with 
tne  inward  purpose,  characteristic  of  one  who  had  not  brought  his  mind  to  the  steady 
acting  point.  He  would  fain  sting  the  uncle's  mind ; — but  to  stab  his  body ! — 
Ophelia's  soliloquy  is  the  perfection  of  love — so  exquisitely  unselfish. 

149.  go.]  Caldecott  :  '  After  having  gone  to  the  extremity  of  the  stage,  from  a 
pang  of  parting  tenderness,  Mr  Kean  came  back  to  press  his  lips  to  Ophelia's  hand. 
It  had  an  electrical  effect  on  the  house.' 

151.  scholar's,  soldier's]  In  support  of  the  QqFf,  Farmer  refers  to  R.  of  L. 
615,  616,  as  a  proof  that  Sh.  has  elsewhere  disregarded  the  exact  collocation  of 
words,  and  also  refers  to  Quintilian  for  a  similar  oversight.  All  edd.  who  notice 
this  line  justify  the  reading  of  Qf,  even  while  following  the  QqFf  in  their  text.  Rohr- 
bach,  in  his  clever  book,  in  which,  with  the  utmost  gravity,  he  turns  all  that  Ham. 
does  or  says  into  ridicule,  asserts  (p.  136)  that  the  text  of  QqFf  is  correct,  and  con- 
veys Shakespeare's  true  meaning :  '  Are  not  Hamlet's  bravado  and  his  two  conver- 
sations with  Oph.  more  in  the  style  of  a  soldier,  bred  in  the  camps  of  Elizabeth's 
time,  than  of  a  scholar  ?  And  is  not  his  sword  that  of  a  student — namely,  a  rapier, 
with  which  he  is  matched  against  Laertes  ?  Is  not  his  fighting  a  mere  pastime  of 
the  fencing  school  ?  And  when  he  really  fights  in  earnest,  is  it  not  the  sword  of  a 
scholar  that  he  uses — namely,  his  tongue  ?  Sh.  wears  a  serious  face,  but  don't  trust 
him ;  he's  laughing  in  his  sleeve.' 

152.  fair  state]  Delius:  The  state  is  'fair,'  because  Hamlet  adorns  it  as  the 
■  rose.'  Clarendon  :  For  a  similar  prolepsis  see  Macb.  I,  vi,  3;  III,  iv,  76;  Rich. 
II:  II,  iii,  94. 

153.  form]  Johnson:  The  model  by  whom  all  endeavored  to  form  themselves. 
Caldecott  :  The  cast  in  which  is  shaped  the  only  perfect  form.     Hudson  :  Com 


222 


HAMLET 


The  observed  of  all  observers,  quite,  quite  down ! 
And  I,  of  ladies  most  deject  and  wretched, 
That  suck'd  the  honey  of  his  music-vows, 
Now  see  that  noble  and  most  sovereign  reason, 
Like  sweet  bells  jangled  out  of  tune,  and  harsh  ; 
That  unmatch'd  form  and  feature  of  blown  youth 
Blasted  with  ecstasy ;  Oh,  woe  is  me, 
To  have  seen  what  I  have  seen,  see  what  I  see ! 


[act  hi,  sc.  i. 
155 


155.  And  I]  Have  fFtTa.  I  am  F3 
F4,  Rowe+. 

156.  mnsic~\  muftckt  Q2Q3Q.- 
vows,~\  Han.  vowes ;  Qq.  vowes  : 

or  vows  :  Ff,  Rowe  + .     vows  !  Jen. 

157.  that  noble]  what  noble  Qq. 

158.  jangled  out  of  tune,]  Ff,  Rowe 
+ ,  Cors.  tangled  out  of  time,  Qq,  Jen. 
jangVd,  out  of  tune  Cap.  et  cet. 


l60 


un- 


159.  unmatched"]  vnmarcht  Q 
snatch 'd 'Jen.  (a  misprint?) 

form]  forme  QqFx.    fortune  F, 


FF. 
34 


feature]  flature  Qq,  Jen. 
161.    To  have]  Cap.      T  have  QqFf, 
Rowe +  ,  Jen.  El.  White,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 
I  see]  I  fee.    Exit.  Q2Q4Q5,  El. 


pare  2  Hen.  IV:  II,  iii,  21.     Tschischwitz :  'Mould  of  form'  would  be  a  dis 
agreeable  pleonasm,  were  not  '  form '  to  be  understood  as  equivalent  to  ceremony, 
external  rites. 

155.  deject]  See  I,  ii,  20. 

156.  music-vows]  For  instances  of  noun-compounds  see  Abbott,  §430;  also, 
§  22  :  Music  is  not  commonly  used  by  us  as  a  prefix,  unless  the  suffix  is  habitually 
connected  with  '  music ;'  thus,  '  music-book,'  '  music-master,'  &c,  but  not  '  music '  for 
musical,  as  here.     Clarendon  :  Another  mixed  metaphor. 

158.  tune]  See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  235,  and  notes.  Corson  :  The  phrase,  'out  of 
tune,'  is  certainly  an  adverbial  element  to  'jangled,'  and  not  an  adjective  element  tc 
'  sweet  bells.'  The  two  ideas  attached  to  '  bells '  are:  1.  'jangled  out  of  tune;'  2. 
'  harsh,'  which  expresses  to  what  extent  'jangled  out  of  tune.' 

159.  feature]  Caldecott:  'The  feature  and  fashion,  or  the  proportion  and 
figure  of  the  whole  bodie.  Conformatio  qusedam  et  figura  totius  oris  et  corporis.' — 
Baret's  Alvearie.     Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Form,  person  in  general. 

159.  blown]  Capell  (i,  136):  Youth  in  its  bloom.  Clarendon:  The  metaphor 
from  a  flower,  as  in  152,  is  resumed  here. 

160.  ecstasy]  See  II,  i,  102. 

161.  see]  Elze:  It  is  evident  that  after  these  words  Oph.  goes  to  find  her 
father,  in  order  to  tell  him  the  result  of  the  interview  which  had  just  taken  place. 
Not  finding  him,  she  returns,  and  is  greeted  with  'How  now,  Ophelia?'  line  178, 
but  is  immediately  sent  away  again  by  her  father.  '  That  Oph.  should  be  present 
during  the  King's  speech  addressed  to  his  confidential  counsellor  is  more  than 
Improbable.  I  have  therefore  inserted  the  appropriate  stage-directions  in  the 
text.'  Tschischwitz:  After  these  words  Oph.  remains  lost  in  painful  thoughts 
until  she  is  addressed  by  her  father.  Miles  (p.  45) :  Oph.  is  most  deject  and 
wretched,  but  without  even  a  suspicion  of  being  badly  treated.  Nor  is  she  badly 
treated.     The  resentment  of  neglected  love  may  inflame  his  dazzling  satire,  but 


at  id,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  223 

Re-enter  King  and  Polonius. 

King      Love?  his  affections  do  not  that  way  tend;  162 

Nor  what  he  spake,  though  it  lack'd  form  a  little, 
Was  not  like  madness.     There's  something  in  his  soul 
O'er  which  his  melancholy  sits  on  brood ;  165 

And  I  do  doubt  the  hatch  and  the  disclose 
Will  be  some  danger ;  which  for  to  prevent, 
I  have  in  quick  determination 
Thus  set  it  down :  he  shall  with  speed  to  England, 

Re-enter...]  Cap.   Enter...  QqFf.         Pope  + . 

162.  Scene  111.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  164.  souf]  foide  ?  F 

Love  ?]Yi.    Loue,  QaQ3-    Loue :  166.  I do  doubt]  I  doubt  Jen. 

Q4QS.     Love!  Q'76et  cet.  167.  for  to]  Qq.     to  F,FB,  Cald.  Knt, 

163.  Nor]  For  Q'76.  White,  Huds.     how  to  F3F4,  Rowe  +  . 

164.  There' 's  something]   Something's  169.  it]  Om.  Q4QS- 

under  the  circumstance,  '  Get  thee  to  a  nunnery '  was  the  best  and  only  advice  he 
could  give  her.  A  nunnery  was  her  best  and  only  refuge  from  the  impending  storm. 
Destruction  for  himself  and  all  else  around  him ;  but  for  her  the  cloister's  timely 
shelter.  There  is  no  telling  when  the  fierce  wrath  may  seize  him ;  when  he  may 
shake  down  the  pillars  of  that  guilty  palace.  But  not,  if  he  can  help  it,  on  her  fair 
head  shall  the  ruin  fall !  Since  the  grave  is  opening  for  him,  let  the  convent  open 
for  her.  Not  his,  but  never  another's  !  O  wonderful  poet !  Could  she  not  guess, 
had  she  not  some  shadowy  perception  of  the  jealous,  selfish,  masculine  love,  which, 
despite  their  fell  divorce,  would  wall  her  from  the  world,  and  mark  her  with  the 
seal  of  God,  to  save  her  from  the  violation  of  man  ? 

162.  affections]  White  :  This  has  no  relation  to  love  ox  preference,  but  refers  to 
the  manner  in  which  Hamlet's  mind  is  affected,  which  affection,  or  affecting,  does 
not,  as  the  King  says,  tend  towards  love. 

163,  164.  Nor  .  .  .  not]  See  I,  ii,  158;  and  III,  ij,  4. 

165.  on  brood]  See  I,  v,  19. 

166.  disclose]  Steevens  :  *  Disclose  is  when  the  young  just  peeps  through  the 
shell.  It  is  also  taken  for  laying,  hatching,  or  bringing  forth  young;  as  "  She  dis- 
closed three  birds." — R.  Holme's  Acade?ny  of  Armory  and  Blazon,  b.  ii,  ch.  xi,  p. 
238.  So  in  The  Booke  of  Huntynge,  Hawkyng,  Fishyng :  First  they  ben  eges,  and 
after  they  ben  disclosed  haukes ;  and  commonly  goshaukes,  ben  disclosed  as  sone  as 
the  choughes.'  To  exclude  is  the  technical  term  at  present.  See  V,  i,  275.  [See 
I,  i,  57;  II,  1,4.] 

167.  for  to]  White,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Authorship  of  Henry  VI  (vol.  vii,  p. 
434),  says  that  this  idiom  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  of  Shakespeare's  authentic 
works.  Rives  {Harness  Prize  Essay,  p.  19)  notes  '  but  a  single  authentic  instance' : 
viz.  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii,  427.  Abbott,  §  152,  refers  to  the  present  passage,  and  to 
All's  Well,Y,  iii,  181.  Schmidt  {Lexicon)  furnishes  the  following  in  addition: 
Pass.  Pilgrim,  342;  Tit.  And.  IV,  iii,  51 ;  IV,  ii,  44;  Pericles,  IV,  ii,  71 ;  Ham. 
I,  ii,  175  (Qq).  In  N.  &>  Qu.,  19  Dec.  1874,  Rule  adds  :  Tarn,  of  the  Sh.  Hi,  a, 
249  ;  and  Ham.  V,  i,  91 . 


224 


HAMLET 


Tact  hi.  sc.  !. 


For  the  demand  of  our  neglected  tribute ; 

Haply  the  seas  and  countries  different 

With  variable  objects  shall  expel 

This  something-settled  matter  in  his  heart, 

Whereon  his  brains  still  beating  puts  him  thus 

From  fashion  of  himself.     What  think  you  on't  ? 

Pol.     It  shall  do  well ;  but  yet  do  I  believe 
The  origin  and  commencement  of  his  grief 
Sprung  from  neglected  love. — How  now,  Ophelia  ? 
You  need  not  tell  us  what  Lord  Hamlet  said ; 
We  heard  it  all. — My  lord,  do  as  you  please ; 
But,  if  you  hold  it  fit,  after  the  play, 
Let  his  queen  mother  all  alone  entreat  him  ^- 
To  show  his  griefs ;  let  her  be  round  with  him ; 
And  I'll  be  placed,  so  please  you,  in  the  ear 
Of  all  their  conference.     If  she  find  him  not, 
To  England  send  him,  or  confine  him  where 
Your  wisdom  best  shall  think. 

King.  It  shall  be  so  ; 

Madness  in  great  ones  must  not  unwatch'd  go. 


170 


17S 


180 


18S 


[Exeunt. 


173.  something-settled]  Hyphen, Warb. 
sometime-settled  Daniel.* 

r74>    175.     Whereon... on' t?]     Three 
lines,  ending  beating...himf elfe... on' t?  Qq. 

174.  brains']  braines  QqFxF2.     brain 
Coll.  (MS),     brain's  White. 

176,  177.  but. ..grief]  One  line,  Q2Q3- 

176.  do  I]  I  doe  Q'76.     /  do  Steev. 
Bos.  Ca!d. 

177.  his  grief  ]  it  Q.Q5>  reading  But 
...of  it  as   one   line,      this  greefe   Ff, 


Rowe  +  ,  Cald.  Knt,  White. 

179.  tell  us]  tell  u  F3. 

180.  We. ..please]  Two  lines,  Johns. 
[Exit   Ophelia.   Theob.    Warb. 

Johns.  El. 

183.  griefs]  Greefes  Ft.  Grief es  F2. 
griefe  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 
Dyce,  Glo.  +  ,  Huds. 

184.  placed,  so  please  you]  placed  fo, 
pleafe  you  FXF2. 

188.  unwatch1  d]  vnmatcht  Qq. 


169.  set  it  down]  Elze  thinks  that  the  King  has  it  •  set  down '  in  his  Tables. 
169.  shall]    Clarendon:    The  verb  of  motion  is  frequently  omitted  after  an 
auxiliary.     See  II,  ii,  477. 

173.  something-settled]  Abbott,  §68:  'Something'  may  possibly  be  used 
here  adverbially,  like  somewhat  (though  somehow  would  make  better  sense).  fSee 
Walker,  Crit.  i,  164.] 

174.  puts]  For  apparent  cases  of  the  inflection  in  ' s'  where  the  verb  has  for  its 
real  nominative,  not  the  noun,  but  the  noun  clause,  see  Abbott,  §  337.  Here  it  is 
'  The  beating  of  his  brains  on  this,'  &c.     Moberly:  *  Brains'  is  singular. 

183.  griefs]  Corson:  In  the  sense  of  grievances.     See  III,  ii,  323. 

183.  round]  See  II,  ii,  138. 

185    find]  Clarendon  :    '  If  she  does  not  discover  his  secret.'     In  A  IPs  Well, 


ACT  in,  sc.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


225 


/  5  e 

d 


% 


■/ 


Scene  II.    A  hall  in  the  castle. 

Enter  Hamlet  and  two  or  three  of  the  Players. 

Ham.  Speak  the  speech,  I  pray  you,  as  I  pronounced 
it  to  you,  trippingly  on  the  tongue ;  but  if  you  mouth  it,  as 
many  of  your  players  do,  I  had  as  lief  the  town-crier  spoke 
my  lines.  Nor  do  not  saw  the  air  too  much  with  your 
hand,  thus ;  but  use  all  gently ;  for  in  the  very  torrent,  tem- 
pest, and,  as  I  may  say,  whirlwind  of  your  passion,  you 
must  acquire  and  beget  a  temperance  that  may  give  it 
smoothness.    Oh,  it  offends  me  to  the  soul  to  hear  a  robus- 


Scene  ii.]  Cap.  Scene  iv.  Pope, 
Han.  Jen.  Om.  QqFf. 

A  hall...]  A  Hall,  in  the  same, 
fitted  as  for  a  Play.  Cap. 

and. ..Players.]  Ff.  and  three  of  the 
Players.  Qq.  and  some  of  the  Players, 
Cap.     and  certain  Players.  Mai. 

1.  pronounced]  pronoun 'd  Q2Q3. 

2.  trippingly  on]  fmoothly  from  Q'76. 

3.  your  players]  our  Players  Qq, 
Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Sing. 
Ktly. 

lief]   Steev.     Hue  QqFxFa.    lieve 
F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Mai. 


3.  spoke]  had  spoke  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt, 

4.  Nor]  And  Pope  +  . 

much  with  your]  much  your  FaF2. 
much,  your  Cald.  Knt,  Sta. 

5.  torrent,  tempest]  torrent  tempefl  Qq. 

6.  whirlwind  of  your  passion]  the 
whirle-winde  of  paffion  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Dyce,  White.  whirlwind  of  passion 
Coll.  the  whirlwind  of  your  passion 
Sta. 

8.  hear]  see  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt. 
robustious]    robuflous    Q'76,    F., 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 


II,  ii,  216,  'found'  is  used  in  the  sense  of  'found  out,'  with  a  pun  upon  its  usual 
meaning. 

Stage-direction]  Collier:  The  (MS)  adds  ' unready'  after  '  Players ;'  that  is 
to  say,  not  yet  'tired  for  the  parts  they  were  to  fill  in  the  play  within  a  play. 

I.  Coleridge:  This  dialogue  of  Ham.  with  the  Players  is  one  of  the  happiest 
instances  of  Shakespeare's  power  of  diversifying  the  scene  while  he  is  carrying  on 
the  plot.  Sievers  {Hamlet,  Leipzig,  1851,  note  13,  p.  263)  maintains  that  this  ad- 
vice of  Ham.  to  the  Player  does  not  apply  to  acting  in  general,  but  only  to  the  act- 
ing of  the  Court-play,  and  most  particularly  to  the  acting  of  his  dozen  or  sixteen 
lines,  which  Sievers  conceives  to  be  lines  243-248, '  Thoughts  black,  hands  apt,'  &c. 

3.  your]  Here  used  ethically;  see  I,  v,  167;  also  Abbott,  §  221. 

8.  hear]  White:  I  am  not  sure  that  the  Ff  are  wrong.  See  is  the  verb  most 
commonly  applied  to  the  observation  of  dramatic  performances  of  all  kinds.  Cor- 
fiON :  This  is  more  addressed  to  the  eye  than  to  the  ear.  His  robustiousness  and  his 
periwig-patedness  are  seen  alone,  as  are  also  the  distortions  through  which  he  en- 
deavors to  exhibit  the  passion;  it  is  only  what  he  says  that  is  addressed  to  the  ear. 
[The  *  ears  of  the  groundlings  '  are  not «  split '  by  what  they  see.  Ed.] 

8.  robustious]  For  parallel  old  forms,  such  as  prolixious.  stupendious,  superbious, 
and  even  splendidious,  see  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  18). 


226  HAMLLT  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 

tious  periwig-pated  fellow  tear  a  passion  to  tatters,  to  very 
rags,  to  split  the  ears  of  the  groundUugs,  who,  for  the  most     10 
part,  are  capable  of  nothing  but  inexplicable  dumb-shows 
and  noise ;  I  could  have  such  a  fellow  whipped  for  o'er- 
doing  Termagaftfc-;  it  out-herods  Herod ;  pray  you  avoid  it. 

9,  periwig-pataf\  Q'76.  perwig-pated  IO.  split]  fpleet  Qq. 

Qq.      Pery-wig-pated    Fx.      Pery-wig-  12.  could]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Dyce  i, 

Parted  F2.     Perriwig-parted  F  .     Per-  Sta.     would  Qq  et  cet. 
riwig parted  F4.  1 3.  oat-herods~\  Hyphen,  Om.  Qq 

to  tatter s\  to  totters  Qq.  Om.Q'76. 

9.  periwig-pated]  Steevens  :  In  the  time  of  Sh.  players  most  generally  seem 
to  have  worn  periwigs  ;  wigs  were  not  in  common  use  till  the  reign  of  Charles  II. 
In  Every  Woman  in  her  Humour,  1609:  ' — as  none  wear  hoods  but  monks  and 
ladies ;  and  feathers  but  fore-horses,  &c.  —  none  periwigs  but  players  and  pictures.5 
Moberly:  '  Feriwig '  is  simply  an  anglicised  pronunciation  of  perruque. 

10.  groundlings]  Steevens  :  In  its  primitive  signification  it  means  a  fish,  which 
always  keeps  at  the  bottom  of  the  water.  In  our  early  play-houses  the  pit  had 
neither  floor  nor  benches.  Hence  the  term  '  groundlings '  for  those  who  frequented 
it.  Jonson  mentions  them  with  equal  contempt :  ' —  the  understanding  gentlemen 
of  the  ground  here  ask'd  my  judgement.' — [Bartholomew  Pair,  Induct,  p.  366, 
Works,  ed.  Gifford.  There  are  other  derisive  allusions  to  them  on  the  same  page 
and  on  the  next.  Ed.]  Again :  * —  give  me  the  penny,  I  care  not  for  the  gentle- 
man, I;  let  me  have  good  ground.' — The  Case  is  Altered,  I,  i  [p.  327,  Works,  ed. 
Gifford],  Nares  :  From  this  last  extract  we  see  that  the  price  paid  by  these  gentry 
was  then  only  a  penny.  See  also,  in  the  same  play,  II,  iv  [p.  361].  Also:  *  Be- 
sides, sir,  all  our  galleries  and  ground-stands  are  furnished,  and  the  groundlings  within 
the  yard  grow  infinitely  unruly.'— Lady  Alimony,  I,  i. 

11.  inexplicable]  Johnson:  That  is,  shows  without  words  to  explain  them 
Steevens:  Rather,  shows  which  are  too  confusedly  conducted  to  explain  them- 
selves. There  is  one  of  these  in  Heywood's  The  Four  Prentices,  1615,  as  may  be 
seen  from  the  following :  '  Enter  Tancred,  with  Bella  Franca  richly  attired,  she 
somewhat  affecting  him,  though  she  makes  no  show  of  it?  [I,  i,  p.  442,  ed.  Dodsley, 
1825.]     Surely  this  may  be  called  an  inexplicable  dumb  show. 

13.  Termagant]  Steevens  :  The  name  (says  Percy)  given  in  the  old  romances 
to  the  god  of  the  Saracens ;  in  which  he  is  constantly  linked  with  Mahound  or  Mo- 
hammed. Thus,  in  the  legend  of  Guy  of  Warwick,  the  Soudan  swears  :  « So  help 
me  Mahoun  of  might,  And  Termagant,  my  God  so  bright.'  Ritson  :  '  Grennyng 
upon  her  lyke  Termagauntes  in  a  play.' — Bale's  Acts  of  English  Votaries,  Reliques, 
i,  77.  Nares  :  This  imaginary  personage  was  introduced  into  our  old  plays  and 
moralities,  and  represented  as  of  a  most  violent  character,  so  that  a  ranting  actor  might 
always  appear  to  advantage  in  it.  Sh.  uses  it  as  an  adjective  in  1  Hen.  IV:  V,  iv, 
114.  It  is  the  Trivigante  of  the  Italians,  or  Tervagant  of  the  French  Romancers. 
Both  Singer  and  Wedgwood  cite  Florio,  161 1 :  '  Termigislo,  a  great  boaster,  quar- 
reler, killer,  tamer  or  ruler  of  the  universe;  the  child  of  the  earthquake  and  of  the 
thunder,  the  brother  of  death.'  Clarendon  :  Spenser  spells  it  '  Turmagant.'  In 
Sir  Beues  of  Hamtoun,  line  659,  it  is  spelled  '  Teruagaunt.'     It  occurs  as  *  Terma- 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


227 


First  Play.     I  warrant  your  honour. 

Ham.  Be  not  too  tame  neither,  but  let  your  own  dis- 
cretion be  your  tutor ;  suit  the  action  to  the  word,  the  word 
to  the  action ;  with  this  special  observance :  that  you  o'er- 
stcp  not  the  modesty  of  nature ;  for  any  thing  so  overdone 
is  from  the  purpose  of  playing,  whose  end,  both  at  the  first 
and  now,  was  and  is,  to  hold,  as  'twere,  the  mirror  up  to 
nature;  to  show  virtue  her  own  feature,  scorn  her  own 
image,  and  the  very  age  and  body  of  the  time  his  form  and 


15 


14,33.  First  Play.]  I.  P.  Cap.  Player. 
or  Play.  QqFf. 

16.  suit]  Han.  fute  QqF,F3F4,  Ro\ye, 
Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Cap.     Sure  F2. 

17.  o'erstep]  orefleppe  Q2QZQ4-     ore- 
Jiep   Q  .     ore-flop   Ff,    Rowe.     ore-top 


ore 


Long  MS  * 

18.  overdone]  ore-doone  Q2Q3Q4- 
done  Q  . 

19.  at  the  first]  atfirfl  Q,.. 

21.  her  own  feature]  her  feature  Qq, 
Cap. 


gaunt'  in  Chaucer,  Cant.  Tales,  15221.  Moberly:  If  the  common  form,  Terma- 
gant, be  accurate,  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  name  may  be  founded  on  the  word 
Ramazan ;  the  name  of  the  solemnity  being  imagined  to  be  that  of  a  god  worshipped 
at  it,  and  the  letter  /  being  simply  the  beginning  of  the  r  vibration,  as  it  is  of  the  / 
vibration  in  such  Welsh  words  as  Llangollen. 

13.  Herod]  Steevens:  The  character  of  Herod  in  the  ancient  mysteries  was 
always  a  violent  one.  Thus,  in  The  Chester  Plays  [p.  153,  ed.  Sh.  Soc],  Herod 
says  of  himself :  '  For  I  am  kinge  of  all  mankinde,  I  byde,  I  beate,  I  lose,  I  bynde, 
I  maister  the  moone,  take  this  in  mynde,  That  I  am  moste  of  mighte.  I  am  the 
greateste  above  degree,  That  is,  that  was,  that  ever  shalbe,'  &c.  Chaucer,  speaking 
of  the  parish-clerk,  Absolon,  says :  *  He  pleyeth  Herodes  vp  on  a  scaffold  hye.'— • 
The  Milleres  Tale — 3384,  Hengwrt  MS.  Douce  gives  a  long  extract  from  an 
ancient  Pageant,  performed  at  Coventry  by  the  Shearmen  and  Taylors,  in  1534,  but 
the  composition  of  which  is  of  a  much  earlier  date.  To  illustrate  the  present  pas- 
sage, and  to  give  an  idea  of  the  boundless  rant  of  the  braggart  tyrant,  it  is  sufficient 
to  cite  such  lines  as  these :  [I  am]  the  myghttyst  conquerowre  that  eyer  walkid  on 
grownd ;'  «  All  the  whole  world  from  the  north  to  the  sowthe,  I  ma  them  dystroie 
with  won  worde  of  my  mouthe.'  And  of  his  enemies, '  with  a  twynke  of  myn  iee 
not  won  be  left  alyve.'  At  one  place  the  stage-direction  gives  unlimited  freedom  to 
the  actor  to  tear  a  passion  to  tatters,  and  to  make  all  split :  '  Here  Erode  ragis  in  thys 
pagond,  and  in  the  strete  also.' — See  Magnus  Herodes,  in  The  Towneley  Mysteries, 
p.  140,  ed.  Surtees  Soc. ;  The  Slaughter  of  the  Innocents,  in  The  Coventry  Mys- 
teries, p.  183,  ed.  Sh.  Soc. ;  King  Herod,  Ibid.  p.  291 ;  The  Slaughter  of  the  Inno 
cents,  in  The  Chester  Plays,  p.  172,  ed.  Sh.  Soc. 

19.  from]  For  instances  of  'from,'  meaning  apart  from,  away  fromt  without  a 
verb  of  motion,  see  Abbott,  §  158;  also  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  36. 

21.  scorn]  Bailey  (ii,  9):  Why  should  'scorn'  be  antithetic  to 'virtue'?  I* 
may  be  on  the  side  of  goodness  as  well  as  opposed  to  it.  Wherefore  read  sin,  which, 
spelt  sinne  as  in  the  old  copies  of  Hamlet,  was  '  easily  pervertible '  into  scorne. 

22.  very  age]  Johnson:  The  'age'  of  the  'time'  can  hardly  pass.    May  we 


• 


y^ 


228  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  ii 

pressure.     Now  this  overdone,  or  come  tardy  of,  though     23 
it  make  the  unskilful  laugh,  cannot-  hut  make,  the  judicious 
grieve;  the  censure ^flhe  which  one  must  in  your  allow- 


23.  tardy~\  trady  Q4.  MS.* 

of]  Q'76,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  25.  the  which,  one]    Ff,  Cald.  Knt, 

Mason,  Walker,     off  QqFf  et  cet.  Dyce,    Sta.  White,    Gla.    Del.    Huds. 

23,  24.  though   it   make]    though   it  one  of  which  Han.     which  one  Qq  et 

makes  Qq,  Cap.  cet. 

25.  the  censure]  in  the  censure  Long 


not  read,  the  face  and  body,  or  did  Sh.  write,  the  page?  The  page  suits  well  with 
'  form '  and  '  pressure,'  but  ill  with  '  body.'  Steevens  :  The  text  means :  to  represent 
the  manners  of  the  time  suitable  to  the  period  that  is  treated  of,  according  as  it  may 
be  ancient  or  modern.  M.  Mason  :  Read,  « every  age  and  body  of  the  time,'  and 
then  the  sense  will  be  :  *  show  virtue  her  own  likeness,  and  every  stage  of  life,  every 
profession  or  body  of  men,  its  form  and  resemblance.'  Malone  :  Perhaps  Sh.  did 
not  mean  to  connect  these  words.  It  is  the  end  of  playing,  says  Hamlet,  to  show 
the  age  in  which  we  live,  and  the  body  of  the  time,  its  form  and  pressure ;  to  de- 
lineate exactly  the  manners  of  the  age,  and  the  particular  humor  of  the  day. 
Keightley  {Exp.  292) :  We  might  feel  inclined  to  read  world  for  '  time,'  but  no 
change  is  required.  Bailey  (ii,  8) :.  Read  visage,  which  is  so  near  *  very  age  * 
in  the  ductus  literarum.  Compare  *  visage  of  the  times,'  2  Hen.  IV:  II,  iii,  3. 
Silberschlag  {Morgenblatt,  No.  47,  i860,  p.  1 1 14):  This  is  essentially  the  same 
definition  of  the  drama  which  Cervantes  in  Don  Quixote  puts  into  the  mouth  of  the 
Priest :  '  Comedy,'  he  says, '  according  to  the  opinion  of  Cicero,  should  be  a  mirror  of 
human  life,  a  model  of  manners,  a  representation  of  truth.'  Both  Sh.  and  Cervantes 
clearly  drew  their  definitions  from  Cicero ;  Cervantes  says  so  expressly,  while  Sh. 
intimates  in  the  phrase, '  both  at  the  first  and  now,'  that  he  gave  an  ancient  definition 
of  the  drama,  but  he  does  not  mention  Cicero's  name,  because  it  was  not  his  style, 
in  the  works  of  his  riper  years,  to  display  his  knowledge,  or  to  support  his  opinions, 
by  the  citation  of  authorities.  His  use  of  'hie  et  ubique,'  in  I,  v,  156,  affords  a 
proof  [noted  ad  loc]  that  the  end  of  that  scene  was  written  many  years  earlier 
than  the  rest  of  the  drama. 

23.  pressure]  Johnson:  Resemblance,  as  in  a  print.  Bailey  (ii,  9) :  We  may 
obtain  something  better  than  Dr  Johnson's  interpretation  by  substituting  posture  for 
*  pressure ;'  then  we  shall  really  have  two  distinct  things :  the  shape  and  the  attitude. 
Clarendon  :  See  I,  v,  100.     So  *  impressure '  in  As  You  Like  It,  III,  v,  23. 

23.  come]  Clarendon:  For  a  similar  use  of  this  participle  without 'being'  or 
••having,'  compare  R.  of  L.  1784. 

23.  tardy  of]  Mason  (p.  387,  anticipating  Walker,  Crit.  iii,  266) :  That  is, 
come  short  of.  Caldecott:  Without  spirit  or  animation;  heavily,  sleepingly  done. 
Abbott,  §  165  :  '  Off'  is  perhaps  simply  of,  i.  e.  '  fallen  short  of.'  Compare  vercpeiv. 
Otherwise,  '  come  off'  is  a  passive  participle. 

25.  censure]  Clarendon  :  Judgement,  as  in  I,  iii,  69. 

25.  the  which  one]  Caldecott:  The  judgement  of  which  one  class  or  descrip* 
tion  of  persons  ('one  of  whom'  had  been  more  familiar  language).  Delius  and 
Clarendon  understand  it  as  meaning  the  'judicious  man  singly.'  Tschischwitz 
agrees  with  Caldecott. 


ACT  in,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  229 

ancc  o'erwcigh  a  whole  theatre  of  others.  Oh,  there  be  26 
players  that  I  have  seen  play,  and  heard  others  praise,  and 
that  highly,  not  to  speak  it  profanely,  that  neither  having 
the  accent  of  Christians  nor  the  gait  of  Christian,  pagan, 
nor  man,  have  so  strutted  and  bellowed,  that  I  have  thought  30 
some  of  nature's  journeymen  had  made  them,  and  not  made 
them  well,  they  imitated  humanity  so  abominably. 

26.  o'erweigh]  ore-weigh  Qq.  oyre-  29.  accent  of  Christians]  accent  0/ 
way  Fx.    tfre-fway  FgFF,  Rowe,  Pope,         Christian  Pope  4- . 

Han.  nor  the]  or  the  Rowe  ii,  Pope. 

27.  praise]  prayfd  QaQ^Q^.  praifd  30.  nor  man]  Nor  Turke  Q,,  El.  or 
Qs-  Norman   Ff,  Rowe.     nor  Mussulman 

28.  30.  neither.. .nor  man,]  Bracketed  Farmer,  or  man  Pope,  Han.  Johns,  or 
as  a  *  foolish  interpolation,'  by  Warb.  Turk  White,  Huds. 

26.  theatre]  Malone:  Compare  Jonson's  Poetaster^  1601,  ■ if  I  prove  the 

pleasure  but  of  one,  If  he  judicious  be,  he  shall  be  alone  A  theatre  unto  me.' 

26.  there  be]  For  instances  of  the  more  common  use  of  be  with  the  plural  than 
the  singular,  see  Abbott,  §  300. 

28.  profanely]  Johnson  :  This  seems  to  relate,  not  to  the  praise  which  he  has 
mentioned,  but  to  the  censure  he  is  about  to  utter.  Any  gross  or  indelicate  language 
was  called  profane.  Mason:  This  refers  to  the  praise  given  to  the  players;  Ham.  con- 
sidering it  as  a  kind  of  profanation  to  praise  persons  highly  who  were  so  undeserving 
of  it.  The  construction  is  'highly,  not  to  say  profanely.'  Caldecott:  Hamlet  says 
that  he  does  not  mean  to  speak  profanely  by  saying  that  there  could  be  any  such  thing 
as  a  journeyman  Creator.     [The  profanity  consists  in  alluding  to  Christians.  Ed.] 

30.  nor  man]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  Farrrer's  conj.  receives  some  countenance  from 
Qs.  The  (MS)  amends  to  *  nor  man.'  White  :  The  reading  of  the  Qq  is  even  more 
absurd  than  that  of  the  Ff, — as  if  Christians  and  pagans  were  not  men !  The  dis- 
tinction, Christian,  Turk,  and  Pagan,  was  not  uncommon.  See  Howell,  in  Richard- 
son's Diet.  s.  v.  *  pagan.'     Clarendon  :  This  means,  nor  even  man. 

31.  journeymen]  Malone:  The  notion  of  Nature  keeping  a  shop  and  employ- 
ing journeymen  to  form  mankind  was  common  in  Shakespeare's  time.  See  Lyly's 
Woman  in  the  Moon,  1597:  '  They  draw  the  curtains  from  before  Nature's  shop, 
where  stands  an  image  clad  and  some  unclad.' 

31.  had  made  them]  Theobald  {Sh.  Restored,  p.  173):  According  to  the  Qq. 
and  Ff,  Hamlet  is  supposed  to  reason  that  because  he  had  seen  some  very  prepos- 
terous players,  he  should  think,  therefore,  that  Nature's  journeymen  had  made  all 
mankind,  for  so  men  in  this  place  without  some  or  those  prefixed  must  Imply.  Might 
not  Sh.  more  probably  have  written  them  ?  [Theobald  gives  two  instances :  Love's 
Lab.  Lost,  III,  i,  25,  and  Com.  of  Err.  II,  ii,  81,  where  'them'  and  the  men  have 
been  confounded.  But  as  he  does  not  allude  to  this  emendation  in  his  subsequent 
edition,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  he  withdrew  it.  It  is  to  me,  however,  so  clearly 
the  correct  reading  that  I  do  not  hesitate  to  follow  it,  although  all  other  editors  except 
two  have  adhered  to  the  text  of  the  QqFf,  which  is  '  had  made  men?  Rann  adopts 
Theobald's  emendation,  and  Hudson  adopts  Farmer's  conj.,  *  had  made  the  men  *' 

Clarendon  suggests  'em.  Ed.] 
20 


230  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  ii. 

First  Play.    I  hope  we  have   reformed  that  indifferently 
with  us,  sir. 

Plain.  Oh,  reform  it  altogether.  And  let  those  that  play  35 
your  clowns  speak  no  more  than  is  set  down  for  them ;  for 
there  be  of  them  that  will  themselves  laugh,  to  set  on  some 
quantity  of  barren  spectators  to  laugh  too,  though  in  the 
mean  time  some  necessary  question  of  the  play  be  then  to 
be  considered ;  that's  villanous,  and  shows  a  most  pitiful  am-  40 
bition  in  the  fool  that  uses  it.     Go,  make  you  ready. — 

[Exeunt  Players. 

34.  sir]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing.  ii,Dyce,  38.  too]  to  Qq. 

Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  +  ,Mob.    Omv  Qq  et  cet.  41.  [Exeunt  Players.]  Exit  Players. 

37.  themselves]    of  them/elves  FF4,  Ft.     Om.  Qq. 
Rowe. 

33.  indifferently]  Measurably.     See  III,  i,  122. 

36.  clowns]  Steevens:  Stowe  informs  us  (p.  697,  ed.  1615)  that  among  the 
twelve  players  who  were  sworn  the  queen's  servants  in  1583,  'were  two  rare  men, 
viz.  Thomas  Wilson,  for  a  quick  delicate  refined  extemporall  witte ;  and  Richard 
Tarleton,  for  a  wondrous  plentifull,  pleasant  extemporall  witty  &c.     Again,  in  Tarle- 

ton's  Newes  from  Purgatory  :  ' 1  absented  myself  from  all  plaies,  as  wanting 

that  merrye  Roscius  of  plaiers  that  famosed  all  comedies  so  with  his  pleasant  and 
extemporall  invention?  This  cause  for  complaint,  however,  against  low  comedians 
is  still  more  ancient;  for  in  The  Contention  Betwyxte  Churchyard  and  Cornell,  &c, 
1560,  I  find  the  following  passage:  'But  Vices  in  stage  plaies,  When  theyr  matter 
is  gon,  They  laugh  out  the  reste  To  the  lookers  on/  &c.  Malone  :  The  clown  very 
often  addressed  the  audience  in  the  middle  of  the  play,  and  entered  into  a  contest 
of  raillery  and  sarcasm  with  such  of  the  audience  as  chose  to  engage  with  him. 
Hunter  (ii,  246) :  There  is  a  remarkable  addition  at  this  place  in  Qx,  which  is  not 
without  marks  of  the  hand  of  Sh.  The  phrases  there  found  continued  to  be  the 
stock-wit  of  the  clowns  who  appeared  on  the  stage  of  the  mountebanks,  and  who 
seem  silently  to  have  withdrawn  themselves  about  the  close  of  the  last  century. 
Collier  (ed.  2) :  The  passage  in  Qx,  which  is  mere  prose,  although  chopped  up 
into  apparent  verse,  is  curious,  because  it  seems  levelled  at  William  Kemp,  who 
about  this  date  quitted  the  company  of  players  to  which  Sh.  had  always  belonged. 
Perhaps,  after  Kemp  rejoined  the  King's  Players  (before  1605),  the  passage  was 
omitted  or  subdued.  We  are  to  bear  in  mind  that  Hamlet  was  probably  not  com- 
posed until  the  winter  of  1 601,  or  the  spring  of  1602,  and  it  was  about  this  date, . . . 
that  Kemp  went  over  from  the  Lord  Chamberlain's  to  Lord  Nottingham's  Players, 
and  of  course  did  his  best  to  promote  the  success  of  a  competing  association.  It 
would,  therefore,  not  be  surprising  if,  besides  laying  down  a  general  axiom  as  to  the 
abuse  introduced  by  the  performers  of  the  parts  of  clowns,  Sh.  had  designed  a  par- 
ticular allusion  to  Kemp.  White:  The  passage  in  Qx  was  probably  an  extempo- 
raneous addition  to  the  text  by  the  actor,  and  had  but  a  passing  application. 
Halliwell  is  inclined  to  think  that  this  addition  in  Qr  should  be  retained  in 
the  text. 


ACT  III.  sc.  ii.1 


HAMLET 


231 


Enter  Polonius,  Rosencrantz,  a^Guildenstern. 

How  now,  my  lord!  will  the  king  hear  this  piece  of  work?     42 

Pol     And  the  queen  too,  and  that  presently. 

Ham.     Bid  the  players  make  haste. —  [Exit  Polonius.'] 

Will  you  two  help  to  hasten  them  ?  45 

Ros.  Gin/.     We  will,  my  lord.  [Exeunt  Rosencrantz 

and  Guildenstern. 
Ham     What  ho  !  Horatio ! 

Enter  HORATIO. 

Hor.     Here,  sweet  lord,  at  your  service. 
Ham.     Horatio,  thou  art  e'en  as  just  a  man 
As  e'er  my  conversation  coped  withal.  50 

Hor.     O,  my  dear  lord, — 
Ham.  Nay,  do  not  think  I  flatter ; 


For  what  advancement  may  I  hope  from  thee, 

That  no  revenue  hast  but  thy  good  spirits, 

To  feed  and  clothe  thee?     Why  should  the  poor  be  flatter'd? 


Enter.. .Rosencrantz,  and  Guild- 
enstern.]  Enter.. .Guyldenfterne,  Sl  Ro- 
sencraus.  Qq  (after  work  ?  line  42). 

42.  Scene  iv.]  Warb.  Johns. 

will. ..work']  One  line,  Ff,  Rowe. 

43.  too]  to  Qq. 

44.  [Exit  Polonius.]  Ff.     Om.  Qq. 

45.  two]  too  Knt. 

46.  Ros.    Guil.]    Dyce.     Both.    Ff. 
Ros.  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Bos.  El. 

We  will]  J  Qq.  Ay  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Var.  El. 

[Exeunt...]  Exeunt  they  two.  Q3 


What  ho,  F4.      What  howe,  Qa 
What  how,  Q4Q5. 


Ff. 


Exeunt  thofe  two.  Q4QS<>    Exeunt. 


47.  Scene  v.  Pope.  Han.  Jen. 
What  ho  /]  Coll.      What  hoa,  F, 

F„F. 

Q. 

Enter  Horatio.]  Before  line  47, 
Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Jen. 

48.  szveet  lord]  my  lord  Q'76. 

50.  coped]  copt  Qq.  coap'd  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Cald.     met  Q'76. 

51.  lord, — ]  Rowe.   lord.  QqFf,  Cald. 
Cors, 

53.  no  revenue  hast]  hajl  no  revenue 
Q'76. 

54.  thee  ?]  thee,  Qq.    thee.  Ff,  Rowe. 
Why]  Om.  Pope+. 


37.  of  them]  Clarendon  :  For  this  partitive  use  of  the  preposition,  see  Leviticus, 
iv,  16. 

43.  And]  Abbott,  §  97 :  '  And '  is  frequently  found  in  answers  in  the  sense  of 
•  you  are  right,'  or  '  yes,  and,'  the  '  yes '  being  implied 

48.  sweet]  A  common  style  of  address  in  Elizabethan  times.     See  V,  ii,  90, 

50.  coped  withal]  Caldecott:  Encountered  with.  Clarendon:  In  Mcr.  of 
Ven.  IV,  i,  412,  *  to  cope '  means  to  reward. 

51.  lord]  Corson:  The  context  shows  that  no  interruption,  indicated  by  a  dash, 
is  intended.  Hor.  must  be  supposed  to  say  *  O  my  dear  lord '  in  a  way  expressive 
of  a  feeling  of  being  flattered  by  what  Hamlet  has  just  said,  uttering '  O '  and  '  Lord* 
with  a  downward  circumflex. 


232  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  it 

No,  let  the  candied  tongue  lick  absurd  pomp,  55 

And  crook  the  pregnant  hinges  of  the  knee 

Where  thrift  may  follow  fawning.     Dost  thou  hear? 

Since  my  dear  soul  was  mistress  of  her  choice, 

And  could  of  men  distinguish,  her  election 

Hath  seal'd  thee  for  herself;  for  thou  hast  been  6q 

As  one,  in  suffering  all,  that  suffers  nothing; 

A  man  that  fortune's  buffets  and  rewards 

55.  tongue  lick]  tongue,  like  Ff.  58.  her]  my  Ff.  Knt. 

absurd]  obfurd  Q4Q5  59«  distinguish,  her  election]  diflin- 

57.  j awning.]  fanning;  QsQr  faun-  guiflt  her  eleclion,  Qq  (eleclion  Q^Qj), 
ing,Q^.  fawning,  Q.  faining ?  FXF2F3.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 

feigning?  F4,  Rowe.    faining;  Cald.  60.  Hath]   Shath  Q2Qr     Shath  Q4 

hear?]    Q'76.      heare,   QqF^.  Q$.     Sh'ath  Q76,  Jen.     She  hath  MaL 

hear,  F3F4.  Steev.  Var. 

58.  dear]  clear  Johns.,  conj.  62.  fortune's]  fortune  Y J?  . 

55.  candied]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Sugared,  flattering,  glozing.  Clarendon:  Sh.  has 
unconsciously  made  a  bold  use  of  the  figure  synecdoche  when  he  makes  the  *  can- 
died tongue '  '  crook  the  hinges  of  the  knee.'  Of  course,  by  *  the  candied  tongue ' 
he  really  means  the  flatterer  himself.  Tschischwitz  construes  •  crook '  as  a  neuter 
imperative. 

55.  absurd]  Clarendon  :  In  all  other  passages  Sh.  accents  this  word  on  the 
second  syllable. 

56.  pregnant]  Johnson:  Quick,  ready,  prompt.  Nares:  Artful,  designing, 
full  of  deceit,  the  ruling  sense  of  this  word  is  being  full,  or  productive  of  some- 
thing. Caldecott  :  '  Pregnant '  is  bowed,  swelled  out,  presenting  themselves,  as 
the  form  of  pregnant  animals.  Keightley  :  I  see  not  what '  pregnant '  can  mean 
here.  It  might  be  better  to  read  pliant,  or  some  such  word.  Clarendon  :  Lear, 
IV,  vi,  227,  and  Twelfth  Night,  III,  i,  100,  support  the  interpretation,  'ready  to 
bow  at  the  owner's  bidding.*  In  this  sense  it  is  opposed  to  ■  stubborn.'  See  III, 
iii,  70.  ['  Pregnant,'  because  untold  thrift  is  born  from  a  cunning  use  of  the 
knee.  Ed.] 

57.  fawning]  Stratmann  :  Faining  of  the  Folio  is  not  a  misprint,  but  another 
form  of  fauning,  just  as  good,  if  not  better.  See  Diet,  of  Old  English,  s.  v. 
'  fainen.' 

58.  dear]  See  I,  ii,  182. 

59.  Ritson  prefers  the  Qq,  and  says  that  '  distinguish  her  election '  is  no  more 
than  *  make  her  election ;'  distinguish  of  men  is  exceeding  harsh,  to  say  the  best  of 
it.  Tschischwitz,  however,  points  out '  distinguish  of  colours,'  2  Hen.  VI:  II,  i, 
130.  Corson:  'Distinguish  her  election'  is  decidedly  Shakespearian,  and  may  be 
what  Sh.  wrote.  The  use  of  a  cognate  accusative  is  a  marked  feature  of  Shake- 
speare's diction.     [See  II,  ii,  27.  Ed.] 

60-66.  for  . . .  please.]  Doering  (p.  62)  :  In  these  lines  Ham.  delineates,  trait 
by  trait,  a  character  the  very  opposite  of  his  own.  Here  is  to  be  found  the  best 
motto  for  the  tragedy. 


ACT  in,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  233 

Hath  ta'en  with  equal  thanks ;  and  blest  arc  those 

Whose  blood  and  judgement  are  so  well  commingled 

That  they  arc  not  a  pipe  for  Fortune's  finger  65 

To  sound  what  stop  she  please.     Give  me  that  man 

That  is  not  passion's  slave,  and  I  will  wear  him 

In  my  heart's  core,  ay,  in  my  heart  of  heart, 

As  I  do  thee.     Something  too  much  of  this. 

There  is  a  play  to-night  before  the  king ;  70 

One  scene  of  it  comes  near  the  circumstance, 

Which  I  have  told  thee,  of  my  father's  death ; 

63.  Hath]    Ff,    Rowe,   Pope,    Han.         (Holes,  i,  pt.  ii,  p.  24) 

Sta.      Has  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  ii.     Hajl  68.  of  heart]  of  hearts  Q'76. 

Qq  et  cet.  Jl.  scene]  Scccne  Fx.     Scane  F2. 

64.  commingled]  Dyce.     co-mingled  72.  thee,  of]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Coll. 
Ff.     comedled   Qq.     commedled   Q'76.  El.  Del.     thee  of  Qq  et  cet. 
commended  Q'03.     comWd  Cap.  conj. 

63.  Hath]  Corson  :  Hast  of  the  Qq  is  a  solecism.  Though  the  subject-nomi- 
native *  thou'  is  second  person,  the  predicate-nominative  '  man '  is  third  person,  and 
being  the  antecedent  of  the  relative  '  that,'  determines  the  person  of  the  verb  to 
which  'that'  is  the  nominative  or  subject. 

64.  blood  and  judgement]  Johnson  :  According  to  the  doctrine  of  the  foui 
humors,  desire  and  confidence  were  seated  in  the  blood,  and  judgement  in  the  phlegm, 
and  the  due  mixture  of  the  humors  made  a  perfect  character.  Caldecott  :  Passions 
and  reason.     [See  IV,  iv,  58.] 

66.  please]  For  other  instances  of  *  please '  in  the  subjunctive,  see  Walker, 
Crit.  i,  207. 

68.  core]  Douce  (ii,  245) :  From  this  speech  Anthony  Scoloker,  in  Daiphantus, 
or  The  Passions  of  Love,  1604,  has  stolen  the  following  line:  'Oh,  I  would  weare 
her  in  my  heart's-heart-gore ;'  whereupon  Clarendon  asks,  should  not '  gore '  be  core  ? 

69.  Something,  &c]  Clarke  :  The  genuine  manliness  of  this  little  sentence, 
where  Ham.  checks  himself  when  conscious  that  he  has  been  carried  away  by  fervor 
of  affectionate  friendship  into  stronger  protestation  than  mayhap  becomes  the  truth 
and  simplicity  of  sentiment  between  man  and  man,  is  precisely  one  of  Shakespeare's 
exquisite  touches  of  innate  propriety  in  questions  of  feeling.  Let  any  one,  who 
doubts  for  a  moment  whether  Sh.  intended  that  Ham.  should  merely  feign  madness, 
read  carefully  over  the  present  speech,  marking  its  sobriety  of  expression  even  amid 
all  its  ardor,  its  singleness  and  purity  of  sentiment  amid  its  most  forcible  utterance, 
and  then  decide  whether  it  could  be  possible  that  he  should  mean  Hamlet's  wits  to 
be  touched.  That  his  heart  is  shaken  to  its  core,  that  he  is  even  afflicted  with  mel- 
ancholia and  hypochondria,  we  admit ;  but  that  his  intellects  are  in  the  very  slightest 
degree  disordered,  we  cannot  for  one  instant  believe. 

72.  thee,]  Corson  :  This  comma  after  '  thee '  serves  to  show  that  the  phrase, 
'of  my  father's  death,'  is  connected  with  'circumstance,'  and  not  with  'told,'  and, 
in  neat  pointing,  should  not  be  omitted. 
20* 


234  HAMLET  [act  III,  SC.  ii. 

I  prithee,  when  thou  seest  that  act  a-foot, 

Even  with  the  very  comment  of  thy  soul 

Observe  my  uncle ;  if  his  occulted  guilt  75 

Do  not  itself  unkennel  in  one  speech, 

It  is  a  damned  ghost  that  we  have  seen, 

And  my  imaginations  are  as  foul 

As  Vulcan's  stithy.     Give  him  heedful  note ; 

73.  a-foot]  on  foot"]  Q'76.  his  ocult  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Cap. 

74.  very]  Om.  F2F  F  .  *  76.  unkennel]  difcover  Q'76. 

thy]  my  Ff,  Knt,  Coll.  i,  Cors.  79.  stithy]    Stythe    Fx,    Cald.    Knt, 

75.  my]  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Styth  F2F3F4,  Rowe.  Smithy  Theob. 
mine  Ff  et  cet.  Han.  Hunter. 

his  occulted]  then  his  hidden  Q'76.  heedful]  needfull  FXF2F3. 

74.  very  comment]  Caldecott  :  The  most  intense  direction  of  every  faculty. 

74.  thy  soul]  Knight:  Hamlet  having  told  Hor.  the  *  circumstances'  of  hi? 
father's  death,  and  imparted  his  suspicions  of  his  uncle,  entreats  his  friend  to  observe 
his  uncle  '  with  the  very  comment  of  my  soul,' — Hamlet's  soul.  To  ask  Hor.  to 
observe  him  with  the  comment  of  his  own  soul  (Horatio's)  is  a  mere  feeble  exple- 
tive. Collier  in  his  first  edition  also  advocated  the  reading  of  the  Ff,  but  fol* 
lowed  the  Qq  and  the  (MS)  in  his  second.  Dyce  {Remarks,  &c,  p.  214)  criti- 
cises the  upholders  of  the  text  of  the  Ff  in  this  passage,  and  says  that  Knight's  text 
of  this  tragedy  is  *  beyond  all  doubt  the  worst  that  has  appeared  in  modern  times.* 
Dyce  thinks  that  the  important  word  *  very,'  as  Caldecott  has  interpreted  it  above, 
demands  *  thy.'  Corson  maintains  just  the  opposite;  he  prefers  my,  as  more  ex- 
pressive. Hamlet's  meaning  is,  I  would  have  thee  so  enter  into  my  feelings,  so 
identify  thyself  with  me,  that  when  thou  seest  that  act  a-foot,  even  with  the  very 
comment  of  my  soul,  thou  wilt  observe  my  uncle.  *  My '  also  gives  force  to  4  Even 
with  the  very,'  whith  has  less  force  in  the  other  reading.  Dyce  furthermore  points 
out  why  Ham.  wished  Hor.  to  watch  his  uncle  so  closely,  when  he  tells  him  that 
'  after  we  will  both  our  judgements  join  In  censure  of  his  seeming.' 

75.  occulted]  Clarendon:  The  word  seems  to  occur  here  only. 

76.  one  speech]  Hunter  (ii,  247):  The  speech  which  Hamlet  himself  had 
prepared  for  the  players. 

77.  damned]  Douce  (ii,  245) :  The  ghost  of  a  person  sentenced  for  his  wicked- 
ness to  damnation,  and  which  in  this  instance  has  deceived  us.  Thus  Spenser,  Fairy 
Queen,  b.  i,  canto  2,  st.  32.  Tschischwitz  :  This  is  the  third  time  that  this  theo- 
logical reflection  occurs  to  the  Prince.     See  I,  iv,  40;  II,  ii,  575. 

79.  Vulcan's]  Delius  :  The  connection  of  thought  between  Vulcan's  realm  and 
the  Christian  Hell  whence  the  «  damned  ghost'  issues,  is  veiy  common  among  Shake- 
speare's contemporaries. 

79.  stithy]  Theobald  substituted  Smithy,  on  the  ground  that « stithy '  meant  an 
anvil,  and  ■  an  anvil  is  far  from  being  the  dirtiest  thing  in  a  smith's  shop.'  But 
Caldecott  says  that  stithy,  stithe,  and  stith  were  the  same,  and  used  indifferently 
to  express  either  the  iron  to  work  upon,  or  the  forge,  or  the  workshop  ;  though  in 
later  times  stith  has  been  confined  to  the  sense  of  anvil,  and  ■  stithy '  to  that  of  shop. 


act  in,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  235 

For  I  mine  eyes  will  rivet  to  his  face,  80 

And  after  we  will  both  our  judgements  join 
In  censure  of  his  seeming. 

Hor.  Well,  my  lord ; 

If  he  steal  aught  the  whilst  this  play  is  playing, 
And  'scape  detecting,  I  will  pay  the  theft. 

Ham.    They  are  coming  to  the  play;  I  must  be  idle;  85 

Get  you  a  place. 

Danish  march.  Flourish.  Enter  King,  Queen*  Polonius,  Ophelia,  Rosen- 
CRANTZ,  GuiLDENSTERN,  and  other  Lords  attendant,  with  the  Guard  carrying 
torches. 

King.     How  fares  our  cousin  Hamlet? 

80.  face, J  Face :  Ft.    face?  F2.  ii,  Huds. 

%i.  judgements]  judgement  Yr  86.  Danish  march.    Flourish.  Enter... 

82.  In]  To  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  the  Guard. ..torches.]  Sta.  (Cap.  substan- 
Knt.  tially),  Cam.  Enter.. .his  Guard. ..torches. 

83.  he~\  a  Qq.  Danifh  March.    Sound  a  Flourifh.  (after 

84.  detecting]  detecled  Qq.  detection  line  84)  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Enter  Trum- 
Q'76.  pets  and  Kettle  Drummes,  King,Queene, 

85.  Scene  vi.  Pope,  Plan.  Jen.  Scene  Polonius,  Ophelia.  Qq  (after  line  84). 
V.  Warb.  Johns.  87.  our]  my  FF4,  Rowe. 

They  are]  They're  Pope  +  ,  Dyce 

Clarendon  adduces  the  following  rendering  by  Coverdale  of  yob,  xli,  24 :  '  His 
hert  is  as  harde  as  a  stone,  and  as  fast  as  the  stythye  that  the  hammer  man  smyteth 
vpon.' 

82.  censure]  Caldecott  :  In  making  our  estimate  of  the  appearance  he  shall 
put  on. 

S3,  steal]  Caldecott  j  Contrive  so  to  carry  it  off  as  that  the  slightest  conscious 
feeling  he  shows  should  escape  unobserved. 

84.  theft]  Clarendon  :  Pay  for  the  thing  stolen.  Compare  Rom.  &  Jul.  I,  i, 
231.  For  'theft'  in  the  sense  of  the  thing  stolen,  see  "Exodus,  xxii,  4.  [See  'of- 
fence,' III,  iii,  56.] 

85.  idle]  Delius  :  This  signifies  the  aimless  going  hither  and  thither  which 
marks  an  idiot.  On  the  entrance  of  the  Court,  Hamlet  intends  to  resume  the  role 
which  he  had  before  assumed.  See  Lear,  I,  iii,  16:  'Idle  old  man.'  Staunton: 
Sh.  employs  'idle'  in  the  sense  of  mad  several  times;  among  others  see  Qx  [line 
930;  in  Appendix],  and  also  [lines  1535— 1537].  Clarendon:  'Idle'  is  still  used 
in  Suffolk  in  the  sense  of  foolish,  lightheaded,  crazy.  Compare  III,  iv,  II.  Mo- 
BERLY :  I  must  appear  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter. 

87.  fares]  Hunter  (ii,  248) :  We  have  here  the  two  senses  of  the  word  *  fare/ 
which,  like  est,  means  both  is  and  eats.  The  King  inquires  in  the  first  sense,  Hamlet 
answers  in  the  second. 


236  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  ii. 

Ham.     Excellent,  i'  faith ;  of  the  chameleon's  dish ;  I  eat 
the  air,  promise-crammed ;  you  cannot  feed  capons  so. 

King.     I  have  nothing  with  this  answer,  Hamlet ;  these     90 
words  are  not  mine. 

Ham.     No,  nor  mine  now. — [To  Polojiius]    My  lord,  you 
played  once  i'  the  university,  you  say  ? 

88-93.    Excellent.. . say  ?]    Prose,  Ff.  lord,  Ff,  Pope  ii,  Theob.  Warb.  Cald. 

Eight  lines,  Qq,  ending yfaith,...eiyre,...  Knt  i.     mine,  now,  my  Lord.    Row©. 

fo.  ...Hamlet,.. .mine.  ...Lord.  ...fay,.  mine  now,  my  lord.  Pope  i,  Han.  Cap. 

88.  chameleon's]  Camelions  QqFf.  Jen. 

91.  [pass  to  their  Seats.  Cap.  [To  Polonius]  Rowe. 

92.  mine  now.  My  lord,]  Johns.  93.  V  the]  in  the  Q'76,  Mai.  Steev. 
mine  now  my  lord.  Qq.    mine.   Now  my        Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  White. 

$8.  chameleon's]  Clarendon  :  See  Sir  Thomas  Browne's  Vulgar  Errors,  iii, 
21,  for  a  grave  discussion  of  the  popular  belief  that  this  animal  feeds  on  air 

89.  promise-crammed]  Moberly:  The  King  had  promised  him  that  he  should 
be  next  to  himself;  but  Hamlet  ought  to  have  been  first  in  the  realm. 

90.  nothing]  Moberly  :  This  answer  is  not  founded  on  any  act  of  mine. 

91.  mine]  Caldecott  :  They  grow  not  out  of  mine  ;  have  no  relation  to  anything 
said  by  me. 

92.  mine  now]  Johnson  :  A  man's  words,  says  the  proverb,  are  his  own  no 
longer  than  he  keeps  them  unspoken.  Caldecott  :  They  are  now  anybody's. 
Moberly  :  I  am  mad,  and  therefore  not  answerable  for  what  I  said  a  minute  ago. 

g^>  university]  Coleridge  :  To  have  kept  Hamlet's  love  for  Ophelia  before 
the  audience  in  any  direct  form,  would  have  made  a  breach  in  the  unity  of  interest; 
— but  yet  to  the  thoughtful  reader  it  is  suggested  by  his  spite  to  poor  Polonius, 
whom  he  can  not  let  rest.  Farmer  infers  that  the  common  players  were  occasionally 
admitted  to  perform  in  the  universities  on  the  strength  of  an  application  for  that 
purpose  in  Vice  Chancellor  Hatcher's  Letters  to  Lord  Burghley,  1580.  But  Calde- 
cott thinks  this  extract  merely  shows  that  applications  of  this  sort  were  occasionally 
made ;  not  that  they  were  accepted;  on  the  contrary,  the  governors  were  always  dis- 
posed to  find  reasons  for  rejecting  them.  Wherefore,  in  the  absence  of  direct  evi- 
dence, Caldecott  thinks  that  the  probability  of  stage  plays  having  been  performed  in 
the  universities  by  professed  actors  is  strongly  negatived.  That  he  was  mistaken 
will  be  seen  from  the  reference  to  Qx  by  Clarendon.  Malone:  The  practice  of 
acting  Latin  plays  in  the  universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  is  very  ancient,  and 
continued  to  near  the  middle  of  the  last  century.  They  were  performed  occasionally 
for  the  entertainment  of  princes  and  other  great  personages;  and  regularly  at  Christ- 
mas, at  which  time  a  Lord  of  Misrule  was  appointed  at  Oxford,  to  regulate  the 
exhibitions,  and  a  similar  officer  with  the  title  of  Imperator  at  Cambridge.  The  most 
celebrated  actors  at  Cambridge  were  the  students  of  St  John's  and  King's  colleges: 
at  Oxford  those  of  Christ-Church.  In  the  hall  of  that  college  a  Latin  comedy  called 
Marcus  Geminus,  and  the  Latin  tragedy  of  Progne,  were  performed  before  Queen 
Elizabeth  in  the  year  1566  ;  and  in  1564,  the  Latin  tragedy  of  Dido  was  played  before 
Her  Majesty,  when  she  visited  the  university  of  Cambridge.    Clarendon:  In  1564, 


ACT  III.  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  237 

Pol.  That  did  I,  my  lord,  and  was  accounted  a  good 
actor.  95 

Ham.     And  what  did  you  enact  ? 

Pol.  I  did  enact  Julius  Caesar;  I  was  killed  i'  the  Capitol; 
Brutus  killed  me. 

Ham.  It  was  a  brute  part  of  him  to  kill  so  capital  a 
calf  there. — Be  the  players  ready  ?  IOO 

94.  did  I]  IdidTt,  Rowe+,  Knt.  97.  Capitol]    Capiiall  Qq.      Capitol! 

96.  And  what]  What  Qq.  Jen.  Glo.         FaF3. 
+  ,  Mob.  99.  brute]  bruite  FfFg.     bruit  F3F4. 

on  Sunday  evening,  Aug.  6,  Queen  Elizabeth  saw  the  Aulularia  of  Plautus  in  the 
antechapel  of  King's  College  Chapel.  On  the  occasion  of  the  visit  of  James  I  and 
Prince  Charles  to  Cambridge  in  16 14  plays  were  performed  in  the  Hall  of  Trinity 
College ;  among  them  the  comedies  of  Ignoramus  and  Albumazar,  which  have 
escaped  oblivion.  On  the  title-page  of  Qx  it  is  said,  '  As  it  hath  beene  diuerse  times 
acted  by  his  Highnesse  seruants  in  the  Cittie  of  London  :  as  also  in  the  two  Vniver- 
sities  of  Cambridge  and  Oxford,  and  else-where.' 

96.  enact]  Delius  recognises  in  this  word  that  affected  style  of  speech  in  which 
Hamlet  purposely  addressed  Polonius.     Corson  :  The  Ff  reading  has  a  touch  of 
the  contemptuous  imparted  to  it  by  the  initial  word  '  And :'  ■  What,  I  pray,  or  for 
sooth,  did  you  enact  ?' 

97.  Caesar]  Malone  :  A  Latin  play  on  the  subject  of  Caesar's  death  was  per- 
formed in  Oxford  in  1582;  and  several  years  before  a  Latin  play  on  the  same  sub- 
ject, by  Jacques  Grevin,  was  acted  in  the  college  of  Beauvais,  at  Paris.  I  suspect 
that  there  was  likewise  an  English  play  on  the  story  of  Caesar  before  the  time  of  Sh. 
Clarendon:  It  is  now  known  that  a  piece  called  Ccesar's  Fall  was  played  in  1602 
by  Antony  Munday,  Drayton,  Webster,  Middleton,  and  others,  and  it  is  probable  that 
the  Julius  Casar  of  Sh.  may  have  appeared  as  early  as  1601. 

97.  Capitol]  Malone  :  The  erroneous  notion  that  Julius  Caesar  was  killed  in  the 
Capitol  is  as  old  as  Chaucer.  [See  note  on  « bodkin,'  III,  i,  76.]  Clarendon  : 
The  mistake  is  repeated  in  Julius  Gzsar.  Caesar  was  assassinated  in  the  Curia 
Pompeii,  near  the  theatre  of  Pompey  in  the  Campus  Martius. 

99.  brute]  Steevens:  Sir  John  Harrington  in  his  Metamorphosis  of  Ajax,  1596, 
has  the  same  quibble.  LAMB  (iii,  94,  ed.  1870) :  Among  the  distinguishing  features 
of  that  wonderful  character  [Hamlet],  one  of  the  most  interesting  (yet  painful)  is 
that  soreness  of  mind  which  makes  him  treat  the  intrusions  of  Pol.  with  harshness. 
•  •  •  .  These  tokens  of  an  unhinged  mind  ....  are  parts  of  his  character,  which 
to  reconcile  with  an  admiration  of  him,  the  most  patient  consideration  of  his  situa- 
tion is  no  more  than  necessary;  they  are  what  we  forgive  afterwards,  and  explain 
by  the  whole  of  his  character,  but  at  the  time  they  are  harsh  and  unpleasant.  Yet 
such  is  the  actor's  necessity  of  giving  strong  blows  to  the  audience,  that  I  have  never 
seen  a  player  in  this  character  who  did  not  exaggerate  and  strain  to  the  utmost  these 
ambiguous  features, — these  temporary  deformities  in  the  character.  They  make  him 
express  a  vulgar  scorn  at  Pol.,  which  utterly  degrades  his  gentility,  and  which  no 
explanation  can  render  palatable ;  they  make  him  show  contempt,  and  curl  up  the 


238 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Ros.    Ay,  my  lord ;  they  stay  upon  your  patience.  101 

Queen.     Come  hither,  my  dear  Hamlet,  sit  by  me. 
Ham.     No,  good  mother,  here's  metal  more  attractive. 
Pol.     [Aside  to  the  King]  Oh,  ho !  do  you  mark  that  ? 
Ham.     Lady,  shall  I  lie  in  your  lap  ?  105 

[Lying  down  at  Ophelia's  feet. 
Oph.     No,  my  lord. 

Ham.     I  mean,  my  head  upon  your  lap  ? 
Oph.     Ay,  my  lord. 

Ham.     Do  you  think  I  meant  country  matters  ? 
Oph.     I  think  nothing,  my  lord.  1 10 

Ham.     That's  a  fair  thought  to  lie  between  maids'  legs. 
Oph.     What  is,  my  lord  ? 
Ham.     Nothing. 
Oph.     You  are  merry,  my  lord. 

Ham.     Who,  I  ?  115 

Oph.    Ay,  my  lord. 
Ham.     O  God,  your  only  jig-maker.    What  should  a 


101.  stay]  wait  Q'76. 

102.  dear]  deere  Q2Q3>  deare  Q.Q5- 
goodYi,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce  i, White, 
Del. 

103.  metal]  Johns.  mettle  QqFf, 
Rowe  +  .     w^/Q'76. 

104.  [Aside  to  the  King]  Cap. 
Oh,  ho  /]    O,  oh,  Q4Q5. 
that?]  that.  Qq. 

105.  [Lying...]  Rowe.  Seating  him- 
self at  Ophelia's  feet.  Cap.  (after  line 
103)- 


107,  108.  Ham.  I  mean...lord.~\  Om. 
Qq,  Pope,  Han. 

107.  upon]  in  Cap. 

109.  country]  contray  Sing,  i  (a  mis- 
print for  contrary  of  Qt  ?). 

matters]  -manners  Johns,  conj. 

III.  maids']   Cap.     viaydes  Q2Q3Q., 
maids  QgFf.     a  maids  Rowe+,  Jen. 

114.  lord.]  lord ?  Ff. 

117.   O  God,]  Om.  Q'76:    Oh  !  Johns 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Sing.  Ktly. 


nose  at  Ophelia's  father, — contempt  in  its  very  grossest  and  most  hateful  form ;  but 
they  get  applause  by  it;  it  is  natural,  people  say;  that  is,  the  words  are  scornful,  and 
the  actor  expresses  scorn,  and  that  they  can  judge  of;  but  why  so  much  scorn,  and 
of  that  sort,  they  never  think  of  asking. 

101.  patience]  Johnson:  Would  not  pleasure  be  more  intelligible?  Compare 
Macb.  I,  iii,  148.  Caldecott:  Await  your  slowest  and  tardiest  convenience. 
Delius  :  Equivalent  to  consent,  permission. 

105.  lap]  Steevens  :  To  lie  at  the  feet  of  a  mistress,  during  any  dramatic  repre- 
sentation, seems  to  have  been  a  common  act  of  gallantry.  Thus :  '  Ushers  her  to 
her  couch,  lies  at  her  feet  At  solemn  masques,'  &c. — Beau.  &  Fl.,  The  Queen  of 
Corinth.  And  in  Gascoigne's  Greene  Knight's  Farewell  to  Fancie  :  l  To  lie  along 
in  ladies  lappes.'  Douce  :  We  are  not  to  conclude  that  this  custom  prevailed  at  the 
public  theatres.  The  instances  which  have  occurred  seem  to  be  confined  to  enter- 
tainments at  the  houses  of  the  nobility  and  gentry. 


KCT  ill,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  239 

man  do  but  be  merry?  for,  look  you,  how  cheerfully  my 
mother  looks,  and  my  father  died  within 's  two  hours. 

Oph.     Nay,  'tis  twice  two  months,  my  lord.  1 20 

Ham.     So  long  ?     Nay,  then,  let  the  devil  wear  black,  for 
I'll  have  a  suit  of  sables.     O  heavens  !  die  two  months  ago, 

119.  within  'j]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Cap.  Jen.  121,  122.  for. ..sables']  QqFf.  for.., 
Dyce,  White,  Del.  Cam.  Cla.  Huds.  ermyn  Han.  fore. ..sable  Warb.  fore 
-within  these  Pope  et  cet.  ...sables  White,  Huds. 

120.  twice]  Om.  Han.   quite  Ingleby.  122.  have]  leave  Lloyd.*     leave  him 

120.  122.  months]  moneths  FXF3F ,.  Anon.*    have  ne'er  Anon.* 

121.  devil]  deide  Q3Qy 

117.  your  only]  White:  We  should  now  say  only  your.  [See  Macb,  III,  iv, 
98;  III,  vi,  2;  or  Abbott,  §  420.] 

ll7'  jig-maker]  See  II,  ii,  478. 

1 19.  within's]  White,  and  Dyce  :  For  *  within  these  two  hours.'  Delius  (ed.  2): 
It  is  rather  •  within  this  two  hours.' 

122.  sables]  Warburton:  These  words  are  an  ironical  apology  for  his  mother's 
cheerful  looks  :  two  months  was  long  enough  in  conscience  to  make  any  dead  hus- 
band forgotten.  The  true  reading  is : — '  fore  I'll  have  a  suit  of  sables,  i.  e.  before. 
As  much  as  to  say — Let  the  devil  wear  black  for  me,  I'll  have  none.  Johnson  :  I 
cannot  see  why  Hamlet,  when  he  laid  aside  his  dress  of  mourning,  in  a  country  where 
it  was  bitter  cold,  and  the  air  nipping  and  eager,  should  not  have  a  suit  of  sables.  I 
suppose  it  is  well  enough  known  that  the  fur  of  sables  is  not  black.  Capell  {Notes, 
&c,  i,  136) :  It  is  scarce  worth  remarking,  being  a  fact  of  such  notoriety,  that 
« sables,'  the  furs  so  called,  are  the  finery  of  most  northern  nations  ;  so  that  Hamlet's 
saying  amounts  to  a  declaration,  that  he  would  leave  off  his  bb.cks,  since  his  father 
was  so  long  dead.  Heath  (p.  538) :  The  sense  seems  to  be :  If  this  be  the  case, 
let  the  devil  wear  plain  black;  I'll  get  me  a  suit  of  sables,  which,  from  their  colour, 
will  have  the  appearance  indeed  of  mourning,  but  at  the  same  time  will  indulge  my 
appetite  for  finery  and  ornament  to  the  utmost.  Farmer  :  There  is  an  equivoque 
here.  In  Massinger's  Old  Law,  we  have :  *  A  cunning  grief  That's  only  faced  with 
sables  for  a  show,  But  gaudy-hearted.'  Malone  :  By  the  Statute  of  Apparel,  24 
Henry  VIII,  c.  13  (article  furres),  it  is  ordained  that  none  under  the  degree  of  an 
earl  may  use  sables.  Bishop  says,  in  his  Blossoms,  1577,  speaking  of  the  extrava- 
gance  of  those  times,  that  a  thousand  ducates  were  sometimes  given  for  « a  face  of 
sables.'  Caldecott  thinks  that  by  the  *  devil '  Hamlet  would  have  it  understood 
that  he  meant  his  uncle.  Wightwick  {The  Critic,  1854,  p.  317;  cited  in  N.  &> 
Qu.,  18  July,  1857)  maintains  that  the  contrast  here  is  of  color,  not  of  material. 
'  Let  the  devil  wear  black;  I'll  wear  a  color  of  all  others  most  oppugnant  to  sorrow  * 
And  having  found  in  Peacham  some  '  directions  for  painting  or  coloring  of  cuts  and 
pictures,'  wherein  the  definitions  are  given  of  certain  colors,  among  them  '  Sabell 
colour,  i.  e.  flame-colour,'  he  infers  that  Ham.  here  says,  *  I'll  have  a  suit  of  sabell? 
i.  e.  of  flame  color.  '  A  misspelling,'  he  adds,  '  has  produced  all  the  previous  con- 
fusion about  this  passage,  and  we  may  reasonably  conclude  that  a  different  pronun* 
ciation  distinguished  the  sable  meaning  black,  and  sabell  meaning  flame  color?  De« 
LIUS  :  *  Sables '  indicated  that  the  period  of  mourning  was  over.  Dyce  :  Another 
correspondent  in  The  Critic,  1854,  p.  373,  observes  that  *  sabell?  or '  sabelle?  is  prop 


240  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 

and  not  forgotten  yet?    Then  there's  hope  a  great  man's 
memory  may  outlive  his  life  half  a  year ;  but,  by'r  lady,  he 
must  build  churches  then;  or  else  shall  he  suffer  not  think-  125 
ing  on,  with  the  hobby-horse,  whose  epitaph  is,  '  For,  O ! 
for,  O !  the  hobby-horse  is  forgot.' 

124.  memory]  Memoty  F2.  124,  125.  he. ..he]  Ff.     a. ..a  Qq. 

by  V  lady]  by 'r-lady F '.    byrlady  126,    1 27.    hobby-horse. ..hobby-horse] 

Fx.    ber  Lady  Qq  (Ladie  Qs).    berlady        Hoby-hor[fe...Hoby-horfe  F£Fa. 
F2F3.     Om.  Q'76. 

erly  a  fawn-color  a  good  deal  heightened  with  red,  and  that  the  term  came  from  the 
French  ' couleur  tfisabelle? — According  to  the  Diet,  de  FAcad.  Tr.,'  isabelle*  is  a 
color  *  entre  le  blanc  et  le  jaune,  mais  dans  lequel  le  jaune  domine.  II  se  dit  surtout 
du  poil  des  chevaux.'  Staunton,  who  thought  that  Warburton's  emendation  was 
possibly  right,  says  that '  it  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  in  the  scene  before  us  Ham- 
let was  intended  to  accompany  these  words  with  the  action  of  flinging  off  his 
mourning  cloak.  White  thinks  '  for,'  of  the  QqFf, '  a  trifling  variation  from  the  true 
text  [viz.  'fore]  :  hardly  to  be  called  a  corruption.  Halliwell:  Shakespeare's  in- 
tention was  most  likely  to  make  Ham.  here  speak  incoherently.  If  this  be  not  the 
case,  some  sort  of  meaning  may  be  elicited  in  this  way :  *  nay,  then  let  the  devil  wear 
black,  for  even  I  will  have  a  suit  of  mourning ;  if  I  wear  one,  the  devil  himself  may.* 
Keightley  [reading, '  I'll  not  have  a  suit,'  &c]  :  When  the  critics  shall  have  proved, 
—which  they  have  not  done  yet, — that  a  dress  trimmed  with  sable  was  called  '  a  suit 
of  sables,'  I  will  grant  that  Hamlet  did  not  mean  mourning,  and  that  the  negative  is 
not  needful.  Elze  (Sh.  yahrbuch,  Bd.  xi) :  The  constrast  between  a  suit  of  sables 
and  a  black  mourning  garment  lies  not  in  the  color,  but  in  the  costliness  and  splendor 
of  the  material.  In  accordance  with  the  immemorial  biblical  usage  of  mourning 
in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  mourning  garments  to  this  day  are  made  of  coarse  and  harsh 
material,  whereas  for  the  trimming  of  a  suit  of  sable  the  most  gorgeous  and  brilliant 
stuff  was  selected. 

125.  not  thinking  on]  Knight:  He  shall  suffer  being  forgotten. 

126.  hobby-horse]  Warburton:  Amongst  the  country  May-games  there  was 
a  hobby-horse,  which,  when  the  puritanical  humor  of  those  times  opposed  and  dis- 
credited these  games,  was  brought  by  the  poets  and  ballad-makers  as  an  instance  of 
the  ridiculous  zeal  of  the  sectaries ;  from  these  ballads  Ham.  quotes  a  line  or  two. 
Nares  :  A  small  horse ;  also  a  personage  belonging  to  the  ancient  morris-dance, 
when  complete,  and  made,  as  Mr  Bayes's  troops  are  on  the  stage,  by  the  figure  of  a 
horse  fastened  round  the  waist  of  a  man,  his  own  legs  going  through  the  body  of  the 
horse,  and  enabling  him  to  walk,  but  concealed  by  a  long  foot-cloth;  while  false 
legs  appeared  where  those  of  the  man  should  be,  at  the  sides  of  the  horse.  Lat- 
terly the  hobby-horse  was  frequently  omitted,  which  appears  to  have  occasioned  a 
popular  ballad,  in  which  was  the  line  now  quoted  by  Ham.  It  is  also  quoted  in 
Love's  Lab.  Ill,  i,  30.  Dyce  adds  to  this  note  of  Nares's :  Many  readers  will  prob- 
ably recollect  the  spirited  description  of  the  Hobby-horse  in  Scott's  Monastery ;  but, 
since  Mr  Bayes's  troops  have  been  long  banished  from  the  stage,  it  may  be  necessary 
to  mention  here  that  they  are  part  of  the  dramatis  persona  in  the  Duke  of  Bucking- 
ham's once-celebrated  satirical  play  called  The  Rehearsal.  Collier  :  A  ballad  seems 
to  have  been  written  on  the  omission  of  the  Hobby-horse  in  May-games.     •  The 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


24I 


Hautboys  flay.     The  dumb-show  enters. 

Enter  a  King  and  a  Queen  very  lovingly  ;  the  Queen  embracing  him,  and  he 
her.  She  kneels,  and  makes  show  of  protestation  unto  him.  He  takes  her 
up,  and  declines  his  head  upon  her  neck  ;  lays  him  down  upon  a  bank  of 
flowers ;  she,  seeing  him  asleep,  leaves  him.  Anon  comes  in  a  fellow,  takes 
off  his  crown,  kisses  it,  and  pours  poison  in  the  King's  ears,  and  exit. 
The  Queen  returns  ;  finds  the  KING  dead,  and  makes  passionate  action. 
The  Poisoner,  with  some  two  or  three  Mutes,  comes  in  again,  seeming  to 
lament  with  her.  The  dead  body  is  carried  azoay.  The  Poisoner  wooes 
the  Queen  with  gifts;  she  seems  loath  and  unwilling  awhile,  but  in  the 
end  accepts  his  love.  Exeunt. 


127.  Scene  vii.  Pope,  Han.  Scene 
VI.  Warb.  Johns. 

127.  Hautboys.. .love.]  Steev.,  from 
the  Ff,  substantially.  The  Trumpets 
founds  (found  QAQS)-  Dumbe  (how  fol- 
lowes.  Enter  a  King  and  a  Queene,  the 
Queene  embracing  him,  and  he  her,  he 
takes  her  vp,  and  declines  his  head  vpon 
her  necke,  he  lyes  him  downe  vppon  a 
bancke  of  flowers,  fhe,  feeing  him  afleepe, 
leaues  him :  anon  come  in  (anon  comes 
Q.QS)  an  other  man,  takes  off  his  crowne, 
kifles  it,  pours  poyfon  in  the  fleepers 
eares,  and  leaues  him :  the  Queene  re- 
turnes,  finds  the  King  dead,  makes  paf- 
fionate  action,  the  poyfner  with  fome 
three  or  foure  come  in  (comes  in  QAQS) 


againe,  feeme  to  condole  with  her,  the 
dead  body  is  carried  away,  the  poyfner 
wooes  the  Queene  with  gifts,  fhee  feemes 
harfh  awhile,  but  in  the  end  accepts  loue. 
Qq,  and  substantially  Cap.  Jen. 

a  King  and  a  Queen]  a  Duke 
and  Dutchess,  with  regal  coronets, 
Theob.-K 

and  a]  and  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Coll. 

and  he  her]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Coll.  El.  White,  Ktly,  Huds. 

She  kneels.. .unto  him]  Om. 
Pope,  Han. 

and  makes... unto  him]  Om. 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

exit.]  Exits.  Ff,  Rowe. 

[Exeunt.]  Om.  Qq. 


hobby-horse  is  forgot,'  and  '  the  hobby-horse  is  quite  forgot,'  are  phrases  constantly 
occurring  in  old  writers  to  denote  some  omission. 

127.  The  dumb-show]  Pye:  This  appears  to  contain  every  circumstance  of 
the  murder  of  Hamlet's  father.  Now  there  is  no  apparent  reason  why  the  Usurper 
should  not  be  as  much  affected  by  this  mute  representation  of  his  crimes  as  he  is 
afterwards  when  the  same  action  is  accompanied  by  words.  The  subsequent  con- 
versation between  Hamlet  and  Ophelia  precludes  the  possibility  of  its  having  been 
a  kind  of  direction  to  the  players  only.  Caldecott:  Since  the  usage  of  the  time 
warranted,  and,  as  it  would  seem,  even  demanded  this  dumb-show,  how  could  it 
have  been  omitted  ?  Hamlet,  intent  on  '  catching  the  conscience  of  the  king,'  would 
naturally  wish  that  his  '  mouse-trap '  should  be  doubly  set ;  and  could  never  be  sup- 
posed willing  to  relinquish  any  one  of  those  engines,  the  use  of  which  custom  had 
authorized.  The  King,  in  fact,  takes  alarm  at  the  thought  that  the  subject  is  to  be 
afterward  brought  forward  in  plain  terms  in  the  play,  and  expresses  his  apprehension 
of  'offence  in  that  argument,'  of  which  he  was  already  in  possession;  and  at  this, 
indeed,  he  '  blenches.'  Knight  :  Mute  exhibitions,  during  the  time  of  Sh.,  and  be- 
fore and  after,  were  often  introduced  to  exhibit  such  circumstances  as  the  limits  of  a 
play  would  not  admit  to  be  represented.     We  presume,  however,  that  Sh.  had  here 

some  stage  authority  for  making  the  dumb-show  represent  the  same  action  that  is 
21  O 


242  HAMLET  [act  m,  sc.  ii. 

Oph.    What  means  this,  my  lord? 
Ham.     Marry,  this  is  miching  mallecho ;  it  means  mis- 
chief. 130 

129.  Marry,  this']  It  Q'76.  iV^Mallio^QqJen.  El.   Miching  Mali- 
this  is]   this  Q2Qr    tis  QA     it  cho,  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Sing,    munching  Mali- 
is  Q5<  cho,  Cap. 

miching  mallecho;]  Mai.  munch-  it]  that  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

indicated  in  the  dialogue.  His  dramatic  object  is  [pointed  out  by  Caldecott],  Hun- 
ter (ii,  249) :  To  represent  the  story  of  a  play  in  dumb-show  when  the  play  itself 
is  going  to  be  performed  appears  a  most  extraordinary  mode  of  procedure,  and  noth- 
ing like  it  has  been  traced  in  the  usages  of  the  English  theatre,  or,  I  believe,  in  the 
theatres  of  the  more  polished  nations  of  Europe.  What  approach  nearest  to  it,  and 
may  by  some  be  mistaken  for  it,  are  the  Dumb  Shows  in  Sackville's  Gorboduc  and 
Gascoign's  Jocasta.  But  whoever  considers  these  shows  attentively  will  perceive 
that  they  are  something  essentially  different  from  the  exhibition  of  the  very  action 
which  is  immediately  to  follow  with  the  accompanying  dialogue.  They  are,  in  fact, 
but  so  many  moralizations,  resembling  the  choruses  of  the  Greek  drama,  the  moral 
lessons  being  read  in  action,  rather  than  in  words.  I  do  not  recollect  any  other 
English  play  with  a  dumb-show  even  of  this  kind ;  and  Ophelia's  questions,  *  What 
means  this,  my  lord  ?'  and  '  Will  he  tell  us  what  this  show  means  ?'  prove  that  shows 
such  as  these  made  no  part  of  the  common  dramatic  entertainments  of  England. 
[Gascoign's  instructions  respecting  the  dumb-shows  in  Jocasta  are  here  given,  to 
show  how  utterly  unlike  they  are  to  this  in  Hamlet.]  No  one  has  hitherto  hit  upon  the 
true  origin  of  the  show  in  Hamlet.  It  seems  that  such  strange  and  unsuitable  antici- 
pations were  according  to  the  common  practice  of  the  Danish  theatre.  I  first  became 
acquainted  with  this  fact,  which  appears  to  explain  what  without  it  appears  to  carry 
absurdity  as  far  as  it  will  go,  when  reading  an  unpublished  diary  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  the  writer  of  which  relates  that  about  the  close  of  the  year  1688  there  landed 
at  Hull  about  six  thousand  Danish  soldiers,  who  were  dispersed  in  the  neighboring 
towns.  Some  of  them  were  quartered  at  the  little  town  of  Hatfield,  near  Doncas- 
ter,  near  to  which  the  writer  of  the  diary  lived,  who,  having  given  some  general 
account  of  their  habits,  proceeds  thus : — •  Many  of  them  while  they  stayed  here  acted 
a  play  in  their  language,  and  they  got  a  vast  deal  of  money  thereby.  The  design  of 
it  was  Herod's  Tyranny,  the  Birth  of  Christ,  and  the  Coming  of  the  Wise  Men. 
They  built  a  stage  in  our  large  courthouse,  and  acted  the  same  thereon.  I  observed 
that  all  the  postures  were  shown  first,  namely,  the  king  on  his  throne,  his  servants 
standing  about  him;  and  then,  the  scenes  being  drawn,  another  posture  came,  the 
barbarous  soldiers  murdering  the  infants,  and  so  on ;  and  when  they  had  run  through 
all  so,  they  then  began  to  act  both  together.  All  which  time  they  had  plenty  of  all 
sorts  of  music  of  themselves,  for  [one]  6oldier  played  on  one  sort,  and  one  another. 
I  heard  some  of  them  say  that  some  of  these  players  belonged  to  the  King  of  Den- 
mark's play-house,  that  was  set  a  fire  and  burnt  when  most  of  the  nobles  were  behold- 
ing a  play  several  years  ago.'  The  writer  of  this  diary  was  Abraham  de  la  Pryme. 
Halliwell  :  I  cannot  say  that  I  am  satisfied  with  the  explanation  [given  by  Calde- 
cott and  Knight],  although  it  is  certainly  ingenious.  If  the  King  had  seen  the 
dumb-show,  he  must  have  known  that  there  was  offence  in  it.     Is  it  allowable  to 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  243 

Oph.  Belike  this  show  imports  the  argument  of  the  play?  131 

Enter  Prologue. 

Ham.   We  shall  know  by  this  fellow;  the  players  cannot 
keep  counsel ;  they'll  tell  all. 

131.  Belike]  Be  like  F3.  138,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

play?]  Ff,  Rowe+.    play.  Qq  132.  this  fellow]    thefe  fellowcs  Ff, 

et  cet.  Rowe. 

Enter  Prologue.]  Theob.    After  132,  133.  the. ..all.]  One  line,  Qq. 

fellow,  line  132,  Qq.     After  play,  line  133.  counsel]  Om.  Qq. 

direct  that  the  King  and  Queen  should  be  whispering  confidentially  to  each  other 
during  the  dumb-show,  and  so  escape  a  sight  of  it? 

129.  miching  mallecho]  Hanmer  defines  the  first  word  as  'secret,  covered, 
lying  hid ;'  and  the  second  as  '  a  wicked  act,  a  piece  of  iniquity.  Span,  malhecho.* 
Warburton  maintains  that  the  phrase  means :  '  Lying  in  wait  for  the  poisoner.' 
And  that  it  should  therefore  read :  '  miching  MalhechorJ  and  so  introduces  it  in  his 
text.  Henley  very  properly  points  out  that  malhechor  no  more  means  a  poisoner 
than  the  perpetrator  of  any  other  crime.  Grey  (ii,  296) :  Why  may  not  Sh.  have 
wrote  miching  Malbecco,  from  Spenser's  description  of  him,  Fairy  Queene,  iii,  cantos 
9,  10?  Farmer  (cited  by  Steevens) :  Were  not  these  obscure  words  originally: 
'  This  is  mimicking  Malbecco,*  a  private  gloss  by  a  friend  on  the  margin  of  the  MS 
Hamlet,  and  thence  ignorantly  received  into  the  text  ?  Heath  :  To  mich  is  a  word 
still  in  common  use  in  the  western  part  of  this  island,  and  signifies,  to  lurk,  to  do 
mischief,  under  a  fair  external  appearance.  Capell  (Notes,  i,  136) :  This  is  said 
of  the  person  of  the  Poisoner  in  the  Dumb  Show,  a  representative  of  the  King,  who 
was  a  man  of  mean  figure  (see  III,  iv,  64),  and  is  therefore  compared  by  the  speaker 
to  the  character  called  Iniquity,  in  the  ancient  moralities,  whose  figure  (it  is  like) 
was  the  same,  an  ill-looking,  munching  animal.  Malone  :  In  Norfolk  michers  sig- 
nify pilferers.  The  signification  of  miching  in  the  present  passage  maybe  ascer- 
tained by  a  passage  in  Decker's  Wonderful  Yeare,  1603:  'Those  that  could  shift 
for  a  time, — went  most  bitterly  miching  and  muffled,  up  and  downe,  with  rue  and 
wormwood  stuft  into  their  eyes  and  nostrills.'  See  also  Florio,  Acciapinare  :  '  To 
miche,  to  shrug  or  sneake  in  some  corner*  Caldecott  :  iMychyn  or  stelyn  pryueiy.' 
—Prompt.  Parv.  Knight  :  The  skulking  crime  pointed  out  in  the  Dumb  Show  is, 
in  one  sense  of  Hamlet's  wild  phrase,  miching  malhecho;  his  own  secret  purpose 
from  which  mischief  will  ensue,  is  miching  mallecho,  in  another  sense ; — in  either 
case  'it  means  mischief.'  Maginn  (Eraser's  Maga.  Dec.  1839) :  In  the  Qq  we  find 
the  traces  of  the  true  reading:  mucho  malhecho,  much  mischief.  Dyce  (Gloss.): 
*  Malhecho An  evil  action,  an  indecent  and  indecorous  behaviour;  malefac- 
tion.'— Connelly's  Span,  and  Engl.  Diet.,  Madrid.  Compare:  *Tho.  Be  humble,. 
Thou  man  of  mallecho,  or  thou  diest.' — Shirley's  Gentleman  of  Venice ;  Works, 
vol.  v,  p.  52.  Maginn's  alteration  is  doubtless  wrong.  Keightley  did  not  think 
so;  he  adopted  it.  Clarendon:  Minsheu  (The  Guide  into  Tongues)  gives,  'To 
Miche,  or  secretly  to  hide  himself  out  of  the  way,  as  Truants  doe  from  schoole.' 
Mackay  (Athenaum,  16  Oct.  1875)  says  that  it  is  to  the  wooing  of  the  Queen  by 
the  Poisoner  that  Ham.  refers  as  meaning  mischief,  not  to  the  murder;  in  the  latter 
the  mischief  is  past,  in  the  former  it  is  to  come.    This  is  the  clue  which  reveals  the 


244 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  S. 


Oph.     Will  he  tell  us  what  this  show  meant  ? 
Ham.  Ay,  or  any  show  that  you'll  show  him;  be  not  you  135 
ashamed  to  show,  he'll  not  shame  to  tell  you  what  it  means. 
Oph.    You  are  naught,  you  are  naught ;  I'll  mark  the 
play. 

Pro,     '  For  us,  and  for  our  tragedy, 

1  Here  stooping  to  your  clemency,  140 

'  We  beg  your  hearing  patiently/  [Exit. 

Ham.     Is  this  a  prologue,  or  the  posy  %of  a  ring  ? 
Oph.     'Tis  brief,  my  lord. 
Ham.    As  woman's  love. 


Enter  two  Players,  King  and  Queen. 

R  King.    '  Full  thirty  times  hath  Phoebus*  cart  gone 
*  round 


145 


134.  he]  Pope.   aQq.   MeyFf,  Rowe. 
tell]  teil  F3.    fhew  Q'78. 

135.  you' If]  you  will  Qq,  Coll.  El. 
White. 

137.  mark"]  tnake"FJFJ?A. 

141.  [Exit.]  Glo.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  Del. 
Huds.     Om.  QqFf  et  cet. 

142.  posy]  Cap.  pofie  QqF4,  Rowe+, 
Jen.  Poefie  FTF3F3.  poesy  Johns.  Knt, 
Coll.  El.  Sta.  White. 

144.  Enter...]  Glo.  Enter  King  and 
Queen,  Players.  Pope.    Enter  King  and 


Queene.  Qq.  Enter  King  and  his 
Queene.  FXF2.  Enter  King,  and  Queen. 
F3F4.  Enter  Duke,  and  Dutchess,  Play- 
ers. Theob  +  ,  Cap.  Enter  Gonzago  and 
Baptista.  Sta. 

145,  &c.  P.  King.]  Steev.'7S.  King. 
QqFf.     Duke.  Theob.  +  ,  Cap. 

145, 146.  Phcebuf...  TelluS]  Apostro- 
phes, Pope. 

145.  cart]  ear  Rowe,    Pope,  Han* 
Carr  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
gone]  gon  Ff,  Rowe. 


meaning  of  the  Gaelic  into  which  Ham.  in  his  indignation  bursts.  «  Miching  mal- 
lecho'  is  miannach  mailleachadh,  the  Gaelic  for  desirous  of  procrastination.  ['  Mich- 
ing '  is  still  in  common  use  in  New  England,  and  pronounced  (as  it  is  spelled  in 
Webster)  meaching  or  meeching.  It  is  usually  applied  to  the  expression  of  the  face : 
c  he  has  a  hang-dog,  meaching  look.'  Ed.] 

136.  means]  Steevens:  The  conversation  of  Hamlet  with  Ophelia  is  probably 
such  as  was  peculiar  to  the  young  and  fashionable  of  the  age  of  Sh.,  which  was,  by 
no  means,  an  age  of  delicacy. 

142.  posy]  Caldecott:  See  Mer.  of  Ven.  V,  i,  147-150.  Knight:  This  is 
certainly  the  same  as  poesy  ;  but  was  formerly,  as  now,  understood  to  mean  a  short 
sentence  or  motto.  Halliwell:  These  posies  were  necessarily  brief,  e.g.  'I 
cannot  show,  the  love  IO;'  '  God  above,  increase  our  love ;'  '  God's  blessing  be, 
with  thee  and  me ;'  '  Let  love  abide,  -till  death  divide.'  These  are  from  rings  of 
the  Shakespearian  period.    Clarendon  :  See  Fairholt's  Costume  in  England,  p.  568. 

145.  Coleridge  :  The  style  of  the  interlude  here  is  distinguished  from  the  real 
dialogue  by  rhyme,  as  in  the  first  interview  with  the  Players,  by  epic  verse. 

145.  cart]  Clarendon:  An  archaism  purposely  affected  to  suit  the  fustian  of 
the  speech.   Chaucer.  Cant.  Tales,  2043,  has, '  The  statue  of  Mars  upon  a  carte  stood.' 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


45 


'Neptune's  salt  wash  and  Tellus'  orbed  ground,  146 

4  And  thirty  dozen  moons  with  borrow'd  sheen 

1  About  the  world  have  times  twelve  thirties  been, 

1  Since  love  our  hearts  and  Hymen  did  our  hands 

1  Unite  commutual  in  most  sacred  bands.  1 50 

P.  Queen.    'So  many  journeys  may  the  sun  and  moon 
1  Make  us  again  count  o'er  ere  love  be  done  ! 
'  But,  woe  is  me,  you  are  so  sick  of  late, 
1  So  far  from  cheer  and  from  your  former  state, 
'That  I  distrust  you.     Yet,  though  I  distrust,  155 

'  Discomfort  you,  my  lord,  it  nothing  must ; 


146.  orbed]  orVd  the  Qq. 

147.  borrowed]  Cap.  borrowed  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  White,  Cam.  Cla. 

148.  times  twelve  thirties]  time,  twelve 
thirties  F3F4,  Rowe.  twelve  times  thirty 
Q'76.  time  twelve  thirties  Pope  +  .  times 
twelve  thirty  Han. 

150.  commutual]  co-mutuall  FF, 
Cap.  Jen.  Sta. 

commutual  in  most]   infolding 
them  in  Q'76. 

151,  &c.  P.  Queen.]  Steev.'78.   Quee. 


or  Que.  QqF2F3.     Queen.  F4>     Dutch. 
Theob.  + .     Bap.  or  Bapt.  Ff,  Sta. 
154.  from  cheer  and]  different  Q'76. 

your]  our  Q3Q3. 

formtr]  forme  Fx. 
156,157.  must :  For]  must.  Forwo* 
men  feare  too  much,  euen  as  they  lovet 
And  Qq,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 
Steev.  Var.  Sing,  ii,  Ktly.  For..  Jove, 
in  brackets  by  Jen.  and  Ktly,  the  latter 
marks  a  line  omitted  after  it. 


146.  wash]  Delius  :  Land  overflowed  by  the  sea  at  high  water.  Tschischwitz  : 
In  the  Netherlands  it  is  called  Watt,  the  alluvium  of  the  coast.  Clarendon  :  Ob- 
viously, it  means  the  sea  itself. 

150.  commutual]  Clarendon  :  An  intensive,  like  '  commixture '  and  '  corrival.' 

154.  cheer]  Clarendon:  Cheerfulness.  See  Rich.  Ill:  V,  iii,  74.  The  word 
originally  signified  face,  countenance,  from  Fr.  chire  (compare  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii, 
314) ;  hence,  *  to  be  of  good  cheer '  was  to  exhibit  joy  in  the  face.  It  was  then  applied 
to  that  which  produces  gratification,  and  denotes  entertainment  or  fare,  as  in  III,  ii,i94. 

155.  distrust]  Delius:  That  is,  I  am  distrustful  on  your  account.  Compare 
'  fear  me  not,'  I,  iii,  51. 

156.  Johnson  :  [After  the  line  in  the  Qq]  a  line  seems  to  have  been  lost,  which 
should  have  rhymed  with  '  love.'  Steevens  :  Perhaps  a  triplet  was  designed,  and 
then  instead  of  Move'  we  should  read  lust.  M alone:  Perhaps  the  words  omitted 
might  have  been  of  this  import,  *  Either  none  they  feel,  or  an  excess  approve, 
Knicht  :  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  line  from  the  Qq  should  be  struck  out,  it 
being  superseded  by  line  157.  Cambridge  Editors  :  As  the  line  in  the  Qq  occurs 
at  the  top  of  the  page,  the  omission  [conjectured  by  Johnson,  Jennens,  and  others]  is 
more  likely  to  have  been  caused  by  a  line  having  dropped  out  at  the  foot  of  the 
previous  page.  The  Quarto  probably  gives  us  the  author's  first  thought,  incomplete, 
as  well  as  the  lines  he  finally  adopted,  as  they  stand  in  the  Folio.  The  thought  will 
hardly  bear  to  be  expanded  over  four  lines.  Tschischwitz  retains  the  line  from 
the  Qq,  and  in  order  to  do  so  '  without  hesitation'  supplies  the  missing  phrase  thus: 
•  Either  none  at  all  or  one  man  all  above ;  And  women's  fear,'  &c. 

2S* 


246  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  ii. 

4  For  women's  fear  and  love  holds  quantity,  157 

'  In  neither  aught,  or  in  extremity, 

'Now,  what  my  love  is,  proof  hath  made  you  know, 

'And  as  my  love  is  sized,  my  fear  is  so ;  160 

'  Where  love  is  great,  the  littlest  doubts  are  fear, 

'  Where  little  fears  grow  great,  great  love  grows  there. 

P.  King,    '  Faith,  I  must  leave  thee,  love,  and  shortly 
'too; 
'  My  operant  powers  their  functions  leave  to  do ; 
'And  thou  shalt  live  in  this  fair  world  behind,  165 

'  Honour'd,  beloved ;  and  haply  one  as  kind 
'  For  husband  shalt  thou — 

P.  Queen.  '  Oh,  confound  the  rest ! 

X57.  For]  And  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.  Pope,    great  Q '76. 

Var.  Sing.  ii.  161,  162.    Where  love... there!]   Om, 

holds']  Ff,  Cald,  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sta,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

Glo.  +  ,  Del.  Mob.     holdQq,  et  cet.  161.  littlest]  litle/lQq.  fmalle/l  Q'?6, 

158.  In  neither  aught"]  Mai.  fnneith-  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

er  ought  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Jen.     Eyther  163.  Faith,  I]  /Q'76. 

none,  in  neither  ought  Qq.     iTis  either  164.  operant]  working  Q'76. 

none  "Pope +  .    Either  in  nought  Anon.*  their  functions]    my  funclions 

In  either  aught  Anon.  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt. 

159.  love]  Lord  Qq.  165.  fair]  fare  Q4. 

is,  proof  hath  made]  has  been,  1 66.  kind]    kind,  Qq.      kinde.    F,. 

f>roof  makes  Q'76.  kind.  F2F  F  .     a  kind  Rowe  ii. 

160.  sized]  ciz'd  Q2Qr     ciz'fl  Q^QS>  1 67.  thou—]  thou.  Qq 

Jiz'd  Fx.  ftz  F2.  fixt  F3F4.  fi x>d  Rowe,  confound]  counfound  F4. 

157.  holds  quantity]  Capell  (i,  137) :  That  is,  bear  proportion  the  one  to  the 
other.  Caldecott  :  Compare  Mid.  N.  L>,  I,  i,  232.  Clarendon  :  For  the  con- 
struction compare  V.&A.  988.  In  mathematical  language  'fear'  would  be  said  to 
vary  directly  as  'love.'  [For  instances  of  the  inflection  in  's'  with  two  singular 
nouns,  see  Abbott,  §  336;  Macb.  I,  iii,  147;  III,  ii,  37;  V,  v,  20.  Also  Abbott, 
§  388c,  for  a- paraphrase  of  this  passage.] 

158.  Capell  (i,  137) :  They  either  feel  none  of  these  passions  or  feel  them  both  in 
extremity.  Hunter  (ii,  251) :  Punctuate  * — hold  quantity  In  neither: — aught  or  in 
extremity.*  That  is,  nothing,  or  in  excess.  Ingleby  {Birmingham  Gazette,  25  July, 
1867)  proposed  as  a  possible  emendation:  '  In  either  naught,  or  in  extremity,'  i.e. 
there  is  no  mean  in  the  fear  or  the  love  of  a  woman. 

161.  littlest]  See  Walker  (Crit.  i,  271)  for  instances  of  this  word;  gooder  and 
goodest ;  badder  and  baddest.  *  But  littlest  is  not  [here]  a  mere  synonym  of  least. 
Delius  :  This  is  not  found  elsewhere  in  Sh. 

164.  operant]  Steevens:  Active.    See  its  use  with  'poison,'  Timon,  IV,  iii,  2$, 
164.  to  do]  For  instances  of  the  infinitive  used  as  a  noun,  see  Abbott,  §355; 

also,  'to  feed,'  III,  iv,  66. 

164.  leave]  Clarendon:  Leave  off,  cease.    See  I, ii,  155.    [Also  II,  i,  51;  III, 

iv,  66.] 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  2\7 

'Such  love  must  needs  be  treason  in  my  breast; 
1  In  second  husband  let  me  be  accurst ! 

1  None  wed  the  second  but  who  kill'd  the  first.'  170 

Ham.     [Aside]  Wormwood,  wormwood ! 
1  The  instances  that  second  marriage  move 
'Are  base  respects  of  thrift,  but  none  of  love; 
'  A  second  time  I  kill  my  husband  dead, 
'  When  second  husband  kisses  me  in  bed.  175 

P.  King.  '  I  do  believe  you  think  what  now  you  speak, 
'  But  what  we  do  determine  oft  we  break. 
1  Purpose  is  but  the  slave  to  memory, 

170.  kilPd]  kill  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  172.    The]  Qq,  Sta.      Bapt.  The  Ff, 

171.  [Aside]  Cap.  Om.  QqFf,  Rowe  Dutch.  The  Theob.  +  ,  Cap.  Queen.  The 
•+,  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt.  or  P.  Queen.  The  Rowe,  Steev.  et  cet. 

Wormwood,  wormwood!]  Thaf 's  1 73.  thrift]  Trift  F2. 

wormwood.    Qq  (in  the  margin),  Cap.  174.  husband  dead]  lord  tha? s  dead 

Jen.  Steev.  Var.;  and  Seymour,  complet-  Q,,  Sta. 

ing  the  line  with  To  her,  Mark,  Horatio.  176.  you  think]  you.      Think  Ff. 

170.  wed]  Tschischwitz  construes  this  as  an  imperative. 

172.  instances]  Johnson:  Motives,  inducements. 

174.  kill . . .  dead]  Elze:  This  tautology  occurs  not  infrequently.  See  Tit.  And. 
Ill,  i,  92.  Tschischwitz:  Originally  the  phrase  was  not  tautological,  because  the 
Anglo-Saxon  cveljan  meant  to  torture.  Its  figurative  meaning  required  the  addition 
of  the  adjective. 

176,  177.  speak  . . .  break]  Clarendon  :  Observe  the  rhyme. 

178-203.  Sievers  {Hamlet,  p.  142,  Leipzig,  1S51)  was,  I  believe,  the  first  to  point 
out  the  dozen  or  sixteen  lines  which  Ham.  had  promised  to  insert  in  the  play ;  and  he 
supposed  them  to  be  lines  243-248,  but  Mr  and  Mrs  Cowden  Clarke,  in  their  ed.,  be- 
lieve that  they  are  to  be  found  in  the  present  passage;  because:  the  diction  is  different 
from  the  remainder  of  the  dialogue,  and  is  signally  like  Hamlet's  own  argumentative 
mode.  '  This  world  is  not  for  aye,'  the  thoughts  upon  the  fluctuations  of '  love '  and 
'fortune,'  and  the  final  reflection  upon  the  contrary  current  of  'our  wills  and  fates,' 
with  the  overthrow  of  our  '  devices,'  and  the  ultimate  diversity  between  our  inten- 
tions and  their  '  ends,'  are  as  if  proceeding  from  the  Prince  himself.  His  mctive  in 
writing  these  additional  lines  for  insertion,  and  getting  the  player  to  deliver  them, 
we  take  to  be  a  desire  that  they  shall  serve  to  divert  attention  from  the  special  pas- 
sages directed  at  the  King,  and  to  make  these  latter  seem  less  pointed.  We  have 
fancied  that  this  is  Shakespeare's  intention,  because  of  the  emphatic  variation  in 
the  style  just  here.  Observe  how  very  different  are  the  mythological  allusions  to 
•  Phoebus,'  '  Neptune,'  &c,  and  the  stiff  inversions  of  '  about  the  world  have  times 
twelve  thirties  been,'  '  discomfort  you,  my  lord,  it  nothing  must,'  &c. ;  and,  moreover^ 
observe  how  exactly  the  couplet  commencing  the  Player-King's  speech,  '  I  do  be- 
lieve,' &c,  and  the  couplet  concluding  it,  '  So  think  thou  wilt,'  &c,  would  con- 
join were  the  intervening  lines  omitted.  To  the  same  effect  Tschischwitz,  who 
finds  in  lines   194-199  an  allusion  to  Ros.  and  Guild;   see  II,  ii,  346-349.     A 


248  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  U, 


[178-203.  the  dozen  or  sixteen  lines.] 

discussion  as  to  whether  or  not  these  were  Hamlet's  dozen  or  sixteen  lines  was 
started  by  a  note  from  FURNIVALL  in  The  Academy,  3  Jan.  1874,  to  the  effect  that 
both  Seeley  and  himself,  independently  and  without  any  knowledge  of  Clarke's 
note  on  the  subject,  had  hit  upon  these  lines  as  those  written  by  Ham.     The  dis- 
cussion is  carried  on  in  the  pages  of  The  New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  1  Series,  pt.  ii.  p. 
465,  and  as  it  there  takes  up  some  thirty  or  more  pages,  a  mere  digest  of  it  can  be 
given  here.     MALLESON  contends  that  these  are  not  the  lines  written  by  Ham.     1. 
They  do  not  apply  to  the  King's  character  or  position,  but  rather  to  Ham.  himself. 
2.  There  is  nothing  in  them  of  the  torrent,  tempest,  and  whirlwind  of  passion  that 
Ham.  was  so  anxious  should  not  be  torn  to  tatters.     And,  lastly,  there  was  one 
scene  which  Ham.  tells  Hor.  is  to  be  the  test,  during  which  he  is  to  watch  the  King 
with  every  faculty  of  his  being,  while  Ham.  will  do  the  same  during  one  speech. 
Beyond  doubt  the  scene  is  where  poison  is  poured  into  the  Player-King's  ear,  and 
here,  likewise,  at  the  crisis  of  the  plot  is  to  be  found  the  speech,  viz.  *  Thoughts  black, 
hands  apt,  drugs  fit,'  &c,  and  this  is  Hamlet's  addition  to  the  play.    Had  the  King  not 
blenched,  we  should  have  had  probably  the  rest  of  the  dozen  lines,  which  might  have 
contained  a  hint  of  the  Poisoner's  next  aim,  the  seduction  to  a  sudden  second  marriage 
of  the  seeming-virtuous  Queen.    It  was  the  success  of  this  alteration  or  addition  that 
Ham.  declared  would  get  him  a  fellowship  in  a  cry  of  players,  and  this  success  was  due 
to  the  '  talk  of  the  poisoning,'  and  this  *  talk  of  the  poisoning '  is  found  only  in  this 
speech  of  Lucianus.     Seeley,  on  the  other  hand,  believed  that  the  dozen  or  sixteen 
lines  were  some  of  those  which  make  up  the  long  speech  beginning  •  I  do  believe 
you  think  what  now  you  speak.'     To  avoid  conjecture  as  much  as  possible,  we  must 
consider  two  characteristics  which  the  inserted  speech  must  necessarily  have:  I.  It 
must  consist  of  some  dozen  or  sixteen  lines.     2.  Being  an  insertion,  it  must  be  such 
a  speech  as  can  be  removed  without  affecting  the  action  of  the  play.     Now,  these 
two  characteristics  belong  to  this  speech  of  the  Player-King,  and  to  it  alone.     It  is 
exceptionally  long,  and  the  whole  of  it  could  not  be  spared,  but  it  is  quite  easy  to 
spare  about  a  dozen  or  sixteen  lines  from  the  middle  of  it,  and  such  a  retrenchment 
would  bring  the  speech  to  about  the  average  length  of  the  other  speeches.     There 
is  no  reason  why  Ham.  should  make  his  lines  *  charge  the  King  with  murder,  or  to 
drive  the  moral  of  the  play  home  to  the  King's  conscience.'  *    The  play  might  be 
trusted  to  do  that ;  no  speech  could  make  the  application  plainer.     It  is  impossible 
foT  the  speech  beginning  'Thoughts  black,'  &c,  to  be  the  inserted  speech,  because 
it  satisfies  none  of  the  conditions.     It  is  not  a  dozen  or  sixteen  lines,  but  only  six; 
it  is  not  an  inserted  speech,  but  belongs  essentially  to  the  action.     It  is  also  impos- 
sible to  suppose  exactly  that  it  was  broken  off  by  the  King's  rising,  for  the  six  lines 
in  question  form  only  one  sentence,  and  must  therefore  belong  entirely  to  the  play 
itself  in  its  original  form,  unless  the  murder  were  to  be  done  in  dumb  show,  which 
nobody  supposes.     His  uncle's  guilt  is  by  no  means  the  absorbing  topic  of  Hamlet's 
thoughts;  it  is  an  annoying  subject  that  weighs  upon  his  mind  without  interesting  it, 
and  his  only  desire  is  to  postpone  and  keep  at  arm's  length  everything  connected 
with  it,  and  with  his  duty  to  punish  it.     His  real  feeling  for  his  uncle  is  only  con- 
tempt, as  for  a  vulgar  knave,  whom  there  is  no  satisfaction  in  thinking  about, — and 
it  would  be  source  of  wonder  if  he  should  think  about  him  enough  to  take  the 

w  — — . ■ 

*  Seeley  quotes  this  from  Malleson,  but  it  is  not  to  be  found  in  his  published  argument.  Ed, 


act  in,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  249 


[178-203.  the  dozen  or  sixteen  lines.] 
trouble  to  write  a  dozen  or  sixteen  lines  to  make  clear  what  was  already  as  clear  as 
the  day.  But  the  subject  that  really  does  fill  Hamlet's  mind,  to  the  exclusion  of 
what  ought  to  engage  his  attention  more,  is  his  mother,  and  she  it  is  with  whom  these 
inserted  lines  deal.  From  what  we  know  of  Hamlet's  feelings  she  would  be,  d 
priori,  the  subject  of  his  inserted  speech.  Furthermore,  if  the  speech  were  about 
the  murder,  it  would  be  of  no  help  in  the  progress  of  the  play,  nothing  would  be  re 
vealed  to  us  by  it.  Whereas,  if  the  speech  dealt  with  the  mother,  it  would  be  a  broad 
hint  to  us  not  to  trust  Hamlet's  professions,  and  that  the  experiment  of  the  play,  with, 
all  its  parade  of  ingenuity  and  of  vengeance  to  follow,  is  a  mere  blind  by  which 
Ham.  hides  both  from  himself  and  Hor.  that  he  does  not  intend  to  act  at  all,  but  will 
go  on  for  ever  brooding  over  the  frailty  of  his  mother  and  of  all  womankind.  To 
this  Malleson  rejoins  :  Ham.  never  says  he  has  written  a  passage  of  so  many  lines, 
but  that  he  intended  to  write  some  uncertain  number,  a  dozen  or  sixteen.  When  he 
sat  down  with  the  play  before  him,  he  may  have  written  twenty  or  twenty-six,  and 
indeed,  if  the  Player-King's  speech  be  accepted  as  partly  Hamlet's,  all  of  it  might 
be  claimed  for  him  except  the  first  two  and  the  last  two  lines,  which,  omitting  the  in- 
tervening twenty-six,  go  fairly  together.  There  is  no  reason  why  the  inserted  lines 
must  be  such  as  can  be  removed  without  affecting  the  play;  may  not  Ham.  have 
substituted  his  lines  for  those  which  he  struck  out  ?  If  lines  178-203  were  made,  as 
Seeley  contends,  to  catch  the  conscience  of  the  Queen,  there  appears  to  be  in  them 
when  closely  analyzed  nothing  with  any  special  reference  to  her,  and  accordingly  she  is 
perfectly  unmoved  by  them ;  her  response,  when  appealed  to  by  Hamlet  as  to  how  she 
likes  the  play,  betokens  perfect  self-possession.  Afterwards,  to  be  sure,  she  is  thrown 
into  ■  most  great  affliction  of  spirit,'  but  it  is  entirely  on  her  husband's  account, — as 
far  as  she  was  concerned,  this  speech  was  pointless.  Grant  that  the  plot  of  the  play, 
by  itself,  sufficiently  emphasized  the  King's  guilt,  there  is  nothing  unnatural  in 
Hamlet's  wishing  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure.  In  Seeley's  final  remarks  he 
admitted  that  Hamlet's  instructions  to  the  Player  suggest  a  speech  that  is  in  some 
sense  passionate,  but  that  in  reality  Ham.  takes  the  occasion  of  a  particular  speech 
to  give  a  general  lecture  on  elocution,  or  on  the  general  way  in  which  a  passion 
should  be  expressed.  And  these  lines,  which  may  appear  tame  to  us,  may  have 
borne  a  much  more  intense  feeling  to  Ham.  The  insertion  is  introduced  to  tell 
us  something  about  Ham.  that  we  should  not  otherwise  have  known.  Its  object 
was  not  to  catch  the  conscience  of  the  Queen,  but  to  give  us  an  additional  in** 
sight  into  the  dreamy,  unpractical  character  of  Ham,  He  had  been  from  the 
■first  brooding  over  his  mother's  conduct,  and  the  play  offers  him  an  opportunity 
to  relieve  his  feelings ;  the  lines  may  not  produce  much  effect  upon  her, — he  knows 
how  unimpressionable  she  is, — but  his  object  will  be  gained  if  he  only  writes  them. 
FURNIVALL  sums  up :  Technically,  Seeley's  position  is  very  strong,  but  'on  the 
merits '  he  breaks  down, — he  has  a  capital  case  at  Law,  but  none  in  Equity,  I 
cannot  resist  Malleson's  argument,  that  Hamlet's  inserted  speech  is  the  one  speech 
in  which  he  tells  Hor.  the  King's  guilt  is  to  unkennel  itself.  But  I  hold  very 
strongly  that  Lucianus's  speech  is  not  the  speech,  and  that,  in  fact,  the  speech  is  not 
in  the  printed  play.  Either  the  King's  conscience  was  more  quickly  stung  than 
Ham.  anticipated,  and  so  the  written  speech  was  never  needed ;  or  (as  Mr  Matthew 
has  suggested)  Sh.  contented  himself  with  showing  us,  or  letting  us  assume,  that 
Ham.  alterd  the  play,  and  put  his  « dozen  or  sixteen  lines'  into  action  instead  of 


250  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  it 


[178-203.  the  dozen  or  sixteen  lines.] 
words;  if  he  had  not  modified  the  play,  what  credit  could  he  have  claimd  for  him- 
self as  a  play-writer  or  adapter.  The  inconsistency  of  Shakespeare's  having  made 
Ham.  first  talk  so  much  about  inserting  a  speech,  and  then  leaving  it  out  after  all, 
is  what  one  might  fairly  expect  in  the  recast  Hamlet  after  its  other  startling  incon- 
sistencies, e.g.  Hamlet's  age  and  Ophelia's  suicide.  What  can  it  matter  whether  an 
actual  speech  of  a  dozen  or  sixteen  lines,  though  often  announct,  be  really  in  the 
play  or  not?  Simpson  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  just  as  the  historical  drama 
takes  for  granted  those  events  which  are  made  known  by  previous  allusions,  so  the 
sub-play  generally  omits  all  those  details  which  have  been  previously  described  or 
alluded  to.  Thus  in  Mid.  N.  D.  we  have  both  the  play  as  presented  before  Theseus 
and  a  rehearsal  of  it.  The  lines  rehearsed  are  different  from  any  in  the  actual  play. 
'  Looking  at  the  practice  of  the  time  and  at  the  previous  likelihoods  of  the  case,  I  see 
no  reason  whatever  for  expecting  to  find  that  Sh.  would  have  put  into  the  sub-play 
the  dozen  lines  that  he  makes  Ham.  promise.'  Bathurst  (p.  70)  says  that  he  sees 
4  no  symptoms  of  the  lines  which  Ham.  was  to  insert.'  Gervinus  (2te  Band,  p. 
102,  3te  Auflage)  believes  that  Sh.  meant  the  passage  from  line  177  to  187  to  apply 
to  Ham.  '  Indeed,  Gonzago  acted  the  part  of  Hamlet's  father.  Ham.  as  well  as  his 
mother  must  have  a  taste  of  "  wormwood." '  My  friend  Dr  Ingleby  has  kindly  sent 
me  extracts  from  a  Paper  on  this  subject,  which  is  announced  for  reading  to  the 
New  Shakspere  Society,  9  February,  1 877.  In  these  extracts  Dr  Ingleby  dissents 
from  all  that  has  been  assumed  heretofore  on  this  subject  in  that  Society's  Transactions, 
and  maintains  his  own  view,  very  briefly  thus :  The  court-play  is  but  a  part  of  Ham 
let ;  that  Ham.  writes  no  speech  at  all,  whether  of  six,  twelve,  or  sixteen  lines,  nor 
recites  such  a  speech ;  Sh.  simply  wrote  the  entire  play,  not  writing  any  additions  in 
persona*  Hamleti,  still  less  writing  an  addition  to  a  play  which  he  had  previously 
written,  in  the  character  of  the  author  of  an  Italian  morality.  To  trace  into  its 
issues  every  suggestion  in  the  play,  so  that  the  event  should  justify  the  hint,  is  'to 
consider  too  curiously.'  A  drama  is  a  work  of  art,  a  contrivance  for  imposing  upon 
the  spectator,  causing  him  to  take  no  account  of  actual  time,  place,  and  circum- 
stance, making  him  almost  forget  that  he  is  in  a  play-house.  In  real  life  a  Hamlet 
might  compose  and  insert  a  few  lines  to  add  point  and  force  to  an  ordeal,  like  that 
of  the  court-play,  to  which  the  fictitious  Hamlet  subjects  the  supposed  criminal ; 
and  if  we  had  the  play  before  us,  we  might  detect  the  insertion  by  means  of  our 
various  tests  of  metre,  phraseology,  &c.  If  we  failed  to  discover  the  added  lines, 
the  fault  is  ours;  the  lines  would  be  there.  Now  to  suppose  that  Sh.  in  composing 
Hamlet  followed  out  the  exact  course  that  a  real  living  prince  would  have  followed, 
is  to  impute  to  him  a  lack  of  the  simplest  art  of  the  playwright,  and  a  neglect  of 
the  artifices  which  the  drama  places  at  his  command.  Whereas,  Shakespeare's  pro- 
cedure was  probably  this:  In  the  course  of  enlarging  the  first  sketch  of  his  Hamlet 
he  conceived  the  design  of  making  it  a  vehicle  for  the  highest  possible  instruction 
in  the  art  of  elocution.  The  play-scene  was  already  devised,  and  he  had,  therefore, 
to  introduce  the  Players  as  arriving  at  Elsinore.  Here  was  the  chance  he  wanted. 
He  would  make  Ham.  instruct  the  Player,  and  through  him  all  players,  how  to 
act.  But  how  was  this  to  be  brought  about  ?  Ham.  could  hardly  be  supposed  to 
know  by  heart  the  rdles  of  a  strolling  player.  Wherefore,  Sh.  makes  Ham.  speak 
as  if  he  had  already  recited  to  the  Player  a  speech  of  his  own  composition,  and 
hereupon  give  his  instructions.     Thus,  having  found  or  made  the  occasion,  Sh.  had 


ACT  ill.  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  25 1 

1  Of  violent  bhth  but  poor  validity  ; 

1  Which  now,  like  fruit  unripe,  sticks  on  the  tree,  180 

179.  but]  andQlb.  180.  fruit]  fruits  Q'76,  Pope  +  . 

I  So.  like]  the  Qq. 


to  prepare  the  audience  for  the  supposed  recitation,  and  this  was  done  by  represent- 
ing Ham.  at  a  former  interview  imparting  to  the  old  Player  his  intention  of  writing 
'  a  speech  of  some  dozen  or  sixteen  lines'  (i.  e.  a  speech  of  several  lines)  for  inser 
tion  in  The  Murder  cf  Gonzago.  But  all  the  while  Shakespeare's  object  (kept 
wholly  out  of  view)  was  to  prepare  the  audience  for  his  own  lesson  (voce  Hamleti) 
on  elocution.  It  is  a  rule  of  dramatic  art  that,  a  dramatic  expedient  not  essential 
to  the  plot,  introduced  for  a  collateral  object,  is  to  be  left  out  of  consideration  as 
soon  as  that  object  is  attained.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  Ham.  has  given  the  old  Player 
his  lesson,  the  dramatic  need  of  the  '  dozen  or  sixteen  lines '  is  satisfied,  and  we  have 
no  further  concern  with  them.  The  suggestion,  however,  served  ( 1 )  to  prepare  the  way 
for  Hamlet's  advice;  (2)  to  suggest  the  possibility,  vague  to  the  last  degree,  that  Ham- 
had  the  old  play  touched  and  tinkered  to  suit  his  purpose  more  completely.  The 
phrase,  '  some  dozen  or  sixteen,'  does  not  mean  what  it  says ;  it  is  even  more  indefi- 
nite  than  '  ten  or  a  dozen,'  or  '  a  dozen  or  fourteen,'  which  Mrs  Quickly  uses  in  Hen. 
V:  II,  i;  the  prefix  'some'  adds  vagueness  to  what  was  vague  already.  These 
lines,  by  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  can  never  have  been  in  Hamlet.  [It  is  to  task 
the  credulity  of  an  audience  too  severely  to  represent  the  possibility  of  Hamlet's 
finding  an  old  play  exactly  fitted  to  Claudius's  crime,  not  only  in  the  plot,  but  in  all 
the  accessories,  even  to  a  single  speech  which  should  tent  the  criminal  to  the  very 
quick.  In  order,  therefore,  to  give  an  air  of  probability  to  what  every  one  would 
feel  to  be  thus  highly  improbable,  Sh.  represents  Ham.  as  adapting  an  old  play  to 
his  present  needs  by  inserting  in  it  some  pointed  lines.  Not  that  such  lines  were 
actually  inserted,  but,  mindful  of  this  proposal  of  Hamlet's,  the  spectator  is  pre- 
pared to  listen  to  a  play  which  is  to  unkennel  the  King's  occulted  guilt  in  a  certain 
speech ;  the  verisimilitude  of  all  the  circumstances  is  thus  maintained.  No  matter 
how  direct  or  pointed  the  allusion  to  the  King's  guilt  may  be,  we  accept  it  all,  secure 
under  Shakespeare's  promise  that  the  play  shall  be  made  to  hit  Claudius  fatally. 
And  we  hear  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise  in  Hamlet's  cry  of  exultation  over  the 
success  of  his  attempt  at  play-writing.  The  discussion,  therefore,  that  has  arisen 
over  these  '  dozen  or  sixteen  lines '  is  a  tribute  to  Shakespeare's  consummate  art. 
Ingleby,  I  think,  is  right  in  maintaining  that  Sh.  did  not  first  write  The  Murder  of 
Gonzago,  and  then  insert  in  it  certain  lines,  as  though  written  by  Hamlet.  And 
Sievers,  the  Clarkes,  Malleson,  and  others  are  also  right,  I  think,  in  believing  that 
certain  lines  of  the  court-play  are  especially  applicable  to  Claudius,  and  which  we 
may  imagine  are  those  that  Ham.  told  the  Player  he  would  give  him.  It  is  the  very 
impression  which,  I  think,  Sh.  wished  to  convey.  Ed.] 

179.  validity]  Caldecott:  The  conception  and  origin  of  our  resolutions  are 
violent  and  passionate ;  but  their  progress  and  close  of  little  vigor  or  efficiency. 

180.  sticks]  Tschischwitz  advocates  his  text,  which  reads:  *  Like  fruit  unripe, 
which  now  sticks  on  the  tree,'  on  the  ground  *  that "  Which,"  referring  to  "  Purpose," 
in  connection  with  "sticks  on  the  tree,"  is  nonsense.*  And,  furthermore,  that 
« sticks '  is  an  archaic  plural  equivalent  to  stickest  sticketh. 


252 


HAMLET 


[act  m,  sc.  \l 


But  fall  unshaken  when  they  mellow  be.  \%\ 

Most  necessary  'tis  that  we  forget 

To  pay  ourselves  what  to  ourselves  is  debt; 

What  to  ourselves  in  passion  we  propose, 

The  passion  ending,  doth  the  purpose  lose.  185 

The  violence  of  either  grief  or  joy 

Their  own  enactures  with  themselves  destroy ; 

Where  joy  most  revels,  grief  doth  most  lament; 

Grief  joys,  joy  grieves,  on  slender  accident. 

This  world  is  not  for  aye,  nor  'tis  not  strange  190 

That  even  our  loves  should  with  our  fortunes  change, 

For  'tis  a  question  left  us  yet  to  prove, 

Whether  love  lead  fortune  or  else  fortune  love. 


186.  either]  eythert  Q3Q3.  either,  Q4. 
ether  Ff. 

187.  enactures]  Q'76,  Johns,  en- 
naclures  Qq.  ennaclors  Fz.  enaclors 
F2F3F4,  Rowe  +  . 

188.  lament]  relent 'Jen.  (misprint?) 

1 89.  joys]  joyes  F,F2F3.     toy  Qq. 


FF, 


griefes 


189.  grieves]  greeue± 
Qq. 

190.  nor]  and  Tope,  Han. 
'tis  not]  is  it  Q'76. 

193.  lead  fortune]  fortune  lead  Pope, 
Han.  leads  fortune  Theob.Warb.  Johns. 
else]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 


181.  fall]  Caldecott:  This  verb,  like  'sticks,'  is  to  be  referred  to ' purpose ;' 
but  in  Shakespeare's  mind  it  was  connected  with  '  unripe  fruit,'  and  ' they,'  its  rela- 
tive. Elze:  See  the  reversed  construction,  I,  iii,  47,  50 :  'pastors  •  .  .  libertine, 
Himself.'  Abbott,  §415:  The  subject,  which  is  singular,  is  here  confused  with 
and  lost  in  that  to  which  it  is  compared,  which  is  plural. 

183.  debt]  Johnson  :  The  performance  of  a  resolution,  in  which  only  the  re* 
solver  is  interested,  is  a  debt  only  to  himself,  which  he  may  therefore  remit  at 
pleasure. 

186.  187.  violence  . . ,  destroy]  Delius  :  The  plural  is  to  be  explained  by  sup- 
posing that  in  'violence'  there  are  two  '  violences'  understood;  'of  grief  and  'of 
joy.'  Clarendon  :  A  more  natural  explanation  is  that  the  verb  is  attracted  by  the 
nearer  substantive  '  enactures.'     Compare  I,  ii,  38. 

187.  enactures]  Johnson:  What  grief  or  joy  enact  or  determine  in  their  vio- 
lence is  revoked  in  their  abatement.  Clarendon  :  Enactments,  resolutions.  Pep- 
haps  it  may  have  the  further  meaning  of  carrying  purposes  into  execution.  ABBOTT, 
§  194 :  '  With  themselves '  seems  to  mean  by  or  of  themselves. 

188.  Moberly:  The  very  temper  that  is  most  cast  down  with  grief  is  also  most 
capable  of  joy,  and  passes  from  one  to  the  other  with  slenderest  cause. 

190.  nor  'tis  not]  For  instances  of  double  negatives,  see  I,  ii,  158;  and  ABBOTT, 
§406. 

191.  loves]  Moberly  :  The  love  which  others  feel  for  us. 
193.  Whether]  See  II,  ii,  17. 

193.  or  else]  Clarendon:  A  reduplication,  like 'or  ere,'  'an  if,'  See  Genesis^ 
sclii.  16. 


ACT  III.  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


253 


'The  great  man  down,  you  mark  his  favourites  flies; 

1  The  poor  advanced  makes  friends  of  enemies ;  195 

'And  hitherto  doth  love  on  fortune  tend; 

1  For  who  not  needs  shall  never  lack  a  friend, 

1  And  who  in  want  a  hollow  friend  doth  try 

1  Directly  seasons  him  his  enemy. 

'  But,  orderly  to  end"  where  I  begun,  200 

1  Our  wills  and  fates  do  so  contrary  run, 

'That  our  devices  still  are  overthrown, 

'  Our  thoughts  are  ours,  their  ends  none  of  our  own  ; 

'  So  think  thou  wilt  no  second  husband  wed, 

'  But  die  thy  thoughts  when  thy  first  lord  is  dead.  205 

P.  Queen.  '  Nor  earth  to  me  give  food  nor  heaven  light ! 
1  Sport  and  repose  lock  from  me  day  and  night ! 
'  To  desperation  turn  my  trust  and  hope  ! 
'An  anchor's  cheer  in  prison  be  my  scope! 


194.  favourites']  Ff.    favourite  QqFa 


F3F4  et  cet. 

196.  hithertoj  hethertoo  Q+Q^   hither 
toF3. 

197.  friend,]   Frend :  Fx.     friend? 

334 
199.  seasons  him]  sees  in  him  Anon.* 

204.  So  think]  Think  still  Q 7 6,Theob. 
Warb. 

wilt  no]  wilt  not  Jen. 

205.  die  thy  thoughts]   thy  thoughts 


dye  Q'76. 

206.  to  me  give]  to  give  me  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Johns.  Jen.  Cald.  Knt.  oh  !  give 
me  Han.  Cap.    do  give  me  Seymour. 

Nor. ..give]   Let  earth  not  give 
me  Anon.  {Misc.  Obs.  1752,  p.  34). 

208, 209.  To...scopel]  Om.  Ff,Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

209.  An  anchor's]  Theob.  And  An- 
chors Qq.  And  anchors'  Jen.  An  an* 
chord's  Anon,  apud  Rann. 


194.  favourites  flies]  Abbott,  §  333 :  The  reading,  favourite,  completely  misses 
the  intention  to  describe  the  crowd  of  favorites  scattering  in  flight  from  the  fallen 
patron.  [See  this  paragraph  in  Abbott  for  instances  of  the  third  person  plural  in  s."] 
CORSON  (p.  27) :  The  plural,  *  favourites/  is,  in  fact,  demanded. 

197.  not  needs]  Clarendon:  For  this  construction, see  Temp.  II, i,  121 ;  Much 
Ado,  IV,  i,  175. 

199.  seasons]  Caldecott:  Throws  in  an  ingredient,  which  constitutes,  &c. 
This  word  is  used  with  great  latitude  in  several  parts  of  this  play.  Delius  :  This 
signified  formerly  every  kind  of  modification  in  its  widest  sense.  Dyce  ( Gloss.) : 
Confirms,  establishes.  Clarendon:  Ripens,  brings  to  maturity  in  his  true  cha- 
racter. 

201.  contrary]  For  words  in  which  the  accent  is  nearer  the  end  than  with  us, 
see  Abbott,  §  490. 

209.  anchor's]  Johnson  :  May  my  whole  liberty  and  enjoyment  be  to  live  on 

hermit's  fare  in  prison.    '  Anchor '  is  for  anchorite.    Steevens  :  This  abbreviation 

is   very  ancient     In  the  Romance  of  Robert  the  Devil,  printed  by  Wynkyn  de 

Worde:  ' We  haue  robbed  and  killed  nonnes,  holy  aunkers,  preestes,' &c.    Again; 

22 


254 


HAMLET 


[ACT  III,  sc.  15, 


4  Each  opposite,  that  blanks  the  face  of  joy,  210 

4  Meet  what  I  would  have  well  and  it  destroy ! 
*  Both  here  and  hence  pursue  me  lasting  strife, 
'  If,  once  a  widow,  ever  I  be  wife  !' 
Ham.    If  she  should  break  it  now ! 

P.  King.    *  Tis  deeply  sworn.    Sweet,  leave  me  here 

'awhile;  215 

4  My  spirits  grow  dull,  and  fain  I  would  beguile 
4  The  tedious  day  with  sleep.  [Sleeps. 

P.  Queen.  '  Sleep  rock  thy  brain ; 

4  And  never  come  mischance  between  us  twain  ?'       [Exit 

Ham.     Madam,  how  like  you  this  play  ? 
Queen.    The  lady  protests  too  much,  methinks.  220 

Ham.    O,  but  she'll  keep  her  word. 
King.    Have  you  heard  the  argument?    Is  there  no 
offence  in't  ? 


213.  once... wife]  once  I  be  a  widdow, 
mer  I  be  a  wife  Qq  {bee  Q4),  Jen.  once 
I  be  a  widdow,  euer  I  be  wife  Q  .  once 
I  widow  be,  and  then  a  wife  Q'76. 

214.  Ham.  If  ..now!]  Dyce.  Ham. 
If. .now.  Qq  (in  the  margin)  {he  Q'76) 
Ff,  Ham.  If  ..now —  Pope  + ,  Jen.  Coll, 
White,  Del.  Ham.  [to  Oph.]  If... 
now, —  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt, 
Sing.  El.  Ktly,  Huds. 

it  now"]  her  vow  Coll.  (MS).  El. 

215.  *  Tis. ..awhile;]  Two  lines,  Ff. 


215.  here]  heare  Q4Q  F2. 

217.  [Sleeps.]  Pope.  (After  brain), 
Ff,  Rowe.  Om.  Qq.  lays  him  down. 
Cap. 

218.  between]  betwixt  Q^Q5y  Cap. 
[Exit.]      Exeunt.     Qq.      Exit 

Dutchess.     Duke  sleeps.  Cap. 

219.  this]  the  F2F3F4,  Rowe. 

220.  protests]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Cap.  Knt, 
El.  Dyce  i,  White,  Del.  Glo.  Mob. 
doth  protefl  Qq  et  cet. 

too  much]  to  much  Fx. 


'the  foxe  will  be  an  aunker,'  &c.  Also,  in  The  Vision  of  Piers  Ploughman,  1.  55  : 
( As  ancres  and  heremites  That  holden  hem  in  hire  selles.'  I  believe  we  should 
read, — 'anchor's  chair*  Compare  Hall,  Sat.  ii,  bk.  IV,  p.  18,  ed.  1602: — 'Sit 
seven  yeres  pining  in  an  anchore's  cheyre.'  Delius:  Logically,  'scope'  cannot 
refer  to  '  anchor's  cheer,'  but  to  '  prison.'  Clarendon  :  '  Anchor '  is  applied  both  to 
men  and  women. 

210.  opposite]  Clarendon:  An  opponent;  here  it  denotes  any  obstacle  to  joy. 
For  the  literal  sense,  see  V,  ii,  62,  and  Twelfth  Night,  III,  iv,  293. 

210.  blanks]  Clarendon  :  Blanches,  makes  pale,  as  with  fear. 

214.  Delius  :  It  is  just  as  likely  that  Ham.  addressed  this  to  his  mother  as  to 
Oph. 

220.  protests]  Corson  :  The  familiar  « protests '  is  better  here  than  '  doth  pro* 
test.' 

222.  argument]  See  notes  on  line  127,  where  various  attempts  are  made  to  ex- 
plain what  Hunter  calls  '  the  oversight '  In  this  question  of  the  King's. 


ACT  ill,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  255 

Ham.     No,  no ;  they  do  but  jest,  poison  in  jest;  no  offence 
H  the  world.  225 

King.     What  do  you  call  the  play  ? 

Ham.      The    Mouse-trap.       Marry,    how?       Tropically. 
This  play  is  the  image  of  a  murder  done  in  Vienna ;  Gon 
zago  is  the  duke's  name ;  his  wife,  Baptista ;  you  shall  see 
anon ;  'tis  a  knavish  piece  of  work ;  but  what  o'  that  ?  your  230 
majesty,  and  we  that  have  free  souls,  it  touches  us  not ;  let 
the  galled  jade  wince,  our  withers  are  unwrung. — 

225.  f  the  world]  Om.  Q'76.  Qq,  Cap.  et  cet. 

227.  how?]  hozvQq.  23 1,  that  have]  fliall haue  Q4Q$. 
Tropically]  topically  Pope  i.  us  not]  not  us  Q'76. 

228.  &c.   Gonzago]  Gonzaga  Johns.  232.  wince]     Steev.      winch    QqFf, 

229.  wife]    wife's  Theob.  +  .    wifes*  Rowe+,  Cap.  Jen. 

Ktly.  unwrung]  vnwrong  QaQ,.    v «• 

230.  0']  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Dyce,  Glo.     of        rung  FXF3,  Johns. 

224.  offence]  Delius:  Here  again,  as  before  in  I,  v,  137,  this  word  is  used  in 
a  double  sense.  The  King  means  a  moral  *  offence,'  and  Hamlet  means  a  physical 
*  offence,'  or  crime. 

227.  Mouse-trap]  Steevens  :  In  reference  to  II,  ii,  580. 

227.  Tropically]  Caldecott  :  Figuratively,  by  a  trope  or  turn  we  give  things. 
Hunter  (ii,  282) :  Trapically  of  Qx  is  an  unmeaning  word,  except  that  we  may  see 
a  faint  shade  of  meaning  in  the  play  being  a  figurative  representation  of  an  actual 
deed,  and  this,  combined  with  the  opportunity  of  playing  on  the  word  trap,  is  the 
true  reason  that  we  meet  with  this  word  thus  oddly  introduced. 

228.  image]  See  Macb.  II,  iii,  74. 

228.  Vienna]  Collier  :  The  Guiana  of  Qf  perhaps  arose  from  the  shorthand- 
writer  having  misheard  the  name. 

229.  duke's]  Hunter  (ii,  252) :  Qt  explains  why  everywhere  else  he  is  a  king. 
The  character  was  a  duke  throughout,  as  the  play  was  originally  written,  and  when 
king  was  to  be  substituted  for  duke,  this  passage  remained  by  some  accident  uncor- 
rected. Walker  (Crit.  ii,  281)  shows  by  many  instances  that  king,  duke,  and  count 
were  confounded  in  sense,  and  that  to  the  poet  they  were  one  and  the  same,  all  in- 
volving alike  the  idea  of  sovereign  power  j  and  thus  might  easily  be  confounded 
with  each  other  in  the  memory. 

229.  Baptista]  Johnson  :  In  Italian,  I  think,  the  name  always  of  a  man.  Rit- 
SON :  I  believe  it  is  never  used  singly,  but  compounded  with  Gian  (for  Giovanni)t 
and  meaning,  of  course,  John  the  Baptist.  Hunter  (ii,  252) :  I  have  seen  a  few 
instances  in  which  the  name  was  borne  by  women  in  England.  Sh.  was  not  solicit- 
ous about  it.     It  had  a  feminine  termination ;  that  was  enough. 

231.  we]  See  I,  iv,  54. 

231.  free]  See  II,  ii,  537. 

232.  wince]  Steevens:  A  proverb.  Thus,  in  Damon  and  Pythias,  1582:  'I 
know  the  gall'd  horse  will  soonest  wince.'  Clarendon:  See  Lyly's  £uphues,p. 
119  (ed.  Arber) :  •  For  well  I  know  none  will  winch  except  she  be  gawlded.'  See 
Mother  Bombie,  I,  iii. 


256 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  3, 


Enter  LuciANUS. 

This  is  one  Luc'anus,  nephew  to  the  king. 

Oph.    You  are  a  good  chorus,  my  lord. 

Ham.    I  could  interpret  between  you  and  your  love,  if  235 
I  could  see  the  puppets  dallying. 

Oph.    You  are  keen,  my  lord,  you  are  keen. 

Ham.     It  would  cost  you  a  groaning  to  take  off  my  edge. 

Oph.    Still  better,  and  worse. 

Ham.    So  you  must  take  your  husbands. — Begin,  mur-  240 


232.  Enter  Lucianus.]  After  king, 
line  233,  Qq.  Enter  Nephew  with  a 
Vial.  Cap. 

233.  king]  Duke  Theob.  +  ,  Pope  ii, 
Cap. 

234.  a  good]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt, 
Dyce  i,  Del.    as  good  as  a  Qq  et  cet. 

238.  my]  mine  Qq. 

239.  better,]  worfe  Q'76,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

240.  So... husbands.]  Pope.  So  you 
mi/lake  your  husbands  Qq,  Theob.  Warb. 


Johns.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Sing.  So  you 
tnijiake  Husbands  Ff,  R.owe.  So  most 
of  you  take  husbands  Han.  €0  you 
mis-take  husbands  Cap.  So  you  must 
take  husbands  Knt,  Long  MS.*  So  you 
must  take  your  husband  White.  Sepa- 
rate line,  Ff. 

240,  242.  Begin... revenge]  Two  lines, 
the  first  ending  begin.  F  ,  Rowe+. 


240,  241. 
Rowe. 


murderer]    Murther    F. 


234.  chorus]  Delius  :  We  find  a  chorus  explaining  the  action  of  the  play  in 
Winter's  Tale,  Rom.  <5r»  Jul.,  and  Hen.  V. 

235.  interpret]  Steevens  :  An  interpreter  formerly  sat  on  the  stage  at  all  motions 
ox  puppet-shows,  and  interpreted  to  the  audience.  See  Two  Gent.  II,  i,  IOI  j  Timon, 
I,  i,  34.  Again,  in  Greene's  Groatsworth  of  Wit,  1 621 :  'It  was  I  that  ....  for 
seven  years'  space  was  absolute  interpreter  of  the  puppets.* 

236.  puppets  dallying]  Seymour  (ii,  179) :  If  I  could  observe  the  agitations 
of  your  bosom.     Nares  :  Synonymous  with  the  babies  in  the  eyes. 

237.  keen]  Hunter  (ii,  252) :  There  is  no  appropriateness  in  this  as  a  reply  to 
what  Hamlet  had  said,  and  it  is,  in  fact,  an  observation  on  something  said  by  him 
that  is  now  transposed  to  another  part  of  the  play.  This  we  learn  from  Qx,  where 
the  remarks  of  Ham.  to  Oph.  on  the  cheerful  appearance  of  his  mother  occur  in 
this  part  of  the  dialogue.  It  is  in  reference  to  these  satirical  remarks  about  his 
mother  that  Ophelia  says,  *  You  are  keen,'  or  as  it  reads  in  Qx. 

239.  worse]  Caldecott  :  More  keen  and  less  decorous. 

240.  must  take]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  p.  90) :  Hamlet  certainly  alludes  to  the 
church-service  of  matrimony,  where  the  husband  and  wife  promise  alternately  to  take 
each  other  for  *  better  for  worse.'  [Theobald  changed  his  mind  when  he  came  to 
print  his  edition ;  for  there  he  follows  the  QqFf,  and  paraphrases :  *  So  you  take 
Husbands,  and  find  yourselves  mistaken  in  them.'  The  majority  of  notes  on  this 
passage  are  in  favor  of  the  reading  of  the  QqFf.  Those  edd.  who  have  followed 
the  reading  of  Qf  have  been  apparently  so  firmly  fixed  in  their  belief  in  the  excellence 
of  that  text  in  this  passage,  that  they  have  not  thought  it  worth  while  to  vindicate 
it.  Ed.]  Farmer:  I  believe  mistake  to  be  right ;  the  word  is  sometimes  used  in 
this  ludicrous  manner :  '  Your  true  trick,  rascal '  (says  Ursula,  in  Bartholomew  Fair), 


act  in,  sc.  II]  HAMLET  257 

dercr.     Pox,  leave  thy  damnable  faces,  and  begin.     Come :    241 
The  croaking  raven  doth  bellow  for  revenge. 

Luc.    €  Thoughts  black,  hands  apt.  drugs  fit,  and 
'time  agreeing; 
'  Confederate  season,  else  no  creature  seeing ; 
1  Thou  mixture  rank,  of  midnight  weeds  collected,  245 

'  With  Hecate's  ban  thrice  blasted,  thrice  infected, 

241.  Pox,]   Om.   Qq,   Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Cla. 

Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  243.  Two  lines.  Ff. 

Sta.  Cla.  Huds.  Mob.  244.  Confederate]     Confiderat  Q2Q3. 

241,242.  Come:    Tke~\   Jen.     Come,  Confiderat  Q4.     Confederate  Qs. 

the  QqFf,  Rowe  +  .     Come.    The  Johns.  e/se~\   and  Q'76,  Theob.   Han. 

Come,  The  Cap.   As  two  half  lines,  end-  Warb. 

ing   raven. ..revenge  Steev.   Bos.   Cald.  246.  ban]  Bane¥A,  Rowe,  Pope,Kan. 

Knt.     In  quotation-marks,  White,  Glo.  infected]  inuecled  Q3Q3- 

*  must  be  to  be  ever  busie,  and  mistake  away  the  bottles  and  cans,  before  they  be 
half  drunk  off.'  Steevens  :  Again,  in  Jonson's  Masque  of  Augurs  :  *  To  mistake 
six  torches  from  the  chandry,  and  give  them  one.'  Again,  in  The  Elder  Brother  of 
Fletcher:  'I  fear  he  will  persuade  me  to  mistake  him,'  Again,  in  Chrestoleros ; 
Seven  Bookes  of  Epigrams,  written  by  T.  B.  [Thomas  Bastard],  1598,  lib.  vii,  epig. 

xviii :  « For  none  that  see'th  her  face  and  making,  "Will  judge  her  stolne,  but  by 

mistaking.'     Again,  in  Questions  of  Profitable  and  Pleasant  Concernings,  1594 ' 

*  Better  I  were  now  and  then  to  suffer  his  remisse  mother  to  mistake  a  quarter  or  twa 
of  come.'  Tollet  :  The  meaning  is :  '  You  do  amiss  for  yourselves  to  take  husbands 
for  the  worse.  You  should  take  them  only  for  the  better.'  Caldecott  :  In  these 
very  terms  of  confusion  and  contradiction  it  is  that  you  make  up  what  you  call  yout 
solemn  contract  of  marriage.  For  '  mistake '  =  wrongly  judged  of,  see  Hen.  VIII: 
III,  i,  101.  Singer:  Hamlet  puns  upon  the  word  mistake :  'So  you  mis-take,  or 
take  your  husbands  amiss  for  better  and  worse.'  The  word  was  often  thus  misused 
for  anything  done  wrongfully,  and  even  for  privy  stealing. 

241.  Pox]  DVce:  Need  I  observe  that,  in  Shakespeare's  time,  this  imprecation 
undoubtedly  referred  to  the  small-pox? 

242.  revenge]  Collier  :  This  perhaps,  was  a  quotation  from  some  other  play  in 
Hamlet's  memory.  Dyce  {Remarks,  &c,  p.  215) :  Ham.  seems  to  mean  :  *  Begin 
without  more  delay;  for  the  raven,  prescient  of  the  deed,  is  already  croaking,  and, 
as  it  were,  calling  out  for  the  revenge  which  will  ensue.'  Simpson  (  The  Academy ; 
19  Dec.  '74):  Ham.  rolls  into  one  two  lines  of  an  old  familiar  play:  The  True 
Tragdie  of  Richard  the  Third  (p.  61,  Sh.  Soc.  Reprint).  The  king  is  describing 
the  terrors  of  his  conscience :  *  Methinks  their  ghosts  ccmes  gaping  for  revenge 
Whom  I  have  slain  in  reaching  for  a  crown ;'  and  of  the  two  lines  that  follow, 
Hamlet's  speech  is  a  satirical  condensation  :  '  The  screeking  raven  sits  croking  for 
revenge  Whole  herds  of  beasts  comes  bellowing  for  revenge.' 

244.  confederate]  Tschischwitz  [following  Q  ]  :  '  Confederate  is  clearly  the 
wrong  reading,  since  it  merely  expresses  what  is  already  implied  in '  time  agreeing.* 
Clarendon  :  The  opportunity  conspiring  to  assist  the  murderer. 

245.  midnight]  Steevens:  See  Macb.  IV,  i,  25. 

22*  R 


258  HAMLET  [ACT  in,  SC.  ii. 

1  Thy  natural  magic  and  dire  property,  247 

*  On  wholesome  life  usurp  immediately/ 

[Pours  the  poison  into  the  sleeper's  ear. 
Ham.     He  poisons  him  i'  the  garden  for  his  estate.     His 
name's  Gonzago;  the  story  is  extant,  and  writ  in  choice  250 
Italian ;  you  shall  see  anon  how  the  murderer  gets  the  love 
of  Gonzago's  wife. 
Oph.    The  king  rises! 
Ham.     What,  frighted  with  false  fire! 

Queen.     How  fares  my  lord?  255 

Pol.     Give  o'er  the  play ! 
King.     Give  me  some  light. — Away ! 
All.     Lights,  lights,  lights ! 

[Exeunt  all  but  Hamlet  and  Horatio, 
Ham.    Why,  let  the  strucken  deer  go  weep, 

The  hart  ungalled  play;  260 

For  some  must  watch,  while  some  must  sleep ; 
So  runs  the  world  away. 

247.  Thy]  7^F4,Rowe.   Zfo#Pope,        Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Cam. 

Han.  [Exeunt...]  Exeunt.  Manet  Ham- 

248.  usurp~\  vfurpe  FxFa.  vfurps  Qq,        let  &  Horatio.  Ff  (Manent  F4). 

Cap.  Sing.  Ktly.  259.  Scene  viii.    Pope,  Han.  Jen. 

[Pours. ..ear.]  Mai.    Powres  the  Scene  vii.  Warb.  Johns, 

poyfon  in  his  eares.  Ff.     Om.  Qq.  strucken]  flrooken   Q2Q3t   Cap. 

249.  He]  A  Qq.  Jlroken  Q4Q$.     stricken  Han.  Coll.  El. 
for  his]  for's  FXF3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  White,  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Del.  Huds.  Mob.  fors  F3.  260.  hart]  Heart  F2F„  Rowe,  Johns. 

250.  name^s]  na?nes  QqF2F3F  .  Cap. 

writ  in]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Knt,  Dyce,  ungalled]  vngauled  Qq. 

Sta.  White,  Glo.  Del.  Huds.     written  261.  while]  whiljl  QAQS,  Rowe  +  . 

in  Cald.     written  in  very  Qq  et  cet.  sleep  :]Jleepe  ?  F2F3F4,  Rowe. 

254.  Ham.      What,.. .fire]    Om,   Qq,  262.  So]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Cald.  Knt 

Pope.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Mob.    Thus  Qq  et  cet. 

258.  All.]   Ff.     Pol.  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 

248.  usurp]  Walker  (Cril.  iii,  176) :  That  is, '  let  them  usurp.' 

250.  extant]  White  :  This,  I  believe,  is  actually  true.  I  am  sure  that  I  have 
seen  the  incidents  of  this  Murder  of  Gonzago  mentioned  as  having  actually  occurred 
in  Italy  during  the  Middle  Ages. 

250.  writ  in]  Corson  :  This  may  be  a  case  of  absorption ;  the  -en  of  the  par- 
ticiple being  present  in  *  in.' 

259-262.  Dyce  :  In  all  probability  a  quotation  from  some  ballad. 

259.  weep]  Steevens  :  See  As  You  Like  It,  II,  i,  33. 

262.  So]  Corson  :  The  more  general  and  indefinite  *  So '  seems  preferable  here 
to  the  formal «  Thus.' 


act  in,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  259 

Would  not  this,  sir,  and  a  forest  of  feathers, — if  the  rest  of 
my  fortunes  turn  Turk  with  me, — with  two  Provincial  roses 
on  my  razed  shoes,  get  me  a  fellowship  in  a  cry  of  players,  265 
sir? 

263.  feathers']  Fathers  F4«  Jen.  Sing.  El.  Ktly. 

264.  two]  Om.  Qq,  Jen.  265.  cry]  city  QQ. 

265.  razed"]  Mai.     raz'd  Qq.     radd  players]  player  Q. 
Ff,  Rowe  i.      rack?d  Rowe  ii.     rayed            266.  sir]  Om.  Qq,  Jen. 
Pope  +  /   ray'dCzp.    rais'dThcob.  conj. 

263.  feathers]  Malone:  It  appears  from  Decker's  GuPs  llornbooke  that  feathers 
were  much  worn  on  the  stage  in  Shakespeare's  time. 

264.  turn  Turk]  Steevens:  Gee  Much  Ado,  III,  iv,  57;  and,  in  Greene's  Tu 
Quoque,  1 6 14 :  '  This  it  is  to  turn  Turk,  from  an  absolute  and  most  compleat  gentle- 
man, to  a  most  absurd,  ridiculous,  and  fond  lover.'  It  means  no  more  than  to 
change  condition  fantastically.   Caldecott  :  To  undergo  a  total  and  ruinous  change. 

264.  Provincial]  Warton  :  Hamlet  means  the  roses  of  Provence,  a  beautiful 
species ;  therefore  read  Provencial  [Gat-ell,  Malone,  and  Steevens  adopted  this 
reading]  or  Provencal.  Douce  :  Change  is  unnecessary.  There  is  no  evidence  that 
Provence  was  ever  remarkable  for  its  roses ;  whereas,  Provins,  about  forty  miles 
from  Paris,  was  formerly  very  celebrated  for  the  growth  of  this  flower,  which,  accord- 
ing to  tradition,  was  imported  into  that  country  from  Syria  by  a  Count  de  Brie. 
Johnson  :  When  shoe-strings  were  worn  they  were  covered,  where  they  met  in  the 
middle,  by  a  ribbon  gathered  in  the  form  of  a  rose.  Clarendon  :  Cotgrave  gives 
both  localities  :  *  Rose  de  Provence.  The  Prouince  Rose,  the  double  Damaske  Rose;' 
and  '  Rose  de  Provins.  The  ordinarie  double  red  Rose.'  In  either  case  it  was  a 
large  rose.  The  Province  or  Damask  Rose  was  probably  the  better  known.  Gerarde, 
in  his  Herbal,  says  that  the  damask  rose  is  called  by  some  '  F.osa  provincialis.'  Fair- 
holt  {Costume  in  England,  p.  238)  quotes  from  Friar  Eacon's  Prophecy,  1604: 
'  When  roses  in  the  gardens  grew,  And  not  in  ribbons  on  a  shoe :  Now  ribbon  roses 
take  such  place,  That  garden  roses  want  their  grace.'  At  p.  579  he  gives  several 
instances  of  the  extravagances  to  which  this  fashion  led.  TSCHISCHWITZ  wildly  pro- 
poses and  adopts  *  provisional '  for  the  following  reason  :  '  The  passing  strangeness 
of  the  assumption  that  actors  procured  fresh  (?)  roses  from  the  town  of  Provins 
occurred  neither  to  Douce  nor  to  the  critics  who  follow  him.  It  is  probable  that 
nothing  more  than  parti-colored  paper  was  used  as  a  substitute.'  Kence,  '  Since 
"Provincial"  yields  no  meaning,  it  is  clear  that  Sh.  here  wrote  provisional  (like  the 
Italian  provisional),  that  is,  a  pair  of  makeshift-roses.' 

265.  razed]  Theobald:  I  once  suspected  that  we  ought  to  read  '  raised  shoes.' 
It  was  the  known  custom  of  the  tragedians  of  old,  that  they  might  nearer  resemble 
the  heroes  they  personated,  to  make  themselves  as  tall  in  stature  as  they  possi- 
bly could.  But  perhaps  it  may  have  been  '  rayed  shoes,'  that  is,  striped,  spangled. 
Steevens  :  '  Razed  shoes '  may  mean  slashed  shoes,  i.  e.  with  cuts  or  openings  in 
them.  Sh.  might  have  written  '  raised  shoes,'  i.  e.  shoes  with  high  heels.  Stubbes, 
Anatomic  of  Abuses,  1595,  has  a  chapter  on  corked  shoes,  '  which,'  he  says,  'beare 
them  up  two  inches  or  more  from  the  ground,  &c.,  some  of  red,  blacke,  &c,  razed, 
carued,  cut,  and  stitched,'  &c.  To  raze  and  to  race  alike  signify  to  streak.  See 
Markham's  Country  Farm:  * — baking  them  all  [i.e.  wafer   cakes)  together  bfi- 


26o  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 

Hon     Half  a  share.  267 

tween  two  irons,  having  within  them  many  raced  and  checkered  draughts  after 
the  manner  of  small  squares.'*  Hunter  (ii,  254)  cites  from  Peacham,  The  Truth 
of  Our  Times,  1638,  to  show  that  gallants  sometimes  paid  thirty  pounds  for  a 
pair  of  shoe-ties,  called  roses.  Collier  (ed.  2)  :  The  (MS)  reads  rais'd,  which 
is  possibly  right.  Burbage,  being  short,  may  have  worn  *  rais'd  shoes,'  but  still 
it  seems  unlikely  that  he  would  thus  be  made  to  advert  to  his  own  deficiency. 
Staunton  :  If  *  razed  '  be  right,  it  must  mean  slashed  or  opened  shoes.  Claren- 
don :  In  Randle  Holme's  Academy  of  Armory,  bk.  iii,  ch.  i,  p.  14,  we  find  : 
'  Pinked  or  raised  Shooes,  have  the  over  leathers  grain  part  cut  into  Roses,  or  other 
devices.' 

265.  cry]  Warburton  :  *  Allusion  to  a  pack  of  hounds,'  which,  says  Steevens, 
was  formerly  called  a  cry.  Here  it  means  a  troop  or  company.  See  Cor.  IV,  vi* 
168,  and  III,  iii,  120.  CLARENDON :  Compare  Cotgrave  :  *  Meute :  f.  A  kennell,  or 
crie  of  hounds.' 

267.  share]  Malone  :  The  actors  in  Shakespeare's  time  had  not  annual  salaries 
as  at  present.  The  whole  receipts  of  each  theatre  were  divided  into  shares,  of  which 
the  proprietors  of  the  theatre,  or  house-keepers,  as  they  were  called,  had  some :  and 
each  actor  had  one  or  more  shares,  or  part  of  a  share,  according  to  his  merit.  See  Var, 
1821,  iii,  [p.  171.  Also  Collier's  Annals  of  the  Stage,  iii,  p.  429.]  Clarendon; 
In  Henslowe's  Diary  (p.  5)  is  a  memorandum  of  ^15  being  lent  to  Francis  Hens- 
lowe  for  a  share  with  the  Queen's  players,  and  [p.  8,  three  years  afterwards,  in  1596] 
£9  for  a  half  share  with  another  company.  [In  Halliwell's  very  valuable  Illus- 
trations of  the  Life  of  Shakespeare,  1874,  pp.  86-91,  certain  petitions  and  answers 
are  reprinted,  that  were  filed  in  1635,  in  the  Lord  Chamberlain's  office,  and  although 
in  date  they  are  after  Shakespeare's  day,  they  nevertheless  throw  great  light  on  the 
early  financial  management  of  the  Globe  and  Blackfriars  theatres,  and  of  the  value 
of  the  shares  in  them.  The  substance  of  one  of  these  petitions,  which  shows  us 
what  the  house-keepers  were,  and  that  they  and  the  actors  were  not  always  in  accord, 
is  as  follows:  'Robert  Benefield,  Eyllardt  Swanston,  and  Thomas  Pollaid  doe 
further  humbly  represent  unto  your  Lordship.  That  the  houskeepers  beeing  but 
six  in  number,  vizt.,  Mr.  Cutbert  Burbadge,  Mrs.  Condall,  Mr.  Shankes,  Mr.  Taylor, 
Mr.  Lowen  and  Mr.  Robinson  (in  the  right  of  his  wife),  have  amongst  them  the 
full  moyety  of  all  the  galleries  and  boxes  in  both  houses,  and  of  the  tireing-house 
dore  at  the  Globe.  That  the  actors  have  the  other  moyety,  with  the  outer  dores ; 
but  in  regard  the  actors  are  halfe  as  many  more,  vizt.,  nine  in  number,  their  shares 
fall  shorter  and  are  a  great  deale  lesse  then  the  houskeepers ;  and  yet,  notwithstand- 
ing out  of  those  lesser  shares  the  sayd  actors  defray  all  charges  of  the  house  what- 
soever, vizt.,  wages  to  hired  men  and  boyes,  musicke,  lightes,  &c.,  amounting  to  900 
or  1000  li.  per  annum  or  thereaboutes,  beeing  3  li.  a  day  one  day  with  another; 
besides  the  extraordinary  charge  which  the  sayd  actors  are  wholly  at  for  apparell 
and  poetes,  &c.  Whereas  the  sayd  houskeepers  out  of  all  their  gaines  have  not 
till  Lady  Day  last  payd  above  65  li.  per  annum  rent  for  both  houses,  towardes  which 
they  rayse  betweene  20  and  30  li.  per  annum  from  the  tap  houses  and  a  tenement 
and  a  garden  belonging  to  the  premisses,  &c,  and  are  at  noe  other  charges  whatsoever, 
excepting  the  ordinary  reparations  of  the  houses.  Soe  that  upon  a  medium  made  of 
the  gaynes  of  the  howskeepers  and  those  of  the  actors  one  day  with  another  through* 
out  the  yeere,  the  petitioners  will  make  it  apparent  that  when  some  of  the  hous- 


act  in,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  26l 


[267.  4  share.'] 
kepers  share  \2s.  a  day  at  the  Globe,  the  actors  share  not  above  3  s.  And  then  what 
those  gaine  that  are  both  actors  and  houskeepers,  and  have  their  shares  in  both,  your 
Lordship  will  easily  judge,  and  therby  finde  the  modesty  of  the  petitioners  suite,  who 
desire  onely  to  buy  for  their  money  one  part  a  peece  from  such  three  of  the  sayd 
houskepers  as  are  fittest  to  spare  them,  both  in  respect  of  desert  and  otherwise,  vizt., 
Mr.  Shankes,  one  part  of  his  three,'  &c.  Mr  John  Shankes  not  unnaturally  remon- 
strated, and  it  is  from  his  answer  that  we  learn  the  value  of  a  '  share,'  not  only  of  a 
* houskeeper,'  but  in  a  'cry  of  players;'  he  states  that  'he  did  buy  [of  William 
Hemings]  one  part  hee  had  in  the  Blackfriers  for  about  six  yeeres  then  to  come  at 
the  yeerly  rent  of  6  li.  5  s.,  and  another  part  hee  then  had  in  the  Globe  for  about 
two  yeeres  to  come,  and  payd  him  for  the  same  two  partes  in  ready  moneys  156  It. 
.  .  .  about  eleven  months  since,  the  sayd  William  Hemings,  offering  to  sell  unto 
your  suppliant  the  remaining  partes  hee  then  had,  viz.,  one  in  the  Blackfriers,  wherin 
hee  had  then  about  five  yeeres  to  come,  and  two  in  the  Globe,  wherein  hee  had  then 
but  one  yeere  to  come,  your  suppliant  likewise  bought  the  same,  and  payd  for  them 
in  ready  moneys  more  350  /*'.,  all  which  moneys  so  disbursed  by  your  suppliant 
amount  to  506  /*.,'  &c.  Shankes,  who  had  been  one  of  Shakespeare's  fellow-actors, 
makes  an  appeal  ad  misericordiam  as  '  beeing  an  old  man  in  this  quality,  [see  Ham, 
Hi  ii,  333  and  417],  and  then  states  that  '  Mr.  Swanston  one  of  them  who  is  most 
violent  in  this  busines,'  « hath  further  had  and  receaved  this  last  yeere  above  34  li, 
for  the  profitt  of  a  third  part  of  one  part  in  the  Blackfriers  which  hee  bought  for  20 
li*  Nor  did  *  Cutbert  Burbadge  and  Winifred  his  brothers  wife,  and  William  his 
sonne '  submit  any  more  quietly  than  John  Shankes  to  be  '  trampled  upon,'  as  they 
term  it,  and  their  answer  is  a  Shakespearian  discovery  so  recent  and  so  interesting 
not  only  in  its  familiar  allusion  to  Shakespeare  as  a  '  deserveing  man,'  but  also  in  its 
reference  to  the  Children  of  the  Queen's  Chapel,  that  the  following  extract  will  not 
be  deemed  too  long  nor  out  of  place :  ' The  father  of  us,  Cutbert  and  Richard  Bur« 
badge,  was  the  first  builder  of  playhowses  and  was  himselfe  in  his  younger  yeeres  a 
player.  The  Theater  hee  built  [the  first  ever  built  in  England,  in  1576.  Ed.]  with 
many  hundred  pounds  taken  up  at  interest.  The  players  that  lived  in  those  first 
times  had  onely  the  profitts  arising  from  the  dores,  but  now  the  players  receave  all 
the  comniings  in  at  the  dores  to  themselves  and  halfe  the  galleries  from  the  hbus- 
kepers.  Hee  built  this  house  upon  leased  ground,  by  which  meanes  the  landlord 
and  hee  had  a  great  suite  in  law,  and,  by  his  death,  the  like  troubles  fell  on  us,  his 
sonnes ;  wee  then  bethougt  us  of  altering  from  thence,  and  at  like  expence  built  the 
Globe,  with  more  summes  of  money  taken  up  at  interest,  which  lay  heavy  on  us 
many  yeeres ;  and  to  ourselves  wee  joined  those  deserveing  men,  Shakspere,  Hem- 
ings, Condall,  Philips  and  others,  partners  in  the  profittes  of  that  they  call  the  House, 
but  makeing  the  leases  for  twenty-oue  yeeres  hath  beene  the  destruction  of  ourselves 
and  others  for  they  dyeing  at  the  expiration  of  three  or  foure  yeeres  of  their  lease, 
the  subsequent  yeeres  became  dissolved  to  strangers  .  .  .  Thus,  Right  Honorable,  as 
concerning  the  Globe,  where  wee  ourselves  are  but  lessees.  Now  for  the  Black- 
friers, that  is  our  inheritance,  our  father  purchased  it  at  extreame  rates,  and  made  it 
into  a  playhouse  with  great  charge  and  troble ;  which  after  was  leased  out  to  one 
Evans  that  first  sett  up  the  boyes  commonly  called  the  Queenes  Majesties  Children 
of  the  Chappell.  In  process  of  time,  the  boyes  growing  up  to  bee  men,  which  were 
Underwood,  Field,  Ostler,  and  were  taken  to  strengthen  the  Kings  service ;  and  the 


262  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  ii. 

Ham.    A  whole  one,  I. 

For  thou  dost  know,  O  Damon  dear, 

This  realm  dismantled  was  270 

Of  Jove  himself;  and  now  reigns  here 
A  very,  very — pajock. 

268.  A  whole  one,  I.]   Ay,  a  whole  Paiocke  Fx,   Cald.   Knt.     Pcjot  ke  F . 

one.  Han.     A  whole  one,  ay.  Mai.  conj.  paicock  Q'76.     pecock   Q'95.     peacock 

Knt  i,  Sing.  White,  Ktly,  Huds.  Pope,  Warb.    Johns.   Cap.  Jen.*  Stcev. 

270.  271.  This. ..himself]  One  line,  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Huds.  paddock  Theob. 
Ff.  Han.  El.  Ktly.    kedjocke  (i.  e.  hedgehog) 

272.  very,  very]  very-very  Sta.  S.    Evans,      padge-haivk    Id.     (with- 

pajock']  F3F4,  Rowe,  Dyce,  Sta.         drawn). 
White,  Glo.+,  Del.  Mob.    paiock  Qq. 

more  to  strengthen  the  service,  the  boyes  dayly  wearing  out,  it  was  considered  that 
house  would  be  as  fitt  for  ourselves,  and  soe  purchased  the  lease  remaining  from 
Evans  with  our  money,  and  placed  men  players,  which  were  Hemings,  Condali, 
Shakspeare,  &c.'  Ed.] 

268.  I]  Malone  :  It  should  be,  I  think, — *  A  whole  one ; — ay, — '  [Most  improp- 
erly— Dyce,  Gloss."].  Steevens:  It  means  no  more  than,  *I  think  myself  entitled 
to  a  whole  one.'  Caldecott  :  *  A  whole  one,  say  I.'  Staunton  :  Malone's 
emondation  will  strike  many  as  the  more  likely  reading,  White  thinks  it  strange 
that  modern  editions  should  retain  '  I '  of  QqFf.     Stratmann  agrees  with  Malone. 

269-271.  Dyce:  Another  quotation,  surely ;  *  pajock,'  of  course,  excepted. 

271.  Jove]  Hudson:  The  meaning  is,  that  Denmark  was  robbed  of  a  king  who 
had  the  majesty  of  Jove. 

272.  pajock]  Pope  :  This  alludes  to  the  fable  of  the  birds  choosing  a  king ;  in- 
stead of  the  eagle,  a  peacock.  Theobald  (Sh.  Restored,  p.  94)  proposed :  First, 
tneacock,  a  *  cravenly '  bird,  and  metaphorically  a  dastardly  effeminate  fellow;  Second, 
paddock,  a  toad ;  Third,  puttock,  a  ravenous  kite,  a  devourer  of  the  state  and  people. 
Of  these  three  Theobald  repeated  only  the  second  in  his  edition,  with  the  note  :  *  I 
think  Ham.  is  setting  his  father's  and  uncle's  characters  in  contrast  to  each  other : 
and  means  to  say,  that  by  his  father's  death  the  state  was  stripped  of  a  godlike  mon- 
arch, and  that  now  in  his  stead  reigned  the  most  despicable  poisonous  animal  that 
could  be ;  a  mere  paddock  or  toad.  This  word  I  take  to  be  of  Hamlet's  own  sub- 
stituting.    The  verses  repeated,  seem  to  be  from  some  old  ballad ;  in  which,  rhyme 

being  necessary,  I  doubt  not  but  the  last  verse  ran  thus :   A  very,  very ass. 

Farmer:  A  peacock  seems  proverbial  for  a  fool.  Thus,  Gascoigne,  in  his  Weeds  : 
*  A  theefe,  a  cowarde,  and  a  peacocke  foole.'  Malone  :  Sh.  means  that  the  King 
struts  about  with  a  false  pomp,  to  which  he  has  no  right.  See  Florio,  1598 :  *  Pauon- 
neggiare.  To  iet  vp  and  down  fondly  gazing  vpon  himselfe,  as  a  peacocke  doth.' 
Martinus  Scriblerus  {Explanations,  &c,  Edinburgh,  1814) :  The  original  word 
soundeth  to  me  like  a  foreign  word  introduced  into  our  language.  Following  out 
this  hint,  if  thou  wilt  look,  reader,  into  any  Italian  Dictionary,  thou  wilt  see  that  the 
word  baiocco  means  a  piece  of  money,  of  about  three  farthings  value,  and  there  was 
a  silver  coin  of  that  value  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  time,  which  seemed  to  figure  in 
Shakespeare's  imagination  as  something  abundantly  ridiculous.     See  King  John,  I. 


act  in,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  263 


[272.  'pajock.'] 
i,  143.  When  Hamlet,  therefore,  calls  the  King  a  paiock,  he  merely  means  to  use 
one  of  the  most  contemptuous  expressions  which  occurred  to  him  in  the  moment ; 
so  that  I  would  not  alter  the  text.  Dyce  :  ■  Pajock '  is  certainly  equivalent  to  pea- 
cock. I  have  often  heard  the  lower  classes  in  the  north  of  Scotland  call  the  peacock 
— the  ■  pea.-joc&;'  and  their  almost  invariable  name  for  the  turkey-cock  is  « bubbly-jock.' 
Halliwell  quotes  Dyce,  and  adds :  there  can  be  little  doubt  but  that  the  word  in 
the  text  is  a  similarly  corrupted  form.  Elze  :  If  paddock  be  inadmissible,  bawcock 
may  be  suggested.  See  Hen.  V:  IV,  i,  44 ;  and  Twelfth  Night,  III,  iv,  125.  Eden 
Warwick  (N.  &  Qu.,  7  Dec.  '61),  finding  from  Bunsen's  Egypt's  Place,  &>c.  that 
the  word  Pataikoi,  the  name  of  the  ancient  Phoenician  gods,  still  survives  at  the 
present  day  in  Rome,  applied  to  a  coin  with  a  hideous,  worn-out  impression,  which 
is  called  a  *  Patacco,'  suggested  that  'paiocke '  is  a  misprint  for  patokie.  Leo  [N. 
cr*  Qu.,  Jan.  21,  '65)  :  *  Hamlet  means  ass,  and  does  not  intend  to  weaken  what  he 
means  by  supplying  it  by  such  an  innocent  word  as  "  peacock,"  "  paddock,"  &c.  He 
says,  "  A  very,  very  .  .  .  ,"  and  then  he  says  nothing  more,  but  hems  in  a  rather  cha« 
racteristic  way ;  and  so  gives  to  the  hearer  the  opportunity  to  supply  by  rhyming 
what  he  has  left  unsaid.  And  so  I  suppose  the  word  in  question  did  not  belong  to 
the  verse,  but  was  a  stage-direction,  which  I  should  like  to  understand  as — "  hiccup." 
"  A  very,  very  . . .  \hiccups."  *  [Can  this  be  surpassed  ?  Ed.]  Latham  (N.  &■»  Qu.t 
12  Aug.  '71)  suggests  Polack.  In  Hamlet  Danicisms  may  be  expected,  and  this 
word,  besides  its  primary,  national  meaning,  had,  owing  to  the  ill  feeling  between 
the  Poles  and  the  Danes,  a  secondary  meaning  equivalent  to  blackguard  or  Philistine. 
T.  McGrath  (N.  &  Qu.,  23  Sept.  '71)  suggests  paj-ock,  i.e.paj,  equivalent  to  patch, 
a  contemptuous  fellow,  and  -ock,  diminutive.  Hence  *  pajock'  or  patchock,  a  paltry 
clown ;  and  cites  Spenser,  A  View  of  the  present  State  of  Ireland,  p.  636,  Globe  ed.  \-^ 
*  Some  in  Leinster . . .  are  degenerate,  and  growen  to  be  as  very  patchockes  as  the  wild 
Irish.'  Keightley  {Expositor,  293) :  I  agree  with  Theobald,  as  the  King  is  afterwards 
called  a  ■  paddock,'  and  there  is  probably  an  allusion  to  the  poisoning.  Tschisch- 
WITZ :  The  word  is  Polish,  pajuk,  pajok,  and  means  a  servant,  a  doorkeeper,  like 
hajduk.  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  at  what  period  Haiducks  were  introduced 
into  European  courts,  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  it  took  place  towards  the  close  of 
the  sixteenth  century.  Anonymous  {New  Shakespearian  Interpretations,  Edin. 
Rev.  Oct.  1872) :  All  agree  that  the  various  spellings  in  the  QqFf  indicate  one  word : 
peacock;  in  discussing  this  passage  critics  have  forgotten  the  character  that  the  peacock 
held  in  the  natural  history,  as  well  as  in  the  popular  belief,  of  the  time.  The  most 
popular  manual  of  natural  history  in  Shakespeare's  day  gives  the  following  account : 
« And  the  pecocke  is  a  bird  that  loveth  not  his  young,  for  the  male  searcheth  out  the 
female,  and  seeketh  out  her  egges  for  to  break  them,  that  he  may  so  occupy  him  the 
more  in  his  lecherie.  And  the  female  dreadeth  that,  and  hideth  busily  her  egges, 
lest  the  pecocke  might  soone  find  them.  And  Aristotle  sayth  that  the  pecocke  hath 
an  unsteadfast  and  evill  shapen  head,  as  it  were  the  head  of  a  serpent,  and  with  a 
crest.  And  he  hath  a  simple  pace,  and  a  small  necke,  and  areared,  and  a  blew 
breast,  and  a  taile  ful  of  bewty,  and  ho  hath  the  foulest  feet  and  riveled  .  .  .  and  he 
hath  an  horrible  voice.  And  as  one  sayeth,  he  hath  a  voice  of  a  feend,  the  head  of 
a  serpent,  and  the  pace  of  a  theefe.  And  Plinius  sayth  that  the  pecocke  hath  envie 
to  man's  profit,  and  swalloweth  his  owne  durt :  for  it  is  full  medicinable,  but  it  is 
seldom  found.'    This  last  is  a  curiously  dark  touch  of  malevolence.     Ham.  could 


264 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Hot.     You  might  have  rhymed. 

Ham.     O  good  Horatio,  I'll  take  the  ghost's  word  for  a 
thousand  pound.     Didst  perceive  ?  275 

Hot.     Very  well,  my  lord. 

Ham.    Upon  the  talk  of  the  poisoning  ? 

Hor.     I  did  very  well  note  him. 

Ham.    Ah.  ha !    Come,  some  music !  come,  the  record- 
ers ! —  280 
For  if  the  king  like  not  the  comedy, 

Why  then,  belike, — he  likes  it  not,  perdy. 
Come,  some  music ! 


Reenter  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern. 

Guil.  Good  my  lord,  vouchsafe  me  a  word  with  you. 

Ham.  Sir,  a  whole  history. 

GuiL  The  king,  sir, — 

Ham,  Ay,  sir,  what  of  him  ? 


285 


275.  pound]  pounds  F4,  Rowe+. 

277.  poisoning  f\  Ff.  poyfning.  Q3Q-> 
poyfoning,  Q4.  poifoning.  Q$.  poison- 
ing,—  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  El.  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Ktly,  Del. 
Huds. 

279.  Ah,  ha  f]  Jen.  Ah  ha,Q<\.  Oh, 
^/FtF2F3.  Oh,ha /FA,Rov?e+.  Ha, 
'ha  /  Cap. 

come,  the]  com  the  Q4. 


281.  like]  likes  Q'76. 

282.  perdy]  Perdie  FtQs,  Cald. 
Re-enter...]  Dyce.    Enter...  Qq. 

Enter...   (after  line   278)  Ff,  Rowe+, 
Cap.     After  perdy  Johns.    Steev.  Var. 
Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  El.  White. 
284.  vouchsafe]  voutfafe  Qq. 

286.  sir, — ]  sir —  Rowe.    fir.  QqFf. 

287.  him  ?]  him.  F2F3F4> 


not  have  selected  the  name  of  bird  or  beast  that  expressed  with  greater  emphasis 
the  hateful  union  of  corrupted  passion  and  evil  life  that  now  usurped  the  throne 
and  bed  of  Denmark.  John  Davies  (N.  &»  Qu.,  11  March,  '76) :  This  is  prob 
ably  the  Low  German  (Friesic) /<?;>£,  or  pajek,  a  boy.  In  Sweden  the  modern  form 
is  pojke,  but  the  provincial  and  older  form  is  pajke  =payek.  In  the  north  of  Eng- 
land it  is  shortened  into  pack,  and  in  Denmark  into  pog.  In  all  these  countries 
it  is  a  term  of  reproach.  A  northern  peasant  woman  in  England  will  call  her  child 
a  dirty  or  a  naughty  pack,  especially  when  some  offence  against  cleanliness  has  been 
committed.  It  is  often  pronounced  broadly,  paack,  not  unlike  paiocke.  In  the 
present  passage  it  is  equivalent  to  a  mere  dirty  boy,  probably  with  some  reference  to 
his  sensual  habits.     [I  think  Dyce's  testimony  is  conclusive.  Ed.] 

279.  recorders]  See  notes  on  line  329 

282.  belike]  Johnson  :  Ham.  was  going  on  to  draw  the  consequence,  when  the 
courtiers  entered. 

282.  perdy]  Steevens  :  The  corruption  of  par  Dieu.  Collier  :  This  couplet 
is  probably  a  quotation.  Tschischwitz  :  The  word  that  Ham.  adds  in  this  line 
is  not '  perdy,'  but  probably  '  likes;'  perhaps  brooks  is  the  word  intimated. 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.J 


HAMLET 


265 


Gut/.     Is  in  his  retirement  marvellous  distempered 

Ham.     With  drink,  sir  ? 

Gut/.     No,  my  lord,  rather  with  j^holen,-  ^^^^  290 

Ham.  Your  wisdom  should  show  itself  more  richer  to 
signify  this  to  his  doctor;  for,  for  me  to  put  him  to  his  pur- 
gation would  perhaps  plunge  him  into  far  more  choler. 

Gut/.  Good  my  lord,  put  your  discourse  into  some 
frame,  and  start  not  so  wildly  from  my  affair.  295 

Ham.     I  am  tame,  sir;  pronounce. 

Gut/.  The  queen,  your  mother,  in  most  great  affliction 
of  spirit,  hath  sent  me  to  you. 

Ham.    You  are  welcome. 

GuU.     Nay,  good  my  lord,  this  courtesy  is  not  of  the  300 
right  breed.    If  it  shall  please  you  to  make  me  a  wholesome 
answer,  I  will  do  your  mother's  commandment ;  if  not,  your 
pardon  and  my  return  shall  be  the  end  of  my  business. 

Ham.     Sir,  I  cannot 


288.  distempered.'] 
Rowe+,  Jen. 

290.  rather]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  El.  Sta.  Dyce  ii, 
Huds. 

291.  should]  would  Seymour. 

more  richer]  more  rich  FaF  F  , 
Rowe  + .     richer  Q'  76. 

292.  his  doctor]  this  doctor  F..  the 
doctor  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 
Sing.  Ktly,  Cam.  Cla. 

for,  for]  for  for  F,.  for  FaF3F4, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 


distemper* d—  293.  far]  farre  FXF3F  .     Om.   Qq, 


Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  El. 
Sta.  Huds. 

294.  295.   Good. ..affair.]    Prose,   Ff. 
Two  lines,  the  first  ending  frame.  Qq. 

295.  start]  flare  Qq. 
my]  the  Coll.  (MS). 
affair]  bufinefs  Q'76. 

299.  [with  great  Ceremony.  Cap. 

302.  commandment]  commaundement 

commandement  QF _. 

303.  of  my]  of  Qq,  Cap.   oftheQib. 


commandment  FxFa,  White. 


288.  marvellous]  See  II,  i,  3. 

288.  distempered]  Caldecott:  Discomposed,  overtaken.  'Spinache  extin- 
guish choler,  and  is  good  for  the  breast  and  loonges,  that  be  distempered  with  heat.* 
— Newton's  Approved  Medicines,  1580.  CLARENDON:  It  was  used  both  of  mental 
and  bodily  disorder,  and  Ham.  pretends  to  understand  it  in  the  latter  sense.  See 
Temp.  IV,  i,  145 ;  2  Hen.  IV;  III,  i,  41. 

289.  drink]  Johnson  :  Ham.  takes  particular  care  that  his  uncle's  love  of  drink 
shall  not  be  forgotten. 

291.  should]  See  II,  ii,  201. 

291.  more  richer]  See  II,  i,  II. 

292.  purgation]  Clarendon  :  A  play  upon  the  legal  and  medical  senses  of  the 
word. 

303.  pardon]  See  I,  ii,  56. 
23 


266 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Guil.    What,  my  lord  ?  305 

Ham,  Make  you  a  wholesome  answer;  my  wit's  dis- 
eased ;  but,  sir,  such  answer  as  I  can  make,  you  shall  com- 
mand; or  rather,  as  you  say,  my  mother;  therefore  no 
more,  but  to  the  matter;  my  mother,  you  say, — 

Ros.     Then  thus  she  says:  your  behaviour  hath  struck  310 
her  into  amazement  and  admiration. 

Ham.  O  wonderful  son,  that  can  so  astonish  a  mother ! 
But  is  there  no  sequel  at  the  heels  of  this  mother's  admira- 
tion ?     Impart. 

Ros.    She  desires  to  speak  with  you  in  her  closet,  ere  315 
you  go  to  bed. 

Ham.  We  shall  obey,  were  she  ten  times  our  mother. 
Have  you  any  further  trade  with  us  ? 

Ros,     My  lord,  you  once  did  love  me. 

Ham.     So  I  do  still,  by  these  pickers  and  stealers.  320 


305.  Guil.]  Ros.  Qq,  Cap. 
lord?]  lord.  Qq. 

306.  wit's']  wits  QqFxF2F3. 

307.  answer]   an/were  Q2Q3Q..    an- 
fwers  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt. 

308.  as  you]  you  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Knt. 

309.  say, — ]  say —  Rowe.  fay.  QqFf. 

310.  struck]  Jlrooke  Qq.   Jlroke  FxFa 
F,.     strook  Cap. 

312.  so]  thus  Q'76. 


312.  astonish]  Jlonijh  Qq.  'sionish 
Cap.  Jen. 

313.  mother's  admiration]  Mother 
admiration  F  .  Mother- admiration  F  , 
Rowe,  Pope, 

admiration  ?]  admiration,  Q2Q,. 

314.  Impart.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe+,  Knt, 
Dycei,  Sta.  Glo. 

-  320.  So  I]  And  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Sta.  White,  Ktly, 
Dyce  ii,  Del. 


305.  Guil.]  Capell  (i,  138) :  It  is  plain  from  his  last  speech  that  Guil.  is  not 
pleased  with  his  reception,  and  the  answer  he  receives  puts  him  quite  out  of 
humor,  which  answer  should  be  spoke  somewhat  brusquely,  and  the  receiver  make 
a  bow,  and  retire.  Ham.  answers  to  Ros.  without  considering  which  of  them 
spoke.     [See  Textual  Notes.  Ed.] 

311.  amazement]  Clarendon:  Perturbation  of  mind  from  whatever  cause. 
Compare  I  Peter,  iii,  6. 

311.  admiration]  See  I,  ii,  192.  Delius:  Each  tries  to  outdo  the  other  in  the 
use  of  the  affected  phraseology  of  the  court. 

315.  closet]  See  II,  i,  77* 

317.  shall]  See  II,  i,  3. 

318.  trade]  Johnson:  Business,  dealing. 

320.  So]  Coleridge  :  I  never  heard  an  actor  give  this  word  its  proper  emphasis. 
Shakespeare's  meaning  is — 'loved  you?  Hum! — so  I  do  still,'  &c.  'There  has 
been  no  change  in  my  opinion  : — I  think  as  ill  of  you  as  I  did.'  Else  Hamlet  tells 
an  ignoble  falsehood,  and  a  useless  one,  as  the  last  speech  to  Guildenstern, — '  Why, 
look  you  now,'  &c. — proves.     Strachey  (p.  68)  :  I  should  rather  say,  that  the  last 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  26j 

Ros.     Good  my  lord,  what  is  your  cause  of  distemper?  321 
you  do  surely  bar  the  door  upon  your  own  liberty,  if  you 
deny  your  griefs  to  your  friend. 

Ham.     Sir,  I  lack  advancement. 

Ros.     How  can  that  be,  when  you  have  the  voice  of  the  325 
king  himself  for  your  succession  in  Denmark  ? 

Ham.    Ay,  sir,  but  'while  the  grass   grows/ — the  pro 
verb  is  something  musty. — 

Re-enter  Players  with  recorders. 

Oh,  the  recorders !  let  me  see  one. — To  withdraw  with  you ; — 

322.   surely. ..upon]     freely. ..of    Ff,  Qq,  Cap.     Enter  one  with  a  Recorder. 

Rowe,    Cald.    Knt,    Del.      surely... of  Ff. 

Pope+,  White,  Huds.  329.  recorders']    Recorder  Ff,   Cald. 

bar]  but  bar  Reed  '03,  Bos.  Coll.  Knt. 

Sing.  Ktly.  see  one.     To]  Pope,    fee  one,  to 

327.  sir]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Cald.  Knt,  Qq.  fee,  to  F^.  fee  to  F3F4-  set  one. 
Dyce  i,  Sta.  To  Rowe. 

grows, — ]  grows —  Pope,  growes,  see  one]  see  Cald.  Knt. 

Q2Q3Q4FxFaF3-     £™^»QSF4-  you;— ]  you;  Q'76.  you,  Qq[F{. 

328.  Re-enter...]  Dyce.  Enter  the  you — Rowe-!-,  Jen.  you?  White,  you. 
Players  with  Recorders,  (after  line  326)         Ktly,  Del. 

gleam  of  Hamlet's  old  regard  for  his  schoolfellows  shines  out  here  for  a  moment; 
but  it  fades  again  instantly,  and  he  ends  with  a  jesting  allusion  to  the  catechism,— 
intended  to  avow,  rather  than  to  conceal,  his  feeling  that  he  is  using  his  tongue  in  a 
way  forbidden,  as  much  as  picking  and  stealing  are  to  his  hands. 

320.  pickers  and  stealers]  Johnson:  Hands.  Whalley:  The  phrase  is 
taken  from  our  church  catechism,  where  the  catechumen,  in  his  duty  to  his  neighbor, 
is  taught  to  keep  his  hands  from  picking  and  stealing.  Nares  :  Examples  are  com- 
mon of  swearing  by  the  fingers,  called  in  cant  phrase,  '  the  ten  bones.'  See  2  Hen. 
VI:  I,  iii,  193.  Caldecott:  '  Pykare  or  lytylle  theef.' — Prompt.  Parv.  Claren- 
don :  *  By  this  hand !'  is  a  frequent  form  of  asseveration.  See  Temp.  Ill,  ii,  56,  78; 
Mer.  of  Ven.  V,  i,  161. 

321.  your  cause]  Clarendon:  The  cause  of  your  disorder.  So  'your  sover- 
eignty of  reason,'  in  I,  iv,  73. 

325.  voice]  Malone:  See  I,  ii,  109. 

327.  proverb]  Malone:  The  remainder  of  this  old  proverb  is  preserved  in 
Whetstone's  Promos  and  Cassandra,  1578:  '  Whylst  grass  doth  growe,  oft  sterves 
the  seely  steede.'  Again,  in  The  Paradise  of  Daintie  Devises,  1578 :  «  To  whom  of 
old  this  proverbe  well  it  serves,  While  grass  doth  growe,  the  silly  horse  he  starves.' 
Ham.  means  to  intimate  that  whilst  he  is  waiting  for  the  succession  to  the  throne 
of  Denmark,  he  may  himself  be  taken  off  by  death. 

329.  recorders]  Dyce  :  The  change  from  the  plural  of  the  Qq  to  the  singular 
of  the  Ff  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt  we  must  attribute  to  the  '  company,'  who 
were  obliged  to  be  economical  both  of  persons  and  properties.    A  single  recorder. 


268  HAMLET  [act  in.  sc.  ii 

why  do  you  go  about  to  recover  the  wind  of  me,  as  if  you  330 
would  drive  me  into  a  toil  ? 

indeed,  suffices  for  the  mere  business  of  this  scene ;  but  the  alteration  is  quite  at 
variance  with  what  precedes  in  line  280. 

329.  recorders]  Chappell  {Popular  Music  of  the  * Olden  Time*  p.  246,  and 
note) :  Old  English  musical  instruments  were  commonly  made  of  three  or  four 
different  sizes,  so  that  a  player  might  take  any  of  the  four  parts  that  were  required 
to  fill  up  the  harmony.  So  Violins,  Lutes,  Recorders,  Flutes,  Shawms,  &c,  have 
been  described  by  some  writers  in  a  manner  which  (to  those  unacquainted  with 
this  peculiarity)  has  appeared  irreconcilable  with  other  accounts.  Sh.  (in  Hamlet') 
speaks  of  the  Recorder  as  a  little  pipe,  and  says,  in  Mid.  N.  D., '  he  hath  played 
on  his  prologue  like  a  child  on  a  recorder;'  but  in  an  engraving  of  the  instru- 
ment* it  reaches  from  the  lip  to  the  knee  of  the  performer;  and  among  those 
left  by  Henry  VIII  were  Recorders  of  box,  oak,  and  ivory,  great  and  small,  two 
base  Recorders  of  walnut,  and  one  great  base  Recorder.  Recorders  and  (English) 
Flutes  are  to  outward  appearance  the  same,  although  Lord  Bacon  in  his  Naturat 
History,  cent,  iii,  sec.  221,  says  the  Recorder  hath  a  less  bore,  and  a  greater  above 
and  below.  The  number  of  holes  for  the  fingers  is  the  same,  and  the  scale,  the 
compass,  and  the  manner  of  playing,  the  same.  Salter  describes  the  recorder,  from 
which  the  instrument  derives  its  name,  as  situate  in  the  upper  part  of  it,  **.  e.  between 
the  hole  below  the  mouth  and  the  highest  hole  for  the  finger.  He  says,  '  Of  the 
kinds  of  music,  vocal  has  always  had  the  preference  in  esteem,  and  in  consequence 
the  Recorder,  as  approaching  nearest  to  the  sweet  delightfulness  of  the  voice,  ought 
to  have  first  place  in  opinion,  as  we  see  by  the  universal  use  of  it  confirmed.'1 
Ward,  the  military  instrument-maker,  informs  me  that  he  has  seen  *  old  English 
flutes '  with  a  hole  bored  through  the  side,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  instrument,  cov- 
ered with  a  thin  piece  of  skin,  like  gold-beater's  skin.  I  suppose  this  would  give 
somewhat  the  effect  of  the  quill  or  reed  in  the  Hautboy,  and  that  these  were  Re- 
corders.    Recorders  were  used  for  teaching  birds  to  pipe. 

329.  To  withdraw  with  you]  Capell  (Notes,  i,  138) :  That  is,  to  have  done 
with  you,  draw  towards  an  end  with  you;  and  he  singles  out  Guil.,  as  of  a  darker 
and  more  treacherous  temper  than  the  other.  [Capell  marks  the  phrase  as  an 
Aside.]  M.  Mason:  These  words  were  probably  spoken  to  the  Players,  whom 
Ham.  wished  to  get  rid  of.  Read,  therefore,  '  So,  withdraw  you ;'  or  *  So  with- 
draw, will  you?'  Steevens:  Here  Malone  added  the  stage-direction:  [Taking 
Cuildenstern  aside. ~\  But  the  foregoing  obscure  words  may  refer  to  some  gesture 
which  Guil.  had  used,  and  which  at  first  was  interpreted  by  Ham.  into  a  signal  for 
him  to  attend  the  speaker  into  another  room.  'To  withdraw  with  you?'  (says  he). 
'Is  that  your  meaning?'  But  finding  his  friends  continue  to  move  mysteriously 
about  him,  he  adds,  with  some  resentment,  a  question  more  easily  intelligible. 
Caldecott  :  The  two  royal  emissaries  at  first  only  request  that  the  Prince  would 
'vouchsafe  them  a  word;'  and  they  then  acquaint  him  with  the  King's  rage,  and  the 
Queen's  command  to  visit  her.  They  then,  by  a  waving  of  the  hand,  or  some  suck 
signal,  as  the  exclamation  of  Ham.  denotes,  intimate  that  he  should  remove  to  a 

•  See  'The  Genteel  Companion  for  the  Recorder/  by  Humphrey  Salter,  1683. 


ACT  in,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  269 

Guil.     O,  my  lord,  if  my  duty  be  too  bold,  my  love  is  332 
too  unmannerly. 

Ham,     I  do   not  well  understand  that.     Will  you  play 
upon  this  pipe  ?  335 


more  retired  quarter.  Although  aware  that  the  above,  their  only  proper  business, 
could  not  require  any  private  communication,  he  at  first,  in  gentle  expostulation, 
reproaches  them ;  but  presently  recollecting  their  insidious,  aims,  and  feeling  at  the 
same  time,  as  an  indignity,  the  freedom  taken  in  thus  beckoning  him  to  withdraw, 
he  in  a  moment  assumes  a  different  tone;  and,  with  the  most  galling  sneer  and 
interrogatory,  heaps  upon  them  the  utmost  contempt  and  contumely.  Singer  :  It 
means  no  more  than  '  to  draw  back  with  you,'  to  leave  that  scent  or  trail.  It  is  a 
hunting  term,  like  that  which  follows.  Staunton  :  It  is  simply  a  direction  ad- 
dressed to  the  Players  who  bring  in  the  recorders,  and  the  true  reading :  *  So,— 
[taking  a  recorder]  withdraw  with  you.'  What  subsequently  transpires  between 
Ham.  and  his  schoolfellows  could  hardly  have  taken  place  in  presence  of  the 
Players,  and  the  disputed  words  may  have  been  intended  to  mark  the  departure  of 
the  latter.  Cambridge  Editors  :  If  the  reading  and  punctuation  given  in  our  text 
be  right,  the  words  seem  to  be  addressed  to  Guil.  Clarendon  :  For  this  use  of  the 
infinitive,  compare  III,  iv,  216;  and  King  John,  I,  i,  256.  Moberly:  Just  step 
aside  for  a  moment.  Tschischwitz  :  Perhaps  we  should  read,  *Got  withdraw 
with  you.' 

330.  wind]  Singer  :  This  phrase  is  borrowed  from  hunting,  and  means  to  get 
the  animal  pursued  to  run  with  the  wind,  that  it  may  not  scent  the  toil  or  its  pur- 
suers. *  Observe  how  the  wind  is,  that  you  may  set  the  net  so  as  the  hare  and  wind 
may  come  together ;  if  the  wind  be  sideways  it  may  do  well  enough,  but  never  if 
it  blow  over  the  net  into  the  hare's  face,  for  he  will  scent  both  it  and  you  at  a  dis* 
tance.' — Gentleman's  Recreation.     Moberly  :  As  if  you  were  stalking  a  deer. 

333.  unmannerly]  Warburton  :  If  my  duty  to  the  king  makes  me  press  you 
a  little,  my  love  to  you  makes  me  still  more  importunate.  If  that  makes  me  bold, 
this  makes  me  even  unmannerly.  Heath  (p.  540) :  If  you  think  me  too  bold  in 
what  I  have  said  by  the  command  of  your  mother,  to  offer  anything  on  the  single 
motive  of  my  love  to  your  person  would  be  unmannerly.  Tyrwhitt  :  Read — my 
love  is  not  unmannerly.  My  conception  of  the  passage  is,  that,  in  consequence  of 
Hamlet's  moving  to  take  the  recorder,  Guil.  also  shifts  his  ground,  in  order  to  place 
himself  beneath  the  prince  in  his  new  position.  This,  Ham.  ludicrously  calls  '  going 
about  to  recover  the  wind,'  &c,  and  Guil.  may  answer  properly  enough,  and  like  a 
courtier :  if  my  duty  to  the  king  makes  me  too  bold  in  pressing  you,  upon  a  disagree- 
able subject,  my  love  to  you  will  make  me  not  unmannerly,  in  showing  you  all  pos- 
sible marks  of  respect  and  attention.  Caldecott:  If  my  sense  of  duty  have  led 
me  too  far,  it  is  affection  and  regard  for  you  that  makes  the  carriage  of  that  duty 
border  on  disrespect.  See  *  Forgive  me  this  my  virtue,'  III,  iv,  152.  Singer: 
Ham.  may  say  with  propriety,  'I  do  not  well  understand  that.'  Keightley:  *I 
read,  "  If  my  duty  be  too  bold,  my  love  [is]  too  unmannerly. .  .  ."  '  Clarendon: 
Probably  Sh.  intended  Guildenstern's  words  to  express  an  unmeaning  compliment. 
As  Ham.  did  not  well  understand  them,  commentators  may  be  excused  from  at- 
tempting to  explain  them. 
23* 


270  HAMLET  [act  III,  SC  ii. 

Gut/.     My  lord,  I  cannot.  336 

Ham.     I  pray  you. 

GuiL     Believe  me,  I  cannot. 

Ham.     I  do  beseech  you. 

GuiL     I  know  no  touch  of  it,  my  lord.  340 

Ham.  'Tis  as  easy  as  lying ;  govern  these  ventages  with 
your  fingers  and  thumb,  give  it  breath  with  your  mouth, 
and  it  will  discourse  most  eloquent  music.  Look  you, 
these  are  the  stops. 

339.  do]  Om.  Qfi,.  Cap.  Dyce,  White,  Glo.  Del.  Huds. 

341.  'Tis]  It  is  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  El.  342.  and  thumb]  and  thumbe  F,F2 
White,  Del.  Cam.                                              F3.     &>  the  vmber  Q2Q2,  Cap.     and  the 

ventages]    Ventiges    Ff,   Rowe,        thumb  QAQ5> 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  343.  eloquent]    excellent   Ff,   RoweP 

342.  fingers]  finger  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  i,         Cald.  Knt,  White, 

336.  Guil.]  Dr  B.  Nicholson:  Hitherto  Ros.  and  Guild,  have  so  uniformly 
worked  in  common  that  the  artistic  management  of  the  scene,  as  v/ell  as  ths  fuller 
force  thereby  gained,  demands  that  Hamlet's  request  be  addressed  first  to  one  and 
then  to  the  other.  Nor,  though  Guil.  may  or  may  not  be  the  leader  of  the  two,  is 
Ros.  silent ;  in  fact,  in  the  previous  dialogue,  Ros.  is  the  one  who  is  set  before  us  as 
trying  to  get  the  wind  of  Ham.  In  this  reply,  therefore,  let  '  Guil.'  be  changed 
to  Ros.  [Probably  these  same  reasons  influenced  the  following  emendation  of 
Staunton,  line  339.  Ed.] 

339.  you]  Staunton  :  Should  not  this  be  addressed,  and  the  reply  which  follows 
be  assigned,  to  Rosencrantz  ?     See  the  dialogue  in  Qx. 

341.  govern]  Caldecott:  One  would  almost  suppose  this  word  to  be  here  tech- 
nical, from  the  use  made  of  it  on  this  subject  in  Mid.  N.  D.  V,  i,  123. 

341.  ventages]  Johnson:  The  holes  of  a  flute. 

342.  thumb]  Steevens  attempts  to  justify  the  misprint  of  Q3Q3  by  supposing 
that  the  umber  was  'the  ancient  name  for  that  piece  of  movable  brass  at  the  end 
of  a  flute  which  is  either  raised  or  depressed  by  the  finger.'  In  support,  he  adduces 
instances  of  the  use  of  the  words  timber,  and  umbriere,  which,  however,  mean  the 
visor  of  a  helmet.  Tollet  supports  the  reading  on  practical  grounds  :  if  a  re- 
corder had  a  brass  key  like  the  German  flute,  we  are  to  follow  Q2Q3 ;  for  then  the 
thumb  could  not  govern  the  ventages ;  if,  however,  it  had  not  a  brass  key,  then  the 
reading  of  the  Ff  must  stand.  Nares,  in  refutation,  says  that  the  brass  key  is  more 
modern  than  the  time  of  Sh. 

343.  eloquent]  Corson  :  I  feel  a  certain  seriousness — that's  hardly  the  word — 
about  '  eloquent,'  not  in  keeping;  whereas,  in  the  use  of  excellent  there  seems  to 
be  implied  the  idea  that  the  music  that  can  be  got  out  of  the  little  instrument  is 
superior  to  what  one  would  suspect.  The  word  '  excellent '  should  be  pronounced 
with  a  downward  circumflex  on '  ex-,'  imparting  a  patronizing  tone. 

344.  stops]  Malone:  The  sounds  formed  by  stopping  the  holes.  See  line  17 
of  Induction  to  2  Hen.  IV.  Singer  :  Rather  the  mode  of  stopping  those  ventages 
to  produce  notes. 


act  in,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  271 

Guff,    But  these  cannot  I  command  to  any  utterance  of  345 
harmony ;  I  have  not  the  skill. 

Ham.  Why,  look  you  now,  how  unworthy  a  thing  you 
make  of  me !  You  would  play  upon  me ;  you  would  seem 
to  know  my  stops ;  you  would  pluck  out  the  heart  of  my 
mystery;  you  would  sound  me  from  my  lowest  note  to  the  350 
top  of  my  compass ;  and  there  is  much  music,  excellent 
voice,  in  this  little  organ ;  yet  cannot  you  make  it  speak. 
'Sblood,  do  you  think  I  am  easier  to  be  played  on  than  a 
pipe  ?  Call  me  what  instrument  you  will,  though  you  can 
fret  me,  you  cannot  play  upon  me. —  355 

Re-enter  POLON1US. 

God  bless  you,  sir ! 

Pol.  My  lord,  the  queen  would  speak  with  you,  and 
presently.    ^^^6,^^ 

Ham.  Do  you  see  yonder  cloud  that's  almost  in  shape 
of  a  camel  ?  360 

345.  utterance}  vtrance  QAQc<  355*  fret  we*  you]  fret  tne,  yet  you 

346.  harmony]  hermony  Ff<  Glo.  +  . 

348.  make]  would  make  Johns.  cannot]  can  not  Cap.  (Errata). 

350,  351.  the  top  of]  Om.  Qq,  Jen.  Re-enter...]  Sta.     Enter...  after 

352.  speak]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt  i.  sir!  line  356,  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

353.  'Sblood]    s'bloud  QsQy     ^ blood  356.  you]  your  Fa. 

Q4Q  .      Why  Ff,    Rowe  +  ,   Knt,  Sing.  359.  yonder]  that  Ff,  Rowe. 

Ktly.     Om.  Q'76.  359,  360.    cloud... camel?]     cloud?... 

I]   that  I  Ff,   Rowe+,    Knt,  camell.  F1F8.   cloud,.. .camell.  F3.    cloud, 

Dyce  i,  Sta.  ...camel?  F4. 

354.  355.  can  fret  me]  fret  me  not  Qq.  360.  of]  like  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Sta. 

352.  speak]  Knight  (ed.  i)  :  Sh.  certainly  meant  to  say  [in  FJ,  yet  cannot  you 
make  this  music,  this  excellent  voice.  Guil.  could  have  made  the  pipe  speak,  but 
he  could  not  command  it  to  any  utterance  of  harmony.  Even  in  the  Qq  it  should 
be  printed  *  yet  cannot  you  make  it.  Speak  !  'Sblood,'  &c.  [This  last  conj.  is  with- 
drawn in  ed.  ii,  and  instead  is  the  sentence  :  *  We  now  prefer  to  consider  the  Folio 
erroneous.']  Dyce:  When  *  'Sblood*  was  struck  out  [of  Ff],  to  be  replaced  by 
Why,  the  preceding  word,  *  speak/  was  at  the  same  time  accidentally  struck  out. 
♦Speak'  answers  to  *  discourse,'  line  243. — Remarks,  &c,  p.  217. 

355.  fret]  Douce  (ii,  250)  :  Here  is  a  play  on  words  and  a  double  meaning. 
Ham.  says,  *  though  you  can  vex  me,  you  cannot  impose  on  me ;  though  you  can 
stop  the  instrument,  you  cannot  play  on  it.'  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Frets  are  stops  of  in- 
struments of  the  lute  or  guitar  kind,  'small  lengths  of 'wire  on  which  the  fingers 
press  the  strings  in  playing  the  Guitar.' — Busby's  Diet,  of  Musical  Terms,  ed.  iii. 

355.  you]  Corson  :  The  use  of  yet  [as  in  QJ  as  the  correlative  of  '  though,' 
adds  to  the  formalness,  and  takes  away  from  the  plain  decisiveness,  of  the  speech. 


272 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Pol,     By  the  mass,  and  'tis  like  a  camel,  indeed  361 

Ham.     Methinks  it  is  like  a  weasel. 

Pol.    It  is  backed  like  a  weasel. 

Ham.     Or  like  a  whale  ? 

Pol.     Very  like  a  whale.  365 

Ham.  Then  will  I  come  to  my  mother  by  and  by. — 
[Aside]  They  fool  me  to  the  top  of  my  bent. — I  will  come 
by  and  by. 

Pol.    I  will  say  so.  [Exit  Polonins. 

Ham.    '  By  and  by1  is  easily  said. — Leave  me,  friends.        370 

{Exeunt  all  but  Hamlet. 


360.  361.  camel.. .came/]  weazel.., 
weazel  Cap. 

361.  By  the  mass]  By  Hh  maffe  Qq. 
By  lh'  Mafs  F4,  Rowe,  Cap.  (Errata), 
Jen.  B)  »M*  Mijfe  FXF3.  By  th>  Mijfe 
F3.    Om.  Q'76. 

His  like]  lis,  like  QaQr    it's  like 
Ff,  Rowe  + .    His — like  Jen. 

362.  363.  a  weasel.. .a  weasel]  an 
Ouzle...an  Ouzle  Pope+.  a  camel. ..a 
camel  Cap. 

363.  backed]  bacWd  Ff.  backt  Q3Qr 
black  Q4QS,  Pope  +  .     beek'd  Toilet,  El. 

364.  whale?]  whale.  Qq. 

366.  will  I]  I  will  Qq,  Jen.  Glo.  +  . 


366-370.  Then. ..said]  Four  lines, 
ending  by  and  by,.. .by  and  by, ...friends. 
...said,  (transposing  Leave  me  friends, 
as  a  separate  line,  to  follow  by  and  by, 
line  368;  and  continuing  /  will  say  so 
to  Ham.)  Qq,  Pope  (Prose,  Pope). 

367.  [Aside]  Sta.  Cla.  [to  Hor.  Cap. 
Om.  QqFf  et  cet. 

They. ..bent.]  Separate  line,  Ff, 
Rowe. 

369.  [Exit  Polonius.]  Exit.  Ff.  Om. 
Qq.    After  said,  line  370,  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo. 

370.  [Exeunt...]  Exeunt  Ros.  and 
Gui.  Horatio,  and  the  Players,  with- 
draw. Cap.     Exe.  Rowe.     Om.  QqFf. 


363.  backed  . . .  weasel]  Theobald  preferred  ouzle  to  '  weasel,'  because,  first, 
a  'weasel*  is  not  black  (to  read  'back'd'  only  avoids  the  absurdity  of  giving  a 
false  color  to  the  'weasel');  secondly,  by  reading  'ouzle,'  there  is  humor  in  com- 
paring the  same  cloud  to  a  Beast,  a.  Bird,  and  a  Fish.  Heath  :  The  resemblance 
of  a  cloud  to  an  animal  is  generally  concluded  from  its  shape,  not  its  color.  '  Weasel,' 
then,  is  the  true  reading,  and  Polonius,  in  his  eagerness  to  humor  a  madman,  un- 
luckily pitches  upon  the  very  portion  of  a  weasel  in  which  it  most  differs  from  a 
camel.  Steevens  :  Toilet  observes  that  we  might  read,  *  it  is  becked  like  a  weasel,' 
*.  e.  weasel-snouted.  So,  in  Hollinshed's  Description  of  England,  p.  172:  '  if  he 
be  wesell-becked.*  Quarles  uses  this  term  of  reproach  in  his  Virgin  Widow :  '  Go 
you  weazel-snouted,  addle-pated,'  &c.  'Toilet  adds,  that  Milton  in  his  Lycidas  calls 
a  promontory  beaked,  i.  e.  prominent  like  the  beak  of  a  bird  or  a  ship. 

366.  Then]  Caldecott  :  Then  will  I  assent  to  your  request,  as  yours  is  assenta- 
ticn  to  everything  I  say. 

366.  by  and  by]  Clarendon:  Immediately.  Compare  Matthew,  xiii,  21,  where 
<by  and  by'  is  the  translation  of  evdvg. 

367.  bent]  Johnson  :  *  Bent'  is  used  by  Sh.  for  the  utmost  degree  of  any  passion 
or  mental  quality.  The  expression  is  derived  from  archery ;  the  bow  has  its  bent 
when  it  is  drawn  as  far  as  it  can  be.     [See  Wellesley,  II,  ii,  328;  also  II,  ii,  30.] 


r 


Act  in,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  273 

Tis  now  the  very  witching  time  of  night,  371 

When  churchyards  yawn,  and  hell  itself  breathes  out 

Contagion  to  this  world ;  now  could  I  drink  hot  blood. 

And  do  such  bitter  business  as  the  day 

Would  quake  to  look  on.     Soft !  now  to  my  mother.  375 

0  heart,  lose  not  thy  nature ;  let  not  ever 
The  soul  of  Nero  enter  this  firm  bosom ; 
Let  me  be  cruel,  not  unnatural ; 

1  will  speak  daggers  to  her,  but  use  none ; 

372.  breathes]    breaths   FrF3,  Rowa,         /elf  Q'76.     Om.  bitter  Jen. 

Pope,  Theob.    Cap.      breakes  QaQ3Q4-  375-  Soft  I  now]  foft,  now  Qq.    Soft 

breaks  Q5.  now,  Ff. 

373.  this]  the  Q'76.  376.  lose]  Q'76.     loo/e  QqFf. 

374.  bitter. ..day]  bu/ines  as  the  bitter  378.  not]  but  not  Johns. 
day  Qq,  Steev.  Var.     bu/ine/s  as  day  it  379.  daggers]  dagger  Qq. 

374.  bitter  business]  Warburton  :  This  expression  is  almost  burlesque.  The 
Quarto  is  much  nearer  Shakespeare's  words,  who  wrote  *  better  day,'  which  gives  the 
sentiment  great  force  and  dignity.  '  The  horror  of  the  season  fits  me  for  a  deed 
which  (he  pure  and  sacred  day  would  quake  to  look  on.'  This  is  said  with  great 
classical  propriety.  According  to  ancient  superstition,  night  was  prophane  and  exe- 
crable, and  day  pure  and  holy.  Heath:  Warburton  objects  that  the  phrase  is 
almost  burlesque.  It  is  so ;  but  it  is  so  only  from  the  abuse  of  the  word  '  bitter/ 
which  is  crept  into  our  language  from  amongst  the  vulgar,  long  since  the  days  of 
Sh.,  and  which  can  have  no  weight  in  the  present  case.  If  alteration  be  necessary, 
I  should  suppose  Sh.  wrote  ■  the  bitterest  day.'  Steevens  :  Though  at  present  this 
is  a  vulgar  phrase,  yet  it  might  not  have  been  such  in  Shakespeare's  time.  Dyce,  in 
his  Few  Notes,  &c,  p.  141,  not  knowing  that  he  had  been  anticipated  by  Warburton, 
proposed  '  better  day.'  And  although  in  both  of  his  eds.  he  preferred  the  reading 
of  the  Ff,  he  would  not  allow  that  'better*  was  indefensible,  but  cites  in  his  ed.  ii 
the  following  note  by  Mitford  : '  The  word  is  better*  The  "  better  day  M  is  opposed 
to  the  "  witching  time  of  night."  It  is  the  kpbv  rjfiap  of  Homer,  II.  6.  66.' — Gent. 
Maga.  Feb.  1845,  p.  125.  *  I  may  add,  too/  continues  Dyce, '  that  John  Kemble,— 
whose  performance  of  the  Prince  of  Denmark  is  among  the  most  vivid  recollections 
of  my  youth, — invariably  [said  "  better  day."]  See  Hamlet,  revised  by  J.  P.  Kemble, 
1814,  p.  51/  Cartwright  {New  Readings^  &c,  p.  37):  Read,  'And  do  such 
business  as  the  light  0/  day.1 

375.  Coleridge  :  The  utmost  at  which  Ham.  arrives,  is  a  disposition,  a  mood,  to 
do  something ; — but  what  to  do  is  left  undecided,  while  every  word  he  utters  tends 
to  betray  his  disguise.  Yet  observe  how  perfectly  equal  to  any  call  of  the  moment 
is  Ham.,  let  it  only  not  be  for  the  future. 

377.  Nero]  Elze  :  The  murderer  of  his  mother.  Clarendon  :  Compare  King 
John,  V,  ii,  152. 

379.  use  none]  Hunter  (ii,  254) :  To  be  sure  not ;  and  strange  it  is  that  the 
Poet  should  have  thought  it  necessary  to  put  such  a  remark  into  the  mouth  of  Ham. 
That  the  thought  should  arise  detracts  from  our  admiration  of  his  character,  as  much 

S 


274  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 

My  tongue  and  soul  in  this  be  hypocrites;  380 

How  jn_ my  wordsjtoeyexshejje^^ 

Tojrjyg-them  seals,  never,  my  soul,  consent !  {Exit. 

Scene  III.    A  room  in  the  castle. 

Enter  King,  Rosencrantz,  and  Guildenstern. 

King.    I  like  him  not,  nor  stands  it  safe  with  us 
To  let  his  madness  range.    Therefore  prepare  you ; 
I  your  commission  will  forthwith  dispatch, 
And  he  to  England  shall  along  with  you  ; 

381,  3S2.  Om.  Pope,  Han.  Scene  iii.]  Cap.     Scene  DC.  Pope, 

381.  soever]  fomeuer  QqFf,  Rowe.  Han.  Jen.     Scene  VIII.  Warb.  Johns. 

382.  never,  my  soul,  consent]   neuer        Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

tny foule  confent  QqFf,  Rowe+,  Jen.  A.. .castle.]  Glo.  Cap.  (subs.)* 

[Exit.]  Q2Q3Q4.     Om.  Q$Ff.  2.  range]  rage  Pope. 

as  it  precludes  approbation  or  silent  admission  of  the  moral  taste  discovered  in  this 
play  by  its  author.  It  is,  besides,  dramatically  improper ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  his 
mother  had  done  nothing  to  deserve  it ;  it  is  not  even  insinuated  against  her  that  she 
was  acquainted  with  the  manner  of  her  former  husband's  death.  Her  offence  was 
marrying  again  too  soon,  and,  in  addition  to  this,  that  her  second  husband  was 
brother  to  the  first.  In  the  next  place,  such  a  deed  would  not  only  delay  the  execu* 
tion  of  the  high  behest  of  the  Ghost,  which  is  the  main  purpose  of  the  drama,  but 
would  in  all  probability  have  entirely  frustrated  it ;  and  Ham.  cannot  be  supposed 
not  to  have  foreseen  that  such  would  be  the  result.  Ham.  a  matricide  would  have 
become  instantly  an  object  of  universal  odium.  In  fact,  the  truth  cannot  and  ought 
not  to  be  concealed  that,  popular  as  this  play  is,  not  in  England  only,  but  all  the 
world  over,  there  are  parts  in  it  which  seem  quite  at  variance  with  the  ordinary 
modes  of  thinking  of  its  author. 

381.  shent]  Steevens  :  To  shend,  is  to  reprove  harshly,  to  treat  with  rough  lan- 
guage. Henderson:  'Shent*  means  more  than  reproof.  Ham.  surely  means 
*  however  my  mother  may  be  hurt,  wounded,  or  punished.' 

382.  seals]  Warburton  :  Put  them  in  execution.  Knight  :  To  make  my  say- 
ings deeds. 

382.  consent]  Corson  (p.  28) :  '  Consent '  is  not  an  imperative,  but  a  subjunc- 
tive, and  '  soul '  a  nominative,  not  a  vocative.    See  Abbott,  §§  364,  365. 

3.  commission]  Moberly:  Ros.  and  Guil.  are  therefore  privy  to  the  traitorous 
scheme  for  killing  Ham.  in  England. 

4.  along]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  verb  of  motion  after  '  along,*  see 
Abbott,  §  30,  where  it  is  stated  that ' "  Let's  along"  is  still  a  common  Americanism.* 
[See  I,  i,  26.]  To  the  instances  given  by  Abbott,  add  Wint.  Tale,  V,  ii,  121 ;  Jul. 
Cas.  Ill,  i,  119;  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  197,  given  by  Clarendon. 


ACT  III.  SC.  iii.] 


HAMLET 


The  terms  of  our  estate  may  not  endure 
Hazard  so  near  us  as  doth  hourly  grow 
Out  of  his  lunacies. 

GuiL  We  will  ourselves  provide; 

Most  holy  and  religious  fear  it  is 
To  keep  those  many  many  bodies  safe 
That  live  and  feed  upon  your  majesty. 

Ros.    The  single  and  peculiar  life  is  bound 
With  all  the  strength  and  armour  of  the  mind 
To  keep  itself  from  noyance ;  but  much  more 
That  spirit  upon  whose  weal  depends  and  rests 


275 
5 


10 


5.  estate  may]  eft  ate,  may  FjF3F3. 

6.  near  us]  Q'76,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Var.  El,  Cam.  Cla.  fleet's  Qq. 
dangerous  Ff  et  cet. 

7.  lunacies']  browes  Qq.  brows  Jen. 
El.  lunes  Theob.  Han.  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
braves  Anon.* 

ourselves  provide]  provide  our  selves 
Pope  +  . 

9,  10.  To  keep. ..live]  One  line,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

9.  many  many]  many  FaF3F  ,  Rowe, 


Pope,  Han. 

11.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending  single, 
Ff. 

13.  noycnce]  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Dyce, 
White,  Glo.+,  Del.  'noyance  Han.  et 
cet. 

14.  upon]  on  Pope-f. 

weal]  wealc  Qq.  fpirit  Ff,  Rowe, 
Cald.  Knt. 

depends  and  rests]  QqFf,  Rowe  + , 
Cald.  Cam.  Cla,  depend  and  rest  Han. 
et  cet. 


6.  near  us]  White:  Considering  the  expression  of  personal  fear  in  the  first 
line  of  the  King's  speech,  the  Qq  may  contain  the  true  reading,  of  which  that  of  the 
Ff  is  a  corruption. 

7.  lunacies]  Theobald  :  This  unnecessary  Alexandrine  we  owe  to  the  players. 
Sh.  wrote  lunes,  i.  e,  madness,  frenzy.  See  Wint.  Tale,  II,  ii,  30 ;  Merry  Wives, 
IV,  ii,  22.  Johnson  :  I  take  browes  of  the  Qq  to  be,  properly  read, /rows,  which, 
I  think,  is  a  provincial  word  for  perverse  humours,  which  being  not  understood  was 
changed  to  « lunacies.'  But  of  this  I  am  not  confident.  Steevens  suggested  that 
perhaps  Sh.  designed  a  metaphor  from  horned  cattle,  whose  powers  of  being  danger- 
ous increase  with  the  growth  of  their  brows  I  Henley  improved  on  this,  and  main- 
tained that  the  image  under  which  the  King  apprehends  danger  from  Ham.  is  that 
of  a  bull  I  *  which,  in  his  frenzy,  might  not  only  gore,  but  push  him  from  his  throne.' 
Elze  :  It  is  not  improbable  that  Sh.  wrote  either  frowns  or  brains. 

9.  many  many]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  (MS)  has  'very  many?  thus  setting  right 
a  manifest  misprint  of  the  Ff.  [Adopted  in  the  text  by  Collier  (ed.  ii)  and  Elze.] 
Staunton  :  This  expression,  signifying  numberless,  should  certainly  be  hyphened, 
like  too-too, few-few,  most-most,  &c.  Clarendon:  Compare  ' little  little,'  Hen.  V: 
IV,  ii,  33. 

13.  noyance]  Clarendon:  Harm.  Here  used  in  a  stronger  sense  than  our 
modern  annoyance.  Spenser,  however,  Fairy  Queen,  I,  i,  23,  has  it,  with  the  weaker 
meaning,  applied  to  the  '  feeble  stinges '  of  '  gnattes.' 

14.  rests]  See  I,  ii,  38. 


276  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 

The  lives  of  many.    The  cease  of  majesty     Y  15 

Dies  not  alone,  but  like  a  gulf  doth  draw 

What's  near  it  with  it ;  it  is  a  massy  wheel, 

Fix'd  on  the  summit  of  the  highest  mount, 

To  whose  huge  spokes  ten  thousand  lesser  things 

Are  mortised  and  adjoin'd;  which,  when  it  falls,  20 

Each  small  annexment,  petty  consequence, 

Attends  the  boisterous  ruin.     Never  alone 

Did  the  king  sigh,  but  with  a  general  groan. 

King.    Arm  you,  I  pray  you,  to  this  speedy  voyage ; 
For  we  will  fetters  put  upon  this  fear,  25 

Which  now  goes  too  free-footed. 

*H\  \  We  will  haste  us. 

Guil.  ) 

[Exeunt  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern. 

15.  many.     The]    many;  the  Q'76.  23.  sigh,  but]  sigh;  but  always  Sty* 

many,  the  QqFf.  mour. 

cease]  cejfe  Qq.     decease  Pope.  with]  Om.  Qq. 

17.  it  is]  It  is  Ff.  or  it  is  Qq.  Ifs  groan]  grone  Q3Q3FxFa.  growne 
Pope  +  .    'tis  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  Q4Q5. 

18.  summit]  Rowe.    fomnet  QqFf.  24.  voyage]  viage  Q2Q3.  voiageQCX- 

19.  huge]  hough  Q2Qr     hugh  Q4.  25.  upon]  about  Qq,  Cam.  Tsch. 

20.  mortised]  morteiji  Qq.  mortiz'd  26.  Ros.  Guil.]  Mai.  Both.  Ff.  Ros, 
Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  El. 

adjoin'd]  adjorid  F2.  haste  us]  make  hqfte  Q'76. 

22.  ruin]  Ruine  Ff.     raine  Qq.  [Exeunt...]  Han.     Exeunt  Gent. 

Never]    Ne'er  Pope  +  ,  Walker,        QqFf. 
Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

15.  cease]  Caldecott:  The  demise.  Throughout  Sh.  a  strong  sense  is  attached 
to  this  verb  'cease.'  Hudson:  '  Cease'  and  '  Dies'  are  tautological  in  word,  not  in 
sense.  The  death  of  Majesty  comes  not  alone.  Bailey  (ii,  10)  :  '  Cease '  as  a  noun 
is  not  found  elsewhere ;  here  it  means  death,  so  that  the  speaker  is  made  to  assert 
that  death  dies  not  alone,  and  that  it  is  a  massy  wheel  as  well  as  like  a  gulf;  whereas 
Sh.  evidently  meant  to  predicate  these  things  of  majesty  itself.  Read,  therefore, 
*Deceasing  majesty,'  &c.  Clarendon  :  Here  used  for  the  king  dying,  as  ■  life '  in 
line  1 1  is  used  for  the  living  man. 

18.  mount]  Moberly  :  At  the  top  of  the  bank,  at  the  edge  of  a  mine* 

21.  annexment]    Clarendon:  This  is  not  found  elsewhere. 

24.  Arm]  Delius  :  Prepare  yourselves. 

25.  fear]  Caldecott  :  Bugbear.    See  Ant.  6^  Cleo.  II,  iii,  22. 

26.  We]  Elze  :  This  speech  is  given  erroneously  to  both  Ros.  and  Guil.  The 
former  is  on  all  occasions  the  spokesman,  while  the  latter  appears  to  be  more  a  sub- 
ordinate attendant, — the  only  time  that  he  ventures  on  an  independent  speech  is  III, 
ii,  284,  et  sea.,  and  then  he  begs  express  permission  to  speak.  See  III,  ii,  46  [Q(\\. 
and  IV,  iii,  16,  where  Ros.  treats  him  like  a  messenger. 


act  Hi,  sc.  III.l  HAMLET  277 

Enter  PoLONIUS. 

Pol.     My  lord,  he's  going  to  his  mother's  closet ;  27 

Behind  the  arras  I'll  convey  myself, 
To  hear  the  process;  I'll  warrant  she'll  tax  him  home; 
And,  as  you  said,  and  wisely  was  it  said,  30 

Tis  meet  that  some  more  audience  than  a  mother, 
Since  nature  makes  them  partial,  should  o'erhear 
The  speech,  of  vantage.     Fare  you  well,  my  liege ; 
I'll  call  upon  you  ere  you  go  to  bed, 
And  tell  you  what  I  know. 

King.  Thanks,  dear  my  lord.  35 

[Exit  Polonius. 
Oh,  my  offence  is  rank,  it  smells  to  heaven ; 
It  hath  the  primal  eldest  curse  upon't, 
A  brother's  murder !     Pray  can  I  not, 
Though  inclination  be  as  sharp  as  will; 

29.  warrant"]  warnt  Q'37*.  ter  know)  QqFf,  Rowe-K 
33.  the  speech,   of  vantage]    Theob.  37.  primal]  Om.  Q'76. 

the/peech  of  vantage  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  upon't]  vppont  Qq. 

Jen.  Mai.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  ii,  Sta.  Huds.  38.  can  I  not]  I  cannot  Q'76,  Rowe 

Their  fpeech.  Q'76.  +.     alas!  I  cannot  Han.     that  can  1 

35.  know]  heare  Q'76.  not  Seymour. 

[Exit  Polonius.]  Cap.    Exit,  (af-  38,  39.  not, ... will '/]  not,.. .will,  Qq. 

27.  Polonius]  Coleridge  :  Polonius's  volunteer  obtrusion  of  himself  into  this 
business,  while  it  is  appropriate  to  his  character,  still  itching  after  former  importance, 
removes  all  likelihood  that  Karn.  should  suspect  his  presence,  and  prevents  us  from 
making  his  death  injure  Ham.  in  our  opinion. 

30.  as  you  said]  Moberly  :  This  was  Polonius's  own  suggestion,  which,  cour» 
tier-like,  he  ascribes  to  the  King. 

32.  them]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  mothers. 

33.  of  vantage]  Warburton  :  By  some  opportunity  of  secret  observation.  Ab- 
bott, §  165  :  'OP  here  retains  its  original  meaning  of  from;  hence  the  words  are 
equivalent  to  '  from  the  vantage-ground  of  concealment..' 

38.  murder]  Theobald  :  Was  a  brother's  murder  the  eldest  curse  ?  Surely,  it 
was  rather  the  crime  that  was  the  cause  of  this  eldest  curse.  I  have  ventured  at  two 
supplemental  syllables,  as  innocent  in  themselves,  as  necessary  to  the  purposes  for 
which  they  are  introduced:  iTkat  of  a  brother's  murder.'  Heath  (p.  541) :  The 
defect  in  the  measure  is  sufficiently  accounted  for,  by  the  break  which  divides  the 
verse :  ■ A  brother's  murder '  is  in  apposition,  not  to  the  curse,  but  to  the  offence. 
Walker  {Crit.  ii,  199) :  '  Read,  for  metre-sake,  murderer? 

39.  as  will]  Theobald:  An  ingenious  gentleman  started,  at  a  heat,  this  very 

probable  emendation:  'as  'twill.'     Will  signifying  barely  the  determination  of  mind 
24 


278 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  iii. 


My  stronger  guilt  defeats  my  strong  intent, 

And,  like  a  man  to  double  business  bound, 

I  stand  in  pause  where  I  shall  first  begin, 

And  both  neglect.    What  if  this  cursed  hand 

Were  thicker  than  itself  with  brother's  blood, 

Is  there  not  rain  enough  in  the  sweet  heavens 

To  wash  it  white  as  snow  ?    Whereto  serves  mercy 

But  to  confront  the  visage  of  offence? 

And  what's  in  prayer  but  this  twofold  force, 

To  be  forestalled  ere  we  come  to  fall, 

Or  pardon'd  being  down  ?    Then  I'll  look  up ; 

My  fault  is  past.    But  oh,  what  form  of  prayer 

Can  serve  my  turn  ?    '  Forgive  me  my  foul  murder  T 

That  cannot  be,  since  I  am  still  possess'd 

Of  those  effects  for  which  I  did  the  murder, 

My  crown,  mine  own  ambition  and  my  queen. 


40 


45 


So 


55 


40.  guilt  defeats']  guilt,  defeats  FXF3F3. 

43.  neglect.    What]  neglec?  :  what  Q4 

Qg.     neglect ;  what  Ff.    neglecl,  what 

$0.  pardorCd]  pardon  Qq. 

51.  fault  is]  faults  is  Q4Q'- 

52.  '  Forgive.. .murder  ?']   As   quota- 


tion, Glo.  + ,  Dyce  ii.  Italics,  Han.  Kuds. 

52.  murder?]  Cald.  Glo.  +  ,  Dyceii, 
Huds.  murther?  Q'76.  murther,  Q2Q3. 
Murther:  Q4QSFXF3F3.  Mother:  F4. 
murther!  Pope-{-,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 
Knt,  Coll. 

54.  effects]  affecls  Q4Q5. 


to  do  a  thing,  the  sense  will  be  this :  '  Though  the  pleasure  I  take  in  this  act  be  as 
strong  as  the  determination  of  my  mind  to  perform  it,  yet  my  stronger  guilt  defeats 
my  strong  intent,'  &c.  [Hanmer,  Johnson,  Heath,  Keightley,  adopted  this  conj.  Ed.] 
Warburton  :  '  As  will '  is  rank  nonsense.  Read,  ■  as  th*  ill,"  i.  e.  though  my  inclina- 
tion makes  me  as  restless  and  uneasy  as  my  crime  does.  The  line  following  proves 
it.  Boswell  :  The  distinction  between  '  inclination '  and  *  will '  is  philosophically 
correct.  I  may  will  to  do  a  thing  because  my  understanding  points  it  out  to  me  as 
right,  although  I  am  not  inclined  to  it.  See  Locke,  On  the  Human  Understanding, 
b.  2,  ch.  21,  sec.  30. 

47.  confront]  Clarendon  :  To  oppose  directly,  and  so  to  break  down,  the  sin. 

49.  forestalled]  Caldecott  :  Prevented  from  falling.  Moberly  :  What  is  the 
very  meaning  of  prayer,  except  that  we  pray  first  not  to  be  led  into  temptation,  and 
then  to  be  delivered  from  evil  ? 

51.  what  form]  Hunter  (ii,  256) :  This  speech  is  in  many  respects  admirable. 
But  it  wants  an  issue.  We  are  left  at  last  uncertain  in  what  mould  the  prayer  will 
be  cast,  when  at  the  close  of  it  he  *  retires  and  prays.'  It  was  not  so  when  the  play 
was  originally  written.  His  meditations  there  issue  in  a  resolve.  [See  Reprint  of 
Hamlet,  1603,  line  1423,  in  Appendix.] 

55.  ambition]  Delius:  The  realization  of  ambition;  like  *  offence '  in  the  next 
line. 


ACT  in,  sc.  iii.]  HAMLET  279 

May  one  be  pardon'd  and  retain  the  offence?  56 

(n  the  corrupted  'currents  of  this  world 

Offence's  gilded  hand  may  shove  by  justice, 

And  oft  'tis  seen  the  wicked  prize  itself 

Buys  out  the  law ;  but  'tis  not  so  above ;  60 

There,  is  no  shuffling,  there  the  action  lies 

In  his  true  nature,  and  we  ourselves  compell'd  • 

Even  to  the  teeth  and  forehead  of  our  faults 

56.  pardorid~\  pardoned  QQ.  58.  gilded  ]guildcdQ3Q3F J? y  guided 
offence']  effecls  Warb.                               Q*QS' 

57.  corrupted  'currents]  Walker,Dyce  shove]  JJiowe  QjQr    fliow  Q4QS- 
fi.     corrupted  currants  Ff.     corrupt  oc-  shove  by]  shove-by  Dyce,  Huds. 
currents  Anon.  {Misc.  Obs.  1 752).    cor-  59.  prize]  purse  Coll.  ii.  (MS). 
rupted  currents  Qq  et  cet.    .  itself]  it  felfe  QqFf,  Rowe  + . 

y  currents  of  this  world]  courts  of  62.  and]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

this  bad  world  Long  MS.* 

56.  offence]  Warburton  :  Sh.  here  repeated  a  word  which  he  employed  two 
lines  above, '  th'  effects?  i.  e.  of  his  murder.  Johnson  :  He  that  does  not  amend 
what  can  be  amended  retains  his  offence.  The  King  kept  the  crown  from  the  right 
heir.    Clarendon  :  See  ■  theft,'  III,  ii,  84. 

57.  corrupted  'currents]  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  267) s  Write  ''currents,'  as  in  1 
Hen.  IV;  II,  iii,  58.  (Note,  too,  occurrences,  Hen.  V:  V,  Prologue,  line  40.) 
Lettsom  (Footnote  to  the  above) :  In  Beau.  &  Fl.,  Beggar's  Bush,  I,  i,  8 :  'So  much 
to  all  the  occurrents  of  my  country,'  we  have  the  word  at  full  length.  So,  in  Hamlet, 
V,  ii,  344.  [Unless  we  adopt  this  excellent  emendation  of  Walker's,  we  are  forced 
to  the  conclusion  of  Clarendon's,  that  these  lines-,  57  and  58, '  offer  an  example  of 
that  confusion  of  metaphor  so  frequent  in  Sh.  Compare  III,  i,  59.'  This  '  confusion 
of  metaphor '  is  certainly  '  frequent '  enough,  but  I  can  see  no  need  of  retaining  as  an 
instance  of  it  a  passage  that  can  be  cleared  up  by  an  apostrophe.  The  word  is  given 
in  full,  occurrents,  in  Miscellaneous  Obs.  on  Hamlet,  1752,  p.  37.  Ed.] 

58.  shove  by]  Tschischwitz  calls  attention  to  this  adverbial  use  of  'by,* 
and  Dyce  prints  shove-by.  [Consistency  would  print,  'To  give-in  evidence/  line 
64.  Ed.] 

59.  prize]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  There  cannot  be  a  doubt  of  the  propriety  of  an 
emendation  [purse  of  the  (MS)]  of  an  error,  which  perhaps  arose  from  the  use  of 
short-hand  in  transcribing  the  words ;  purse  and  '  prize '  being  spelt  with  the  same 
letters.  Dyce  {Strictures,  &c,  p.  189) :  The  'prize*  is  equivalent  to  'the  thing  ac- 
quired by  wicked  means,'  i.  e.  the  crown. 

61.  lies]  Clarendon  :  This  word  is  here  used  in  its  legal  sense. 

62.  his]  Delius  :  Equivalent  to  its, 

62,  64.  we  , . .  evidence]  Wordsworth  {Shakespeare's  Knowledge  of  the  Bible, 
p.  301) :  It  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  Sh.  should  have  seized  upon  this  point. 
He  is  supported  by  Bishop  Pearson  (obit.  1686),  that  great  divine,  who  says:  'this 
conscience  is  not  so  much  a  judge  as  a  witness  bound  over  to  give  testimony,  for  or 
against  us,  at  some  judgement  after  this  life.' 

62.  ourselves  compelled]  Tschischwitz  :  For  another  instance  of  the  omissioo 


♦• 


28o 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  iii. 


To  give  in  evidence.    What  then  ?  what  rests  ? 

Try  what  repentance  can.     What  can  it  not  ?  65 

Yet  what  can  it  when  one  can  not  repent  ? 

O  wretched  state !  O  bosom  black  as  death ! 

C  limed  soul,  that  struggling  to  be  free 

Art  more  engaged !     Help,  angels !  make  assay ! 

Bow,  stubborn  knees,  and,  heart  with  strings  of  steel,  70 

Be  soft  as  sinews  of  the  new-born  babe ! 

All  may  be  well.  [Retires  and  kneels. 

Enter  Hami.et. 

Ham,     Now  might  I  do  it  pat,  now  he  is  praying  ; 


66.  it]  aught  Han. 

can  not]  cannot  QqFf,  Rowe+, 
Jen.     can  but  Warb. 

69.  angels]  Angles  Q4Q*' 

70.  steel]  Jleale  Q3Q3> 
72.  Om.  Seymour. 

[Retires...]  Theob.  (subs.).  The 
King  kneels.  Rowe+  remains  in  Ac- 
tion of  Prayer.  Cap.     Om.  QqFf. 


Enter...]  ...at  a  Distance.  Cap. 
73.  Scene  x.  Pope,  Han.    Scene  ix. 
Warb.  Johns. 

Now... praying]     Where    is    this 
murderer ,  he  kneels  and  prays,  Q'76. 

it  pat,  now  he  is]  it,  but  now  a  is 
Qq.     it — but  now  he  is  Jen. 

praying]  a  praying  Qq. 


of  the  substantive  verb,  see  II,  ii,  230.    Clarendon  instances  I,  ii,  90;  and  Rich* 
II:  IV,  i,  129. 

64.  evidence]  Delius  :  Contrary  to  the  rule  that  a  witness  may  not  criminate 
himself. 

66.  can  not]  Warburton:  This  nonsense  even  exceeds  the  last.  Sh.  wrote, 
'  when  one  can  but  repent/  i.  e.  what  can  repentance  do  without  restitution  ?  John* 
SON :  What  can  repentance  do  for  a  man  that  cannot  be  penitent,  for  a  man  who  has 
only  part  of  penitence,  distress  of  conscience,  without  the  other  part,  resolution 
of  amendment?  Walker  (Vers.  159) :  Write  cannot,  with  the  accent  on  the  last 
syllable. 

69.  engaged]  Clarendon  :  Hampered,  entangled. 

69.  assay]  See  Brae's  forcible  explanation  of  this  word,  III,  i,  59,  p.  208. 

72.  well]  Coleridge  :  This  speech  well  marks  the  difference  between  crime  and 
guilt  of  habit.  The  conscience  here  is  still  admitted  to  audience.  Nay,  even  as  an 
audible  soliloquy,  it  is  far  less  improbable  than  is  supposed  by  such  as  have  watched 
men  only  in  the  beaten  road  of  their  feelings.  But  the  final,  •  All  may  be  well !'  is 
remarkable;  the  degree  of  merit  attributed  by  the  self-flattering  soul  to  its  own 
struggle,  though  baffled,  and  to  the  indefinite  half-promise,  half-command,  to  per- 
severe in  religious  duties.  The  solution  is  in  the  divine  medium  of  the  Chris- 
tian doctrine  of  expiation ;  not  what  you  have  done,  but  what  you  are,  must  de- 
termine. 

72.  Enter  Hamlet]  Collier  :  When  Ham.  enters  behind,  another  stage-direction 
by  the  (MS)  states  that  he  has  his  sword  drawn  ready  to  kill  the  King,  if  his  reso- 
lution hold,     The  old  mode  of  acting  the  scene  appears  to  have  been,  that,  when 


act  in,  sc.  iii.J  HAMLET  28l 

And  now  I'll  do't;  and  so  he  goes  to  heaven; 

And  so  am  I  revenged.     That  would  be  scann'd  :  75 

A  villain  kills  my  father ;  and  for  that, 

I,  his  sole  son,  do  this  same  villain  send 

To  heaven. 

Oh,  this  is  hire  and  salary,  not  revenge, 

74.  do't]  do't  [drawing]  Cap.  78.   To  heaven.']    Separate  line,  Qq. 
so  he  goes]  fo  a  goes  Qq.                        Begins  line  79,  Ff,  Rowe-f,  Jen.     Ends 

75.  revenged.]  Glo.-K    reuendge,  Q3         line  77,  Sta.  Ktly. 

Q,Q4.     reuenged,  Qs.     reveng'd:  FxFa  79.   Oh]  Why  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Var. 

F3,  Dyce,  Sta.  Huds.      revenged:  F4.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White,  Ktly,  Del.  Huds. 

reveng'd?  Q'76  et  cet.  hire  and  salary]  hire  and  Sallery 

76.  A  villain  kills]  He  kill  d  Q'76.  Ff.    bafe  and  filly  Qq.   a  reward  Q'76. 

77.  sole]foule  FXF3F3.    foulY.  reward  Q' 03. 


do. ..send]  send  him  Q'76.  salary,  not]  filly. not  QAQ 


Ham.  came  in  at  the  back,  the  King  was  kneeling  in  front  of  the  stage,  and  did  not 
retire  and  kneel,  as  stated  in  modern  eds. 

73.  Hanmer  {Some  Remarks,  &c,  1 736,  p.  41) :  This  speech  of  Hamlet's  has 
always  given  me  great  offence.  There  is  something  so  very  bloody  in  it,  so  inhu- 
man, so  unworthy  of  a  hero,  that  I  wish  our  poet  had  omitted  it.  Coleridge  :  Dr 
Johnson's  mistaking  [see  note,  line  95]  of  the  marks  of  reluctance  and  procrastination 
for  impetuous,  horror-striking  fiendishness ! — of  such  importance  is  it  to  understand 
the  germ  of  a  character.  But  the  interval  taken  by  Hamlet's  speech  is  truly  awful! 
Hazlitt  (p.  107) :  This  refinement  of  malice  here  expressed  by  Ham.  is  in  truth 
only  an  excuse  for  his  own  want  of  resolution.  Hunter  (ii,  255) :  In  the  whole 
range  of  the  drama  there  is,  perhaps,  nothing  more  offensive  than  this  scene.  Ham. 
is  made  to  doat  on  an  idea  which  is  positively  shocking.  Besides,  as  an  excuse 
for  not  then  executing  the  command,  under  the  spell  of  which  he  lived,  it  is  poor 
and  trivial.  Moberly:  Ham.  had  before  said  (I,  ii,  182) :  *  Would  I  had  met  my 
dearest  foe  in  heaven,'  &c.  This  notion  of  killing  soul  and  body  must  therefore  be 
the  natural  impulse  of  his  mind.  It  seems  simpler  to  admit  this  view  of  Hamlet's 
speech  here  than  to  consider  it,  as  Coleridge  does,  to  be  at  least  half  an  excuse  for 
not  doing  now  the  act  of  vengeance  from  which  his  soul  shrinks,  though  an  unbend- 
ing law  has  imposed  it  on  him.  Horn  (ii,  56) :  Now  comes  the  moment  for  revenge, 
but  only  for  revenge,  not  for  righteous  punishment,  which  must  be  preceded  by  a 
full,  perhaps  also  by  a.  public,  conviction. 

75.  would]  For  instances  of  *  would  '  =  requires  to,  see  Macb.  I,  v,  19 ;  I,  vii,  34; 
and  Abbott,  §  329. 

77.  sole]  Warburton  :  The  Ff  lead  us  to  the  true  reading,  which  is  *faPn  son,' 
i.e.  disinherited.  This  was  an  aggravation  of  the  injury;  that  he  had  not  only 
murdered  the  father,  but  ruined  the  son.  Heath  :  If  any  alteration  be  needed  the 
Ff  would  rather  direct  us  to  substitute  *  fool  son?  Capell  (vol.  i,  Various  Readings,  p. 
26)  also  conjectures  *fool.'  Johnson  :  '  I  his  only  son,  who  am  bound  to  punish  his 
murderer.'  Caldecott  ;  Foule  (most  probably  a  misprint)  may  be  offending,  de» 
generate.  Collier  (ed.  2) :  A  blunder,  of  course,  from  the  long  s  having  been  mis- 
taken, and  from  the  misspelling  of  '  sole,'  foule. 
24* 


J 


282  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  iu. 

He  took  my  father  grossly,  full  of  bread,  80 

With  all  his  crimes  broad  blown,  as  flush  as  May; 

And  how  his  audit  stands  who  knows  save  heaven  ? 

But  in  our  circumstance  and  course  of  thought, 

Tis  heavy  with  him ;  and  am  I  then  revenged, 

To  take  him  in  the  purging  of  his  soul,  85 

When  he  is  fit  and  season'd  for  his  passage  ? 

No. 

Up,  sword,  and  know  thou  a  more  horrid  hent; 

80.  He]  A  Qq.  86.  season 'd]  fcafoned  QQ. 
bread']  blood  Mason.  87.  No]   Separate  line,  Qq.      Ends 

81.  With  all]  Withall  Qq.  line  86,  Ff,  Rowe,  Jen.  Sta.     Begins 
broad]  braod  Q2Q3.  line  88,  Ktly.     Om.  Pope  +  . 

as  flush]  asfre/Ji  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  88.  hent]  bent  F4,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

and  flush  Warb.  time  Q'76,  Rowe,  Pope. 

84.  and]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

79.  hire  and  salary]  Caldecott  :  A  thing,  for  which  from  him  I  might  claim 
a  recompense. 

80.  bread]  Malone  :  *  Behold  this  was  the  iniquity  of  thy  sister  Sodom,  pride. 
fullness  of  bread  and  abundance  of  idleness,'  &c. — Ezekiel,  xvi,  49. 

81.  broad  blown]  Clarendon:  Compare  what  the  Ghost  says  of  himself,  I,  v, 
76,  &c. 

81.  flush]  Clarendon:  Full  of  sap  and  vigor. 

82.  audit]  Warburton  :  From  these  lines,  and  some  others,  it  appears  that  Sh. 
had  drawn  the  first  sketch  of  this  play  without  his  Ghost ;  and,  when  he  added  that 
machinery,  he  forgot  to  strike  out  these  lines.  For  the  Ghost  had  told  him 
very  circumstantially  how  his  audit  stood ;  and  he  was  now  satisfied  with  the  real- 
ity of  the  vision.  Ritson  :  As  it  appears  from  the  Ghost's  own  relation  that 
he  was  in  purgatory,  Hamlet's  doubt  could  only  be  how  long  he  was  to  continue 
there. 

83.  our  . . .  thought]  Both  Caldecott  and  Delius  connect  'our*  with  'cir- 
cumstance,' the  former  paraphrasing :  '  the  measure  or  estimate  of  what  may  have 
reached  us,'  the  latter, '  according  to  human  relations  and  thoughts.*  Clarendon, 
on  the  other  hand,  connects  '  our '  with  '  thoughts,'  and  paraphrases :  '  the  circum- 
stance and  course  of  our  thought,'  adding,  *  We  have  a  similar  use  of  the  possessive 
pronoun,  I,  iv,  73;  III,  ii,  321.'  In  Two  Gent.  I,  i,  36,  and  Tro.  &  Cres.  Ill,  iii, 
114,  *  circumstance '  means  the  details  of  an  argument.  So  here  'circumstance  of 
thought '  means  the  details  over  which  thought  ranges,  and  from  which  its  conclu- 
sions are  formed. 

85.  To  take]  For  instances  of  the  infinitive  indefinitely  used,  see  Abbott,  §§  356, 
357,  and  Macb.  IV,  ii,  69.     Clarendon:  In  taking  him. 

88.  hent]  Theobald  (Nichols's  Jllust.  ii,  572) :  We  must  either  restore  bent  or 
hint.  [Not  repeated  in  his  ed.]  Warburton  (Nichols's  Jllust.  ii,  648)  :  The  true 
word  is  plainly  hest,  command.  [Not  repeated  in  his  ed.]  .As  these  conjectures  are 
found  in  the  private  correspondence  between  Warburton  and  Theobald,  CAPELL 


act  in,  sc.  ill.]  HAMLET  283 

When  he  is  drunk  asleep,  or  in  his  rage* 

Or  in  the  incestuous  pleasure  of  his  bed;  90 

At  gaming,  swearing ;  or  about  some  act 

That  has  no  relish  of  salvation  in't ; 

Then  trip  him,  that  his  heels  may  kick  at  heaven 

And  that  his  soul  may  be  as  damn'd  and  black 

As  hell,  whereto  it  goes.     My  mother  stays. — -  95 

89.  drunk  asleep]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Coll.  El.  White,  Del. 
Glo.-K  drunk-asleep  Johns.  drunke,  91.  gaming,  swearing]  game  a fiuear- 
ajleep  Qq  et  cet.                                                  ing  Q2Q3*     game,   a  /wearing   QAQ$t 

90.  incestuous]  inceflious  Qq.  Jen.    game,  a-swearing  Cam.  Cla. 
pleasure]    pleafures   Q'76,    Cap.  93.  heels  may]  heele  mas  Q.QS« 

cannot  be  accused  of  plagiarism  for  having  adopted  hint  in  his  text.  Johnson  :  To 
'  hent '  is  used  by  Sh.  for  to  seize,  to  catch,  to  lay  hold  on.  '  Hcnt '  is  therefore  hold, 
or  seizure.  'Lay  held  on  him,  sword,  at  a  more  horrid  time.'  Caldecott  :  *  Have 
a  more  fierce,  rash,  or  headlong  grasp  or  purpose.*  '  Hyntyn  or  hentyn,  rapio, 
arripio.' — Prompt.  Parv.  White  :  '  A  more  horrid  having,  taking,  opportunity. 
Staunton:  «  Feel  or  be  conscious  of  a  more  terrible  purpose.'  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  A 
hold,  an  opportunity  to  be  seized.  Clarendon  :  Equivalent  to  grip.  Hamlet,  as 
he  leaves  hold  of  his  sword,  bids  it  wait  for  a  more  terrible  occasion  to  be  grasped 
again.  Moberly:  A  more  fell  grasp  on  the  villain.  John  Davies  (N.  6°  Qu.t 
II  March,  1876):  More  probably  here  used  in  a  sense  common  In  some  of  the 
western  counties,  meaning  the  course  or  passage  of  the  ploughshare  up  the  furrow. 
This  is  the  W.  hynt,  O.  W.  hent  (Zeuss,  100,  101),  a  way,  a  course;  compare  Lat. 
sent-is,  Gothic  sinths.  Hamlet's  words  would  convey  to  the  mind  of  a  West-coun- 
tryman a  very  forcible  image ;  the  sword,  in  its  shearing  through  the  flesh,  being 
compared  to  the  passage  of  a  ploughshare  through  the  earth. 

94>  95*  JOHNSON:  This  speech,  in  which  Ham.,  represented  as  a  virtuous  cha- 
racter, is  not  content  with  taking  blood  for  blood,  but  contrives  damnation  for  the 
man  that  he  would  punish,  is  too  horrible  to  be  read  or  to  be  uttered.  M.  MASON : 
Yet  some  moral  may  be  extracted  from  it,  as  all  his  subsequent  calamities  were 
owing  to  this  savage  refinement  of  revenge.  [Steevens  cites  from  Webster's 
White  Devil,  1 6 12;  The  Honest  Lawyer,  161 6;  the  third  of  Beau.  &  Fl.'s  Four 
Plays  in  One,  to  show  that  the  same  fiend-like  disposition  is  displayed  by  the 
various  characters  there  portrayed.  Malone,  to  the  same  end,  cites  Machin's  The 
Dumb  Knight,  1633.  As  this  does  not  illustrate  Sh.,  but  his  successors,  I  have  not 
repeated  the  half  page  from  the  Var.  1821.  Ed.]  Reed:  I  think  it  not  improb- 
able, that  when  Sh.  put  this  horrid  sentiment  into  the  mouth  of  Ham.,  he  might 
have  recollected  the  following  story :  '  One  of  these  monsters  meeting  his  enemie 
unarmed,  threatned  to  kill  him,  if  he  denied  not  God,  his  power,  and  essential 
properties,  viz.  his  mercy,  suffrance,  &c,  the  which  when  the  other,  desiring  life, 
pronounced  with  great  horror,  kneeling  upon  his  knees ;  the  bravo  cried  out,  nowi 
will  I  kill  thy  body  and  soul e,  and  at  that  instant  thrust  him  through  with  his  rapier.' 
—Brief  Discourse  of  the  Spanish  State,  with  a  Dialogue  annexed  intitled  Philoba* 
fills,  4to,  1590,  p.  24.    Caldecott  :  Sh.  had  a  full  justification  in  the  practice  of  tha 


284  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 

This  physic  but  prolongs  thy  sickly  days.  \Exit. 

King.    \Rising\   My  words  fly  up,  my  thoughts  remain 
below ; 

Words  without  thoughts  never  to  heaven  go.  [Exit. 

Scene  IV. .  The  Queen's  closet. 


Enter  Queen  and  Polonius. 

Pol.   He  will  come  straight.   Look  you  lay  home  to  him ; 
Tell  him  his  pranks  have  been  too  broad  to  bear  with, 
And  that  your  grace  hath  screen'd  and  stood  between 

97.  [Rising]  Rises.  Cap.  (after  up).  Enter  Queen...]  Enter  Gertrard.*. 

The   King  rises,  and   comes    forward.  Qq. 

Theob.  +  .     Om.  QqFf.  I.  He]  A  Qq. 

Scene  iv.]  Cap.      Scene  II.  R.owe.  straight]  strait  Qq,  jen. 

Scene  xi.  Pope,  Han.  Jen.    Scene  x.  He.. Mm;]  Two  lines,  Ff. 

Warb.  Johns.  2.  bear]  berre  Fa. 

The  Queen's  closet.]  Steev.   The  3.  screened   and]   scree*  nd,  and  Ft. 

Queen's  Apartment.  Rowe-f .  force*  nd,  andF^Y^.     Om.  Q'76. 

age  in  which  he  lived.  The  true  question  is  not  whether  this  practice  were  founded 
in  religion,  but  whether  or  not  Sh.  gave  a  faithful  picture  of  human  nature  in  a  bar- 
barous age.  With  our  ruder  Northern  ancestors,  revenge,  in  general,  was  handed 
down  in  families  as  a  duty,  and  the  more  refined  and  exquisite,  the  more  honorable 
it  was;  and  this  character  or. feature  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  every  book  that  in  those 
times  applies  to  the  subject.  And  it  was  a  subject  brought  upon  the  stage  by  subse- 
quent tragedians  as  late  as  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Sh.  has  here  in 
some  sort  laid  a  ground  for  the  introduction  of  it  by  making  the  King  himself  pro- 
claim (IV,  vii,  129) :  '  Revenge  should  have  no  bounds,'  and  he  makes  even  the 
philosophizing  and  moralizing  Squire  of  Kent,  in  his  beloved  retirement  from  the 
turmoils  of  the  world,  exclaim  on  killing  Cade,  2  Hen.  VI:  And  as  I  thrust  thy 
body  in  with  my  sword,  So  wish  I,  I  might  thrust  thy  soul  to  hell.'  Y/ordsworth 
{Shakespeare's  Knowledge  of  the  Bible,  p.  208)  finds  for  Ham.  the  same  palliation 
as  does  Caldecott. 

96.  physic]  Delius:  Hamlet  calls  his  temporary  forbearance  a  physic  which 
does  not  impart  life  to  his  foe,  but  prolongs  his  illness. 

96.  Hudson  :  Hamlet  here  flies  off  to  an  ideal  revenge,  in  order  to  quiet  his  filial 
feelings  without  violating  his  conscience ;  effecting  a  compromise  between  them,  by 
adjourning  a  purpose  which,  as  a  man,  he  dare  not  execute,  nor,  as  a  son,  abandon. 
He  afterwards  asks  Horatio : — '  Is't  not  a  perfect  conscience,  to  quit  him  with  this 
arm  ?'  which  confirms  the  view  here  taken,  as  it  shows  that  even  then  his  mind  was 
not  at  rest  on  that  score. 

97,  98.  Coleridge  :  Oh  what  a  lesson  concerning  the  essential  difference  between 
wishing  and  willing,  and  the  folly  of  all  motive-mongering,  while  the  individual 
self  remains! 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


HAMLET 


285 


Much  heat  and  him.     I'll  silence  me  e'en  here. 
Pray  you,  be  round  with  him. 

Ham.    \\Vithin~\  Mother,  mother,  mother !  5 

Queen.     I'll  warrant  you ; 
Fear  me  not     Withdraw,  I  hear  him  coming. 

[Polonius  hides  behind  the  arras 

Enter  Hamlet. 

Ham.  Now,  mother,  what's  the  matter  ? 

Queen.  Hamlet,  thou  hast  thy  father  much  offended. 

Ham.  Mother,  you  have  my  father  much  offended.  10 

Queen.  Come,  come,  you  answer  with  an  idle  tongue. 

Ham.  Go,  go,  you  question  with  a  wicked  tongue. 


4.  silence  me  e'en]  fdence  me  euen 
Qq.  fdence  me  e'ene  Yx.  filence  me  e'ne 
F3F  F4.  sconce  me  even  Han.  Sing.  El. 
Coll.  ii(MS),  Glo.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 
'sconce  me  e'en  Warb.  silence  me  in 
Long  MS.*    here  conceal  myfelfQ'']6. 

5.  with  him]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 
Ham... mother!]    Om.   Qq,  Pope, 

Han.  Cap.  Steev.  Var. 

6.  Queen.]  Qu.,  Que.  or  Queen.  Ff. 
Ger.  Qq  (and  throughout  the  scene,  ex- 
cept line  51,  where  it  is  Quee). 


6,  7.  r II. ..coming.]  Han.  r  11. ..not. 
One  line,  QqFf,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Jen.  MaL 
Del.     Prose,  Cam.  Cla. 

6.  warrant]  wait  Q^Qy    waite  Q4Q^ 

Withdraw]  you  withdraw  Han. 

7.  [Polonius  hides...]  Rowe  (subs.). 
Om.  QqFf. 

Enter  Hamlet.]  After  round,  line 
5,  in  Qq.    Enter  Hamlet,  abruptly.  Cap. 
12.  Go t  go]  Come,  go  F3F4. 

a  wicked]  an  idle  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald. 
Knt,  Del.  i. 


4.  silence]  Hanmer  :  'Sconce  is  the  same  as  insconce,  i.  e.  to  cover  or  secure. 
The  same  word  is  used  upon  a  like  occasion  in  Merry  Wives,  III,  iii,  96.  Johnson  : 
The  advocates  of  'sconce  forget  that  the  contrivance  of  Pol.  to  overhear  the  con- 
ference was  no  more  told  to  the  Queen  than  to  Ham.  *  I'll  silence,'  &c,  is  *  I'll  use 
no  more  words.'  Hunter  (ii,  256):  When  Qx  was  altered,  the  text  stood:  *  I'll 
ensconce  me  here  j'  in  printing  en  fell  out,  and  was  replaced  wrongly ;  sconce,  which 
remained,  was  then  altered  to  *  silence.'  Delius  :  As  elsewhere,  Polonius  here 
thinks  that  he  cannot  be  silent  without  letting  it  be  known  that  he  could  and  should 
say  much  more.  Dyce  :  ■  Silence '  may  be  right ;  but  Hanmer's  alteration  cannot  be 
called  an  improbable  one,  in  view  of  the  corresponding  words  of  Qt.  White:  Han- 
mer's change  is  very  plausible.  Staunton  :  Perhaps  Hanmer  is  right.  Cambridge 
Editors  :  We  have  adopted  Hanmer's  correction  because  of  the  corresponding  pas- 
sage in  Qt. 

5.  Ham.]  Dyce  (ed.  ii) :  I  certainly  am  not  disposed  to  find  fault  with  those 
editors  who  have  omitted  this  speech. 

7.  Polonius  hides]  See  Appendix,  The  Hystorie  of  Hamlet,  p.  97. 

12.  wicked]  Dyce:  Idle  of  the  Ff  was  evidently  caught  by  the  transcriber  or 
compositor  from  the  preceding  line.  Such  faulty  repetitions  are  extremely  frequent 
in  the  Folio  throughout  this  play.     See  *  my  lord,'  I,  v,  136;  'and  if  there,'  I,  v. 


286 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  to 


Queen,    Why,  how  now,  Hamlet  ? 

Ham.  What's  the  matter  now  ? 

Queen.     Have  you  forgot  me  ? 

Ham.  No,  by  the  rood,  not  so ; 

You  are  the  queen,  your  husband's  brother's  wife ; 
And — would  it  were  not  so ! — you  are  my  mother. 

Queen.    Nay,  then,  I'll  set  those  to  you  that  can  speak. 

Ham.  Come,  come,  and  sit  you  down;  you  shall  not  budge; 
You  go  not  till  I  set  you  up  a  glass 
Where  you  may  see  the  inmost  part  of  you. 

Queen.    What  wilt  thou  do?  thou  wilt  not  murder  me? 
Help,  help,  ho ! 

Pol.     [Behind"]  What,  ho !  help,  help,  help ! 

Ham.    [Drawing]  How  now !  a  rat  ?    Dead,  for  a  ducat, 
dead !  [Makes  a  pass  through  the  arras. 


*5 


20 


16.  And — would.... so /— you]  Pope 
(subs.).  And  would  it  were  not  fo,  you 
Qq.  But  would  you  were  not  fo.  You 
Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Del.  But,  'would, 
you  were  not  so  / —  You  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Del. 

17.  set]  send  Coll.  (MS),  El. 

18.  you]  Om.  Q'76. 
budge]  boudge  QqFxFa. 

19.  set  you  ttp]fet  up  FSF3F4. 

19,  20.  glass  Where.... you.]  gtajfe. 
Where... you?  Ff  (glajfe,  Fx). 

20.  inmost]  mojl  Qq.     vtmojl  Q'76. 
22.  Help,  help,  ho  /]  Helpe,  helpe,  koa. 

FtFa.     Help,  help,  hoa.  F3.     Helpe  how. 
Q2Q3.    Helpe  hoe.  Q4QS.  Help,  ho.  Pope 


+  ,  Jen.  El. 

23.  [Behind]  Cap.   Behind  the  arras. 
Rowe.    Om.  QqFf. 

What,  ho!.,  .help  l]  Ff.  What  how 
helpe.  QaQ3.  What  hoe  helpe.  QAQ$. 
What  ho,  help.  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  El. 

24.  [Drawing]    Draws.  Mai.   (after 
rat?).    Om.  QqFf. 

How. ..dead I]  Two  half  lines,  ai- 
viding  at  rat?  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Cald. 
Knt. 

ducat]  Duckat  Qq.  Ducate  Ff 
Ducket  Q'76. 

[Makes... .arras.]  Cap.  (subs.). 
Om.  QqFf. 


177;  'news,1  II,  ii,  52;  'your  Honesty,*  III,  i,  no;  ' had  spoke,'  III,  ii,  y,  'my 
choice/  III,  ii,  58;  'my  functions/  III,  ii,  164;  'this  same  skull,  sir,'  V,  i,  170; 
*  on  sir,'  V,  ii,  267.  White  :  The  Ff  may  be  right,  the  intended  emphasis  of 
Hamlet's  reply  being  in  that  case,  'you  question  with  an  idle  tongue.'  Knight 
(ed.  ii):  The  antithesis  is  in  'answer'  and  'question,'  and  not  in  'idle'  and 
'wicked.'  Besides,  'wicked'  was  too  strong  an  epithet  for  Ham.  to  apply  to  his 
mother, — inconsistent  with  that  filial  respect  which  he  never  wholly  abandoned. 

13,  14.  Why . . .  me  ?]  Walker  (Grit,  ii,  187) :  Perhaps  all  this  belongs  to  the 
Queen.    Dyce  (ed.  ii) :  I  do  not  think  so. 

14.  rood]  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  The  cross,  the  crucifix.  It  would  appear  that,  at  least 
in  earlier  times,  the  rood  signified  not  merely  the  cross,  but  the  image  of  Christ  on 
the  cross. 

24.  rat]  Collier  :  In  Shirley's  Traitor,  1635,  Depazzi  says  of  a  secreted  listener, 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.J 


HAMLET 


287 


Pol.     [Behind]  Oh,  I  am  slain !  [Falls  and  dies. 

Queen.  Oh  me,  what  hast  thou  done?  25 

Ham.     Nay,  I  know  not ;  is  it  the  king  ? 

Queen.     Oh,  what  a  rash  and  bloody  deed  is  this  ? 

Ham.     A  bloody  deed!  almost  as  bad,  good  mother. 
As  kill  a  king,  and  marry  with  his  brother. 

Queen.     As  kill  a  king  ? 

Ham.  Ay,  lady,  'twas  my  word. —  30 

[Lifts  up  the  arras  and  discovers  Polonius. 
Thou  wretched,  rash,  intruding  fool,  farewell ! 
I  took  thee  for  thy  better ;  take  thy  fortune ; 
Thou  find'st  to  be  too  busy  is  some  danger. — 
Leave  wringing  of  your  hands.     Peace !  sit  you  down, 
And  let  me  wring  your  heart;  for  so  I  shall,  35 

If  it  be  made  of  penetrable  stuff; 
If  damned  custom  have  not  brazed  it  so, 
That  it  is  proof  and  bulwark  against  sense. 


25.  [Behind]  Cap.    Om.  QqFf. 
[Falls  and  dies.]    falls  forward, 

and  dies.   Cap.     Killes   Polonius.   Ff. 
Om.  Qq. 

what  hast]  hajl  F3. 

26.  Nay. .. king  ?]  QqFf,  Rowe  +  Jen. 
Sta.  Ktly,  Cam.  Huds.  Cla.  Line  25 
ends  at  know  not ;  Cap.  et  cet. 

30.  kill]killd¥9.  &'//'</ F3F4,  Rowe. 

king?]  king.  Qq. 

'twas")  twas  F3.     it  was  Qq,  Jen. 

[Lifts.. .discovers...]  Glo.  +  .  Lifts 
...sees...  Dyce,  Sta.White  (after  line  26), 
Del.  Huds.  Lifts  up  the  Arras,  and  draws 
forth  Polonius.  (after  line  26),  Cap.  et 


cet.    Om.  QqFf,  Rowe  +  . 

31.  [To  Polonius.  Pope.  Om.  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Jen.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  +  , 
Del.  Huds. 

rash,  intruding]  rash-intruding 
Dyce  ii. 

32.  letter]  Qq,  Pope,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Del.  Huds. 
Betters  Ff  et  cet. 

33.  [Drops  the  arras.  White. 

37.  brazed]  bra/d  Qq.  brass1  dG\o.  +  » 

38.  is]  be  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var» 
EI.  Cam.  Cla. 

sense]  thy  fenfe  Q'03. 


<I  smell  a  rat  behind  the  hangings.' — Works,  vol.  ii,  p.  129,  ed.  Dyce.  [Gifford 
asks,  in  a  footnote :  *  But  how  did  this  sneer  at  Sh.  escape  the  wrath  of  Messrs 
Steevens  and  Malone?'  Ed.]  Elze:  According  to  Grimm,  Correspondance  Litte* 
raire  Secrete,  Jan.  IX,  1776,  '  Chevalier  Rutlige'  defends  this  exclamation  from  Vol- 
taire's sneer  on  the  ground  that '  a  rat '  was  not  only  symbolic,  but  also  that  it  often 
meant  a  spy.    Compare  the  phrase, '  smell  a  rat.* 

30.  kill  a  king  ?]  See  Appendix,  The  Hystorie  of  Hamblet,  p.  94  and  p.  100,  in 
reference  to  the  Queen's  innocence;  also  Q,,  line  1532. 

38.  proof  and  bulwark]  Clarendon  :  *  Proof,'  used  here  adjectively,  is  origin- 
ally a  substantive,  as  in  Macb.  I,  ii,  54,  and  elsewhere,  and  thus  suggests  *  bulwark/ 
which  would  scarcely  have  been  used  for  an  adjective  had  it  stood  alone. 

38.  sense]  Caldecott:  Feeling. 


288  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  iv 

Queen.    What  have  I  done,  that  thou  darest  wag  thy 
tongue 
In  noise  so  rude  against  me  ? 

Ham.  Such  an  act  40 

That  blurs  the  grace  and  blush  of  modesty, 
Calls  virtue  hypocrite,  takes  off  the  rose 
From  the  fair  forehead  of  an  innocent  love, 
And  sets  a  blister  there ;  makes  marriage  vows 
As  false  as  dicers'  oaths ;  oh,  such  a  deed  45 

As  from  the  body  of  contraction  plucks 

42.  hypocrite]  hippocrit  Q2Q,.     hipo-  Cald. 

crit  Q4.  45.  dicer?]  Theob.  ii.     Dicers  QqF£ 

off]  o/Qq.  dicer's  Cald. 
44.  sets]   makes  Ff,   Rowe,  Theob. 

42.  rose]  It  is  only  by  keeping  steadfastly  in  mind  the  many  benefits  which  we 
have  received  at  the  hands  of  the  early  commentators  that  we  can  listen  with  any 
patience  to  their  dispute  about  the  meaning  of  this  phrase.  Warburton  thinks  it 
refers  to  an  actual  flower  worn  on  the  side  of  the  face.  Steevens  accepts  the  flower 
but  denies  the  '  side  of  the  face,'  because  the  text  reads  *  forehead;'  it  cannot  mean 
a  blush,  ■  because  the  forehead  is  no  proper  place  for  a  blush  to  be  displayed  in.' 
It  must  be  a  rose  on  the  forehead,  and  in  proof  a  figure,  in  a  painted  glass  window 
representing  a  Morrice- Dance,  is  cited  that  bears  a  flower  on  the  forehead !  (I 
hope  here  be  truths  !)  It  makes  very  little  matter  that  this  flower  turns  out  to 
be  a  Deptford  Pink ;  the  flower  is  there,  and  the  rose  in  Hamlet  follows  as  of  course. 
Malone  is  rather  overpowered  by  this  display  of  learning,  but  ventures  to  suggest 
that  rose  might '  only  mean  the  roseate  hue.'  And  then,  as  if  frightened  at  his  own 
boldness,  hastens  to  add  that '  the  forehead  certainly  appears  to  us  an  odd  place  for 
the  hue  of  innocence  to  dwell  on ;'  and  yet  Sh.  has  represented  a  smile  there,  as  in 
Tro.  <5r*  Cres.  II,  ii,  205,  and  moreover,  *  that  part  of  the  forehead  which  is  situated 
between  the  eyebrows  seems  to  have  been  considered  by  our  poet  as  the  seat  of 
innocence  and  modesty,'  as  in  IV,  v,  119.  Boswell  closes  the  discussion  forever 
by  saying  that  *  "  rose"  is  put  generally  for  the  ornament,  the  grace,  of  an  innocent 
love.'  CALDECOTT  refers  to  the  proverb  frequent  in  Sh.,  and  found  in  The  London 
Prodigal,  1605  :  'As  true  as  the  skin  between  any  man's  brows.'  And,  lastly,  SINGER 
refers  to  Ophelia's  description  of  Ham.  as  *  the  rose  of  the  fair  state.' 

44.  blister]  Clarendon:  Brands  as  a  harlot.    Compare  Com.  of  Err.  II,  ii,  138. 

46.  contraction]  Warburton:  For  'marriage  contract.'  Caldecott:  Anni- 
hilates the  very  principle  of  contracts.  White  :  There  seems  to  be  no  better  ex- 
planation than  Warburton's.  But  I  suspect  that  there  is  corruption.  TsCHISCH- 
witz  :  Probably  a  misprint  for  contractation,  formed  by  analogy  with  the  Ital.  con- 
trattazione.  [This  conjectural  emendation  (which  Stratmann  terms  judicious, 
and  compares  with  affectation  of  the  Ff  for  ■  affection '  of  the  Qq  in  II,  ii,  422) 
Tschischwitz  inserts  in  the  text,  and  instructs  us  to  read  *  body  of '  as  a  trochee.  Ed.] 
Hudson  :  «  Contraction '  here  means  the  marriage  contract ;  of  which  Hamlet  holds 
religion  to  be  the  life  and  soul,  insomuch  that  without  this  it  is  but  as  a  lifeless  body. 


ACT  in,  sc.  iv.J  HAMLET  289 

The  very  soul,  and  sweet  religion  makes  4/ 

A  rhapsody  of  words ;  heaven's  face  doth  glow ; 

Yea,  this  solidity  and  compound  mass, 

With  tristful  visage,  as  against  the  doom,  50 

Is  thought-sick  at  the  act. 

Queen.  Ay  me,  what  act, 

That  roars  so  loud  and  thunders  in  the  index? 

48.  r hapsody]  rapfedy  Q3Q3'   rapfody  Qq,  Jen. 

Q^FjjF  .     rapfodie  Q  .     rapfidie  Fx.  50,  51.  doom.  Is]  doom.    '  Tis  Pope. 

doth]  dooes  Q2Q3Q..    does  Q  .  51.  thought-sick']  thought  fick  QaQ3- 

48.  49.  glow;    Yea,]   glow.  Yea   Ff.  ad.]  aft.   Ah  me  that  aft  Q' 76. 
glowe  Ore  Q^Qr  glow  Ore  Q4Q5-  glow  51,  52.  Ay... index  ?]  Prose,  Ff. 
O'er  Pope,  Warb,  Jen.  52.  Given  to  Ham.  in  Qq,  Warb. 

49.  solidity]  folidiry  Q4>  loud]    low'd  QaQ3-      low'de  Qt. 

50.  tristful]  trijlfull  FXF3F3.    heated  lowd  Q^F.,. 

and  must  soon  become  a  nuisance.  Rather  superstitious,  perhaps  ;  but  it  should  be 
considered  that  this  play  was  written  nearly  three  hundred  years  ago,  when  marriage 
was  more  a  '  despotism '  than  it  is  now.  CLARENDON :  The  word  has  probably 
never  been  used,  before  or  since,  in  the  same  sense. 

48.  rhapsody]  Clarendon  :  The  meaning  of  the  word  here  is  well  illustrated 
by  the  following  passage  from  Florio's  Montaigne,  p.  68,  ed.  1603:  'This  con- 
cerneth  not  those  mingle-mangles  of  many  kindes  of  stuffe,  or,  as  the  Grecians  call 
them,  Rapsodies? 

49.  solidity.. .mass]  Knight:  The  earth. 

50.  as  against]  Warburton  reads  '  and  as  'gainst,'  which  he  says  makes  « a 
fine  sense'  in  comparison  with  the  'sad  stuff'  of  the  original.     [See  I,  i,  158.] 

50.  doom]  That  is,  doomsday.  See  Macb.  II,  iii,  74.  Moberly  :  Heaven  blushe* 
at  you,  and  the  solid  mass  of  earth  is  sick  to  think  of  it,  as  if  it  were  waiting  for  the 
day  of  judgement.  Malone  asks :  Had  not  Sh.  St  Luke's  (xxi,  25,  26)  description 
of  the  last  day  in  his  thoughts  ?  Wordsworth  {Shakespeare* s  Knowledge  of  the 
Bible,  p.  305)  replies :  '  No  doubt  he  had;  but  why  not  also  the  parallel  descriptions 
of  Matthew  and  of  Mark?  Yes,  and  still  more,  of  Peter,  2  Ep.  iii,  7-1 1 ;  and  John, 
Rev.  xx,  11.  The  truth  is,  I  fear,  that  whatever  else  our  poet's  critics  have  been 
strong  in,  they  have,  for  the  most  part,  not  been  strong  in  knowledge  of  the  Scrip- 
tures ;  and  that  the  book  which  they  should  have  looked  to  first  and  most  for  help 
in  the  illustration  of  his  works  is  the  book  which  has  been  generally  looked  to  last 
and  least.' 

51.  Is  thought-sick]  Tschischwitz  omits  the  hyphen,  and  affirms  'Is'  to  b« 
the  '  historical  Present,'  that  is,  *  Is  thought  [to  be]  sick.' 

52.  and  . . .  index]  Warburton  [following  the  distribution  of  speeches  in  Qq]  : 
To  the  Queen's  question,  '  what  act?'  Ham.  replies  :  '  That  roars  so  loud  it  thundere 
to  the  Indies?  He  had  before  said,  Heav'n  was  shocked  at  it ;  he  now  tells  her  it 
resounded  all  the  world  over.  This  gives  us  a  very  good  sense  where  all  sense  was 
wanting.  Edwards  {Canons,  &C,  p.  156,  7th  ed.)  :  Sh.  uses  'index'  for  title,  or 
prologue.  The  Index  used  formerly  to  be  placed  at  the  beginning  of  a  book,  not 
it  the  end,  as  now.     Thus,  also,  in   Rich.  Ill :  II,  ii,  149 ;    and   Oth.   II,  i,  263. 

25  T 


29°  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  \y. 

Ham.     Look  here,  upon  this  picture,  and  on  this,  53 

The  counterfeit  presentment  of  two  brothers. 

Malone  :  Bullokar's  Expositor  defines  an  « Index  '  by  '  A  Table  in  a  booke.'  The 
table  was  almost  always  prefixed  to  books.  Indexes,  in  the  modern  sense,  were  veiy 
uncommon.  Dyce  {Gloss.):  Index,  a  prelude,  anything  preparatory  to  another. 
Tschischwitz  :  The  explanations  of  *  in  the  index '  are  very  lame.  Instead  of 
'  in,'  we  should  manifestly  read  is,  and  the  sense  is,  *  What  act,  that  roars  so  loud 
and  thunders,  is  my  accuser  ?'  '  index '  being  understood  in  its  ancient  judicial 
sense. 

53.  picture]  Davies  {Dram.  Misc.,  Dublin,  1784,  vol.  iii,  p.  63) :  It  has  been  the 
constant  practice  of  the  stage,  since  the  Restoration,  for  Ham.  to  produce  from  his 
pocket  two  pictures  in  little  of  his  father  and  uncle,  not  much  bigger  than  large  coins 
or  medallions.  Instead  of  movable  scenery,  which  was  first  introduced  from  France 
by  Betterton  in  1662,  Shakespeare's  stage  made  use  of  tapestry.  Two  full-length 
portraits  in  the  tapestry  of  the  Queen's  closet  might  be  of  service  in  this  scene. 
Steevens  :  It  is  evident  from  the  words,  '  A  station,'  &c,  that  these  pictures,  which 
are  introduced  as  miniatures  on  the  stage,  were  meant  for  whole  lengths,  being  part 
of  the  furniture  of  the  Queen's  closet.  Ham.,  who  in  a  former  scene  had  censured 
those  who  gave  *  forty,  fifty  ducats  apiece'  for  his  uncle's  'picture  in  little,'  would 
hardly  have  condescended  to  carry  such  a  thing  in  his  pocket.  Malone  :  The  in- 
troduction of  miniatures  in  this  place  appears  to  be  a  modern  innovation.  A  print 
prefixed  to  Rowe's  edition  of  Hamlet,  1709,  proves  this.  There  the  two  royal  por- 
traits are  exhibited  as  half-lengths,  hanging  in  the  Queen's  closet ;  and  either  thus, 
or  as  whole-lengths,  they  were  probably  exhibited  from  the  time  of  the  original 
performance  to  the  death  of  Betterton.  To  half-lengths,  however,  the  same  objec- 
tion lies  as  to  miniatures.  Steevens  :  We  may  also  learn  that  from  this  print  the 
trick  of  kicking  the  chair  down  on  the  appearance  of  the  Ghost  was  adopted  by 
modern  Hamlets  from  the  practice  of  their  predecessors.  Caldecott  objects  to 
miniatures,  because  the  audience  could  not  then  be  permitted  to  judge  of  what  they 
hear,  nor  make  any  estimate  of  the  comparative  excellence  of  the  features,  nor  could 
the  '  station '  and  the  '  combination  and  the  form '  be  adequately  represented  in  so 
confined  a  space.  Completely  to  do  away  with  the  objection  that  it  is  not  probable 
that  Ham.  should  have  about  him  his  uncle's  picture,  a  Bath  actor  once  suggested 
the  snatching  of  it  from  his  mother's  neck.  Hunter  (ii,  256)  :  Perhaps  Holman's 
way  was  the  best.  The  picture  of  the  then  King  hung  up  in  the  lady's  closet,  but 
the  miniature  of  the  king  who  was  dead  was  produced  by  Ham.  from  his  bosom. 
[Fitzgerald  {Life  of  Garrick,  ii,  65)  suggests  that  the  pictures  be  seen  with  the 
mind's  eye  only ;  a  suggestion  adopted  by  Irving  and  Salvini.  Fechter  follows 
the  suggestion  of  the  Bath  actor  mentioned  by  Caldecott,  and  tears  the  miniature 
from  his  mother's  neck  and  casts  it  away.  Rossi  not  only  tears  it  from  his  mother's 
neck,  but  dashes  it  to  the  ground  and  stamps  on  the  fragments.  Edwin  Booth 
makes  use  of  two  miniatures,  taking  one  from  his  own  neck,  and  the  other  from  his 
mother's. — A.  I.  Fish.] 

54.  counterfeit  presentment]  Caldecott  :  The  picture,  or  mimic  represent 
Hon.  See  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii,  1 16.  Clarendon  :  '  Counterfeit,'  of  course,  is  ht.f 
nsed  as  an  adjective  It  is  given  by  Cotgrave  as  an  equivalent  to  the  French  pout. 
traict. 


act  in,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  29 1 

See  what  a  grace  was  seated  on  this  brow ;  55 

Hyperion's  curls  ;  the  front  of  Jove  himself; 

An  eye  like  Mars,  to  threaten  and  command ; 

A  station,  like  the  herald  Mercury 

New-lighted  on  a  heaven-kissing  hill ; 

A  combination  and  a  form  indeed,  60 

Where  every  god  did  seem  to  set  his  seal 

To  give  the  world  assurance  of  a  man ; 

This  was  your  husband.     Look  you  now,  what  follows ; 

Here  is  your  husband ;  like  a  mildew'd  ear, 

Blasting  his  wholesome  brother.     Have  you  eyes  ?  65 

Could  you  on  this  fair  mountain  leave  to  feed, 

And  batten  on  this  moor  ?     Ha  !  have  you  eyes  ? 

55.  was]  Om.  F2F3F4.  60.  and  a]  and  Q4QS« 

this]  his  Q4QsFf,  Rowe,Cald.  Knt.  64.  mildew'd]      mildewed    Q2Q3Q4. 

57.  and]  or  Ff,  Rowe+,  Knt.  mil-dewed  Q  . 

59.  New- lighted ]  Pope.    New  lighted  ear]  eare  QqFf.    deareF9.    Deer 

QqFt.     Now  lighted  F9F  F4,  Rowe.  ^j?*; 

a  heaven- kissing]  a  heaue,a  kifs-  65.  brother]  breath  Ff. 

ing  Qq.     a  Heauen  kijfing  F  .  67.  batten]  batton  Q4QS- 

55.  this]  For  instances  of  the  confusion  in  Ff  of  his  and  this,  see  Walker,  Crit. 
ii,  219. 

56.  Hyperion]  See  I,  ii,  140. 

58.  station]  Theobald:  An  attitude  [in  standing].  See  Ant.  <Sr»  Cleo.  Ill, 
iii,  22. 

59.  Malone  :  It  is  not  improbable  that  Sh.  caught  this  image  from  Phaer's  sEneid, 
book  iv  [line  246. — Clarendon]  : — 

4  And  now  approaching  neere,  the  top  he  seeth  and  mighty  lims 
Of  Atlas,  mountain  tough,  that  Heauen  on  boystrous  shoulders  beares;  .... 
There -first  on  ground  with  wings  of  might  doth  Mercury  arrive.' 

CLARENDON:  The  first  seven  books  of  Phaer's  translation  were  published  in  1558, 
the  whole  sEneid  in  1573,  the  two  last  books  and  the  major  part  of  the  tenth  being 
translated  by  Thomas  Twyne. 

64.  ear]  Observe,  in  Textual  Notes,  the  gradual  corruption  of  '  ear '  into  Deer , 
the  compositors  were  misled  by  that  which  they  corrupted.  Ed. 

66.  fair]  Clarendon  :  This  epithet  seems  either  to  have  suggested  the  word 
*  moor '  in  the  following  line,  or  to  have  been  suggested  by  it. 

66.  leave]  Leave  off,  cease.     See  II,  i,  51;  III,  ii,  164;  III,  iv,  34. 

66.  to  feed]  See  Abbott,  cited  at  III,  ii,  164. 

67.  batten]  Wedgwood  :  To  thrive,  to  feed,  to  become  fat.  Dutch  bat,  bet,  better, 
more.  Steevens  :  Thus,  Marlowe's  Jew  of  Malta  [p.  297,  ed.  Dyce,  1850]  :  ' — a 
mess  of  porridge  ?  that  will  preserve  life,  make  her  round  and  plump,  and  batten 
more  than  you  are  aware.'  Also,  Claudius  Tiberius  Nero,  1607  :  ' — and  for  milk  I 
battened  was  with  blood.'     Caldecott  :  Thus,  Milton's  Lycidas,  1.  29 :  •  Battening 


292  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  iv. 

You  cannot  call  it  love,  for  at  your  age 

The  hey-day  in  the  blood  is  tame,  it's  humble, 

And  waits  upon  the  judgement;  and  what  judgement  70 

Would  step  from  this  to  this  ?     Sense  sure  you  have, 

Else  could  you  not  have  motion ;  but  sure  that  sense 

Is  apoplex'd ;  for  madness  would  not  err, 

69.  in  the]  of  the  Q'76.  7 'I-76.  Sense.... difference.]    Om.    F£ 

it's]  its  Fa.  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

71.  step]  stoop  Coll.  ii  (MS),  El.  72.  motion]  notion  Warb.  Johns. 

our  flocks  with  the  fresh  dews  of  night.'  Dyce  (Gloss.):  'To  batten  (grow  fat), 
pinguesco.' — Coles's  Lat.  and  Eng.  Diet.  Clarendon  :  Cotgrave  gives  "  to  battle ' 
as  equivalent  to  *  Prendre  chair,'  s.  v.  *  Chair.'  The  word  ■  battels '  is  no  doubt 
derived  from  the  same  root.  It  occurs  transitively  in  the  above  quotation  from 
Marlowe  and  Milton,  and  intransitively  in  Jonson's  Eox,  I,  i :  '  With  these  thoughts 
so  battens.' 

69.  hey-day]    Steevens:    Thus,  in  Ford's   '  Tis  Pity   She's  a    Whore,   1633: 

' must  The  hey-day  of  your  luxury  be  fed  Up  to  a  surfeit.'     Caldecott  :  High 

day  is  Johnson's  explanation.  It  must  mean  the  meridian  glow.  See  '  such  high, 
day  wit.' — Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  ix,  98.  Wedgwood  :  German  Heyda  !  Heysa  !  excla- 
mations of  high  spirits,  active  enjoyment.  Hence,  hey-day,  the  vigor  and  high 
spirits  of  youth,  where  the  spelling  is  probably  modified  under  an  erroneous  im- 
pression that  there  is  something  in  the  meaning  of  the  word  which  indicates  a 
certain  period  of  life.  Clarendon  :  The  meaning  is  obvious,  but  the  derivation 
uncertain. 

71.  step]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  Stoop  is  from  the  (MS)  with  evident  fitness,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  disadvantageous  comparison  Ham.  is  drawing.  Elze  pronounces  this  a 
brilliant  emendation. 

71.  Sense]  Warburton:  From  what  philosophy  our  editors  learnt  this,  I  cannot 
tell.  Since  motion  depends  so  little  upon  sense,  that  the  greatest  part  of  motion  in 
the  universe  is  amongst  bodies  devoid  of  sense.  We  should  read :  *  Else,  could  you 
not  have  notion'  i.  e.  intellect,  reason,  &c.  This  alludes  to  the  famous  peripatetic 
principle  of  Nil  Jit  in  intellectu,  quod  non  fuerit  in  sensu.  Capell  (i,  140) :  '  Sense5 
Is  reason  ;  since  she  moved  and  performed  other  actions  that  belonged  to  humanity, 
the  presumption  was  she  had  the  reason  belonging  to  it.  Steevens  :  Whichsoever 
of  the  readings  be  the  true  one,  the  poet  was  not  indebted  to  this  boasted  philoso- 
phy [referred  to  by  Warburton]  for  his  choice.  MALONE :  ■  Sense '  has  been  already 
used  for  sensation  in  line  38,  above.  Staunton  :  The  meaning  is :  «  Sense  (i.  e. 
the  sensibility  to  appreciate  the  distinction  between  external  objects)  you  must  have, 
or  you  would  no  longer  feel  the  impulse  of  desire.'  This  signification  of  '  motion' 
might  be  illustrated  by  numerous  examples  from  our  early  writers,  but  the  accom- 
panying out  of  Sh.  will  suffice:  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  iv,  59;  Oth.  I,  iii,  95;  Ibid.  I, 
iii,  334.  Clarendon  :  '  Motion '  is  emotion,  as  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  cited  above. 
Moberly  inclines  to  Staunton's  explanation. 

73.  apoplex'd]  Clarendon  :  We  have  '  apoplex,'  for  '  apoplexy,'  in  Ben  Jonscn, 
For.  I,  i,  p.   188,  ed.  Gifford:  'How  does  his  apoplex?'     And  in  Beau.  &  Fl. 


act  III,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  293 

Nor  sense  to  ecstasy  was  ne'er  so  thrall'd 

But  it  reserved  some  quantity  of  choice,  75 

To  serve  in  such  a  difference.     What  devil  was't 

That  thus  hath  cozen'd  you  at  hoodman-blind  ? 

Eyes  without  feeling,  feeling  without  sight,  tap 

Ears  without  hands  or  eyes,  smelling  sans  all,     ^ 

Or  but  a  sickly  part  of  one  true  sense  80 

Could  not  so  mope. 

O  shame  !  where  is  thy  blush  ?     Rebellious  hell, 

If  thou  canst  mutine  in  a  matron's  bones, 

To  flaming  youth  let  virtxrer15e  as  wax 

74.  sense]  fenc  Q4  Pope,  Han. 

77.  cozen'd]    cofund   QaQ3-      cofond  79.  sans]  fance  Qq. 

Q  Q  .     coufend  FxFa.  81,82.   Could. Mush?]  One  line,  Qq. 

hoodman]  hodman  Qq.  82.    Rebellious   hell]     Separate    line, 

hoodman-blind]  Hyphen  om.,  Q2  Qq. 

Q  ,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  hell]  heat  Han. 

78-81.  Eyes. ..mope.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  83.  mutine]  mutiny  Rowe+,  Jen. 

Philaster,  II,  ii  :  '  She's  as  cold  of  her  favour  as  an  apoplex.'  The  word  is  not 
found  in  Sh. ;  for  the  reading  ■  apoplex  '  in  2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iv,  130,  is  a  conjectural 
emendation  made  by  Pope  for  the  metre's  sake. 

73.  err]  Clarendon  :  '  Would  not  err  so,'  the  sense  being  completed  by  what 
follows. 

74.  thrall'd]  Hudson  :  Sense  was  never  so  dominated  by  the  delusions  of  in- 
sanity but  that  it  retained  some  power  of  choice. 

75.  quantity]  Clarendon:  'Portion.'  Some  disparagement  is  implied  in  the 
word,  as  in  III,  ii,  38  ;  V,  i,  258;  King  John,  V,  iv,  23. 

77.  hoodman-blind]  Singer  :  '  The  Hoodwinke  play,  or  hoodmanblinde,  inc 
some  places  called  the  blindmanbuf.' — Baret's  Alvearie.  Collier  (ed.  2) :  An  ex- 
planation of  the  game,  if  wanted,  may  be  found  in  Strutt's  Sports  and  Pastimes. 
Clarendon:  See  Alls  Well,  IV,  iii,  136.  Cotgrave  gives:  '  Clignemusset.  The 
childish  play  called  Hodman  blind,  Harrie-racket,  or,  are  you  all  hid.' 

81.  mope]  Steevens:  Could  not  exhibit  such  marks  of  stupidity.  See  Temp. 
V,  i,  239. 

82.  hell]  Warburton  :  Hanmer's  change  is  nonsense.  White  :  Hanmer's 
change  is  very  specious. 

83.  mutine]  Steevens:  Mutineers  are  called  'murines  '  in  V,  ii,  6.  Malone. 
To  '  mutine '  anciently  signified  to  rise  in  mutiny.  Thus,  in  Knolles's  History  of 
the  Turks,  1603  :  « The  Janisaries — became  wonderfully  discontented  and  began  to 
mutine  in  diverse  parts  of  the  citie.'  Clarendon  :  See  Jonson's  Sejanus,  III,  i : 
*  Had  but  thy  legions  there  rebell'd  or  mutined.'  The  verb  does  not  occur  again  in 
Sh.  Cotgrave  gives:  'Mutiner:  to  mutine,'  and  'Mutinateur:  a  mutiner.'  Thfe» 
form,  mutiner,  occurs  in  Cor.  I,  i,  254,  but  in  Temp.  Ill,  ii,  41,  Yt  has  '  mutineere/ 
TSee  also  Walker,  Vers.  222.] 

25* 


294  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  iv 

And  melt  in  her  own  fire ;  proclaim  no  shame  85 

When  the  compulsive  ardour  gives  the  charge, 
Since  frost  itself  as  actively  doth  burn, 
And  reason  panders  will. 

Queen.  O  Hamlet,  speak  no  more ; 

Thou  turn'st  mine  eyes  into  my  very  soul, 

And  there  I  see  such  black  and  grained  spots  90 

As  will  not  leave  their  tinct. 

Ham.  Nay,  but  to  live 

In  the  rank  sweat  of  an  enseamed  bed, 


* 


\ 


86.  ardour]    Pope.      ardure   QqFf,  my  Qq. 
Rowe.  90.  grained]  greeued Q9Q3Q..  greiuea 

88.  And]  As  Ft,  Rowe.  Qg. 

panders']  pardons  Qq,  Pope,Tsch.  91.  not  leave A  Isaue  there  Qq. 

Hamlet]  Om.  Seymour.  92.  enseamed]    infeemed  Q2Q3-     in 


89.  eyes  into  my  very]  very  eyes  into         cejluous  QAQS,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Jen. 


85.  her  own  fire]  Delius  :  This  refers  to  'flaming  youth.' 
88.  panders]  Theobald:  Suffers  Reason  to  be  the  Bawd  to  Appetite.    Malone: 
See  Ven.  &>  Ad.  792. 

90.  grained]  Marsh  (Lectures  on  the  English  Language,  New  York,  1859,  p. 
67,  et  seq.)  :  Granum,  in  Latin,  signifies  a  seed  or  kernel,  and  it  was  early  applied 
to  all  small  objects  resembling  seeds,  and  finally  to  all  minute  particles.  Hence  it 
was  applied  to  the  round,  seed-like  form  of  the  dried  body,  or  rather  ovarium,  of  an 
insect  of  the  genus  coccus,  which  furnished  a  variety  of  red  dyes.  Granum  becomes 
grana  in  Spanish,  graine  in  French,  and  grain  in  English,  meaning  a  dye  produced 
by  the  coccus  insect,  often  called  in  commerce  kermes.  The  color  obtained  from 
kermes  or  grain  was  peculiarly  durable.  When,  then,  a  merchant  recommended  his 
purple  stuffs  as  being  dyed  in  grain,  he  originally  meant  that  they  were  dyed  with 
kermes,  and  would  wear  well;  and  this  phrase  was  afterwards  applied  to  other 
colors,  as  a  mode  of  expressing  the  quality  of  durability.  See  Com.  of  Err.  Ill,  ii, 
108;  and  Twelfth  Night,  I,  v,  256.  In  both  these  examples  [as  also  in  the  present 
instance  from  Hamlet]  it  is  the  sense  of  permanence  (a  well-known  quality  of  the 
purple  produced  by  the  grain  or  kermes)  that  is  expressed.  It  is  familiarly  known 
that  if  wool  be  dyed  before  spinning,  the  color  is  usually  more  permanent  than  when 
the  spun  yarn  or  manufactured  cloth  is  first  dipped  in  the  tincture.  When  the  origi- 
nal sense  of  grain  grew  less  familiar,  and  it  was  used  chiefly  as  expressive  of  fast- 
ness of  color,  the  name  of  the  effect  was  transferred  to  an  ordinary  known  cause,  and 
dyed  in  grain,  originally  meaning  dyed  with  kermes,  then  dyed  with  fast  color,  came 
at  last  to  signify  dyed  in  the  wool  or  other  raw  material.  Clarendon  :  Cotgrave  has 
'  Graine  :  .  . .  graine  wherewith  cloth  is  dyed  in  graine ;  Scarlet  dye,  Scarlet  in  graine.' 

91.  leave]  Steevens:  'To  part  with,  give  up.'  See  Two  Gent.  IV,  iv,  79; 
Mer.  of  Ven.  V,  i,  172. 

92.  enseamed]  Theobald  :  Seam  is  properly  the  fat  or  grease  of  a  hog.  It  i% 
used  in  Tro.  <5r»  Cres.  II,  iii,  195.  Steevens:  Beau.  &  Fl.  use  inseamed  \n  the  same 
tense.     See  [  Triumph  of  Death,  p.  535,  vol.  ii,  ed.  Dyce]  :  '  His  lechery  inseamed 


act  III,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  295 

Stcw'd  in  corruption,  honeying  and  making  love  93 

Dver  the  nasty  sty, — 

Queen.  O,  speak  to  me  no  more ; 

These  words  like  daggers  enter  in  mine  ears.  95 

No  more,  sweet  Hamlet ! 

Ham.  A  murderer  and  a  villain  ; 

A  slave  that  is  not  twentieth  part  the  tithe 
Of  your  precedent  lord ;  a  vice  of  kings ; 

94.  sty, — ]  sty  ; —  Theob.    Jiie.  Qq.         Cam. 

Sfye.F^JF.    Sty.  F<t  Rowe,  Pope,  sty!  97.  that  is  not]  that's  not  the  Q'70. 

Johns.  that  is  not  a  Ktly. 

to  me]  Om.  Pope  +  .  not]  not'  Ed.  conj. 

me  no]  me,  no  Ff,  Rowe.  twentieth]  twentith  Qq. 

95.  mine]    Ff.      my   Qq,    Cap.  Jen.  tithe]  tythe  Ff.     kyth  Qq. 

upon  him.'  In  The  Book  of  Haukyng,  bl.  1.,  n.  d.,  we  are  told  that  '  ensayme  of  a 
hauke  is  the  grece.'  In  Randle  Holme's  Academy  of  Armory  and  Blazon,  B.  II, 
ch.  ii,  p.  238,  we  are  told  that  '  Enseame  is  the  purging  of  a  hawk  from  her  glut 
and  grease.'  From  the  next  page  in  the  same  work  we  learn  that  the  glut  is  '  a 
slimy  substance  in  the  belly  of  the  hawk.'  Henley  :  In  the  West  of  England  the 
inside  fat  of  a  goose,  when  dissolved  by  heat,  is  called  its  seam.  White  :  The 
phrase  is  so  gross  that,  were  it  not  for  Hamlet's  mood,  we  might  willingly  believe 
that  incestuous  of  Q4QS  is  the  true  text.  [Cotgrave  gives  :  ■  Gramouse,  a  dish  made 
of  slices  of  cold  meat  fryed  with  Hogs  seame.'  There  is  also  a  note  on  this  passage  in 
the  valuable  essay:  New  Shakespearian  Interpretations,  Edin.  Rev.  Oct.  1872,  p. 
355,  but  the  foregoing  explanations  are  ample  for  so  unsavory  a  subject.  Ed.] 

95.  enter  in]  Abbott  (§  159) :  In  for  into,  with  enter,  see  Rich.  II :  II,  iii, 
160;  Rich.  Ill;  V,  iii,  227. 

97.  tithe]  Stratmann  :  Kyth  of  the  Qq  is  evidently  the  true  reading. 

98.  vice]  Theobald  was  the  first  who  noted  that  this  means  « that  buffoon  cha- 
racter which  used  to  play  the  Fool  in  old  Plays.'  In  the  Variorum  notes  to  2  Hen. 
IV:  III,  ii,  343,  various  fanciful  etymologies  of  the  word  are  given.  Douce  (i,  468) 
closes  the  discussion  by  showing  that  the  character  in  the  old  moral-plays,  known  as 
the  '  Vice,'  was  doubtless  so  named  from  the  vicious  qualities  attributed  to  him,  and 
from  the  mischievous  nature  of  his  general  conduct.  Collier  [Hist,  of  Eng.  Dram. 
Poetry,  ii,  264,  et  sea.)  gives  the  best  account  of  this  curious  personage  in  a  passage 
quoted  by  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  As  the  Devil  now  and  then  appeared  without  the  Vice, 
so  the  Vice  sometimes  appeared  without  the  Devil.  Malone  tells  us  that  '  the  prin- 
cipal employment  of  the  Vice  was  to  belabor  the  Devil;'  but,  although  he  was 
frequently  so  engaged,  he  had  higher  duties.  He  figured  now  and  then  in  the 
religious  plays  of  a  later  date,  and,  in  The  Life  and  Repentance  of  Mary  Mag- 
dalen, 1567,  he  performed  the  part  of  her  lover,  before  her  conversion,  under  the 
name  of  Infidelity;  in  King  Darius,  1565,  he  also  acted  a  prominent  part,  by 
his  own  impulses  to  mischief,  under  the  name  of  Iniquity,  without  any  prompting 
from  the  representative  of  the  principle  of  evil.  Such  was  the  general  style  of  the 
Vice,  and  as  Iniquity  he  is  spoken  of  by  Sh.  (Rich.  Ill :  III,  i,  82)  and  Ben  Jonson 
{ Staple  of  News,  second  Intermean).     The  Vice  and  Iniquity  seem,  however,  some- 


296  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  iv. 

A  cutpurse  of  the  empire  and  the  rule, 

That  from  a  shelf  the  precious  diadem  stole  100 

And  put  it  in  his  pocket ! 

Queen.  No  more ! 

Ham.     A  king  of  shreds  and  patches — 

Enter  Ghost. 

Save  me,  and  hover  o'er  me  with  your  wings, 

99.  the  rule,]  a  rogue  Rann  conj.  Ff.    patches,  all  unseemly.  Seymoui. 

101.  pocket!']  pocket,  a —  Seymour.  Enter  Ghost.]  Sing,  ii,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Queen.    No  more!]  Om.    QQ,         Ktly,  Glo.  +  ,  Del.  Huds.     Before  line 

Pope.  102  in  QqFf  et  cet.     Enter  the  Ghoft  in 

No]  Oh!  no  Han.  his  night gowne.  Qf,  Ktly.    Enter  Ghosf 

102.  of... patches]  Separate  line,  Steev.         unarmed.  Coll.  (MS). 

Cald.  Knt.  103.   [Starting  up.  Rowe +  ,  Jen. 

patches — ]  patches,  Qq.    patches. 

times  to  have  been  distinct  persons,  and  he  was  not  unfrequently  called  by  the  name 
of  particular  vices ;  thus,  in  Lusty  yuventus,  the  Vice  performs  the  part  of  Hypoc- 
risy :  in  Common  Conditions  he  is  called  Conditions ;  in  Like  will  to  Like,  he  is 
named  Nichol  New-fangle ;  in  The  Trial  of  Treason  his  part  is  that  of  Inclination ; 
in  All  for  Money  he  is  called  Sin ;  in  Tom  Tyler  and  his  Wife,  Desire ;  and  in 

Appius  and  Virginius,  Haphazard Though  Douce  is  unquestionably  correct 

when  he  states  that  the  Vice  '  was  generally  dressed  in  a  fool's  habit '  [hence  the 
expression  in  Hamlet,  '  A  king  of  shreds  and  patches.' — Dyce],  he  did  not  by  any 
means  constantly  wear  the  parti-colored  habiliments  of  a  fool ;  he  was  sometimes 
required  to  act  a  gallant,  and  now  and  then  to  assume  the  disguise  of  virtues  it  suited 
his  purpose  to  personate.  In  The  Trial  of  Treasure,  1567,  he  was  not  only  pro- 
vided, as  was  customary,  with  his  wooden  dagger,  but,  in  order  to  render  him  more 

ridiculous,  with  a  pair  of  spectacles  (no  doubt  of  a  preposterous  size) The 

Vice,  like  the  Fool,  was  sometimes  furnished  with  a  dagger  of  lath,  and  it  was  not 

unusual  that  it  should  be  gilt Tattle  [in  Jonson's  Staple  of  News]  observes 

that  '  there  is  never  a  fiend  to  cany  him  [the  Vice]  away,'  and  in  the  first  Inter- 
mean  of  the  same  play  Mirth  leads  us  to  suppose  that  it  was  a  very  common  termi- 
nation of  the  adventures  of  the  Vice  for  him  to  be  carried  off  to  hell  on  the  back  of 
the  Devil ;  '  he  would  carry  away  the  Vice  on  his  back,  quick  to  hell,  in  every  play 
where  he  came.'  In  The  Longer  thou  livest  the  more  Tool  thou  art,  and  in  Like 
will  to  Like,  the  Vice  is  disposed  of  nearly  in  this  summary  manner :  in  the  first, 
Confusion  carries  him  to  the  Devil,  and  in  the  last,  Lucifer  bears  him  off  to  the  in- 
fernal regions  on  his  shoulders.  In  King  Darius  the  Vice  runs  to  hell  of  his  own 
accord,  to  escape  from  Constancy,  Equity,  and  Charity.  According  to  Bishop  Hars- 
net  (in  a  passage  cited  by  Malone, — Shakespeare,  by  Boswell,  iii,  27),  the  Vice  was 
in  the  habit  of  riding  and  beating  the  Devil,  at  other  times  than  when  he  was  carried 
against  his  will  to  punishment. 

99.  cutpurse]  Clarendon  :  Purses  were  usually  worn  outside  attached  to  the 
girdl~ 

102.   Enter  Ghost]  Collier  (ed.  2):  The  stage  direction  of  Qx  shows  that  at 


act  in,  sc.  !▼.]  HAMLET  297 

You  heavenly  guards  ! — What  would  your  gracious  figure  ? 
Queen.     Alas,  he's  mad  !  105 

Ham.     Do  you  not  come  your  tardy  son  to  chide, 

That,  lapsed  in  time  and  passion,  lets  go  by 

The  important  acting  of  your  dread  command  ? 

Oh,  say ! 

Ghost.     Do  not  forget.     This  visitation  I IO 

Is  but  to  whet  thy  almost  blunted  purpose. 

104.  your]  you  Ff.  you,  Rowe,  Cald.  107,  108.  passion. ..dread]  per/on... 
Knt,  Coll.  El.  Corson.                                        dead Q'76. 

105.  Om.  Seymour.  109.   Oh.  say  /]  As  in  Theob.    Closes 
he's]  hee's  Qq.     hes  Ft.                        previous  line,  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope. 
mad  I]    mad —    Theob.    Warb.  ill.  almost  blunted]    almost-blunted 

Johns.  Jen.  Ktly,  Huds. 

that  date,  in  this  scene,  the  spirit  was  not  apparelled  as  when  it  had  before  appeared 
on  the  platform.  This  is  important,  because  it  completely  explains  Hamlet's  excla- 
mation in  line  135.  In  the  (MS)  it  is  unarmed.  If,  therefore,  the  Ghost  did  not 
wear  a  'nightgown,'  he  was  unarmed  at  the  time  of  the  old  annotator.  Elze: 
'Who,'  asks  Goethe  (Nachgelassene  Werke,  voL  v,  p.  61),  in  reference  to  the  stage- 
direction  in  Qx,  '  does  not  feel  a  momentary  pang  on  comprehending  this  ?  to  whom 
is  it  not  repulsive  ?  And  yet  when  we  grasp  it,  and  reflect  upon  it,  we  find  that  it 
is  the  right  way.'     The  Ghost  is  not  here  introduced,  as  in  Act  I,  in  warlike  guise, 

but  in  his  every-day  clothing We  must  not  be  too  precise  in  the  matter  of 

this  nightgown, — it  refers  to  the  ordinary  clothes  of  the  old  king.  Keightley 
{Exp.  p.  294) :  As  the  Ghost  makes  but  one  short  speech,  if  it  could  be  so  managed, 
it  would  be  more  psychologic  and  effective  for  him  to  remain  invisible,  except  to 
Ham.  mentally,  and  his  voice  only  be  heard  by  the  audience.  Clarendon  :  Night- 
gown here  is  the  same  as  dressing-gown. 

103.  me  . .  .  me]  Marshall  (p.  51) :  The  use  of  the  singular  number  may  be 
accidental,  or  it  may  intimate  that  Ham.  felt  this  visitation  to  be  addressed  to  him 
alone.     On  the  former  occasion  he  used  the  plural. 

104.  would  your]  Dyce  :  The  compositor  of  the  Folio  has  here  omitted  by  mis- 
take the  letter  r.  Stratmann  agrees  with  Dyce.  Corson  :  Making  '  figure '  the 
vocative  [as  in  Rowe's  text]  is  the  better  reading.  '  Figure '  doesn't  make,  logically, 
a  very  good  subject  to  '  would.' 

107.  time  and  passion]  Johnson  :  That,  having  suffered  time  to  slip  and.  passion 
to  cool,  lets  go,  &c.  Clarendon  :  Or  rather  the  indulgence  of  mere  passion  has 
diverted  him  from  the  execution  of  his  purpose.  Collier  (ed.  2) :  The  (MS)  has 
fume  for  '  time.'  We  do  not  adopt  fume,  because,  though  it  may  have  been  the 
word  used  by  some  actor  when  the  old  annotator  saw  the  play,  we  doubt  if  it  were 
the  word  of  Sh.,  who  probably  used  '  laps'd  in  time '  to  indicate  Hamlet's  indecision, 
which  had  allowed  the  proper  period  for  revenge  to  escape.  Elze  applauds  and 
adopts  fume. 

108.  important]  Clarendon  :  Urgent,  requiring  immediate  attention.  Compare 
Mu<h  Ado  TI,  i,  74;    Tro.  &>  Cres.  V,  i,  89. 


298  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 

But  look,  amazement  on  thy  mother  sits ;  112 

Oh,  step  between  her  and  her  fighting  soul  ; 
Conceit  in  weakest  bodies  strongest  works ; 
Speak  to  her,  Hamlet. 

Ham.  How  is  it  with  you,  lady  ?  115 

Queen.     Alas,  how  is't  with  you, 
That  you  do  bend  your  eye  on  vacancy 
And  with  the  incorporal  air  do  hold  discourse  ? 
Forth  at  your  eyes  your  spirits  wildly  peep ; 
And,  as  the  sleeping  soldiers  in  the  alarm,  120 

Your  bedded  hair,  like  life  in  excrements, 
Starts  up  and  stands  an  end.     O  gentle  son, 
Upon  the  heat  and  flame  of  thy  distemper 
Sprinkle  cool  patience.     Whereon  do  you  look  ? 

11 3*  fighting]  fighing  Q4QS-  121.  hair]     haire     QqFxF9.       hairs 

117.  you  do]  you  doe  Qq.    you  Fx,         Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  White,  Cam. 

Cald.     thus  you  F2F  F  ,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  like... excrements]  Om.  Q'76. 

118.  the  incorporal]  th?  incorporall  122.  Starts... stands]  Start. ..Jland  Qa 
Qq.  their  corporall  Fx.  the  corporall  Q  ,  Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.  Cald.  White,  Cam. 
F2F  .     th?  incorporeal  Q'76.     the  Cor-  Cla.     Start... stands  Knt. 

poral  F4,  Rowe.  an  end]  QqFf,  Cap.  Jen.  Dyce  i, 

121.  bedded]  beaded Q^Q,-  Om.  Q'76.         Glo.  +  ,  Mob.     on  end  Pope  ii,  et  cet. 

114.  Conceit]  Imagination.  See  II,  ii,  530;  IV,  v,  43;  Rom.  6°  Jul.  II,  vi,  30, 
and  Craik's  note  {English  of  Shakespeare,  p.  135). 

118.  incorporal]  See  Clarendon's  note  on  Macb.  I,  iii,  81. 

121.  hair  .  .  .  Starts]  Clarendon  [reading  *  hair  .  .  .  Start']  :  '  Hair,'  in  fact, 
may  be  considered  as  a  noun  of  multitude,  and  the  intervention  of  the  plural  sub- 
stantive, '  excrements,'  would  also  suggest  the  plural  verb. 

121.  excrements]  Pope:  The  hairs  are  excrementitious,  that  is,  without  life  or 
sensation.  Malone:  See  Macb.V,  v,  11-13.  Whalley:  Not  only  the  hair  of 
animals  having  neither  life  nor  sensation  was  called  an  excrement,  but  the  feathers 
of  birds  had  the  same  appellation.  Thus,  in  Izaak  Walton's  Compleat  Angler,  P. 
I,  c.  i,  p.  9,  ed.  1766:  'I  will  not  undertake  to  mention  the  several  kinds  of  fowl 
by  which  this  is  done,  and  his  curious  palate  pleased  by  day ;  and  which,  with  their 
very  excrements,  afford  him  a  soft  lodging  at  night.'  Nares  :  Everything  that 
appears  to  vegetate  or  grow  upon  the  human  body ;  as  the  hair,  the  beard,  the  nails. 
Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  'And  albeit  hayre  were  of  it  selfe  the  most  abiect  excrement  that 
were,  yet  should  Poppaeas  hayre  be  reputed  honourable.     I  am  not  ignorant  that 

hayre  is  noted  by  many  as  an  excrement,  a  fleeting  commodity An  excrement 

it  is,  I  deny  not,'  &c. — Chapman's  yustification  of  a  strange  action  of  Nero,  &c. 
1629,  sig.  b  2.    Clarendon  :  Bacon,  Natural  History,  cent.  1,  sect.  58,  says, '  Living 
creatures  put  forth  (after  their  period  of  growth)  nothing  that  is  young  but  hair  and 
nails,  which  are  excrements  and  no  parts.' 

122.  an  end]  See  I,  v,  19. 


»cr  in,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  299 

Ham.     On  him,  on  him  !   Look  you,  hovv  pale  he  glares  !    125 
His  form  and  cause  conjoin'd,  preaching  to  stones, 
Would  make  them  capable. — Do  not  look  upon  me, 
Lest  with  this  piteous  action  you  convert 
My  stern  effects ;  then  what  I  have  to  do 
Will  want  true  colour!  tears  perchance  for  blood.  130 

Queen.     To  whom  do  you  speak  this  ? 

Ham.  Do  you  see  nothing  there  ? 

Queen.     Nothing  at  all ;  yet  all  that  is  I  see. 

Ham.     Nor  did  you  nothing  hear  ? 

Queen.  No,  nothing  but  ourselves. 

Ham.     Why,  look  you  there !  look,  how  it  steals  away  ! 
My  father,  in  his  habit  as  he  lived!  135 

125.  glares']  gleres  Q  .  131.  whom]  who  Ft. 

126.  conjoin'd']  conioy 'tied  QjQ^  [Pointing  to  the  Ghost.  Rowe  +  , 

127.  upon]  on  Pope  +  .  Jen. 

129.  effects]  affecls  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds.  132.  is]  is  there  Q4Q5- 

I  have]  have  I FF. 

127.  capable]  Susceptible.     See  III,  ii,  11. 

129.  effects]  Malone:  Used  for  actions ;  deeds  effected.  Singer:  We  should 
certainly  read  affects,  i.  e.  dispositions,  affections  of  the  mind,  as  in  Oth.  I,  iii,  264. 
It  is  remarkable  that  we  have  the  same  error  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  Ill,  i,  24.  The 
'piteous  action'  of  the  Ghost  could  not  alter  things  already  effected,  but  might  move 
Ham.  to  a  less  stern  mood  of  mind.  Stratmann  pronounces  this  conj.  of  Singer's 
very  plausible.  Hudson  :  I  can  find  no  meaning  in  *  effects '  that  will  run  smooth 
with  the  context.     Clarendon  :  The  accomplishment  of  my  stern  purposes. 

130.  true  colour]  Caldecott  :  Change  the  nature  of  my  fell  purposes,  ends,  or 
what  I  mean  to  effect.  And  make  those  purposes  lose  their  proper  character.  The 
expression  somewhat  resembles  that  of  the  Queen,  line  91,  '  leave  their  tinct.' 

131.  nothing  there  ?]  Seymour  (ii,  188):  Upon  this  question  of  Hamlet's  we 
see  on  the  stage  the  Queen  turning  anxiously  and  slowly  her  looks  about  the  room  as 
if  she  expected  to  find  the  object  referred  to;  whereas,  she  entertains  no  such  appre- 
hension, but  is  solely  occupied  in  anxiety  at  her  sen's  distraction.  The  actresses 
make  the  Queen  as  mad  as  Ham.,  and  are  generally  applauded  for  their  mistake. 

134.  steals]  Miscellaneous  Obs.  on  Hamlet  (0.  44) :  Surely  Sh.  wrote  stalks. 
He  uses  the  same  word  twice  before  in  this  play,  describing  the  gait  of  the  appari- 
tion.    [Thus  also  Quincy  (MS).] 

135.  See  notes  on  stage-direction,  line  102.  Steevens,  not  having  the  aid  af- 
forded by  Qx,  endeavored  to  get  rid  of  the  discrepancy  between  the  'armor'  of  the 
earlier  scenes  and  the  ■  habit '  here  by  punctuating  the  line  thus  :  •  My  father — in  his 
habit — as  he  lived !'  Mason  (p.  390) :  A  man's  armor,  who  is  used  to  wear  it,  may 
be  called  his  habit,  as  well  as  any  other  kind  of  clothing.  '  As  he  lived '  means  '  as 
if  he  were  alive — as  if  he  lived.'  [It  is  probable,  as  Clarendon  suggests,  that  '  the 
Ghost  appears  in  the  ordinary  dress  of  the  king.'] 

135    as]  As  if.     See  I,  ii,  217. 


3oo 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


Look,  where  he  goes,  even  now,  out  at  the  portal !     \_Exit  Ghost. 

Queen.     This  is  the  very  coinage  of  your  brain  ;  137 

This  bodiless  creation  ecstasy  ,  ,    ,  .'-  -•  ■ '  * 

Is  very  cunning  in. 

Ham.  *  Ecstasy '  ? 

My  pulse,  as  yours,  doth  temperately  keep  time,  140 

And  makes  as  healthful  music ;  it  is  not  madness 
That  I  have  utter'd ;  bring  me  to  the  test, 
And  I  the  matter  will  re-word,  which  madness 
Would  gambol  from.     Mother,  foi  love  of  grace, 
Lay  not  that  flattering  unction  to  your  soul,  145 

That  not  your  trespass  but  my  madness  speaks  ; 
It  will  but  skin  and  film  the  ulcerous  place, 
Whilst  rank  corruption,  mining  all  within, 
Infects  unseen.     Confess  yourself  to  heaven ; 
Repent  what's  past,  avoid  what  is  to  come,  150 


136.  even']  ev'n  Pope  +  . 

[Exit  Ghost.]  Exit.  Ff. 

138,  139.  This. ..in.]  One  line,  QqFf, 
Rowe. 

138.  bodiless]  bodily  Col.  i,  El.  (mis- 
print ?) 

139. 
Qq. 

ecstasy 
mour. 

140. 

141. 


Ecstasy?]  Extasie ?  Ff.      Om. 
What    ecstasie  ?     Pope  +  ,    Cap. 
t  Steev.     How !  ecstasie  I    Sey- 
Om.  Q'76. 
yours]  youre  Fa. 
it  is]  '  Tis  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 


142.  utter 'd]  vttred  Qq.  uttered  Ff, 
Rowe,  Cald.  Knt. 

143.  And  I  the]  And  the  Qq. 
re-word]  re-ward  Q'03. 

144.  Would  gambol  from.  Mother t\ 
Cannot  do  mother,  Q'76. 

145.  that]  a  Ff,  Rowe. 

148.  Whilst]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Bos. 
Coll.  El.  Dyce,  White,  Del.  Glo.  Huds. 
Whiles  Qq  et  cet. 

mining]  running  FF,  Rowe, 
Pope. 


136.  Marshall  (p.  52) :  When  the  Ghost  has  passed  through  the  door,  Ham. 
breaks  away  from  his  mother's  hold,  and  throws  himself  on  his  knees  at  the  spot 
where  the  Ghost  disappears,  as  fain  to  catch  at  its  robe  to  detain  it. 

137.  brain]  White:  The  six  lines  following  this  in  Qx,  in  which  there  is  a  de- 
nial by  the  Queen  of  knowledge  of  her  first  husband's  murder,  I  do  not  believe 
were  written  by  Sh. 

138.  ecstasy]  See  II,  i,  102.     Malone:  Compare  Rape  of  Luc.  460. 
139-155.  Clarke:    Let  any  one  who  is  inclined  to  be  swayed  by  the  special 

pleading  and  question-begging  of  those  who  maintain  that  Ham.  is  really  mad,  read 
carefully  over  this  speech,  with  its  sad  earnestness,  its  solemn  adjuration,  its  sober 
remonstrance,  and  ask  himself  whether  Sh.  could  by  possibility  have  intended  his 
hero  to  be  otherwise  than  most  sane  and  sound  of  mind. 

144.  for  love]  For  the  omission  of  the  definite  article  compare  V,  ii,  51,  «  writ 
up  in  form,'  and  see  Abbot"  §  89. 

150.  what  is  to  come]  Seymour  ( ii,  189) :  What  is  to  come  cannot  be  avoided: 
perhaps,  read  '  what  else  will  come,'  i.  t ,  without  repentance. 


act  in,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  301 

And  do  not  spread  the  compost  o'er  the  weeds,  1 5 1 

To  make  them  ranker.     Forgive  me  this  my  virtue, 

For  in  the  fatness  of  these  pursy  times 

Virtue  itself  of  vice  must  pardon  beg, 

Yea,  courb  and  woo  for  leave  to  do  him  good.  15? 

Queen.     O  Hamlet,  thou  hast  cleft  my  heart  in  twain. 

Ham.     O,  throw  away  the  worser  part  of  it, 
And  live  the  purer  with  the  other  half. 
Good  night ;  but  go  not  to  mine  uncle's  bed ; 
Assume  a  virtue,  if  you  have  it  not.  160 

151.  o'er']  Cald.  Knt,  Walker  .Corson.  155.  him']  *VPope  +  ,Jen. 

or  Ff.     on  Qq  et  cet.  156.   O  Hamlet]  Separate  line,  Ff. 

152.  ranker]  rancker  Q2Q3Q4-   ranke  in  huain]  Om.  Q'76. 
FXF2.     rank  F3F4,  Cald.  Knt.    '                            157.    O]  Then  Q'76. 

me]  Om.  Pope,  Han.  158.  live]  leaue  Qq. 

153.  these]  this  Fx.  159.  mine]  my  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
155.  courb]  Ffl  Theob.  Han.  Warb.         Var.  Cald.  Dyce  ii,  Cam.  Cla.  Huds. 

Cap.    Ktly.     curbe   QqF  .      courbe   Fa.  160.  not.]  not.   Once  more  goodnight, 

curb  F4  et  cet.  Q'76. 

151.  weeds]  Johnson:  Do  not,  by  any  new  indulgence,  heighten  your  former 
offences. 

152-155.  Forgive  .  .  .  good.]  Staunton:  Although  the  modern  edd.  uniformly 
print  this  as  if  Ham.  addressed  it  to  the  Queen,  nothing  can  be  more  evident  than 
that  it  is  an  imploration  to  his  own  virtue.  [Staunton  therefore  marks  it  as  an 
'Aside,'  with  a  comma  after  'Forgive  me  this,'.]  Clarke:  Surely  the  context 
shows  that  Ham.  asks  his  mother  to  pardon  the  candor  of  his  virtuous  reproof,  empha- 
sising it  by  line  153.  Daniel  (p.  75)  also  suggested  a  comma  between '  this '  and  *  my.' 
[I  agree  with  Clarendon,  that  Staunton's  '  Aside'  has  great  probability.  Ed.] 

153.  fatness  .  .  .  pursy]  Delius:  The  same  connection  of  ideas  between  these 
words  is  repeated  in  V,  ii,  274.  Clarendon  :  Cotgrave  gives  '  Poulsif  . .  .  Pursie, 
short-winded,  breathing  with  difficultie.' 

155.  courb]  Steevens:  Bend  and  truckle.  From  French  courber.  So,  in  the 
Vision  of  Piers  Ploughman,  1.  617  (ed.  T.  Wright) :  '  Thanne  I  courbed  on  my  knees, 
And  cried  hire  of  grace.'  Clarendon  adds  line  880  also.  Walker  (Crit.  iii, 
267) :  It  would  be  better,  for  distinctness'  sake,  to  write,  with  Fx,  courb  ;  as  Carv 
does,  Purg.  x,  1.  104.     Daniel  (p.  75)  to  the  same  effect. 

156.  thou]  Note  the  use  of  the  more  affectionate  'thou.' 

156.  twain]  Seymour  (ii,  190) :  The  Queen  means  by  this  that  her  heart  is  di 
vided  between  compunction  at  her  misconduct  and  a  sense  of  her  duty. 

157,  158.  Moberly:  The  manly  compassion  of  a  pure  heart  to  the  weak  and 
fallen  could  not  express  itself  with  more  happy  persuasiveness  than  in  this  reply, 
which  takes  the  unhapp-  Queen's  mere  wail  of  sorrow  and  transmutes  it  to  a  soul- 
strengthening  resolve. 

157.  worser]  For  instances  of  double  comparatives,  see  II,  i,  II;  III,  ii,  291 
V,  ii,  121. 

158.  live]  Stratmann  :  Ltzve,  of  the  Qq,  seems  to  be  the  true  reading 

26 


302  HAMLET  [act  hi,  sc.  iv 

That  monster,  custom,  who  all  sense  doth  eat,  161 

161-165.    That... put  on, ,]  Om.  Ff.  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Coll.  ii,  Huds.     eai 

161,  162.  eat,  Of  habits  devil ',]  Q'76,  Of  habits,  devil,  Johns.  Jen.  Coll.  i,  Del. 

fald.  Dyce,Glo.  +  ,  Clarke,  eate  Of  habits  i,    El.      eat — Of  habits  devil, —   Knt. 

ieuill,  Qq.    eat  Of  habit's  devil,  Rowe,  eat,  Oft  habits'  devil,  Sta.  Del.  ii.     eat, 

Steev.  Var.    Sin^-.  i.      eat,   Of  habits  — O  shapeless  devil ! — Bullock  conj.* 

devil,  Pope,    eat  Of  habits  evil,  Theob. 

161,  162.  eat  .  .  .  devil]  Theobald:  'Habits  devil'  arose  from  the  supposed 
necessity  of  contrasting  devil  and  angel.  *  Habits  evil*  I  owe  to  the  sagacity  of  Df 
Thirlby.  That  is,  custom,  which,  by  inuring  us  to  ill  habits,  makes  us  lose  the  ap- 
prehension of  their  being  really  ill,  as  easily  will  reconcile  us  to  the  practice  of  good 
actions.  Theobald,  in  his  correspondence  with  Warburton  (Nichols's  Illust.  of  Lit. 
ii,  574),  says:  'I  would  read  and  point  "doth  eat  Of  habits  evil,"  &c,  i.e.  of 
the  evil  of  habit.'  [Herein  he  is  followed  by  Singer  (ed.  2)  and  White.  Ed.] 
Johnson  :  I  think  Thirlby's  conjecture  wrong ;  angel  and  devil  are  evidently  opposed. 
Malone  :  I  incline  to  think  with  Dr  Thirlby.  Steevens  :  I  would  read :  Or  habit's 
devil.  The  poet  first  styles  custom  a  monster,  and  may  aggravate  and  amplify  his 
description  by  adding,  that  it  is  the  '  daemon  who  presides  over  habit.' — That  mon- 
ster custom,  or  habit's  devil,  is  yet  an  angel  in  this  particular.  Boswell  :  '  Habit's 
devil '  means  a  devil  in  his  usual  habits.  Becket  (i,  60)  and  Mitford  ( Gent. 
Maga.  1845)  both  conjectured  'If  habit's  devil;'  the  latter  paraphrases:  'If  that 
monster,  custom,  which  in  general  is  the  devil  of  habit,  leading  to  evil,  yet  in  this 
thing  acts  the  good  part  of  angel,'  &c.  Caldecott  :  '  That  monster,  custom,  who 
devours  all  sense,  all  just  and  correct  feeling,  (being  also)  the  evil  genius  of  (our) 
propensities  or  habits,  is,  nevertheless,  in  this  particular  a  good  angel.'  It  has  been 
suggested  that  if  a  comma  were  placed  after  '  habits '  the  sense  would  be — 'A  monster 
or  devil,  who  makes  mankind  insensible  to  the  quality  of  actions  which  are  habit- 
ual.' Knight  :  The  edd.  who  have  made  '  habits '  the  genitive  case  cannot  explain 
their  own  reading.  As  we  print  the  passage  it  means :  custom,  who  destroys  all 
nicety  of  feeling, — sense, — sensibility, — who  is  the  devil  that  governs  our  habits, — 
is  yet  an  angel  in  this,  &c.  Collier  (ed.  1):  Our  punctuation  means,  'that 
monster,  custom,  who  is  a  devil,  devouring  all  sense  of  habit,  is  still  an  angel 
in  this,'  &c.  Singer  (ed.  ii) :  The  old  copy  indicates  clearly  the  misprint,  for  the 
word  is  here  devill,  while  just  below  and  elsewhere  it  is  uniformly  divell  when 
the  evil  spirit  is  meant.  Delius  (ed.  i) :  The  opposition  between  '  angel '  and 
•  devil '  shows  that  the  latter  as  well  as  the  former  refers  to  '  monster,  custom :' 
'  devil,'  therefore,  must  be  in  apposition,  separated,  it  is  true,  from  the  subject  by 
the  subordinate  clause.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  We  now  adopt  Thirlby's  emendation, 
although  it  is  very  possible  that  an  opposition  between  '  devil '  and  '  angel '  was 
intended.  Still,  the  passage  is  decidedly  corrupt.  White:  The  text  of  the  Qq 
is  clearly  wrong.  'Angel'  is  opposed  to  'monster'  in  the  line  above.  The  old 
text  also  nullifies  the  force  of  the  important  word  '  likewise,'  two  lines  below. 
Staunton  :  The  trifling  change  we  have  taken  the  liberty  to  make,  while  doing 
little  violence  to  the  original,  may  be  thought,  it  is  hoped,  to  give  at  least  as  good  a 
meaning  as  any  other  which  has  been  proposed.  Keightley  :  The  verb  '  eate ' 
here  could  never  have  come  from  the  poet's  pen ;  for  it  makes  pure  nonsense.  I 
read  create  with  the  g  eatest  confidence,  of  which  the  first  two  letters  must  have 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


rrstMLET 


303 


Of  habits  devil,  is  angel  yet  in  this, 

That  to  the  use  of  actions  fair  and  good 

He  likewise  gives  a  frock  or  livery, 

That  aptly  is  put  on.     Refrain  to-night, 

And  that  shall  lend  a  kind  of  easiness 

To  the  next  abstinence ;  the  next  more  easy ; 

For  use  almost  can  change  the  stamp  of  nature, 

And  either  master  the  devil,  or  throw  him  out 


162 


165 


1(35.  on.  Refrain  to-night]  Johns. 
Jen.  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Ktly,  Glo.  + ,  Del. 
on  to  refraine  night  Qq.  on  :  refrain 
tonight  Q'76,  Rowe.  on:  Refrain  to- 
night Pope  et  cet. 

Refrain  to  night]  Closes  l.i6o,Ff. 

167-170.  the  next  more... potency.] 
Om.  Ff. 

168.  almost  can]  can  almost  Rowe+. 

169.  And. ..the]   Jen.    Steev.   (1785), 


Walker,  Dyce  ii.  And  either  the  Q3Q3- 
And  Maifler  the  Q4,  Cald.  And  maflet 
the  Q5Q'76,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  El.  Dyce  i, 
Sta.  Del.  And  master  ev'n  the  Pope  + . 
And  master  even  the  Cap.  And  either 
curb  the  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Chalmers,  Sing, 
ii,  White,  Ktly,  Iluds.  And  overcome  the 
Tsch.   And either  ?nate  the  Anon.*   And 

wither  up  the  Bullock.*   And  either 

the  Glo.  + . 


been  effaced  in  the  poet's  MS.  We  have  an  exact  parallel  in  smelly  '  all,'  in  Timon, 
I,  ii,  132.  '  Sense  '  seems  here  to  signify  kind,  manner,  way.  [Keightley's  text 
reads :  '  That  monster,  custom,  who  all  sense  doth  create  Of  habits,  devil  is  angel 
yet  in  this,'  &c,  which  is  to  me  unintelligible.  Ed.]  Clarendon  :  The  words  as 
they  stand  yield  a  very  intelligible  sense  and  require  no  alteration.  That  monster, 
Custom,  who  destroys  all  natural  feeling  and  prevents  it  from  being  exerted,  and  is 
the  malignant  attendant  on  habits,  is  yet  angel  in  this  respect,  &c.  The  double 
meaning  of  the  word  'habits'  suggested  the  'frock  or  livery'  in  1.  164.  Mo- 
berly:  This  noble  passage  contains  Shakespeare's  philosophy  of  custom  (£6og), 
in  which,  happier  than  some  professed  moralists,  he  sees  that  the  function  of  habit 
is  to  work  upward  towards  a  formed  resolution. 

164.  livery]  Moberly:  Just  as  a  new  dress  or  uniform  becomes  familiar  to  us  by 
habit,  so  custom  enables  us  readily  to  execute  the  outward  and  practical  part  of  the 
good  and  fair  actions  which  we  inwardly  desire  to  do. 

169.  master]  Malone:  For  the  insertion  of  the  word  curb  I  am  answerable. 
The  printer  or  corrector  of  a  late  Quarto,  finding  the  line  nonsense,  omitted  the  word 
either,  and  substituted  master  in  its  place.  The  modern  editors  have  accepted  the 
substituted  word,  and  yet  retain  either ;  by  which  the  metre  is  destroyed.  The  word 
omitted  in  the  first  copy  was  undoubtedly  a  monosyllable.  Steevens  :  This  very 
rational  conjecture  may  be  countenanced  by  the  same  expression  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV, 
i,  217.  Singer  (ed.  i)  [reading  '  either  quell,  followed  by  Moberly]  :  The  occur- 
rence of  curb  in  so  opposite  a  sense  just  before  is  against  Malone's  emendation. 
Staunton  :  '  Master,'  which,  as  it  affords  sense,  though  destructive  to  the  metre,  we 
retain,  not,  however,  without  acknowledging  a  preference  for  Malone's  emendation. 
Walker,  Vers.  75  :  Read  <  either  master  th'  devil,'  &c.  Moreover,  '  curb '  occurs 
fourteen  lines  before. — Grit,  i,  308.  Bailey  (ii,  12) :  Ham.  means  to  say  that  cus- 
tom can  either  bring  the  devil  into  our  natures,  or  throw  him  out.  I  therefore  pro- 
pose :    '  And  either   house  the  devil,'  which  forms  an   appropriate   counterpart  to 


3°4  HAMLET  [act  in,  sc.  iv. 


[169.  'either  master  the  devil.'] 
'throw  him  out.'    Forsyth  proposed  the  same  word  in  his  Notes,  &c,  102,  and  also 
in  N.  &*  Qu.,  1  Dec.  '66.     Elze  (Athenaum,  11  Aug.  '66)  proposes,  'And  either 
usher  the  devil,'  and  thinks  that  the  similarity  of  sound  in  the  two  consecutive  words, 

*  either  usher,'  may  have  caused  the  compositor  of  Qx  to  omit  the  latter.  H.  D. 
{Athenczum,  18  Aug.  '66)  :  Why  not  read,  '  To  master  the  devil,  and  throw  him  out.' 
Bolton  Corney  (N.  &>  Qu.,  8  Dec.  '66):  Read  'And  either  aid  the,'  &c.  J. 
Wetherell  (N.  &■»  Qu.,  22  Dec.  '66)  believes  that  sound  and  sense  are  satisfied  by 
'  And  hie  there  the  devil ;'  a  speedy  summons  is  hereby  contrasted  with  a  dismissal 
implied  in  '  throw  him  out.'  Cartwright  {New  Readings,  &c,  p.  37) :  Read  '  And 
either  lay  the,'  &c.  Nicholson  (N.  &•>  Qu.,  19  Dec.  1868) :  I  propose, '  And  either 
throne,'  &c.  Its  alliteration  explains  its  omission,  and  why  '  cast  out,'  the  wording 
of  every  version,  was  changed  into  '  throw  out.'  It  restores  to  the  line  its  musical 
tone.  It  gives  the  exact  sense  required.  Persistence  in  well-doing,  whether  by 
doing  good  or  by  leaving  evil  undone,  exorcises  the  Tempter  with  wondrous  potency ; 
but  persistence  in  evil  so  destroys  rebelling  conscience,  that  the  prince  of  this  world 
unresistingly  ascends  our  vacant  throne,  and  makes  of  us  willing  and  unrespective 
servants  for  his  work.  Lastly,  it  gives  not  only  the  exact  sense,  but  the  full  sense, 
required  by  the  context,  whether  above  or  below  it.  Clarendon  :  It  seems  more 
probable  that  something  is  omitted  which  is  contrasted  with  '  throw  out,'  and  this 
may  have  been  '  lay '  or  '  lodge.'  The  latter  was  the  technical  word  used  in  Hars- 
net's  Declaration,  c.  12.  Moberly  [reading  '  either  quell '~\  :  Either  quell  him  once 
for  all,  or  baffle  his  attacks  whenever  they  arise.  Ingleby  [Sh.  Hermeneutics,  p. 
125)  records  two  emendations  suggested  to  him  by  friends:  Sylvester  proposes, 
'  either  mask  the  devil,'  of  which  Q  is  the  corruption.  Compare  III,  i,  47-49. 
And  C.  J.  Munro  '  half-seriously '  suggests  :  '  And  entertain  the  devil.'  *  It  is  not 
easy  to  discovex,'  says  Ingleby,  'why  [the  words  suggested  by  Malone,  Singer,  and 
the  rest]  should  find  more  favor  than  a  score  of  others  just  as  good.'  Curb  sug- 
gests rein,  rule,  thrall,  bind,  chain,  &c. ;  quell,  lay,  and  couch  suggest  charm* 
worst,  quench,  foil,  balk,  cross,  thwart,  daunt,  shame,  cow,  tame,  &c. ;  while  aid 
suggests  fire,  rouse,  stir,  serve,  feed,  &c.  Besides  which,  there  are  many  dissylla- 
bles that  befit  the  sense  and  measure,  as  abate,  abase,  &c.      And  why  not  read 

•  over-maister,'  which  occurs  in  a  former  scene  ?  Thus  we  see  what  a  wealth  of 
suggestion  has  been  ignored !  We  venture  to  call  attention  to  the  evident  require- 
ments of  the  passage :  '  The  stamp  of  nature '  is  not  new  to  us  in  this  connec- 
tion, nor  in  this  play;  we  have  had  it  twice  in  the  second  ghost-scene,  viz.  'the 
vicious  mole  of  nature,'  and  '  the  stamp  of  one  defect.'  Now  Hamlet  would  say, 
'Use  almost  can  change,  or  convert,  this  stamp  of  nature;'  so  that  an  antithesis  is 
not  only  not  required,  but  is  impertinent.  Use,  he  would  say,  can  either  subdue 
'  habit's  devil '  by  following  out  his  own  prescription  of  gradual  weaning  from  evil, 
or  (if  the  worst  come  to  the  worst,  and  revolution  be  necessary)  cast  him  out ;  and 
either  of  these  can  such  use,  or  change  of  habit,  effect  •  with  wondrous  potency.'  The 
keynote  of  the  whole  passage  is  '  Reformation,  by  gradually  subduing  evil  habits ;' 
and  so  far  from  Hamlet's  advice, '  assume  a  virtue  if  you  have  it  not,'  being  a  recom- 
mendation of  hypocrisy,  it  is  given  solely  with  the  view  of  facilitating  inward  amend- 
ment, and  is  therefore  honest  and  sincere.  The  missing  word,  then,  must  at  least 
import  the  subduing  of  the  devil  of  habit.  In  the  First  Quarto  we  have  the  expres- 
sion, '  And  win  [i.  e.  wean]  yourself  by  little  as  you  may '  from  the  sin  to  which  you 


act  in,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLET  3°5 

With  wondrous  potency.     Once  more,  good  night;  170 

And  when  you  are  desirous  to  be  blest, 

I'll  blessing  beg  of  you. — For  this  same  lord, 

[Pointing  to  Polonius. 

I  do  repent ;  but  heaven  hath  pleased  it  so, 

To  punish  me  with  this,  and  this  with  me, 

That  I  must  be  their  scourge  and  minister.  175 

I  will  bestow  him,  and  will  answer  well 

The  death  I  gave  him. — So,  again,  good  night. 

I  must  be  cruel,  only  to  be  kind ; 

Thus  bad  begins,  and  worse  remains  behind. 

One  word  more,  good  lady. 

Queen,  What  shall  I  do?  180 

Ham.     Not  this,  by  no  means,  that  I  bid  you  do : 

172.  [Pointing...]  Om.  QqFf.  with  this  Johns. 

173.  heaven  hath~\  the  heavens  have  179.    Thus]  This  Qq. 

Han.     heavens    have  Johns.     Heavens  180.   One. ..lady.]   Om.   Ff,   Rowe  +  . 

hath  Ktly.  Hark,  one. ..lady.  Cap.     But  one. ..lady. 

174.  me.. ,me~\  him  with  me,  and  me  Steev.  Bos.  Sing.  i.  One... good  my  lady, 
with  this  Han.     this  with  me,  and  me  Ktly. 

[the  Queen]  have  habituated  yourself.  Now,  that  weaning  by  little  and  little,  or 
gradually  weaning  the  will  and  affections  from  the  customary  sin,  '  recurring  and 
suggesting  still,'  is  just  what  the  missing  word,  were  it  recovered,  would  assuredly 
be  found  to  express  or  imply.  Lay  and  shame  are  equally  acceptable  in  sense,  and 
both  afford  a  perfect  rhythm.  Perhaps  shame  is  the  finer  reading  of  the  two.  At 
the  same  time  it  must  be  owned  that  Hamlet's  prescription  is  calculated  to  do  little 
for  the  sinner ;  at  best,  we  fear,  to  '  skin  and  film  the  rancorous  place.'  We  can 
hardly  say  that  conjecture  has  yet  determined  the  best  reading  here,  though  it  cannot 
be  said  that  sufficient  indications  are  wanting  for  its  guidance.  Unfortunately,  it  is 
in  the  very  nature  of  the  case  that  some  doubt  should  continue  to  vex  this  passage, 
after  conjecture  has  done  its  work. 

172.  of  you]  Seymour  (ii,  190) :  The  desire  to  be  blest  will  show  contrition,  and 
constitute  a  state  of  grace ;  consequently,  it  will  render  you  fit  to  bestow  a  blessing 
upon  me. 

1 74.  Malone  :  To  punish  me  by  making  me  the  instrument  of  this  man's  death, 
and  to  punish  this  man  by  my  hand.  Moberly  :  To  give  me  this  penal  task,  which 
will  be  the  worse  done  for  my  having  to  do  it. 

175.  their]  For  instances  of  Shakespeare's  use  of  Heaven  as  a  plural,  see  Walker 
Crit.  ii,  no. 

178,  179.  I  .  .  .  behind]  Delius:  These  two  lines,  of  which  the  first  explains 
Hamlet's  sudden  change  of  bearing  towards  his  mother  and  his  cruel  speeches  after 
it,  should  be  spoken  as  an  Aside. 

180.  word]  For  instances  of  monosyllables  containing  a  vowel  followed  by  '  r,' 
whi-h,  according  to  Abbott,  are  prolonged  in  scansion,  see  Abbott,  §  481;. 
26*  U 


306 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


Let  the  bloat  king  tempt  you  again  to  bed ; 

Pinch  wanton  on  your  cheek ;  call  you  his  mouse ; 

And  let  him,  for  a  pair  of  reechy  kisses, 

Or  paddling  in  your  neck  with  his  damn'd  fingers, 

Make  you  to  ravel  all  this  matter  out, 

That  I  essentially  am  not  in  madness, 

But  mad  in  craft.     'Twere  good  you  let  him  know ; 

For  who,  that's  but  a  queen,  fair,  sober,  wise, 

Would  from  a  paddock,  from  a  bat,  a  gib, 


182 


185 


19c 


182.  the  bloat]  Warb.  the  blowt  Qq. 
the  blunt  Ff,  Rowe.  not  the  Q'76.  the 
fond  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 

again  to  bed~\  to  bed  again  Q'76. 

186.  to    ravel]     to    ravell     F.F_F. 
rouell  Qq. 

188.  mad]  made  Fx. 


2   3 


188.  craft.    '  Twere]  craft,  'twere  Qq. 
know  ;]  know,  Q2Q  Ff.     know 

Q4Q5- 

189.  a]  Om.  Q'76. 

190.  paddock]  paddack  Qq. 

gib]  Gibbe  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen. 


182.  bloat]  Blackstone  :  This  again  hints  at  his  intemperance.  He  had  al- 
ready drunk  himself  into  a  dropsy.     [See  I,  ii,  20.] 

183.  mouse]  Steevens  :  A  term  of  endearment.  In  Warner's  Albion's  England^ 
1602,  b.  ii,  ch.  xvi:  'God  bless  thee,  mouse,  the  bridegroom  said.'  Again,  in  the 
Menachmi,  1595  :  'Shall  I  tell  thee,  sweet  mouse?'  Burton's  Anatomy  of  Melan- 
choly, ed.  1632,  p.  527  :  « pleasant  names  may  be  invented,  bird,  mouse,  lamb, 

pus,  pigeon,  &c.'  Clarendon  :  See  Twelfth  Night,  I,  v,  69  ;  and  Love's  Lab.  V, 
ii,  19.  Muss,  corrupted  from  'mouse,'  occurs  several  times  in  Jonson's  Every  Man 
in  his  Humour,  II,  i. 

184.  reechy]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  '  Reechy  is  greasy,  sweaty.  .  .  .  Laneham  [in  his 
Letter,  &c],  speaking  of  "three  pretty  puzels "  in  a  morris-dance,  says  they  were 
"  az  bright  az  a  breast  of  bacon,"  that  is,  bacon  hung  in  the  chimney ;  and  hence 
reechy,  which  in  its  primitive  signification  is  smoky,  came  to  imply  greasy.' — Ritson. 
Clarendon  :  In  the  present  passage  the  word  may  have  been  suggested  by  *  bloat,' 
two  lines  before,  which  has  also  the  meaning  '  to  cure  herrings  by  hanging  them  in 
the  smoke.' 

186.  ravel]  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  To  unravel,  unweave, — to  unfold,  to  disclose. 

189.  but  a]  Caldecott:  Strictly  speaking,  'no  more  than;'  but,  in  the  familiar 
language  of  banter,  importing  '  who  being  as  much  as,  having  some  pretence  at  least, 
or  title,  to  the  rank  and  state  of,'  &c.  Moberly  :  Unless  more  can  be  said  of  a 
woman  than  that  she  is  a  queen,  fair,  sober,  wise,  of  course  it  is  natural  for  her  to 
take  the  scum  of  the  earth  into  her  inmost  confidence. 

190.  paddock]  A  toad.     See  Macb.  I,  i,  9. 

190.  gib]   Steevens:  A  common  name  for  a  cat.     See  Chaucer's  Romaunt  of 

the  Rose,  6208 :    ' Gibbe  oure  cat,  That  awayteth  mice  and  rattes  to  kyllen.' 

Nares  :  A  male  cat.  An  expression  exactly  analogous  to  that  of  a  Jack-ass,  the 
one  being  formerly  called  Gib,  or  Gilbert,  as  commonly  as  the  other  Jack.  Tom-cat 
is  now  the  v.sual  term,  and  for  a  similar  reason.  Tibert  is  said  to  be  the  old  French 
for  Gilbert,  an '  is  the  name  of  the  cat  in  Reineke  Fuchs.     In  Sherwood's  English- 


fcCT  III,  SC.  iv.]  HAMLET  307 

Such  dear  concernings  hide?  who  would  do  so?  191 

No,  in  despite  of  sense  and  secrecy, 

Unpeg  the  basket  on  the  house's  top, 

Let  the  birds  fly,  and  like  the  famous  ape, 

To  try  conclusions,  in  the  basket  creep,  195 

And  break  your  own  neck  down. 

Queen.     Be  thou  assured,  if  words  be  made  of  breath 
And  breath  of  life,  I  have  no  life  to  breathe 
What  thou  hast  said  to  me. 

Ham.     I  must  to  England ;  you  know  that  ? 

Queen.  Alack,  200 

191.  concernings]     conctruings     Q4.  200.  that?]  that.  QaQ3-     that,  Q4Q5- 

tonferuings  Q  .  Alack, ~\    Om.    Seymour,  ending 

195.  conclusions,  in  the  basket"]    con-  lines     196-199,    assured,.. .life,.. .said... 

clufions  in  the  basket  Qq.    Concluftons  in  that? 

the  Basket,  Yx.   conclusions ;  in  the  bas-  200,    201.    Alack. ..on.]    Cap.      Two 

ket  Pope.  lines,   the   first    ending  forgot,   in   Qq. 

198.  breathe]  breath  QqFxFa,  Cap.  One  line,  Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.  Mai. 

French  Dictionarie,  appended  to  Cotgrave,  we  have  '  A  gibbe  (or  old  male  cat). 
Macou.'  [A  misprint  for  Matou;  which  Nares  silently  corrects,  but  which  is  unnoticed 
by  Dyce  and  Clarendon.  Ed.]  Coles  has  *  Gib,  a  contraction  for  Gilbert]  and  'a 
Gib-cat,  catus,  felis  mas.1  Keightley:  I  read  «  g\h-cat,'  as  'gib'  never  occurs 
alone.  We  surely  would  not  say  a  torn  for  a  tom-cat,  a  jack  for  a  jackass,  a  jack- 
daw, &c.  Clarendon  :  Graymalkin  was  the  female  cat.  The  toad,  bat,  and 
cat  were  supposed  to  be  familiars  of  witches,  and  acquainted  with  their  mistresses 
secrets. 

194.  famous  ape]  Warner:  Sir  John  Suckling,  in  one  of  his  letters,  may  pos- 
sibly allude  to  the  same  story  :  '  It  is  the  story  of  the  jackanapes  and  the  partridges ; 
thou  starest  after  a  beauty  till  it  be  lost  to  thee,  and  then  let'st  out  another,  and 
starest  after  that  till  it  is  gone  too.'  Clarendon  :  No  one  has  yet  found  the  fable 
here  alluded  to. 

195.  conclusions]  Steevens:  Experiments. 

198.  breathe]  Caldecott:  *  Most  distantly  glance  at.*  See  II,  i,  44.  Mo- 
berly  :  The  Queen  keeps  her  word,  and  is  rewarded  by  the  atoning  punishment 
which  befalls  her  in  this  world.  Rue  is  herb  of  grace  to  her,  as  poor  Ophelia 
says. 

200.  England]  Malone  :  Sh.  does  not  inform  us  how  Ham.  came  to  know  that 
he  was  to  be  sent  to  England.  Ros.  and  Guil.  were  made  acquainted  with  the 
King's  intentions  for  the  first  time  in  the  very  last  scene ;  and  they  do  not  appear  to 
have  had  any  communication  with  the  Prince  since  that  time.  Add  to  this,  that  in 
a  subsequent  scene,  when  the  King,  after  the  death  of  Pol.,  informs  Ham.  he  was 
to  go  to  England,  he  expresses  great  surprise,  as  if  he  had  not  heard  anything  of  it 
before. — This  last,  however,  may,  perhaps,  be  accounted  for  as  contributing  to  his 
design  of  passing  for  a  madman.  Stearns  (Sh.  Treasury,  &c,  p.  366) :  We  may 
infer  *Jbat  Ham.  had  managed  to  place  Hor.  in  some  office  or  employment  about  the 


3o8 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


I  had  forgot;  'tis  so  concluded  on.  201 

Ham.     There's  letters  seal'd ;  and  my  two  schoolfellows, 
Whom  I  will  trust  as  I  will  adders  fang'd, 
They  bear  the  mandate ;  they  must  sweep  my  way, 
And  marshal  me  to  knavery.     Let  it  work ;  205 

For  'tis  the  sport  to  have  the  enginer 
Hoist  with  his  own  petar;  and't  shall  go  hard 
But  I  will  delve  one  yard  below  their  mines, 
And  blow  them  at  the  moon ;  oh,  'tis  most  sweet 
When  in  one  line  two  crafts  directly  meet.  210 

This  man  shall  set  me  packing ; 
I'll  lug  the  guts  into  the  neighbour  room. 


201.  on]  Om.  Han. 

202-210.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

206.  the  sport]  true  sport  Anon.* 

enginer]  Qq,  Coll.  El.  Dyce, 
Sta.  White,  Del.  Glo.  + ,  Mob.  engineer 
Q'76,  Pope  et  cet. 


207.  petar]  petard  Johns. 

and't]  Theob.     arit  Qq,  Pope. 
and  it  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Coll.  El.  White. 

210.  meet.]    Q'76.      meete,    Q2Q3Q4- 
meet,  Q  . 

211.  shall]  will  Q  76. 


court  where  he  could  get  at  state  secrets.  Miles  (p.  52) :  Ham.,  on  his  way  to  his 
mother's  closet,  must  have  overheard  the  interview  between  the  King  and  Ros.  and 
Guil.  For  scarcely  in  any  other  way  could  he  have  foreknown  this  royal  determina- 
tion to  send  him  away. 

202.  There's  letters]  See  IV,  v,  5;  Macb.  II,  iii,  137;  and  Abbott,  §  335. 

203.  fang'd]  Johnson  :  '  Adders  with  their  fangs,  or  poisonous  teeth,  undrawn. 
Seymour  (ii,  191) :  It  means,  rather,  with  their  poisonous  teeth  extracted ;  Calde 
COTT  inclines  to  this  interpretation. 

204.  They]  Clarendon:  The  nominative  is  repeated  for  clearness,  after  ar. 
intervening  parenthesis.     See  '  he,'  II,  i,  84. 

206.  enginer]  For  list  of  nouns  with  the  suffix  -er,  signifying  the  agent,  see 
Walker  (  Vers.  217),  or  Abbott,  §443.  For  words  with  accent  nearer  the  beginning 
than  with  us,  see  Abbott,  §492.     See  '  truster,'  I,  ii,  172;  '  pioner,'  I,  v,  163. 

207.  hoist]  Dyce  [Gloss.)  :  For  hoised  or  hoisted  (not  as  Caldecott  explains  it: 
'  i.  e.  mount.  Hoist  is  used  as  a  verb  neuter').  Clarendon  :  If  it  is  the  participle 
of  the  verb  hoist,  it  is  the  common  abbreviated  form  for  the  participles  of  verbs  end- 
ing in  a  dental.     [See  I,  ii,  20.] 

207.  petar]  Clarendon  :  Cotgrave  gives :  '  Petart :  A  Petard,  or  Petarre ;  an 
Engine  (made  like  a  Bell,  or  Morter)  wherewith  strong  gates  are  burst  open.' 

209.  at]  Abbott,  §  143  :  '  At '  is  used  like  near  with  a  verb  of  motion,  where  we 
should  use  up  to.     Moberly  :  Like  Virgil's  '  It  caelo  clamor.' 

210.  line]  Malone:  Still  alluding  to  a  countermine. 

211.  packing]  Clarendon:  'Contriving,'  'plotting.'  There  is,  of  course,  a 
play  upon  the  other  sense  of  the  word  :  '  to  be  off  quickly.'  [Delius's  interpreta- 
tion of  one  of  its  meanings :  '  sich  belasten,'  to  load  one's  self,  referring  to  Hamlet's 
lugging  off  Pol.,  is,  I  think,  a  little  too  fine  spun.  Ed.] 

212.  guts]  Steevens  gives  several  examples  (one  from  Lyly,  'who  made  the 


act  in,  sc.  iv.]  HAMLE'l  3°9 

Mother,  good  night.     Indeed  this  counsellor 

Is  now  most  still,  most  secret,  and  most  grave, 

Who  was  in  life  a  foolish  prating  knave. —  215 

Come,  sir,  to  draw  towards  an  end  with  you. — 

213.  good  night.    Indeed]  good  night  215.  in  life]  in's  life  Q'76. 

indeed,  Qq.  foolish]  mofl  foolifh  Qq,  Jen. 


first  attempt  to  polish  our  language')  to  show  that  anciently  this  word  was  not  so 
offensive  to  delicacy  as  at  present.  Caldecott,  while  conceding  this,  nevertheless 
thinks  that  '  there  is  a  coarseness  and  want  of  feeling  in  this  part  of  the  conduct,  if 
not  in  the  language,  of  Hamlet, — an  excuse  for  which  we  seek  in  vain  at  this  time 
in  the  peculiarity  or  necessities  of  his  situation ;'  and  he  can  account  for  it  only  by 
supposing  that  it  must  have  been  in  compliance  with  the  rude  taste  of  the  age. 
Halliwell  :  This  is  one  of  those  words  which  the  silly  caprice  of  fashion  has  in- 
vested with  an  imaginary  coarseness.  I  have  seen  a  letter,  written  about  a  century 
ago,  in  which  a  lady  of  rank,  addressing  a  gentleman,  speaks  of  her  guts  with  the 
same  nonchalance  with  which  we  should  now  write  stomach.  STAUNTON :  It  was 
commonly  used  where  we  should  employ  entrails,  and  in  this  place  really  signifies 
no  more  than  lack-brain  or  shallow-pate. 

212.  Staunton:  A  consideration  of  the  exigencies  of  the  theatre  in  Shakespeare's 
time,  which  not  only  obliged  an  actor  to  play  two  or  more  parts  in  the  same  drama, 
but  to  perform  such  servile  offices  as  are  now  done  by  attendants  of  the  stage,  shows 
that  this  line  is  a  mere  interpolation  to  afford  the  player  an  excuse  for  removing  the 
body.  We  append  a  few  examples  where  the  same  expedient  is  adopted  for  the 
same  purpose.  Among  them  the  notable  instance  of  Sir  John  Falstaff  carrying  off 
the  body  of  Harry  Percy  on  his  back, — an  exploit  as  clumsy  and  unseemly  as  Ham- 
let's '  tugging  out'  Pol.,  and,  like  that,  perpetuated  on  the  modern  stage  only  from 
sheer  ignorance  of  the  circumstances  which  originated  such  a  practice :  Rom.  6°  yul. 
Ill,  i,  201 ;  Rich.  II:  V,  v,  118,  119;  I  Hen.  IV:  V,  iv,  160;  1  Hen.  VI:  I,  iv, 
I IO;  Ibid.  II,  v,  120,  121 ;  Ibid.  IV,  vii,  91,  92;  2  Hen.  VI:  IV,  i,  145;  Ibid.  IV, 
x,  86,  87;  Ibid.  V,  ii,  61-65;  3  Hen.  VI:  II,  v,  113;  Ibid.  II,  v,  121,  122;  Ibid. 
V,  vi,  92,  93 ;  Rich.  Ill:  I,  iv,  287,  288 ;  Lear,  IV,  vi,  280-282 ;  Tro.  &•>  Cres.  V, 
viii,  21,  22;  yul.  Cas.  Ill,  ii,  261 ;  Ibid.V,  v,  78,  79;  Ant.  6°  Cleo.  IV,  ix,  31,  32; 
Ibid.  IV,  xiv,  138.  These  instances  from  Sh.  alone,  and  they  could  easily  be  multi- 
plied, will  suffice  to  bring  into  view  one  of  the  inconveniences  to  which  the  elder 
dramatists  were  subject  through  the  paucity  ot  actors ;  and  at  the  same  time,  by  ex- 
hibiting the  mode  in  which  they  endeavored  to  obviate  the  difficulty,  may  afford  a 
key  to  many  passages  and  incidents  that  before  appeared  anomalous. 

215.  foolish  prating]  Walker  {Crit.  1,  25):  Write  foolish-prating ;  unless,  in- 
deed, '  foolish '  is  opposed  to  *  grave,'  and  '  prating '  to  '  secret.' 

215.  a  .  .  .  knave]  Moberly:  These  are  almost  exactly  the  words  used  by  the 
porter  at  Holyrood,  when  Rizzio's  body  was  placed  on  a  chest  near  his  lodge 
(Froude,  viii,  254). 

216.  to  draw]  Clarendon  :  For  the  construction  compare  III,  ii,  329.  Steevens  : 
Sh.  hai  been  unfortunate  in  his  management  of  the  story  of  this  play,  the  most 
striking  circumstances  of  which  arise  so  early  in  its  formation  as  not  to  leave  him 


3io 


HAMLET 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv 


Good  night,  mother.  217 

[Exeunt  severally  ;  Hamlet  dragging  in  Polonius. 


217.  [Exeunt...]    Steev.    after    Cap. 
£xit.    Qq.      Exit    Hamlet    tugging   in 


Polonius.    Ff,    Rowel-,     (tugging   out, 
Han.) 


room  for  a  conclusion  suitable  to  the  importance  of  its  beginning.     After  this  last  in- 
terview with  the  Ghost  the  character  of  Ham.  has  lost  all  its  consequence. 

217.  Good  night,  mother]  Hunter  (ii,  257) :  This  scene  has  always  been  ad- 
mired as  one  of  the  masterpieces  of  this  great  dramatic  writer ;  and  there  are  in  it 
undoubtedly  fine  opportunities  for  the  display  of  an  actor's  powers, — striking  situa- 
tions, and  also  fine  poetry.  But  the  question  arises,  To  what  purpose  all  this  excite- 
ment and  bustle  ?  The  scene  appears  to  have  been  written  for  its  own  sake,  not 
helping  forward  the  story.  Except  that  Pol.  is  accidentally  killed  in  the  course  of 
it,  the  parties  are  left  precisely  where  they  were,  Ham.  having  only  in  this  forcible 
manner  signified  to  his  mother  the  displeasure  which  he  felt  at  her  conduct.  But  as 
the  play  was  originally  written  this  scene  had  a  purpose.  Ham.  reveals  to  his  mother 
his  knowledge  of  his  uncle's  guilt,  and  his  purpose  of  revenge ;  and  she  engages  to 
conceal  and  to  assist.  From  this  time  the  Queen  keeps  up  appearances  with  her 
husband,  but  is  secretly  a  friend  to  Ham. ;  and  there  is  an  entire  scene,  afterwards 
withdrawn,  between  her  and  Hor.,  in  which  Hor.  communicates  to  her  confidentially 
the  return  of  Ham.  from  England,  when  the  dialogue  ends  with  her  saying :  [see 
Appendix,  p.  77,  lines  1779-1781.]  This  removes  all  ambiguity  respecting  the  part 
which  the  poet  intended  the  Queen  should  take;  according  to  the  present  regulation, 
her  precise  situation  is  not  clearly  exhibited. 


4CT  IV.  SC.  i.J 


HAMLET 


3" 


ACT  IV 


Scene  I.     A  room  in  the  castle. 


Enter  King,  Queen,  Rosencrantz,  and  Guildenstern. 

King.     There's   matter  in  these   sighs;   these   profound 
heaves 
You  must  translate ;  'tis  fit  we  understand  them. 
Where  is  your  son  ? 

Queen.     Bestow  this  place  on  us  a  little  while. — 

\_Exeunt  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern. 
Ah,  my  good  lord,  what  have  I  seen  to-night !  5 

King.     What,  Gertrude  ?     How  does  Hamlet  ? 
Queen.     Mad  as  the  sea  and  wind,  when  both  contend 


Act  iv.    Scene  i.]  Q'76. 

A  room...]  A  Royal  apartment. 
Rowe  +  .     The  same.  Cap. 

Enter...]    Enter  King,  and    Queene, 
with  Rofencraus  and  Guyldenfterne.  Qq 
(Eenter  Q2Q3).     Enter  King.  Ff. 
I.    There's... heaves']  Two  lines,  Ff. 
matter]  matters  Ff,  Rowe. 
sighs;  these. ..heaves]  Pope +  ,  Jen. 
Mai.  Coll.  El.  White,     fighs.    Thefe... 
heaves  Ff.  Jighes,  thefe...heuues,  Qq,  Sta. 
Ktly,    Huds.     sighs y   or  sighs;   these... 
heaves  ;  Rowe  et  cet. 

4,  &c.  Queen.]  Ger.  or  Gert.  in  Qq. 
Bestow... while.]    Om.   Ff,   Rowe, 


Pope,  Han.  Knt. 

4.  a  little  while]  Om.  Seymour. 
[Exeunt...]  Q'76.  To  Ros.  and  Guild. 

who  go  out.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly. 
Om.  QqFf. 

5.  my  good]  mine  own  Qq.  Jen.  Cam. 
Cla. 

to-night !]  Han.     to  night  ?  QqFf. 

6.  Gertrude]    Gertrard   Q2Q,.     Ger- 
trad  Q4.     Gertard  Q$. 

How]   hast  thou   seen?  and  how 
Seymour. 

7.  sea]  Seas  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt. 


Act  iv]  Johnson  :  This  modern  division  into  Acts  is  here  not  very  happy,  for 
the  pause  is  made  at  a  time  when  there  is  more  continuity  of  action  than  in  almost 
any  other  of  the  scenes.  Caldecott  suggests,  and  Elze  agrees  with  him,  that  Act  IV 
should  begin  with  the  present  IV,  iv.  The  latter  suggests  that  probably,  as  indicated 
by  the  Qq,  the  Queen  goes  to  seek  out  the  King  as  soon  as  Ham.  has  left  her,  and 
having  met  him  in  the  gallery,  enters  with  him  and  his  courtiers  one  of  the  King's 
apartments. 

1.  heaves]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  268)  prefers  the  punctuation  of  the  Qq,  and  under- 
stands '  which '  before  '  You.'  Corson  :  The  King  uses  *  profound '  equivocally,  as 
it  may  mean  deep  literally,  and  deep  in  significance,  and  upon  the  latter  meaning 
*  translate '  bears. 

7.  Mad]  Clarke:  The  Queen  both  follows  her  son's  injunction  of  keeping  up 
the  belief  in  his  madness,  and,  with  maternal  ingenuity,  makes  it  the  excuse  for  his 


312 


HAMLET 


[act  rv,  sc.  i. 


Which  is  the  mightier :  in  his  lawless  fit, 
Behind  the  arras  hearing  something  stir, 
Whips  out  his  rapier,  cries  '  a  rat,  a  rat !' 
And  in  this  brainish  apprehension  kills 
The  unseen  good  old  man. 

King,  O  heavy  deed ! 

It  had  been  so  with  us,  had  we  been  there ; 
His  liberty  is  full  of  threats  to  all, 
To  you  yourself,  to  us,  to  every  one. 
Alas,  how  shall  this  bloody  deed  be  answer'd  ? 
It  will  be  laid  to  us,  whose  providence 
Should  have  kept  short,  restrain'd,  and  out  of  haunt, 
This  mad  young  man ;  but  so  much  was  our  love, 
We  would  not  understand  what  was  most  fit, 
But,  like  the  owner  of  a  foul  disease, 
To  keep  it  from  divulging,  let  it  feed 
Even  on  the  pith  of  life.     Where  is  he  gone  ? 

Queen.     To  draw  apart  the  body  he  hath  kill'd ; 


10 


15 


20 


8.  mightier  :~\  mightier;  Rowe.  migh- 

*ur>  Q2Q3F=F3F4'     mightier  C^J^. 

fit,]  fit  Ff,  Rowe. 
TO.  Whips  out... cries']  Qq  (  Whyps  out 
QS^3'  cryeis  Q4Q5)>  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Sing.  Glo.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  Mob.  Whips  his 
rapier  out,  cries  Cald.  i.  He  whips  his 
rapier  out,  cries  Ktly.  He  whips  his 
Rapier  out,  and  cries  Ff  et  cet. 

1  a  rat,  a  rat  /']  a  rat !  Pope  +  . 
II.  this"]  his  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 


Knt,  Coll.  White,  Huds. 

13.  been]  beene  Qq.    bin  Fx.    bine  F2. 

been]  beene  Q4FXF2.     bin  Qs> 
16.  answered]  anfwered  Ff,  Dyce  i, 
Sta. 

18.  kept... haunt]  rejlrained  Q'76. 
haunt]  harm  Johns,  conj. 

22.  let]  let's  FXF3F4.     lets  F3,  Rowe. 
Pope. 

23.  Even]  Erin  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 


rash  deed.  This  affords  a  clue  to  Hamlet's  original  motive  in  putting  '  an  antic  dis- 
position on '  and  feigning  insanity ;  he  foresaw  that  it  might  be  useful  to  obviate  sus- 
picion of  his  having  a  steadily-pursued  object  in  view,  and  to  account  for  whatever 
hostile  attempt  he  should  make. 

10.  Whips]  Clarendon:  He,  which  should  govern  the  verb,  is  omitted.    Com- 
pare III,  i,  8. 

1 1 .  brainish]  Caldecott  :  Brain-sick  mood,  or  conceit.     Clarendon  :  It  does 
not  occur  again  in  Sh. 

17.  to  us]  Dyce,  in  a  note  on  IV,  v,  89,  reads  •  on  us.' 

18.  short]  Clarendon:  Kept,  as  it  were,  tethered,  under  control;  opposed  to 
loose,'  IV,  iii,  2. 

18.  haunt]  Steevens:  Out  of  company.     As  in  Rom.  6°  Jul.  Ill,  i,  45 ;  Ai 
You  Like  It,  II,  i,  15. 


act  iv,  sc.  L]  HAMLET  3 1 3 

O'er  whom  his  very  madness,  like  fine  ore  25 

Among  a  mineral  of  metals  base, 

Shows  itself  pure.     He  weeps  for  what  is  done. 

King.     O  Gertrude,  come  away ! 
The  sun  no  sooner  shall  the  mountains  touch, 
But  we  will  ship  him  hence ;  and  this  vile  deed  30 

We  must,  with  all  our  majesty  and  skill, 
Both  countenance  and  excuse. — Ho,  Guildenstern ! 

Re-enter  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern. 

Friends  both,  go  join  you  with  some  further  aid ; 

Hamlet  in  madness  hath  Polonius  slain, 

And  from  his  mother's  closet  hath  he  dragg'd  him.  35 

Go  seek  him  out ;  speak  fair,  and  bring  the  body 

Into  the  chapel.     I  pray  you,  haste  in  this. — 

\Exeunt  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern 
Come,  Gertrude,  we'll  call  up  our  wisest  friends ; 
And  let  them  know,  both  what  we  mean  to  do, 

25.  fine]  Walker,   fome  QqFf  et  cet.         cuse  in  Ff. 

ore~\  Oare  FxFaF  .  33.  you  with"]  with  you  Q'76. 

26.  metals']  Mettels  F,.     Methals  Fa.  35.  mother's  closet]    Mother   Cloffets 

27.  He]  a  Qq.  F,. 

what]  wat  Fa.  dragg'd]  dreg'd  QaQ,. 

28.  O]  Oh  Ff.     Om.  Q4QS,  El.  37.  I  pray]  Pray  Pope  -I- . 

30.  vile]  vilde  FfFaF  .  [Exeunt...]   Rowe.     Exit   Gent.   Ff. 

31.  We  must]  We  mojl  Q3.  Om.  Qq. 

32.  Two  lines,  Ff.  39.  And  let]  To  let  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald. 
Re-enter...]    Dyce.     Enter  Ros.         Sta. 

&  Guild.  Qq.  (after  line  31).     After  ex- 

25.  fine]  Walker  (ii,  299) :  Read  fine  [for  some  of  QqFf] ;  the  corruption 
would  perhaps  be  still  easier  if  '  some '  was  written  in  the  MS  ut  s<zpe  :  fom. 

25.  ore]  Johnson  :  Sh.  seems  to  think  *  ore  '  to  be  or,  that  is,  gold.  Claren- 
don :  In  the  English-French  Diet,  appended  to  Cotgrave  '  ore '  is  confined  to  gold. 

26.  mineral]  Steevens  :  *  Minerals '  are  mines.  Thus,  Hall's  Satires,  b.  vi  (p. 
154,  ed.  Singer) :  ■  Shall  it  not  be  a  wild-fig  in  a  wall,  Or  fired  brimstone  in  a  min- 
erall  ?'  Malone  :  Minsheu  defines  *  mineral '  to  be  '  anything  that  grows  in  Mines, 
and  contains  mettals.'  Caldecott  :  It  is  here  used  for  a  mass  or  compound  mine 
of  metals.    Staunton  :  Rather,  a  metallic  vein  in  a  mine ;  we  should  now  say  a  lode. 

26.  metals]  M.  Mason  suggests  metal,  as  much  improving  the  construction  of 
the  passage. 

27.  weeps]  Moberly:  Either  this  is  an  entire  invention  of  the  Queen's,  or  Ham- 
let's mockeries  had  reailv  been  succeeded  by  sorrow.  [See  Doering,  in  Appendix, 
Vol.  TI.] 

27 


3H 


HAMLET 


[act  iv,  sc.  iu 


And  what's  untimely  done ;  so,  haply,  slander, 
Whose  whisper  o'er  the  world's  diameter, 
As  level  as  the  cannon  to  his  blank 
Transports  his  poison'd  shot,  may  miss  our  name 
And  hit  the  woundless  air.     Oh,  come  away ! 
My  soul  is  full  of  discord  and  dismay. 


40 


\_Exeunt,    45 


Scene  II.     Another  room  in  the  castle. 

Enter  Hamlet. 

Ham.     Safely  stowed. 

R°S'   \   [Within\  Hamlet!  Lord  Hamlet! 
Guil.  J 

Ham.     But  soft,  what  noise?   who  calls  on  Hamlet? 

O,  here  they  come. 

Enter  Rosenorantz  and  Guildenstern. 
Ros.  What  have  you  done,  my  lord,  with  the  dead  body  ? 


5 


40-44.  so,.. .air.']  Ora.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

40.  so,  haply,  slander]  Cap.  Sleev. 
Cald.  Bos.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Dyce, 
Sta. White,  Ktly,  Huds.  Mob.  Eor,  haply, 
slander  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  So 
viperous  slander  Mai.  thus  calumny 
Sta.  conj.     Om.  QqFf,  Glo. +  . 

43.  his]  its  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 
poison'd]  poyfned  Q2Q3Q4.  poy- 
foned  Q  . 

Scene  ii.]  Pope. 


Another...]  Cap.  (subs.). 
Enter  Hamlet.]  Enter  Hamlet,  Rofen- 
craus,  and  others.  Qq. 

2.  Ros.  Guil.  [Within]  ...Hamlet!] 
Han.  Gentlemen  within.  Hamlet,  Lord 
Hamlet.  Ff,  Rowe  + .     Om.  Qq,  Jen. 

3.  But  soft,]  but  foftly  Q4Qg.  Om. 
Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Knt,  Dyce,  Glo.  Huds.  Mob. 
After  stowed.,  line  I,  Cap. 

on]  Om.  Q'76. 

4.  Enter...]  Om.  Qq. 


40.  slander]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  p.  108)  suggested  Happily,  slander  or  rumour^ 
as  being  at  least  very  near,  in  substance,  the  words  that  had  dropped  out  of  this  line. 
He  changed  them  in  his  ed.  to  'Eor,  haply,  slander?  Capell  {Notes,  i,  141)  says; 
*Eor  makes  not  so  good  connection  as  so;*  and  the  majority  of  editors  since  his  day 
have  adopted  this  modification.  The  Cambridge  Editors  (Note  xxiii) :  Malice,  or 
Envy,  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  often  used  by  Sh.,  would  suit  this  passage  as  well 
as  '  slander.'  Tschischwitz  reads  by  this,  suspicion,  and  understands  it  as  referring 
to  what  the  King  '  means  to  do,'  viz.  send  Hamlet  to  England.  He  also  suggests 
that  the  lines  following  it  down  to  *  woundless  air '  may  have  been  an  Aside.  Strat- 
hlANN :  I  think  Tschischwitz's  reading  the  most  suitable,  but  it  might,  perhaps,  be 
improved  by  the  substitution  of  so  that  for  by  this. 

41.  diameter]  Moberly:  That  is,  *  slander  can  pass  in  direct  line  from  hence 
to  the  antipodes  without  going  round  by  the  semi-circumference  of  the  earth.' 

42.  blank]  Steevens  :  The  white  mark  at  which  shot  or  arrows  were  aimed. 


act  iv,  sc.  li.J  HAMLET  3 1  5 

Ham.     Compounded  it  with  dust,  whereto  'tis  kin.  6 

Ros.     Tell  us  where  'tis,  that  we  may  take  it  thence 
And  bear  it  to  the  chapel. 

Ham.     Do  not  believe  it. 

Ros.     Believe  what  ?  io 

Ham.  That  I  can  keep  your  counsel  and  not  mine 
own.  Besides,  to  be  demanded  of  a  sponge,  what  replica- 
tion should  be  made  by  the  son  of  a  king  ? 

Ros.     Take  you  me  for  a  sponge,  my  lord  ? 

Ham.     Ay,  sir;   that  soaks  up  the  king's   countenance,     15 
his  rewards,  his  authorities.     But  such  officers  do  the  king 
best  service  in  the  end ;  he  keeps  them,  like  an  ape  doth 
nuts,  in  the  corner  of  his  jaw ;   first  mouthed,  to  be  last 
swallowed ;   when   he   needs    what   you    have    gleaned,    it 

6.   Compounded']     Compound    Q3Q3>  spunge !  Cald.  Glo. +  ,  Mob. 

Jen.  17.  like. ..nuts']  Qv  Sing.  Coll.  ii,  Sta. 

'tis  kin]  it  is  kin  Q4QS«    it  is  a  kin  Clarke,  Ktly,  Huds.     like  an  apple  Qq, 

Q'76.  Pope-f.     like  an  Ape  Ff,  Rowe,  Han.  et 

12.  sponge^]  spunge ; — Cap.  spunge! —  cet. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly. 

6.  Compounded]  Jennens  retains  the  reading  of  QaQ3  and  interprets  it  as  an 
imperative,  otherwise  Ham.  tells  an  untruth,  for  he  had  not  buried  the  body. 

12.  to]   For  the  indefinite  use  of  the  infinitive,  see  III,  iii.  85,  and  Abbott,  §  356. 

12.  of]  See  I,  iv,  18;  Macb.  Ill,  vi,  27 ;  Abbott,  §  170. 

12.  sponge,]  Corson  defends  the  comma,  maintaining,  and  rightly,  that  the  sen- 
tence is  not  exclamatory.  '  In  modern  English  we  should  say  "  in  being  demanded 
by  a  sponge,  what,"  '  &c.  Coleridge  :  Hamlet's  madness  is  made  to  consist  in  the 
free  utterance  of  all  the  thoughts  that  had  passed  through  his  mind  before ; — in  fact, 
in  telling  home-truths. 

12.  replication]  Rushton  {Sh.  a  Lawyer,  p.  34)  :  This  is  an  exception  of  tht 
second  degree  made  by  the  plaintiff  upon  the  answer  of  the  defendant. 

15.  soaks]  Bailey  (ii,  343),  in  this  speech  of  Hamlet's,  would  transpose  tin 
sentences,  so  that  lines  19,  20,  containing  the  simile  of  a  sponge,  should  follow  im- 
mediately 'authorities'  in  line  16;  and  for  'soaks  up'  he  would  read  sucks  up,  and 
for  ♦  gleaned '  he  suggests  glutted. 

15.  countenance  .  .  .  authorities]  Clarendon:  The  first  means  favour,  as  in 
I,  iii,  113;  V,  i,  26.     The  latter,  offices  of  authority. 

17.  nuts]  Farmer  conjectured,  •  like  an  ape,  an  apple.'  To  this  Malone  ob- 
jected, on  the  ground  that  Sh.  then  would  have  written  •  as  an  ape,'  &c,  not  '  like 
an  ape.'  But  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  116)  suspected  Farmer  to  be  right,  having  found 
in  Hugh  Holland  a  construction  precisely  similar :  'Where,  like  in  Jove's  [braines], 
Minerva  keeps  a  coile.' 

19.  needs]  Seymour  (ii,  193)  finds  an  equivoque  here  between  to  need  and  to 
knead. 


31 6  HAMLET  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 

is  but  squeezing  you,  and,  sponge,  you  shall  be  dry  again.     20 

Ros.     I  understand  you  not,  my  lord. 

Ham.  I  am  glad  of  it ;  a  knavish  speech  sleeps  in  a 
foolish  ear. 

Ros.  My  lord,  you  must  tell  us  where  the  body  is,  and 
go  with  us  to  the  king.  25 

Ham.  The  body  is  with  the  king,  but  the  king  is  not 
with  the  body.     The  king  is  a  thing — 

27.  a  thing — ]  a  thing.  Qq,  Jen.     nothing.  Han. 

22.  sponge  . . .  dry  again]  Caldecott  :  '  When  princes  .  .  .  have  used  courtiers 
as  sponges  to  drinke  what  juice  they  can  from  the  poore  people,  they  take  pleasure 
afterwards  to  wring  them  out  into  their  owne  cisternes.' — R.C.'s  Henr.  Steph.  Apology 
for  Herodotus,  1608.  Vespasian,  when  reproached  for  bestowing  high  office  upon  per 
sons  most  rapacious,  answered,  '  that  he  served  his  turne  with  such  officers  as  with 
spunges,  which,  when  they  had  drunke  their  fill,  were  the  fittest  to  be  pressed.' — Bar- 
nabe  Rich's  Faultes,  faults  and nothing  but  faults,  1606;  also  Suetonius,  Vespas.c.  16. 

22.  ear]  Steevens  :  A  proverb  since  Shakespeare's  time. 

26-27.  The  .  .  .  body]  Johnson  :  This  answer  I  do  not  comprehend.  Perhaps 
it  should  be, — The  body  is  not  with  the  King,  for  the  King  is  not  with  the  body. 
Jennens  :  The  body,  being  in  the  palace,  might  be  said  to  be  with  the  King;  though 
the  King,  not  being  in  the  same  room  with  the  body,  was  not  with  the  body.  Stee- 
vens :  Perhaps  this, — The  body  is  in  the  King's  house  (#.  e.  the  present  King's),  yet 
the  King  (*.  e.  he  who  should  have  been  king)  is  not  with  the  body.  Intimating  that 
the  usurper  is  here,  the  true  King  in  a  better  place.  Or  it  may  mean — the  guilt  of 
the  murder  lies  with  the  King,  but  the  King  is  not  where  the  body  lies.  Douce  :  The 
body,  i.  e.  the  external  appearance  or  person  of  the  monarch,  is  with  his  uncle ;  but 
that  the  real  and  lawful  king  is  not  in  that  body.  Caldecott  :  The  King  is  not  yet 
cut  off  from  life  and  sovereignty  :  his  carcase  remains  to  the  King;  but  the  King  is 
not  with  the  body  or  carcase  that  you  seek ;  the  King  is  not  with  Polonius.  But 
Hamlet's  answers  are  necessarily  enigmatical.  A  more  natural  meaning  is  suggested: 
The  image  raised,  the  impression  made  upon  the  King's  fears  by  the  fate  of  Polo- 
nius, makes  his  body  or  carcase  present  to  the  fancy  of  the  King,  who  knew  and  has 
said  that  '  it  had  been  so  with  him  had  he  been  there ;'  but  the  King  is  not  with  the 
body,  i.  e.  is  not  lying  with  Polonius.  Others  interpret,  plainly  enough,  if  admissi- 
bly :  The  body  is  with  the  King,  i.  e.  intombed,  or  in  the  other  world  with  the  late, 
the  real  king;  but  the  King,  i.  e.  he  who  now  wears  the  crown,  the  usurper,  is  not 
with  the  body.  Singer  :  It  may  mean  :  The  King  is  a  body  without  a  kingly  soul, 
a  thing — of  nothing.  Elze  agrees  with  Eschenburg's  explanation :  The  corpse  is 
here  with  the  King,  but  the  King  is  not  with  it,  i.  e.  he  is  as  yet  no  corpse.  Hud- 
son :  The  meaning  of  this  intended  riddle,  to  the  best  of  my  guessing,  is :  The 
King's  body  is  with  the  King,  but  not  the  King's  soul :  he's  a  King  without  kingli- 
ness.  Moberly  :  Apparently  a  sententious  maxim  from  some  political  book.  •  The 
body  politic  is  joined  to  the  King,  yet  the  King  is  not  to  be  considered  part  of  the 
b^dy  politic,  but  a  thing  apart.'  [The  present  editor  agrees  with  Clarendon,  that 
Ham.  is  talking  nonsense  designedly.] 


act  iv,  sc.  HI]  HAMLET  31 7 

Guil.     '  A  thing,'  my  lord  ? 

Ham.     Of  nothing ;  bring  me  to  him.      Hide  fox,  and 
all  after.  {Exeunt.     30 


Scene  III.     Another  room  in  the  castle. 

Enter  King,  attended. 

King.     I  have  sent  to  seek  him,  and  to  find  the  body. 
How  dangerous  is  it  that  this  man  goes  loose ! 
Yet  must  not  we  put  the  strong  law  on  him ; 
He's  loved  of  the  distracted  multitude, 

Who  like  not  in  their  judgement,  but  their  eyes ;  5 

And  where  'tis  so,  the  offender's  scourge  is  weigh'd, 
But  never  the  offence.     To  bear  all  smooth  and  even, 
This  sudden  sending  him  away  must  seem 
Deliberate  pause ;  diseases  desperate  grown 

28.  lA  thing']  Nothing  Han.  King,  and  two  or  three.   Qq.      Enter 
lord?]  Lord.  Qq.                                    King.  Ff. 

29.  Of  nothing  ;]  Of  nothing,  Qq.  1.  I  have]  I've  Pope  +  ,Dyceii,  Huds. 
Of  nothing?  FaF  F  ,  Rowe.      A  thing             3.  on]  upoti  Ktly. 

or  nothing  Han.  6.  weighed]  wayed  Qq. 

29,  30.  Hide... after.]  Om.  Qq.  7.  never]  neerer  FfFa.     nearer  FF. 

Scene  hi.]  Pope.  and  even]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 

Another...]  Cap.  Warb.     even  Jen.  (a  misprint?). 
Enter  King,  attended.]  Cap.     Enter 

29.  Of  nothing]  Johnson  :  Should  it  not  be  read :  Or  nothing  ?  When  the 
courtiers  remark  that  Ham.  has  contemptuously  called  the  King  a  thing,  Ham.  de- 
fends himself  by  observing  that  the  King  must  be  a  thing  or  nothing.  Farmer 
and  Steevens  cite  instances  of  the  use  of  this  not  uncommon  phrase,  and  Whalley 
cites  Psalm  cxliv,  4 :  '  Man  is  like  a  thing  of  nought.'  [ — Prayer  Book  Version. 
' of  vanity.' — Authorized  Version.]  Nares  quotes  Beau.  &  Fl.  Humorous  Lieu- 
tenant, IV,  vi :  'And  though  a  thing  of  nothing,  thy  thing  ever.'  [ — p.  517,  ed. 
Dyce.] 

29.  Hide  .  .  .  after]  Hanmer  :  There  is  a  play  among  children  thus  called. 
Singer  :  Most  probably  what  is  now  called  •  whoop '  or  *  hide  and  seek.'  White  : 
The  exclamation  is  merely  one  of  Hamlet's  signs  of  feigned  madness.  Moberly  : 
Ham.  sheathes  his  sword  ('  a  Toledo  or  an  English  fox' — 'point  of  fox,'  &c,  prob- 
ably from  the  name  of  a  celebrated  maker  like  Andrea  di  Ferrara),  and,  as  if  he 
were  playing  hide  and  seek,  cries  '  now  the  fox  is  hid :  let  all  go  after  him.' 

9,  10.  diseases. ..relieved]  Rushton  {Shakespeare's  Euphuism,^.  11):  '  But  1 

feare  me  wher  so  straunge  a  sicknesse  is  to  be  recured  of  so  vnskilfull  a  Phisition,  that 

either  thou  wilt  be  to  bold  to  practise,  or  my  body  too  weake  to  purge.     But  seeing 

a  desperate  disease  is  to  be  committed  to  a  desperate  Doctor,  I  wil  follow  thy  counsel, 

and  become  thy  cure.' — \_Euphues,  p.  67,  ed.  Arber.] 
27* 


31 8  HAMLET  [Acr  iv,  sc  ill. 

By  desperate  appliance  are  relieved,  IO 

Or  not  at  all. — 

Enter  Rosencrantz. 

How  now  !  what  hath  befall'n  ? 
Ros.     Where  the  dead  body  is  bestow'd,  my  lord, 
We  cannot  get  from  him. 

King.  But  where  is  he  ? 

Ros.     Without,  my  lord ;  guarded,  to  know  your  pleasure. 
King.     Bring  him  before  us.  1 5 

Ros.     Ho,  Guildenstern  !  bring  in  my  lord. 

Enter  Hamlet  and  Guildenstern. 

King.     Now,  Hamlet,  where's  Polonius  ? 

Ham.     At  supper. 

King.     '  At  supper '  ?  where  ? 

Ham.     Not  where  he    eats,  but  where    he    is    eaten ;    a     20 
certain  convocation  of  politic  worms  are  e'en  at  him.    Your 
worm  is  your  only  emperor  for  diet.     We  fat  all  creatures 
else  to  fat  us,  and  we  fat  ourselves  for  maggots.     Your  fat 

II.  Enter...]    Enter  Rofencraus  and  lord  Hamlet  Q' '76. 
all  the  reft.  Qq.     Enter  Rofincrane.  Fx.  Enter...]  They  enter.  Qq. 

Enter  Rofincros.  F2FF.    After  relieved  19.  '  supper'?  where  ?]f upper  where. 

Cap.   Steev.  Var.   Cald.   Knt,  Coll.  El.  Q4Qg. 
White.  20.  he  is]  a  is  Q2Q3Q4. 

16.   Ho,   Guildenstern!]    Hoa,  Guil-  21.  convocation]  conuacation Q2Q3Q.. 

denflerne  ?  Fx.    Hoa,  Guildenflar?  F2F3>  politic]  politique  QaQ3Q4.  politick 

Ho,  Guildenftare  ?    F4.      How,    QaQr  Qs.    Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 
Hoe,  Q4Q5-     Hoi  Cap.  e'en]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

my  lord]  the  Lord  Qq,  Cap.     the  23.  ourselves]  our  felfe  Fx. 

21.  politic]  Collier  (ed.  2):  The  (MS)  reads  palated ;  perhaps  he  so  misheard 
the  word  •  politic,'  but  although  it  has  considerable  fitness  with  reference  to  the  dain- 
tiness of  the  diet  of  worms,  we  do  not  adopt  it.  Anonymous  [New  Readings  in  Sh., 
Blackwood's  Maga.  Oct.  1853) :  '  Convocation'  proves  '  politic '  to  be  the  right  word. 
A  '  convocation  '  is  a  kind  of  parliament ;  and  does  not  a  parliament  imply  policy  ? 
'  Politic '  here  means  polite,  social,  and  discriminating.  Delius  :  The  worms  that 
were  feeding  on  so  distinguished  a  politician  must  needs  partake  of  his  character 
and  become  '  politic ;'  accordingly  their  assemblage  is  likened  to  a  convocation  for 
religious  or  political  purposes. 

21.  worirs]  Singer:  An  allusion  to  the  Diets  of  the  Empire  convoked  at 
Worms. 

21,22,23.24.  your!  Fc-  this  colloquial  use,  see  I,  v,  167;  and  'me,'  II,  ii, 
4IJ 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iii.l 


HAMLET 


3*9 


king,  and  your   lean   beggar,  is   but  variable   service,  two 
dishes,  but  to  one  table  ;  that's  the  end.  25 

King,     Alas,  alas ! 

Ham.     A  man  may  fish  with  the  worm  that  hath  eat  of__ 
aJdng,  and  eat  of  the  fish  that  hath  fed  of  that  worm. 

King.     What  dost  thou  mean  by  this  ? 

Ham.     Nothing  but  to  show  you  how  a  king  may  go  a     30 
progress  through  the  guts  of  a  beggar. 

King.     Where  is  Polonius  ? 

Ham.     In  heaven ;  send  thither  to  see ;  if  your  messen- 
ger find  him  not  there,  seek  him  i'  the  other  place  yourself. 
But  indeed,  if  you    find  him  not  within  this    month,  you     35 
shall  nose  him  as  you  go  up  the  stairs  into  the  lobby. 

King.     [To  some  Attendants]  Go  seek  him  there. 

Ham.     He  will  stay  till  ye  come.  [Exeunt  Attendants. 

King.     Hamlet,  this  deed,  for  thine  especial  safety, 
Which  we  do  tender,  as  we  dearly  grieve  40 

For  that  which  thou  hast  done,  must  send  thee  hence 
With  fiery  quickness ;  therefore  prepare  thyself; 
The  bark  is  ready  and  the  wind  at  help, 


24.  service,  two]  feniice  to  Fx. 

25.  but]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

26-28.  King... worm. ]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

26.  Alas,  alas  /]  Alaffe,  alaffe.  Q4QS- 

27.  may  fish']  may  eat  fish  Jen. 

28.  and)    Om.  Q4Q$,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Cald. 

31.  guts]  gut  F2F3F4,  Rowe. 

32.  Where  is]   Where's  Cald. 
35.  indeed,  if]  if  indeed  Qq. 

within]    Om.    Ff,    Rowe,    Pope, 
rlan.  Cap.  Knt. 


37.  [To  some...]  Cap.     Om.  QqFf. 

38.  He]  A  Qq. 

ye]  you  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 
Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  El.  Cam.  Cla. 

[Exeunt...]  Cap.     Om.  QqFf. 

39.  deed,  for  thine]  deed  of  thine,  for 
thine  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Del.  i. 

41.  send]  feudQ4. 

42.  With  fiery  quickness  ;]  Om.  Qq. 
therefore]  then  Pope,  Han. 

43.  at  help]  fits  fair  Q'76.     at  helm 
Johns,  conj. 


31.  progress]  Steevens:  Royal  journeys  of  state  were  always  styled 'progresses,' 
and  were  familiar  enough  to  the  subjects  of  Elizabeth  and  James  I. 

33.  messenger]  Delius  :  Heaven  is  inaccessible  to  the  King,  thither  he  must 
send  a  messenger. 

40.  tender]  To  have  regard  for,  as  in  I,  iii,  107.  Delius  says  *  dearly'  is  to  be 
understood :  '  as  dearly  tender  as  we  grieve.' 

42.  fiery]   Caldecott  :  As  rapid  as  the  progress  of  flames. 

43.  at  help]  For  instances  of  Shakespeare's  use  of  '  at '  instead  cf  c  a,'  the  con- 
traction of  the  Anglosaxon  on  (still  existing  in  alive,  afoot,  asleep,  &c),  see  Abbott, 
§  143.  In  '  at  foot,'  line  53,  '  at '  is  not,  says  Abbott,  on,  but  near,  as  in  « at  his 
heels.'     See  '  at    he  moon,'  III,  iv,  209.     '  The  at  of  price  generally  requires  an 


320  HAMLET  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 

The  associates  tend,  and  every  thing  is  bent  44 

For  England. 

Ham.  For  England  ? 

King.  Ay,  Hamlet. 

Ham.  Good.  45 

King.    So  is  it,  if  thou  knew'st  our  purposes. 

Ham.     I  see  a  cherub  that  sees  them. — But,  come;  for 
England ! — Farewell,  dear  mother. 

King.     Thy  loving  father,  Hamlet. 

Ham.     My  mother ;  father  and  mother  is  man  and  wife ;     50 
man  and  wife  is  one  flesh,  and  so,  my  mother. — Come,  for 
England !  [Exit 

King.     Follow  him  at  foot;  tempt  him  with  speed  aboard; 
Delay  it  not ;  I'll  have  him  hence  to-night ; 
Away !  for  every  thing  is  seal'd  and  done  55 

That  else  leans  on  the  affair ;  pray  you,  make  haste. — 

\_Exeunt  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern, 
And,  England,  if  my  love  thou  hold'st  at  aught, — 
As  my  great  power  thereof  may  give  thee  sense, 

44.  associates]  affotiats  Q.Q^  Q^* 
is  bent]  at  bent  Ff,  Rowe.  51.  and  so]  fo  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 

45.  For    England. ..Good.]    As    one  Come,]  Come.  Johns. 

line,  Steev.  53.  Follow. .. aboard ;]    Rowe.      Two 

England ?]  England.  QqFa.  lines,  the  first  ending  foote,  QqFf. 

46.  is  it]  is>t  Cald.     it  is  Huds.  at  foot]  Om.  Q'76. 

47.  sees]  knows  Seymour.  56.  [Exeunt...]  Theob.     Om.  QqFf. 
them]  him  Ff,  Cald.  Knt.  57.  aught]  Han.     ought  QqFf. 

47,  48.  for.... mother]    Separate   line,  58-61.  As. ..us, — ]Dyceii.    In  paren 
Johns.  Jen.                                                         thesis  first  by  Han.     As...vs,  Qq.    As... 

48.  Farewell... mother]   Separate  line,         us;  Ff. 

adjective  or  article,  as  well  as  a  noun,  after  it,  except  in  "  at  all."  We  have,  how- 
ever [in  line  57  of  this  scene],  "  at  aught,"  *.  e.  at  a  whit.'' 

44.  is  bent]  Corson  :  '  At  bent '  is  the  more  forcible,  expressing,  as  it  does,  the 
suspended  readiness  indicated  by  what  precedes,  '  the  bark  is  ready,'  •  the  wind  at 
help,'  '  th'  associates  tend.' 

47.  cherub]  Caldecott:  This  beauteous  and  sudden  intimation  of  heavenly  in- 
sight and  interference,  against  the  insidious  purpose  of  the  King's  show  ofJ  regard 
for  Hamlet's  welfare,  flashes  upon  us  with  a  surprise  and  interest  rarely  to  be  found 
or  equalled,  and  worthy  of  this  great  master  of  the  drama.  Collier  :  '  Him '  [of 
the  Ff]  seems  to  have  no  reference,  unless  Ham.  be  mentally  adverting  to  his  father. 
Moberly  :  The  cherubs  are  angels  of  love ;  they  therefore,  of  course,  know  of  such 
true  affection  as  the  King's  for  Ham. 

58.  As]  For  instances  of  '  as  '  used  parenthetically,  equal  to  for  so,  see  Abbott. 
§  110;  IV,  vii,  159;  V,  ii,  323. 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  HAMLET  321 

Since  yet  thy  cicatrice  looks  raw  and  red 

After  the  Danish  sword,  and  thy  free  awe  60 

Pays  homage  to  us, — thou  mayst  not  coldly  set 

Our  sovereign  process ;  which  imports  at  full, 

By  letters  conjuring  to  that  effect, 

The  present  death  of  Hamlet.     Do  it,  England; 

For  like  the  hectic  in  my  blood  he  rages,  65 

And  thou  must  cure  me ;  till  I  know  'tis  done, 

Howe'er  my  haps,  my  joys  were  ne'er  begun.  [Exit. 

61.  set]  let  Pope  ii.   set  by  Han.  Johns.  67.  my  haps.. .begun]  Ff  (happes  Ft). 

Cap.  Ktly.    rate  Anon.*  see  Coll. (MS).  my  haps,  my  ioyes  wilt  nere  begin  Qq, 

63.  conjuring]  congruing  Qq,  Pope,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.     V  may 

Han.  Theob.Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  El.  Glo.  +  .  hap,  my  joys  will  ne'er  begin  Heath. 

58.  thereof]  Caldecott:  May  make  thee  a  very  intelligible  suggestion  to  that 
effect. 

60.  free]  Clarendon  :  Awe  still  felt,  though  no  longer  enforced  by  the  presence 
of  Danish  armies. 

61.  set]  M.  Mason  :  One  of  the  common  acceptations  of  the  verb '  set '  is  to  value 
or  estimate ;  as  we  say,  to  set  at  nought.  Malone  thinks  that  it  is  an  elliptical  ex- 
pression  for  set  by.  Singer  denies  the  ellipsis,  and  quotes,  without  giving  the  au- 
thority, '  To  sette  or  tell  the  pryce ;  astimare.'  [Barett's  Alvearie  has :  '  To  set,  of 
tell  the  price.  Indicare,' which  makes  nothing  against  Malone;  because  *  To  set* 
is  not  used  absolutely,  but  the  full  phrase  is  '  to  set  the  price.'  Ed.]  Clarendon 
says  that '  set '  would  not  have  been  thus  used  had  it  not  been  familiar  in  the  phrases, 
set  at  nought,  set  at  a  pin's  fee,  &c. 

6$.  conjuring]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.  109) :  If  the  ■  letters,'  importing  the  te- 
nour  of  the  process,  were  to  that  effect,  they  were  certainly  congruing ;  but  of  no 
great  use,  when  the  sovereign  process  imported  the  same  thing.  Now  a  process 
might  import  a  command,  and  letters  conjuring  a  compliance  with  it  be  sent,  and  be 
of  great  efficacy,  where  the  execution  of  the  command  was  to  be  doubted  of.  More- 
over, Ham.  when  he  changed  the  substance  of  the  commission  would  be  likely  to 
retain  the  form,  and  we  find  him  using  'earnest  conjurations.'  As  to  the  accent,  Sh- 
generally  accented  the  first  syllable.  Clarendon  thinks  *  conjuring '  probably  a 
misprint,  although  it  yields  a  fair  sense. 

65.  hectic]  Clarendon  :  Used  as  a  substantive  in  Cotgrave :  •  Hectique :  Sicke 
of  an  Hectick,  or  continuall  Feauer.'  Only  here,  either  as  substantive  or  adjective, 
in  Sh. 

67.  haps  . . .  begun]  Johnson  :  This  being  the  end  of  a  scene,  should,  accord- 
ing to  Shakespeare's  custom,  be  rhymed.  Perhaps  he  wrote, '  Howe'er  my  hopes, 
my  joys  are  not  begun.'  [Collier's  (MS)  has  hopes.]  If  '  haps '  be  retained,  the 
meaning  will  be :  '  till  I  know  'tis  done,  I  shall  be  miserable,'  whatever  befall  me. 
Walker  (Crit.  iii,  268):  Begun,  certainly;  rhyme  is  demanded  here.  As  to  the 
rest,  £7r^w.  Lettsom  {Footnote  to  Walker)  :  Qt  gives  at  least  sense  and  English. 
[See  lines  161 2,  1613.]  Tschischwitz,  having  found  that  gin  is  used  for  begin, 
suggests,  reads,  and  defends  ■  my  joys  will  ne'er  be  gun.1 

V 


3^2 


HAMLET 


[ACT  IV,  SC.  IV. 


Scene  IV.    A  plain  in  Denmark. 

Enter  Fortinbras,  a  Captain  and  Soldiers,  marching. 

For.    Go,  captain,  from  me  greet  the  Danish  king ; 
Tell  him  that  by  his  license  Fortinbras 
Claims  the  conveyance  of  a  promised  march 
Over  his  kingdom.     You  know  the  rendezvous,, 
If  that  his  majesty  would  aught  with  us,  5 

We  shall  express  our  duty  in  his  eye ; 
And  let  him  know  so. 

Cap.  I  will  do't,  my  lord. 

For.    Go  softly  on.  [Exeunt  Fortinbras  and  Soldiers. 

Enter  Hamlet,  Rosencrantz,  Guildenstern,  and  others. 

Ham.    Good  sir,  whose  powers  are  these  ? 

Cap.    They  are  of  Norway,  sir.  10 


Scene  rv.]  Pope.    Scene  ii.  Rowe. 
A  plain...]  Cap.    A  camp.  Rowe. 
A  camp,  on  the  Frontiers  of  Denmark. 
Theob. 

Enter...]  Glo.  Enter  Fortinbrafle  with 
his  Army  over  the  stage.  Qq.  Enter  For- 
tinbras with  an  Annie.  Ff.  Enter  For- 
tinbras, and  Forces,  marching.  Cap. 

I.  greet  the"]  to  the  FaF3F4,  Rowe. 

3.  Claims']  Claimes  FtFa.  Craues 
Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  El.  Dyce  i, 
Glo.+. 

4.  kingdom]  realm  Pope+. 
rendezvous]  randeuoits  Q3Q3t  Jen. 


Rendeuous  Fx. 


Rendevouz  F„F„F,,. 

834 


5.  aught]  Han.    ought  QqFf. 

6.  duty]  durie  Fs. 

8-13.  Go. ..sir?]  As  four  lines, ending 
these  ?... sir ,...  Who... sir  ?  Steev.  Bos. 
Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White,  Ktly. 

8.  softly]  fafefy  Ff,  Cald.  Knt. 

[Exeunt...]  Exit  Fortinbras,  with 
the  Army.  Theob.  Exit.  Ff.  Om.  Qq. 
Enter.. .and  others.]  Dyce.  Enter 
...Rosincrantz,  Guildenstern,  &c.  Theob. 
Enter  Hamlet,  Rofencraus,  &c.  Qq.  Om. 
Ff. 

9-66.  Ham.  Good  sir, ...worth  f]  Om. 
Ff. 

10.   They]  The  Q4. 


6.  eye]  Steevens:  Compare  Ant.  <5r»  Cleo.  II,  ii,  212.  The  phrase  seems  to 
have  been  a  formulary  for  the  royal  presence.  See  The  Establishment  of  the  House- 
hold of  Prince  Henry,  1610:  'Also  the  gentleman-usher  shall  be  careful  to  see 
and  informe  all  such  as  doe  service  in  the  Prince's  eye,  that  they  perform  their 
dutyes,'  &c.  Again,  in  The  Regulations  for  the  Government  of  the  Queerts  House- 
hold,  1627 :  • all  such  as  doe  service  in  the  Queen's  eye.'     [See  IV,  vii,  45.] 

7.  let]  Delius  construes  « let  *  like  '  express,'  '  We  shall '  being  understood ;  and 
he  has  a  comma  after  '  eye,'  as  has  also  Keightley. 

8.  softly]  Staunton:  That  is,  slowly.  Clarendon:  Compare  Bacon,  Essay, 
vi,  p.  19:  ■  Like  the  going  softly  by  one  that  cannot  well  see.'  Colliers  These 
words  are  probably  addressed  to  his  troops. 

8-66.  Enter,  &c]  Knight:  This  scene,  in  which  a  clue  is  so  beautifully  fur- 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


HAMLET 


323 


Ham.     How  purposed,  sir,  I  pray  you  ? 

Cap.     Against  some  part  of  Poland. 

Ham.     Who  commands  them,  sir  ? 

Cap.    The  nephew  to  old  Norway,  Fortinbras. 

Ham.     Goes  it  against  the  main  of  Poland,  sir, 
Or  for  some  frontier  ? 

Cap.    Truly  to  speak,  and  with  no  addition, 
We  go  to  gain  a  little  patch  of  ground 
That  hath  in  it  no  profit  but  the  name. 
To  pay  five  ducats,  five,  I  would  not  farm  it ; 
Nor  will  it  yield  to  Norway  or  the  Pole 
A  ranker  rate,  should  it  be  sold  in  fee. 

Ham.    Why,  then  the  Polack  never  will  defend  it 

Cap.    Yes,  'tis  already  garrison'd. 


II 


IS 


20 


11.  purposed]  purpofd  QaQ3-  pro- 
pofdQQ.  propofd  Q'76,  Rowe.  pro- 
posed CaXd.  Knt. 

12.  Against]  Sir,  against  Cap.,  read- 
ing lines  II— 13  as  two  lines,  ending 
against...  sir  f 

14.  nephew]  nephews  G\o.  (misprint?) 
to]  of  Q'76,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

17.  speak]  speak  it  Pope  +  .  speak , 
sir  Cap.  Steev.  Bos.  Dyce  ii,  Del.  Huds. 
speak  on't  Anon.* 


17.  no]  no  more  Anon.* 

20.  five  ducats,  five,]  fiue  duckets, fitted 
Qq.   Jive  ducats— five,  Theob.  Warb. 
farm  it ;]  far  me  it?  Q*QS' 

22.  sold]  so  Rowe  ii. 

24.  Yes,  'tis]  Pope  +  ,  Steev.  Var* 
Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Sta.  White, 
Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  Del.  Huds.  O,  yes,  it  is 
Cap.  Nay,  His  Q'76,  Rowe.  Yes,  it  is 
Qq  et  cet. 


nished  to  the  indecision  of  Ham.,  was  perhaps  omitted  in  the  Ff  on  account  of  the 
extreme  length  of  the  play,  and  as  not  helping  on  the  action.  Collier  :  So  import- 
ant is  it  as  a  key  to  Hamlet's  character,  that  its  omission  convinces  us  that  the  abbre- 
viation of  the  play  as  we  find  it  in  Ft  was  the  work  of  the  players  and  not  of  Sh. 
Lloyd  (Crit.  Essay,  Singer's  2d  ed.  p.  345):  Beautiful  as  the  soliloquy  in  this 
scene  is,  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  the  excision  of  it  may  have  been  deliberate,— 
as  unnecessary,  prolonging  the  action,  and,  it  may  be,  exhibiting  the  weakness  of 
Ham.  too  crudely ;  it  shows  him  making  the  most  definite  of  his  resolutions  to  re- 
venge precisely  as  he  turns  his  back  upon  the  last  opportunity  by  quitting  the  coun- 
try. The  passage,  however,  with  some  others,  is  too  fine  to  be  suppressed,  though  I 
am  inclined  to  think  the  poet  sacrificed  them,  and  worthily  and  properly  they  may 
teike  their  place  in  brackets. 

15.  main]  Clarendon  :  The  chief  power.    See  II,  ii,  56. 

20.  five]  Theobald,  in  his  correspondence  with  Warburton  (Nichols's  Lit.  Hist. 
ii,  575),  suggested  five  ducats  fine,  but  did  not  adopt  nor  even  allude  to  the  sugges- 
tion in  his  edition.  Dyce  (ed.  ii)  says  that  Mr  John  Jones  proposed  the  same 
reading,  taking  '  fine'  either  as  a  market  denomination,  or  in  the  sense  of '  rent.' 

24.  garrison'd]  See  '  I'll . . ,  him,*  Macb.  Ill,  vi,  49.  Walker  ( Vers.  273)  1 
Pronounce  garr'son'd.    Scan  •  Yes,  'tis  |  alrea  |  dy  gam  |  son'd.* 


324  HAMLET  [act  iv,  sc.  iv. 

Ham.    Two  thousand  souls  and  twenty  thousand  ducats      2$ 
Will  not  debate  the  question  of  this  straw ; 
This  is  the  imposthume  of  much  wealth  and  peace, 
That  inward  breaks,  and  shows  no  cause  without 
Why  the  man  dies. — I  humbly  thank  you,  sir. 

Cap.     God  be  wi'  you,  sir.  [Exit. 

Ros.  Will't  please  you  go,  my  lord  ?     30 

Ham.    I'll  be  with  you  straight.     Go  a  little  before. 

[Exeunt  all  except  Hamlet. 
How  all  occasions  do  inform  against  me, 
And  spur  my  dull  revenge !     What  is  a  man, 
If  his  chief  good  and  market  of  his  time 

Be  but  to  sleep  and  feed  ?  a  beast,  no  more.  35 

Sure,  he  that  made  us  with  such  large  discourse, 
Looking  before  and  after,  gave  us  not 

25.  Two]  Ten  Walker.  (ending  the  line  straight).   Iwill  Steev* 

twenty  thousand]    20,000  Q'76.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sta. 
many  thousand  Han.  31.  straight]  Om.  Pope,  Han, 

30.  be  wi*  you]  Cap.    buy  you  Qq.  Go]  Go  on  Ktly. 

b}  w3  ye  Q'76,  Rowe+,  Jen.    V  wV  you  [Exeunt...]  Dyce.     Exe.  Manet 

Dyce,  White.  Hamlet.  Rowe.     Om.  Qq. 

[Exit.]  Dyce.   Exit  Captain.  Cap.  35.  feed?]  Q'76.    feede,  Qq. 

31.  I'll]  He  Qq  {lie  QJ.    /  will  Cap.  36.  such]  fuh  Q4. 

25,  26.  Two  . . .  straw]  As  You  Like  It  (Gent.  Mag.  lx,  403) :  These  lines 
are  certainly  given  to  Ham.  very  wrongfully,  as  they  undoubtedly  belong  to  the  Capt. 
Ham.  appears  entirely  ignorant  of  the  object  of  the  Norwegian  army.  The  Capt. 
speaks  with  contempt  of  the  little  patch  of  ground,  which  for  five  ducats  he  would 
not  farm,  to  recover  which  so  many  souls  were  to  be  sacrificed  and  so  much  money 
expended.  After  this,  Ham.  begins  very  properly,  « This  is  an  imposthume/  &c. 
Tschischwitz  goes  still  farther,  and  gives  the  whole  speech  down  to  '  dies.'  to  the 
Capt.,  on  the  ground  that  this  speech  does  not  accord  with  what  Ham.  says  after- 
wards, where  honor  is  the  cause  that  impels  him  to  the  struggle,  not  an  *  imposthume 
of  much  wealth  and  peace.' 

27.  imposthume]  Clarendon  :  Cotgrave,  'Apostume :  f.  An  Jmpostume ;  an  in- 
ward swelling  full  of  corrupt  matter.'    Caldecott  :  Compare  I  Hen.  IV;  IV,  ii,  32. 

34.  market]  Johnson  :  That  for  which  he  sells  his  time.  Seymour  (ii,  195) : 
This  means  his  prime  of  life,  the  time  at  which  he  ought  to  exert  his  faculties  to  the 
best  advantage  and  profit.  Clarendon  :  Possibly,  the  business  in  which  he  employs 
his  time. 

36.  discourse]  See  I,  ii,  150.  Johnson:  Such  latitude  of  comprehension,  such 
power  of  reviewing  the  past  and  anticipating  the  future. 

37.  Looking,  &c]  Theobald  :  An  expression  purely  Homeric.  Conf.  Iliad t  iii, 
109 ;  xviii,  250. 


act  rv,  sc.  iv.)  HAMLET  325 

That  capability  and  god-like  reason 

To  fust  in  us  unused.     Now,  whether  it  be 

Bestial  oblivion,  or  some  craven  scruple  40 

Of  thinking  too  precisely  on  the  event, —       \ 

A  thought  which,  quarter'd,  hath  but  one  part  wisdom 

And  ever  three  parts  coward, — I  do  not  know 

Why  yet  I  live  to  say  *  This  thing's  to  do,' 

Sith  I  have  cause,  and  will,  and  strength,  and  means,  45 

To  do't.     Examples,  gross  as  earth,  exhort  me ; 

Witness  this  army,  of  such  mass  and  charge, 

Led  by  a  delicate  and  tender  prince, 

Whose  spirit  with  divine  ambition  pufFd 

Makes  mouths  at  the  invisible  event ;  50 

Exposing  what  is  mortal  and  unsure 

To  all  that  fortune,  death,  and  danger  dare, 

Even  for  an  egg-shell.     Rightly  to  be  great 

Is  not  to  stir  without  great  argument, 

39.  fust]  rust  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob  be  great  Never  to  stir  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 

Han.  Warb.  Warb. 

43.  44.  know. .Jive]  know.  WJiy  yet  54.  Xs  not]  Is  not,  not  Cap.  Is,  no* 
live  /Q'37  (MS),  Ingleby's  copy  *   '  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing. 

53»  54»  lightly. ..to  stir]  *Tis  not  to 

39.  fust]  Wedgwood  :  To  grow  mouldy.  From  French  fuste,  a  cask,  fusti, 
fusty,  tasting  or  smelling  of  the  cask. 

40.  scruple]  See  Abbott,  §  i63.  Clarendon:  Scruple  which  consists  in  think- 
ing or  results  from  thinking. 

44.  to  do]  For  instances  of  the  infinitive  active  where  we  should  use  the  passive, 
cee  Abbott,  §  359;  Macb.  V,  vi,  5. 

45.  Sith]  See  II,  ii,  6 ;  and  Abbott,  §  132. 
50.  mouths]  See  II,  ii,  347 

53-56.  Rightly  . . .  stake]  Johnson  :  This  sentiment  is  partly  just  and  partly 
romantic.  '  Rightly  . . .  argument '  is  exactly  philosophical.  *  But  .  .  stake '  is  the 
idea  of  a  modern  hero.  But  then,  says  he,  honor  is  an  argument,  or  subject  of  de- 
bate, sufficiently  great ',  and  when  honor  is  at  stake,  we  must  find  cause  of  quarrel  in 
a  straw. 

54.  Is  not  to  stir]  [Does  the  '  not '  belong  to  the  copula  or  to  the  predicate  ?  I 
think  it  belongs  to  the  copula,  and  that  there  should  be  a  comma  after  it :  *  Is  not, 
to  stir,'  &c.  To  stir  without  great  argument,  upon  every  trifling  occasion,  is  not  an 
attribute  of  greatness;  it  is  rather  the  attribute  of  smallness,  of  a  mere  love  of 
fighting ;  but  it  is  the  attribute  of  greatness  to  stir  instantly  and  at  a  trifle  when 
honor  is  touched.  The  mere  fact  that  For.  is  astir,  and  Ham.  is  still,  does  not  prove 
the  former  to  be  the  greater  man,  or  make  him  an  example  to  the  latter.  But  be- 
cause, for  the  merest  fantasy  that  his  honor  was  touched,  he  was  going  to  his  grave 
28 


326  HAMLET  [ACT  IV,  SC.V. 

But  greatly  to  find  quarrel  in  a  straw  55 

When  honour's  at  the  stake.     How  stand  I  then, 

That  have  a  father  kill'd,  a  mother  stain'd, 

Excitements  of  my  reason  and  my  blood,. 

And  let  all  sleep,  while  to  my  shame  I  see 

The  imminent  death  of  twenty  thousand  men,  60 

That  for  a  fantasy  and  trick  of  fame 

Go  to  their  graves  like  beds,  fight  for  a  plot 

Whereon  the  numbers  cannot  try  the  cause, 

Which  is  not  tomb  enough  and  continent 

To  hide  the  slain  ?    Oh,  from  this  time  forth,  65 

My  thoughts  be  bloody,  or  be  nothing  worth !  [Exit 


Scene  V     Elsinore     A  room  in  the  castle. 

Enter  Queen,  Horatio,  and  a  Gentleman. 
Queen.    I  will  not  speak  with  her. 

60.  imminent]  iminent  Qq.    eminent  Enter...]  Pope.     Enter  Horatio,  Ger» 

Q'03,  Rowe.  trard,  and   a  Gentleman.   Qq.      Enter 

62.  plot]  spot  Pope,  Han.    plat  Jen.  Queene  and  Horatio.  Ff,  Johns.  Steev. 

conj.  Var.  Cald.  Sing.  Knt,  Dyce,  Del.  White, 

65.  0,~\  O  then  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Clarke.    Enter  Queen,  Horatio,  and  At- 

Scene  v.]  Pope.     Scene  hi.  Rowe.  tendants.  Rowe.     Enter  Queen,  and  a 

Elsinore.     A    room...]    Cap.     A  Gentleman.  Han.   Enter  Queen,  attend- 

Palace.  Rowe -re  ed;  Horatio,  and  a  Gentleman.  Cap. 


as  to  a  bed,  herein  lies  the  contrast  and  example  to  Ham.  Moreover,  when  *not* 
is  joined  to  the  copula,  and  a  comma  placed  after  it,  the  force  of  ■  But ■  is  felt,  thus : 
True  greatness  is  not  (predicate),  but  it  is  this.  Include  the  '  not '  in  the  predicate, 
and  *  But '  becomes  inconsequent :  True  greatness  is  (predicate),  but  it  is  this.  Ca- 
PELL  perceived  this,  and  added  a  second  not  as  a  compromise,  embracing  both  read- 
ings :  '  Is  not,  not  to  stir,'  &c.  DELIUS  does  not  actually  add  the  second  noty  but 
he  says  it  is  understood,  or  rather  that  the  *  not '  belongs  to  both  copula  and  predicate. 
This  discussion  may  seem  trifling  enough,  but  we  must  remember  that :  Rightly  to 
punctuate  is  not,  to  put  a  stop  without  great  argument,  but  greatly  to  find  quarrel  in 
a  comma  when  Shakespeare's  at  the  stake.  Ed.] 

58.  blood]  Clarendon  :  *  Blood,'  which  is  stirred  by  passion,  is  here,  as  fre- 
quently, antithetical  to  reason  and  reflection.     See  III,  ii,  64. 

61.  fame]  Caldecott:  That  is,  point  of  honor.  Delius:  ♦  Of  fame'  belongs 
to  '  fantasy '  as  well  as  to  '  trick '  =  an  illusion  and  a  whim  that  promise  fame. 

64.  continent]  Steevens  :  That  which  comprehends  or  encloses.  Reed  ;  ■  and 
if  there  be  no  fullness,  then  is  the  continent  greater  than  the  content.' — Bacon,  Adv. 
yf  Learning  [p.  6,  ed.  Wright], 

Scene  V.]  Miles  (p.  62)  :  With  this  pomp  and  circumstance  of  Fortinbras  and 


act  iv,  sc.  v.]  HAMLET  327 

Gent.    She  is  importunate,  indeed  distract;  2 

2,  4.  Gent.]  Qq,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  2,  3.  She. ..pitied.']  As  in  Cop.    Two 

Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  El.  Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  lines,  the  first  ending  importunate  Qq, 

+  ,  Mob.    Hor.  Ff,  Rowe,  Johns  et  cet.  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.     Prose  in  Ff. 

2.  She]  Beseech  you,  madam,  she  Sey-  2.  distract ;... pitied.]  dijlradedt  and 

mour.  deferves pity.  Q'7o. 

his  army, — with  this  flash  of  a  better  fortune  for  Denmark  athwart  the  deepening 
drama,  the  Act  should  end.  Ending  here,  the  interval  consumed  by  the  voyage  to 
England,  the  return  of  Laer.  from  Paris,  and  the  expedition  of  For.  to  Poland  and 
back,  is  thrown  between  the  Acts, — its  natural  place.  This  proposed  extension  of 
the  Third  Act  would  make  this  greatest  of  tragedies  the  most  symmetrical  too ;  while 
the  Fourth  Act,  relieved  of  a  confusion  which  is  now  mistaken  for  an  anticlimax, 
would  be  devoted  with  a  single  purpose  to  its  two  superb  contrasts :  the  revenge  of 
Laer.  with  the  revenge  of  Ham.,  and  the  utter  madness  of  Oph.  with  the  semi- 
counterfeit  lunacy  of  her  lover.  A  gain  almost  as  great  for  the  closet  as  for  the 
stage.  Marshall  (p.  77) :  The  interval  which  elapses  between  this  scene  and  the 
preceding  is  at  least  a  month,  and  probably  more.  [Page  193.] — This  may  be  seen 
by  an  examination  of  the  remaining  scenes.  No  break  can  occur  at  the  end  of  this 
scene;  the  conversation  between  the  King  and  Laer.  in  sc.  vii  is  evidently  part 
of  that  which  ends  this  scene;  the  time  occupied  by  sc.  vi  is  merely  sufficient 
for  the  King  to  explain  to  Laer.  the  circumstances  of  Polonius's  death.  We  find 
from  sc.  vi  that  Ham.  has  returned,  having  been  taken  by  the  pirates  on  his  second 
day  out ;  how  long  he  was  detained  by  them  does  not  appear;  it  must  have  been  for 
some  time,  since  between  Acts  IV  and  V  there  cannot  elapse  much  more  than  two 
days,  and  at  the  end  of  Act  V  we  find  ambassadors  announcing  the  death  of  Ros. 
and  Guil.,  and  For.  returned  from  Poland,  so  that  it  is  evident  that  the  break  im- 
plied by  a  new  Act  ought  to  occur  at  the  end  of  IV,  iv.  Moreover,  if  Ophelia's 
madness  were  introduced  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  Act,  it  would  be  more  effective, 
and  the  interval  which  is  supposed  to  have  occurred  would  give  color  to  the  causes 
which  produced  ft.     [See  notes  on  Act  IV,  p.  311.] 

Enter.. .Gentleman]  Collier  :  The  omission  in  the  Ff  of  the  Gentleman  was, 
no  doubt,  to  avoid  the  employment  of  another  actor.  Dyce  :  There  is  certainly  room 
for  suspecting  that  the  omission  of  the  *  Gentleman '  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  players. 
But  be  that  as  it  may,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  a  modern  editor  adheres  to  Ft  in 
this  omission,  he  ought  to  restore  to  Hor.  (what  comes  very  awkwardly  from  the 
Queen)  lines  14, 15 ;  and  that,  whether  he  chooses  to  retain  or  omit  the  '  Gentleman,' 
he  ought  to  make  the  Queen's  speech  begin  with  line  16.  White:  I  see  no  reason 
for  deviating  from  F,.  Lines  14,  15  are  much  more  appropriate  in  the  Queen's 
mouth,  as  a  reflection  by  which  she  is  led  to  change  her  determination  with  regard 
to  Oph.,  than  as  a  direct  warning  to  a  queen  from  a  subject.  CLARKE :  We  think 
there  is  something  exquisitely  appropriate  in  making  Hamlet's  beloved  friend  Hor.  the 
one  who  watches  over  and  tenderly  thinks  for  Oph.  during  the  Prince's  absence,  and 
brings  her  to  his  mother  alone.  Feeling  thus,  we  believe  it  to  have  been  Shake- 
speare's reconsidered  intention.  Clarendon:  Lines  1 1-1 3,  so  cautiously  obscure, 
seem  better  suited  to  an  ordinary  courtier  than  to  Hor. 

2.  distract]  See  I,  ii,  20. 


328 


HAMLET 


[ACT  IV,  SC.  V. 


Her  mood  will  needs  be  pitied. 

Queen.  What  would  she  have  ? 

Gent.     She  speaks  much  of  her  father ;  says  she  hears 
There's  tricks  i'  the  world ;  and  hems  and  beats  her  heart ; 
Spurns  enviously  at  straws ;  speaks  things  in  doubt, 
That  carry  but  half  sense ;  her  speech  is  nothing, 
Yet  the  unshaped  use  of  it  doth  move 
The  hearers  to  collection ;  they  aim  at  it, 
And  botch  the  words  up  fit  to  their  own  thoughts ; 
Which,  as  her  winks  and  nods  and  gestures  yield  them, 
Indeed  would  make  one  think  there  might  be  thought, 
Though  nothing  sure,  yet  much  unhappily. 

Hor.    'Twere  good  she  were  spoken  with,  for  she  may 
strew 


IO 


9.  aim]  ayme  FXF9.  yawne  Qq. 
fawn  Jen.  gape  El.  (Athenczum,  II 
Aug.'66). 

10.  botch']  both  F3F4,  Rowe. 

11.  as  her]  as  QAQS-     at  her  F3F4. 

12.  might]  would  Ff,  Rowe. 
thought]  thoughts  F3F4,  Rowe. 

14-16.  Hor....z#.]  Blackstone,  Coll. 
Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  + ,  Mob.  Given  to  Queen 
in  Ff,  Rowe,  Steev.'85,  Mai.  Steev.'o^, 


Bos.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  White.  Given  to 
Hor.  Qq,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.'73,  El.  Lines  14,  15  are 
continued  to  the  preceding  speaker  by 
Han.  Johns.  Dyce,  Del.  Huds.  Lines 
14,  15,  given  to  the  Queen  as  an  '  aside, 
and  stage-direction  [To  Hor.]  before 
line  16,  by  White.  Lines  end  with.., 
conjectures. ..in.  in  Ff. 


3.  will]  See  Abbott,  §  319. 

5.  There's]  See  III,  iv,  202. 

6.  Spurns]  Hudson  :  Kicks. 

6.  enviously]  Nares  :  Angrily,  spitefully.    Singer  :  *  Enviously  ■  and  spitefully 
are  treated  as  synonymous  by  old  writers. 
6.  doubt]  Caldecott  :  Without  distinct  or  certain  aim. 
9.  collection]  Mason:  To  endeavor  to  collect  some  meaning  from  it. 
9.  aim]  Collier:  The  Qq  may  possibly  be  right,  though  not  very  likely  to  be  so. 

12.  thought]  Staunton  :  '  Thought '  is  possibly  a  misprint,  caught  from  the  line 
above,  for  meant,  or  seen,  or  a  word  of  like  import.  Clarendon  :  The  general 
sense  of  this  ill-expressed  sentence  is  more  easily  understood  than  paraphrased. 
The  speaker  is  afraid  of  committing  himself  to  any  definite  statement.  If  he  had 
spoken  out  he  would  have  said :  '  Her  words  and  gestures  lead  one  to  infer  that  some 
great  misfortune  has  happened  to  her.' 

13.  unhappily]  Warburton:  Though  her  meaning  cannot  be  certainly  col- 
lected, yet  there  is  enough  to  put  a  mischievous  interpretation  to  it.  Steevens  : 
That  this  word  once  signified  mischievous  is  seen  in  Holland's  Pliny* s  Nat.  Hist.  b. 

xix,  ch.  vii :  ' the  shrewd  and  unhappie  soules  which  lie  upon  the  lands,  and 

eat  up  the  seed  new  sowne.' 

14.  she  were]  Walker  (Cril.  ii,  202) :  Thou  wert  (sometimes  written  in  the 
old  poets  Th1  wert),  you  were,  I  was,  &c,  occur  frequently  in  places  where  it  is  clear 


act  iv,  sc.  v.]  HAMLET  3 29 

Dangerous  conjectures  in  ill-breeding  minds.  15 

Queen.     Let  her  come  in.  \Exit  Gentleman. 

[Aside]  To  my  sick  soul,  as  sin's  true  nature  is, 
Each  toy  seems  prologue  to  some  great  amiss ; 
So  full  of  artless  jealousy  is  guilt, 
It  spills  itself  in  fearing  to  be  spilt.  20 

Re-enter  Gentleman,  with  Ophelia. 

Oph.    Where  is  the  beauteous  majesty  of  Denmark  7 

Queen.     How  now,  Ophelia  ? 

Oph.    [Sings']  How  should  I  your  true-love  know 

16.  [Exit  Gentleman.]    Han.   Cap.  Re-enter  Horatio,  with  Ophelia.  Steev.i 

Cam.  Cla.     Om.   QqFf,   Rowe+,  Jen.  et  cet. 
Exit  Hor.  Johns,  et  cet.  21.  beauteous"]  beautious  Q3Q3> 

16.  17,  in.     To]  in  To  FaF3F4.  22.   Ophelia?]  Ophelia.  Q4Q$.    OpJu- 

17.  [Aside]  Cap.  Cam.   Cla.      Om.  Hal  Dyce,  Glo.  +  . 

QqFf.  23.  [Sings]  fhee  fings,  Qq.     Om.  Ff. 

20.  Re-enter...]    Cam.   Cla.      Enter  23-26.  How...shoon.]  Two  lines,  Qq 

Ophelia.   Qq   (after    line   16).      Enter  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen. 

Ophelia  diftracted.   F£,   Rowe+,  Jen.  23.  true-love]     Hyphened    by   Cap. 

Enter  Horatio,  with  Ophelia,  distracted.  Dyce  ii. 
Johns.      Enter  Ophelia,   wildly.   Cap. 

they  must  have  been  pronounced  as  one  syllable,  in  whatever  manner  the  contrac- 
tion was  effected.     [See  also  Abbott,  §  461.] 

17-20.  To...  spilt]  Collier:  It  deserves  notice  that  these  lines  are  marked 
with  inverted  commas  in  the  Qq,  not  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  the  passage 
was  a  quotation,  but  apparently  to  enforce  it  as  a  maxim.  It  was  not  a  very  unusual 
practice.     [See  I,  iii,  59,  Knight's  and  Dyce's  notes.  Ed.], 

18.  amiss]  Misfortune,  disaster.  For  instances  of  its  use  as  a  substantive,  see 
NARES,  Steevens,  and  Concordance  to  Shakespeare's  Poems. 

19.  jealousy]  Clarendon  :  Suspicion.  Guilt  is  so  full  of  suspicion  that  it  un« 
skilfully  betrays  itself  in  fearing  to  be  betrayed. 

20.  Ophelia]  Hunter  (ii,  258) :  Perhaps  the  *  lute '  of  Q,  was  banished  when 
line  21  was  added,  which  must  be  said  running  wildly  up  to  the  Queen,  when  the 
lute  would  have  been  an  incumbrance.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  :  There  is  no  part 
of  this  play  in  its  representation  on  the  stage,  more  pathetick  than  this  scene ;  which, 
I  suppose,  proceeds  from  the  utter  insensibility  Oph.  has  to  her  own  misfortunes. 
A  great  sensibility,  or  none  at  all,  seems  to  produce  the  same  effect.  In  the  latter 
the  audience  supply  what  she  wants,  and  with  the  former  they  sympathize.  Cole- 
ridge :  Ophelia  singing.  O,  note  the  conjunction  here  of  these  two  thoughts  that 
had  never  subsisted  in  disjunction,  the  love  of  Hamlet  and  her  filial  love,  with  the 
guileless  floating  on  the  surface  of  her  pure  imagination  of  the  cautions  so  lately  ex- 
pressed, and  the  fears  not  too  delicately  avowed,  by  her  father  and  brother,  concern- 
ing the  dangers  to  which  her  honor  lay  exposed.  This  play  of  association  is  in* 
stanced  in  lines  67,  68. 

23.  [Sings]  Knight  :  The  music  still  sung  in  the  character  of  Oph.  is  supposed 
28* 


33Q 


HAMLET 


[ACT  IV,  SC.  V. 


From  another  one  t 
By  his  cockle -hat  and  staff  25 

And  his  sandal  shoon. 
Queen,    Alas,  sweet  lady,  what  imports  this  song  ? 

26.  And  his]  and  by  his  Q'76,  Johns.  26.  sandal]  Sendall  Qq. 

to  be  the  same  or  nearly  so  that  was  used  in  Shakespeare's  time,  and  thence  trans- 
mitted to  us  by  tradition.  When  Drury-lane  Theatre  was  burnt  in  1812,  the  copy 
of  these  songs  shared  the  fate  of  the  whole  musical  library.  Chappell  {Popular 
Music  of  the  *  Olden  Time,'  vol.  i,  p.  236) :  The  late  \V.  Linley  (an  accomplished 
amateur,  and  brother  of  the  highly-gifted  Mrs  Sheridan)  collected  and  published 
•  the  wild  and  pathetic  melodies  of  Oph.,  as  he  remembered  them  to  have  been 
exquisitely  sung  by  Mrs  Forster,  when  she  was  Miss  Field,  and  belonged  to  Drury- 
lane  Theatre;'  and  he  says  'the  impression  remained  too  strong  on  his  mind  to 
make  him  doubt  the  correctness  of  the  airs,  agreeably  to  her  delivery  of  them.' 
Dr  Arnold  also  noted  them  down  from  the  singing  of  Mrs  Jordan.  Mr  Ayrton 
has  followed  that  version  in  Knight's  Shakespeare.  The  notes  of  the  air  to  this  first 
song  of  Ophelia's  are  the  same  in  both ;  but  in  the  former  it  is  in  three-quarter  time, 
in  the  latter  in  common  time.  The  melody  is  printed  in  common  time  in  The 
Beggar's  Opera  (1728),  to  'You'll  think,  e'er  many  days  ensue,'  and  in  The  Gene- 
rous Freemason,  1731.  The  following  is  the  tune;  but  in  singing  Ophelia's  frag- 
ments, each  line  should  begin  on  the  first  of  the  bar,  and  not  with  the  note  before  it. 
In  the  ballad-operas  it  has  the  burden,  Twang,  lang,  dildo  dee,  at  the  end,  with  two 
additional  bars  of  music  : 

Moderate  time,  and  smoothly. 

J ,     1 


j^-JJfl^ 


M 


rr 


f  2  *f* 


And  how  should  I    your  true-love  know  From  many  anoth- er    one?    Oh,  by  his  coc  -  kle 
How  should  I  From  anoth*  er  By  his 


^m 


sen  m 


3 


3 


5£E 


22: 


f=F=g 


:w 


-a* 


A 


S 


S 


33=* 


r 

hat  and   staff, 


And      by       his 
And     his 


-■& 


sandal     shoon.       Twang,  lar.g,     dil  •  do     dee- 


3 


mm 


gj   Jnj-y-      g  j. 


m 


£ 


sL 


25.  cockle-hat]  Warburton  :  The  description  of  a  pilgrim.  While  this  kind 
of  devotion  was  in  favor,  love  intrigues  were  carried  on  under  this  mask.  Hence 
the  old  ballads  and  novels  made  pilgrimages  the  subjects  of  their  plots.  The  cockle- 
shell hat  was  one  of  the  essential  badges  of  this  vocation;  for  the  chief  places  of 
devotion  being  beyond  sea  or  on  the  coasts,  the  pilgrims  were  accustomed  to  put 
cockle-shells  upon  their  hats,  to  denote  the  intention  or  performance  of  their  de- 
votion. 

26.  shoon]  Delius  :  This  form  of  the  plural  was  archaic  in  Shakespeare's  time. 
Elze:  It  also  occurs  in  2  Hen.  VI;  IV,  ii,  195. 


ACT  IV.  SC.  V.J 


HAMLET 


331 


Oph.     Say  you  ?  nay,  pray  you,  mark. 
[Sings]  He  is  dead  and  go?ie,  lady, 

He  is  dead  and  gone  t  3° 

At  his  head  a  grass-green  turf, 
At  his  heels  a  stone. 
0,ho! 

Queen.     Nay,  but,  Ophelia, — 
Oph.    Pray  you,  mark. 

[Sings]  White  his  shroud  as  the  mountain  snow," 

Enter  King. 

Queen.    Alas,  look  here,  my  lord.  35 

Oph.    [Sings]  Larded  with  sweet  flowers  ; 

Which  bewept  to  the  grave  did  go 
With  true-love  showers. 


28.  Say  you?"]  Say  you,  Qq. 

29.  [Sings]  Song.  Qq.     Ora.  Ff. 
29,  30.  He  is... He   is]    He's. ..he  is 

Pope,  Theob.  Johns.     He's... he's  Han. 
Warb. 

29~32'  He.. .stone.]  Cap.  Two  lines, 
QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

33.  O,  ho/]  Qq.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Knt,  Dyce, 
Sta.  White,  Glo.  Huds.  0,0!  Cap.  Oh, 
ho  I  Coll.  ii.     Oh,  oh  I  Cam.  Cla. 

34.  [Sings]  Cap.     Om.  QqFf. 
his]  the  Warb. 

Enter  King.]  After  stone,  line  32, 


Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen. 

36.  Sings]   Song.  Qq  (opposite  line 
37).     Om.  Ff. 

Larded]  Larded  all  Qq,  Theob, 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 
Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 

37.  bewept]  beweept  Qq. 
grave]  ground  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 
did]  Pope,    did  not  QqFf,  Rowe, 

Jen.  Mai.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  i,  El.  Ktly. 

38.  true-love]    true  toue  Qq,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns, 

showers]  flowers  F3F4 


29-32,  34-38.  The  continuation  of  the  same  song,  and  to  the  same  tune. 
31.  grass-green]  Elze  adopts  green  grass  of  Collier's  (MS)  and  Percy's  ReU 
iques. 

36.  Larded]  Caldecott  :  Garnished,  set  out  as  a  dish.  Also  in  V,  ii,  20,  and 
in  <  a  quiet  and  retired  life,  Larded  with  ease  and  pleasure.' — Jonson's  Sejanus,  III, 
ii,  p.  86,  ed.  GifFord,  1816. 

37.  bewept]  Keightley  :  We  might  read  unwept,  as  in  Rich.  ILI:  II,  ii,  6$ ; 
or  as  I  have  done  unbewept,  as  the  initial  un  is  at  Hmes  omitted. 

37.  did  go]  Caldecott  :  His  •  shroud,'  or  corpse, « did  not  go  bewept  with  true- 
love  showers,'  for  his  was  no  love-case ;  his  death  had  the  tragical  character  of  fierce 
outrage,  and  this  was  the  primary  and  deepest  impression  on  her  lost  mind ;  she  felt 
that  something  more  than  the  ceremonial  forms,  insisted  on  by  Laer.,  was  wanting. 
Collier  :  The  QqFf  read  '  did  not  go,'  which  Pope  considered  an  error,  and  it 
probably  was  so.  Dyce  :  That  any  one  should  fail  at  once  to  perceive  that  the 
original  reading,  *  did  not  go,'  is  utterly  irreconcilable  with  the  preceding, '  Larded 


332 


HAMLET 


[act  IV,  SC.  V. 


King.     How  do  you,  pretty  lady  ? 

Oph.    Well,  God  'ild  you!     They  say  the  owl  was  a    40 
baker's  daughter.     Lord,  we  know  what  we  are,  but  know 
not  what  we  may  be.     God  be  at  your  table ! 

King.     [Aside]  Conceit  upon  her  father. 

Oph.     Pray  you,  let's  have  no  words  of  this ;  but  when 
they  ask  you  what  it  means,  say  you  this :  45 

[Sings]  To-morrow  is  Saint  Valentine's  day, 


39.  you]  ye  Ff,  Rowe+. 

40.  God  Hid]  Cap.  good  dild  Qq. 
Cod  dil'd  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Codild  Han.  God  yield  Warb.  God 
'ield  Johns.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing. 
Sta.  Ktly,  Huds.  God  'eld  Jen.  God 
dild  Dyce. 

41.  but  know]  but  we  know  Johns. 

42.  God. .. table  !]  Om.  Q'76. 

43.  [Aside.]  Ed. 

44.  Pray  you,  let's]    Pray  you  lets 


FXF2.  Pray  lets  Qq.  Pray  let's  Q'76, 
Cap.  Jen.  Pray  you  let  us  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Cald.  Knt.  Pray  let  us  Pope  + ,  Steev. 
Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

46.  [Sings]  Song.  Qq.    Om.  Ff. 
Saint]  S.  QqFf. 

46-49.  Four  lines,  Qq,  Johns.    Two, 
Ff.  Rowe+. 

46.  To-morrow  is]  Good  morrow,  'tis 
Farmer,  Steev.  Sing.  El. 


with  sweet  flowers' !  And  that  any  one  should  have  the  folly  to  suppose  that  the 
ballad  now  sung  by  Oph.  must  apply  in  minute  particulars  to  her  father !  Enough 
for  her  that  it  is  a  ditty  about  death  and  burial ;  no  matter  that  its  hero  is  a  youthful 
lover, — he  was  cut  off  by  a  sudden  fate,  and  so  far  resembled  Pol.  Keightley  : 
Though  the  printers  often  omitted  the  negative  (as  once  already  in  this  play),  they 
rarely  added  it.  We  have,  however,  an  instance  in  Much  Ado,  III,  ii,  28,  and  it 
might  be  better  to  suppose  the  same  to  be  the  case  here. 

40.  God  *ild]  *  God  reward  you.'     See  Macb.  I,  vi,  13. 

41.  daughter]  Douce:  This  is  a  common  story  among  the  vulgar  in  Gloucester- 
shire, and  is  thus  related :  *  Our  Saviour  went  into  a  baker's  shop  where  they  were 
baking,  and  asked  for  some  bread  to  eat.  The  mistress  of  the  shop  immediately  put  a 
piece  of  dough  into  the  oven  to  bake  for  him,  but  was  reprimanded  by  her  daughter, 
who,  insisting  that  the  piece  of  dough  was  too  large,  reduced  it  to  a  very  small  size. 
The  dough,  however,  immediately  afterwards  began  to  swell,  and  presently  became 
of  a  most  enormous  size.  Whereupon  the  baker's  daughter  cried  out,  "  Heugh, 
heugh,  heugh,"  which  owl-like  noise  probably  induced  our  Saviour  for  her  wicked- 
ness to  transform  her  into  that  bird.'  This  story  is  often  related  to  children,  in  order 
to  deter  them  from  such  illiberal  behavior  to  poor  people.  Caldecott:  The  plumage 
of  the  melancholy  bird,  and  the  color  of  the  baker,  in  correspondence  with  her 
father's  'white  shroud,'  and  probably  her  own  habit,  may  have  suggested,  to  a  bewil- 
dered mind,  this  singular  allusion.  Elze:  As  little  did  the  baker's  daughter  expect 
to  be  turned  into  an  owl  as  it  occurred  to  my  father  and  myself  to  anticipate  the 
kind  of  death  we  should  die.  Doering  (p.  79) :  Oph.  feels  that  she  has  acted 
towards  Ham.  in  an  equally  heartless  manner. 

43.  conceit]  Imagination.  See  III,  iv,  114.  Moberly:  The  King  seems  to 
catch  only  the  word  '  daughter,'  and  so  misunderstands. 

46.  Strachey  (p.  S$) :  If  we  bear  in  mind  the  notorious  fact  that,  in  the  dread- 


ACT  IV.  SC.  V.] 


HAMLET 


333 


All  in  the  morning  betime, 
A?id  I  a  maid  at  your  window  % 
To  be  yonr  Valentine. 

47.  morning]  morne  Fa.    morn  F3F+,  Rovve  H,  Cap 


47 


ful  visitation  of  mental  derangement,  delicate  and  refined  women  will  use  language 
so  coarse  that  it  is  difficult  to  guess  where  they  can  ever  have  even  heard  such  words, 
and  certain  that  wherever  heard  they  would  have  always  lain,  unknown  of,  and  in- 
nocuous,  in  the  mind,  unless  the  hot-bed  of  mental  fever  had  quickened  them  for  the 
first  time  into  life ; — if  we  remember  this  fact,  and  couple  it  with  the  consideration 
that  the  infant  ears  of  the  motherless  Ophelia  might  have  heard  the  talk  and  the 
songs  of  such  a  nurse  as  that  of  Juliet,  we  shall  find  nothing  improbable,  nor  even 
unseemly,  in  the  poor  girl's  songs — not  only  nothing  to  disturb  our  faith  in  the  un- 
sullied purity  of  her  maiden  mind,  but  nothing  to  cloud  the  bright  beauty  of  that 
purity  with  even  the  slightest  passing  breath.  [Mrs  Jameson  was,  I  think,  the  first 
to  suggest  that  Oph.  may  have  been  sung  to  sleep  in  infancy  by  snatches  of  old  bal- 
lads such  as  these,  and  Mrs  Cowden  Clarke  has  carried  out  the  idea  in  her  story 
of  The  Rose  of '  Elsinore,  where  Botilda,  the  nurse,  is  scolded  for  singing  this  song  to 
her  infant  charge.]  Hudson  {Shakespeare:  His  Life,  Art,  &c,  Boston,  1872,  ii, 
281) :  The  immodesty  of  some  of  these  songs  is  surpassingly  touching;  it  tells  us, 
as  nothing  else  could,  that  Oph.  is  utterly  unconscious  of  what  she  is  saying. 

l6.  [Sings]  Chappell  {Popular  Music  of  the  *  Olden  Time,'  vol.  i,  p.  227)  : 
This  song  is  found  in  several  of  the  ballad-operas,  such  as  The  Cobblers'  Opera 
(1729),  The  Quaker's  Opera  (1728),  &c.  In  Pills  to  purge  Melancholy  (1707),  ii, 
44)  it  is  printed  to  a  song  in  Heywood's  Rape  of  Lucrece,  beginning,  *  Arise,  arise, 
my  juggy,  my  puggy.'  Other  versions  will  be  found  under  the  name  of  '  Who  list 
to  lead  a  soldier's  life  ?'  and  '  Lord  Thomas  and  Fair  Ellinor.' 


Cheerfully. 


;gpg 


^^b-^J— i5±£C^^^ 


Good    morrow,    'tis      St    Valentine's  day.      All        in      the  morning  be  -  time, 


Wi-^T 


im^mm 


afe£ 


i 


E^&E 


* 


And 


maid   at     your     window      To  be  your  Val-  en    -    tine. 


m 


£E 


=?2 


i 


*. 


y ;  ift. 


46.  Saint  Valentine's  day]  Halliwell  :  This  song  alludes  to  the  custom  of  the 
first  girl  seen  by  a  man  on  the  morning  of  this  day  being  considered  his  Valentine  or 
true-love.  The  custom  continued  until  the  last  century,  and  is  graphically  alluded  to 
by  Gay.  The  custom  of  the  different  sexes  choosing  themselves  mates  on  St  Valen- 
tine's day,  14th  February,  the  names  being  selected  either  by  lots  or  methods  of 
divination,  is  of  great  antiquity  in  England.  The  name  so  drawn  was  the  Valentine 
of  the  drawer.    Douce  traces  the  custom  to  the  Lupercalia  of  Rome,  during  which 


334 


HAMLET 


[act  rv.  sc.  v. 


Then  up  he  rose,  and  donrid  his  clothes,  50 

And  dupp'd  the  chamber  door; 
Let  in  the  maid,  that  out  a  maid 

Never  departed  more. 

King.     Pretty  Ophelia ! 

Oph.    Indeed,  la,  without  an  oath,  I'll  make  an  end  on't:     55 

[Sings']    By  Gis,  and  by  Saint  Charity, 
Alack,  and  fie  for  shame  I 
Young  men  will  ddt,  if  they  come  tdt; 
By  Cock,  they  are  to  blame. 


50-53.  Four  lines,  Johns.  Two,  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe  +  .     Six  in  Cap. 

50.  donn'd]  dond  Qq.  tforid  Cap. 
Jen. 

clothes]  close  Qq.     cloathes  F2. 
cloths  F4,  Rowe. 

51.  dupp'd]  dupt  QqFf,  Rowe+. 
ofd  Han.  ddpt  Warb.  d'op'd  Cap. 
(T  upt  Jen. 

52.  the  maid,  that  out]  the  maid,  let 
in  Fa.  a  maid,  that  out  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,    a  maid,  but  out  Han. 


55.  Indeed,  la,"]  Johns.  Indeed  la  f 
Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Indeede  Q3Qr  Indeed 
QQ.  ludeed,  Q»76,  Theob.Warb.  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Indeed  ?  Pope, 
Han. 

56.  [Sings]  Cap.    Om.  QqFf. 
Gis]  gis  QqFxF2. 

Saint]  S.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Warb. 
56-59.  Four  lines,  QqFf.     Six,  Cap. 

57.  and  fie]  an  fie  F3F  ,  Rowe. 

59.  to  blame]  too  blame  QaQ3Q4FfF2. 


a  similar  custom  prevailed.  There  is  nothing  in  the  life  of  the  Saint  himself  which 
can  authorize  such  a  practice,  and  his  day  was  merely  selected  as  most  fit  in  point 
of  time  whereon  to  engraft  a  Christian  festival.  It  was  also  believed  that  on  this 
day  birds  chose  their  mates.  Pepys  gives  some  quaint  notices  of  *  Valentines  •  in 
his  Diary  under  date  14th  and  16th  Feb.,  1666,  and  14th  and  18th  Feb.,  1667. 

51.  dupp'd]  Wedgwood  :  To  do  up,  as  doff  and  don,  to  do  off  and  do  on. 

52,  53.  Let . . .  more]  Douce  found  a  French  ballad  of  1598,  of  which  the  con- 
clusion runs  thus :  '  Elle  y  entra  pucelle,  Grossette  elle  en  sorta.' 

56-63.  A  continuation  of  the  same  song. 

56.  Gis]  Johnson  :  Rather,  *  By  Cis,y  i.  e.  By  St  Cecily.  Ridley  :  There  is  not 
the  least  mention  of  any  saint  whose  name  corresponds  with  this,  either  in  the  Ro- 
man Calendar,  the  service  in  Usum  Sarum,  or  in  the  Benedictionary  of  Bishop 
Athelwold.  I  believe  the  word  to  be  only  a  corrupted  abbreviation  of  Jesus,  the 
letters  J.  H.  S.  being  anciently  all  that  was  set  down  to  denote  that  sacred  name,  on 
altars,  the  covers  of  books,  &c.  Ritson  :  Though  Gis  may  be,  and  I  believe  is, 
only  a  contraction  of  Jesus,  there  is  certainly  a  Saint  Gislen,  with  whose  name  it 
corresponds.  Douce:  Ridley's  conjecture  is  the  true  one j  but  the  corruption  is 
not  in  the  way  he  has  stated.  The  letters  I  H  S  would  not  be  pronounced  Gis, 
even  by  those  who  understood  them  as  a  Greek  contraction 

56.  Saint  Charity]  Steevens  :  This  is  a  known  saint  among  the  Roman  Cath- 
olics.   Spenser  mentions  her,  Eclog.  V,  255. 

59.  Cock]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  A  corruption,  or  euphemism,  for  God.  This  irreve- 
rent alteration  of  the  sacred  name  was  formerly  very  common ;  it  occurs  at  least 


ACT  IV,  SC.  V.] 


HAMLET 


335 


He  answers : 


Quoth  she,  before  you  tumbled  me, 
You  promised  me  to  wed. 


60 


So  would  I  JicC  done,  by  yonder  sun, 
And  thou  hadst  not  come  to  my  bed. 

King.     How  long  hath  she  been  thus  ? 

OpJi.  I  hope  all  will  be  well.  We  must  be  patient ;  but  65 
I  cannot  choose  but  weep,  to  think  they  should  lay  him  i' 
the  cold  ground.  My  brother  shall  know  of  it ;  and  so  I 
thank  you  for  your  good  counsel. — Come,  my  coach ! — 
Good  night,  ladies ;  good  night,  sweet  ladies ;  good  night, 
good  night.  [Exit.     JO 

King.     Follow  her  close;  give  her  good  watch,  I  pray 
you. —  [Exit  Horatio. 

Oh,  this'  the  poison  of  deep  grief;  it  springs 
All  from  her  father's  death.     O  Gertrude,  Gertrude, 
When  sorrows  come,  they  come  not  single  spies, 


60.  Quoth  she,  before]  Before,  quoth 
she,  Cap. 

60,  61.  Two  lines,  Ff,  Rowe  +  .  One, 
Qq.     Three,  Cap. 

62.  He  answers  :]  {He  answers.)  Qq. 
Om.  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,Knt,  El.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Glo.  Del.  Huds. 

So. ..sun,]  Two  lines,  Cap. 

would]  should  Q4QS> 

ha'  done]  ha  done  Ff.  a  done  Qq. 

63.  And]  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  An 
Han.  et  cet. 

64.  been  thus"]  bin  this  Ft.  been  this 
Cald.  Knt. 

66.  should]  would  Qq,  Cap.  Coll.  El. 
White. 

69,70.  Good. ..good. ..good. ..good]  God 
. .  .god. .  .god. .  .god  Q2Q3«  God. . .  God. . .  God 
...GodQAQs. 

night,  sweet. ..night.]  Theob.  as  in 


Ff(subs.).     night.     Sweet... night.    Qq, 
reading  Szveel... night,  as  a  separate  line. 

69.  sweet  ladies]  Sweet  L aides  Q  . 

70.  [Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

71.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

[Exit  Horatio.]  Theob.     Exeunt 
Hor.  and  Att.  Cap.     Om.  QqFf. 

72.  Oh,  this]  This  Pope-K 

72.  73.  As  prose,  Qq,  Jen.(  As  verse, 
ending  the  lines  with  fprings... behold, 
and  reading  O  Gertrude,  Gertrude,  as 
a  separate  line,  Steev.  Bos.  Cald.  Coll. 
Sing.  El.  White,  Del.  Ktly. 

73.  death.  O]  Pope,  death.  Oh  Ff, 
Rowe.  death,  and  now .  behold,  0  Qq. 
death.  And  now  behold,  O  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  Cald.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White,  Del. 
Ktly. 

74.  come,  they]  comes,  they  Ff. 
spies]  fpyes  Q2Q3. 


a  dozen  times  in  Heywood's  Edward  the  Fourth,  where,  in  one  passage,  the  Herald 
*:ays,  '  Sweare  ...  so  help  you  God,'  and  King  Lewis  replies,  '  So  helpe  me  Cock.' 

72.  this']    For  instances  of  the  contraction  of  this  is  into  a  monosyllable :  this9 
(where  this  line  is  given  as  an  example),  see  Walker,  Vers.  80;  Abbott,  §461. 

73.  Stratmann  :  I  suppose  Sh.  first  wrote  and  now  behold,  for  which  he  then  sub» 
stituted  '  O  Gertrude,  Gertrude.' 

74.  spies]  M.  H.  {Gent.  Maga.\o\.  Ix,  p.  307) :  Read^&j,  as  more  correspond* 
ent  to  battalions. 


33^ 


HAMLET 


[act  iv.  sc.  V, 


But  in  battalions !     First,  her  father  slain ; 

Next,  your  son,  gone ;  and  he  most  violent  author 

Of  his  own  just  remove ;  the  people  muddied, 

Thick  and  unwholesome  in  their  thoughts  and  whispers, 

For  good  Polonius'  death ;  and  we  have  done  but  greenly, 

In  hugger-mugger  to  inter  him ;  poor  Ophelia 

Divided  from  herself  and  her  fair  judgement, 

Without  the  which  we  are  pictures,  or  mere  beasts ; 

Last,  and  as  much  containing  as  all  these, 

Her  brother  is  in  secret  come  from  France, 

Feeds  on  his  wonder,  keeps  himself  in  clouds, 

And  wants  not  buzzers  to  infect  his  ear 

With  pestilent  speeches  of  his  father's  death ; 

Wherein  necessity,  of  matter  beggar'd, 


75 


80 


85 


75.  "battalions']  Rowe.  battalions  Qq. 
BattaliaesF^.  Battels F3F4.  battalias 
Dyce,  Sta.  Huds. 

78.  their]  Om.  Qq. 

79.  and  we  have]  We've  Pope  +  . 
but  greenly^]  Om.  Q'76.     Trans- 
ferred to  next  line  by  Cap. 

80.  In  hugger-mugger]  Obfcurely 
Q'76.  In  private  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.    Om.  Cap.     Hyphen  by  Steev. 

82.  the  which  we  are]  which  we  are 


but  Q'76.      the   which  we're  Pope+, 
Dyceii,  Huds. 

85.  Feeds  on  his  wonder]  Johns.  Feeds 
on  this  wonder  Qq,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Keepes  on  his  wonder  Ff  {Keeps 
F3F4).     Feeds  on  his  anger  Han. 

86.  buzzers]  whi/pers  Q'76. 

88.   Wherein]  Where  in  Ff,  Rowe. 
Wherein  necessity]  Whence  anU 
tnosity  Han. 


77.  muddied  .  .  .  unwholesome]  Delius  :  These  refer  primarily  to  the  blood, 
and  then,  with  which  Sh.  here  connects  them,  to  the  mood  of  the  people.  Dyce 
(ed.  ii)  reads  mudded,  as  he  does  also  in  A  IPs  Well,  V,  ii,  4. 

79.  greejttly]  Johnson  :  Unskilfully,  with  greenness,  without  maturity  of  judge- 
ment. 

80.  hugger-mugger]  Steevens  :  Sh.  probably  took  the  expression  from  North's 
Plutarch,  p.  999,  ed.  1631  [p.  121,  ed.  Skeat]  :  '  Antonius  thinking  good  ....  that 
his  bodie  should  be  honorably  buried,  and  not  in  hugger-mugger.'  Malone  :  Its 
meaning  is  seen  in  Florio's  Diet.  :  Dinascoso,  secretly ',  hiddenlyt  in  hugger-mugger. 
[See  Wheatley's  Diet,  of  Reduplicated  Words.] 

81.  Divided]  Tschischwitz  :  Compare  V,  ii,  221. 

85.  wonder]  Clarendon  :  The  mysterious  death  of  Pol.  filled  his  son  with  doubt 
and  amazement. 

85.  in  clouds]  Theobald  (Nichols's  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  575) :  Thirlby  has  conjectured 
inclosed,  i.e.  private,  close  in  his  apartment,  and  cites  IV,  vii,  130,  in  confirmation. 
But  change  is  needless ;  the  text  means :  'to  be  reserved  and  mysterious  in  his  con- 
duct.' Caldecott:  At  lofty  distance  and  seclusion.  Tschischwitz  suggests 
*  keeps  in  his  wonder,  wraps  himself  in  clouds.' 

88.  Wherein]  Johnson  :  Wherein  (that  is,  in  which  pestilent  speeches)  neces* 
sity,  or  the  obligation  of  an  accuser  to  support  his  charge,  will  nothing  stick?  &a 


ACT  IV,  SC.  V.] 


HAMLET 


337 


Will  nothing  stick  our  person  to  arraign 
In  ear  and  ear.     O  my  dear  Gertrude,  this, 
Like  to  a  murdering-piece,  in  many  places 
Gives  me  superfluous  death. 

Queen.  Alack,  what  noise  is  this  ? 

King.     Where  are  my  Switzers  ?     Let  them   guard  the 
door. — 


90 


[A  noise  witJiin. 


What  is  the  matter  ? 
Gent. 


Enter  another  Gentleman. 


Save  yourself,  my  lord ; 


89.  person]  perfons  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap. 
Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  i,  El. 

91.  murdering-piece]  Hyphen,  Q.Q-. 
piece,.. .places]  Peece... places,    Ff, 

Rowe,  Pope. 

92.  Queen.  Alack,.. .this  ?]  Om.  Qq, 
Pope,  Han. 

93.  Scene  vi.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
Where]  Attend,  where  Qq.     At- 
tend.   Wliere  Jen.  Steev.Var.  Cald.  Coll. 
Sing.   El.   WTiite,   Ktly;    all   but  Jen. 
reading  Attend  !  as  a  separate  line. 


93.  are]  is  QaQ3. 
Switzers]  Swijfers  Qq. 

93>  94»  Let. ..matter.]  One  line  Fl. 
Enter  another  Gentleman.]  Sta. 
Enter  a  Gentleman,  hastily.  Cap.  En- 
ter a  Meflenger.  (after  death,  line  92) 
QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope.  (after  this,  line 
92)  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Enter  a 
Gentleman,  (after  this)  Steev.Var.  Cald 
Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  White,  Ktly. 

94.  Gent.]  Gen.  Cap.      Meffen.  Qq 
Mes.  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 


89.  person]  Dyce  :  The  King  is  certainly  speaking  of  himself  only.  Compare 
his  reference  to  himself  in  other  passages  on  the  same  subject,  IV,  i,  13,  15,  17. 
also  IV,  v,  118,  145. 

91.  murdering-piece]  Steevens:  'A  case  shot  is  any  kinde  of  small  bullets, 
nailes,  old  iron,  or  the  like,  to  put  into  the  case,  to  shoot  out  of  the  ordinances  01 
murderers;  these  will  doe  much  mischiefe.' — Smith's  Sea  Grammar,  1627.  Thus, in 
Beau.  &  Fl.  The  Double  Marriage,  IV,  ii,  6 :  'A  father's  curses  .  .  .  like  a  murder- 
ing-piece, aim  not  at  one,  But  all  that  stand  within  the  dangerous  level.'  Singer  : 
A  murdering-piece,  or  murderer,  was  a  small  piece  of  artillery ;  in  Fr.  meurtriire, 
which  took  its  name  from  the  loopholes  and  embrasures  in  towers  and  fortifications, 
that  were  so  called.  '  Meuririire,  c'est  un  petit  canonniere  comme  celles  des 
tours  et  murailles,  ainsi  appelle,  parceque  tirant  par  icelle  a  desceu,  ceux  ausquels 
on  tire  sont  facilement  meurtri.' — Nicot.  '  Visiere  meurtriire,  a  port-hole  for  a  mur- 
thering  Peece  in  the  forecastle  of  a  ship.' — Cotgrave.  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  '  Murdering- 
pieces,'  if  we  may  trust  Coles,  were  not  always  '  small,'  for  he  gives  '  A  murdering- 
piece,  Tormentum  murale?  and  afterwards  'Tormentum  murale,  a  great  gun.' — Lat. 
and  Eng.  Diet. 

93.  Switzers]  Reed  :  In  many  of  our  old  plays  the  guards  attendant  on  kings 
are  called  •  Switzers,'  and  that  without  any  regard  to  the  country  where  the  scene 
lies.  Malone  :  *  Law,  logicke  and  the  Switzers,  may  be  hired  to  fight  for  any  body.' 
— Nash,    Christ's    Teares  over  Jerusalem,  1594. 


29 


W 


3?8 


HAMLET 


[ACT  IV,  SC.  V. 


The  ocean,  overpeering  of  his  list, 

Eats  not  the  flats  with  more  impetuous  haste 

Than  young  Laertes,  in  a  riotous  head, 

O'erbears  your  officers.     The  rabble  call  him  lord ; 

And,  as  the  world  were  now  but  to  begin, 

Antiquity  forgot,  custom  not  known, 

The  ratifiers  and  props  of  every  word, 

They  cry  '  Choose  we  ;  Laertes  shall  be  king !' 


95 


ioo 


96.  impetuous~\  impitious  Q2Q3,  Cald. 
Knt.     impittious  Yv 

99-101.  And.. .word,"]  In  parenthesis, 
Anon.  {Gent.  Mag.  1790,  lx,  403). 

101.  Han.  transposes  this  line  to  fol- 
low 102. 


101.  zuord~\  war^Warb.Theob.  Johns. 
order  Cartwright. 

102.  They  cry~\  The  cry  Qq,  Warb. 
we ;...king~\  Cap.  we P...kingFi. 

we,.. .king  Qq.    we  Laertes  for  our  king 
Q'76,  Rowe-f.     we  /...king  Sta. 


95.  overpeering]  Petri  {Archivf.  n.  Sprachen,  vol.  vi,  p.  93)  suggests  overpier 
ing,  i.  e.  over  the  piers,  •  which  is  more  picturesque,  and  in  accordance  with  nature.' 

95.  list]  Malone:  Boundary,  i.e.  shore.  [For  '  of  his  list,'  see  I,  v,  175;  Ab- 
bott, §  178.] 

96.  Eats]  Dyce  (ed.  2):  W.  W.  Williams  (under  the  signature  W.  D.),  in 
The  Literary  Gazette  for  March   15,  1862,  p.  263,  would  read  Beats.     But  is  not 

•  Eats '  to  be  defended  on  classical  authority  ?  ' et  ripas  radentia  flumina  rodunt.' 

— Lucretius,  v,  256.     '  Non  rura,  quse  Liris  quieta  Mordet  aqua,  taciturnus  amnis.' 
— Horace,  Carm.  i,  xxxi,  7. 

97.  head]  Clarendon  :  '  A  head'  is  an  armed  force,  as  in  1  Hen.  IV:  I,  iii,  284; 
lb.  Ill,  ii,  167. 

98.  lord]  Collier  (ed.  2)  :  The  (MS)  would  warrant  us  in  changing  'lord'  to 
king  ;  perhaps  the  meaning  of  the  rabble  was  the  same,  but  afterwards  they  are 
represented  as  exclaiming  '  Laertes  shall  be  king.'  Perhaps  it  ought  to  be  king  in 
both  places. 

99.  as]  See  III,  iv,  135. 

100.  custom]  Moberly  :  As  if  the  government  were  to  be  settled  by  random 
plebiscites  at  the  good  pleasure  of  the  rabble. 

101.  word]  Warburton  :  Certainly  Sh.  wrote  ward,  i.  e.  the  security  that  nature 
and  law  place  about  the  person  of  a  king.  Johnson  :  I  think  the  fault  can  be  mended 
at  less  expense  by  reading  weal,  i.  e.  of  every  government.  Tyrwhitt  :  I  should 
be  rather  for  reading  work.  Capell,  who  adopted  Tyrwhitt's  conj.,  says  (Arotes, 
i,  143)  :  Work  is  work  of  such  sort  as  the  people  were  about  to  proceed  to.  Heath 
(p.  544) :  By  '  word  '  is  here  meant  a  declaration  or  proposal,  referring  to  •  the  rabble 
call  him  lord.'  Tollet  believed  the  sense  to  be  '  the  ratifiers  and  props  of  every 
word  he  utters.'*  Caldecott  :  '  Word  '  is  term,  and  means  appellation  or  title ;  as 
1  lord '  and  'king;'  in  its  more  extended  sense  it  must  import '  every  human  establish- 
ment.' Elze  {AthencBum,  11  Aug.  '66) :  Read  worth.  As  far  as  worth  is  concerned, 
Laer.  would  indeed  be  a  proper  person  to  be  elected  king.  But  the  king  is  not 
chosen  for  his  worthiness  ;  antiquity  and  custom  claim  a  share  also ;  they  are  '  the 
ratifiers  and  props  of  every  worth.'     Tschischwitz  <•  I  hold  wont  to  be  the  true 


ACT  IV,  SC.  V.] 


HAMLET 


339 


Caps,  hands,  and  tongues  applaud  it  to  the  clouds, 
1  Laertes  shall  be  king,  Laertes  king!' 

Queen.     How  cheerfully  on  the  false  trail  they  cry  !  105 

Oh,  this  is  counter,  you  false  Danish  dogs !      [Noise  witldn. 

King.     The  doors  are  broke. 

Enter  Laertes,  armed  ;   Danes  following. 

Lacr.     Where  is  this  king?— Sirs,  stand  you  all  without. 

Danes.     No,  let's  come  in. 

Lacr.  I  pray  you,  give  me  leave. 

Danes.     We  will,  we  will.        [They  retire  without  the  door.   1 10 

Laer.     I  thank  you.     Keep  the  door. — O  thou  vile  king, 
Give  me  my  father! 

Queen.  Calmly,  good  Laertes. 

Laer.     That    drop   of  blood    that's    calm    proclaims    me 
bastard ; 
Cries  cuckold  to  my  father ;  brands  the  harlot 


103.  tongucs~\  shouts  Han. 
applaud~\  applau'd  Qq. 

104.  Laertes  king /]  Om.  Q'76. 
[Noise  again,  and  Shouts:  Door 

assaulted.  Cap. 

106.  [Noise  within.]  A  noife  within. 
Qq,  opposite  to  line  105. 

107.  Enter.. .following.]  Cap.  Enter 
Laertes  with  others.  Qq,  after  line  106. 
Enter  Laertes,  (after  line  106),  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  Enter  Laertes,  with  a  Party 
at  the  Door,  (after  line  106),  Theob. +  , 
Jen.    Enter... People  following.  White. 

108.  this  king?  Sirs,"]  the  King  >  firs  ? 


Ff.    the  king?    Sirs!  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

109,  no.  Danes.]  Dan.  Cap.  All. 
QqFf,  Rowe  +  .     People.  White. 

no.  [They  retire...]  Mai.  after  Cap. 
Exeunt.  Theob.     Om.  QqFf. 

in,  112.  O  thou.,  father  /]  One  line, 
Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

111.  vile"]  vilde  FxF2.     vildY^. 

112.  [Laying  hold  on  him.  Johns. 

113.  That... bastard '/]  Two  lines,  Ff. 
that's   calm~\    that's   calme   Q  . 

thats  calme  Q2Q3Q4«     that  calmes  FtFB 
F  .     that  calms  F  ,  Rowe,  Cald. 


reading  [and  he  so  prints  it.  Ed.]  See  Blackstone's  note  on  I,  ii,  109.  Cole 
ridge  :  Fearful  and  self-suspicious  as  I  always  feel  when  I  seem  to  see  an  js-rror 
of  judgement  in  Sh.,  yet  I  can  not  reconcile  the  cool  reflection  in  these  lines  with 
the  anonymousness,  or  the  alarm,  of  this  Gentleman  or  Messenger. 

106.  counter]  Clarendon  :  In  Holmes's  Academy  of  Armory,  Bk  II,  c.  ix,  p. 
187,  'counter'  is  defined:  'When  a  hound  hunteth  backwards,  the  same  way  that 
the  chase  is  come.' 

113.  calm]  Corson:  Ft  reads  better.  Laer.  is  under  the  wildest  excitement, 
with  not  a  calm  drop  of  blood  in  his  veins,  and  when  the  Queen  entreats,  '  Calmly, 
good  Laertes,'  be  or  become  calm,  he  replies,  ■  That  drop  of  blood  that  calms,'  that 
is,  that  grows  calm,  or  will  calm,  •  proclaims  me  bastard;'  •  calms  '  and  '  proclaims' 
are  both  future  in  force. 


34°  HAMLET  [act  iv,  sc.  v. 

Even  here,  between  the  chaste  unsmirched  brows  115 

Of  my  true  mother. 

King.  What  is  the  cause,  Laertes, 

That  thy  rebellion  looks  so  giant-like  ? — 
Let  him  go,  Gertrude  ;  do  not  fear  our  person  ; 
There's  such  divinity  doth  hedge  a  king, 

That  treason  can  but  peep  to  what  it  would,  120 

Acts  little  of  his  will. — Tell  me,  Laertes, 
Why  thou  art  thus  incensed. — Let  him  go,  Gertrude. — 

115.  unsmirched  brows']  White,  Ktly,  120.  can  but]  cannot  Q4Q-. 

Dyce  ii.     vnfmirched  browe  Q2Q3.     vn-  can  but  peep  to~\  dares  not  reacn 

fmerched  browe  Q.     vnfmerched  brow  at  Q'76. 

Qg.     unfmitched  brow   FaF  F  ,  Rowe.  121.  Acts]  AcT  s  Qq.     Act  Han. 

brows  Q'76.    and  unsmich'd  brow  Pope.  his]  its  Pope  + . 

and  unsmirched  brow  Theob.  +  .     and  122.  thou  art]  art  thou  F  F  ,  Rowe. 

unsmirched  brows  Johns,     vnfmirched  are  you  Rowe  ii  + . 
brow  Ft,  Cap.  et  cet. 

115.  unsmirched]  Steevens:  Clean,  not  defiled.  This  seems  to  be  an  allusion 
to  a  proverb  often  introduced  in  the  old  comedies.     Thus,  in  The  London  Prodigal^ 

1605  :  * as  true  as  the  skin  between  any  man's  brows.'     Collier  (ed.  2) :  This 

seems  the  only  place  where  Sh.  uses  this  word,  meaning  unsullied.     We  have  else- 
where '  smirched '  and  '  besmirched '  for  dirtied. 

115.  brows]  White:  '  Between '  shows  that  the  s  is  manifestly  needed. 

116.  true]  Delius:  That  is,  faithful. 
118.  fear]  See  I,  iii,  51. 

118.  person]  Delius:  It  is  to  be  inferred  that  the  Queen  throws  herself  between 
her  husband  and  the  enraged  Laer.  Clarendon  :  She  clings  round  the  latter  tc 
prevent  him  from  striking.  [See  Dr  Johnson's  stage-direction,  Textual  Notes,  line 
112.] 

119-121.  There's  .  .  .  will]  Coleridge:  Proof,  as  indeed  all  else  is,  that  Sh 
never  intended  us  to  see  the  King  with  Hamlet's  eyes ;  though,  I  suspect,  the  man 
agers  have  long  done  so. 

119.  divinity]  Boswell:  In  Chettle's  Englandes  Mourning  Garment  is  the  fol 
lowing  anecdote  of  Queen  Elizabeth :  While  her  Majesty  was  on  the  river  nea» 
Greenwich,  a  shot  was  fired  by  accident,  which  struck  the  royal  barge,  and  hurt  » 
waterman  near  her.  •  The  French  ambassador  being  amazed,  and  all  crying  Treason, 
Treason !  yet  she,  with  an  undaunted  spirit,  came  to  the  open  place  of  the  barge, 
and  bad  them  never  feare,  for  if  the  shot  were  made  at  her,  they  durst  not  shoots 
againe :  such  majestie  had  her  presence,  and  such  boldnesse  her  heart,  that  she  de- 
spised all  feare,  and  was,  as  all  princes  are  or  should  be,  so  full  of  divine  fullnesse, 
that  guiltie  mortalitie  durst  not  beholde  her  but  with  dazeled  eyes.' 

119.  hedge]  Caldecott:  See  Job,  i,  10 ;  and  iii,  23. 

120,  121.  That  .  .  .  will]  Staunton:  This  is  passed  by  the  critics  without  com- 
ment ;  but  we  shrewdly  suspect  it  has  undergone  some  depravation  at  the  hands  cA 
transcribers  or  compositors. 


act  iv,  sc.  v.]  HAMLET  34  * 

Speak,  man.  123 

Laer.     Where's  my  father? 

King.  Dead. 

Queen.  But  not  by  him. 

King.     Let  him  demand  his  fill.  1 25 

Laer.     How  came  he  dead?     I'll  not  be  juggled  with. 
To  hell,  allegiance !  vows,  to  the  blackest  devil ! 
Conscience  and  grace,  to  the  profoundest  pit ! 
I  dare  damnation.     To  this  point  I  stand : 

That  both  the  worlds  I  give  to  negligence,  130 

Let  come  what  comes ;  only  I'll  be  revenged 
Most  throughly  for  my  father. 

King.  Who  shall  stay  you  ? 

Laer.     My  will,  not  all  the  world ; 
And  for  my  means,  I'll  husband  them  so  well, 
They  shall  go  far  with  little. 

King.  Good  Laertes,  135 

124.  Where's}  F,F  F,  Rowe,  Corson.  Glo.-f,  Huds.  Mob.  worlds  Qq.  uorld's 

Wheres  Fa.      Where  is  Qq  et  cet.  Pope  et  cet. 

Dead}  Dead,  Laertes  Cap.  135.    They}  The  Q4. 

127.  blackest}  black  Pope,  Han.  135,  136.   Good. ..certainty}  One  line, 

128,  129.  grace,  to... pit !  L}  grace,  to  Qq. 

...pit.     LFf.     grace,  to... pit  /Qq.  I35~I39-    Good.. . loser  ?}   Will  you  in 

132.  throughly}  thoroughly  Sing.  Ktly.  revenge  of  your  Dear  fathers  death  de- 

133.  world}  Ff,  Rowe,  Theob.  Warb.  ftroy  both  friend  and  foe  ?  Q'76. 
Johns.  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.White,  Del. 

126.  Theobald  gives  this  note  of  Warburton's,  which,  not  being  in  Warburton's 
own  edition,  was  probably  a  MS  communication:  Laertes  is  a  good  character.  But 
being  in  rebellion,  Sh.  avoids  any  appearance  of  sanctioning  such  conduct  by  put- 
ting into  his  mouth  absurd  and  blasphemous  sentiments,  which  excite  nothing  but 
horror  at  his  actions.  The  jealousy  of  the  two  reigns  in  which  Sh.  wrote  would 
not  dispense  with  less  exactness.  Coleridge  :  Mercy  on  Warburton's  notion  of 
goodness !  Please  refer  to  the  seventh  scene  of  this  Act.  Yet  I  acknowledge  that 
Sh.  evidently  wishes,  as  much  as  possible,  to  spare  the  character  of  Laer. — to  break 
the  extreme  turpitude  of  his  consent  to  become  an  agent  and  accomplice  of  the 
King's  treachery;  and  to  this  end  he  re-introduces  Oph.  at  the  close  of  this  scene  to 
afford  a  probable  stimulus  of  passion  in  her  brother. 

128.  grace]  Caldecott:  A  religious  feeling,  a  disposition  to  yield  obedience  to 
the  divine  laws. 

130.  worlds]  Clarendon  :  This  world  and  the  next.  See  Macb.  Ill,  ii,  16, 
where  it  means  the  terrestrial  and  the  celestial  worlds. 

133.  world]  Clarendon:  The  reading  of  the  Qq  is  perhaps  right.  The  extrava- 
gant hyperbole  '  al'  thf  worH  '  which  Laer.  would  thus  use  in  reference  to  his 
29* 


342 


HAMLET 


[ACT  IV,  SC.  V. 


If  you  desire  to  know  the  certainty  136 

Of  your  dear  father's  death,  is't  writ  in  your  revenge, 
That,  swoopstake,  you  will  draw  both  friend  and  foe, 
Winner  and  loser? 

Lacr.     None  but  his  enemies. 

King,  Will  you  know  them  then?    140 

Lao\     To  his  good  friends  thus  wide  I'll  ope  my  arms ; 
And,  like  the  kind  life-rendering  pelican, 
Repast  them  with  my  blood. 

King.  Why,  now  you  speak 

Like  a  good  child  and  a  true  gentleman. 

That  I  am  guiltless  of  your  father's  death,  145 

A.nd  am  most  sensibly  in  grief  for  it, 


137.  father's  death"]  fathers  death  Fx 
F2.  father  Qq,Theob.Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

is't]  ffl  Qq.     ?/Ff.     if  'tis  not 
Rowe. 

is't  writ]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

138.  That,  swoopstake]  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo. 
+  ,  Del.  Huds.  That  soopflake  QaQr 
That  foope-flake  Q4.  That  Soopflake 
Q5Ff,  Rowe.  (  That  sweep- stake,)  Pope 
+  .      That,  sweep-stake  Johns,  et  cet. 

you  will]  will  you  Theob.  conj. 
Han. 


139.  loser?]  Q'37*.  Lofer.  F,  Pope. 
Loofer.  QqFf. 

140.  then  ?]  then.  F^F . 

141.  his]  this  Q'76. 
ope]  hope  F2. 

142.  pelican]  Politician  Fx. 

143.  Repast]  Relieve  Q'76. 

Why,    now  you    speak]     Wny 
now  ?  what  noyfe  is  that  ?  F  F  F,. 

146.  sensibly]  fencibly  Q2Q3-  fencible 
Q4.  fenfible  Q5Ff,  Rowe,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen.  Cald.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Glo.  Mob. 


former  words,  ■  both  the  worlds,'  is  not  unsuitable  to  his  excited  state  of  mind. 
[Pope's]  reading  might  be  the  meaning  of  the  reading  of  Qq,  in  which  no  apostro- 
phe is  used  to  distinguish  the  genitive  singular  from  the  nominative  plural.  White 
pronounces  Pope's  reading  '  cramped,  literal,  inferior.' 

138.  swoopstake]  Clarendon  :  The  metaphor  is  from  a  game  at  cards,  where 
the  winner  sweeps  or  '  draws  '  the  whole  stake.  The  meaning  is  somewhat  confused 
by  this  admixture  of  metaphor.  Moberly  :  Are  you  going  to  vent  your  rage  on 
both  friend  and  foe ;  like  a  gambler  who  insists  on  sweeping  the  stakes,  whether  the 
point  is  in  his  favor  or  not? 

142.  pelican]  Caldecott  quotes  Dr  Sherwen  :  *  By  the  pelican's  dropping 
upon  its  breast  its  lower  bill  to  enable  its  young  to  take  from  its  capacious  pouch, 
lined  with  a  fine  flesh-colored  skin,  this  appearance  is,  on  feeding  them,  given.  H. 
B.  Forrest  [N.  6°  Qu.,  26  June,  1869)  suggests  that  Sh.  might  have  drawn  his 
Knowledge  on  this  point  from  Prodigorum  ac  Ostentorum  Chronicon.,  Basileae,  1557. 
Moreover,  in  this  book  there  is  a  full  description  of  '  The  Anthropophagi,  and  men 
whose  heads  Do  grow  beneath  their  shoulders.'  Rushton  {Shakespeare 's  Euphu- 
ism, p.  9)  cites  '  the  Pelicane,  who  stricketh  bloud  out  of  hir  owne  bodye  to  do 
others  good.' — Euphues  and  his  England  (p.  341,  ed.  Arber).  Clarendon:  In 
Rich.  II:  II,  i,  126,  and  Lear,  III,  iv,  77,  young  pelicans  are  used  as  illustrations 
l>f  filial  impiety. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  V.J 


HAMLET 


It  shall  as  level  to  your  judgement  pierce 
As  day  does  to  your  eye. 

Danes.  \Withiri\  Let  her  come  in  ! 

Lacr.     How  now !  what  noise  is  that  ? — 

Re-enter  OPHELIA. 

O  heat,  dry  up  my  brains !  tears  seven  times  salt, 
Burn  out  the  sense  and  virtue  of  mine  eye ! — 
By  heaven,  thy  madness  shall  be  paid  by  weight, 
Till  our  scale  turn  the  beam.     O  rose  of  May  ! 
Dear  maid,  kind  sister,  sweet  Ophelia ! — 
O  heavens !  is't  possible  a  young  maid's  wits 
Should  be  as  mortal  as  an  old  man's  life? 
Nature  is  fine  in  love,  and  where  'tis  fine 


343 

i47 


150 


155 


147.  pierce] peare  Qq.  lye Q'76.  'pear 
Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Dyce  ii. 

Scene  vii.  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen. 

148.  eye.~\  eye.  A  noyfe  within.  Qq. 
Cap.  eye.  A  noife  within.  Let  her  come 
in  (as  a  stage-direction,  in  the  margin), 
Ff,  Rowe,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Jen. 

Danes.  [Within]  Cap.  Laer.  Qq, 
Pope.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.     Crowd  within.  Johns. 

148,  149.  Let. ..that]  One  line,  Pope. 

149.  Re-enter...]  Coll.  Dyce,  El.  Sta. 
White,  Del.  Glo.  + ,  Huds.    Enter  Ophe- 


lia, (after  eye,  line  148)  QqFf.  Entei 
Ophelia,  fantaftically  drefl  with  Straws 
and  Flowers.  Rowe  et  cet. 

151.  Burn  out]  Burn  on  Pope  i. 

152.  by]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt,  Coll. 
El.  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Del.  Glo.  Mob. 
with  Qq  et  cet. 

153.  Till]  TellQaQy 

turn]   turne  Qq.     turnes  FtFa. 
turns  F3F4,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  El.  White. 

156.  an  old]  a poore  Qq.   afickQlb. 
157-159.  Nature. ..loves.]  Om.  Qq. 

157,  158.  fine... fine, ...instance]  fire..* 
fire, ...incense  Pope  conj. 


147.  pierce]  White  :  Peare  of  Qq  is  an  absurd  reading,  which  represents  day 
as  appearing  level  to  the  eye,  instead  of  piercing  level,  i.  e.  directly,  point  blank  to 
the  eye.  Stratmann  :  Peare  is  a  misprint  for  pearce,  just  as  feare  for  fear ce,  in  I, 
i,  121. 

148.  Danes.  [Within]  Stratmann  :  I  rather  suspect  noise  of  the  Qq  is  a  mis- 
print for  uoise,  i.  e.  voice. 

148.  Let  .  .  .  in]  Theobald  (Sh.  Pest.  p.  112)  notes  the  error  of  the  Qq  in-giv- 
ing this  speech  to  Laertes ;  who  could  not  know  that  it  was  his  sister  that  caused 
the  noise ;  and  who  would  not  command  the  guards  to  let  in  his  sister,  and  then  ask 
what  the  noise  meant. 

149.  Re-enter]  Collier  :  Ophelia  has  been  on  the  stage  before  in  this  scene, 
this  is  therefore  only  her  '  r*?-entrance.'  [It  is  noteworthy  that  Rowe  is  the  only 
authority  for  the  fantastic  straws  and  flowers  with  which  Oph.  on  the  modern  stage 
is  decked.    From  Qx  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  she  merely  has  '  her  haire  downe.'  Ed.] 

157.  fine]  Theobald:  In  the  passion  of  love,  nature  becomes  more  exquisite 
of  sensation,  is  more  delicate  and  refined ;  and  where  it  is  so,  as  people  in  love  gen- 
erally send  what  tV.ey  have  of  most  valuable  after  their  lovers,  so  poor  Ophelia  has 


344 


HAMLET 


[ACT  IV.  SC.  V 


It  sends  some  precious  instance  of  itself 
After  the  thing  it  loves. 

OpJi.  \Sings\   They  bore  him  barefaced  on  the  bier ;  160 

Hey  non  nonny,  nonny  y  hey  nonny  ; 
And  on  his  grave  rains  many  a  tear. — 
Fare  you  well,  my  dove ! 

Laer.     Hadst  thou  thy  wits,  and  didst  persuade  revenge, 
It  could  not  move  thus.  165 

Oph.     You  must  sing,  Down  a-down,  and  yon  call  him 


160.  barefaced]  bare-fa/le  Q2Q3« 
[Sings]  Cap.  Dyce,  Sta.  Huds. 

Glo.  -h .  Song.  Qq.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe  et  cet. 

161.  Hey.. .nonny;]  Hey...nony ;  or 
Hey...noney :  Ff.  Om.  Qq,  Pope  +  , 
Cap.  Jen. 

162.  on]  Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Cap.  Cald.  Knt, 
Sing.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Ktly.     in  Qq  et  cet. 

rains']  F  F^,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Cap.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 
raines  FIF2.  remains  Warb.  rain  Coll. 
(MS),     rained  Qq  et  cet. 

tear.]  Q'76.     tear,  QqFf. 

163.  Fare. ..dove]  As  last  line  of  the 
song  (in  Italics),  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.;  (in 
Roman)  Qq.     As  in  text  first  by  Cap. 

164.  165.  Hadst... thus.]   Prose  in  Ff, 


Pope. 

166,  167.  You...a-down-a]  In  Italics 
as  a  song  first  by  Johns.  Cap.  indicated 
the  present  text  by  beginning  'Down' 
with  a  capital;  Steev.  (1778)  adopted 
it,  and  is  followed  by  all  edd.  except 
Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  who  return  to  Johns,  and 
insert  [Sings]  before  *  You  /'  and  divide 
into  two  lines,  the  first  ending  a-down. 

166-168.  You... daughter]  Three  lines, 

ending   downe, it, daughter.    Qq. 

Prose,  Ff  et  cet.  except  Sta.  Glo.  + . 

166.  Down  a-down]  a  downe  a  downe 
Qq.  a  down  a  down  Jen.  Sta.  Glo. 
Cla. 

166.  and]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.  And 
Qq.     an  Cap.  et  cet. 


sent  her  most  precious  senses  after  the  object  of  her  inllamed  affection.  Warburton  : 
The  cause  of  Ophelia's  madness  was  grief,  occasioned  by  the  violence  of  her  natural 
affection  for  her  murdered  father;  her  brother,  therefore,  with  great  force  of  expression, 
says  :  '  Nature  is  faPn  in  love,  and  where  'tis  faTnS  [Thus  Warburton's  text.] 
To  distinguish  the  passion  of  natural  affection  from  the  passion  of  love  between 
the  two  sexes,  i.  e.  Nature,  or  natural  affection  is  faPn  in  love.  Johnson  :  These 
lines  might  have  been  omitted  in  the  Folio  without  great  loss,  for  they  are  obscure 
and  affected;  but,  I  think,  they  require  no  emendation.  Love  (says  Laertes)  is  the 
passion  by  which  nature  is  most  exalted  and  refined ;  and  as  substances,  refitted  and 
subtilised,  easily  obey  any  impulse,  or  follow  any  attraction,  some  part  of  nature,  so 
purified  and  refined,  flies  off  after  the  attracting  object,  after  the  thing  it  ]oves. 
Clarendon:  «  Fine'  seems  to  mean  '  delicately  tender,'  and  '  instance'  'proof  or 
1  example.'  '  The  thing  it  loves  '  is  here  Polonius ;  the  •  precious  instance,'  Ophelia's 
natural  soundness  of  mind.  Her  sanity  has  followed  her  father  to  the  grave.  Col- 
lier (ed.  2) :  Lines  157-159  are  struck  through  with  a  pen  in  the  (MS),  probably 
because  they  were  not  understood. 

160.  [Sings]   I  can  fin*?  no  music  to  this  in   Chappell's  Popular  Music  of  tht 
s  Olden  Time 

161.  nonny]  Narls  :  Such  unmeaning  burdens  are  common  to  ballads  inmost 
languages.     It  appears  from  Floric's  Diet,  that  the  word  had  not  always  a  decorous 


act  iv,  sc.  v.]  HAMLET  345 

a-doii'u-a.  Oh,  how  the  wheel  becomes  it!  It  is  the  false  167 
steward,  that  stole  his  master's  daughter. 

Lacr.     This  nothing's  more  than  matter. 

Oph.     There's    rosemary,  that's  for  remembrance;   pray   170 

167.  wheel  becomes  it]  wheele  becomes  rate  line,  Ff,  Rovve. 
it  QqFt.     wheeles  become  it  F9,  Rowe.  170.  that's']  that  QQ. 

wheels  become  ?  FF4-  170,  1 71.  pray  you]  Pray  Ff,  Rowe  +  , 

169.  nothing's]  nothings  FfFa.    noth-  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Glo.  Cla. 

ing  is  much  Q'76.  pray. ..remember]  [Sings]   Pray, 

170.  There' s... .remembrance  ;]   Sepa-         love,  remember  :  Sta. 

meaning.  Steevens  :  I  am  informed  that  among  the  common  people  of  Norfolk 
to  nonny  signifies  to  trifle,  ox  play  with. 

165.  move]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  261) :  '  Move  me  thus;'  at  least  I  am  all  but  sure 
that  this  is  the  true  reading. 

166.  167.  Down  .  .  .  a-down-a]  Malone:  Florio  gives:  Filibustacchina,  the 
burden  of  a  countrie  song,  as  we  say  hay  doune  a  doune  douna.  Dyce  :  Whether 
these  words  are  rightly  given  I  cannot  determine.  (On  the  modern  stage  they  are 
sung  by  Oph.)  Cambridge  Editors  (Note  xxviii) :  The  late  Mr  John  Taylor,  in  a 
copy  of  the  Var.  1 81 3  now  in  the  Library  of  Trin.  Coll.,  Cambridge,  has  made  the 
following  note:  'Oph.  gives  the  song  without  the  Burthen  first,  and  then  she  in- 
structs them,  "  You  must  sing  a-down  a-down,  and  you  (speaking  to  another)  call 
him  a-down- a.^  ' 

167.  wheel]  Warburton  :  We  should  read  weal.  She  is  now  rambling  on  the 
ballad  of  the  steward  and  his  lord's  daughter;  and  in  these  words  speaks  of  the 
state  he  assumed.  Heath  :  Possibly  by  ■  wheel '  is  here  meant  the  burden  of  the 
ballad.  Dyce  (Gloss.)  says  that  '  most  critics  seem  now  to  agree  with  Steevens  [sic] 
in '  thus  referring  it  to  the  burden  or  refrain ;  but  Clarendon  asserts  that  no  satis- 
factory example  has  been  found  of  the  word  in  this  sense.  Steevens  cites  a  very 
apposite  illustration  '  from  memory,  from  a  book  of  which '  he  could  not  •  recollect 
the  exact  title  or  date ;'  unfortunately  when  Steevens  does  not  adduce  line,  page, 
and  title,  his  illustrations  are  to  be  received  with  caution ;  his  wit  was  too  ready  at  a 
pinch,  and  the  simple  reference  to  a  '  black-letter  quarto  in  my  possession '  was  con- 
venient, much  like  Sir  Walter  Scott's  'Old  Play.'  The  illustration  in  question 
(which  has  been  repeated  by  several  edd.  since  hb  day)  is  as  follows :  '  The  song 
was  accounted  a  good  one,  thogh  it  was  not  moche  graced  by  the  wheele,  which  in 

no  wise  accorded  with  the  subject-matter  thereof.'     A  conclusive  quotation,  if . 

Steevens  adds  that  '  Rota '  is  the  ancient  musical  term  in  Latin  for  the  burden  of  a 
song.  Johnson  suggests  :  ■  perhaps  the  lady  stolen  by  the  steward  was  reduced  to 
spin  /'  Malone  divests  this  suggestion  of  its  tragic  element  by  supposing  that  the 
wheel  is  here  used  in  its  ordinary  sense,  and  that  these  words  refer  to  the  occupation 
of  the  girl  who  is  supposed  to  sing  the  song  alluded  to  by  Oph.  Staunton  says  it 
was,  perhaps,  the  practice  on  the  old  stage  for  Oph.  to  play  the  '  wheel,'  i.  e.  the 
refrain,  upon  her  lute  before  these  words.  [If  '  wheel '  ever  meant  refrain,  the 
meaning  apparently  had  become  obsolete  when  F3  was  printed.  Ed.] 

168.  steward]  Collier:  No  such  ballad  is  known.  Moberl"!  .  By  the  false 
steward  stealing  his  master's  daughter  she  may  mean  that  the  rollicking  chorus,  in- 
stead of  aiding  the  sense,  steals  away  all  its  pathos  and  dirge-like  character. 


34-6  HAMLET  [act  iv,  sc.  v. 

you,    love,    remember;    and    there    is    pansies,    that's    for  171 
thoughts. 

Laer.     A  document  in  madness :    thoughts  and  remem- 
brance fitted. 

Oph.     There's  fennel  for  you,  and  columbines;   there's   175 

171.  there  is~\  there's  F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  171.  pansies]    Johns.     Paconae*  Fs. 

Cap.  (in  Errata).  Fancies  QqF  F  F4< 

169.  matter]   See  II,  ii,  95  ;  and  Lear,  IV,  vi,  178. 

170.  rosemary]  See  Rom.  &>  Jul.  IV,  v,  79,  and  notes.  Hunter  (ii,  259): 
The  mind  of  Oph.  is  thrown  off  its  poise  by  the  shock  which  she  had  received ; 
she  thinks  of  marriage :  with  that  comes  the  idea  of  rosemary,  the  sweet-scented 
rosemary,  and  she  addresses  him  who  should  have  been  the  bridegroom,  Ham. 
himself,  as  her  *  love.'  She  then  feels  her  disappointment.  Ham.  is  not  there,  and 
she  turns  to  another  flower  wrought  up  in  her  wild  attire,  pansies,  as  more  fitting  her 
condition, — a  flower  connected  with  melancholy,  then  often  called  thought,  and 
taking  its  name  from  it.  '  There's  a  daisy ;  I  would  give  you  some  violets,  but,'  &c. 
When  the  mind  is  unsettled,  it  is  usual  for  some  idea  to  recur  which  has  been  intro- 
duced at  a  critical  period  of  the  person's  life.  Now,  when  Laer.  was  warning  Oph. 
against  encouraging  the  attentions  of  Ham.,  he  urged  her  to  consider  his  trifling  but 
as  '  A  violet  in  the  youth  of  primy  nature.'  These  words  had  remained  imprinted 
on  her  mind,  associated  with  the  idea  of  Ham.  and  the  idea  of  her  brother,  and  they 
now  recur  to  her  memory  when  she  again  converses  with  her  brother  on  the  same 
unhappy  subject.  The  violets  withered  when  her  father  died.  When  Ham.  had 
slain  Pol.  there  was  a  final  obstacle  interposed  to  their  union.  Staunton  :  There 
is  method  in  poor  Ophelia's  distribution.  She  presents  to  each  the  herb  popularly 
appropriate  to  his  age  or  disposition.  To  Laer.,  whom  in  her  distraction  she  prob- 
ably confounds  with  her  lover,  she  gives  '  rosemary '  as  an  emblem  of  his  faithful 
remembrance ;  and  '  pansies '  to  denote  love's  '  thoughts '  or  troubles.  Delius  : 
Probably  these  flowers  existed  only  in  Ophelia's  fantasy,  and  there  was  no  distribution 
of  real  flowers  to  the  persons  present. 

171.  pansies]  Johnson:  'For  thoughts,  because  of  its  name,  pens'ees?  In  N. 
6°  Qu.,  22  Oct.  1864,  Fabius  Oxoniensis  gives  a  number  of  the  names  by  which 
this  flower  is  known  among  rustics  and  old  writers ;  see  also  Beisly  (SA.  Garden, 
p.  156). 

173.  document]  Edinburgh  Review  {Shakespearian  Glossaries,  July,  1869): 
This  word  is  here  used  in  its  earlier  and  etymological  sense  of  instruction,  lesson, 
teaching.  This  early  signification  is  well  illustrated  in  the  Fairy  Queen  [i,  10,  19 — 
Clarendon],  'her  sacred  booke  ....  She  unto  him  disclosed  every  whit,  And 
heavenly  documents  thereout  did  preach.'  The  word  was  habitually  used  in  this 
sense  in  Shakespeare's  day,  but  has  now  wholly  lost  its  primitive  signification,  and 
is  restricted  to  its  secondary  sense  of  written  precepts,  instructions,  and  evidences. 
Clarendon  :  Cotgrave  gives  '  Document :  m.  A  document,  precept ;  instruction, 
admonition;  experiment,  example.' 

175.  fennel]  Malone:  Oph.  gives  her  fennel  and  columbines  to  the  King.  In 
A  Handfull  of  Pleasant  Deliles,  1584,  the  former  is  thus  mentioned  :  '  Fennel  is  for 
flatterers,'  &c.     See  also  Florio  :   Dare  finocchio,  to  give  fennell  .  ...  to  flatter,  to 


4CTiv,  sc.  v.]  HAMLET  347 

rue  for  you  ;  and  here's  some  for  me;  we  may  call  it  herb  176 
of  grace  o'  Sundays ;  oh,  you  must  wear  your  rue  with  a 

176,  177.   herb    of  grace]    herbe   of  177.  Sundays]  Sondaies  Q3Q,Q4. 
Grace  Qq.     Herbe-Grace  FIF2.     Herb-  oh,  you    must]  you    may    Qq, 
grace  F  F  ,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  El. 
White,  Glo.  Del.  Huds.  you  must  Cald. 

177.  0']  Theob.  a  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope. 

dissemble.  Narf.s  :  This  was  generally  considered  an  inflammatory  herb,  and  was 
certainly  emblematic  of  flattery.  [Several  instances  are  given.]  Staunton:  For 
the  King  she  has  'fennel,'  signifying  'flattery'  and  Must;'  and  *  columbines,' 
which  marked  ingratitude.  Dyce  {Gloss.):  We  may  certainly  suppose  that  she 
offers  the  King  '  flattery,'  though  we  do  not  agree  with  Staunton  in  supposing  that 
here  fennel  signifies  '  lust'  also.  Beisly  (p.  157)  cites  Holland's  Pliny  [p.  77,  ed. 
1635]  :  *  Fennel  hath  a  singular  property  to  mundifie  our  sight,  and  tak.2  away  the 
filme  or  web  that  ouercasteth  and  dimmeth  our  eyes.'  This  property  is  noticed  by 
most  of  our  early  writers  on  plants,  and  it  is  in  reference  to  this  quality  that  Oph. 
presents  it  to  the  King  to  clear  his  sight,  just  as  the  rosemary  was  given  to  Laer.  to 
aid  his  memory. 

175.  columbines]  Steevens  :  In  All  Fools,  by  Chapman,  1605:  'a  columbine? 
No;  that  thankless  flower  fits  not  my  garden,' — II,  i.  Gerard  and  other  herbalists 
impute  few,  if  any,  virtues  to  them ;  and  they  may  therefore  be  styled  lhanhless, 
because  they  appear  to  make  no  grateful  return  for  their  creation.  S[te-phen] 
W[eston]  :  Columbine  was  an  emblem  of  cuckoldom  on  account  of  the  horns  of  its 
nectaria,  which  are  remarkable  in  this  plant.  Holt  White  :  It  was  also  emblem- 
atic of  forsaken  lovers :  '  The  columbine  in  tawny  often  taken  Is  then  ascribed  to 
such  as  are  forsaken.' — Browne's  Britannia1  s  Pastorals,  b.  i,  song  ii,  1 613.  Dyce 
(Gloss.)  :  But  here  Oph.  is  not  assigning  the  columbine  to  herself,  and,  except  her- 
self, there  is  no  '  love-lorn '  person  present. 

176,  177.  rue  .  .  .  Sundays]  Warburton:  The  reason  why  'rue'  was  called 
'  herb  of  grace '  is  because  that  herb  was  a  principal  ingredient  in  the  potion  which 
the  Romish  priests  used  to  force  the  possessed  to  swallow  when  they  exorcised  them. 
These  exorcisms  being  performed  generally  on  a  Sunday,  in  church  before  the  whole 
congregation,  is  the  reason  why  she  says  we  call  it  *  herb  of  grace  o'  Sundays.' 
[Dyce  says  Warburton  was  only  repeating  what  he  had  read  in  the  works  of  a  great 
divine, — Jeremy  Taylor;  see  Todd  post.]  Steevens:  I  believe  there  is  a  quibble 
meant  in  this  passage ;  '  rue '  anciently  signifying  the  same  as  ruth,  i.  e.  sorrow.  Oph. 
gives  the  Queen  some,  and  keeps  a  proportion  of  it  for  herself.  There  is  the  same 
kind  of  play  with  the  same  word  in  Rich.  II:  III,  iv,  104.  '  Herb  of  grace  '  is  one 
of  the  titles  which  Tucca  gives  to  William  Rufus,  in  Decker's  Satiromastix.  I 
suppose  the  first  syllable  of  the  surname  Rufxxs  introduced  the  quibble.  Henley  : 
The  following  passage  from  Greene's  Quip  for  an  Upstart  Courtier  will  furnish  the 
best  reason  for  calling  rue  herb  of  grace  o'  Sundays:  ' — some  of  them  smil'd  and 
said,  Rue  was  called  Herbegrace,  which,  though  they  scorned  in  their  youth,  they 
might  weare  in  their  age,  and  that  it  was  never  too  late  to  say  Miserere.''  Malone: 
1  Herb  of  grace '  was  not  the  Sunday  name,  but  the  every-day  name  of  '  rue.'  In 
the  common  dictionaries  of  Shakespeare's  time  it  is  called  '  herb  of  grace.'  See 
Flmrio  s.  v.  ruta,  and  Cotgrave  s.  v.  rue.     There  is  no  ground,  therefore,  for  sup* 


34$  HAMLET  [act  lv,  sc.  v. 

difference.  There's  a  daisy;  I  would  give  you  some 
violets,  but  they  withered  all  when  my  father  died ;  they 
say  he  made  a  good  end, —  180 

178.  daisy]  Day  fee  Fx.     Dafie  QqF2  180.  he  made~\  a  made  Qq.     a'  made 

F3F4.  Cam. 

posing  with  Warburton  that  '  rue '  was  called  '  herb  of  grace '  from  its  being  used  in 
exorcisms  performed  in  churches  on  Sundays.  Oph.  only  means,  I  think,  that  the 
Queen  may  with  peculiar  propriety  on  Sundays,  when  she  solicits  pardon  for  that 
crime  which  she  has  so  much  occasion  to  rue  and  repent  of,  call  her  '  rue'  'herb  of 
grace.'  After  having  given  the  Queen  '  rue,'  to  remind  her  of  the  sorrow  and  con- 
trition she  ought  to  feel  for  her  incestuous  marriage,  Oph.  tells  her  she  may  wear  it 
with  a  difference,  to  distinguish  it  from  that  worn  by  Oph.  herself;  because  her  tears 
flowed  from  the  loss  of  a  father,  those  of  the  Queen  ought  to  flow  for  her  guilt. 
Todd  (ap.  Caldecott)  cites  Jeremy  Taylor's  A  Dissuasive  from  Popery,  Part  I,  ch. 
ii,  sect,  ix  :  *  They  [the  Romish  exorcists]  are  to  try  the  devil  by  holy  water,  incense, 
sulphur,  rue;  which  from  thence,  as  we  suppose,  came  to  be  called  herb  of  grace.' 
Caldecott  cites  a  passage  from  Edward  Alleyn's  letters  [  Var.  1821,  vol.  xxi,  p.  390, 
and  Sh.  Soc.  vol.  ix,  p.  26],  which  seems  to  imply  that  'herb  of  grace'  and  'rue' 
were  different  plants :  •  Every  evening '  [ Alleyn  is  telling  his  wife,  whom  he  calls 
•good  sweete  mouse,'  to  take  precautions  against  the  plague  raging  that  year,  1593, 
in  London]  '  throwe  water  before  your  dore  and  in  your  bake  sid,  and  have  in  your 
windowes  good  store  of  reue  and  herbe  of  grace.'  That  this  '  herb  of  grace '  was 
wormwood  Malone  shows  by  referring  to  the  reply  from  Alleyn's  parents  to  this 
letter :  '  for  your  good  cownsell  ....  we  all  thanck  you,  which  wasse  for  keping 
of  our  howsse  cleane  ....  and  strainge  our  windowes  with  wormwode  and  rewe.' 
-Sh.  Soc.  vol.  ix,  p.  30. 

178.  difference]  Steevens:  This  seems  to  refer  to  the  rules  of  heraldry,  where 
the  younger  brothers  of  a  family  bear  the  same  arms  with  a  difference,  or  mark  ot 
distinction.  So,  in  Holinshed's  Reign  of  King  Richard  II,  p.  443  :  '  — because  he 
was  the  youngest  of  the  Spensers,  he  bare  a  border  gules  for  a  difference.'  There 
may,  however,  be  somewhat  more  implied  here  than  is  expressed.  You,  madam 
(says  Oph.  to  the  Queen),  may  call  your  rue  by  its  Sunday  name,  herb  of  grace,  and 
so  wear  it  with  a  difference  to  distinguish  it  from  mine,  which  can  never  be  anything 
but  merely  rue,  i.e.  sorrow.  CALDECOTT:  Between  the  ruth  and  wretchedness  of 
guilt,  and  the  ruth  and  sorrows  of  misfortune,  it  would  be  no  difficult  matter  to  dis- 
tinguish. Skeat  (JV.  6°  Qu.,  25  Dec.  1869) :  There  is  no  difficulty  here  if  we  do 
not  force  the  words  into  some  heraldic  phrase.  It  merely  means  this:  I  offer  you 
rue,  which  has  two  meanings;  it  is  sometimes  called  herb  of  grace,  and  in  that  sense 
I  take  some  for  myself;  but  with  a  slight  difference  of  spelling  it  means  ruth,  and 
in  that  respect  it  will  do  for  you.  This  explanation  is  not  mine, — it  is  Shakespeare's 
own;  see  Rich.  II:  III,  iv,  105,  106.  [A  discussion  on  the  meaning  of  this  phrase 
is  also  to  be  found  in  Edin.  Rev.  July,  1869;  N.  6*  Qu.  25  Sept.  1869;  23  Oct. 
1869,  and  8  Jan.  1870.] 

178.  daisy]  Henley:  Greene,  in  his  Quip  for  an  Upstart  Courtier,  has  explained 
the  significance  of  this  flower :  '  — Next  them  grew  the  dissembling  daisie,  to  warne 
such  lightsof  love  wer.ches  not  to  trust  every  faire  promise  that  such  amorous  bache- 


ACT  IV,  SC.  V.] 


HAMLET 


[Sings']  For  bonny  szveet  Robin  is  all  my  joy. 

Laer.     Thought  and  affliction,  passion,  hell  itself, 
She  turns  to  favour  and  to  prettiness. 

Oph.  [Sings]  And  zvill  he  not  come  again  ? 


349 
i8i 


181.  [Sings]  Cap.    Om.  QqFf,  Rowe 
+  ,  Jen.  Steev.  Del. 

182.  Thought]   Thoughts  Q'76. 
affliction]  afflictions  Qq. 


184.   [Sings]  Song.  Qq.     Om.  Ff. 
184,  185.  he.. .he]   a. ..a  Qq.     a\..a* 
Cam.  Cla. 


lors  make  them.'  Dyce  {Gloss.)'.  Does  Oph.  mean  that  the  daisy  is  for  herself* 
CLARENDON :  It  does  not  appear  to  whom  she  gives  it ;  probably  either  to  the  King 
or  Queen. 

179.  violets]  Malone:  In  A  Handfull  of  Pleasant  Delites,  above  quoted,  the 
violet  is  thus  characterized :  *  Violet  is  for  faithfulnesse,  Which  in  me  shall  abide.' 
Clarendon  :  Perhaps  she  says  this  to  Hor. 

181.  [Sings]  Chappell  [Popular  Music  of  the  'Olden  Time?  vol.  i,  p.  233): 
This  song  is  contained  in  Anthony  Holborne's  Ciltharn  Schoole,  1597;  in  Queen 
Elizabeth's  Virginal  Book;  in  William  Ballet's  Lute  Book ;  and  in  many  other 
manuscripts  and  printed  books.  There  are  two  copies  in  William  Ballet's  Lute 
Book,  and  the  second  is  entitled  *  Robin  Hood  is  to  the  greenwood  gone ;'  it  is,  there- 
fore, probably  the  tune  of  a  ballad  of  Robin  Hood,  now  lost.  In  Fletcher's  Two 
Noble  Kinsmen*  II,  i,  the  jailer's  daughter,  being  mad,  says,  '  I  can  sing  twenty  more. 
....  I  can  sing  The  Broom  and  Bonny  Robin.''  In  Robinson's  Schoole  of  Mu- 
sicke  (1603),  and  in  one  of  Dowland's  Lute  Manuscripts  (D.  d.,  2.  II,  Cambridge), 
it  is  entitled  •  Robin  is  to  the  greenwood  gone;'  in  Addit.  MSS.  17,786  (Brit.  Mus.), 
lMy  Robin,'  &c. 


Slowly,  and  ad  libitum. 


M^j=^ 


P5* 


Qa 


3 


3* 


My    Robin  is      to      the    greenwood  gone. 


m 


j_^ 


mm 


j  j 


1* 


3 


e 


182.  Thought]  Malone:  'Thought'  here,  as  in  many  other  places,  means  mel- 
ancholy. Caldecott  :  See  Prompt.  Parv.  :  *  Thowhte,  or  hevynesse  yn  herte.  Me$-> 
ticia,  molestia,  tristicia.'     [See  III,  i,  85.] 

182.  passion]  Suffering.     See  Macb.  III.  iv,  57. 

184.  [Sings]  Chappell  {Popular  Music  of  the  'Olden  Time?  vol.  i,  p.  237). 
This  fragment,  sung  by  Ophelia,  was  also  noted  down  by  W.  Linley.  It  appears  to 
30 


35° 


HAMLET 


[ACT  IV,  SC.  V 


And  will  he  not  come  again  ? 
Noy  no,  he  is  dead, 
Go  to  thy  death-bed, 

He  never  will  come  again. 

His  beard  was  white  as  snow, 
All  flaxen  zvas  Ids  poll ; 
He  is  gone,  he  is  gone. 
And  we  cast  away  moan  ; 
God  hd  mercy  on  his  soul/ 


18$ 


IQO 


1 86,  187.  Two  lines,  Johns.  One,  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe  +  . 

187.  Go  to  thy]  Gone  to  his  Coll.  ii 
(MS),  El. 

189.  was]  Johns,  Jen.  Coll.  ii  (MS). 
as  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Cald.  Knt,  El. 
Sta.  Del.     is  Knt  ii.     was  as  Qq  et  cet. 

190.  All  flaxen]  Flaxen  Qq,  Jen. 
poll]  Han.    pole  QqFf. 


191,  192.  Two  lines,  Johns.  One, 
QqFf,  Rowe+. 

193.  God  ha'  mercy]  Coll.  God  a 
mercy  Qq.  Gramercy  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap. 
Cald.  Knt,  Sta.  White.  God  a?  mercy 
Jen.     God  '«  mercy  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 

193,  194.  God... souls,"]  One  line,  end- 
ing the  song  with  God  buy  you  in  a  sep- 
arate line,  Qq. 


be  a  portion  of  the  tune  entitled  '  The  Merry  Milkmaids?  in  The  Dancing  Master, 
1650,  and  The  Milkmaids'  Dumps,  in  several  ballads. 


Very  slowly,  and  ad  libitum. 


no,    he    is  dead,     Go      to    thy  death-bed,  He     nev  -  er  will      come     a 


gain. 


^^ 


3g=; 


^ 


■*m- 


187.  Go]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  The  reference  is  to  the  person  who  is  dead,  therefore 
the  (MS)  correctly  has  Gone. 

189.  Steevens  :  This  and  several  circumstances  in  the  character  of  Oph.  seem  to 
have  been  ridiculed  in  Eastward  Hoe  by  Jonson,  Chapman,  and  Marston,  1605  : 
'  His  head  as  white  as  milk,  All  flaxen  was  his  hair;  But  now  he  is  dead,  And  lain 
in  his  bed,  And  never  will  come  again,'  III,  i.  Singer  :  Hamlet  is  the  name  of 
a  foolish  footman  in  the  same  scene.  I  know  not  why  this  should  have  been  con- 
sidered an  attack  on  Sh.;  it  was  the  usual  license  of  comedy  to  sport  with  everything 
serious  and  even  sacred.  Hamlet  Travestie  may  as  well  be  called  an  invidious 
attack  on  Sh. 

193,  194.  God  .  .  .  souls,]  Steevens  :  This  is  the  common  conclusion  to  many 
of  the  ancient  monumental  inscriptions.     Berthelette,  the  publisher  of  Gower's  Con- 


KCS  IV,  SC.  v.] 


HAMLET 


5' 


And  of  all  Christian  souls,  I  pray  God. — God  be  wi'  you  !  [Exit 


Lacr.     Do  you  see  this,  O  God  ! 

King.     Laertes,  I  must  commune  with  your  grief, 
Or  you  deny  me  right.     Go  but  apart, 
Make  choice  of  whom  your  wisest  friends  you  will, 
And  they  shall  hear  and  judge  'twixt  you  and  me. 
If  by  direct  or  by  collateral  hand 
They  find  us  touch'd,  we  will  our  kingdom  give, 


195 


200 


194.  of]  Om.  Q4QS-     on  Johns. 

Christian]  Chrijlians  Qq. 

I  pray  God]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  +  , 
Jen. 

God  be  wV  you]  Cap.  Separate 
line,  QqFf.  God  buy  you  Q2Qy  God 
buy  yous  QQ.  God  buy  ye  FfFa.  God 
bit'  ye  F  .  God  b'w'ye  F4,  Rowe  +  , 
Jen.  Dyce.  6'  wi'  you  White,  Huds. 
be  wi'  ye  Glo. 

[Exit.]  Exeunt  Ophelia.  Ff. 
Om.  Qq.  Exit  dancing  distractedly. 
Coll.  (MS). 


194.  195.  And...  God  ?]  And  peace  bt 
with  his  foul  and  tailh  all  Lovers  fouls 
Q'76. 

195.  Do  you  see  this,  O  God !]  Cap. 
Doe  you  this  0  God.  Qq.  Do  you  fee 
this,  you  gods  ?  Ff  ( Gods  FJ,  Rowe  + . 

196.  commune  with]  common  with  F  , 
Cald.  Knt,  El.    fliare  in  Q'76. 

197.  deny]  deney  Q  . 

200.  collateral]  colalurall  Q2Q,Q.. 
collaturall  Q  .  Cola t era  11  Ft.  Collat- 
erall  F,. 

201.  kingdom]  kindome  Q  . 


fessio  Amantis,  1554,  speaking  first  of  the  funeral  of  Chaucer,  and  then  of  Gower, 

says :  ' he  lieth  buried  in  the  monasterie  of  Seynt  Peter's  at  Westminster,  &c. 

On  whose  soules  and  all  christen,  yesu  have  mercie?  Moberly  :  So,  with  this  most 
touching  prayer,  Oph.  goes  to  meet  her  death.  It  displays  admirably  her  simple  and 
loving  spirit,  and  seems  to  be  a  protest  beforehand  against  the  hard-hearted  law 
Which  hinders  her  having  the  full  Christian  burial-rites. 

194    of]   For  instances  of  '  of  used  for  on,  see  Abbott,  §  175  and  §  181. 

195.  Jennens  :  '  Do  you  see  this  ?'  is  spoken  to  the  King;  and  '  O  God !'  is  only 
an  exclamation  expressing  the  anguish  of  Laertes's  mind  on  the  sight  of  his  sister's 
frenzy.     [So  in  Jennens's  text.  Ed.] 

196.  commune]  Steevens  :  To  common  of  F,  is  to  'commune,'  which,  pro- 
nounced as  anciently  spelt,  is  still  in  frequent  provincial  use.  So,  in  The  Last  Voy- 
age of  Captaine  Frobisher,  by  Dionyse  Settle,  bl.  1.,  1577:  'Our  Generall,  repayred 
with  the  ship  boat  to  common  or  sign  with  them.'  Again,  in  Holinshed's  account 
of  Jack  Cade's  insurrection  :  '  —  to  whome  were  sent  from  the  king  the  archbishop, 
&c,  to  common  with  him  of  his  griefs  and  requests.'  Boswell  :  Surely  the  word 
common  in  Fx  means,  I  must  be  allowed  to  participate  in  your  grief,  to  feel  in  com- 
mon with  you.  [Grant  White,  in  his  excellent  Sh.  Scholar,  p.  421,  was  beguileu 
by  the  '  homely  strength '  of  the  Ft  text  into  approval  of  Boswell's  interpretation  of 
tt,  much  to  Dyce's  '  surprise,'  who  pronounced  it  '  most  erroneous  ;'  the  two  words, 
common  and  'commune,'  are  mere  variations  in  spelling  of  the  same  word ;  they  were 
both  accented  alike,  on  the  first  syllable, — as  Grant  White  afterwards  remarked  in 
his  edition.  And  Hudson  says  Milton  so  accents  'commune,'  and  so  also  ev«c 
Wordswoitii.  \L\j.\ 

108.  Clarendon  :  That  is,  'of  your  wisest  friends,  whom  you  will.' 


352 


HAMLET 


[act  iv,  sc.  vi 


Our  crown,  our  life,  and  all  that  we  call  ours, 
To  you  in  satisfaction.     But  if  not, 
Be  you  content  to  lend  your  patience  to  us, 
And  we  shall  jointly  labour  with  your  soul 
To  give  it  due  content. 

Laer.  Let  this  be  so ; 

His  means  of  death,  his  obscure  burial, 
No  trophy,  sword,  nor  hatchment,  o'er  his  bones, 
No  noble  rite,  nor  formal  ostentation, 
Cry  to  be  heard,  as  'twere  from  heaven  to  earth, 
That  I  must  call't  in  question. 

King.  So  you  shall ; 

And  where  the  offence  is  let  the  great  axe  fall. 
I  pray  you,  go  with  me. 


205 


210 


[Exeunt. 


Scene  VI.     Another  room  in  the  castle. 

Enter  Horatio  and  a  Servant. 

Hor.     What  are  they  that  would  speak  with  me  ? 


204.  patience]  paience  F2. 

207.  buriat]  F3F4,  Rowe,  Cap.  Cald. 
Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Ktly,  Del. 
Huds.  buriall  FxF2.  funerall  Qq  et  cet. 

208.  trophy]  trophe  Q2Q3-  trophce 
Q4QS.      Trophee  Ff.     trophey  Q'76. 

trophy,  sword, ~\  trophe  sword, 
Q2Q3*  trophy  sword,  Pope,  Han.  tro- 
phee sword,  Cap. 

209.  rite"]  right  Qq. 

210.  heaven  to  earth]  earth  to  heaven 
Q'76. 


211.  calVt]  callYiy  Rowe,  Pope. 

Scene  vi.]  Cap.  Scene  viii.  Pope, 
Han.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

Another...]    Another   Room  in 
the  same.  Cap. 

Enter...]  Cap.  Enter  Horatio,  with 
an  Attendant.  Ff.  Enter  Horatio  and 
others.  Qq. 

1-3.  What... in]  Verse  (ending  the 
lines  sir.. .in.),  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 
Knt,  Ktly. 


201.  touch'd]  Clarendon:  Implicated  in  the  guilt  of  Polonius's  murder. 

207.  means]  Abbott,  §  423 :  That  is,  the  means  of  his  death.  See  I,  iv,  73 ; 
III,  ii,  321. 

208.  hatchment]  Sir  J.  Hawkins  (  Var.  1821) :  This  practice  is  uniformly  kept 
up,  to  this  day.  Not  only  the  sword,  but  the  helmet,  gauntlet,  spurs,  and  tabard 
{i.e.  a  coat  whereon  the  armorial  ensigns  were  anciently  depicted,  from  whence  the 
term  coat  of  armor),  are  hung  over  the  grave  of  every  knight. 

209.  ostentation]  Caldecott  :  •  Ostentation,'  or  ostent,  seems  to  have  been  a  term 
which  fashion  had  in  some  sort  appropriated  to  funeral  pomp  or  the  show  of  heavy 
and  deep  depression. 

211.  That]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  so  before  'that,'  see  IV,  vii,  148; 
and  Abbott,  §  283. 

212.  axe]  Warburton  suggests  and  reads  tax,  i.  e.  penalty,  punishment. 


act  iv,  sc.  vi.]  HAMLET  353 

Serv.     Sailors,  sir;  they  say  they  have  letters  for  you. 

Hor.     Let  them  come  in. —  [Exit  Servant. 

I  do  not  know  from  what  part  of  the  world 
I  should  be  greeted,  if  not  from  Lord  Hamlet.  5 

Enter  Sailors. 

First  Sail.     God  bless  you,  sir. 

Hor.     Let  him  bless  thee  too. 

First  Sail.      He  shall,  sir,  an't  please  him.      There's  a 
letter  for  you,  sir, — it  comes  from  the  ambassador  that  was 
bound  for  England, — if  your  name  be  Horatio,  as  I  am  let     10 
to  know  it  is. 

Hor.  [Reads']  Horatio,  when  thou  shalt  have  overlooked 
this,  give  these  fellows  some  means  to  the  king ;  they  have 
letters  for  him.  Ere  we  were  two  days  old  at  sea,  a  pirate 
of  very  warlike  appointment  gave  us  chase.  Finding  our-  15 
selves  too  slow  of  sail,  we  put  on  a  compelled  valour ;  in  the 
grapple  I  boarded  them  ;  on  the  instant  they  got  clear  of  our 
ship ;  so  I  alone  became  their  priso?ier.  They  have  dealt 
with   me  like   thieves   of  mercy ;    but  they  knew   what  they 

2.  Serv.]  Gent,  or  Gen.  Qq.  8.  He]  A  Qq. 

Sailors]  Saylors  FXF2.    Sea-faring  an't]  and  Qq.     and  't  FXF2F  . 

men  Qq,  Cam.  Cla.  9.  comes]  came  Qq. 

3.  [Exit...]  Han.     Om.  QqFf.  ambassador]  Embaffador  Qq.  Am- 

5.  greeted,  if]  greeted.    If  Qq.  baffadours   FjF2F  .       A?7ibaffadour  F  . 
Sailors.]  Saylor.  Ff  (Sailor  F  ).  ambassadors  Cald.  Knt. 

6,  8.  First  Sail.]  1.  S.  Cap.    Say.  Qq  12.  Hor.  [Reads]  Reads  the  Letter. 
F,F,.     Sayl.  F3.     Sail.  F4.                               Ff.     Hor.  Qq. 

God. ..him]  Save  you  Sir  Q'76.  16.  in]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt,  Dyce  i, 

6.  you]  your  Fa.  Sta.  Del.     and  in  Qq  et  cet. 


10.  let  to  know]  Clarendon  :  Caused  to  know,  informed.  Compare  the  phrase 
'  do  to  wit.' 

13.  means]  Caldecott  :  Means  of  access,  introduction. 

14.  pirate]  Coleridge  :  This  is  almost  the  only  play  of  Sh.  in  which  mere  acci 
dents,  independent  of  all  will,  form  an  essential  part  of  the  plot ; — but  here  how 
judiciously  in  keeping  with  the  character  of  the  over-meditative  Ham.,  ever  at  last 
determined  by  accident  or  by  a  fit  of  passion. 

19.  thieves  of  mercy]  Clarendon:  Merciful  thieves.  See  note  on  I, 
ii,  4. 

19,  20.  what  they  did]  Miles  (p.  70)  maintains  that  this  capture  was  net  accidental, 
but  was  pre-arranged  by  Ham.,  who  hints  at  it  when  he  says  to  the  King  (IV,  iii,  47), 
*  I  see  a  chemb  that  sees  them,'  but  alludes  to  it  most  positively  and  specifically  at 

30*  X 


354 


HAMLET 


[act  iv,  sc.  vi. 


did  ;  I  am  to  do  a  good  turn  for  them.  Let  the  king  have  20 
the  letters  I  have  sent;  and  repair  thou  to  me  with  as  much 
haste  as  thou  would' st  fly  death.  I  have  words  to  speak 
in  thine  ear  will  make  thee  dumb;  yet  are  they  much  too 
light  for  the  bore  of  the  matter.  These  good  fellows  will 
bring  thee  where  I  am.  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstem  hold  25 
their  course  for  England ;  of  them  I  have  much  to  tell  thee. 
Farewell. 

He  that  thou  knowest  thi?iey  Hamlet. 


20.  good]  Om.  Qq. 

22.  haste]  hast  FtFa.    fpeede  QaQ3- 
/peedQ4Qs,  Cap.  Glo.  +  . 

would'st]   wouldest  QaQ3FxFaF3, 
Pope  +  ,  Jen.  White,  Cam.  Cla. 

23.  thine]  your  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.    thy 


Pope  + . 

24.  bore  of  the]  bord  of  the  Qq.  Om. 
Q'76,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

26.  much]  as  much  FF,  Rowe. 

28.  He  that... thine ,]  So  that.. .thine 
Qq.     Om.  Q'76. 


the  close  of  the  interview  with  his  mother :  '  O  'tis  most  sweet  When  in  one  line 
two  crafts  directly  meet.' — *  If  the  word  crafts  had  its  present  maritime  significance 
in  Shakespeare's  time,  the  pun  alone  is  conclusive  of  a  pre-arranged  capture.  How 
arranged  is  neither  here  nor  there ;  but  opportunities  of  chartering  a  free  cruiser 
could  not  have  been  wanting  to  a  prince  of  Denmark,  and,  what  is  more  significant, 
the  fleet  of  Fortinbras  was  then  in  port  at  Elsinor.  There  is  an  understanding,  just 
ever  so  vaguely  glanced  at,  between  the  two  young  princes.  But  the  following  lines 
admit  of  but  one  interpretation:  "Let  it  work;  For  'tis  the  sport  to  have  the  en- 
giner  Hoist  with  his  own  petar ;  and  *t  shall  go  hard  But  I  will  delve  one 
YARD  BELOW  THEIR  MINES  AND  BLOW  THEM  AT  THE  MOON  !"  One  would  think 
it  required  a  miraculous  allowance  of  critical  obtuseness  to  ignore  a  counterplot  so 
strikingly  pre-announced. .  . .  To  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  comes  the  letter  to 
Hor.,  "  In  the  grapple  /  boarded  them  ;  on  the  instant  they  got  clear  of  our  ship  ; 
so  I  alone  became  their  prisoner.  They  dealt  with  me  like  thieves  of  mercy  ;  BUT 
THEY  KNEW  WHAT  THEY  DID."  Can  circumstantial  proof  go  farther?  Could  any 
twelve  men  of  sense,  on  such  a  record,  acquit  Ham.  of  being  an  accessory  before,  as 
well  as  after  the  fact?'     [See  Snider,  Appendix,  Vol.  II,  p.  183.] 

21.  as]  Clarendon:  We  must  either  take  'as'  =  as  though,  or  supply  withal 
after  *  death.' 

23.  will  make]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  relative,  see  Abbott,  §  244, 
and  Macb.  V,  vii,  7. 

24.  bore]  Johnson  :  The  calibre  of  a  gun,  or  the  capacity  of  the  barrel.  '  The 
matter  would  carry  heavier  words.'  Tschischwitz  cannot  persuade  himself  that 
•bore '  is  not  a  verbal  substantive  from  '  to  bear,'  and  means  '  capacity  for  bearing.' 

28.  Clarke:  This  simple  yet  strong  conclusion  to  his  sedate  but  most  earnest 
letter  to  his  bosom-friend  might,  we  think,  fully  serve  to  denote  Hamlet's  per- 
fect sanity.  Madmen  do  not  write  in  a  style  thus  condensed  and  pertinent;  if 
they  are  warm  they  are  violent,  if  they  are  fervent  they  are  excited ;  but  here  is 
warmth  of  friendship  with  staid  expression,  fervour  of  feeling  with  sobriety  of 
assur  mce. 


act  iv,  sc.  vii.J 


HAMLET 


355 


Come,  I  will  make  you  way  for  these  your  letters ; 
And  do't  the  speedier,  that  you  may  direct  me 
To  him  from  whom  you  brought  them. 


\_Exeunt. 


30 


Scene  VII.     Another  room  in  the  castle. 


Enter  King  and  Laertes. 

King.     Now  must  your  conscience  my  acquittance  seal, 
And  you  must  put  me  in  your  heart  for  friend, 
Sith  you  have  heard,  and  with  a  knowing  ear, 
That  he  which  hath  your  noble  father  slain 
Pursued  my  life. 

Laer.  It  well  appears  ;  but  tell  me 

Why  you  proceeded  not  against  these  feats, 
So  crimeful  and  so  capital  in  nature, 
As  by  your  safety,  wisdom,  all  things  else, 
You  mainly  were  stirr'd  up. 

King.  Oh,  for  two  special  reasons, 

Which  may  to  you  perhaps  seem  much  unsinew'd, 
But  yet  to  me  they  are  strong.     The  queen  his  mother 


10 


29.  make]  QAQ5,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Glo.  +  , 
Dyce  ii.     Om.  Q2Q3.    give  Ff  et  cet. 

31.  [Exeunt.]  Exit.  Ff. 

Scene  vii.]  Cap.    Scene  ix.  Pope  +  , 
Jen. 

Another.. .castle.]  Cap.  (subs.). 

4.  which]  who  Q'76. 

6.  proceeded]  proceede  Q2Q3Q4-    pro- 
ceed Q5. 

7.  crimefut]  criminall  Qq,  Jen.  Coll. 

8.  safely,]    fafetie,    greatnes,    Q2Q3- 
fafety,  greatnes,  Q4.   fafetie,  greatnejfe, 


Q5.     safety,  greatness,  Jen.   Steev.  Var. 
Cald.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Ktly,  Huds. 

9.  O,  for  two]  For  two  Q'76.      Two 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

10.  to...unsinew*d]    to   you   perhaps 
feem  weak  Q'76. 

unsinew'd]  vnfinnow*d  Qq.     vn~ 
finnowed  FxFa.     unfinewed  FF. 

11.  But]  And  F(,Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Cald. 
Knt,  Ktly,  Del. 

they  are]  thd'r  Qq.     are  Pope+ . 
they're  Q'76,  Dyce  ii,  Cam.  Huds. 


1.  acquittance  seal]  For  other  similar  instances  of  Shakespeare's  use  of  legal 
phraseology  in  reference  to  seals,  see  Rushton,  Sh.  a  Lawyer,  p.  29 
3.  Sith]  See  II,  ii,  6;  IV,  iv,  45. 

7.  crimeful]  Clarendon  :  The  Ff  are  probably  right  in  giving  this  rarer  word, 
which  is  not  used  elsewhere  by  Sh 

8.  CLARENDON :  The  Qq  make  this  line  an  Alexandrine.  But  this  is  no  grave 
objection,  as  the  next  line  is  Alexandrine  also.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  269)  proposed 
to  make  •  As  by '  .1  line  by  itself,  but  withdrew  it,  as  '  much  too  harsh.' 


35 6  HAMLET  [act  iv,  sc.  vii. 

Lives  almost  by  his  looks;  and  for  myself, —  12 

My  virtue  or  my  plague,  be  it  either  which, — 

She's  so  conjunctive  to  my  life  and  soul, 

That,  as  the  star  moves  not  but  in  his  sphere,  15 

I  could  not  but  by  her.     The  other  motive, 

Why  to  a  public  count  I  might  not  go, 

Is  the  great  love  the  general  gender  bear  him ; 

Who,  dipping  all  his  faults  in  their  affection, 

Would,  like  the  spring  that  turneth  wood  to  stone,  20 

Convert  his  gyves  to  graces ;  so  that  my  arrows, 

13.  be  it]   be't  Pope +  ,  Jen.  Dyce  ii,  18.  general  gender]  people  Q '76. 
Huds.                                                                        20.    Would]    Worke  Qq.      Work  Jen. 

either  which]  either Q'76.    either-  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  El.  White. 

which  Sing,  ii,  Ktly.  21.  gyves]  Giues  QqF4. 

14.  She's  so   conjunctive]   She   is  fo  that]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
concliue  Qq.     She  is  fo  precious  Q'76. 

13.  be  .  .  .  which]  Abbott,  §  273  :  There  is,  perhaps,  a  confusion  between  'be 
it  either,'  and  '  be  it  whichever  of  the  two.'  Perhaps,  however,  '  either '  may  be 
taken  in  its  original  sense  of  '  one  of  the  two,'  so  that  '  either  which  '  is  '  which-one- 
so-ever  of  the  two.' 

17.  count]  Abbott,  §460:  For  account. 

18.  general  gender]  Johnson:  The  common  race  of  the  people.  Delius: 
'Gender'  is  applied  to  herbs  in  Oth.  I,  iii,  326.  CALDECOTT:  See  '  the  general,' 
II,  ii,  416. 

20.  Would]  Clarendon:  The  Qq  make  'convert'  indicative  instead  of  infini 
tive.     But  '  Would  convert '  seems  required  by  the  context. 

20.  spring]  Johnson  :  This  simile  is  neither  very  seasonable  in  the  deep  interest 
of  this  conversation,  nor  very  accurately  applied.  If  the  spring  had  changed  base 
metals  to  gold,  the  thought  had  been  more  proper.  Reed  :  The  allusion  is  to  the 
qualities  of  the  dropping-well  at  Knaresborough,  in  Yorkshire.  Camden  (1590,  p. 
564)  thus  mentions  it:  '  Sub  quo  fons  est  in  quern  ex  impendentibus  rupibus  aquae 
guttatim  distillant,  unde  Dropping  Well  vocant,  in  quern  quicquid  ligni  immittitur, 
lapideo  cortice  brevi  obduci  et  lapidescere  observatum  est.'  Clarendon  :  Lily 
has :  '  Would  I  had  sipped  of  that  ryuer  in  Caria,  which  tunieth  those  that  drinke 
of  it  to  stones.' — Euphues,  p.  63,  ed.  Arber. 

21.  gyves]  Theobald  (Nichols's  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  576):  I  own  I  do  not  understand 
this.  I  have  conjectured  gybes,  i.  e.  even  gybes,  mocks,  fleering,  &c,  would  in  him 
be  construed  graces.  [This  was  not  repeated  in  Theobald's  ed.,  but  it  is  adopted 
by  Tschischwitz.  Ed.]  Elze  :  Perhaps  we  should  read  crimes.  Clarke  :  That  is, 
turn  all  my  attempts  to  restrain  him  into  so  many  injuries  perpetrated  against  his 
innocence  and  good  qualities.  Daniel  (p.  76)  :  Read  gyres,  i.  e.  his  '  wild  and 
whirling '  actions,  his  mad  eccentricities.  Clarendon  :  Compare,  '  And  made  their 
bends  adornings.' — Ant.  6°  Cleo.  II.  ii,  213.  Elze  {Shakespeare-  Jahrbuch,  xi,  295, 
and  also  The  Athenceum,  20  Feb.  1869) :  The  corruption  appears  to  be  here  not  in 


act  iv,  sc.  vii.J  HAMLET  357 

Too  slightly  timbcr'd  for  so  loud  a  wind,  22 

Would  have  reverted  to  my  bow  again, 
And  not  where  I  had  aim'd  them. 

Laer.     And  so  have  I  a  noble  father  lost ;  25 

A  sister  driven  into  desperate  terms, 
Whose  worth,  if  praises  may  go  back  again, 
Stood  challenger  on  mount  of  all  the  age 

22.  timber 'd]    tymbcrd  Q3Q3-     tym-  24.  aim'd]  arni'dYx. 

bered  Q.     timbered  Q.     timbred  Ff.  25.  have  I]  I  have  Q. 

loud  a  wind]  loued  Arm?d  Q3Q,.  26.  desperate]  defprat  QaQ,. 

loued  armes  QQ.     loved  arms  Q  J 6.  27.  Whose  worth]  Who  was  Ff.    ff/i* 

24.  And]  But  Qq.  ^«j  Johns.      Who,  once  Quincy  (MS). 
not]  not  gone  Ktly.  28.  mount]  the  mount  Q'76. 
had]  haue  Qq. 

'  gyves,'  but  in  '  graces.'  How  can  corporeal  '  gyves '  be  converted  into  incorporeal, 
abstract  '  graces '  J  That  is  more  than  even  the  well  at  Knaresborough  could  do. 
An  abstract  noun  in  this  connection  ruins  the  whole  metaphor,  and  is  illogical. 
If  we  substitute  some  abstract  noun  for  ■  gyves,'  while  restoring  logical  propriety, 
we  deprive  the  simile  of  all  significant  clearness,  force,  and  depth,  and  to  introduce 
the  wonder-working  spring  in  order  to  compare  together  two  abstract  qualities 
would  be  pointless,  and  assuredly  not  in  accordance  with  Shakespeare's  genius 
and  style.  Read,  therefore :  graves.  Graves,  now  spelled  greaves,  is  found  also  in 
2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iv,  50,  where,  as  here,  something  mean  becomes  ennobled.  For 
the  spelling,  compare  '  thraves,'  instead  of  threaves  (Chapman's  Iliad,  xi,  477) ; 
and  'stale,'  instead  of  steale  ox  stele  {lb.  iv,  173).  Stratmann  praises  this  emen- 
dation of  Elze's  as  judicious. 

22.  Jennens  finds  the  reading  of  the  Ff  so  unnatural  and  impossible  that  he 
adopts  that  of  Q2Q3,  reading  so  loved,  arm'd,  and  paraphrases,  'Too  slightly  timbered 
for  one  so  loved  and  armed  with  the  affections  and  veneration  of  the  people.'  The 
armes  of  Q4  are  put  for  the  person  armed,  and  the  love  applied  to  them  which  is 
meant  for  him.  In  both  these  readings  we  have  the  idea  of  a  suit  of  armor  reverbe- 
rating an  arrow  back  to  its  bow,  which  is  not  only  possible,  but  just.  Steevens  : 
The  reading  of  the  Ff,  however,  is  supported  by  Ascham's  Toxophilus :  '  Weake 
bowes,  and  lyghte  shaftes  can  not  stande  in  a  rough  wynde.'    [p.  151,  ed.  Arber.] 

25,  26.  have  .  .  .  driven]  Abbott,  §  425  :  Here  note  that  though  the  first  line 
could  be  re-transposed,  and  Laer.  could  naturally  say,  '  I  have  lost  a  father,'  on  the 
other  hand  he  could  not  say,  '  I  have  driven  a  sister,'  without  completely  changing 
the  sense.  '  Have '  is  here  used  in  its  original  sense,  and  is  equivalent  to  '  I  find.' 
When  '  have '  is  thus  used  without  any  notion  of  action,  it  is  separated  from  the  par- 
ticiple passive.     See  I,  ii,  215  ;  III,  iii,  38. 

27.  praises]  Johnson  :  If  I  may  praise  what  has  been,  but  is  now  to  be  found 
no  more. 

28.  on  mount]  Caldecott  :  On  the  highest  ground,  in  the  fullest  presence  of 
the  age,  to  give  a  general  challenge  in  support  of  her  excellence.  [I  think  Caldecott 
failed  to  see  that  '  of  all  the  age '  qualifies  '  challenger.'     Her  worth  challenged 


58 


HAMLET 


[act  iv,  &c.  vii 


30 


For  her  perfections.     But  my  revenge  will  come. 

King.     Break  not  your  sleeps  for  that;  you   must  not 
think 

That  we  are  made  of  stuff  so  flat  and  dull 
That  we  can  let  our  beard  be  shook  with  danger 
And  think  it  pastime.     You  shortly  shall  hear  more ; 
I  loved  your  father,  and  we  love  ourself ; 
And  that,  I  hope,  will  teach  you  to  imagine —  35 


Enter  a  Messenger,  with  letters. 

How  now !  what  news  ? 

Mess.  Letters,  my  lord,  from  Hamlet ; 

This  to  your  majesty ;  this  to  the  queen. 

King.     From  Hamlet  ?  who  brought  them  ? 

Mess.     Sailors,  my  lord,  they  say ;  I  saw  them  not ; 
They  were  given  me  by  Claudio  ;  he  received  them 


40 


29.  perfections.    But]  perfections 

but  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Ktly. 

my]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

30.  Break. ..think]  Two  lines,  Ff. 

32.  beard]  berd  Q^.     beards  Q'76. 
with   danger]    of  danger    Cap. 

conj.  {Notes,  i,  p.  29). 

33.  pastime]  pafltime  F2. 

shortly  shall]  shall  soon  Pope  + . 

34.  ourself]  your  f elf e  Fa.    your  f elf 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 

35.  imagine — ]  imagine.  Qq. 


Enter...]  Enter  a  Meflenger.  Ff. 
...a  Gentleman.  Cap.  After  news?  line 
36,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  El.  White. 

36.  How. ..Hamlet]    Om.    Qq,   Pope, 
Han. 

36,37.  Letters... queen]  Theob.    Prose, 
Ff,  Rowe. 

37.  This  to  your]  Thefe  to  your  Qq, 
Pope  + ,  Cap.  Jen. 

38.  Hamlet  ?]  Hamlet,  Qq. 


all  the  age  to  deny  her  perfection.  Ed.]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  The  (MS)  reads  sole 
challenger.  Moberly  :  The  allusion  seems  to  be  the  coronation  ceremony  of  the 
Emperor  of  Germany  [Austria  ?]  as  King  of  Hungary ;  when  on  the  Mount  of  De- 
fiance, at  Presburg,  he  unsheathes  the  ancient  sword  of  state,  and  shaking  it  towards 
North,  South,  East,  and  West,  challenges  the  four  corners  of  the  world  to  dispute 
his  rights. 

30.  sleeps]  See  I,  i,  173.  Dyce  quotes  from  Phaer's  Virgil,  ALneidos,  ii :  'The 
towne  ....  in  sleepes  [the  original  somno]  and  drinking  drownd;'  and  refers  to 
2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  v,  69,  where  he  also  reads  •  sleeps.' 

32.  with]  For  instances  of  '  with '  equivalent  to  by,  see  Macb.  Ill,  i,  62 ;  IV,  ii, 
32;  and  Abbott,  §  193. 

34.  I  .  .  .  ourself]  Seymour  (ii,  196),  losing  sight  of  the  distinction  here  im- 
plied between  the  feelings  of  a  man  and  those  of  a  king,  says  that  in  tne  beginning 
of  this  speech  the  King  seems  to  have  forgotten  the  pompous  dignity  of  his  plural 
distinction. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  vii.] 


HAMLET 


359 


King. 
Leave  us. 


Of  him  that  brought  them. 

Laertes,  you  shall  hear  them. — 

\Exit  Messenger. 

[Reads]      High  and  mighty,    You   shall  knozv  I  am    set 
naked  on  your  kingdom.      To-morrozv  shall  I  beg  leave  to 
see  your  kingly  eyes  ;  when  I  shall \  first  asking  your  pardon     45 
thereunto,  recount  the  occasion  of  my  sudden  and  more  strange 

return-  Hamlet. 

What  should  this  mean  ?     Are  all  the  rest  come  back  ? 

Or  is  it  some  abuse,  and  no  such  thing?  50 

Laer.     Know  you  the  hand  ? 

King.     Tis  Hamlet's  character.     *  Naked !' 
And  in  a  postscript  here,  he  says  '  alone  !' 
Can  you  advise  me  ? 

Laer.     I'm  lost  in  it,  my  lord.     But  let  him  come ;  55 


41.   0/...them.]     Om.    Ff,    Rowe  +  , 
Cald.  Knt. 

hear]  Om.  F3.     read  F3F4. 

41.  42.  Laertes... us.]   One  line,  Qq, 
Jen.  Knt. 

42.  us.']  us,  all —  (reading  Laertes... 
all —  as  one  line)  Pope  +  . 

[Exit...]  Om.  Qq. 

43.  [Reads]  Cap.  (after  mighty,)  Om. 
QqFf. 

44.  shall  I]  I shall Jen. 

45.  46.   first. ..thereunto,]  {firft... par- 
don) thereunto   Q'76. 

45.  asking  your]   asking  you   QqF  , 
Rowe,  Pope. 

45,  46.  pardon   thereunto,]    pardon, 


there-vnto  Q3Q,Q4.  pardon,  thereunto  Q  . 

46.  occasion]  Occafions  Ff,  Rowe,  Bos. 

Knt,  Coll.  Dyce  i,  Sta. White,  Del.  Huds. 

and  more  strange]  Om.  Qq,  Pope 

+ ,  Cap.  Jen.    and  most  strange  Anon."" 

48.  Ifamlet.]  Om.  Qq,  Jen. 

50.  abuse,  and~\  abufe  ?  Or  Ff,  Rowe. 
abuse,  or  Knt. 

52-54.  ' 'Tis. ..me?]  Prose,  Ff,  Rowe. 
Ending  the  lines  {character ;... says)... 
me  ?  Pope  + ,  Jen.  El. 

52-53.  ' Naked P ...' alone.1']  As  quota- 
tions, Johns. 

54.  advise]  deuife  Qq. 

55.  L'm]  I  am  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Var 
Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 


41.  Of  him]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  208) :  'Him'  for  them,  I  suspect.  [Would  •  he 
leceived  them  of  them  that  brought  them1  be  tolerable?  Ed.]  Tschischwitz 
thinks  he  has  mended  matters  by  giving  this  speech  to  a  servant  instead  of  to  a  mes- 
senger. 

45.  eyes]  Clarendon:  See  IV,  iv,  6. 

47.  more  strange]  Abbott,  §6:  'My  sudden,  and  even  more  strange  than 
sudden.' 

49.  should]  See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  49,  or  Abbott,  §  325. 

52.  character]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  269):  The  verse  seems  to  require  that  this 
word  (character,  as  it  is,  frequently  at  least,  accented  in  the  old  poets)  should  be 
pronounced  cn'ract",  as  it  is  in  Middleton's  The  Roaring  Girl,  Prologue,  '  WTith 
w-ngs  more  lofty;  thus  her  character  lies.'    [ — p.  435,  ed.  Dyce.] 


30O  HAMLET  [act  iv,  sc.  vii. 

It  warms  the  very  sickness  in  my  heart,  56 

That  I  shall  live  and  tell  him  to  his  teeth, 
'Thus  didest  thou.' 

King,  If  it  be  so,  Laertes, — 

As  how  should  it  be  so  ?  how  otherwise  ? — 
Will  you  be  ruled  by  me  ? 

Laer.  Ay,  my  lord ;  60 

So  you  will  not  o'errule  me  to  a  peace. 

King.     To  thine  own  peace.     If  he  be  now  return'd, 
As  checking  at  his  voyage,  and  that  he  means 

57.  shall]  Om.  Qq.  my  Lord,fo  you  will  Qq.     If  fo  you? I 
and  tell]  to  tell  Han.  Ff,  Rowe,    Knt,  White.      /,  so  you'll 

58.  didest]  diddefl  Ff.  didjl  Qq,  Jen.  Pope  +  .  Ay ;  so  you'll  Johns.  I  will, 
diest  Marshall,  from  Qf.  my  lord ;  So  you  will  Cap.  Ktly.     If 

58-60.  If  it... me  ?]    Two   lines,   the  you' 11  not  Ca.\d. 

first  ending  so  ?  Ff,  Rowe.  62.  returned]  returned  Qq. 

60,  61.  Ay. ..peace.]  One  line,  QqFf,  63.  checking  at]  the  King  at  Q2Q,. 

Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Cald.  Knt,  White.  liking  not  Q4QS,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.  El. 

Ay. ..So  you  will]   Steev.     /  kecking  at  Long  MS.* 

58.  Thus  .  .  .  thou]  Staunton  :  The  reading  of  Qt  may  be  thought  superior  by 
some. 

59.  As  .  .  .  otherwise]  Delius  :  We  should  expect  '  How  should  it  not  be  so  ?' 
Sh.  is  elsewhere  inexact  in  repeating  and  in  omitting  the  negative.  Keightley  (Ex- 
positor, p.  295) :  It  is  manifest  that  but  or  not  has  been  omitted.  [Keightley  reads 
'should  it  but*  in  his  text.]  Clarendon:  Perhaps  the  first  clause  refers  to  Hamlet's 
return,  the  second  to  Laertes's  feelings.  Marshall  (p.  197):  If  the  'should' 
were  italicised  we  might  make  sense  of  it,  thus  :  '  If  it  be  so ' —  (/.  e.  if  Ham.  has 
come  back  because,  on  consideration,  he  did  not  choose  to  go  to  England) — '  As 
how  should  it  be  so  ?'  (i.  e.  how  should  there  be  any  question  about  it  being  so  ?) — 
'  How  (could  it  be)  otherwise  ?'  I  admit  that  in  this  case  we  should  expect  '  if ' 
fo  be  repeated. 

60.  Will . . .  me  ?]  White  :  The  most  un-Shakespearian  want  of  accord  between 
the  rhythm  and  the  sense  of  this  hemistich, — the  accent  being  thrown  upon  '  by ' 
instead  of  '  me,' — warrants  the  opinion  that  the  intelligent  correction  in  the  Folio  is 
by  authority.  [It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  White  supposes  '  ruled '  is  to  be  pro- 
nounced as  a  dissyllable.  In  his  text  he  prints  '  rul'd,'  and,  following  the  Ff,  omits 
1  Ay,  my  lord.'  Ed.] 

60.  my  lord]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  270) :  Perhaps  '  my  good  lord.' 
63.  As]  Abbott,  §  115:  'As'  is  used  nearly  redundantly  before  participles  to 
denote  a  cause,  '  inasmuch  as.' 

63.  checking]  Steevens  :  The  phrase  is  from  falconry.  '  For  who  knows  not, 
quoth  she,  that  this  hawk,  which  comes  now  so  fair  to  the  fist,  may  to-morrow  check 
at  viy  lure?' — Hinde's  Eliosto  Libidinoso,  1606.  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Applied  to  a  hawk 
wnen  she  forsakes  her  proper  game  and  follows  some  other  of  inferior  kind  that 
crosses  her  in  her  flight.       Clarendon:  Compare   Twelfth  Night,  II,  v.  124,  and 


act  iv,  sc.  vii.]  HAMLET  3^1 

No  more  to  undertake  it,  I  will  work  him 

To  an  exploit  now  ripe  in  my  device,  65 

Under  the  which  he  shall  not  choose  but  fall ; 

And  for  his  death  no  wind  of  blame  shall  breathe ; 

But  even  his  mother  shall  uncharge  the  practice, 

And  call  it  accident. 

Laer.  My  lord,  I  will  be  ruled ; 

The  rather,  if  you  could  devise  it  so  70 

That  I  might  be  the  organ. 

King.  It  falls  right. 

You  have  been  talk'd  of  since  your  travel  much, 
And  that  in  Hamlet's  hearing,  for  a  quality 
Wherein,  they  say,  you  shine ;  your  sum  of  parts 
Did  not  together  pluck  such  envy  from  him,  75 

As  did  that  one,  and  that,  in  my  regard, 
Of  the  unworthiest  siege. 

Laer.  What  part  is  that,  my  lord  ? 

King.     A  very  riband  in  the  cap  of  youth, 
Yet  needful  too ;  for  youth  no  less  becomes 
The  light  and  careless  livery  that  it  wears  80 

Than  settled  age  his  sables  and  his  weeds, 
Importing  health  and  graveness.     Two  months  since, 

65.  device]  deuife  Qq,  Pope,  Cap.  71.  organ"]   instrument  Q'76,  Rowe, 

67.  breathe]  breath  FXF2,  Cap.  Pope. 

68.  even]  ev'n  Pope  +  .  78.  riband]  ribaud  Q  .  feather  Q'76, 

69.  accident]  accedent  Q2Q3Q4>  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 
69-82.    Laer.    My   lord. ..graveness.]  82.    Two   months    since]     Some    two 

Cm.  Ff.  monthes  hence  Ff,  Cald.  Knt. 

69.  My  lord t]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

Ill,  i,  71.  The  use  of  the  word  is  not  quite  the  same  here,  because  the  voyage  was 
Hamlet's  *  proper  game,'  which  he  abandons.  Collier  (ed.  1 ) :  *  Checking  at '  was 
doubtless  introduced  in  the  Ff  as  a  conjectural  emendation.  [Not  repeated  in  Col- 
lier's ed.  2.]  Dyce  :  The  Ff  reading  is  much  more  in  Shakespeare's  manner  than 
liking  not. 

68.  uncharge]  Caldecott  :  Acquit  of  blame.  Clarendon  :  The  word  is  prob- 
ably  coined  by  Sh.  for  the  nonce. 

68.  practice]  Clarendon:  Plot,  stratagem,  treachery.  See  IV,  vii,  139;  V, 
li,  304. 

77.  siege]  Johnson  :  Of  the  lowest  rank.  Clarendon  :  Seat,  thence  rank, 
because  people  sat  at  table  and  elsewhere  in  order  of  precedence. 

82.  health]  Warburton  :  But  a  warm  furred  gown  rather  implies  sickness  than 
31 


362  HAMLET  [act  iv.  sc.  vii 

Here  was  a  gentleman  of  Normandy ; — 

I've  seen  myself,  and  served  against,  the  French, 

And  they  can  well  on  horseback ;  but  this  gallant  85 

Plad  witchcraft  in't ;  he  grew  into  his  seat, 

And  to  such  wondrous  doing  brought  his  horse 

As  he  had  been  incorpsed  and  demi-natured 

With  the  brave  beast.     So  far  he  topp'd  my  thought 

That  I,  in  forgery  of  shapes  and  tricks,  90 

Come  short  of  what  he  did. 

Laer.  A  Norman,  was't? 

King.     A  Norman. 

83.  Normandy; — ]    Normandy.    Ff.  $>%.  As]  And  Rowe. 

Normandy,  Qq,  Cald.  he  had]    Q'76.      had  he   QqFi, 

84.  Pve~\  I  haue  Qq.  Cam.  Cla. 

against,"]  Han.     againjl  QqFf.  89.  topped]  topt  Qq.    paft,  Ff,  Rowe, 

85.  can]  ran  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt  i.  Pope,  Han.  Cald.  Knt. 

86.  into]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Sta.  my  thought]  me  thought  Qq. 
vnto  Qq  et  cet.  91.   Come]    Came   Cap.    conj.    (  Var. 

87.  doing]  doings  Cald.  headings,  p.  30)  Cla. 

•  health.'  ,  Sh.  wrote  wealth,  i.  e.  that  the  wearers  are  rich  burghers  and  magistrates. 
[Moberly:  This  emendation  gives  better  sense.]  Johnson  :  *  Importing  '  here 
may  be  not  inferring  by  logical  consequence,  but  producing  by  physical  effect.  A 
young  man  regards  show  in  his  dress,  an  old  man,  health.  MALONE :  '  Importing 
health  '  means  denoting  an  attention  to  health.  Steevens  :  '  Importing '  may  only 
signify, — implying,  denoting.  Malone's  explanation  may  be  the  true  one.  Claren- 
don adopts  Malone's  explanation.  [See  Rom.  6°  Jul.  I,  i,  86.  May  not  this  be 
an  instance  of  what  Corson  {Cornell  Rev.  Nov.  1876)  calls  respective  construction, 
and  '  health  '  refer  to  '  careless  livery,'  and  '  graveness  '  to  '  sables  '  and  •  weeds  '  ? 
Compare  III,  i,  151  :  'The  courtier's,  scholar's,  soldier's,  eye,  tongue,  sword  ;'  also 
Macb.  I,  iii,  60:  '  speak  thou  to  me  who  neither  beg  nor  fear  your  favour  nor  your 
hate;'  Wint.Tale,  III,  ii,  164:  'though  I  with  death,  and  with  Reward,  did  threaten 
and  encourage  him.'  For  these  and  other  instances  of  similar  construction,  see  the 
Cornell  Rev.  cited  above;  and  see  also  II,  ii,  382.  Ed.] 

83,  84.  Normandy  .  .  .  against]  Caldecott  :  '  With  the  punctuation  of  the 
QqFf  the  construction  may  be  :  "  Here  was  a  gentleman  [whom]  I've  seen  myself, 
and  [I  have  also]  served  against  the  French,  And  they,"  '  &c. 

85.  can]  Collier:  The  ran  of  Ff  is  a  mere  misprint;  people  do  not  run  on 
horseback.  See  Abbott,  §  307,  for  other  instances,  found,  though  very  rarely,  in 
Sh.  of  this,  the  original  meaning  of  '  can.'  Clarendon  :  Compare  Bacon,  Essay 
xi,  p.  40:  '  In  evil  the  best  condition  is  not  to  will,  the  second  not  to  can.' 

89.  topp'd]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  To  rise  above,  to  surpass.  See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  57; 
Lear,  I,  ii,  21. 

90.  forgery]  tohnson:  I  could  not  contrive  so  many  proofs  of  dexterity  as  he 
tould  perform 


\ct  iv,  sc.  vii.]  HAMLET  3^3 

Laer.     Upon  my  life,  Lamond. 

Ki)ig.  The  very  same. 

Lacr.     I  know  him  well ;  he  is  the  brooch  indeed 
And  gem  of  all  the  nation.  95 

King.     He  made  confession  of  you, 
And  gave  you  such  a  masterly  report, 
For  art  and  exercise  in  your  defence, 
And  for  your  rapier  most  especially, 

That  he  cried  out,  'twould  be  a  sight  indeed  100 

If  one  could  match  you ;  the  scrimers  of  their  nation, 
He  swore,  had  neither  motion,  guard,  nor  eye, 
If  you  opposed  them.     Sir,  this  report  of  his 

93.  Lamond]     Pope-t-,    Dyce,    Sta.  100.  sight]  fight  Rowe  ii,  Pope. 

Glo.  +  ,    Huds.      Lamound  Ff,   Rowe,  101.  you;]  you  Sir.  Ff,  Rowe. 

Cald.  Knt.     Lamont  White.     Lamord  101,  103.  the. ..them]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe, 

Qq  et  cet.  Pope,  Han. 

very]  Om.  Theob.  ii,Warb.  Johns.  101.  the  scrimers]  the  Scrimures  Qa 

95.  the]  our  Ff.     that  Coll.  (MS).  Qy     the  fencers  Q'76. 

96.  He  made]  Hee  mad  Ff.  103.  them]  'cm  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
99.  And]  An  F  .  Jen. 

especially]  especially  Fx.    efpeciall  Sir,  this]   This  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 

Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.   El.         Han. 
Cam.  Cla. 

93.  Lamond]  Malone  :  Sh.  wrote,  I  suspect,  Lamode.  See  lines  94,  95,  where 
he  is  spoken  of  as  '  the  brooch  and  gem  of  all  the  nation.'  Clarendon:  The  name 
appears  to  have  been  altogether  fictitious.  C  Elliot  Browne  {Athenaum,  29  July, 
1876) :  It  is  not  impossible  that  this  is  an  allusion  to  Pietro  Monte  (in  a  Gallicized 
form),  the  famous  cavalier  and  swordsman,  who  is  mentioned  by  Castiglione  ((J7 
Cortegiano'  b.  i)  as  the  instructor  of  Louis  the  Seventh's  Master  of  Horse.  In  the 
English  translation  he  is  called  '  Peter  Mount.'  [I  regret  that  these  valuable  Holes 
on  Shakespeare' s  Hames  reached  me  too  late  to  be  inserted  in  due  place  in  the  com- 
mentary under  the  first  appearance  of  each  character.  They  will  be  found,  how- 
ever, in  the  Appendix,  Vol.  II,  p.  241.  Ed.] 

94.  brooch]  Nares  :  An  ornamental  buckle,  pin,  or  loop.  From  the  French 
broche,  a  spit.     It  is  frequently  mentioned  as  an  ornament  worn  in  the  hat. 

96.  confession]  Delius  :  Here  used,  because  Lamond  would  not  willingly  ac- 
knowledge the  superiority  of  Laer.  over  the  French  in  the  art  of  fighting. 

97.  masterly  report]  Clarendon  :  A  report  which  describes  Laer.  as  a  master 
of  fence. 

98.  defence]  Johnson  :  That  is,  in  the  science  of  defence. 

101.  scrimers]  Johnson:  Fencers.  Malone:  From  escrimeur,  Fr.  a  fencer. 
Collier  (ed.  2) :  It  is  not  used  by  any  other  poet.  White:  The  Qq  give  a  mere 
ignorant  printing  of  th'  escrimeurs  [which  White  adopts  in  his  text],  helped,  per- 
haps, by  an  accidental  putting  of  the  space  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  e.  No  such 
word  *\s  scrimers  has  been  met  with  in  the  books  on  fencing,  or  anywhere  else. 

103.  report]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  302) :  Is  'report'  the  object  or  the  subject  of 


3^4 


HAMLET 


[act  iv,  sc.  vii, 


Did  Hamlet  so  envenom  with  his  envy 

That  he  could  nothing  do  but  wish  and  beg  105 

Your  sudden  coming  o'er,  to  play  with  him. 

Now,  out  of  this — 

Laer.  What  out  of  this,  my  lord  ?  107 

King.     Laertes,  was  your  father  dear  to  you  ? 
Or  are  you  like  the  painting  of  a  sorrow, 
A  face  without  a  heart  ? 

Laer.  Why  ask  you  this  ?  no 

King.     Not  that  I  think  you  did  not  love  your  father ; 
But  that  I  know,  love  is  begun  by  time, 
And  that  I  see,  in  passages  of  proof, 
Time  qualifies  the  spark  and  fire  of  it. 


106. 
Rowe. 


o'er']    ore   QqFx.     over  F2F  F  , 
him]  you  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 


Bos.  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Ktly,  Huds. 
107.  this—  ]  this.  QqFxF2F3. 

What]  Why  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt 


*  envenom '  ?  If  the  latter,  read  *  your  envy.'  Coleridge  :  Note  how  the  King 
first  awakens  Laertes's  vanity  by  praising  the  reporter,  and  then  gratifies  it  by  the 
report  itself,  and  finally  points  it  by  these  lines. 

in.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  270) :  Here,  and  in  III,  iii,  57,  and  IV,  v,  119,  Claudius, 
like  the  Ghost,  shows  something  of  Hamlet's  philosophising  turn. 

112.  begun  by  time]  Johnson:  The  meaning  may  be,  love  is  not  innate  in  us, 
and  co-essential  to  our  nature,  but  begins  at  a  certain  time  from  some  external  cause, 
and  being  always  subject  to  the  operations  of  time,  suffers  change  and  diminution. 
M.  Mason  :  The  King  reasons  thus  : — '  I  do  not  suspect  that  you  did  not  love  your 
father ;  but  I  know  that  time  abates  the  force  of  affection.'  I  therefore  suspect  that 
we  ought  to  read  :  '  love  is  begone  by  time.'  I  suppose  that  Sh.  places  the  syllable 
be  before  gone,  as  we  say  <5<?-paint,  ^-spatter,  <$<?-think,  &c,  or  possibly  we  should 
read  '  by-gone.'  Bailey  (ii,  14) :  The  dominant  idea  of  the  speech  is  that  love 
is  abated  by  time.  Read  '  love  is  begnawn  by  time,'  an  expression  which  exactly 
conveys  the  sense  required,  while  the  change  requisite  for  perverting  it  into  the 
received  text  is  slight.     Compare  Rich.  Ill :  I,  iii,  222  ;    Tro.  &  Cres.  IV,  v, 

293- 

112.  by  time]  Seymour  (ii,  197):  Read  betitne.  The  King  means,  'love  begins 
at  an  early  period  of  life,  but  as  our  affections  ripen  this  affection  suffers  abatement.' 
Keightley  :  I  cannot  make  any  good  sense  out  of  this.  I  suspect  that  '  time ' 
may  be  owing  to  the  same  word  lower  down.  The  love  spoken  of  seems  to  be  that 
of  children  for  parents,  and  possibly  the  word  was  childhood,  birth. 

113.  proof]  Johnson:  In  transactions  of  daily  experience.  Clarendon:  Cir- 
cumstances which  prove  that  time  abates  love.     Compare  II,  i,  38. 

1 14.  fire]  For  other  instances  of  the  lengthened  pronunciation  of  this  word,  see 
Walker,  Very   144 ;  Abbott,  §  480. 


kct  iv,  sc.  vii.]  HAMLET  365 

There  lives  within  the  very  flame  of  love  1 15 

A  kind  of  wick  or  snuff  that  will  abate  it ; 

And  nothing  is  at  a  like  goodness  still, 

For  goodness,  growing  to  a  plurisy, 

Dies  in  his  own  too-much ;  that  we  would  do 

1 15-124.    There... ulce  r  ;]  Om.  Ff.  ///07  Han. 

116.  wick~\     Rowe    ii.      weeke    Qq.  119.  too-much\  Mai.     too  much  Qq. 
wieke  Q'76.     wiek  Rowe  i.  that']  what  Pope  +  . 

118.  plurisy']  plurifle  Qq.     pleurifie  would]  should  Seymour. 

Q'76,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.     ple- 

117.  still]  Always,  constantly.     See  Rom.  6°  Jul.  V,  iii,  106,  and  notes. 

118.  plurisy]  Warburton  :  I  would  believe,  for  the  honor  of  Sh.,  that  he  wrote 
plethory.  But  I  observe  the  dramatic  writers  of  that  time  frequently  call  a  fulness 
of  blood  a.  pleurisy,  as  if  it  came  not  from  ir?^vfjd,  but  from  plus,  pluris.  [This 
emendation  Warburton  communicated  by  letter  to  Theobald,  who  replied  that  it  had 
also  occurred  to  him,  but  that  he  was  doubtful  of  it,  partly  from  •  the  accental  sylla- 
ble falling  so  wrong  in  the  verse,  the  0  being  long '  [here  Theobald's  Greek  misled 
him],  and  partly  because  Sh.  might  have  mistaken  the  nature  of  pleurisie,  as  Beau 
&  Fl.  seem  to  have  done:  •  those  too  many  excellencies,  that  feed  Your  pride,  turn  tc 
a  pleurisy.' — Ctcstom  of  the  Country  [II,  i,  p.  417,  ed.  Dyce].  In  his  edition  Theobald 
added :  •  thou  grand  decider  .  .  .  that  heal'st  The  earth  when  it  is  sick,  and  cur'st 
the  world  O'  the  pleurisy  of  people.' — Two  Noble  Kinsmen  [V,  i,  p.  417,  ed.  Dyce]. 
Tollet,  in  the  Var.  1821,  cites:  Mascal's  Treatise  on  Cattle,  1662,  p.  187,  'Against 
the  blood,  or  plurisie  of  blood.  The  disease  of  blood  is,  some  young  horses  will 
feed,  and  being  fat  will  increase  blood,  and  so  grow  to  a  plurisie,  and  die.1  Malone 
cites :  '  Must  your  hot  itch  and  plurisy  of  lust  ...  be  fed  Up  to  a  surfeit.' — '  Tis 
Pity  She's  a  Whore,  IV,  iii  [Ford's  Works,  p.  177,  ed.  Dyce].  Other  instances  are 
given  by  M.  Mason  and  Nares,  in  all  of  which  the  word  is  spelled  '  plurisy,'  and 
means  a  surfeit,  a  plethory.  Whence  Nares  affirms  that  it  means  '  a  plethora  or 
redundancy  of  blood.  Not  the  same  as  pleurisy,  but  derived  from  plus,  pluris, 
more.'  And  Nares  is  followed  in  the  derivation  from  plus,  phiris,  by  Dyce,  Col- 
lier, Staunton,  White,  and  Hudson.  Gifford  also  explains  :  '  Thy  plurisy  of 
goodness  is  thy  ill'  (Massinger's  Unnatural  Combat,  IV,  i,  p.  196,  ed.  Gifford)  by 
•  thy  superabundance  of  goodness :  the  thought  is  from  Sh.,'  and  cites  the  present 
passage  from  Hamlet.  Coleridge,  in  his  Notes,  says, '  I  rather  think  that  Sh.  meant 
pleurisy,  but  involved  in  it  the  thought  of  plethora,  as  supposing  pleurisy  to  arise 
from  too  much  blood;  otherwise  I  can  not  explain  "this  '  should  '  is  like  a  spend- 
thrift sigh  That  hurts  by  easing."  In  a  stitch  in  the  side  every  one  must  have 
heaved  a  sigh  that  "  hurt  by  easing."  Since  writing  the  above  I  feel  confirmed 
that  "pleurisy"  is  the  right  word;  for  I  find  that  in  the  old  medical  dictionaries  the 
pleurisy  is  often  called  the  "  plethory."  '  In  fine,  Sh.  and  the  early  dramatists  were 
misled  by  the  sound  into  supposing  that  pleurisy  was  the  same  as  plethory,  and  it 
was  accordingly  spelled  'plurisy,'  as  indicating  the  symptoms  implied  in  its  supposed 
derivation  from  plus, pluris.  It  is  better  to  retain  that  spelling,  although  there  is  no 
disease,  I  believe,  so  named,  or  rather  so  spelled,  at  present.  Ed.] 

*!9~I22.  that  .  .  .  accidents]    Tschischwitz  :    The  fundamental   idea  o(    the 
31* 


366 


HAMLET 


[act  iv,  sc.  vii. 


We  should  do  when  we  would ;  for  this  '  would  '  changes       120 

And  hath  abatements  and  delays  as  many 

As  there  are  tongues,  are  hands,  are  accidents, 

And  then  this  '  should '  is  like  a  spendthrift  sigh, 

That  hurts  by  easing.     But,  to  the  quick  o'  the  ulcer : 

Hamlet  comes  back;  what  would  you  undertake,  125 

To  show  yourself  your  father's  son  in  deed 

More  than  in  words  ? 

Laer.  To  cut  his  throat  i'  the  church. 

King.     No  place  indeed  should  murder  sanctuarize ; 


120,  123.  'would'...1  should']  Italics, 

122.  accidents]  accedents  Q3Q3Q4- 

123.  spendthrift  sigh~\  fpend- thrift 
feh  Q'76.  fpend  thirfts  figh  Q2Q3. 
fpend-thrifts  figh  QfX,  Pope,  Cap. 
Coll.  Sing,     spendthrift-sigh  Ktly. 

125.  Hamlet  comes"]  Hamlet  comeFa 
F  .     Hamlet,  come  F  . 


126.  your. ..in  deed]  your  fathers 
fonne  indeed  FfF3.  your  father's  fon 
indeed  F3,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  El.  indeede 
your  fathers  fonne  Qq,  Cap.  in  deed 
your  father's  son  Steev.  Var.  Sing. 
Ktly. 

128.  murder  sanctuarize]  protect  a 
murderer  Q'76. 

sanctuarize]  Sanclurize  F  . 


whole  tragedy.     Grant  White  {Hamlet  the  Younger,  Galaxy,  April,  1870,  p.  544) 
says  the  same. 

119.  too-much]  Moberly  :  Like  '  a  great  amiss,'  ■  the  why  and  wherefore,'  and 
the  like.  English  had  at  this  time  something  like  the  flexibility  of  the  Greek,  and 
had  no  difficulty  in  throwing  out  phrases  like  rb  ayav  and  to  npiv. 

120.  should  . .  .  would]  See  I,  v,  32  ;  III,  iii,  75 ;  Macb.  I,  v,  19,  and  III,  vi,  19. 

128.  spendthrift  sigh]  Warburton:  This  nonsense  should  be  read  '  a  spend- 
thrift's sign,'  1.  e.  though  a  spendthrift's  entering  into  bonds  or  mortgages  gives  him 
a  present  relief  from  his  straits,  yet  it  ends  in  much  greater  distresses.  Heath  : 
This  refers  to  a  very  idle  opinion,  still  prevalent  among  the  common  people,  that 
every  sigh  draws  drops  of  blood  from  the  heart  and  tends  to  shorten  life.  Calde- 
cott  cites  Dr  Sherwen  :  To  have  conceived,  previous  to  the  discovery  of  the  cir- 
culation of  the  blood,  that  sighing  sucked  the  blood,  was  an  idea  natural  enough 
for  after,  orrathcr  during,  a  deep  sigh  the  blood  flows  more  freely  through  the  pul- 
monary artery  and  its  ramifications  in  the  different  lobes  of  the  lungs ;  and  it  might 
have  appeared  to  the  old  physiologists  to  be  thus  drawn  away  from  the  heart  and  the 
general  mass  into  the  lungs.  How  it  got  back  again  into  the  heart,  they  did  not 
know.  Clarendon  :  The  meaning  is  that  the  mere  recognition  of  a  duty  without 
the  will  to  perform  it,  while  it  satisfies  for  a  moment,  enfeebles  the  moral  nature. 
We  have  the  same  notion  of  sighs  wasting  the  vital  powers  in  2  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii, 
63;  Mid.  N.  £>.,  Ill,  ii,  97.  [See  Rom.  &  Jul.  Ill,  v,  58.]  Moberly:  He  who 
vainly  acknowledges  that  he  •  should '  have  done  a  thing  is  like  a  spendthrift  sighing 
for  his  squandered  estate. 

128.  sanctuarize]  Clarendon:  This  verb  is  probably  invented  by  Sh.  No 
plac?  should  protect  murder  (such  as  that  which  Ham.  has  perpetrated)  from  punish- 
ment.    Compare  Rich.  Ill    III,  i,  42  ;   Cor.  I,  x,  19. 


act  iv,  sc  vii.]  HAMLET  ?>6j 

Revenge  should  have  no  bounds.     But,  good  Laertes, 

Will  you  do  this,  keep  close  within  your  chamber.  130 

Hamlet  return'd  shall  know  you  are  come  home ; 

We'll  put  on  those  shall  praise  your  excellence 

And  set  a  double  varnish  on  the  fame 

The  Frenchman  gave  you  ;  bring  you,  in  fine,  together 

And  wager  on  your  heads  ;  he,  being  remiss,  135 

Most  generous  and  free  from  all  contriving, 

Will  not  peruse  the  foils,  so  that  with  ease, 

Or  with  a  little  shuffling,  you  may  choose 

A  sword  unbated,  and  in  a  pass  of  practice 

130.    Will. ..this']  Om.  Q'76.  133.  fame']  fame  QSF,F4. 

this,. ...chamber.]     Coll.    i,    El.  134.   Frenchman]  Frenchmen  Warb. 

Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Del.  Huds.  Glo. +  .  135.  on]  ore  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 

this,.. .chamber,  QaQJ^.    this,.. .chamber  Cald.  Sing.  Huds. 

Q4Q$.     this, ...chamber?  F3F3F4,  Rowe,  137.  foils,]  Foiles  ?  Ff. 

Pope,  Knt.   this?. ...chamber;  Theob.  -f,  139.  unbated]  unbaited  FgF3,  Rowe. 

Jen.      this /...chamber  ?    Cap.       this,...  un- baited  F^F  . 

chamber:    Steev.   Var.    Sing.      this?...  pass]  paffe  FfFa.    pace  Qq. 
chamber!  Cald.    this?. ..chamber.  Coll.  ii. 

132.  those]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  relative,  see  IV,  vi,  23;  Abbott, 
§  244;  Macb.  V,  vii,  7. 

135.  remiss]  Clarendon  :  A  word  seldom  if  ever  used  now,  except  with  refer- 
ence to  some  particular  act  of  negligence.  Here  it  means  careless,  indifferent.  So 
in  1  Hen.  VI:  IV,  iii,  59. 

137.  peruse]  See  II,  i,  90. 

139.  unbated]  Pope  (ed.  2) :  Not  blunted,  as  foils  are.  Or,  as  one  edition  has 
it,  embaited  or  envenomed.  [No  edition  has  yet  been  found  with  this  reading.  Two 
years  before  Pope's  second  edition  was  published  in  1728,  Theobald,  in  his  Sh.  Re- 
stored, p.  119,  in  a  note  on  this  passage  had  conjectured  imbaited,  and  also  on  the 
same  page  suggested  'imbaited  and  envenom'd'  for  'unbated  and  envenom'd,'  V, 
ii,  704.  Hence  arose,  probably,  Pope's  error.  Theobald,  in  the  Appendix,  p.  192, 
withdrew  these  conjectures,  and  supposes  that  '  unbated '  may  here  mean  unabated, 
or  not  robbed  of  its  point ;  nor,  he  adds,  can  the  conjecture  hold  in  the  second  pas- 
sage without  tautology,  because  '  envenom'd '  signifies  the  same  as  imbaited.  Ed.] 
Steevens  :  In  North's  Plutarch  it  is  said  of  one  of  the  Metelli,  that  '  he  shewed 
the  people  the  cruel  fight  of  fencers  at  unrebated  swords.'  Malone  :  Not  blunted, 
as  foils  are  by  a  button  fixed  to  the  end.  So  in  Love's  Lab.  I,  i,  6 :  •  That  honour, 
which  shall  bate  his  scythe's  keen  edge.'  Clarendon  :  See  Rich.  Ill :  V,  v,  35. 
Also,  ■  rebate,'  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  iv,  60. 

139.  practice]  Johnson:  Although  the  meaning  of  stratagem,  ox  privy  treason, 
is  not  incongruous  here,  yet  I  rather  believe  that  nothing  more  is  meant  than  a  thrust 
for  exercise.     M.  Mason  :  It  means  a  favorite  pass,  one  that  Laer.  was  well  prac- 
tised in.     The  treachery  lay  in  the  use  of  a  sword  unbated  and  envenomed.     Claa 
endon  :  A  treacherous  thrust.     See  line  68  of  this  scene. 


368 


HAMLET 


[act  iv,  sc.  vii. 


Requite  him  for  your  father. 

Laer.  I  will  do't; 

And  for  that  purpose  I'll  anoint  my  sword. 
I  bought  an  unction  of  a  mountebank, 
So  mortal  that  but  dip  a  knife  in  it, 
Where  it  draws  blood  no  cataplasm  so  rare, 
Collected  from  all  sirrples  that  have  virtue 
Under  the  moon,  can  save  the  thing  from  death 
That  is  but  scratch'd  withal ;  I'll  touch  my  point 
With  this  contagion,  that  if  I  gall  him  slightly 
It  may  be  death. 

King.  Let's  further  think  of  this ; 

Weigh  what  convenience  both  of  time  and  means 
May  fit  us  to  our  shape.     If  this  should  fail, 
And  that  our  drift  look  through  our  bad  performance, 
'Twere  better  not  assay'd ;  therefore  this  project 
Should  have  a  back  or  second,  that  might  hold 


140 


145 


150 


141.  that]  Om.  Q2Q3.  the  Q4Q5, 
Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Cald. 
Sing.  El.  Ktly. 

anoint']  cnnoiot  F2. 

143.  that  but  dip]  that  but  dippe  Q2Q3 
Q4.     I  but  dipt  Yi. 

148,  149.  With. ...death.]  One  line, 
Qq. 

150.  Weigh]   Wey  Q2Q3Q4- 


150.  convenience]  conueiance  Q.Q-. 

151.  us]  it  Han. 

shape.  If... fail,]  Rowe  +  ,Jen. 
Coll.  El.  White,  Ktly,  Del.  Huds.  fhape 
if.fayle,  Qq.  Jkape,  if.faile;  FXF2F3. 
Jhape  if  ...fail ;  F4.  shape:  if. .fail, 
Cap.  et  cet.  substantially. 

152.  look]  lookt  F4.     looked  Rowe. 


141.  anoint]  Moberly:  Laer.  shows  by  this  horrid  suggestion  how  little  need 
there  was  for  the  King  to  prepare  the  temptation  as  carefully  as  he  did. 

142.  mountebank]  Clarendon  :  Quack-doctor.  See  Oth.  I,  iii,  61 ;  and  in 
Bacon's  Advancement  of  Learning,  ii,  10,  §  2 :  '  Nay,  we  see  the  weakness  and 
credulity  of  men  is  such,  as  they  will  often  prefer  a  mountebank  or  witch  before  a 
learned  physician.'  In  Jonson's  Fox,  Volpone,  disguised  as  a  mountebank,  has  a 
multitude  of  medicines  to  sell.  In  Italian  he  is  called  ciarlatano,  whence  the  French 
charlatan,  for  which  among  others  Cotgrave  gives  as  equivalents,  « A  Mountebanke, 
a  cousening  drug-seller,  a  pratling  quack-saluer.' 

145.  simples]  Clarendon  :  Herbs,  so-called  as  being  the  simple  ingredients  of 
compound  mixtures.   See  Rom.  &*  Jul.  V,  i,  40. 

146.  moon]  To  gather  simples  by  moonlight  was  supposed  to  add  to  their  medi- 
cinal power  or  '  virtue.' 

148.  contagion]  Clarendon:  Used  like  'unction,'  line  142,  for  a  material  ob- 
ject, abstract  for  concrete,  the  thing  which  gives  contagion. 

148.  that]  For  'so  that,'  see  IV,  v,  211. 

151.  shape]  Johnson:  May  enable  us  to  assume  proper  characters,  and  to  act 
oir  part. 


act  rv,  sc.  vii.] 


HAMLET 


If  this  should  blast  in  proof.     Soft ! — let  me  see  1 — 
We'll  make  a  solemn  wager  on  your  cunnings ; 
I  ha't : 

When  in  your  motion  you  are  hot  and  dry, — 
As  make  your  bouts  more  violent  to  that  end, — 
And  that  he  calls  for  drink,  I'll  have  prepared  him 
A  chalice  for  the  nonce ;  whereon  but  sipping, 


369 

155 


I6c 


155.  should]  did  Q(\,  Cap.  Cam.  Cla. 
Soft!—]  Coll.     Soft,  Ff.     Soft 

Qq.     Soft — Rowe +  ,  Jen.     Soft;  Cap. 
et  cet. 

156.  cunnings]      commings     FxFaF3, 
Cald.  Knt.     comings  F4. 

157.  I  ha't]  I  hate  QaQ3.    Lhau'tQA 
Q5,  Jen.  Sing.  Ktly.      That—  Rowe. 

157,  158.  7*  ha't... dry]    Johns.     One 
line,  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Sta.  Ktly. 

158.  and  dry]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 


Warb. 

159.  As]  And  Pope,  Han.  Ktly. 
ma  he  your]  make  you  Jen. 
that  end]    the  end  Ff,  Rowe, 

th%  end  Pope,  Han. 

160.  prepared]  prepared 'Ff.  prefard 
Q3Q3*  Preferd%%  prefer"  d  Cap.  Mai. 
Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  El. 

161.  nonce]  once  QQ.  purpofe(^'j6. 
sipping]  tafling  Q'76. 


155.  proof]  Steevens  :  A  metaphor  taken  from  the  trying  or  proving  of  fire-armi 
or  cannon,  which  blast  or  burst  in  the  proof. 

156.  cunnings]  Caldecott,  followed  by  Knight,  plausibly  explains  commings 
of  F,  as  a  meeting  in  assault,  bout,  or  pass  at  fence.  Minsheu:  'Comming,  Gall. 
Venue.'     Cotgrave :  '  Venue",  f.  A  comming ;  also,  a  vennie  in  fencing.' 

159.  As]  Equivalent  to  '  For  so.'     See  IV,  iii,  58. 

160.  that]  Clarendon:  'That'  follows  •  when,'  after  a  parenthesis  or  other  in 
tervening  words  (compare  Lear,  II,  i,  45),  completing  the  conjunction  *  When  that,' 
which  is  used  by   Sh.,  as  e.  g.  yul.  Cas.  Ill,  ii,  96 :  '  When  that  the  poor  havo 
cried.' 

160.  prepared]  White:  The  Qq  are  decidedly  wrong.  'A  goblet  might  be 
well  spoken  of  as  prepared  for  the  nonce,  but  not  as  preferred  [offered]  for  the 
nonce.' 

161.  nonce]  Clarendon:  For  the  special  occasion.  The  phrase  was  originally 
'for  the  once,'  the  'n'  being  added  for  euphony.  [See  Matzner,  vol.  i,  p.  181.] 
Hunter  (ii,  260) :  There  is  little  in  our  poet's  writings  more  painful  than  such  a 
scene  as  this ;  the  cool  deliberation  with  which  Laer.  comes  into  such  a  plot  is  so 
inconsistent  with  his  character  as  exhibited  in  the  other  parts  of  the  play ;  the  clum- 
siness of  the  whole  contrivance,  and  the  barefaced  manner  in  which  the  King  is 
made  to  expose  his  villainous  purpose  to  one  who  is  already  half  his  enemy,  that 
one  is  tempted  to  ask  where  the  mighty  spirit  is  fled  which  dictated  some  portions  of 
this  most  unequal  performance.  What  an  abandonment  also  of  the  great  design  of 
the  tragedy  (as  announced  in  the  First  Act),  that  there  should  be  a  train  laid  which 
is  to  bring  about  the  catastrophe  while  the  principal  actor  is  not  cognizant  of  it,  and 
has,  of  course,  no  part  in  it.  The  death  of  the  King  is  in  consequence  brought 
about  without  that  intention  of  the  mind  of  Ham.  which  was  necessary  to  connect 
it  with  the  early  scenes  of  the  play,  and  to  give  dignity  to  the  great  catastrophe. 


\ 


370  HAMLET  [act  iv,  *c.  vii 

If  he  by  chance  escape  your  venom'd  stuck,  162 

Our  purpose  may  hold  there.     But  stay,  what  noise  ? — 

Enter  Queen. 
How  now,  sweet  queen  ! 

Queen.     One  woe  doth  tread  upon  another's  heel,  165 

So  fast  they  follow. — Your  sister's  drown'd,  Laertes. 

Laer.     '  Drown'd  !'     Oh,  where  ? 

Queen.     There  is  a  willow  grows  aslant  a  brook, 
That  shows  his  hoar  leaves  in  the  glassy  stream ; 

162.  stuck"]  tuck  Q'76,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  166.  So...follow~\  Separate  line.  Cap. 
White.  they]  theft  F,F-.     they'll  F3F4, 

163.  But. .. noise .<?]  Om.  Ff,  Rovve  +  ,         Rowe. 

Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Huds.  Glo.  168.  grows  aslant]  growing <?' re  Q1 76. 

Enter  Queen.]  After  queen  !  Ff,  aslant  a]  afcaunt  the  Qq,  Cap. 

Rowe,  Tope,  Han.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Coll.   El.  Ktly. 

164.  How... queen  /]  Om.  Qq.  aslant  the  Sing.  White,     as c aunt  a  Sta. 
Hozu  nozv\  how  Fx,  Coll.  169.  hoar~\  hore  FXF2.     horry  Q2Q,. 

165.  Scene  X.  Pope  +,  Jen.  hoary  Q  ,  Jen.     hoarie  Q  . 

162.  stuck]  Blackstone:  Read  tuck,  a  common  name  for  a  rapier.  Malone: 
•Stuck,'  a  term  of  the  fencing-school,  means  thrust.  Dyce  (Gloss.):  More  prop- 
erly slock,  an  abbreviation  of  stoccado.  White  speaks  of  an  •  old  copy '  which 
reads,  '  your  venom'd  trick.1  [I  have  been  unable  to  find  any  old  copy  which  so 
reads.  Ed.] 

163.  noise]  Jennens  finds  great  significance  in  these  words,  as  an  expression  of 
the  King's  guilt,  and  fear  of  being  overheard. 

165.  Steevens:  Compare  Per.  I,  iv,  63.  Ritson  calls  attention  to  a  similar 
thought  in  Locrine,  one  of  the  Spurious  Plays,  first  published  in  1595.  Sabren 
drowns  herself,  and  Queen  Gwendoline  exclaims :  '  One  mischief  follows  another's 
neck.'     [So  it  reads  in  the  last  column  of  the  last  page  of  F  .] 

168.  Thomas  Campbell  [?]  (Blackwood's  Maga.  March,  1833):  The  Queen  was 
affected  after  a  fashion  by  the  picturesque  mode  of  Ophelia's  death,  and  takes  more 
pleasure  in  describing  it  than  any  one  would  who  really  had  a  heart.  Gertrude  was 
a  gossip, — and  she  is  gross  even  in  her  grief. 

168.  willow]  Hunter  (ii,  261)  :  She  resorted  to  the  willow  'to  make  her  a  gar- 
land, as  being  forsaken,'  as  Benedick  says  of  the  Count. 

168.  aslant]  Collier  :  Ascaunt  has  nearly  the  same  meaning  as 'aslant.'  Beis- 
LEY  (p.  159) :  This  willow,  the  Salix  alba,  grows  on  the  banks  of  most  of  our 
small  streams,  particularly  the  Avon,  near  Stratford,  and  from  the  looseness  of  the 
soil  the  trees  partly  lose  their  hold,  and  bend  '  aslant '  over  the  stream. 

169.  hoar]  Clarke:  Willow  leaves  are  green  on  the  upper  side,  but  silvery-grey, 
or  hoary,  on  the  under  side,  which  it  shows  in  the  glassy  stream.  Clarendon  : 
Compare  Virgil,  Georgics,  ii,  13  :  '  Glauca  canentia  fronde  salicta.'  Lowell  (Among 
My  Books,  p.  185)  :  Sh.  understood  perfectly  the  charm  of  indirectness,  of  making 
nis  readers  seem  to  discover  for  themselves  what  he  means  to  show  them.  If  he 
wishes  to  tell  that  the  leaves  of  the  willow  are  gray  on  the  under  side,  he  does  not 


act  iv,  sc.  vii.]  HAMLET  37 1 

There  with  fantastic  garlands  did  she  come  17a 

Of  crow-flowers,  nettles,  daisies,  and  long  purples, 

That  liberal  shepherds  give  a  grosser  name, 

But  our  cold  maids  do  dead  men's  fingers  call  them ; 

There,  on  the  pendent  boughs  her  coronet  weeds 

Clambering  to  hang,  an  envious  sliver  broke;  175 

When  down  her  weedy  trophies  and  herself 

170.    There  with... come]   Therewith...  fingers  Tsch. 

make  QaQ3,  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.   El.  174.    There]   Then  Cap. 

There   with. ..make  Q4QS»    Jen.       Near  pendent]  Om.  Q'76. 

which. ..JJie  did  make  Q '76.  coronet]  cronet   QaQ3« 

172.  give]  gave  F  .  175.  sliver]  Jluer  Q4QS-  fiiiver  Q'7b. 
name]  name  to  Rowe,  Warb.  176.  her]  the  Ff,  Rowe.     these  Cald 

173.  cold]  cull-cold  Qq  (culcold  Q5).  trophies]  trophas  Q4QS- 
dead  men1  s  fingers]     deadman's 

make  it  a  mere  fact  of  observation  by  bluntly  saying  so,  but  makes  it  picturesquely 
reveal  itself  to  us  as  it  might  in  Nature. 

170.  come]  Jennens  interprets  the  Qq:  With  the  willow  she  made  a  garland, 
and  stuck  flowers  in  it.  Knight  says :  To  ■  make,'  of  the  Qq,  here  means  to  '  come,' 
to  '  make  way,'  to  '  proceed.' 

171.  Farren  {Mania  and  Madness,  &c,  p.  62)  :  This  line  is  an  exquisite  speci- 
men of  emblematic  or  picture-writing.  The  '  crow-flower,'  according  to  Parkinson, 
was  called  The  fay  re  Mayde  of  France  ;  the  '  long  purples  '  are  dead  men's  fingers  ; 
the  '  daisy  '  imports  pure  virginity  or  spring  of  life,  as  being  itself  '  the  virgin  bloom 
of  the  year.'     The  order  runs  thus,  with  the  meaning  of  each  flower  beneath  : 

Crow-flowers,  Nettles,       Daisies,    Long  Purples. 

virgin  cold  hand     1 

bloom  of  death.      / 

1  A  fair  maid  stung  to  the  quick,  her  virgin  bloom  under  the  cold  hand  of  death.' 
Beisley  (p.  159):  'Crow-flowers'  are  the  bulbous  crowfoot,  Ranunculus  bulbosus, 
and  the  meadow  crowfoot,  R.  acris.  The  most  common  •  nettles '  which  blossom 
early  are  the  white  dead-nettle,  Lamium  album,  and  the  purple  dead-nettle,  L.  pur- 
pureum.  '  Daisy,'  Bellis  perennis ;  the  only  British  species,  blossoms  all  the  year, 
and  is  one  of  the  earliest  flowers  of  spring. 

171.  long  purples]  Steevens:  In  Lyte's  Herbal,  1578,  its  various  names,  too 
gross  for  repetition,  are  preserved.  Malone  :  One  of  the  grosser  names  Gertrude 
had  a  particular  reason  to  avoid, — the  rampant  widow.  Beisley  (p.  160) :  This  is 
the  early  purple  orchis,  Orchis  mascula,  which  blossoms  in  April  and  May.  The 
*  cold  maids '  mistook  one  of  the  other  orchids,  having  palmated  roots,  for  ■  long 
purples.'  The  spotted  palmate  orchis,  Orchis  maculata,  and  the  marsh  orchis,  O. 
latifolia,  have  palmated  roots,  and  are  called  '  dead  men's  fingers,'  which  they  some- 
what resemble.     [See  also  The  Garden,  19  Sept.  1874.] 

172.  liberal]  Reed:  Licentious.  See  Much  Ado,  IV,  i,  93.  Malone :  Free- 
kpoken      Clarendon:  As  in  Rich.  II:  II,  i,  229. 

173.  cold]   Delius  :  In  opposition  to  'liberal.' 
175    sliver]   See  Macb.  IV,  i,  28. 


f      stung  to 
Fayre  Mayde        \    the  quick, 


372 


HAMLET 


ACT  IV,  SC.  V1L 


Fell  in  the  weeping  brook.     Her  clothes  spread  wide, 

And,  mermaid-like,  a  while  they  bore  her  up ; 

Which  time  she  chanted  snatches  of  old  tunes, 

As  one  incapable  of  her  own  distress, 

Or  like  a  creature  native  and  indued 

Unto  that  element ;  but  long  it  could  not  be 

Till  that  her  garments,  heavy  with  their  drink, 

Pull'd  the  poor  wretch  from  her  melodious  lay 

To  muddy  death. 

Laer.  Alas,  then,  is  she  drown'd? 


1 80 


185 


178.  tnermaid\      Marmaide 


Maremaid  F 


4' 


a  while]    awhile    Q2Q3, 
Dyce,  Glo.  +  ,Ktly,  Del. 

bore]  bear  F  ,  Rowe. 
179.  snatches]  remnants  Q'76. 
tunes]    laudes   Q2Q3Q4. 
Qj.,  Jen.  Coll.  El.  Ktly. 

181.  indued]     indewed    Qq, 
Theob.     deduced  F8F3F4,    Rowe. 
duced  Coll.  (MS). 


Q3Q3- 

Sing. 

lauds 

Pope, 
re- 


183.  their]  her  Ff. 

185.  poor  wretch]  poore  wench  Q.Q-. 
gentle  maid  Q'76. 

lay]  buy,  Ff.     by,  FaF3.     by  F4. 

185.  is  she  drown 'd 7]  Ff,  Rowe,  Jen. 
Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El.  Sta.  White,  Del. 
Ktly.  Jhe  is  drownd.  QaQ3-  is  Jhe 
drownd.  Q4.  is  Jhe  drowrid.  Q..  she  is 
drown1  d  I  Pope +  ,  Cam.  she  is  drown' d  ? 
Cap.  et  cet. 


179.  Which  time]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  preposition  in  adverbial 
expressions  of  time,  manner,  &c,  see  Abbott,  §  202. 

179.  tunes]  Jennens  :  The  reading,  '  tunes,'  of  the  Ff  is  vague,  while  lauds  of 
the  Qq,  i.  e.  hymns  or  psalms,  tells  us  just  what  kind  of  music  she  died  singing. 
Singer  :  Lauds  were  so  called  from  the  psalm  Laudate  Dominum.  White  :  Lauds 
of  the  Qq  is  a  word  singularly  inappropriate  here.  Hudson  :  Lauds  might  well 
be  preferred,  as  agreeing  better  with  chanted,  and  as  conveying  a  touch  of  pathos 
which  '  tunes '  does  not  quite  reach. 

180.  incapable]  MALONE:  Having  no  understanding  or  knowledge.  See  •  capa- 
ble,' III,  ii,  11;  III,  iv,  127.  RlTSON:  That  is,  insensible.  Caldecott:  Thus: 
*  conducted  into  the  great  hall  of  the  gods,  Mercury  sprinkled  me  with  water,  which 
made  me  capable  of  their  divine  presence.' — Greene's  Orpharion,  1599. 

181.  native]  See  I,  ii,  47. 

181.  indued]  MASON:  We  should  read  either  inured  or  indured.  Sh.  seems  to 
have  forgotten  himself  in  this  scene,  as  there  is  not  a  single  circumstance  in  this  rela- 
tion which  implies  that  Oph.  had  drowned  herself  intentionally.  Malone  :  *  Indued ' 
is  clothed,  endowed,  or  furnished  with  properties  suited  to  the  element  of  water. 
Our  old  writers  used  indued  and  endowed  indiscriminately. 

184.  poor  wretch]  Clarendon:  So  Ham.  is  called,  II,  ii,  167. 

185.  muddy]  Caldecott:  Sh.  uses  'mudded'  twice  in  reference  to  drowning; 
lee  Temp.  Ill,  iii,  102;  lb.  V,  i,  151. 

185.  death]  Malone:  In  the  first  scene  of  the  next  Act  we  find  Oph.  buried 
with  such  rites  as  betoken  she  foredid  her  own  life.  It  should  be  remembered  that 
the  account  hevf   given  is  that  of  a  friend,  and  that  the  Queen  could  not  possibly 


act  iv,  sc.  vii.J  HAMLET  m 

Queen,     Drown'd,  drown'd.  186 

Laer,     Too  much  of  water  hast  thou,  poor  Ophelia, 
And  therefore  I  forbid  my  tears ;  but  yet  -^ 

It  is  our  trick ;  nature  her  custom  holds,  Q^JjlA^ 

Let  shame  say' what  it  will;  when  these  are  gone,  190 

The  woman  will  be  out. — Adieu,  my  lord ; 


know  what  passed  in  the  mind  of  Oph.  when  she  placed  herself  in  so  perilous  a  situ- 
ation. After  the  facts  had  been  weighed  and  considered,  the  priest  in  the  next  Act 
pronounces  that  her  death  was  doubtful.  Seymour  (ii,  197)  :  As  the  Queen  seems 
to  give  this  description  from  ocular  knowledge,  it  may  be  asked  why,  apprised  as 
she  was  of  Ophelia's  distraction,  she  did  not  take  steps  to  prevent  the  fatal  catastro- 
phe, especially  as  there  was  so  fair  an  opportunity  of  saving  her  while  she  was,  by 
her  clothes,  borne  '  mermaidlike-up,'  and  the  Queen  was  at  leisure  to  hear  her 
'  chanting  old  tunes.'  T.  C.  [Thomas  Campbell  ?]  {Blackwood's  Maga.,  Feb. 
1818,  p.  5 1 1 )  :  Perhaps  this  description  by  the  Queen  is  poetical  rather  than  dramatic ; 
but  its  exquisite  beauty  prevails,  and  Oph.,  dying  and  dead,  is  still  the  same  Oph. 
that  first  won  our  love.  Perhaps  the  very  forgetfulness  of  her  throughout  the  re- 
mainder of  the  play,  leaves  the  soul  at  full  liberty  to  dream  of  the  departed.  She 
has  passed  away  from  the  earth  like  a  beautiful  air, — a  delightful  dream.  There 
would  have  been  no  place  for  her  in  the  agitation  and  tempest  of  the  final  catas- 
trophe. We  are  satisfied  that  she  is  in  her  grave.  And  in  place  of  beholding  her 
involved  in  the  shocking  troubles  of  the  closing  scene,  we  remember  that  her  heart 
lies  at  rest,  and  the  remembrance  is  like  the  returning  voice  of  melancholy  music. 
Hudson  :  This  passage  is  deservedly  celebrated,  and  aptly  illustrates  the  Poet's  power 
of  making  the  description  of  a  thing  better  than  the  thing  itself,  by  giving  us 
his  eyes  to  see  it  with.  CLARENDON :  This  speech  of  the  Queen  is  certainly  un- 
worthy of  its  author  and  of  the  occasion.  The  enumeration  of  plants  is  quite  as 
unsuitable  to  so  tragical  a  scene  as  the  description  of  the  Dover  cliff,  in  Lear,  IV, 
vi,  1 1-24.  Besides,  there  was  no  one  by  to  witness  the  death  of  Oph.,  else  she 
would  have  been  rescued. 

185.  drown'd  ?]  Corson  :  It  would  appear  from  the  Queen's  reply  that  Laertes's 
speech  must  have  been  meant  to  be  interrogative.  If  exclamatory,  the  iteration 
thereupon  of  the  Queen,  '  Drown'd,  drown'd,'  is  almost  ludicrous,  and  makes  one 
feel  that  the  poor  girl  has  had  indeed,  as  Laer.  says  in  the  next  speech,  '  too  much 
of  water.' 

186.  drown'd]  Warburton  :  Beau.  &  Fl.  ridicule  this  passage:  •  I  will  run  mad 
first,  and  if  that  get  not  pity,  I'll  drown  myself  to  a  most  dismal  ditty.' — The  Scorn- 
full  Lady,  III,  ii,  p.  68,  ed.  Dyce.  Elze  finds  another  allusion  to  this  passage  in 
the  same  play  of  The  Scornfull  Lady,  II,  iii,  p.  41  :  'Drown'd,  drown'd  at  sea.' 
[But  this  allusion  is  doubtful ;  the  plot  hinges  on  the  supposed  drowning  at  sea  of 
the  hero,  and  such  a  phrase  could  hardly  be  avoided.  There  are,  however,  undoubt- 
edly other  allusions  to  Hamlet  elsewhere  in  the  play.  Ed.] 

189.  trick]  Caldecott:  Our  habit,  a  property  that  makes  a  part  of  us.     Clar 
ENDON  :  See  AlPs  Well,  III,  ii,  9;  Love's  Lab.  V,  ii,  416.     [Lear,  IV,  vi,  105.] 

191.  woman]  Steevens  :  See  Hen.  V:  IV,  vi,  31.     Caldecott:  When  thes* 
teaio  ire  shed  this  womanish  passion  will  be  over. 
32 


3 74  HAMLET  [  ^ct  v,  sc.  i. 

I  have  a  speech  of  fire  that  fain  would  blaze,  192 

But  that  this  folly  douts  it.  [Exit. 

King.  Let's  follow,  Gertrude  ; 

How  much  I  had  to  do  to  calm  his  rage  ! 

Now  fear  I  this  will  give  it  start  again;  195 

Therefore  let's  follow.  {Exeunt 


ACT  V 
Scene  I.     A  churchyard. 

Enter  two  Clowns,  with  spades,  &C. 

First  Clo.     Is  she  to  be  buried  in  Christian  burial  that 
wilfully  seeks  her  own  salvation  ? 

192.  of  fire~\  afire  Qq.  Rowe+,  Jen. 

193.  douts']  Knt,  Dyce,  White,  Del.  Enter...]  Cap.  Enter... fpades  and 
Glo. -f.  doubts  Fs,  Cald.  drownes  Qq  mattocks.  Q'76,  Rowe+.  Enter  two 
Fs.     drowns  FF,  Rowe  et  cet.  Clownes.  QqFf. 

Let's]  Om.  Pope  +  .  1,  6,  &c.  First  Clo.]  1  Clown.  Rowe. 

194.  J  had]  had  /Pope  ii  +  ,  Walker.         Clowne,  or   Clown,  or   Clow,   or  Clo. 

195.  fear  I  this]  this  I  fear  Anon.  QqFf. 
Act  v.  Scene  i.]  Q'76.     Om.  QqFf.  1.  that]  whenfhe  Qq,  Jen.  Tsch. 

A  churchyard.]  Cap.   A  Church. 

193.  douts]  Caldecott:  That  is,  does  out,  extinguishes.  Collier:  Shake- 
speare's word  may  have  been  '  douts,'  but  drowns  seems  preferable.  Stratmann  : 
If  doubts  is  equivalent  to  '  douts,'  it  suits  the  context  better  than  drowns. 

193.  Coleridge:  That  Laer.  might  be  excused  in  some  degree  for  not  cooling, 
the  Act  concludes  with  the  affecting  death  of  Oph., — who  in  the  beginning  lay  like 
a  little  projection  of  land  into  a  lake  or  stream,  covered  with  spray-flowers,  quietly 
reflected  in  the  quiet  waters,  but  at  length  is  undermined  or  loosened,  and  becomes 
a  fairy  isle,  and  after  a  brief  vagrancy  sinks  almost  without  an  eddy. 

Scene  I.]  Schlegel  (ii,  194):  The  only  circumstance  from  which  this  piece 
might  be  found  less  theatrical  than  other  tragedies  of  Sh.  is,  that  in  the  last  scenes 
the  main  action  either  stands  still  or  appears  to  retrograde.  This,  however,  was  in- 
evitable, and  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  thing.  The  whole  is  intended  to  show  that  a 
consideration,  which  would  exhaust  all  the  relations  and  possible  consequences  of  a 
detti  to  the  very  limits  of  human  foresight,  cripples  the  power  of  acting. 

Strachey  (p.  88) :  The  Clowns  open  this  scene,  partly  to  carry  on  the  action 
partly  to  form,  by  their  utter  indifference  to  the  tragedy  that  is  enacting,  a  back- 
ground  which  shall  throw  that  tragedy  and  its  actors  into  strong  relief;  and  in 


act  v,  sc.  I]  HAMLET  375 

Sec.  Clo.  I  tell  thee  she  is;  and  therefore  make  her 
grave  straight ;  the  crowner  hath  sat  on  her,  and  finds  it 
Christian  burial.  5 

First  Clo.  How  can  that  be,  unless  she  drowned  herself 
m  her  own  defence  ? 

Sec.  Clo.     Why,  'tis  found  so. 

First  Clo.     It  must  be  se  offendendo ;   it  cannot  be  else. 
For  here  lies  the  point:  if  I  drown  myself  wittingly,  it  ar-      10 
gues  an  act,  and  an  act  hath  three  branches :  it  is,  to  act,  to 
do,  and  to  perform ;  argal,  she  drowned  herself  wittingly. 

3,  8,  &c.  Sec.  Clo.]   2  Clown.  Rowe.  9.  se  offendendo]  Ff  (in  Italics).  Jo 

Other,  or  Othe.  or  Oth.  Qq.     Other.  Ff.  offended  Qq. 

3.  and]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  \\.  to  act,  to  do,~]  an  Acle  to  doe,  Ff 
Steev.  Var.  El.  {doe  Fx)  an  Act  to  do,  Rowe,  Pope  i. 

4.  sat]  set  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Cald.  12.  and  to  perform ;  argal,"]  to  per- 
Coll.  White.  forme,  or  all ;  Qq. 

5.  Christian]  a  christian  Knt. 

particular  to  bring  out  Hamlet's  character  by  contrasting  it  with  such  extreme 
opposites. 

Halliwell  :  Until  within  a  very  recent  period  it  was  customary  for  one  of  the 
Grave-diggers  to  preface  his  labors  by  divesting  himself  of  about  a  dozen  waistcoats, 
an  operation  which  always  created  great  merriment,  and  which,  perhaps,  had  come 
down  by  tradition  from  the  players  of  Shakespeare's  own  time.  The  Doctor,  in  The 
Duchess  of  Malfi,  according  to  a  stage-direction  in  ed.  1708, '  puts  off  his  four  cloaks, 
one  after  another,' — a  similar  stratagem  to  create  the  laughter  of  the  audience. 

4.  straight]  Johnson  :  Make  her  grave  from  east  to  west,  in  a  direct  line,  parallel 
to  the  church ;  not  from  north  to  south,  athwart  the  regular  line.  Jennens  first 
pointed  out  that  •  straight '  here  means  s,\mp]y  forthwith  ;  and  Steevens  corroborated 
it  by  citations  from  III,  iv,  1 ;  Oth.  Ill,  iii,  87;  Merry  Wives,  IV,  ii,  81.  Malone 
added  from  Herbert's  Jacula  Prudentum  :  '  There  is  no  churchyard  so  handsome 
that  a  man  would  desire  straight  to  be  buried  there.'  Douce  (ii,  261)  believes  that 
the  Clown  refers  to  the  place  where  the  grave  should  be;  suicides  were  buried  on 
the  north  side  of  the  church,  in  unconsecrated  ground. 

4.  crowner]  Rushton  (Sh.  Illustrated  by  Old  Authors,  p.  72) :  This  word  is 
generally  supposed  to  be  a  corruption  of  the  Clown's,  but  it  is  merely  the  English  of 
the  Law  Latin  coronator,  from  corona,  a  crown,  which  Holinshed  also  uses. 

9.  se  offendendo]  Caldecott  :  Used  for  se  defendendo,  a  finding  of  the  jury  in 
justifiable  homicide. 

11.  three  branches]  Warburton  :  Ridicule  on  scholastic  divisions  without 
distinction  and  of  distinctions  without  difference.  Elze  calls  attention  to  the  fre- 
quency in  The  Hystorie  of  Hamblet  of  these  threefold  '  branches  of  the  same  idea, 
e.g. :  'rob,  pill,  and  spoyle;'  'A  valiant,  hardy,  and  courageous  prince;'  'ges- 
tures, countenances,  and  words;'  'time,  means,  and  occasions,'  &c.  Tschisch- 
witz  says  that  this  threefold  tautological  form  belongs  to  the  most  ancient  Ger- 
man''" legal  usage,  and  cites  Grimm  as  an  authority  that  it  is  also  true  of  the  Old 


376 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  i 


Sec.  Clo.  Nay,  but  hear  you,  goodman  delver, — 
First  Clo.  Give  me  leave.  Here  lies  the  water ;  good ; 
here  stands  the  man  ;  good;  if  the  man  go  to  this  water  and  15 
drown  himself,  it  is,  will  he  nill  he,  he  goes;  mark  you 
that ;  but  if  the  water  come  to  him  and  drown  him,  he 
drowns  not  himself;  argal,  he  that  is  not  guilty  of  his  own 
death  shortens  not  his  own  life. 

Sec.  Clo.     But  is  this  law  ?  20 

First  Clo.     Ay,  marry,  is't ;  Crowner's  Quest  law. 


13.  hear]  here  Fa. 

delver, — ]  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  delver; 
Cap.  Delver.  Y^A.  Deluer.  FtFa  et  cet. 

14.  Here~\  Clown,  here  Johns. 

15.  this]  his  F3. 

16.  himself]  himfele  Fx. 

nill  he,  he  goes ;]  nill  he;  he  goes, 


Q'76. 

17.  that;]  that,  Qq.    that?YxY9Y3. 

21.   Crowner's  Quest]  crowned s- quest 

Cap.  Steev.Var.  Cald.  Knt,  White,  Ktly. 

Quest     law]     quest-law    Theob. 

Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Coll.  Dyce,  El.  Del 

Sta. 


French.  A  parallel  to  the  present  passage  is  to  be  found  in  Grimm :  «  egeris,  feceris, 
gesserisve.' 

13.  delver]  Walker  (Grit.  Hi,  270):  Hence  it  would  appear  that  the  Second 
Clown  is  not  a  gravedigger. 

21.  Crowner's  Quest  law]  Sir  John  Hawkins:  I  strongly  suspect  that  this 
is  in  ridicule  of  a  case  of  forfeiture  of  a  lease  to  the  Crown,  reported  by  Plowden 
in  his  3  Eliza.  It  seems  that  Sir  James  Hales  drowned  himself  in  a  river  in  a  fit  of 
insanity  (produced,  it  is  supposed,  by  his  having  been  one  of  the  judges  who  con- 
demned Lady  Jane  Grey),  and  the  question  was  whether  this  did  not  work  a  forfeit- 
ure to  the  Crown  of  his  lease.  The  coroner  sat  on  him,  and  a  verdict  of  felo  de  se 
was  rendered.  The  legal  and  logical  subtilties  arising  in  the  course  of  the  case 
gave  a  very  fair  opportunity  of  sneering  at  *  Crowner's  Quest  law' : — Walsh  said  that 
the  act  consists  of  three  parts.  The  first  is  the  imagination,  which  is  a  reflection  or 
meditation  of  the  mind,  whether  or  no  it  is  convenient  for  him  to  destroy  himself, 
and  what  way  it  can  be  done.  The  second  is  the  resolution,  which  is  a  determina- 
tion of  the  mind  to  destroy  himself,  and  to  do  it  in  this  or  that  particular  way.  The 
third  is  the  perfection,  which  is  the  execution  of  what  the  mind  has  resolved  to  do. 
And  this  perfection  consists  of  two  parts,  viz.  the  beginning  and  the  end.  The  be- 
ginning is  the  doing  of  the  act  which  causes  death,  and  the  end  is  the  death,  which  is 
only  a  sequel  to  the  act.'  Much  subtilty  was  expended  in  finding  out  whether  Sir 
James  was  the  agent  or  the  patient ;  or,  in  other  words,  whether  he  went  to  the  water 
or  the  water  came  to  him  : — '  Sir  James  Hales  was  dead,  and  how  came  he  to  his 
death?  It  may  be  answered,  by  drowning;  and  who  drowned  him?  Sir  James 
Hales;  and  when  did  he  drown  him?  In  his  life  time.  So  that  Sir  James  Hales 
being  alive  caused  Sir  James  Hales  to  die,  and  the  act  of  the  living  man  was  the 
death  of  the  dead  man.  And  then  for  this  offence  it  is  reasonable  to  punish  the 
living  man  who  committed  the  offence,  and  not  the  dead  man.  But  how  can  he  be 
said  to  be  punished  alive  when  the  punishment  comes  after  death  ?'  &c,  &c.  Ma« 
IONE  thinks  that  Sh.  must  have  heard  of  this  case  in  conversation,  for  it  was  deter- 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  HAMLE T  377 

Sec.  Clo.     Will  you  ha'  the  truth  on't?     If  this  had  not     22 
been  a  gentlewoman,  she  should  have  been  buried  out  o' 
Christian  burial. 

First  Clo.    Why,  there  thou  say'st;  and  the  more  pity  that     25 
great  folk  should  have  countenance  in  this  world  to  drown 
or  hang  themselves,  more  than  their  even-Christen. — Come, 
my  spade.     There  is  no  ancient  gentlemen  but  gardeners, 
ditchers,  and  grave-makers;  they  hold  up  Adam's  profession. 

Sec.  Clo.     Was  he  a  gentleman  ?  30 

^2.  ha']  ha  QqFjF,.     have  Q'76.  theyr  euen  Chrijlen  Qq.    weQ'j6.    other 

on't]  arit  Qq,  Jen.  Christians  Rowe,   Pope,  Theob.   Han. 

23.  out  o1]  Jen.  Glo.  +  ,  Mob.     out  a  their  even  Chrijlian  Ff  et  cet. 

Qq.     without  Q' 7 6.     out  of  Ff  et  cet.  27.  Come,"]  Come.  Johns. 

26.  folk  should]  folks  should  Mai.  28.  spade.]  spade,  [strips,  and  falls  to 
Steev.  Sing.  Ktly.  folks  shall  Bos.  Cald.  digging.  Cap. 

folk  shall  Coll.  White.  gardeners]  Gardners  Qq.      Gar- 

27.  their]  your  Coll.  ii,  conj.  diners  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap. 
their  even-  Christen]  Ed.  after  Cap. 

mined  before  he  was  born,  and  Plowden's  Commentaries  were  not  translated  until 
towards  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century. 

25.  thou  say'st]  Caldecott  :  That  is,  speak'st  something  to  the  purpose. 
Walker  (Crit.  iii,  270)  :  Surely, — *  thou  say'st  true?  Dyce  (ed.  2) :  The  expres- 
sion is  elliptical.  [May  not  the  full  phrase  have  been  '  thou  say'st  iV,'  as  we  find  it 
in  Luke  xxiii,  3  ;  the  mere  dental  sound,  into  which,  in  rapid  pronunciation,  it  de- 
generates being  absorbed  by  the  t  of  say's/?  Ed.] 

27.  even-Christen]  Thirlby  (Nichols's  //lust,  ii,  229)  was  the  first  to  point  out 
that  this  is  equivalent  to  fe//ow- Christian,  and  a  remnant  of  the  Anglosaxon  emne 
christen,  citing  Spelman's  G/oss.,  where  Spelman  erroneously  distinguishes  between 
emne  and  even.  Steevens  cites  Chaucer:  '  Despitous,  is  he  that  hath  desdayn  of  his 
neighebour,  that  is  to  say,  of  his  evencristen.' — The  Persones  Ta/e,  iii,  294,  ed.  Morris. 
Nares  cites  Sir  Thos.  More's  Works,  fol.  p.  83  :  '  Proudly  judging  the  lives  of  their 
even  Christen ;'  and  '  thei  maie  not  fighte  against  the  Turke,  [but]  arise  in  greate 
plumpes  to  fighte  against  their  even  Christen.' — /b.  p.  277.  Clarendon  :  In  Anglo- 
Saxon  we  find  the  compound  efen-bisceop,  a  co-bishop,  efen-esne,  a  fellow-servant.  In 
Forshall  and  Madden's  G/ossary  to  the  Wyck/ifjite  Versions  of  the  Pib/e,  we  find 
•euene-caytif,'  a  fellow-prisoner,  *  euen-seruaunt,'  fellow-servant,  and  others.  [Other 
instances  are  given  in  Caldecott  ad  /oc.,  in  Hunter  (New  ///ust.  ii,  261),  and  in 
The  Myroure  of  oure  Ladye  (E.  E.  Text  Soc.  p.  73) :  *  we  ar  en  formed  to  haue 
.  .  .  loue  eche  to  other,  and  to  all  oure  euen  crystens.'  In  a  note  on  this  passage 
Blunt  cites :  '  Therfore  Thomas  that  is  seid  Didymus,  seide  to  euen  disciplis. — 
Wick/iffite  N.  71,  John  xi,  16;  and  adds:  *  The  word  is  also  spelt  emecristen  or 
emcristen,  as  in  Piers  P/owman.  It  occurs  in  Swedish  in  the  form  jamncristen 
where  j3mn  is  merely  the  Swedish  spelling  of  our  even.'] 

30.  gentleman]  Douce  (ii,  262) :  Gerard  Leigh,  one  of  the  oldest  writers  on 

Heraldry,  speaks  of  •  Jesus  Christ,  a  gentleman  of  great  linage,  and  King  of  the 

Jewes.'     And  again,  ■  Frvr  tha*  it  might  be  known  that  even  anon  after  the  creation 
32* 


378 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  L 


First  Clo.     A'  was  the  first  that  ever  bore  arms. 

Sec.  Clo.     Why,  he  had  none. 

First  Clo.  What,  art  a  heathen  ?  How  dost  thou  under- 
stand the  Scripture  ?  The  Scripture  says  '  Adam  digged ' ; 
could  he  dig  without  arms  ?  I'll  put  another  question  to 
thee ;  if  thou  answerest  me  not  to  the  purpose,  confess 
thyself — 

Sec.  Clo.     Go  to. 

First  Clo.  What  is  he  that  builds  stronger  than  either 
the  mason,  the  shipwright,  or  the  carpenter  ? 

Sec.  Clo.  The  gallows-maker ;  for  that  frame  outlives  a 
thousand  tenants. 

First  Clo.  I  like  thy  wit  well,  in  good  faith ;  the  gallows 
does  well ;  but  how  does  it  well  ?  it  does  well  to  those  that 
do  ill ;  now,  thou  dost  ill  to  say  the  gallows  is  built  stronger 
than  the  church;  argal,  the  gallows  may  do  well  to  thee. 
To't  again,  come. 

Sec.  Clo.  'Who  builds  stronger  than  a  mason,  a  ship- 
wright, or  a  carpenter  ?' 


31 


35 


40 


45 


31.  A']  Cam.  Cla.  A  Qq.  He  Ff 
et  cet. 

32-35.  Sec.  Clo.  Why. ..arms?]  Om. 
Qq. 

33.  a  heathen]  heathen  Cap.  conj. 
{Notes,  i,  31). 

36.  not']  Om.  Warb. 


37.  thyself—1  thyfelfe—  FXF2.  thy 
/•etf-F3VA.     thyfelfe.Qq. 
41.  frame]  Om.  Qq,  Jen. 
43.  in  good  faith]  Om.  Q'76. 

48.  ' Who... carpenter'']  As   a  quota- 
tion, Glo. +  ,  Dyce  ii. 

49.  carpenter  ?]  carpenter.  Qq. 


of  Adam,  there  was  both  gentlenes  and  ungentlenes,  you  shall  understand  that  the 
second  man  that  was  born  was  a  gentleman,  whose  name  was  Abell.  I  say  a  gentle- 
man both  of  vertue  and  lignage,  with  whose  sacrifice  God  was  much  pleased.  His 
brother  Cain  was  ungentle,  for  he  offered  God  the  worst  of  his  fruites.' — Accedence 
of  Armorie,  1591.  There  is  still  a  concealed  piece  of  wit  in  the  Clown's  allusion  to 
the  spade.  Adam's  spade  is  set  down  in  some  of  the  books  of  heraldry  as  the  most 
ancient  form  of  escutcheons ;  nor  is  it  improbable  that  the  lower  part  of  this  utensil 
suggested  the  well-known  form  of  the  old  triangular  shields. 

36.  confess  thyself]  Malone:  And  be  hanged,  the  Clown  would  have  said  if 
he  had  not  been  interrupted.  This  was  a  common  proverbial  sentence.  See  Oth. 
IV,  i,  39.  Seymour  (ii,  198)  thinks  that  it  may  perhaps  mean  that  he  is  to  go  to 
the  priest  and  make  confession  of  heathenish  ignorance. 

39.  What  is  he]   Steevens  refers  to  a  collection  of  similar  queries  ('  which  per 
haps  composed  the  chief  festivity  of  our  ancestors  by  an  evening  fire '),  preserved  in 
a  volume  in  the  University  Library  at   Cambridge.     •  The  innocence  of  these  De- 
maundes  foyous  may  deserve  a  praise  which  is  not  always  due  to  their  delicacy.' 
Collier  gives  a  specimen  from  a  small  book,  called  Demaundes  joyous,  printed  by 


act  v,  sc.  L]  HAMLET  379 

First  Clo.     Ay,  tell  me  that,  and  unyoke.  50 

Sec.  Clo.  Marry,  now  I  can  tell. 

First  Clo.     To *t. 

Sec.  Clo.  Mass,  I  cannot  tell. 

Enter  HAMLET  and  HORATIO,  afar  off. 

First  Clo.     Cudgel  thy  brains  no  more  about  it,  for  your 
dull  ass   will  not  mend   his   pace  with  beating,  and  when     55 
you  are  asked  this  question  next,  say  '  a  grave-maker ;'  the 
houses  that  he  makes  last  till  doomsday.     Go,  get  thee  to 
Yaughan ;  fetch  me  a  stoup  of  liquor.         [Exit  Sec.  Clown. 

[He  digs,  and  sings. 

53.  Enter...]    Ff,   Cam.    Cla.     Enter  Coll.  ii  (MS),     to  ye  ale  and  Anon* 

Hamlet  and  Horatio.  Qq,  after  line  62.  58.  fetc/i]  and  fetch  Qq,  Theob.Warb. 

EDter...at  a  distance.  Rowe  et  cet.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.Var.  Cald.  Sing. 

57.  that"]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Ktly. 

/as/]  lafls  Q2Q3Q5FIF3F3.  stoup\  Jloupe  Ff.  Jloape  Fa.  ftoap 

/i//~\/e//QA.     /e/Q5.  Fr   foope  Qq,  Jen.    floop  Q'76. 

57,58.  /o  Yaughan']  Ff  (Yaughan  in  [Exit  Sec.  Clown.]  Exit  2  Clown. 

Italics),     in,  Q,Q3,  Jen.  Rann.  El.     in  Rowe.     Om.  QqFf. 

QAQ..  /oYoughan  Roweii,  Pope,Theob.  [He    digs,    and    sings.]     Rowe. 

Han.  Warb.      /o  Yaughan's  Cap.  conj.  Song.  Qq.     Sings.  Ff,  Cap. 

{Notes,  i,  31 ).  to  Vaughan  Sing.  i.  to  yon 

Wynkyn  de  Worde,  1511:  '  Demaunde.  What  almes  is  worst  bestowed  that  men 
gyve  ?  A.  That  is  to  a  blynde  man ;  for  as  he  hathe  ony  thynge  gyven  hym,  he 
wolde,  with  good  wyll,  see  hym  hanged  by  the  necke  that  gave  it  hym.' 

50.  unyoke]  Caldecott  :  That  is,  unravel  this,  and  your  day's  work  is  done, 
your  team  you  may  then  unharness. 

58.  Yaughan]  Collier  (ed.  i) :  It  is  just  possible  that  this  was  a  misspelt  stage- 
direction  to  inform  the  player  that  he  was  to  yawn  at  this  point.  Collier  (ed.  2) : 
The  emendation  of  the  (MS),  which  we  accept,  is  as  much  as  to  say,  '  get  thee  to  yon 
alehouse;  fetch  me  a  jug  of  liquor.'  We  must  suppose  the  alehouse  understood, 
and  pointed  to  by  the  First  Clo.  White  :  I  suspect  that  this  is  a  misprint  for 
Tavern.  But  some  local  allusion  understood  at  the  day  may  lurk  under  it.  J.  San 
{N.  &  Qu.,  5  Oct.  1 861)  :  This  is  merely  Shakespeare's  English  way  of  representing 
the  Danish  Johan, — John.  Nicholson  (JV.  &°  Qu.,  29  July,  1871) :  Most  probably 
Yaughan  was  the  well-known  keeper  of  a  tavern  near  the  theatre;  and  we  have 
three  items  of  corroborative  evidence  which  show :  First,  that  a  little  before  the  tirce 
of  this  allusion  by  Sh.,  which  is  not  found  in  the  Qq,  there  was  about  town  '  a  Jew, 
one  Yohan,'  most  probably  a  German  Jew,  who  was  a  perruquier, — he  is  mentioned 
by  Jonson  in  Every  Man  out  of  his  Humour,  V,  vi ;  Second,  i»  The  A/chemist,  I,  i, 
which  was  produced  eleven  years  afterwards,  Subtle  speaks  of  '  an  alehouse,  darker 
than  deaf  John,'  a  name  which  sounds  like  that  of  our  foreign  John,  anglicised, 
and  it*  owner  grown  deaf  by  lapse  of  time ;  Third,  that  there  was  actually  an  ale- 
house attached  to  the  Globe  Theatre  is  proved  by  the  '  Sonnett  upon  the  Burneing'  of 
that  playhous*    'see  Collier's  Anna/s  of  the  Stage,  i,  388).     Is  it  then  unlikely  that 


38o  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  i. 

In  youth,  when  I  did  love,  did  love, 

Methought  it  was  very  sweet,  60 

To  contract,  Oh !  the  time,  for,  Ah !  my  behove, 

Oh,  methought,  there  was  nothing  meet. 

61.  contract,  Ok,"]  contracl-a  Anon.*  62.  there  was]  Ff.     there  a  was  Qq. 

Oh!  the  time]  Coll.  ii,  after Theob.  there,  a,  was  Jen.  there-a  was  Cam.  Cla. 

Othe  F2F3F4,Rowe,Pope.  0,thenRa.nn.  nothing  meet]  Ff.  nothing  a  meet 

for,  Ah  /]  Coll.  ii,  after  Cap.  for  Qq.     nothing,  a,  meet  Jen.     nothing  so 

a  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,   for,  a,  Theob.  + ,  meet  Han.  + ,  Cap.    notking-a  meet  Cam. 

Jen.  for-a  Cam.  Del.  Cla.  for  all  Tsch.  Del.  Cla. 

our  wandering  Jew,  either  in  search  of  a  business,  or  as  a  profitable  extension  of  his 
theatrical  connection,  set  up  *  the  Globe  Public-house ;'  and  was  thus,  as  the  known 
refresher  of  the  thirsty  actors  and  audience,  mentioned  by  both  Sh.  and  Jonson  ? 
Clarendon  :  It  is  impossible  to  detect  the  meaning  which  lies  under  this  corruption. 
Elze  (Shakespeare- fahrbuch,  xi,  297),  who  accepts  without  qualification  San's 
and  Nicholson's  suggestion,  asks  whether  there  be  not  an  allusion  to  the  same  Johan 
in  the  sneering  * Johannes  factotum '  that  Greene  applies  to  Sh.  C  Elliot  Browne 
(Athenaum,  29  July,  1876) :  Yaughan  is  a  common  Welsh  name,  and  it  is  surely  only 
necessary  to  suppose  that  it  was  borne  by  some  Welsh  tavern-keeper  near  the  theatre. 

58.  stoup]  Clarendon  :  This  word,  meaning  a  *  drinking-cup,'  is  still  used  in 
college  halls.  It  was  applied  to  vessels  of  various  sizes,  and  occurs  elsewhere  in  Sh. 
[See  V,  ii,  254.]  Jennens  :  Soope  of  the  Qq  represents  the  clownish  pronunciation 
of  sup. 

59-62,  &c.  THEOBALD  was  the  first  to  discover  that  the  Clown  here  sings  some 
stanzas  from  a  poem,  which,  because  it  was  printed  in  a  collection  of  Songes  and 
Sonnettes,  written  by  the  ryghl  honorable  Lorde  Henry  Howard,  late  Earle  of  Surrey, 
and  other,  and  published  by  Tottel  in  1557,  Theobald  inferred  was  written  by  the 
noble  lord  whose  name  by  precedence  of  rank  stood  on  the  title-page.  But  Gas- 
coign  e,  who  was  ten  years  old  when  Surrey  was  beheaded,  attributes  the  poem  in 
question  to  Lord  Vaux,  in  an  Epistle  to  a  Young  Gentleman,  prefixed  to  his  Posies  : 
1  The  L.  Vaux  his  dittie,  beginning  thus  I  loath,  was  thought  by  some  to  be  made 
upon  his  death-bed,'  &c.  And  WARTON,  in  his  Hist,  of  Eng.  Poetry,  iii,  45,  con- 
siders that '  undoubted  evidence '  is  found  that  Thomas  Lord  Vaux  was  the  author, 
in  a  manuscript  in  the  British  Museum  (Harleian  MS,  1703)  in  which  we  have  a 
copy  of  this  poem,  beginning  /  lothe  that  I  did  love,  with  this  title :  '  A  dyttye  or 
sonet  made  by  the  lord  Vaus  ['vaux,'  ap.  Arber,  p.  xiii],  in  the  time  of  the  noble 
quene  Marye,  representing  the  image  of  Death.'  It  is  thus  given  in  Arber's  Re- 
print of  Tottel's  Miscellany,  p.  173  : 

The  aged  louer  renounceth  loue. 

I  lothe  that  I  did  loue, 
In  youth  that  I  thought  swete  : 
As  time  requires  for  my  behoue 
Me  thinkes  they  are  not  mete, 
My  lustes  they  do  me  leeue, 
My  fansies  all  be  fledde  : 
And  tract  of  time  begins  to  weauc 
Gray  neaies  vpon  my  hedde 


act  v,  sc.  i.J  HAMLET  38 1 


[59-62.  '  In  youth,  when  I  did  love.*] 

For  age  with  stcyling  steppes, 
Hath  clawed  me  with  his  cowche  [crowch], 
And  lusty  life  away  she  leapes, 
As  there  had  bene  none  such. 

My  muse  dothe  not  delight 
Me  as  she  did  before  : 
My  hand  and  pen  are  not  in  plight, 
As  they  haue  bene  of  yore. 

For  reason  me  denies, 
This  youthly,  idle  rime: 
And  day  by  day  to  me  she  cryes, 
Leaue  of  these  toyes  in  time. 

The  wrinckles  in  my  brow, 
The  furrowes  in  my  face  : 
Say  limpyng  age  will  hedge  him  now 
Where  youth  must  geue  him  place. 

The  harbinger  of  death, 
To  me  I  see  him  ride : 
The  cough,  the  colde,  the  gaspyng  breath, 
Doth  bid  me  to  prouide, 

A  pikeax  and  a  spade 
And  eke  a  shrowdyng  shete, 
A  house  of  claye  for  to  be  made, 
For  such  a  gest  most  mete. 

Me  thinkes  I  heare  the  clarke, 
That  knols  the  careful  knell : 
And  bids  me  leue  my  wofull  warke, 
Er  nature  me  compell. 

My  kepers  knit  the  knot, 
That  youth  did  laugh  to  scorne  : 
Of  me  that  clene  shalbe  forgot, 
As  I  had  not  ben  borne. 

Thus  must  I  youth  geue  vp, 
Whose  badge  I  long  did  weare : 
To  them  I  yelde  the  wanton  cup 
That  may  it  better  beare. 

Loe  here  the  bared  scull. 
By  whose  bald  signe  I  know : 
That  stoupyng  age  away  shall  pull, 
Which  youthfull  yeres  did  sowe. 

For  beauty  with  her  bande 
These  croked  cares  hath  wrought : 
And  shipped  me  into  the  lande, 
From  whence  I  first  was  brought. 

And  ye  that  bide  behinde, 
Haue  ye  none  other  trust : 
As  ye  of  claye  were  cast  by  kinde. 
So  shall  ye  waste  to  dust. 

PfcRCY  in  his  Reliques  suggests  that  the  different  corruptions  in  these  stanzas  <** 
sung  by  the  Grave-digger  [notably  line  61]  may  have  been  designed  by  Sh.  'the 
better  to  paint  the  character  of  an  illiterate  clown.'  Of  course  there  have  not  been 
wanting  critics  who  would  fain  '  offer  these  lines  cur'd  and  perfect  of  their  limbes, 
but  the  task  is  hopeless,  and  we  must  be  consoled,  as  Elze  says,  by  the  reflection 
that  the  common  people  in  all  times  and  in  all  climes  have  sung  nonsense.  The 
'  oh '  and  the  '  ah,'  as  Jennens  notes,  form  no  part  of  the  song,  but  are  « only  the 
breath  forced  out  by  the  strokes  of  the  mattock.'     M.  Mason  suggests  that  instead 


382 


HAMLET 


[act  V,  sc,  I 


Ham.     Has  this  fellow  no  feeling  of  his  business,  that 
he  sings  at  grave-making  ? 

Hor.     Custom  hath  made  it  in  him  a  property  of  easi-     65 
ness. 

Ham.     Tis  e'en  so  :  the  hand  of  little  employment  hath 
the  daintier  sense. 


63.  of]  in  Q'76. 

63,  64.  that  he  sings  at\  a  fngs  in 
Qq.  he  fings  in  Q'76,  Cap.  Jen.  he 
sings  at  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  i.    a?  sings  in 


Sing,  ii,  Ktly. 

65.  in  him~\  to  him   Pope  ii,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 

68.  daintier]  dintier  Q2Q,. 


of  ■  for,  ah,'  we  reader  aye,  because  the  Clown  means  that,  though  he  was  in  love, 
it  was  not  meet  to  contract  himself  for  ever.  Clarendon  thinks  that  *  for-a,'  there-a, 
nothing-a  (see  Text.  Notes),  represent  the  drawling  notes  in  which  the  Clown  sings, 
like  'stile-a'  and  '  mile-a,'  in  Wint.  Tale,  IV,  ii,  133.  The  first  two  lines  of  each 
of  the  stanzas  sung  by  the  Clown  are  used  by  Goethe  in  the  Second  Part  of  Faust, 
for  a  part  of  the  song  chanted  by  the  Lemures  while  digging  Faust's  grave.  It  is 
noteworthy  that  Goethe  adopted  the  '  crutch  *  of  the  original  instead  of  <  clutch.'  See 
the  note  on  that  passage  in  Bayard  Taylor's  most  admirable  translation  of  Faust, 
vol.  ii,  p.  528.  Chappell  (i,  216) :  On  the  margin  of  a  copy  of  the  Earl  of  Surrey's 
poems,  some  of  the  little  airs  to  which  his  favorite  songs  were  sung  are  written  in 
characters  of  the  times.  From  this  copy  the  following  tune  for  *  I  lothe  that  I  did 
love '  is  taken.  On  the  stage  the  Grave-digger  in  Hamlet  now  sings  them  to  the 
tune  of  The  Children  in  the  Wood.     [See  line  89  of  this  scene.] 

Slow. 


fefe 


£e£ 


-('      aLizaj 


-y- 


zig: 


ga  . 


S. 


— 1  cm; 


* 


* 


I       loathe   that       I       did        love, 


youth      that      I      thought  sweet :      As 


£ 


E 


£ 


5?=: 


2± 


122: 


1U^-J-J: 


m 


:«£: 


izr 


S7 


time  re  -  quires  for 


my 


be  -  hove    Me    -     thinks   they    are      not       meet. 


e 


f=f=f 


£ 


^ 


65.  property  of  easiness]  Clarendon:  'Property'  here  means  individual 
peculiarity,  and  '  of  easiness '  is  used  with  adjectival  force,  as  in  I,  ii,  4. 

68.  daintier]  Clarendon  :  Compare  Tro.  6°  Cres.  I,  i,  59. 

68.  sense]  Bucknill  (p.  119) :  This  line  is  but  half  truth.  Does  custom  blunt  the 
fingers  of  a  watchmaker,  the  eyes  of  a  printer,  or  the  auditory  nerve  of  a  musician  ? 
Did  the  grave-digger  do  his  own  sombre  work  with  less  skill  because  he  had  been 
accustomed  to  it  for  thirty  years  ?  Custom  blunts  our  sensations  to  those  impressions 
which  we  do  not  attend  to,  and  it  sharpens  them  to  those  which  we  do.  Custom  in 
Ham.  himself  had  sharpened  the  sj  eculative  faculties  which  he  exercised,  while  it 


,\.  i  v.  sc.  i.] 


HAMLET 


383 


First  Clo.  [Sings]  But  aget  with  his  stealing  steps, 

Hath  claw'd  mc  in  his  clutch,  JO 

And  hath  shipped  me  intil  the  /and, 
As  if  I  had  never  bee?i  such. 

[  Throws  up  a  skull. 
Ham.  That  skull  had  a  tongue  in  it,  and  could  sing 
once;  how  the  knave  jowls  it  to  the  ground,  as  if  it  were 
Cain's  jaw-bone,  that  did  the  first  murder !  It  might  be  75 
the  pate  of  a  politician,  which  this  ass  now  o'er-reaches  ; 
one  that  would  circumvent  God,  might  it  not  ? 


69  and  89.  First  Clo.  [Sings]  Cap. 
Clowne  sings.  Ff.     Song.  Qq. 

69-71.  steps. ..shipped  me  intil  the~\ 
sand... shifted  vie  into  his  Johns,  conj. 

70.  claw'd]  Pope,  clawed Qq.  caught 
Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Sta. 

71.  hath]  Om.  Cap. 

intil]  infill  Yf.  into  Qq,  Pope  +  , 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  El. 

the  land]  his  land  Han.  Warb. 
Rann. 

72.  had  never]  never  had  FF,  Rowe. 
ne'er  had  Pope,  Han. 

[Throws  up  a  skull.]  Cap.  Om. 
QqFf. 


73.  in  it]  inft  Cap. 

74.  it  were]    twere    Q2Q3Q4-     fwert 
%  Jen. 

75.  //  might]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.   Knt, 
Dyce  ii,  Glo.  + .      This  might  Qq  et  cet. 

76.  the  pate]  y  pate  Q4> 

now  o'er-reaches]  now  ore-reaches 
Qq.      o're    Offices  Fx.      ore- Offices   Yi 


6 )  re-offices    F  . 


o  er- 


o' re- Offices   F3 

offices  Rowe+,  Cald.    Knt,  Del.     o'er 

reaches  Sta. 

77.  would]    could  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Cald.  Knt,  Sta. 

God]  Heaven  Q'76. 


had  dulled  the  active  powers  which  depend  upon  that  resolution  which  he  did  not 
practise. 

74.  jowls]  Clarke  :  If  proof  were  wanted  of  the  exquisite  propriety  and  force 
of  effect  with  which  Sh.  uses  words,  and  words  of  even  homely  fashion,  there  could 
hardly  be  a  more  pointed  instance  than  the  verb  '  jowls '  here.  What  strength  it 
gives  to  the  impression  of  the  head  and  cheek-bone  smiting  against  the  earth  !  and 
how  it  makes  the  imagination  feel  the  bruise  in  sympathy  ! 

75.  that]  Abbott,  §  262  :  The  antecedent  pronoun  is  probably  to  be  repeated 
immediately  before  the  relative :  '  (him)  that  did.' 

76.  politician]  Staunton  :  A  plotter,  a  schemer  for  his  own  advantage ;  thus 
1  Hen.  IV:  I,  iii,  241 ;  Twelfth  Night,  III,  ii,  34.  Clarendon  :  The  word  is 
always  used  in  a  bad  sense  by  Sh. 

76.  o'er-reaches]  Warburton  :  People  in  office,  at  that  time,  were  so  over 
bearing,  that  Sh.,  speaking  of  insolence  at  the  height,  calls  it  '  insolence  in  office.' 
[Ham.  Ill,  i,  73.]  Johnson:  It  is  a  strong  exaggeration  to  remark, that  an  ass  can 
over-reach  him  who  would  once  have  tried  to  circumvent — .  I  believe  both  the  words 
of  the  Qq  and  Ff  were  Shakespeare's.  An  author  in  revising  his  work,  when  his 
original  ideas  have  faded  from  his  mind,  and  new  observations  have  produced  new 
sentiments,  easily  introduces  images  which  have  been  more  newly  impressed  upon 
him,  without  observing  their  want  of  congruity  to  the  general  texture  of  his  original 
design.     Jennens:  It  is  applied  to  a  politician,  not  as  an  insolent  office* ,  but  as  a 


384 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  t 


X 


Hor.     It  might,  my  lord. 

Ham.     Or  of  a  courtier,  which  could  say  '  Good  mor- 
row, sweet  lord  !     How  dost  thou,  good  lord  ?'    This  might     80 
be  my  lord  Such-a-one,  that  praised  my  lord  Such-a-one's 
horse,  when  he  meant  to  beg  it, — might  it  not  ? 
fHor.     Ay,  my  lord. 

Ham.     Why,   e'en   so  ;    and   now ,  my    Lady   Worm's ; 
chapless,  and  knocked  about  the  mazzard  with  a  sexton's     85 
spade;  here's  fine  revolution,  an  we  had  the  trick  to  see't. 
Did  these  bones  cost  no  more  the  breeding,  but  to  play  at 
loggats  with  'em  ?  mine  ache  to  think  on 't. 


80.  sweet  lord  ]  my  lord  Q4QS,  Jen. 
good  lord"]  fweet  lord  Qq,  Cap. 

Jen.  Cam.  Cla. 

81.  Such-a-one"]  such  a  one's  Han. 
Johns. 

82.  when  he  meant]  when  a  went  Q2 
Q3.    when  a  ment  Q  .   when  a  meant  Q  . 

beg  it]  beg  him  Q'76. 

84.  now]  now  'tis  Rowe. 

84,  85.  Lady  Worm's;  chapless,] 
Johns.  LadywormesChoples,Qq.  Lady 
Wormes,  Chaplejfe  FXF9.  Lady  Worme's, 


Chap-lefs,Y%.  Lady  Worm's,  Chaplefs, F4. 

85.  mazzard]   Mazard  Ff.     mafflen* 
Q2Q3.     mazer  QQ. 

86.  fine]  a  fine  Q'76,  Popeii,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 

an]  Cap.    and  Qq.    if  'Ff,  Row<» 
+ ,  Jen.  Knt,  Sta. 

88.  loggats]   loggits  Qq.     Loggets  Ft 
F3F  .     Loggers  F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 

with   'em?]    Ff,    Rowe  +  ,    Jen. 
Dyce,  Sta.   Glo.  +  ,   Mob.     with  them 
Qq.     with  them  t  Q'76  et  cet. 


circumventing,  scheming,  man.      CORSON :  The  Ff,  without  doubt,  give  the  more 
expressive  term. 

81.  Such-a-one]  Steevens:  See  Timon,  I,  ii,  216. 

84.  Worm's]  Johnson  :  The  scull  that  was  my  lord  Such-a-one's  is  now  my 
lady  Worm's. 

85.  mazzard]  Nares:  Ahead;  usually  derived,  but  with  very  little  probability, 
from  machoirc,  French,  which  means  only  a  jaw.  The  fact  is,  that  it  has  always 
been  a  burlesque  word,  and  was  as  likely  to  be  made  from  mazer,  a  bowl,  as  from 
anything  else ;  comparing  the  head  to  a  large  goblet.  Wedgwood  confirms  Nares's 
derivation.  '  In  a  similar  way,  Italian  zucca,  properly  a  gourd,  and  thence  a  drink 
ing  cup,  is  used  to  signify  a  skull.' 

86.  trick]  Caldecott  :  Knack,  faculty. 

87.  the  breeding]  See  Macb.  I,  iv,  8. 

88.  loggats]  The  nature  of  this  game  has  been  much  discussed,  but  what  appears 
to  be  the  most  exact  description  is  thus  given  by  Clarendon  :  •  "Loggats,"  diminu- 
tive of  log.  The  game  so  called  resembles  bowls,  but  with  notable  differences.  First, 
rt  is  played  not  on  a  green,  but  on  a  floor  strewed  with  ashes.  The  Jack  is  a  wheel 
of  lignum-vitae  or  other  hard  wood,  nine  inches  in  diameter  and  three  or  four  inches 
thick.  The  loggat,  made  of  apple-wood,  is  a  truncated  cone  26  or  27  inches  in  length, 
tapering  from  a  girth  of  %y2  or  9  inches  at  the  one  end  to  t>Yz  or  4  inches  at  the 
other.  Each  player  has  three  loggats  which  he  throws,  holding  lightly  the  thin  end. 
The  object  is  to  lie  as  near  the  Jack  as  possible.     The  only  place  we  have  heard  of 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


HAMLET 


$S 


First  Clo.     [Sings']  A  pick-axe,  and  a  spade,  a  spade, 
For  and  a  shrouding  sheet ; 
Oh,  a  pit  of  clay  for  to  be  made 
For  such  a  guest  is  meet. 

[Throws  up  another  skull* 


90 


90.  For  and]  For, — aw^/Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 


Knt,  Coll.  i.     For  and,  Pope. 
92.  [Throws...]  Cap.     Om.  QqFf. 


where  this  once  popular  game  is  now  played  is  the  Hampshire  Hog  Inn,  Norwich. 
We  have  to  thank  the  Rev.  G.  Gould  for  a  detailed  description  of  the  game,  which 
we  have  abridged  as  above.  Perhaps  Ham.  meant  to  compare  the  skull  to  the  Jack 
at  which  the  bones  were  thrown.  In  Jonson's  Tale  of  a  Tub,  IV,  vi :  "  Now  are 
they  tossing  of  his  legs  and  arms  Like  loggats  at  a  pear  tree." ' 

89.  [Sings]  Chappell  (i,  200) :  The  traditions  of  the  stage  give  the  following 
tune  of  The  Children  in  the  Wood  os  the  air  of  the  Grave-digger's  song  in  Hamlet* 
*  A  pickaxe  and  a  spade ' : 

Slowly  and  smoothly. 

t 


9 


1 


s 


m 


*=: 


r* 


=•=* 


A       pick-axe   and  a       spade,  a  spade,       For     and  a    shroud  -  ing 


*m=? 


2 


2 


3 


* # 


pp3f 


wm 


P 


f-l^-JX^ 


f 


r 


sheet.         Oh,  a    pit  of   clay      for     to   be    made     For  such  a  guest       is      meet 


SH 


ps 


3 


f 


90.  For  and]  Dyce  {Remarks,  &c,  p.  218) :  The  break  after  ■  For'  inserted  by 
modern  edd.  is  quite  wrong.  ■  For  and,.'  in  the  present  version  of  the  stanza,  answers 
to  *  And  eke '  in  that  given  by  Percy  {Rel.  of  A.  E.  P.  vol.  i,  192,  ed.  1812).  Com- 
pare the  following  passages  (to  which  many  others  might  be  added) :  '  Syr  Gy,  Syr 
Gawen,  Syr  Cayus,  for  and  Syr  Olyuere.' — Skelton,  Works,  i,  119,  ed.  Dyce.  * 
and  with  him  comes  the  lady,  For,  and  the  Squire  of  Damsels.' — Beau.  &  FL. 
Knight  of  the  Burning  Pestle,  II,  iii :  'A  hippocrene,  a  tweak,  for  and  a  fucus.*— 
Middleton's  Fair  Quarrel,  V,  i.  [In  Lettsom's  MS  note  in  my  copy  of  Dyce's 
Remarks  attention  is  called  to  the  Scotch  usage  of  But  and  as  equivalent  to  this 
*  For  and,'  e.g.  '  Or  I  will  burn  yoursel  therein,  Bot  and  zour  babies  three.' — Edom 
J  Gordon,  Percy's  Ballads,  i,  125.  *  He  has  broke  three  ribs  in  that  ane's  side,  But 
and  his  collar  bane.' — Johnnie  of  Breadislee,  Minstrelsy  of  the  Scottish  Border,  ii, 
345,  ed.  1825.  Clarendon,  in  a  note  on  the  present  passage  in  Hamlet,  says: 
4  "  But  and  "  seems  to  mean  both  besides  and  except?  Ed.] 

91.  for  to]  See  III,  i,  167. 

92.  guest]  Lowell  {Among  My  Books,  p.  210) :  This  Grave-diggers'  scene  always 

impresses  me  as  one  of  the  most  pathetic  in  the  whole  tragedy.    That  Sh.  introduced 

Z 


2>Z6  HAMLET  [actv,  sc.  L 

Ham.    There's  another;  why  may  not  that  be  the  skull    93 
of  a  lawyer?     Where  be  his  quiddits  now,  his  quillets,  his 

93.  may]  might  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,        Glo. +  ,  Tsch.  Mob. 

Sta.  94.  quillets']  quillites  Q2Q-.    quillities 

94.  of]  of  of  Fx  Q4QS>  Cap.  Jen.  Tsch. 
quiddits]  quiddities  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 

such  scenes  and  such  characters  with  deliberate  intention,  and  with  a  view  to  artistic 
relief  and  contrast,  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt.  We  must  take  it  for  granted  that 
a  man  whose  works  show  everywhere  the  results  of  judgement  sometimes  acted  with 
forethought.  I  find  the  springs  of  the  profoundest  sorrow  and  pity  in  this  hardened 
indifference  of  the  Grave-diggers,  in  their  careless  discussion  as  to  whether  Ophelia's 
death  was  by  suicide  or  no,  in  their  singing  and  jesting  at  their  dreary  work.  We 
know  who  is  to  be  the  guest  of  this  earthen  hospitality, — how  much  beauty,  love, 
and  heart-break  are  to  be  covered  in  that  pit  of  clay.  All  we  remember  of  Oph. 
reacts  upon  us  with  tenfold  force,  and  we  recoil  from  our  amusement  at  the  ghastly 
drollery  of  the  two  delvers  with  a  shock  of  horror.  That  the  unconscious  Ham. 
should  stumble  on  this  grave  of  all  others,  that  it  should  be  here  that  he  should  pause 
to  muse  humorously  on  death  and  decay, — all  this  prepares  us  for  the  revulsion  of 
passion  in  the  next  scene,  and  for  the  frantic  confession:  'I  loved  Ophelia;  forty 
thousand  brothers  Could  not  with  all  their  quantity  of  love  Make  up  my  sum !'  And 
it  is  only  here  that  such  an  asseveration  would  be  true  even  to  the  feeling  of  the 
moment ;  for  it  is  plain  from  all  we  know  of  Ham.  that  he  could  not  so  have  loved 
Oph.,  that  he  was  incapable  of  the  self-abandonment  of  a  true  passion,  that  he  would 
have  analyzed  this  emotion  as  he  does  all  others,  would  have  peeped  and  botanized 
upon  it  till  it  became  to  him  a  mere  matter  of  scientific  interest.  All  this  force  of 
contrast,  and  this  horror  of  surprise,  were  necessary  so  to  intensify  his  remorseful 
regret  that  he  should  believe  himself  for  once  in  earnest.  .  The  speech  of  the  King, 
'Oh,  he  is  mad,  Laertes,'  recalls  him  to  himself,  and  he  at  once  begins  to  rave. 

94.  lawyer]  C.  ELLIOT  Browne  {Athenceum,  22  May,  1875) :  There  is  a  striking 
imitation  of  this  passage  in  Raynoldes's  Dolarny^s  Primerose,  1 606  [which,  despite 
the  eulogy  of  Sh.  contained  in  it,  Caldecott  pronounces  '  a  very  mean  perform- 
ance.' Ed.]  : 

'Why  might  not  this  hauc  beene  some  lawier's  pate, 
The  which  sometimes  brib'd,  brawl'd,  and  tooke  a  fee 
And  lawe  exacted  to  the  highest  rate; 
Why  might  not  this  be  such  a  one  as  he? 
Your  quirks  and  quillets,  now  Sir,  where  be  they  ? 
Now  he  is  mute  and  not  a  word  can  say,'  &c. 

94.  quiddits]  Nares  :  A  contraction  of  quiddity,  which  is  from  [Mid.  Lat.J 

miditasy  not  from  quidlibet.     It  was  used,  as  quiddity  also  was,  for  a  subtilty,  or  nice 

efinement.    Generally  applied  to  the  subtilties  of  lawyers.    Wedgwood  :  Mid.  Lat. 

quiditas,  the  whatness  or  distinctive  nature  of  a  thing,  brought  into  a  by-word  by  the 

nice  distinction  of  the  schools. 

94.  quillets]  Malone:  Nice  and  frivolous  distinctions.  The  word  is  rendered 
by  Cole,  Lat.  Diet.  ;  res  frivola.  Nares  follows  Bailey  in  deriving  it  from  quibblett 
a  diminutive  of  quibble.  Douce  (i,  231)  derives  it  from  quidlibet.  But  Nares 
objects  to  this,  that  the  scholastic  phrase  was  uniformly  quodlibet,  never  quidlibet. 
"WEDGWOOD:  Notwithstanding  Nares's  objection  that  the  scholastic  phrase  was  quod 


ACT  v,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  387 

cases,  his  tenures,  and  his  tricks?  why  does  he  suffer  this  95 
rude  knave  now  to  knock  him  about  the  sconce  with  a  dirty 
shovel,  and  will  not  tell  him  of  his  action  of  battery?  Hum! 
This  fellow  might  be  in  's  time  a  great  buyer  of  land,  with 
his  statutes,  his  recognizances,  his  fines,  his  double  vouchers, 
his  recoveries;  is  this  the  fine  of  his  fines  and  the  recovery  IOO 
of  his  recoveries,  to  have  his  fine  pate  full  of  fine  dirt  ?  will 
his  vouchers  vouch  him  no  more  of  his  purchases,  and  dou- 

96.  rude]  madde  Q2Q3.     mad  Q4Q5>  98.  in's]  in  his  Klly. 

Jen.  100,101.  is  this. ..recoveries]  Om.  Qq. 

97.  action"]  actions  Q  .  102.  his  vouchers]  vouchers  Qq,  Jen. 
Hum]  Humph  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.              102,  103.  double  ones  too]  doubles  Qq, 

Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  White,  Ktly.  Jen. 

Zibet,  and  not  quidlibcl,  the  derivation  from  this  source  was  probably  correct.  F.  J. 
V.  (AT.  &>  Qu.t  18  Sept.  1875) :  As  'quiddit'  is  from  the  logical  term  quiditas,  why 
may  not  '  quillet '  or  *  quilit '  be  from  another  logical  term,  qualitas  ?  The  word  may 
have  been  originally  qualil,  then  the  a  may  have  been  thinned  into  i  to  make  it 
jingle  with  'quiddit.' 

94-103.  Lord  Campbell  (p.  no):  These  terms  of  art  are  all  used  seemingly 
with  a  full  knowledge  of  their  import ;  and  it  would  puzzle  some  practising  barristers 
with  whom  I  am  acquainted  to  go  over  the  whole  seriatim,  and  to  define  each  of 
them  satisfactorily. 

95.  tenures]  Elze  [The  Athenamm,  20  Feb.  XS69)  thinks  that  this  word  has 
slipped  out  of  place,  that  it  belongs  to  the  law-terms  relative  to  property,  and  should 
therefore  be  inserted  between  '  recognizances '  and  *  fines '  in  line  99. 

96.  sconce]  Clarendon  :  A  colloquial  and  jocose  term,  like  costard,  pate,  maz- 
zard,  &c. 

99.  100.  statutes,  recognizances,  fines,  double  vouchers,  recoveries]  Rit 
SON :  A  recovery  with  double  voucher  is  the  one  usually  suffered,  and  is  so  denomi- 
nated from  two  persons  (the  latter  of  whom  is  always  the  common  crier,  or  some 
such  inferior  person)  being  successively  vouched,  or  called  upon,  to  warrant  the 
tenant's  title.  Both  *  fines '  and  '  recoveries '  are  fictions  of  law,  used  to  convert 
an  estate  tail  into  a  fee  simple.  '  Statutes '  are  (not  acts  of  parliament,  but)  statutes- 
merchant  and  staple,  particular  modes  of  recognizance  or  acknowledgement  for  se- 
curing debts,  which  thereby  become  a  charge  upon  the  party's  land.  *  Statutes '  and 
'  recognizances '  are  constantly  mentioned  together  in  the  covenants  of  a  purchase 
deed. 

100.  fine  of  his  fines]  Caldecott:  This  is  the  end  of,  or  utmost  attained  byr 
the  operation  of  all  this  legal  machinery.  RUSHTON  (Sh.  a  Lawyer,  p.  10) :  The 
first  'fine'  means  not  a  penalty,  but  an  end.  Clarendon:  Compare  AIVs  Well, 
IV,  iv,  35. 

101.  fine  dirt]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  316):  Foule?  Dyce  (ed.  2):  I  believe  the 
old  text  is  right  here.  Rushton  (Sh.  a  Lawyer,  p.  10)  acutely  interprets  this  *  fine,' 
like  the  preceding  '  fine,'  in  the  sense  of  last.  *  His  fine  pate  is  filled,  not  with  fine 
dirt,  but  with  the  last  dirt  which  will  ever  occupy  it,  leaving  a  satirical  inference  to 
be  drawn,  that  even  in  his  lifetime  his  head  was  filled  with  dirt.' 


388 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  L 


ble  ones  too,  than  the  length  and  breadth  of  a  pair  of  inden- 
tures ?  The  very  conveyances  of  his  lands  will  hardly  lie  in 
this  box ;  and  must  the  inheritor  himself  have  no  more,  ha  ?  105 

Hor.    Not  a  jot  more,  my  lord. 

Ham.    Is  not  parchment  made  of  sheep-skins  ? 

Hor.    Ay,  my  lord,  and  of  calf-skins  too. 

Ham.    They  are  sheep  and  calves  which  seek  out  as- 
surance in  that  X  will  speak  to  this  fellow. — Whose  grave's  1 10 
this,  sirrah  ? 

First  Clo.    Mine,  sir. — 

[Sings']     Oh,  a  pit  of  clay  for  to  be  made 
For  such  a  guest  is  meet. 

Ham.    I  think  it  be  thine  indeed,  for  thou  liest  in't  1 15 

First  Clo.    You  lie  out  on't,  sir,  and  therefore  it  is  not 
yours ;  for  my  part,  I  do  not  lie  in't,  and  yet  it  is  mine. 


104.  lands']  land  Q'76,  Jen. 
hardly"]  fcarcely  Qq,  Jen. 

108.  calf-skins]  Calue-skinnes  QJFX 
F3F3.  Calue-skins  QSF4<  Calues-skinnes 
Q2Q3,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Cald.  Knt. 

109.  which]  (hat  Ff,  Rowe+,  Knt, 
Sta. 

111.  sirrah]  firra  Qq.  SirFf,  Rowe, 
Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  White,  Huds. 

112,  113.  Mine. . .made]  Mine  fir,  or 


a.. .made,  (as  one  line)  Qq. 

113.  [Sings]  Cap.     Om.  QqFf. 

114.  For.. .meet.]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 
guest]  ghost  Rowe  ii,  Pope. 

1 15.  it  be]  it  Qs.     it's  Q'76. 

116.  it  is]  lis  Qq.     'tis  Q'76,  Jen. 
Cam.  Cla. 

117.  and  yet]  yet  Qq,  Pope+,  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Cald.  Sing.  El.  Ktly. 

it  is]  it's  Q'76. 


103.  indentures]  Clarendon  :  •  Indentures  were  agreements  made  out  in  dupli- 
cate, of  which  each  party  kept  one.  Both  were  written  on  the  same  sheet,  which 
was  cut  in  two  in  a  crooked  or  indented  line,  in  order  that  the  fitting  of  the  two 
parts  might  prove  the  genuineness  of  both  in  case  of  dispute. 

105.  box]  Rushton  (Sh.  a  Lawyer,  p.  10) :  Ham.  compares  a  grave  to  a  box, 
because  conveyancers  and  attorneys  keep  their  deeds  in  wooden  or  tin  boxes. 

105 .  STAUNTON  cites  some  passages  parallel  to  the  foregoing  dozen  b'nes  from 
Randolph's  comedy  of  The  jealous  Lovers,  published  at  Oxford,  1668. 

109.  assurance]  Clarendon.:  *  Assurance  of  lands  is  where  lands  or  tenements 
are  conveyed  by  deed.' — Jacob,  Law  Diet.  Here,  of  course,  there  is  a  reference 
also  to  the  ordinary  meaning. 

1 10.  Coleridge:  O,  the  rich  contrast  between  the  Clowns  and  Ham.  as  two 
extremes  !  You  see  in  the  former  the  mockery  of  logic,  and  a  traditional  wit  valued, 
like  truth,  for  its  antiquity,  and  treasured  up,  like  a  tune,  for  use. 

111.  sirrah]  See  Mac3.1V,  ii,  30. 

115,  116.  thine  .  .  .You]  Note  that  throughout  this  dialogue  Ham.  addresses 
the  Clown  in  the  second  person  singular,  while  the  Clown  replies  in  the  second  per- 
son plural.  Ed. 


act  v,  sc.  i.'j  HAMLET  389 

Ham.    Thou  dost  lie  in't,  to  be  in't  and  say  it  is  thine ;        % 


'tis  for  the  dead,  not  for  the  quick ;  therefore  thou  liest. 

First  Go.     Tis  a  quick  lie,  sir;  'twill  away  again,  from  120 
me  to  you. 

Ham.     What  man  dost  thou  dig  it  for  ? 

First  Clo.     For  no  man,  sir. 

Ham.     What  woman  then  ? 

First  Clo.     For  none,  neither.  1 25 

Ham.     Who  is  to  be  buried  in't? 

First  Clo.     One  that  was  a  woman,  sir ;  but,  rest  her  soul, 
she's  dead. 

Ham.     How  absolute  the  knave  is !  we  must  speak  by 
the   card,   or  equivocation  will   undo   us.     By  the    Lord,  1 30 
Horatio,  these  three  years  I  have  taken  note  of  it ;  the  age 
is  grown  so  picked  that  the  toe  of  the  peasant  comes  so 

118.  it  is]  'tis  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Sta. White.  13 1.  these]  this  Qq,  Cam.  Cla. 
120.  away]  Om.  Q'76.  taken]  tooke  Qq. 

130.  undo]    vndoo   Qq.      vndoe   Fx.  note]  notice  Q'76. 

follow  F2F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  132.  that]  and  F2F3F4,  Rowe. 

129.  absolute]  Dyce  {Gloss.) :  Positive,  certain. 

130.  card]  Johnson  explained  this  as  the  card  on  which  the  different  points  of 
the  compass  are  described,  as  in  Macb.  I,  iii,  17.  Malone  understood  it  as  only 
another  name  for  chart,  and  paraphrased  its  use  in  the  present  instance  by :  *  we 
must  speak  with  the  same  precision  and  accuracy  as  is  observed  in  marking  the  true 
distances  of  coasts,  the  heights,  courses,  &c,  in  a  sea-chart.'  Dyce  selected  this  as 
the  definition  of  the  present  passage  in  his  Glossary.  Staunton  says  it  is  '  rather 
an  allusion  to  the  card  and  calendar  of  etiquette,  or  book  of  manners,  of  which  more 
than  one  were  published  during  Shakespeare's  age.'  Ritson  notes  its  use  by  Osric, 
V,  ii,  109.  Whatsoever  its  immediate  derivation,  'to  speak  by  the  card'  undoubt- 
edly means  to  speak  with  precision. 

131.  These  three  years]  Capell  (i,  146) :  Just  so  many  years  had  King  James 
"been  in  England,  bringing  with  him  a  Danish  queen,  when  the  Quarto  that  is-  our 
guide  in  this  play  made  its  appearance. 

132.  picked]  Hanmer:  Smart,  sharp.  Johnson:  There  was,  about  that  time,  a 
picked  shoe,  that  is  a  shoe  with  a  long  pointed  toe,  in  fashion,  to  which  the  allusion 
saems  likewise  to  be  made.  Steevens  :  This  fashion  was  carried  to  such  excess  that 
it  was  restrained  by  proclamation  in  the  fifth  year  of  Edward  IV,  when  it  was  ordered, 
'  that  the  beaks  or  pykes  of  shoes  and  boots  should  not  pass  two  inches  upon  pain 

of  cursing  by  the  clergy,  and  forfeiting  twenty  shillings Before  this  time,  and 

since  1482,  the  pykes  of  shoes  and  boots  were  of  such  length  that  they  were  fain  to 
be  tied  up  to  the  knee  with  chains  of  silver,  and  gilt,  or  at  least  silken,  laces.'  Ma- 
lone :  That  is,  so  spruce,  so  quaint,  so  affected.  There  is  no  allusion  to  picked  or 
pointed  shoes.     [Douce  agrees  with  Malone  here,  because  this  fashion  had  expired 

33* 


390 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


near  the  heel  of  the  courtier,  he  galls  his  kibe. — How  long 
hast  thou  been  a  grave-maker  ? 

First  Clo.    Of  all  the  days  i'  the  year,  I  came  to't  that  135 
day  that  our  last  king  Hamlet  o'ercame  Fortinbras. 

Ham.     How  long  is  that  since  ? 

First  Clo.  Cannot  you  tell  that?  every  fool  can  tell 
that;  it  was  the  very  day  that  young  Hamlet  was  born; 
he  that  is  mad,  and  sent  into  England.  14a 

Ham.    Ay,  marry ;  why  was  he  sent  into  England  ? 

First  Clo.  Why  because  a*  was  mad ;  a*  shall  recover 
his  wits  there ;  or,  if  a*  do  not,  it's  no  great  matter  there. 

Ham.    Why  ? 

First  Clo.     Twill  not  be  seen  in  him  there;  there  the  145 
men  are  as  mad  as  he. 


133.  heel]  keeles  Fx. 

the  courtier]  our  Courtier  Ff, 
Rowe  -f .  ( Countier  Rowe.)  your  cour- 
tier White  conj. 

134.  a]  Om.  Q2Q3. 

135.  all]  Om.  Qq. 

136.  overcame]  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Knt, 
Dyce,  White,  Cam.  o'recame  Ff.  ouer- 
came  Qq  et  cet. 

137.  long  is]  long's  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 
Cald. 

139.  the  very]  that  very  Qq,  Pope+, 


Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Sing.  Ktly, 
Cam. 

140.  is]  was  Ff,  Rowe-t-,  Knt,  Sta.. 

142,  143.  a']  Cam.  Cla.  a  Qq.  he 
Ff  et  cet. 

143.  it's]  tis  Qq.  'tis  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  Cald.  Sing.  Coll.  White,  Ktly,  Cam. 

145,  146.  him  there ;  there  the  men 
are]  Cap.  him  there,  there  the  men  ars 
Q2Q3-  him  there,  tkere  the  are  men  Q4. 
him  there,  there  are  men  Q  .  him,  there 
the  men  are  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Sta. 


long  before  Shakespeare's  time.]  '  Picked'  was  a  common  word  in  Shakespeare's  age 
in  this  sense.  Clarendon  :  *  Cotgrave  gives :  "Miste,  Neat,  spruce,  compt,  quaint, 
picked,  minion,  trickesie,  fine,  gay."  There  may  possibly  be  a  covert  reference  to  the 
pointed  shoes.' 

133.  kibe]  Hunter  (ii,  264)  :  This  should  probably  be  kibes  in  the  plural.  It  is 
the  same  as  chilblains ;  thus,  Florio,  Ital.  Diet.  :  Bugancia,  kibes  or  chilblains.  [My 
copy  of  Florio,  1598,  reads  Bugancie,  the  plural,  which,  I  am  afraid,  galls  Hunter's 
conjecture.  Ed.] 

135.  Of.  .  .year]  Clarendon:  Compare  Rom.  &•»  Jul.  I,  iii,  16. 

139.  the  .  .  .  born]  Blackstone  :  By  this  scene  it  appears  that  Ham.  was  then 
thirty  years  old,  and  knew  Yorick  well,  who  had  been  dead  twenty-three  years.  And 
yet  in  the  beginning  of  the  play  he  is  spoken  of  as  a  very  yozing  man,  one  that  de- 
signed to  go  back  to  school,  i.  e.  to  the  University  of  Wittenberg.  The  poet  in  the 
Fifth  Act  had  forgot  what  he  wrote  in  the  First.  Tschischwitz  :  Blackstone's  criticism 
is  founded  on  a  very  erroneous  idea  of  German  Universities  and  their  arrangements. 
It  is  well  known  that  A.  v.  Humboldt,  up  to  an  advanced  age,  attended  lectures 
{Collegia  horte)  under  his  friend  Boekh. 

146.  Clarendon:  Compare  Marston's  Malcontent,  III,  i:  'Your  lordship  shall 
ever  finde  . .  .  amongst  a  hundred  Englishmen  fourscore  and  ten  madmen.' 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  39 1 

Ham.     How  came  he  mad  ?  147 

First  Clo.     Veiy  strangely,  they  say. 
Ham.     How  '  strangely '  ? 

First  Clo.     Faith,  e'en  with  losing  his  wits.  1 50 

Ham.     Upon  what  ground  ? 

First  Clo.     Why,  here  in  Denmark ;  I  have  been  sexton 
here,  man  and  boy,  thirty  years. 

149.  'strangely']    Quotation,    Cam.  152.  sexton"]  Sexten  Q2Q3.    fixetcene 
Cla.                                                                        Fx.     Sexe/lone  Fa.     Sex/lone  F  . 

150.  losing]  loofing  QqF^Fg.  153.  here]  Om.  Q'76. 

152.  I  have]  where  J  have  Q'76.  thirty]  twenty  Hal. 

153.  [The  words  of  the  Grave-digger  are  so  explicit  that  the  age  of  Ham.  has  been 
generally  accepted  as  that  of  thirty  years,  and  none  the  less  generally  has  it  been 
felt  that  this  age  does  not  accord,  as  Blackstone  says,  with  the  impression  of  his 
youth  which  Ham.  in  the  earlier  scenes  gives  us.  Halliwell  [see  Text.  Notes]  at- 
tempts to  avoid  the  difficulty  by  the  aid  of  Qx,but  this  aid  will  hardly  bear  analysis.  In 
line  1922  of  Qr  the  Clown  says  l  heres  a  scull  hath  bin  here  this  dozen  yeare ;'  the  con 
versation  for  sixteen  lines  then  turns  upon  Ham.,  and  his  being  sent  to  England.  At 
the  end  of  it  Ham.  says,  '  whose  scull  was  this  ?'  It  is  by  no  means  certain  that  the 
former  skull  is  here  referred  to ;  the  Clown  may  have  just  turned  up  another.  It 
does  not  follow,  therefore,  of  necessity  that  it  was  Yorick's  skull  that  had  lain  in  the 
ground  a  dozen  years,  and  Qr  fails  us  here  at  the  most  important  point.  Grant 
White,  at  the  beginning  of  his  story  of  Hamlet  the  Younger,  says  that  the  Prince 
was  twenty  years  old  when  the  tragedy  opens,  and  at  the  close  his  essay,  probably 
overlooking  this  statement,  says  that  Ham.  was  thirty  years  of  age  in  the  Fifth  Act. 
No  one  would  impute  to  so  shrewd  a  scholar  as  Grant  White  the  supposition  that 
the  action  of  the  tragedy  lasted  ten  years.  Eduard  and  Otto  Devrient,  in  their 
ed.  of  Sh.,  contend,  and  with  much  force,  for  Hamlet's  extreme  youth  [see  Ap- 
pendix, Vol.  II],  and  modify  their  text  accordingly.  Furnivall  (New  Sh.  Soc. 
Trans,  Part  ii,  1874,  p.  494),  speaking  of  the  'startling  inconsistencies'  in  regard 
to  Hamlet's  age,  says :  '  We  know  how  early,  in  olden  time,  young  men  of  rank  were 
put  to  arms ;  how  early,  if  they  went  to  a  University,  they  left  it  for  training  in  Camp 
and  Court.  Ham.,  at  a  University,  could  hardly  have  passt  20 ;  and  with  this  age 
the  plain  mention  of  youth  [in  I,  iii,  7;  I,  iii,  11-12;  and  I,  iii,  123-4]  agrees. 
With  this,  too,  agrees  the  King's  reproach  to  Ham.  for  his  intent  in  going  back  to 
Wittenberg ;  and  Hamlet's  own  revclt-of-nature  at  his  mother's  quick  marriage  to 
his  uncle.  Had  he  been  much  past  21,  and  had  he  had  more  experience  of  then 
v/omen,  he'd  have  taken  his  mother's  changeableness  more  coolly.  I  look  on  it  as 
certain,  that  when  Sh.  began  the  play  he  conceivd  Ham.  as  quite  a  young  man. 
But  as  the  play  grew,  as  greater  weight  of  reflection,  of  insight  into  character,  of 
knowledge  of  life,  &c,  were  wanted,  Sh.  necessarily  and  haturally  made  Ham.  a 
formd  man;  and,  by  the  time  that  he  got  to  the  Grave-diggers'  scene,  told  us  the  Prince 
was  30, — the  right  age  for  him  then ;  but  not  his  age  when  Laer.  and  Pol.  warnd 
Oph.  against  his  blood  that  burnd,  his  youthful  fancy  for  her, — "  a  toy  in  blood"— 
&c.     The  two  parts  of  the  play  are  inconsistent  on  this  main  point  in  Hamlets  state. 


39 2  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  i 


[153.  Hamlet's  age.] 
What  matter?  Who  wants  'em  made  consistent  by  the  modification  of  either  part  ? 
The  "  thirty  "  is  not  in  Qx ;  yet  who  wants  to  go  back  to  that  ?'  Minto  ( The  Exam* 
iner,  6  Mar.  1875)  contends  that  apart  from  the  Grave-digger's  speech  and  the  thirty 
years  of  the  wedded  life  of  the  Player  King  and  the  Player  Queen  (and  he  is  at  a 
loss  to  understand  how  these  passages  came  into  the  play).  '  the  natural  construction 
is  that  Ham.  and  his  associates  were  youths  of  seventeen,  fresh  from  the  University. 
That  was  the  usual  age  in  Shakespeare's  time  at  which  young  nobles  set  out  on  their 
travels,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  he  thought  of  altering  the  University 
age  in  his  play,  and  no  hint  that  Ham.  was  so  very  much  older  than  his  companions.' 
. . . . « A  proper  conception  of  Hamlet's  age  is  essential  to  the  understanding  of  the 
play.  He  is  a  youth  called  home  from  the  University  by  his  father's  death ;  a  youth 
of  the  age  of  Romeo,  or  of  young  Prince  Hal  at  the  time  of  his  father's  accession.' 
. . . . «  Hamlet's  action  is  not  the  weak  and  petulant  action  of  an  emasculated  man  of 
thirty,  but  the  daring,  wilful,  defiant  action  of  a* high-spirited  sensitive  youth,  rudely 
summoned  from  the  gay  pursuits  of  youth,  and  confronted  suddenly  with  monstrous 
treachery,  with  crime  that  blurs  the  modesty  and  grace  of  nature,  that  makes  the 
very  sunlight  fire,  and  loads  the  sweet  air  of  heaven  with  pestilence.'  Marshall 
(p.  181)  thinks  that  Sh.  intended  Ham.  to  be  nearer  twenty  than  thirty;  the  general 
features  of  his  character  are  those  of  youth,  and  the  frequent  allusions  throughout 
the  play  to  his  being  very  young  forbid  the  belief  that  he  was  really  thirty  years  old. 
The  Grave-digger  may  mean  that  '  he  began  to  serve  his  apprenticeship  thirty  years 
before ;  but  he  may  not  have  come  to  the  trade  of  grave-maker  till  some  years  later ; 
so  that  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  day  when  King  Hamlet  overcame  For« 
tinbras  was  thirty  years  previously.' . . . . « The  most  material  objection  against  Ham* 
let's  being  more  than  between  twenty  and  Iwenty-three  years  of  age  is  that  if  he 
were  older  his  mother  could  scarcely  have  been  the  object  of  such  a  passion  as  that 
of  Claudius.' 

Minto  afterwards  (in  The  Academy,  18  December,  1875)  expressed  his  views  at 
greater  length.  Against  the  weighty  authority  of  the  Grave-digger  is  to  be  placed 
Laer.,  whose  advice  to  Oph.  in  simple  prose  means  that  she  was  not  to  trust  Ham., 
because  he  was  at  an  age  of  changeful  fancies  and  fleeting  attachments.  Who  would 
speak  of  the  love  of  a  man  of  thirty  as  'a  violet  in  the  youth  of  primy  nature'? 
The  very  idea  is  a  profanation  of  words,  which  carry  such  fragrance  with  them  when 
applied  to  the  first  love  of  budding  youth.  Again,  the  University  age  of  young 
noblemen  at  that  time  was  from  seventeen  to  nineteen,  and  Laer.  had  just  left  the 
University ;  Ham.  wanted  to  go  back  to  it,  and  Hor.  is  under  suspicion  of  playing 
« truant.'  The  play  is  full  of  allusions  to  the  youth  of  the  personages  coeval  with 
Ham.  Fort,  is  *  Young  Fortinbras,'  Laer.  is  *  Young  Laertes,' — the  epithet  in  both 
cases  being  repeated.  The  King  speaks  of  skill  with  the  rapier  as  a  *  very  riband 
in  the  cap  of  youth.'  Hamlet's  envy  of  Laertes's  fame  with  the  rapier  has  an 
almost  boyish  air.  Making  Ham.  thirty  also  adds  some  improbability  to  the  suc- 
cession of  Claudius  to  his  murdered  brother;  if  at  that  age  Ham.  had  tamely  sub- 
mitted to  such  a  usurpation,  and  desired  to  go  back  to  school  in  Wittenberg,  he 
would  have  been  too  contemptible  a  character  to  be  fitted  for  any  dramatist's  hero. 
Prof.  Dowden  having  pronounced,  in  a  notice  of  Werder's  Hamlet  (  The  Academy ; 
4  Dec.  1875),  that  theory  incredible  which  'makes  Ham., the  utterer  of  the  saddest 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  393 


[153.  Hamlet's  age.] 
and  most  thoughtful  soliloquies  to  be  found  in  Sh.,  a  boy  of  seventeen/  MiNTO 
replies  that  we  are  apt  to  underrate  the  precocity  of  boys  of  seventeen.    *  I  venture  to 
say  that  sad  and  thoughtful  questionings  of  the  mysteries  of  life  are  more  common 
among  boys  under  twenty  than  among  men  of  thirty.'    *  Not  only  is  it  possible  for  sad 
thoughts  to  come  to  a  youth  of  seventeen,  but  it  is  at  such  an  age,  when  the  character 
is  not  deeply  founded,  that  the  shattering  of  first  ideals  is  most  overwhelming.    The 
terrible  circumstances  that  overthrew  Hamlet's  noble  mind  gave  a  stimulus  to  the 
development  of  his  thoughtfulness  apart  from  an  increase  of  years.     The  fresher 
and  brighter  our  conception  of  the  gay  boy-world  out  of  which  he  was  summoned, 
the  deeper  becomes  the  monstrous  tint  of  the  horrible  ambition,  murder,  and  in- 
cest, which  appalled  his  vision  and  paralyzed  the  clear  working  of  his  mind  when 
he  was  first  called  upon  to  play  a  man's  part  in  the  battle  of  life.     Too  much  ha* 
been  said  of  the  philosophic  temperament  of  Ham. ;  impulse  and  passion  were  more 
in  his  nature  than  philosophy ;  his  philosophy  was  not  a  serene  growth,  a  natural  de- 
velopment of  a  mind  predisposed  to  thought;  it  was  wrung  out  of  him  by  circumstances 
terrible  enough  to  make  the  most  obtuse  mind  pause  and  reflect.'     Prof.  Dowden 
{The  Academy,  25  Dec.  1875)  urged  the  following  considerations  in  condemnation 
of  the  theory  that  Ham.  was  a  youth  of  seventeen  :  '  The  poet's  youngest  heroine: 
(children  of  the  South)  are  aged  fourteen  (Juliet,  Marina)   and  fifteen  (Miranda). 
The  age  of  Perdita  is  sixteen.     Sh.  loved  these  earliest  years  of  budding  woman- 
hood.    What  is  the  corresponding  period  of  early  manhood  that  charms  the  poet's 
imagination  ?     At  what  age  does  Sh.  conceive  that  boyhood  is  blooming  into  adult 
strength  and  beauty  ?     I  answer,  from  twenty-one  to  twenty-five.     The  stolen  sons 
of  Cymbeline,  boys  just  ready  to  be  men,  are  aged  twenty-three  and  twenty-two  j 
Florizel  looks  about  twenty-one  (  Wint.  Tale,  V,  i,  126) ;  Troilus,  a  beardless  youth 
(two  or  three  hairs  upon  his  chin),  is  older:  ■  he  ne'er  saw  three-and-twenty.'     I  am 
not  aware  that  we  can  determine  Romeo's  age.     Prince  Hal  at  the  time  of  hii 
father's  accession  was  some  twelve  years  old,  but  Sh.  represents  him  as  considerably 
older.     When  the  battle  of  Shrewsbury  took  place  (Henry  being  in  fact  sixteen 
years  old),  Sh.,  I  believe,  intends  his  age  to  be  ■  twenty-two  or  thereabouts'  (1  Hen, 
IV.  :  III,  iii,  212).     WTien  Henry  V  ascended  the  throne,  his  age  was  twenty-six, 
and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Sh.,  who  had  up  to  that  point  made  him  older 
than  the  Prince  Henry  of  history,  now  represented  him  as  younger.     The  Bishop  of 
Ely  says  :  '  My  thrice  puissant  liege  Is  in  the  very  May-morn  of  his  youth*     Test 
the  theory  of  Hamlet's  extreme  youth  by  the  other  plays.     Are  we  to  imagine  the 
utterer  of  the  soliloquy,  *  To  be  or  not  to  be,'  as  five  or  six  years  the  junior  of  the 
boys  of  old  Belarius,  and  that  at  a  period  of  life  when  each  added  year  counts  for 
much  ?     Is  Florizel, — one  of  Shakespeare's  ideals  of  youthful  grace, — four  years 
older  than  Ham.  ?     Did  Ham.  begin  his  observations  on  society  (V,  i,  150)  at  four- 
teen ?     Were  his  schoolfellows, — dispatched  on  a  critical  mission  to  England, — also 
youths  of  seventeen  ?     Can  it  be  proved  that  any  chief  male  personage  in  Shake- 
speare's plays  is  aged  seventeen,  or  eighteen,  or  even  nineteen  ?     The  dating  of  the 
Player-King's  marriage  is  important  in  this  discussion.     His  thirty  years'  wife  (rep- 
resenting Gertrude)  is  not  too  old  to  win  a  second  husband's  love ;  therefore  Ger- 
trude, although  the  'hey-day  of  her  blood'  is  'tame,'  is  not  necessarily  too  old;  we 
may  imagine  her  forty-seven.     But  I  am  not  greatly  concerned  to  maintain  the 


394 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  U 


Ham.    How  long  will  a  man  lie  i'  the  earth  ere  he  rot  ? 

First  Clo.    I'faith,  if  a*  be  not  rotten  before  a*  die, — as  155 
we  have  many  pocky  corses  now-a-days,  that  will  scarce 
hold  the  laying  in, — a'  will  last  you  some  eight  year  or  nine 
year ;  a  tanner  will  last  you  nine  year. 

Ham.    Why  he  more  than  another? 

First  Clo.    Why,  sir,  his  hide  is  so  tanned  with  his  trade  160 
that  a*  will  keep  out  water  a  great  while ;  and  your  water  is 
a  sore  decayer  of  your  whoreson  dead  body.   Here's  a  skull 


155.  Pfaith]  Rowe+,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Glo.-K  IfaithYi.  Fayth  Q^.  Faith 
or  ' Faith  Q4  et  cet. 

not]  Om.  F3F4. 

155,  157,  and  161.  a']  Cam.  Cla.  a 
Qq.     he  Ff  et  cet. 

156.  now-a-days]  Om.  Qq. 

158.  you  nine  year]  you  nine  year es 


F3F  .    you  nine  years  F  ,  Rowe+* 

160.  so]  Om.  F3F4,  Rowe. 

161.  your]  you  Rowe  ii. 

162.  whoreson]  horfon  F,. 

162, 163.  Here 's  a  skull. ..skull]  Here** 
a  skull  now  Qq,Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev* 
Var.  Sing.  Ktly  (Heer's  Qq). 


Player-King's  and  the  Grave-digger's  dates,  except  for  the  sake  of  resisting  rash 
tampering  v/ith  Shakespeare's  text.  I  can  imagine  Ham.  as  a  man  in  the  •  May- 
morn  of  his  youth '  at  twenty-six  or  twenty-five.  I  am  much  concerned,  however, 
to  oppose  such  a  misreading  of  the  play  as  would  not  only  render  the  conception  of 
Ham.  incoherent,  but  would  pervert  our  view  of  an  entire  group  of  lovely  charac- 
ters,— the  Florizels  and  Polydores  and  Ferdinands  of  Sh.  And  I  would  note  that 
Sh.  found  it  possible  to  think  of  thirty  as  a  youthful  age.  The  Grave-digger  him* 
self  speaks  of  *  young  Hamlet/  In  Much  Ado  we  read  (of  fashions  in  clothes) : 
*  How  giddily  a'  turns  about  all  the  hot  bloods  between  fourteen  and  five-and-thirty.' 
In  the  Sonnets  Sh.  names  forty  (not  thirty)  as  the  age  when  time  has  marred  the 
face.  In  the  Elegy  on  Burbadge,  that  great  actor  is  praised  for  his  equal  success 
in  the  part  of  '  young  Hamlet '  and  of  '  old  Hieronymo.'  If  Burbadge  represented 
Ham.  as  thirty  years  of  age,  still,  in  spite  of  the  thirty  years,  Burbadge's  Ham. 
passed  for  young.  I  will,  however,  yield  something,  and  if  any  critic  will  effi- 
ciently knock  upon  the  mazzard  that  *  absolute '  knave,  the  Clown,  I  accept  as 
satisfactory  the  age  assigned  by  Marshall, — twenty-five.' 

In  The  Academy y  II  March,  1876,  J.  W.  Hales  cites  the  following  quotation  from 
a  well-known  book  as  noteworthy  with  regard  to  Hamlet's  age :  '  For  fashion  sake 
some  [Danes]  will  put  their  children  to  schoole,  but  they  set  them  not  to  it  till 
they  are  fourteene  years  old;  so  that  you  shall  see  a  great  boy  with  a  beard 
learne  his  ABC,  and  sit  weeping  under  the  rod  when  he  is  thirty  years  old.'— • 
Nash's  Pierce  Penniless 's  Supplication  to  the  Devil,  ed.  Collier,  for  the  Sh.  Soc. 
p.  27.  «  So,  after  all,'  adds  Hales,  *  there  is  perhaps  less  inconsistency  in  the  play 
than  has  been  supposed.     I  do  not  mean  that  there  is  none.' 

157.  you]  An  ethical  dative.  See  II,  ii,  414;  also  Corson  {Cornell  Rev.  Oct* 
1876,  p.  42). 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


HAMLET 


395 


now;  this  skull  has  lain  in  the  earth  three  and  twenty  years. 

Ham.     Whose  was  it  ? 

First  Clo.     A  whoreson  mad  fellow's  it  was;   whose  do  165 
you  think  it  was  ? 

Ham.     Nay,  I  know  not. 

First  Clo.    A  pestilence   on  him   for  a  mad 
poured  a  flagon  of  Rhenish  on  my  head  once, 
skull,  sir,  was  Yorick's  skull,  the  king's  jester.  170 

Ham.     This  ? 

First  Clo.     E'en  that. 

Ham.    Let    me    see.      [Takes   the   s&ulli] — Alas,  poor 


rogue!   a* 
This  same 


163.  has  lain]  hath  lyen  you  Qq,  Jen. 
hath  lain  you  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sing. 
Coll.  EL  Del.  White,  Ktly,  Huds. 

three  and  twenty]  23.  QaQ3Q4. 
twenty  three  Q$. 

165,  166.  A. ..was?]  Two  lines,  Ff, 
Rowe. 

168.  a']  Coll.  a  QqFf,  Rowe,  Knt. 
he  Q'76,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 
Cald.  El. 

169,  170.    This,  .sir]    Twice  in  Ff, 


Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Sta.  White,  Ktly. 

170,    Yorick's]  fir  Yoricks  Qq,  Cap. 
Jen. 

173.  Let  me  see]   Om.  Qq,  Pope+f 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  i. 

[Takes  the  skull.]  After  This? 
line  171,  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sing,  i,  Cald. 
Coll.  Del.  El.  White.  After  see.  line 
173,  Sing,  ii,  Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.+, 
Mob.  Huds.  Om.  QqFf,  Rowe  +, 
Knt. 


163.  three  and  twenty]  Halliwell:  I  have  ventured  to  alter  the  text  here  to 
a  dozen  by  the  aid  of  Q:,  in  order  to  avoid  a  chronological  difficulty,  and  for  a  similar 
reason  to  alter  « thirty'  to  twenty  in  line  153.  It  must  be  remembered  that  Ham.  is 
alluded  to  in  the  First  Act  as  a  very  young  man. 

169,  170.  This  . . .  sir]  White:  If  the  repetition  of  these  words  were  accidental 
in  the  Ff,  the  chance  must  be  reckoned  among  gli  inganni  felici.  Dyce  (ed.  2) :  I 
wish  White  had  told  us  what  force  is  added  to  the  dialogue  by  the  repetition.  COR. 
SON  partially  answers  Dyce's  question  by  saying  that  the  repetition  serves  to  exhibit 
the  Clown's  *  sense  of  his  official  importance  as  he  turns  the  skull  over  in  his  hands ;' 
[there  also  lurks  in  it  a  tone  of  hesitation,  as  though  deliberating  carefully  the  posi- 
tion of  the  skull  in  the  earth  whence  it  was  exhumed  before  deciding  on  the  owner- 
ship. Ed.] 

170.  Yorick]  J.  San  (N.  &>  Qu.,  5  Oct.  1861)  :  This  is  the  German  and  Danish 
Georg,  Jorg,  our  George;  the  English^  represents  the  foreign/,  which  has  the  same 
sound.  Clarendon  :  Mr  Magnusson  suggests  to  us  that  this  name  may  be  a  cor- 
ruption of  Rorick,  Saxo's  Roricus,  Hamlet's  grandfather  on  the  mother's  side. 
Latham  (Two  Dissertations,  &c,  1 872,  pp.  93  and  145):  Name  for  name,  the 
*  Yorick  *  of  Six.  seems  to  be  the  Eric  of  Der  bestrafte  Briider?nord.  If  so,  the 
King  is  his  own  Jester.  Be  it  so.  A  Chronicon  Erici  Regis  actually  exists.  A 
Gesta  Erici  Regis  may  have  existed.  Hence,  by  a  confusion  of  which  we  only  get 
a  general  notion,  out  of  Gesta  Erici  Regis  may  have  come  Yorick,  the  King's  Jester. 
[' Jerick'  is  the  name  of  a  '  Dutch  Bowr'  in  Chapman's  A/phonsus.  Ed.] 

173.  Let  .• .'.  see]  Knight:  This  supersedes  any  stage-direction. 


39<5 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


Yorick ! — I  knew  him,  Horatio ;  a  fellow  of  infinite  jest,  of 
most  excellent  fancy;   he  hath  borne  me  on  his  back  a  175 
thousand  times ;  and  now  how  abhorred  in  my  imagination 
it  is!  my  gorge  rises  at  it.     Here  hung  those  lips  that  I     Ls 
have   kissecTT  know  not  how  oft. — Where  be  your  gibes 
now  ?  your  gambols  ?  your  songs  ?  your  flashes  of  merri- 
ment, that  were  wont  to  set  the  table  on  a  roar  ?     Not  one  1 80 
now,  to  mock  your  own  grinning?  quite  chop-fallen?     Now 
get  you  to  my  lady's  chamber,  and  tell  her,  let  her  paint 
an  inch  thick,  to  this   favour  she   must  come;   make  her 
laugh  at  that. — Prithee,  Horatio,  tell  me  one  thing. 

Hor.    What's  that,  my  lord  ?  185 

Ham.    Dost  thou  think  Alexander  looked  o*  this  fashion 
i'  the  earth  ? 
Hor.    E'en  so. 


4^H/ 


175.  borne]  bore  Qq. 

176.  and  now  how]  And  how  Ff, 
Rowe. 

176, 177.  in.. .is]  my  imagination  is 
Ff,  Knt,  Del.  White,  my  imagination 
is  now  Rowe. 

179.  gambols]  jests  Q'76. 

180.  on  a  roar]  in  a  roar  Pope+, 
Mob. 


180.  Not   one]   No  one  Ff,  Rowe, 
White. 

181 .  grinning]    jfeering  Ff,   Rowe, 
Cald.  Knt. 

182.  chamber]  table  Qq,  Jen.  Tsch. 

183.  favour]    savour   Warb.     (mis* 
print?). 

186.  d]  a  Qq.    on  Q'76. 


176.  abhorred  in]  White:  What  is  abhorred ?  At  what  does  Hamlet's  gorge 
rise  ?  At  the  skull  ?  He  is  not  speaking  of  that.  What  he  abhors,  what  his  gorge 
rises  at,  is  his  imagination  that  here  hung  the  lips  that  he  has  kissed.  This  construc- 
tion is  sustained  by  the  reading  of  Qt :  '  those  lippes  . . .  they  abhorre  me.'  Clarke  : 
•  It '  in  this  sentence,  and  in  « my  gorge  rises  at  it*  is  used  in  reference  to  the  idea 
of  having  been  borne  on  t&e  back  of  him  whose  skeleton  remains  'are  thus  suddenly 
presented  to  the  speaker's  gaze,  the  idea  of  having  caressed  and  been  fondled  by  one 
whose  mouldering  fleshless  skull  is  now  held  in  the  speaker's  hand. 

177.  gorge]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  Throat,  swallow,  equivalent  to  stomach  (Fr. gorge). 

180.  on  a  roar]  Clarendon:  We  still  say  'to  set  on  fire,'  and  in  Exodus,  xix, 
18,  we  find  « on  a  smoke'  for  ' smoking.* 

181.  grinning]  Collier  :  The  skull  did  not  jeer,  though  it  'grinned.' 

182.  chamber]  Steevens:  The  table  of  the  Qq  means  her  dressing-table.  DoUCE 
(ii,  264) :  There  is  good  reason  for  supposing  that  Sh.  borrowed  this  thought  from 
some  print  or  picture  he  had  seen.  There  are  several  which  represent  a  lady  at  her 
toilet,  and  an  old  man  presenting  a  skull  before  the  mirror. 

183.  favour]  Steevens:  Countenance  or  complexion.  Clarendon:  So  in 
Bacon,  Essay  xliii :  '  In  beauty,  that  of  favour  is  more  than  that  of  colour,  and  that 
of  decent  and  gracious  motion  more  than  that  of  favour.' 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


HAMLET 


397 


Ham.    And  smelt  so  ?  puh !  \Pnts  down  the  skull. 

Hor.     E'en  so,  my  lord. 

Ham.  To  what  base  uses  we  may  return,  Horatio! 
Why  may  not  imagination  trace  the  noble  dust  of  Alex- 
ander, till  he  find  it  stopping  a  bung-hole  ? 

Hor.     'Twere  to  consider  too  curiously,  to  consider  so. 

Ham.  No,  faith,  not  a  jot ;  but  to  follow  him  thither 
with  modesty  enough  and  likelihood  to  lead  it ;  as  thus : 
Alexander  died,  Alexander  was  buried,  Alexander  return- 
eth  into  dust ;  the  dust  is  earth ;  of  earth  we  make  loam ; 
and  why  of  that  loam,  whereto  he  was  converted,  might 
they  not  stop  a  beer-barrel  ? 

Imperious  Csesar,  dead  and  turn'd  to  clay, 


190 


I9S 


^ 


200 


189.  so? puh']  Ff,Rowe  +  ,Knt,White. 
fopak  Q2Qy  fo  :  pah  Q4Q$.  so  ?  pah 
Q'76  et  cet. 

[Puts  down...]  Coll.  Throws  it 
down.  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Smelling 
to  the  Scull.  Rowe+,  Jen.     Om.  QqFf. 

193.  he]  a  Qq. 
find]  found  Jen. 

194.  consider  too]  conftder ;  to  F,. 
conftder  :  too  F2F3F4. 

195.  thither]  thether  QqFx. 

196.  as  thus  :]  Om.  Qq,  Jen. 


197.  returneth]  returned  Coll.  ii 
(MS). 

198.  into]  to  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen, 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Sing.  El. 

199.  that  loam. ..was]  this  earth. ..was 
or  that  loam. ..may  have  been  Seymour. 

200.  beer-barret]  Beare-barrell  Q3Q- 

201.  Imperious]  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 
Sing.  Ktly,  Glo.  + ,  Dyce  ii.  Imperial! 
FIF3.     Imperial  F3F4  et  cet. 


191.  we  may]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  248) :  Surely  the  old  syntax  requires  may  we. 

201-204.  Dyce  (ed.  1) :  Are  these  four  lines  a  quotation?  Collier  {Notes,  &c, 
p.  445) :  They  are  marked  in  the  (MS)  as  a  quotation;  and  they  seemed  to  have  oc- 
curred to  the  speaker  as  extremely  apposite  to  what  he  had  himself  just  said.  We 
have  no  notion  whence  the  passage  was  taken.  Dyce  (ed.  2)  repeats  his  query, 
and  answers :  ■  I  believe  not.*  Clarke  :  Ham.  is  merely  putting  into  rhyming 
form  the  fancy  that  for  the  moment  passes  through  his  mind.  Sh.  has  made  this  a 
marked  characteristic  with  Ham. — a  tendency  to  doggerelize  when  he  is  speaking 
lightly  or  excitedly;  thus  III,  ii,  281,  282.  Again  at  the  close  of  the  present  scene, 
where  it  is  not  so  much  a  couplet  that  conventionally  closes  a  scene  as  it  is  a  fleer 
extemporaneously  put  into  rhyme,  by  way  of  light  turning  off  from  serious  thought 
and  remonstrance  to  a  manner  that  shall  favor  the  belief  in  his  madness. 

201.  Imperious]  Malone:  This  is  used  in  the  same  sense  as  imperial.  See 
Tro.  c>*  Cres.  IV,  v,  172;  and  Cymb.  IV,  ii,  35.  There  are  other  instances  in  the 
Folio  of  a  familiar  term  being  substituted  in  the  room  of  a  more  ancient  word ; 
e.g.  rites  for  'crants,'  line  220.  Dyce  {Few  Notes,  &c,  p.  144):  'Imperious'  in 
Shakespeare's  time  was  the  usual  form  of  the  word.  Thus,  ■  The  scepters  promis'd 
of  imperious  Rome.' — Countess  of  Pembroke's  Tragedie  of  Antonie  (trans,  from 
the  French),  1595.  Even  in  Fletcher's  Prophetess,  written  long  after  Hamlet:  *  'tis 
Imperious  Rome,'  II,  iii.  Caldecott  :  It  was  so  used  down  to  at  least  the  middle 
34 


398 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


Might  stop  a  hole  to  keep  the  wind  away ; 
Oh,  that  that  earth,  which  kept  the  world  in  awe, 
Should  patch  a  wall  to  expel  the  winter's  flaw ! 
But  soft !  but  soft !  aside !  here  comes  the  king, 


202 


205 


Enter  Priests,  "&c,  in  procession;  the  Corpse  of  Ophelia,  Laertes  and  Mourners 
following  it;  King,  Queen,  their  trains,  &>c. 

The  queen,  the  courtiers ;  who  is  that  they  follow? 
And  with  such  maimed  rites  ?    This  doth  betoken 
The  corse  they  follow  did  with  desperate  hand, 
Fordo  it  own  life ;  't  was  of  some  estate. 


203.  that  that']  that  the  Jen.  Cald. 

204.  Should]  Shoulp  Q4.     Soidd  Q  . 
to    expel]    f   expell  QqFxF3F4, 

Rowe+ ,  Jen.  Coll.  White,     expell  Fa. 
winter's]  waters  Qq,  Jen. 

205.  aside]  awhile  Qq.   a  while  Q'76, 
Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.  El.  White. 

Enter...]  Mai.  after  Cap.  Enter 
K.  Q.  Laertes  and  the  corfe.  Qq  (in 
margin).  Enter  King,  Queene,  Laertes, 
and  a  Coffin,  with  Lords  attendant.  Ff, 


Rowe+.    After  line  204,  Sing.  Ktly. 

206.  Scene  ii.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

who  is  that]  Ff,  Cald.  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Huds-.  Who  is't  that 
F2.  What  wV  that  F3F4,  Rowe.  What 
is  that  Pope  + .     who  is  this  Qq  et  cet. 

207.  rites]     rights     F2F3F4,     Rowe, 
Pope  i. 

209.  it]  QqFtFa,  White,  Ktly,  Cla. 
it's  F3F4,  Rowe,  Cap.     its  Q'76  et  cet. 
of]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Johns.  Cald. 


of  the  next  century.  See  Drayton's  Mttse's  Elysium :  *  Or  Jove's  emperious  Queene.' 
Dyce  :  We  find,  indeed,  *  imperial  Caesar '  in  Cymb,  V,  v,  474 ;  but  then  that  play 
comes  to  us  only  through  the  Folio. 

204.  patch  a  wall]  Caldecott  cites  the  following  passage  from  Harrison's  De- 
scription of  England,  to  show  that  the  text  gives  no  very  unfaithful  picture  of  the 

general  state  of  habitations  in  the  days  of  Shakespeare's  youth :     ' in  the  open 

champaine  countries  they  are  enforced  for  want  of  stuffe  to  vse  no  studs  at  all,  but 
onlie  posts  ....  with  here  and  there  a  girding,  wherevnto  they  fasten  their  splints  or 
radels,  and  then  cast  it  all  ouer  with  claie  to  keepe  out  the  wind,  which  otherwise 
would  annoie  them.  Certes  this  rude  kind  of  building  made  the  Spaniards  in 
queene  Maries  daies  to  woonder,  but  cheefiie  when  they  saw  what  large  diet  was 
vsed  in  manie  of  these  so  homelie  cottages;  in  so  much  that  one  of  no  small  repu- 
tation amongst  them  said  after  this  maner :  "  These  English  (quoth  he)  haue  their 
houses  made  of  sticks  and  durt,  but  they  fare  commonlie  so  well  as  the  king  "  '  (p. 
233,  ed.  New  Sh.  Soc). 

204.  flaw]  Malone  :  A  sudden  gust  of  wind.  '  Groppo,  a  flawe  or  berrie  of 
winde.' — Florio,  Ital.  Diet.  1598.  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  'A  flaw  (or  gust)  of  wind.  Tour- 
billon  de  vent? — Cotgrave.  *  A  flaw  of  wind  is  a  gust,  which  is  very  violent  upon  a 
sudden,  but  quickly  endeth.' — Smith's  Sea  Grammar,  1627. 

206.  that]  Corson:  'That,'  per  se,  is  better  than  this,  Ham.  and  Hor.  being 
supposed  to  be  at  some  distance  from  the  procession;  and  then  '  This,'  occurring  in 
the  next  line,  referring  to  '  maimed  rites,'  adds  to  the  preferableness  of  the  Ff  reading, 

209.  Fordo]  See  II,  i,  103. 

209.  it]  See  I,  ii,  216. 


ACT  T,  SC.  i.] 


HAMLET 


399 


Couch  wc  awhile,  and  mark.  [Retiring  with  Horatio.  210 

Lacr.     What  ceremony  else  ? 

Ham.     That  is  Laertes,  a  very  noble  youth ;  mark. 

Lacr.     What  ceremony  else  ? 

First  Priest.     Her  obsequies  have  been  as  far  enlarged 
As  we  have  warrantise;  her  death  was  doubtful ;  215 

And,  but  that  great  command  o'ersways  the  order, 
She  should  in  ground  unsanctified  have  lodged 
Till  the  last  trumpet ;  for  charitable  prayers, 


210.  Couch  we]  Stand  by  Q'76. 
we]  me  Rowe  ii. 
[Retiring...]  Cap.     Om.  QqFf. 

211.  [to  the  Priests.  Cap. 

211,  213.  ceremony]  Cerimony  Yx. 

212.  [to  Horatio.  Cap. 

That. ..mark]    One    line,  QqFf, 
Rowe +  ,  Jen.  Cam.  Cla.   Two  half-lines 
(dividing  at  Laertes),  Cap.  et  cet. 
very]  most  Pope  + . 
mark]  make  Q^Qj.     Om.  Q'76. 
214,  223.  First   Priest.]    I.   P.   Cap. 
Prieft.  Ff.     Docl.  Qq. 

214.  as  far]  so  far  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 


Johns. 

215.  warrantise]  Dyce,  Sta.  White, 
Knt  ii,  Del.  ii,  Glo.  Huds.  Cla.  war* 
rantisYx.  warrantieQ2QF2FFA.  war 
rantize  Cap.  conj.  (  Var.  Readings,  p. 
32).  warranties  Cald.  Knt  i.  war* 
ranty  Q4Q,  et  cet. 

217.  unsanctified]  unfancl ied  FaF  . 
have]    been   Q3Qy      beene    Q4i 

bin  Qs. 

218.  Tilt... trumpet]  Om.  Q'76. 
trumpet]  trump  Pope  +  . 
prayers]  prayer  Ff,  Rowe,  Sta. 


209.  estate]  Johnson  :  Some  person  of  high  rank. 

210.  couch]  Clarendon:  Lie  down,  and  so  hide. 

215.  warrantise]  Whalley:  Is  there  any  allusion  here  to  the  coroner's  war- 
rant, directed  to  the  minister  and  churchwardens  of  a  parish,  and  permitting  the 
body  of  a  person  who  comes  to  an  untimely  end  to  receive  Christian  burial  ?  Clar- 
endon :  This  suggestion  of  Whalley's  receives  support  from  the  conversation  of  the 
Clowns  at  the  beginning  of  the  scene,  but  is  scarcely  consistent  with  what  follows  in 
the  next  line,  where  'great  command'  evidently  refers  to  the  influence  of  the  king, 
which  had  been  exercised  so  as  to  interfere  with  the  usual  proceedings.  The  rubric 
before  the  Burial  Office  forbids  it  to  be  used  for  persons  who  have  laid  violent  hands 
upon  themselves.  For  the  word  •  warrantise/  see  Cotgrave :  '  Garentage  :  m.  War- 
rantie,  warrantize,  warrantage.' 

215.  doubtful]  Seymour  (ii,  199) :  But  the  Queen,  who  was  witness  of  the  factr 
has  told  us  that  the  death  was  accidental,  from  the  breaking  of  an  '  envious  sliver ' 
of  a  tree.  Moberly  :  Only  so  far  as  that  she  was  a  lunatic,  and  had  died  by  her 
own  act ;  the  presumption  in  such  a  case  being  held  to  be  that  the  act  was  wilful ; 
and  there  being  always  a  doubt  whether  Christian  burial  could  then  be  demanded ; 
although,  as  Burn's  Ecclesiastical  Law  states,  there  is  no  record  of  its  having  been 
actually  refused  in  any  instance. 

216.  order]  Caldecott:  That  is,  the  course  which  ecclesiastical  rules  prescribe. 
2 1 8.  for]  For  instances  of  *  for,'  meaning  instead  of,  see  I,  iii.  131,  and  Abbott, 

§148. 


400  HAMLET  [act  v,  SC.  L 

Shards,  flints,  and  pebbles  should  be  thrown  on  her ; 

Yet  here  she  is  allow'd  her  virgin  crants,  220 

219.  Shards']  Om.  Qq.  220.  crants]   Crants  Qq.     Rites  Ff. 
pebbles]  Peebles  QqFxF2.                     Rowe+,  Cap.  Jen.  Cald.  Knt,  Del.  i. 

220.  allow'd]  allowed  Ff,  Rowe.  "White,  Huds. 

219.  Shards]  Fragments  of  broken  tiles  or  pots.     See  Macb.  Ill,  ii,  42. 

220.  crants]  Warburton  pronounced  this  an  *  evident  corruption  of  chant?,  the 
true  word,'  on  the  ground  that  a  specific  rather  than  a  generic  term  was  required  to 
answer  to  '  maiden  strewments.'  Edwards,  whose  book,  Canons  of  Criticism,  was 
written  in  ridicule  of  Warburton's  edition,  suggests  derisively  (7th  ed.,  p.  147)  that 
Warburton  had  better  have  '  pitched  upon  grants,  wants,  pants,  or  any  other,  pro- 
vided it  rhymes  to  chants ;  because  it  would  seem  by  the  very  next  speech  of  the 
Priest  that  these  same  chants  were  the  only  things  denied  her  ['-To  sing  a  requiem ']. 
If  Warburton's  reading  be  approved,  we  should,  to  restore  integrity,  make  a  slight 
alteration  in  line  221,  and  read  "  Her  maiden  'struments  "  for  instruments.  Music, 
not  only  vocal,  but  instrumental  also.'  Heath  supposes  '  crants '  to  be  a  misprint 
for  jrants,  that  is,  '  the  ceremonies  granted  by  custom  to  those  who  died  unmarried/ 
and  that  Sh.  afterwards  substituted  rites.  Johnson,  on  the  authority  of  an  anonymous 
con  espondent,  was  the  first  to  explain  '  crants  '  as  the  German  word  for  garlands ; 
adding,  that '  to  carry  garlands  before  the  bier  of  a  maiden,  and  to  hang  them  over 
her  grave,  is  still  the  practice  in  rural  parishes.'  '  Crants,'  therefore,  was  the  original" 
word,  which  Sh.,  discovering  to  be  provincial,  and  perhaps  not  understood,  changed 
to  a*  term  more  intelligible,  but  less  proper.  '  Maiden  rites '  give  no  certain  or 
definite  image.  Malone  doubted  whether  this  and  many  other  changes  in  the 
Folio  were  made  by  Sh.,  as  an  attentive  comparison  of  the  Qq  and  Ff  would  show. 
Dyce  (ed.  i)  emphasises  the  fact  on  which  both  Warburton  and  Dr  Johnson  lay 
stress,  viz. :  that  a  specific,  definitive  image  is  here  essential,  and  that  rites  does  not 
fulfil  this  requirement,  while  *  crants '  does.  Of  the  advocates  for  rites,  Knight  and 
White  are  the  chief;  the  former  urges  that  'the  "maiden  strewments"  are  the 
flowers,  the  garlands,  which  piety  scatters  over  the  bier  of  the  young  and  innocent. 
The  rites  included  these.'  White  agrees  with  him,  that  •  crants '  would  hereby  be  a 
mere  repetition.  Elze  cannot  avoid  the  conviction  that  •  crants '  is  a  sophistication, 
since  a  most  unusual  and  foreign  word  would  never  be  applied  to  a  most  usual  and 
domestic  ceremony.  In  Dyce's  second  ed.  he  gives  this  note  of  Lettsom's  :  '  Most 
of  the  edd.  explain  'crants'  by  garlands ;  but  the  German  Kranz  is  singular,  and 
the  singular  seems  indispensable  here.  From  a  note  to  Prior's  Danish  Ballads,  it 
would  seem  that  young  unmarried  Danish  ladies  wear,  or  wore,  chaplets  of  pearl ; 
at  least,  'fair  Elsey'  is  described  as  wearing  one;  and  the  translator  (vol.  ill, p.  in) 
says  that  this  is  the  same  as  the  'virgin  frant  (sic)  of  Oph.'  Guided  by  this,  Dyce, 
in  his  Gloss.,  defines  '  crants,'  a  crown,  a  chaplet,  a  garland,  and  cites  Jamieson, 
Etym.  Did.  of  the  Scottish  Lang. :  '  Crance ....  Teut.  krants,  corona,  corolla, 
sertum,  strophium,  Kilian.  Germ.  Kranz?  &c.  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that 
Jamieson,  in  this  same  passage  cited  by  Dyce,  gives  an  instance  of  the  plural :  '  Thair 
heids  wer  garnisht  gallandlie  With  costly  crancis  maid  of  gold.' — Watson's  Collec- 
tion of  Choice  Songs,  &c,  ii,  10.  Halliwell  gives  a  wood-cut  of  a  funeral  garland 
seen  by  Fairholt.  in  1844,  suspended  in  St  Albans  Abbey.    '  It  was  then.'  says 


ACTV.sc.  i.]  HAMLET  40I 

Her  maiden  strewments,  and  the  bringing  home  221 

Of  bell  and  burial. 

Lacr.     Must  there  no  more  be  done? 

First  Priest.  No  more  be  done : 

We  should  profane  the  service  of  the  dead 
To  sing  a  requiem  and  such  rest  to  her  225 

As  to  peace-parted  souls. 

22-1.  maiden    strewments]      maiden-  (MS),     such    requiem     White,     false 

strewments  Theob.  ii.Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  requiem  Anon.* 

223.  there]  Om.  Pope  +  .  226.  peace-parted]  peace-departed  F3 

225.  a   requiem]  /age   Requiem  Ff,  F^. 

Rowe,  Cald.  Knt.     sad  requiem  Coll.  [Coffin  lay'd  in.  Cap. 

Fairholt,  *  very  old,  and  I  was  told  by  "the  sexton  that  such  garlands  were  once  com. 
monly  borne  before  the  bodies  of  unmarried  women  to  the  grave,  and  suspended  in 
the  church  afterwards,  but  that  the  custom  had  ceased  tv/enty  years  before  this  time. 
The  substructure  was  formed  of  wooden  hoops,  to  which  were  affixed  rosettes  of 
coloured  paper,  and  flowers,  real  and  artificial,  covered  the  whole ;  when  I  &aw  it 
nothing  but  the  remains  of  the  artificial  decorations  remained ;  but  the  sexton  ex- 
plained to  me  that  the  whole  had  been  originally  thickly  covered  with  flowers.' 
According  to  Nares  no  other  instance  of  the  use  of  this  word  had  been  found ;  it 
was  reserved  for  Elze  to  discover  two  examples  of  it  elsewhere.  In  Chapman's 
Alphonsus  (ed.  Elze,  1867,  p.  82)  there  is  the  following  stage-direction:  'Enter 
....  Saxon,  Mentz  like  Clowns  with  each  of  them  a  Mitre  with  Corances  on 
their  heads.'  In  a  note  on  « corances,'  Elze  says,  referring  to  the  present  passage 
in  Hamlet:  •  Sh.,  in  my  opinion,  made  the  acquaintance  of  this  German  importation 
at  the  Steelyard,  or  he  witnessed  the  funeral,  in  London,  of  some  young  German 
girl,  where  the  coffin  was  decked,  according  to  the  German  custom,  with  "crances;" 
nay,  both  may  have  been  the  case.  From  the  present  passage  it  would  appear  that 
we  ought  to  write  crance.  See  Cooper's  List  of  Foreign  Protestants  and  Aliens, 
where  "Hans"  is  usually  spelt  "Hance"  or  "  Haunce."  *  The  second  instance 
occurs  on  p.  117, '  When  thou  hast  stolen  her  dainty  rose-corance.' 

221.  strewments]  Clarendon:  Compare  Rom.  <5^  Jul.  IV,  v,  79  and  89;  lb. 
V,  iii,  280;   Wint.  Tale,  IV,  iv,  128;  Cymb.  IV,  ii,  218. 

221.  bringing  home]  Clarendon:  In  these  words  reference  is  still  made  to 
the  marriage  rites,  which  in  the  case  of  maidens  are  sadly  parodied  in  the  funeral 
rites.  See  Rom.  &  Jul.  IV,  v,  85-90.  As  the  bride  was  brought  home  to  her 
husband's  house  with  bell  and  wedding  festivity,  so  the  dead  maiden  is  brought  to 
her  last  home  «  with  bell  and  burial.' 

222.  Of]  Equivalent  to  with.  See  Abbott,  §  193,  which  most  nearly  explains 
the  use  of  '  of '  here. 

225.  a  requiem]  Caldecott  :  Sage  of  the  Ff  is  grave  and  solemn.  Knight  : 
We  suspect  some  corruption  of  the  text.  Collier  :  The  (MS)  alters  sage  to  sadt 
which  may  be  the  true  word.  Dyce  :  But  qy.  is  it  not  rather  a  mistake  for  such  ? 
Singer  :  '  Requiem '  is  so  called  from  the  words  of  the  service :  *  Requiem  aeternam 
dona  eis,  Domine.' 

226.  peace-parted]  Clarendon:  A  singularly-formed  compound,  of  which  there 

34*  2  A 


402 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


Laer.  Lay  her  i'  the  earth ;—  226 

And  from  her  fair  and  unpolluted  flesh 
May  violets  spring ! — I  tell  thee,  churlish  priest, 
A  ministering  angel  shall  my  sister  be, 
When  thou  liest  howling. 

Ham.  What,  the  fair  Ophelia  ?  230 

Queen.   [Scattering \flowers\  Sweets  to  the  sweet;  farewell! 
I  hoped  thou  shouldst  have  been  my  Hamlet's  wife. 
I  thought  thy  bride-bed  to  have  deck'd,  sweet  maid, 
And  not  t'  have  strew'd  thy  grave. 

Laer.  Oh,  treble  woes 

Fall  ten  times  treble  on  that  cursed  head  23$ 

Whose  wicked  deed  thy  most  ingenious  sense 
Deprived  thee  of! — Hold  off  the  earth  awhile, 
Till  I  have  caught  her  once  more  in  mine  arms. 

[Leaps  into  the  grave. 


2^1.  [Scattering flowers]  Johns.  Om. 
QqFf. 

Sweets.. .farewell']  Sweets  to  the 
fweet,  farewell  Qq.  Sweets,  to  the  fweet 
farewell  FXF2.  Sweets,  to  thee  fweet 
farewell  FF.  Sweets,  to  thee  sweet, 
farewell  Rowe. 

232.  shouldst]  would' st  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope. 

234.  /'  have]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing,  ii, 
Sta.  White,  to  have  Coll.  Del.  i,  El. 
Ktly,  Hal.     haue  Qq  et  cet. 


234.  treble  woes]  Ed.  Walker  conj. 
trebble  woe  Q4Q5-  terrible  woer  Fx.  ter- 
rible wooer  F2F  F  ,  Rowe.  treble  woe 
Q2Q3  et  cet. 

235.  treble]  trebble  FtFa.  double  Qq, 
Jen.     treble  woes  Rowe. 

cursed]  curs1 d  Rowe. 

236.  237.  deed.. .of  I]  deeds  deprived 
thee  of  Thy  mofl  ingenuous  fense  :  Q'76. 

238.  mine]  my  Rowe+. 

[Leaps  into  the  grave.]    Leaps 
in  the  graue.  FXF2F3.     Om.  Qq. 


is  no  other  example,  for  '  peacefully  parted,'  '  departed  in  peace.'  A  similar  irregu- 
larity is  found  in  the  compound  *  death-practised.' — Lear,  IV,  vi,  284. 

228.  violets]  Steevens  :  Thus  Persius,  Sat.  i,  37. 

232>  233-  shouldst  have  been  ...  to  have  decked]  Abbott,  §  360 :  It  is  now 
commonly  asserted  that  such  expressions  as  •  I  hoped  to  have  seen  him  yesterday '  are 
ungrammatical.  But  in  the  Elizabethan,  as  in  Early  English  authors,  after  verbs  of 
hoping,  intending,  or  verbs  signifying  that  something  ought  to  have  been  done,  but 
was  not,  the  Complete  Present  Infinitive  is  used. 

234.  woe]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  271)  conjectures  woes.  In  a  footnote  Lettsom 
says :  It  is  whimsical  enough  that  the  Qq,  which  in  this  line  correctly  read  treble  for 
the  Ff  terrible,  in  the  very  next  line  read  double  for  the  Ff  correct  treble.  I  men- 
tion this  that  they  may  not  be  trusted  too  confidently  for  '  woe '  in  preference  to 
«  woes.'  [I  think  it  likely  that  either  the  r  in  woer  of  Fx  is  a  misprint  for  s,  or  else 
the  compositor  mistook  the  s  in  the  MS  from  which  he  set  up.  Moreover,  the  plural 
somewhat  avoids  the  cacophony  of  the  singular:  'Oh,  treble  woe.'  Ed.] 

236.  ingenious  sense]  Caldecott  :  Compare  Lear,  IV,  vi,  287,  288. 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  4°3 

Now  pile  your  dust  upon  the  quick  and  dead, 

Till  of  this  flat  a  mountain  you  have  made  240 

To  o'ertop  old  Pelion  or  the  skyish  head 

Of  blue  Olympus. 

Ham.     \Advancing\  What  is  he  whose  grief 
Bears  such  an  emphasis  ?  whose  phrase  of  sorrow 
Conjures  the  wandering  stars,  and  makes  them  stand 
Like  wonder-wounded  hearers  ?     This  is  I,  245 

Hamlet  the  Dane !  [Leaps  into  the  grave. 

Laer.  The  devil  take  thy  soul ! 

[Grappling  with  him. 

Ham.    Thou  pray'st  not  well. 
I  prithee,  take  thy  fingers  from  my  throat ; 
For,  though  I  am  not  splenitive  and  rash, 
Yet  have  I  something  in  me  dangerous,  250 

241.  To    o'ertop']    Tdretop    Q2Q3Q4-         Q'76. 

To  retop  Q  .     T  oretop  Q'76.     T  o'er-  246.  [Grappling...]  Rowe.  Om.  QqFf. 

top  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Dyce  ii.  247,  248.  Thou. ..throat]  One  line,  Qq. 

242.  blue]  blew  QqFIF3F3.  249.  For]  Sir  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt. 
[Advancing]  Cap.    Discovering  splenitive]  Theob.  ii.  fpleenative 

himself.  Pope +  .     Om.  QqFf.  QqFf,  Rowe.    fplenative  Pope,  Theob. 

242,  243.  grief  Bears]  griefe  Beares  splenetive  Plan.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  White, 

Qq.    griefes  Beares  FXF2.    griefs  Bears  Ktly.     splenetic  Coll.  (MS). 

F  .    griefs  Bear  F4,  Rowe+,  Cald.  and]  Om.  Qq. 

244.  Conjures]  Coniure  Ft.  250.  I.. .dangerous]    I  dangerous   in 

245.  This  is]  tis  Q^QS.  me  something  Tsch. 

246.  [Leaps...]  Hamlet  leaps...  Rowe.  something  in  me]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Om.  QqFf.    [leaps  too  in  the  Grave.  Cap.  Del.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Huds.  Cla.  Mob. 

The. ..soul]  Perdition  catch  thee         in  me  fomething  Qq  et  cet. 

244.  wandering  stars]  Clarendon  :  The  planets,  of  which  Cotgrave  says  {5. 
v.  Pianette),  'they  bee  also  called  Wandering  starres,  because  they  neuer  keepe  one 
certaine  place  or  station  in  the  firmament.'  In  Albumazar,  I,  i,  they  are  called 
'  wanderers.' 

245.  This  .  .  .  Dane]  Grant  White  {Hamlet  the  Younger,  p.  543) :  With  a 
tremendous  revulsion  of  feeling  Ham.  breaks  forth  into  passionate  exclamations  of 
love  and  grief;  and  then,  too,  at  this  strange  unfitting  time  he  claims  his  royal  rank, 
and  announces  himself  as  '  The  Dane.'  Werder  (p.  202)  interprets  this  as  the 
answer  to  the  question  Ham.  has  just  asked. 

247.  Thou  . . .  well]  Moberly  :  A  litotes  marking  the  perfect  self-possession  of 
Ham.  at  first,  and  his  real  love  for  Laer. 

249.  For]  See  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  290)  on  the  confounding  of  Sir  for  for,  in  the 
Folio. 

249.  splenitive]  Clarendon:  Sh.  uses  'spleeny,'  Hen.  VIII:  III,  ii,  99;  and 
'spleenful,  Tit.  And.  II,  iii,  191,  in  the  same  sense.  The  spleen  was  supposed  to 
be  the  seat  of  anger.     Compare  1  Hen.  IV:  V,  ii,  19. 


404  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  i. 

Which  let  thy  wisdom  fear.     Hold  off  thy  hand !  251 

King.     Pluck  them  asunder. 

Queen.  Hamlet,  Hamlet! 

All.    Gentlemen, — 

Hor.  Good  my  lord,  be  quiet. 

[The  Atte?idants part  themf  and  they  come  out 

of  the  grave. 

Ham.    Why,  I  will  fight  with  him  upon  this  theme 
Until  my  eyelids  will  no  longer  wag.  255 

Queen.     O  my  son,  what  theme  ? 

Ham.     I  loved  Ophelia ;  forty  thousand  brothers 
Could  not,  with  all  their  quantity  of  love, 
Make  up  my  sum. — What  wilt  thou  do  for  her? 

King.    Oh,  he  is  mad,  Laertes.  260 

251.  wisdom]  ivifeneffe  FjF,,.     wife-  253.  Hor.]    Gen.   Ff,   Rowe,  Cald. 

nefs  F3F4,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Del.  Dyce  Knt. 

i,  Sta.  Glo.  Mob.  [to  Hamlet.  Cap. 

Hold  off"]  AwayYi,  Rowe,  Cald.  [The    Attendants    part    them] 

Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Rowe.  After    Gentlemen,  Cap.     Om. 

hand!]  hand,  Q2Qr    hand?  Q4  QqFf. 

Q$.  and    they.... grave]    Cap.    Om. 

253.  All.  Gentlemen,—]  All.  Gentle-  QqFf. 

men.  Qq.   Att.  Gentlemen, —  Cap.  Om.  254.  this]  his  Rowe. 

Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cald.  Knt,  Sta.  258.  their]  there  F,. 

255.  wag]  Clarendon  :  The  word  had  not  the  grotesque  signification  which  it 
now  has,  and  might  be  used  without  incongruity  in  the  most  serious  passages.  Com- 
pare III,  iv,  39,  and  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  76,  where  the  verb  is  transitive.  It  is  in- 
transitive, as  here,  in  Tit.  And.  V,  ii,  87. 

258.  quantity]  Clarendon  :  Compare  III,  ii,  38 ;  III,  iv,  75 ;  where,  as  here, 
the  context  implies  that  the  word  has  a  depreciatory  meaning. 

259.  do  for  her]  F.  G.  T.  (N.  &>  Qu.,  vol.  iv,  p.  156, 1851)  denies  that  Ham.  really 
rants :  '  Ham.,  a  prince,  is  openly  cursed,  and  even  seized  by  Laer.,  and  yet  he  only 
remonstrates.  He  uses  phrases  so  homely  that  there  is  something  very  like  scorn  in 
them:  "What  wilt  thou  do  for  her?"  is  the  quietude  of  contempt  for  Laertes's  insult- 
ing rant ;  and  so,  if  my  memory  deceive  me  not,  the  elder  Kean  gave  it.  "Do  for 
her"  being  contrasted  with  Laertes's  braggadocio  "say.11  Then  come  the  possibilities : 
weep,  fight,  fast,  tear  thyself  (all,  be  it  noted,  common  lovers'  tricks),  drink  up  eisel, 
eat  a  crocodile.  Here  the  crocodile  probably  refers  to  those  put  up  in  spirits  in 
apothecaries'  shops.  Here  we  have  possibilities  put  against  the  rant  of  Laer. ;  the 
doing  against  the  saying;  things  that  could  be  done,  for  Ham.  ends  with  "  I'll  do  it." 
But  his  quick  imagination  has  caught  an  impetus  from  its  own  motion,  and  he  goes 
on :  "  Nay,  I'll  even  out-prate  you,"  and  then  follows  his  superior  rant,  not  uttered 
with  vehemence,  but  with  quiet  philosophic  scorn.' 


ACT  v,  sc.  i.]  HAMLET  4°5 

Queen.     For  love  of  God,  forbear  him.  26 1 

Ham,     'Swounds,  show  me  what  thou'lt  do ; 
Woo't  weep  ?  woo't  fight?  woo't  fast?  woo't  tear  thysdf? 
Woo't  drink  up  eisel  ?  eat  a  crocodile  ? 

261.  For.. .God,"]  Om.  Q'76.  263.  woo't  fast]  Om.  Ff,Rowe.  wouTt 

262.  'Sivounds]    S' wounds  Qq,  Jen.         storm  Coll.  (MS). 

Om.  Q'76.    Come  Ff,  Rowe+,  Knt,  Sta.  264.  eiset\  Eise/' iheob.  Warb.  Johns, 

1 Zounds  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Cald.  Jen.  Mai.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  + ,  Mob.    Efdl 

thou' It]  th'  owt  Q3Q3.     th'  out  Qq,  Pope,  Coll  Del.  White,  Hal.  Huds. 

Q4QS.     thou't  Q'76,  Cap.    '  E/i/e  (in  Italics)  Ff,  Rowe  (in  Roman), 

263,264.  Woo't]  Wilt  Q'76.     Wou't  Sing.  Esil  Steev.  Bos.  Cald.  Knt.  Esule 

Cap.     WouVt  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Cald.  Tsch. 
Knt,  Coll. 


263.  Woo't]  Singer  :  Woo't,  or  woot'o,  in  the  northern  counties,  is  the  common 
contraction  of  wouldst  thou.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  271):  Can  any  good  reason  be 
given  why  we  should  write  woo't  or  wouVt  here  and  not  elsewhere?  Lettsom 
{Footnote  to  Walker)  :  Halliwell,  in  his  Diet.,  has  fWoot.  Will  thee.  West.'  In 
the  passage  before  us  the  context  requires  wilt,  and  this,  indeed,  is  the  text  of  Qf. 
Clarendon  :  A  colloquialism  by  which  Ham.  marks  his  contempt  for  Laer.  In 
Ant.  cV  Cleo.  IV,  ii,  7;  IV,  xv,  59,  it  indicates  affectionate  familiarity. 

264.  eisel]  With  the  exception  of  '  the  dram  of  eale,'  no  word  or  phrase  in  this 
tragedy  has  occasioned  more  discussion  than  this  Est//  or  Esi/ey  which,  as  it  stands, 
represents  nothing  in  the  heavens  above,  or  the  earth  beneath,  or  the  waters  under 
the  earth,  if  from  the  last  we  exclude  the  vesse/s  of  Qx.  Rowe  and  Pope  blindly  fol- 
lowed the  blind  compositors  of  the  QqFf.  Theobald  saw  the  difficulty  so  clearly 
that  subsequent  criticism  has  chiefly  ranged  itself  on  one  or  other  of  the  two  interpre- 
tations suggested  by  him,  viz.  that  the  word  either  represents  the  name  of  a  river, 
or  is  an  old  word,  meaning  vinegar.  Theobald's  objection  to  its  being  the  name  of  a 
river  is  that  it  must  be  some  river  in  Denmark,  and  that  he  knew  of  none  there  so 
called,  nor  any  other,  idem  sonans,  nearer  than  '  the  Yssel,  from  which  the  Province 
of  Over-yssel  derives  its  title  in  German  Flanders.'  This  objection  comes  strangely 
from  Theobald,  for  none  knew  better  than  he  that  Sh.,  who  did  not  hesitate  to  make 
Ham.  swear  by  St  Patrick,  would  have  been  just  as  likely  to  mention  a  river  in 
farthest  Ind  as  in  Denmark,  if  the  name  flashed  into  his  mind,  and  would  have  been 
intelligible  to  his  audience.  'Besides/  continues  Theobald, '  Ham.  is  not  proposing 
impossibilities  to  Laer.,  as  the  drinking  up  a  river  would  be,  but  he  rather  seems  to 
mean,  Wilt  thou  resolve  to  do  things  the  most  shocking  and  distasteful  ?  and,  behold, 
I  am  as  resolute.'  Hanmer,  forgetful  of  his  own  good  rule  of  not  giving  *  a  loose  to 
fancy,'  changed  '  Esill '  into  Ni/e,  without  a  note  or  comment,  in  his  first  edition,  to 
indicate  that  it  was  not  Shakespeare's  word;  and  then,  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  the 
verse,  introduced  another  woo't  before  '  eat.'  Capell  (Notes,  &c,  i,  146)  says  it  is 
*  palpable '  that  a  river  is. intended,  but  there  is  no  absolute  necessity,  because  a  croco* 
dile  is  mentioned,  that  the  river  must  be  the  Nile,  and  Hanmer's  better  reading  would 
have  been  JVi/us,  which  would  have  suited  the  metre  without  the  addition  of  woo't, 
(See  post  Elze.)  Capell  then  goes  on  to  say  that '  Sh.  sought  a  river  in  Denmark, 
and,  finding  none  that  would  do  for  him,  coin'd  the  word — Elsil ;  in  a  supposition 


406  HAMLET  [act  v,  SG  L 


[264.  *  drink  up  eisel.'] 
that  there  might  be  a  brook  so  denominated,  which  Elsinour  stood  upon,  and  took  it's 
name  from.'  Capell  therefore  printed  Elsil  in  his  text,  in  Italics.  Steevens  says  that 
Ham.  certainly  meant  (for  he  says  he  will  rant)  to  dare  Laer.  to  attempt  anything, 
however  difficult  or  unnatural,  such  as  draining  the  channel  of  a  river,  or  trying  his 
teeth  on  an  animal  whose  scales  are  supposed  to  be  impenetrable,  '  Theobald's 
Yssell,'  adds  Steevens,  •  would  serve  Hamlet's  turn  or  mine.  The  river  is  twice 
mentioned  by  Stowe,  p.  725  :  "  It  standeth  a  good  distance  from  the  river  Issel,  but 
hath  a  sconce  on  Issell  of  incredible  strength."  Again,  by  Drayton,  in  Polyolbion, 
The  twenty-fourth  Song,  p.  359,  ed.  1748  :  "  Th'  one  o'er  Isell's  banks  the  ancient 
Saxon's  taught :  At  Over-Isell  rests,"  &c.  But  in  an  old  Latin  account  of  Danemark 
and  the  neighboring  provinces  I  find  the  names  of  several  rivers  little  differing  from 
Est/,  or  Eisel!,  in  spelling  or  pronunciation.  Such  are  the  Essa,  the  Oesil,  and  some 
others.  .  c  .  .  Sh.  might  have  written  the  Weisel,  a  considerable  river  which  falls  into 
the  Baltic  Ocean,  and  could  not  be  unknown  to  any  Prince  of  Denmark.'  Malone, 
in  his  first  edition,  1790,  having  adopted  Theobald's  eisel,  discarded  it  in  the  Var.  1821, 
and  adopted  Steevens's  interpretation  on  the  ground  that  such  hyperbole  was  common 
among  ancient  poets.  So  in  Eastward  Hoe,  1609  :  '  Come  drink  up  Rhine,  Thames, 
and  Meander  dry.'  Also  Greene's  Orlando  Furioso,  1599:  'Else  would  I  set  my 
mouth  to  Tygris'  streames,  And  drinke  up  overflowing  Euphrates.'  And  in  Mar- 
lowe's Jew  of  Malta  :  'As  sooner  shalt  thou  drink  the  ocean  dry,  Than  conquer 
Malta.'  Boswell  cites  Tro.  6°  Cres.  Ill,  ii,  84,  as  containing  a  '  similar  exaggera- 
tion,' but  the  similarity  is  by  no  means  exact.  More  to  the  purpose  is  his  reference  to 
Chaucer's  Romaunt  of  the  Rose  [1.  5712,  ed.  Morris]  :  *  He  undirfongith  a  gret  peyne, 
That  undirtakith  to  drynk  up  Seyne.'  Nares  considers  the  challenge  to  drink  vinegar, 
in  such  rant,  so  inconsistent  and  even  ridiculous  that  we  must  decide  for  the  river, 
whether  its  name  can  be  exactly  found  or  not.  Caldecott  agrees  with  Steevens, 
that  it  refers  to  the  Yssel,  the  most  northern  branch  of  the  Rhine,  one  which  flows 
nearest  to  Denmark,  and  by  Zutphen  into  the  Zuyder  Zee.  Caldecott  adds  strength 
to  Steevens's  supposition,  that  it  might  refer  to  the  Vistula  or  Weissel,  by  showing, 
in  a  passage  from  King  Alfred's  Anglosaxon  version  of  Orosius,  that  Denmark's 
possessions  once  extended  as  far  as  the  Weissel-mouth  ;  but  very  sensibly  adds  that 
even  if  Weissel  were  nearer  to  the  text,  both  to  the  eye  and  ear,  than  it  is,  it  is  very 
little  likely  that  Sh.  was  read  in  the  early  Danish  geographies,  or  that  he  gave  him- 
self any  concern  about  them ;  Sh.  took  his  geography  from  more  accessible  sources, 
and  from  points  nearer  home.  Knight  adopts  Caldecott's  interpretation.  In  N.  & 
Qu.,  vol.  ii,  p.  241,  1850,  Singer  started  a  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  this  phrase 
by  asserting  that  '  eisel '  means  Wormwood  Wine,  a  nauseously  bitter  medicament 
much  in  vogue  in  Shakespeare's  time.  Could  he  have  proved  this,  the  discovery" 
would  have  been  valuable,  but  unfortunately  the  premises  from  which  he  drew  his 
conclusion  were  weak.  '  In  Thomas's  Ital.  Diet.  1562,'  says  Singer,  '  we  have  "  As- 
sentio,  Eysell,"  and  Florio  renders  Assentio  by  Wormwood.  What  is  meant,  how- 
ever, is  Absinthites  or  Wormwood  wine?  The  inference  here  is  that  Florio  refers  to 
a  liquid  Wormwood,  whereas  he  defines  '  Assentio,  ....  the  herbe  Wornnuood,* 
which,  I  am  afraid,  weakens  Singer's  conclusion.  In  the  same  journal  (vol.  iv,  p. 
64,  185 1 )  J.  S.  W.  sums  up  the  controversy,  and  decides  in  favor  of  a  river,  because 
to  drink  a  potion  of  vinegar  '  is  utterly  tame  and  spiritless  in  a  place  where  anything 
but  tameness  is  wanted,  and  where  it  is  quite  out  of  keeping  with  the  rest  of  the 


4CT  v,  sc.  L]  HAMLET  407 


[264.  4  drink  up  eisel.'] 
speech.'  Elze  contends  vigorously  for  Nilus,  not  only  because  *  crocodiles'  are 
immediately  mentioned,  but  because  in  Elizabethan  times  the  Nile  was  the  home, 
and  the  synonym,  for  everything  wondrous  and  monstrous,  and  was  moreover  held 
lo  be  one  of  the  mightiest  of  rivers,  if  not  the  mightiest.  To  drink  up  the  bound- 
less Nile  is  an  hyperbole  than  which  nothing  could  better  befit  the  occasion ;  Ham. 
wished  to  express  a  pure  impossibility.  To  Delius's  well-put  objection  that  it  is 
difficult  to  see  how  so  familiar  a  word  as  Nile  could  be  sophisticated  into  vessels, 
Esile,  and  Esill,  Elze  opposes  the  supposition  that  the  Dutch  Yssel  or  the  Danish 
Oesil  was  a  marginal  gloss  of  some  wiseacre  who  thought  it  more  appropriate  to  the 
unities  of  the  drama,  and  which  by  accident  crept  into  the  text.  In  N.  cV  Qu.,  12 
Feb.  1859,  Cuthbert  Bede  offers  a  citation  which  would  bring  the  river  much 
closer  to  the  doors  of  the  Globe  theatre  than  any  yet  proposed :  '  The  Saxon  etymon 
of  Iseldon,  according  to  Mr  Sharon  Turner,  is  Ysseldune,  i.  e.  the  Down  of  the  Yssel, 
which  I  take  to  have  been  the  original  name  of  some  river,  most  likely  of  the  river 
of  Wells,  which  flowed  into  the  Fleet  River;  but  I  consider  also  that  Ysel  or  Eysel  is 
the  same  as  Ouse/,  the  diminutive  of  Onse  or  Eyse,  in  the  British  language,  signify- 
ing either  a  river  or  water.' —  Yseldon ;  a  Percmibidation  of  Islington,  by  T.  E. 
Tomkins,  Esq.  Halliwell  thinks  that  the  Oesil  or  Isell  is  referred  to,  and  adds, 
'  obscure  streams  certainly,  but  the  reading  is  hardly  to  be  rejected  on  that  account, 
for  the  name  would  be  at  least  as  familiar  to  an  Elizabethan  audience  as  that  of  the 
mountain  of  Ossa,  mentioned  in  the  same  speech.  Sh.  in  all  probability  adopted 
both  names  from  the  older  play  on  Hamlet?  Dr.  Scadding  (Canadian  Journal, 
No.  LXI,  1866,  p.  70)  also  advocates  Nilus,  and  attributes  to  'indistinctness  of 
writing,  perhaps,  the  wrong  orthography  of  a_y  for  an  i,  and  an  accidental  transposi- 
tion of  syllables  in  the  printing-office'  the  conversion  of  'Nilus  into  Eysell,  Eisil or 
Esil  (in  these  several  ways  the  modern  text  is  given),  conjectured  by  the  commenta- 
tors to  be  variously  esil  (that  is,  perhaps,  vinegar  in  the  sense  of  poison-]  or  vessels 
(that  is,  huge  caldrons)  or'  some  proper  name.  Keightley  adopts  Yssel,  because 
its  name  may  have  been  familiar  to  the  English  mind  from  the  fact  that  it  was  at 
Zutphen,  on  its  banks,  that  Sir  Philip  Sidney  received  his  death-wound. 

Thus  far  I  have  cited  only  those  who  are  in  favor  of  the  name  of  a  river,  and  have 
given  all  their  arguments  except  one,  which  I  have  not  repeated  in  every  instance,  be- 
cause all  more  or  less  emphasize  it;  and  this  argument,  which  many  find  convincing, 
lies  in  the  words  '  drink  up  ;'  this,  it  is  claimed,  means  to  drain,  to  exhaust,  and  must 
apply  to  a  river  or  to  something  concrete, — it  cannot  apply  to  vinegar  or  to  anything 
in  the  abstract;  Ham.  never  could  have  challenged  Laer.  to  drink  up  all  the  vinegar 
in  the  world, — there  was  a  limit  even  to  professed  rant.  Malone  was  the  first  to  note 
that  this  phrase,  *  drink  up,'  does  not  of  necessity  mean  to  exhaust  totally,  citing  in 
proof  Shakespeare's  114th  Sonnet,  where  it  is  synonymous  with  merely  to  drink: 
'Drink  up  the  monarch's  plague,  this  flattery,'  and  again  in  the  same  Sonnet :  'And 
my  great  mind  most  kingly  drinks  it  up ;'  and  in  Tro.  <5r»  Crcs.  II,  iii,  21 1,  '  his  silence 
drinks  up  his  applause '  (through  an  oversight  Malone  cites  this  from  Timon).  '  In 
Shakespeare's  time,'  adds  Malone,  '  to  drink  up  often  meant  no  more  than  simply  to 
drink.  So  in  Florio,  Ital.  Diet.  1598 :  "  Sorbire,  to  sip  or  sup  up  any  drink."  In  like 
manner  we  sometimes  say,  "  when  you  have  swallowed  down  this  potion,"  meaning 
when  you  have  swallowed  it.'  He  might  have  cited  from  Hamlet,  I,  iv,  10 :  '  drains 
his  draughts  of  Rhenish  down.'     Gifford  is  more  emphatic  on  this  point  in  a  note 


408  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  i . 


[264.  *  drink  up  eisel.'] 
on  Jonson's  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  IV,  v  (Works,  p.  122,  ed.  1816,  cited  by 
Dyce) :  *  It  may  just  be  observed  that  off,  out,  and  up,  are  continually  used  by  the 
purest  and  most  excellent  of  our  old  writers,  after  verbs  of  destroying,  consuming, 
eating,  drinking,  &c. ;  to  us,  who  are  less  conversant  with  the  power  of  language, 
they  appear,  indeed,  somewhat  like  expletives ;  but  they  undoubtedly  contributed 
something  to  the  force,  and  something  to  the  roundness,  of  the  sentence.'  In  con- 
firmation of  this  use  of  up,  Dyce  cites  the  following  passages :  Love's  Lab.  Lost, 
IV,  iii,  ^305;  AWs  Well,  IV,  iii,  250;  King  John,  IV,  iii,  133;  As  You  Like  Lt,  II, 
i,  62;  Tro.  6°  Cres.  Ill,  ii,  189.  If  more  instances  be  needed,  at  least  half  a  dozen 
can  be  found  by  reference  to  Schmidt's  invaluable  Lexicon,  s.  v.  7 ;  or  to  Mrs 
Furness's  Concordance  to  Shakespeare 's  Poems,  s.  v.  «  up.'  The  passages,  however, 
cited  by  Malone  and  Dyce  do  not  satisfy  Grant  White  of  the  soundness  of  Gif- 
ford's  explanation ;  he  thinks  that  in  all  of  them  '  up '  conveys  the  sense  either  of 
totality  or  completeness,  as  in  the  lines  from  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  AWs  Well,  and  Tro. 
&>  Cres.  Ill,  ii,  189  (and  herein  Schmidt  agrees  with  him);  or  of  eagerness  or  in- 
satiability, as  in  the  lines  from  114th  Sonnet  and  Tro.  6°  Cres.  II,  iii,  211.  The 
use  of  « up '  in  the  present  passage  seemed,  therefore,  to  Grant  White  fatal  to  the  in- 
terpretation of  '  eisel,'  or  vinegar.  But  granting  that  the  sense  of  '  totality  or  com- 
pleteness '  is  inapplicable  here,  is  not  '  eagerness  or  insatiability '  the  very  sense 
required?  I  cannot  but  believe,  therefore,  that  in  the  present  passage,  'drink  up 
esill,'  means  no  more  than  '  to  quaff  esill,'  whatever  that  may  be. 

I  now  turn  to  the  second  interpretation  by  Theobald,  who  says :  '  I  am  persuaded 
the  poet  wrote  "  eisel,"  that  is,  Wilt  thou  swallow  down  large  draughts  of  vinegar  f 
The  proposition,  indeed,  is  not  very  grand ;  but  the  doing  it  might  be  as  distasteful 
and  unsavory  as  eating  the  flesh  of  a  crocodile.  And  now  there  is  neither  an  im- 
possibility nor  an  anticlimax;  and  the  lowness  of  the  idea  is  in  some  measure  re- 
moved by  the  uncommon  term.'     Thereupon  he  cites  Chaucer,  The  Romaunt  of  the 

Rose,  line  217  :  ' breed  Kneden  with  eisel  strong  and  egre ;'  Shakespeare's  111th 

Sonnet:  *  Potions  of  eisel  'gainst  my  strong  infection;'  and  Sir  Thomas  More's 
Poems  (p.  21,  ed.  1557):  *  remember  therewithal  How  Christ  for  thee  tasted  eisel 
and  gall.'  CAPELL,  in  his  dissent  from  this  interpretation,  indulges  in  a  gird  of 
most  unusual  humour  for  him  :  *  if  Eisel,  an  old  word  that  signifies  vinegar,  be  the 
right  reading,  it  must  be  because  'tis  wanted  for  sauce  to  the  crocodile.*  Steevens, 
too,  has  his  merry  fling  at  it :  '  neither  is  that  challenge  very  magnificent  which  only 
provokes  an  adversary  to  hazard  a  fit  of  the  heart-burn  or  the  colic'  Hunter  (ii, 
263)  thinks  that  the  '  Potions  of  eysell '  in  the  111th  Sonnet  prove  that  it  was  not 
any  river  so  called,  but  a  desperate  drink.  *  The  word,'  he  adds,  '  occurs  often  in  a 
sense  of  which  acetum  is  the -best  representative,  associated  with  verjuice  and  vine- 
gar. It  is  a  term  used  for  one  ingredient  of  the  bitter  potion  given  to  our  Saviour 
on  the  cross,  about  the  composition  of  which  the  commentators  are  divided.  Thus, 
the  eighth  prayer  ....  in  the  Salisbury  Primer,  1555,  begins  thus: — uO  blessed 
Jesu  I  ....  I  beseech  thee  for  the  bitterness  of  the  aysell  and  gall  that  thou  tasted," 
&c.'  Singer  (ed.  2) :  It  was  a  fashion  of  the  gallants  of  Shakespeare's  time  to  do  some 
extravagant  feat  as  a  proof  of  their  love  in  honor  of  their  mistresses,  and  among  other 

the  swallowing  of  some  nauseous  potion  was  the  most  frequent In  Thomas's 

Ital.  Diet.,  1562,  we  have  '  Assentio.  Eysell,'  and  Florio  renders  the  same  word  by 
Wormwood.    Dyce:  •  For  my  own  part  I  certainly  believe  that  eisel  is  meant  here- 


ACT  v,  SC.  i.]  HAMLET  409 

I'll  do't.     Dost  thou  come  here  to  whine  ?  265 

To  outface  me  with  leaping  in  her  grave? 

Be  buried  quick  with  her,  and  so  will  I. 

And,  if  thou  prate  of  mountains,  let  them  throw 

265.  I'll  do't']  Til  ddt,  Til  doU  Coll.  266.  grave  ?]  grave,  Qq. 
(MS).     Plldo  it  too  Anon.*  267.  her,]  her;  Rowe+,  Cap. 

thou]  Om.  Qq.  /.]  /,  F4. 

here J  hither  F-F^t  ROWC.  hither  268.  mountains,]    Mountaines ;    Ff, 

£«/Pope+  Rowe. 

266.  in]  in  to  F4.    into  Rowe. 

the  word  (and  it  was  common  enough  formerly)  is'  spelled  Eysell  \n  the  I  nth  Son* 
net,  ed.  1609.  'In  the  " hyperbolical "  passages  cited  by  Malone,  what  rivers  do 
those  poets  mention  ?  The  Rhine,  the  Thames,  the  Meander,  the  Euphrates, — and 
not  such  obscure  streams  as  the  Yssell,  the  existence  of  which  the  commentators 
had  some  difficulty  in  detecting.'  Collier  says  that  the  (MS)  makes  no  change  in 
Esile.  Grant  White  confesses  himself  unable  to  conjecture  what  the  word  means; 
if  a  river  be  intended,  *  we  must  regard  the  word  as  a  remnant  of  a  play,  or  tale,  un- 
known to  us,  which  preceded  Shakespeare's  tragedy.'  In  N.  dr3  Qu.  (Aug.  10, 1872), 
John  DE  Soyres  says  that  he  remembers  in  a  book  of  Scandinavian  legends  an 
account  of  Thor's  trials  of  strength  with  the  Giants,  and  that  one  of  these  trials  was 
to  drink  a  lake  Esyl  dry,  and  suggests  that  this  is  Hamlet's  allusion.  The  CLAREN- 
DON Editors  *  consulted  Mr  Magnusson  on  this  point,  and  he  writes  as  follows : 
"  No  such  lake  as  Esyl  is  known  to  Norse  mythology  or  folklore.  Thor's  only  trial 
at  drinking  an  impossible  draught  was  at  Utgaroaloki's,  where  he  had  to  empty  a  horn, 
the  other  end  of  which  mouthed  into  the  sea :  in  consequence,  he  only  achieved 
drinking  the  ocean  down  to  the  ebb  mark.'"  The  citation  from  the  inth  Sonnet 
convinces  Moberly  that  the  same  word  there,  is  used  here ;  Moberly  adds :  '  a  large 
draught  of  vinegar  would  be  very  dangerous  to  life.'  There  yet  remain,  however, 
four  interpretations  to  be  mentioned.  First:  In  N.  cV  Qu.  (Oct.  5,  1872)  John 
Kershaw  calls  attention  to  a  passage  in  Fletcher's  Wife  for  a  Month,  IV,  iv  [p.  566, 
ed.  Dyce],  where  Alphonso  [who  is  burning  up  with  poison  and  indulges  in  the  most 
extravagant  figures  of  speech]  says :  *  I'll  lie  upon  my  back,  and  swallow  vessels.* 
'What  more  probable,  therefore,  than  that  Fletcher's  "swallow  vessels"  had  its 
origin  in  Shakespeare's  "  drinke  up  vessels  "  of  Qx  ?'  Second :  Tschischwitz  prints 
Esule  in  his  text,  and  explains  it  as  Euphorbia  Esula,  spurge,  a  poisonous  plant, 
whose  juice  was  employed  anciently  as  an  emetic.  Third :  Schmidt  (Sh.  Lexicon,  s.  v. 
Eysell) :  '  Hamlet's  questions  are  apparently  ludicrous,  and  drinking  vinegar,  in  order 
to  exhibit  deep  grief  by  a  wry  face,  seems  much  more  to  the  purpose  than  drinking 
up  rivers.  As  for  the  crocodile,  it  must  perhaps  be  remembered  that  it  is  a  mournful 
animal.'  Fourth :  The  late  Rev.  J.  B.  Dykes,  Mus.  Doc.  (in  a  MS  note  sent  to  me 
by  Dr  Ingleby),  suggests  the  old  English  word  isyl,  signifying  ashes,  mentioned  in 
HalliwelPs  Archaic  and  Provincial  Diet.  s.  v.  Isles  [where  Halliwell  cites :  *  Isyl 
of  fyre,  favilla*  Pr.  Parv.  p.  266].  '  One  might  possibly  extract  a  meaning  out  of 
this  :  "feeding  on  ashes,"  or  swallowing  flame;  but  this  again  is  far-fetched  and  im« 
possible.'  In  conclusion,  the  present  Editor  believes  Esill  and  Esile  to  be  mis- 
prints for  Eysell 
35 


4 1 0  HAMLET  [ACT  V.  SC.  L 

Millions  of  acres  on  us,  till  our  ground, 

Singeing  his  pate  against  the  burning  zone,  270 

Make  Ossa  like  a  wart !     Nay,  an  thou'lt  mouth, 

I'll  rant  as  well  as  thou. 

Queen,  This  is  mere  madness ; 

And  thus  a  while  the  fit  will  work  on  him ; 
Anon,  as  patient  as  the  female  dove 

When  that  her  golden  couplets  are  disclosed,  27  $ 

His  silence  will  sit  drooping. 

Ham.  Hear  you,  sir ; 

What  is  the  reason  that  you  use  me  thus? 

270.  Singeing]Sindging  QqF(,'Rowet  273.  awhile]  awhile  Jen.  Steev  Dyce, 
Pope,   Han.  Cap.     Singing  Jen.  (mis-         Del.  Glo.-K 

print?).  274.  the]  a  Q„. 

zone]  Sun  Warb.  dove]  Doe  Q4Q$. 

271.  an]  and  QqFf,  Rowe.  275.    When  that]  When  firjl  (^76. 
mouth]  mouthe  Q3Q3F2F?.  E'er  that  Warb.     Ere  that  Johns. 

272.  Queen.]  Kin.  Ff.  King.  F8F  couplets]  cuplets  Qq.  Cupiet  Ff, 
F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Cald.                                    Rowe.     couplet  Del.  Tsch. 

273.  thus]  this  Qq. 

272-276.  This  .  .  .  drooping]  Caldecott,  who  follows  the  Ff  in  giving  these 
lines  to  the  King,  thinks  this  distribution  may  be  justified  on  the  ground  that  the  King 
was  fearful  lest  Laertes's  rage  and  rebellion  should  break  out  anew ;  and  that  his 
interference  would  be  more  likely  to  have  weight  with  Laer.  than  that  of  the  Queen, 
and  after  what  had  been  concerted  between  him  and  Laer.,  his  affected  tenderness 
for  Ham.  would  be  perfectly  understood.  Knight  :  The  assignment  in  the  Ff  of  so 
beautiful  and  tender  an  image  as  that  of  *  the  female  dove  '  to  a  man  represented  as 
a  Coarse  sensualist  proceeds  from  a  typographical  error. 

274-276.  Anon  ....  drooping]  Collier  (Notes,  &c,  ed.  2,  p.  445) :  A  new 
prefix  by  the  (MS)  assigns  these  lines  to  the  Queen,  while  the  two  preceding  are 
given  to  the  King.  Jt  seems  likely  that  the  King  should  interpose  to  tell  the 
spectators  of  the  funeral, '  This  is  mere  madness,  And  thus  a  while  the  fit  will  work  on 
him.'  In  some  consistency  with  this  view,. the  King  just  afterwards  desires  Hor.  to 
follow  Ham.,  who  has  rushed  out.  [Collier,  in  his  ed.  2,  adopted  this  distribution 
of  the  speeches.] 

275.  When  that]  Warburton  reads  E'er  that,  because  « it  is  the  patience  of 
birds,  during  incubation,  that  is  here  spoken  of.  The  pigeon  generally  sits  upon 
two  eggs,  and  her  young  when  first  disclosed  are  covered  with  a  yellow  down.' 
Heath  (p.  547) :  The  young  nestlings  of  the  pigeon  when  first  disclosed  stand  in 
need  of  the  kindly  warmth  of  the  hen  for  a  considerable  time.  Steevens  :  During 
three  days  after  she  has  hatched  her  couplets,  the  pigeon  never  quits  her  nest,  except 
for  a  few  minutes  in  quest  of  a  little  food  for  herself;  as  all  her  young  require  in 
ihat  early  state  is  to  be  kept  warm,  an  office  which  she  never  entrusts  to  the  male, 
Johnson  :  Perhaps  it  should  be  E'er  yet.     Yet  andyt  are  easily  confounded. 

275.  disclosed]  See  III,  i,  166,  and  notes. 


act  v,  sc  1.1  HAMLET  4 1 1 

I  loved  you  ever. — But  it  is  no  matter ; 
Let  Hercules  himself  do  what  he  may, 

The  cat  will  mew,  and  dog  will  have  his  day  [Exit.  280 

King.     I  pray  you,  good  Horatio,  wait  upon  him. — 

[Exit  Horatio. 
[To  Laertes]    Strengthen  your  patience  m  our  last  night's 

speech ; 
We'll  put  the  matter  to  the  present  push. — 

278.  loved]  loud1  F2.  Horatio.  Qq  (opposite  the  next  line). 
ever. — ]  Cald.   ever,  Qq.   ever...  2S1.  you~\  thee  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 

Ktly.     ever ;  or  ever:  Ff  et  cet.  Mai.  Cald.  Cam.  Cla. 

2 So.  and  dog]  a  dogge  Q,.    a  Dog  Qs,  [Exit  Horatio.]  Om.  Ff. 

Theob.  i.     the  dog  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  282.  [To  Laertes]  Om.  QqFf. 

Johns.  Sing,  i,  El.  your]  you  FXF3. 
[Exit.]   Exit   Hamlet  Qq.     and 

279.  280.  Let  .  .  .  day]  Caldecott  :  *  Things  have  their  appointed  course , 
nor  have  we  power  to  divert  it,'  may  be  the  sense  here  conveyed,  though  the  pro- 
verb is  usually  applied  to  those  who  for  a  time  fill  stations  to  which  their  merits 
give  them  no  claim.  Tschischwitz  detects  here  a  reference  to  Laer.,  the  King, 
and  to  Ham.  himself.  '  Let  the  herculean  power  of  Laer.  do  what  it  may,  and 
the  cat,  which  creeps  stealthily  in  the  dark,  mew,  the  faithful  dog  will  have  his 
turn  at  last.' 

280.  day]  B.  Street  (Athenaum,  5  Sept,  1868) :  These  lines  are  so  familiar  thai 
we  pay  little  attention  to  their  wording,  and  what  seems  the  correct  reading,  ■  dog 
will  have  its  bay  J  has  not  been  suspected.  That  it  is  bay,  and  not  *  day,'  appears 
so  probable  as  to  be  almost  certain  if  we  consider  that  a  dog  might  have  its  day  of 
popularity  without  any  detraction  from  a  very  Hercules, — at  least  without  any  ex- 
pressed disparagement  of  him ;  the  idea  is  the  expression  of  detraction  on  the  part 
of  an  inferior  against  his  better.  Each  animal  severally  employing  its  natural  utter- 
ances in  carping  at  worthiness ;  the  cat  mewing  its  cavils,  the  dog  barking  its  dislike. 
In  The  Athenaum,  3  Oct.  1868,  'A.  O.  S.'  showed  that  the  phrase  is  older  than  Sh. 
by  giving  an  extract  from  a  letter  from  the  Princess  Elizabeth  to  her  sister,  Queen 

Mary :  ' as  a  doge  hathe  a  day,  so  may  I,'  &c.     In  The  Athencsum,  19  Nov. 

1870,  P.  A.  Daniel  adduced  two  other  instances  of  the  use  of  the  phrase.  In  The 
Interlude  (printed  in  1573),  entitled  New  Custom,  II,  iii :  *  Well  if  it  chaunce  that 
a  dogge  hath  a  day,'  &c.  Also,  in  Jonson's  Tale  of  a  Tub,  II,  i :  *  A  man  hath  his 
hour,  and  a  dog  his  day.'  This  was  written  in  1663,  'later,'  adds  Daniel,  'than 
Hamlet,  no  doubt,  but  Jonson  would  scarcely  have  adopted  a  meaningless  bit  of 
slang.'  Elze  (Shakespeare- Jahrbuch,  Bd.  xi)  adds  a  fourth  example  from  Sum- 
mer's Last  Will  and  Testament,  ed.  Dodsley,  vol.  ix,  p.  37. 

282.  in]  Abbott,  §  162  :  '  In '  is  here  used  metaphorically,  where  we  should  say, 
*  in  the  thought  of.' 

283.  push]  Clarendon  :  The  instant  test.  For  '  present,'  see  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii, 
281.  For  'push'  in  the  sense  of  'crisis,'  'critical  moment,'  see  the  same  play,  V, 
Hi.  129,  and  Macb.  V,  iii,  20. 


412 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


Good  Gertrude,  set  some  watch  over  your  son. — 

This  grave  shall  have  a  living  monument ; 

An  hour  of  quiet  thereby  shall  we  see ; 

Till  then,  in  patience  our  proceeding  be.  [Exeunt 


285 


Scene  II.    A  hall  in  the  castle. 


Enter  Hamlet  and  Horatio. 


Ham.     So  much  for  this,  sir ;  now  let  me  see  the  other ; 
You  do  remember  all  the  circumstance  ? 

Hor.     Remember  it,  my  lord  ? 

Ham.     Sir,  in  my  heart  there  was  a  kind  pf  fighting, 
That  would  not  let  me  sleep;  methought  I  lay 
Worse  than  the  mutines  in  the  bilboes.     Rashly, — 


284.  [Exit  Queen.  Sta. 

286.  An]  In  an  Ktly. 

thereby]  Q3Q4Q5,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll. 
Sing.  El.  Ktly,  Hal.  thirtie  Q2.  Jliortly 
Ff  et  cet. 

287.  Till]  TellQq. 

Scene  ii.]  Rowe.    Scene  hi.  Pope, 
Han.     Om.  QqFf. 

A.  hall...]  Cap.   A  Hall.  Rowe.  A 
Hall,  in  the  Palace.  Theob. 

1.  sir]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han.Warb. 
now  let  me]  youjhall  now  Q'76. 
let  me]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Del. 

Dyce,  Sta.  White.    Jhall  you  Qq  et  cet. 

2.  circumstance?]    Theob.     circum- 
/lance.  QqFf,  Rowe,  Coll.  El. 

3.  my  lord?]  my  Lord.QqFJ?3FA. 

5.  methought]  my  thought  Q3Q3.     me 
thought  Q4QsFf. 

6.  mutines  in  the]  mutineers  in  the 


Rowe.     mutineers  in  Pope,  Han. 

6.  bilboes.]  bilboes;  Rowe.  Bilboes^ 
Ff.     bilbo,  Q2Q3.     bilbo's,  QQ. 

6,  7.  Rashly, — And. ...it,  let]  Ed. 
rajlily,  And. ..it :  let  Qq.  raJJily,  (And 
...it)  let  Ff,  Rowe  (prais'd  Rowe). 
rashness  (And. ..it)  lets  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  i,  Warb.  rashness  (And. ..it)  let 
Han.  ii.  Rashly,  And.. At — Let  Johns. 
Steev.  Var.  Sing.  i.  Rashness  (And.., 
it!)  lets  Cap.  Rashly  And...it, — (Let 
Jen.,  ending  parenthesis  after  will,  line 
1 1 .  Rashly,  And  praise.. .  it, — Let  Cald. 
Knt.  Rashly,— And... it, —let  Coll.  Del. 
El.  White,  Hal.  Rashly,—  (And.  ..it  /— 
let  Sing,  ii,  ending  parenthesis  after  cet' 
tain,  line  II.  Rashly,  And. ..it, — let 
Dyce  i,  Sta.  Rashly,  And. ..it,  let  Glo.  + , 
Mob.  Rashly, — And... it ;  let  Dyce  ii. 
Rashly— And. ..it !... Let  Ktly. 


285.  living]  Clarendon:  Perhaps  it  is  usee? by  the  speaker  in  a  double  sense; 
first,  that  of  enduring,  as  the  Queen  would  understand  it ;  secondly,  Laer.  would  be 
cognizant  of  the  deeper  meaning,  by  which  the  life  of  Ham.  is  menaced. 

I.  sir]  Tschischwitz  calls  attention  to  the  distant  tone  with  which  Ham.  speaks 
to  Hor. ;  twice  in  the  first  four  lines,  and  afterwards,  also,  he  addresses  him  as  Sir ; 
furthermore,  throughout  the  dialogue  the  frequent  omission  of  the  personal  pronoun 
(as  *  had  my  desire,'  &c.),  and  the  more  frequent  use  of  participial  and  infinitive 
clauses,  justify  the  suspicion  that  the  first  fifty-five  lines  are  not  Shakespeare's. 

6.  mutines]  Malone.  For  mutiner  or  mutineer  ;  see  the  verb  in  III,  iv,  $3. 

6.  bilboes]  Steevens  :  This  is  a  bar  of  iron  with  fetters  annexed  to  it,  by  which 


act  v,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  41 3 

And  praised  be  rashness  for  it,  let  us  know,  J 

Our  indiscretion  sometimes  serves  us  well 

7.  praised ']  prayfd  Qq.    praife   Ff,  8.  sometimes']  fometime  Q2Q3QA,  Cap. 

Cald.  Knt.  Steev.  Mai.  Cam. 

7,  8.  know]  own  Coll.  (MS). 

mutinous  or  disorderly  sailors  anciently  were  linked  together.  The  word  is  derived 
from  Bilboa,  a  place  in  Spain,  where  instruments  of  steel  were  fabricated  in  the 
utmost  perfection.  To  understand  Shakespeare's  allusion  completely,  it  should  be 
known  that,  as  these  fetters  connect  the  legs  of  the  offenders  very  close  together, 
their  attempts  to  rest  must  be  as  fruitless  as  those  of  Ham.,  in  whose  mind  there  was 
a  kind  of  fighting  that  would  not  let  him  sleep.  Every  motion  of  one  must  disturb 
his  partner  in  confinement.  The  bilboes  are  still  shown  in  the  Tower  of  London 
among  the  other  spoils  of  the  Spanish  Armada. 

6.  Rashly]  Johnson  :  Ham.,  delivering  an  account  of  his  escape,  begins  with 
saying,  That  he  rashly — ,  and  then  is  carried  into  a  reflection  upon  the  weakness  of 
human  wisdom.  I  rashly — praised  be  rashness  for  it — Let  us  not  think  these  events 
casual,  but  let  us  know,  that  is.  take  notice  and  remember,  that  we  sometimes  succeed 
by  indiscretion  when  we  fail  by  deep  plots,  and  infer  the  perpetual  superintendence 
and  agency  of  the  Divinity.  The  observation  is  just,  and  will  be  allowed  by  every 
human  being  who  shall  reflect  on  the  course  of  his  own  life.  TYRWHITT  suggested 
that  the  rest  of  Hamlet's  speech  after  ■  Rashly,'  and  Horatio's  reply,  ■  That  is 
most  certain,'  should  be  put  in  a  parenthesis,  so  that  '  Rashly '  may  be  joined  in 
construction  with  *  in  the  dark  Groped  I,'  &c.  He  also  reads :  •  And  praised  be 
rashness,  for  it  lets  us  know,'  and  does  not  put  a  period  after  '  will '  at  the  end  of 
the  speech,  but  prints  ■  will ; — '.  Although  Staunton  in  a  note  said  that  he  agreed 
with  Tyrwhitt's  suggestion,  he  nevertheless  did  not  conform  his  text  thereto.  Un» 
doubtedly  there  is  force  in  Tyrwhitt's  arrangement.  Collier  :  The  reasoning  in 
this  passage  is  consecutive  in  Hamlet's  mind,  but,  perhaps,  hardly  so  in  his  expres- 
sions. Tschischwitz  follows  Tyrwhitt,  except  that  he  prints  « for  it  let  us  know,' 
because  ■  let '  is  clearly  the  perfect  tense,  since  Ham.  is  speaking  of  an  act  that  is 
past. 

6-1 1.  Strachey  (p.  93) :  That  is  to  say,  that  when  we  have  exhausted  all  our 
powers  of  thought  and  reasoning  upon  the  consideration  of  the  course  we  should 
pursue,  and  when  it  yet  remains  dark  to  us, — •  sicklied  o'er  with  the  pale  cast  of 
thought,' — then  a  higher  wisdom  and  providence  than  our  own  will  assuredly  come 
to  our  aid,  and  employ  some  apparently  unimportant  accident, — something  which  to 
us  seems  merely  a  rashness  or  indiscretion, — to  strike  the  hour  and  give  command 
for  action.  This  is  Hamlet's  final,  crowning,  discovery;  a  discovery  which  every 
man  of  Hamlet's  tendency  of  mind  must  make  for  himself  before  it  is  possible  foi 
him  to  turn  his  intellectual  powers  to  practical  account  and  to  make  his  philosophi- 
cal speculations  available  to  the  every-day  service  of  God  and  man.  Till  such  a 
man  has  learnt  the  value  of  accidents  in  breaking  the  thread  of  his  meditations 
when  it  is  spun  long  enough,  and  has  formed  the  habit  of  seizing  and  using  these 
accidents,  he  must  remain  an  unpractical  visionary. 

8.  Our]  Warburton  prints:   « Rashness  ....  lets  us  know;  Or  indiscretion, 
&c,  and  vaguely  interprets, « Rashness  acquaints  us  with  what  we  cannot  penetrate 
to  by  plots.'    Heath  (p.  547)  exposed  the  futility  of  this  change. 

35* 


4 1 4  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

When  our  deep  plots  do  fail ;  and  that  should  teach  us 

There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends,  10 

Rough-hew  them  how  we  will. 

9.  deep"]  deepe  Q2Q3Q4-    deare  FtF2.  Ei.  Dyce  ii,  Huds.   fall  Q3QA.  fal  Qs. 

dear  F3F4,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  paule  FtF2F3.    pall  Q2F4  et  cet. 
Del.  Sta.  9.  teach]  learne  Qq,  Jen.  Cam.  Cla. 

fail]  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  (MS),  11.  Rough-hew]  Hyphen  in  Ff. 

9.  fail]  MALONE  thinks  that  pall  and  « fail '  were  by  no  means  likely  to  have  been 
confounded ;  he  therefore  adheres  to  the  Ff,  and  cites  Ant.  6°  Cleo:  II,  vii,  88. 
Caldecott  says  that  pall  means  •  lose  their  spirit,  poignancy,  and  virtue ;  become 
abortive.'  Dyce  (in  his  first  ed.  retaining /a// in  his  text)  cites  the  parallel  phrase: 
•And  if  I  fail  not  in  my  deep  intent?  Rich.  Ill :  I,  i,  149.  Collier  (ed.  2) :  Very 
possibly  *  fail*  of  the  (MS)  is  the  true  word.  Clarendon  interprets  pall:  'to  grow 
vapid,  and  tasteless,  like  wine ;  hence  to  become  vain  and  worthless,'  and  cites  the 
passage  from  Ant.  &  Cleo.  cited  by  Malone.  Ingleby  ( The  Sh.  Fabrications,  p. 
115)  suggests  that  fall  and  'fail*  were  used  as  synonymous  by  Sh.,  and  cites  in 
proof  Cent,  of  Err.  I,  ii,  37 ;  and  Merry  Wives,  I,  i,  262 ;  and  Sir  John  Old  castle  : 
*  London*  you  say,  is  safely  look'd  unto,  Alas,  poor  rebels,  there  your  aid  must  fall.'- 
In  a  note  on  c  if  ye  fall  in't '  in  The  Two  Noble  Kinsmen,  III,  vi,  236,  Littledale 
says  that  Ingleby  has  confirmed  him  in  thinking  that '  fall,'  and  not  fail,  is  the  right 
reading  in  that  passage,  and  he  gives  a  fuller  note  from  Ingleby  than  is  contained  in 
The  Sh.  Fabrications  cited  above,  as  follows :  Compare  line  272  [of  this  same  scene 
in  The  Two  Noble  Kins?nen] :  « Let  it  not  fall  agen,  Sir.'  There  are  remarkable 
instances  of  the  use  of  this  intransitive  verb  as  a  synonym  of  fail.  Sh.  affords  us 
only  two  certain  examples  of  this :  *  her  better  judgement  May  fall  to  match  you 
with  her  country  forms  And  happily  repent.' — Oth.  Ill,  iii,  237.  Here  ' fall'  is  not 
happen  (Schmidt,  wrongly,  begin,  get  into),  but  fail.  [The  second  instance  is  the 
present  passage  in  Hamlet,  where]  pall  is  nonsense;  and  fall  makes  sense.  Fall, 
of  course,  is  the  opposite  of  succeed.  Now  our  word  for  this  is  '  fail.'  There  is 
also  one  example  in  The  London  Prodigal,  and  two  in  Isaiah,  xxxi,  3,  and  lvii,  14, 
15.     [Dyce  disapproved  of  this  suggestion  of  Ingleby's.  Ed.] 

10.  ends]  Steevens  :  Dr  Farmer  informs  me  that  £hese  words  are  merely  tech- 
nical. A  wool-man,  butcher,  and  dealer  in  skewers,  lately  observed  to  him  that  his 
nephew  (an  idle  lad)  could  only  assist  him  making  them :  « — he  could  rough-hew 
them,  but  I  was  obliged  to  shape  their  ends?  Whoever  recollects  the  profession  of 
Shakespeare's  father  will  admit  that  his  son  might  be  no  stranger  to  such  terms. 
I  have  frequently  seen  packages  of  wool  pinned  up  with  skewers.  Caldecott  says 
that  the  phrase  is  doubtless  technical,  in  so  far  as  it  is  drawn  from  a  handicraft,  and 
that,  as  the  use  of  tools  is  general,  the  phrases  belonging  to  them  pass  into  general 
use.  Knight  fleers  at  Farmer's  suggestion ;  and  Hunter  (ii,  264)  says  '  the  sooner 
it  is  expunged  the  better.  Rough-hew  is  ijot  and  never  was  technical.  It  is  a  com- 
mon English  word  applicable  to  all  kinds  of  work  where  there  is  room  for  Ordinary 
manual  labor  before  the  master  comes  and  applies  a  skilfuL  hand.  Thus,  in  Pals- 
grave's Table  of  Verbs,  1530 :  "  I  rough -hewe  a  pece  of  tymber  to  make  an  ymage 
of;"  Florio,  1598:  "Abbozzare,  to  rough  hew  any  first  draught,  to  bungle  ill— 
favouredly."  *    Staunton  has  a  note  to  the  same  effect,  and  cites  Baret's  Ahearie, 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


Hor.  That  is  most  certain. 

Ham.     Up  from  my  cabin, 
My  sea-gown  scarf  d  about  me,  in  the  dark 
Groped  I  to  find  out  them ;  had  my  desire, 
Finger'd  their  packet,  and  in  fine  withdrew 
To  mine  own  room  again ;  making  so  bold, 
My  fears  forgetting  manners,  to  unseal 
Their  grand  commission ;  where  I  found,  Horatio,- 
O  royal  knavery ! — an  exact  command, 
Larded  with  many  several  sorts  of  reasons, 


415 
it 


15 


13.  scarf  d~\  wrapt  Q'76. 

me,  in  the  dark]  Q'76.  me  in  the 
darke  Qq.  me  in  the  darke,  Ff  {dark, 
FF). 

14.  Groped  I]  Igrofd  Q'76. 

16.  again;  making  so]  cgaine  making, 

16, 17.  bold,  My... manners]  bold,  {My 
...manners')  Ff,  Pope,  Theob..  Han. 
Warb.     bold  My... manners  Qq. 

17.  fears]  teares  FaF3.     tears  F4. 


F  F 


20 


vnfold 


17.  unseal]    vnfeale 
Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  i,  El.  Hal. 

19.  O]  Cald.    Oh  Ff,  Rowe.    A  Qq, 
Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  i. 

O  royal  knavery  I — ]  Om.  Q'76. 
knavery  I — ]  knauery,  Qq.    kna- 
uery :  Ff.     knavery!  Rowe. 

20.  sorts]  forts  F2. 

reasons]  reafon  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald. 
Knt,  Sta. 


11.  certain]  Moberly:  Hor.  for  once  expresses  a  slight  impatience,  which  cuts 
short  Hamlet's  generalisation. 

13.  sea-gown]  Singer:  lEsclavine  ....  a  sea-gowne;  or  a  course,  high-col- 
lered,  and  short-sleeued  gowne,  reaching  down  to  the  mid  leg,  and  vsed  most  by 
sea-men,  and  Saviors.' — Cotgrave. 

13.  scarf 'd]  Clarendon  :  Thrown  on  like  a  scarf,  i.  e.  without  putting  the  amis 
through  the  sleeves.     Compare  Much  Ado,  II,  i,  197. 

14.  find  out  them]  Clarendon  :  This  is  here  used  as  if  it  were  a  compound 
verb.  Comp.  Rom.  &>  Jul.  IV,  ii,  41;  Jul.  Cces.  I,  iii,  134.  The  objective  personal 
pronoun  is  frequently  placed  after,  and  not  before,  the  preposition  which  belongs  to 
the  verb.  Modem  usage  only  admits  this  order  when  the  pronoun  is  emphatic.  S6e 
Abbott,  §  240.     [Also  II,  ii,  150.] 

t$.  fingered]  Hanmer  (Some  Remarks,  &c,  p.  46) :  Hamlet's  stratagem  was 
possible,  but  not  very  probable ;  mahinks  their  commission  was  kept  in  a  very  negli» 
gent  manner  to  be  thus  got  from  them  without  their  knowing  it. 

16,  17.  so  .  c  .  to]  See  Macb.  II,  iii,  47;  III,  i,  87,  88;  and  Abbott,  §  281. 

17.  unseal]  Delius:  It  was  the  breaking  of  the  seal  that  was  the  violation  of 
good  manners.  Thus,  in  Lear,  IV,  vi,  264.  White  :  The  terminal  syllable  of  the 
line  above  probably  misled  the  compositors  of  the  Qq.  Here  Sh.  would  have 
avoided  a  rhyme;  and  from  line  52  it  is  plain  that  he  broke  a  seal. 

19.  O]  Delius  (Sh.  Lex.):  In  the  careless  printing  of  the  Qq,  «A'  probably 
signified  '  Ah.' 

20.  Larded]  Caldzcctt  :  See  IV,  v,  36; 


416 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


Importing  Denmark's  health  and  England's  too,  21 

With,  ho !  such  bugs  and  goblins  in  my  life, 
That,  on  the  supervise,  no  leisure  bated, 
No,  not  to  stay  the  grinding  of  the  axe, 
My  head  should  be  struck  off 

Her.  Is't  possible  ?  25 

Ham.     Here's  the  commission ;  read  it  at  more  leisure. 
But  wilt  thou  hear  me  how  I  did  proceed  ? 

Hor.     I  beseech  you. 

Ham.     Being  thus  be-netted  round  with  villainies, — 
Ere  I  could  make  a  prologue  to  my  brains,  30 


22.  ho  /]  hoe  Qq.    hoo,  Ff,  Rowe. 

24.  grinding]  gringding  F2, 

25.  struck]  Jlrucke  F2.  Jlrooke  Qq. 
strook  Cap. 

27.  me]  now  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Var.  El.  Cam.  Om.  FaF3F4, 
Rowe. 

28.  /beseech]  Ay,  'beseech  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Cald.  Sing.  Knt,  Del.  ii,  Ktly 
Ay,  beseech  Sta. 

29.  be-netted]  Hyphened,  QJX*  Dyce, 
Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

29-3  r .  villainies, — Ere.  ..play, — L\ 
Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  DeL  ii,  Huds.  Mob. 


villaines,  Or.. .play,  I  Qq,  El.  Villaines, 
Ere...Play.  /Ff  {Villains  Ere  Y^^, 
Rowe,  Pope,  villainy,  {Ere. ..prologue, 
to  my  bane  They... play  :)  I  Theob.  vil- 
lains,  and  Ere. ..brains,  They  having 
...play;  /Han.  villains,  {Ere  I  could 
mark  the  prologue  to  my  bane  They  had 
. . play  .*)  /  Warb.  villains,  Ere. ..play  : \ 
I  Johns.  Jen.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  ii.  vil- 
lainies,— Or. ..play; — / Cap.  Steev.  Var. 
Sing,  i,  Cam.  Cla.  {play, —  Cam.  Cla.). 
villains, — Ere... play, — /  Coll.  Del.  i, 
White,  Hal.  Ktly  {villainy  Ktly). 


21.  Importing]  Clarendon:  See  I,  ii,  23 ;  IV,  vii,  82.  Here  the  word  is  used 
in  a  somewhat  different  sense :  *  gravely  affecting,'  *  concerning.'  Compare  LovSs 
Lab.  Lost,  IV,  i,  57. 

22.  ho  !]  Delius  :  This  is  an  exclamation  of  horror. 

22.  such  . . .  life]  Caldecott  :  Such  multiplied  causes  of  alarm,  such  bugbears, 
if  I  were  suffered  to  live. 

22.  bugs]  Clarendon  :  Bugbears,  objects  of  terror.    Compare  Wint.  TaU}  III, 
ii,  93.     In  Coverdale's  translation  of  the  Psalms  {Ps.  xc,  or  according  to  the  present 
numbering  xci,  5)  we  find  :  «  So  yl  thou  shalt  not  nede  to  be  afrayed  for  eny  buggesi 
by  night  ner  for  arrowe  that  fiyeth  by  daye.*    In  Cotgrave  *  Goblin '  and  *  Bug '  are 
given  as  translations  of  the  French  Gobelin. 

23.  supervise]  Clarendon  :  On  the  supervision,  on  the  first  reading.  The  verb 
occurs  in  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  IV,  ii,  124.     See  I,  i,  57. 

23.  bated]  Malone  :  Without  any  abatement  or  intermission  of  time.  Clar- 
endon: The  execution  must  follow  immediately  without  any  exception  of  leisure. 

29.  villainies]  For  other  instances  of  the  confusion  of  villaine  and  villainie  in  the 
Folio,  see  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  44). 

30,  31.  prologue  .  .  .  play]  Theobald  paraphrased  his  emendation  (which  he 
Says  he  owed  in  part  to  Warburton  and  Bishop)  thus :  Being  in  their  snares,  e're  I 
could  make  a  Prologue  (take  the  least  previous  step)  to  ward  off  danger,  they  had 


act  v,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  4* 7 

They  had  begun  the  play, — I  sat  me  down ;  3 1 

Devised  a  new  commission;  wrote  it  fair; 

I  once  did  hold  it,  as  our  statists  do, 

A  baseness  to  write  fair,  and  labour'd  much 

How  to  forget  that  learning;  but,  sir,  now  35 

It  did  me  yeoman's  service.     Wilt  thou  know 

The  effect  of  what  I  wrote  ? 

Hor.  Ay,  good  my  lord. 

31.  saf\  sate  Ff,  Rowe+.  36.  yeomari  s~\  yemans  QaQ3Q4. 

34.  labour 'd]  laboured  F^F^  37.  effect]  effecls  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  Sta. 

begun  the  play  (put  their  schemes  into  action)  which  was  to  terminate  in  my  de» 
struction.  Warburton  :  They  had  begun  to  act,  to  my  destruction,  before  I  knew 
there  was  a  Play  towards.  Ere  I  could  mark  the  prologue.  Heath  (p.  549) 
agrees  with  his  predecessors  in  thinking  that  *  They '  refers  to  *  villains,*  not  to 
1  brains,'  and  paraphrases :  Before  I  could  take  the  very  first  step  towards  forming 
my  own  scheme,  they  had  already  proceeded  a  considerable  way  in  the  execution 
of  theirs.  JOHNSON  was  the  first  to  refer  '  They'  to  its  right  antecedent,  '  brains': 
'Before  he  could  summon  his  faculties,  and  propose  to  himself  what  should  be 
done,  a  complete  scheme  of  action  presented  itself  to  him.  His  mind  operated  be- 
fore he  had  excited  it.'  Caldecott  returns  to  Heath's  interpretation,  as  do  Delius 
and  Elze,  but,  with  these  exceptions,  all  the  rest  follow  Johnson.  Clarke  sees 
herein  a  vivid  picture  of  Shakespeare's  own  mode  of  composition,  his  teeming  brains 
beginning  a  play,  and  seeing  all  its  scope  and  bearings,  ere  he  had  well  penned  the 
opening  words.  Moberly  :  '  Before  I  formed  my  real  plan,  my  brains  had  done 
the  work.  This  line  should  be  carefully  remarked.  Ham.  writes  the  commission 
under  a  strong  impulse  rather  of  imagination  than  will,  the  ingenuity  of  the  trick 
captivating  him.  Then  the  encounter  with  the  pirate  puts  an  end  to  the  chance  of 
undoing  it ;  and  thus  he  is  driven,  somewhat  uneasily,  to  justify  his  action  to  Hor. 
As  the  latter  receives  his  narrative  with  something  like  surprise,  and  even  with  a 
touch  of  compassion,  we  may  conclude  with  safety  that  Hamlet's  kindly  nature 
would  have  cancelled  the  letters  but  for  the  accident  which  hindered  his  doing 
so.' 

23.  statists]  Steevens  :  Statesmen.  Blackstone  :  Most  of  the  great  men  of 
Shakespeare's  time,  whose  autographs  have  been  preserved,  wrote  very  bad  hands ; 
their  secretaries  very  neat  ones.  Ritson  :  '  I  have  in  my  time,  (says  Montaigne) 
Seene  some,  who  by  writing  did  earnestly  get  both  their  titles  and  living,  to  disavow 
their  apprentissage,  marre  their  pen,  and  affect  the  ignorance  of  so  vulgar  a  qualitie.' 
Florio's  translation,  1603,  p.  125. 

36.  yeoman's  service]  Steevens  :  The  ancient  yeomen  were  famous  for  their 
military  valor.  <  These  were  the  goode  archers  in  times  past,'  says  Sir  Thomas 
Smith,  'and  the  stable  troop  of  footmen  that  affraide  all  France.'  Clarendon: 
They  composed  the  mass  of  the  infantry.  Their  formidable  character  is  mentioned 
by  Bacon  in  his  Essay  :  Of  the  true  greatnesse  of  Kingdomes  and  Estates,  p.  122.  ecL 
W.  A  Wright. 

2B 


41 S  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

Ham.    An  earnest  conjuration  from  the  king, 
As  England  was  his  faithful  tributary, 

As  love  between  them  like  the  palm  might  flourish,  40 

As  peace  should  still  her  wheaten  garland  wear 
And  stand  a  comma  'tween  their  amities, 

40.  like]  as  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Del.  Sta.  Huds.      commercing  Anon.  (ap.  Sing. 

might"]   should  Ff,  Rowe,    Knt,  er's  Sh.  Vind.  p.  268).    a  comare  Nich- 

Del.  Sta.  olson.* 
42.  a  comma]  a  cement  Han.  White, 

38.  conjuration]  See  Rom.  &•>  Jul.  V,  iii,  68,  where  this  passage  seems  to  have 
been  overlooked  by  the  critics. 

42.  comma]  Theobald  (Nichols's  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  579),  writing  to  his  'most  affec- 
tionate friend,'  Warburton,  says  that  it  should  be  either  '  no  comma,'  i.  e.  as  no  bar 
should  stand  between  their  friendships: — Or,  'And  stand  a  comma  'tween  their 
enmities?  i.  e.  as  peace  should  intervene  and  prevent  enmities.'  He  did  not  repeat 
these  suggestions  in  his  ed.,  but  adopted  Warburton's  emendation,  and  justifies  it  in  a 
note  which  he  attributes  to  Warburton :  'The  poet  without  doubt  wrote,  "And  stand 
a  Commere"  i.  e.  a  guarantee,  a  common  mother.  Nothing  can  be  more  picturesque 
than  this  image  of  Peace's  standing,  drest  in  her  wheaten  garland,  between  the  two 
Princes,  and  extending  a  hand  to  each.  We  thus  frequently  see  her  on  Roman  coins.' 
But  Warburton,  in  his  ed.,  goes  further,  and  says  that  Commere  here  means  'a  traf- 
ficker in  love,  one  who  brings  people  together,  a  procuress.'  [Cotgrave  sustains 
him  in  this  meaning.]  Capell  {Notes,  &c,  i,  147)  was  taken  by  this  allusion  to 
Peace  as  represented  on  coins,  and  so  adopted  Commere.  Heath  (p.  549)  well 
interprets  :  '  As  a  comma  stands  between  two  several  members  of  a  sentence,  without 
separating  them  otherwise  than  by  distinguishing  the  one  from  the  other,  in  like 
manner  peace  personized,  or  the  Goddess  of  Peace,  is  understood  to  stand  between 
the  amities  of  the  two  kings.*  [Dyce  (ed.  ii)  cites  this  paraphrase  of  Heath's,  and 
adds  :  '  Perhaps  so.']  JOHNSON :  The  comma  is  the  note  of  connection  and  conti- 
nuity of  sentences  j  the  period  is  the  note  of  abruption  and  disjunction.  Sh.  had  it 
perhaps  in  his  mind  to  write, — That  unless  England  complied  with  the  mandate, 
war  should  put  a  period to  their  amity;  he  altered  his  mode  of  diction,  and  thought 
that,  in  an  opposite  sense,  he  might  put,  that  peace  should  stand  a  comma  between 
their  amities.  Becket  (Shakespeare'  s  Himself  Again,  i,  73)  suggested,  '  And  stand 
a  co-mate?  i.  e.  'companion  ;  peace  should  be  associate  with  them.'  Staunton  con- 
sidered this  '  co-mate  within  the  range  of  possibility.'  And  Elze  (Athen&um,  1 1 
Aug.  1866)  lit  upon  the  same  conjecture  independently  of  Becket,  and  thinks  that 
this  coincidence  adds  strength.  It  should  be  added  that  Elze,  one  of  the  very 
best  English  scholars  in  Germany,  had  merely  heard  at  the  time  of  Becket's  conjec- 
ture, and  had  no  knowledge  of  the  quality  of  the  rest  of  that  wild  '  Nonsense  Book.* 
Tschischwitz  follows  Becket.  Caldecott  cites  :  '  I  feare  the  point  of  the  sword 
will  make  a  comma  to  your  cunning.' — N.  Breton's  Packet  of  Letters,  p.  23,  1 637. 
Hunter  (ii,  264)  thinks  Sh.  meant  to  ridicule  such  an  absurd  expression  in  some 
speech  or  document  of  the  time.  Singer  (ed.  ii)  reads,  '  And  stand  a  co-mere,*  i.  e< 
'as  a  mark  defining  them.  Mere  is  a  boundary  mark,  the  lapis  terminalis  of  the 
ancients;  and  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  god  of  meres  or  bounds,  Terminus, 


act  v,  sc.  H.]  HAMLET  4 1 9 

And  many  such-like  ^es  of  great  charge,  43 

43.  such-like  As«]  fuch  like  Affis  Ff.    fuck  like,  as  fir  Qq. 

was  wont  to  end  the  strifes  and  controversies  of  people  in  dividing  their  lands.'  To 
this  suggestion  Dyce  (ed.  i)  adds :  '  But  our  author's  text  is  not  to  be  amended  by 
the  insertion  of  words  coined  expressly  for  the  occasion ;  and  to  me  at  least  all  this 
tampering  of  critics  with  the  passage  does  not  prove  that  it  is  corrupt.'  White 
finds  ■  comma'  incomprehensible,  and  adopts  Hanmer's  reading,  cement,  which  'is 
supported,  in  accent  and  all,  by  Ant.  &°  Cleo.  Ill,  ii,  29.  And  see  Octavia's  subse- 
quent description  of  herself,  scene  iv,  as  standing  between,  praying  for  both  parts. 
Clarke:  'Comma'  is  here  employed  as  the  term  applied  by  theoretical  musicians 
to  express  *  the  least  of  all  the  sensible  intervals  in  music,'  showing  the  exact  pro- 
portions between  accords.  Tuners  of  organs  and  piano-fortes  use  the  word  'comma* 
thus  to  the  present  day.  The  term  in  its  musical  sense  is  fully  explained  in  Hawkins's 
Hist,  of  Music  (pp.  28,122,410,  ed.  Novello,  1853).  From  the  context  of  the 
present  passage,  there  is  far  greater  probability  that  Sh.  had  in  view  a  term  refer- 
ring to  concord,  than  one  alluding  to  the  method  of  stopping ;  and  we  think  that  he 
here  uses  the  word  '  comma'  to  express  a  link  of  amicably  harmonious  connection. 
That  he  was  well  acquainted  with  various  technical  terms  in  music  we  have  several 
proofs  in  his  writings.  Bailey  (i,  55) :  'That  Peace  wearing  a  garland  should  stand 
as  a  punctuation-mark  between  persons  or  abstractions  of  any  kind  is  as  pure  non- 
sense as  ever  flowed  from  penman  or  printer.  I  suggest,  "  And  hold  her  olive  'tween 
their  amities."  '  Compare  Shakespeare's  use  of  '  the  olive  '  elsewhere  in  2  Hen. 
IV,  and  Twelfth  Night.  The  transformation  of  holds  her  olive  into  'stands  a 
comma'  arose  '  by  a  very  simple  blunder.  It  is  clearly  a  case  of  the  incorporation 
of  a  marginal  direction  into  the  text.  The  compositor  had  before  him  the  genuine 
line,  and  put  it  accurately  into  type,  except  that  he  omitted  to  place  the  mark  of 
elision  (')  before  tween, and  the  proof-reader  wrote  the  correction  in  full,  'a  comma,' 
in  the  margin ;  this  the  compositor  inserted  in  the  text  under  the  misconception  that 
•  a  comma  '  was  to  be  substituted  for  '  her  olive.'  And  thus  '  hold  a  comma '  was 
next  changed  into  '  stand  a  comma.'  In  Q2  '  there  is  no  elision  mark  [if  Bailey 
had  said  comma  here,  would  it  not  have  revealed  the  fallacy  of  his  whole  theory? 
would  the  proof-reader  have  called  for  '  comma '  when  he  meant  an  apostrophe  ? 
Ed.]  before  tween,  which  is  just  what  my  theory  requires;  for,  supposing  the  error 
to  have  been  made  originally  in  Q2,  it  is  obvious  that  the  words  a  comma  would 
be  introduced  into  the  text  instead  of  the  elision  mark.'  CartWright  {New 
Readings,  &c,  p.  37)  proposed,  '  And  stand  as  one  atween  ;'  two  years  later  ( N, 
<5r*  Qu.,  20  June,  1868)  he  conjectured, '  And  stand  as  concord'  J.  Wetherell 
(N.  6°  Qu.,  27  June,  1868) :  Read:  'And  stand  at-one  between  their  majesties' 

43.  Ases]  Johnson  :  A  quibble  is  intended  between  as  the  conditional  particle, 
and  ass  the  beast  of  burthen.  That  charg>d  anciently  signified  loaded  may  be  proved 
from  the  following  passage  in  The  Widow's  Tears,  by  Chapman,  1612:  'Thou  must 
be  the  ass  charged  with  crowns,  to  make  way.'  Malone  :  It  should  be  remembered 
that  the  letter  s  in  the  particle  as  in  the  midland  counties  is  usually  pronounced 
hard,  as  in  the  pronoun  us.  Dr  Johnson  himself  always  pronounced  the  particle  as 
hard,  and  so  I  have  no  doubt  did  Sh.  It  is  so  pronounced  in  Warwickshire  at  this 
day.    Clarendon:  Compare  Twelfth  Night,  II,  iii,  184,  185. 


4-20  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

That,  on  the  view  and  knowing  of  these  contents, 

Without  debatement  further,  more,  or  less,  45 

He  should  the  bearers  put  to  sudden  death, 

Not  shriving-time  allow'd. 

44.  knowing  of]  Qq,  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  47.  Nof\  No  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Steev.  Var.    El.  Glo.  4- ,  Dyce  ii,  Mob.  shriving-time]    Hyphen,  Theob. 
knowingTopQfTheob.  Han.Warb.  know        ii.     thriving  time  Jen.  (misprint?). 

of  Ff  et  cet.  allow' W]  alow'd  Q^Q.Q..  allowed 

45.  further']  farther  Coll.  White.  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald. 

46.  the  bearers]  thofe  bearers  Qq,  Jen. 

44.  knowing]  Contracted,  or  slurred  in  pronunciation,  into  a  monosyllable.  See 
Walker  (Vers.  p.  119),  and  Abbott,  §470.  Stratmann:  As  know  cannot  be, 
nor  has  ever  been,  used  substantively,  it  must  be  a  misprint  in  the  Ff. 

47.  shriving-time]  Hunter  (ii,  265) :  This  was  a  term  in  common  use  for  any 
short  period.     All  Ham.  meant  was  that  they  should  be  put  to  instant  death. 

47.  allow'd]  HaNMER  (Some  Remarks,  &c,  p.  46) :  The  punishment  of  Ros.  and 
Guil.  was  just,  because  they  had  devoted  themselves  to  the  service  of  the  Usurper  in 
whatever  he  should  command.  Malone:  From  The  Hystorie  of  Hamblet,  it  appears 
that  the  faithful  ministers  of  Fengon  were  not  unacquainted  with  the  import  of  the 
letters  they  bore  [see  Vol.  II,  p.  103].  Sh.  probably  meant  to  describe  their  representa- 
tives, Ros.  and  Guil.,  as  equally  guilty.  So  that  Hamlet's  procuring  their  execution, 
though  certainly  not  absolutely  necessary  to  his  own  safety,  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  a  wanton  and  unprovoked  cruelty.  Steevens  :  I  apprehend  that  a  critic  and 
a  juryman  are  bound  to  form  their  opinions  on  what  they  see  and  hear  in  the  cause 
before  them,  and  not  to  be  influenced  by  extraneous  particulars  unsupported  by  legal 
evidence  in  open  court.  I  persist  in  observing,  that  from  Shakespeare's  drama  no 
proofs  of  the  guilt  of  Ros.  and  Guil.  can  be  collected.  They  may  be  convicted  by 
the  old  Hystorie  ;  but  if  the  tragedy  forbears  to  criminate,  it  has  no  right  to  sentence 
them.  This  is  sufficient  for  the  commentator's  purpose.  It  is  not  his  office  to  inter- 
pret the  plays  of  Sh.  according  to  the  novels  on  which  they  are  founded, — novels 
which  the  poet  sometimes  followed,  but  as  often  materially  deserted.  Perhaps  he 
never  confined  himself  strictly  to  the  plan  of  any  one  of  his  originals.  His  negli- 
gence of  poetic  justice  is  notorious;  nor  can  we  expect  that  he  who  was  content  to 
sacrifice  the  pious  Oph.  should  have  been  more  scrupulous  about  the  worthless  lives 
of  Ros.  and  Guil.  Therefore  I  assert  that  in  the  tragedy  before  us  their  deaths  ap- 
pear wanton  and  unprovoked;  and  the  critic,  like  Bayes,  must  have  recourse  to 
somewhat  long  before  the  beginning  of  the  play  to  justify  the  conduct  of  its  hero. 
Pye  (p.  326) :  There  is  not  one  word  uttered  by  Ros.  and  Guil.  throughout  the 
play  that  does  not  proclaim  them  to  the  most  superficial  observer  as  creatures 
of  the  King,  purposely  employed  to-feetxa^LHam.,  their  friend  and  fellow-student. 
Strachey  (p.  96) :  Something  more  than  Hamlet's  own  preservation  is  at  stake;  he 
is  the  representative  and  avenger  of  the  rights  of  the  crown  and  laws  of  Denmark, 
outraged  by  a  murderer  and  a  usurper,  (for  he  was  only  elected  because  he  con- 
trived to  murder  the  rightful  possessor  at  a  moment  when  his  natural  heir  was  ab» 
sent) ;  and  he  has  to  act  under  those  circumstances,  which  at  rare  and  long  intervals 
in  the  history  of  every  country,  call  on  some  man  to  maintain  the  spirit  of  the  laws 
by  disregarding  for  a  moment  their  letter.     It  is  Hamlet's  duty  to  avenge  the  crown 


ACT  V,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


421 


Hor.  How  was  this  seal'd  ? 

Ham.     Why,  even  in  that  was  heaven  ordinant. 
I  had  my  father's  signet  in  my  purse, 
Which  was  the  model  of  that  Danish  seal ; 
Folded  the  writ  up  in  form  of  the  other ; 
Subscribed  it;  gave't  the  impression;  placed  it  safely, 
The  changeling  never  known.     Now,  the  next  day 
Was  our  sea-fight ;  and  what  to  this  was  sequent 
Thou  know'st  already. 

Hor.     So  Guildenstern  and  Rosencrantz  go  to't. 

Ham.     Why,   man,   they   did   make    love  to   this 
ployment ; 
They  are  not  near  my  conscience;  their  defeat 
Does  by  their  own  insinuation  grow. 
'Tis  dangerous  when  the  baser  nature  comes 
Between  the  pass  and  fell  incensed  points 
Of  mighty  opposites. 

Hor.  Why,  what  a  king  is  this ! 


47 


SO 


55 


em- 


60 


48.  ordinant]  ordinate  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Cald.  Knt. 

51.  Folded]  I  folded  Rowe-h,  Cap 
Ktly, 

in  form]   in  the  forme  Qq,  Jen. 
Dyce  ii,  Cam.  Cla. 

52.  Subscribed]  Subcribe  Q2Q3> 
gave't  the]  gau't  tft1  QqFf.    gav* 

th'  F2F3F4.    gave  th'  Rowe +  . 

53.  changeling]  change  was  Pope, 
Han.     changing  Anon.* 

54.  sequent]  fement  Ff.  sequell  Coll. 
(MS). 

55.  know* si]  knowefl  Qq. 

56.  So. ..go]  So...Roftncrance,  go  Ff. 
So  Guildenflare  and  Rqfcncros,  goe  F2 
F  .    So,  Guildenflare  and  Rofincrofs,  go 


F4.     So,  Guildenstern  and  Rosineraus, 
go  Rowe  i.     So,.. go  Pope  + ,  Jen. 

56.  go]  went  Q'76. 

57.  Why employment;    Ora.    Qq, 

Pope,  Han. 

58.  defeat]  debate  Ff,  Rowe. 

59.  Does]  Dooes  Q2Q3Q4.     Doth  Ff, 
Rowe+,  Jen.  Dyce  ii. 

60.  the  baser]  bafer  FaF  F  ,  Rowe, 
Pope. 

the  baser.. .comes]  baser  natures 
come  Han. 

6 1 .  fell incensed]  fell-incensed  WaXker, 
Sta.  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

62.  opposites]   apposites  Jen,   (a  mis- 
print?). 

is  this  f]  is  this  ?  Ff,  Pope. 


and  laws  of  Denmark  by  putting  the  tyrant  to  death ;  and  if  as  a  means  to  that  end  he 
has  to  sacrifice  also  the  base  instruments  of  the  tyrant's  will,  he  is  justified  in  doing  it. 
48.  was  .  .  .  ordinant]  Clarendon  :  Compare  '  was  sequent,'  post  1.  54, 

50.  model]  M ALONE:  The  copy,  the  imitation;  see  Rich.  II:  III,  ii,  153. 

51.  in  form]  For  the  omission  of  the  definite  article,  compare  III,  iv,  144. 

59.  insinuation]  Malone  :  By  their  having  insinuated  or  thrust  themselves  into 
the-  employment. 

61.  Between  the  pass]  Moberly:  So  as  to  get  the  dangerous  woui  d  which 
comes  from  the  ■  redding-straik.' 
36 


42  2  HAMLET  [act  v,  SC.  ii. 

Ham.     Does  it  not,  thinks't  thee,  stand  me  now  upon — 
He  that  hath  kill'd  my  king,  and  whored  my  mother; 
Popp'd  in  between  the  election  and  my  hopes ;  65 

Thrown  out  his  angle  for  my  proper  life, 
And  with  such  cozenage — is't  not  perfect  conscience 

63.  thinks 7  tkee~\  Walker,  Dyce,  Glo.  64.  my  king~\  your  king  Anon.* 

-f,  Del.  ii.     thinkjl  thee  Fx.     think'Jl  65.  Popfd]  Stept  Q1 '76. 

thee  F2F3F4,  Sing,  ii,  Sta.  White,  Knt  ii,  66.   Thrown... life']  His  angle  for  my 

Ktly,  Clarke,  Mob.  Huds.     thinke  thee  proper  life  thrown  out  Coll.  (MS). 

Q2Q3Q&-   think  thee  Q  ,  Cap.  jen.  Steev.  67.  cozenage — ]  Bos.  Coll.  El.  Dyce, 

Var.   Sing,  i,  Cald.  Knt  i,  Coll.  Del.  i,  Sta.  White,  Glo.  +  ,  Mob.      aifnage,  Q2 

El.  Hal.    think  you  Q' '76.   think'st  thou  Q3.   cofnage,  Q4Q5*   coozenage;  Fx.  cou- 

Rovve  +  .  s'nage;  Cap.     cozenage;  F2F  F4  et  cet. 

upon — ]  Bos.  Coll.  El.  Dyce,  Sta.  conscience]   Jen.  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

White,  Glo. +  ,  Mob.     vppon?  Q2Q3QA.  confcience?  Qq.     conscience,  Ff  et  cet. 
upon  Fx.  upon,  F2  F3F4.  upon  ?  Q  et  cet. 

63.  thinks't  thee]  The  editors  who  follow  Q,.  interpret  this  as  equivalent  to 
'  bethink  thee.'  Walker  in  dealing  with  this  passage  exhibited,  as  his  admirable 
editor,  Lettsom,  well  says,  profound  critical  sagacity,  and,  almost  entirely  unaided 
by  any  old  copies,  put  aside  ancient  and  modern  corruptions,  and  made  his  way  at 
once  to  the  genuine  reading:  *  It  may  be  observed*  (  Vers.  281)  'that  thinks  it  thee 
also  occurs  in  the  Elizabethan  poets  in  the  sense  of  fitiv  donel  col.1  He  then  cites  the 
present  passage,  and  gives  the  reading  of  the  present  text;  and  also  corrects  the  same 
phrase  in  Cartwright,  The  Ordinary,  III,  ii  (Dodsley,  x,  216):  '"  Little  think'st 
thee  how  diligent  thou  art  To  little  purpose."  Thinks't  thee,  of  course.  (I  under- 
stand, by  the  way,  that  the  thinks  in  methinks  is,  originally  and  etymologically,  not 
the  same  with  our  present  verb  to  think ;  but  that  it  is  a  corruption  of  another  verb 
signifying  to  seem;  so  that  methinks  is  as  it  appears  to  me. y  Clarendon  offers 
another  solution :  Perhaps  the  true  reading  is  *  thinks  thee,'  the  final  s  of  the  Quarto 
being  mistaken  for  e.  The  word  '  think '  in  this  passage  is  not  the  same  in  origin 
as  '  think  *  used  personally,  but  comes  from  Anglosaxon  thincan,  to  seem,  appear, 
which  is  used  impersonally  with  all  personal  pronouns.  The  other  word  is  then- 
can,  to  think,  and  the  distinction  is  maintained  in  the  German  dilnken  and 
denken.  In  Rich.  Ill :  III,  i,  63 :  'Where  it  seems  best  unto  your  royal  self,'  for 
'  seems,'  which  is  the  reading  of  the  earliest  Qq,  the  later  editions  have  '  thinkst ' 
or « think'st.' 

63.  stand  me]  Abbott,  §  204 :  This  phrase  cannot  be  explained,  though  it  is 
influenced,  by  the  custom  of  transposition.  Almost  inextricable  confusion  seems  to 
have  been  made  by  the  Elizabethan  authors  between  two  distinct  idioms:  (1)  'it 
stands  on'  (adv.),  or  'at  hand,'  or  'upon'  (comp.  'instat,'  irpooquei),  i.e.  'it  is  of 
importance,'  'it  concerns,'  'it  is  a  matter  of  duty;'  and  (2)  '  I  stand  upon'  (adj.), 
i.  e.  '  I  insist  upon.'  In  (1)  the  full  phrase  would  be:  '  it  stands  on,  upon,  to  me,' 
but,  owing  to  the  fact  that '  to  me1  or • '  me'  {the  dative  infection)  is  unemphatic,  and 
*  upon  '  is  emphatic  and  often  used  at  the  end  of  the  sentence,  the  words  were  trans- 
posed into,  '  it  stands  me  upon?  '  Me'  was  thus  naturally  taken  for  the  object  of 
upon.  [In  the  present  passage]  it  means  '  it  is  imperative  on  me.'  Clarendon  1 
The  construction  is  here  interrupted  by  the  parenthesis. 


•\ 


ACT  V,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


To  quit  him  with  this  arm  ?  and  is't  not  to  be  damn'd, 
To  let  this  canker  of  our  nature  come 
In  further  evil  ? 

Hor.     It  must  be  shortly  known  to  him  from  England 
What  is  the  issue  of  the  business  there. 

Ham.     It  will  be  short;  the  interim  is  mine; 
And  a  man's  life's  no  more  than  to  say  '  One/ 
But  I  'am  very  sorry,  good  Horatio, 
That  to  Laertes  I  forgot  myself; 
For,  by  the  image  of  my  cause,  I  see 
The  portraiture  of  his ;  I'll  court  his  favours ; 


423 


70 


75 


68-80.    To  quit. ..here?}  Om.  Qq. 
68.  this']  his  F2F3F4,  Rowe. 

this  arm]  his  own  Coll.  (MS). 
and]  Om.  Han. 
70.  further]  farther  Coll.  White. 

evil?]  Rowe.  evill.  or  evil.  Ff. 
73-75.  Itwill...Horatio]1la.n.  Three 
lines,  ending  short,.. .more. ..Horatio,  Ff, 
Row.e.  Four,  ending  short... more... one 
...Horatio,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Walker. 

73.  interi?n  is]    Han.     interim's  Ff, 


Rowe+,  Sing.  ii. 

74.  life's]  life  Reed'03,  Bos.  Cald. 
Coll.  Sing.  DeL  White,  Ktly,  Hal. 
Huds. 

'One ']  one  Ff.  Quotation,  Glo. 
+  ,  Dyce  ii,  Mob.  Italics,  Han.  Sta. 
Huds. 

78.  court  his  favours]  Rowe.  count 
his  favours  Ff,  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 
Knt,  Coll.  i.  court  his  favour  Theob. 
Han.  Warb.  Johns.  El. 


68.  quit]  Johnson  :  To  requite  him. 

70.  In]  For  other  instances  of  in  equivalent  to  inlo9*see  II,  ii,  112;  V,  i,  266; 
Macb.  I,  iii,  126;  and  Abbott,  §  159. 

71,  72.  It  .  .  .  there]  Strachey  (p.  94) :  Note  the  usual  cautiousness  of  Hor., 
who  contrives  to  suggest  to  Ham.  the  very  strongest  of  all  motives  for  instantly  put- 
ting the  King  to  death,  under  an  indirect  and  very  innocently-sounding  remark. 

73.  mine]  Miles  (p.  80) :  You  never  suspect  the  errand  Ham.  is  on  until  yo;; 
happen  to  hear  that  little  word,  *  The  interim  is  mine  /'  It  means  more  mischief 
than  all  the  monologues !  No  threats,  no  imprecations,  no  more  mention  of  smiling 
damned  villain;  no  more  self-accusal ;  but  solely  and  briefly,  'It  will  be  short ;  the 
interim  is  mine !'  Then,  for  the  first  time,  we  recognize  the  extent  of  the  change 
that  has  been  wrought  in  Ham. ;  then,  for  the  first  time,  we  perfectly  comprehend 
his  quiet  jesting  with  the  Clown,  his  tranquil  musings  with  Hor.  The  man  is  trans- 
formed by  a  great  resolve :  his  mind  is  made  up  /  The  return  of  the  vessel  from 
England  will  be  the  signal  for  his  own  execution,  and  therefore  the  moral  problem 
is  solved :  the  only  chance  of  saving  his  life  from  a  lawless  murderer  is  to  slay  him  ; 
it  has  become  an  act  of  self-defence ;  he  can  do  it  with  perfect  conscience.  He  has 
calculated  the  return  voyage ;  he  has  allowed  the  longest  duration  to  his  own  exist- 
ence and  the  King's.  At  the  very  moment  he  encounters  the  Clown  in  the  church- 
yard he  is  on  his  death-march  to  the  palace  at  Elsinore. 

78.  court]  Steevens,  Caldecott,  and  Clarke  justify  count  in  the  sense  of 
make  account  of  reckon  zip,  value. 


424  HAMLET  [act  v,  SC.  ii 

But,  sure,  the  bravery  of  his  grief  did  put  me 
Into  a  towering  passion. 

Hor.  Peace !  who  comes  here  ?  80 

Enter  OSRIC. 

Osr.     Your  lordship  is  right  welcome  back  to  Denmark* 

Ham.    I  humbly  thank  you,  sir. — [Aside  to  Hor!]    Dost 
know  this  water-fly? 

Hor.    [Aside  to  Ham!]   No,  my  good  lord. 

Ham.     [Aside  to  Hor.]    Thy  state  is  the  more  gracious,     85 
for  'tis  a  vice  to  know  him.    He  hath  much  land,  and  fertile  > 
let  a  beast  be  lord  of  beasts,  and  his  crib  shall  stand  at  the 
king's  mess :  'tis  a  chough,  but,  as  I  say,  spacious  in  the  pos- 
session of  dirt 

80.  Hor.]  2  Hor.  F8.  cod smells  /]  Dost  Cald.  from  Qr 
Osric]  young   Ofricke.    Ft.     a  82,  84,  85.  Aside...]  Dyce  ii,  Ktly, 

Courtier.  Qq.  Clarke,  Huds.     As  an  Aside,  first  by 

81.  Scene  rv.  Pope +,  Jen.  Cap. 

81.  &c.  Osr.]  Cour.  Qq.  88.  'tis]  //  is  Johns. 

82.  J  humbly. ..water-fly?]  Two  lines,  chough]  cough  Cap.  (corrected  in 
Qq.                                                                 Errata). 

sir.— Dost]  Sir,  dojl  ¥t¥r   fir;  say]fawFt. 

dofl  F3F4.    #>.«—  \foh,  how  the  muske> 

79.  bravery]  DYCE  (Gloss.):  Bravado. 

80.  Osric]  C.  Elliot  Browne  ( The  Athenaum,  29  July,  1876) :  This  was  a 
name  well  known  at  the  time.  Henslowe's  company  performed  an  Oseryck  in  1597, 
perhaps  Heywood's  lost  play  of  Marshal  Osrick. 

83.  water-fly]  Johnson:  A  water-fly  skips  up  and  down  upon  the  surface  of 
the  water  without  any  apparent  purpose  or  reason,  and  is  thence  the  proper  emblem 
of  a  busy  trifler.  Clarendon  :  The  name  is  given  to  several  kinds  of  flies  haunting 
water  in  Mouffet's  Theater  of  Insects,  ed.  1 658,  p.  943. 

SS.  chough]  Johnson  says  this  is  a  kind  of  jackdaw.  Harting  (p.  115)  calls 
it  the  Red-legged  Crow,  or  the  Cornish  Chough,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  from  its 
being  considered  a  bird  peculiar  to  the  south-west  coast  of  England,  though  now 
known  to  be  much  more  widely  distributed.  As  to  its  pronunciation,  Skinner 
derives  the  name  &  sono  naturali  quern  avis  edit,  and  Cotgrave  translates  Cau6 
(clearly  a  case  of  onomatopoeia),  and  Cauvette,  by  A  Chough  or  Jacke  Daw.  Fi- 
nally, Ritson  (p.  92)  says  that  the  name  of  the  Cornish  bird  is  pronounced  by 
the  natives  chow,  which  is  conclusive.  CaldeCOTT  doubts  much  if,  in  the  present 
instance,  from  its  association  with  wealth,  it  have  any  relation  to  that  bird,  but  in- 
clines to  think  it  should  be  chuff.  [Is  not  Caldecott  right  here?  The  chow  is, 
perhaps,  applicable  to  Osr.  on  the  score  of  chattering,  but  how  about  the  spacious 
possession  of  dirt,  the  special  application  made  by  Ham.  ?     If  chuff  be  here  meant 


ACT  V,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


425 


Osr.    Sweet   lord,   if  your  lordship   were  at  leisure,  I     90 
should  impart  a  thing  to  you  from  his  majesty. 

Ham.     I  will  receive  it,  sir,  with  all  diligence  of  spirit. 
Put  your  bonnet  to  his  right  use ;  'tis  for  the  head. 

Osr.     I  thank  your  lordship,  'tis  very  hot. 

Ham.     No,  believe  me,  'tis  very  cold ;  the  wind  is  north-    95 
erly. 

Osr.     It  is  indifferent  cold,  my  lord,  indeed. 

Ham.    But  yet  methinks  it  is  very  sultry  and  hot  for  my 
complexion. 


90.  lordship']  Lordjhippe  Q3Q3QV 
friend/Jiip  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Del.  i. 

leisure]  lea/ure  Q2Q3Q4F,«     kjr* 
Jure  F,. 

92.  sir]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Knt,  Dyce  i, 
Sta. 

93.  Put]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt, 
Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Glo.  +  ,  Mob.  Om. 
Qq  et  cet. 

94.  'tis]  it  is  Qq,  Jen.  Glo.  + ,  Dyce  ii, 
Mob. 


98.  But  yet]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sta. 

sultry]   foultry    Q4QsFf.     fully 

98,  99.  hot  for  my  complexion.]  Ff, 
Rowe+,  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Dyce, 
Sta.  White,  Hal.  Glo.  Huds.  hot,  or 
my  compaction.  Qq  [complexion.  Q.QS). 
hot,  or  my  complexion —  Warb.  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.Var.  Sing.  El.  Ktly,  Cam.  Cla. 
Mob, 


its  application  accords  with  Cotgrave's  use  of  the  word :  ■  Franc-gontier.  A  sub- 
stanciall  yonker,  wealthie  chuffe ;'  or  again,  *  Maschefouyn :  A  chuffe,  boore,  lob- 
cocke,  lozell;  one  that  is  fitter  to  feed  with  cattell,  then  to  conuerse  with  men.' 
GlFFORD  (Massinger's  Duke  of  Milan,  III,  i,  p.  279,  ed.  Gifford)  says  '  chuff  is 
always  used  in  a  bad  sense,  and  means  a  coarse,  unmannered  clown,  at  once  sordid 
and  wealthy.'  Dyce  ( Gloss,  s.  v.  chuff)  adds  instances  corroborating  Gifford  from 
A  Gorgious  Gallery  of  Gallant  Inventions,  1 578,  and  Marlowe's  Ovid's  Elegies* 
Whether  it  be  chow  or  chuff,  the  whole  speech  is  puzzling.  Ed.] 

90.  Sweet]  Mommsen  (p.  258)  shows  by  manifold  examples  that  'sweet'  was 
a  common  mode  of  address  in  the  Elizabethan  court  language  >  it  occurs  very  fre- 
quently in  Marlowe.     See  III,  ii,  48. 

91.  a]  Abbott,  §81 :  'A'  is  here  used  emphatically  for  'some,'  'a  certain.' 

92.  diligence  of  spirit]  Caldecott  :  In  ridicule  of  the  style  of  the  airy,  affected 
insect  that  was  playing  around  him. 

94.  hot]  Theobald  :  ' igniculum  brumse  si  tempore  poscas,  Accipit  endro* 

midem;  si  dixeris,  sestuo,  sudat.'— Juvenal,  Sat.  iii. 

99.  complexion]  Those  who  follow  the  Qq  adopt  Warburton's  explanation : 
Ham.  was  going  on  to  say  '  or  my  complexion  deceives  me?  but  the  over- complai- 
sance of  Osr.  interrupted  him.  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  322)  follows  the  Qq,  because 
'for*  of  the  Ff  is  so  frequently  misprinted  for  or.  Lettsom  upholds  the  Ff, 
Daniel  (p.  76)  suspects  that  Hamlet's  speech  should  end  at '  hot,'  and  that  '  for 
my  complexion '  is  a  petty  oath  ('Fore  my  complexion  I),  which  should  be  given, 
to  Osr.  See  Rosalind  in  As  You  Like  It:  *  Good  my  complexion  I'  III,  ii,  204, 
36* 


426  HAMLET  [act  v,  SC,  ii. 

Osr,    Exceedingly,  my  lord ;  it  is  very  sultry, — as 'twere,  ioo 
—I  cannot  tell  how.    But,  my  lord,  his  majesty  bade  me 
signify  to  you  that  he  has  laid  a  great  wager  on  your  head. 
Sir,  this  is  the  matter — 

Ham,    I  beseech  you,  remember — 

[Hamlet  moves  him  to  put  on  his  hat 

Osr.    Nay,  in  good  faith ;  for  mine  ease,  in  good  faith.  105 

ioo.  sultry]  foultery  QaQ3.    foultry  104.  remember — ]  Pope,     remember, 

Q4QsFf.  QqFf. 

101.  But]  Om.  Qq,  Pope+,Cap.  Jen.  [Hamlet.,  hat.]    Johns.      Ora. 
Steev.  Var.  Sing.  El.  Ktly.  QqFf,  Cap. 

bade]  bid  F4,  Rowe+.     bad  Qq  105.  in  good  faith]  Ff,  Rowe+,Cald. 

F,F3F  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  White,    good  my 

102.  to  you]  unto  you  Q'76.  lord  Qq  et  cet. 

he]  a  Qq.  mine]  my  Qq.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 

103.  matter — ]  Rowe.   matter.  QqFf,        Var.  Sing  El.  Ktly 
Knt,  Sta.     matter ; —  Cap. 


104.  remember]  Malone,  in  his  ed.,  1790,  conjectured  that  Ham.  was  about 
to  say  *  remember  not  your  courtesy/  because  he  could  not  possibly  have  said  '  re- 
member your  courtesy '  when  he  wanted  Osr.  to  put  his  hat  on.  Malone  be- 
lieved that  courtesy  meant  to  uncover  the  head,  and  accordingly  in  Love's  Lab.  Lost, 
V,  i,  103,  he  added  not  in  Armado's  speech,  *  I  do  beseech  thee  remember  not  thy 
courtesy;  I  beseech  thee  apparel  thy  head,'  and  "Dyce  shared  this  opinion,  for  he 
considered  the  '  not '  as  indispensable.  STAUNTON  discarded  the  *  not '  in  Love's 
Lab.  Lost,  and  in  a  note  on  the  passage  says;  '  Whatever  may  have  been  the  mean- 
ing of  the  words,  or  whether  they  were  a  mere  complimentary  periphrasis,  without 
any  precise  signification,  the  following  quotations  prove  beyond  a  question  that  the 
old  text  is  right,  and  that  the  expression  refers  to  the  Pedant's  standing  bareheaded : 
— "  I  pray  you  be  remembred,  and  cover  your  head." — Lusty  juventus,  ed.  Haw- 
kins, p.  142.     '*  Pray  you  remember  your  courts' y Nay,  pray  you  be  cover' d." 

— Every  Man  in  His  Humour,  I,  i,  ed.  Gilford.'  Grant  White  ( The  Galaxy, 
Oct.  1869)  upholds  Staunton,  adding:  It  seems  clear  that  Osric's  completed  speech 
would  have  been,  *  remember  your  courtesy?  The  phrase  was  a  conventional  one 
for  *  be  Covered.*  But  why  ?  The  removal  of  the  hat,  in  Shakespeare's  time,  even 
more  than  now,  was  regarded  as  a  mark  of  courtesy.  I  am  unable  to  offer  any 
explanation  of  the  phrase  which  is  acceptable  even  to  myself.  I  can  only  suggest 
that  the  difficulty  lies  not  in  courtesy,  but  in  some  peculiar  and,  perhaps,  elliptical 
use  of  remember.     Elze  suggests  *  remember  thy  bonnet? 

105.  for  mine  ease]  Farmer  :  This  seems  to  have  been  the  affected  phrase  of 
the  time.  Thus,  in  Marston's  Malcontent,  1604  :  « I  beseech  you,  sir,  be  covered.— 
No,  in  good  faith  for  my  Case'.'  And  in  other  places.  Malone  :  It  appears  to 
have  been  the  common  language  of  ceremony  in  our  author's  time.  « Why  do  you 
stand  bareheaded ?  (says  one  of  the  speakers  in  Florio's  Second  Frutes,  1591,)  you 
do  yourself  wrong.  Pardon  me,  good  sir,  (replies  his  friend;)  I  do  it  for  7tiy  ease? 
Again,  in  A  New  Way  to  Pay  Old  Debts,  by  Massinger,  II,  iii,  1 633:  « Is't 


1  I 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  42  J 

Sir,  here  is  newly  come  to  court  Laertes ;  believe  me,  an  ab-  106 
solute  gentleman,  full  of  most  excellent  differences,  of  very 
soft  society  and  great  showing;  indeed,  to  speak  feelingly  of 
him,  he  is  the  card  or  calendar  of  gentry,  for  you  shall  find 
in  him  the  continent  of  what  part  a  gentleman  would  see.       1 10 
Ham.    Sir,  his  definement  suffers  no  perdition  in  you ; 

106-138.  Sir,  here...unfello2ved.]  Qq.  Warb.  Johns. 

Sir,  you  are  not  ignorant  of  what  excel-  108.  feelingly]  fellingly  Q3Q3« 

lence  Laertes  is  at  his  weapon.  Ff,  Rowe,  109.  the  card]  the  very  card  Cap. 

Pope,  Han.  no.  part]  parts  Nicholson.* 

107.  gentleman]  gentlemen  Q3Q,.  part. ..see]  port. ..use  Anon.* 

108.  showing]   fliew    Q'76,    Theob. 

for  your  ease  You  keep  your  hat  off?'  [In  Marston's  Malcontent  several  of  Shake- 
speare's fellow-players  are  introduced  by  name;  among  them  William  Sly,  and  some 
of  Osric's  affected  speeches  are  there  put  into  his  mouth,  e.g.  the  present  line,  just 
cited  by  Farmer;  wherefore  Malone  (Var.'2l,  vol.  iii,  206)  inferred  that  he  was 
the  original  performer  of  this  part  of  Osr.  See  also  Collier's  Memoirs  of  Actors* 
Sh.  Soc.  p.  154.] 

106-138.  Knight  conjectures  that  this  passage  was  cut  out  of  the  Ff  because  it 
prolonged  the  main  business  too  much. 

107.  excellent  differences]  Caldecott  :  That  is,  is  master  of  every  nice  punc- 
tilio of  good  breeding;  of  every  form  and  distinction  that  place  or  occasion  may 
require.  Delius  thinks  it  equivalent  to  different  excellences.  Clarendon  inter- 
prets :  '  distinctions  marking  him  out  from  the  rest  of  men,  This  affected  phrase 
was  probably  suggested  by  the  heraldic  use  of  the  word.' 

108.  feelingly]  Jennens  and  Collier  agree  in  thinking  that  Q2Q3  may  possibly 
be  right,  with  an  allusion  to  the  praises  which  a  seller  gives  to  his  wares.  Steevens 
cites  Love's  Lab.  IV,  iii,  240.  [Indeed,  no  interpretation, hov/ever  far-fetched,  would 
seem  out  of  place  in  this  scene ;  perhaps  the  farther  the  better.]  Caldecott  inter- 
prets it  [and  Dyce  {Strictures,  &c.,  p.  191)  says:  'rightly'],  'to  speak  with  insight 
and  intelligence.* 

109.  card  or  calendar]  Johnson:  The  general  preceptor  of  elegance ;  the  card 
by  which  a  gentleman  is  to  direct  his  course;  the  calendar  by  which  he  is  to  choose 
his  time,  that  what  he  does  may  be  both  excellent  and  seasonable.  Clarendon  : 
One  of  Greene's  pamphlets  (1584)  is  called  ' Gwydonitis,  The  carde  of  Fancied 

109.  gentry]  Clarendon  :  Equivalent  to  gentility.    See  II,  ii,  22. 

no.  continent . . .  see]  Johnson:  You  shall  find  him  containing  and  com* 
prising  every  quality  which  a  gentleman  would  desire  to  contemplate  for  imitation. 
I  know  not  but  it  should  be  read : '  You  shall  find  him  the  continent.'  Clarendon  : 
'  Part '  is  here  used  in  a  double  sense,  first  keeping  up  the  simile  of  a  map,  and  next 
in  the  same  sense  as  in  IV,  vii,  74. 

in.  definement]  Warburton  :  This  is  designed  as  a  specimen  and  ridicule  of 
the  court -jargon  amongst  the  precieux  of  that  time.  The  sense  is  in  English:  'Sir, 
he  suffers  nothing  in  your  account  of  him,  though  to  enumerate  his  good  qualities 
particularly  would  be  endless ;  yet  when  we  had  done  our  best,  it  would  still  come 
short  of  him.  However,  in  strictness  of  truth  he  is  a  great  genius,  and  of  a  cha- 
racter so  rarely  met  with,  that  to  find  anything  like  him  we  must  look  into  his  mirror, 


428  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  il 

though,  I  know,  to  divide  him  inventorially  would  dizzy  the  112 
arithmetic  of  memory,  and  yet  but  yaw  neither,  in  respect 

112.  inventorially]  inventorily  Coll.        Glo.  +  ,   Mob.     yet  but  raw  QQAQ<, 
ii  (misprint  ?).  Theob.  Johns.  Cap.   Jen.    Steev.    Var. 

dizzy]   dizzie  Q4Q$.     dofie  Q8.        Sing,  i,  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Clarke,     yet 
dazzie  Q3.     defy  Anon.  but  slow  Warb.     it  but  yaw  Dyce,  Del. 

113.  yet  but  yaw]  Q2,  El.  Sta.  Ktly,        Sing,  ii,  White,  Hal.  Huds. 


and  his  imitators  will  appear  no  more  than  his  shadows.'  Clarendon  :  The  only 
illustration  which  can  be  given  of  this  dialogue,  in  which  Ham.  talks  nonsense  in- 
tentionally and  Osr.  unintentionally,  is  the  dialect  of  Parolles  in  AWs  Well,  and  of 
Don  Armado  and  Holofernes  in  Love's  Lab.  Lost. 

113.  yet  but  yaw]  Johnson:  I  believe  raw  to  be  the  right  word;  it  is  a  wora 
of  great  latitude ;  it  signifies  unripe,  immature,  thence  unformed,  imperfect,  unskil- 
ful. The  best  account  of  him  would  be  imperfect  in  respect  of  his  quick  sail.  The 
phrase  '  quick  sail '  was,  I  suppose,  a  proverbial  term  for  activity  of  mind.  HEATH  : 
The  meaning  undoubtedly  is  that  Laer.  was  but  young  (raw)  in  proportion  to  the 
quick  progress  he  had  made  in  all  gentlemanly  accomplishments.  Caldecott  : 
Raw  is  unready,  untrained,  and  awkward.  Compare  Per.  IV,  ii,  60;  As  You  Like 
It,  III,  ii,  76.  Dyce  (Remarks,  &c,  p.  220)  :  •  Nothing,  I  think,  can  be  more  cer- 
tain than  that  the  passage  should  stand  thus :  "  and  it  [which  was  often  mistaken  by 
our  early  printers  for  *  yet,'  perhaps  because  it  was  written  yf\  but  yaw  neither  in 
respect  of  his  quick  sail.'*  "  To  yaw  (as  a  ship),  hue  illuc  vacillare,  capite  nutare." 
—Coles's  Diet  The  substantive  "  yaw  "  occurs  in  Massinger :  "  O,  the  yaws  that 
she  will  make !  Look  to  your  stern,  dear  mistress,  and  steer  right,  Here's  that  will 
work  as  high  as  the  Bay  of  Portugal." —  Very  Woman,  III,  v ;  Works,  iv,  293,  ed. 
1805,  where  GifTord  remarks :  "  A  yaw  is  that  unsteady  motion  which  a  ship  makes 
in  a  great  swell,  when,  in  steering,  she  inclines  to  the  right  or  left  of  her  course." ' 
Elze  thinks  the  possible  solution  of  this  difficulty  is  to  consider  '  yaw '  as  a  transitive 
verb,  and  he  thus  interprets:  '  An  inventory  of  Laertes  s  excellences  would  dizzy  the 
arithmetic  of  memory ;  yet  it  would  not  let  it  stagger  hither  and  thither  (like  a  badly- 
steered  ship),  in  view  of  his  quick  sail/  A  quick-sailing  ship  holds  a  steadier  course 
than  one  that  sails  slowly.  Staunton  says  he  must  admit  his  inability  to  understand 
Dyce's  reading,  and  adds:  *  Yet'  is  certainly  suspicious,  but  the  word  displaced  we 
have  always  thought  was  wit,  not  il,  and  the  drift  of  Hamlet's  jargon  to  be  this :  his 
qualifications  are  so  numerous,  and  so  far  surpass  all  ordinary  reckoning,  that  memory 
would  grow  giddy  in  cataloguing,  and  wit  be  distanced  in  attempting  to  keep  pace 
with  them.  White:  There  seems0 to  be  no  doubt  that  'yt}  was  mistaken  for  'yet.' 
Clarke  believes  raw  to  be  used  in  the  same  sense  as  in  As  You  Like  It,  and  inter- 
prets :  '  your  description  is  but  inefficient  and  inadequate  after  all.'  Abbott,  §  128 : 
The  ellipsis  of  the  negative  explains  '  neither.'  That  is,  *  do  nothing  but  lag  clum- 
sily behind  neither.'  *  Neither,'  for  our  either,  is  in  Shakespeare's  manner,  after  a 
negative  expressed  or  implied.  TSCHISCHWITZ  says  raw  is  merely  a  misprint  for  row, 
and  so  gives  it  in  his  text,  and  thus  interprets :  '  Memory,  even  with  the  help  of  arith- 
metic, cannot  overtake  this  swift  sailer,  but  can  only  row  while  he  sails.  At  the 
present  day  we  should  say :  and  yet  but  sail  neither  in  respect  of  his  full  steam.' 
CLARENDON:  If  this  passage  stands  as  Sh.  wrote  it,  any  meaning  it  may  have  has 
defied  the  penetration  of  commentators  to  detect.    If  'vet'  is  a  mistake  for yt  or  it, 


act  v,  sc.  IL]  HAMLET  429 

of  his  quick  sail.     But,  in  the  verity  of  extolment,  I  take 
him  to  be  a  soul  of  great  article,  and  his  infusion  of  such  1 15 
dearth  and  rareness,  as,  to  make  true  diction  of  him,  his 
semblable  is  his  mirror,  and  who  else  would  trace  him,  his 
umbrage,  nothing  more. 

Osr.     Your  lordship  speaks  most  infallibly  of  him. 

Ham.     The    concernancy,   sir?    why   do  we  wrap  the  120 
gentleman  in  our  more  rawer  breath  ? 
'  Osr.    Sir? 

Hor.     Is't  not  possible  to  understand  in  another  tongue  ? 
You  will  do't,  sir,  really 

116.  as]  ns  Q4.  let.  Cap.     [To  Osrick.  Rann. 

120.  sir?  why]  Cap.    fir,  why  Qq.  123.  tongue  ?~\  Theob.     tongue,  Qq. 
sir? — [To  Horatio]  Why  Theob.  Warb.             124-    You. ..really]  Johns,     you  will 

121.  more]  Om.  Q'76.  loo't  fir  really  Q2.    you  will  dod't  fr 

122.  Sirf\  Cap.  Sir  Qq.  Sir,—  really  Q3Q4Q$.  you  will  do't,  sir,  rareh 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Theob.  Warb.  Cap.  Walker 

123, 124.  Is'  t...really]  Aside  To  Ham- 

we  should  require  some  such  word  as  let  or  make  to  precede.  The  sense  would  then 
be:  'to  attempt  to  catalogue  his  perfections  would  dizzy  the  arithmetic  of  memory, 
and  make  it  stagger,  as  it  were,  in  pursuit  of  his  swift-sailing  ship.'  '  The  two  meta- 
phors are  a  little  difficult  to  separate.' 

114.  sail]  Collier  (ed.  2)  prints  sale,  and  thinks  that  sellingly  of  the  Qq  in  line 
108  may  very  possibly  be  right  when  taken  in  connection  with  it,  and  *  inventorily,' 
line  112.  Sale  has  reference  to  the  value,  and  speedy  sale  of  the  qualifications,  of 
Laer. 

115.  article]  Johnson  :  This  is  obscure.  I  once  thought  it  might  have  been  '  of 
great  altitude,  but  I  suppose  it  means  '  a  soul  of  large  comprehension,  of  many  con- 
tents ;'•  the  particulars  of  an  inventory  are  called  articles.     Caldecott  defines  it : 

*  Of  great  account  or  value/ 

115,  116.  infusion  .  .  .  rareness]  Johnson:  'Dearth'  is  dearness,  value,  price. 

*  And  his  internal  qualities  of  such  value  and  rarity.'  Caldecott  :  The  qualities 
with  which  he  is  imbued  or  tinctured  are  of  a  description  so  scarce  and  choice. 
Clarendon  defines  ' infusion,'. essential  qualities. 

117.  trace]  Clarendon:  Follow.  Compare  1  Hen.  IV:  III,  i,  48;  and  Gorges's 
Trans,  of  Lucan,  bk  i,  p.  36  (ed.  1614) :  '  And  in  their  turnes  next  to  them  trace 
Prelates  of  an  inferior  place.' 

121.  more  rawer]  See  II,  i,  11. 

123.  Is't  o .  .  tongue]  Johnson:  This  may  mean,  Might  not  all  this  be  under- 
stood in  plainer  language  ?  But  then, '  you  will  do  it,  sir,  really,'  seems  to  have  no 
use,  for  who  could  doubt  but  plain  language  would  be  intelligible  ?  I  would  there- 
fore read :  Is't  possible  not  to  be  understood  in  a  mother  tongue  ?  You  will  do  it, 
sir,  really.  Heath  (p.  550):  Read,- 'It  is  not  possible  to  understand  in  another 
tongue.'    That  is,  such  language  as  this  is  the  only  one  which  communicates  ideas 


43°  HAMLET  [act  v,  SC.  il 

Ham.    What  imports  the  nomination  of  this  gentleman?    125 

Osr.     Of  Laertes? 

Hor.  [Aside  to  Ham!]  His  purse  is  empty  already ;  all's 
golden  words  are  spent. 

Ham.     Of  him,  sir. 

Osr.     I  know  you  are  not  ignorant —  130 

Ham.  I  would  you  did,  sir ;  yet,  in  faith,  if  you  did,  it 
would  not  much  approve  me.    Well,  sir  ? 

126.  Laertes  ?~\  Laertes.  Qq,  Jen.  130.  ignorant — ]    Theob.     ignorant. 

127.  Aside...]    Cap.   Dyce  ii,  Huds.        Qq. 

Om.  Qqetcet.  132.  me.    Well,  sir?]  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

airs']  Qq,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  me,  well  fir.  Qq.    me.   Well,  sir.  Theob. 

Cap.  Jen.  Steev.'85,  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  El. 

Del.  Mob,    all  his  Mai.  et  cet.  Sta.  White,  Ktly,  Del.     me  .•—  Well,  sir 

129.  sir.]  sir?  Cap.  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Dyce. 

to  us.  It  is  spoken  ironically.  Jennens  :  This  speech  is  addressed  to  Osr.  Hor. 
rinding  him  posed  says, ' Is't  not  possible  to  understand  ?  In  another  tongue  you 
will  do't,  sir,  really,'  i.  e.  Are  you  defeated  at  your  own  weapons  ?  Can't  you  un- 
derstand your  own  kind  of  jargon?  If  so,  you  had  better  speak  in  another  tongue, 
make  use  of  common  sense  without  any  flourishes,  and  you'll  not  be  in  danger  of 
being  put  out  of  countenance.  Malone:  This  speech  is  addressed  to  Ham. 
'Another  tongue'  does  not  mean,  as  I  conceive, plainer  language  (as  Dr  Johnson 
supposed),  but  'language  so  fantastical  and  affected  as  to  have  the  appearance  of  a 
foreign  tongue  /'  and  in  the  following  words  Hor.,  I  think,  means  to  praise  Ham. 
for  imitating  this  kind  of  babble  so  happily.  I  suspect,  however,  that  the  poet 
wrote :  '  Is't  possible  not  to  understand  in  a  mother  tongue  /"  The  very  same  error 
occurs  in  Bacon's  Advancement  of  Learning,  4to,  1605,  b.  ii,  p.  60:  ' — the  art  of 
grammar,  whereof  the  use  in  another  tongue  is  small,  in  a  foreine  tongue  more.' 
The  author,  in  his  table  of  Errata,  says  it  should  have  been  printed, — in  mother 
tongue.  Staunton:  Should  we  not  read,  'in's  mother  tongue?'  Walker  (Crit. 
iii,  273)  :  Surely  read, '  a  mother  tongue,'  with  Johnson.  [Tschischwitz  adopted 
it.]  Hudson  :  Hor.  means  to  imply,  that  what  with  Osric's  euphuism,  and  what 
with  Hamlet's  catching  of  Osric's  style,  they  are  not  speaking  in  a  tongue  that 
can  be  understood ;  and  he  hints  that  they  try  another  tongue,  that  is,  the  common 
one.  Moberly  :  '  Can't  you  understand  your  own  absurd  language  on  another's 
tongue  ?     Use  your  wits,  sir,  and  you'll  soon  be  at  the  bottom  of  it.' 

124.  You  . . .  really]  Heath  (p.  550) :  Undoubtedly  read, '  You  do't,  sir,  rarely,' 
t.  e.  You  have  exactly  hit  upon  the  humour  of  this  language.  HeussI  :  This  is 
undoubtedly  addressed  to  Osr.  To  Ham.  he  would  not  have  used  '  sir,'  but '  my 
lord.' 

132.  approve]  Johnson:  If  you  knew  I  was  not  ignorant,  your  esteem  would 
not  much  advance  my  reputation.  To  'approve'  is  to  recommend  to  approbation. 
Singer  (ed.  2) :  'If  you  did,  it  would  not  tend  much  toward  proving  me,  or  eon» 
firming  me.'  What  Ham.  would  have  added,  we  know  not;  but  surely  Shake* 
speare's  use  of  the  word  'approve,'  upon  all  occasions,  is  against  Johnson's  explana* 
tion  of  it.     Clarendon  :  '  Would  not  be  much  to  my  credit.'' 


ACT  V,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


43  « 


Osr.  You  are  not  ignorant  of  what  excellence  Laertes  is — 

Ham.     I  dare  not  confess  that,  lest  I  should  compare 
with  him  in  excellence;  but,  to  know  a  man  woll,  were  to  135 
know  himself. 

Osr.  I  mean,  sir,  for  his  weapon  ;  but  in  the  imputation 
laid  on  him  by  them,  in  his  meed  he's  unfellowed. 

Ham.    What's  his  weapon  ? 

Osr.     Rapier  and  dagger.  140 

Ham.    That's  two  of  his  weapons ;  but,  well. 

Osr.  The  king,  sir,  hath  wagered  with  him  six  Barbary 
horses ;  against  the  which  he  has  imponed,  as  I  take  it,  six 
French  rapiers  and  poniards,  with  their  assigns,  as  girdle, 
hangers,  and  so  ;  three  of  the  carriages,  in  faith,  are  very  .145 


133'  no*  ignorant]  ignorant  Q4Q5- 
is — ]   Mai.     is :   Cap.     is.  Qq, 
Thcob.  Warb.   Johns.  Jen.      is  at  his 
weapon  ?  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Cald. 
Knt. 

137.  for  his]  Q'76.  for  this  Qq,  Cald. 
Knt. 

138.  them ,.... meed]  Steev.  them.... 
meed,  Qq,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 
them  :...tkis  meed  Cap. 

141.  but,  well.]  Cap.  but  well.  QqFf, 
Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  El.     but,  well?  Anon. 

142.  king,  sir]  fir  King  FJ. 


142.  hath  wagered]  hath  wager d 
Qq.  ha's  wag'd  Fx.  has  wag'd  F2F3F4, 
Rowe  +  .  kath  wag'd  Johns.  Cald. 
Knt,  St*  White,  Huds. 

143.  he  has  imponed]  Theob.  hee 
has  i?npaund  Qq.  he  has  impawned 
Q'76,  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  El.  he  import d 
Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  .Han. 

145.  hangers]  hanger  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 
Cam. 

and  so]  or  fo  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Cald.  Knt. 


134-136.  I  .  .  ,  himself  ]  Johnson:  'I  dare  not  pretend  to  know  him,  lest  I 
should  pretend  to  an  equality ;  no  man  can  completely  know  another  but  by  kno\v  \ig 
himself,  which  is  the  utmost  extent  of  human  wisdom.' 

135.  but]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  274):  Surely  the  sense  requires  for.  [So  in 
Capell's  text.] 

138.  by  them]  Caldecott:  There  is  nothing  here  to  refer  to,  no  antecedent  to 
«  them.'     It  must  mean  '  the  qualities  ascribed  to  him  by  the  public  voice.* 

138.  meed]  Johnson:  Excellence.  Caldecott:  'Reward,  or  recompense;' 
it  seems  here  used  fantastically  for  that  which  challenges  it  merendot  i.e.  'merit,1 
and  means :  '  In  this  his  particular  excellence.' 

142.  wagered]  White  :  The  reading  of  the  Ff  is  in  perfect  accordance  with 
Shakespeare's  usage,  and  that  of  his  contemporaries.     So  in  Cym.  I,  iv,  144. 

143.  imponed]  Johnson:  Perhaps  it  should  be  deponed.  So  Hudibras :  'I 
would  upon  this  cause  depone,  As  much  as  any  I  have  known.'  But,  perhaps,  'im- 
poned' is  pledged,  impawned,  so  spelt  to  ridicule  the  affectation  of  uttering  English 
words  with  French  pronunciation.  Collier  and  Dyce  (Gloss.)  agree  in  accepting 
this  explanation :  that  it  is  Osric's  affected  pronunciation  of  impawned. 

145.  hangers]  Steevens  :  Under  this  term  were  comprehended  four  graduated 


432 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  il 


dear  to  fancy,  very  responsive  to  the  hilts,  most  delicate  146 
carriages,  and  of  very  liberal  conceit 

Ham.    What  call  you  the  carriages  ? 

Hor.  [Aside  to  Ham^\  I  knew  you  must  be  edified  by 
the  margent  ere  you  had  done.  150 

Osr.    The  carriages,  sir,  are  the  hangers. 

Ham.  The  phrase  would  be  more  germane  to  the 
matter  if  we  could  carry  cannon  by  our  sides ;  I  would 
it  might  be  hangers  till  then.  But,  on :  six  Barbary  horses 
against  six  French  swords,  their  assigns,  and  three  liberal-  155 
conceited  carriages;  that's  the  French  bet  against  the 
Danish.    Why  is  this  '  imponed/  as  you  call  it  ? 

Osr.  The  king,  sir,  hath  laid,  sir,  that  in  a  dozen 
passes  between  yourself  and  him,  he  shall  not  exceed  you 
three  hits;  he  hath  laid  on  twelve  for  nine;  and  it  would  1 60 


149.  [Aside...]    Theob.  Warb.  Cap. 
Dyce  ii,  Huds.    Om.  QqFf  et  cet. 
149, 150.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

151.  carriages]  carriage  Qq. 

152.  germane]  F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Cam.  Cla.  Ger?naine  Fx.  Ger- 
mane Fa.  lerman  Q2Q3>  German  Q4 
Q5.    german  Q'76  et  cet. 

153.  matter  if]  matter  :  If  Ff. 
cannon]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cald.  Knt, 

Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Del.  Mob.  Huds.    a 
canon  or  a  cannon  Qq  et  cet. 

154.  it  might  be]  it  be  Q2.  it  be 
might  Q3. 

on :]  Pope,    on  Fx,  Cald.    on, 
QqF9F3F4,  Rowe.    on.  Ktly. 

Barbary]  Barbry  Q3Q3» 

155.  swords,]  Swords  :  Ff. 


155.  156.  liberal-conceited]  Hyphen 
by  Pope. 

156.  French  bet]  French  but  Fx, 
French,  but  F2F3F4.   French  ;  but  Rowe. 

157.  Danish.  Why]  Johns.  Danifh; 
why  Ff,  Pope  +  .  Danijh,  why  Qq, 
Rowe. 

this  '  imponed?  as]  this  impon'd 
as  Ff.   this  all  Qq.   As  a  quotation,  Sta. 

158.  sir,  that]  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  El. 
White,  Hal.  Cam.  Del.  Cla.  that  Ff  et 
cet. 

159.  yourself]  yotcr  felfe  Qq.  you 
Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Sta. 

160.  laid  on]  layd on  Q3Q3Q.  one  Ft, 
nine]  mine  Ff. 

it]  that  Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt, 
Coll.  Del.  White,  Hal. 


straps  by  which  the  sword  was  attached  to  the  girdle.  See  Chapman's  Iliad,  xi,  27 ; 
*  The  scaberd  was  of  silver-plate,  with  golden  hangers  grae'd.'  Knight  and  Haz- 
LIWELL  give  pictorial  illustrations. 

147.  liberal  conceit]  Clarendon  :  Elaborate  design. 

149.  margent]  In  old  books  explanatory  comments  were  printed  in  the  margin. 
See  Rom.  cV»  Jul.  I,  iii,  $6. 

152.  germane]  Johnson:  More  akin. 

160.  twelve  for  nine]  Johnson:  This  wager  I  do  not  understand.  In  a  dozen 
passes  one  must  exceed  the  other  more  or  less  than  three  hits.  Nor  can  I  compre- 
hend how,  in  a  dozen,  there  can  be  twelve  to  nine.  The  passage  is  of  no  import- 
ance ;  it  is  sufficient  that  there  was  a  wager.     Malone  :  The  King  hath  laid  that 


act  v,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  433 

come  to  immediate  trial,  if  your  lordship  would  vouchsafe  161 
the  answer. 

Ham.     How  if  I  answer  No  ? 


in  a  game  of  a  doz:n  passes,  or  bouts,  Laer.  does  not  exceed  you  three  hits ;  the 
King  hath  laid  on  the  principle  of  him  whd  makes  a  bet,  with  the  chance  of  gaining 
twelve  for  nine  that  he  may  lose;  or  the  King  (by  the  advantage  allowed  to  Ham.) 
hath  odds,  tantamount  to  four  to  three.  If  the  words,  '  he  hath  laid  on/  refer  to 
Laer.,  it  means  that  he  has  laid  on  the  principle  of  one  who  undertakes  to  make 
twelve  passes  for  nine  that  his  adversary  shall  make ;  on  the  ratio  of  twelve  to 
nine.  Ritson  (p.  212)  maintains  that  there  were  to  be  but  twelve  passes  in  all, 
and  '  Laer.,  to  win,  must  have  got  eight  hits,  v/hereas  Ham.  would  have  won  if  he 
had  got  only  five;  so  that  he  had  clearly  the  advantage  of  Laer.,  in  point  of  number, 
three  whole  passes  or  hits,  and  the  odds  were  eight  to  five,  which  is  in  the  same  arith- 
metical proportion  of  twelve  to  nine,  in  Hamlet's  favor  before  they  began  to  play.1 
[This  is,  I  think,  virtually  the  same  explanation  as  that  given  by  Elze.]  Seymour 
(ii,  203) :  «  If  in  the  dozen  passes  Ham.  shall  be  hit  seven  times,  and  Laer.  only  three, 
the  King  will  lose  his  wager.'  Mitford  {Gent.  Mag.  1845) :  The  reading  of  the 
Ff  of  one  for  Maid  on'  may  be  an  error  for  won,  or  on;  indeed  the  whole  phrase, 
'he  hath  laid  on  twelve  for  nine,'  seems  very  like  an  interpolation  from  the  margin. 
One  might  say  that,  by  a  loose  manner  of  speaking,  not  exceeding  three  hits  may 
mean  not  exceeding  more  than  two.  It  may  also  be  observed  that  these  numbers 
were  probably  represented  by  Arabic  figures,  and  not  by  letters,  and  were  more 
liable  to  be  altered  and  made  corrupt.  Quarterly  Review  (March,  1847,  vol.  lxxix, 
p.  332) :  Osric  never  stoops  to  use  the  language  of  ordinary  mortals.  '  He  hath  laid 
on  twelve  for  nine  '  is  not  he  has  laid  twelve  to  nine,  but  he  has  wagered  for  nine 
out  of  twelve.  The  King  backs  Ham.  Laer.,  who  is  the  celebrated  fencer  of  the 
age,  is  to  give  the  Prince  great  odds  : — the  King  stipulates  out  of  the  twelve  passes 
for  nine  hits  from  Laer.  without  his  being  declared  winner.  So  also  in  the  for- 
mer part  of  the  sentence, '  he  shall  not  exceed  you  three  hits,'  does  not  mean  that 
the  sum  of  Laertes's  hits  over  Hamlet's  shall  not  be  more  than  three.  In  a  dozen 
passes  six  hits  each  would  place  them  on  a  par,  and  Osric  calls  Laertes's  excess  the 
number  of  hits  that  he  makes  above  his  own  half.  This,  the  King  bets,  will  not 
surpass  three,  rendering  the  total  amount  to  nine,  which  tallies  with  the  other  form 
under  which  the  bet  is  expressed.  Moberly  :  '  Each  is  to  attack  twelve  times, 
going  on  till  a  hit  is  made :  and  Laer.  bets  that  he  will  hit  Ham.  twelve  times  before 
Ham.  can  hit  him  nine  times.  That  is :  Ham.  has  three  points  given  him,  and  with 
these  odds  he  trusts  that  he  shall  win.'  Tschischwitz  assumes  that '  a  dozen '  is 
merely  an  indefinite  number,  and  gives  an  elaborate  calculation  on  the  basis  of 
twenty-one  rounds.  [It  may  be  said  of  all  these  calculations  what  Clarendon  says 
of  one  of  them,  they  are  doubtless  correct,  but  do  not  explain-  the  form  in  which  the 
wager  is  put.]  Steevens  refers  this  very  *  unimportant  passage '  to  the  members  of 
the  Jockey  Club,  at  Newmarket,  « who  on  such  subjects  may  prove  the  most  enlight- 
ened commentators,  and  most  successfully  bestir  themselves  in  the  cold  unpoetic 
dabble  of  calculation.' 

162.  the  answer]  Caldecott:  Meet  his  wishes.    Clarendon:  Compare  Cymb. 
IV,  ii,  161. 

37  2C 


434 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  SC.  ii. 


Osk  I  mean,  my  lord,  the  opposition  of  your  person  in 
trial.  165 

Ham.  Sir,  I  will  walk  here  in  the  hall ;  if  it  please  his 
majesty,  'tis  the  breathing  time  of  day  with  me ;  let  the 
foils  be  brought ;  the  gentleman  willing,  and  the  king  hold 
his  purpose,  I  will  win  for  him  if  I  can ;  if  not,  I  will  gain 
nothing  but  my  shame  and  the  odd  hits.  170 

Osr.    Shall  I  re-deliver  you  e'en  so  ? 

Ham.  To  this  effect,  sir,  after  what  flourish  your  nature 
will. 

Osr.     I  commend  my  duty  to  your  lordship. 

Ham.    Yours,  yours. — [Exit  Osric.']      He   does  well  to  175 
commend  it  himself;  there  are  no  tongues  else  for's  turn. 

Hon    This  lapwing  runs  away  with  the  shell  on  his  head. 


1 66.  167.  hall;  if. ..majesty,  it]  hall, 
if...maiejlie,  it  Qq. 

167.  majesty,  'tis.. .me;   let]  majesty, 
— 'tis. ..me, — let  Sta. 

*tis]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Glo.  Mob.     it  is  Qq  et  cet. 

168.  hold]  holding  Cap. 

169.  purpose,]  Theob.    purpose;  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

if]  and  Qq.  an  Cap.  Glo.+, 
Dyce  ii,  Mob. 

/  will  gain]  lie  gaine  FXF3. 
Pie  gain  F .  I'll  gain  F4,  Rowe  +  , 
Sta.  White.     I  gain  Coll.  (MS). 

171.  re-deliver  you  e'en  so]  Ff,  Rowe, 


Cald.  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  White,  Glo.  +  , 
Del.   Mob.    Huds.    (hyphen,    first    by 
Cald.).     deliver  you  so  Qq  et  cet. 
172.  this]  that  Cap. 

175.  Yours.. ..does]  Cap.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Clarke,  Glo.  +  ,  Del.  ii,  Mob.  Huds. 
Yours, yours;  he  does  Ff  [hee  Fx)  ,Rowe  + . 
Yours  doo's  Qq.  Yours.  He  does  Jen. 
Yours,  yours. — He  does  Steev.  et  cet. 

[Exit...]  After  line  174,  F2F3F4, 
Rowe  +  ,  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  ColL 
Sing.  El.  White,  Ktly. 

176.  it  himself]  itfelfQ'76. 
for's]  for  his  Q5,  Ktly. 
turn]  turne  Qq.     tongue  Ff. 


167.  breathing  time]  Clarendon:  The  time  of  relaxation  and  rest.  Compare 
Much  Ado,  II,  i,  378;  Tro.  dr3  Cres.  II,  iii,  121.  Seymour  (ii,  203)  proposes,  'Sir, 
I  will ....  hall :  It  is  the  breathing  ....  me — if  it  please  his  majesty,  let,'  &c, 
or  else, '  Sir,  I  will  ....  hall,  if  it  please  his  majesty.  It  is  the  breathing  time/ 
&c.  It  was  Hamlet's  customary  breathing  time,  whether  his  majesty  pleased 
or  not 

169.  will  gain]  For  instances  of  'will'  used  for  shall,  see  Walker  ( Vers.  238; 
and  Crit.  ii,  348).  Abbott,  §319,  says  that '  will*  is  probably  used  here  by  attrac- 
tion with  a  jesting  reference  to  the  previous  ■'  will.'  •  My  purpose  is  to  win  if  I  can, 
or,  if  not,  to  gain  shame  and  the  odd  hits/ 

177.  lapwing]  Johnson  :  I  see  no  particular  propriety  in  this  image.  Osr.  did 
not  run  away  till  he  had  finished  his  business.  We  may  read : — '  ran  away,'  i.  e. 
'This  fellow  was  full  of  unimportant  bustle  from  his  birth.'  Jennens:  Osr.  is 
shoitly  after  spoken  of  as  ' young  Osric,'  he  may  therefore  be  supposed  to  be  but  a 
half-formed  courtier ;  and  under  this  image  of  the  lapwing  Hor.  ridicules  his.  for- 


ACT  v,  SC.  ii.]  HAMLET  435 

Ham.  He  did  comply  with  his  dug  before  he  sucked 
it.  Thus  has  he,  and  many  more  of  the  same  bevy  that 
I  know  the  drossy  age  dotes  on,  only  got  the  tune  of  the  180 

178.  He  did  comply  wit h~\  Ff  {Com-  179.  has  he]  had  he  Ff. 

fflieY^.     A  did  '  fr  with  Q2.     A  did  fo  many]  mine  Fx.     nine  FXF^ 

fir  with.  Q3Q4Q5-     He  did  so,  sir,  with  Rowe. 

Theob.   Jen.     He  did  so  with  Rowe,  bevy"]  Cald.     Beauy  Fx.     Beavy 

Pope.     He  did  compliment  with  Han.  F2F3F4,  Rowe.     breede  Q2Q3Q4.     breed 

Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Steev.  '85    (comple-  Qs,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Coll. 

ment  Han.).  El.  Cam.  Cla. 
before  he~\  before  a  Qq. 

wardness  of  talk  and  self-conceit, — his  putting  on  the  courtier  before  he  was  prop- 
erly qualified.  Steevens  :  Thus,  in  Greene's  Never  Too  Late,  1616:  'Are  you  no 
6ooner  hatched,  with  the  lapwing,  but  you  will  run  away  with  the  shell  on  your 
head?'  Malone:  In  Meres's  Wit's  Treasury,  1598:  'As  the  lapwing  runneth 
away  with  the  shell  on  her  head  as  soon  as  she  is  hatched.'  Caldecott  :  '  He  is 
prematurely  hasty,  starts  almost  before  he  has  means,  ere  he  has  found  legs  or  mes- 
sage, to  carry  or  be  carried.'  Clarendon  :  The  lapwing  was  also  a  symbol  of  in- 
sincerity, from  its  habit  of  alluring  intruders  from  its  nest  by  crying  far  away  from 
it.  Osr.  was  both  forward  and  insincere.  [See  Harting,  Ornithology  of  Sh.t 
p.  220.] 

178.  comply]  Warburton:  The  true  reading  is:  compliment,  i.e.  stand  upon 
ceremony  with  his  dug,  to  show  that  he  was  born  a  courtier.'     Capell  (i,  148) : 

•  He  must  have  ask'd  the  dug's  pardon  before  he  handi'd  it.'  Jennens  justifies  the 
reading  of  Q2 :  '  Do  you  wonder,'  says  Ham.,  in  effect, '  at  his  affecting  the  cour- 
tier now?  Why  he  had  done  it  from  his  very  cradle.'  Caldecott  well  para- 
phrases :  He  was  complaisant  with,  treated  it  with  apish  ceremony.  The  same 
idea,  and  partly  the  same  phrase  itself,  occurs  in  Ulpian  Fulwel's  Arte  of  Flatterie, 
1579:  '  Flatterie  hath  taken  such  habit  in  man's  affections,  that  it  is  in  moste  men 
altera  natura :  yea,  the  very  sucking  babes  hath  a  kind  of  adulation  towards  their 
nurses  for  the  dugge.' — Preface  to  the  Reader.  Reed  :  '  Comply '  is  right.  So  in 
Fuller's  Historie  of  the  Holy  Warre,  p.  80 :  '  Some  weeks  were  spent  in  complying, 
entertainments,  and  visiting  holy  places,'  In  Reed's  Var.  1803  and  1813  he  added 
the  remark :  'To  compliment  was,  however,  by  no  means  an  unusual  term  in  Shake- 
speare's time.'  '  This,'  says  Caldecott,  '  was  said  [by  Reed]  in  answer  to  Malone's 
assertion  in  the  Pseudo-Rowleian  controversy,  "  that  the  verb,  to  compliment,  was  un- 
known for  half  a  century  after  Elizabeth's  reign."  Reed  having,  however,  omitted 
to  produce  any  instance,  and  none  having  been  given  from  any  other  quarter,  we 
shall  instance  Lord  Burleigh,  who  died  1598;  and  who,  in  his  Letter  of  Advice  to 

his  son,  says :  "  Be  sure  to  keep  some  great  man Compliment  him  often  with 

many,  but  small,  gifts,  and  of  little  charge."  So  "free  from  inhumane  austeritie  on 
the  one  side  and  voyde  of  fond  and  idle  complementing  indulgence  on  the  other."— 
Chadwith's  Funeral  Sermon,  1613.'  [See  II,  ii,  354;  both  there  and  here  Singer 
maintains  his  interpretation  of  'embrace.'] 

179.  bevy]  Tollet:  He  has  just  called  Osr.  a  lapwing,  hence  the  propriety  of 

*  bevy.'    White  :  It  is  a  more  characteristic  classification  of  Osr.  than  breed. 


43<5 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


time  and  outward  habit  of  encounter;  a  kind  of  yesty  col-  181 
lection,  which  carries  them  through  and  through  the  most 
fond  and  winnowed  opinions;  and  do  but  blow  them  to 
their  trial,  the  bubbles  are  out. 


l8l.  and  outward]  and  out  of  an 
Qq,  and  Jen.,  who  puts  out  of.. .encoun- 
ter in  parenthesis,     an  outward  Cap. 

yesty]   hijly   QaQy     mifly    Q4, 
Jen.    miflie  Q  . 

183.  fond  and  winnowed"]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Johns.  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 
Knt,  Coll.  i,  Del.  El.  Clarke,  Glo.  +  , 
Mob.  Huds.  prophane  and  trennowed 
Q2Q3.  prophane  and  trennowned  Q4< 
profane  and  trennowned  Q  .   prophane 


and  renowned  Ql 6.  fanned  and  win* 
nowed  Warb.  Han.  Cap.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Coll.  ii,  Sta.  White,  Ktly.  sound  and 
winnowed  Mason,  Rann.  conj.  fand 
and  winnowed  Hal.  proven  and  re* 
nowned  Bullock.*  fond  unwinnowed 
Fleay  MS  conj. 

184.  triaf]  try alls  FjF,.  TryalsY^^ 
Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Sta. 

184-196.  Enter... instructs  me.]  Om. 
Ff. 


181.  the  time]  The  present  age.     See  Macb.  I,  v,  61 ;  I,  vii,  81 ;  V,  viii,  24. 

181.  outward  habit]  Henley:  Exterior  politeness  of  address. 

181.  yesty]  Clarendon  :  Histy  of  Q2Q3  may  have  been  a  mistake  for  hasty. 

183.  fond  and  winnowed]  Warburton:  'Fond'  should  undoubtedly  be  fann'd, 
alluding  to  corn  separated  by  the  fan  from  chaff.  The  opinions  here  spoken  of  may 
mean  the  opinions  of  great  men  and  courtiers,  men  separated  by  their  quality  from 
the  vulgar,  as  corn  is  separated  from  the  chaff.  This  *  yesty  collection '  insinuates 
itself  into  people  of  the  highest  Quality,  as  yeast  into  the  finest  flour.  Johnson  : 
'  If  Qs  preserved  any  traces  of  the  original,  Sh.  wrote  " sane  and  renowned"  which  is 
better  than  "fann'd  and  winnowed."  The  meaning  is :  these  men  have  got  the  cant 
of  the  day,  a  superficial  readiness  of  slight  and  cursory  conversation,  a  kind  of  frothy 
collection  of  fashionable  prattle  which  yet  carries  them  through  the  most  select  and 
approving  judgements.  This  airy  facility  of  talk  sometimes  imposes  upon  wise  men. 
Who  has  not  seen  this  observation  verified  ?'  Jennens  follows  Q2,  but  modifies  it  in 
his  text  to  '  profane  and  tres-renowned,'  '  which  is  the  French  method  of  forming 
superlatives,  i.  e.  the  most  renowned ;'  and  paraphrases :  such  a  superficial  collec- 
tion of  knowledge  as  carries  them  through  the  most  common  {profane)  and  even 
the  most  renowned  opinions,  i.  e.  opinions,  or  branches  of  learning,  which  bring  re- 
nown to  the  learned  in  them.  Steevens  :  '  Fond,'  i.  e.  foolish,  is  evidently  opposed 
to  '  winnowed,'  i.  e.  sifted,  examined.  Their  conversation  was  yet  successful  enough 
to  make  them  passable  not  only  with  the  weak,  but  with  those  of  sounder  judgement. 
The  same  opposition  in  terms  is  in  the  readings  of  the  Qq :  profane  and  vulgar  are 
opposed  to  trenowned  or  thrice  renowned.  Tollet  :  Fanned  and  '  winnowed  '  occur 
together  in  Markham's  Husbandry,  pp.  1 8,  76,  77.  So  also  ' fan  and  wind '  in  Tro.  &* 
Cres.  V,  iii,  41 .  Caldecott  interpreted  the  phrase :  *  All  judgements,  not  the  simplest 
only,  but  the  most  sifted  and  wisest.'  Dyce.  [Remarks,  &c,  p.  221)  pronounces 
Warburton's  emendation  '  admirable,'  and  one  which  *  evidently  restores  the  genuine 
reading.'  White  (Sh.  Scholar,  p.  422)  advocates  •  fond  and  winnowed,'  and  inter- 
prets :  '  They  go  through  and  through  (/.  e.  they  stop  at  no  absurdity  in)  the  most 
fond  (i.e.  affected  or  foolish)  and  winnowed  (*'.  e.  elaborately  sought  out)  opinions.' 
But  White,  having  found  that  'fan'   and  'winnow'  are  'often  coupled  in  the 


ACT  v,  SC.  U.  HAMLET  437 

Enter  a  Lord. 

Lord.     My  lord,  his  majesty  commended  him  to  you  by  1 85 
young  Osric,  who  brings  back  to  him,  that  you  attend  him 

186.  Osric]  Oflricke  Qq. 

writings  of  Shakespeare's  day,*  and  ''  that  ''fond"  {foolish)  sorts  ill  with  "win- 
nowed "  in  its  figurative  sense,'  in  his  subsequent  edition  agreed  with  Warburton  and 
Dyce  that  'fond'  of  the  Ff  is  a  misprint  for  /and,  and  added,  'of  the  meaning 
of  the  passage  in  this  form  I  am  not  quite  sure,  though  it  is  probably  to  be  found  in 
Dr  Johnson's  paraphrase.'  Clarke:  'Probably  "fond"  is  here  used  to  express 
"fondly  cherished,"  "  dearly  esteemed,"  while  "  winnowed"  means  "  choice,"  "  se- 
lect." "  Fond  "  is  thus  used  in  I,  v,  99.'  B.  Nicholson  (N.  cV  Qu.,  16  Jan.  1864) : 
Ham.  of  course  means  that  Osr.  and  his  compeers  have  not  that  inward  wit  neces- 
sary to  parley  true  euphuism,  but  only  the  outward  trick  of  the  language,  which 
while  it  passed  with  folks  of  like  mind,  would  not  stand  the  trial  of  better  judge- 
ment  If  for  '  winnowed'  or  trennowed,  we  read  vinewed  or  vinnewed—a.nd 

blue  vinney  is  Dorsetshire,  and  vinewedst  is  spelt  in  the  Ff  of  Tro.  <5r»  Cres. '  whinidst,' 
—we  have  a  change  that  restores  the  sense, — a  word  not  incongruous  with,  but  sug- 
gested by,  the  metaphorical  yesty  collection,  and  a  repetition  of  that  Shakespearian 
expresssion,  a  '  mouldy  wit.'  ....  The  '  yesty  collection '  is  the  frothiness  of  sour 
and  stale  beer,  which  passes  with  those  of  corrupted  and  vitiated  taste ;  but  when 
tried  and  blown  upon  by  the  more  sober  judgement  flies  off,  and  does  not  remain 
like  the  true  head  of  sound  liquor  or  wit.  Subsequently  (iV.  <5r*  Qu.,  31  Dec.  1864), 
Nicholson  added  that  he  had  forgotten  the  variant  of  vinewed,  which  is  fenowed  or 
fennowed.  '  The  last  was  doubtless  the  form  chosen  by  Sh.  in  this  passage.' 
Bailey  (ii,  17)  changes  this  whole  passage  thus:  'only  got  the  tune  of  the  time, 
and  out  of  the  habit  of  encounter  [got]  a  kind  of  yesty  diction  which  ....  the  most 
profound  and  renowned  opinions.'  In  support,  he  adds:  1.  That  the  verb 'got' 
governs  both  the  '  tune  of  the  time '  and  '  a  kind  of  yesty  diction,  the  latter  of  which 
the  persons  concerned  got,  '  out  of  the  habit  of  encounter.'  2.  That  diction  has  been 
used  by  Ham.  just  before  in  the  phrase,  '  to  make  true  diction  of  him.'  3.  That 
'  most  profound  and  renowned '  comes  much  nearer  the  old  reading  than  '  most  fond 
and  winnowed.'  Besides,  most  winnowed  is  not  English.  We  should  not  say  of 
one  sack  of  wheat  amongst  several  that  it  was  the  most  winnowed,  but  that  it  was 
the  best  winnowed.  Tschischwitz  proposed  and  adopted  in  his  text :  'profound 
and  winnowed,'  on  the  ground  that  two  opposite  ideas,  like  '  fond'  and  'winnowed,' 
cannot  be  connected  by  'and'  so  long  as  'most,'  by  qualifying  both,  combined 
them  in  one  idea.  '  People  of  Osric's  class  are  like  chaff  that  is  to  be  found  in 
a  deep  and  well-sifted  heap  of  wheat.'  Hudson  :  '  Opinions  conceitedly  fine  and 
winnowed  clean  of  the  dust  of  common  sense;  such  opinions  as  are  affected  by 
lingual  exquisites  of  all  times.  Clarendon  inclines  to  Tschischwitz's  reading: 
'profound  and  winnowed'  as  affording  a  proper  contrast  with  'yesty  collection.' 
Moberly  :  '  A  set  of  frothy  expressions  suited  perpetually  to  express  the  absurdest 
and  most  over-refined  notions.' 

184.  trial]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  264) :  I  suspect  that,  according  to  the  old  grammar, 
we  ought  to  read,  with  the  Ff,  trials* 
37* 


438 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


in  the  hall ;  he  sends  to  know  if  your  pleasure  hold  to  play  187 
with  Laertes,  or  that  you  will  take  longer  time. 

Ham.     I  am  constant  to  my  purposes ;  they  follow  the 
king's  pleasure;  if  his  fitness  speaks,  mine  is  ready;  now  or  190 
whensoever,  provided  I  be  so  able  as  now. 

Lord.  The  king,  and  queen,  and  all  are  coming  down. 

Ham.     In  happy  time. 

Lord.     The  queen  desires  you  to  use  some  gentle  enter- 
tainment to  Laertes  before  you  fall  to  play.  195 

Ham.     She  well  instructs  me.  [Exit  Lord. 

Hor.     You  will  lose  this  wager,  my  lord. 

Ham.     I  do  not  think  so ;  since  he  went  into  France,  I 
have  been  in  continual  practice;  I  shall  win  at  the  odds. 
But  thou  wouldst  not  think  how  ill  all's  here  about  my  200 
heart ;  but  it  is  no  matter. 

Hor.     Nay,  good  my  lord, — 

Ham.     It  is  but  foolery ;  but  it  is  such  a  kind  of  gain- 
giving  as  would  perhaps  trouble  a  woman. 


194.  to  use~\  use  Walker  (Crit.  i,  1 6), 
reading  lines  193-196  as  verse,  ending 
Use. ..Laertes. ..me. 

195.  fall]  goe  Q4.  go  Qs,  Rowe,  Knt. 

196.  [Exit  Lord.]  Theob.  Om.  Qq 
Ff.     Exit  Courtier.  Cap. 

197.  lose  this  wager]  loofe  Qq.  lofe 
Q'76,  Jen.  El. 

200.  'But]  but  Yi.  Om.  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 
Coll.  Sing.  Del.  El.  Ktly. 

wouldst]    wouldejl    Ff,    Rowe, 


White,  Huds. 

200.  how  ill  alPs]  how  all  Ff.  how 
all's  Rowe.     how  ill  all  is  Coll.  (MS). 

202.  good  my]  my  good  Theob.  ii, 
Warb.  Johns. 

lord,—]  Cap.  lord.  QqFf,  Cald. 

203,  204.  gain-giving]  gamgiuing 
Q2Q3-  game-giza'ngQ^Q  ,  "Pope  i.  boding 
Q'76.  misgiving  Pope  ii.  'gaingiving 
Cap. 


189,  190.  purposes  .  .  .  pleasure  .  .  .  fitness]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  274) :  Note 
the  double  meaning.  Tschischwitz  :  Hamlet's  purpose  is  unchanged  to  kill  the 
King  and  avenge  his  father,  when  the  King  is  Jit  for  it  in  the  hour  of  his  unholy 
pleasure.  Caldecott  expresses  a  doubt  whether  ' fitness'  applies  to  the  King  or  to 
Laer. 

193.  In  happy  time]  Like  the  French  d  la  bonne  heure.  See  Rom.  &*  Jul.  Ill, 
v,  no,  and  notes.     Clarendon  refers  to  Rich.  Ill :  III,  iv,  22;   Oth.  Ill,  i,  32. 

194.  entertainment]  Caldecott  :  Conciliating  behavior. 

199.  odds]  Malone:  'With  the  advantage  that  I  am  allowed.' 

200.  Coleridge:  Sh.  seems  to  mean  all  Hamlet's  character  to  be  brought  together 
before  his  final  disappearance  from  the  scene:  his  meditative  excess  in  the  grave- 
digging,  his  yielding  to  passion  with  Laer.,  his  love  for  Oph.  blazing  out,  his  tend- 
ency to  generalize  on  all  occasions  in  the  dialogue  with  Hor.,  his  fine  gentlemanly 
manners  with  Osr.,  and  his  and  Shakespeare's  own  fondness  for  presentiment. 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  439 

Hor.  If  .your  mind  dislike  any  thing,  obey  it.  I  will  20$ 
forestal  their  repair  hither,  and  say  you  are  not  fit. 

Ham.     Not  a  whit;    we  defy  augury;    there's  a  special 
providence  in  the  fall  of  a  sparrow.     If  it  be  now,  'tis  not  to 
come;  if  it  be  not  to  come,  it  will  be  now;  if  it  be  not  now, 
yet  it  will  come;  the  readiness  is  all.     Since  no  man,  of  2IO 
aught  he  leaves,  knows,  what  is't  to  leave  betimes  ?    Let  be. 

205.  obey  it."]  obey.  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  What  is't  Ff  (subs.),  man  has  aught 0/ 

207.  there's  a"]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce,  what  he  leaves,  what  is't  Rowe,  Pope, 
Sta.  Glo.  Mob.  there  is  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Theob.Cald.  Knt,  Del.  Dyce,  Sta.White, 
Cam.  Cla.  there's  Pope,  Han.  there  is  Glo.  +  ,  Mob.  {ought  Rowe,  Pope),  man 
a  Q'76,  Theob.  et  cet.  owes  aught  of  what  he  leaves,  what  is't 

208.  now~\  Om.  Qq,  Jen.  Han.  man  k)iows  aught  of  what  he  leaves, 
210.  will]  well  QaQ3.                                   what  is't  Johns.  Steev.'73,'78,  '85,  Rann. 

all.]  Pope  +  Jen.  Coll.  El.White,  man,. ..leaves, — knows; — what  is't  Sing. 

Ktly,  Hal.  Del.    all,  QqFf.   all :  ox  all ;  i.    man. ..leaves  knows  what  'tis  Qq, ! '76, 

Rowe  et  cet.  '83,  '95,  '03.   man,... leaves,  knows  what 

210,  2X1.     man,  of  aught  he  leaves,  it  is  Ktly  (marking  the  sentence  as  un- 

knows,   what    is't]    Warb.    Cap.    Jen.  finished:  betimes...). 
Steev.'93,  Var.  Coll.  Sing,  ii,  El.  Clarke,  211.  Let  be]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 

Hal.  Tsch.  Huds.  {ought  Warb.  Cap.).  Theob.  Han.  Johns.   Knt,   Dyce,   Sta, 

man  of  ought  he  leaues,  knowes  what  ifl  Glo.  Mob. 
Qq.     man  ha's  ought  of  what  he  leaues. 

203.  gain-giving]  Theobald  {Sh.  Restored,  p.  127):  The  same  as  mis-giving. 
We  thus  use  gainsay. 

206.  repair]  See  I,  i,  57. 

207.  augury]  Cornhill  Magazine  ('Presentiments,'  October,  1866,  p.  459): 
This  passage  is  one  of  the  simplest,  as  it  is  one  of  the  strongest,  proofs  of  Shakespeare's 
belief  in  presentiments.  In  all  the  instances  he  gives  us,  the  moral  to  be  drawn  is 
that  the  warning  is  neglected  and  the  fate  comes.  At  first  we  might  think  that 
Hamlet's  feeling  was  natural.  He  had  detected  the  King's  villainy,  and  he  knew 
his  own  counterplot  would  not  long  be  secret.  But  it  is  plain  that  he  suspected 
nothing  in  the  challenge  to  fence  with  Laer.  He  never  once  examined  the  foils,  of 
measured  them,  but  picked  up  the  first  that  came  to  hand,  and  took  the  length  on 
trust.  Just  before,  when  Hor.  warned  him,  he  had  said, '  The  interim  is  mine,'  and 
he  clearly  looked  forward  to  having  things  his  own  way  till  the  next  news  from 
England.     [See  Rom.  &>  Jul.  V,  i,  I.] 

208-211.  If. .  .betimes  ?]  Tschischwitz  {Sh.  Forschungen,  i,  62)  calls  attention 
to  an  '  exactly  parallel '  passage  in  the  Dedication  to  Giordano  Bruno's  Candelajo . 
4  By  this  philosophy  my  soul  is  elevated  and  my  capacity  for  thinking  enlarged.  But 
"whatsoever  may  be  the  appointed  hour  of  that  evening  which  I  am  awaiting,  when 
the  change  will  take  place,  I,  who  am  in  the  night,  await  the  day,  and  those  who 
are  in  the  day  await  the  night.  Everything  that  exists  is  either  at  hand  or  at  a  dis- 
tance, near  or  far,  now  or  later,  instantly  or  hereafter.' 

210,  211.  man  .  .  .  is't]  Warburton:  *  It  is  true  that,  by  death,  we  lose  all  the 
goods  of  life;  yet  seeing  this  loss  is  no  otherwise  an  evil  than  as  we  are  sensible- 
of  it;  and  since  death  removes  all  sense  of  it,  what  matters  it  how  soon  we  lose 


440 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


Enter  King,  Queen,  Laertes,  and  Lords,  Osric  and  other  Attendants  with  Foils 
and  Gauntlets  ;  a  Table  and  Flagons  of  Wine  on  it. 

King.    Come,  Hamlet,  come,  and  take  this  hand  from  me.  212 

[The  King  puts  Laertes's  hand  into  Hamlet's. 
Ham.     Give  me  your  pardon,  sir ;  I've  done  you  wrong ; 
But  pardon 't,  as  you  are  a  gentleman 


212.  Scene  v.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

Enter...]  Ff  (subs.).  A  table 
prepard,  Trumpets,  Drums  and  officers 
with  Cufhions,  King,  Queene,  and  all 
the  flate,  Foiles,  daggers,  and  Laertes. 
Qq.  El. 

Osric  and  other  Attendants...] 
Osrick  with  other  Attendants...  Theob. 
with  other  Attendants.,.  Ff. 

King.]  King.  [Taking  Laertes 


by  the  hand.  StaT 

[The  King...]  Dyce.  .Gives  him 
the  hand  of  Laertes.  Han.  King  .puts 
the  hand  of  Laertes  into  the  hand  of 
Hamlet.  Johns.     Om.  QqFf. 

213.  rve~\   L  haue  Qq,  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

214,  215.  One  line,  Qq. 

214.  pardon1/]  pardon  it  Steev.  Mal# 
Cald. 


them  ?  Therefore,  come  what  will,  I  am  prepared.'  Johnson  :  *  The  reading  of  the 
Quarto  was  right,  but  in  some  other  copy  the  harshness  of  the  transposition  was 
softened,  and  the  passage  stood  thus  :  Since -no  man  knows  aught  of  what  he  leaves. 
For  knoivs  was  printed  in  the  later  copies  has  by  a  slight  blunder  in  such  typographers. 
I  do  not  think  Warburton's  interpretation  of  the  passage  the  best  that  it  will  admit. 
The  meaning  may  be  this  :  Since  no  man  knows  aught  of  the  state  of  life  which  he 
leaves,  since  he  cannot  judge  what  other  years  may  produce,  why  should  he  be 
afraid  of  leaving  life  betimes  ?  Why  should  he  dread  an  early  death,  of  which  he 
cannot  tell  whether  it  is  an  exclusion  of  happiness  or  an  interception  of  calamity  ? 
I  despise  the  superstition  of  augury  and  omens,  which  has  no  ground  in  reason  or 
piety;  my  comfort  is,  that  I  cannot  fall  but  by  the  direction  of  Providence.  Han- 
mer's  conjecture  is  not  very  reprehensible :  Since  no  man  can  call  any  possession 
certain,  what  is  it  to  leave  ?'  The  Ff  have  received  their  best  interpretation  from 
Caldecott,  viz. :  '  Since  no  man  has  (i.  e.  has  any  secure  hold,  or  can  properly  be 
denominated  the  possessor,  of)  any  portion  of  that  which  he  leaves,  or  must  leave, 
behind  him,  of  what  moment  is  it  that  this  leave-taking,  or  parting  with  a  possession 
so  frail,  should  be  made  thus  early?'  Collier  truly  remarks  that  no  old  copy  is  at 
all  well  printed  in  this  scene;  and  Dyce  pronounces  the  present  passage  suspi- 
cious. White  thinks  the  Qq  are  manifestly  wrong.  Clarke  prefers  the  Qq  on 
what,  I  think,  is  the  true  ground,  so  finely  paraphrased  by  Johnson :  That  it  is  more 
characteristic  of  Ham.  to  think  little  of  leaving  life,  because  he  cannot  solve  its 
many  mysteries,  than  because  he  cannot  carry  with  him  life's  goods.  CLARENDON 
thinks  that  Johnson's  is  perhaps  the  true  reading. 

213.  pardon]  Johnson:  I  wish  Ham.  had  made  some  other  defence;  it  is  un- 
suitable to  the  character  of  a  brave  or  a  good  man  to  shelter  himself  in  falsehood. 
Seymour  (ii,  204)  believes  that  the  passage  from  •  This  presence,'  &c,  line  215, 
down  to  'enemy,'  line  226,  is  an  interpolation.  The  falsehood  contained  in  it 
is  too  ignoble.  Walker  (Cril.  iii,  274) :  Arrange:  ' — I  'have  done  you  wrong ; 
but  pardon 't,  As  you1  re  a  gentleman.  This  presence  knows.'  [That  is,  in  two  lines, 
the  first  ending  '  pardon 't.    Ed.] 


ACT  V,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


441 


This  presence  knows, 

And  you  must  needs  have  heard,  how  I  am  punish'd 

With  sore  distraction.     What  I  have  done, 

That  might  your  nature,  honour,  and  exception 

Roughly  awake,  I  here  proclaim  was  madness. 

Was't  Hamlet  wrong'd  Laertes  ?     Never  Hamlet ; 

If  Hamlet  from  himself  be  ta'en  away, 

And,  when  he's  not  himself,  does  wrong  Laertes, 

Then  Hamlet  does  it  not ;  Hamlet  denies  it. 

Who  does  it  then  ?     His  madness;  if't  be  so, 

Hamlet  is  of  the  faction  that  is  wrong'd ; 

His  madness  is  poor  Hamlet's  enemy. 

Sir,  in  this  audience, 

Let  my  disclaiming  from  a  purposed  evil 

Free  me  so  far  in  your  most  generous  thoughts, 

That  I  have  shot  mine  arrow  o'er  the  house, 

And  hurt  my  brother, 

Laer  I  am  satisfied  in  nature, 

Whose  motive,  in  this  case,  should  stir  me  most 


215 


220 


225 


230 


215-217.  This. ..done]  Three  lines, 
ending  heard. ..distraction. ..done,  Rowe 
4- ,  Jen.  Steev  Mai.  Sing,  i,  Cald.  Knt, 
Sta. 

216.  punish' d~\  punished  Rowe  ii, 
Pope,  Han. 

217.  sore~\  a  fore  Qq,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Sing.  Cald.  Knt, 
Sta.  Ktly. 

distraction."]   diflracTion,  Q^Qy 
diflraclion  :  Q£ls>    diflradlion  ?  Ff. 

218.  nature,  honour]  nature  honour 


Fx.     natures  honour  F3FF  {honor  F2). 
native  honour  Anon.* 

224.  madness;"]  Cap.  madnejfe.  Qq, 
Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.  El. White,  Ktly  {mad- 
nesQJ.  Madnejfe?  F,Fa.  madnefsfY^^ 

225.  wrong'd]  wronged  Qq. 

227.  Sir... audience^]  Om.  Qq,Pope  +  f 
Cap. 

230.   That]  As  that  Ktly. 

mine]  my  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Var.  Cald.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds.  Mob. 

231    brother]  Mother  Ff,  Rowe. 


215.  presence]  Clarendon  :  The  abstract  for  the  concrete.  Compare '  audience,' 
line  227. 

218.  exception]  Clarendon:  This  word,  in  the  sense  of  'objection,'  'dislike,' 
occurs  most  commonly  in  the  phrase, '  to  take  exception.'  The  best  comment  on 
this  passage  is  All's  Well,  I,  ii,  40. 

231.  brother]  Hunter  (ii,  265) :  The  change  in  Ff  might  be  made  by  Sh.  after 
he  retired  to  Stratford,  the  passage  as  it  originally  stood  coming  too  near  to  an  in- 
cident which  had  recently  occurred  in  the  family  of  Greville  in  that  neighborhood, 
where  one  of  them  had  by  misadventure  killed  his  brother  with  an  arrow. 

231.  nature]  Steevens:  A  piece  of  satire  on  fantastical  honor.  Though  nature 
is  satisfied,  yet  he  will  ask  advice  of  older  men  of  the  sword  whether  artificial  honor 
ought  to  be  contented  with  Hamlet's  submission. 


442 


HAMLET 


[ACT  V,  SC.  ii 


To  my  revenge ;  but  in  my  terms  of  honour 

I  stand  aloof,  and  will  no  reconcilement, 

Till  by  some  elder  masters  of  known  honour  235 

I  have  a  voice  and  precedent  of  peace, 

To  keep  my  name  ungored.    But  till  that  time 

I  do  receive  your  offer'd  love  like  love, 

And  will  not  wrong  it. 

Ham.  I  embrace  it  freely, 

And  will  this  brother's  wager  frankly  play.—  240 

Give  us  the  foils. — Come  on. 

Laer.  Come,  one  for  me. 

Ham.    I'll  be  your  foil,  Laertes ;  in  mine  ignorance 
Your  skill  shall,  like  a  star  i'  the  darkest  night, 
Stick  fiery  off  indeed. 

Laer.  You  mock  me,  sir. 

Ham.     No,  by  this  hand.  245 

King.   Give  them  the  foils,  young  Osric. — Cousin  Hamlet, 


236.  precedent]  Johns,    prefident  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.. 

237.  keep]  keepe  FxFa.     Om.  Qq. 
ungored]    vngord    Q3Q3>      t 

goSd  Q4QS.     ungorgd  Ff,  Rowe. 
till]  all  Qq. 

238.  offer 'd]  offered  Qg. 

239.  I]  I  do  FXF3F4,  Rowe.    /  doe 

239,  240.  /...play]  Prose,  Qq. 
241.  Come  on.]  Om.  Qq,  Pope,Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  El.    Come,  one.  Strat- 


mann  conj. 

243.  darkest]  brightest  F3F3F4,  Rowe. 

244.  Stick. ..indeed]  Appear  Q'76. 

off]  '/Qq. 

245.  by  this  hand]   on  my  honour 
Q'76. 

246.  247.  Give.. .wager?]  Two  lines, 
the  first  ending  Osricke,  Ff,  Rowe  + , 

246.  them]  Om.  FaF3F4,  Rowe. 

Osric]  Ostricke  or  Ostrick  Qq. 
Cousin]  Om.  Pope  +  . 
Hamlet]  Bam.  Q4Q$. 


235.  masters  .  .  .  honour]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  244)  suspects  that  c  masters'  is  a 
misprint  for  master,  and  that  one  of  the  two  '  honours,' — the  latter, — has  originated 
in  the  other  in  line  233. 

236.  peace]  Clarendon  :  '  An  opinion  and  precedent  which  will  justify  me  in 
making  peace.'  Clarke:  The  stiffness  of  egotistical  susceptibility, the  petty  anxiety 
to  preserve  the  world's  good  opinion,  the  regard  to  social  claims  rather  than  to  natu- 
ral affections,  the  artificial  and  not  the  true  gentleman, — all  are  admirably  embodied 
in  Laertes. 

241.  Come  on]  Jennens;  This  being  a  phrase  used  immediately  before  attack- 
ing, cannot  be  proper  here;  they  had  not  yet  received  the  foils. 

244.  Stick]  Caldecott:  This  seems  to  have  been  a  favorite  phrase  with  Sh. 
See  Cor.  V,  iii,  73  ;  Ant.  <Sr»  Cleo.  I,  iv,  13.  Clarendon  :  « Stand  in  brilliant  re- 
lief.' '  Indeed '  seems  rather  to  belong  to  Laertes's  speech.  Keightley  (Exposi- 
tor, p.  297) :  In  my  edition  I  most  rashly  read  Strike.  In  the  language  of  the  time, 
stick  off  meant  set  off,  show  off,  display. 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


443 


You  know  the  wager  ? 

Ham.  Very  well,  my  lord ;  247 

Your  grace  hath  laid  the  odds  o'  the  weaker  side. 

King.     I  do  not  fear  it ;  I  have  seen  you  both ; 
But  since  he  is  better'd,  we  have  therefore  odds.  250 

Lacr.     This  is  too  heavy ;  let  me  see  another. 

Ham.     This  likes  me  well. — These  foils  have  all  a  length  ? 

0:r.    Ay,  my  good  lord.  [They  prepare  to  play. 


247.  wager?]    Cap.      wager.   QqFf, 
Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

Very  well  ]  Well  Pope  + . 

248.  hath]  has  Qq,  Cam. 

laid]  layed  QaQy  layde  Q4. 
hide  Fx. 

the  odds  d  the]  upon  the  Han. 
Johns. 

0'  the]  d  tJC  F .  a'  th  Qq.  a' 
JN  FIF3F3. 

weaker]  weeker  QQ-> 

249.  Two  lines.  Ff. 

250.  he  is]  he's  Pope  +  ,  Steev.  Mai. 
Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  Del. 


Huds. 

250.  better'd]  better  Qq. 
we]  you  Cap. 

251,  252.  Four  lines,  Ff,  Rowe, 

251.  too]  to  Qq. 

252.  have]  have  have  Fa. 
length  ?]  length.  QqFf. 

253.  [They  prepare...]  Prepare...  Ff, 
Rowe.  Om.  Qq.  Prepares...  Rowe  ii  +  , 
Jen.  After  line  250,  Cap.  As  in  text, 
Sta.     After  line  252,  Ff  et  cet. 

[Enter  Attendants,  with  Wine.] 
Cap. 


247,  248.  Very  .  .  .  side]  Heath  (p.  550)  pronounces  this  passage,  as  at  present 
punctuated,  stark  nonsense,  which  is  to  be  remedied  by  a  comma  after  'lord,'  and 
a  semicolon  after  'laid;'  That  is:  'Your  wager,  my  lord,  is  prudently  laid;  you 
have  given  odds  to  the  weaker  side.'  And  the  King's  reply  is  in  proof:  'But  since 
that  time  he  is  greatly  improved,  therefore  we  are  allowed  odds.'  JOHNSON :  The 
odds  were  on  the  side  of  Laer.,  who  was  to  hit  Ham.  twelve  times  to  nine.  It 
was  perhaps  the  author's  slip.  Jennens  solved  the  difficulty,  in  noting  that  the  odds 
here  alluded  to  are  those  that  were  laid  in  the  wager,  viz.  the  greater  value  of  the 
King's  stake  as  compared  with  Laertes's,  and  not  to  the  number  of  hits,  which  is 
what  the  King  refers  to  in  his  reply.  Ritson  computes  the  value  of  the  King's  six 
Barbary  horses  in  comparison  with  the  rapiers, &c.,  as  about  twentymo  one, and  adds, 
4  these  are  the  odds  here  meant.'  Moberly  :  '  I  understand  that  your  grace  has 
taken  care  that  points  shall  be  given  me ;  but  for  all  that,  I  fear  that  I  shall  be  the 
weaker.  No,  replies  the  King,  I  have  seen  you  both,  and  the  points  given  will 
counterbalance  his  Paris  improvement.' 

250.  better'd  . .  .  odds]  Jennens  :  '  Since  the  wager  he  gains  if  he  should  win 
is  better  than  what  we  shall  gain  if  he  loses,  therefore  we  have  odds,  that  is,  we  are 
not  to  make  as  many  hits  as  Laer.'  Caldecott  :  '  Better'd,'  i.  e.  stands  higher  in 
estimation,  Delius  (and  Moberly  in  the  preceding  note)  refer  '  better'd '  to  La- 
ertes's proficiency  acquired  in  Paris.  Keightley  {Expositor,  p.  298) :  If  he  {£.  e. 
Laer.)  was  bettered,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  how  could  the  odds  lie  against 
him  ?  You're  would  give  better  sense  than  '  he's  ;'  but  it  does  not  satisfy  me.  A 
line  has  evidently  been  lost,  and  the  latter  part  may  be  addressed  to  the  Queen. 
The  lost  line  may  have  been  something  like  this :  « 'Tis  true  he  did  neglect  his 


444  HAMLET  [act  V,  SC.  il 

King.     Set  me  the  stoups  of  wine  upon  that  table.— 
If  Hamlet  give  the  first  or  second  hit,  255 

Or  quit  in  answer  of  the  third  exchange, 
Let  all  the  battlements  their  ordnance  fire ; 
The  king  shall  drink  to  Hamlet's  better  breath ; 
And  in  the  cup  an  union  shall  he  throw, 

Richer  than  that  which  four  successive  kings  260 

In  Denmark's  crown  have  worn.     Give  me  the  cups ; 
And  let  the  kettle  to  the  trumpet  speak, 
The  trumpet  to  the  cannoneer  without, 
The  cannons  to  the  heavens,  the  heavens  to  earth, 

254.  stoups]   Johns.   Jloopes  Q2Q3Q4.         Onix  Qg.     Onyx  Q'76,  Pope. 
/loops  Qs,  Pope  +  .    Slopes  Ff,  Rowe.  261.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

that']  the  Q4Q,'  262.  trumpet]  trumpets  Ff,  Rowe-t-. 

255.  give]  gives  Theob.  Warb.  Mob.  263.  trumpet]  trumpets  FF,  Rowe 

256.  0/ the  third]  of  a  third  F3F4,  +  (Trupels  Rowe).  trumpeter  White. 
Rowe.     to  the  third  Q'03.  264.  heavens  to]  heaven  to  QaQ,Ff, 

257.  ordnance]  Ordinance  Ff.  Rowe,   Cap.   Mai.    Steev.   Cald.   Knt, 
259.  union]  Vnice  Q2.    Onixe  Q3QA>        Sing.  Bos.  Cam.  Huds.  Cla. 

exercises.'  Ham.  had  said  that  he  had  «  foregone  all  custom  of  exercise.'  In  my 
edition  I  have  made  an  Aside  here  to  the  Queen,  who  may  have  made  a  sign  of 
dissent ;  but  a  speech  of  the  Queen's  to  the  same  effect  may  have  been  what  is 
lost. 

252.  This  likes  me  well]  See  II,  ii,  80. 

252.  a  length]  For  instances  of '  a'  being  used  for  one,  see  Abbott,  §  81.  Also 
Rom.  &Jul.  II,  iv,  187  :  '  Doth  not  rosemary  and  Romeo  begin  both  with  a  letter?' 
Compare  the  Scotch  '  ae.' 

256.  quit .  .  .  exchange]  Clarendon  :  That  is,  pay  off  Laer.  in  meeting  him  at 
the  third  encounter. 

259.  union]  Theobald:  The  finest  sort  of  pearl,  which  has  its  place  in  all 
crowns  and  coronets.  The  King  afterwards  refers  to  it,  line  269.  Malone  :  Florio, 
Ital.  Diet. t  1598,  gives  'Vnione  ....  Also  a  faire,  great,  orient  pearle,  called  an 
vnion.'  And  Bullokar,  Eng.  Expositor,  1621,  to  the  same  effect.  Steevens  :  See 
Holland's  trans,  of  Pliny,  p.  255:  '  .  .  .  .  our  dainties  and  delicates  here  at  Rome, 
haue  deuised  this  name  for  them,  and  call  them  Vnions ;  as  a  man  would  say,  Sing- 
ular, and  by  themselves  alone.'  It  may  be  observed  that  pearls  were  supposed  to 
possess  an  exhilarating  quality.  Thus,  Rondelet,  lib,  i,  de  Testae,  c.  xv :  '  Uniones 
quae  a  conchis,  &c,  valde  cordiales  sunt.'  Clarendon  :  Mr  King  (Nat.  Hist,  of 
Precious  Stones,  &c,  p.  267)  says  :  '  As  no  two  pearls  were  ever  found  exactly  alike, 
this  circumstance  gave  origin  to  the  name  "  unio  "  (unique).  But  in  Low  Latin 
"  Margarita(um),"  and  "perla"  became  a  generic  name,  "unio"  being  restricted 
to  the  fine  spherical  specimens.' 

262.  kettle]  Nares:  Tor  kettledrum. 

263.  cannoneer]  Walker  (  Vers.  225) :  The  flow  of  the  verse  seems  to  require 
tannoner. 


ACT  V,  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


445 


1  Now  the  king  drinks  to  Hamlet !' — Come,  begin ;—  265 

And  you,  the  judges,  bear  a  wary  eye. 

Ham.    Come  on,  sir. 

Laer.  Come,  my  lord.  [They  play 

Ham.  One. 

Laer.  No. 

Ham.  Judgement. 

Osr.    A  hit,  a  very  palpable  hit. 

Laer.  Well;  again. 

King.    Stay;  give  me  drink. — Hamlet,  this  pearl  is  thine; 
Here's  to  thy  health. — 

[Trumpets  sound,  a?id  cannon  shot  off  within. 

Give  him  the  cup.  270 

Ham.     I'll  play  this  bout  first ;  set  it  by  awhile. — 
Come.     [They  play]    Another  hit ;  what  say  you  ? 

Laer.    A  touch,  a  touch,  I  do  confess. 


265.   ' Now Hamlet*]     Quotation 

marks,    Coll.   Dyce,    El.  White,   Hal. 
Glo.  +  ,    Del.    Mob.       Roman,    QqFf, 
Rowe+,  Jen.  Knt.    Italics,  Cap.  Steev. 
Var.  Cald.  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly,  Huds. 
[Trumpets  the  while.  Qq. 

267.  Come,  my  lord.]  Come  on  fir. 
Ff,  Rowe,  Cald.  Knt,  Sta.  So  on,  sir 
Rowe  ii. 

[They  play.]  Om.  Qq. 
Judgement.]  Judgement  ?  Cap. 

268.  hit.]  kit.  Drum,  trumpets  and 
(hot.  Florifh,  a  peece  goes  off.  Qq. 
hit.    Flourish.  El. 

Well;]  Well:  Ff.  Well,  Qq, 
Cap.  Well, —  Rowe+,  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 
Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly.  Well;—  Coll. 
El.  Dyce,  Sta.  White. 

again.]  again —  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

269.  Two  lines,  Ff. 


270.  cup.  [Trumpets...]  Mai.  Om, 
Qq.  Trumpets  found,  and  (hot  goes  off. 
Ff.  Trumpet  founa,  lhot  goes  off.  FaF3 
F4.  drinks,  and  puts  Poison  in  the  Cup. 
Flourish.  Ordinance  within.  Cap.  After 
health.  Cap.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Clarke, 
Mob.    After  cup.  Ff  et  cet. 

271.  set  it]  fetYi. 

272.  Come.]  Johns.  Come;  Ft  Come, 
Qq.     Come —  Rowe  +  . 

[They  play.]  As  in  text,  Cap. 
(reading:  [play]),  Glo,  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
Clarke,  Huds.  Del.  ii,  Mob.  Om.  QqFf, 
Jen.  After  awhile.  Pope  +  .  After  say 
you  ?  Rowe  (reading :  They  play  again) 
et  cet. 

273.  A  touch,  a  touch]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 
Jen.  Ktly. 

confess]  confejl  Qq.  confefs*t 
Q'76,  Cap.  Jen. 


269.  pearl]  Steevens  :  Under  pretence  of  throwing  a  '  pearl '  into  the  cup,  the 
King  may  be  supposed  to  drop  some  poisonous  drug  into  the  wine.  [See  Capell's 
stage-direction  at  line  270,  in  Text.  Notes.]  Hani,  seems  to  suspect  this,  when  he 
afterwards  discovers  the  effects  of  the  poison,  and  tauntingly  asks  him,  '  Is  thy  union 
here?' 

273.  a  touch]  Elze:  Laer.  distinguishes  between  *a  hit  *  and  'a  touch,' and 
confesses  that  he  was  touched,  but  not  hit.  Keightley  {Expositor,  p.  298): 
With  the  Qq  I  omit  these  words,  as  needless  to  the  sense  and  injuricus  to  the 
measure. 


38 


44-6  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  iL 

King,     Our  son  shall  win. 

Queex  He's  fat  and  scant  of  breath. — 

Here,  Hamlet,  take  my  napkin,  rub  thy  brows ;  275 

The  queen  carouses  to  thy  fortune,  Hamlet. 

Ham.     Good  madam, — 

275.  Here.. .napkin]  Here's  a  napkin  rub  thy  trows,  my  son.  Coll.  (MS.). 

Ff.     Here's  a  napkin   F2F3F4,  Rowe,  276.  carouses  to]  falutes  Q'7 6. 

Cald.  277-   Good]  Thank  you,  good Cap. 

napkin,  rub]  Handkerchief,  wipe  madam, — ]  Rowe.   madam.  Qq 

Q'76.  Ff,   Cap.    Knt,   Sta.      madam!   Dyce, 

Here... br ows ;]  Here  is  a  napkin,  Glo.  +  ,  Clarke,  Huds.  Del.  Mob. 

274.  fat]  Roberts,  the  player,  in  his  Answer  to  Pope,  1729,  stated  that  John 
Lowin  acted  Henry  VIII  and  Hamlet;  it  is  also  known  on  the  authority  of  Wright, 
in  his  Historia  Histrionica,  1699,  that  Lowin  acted  Falstaff.  Hence  Steevens  con- 
jectured that,  if  the  man  who  was  corpulent  enough  to  act  Falstaff  and  Henry  VIII 
should  also  appear  as  Hamlet,  this  observation  was  put  by  Sh.  into  '  the  mouth  of  her 
majesty  to  apologize  for  the  want  of  such  elegance  of  person  as  an  audience  might 
expect  to  meet  with  in  the  representative  of  the  youthful  Prince  of  Denmark,  whom 
Oph.  speaks  of  as  the  "glass  of  fashion  and  the  mould  of  form/' '  Malone  :  Wright 
and  Downes,  the  prompter,  concur  in  saying  that  Taylor  was  the  performer  of  Hamlet. 
Roberts  alone  has  asserted  (and  apparently  without  authority)  that  Lowin  acted  this 
part.  But,  in  truth,  I  am  convinced  it  was  neither  Taylor  nor.  Lowin,  but  prob- 
ably Burbadge.  Taylor  apparently  was  not  of  the  company  till  late,  perhaps  after 
1 61 5,  and  Lowin  not  till  after  1603.  Collier,  in  his  Memoirs  of  the  Principal 
Actors  in  the  Plays  of  Sh.,  Sh.  Soc.  Publications,  1846,  p.  51,  shows  conclusively 
that  Burbadge  was  the  original  Hamlet,  and  cites  in  proof  the  Elegy  upon  him, 
copied  from  a  MS  in  the  possession  of  Heber,  containing  an  enumeration  of  the 
various  parts  in  which  Burbadge  was  distinguished.  Shakespeare's  words  are  there 
used  in  reference  to  the  fatness  of  the  actor :  *  No  more  young  Hamlet,  though  but 
scant  of  breath,  shall  cry  "  Revenge !"  for  his  dear  father's  death.'  Staunton  : 
Does  the  Queen  refer  to  Ham.  or  Laer.  ?  Clarke  :  We  believe  that  this  refers  not 
to  Burbadge,  but  to  Ham.  himself,  who,  as  a  sedentary  student,  a  man  of  contem- 
plative habits,  one  given  rather  to  reflection  than  to  action,  might  naturally  be  sup- 
posed to  be  of  somewhat  plethoric  constitution.  This  accords  well  with  his  not 
daring  to  '  drink '  while  he  is  heated  with  the  fencing  bout ;  with  his  being  of  a 
*  complexion '  that  makes  him  feel  the  weather  *  sultry  and  hot ;'  with  his  custom  of 
walking  *  four  hours  together  in  the  lobby;'  with  his  having  a  special  'breathing 
time  of  the  day ;'  and  with  his  telling  Hor.  that  he  has  '  been  in  continual  practice ' 
of  fencing, — as  though  he  took  set  exercise  for  the  purpose  of  counteracting  his 
constitutional  tendency  to  that  full  habit  of  body  which  is  apt  to  be  the  result  of 
sedentary  occupation  and  a  too  sedulous  addiction  to  scholarly  pursuits.  W.  Aldis 
Wright  {N.  6°  Qu.,  9  March,  1867,  p.  202)  states  that,  in  1864,  he  received  a  letter 
from  Dr  Ingleby,  communicating  a  *  fine  reading '  proposed  by  «  Mr  H.  Wyeth,  of 
Winchester,'  of  faint  for  'fat.'  Plehwe  {Hamlet,  Prinz  von  Danemark,  Ham- 
burg, 1862,  p.  214)  refers  to  IV,  vii,  158,  and  conjectures  that  the  same  word  is 
here  used :  hot. 

277.  Good  madam  J  Moberly  :  Many  thanks,  madam. 


ACT  V.  SC  ii.] 


HAMLET 


447 


King.  Gertrude,  do  not  drink !  277 

Queen.     I  will,  my  lord ;  I  pray  you,  pardon  me. 

King.     [Aside"]  It  is  the  poisoned  cup !  it  is  too  late ! 

Ham.     I  dare  not  drink  yet,  madam ;  by  and  by.  280 

Queen.     Come,  let  me  wipe  thy  face. 

Laer.     My  lord,  I'll  hit  him  now. 

King.  I  do  not  think't. 

Laer.    [Aside]  And  yet  'tis  almost  'gainst  my  conscience. 

Ham.     Come,  for  the  third,  Laertes ;  you  but  dally ; 
I  pray  you,  pass  with  your  best  violence ;  285 

I  am  afeard  you  make  a  wanton  of  me. 

Laer.    Say  you  so  ?  come  on.  [They  play. 

Osr.     Nothing,  neither  way. 


277.  Gertrude]  Gertrude,  Gertrude 
Ktly. 

278.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

[Drinks.    Han.       drinks,    and 
tenders  the  Cup  to  Hamlet.  Cap. 

279.  283.  [Aside]  Rowe. 

280.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

282.  My  lord,]  Om.  Pope  +  . 
think't]  think  it  Mai.  Steev.Var. 

Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  El.  Huds.  Del. 

283.  'tis..? gainst]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sing,  ii, 
Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  Huds.  Mob.  ii 
is...againfi  Qq  et  cet. 


284.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

thirds  Laertes  ;  you]  Cald.  Knt, 
Sing.  Dyce,  Ktly,  Glo.  + .  third  Laertes, 
you  doe  Qq.  third.  Laertes,  you  Ff, 
Rowe.  third,  Laertes.  You  Johns. 
Coll.  El.  White,  Del.  Huds.  third,  La- 
ertes,  you  Pope  + .  third ;  Laertes,  you 
Han.  Cap.  Sta.  third,  Laertes ;  you  do 
Jen.  Steev.  Var. 

286.  afeard]    affeaSd   Fx.     affeard 
F3.    fure  Qq,  Jen.     afraid  Rowe  + 

287.  [They  play.]  Play.  Ff.   Om.  Qq. 


281.  Come  .  .  .face]  Steevens:  These  very  words  (the  present  repetition  of 
which  might  have  been  spared)  are  addressed  by  Doll  Tearsheet  to  Falstaff,  when 
he  was  heated  by  his  pursuit  of  Pistol. 

283.  conscience]  Clarke  :  This  symptom  of  relenting  is  not  only  a  redeeming 
touch  in  the  character  of  Laer.  (and  Sh.,  in  his  large  tolerance  and  true  knowledge 
of  human  nature,  is  fond  of  giving  these  redeeming  touches  even  to  his  worst  cha- 
racters), but  it  forms  a  judiciously  interposed  link  between  the  young  man's  previous 
determination  to  take  the  Prince's-  life  treacherously,  and  his  subsequent  revealment 
of  the  treachery.  From  the  deliberate  malice  of  becoming  the  agent  in  such  a  plot, 
to  the  remorseful  candor  which  confesses  it,  would  have  been  too  violent  and  too 
abrupt  a  moral  change,  had  not  the  dramatist,  with  his  usual  skill,  introduced  this 
connecting  point  of  half  compunction. 

286.  wanton]  Ritson  :  You  trifle  with  me  as  if  you  were  playing  with  a  child. 
Hudson  :  This  is  a  quiet  but  very  significant  stroke  of  delineation.  Laer.  is  not 
playing  his  best,  and  it  is  the  conscience  of  what  is  at  the  point  of  his  foil  that 
keeps  him  from  doing  so;  and  the  effects  are  perceptible  to  Ham.,  though  he  dreams 
not  of  the  reason. 


443  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  ii 

Laer.    Have  at  you  now !  289 

[Laertes  wounds  Hamlet ;  then,  in  scuffling,  they 
change  rapiers,  and  Hamlet  wounds  Laertes. 

289.  now  f]  now.  [play  again.  Cap.  fcuffling  they  change  Rapiers.  Ff.    Om, 

[Laertes.. .Laertes.]   Rowe.     In        Qq. 

289.  Stage-direction]  Seymour  (ii,  204) :  It  is  common  in  the  exercise  of  the 
sword  for  one  combatant  to  disarm  the  other  by  throwing,  with  a  quick  and  strong 
parry,  the  foil  out  of  his  hand ;  and  Ham.,  having  done  this,  might,  agreeably  to 
the  urbanity  of  his  nature,  have  presented  his  own  foil  to  Laer.,  while  he  stooped 
to  take  up  that  of  Iiis  adversaiy ;  and  Laer.,  who  was  only  half  a  villain,  could  not 
have  hesitated  to  accept  the  perilous  accommodation,  and,  indeed,  had  not  time 
allowed  him  to  avoid  it.  M.  C.  {New  Monthly  Maga.  vol.  xiii,  p.  301,  March, 
1820) :  After  Ham.  is  hurt  in  the  next  round  Laer.  should  master  his  foil.  Ham. 
thus  on  the  point  of  being  disarmed,  should  by  a  vigorous  effort  seize  the  sword  of 
Laer.  Thus  both  parties  would  hold  both  weapons,  and  in  separating  each  would 
retain  that  of  which  he  had  a  better  hold.  By  these  means  an  exchange  might 
easily  take  place.  It  is  quite  unnecessary  that  the  parties  should  be  ignorant  of  the 
circumstance.  Ham.  is  not  aware  of  its  importance ;  but  Laer.  sees  his  imminent 
peril.  Horror,  remorse,  and  shame  would  make  him  parry  imperfectly  in  the  next 
round,  wherein  he  receives  his  mortal  wound.  TlECK  (Zudwig  Tieck  von  Rud. 
Kopke,  Leipzig,  1855,  ii,  220,  cited  by  Elze)  thus  explains  the  exchange  of  rapiers : 
At  the  back  of  the  stage  there  is  a  table,  on  which  lie  the  rapiers.  The  combat- 
ants take  them  up,  fight  a  round,  and  replace  them  on  the  table,  and  conversation 
occupies  the  pause  between  the  rounds.  The  King  then  lets  Osric,  or  some  other 
courtier,  change  the  rapiers  unobserved,  so  that  the  poisoned  one  falls  to  Ham.  and 
is  taken  up  by  him.  For  the  King,  whose  character  is  always  consistent,  cannot 
permit  Laer.  to  survive,  who  had  just  headed  a  rebellion,  and  was  moreover  privy 
to  the  whole  plot  against  Ham.  [See  Tieck,  Appendix,  Vol.  II.]  Elze  thinks 
that  in  scuffling  the  rapiers  are  dropped,  and  are  accidentally  changed  in  picking 
them  up,  and  that  Laer  is  too  excited  and  Ham.  too  unsuspicious  to  notice  the 
change.  Heussi  attaches  but  little  importance  to  the  whole  matter, — actors  have 
more  adroitness  in  managing  such  things  than  scholars  at  their  desks,  anyhow ;  the 
spectators  need  not  see  so  very  exactly  that  there  has  been  an  actual  exchange.  It 
is  enough  that  the  combatants  become  violently  incensed,  and  that  a  spectator  at  a 
distance  could  not  rightly  say  what  was  done  in  the  scuffle.  The  issue  makes  it 
clear  enough.  [No  aid,  that  I  can  find,  is  to  be  obtained  from  Vincentio  Saviolo  his 
Practise,  1595.  In  sig.  H  3,  directions  are  given  for  '  fastning  your  left  hand  on  the 
hiltes  of  your  enemies  swoord.' — Ed.]  The  following  stage-directions  are  given  in 
Tom  TAYLOR'S  Acting  Edition  of  Hamlet,  1873  :  '  [Laertes  wounds  Hamlet ;  who 
in  return  disarms  him,  and  catches  his  foil. ~\  After  *  Ham.  Nay,  come  again,'  line 
290: — '  \_He  throws  Laertes  a  foil,  but,  by  mistake,  retains  the  one  he  had  disarmed 
him  of,  and  wounds  him  with  it.]'  In  A  Study  of  Hamlet,  by  E.  B.  H.  (London, 
1875),  the  passage  is  thus  given : — '  [Laertes  wounds  Hamlet,  who  in  return  disarms 
him — Laertes  then,  to  prevent  himself  being  struck  by  Hamlet,  rushes  on  him  and 
clutches  his  foil — they  struggle."]  King.  Part  them !  they  are  incens'd.  [Hamlet 
leaves  his  foil  in  Laertes's  grasp  and  picks  up  the  poisoned  one.']     Ham.  Nay,  come 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


449 


King.  Part  them !  they  are  incensed. 

Ham.     Nay,  come,  again.  {The  Queen  falls. 

Osk  Look  to  the  queen  there,  ho !      290 

Hor.     They  bleed  on  both  sides. — How  is  it,  my  lord  ? 

Osk     How  is't,  Laertes  ? 

Laer.    Why,  as  a  woodcock  to  mine  own  springe,  Osric  ; 
I  am  justly  kill'd  with  mine  own  treachery. 

Ham.     How  does  the  queen  ? 

King.  She  swoons  to  see  them  bleed.  295 

Queen.     No,  no,  the  drink,  the  drink, — O  my  dear  Ham-  296 
let,— 
The  drink,  the  drink ! — I  am  poison'd !  {Dies. 

Ham.     O  villany ! — Ho  !  let  the  door  be  lock'd ! 
Treachery !  seek  it  out !  {Laertes  falls. 


290.  come,  again.]  Dyce.  come, 
againe.  Fx.  come  againe.  QqFa.  come 
again.  FF,  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 
Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Sta.  Del.  come 
again —  Rowe+.     come,  again —  Han. 

[The  Queen  falls.]  Cap.  Om. 
QqFf. 

there,  ho  /]  F^  there  hoa  FIF2F3. 
there  howe  Q7Q3.  there  hoe  Q^Q5'  there. 
—Ho  /  Sta.  Del. 

291.  Two  half-lines,  Cap. 

is  it]  is't  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Sing.  Huds. 

292.  How  is't,  Laertes?]  Hojl  ifl 
Laeres?  Q4. 

293.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

to  mine]  in  my  Q'76,  Han. 

mine  own]  mine  Fx.     my  F2F 
F4,  Rowe.     my  own  Pope+,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai. 

springe]  fprindge  Q3Q3QAFf, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Cap. 

Osric]  OJlrick  Qq. 

294.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Hal.  Dyce 


ii,  Huds. 

295.  swoons]  Q'76.  founds  QqFfFa 
Cald.    /wounds  F3F4,  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 

296.  drink, — ]  Cap.  drink.  Ft, 
drinke,  or  drink,  QqFaF3F4.  drink — 
Rowe  +  . 

296,  297.  O  my. ..drink  /]  One  line, 
Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

296.  Hamlet,]  Ham  Q4.     Ham,  Q$. 

297.  poison'd!]  poyfned.  Qq.  poyforid, 
FxFa.    poison'd—  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

[Dies.]  Queen  dies.  Rowe.  Om. 


298.  villany]    villaine  Qs.      villain 


QqFf. 

298 

Q'76. 

Ho!]  Theob. ii.  how  Q2Qr  Hoe 
Q4QS,  Pope,  Theob.  i.  How?  Ff,  Rowe, 
Knt,  Coll.  ho  Q'76.  how?—  Jen. 
How!  Cald.  Ktly. 

298,  299.  Ho!. ..out  /]  One  line,  Ktly. 

299.  out !]  out.  QqFf.   out — Rowe+, 
Jen. 

[Laertes  falls.]  Cap.  Om.  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe-f,  Dyce,  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 


again,  [and  rushing  furiously  on  Laertes,  wounds  him  and  he  falls.*  [See 
also  Vol.  II:  Edwin  Booth;  Marquard;  Flathe;  Doering;  von  Frtf- 
sen.  Ed.] 

290.  ho !]  Staunton:  The  exclamation,  *hol'  meaning  stop !  should  perhaps  be 
addressed  to  the  combatants,  and  not  to  those  who  are  to  raise  the  Queen. 

293.  woodcock]  F.  J.  V.  (^V.  6*  Qu.,  8  Aug.  1874) :  This  bird  is  trained  to  decoy 
other  birds,  and  sometimes,  while  strutting  incautiously  too  near  the  springe,  it  be- 
comes itself  entangled. 

38*  2D 


45o 


HAMLET 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


Laer.     It  is  here,  Hamlet     Hamlet,  thou  art  slain ;  300 

No  medicine  in  the  world  can  do  thee  good, 
In  thee  there  is  not  half  an  hour  of  life ; 
The  treacherous  instrument  is  in  thy  hand, 
Unbated  and  envenom'd ;  the  foul  practice 
Hath  tum'd  itself  on  me;  lo,  here  I  lie,  305 

Never  to  rise  again ;  thy  mother's  poison'd ; 
I  can  no  more, — the  king — the  king's  to  blame. 

Ham.    The  point  envenom'd  too ! — 
Then,  venom,  to  thy  work !  \_Stabs  the  King, 

All.    Treason!  treason!  310 

King.     Oh,  yet  defend  me,  friends ;  I  am  but  hurt. 

Ham.     Here,  thou  incestuous,  murderous,  damned  Dane, 


300.  //  is... slain  ;]  Two  lines,  Ff. 
here,     Hamlet.      Hamlet-]     F4, 

Rowe,  Coll.  El.  White,  Ktly,  Del.  Huds. 
here  Hamlet.  Hamlet  F,F2F3.  here 
Hamlet  Qq.  here.  Hamlet  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  here,  Hamlet,  Warb.  here,  Ham- 
let. Johns.  Jen.  here,  Hamlet :  Hamlet 
Cap.  et  cet. 

301.  medicine]  medcin  Q2Q3QA>   med- 
eeine  Q  .     medicine  Johns.  Cap. 

302.  hour  of]  houres  Qq.      hour's 
Q'76,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Sing. 

303.  thy  hand]  my  hand  Qq. 

304.  Unbated]  Imbaited  Theob.  conj. 
(withdrawn,  Sh.  Rest.  p.  1 92). 

305.  lo,]  so  Q'83. 

306.  poison'd]  poyfortd  FXF2.    poy- 
fned  Qq. 

307.  can]  am  Q  . 

more — ]   Rowe+,  Jen.     more, 
QqFf.      more; —    Steev.   Mai.   Dyce. 


more> —  Bos.     more.   Coll.  El.  White. 
more ;  Cap.  et  cet. 

307.  to  blame]  too  blame  QqFx. 

308.  envenom'd  too  /]  inuenom'd  to9 
QjjQj.     enuenom'd  to,  Q^Q^ 

308,  309.  The... work.]  One  line,  Qq, 
White. 

308.  309.  envenom' d.. ...work  !]  One 
line,  Steev.  Bos.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Coll. 
El.  Hal.  Ktly,  Huds. 

309.  to  thy]  do  thy  Theob.  ii  + 
[Stabs  the  King.]  Rowe.   Hurts 

the  King.  Ff.     Om.  Qq. 

310.  All.]  Osr.  and  Lords.  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 

312.  Here]  Heare  Q3Qr 

damned  Dane,]  One  line,  Ff. 
incestuous]  incejlious  Qq. 
murderous]     murdrous     Fx  F . 
tnurcProus  F3F4,  Rowe  +  .     Om.  Qq. 

murderous,  damned]  Om.  Q'76. 


308.  too]  Staunton  :  Recurring  to  what  Laer.  had  just  said,  *  Unbated  and  en- 
venom'd,' Ham.  examines  the  foil,  and,  finding  the  button  gone,  exclaims :  '  The 
point — ,'  and  then,  without  finishing  the  sentence, — ■  unblunted ' — hurries  on  to — 
'envenom'd  too!'  &c.  [Staunton's  text,  followed  by  Delius,  thus  reads:  'The  point 
—envenom'd  too ! — '] 

311.  but  hurt]  RoHRBACH  (p.  37):  Claudius's  last  words  are  characteristic;  he 
says  that  he  is  merely  wounded,  although  he  knows  that  the  sword  which  has  stabbed 
him  is  poisoned.  Thus  tenacious  is  he  of  that  which  he  has,  this  present  life,  until 
Ham.  forces  down  his  throat  the  poisoned  drink.  To  his  latest  breath  he  is  the  type 
of  strength  and  quick  decision.  Even  his  death,  his  last  step,  is  quick  and  decided, 
as  had  always  been  his  style  of  action. 


act  v,  sc.  ii.]  HAMLET  45 1 

Drink  off  this  potion !     Is  thy  union  here  ? 

Follow  my  mother !  [King  dies. 

Laer.  He  is  justly  served ; 

It  is  a  poison  temper'd  by  himself. —  3 '5 

Exchange  forgiveness  with  me,  noble  Hamlet ; 
Mine  and  my  father's  death  come  not  upon  thee, 
Nor  thine  on  me !  [Dies. 

Ham.     Heaven  make  thee  free  of  it !     I  follow  thee. — 
I  am  dead,  Horatio. — Wretched  queen,  adieu ! —  320 

You  that  look  pale  and  tremble  at  this  chance, 
That  are  but  mutes  or  audience  to  this  act, 
Had  I  but  time  (as  this  fell  sergeant,  death, 

313.  off  this]  of  this  Qq.  3 1 8.  me!]  Pope.    me.  QqFf. 
thy  union']  the  Onixe  Qq.    the  [Dies.]  On.  Qq. 

Onyx  Q'76,  Pope,    the  union  Theob.  + ,  319.  thee  free"]  the  free  Theob.  i. 

Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  El.  Hal.  320.  lam]  I*m  Pope  +  ,  Huds. 

314.  [King  dies.]  Om.  Qq.  adieu]  farewelQld. 

314,  315.  He... himself.]  One  line,  Qq.  322.  to  this]  at  this  FaF3F4,  Rowe. 

315.  tempered]  Rowe.  temperd  Qq.  323,  324.  time  {as. ..arrest)  oh]  time 
tempered  Ff.                                                         as...arrejl.  O  Q^QS> 

317.  upon]  on  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

313.  Drink]  Capell  (i,  149)  :  The  literal  sense  of  these  words  leads  us  to 
imagine  that  Ham.  pours  some  of  the  poisoned  cup  into  the  mouth  of  the  King  as 
he  lies  gasping,  or  else  dashes  what  is  left  on't  upon  him.  But  how,  then,  could 
Hor.  in  either  case  say  what  he  does  in  line  329  ?  Ham.  would  hardly  pour  it  so 
gently  as  to  leave  much  behind.  It  is  probable  that  the  expression  is  figurative,  and 
spoken  upon  making  the  King,  who  had  declared  he  was  only  '  hurt,'  taste  again  of 
his  *  sword.' 

313.  union]  Caldecott:  There  may  be  a  play  here  upon  the  word* union.' 
Moberly  :  Was  this  cursed  drug  the  pearl  that  you  said  you  were  putting  in  ? 

315.  temper'd]  Clarendon:  Mixed,  compounded.     Compare  Exodus,  xxix,  2 ; 

*  cakes  unleavened  tempered  with  oil.' 

318.  Dies]  Caldecott:  We  here  find  Laer.,  who  was  not  wounded  till  after 
Ham.,  first  dying  of  a  poison  described  as  singularly  quick  in  its  operation.  The 
purposes  of  the  drama  might  require  that  Ham.  should  survive,  and  the  same  quan- 
tity of  poison  may  affect  different  constitutions  differently,  but  the  poison  of  the 

•  anointed '  sword,  which  had  first  entered  the  body,  and  was  steeped  with  the  blood, 
of  Ham.,  must,  one  would  think,  in  the  second  instance  have  lost  something  of 
its  active  quality,  and  would  consequently  have  been  more  slowly  operative  upon 
Laer.  [Possibly  Ham.  gave  Laer.  a  mortal  thrust  in  return  for  the  'scratch,'  which 
was  all  that  Laer.  was  aiming  at.  So  that  Laer.  dies  of  the  wound,  Ham.  of  the 
poison.  Ed.] 

322.  mutes]  Johnson  :  That  are  either  auditors  of  this  catastrophe,  or  at  most 
only  mute  performers,  that  fill  the  stage  without  any  part  in  the  action. 


452 


HAMLET 


[ACT  V,  SC.  il 


Is  strict  in  his  arrest)  oh,  I  could  tell  you — 
But  let  it  be. — Horatio,  I  am  dead  ; 
Thou  livest ;  report  me  and  my  cause  aright 
To  the  unsatisfied. 

Hok  Never  believe  it ; 

I  am  more  an  antique  Roman  than  a  Dane ; 
Here's  yet  some  liquor  left. 

Ham.  As  thou'rt  a  man, 

Give  me  the  cup ;  let  go ;  by  heaven,  I'll  have't.— 
O  God ! — Horatio,  what  a  wounded  name, 
Things  standing  thus  unknown,  shall  live  behind  me ! 


32S 


330 


324.  strict]  Jlrick'd  Fx.    Jlrick't  F8. 
his]  this  F2F3F4. 

you—]  Pope,  you,  Q2Q3F2F3F4, 
Rowe.  you  I  Q4QS«  you.  Fx.  you; 
Q'76. 

325.  be.—]  Coll.     be;  Qq.    be:  Ff. 
be — Rowe  +  . 

326.  cause  aright]  cause  a  right  Q. 
Q3.     causes  right  Ff,  Rowe. 

327.  the]  be  F3F4. 

Never  believe]  Never ;  believe 
Han. 

[takes  the  cup.  Coll.  (MS). 

328.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii. 
antique]  anticke  Q2Q,.     antike 

Q4QSF1F3.    AnHckYf,. 

329»  330*  As. ..cup]  Separate  line,  Ff, 
Rowe. 


329.  thou'rt]  Cap.  th'art  QqFf, 
Rowe+. 

330.  by  heaven?]  Om.  Q'76. 
have't]  hate  Qq.      hav't  F3F4. 

ha't  Cap.      have  it  Steev.  Var.  Cald. 
Knt,  Coll.  i,  White,  Hal.  Del. 

[Struggling,  Hamlet  gets  it. 
Coll.  (MS). 

331.  O  God !—  Horatio,]  Cap.  Ogod 
Horatio,  QQ.  O  God  Horatio !  Qfis. 
O  Horatio  Q'76.  Oh  good  Horatio,  F, 
F2F3,  Pope  +  ,  Del.  Dyce,  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 
Oh,  good  Horatio,  F4,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta. 

332.  live]  I  leave  Qq,  Jen.  leave 
White. 

me!]  Jen.  me?  Qq,  Rowe  +  , 
Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt,  Coll.  i,  El. 
White,     me.  Ff. 


323.  as]  See  IV,  iii,  58.  Abbott  (§  1 10) :  An  ellipsis  must  be  supplied  here : 
'  Had  I  but  time  (which  I  have  not) — as,'  &c. 

323.  sergeant]  Ritson  :  The  bailiff  or  sheriff's  officer.  M  ALONE:  So  in  Sil- 
vester's Du  Bartas : — 'And  Death,  drad  serjant  of  th'  eternall  Judge,  Comes  very 
late  to  his  sole-seated  Lodge.' — The  Third  Day  of  the  first  Week,  p.  30,  ed.  1633. 
Hunter  (ii,  266) :  Silvester  is  the  earlier  writer,  but  Shakespeare's  substitution  of 
« fell '  for  •  dread '  shows  a  master  hand. 

326.  cause  aright]  Delius  (ed.  i) :  Perhaps  the  text  of  the  Ff  should  read 
'  cause's  right.'     [Not  repeated  in  ed.  ii.] 

328.  Roman]  Franz  Horn  (ii,  91) :  This  allusion  is  characteristic;  in  the  very 
first  scene  Hor.  described  vividly  the  omens  that  took  place  '  ere  the  mightiest  Juliu? 
fell.' 

332.  live  behind]  Staunton:  Compare,  'No  glory  lives  behind  the  back  of 
such.' — Much  Ado,  III,  i,  no.  White:  The  reading  of  the  Ff  infelicitously 
makes  '  Things  standing  thus  unknown '  parenthetical,  and  as  Q3  has  '  shall  I  leave 
behind  me,'  and  Qx,  'What  a  scandal  wouldst  thou  leave  behind,'  I  have  no  doubt 


act  v,  sc.  «.]  HAMLET  453 

If  thou  didst  ever  hold  me  in  thy  heart, 
Absent  thee  from  felicity  awhile, 

And  in  this  harsh  world  draw  thy  breath  in  pain,  335 

To  tell  my  story. —  [March  afar  off,  and  shot  within. 

What  warlike  noise  is  this  ? 

Osr.   Young  Fortinbras,  with  conquest  come  from  Poland, 
To  the  ambassadors  of  England  gives 
This  warlike  volley. 

Ham.  Oh,  I  die,  Horatio ; 

The  potent  poison  quite  o'er-crows  my  spirit ;  340 

I  cannot  live  to  hear  the  news  from  England. 
But  I  do  prophesy  the  election  lights 
On  Fortinbras ;  he  has  my  dying  voice ; 
So  tell  him,  with  the  occurrents,  more  and  less, 

334.  [Firings  within.  Cap.  338.   To  the]   To  tk*  Q2Q3Ff,  Rowe. 

336.  story]  tale  Pope,  Theob.  Han.         Tk  th*  Q4.     Tk'  Q$. 

Warb.  338,  339.   To.. ..volley.]    Pope.     One 

[March. ...shot   within.]     Steev.  line,  QqFf,  Rowe. 

March  afarre  off,  and  (hout  within.  Ff.  338.  ambassadors]  ambassador  Han. 

A  march  a  farre  off.  Qq.    March  at  some  340.  quite]  quie  F3. 

distance.. .within.  Dyce  ii.     Om.  Cap.  d  er-crows]     ore-growes     Q.QS' 

this?]  this?  [Exit  Osrick.  Jen.  der-grows  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  El.     oertkrows 

337.  Scene  vi.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  E.  B.  H. 

[Enter  Ofrick.  QqFf,  Rowe+,  344.  and  less]  or  less  F,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

Jen.  Sing,  i,  Cald. 

that  in  the  Folio  there  is  a  slight  misprint.  The  possible  objection  that  Ham.,  and 
net  the  things  unknown,  would  leave  the  name,  is  of  a  prosaic  sort  that  need  not  be 
regarded.  Stratmann  :  It  can  hardly  be  denied  that  the  reading  of  the  Qq  is  more 
natural  than  that  of  the  Ff. 

334.  felicity]  Delius  :  The  joys  of  heaven. 

340.  o'er-crows]  Jennens  :  As  a  victorious  cock  crows  over  his  defeated  antago- 
nist. Steevens  :  This  expression  is  also  found  in  Chapman's  Odyssey,  lib.  xxi  :— 
*  and  told  his  foe  It  was  not  fair,  nor  equal,  t'  overcrow  The  poorest  guest.'  Ma- 
LONE:  Again,  in  the  epistle  prefixed  to  Nash's  Apologie  of  Pierce  Pennilesse,  1593: 
'  About  two  yeeres  since  a  certayne  demi-divine  took  upon  him  to  set  his  foote  on 
mine,  and  overcrowe  me  with  comparative  terms.'  Clarendon  :  Johnson  quotes 
from  Spenser's  View  of  tke  Present  State  of  Ireland  (Globe  ed.,  p.  660) :  '  A  base 
>arlett,  that  being  but  of  late  growen  out  of  the  dounghill  beginneth  nowe  to  over- 
crowe soe  high  mountaynes,  and  make  himselfe  greate  protectour  of  all  outlawes 
and  rebells  that  will  repayre  vnto  him.'  Tschischwitz  adopts  over-awes  in  his  text, 
as  '  the  only  word  which  affords  a  suitable  sense.' 

344.  occurrents]  Steevens:  Incidents,  occurrences.  Compare:  'As  our  occur- 
rents happen  in  degree.' — Drayton's  Barons'  Wars,  bk  i,  canto  xii.  Clarendon: 
Compare  Holland's  Pliny,  xxv,  2 :  '  This  occurrent  fell  out  in  Lacetania,  the  nearest 
part  unto  vs  of  Spain.' 


454  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

Which  have  solicited — the  rest  is  silence.  [Dies.  345 

Hor.     Now  cracks  a  noble  heart — Good  night,  sweet 
prince, 
And  flights  of  angels  sing  thee  to  thy  rest ! — 
Why  does  the  drum  come  hither  ?  [March  within. 

345.  solicited—]  Jen.  Coll.  Del.  El.  dies.  Cap. 

White,  Ktly,  Hal.  Dyceii,  Huds.    fo-  346.  Now... prince,]  Two  lines,  Ff. 

Ii  cited,  Qq.  folicited:  Q'76.   solicited, —  cracks]  cracke  F  . 

Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Cald.  Sing,     folicited.  prince]  Prience  F  . 

Ff  et  cet.  347.  flights]  flight  Q^.     choires  Q'76. 

is  silence]  in  fllence  Q' '76.  '   sing]  flnge  Q4Q5*     wingWzxb. 

silence.]  Qq.    fllence.    O,  o,  o,  o.  [March  within.]  Cap.    Om.  Qq 

Fj,  Cald.  fllence,  0,o,o,o,Fa.  fllence,  Ff,  Rowe+,  Jen.     March  without  Sta. 

O,  o,  0.  F3F4,  Rowe.  After  line  347,  Cam. 

[Dies.]  Ff.  Om.  Qq.   sinks,  and 

345.  solicited]  Warburton:  That  is,  brought  on  the  event.  Heath  (p.  551) : 
That  is,  incited  me  to  the  act  of  vengeance  I  have  just  performed.  Mason  :  The 
sentence  is  left  imperfect.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  274) :  *  Solicit,'  like  many  other 
words  derived  from  the  Latin, — as  religion  for  worship  or  service,  &c, — had  not  yet 
lost  its  strict  Latin  meaning.  Lettsom  {foot-note  to  foregoing) :  The  original  signi- 
fication of  the  Latin  word  seems  to  have  been  to  move,  and  the  various  meanings 
attached  to  it  by  lexicographers  are  but  modifications  of  this  primary  one.  Ham. 
seems  to  have  been  thinking  of  the  events  that  had  '  solicited '  or  moved  him  to  re- 
commend Fort,  as  successor  to  the  throne.  Clarendon  :  Compare  Rich.  II:  I,  ii, 
2.     [See  Macb.  I,  iii,  130.] 

345.  The  rest  is  silence]  Clarendon:  If  Hamlet's  speech  is  interrupted  by 
his  death,  it  would  be  more  natural  that  these  words  should  be  spoken  by  Hor. 
Moberly  :  To  Ham.  silence  would  come  as  the  most  welcome  and  most  gracious 
of  friends,  as  relief  to  the  action-wearied  soul,  freedom  from  conflicting  motives, 
leisure  for  searching  out  all  problems,  release  from  the  toil  of  finding  words  for 
thought ;  as  the  one  sole  language  of  immortality,  the  only  true  utterance  of  the 
infinite. 

345.  White:  The  O,  0,  o,  0,  of  the  Folio  is  the  addition,  doubtless,  of  some 
actor. 

346.  cracks]  Elsewhere  used  by  Sh.  where  we  should  now  use  break.  See  Per. 
Ill,  ii,  78;  Cor.  V,  iii,  9. 

347.  rest]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  remainder  of  the  tragedy  is  struck  through 
with  a  pen  in  the  (MS)  and  the  word  Finis  subjoined,  to  show  that  it  was  there  at 
an  end.  The  concluding  lines  also  are  thus  converted  into  a  couplet :  '  Now  cracks 
a  noble  heart :  good  night,  be  blest,  And  flights  of  angels  sing  thee  to  thy  rest.' 
Another  '  tag '  is  added  afterwards,  of  a  very  poor  and  inanimate  character,  most 
unlike  the  language  of  Sh.  which,  it  seems,  the  performer  of  the  part  of  Hor.  was 
also  to  deliver  when  the  piece  was  abbreviated ;  it  is  as  follows  : — While  I  remain 
behind  to  tell  a  tale,  That  shall  hereafter  turn  the  hearers  pale.'  Although  the  con- 
clusion is  hastened  in  this  way,  the  old  annotator  has  continued  his  corrections  to 
the  end  of  the  tragedy,  as  it  has  come  down  to  us ;  but  from  what  source  he  derived 


ACT  V,  SC.  U.] 


HAMLET 


455 


Enter  Fortinbras,  and  the  English  Ambassadors,  with  Drum, 
Colours,  and  Attendants. 

Fort.    Where  is  this  sight  ? 

Hor.  What  is  it  ye  would  sec  ? 

If  aught  of  woe  or  wonder,  cease  your  search. 

Fort.     This  quarry  cries  on  havoc. — O  proud  Death  ! 
What  feast  is  toward  in  thine  eternal  cell, 
That  thou  so  many  princes,  at  a  shot, 
So  bloodily  hast  struck  ? 


3SO 


348.  Enter...]  Theob.  +  ,  Jen.  Cam. 
Cla.  Enter  Fortinbras  and  Englifh 
Ambaflador,...  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  Enter 
FortenbrafTe,  with  the  EmbafTadors.  Qq 
(Fortinbrafle  Q.Qc).  Enter... Embassa- 
dors, and  others.  Cap.  et  cet. 

349.  this]  the  F3F4,  Rowe. 

ye]  FXF„,  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Dyce, 
El.  Sta.  White,  Glo.  Hal.  Huds.  Mob. 
you  QqF3F4  et  cet. 

350.  aught]  Han.  ought QqFf,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Cap. 

search.]  fearch?  Q'76. 


351.  This]  His  Ff. 

cries  on  havoc]  cries  out,  havoc h 
Han.     cries — on  havock.  Warb. 
proud]  prou'd  Q3Q3. 

352.  toward]  tovJrd  Pope+,  Jen. 
thine    eternal]    thine    infernal 

Q'76,   Jen.   El.     thy  infernal  Theob. 
Warb.  Jolins. 

353.  shot]  Jhoote  Fs.    Jhoot  F2F3F4, 
Rowe,  Knt. 

354.  struck]  Rowe.  flrook  Q2Q3F3F4, 
Cap.   Jlrooke  Q4QSFXF2. 


his  information  we  know  not ;  perhaps  he  had  at  one  time  witnessed  the  performance 
in  its  entirety,  and  had  remedied  defects  from  the  recitation  of  the  actors. 
351.  quarry]  The  game  killed.     See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  206. 

351.  cries  on]  Johnson:  To  exclaim  against.  I  suppose  when  unfair  sportsmen 
destroyed  more  quarry  or  game  than  was  reasonable  the  censure  was  to  cry  Havock, 
Caldecott  :  See  Oth.  V,  i,  48.  White  :  « This  heap  of  dead  proclaims  an  indis- 
criminate slaughter.'  Clarendon  :  *  This  pile  of  corpses  urges  to  merciless  slaugh- 
ter, where  no  quarter  is  given.'  In  the  Statutes  of  Warre,  &c,  by  King  Henry  VIII 
(15 13),  quoted  in  Todd's  ed.  of  Johnson's  Diet.,  it  is  enacted, '  That  noo  man  be  so 
hardy  to  crye  havoke,  upon  payne  of  hym  that  is  so  founde  begynner,  to  dye  there- 
fore; and  the  remenaunt  to  be  emprysoned,  and  theyr  bodyes  punyshed  at  the 
lcynges  will.'  See  also  the  Ordinances  of  War  of  Richard  II  and  Henry  V,  pub- 
lished in  the  Black  Book  of  the  Admiralty  (ed.  Twiss),  i,  455,  462.  The  etymology 
of  the  word  is  purely  conjectural.  Some  derive  it  from  the  Welsh  hafog,  destruc- 
tion ;  others  from  the  A.  S.  hafocf  a  hawk ;  others  from  the  French  hai,  voux  /  a  cry 
to  hounds. 

352.  feast]  Caldecott  :  This  allusion  has,  no  doubt,  some  connection  with  the 
usage  of  all  the  northern  nations,  their  Ambarvalia  or  Arval  suppers  referred  to  by- 
Ham.  I,  ii,  180.     Compare  «  Death  feasts.' — King  John',  II,  i,  354. 

352.  toward]  See  I,  i,  77. 

352.  eternal]  Walker  {Crit.  i,  62)  gives  two  other  instances  besides  this  and  1, 
v,  21  (which  see),  where  '  eternal'  seems  to  be  used  for  infernal:  Jul.  Cess.  I,  ii, 
160;  Oth.  IV,  ii,  1 154.  'This  seems  to  be  still  in  use  among  the  common  people. 
X  need  scarcely  notice  the  Yankee  Harnal* 


45 6  HAMLET  [actv,  sc.  ii 

First  Amb.  The  sight  is  dismal ; 

And  our  affairs  from  England  come  too  late;  355 

The  ears  are  senseless  that  should  give  us  hearing, 
To  tell  him  his  commandment  is  fulfill'd, 
That  Rosencrantz  and  Guildenstern  are  dead. 
Where  should  we  have  our  thanks  ? 

Hor.  Not  from  his  mouth, 

Had  it  the  ability  of  life  to  thank  you ;  360 

He  never  gave  commandment  for  their  death. 
But  since,  so  jump  upon  this  bloody  question, 
You  from  the  Polack  wars,  and  you  from  England, 
Are  here  arrived,  give  order  that  these  bodies 
High  on  a  stage  be  placed  to  the  view ;  365 

And  let  me  speak  to  the  yet  unknowing  world 
How  these  things  came  about ;  so  shall  you  hear 
Of  carnal,  bloody,  and  unnatural  acts, 
Of  accidental  judgements,  casual  slaughters, 
Of  deaths  put  on  by  cunning,  and  forced  cause,  370 

354.  First  Amb.]  1.  E.  Cap.   Embaf.  QAQ5.     Polake  FfFs. 
Qq.     Amb.  Ff.  364.  arrived,  give]   arriued.      Give 

357,361.  commandment]  commande-  F2F2F  .     arrived:  Give  F. 
tnent  Qq  (commandment,  line  357,  Q3  365.  the  view]  publick  view  Q'76. 

Q3).     command*  ment  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  366.  to  the  yet]  Cap.  to  th}  yet  Q  QsFf, 

Theob.  White.  Rowe  +  .    to  yet  Q2Qr 

360.  life]  breath  Q'76.  368.  carnal]    cruell  Q4Q5,   Rowe  +  , 

362.  jump]   apt   Q'76.     full   Pope,  Cap.  Jen. 

Theob.  i,  Han.  370.  deaths]  death's  FXF9. 

363.  Polack]  Pollack  Q2Q,.     Pollock  forced  cause]  for  no  caufeQq,] en. 

359.  his  mouth]  Of  course  this  refers  to  the  King,  as  Warburton  long  ago 
pointed  out.  But,  strange  to  say,  Theobald  referred  it  to  Ham.,  a  noteworthy  slip 
in  one  of  the  best  editors  Sh,  ever  had,  and  it  is  quite  as  remarkable  that  the  slip 
escaped  the  notice  of  the  subsequent  Variorum  editors,  who  omitted  no  chance  of 
making  merry  over  *  poor  Tib  and  his  Toxophilus.' 

362.  jump]  See  I,  i,  65. 

368.  carnal]  Malone  :  Of  sanguinary  and  unnatural  acts,  to  which  the  perpe- 
trator was  instigated  by  concupiscence,  or,  to  use  Shakespeare's  own  words,  by 
'  carnal  stings.'  Hor.  alludes  to  the  murder  of  old  Hamlet  by  his  brother,  previous 
to  his  incestuous  union  with  Gertrude.  A  Remarker  asks,  '  Was  the  relationship 
between  the  usurper  and  the  deceased  king  a  secret  confined  to  Hor.  ?'  No,  but 
the  murder  of  Hamlet  by  Claudius  was  a  secret  which. the  young  Prince  had  im- 
parted to  Hor.,  and  to  him  alone;  and  to  this  it  is  he  principally,  though  covertly, 
alludes, 

369,  370.  Of  accidental . . .  cause]  Delius:  The  first  line  refers  to  Pol.,  the 
second  to  Ros.  and  Guil.,  whose  deaths  were  *  forced '  on  Ham. 


ACT  V.  SC.  ii.] 


HAMLET 


457 


And,  in  this  upshot,  purposes  mistook  37 J 

Fall'n  on  the  inventors'  heads.    All  this  can  I 
Truly  deliver. 

Fort.  Let  us  haste  to  hear  it, 

And  call  the  noblest  to  the  audience. 

For  me,  with  sorrow  I  embrace  my  fortune ;  375 

I  have  some  rights  of  memory  in  this  kingdom, 
Which  now  to  claim  my  vantage  doth  invite  me. 

Hon     Of  that  I  shall  have  also  cause  to  speak, 
And  from  his  mouth  whose  voice  will  draw  on  more ; 
But  let  this  same  be  presently  perform'd,  380 

Even  while  men's  minds  are  wild ;  lest  more  mischance, 
On  plots  and  errors,  happen. 

Fort  Let  four  captains 

Bear  Hamlet,  like  a  soldier,  to  the  stage ; 


372.  inventors'"]  Theob.  ii.    inuenters 

Qq.   Inuentors  FxFa,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

Theob.  i.     Inventor's  F„F,. 

34  #> 

374.  noblest]  noblefs  Q'76,   Pope  ii, 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns,     noblesse  Cap. 

376.  rights]  rights,  QaQr     Rites  Ff. 

377.  doth. ..me.]    Separate    line,    Ff, 
Rowe. 

now  to]  are  to  Ff. 
vantage]  inter ejt  Q'76. 

378.  shall   have    also]    Jhall    haue 
alwayes  Fx,  Cald.    Jhall  alwayes  F2F  . 


Jhall  always  F4. 

379.  And. ..mouth  ;]  Separate  line,  Ff. 
on  more]   no  more  Qq,  Rowe, 

Pope. 

380.  same]  scene  Coll.  ii  (MS). 

381.  lest. ..mischance]   Separate  line, 
Ff. 

while]  whiles  Ff,  Rowe. 

382.  plots  and]  plots,  and  Ff,  Rowe, 
Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Cald.  Knt. 

383.  to  the]    off  the    F3F4,   Rowe, 
Pope. 


370.  put  on]  Malone:  Instigated.     See  Cor.  II,  i,  272.     [See  I,  iii,  94.] 

371.  upshot]  Clarendon:  This  conclusion  of  the  tragedy.  In  archery  the 
*  upshot '  was  the  final  shot,  which  decided  the  match.  It  is  used  in  the  same  meta* 
phorical  sense  in  Twelfth  Night,  IV,  ii,  76. 

376.  rights  of  memory]  Malone  :  Some  rights  which  are  remembered. 

379.  voice  will  draw  on]  Theobald:  Hor.  is  to  deliver  the  message  given 
him  by  Ham.,  lines  343,  344,  and  justly  infers  that  Hamlet's  'voice '  will  be  seconded 
by  others. 

380.  same]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  alteration  by  the  (MS)  is  so  much  superior 
to  the  QqFf  in  reference  to  the  words  *  perform'd '  and  •  stage,'  which  occur  just 
afterwards,  that  we  make  the  change,  not  only  without  reluctance,  but  with  thank- 
fulness for  the  improvement  upon  the  usual  tame  and  unfigurative  line.  '  Same '  for 
scene  was  the  easiest  possible  misprint  from  carelessly  written  manuscript. 

382.  On]  Caldecott:  In  consequence  of.     [See  Abbott,  §  180.] 
382.  four  captains]  Hunter  (ii,  266) :  As  may  be  seen  in  the  monument  in 
Westminster  Abbey  of  Sir  Francis  Vere,  a  soldier,  who  died  1608.    This  was  no 
doubt  at  that  time  the  accustomed  mode  of  burial  of  a  soldiei  of  rank. 
39 


458  HAMLET  [act  v,  sc.  u. 

For  he  was  likely,  had  he  been  put  on, 

To  have  proved  most  royally;  and,  for  his  passage,  385 

The  soldiers'  music  and  the  rites  of  war 
Speak  loudly  for  him. — 
Take  up  the  bodies. — Such  a  sight  as  this 
Becomes  the  field,  but  here  shows  much  amiss. — 
Go,  bid  the  soldiers  shoot.  390 

[A  dead  march.    Exeunt,  bearing  off  the  bodies  ; 
after  which  a  peal  of  ordnance  is  shot  off. 

385.  Two  lines,  Ff.  ami  eJJT  Fa. 

royally]  royall  Qq.  390.  [A  dead  march.]  Cap. 

386.  soldiers']  Souldiours  Fx.  Exeunt....]  Exeunt  solemnly,... 
rites]   right  Qq,   Cap.      rights        Cap.     Exeunt.  Qq.    Exeunt  Marching : 

Q'76,  Knt.  after  the  which,  a  Peale  of  Ordenance  are 

388.  bodies]  body  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cald.  fhot  off.  Ff  (after  which,  F3F4.  Ord- 
Knt,  Coll.  Del.  White.  nance,  F3F3F4). 

389.  amiss]   amiffe    Qq.     amis  Fx. 

384.  put  on]  Caldecott  :  Put  to  the  proof,  tried. 

390.  Moberly:  Ham.  has  gained  the  haven  for  which  he  longed  so  often;  yet 
without  bringing  guilt  on  himself  by  his  death ;  no  fear  that  his  sleep  should  have 
bad  dreams  in  it  now.  Those  whom  he  loved,  his  mother,  Laer.,  Oph.,  have  all 
died  guiltless  or  forgiven.  Late,  and  under  the  strong  compulsion  of  approaching 
death,  he  has  done,  and  well  done,  the  inevitable  task  from  which  his  gentle  nature 
shrank.  "Why,  then,  any  farther  thought,  in  the  awful  presence  of  death,  of  crimes, 
conspiracies,  vengeance?  Think  that  he  has  been  slain  in  battle,  like  his  Sea- King 
forefathers ;  and  let  the  booming  cannon  be  his  mourners. 


INDEX  TO  SOME  OF  THE  MORE  IMPORTANT 
NOTES  IN  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


A~*scme     . V,  ii,    91 

A  =  one        V,  ii,  252 

Abhorred  in           . .        •  •  V,  i,  170 

About           .  .        • .         .  .  II,  ii,  564 

Abridgements         . .        .  .  II,  ii,  401 

Absolute V,  i,  129 

Abstracts II,  ii,  501 

Absurd        . .        • .        .  .  Ill,  ii,    55 

Abuses        II,  ii,  579 

Access         .  .        • .        . .  II,  i,  1 10 

Acquittance  seal     .  .        . .  IV,  vii,      1 

Act  of  fear I,  ii,  205 

Action         Ill,  i,   48 

Actor          II,  ii,  373 

Actor  of  Hamlet,  the  original  V,  ii,  274 

A-cursing II,  ii,  562 

Adieu          •  •        . .        .  •  I,  v,    91 

Addition      ♦ .        • .        . .  I,  .iv,    20 

Addition II,  i,    47 

Admiration I,  ii,  192 

Admiration Ill,  ii,  311 

Adulterate I,  v,    42 

./Eneas'  tale  to  Dido          .  .  II,  ii,  425 

Aerie II,  ii,  327 

Affections Ill,  i,  162 

Affrighted II,  i,    75 

Affront         . .        . .         .  .  Ill,  i,    31 

Again          I,  i,    21 

Age  and  body  of  the  time  III,  ii,   22 

Aim             IV,  v,      9 

A  length V,  ii,  252 

Allow          I,  ii,    38 

Allow'd V,  i,   47 

All  we         II,  ii,  150 

Alone          II,  ii,  522 

Along          I,  i,    26 

Along          Ill,  iii,     4 

Already I,  v,  147 


A-making  .  .        .  .         .  .  I,  in,  119 

Amazement           ..         ..  Ill,    ii,  311 

Ambition Ill,  iii,    55 

Anchors Ill,    ii,  209 

An  end I,    v,    19 

An  end Ill,  iv,    22 

An  eye  of  you       . .         . .  II,    ii,  283 

And  my  son          . .        . .  I,    ii,    64 

And  to  my  king    .  .         .  .  II,    ii,    45 

And^yes,  and      .  .         .  .  Ill,    ii,    43 

And  now  =  and  there  now  II,    ii,  100 

Annexment           . .        .  .  Ill,  iii,    21 

Anoint        .  .        .  .        . .  IV,  vii,  141 

Anon... drooping  . .         .  .  V,     i,  274 

Another II,     i,    29 

Another  tongue     ; .        . .  V,    ii,  123 

Answer II,    ii,    82 

Antic          I,    v,  172 

Any  the  most        . .        .  .  I,    ii,    99 

Apoplex'd Ill,  iv,    75 

Appears      . .        .  .        . .  I,    ii,  201 

Approve     . .        .  ♦        . .  I,     i,    29 

Approve V,    ii,  132 

Appurtenance        . .        . .  II,    ii,  353 

Argument  .  .        . .        .  .  II,    ii,  340 

Arm            Ill,  iii,    24 

Arm'd        .  .        . .        . .  I,    ii,  226 

Armour I,     i,    60 

Arras          II,    ii,  162 

Art              II,    ",    96 

Article       V,    ii,  115 

As  =  asif I,    ii,  217 

As  I  do  live           .  .        . .  I,    ii,  221 

As  he  in  his  particular  act  I,  iii,    26 

As  =»  namely          ..         ..  I,   iv,    25 

As=*as  if II,     i,    91 

As  against Ill,   iv,    50 

As~as  if Ill,  iv,  135 

459 


460 


INDEX  TO    THE  FIRST   VOLUME 


As = for  so 

As  =  as  if 

As  =  as  though 

As  =  inasmuch  as 

As = for  so 

As    .  . 

As  stars  with  trains  of  fire 

Ases  . . 

Aslant 

Assail.. .fortify 

Assay         .  . 

Assay  .  . 

Assay  of  arms 

Assays  of  bias 

Assurance 

As  will 

At  =  up  to 

At  height 

At  help 

At  foot 

At  point 

Attended 

Attent 

Attraction,  number  of.  the 

verb  influenced  by 
Attraction  . , 
Avouch  . , 
A-work  • , 
Awry  • , 
Audit 

Aught  • . 
Augury  . , 
Aunt-mother 
Auspicious . , 
Authorities  =  officers 

thority 
Axe 
Ay 
Ay 


Back'd... weasel 
Baked  meats 
Baker's  daughter 
Baptista        . 
Bare  bodkin 
Barred 
Bated 
Batten 
Bawds        • . 


of  au 


IV,  iii,  58 
IV,  v,  99 
IV,   vi,    21 

IV,  vii,  63 
IV,  vii,  159 

V,    ii,  323 

I,     i,  117 

V,     i,    43 

IV,  vii,  1 63 

I,     i,    31 

III,     i,    14 

III,  iii,    69 

II,    ii,    71 

II,  i,    65 
V,     i,  109 

III,  iii,    39 

III,  iv,  209 
I,  iv,    21 

IV,  iii,  43 
IV,  iii,    53 

I,    ii,  200 

II,    ii,  263 

I,    ii,  193 

I,    ",    33 

III,  ii,  186 

I,    ",    57 
II,    ii,  466 

HI,  i,    87 

III,  iii,    82 

III,  i,  96 
V,  ii,  207 
II,  ii,  358 

I,    ii,    11 

IV,  ii,    15 

IV,  v,  212 
I,    v,   42 

II,     i,    36 

III,  ii,  363 
I,    ii,  180 

IV,  v,  41 
III,  ii,  229 
III,     i,    76 

I,    ",  114 

V,     i,    23 

III,  iv,    67 

I,  iii,  130 


Be  [implying  doubt]        .  .  I, 

Be  or  not  to  be     .  .        .  .  Ill, 

Beaten        II,    i 

Beating I, 

Beautified  . .        .  .        ,  .  II, 

Beauty.. .virtue      .  .        .  .  Ill, 

Beaver       I,    i 

Beck          Ill, 

Bed-rid       .  .        .  .        ,  .  I,    i 

Befitted I,    i 

Beggar  that  I  am  .  .        .  .  II,    i 

Beggars'  bodies    .  .        .  .  II,    i 

Begun  by  time       .  .        .  .  IV,  v 

Belike         Ill, 

Benefit  [involving  the  idea 

of  a  benefactor]           . .  I, 

Bent           II, 

Bent           Ill, 

Bent,  is IV, 

Beshrew II, 

Bespeak II, 

Best  =  ^*  best       . .        .  .  I, 

Bestow       Ill, 

Beteem I, 

Better'd...odds      .  .        . .  V, 

Between  the  pass  .  .        .  .  V, 

Bevy           V, 

Bewept       . .        ,  .        .  .  IV, 

Bilboes V, 

Bisson         II, 

Bitter  business       . .        .  .  Ill, 

Blastments            .  .        .  .  I, 

Blank         IV, 

Blanks  [verb]       .  .        .  .  Ill, 

Blazon        I. 

Blench       II, 

Blister        Ill, 

Bloat          Ill, 

Blood  =  temperament       .  .  I, 

Blood         I, 

Blood  and  judgement     .  •  III, 

Blood         IV, 

Blown        Ill, 

Board  him  .  .         .  .         .  .  II, 

Bodkin       Ill, 

Body  is  with  the  king      .  .  IV, 

Bore  of  the  matter          .  .  3V, 

Borne  in  hand      .  .        .  .  II, 

Bosom       .  •        •  9        .  ■  II, 


,  108 
,  56 
,  265 

,  39 
,  109 

,  39 
,229 

,  125 

,    29 

,      2 

,  266 

,257 
,  112 

.382 


111,  2 
ii,  30 
ii,  367 
iii,    44 

i,  113 

»,  139 

iii,    43 

i,  44 
ii,  141 
ii,  250 
ii,  61 
ii,  178 
v,    37 

i,     6 

ii,  484 

ii,  374 

iii,    42 

i,  42 
ii,  210 
v,    21 

»,  573 
iv,  44 
iv,  182 
iii,  6 
iii,  116 
ii,  64 
iv,    58 

i,  159 

ii,  169 

i,  76 
ii,  26 
vi,  24 
ii,  67 
ii,  112 


INDEX  TO    THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


461 


Bourn 

Box 

Brain 

Brain 

Brainish 

Brains 

Brave  o'er-hanging 

Bravery 

Bread 

Break  we  [subjunctive] 

Breathe 

Breathe 

Breathing-time 

Bringing  home 

Broad-blown 

Brokers 


Brooch 

Brother 

Brows 

Bruit 

Brute 

Bugs 

Bulk 

Burnt  and  purged 

But 

But  =  except 

But  =  except 

But  [redundant] 

But  =  only 

But  =  merely 

But  [adversative] 

But 

But 

Buttons 

Buz 

"By  ^  with 

By  =  about ',  concerning 

By  and  by  «=  immediately 

By'r  [pronunication] 

By  time 

Calm 

Can  [used  in  original  mean 

ing] 
Candied      .  . 
Canker       .  , 
Canon 

Canonized  . . 
39* 


III,  i,    79 

V,  i,  105 

II,  ii,  564 

III,  iv,  137 

IV,  i,    11 

Hi    ii,  343 
II,    ii,  292 

V,    ii,    79 

III,  iii,  •  80 

I,     i,  168 

II,  i,    31 

III,  iv,  198 

V,  ii,  167 

V,  i,  221 

III,  iii,    81 
I,  iii,  127 

IV,  vii,    94 
V,    ii,  231 

IV,  v,  us 

I,  ii,  127 

III,  ii,    99 

V,  i,    22 

Hi  i,    95 

I,  v,    14 

I,  i,    81 

I,  i,  102 

I,  i,  108 

II,  ii,    29 

II,  ii,  272 

II,  ii,  451 

II,  ii,  552 

V,  ii,  135 

III,  iv,  189 
I,  iii,    40 

II,  ",  375 
II,  ii,  126 
II,  ii,  186 
HI,  ii,  366 
II,    ii,  406 

IV,  vii,  112 

III,  ii,    97 

IV,  v,  113 

IV,  vii,    85 

III,    ",    55 

I,  iii,    39 

I,    ii,  132 

I,  iv,    47 


Cannoneer             . .        .  •  V,  ii,  263 
Cannot  [with  double  nega- 
tive]          I,  ii,  158 

Capable Ill,  iv,  127 

Capitol        Ill,  ii,    97 

Card           V,  i,  130 

Card  or  calendar  .  .         . .  V,  ii,  109 

Carnal         V,  ii,  368 

Carriage I,  i,    94 

Carrion,  good  kissing       .  .  II,  ii,  1 81 

Cart             Ill,  ii,  145 

Carve          I,  iii,    20 

Ca.st  =  design         ..         ..  II,  i,  115 

Cat. ..mew             . .        . .  V,  i,  280 

Cautel         I,  iii,    15 

Caviare II,  ii,  416 

Cease  of  majesty  .  .        .  .  Ill,  iii,    15 

Censure  =  opinion             .  .  I,  iii,    69 

Censure  =  opinion             ,  .  I,  iv,    35 

Censure  =»  opinion             .  .  Ill,  ii,    25 

Censure  =  opinion             .  •  III,  ii,    82 

Centre II,  ii,  158 

Cerements I,  iv,    48 

Challenger  on  mount       .  .  IV,  vii,    28 

Chamber V,  i,  182 

Chameleons           .  .        .  .  Ill,  ii,    88 

Change  that  name            .  .  I,  ii,  163 

Character  [its  accent]      .  .  I,  iii,    59 

Character  [a  dissyllable]  .  .  IV,  vii,    52 

Chariest      . .         .-.         .  .  I,  iii,    36 

Checking IV,  vii,    63 

Cheer  =  cheerfulness         .  •  III,  ii,  154 

Cherub       IV,  iii,    47 

Chief  in  that         .  •        . .  I,  iii,    74 

Chopine II,  ii,  407 

Chorus Ill,  ii,  234 

Chough V,  ii,    88 

Circumstance  [a  collective 

noun] I,  iii,  102 

Circumstance         .  .        .  .  I,  v,  127 

Circumstance         .  .         .  .  Ill,  i,      1 

City  =  London       .„         ••  II,  ii,  316 

Clepe          I,  iv,    19 

Climature I,  i,  125 

Closely  =  secretly  .  .         .  .  Ill,  i,    29 

Closes... consequence       .  •  II,  i,    45 

Closet         II,  i,    77 

Clowns       Ill,  ii,    36 

Cock          I,  i,  150 


462 


INDEX  TO    THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


Cock  =»  God  .  .        .  . 

Cock  crows  [stage- direc- 
tion]      ♦  . 

Cockle-hat 

Coil  .  . 

Cold  maids 

Colleagued 

Collection  .  . 

Columbines 

Come  [participle  used  with 
out  •  being'] 

Come,  bird,  come  .  . 

Come  on    .  .        .  . 

Comma      •  •         •  • 

Commendable       ,  . 

Commission 

Common     .  .         ,  . 

Common  players   .  . 

Commune  =  common 

Commutual  .  , 

Compact     .  •         .  . 

Companies  [attributive  plu 
ral] 

Complete  [accent] 

Complexion  =  temperament 

Complexion 

Comply      •  , 

Comply       .  , 

Compounded 

Comrade    .  . 

Conceit  =  conception 

Conceit  =  imagination 

Conceit       . . 

Conception  [a  quibble] 

Conclusions  .  . 

Condolement         . . 

Confederate  ,  . 

Confession  .  • 

Confine      • ,        .  . 

Confines  =  confinement 

Confront     .  •         ,  » 

Conjuration  .  • 

Conjuring  .  .         .  . 

Conscience  .  • 

Consent      .  ,         .  . 

Consonancy  . , 

Contagion  .  .         .  . 

Continent   .  ,         .  . 

Continent. ..see      . . 


IV,    v,    59 

I,  h  139 
IV,  v,  25 
HI,  i,  67 
IV,  vii,  173 

I»  ",  31 
IV,  v,  9 
IV,    v,  175 

III,  ii,    23 
I,    v,  116 

V,  ii,  241 

V,  i,    42 

I,  ",    87 

III,  Hi,      3 

Ii  ii,    74 

II,  ii,  335 

IV,  v,  196 

III,  ii,  150 
I,     i,    86 

II,  ii,  14 

I,  iv,  52 

I,  iv,  27 

V,  ii,  99 

II,    »,  354 
V,    ii,  178 

IV,  ii,      6 
I,  iii,    65 

II,    ii,  530 

III,  iv,  114 

IV,  v,    43 
II,    ii,  183 

III,-  iv,  195 

I,    ii,    93 

III,  ii,  244 

IV,  vii,    96 

I,     i,  155 
II,    ii,  241 

III,  iii,    47 
V,     i,    38 

IV,  iii,    63 
V,    ii,  283 

III,  ii,  282 
II,    ii,  278 

IV,  Vii,  148 
IV,  iv,    64 

V,    ii,  no 


Contraction           .  ,        .  .  Ill,  iv,    46 

Contrary     .  .         .  .         ,  ,  III,    ii,  201 

Converse    .  .        .  ,        .  .  II,     i,    42 

Convoy I,  iii,      3 

Corrupted  currents           .  .  Ill,  iii,    57 

Coted          II,    ii,  307 

Coted  =  auotea*      .  .         .  .  II,     i,  112 

Couch        V,     i,  210 

Count  =  account    .  .         .  .  IV,  vii,    17 

Countenance  = favour     .  .  IV,    ii,    15 

Counter IV,    v,  106 

Counterfeit  presentment  .  .  Ill,  iv,    54 

Courb          Ill,  iv,  155 

Courses I,    v,    66 

Court          V,    ii,    78 

Cousin I,    ii,    64 

Covenant    .  •        .  •        .  •  I,     i,    93 

Cracks        V,    ii,  346 

Grants         V,     i,  220 

Credent  =  credible             .  .  I,  iii,    30 

Cried  in  the  top    .  .         .  .  II,    ii,  418 

Cries  on V,    ii,  351 

Crimeful IV,  vii,      7 

Croaking  raven     .  .         .  .  Ill,    ii,  243 
Crown  of  Denmark  elect- 
ive            I,    ii,  109 

Crowner V,     i,      4 

Crowner's  quest  law        ...  V,     i,    21 

Cry Ill,    ii,  265 

Cue II,    ii,  534 

Cunnings IV,  vii,  156 

Custom  not  known          .  .  IV,    v,  100 

Cut-purse    .  .        .  .         . .  Ill,  iv,    99 

Daintier V,     i,    68 

Daisy          IV,    v,  178 

Danes         IV,    v,  148 

Dangerous             .  .        .  .  Ill,  iii,      6 

Danskers II,     i,      7 

Dare  stir    . .        .  .        .  .  I,     i,  161 

Dear           Ill,    ii,    58 

Dearest I,    ii,  182 

Debt           Ill,    ii,  183 

Declining   [Sh.'s   peculiar 

use  of] II,    ii,  456 

Defeat        II,    ii,  545 

Defeated  joy         .  .        .  .  I,    ii,    10 

Defence IV,  vii,    98 

Definement           * .        . .  V,    ii,  in 


INDEX   TO    THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


463 


Deject  [-<?</ omitted] 

Delver 

Demonstrated       .  . 

Denmark    .  .         .  . 

Deprive  your  sovereignty 

Desires       .  .         .  . 

Devil 

Dexterity    .  ♦        .  t 

Diameter    •  •        •  • 

Did  go        .  •        •  ( 

Dilated 

Disappointed         .  . 

Disasters  in  the  sun 

Disclose     .  •        •  • 

Disclosed    .  .        • « 

Discourse   . .        • . 

Discourse  of  reason 

Discovery  .  .        .  . 

Diseases  desperate  grown 

Disjoint  [-«/  omitted] 

Dispatch'd  =  bereft 

Disposition  ■=  mood 

Disposition  •  • 

Disprized   . .        .  , 

Distemper' d  .  . 

Distill'd 

Distract  \-ed  omitted] 

Distrust       •  •         *  . 

Divided      .  .         .  • 

Divinity       . ,        ,  , 

Document  . .        • « 

Dog... day 

Double  comparatives 

Doubt 

Doubt 

Doubtful  [Ophelia's  death] 

Douts  —  do  out       . . 

Don  =>do  on  .  . 

Doom         . .        .  . 

Doun-a-doun-a     . . 

Down-gyved 

Dozen  or  sixteen  lines 

Dram  of  eale        . . 

Dream        .  .        .  . 

Dream  of   .  .        .  . 

Dreaded 

Dreadful 

Drift  of  circumstance 

Drink  off    .  . 


Ill, 

1, 

155  I 

v, 

1, 

13 

I, 

1, 

124 

I, 

V, 

123 

I, 

IV, 

73 

•II, 

ii, 

60 

II, 

ii, 

575 

I, 

ii, 

157 

IV, 

i, 

4* 

IV, 

V, 

37 

I, 

ii, 

38 

I, 

V, 

77 

I, 

i, 

118 

III, 

i, 

166 

v, 

i, 

275 

IV, 

iv, 

36 

I, 

ii, 

150 

II, 

ii, 

287 

IV, 

iii, 

9 

I, 

11, 

20 

I, 

V, 

75 

I, 

IV, 

55 

III, 

i, 

12 

III, 

i, 

72 

III, 

"l 

288 

I, 

ii, 

204 

IV, 

V, 

2 

III, 

ii, 

155 

IV, 

V, 

Si 

IV, 

V, 

119 

IV, 

V 

173 

v, 

i 

280 

II, 

i, 

11 

II, 

iij 

118 

IV, 

V 

,  6 

v, 

i, 

215 

IV, 

vii 

193 

IV, 

V 

.  5o 

III, 

iv 

p  5o 

IV, 

V 

,  166 

II, 

i 

,  80 

II, 

ii 

»5i5 

I, 

iv 

.  36 

I, 

n, 

21 

II, 

ii, 

10 

I, 

i, 

•  25 

I, 

11, 

207 

III, 

i, 

1 

v, 

ii, 

Z*Z 

Drown'd IV,  vii,  185 

Drunkards             •  .        .  .  I,   iv,    19 

Dull  thy  palm       .  .        .  .  I,   iii,    64 

Dumb  to  us           ..        .  .  I,     i,  171 

Dupp'd IV,    v,    51 

Duke's  name         .  .        .  .  Ill,    ii,  229 

Duty           I,    ",    39 

Duty           I,    ii,  252 

Dye  which  their  investments 

show       I,  iii,  128 


Eager         .  ,        .  .        . , 

Eager  

Ear  [corrupted  to  Deer]  .  . 
Ease,  for  mine  . .  .  . 
East  and  west 

Eastern       

Eat. ..devil , 

Eats  not  the  flats   .  .        • . 

Ecstasy , 

Ecstasy  .  .  . .  , , 
Ecstasy       , .        .  .        . . 

Ecstasy 

~ed  omitted  .  .         .  . 

-ed  omitted  .  .        .  , 

•ed  omitted  ,  .        .  . 

•ed  omitted  .  .        .  . 

•ed  omitted  .  ,        .  . 

Edge  

Effects        . .        .  . . 

Eisel  

Either  which  • .  .  • 
Either  master  the  devil  . . 
Eloquent     .  .        . .        .  . 

Embark'd 

Emulate  «=»  emulous  .  . 

Enact  

Enactures   . .        . .        , . 
Encompassment  and  drift 
Encumbered         * ,        . . 

Ends  

Engaged     . .        . ,        , . 

England 

Enginer 

Enseam'd 

Enter  in 

Entertainment 

Entreatments 

Enviously 


I,  iv,   2 
I,  v,  69 

III,  iv,  64 

V,  ii,  105 

I,  iv,  17 

I,  i,  167 

III,  iv,  161 

IV,  v,  96 
II,  i,  102 

III,  i,  160 

III,  iv,  74 

III,  iv,  138 

I,  ii,  20 

III,  i,  155 
III,  iv,  182 

III,  iv,  207 

IV,  v,  2 
III,  i,  26 

III,  iv,  129 
V,  i,264 

IV,  vii,  13 
III,  iv,  169 
III,  ii,  343 

I,  iii,   I 

I,  »,  83 

III,  ii,  96 

III,  ii,  187 

II,  i,  10 
I,  v,  174 

V,  ii,  10 
III,  iii,  69 
III,  iv,  200 
III,  iv,  206 
III,  iv,  92 

III,  iv,  95 
V,  ii,  194 
I,  iii,  122 

IV,  v,   6 


464 


INDEX  TO    THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


Escoted 

Estate         

Eternal  blazon       <> .        .  . 

Eternal       

Even  =  exactly       .  . 
Even-christen 

Evidence 

Excellent  differences       • . 
Except  my  life 
Exception  =  objection 
Excrements  . .        . . 

Expostulate  . . 

Express       . .        .  •        . . 

Extent        

Extravagant  •  •        . . 

Extremity   .  .        . .        . . 

Eyases 

Eye  =  royal  presence        . . 

Eye  ■=  royal  presence        • . 

Fail  =pall  or  fall? 

j.  air « •         ••         ••         •• 

Fair  state 

Fall  unshaken  . .  . . 
Fame,  fantasy  and  trick  of 
Famous  ape  . .        . . 

Fang'd       

Fantasy      , .        , . 

Fardels       

Fares  

Fashion 

Fat 

Favour        

Favourites  flies      • .        .  • 

Favours 

Fawning  =faining  . . 

Fay 

Fear  = fear  for  ..  ., 
Tear  =fear  for  . .  .  . 
Fear**  bugbear      •  •        .  , 

Feast  

Feature  =form      •  • 

Feelingly 

Fell  incensed  points         . , 

Fellies         

Fencing 

Fennel        « . 
Fetch  of  warrant 
Fierce  events 


II,  ",  333 

V,  i,  209 

I,  v,  21 

V,  ii,  352 

I,  ii,  218 

V,  i,  27 

III,  iii,  64 

V,  ii,  107 

II,  ii,  213 

V,  ii,  218 

III,  iv,  121 
II,  ii,  86 
II,  ii,  297 

II,  ",355 

I,  i,  154 

II,  ii,  189 

II,  ii,  327 

IV,  iv,   6 
IV,  vii,  45 


V, 

HI, 

III, 

III, 

IV, 

HI, 

HI, 

I, 

HI, 

HI, 

I, 

V, 

V, 

III, 

II, 

III, 

II, 

I, 

IV, 

III, 

v, 

III, 

v, 
v, 

II, 
II, 

iv, 

II, 
I, 


h     9 
iv,  66 

i,  152 

ii,  181 

iv,  61 

iv,  194 

iv,  203 

i,  23 

i,  76 

ii,  87 

iii,   6 

ii,  274 

i,  183 
ii,  194 
ii,  229 

",  57 
ii,  259 
iii,  51 
v,  118 
iii,  25 
",  352 

i,  159 
ii,  108 
ii,  61 
ii,  473 

i,  25 
v,  175 

i,    38 

i,  121 


Find  =fnd  out 

Fine 

Fine  It  sends 

Fine  dirt     .  . 

Fine  of  his  fines    .  . 

Fire  [dissyllable]  .  . 

Firmament  .  .         .  . 

Fishmonger 

Flourishes  [dissyllable] 

Flushing 

Folio,  faulty  repetition  in 

Fond  = foolish 

Fond  and  winnowed 

Fools  of  nature 

For  bearers 

For  and  =  besides,  except 

For  =  instead  of    .  . 

For  =  instead  of    .  . 

For,  confounded  with  sir 

For  love   [definite    article 

omitted] 
For  mine  ease 
For  to 
For  to 
For  yourself 
Fordo 
Fordoes 

Fortenbras  [derivation] 
Foul'd  [various  readings  in 

copies  of  the  same  edition] 
Four  [indefinite  number] 
Four  captains         .  .        . . 

Free  

Free  . . 

Free  

French        .  .        •  .        .  . 

Fret 

Fretted 

Friend...  gentleman 

Friending 

From  . .        .  .        .  . 

Fruit  

Function 

Fust  


Gain-giving 
Gainst 
Gait 
Galled 


III,  i,  185 

IV,  i,  25 
IV,  v,  157 

V,  i,  101 

V,  i,  100 
IV,  vii,  114 

II,  ",  293 

II,  ",  173 

II,  »,  91 

I,  ",  155 

III,  iv,  12 

I,  v,  99 

V,  ii,  183 

I,  iv,  54 

I,  »,  35 

V,  i,  90 

I,  i",  131 

V,  i,  218 

V,  i,  249 

III,  iv,  144 

V,  ii,  105 

III,  i,  167 

V,  i,  91 

II,  ii,  201 

V,  i,  209 

II,  i,  103 

I,  i,  82 

II,  i,  79 

II,  ",  159 

V,  ii,  382 

II,  »,  537 

III,  ii,  221 

IV,  iii,  60 
II,  ii,  410 

HI,  ii,  355 

II,  ii,  293 

II,  i,  52 

I,  v,  186 

III,  ii,  19 

II,  ii,  52 

II,  ii,  529 

IV,  iv,  39 

V,  ii,  203 

I,  i,  153 

I,  »,  31 

I,  ",  15$ 


INDEX   TO    THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


465 


Gape           I,    ii,  244 

Garden        I,    »,  135 

Garrisoned IV,  iv,    24 

General-gender      .  •        .  .  IV,  vii,    18 

Gentry  =  gentleness           .  .  II,    ii,    22 

Gentry  =>  gentility  .  0         .  .  V,    ii,  109 

Germane     . .        . .        . .  V,    ii,  152 

Gib  . .        Ill,  iv,  190 

Gis IV,    v,    56 

Give  you  good  night        . .  I,     i,    16 

Giving-out  = profession     . .  I,    v,  178 

Gnomic  lines         . .        . .  I,  iii,    59 

God  be  wi'  you      . .        .  •  II,     i,    69 

God  'ild IV,    v,    40 

God. ..souls            . .        . .  IV,    v,  193 
Gods  [conformity  of  Fx  to 

3  Jac.  I.]            . .        . .  I,    ii,  195 

Good  kissing  carrion        .  .  II,    ii,  181 

Good,  my  lord       . .        . .  II,     i,    70 

Goodnight,  mother           . .  Ill,  iv,  217 

Good  now  =»  J  la  bonne  heure  I,     i,    70 

Goose-quills           • .        . .  II,    ii,  331 

Go  pray I,    v,  132 

Gorge         V,     i,  177 

Grace         IV,    v,  128 

Graces        I,    ii,    63 

Gracious Ill,     i,    43 

Grained      , Ill,  iv,    90 

Grass  grows,  while  the    . .  Ill,    ii,  327 

Grating  [used  transitively]  III,     i,      3 

Green          I,  iii,  101 

Greenly IV,    v,    79 

Griefs  =*  grievances           .  •  Ill,     i,  183 

Grizzled — no  ?       •  •        . .  I,    ii,  239 

Groundlings          •  •        . .  Ill,    ii,    10 

Grunt          Ill,     i,    77 

Gules          II,    ii,  435 

Guts           . .        . ,        . .  Ill,  iv,  212 

Gyves         IV,  vii,    21 

Ha II,    ii,  550 

Habits  devil          • .        . .  Ill,  iv,  161 

Had  made  them    . .        . .  Ill,    ii,    31 

Hair... starts           .  •         ,  .  Ill,  iv,  121 

Half-penny           . .        .  .  II,    ii,  268 

Hamlet I,     i,  170 

Hamlet I,    v,  185 

Hamlet's  age        . .         . .  V,     i,  153 

Handsaw II,   ii,  361 


Handsome  than  fine         .  .  II,    ii,  424 

Hangers V,    ii,  145 

Happily I,     i,  134 

Harrows I,     i,    44 

Hast,  and  their  adoption 

tried        I,  iii,    62 

Hatchment            .  .        .  .•  IV,    v,  208 

Hath  [the  person  of  the  verb 
determined  by  the  ante- 
cedent] . .          .  .         . .  Ill,    ii,    63 

Have  after             .  .         .  .  I,  iv,    89 

Have  =find           .  .         .  .  IV,  vii,    25 

Haviour  [prefix  dropped]  I,    ii,    8 1 

Hawk         ♦ H,    ii,  361 

Head          IV,    v,    97 

Health  and  gravenesS       .  .  IV,  vii,    82 

Heaven  [used  as  a  plural]  III,  iv,  175 

Hebenon    .  .        .  .        „  •  I,    v,    62 

Hectic  [a  noun]   .  .        .  .  IV,  iii,    65 

Hedge         . .        . .        . .  IV,    v,  1x9 

Hent           Ill,  iii,    88 

Hercules  and  his  load  to  II,    ii,  345 

Herod        Ill,    ii,    13 

Hey-day Ill,  iv,    69 

Hie  et  ubique        .  .        .  .  I,    v,  156 

Hide  fox IV,    ii,    29 

Him  =  he  [by  attraction]  II,     i,    42 

His  «■  its     •  •        .  .        .  •  I,  iv,    26 

His  =  her I,    v,    90 

His  =  ils     o  •        •  •        •  •  III,  iii,    62 

His  mouth V,    ii,  359 

Ho V,     i,    22 

Ho  =  stop V,    ii,  290 

Hoar           « IV,  vii,  169 

Hobby-horse         . .        . .  Ill,    ii,  126 

Hoist  \-ed  omitted]          . .  Ill,  iv,  207 
Holds   quantity   [inflection 

in  s']        Ill,    ii,  157 

Honest  =  genuine  .  .         .  .  I,    v,  13S 

Honest =  chaste     ..         ••  III,     i, 103 

Honesty.. .beauty  . .        . .  Ill,     i,  107 

Hoodman-blind    .  •        . .  Ill,  iv,    77 

Hoops        .  .         .  .        . .  I,  iii,    63 

Hot V,    ii,    94 

Hugger-mugger    . .        . .  IV,    v,    80 

Humorous  =* fretful         .  •  II,    ii,  312 

Humour = disposition       .  .  II,    ii,    12 

Husbandry             .  .        .  .  I,  iii,    77 

Husbands,  So  you  must  take  III,    ii,  240 
E 


466 


INDEX  TO    THE  FIRST   VOLUME 


Hush 

Hyperion 
Hyperion 


I,  A  whole  one 

I'  the  sun 

Idle 

Ignorance 

Illume 

Image 

Immediate  to  our  throne 

Impart 

Impasted 

Imperious 

Imponed 

Importing  «=  importuning 

Importing  health  . . 

Importing 

Imposthume 

Impress       . .        . , 

In  the  afternoon    . . 

In  «=  into 

In  =  into 

In  =  in  the  thought  of 

In  ■»  into     •  •        •  • 

In  clouds 

In  few        . .        • . 

In  little 

In  happy  time 

In  yourself 

Incapable 

Incorporal  .  .        .  • 

Indeed        . .        • . 

Indentures 

Indict... affection  . . 

Indifferent 

Indifferently  . . 

Indirections  •  • 

Individable  •  . 

Indued 

Inexplicable  dumb-show 

Inflection  in  s  with  two  sin 

gular  nouns 
Infants 
In  form  [omission  of  the 

definite  article] . . 
Infusion  ,  .  .  . 
Inhibition  .  .  . . 
Inquiry       . .        • . 


II, 

ii,  464 

I, 

11,  140 

III, 

iv,  56 

III, 

ii,  26S 

I, 

ii,  67 

III, 

ii,  85 

III, 

i,  145 

I, 

i,  37 

III, 

ii,  22S 

I, 

ii,  109 

I, 

ii,  112 

II, 

ii,  437 

v, 

i,  201 

v, 

ii,  143 

I, 

i,  23 

IV, 

vii,  82 

v, 

ii,  21 

IV, 

iv,  27 

I, 

i,  75 

I, 

v,  60 

II, 

ii,  X12 

v, 

i,  266 

v, 

i,  282 

v, 

ii,  70 

IV, 

v,  85 

I, 

iii,  126 

II, 

ii,  349 

v, 

»,  193 

II, 

i,  71 

IV, 

vii,  180 

III, 

iv,  118 

I, 

v,  148 

v, 

i,  103 

II, 

ii,  422 

II, 

ii,  223 

III, 

»,  33 

II, 

i,  66 

II, 

ii,  381 

IV, 

vii,  181 

III, 

ii,  11 

III, 

",  157 

I, 

i»,  39 

V, 

ii,  51 

v, 

",  "5 

II, 

ii,  320 

II, 

i,   4 

nsinuation 
nstant        , . 
nstances  =»  motives 
ntents        . . 
nterpret     . .        , 


nurn'd 

3  bent 

s  not  to  stir  .  • 

t  [used  indefinitely] 

t  [singular  by  attraction] 

t  head       .  .        . . 

t  own  life  . .        . 

t  likes 


V,  ii,   59 

I,  v,   71 

III,  ii,  172 

I,  iv,   42 

III,  ii,  235 
I,  iv,    49 

IV,  iii,    44 
IV,  iv,    54 

II,  i,    12 

II,  ii,    65 

I,  ii,  216 

V,  i,  209 

II,  ii,    80 


calonsy^  suspicion         , .  IV,  v,    19 

ephthah II,  ii,  384 

'£ II,  ",478 

ig-maker Ill,  ii,  117 

ohn-a*dreams       . .        . .  II,  ii,  542 

ourneymen  had  made  them  III,  il,    31 

umP          I,  i,    65 

ump          V,  ii,  362 


Keep  . .        . . 

Keeps         • .        •  • 

Kettledrum  •  • 

Kibe  .  .        .w 

Kill...dead 

Kin. ..kind  • . 

Kindless Ill,    ii,  556 

Knave        Ill,  iv,  215 

Knavish  speech     . .        . .     IV,    ii,    22 
Knowing  [monosyllable]         V,    ii,    44 


II,     i,     8 

III,    i,     8 

I,  iv,    11 

V,     i,  133 

III,    ii,  174 

I,    n,    65 


Lady  shall  say  her  mind  . . 
Ladyship  [boy  actors,  and 

first  actress] 
Lamond 
Lap.  . 
Lapwing 
Larded 
Larded 
Law  of  writ 
Law  and  heraldry 
Lawful  espials 
Leave  =  leave  off 
Leave  =  leave  off 
Leave  =  leave  off 
Leave  =give  up 


II.  H,  3r4 

II,  ii,  406 

IV,  vii,    93 

III,  ii,  105 
V,  ii,  177 

IV,  v,  36 
V,  ii,  20 
II,  ii,  382 

I,  i,    87 

III,  i,    32 

II,  i,    51 

III,  ii,  164 

III,  iv,    66 

III,  iv,    QI 


INDEX  TO   THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


467 


Lenten       •  •  • . 

Let  him  know  so  . . 
Let  Hercules  himself 

Let  to  know  •  • 

Lethe  wharf  .  • 

Lets  me      .  •  •  • 

liberal       •  .  .  . 

Liberal  conceit  •  . 

Lies,  the  action  •  • 

Lightness   .  .  •  • 

Like  —  likely  •  • 

Like  as  =»  as  if  •  • 
List 

List  • .  .  • 

Lfttlest 
Live  behind 

Livery        . .  . . 

Loggats      . .  . . 

Long  purples  . . 

Lost,  lost    .  •  . , 

Lost  . .  • . 

Loves  [attributive  plural] 

Loves         .  •  •  • 

Loves  [passive]  .  • 

Lunacies  .  .  . . 
Luxury  =  lasciviousness 

Main 

Main  =  chief  power 
Make  . .        • . 

Makes  mouths  • . 
Man,  What  a  piece  of  work 

is 

Many  many  • . 

Margent  . .  • . 
Mart 

Market  . .  . . 
Marvellous  . . 

Master  the  devil  . . 
Masters... honour  • . 
Matin         • .        •  • 


Matter  . .  . . 
Matter  . .  . . 
Matter 

Matter  . ,  . . 
May  deliver  . . 
Mazzard  . .  . . 
Me  [ethical  dative] 
Me 


II,    ii,  306 

IV,  iv,  7 
V,    i,  279 

IV,  vi,  10 
I»  v,  33 
I,  iv,    85 

IV,  vii,  172 
V,    ii,  147 

III,  iii,  61 
II,    ii,  148 

I,  ii,  236 
I,  ii,  217 
I,     i,    98 

IV,  v,  95 
III,    ii,  161 

V,  ii,  332 

III,  iv,  164 
V,     i,    8S 

IV,  vii,  171 
I,    ii,    90 

III,     i,    99 

I,     i,  173 

I,    »,  253 

III,    ii,  191 

III,  iii,  7 
I,    v,    S3 

II,    ii,    56 

IV,  iv,  15 
I,    ii,  164 

IV,  iv,    50 

II,    ii,  295 

III,  iii,      9 

V,  ii,  149 

h  h    74 

IV,  iv,  34 
III,  ii,  288 
III,  iv,  169 

V,  ii,  235 
I,  v,    89 

II,  ii,    95 

II,  ii,  192 

III,  i,    23 

IV,  v,  169 

I,    ",  193 
V,     i,    85 

II,    ",  4H 
H,    ii,  549 


Means  of  death    . 
Means  to  the  king 
Meditation .  . 
Meed  .  .         . 

Merely       .  .        • 
Message      . .        . 
Miching  mallecho 
Mights  was  able  . 
Mightiest  Julius    • 
Milch 
Mind's  eye 
Mineral      .  . 


Minutes  •  •  •  • 
Mobled  .  .  . . 
Mock         . .        .  . 

Model        . .        . . 

Modes 

Modesties  .  .        .  • 

Modesty  =  moderation 

Moiety  competent .  . 

Moist  star 

Mole  . .        . . 

Moment's  leisure  . . 

Monster,  custom    . . 

Moon,  at  the 

Moon,  under  the  .  . 

Mope 

More  above 

More  nearer  • . 

More  rawer 

More  richer 

Moreover  that  =*  besides  that 

Most 

Mote 

Mount,  challenger  on 

Mountebank  . . 

Mouse         .  .        . , 

Mouse-trap 

Mouths  at  the  invisible  event 

Move  thus  .  . 

Mows         . .        .  • 

Much 

Muddied    .  .        .  . 

Muddy  death 

Murder,  a  brother's 

Murdering  piece   .  . 

Music         . .        .  . 

Music  vows 

Must  •  •        .  • 


I, 
I, 


IV,   v,  207 

IV,  vi,    13 

I,    v,    30 

V,    ii,  138 

I,  ii,  137 
I,    ii,    22 

III,  ii,  129 

i,    56 
i,  114 

II,  ii,  495 

I,  ii,  185 

IV,  i,    26 
I,  i,    27 

II,  ii,  480 

II,  ii,  519 

V,  ii,  50 

I,  ii,  82 

II,  ii,  274 

II,  ii,  419 

I,  i,  90 
I,  i,  118 
I,  iv,  24 

I,  iii,  133 
III,  iv,  161 

III,  iv,  209 

IV,  vii,  146 
III,  iv,  81 

II,  ii,  III 

II,  i,  125 

V,  ii,  121 

III,  ii,  291 
II,  ii,   2 

I,  v,  1  So 
I,  i,  112 

IV,  vii,  28 
IV,  vii,  142 
III,  iv,  183 

III,  ii,  227 

IV,  iv,  50 
IV,  v,i65 
II,  ",  347 

I,  i,   8 

IV,  v,  77 

IV,  vii,  185 

HI,  iii,  38 

IV,  v,  91 

II,  i,  73 
III,  i,  156 

II,  ii,  56l 


468 


INDEX  TO    THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


Must  take  your  husbands 

Mutes         

Mutine       

Mutines 

My  [used  ethically]         .  . 

Native        .  .        .  .        . . 

Native. ..manner  born 

Native  hue 

Native        

Nature's  livery  or  fortune's 

star  

Needs... come  [omission  of 

to  before  the  infinitive] 
Nemean  [accent]  .  . 
Nero 
Neutral 
Nickname 
Niggard  of  question 
Nighted 

Nobility  of  love    .  . 
Nominative  omitted 
Nominative  omitted 
Nominative  omitted 
Nortce 
Nonny 
Nor  man 
Nor... not   [double   nega 

tives] 
Nor  'tis  not  [double  nega 

tives] 
North-north-west 
Not  needs,  who  .  . 
Not  thinking  on  •  • 
Noyance  . .  . . 
Nuts,  ape  doth  .  • 
Nymph       .  .         .  • 


Oh  [Corson's  note] 

O,  fie  [to  be  omitted] 

O  give  me  leave  [distribu 

tion  of  speeches] 
Obsequious 
Occulted     •  .         .  . 
Occurrents  .  • 

Odds 
Odds 
O'er  crows  . . 


Ill, 

11, 

240 

v, 

ii, 

322 

HI, 

iv, 

-S3 

V, 

i, 

6 

II, 

ii, 

401 

I, 

ii, 

47 

I, 

IV, 

14 

III, 

i, 

84 

IV, 

vii, 

181 

I, 

iv, 

3* 

I, 

V, 

125 

I, 

§3 

III, 

377 

II, 

459 

III, 

144 

III, 

13 

I, 

68 

I, 

no 

II, 

67 

III, 

8 

IV, 

10 

IV, 

vii, 

161 

IV, 

v, 

161 

III, 

ii, 

30 

III, 

i, 

163 

III, 

ii, 

190 

II, 

ii, 

360 

III, 

ii, 

197 

III, 

ii, 

125 

III, 

iii, 

13 

IV, 

ii, 

17 

III, 

i, 

89 

I, 

V, 

80 

I, 

V, 

93 

II, 

ii, 

169 

I, 

ii, 

92 

III, 

ii, 

75 

v, 

ii, 

344 

v, 

i], 

199 

v, 

ii, 

2<;o 

v, 

ii, 

340 

O'cr-raught  •  .         4  • 

O'erreaches  . .         . . 

O'er-sized 

Q*zx-\.oo\.  — drunk 

Qi^by        

Of  [following  verbal  nouns] 
Of=by  means  of  .  . 
Of = ever 

Of  =  en „ 

Of=  about  .  .        .  .         .  • 

Oi=by        

Oi=on       .  .         .  .         . . 

Oi— with 

Of  him  that  brought  them 

Of  nothing  .  *        .  . 

Of  our  demands    .  .         .  « 

Of  so  young 

Of  them,  there  be 

Of  vantage 

Offence 

Offence       • .        . .        . . 

Omen  

Omission  from  absorption 
Omission  from  absorption 
Omission  from  absorption 
Omission  from  absorption 

On  a  roar 

On  board 

Once  =  ever  , . 

One  speech  .  . 

On  mount 

On  plots  and  errors 

On't  

Operant      •  .        .  M        ♦  . 

Opposite     .  .        .  .        .  • 

Oppression  .  .        . . 

Orchard 

Order  =  orders       .  .         .  • 

Ordnance    

Ore 

Or  else 

Or  ere        

Or  ever 

Orisons 

Ostentation  •  .        . . 

Our  circumstance  and  course 

of  thought 
Outward  habit       .  ^         . . 


HI,  i,    17 

V,  i,    76 

II,  ii,  440 

II,  i,    58 

I,  iv,    18 

I,  v,  175 

II,  i,    64 

II,  ii,    27 

II,  ii,  283 

III,  ii,    59 

IV,  ii,    12 
IV,  v,  194 

V,  i,  222 

IV,  vii,    41 

IV,  ii,    29 

III,  i,    13 

II,  ii,    11 

III,  ii,    37 

HI,  iii,    zi 

I»  v,  137 

III,  ii,  224 

I,  i,  123 

II,  ii,    58 

I,  iv,    21 

I,  v,    65 

III,  ii,  250 

V,  i,  180 

III,  i,  165 

I,  v,  121 

III,  ii,    76 

IV,  vii,    28 
V,  ii,  382 

I,  i>   55 

III,  ii,  164 

III,  ii,  210 

II,  ",  553 

I,  v,    59 

III,  i,    20 
I,  iv,      6 

IV,  i,    25 
III,  ii,  193 

I,  ",  147 

I,  ii,  183 

III,  i,    89 

IV,  v,  209 

III,  iii,    S3 

V,  ii,  181 


INDEX  TO    THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


469 


Packing Ill,  iv,  211 

Paddock Ill,  iv,  190 

Painted II,    ii,  458 

Painted Ill,     i,    53 

Paintings Ill,     i,  142 

Pajock        Ill,    ii,  272 

Pansies        IV,    v,  171 

Paragon II,    ii,  299 

Pardon        Ill,    ii,  303 

Pardon        V,    ii,  213 

Pardon  =  leave  to  depart  .  .  I,    ii,    56 

Parle           .  .         .  .         .  .  I,     i,    62 

Partisan I,     i,  140 

Patch  a  wall          .  .        .  .  V,     i,  204 

Patience     .  .        .  .        .  .  Ill,    ii,  101 

Pass             .  .        .  ,         .  .  V,    ii,    61 

Passeth        I,    ii,    85 

Passion II,    ii,  496 

Passion IV,    v,  182 

Pastors... himself  .  .        .  .  I,  iii,    47 

Pause          Ill,     i,    68 

Peace-parted         .  .        .  .  V,     i,  226 

Peak           . .        .  .        .  .  II,    ii,  541 

Pearl           .  .         .  .         .  .  V,    ii,  269 

Peasant  slave         . .        . .  II,    ii,  523 

Pelican       IV,    v,  142 

Perdy          Ill,    ii,  282 

Periwig-pated        .  .        .  .  Ill,    ii,      9 

Perpend II,   ii,  105 

Person IV,    v,    89 

Perusal       II,     i,    90 

Peruse         . .        . .        . .  IV,  vii,  137 

Pester         I,    ii,    22 

Petar          Ill,  iv,  207 

Picked        V,     i,  132 

Pickers  and  stealers         . .  Ill,  iii,  320 

Picture       Ill,  iv,    53 

Piece  of  him         . .        .  .  I,     i,    19 

Pierce         IV,    v,  147 

Pigeon-livered      . .        .  .  II,    ii,  552 

Pioner        I,    v,  163 

Pious  chansons      . .        .  .  II,    ii,  400 

Pirate          . .         .  .         . .  IV,  vi,    14 

Pith Ill,     i,    86 

Planets        I,     i,  162 

Play   something   like   the 

murder II,    ii,  565 

Please         Ill,    ii,    66 

Plurisy        IV,  vii,  118 

40 


Points  .  .         .  .         ,  . 

Politic  worms 

Politician 

Polonius  [derivation  of]  .  . 
Polonius  [character  of]    .  . 

Polonius 

Poor  wretch 

Posset         

Posy  

Pox 

Practice 

Practice 

Precurse 

Pregnant     

Pregnant     

Prescripts 

Presence  [abstract  for  the 

concrete] 
Presently  =  immediately  .  . 
Presently  =  immediately  .  . 

Pressures    

Pressure      

Prevent       

Primy  nature 

Private        

Prize  

Probation 

Process        

Prodigal 

Profanely 

Progress 

Prologue  to  my  brains 

Proof  

Proof  

Proof  and  bulwark 

Proper        

Property 

Property  of  easiness 
Prophetic  soul 
Proportions 

Proud  

Proverb       .  .         .  . 
Provincial  roses 
Puff'd  and  reckless 
Puppets  dallying 
Purgation 
Purport  [accent] 
Purposes. ..pleasure. ..fitness 

[double  meanings] 


V, 

ii,  61 

IV, 

iii,  21 

V, 

i,  76 

I, 

",  57 

II, 

ii,  86 

III, 

iii,  27 

IV, 

vii,  184 

I, 

v,  68 

III, 

ii,  142 

III, 

ii,  241 

IV, 

vii,  68 

iv, 

vii,  139 

I, 

1,  I2E 

II, 

ii,  206 

III, 

",  56 

II, 

ii,  141 

v, 

ii,  215 

II, 

ii,  169 

II, 

",  5^7 

I, 

v,  IOO 

III, 

ii,  23 

II, 

ii,  286 

I, 

iii,   7 

I, 

iii,  92 

III, 

iii,  59 

I, 

i,  156 

I, 

v,  37 

I, 

iii,  116 

III, 

ii,  28 

IV, 

iii,  31 

v, 

ii,  30 

iv, 

vii,  113 

iv, 

vii,  155 

III, 

iv,  38 

II, 

i,  114 

II, 

",  544 

V, 

i,  65 

I, 

v,  40 

I, 

",  33 

III, 

i,  71 

III, 

ii,  327 

III, 

ii,  264 

I, 

111,  49 

III, 

ii,  236 

III, 

ii,  292 

II, 

i,  82 

V,    ii,  189 


47o 


INDEX  TO    THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


Push=tor 

Put  on= tried       .  . 
Put  on  mz= suggested 
Puts 

Quaintly 

Quality  [technical  use]    .  . 

Quantity 

Quantity  [in  a  depreciatory 
sense]        .        •  •        * . 

Quarry        .  •        ■  •        .-.. 

Questionable  =  inviting  ques- 
tion 

Quiddits     .  ♦        . .        »\.« 

Quietus       

Quillets         

Quintessence         ,  • 

Quit  =  requite        .  . . 

Quoted  =2  observed , .        • . 

Rack  . .        . . 

Rashly, — And  praised  be . . 
xtat  •  •         •  •         • « 

Ravel  ^unravel 
Razed  shoes  .  •        .  • 

Reckon  =  to  scan  . .  . . 
Records  [accent]  . .        . . 

Recorders 

Recorders 

Rede  

Reechy       • . 

Region        •  . .        , » 

Relative 

Remember  [your  courtesy] 

Remiss        

Repetitions  in  F,  . .        . . 

Replication 

Report        • ,         , .        . . 

Requiem    . .        . .        . . 

Resolutes    • .        . .        . . 

Resolve  =  dissolve  .  .        . . 

Respect 

Respective  Construction  .  . 
Respective  Construction  . . 
JKest  « .        •  •        . , 

Return'd , 

Returns,  No  traveller 
Revenge,    The    croaking 
raven  doth  bellow  for  . . 


v, 

1,283 

v, 

ii,  384 

I, 

iii,  94 

III, 

i,  174 

II, 

i,  31 

II, 

ii,  333 

III, 

iv,  75 

v, 

1,258 

v, 

ii*  351 

I, 

iv,  43 

v, 

i,  94 

III, 

i,  75 

v, 

i,  94 

II, 

11,300 

v, 

ii,  68 

II, 

i,  112 

II, 

ii,  462 

v, 

ii,  6 

III, 

iv,  24 

III, 

iv,  186 

III, 

ii,  265 

II, 

ii,  120 

I, 

v,  99 

III, 

ii,  279 

III, 

ii,  329 

I, 

iii,  51 

III, 

iv,  184 

II,  ii,  465 
II,  ii,  580 
V,    ii,  104 

IV,  vii,  135 

III,  iv,    12 

IV,  ii,    12 
IV,  vii,  103 

V,     i,  225 

I,  i,    98 

I,  ii,  130 

III,  i,  68 
II,  ii,  382 

IV,  vii,    82 

V,    ii,  347 

I,    i,   91 

III,    i,    80 

III,   ii,  242 


Revisit'st  [qy.  revisits]    .  • 

Rhapsody 

Rightly  to  be  great 

Ring,  cracked  within  the 

Rivals         

Robustious  [and  parallel 
forms] 

Romage 

Rood  

Roots  itself  in  ease 

Rose,  From  the  fair  fore- 
head       . .        . . 

Rosemary   . .        . , 

Rosencrantz 

Round 

'Rouse         . .         , .        .  . 

Rouse         

Rowe,  the  authority  for 
Ophelia's  straws  and 
flowers    . .        • . 

Royal  Dane  ,  • 

Rub . 

Rue 

Running  it  thus     . .        . . 

Sables 

Safety  and  allowance       • 

Safety  and  health 

Safety  lies  in  fear  . . 

call  1  .  .         • «         ,o 

Saint  Charity         .  . 

Saint  Patrick 

Saint  Valentine's  day       . , 

Sallets         

Sanctuarize  . .        .  , 

Satyr  .  .        •  •        . . 

Savageness  .  • 

Saws  ,  .        • « 

S'blood 

Scarf 'd       , ,         .  •         .  « 

Scholar       

Scholar's,  soldier's  • . 

Sconce        . .        • «        ■ 
Scrimers      .  .        • . 
Scruple       . ,        • . 
Sea-gown    . .        , , 
Sea  of  troubles      .  •        . . 
Season  of  the  year  when 
the  action  took  place    . . 


I,  »v,   S3 

III,  iv,    48 

IV,  iv,    53 
II,  ii,  409 

I,     i,    13 

III,  ii,     8 

I,  i,  107 

III,  iv,    14 

I,  v,    33 

III,  iv,    42 

IV,  v,  170 

II,  ii,      I 
II,    ",  138 

I,    ii,  127 
I,  iv,     8 


IV,    v,  149 

I,  iv,  45 
HI,  i,  65 
IV,    v,  176 

I,  iii,  109 

III,  ii,  122 

II,  ii,    79 
I,  iii,    21 

I,  i",    43 
V,    ii,  114 

IV,  v,    56 
I,    v,  136 

IV,    v,    46 

II,    ii,  420 

IV,  vii,  128 

I,    ii,  140 

II,     i,    34 
I,    v,  100 

II,  ",  349 

V,  i,    13 

I,  i,    42 

III,  i,  151 
V,  i,    96 

IV,  vii,  1 01 
IV,  iv,    40 

V,  ii,  13 
HI,     i,    59 

I,     1,158 


INDEX  TO    THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


471 


Season  this  in  thee 

Season  jtmr  admiration 

Seasons  him 

Secure 

See  [stage-directions] 

Seen 

Select  and  generous 

Sends  [ellipsis  of  nomina 

tive] 
Sense... motion 
Sense,  the  daintier 
Sensible  [active  and  passive 

adjectives]  .  . 

Set  m  to  estimate  .  . 
Shall  [for  will]  .  . 
Share  [in  the  profits  of  the 

theatre] 
She  were  [pronounced  as 

one  syllable] 
Shoes 
Should  [denoting  a  state 

ment  not  made  by  the 

speaker] 
Should  [for  would] 
Should. ..would 
Shouldst  [for  wouldsf\     . 
Shouldst    have    been  ...to 

have  decked 
Shows         .  . 
Silence  me  e'en  here 
oir    j «        •  •        •  • 
Sirrah         • .        . , 
Sit  we        •  •       •  • 

Sith 

Sith .  -        • .        ■  , 

Sith 

Slander,  Whose  whisper 
Sledded  Polacks    .  . 
Sleep, — No  more  . . 
Slings  •  •  •  • 

So    [in    conditional    sen 

tences] 
So.. .As 
So  [emphatic] 
So...to 
So  be  it   [distribution  of 

speeches]  . , 

Softly  =>  slowly 
Soldiers  [pronunciation] 


I, 

iii,  81 

I, 

ii,  192 

III, 

ii,  199 

I, 

V,  01 

III, 

i,  161 

I, 

v,  153 

I, 

iii,  74 

II, 

ii,  67 

III, 

iv,  71 

v, 

i,  68 

I, 

i,  57 

IV, 

iii,  61 

II, 

i,   3 

III, 

ii,  267 

IV, 

v,  14 

I, 

ii,  147 

I, 

iv,  64 

II, 

ii,  201 

IV, 

vii,  120 

I, 

v,  32 

v, 

1,232 

I, 

ii,  82 

III, 

iv,   4 

v, 

ii,   1 

v, 

i,  in 

I, 

h   33 

II, 

ii,   6 

IV, 

iv,  45 

IV, 

i,  40 

I, 

i,  63 

III, 

i,  60 

III, 

i,  58 

I, 

iii,  89 

II, 

i,  82 

III, 

ii,  $20 

v, 

ii,  16 

I, 

v,  114 

IV, 

iv,  8 

I, 

v,  141 

Sole  son 
Solicited 

Something  settled  . . 
Sovereignty  of  reason 
Speak... break  [rhymes]  . 
Spendthrift  sigh     .  . 
Spirits  [pronunciation]     . 
Spring  that  turneth  wood 
Stand  me  =  it  is  imperative 

on  me      .  .         .  .  • 

Star,  Out  of  thy    . . 
State  [Wilson's  note] 

Statists        

Stay'd  [pronunciation]    . 
Steward,  the  false . .        •  . 
Stick  fiery  off        ,'. 
Still  =  always         .  ,         • . 
Still  =s  always 

Stithy  .        . .        . , 

Stomach  =»  courage  „ , 

Stoup  .  a        ,  . 

Straight  [Ophelia's  grave] 

Stuck  

Subject       . .        . .        . . 

Such  a  one  . .        . . 

Suffix  indicating  the  agent 
Sun  .  . 

Sun,  too  much  i*  the        •  • 
Suppliance  „ .        •  • 

Sweet  lord  [common  mode 

of  address]        , .        .  . 
Switzers      . .        . .        . . 

Sword  [swearing  by  it]   ,  , 

1  aoies        •  •        0  >        (j « 

Takes 

Tardy  of     . . 

Tarre  • , 

Temple       • .        , .        •  • 

Tenable      •  •        •  •        . . 

Tender  yourself    • .        • . 

Tender        

Tent  . ,        , .        •  • 

Termagant .  •        • .        » • 
Tha.t=>  tfougA  that  . . 

That— such  .,         ., 

ThzX=*such  .  •, 

That  [redundant]  . 

That  [so  omitted  before  it] 


III,  iii,    77 

V,  ii,  345 

III,  i,  169 

I,  iv,    73 

III,  ii,  176 

IV,  vii,  128 

I,  i,  133 

IV,  vii,    20 

V,  ii,    63 

II,  ii,  140 

I,  i,  "3 

V,  ii,    33 

II,  i,    91 

IV,  v,  168 

V,  ii,  244 

I,  i,  122 

IV,  vii,  117 

III,  ii,  79 
I,  i,  300 

V,  i,  58 

V,  i,     4 

IV,  vii,  162 
I,  i,    72 

V,  i,    Si 

I,  ii,  172 

II,  ",  183 

I,  ii,    67 

I,  iii,     9 

V,  ii,   90 

IV,  v,   93 

ly  v,  X47 

I,  v,  107 

I,  1,163 

III,  ii,   23 

II,  «,  339 

I,  iii,    12 

I,  ii,  247 

I,  iii,  107 

IV,  iii,   40 

II,  "p  573 

III,  ii,  13 
I,  ii,  2 
I,  ii,  171 
I,  v,    48 

II,  ii,    13 

IV,  v,  248 


47 2                   INDEX  TO    THE 

ThsLt-sotiat       .  .        .  .  IV,  vii,  148 

That  [following  when\    , .  IV,  vii,  160 

That            ..        .  .  V,     i,    75 

That            . .        .  .        . .  V,     i,  206 

That  you  know      .  .        . .  I,    ii,    17 

The  [unemphatic,  accented 

monosyllable]    . .        .  .  I,  iii,    Sg 

The  answer            . .        . .  V,    ii,  162 

The  body  is  with  the  king  IV,    ii,.    26 

The  general           . .        . .  II,    ii,  416 

The  time  =  the  present  age  III,     i,  114 

The  time V,    ii,  181 

The  which  one      .  .        . ,  III,    ii,    25 

Thereabout  [a  noun]       .  .  II,    ii,  425 

There  be,  an  if      e .        .  .  I,    v,  177 

There's  letters       . .        e .  Ill,  iv,  202 

There's  tricks        . .        . .  IV,    v,      5 

These  three  years  . .        . .  V,     i,  131 

Thews         I,  iii,    12 

They  [nominative  repeated]  III,  iv,  204 
Think'st  thee         .  .        .  .  V,   ii,    63 
This   [his    and   this    con- 
founded]           .  .        ,  0  III,  iv,    55 
This  is   [contracted  to   a 

monosyllable]    .  .         .  .  IV,    v,    72 

Those  [omission  of  relative]  IV,  vii,  132 

Thou           . .        . .        , .  Ill,  iv,  156 

Thou  sayst V,     i,    25 

Though    none    else   near 
[omission  of  the  predi- 
cate verb]           .  .        •  •  I,  iii,    44 
Thought      .  ,        .  •        ,  •  I,     i,    67 

Thought Ill,     i,    85 

Thought o  IV,    v,    12 

Thought IV,    v,  182 

Three  and  twenty  years  . .  V,     i,  163 

Three  branches     . .        . .  V,     i,    1 1 

Thy  soul Ill,    ii,    74 

Tickle  o'  the  sere  . .        •  •  II,   ii,  313 

Till I,    ii,  105 

Time,  whips  and  scorns  of  III,    i,    70 

-tion  [pronunciation]      • .  II,    ii,      6 

Time  and  passion  . .        . .  Ill,  iv,  107 

To  a  satyr I,    ii,  140 

To  be  demanded   [indef- 
inite use  of  the  infinitive]  IV,   ii,    12 
To  be  or  not  to  be           . .  Ill,     i,    56 
To  do  =  ado           •  •        • .  II,    ii,  338 
To  do  [infinitive  as  a  noun]  III,    ii,  164 


FIRST   VOLUME 

To  do  [infinitive  active  in- 
stead of  infinitive  passive] 

To  fast  in  fires 

To  my  most  painted 

To  note  That  you  know  .  . 

To.. .split  [mnemonic  lines] 

To  take  [indefinite  infini- 
tive]         

To  those  of  mine 

To  wife 

Toils  [transitive  and  intran- 
sitive verbs] 

Too  =  much  , 

Too  too       . .        , 

Top  of  question    . 

Touch         . .        . 

Touch'd  =  tainted . 

Toward  =  at  hand 

Toward  =  at  hand 

Toy •  =  caprice 

Toy  =  caprice         .  . 

To  withdraw  with  you 

Transformation  [pronuncia 
tion  of  -tion"]     .  . 

Travel  [technical]  . 

Trick  ^peculiarity ,  knack 

Trick  =  peculiarity ,  knack 

Tropically 

True-penny 

Truster  [suffix    indicating 
agent]     . .        . . 

Tune 


i  urn  i  uric  . . 
Twelve  for  nine 
Tyrannically 


Unaneled    •  •  •  • 

Unbated      , .  • . 

Uncharge    • .  • . 

Uneffectual  fire  .  • 

Ungartered  •  • 

Unhouseled  •  • 

Unimproved  •  • 

Union          • ,  •  • 

Union         •  •  •  • 

Unmannerly  • . 

Unprevailing  *  • 

Unsmirch'd  • 

Upon  your  hour  , 


IV,  iv,  44 
I,    v,    11 

HI,  i,  52 
I,    v,  178 

IV,    v,    17 

III,  iii,  85 
I,    v,    52 

I,    ii,    14 

I,     i,    72 

IV,  vii,  119 
I,    ii,  129 

II,    ii,  328 

V,    ii,  273 

IV,    v,  20  z 

It    i»    77 

V,  ii,  352 
I,  iii,  6 
I,  iv,    75 

III,  ii,  329 

II,    ii,      6 
II,    ii,  318 

IV,  vii,  189 
V,    i,    86 

III,  ii,  227 
I,    v,  150 

I,  ii,  172 

III,  i,  158 

III,  ii,  264 
V,  ii,  160 
II,  ii,  328 

I,    v,    77 

IV,  vii,  139 
IV,  vii,    68 

I,  v,    90 

II,  i,    80 

I*  v,    77 

I,  i,    96 

V,  ii,  259 

V,  ii,  313 

HI,  ",333 

I,  ii,  107 

IV,  v,  115 

I»  h     6 


INDEX  TO   THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


473 


Upshot 
Up-spring   .  . 
Usurp'st  [zeugma] 


Valanced 

Variation  in  copies  of  the 

same  edition 
Vast  =  emptiness     .  . 
Vice 

Vienna        .  .         .  . 
Villainies 
Violence  ...  destroy    [  verb 

plural  by  attraction] 
Virtue         .  . 
Virtue  [noun  absolute] 
Vulgar  =  common  .  . 


Wag 

Wandering  stars  =>j>lanels 

Wann'd 

Warrant      .  .        .  . 

Warrantise 

Wash 

Wassail 

Water-fly 

We  fools  of  nature 

Welcome 

Welcome  [absorption] 

Wheel 

When  that 

Where  [dissyllable] 

Wherefore  [shifting  accen 

Whether  [monosyllable] 

Which  time  [omission 

preposition]       .  . 
Who 
Who? 

Who  [inflection]  .  . 
Wicked  [faulty  repetitions 

in  Folio] 
Will... were   [irregular  se 

quence  of  tenses] 
Will  [used  for  shall] 
Wince,  let  the  galled  jade 
Wind,  to  recover  the 
Windlasses . .        , . 


V,  ii,  371 
I,  iv,  9 
I,     i,    46 

II,    ii,  404 

II,  h    79 

I,  ii,  198 

III,  iv,    98 

III,  ii,  228 

V,  ii,    29 

III,    ii,  186 

I,  iii,  16 

I,    v,  S3 

I,  iii,  61 

V,  1,255 

V,  i,  244 

II,  ii,  527 

I,  ii,  242 

V,  i,  215 

III,  ii,  146 
I,  iv,      9 

V,  ii,    83 

I,  iv,    54 

I,  v,  165 

II,  ii,    58 

IV,  v,  167 
V,  i,  275 

I,    ii,  185 

I,  iv,    57 

II,    ii,    17 

IV,  vii,  179 

I,    ii,  104 

I,    ii,  190 

II,    ii,  193 

III,  iv,    12 

II,  ii,  156 

V,  ii,  169 

III,  ii,  232 

III,  ii,  330 

II,  i,    65 


Wit  =  knowledge    .  .        .  .  II,  ii,    90 

With           I,  ii,  151 

With  =  by IV,  vii,    32 

With  blood  [absorption]  .  .  I,  v,    65 

Withal         II,  ii,  213 

Within  's  two  hours          .  .  Ill,  ii,  119 

Wittenberg            .  .        .  .  I,  ii,  113 

Woe            I,  ii,     4 

Woe            V,  i,  234 

Wont          I,  iv,      6 

Woodcock             .  .        .  .  V,  ii,  293 

Woodcocks            .  .         .  .  I,  iii,  115 

Woo't         V,  i,  263 

Word,  Now  to  my            .  ,  I,  v,  1 10 
Word  [prolonged  in  scan- 
sion]          Ill,  iv,  180 

Word,  props  of  every       .  .  IV,  v,  101 

World         IV,  v,  133 

Worms        IV,  iii,    21 

Worm's,  my  Lady .  .         .  .  V,  i,    84 
Worser  [double  compara- 
tive]          Ill,  iv,  157 

Would  =  requires  to          .  .  Ill,  iii,    75 

Would  your  gracious  figure  III,  iv,  104 

Wreck         II,  i,  1 13 

Wretch    [term  of  endear- 
ment]        II,  »,  167 

Writ... liberty         .  .         .  .  II,  ii,  382 

Writ  in  [absorption]         ,  .  Ill,  ii,  250 

Yaughan     .  .        . .        , „  V,  i,    58 

Yeoman's  service  .  .        .  ,  V,  i,    36 

Yesty          V,  ii,  181 

Yet  but  yaw          .  .        . .  V  ii,  1 13 

Yorick        .  .         .  .        ,  .  V,  i,  170 

You... thou             •  •        .  .  I,  ii,    42 

You  [ethical  dative]        .  .  V,  i,  157 

Your  [ethically]    .  .        «,  .  Ill,  ii,      3 

Your  [ethically]    .  .         .  .  IV,  iii,    21 

Your  cause            0  .        .  .  Ill,  ii,  321 
Your  only  [instead  of  only 

your] Ill,  ii,  1 17 

Your  philosophy   .  .        .  .  I,  v,  167 

Your  sovereignty  of  reason  I,  iv,    73 

You  were  better  have      .  .  II,  ii,  5°3 


40 


■* 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


«1 


