" Pietra 


ee 
weed ere 


ve ek wings 

ev leresedn eae Samay 
be aot iter * telisen. Pi 

Vedic met 9a Paid Pe ry he 
Fae «Washi 


ays 
+1 tee eta 


sept 0 


LIBRAKY 31. MAx1 S COLLEGE 


l COLLEGE } 


\s \ 
VARIORUM ‘EDITION seni 


A NEW 


OF 


SHAKESPEARE 


EDITED BY 
HORACE HOWARD BURNESS, PHD. VILLD: 1H. D. 


HONORARY MEMBER OF THE ‘ DEUTSCHE SHAKESPEARE-GESELLSCHAFT ’ OF WEIMAR 


/7S4-6 


/, ¥ 
THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 


. ne 


_ 


(THIRTEENTH EDITION) 


WITHDRAWN 


PHILADELPHIA 
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 


LIBRARY ST. MARY S COLLEGE 


Copyright, 1888, by H. H. Furness 


Copyright, 1916, by H. H. FURNESS, JR, 


ee 


PRINTED IN UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


MAY39 X 


IN MEMORIAM 


nate 


PREFACE 


As the volumes of this Edition are severally independent, it 
has been considered necessary hitherto to repeat in the Preface 
an explanation of its plan and scope. In the present volume, 
however, all needful information in this regard has been rele- 
gated into the Appendix, where it will be found on pp. 466 
é¢t Seq. 

Experience has deepened the conviction that for an Edition 
like the present the befitting Text is that of the First Fotio. 
Accordingly, that Text has been again adopted for The Mer- 
chant of Venice. 

To read and to enjoy SHAKESPEARE, any text, from the S//- 
ling Edition upwards, will suffice. In the familiar passages of 
beauty or of wisdom we find no difficulties; the text is every- 
where adequately the same. 

But to study SHAKESPEARE as we would a Greek Poet, dwell- 
ing on every line and syllable, weighing every phrase and every 
word, then we need a text as near as may be, in point of time 
at least, to the author’s hand. With certain qualifications, such 
a text is that of the First Folio. 

Topics, hitherto discussed in these Prefaces, are now to be 
found set forth in the Appendix. 

It is again my high privilege to express my thanks to my 
Father, the Rev. Dr Furness, for the translation of many of 


the selections from the German. 
Mav, 1888, 


WY @& mv 
ie fh 2% Stee 
2) 9 CTE 


COLLEGE 


2 


} 
; 
ns 


= keows 
“45 : 


—_ 
a dv VU 


The Actors Names. 


The Duke of Venice. 

Morochus, a Prince, and a Sutor to Portia. 

The Prince of Aragon, Sutor alfo to Portia. 

Baffanio, an Italian Lord, Sutor likewife to Portia. 5 
Anthonto, a Merchant of Venice. 


Salarino, 

Salanio, Gentlemen of Venice, and Compa- 
Gratiano, nions with Baffanio. 

Loren/fo, 10 


Shylock, the rich Iew, and Father of Jefica. 


1, First given in Q,. 7. Salarino] Solarino. Rowe. 
3- Morochius, a Moorish Prince. Rowe. 10. Lorenzo. Rowe. 


11. Shylock] STEEVENS: Our author, as Dr Farmer infornis me, took this name 
from an old pamphlet, entitled ‘Caleb SAz//ocke his prophecie, or tiie Jewes Prediction.’ 
London, printed for T. P. (Thomas Pavier), no date. MALONE: {f Shakespeare took 
the name of Sy/ock from the pamphlet mentioned by Dr Farmer, it certainly was not 
printed by Thomas Pavier, to whom Steevens has ascribed it, for that prototype of Curl 
had not commenced a bookseller before 1598. The pamphlet in question, which was 
not in Dr Farmer’s collection (nor do I know where it is to be found), may have been 
printed by Thomas Purfoot. BoswELL: Mr Bindley had a copy of this pamphlet, the 
date of which was 1607. ‘Therefore,’ says Knight, who quotes this note of Boswell, 
‘Farmer’s theory is worthless.’ HUNTER (Mew Jilust. i, 307): We collect that Shy- 
lock was a Levantine Jew from the name: Scza/ac, which is doubtless the same name 
in a different orthography, being the name of a Maronite of Mount Libanus, who was 
living in 1614. See Account of the MSS. in the Library of France, 1782, p. 23. For 
this very valuable reference I am indebted to some pencil notes on this play by the late 
Mr F. G. Waldron. HaLutweE.. (JV. & Qu. Ist Ser. vol. i, p. 221): Upton, in 1748, 
remarked that Scialac was the generic name, and Shylock merely a corruption. It by 
no means follows that 1607 is the date of the first edition of Caleb Shillocke, merely 
because Boswell saw a copy bearing that date. M. A. LOWER (WV. & Qu. Ist Ser. 
vol. i, p. 184): Was not Shylock, a proper name among the Jews, derived from the 
designation employed by the patriarch Jacob in predicting the advent of the Messiah,— 
‘until Shz/oh come’—(Gen. xlix, 10)? The difference between Shzloach and Shylock 
is very trivial indeed. But, after all, Shylock may have been a family name familiar 
to the great dramatist. In all my researches on the subject of English Surnames, 
however, I have but once met with it as a generic distinction, In the Battel Adbdev 


Deeds ocenxs a power of attorney to Richard Shylok of Hoo, co. Sussex. The date 
ix 


x THE ACTORS NAMES 


Tuball, a lew, Shilocks Friend. 12 
Portia, the rich Italian Lady. 


13. the... Lady] an Heiress of great Quality and Fortune. Rowe. an heiress, Johns. 


a rich Heiress. Cap. 
LAS ew ee 


of this document is 4 July, 1435. STAUNTON: This may have been an Italian name, 
Scialocca, the change of which into Shylock was natural. At all events, it was a name 
current among the Jews, for, at the end of an extremely rare tract, called ‘A Jewes 
Prophesy, or Newes from Rome of two mightie Armies, as well footemen as horsmen,’ 
1607, is a piece entitled: ‘Caleb Shilock his prophesie for the yeere 1607,’ which 
begins as follows :—‘ Be it knowne unto all men, that in the yeare 1607, when as the 
moone is in the watrye signe, the world is like to bee in great danger; for a learned 
Jew named Caleb Shilock doth write that, in the foresaid yeere, the sun shall be cov- 
ered with the dragon in the morning, from five of the clocke untill nine and will 
appeare like fire,’ &c. Although pretending to be a prophecy for the year 1607, this 
edition was a reprint of a much older copy, the date of the predicted event being 
altered to give interest to the publication? CLARENDON: In Pepys’s Collection of Bal- 
lads, vol. i, p. 38, is one with the title ‘ Calebbe Shillocke, his Prophesie: or the lewes 
Prediction. To the tune of Bragandarie.’? The second verse begins, ‘ And first, within 
this present yeere, Beeing séxteene hundreth seau’n.’ The existence of the name in 
the title of this ballad is sufficient to show that it was known in Shakespeare’s time. 
CassEL (Literatur u. Symbolik, 1884, p. 384): Ock is a termination found in many 
old languages, notably in the Irish, and, as it were, represents the Latin ws. Shy is 
the Hebrew name Schau/,; therefore, Saulus. 

12. Tuball] Kary ELze (LZssays, p. 383): Tubal and Chus are taken from Genesis, 
x, 2 and 6, without change. 

13. Portia] I have seen it somewhere stated, though I cannot now remember 
where or by whom, that Julius Czesar and the characters which were grouped around 
him seem to have made a deep impression on the mind of Shakespeare, and that 
there is scarcely one of his plays wherein an allusion to them may not be found. The 
choice of this present name may be cited in illustration of the truth of this, together 
with Bassanio’s direct allusion to Brutus’s Portia, in I, i, 176.—Eb. 

TH. ELzE (Sh. Jahrbuch, xiii, 145): We shall hardly be contradicted when we 
say that every man of the North, especially a German, believes the ideal of Southern 
female beauty to be a slender lovely figure, an oval face, a Grecian nose, glowing dark 
eyes, and hair of glossy jet, flowing down over a haughty, Junonian neck, It would 
never occur to any poet north of the Alps in choosing an Italian heroine to represent 
her otherwise than with jet black hair, nor could any reader otherwise imagine a Fior- 
mona ora Bianca Capello, In the most striking opposition to this almost universal 
idea, Shakespeare describes the Venetian Portia as a blonde; ‘her sunny locks Hang 
on her temples like a golden fleece.’ Is not this ‘die blonde Englanderin,’ or at least 
a blonde maiden of the North? But before we charge Shakespeare’s poetic fancy 
with this carelessness, we must first look around somewhat more closely in Venice, 
The great masters of the Venetian school in the 16th Century: Titian, Giorgione, 
Palma Vecchio, Paris Bordone, and others gave to their Ideal of female beauty red- 
golden hair. Like these great Venetian painters, the great English Dramatist arrays 
the ideal creature of his fancy, not only with all the wealth of intellectual and worldly 


4 B : : : d 
gifts and graces, but also with an enchanting ornament rarely seen in Venice, sunny 


THE ACTORS NAMES xi 


Nerriffa, her wayting-Gentlewoman. 
leffica, Daughter to Shylock. 15 
Gobéo, an old man, father to Lancelot. 


14. Nenssa, Confident to Portia. Rowe. waiting-maid to Portia. Johns, her woman. 
Cap. 


blonde or red-golden hair. Is this noteworthy agreement of Shakespeare with Titian 
and Paul Veronese a happy accident, or does it not rest upon a deeper, more exact 
knowledge of the people of Venice and of their art? This peculiar appearance of 
Portia with red-golden or sunny blonde hair, Shakespeare, with deep knowledge, 
placed in contrast to the black locks of her waiting-gentlewoman, Nerissa. That 
Nerissa has black hair and is of the generally accepted type of female beauty in the 
South, the Poet has indicated in the finest way, which has not perhaps been generally 
detected—to wit, by her name. Verissa is simply the Italian Mericcia (from nero), 
and thereby signifies ‘the black-haired.’ In the same way the name JVerissa is the 
most excellent opposite to the name Biondello (that is, the fair-haired youth) in Zhe 
Taming of the Shrew, which C. A. Brown has mentioned as a name chosen by Shake- 
speare with full knowledge of the Italian tongue. RusKIN (Maunera Pulveris, p. 89): 
Shakespeare would certainly never have chosen this name had he been forced to retain 
the Roman spelling. Like Perdita, ‘lost lady,’ or Cordelia, ‘heart lady,’ Portia is 
‘fortune’ lady. The two great relative groups of words, Fortuna, fero, and fors— 
Portio, porto, and pars (with the lateral branch, op-portune, im-portune, opportunity, 
&c.), are of deep and intricate significance; their various senses of bringing, abstract- 
ing, and sustaining being all centralized by the wheel (which bears and moves at 
once), or still better, the ball (spera), of Fortune. 

14. HUNTER (WVew J//ust. i, 309): Nerissa, or, as Shakespeare wrote the name, 
Nerrissa, is to be regarded not as a waiting-maid in the modern sense of the term, but 
as a young lady of birth and rank, such persons being often found, in the age of Shake- 
speare, attending on ladies of superior distinction and fortune; and therefore a suitable 
match for Gratiano, the friend of Bassanio. Thus Magdalene Dacre, an account of 
whose life was written by Richard Smith, the bishop of Chalcedon, a daughter of Lord 
Dacre of the North, waited on the old Countess of Bedford; and there are sixteen 
quarterings over the tomb of Catharine Clippesby, an attendant on the Countess of 
Shrewsbury of the time. That /Verréssa, as Shakespeare wrote, is the better reading 
a nice ear will perceive in this line, as well as in many others; ‘ Nerissa [Nerrissa] 
and the rest stand all aloof.’—III, ii. There are also passages in which Anthonto, as 
Shakespeare appears to have written, pleases the ear better than Amfonio, which the 
modern editors have chosen to substitute. These, it may be said, are trifling remarks; 
but poetry is a luxury, and therefore should be as pure and perfect as may be; nor can 
there be any reason why we should accept at the hands of an editor a text which is 
even in a slight degree worse than that which the author himself has bequeathed to us. 

15. lessica] KARL E1ze (Zssays, p. 282): To all appearance this is borrowed 
from Genesis, xi, 29, where Zscah of King James’s translation appears in earlier edi- 
tions of the Bible, in 1549 and 1551, as Jesca. In the Hebrew it is /iscah, signifying 
a spy, or looker-out. Has it a reference to Shylock’s warning to his daughter not to 
‘thrust her head into the public street to gaze on Christian fools’? 

16. Gobbo] STEEVENS: It may be inferred from the name nf Gobbo, that Shakespeare 
designed this character to be represented with a hump back £ELZE (Zssays, p. 281) 


xii THE ACTORS NAMES 


Lancelot Gobbo the Clowne. 17 
Stephano, a Meffenger. 
Iaylor, and Attendants. 


18. The following have been added: 19. Rowe added: Senators of Venice 
Leonardo, servant to Bassanio. Bal- Officers, Servants to Portia. 
thazar, servant to Portia. Theob. et seq. Rowe also added: Scene partly at 
Salerio, a messenger from Venice. Steev. Venice, and partly at Belmont, the Seat 


Coll. Wh. i, Rife, (a friend to Antonio of Portia upon the Continent. 
and Bassanio. Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii). 


This name reminds us vividly of the Gobbo di Rialto, a stone figure which serves as a 
supporter to the granite pillar, of about a man’s height, from which the laws of the 
Republic were proclaimed. This figure, as far as we know, is not mentioned by 
Coryat. The name of Gobbo is indeed of frequent occurrence in Italian history, and 
exists even now-a-days as a family name in Venice. [In BELL’s Shakespeare's Puch 
(n, 47, 1864) are to be found fanciful derivations of the names of Shylock and An 
thonio, as well as several Notes on certain words and phrases in the Play.—ED. ] 


The Merchant of Venice. 


Actus primus. [Scene I] 


Enter Anthonio, Salarino, and Salanio. 


Anthonio. 
N footh I know not why I am fo fad, 5 


3 G a It wearies me : you fay it wearies you; 
} 
) 


| But how I caught it, found it, or came by it, 
What ftuffe ’tis made of, whereof it is borne, 


1. The...Venice] The Comicall His- 3. Salarino] Salaryno Q.Q,. Solarino 
tory of...Venice. Qq. F,F,, Rowe+. 
2. Actus primus.] Om. Qq. Salanio] Solanio Cap. Knt. 
[Scene I. Rowe et seq. 8. of] of Q,- 
[A Street in Venice. Theob. et seq. borne] born FF. 
(subs.). 


Actus primus] In the Qq there are no divisions into either Acts or Scenes. In the 
Ff the Acts alone are indicated. For the purposes of citation and reference I have fol- 
lowed the division into Scenes most commonly adopted, and have indicated by brackets 
that these divisions are not in the Folio. At the beginning of each Scene throughout 
the play EccLzs notes what, in his judgment, is the sequence of time. The discussion 
of ‘The Duration of the Action’ will be found in the Appendix, p. 332. In CHARLES 
KEan’s fine revival of this play at the Princess’s Theatre in 1858, the curtain draws 
up on a scene laid in Saint Mark’s Place, with various groups of Nobles, Citizens, 
Merchants, Foreigners, Water-Carriers, Flower-Girls, &c., passing and repassing, while 
a Procession of the Doge in state crosses the Square. ‘This Procession was copied 
from a print in the British Museum by Josse Amman, who died in 1591.’—Ep. 

Enter... .] A trifling difficulty in nomenclature meets us on the threshold. Anthonio 
enters with two friends, whose names are so nearly the same that before fifty lines are 
passed the compositors have fallen into a confusion over them, from which they do 
not recover throughout the play. Inthe Folios and Quartos these names appear as 
Salaryno, Salerino, Slarino, Solarino, Salerio, Salanio, Salino, and Solanio, with ab- 
breviations at the beginning of the speeches correspondingly variable. Indeed, so great 
does the puzzle become that STEEVENS added ‘ Sa/erio, a messenger from Venice,’ as a 
third character in the Dramatis Persone, and has been followed therein by many an 
editor, even down to the conservative Cambridge Edition and to Rolfe. CAPELL was 
the first to attempt to solve the difficulty, and, in the belief that there were but two 


characters, he adopted Salerino as the name of one, and Solanio as the name of the 
5 


\ 


2 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. f. 


[Enter Anthonio, Salarino, and Salanio. ] 

other, ‘induc’d’ thereto, as he said, ‘by convenience (for, in themselves, they’re indif- 
ferent).’ In III, ii, 230, where in F, it is three times printed Sa/erio, Capell adopts 
this spelling as an abridged form of Salerino, which he gives in full in the stage-direc- 
tion, KNIGHT approves of the distinction made by Capell, and probably thought that 
he adopted it, but he did not, for he changed Sa/erino into Salarino. Capell’s abbre- 
viations are So/, anc Sa/. Knight’s are Solan. and Salar. Knight, however, does not 
agree with Capell that, as to the characters ‘in themselves, they’re indifferent ;’ on the 
contrary, he is of the opinion that ‘ Sa/arino is decidedly meant for the liveliest and 
the greatest talker;’ wherein VERPLANCK agrees, and urges that ‘this discrimination 
of character, even in subordinate parts, slight as it is, is in Shakespeare’s manner, and is 
lost by the more equal alternation of the dialogue given by Steevens.’ Dycr, STAUN- 
TON, and De.ius have followed Knight. The discussion over Steevens’s third cha- 
racter, Sa/erio, will come more appropriately at his entrance in ITI, ii, 230.—Ep. 

5. It is not easy to see why Anthonio is represented at the outset as in this melancholy 
mood. It is not his wonted mood, and yet he scarcely recovers from it throughout the 
play. It is so unusual that he does not even recognize himself; nay, from being the 
shrewd, long-headed merchant, the ‘royal merchant,’ he had become a very ‘ Want- 
wit.’ Mrs GRIFFITH (p. 51) would have it that these are ‘the forebodings or presenti- 
ments of evil, natural to the human mind,’ which can be no more accounted for than 
we can account for ‘prophetic dreams.’ ULRIct thinks that it is the contrast between 
the real and the ideal, and the power of deceptive appearances, which have robbed 
Anthonio of his gayety; he feels that ‘his foreboding mind will one day fall between 
the extremes of this contrast;’? which I do not understand. GERVINUS says that Antho- 
nio has the ‘ malady of the rich, who have been agitated and tried by nothing,’ and that 
he has ‘the spleen.’ Euze believes that ‘his wealth has blunted his feelings and made 
him effeminate.’ The anonymous author of A/ter Ego (Hamburg, 1862, p. 9) would have 
it that it is the prospect of losing his friend Bassanio that so weighs down Anthonio’s 
spirits. Bassanio had promised to tell Anthonio ‘to-day’ (line 131) ‘the name of the 
lady to whom he had sworn a secret pilgrimage ;’ and ‘an Alpine load oppresses the 
breast of Anthonio as if an irreparable loss awaited him’ in thus losing his dearest 
friend. MACDONALD (Zhe /magination, p. 164) points out that a melancholy disposi- 
tion like Anthonio’s, ‘even if it be not occasioned by any definite event or object, will 
generally associate itself with one; and when Antonio is accused of being in love, he 
repels the accusation with only a sad “ Fie! fie!” This, and his whole character, seem 
to me to point to an old but ever-cherished grief.” . CLARENDON says that the ‘ key-note 
of the play’ is here struck; and that this sadness without cause is a ‘ presentiment of 
disaster : “Coming events cast their shadows before.” ’ But this play is not a Tragedy; 
it is a Comedy, wherein a tragic key-note would be falsely struck, Witches and a 
blasted heath, a chilly rampart and a midnight ghost,—these are key-notes; but no 
irretrievable disaster is impending here. Moreover, it is not thus that Shakespeare 
deals with presentiments; he knew too well the ‘lightning before death’ which made 
Romeo’s ‘bosom’s lord sit lightly in his throne.’ Had Shylock actually cut the flesh 
from off Anthonio’s breast, I doubt if Anthonio would have been here introduced as sa 
weighed down with sadness as to be a ‘ Want-wit.’ I am inclined to think that the 
true explanation is hinted at in a short marginal note in pencil by my lamented friend, 
Prof. ALLEN, as follows: ‘If Anthonio were not represented as a melancholy man and 
therefore crotch¢y, he would not have been so extravagantly devoted to a friend, nor 
would he have signed to such a bond.’ Shakespeare foresaw the difficulty of represent- 


ACT I, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 3 


I am to learne : and fuch a Want-wit fadneffe makes of 
mee, 10 
That I haue much ado to know my felfe. 
Sal, Your minde is tofsing on the Ocean, 


There where your Argofies with portly faile 13 
9. J am] As closing line 8, Ktly. II. ado] adoe QqF,F,. a-do F,. 
1...learne] Sep. line, Q,, Rowe et 12. Sal.] Salarino. Q,Q,, Wh. Rife. 
seq. Salar. Qs Var. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Io. mee] Q.. Del. Ktly. 


ing a merchant, royal among merchants, as executing a bond so hazardous in its condi- 
fion that any child would shrink from signing it, and therefore introduced him as of 
so changeable a mood that he was borne down by a nameless melancholy and utterly 
unlike himself; and if to this we add the appellation ‘ Want-wit,’ which he gives him- 
self, we have the elements of character that are needed, in the scene with Shylock, to 
give an air of consistency in the sealing to the bond. This melancholy, then, is, after 
all, a key-note of the play, but not as portending disasters or as preluding a tragedy.— 
ED. 

HUNTER (i, 299): In perusing this play we should keep constantly in mind the ideas 
which prevailed in England in the time of Shakespeare of the magnificence of Venice. 
Now, the name calls up ideas only of glory departed—‘ Her long life hath reached its 
final day;’ but in the age of the poet Venice was gazed on with admiration by the people 
of every country, and by none with more devotion than those of England. Her mer- 
chants were princes, —her palaces were adorned with the works of Titian, and she was, 
moreover, the seat of all pleasant delights—‘ The pleasure-place of all festivity, The 
revel of the world, the masque of Italy.” Lewkenor, Moryson, and other English travel- 
lers of the age of Shakespeare, have described Venice, including Coryat, who speaks of 
the palazzos of the merchants in the vicinity of the city, of the Rialto, and of the Ghetto, 
one of the islands on which the Jews lived, who were in number five or six thousand. 
He describes their dress; those born in Italy wearing red hats, while the Eastern or 
Levantine Jews wore yellow turbans. The impression which the magnificence of Ven- 
ice made upon this simple-minded but observant traveller may be judged of by the 
following passage, which will at the same time serve to show how he became himself a 
butt for the sharp wits of his time, so that his merit as a traveller has been too much 
overlooked :—‘ This incomparable city, this most beautiful Queen, this untainted Vir- 
gin, this Paradise, this Tempe, this rich diadem and most flourishing garland of Chris- 
tendom, of which the inhabitants may as proudly vaunt as I have read the Persians 
have done of their Ormus, who say that if the world were a ring then should Ormus 
be the gem thereof,—the same, I say, may the Venetians speak of their city, and much 
more truly ;’ and he concludes with saying that ‘if four of the richest manors in Som- 
ersetshire, where he was born, should have been bestowed upon him if he never saw 
Venice, he would say that seeing Venice was worth them all.’ 

7. came by it] See ‘stperfluity comes sooner dy white hairs,’ I, ii, 9. 

g. I am] AssoTt, § 405, cites this among other ellipses after w7// and zs. ‘We 
still retain an ellipsis of “under necessity” in the phrase “I am (yet) to learn.”’ 

12. Ocean] Pronounced as a trisyllable,—AsBBOTT, § 479. 

13. Argosies] Murray (New Eng. Dict. s. v.) gives the forms of this word in 
the i6th Century as ragusye, arguze from the 16th to 17th Centuries, a7gose ; in the 


4 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. i. 


Like Signiors and rich Burgers on the flood, 

Or as it were the Pageants of the fea, 15 
Do ouer-peere the pettie Traffiquers 

That curtfie to them, do them reuerence 


14. Burgers] Burgars Q,Q,. 17. curtfie] curfie Q,Q,. courfie Qy 
on] of Anon. MS (ap. Hal.) Cap. curl’ sy ng Allen. 
conj. Steev. Dyce iii. them,] them Q,Q, them, and 
15. Pageants]. Pageans ¥,. Ktly. 


16. Zraffiquers] Traffickers ¥¥,. 


17th (rhaguse, ragosie) argosea, argosey, argozee ; from the 16th to the 1oth, argosze; 
and says that it is apparently an adaptation from the Italian, Raguwsea, plural Ragusee, 
i. e. una (nave or caracca) Ragusea, a Ragusan (vessel or carack), best represented 
by the earliest form ragusye, the transposition in argosea, arguze, argusee, &c., is no 
doubt connected with the fact that Ragusa (in Venetian Regus? ) itself appears in 16th 
Century English as Avagouse, Arragouese, Arragosa, ‘That argosies were reputed to 
take their name from Ragusa is stated by several writers of the 17th Century; and 
the derivation is made inductively certain by investigations made for us by Mr A. J. 
Evans, showing the extent of Ragusan trade with England, and the familiarity of Eng- 
lishmen with the Ragusee, or large and richly-freighted merchant ships of Ragusa. No 
reference to the ship Argo is traceable in the early use of the word.’ HUNTER (i, 323) : 
With this word Shakespeare might have become acquainted in reading Marlowe’s Jew 
of Malta, in which play the word often occurs, 

13-18. HUNTER (i, 324): Though this passage pleases everyone who reads it, as 
well by the agreeable flow of the verse as by the beautiful image it presents to the 
mind, of a richly laden vessel with all its sails unfurled passing in a stately manner 
along, it is perhaps not perfectly constructed. At least we cannot be sure that we 
apprehend what was the real meaning of the poet, between two meanings of which 
the passage admits. It may be that the argosies of Anthonio overpeer at sea the petty 
traffickers, just as the signiors and rich burghers do petty traffickers upon land, in which 
case the line, ‘Or, as it were the pageants of the sea,’ must be regarded as parenthet- 
ical, and as producing a slight interruption of the continuity; or it may be taken as 
meaning that the argosies appear upon the sea like so many signiors and rich burghers, 
bearing with them the ideas of wealth and abundance, and, as if that was not suffi- 
cient, he compares them again to ‘ pageants,’ pageant ships, gorgeously decorated, such 
as were exhibited in the shows of the time, no longer confined to some inland lake or 
river, but the ‘ pageants of the sea’ itself, so large and so magnificent in all their appa- 
ratus. 

14. on the] HALLIWELL gives a page in fac simile of extracts from a Common-place 
Book of the 17th Century, exhibiting some unauthorized alterations in the text of Shake- 
speare, and among these alterations is ‘of the’ in this line instead of ‘on the.’ Capell 
suggests the same alteration; Steevens adopted it, as did Dyce in his third edition. 
Halliwell says that it is not really necessary; which is true, but I think it is really the 
petter reading, as is shown by the very next line; just as the argosies were ‘the 
Pageants of the sea,’ so were they ‘the rich Burgers of the flood..—Ep. 

15. Pageants] Douck (i, 250): An allusion to those enormous machines, in the 
shape of castles, dragons, ships, giants, &c., that were drawn about the streets in the an. 
cient shows or pageants, and which often constituted the most important part of them, 


THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 5 


ACT I, SC. i.] 

As they flye by them with their wouen wings. 18 
Salar. Beleeue me fir, had I fuch venture forth, 

The better part of my affections, would 20 


Be with my hopes abroad. 


I fhould be ftill 


Plucking the graffe to know where fits the winde, 

Peering in Maps for ports, and peers, and rodes: 

And euery obieét that might make me feare 

Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt 25 


Would make me fad. 


Sal, My winde cooling my broth, 27 


18. flye] flie Qq. jy F,. 
their] theyr Q.. 


19. Salar.] Salanio. Q.Q., Wh. Cla. 
Rife. Sala. F,. Sola. FF, Rowe+. 


3 4 


Salan. Q,, Steev. Var. Sing. Coll. Cam. 
Glo. Ktly. Sol. Cap. Solan. Dyce, Sta. 


Del. 
me] mee Q,. 
venture] ventures Han. 


Sorth| foorth Q,. 
(20. affections,| F,, 


21. abroad | abroadeQ,. aboard Pope, 
Han. 
22. graffé] graff, Qy 
winde] Q,F,Q,F,- 
23. Peering] Piering Q,. Piring Q, 
Prying Q,, Pope, Han. Steev. ’85. 
and peers| for Peeres Q,. and 
piers Johns. et seq. 
27. Sal.] Salar. Qq, Steev. Mal. Var. 
Kant, Sing. 
winde] Q,F,. 


17. Curtsie] Suggested by the rocking, ducking motion in the petty traffiquers 
caused by the wake of the argosie as it sails past them.—ED. 

21. still] That is, constantly. For other instances, see ABBOTT, § 69, or SCHMIDT’S 
exe 

22. grasse| JOHNSON cites the following from Ascham’s Zoxophilus (p. 159, ed. 
Arber): ‘When I was in the myd way betwixt the markes whyche was an open place, 
there I toke a fether or a lytle lyght grasse, and so well as I could, learned how the 
wynd stoode,’ &c.; and other instances could be cited from the same book, where the 
practice is frequently referred to—Ep. KNiGHT: Though sea-weed is much more 
common than grass in Venice, there is enough land-vegetation in the gardens belong- 
ing to some of the palazzi to furnish the means of this experiment. 

22. sits] ALLEN: Sa/, (Imperf.)—by attraction—would be normal English. ‘Sits’ 
(Pres.)—for greater vivacity is Greek. 

23. Peering] Halliwell suggests that Prying of Q, was adopted to avoid the jingle 
with ‘peers,’ Unfortunately, on no other occasion does the compositor of that Qto dis- 
play a similar delicacy of ear. In one passage, however, this Qto has given us a word 
which several editors have adopted (see III, ii, 118, reive for ‘raine’), and it is the sole 
jewel in its crown.—ED. 

23. in] Equivalent to zzfo. See ABBOTT, § 159. 

23. rodes] CLARENDON: That is, anchorages. Cotgrave gives, ‘Rade. f. A road, 
an open harbor for shipping.’ ‘ Yarmouth Roads’ is the name given to the open sea 
off Yarmouth, where ships ride at anchor. See V, i, 304. 

27. cooling] ABBOTT, § 452, cites two other half lines of similar scansion, viz.. 
‘Thy knée, | bassing | the sténes’—Cor. III, ii, 75; ‘The smile | mocking | the 
sigh’—Cym. IV, ii, 54, and suggests that ‘the foot following the emphasized mono- 


6 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, sc. 1. 


Would blow me to an Ague, when I thought 28 
What harme a winde too great might doe at fea. 
I fhould not fee the fandie houre-glaffe runne, 30 
But I fhould thinke of fhallows,and of flats, 
And fee my wealthy Axdrew docks in fand, 32 
28. Avue,| ague Q,. 32. fee] see! Ktly conj 
29. winde] Q,Q,F,. Andrew docks] Andrew dockes Q, 
might...fea] Q,FIQ, af Sea, Arg’sie dock'd Han. Andrew's decks 
might do Q,. Coll. conj. Andrew, decks Del. An- 
30. fandie] Q,F,Q,. drew dock Ktly. Andrew stucke Gould. 
houre-| howre Q,.Q,- Andrew dock'd Rowe et seq. 


31. flats] flatis Q,,. 


syllable may (as an alternative to the “ pause-accent”’) be regarded as quasi-trisyllabic ;’ 
[that is, that there is an unconscious pause between the noun and its participle (here 
‘wind’ and ‘ cooling’), and that this takes the place of a third syllable, whereby the 
proper ictus falls on ‘cooling.’] 

30. houre-glasse] HALLIWELL: This illustration was a very familiar one in 
Shakespeare’s time, when the hour-glass was an almost invariable accompaniment of 
the pulpit, fixed near it on an iron stand. ‘ Hour-glasses for the purpose of limiting 
the length of a sermon were coeval with the Reformation, as appears from the frontis- 
piece prefixed to the Holy Bible of the Bishops’ translation, imprinted by John Day, 
1569. In this frontispiece, Archbishop Parker is represented with an hour-glass stand- 
ing on his right hand. Clocks and watches being then but rarely in use, it was thought 
fit to prescribe the length of the sermons of the Reformists to the time of an hour, that 
is, the run of an hour-glass. This practice became generally prevalent, and continued 
to the time of the Revolution in 1688.’—Wotes to Reprint of the Fatal Vespers, &c. 
[Halliwell subjoins a wood-cut of ‘a very fine example of one still preserved in the 
church of St. Alban’s in Wood Street, London.,”} 

31. But] AssorT ($118): A contraction for ‘by-out,’ and is formed exactly like 
‘with-out.’ Hence ‘ but’ means excepted or excepting. 

32. Andrew] KNIGHT: Johnson explains this (which is scarcely necessary) as 
‘the name of the ship;’ but he does not point out the propriety of the name for a 
ship, in association with the great naval commander, Andrea Doria, famous through all 
Italy. [This guess seems to me a little far-fetched, but none other, that I am aware 
of, has ever been given. I think some proof is needed that the Italian was ever trans- 
lated into English_—Eb. ] 

32. docks] H. B. SPRAGUE (Shakespeariana, March, 1884, p. 158): Change is 
needless; the meaning is more vivid, more Shakespearian, to use the present tense, 
‘docks,’ i. e. places itself in sand as in a dock. [The alphabet contains few more 
troublesome letters than s, whose external crookedness is typical of its internal nature 
Walker, long ago, showed us how frequently it is interpolated to the marring of the 
sense (see Orh. I, i, 31), and suggested that it might have originated in some peculiar- 
ity of Shakespeare’s handwriting. It is not unlikely; but in the present play, which 
in the Folio was printed from Q,, and this again, perhaps, from a stage transcript, our 
nearness to Shakespeare’s own hand, with its peculiarities, is two or three times 
removed, May not the confusion in this word ‘docks’ have arisen from the ease with 
whch sin the ol Court hand can be confounded with d@? The top of s should turn 


ACT I, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 7, 


Vailing her high top lower then her ribs 33 
To kiffe her buriall ; fhould I goe to Church 
And fee the holy edifice of ftone, 35 


And not bethinke me ftraight of dangerous rocks, 

Which touching but my gentle Veffels fide 

Would fcatter all her fpices on the ftreame, 

Enrobe the roring waters with my filkes, 

And in a word, but euen now worth this, 40 
And now worth nothing. Shall I haue the thought 

To thinke on this, and fhall I lacke the thought 

That fuch a thing bechaunc’d would make me fad ? 

But tell not me, I know Axthonzio 


Is fad to thinke vpon his merchandize. 45 
33- Vailing] Veyting Q,. Vayling 38. her] the Q., Pope+. my Anon. 
3° (ap. Cam.) 
high top| high-top Steev. 39. roring | roaring Q,Q,F,. 
ribs] ribs, Q,Q,F,. 41. nothing.| nothing ? Q,. 
34. burial ;] pea Oe 42. lacke] lack Q,F.F,. 
goe] goQ,F, 43. bechauned] Q,. be-chanced Q,. 


§0. rocks,] vockes, oS rocks ? Rowe. bechane'd F{Q,. 


to the right, the top of d to the left; unless this turn be decided, it is not difficult to 
mistake one letter for the other, which I think was done here, and that ‘docks’ was 
really written dockd.—ED.] 

aa: Vailing] STEEVENS: We find in Bullokar’s Expositor, 1621, ‘Vaile bonet. To 
put off the hatte, to strike saile, to giue signe of submission.’ It signifies also to ower, 
to Jet down. Thus, in Middleton’s Blurt, Master-Constable, 1602 [p. 248, ed. Dyce]: 
‘Boy, tell my love her love thus sighing spake, I’ll vail my crest to death for her dear 
sake.’ Again, in Zhe Hair Maid of the West, by Heywood, 1631 [p. 56, ed. Sh. Soc.] : 
‘It did me good To see the Spanish carvel vail her top Unto my maiden flag.’ [Conf 
‘vailed lids, —Ham. I, ii, 70.] 

34. buriall] Of course, her burial-place. 

39. Dyce (ed. iii) records Lettsom’s opinion that something is wanting between this 
line and the next, an opinion probably founded on the difficulty of understanding the 
meaning of ‘this’ in line 40. ‘The meaning here,’ says CLARENDON, ‘is obscure, and 
the construction abrupt, if “this” refers to the spices and silks just mentioned. As the 
text stands, the actor may be supposed to complete the sense by a gesture, extending his 
arms.’ If this is the only explanation, and I can neither find nor offer any better, the 
gesture as expressive of great wealth is, I am afraid, a little weak.—Ep. 

41. thought] That is, care, anxiety. Conf. ‘pale cast of thought,’ /Yam. III. i, 85 ; 
*Take no thought for the morrow,’ Matt. vi, 34; ‘M. Lepidus . . . who died for thought 
and griefe of heart, —Holland’s P/inde, Bk vii, p. 186.—Eb. 

44. know] With emphasis.—ED. 

45. to thinke] That is, 7 ¢hinking. For an interesting and highly useful collection 
of instances where ‘/o is used in the sense of “ for,” “about,” “in,” “as regards,” and, 


8 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. i, 


Anth, Beleeue me no,I thanke my fortune for it, 46 
My ventures are not in one bottome trufted, 
Nor to one place ; nor is my whole eftate 
Vpon the fortune of this prefent yeere: 
Therefore my merchandize makes me not fad. 50 
Sola. Why then you are in loue. 
Anth. Fie, fie. 
Sola. Not in loue neither : then let vs fay you are fad 
Becaufe you are not merry ; and ’twere as eafie 
For you to laugh and leape,and fay you are merry 55 
Becaufe you are not fad. Now by two-headed Janus, 
Nature hath fram’d ftrange fellowes in her time : 
Some that will euermore peepe through their eyes, 


And laugh like Parrats at a bag-piper. 59 
46. no,] no: Q,. Coll. Sing. Wh. i, Ktly, Clarke, Del. Dyce 
49. yeere] QF. iii, Huds. 

51, 53- Sola.] Q.Ff, Rowe+. Sala. 53, 55. you are] you're Pope+, Dyce 

Q,- Sal. Cap. Salan. Mal. Steev. Coll. iii, Clarke, Rlfe, Huds. 

Sing. Ktly. Solan. Coll. iii. Salar. Q, 54. and | Om. Pope, Han. az Knt. 

et cet. 56. Because you are| ’Cause you're 
51. Why...are| Then y are Q,. Han. Dyce iii. 

52. fie.| fie, away / Han. 57. fram’a | framd Q,. 
53. neither | neither? Q.. neither! 59. Parrats| Parrots F ,. 
Ff. bag-piper| bagpyper Q,. Pagpiper 


let vs] let’s Pope+, Steev. Mal. Q;. 


in a word, for any form of the gerund as well as for the infinitive,’ see ABBOTT, § 356. 
Conf. ‘make moan to be abridged,’ I, i, 136, gost, and ‘To winde about my love,’ &c., 
I, i, 164; and ‘TI will not shame myself to give you this,’ IV, i, 451. 

47. KNIGHT: This was no doubt proverbial,—something more elegant than ‘all the 
eggs in one basket.’ Sir Thomas More, in his History of Richard III, has: ‘ For what 
wise merchant adventureth all his good in one ship?’ 

48, 49. is... Vpon] ALLEN suggests that there is no ellipsis here, but that ‘is 
upon’ may perhaps be equivalent to exists upon. : 

50. Shakespeare was such an absolute master over his slave, rhythm, that one is 
tempted to doubt whether there be not some subtle reason, other than rhythmical, for 
his frequent transpositions, as here, ‘makes me not sad,’ or ‘touching but my gentle 
vessels side,’ line 37.—Eb. 

51. Sola.] WHITE speaks for the majority of the editors in pronouncing Q, to be 
here right in giving the speech to Salarino, ‘as the more loquacious of Anthonio’s 
two friends, and just after the entrance of Bassanio he declares that he had intended to 
banter Anthonio into good spirits.’ 

52. Dyce (ed. ii): I have little doubt that Shakespeare wrote ‘ Zz love! fie, fie!’ 

56. Janus] Eccies: He swears by that divinity, whose image exhibits a represen: 
tation of either kind of countenance, the laughing and the sad. 

58. peepe] WARBURTON: As in laughing, when the eyes are half shut. 


ACT I, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 


© 


And other of fuch vineger afpe&, 60 
That they'll not fhew their teeth in way of fmile, 
Though Wefor fweare the ieft be laughable. 


Enter Baffanio, Lorenfo,and Gratiano. 

Sola. Heere comes Bafanio, 
Your moft noble Kinfman, 65 
Gratiano, and Lorenfo. Faryewell, 
We leaue you now with better company. 

Sala. I would haue ftaid till I had made you merry, 
If worthier friends had not preuented me. 

Ant. Your worth is very deere in my regard. 70 
I take it your owne bufines calls on you, 
And you embrace th’occafion to depart. 


Sal, Good morrow my good Lords. (when? 
Baff, Good figniors both, when fhall we laugh? fay, 
You grow exceeding ftrange : muft it be fo? 75 
60. other] others Pope+. 66. Faryewell] Fare ye well Q.F.F,. 
vineger| vinigar Q,. viniger Q,. Fare you welt Cap. Steev. Mal. Knut, 
vinegar Q,F LF. Coll. Sing. Sta. 
61. theyll a ‘theyle Ox 67. you] ye Pope, Theob. Warb. 
63. Enter... ] After line 72, Dyce, Sta. 68. Sala.] Q.FLF,. Salan. Q,. Sola. 
Clarke, Huds. F,, Rowe+. Sal. Cap. Salar. Q, et cet. 
Lorenfo] Lorenzo. Rowe. 71. bufines calls bufineffe cals Q,. 
64. Sola.] Q,Ff. Sala. Q, Sal. 72. th) the Q,. 
Rowe+. Sol. Cap. Solan. Knt, Dyce, 73, 76. Sal.] QLFf, Rowe+. Salar. 


Sta. Del. Coll. iii, Huds. Salan. Q, et cet. Oureti cet: 


60. other] For other instances of this singular used as a plural, see ABBOTT, § 12. 

60, aspect] For a long list of words in which the accent was formerly nearer the 
end than now, see ABBOTT, § 490. 

61. in way] For other instances of the omission of the, see ABBOTT, § 89. 

62. Nestor] CLARENDON: The oldest, and therefore presumably the gravest, of 
heroes. 

62. swear] ALLEN: Possibly, sware ; i. e. had sworn, or, should have sworn. 

69. preuented] WorDsworTH (Sk. Knowl. and Use of the Bible, p. 40): That is, 
anticipate. See 1 Thess. iv, 15: ‘We which are alive shall not prevent them which are 
asleep.’ Also Ps. cxix, 148: ‘Mine eyes prevent the night-watches.’ 

75. exceeding] RoLFE: This adverbial use is frequent in Elizabethan writers, 
Shakespeare uses ‘exceedingly’ only five times, in four of which it modifies the adverb 
well, while in the fifth (Ham. V, ii, 103) it modifies an adjective understood. 

75 strange] CLARENDON: In modern English we should say: ‘ You are becoming 
quite strangers.’ 

75. Must it be so?] Of course the first, and perhaps the only, interpretation of 
these words is that they apply to the infrequency of the intercourse between Bassanio 


iol t THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act 1, Sc. i. 


Sul. Wee’ll make our leyfures to attend on yours. | 76 
Exeunt Salarino,and Solanio. 
Lor. My Lord Baffanio,fince you haue found Anthonio 
We two will leaue you,but at dinner time 
I pray you haue in minde where we muft meete. 80 
Baf. Iwill not faile you. 
Grat. You looke not well fignior Anthonzo, 
You haue too much refpeét vpon the world: 
They loofe it that doe buy it with much care, 


Beleeue me you are maruelloufly chang’d. 85 
Ant. I hold the world but as the world Gratiano, 

A ftage,where euery man mutt play a part, 87 
76. Wee'll] Weele Q,Q,- 78. you haue] you've Pope+, Dyce ii, 
77. Exeunt...] After line 81, Rowe+. Rife, Huds. 

Exeunt...Solanio] | Exeunt...Sa- 81. you.] you. Exit. Q.. 

lanio Q,Q,, Mal. Steev. Coll. Wh. Cam. 84. doe] do Q,F.F,. 

Exeunt...Solar. and Sala. Rowe+. 85. maruelloufly| meruailoufly Q,Q,- 
78. Lor.] Lord. Ff. Sola. Rowe+. mervelloufly Q,. 


87. man] one Q,, Pope ii. 


and ‘the good signiors both,’ but may they not refer to the leave-taking of Salarino and 
Solanio? As they are close to the door, or to the parting of the ways, after having 
actually bade Anthonio farewell, Bassanio sees how hopeless it is to detain them, and, 
in effect, says, ‘Must you really go now?’ ‘To me this short phrase reads like one of 
the many which Shakespeare uses to supply the place of stage-directions.—Ep. 

78. Lor.] The misprint here in F, of Lord was repeated by F, and F,, and still fur- 
ther sophisticated by Rowe, who changed it to So/a., and was therein heedlessly fol- 
lowed by every editor down to Capell, and the Zxezn?t of Salarino and Solanio trans- 
ferred to the end of line 81. Capell, however, restored the speech of Lorenzo, because, 
as he says, ‘ Lorenzo enters with a design of retiring, having executed the purpose he 
came for, to wit—the finding of Anthonio; but such a sudden and silent departure not 
suiting with his companion, he is kept a while ’till the other has gratify’d his passion 
for talking, and, that done, repeats at [line 115] his declaration in this speech, and 
soon after puts it in execution.’—Ep. 

78. Anthonio] One of the numberless instances of the rhythmical shortening of 
polysyllabic names, to which no further reference will be hereafter made,—perhaps it 
is needless even here. See ABBott, § 469.—Ep. 

83. vpon] ABBOTT, § 191: In this use of ‘upon’ there is an allusion to the literal 
meaning of ‘respect.’ ‘You /ook too much ufom the world” The ‘upon’ is con- 
nected with ‘respect,’ and is not used like our for in ‘I have no respect for him.’ 

84. loose] Steevens considers this a misprint for /ose, strangely enough, because no 
one was better acquainted than Steevens with the fact, which Halliwell notes, that it is 
merely the old spelling of dose, and is of continual occurrence. See I, iv, 28.—Ep. 

84. WoRDswoRTH (p. 343): This appears to be founded upon Mav. xvi, 25: * Who- 
soever will save his life shall lose it.’ [*It’ refers to the opinion of the world.—Ep. ] 

87 stage] STEEVENS: See Sidney’s Arcadia, book ii: ‘She found the world but a 


ACT I, SC, i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE IY 


And mine a fad one. | 88 
Gratt, Let me play the foole, 
With mirth and laughter let old wrinckles come, go 


And let my Liuer rather heate with wine, 

Then my heart coole with mortifying grones. 
Why fhould a man whofe bloud is warme within, 
Sit like his Grandfire, cut in Alablafter ? 


Sleepe when he wakes ? and creep into the Iaundies 95 
88. mine] mine's Han, Warb. 90. wrinckles] wrinklesQ,. wrinckes 
89. Grati.] Gra. Q.. 3" 

89, 90. foole,...laughter] fool...laugh- 92. heart] hartQ,. heat FF, 

ter ; Rowe, Pope, Han. 94. Alablafter| Alabaster Pope. 

90. let old] so let Han, 95. laundies| Jaundies F,. Jaundies 


F re jaundice Rowe ii. 


wearisome stage to her, where she played a part against her will.’ ROLFE: See the 
famous passage: ‘ All the world’s a stage,’ 4s You Like it, Il, vii. 

88. sad] WALKER (iii, 52): ‘Sad’ is grave. [Unquestionably. See fost, II, ii, 
193: ‘ Well studied in a sad ostent To please his Grandam,’ and many another instance 
given by SCHMIDT.—ED.] 

89. foole] WARBURTON: Gratiano desires to play the Fool’s or buffoon’s part 
which was a constant character in the old farces; from whence came the phrase, ‘to 
play the fool.’ 

go. With] Here used causatively. 

go. old] HALLIWELL: Gratiano here means to refer to old age, which he desircs 
may be reached with joy and laughter; or he is possibly merely alluding to the wrin- 
kles caused by mirth, in which case the epithet ‘old’ is the common augmentative. 
‘Some Dick, that sles his cheek in years,’ Love's Lab. Lost, V, ii, 465. 

92. mortifying] Used in its literal sense, like extravagant in Othello, I, i, 149, or 
fantastical in Macbeth, I, iii, 139, or, perhaps as ‘mortified’ in the latter play, V, ii, 5. 
The belief that groans were ‘mortifying’ Shakespeare shared in common with his age; 
he refers to it more than once. ‘ Dry sorrow drinks our blood,’ Rom. & Jul. III, v, 
58; ‘a spendthrift sigh, That hurts by easing,’ Ham. IV, vii, 128; ‘sighs that cost the 
fresh blood dear,’ Afid. NV. D. III, ii, 97; ‘Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking 
sighs, 2 Hen. VJ: III, ii, 63.—Eb. 

94. Grandsire] Under this respectful appellation our German brothers seem to have 
detected some merry jest. Voss, Schlegel, Bodenstedt, and even Schmidt, have trans- 
lated it ‘ Grosspapa.’—ED. 

94. Alablaster] Murray (Mew Eng. Dict.): The spelling in the 16th-17th Cen- 
turies is almost always ‘alablaster;’ apparently due to a confusion with ard/aster,a 
cross-bowman, also written a/ablaster.—Vote on Oth. V, ii, 7. 

95. Iaundies] BuCKNILL (p. 92): In this whole passage the intimate connection 
between mind and body is sketched with exact physiological truth. Perhaps the most 
curious and undoubted instance of the mind’s influence in the production of bodily dis- 
ease, is jaundice caused by depressing emotion. It is not always ‘crept’ into, since bad 
news has frequently been known to cause jaundice in a few hours. In Copland’s Dict. 
of Medicine it is stated that ‘The most common exciting causes of jaundice are the more 
vio'ent mental sriotions,’ and in the list of these emotions, which he adds, he specially 


12 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. i. 


By being peeuifh ? I tell thee what Anthonio, 96 
I loue thee, and it is my loue that fpeakes : 

There are a fort of men, whofe vifages 

Do creame and mantle like a ftanding pond, 

And do a wilfull ftilneffe entertaine, 100 
With purpofe to be dreft in an opinion 

Of wifedome, grauity, profound conceit, 


97. tf 2s] tés Qq, Han. 100. wilfull filneffe] wilful filnes Q, 
Speakes | [peakes. Q,. 102. grauity] grauitie Q,. 
99. creame| dreameQ,. E 


includes ‘peevishness.’ In Watson’s Lectures on Physic, that able physician states that 
among the causes of jaundice ‘the pathemata mentis play their assigned part; fits of 
anger and fear and alarm have been presently followed by jaundice.’ This curious 
medical fact Shakespeare has here sketched with exact fidelity. The effect of wine on 
the temperature of the liver, and despondency on that of the heart, are also unques- 
tionably medical thoughts. ROLFE: The only other passage in which Shakespeare 
mentions the jaundice the cause is, as here, a mental one. See Zvo. & Cress. 
lity 2 

96. In the Folio, the page beginning with this line is wrongly numbered 162, instead 
of 164; so also the opposite page is 163, instead of 165; after this, the pagination is 
correct.—ED. 

100. do] CLARENDON: That is, ‘And who do,’ Not unfrequently in Shakespeare 
the pronoun requires to be mentally repeated in order to complete the construction. 
See 1 Hen. JV; Il, iv, 279: ‘We two saw you four set on four and bound them, and 
were masters of their wealth.? A somewhat similar inaccuracy occurs also in the pres- 
ent scene, 108, 109. 

100. wilfull stilnesse] MALONE: That is, an obstinate silence. 

IoI. opinion] CLARENDON: That is, reputation for wisdom. ‘Opinion’ is used in 
the same sense in line 112. 

102. grauity] HALLIWELL: This fine passage, observes Dr Dodd, always puts me 
in mind of a remark made by Dryden: ‘There are, who wanting wt, affect gravity, 
and go by the name of solid men; and a so/td maz is, in plain English, a solid, solemn 
fool.’ 

102, conceit] CRAIK (Jul. Cas, I, iii, 162): To concezt is another form of our still 
familiar to conceive. And the noun ‘conceit,’ which survives with a limited meaning 
(the conception of a man by himself, which is so apt to be one of over-estimation), is 
also frequent in Shakespeare with the sense, nearly, of what we now call conception, in 
general. Sometimes it is used in a sense which might almost be said to be the opposite 
of what it now means; as when Juliet employs it as the term to denote her all-absorb- 
ing affection for Romeo, II, v, 30. Or as Gratiano uses it here—that is, in the sense of 
deep thought. So again when Rosaline, in Love’s Lab. Lost, II, i, speaking of Biron, 
describes his ‘fair tongue’ as ‘conceit’s expositor,’ all that she means is that speech is 
the expounder of thought. The Scriptural expression, still in familiar use, ‘ wise in his 
own conceit,’ means merely wise in his own thought, or in his own eyes, as we are 
told in the margin the Hebrew literally signifies. [Cf. the title of the First Quarto of 
Rom & Jul.: ‘The Excellent conceited Tragedie,’ &c.] 


ACT I, SC. i.] LHE MERCHANT OF VENICE 13 


As who fhould fay, I am fir an Oracle, 

And when I ope my lips, let no dogge barke. 

O my Axthonio, I do know of thefe 105 
That therefore onely are reputed wife, 

For faying nothing ; when I am verie fure 


If they fhould fpeake, would almoft dam thofe eares 108 
103. fir an] FF. jr, an F,, Rowe. 107. J am] I’m Pope+, Dyce ii, 
Jr Qq et cet. Huds. 
104. dogge] dog Q,F.F,. 108. would |’twould Coll. (MS), Ktly, 
105. the/e] thofe Q., Pope+. Dyce ii. 
107. when] who Rowe+, Cap. Steev. dam] Q,Q, dant Q,. damme 
Mal. Knut, Sta. Huds. EY doom Clarke. damn F , et cet. 


103. who] AxgortT (§ 257, after citing Macb. III, vi, 42; Rich. IZ: V, iv, 8, and 
Mer. of Ven. I, ii, 45): In these passages it is possible to understand an antecedent to 
‘who,’ ‘as, or like (one) who should say.’ In Early English (Morris, Specimens, p. 
xxxli) ‘als wha say’ was used for ‘as amy one may say.’ Comp. the Lat. guwis after sé, 
num, &c. Possibly an zfis implied after the ‘as’ by the use of the subjunctive. Littré 
explains ‘comme qui dirait’ by supplying ‘celui.’ ‘Il portait sur sa teste comme qui 
dirait un turban; c’est-a-dire, il portait, comme dirait celui qui dirait un turban” But 
this explanation seems unsatisfactory, in making a likeness to exist between ‘ carrying’ 
and ‘saying.’ But whatever may be the true explanation of the original idiom, Shake- 
speare seems to have understood wo as the relative, for the antecedent can be supplied 
in all passages where he uses it. 

103. sir an Oracle] WHITE (ed. i): The absence of a capital letter in the ‘sir’ is 
remarkable in the Folio,—which, in this respect, is very carefully printed,—even if not 
in the Quartos. I believe the ‘sir oracle’ of the Quartos which has been universally 
adopted, to be the result of accident, and that the change in the Folio is intentional 
and by authority. ‘Sir Oracle’ is so awkward an effort in nomenclature, and a speci- 
men of so cheap a sort of wit, that I for one am quite willing to take the testimony of 
the authorized edition, that it is none of Shakespeare’s. But being one of those phrases 
which save people the trouble of thinking and finding words for themselves, it has be- 
come almost a part of the language; and to disturb the text would, under the circum- 
stances, be a thankless work of supererogation. [I think it is a little too severe to say 
that the phrase is popular because it saves the trouble of thinking or of finding words. 
There is a certain pomposity in ‘Sir Oracle’ which befits the character and which 
speaks to all. Yet it is this very pomposity which gives it a disagreeable tone and makes 
me wish that the Folio were right, which it cannot be, I fear, in its present unrhythmical 
line, unless we suppose, with ALLEN, that the indefinite article was slurred in pronun- 
ciation: ‘I am, sir, ’n Oracle.’—ED.] 

106, 107. WORDSWORTH (p. 241): Conf. ‘Even a fool when he holdeth his peace 
is counted wise; and he that shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of u~derstanding.’— 
Prov. xvii, 28. 

108. would] The omission of the nominative, when the sense will readily supply 
it, is so common that no change is needed her:. See Ham. Il, ii, 67; IlI,i, 8; Lear 
II, ii, 143; II, iv, 41; IV, ii, 76, V,i, 67; or ABBOTT, §399. COLLIER (ed. ii) 
adopted his (MS) change ’¢ woudd, but doubted if change were necessary. CLAREN- 
DON suggests that ‘the clause “If they should speak,’ equivalent to “their speaking,” 


14 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. i. 


Which hearing them would call their brothers fooles : 
Ile tell thee more of this another time. 110 
But fifh not with this melancholly baite 
For this foole Gudgin, this opinion: 
Come good Lorenzo, faryewell a while, 
Ile end my exhortation after dinner. 
Lor. Well, we will leaue you then till dinner time. 115 
I muft be one of thefe fame dumbe wife men, 
For Gratiano neuer let’s me f{peake. 
Gra. Well, keepe me company but two yeares mo, 
Thou fhalt not know the found of thine owne tongue. 


Ant. Far you well, Ile grow a talker for this geare. 12G 
112. foole Gudgin] foole Gudgion Ff. 113. a while] awhile Coll. 
fool’s gudgeon Pope+, Steev. Var. fool- 116, dumbe wife] dumb-wise Huds. 
gudgeon Mal. Coll. Sing. Dyce, Sta. Wh. 118. mo] F,F,. moe QqF,, Cam. Glo. 
i, Ktly, Rife, Huds. Clarke, Del. Rife. move Rowe et cet. 
113. Lorenzo] Lorenfo Q,Q.. 120, Far you well] Q,. Farwell Q,. 
Saryewell| farwell Q,. Fare you well FfQ,. Fare well Pope+. 


serves for subject to the following verb.’ I think the simpler way is to suppose that 
‘they’ is carried forward from ‘should’ to ‘would.’—ED. 

108. damn] THEOBALD: That is, That some people are thought wise, whilst they 
keep silence; who, when they open their mouths, are such stupid praters, that the hear- 
ers cannot heip calling them ‘fools’ and so incur the judgment denounced in the Gos- 
pel [JZazz. v, 22]. 

111. melancholly baite] ALLEN (MS) suggests (rightly, I think) that this is a 
genitive of apposition; it should therefore be printed with a hyphen, and its meaning 
would be zhis bait of melancholy, that is, this melancholy as a bait. The same would 
apply to ‘foole gudgin,’ and so Malone printed it in 1790. The whole sentence is, 
then, ‘fish not with this melancholy as a bait for this gudgeon of the fool.’ Eccles, 
however, prints /ool-gudgeon, and evidently understands ‘fool’ as an adjective; ‘that 
is,’ he says, ‘a gudgeon foolish enough to be taken with such a bait,’ whereby the point 
is not given which I think the sentence bears. It is not the folly of the gudgeon that 
is in question, but that ‘this opinion’ is the worthless gudgeon that only fools care to 
fish for. SCHMIDT (Zex.) also takes ‘fool’ as an adjective, and there is, to be sure, 
some warrant for it in the similar phrase ‘fool multitude,’ Zosz, II, ix, 28; but I doubt 
if the sense here admits of a similar interpretation.—ED. 

116. dumbe wise men] WALKER (ii, 139): Write dumb-wise,; for ‘dumb wise 
men’ would be pronounced dumb wisemen. 

120. Ile] ALLEN (MS): That is, 7 w2//, not J ska//. Gratiano thanks him for the 
resolution. 

120. geare] Eccies: That is, ‘I’ll grow a talker for this time,’ or ‘upon this par- 
ticular occasion.’ Nares defines the word as meaning, in general, ‘ matter, subject, 
or business in general; often applied to dress also.’ Dyce gives it three meanings s 

dress; matter in hand, business [as in the present instance]; stuff.’ SciumipT divides 
its meanings under two heads: ‘stuff’ [as in the present instance]; and ‘affair, matter. 


ACT I, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 15 


Gra, Thankes ifaith, for filence is onely commendable 121 
In a neats tongue dri’d, and a maid not vendible. Exit. 

Ant. It is that any thing now. 

Baf. Gratiano {peakes an infinite deale of nothing, 
more then any man in all Venice, his reafons are two 125 


121. ifaith] yfaith Q,Q,. i’faith F -..now ? Ktly. Js that...now ? Rowe et 
122. tongue] togue Q.. cet. 

vendible| vendadble Q,Q,. 124. nothing, | nothing Q,,. 

Exit.] Exeunt. Qq. 125. are] Ff, Rowe, Knt. are as Oq 
123. ft ws that...now.] Zt is that. et cet. 


business.’ [All of which confirms the truth of what Steevens said long ago—that ‘ it 
is a colloquial expression perhaps of no very determinate import.’ The sense demanded 
by the context must in each case be our guide; in B. and Fl.’s Zhe Scornful Lady, 
II, i, Sir Roger says of tobacco, ‘it is notable stinging gear indeed.’ Iam not sure 
that our colloquial word ‘stuff,’ as given by Dyce and Schmidt, herein following John- 
son’s Dict., does not very nearly correspond to ‘gear.—Ep.] HAaLLIWELL: It has 
been unnecessarily proposed to alter ‘gear’ to jeer or year; and another critic to fear, 
the last one referring it to the fear of not knowing the sound of his own tongue. [See 
also Zost, II, ii, 159. ] 

121, 122, These two lines ABBOTT, § 490, scans thus: Thanks faith, | for silence | 
is 6nly | comménd | ablé. In a néat’s | tongue dried | and a maid | not vénd | iblé. 
The lines may be some jingle current at that time, but now lost.—Ep. 

123. JOHNSON: I suppose we should read: ‘Is that anything mew?’ STEEVENS: 
The sense of the old reading is, Does what he has just said amount to anything, or 
mean anything? TyYRWHITT: Anthonio asks: Is that any thing now? and Bassanio 
answers, that Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of #othing,—the greatest part of his dis- 
course is xot any thing. COLLIER [whose text reads, ‘It is that :—any thing now.’] 
says: This is the reading of Q,, Q., and F,, and it is preserved in F,. Surely, there- 
fore, we are not warranted in altering the text when a clear meaning can be made out 
of it. Antonio’s observation, ‘It is that,’ is addressed to Gratiano, concurring in his 
remark just before he made his exit, and then Antonio’s bad spirits return upon him, 
and he adds, as if weary of Gratiano’s talk, ‘any thing now.’ This naturally leads to 
Bassanio’s criticism upon Gratiano. [Collier gives the words of the Qq and Ff cor- 
rectly, but the punctuation is wholly his own; there is not even a comma in the orig- 
inal.—Ep.] Lerrrsom [ap. Dyce, ed. iii]: ‘It’ appears to me a mere blunder for 
‘J i. e. Ay / an ironical interjection. As to the rest of this short speech, nothing can 
be more awkward than ‘is that any thing’ for ‘72s ¢here any thing in that ?’ and ‘now’ 
is worse than superfluous. On the other hand, it may be said against Johnson’s con- 
jecture ew, that it does not so exactly accord with Bassanio’s phrase, ‘an infinite deal 
of nothing.’ It is, however, quite common for speakers to wrest the meaning of a pre- 
ceding speech for the sake of a retort; when this happens in a written dialogue, it is 
only an imitation of nature; but it is a fault in the writer to prepare the way for a retort 
by previously introducing awkward phraseology. [I think Rowe’s emendation must be 
adopted. 1can make nothing of the original text, which I am afraid I cannot see is 
aided by Lettsom’s change.—ED. ] 

125. are two] It may be that as of the Qq is here omitted through the compos- 


16 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act I, sc. i 


graines of wheate hid in two bufhels of chaffe : you fhall 126 
feeke all day ere you finde them, & when you haue them 
they are not worth the fearch. 
An. Well: tel me now, what Lady is the fame 
To whom you {wore a fecret Pilgrimage 130 
That you to day promis’d to tel me of? 
Baf. Tis not vnknowne to you Axthonto 
How much I haue difabled mine eftate, 
By fomething fhewing a more fwelling port 
Then my faint meanes would grant continuance: 135 
Nor do I now make mone to be abridg’d 
From fuch a noble rate, but my cheefe care 
Is to come fairely off from the great debts 
Wherein my time fomething too prodigall 
Hath left me gag’d : to you Anthonio 140 
I owe the moft in money, and in loue, 
And from your loue I haue a warrantie 
To vnburthen all my plots and purpofes, 
How to get cleere of all the debts I owe. 


An, I pray you good Baffanio let me know it, 145 
129. the] this Han. Sing. Ktly. Rowe. 
134. /omething /hewing | shewing some- 136. mone] Q,F,. 
thing Pope+. 138. off] of Q.. 
135. grant] graunt Q,. 142. warrantie] Q,Q,- 
continuance] continuance to 145. An.] Antho. Q,. 


itor’s carelessness, but it is doubtful if the sentence be not a little stronger without 
it.—Ep. 

126, you shall] AxBBoTT, § 315: ‘ You skal/ see, find,’ &c., was especially common 
in the meaning ‘you may;’ ‘you will’ applied to that which is of common occurrence, 
or so evident that it cannot but be seen. Cf. O¢h. I, i, 44. 

129. the same] I cannot but think that Hanmer is here right in printing ¢his 
same.—ED. 

131. That] It is hard to say whether this refers to ‘lady’ or ‘ pilgrimage.’_Ep. 

134. Something] See line 139; Ham. III, i, 173; Lear, I, i, 20, or ABBOTT, § 68, 
for other instances of this adverbial use like somewhat. 

134. port] STEEVENS: External pomp of appearance, state. 

135. continuance] CLARENDON: That is, continuance of. Such omissions are fre- 
quent in Shakespeare. See II, vi, 11; III, iv, 8; IV, i, 406; and see ABBOTT, § 394. 

136. to be] See I, i, 45. 

139. time] ScumipT defines this simply by %/e; but ALLEN notes that it is equiv- 
alent to dpa, when &p»a means the springtime of life, youth, manhood.—Ep. 

140. gag’d] HALLIwELL: That is, p/edged; not a contraction of engaged. 

145. it] That is, the plot or purpose. 


ACT I, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 17 


And if it ftand as you your felfe ftill do, 146 
Within the eye of honour, be affur’d 
My purfe, my perfon, my extreameft meanes 
Lye all vnlock’d to your occafions. 

Baf, In my fchoole dayes, when I had loft one fhaft 150 
I fhot his fellow of the felfefame flight 
The felfefame way, with more aduifed watch 


To finde the other forth, and by aduenturing both, 153 

146. fand | stands Rowe. Q,. the other, forth; Han. the other ; 
147. afurd] afurdQ,. affured Q.. Cap. 
149. unlock’d] vnlockt Qq. 153. and by aduenturing | byvent’ ring 
150. dayes, when] dayes. when Q,. Pope+. and, venturing Dyce cony. 
151, 152. /elfe/ame] felfe-fame Q.,. aduenturing| aduentring Q,, 

Setfe fame Q,Q,: Cap. Steev.’85, Mal. 


153. the other forth, | the other foorth, 


146. still] That is, constantly, always. STAUNTON was, I think, the first to call 
attention to this meaning of ‘still,’ instances of which are innumerable in Shakespeare. 

147. eye of honour] Ecciss: If it be of such a nature that honour may be sup- 
posed to keep a continual watch over it, or, rather, perhaps, if it be such as needs not 
at any time shrink from the view of honour. CLARENDON: That is, within the scope 
of honour’s vision, within the limits of that which can be regarded as honourable. 
ALLEN? Cf. 1 Hen. JV: I, i, 81, ‘The theme of Honour’s tongue.’ 

150, &c. STEEVENS: Compare Dekker’s Villanies discovered by Lanthorne and 
Candlelight : ‘And yet I have seen a Creditor in Prison weepe when he beheld the 
Debtor, and to lay out money of his owne purse to free him: he shot a second arrow to 
find the first.’ [I have searched in vain for this passage in Grosart’s edition; even if 
it could be found, it would be useless; the date of the pamphlet is 1609, and therefore 
subsequent to the Jer. of Ven. Steevens cites from the edition of 1616, wherein it is 
possible the passage appears.—Ep.] Douce cites a passage from ‘ P. Crescentius in 
his treatise de Agricultura, and another from Howell’s Lerters, where this method of 
finding an arrow is referred to; and CoLLizr, to the same effect, cites from Quips upon 
Questions, published in 1600, 

151. flight] Ascham, in his Zoxophi/us (B. p. 152, ed. Arber), lays it down, as a 
rule, that ‘a perfyte archer muste firste learne to knowe the sure flyghte of his shaftes.’ 
With this knowledge it would be possible, of course, as Bassanio says, to choose a ‘ fel- 
low of the selfsame flight.’ CLARENDON calls attention to another passage in Ascham 
[B. p. 131, ed. Arber], where this word ‘flight’ is used in precisely ‘the same sense 
which it has here:’ ‘ You must haue diuerse shaftes of one flight,’ &c.—Eb. 

152. aduised] Dyce: That is, deliberate. [See II, i, 48, and ‘advice,’ IV, 
ii, 8.] 

153. To finde] Cf. I, i, 45. 

153. forth] Craik (Jul. Ces. p. 40, 2d ed.): Zo find forth may, I apprehend, be 
safely pronounced to be neither English nor sense. The ‘forth’ has apparently been 
transferred from the preceding line, which was either originally written ‘The same way 
forth,’ or, more probably, was so corrected after having been originally written ‘The 
selfsame way.’ STAUNTON: It may not be English of the present day, but it was 

2 


18 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. i, 


I oft found both. I vrge this child-hoode proofe, 

Becaufe what followes is pure innocence. 155 
I owe you much, and like a wilfull youth, 

That which I owe is loft : but if you pleafe 

To fhoote another arrow that felfe way 

Which you did fhoot the firft, I do not doubt, 159 


156. wilfull] witless Warb. wasteful Coll. (MS), 


thought good sense and good English in the time of Shakespeare. ‘Forth’ here 
means owt, and with this import it is used in the following, and in a hundred other, 
instances: Com. of Err. I, ii, 37, where we have again the identical expression to 
‘find forth;’ 7wo Gent. II, iv, 186 [and here in this play, line 153. See Schmidt's 
Lex.| 

153. Various expedients have been devised to rid this line of its superfluous foot. 
Capell omits ‘forth ;’ Pope omits ‘and’ while contracting ‘adventuring’ to vent’ring ; 
Dyce proposes to omit ‘by’ and change ‘adventuring’ to venturing ; Lloyd (ap. Cam.) 
proposes to substitute 42 for ‘the other;’ and Abbott, § 466, would soften ‘other’ to 
a monosyllable. The line is unquestionably ungainly in length, but it runs throughout 
smoothly, and having a pause after the third foot, I imagine that Shakespeare’s ear was 
satisfied; I doubt if there be need of change.—ED. 

154. child-hoode proofe] WALKER (ili, p. 53) : Compare ‘ All school-days’ friend- 
ship, childhood innocence,’ AZzd. VV. D. III, li, 202. [For many other instances where 
the first of two nouns may be treated as a genitive used adjectively, see ABBOTT, § 22 
or § 430.] : 

155. pure innocence] DR JOHNSON interprets ‘pure innocence’ as ‘without dis- 
guising his former faults or his present designs.’ EccLes: ‘I bring as an example in 
proof of the probable success of the proposed expedient, one of the practices of child- 
hood, because my designs, as to everything to come, are as immocent and harmless as 
any of the purposes of youth in this kind of boyish amusement.’ [I think it is by no 
means certain that ‘pure innocence’ does not here mean pure foolishness. Bassanio 
assuredly was aware how flimsy was his pretext for Anthonio to send more good money 
after bad, and that his best argument was drawn from childish games, and therefore 
does not attempt to disguise the ‘innocence’ (in its frequent meaning of chi/dishness, 
Joolishness) of his proposal. Moreover, the greater the folly of the risk, the greater 
the proof of Anthonio’s friendship in assuming it.—ED.] 

156. wilfull youth] HzaTuH: It has happened to me, as it generally doth to a 
wilful youth, I have squandered away what I am now a debtor for. Eccirs: That is, 
‘that which, like a wilful youth, I owe, is lost.’ CLARENDON: ‘ Wilful’ here means 
obstinate in extravagance. ROLFE: ‘ Wilful’ in his prodigality. ScumipT: ‘ Wilful,’ 
i. e. regardless, reckless, saucy. In the present instance, ‘like a reckless boy I confess 
to you.’ [It seems to me that we need but give due weight to both syllables of < wil- 
ful,’ to have a meaning ample to fit the case. I doubt the correctness of Schmidt's 
interpretation.—ED. ] 

158. selfe] Compare ‘by self and violent hands,’ Afacé. V, viii, 70; ‘I am made 
of that self metal as my sister,’ Zeav, I, i, 68; or ABBOTT, § 20; or for many other 
instances, SCHMIDT’s Lex. CLARENDON says that this use of ‘self’ is frequent in 
Chaucer, and prevailed as late as Dryden’s time. 


ACT 1, sc. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 19 


As I will watch the ayme : Or to finde both, 160 
Or bring your latter hazard backe againe, 
And thankfully reft debter for the firft. 
An. You know me well,and herein {pend but time 
To winde about my loue with circumftance, 
And out of doubt you doe more wrong 165 
In making queftion of my vttermoft 
Then if you had made wafte of all I haue: 
Then doe but fay to me what I fhould doe 
That in your knowledge may by me be done, 
And I am preft vnto it : therefore fpeake. 170 
Baff, In Belmont is a Lady richly left, 


160. ayme:] ayme Q,Q,. ayme,Q,, 165. doe more] do to me more Ff, Rowe. 
Rowe et seq. do me now more Qq et cet. 
161. hazard backe] hazzard bake Q.. 167. wa/fte] waft Q,. 


164. winde] wind Q,Ff. 


160. As] ABBOTT, § 110: ‘ As, in its demonstrative meaning of sv, is occasionally 
found parenthetically equivalent to ‘for so.’ See I, iii, 76: ‘As his wise mother wrought 
in his behalf,’ i. e. ‘for so did his mother work.’ [See also Ham. IV, iii, 58; 73. IV, 
vil, 159; 20. V, ii, 323.] 

160, 161. Or... Or] See ABBorT, §136. This use of or... or is very frequent 
in B. & Fl. It is almost superfluous to call attention to the defective punctuation in 
line 160. The colon after ‘ayme’ was changed to a comma in Q,—Ep. 

164. To winde] That is, 7 winding. See I, i, 45. 

164. circumstance] HALLIWELL: This line appears to have been imitated in 
Cooke’s play of Greene’s Tu Quogue, or The Cittie Gallant: ‘Old Geraldine. You put 
us to a needless labour, sir, To run and wind about for circumstance; When the 
plain word, “I thank you,’ would have serv’d,’ [p. 283, Dodsley’s Old Plays, ed. 
Hazlitt. Dyce (G/oss.) defines ‘circumstance’ by defaz/, as does also SCHMIDT; but 
in Cotgrave we find ‘ Circuttion de paroles. A circumlocution, paraphrase, great cir- 
cumstance of words, a going about the bush.’—ED.] 

170. I am] By an error of the press, this is printed am J in the Var. 1778, and the 
error is continued in the Var. 1785. MASON (p. 73) corrected it, and in doing so quoted 
the phrase as, ‘am I prest to serve you,’ taking no note whatever of his own change 
of ‘unto’ into ¢o serve, which the Cam. Ed. accredits to him as a conjectural emenda- 
tion. Was it not a mere oversight ?—ED. 

170. prest] The best definition of this word, which, although by no means uncom- 
mon in early writers, is found in Shakespeare only here and in Pericles, IV, Pro- 
logue, 45, is, 1 think, obtained from Cotgrave, who gives it as the translation of the 
same word in French: ‘Prest: m. preste. f. Prest, readie, full-dight, furnished, prepared, 
prouided, prompt, neere at hand, quick, nimble, fleet, wight.” Steevens gives several 
instances of its use in the sense of ready, and says that he could add twenty more; 
but Staunton doubts (I think, needlessly) whether it is not used in this present passage 
in the sense of dound or urged.—ED. 


20 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. i. 


And fhe is faire, and fairer then that word, 172 
Of wondrous vertues, fometimes from her eyes 

I did receiue faire fpeechleffe meffages : 

Her name is Portia, nothing vndervallewd 175 
To Cato’s daughter, Brutus Portia, 

Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth, 

For the foure windes blow in from euery coaft 

Renowned futors , and her funny locks 

Hang on her temples like a golden fleece, 180 
Which makes her feat of Belmont Cholchos ftrond, 

And many Ja/ons come in queft of her. 

O my Anthonio, had I but the meanes 

To hold a riuall place with one of them, 

I haue a minde prefages me fuch thrift, 185 
That I fhould queftionleffe be fortunate. 


173. vertues,| vertues. Q,. 181, Cholchos] Colchos Q,. 
Sometimes | sometime Theob. Han. Jtrond] strand Johns. Steev. et 
Cap. seq. 
174. receiue] receaue Q,. 182. come] comes Q,. 
175. Portia,] Portia; Q,. 184. riuall place] rival-place Pope, 
undervallewd | under-valew'd Q,. Han, 


172. fairer] EccLes: The meaning is, that simply to declare that she was ‘ fair’ was 
a commendation not adequate to the perfection of her beauty. Perhaps these words 
are to be considered as having a relation to those which follow; as if she was to be 
esteemed ‘fairer’ in the possession of those ‘wond’rous virtues’ which adorn her 
mind, than in that of so many personal charms. 

173. sometimes] THEOBALD: This should certainly be sometime, i. e. formerly, 
some time ago, at a certain time; and it appears by a subsequent scene that Bassanio 
was at Belmont with the Marquis de Montferrat, and saw Portia in her father’s life- 
time. FARMER: In old English ‘sometimes’ is synonymous with formerly. Nothing 
is more frequent in title-pages than ‘sometimes fellow’ of such a college. CLAREN- 
DON: ‘Sometimes’ and ‘sometime’ are often used by Shakespeare indifferently, with 
the signification formerly, in time past. See Rich. JT: I, ii, 54, ‘Thy sometimes bro- 
ther’s wife.’ So also in the Authorized Version, Ephesians, ii, 13: ‘Ye who sometimes 
were far off.’ [Conf. Ozh. II, ii, 38: ‘What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds 
a parley to provocation ;’ also Zro. &* Cress. IV, v, 55: ‘ There’s language in her eye.’} 

176. To] ApgotTt, § 187: Zo, even without a verb of motion, means ‘ motion to the 
side of.’ Hence ‘motion to and consequent rest near.’ See ‘Impostors to true fear,’ 
Macb, III, iv, 64. [Thus in the present passage Portia will be found not inferior when 
orought to the side of, and compared with, Brutus’s Portia. So also fost, II, vii, 54. 

Beirg ten times vndervalued to tride gold.’] 

18, strond] CLARENDON: This was once, doubtless, the pronunciation of strana. 

Another allusion to the expedition of the Argonauts is found in this play, III, ii, 254. 


185. minde presages] For many other instances of the omission of the relative, 
see ABBOTT, § 244. 


ACT I, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 21 


Anth. Thou knowft that all my fortunes are at fea, 187 
Neither haue I money, nor commodity 
To raife a prefent fumme, therefore goe forth 
Try what my credit can in Venice doe, 190 
That fhall be rackt euen to the vttermoft, 
To furnifh thee to Belmont to faire Portia. 
Goe prefently enquire, and fo will I 
Where money is, and I no queftion make 
To haue it of my truft, or for my fake. Exeunt. 195 


[Scene LL. 


Enter Portia with her waiting woman Neriffa. 


Portia. By my troth Nerriffa, my little body is a wea- 


rie of this great world. 3 
188. Weither] Nor Pope+, Steev.’85. Cap. 
189. /umme,| /umme. Q,. 1. Enter... Enter Portia and Nerrissa. 
190. credit] credite Q,. Rowe et seq. 
[Scene II. Belmont. Rowe et seq. Neriffa] Nerriffa Qq. 
[Three Caskets are set out, one of gold, 2. Nerriffa] Neriffa Le dye 

another of silver, and another of lead. a wearie] awearieQ,Q,. weary F, 


Rowe+. A Room in Portia’s House. F,, Rowe+. aweary Cap. et seq. 


188. Neither] For many instances where ‘ezther, neither, whether, mother, brother, 
and some other dissyllables in which the final ther is preceded by a vowel,—perhaps in 
some measure, all words in ¢er,—are frequently used either as monosyllables, or as so 
nearly such that in a metrical point of view they may be regarded as monosyllables,’ see 
WALKER, Vers. p. 103; ABBOTT, § 466; or BROWNE, p. 10. CLARENDON says that 
this speech of Antonio is ‘scarcely consistent with what he had previously said’ (lines 
46-50), that his ‘whole estate’ was not placed ‘upon the fortunes of this present yeere.’ 

188. commodity] See SCHMIDT, s. v., for instances of the use of this word in the 
meanings of convenience (as in III, iii, 32); of profit, advantage; of merchandise (as 

- here); and of guantity of wares, parcels. 

193. presently] That is, at once, immediately. 

195. of ] ABBOTT, § 168: ‘Of, meaning from, passes naturally into the meaning 
resulting from, as a consequence of. ECCLEs: That is, either raise it upon my credit, 
or obtain it on account of the affection entertained for me by the lender. 

2. LaDy MARTIN (p. 33): Although Portia is heart-whole, yet she is not ‘fancy 
free.’ We learn from Nerissa that in her father’s time there was one visitor, a ‘ Veni- 
tian, a scholar, and a soldier,’ whom Nerissa considered of all men the ‘best deserving 
a fair lady.’ Portia responds very briefly, but suggestively: ‘I remember him well; 
and I remember him worthy of thy praise.’ Often, no doubt, has she wondered why 
he has not presented himself among her suitors. Unconsciously, perhaps, the languor 
of hope deferred speaks in these first words we hear from her. The one who she 
thought might rossibly have been among the first comers, comes not at all. 

2. a wearie This is, of course, me:ely a compositor’s uncouth way of setting up 


22 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. i. 


Ner. You would be fweet Madam , if your miferies 
were in the fame abundance as your good fortunes are: 5 
and yet for ought I fee, they are as ficke that furfet with 
too much, as they that ftarue with nothing ; it is no fmal 
happineffe therefore to bee feated in the meane, fuper- 
fluitie comes fooner by white haires, but competencie 
liues longer. 10 
Portia. Good fentences,and well pronounc’d. 
Ner. They would be better if well followed. 
Portia. If to doe were as eafie as to know what were 
good to doe, Chappels had beene Churches, and poore 


mens cottages Princes Pallaces: it is a good Diuine that 15 

followes his owne inftructions; I can eafier teach twen- 

tie what were good to be done, then be one of the twen- 17 
5. abundance] aboundance Q.,. it ts no mean happineffe therefore Qq et 
6. furfet] furfeite Q,. cet. 
7, 8. tt...therefore] FF yy Kant, Wh. i, 9. but] and Han. 

Huds. Therefore tt is no small happi- 15. 2] He Pope+. 

ness F., Rowe, Pope, Han. therefore tt 17. be] to be Qq, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


ts no mean happiness Theob. Warb. Johns. Warb. Johns. 


awearie. The preposition a, here used as a prefix, conveys in this instance the idea 
of state. See MuRRAY’s Mew Eng. Dict.s.v. 11: ‘as a live, a sleep, a work, a jar, 
a thirst, a blaze, a fright, a float, a stare, In these the word governed by @ was orig- 
inally a noun, e. g. Le, sleep, work, float (“on the Mediterranean flote ”— Zens. I, ii, 
234), but being often the verbal substantive of state or act, it has been in modern times 
erroneously taken as a verb, and used as a model for forming such adverbial phrases 
from any verb, as a-wash, a-blaze, a-bask, a-swim, a-flaunt, a-blow, a-dance, a-run, 
a-stare, a-gaze, a-howl, a-tremble, a-shake, a-jump. These are purely modern and ana- 
logical.’ [We have agazed in 1 Hen. VI; II, iv, 126.—EpD.] ABBOTT, § 24, p. 35° 
In a-weary it can scarcely be said that weary is a noun. Rather ‘a-weary,’ like ‘ of 
walked,’ means ‘ of-weary,’ i. e. ‘tired out.’ 

7. with] ALLEN (MS): ‘ With’ is explained by ‘7 the mean’ (in the next line), 
and is equivalent to apud, chez, by. 

7. smal] The reading of the Qq, mean, is much to be preferred; in the: Ff, as 
CLARENDON says, the play upon the word ‘mean’ is lost. 

g. comes sooner by] WRIGHT (ible Word-Book): To get, acquire. Conf. «we 
had much work to come by the boat.’—Acés, xxvii, 16. ‘Translation it is... . that 
remooueth the couer of the well, that we may come by the water.’— 7he Translators 
to the Reader. See also in this present play, I, i, 7, ‘how I caught it, found it, or 
came by it.’ 

g. but] I cannot say that I see the force of this adversative ‘but ;’ Hanmer changed 
it to avd, which seems the more fitting word.— Ep. 

II. sentences] CLARENDON: That is, maxims. ALLEN (MS): Sententie, yrouat, 

15. it is a good Diuine, &c.] WorpsworTH (p. 264): An observation which 
must find an echo in every clergyman’s breast. 


ACT 1, sc. ii] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 23 


tie to follow mine owne teaching : the braine may de- 18 
uife lawes for the blood, but a hot temper leapes ore a 
colde decree, fuch a hare is madneffe the youth, to skip 20 


ore the mefhes of good counfaile the cripple ; but this 

reafon is not in fafhion to choofe me a husband : O mee, 

the word choofe, I may neither choofe whom I would, 

nor refufe whom I diflike, fo is the wil of a liuing daugh- 

ter curb’d by the will of a dead father : it is not hard Wer- 25 
riffa, that I cannot choofe one, nor refufe none. 


Ner. Your father was euer vertuous, and holy men oN 4 
18. mine] my Theob. Warb. Johns. 22. fafhion] Ff, Rowe. the fashion 
1g. ore] over Steev. Mal. Sing. Ktly. Qgq et cet. 
21. counfatle] QF ,Q,. coun/fell Q,. husband :| husband; Q,. hus. 
22. reafon] Ff, Rowe. rea/foning Qq band, QQ; 
et cet. 23, 24. whom...whom] who...who Qq, 
in] the Mason. 25. 2 ts] 2s 2¢ QqFf et cet. 


Nerriffa] Neriffa ONoA Vs 


"18, braine] BucKNILL (p. 93): The tyranny of desire over reason is here stated 
physiologically: the ‘blood’ in this sense being always used poetically for the prompt- 
ings of animal passion. A better knowledge has indeed exploded the theory, and 
attributed both reason and passion to the brain, though to different parts of it. 

22. reason is not in] After noting that the reading of the Qq: ‘this reasoning is 
not in the fashion,’ has been ‘universally’ deemed correct, WHITE adds that he is 
not ‘ prepared positively to dissent from this decision; although, had there been no Qq, 
the text of F, is sufficiently clear and sufficiently in accordance with the usage of Shake- 
speare’s day not to have needed emendation.’ On the other hand, CLARENDON pro- 
nounces ‘reason’ of F, ‘a manifest error.’ [I quite agree with White as to the need- 
lessness of emendation, and am inclined to go even farther and regard the reading of 
F, as being, so far from a ‘ manifest error,’ the better of the two. ‘Reason’ here is not 
ratiocination, which is what ‘reasoning’ is, and what Portia, having stated merely facts, 
has not attempted, but is used, as in many another passage, in the sense of speech, dis- 
course, talk ; just as it is used later in this very play, where Salarino says, ‘I reason’d 
with a Frenchman yesterday ’—II, viii, meaning simply ‘I talked with a Frenchman.’ 
Thus, here, Portia exclaims, according to F,, ‘But all this talk will never pick out a 
husband for me.’ The omission of the indefinite article, or even the definite article, 
in ‘in fashion’ for ‘in @ fashion,’ or ‘in ¢ke fashion,’ is common enough; see ABBOTT, 
§§ 82, 90.—Ep.] On the meaning of the whole passage, EccLEs remarks: Perhaps 
Portia designs to insinuate that maxims of prudence, such as those uttered at first by 
Nerissa, relative to the insufficiency of superabundant wealth to procure happiness to 
the possessor, and afterward expressed by herself upon the difference between specula- 
"tive and practical wisdom, might, indeed, be of use to others, by inspiring them with 
caution in the choice of a husband, but could afford no advantage of such nature to 
her, who is precluded, hy the determination of her father, from any exercise of her 
judgment upon that subject. 

24, 25. wil... will] CLARENDON: Shakespeare, more suo, plays upon the two 
senses of ‘will.’ 


24 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act 1, Sc. ii, 


at their death haue good infpirations, therefore the lot- 28 
terie that hee hath deuifed in thefe three chefts of gold, 
filuer, and leade, whereof who choofes his meaning, 30 


choofes you, wil no doubt neuer be chofen by any right- 
ly, but one who you fhall rightly loue : but what warmth 
is there in your affe€tion towards any of thefe Princely 
futers that are already come? 


Por. 1 pray thee ouer-name them, and as thou nameft 35 
them, I will defcribe them, and accords, to my defcrip- 
tion leuell at my affection. 37 
28. lotterie) lottry Q,Q,- lottrie Q,- Glo. Cla. Huds. whom you Pope+, Coll. 
lottery Ff. Clarke. 
31. wil...neuer] no doubt you wil 35. pray thee] prethee Q,. 
neucr Q,. nameft| nam’st Pope+. 
32. who you] who Q,, Johns. Cam. 36. de/cription] de/cription, Q,Q,F.F,. 


32. The Folio here follows the Second Quarto. CLARENDON adopts the First Quarto 
as ‘the higher authority.’ I prefer it as giving us the better text, although this very pas- 
sage has been cited by FURNIVALL as an instance of its inferiority to Q,, in so far as it 
‘leaves out a necessary word.’ (Forewords to Q,,p.v.) In the text before us ‘the lotterie’ 
is nominative to ‘ will no doubt neuer be chosen,’ and the sense is that the lottery will 
be sure to fall on some one whom Portia ‘ rightly loves;’ and that this is the right mean- 
ing, says ROLFE, appears from the question which follows: ‘ What affection have you 
for any of the suitors that are a/ready come?’ On the contrary, I think the very point 
of Nerissa’s comforting is lost in the present text. The very idea of the lottery was a 
holy inspiration, the choice of a husband is committed to Heaven, and he who is the 
right husband for Portia will know how to choose the right casket, he cannot choose 
the wrong one; no unfit husband will have the sterling qualities to choose the right 
one. And this is the text of Q,.. It reads: ‘no doubt you wil neuer be chofen by 
any rightly, but one who fhall rightly loue.’? ‘Who’ is the nominative, in sense as well 
as in form; not the accusative (‘who’ is often enough used for wom, but not here) 
That this is the true meaning Portia herself tells us, I think, in plain words, where 
she says to Bassanio (III, ii, 44), ‘ Jf you do love me, you will find me out. His capa- 
city to find her is the very test of his ‘rightly’ loving her. The punctuation of Q, 
should be amended by a full stop before the sentence I have given above, thus: ‘holy 
men.... have good inspirations, therefore [i. e. hence there is] the lottery that he 
hath devised . . . . whereof who chooses his meaning chooses you. No doubt you will 
never, &c. As both the Quartos were issued in the same year and were probably 
printed by the same man, the question of superiority is a nice one, and can be deter- 
mined only by a careful weighing of the texts. In the present instance I think the 
Scales turn decidedly in favour of Q..—Ep. 

35. thee] For the use of thou and you, see Ofh. II, ii, 275, in this edition, where 
SKEAT’s general rule is given: ‘ Zhou is the language of a lord to a servant, of an 
equal to an equal, and expresses also companionship, love, permission, defiance, scorn, 
threatening; whilst ye is the language of a servant to a lord, and of compliment, and 
further expresses honour, submission, entreaty.’—Preface to William of Palerne, p. 
xlii, Se+ also ABBOTT, §§ 231, 232. 


ACT I, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 25 


Ner. Firft there is the Neopolitane Prince. 38 
Por. I that’s a colt indeede, for he doth nothing but 
talke of his horfe, and hee makes it a great appropria- 40 


tion to his owne good parts that he can fhoo him him- 
felfe : I am much afraid my Ladie his mother plaid falfe 
with a Smyth. 


Ner. Than is there the Countie Palentine. 44 
38. Meopolitane] Neapolitane Q.F.. 43. Smyth] /mith Q,. 
Neapolitan F,. Neopolitan F 44. Than] Q,. 
39. colt] Dolt Theob. Han. ts there] there is Q., Pope+, Cam. 
49, 41. appropriation to] appropriation Glo. Cla, Wh. ii. 
unto Q,. approbation of Coll. ii. (MS). Countie]Q,. CountyQ,. Count 
41. him] Om. Q,. Pope+. 
42. afraid] afeard Q,Q,, Cap. Cam. 44, 57. Palentine] Q,FEQ,, Rowe. 
Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. afear'd Q.. Palatine Q,, Pope et seq. 


37. leuell] That is, azz az. It is here the imperative. 

38. Neopolitane] STEEVENS: The Neapolitans, in the time of Shakespeare, were 
eminently skilled in all that belongs to horsemanship. MALONE: Though our author, 
when he composed this play, could not have read the following passage in Florio’s . 
translation of Montaigne’s Zssazes, 1603, he had perhaps met with the relation in some 
other book of that time: ‘While I was a young lad,’ says old Montaigne, ‘I saw the 
prince of Salmona, at Naples, manage a young, rough, and fierce horse, and show all 
manner of horsemanship; to hold testons or reals under his knees and toes so fast as if 
they had been nayled there, and all to show his sure, steady, and immoveable sitting.’ 

39. colt] JoHNsON: ‘Colt’ is used for a witless, heady, gay youngster, whence the 
phrase is used of an old man too juvenile that he still retains his colt’s tooth. 

40. appropriation] CoLLIER (Votes & Emend. p. 113): This is altered by the 
(MS) to approbation of, in the sense of proof,—a great proof of his own good parts, 
&c. Approbation is not unfrequently used by Shakespeare for probation; whereas, if 
‘appropriation’ were his word, this is the only place where he has employed it. SINGER 
(Sk. Vind. p. 32): ‘ Appropriation to’ is equivalent to addition fo his other accomplish- 
ments. Nothing can be concluded from this being the only instance of Shakespeare’s 
use of the word. Dyce called this substitution by Collier’s (MS) ‘cool,’ but CoLLizr, 
in his Second Ed., adopted it and pronounced it ‘excellent.’ In his Third Ed. he 
silently relinquished it (as he relinquished so many other of his (MS) emendations in 
his venerable age), and returned to ‘ appropriation.’ Ep. 

41. shoo him himself] Q, omits ‘him,’ a common enough compositor’s over- 
sight. Rather than present all the more noticeable variations between Q, and Q, in 
a dry and appalling table in the Appendix, I prefer to give a few lines to them, here 
and there, as they occur, on the same page with the text. In the Appendix (p. 275) 
will be found a recapitulation of many of these variations, wherefrom a conclusion may 
be drawn as to the relative excellence of each Qto. I do not hesitate to avow my 
preference for Q,, albeit on the title-page of Pretorius’s Reprint of Q,, London, 1887, 
it is stated to be that of ‘The Second (and better) Quarto.’.—Ep. 

44. Countie Palentine] JoHNson: The Count here mentioned was, perhaps, 
Albertus a Lasco, a Polish Palatine, who visited England in our author’s ‘ifetime, was 
eagerly caressed and splendidly entertained; but running in debt, at last stole away, - 


26 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. ii. 


Por. He doth nothing but frowne (as who fhould 45 
fay,and you will not haue me, choofe : he heares merrie 
tales and {miles not, I feare hee will proue the weeping 
Phylofopher when he growes old, being fo full of vn- 
mannerly fadneffe in his youth.) I had rather to be marri- 
ed to a deaths head with a bone in his mouth, then to ei- 50 
ther of thefe : God defend me from thefe two. 

Ner. How fay you by the French Lord, Mounfier 


Le Boune? 53 
46. and] FfQ,. 7Q: Pope +, Cam. 50. deaths head | Death/-head Q.. 

Glo, Cla. Huds. Wh. ii. & Q.. An 52. Mounfier] Monfieur Rowe. 

Cap. et cet. 53- Boune] QqF,. Boun F,F,, Rowe+. 


48. Phylofopher]Q,. Philofopher Q,. Bon Cap. et seq. 
49. to be] Ff, Rowe. Je Qq et cet. 


and endeavored to repair his fortune by enchantment. MALONE: County and Count 
were synonymous. The Count Alasco was in London in 1583. CLARENDON: The 
visit of Albert a Lasco, or Laski, took place when our author was still in Stratford, and 
so long before the production of this play that the allusion would be unintelligible to 
the audience. HALLIWELL: There was another County Palatine, who married the 
daughter of James I, and who was a frequent spectator of the plays of Shakespeare, 
when they were exhibited before the Court; but the present allusion, appearing in the 
original editions, can scarcely be applicable’to that personage, unless he had visited 
England previous to the accession of his future father-in-law. 

45. as who] See I, i, 103. 

46. and] For ‘and’ equivalent to 7f see ABBOTT, § 101, and for and 7f, see Jb., 
§ 105. 

46. choose] What has frowning to do with an alternative choice? What is the 
threat that is here implied? I confess I do not understand the connection of thought. 
Does it mean, ‘If you will not have me, I don’t care, take your choice?’ or is it, ‘If 
you will not have me, let it alone?’ This is the sense in which Schlegel, endorsed by 
Schmidt, translates it: ‘wenn ihr mich nicht haben wollt, so lasst’s!’ and this same 
sense Schmidt retained when, in his invaluable Lexicon, he gives the passage under a 
meaning of the verb 0 choose, as ‘to do at one’s pleasure.’ Although several othe 
instances are there given under this head, only two of them seem to me fairly ger 
mane, viz: Tam. of the Sh. V, i, 48, and Merry Wives, I, i, 316. In the herme 
neutical torture to which one always subjects a puzzling phrase, it has even occurred to 
me that, modifying the punctuation, it might read, in view of the Countie’s black looks, 
‘If you will not have me choose—’ i. e. if you will not suffer me to make trial of the 
ciskets—take the consequences !.—Ep, 

47. weeping Phylosopher] CLARENDON: That is, another Heraclitus, 

49. to be married] For the infinitive after ‘I had rather,’ see O74. I, iii, 217, in this 
edition; or ABBOTT, § 349. 

52. by] See Anport, § 145, for other instances where ‘by’ means about, concern- 
tng. See also ‘That many may be meant By the foole multitude,’ II, ix, 28, where, as 


I think, ‘by’ is used idiomatically after ‘mean,’ and is, perhaps, not exactly parallel to 
she present usage.—Ep, 


ACT'I, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 27 


Pro. God made him, and therefore let him paffe for a 
man, in truth I know it is a finne to be a mocker, but he, 55 
why he hath a horfe better then the Neopolitans, a bet- 
ter bad habite of frowning then the Count Palentine, he 
is euery man in no man, if a Traffell fing, he fals ftraight 
a capring, he will fence with his own fhadow. If I fhould 
marry him, I fhould marry twentie husbands: if hee 60 
would defpife me, I would forgiue him, for if he loue me 
to madneffe, I fhould neuer requite him. 
Ner. What fay you then to Fauconbridge, the yong 
Baron of England ? 
Por. You know I fay nothing to him, for hee vnder- 65 
ftands not me, nor I him - he hath neither Lazine, French, 


54. Pro.] F.. 58. ftraight] feraght Q.,,. 
55. @ fii inne] Jinne FF. jin F,. 62. /hould]| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han 
56. Meopolitans] Weapolitens Q.Ff. Jhall Qq et cet. 


58. Traffell] Qq. TarffellF,. Taffell 63. you] Om. Cap. (corrected in Er- 
F,. Tafel F,, Rowe. throstle Pope et _—rata), 
seq. 64. Baron] Barron Q.. 


56, 57. better bad] This is not a ‘ detter-bad habit,’ as HALLIWELL thinks, whose 
note is, ‘ de¢fer is here used as an intensative, without the usual implication of good- 
ness; better bad, that is, worse ;’ but it is a ‘ better dad-Aadit, and so, I think, it should 
be printed in a modernized text.—ED. 

58. Trassell] All modern editions follow Pope in changing this to throst/e, and with 
propriety; but it is nut to be supposed that ‘trassell’ is a misprint; it is merely the 
phonetic spelling of ¢hrostle.—ED. 

59. a capring] For other instances of this prefix a, see ABBOTT, § 24. 

62. should] Despite the editorial unanimity with which the sa// of the Qq has been 
preferred to this ‘should,’ I cannot but think that the Folio is right, and that in shai 
some of the sparkle of Portia’s fun is lost. She is not foretelling the state of her 
affection for a future husband, but her capacity to love twenty husbands, all of them 
loving her te madness; such a multitudinous love as that, she would never be able to 
Tequite.—Ep. 

65. say] CLARENDON: Portia playfully uses the phrase ‘say to’ in a different sense 
from that which Nerissa meant. 

66. neither Latine] STAuNToN: This satirical allusion to our ignorance in ‘the 
tongues’ has not yet lost all its point. 

PRoEtss (Kauf. von Ven. Erlautert, 1875, p. 128): It is to be inferred from this 
passage that, in Shakespeare’s time, a knowledge of these three languages was an in- 
dispensable requisite of a man of culture; Portia laughs at the Baron for his ignorance 
of them. It would hz72 been impossible for Shakespeare.to hold up to ridicule this 
ignorance, had he himself come under the same condemnation. [A shrewd remark, 
which will neutralize a page at least of Dr Farmer’s Zssay, which was written to prove 


Shakespeare’s ignorance of these very languages.—ED.] 


2d THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. IL 


nor Jtalian, and you will come into the Court & fweare 67 
that I haue a poore pennie-worth in the Exgit/h : hee is a 
proper mans piéture, but alas who can conuerfe with a 
dumbe fhow ? how odly he is fuited, I thinke he bought 70 
his doublet in /tale, his round hofe in France, his bonnet 
in Germanie, and his behauiour euery where. 

Ner. What thinke you of the other Lord his neigh 
bour? 

Por. That he hath a neighbourly charitie in him, for 75 
he borrowed a boxe of the eare of the Angli/hman, and 


{wore he would pay him againe when hee was able: I vif 
67. will] may Pope+. 73. other] Ff, Rowe. Scotti/h Qq et 
68. the] Om. Rowe. cet. 


77. [wore] fworne ¥,. 


67. you will] ABBOTT, § 320: Perhaps this means ‘you are willing and prepared.’ 

67. Court] CLARENDON: You will bear me witness that I have but a very small 
stock of English. 

69. proper mans picture] STEEVENS: ‘Proper’ means handsome, STAUNTON: 
The word with this import is so common, that it is needless to give examples; they 
may be found in every play of the time. ALLEN (MS) suggests that it should be 
printed ‘ proper man’s-picture ;’ [wherein I agree with him; in which case I think that 
‘proper’ is to be taken in the sense of very, just as it is in ‘though our proper son stood 
in your action.’— Ofh. I, iii, 84.—EDb. ] 

71. doublet... round hose] HALLIWELL: ‘If you aske why I have put him in 
rounde hose, that usually weares Venetians, it is because I would make him looke more 
dapper, and plump, and round upon it.’—Nash’s Have with You to Saffron Walden, 
1596. CLARENDON: Planché (Hist. of Brit. Costume, p. 266) quotes from Stubbs 
‘The French hose are of “two divers making; the common sort contain length 
breadth, and sideness sufficient, and they are made very round.” ’ On p. 267 Planché 
describes the quilted doublet, and adds: ‘These bombasted doublets formed a point in 
front... . to this day the dress of our friend Punch, whose wardrobe of Italian origin 
dates as nearly as possible from this identical period.’ 

73. Other] THEOBALD: This word was substituted for Scotti/z of the Qq, fur fear of 
giving offence to King James’s countrymen. CAPELL (ii, 59) : 1598, if not earlier, is the 
date of this play’s birth; at which time, Portia’s gentle wipe upon Scotland, and upon 
France, her almost constant ally in all her quarrels with England, in which neither were 
very fortunate, sounded gratefully enough in ears that had very likely been witnesses [sic] 
to some of those ‘boxes’ [line 76], perhaps actors in them: but things altering shortly 
after upon the Scottish accession, a change of one of the quoted words [Scottish], in 
way of softening, is found in the player editor’s copy [i.e. F,]; but when made, or by 
whom, we have no foundation for guessing. COLLIER (ed. ii): In the (MS) Jrish is 
substituted for ‘Scottish.’ ‘A suggestion,’ says HALLIWELL, ‘which is at variance with 
Portia’s subsequent allusion to the Frenchman, and which would have been more appro- 


priate to the first portion of her reply had the comedy been written after the Irish rebel 
lion in 1641.’ 


ACT I, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 29 


thinke the Frenchman became his furetie, and feald vnder 78 
for another. 
Ner. How like you the yong Germaine, the Duke of 80 
Saxonies Nephew ? 
Por. Very vildely in the morning when hee is fober, 
and moft vildely in the afternoone when hee is drunke: 
_ when he is beft, he is a little worfe then a man, and when 
he is worft, he is little better then a beaft : and the worft 85 
fall that euer fell, I hope I fhall make fhift to goe with- 
out him. 
Ner. If he fhould offer to choofe, and choofe the right 
Casket, you fhould refufe to performe your Fathers will, 
if you fhould refufe to accept him. go 
Por. Therefore for feare of the worft, I pray thee fet 
a deepe glaffe of Reinifh-wine on the contrary Casket, 


for if the diuell be within, and that temptation without, 93 
82. vildely] vildlieQ,. vildly Q,. the Han. an the Cap. et cet. 
83. vildely] vilely Q,. vildly Q.,. Ql. pray thee| prethee Q,. 

videly Q,. widely Herr. 92. Reinifh-wine] Reyni/n WineQ,Q,. 


85. and the] QqFf, Rowe+. and, Reynifhe vvine Q,. Rennifh-wine FF. 


78. Frenchman] WARBURTON: Alluding to the constant assistance, or rather con- 
stant promises of assistance, that the French gave the Scots in their quarrels with the 
English. 

79. for another] CLARENDON: That is, for another box on the ear. The principal 
was said to ‘seal to’ a bond; his surety ‘sealed under.’ 

80, &c. JOHNSON: Perhaps in the enumeration of Portia’s suitors there may be some 
covert allusion to those of Queen Elizabeth. 

85. and] Equivalent to 74 as noted by CAPELL. 

89, 90. should] ABBOTT, § 322: Should is the past tense of shal/, and underwent 
the same modifications of meaning as ska//. Hence should is not now used with the 
second person to denote mere futurity, since it suggests a notion, if not of compulsion, 
at least of bounden duty. But in a conditional phrase, ‘If you should refuse,’ there 
can be no suspicion of compulsion. We therefore retain this use of shoz/d in the condi- 
tional clause, but use wou/d in the consequent clause: ‘If you should refuse, you would 
do wrong.’ On the other hand, Shakespeare used shoz/d in both clauses [as here]. 

92. Reinish-wine] Doubtless this wine is mentioned because of the young German, 
but HALLIWELL gives an extract from Fynes Moryson’s /éimerary, 1617, in which it is 
said that the Germans only ‘sometimes and rarely drinke Rhenish wine,’ but ‘com- 
monly beere.? In Arber’s Zxglish Garner there is an account by Dean William Tur- 
ner of the different wines drunk in England in 1568, wherein the Dean, who was also 
a Doctor of Physic, says that ‘the Rhenish wine that is commonly drunken in gentle- 
men’s houses and citizens’ houses is commonly a year old at the least, before it be 
drunken: and therefore it is older than the common clared wine, which dureth not 
commonly above one year.’—ED. 


Pa THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [acr1, 8c. ii 


I know he will choofe it. I will doe any thing Merriffa 
ere I will be married to a fpunge. 95 
Ner. You neede not feare Lady the hauing any of 
thefe Lords, they haue acquainted me with their deter- 
minations, which is indeede to returne to their home, 
and to trouble you with no more fuite, vnleffe you may 
be won by fome other fort then your Fathers impofiti- 100 
on, depending on the Caskets. 
Por. If 1 liue to. be as olde as Szdz//a, I will dye as 
chafte as Diana: vnlieffe I be obtained by the manner 
of my Fathers will: I am glad this parcell of wooers 


are fo reafonable, for there is not one among them but 105 
I doate on his verie abfence : and I wifh them a faire de- 
parture. 107 
94. Nerriffa] Neriffa Q,F,F,. 103. chafte] chaf QF. 
95. Iwill] ile Q.. 106. J wifh them] F,, Knt, Wh. i, 
97. determinations | determination Rife. wish them F,F,, Rowe+. J pray 
Rowe, Ktly. God grant them Qq (graunt Q,) et 
100. your] you F,. cet. 


96. the hauing] For other instances of the preceding a verbal that is followed by 
an object, see ABBOTT, § 93. 

97. determinations] ALLEN (MS): One expects (even in Shakespeare) determina- 
tion, for it means that ome determination which is common to all; and it is strange to 
have ‘home’ just after, where Aomes, i. e. their respective homes, would be natural. 
Cf, ‘leave,’ line 121. [See Text. Notes. ] 

100. sort] WHITE: Here used in its radical sense; sors, a lot. CLARENDON: It is 
thus used in Zvo. & Cress. I, ili, 376. In the present instance the phrase means—by 
some other method or manner. ROLFE: It may be as White suggests. [Whereto I 
also agree, but possibly White, having in mind the phrase ‘ by lot,’ may have been influ- 
enced here by the use of ‘4y some other sort.’ Conf. in Portia’s next speech, ‘dy the 
manner.’—ED. ] 

102. Sibilla] CLARENDON: Used erroneously as if it were a proper name. So in 
Tam. Shr. I, ii, 70: ‘As old as Sibyl.’ But Shakespeare speaks of ‘nine sibyls,’ 
1 Hen. VII, ii, 56, and in Off. III, iv, 74. RoLFE: So Bacon, in Colours of Good 
and Evil, 10, speaks of ‘ Syéz/la, when she brought her three books,’ and in Adv. of 
Learn. ii, 23, 33, of ‘Sybille’s books.’ The reference here is to the Cumzan Sibyl, 
who obtained from Apollo a promise that her years should be as many as the grains 
of sand she was holding in her hand. The story is told by Ovid, AZez. xv. 

103. chaste] WHITE: It is to be feared that a vicious and unfounded use of this 
word, which has long prevailed, has produced in some minds a deplorable confusion 
of thought. Chastity and continence are far from being identical; the one is a virtue, 
the other is not. An honorable matron is as chaste as a maid; Diana was no chaster 
than Penelope, and Portia as chaste after she was Bassanio’s wife as before. It is but 
ue to our own wives and mothers to say at least so much upon this passage. 

106. I wish] See Textual Notes. CoLLIER: The Qq were printed before the Act 


ACT I, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 31 


Ner. Doe you not remember Ladie in your Fa- 108 
thers time, a Venecian, a Scholler and a Souldior that 
came hither in companie of the Marqueffe of Mount- 110 
Jerrat? 


Por. Yes, yes, it was Baffanio, as I thinke, fo was hee 
call’d. 
ver. True Madam, hee of all the men that euer my 
foolifh eyes look’d vpon, was the beft deferuing a faire 115 
Lady. 
Por. remember him well, and I remember him wor- 
thy of thy praife. 


Enter a Seruingman. 


Ser. The foure Strangers feeke you Madam to take 120 
their leaue : and there is a fore-runner come from a fift, 


109. @ Scholler] Scholler Q,. praife. Hownow, what newes ? Qq et cet. 
110. hither] hether Q,. 120. /eeke you] Ff, Rowe. /eeke for 
112. fo was hee] he was fo Q,, Pope, you Qq et cet. 

Cam. Glo. Cla. so he was Steev.’85. Madam] MadameQ,. maddam 


118. prai/e.] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Wh. Rife. Ox 


3 Jac. I, c. 21 [1605], against using the name of the Creator on the stage, Yet, else- 
where, the Folio has ‘God forbid,’ ‘God rest his soul,’ and other expressions where the 
name of the Creator occurs. WHITE: ‘I wish them’ of F, suits the occasion and Por- 
tia’s lips better than the reading of the Qq. CLARENDON reprints the Act of 3 Jac. I, 
c. 21, ‘to restrain the abuses of Players: For the preventing and avoiding of the great 
abuse of the holy Name of God, in Stage-playes, Enterludes, May-games, Shews, and 
such like, Be it enacted by our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, and by the Lords 
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and 
by the authority of the same, That if at any time or times after the end of this present 
Session of Parliament, any person or persons do or shall in any Stage-play, Enterlude, 
Sew [shew], May-game, or Pageant, jestingly or prophanely speak, or use the holy Name 
of God, or of Jesus Christ, or of the Holy Ghost, or of the Trinity, which are not to be 
spoken, but with fear and reverence, shall forfeit for every such offence by him or them 
committed, ten pounds; The one moiety thereof to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and 
Successors, the other moiety thereof to him or them that will sue for the same in any 
Court of Record at Westminster, wherin no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall 
be allowed.’ (Statutes at Large, ed. 1695.) 

118. praise] See Text. Notes. KniGHT: The questions in the Qq may well be 
spared; they do not belong to Portia’s calm and dignified character. WHITE: It was 
not Portia’s way to call out thus [as in the Qq] to her attendants the moment they 
showed themselves in her presence. 

120. foure] HUNTER (i, 322): The recovery of the original play mentioned by Gosson 
would doubtless throw much light upon the composition of 7he Mer. of Ven. as we now 
have it. In its present state it seems to have been subjected to correction, alteration, and 


32 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [AcT I, SC. ii 


the Prince of Moroco, who brings word the Prince his 122 
Maifter will be here to night. 
Por. If I could bid the fift welcome with fo good 
heart as I can bid the other foure farewell, I fhould be 125 
glad of his approach : if he haue the condition of a Saint, 
and the complexion of a diuell, I had rather hee fhould 
fhriue me then wiue me. Come WVerriffa, firra go before ; 
whiles wee fhut the gate vpon one wooer, another 


knocks at the doore. _ Exeunt. 13U 
123. Matfer] Q, Mafter Q, et 128. Come] Come in Ktly. 

cet. 128-130. Come...doore] As verse, the 
124. good | good a Q,, Han. Cam. Glo. first line ending Jefore, Knt, Dyce, Coll. 

Ula. Wh. ii. ii. et seq. (Prose, Coll. iii.) 
125. farewell] farwell Q,. 129. gate] gates Q,, Cam. Glo. Cla. 
127. complexion] complection Q,. Rife, Wh. ii. 


addition after it had been once completed, but doubtless all by Shakespeare’s own hand, 
though one passage at least remained not accommodated to the changes which were 
made. The passage is: ‘The four strangers,’ &c.; but in all the copies, beginning 
with the earliest, there were six, namely, the Neapolitan, the County Palatine, the 
French lord, the English lord, the Scottish lord, and the young German. It may be 
presumed that the number originally was only four, and that the two added on a revisal 
were the English and Scottish lords, the better to please an English audience. 

124, 125. so... as] See ABBOTT, § 275, for similar instances where we should say 
Digs of ke 

126. condition] MAtone: That is, temper, qualities. So, in O7h. IV, i, 210, ‘of 
so gentle a condition.’ 

128-130, Come... doore] Knicur: We have printed the conclusion of this 
scene as verse. [See Text. Notes.] The doggerel line is not inconsistent with the 
playfulness of the preceding dialogue. Dyce (Remarks, p. 52): Knight is doubtless 
right. Many passages might be cited to show that our early dramatists frequently, at 
the end of a scene, make a prose speech conclude with a couplet, the first line of which 
is much shorter than the second. CoLLter (ed. fi): The consonance of ‘shrive me’ 
and ‘wive me’ may have put Portia upon rhyming at her exz¢. 

129. whiles] ABBOTT, § 137: ‘ Whiles,’ the genitive of w4z/e, means ‘of, or during, 
the time.’ 


ACT I, SC. iii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 33 


[Scene LII.| 
Enter Baffanio with Shylocke the Tew, 


Shy. Three thoufand ducates, well. 

Baff. I fir, for three months. 

Shy. For three months, well. 

Baff. For the which, as I told you, 5 
Anthonio fhall be bound. 

Shy. Anthonio fhall become bound, well. 


Baf. May you fted me? Will you pleafure me? 8 
[Scene III. Rowe et seq. ... Venice. 5-11. Prose, Pope et seq. 

Pope. ...a public place in Venice. Theob. 8. fred] ftead Q.. 
2. ducates) ducats Q,FF,. | pleafure me?) pleasure me in it? 
4. months| moneths Q,. mouths ¥.. Ktly conj. 


Enter, &c.] BooTH: Shylock enters with slow, shuffling gait; restless, half-closed 
eyes, and the fingers of his disengaged hand (one holds his staff) ever moving, as if 
from the constant habit of feeling and caressing the ducats that are passing through 
them. Speak with a measured and a rather gruff voice. 

LEWEs (p. 11): From the first moment that [Kean] appeared and leant upon his 
stick to listen gravely while moneys are requested of him, he impressed the audience, 
as Douglas Jerrold used to say, ‘like a chapter of Genesis.’ 

2. ducates] HUNTER (i, 324) : This is a pure Venetian piece of money, and the name 
is a mere abbreviation of Ducatus Venetorum. It was a gold coin, so that a loan of 
three thousand ducats must be considered a very large sum, perhaps something nearly 
equivalent to a loan of twenty or thirty thousand pounds, were such a transaction to 
take place now. The ducat bore [an abbreviated inscription]; which is to be read in 
full: ‘Sit tibi, Christe, datus Quem tu regis, iste Ducatus.’ HALLIWELL: The value 
of the ducat varied in different parts of the Continent. At Venice there were ‘two 
sorts of duccats, the one currant in payment, which may bee valued ster. about 3s. 4d., 
and the other of banco, which may be valued about 4s. or 4s. 2¢., as the exchange will 
admit, the one being twenty per cent. better than the other.’—Roberts’s Marchant’s 
Mapp of Commerce, 1638. A ducat means literally a coin belonging to or coined by 
a duke, and the inscriptions upon the various impressions of it are exceedingly numer- 
ous. CLARENDON: Cotgrave (ed. 1632) mentions many kinds of ducats, Venetian 
among them. He adds: ‘all foraine coynes, of whose value (often changed by the 
French Kings) no certaine interpretation can be giuen, other then that they hold a rate 
much about v. or vjs. sterl. the peece.’ Coryat, who visited Venice in 1608, tells us 
that the ducat was worth 4s. 8¢.—Crudities, ed. 1611, pp. 228, 253. ROLFE: The 
value of the Venetian silver ducat was about that of the American dollar. 

5. the which] See Jacé. III, i, 16, or ABBOTT, § 270. 

7. bound,] BoorH: Here a longer pause than before, with a curious glance at 
Bassanio. 

8. May] CLARENDON: ‘ May,’ in the sense of cam. ABBOTT, § 307: Like the Ger- 
nan médgen. [Therefore, I think it is used here rather in the sense of ‘Are you will- 


ng ?’—Ep.] 
3 


34 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT 1, SC. iii, 


Shall I know your anfwere. 
Shy. Three thoufand ducats for three months, 10 
and Anthonio bound. 
Baff. Your anfwere to that. 
Shy. Anthonio is a good man. 
Baf, WHaue you heard any imputation to the con- 
trary. 15 
Shy. Ho no, no, no, no : my meaning in faying he is a 
good man, is to haue. you vnderftand me that he is fuffi- 
ent, yet his meanes are in fuppofition : he hath an Argo- 
fie bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies, I vnder- 


ftand moreouer vpon the Ryalta, he hath a third at Mexi- 20 
Q, 12. anfwere]| aunf/were Q.. 17. fuffient | fufficient Qq Ff. 
16. Shy.] Shylocke. Q,. 19. Jndies,| Indies. FF. 
Ho no,| No, no, F,. No, LVR a 20. Ryalta] Qq. Ryalto ore Royalto 
Rowe+. Of xo, Knut, Glo. Cla. Clarke, Pee 
Wh. ii. 


13. good] CLARENDON: ‘Good’ is opposed to foor in Cor. I, i, 16: ‘We are 
accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.’ ROLFE: That is, ‘good’ in the com- 
mercial sense, ‘having pecuniary ability of unimpaired credit.’—Webster’s Dict. 
HALLIWELL: The epithet has continued in use, in a cognate sense, to the present 
day; a ‘good man,’ in fashionable slang, being one in actual possession of his estate. 
A person who exceeds another in wealth is said to be a better man than the other. 
[Shylock is his own best commentator, and fully explains the word in his next speech. 
—Ep.] 

17. suffient] BootH: Indicate by gesture (touch your palm or the pouch you 
carry) what you mean. All this is spoken deliberately, not too slowly, and with an 
occasional shrug of the shoulders. 

18. supposition] Eccirs: Are but supposed, the subject of conjecture, rather than 
assurance. CLARENDON: Because exposed to the perils of the sea. 

20. Ryalta] STAUNTON: There were in ancient Venice three distinct places prop- 
erly called Rialto; namely, the island at the farther side of the Grand Canal; the 
Exchange erected on that island; and the Ponte di Rialto, which connected the island 
with St. Mark’s Quarter. The first of these places, according to Daru, received the 
name of /za/to on account of its convenience to fishermen, its height, its contiguity to 
the sea, and its situation in the centre of a basin. If this conjecture be accurate, the 
original name was perhaps Rzva Alfa, a high bank-shore, or Rz/evato, an elevated mar- 
gin; since the island was the highest, and probably the oldest, of those in the lagune 
to which the Veneti fled. Early in the fifth century the church of San Jacopo was 
erected on this spot, near the fish-market; and adjoining to it were built the Faé- 
bricche, a series of edifices connected by arcades, employed as warehouses and custom- 
houses; in the open space opposite to which was held the Exchange. Sabellicus, who 
wrote on Venetian history in the seventeenth century, states that this ‘most noble piazza’ 
was crowded from morning to night. The part where the merchants transacted the 
most weighty and important affairs was near the double portico at the end of the piazza 


ACT I, SC. iii.] 


THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 35 


co, a fourth for England, and other ventures hee hath — 21 
{quandred abroad, but fhips are but boords, Saylers but 
men, there be land rats, and water rats, water theeues, 
and land theeues, I meane Pyrats, and then there is the 24 


21. hath] hath, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Cap. Steev. Mal. Knt, Sing. Sta. Cam. 


Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. 
22. abroad,| abroad. Rowe. 
boords| boards Q,. 
boardes Q:: 
23. men,| men; Q,. 


boordes Q.. 


23. land rats...water rats| Hyphened 
by Pope. 

23, 24. water theeues,and land theeues | 
land-thieves and water-thieves Coll. (MS), 
Sing, (MS), Sta. Wh. i, Dyce iii. 

theeues| theives F re 

24. Pyrats,| Pyrats ; Fp Pyrates , 


land | lands F.,. Rowe. 


opposite San Jacopo’s Church, where the Banco Giro was established. The following 
is Coryat’s description of the Rialto, or Exchange, as it appeared when he visited Ven 

ice: ‘ The Rialto, which is at the farthest side of the bridge as you come from St. Mark’s, 
is a most stately building, being the Exchange of Venice, where the Venetian gentlemen 
and the merchants doe meete twice a day, betwixt eleven and twelve of the clocke in 
the morning, and betwixt five and sixe of the clocke in the afternoone. This Rialto is 
of a goodly height, built all with bricke as the palaces are, adorned with many faire 
walkes or open galleries that I have before mentioned, and hath a pretty quadrangular 
court adjoining to it. But it is inferior to our Exchange in London, though indeede 
there is a farre greater quantity of building in this than in ours.’—Crudities, 1611, 
p. 169. CLARENDON: ‘ As it were, Rivo Alto, a high shore .... An eminent place in 
Venice where Marchants commonly meete.’—Florio, /ta/. Dict. 1611. The bridge 
called Ponte di Rialto was first built in 1591, but the existing bridge is a more recent 
structure. [See fost, line 111.] 

20. Mexico] See TH. E1zz, III, ii, 284. 

21. hath] Note Theobald’s judicious punctuation—Ep. 

22. squandred] KNIGHT: In a letter published by Waldron, in Woodfall’s ‘ The- 
atrical Repertory,’ 1801, it is stated that ‘ Macklin, mistakenly, spoke the word with a 
tone of reprobation, implying that Antonio had, as we say of prodigals, unthriftly squan- 
der’d his wealth.’ The meaning is simply scattered ; of which Waldron gives an exam- 
ple from Howell’s Letters ; ‘The Jews, once an elect people, but now grown contempt- 
ible, and strangely squander’d up and down the world.’ In Dryden’s Annus Mirabilis 
we have the same expression applied to ships: ‘They drive, they squander, the huge 
Belgian fleet.’ HALLIWELL: Still used in Warwickshire, and, according to Wilbraham, 
p. 80, still used in Cheshire in the sense of scattered, dispersed. 

23, 24. water... theeues] Eccixs: It seems that these ought to change places, 
i. e. ‘land thieves and water thieves,’ for the purpose of connecting ‘ water thieves’ with 
‘pirates.’ STAUNTON: There can be little doubt that the reading in the old copies was 
a printer’s or transcriber’s error. HALLIWELL: Shylock is intended to speak somewhat 
disjointedly, otherwise one would be induced to adopt the change suggested by Eccles, 
[See note on ‘warmed ... . summer,’ ITI, i, 57.—Ep.] 

24. Pyrats] HALLIWELL: ‘ Water-rats,’ a jocular term for pirates, is not peculiar to 
Shakespeare. [The instances cited are from ‘a rare tract: The Abortive of an Idle 
Hour, 1620;’ Massinger’s A Very Woman, 1655 [1624 is probably its earliest date], 
and Jand-pirate in The Wandering Jew telling Fortunes, &c., 1649—all subsequent to 
The Merchant of Venice.—ED.] 


36 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. iii, 


perrill of waters, windes, and rocks : the man is notwith- 25 
ftanding fufficient, three thoufand ducats, I thinke I may 
take his bond. 

Baf. Be affured you may. 

Tew. I will be affured I may: and that I may be affu- 
red, I will bethinke mee, may I fpeake with Avtho- 30 
n1o ? 

Baf. If it pleafe you to dine with vs. 

Iew. Yes, to fmell porke, to eate of the habitation 


which your Prophet the Nazarite coniured the diuell 34 
25. perrill] QEF, peril! QQ, 29, 33, 41. Iew.] Q,FFQ,. Shy. Q,. 


28, 29. affured] affurd Q,. afurd 30. mee,| me; Rowe. 


i 34. WMazarite] Nazarit Q,. 


26. three thousand ducats] BooTH: Very slowly, as if calculating the chances 
of loss or gain. 

29. I will] BoorH: With emphasis on ‘ w://, and with a chuckle. 

32. dine] HALLIWELL: This invitation was of an unusual character under any cir- 
cumstances of business, and intended evidently as a very great compliment. 

33. porke] Bootu: Doggett, doubtless, made a strong ‘point’ here, but be very 
careful that you do not; a too strong emphasis or expression of disgust might cause a 
laugh; the whole speech must be spoken impressively. [The rest of this sentence, 
down to ‘I will buy with you,’ Dr Johnson silently omitted.—ED.] 

34. Nazarite] HALLIWELL: According to some critics, Shylock is here speaking in 
contempt of Christ, the Nazarenes being mentioned in the Scriptures as having been in 
low estimation with the Jews; but the better interpretation is that the speaker wishes 
merely to indicate more strongly his intense horror of pork, by recalling it to mind as 
the material into which the devils were driven, thus ridiculing Bassanio by implying 
how foolish he and other Christians were in eating of the flesh of the animal which 
was selected by their own prophet for the proper habitation of evil spirits. The great 
prophet himself was not regarded contemptuously by the Jews of Venice, and Shylock 
would be speaking out of character were he to be represented as ridiculing him. A 
Jew whom Coryat met in that city told him ‘that Christ forsooth was a great prophet, 
and in that respect as highly to be esteemed as any prophet amongst the Jewes that 
ever lived before him; but derogated altogether from his divinitie, and would not 
acknowledge him for the Messias and Saviour of the world, because he came so con- 
temptibly, and not with that pompe and majestie that beseemed the redeemer of man. 
kind,’—Crudities, 1611, p. 215. [The use of this word instead of Vazarene is at first 
sight puzzling. The distinction between a ‘ Nazarite’ and a Vazarene is of the broad- 
est. Samson was a Nazarite, and is always correctly so called by Milton in his Samson 
Agonistes. And John the Baptist was a Nazarite. Shylock must have known perfectly 
well that the Prophet who conjured the devil into the swine was not a Nazarite, but a 
Nazarene, While still lost in questionings over the passage I mentioned the difficulty 
to my friend, Dr THomas CHASE, late President of Haverford College, who at once in 
the simplest and most obvious way solved it, in the following note: ‘ You say well that 
“ Shakespeare is always nght,” and he was right in saying “ your prophet the Nazarite”” 


ACT I, SC. ili.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 37 


into : I will buy with you, fell with you, talke with 35 
you, walke with you, and fo following : but I will 

not eate with you, drinke with you, nor pray with you. 

What newes on the Ryalta, who is he comes here ? 


Enter Anthonio. 


Baff. This is fignior Anthonio. 4o 
few. How like a fawning publican he lookes. 


35- into .] into? Theob. 38. Ryalta] RyaltoQ,Q, Ff. RialtoQ, 
37, 38. pray...here?] pray with you, zs he] Om. Rowe. 
that’s fiat. Lans. 41. [Aside. Rowe et seq. 


The word “ Nazarite” was, in his day, the proper (and probably the only) appellation for 
“a man of Nazareth.” Thus, in Tyndale’s version (1534), we find “ He shalbe called 
a Nazarite.” In the same passage it is \Vazarife in Myles Coverdale’s translation 
(1535); Matthews’s (1537); Taverner’s (1539); Cranmer’s (1539); the Bishops’ Bible 
(1568) [which Ginsburg has shown to be that used by Shakespeare—ED.]; in the 
Geneva version (1587); and in the Rheims, or Roman Catholic, version (1582). What 
else then could Shakespeare call him in the Jer. of Ven.? especially as King James’s 
Version, in which, as far as I know, the word azarene appears for the first time, was 
not published till 1611.’—Ep.] 

41. publican] CLARENDON: A ‘fawning publican’ seems an odd combination. 
The Publicani, or farmers of taxes, under the Roman government, were much more 
likely to treat the Jews with insolence than with servility. Shakespeare perhaps 
remembered that in the Gospels ‘publicans and sinners’ are mentioned together as 
objects of the hatred and contempt of the Pharisees, Karu ELZE (SA. Jahrbuch, xi, 
276): ‘Clarendon’ overlooks the fact that in the parable related in Zwke xviii, 10-14, 

the Publican is represented as ‘fawning’ not on man, but on God. Such humility and 
‘contrition before God as is there expressed in ‘God be merciful to me, a sinner!’ Shy- 
lock—nay, the Mosaic Law itself—neither knows nor comprehends; there the Phari- 
see is the exact representative of his faith, On the other hand, Shylock repeatedly 
refers to his rights, not only as before man but as before God; as before them both he 
stands upon his bond. ‘What judgment shall I dread doing no wrong?’ and ‘ My 
deeds upon my head!’ he exclaims in Act IV. So, too, Marlowe’s Barabas says, ‘ The 
man that dealeth righteously shall live.’ From this point of view the publican fawning 
on God and begging for mercy was most repugnant to Shylock, just as Portia’s exquis- 
~ ite plea for mercy rebounded from him without effect. The only objection which can 
be urged against this explanation is, that a reference to the New Testament is put in 
the mouth of the Jew Shylock; but this reference lies in the word ‘ publican,’ interpret 
‘fawning’ as we please. ALLEN (MS): Shakespeare must have made Shylock, as a 
Jew, speak of a ‘publican’ as his forefathers did in the New Testament; and yet the 
epithet he used shows that he conceived of him as an English innkeeper. In various 
dialects (see Halliwell’s Archaic Dict.) ‘public’ is equivalent to an inn. So in Scot- 
land, as in Scott’s novels. So wow in Ireland: ‘The pudticans are in terror at Father 
Mathew’s approach.’—Life of Mother McAuley, p. 380, New York, 1866. In Web- 
ster’s Dict, under ‘publican,’ in the sense of innkeeper, this very passage is cited, 
WuiTe (ed. ii): A strange and either heedless or ignorant use of ‘publican.’ That 


38 THE MERCHANT CF VENICE [Act 1, SC. iL 


I hate him for he is a Chriftian : 42 
But more, for that in low fimplicitie . 
He lends out money gratis, and brings downe 

The rate of vfance here with vs in Venice. 45 


If I can catch him once vpon the hip, 

43. more,] more F,. 
wo ew A ee ee eee 
Shylock means an innkeeper is hardly possible. [I incline to agree with Elze that the 
thought uppermost in Shylock’s mind was the publican of the parable, but cannot go 
as far as he does in attributing Shylock’s contempt*for humility to the Jewish race in 
general. The parable itself was told by a Jew.—ED.] 

42. for] For instances of ‘for’ in the sense of ‘because of,’ see ABBOTT, § I5I. 

45. vsance] Douce (i, 251): ‘It is almoste incredyble what gaine the Venetians 
receiue by the vsury of the Jewes, both pryuately and in common. For in euerye citee 
the Jewes kepe open shops of vsurie, taking gaiges of ordinarie for .xv. in the hundred 
by the yere: and if at the yeres ende, the gaige be not redemed, it is forfeite, or at the 
least dooen away to a great disaduantage: by reason whereof the Jewes are out of 
measure wealthie in those parties.—Thomas’s Historye of Italye, 1561, fol. 76 b. 
[Several Editors call attention to the interchangeable use of interest, usance, and usury, 
and some refer to Bacon’s Essay of Vsurie. In the opening sentences of that Essay 
there is an allusion which seems noteworthy, not alone because of the mention of the 
‘orange-tawney bonnets,’ but because we may infer that in 1625, when this Essay was 
first published, the presence of Jews in England was not so unfamiliar as on historical 
grounds might be supposed. ‘Many haue made Wittie Inuectiues against V/wrze. 
They fay, that it is Pitie, the Deuill fhould haue Gods part, which is the 77¢ke. That 
the V/urer is the greatest Sabbath Breaker, becaufe his Plough goeth euery Sunday 
That the V/urer is the Droane, that Virgil fpeaketh of: Jenauum Fucos Pecus a pre- 
JSepibus arcent. That the V/urer breaketh the 7i7/? Law, that was made for Man- 
kinde, after the Fall; which was, Jz Sudore Vultts tui comedes Panem tuum; Not, 
In Sudore Vultts alienit. That V/urers fhould haue Orange-tawney Bonnets, becaufe 
they doe /udaize. That it is againft Nature, for (/oney to beget Money ; And the like. 
I say this onely, that V/ury is a Conceffum propter Duritiem Cordis ; For fince there 
muft be Borrowing and Lending, and Men are fo hard of Heart, as they will not lend 
freely, V/ury muft be permitted.’ Bacon goes on to recommend that ‘V/ury, in gen- 
erall be reduced to Fiue in the Hundred,’ and frequently employs the word /zéerest 
instead of V/ury. See line 112, post.—ED. | 

46. vpon the hip] Here, at IV, i, 350, and in Off. II, i, 338, are the only passages 
in Shakespeare where this phrase is found. Johnson (O¢A. II, i, 338) says that it is a 
phrase from the art of wrestling, but in his Dict. he derived it from hunting; with 
more probability, says Dyce (Remarks, 52), and cites several passages in proof, none 
of which seems to me conclusive, and one seems decidedly to point to wrestling. Since 
compiling the note in Of. I have found, in Motes &* Qu. vol. vii, p. 375, the following 
remarks on the phrase by W. R. ARROWSMITH, which, with its citation from Sir John 
Harington, settles its meaning beyond a peradventure: ‘“On the hip,” at advantage. 
A term of wrestling. So said Dr Johnson at first; but, on second thought, referred it to 
venery, with which Mr Dyce consents; both erroneously..... The hip of a chase is 
ro term of woodman’s craft; the haunch is. Moreover, what a marvellous expression 
to say, A hound has a chase om the hip, instead of 4y/ Still more prodigious to say, 


act I, Sc. iii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 39 


I will feede fat the ancient grudge I beare him. 47 
He hates our facred Nation, and he railes 
Euen there where Merchants moft doe congregate 
On me, my bargaines, and my well-worne thrift, 50 
Which he cals interreft : Curfed be my Trybe 
If I forgiue him. 
Baff. Shylock, doe you heare. 
Shy. Iam debating of my prefent ftore, 
And by the neere geffe of my memorie 55 
I cannot inftantly raife vp the groffe 
Of full three thoufand ducats : what of that? 
Tuball a wealthy Hebrew of my Tribe 
Will furnifh me; but foft, how many months 


Doe you defire ? Reft you faire good fignior, 60 
47. ancient] auncient Q,. 53. Shylock] Shyloch Q.. 
grudge) grudg ¥,. 55- SH] Qa gueffe QQ, guc/s 
50. well-worne] FF. well-wone Q,,. F,. 
well-worn F,. well-won Q,Q, et cet. 60. defire ?| desire ? [To Ant.] Rowe 
51. interrefi] QF. intereft Q.. et seq. 
that a hound ge¢s a chase om the hip..... To the examples alleged by Mr Dyce, the 
three following may be added; whereof the last, after the opinion of Sir John Haring- 
ton, rightly refers the origin of the metaphor to wrestling..... “Full oft the valiant 


Knight his hold doth shift, And with much prettie sleight, the same doth slippe; In 
fine he doth applie one speciall drift, Which was to get the Pagan on the hippe: And 
having caught him right, he doth him lift, By nimble sleight, and in such wise doth 
trippe: That downe he threw him,” &c.—Harington’s trans. of Orlando Furtoso, 
Booke xlvi, Stanza 117.’ The two other examples, cited by Arrowsmith, in no wise 
explain the phrase, but merely repeat it; and moreover they are fost-Shakespearian 
—ED. 

51, 52. Cursed...him] BoorH: This in a lower tone, almost growled sotto 
voce. Turning your back on Antonio as he enters, and pretending to be lost in calcu- 
lation of your ‘present store.’ 

54. of ] For other instances where ‘of’ means as regards, concerning, about, see 
ABBOTT, § 174; also, V, i, 421. 

58. Tuball] CassEx (Literatur u. Symbolik, 1884, p. 381) says that this name is 
not to be found in Jewry. [It is no disgrace to be inferior to Shakespeare in any wise, 
not even in the reading of the Bible; in Geneszs x, 2, Tubal is enumerated among the 
sons of Japheth, and Chus or Cush, afterwards mentioned by Jessica, is among the sons 
of Ham. See Actors Names, anxte.—ED.] 

60. desire] This is one of the many instances cited by WALKER ( Vers. 144) where 
words ending in zve suffer dissolution, as the grammarians call it. ‘This, like many 
other a-chaic modes of pronunciation, occurs more frequently in Shakespeare’s earlier 
plays tuan in his, later, and even in them he is more sparing of it, or, at any rate, ap- 
plies it to a smaller number of words, than Marlowe, Greene, &c.’ ABBOTT’S corre- 


40 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act I, SC. iii. 


Your worfhip was the laft man in our mouthes. 61 
Ant. Shylocke, albeit I neither lend nor borrow 

By taking, nor by giuing of exceffe, 

Yet to fupply the ripe wants of my friend, 

Ile breake a cuftome : is he yet poffeft 65 

How much he would? 


61. mouthes] mouth’s ¥.. he would haue?Q,. is he...ye would ’ 
62. albeit although Q., *Pope+, Cam. Q,Q,, Dyce, Cam. Glo. Del. Cla. Wh. ii. 
Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. Are you...he would ? Coll. (MS). as he 
borrow] borrow, Q,. ..we would? Walker, Dyce ii, Huds, 


65, 66. zs he...he would] Fi, Rowe, is he...you woudd ? Theob. et cet. 
Pope, Han. are you refolu’d, How much 


sponding paragraph is 480; in BRowNE’s /Vo‘es, &c, that invaluable condensation, see 
p- 15. Boor: Here turn, and with pretended surprise at Anthonio’s presence, 
uncover, and address him obsequiously, but with a touch of irony in voice and face. 

61. worship] Morris: We retain the same meaning in the title of ‘your worship’ 
(i. e. worth-ship), addressed to the magistrate on the bench. 

63. By... of] ABBOTT, § 178, ‘of’ naturally followed a verbal noun, In many 
cases we should call the verbal noun a participle, and the ‘of’ has become unintelligible 
tous. ‘Here stood he mumbling of wicked charms,’-—Zear II, i, 39. In most cases, 
however, a preposition is inserted, and thus the substantive use of the verbal is made 
evident. As in this present passage. 

63. excesse] CLARENDON: That which, when the loan is repaid, is paid in excess 
of the sum lent, i. e. interest. 

64. ripe] JoHNsoN: That is, wants come to the height, wants that can have no 
longer delay. Perhaps we might read—7sz/e wants, wants that come thick upon him. 
MALONE: So afterwards, ‘stay the very riping of the time.’ 

65. possest] STEEVENS: That is, acquainted, informed. So in Zwei. XM. II, iii, 
149: ‘Possess us, possess us.’ See also fost, IV, i, 39. 

65, 66. is... would] That ‘he’ in line 66 is a misprint, is clear. As we know 
that this text was printed from Q,, the misprint is probably due to the compositor’s mis- 
taking the ye in that Quarto for ‘he.’ Theobald changed ye into you, and has been 
followed by the majority of editors. This involves the supposition that Anthonio 
breaks off in his talk to Shylock, and asks Bassanio the question. Yet Bassanio does 
not answer, and Shylock, who was doing all he could to gain time, would, I think, 
have willingly resigned the conversation to Bassanio had the chance occurred. Nor 
is it Bassanio who says, ‘And for three months,’ but Anthonio. Bassanio does not 
speak for some time, not until after Shylock has made his offer. This address to Bas- 
sario is therefore apparently purposeless ;, nothing is called forth by it. As a general 
tule, this is not Shakespeare’s style; but it might be urged that we have it here, and 
must understand it as best we can. Happily, we have a resource in an appeal to Q,. 
The text there reads : ‘are you resolu’d How much he would haue??’ This is plain and 
clear. The only objection to it that I can see lies in the scansion, and this is but trifling 
in comparison with the objection to Q, with its change of address, to which no heed is 
paid by Bassanio; and the scansion is very far from irregular: a pause in the third 
foot is common enough. ‘Ile break | a cfistom; | / | are yéu | resélv’d” In the Fifth 
Act Gratiano says, ‘That shé | did give me | ’ | whose pé | sy was.’ There is even 


ACT I, SC. iii. ] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 4! 


Shy. I, 1, three thoufand ducats. 67 
Ant. And for three months. 
Shy. ~ I had forgot, three months, you told me fo. 
Well then, your bond : and let me fee, but heare you, 70 
Me thoughts you faid, you neither lend nor borrow 


67.44) 74Q. Ay, ay, Rowe. det Cap. Mal. Steev. Sing. Sta. Ktly. 

68. months] moneths Q,. 71. Me thoughts] Q,Ff. Me-though. 
69. you] he Han. Q,. Me thought Q,- Methoughts Rowe, 
70. and let] but let FF, Rowe. and, Cap. Methought Pope et cet. 


reason for a pause in Anthonio’s line; there is a change of thought. Nor is the scan- 
sion in line 66 any more difficult. Just as in line 65, 7 w// is contracted into ‘I’ll,’ so 
here ‘he would’ may be contracted into he'd: ‘ How mich | he’d have? | Ay, ay | 

three thoa | sand dicats.’ For the rest, veso/v’d is quite as Shakespearian as ‘ possest.’ 
On the whole, the text of Q, seems to me preferable to that of Q_; it is perfectly intel- 
ligible, its metre is irreproachable, and it obviates a change of address which needs 
explanation. But FURNIVALL pronounces it (Forewords to Q,, p. v) ‘the [Italics, 
his] test-passage’ in deciding that Q, is superior to Q,. ‘And though,’ continues Fur- 
nivall, ‘you can mend the metre without introducing yes, by printing: “Are you 
‘“resoluéd how much he would have?” yet few students will doubt that the Heyes 
‘Quarto [Q,] has Shakspere’s reading—revisd, if not original,—when it makes 
‘ Antonio turn to Bassanio, and say “is hee yet possest How much ye would?” This 
‘change cannot have been a copier’s or printer’s doing, but must have been got 
‘from Shakspere directly or thru his MS.’ In a foot-note: ‘This may involve the 
“change of ass. for Ant. in the “And for three months,” with Shylock answering 
‘ Bassanio, “I had forgot, three months, you told me so,” and. then turning to Antonio 
‘with “Well, then, your bond.” I prefer this change [first suggested by Capell.— 
‘Ep.], but of course the Heyes text may stand as it is.’ Merely that the question of 
a change as great as that of a redistribution of speeches can be raised in Q.,, is in itself 
a plea for the superior simplicity and clearness of the text of Q,.. If, however, the 
text of Q, is to be preferred, I should certainly change the ye, not into you, as Theo- 
bald changed it, but into we, as suggested by WALKER and adopted by Dycr and 
Hupson.—Eb. 

68. Ant.] CAPELL (p. 60, 2): Had the moderns [by this term all the editors from 
Rowe to Johnson are designated] set the name of Bassanio here, the speech’s own fit- 
ness, and a word of the line immediately answering it, had gone far to have justify’d 
them: but not quite far enough: for Antonio had learnt in conversation, before his 
entry, as well the term as the sum; and the Jew—whose brain is then working upon 
matters that break out afterwards,—thinks Bassanio the speaker, and frames his first 
line accordingly; his next addresses Antonio, and his whole speech is the language 
of one absent. [However broadly we may smile at Capell’s uncouth style, if we will 
but have the patience to penetrate the rough rind, we shall find the kernel generally 
sound and at times wholesome. In this present passage ‘you told me so’ might have 
been uttered decxrix@¢, as the grammarians say, that is pointing to Bassanio.—ED. ] 

70. and let me see] BootH: Slowly; with a slight pause and a searching look at 
Antonio. 

71. Me thoughts] This form occurs elsewhere in the Ff and Qq; it is found twice 
in Clarence’s dream in Rich. J/7; 1, iv; and also in Wine, 7.1, ii, 154. It is perhaps 


42 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. iii. 


Vpon aduantage. 72 
Ant. I doe neuer vfe it. 
Shy. When Jacob graz’d his Vncle Labans fheepe, 


This /acod from our holy Adram was 733 

(As his wife mother wrought in his behalfe) 

The third poffeffer ; I, he was the third. tie 
73 doe) tid Rowe. 77. third.| third,— Dyce, Cam, Glo. 
75. Abram] Abraham F,, Rowe et seq. Ktly, Cla. Clarke, Del. Rlfe, Huds. Wh. 
77. LIL er) PU Dr Qs ii. 


formed, as WALKER suggests ( Vers. 284), ‘by contagion from methinks. ‘Me thought’ 
and ‘me thoughts’ are always printed as two words in F,. It is to be borne in mind 
that the word ‘think,’ in ‘methinks,’ comes from the Anglo-Saxon ¢hzncan, to seem 
to appear, and not from ¢hencan, to think. See notes in Ham. V, ii, 63.—En. 

74. Iacob] GINSBURG (Atheneum, 28 April, 1883): Every item in this remarkable 
dialogue exhibits Shakespeare as one of the most original interpreters of the Bible 
Jacob is selected because he was not only preferred by God himself to his brother 
Esau, but because his additional name was Israel,—the name from which Shylock and 
his race obtained the appellation /srae/ites. ‘The paraphrase ‘the eanlings which were 
streak’d and pied’ is Shakespeare’s own, and beautifully reflects the sense of the orig- 
inal. The reply which he puts into the mouth of Anthonio, that it was God’s wonder- 
ful interposition, and must not be adduced as justifying foul play, shows that Shake- 
speare has not only carefully studied the Biblical na rative, but that he has based it 
upon the remark in the margin against the passage (Gem. xxx, 37) in the Bishops 
Bible (1568), which is as follows: ‘It is not lawefull by fraude to seke recompence of 
iniurie: therefore Moyses sheweth afterwarde that God thus instructed Jacob.’ (Gen 
xxxi, 9.) But the most remarkable part of this remarkable transaction is the crushing 
manner in which the attempt ‘te clothe the naked villainy with old, old ends stolen 
forth from Holy Writ’ is brought home to the villain. Shakespeare makes Anthonic 
meet this device by appealing to another Scriptural event showing that ‘the devil can 
cite Scripture for his purpose.’ But as this fact is recorded in Matt. iv, 6, and as Shy- 
lock the Jew does not believe in the New Testament, Anthonio is made to address it 
to his Christian friend Bassanio. [In this valuable letter Ginsburg shows from the use 
of the word ‘charity’ in Love’s Lad. Lost, IV, iii, 364, that the version which Shake- 
speare used was the Bishops’ Bible (1568), the only version of the eight then extant 
wherein this word is found; all the other seven read ‘love.’ The present passage, as 
Ginsburg shows us, also points to his use of that same version. ] 

76. As] That is, Forso. See I, i, 160. 

77. third] FARREN (p. 12): Actors have misunderstood one of the finest allusions 
in the play. The reader will remember the part taken by Rebecca, the wife of Isaac 
and the mother of Jacob, to obtain his father’s blessing for him in preference to Esau, 
the elder son (Gen. xxvii). It was by this act of hers that Jacob decame the third pos- 
sessor; and for this deceit Shylock thinks her entitled to great praise, not only as it 
showed the superior cunning of the woman on behalf of her favorite son, but as it was 
the means through which the greatness of the Israelites was accomplished ; for it drove 
Jaco’ to Laban, and from Jacob the whole of the tribes were descended. Shylock, 
therefore, says with grev exultation: ‘Ay, he was the third,’ whereas the actors have 


ACT I, SC. iii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 43 
Ant. And what of him, did he take interreft ? 78 
Shy. No, not take intereft, not as you would fay 

Direétly intereft, marke what /acoéd did. 80 


When Laéan and himfelfe were compremyz’d 
That all the eanelings which were ftreakt and pied 
Should fall as Jacods hier, the Ewes being rancke, 
In end of Autumne turned to the Rammes, 


And when the worke of generation was 85 
Betweene thefe woolly breeders in the act, 
The skilfull fhepheard pil’d me certaine wands, 87 


80-91. marke...[acobs| You know the 
story, Lansdowne. 

80. did.] In the original, this period 
may be a comma. 

81. were] vvas Q,. 

compremyz d\ compremyzd Q,Q,. 

comprimyzd FF,  compremiz’d Q,. 
comprimizd F. compromis’d Rowe. 

82. eanelings] eueclings F,. Ewelings 
Rowe. yeanlings Pope+. 


83. hier] hire F,. 

84. In end] In th’ end Q,, Popet+. 
In the end Steev. Var. Sing. Cam. Ktly, 
Glo. Wh. ii. 

85. And] Then Han. 

86. woolly] wolly Q.. 

87. pil’d) pyld Q,Q,. peel’d Pope+ 
Steev. Mal. Coll. Dyce, Cam. Del. Glo. 
Wh. ii. pil/’d Knt, Sing. Sta. Ktly. 
piled Wh. i. 


uttered the line as if Shylock doubted whether Jacob were the third, or a subsequent pos- 
sessor,—a point of genealogy, not only thoroughly well known to Shylock, but to every 
Jew who has lived from the time of Jacob to the present hour. CLARENDON: That is, 
reckoning Abraham himself as the first. BooTH: Antonio should break in, impatiently. 

79. WORDSWORTH (p. 64): The use here made of the history of Jacob and Laban 
appeared, I conclude, objectionable to Mr Bowdler, for he has omitted the entire pas- 
sage, amounting to thirty-two lines; but to me it appears so far otherwise, that I ven- 
ture to cite almost the whole of it, as a remarkable instance of the tact with which 
Shakespeare could apply with perfect accuracy a passage of Scripture open to miscon- 
ception, and yet divest its application of all dangerous tendency. A close knowledge 
of the Bible may be traced also in the use of the word ‘falsehood’ [line 106] for 
knavery or dishonesty. 

81. compremyz’d] CLARENDON: That is, had come to a mutual agreement. 

82. eanelings] HaALLIwELL: Lambs just born. From the Anglo-Saxon eanian, 
to bring forth, and the old English verb came, of the same meaning. ‘Chorai agnes, 
lames eaned after their tyme.’—Elyote’s Dzct., 1559. 

84. In end] The definite article, which Q, adds here, is scarcely needed; it can be 
but slightly indicated in pronunciation. In regard to ‘turned,’ WALKER ( Vers., p. 40) 
is inclined to think that in all words, where rm, rn are followed by -ed, the e¢ in -ed is 
not suppressed.—ED. 

87. pil’d] KnicHT: This is usually printed fee/’d. The words are synonymous; 
but in the old and the present translations of the Bible we find 7//’d, in the passage 
of Genesis to which Shylock alludes. Boor: Use your staff to illustrate the acts of 
peeling and sticking the wand in the ground. 

87. me] For other instances of this ethical dative, see ABBOTT, § 220, or Shake 


speare passim. 


44 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. ili. 


And in the dooing of the deede of kinde, 88 
He ftucke them vp before the fulfome Ewes, 
Who then conceauing, did in eaning time ™ go 


Fall party-colour’d lambs, and thofe were Lacobs. 
This was a way to thriue, and he was bleft: 
And thrift is bleffing if men fteale it not. 
Ant. This was a venture fir that /acoé feru’d for, 
A thing not in his power to bring to paffe, 95 
But fway’d and fafhion’d by the hand of heauen. 
Was this inferted to make interreft good? 
Or is your gold and filuer Ewes and Rams ? 
Shy. I cannot tell, I make it breede as faft, 


But note me fignior. 10U 
Ant. Marke you this Bafanio, 

The diuell can cite Scripture for his purpofe, 102 
90. caning] yeaning FF, Rowe+. 97. inferted | inferred Coll. (MS). 
93. And] This Var.’21 (misprint). 99. breede] breeds F,. 

blefing if | Blefing, if Q,. bleffing 1o1—-106. [Aside to Bass. Ktly, Coll. 
if, F.. iii. 
94. fered] Jerud Q.. ferud Qu. 102. diuell] Q.F,. deuill Qy 


89. fulsome] LATHAM (/Johnson’s Dict., s. v.) says that it is difficult to determine 
in this passage whether the root of this word is fu// or foul. SKEAT (Dict. s. v.) 
defines the word ‘cloying, satiating, superabundant,’ and adds that it is ‘sof derived 
from foul.” He does not cite this passage. Whatever its original meaning, its later 
usage certainly conveys a meaning akin to foulness, and in the present passage it seems 
to be nearly synonymous with ‘rancke,’ line 83. See Ozh. IV, i, 45.—ED. 

gi. Fall] For other instances of intransitive verbs converted into transitive verbs, 
see ABBOTT, § 291. 

92. ALLEN: These two propositions are independent; the second is equivalent to 
‘Jacob was the one that received Isaac’s blessing.’ Eccirs: In Shylock’s defence of 
usury, drawn from the example of Jacob’s conduct, there seems to be little appositeness 
or ingenuity; indeed, it is not easy to discover in what the parallelism of the two cases 
consists. However exorbitant the demands of the money-lender may be, the utmost 
extent of the profits accruing to him is defined by mutual stipulation between him and 
the borrower; whereas the advantage obtained by Jacob was the result of a stratagem, 
practised after the compact, of which Laban had no suspicion, and the success of 
which was by no means certain. Moreover, the money is to be considered as the prop- 
erty of the lender; the ewes were a part of the possessions of Laban; in short, the 
only circumstance of resemblance seems to be, a supposed earnest appetite for gain 
m each, and a diligent exercise of the means of obtaining it; and of these, Shylock 
evidently wishes to establish the justification upon the authority of so venerable a 
character. This objection may appear in some measure to have been anticipated by 
Anthonio’s reply. 

1o2 divell] Grey (i, 131): See Matthew iv, 6, where the devil quotes Psalm xci, 


ACT I, SC. iii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 45 


An euill foule producing holy witneffe, 103 
Is like a villaine with a fmiling cheeke, 
A goodly apple rotten at the heart. 105 


O what a goodly outfide falfehood hath. 
Shy. Three thoufand ducats, ’tis a good round fum. 
Three months from twelue, then let me fee the rate. 
Ant. Well Shylocke, thall we be beholding to you ? 


Shy. Signior Anthonio, many a time and oft 18 fe) 
106. Transpose, to follow 102, reading 108. then...rate] then, let me see; the 
Or for A, line 105, Johns. conj. (with- rate— Cam. (Lloyd conj. ap. Cam.) Glo. 
drawn). Cla. Dyce iii, Huds. Wh. ii. 
goodly outhide| godlyoutside Rowe, 109. beholding’ beholden Pope+, Knt, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Huds. comely outside Sing. Sta. Ktly. 
Bailey. 


II, 12. BooTH: Hearing this, Shylock shows his true feeling in his face as he turns 
from them; then, just loud enough for them to hear, calculates the rate, &c. 

106. WARBURTON: But this is not true, that falsehood hath always a goodly outside. 
Nor does this take in the force of the speaker’s sentiment, who would observe that that 
falsehood which quotes Scripture for its purpose has a goodly outside. We should there- 
fore read outside’s falsehood, i. e. outside zs falsehood, Shylock’s. HEATH (p. 112): 
These words must be understood as spoken in an ironical, contemptuous manner, by 
which they are peculiarly applied and confined to the instance which had just then pre- 
sented itself to observation. They are not intended to express a general maxim, which 
holds universally ; so that Warburton’s first objection is beside the purpose. Still more 
so is his other objection; since this is the very circumstance which gave occasion to this 
sarcasm, and is particularly alluded to in it. JOHNSON: Falsehood, which, as truth 
means /onesty, is taken here for treachery and knavery, does not stand for falsehooa 
in general, but for the dishonesty now operating. [When Walker, whose library was 
small, suggested (Crzt. i, 303) that ‘goodly’ should be godly, he did not know that sev- 
eral editors had followed Rowe in so reading. To me it is a /ectio certissima on its 
own merits, even without the many instances which Walker cites where goodly and 
godly have been interchangeably misprinted, or without, as Dyce suggests, supposing 
that it had been caught by the printer from the preceding line.—ED.] 

109. beholding] See ABBOTT, § 372. [A form very common in our early writers. 
We have ‘beholdingness’ in B. and Fl., The Faithful Friends, IV, iii, p. 281, ed. 
Dyce.—ED. ] 

110. BOADEN (Memoir of Mrs Siddons, i, 119): Henderson set out in the play with 
a reading which I should recommend for effect to the actor, but carefully keep from the 
text of Shakespeare..... The compound adverb many-a-time-and-oft is one of those 
clustered pleonasms which have passed unquestioned into common speech; absurd 
enough, like the aldermanic toast, ‘a speedy peace and soon;’ but it was the phraseol- 
ogy of Shakespeare, and should never be suspected of corruption. Henderson divided 
it, for the sake of strengthening his impression, ‘ Many a time,’—(as if he had implied 
many f/aces,)—‘ and oft on the RIALTO! (the place where merchants most do congre- 
gate, and therefore that where his vituperation would be most injurious,) ‘you have 
rated me.’ I persuade myself that Shakespeare, w'th our present feeling of the value 


46 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. iii, 


In the Ryalto you haue rated me III 
About my monies and my vfances: 

Still haue I borne it with a patient fhrug, 

(For fuffrance is the badge of all our Tribe.) 


You call me misbeleeuer, cut-throate dog, 115 
111. J] On Cap. conj. Coll. ii, iii. Q,F,F, et cet. 
Ryailto] Rialto F,. 114. badge] badg F,. 
112. monies] moneyes Q,. 115. call] ca/l’d Rann, Coll. (MS), 


114. fuffrance] Q,F,Q, /ufferance 


of character upon the Royal Exchange, would have thanked an actor for a discrim- 
ination so emphatic and judicious. BoorH: Pause before turning to him, and show 
great self-restraint; turn slowly, and, beginning with rising inflection of voice, ad- 
dress Antonio reproachfully. ROoLFE: ‘Many a time and oft’ is an old phrase still 
familiar; equivalent to many and many a time—that is, many times, and yet again 
many more times. RUSHTON (52. a Lawyer, p. 49) points out that Shakespeare 
uses the phrase again in s Hen. JV. 1, ii; 2 Hen. V7: II, i; Timon, I1,i; and in 
u/tl Ceca ky \1- 

111, In the Ryalto] HALLIWELL; Shakespeare uses indifferently 77, on, and upon 
the Rialto, The Rialto was, in fact, in the general style of its construction, very sim- 
ilar to the Bourse at Antwerp, the model of the original London Exchange. ‘The 
foure square market-place of Rialto is compassed with publike houses, under the arches 
whereof, and in the middle part lying open, the merchants meet.’—Moryson’s /tinerary, 
1617. [See supra, line 20.] 

112. vsances] See the quotation from Bacon at line 45, supra. MALONE: This term 
occurs three times in the sense of zmterest in the present drama. REED: ‘I knowea 
gentleman borne to five hundred pounde lande, did never receyve above a thousand 
pound of nete money, and within certeyne yeres ronnynge still upon usurie and double 
usurie, the merchants termyng it wsazce and double usance, by a more clenly name, he 
did owe to master usurer five thousand pound at the last, borowyng but one thousande 
pounde at first, so that his land was clean gone, beynge five hundred poundes inheryt- 
ance, for one thousand pound in money, and the usurie of the same money for so fewe 
yeres; and the man now beggeth.’— Wylson on Usurye, 1572, p. 32. 

113. Still] That is, always. 

113. shrug] MALONE: So in Marlowe’s /ew of Malta [II, ii p. 269, ed. Dyce], 
‘I learn’d in Florence how to kiss my hand, Heave up my shoulders when they call 
me dog.’ 

114. HALLIWELL: According to a memorandum, the source of which is unknown 
to me, Shylock ‘should assuredly wear a large red cross, embroidered upon his shoul- 
der, the Senate of Venice having passed an edict to mortify the Jews,—many of whom 
quitted their territory to avoid its infliction—that no Israelite should appear upon the 
Rialto without the emblem or badge above specified.’ [In Booth’s Acting Copy there 
is a stage-direction here: ‘Showing his yellow cap.’ In MS he notes: ‘I prefer the 
yellow cap to the cross upon the shoulder which other actors have worn, my Father 
among them. Cooke used the cap, and said that Macklin also used it.’] 

115. call] Rann’s emendation: ‘Call’d’ is, to me, more than plausible. Shylock 
is rehearsing what Anthonio has done to him in the past, and then contrasts it with his 


ACT I, SC, iii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 47 


And {pet vpon my Iewifh gaberdine, 116 
And all for vfe of that which is mine owne. 

Well then, it now appeares you neede my helpe: 

Goe to then, you come to me, and you fay, 

Shylocke, we would haue moneyes, you fay fo: 120 
You that did voide your rume vpon my beard, 

And foote me as you fpurne a ftranger curre 

Ouer your threfhold, moneyes is your fuite. 

What fhould I fay to you ? Should I not fay, 

Hath a dog money ? Is it poffible 125 
A curre fhould lend three thoufand ducats ? or 

Shall I bend low, and in a bond-mans key 


With bated breath, and whifpring humbleneffe, 128 
116. /fet) QqF,, Cap. Knt, Sing. Sta. 123. zs] are Eccles conj. 

Wh. Rife. sfat Rann. /pit FF, et 125. money] monies Ktly. 

cet. 126. /hould] Ff, Rowe, Wh. i. can 
120. moneyes,| monies, Q,Q,. moneys, Qgq, Pope et cet. 

FF. monies ; Rowe. 127. bond-mans| bondmans F,. 
121. rume]| rheume F,. 128. bated] "bated Cap. Steev. Mal. 
123. threfhold,| threshold ; Rowe. Knt, Coll. Sing. 


moneyes| money Q., Pope+. 


present conduct, ‘ Well then, it zow appears,’ &c, He afterward refers to Anthonio’s 
treatment of him in the past, ‘ You that did void,’ ‘ You spurn’d me such a day,’ ‘ You 
call’d me dog.’ This change occurred also to Allen, independently.—Ep. 

116. spet] Dyce: The Folio has ‘spit’ in Meas. for Meas. l,i; As You Like St, 
II], ii; IV,i; Zam. Shr. Ill, i; Wint. Tale, IV, ii, &c. &c. ROLFE: ‘Spet’ is used 
by Milton in the one instance (Comzs, 132) in which he employs the word. [Halli- 
well, who erroneously refers the word to Zycidas, says that Milton himself wrote it 
‘spits.’—ED. ] 

116. gaberdine] KnicHT: Shylock speaks of ‘his Jew7sh gaberdine;’ but inde- 
pendently of Vecellio’s assurance that no difference existed between the dress of the 
Jewish and Christian merchants save the yellow bonnet, the word ‘ gaberdine’ conveys 
to us no precise form of garment, its description being different in nearly every Diction- 
ary, English or foreign. In German, it is called a rock or frock, a mantle, coat, petti- 
coat, gown or cloak. In Italian, pa/andrano, or great coat, and gavardina, a peasant’s 
jacket. The French have only gaan and gabardine, —cloaks for rainy weather. In 
Spanish, gabardina is rendered a sort of cassock with close-buttoned sleeves. In Eng- 
lish, a shepherd’s coarse frock or coat. HALLIWELL: A kind of large, loose cloak. 
‘Furst, a gawlberdyne of russett welvett for my lord, gardytt with green cloth of golde, 
and lyned with black sarsnett—-MS temp. Hen. VIII. ‘A gabbardine, tunica 
casatica vel rustica, a sort of double mill’d Kersy, such as was formerly given for 
livery cloaks; vid. plura apud Skinnerum.’—MS Gl. SrTaunTon: It does not appear 
that this habiliment, as worn by the Jews, was in any respect different from that im 
ordinary use 


48 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. iii, 


Say this : Faire fir, you fpet on me on Wednefday laft ; 
You fpurn’d me fuch a day ; another time 130 
You cald me dog : and for thefe curtefies . 
Ile lend you thus much moneyes. 

Ant. Jamas like to call thee fo againe, 
To fpet on thee againe, to fpurne thee too. 


If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not 135 
As to thy friends, for when did friendfhip take 
A breede of barraine mettall of his friend ? 137 
129. Say this] Separate line, Steev. 93 131. me dog| me dogge Q,Q,- me— 
et seq. (except Ktly). dog Cap. Steev. Mal. Sing. Sta. . 
Jeet} QqFf, Rowe, Cap. Knt, 134. /pet | Qq Ff, Cap. Knt, Sta. Wh. i, 
Sta. Wh. Rlfe. sat Rowe ii. spit Pope Rife. sf2¢ Rowe et cet. 
et cet. thee too| thee to Qq. 
on...laft| last Wednesday Pope+, 136. friends] friend Ff, Rowe+. 
Eccles. Wednesday last Cap. 137. dbreede of | Ff, Rowe+, Knt, Hal. 
Wednefday| wend/day Q,. Wh. i. Del. Rife, Huds. dreed for Qg 
130. You] Your F,. et cet. 
day ; another| day another Qa. barraine] Q,F,. darren Q,. 


129. From the Text. Notes it will be seen that Steevens was the first to resolve this 
Alexandrine into regular verse. For many other instances of similar dealing with Alex- 
andrines, both apparent and real, see ABBOTT, § 499. This scansion, however, is 
wholly for the eye-—Ep. 

131. BooTH: Sarcastically,—with a pause and a gulp before ‘dog,’ as Kean is said 
to have uttered it. [See Text. Notes, which show that the credit of suggesting this 
pause before ‘dog’ is due to Capell. Its effectiveness, as employed by Kean, remains, 
so he says, still vivid in my Father’s memory.—EpD.] Utter ‘courtesies’ with strong 
emphasis—looking up, as you ‘bend low,’ with a devilish grin into Antonio’s face. 
Antonio should stand erect, looking contemptuously at Shylock till the end, when he 
moves, as if stung, a few paces from his position, to return and angrily reply, but not 
too violently, yet sufficiently to cause Shylock to pretend alarm and regret at the 
‘storm’ he has raised. 

137. breede of barraine] THEOBALD (Nichols’s Zz¢. Hist. ii, 305): Will ‘ barren’ 
metal ‘breed’? I rather think the Poet wrote ‘A breed of dearing metal,’ i. e. produ- 
cing an increase by usury, or interest. Consonant to this, you know, the Latins explained 
interest thus: fenus, fetum accepti; and the Greeks called it réxoc. Both which ex 
pressions take in our Poet’s idea of a ‘breed.’ WARBURTON: A breed, that is, interest 
money bred from the principal. By the epithet darren, the author would instruct us in 
the argument on which the advocates against usury went, which is this: that money is 
a barren thing, and cannot, like corn and cattle, multiply itself. And to set off the 
absurdity of this kind of usury, he put éreed and barren in opposition. Pope having 
said that ‘the old editions (two of ’em) have it, A bribe of barren metal,’ CAPELL 
remarks that ‘this is perhaps a mistake: and that the word which follows reed in this 
copy differ’d from the word he has follow’d, for this is true of fowr old ones: and had 
he been pleased to restore it, he had purg’d his author of a glaring absurdity (for what 
else is—breed of things that are barren?) that runs through all his other editions, old 


ACT I, SC. ili. ] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 49 


But lend it rather to thine enemie, 138 
Who if he breake, thou maift with better face 
Exact the penalties. 140 


Shy. Why looke you how you ftorme, 
I would be friends with you, and haue your loue, 


Forget the fhames that you haue ftaind me with, 143 
139. Who] Then Eccles conj. Qq et cet. 
140. Zenalties] Ff, Knt,Wh.i. penalty 141. looke you] Om. Pope+. 


and new :—éreed conveys in that place it’s generical idea, i. e. encrease; but breed is 
chose to express it by, that it’s opposition to “éarren’’ may set off and heighten the 
unfitness of such usury.’ FARMER: Old Meres says: ‘ Usurie and encrease by gold 
and silver is unlawful, because against nature; nature hath made them steri// and dar- 
ren, usurie makes them procreative.’ HoLT WHITE: The honour of starting this con- 
ceit belongs to Aristotle. See De Republica, lib. i. GRANT WHITE (ed. i): ‘Of, for 
Jor in the Qq, is not only authoritative, but very happy. ‘A breed of barren metal’ is 
an increase of barren metal; but, in Lucina’s name, what is ‘a breed for barren metal’ ? 
[White apparently found an answer somewhere to his question before he published his 
Second Edition, wherein he followed the Qq without comment. I prefer the Ff decided- 
ly. Anthonio is merely repeating the very phrase of Shylock, who had just boasted that 
he made his gold and silver ‘breed as fast’ as sheep. Anthonio’s contemptuous use 
of ‘barren’ casts a slur on Shylock’s well-won thrift, which assuredly was felt. If the 
reading of the Qq: ‘a breed for barren metal’ is equivalent to ‘a breed for the use of 
that which cannot breed,’ it is, to me, much inferior to that of the Ff.—Ep.] 

139. Who if he] ALLEN: Qui si fidem franget,; a proof of Shakespeare’s gram- 
mar-school instruction; he ¢vans/ates as he was taught. ‘Who—he’ may be taken as 
one subject separated by 7f£ Or else ‘who’ is used for the From whom, which Shake- 
speare would have written if he had foreseen how he was to end. ABBOTT, § 249: 
The Supplementary Pronoun is generally confined to cases where the relative is sepa- 
rated from its verb by an intervening clause, and where, on this account, clearness 
requires the supplementary pronoun. The present passage seems at first as though it 
could be explained [by supposing ‘who’ to be like whzch, when the latter approxi- 
mates the vulgar idiom so familiar to the friends of ‘Sairey Gamp’]; but ‘who’ is put 
for whom, and ‘exact the penalty’ is regarded as a transitive verb. [This explanation 
cannot, I think, be ranked among the happiest of Dr Abbott’s.—ED.] 

141. BLACKWOOD’s MAGAZINE (Dec. 1879) : When Shylock changes from reproach 
to fawning in this speech, he [IRVING] comes close up to Antonio and touches him on 
the breast with an air of familiar entreaty. Antonio recoils from him with contemptu- 
ous scorn, and Shylock bows low, while he winces at the rebuke. This has been praised 
as a fine stroke of truth. But is itso? Antonio has just told Shylock that he is ‘as 
like to spit on him again, to spurn him too.’ Would Shylock, with these words fresh 
in his ears, forget himself so far as to lay a finger on the haughty merchant, never 
haughtier than at that moment when asking a loan from a man he despised. Again, 
is such an action conceivable in one who feels the pride of race so strongly as Shy- 
lock? For one of ‘the sacred nation’ like himself to touch the Christian merchant 
would, in his mind, be viewed as nothing less than contamination and defilement. 

143. shames? ALLEN: Shylock compares the words of shame (probra) which 


50 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act 1, Sc. iii 


Supplie your prefent wants, and take no doite . 
Of vfance for my moneyes, and youle not heare me, 145 
This is kinde I offer. 

Baf. This were kindneffe. 

Shy. This kindneffe will I fhowe, 
Goe with me to a Notarie, feale me there 


Your fingle bond, and in a merrie {port 150 
145. ufance] usage Rowe. 146. J offer. I offer you. Ktly. that l 
145, 146. azd...offer] One line, Coll. offer Ktly con). 

Wh. Walker, Dyce iii. + 147. Baff.] Q,Q, Ff, Rowe, Cap. Dyce, 
145. me,] me: Q,. me, F,. Cam. Glo. Cla. Hal. Rife. Ant. Q, et cet. 
146. This ts] This sure ts Han. This| Ay, this Cap. 


Antonio had been wont to utter against him, to the s#zé/le which he had voided 
on him. 

144. doite] HaLLIwELL: A Low Country coin in Shakespeare’s time of exceed- 
ingly small value, and hence the term came generally to be used for a very trifle, « 
mere fraction. According to Coryat, the Dutch ‘use to stampe the figure of a maide 
upon one of their coynes that is called a doit, whereof eight goe to a stiver, and ten 
stivers do make our English shilling.’—Crudities, 1611, p. 642. FAIRHOLT (ap. Hal- 
liwell) says that these ‘coins are now of extreme rarity, their small intrinsic value con- 
ducing to their loss; and our National collection contains no examples of them.... 
the meanest coin which received a current stamp in the Middle Ages.’ SKEAT derives 
it from the ‘Dutch dz¢t. Remoter origin unknown.’ 

149. Dr M. JastRow ( Young Israel, Mai, 1876): Does Shylock really intend to 
carry out the forfeiture of his bond? Hardly; he intends merely to humiliate, to tor- 
ture his enemy, to see him at his feet, and then to heap coals of fire on his head by a 
magnanimous revenge. What a triumph for the ‘dog’ that to him, to the dog, the great 
man should owe his life. What a degradation, worse than death, for the ‘royal mer- 
chant,’ to drag round ever after like a chain, the gift of his very life at the hands of a 
Jew! [Dr Jastrow goes on to show that it was Jessica’s flight and robbery that changed 
all this.—ED.] 

150. From this line to line 172 the verses do not begin with capitals, but with lower 
case, in Q..—Ep. 

150. Your] ABBOTT, § 219: Your, our, their, &c. are often used in their old signifi- 
cation, as genitives, where we should use ‘of you,’ &c. 

150. single bond] ‘An obligation, or bond, is a deed whereby the obligor obliges 
himself, his heirs, executors, and administrators, to pay a certain sum of money to 
anothe: at a day appointed. If this be all, the bond is called a single one, simplex 
obligato ; but there is generally a condition added, that if the obligor does some par- 
ticular act, the obligation shall be void, or else shall remain in full force: as payment 
of rent; ....repayment of a principal sum of money borrowed of the obligee..... 
In case this condition is not performed, the bond becomes forfeited, or absolute at law, 
and charges the obligor..—BLACKSTONE’S Commentaries, iv, 340. LORD CAMPBELL 
says that this ‘bond to Shylock is prepared and talked about according to all the forms 
observed in an English attorney’s office. The distinction between a “ single bill” and 
« “bond with a condition” is clearly referred to.’ For this latter hasty assertion, Lord 


ACT I, SC. iii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 51 


If you repaie me not on fuch a day, 151 
In fuch a place, fuch fum or fums as are 
Expreft in the condition, let the forfeite 
Be nominated for an equall pound 154 


153. forfeite] forfaite Q.,. 


Campbell was properly criticised by RUSHTON ( 7estamentary Language, p. §1), and 
the technical distinction pointed out het ween ‘a single bond’ and ‘a bond with a con- 
dition,’ to which latter class, I should say, Antonio’s bond pretty decidedly belongs. 
The simplest explanation, to me, is that ‘single’ is used neither in its legal sense nor 
as applied to the bond ScHMIDT (Zex.) says that it here means ‘no more than mere, 
only,’ and refers to Zemp. I, ii, 432: ‘ What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard 
thee? A single thing, as I am now.’ But I am inclined to think that it means 
‘separate, alone,’ just as it is used in ‘single combat.’ Shylock wanted the bond of 
Anthonio, of him alone, and hence ‘single’ refers to Anthonio, and not to the bond. 
CLARENDON says that Shylock means ‘a bond with your own signature alone attached 
to it, without the names of sureties.’ I doubt if ‘single’ in this sense can be properly 
applied to a bond. Whatever difference the presence or absence of sureties would 
make in a bond with such a condition as Shylock was seeking, the difficulty of find- 
ing sureties might make much difference in the ease with which Anthonio could 
execute it. Practically, therefore, I agree with Clarendon, merely withholding, on 
technical grounds, the application to the bond of the term ‘single.’ ROLFE says 
( Shakespeariana, Jan., 1886) that he has sometimes been inclined to explain ‘single’ 
here as used craftily by Shylock in its technical sense, because Shylock ‘wants to make 
the “condition” appear like none at all,—merely the “merry sport”’ he calls it; as if 
he had said, “Give me your bond without any condition,—at least none worthy of the 
name or to be legally enforced,—though for the joke of the thing we will say that I 
am to have a pound of your flesh if you fail to pay up at the appointed time.”’ I 
think we need place no limit to Shylock’s craftiness, and if a legal acceptation of the 
term ‘single,’ as applied to the bond, be here insisted on, Rolfe’s explanation is pat. 
(Rolfe himself thinks that ‘single’ is used as Clarendon interprets it.) When, how 

ever, we undertake to discuss the term ‘single’ in its legal bearings, there is no end to 
the quiddities and quillets we may sound shrilly and to no purpose. Here, and in the 
Trial scene, Shakespeare accepted what of law there is, as he found it either in the old 
play, mentioned by Gosson, which he rewrote, or in Ser Giovanni’s novel, and as far as he 
considered it effective for dramatic purposes. It was enough that the scene was laid in a 
far-off foreign land, and in former times, to lend acquiescence on the part of his English 
audiences in any apparent misuse of legal terms or violation of legal procedure.—Ep. 

150-152. BooTH: Jocosely. Keep up this expression and chuckle until Bassanio 
interferes, then suddenly change it to disappointed rage,—but only for a moment; then, 
at ‘O father Abram,’ &c., assume a look and tone of pity. 

154. nominated] ALLEN: Not nominated-for, but forfeit-for, i.e. ‘the forfeit 
(nominated) shall be for,’ &c. This, therefore, may be one of Shakespeare’s frequent 
transpositions. In fact, ‘nominated’ really belongs much earlier: ‘and (in a merry 
sport) let it be nominated, that if... . the forfeit [shall] be for,’ &c. This is the way 
‘nominated’ is used in IV, i, 273. ABBOTT, §148: Jor is nearly redundant in this 
passage. [Which I do not think Abbott would have said had Allen’s interpretation 
ocurred t¢ him.—ED.] 


52 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [AcT I, SC. iii. 


Of your faire flefh, to be cut off and taken 155 
In what part of your bodie it pleafeth me. 
Ant. Content infaith, Ile feale to fuch a bond, 
And fay there is much kindneffe in the lew. 
Baff. You fhall not feale to fuch a bond for me, 
Ile rather dwell in my neceffitie. 160 
Ant. Why feare not man, I will not forfaite it, 
Within thefe two months, that’s a month before 
This bond expires, I doe expect returne 
Of thrice three times the valew of this-bond. 


Shy. O father Adram, what thefe Chriftians are, 165 

156. 2 pleafeth] Ff, Rowe, Wh. i. i 161. forfatte] Q,. forfetQ,. forfeite 
shall please Pope+. pleafeth Qaq et cet. F,. forfeit Q, et cet. 

157. infaith] Q,F,Q, iaith Q,, Cap. 164. valew] Q.F,. value Q, et cet. 
in faith FF, et cet. 165. Abram] Qq F,F,, Wh. Cam. Glo, 

Lle| yle Q,. Del, Cla. Abraham F, et cet. 

158. the Jew] a Jew or thee, Jew Cap. thefe| the Cap. (corrected in Er 

conj. rata). 


154. equall] CLARENDON, RoLFE, and Hupson interpret this as ‘ equivalent for the 
debt,’ but I prefer ScHmip1’s definition of ‘exact,’ ‘just the weight,’ where the beams 
of the scales are exactly, equally counterpoised, as in Ham. I, ii, 13, ‘In equal scale 
weighing delight and dole.’ Eze (Jahrbuch, xi, 277) also adopts this view, and 
appositely cites not only Portia’s parallel use of ‘just’ in IV, i, 343, but also the title- 
pages of the First and Second Quartos, where Shylock’s extreme cruelty is mentioned 
in cutting a ‘just pound’ of flesh.—Eb. 

155. faire flesh] This suggests Shylock’s darker, Oriental hue.—Ep. 

155, &c, SALAMAN (Jews As They Are, p. 215): Jews are commanded by their 
immutable divine Law to love their neighbors as themselves, and to treat all living 
creatures with kindness, mercy, and humane consideration. When slaughtering ani- 
mals required for food, they are forbidden to torture them or to subject them to pro- 
longed suffering. To mutilate any living creature, much less [Qu. more ?] a human 
being, is strictly opposed to the merciful spirit of the Jewish Law, as it would be 
abhorrent to the Jewish nature. It may be confidently averred that no Jew that ever 
had existence, beyond the inflamed imagination of a romancer or a balladmonger, was 
ever justly charged with the abominable crime of animal mutilation, or even with the 
barbarous disposition to mutilate which is ascribed to Shylock. The mere suggestion 
that so horrible a desire might be possible, has been viewed by all Jews as a foul libel 
upon Jewish character. Cruelty to the person has never been a Jewish vice. 

157,158. Ie... Tew] CoLiier (ed. ii): These words are addressed to Bassanio, 
and not to Shylock; consequently, Bassanio immediately answers. In the (MS) ‘the 
Jew’ is changed to ‘thee, Jew,’ which might have been right if Antonio had been 
speaking to Shylock. [See Text. Notes.—Ep.] 

165-167. O... others] BoorH: My Father uttered this as an aside, and I rathet 
think he was right; but in that case the tone and look should express disgust. 

165 what] ABBOTT, § 256. 


ACT I, SC. iii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 53 


Whofe owne hard dealings teaches them fufpeét 166 
The thoughts of others : Praie you tell me this, 
If he fhould breake his daie, what fhould I gaine 
By the exaction of the forfeiture ? 
A pound of mans flefh taken from a man, 170 
Is not fo eftimable, profitable neither 
As flefh of Muttons, Beefes, or Goates, I fay 
To buy his fauour, I extend this friendfhip, 
If he will take it, fo : if not adiew, 
And for my loue I praie you wrong me not. 175 
Ant. Yes Shylocke,I will feale vnto this bond. 
Shy. Then meete me forthwith at the Notaries, 


Giue him direétion for this merrie bond, 178 
166. dealings] dealing Ff, Rowe, Cap. 171. profitable netther| or profitable 
Sing. Dyce iii. Pope+. 
teaches them [ufpect | teach them 172. Goates,| Goats. Rowe. 
to suspect Pope+. 174. i, fo.] it fo, Q,. 


167. Praie] F,. 


166. teaches] For other instances of this Northern Early English plural in -s, see 
ABBOTT, § 333- 

166. suspect] For other instances of the omission of ¢o before the infinitive, see 
ABBOTT, § 349. 

168. breake his daie] HaLLIWELL: The word day was frequently used by ow 
old writers in the generic sense of ¢##ze, and the verb ¢o dveak in the sense of not keep- 
ing an appointment on a contract. In the old ballad of Germutus, the usurer recom- 
mends his wife to ‘keep your day,’ that is, adhere strictly to the terms of your loans. 
Conf. Heywood’s The Fayre Maide of the Exchange, Il, ii, 1607: ‘If you do break 
your day, assure yourself That I will take the forfeit of your bond.’ [Many other 
examples are given, and many more could be added.—Eb. ] 

171. WALKER (Vers. p. 274) : We sometimes find two unaccented syllables inserted 
between what are ordinarily the fourth and fifth [as here] or the sixth and seventh, the 
whole form being included in one word: ‘Is nét | so ést zma | ble, pxé | fita | ble 
neither |.’ ABBOTT, § 495, to the same effect. ALLEN suggests the following punc- 
tuation: ‘Is not so estimable, profitable, neither As,’ &c. That is, perhaps, is not so 
estimable (i. e. profitable) as that of either muttons, beefs, or goats. 

172. Beefes] CLARENDON: In zs Hen. JV III, iii, 199, the Prince calls Falstaff 
*O, my sweet beef!’ Cotgrave explains deuf to mean ‘An Ox; a Beefe; also beefe.’ 
The plural occurs in 2 Hen. JV. III, ii, 253. [Murray (ew Eng. Dict.) gives the 
plural as deeves.—ED.] 

175. for my loue] CLARENDON: Not ‘in return for my love,’ but ‘for my love’s 
sake.’ [Does Shylock mean ‘for my love’s sake, do not, in this matter, impute un- 
worthy motives to me,’ or (he has just spoken of ‘buying Anthonio’s favour’) ‘do not, 
for my love’s sake, hereafter maltreat me’ ?—ED.] 

177. BooTH: Eagerly. 


54 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 


[Act I, sc. ii. 


And I will goe and purfe the ducats ftraite. 
See to my houfe left in the fearefull gard 180 


Of an vnthriftie knaue : and prefentlie 


Ile be with you. 
Ant. 
Chriftian, he growes kinde. 


Exit. 


Hie thee gentle Jew. This Hebrew will turne 


Baff. 1 like not faire teames, and a villaines minde. 185 


Ant. 


179. ftraite] firaight Q,. 

180, See] Look Cap. (corrected in Er- 
rata). 

fearefull) fearless Warb. 

182. fle] J’le FF, J will Theob. ii 
et seq. 

183. Hie...Jew] As closing line 182, 
Q, Pope et seq. 


Come on, in this there can be no difmaie, 
My Shippes come home a month before the daie. 


Exeunt. 


183, 184. Zhis...2inde] Prose, Q.Q, Ft. 
Separate line, Q, et cet. 

183. This] The Qq, Pope, Han. Cap. 
Coll. Cam. Glo. Cla. Rlfe, Huds. Wh. 
ii. 

184. growes| growes foQ.. 

185. teames | termes or tearmes or terms 


Qq Ff. 


180, fearefull] JoHNsON: A guard that is not to be trusted, but gives cause of fear. 
ABBOTT, § 3: Adjectives, especially those ending in /x//, less, ble, and zve, have both 
an active and a passive meaning. 

183. This, &c.] BooTH: Shylock overhears this, and grins at it as a pleasant joke, 
and, moving slowly up the stage, turns as they exeunt, and looks after them with 
intense hatred. 

185. teames] JOHNSON: Kind words, good language. [Of course a misprint for 
termes. But does it mean no more than ‘kind words, good language’? May it not 
refer to the bond?—Ep.] Lioyp: The thoughtful rejoinder of Bassanio marks 
apprehension, and this is the very cautiousness that besteads him in his venture on the 
caskets, when he comments on the deceptiveness of ornament, ‘The seeming truth, 
which cunning time puts on To entrap the wisest.’ 


ACTII,sc.i] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 55 


Actus Secundus. [Scene I] 


Enter Morochus a tawnie Moore all in white, and three or 
Joure followers accordingly, with Portia, 
Nerriffa, and their traine. 

Flo. Cornets. 


Mor. Miflike me not for my complexion, 5 
The fhadowed liuerie of the burnifht funne, 
To whom I am a neighbour, and neere bred. 
Bring me the faireft creature North-ward borne, 
Where Phadus fire fcarce thawes the yficles, 
And let vs make incifion for your loue, 10 
To proue whofe blood is reddeft, his or mine. 


[Scene I. Belmont. Rowe. A Room 4. Flo. Cornets] Om. Qq. 
Nn Portia’s House. Cap. 5. Mor.] Moroc. Q,Q,. Morocho. Q,. 
1. Morochus] Morochius Ff, Rowe+. 6. burnifhi | burning Coll. (MS). 
Prince of Morocco. Cap. 8. Bring me] Bring Q,. 
all in white] all white Ff. 10. incifion] incyzion Q,. 


3. their traine.] her train. Rowe. 


I. tawnie Moore] It is well to remember that it is this phrase in this place on 
which stress is laid by those who maintain that Othello, although a Moor, was not 
black. Note, too, the misprint of the Ff: ‘a tawnte Moore all white. —Ep. 

4. Flo. Cornets.] See Appendix, p. 274. 

5. KoEnic (Ueber Sh., p. 103): Conf. The Song of Solomon, i, 6: ‘Look not upon 
me, because I am black, because the sun hath looked upon me.’ 

6. burnisht] Coie, in his Votes, &c. (1853, p. 114), thinks that drning, of the 
(MS), ‘seems much more proper, when the African Prince is speaking of his black 
complexion as the effect of the sun’s rays. To speak of the sun as artificially “ bur- 
nished” is very unworthy.’ In a Review of Collier’s Motes in Blackwood (Aug., 1853), 
the Reviewer denies that the African Prince speaks thus, and asserts that ‘he is merely 
throwing brightness and darkness into picturesque contrast,—as the sun is bright or 
“burnished,” so am I, his retainer, dark, or “shadowed.”’ ‘Shakespeare speaks of 
the sun as zaturally burnished; and so far is this from being “ unworthy,” it is, in the 
circumstances, highly poetical.’ COLLIER, in his ed. ii, records the reading of his (MS), 
but is not ‘so confident that “ burnished” is wrong as to exclude it’ and adopt burning. 

7. whom] For other instances where who personifies irrational antecedents, see 
ABBOTT, § 264. 

8. Bring me] Q, omits ‘me,’ somewhat to the detriment of the metre, but not to 
the sense; it is probably merely a compositor’s oversight.—Ep. 

tt. reddest] JoHNson: To understand how the tawny prince, whose savage dig 
aty is very well supported, means to recommend himself by this challenge, it must be 


56 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [AcT II, SC. i, 


I tell thee Ladie this afpect of mine 12 
Hath feard the valiant,(by my loue I fweare) 

The beft regarded Virgins of our Clyme ie 

Haue lou’d it to : I would not change this hue, 15 
Except to fteale your thoughts my gentle Queene. 


13. feard]Q,Ff. feardQ,Q,. scard 15. Haue]| Hath Q,. 
Stockdale conj. to] 400 Q, FfQ,. 
14. deft regarded | best-regarded Steev. 


remembered that ved blood is a traditionary sign of courage. Thus, Macbeth calls one 
of his frighted soldiers a Zily-iver’'d boy; again, in this play, cowards are said to have 
livers as white as milk; and an effeminate and timorous man is termed a milksop. 
Douce (i, 254): Dr Johnson’s observation derives support from our English Pliny, 
Bartholomew Glantville, who says, after Isidorus, ‘Reed clothes ben layed upon deed 
men in remembrance ot theyr hardynes and boldnes, whyle they were in theyr bloudde.’ 
On which his commentator, Batman, remarks: ‘It appereth in the time of the Saxons 
that the manner over their dead was a red cloath, as we now use black. The red of 
valiauncie, and that was over kings, lords, knights and valyaunt souldiers: white over 
cleargie men, in token of their profession and honest life, and over virgins and matrons.’ 
Monck Mason (note on Fletcher’s Humorous Lieutenant, IV, iv, p. 511, ed. Dyce): 
It was the fashion in Fletcher’s time for the young gallants to stab themselves in the 
arms, or elsewhere, in order to drink the healths of their mistresses, or to write their 
names, in their own blood. The custom is particularly described in Jonson’s Cynthza’s 
Revels [and mentioned or alluded to in innumerable passages of early writers—DvYceE. ] 
Morochius alludes to this practice in the Jer. of Ven. See ABBOTT, § 10, for the 
superlative. 

12. aspect] For a long list of words where the accent is nearer the end than at 
present, see ABBOTT, § 490. 

13. feard] ABBOTT, § 291: This is not an intransitive verb converted into a transi- 
tive verb, It had the signification of frighten in Anglosaxon and Early English. 

16. steale] CLARENDON: Except I might steal your affections by disguising myself, 
as thieves do. KOENIG (p. 103): Morocco, in order to counteract the judgment that 
may be passed on him for his color, appeals to what is, to be sure, somewhat of an 
internal quality, but which is of a purely physical nature, and therefore, in reality, ex- 
ternal—namely, his blood; then he refers to his exterior, and tells how his ‘aspect’ 
has ‘feared the valiant,’ and how the ‘best regarded virgins of his clime’ have fallen 
in love with his face. Thus far in six verses he has mentioned ‘love’ three times, and 
twice his love for Portia, whom he has just seen, evidently for the first time. What he 
calls ‘love,’ therefore, is nothing but a desire to possess Portia for her wealth and her 
fair reputation,—a purely superficial affection, not an honest love down deep in the 
heart. Then he goes on to talk of the devotion of true love, and he declares, with a 
jingling of his sabre, that to win Portia he is ready to confront perils and engage with 
lions and bears. Portia’s assurance that he stood as fair as any other of her suitors 
conveys to us, who know what her feelings toward those others are, a keen satire, 
which becomes extremely comic when Morocco thanks her for it. In the choice itself, 
true to his whole character, Morocco passes by the lead casket solely on account of its 
homely exterior, and hesitates between the silver and gold solely with reference to his 
awn merits: and finally chooses the gold entirely in accordance with its exterior and 


ACT Il, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 57 


Por. In tearmes of choife I am not folie led 17 
By nice direétion of a maidens eies : 
Befides, the lottrie of my deftenie 
Bars me the right of voluntarie choofing : 20 
But if my Father had not fcanted me, 
And hedg’d me by his wit to yeelde my felfe 
His wife, who wins me by that meanes I told you, 
Your felfe (renowned Prince) than ftood as faire 


As any commer I haue look’d on yet 25 
For my affection. 
Mor. Euen for that I thanke you, 27, 
17. Por.] Portia. Q.. 22. wit] will Han. Cap. Steev.’85, 
Jolie] foly Q,Q,FF,. foelly F,. Rann, Mal. Dyce iii, Huds. Coll. iii 
[olely Q.. 24. than] Q,Q,. then F,, 


19. deftenie] Q,. deftiny Q,. 


its inscription, as he wishes to have that which all the world desires, and more than he 
deserves. 

17, 18. In tearmes ... By nice] Conf. ‘in way of smile,’ I, i, 61, and ‘In way 
of marriage,’ line 48 of this present scene, and many other instances of the omissiou 
of the definite article, in ABBOTT, §§ 89, go. 

17. tearmes] KARL ELzE (Jahrbuch, vi, 166): The terms for the choice of the 
caskets were devised to frighten off unworthy and unlovable wooers, like the French 
jumping-jack, the German toper, and the Neapolitan dilettante in the noble art of 
horse-shoeing. In plain prose, Portia’s Father did not wish that she should become the 
prize of a wooer who should choose her for the sake of her gold and silver, one who 
should in marriage seek outward show not inward worth, one who should love her for- 
tune not herself. And yet—strange contradiction !—Bassanio it was who set out for 
Belmont on purpose to win the ‘ Golden Fleece;’ while to the Princes of Arragon and 
of Morocco, with their royal wealth, this mercenary motive could not be imputed..... 
We learn to know afterwards that Bassanio, in spite of his prodigality and too swelling 
port, is at heart a sound, manly character, and does not love Portia’s wealth more than 
her very self. 

18. nice] Dyce: Scrupulous, precise, squeamish. 

20. Bars] ABBOTT, § 198: Verbs of ablation, such as dar, banish, forbid, often omit 
the preposition before the place or inanimate object. 

22. wit] THEOBALD (JVichols’s Ill. of Lit. ii, 305): I would read, wi. So in], 
ii, 25, ‘the will of a dead father;’ /., line 89, ‘you should refuse to perform your 
Father’s will;’ ZZ., line 104, ‘by the manner of my Father’s will.’ JOHNSON: I sup- 
pose we may safely read w7/7. Confined me by his will. STEEVENS: As the ancient 
signification of ‘ wit’ was sagacity, or power of mind, I have not displaced the original 
reading. STAUNTON: ‘ Wit’ is knowledge, foresight, wisdom. 

23. His] ABBOTT, § 218: His, her, &c. being genitives of he, she, &c., may stand 
as the antecedent of a relative. 

24. stood] The same construction as ‘had scanted’ just above. 

24. as faire] CLARENDON: A reference to the complexion of the Moor. 


58 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act I, SC. i. 


Therefore I pray you leade me to the Caskets 28 
To trie my fortune : By this Symitare 
That flew the Sophie, and a Perfian Prince ~ 30 


That won three fields of Sultan Solyman, 

I would ore-ftare the fterneft eies that looke : 

Out-braue the heart moft daring on the earth: 

Plucke the yong fucking Cubs from the fhe Beare, 

Yea, mocke the Lion when he rores for pray 35 
To win the Ladie. But alas, the while 


29. Symitare] QQ, Semitaur Q,. 34. fucking | suckling Ktly. 
Symitar Ff. 35. he] a Q,Q,. 
30. Sophie] F,. Sophy Q, et cet. pray| prey, Rowe. 
Prince] Prince, Rowe. 36. the Ladie.] thee, lady. Rowe ii et 
32. ore-ftare] Q,FfQ,, Rowe, Cap. seq. 
Knt, Sta. Wh. i, Rife. out/fare Q, et while] while ! Pope. 
cet. 


30. Sophie] JoHNson: Shakespeare seldom escapes well when he is entangled with 
geography. The Prince of Morocco must have travelled far to kill the Sophy of Persia. 
TYRRWHITT: It were well if Shakespeare had never ‘entangled’ himself ‘with geog- 
raphy’ worse than in the present case. If the Prince of Morocco be supposed to have 
served in the army of Sultan Solyman (the Second, for instance), I see no geographical 
objection to his having killed the Sophi of Persia. (See D’Herbelot in Solyman Ben 
Selim.) HALLIWELL: The Prince, however, clearly means to say that he won three 
fields from Solyman. CLARENDON: In ‘The Table’ at the end of Zhe History of the 
Warres betweene the Turkes and the Persians, written in Italian by J. T. Minadoi, and 
translated by Abraham Hartwell, London, 1595, we read: ‘ Sofi, and Sofito, an auncient 
word signifying a wise man, learned and skilfull in Magike Naturall. It is growen to 
be the common name of the Emperour of Persia.’ The first monarch who bore the 
name was Ismael Sophi, the founder of the Suffavian dynasty, at the beginning of the 
16th Century. So says Millin his British Jndia, but Minadoi, p. 48, affirms that he 
did rather renew it in his own person. It is not necessary to suppose that Shakespeare 
was at all careful of historical accuracy; but probably he refers, in the next line, to the 
unfortunate campaign which Solyman the Magnificent undertook against the Persians 
in 1535. [The ‘Sefi of Persia’ is mentioned in Der Jud von Venedig, performed 
during Shakespeare’s lifetime by English comedians on the Continent. See Appendix, 
‘Source of the Plot.’—Ep.] 

33. ore-stare] A majority of editors have decided, and, I think, rightly, that Q, has 
here decidedly the better word. Again, in line 35, I think ‘he’ of Q, and Ff is better 
than the colloquial @ of Q,.—Ep. 

36. alas, the while] Sraunron: The vernacular phrase a/as, or woe the white, 
appears to have been a parenthetical ejaculation of sorrow, with no more determinate 
meaning than Pistol’s ‘lament therefore,’ or our ‘it’s sad to think.’ It occurs again in 
Hen. V; IV, vii, 78, and in Jud. Cas. I, iii, 82. RoLFE: This expression seems orig- 
inally to have meant, ‘Alas for the present state of things!’ but it came to be used as 
indefinitely as the simple ‘alas!’ CLARENDON: Compare Ezefiel, xxx, 2: ‘Woe worth 
the day!’ 


ACT li, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 59 


If Hercules and Lychas plaie at dice 37 
Which is the better man, the greater throw 
May turne by fortune from the weaker hand: 
So is Alcides beaten by his rage, 40 
And fo may I, blinde fortune leading me 
Miffe that which one vnworthier may attaine, 
And die with grieuing. 
Port. You muft take your chance, 
And either not attempt to choofe at all, 45 
Or fweare before you choofe, if you choofe wrong 
Neuer to fpeake to Ladie afterward 


In way of marriage, therefore be aduis’d. 48 
38. man,] man ? Rowe. Theob. et cet. 
40. rage] QqFf, Rowe, Popei: page 44, 49. chance] chaunce Q.. 


40. rage] THEOBALD (SA. Restored, p. 166): Tho’ the whole Set of Editions con- 
cur in this Reading, I am very well assur’d, and I dare say the Readers will be so too 
anon, that it is corrupt at Bottom. Let us look into the Poet’s Sentiment, and the His- 
tory of the Persons represented. If Hercules (says he) and Lichas were to play at Dice 
for the Decision of their Superiority, Zzchas, the weaker Man, might have the better 
Cast of the Two. But how then is A/cides beaten by his Rage? To admit This, we 
must suppose a Gap in the Poet, and that some Lines are lost in which Hercules, in his 
Passion for losing the Hand, had thrown the Box and Dice away, and knock’d his own 
Head against the Wall for meer Madness. Thus, indeed, might he be said, in some 
Sense, to be beaten by his Rage. But SHAKESPEARE had no such Stuff in his Head. 
He means no more than, if Zzchas had the better Throw, so might Hercules himself be 
beaten by Zichas. Im short Lichas was the poor unfortunate Servant of Hercules, who, 
unknowingly, brought his Master the envenom’d Shirt, dipp’d in the Blood of the Cen- 
taur (Vessus, and was thrown headlong into the Sea for his Pains. [Ovid’s Metam. ix, 
155.] The Poet has alluded to some Parts of this Fable in another of his Plays; [Avz. 
& Cleop. 1V, xii, 43] and there indeed a reasonable Intimation is made of Hercules 
worsting himself thro’ his own Rage. Can we desire more than to know this one Cir- 
cumstance of Zichas’s Quality to set us right in the Poet’s Meaning, and put an End to 
all the present Absurdity of the Passage? Restore it, without the least Scruple, only 
with cutting off the Tail of a single Letter; So is A/cides beaten by his PAGE..... 
The very excellent Lord Lansdowne, in his Alteration of this Play, tho’ he might not 
stand to make the Correction upon the Poet, seems at least to have understood the Pas- 
sage exactly as Ido; And tho’ he changes the Verse, retains the Sense of it in this 
Manner; ‘So were a Giant worsted by a Dwarf.’ Tho’ I had made the Emendation, 
before I thought to look into his Lordship’s Performance, it is no small Satisfaction to 
me, that I have the Authority of such a Genius to back my Conjecture. 

48. In way] See ‘In tearmes,’ line 17. 

48. aduis’d] JoHNson: Therefore be not precipitant; consider well what you are 
to do, ‘Advis’d’ is the word opposite to rash. [See I, i, 152.] 


60 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act I, SC. i. 


Mor. Nor will not, come bring me vnto my chance. 


Por. Firft forward to the temple, after dinner 50 
Your hazard fhall be made. - 
Mor. Good fortune then, Cornets. 
To make me bleft or curfed’{t among men. Exeunt. 53 
49. come...unto] therefore bring me to 52. Cornets.] Om. Qq. 
Pope+. 53. deft] bless’t Steev.’93. 
unto] to Q,, Pope+. curfed’ft| curfedft Q,. 


50. temple] table Ktly. 


49. Nor will not] For other instances of double negatives, see ABBOTT, § 406, also 
above I, ii, 26: ‘nor refuse none.’ 

49. vnto] F, here wisely followrd Q,, to the improvement of the metre.—Ep. 

50. temple] Eccies: Where. 1 suppose, the oath she spoke of was to be adminis- 
tered to the suitors. KEIGHTLEY (Zxf. p. 149): Surely ‘temple’ has no meaning 
here. Must not the poet have written sable? In Lucrece (St. 168), in the Var. Shake- 
speare, ‘Her sacred ¢emple’ is printed ‘Her sacred ¢ad/e.’ I am not aware that any 
critic has observed this palpable error. The term ¢aé/e, it may be observed, was much 
more used by our forefathers than by us. CLARENDON: The mention of a temple 
instead of a church seems odd here. Perhaps Portia’s Roman name led Shakespeare 
momentarily to forget that she was a Christian, or the mention of Hercules and Lichas 
may have given his thoughts a classical turn. 

52. Good] Eccirs: Morochius cannot mean that good fortune, as opposed to dad, 
should make him cursed; ‘good’ is here only an epithet of respect applied to Fortune 
in his address to her: ‘Thou, O good Fortune! it will be thy task, or office, to make 
me blest, or,’ &c. : 

53. blest] STEEVENS: That is, blessed’st. WALKER (C7i¢. i, 218) gives many 
instances, not alone from Shakespeare, but from the Elizabethan poets, with whom, as 
he says, the idiom is not unfrequent, of ‘attaching terminations to one adjective, which 
affect others.’ Thus, ‘The generous and gravest citizens,—J/eas. for Meas. IV, vi, 
13; ‘ The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,’— Som. 1xxx. We have the adverbial 
termination in ‘ Why do you speak so startingly and rash,’— O¢#. III, iv, 94. Again, 
the usage, whereby the /a¢ter of two superlatives copulated with and is changed into a 
positive, is frequent in Shakespeare and his contemporaries. Conf.‘ The dest condi- 
tion’d and unwearied spirit, —Mer. of Ven. III, ii, 310. The corresponding section 
in ABBOTT is 398. EccLzs remarks that the present passage will be ‘good sense 
enough, though we should suppose “blest” only in the positive degree ;’ which is true, 
but the number of instances alleged by Walker show that the superlative applies to 
both adjectives; moreover, in this present line, there is the sound of a superlative in 
‘blest,’ which satisfies the ear.—Ep. 


ACT II, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 61 


[Scene LT. 


Enter the Clowne alone. 


Clo. Certainely, my confcience will ferue me to run 


from this lew my Maifter : the fiend is at mine elbow, 3 
[Scene II. Venice. Rowe. Venice. A 2. will] will not Hal. 

Street. Cap. 3. Matfer] Q.. 
1. Enter...] Enter Launcelot alone. mine| my Rowe i. 

Rowe. 


I. The lack in the Qq of any division into Acts and Scenes is made use of by Ec- 
CLEs to re-arrange the order, whereby the First Act ends with the discomfiture of the 
Prince of Morocco, and the Second with that of Arragon. It is not altogether for the 
sake of sensational effect that he thus closes the Acts, but for reasons connected with 
the dramatic time of the action, reasons which will be found more fully discussed in 
the Appendix. At the first blush there seems to be a degree of propriety in this re-ar- 
rangement; in each of the first three Acts we have a Casket scene, with all its attend- 
ant bravery, and the charm and fragrance of Belmont dominate the Ghetto; but the 
Master is wiser than all of us. The play hereby becomes three different stories, at the 
end of each we draw a long breath, instead of keeping our suspense locked up to the 
very close. Portia has just told Morocco that his hazard must be made after dinner ; 
Eccles accordingly takes the Seventh Scene of Act Second, wherein Morocco makes 
his choice, and transfers it to this First Act, and closes the Act with it. The First 
Scene of the Second Act, according to Eccles, now opens at Venice, with Launcelot 
Gobbo. ‘The particular time of the day,’ he says, ‘is undetermined; Bassanio, how- 
ever, upon his entrance, desires that “ supper may be ready by five of the clock.” ’—Ep. 

1. Clowne] Douce (i, p. 271): There is not a single circumstance through the 
whole of this play which constitutes Launcelot an allowed Fool or Jester; and yet there 
is some reason for supposing that Shakespeare intended him as such, from his being 
called @ patch, a fool of Hagar’s offspring, and in one place ¢he fool. It is not reason- 
able, however, to conclude that a person like Shylock would entertain a domestic of 
this description; and it is possible that the foregoing terms may be designed merely as 
synonymous with the appellation of clown, as in Love's Lab. Lost. On the whole we 
have here a proof that Shakespeare has not observed that nice discrimination of cha- 
racter in his clowns for which some have given him credit. 

2. will serue] EccLes: He must be understood to mean that his conscience will 
finally be induced to acquiesce in, or even be assistant to, his purpose of running away 
from the Jew. HALLIWELL: The particle of, a word frequently omitted in early edi- 
tions of plays, seems essential to the sense of what follows. The fiend beats the con- 
science, but the latter is represented as firmly inveighing against the desertion of his 
master. ALLEN: Read either ‘will ot’ with Halliwell, or ‘will fordzd, which is not 
so very remote from the ductus literarum. ‘Will not’ is more plausible for modern, 
than for Old, English. W/i//, in Shakespeare, is oftener equivalent to veut, intends. 
Now ‘it is clear (from what it has been saying and continues to say) that my con- 
science intends to forbid my running away’ is exactly consistent with the fact, as stated 
by Launcelot himselt 


62 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT II, SC. ii. 


and tempts me, faying to me, lobve, Launcelet Iobbe, good 
Launcelet, or good Jobbe, or good Launcelet Lobbe, vie 5 
your legs, take the ftart, run awaie : my confcience faies 
no ; take heede honeft Launcelet, take heed honeft /odde, 
or as afore-faid honeft Launcclet [obbe, doe not runne, 


fcorne running with thy heeles; well, the moft coragi- 9 
4. tempts] attempts FF, Rowe i. Launcelot Rowe. 
4, &c. Iobbe] Q,F,Q,, Rowe ii. Job 9. keeles] bells Anon. ap. Hal, 

FF, Rowe i. Gobbo Q,, Pope et seq. coragious|Q,Q,. couragious Q, Ff. 


Launcelet] QqFf. (Lancelet Q..) contagious Coll. (MS). 


4. Iobbe, &c.] This spelling, repeated half a dozen times, is apparently one of those 
wild and inexplicable freaks to which the old compositors were subject, and familiar 
enough to the readers of old plays. Or it may be an indication of the piecemeal com- 
position whereby these plays were set up. Launcelot’s father enters a few lines lower 
down, and his name is consistently spelled God0 throughout ; and Launcelot’s speeches 
are at once indicated by Lam. or Lawn. for over a hundred lines, when, at line 143, they 
are again indicated by C/o. (See the Text. Notes for the way in which this /odde misled 
F,F, and Rowe.) Iam afraid we must echo Bottom : ‘man is but an ass, if he go about 
to expound this.’-—ED. ; 

4. Launcelet] WHITE (ed.i): This invariable spelling in the QqFf,—the English 
diminutive of Zaunce,—warrants the belief that such was its original form. But as the 
nomenclature of the Dramatis Personz is purely Italian, as the diminutive in that lan- 
guage is formed in offo, and as the present name has been in the text for a hundred and 
fifty years, it is not worth while to make a change in so trivial a matter. 

9. with thy heeles] STEEvENS: Launcelot was designed for a wag, but, perhaps, 
not for an absurd one. We may therefore suppose no such expression would have been 
put in his mouth as our author had censured in another character. When Pistol says, 
‘he hears with ears,’ Sir Hugh Evans very properly is made to exclaim, ‘ The tevil and 
his tam! what phrase is this, he hears with ears? why it is affectations.’ To talk of 
running with one’s heels has scarcely less of absurdity. It has been suggested that we 
should read and point the passage as follows: ‘Do not run; scorn running; withe thy 
heels :’ i. e. connect them with a withe (a band made of osiers), as the legs of cattle 
are hampered in some countries to prevent their straggling far from home. I think 
myself bound, however, to add that in Auch Ado, the very phrase, that in the present 
instance is disputed, occurs: ‘O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels;’ 
i. e. I recalcitrate, kick up contemptuously. at the idea, as animals throw up their hind 
legs. Such also may be Launcelot’s meaning. [I do not for a minute suppose that 
Steevens, that ‘Puck of Commentators,’ was serious when he started this laughable 
emendation. I think he chuckled in anticipation over the grave and didactic refuta- 
tion which it would receive from Malone, as it did. No one knew better than Stee- 
vens, with his retentive memory and extensive reading, that the phrase was proverbial ; 
but the fiend was at his elbow, he took a good start, and has led the commentators a 
very pretty chase ever since. Had there been anything indelicate in the allusion, his 
note would have been signed Amner or Collins; as it is, he says simply, ‘It has been 
suggested,’ and in citing the passage from Much Ado, he knew well enough that he 
gave all the «xplanation needed.—Ep.] 


ACT II, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 63 


ous fiend bids me packe, fia faies the fiend, away faies 10 
the fiend, for the heauens roufe vp a braue minde faies 
the fiend, and run; well, my confcience hanging about I2 
10. fia] QqFf. Via Rowe. Ktly. Aeavens, Coll. Dyce, Wh. i, Clarke, 
II. for] ’fore Coll. iii (MS). Rife. aven ; M. Mason. 
heauens| QqFf, Rowe+, Sta. 11. rou/e] rofe F. 
heavens; Cap. Steev. Mal. Knt, Sing. 12. run ;] run. Rowe. 


10. fia] NICHOLSON (/V. & Qz. 6th Ser. vol. i, p. 333) : Why was this Italian word 
in not uncommon use in Shakespeare’s England, and why does Shakespeare think it con- 
gruent to put it into the mouth of certainly a quick-witted and town-living, but country 
bred, clown? The answers, I think, lie in the fact, told us by Capt. John Smith in his 
Seaman's Grammar, that via, or, as he spells it by pronunciation, vea, a nautical term, 
from the Italian, like some others, was a word of exhortation used by a boat’s crew 
when redoubling their stroke or pulling more vigorously. It was apparently spoken 
unanimously, and, like the paviors’ ‘Hoh!’ after each stroke, for he gives it thus, ‘ Vea, 
vea, vea, vea, vea, vea.’ Hence it was doubtless in common use among the Thames 
watermen. IBID, (/2. vol. ii, p. 305): Since writing my former note, I think it right to 
add that I have found ‘ via’ was used contemporaneously in England to horses. Ger- 
vase Markham, in his Country Contenitments, 1615, twice gives ‘ via, how, hey’ at pp. 
40 and 45, as terms of encouragement from their riders to horses. Also in his Cava/- 
aria, 1617: ‘ But if you crie Hoa, Ho, or Hey, Hey, or Via, Via, &c. [HALLIWELL 
had already called attention to Markham’s reference to it in Cheap and Good Hus- 
bandry, p. 15, a8 a word to be used in encouraging a horse.] 

II. heauens] CAPELL (ii, 60 4): Signal changes in sense, made by punctuation 
can rarely be lay’d before a reader in any other way than that we are now taking :— 
‘for the heavens’ is in all prior copies connected with ‘rouse’ &c., having no point be- 
tween them; and some moderns mark such it’s connection still stronger, by changing 
Jfiend’s comma into a semicolon: How they understood them, or whether they under 
stood them at all, matters not; pointed as they are at this present, the words have no 
difficulty ; and by giving voice to this passage, through four sentences, we shall feel in 
che only cadence and run of them the pointing’s rectitude: the words are found in the 
mouth of some other characters and (particularly) in that of Beatrice at II, i, of that 
play. But what impropriety, says some objecter, in making the ‘fiend’ speak them! 
True; and in that very impropriety lyes the wit: blunders and false conclusions of all 
sorts, join’d with numberless oddities and an innate honesty, make up this character ; 
some choice flowers in his way the moderns rob him of towards the speech’s end, by 
adopting the readings of a quarto, GiIFFORD (Zvery Man Out of His Humour, U,i, 
p. 68, ed. 1816): The words, ‘for the heavens!’ are merely a petty oath; and where 
soever they occur, in this manner, and by whomsoever they are spoken, mean neither 
more nor less than—by heaven! .... That no future doubts may arise on the subject, 
I will subjoin two or three of as many score examples which I could instantly produce ; 
the first shall be from Jonson himself: ‘Come on, Sir Valentine, I’ll give you a health 
for the heavens, you mad Capricio.’— The Case is Altered. The second from his old 
enemy Dekker: ‘A lady took a pipefull or two (of tobacco) at my hands, and praised 
it, for the heavens !’—Untrussing the Humorous Poet. And, to conclude, Tweddle, 
the drunken piper in Pasguil and Katharine, exclaims, ‘1 must goe ard clap my mis- 
tress’ cheekes (his tabor) there, for th> heavens.’ 


64 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT II, SC. ii 


the necke of my heart, faies verie wifely to me - my ho- 13 
neft friend Launcelet, being an honeft mans fonne, or ra- 
ther an honeft womans fonne, for indeede my Father did 15 


fomething fmack, fomething grow too ; he had a kinde of 
tafte ; wel, my confcience faies Lancelet bouge not, bouge 
faies the fiend, bouge not faies my confcience, confcience 
fay I you counfaile well, fiend fay I you counfaile well, 
to be rul’d by my confcience I fhould ftay with the Jew 20 
my Maifter,(who God bleffe the marke)is a kinde of di- 


16, 100] #0 Q,Q,, Pope et seq. ii Theob. Warb. Johns. ; 

17. tafte] taft Q,Q,- 19. fiend... well] Fiend...ill Q., 
Lancelet] Om. Q,, Pope+. Pope+. 

17, 18. bouge] budge F,. budg F,. 21. (who God] Q,Q,. who (God Q, 

18, 19. confcience...well] conscience... et cet. 


16. smack] EccLes: Of a nave, he may be understood to mean. Whether we 
take ‘smack’ as signifying tctured or as smacking the lips, with either acceptation, 
‘he had a kind of taste’ may agree; the difference will not be great respecting the 
morality of old Gobbo. To ‘grow to’ I suppose to have been a cant phrase, but which 
it seems not very easy precisely to define; it may be designed to express a pretty strong 
natural bias to knavish tricks, cheating practices; or all taken together may imply 
nothing more than the old man’s original propensity to certain conjugal infidelities as 
opposed to his wife’s honesty. CLARENDON: ‘Grow to.’ A household phrase applied 
to milk when burnt to the bottom of the sauce-pan, and thence acquiring an unpleasant 
taste. ‘Grown,’ in this sense, is still used in Lincolnshire. (Brogden’s Dict. of Pro- 
vincial Words, &c.) 

17, &c.] Douce (i, 255) thinks it not improbable that ‘this curious struggle between 
Launcelot’s conscience and the fiend might have been suggested by some well-known 
story in Shakespeare’s time, grafted’ on a monkish fable, which Douce proceeds to set 
forth, wherein a woman’s laziness argues with her conscience about getting up in the 
morning to go to mass. [How inexhaustible and untiring was Shakespeare’s industry 
in collecting materials wherefrom to compose his patchwork plays !—ED.] 

19. fiend... well] FURNIVALL (Forewords to Quarto 1): Q, misses Lancelot’s 
point by making him say, ‘ Fiend say I you counsel 2//,’ where we must [sic] have the 
Heyes ‘well,’ to match the ‘Conscience say I you counsell well,’ and Lancelot’: fol- 
lowing the Fiend’s advice by budging from Shylock. [On what compulsion mzzst we 
believe that logic or reason rules in anything that is said by Launcelot, ‘whose nose 
fell a bleeding on black Monday last, at six o’ciock in the morning, falling out that 
year on Ashwednesday was foure years in the afternoon’? It may be that Q, is right, 
but that Gobbo’s words are here illogical does not, I think, prove Q, wrong; certainly 
not so wrong as that the passage can be cited, as Furnivall cites it, in conclusive proof 
that Q, is the more correct text. Pop, THEOBALD, HANMER, WARBURTON, and Dr 
JOHNSON all preferred in this passage the text of Q..—ED.] 

20. to be rul’d] See Assort, § 356, for instances of infinitives indefinitely used. 

21. marke] CLARENDON: This phrase is used as a parenthetic apology for some 
profane or vulgar word, RoLFe: The origin and meaning of it are alike obscure. 
(Prof. F. 1. CHILp suggests to me that it may have been derived from the mark set 


ACT II, SC, ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 65 


uell ; and to run away from the Jew I fhould be ruled by 22 
the fiend, who fauing your reuerence is the diuell him- 

felfe: certainely the Jew is the verie diuell incarnation, 

and in my confcience, my confcience is a kinde of hard 25 
confcience, to offer to counfaile me to ftay with the Jew; 

the fiend giues the more friendly counfaile : I will runne 

fiend, my heeles are at your commandement, I will 

runne. 


Enter old Gobbo with a Bafket. 30 


Gob. Maifter yong-man, you I praie you, which is the 
waie to Maifter Jewes ? 
Lan. O heauens, this is my true begotten Father, who 
being more then fand-blinde, high grauel blinde, knows 
me not, I will trie confufions with him. 35 


24. diuell] Devil’s Ktly conj. 31, &c. Maifter] Q,. Mafter Q, et 


incarnation] incarnall Q,, Pope, 

Ec. Cam. Glo. Cla. #-carnation Rann. 

25. 2s a] Ff, Knt. zs dut a Qq et cet. 
26. Iew;] Iew. Q.. 

28. commandement | 

Cam. Cla. Glo. Wh. ii. 


command Q., 
commandment 


cet. 
31. yong-man] F,. yong man Q,. 
young-man Q,Q,F,F,, Rowe+. 
33- [Aside. Johns. et seq. 
35. not,] not; Q. 
confufions| conclufions Q,, Johns. 


Rowe et cet. Steev. Mal. Var. Knt. 
upon idolaters, in Zze&ze/, ix, 6. In the misplaced parenthesis before ‘ who,’ one of 
the many proofs is afforded that the Folio was printed from Q,.—ED.] 

23. sauing your reuerence] This phrase is used in much the same way as ‘God 
bless the mark.’—Ep. 

24. diuell] If it be desirable to spoil this speech by making sense of its nonsense, 
KEIGHTLEY’S emendation, ‘ Devil’s incarnation’ will serve the turn.—ED. 

32. Iewes] Knicur: [The Jews’ Quarter] is situated on the canal which leads to 
Mestre. There are houses there old enough to have been Shylock’s, with balconies 
from which Jessica might have talked; and ground enough beneath, between the 
houses and the water, for her lover to stand, hidden in the shadow, or under a ‘ pent- 
house.’ Hence, too, her gondola might at once start for the mainland, without having 
to traverse any part of the city—(M). [Miss Martineau ?—ED.] 

34. sand-blinde] CAPELL: That is, purblind; a vulgar phrase for it, as stone-blind 
is for those who are quite so: Launcelot finds a blind between these, which he calls 
‘gravel-blind.’ MALONE: So in Latimer’s First Sermon on the Lord’s Prayer: ‘The 
Saintis be purre-blinde and sand-blinde.’ CLARENDON: Cotgrave has ‘ Berlué: f. 
The being sand-blind, or pur-blind.’” Haxrs (Mores & Essays, p. 193): Probably the 
sand, as has been suggested, is the Anglosaxon sém (the Latin semz, Greek uc), as in 
sém-cwic, sam-wts, &c. 

35. confusions] CoLLiEr: The printer of Q, did not understand the joke of Laun- 
celot, which he carries into effect immediately afterward by misdirecting his father ‘the 

5 


66 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT II, SC. ii, 


Gob. Maifter yong Gentleman, I praie you which is 36 
the waie to Maifter Jewes. 

Laun, Turne vpon your right hand at the next tur- 
ning, but at the next turning of all on your left; marrie 
at the verie next turning, turne of no hand, but turn down 40 
indire@tlie to the Zewes houfe. 

Gob. Be Gods fonties ’twill be a hard waie to hit, can 
you tell me whether one Launcelet that dwels with him, 
dwell with him or no. 

Laun. Talke you-of yong Mafter. Launcelet, marke 45 
me now, now will I raife the waters; talke you of yong 
Maifter Launcelet? 


Gob. No Maifter fir, but a poore mans fonne, his Fa- 48 
38. upon] Ff, Knt, Hal. Sta. up, on 45. Launcelet,] Lancelet? Q,. Laun- 
Pope+. wp om Qq et cet. celot ? [Aside] Johns. et seq. 
39. all] all, Theob. et seq. 47,55. Matfer] M. Q,. 
41. to the] unto the Q,, Johns. 48. Maifter| Master, Rowe et seq. 
42. Be] By F, et seq. 48-50. Four lines, ending /onne.../ay’t 
43. whether] whither Q,. ...man...liue. Q,. 


44. n0.] no? QF). 


way to Master Jews.’ CLARENDON: Launcelot would not have given a hard word 
[like ‘conclusions’ of Q,] so correctly. 

38. THEOBALD calls attention to similar perplexing directions given by the slave 
Syrus to the old man.Demea in Terence’s Adelphi, IV, ii, 42. There is a feeble 
attempt at a similar misdirection in the Jud von Venedig. See Appendix.—Ep. 

40. of no hand] ABBoTT, § 165: ‘Of’ is here used where we should use on. 

42. sonties] STEEVENS: I know not of what oath this is a corruption. I meet 
with ‘ God’s-santy’ in Dekker’s Honest Whore [I, xii, p. 315, ed. Dodsley]. Again, 
in The Longer thou Livest the more Fool thou Art, bl. 1. without date: ‘God’s santie, 
this is a goodly book indeed.’ Perhaps it was once customary to swear by the san¢é, 
i. e. health, of the Supreme Being, or by his sazmzs, or, as Ritson observes to me, by 
his sanctity. Oaths of such a turn are not unfrequent among our ancient writers. All, 
however, seem to have been so thoroughly convinced of the crime of profane swearing, 
that they were content to disguise their meaning by abbreviations which were permitted 
silently to terminate in irremediable corruptions. ALLEN: ‘By God’s dear Saints.’ 
‘Saint’ = (as in Scotch) saunt, sauntie (as in Scotch), diminutive troxopiotixac. Conf. 
By’r Lakin. 

45. yong] CAPELL (ii, 61 2): We should observe from the Son’s young’s, which 
-are emphatical, that ‘Launcelot’ was his father’s name too: His evgo’s the pro- 
nouncer should sound—azgo; and he uses them for—talk logically, let us keep to 
our ergo’s. 

48. Maister] In the Zrans. of the New Shakspere Soc., Part I, p. 103, FURNIVALL 
gives a quotation from Smith’s Commonwealth of England to show that ‘ Master is the 
tytle which men giue t- esquires, and other gentlemen.’ 


ACT II, SC. ii] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 67 


ther though I fay’t is an honeft exceeding poore man, 

and God be thanked well to liue. 50 
Lan, Well, let his Father be what a will, wee talke of 

yong Maifter Launcelet. 
Gob. Your worfhips friend and Launcelet. 
Laun, But I praie you ergo old man, ergo I befeech you, 


talke you of yong Maifter Launcelet. 55 
49. fayt] Q,FfQ,, Hal. Wh. Rife. Jr Qq et cet. 

fay it Q, et cet. 55. Launcelet.] Q,Q,F,F,, Knt, Sing. 
51. a] Ze Pope+, Cap. Steev. Mal. Sta. Wh. Ktly. Launcelet? QF, e 


53- Launcelet] Ff, Knt. Launcelet cet. 


50. well to liue] The meaning of this phrase, which we all understand at once as 
implying ‘ with every prospect of a long life,’ appears to have escaped all the German 
translators from Wieland down to Bodenstedt. Eschenburg translates it ‘noch ganz 
munter ;’ Schlegel, ‘recht wohl auf;? Max Moltke, ‘befindet sich recht wohl;’ and 
Hager, as well as Schmidt (to whom we owe the Lexicon), ‘es geht ihm gut.’—Ep. 

53. This line is obscure. I cannot see that the reading of the Qtos: ‘Launcelet, 
Sir,’ helps it much, if any. Steevens reports Dr Farmer as of the opinion that ‘we 
should read Goéso instead of Launcelet; and observes that phraseology like this 
occurs also in Love's Lab. Lost, V, ii, 574, where Costard says, “ Your servant, and 
Costard ;”’ but this instance is not parallel; ‘your servant’ refers to ‘Pompey,’ the cha- 
racter Costard was acting. Capell’s explanation we have just had, that the Father and 
Son bore the same name, and that here old Gobbo refers to himself. Malone’s expla- 
nation, which White also adopts, is perhaps the best—that is, ‘plain Launcelot; and 
not, as you term him, aster Launcelot.’—ED. 

55. KnicHT: This sentence is usually put interrogatively, contrary to the punctua. 
tion of all [séc] the old copies; which is not to be so utterly despised as the modern 
editors would pretend. Dyce: So says Mr Knight, forgetting that this is a repetition 
of Launcelot’s preceding zxterrogation, ‘Talk you of young Master Launcelot ?’ 
Wuite: This is imperative, not interrogative. The misapprehension of the passage 
by more than one modern editor justifies an explanation of it. Launcelot whimsically 
takes his father to task for disrespect to himself—Launcelot, and says, in reply to old 
Gobbo’s statement of their condition in life, ‘ Well, let his father be what he will, we 
talk of young Master Launcelot.’ The father, still unable to dub his son ‘ Master,’ 
replies deprecatingly, ‘Your worship’s friend, and Launcelot,’ i. e. ‘ Ay, we speak of 
your worship’s friend, who is Launcelot.’ To this, Launcelot, who evidently, like the 
Gravedigger in amlet, understands, after a fashion, the Latin word he uses, rejoins, 
«But I pray you, ego, old man, evgo, I beseech you, talk you of young Master Laun- 
celot,’ i. e. ‘And therefore, because I am “your worship” and he is my friend, you 
should speak of him as Master Launcelot.’” CAMBRIDGE EpiTors: Dyce’s remark 
that the sentence is a repetition of the preceding interrogation, seems conclusive as to 
the sense. Nothing is more frequent than the omission of the note of interrogation in 
the older editions, apparently from a paucity of types. [I cannot see that White’s 
explanation would not justify an interrogation quite as well as an imperative: ‘And 
therefore, because I am “your worship” and he is my friend, are you, I beseech you, 
talking of voung Master Launcelot?’ ‘Of Launcelot,’ replies the old man, which 
surely seems a response fitter to a question than to a command.—ED. ] 


68 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act tt, Sc. ii. 


Gob. Of Launcelet, ant pleafe your maifterfhip. 56 
Lan. Ergo Maifter Lancelet, talke not of maifter Lance- 
let Father, for the yong gentleman according to fates and 
deftinies, and fuch odde fayings, the fifters three, & fuch 
branches of learning, is indeede deceafed, or as you 60 
would fay in plaine tearmes, gone to heauen. 
Gob. Marrie God forbid, the boy was the verie ftaffe 
of my age, my verie prop. 
Lau. DoT look like a cudgell or a houell-poft, a ftaffe 
or a prop : doe you know me Father. . 65 
Gob. Alacke the day, I know you not yong Gentle- 
man, but I praie you tell me, is my boy God reft his foule 
aliue or dead. 
Lan. Doe you not know me Father. 
Gob. Alacke fir I am fand blinde, I know you not. 70 
Lan. Nay, indeede if you had your eies you might 


56. ant] an’t Q,F, et seq. Dyce iii. 

60. zs] i” F,. 65. you know] you not know Dyce ia, 
62. verie] verey F,. Ktly. 

64, 65. Do...prop] As an Aside, Coll? 67. God] GOD Q,Q,. 


57. Ergo Maister] STAUNTON: The humour here, which consists in Launcelot’s 
determination to be dignified by the title of master, and the old man’s unwillingness so 
to honor him, is less apparent in writing than in acting, where the Master Launcelot 
can be rendered sufficiently emphatic. [Theobald was the first to change the comma 
after Launcelot to a semicolon; Collier, rightly, I think, changed it to a full stop. 
Launcelot has gained his point, his father has called him ‘your mastership.’—ED. ] 

61. MonTEGUT (Commentaire, &c. p. 461): It is noteworthy that after a sort Laun- 
celot is a rustic Je/ esprit, a.servant who has picked up, here and there, scraps and 
orts of learning. He uses Latin words, which he places higgledy-piggledy in his sen- 
tences; we shall find him displaying a knowledge of palmistry; he criticises mytho- 
logical expressions and metaphors used by the learned; he plays on words sharply 
enough to drive Lorenzo mad, and loses no opportunity to discourse. Before entering 
the Jew’s service he must have been the domestic of some savant of the Renaissance 
or of some canon of Venice, or have been a choir-boy under the curate of the village 
where he was born. 

64. houell-post] Cotgrave gives: Escraigne, A little houell made of poles set round 
with their ends meeting at the top, and couerea with turues, sods, &c. so thicke, that 
no weather can pierce it—ED. 

65. you know] Dyck (ed. iii): Vor is here omitted in the old eds., but is abso- 
lutely necessary: and compare Launcelot’s next speech. 

65. Father] WHITE: Twice Launcelot calls Gobbo father, and yet the old man 
does not even suspect with whom he is talking; the reason of which is the ancient 
custom, almos’ universal among the peasantry, of calling all old people father or 
nother, 


ACF Il, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 6g 


faile of the knowing me: it is a wife Father that knowes 72 
his owne childe. Well, old man, I will tell you newes of 

your fon, giue me your bleffing, truth will come to light, 

murder cannot be hid long, a mans fonne may, but in the 75 
end truth will out. 

Gob. Praie you fir ftand vp, Iam fure you are not 
Lancelet my boy. 

Lan. Praie you let’s haue no more fooling about 
it, but giue mee your bleffing: I am Lancelet your 80 
boy that was, your fonne that is, your childe that 
fhall be. 

Gob. I cannot thinke you are my fonne. 

Lan. I know not what I fhall thinke of that: but Iam 
Lancelet the Tewes man, and I am fure Margerie your wife 85 
is my mother. 

Gob. Her name is Margerie indeede, Ile be fworne if 
thou be Laxcelet, thou art mine owne flefh and blood: 

Lord worfhipt might he be, what a beard haft thou got; 
thou haft got more haire on thy chin, then Dobbin my 90 
philhorfe has on his taile. 


74. son,] son. [kneels] Coll. [kneels, Errata). 


with his back to Gobbo] Dyce iii. ~ 89. got.] got/ [feeling the back of his 
74, 76. truth] trueth Q,Q,. head] Hal. Dyce (subs.). 
75. murder| Murther Q,. muder Q.. gl. philhorfe] Q, FE. pilhorfe Q,. phil- 
75, 70. in the end | at the length Q., horfe Q,, Rowe, Pope i, Mal. Zhill-horse 
Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. Theob+, Steev. f//-horse Pope ii, Dyce, 
76. out] not Ff, Rowe et seq. Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. f/-horse Cap. 
89. Lord] Lord! Coll. Wh. i. phill-horse Var. et cet. 
worfhipt| worfhip F ,. has) ha/fe or hafe Q.,. 
might] Om. Cap. (corrected in taile] tale Q,. 


83. you] Note Gobbo’s respectful ‘you,’ until he recognizes Launcelot, and then 
his change to ‘thou.’—EpD. 

89. Lord... be] Rev. Joun Hunter, whose text reads, ‘ Lord-worshipped,’ ex- 
plains the phrase by, ‘He might be a lord worshipful,’ and adds: ‘ This refers to the 
supposed beard, and the arrogated mastership.’. Hupson: This expression does not 
occur again in Shakespeare. The Rev John Hunter means, apparently, that he has 
beard enough to receive the title of lordship. But I doubt both his printing and his 
explanation. ABBOTT, § 313, interprets ‘might’ as an optative. 

89. beard] STAUNTON: Stage tradition, not improbably from the time of Shake- 
speare himself, makes Launcelot, at this point, kneel with his back to the sand-blind 
old Father, who, of course, mistakes his long back hair for a beard, of which his face 
is perfectly innocent. 

90,.91, 93, 94. ON...0n... Of... Of] ABBOTT, §175: Of, signifying proxiny 
ity of any kind, is sometimes used locally in the sense of oz. 


70 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT II, SC. ii. 


Lan. It fhould feeme then that Dobbins taile 92 
growes backeward. I am fure he had more haire of his 
taile then I haue of my face when I loft faw him. 

Gob. Lord how art thou chang’d: how dooft thou 95 
and thy Mafter agree, I haue brought him a prefent ; how 
gree you now ? 

Lan. Well, well, but for mine owne part, as I haue fet 


vp my reft to run awaie, fo I will not reft till I haue run 99 
93. of his] om his Rowe+, Steev. 94. ff] Q,. laf Q, et cet. 

Mal. 95. doo] QF, doef Q,.. doft F, et 
94. of my] on my FF, Rowe +, Steev. seq. 
al, 97. gree] agree Q,, Pope+, Coll. 


91. philhorse] THEOBALD: This must be restored ‘ 7%:/-horse;’ i. e. the Horse 
which draws in the Shafts, or Zhill, of the Carriage. HALLIWELL: Theobald’s 
change is unnecessary; both pAzt-horse and ¢hill-horse were certainly in use. 7/7. 
horse, filler, the horse which goes in the shafts——Forby’s Last Angha. WHITE: 
‘Phill-horse,’ as a corruption of ‘¢#7¢/-horse,’ the synonym for ‘shaft-horse,’ is now in 
common use in the rural districts of New England [and of Pennsylvania.—ED. ]. 
CLARENDON: Shakespeare uses ‘fills’ in Zyro. G Cress. III, ii, 48, ‘An you draw 
backward, we’ll put you i’ the fills.’ 

97. gree] For many instances of dropped prefixes, see ABBOTT, § 460. 

98. set vp my rest] There seems to be some obscurity in regard to the origin of 
this phrase, although there is general agreement that it means ‘to be resolved, to be 
determined.’ Steevens maintained at one time that the expression is taken from the 
manner of firing a matchlock, which was so heavy that a supporter called a res¢ was 
fixed in the ground before the piece was levelled to take aim. Collier adopted this 
derivation ‘in spite of Gifford,’ whose name carries more weight than any other, per- 
haps, of those who maintain that ‘the metaphor is taken from play, where the highest 
stake the parties were disposed to venture was called the vest.’ ares restricted ‘the 
play’ to the ‘once fashionable and favorite game of Primero,’ and said that it meant to 
stand upon the cards you have in your hand, in hopes they may prove better than those 
of your adversary. Hence, ‘to make up your mind, to be determined.’ Keightley com- 
bines both definitions, and to that extent gives the more plausible explanation. He says 
(Expositor, p. 419) that the phrase ‘is derived from gaming, chiefly from the game of 
Primero. As this game came from Spain, it brought, like Ombre, its terms with it, and 
“rest”? was the Spanish resto, which meant, not as is usually supposed, the stake, but the 
bet or wager, which appears to have been made by the players only. “What shall we 
play for?—one shilling stake and three rest.’—Florio, First Fruites. The Spanish 
phrase for laying a wager, or making a bet at play, was echar el resto, put or throw 
down the sum betted; and this became the English set up the rest. The reason, per- 
haps, was because this phrase was already in use in a military sense, as the matchlock 
guns, on account of their weight and mode of firng them, required a res¢ or support.’ 
It is to be regretted that the only authority which Keightley cites for a Spanish phrase 
is an Italian Phrase-book, and even the passage cited I have been unable to find in 
Florio’s /irst Fruites, 1578. Moreover in Minsheu’s Spanish rect, 1623, the phrase 
echar el resto is not g ven under either the verb or the noun. In me Dialogues at the 


ACT I, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 71 


fome ground; my Maifter’s a verie Jew, giue him a pre- 100 
fent, giue him a halter, I am famifht in his feruice. You 

may tell euerie finger I haue with my ribs: Father I am 

glad you are come, giue me your prefent to one Maifter 
Baffanio, who indeede giues rare new Liuories, if I ferue 

not him, I will run as far as God has anie ground. O rare 105 
fortune, here comes the man, to him Father, for 1 am a 

Tew if I ferue the /ew anie longer. 


Enter Baffanio with a follower or two. 


Baf You may doe fo, but let it be fo hafted that 
fupper be readie at the fartheft by fiue of the clocke: 110 
fee thefe Letters deliuered, put the Liueries to mak- 
ing, and defire Gratiano to come anone to my lodg- 


ing. 

Lan. To him Father. 

Gob. God bleffe your worfhip. 115 

Baf, Gramercie, would’ft thou ought with me. 

102. my] your Anon. ap. Cam. 112. anone] anon Q,F, et seq. 

105. not him] him not Rowe+. 113. [Exit one of his men. Q,. 

108. Enter...] Enter Bassanio with 116. would’fi] woul’d F,. would F. 
Leonardo, and a follower or two more. ought | aught Knt et seq. 


Theob, et seq. (subs.). 


end of the Dzct., there is (p. 26) a dialogue during a game of priméra, where we find: 
“Que ha de ser el tanto? What ts the summe that we play for ? Quatro reales y dies 
y seis de saca. Two shillings stake, and eight shillings rest.’ Where, as we see, the 
English sustains Keightley, but the Spanish does not. Further on occurs ‘ Yo enbido 
miresto. J set my rest.’ Perhaps embidar is near enough to echar. See the notes 
on the phrase in Rom. & Jul. IV, v, 6.—ED. 

103 giue me] The Ethical Dative. If need be, see ABBOTT, § 220. 

105. ground] KwNicHT (J///ust.): A characteristic speech in the mouth of a Vene- 
tian. Ground to run upon being a scarce convenience in Venice, its lower orders of 
inhabitants regard the great expanse of the mainland with feelings of admiration which 
can be little entered into by those who have been able, all their days, to walk wkere 
they would.—(M.) [Miss Martineau ?] 

111, to making] ABBOTT, § 349: There are many cases in which the terminations 
of the infinitive and present participle have been confused together, and the -img in 
this construction represents the old infinitive inflection -ew. Perhaps, also, -zmg, as in 
the present instance, was added as a reminiscence of the old gerundive termination 
-ene. 

113. Note the stage-direction of Q, as another indication of its superiority over Q,, 
—Ep. 

116. Gramercie] French, grand merci. 


72 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT II, SC. iL 


Gob. Here’s my fonne fir, a poore boy. 117 
Lan. Nota poore boy fir, but the rich /ewes man that 
would fir as my Father fhall {pecifie. 
Gob. He hath a great infection fir, as one would a 120 
to ferue. 
Lan. Indeede the fhort and the long is, I ferue the 
Tew, and haue a defire as my Father fhall fpecifie. 
Gob. His Maifter and he(fauing your worfhips reue- 
rence) are fcarce catercofins. 125 
Lan. To be briefe, the verie truth-is, that the /ew 
hauing done me wrong, doth caufe me as my Father be- 
ing I hope an old man fhall frutifie vnto you. 
Gob. I haue here a difh of Doues that I would beftow 12g 


II7, 119, 123, 128. doy. .../pecifie. ... 125. catercofins | cater-cousins Rowe et 
Specific. ...you.| boy,— ...Specifyy,— ... seq. 
specify,— ...you,— Theob. et seq. 127, 128. Father...hope| Father, ... 
119. fr] fir, Q,Q.F, hope, Qu. 
124. fauing] /avin F,. 128. frutifie] fruitify Cap. Hal. 


11g. specifie] THEOBALD (Nichols’s ///ust. ii, 306): Considering that Launcelot 
is here upon his game and knocking all words out of joint, Mr Bishop imagines this 
should be sfzcifie. Just as hea little after says ‘fruitifie’ (frat and spice). [Is it 
stage tradition here also which makes Launcelot not only interrupt his father, but turn 
him swiftly round, and after the delivery of his speech to Bassanio turn him as swiftly 
back again, and keep up these gyrations until the amazed Bassanio says, ‘ One speak 
for both’ ?—ED.] 

125. catercosins] JOHNSON (Dict.): A corruption of guatre-cousin, from the ridic- 
ulousness of calling cousin, or relation, to so remote a degree. CLARENDON: No such 
phrase is, or apparently ever was, known in French as ‘quatre-cousin.’ This is the 
only passage in Shakespeare in which it occurs. Halliwell (Arch. and Prov. Dict.) 
gives ‘caper-cousins’ as a Lancashire expression for ‘great friends.’ This is evidently 
a corruption of our phrase. The sense required here is ‘barely on speaking terms.’ 
HALEs (Notes & Essays, p. 177): Is it impossible that the ca¢er is connected with cate 
or cake, cater, acater, caterer, &c., and that the word means simply mess-fellow ? This 
explanation has been offered before; it still requires confirmation. [I do not find the 
word either in Wedgwood, or Skeat.—Ep. ] 

129. dish of Doues] C. A. BROWN (p. 109): The Merchant of Venice is a mer- 
chant of no other place in the world. Everything he says or does, or that is said or 
done about him, except when the scene changes to Belmont, is, throughout the play, 
Venetian. Ben Jonson, in his Volgone, gives no more than can be gathered from any 
one book of travels that has ever been published; nothing but the popular notion of 
the city. Shakespeare, in addition to the general national spirit of the play, describes 
the Exchange held on the Rialto; the riches of the merchants; their argosies ‘From 
Tripolis, from Mexico, and England; From Lisbon, Barbary, and India:’ some with 
‘silks’ and ‘spices,’ ‘richly fraught ;’ he represents ‘the trade and profit of the city’ 
as consisting ‘of all nations;’ he talks familiarly of the ‘masquing mates,’ with thei 


ACT II, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 73 


vpon your worfhip, and my fuite is. 130 
Lan. In verie briefe, the fuite is impertinent to my 


130. zs.] s—— Q,, Rowe et seq. 


‘torch-bearers’ in the streets; of ‘the common ferry which trades to Venice,’ where 
Portia is to meet Balthazar, after he has delivered the letter to Doctor Bellario, at 
Padua, the seat of law; and ‘In a gondola were seen together Lorenzo and his amor- 
ous Jessica.’ All this is written with a perfect knowledge of the place. So magical 
is the painting, that a lover of Shakespeare, as he enters Venice, looks about him with 
the air of a man at home, and almost expects to see some merchants talking with a 
Shylock on the Rialto, till he spies the poverty of the people, and sighs to himself,— 
‘Alas! how changed since the days of the Republic! Shakespeare might have read 
of the ‘strict Court of Venice’ on commercial questions, and of the reasons for such 
strictness; he might also have found authority in books for—‘ You have among you 
many a purchased slave;’ but where did he obtain his numerous graphic touches of 
national manners? where did he learn of an old villager’s coming into the city with a 
‘dish of doves’ as a present to his son’s master? A present thus given, and in our 
days too, and of doves, is not uncommon in Italy. [In Dixon’s Story of Lord Bacon’s 
Life, p. 98, Lady Anne Bacon tells her son Anthony that she sends him ‘ xij pigeons, 
my last flight, and one ringdove beside, and a black coney taken by John Knight this 
day, and pigeons, too, to-day.’ This incident I am sure that I have seen, in some 
attempted proof that Bacon wrote Shakespeare’s plays, cited, in conclusive answer to 
C. A. Brown’s question, as the genuine dovecote whence issued Gobbo’s doves. I 
mistrust the fitness of spending any time in search for it. My editorial conscience is 
rendered placid by the simple allusion; merely begging to be allowed to remark that if 
Bacon wrote this passage, I fully respond to Pope’s estimate of Bacon’s baseness, and 
find herein even a lower depth, in thus introducing his Mother as a prototype of old 
Gobbo. One is sometimes inclined to say to those who dispute the authorship of these 
plays, as the Cockney did to the eels, ‘down, wantons, down!’ but a little calm reflec- 
tion reveals to us that this attempt to dethrone Shakespeare, so far from being treason, 
or Zése majesté, is, in fact, most devout and respectful homage to him, In our sallad 
days, when first we begin to study Shakespeare, who does not remember his bewilder- 
ing efforts to attribute to mortal hand these immortal plays? Then follows the fruitless 
attempt to discern in that Stratford youth, the Emperor, by the grace of God, of all Lit- 
erature. In our despair of marrying, as Emerson says, the man to the verse, we wed 
the verse to the greatest known intellect of that age. Can homage be more profound ? 
But, as I have said, this we do when we are young in judgement. The older we grow 
in this study, and the farther we advance in it, the clearer becomes our vision that, if 
the royal robes do not fit Shakespeare, they certainly do not, and cannot, fit any one 
else. Wherefore, I conceive that we have here a not altogether inaccurate gauge of 
the depth, or duration, or persistence of Shakespearian study, and, measuring by a scale 
of maturity, or growth, in this study, I have come to look upon all attempts to prove that 
Bacon wrote these dramas, merely as indications of youth, possibly, of extreme youth, 
and that they find their comforting parallels in the transitory ailments incident to 
childhood, like the chicken-pox or the measles. The attack is pretty sure to come, 
but we know that it is neither dangerous nor chronic, that time will effecta cure, and 
that, when once well over it, there is no likelihood whatever of its recurrence.—ED. ] 

130. is] The long dash following this word in Q, is an instance of the unusual care 
with which that edition was set up.—ED. 


74 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [acr u, SC. ii. 


felfe, as your worfhip fhall know by this honeft old man, 132 
and though I fay it, though old man, yet poore man my 
Father. . 
Baff. One fpeake for both, what would you? 135 
Lan. Serue you fir. 
Gob. That is the verie defeét of the matter fir. 
Baff. 1 know thee well, thou haft obtain’d thy fuite, 
Shylocke thy Maifter fpoke with me this daie, 
And hath prefer’d thee, if it be preferment 140 
To leaue a rich /ewes feruice, to become: 
The follower of fo poore a Gentleman. 
Clo. The old prouerbe is verie well parted betweene 
my Maifter Shylocke and you fir, you haue the grace of 
God fir, and he hath enough. 145 
Baf. Thou fpeak’ft it well; go Father with thy Son, 
Take leaue of thy old Maifter, and enquire 
My lodging out, giue him a Liuerie 148 


143, 150. Clo.] Clowne. Q.Q.. Lan. Q.. 148. out,| out. Q,. out: Q.F.,. 
2 <3 2 ¢ z Q; 4 


140. prefer’d] Craik (789, p. 344): ‘To prefer,’ Reed observes, ‘seems to have 
been the established phrase for recommending a servant.’ And he quotes [this pres- 
ent passage]. But to prefer was more than merely to recommend. It was rather to 
transfer, or hand over. That it had come to imply also something of promotion, may 
be seen from what Bassanio goes on to say. The sense of the verb ¢o prefer that we 
have in Shakespeare, continued current down to a considerably later date..... At an 
earlier date, again, we have Bacon, in the Dedication of the first edition of his Essays 
to his brother Anthony, thus writing :—‘ Since they would not stay with their master, 
but would needs travail abroad, I have preferred them to you, that are next myself,’ &c. 

143. prouerbe] STAUNTON: The proverb referred to is ‘ The grace of God is better 
than riches ;’ or, in the Scot’s form, is ‘God’s grace is gear enough.’—[Ray’s Proverbs, 
p. 295, ed. 1670,—ap. Clarendon. ] 

145. enough] THEOBALD (Nichols’s //ust. ii, 306): Now here, indeed, methinks, 
this is a little too serious for Launcelot; and he delivers the proverb more justly than 
the Poet intended. It would be very satirical, both to his old and his new master, with 
relation both to their re/igion and circumstances, if we might imagine a small transposi- 
tion in the words: ‘e hath the Grace of God, Sir, and you have enough.’ For Laun- 
celot to say the Jew, whom he thought a Devil, had the grace of God, or that Bassanio 
had enough, whom he knew to be a borrower, is very droll. And then there is much 
humour, too, in the ironical reply of Bassanio: ‘Thou speak’st it well.’ Or, as we read 
it: ‘Thou split’st it well.’ [This emendation Theobald did not allude to in his subse- 
quent edition; but Warburton, in his edition, put it forth in a note, and the Camb. Edd. 
have accorded its authorship to him, an error for which Theobald should surely be grate- 


ful. The harshness of ‘split’st it’ would be much less likely to offend Warburton’s 
ear than Theobald’s.—Ep. } 


ACT II, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 75 


More garded then his fellowes : fee it done. 


Clo. Father in, I cannot get a feruice, no, I haue nere 150 
a tongue in my head, well: if anie man in /talée haue a 
fairer table which doth offer to fweare vpon a booke, I 152 
149. garded] QqFf, Rowe i, Cap. Q, Rowei. head well: FF, head welt, 
guarded Rowe ii et cet. F. head? well, Rowe ii+. heaa!— 
150. 20,] QqFf. no? Roweii+. no/ well; Knt, Hal. Ktly. head. Well, Q,, 
Knt, Hal. 20; Rowe i et cet. Cap. et cet. (subs.). 
haue| ha Q,. 151. [Looking on his own hand. Han. 
I51. tongue] tong Q,Q,. ...palm. Johns. 


head, well:| Q,. head: Well, 


149. garded] HANMER (G/oss.): A guard, the hem or welt of a garment; also, any 
lace or galloon upon the seams or borders of it. Zo guard, to lace over, to adorn. 
STAUNTON: So called from its guarding the stuff from being torn. 

152. table] STAUNTON: The /ad/e Line, or line of fortune, is the line running from 
the forefinger, below the other three fingers, to the side of the hand. The natural line 
is the line which curves in a different direction, through the middle of the palm; and 
the Aine of life is the circular line surrounding the ball of the thumb. The space 
between the two former lines being technically known as the fable. [Whoever is 
interested in Chiromancy may find diagrams, ancient and modern, of the hand, and 
abundant authorities on the subject, in Knight, and in Halliwell. I have selected 
Staunton’s note as the earliest which really gives all needful illustration of the text in 
shortest compass.—ED. ] 

152. table which doth] WARsuRTON in his text indicated an omission after these 
words, and supplies the ‘lost sense,’ which he says is ‘easy enough,’ thus: ‘If any man 
in Italy have a fairer table, which doth promdse good luck, I am mistaken. I durst 
almost offer to swear,’ &c. JOHNSON: ‘Table’ is the palm of the hand extended. 
Launcelot congratulates himself upon his dexterity and good fortune, and, in the height 
of his rapture, inspects his hand, and congratulates himself upon the felicities in his 
table. The act of expanding his hand puts him in mind of the action in which the 
palm is shown, by raising it to lay it on the book, in judicial attestations. ‘ Well,’ says 
he, ‘if any man in Italy have a fairer table, that doth offer to swear upon a book—.’ 
Here he stops with an abruptness very common, and proceeds to particulars. HEATH 
(p. 114): Considering Launcelot’s humourous and fantastical language, the place will 
very well bear the following interpretation: ‘If any man in Italy have a fairer table, 
which pronounces that I shall have good fortune, with as much assurance as if it were 
ready to swear it upon a book—.’ Here the sentence breaks off, and we must supply 
‘I am mistaken,’ or some other expression of like import. KENRICK (Rev. of Dr 
Johnson, &c., p. 50): None of these commentators, though very sensible of the break 
in this passage, seems to know where it lies; but if I might be allowed to take the 
most trifling liberty in the world with the text, I dare say the reader would see the 
whole meaning and propriety of it at one view: ‘ Well, if any man in Italy have a 
fairer table !—Why, it doth offer to swear upon a book I shall have good fortune,—- 
Go to,’ &c. TyRWHITT: Launcelot, looking into the palm of his hand, breaks out: 
‘Well; if any man in Italy have a fairer table; which doth offer to swear upon a book, 
I shall have good fortune’—i. e. @ table which doth (not only promise, but) offer to 
swear (22d to swear upon a book foo) that I shall have good fortune. (He omits the 


76 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT 11, SC. ii, 


fhall haue good fortune; goe too, here’s a fimple line 153 
of life, here’s a fmall trifle of wiues, alas, fifteene wiues 
is nothing, a leuen widdowes and nine maides is a fim- 155 


ple comming in for one man, and then to fcape drow- 


153. fortune ;| fortune. Q,. Rife, Huds. a@’leven Cam. eleuen Q, 
155 aleuen]Q,. alevenQ,F,. aleaven et cet. 
F,F,. aleven Hal. Sta. Wh. i, Dyce iii, 156. comming in] coming-in Theob. 
Scape] efcape Q,. 


conclusion of the sentence, which might have been) J am much mistaken; or, [Ml be 
hanged, kc. KNIGHT: The table (palm) which deth offer to swear upon a book, is 
not very different from other palms; but the palm which doth offer to swear that the 
owner shall have good fortune, is a fair table to be proud of. [Tyrwhitt’s explanation, 
whose punctuation Knight also adopted in his text.] HALLIWELL: Launcelot means 
.o say: § Well; if any man in Italy, who doth offer to swear upon a book, have a fairer 
table,’ a-vernacular form of speech, implying that no one has a fairer table. [White 
(ed. i) adopted this explanation.] CLARENDON: If the text be as Shakespeare wrote 
it, Launcelot seems to have left the sentence imperfect at ‘table,’ with an ellipsis of 
‘T’ll be hanged,’ or some such phrase. RoLFE follows Johnson’s punctuation and 
explanation as opposed to Tyrwhitt’s, that is, that it is the man, not the table, which 
doth offer to swear. [My own decided preference is for Kenrick’s punctuation, and 
for an explanation I am indebted to a MS note of ALLEN’s: ‘ Well, if any man in Italy 
have a fairer table! which doth (equivalent, as in Greek or Latin, to for ¢# doth) offer 
to swear,’ &c. That is, there is no hand so fair in its indications of fortune as mine, 
because it offers to swear that I shall have good luck; which is virtually the same para- 
phrase as Kenrick’s, and Tyrwhitt’s, the difference being merely that they apparently 
failed to note that ‘which’ is here used like the Latin causal relative-—ED.] 

153. fortune] MALONE: Iam persuaded that the author wrote: ‘I shall have zo 
good fortune.’ These words are not, I believe, connected with what goes before, but 
with what follows ; and begin a new sentence. Shakespeare, I think, meant that Laun- 
celot, after this abrupt speech—Well, if any man ¢a¢ offers to swear upon a book, has 
a fairer table than mine—(I am much mistaken)—should proceed in the same manner 
in which he began :—I shall have xo good fortune; go to; here’s a simzf/e line of life! 
&c. [Malone did not venture to adopt this in his text. Eccles did.] 

153. goe too] ABBOTT, §185: ‘To’ is still used adverbially in ‘to and fro’ and 
nautical expressions, such as ‘heave fo,’ ‘come fo.’ This explains ‘Go to.’ ‘Go’ did 
not, in Elizabethan or Early English, necessarily imply motion from, but motion gener- 
ally. Hence, ‘go fo’ meant little more than our stimulative ‘come, come.’ 

153. simple line] KNIGHT: A simple or complex line of life were indications that 
made even some of the wise exult or tremble. Launcelot’s ‘small trifle of wives’ was, 
however, hardly compatible with the simple line of life. There must have been too 
many crosses in such a destiny. CLARENDON: ‘A simple line of life,’ i. e. «a poor, 
mean line,’ is ironical for the converse. 

154. trifle of wiues] HALLIWELL: ‘ Long and deep lines from the Mount of Venus 
[the ball of the thum:] towards the line of life, signifieth so many wives..... These 
lines visible and deep, so many wives the party shall have.’—Saunder’s Chiromancie. 


155. aleuen] HALLIWELL: A/even is a common vulgarism in Shakespeare’s time. 
It is also archz‘c, 


ACT Il, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 77 


ning thrice, and to be in perill of my life with the edge 157 
of a featherbed, here are fimple fcapes : well, if Fortune 
be a woman, fhe’s a good wench for this gere: Father 
come, Ile take my leaue of the Jew in the twinkling. 160 
Exit Clowne. 
Baff, I praie thee good Leonardo thinke on this, 
Thefe things being bought and orderly beftowed 
Returne in hafte, for I doe feaft to night 
My beft efteemd acquaintance, hie thee goe. 165 
Leon. My beft endeuors fhall be done herein. Exit. Le. 
Enter Gratiano, 
Gra. Where’s your Maifter. 
Leon. Yonder fir he walkes. 
Gra. Signior Baffanio, 170 
Baf. Gratiano. 
Gra. I haue a fute to you. 
Baff; You haue obtain’d it. 
Gra. You muft not denie me, I muft goe with you to 


Belmont. 175 
160. twinkling.| twinkling of an eye. ardo. Q,. Exit Leonato. Ff, Om. Rowe. 
Q,, Pope et seq. After line 169, Theob. et seq. 
163. beftowed] beftow'd Q,, Cap. et 167. [Scene III. Pope, Han. Warb 
seq. 171. Gratiano.] Gratiano? Q. Sig- 
164. night] night, Q,. nior Gratiano / Han. 
165. deft efteemd | best-esteemed Theob. 172. a ute] fute Q,. 
ii. 174. You] Nay, you Han. Cap. Dyce 
thee] thee, Q,Q,- iii, Huds. 
goe] goQ,. gonF,, gone FF, 174, 175. with...Belmont] Separate 


Rowe. line, Han. Cap. Dyce iif, Huds. 


166. Exit Le.] Exit.Q,. Exit Leon- 


158. featherbed] WARBURTON: A cant phrase to signify the danger of marrying. 

159. gere] See I, i, 120. 

160. twinkling] Every editor from the days of Pope has followed the completer 
text of Q. 

163. bestowed] Of course, on board the ship. 

166. Exit. Le.] This Exit of Leonardo, inserted before he actually leaves the scene, 
indicat 23 that the copy from which the Folio was printed, and, in fact, the copy of which 
the Qq were transcripts, had been used as a stage-copy.—ED. 

172. a sute] Again may be noted the accuracy of Q,.—Ep. 

173, 176.] you... you... thee] ABBOTT, § 231: Mark the change of pronoun 
as Bassanio assumes the part of a friendly lecturer. 

174. See Hanmer’s text and division of lines in Text. Notes, which Dyce adopts 
because ‘this speech was, beyond all doubt, originally verse.’ 


8 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE {act u, Sc. ii. 


‘ 


Baff. Why then you muft : but heare thee Gratauo, 176 
Thou art to wilde, to rude, and bold of voyce, 
Parts that become thee happily enough, 
And in fuch eyes as ours appeare not faults; 
But where they are not knowne, why there they fhow 180 
Something too liberall, pray thee take paine 
To allay with fome cold drops of modeftie 
Thy skipping fpirit, leaft through thy wilde behauiour 


I be mifconfterd in the place I goe to, 184 
176. muft: but] Ff. muft but Q,. 180. knowne, why] knowne. Why Q. 
muft, but Q, muft. But Q,, Johns. et knowne ; why Q.. 
seq. 181. Lberall,] hb’'rall: Q,. 
thee] me Q,. pray thee) prethee Q.. 
177. t0...t0] Q,. t00...too Q, et cet. 183. leaft] left Q,F,. 
179. faults ;]| faults Q,. 184. mifconfterd| mifconfired Qgq. 
180. they are] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Rlfe. mifconfterd ¥,, Hal. Sing. Sta. Wh. 
thou art Qq et cet. Ktly. mdsconstrued Rowe et cet. 


176. heare thee] Apport, § 212: Verbs followed by ¢hee instead of shou, have been 
called reflexive. But, though ‘haste ¢iee’ and some other phrases with verbs of motion 
may be thus explained, and verbs were often thus used in Early English, it is probable 
that ‘look thee,’ ‘hark chee,’ are to be explained by euphonic reasons. Zee, thus used, 
follows imperatives, which, being themselves emphatic, require an unemphatic pronoun. 
The Elizabethans reduced ¢hou to thee. We have gone further, and rejected it altogether. 

181. liberall] JoHNson: That is, mean, gross, coarse, licentious. [Are not these 
adjectives, which have been adopted by many subsequent editors, too strong for Bassa- 
nio’s friendly remonstrance? Would not our modern ‘ free and easy’ something better 
correspond? Rolfe gives ‘free, reckless,’ which are certainly better than ‘licentious’ 
in any sense.—ED. ] 

181, paine] In printing a modernized text of this play, I should not hesitate to 
change this to the plural, Zazms. Although Shakespeare may have used the singular 
elsewhere (which is doubtful), the plural is certainly used twice subsequently in this 
play, viz. IV, i, 10, and V,i, 201. And no one, I think, can thoughtfully examine the 
instances given in Walker (Cv7¢. i, 233) of the final s both interpolated and omitted in 
the First Folio, without becoming convinced that an editor has ample discretionary 
power in making a change like this, whereby the phrase conforms to sense or usage. 
Numerous as are the instances given in Walker’s thirty pages and more, the list is by 
no means complete. In a note on Osh, I, i, 31, two additional examples were given 
not noticed by Walker, in that play alone. See ‘ multitudes,’ II, ix, 35, post—En. 

182. cold] STEEVENS: So in Ham, III, iv. 123: ‘Upon the heat and flame of thy 
distemper Sprinkle cool patience.’ 

182, modestie] ALLEN: That is, moderation (est modus in rebus). 

183. spirit] For similar contractions into monosyllables, see WALKER, Vers. 64, or 
ABBOTT, § 463, or BROWNE, p. 12, § 5. 

184. misconsterd] This form, for the modern misconstrued, is common, says Dyck 
( Remarks, p. 54), in our early writers. See also the note on conster of the Qq in Oth. 
IV, i, 118. 


ACT II, SC. ii] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 79 


And loofe my hopes. 185 
Gra, Signor Baffanio, heare me, 

If I doe not put on a fober habite, 

Talke with refpeét, and {weare but now and than, 

Weare prayer bookes in my pocket, looke demurely, 

Nay more, while grace is faying hood mine eyes 190 

Thus with my hat, and figh and fay Amen: 

Vie all the obferuance of ciuillitie 

Like one well ftudied in a fad oftent 

To pleafe his Grandam, neuer truft me more. 
Baf. Well, we fhall fee your bearing. 195 
Gra. Nay but I barre to night. you fhall not gage me 

By what we doe to night. 
Baf. No that were pittie, 

I would intreate you rather to put on 


Your boldeft fuite of mirth, for we haue friends 200 
185. loofe] QF. lofe Q, et cet. 189. pocket | pockets Rowe, Pope, 
hopes| hope Q,. Theob. Han. Johns. 
DS7ouly Li af Bee 196. barre] bar F,. 


188. than] Q,Q,. 


187. habite] Eccirs: That is, conduct, behaviour. 

190. is saying] Probably z# or a- has been omitted. See ABBOTT, § 372, or WHITE 
(Words and their Uses, chap. xi, ‘Is being done,’ p. 334). ROLFE cites Marsh, Lect. 
on English Lang., p. 649. 

190. hood] MALONE: It should be remembered that in Shakespeare’s time they 
wore their hats during the time of dinner. STAUNTON: The practice of wearing 
the hat at meals, and especially at ceremonial feasts, was probably derived from the 
age of chivalry. In the present day, at the installation banquet of the Knights of the 
Garter, all the Knights Companions wear their hats and plumes. It appears to have 
been usual formerly for all persons above the rank of attendants to keep on their hats 
at the dinner-table. Lilly, in his Autobiography, gives an edifying account of his woo- 
ing of his widowed mistress, who finally signified her acceptance of his suit by making 
him sit down with her to dinner with his hat on. And the custom may be inferred 
from the following: ‘Roger the Canterburian, that cannot Say Grace for his meat with 
a low-crowned hat before his face: or the character of a prelatical man affecting great 
heighths. Newly written by G. T. Lond.’ As also from the Recipe for Dressing a 
Knuckle of Veal, sent by Dr Delany to Swift: ‘Then skimming the fat off Say Grace 
with your hat off.’ 

192. ciuillitie] CLARENDON: That is, civilization, refinement. 

193. sad ostent] JOHNSON: Grave appearance; show of staid and serious beha- 
viour. STEEVENS: ‘Ostent’ is a word very commonly used for sow among the old 
dramatic writers. BOSwELL: See Zost, II, viii, 47. 

200, suite] Eccies: Probably referring to the ‘sober habit’ of line 187. 


Bo THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act II, SC. iii 


That purpofe merriment : but far you well, 201. 
I haue fome bufineffe. 

Gra. And I muft to Loren/o and the reft, . 
But we will vifite you at fupper time. Exeunt. 


[Scene LL] 
Enter leffica and the Clowne. 


Ief. 1am forry thou wilt leaue my Father fo, 
Our houfe is hell, and thou a merrie diuell 
Did’ft rob it of fome tafte of tedioufneffe ; 
But far thee well, there is a ducat for thee, 5 
And Lancelet, foone at fupper fhalt thou fee 
Lorenzo, who is thy new Maifters gueft, 
Giue him this Letter, doe it fecretly, 
And fo farwell : I would not haue my Father 


See me talke with thee. 10 
Clo. Adue, teares exhibit my tongue, moft beautifull 
Pagan, moft fweete Iew, if a Chriftian doe not play the 12 
201. far you well] faryewellQ,. fare 10. talke] in talke Qq, Cap. Knt, Coll. 
you well F, et seq. Hal. Dyce, Sta. Wh. Cam. Del. Glo. Cla. 
[Scene IV. Pope+. Scene III. Cap. Rlfe. 
et seq. 11. Clo.] Lance. Q,. Clowne. Q,Q,. 
2. Lam] /’m Pope+, Dyce iii, Huds. II, 13, 15. dave] F,. AdewQ,. Adiew 
3. merrie] Om. F,F,. Q,Q,- Adieu F,F, (line 15, adiex Q,). 
5. far] Q,. fare Q, et cet. 12. doe] Qq, Steev. Mal. Coll. i, Verp. 
9. farwell| farewell F.,. Hal. Clarke. did Ff et cet. 


3. hell] ALten: A ‘hell’ to Jessica in her state of ‘strife’ (line 21) between her 
fove and her religion, between duty to her father and passion for her lover. She is 
now in a morbid state. Her gift of a ducat to Launcelot may have been a rebellion 
against her father’s maxims of thrift, due to this state, or she may have been so con- 
stituted as to have an instinctive disposition to lavishness. The reaction, at any rate, 
was a most violent one. 

6. soone] As this supper was to be ready at farthest at five of the clock, it is not 
impossible that ‘soon’ may be here used in its ordinary sense; but I think it more 
likely that its meaning is the same as in Of. III, iv, 229 and 231: at night-fall, ‘ad 
primam vesperam,.’—ED. 

II. exhibit] EccLres: My tears express what my tongue should, if sorrow would per- 
mit it. HALLIWELL suggests that the word is one of Launcelot’s blunders for prohibit, 
CLARENDON remarks that Launcelot means zzAibit. [I prefer Eccles’s interpretation. 
—ED.] 


12,13. dee... get] The Text. Notes show how general has been the preference for 


ACT II, SC. iii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 81 
knaue and get thee, I am much deceiued ; but adue, thefe 13 


the change from ‘do’ to did, first started by F,, Of course, if we accept did, we must 
suppose that ‘get’ is used for degef. Malone upholds F,, and maintains that Launcelot 
is not talking about Jessica’s father, but about her future husband. ‘I am aware,’ he 
adds, ‘that in a subsequent scene he says to Jessica: “ Marry, you may partly hope 
your father got you not,” but he is now on another subject. [In his edition of 1790 
Malone suggests that it is the love-letter to Lorenzo which starts the current of Laun- 
celot's thoughts.] Moreover, a Christian may be said to play the knave if he should 
steal the Jew’s daughter, as Lorenzo himself expresses it in Scene vi: “ When you shall 
please to play the thieves for wives,” &c.’ Steevens suspects that the ‘ waggish Launce- 
lot designed this for a broken sentence,’ and that after ‘get thee—’ there is a subaudi- 
tion of ‘into trouble,’ or the like, The subaudition Cowden-Clarke supplies is: ‘get 
thee for a wife.’ Verplanck asserts that it is the poor joke conveyed by casting a slur on 
Jessica’s birth which has made the reading of F, popular. On the other hand, Monck 
Mason has ‘no doubt but that @7d is the true reading. Launcelot is not foretelling the 
fate of Jessica, but judging from her lovely disposition that she must have been begot- 
ten by a Christian, not by such a brute as Shylock; a Christian might marry her with- 
out playing the knave, though he could not beget her.’ Halliwell begins his note by 
saying that although dd has been generally adopted, he thinks it erroneous, and then 
argues so earnestly for interpreting ‘do’ in the sense of dd, just as in King John we 
have ‘ waft’ for wajted, ‘heat’ for heated, &c., that at the close of his note he says that 
‘unless “do” is a grammatical usage for did, the latter word should be substituted ;’ 
and that, on the whole, it is most probable that Launcelot means to imply that Jessica 
is too beautiful and good to be the daughter of Shylock, and to this Jessica seems te 
allude in the next speech when she laments the sin of ‘being ashamed to be my father’s 
child.’ Dyce (Remarks, p. 54) thinks Launcelot plainly means that he cannot believe 
Jessica to be Shylock’s daughter; and White adds, ‘beside this “get thee”’ had a well- 
settled meaning in Shakespeare’s day.’ [I also think that dd here conveys Launcelot’s 
meaning. I very much doubt if those who saw no harm in Jessica’s theft of her father’s 
money, would have seen any knavery in stealing the girl herself. Moreover, the cha- 
racter of Jessica is so complex, not to say apparently inconsistent, that at times I am 
almost tempted to think that in her we have an outcropping of the old original play, 
wherein it may perhaps have been that she was not the Jew’s own daughter. Can we 
point to a single trait in her that stamps her not only as a daughter of Shylock, but 
even as a Jewess? She is lavish of money to Gobbo, and profusely lavish of it on her 
own pleasures; she has fallen in love with a gay Christian, and longs to change her 
religion; she shows no respect for her dead mother, and not an atom of regard for her 
living father; her very complexion is not oriental, but fair. In the next scene her 
hand is spoken of as whiter than paper, and the contrast between Shylock and her is 
declared by Salarino to be greater than between jet and ivory. Lastly, is the Jessica 
out-nighting Lorenzo in moonlit Belmont the same Jessica who can find amusement in 
the merriment of a Gobbo? In thus supposing Jessica to be no child of Shylock, I 
confess the wish to be, for Shylock’s sake, the father to the thought. Of course it is 
evident, as Macdonald and others have pointed out, that for dramatic purposes the pro- 
foundest depths of Shylock’s nature must be stirred against Anthonio and the Chris- 
tians; and this is done when he believes that they have induced his ‘own flesh and 


blond to rebel’ against him.—Eb.] 
6 


82 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act Ui, SC. ili. 


foolifh drops doe fomewhat drowne my manly fpirit: 
Exit. 15 


adue. 

lef. Farewell good Lancelet. 
Alacke, what hainous finne is it in me 
To be afhamed to be my Fathers childe, 
But though I am a daughter to his blood, 
I am not to his manners : O Lorenzo, 20 
If thou keepe promife I fhall end this ftrife, 
Become a Chriftian, and thy louing wife. Exit. 


14. fomewhat| fomething Qq, Cap. 18. childe,| child? Rowe+. child, 
Sta. Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. Steev. et seq. 

16. Farewell] Farell Var.’21 (mis- 20. 0} 6 Q,Q,. 
print). NG MG) 265 Ox 

17. hainous] heynous Q,Q,. 22. Exit.] Om. Ff. 


17. what] ROLFE suggests that ‘possibly this is one of the instances in which 
“what” is used for what a,’ and refers to Abbott, § 86. [But by the omission of a, 
‘sin’ becomes a collective noun, and suggests many an occasion when Jessica has been 
ashamed to be her father’s child. —Ep. ] 

20, Lorenzo] MACDONALD (Zhe Jmagination, p. 165): Into the original story 
upon which this play is founded, Shakespeare has, among other variations, introduced 
the story of Jessica and Lorenzo, apparently altogether of his own invention. [See 
Appendix, ‘Source of the Plot.’] What was his object in doing so? Surely, there 
were characters and interests enough already! It seems to me that Shakespeare 
doubted whether the Jew would have actually proceeded to carry out his fell design 
against Antonio, upon the original ground of his hatred, without the further incitement 
to revenge afforded by another passion, second only to his love of gold—his affection 
for his daughter; for in the Jew, having reference to his own property, it had risen to 
a passion. Shakespeare therefore invents her that he may send a dog of a Christian 
to steal her, and, yet worse, to tempt her to steal her father’s stones and ducats. 

21. strife] Eccies: This inward conflict of opposite affections. 


ACI I, Sc.iv.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 83 


[Scene IV] 


Enter (cratiano, Lorenzo, Slarino, and Salanio. 


Lor. Nay, we will flinke away in fupper time, 
Difguife vs at my lodging, and returne all in an houre. 
Gra. We haue not made good preparation. 


Sal, We haue not fpoke vs yet of Torch-bearers. 5 
[Scene V. Pope+. Scene IV. Cap. 1. Salanio.] Solania. Ff. Solanio and 
et seq. Salerino. Cap. 
Enter...Slarino] F,. 5. us yet | as yet F ’ Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Johns. 


2. TH. ELzE (Sh. Jahré. xiv, p. 167): Of the public entertainments and festivities of 
the Venetians, of their political and popular observances, of their theatres, of their re- 
ligious music, of their hunting and their games, Shakespeare makes no mention, but 
only of a single amusement which was peculiarly Venetian, and more favoured in the 
city of lagoons than anywhere else. To him who is unacquainted with the old customs 
of the Venetians, it must seem to be a very extraordinary, nay almost fantastic, inven- 
tion of the Poet to represent Lorenzo as slinking away with his friends from a supper 
whereto they had been invited by Bassanio, to go to a masquerade, when it was not 
even carnival time. Such an idea could be conceived of in no other country, not even 
in any other state of Italy, except in Venice, although the custom of wearing masks 
was at that time very common; but here in Venice it was practised universally, and at 
all seasons of the year. It was thus that the Doge, who appeared in public only on 
State occasions, visited the Opera, attended by only a single’servant; he was then in- 
cognito. The Officers of State and the Magnificoes appeared in masks, in the Recep- 
tion Hall of the Republic, on the evenings when new Ambassadors were received. 
Thus, the dignitaries of the Church and State wore at least half-masks, whereby all 
formal ceremonials were avoided, and a freer, unforced intercourse took place instead. 
Thus, a Venetian lady had her mask at hand, just like her fan and handkerchief, as 
Shakespeare has intimated in Ofhello (IV, ii). And thus, then, among the gay and 
livelier young people, a play with masks was not unusual, That torch-bearers were 
also needed arose from the fact that the streets were a tangle and the street-lighting 
deficient. 

2. in] ABBOTT, §161: Here used for during or at. See also the many repetitions 
of ‘in,’ with this sense, in V, i, 1, &c. 

5. spoke vs] CAPELL: This phrase may be—bespoke us; but being oddly fol- 
low’d by ‘of,’ part of it may have been a printer’s mistake for as. WALKER (Crit. iti, 
53): Until ‘spoke us’ can be shown to be English, I would read, with Pope, ‘spoke 
as. ABBOTT, § 220: ‘Us’ seems equivalent to for us. That is, ‘spoken for ourselves 
about torch-bearers.? [Which does not seem to me much more intelligible than the 
original phrase. When, in the preceding Scene, for the sake of a clown’s joke we 
were all so ready to change ‘do’ into did, I cannot see why we should be in anywise 
reluctant here to change ‘us’ into as, which clears away all difficulty and gives us 
English.— Ep. ] 

5. Torch-bearers] See Rom. & /ul. I, iv, 11. 


LIRRARY ST MARY'S COLLEGE 


te 


84 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act Ut, SC. 1. 


Sol. ’Tis vile vnleffe it may be quaintly ordered, 6 
And better in my minde not vndertooke. 
Lor. ?Tis now but foure of clock, we haue two houres 
To furnith vs ; friend Lancelet what’s the newes. 
Enter Laucelet with a Lettar. 10 
Lan. And it fhall pleafe you to break€ vp this, fhall it 
feeme to fignifie. 
Lor. 1 know the hand, in faith ’tis a faire hand 
And whiter then the paper it writ on, 
I the faire hand that writ. : 15 
Gra. Loue newes in faith. 
Lan. By your leaue fir. 
Lor. Whither goeft thou ? 
Lan. Marry fir to bid my old Mafter the Jew to fup 
to night with my new Mafter the Chriftian. 26 
Lor. Hold here, take this, tell gentle /e/ica 


6. Sol.] Ff. Solanio. Q,. Salanio. Lf it Q,. An it shall Theob. et cet. 


Q,- Salan. Q,. 11, 12. fhall it feeme] it fhall feeme 
8. of clock] Q,F,Q, Hal. @ clocke Qq Ff et seq. 
Q,F,F, Rowe. a-clock Pope+, Steev. 14. whiter| whither F,. 
o'clock Cap. on, | on Q,. 
10. Enter...] After line 8, Q,. 15. 7] Fi. 7 Qq et cet. 
with a letter.] Om. Qq. 16. Loue mewes] Loue newes, Q.. 


11. Andit hall} Q,FfQ,, Rowe, Pope. Loue, newes Q,Q,- Love-news Ff et cet. 


6. quaintly] Dyce: Ingeniously, cleverly, artfully. 

7. wndertooke] For other ‘curtailed forms of past participles common in Early 
English,’ see ABBOTT, § 343. 

11. breake vp] STEEVENS: A termin carving. Soin Love's Lab. Lost, IV, i, 56, 
‘you can carve Break up this capon.’ [It would be rash to assert that there is no ref- 
erence here, in Launcelot’s speech, to carving, yet the mere use of the phrase ‘break up’ 
is insufficient to sustain the assertion. If the gentle and elegant speech of Dame Juliana 
Berners still obtained in Elizabethan days, a ‘dere was broken, a gose reryd, a chicken 
Jrusshed, &c., but ‘break up’ is common enough in passages where it cannot refer to 
carving, and where it does refer to opening a sealed letter. Surely there is no refer- 
ence to carving by Horatio when he says, ‘ Break we our watch up.’ It is equally sure 
that Leontes could have had no such thought in that solemn moment when the oracle 
was received from Delphos and he commands: ‘ Break up the seals, and read.’—Ep.] 

14. paper it writ] Hanmer added ‘paper ¢4a/ it writ,’ an emendation which I am 
inclined to think is certisstma, when it is considered how easy it would have been for 
the compositor to omit the ¢ha/, if in the MS it were spelled with the Anglosaxon a, 
and followed as it is by another word almost exactly like it. Dyce adopted it in his 
text in his Third Edition, saying that, ‘without this addition, which is Hanmer’, the 
accent (as Mr W. N. Lettsom observes) would be placed wrong in the line.’ Hudson 
also adopted it —Ep, 


ACT I, SC. iv.] 


THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 85 


I will not faile her, fpeake it priuately : 22 
Go Gentlemen, will you prepare you for this Maske to 


night, 


I am prouided of a Torch-bearer. 


Exit. Clowne. 25 


Sal. I marry, ile be gone about it ftrait. 


Sol. And fo will I. 

Lor. 
Some houre hence. 

Sal. ’Tis good we do fo. 

Gra. 

Lor. 


Meete me and Gratiano at Gratianos lodging 


Exit. 30 


Was not that Letter from faire Je/fica? 
I muft needes tell thee all, fhe hath direéted 


How I fhall take her from her Fathers h oufe, 

What gold and iewels fhe is furnifht with, 

What Pages fuite fhe hath in readineffe: 35 
If ere the /ew her Father come to heauen, 

It will be for his gentle daughters fake ; 

And neuer dare misfortune croffe her foote, 38 


23. Go] Closing line 22, Cap. Steev. 
Mal. Knt, Sing. Hal. Dyce i, Ktly, Del. 
Clarke. 

Gentlemen] Separate line, Cap. 
Steev. Mal. Knt, Sing. Hal. Dycei, Ktly, 
Del. Clarke. 

Go Gentlemen] QqFf, Pope. Go, 
Gentlemen, Rowe, Han. Cam. Glo. Cla. 
Wh. ii. Go.— Gentlemen, Theob. Warb. 


Johns. Coll. Sta. Dyce iii, Rlfe, Huds 
As a separate line, Coll. Wh. Cam, Glo. 
Cla. Dyce iii, Rlfe, Huds. 

23. prepare you] prepare Q,, Pope+. 

this] th’ Han. 

25. Exit...] After line 22, or after Go 
line 23, Cap. et seq. 

27. Sol.] Q,Ff. Salan. Q,Q,. 

30. Exit.] Exeunt. Cap. 


23. Go Gentlemen] The Textual Notes will show that here, as in many another 
place, the correct arrangement of the lines is due to Capell.—Ep., 

25. of a] ABBOTT, §171: ‘Of’ is, hence, used not merely of the agent, but also of 
the instrument. This is most common with verbs of construction, and of filling; be- 
cause in construction and filling the result is not merely effected w/z the instrument, 
but proceeds out of it. We still retain of with verds of construction and adjectives of 
fulness; but the Elizabethans retained of with verds of fulness also, as in this present 
passage ; see also ‘ You are not satisfied Of these events,’ V, i, 324; ‘Supplied of kernes 
and gallowglasses,’ Macé. I, ii, 13. 

29. Some houre] ABBOTT, § 21: ‘Some’ being frequently used with numeral e<liec- 
tives qualifying nouns of time, as ‘some sixteen months,’ 7wo Gent. IV, i, 21, is also 
found, by association, with a singular noun of time. As here; see also ‘some month 
or two,’ III, ii, ro. 

32. needes] For other ‘adverbs ending in s, formed from the possessive inflection 
of Nouns,’ see ABBOTT, § 25. 

38. dare] Rotre: Either the ‘subjunctive used imperatively’ (see Abbott, § 364), 
or the Third Person of the Subjunctive. [It might also be the future continuing the 
construction of the -eceding line: ‘ And ne’er [will] dare Misfortune,’ &c.—Ep.] 


86 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [acrui, SC. iv 


Vnleffe fhe doe it vnder this excufe, 

That fhe is iffue to a faithleffe /ezw : 4c 
Come goe with me, pervfe this as thou goeft, ie 

Faire /efica fhall be my Torch-bearer. Exit. 


40. faithlesse] CLARENDON: Unbelieving. See Mazz. xvii, 17; Mark, ix, 19. 

42. shall] ABBOTT, § 315: Sha//, meaning ¢o owe, is connected with ought, must, 
it is destined. Thus, here, ‘ Fair Jessica zs ¢o de my torchbearer.’ Hence, skal was 
used by the Elizabethans with all three persons to denote inevitable futurity without 
reference to ‘will’ (desire). EccLEs: It is not rendered very apparent whether it was 
designed that this frolic of a masking party should continue no longer than while they 
were absent from the company, and that they should return to it in their proper habits, 
or whether they were to enter in masquerade, as a surprise to the rest of Bassanio’s 
guests. The circumstance of Jessica’s being expected to accompany them in her flight 
must incline us to imagine the latter to have been the case; for, that it was not pro- 
posed that Lorenzo and she should separate themselves from the others, is sufficiently 
evident from what is said of her being ‘a torch-bearer,’ and from their being ‘to return 
aif in an hour.’ The manner of their intended disguise was, doubtless, happily calcu- 
.ated to favour the lady’s escape, and, possibly, they had this end in view when the 
masking scheme was first concerted, though that particular be not expressly declared. 
From Gratiano’s lodging, the scene of their rendezvous, all matters being previously 
settled, we may conclude they were to proceed to supper with Bassanio. 


ACT II, Sc. v.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 87 


[Scene V7] 


Enter Tew, and his man that was the Clowne. 


Jew. Well, thou fhall fee, thy eyes fhall be thy iudge, 
The difference of old Shylocke and Baffanio ; 
What Jeffica, thou fhalt not gurmandize 
As thou haft done with me : what Jeffca? 5 
And fleepe, and fnore, and rend apparrell out. 
Why Je/ffica I fay. 

Clo. Why Jeffica. 

Shy. Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call. 

Clo. Your worfhip was wont to tell me 10 
I could doe nothing without bidding. 

Enter Teffica. 


Lef. Call you? what is your will? 13 
[Scene VI. Pope+. Scene V. Cap. et 5. leffica ?] Q,. Ieffica, Q,Q,. 
seq. 6. apparrell|]Q,. apparaile Q,. 
1. Enter...] Enter the lew and Lance- 8. Clo.] Clowne. Qq. 
let. Q,. 9. do] did Rowe+. 
2. fhall fee] F,. /halt fee Q, et cet. Io, 11. As prose, Q., Pope et seq. 
4. Iefiica,] QqFf. Jessica / Rowe. 11, J] that J Q,, Theob. Warb. Johns, 


gurmandize| QF. gourmandizeQ,. Coll. Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. 


1. Eccies: Shylock appears just before to have received a summons to the enter- 
tainment provided for the friends of Bassanio before the latter starts for Belmont. After 
Shylock’s recent kindness to him and to Anthonio, it was naturally imagined a proper 
mark of gratitude to invite the Jew as one of the guests. The invitation, according to 
modern ideas, appears to have been sent rather late to one who was in no special de- 
gree his friend. Lorenzo, a little while before, had taken notice: ‘’Tis now but four 
o’clock; we have two hours To furnish us.’ Possibly this message might have been 
designed only to remind him of a former engagement, and not to invite him for the 
first time. [The difficulty which Eccles encounters here arises from Shakespeare’s 
use of double time. See Appendix, ‘Duration of the Action.’—ED.] 

2. thy iudge] K&IGHTLEY (p. 149): It might be better to read ‘¢he judge.’ Even 
at the present day printers confound these words. 

4. What] CLARENDON: ‘ What,’ ‘why,’ and ‘when’ were all used as exclamations 
of impatience. 

4. gurmandize] ALLEN: Launcelot had said (II, ii, 101) that he was ‘famished,’ 
&c.; but this must have been merely for effect, speaking to his father; for in his solil- 
oquy he makes no such complaint. On the other hand, Shylock must not be taken too 
literally; to him, with his thrifty habits, any self-indulgence would appear to be ex- 
cess; and it is not likely that, in a household governed by so strict and systematic a 
master, anything like what he compla.z: of would be allowed. 


88 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT II, SC. v. 


Shy. Jam bid forth to fupper lefica, 
There are my Keyes : but wherefore fhould I go? 15 
I am not bid for loue, they flatttr me, 

But yet Ile goe in hate, to feede vpon 

The prodigall Chriftian. J¢/ica my girle, 

Looke to my houfe, I am right loath to goe, 

There is fome ill a bruing towards my reft, 20 
For I did dreame of money bags to night. 

Clo. I befeech you fir goe, my yong Mafter 
Doth expeét your reproach. 

S27. (So-doe hisae 

Clo. And they haue confpired together, I will not fay 25 
you fhall fee a Maske, but if you doe, then it was not for 
nothing that my nofe fell a bleeding on blacke monday 27 


22. J...goe] One line, Q,. 


18. Christian] STEEVENs: Shylock forgets his resolution. In a former scene 
he declares he will neither cat, drink, nor pray with Christians. Of this circum- 
stance the poet was well aware, and meant only to heighten the malignity of the 
character, by making him depart from his most settled resolve, for the prosecution of 
his revenge. 

18. Iessica my girle] BoorH:' These are the only words that Shylock speaks 
which in the least degree approach gentleness, and they mean nothing. 

20. ill] CLARENDON: ‘Some say that to dreame of money, and all kinde of coyne 
is ill’—Artemidorus, The ludgement, or Exposition of Dreames, p. 99, ed. 1606. 
[Probably on the principle that dreams go by contraries.—ED.] 

20. a bruing] For this a, which still exists in alive, afoot, asleep, see ABBOTT, 
§ 140; see also § 24, or ‘ aweary,’ I, ii, 2. 

21. to night] ABBOTT, § 190: ‘To’ was used without any notion of ‘motion to- 
ward the future’ in ¢o-night (last night). See also 2 Hen. VI: III, ii, 31. So in 
Early English, ‘¢o year’ for this year, ‘to summer,’ &c. Perhaps the provincial ‘I 
will come ¢he night, he morn,’ &c., is a corruption of this ‘to.’ It is, indeed, sug- 
gested by Mr Morris that o is a corruption of the demonstrative. [And if so, it well 
explains, it seems to me, the sense, either past or future, which the provincial usage 
can convey.—ED.] 

24. BooTH: Significantly. Launcelot’s mistake should not be too marked, as is fre- 
quently done; it seems too much like helping Shylock to his little joke. 

25. And] The GLose and CLARENDON read am, but the editors suggest that this 
spelling, making ‘and’ equivalent to 7f is of doubtful propriety. 

27. a bleeding] HALLIWELL: An unexpected bleeding of the nose was formerly 
considered an omen that either something wonderful would happen, or that some mis- 
chance would ensue. See examples quoted by Brand. When Charles II was con- 
cealed at Boscobel House on the Sunday, ‘his majesty, coming down into the parlour, 
his rose fell a bleeding, which put his poor faithful servants in a fright,’ till he reas- 
sured them by saying it was a circumstance of frequent occurrence. 


ACT I, SC. v.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 89 


laft, at fix a clocke ith morning, falling out that yeere on 28 
afhwenfday was foure yeere in th’afternoone. 
Shy. What are their maskes ? heare you me Jefica, 30 


Lock vp my doores, and when you heare the drum 

And the vile fquealing of the wry-neckt Fife, 

Clamber not you vp to the cafements then, 

Nor thruft your head into the publique ftreete 

To gaze on Chriftian fooles with varnifht faces: 35 


28. ith] in theQ,. ith’ Fy ith We are these Pope, Han. What! are there 
29. afhwen/day| A/hwedne/day F, et Theob. et cet. 


seq. 30. heare you] Heare Q,. 
th afternoone] thafternoone Q.. the 32. /quealing| /queaking Q,, Pope+, 
afternoon F,. Steev. Mal. Coll. i, ii, Hal. Dyce i, Clarke, 
30. What are their] Ff, Rowe. What Del. 
are there Q,Q,. What, are there Q,, Cap. Fife) Fife QQ: 


Dyce, Cam. Glo. Cla. Huds. Wh. ii. What 


27. blacke monday] Peck (Memoirs cf Milton, p. 229): Black Monday is a 
movable day. It is Easter Monday; and was so called on this occasion: ‘In the 34 
Edw. III (1360.) the 14. of April, & the morrow after Easter-day, K. Edwarde with 
his hoast lay before the cittie of Paris, which day was full darke of mist & haile, & 
so bitter cold, that many men died on their horses backs with the cold. Wherefore 
unto this day it hath beene called the Blacke monday.’—Stow, p. 264 b. 

32. wry-neckt Fife] MALONE: ‘Prima nocte domum claude; neque in vias Sub 
cantu querulz despice tibize.’—Horace, III, Od. vii. Monck Mason: It appears from 
hence that the fifes in Shakespeare’s time were formed differently from those now in 
use, which are straight, not wry-necked. BoswELL: The ‘fife’ does not mean the 
instrument, but the person who played on it. So in Barnaby Rich’s Aphorismes at the 
end of his /risk Hubbub, 1616: ‘A fife is a wry-neckt musician, for he always looks 
away from his instrument.’ Pye (p. 72): During Queen Anne’s wars an old country 
gentleman, in the Sfectafor, expresses surprise at his son, in a letter from the army, 
mentioning a saucy trumpet and a drum that carried messages. KNIGHT: Yet we are 
inclined to think that Shakespeare intended the instrument. We are of this opinion 
principally from the circumstance that the passage is an imitation of the lines in Hor- 
ace, cited by Malone, in which the instrument is decidedly meant. But, independent 
of the internal evidence derived from the imitation, the form of the old English flute,— 
the fife being a small flute,—justifies, we think, the epithet ‘wry-neck’d.’ This flute 
was called the fute 2 bec, the upper part or mouth-piece resembling the beak of a bird. 
And this form was as old as the Pan of antiquity. The terminal figure of Pan, in the 
Townley Gallery, exhibits it. HALLIWELL gives a wood-cut of a ‘wry-necked fife,’ 
copied by ‘ Mr Fairholt from a curious sculpture at Rheims upon a building of the thir- 
teenth century known as La Maison des Musiciens, in which there is a representation 
of a musician with a tabor hung on his neck who is playing on a fife either end of 
which is angulated.’ Booru: My father illustrated this by turning his head as it is 
held when one plays upon the fife. 

35. varnisht faces] HALLIWELL: ‘For varnisht faces and gay and painted cloths, 
Ax but to tempt fooles; every man this knowes.’—-7he Mewe Metarrorphosts, c. 1600, 


go THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT II, SC. v. 


But ftop my houfes eares, I meane my cafements, 36 
Let not the found of fhallow fopperie enter 
My fober houfe. By Jacobs ftaffe I fweare, 
I haue no minde of feafting forth to night: 
But I will goe : goe you before me firra, 40 
Say I will come. 
Clo. I will goe before fir. 
Miftris looke out at window for all this ; 
There will come a Chriftian by, 


Will be worth a Iewes eye. P 45 
36. ftop| shut Cap. 43. at] ata Q,, Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 
42. L...jfir] Sir, I will go before Han. 45. Lewes] QqF,, Wh. i. /ew’s F,F,, 

LI'1l...you, sir. Walker. Rowe. /Jewés Ktly. Jewess’ Pope et 
42, 43. Prose, Coll. Dyce i, Wh. Cam. cet. 

Glo. Del. Cla. Rife. [Exit Laun. Rowe et seq. 

MS. ‘The cortezans....adulterate their faces..... A thing so common amongst 


them, that many of them which have an elegant naturall beauty, doe varnish their faces 
.... with these kinde of sordid trumperies.’—Coryat’s Crudities, 1611, p. 266. CLAR- 
ENDON: Shylock alludes also to Christian duplicity. Conf. Zion, IV, ii, 36: ‘But 
only painted, like his varnish’d friends.” WALKER (C777. iii, 54) refers to a Review in 
The Atheneum, 15 March, 1845, of Mrs Merrifield’s translation of Cennini’s Treatise 
on Painting, &c., in which the Reviewer suggests that the painting of the face was 
practised by masqueraders in Italy. 

36. stop] To Capell’s reading sft I can find no reference throughout his Votes, 
Various Readings, or Errata; although it is not impossible that in that ‘rudis indi- 
gestaque moles’ some reference may lie perdu; yet, after my search, I think it unlikely. 
Thus far it is the only uncorrected misprint which I have found in his text.—Eb. 

38. Iacobs staffe] CLARENDON: See Gen. xxxii, 10, and Hed, xi, 21. It is in this 
sense, no doubt, that Shakespeare understands the phrase, but it was familiarly used in 
the sense of a pilgrim’s staff, because St James (or Jacob), the patron of pilgrims, was 
represented with one in his hand. See Spenser, Aaerie Queene, I, vi, 35: ‘And in his 
hand a Iacobs staffe, to stay His weary limbs upon.’ BooTH: Speak these two lines 
very solemnly, with a slight pause before and after. 

39. of ] For many other instances where we should use /or in place of ‘of,’ see 
ABBOTT, §174. Also, Zé. § 41, for examples of ‘forth’ used ‘ without a verb of motion 
(motion being implied),’ 

45. lewes eye] WHALLEY: ‘It’s worth a Jew’s eye’ is a proverbial phrase. 
KNicHT: That worth was the price which the persecuted Jews paid for immunity 
from mutilation and death. When our rapacious King John extorted an enormous sum 
from the Jew of Bristol by drawing his teeth, the threat of putting out an eye would 
have the like effect upon other Jews. The former prevalence of the saying is proved 
from the fact that we still retain it, although its meaning is now little known. CoLLIER 
(ed. ii) : It may be a question whether Shakespeare did not mean that Launcelot should 
merely repeat the phrase, ‘with a Jew’s eye,’ leaving ‘ Jewés’ to be pronounced as a 
dissyllable. WALKER (Crit. iii, 54): The proverb, in Shakespeare’s days, perhaps, 


ACT Il, SC. v.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE g! 


Shy. What faies that foole of Hagars off-fpring? 46 


ha. 
lef. His words were farewell miftris, nothing elfe. 
Shy. The patch is kinde enough, but a huge feeder : 49 


was still pronounced ‘a Jewés eye.’ WHITE: All the editors read ‘a Jew-ess’ eye,’ 
none of them having observed, or all having forgotten, that ‘Jewess’ is quite a mod- 
ern word, ‘Jew’ having been applied of old to Hebrews of both sexes. It is only 
in the Scene but one previous that Launcelot calls Jessica ‘most sweet Jew.’ Dycz, 
after quoting this note of White, adds: ‘Not “quite a modern word,” surely ; “ Felix 
came with his wife Drusilla, which was a _Jewess,” Acts, xxiv, 24 (Tyndale’s Bible 1525 
or 1526 having there the spelling “iewes,” the Bible of 1599 and the Bible of 1629 the 
spelling “ Zewesse,”—not to mention other Bibles).’ 

46. Hagars off-spring ?] FARREN (p. 24): This allusion is very appropriate to 
the departure of his servant; Hagar having been Jondswoman to Sarah, the wife of 
Abraham, and having quitted her, as Launcelot does Shylock, under the supposed 
grievance of too little indulgence ( Geneszs, xvi). 

47. ha] In a modernised text, should not this be printed Hey ?—Ep. 

49. patch] Doucz (i, 257): It has been supposed that this term originated from 
the name of a fool belonging to Cardinal Wolsey, and that his parti-coloured dress was 
given to him in allusion to his name. The objection to this is, that the motley habit 
worn by fools is much older than the time of Wolsey. Again, it appears that Patch 
was an appellation given not to one fool only that belonged to Wolsey. There is an 
epigram by Heywood, entitled 4 saying of Patch my Lord Cardinals foole,; but in 
the epigram itself he is twice called Sextem, which was his real name. In a manu- 
script Lzfe of Wolsey, by his gentleman usher, Cavendish, there is a story of another 
fool belonging to the Cardinal, and presented by him to the King. A marginal note 
states that ‘this foole was called Master Williames, otherwise called Patch.’ In Hey- 
lin’s History of the Reformation mention is made of another fool called Patch belong- 
ing to Elizabeth. But the name is even older than Wolsey’s time; for in some house- 
hold accounts of Henry the Seventh there are payments to a fool named Pechie and 
Packye. Tt seems, therefore, more probable that fools were nicknamed Patch from 
their dress; unless there happen to be a nearer affinity to the Italian fazzo, a word that 
has all the appearance of a descent from /atwus. But although in the above instance, 
as well as in a multitude of others, a patch denotes a fool or a simpleton, and, by cor- 
ruption, a clown, it seems to have been occasionally used in the sense of any low or 
mean person. Thus, in Mid. NV. D. III, ii, Puck calls Bottom and his companions ‘a 
crew of patches, rude mechanicals,’ certainly not meaning to compare them to pam- 
pered and sleek buffoons. KwnicHT: The usurper in Hamlet, the ‘vice of kings,’ was 
‘a king of shreds and patches.’ It is probable that in this way the word ‘patch’ came 
to be an expression of contempt; just as we say still, cross-patch. SKEAT (s. v.): The 
supposition that ‘patch’ is a nickname from the dress is most probably right. It is in- 
dependent of Italian fazz0, a fool, a madman, which is used in a much stronger sense. 
A derivative is patch-ock, a diminutive form (cf. bu/l-ock, hill-ock) ; ‘as very patchokes 
[clowns] as the wild Irish,’—Spenser, View of the State of Ireland, Globe ed. p. 636; 
this is the word spelt ‘pajock’ in Ham. III, ii. S. L. LEE (The Academy, 27 Nov 
1880): If further proof be required to show that Shakespeare has portrayed in Shy- 
lock the humane side of the Tewish character, the touching allusion to Leah’s turquoise 


92 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act U1, sc. v. 


Snaile-flow in profit, but he fleepes by day 50 
More then the wilde-cat : drones hiue not with me, 
Therefore I part with him, and part with him 

To one that I would haue him helpe to wafte 

His borrowed purfe. Well /e/ica goe in, 


Perhaps I will returne immediately ; 55 
Doe as I bid you, fhut dores after you, faft binde, faft 
finde, 57 

50. but he] Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. 56. Doe...after you] One line, Q,, Cap. 
but Ff, Rowe. and he Qq et cet. Coll. et seq. 

56. Doe as [bid you] Om. Pope, Han. JSiut | shut the Pope+. 
Separate line, Theob. Warb. Johns. Steev. Jaf... faft] safe...safe Coll. (MS). 
Mal. Knt, Sing. 


should be supplemented by the present passage. lLauncelot has arranged with Jessica 
for her elopement, and she, by a series of barefaced falsehoods, has evaded her father’s 
enquiries as to his business with her. Jessica declares that his final words are: ‘ “ Fare- 
well, mistress ;”” nothing more;’ and induces Shylock to believe that Launcelot is through- 
out paying her merely the ordinary courtesies of service. It can only be an appreciative 
kindliness of disposition, which certainly could not belong to a man always ‘ grinning 
with deadly malice’ (as Shylock has often, on and off the stage, been represented), that 
can induce the Jew to reply: ‘The patch is kind enough,’ and then to add, half blam- 
ing himself having parted with a servant who shows such befitting respect to his beloved 
child, ‘but a huge feeder,’ &c. Very effective are the first words of the speech in their 
pathos, when we remember how very, very little Launcelot at the moment deserved them, 
or how they were suggested by the cruel deceptions of the Jew’s unworthy daughter, 
Introduced where they are in the play, they are in themselves almost sufficient to prove 
that Shakespeare saw in Shylock a man ‘more sinned against than sinning.’ 

50. profit] Eccies: In the performance of those duties whence profit might be 
expected to arise to his master. ALLEN suggests that Zerhaps it might mean ‘in 
improvement. He is the same ignorant, awkward country lad he was.’ For such 
compounds as ‘snail-slow,’ see ABBOTT, § 430. 

50. but] Clearly a misprint for axd, caught by the compositor from the preceding 
line.—Ep. 

51. wilde-cat] CLARENDON: The wild cat, which prowls and preys by night 
sleeps during the day. 

55. Perhaps I will] Apsorr, § 319: Some passages which are quoted to prove 
that Shakespeare used ‘ will’ with the first person, without implying wish, desire, &c., do 
not warrant such an inference..... There is a difficulty in the expression ‘ perchance 
I will,’ but, from its constant recurrence, it would seem to be a regular idiom. Com- 
pare the following passages: ‘Perchance, Iago, I wi? ne’er go home,’-—O/A. V, ii, 246 
[of this ed.]; ‘Perchance I will be there as soon as you,’—Com. of Err. IV, i, 39; 
and this present passage. In all these, ‘perchance’ precedes, and the meaning seems 
to be in Shylock’s speech, for instance: ‘My purpose may, perhaps, be fulfilled,’ and 

my purpose is to return immediately,’ or, in other words, ‘If possible, I intend to 
return immediately.’ In all these cases the ‘perhaps’ stands by itself. It does not 
qualify ‘ will,’ but the whole of the following sentence. BooTH: It would seem from 
this remark that Shylock had not perfect confidence in her. 


acTu,sc.v.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 93 


A prouerbe neuer ftale in thriftie minde. Exit. 58 
Lef. Farewell, and if my fortune be not croft, 
I haue a Father, you a daughter loft. Exit. 60 


56. dores] Malone, whose name was originally Maloney, having made the harm- 
less, if needless, remark that ‘ doors is here a dissyllable,’ Ritson, from whose acerbity 
ninety years have evaporated the cruelty, observed that, ‘a previous acquaintance with 
the Irish howl must be of infinite service in the perusal of this harmonious edition.’ 
-—Eb. 

56, 57. fast... finde] WALKER (C77. iii, 54): In Middleton the former line of 
the concluding couplet is frequently a short one; in Shakespeare, very seldom. [See 
Dyce, I, ii, 128.] Dyce (/Vores, &c. p. 64): Collier’s (MS) seems to have made a 
change ‘for variation’s sake.’-—-Compare Cotgrave’s Dict. sub Bon. ‘Bon guet chasse 
malaventure: Pro. Good watch preuents misfortune; fast bind, fast find, say we.’ 
COLLieR (ed. ii): The correction in the (MS) may only denote a difference of reci- 
tation. The usual form occurs in Fletchers Spanish Curate, II, ii, a better authority 
than Cotgrave. It also occurs in S. Rowland’s Paire of Spy-Knaues. 

60. Oxberry’s Edition professes to give ‘the Stage Business and Stage Directions, 
as performed at the Theatres Royal’ (circa 1820). In that edition this scene closes 
with an outburst of song from Jessica, as follows: 


‘ Haste, Lorenzo, haste away, 
To my longing arms repair, 
With impatience I shall die; 
Come, and ease thy Jessy’s care; 
Let me, then, in wanton play 
Sigh and gaze my soul away.’ 


94 , THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act I, SC. vi. 


[Scene VT. 


Enter the Maskers, Gratiano and Salino. 


Gra. This is the penthoufe vnder which Lorenzo 
Defired vs to make a ftand. 
Sal. His houre is almoft patt. 


Gra. And it is meruaile he out-dwels his houre, 5 
For louers euer run before the clocke. 
Sal. O ten times fafter Venus Pidgions flye 7 
[Scene VII. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 3, 4. Defired...houre] One line, Wh. 1. 
Omit, Hal. Dyce, Huds. Scene VI. Cap. 3. to make a} Om. Steev. conj. 
et cet. a fland | Ff, Rowe+, Wh.i. ffand 
1. Salino.] Ff. Salerino, Q.Q,, Cap. Qgq et cet. 
Salanio. Rowe+, Steev. Salarino. Q, et 7. Pidgions] Q,F,Q, pigeons Q,. 
cet. Widgeons Warb. 


2, 3. Prose, Rowe+. 


There is really no new Scene here, and no change could be made even on the mod- 
ern stage, but Shakespeare indicated to his audience in almost the only way he could, 
with his limited resources of traverses, by the rhyming couplets with which both Shy- 
lock and Jessica retire, that a new paragraph in the Story was beginning and that our 
attention must be shifted to a new group. We should bear in mind that these rhyming 
couplets, mere jingles as they may be to us, were of importance to the audience of 
Shakespeare’s day. See Text. Notes, for the Editors who have continued the Scene. 
—ED. 

3, 4. To cure the defective metre of these two lines, when read as one, Steevens 
proposed to omit ‘to make a,’ as an evident interpolation, and Grey (i, 135) would 
omit ‘almost,’ because Gratiano immediately says that Lorenzo ‘ out-dwells his hour.’ 
[In view of the shortness of life, I am afraid it behooves us to forego the pleasure of 
adjusting the rhythm of fragments of lines. As long as each fragment is in itself 
rhythmical, I doubt if Shakespeare troubled himself to piece them together. It is not 
difficult to read these fragments thus: Desi | red us | to make | a stand || His ho | ur’s 
al | most past.—ED.] 

7. Venus Pidgions] Warburton detected a rich joke here which had been ‘ mur- 
der’d by the ignorance or boldness of the first transcribers.’ ‘The image of Venus’s 
pidgeons flying to seal the bonds of Love is very odd.’ He therefore ‘doubts not but 
Shakespeare wrote Venus’ Widgeons.’ ‘For,’ he continues, in Ornithology’s despite, 
‘ Widgeon is not only one species of Pidgeons, but signified likewise, metaphorically, 
a silly fellow, as Goose, or Gudgeon does now. The joke consists in the ambiguity 
of the signification. And the calling love’s votaries, Venus’s Widgeons, is in high 
humour.’ Although the Bishop’s ‘high humour’ failed to tickle Dr Johnson, yet 
this note so far misled him that he thought the pigeons were the ‘lovers,’ and ‘as 
in poetry they were always called ¢urtles or doves, in lower language they might be 
called pigeons.’ HEATH (p. 115) set them both right. ‘It is not the pigeons,’ said he, 
‘who are understood to “seal the bonds of love,” any more than “to keep obliged faith 
unforfeited ;” but it is Venus herself (who is drawn by them, and regulates their flight 
according to her own good pleasure) who is supposed to be assistant in both,’ 


> t 


ACT II, SC, vi. | _ THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 95 


To fteale loues bonds new made, then they are wont 8 
To keepe obliged faith vnforfaited. 
Gra. That euer holds, who rifeth from a feaft 10 


With that keene appetite that he fits downe ? 

Where is the horfe that doth vntread againe 

His tedious meafures with the vnbated fire, 

That he did pace them firft : all things that are, 

Are with more fpirit chafed then enioy’d. 15 
How like a yonger or a prodigall 

The skarfed barke puts from her natiue bay, 

Hudg’d and embraced by the ftrumpet winde: 

How like a prodigall doth fhe returne Ig 


8. freale] Ff, Rowe. /eale Qaq et cet. Knt, Wh. i, Rife. Younker Rowe et cet 
10. holds,| Ff. holds: Qq. holds. Rowe. 18, Hudg’d| Hugd Q.Q,. Hue’d F 
13. meafures...fire,| measures, ...fire PF. Hugg’d Q,F,. 

12; 19. “ike a] like the Qq, Pope, Sing. 
14. firft:) firft? Q,F.F,. Ktly, Cam. Glo. Cla, Rlfe. 

16. yonger] F,. younger QqF,F,, Cap. doth fhe| fhe doth ¥ F, Rowe. 


” 3 4 


g. obliged] CLARENDON: Faith bound by contract. 

II. sits downe] For other instances where the preposition is omitted, see I, i, 135, 
or ABBOTT, § 394. 

12. yntread] CLARENDON: That is, tread in reverse order, retrace. So in King 
John, V, iv, 52: ‘We will untread the steps of damned flight.’ The allusion seems 
to be to a horse trained to perform various feats, such as we now see only in a circus. 

16. yonger] Although Shakespeare’s printers use the form younker elsewhere, 
change is needless here. ‘ Younker exactly expresses,’ says CLARENDON, ‘the Greek 
veaviac.’ HENLEY calls attention to the imitation of this passage by Gray in 7ke Bard 
in those familiar lines: ‘ Fair laughs the morn,’ &c. Coleridge (zag. Lit. i, chap. 1) 
criticised the imitation adversely on the ground that it depends on the printer’s use of 
small capitals (as in ‘ YOUTH at the prow, and PLEASURE at the helm’) ‘whether the 
words should be personifications or mere abstractions.’—Ep, 

17. skarfed] STEEVENS: That is, the vessel decorated with flags. So in Adl’s Well, 
Il, iii, 214: ‘The scarfs and bannerets about thee, did manfully dissuade me from be- 
lieving thee a vessel of too great a burthen.’ Ecc es, from the definition of ‘scarf,’ 
both the noun and the verb, in Johnson’s Dict., thinks that the allusion is to ‘a ship 
under full sail.’ CLARENDON: Or is it that a ship in full sail is compared to a woman 
dressed in scarfs? From the passage in A//’s Well, it would seem that a scarf was a 
decoration of a pleasure vessel. 

19. a] COLLIER: There seems to be no particular allusion to the Prodigal Son, and 
‘a younker’ and ‘a prodigal’ are spoken in the earlier part of the simile. HALLI- 
WELL: The particle zhe, if correct, is of course used with reference to the prodigal 
previously mentioned. CLARENDON refers to Luke, xv, 11-32, and calls attention to 
the text of the Qq, where in line 16 it is ‘@ prodigal,’ and here ‘the prodigal.’ [To 
me it is immaterial whether the article be definite or indefinite, the allusion seems mani 
fest to the Scriptural Prodigal.—Eb. ] 


96 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT I, SC. vi. 


With ouer-wither’d ribs and ragged failes, 20 
Leane, rent, and begger’d by the ftrumpet winde ? 


Enter Lorenzo. 


Salino. Weere comes Lorenzo, more of this here- 
after. 
Lor. Sweete friends, your patience for my long a- 25 
bode, 
Not I, but my affaires haue made you wait: 
When you fhall pleafe to play the theeties for wiues 
Ile watch as long for you then : approach 


Here dwels my father Iew. Hoa, who’s within ? 26 
20. ouer-wither'd| Ff, Rowe. ouer- 29. you then: you. Come then, Ritson. 

wetherd Q,.Q,. over-weatherd Q, et cet. approach] approach ; Rowe. Come, 
22. Enter... ] After line 24, Dyce, Cam. approach Pope+, Cap. 

Glo. Cla. Rife, Wh. ii. 30. Hoa] Ff. HoQ,. HoweQ,. Hoe Q,. 
23. Salino.] Ff. Sal.Q,Q,. Saler. Q,. who's| whofe Qq. 


19. she] STEEVENS: Surely the bark ought to be of the masculine gender, other- 
wise the allusion wants somewhat of propriety. This indiscriminate use of the per- 
sonal for the neuter at least obscures the passage. A ship, however, is commonly 
spoken of in the feminine gender. WHITE: But here there is no poetical personifica- 
tion of the bark; it is only compared to a prodigal. [Is there not some corruption in 
these lines? There seems to be something wrong in the repetition of ‘the strumpet 
wind.’—Ep. ] 

28. you shall please] See ABxorTt, § 297, ad jin. 

29. CLARENDON considers Ritson’s emendation of this metrically-defective line as 
more satisfactory than Pope’s. 

30. Hoa] WHITE: ‘ Ho,’ ‘hoa,’ and ‘how’ were pronounced alike. [These words 
‘Hoa, who’s within,’ are omitted in Oxberry’s Edition, and in their place Lorenzo, not 
to be outdone by Jessica, responds as follows: 


‘ My bliss too long my bride denies ; 
Apace the wasting summer flies ; 
Nor yet the wint’ry blasts I fear, 
Nor storms nor night shall keep me here. 


‘ What may for strength with steel compare ? 
O, love has fetters stronger far! 
By bolts of steel are limbs confin’d ; 
But cruel love enchains the mind. 


‘ No longer, then, perplex thy breast ; 
When thoughts torment, the first are best ; 
’Tis mad to go, ’tis death to stay; 

Away, my Jessy, haste away.’ 


Shall we assume that these ‘songs’ were inserted to make up to us the loss of Shake 
spearc’s ‘Tell me where is fancy bred,’ which, in this Edition, is omitted ?—Eb.] 


ACT II, SC. vi.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 97 


leffica aboue. 31 


lef. Who are you?tell me for more certainty, 
Albeit Ile fweare that I do know your tongue. 

Lor. Lorenzo,and thy Loue. 

Ief. Lorenzo certaine, and my loue indeed, 35 
For who loue I fo much? and now who knowes 
But you Lorenzo, whether I am yours? 

Lor, Heauen and thy thoughts are witnefs that thou 

art. 

Jef. Heere, catch this casket, it is worth the paines, 40 
I am glad ’tis night, you do not looke on me, 
For I am much afham’d of my exchange: 


But loue is blinde, and louers cannot fee 43 
31. aboue.] above in Boys Cloths. 40. Heere] QLF,. Here Q.. 

Rowe et seq. (cloaths. Pope+, Cap. it ts] tis Q.. 

Steev. Mal. clothes. Steev. ’93). 41. Lam] J’m Pope+t, Dyce iii, Huds. 
36. who} whom Johns. Coll. Wh. i, 42. afham’d] afhamade Q.. 

Clarke, Huds. 


33- your] ALLEN: Qu. ¢hat—y? mistaken for yr? Cf. Rom. & Jul. ‘My ears have 
not yet drunk a hundred words Of ¢haz (Q,) tongue’s uttering.’ 

36. who] For manifold instances of ‘who’ for whom, see ABBOTT, § 274. 

38. thy thoughts] EcciEs: It is impossible that she, any more than Heaven itself, 
to which our hearts lie open, can in reality harbour a doubt of the sincerity of his pro- 
fessions. ALLEN: Perhaps ‘#y thoughts.’ In that case, the meaning is: ‘ Not I alone 
know it—Heaven witnesses wzth my thoughts.’ Emphasize, therefore, amd (as in ‘Ye 
cannot serve God azd Mammon’). ‘ Heaven,’ by the way, is a compulsory euphemism 
for God (in answer to ‘who knows’). 

40. LLoyp: Elopement, in Jessica’s case, it must be said, is a virtue; and the ela- 
tion at exchanging freedom for degraded oppression explains and excuses the dry eyes, 
—nay, laughing lips—with which she departs. If we care to apologize for the casket 
she carried off, we may say she helped herself, perhaps not exorbitantly, to her dowry ; 
but we shall do better to mark the incident as the last seal of the truth worth laying to 
heart, how utterly unkindness, cruelty, sordidness, and distrust can at last erase the 
faintest traces of natural duty and affection in hearts that by nature are disposed to be 
their hallowed home. ELzeE (Zssays, Trans. p. 92): Jessica appropriates the ducats, 
all of which must necessarily fall to her after her father’s death, as she is his only child. 
Gervinus considers her to be an ‘ethereal being, naive, and inexperienced as a child, 
and perfectly unacquainted with the value of money.’ This last assertion is, however, 
contradicted by her own words here. She tells her lover that the casket is worth the 
pains, and she hurries back to ‘gild’ herself with more ducats. 

41. you] Ecctss: I suspect that this should be, ‘ yet do not look on me,’ the dark- 
ness not being sufficient entirely to conceal the transformation of which she is ashamed. 
ALLEN: Either: ‘I’m glad (since ’tis night) you do not look on me;’ or: ‘I’m glad ’tis 


night (so that) you do look on me.’ 
7 


98 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ui, sc. vi. 


The pretty follies that themfelues commit, 
For if they could, Cupid himfelfe would blufh 45 
To fee me thus transformed to a boy. 

Lor. Defcend, for you muft be my torch-bearer. 

lef. What, muft I hold a Candle to my fhames? 
They in themfelues goodfooth are too too light. 
Why, ’tis an office of difcouery Loue, 50 
And I fhould be obfcur’d. 


48. /zames| /hame Ff, Rowe. Sing. Ktly. ¢00-to0 Hal. Dyce, Sta. Wh. 
49. too too] too, too, Johns. 00, too i, Rlfe,; Huds. 


45. Cupid] Eccies: That Cupid does not blush is, in a confused manner, consid- 
ered as the consequence of the blindness of his votaries, rather than of his own 
ALLEN: For if they could (and I were Cupid), Cupid himself, &c. 

47. must] ABBOTT, § 314: This is sometimes used by Shakespeare to mean no 
more than definite futurity, like our ‘is to’ in ‘ He is to be here to-morrow.’ 

49. too too] NARES pointed out the intensive effect of this reduplication, giving 
instances from Holinshed and Spenser. Halliwell (S%. Soc. Papers, 1844, i, 39) 
shows that ‘too-too’ is a provincial word recognized by Ray, and explained by him 
as meaning ‘very well, or good,’ and that Watson, a few years afterward, says it is 
‘often used to denote exceeding.’ In proof ‘that TOO-TOO, as used by our early 
writers, ts one word, denoting “ exceedingly,” and that it ought to be so printed, Hal- 
liwell gives twelve instances from the poets, from Skelton down to Audibras, and 
refers to over thirty other passages where the phrase is found. HUNTER doubts if this 
reduplication be emphatic. It appears to him to have been, in sense, neither more nor 
less than foo, and he cites many instances from prose writers. Palsgrave, he adds, has 
beside zo-much, to-little, &c., toto much, to to little, to to great, to to small, answering to 
par trop trop peu, par trop trop grant, par trop trop petit. The pronunciation was foo- 
toé, as appears by this line of Constable’s: ‘But I did too-too inestimable wey her.’ 
[That this accent can be shifted, see ‘ Whence it appears, this too-too to frequent.’— 
Sylvester’s Du Bartas, p. 576, a, ed. 1632.—EpD.] WHITE thinks that it was used 
with intensifying iteration, from the similar iteration of other adverbs and adjectives in 
Elizabethan literature; for instance: ‘ Thy wit dost use still still more harmes to finde,’— 
Sidney’s Arcadia, ii, 225, ed. 1603; ‘ While he did live far, far was all disorder, —J2. 
v, 430; ‘Your lesson is Far far too long,’—Astrophel and Stella, St. 56, Jb. p. 537; 
‘Stop you my mouth with still still kissing me,’—/é. St. 81, 75. p. 547; ‘Even to thy 
pure and most most loving breast.’—Shakespeare’s Sonn. 110. In any case the com- 
pound epithet must have originated in the frequent iterative use of the word. [Note 
on Ham. I, ii, 129, of this edition—ED. ] 

50. discouery] HUNTER (i, 325): This is a military term. Sir John Smith, in his 
Instructions and Orders Military, 1595, p. 51, speaks of ‘ great intelligence by discov- 
erers and espials.’ ‘QObscured’ is disguised. SINGER: I do not think such a sense 
was thought of here. ABBOTT, § 439: This is often used for uncovering, i. e. unfold, 
whether literally or metaphorically. ‘So shall my anticipation prevent your discovery.’ 
—Ham. Il, ii, 305. 

51. should] Axzort, § 323: ‘Should,’ the past tense, not being so imperious as 
shall, the “resent, is still retained in the sense of ought, applying to all three persons. 


ACT I, SC. vi.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 99 


Lor. So you are fweet, 52 
Euen in the louely garnifh of a boy:but come at once, 
For the clofe night doth play the run-away, 


And we are ftaid for at Baffanio’s featt. 55 
lef. will make faft the doores and guild my felfe 

With fome more ducats, and be with you ftraight. 57 
52. you are] are you Qq, Pope et fovely Coll. (MS). 

seq. 53. dut...once| Separate line, Pope et 
53, 54. Euen...run-away] Three lines, seq. 

ending 4oy...night...run-away Q,. 57. more] mo Q,Q,. moe Q,. 
53. louely garnifh of a] garnish of a [Exit from above. Theob. et seq 


In the Elizabethan authors, however, it was more commonly thus used, often where we 
should use ought. As here: ‘A torch-bearer’s office reveals the face, and mine oug 4¢ 
tobe hidden.’ See ‘Should sunder,’ &c., fost, III, ii, 127. 

53- louely] Eccirs: That is, rendered ‘lovely’ because she had assumed it. 

54. run-away] See Rom. & Jul. IIl, ii, 6. CLARENDON: The secret night is 
stealing away. 

55, 56. SPEDDING (Cornhill Maga., March, 1880) : The moral sensibilities of a mod- 
ern spectator receive here a little shock, from which a judicious adapter might relieve 
him by the omission of a few lines. Not that I would debar Jessica from seeking 
relief from her Jewish disabilities by the nearest way. We are all glad to see her at 
liberty to choose her husband and her religion for herself; to escape from a house 
which was to her a hell, with only the ‘merry devil’ Launcelot to cheer it; from a 
father of whose manners she was (not without reason and to her credit, though to her 
regret) ashamed; and from the chance, should it suit 42, of having to take ‘any of 
the stock of Barrabas’ for a husband; nor do many of us object to see advantage 
taken by Antonio of the pressure which the law enables him to put on Shylock for the 
purpose of securing a comfortable provision for her. But we all feel that she ought to 
have left the jewels and the ducats behind; and the fact that Shakespeare allowed her 
to carry them off without a hint of disapprobation from anybody (there being no dra- 
matic necessity for it) suggests a doubt whether in those early days he was fully alive 
to the impropriety. Perhaps the easy morality of the comic theatre in all such ques- 
tions,—the large privilege which the young lovers have always enjoyed of deceiving 
and overreaching the stern parent,—had become so familiar as to hide from him the 
true nature of the transaction; which in so tragic a business as Shylock’s revenge can- 
not be regarded with the levity which comedy permits. But, however that may be, I 
cannot doubt that the effect would be much better in modern eyes if Jessica were 
allowed to escape without the treasure. The loss of his daughter to her race and faith 
would supply Shylock with as fair a motive for vengeance; he could make as much 
noise about it; and the secret that he really cared more for the ducats than the daughter 
would not be forced upon the knowledge of his admirers, who regard paternal tender- 
ness as one of his most conspicuous virtues. Two lines struck out from Jessica’s part in 
the Sixth Scene of the Second Act, a few from Salanio’s in the Eighth, and a few more 
in the interview with Tubal, would (without at all disturbing the action of the play) 
remove completely our only remaining scruple as to the poetic justice of the final set- 
tlcment. 


100 7HE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act I, Sc. vi. 


Gra. Now by my hood,a gentle, and no Iew. 58 
Lor. Befhrew me but I loue her heartily. 
For the is wife, if I can iudge of her, “a 60 


And faire the is, if that mine eyes be true, 
And true fhe is, as fhe hath prou’d her felfe- 
And therefore like her felfe, wife, faire, and true 
Shall the be placed in my conftant foule. 


Enter Leffica. 65 
What, art thou come? on gentlemen, away, 
Our masking mates by this time for vs ftay. Exit. 67 
58. gentle] Q,, Cap. Gentile Q,FFQ, 66. gentlemen] gentleman Q,. 
et cet. 67. Exit.] Exit with Jessica and Sa- 
59. Befhrew] Befhrow Q,Q,, Cap. lerino. Cap. ; 


58. hood] MALONE: Gratiano is in a masqued habit, to which it is probable that 
formerly, as at present, a large cape or hood was affixed. STEEVENS: He alludes to 
the practice of friars, who frequently swore by this part of their habit. [This assertion 
Steevens possibly took from Capell, who says: ‘ The speaker’s oath is of monkish orig- 
inal.’] HALLIWELL gives a MS note by O. Gilchrist, to the effect that ‘the allusion is 
to the practice in single combat, where the accused threw down his hood as a challenge 
against the impeachment of the accuser. See Holinshed, vol. 3, p.5.’ [As the edition 
of Holinshed is not given, I have searched my copy of 1587 in vain for the passage.— 
Ep.] WHuiITE: I had always understood this ancient oath here and elsewhere to be, 
‘by my self,’ i, e. ‘by my estate’ —manhood, kinghood, knighthood, or whatever the 
hood or estate the protester might be. CLARENDON: It is found nowhere else in 
Shakespeare, 

58. gentle] JoHNson: A jest arising from the ambiguity of Gentile, which signifies 
both a heathen and one well born. 

59. Beshrew] STAUNTON: To ‘beshrew’ is to émprecate sorrow or evil on any per 
son or thing, to curse, &c. See *‘ Museragno, a kinde of mouse called a shrew, deadlie 
to other beasts if he bite them, and laming any bodie if he but touch them, of which 
that curse came, I beshrew thee.’—Florio’s Worlde of Wordes, 1508. 

59. but] ABBOTT, § 126: ‘But’ is not adversative, but means ‘if not,’ after ‘be- 
shrew me,’ &c. 

63. true] ExzE (Zssays, Trans. p. 94): It is lucky that there was no Brabantio 
near to whisper into the confiding lover’s ear: ‘She did deceive her father, marrying 
thee !’ 

67. Exit] Where is ‘die tragische Schuld’ of our German brothers, that relentless 
fate which pursues the guilty and ensures their downfall, here in Jessica’s career? 
From the hour of the cruel deception of her father onward, smooth success is strewed 
before her little feet, until they trip into bliss and Belmont under patines of bright gold. 
Why was a fate so different allotted to poor Desdemona, who yielded to her old father, 
after her first offence, all the tender devotion that a married daughter can bestow? Iam 
afraid the doctrine of ‘die tragische Schuld’ in Shakespeare needs patching.—Epb. 


ACT II, SC. vi.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 101 


Enter Anthonio. 68 
Ant. Who’s there ? 
Gra. Signior Anthonio ? 70 


Ant. Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the reft ? 
’Tis nine a clocke, our friends all ftay for you, 
No maske to night, the winde is come about, 
Baffanio prefently will goe aboord, 


1 haue fent twenty out to feeke for you. 74 
Gra. 1am glad on’t, I defire no more delight 

Then to be vnder faile, and gone to night. Exeunt. 
69. Who's] VVhofe Q,Q,: follow line 72, Han. 
71. Fie, fie] Fie, Pope+. 76. Gra.] Om. Q,, continuing to Anth. 


75- f...you] Om. Q,. Transposed to Lam] I’m Pope+, Dyce iii, Huds. 


73. winde] See III, ii, 284, TH. Eze. 
75, 76. The omission of a whole line here in Q,, and continuing Gratiano’s speech 
x0 Anthonio, is an inexcusable defect in that edition —ED. 


102 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ui, Sc. vii 


[Scene VII. 
Enter Portia with Morrocho, and both their traines. 


Por. Goe, draw afide the curtaines, and difcouer 
The feuerall Caskets to this noble Prince: 
Now make your choyfe. 
Mor. The firft of gold, who this infcription beares, 5 
Who choofeth me, fhall gaine what men defire. 
The fecond filuer, which this promife carries, 
Who choofeth me, fhall get as much as he deferues. 
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt, 
Who choofeth me, muft giue and hazard all he hath. 10 
How fhall I know if I doe choofe the right ? 


Scene III. Belmont. Rowe. Scene 4. [Three caskets ate discovered. 
VIII. Pope+. Scene VII. Cap. Steev. Rowe. 
Mal. Sta. Cam. Wh. Scene VI. Hal. 5. who] which Pope+, Dyce iii, Huds. 
Dyce, Huds. Coll. iii. 

A Room in Portia’s House. Flourish. 6. what] what many Qq, Rowe et 
Cap. seq. 

1. Morrocho] Morrochius. Rowe+. 6, 8, 10. In Italics Q.. 
Prince of Morocco. Cap. 11. This line is repeated only in F,F,,. 


The Scene which follows, marked in the majority of modern editions Scene vii, is 
transposed by EccLes to the First Act, and there termed Scene v. See II, ii, 1. 

2. curtaines] KEIGHTLEY (Zxf. 150): As in Scene ix, it is ‘curtain.’ I ascribe 
the s to the printer. 

5. who] Dyce (ed. iii): This is plainly an error for which, occasioned by the 
‘Who’s’ which follow; and compare the third line of the speech. ABzort, § 264: 
Who personifies irrational antecedents. .. . . The slightest active force or personal feel- 
ing attributed to the antecedent suffices to justify wo. Perhaps in this way we may dis- 
tinguish ‘ The first of gold, wo this inscription bears;’ ‘The second silver, which this 
promise carries ’—that is, ‘the first of gold, ad 7 bears this inscription; the second 
(silver), which carries,’ &c. In the first the maverial, in the second the promise, is 
regarded as the essential quality. (Or does euphony prefer which in the accented, who 
in the unaccented, syllables ?) 

6, 8, 10. ABBOTT, § 501: This trimeter couplet is often used by the Elizabethan 
writers in the translation of quotations, inscriptions, &c. 

6. what men] WHITE: That the omission of many is due to accident, its presence 
in the Qq and its occurrence in the inscription (which, of course, was always the same) 
when it is read by the Prince of Arragon, are sufficient evidence. 

g. blunt] JoHNson: That is, as gross as the dull metal. HALLIWELL: I should 
read—not as gross as the metal is dull, but as blunt as the dull metal is gross. 

11. In the Folio this line is the last on the page, with the catchwords ‘ Por. The 
beneath it, At the head of the next page the line is repeated (but with a period, 


ACT II, SC. vii] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 103 


Por. The one of them containes my picture Prince, 12 
If you choofe that, then I am yours withall. 
Mor. Some God direct my iudgement, let me fee, 
T will furuay the infcriptions, backe againe : 15 
What faies this leaden casket ? 
Who choofeth me, muft giue and hazard all he hath. 
Mutft giue, for what? for lead, hazard for lead? 
This casket threatens men that hazard all 
Doe it in hope of faire aduantages : 20 
A golden minde ftoopes not to fhowes of droffe, 
Ne then nor giue nor hazard ought for lead. 
What faies the Siluer with her virgin hue ? 
Who choofeth me, fhall get as much as he deferues. 
As much as he deferues ; paufe there Morocho, 25 
And weigh thy value with an euen hand, 
If thou beeft rated by thy eftimation 
Thou dooft deferue enough, and yet enough 
May not extend fo farre as to the Ladie: 
And yet to be afeard of my deferuing, 30 
Were but a weake difabling of my felfe. 
As much as I deferue, why that’s the Lady. 
I doe in birth deferue her, and in fortunes, 
In graces, and in qualities of breeding: 


But more then thefe, in loue I doe deferue. 35 
13. withall] with all Coll. i. 25. Morocho] Morrochius. Rowe+ 
18. hazard for lead | Om. FF, Rowei. Morocco. Cap. 

19. threatens men] threatens. Men 27. thy] the F,, Rowe i. 

Rowe et seq. 30. afeard | afraid Q,, Rowet+. 

22. nor giue] not giue Rowe li+. 32. deferue,| deserve— Rowe. 
ought | aught Mal. 35. deferue| deserve her Cap. conj. 
25. deferues ,;| deserves ? Pope. Coll. ii, Ktly. 


instead of an interrogation, at the end). ‘That it is merely a compositor’s oversight 
is shown by the catchwords. I have not deemed it worth while to reproduce it here. 
—Ep. 

23. her] ALLEN: He says ‘her’ of silver because he already had in mind ‘ virgin’ 
as its analogue. 

27. beest] RoLFE: This must not be confounded with the subjunctive Je, It is the 
Anglosaxon ézst, 2d pers. sing. Pres. Ind. of deén, to be. 

35. deserue] Capell’s emendation ‘deserve Her’ is, to me, most certain. It is not 
enly a repetition of the very phrase two lines before, but it is easy to see that the printer 
was misled by the ‘here’ in the line following. Eccles suggests two interpretations of 
this line; ‘either “more than these deserve,” the word “these” being a nominative, or, 


104 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [acrii, sc. vii. 


What if I ftrai’d no farther, but chofe here? 36. 
Let’s fee once more this faying grau’d in gold. 

Who choofeth me fhall gaine what many men defire: 

Why that’s the Lady, all the world defires her : 

From the foure corners of the earth they come 40 
To kiffe this fhrine, this mortall breathing Saint. 

The Hircanion deferts, and the vafte wildes 

Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now 

For Princes to come view faire Portia 

The waterie Kingdome, whofe ambitious head 45 
Spets in the face of heauen, is no barre 

To ftop the forraine fpirits, but they come 

As ore a brooke to fee faire Portia. 

One of thefe three containes her heauenly picture. 

Is’t like that Lead containes her? ’twere damnation 50 
To thinke fo bafe a thought, it were too grofe 


41. mortall breathing| Hyphened, 43. throughfares| thoroughfares Rowe 
Dyce. +, Dyce iii. 
42. Hircanion] Hircanian F, et seq. 45. waterie] watry Q,. 
vafte|¥,. vat FF ,, Rowe. vaftie 46. Spets] QqFf, Cap. Spits Rowe et 
Q,Q,, Pope+. vafty Q, et cet. cet. 


50. containes| contain Rowe i. 


“more than J deserve im these, in love I do deserve,” the preposition zz being 
understood.’’ As confirming the latter interpretation, I think we might suppose 
that the zz has been absorbed in ‘then.’ ‘But more then’ these, in love I do deserve 
her.—EpD. 

41. shrine] The use of this word, instead of z#age, here and in: ‘for feature, lam- 
ing The shrine of Venus,’ Cym. V, v, 164, WALKER (C77. i, 66) cites as instances of 
‘an inaccurate use of words in Shakespeare.’ Similar instances (‘eternal’ for izferna/) 
we have had in Ham. I, v, 21, and Oth. IV, ii, 154. Iam afraid Walker is right, but 
it costs a pang to give up the lowly kiss merely on the shrine that holds the saint.— 
Ep. 

42. Hircanion] CLARENDON: Hyrcania was a name given to a district of indefinite 
extent south of the Caspian. Shakespeare three times mentions the tigers of Hyrcania: 
3 Hen. VI; 1, i, 156; Macéd. III, iv, 101; Ham. Il, ii, 428. In Holland’s Plinie, 
viii, cap. 18, we find: ‘Tygres are bred in Hircania and India.’ 

42. vaste] For many another instance of the confusion, in the old copies, of ¢ and 
te final, see WALKER (C777. ii, 48). CLARENDON: Waste, desolate. It has almost an 
active sense in Hen. V; II, iv, 105 : ‘ War opens his vasty jaws.’ So ‘ vastness’ is used 
for desolation in Bacon’s Advancement of Learning, Il, vii, 7: ‘ Because their excur- 
sions into the limits of physical causes hath bred a vastness and solitude in that 
tract.’ 

44. to come] For instances of the omission and of the irsertion of ‘to, see AB- 
BOTT, § 349. 


ACT II, Sc. vii] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 105 


To rib her fearecloath in the obfcure graue: 52 
Or fhall I thinke in Siluer fhe’s immur’d __ 

Being ten times vndervalued to tride gold ; 

O finfull thought, neuer fo rich a Iem 55 
Was fet in worfe then gold / They haue in England 

A coyne that beares the figure of an Angell 

Stampt in gold, but that’s infculpt vpon: 58 


52. rib] ridd Q,Q,. 58. Stampt] Stamped Rowe ii et 3eq. 


52. rib] STEEVENS: That is, to enclose. See Cym. III, i, 19: ‘Neptune’s park, 
ribbed and paled in With rocks unscaleable, and roaring waters.’ 

52. searecloath] CLARENDON: See Cotgrave, ‘ Cera¢: A Plaister made of Waxe, 
Gummes, &c., and certaine oyles; Wee also, call it, a cerot or seare-cloth.’ 

54. vndervalued] CLARENDON: In the beginning of Elizabeth’s reign, gold was 
to silver in the proportion of 11 to 1; in the forty-third year of her reign (i. e. 1600, the 
year in which this play was first printed) it was in the proportion of 10 to 1 (Zacyed. 
Srit., Art. ‘Coinage’). The ratio at present is nearly 15 to 1. 

54. to] See avze, I, i, 176. 

57. coyne] KNIGHT: ‘To come now unto the cause of the general calling of our 
Ancestors by the name of Zng/ishmen, and our Country consequently by the name of 
England..... This King [Egbert] considering that so many different names, as the 
distinct Kingdoms before had caused, was now no more necessary, and that as the peo- 
ple were all originally of one Nation, so was it fit they should again be brought under one 
name; and although they had had the general name of Saxons, as unto this day they 
are of the Welsh and Jrish called, yet did he rather chuse and ordain that they should 
be all called Zxglish-men, as but a part of them before were called; and that the Coun- 
try should be called England. To the affectation of which name of Zxglish-men, it 
should seem he was chiefly moved in respect of Pope Gregory, his alluding the name 
of Engelisce unto Angel-like. The name of Znge/ is yet at this present in all the Zzx- 
tonick Tongue, to wit, the high and low Dutch, &c. as much to say, as Angel, and if a 
Dutch-man be asked how he would in his Language call an Angel-like-man, he would 
answer, ¢in English-man ; and being asked how in his own Language he would or doth 
call an English-man, he can give no other name for him, but even the very same that 
he gave before for an Angel-like-man, that is, as before is said, et English-man, Engel 
being in their Tongue an Amge/, and Lnglish, which they write Zngelsche, Angel- 
lige. And such reason and consideration may have moved our former Kings, upon 
their best Coin of pure and fine Gold, to set the Image of an Ange/, which may be 
supposed, hath as well been used before the Vorman Conquest, as since.’—Verstegan’s 
Restitution of Decayed Intelligence, &c. [p. 161, ed. 1673]. Dyce: This gold coin, 
an ‘angel,’ at its highest value was worth ten shillings. CLARENDON 2 It has supplied 
Shakespeare with many puns. 

58. insculpt] STEEVENs: To ‘insculp’ 1s to engrave. Douce: It is here put in oppo- 
sition to engrave, and simply denotes to carve in relief. The angel on the coin was 
raised; onthe casket indented. The word tnsculp was, however, formerly used with 
great latitude of meaning. Eccixs: It seems as if Morochins, at first view, imagined 
that he had found out the subject of an ingenious and refined compliment, which, at 
the next moment, he discovers to be incapable of producing the effect he expected frcm 


106 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act Ul, SC. vii 


But here an Angell in a golden bed 
Lies all within. Deliuer me the key: 60 
Here doe I choofe, and thriue I as I may. 

Por. There take it Prince, and if — forme lye there © 
Then I am yours. 

Mor. O hell! what haue we here, a carrion death, 
Within whofe emptie eye there is a written fcroule ; 65 
Ile reade the writing. 


All that glifters is not gold, 
Often haue you heard that told ; 
Many a man his life hath fold 


But my out fide to behold; 70 
63. [Unlocking the gold casket. Rowe 64-66. Three lines, ending ere, ... 
et seq. (subs.). eye...writing. Cap. et seq. 


66. le...writing| Om. Ff, Rowe. 


it. [Dyce long ago said (Remarks, p. 96) that ‘except those explanatory of customs, 
dress, &c., the notes of Douce are nearly worthless ;’ which is so true that I never re- 
peat Douce’s notes unless they have been, in whole or in part, used by subsequent edi- 
tors; in that case the scope of this present edition requires their insertion. The above 
note is in point. Douce apparently thought that a distinction was made by Morocco 
between relievo and intaglio; whereas the Angell, lying all w2tkzm, in a golden bed, 
was the portrait of Portia, as is pointed out by the Cowden-Clarkes. Eccles also appa: 
rently fails to see the meaning.—ED.] 

60, 61. key... may] WALKER (C7? ii, 167): A rhyme. ‘Key,’ in Shakespeare’s 
time, was almost always pronounced fay, ELuis (Zarly Eng. Pron., p.957): It is 
not quite certain whether this is meant forarhyme. [This difference of opinion be- 
tween two excellent authorities teaches us caution in drawing conclusions from the 
abundance or the lack of rhymes in these plays.—ED. ] 

63-65. I see no absolute necessity for changing the division of the lines here. Surely, 
after the broken line ‘ Then I am yours,’ the time which elapses while the Prince is open- 
ing the casket is enough to make the ear forget the exigencies of an iambic trimeter.— Eb. 

67. glisters] ROoLFE: Giisten does not occur in Shakespeare nor in Milton. In 
both we find ‘glister’ several times. 

69, 70. Eccles is the only editor, as far as I know, who finds any difficulty here, and 
I sympathize with him. The general drift is clear enough, and is contained in the very 
first line, in the old proverb; but it is not so clear that many a man has sold his life 
merely for the sake of looking at gold. Eccles thinks that, perhaps, since gold pos- 
sesses ‘no essential, inherent utility beyond inferior metals, the extraordinary fondness 
for it may be considered as arising from the gratification men feel in looking at it,’ 
which I doubt. Perhaps it is enough to suppose that in days when wealth was kept 
locked up in chests, to see the gold was to own it. Or it may be that men are willing 
to sell their lives merely for the outside glitter of wealth, its gewgaws and frippery. Or 


there may be no reference to gold at all; as it is the skull that speaks, it may refer ta 
beauty.— Ep. 


ACT II, SC. vii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 197 


Guilded timber doe wormes infola: 7 
Had you beene as wife as bold, 

Yong in limbs, in iudgement old, 

Your anfwere had not beene infcrold, 


Fareyouwell, your fuite is cold, 75 

Mor. Cold indeede, and labour loft, 
Then farewell heate, and welcome froft : 77 
71. Guilded] Gilded Rowe et seq. may Pope+. woods do Ktly. tombs da 


71. timber doe] Q,F,. timber do Q.F, Johns. conj. Cap. et cet. 
F,, Rowe, Hal. Timber doe Q,. wood 


71. JOHNSON: ‘Gilded wood may worms infold’ is a line not bad in itself, but not 
so applicable to the occasion as that which, I believe, Shakespeare wrote: ‘Gilded 
tombs do, &c. A tomb is the proper repository of a death’s head. CAPELL (p. 62): 
‘Tombs’ (or, as written formerly, omées) we can very readily imagine, of either printer 
or copyer, to have been mistaken for ‘timber:’ but that wood should be so, and, over 
and above that, may for ‘doe,’ never enter’d yet into head that had just conceptions of 
criticism; yet into both those words are der and doe converted by the second modern 
[Pope], and his conversion adher’d to by all his successors: Zomzds, richly gilded, are 
the ornaments of many old churches at this day. STEEVENS: Conf. Sidney’s Arcadia, 
i: ‘But gold can guild a rotten piece of wood.’ MALONE: Dr Johnson’s emendation 
is supported by Shakespeare’s 1o1st Somme? ‘It lies in thee To make thee much out- 
live a gilded tomb.’ KNIGHT: Without any violation of grammatical propriety, ‘tim- 
ber’ might be used as a plural noun. Gilded timber — timbers — coffins — do infold 
worms. Still the original reading is harsh and startling. STAUNTON: If ‘timber’ is 
right, then the redundant ‘do’ is an interloper, and should be omitted. HALLIWELL: 
‘Timber’ is here a plural noun, and the redundant syllable is no sufficient reason for 
adopting Dr Johnson’s plausible alteration. It may be questioned whether Shakespeare 
is referring either to a coffin or a tomb, but rather to the gilded chest which contained 
‘the carrion death.’ CoLLieR (ed. ii): Johnson’s suggestion of ‘tombs’ is counte- 
nanced by the (MS), and there can be no doubt about it. Dyce (ed. iii): ‘Timber’ 
is a sheer misprint. 

73. ABBOTT, § 275: It would seem that ‘as.... so’ are both to be implied from 
the previous line. ‘(As) young in limbs, (so) in judgement old.’ 

74. Your] JoHNson: Since there is an answer ‘inscrol’d,’ or wrd/ten in every 
casket, I believe for ‘your’ we should read ¢#zs. When the words were written y” 
and ys, the mistake was easy. EccLs: ‘ Your answer’ may signify, ‘such an answer 
as you have now received.’ 

74,75. Hott WHITE proposed that between these lines, ‘All that glitters is not 
gold’ should be inserted. ‘The inscription on the gold casket will then be comprised 
in the same number of lines which the inscription on the silver one contains.’ 

77. HALLIWELL: This is a paraphrastical inversion of the common old proverb : 
‘ Farewell, frost,’ which was used on the absence or departure of anything that was 
unwelcome or displeasing. ‘ Farewell, frost, will you needes be gone,’—Wapull’s 
Tyde Taryeth No Man, 1576. ‘Therefore are you so foule, and so, farewell, frost.’— 
Lilly’s Mother Bombie, and elsewhere. 


108 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ii, SC. vii. 


Portia adew, I haue too griew’d a heart ~ 78 
To take a tedious leaue : thus loofers part. Exit. 

Por. A gentle riddance : draw the curtaines,go: _ 80 
Let all of his complexion choofe me fo. Exeunt. 


79. Exit.] Exit with his train. Cornets. Dyce. 


79. part] CLARENDON: That is, depart. Defart was also used where we should 
say ‘part,’ as in the Marriage Service ‘till us do part’ is a corruption of ‘till death us 
depart.’ 

79. Exit.] M. D. Conway: Standing before the dull leaden casket which holds tie 
portrait of Portia, the unsuccessful Prince might justly say to it: ‘ Leaden box, you are 
a lie! You are not the fair and honest setting for such a pearl as Portia!’ The box 
might reply: ‘No, I am not exactly a lie, but a stratagem for getting at the truth amid 
a lying world. An old man wanted his daughter to marry a man who had the wit to 
look below the surface of things.’ ‘Well,’ the Prince might retort, ‘you will succeed 
in getting a deeper fellow than I am; but you may find, when Bassanio has paid his 
debts with your gold, that there is such a thing as being too deep.’ [See Cam. Edd. 
note on ‘ Flo. Cornets’ in line 2 of the next Scene.] 

81. JoHNSON: This play having been probably divided without authority by the 
publishers of the First Folio, lies open to a new regulation, if any more commodious 
division can be proposed. The story is itself so wildly incredible and the changes of 
scene so frequent and capricious, that the probability of action does not deserve much 
care; yet it may be proper to observe, that, by concluding the Second Act here, time 
is given for Bassanio’s passage to Belmont. 


ACT II, SC. vili.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 109 


[Scene VILL] 


Enter Salarino aud Solanio. 
Flo. Cornets. 


Sal, Why man I faw Baffanio vnder fayle, 
With him is Gratiano gone along ; 
And in their fhip I am fure Lorenzo is not. 5 
Sol. The villaine Zew with outcries raifd the Duke. 
Who went with him to fearch Baffanios hip. 
Sal. He comes too late, the fhip was vnderfaile ; 
But there the Duke was giuen to vnderftand 
That in a Gondilo were feene together 10 
Lorenzo and his amorous J/effica. 
Befides, Axthonio certified the Duke 
They were not with Baffanzo in his fhip. 
Sol. I neuer heard a paffion fo confufd, 


So ftrange, outragious, and fo variable, 15 
Scene IV. Venice. Rowe. Scene IX. 6. Sol.] Salan. Q.. 
Pope. Scene VI. Eccles. Scene VIII. 8. comes] Ff, Rowe. came Qq et cet. 
Steev. Scene VII. Hal. 10. Gondilo] Gondylo Qq. Gondalo 
1. Salarino] Solarino Rowe. Rowe. Gondola Theob. 
Solanio] Salanio Q,. II. amorous] armorous Q,. 
2. Flo. Cornets.] Om. Qq, Rowe+. 14, 27, 36, 53. Sol.] Salan. Q.. 
5. Lam] ImeQ,. I’m Pope+t, Coll. 15. ftrange, outragious| strange-out- 
Wh. i, Dyce iii, Huds. rageous Dyce iii. 


2. Flo. Cornets.] CAMBRIDGE EpiTors: This Stage-direction Capell [and Dyce] 
transferred to the beginning of Scene vii. Dyce added ‘Cornets’ at the end of the 
Scene also. We have adopted the suggestion, as the Prince’s leaving the stage would 
naturally be accompanied with the same pomp as his entrance. 

10. Gondilo] Staunton and Halliwell give a long account by Tom Coryat (Crudé- 
ties, p. 170, 171, ed. 1611) of the gendola as it was in Shakespeare’s day, whereby 
it appears that it differed little from that of the present time; then, as now, ‘if the 
passenger meaneth to be private, he may draw down’ ‘the faire black cloth,’ ‘and 
after row so secretly that no man c‘n see him.’ Wherefore, if Lorenzo and the 
amorous Jessica were ‘seen,’ it was bisause they chose to be, as Knight suggests.— 
ED. 

14, &c. ELzE (Zssays, p. 95): This is the only Scene in which Shylock might 
appear in a ridiculous light, and the poe! very wisely does not bring it before us on the 
stage, but merely describes it by hearsay. 

15. strange, outragious] WALKER | C7it. i, 32): Read, undoubtedly, serange-out- 
rageous ; ovTwe aTéru¢ &xPuyov. The awh wardness of the common reading is the same 
as in Jul. Ces. I, iii, ‘ Most bloody-fiery, a1‘d most terrible.’ 


Hu THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ui, $c. viii. 


As the dogge Jew did vtter in the ftreets ; 16 
My daughter, O my ducats, O my daughter, 

Fled with a Chriftian,O my Chriftian ducats! 

luftice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter ; 

A fealed bag, two fealed bags of ducats, 20 
Of double ducats, ftolne from me by my daughter, 

And iewels, two ftones, two rich and precious ftones, 

Stolne by my daughter : iuftice, finde the girle, 

She hath the ftones vpon her, and the ducats. 

Sal. Why all the boyes in Venice follow him, 25 
Crying his ftones, his daughter, and his ducats. 

Sol. Let good Anthonio looke he keepe his day 
Or he fhall pay for this. 

Sal. Marry well remembred, 

I reafon’d with a Frenchman yefterday, _ 3c 
Who told me, in the narrow feas that part 

The French and Englifh, there mifcaried 

A veffell of our countrey richly fraught: 

I thought vpon Azthonio when he told me, 

And wifht in filence that it were not his. 35 

Sol. Yo were beft to.tell Axthonio what you heare. 

17, 18. O] 6 Q,Q,. Johns. 00 / two Coll. ii, iii (MS). 

22. two ftones, two] two Ff, Rowe. two 305 Yo)|\iie. 
stones Pope, Theob. Han. 00, stones, Warb. 

17. WALKER (Crit. iii, 54): Sidney, Arcadia, ii, 178 (describing the death of ‘the 
old bad Chremes’),—‘ But one thing was notable for a conclusion of his miserable life, 
that neither the death of his daughter, who (alas, poor gentlewoman!) was by chance 
slain among his clowns, while she overboldly for her weak sex sought to hold them 
from me, nor yet his own shameful end, was so much in his mouth as he was led to 
execution, as the loss of his goods and burning of his house: which often, with more 
laughter than tears of the hearers, he made pitiful exclamations upon.’ [See also, Wily 
Beguiled, in Appendix. ] 

27. keepe] For the subjunctive in subordinate sentences, see ABBOTT, § 368. 

30. reason’d] CaPELL: An arrant Gallicism; us’d, as do the French their Je 
raisonnots, for—I talk’d, simply. 

31. the narrow seas] See ost, III, i, 4. 

36. Yo were best] WALKER (C7it. ii, 204): Thou wert, you were, I was, &c. occur 
‘reqiently, both in Shakespeare and contemporary dramatists, in places where it is clear 
they must have been pronounced as one syllable, in whatever manner the contraction 
was effected. [See Ham. IV, v, 14; Ofh. I, ii, 34, &c. Walker cites 2 Hen. V7: 
V, iz ‘You were best to go to bed, and dream again,’ as under this rule, ‘ unless,’ he 


adds, ‘Shakespeare wrote “ You were dest go,”’ &c., which gives a hint of anticipating 
ALIEN’S conjecture here—viz. ‘ You were dest tel] Antonio,’ &c. According to Allen 


ACT I, SC. viii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE III 


Yet doe not fuddainely, for it may grieue him. 37 
Sai. A kinder Gentleman treads not the earth, 

I faw Baffanio and Anthonio part, 

Baffanio told him he would make fome fpeede 40 

Of his returne : he anfwered, doe not fo, 

Slubber not bufineffe for my fake Baffanio, 

But ftay the very riping of the time, 

And for the Jewes bond which he hath of me, 

Let it not enter in your minde of loue: 45 

_ Be merry, and imploy your chiefeft thoughts 

To courtfhip, and fuch faire oftents of loue 

As fhall conueniently become you there ; 


And euen there his eye being big with teares, 49 
37- doe] do’t Heath. 46. imploy] employ Q.F,F, apply 
Sor] lest Cap. (Erratum). Dodd, Coll. ii (MS). 
42. Slubber] flumber Q,Q,. 48. there ;] there. Q,. there, Q,Q,. 


49. there] then Dyce iii. 


this is an instance of the absorption of the ‘to’ in the ¢ of ‘best’ ‘Bes¢ 70,’ he says, 
‘is against the ear of that age.—Ep.] See ABBOTT, § 230, for the whole phrase, with 
‘other ungrammatical remnants of ancient usage.’ Also fost, V, i, 196; Lear, I, iv, 
933 III, iv, 99. 

45. enter in] See ABBOTT, § 159, for other instances of the use of zz with verbs 
of motion; see also, V, i, 65. 

45. minde of loue] JOHNSON suspects some corruption here, HEATH (p. 116): 
There ought to have been a comma after ‘mind;’ the sense is: Let me entreat you by 
our mutual love, that you take not the least thought of it. CAPELL (p. 62): It was 
once fancy’d that another sense was intended, inconsistent with this pointing; namely,— 
‘in your mind that is and should be engag’d by Jove and love-matters :’ but as this 
anticipates somewhat the thoughts that follow, the other meaning (which moreover 
has pathos to recommend it) is rather preferable: ‘of love’ is every day us’d by us in 
the sense of—for love’s sake. STEEVENS: ‘ Your mind of love’ may, however, in this 
instance, mean your loving mind. STAUNTON: ‘Mind of love’ may be correct, but 
bond of love would be more in Shakespeare’s manner, and is countenanced by a pas- 
sage in Zwel/th N.V,i, 159, where it occurs, and also in Wint. Tale, IV, iv, 584. 
ABBOTT, § 169, adopts Heath’s interpretation, CLARENDON adopts Steevens’s interpre: 
tation, and cites Meas. for Meas. Il, iv, 179: ‘Such a mind of honour.’ So, likewise, 
RoLrFE. [lt is difficult to decide where both interpretations, Heath’s and Steevens’s, 
are so evenly balanced. The weight of authority, however, is on the side of Steevens. 
—ED.] 

46. imploy] Dopp (af. Eccles): The sense seems here, evidently, to require we 
should read apply. 

48. conueniently] CLARENDON: Fitly, suitably. See Proverbs, xxx, 8: ‘Feed 
me with food convenient for me.’ 

49. there] Dyce: This is repeated by mistake from the preceding line. [See Text 
Notes, where Dyce’s change had occurred to me independently.— Eb. ] 


112 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act It, SC. viii. 


Turning his face, he put his hand behinde him, 50 
And with affection wondrous fencible 
He wrung Baffanios hand, and fo they parted. 
Sol. Ithinke he onely loues the world for him, 
I pray thee let vs goe and finde him out 


And quicken his embraced heauineffe 55 
With fome delight or other. 
Sal. Doe we fo. Exeunt. 
51. fencible] Q.. 55. embraced| unbraced Anon ap 
54. pray thee] pretheeQ,. Hal. - 


55. embraced] WARBURTON: This unmeaning epithet would make me choose, 
rather, to read: enraced, from the French enraciner. JOHNSON: When I thought the 
passage corrupted, it seemed to me not improbable that Shakespeare had written en- 
tranced, musing, abstracted, moping melancholy. But I know not why any great 
efforts should be made to change a word which has no incommodious or unusual 
sense. We say of a man now that ‘he Augs his sorrows,’ and why might not Antho- 
nio embrace heaviness? STEEVENS: See ost, III, ii, 115: ‘doubtful thoughts and 
rash-embrac’d despair.’ 


ACT II, SC. ix.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 113 


[Scene LX.] 


Enter Nerriffa and a Seruiture. 


Mer . Quick, quick I pray thee, draw the curtain ftrait, 
The Prince of Arragon hath tane his oath, 


And comes to his eleétion prefently. 4 
Scene IX. Steev. Scene V. Rowe. 1. Enter...Seruiture] Enter...Servitor. 

Scene X. Pope. Scene VII. Ec. Scene QF F,. Enter...Serviter. F,. 

VIII. Dyce. 3. Arragon] Arrogon Q.. 


SCENE IX.] FReyTAG ( 7echnik des Dramas, 1876, p. 71, &c.), in dealing with rep 
etitions of the same or similar dramatic situations, which must always either afford some 
agreeable relief as a foil to exciting scenes, or else, as the drama proceeds, conduce to a 
heightening of the interest, cites as a happy instance of the former, the drowsiness of 
Lucius during the conspiracy in Act II of /z/. Ces., and a repetition of his drowsiness 
in Act IV, in the tent of Brutus; and, as an instance of the latter, Romeo’s fatal duel 
with Tybalt, and his second fatal duel with Paris. ‘But Shakespeare is not always 
equally happy. The repetition of the Witches’ incantation scene in Macbeth adds 
nothing to the dramatic effect of the tragedy; nor does the threefold choice of caskets 
here in the Mer. of Ven., the dramatic movement in the first two elections is but 
small, and there is a lack of exquisite elegance in the speeches of the first two suitors.’ 
‘But,’ Freytag adds, ‘Shakespeare could permit himself to indulge in such rhetorical 
delicacies because his solid, substantial public found especial pleasure in courtly ad- 
dresses.’ [Freytag is not the only offender in failing to give Shakespeare credit for 
consummate skill in the mere artistic construction of his dramas. There is a feeling 
abroad that Shakespeare’s success in this regard was merely a lucky hit, a kind of 
inspiration, of whose operation he himself was not conscious. Proofs of this are 
afforded in the freedom with which critics do not hesitate to rearrange Shakespeare’s 
scenes, It is strange that it does not occur to them that any sequence of scenes, as it 
arranged itself in a mind as through and through dramatic as Shakespeare’s, must be 
better than it possibly can be in any mind less dramatic. If the structure of any of 
his dramas appear incomprehensible to us, it is our duty to study until light dawns on 
us. It never occurred to Freytag, able critic as he is, that there is in the very frame- 
work of this play a dramatic necessity of making three months equivalent to a watch 
in the night, and that powerful, essential aids to this end are the succession of days at 
Belmont, and the succession of suitors which come and go, and all the weeks which 
have to pass to fill up three months, while Bassanio is journeying by night only twenty 
miles from Venice. No soliloquies, no dialogues can give to an avdience a ‘realizing 
sense’ of this flight of time but the actual passing of the events before their eyes upon 
the stage. Yet of this necessity Freytag appears to have caught never a hint.—ED. ] 

2. draw] STEEVENS: That is, draw it open. So in an old Stage-direction in Hen. 
VIII: *The king draws the curtain and sits reading pensively.’ [It can evidently 
mean either to open or close the curtain. At the conclusion of this Scene, line 88, 
Portia again tells Nerissa to ‘draw the curtain,’ of course to close it, after Arragon’s 


choice.—ED. ] 
a 


114 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act Ui, SC. ix. 


Enter Arragon, his traine, and Portia. 5 
Flor . Cornets. 


Por. Behold, there ftand the caskets noble Prince, ~ 
if you choofe that wherein I am contain’d, 
Straight fhall our nuptiall rights be folemniz’d: 
But if thou faile, without more fpeech my Lord, 10 
You mutt be gone from hence immediately. 
Ar. Iam enioynd by oath to obferue three things ; 
Firft, neuer to vnfold to any one 
Which casket ’twas I chofe ; next, if I faile 
Of the right casket, neuer in my life 15 
To wooe a maide in way of marriage: 
Laftly, if I doe faile in fortune of my choyfe, 
Immediately to leaue you, and be gone. 
Por. To thefe iniunétions euery one doth fweare 
That comes to hazard for my worthleffe felfe. 20 
Ar. And fo haue I addreft me, fortune now 


6. Flor. Cornets] Om. Qq. 16, Cap. et seq. (except Sta. Wh. i, Rl fe). 

9. Straight] Srraight Q,. Separate line, Cam. Glo. Del. Cla. Wh. ii. 
rights] rites Pope et seq. 17. [doe] I Pope+. 

10. thou] you Qq, Rowe et seq. 21, 22. me, ...hope:] me; ...hope: Q. 


17. Laftly] Last Pope+. Closing line 


g. solemniz’d] WALKER (Vers. p. 194) called attention to the shifting accent of 
this word. Here and in III, ii, 199, the accent is the same, but in Love’s Lad. Lost, 
II, i, 42, it is solémnzzéd. ABBOTT, § 491, thinks that the emphasis which -zsed now 
has is due to the present broad pronunciation of z, Polysyllables with this termination 
‘generally have now two accents, the principal accent coming first. But in Shake- 
speare’s time it would seem that the z approximated in some of these words to the 
French 2, and, the -ed being pronounced, the 7 in -zsed was unemphatic.’ 

16,17. in way ...in fortune] See I,i, 61; II, i, 17; or ABBOTT, § 89, for omis- 
sion of the definite article. 

16. marriage] A trisyllable. See WALKER (Vers. 175); ABBOTT, § 479. 

17. Lastly] The Cambridge Editors rightly regard this word as an interjectional 
line. For other instances, see ABBOTT, § 511. 

20. to hazard] CLARENDON: Here a substantive. ScumipT (Zex.) considers it 
a verb. It is not easy to determine, but considering the frequency with which the def- 
inite article is absorbed or elided, Clarendon’s view seems the more likely.—Ep. 

21. addrest] STEEVENS: To ‘address’ is to prepare. That is, I have prepared 
myself by the same ceremonies. TyRWHITT: I believe we should read, ‘ And so have 
I. Address me, Fortune, now To my heart’s hope.’ So in the Merry Wives, III, v, 
135, ‘I will then address me to my appointment.’ 

21. fortune, &c.] EccLEs: ‘Be propitious!’ or some such words, seem to be under- 
stood. CLARENDON: That is, ‘May good fortune second my heart’s hope.’ Or, sup 


ACT II, SC. ix.] 


THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 115 


To my hearts hope : gold, filuer, and bafe lead. 22 
Who choofeth me muft giue and hazard all he hath. 

You fhall looke fairer ere I giue or hazard. 

What faies the golden cheft, ha, let me fee : 25 
Who choofeth me, fhall gaine what many men defire: 

What many men defire, that many may be meant 

By the foole multitude that choofe by fhow, 

Not learning more then the fond eye doth teach, 

Which pries not to th’interior, but like the Martlet 30 
Builds in the weather on the outward wall, 


23, 26. Italics, Q.. 
27. defire,| desire— Rowe. 


many may| Many, may Rowe. 


may Pope+. 


28. By the foole] Of the full Pope, Han. 
Of the fool Theob, Warb. Johns. Cap. 


28. foole multitude) foole-multitude Q 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Ktly. 
30. pries] payes F,. pays Fy. pry 
Theob, Warb. 
pries not to) prize not Coll. (MS). 
th’interior,) th’interiour ; Q,, Han. 


Steev. 85. thinteriour,Q,. th inheritour, Q; 


2' 


but] Om. Han. 


posing the speaker to invoke the goddess, we might point thus: ‘ Fortune! now To my 
heart’s hope.’ Now let me try my luck. 

28. By] MALONE: That is, by that many may be meant the foolish multitude 
[which WHITE suggested as a possible reading]. So in Plutarch’s Life of Cesar, 
translated by North, 1575: ‘These fat long-heared men made him not affrayed, but 
the lean and whitely-faced fellows; meaning that by Brutus and Cassius.’ Again, 
in Sir Thomas More’s Life of Edward the Fifth, Holinshed, p. 1374: ‘That meant 
the by the lordes of the queenes kindred.’ Again, Jd. p. 1371: ‘This meant he 
by Catesby, which was of his near secrete counsaile.’ Again, Puttenham’s Arte of 
Poesie, 1589, p. 157: ‘The good old gentleman would tell us that were children, how 
it was meant [in an enigma] by a furr’d glove.’ Again, /d, p. 161: ‘ Any simple judge- 
ment might easily perceive by whom it was meant, that is, by lady Elizabeth, Queene 
of England.’ [In this note of Malone I have omitted the paraphrase which he care- 
fully gives after each instance except the last, to show the different construction of the 
present day. It is strange that it never seems to have occurred, either to Malone or to 
any one else except ALLEN, that these instances, and they might be greatly multiplied, 
reveal the fact that while we now say, ‘I mean this epithet for you,’ Shakespeare and 
his contemporaries said, ‘I mean this epithet 4y you.’ Abbott, § 145, includes this 
present instance under the same section with ‘ How say you dy the French lord,’ I, ii, 
52. It may be that they are parallel, but to me it seems simpler to hold it as an idiom 
that dy was used commonly after the verb ¢o mean.—ED.] 

28. foole multitude] Unquestionably, ‘foole’ here is used adjectively, and is so 
cited by Schmidt (Zex.). See ‘foole gudgin,’ I, i, 112,—Ep. 

30. This line is one of those, of which ABBOTT, § 495, gives several instances, where 
two syllables are inserted at the end of the third or fourth fixot : ‘Which pries | not to | 
th’interior, | but like | the Martééz.’ 

30. Martlet] See Rowe’s emendation, A/acd. I, vi, 4. 


116 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [AcT II, SC ix. 


Euen in the force and rode of cafualtie. 32 
I will not choofe what many men defire, 

Becaufe I will not iumpe with common fpirits, ‘ 

And ranke me with the barbarous multitudes. . 35 
Why then to thee thou Siluer treafure houfe, 

Tell me once more, what title thou dooft beare ; 

Who choofeth me fhall get as much as he deferues: 

And well faid too ; for who fhall goe about 

To cofen Fortune, and be honourable 40 
Without the ftampe of merrit, let none prefume 

To weare an vndeferued dignitie : 

O that eftates, degrees, and offices, 

Were not deriu’d corruptly, and that cleare honour 

Were purchaft by the merrit of the wearer ; 45 
How many then fhould couer that ftand bare ? 

How many be commanded that command ? 


How tnuch low pleafantry would then be gleaned 48 
32. force] course Bailey. 44. and] Om. Pope+. 
rode| QqFf. road Rowe. 45. purchafi| purchac’d Q, 
35. barbarous] barbarious ¥ . 48. pleafantry| pezantry Q,. peafantry 
multitudes| Walker, Dyce iii. Q.Q,, Rowe et seq. 
38, 52, 60. Italics, Q,Q,. 48, 50. gleaned... Pickt| fann'd... 
39. t00] to Q,Q,. Gleaned Daniel. 


41. merrit,| merit ? Rowe. 


32. force] STEEVENS: That is, the power. ALLEN: Perhaps equivalent to 7 ui 
e vid, exposed to the attack of. 

35- multitudes] WALKER (Cyt. i, 254). Multitude, surely; ‘the fool multitude 
that choose by show,’ a few lines above, [In this very valuable chapter, No. xxxvIut, 
Walker gives a great number of instances of the frequent interpolation, and of the fre- 
quent omission, of the final sin the First Folio. So large is the number that Walker 
himself (p. 237) says that ‘the fact of the same error being so often repeated leads me 
to doubt whether it is an error after all.’ See ‘gossips,’ III, i, 7; ‘flints,’ IV, i, 35; 
‘Masters,’ IV, i, 55; ‘ Messengers,’ IV, i, 116. Also, Or, I, i, 31; Lear, V, iii, 258.] 

43. estates] Not property, but dignity, status. 

44. cleare] Eccies: That is, bright, splendid; or, perhaps, unsullied. Dyce 
( Gloss.): Pure, innocent, free from evil. [See ‘the clearest gods,’ Lear, IV, vi, Tas 
and notes.—ED.] 

46. couer] CLARENDON: Wear their hats, as masters. See As Vou Like ft, TIL. 
ili, 78: ‘Pray be covered.’ [See also, III, v, 51.] 

48. gleaned] JoHNson: The meaning is, How much meanness would be found 
among the great, and how much greatness among the mean. But since men are 
always said to g/ean corn though they may fick chaff, the sentence had been more 
agreeable to the common manner of speech if it had been written: ‘How much low 
pleasantry would then be Jick’d.... how much honour gican’d, &c. 


ACT II, SC. ix.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 117 


From the true feede of honor ? And how much honor 

Pickt from the chaffe and ruine of the times, 50 
To be new varnifht : Well, but to my choife. 

Who choofeth me fhall get as much as he deferues. 


I will affume defert ; giue me a key for this, 53 
49. And] Om. Pope+. 53. ...this] A Kev for this; I wi 
50. chaffe] chajt Q.,. assume defert, Han. 

51. varnifht:] vernifh'd? Q,. varnift; defert ;| defert. Q,. 


Q,. vanned Warb. 


50. chaffe and ruine] STAUNTON: The same as chaff and bran. ‘Ruin’ meant 
refuse, rubbish. ‘But,’ asks ALLEN, ‘is 6ram more rubbish than chaff? Perhaps “ruin” 
is the Latin rwiza, a heap, and perhaps the phrase, by hendiadys, a heap of chaff.’ 

51. varnisht] WARBURTON: This confusion and mixture of metaphors makes me 
think that Shakespeare wrote vanmed, i. e. winnow’d, purged, from the French vanner. 
This alteration restores the metaphor to its integrity. STEEVENS: Shakespeare is per- 
petually violating the integrity of his metaphors, and the emendation proposed seems to 
me to be as faulty as unnecessary ; for what is already selected from the chaff needs not 
be new vanned. I wonder Dr Warburton did not think of changing the word ‘ruin” 
into rowing, which in some counties of England is used to signify the second and infe- 
nor crop of grass which is cutin autumn. HEATH (p. 116): The confusion of meta- 
phors was introduced by adding ‘ruins’ to ‘chaff,’ and it is to the former of these 
words that ‘new varnish’d’ is adapted. EccLrs: The connection between the ‘ chaff’ 
and ‘ruins’ is not extremely obvious, but ‘honour,’ having been recovered thence, is, 
upon the metaphorical allusion being suddenly dropped, to be considered in a new 
point of view, more suitable to its true nature and character, and, possibly, with refer- 
ence to those armorial insignia and types of nobility, which, having been painted, are 
liable by time to be sullied and defaced, but, by being mew varnished, may be restored 
to their primitive splendor. BAILEy (ii, 206) devotes six octavo pages to the justifica- 
tion of his emendations in this passage, and no one will think them too many when he 
sees the alterations which Bailey says give a ‘clear meaning’ to Shakespeare and ren- 
der Shakespeare’s metaphorical language ‘consistent throughout.’ ‘How much low 
peasant’s rye would then be screen’d From the true seed of honour! and how much 
seed Pick’d from the chaff and strewings of the temse, To be new garnerad! ‘Temse,’ 
which appears to be a kind of sieve, Bailey acknowledges is not to be found in Shake- 
speare, nor indeed in any other writer, except in Tusser, and then only as a compound 
with ‘loaf’ It also appears from a book called ‘The Wheat Plant,’ published in Cin- 
cinnati, in 1860, that ‘formerly’ (Bailey does not tell us when) it was ‘usual’ (Bailey 
does not tell us where) to sow rye and early wheat together; the harvested grain was 
termed meslin. ‘It is a probable supposition,’ concludes Bailey, ‘that Shakespeare, in 
forming ‘his metaphor, had this mes/in in his mind, and it is pretty clear why he spoke 
of peasant’s rye. It may be added, that “ peasantry” is a word not to be found in his 
dramas.’—ED. 

53. assume] SCHMIDT: That is, claim. [Perhaps it is even stronger than ‘claim.’ 
It is used, I think, in its original Latin meaning of taking ¢o one’s self; just as Hamlet 
tells his mother to ‘assume a virtue, if she have it not,’ or as Bassanio uses it in III, 
n, 87.—ED.] 

53. for this] Dyce (ed. iii): Hanmer, Ritson, and Steevens were, I believe, right in 


118 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [acr ti, sc. im 


And inftantly vnlocke my fortunes here. 
Por. Too longa paufe for that which you finde there. 55 
Ar. What’s here, the portrait of a blinking idiot 

Prefenting me a fcedule, I will reade it : 

How much vnlike art thou to Porta? 

How much vnlike my hopes and my deferuings ? 


Who choofeth me, fhall haue as much as he deferues. 60: 
55. As an aside, Cap. 57. /cedule,| fedule?Q,. fhedule, Q, 
56. [Unlocking the silver casket. Rowe. Schedule? F ,. 

here,) here! Q,. 59. deferuings] deferving F, Rowe. 
portrait) pourtrait Q,Q,- 60. haue] get Knt, Dyce iii. 


regarding these words as an interpolation. [Against which I beg to enter a deferential 
protest. To me, these words are both important and emphatic. After he has got as far 
as to assume desert, Arragon makes so long a pause that Portia (although, perhaps, in 
an Aside) even calls attention to it. Now, while we do not need this pause, as we 
frequently do need one, to supply the lack of missing syllables, yet the line is undenia- 
bly broken, and in broken lines I think that all the requirements of rhythm are met if 
both fragments run smoothly. Of course, there is a limit in all things. It is not to be 
supposed that we should accept fragments composed of four feet each. In that case we 
may suspect corruption and, perhaps, set to work at restoration. But here the fragments 
are of only three feet each, and when joined together merely form an Alexandrine; and 
however much we may slur over syllables and compress full-grown words into dwarfs, 
yet Alexandrines are to be found in Shakespeare, and Alexandrines they will remain, 
not alone to the eye, but to an ear which prefers a clear and clean enunciation to an 
abnormal one. Arragon says, ‘give me the key for ¢his ;’ to me the words are indis- 
pensable. We could even better spare ‘give me,’ or even ‘ the key,’ which is involved 
in the word ‘unlock.’ But there is no necessity for any omission, and not a syllable 
can be spared, as I think. Ina modernized text, might it not be proper to print this 
in a parenthesis? Unless this request for the key be parenthetical, how are we to 
understand the construction? This ‘give’ is an imperative addressed to Portia. With 
the customary punctuation, ‘unlock’ is an imperative also, and is Portia to unlock the 
casket? If ‘give me a key for this’ be put in a parenthesis, then ‘unlock’ is future, 
and in the same construction with ‘I will assume desert.’.—Ep.] 

55. I cannot find that any editor has noticed Capell’s plausible reading of this line 
as an Aside. (There is no reference to it in the Cam. Ed.) It is to me, beyond a 
peradventure, As addressed to Arragon these words have the sound of twitting him, 
which is not, to me, quite in character. To be sure, it may be said that Portia is so 
delighted at his failure that she cannot restrain her merriment, but the open expression 
of it, even to a deliberate fool, is not exactly in harmony with that sympathetic tender- 
ness of hers which was like the gentle rain from heaven.—ED. 

60. haue] Dyce (ed. i): This (if not an oversight of the poet) is a mistake of the 
scribe or printer for get; see this line [where it has been previously given]. WHITE 
(ed. i): But as this line is read from ‘a schedule,’ there is little warrant and less need 
to change it. [From aught that the context shows, it does not follow that Arragon did 
read the line. This very change in phraseology may have been meant as a hint to us 
that he was repeating it from memory.—Ep.] 


acT 1, Sc. ix]  7HE MERCHANT OF VENICE 119 


Did I deferue no more then a fooles head, 61 
Is that my prize, are my deferts no better ? 

Por. To offend and iudge are diftin& offices, 
And of oppofed natures. 

Ar, What is here? 65 


The fier feauen times tried this, 

Seauen times tried that iudement is, 

That did neuer choofe amis, 

Some there be that fhadowes kiffe, 

Such haue but a fhadowes bliffe: 70 
There be fooles aliue Iwis 

Siuerd o’re, and fo was this: 

Take what wife you will to bed, 

[ will euer be your head: 


So be gone, you are fped. 75 
61, 62. head, ...prize,| head ?...prize ? 70. fhadowes bliffe] shadow’d Bliss 
Q,9;- Rowe. 
62. prize] price Cap. conj. 71. I wis] Iwis Q.. 
65. What is| VVhat Q,. 75. be gone] be gone fir Ff, Rowe+, 
[Hee reads. Q.. Steev. Mal. Dyce iii, Huds. farewell, sir 
66. fier feauen] Q,. fire feven Q.. Cap. degone Knt, Coll. Sing. Hal. Wh. i, 
67. iudement] Q,. iudgement Q.. Sta. Ktly. 


63. EccLes: There is surely an obscurity in this reply. She seems to consider him 
as having offended by the injudicious choice he had made; he ought not, therefore, to 
assume the character of a judge in deciding upon his own merits, which, indirectly, he 
may be said to do by this indignant inquiry. 

63. distinct] See ABBOTT, § 492, for a list of words in which ‘the accent was 
nearer the beginning than with us.’ 

65. What is here?] Again another careless omission in Q,. 

71. I wis] CAMBRIDGE EDITORS: Mr Staunton, in a note to Zam. Shr. I, i, men- 
tions, on Sir F, Madden’s authority, that ‘I wis’ is undoubtedly derived from the Saxon 
adverb ‘ gewis,’ but in the 13th century ‘ge’ was changed to ‘y’ or ‘i,’ and in the latter 
end of the 15th it was probably held to be equivalent to the German ‘Ich weiss.’ There 
can be no doubt that Shakespeare spelt it ‘I wis,’ and used it as two words, pronoun and 
verb, [See also ABBOTT, § 345.] 

73. JOHNSON: Perhaps the poet had forgotten that he who missed Portia was never 
to marry any woman. HALLIWELL: The best solution of this difficulty is to suppose 
that the oaths were enjoined by Portia, and not by the father who prepared the caskets. 
CLARENDON: Johnson is hypercritical when he finds fault with this doggerel. 

74. CLARENDON: There is here, perhaps, a reference to the text: ‘The husband 1s 
the head of the wife.’—Zphesians, v, 23. 

75. gone] The sir of F,, BoswELL says was added ‘unnecessarily ;’ HALLIWELL 
thinks because the editor of that edition did not ‘understand the metrical system fol- 
lowed by the author;’ and CoLLier would ‘prefer for, if it were wanted at all.’ 


120 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act I, Sc. ix 


Ar. Still more foole I fhall appeare 76 
By the time I linger here, 
With one fooles head I came to woo, 
But I goe away with two. 
Sweet adue, Ile keepe my oath, 80 
Patiently to beare my wroath. 

Por. Thus hath the candle fing’d the moath: 
O thefe deliberate fooles when they doe choofe, 
They haue the wifdome by their wit to loofe. 

Ner. The ancient faying is no herefie, 85 
Hanging and wiuing goes by deftinie. 

Por. Come draw the curtaine Nerriffa. 


Enter Meffenger. 
Mef. Where is my Lady? 
Por. Here, what would my Lord? fore) 
76. Ar.] Om. Q,. Arrag. Q,Q. 82. fing’d)| jindg’d Q,. jfingd Q» 
81. wroath | Q,Q, Ff, Cap. Vee, Hal. moath| Moth Q,FF,. 
wrath Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. roth Dyce 84. the] their Q,Q,. 
i. wroth Q, et cet. 86. goes] go Han. Hal. 


[Exit. Rowe. 


81. wroath] CAPELL (p. 63): This, and a word that follows it, ‘moath,’ at the end 
of Arragon’s speech, are strange perversions of spelling (but authentic perversions) 
caus’d by rime. But wroath is open to yet another objection, after we have discover’d 
that wrath is meant by it, viz. that there is no seeming sense in it: the best, and the 
only one (perhaps) that invention can put on it, is—misfortune which wrath has brought 
down, the wrath of the gods. STEEVENS: ‘ Wroath’ is. used in some of the old books 
for misfortune ; and is often spelt like ruth, which at present signifies only Zzty, or sor- 
row for the miseries of another. \NHITE: Wroth seems here to be used somewhat in 
its radical sense, which connects it with the idea of suffering. See Richardson’s Dict. 
s. v. ‘Wrath.’ COWDEN-CLARKE: It is an old word for that which causes writhing: 
‘misfortune,’ ‘calamity,’ ‘ disaster.’ 

82. moath] This is, as Capell intimates in the preceding note, evidently a merry 
thyme of Portia to the ‘oath’ and ‘wroath’ of A: ragon, howsoever these two words 
were pronounced. I cannot find that either Grant White or Ellis has anywhere noted 
this rhyme, yet that the former would accept it as such I have but little doubt.—Ep. 

86. Halliwell gives very many references to this proverb, which, as he truly says, is 
‘so exceedingly common.’ In fact, its commonness might well be presupposed from 
Nerissa’s calling it ‘the ancient saying.’—Ep. 

87. curtaine] ALLEN suggests, mefri gratia, ‘curtaine fo, i.e. to close it. Or 

good Nerissa,’ although Portia uses no epithet elsewhere with Nerissa. 

88. Messenger] Cottier, in his first edition, inferred from Portia’s address that 
this was a ‘person of rank,’ but omitted the note in his Second Edition. 

go. my Lord?] Ty’wHitT: Would not this speech to the servant be more proper 


ACT II, SC. ix.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 121 


Mef. Madam, there is a-lighted at your gate 91 
A yong Venetian, one that comes before 
To fignifie th’approaching of his Lord, 
From whom he bringeth fenfible regreets ; 
To wit (befides commends and curteous breath) 95 
Gifts of rich value ; yet I haue not feene 
So likely an Embaffador of loue. 
A day in Aprill neuer came fo fweete 
To fhow how coftly Sommer was at hand, 


As this fore-fpurrer comes before his Lord. 100 
Por. No more I pray thee, I am halfe a-feard 

Thou wilt fay anone he is fome kin to thee, 102 
91. alighted] alighted F ,. 101. a-feard] Q,F,Q,. a-feard Q,. 
95. curteous| courteous Q,. curtious a feard¥,. afraid Popet+. afeard F, 

Q,. curious Q,. et cet. 
99. Sommer] Summer Q,. 102. Thou wilt | Thou’lt Pope+, Dyce 
100. fore-/purrer| fore-spurrier Cap. iii, Huds. 

(Corrected in Errata.) anone] anon Q,. 


in the mouth of Nerissa? ‘No,’ replies RITSON (p. 53), ‘very impertinent, in the pres 
ence of her lady.’ Dyck (Remarks, p. 55): Portia was not herself of sufficient rank 
to have ‘ persons of rank’ among her attendants. Her reply here is nothing more than 
a sportive rejoinder to the abrupt exclamation of the Messenger. Compare: 


‘Hostess. O Jesu! my lord, the prince. 
P. Henry. How now, my lady, the hostess.’—1 Hen. JV: I, iv. 


‘Groom. Hail, royal prince / 
King Richard. Thanks, noble peer.’—Rich. IT: V, v. 


‘Enter Peter with a candle. 
Peter. Where are you, my Lord ? 
Hog. Here, my Lady. —The Hogge hath Lost his Pearle, 1614, sig. H. 


STAUNTON: A dozen instances may be cited, where a similar expression is used by an 
individual of station to one of very inferior rank. [But Staunton, while citing those 
already alleged by Dyce, unfortunately adds none to them.—ED.] 

94. sensible] CLARENDON: Evident to the senses, substantial. See Jacd. Il, 
1530: 

94. regreets] STEEVENS: That is, salutations, as in King John, III, i, 241. 

95. commends] ABsorTT, § 451, gives this in a list of words used as nouns, to which 
we should at the present time append -ation or -ition, -ure or -ing. 

06 yet] See ABBOTT, § 76, for other instances of the use of ‘yet’ Jefore a negative, 
meaning ‘ up to this time.’ 

97. likely] RoLFE: In the Yankee sense of promising [or good-looking ?—ED.]. 

99. costly] ALLEN suggests ‘costly a.’ Here equivalent to Germar £éstlich, pre- 


cious, 


122 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT II, SC. ix 


Thou fpend’ft fuch high-day wit in praifing him: 103 
Come, come Werry/ja, for I long to fee ; 
Quicke Cupids Poft, that comes fo mannerly. 105 
Ner. Baffanio Lord, loue if thy will it be. Exeuni. 
103. high-day] high day QqF,. love, F,. Bassanio lord, Lord! Pope. 
104. Nerryffa] Q,Q,. Nerriffa Q,. Bassanio, Lord Love! Theob. Han. Coll. 
105. Quicke Cupids] Cupid's quick ii, Bassanio, Lord Love, or Bassanio, 
Coll. (MS). lord love, Rowe et cet. 
106, Baffanio Lord, lowe] Q,Q,F,F,. 106. Exeunt] Exit. Q,. 


Baffanio, Lord, Love Q,. Baffanio Lord, 


103. high-day] STEEVENS: So Merry Wives, III, ii, 69: ‘he speaks holiday. 
Eccies: It seems here to have a sense pretty similar to Aigh-flown, extravagant. 

106. THEOBALD (Nichols’s ///ust. ii, 307): Mr Pope certainly conceives ‘ Bassanio 
lord’ to stand for Lord Bassanio. I take the liberty to alter the pointing: ‘ Bassanio, 
—Lord Love! if, &c. ALLEN: Thus scan: Bassa | nié | Lord Léve | if thy | will’t 
bé. 


ACT 11, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 123 


a 
Atus Tertius. 


[Scene /.] 


Enter Solanio and Salarino. 


Sol. Now, what newes on the Ryalto? 
Sal. Why yet it liues there vncheckt, that Anthonio 
hath a fhip of rich lading wrackt on the narrow Seas;the 


Goodwins I thinke they call the place, a very dangerous 5 
Actus Tertius] Om. Qq. I. Salarino] Solarino F,, Rowe+. 
1. Solanio] Salanio Q,, Rowe+, Cam. 2, &c. Sol.] Salan. Q,. Solanio Q,. 
Glo. Cla. Now,] Now Q,Q,- 


4. the narrow Seas] CLARENDON: The English Channel. In the ‘prologe of 
the processe of the Libel? of Englishe Policye’ [ed. Hertzberg] we find: ‘Cherish 
marchaundyes keep th’ amiraltee That we be maysteres of the narow see.’ And again 
of Calais and Dover: ‘ Keep thees two townes, sire, to your magestee As your twein 
eyen, to keep the narow see.’ Sir John Hawkins, writing to Lord Burghley, Nov. 30, 
1593, ‘sends a note of the pay for the ships serving in the Narrow seas.’— Calendar 
of State Papers, 1591-1594, p. 389. [The foregoing extracts from the ZLibell of Eng- 
fish Policy, Clarendon takes from Hakluyt’s Voyages, i, p. 387, ed. 1599, but they are 
given above from the admirably-edited edition by Hertzberg. In this Zide//, which, 
dating from 1436, is probably the very earliest Protectionist plea extant, there are sev- 
eral other allusions to ‘the narowe see,’ especially one which occurs just before the first 
example cited by Clarendon, which, by ‘ exhortyng alle England to keep the see envi- 
roun, and namely the narowe see,’ also shows that the English Channel is unquestion- 
ably meant. Yet in every instance the ‘sea’ is in the singular, and not in the plural, 
as Shakespeare uses it. The citation from Sir John Hawkins, therefore, is exactly 
apposite.—ED. ] 

5. I thinke they call the place] There is a fine passage in r Hen. /V« I, iii, 241, 
where Hotspur, in his headlong fury, cannot recall the name of Berkeley Castle: ‘ What 
do you call the place ?—A plague upon it—it is in Gloucestershire,—’Twas where the 
madcap duke his uncle kept—His uncle York—where I first bow’d my knee Unto 
this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,—’Sblood !—When you and he came back from 
Ravensburgh.’ So true to nature is Hotspur’s annoyance, that I cannot divest myself 
of the belief, first suggested to me by my father, that Shakespeare in the hurry of 
composition, could not, himself, at that instant, recall the name. Thus here, I was 
inclined at first to think that Shakespeare might have been himself a little in doubt as 
to the correctness of the name ‘Goodwins,’ but I yield to the Cowden-Clarkes and to 
Elze, who rightly, as I now think, interpret it as uttered by Salarino for the sake of giv- 
ing local colour, and to make us believe that we are in Venice, where Venetians, and 
not Englishmen, are speaking. ‘ By such touches as these,’ say the COWDEN-CLARKES, 


124 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ul, sc i 


flat, and fatall, where the carcaffes of many a tall fhip, lye 6 
buried, as they fay, if my goffips report be an honeft wo- 
man of her word. : 

Sol. I would fhe were as lying a goffip in that, as euer 
knapt Ginger, or made her neighbours beleeue fhe wept 10 
for the death of a third husband : but it is true, without 
any flips of prolixity, or croffing the plaine high-way of 
talke, that the good Anthonio, the honeft Anthonio;0 that 
I had a title good enough to keepe his name company! 


Sal. Come, the full ftop. : 15 
Sol. Ha, what fayeft thou, why the end is, he hath loft 
a fhip. 
Sal. I would it might proue the end of his loffes. 
Sol. Let me fay Amen betimes, leaft the diuell croffe 19 
7. goffips report | Q, Ff, Rowe. gossip, 9. Lying a] a ling Q.. 
report, Coll, Wh. i, Clarke. goffip report 13. honeft Anthonio;]Q,. hone/é An- 
Q,Q,, Pope et cet. thonio, Q,. oneft Antho. Ff. 


honeft| honft F,,. 


‘Shakespeare keeps perpetually before us the circumstance that the scene of his play is 
abroad.’ And, furthermore, the distance from Venice of this remote locality insensibly 
conveyed to the hearer the idea of ‘Long Time.’ See Appendix, ‘Duration of Action.’ 
—ED. 

7. gossips] See WALKER, II, ix, 35. 

8. of ] See ABBOTT, § 173, where instances are given of ‘of’ applied not merely 
to the agent and the instrument, but to any influencing circumstance, in the sense of 
‘as regards,’ 

10. knapt Ginger,] STEEVENS: To ‘knap’ is to dreak short. The word occurs in 
The Lommon Prayer - ‘He knappeth the spear in sunder.’? HALLIWELL: That is, to 
snap, or break off short. ‘ Breusté for Brousté; Broused, or knapped off.’—Cotgrave. 
‘He knapped the staffe of the darte asunder.’—North’s Plutarch, 1579. [Other in 
stances of this meaning of ‘knap’ are given by Halliwell and White, and I doubt not 
many more could be added. But, as White truly remarks, ‘ginger is a tough root;’ 
and so impressed was he with this objection, that in his First Edition he hinted that ‘a 
ginger cake must be meant, and probably of the sort even now called “ ginger snaps.”’’ 
In his Second Edition all doubts have vanished; he says, without qualification, that 
‘knapp’d ginger’ is equivalent to ‘snapped ginger nuts.’ I think, however, that Cot- 
grave will help us to a better definition of ‘knap,’ in this present passage, than to dreaé 
off short, a meaning it undoubtedly bears in the passages cited above, As the trans- 
lation of Ronger and its five derivatives, Cotgrave gives invariably ‘to gnawe, knap or 
nible off;’ so also of Brouter, Broust, Brouteur, &c., he gives to ‘ brouze, knap or nible 
off.’ Whence, I think, we may be justified in paraphrasing ‘knapt ginger’ by #ibbled 
ginger. That old women were fond of ginger is to be inferred from Meas. for Meas. 
[V, iii, 8, a passage which I think must have escaped White; the reference there is tc 

old ginger’ which is not likely to mean ‘old ginger nuts.’—ED.] 


ACT UI, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 125 


my praier, for here he comes in the iikenes of a Jew. How 20 
now Shylocke, what newes among the Merchants ? 
Enter Shylocke. 

Shy. You knew none fo well, none fo well as you, of 
my daughters flight. 

Sal. That’s certaine, I for my part knew the Tailor 25 
that made the wings fhe flew withall. 

Sol. And Shylocke for his own part knew the bird was 
fledg’d, and then it is the complexion of them al to leaue 
the dam. 

Shy. She is damn’d for it. 30 

Sal. That’s certaine, if the diuell may be her Iudge. 

Shy. My owne flefh and blood to rebell. 

Sol. Out vpon it old carrion, rebels it at thefe yeeres. 

Shy. I fay my daughter is my flefh and bloud. 

Sal. There is more difference betweene thy flefh and 35 
hers, then betweene Iet and Iuorie, more betweene your 


20. my] thy Warb. Theob. Johns, 23, 24. of...jflight] Separate line, Q.. 
Steev.’85. 26. As verse, Q.. 
ztkenes| Misprint. 28. fledg’d] flidge Q,Q,. ledge Cap 
21. Merchants) Marchanis Q,. Mal.’go. 
22. Enter...] After /ew line 20, Q., 33- yeeres] times ? Rowe ii. 
Cap. et seq. 34. loud] my blood Q,Q,, Cap. 
23. knew] know Q,. 36. hers] hirs Q,. : 


20. my praier] WARBURTON: But the prayer was [Salarino’s]. We must therefore 
read ‘¢hy prayer.’ HEATH (p. 116): It is somewhat wonderful this reverend gentle- 
man should not have recollected that the people pray as well as the priest, though the 
latter only pronounces the words, which the people make their own by saying ‘ Amen’ 
to them. It is after this needless to add that the Devil, in the shape of a Jew, could 
not cross [Salarino’s] prayer, which, as far as it was singly his, was already ended. 
CAPELL (p. 63): Meaning the prayer of his companion, which he would make his 
own by saying ‘amen’ to it; for this, in all prayers congregational, is the force of that 
formula. The changers of ‘my’ to ¢#y seem to have thought ‘amen’ a conjuring for- 
mula, that sanctify’d the prayer and prevented the devil’s crossing it. [Heath is right, 
of course, ‘Amen’ was Solanio’s own prayer.—ED.] 

25, 26. In Q, these two lines are printed as verse, divided as they stand here in the 
Folio. Although they have been held to be prose (and rightly) by all ed’tors, yet they 
are metric prose, and by giving them as verse the transcriber of that Quarto shows a 
more excellent ear than the transcribers of the other texts.—Ep. 

28. complexion] CLARENDON: That is, nature, disposition, temperament. Cot- 
grave translates the French complexion, thus: ‘The complection, making, temper, con- 
stitution of the bodie; also, the disposition, affection, humors, or inclination of the 


mind.’ 


126 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT III, SC. i. 


bloods, then there is betweene red wine and rennifh : but Vf 
tell vs, doe you heare whether Axthonio haue had anie 
loffe at fea or no? 
Shy. There I haue another bad match, a bankrout, a 40 
prodigall, who dare fcarce fhew his head on the Ryalto, 
a begger that was vid to come fo fmug vpon the Mart: 
let him look to his bond, he was wont to call me Vfurer, 
let him looke to his bond, he was wont to lend money 
for a Chriftian curtfie, let him looke to his bond. 45 
Sal. Why Iam fure if he forfaite, thou wilt not take 
his flefh, what’s that good for? 
Shy. To baite fifh withall, if it will feede nothing 
elfe, it will feede my reuenge ; he hath difgrac’d me, and 


hindred me halfe a million, laught at my loffes, mockt at 5u 
37. rennifh| rhennifh ¥F,. 41. Ryalto| Ryalta Ff. 
38, 39. ante loffe at] at lofe a Q,. 42. was v/a] us'd Rowe ii+, Steev. 
40, bankrout | Qq Ff, Knt, Hal. dank- Var. Coll. Sing. Ktly. 

rupt Rowe et cet. 46. forfatte] Q.F,. forfet Q,. forfeit 
40, 41. @ prodigall] for a prodigal Q,. 

Warb. 50. halfe] of half Theob. ii, Warb. 
41. dare] dares Rowe ii+. Johns. Steev. Var. Ktly. 


38, 39. anie losse at sea] The text in Q., ‘at losse a sea or no,’ is not a very seri- 
ous blunder; it is merely a transposition of words, instead of @ /osse at sea; and is prob- 
ably due to the compositor, not to the transcriber.—ED. 

41. prodigall] WARBURTON: This is spoke of Anthonio. But why a ‘prodigal’? 
His friend Bassanio had indeed been too liberal, and with this name the Jew honours 
him when he is going to sup with him: ‘T’ll go in hate to feed upon The prodigal Chris- 
tian.’ But Anthonio was a plain, reserved, parsimonious merchant; be assured, there- 
fore, we should read: ‘a bankrupt for a prodigal,’ i. e. he is become bankrupt by sup- 
plying the extravagancies of his friend Bassanio. JOHNSON: There is no need of 
alteration, There could be, in Shylock’s opinion, no prodigality more culpable than 
such liberality as that by which a man exposes himself to ruin for his friend. Ep- 
WARDS (p. {21): His lending money without interest was reason enough for the Jew 
to call him prodigal, and this Shylock upbraids him with immediately after. 

42. was vsd] COLLIER (ed. ii): In the (MS) it is ‘that was wont to, consistently 
with ‘was wont to call’ and ‘ was wont to lend,’ just below. The poet may have had 
reason to vary the expression, although actors may have reiterated it. 

49. disgrac’d] ALLEN: To grace a person is to show favour to him by some act 
of kindness or help. To disgrace, therefore, may be to show disfavour to (to be un- 
gracious to) by doing him some wrong, SCHMIDT gives this passage under the mean- 
ing ‘to dishonour.’ It would be better placed, I think, under the meaning, of which 
he gives instances, of ‘to lower in estimation.’ —Ep. 

50. halfe a million] See ABBoTT, § 198 a, for other instances of the omission of 
the preposition after some verbs and adjectives that imply value, worth, &c. 


ACT IH, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE — 127 


my gaines, fcorned my Nation, thwarted my bargaines, 51 
cooled my friends, heated mine enemies, and what’s the 
reafon? Iam a Jewe: Hath not a Jew eyes? hath nota 
few hands, organs, dementions, fences, affections, paffi- 
ons, fed with the fame foode, hurt with the fame wea- 55 
pons, fubieét to the fame difeafes, healed by the fame 
meanes, warmed and cooled by the fame Winter and 
Sommmer as a Chriftian is: if you pricke vs doe we not 
bleede? if you tickle vs, doe we not laugh? if you poifon 


vs doe we not die? and if you wrong vs fhall we not re- 60 

uenge ? if we are like you in the reft, we will refemble you 

in that. Ifa /ew wrong a Chri/uan, what is his humility, 62 
52, 53. the reafon] Ff, Rowe. hes 57. meanes| medicines Warb. conj. 

reafon Qq et cet. 57, 58. Winter and Sommmer] sum- 
53. Hath not] Hath nos Q,. mer and winter Han. 


54. dementions| Q,. dimenfions Q,. 


53- I am a Iewe] HaAwkIns (Li of Kean, i, 150): How beautifully did Kean 
express these last four words! A slight approach to deprecation on account of his 
unmitigated injuries passed away in a moment when he reflected that the dignity of his 
race must not be hurt by his exciting commiseration in a Chrzstian. In this single speech 
he was worth, Hazlitt states, ‘a wilderness of monkeys that have aped humanity.’ 

54. affections, passions] See IV, i, 54, where there is an excellent citation by 
Steevens from Greene’s (Vever Too Late, which shows that the distinction formerly 
drawn between these two words is, that ‘affections’ were objective and ‘ passions’ sub- 
jective. ‘ Affections’ are influenced through the eyes, ‘ passions’ are stirred from the 
heart. GouLp (Zhe Tragedian, p. 75): Cooke, when he came to the word ‘affections,’ 
so informed it with human feeling, so contrasted it with the context, that it remains as 
the marked point of his performance. 

57, 58. warmed ... Sommmer] An instance of the construction called by the 
old grammarians a chiasm. (If under ‘warmed’ and ‘cooled’ were written ‘winter’ 
and ‘summer,’ and the words which refer to each other joined by a line, the Greek 
letter chz would be formed.) It is the same as in I, iii, 23, ‘land rats and water rats, 
water thieves and land thieves,’ although it may be doubted if the order of the words 
be there correct.’—ED. 

62. humility] Scumipt (Zex.): That is, kindness, benevolence, humanity. Thus, 
‘plant in tyrants mild humility,—Zove’s Lad. Lost, IV, iii, 349; ‘in peace there’s 
nothing so becomes a man as modest stillness and humility,’—Hen. V; III, i, 4; ‘I 
thank God for my humility,—Rich. 777: II, i, 72. [This excellent distinction in the 
use of this word is original, I think, with Schmidt, and was given first in the Sh. Jahr. 
(1868) iii, 346; where, furthermore, by examining every instance of Shakespeare’s use 
of the word, Schmidt shows that Zumanity was always used by Shakespeare in the 
sense of the xature of man, and never in our modern sense of universal benevolence. 
Wherefore, when in the foregoing citation from Love's Lad. Lost, Collier’s (MS) sub- 
stituted Awmanity for ‘humility,’ Schmidt considers it as a conclusive proof that the 
(MS) was modern, almost modern enough to date from our own days. Of course 


128 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT II, sc. Lh 


reuenge? If a Chri/lian wrong a Jew, what fhould his fuf- 63 
ferance be by Chriftian example, why reuenge? The vil- 

lanie you teach me I will execute, and it fhall goe hard 65 
but I will better the inftruction. 


Enter a man from Anthonio. 
Gentlemen, my maifter Axthonio is at his houfe, and 
defires to fpeake with you both. 
Sal. We haue beene vp and downe to feeke him. 70 
Enter Tuball. 
Sol. Here comes another of the Tribe, a third cannot 
be matcht, vnleffe the diuell himfelfe turne Jew. 


Exeunt Gentlemen. 74 
64. by] by a FF, Rowe. 68. Gentlemen] Ser. Gentlemen Rowe. 
example, why reuenge ?| example ? 71. Enter...] Repeated, after line 74, 

why revenge. Ff (subs.). Q,. After line 74, Coll. 


67. Enter...] Enter a Servant. Rowe. 


‘humility’ in many cases has its usual meaning, but for the present passage and for 
those cited above, Schmidt has, I think, given its true definition.—ED.] 

64. reuenge] COWDEN-CLARKE: To those who, like the present editors, can 
remember Edmund Kean’s delivery of this superb speech of wild wrath pleading its 
claim to some show of justice, there is excitement in recalling the wonderful eyes flash- 
ing out their red sparkles, the body writhing from head to foot, the arm thrown upward 
as witness to the recorded oath of vengeance. The attitude, as the voice, rose to a 
sublime climax when these words were uttered; then there was a drop, both of person 
and tone, as he hissed out-the closing sentence of deep concentrated malignity. 

66. FRANGoIs VICTOR HvGo (p. 41): This sublime imprecation is the most eloquent 
plea that the human voice has ever dared to utter fora despised race. Whatsoever be 
the dénofiment, it is hereby justified. Let Shylock be as implacable as he may, assur- 
edly he will no more than equal his instruction. Even granting that he obtains it, a 
pound of Antonio’s flesh will never outweigh, in the scales of reprisal, the millions of 
corpses heaped in the Christian shambles by a butchery of thirteen centuries. 

Honieman (Sk. Jahrb. xvii, 221): Here it is that Shylock figures as the deputy and 
avenger of his whole shamefully-maltreated race. In his tones we hear the protest, 
crying to heaven, of human rights trodden under foot, against the love of humanity 
paraded by the hypocritical mouths of his oppressors; and if his towering revenge 
mounts to fanaticism, it is verily of a different stamp to the fanaticism of usury and 
greed which the critics are fain to find in his character. 

71. Tuball] BootH: Tubal should wear a yellow cap,—not necessarily of the same 
shape as Shylock’s. 

72, 73- COLLIER (ed. i): This should be spoken as Tubal is approaching, and before 
he actually comes upon the stage; because the instant that he appears, Shylock ought 
to put the question to him, ‘ How now, Tubal?’.&c. Hitherto the entrance of Tubal 
has been wrongly placed, preceding what Salanio says, and keeping Shylock, who 
must naturally be all eagerness, waiting until Salanio has concluded his observation, 
[See Text. Notes.] 


ACT III, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 12 


Shy. How now Juéall, what newes from Genowa? hatt 75 
thou found my daughter ? 

Inb. I often came where I did heare of fter, but can- 
not finde her. 

Shy. Why there, there, there, there, a diamond gone 
coft me two thoufand ducats in Franckford, the curfe ne- 80 
uer fell vpon our Nation till now, I neuer felt it till now, 
two thoufand ducats in that, and other precious, preci- 


ous iewels : I would my daughter were dead at my foot, 83 
75. Genowa] Geneva F,. Genoua 77. fer] F.. 
Rowe. 80. Hranckford,] Frankford QF. 


75. The CowDEN-CLARKES call attention here to the artistic use of indications of 
Long Time. At the opening of the scene Shylock’s vehement words to Solanio, and 
Salarino, give the effect of Short Time, uttered as they seem to be in the first fury of 
his discovery of Jessica’s flight, and thereby the Third Act is linked to the period of 
the previous Acts. But here in his talk with Tuball every sentence serves to aid an 
impression of Long Time, and to advance the period when the date of the bond shall 
have expired and the forfeiture become due. 

75. Genowa] White (ed. i) finds in this spelling a proof that the pronunciation 
was Ge-no/a, although in the Zam. of the Shr., as he notes, ‘the rhythm enables us to 
determine that the pronunciation is plainly Gen/o-a.’ He has no note in regard to 
this in his Second Edition; I think his inference is scarcely justifiable. Could we not 
equally well from this spelling infer that the pronunciation was, in New England style, 
Gén-o-way? In Howell’s Justructions for Forraine Travel, 1642, the distinction in 
spelling between the name of the city and an inhabitant of it is curious. On p. 41 
(Arber’s Reprint) occurs the following: ‘Having put foot ashoare in Genoa, I will 
not wish him stay..... When a Jew meeteth with a Genoway, and is to negotiat, 
&c.—Eb. 

77. BooTH: Before replying to Shylock’s questions, shake your head sorrowfully 
and speak slowly. 

83, &c. HEINEMANN (Shylock and Nathan, 1886, p. 10): What Hebrew father is 
there, what Hebrew mother, that does not know these words of Shylock to be false, 
nay, impossible? How happens it then that Shakespeare, this greatest searcher of the 
human heart, has erred so grievously in regard to Jews and Jewry? It is because he 
has overlooked, and he could not but overlook, one element which has entered most 
largely into the history of Jewry—viz. that ideal blessing which Israel carried with it 
into its sorrowful night of exile, and to which it has always remained steadfast and 
true: its Doctrine, its Religion. Shakespeare could not know how, by our Sabbaths 
and High-days, a pure and secluded life was cherished around our hearthstones, which 
blossomed forth in the narrow houses of the Jewish quarter, and transformed the 
gloomy Ghetto into a Paradise. He could not know how the Jew, albeit scorned and 
despised by the outer world, retired to his humble home, and there refreshed himselt 
with the strains which once flowed from the harp of his Poet-king, or else strengthened 
himself with the consoling promises of the Prophets, or lost himself in the intricacies 
of a discussion over the Talmud, or over the deepest problems of humanity, and that 
amid such an elevating and intellectual life he never cherished for the outer world and 

o 


130 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 


[ACT III, Sc. 1. 


and the iewels in her eare : would fhe were hearft at my 
foote, and the duckets in her coffin : no newes of them, 85 
why fo?and I know not how much is fpent in the fearch: 
why thou loffe vpon loffe , the theefe gone with fo 
much, and fo much to finde the theefe, and no fatisfa- 
tion, no reuenge, nor no ill luck ftirring but what lights 
a my fhoulders, no fighes but a my breathing, no teares go 


but a my fhedding. 


Tub. Yes, other men haue ill lucke too, Anthonzo as I 


heard in Genowa? 


84. would] Q.FF. O would Q,, Pope 
+. ’would Cap. Steev. Mal. Knt, Sing. 
Sta. Ktly. 

85. duckets] ducats QqF,F,. 

85, 86. them, why fo ?] QF ,Q,F,. them, 
why fo: Q,. them; why fo? F. them— 
why, so! Johns. them? Why, so; Cap. 

86. how much is| Ff, Rowe, Knt. what 
Han. whazs Qaq, Pope et cet. (subs.). 


eK) 


Ktly. ¢here / Lloyd (ap. Cam.). 

89, 90. lights a] Q,FfQ, Rowe 1. 
lights on Q,, Cam. Glo, Cla. Wh. ii. dights 
o Rowe ii et cet. 

90, 91. but a] Q, FFQ,, Rowei. but of 
Q,, Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. dz o’ Rowe 
ii et cet. 

93. heard in] heard, ts in Q,. 

Genowa ?| Genoway.Q,. Genowa, 


87. thou] then Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 


F,. Genowa. Ee Genoua. F,, Genoua— 
Hal. Wh. i, Dyce iii. #hou— Coll. Sing, 


Rowe et seq. 


‘its scorn feelings of hate, but only of pity. Shakespeare could never know how the 
Jew, from the heights of this spiritual life, looked down upon those who could fetter 
his body indeed, but never his soul. 

85. coffin] HoNnIGMAN (_/ahré. xvii, p, 222): This passage is always cited to prove 
that the love of gold had eradicated all human affection from Shylock’s heart. This 
opinion is wrong and exaggerated. If the passage is taken in connection with the rest 
of the dialogue, it will be found to be merely a masterstroke of the poet in depicting as 
powerfully as possible the unbridled passion of a volcanic nature, like Shylock’s, whose 
violence forces his speech beyond the bounds of genuine feeling. This language re- 
minds us of the exaggerated expressions of King Lear against his daughters. Reflect 
for a minute on the profound bitterness of the injury to the wounded old man: his 
daughter, lost to all propriety or shame, had eloped with a Christian; a thief, and her 
own father the victim; despising the souvenirs of her mother and forswearing her religion 
—and for the loss of such a creature as this is he to grieve? Never; so low has she 
fallen in his esteem that, even were she lying dead before him, regret for her loss would 
be far inferior to that for the money she had stolen. It is the very strongest expression 
of scorn which his wrath can suggest. 

86. why so?] Is not this better marked as an interrogation than as an exclama- 
tion? ‘Why is there no news of them? after I have spent, I know not how much, in 
the search.’ ED. 

86. how much is] See in Text. Note an unusual variation in the Folio from 
the Qq. 

87. thou] I cannot find that any of those Editors who have here followed F, have 
given any reason for so doing. I cannot but think that ‘thou’ is a misprint for the 
then of the Ff.—Eb. 


ACT III, SC. i] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 131 


Shy- What, what, what, ill lucke, ill lucke. 

Tub. Hath an Argofie caft away comming from Tri- 95 
polis. 
Shy. I thanke God, I thanke God, is it true, is it true? 

Tub. I {poke with fome of the Saylers that efcaped 
the wracke. 

Shy. I thanke thee good Zuédall, good newes, good 100 
newes : ha, ha, here in Genowa. 

Tub. Your daughter fpent in Genowa, as I heard, one 
night fourefcore ducats. 

Shy. Thou ftick’ft a dagger in me, I fhall neuer fee my 


gold againe, fourefcore ducats at a fitting, fourefcore du- 105 
cats. 
Znb. There came diuers of Axthonios creditors in my 107 
94. What, what, what] What, what, 100. thee] the Q,. 
kowe, Pope, Han. Io. here] Ff. heereQq. where ? Rowe 
lucke.) lucke? Q,F et cet. 
Q7. 2 it...08 it] ift...if2 Q.. 102. ome] in one Q., Cam. Glo. Cla. 
99. wracke] Qq Ff (subs.). Rlfe, Wh. ii. 


97. God] Booru: Clapping his hands high in the air. 

97. is it true?] BoorH: Eagerly, almost a shriek. Tubal’s answer should be 
spoken quickly. 

98. escaped] See ABBOTT, § 198, for the omission of the preposition. 

101. here] This Scene opens with the rumour, which lives unchecked on the Rialto, 
that one of Anthonio’s rich ships had been wrecked on the distant coast of England. 
Shylock must have heard it, but had evidently not allowed himself to trust it, and when 
Salarino asks about it he is too wily to give the insolent young fellow an additional chance 
to jeer. But when Tubal refers positively to the wreck of an argosy, thus verifying the 
rumour, Shylock shrieks out ‘is it true?’ and laughs aloud at the thought that the loss 
which is reported as fallen on Anthonio has happened, not far off, in England, but is 
known ‘here’ in Italy, ‘in Genoa.’ Is this interpretation too forced? If it be not, 
then we can adhere to the authority of the Qq and Ff. But if otherwise, then I see 
no way for it but to accept Rowe’s text, and reading were, turn it into a question, to 
which, be it observed, Tubal makes no reply.—ED. 

102. BooTH: Nod several times affirmatively before replying, and speak the line 
slowly, with the least shade of wickedness in your look. Shylock’s expression 
gradually changes from joy to agony while this line is spoken, therefore speak it 
slowly. 

102. as I heard] Eccizs: It may be doubted whether this account by Tubal of 
Jessica’s extravagance was intended by the poet as truth, or as only a vague, uncertain 
rumour, with little or no foundation. 

102, one night] Q, here supplies the missing word 7, which, although not abso- 
Infely necessary, ‘s good, and will serve to offset some of its previous omissions.—ED. 

197. Booru: This with a cheerful tone, and quickly. 


132 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT III, SC. i. 


company to Venice, that fweare hee cannot choofe but 108 
breake. ‘ 
Shy, 1am very glad of it, ile plague him, ile torture 110 
him, I am glad of it, ; 
Tub. One of them fhewed me a ring that hee had of 
your daughter for a Monkie. 
Shy. Out vpon her, thou tortureft me Zudall, it was 
my Turkies, I had it of Leak when I was a Batcheler : I 135 
would not haue giuen it for a wilderneffe of Monkies. 
Tub. But Anthonio is certainely vndone. 
Shy. Nay, that’s true, that’s very true, goe 7xdall, fee 
me an Officer, befpeake him a fortnight before, I will 
haue the heart of him if he forfeit, for were he out of Ve- 120 


108. 40] veto Q,. 114. tortureft] tortur' ft Q,. 
hee] that hee Q,. 115. Zurkies] Turkis Ff. Turquoise 
110. very] Om. Rowe-+, Steev.’85. Rowe. 
EIT. 00f #2, 0712. Oo. (0, tr Oo met 118. Tnball] Om. Pope+. 
cet. fee] see Var.’21 (misprint). 


115. Turkies] STEEVENS: As Shylock had been married long enough to have a 
daughter grown up, it is plain he did not value this turquoise on account of the money 
for which he might hope to sell it, but merely in respect of the imaginary virtues for- 
merly ascribed to the stone. It was said to fade or brighten as the health of the 
wearer increased or grew less. To this Ben Jonson refers in his Sejanus, I, i: ‘ And, 
true as turquoise in my dear lord’s ring, Look well or ill with him.’ [Ina note on 
this passage in Sejanus, Gifford says that ‘to this supposed quality of the stone our old 
writers have innumerable allusions.’] Again, Edward Fenton, in Secrete Wonders of 
Nature, 1569: ‘The Turkeys doth move when there is any perill prepared to him that 
weareth it.’ [There is a long account in Holland’s Pknie, ii, 619, a, of Turquoises 
which ‘be found in ycie cliffes hardly accessible,’ and which ‘the people of that coun- 
try reach afar off with slings, and so drive them down;’ and it occurs in the paragraph 
immediately following one which I cannot but think that Shakespeare once read, and 
from which he took the allusion to ‘one entire chrysolite’ in Osh. V, ii, 179.-- 
ED.] 

115. I had, &c.] Le Tourneur (1781) thus translates: ‘Je Vachetai de Lee, étant 
encore gargon,’—ED. 

116. Haz.itT (p. 273): We may collect from a few sentences the history of Shy- 
lock’s life-—his descent and origin, his thrift and domestic economy, his affection for 
his daughter, whom he loves next his wealth, his courtship and his first present to [J 
Leah, his wife! ‘I would not have parted with it’ (the ring which he first gave her) 
‘for a wilderness of monkeys!’ What a fine Hebraism is implied in this expression! 
KnicHT: Shakespeare here, with marvellous art, shors us the betrayed and persecuted 
Shylock, at the moment when he is raving at the desertion of his daughter, and panting 


for a wild revenge, as looking back upon the days when the fierce passions had proba- 
bly no place in his heart. 


ACT III, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 133 


nice, I can make what merchandize I will : goe Zudall, 121 
and meete me at our Sinagogue, goe good Tubal, at our 
Sinagogue Zudall. Exeunt. 

121. [will : goe] Q,FFQ,, Cap. Knt. go, Johns. et cet. 
Twill go: goQ,. will: go: go Popet+. 122, 123. Sinagogue] QF. Synagogue 
I will ; go, go, Warb. Iwill. Go, Coll. ONeticet: 
Hal. Dyce, Sta. Huds. Wh.i. Jw/l. Go, 123. Exeunt.] Om. F,. 


121. I will: goe] The misplaced colon here in Q, (I will goe:’) is a typographical 
error, of so common and slight a kind that it scarcely deserves to be reckoned among 
the variations which are to be counted as proofs of its inferiority to Q,.—Eb. 

122. Sinagogue] CLARENDON: Shakespeare probably intended to add another 
shade of darkness to the character of Shylock by making him still formally devout 
while meditating his horrible vengeance. FRANGOIS VICTOR Huco (p. 43): The Jew 
invokes the Ancient of Days, who spoke unto Moses aforetime: ‘If a man cause a 
blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him; breach for 
breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it 
be done to him again,’ In entering his synagogue Shylock entrusts his hatred to the 
safeguard of his Faith. Henceforward his vengeance assumes a consecrated character. 
His bloodthirstiness against the Christian becomes sacerdotal. The expiation of Anthonio 
is but a holocaust offered to the Omnipotent Avenger. Shylock is bound by irrevoca- 
ble vows. And when he appears before the tribunal his bearing is the indomitable 
impassiveness of a priest about to sacrifice an expiatory lamb to the God of Sabaoth. 


134 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act Ill, sc. u 


[Scene L1.| 
Enter Baffanio, Portia, Gratiano, and all their traine. 


Por. J pray you tarrie, paufe a day or two 
Before you hazard, for in choofing wrong 
I loofe your companie ; therefore forbeare a while, 
There’s fomething tels me (but it is not loue) 5 
I would not loofe you, and you know your felfe, 
Hate counfailes not in fuch a quallitie; - 
But leaft you fhould not vnderftand me well, 


And yet a maiden hath no tongue, but thought, 9 
[Scene II. Rowe. 6. loofe] lofe Q,. 
I. traine.] Traines. Q,. traynes. Q,,. 7. counfailes...qualtitie ;| counfels... 
4. therefore] Om. Pope, Han. quality. Q,. 


2. GEO, FLETCHER (Fraser's Maga., May, 1850, p. 506): Why at this moment does 
Portia wish to stay Bassanio from election? Because, though she has no doubt what- 
ever of his personal liking for her, and his readiness to marry her, she feels not yet 
assured that he really does love her with that perfect devotion which alone can or ought 
to content a spirit like hers in such a union. Bassanio, we must observe, is no Romeo, 
quite a novice in the world; on the contrary, he is a man of the world and of pleasure, 
as well as a scholar and a soldier. Nevertheless, with the high instinct of her noble 
heart and intelligence, she doubts not that a man of his endowments will not fail to 
love her truly if he once but know her thoroughly. 

3. in choosing] ABBorT, § 372: That is, ‘in the event of your choosing wrong, 
Z lose your company.’ 

7. This line presents a noteworthy proof that what is so often loosely spoken of as 
‘ Shakespeare’s spelling,’ is merely that of a compositor. Here in the Folio the spell- 
ing is archaic simply because the compositor followed his copy, which happened to be 
Q, In Q,, printed in the same year with Q., the spelling and punctuation are, as a 
general rule, as modern as in Dyce’s Third Edition.—Ep. 

g. SEYMOUR: Does this mean that she utters nothing but what her heart suggests, 
and that, therefore, she ought not to be misunderstood ? or that, being a maiden, she 
cannot speak freely, and must only think? I believe the first is the sense. CLAREN- 
DON: Portia means: ‘And yet, since a maiden may only think and not speak her 
thoughts, you will not understand me, however long you stay.’ A. CAMERON (Shake- 
speariana, Dec. 1886) gives a discussion of the meaning of this line, with a class com- 
posed chiefly of young women from fifteen to eighteen years of age, where the first inter. 
pretation offered was that Portia loved Bassanio, but felt herself restrained from telling 
him so by maidenly modesty and social conventionality. Thus, in Zhe Temp. ILI, i, 
Miranda feels the restraining force of ‘bashful cunning’ as much as Portia feels it, but, 
being untrammelled by the acquired bonds of conventionality, can say, ‘ Hence, bashful 
cunning! And prompt me, plain and holy innocence! I am your wife, if you will 
marry me.’ A second suggestion was that ‘a maiden speaks just what she thinks,— 
tells the plain truth.’ This was considered to fit in well with the previous line, ‘ But 


ACT III, Sc.ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 135 


I would detaine you here fome month or two 10 
Before you venture for me. I could teach you 
How to choofe right, but then I am forfworne, 


So will I neuer be, fo may you miffe me, 13 
10. month] moneth Q,Q.. Steev. ’85, Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. 
12. then [am] I am then Q,, Pope+, 13. 4e,] be; Theob. et seq. 


lest you should not understand me well.’ ‘And yet, why shouldn’t you understand 
me? I’m telling you the simple, honest truth.’ To this it was objected that Portia 
had just told Bassanio, ‘ There’s something tells me, but it is not love, I would not lose 
you.’ Whereas it is quite apparent from her whole speech and conduct that she is pas- 
sionately in love with him. A more general objection was ungallantly insinuated by 
the question: ‘Does a maiden’s tongue always speak just what is in her thought ?? In 
affirmation only one quotation was forthcoming,—Rosalind’s ‘Do you not know that 
I am a woman? When I think I must speak.’—As You Like it, Ill, ii, 263. In 
denial, Chaucer, Byron, and Allan Ramsay were cited. From Yhe Gentle Shepherd: 
‘When maidens, innocently young, Say often what they never mean, Ne’er mind their 
pretty, lying tongue, But tent the language o’ their e’en.’’ Byron testifies: ‘The charm- 
ing creatures lie with such a grace There’s nothing more becoming to the face.’ But 
the Wife of Bath blurted out: ‘Half so boldely can ther no man Sweren and lyen as 
a woman can.’ The third interpretation was that Portia thinks what she would like 
Bassanio to know, but is unable to clothe her thoughts with speech; like the Laureate’s, 
‘Oh, that my tongue could utter The thoughts that arise in me !’—and that perhaps she 
is even a little lovingly angry with him for not at once divining her thoughts. The 
proposer of this view thought there should have been such perfect sympathy of soul 
between the lovers that, as Tennyson says, ‘ Thoughts leapt out to wed with thought, 
Ere thought could wed itself with speech;’ and that he should have been able to read 
her thoughts as clearly as Venus read those of Adonis: ‘His meaning struck her ere 
his words begun.’ We had to finish our discussion just as we began it: Is there any 
generally-accepted interpretation of this line? [The most probable interpretation of 
line 8 is, undoubtedly, as it seems to me, that which Fletcher and Clarendon suggest : 
that Portia wishes Bassanio to learn to know her better before he hazards. But is it not 
also possible to interpret the whole passage, as follows: If I beg you to forbear a while, 
you are not to construe this wish into a confession of love, and yet at the same time 
you know it cannot be hate; wherefore, since I cannot explain myself more fully, but 
am restricted to maiden meditation, and since I do not wish you to misunderstand me, 
let me beg you simply to stay here a month or two before you choose? Thus far Portia 
intended to be, and was, absolutely non-committal. She did not wish to reaffirm her 
‘fair speechless messages’ of aforetime, and she could not deny them. She had had 
“no tongue’ then; she had none now; she wished him simply to stay a while. It seems 
to me, that in the somewhat broken sentences may be detected her maidenly embarrass- 
ment at asking Bassanio to pause ‘a day or two’ (which as she goes on grows into ‘a 
month or two’); and ‘lest he should not understand her well’ in preferring such a 
request, she urges her incapacity as a tongue-tied maiden to explain herself more fully, 
and can only reiterate her wish to detain him. In the interesting discussion in Shake- 
speariam.-,1 should be inclined to think that ‘the first interpretation offered’ is the true 
one.—Ev.] 
10, some] See II, iv, 29. 


136 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 


[act 11, Sc. ii 


But if you doe, youle make me wifh a finne, 
That I had beene forfworne : Befhrow your eyes, 15 
They haue ore-lookt me and deuided me, 

One halfe of me is yours, the other halfe yours, 

Mine owne I would fay: but of mine then yours, 

And fo all yours; O thefe naughtie times 

Puts bars betweene the owners and their rights. 20 
And fo though yours, not yours (proue it fo) 


15. Befhrow] Q.F,, Cap. Befhrew Q, 
FES Rowe et cet. 

16. deuided] Q,F,. 
cet. 

17. halfe yours] halfe Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. yours Cap. 

18. of] fix Ff, Rowe. if Qq, Pope 
et seq. 


19. yours ;] yours. Q,. 


diuided Q, et 


19. 0] 6Q,. <Alas/ Pope+. 
20. Puts] Put FF, Rowe ii et seq. 
21. not yours] not yours, Rowei, Warb. 
not yours; Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. Han. 
not yours.— Johns. etseq. J’me not yours 
Johns. conj. 
proue| but prove Han. 
it fo)] it not so! Cap. it so, Rowe 
+, Steev. et seq. 


15. Beshrow] Undoubtedly spelled as it was pronounced. WALKER (C7it.i, 159) 
says that ‘Shrewsbury’ is still pronounced by some Shrowsbury. 

16. ore-lookt] EccLes: That is, bewitched me, in allusion to the superstitious 
notion of the influence of malignant and envious eyes. Portia seems to consider her 
present agitation as the consequence of a supposed fascination. MALONE: So, in Merry 
Wives, V, v, 87: ‘Vile worm, thou wast o’erlook’d even in thy birth.’ 

17. the other] See ABBOTT, § 462, for words contracted in pronunciation. [I sup- 
pose Portia in reality said ‘t’other.’—ED. ] 

18. of mine] See Text. Notes for the correct reading of the Qq. 

20. Puts] For other instances of this Northern plural form in s, see ABBOTT, § 332. 

21. yours, not yours] MALONE: The first is a monosyllable, and the second a 
dissyllable. WALKER (Vers. 137, 138) gives many other instances of this use of the 
same word as a monosyllable and as a dissyllable in the same line in Shakespeare and 
in his contemporaries. See also ABBOTT, § 480, who says it is a matter of taste which 
‘yours’ should receive the emphasis. See also §§ 475, 476. 

21. proue it so] CAPELL (p. 63): These words are, by old editions of all sorts, put 
in parenthesis; their putting so indicates a disjunction or sentence apart, and the words 
shew themselves a wish: a consistent wish they cannot be, without a negation; and 
exactly that negative which they are now [see Text. Notes] furnish’d with, perfects the 
verse’s measure. Her last expressions—‘ not yours’—are look’d upon by the speaker 
as expressions of ill omen; and this wish, or this petition, is put up to avert it: A 
pause ensues upon it; and then other expressions, indicating a renewal of former 
struggles between her love and her oath, in which the latter has victory ; they are the 
result of her fears, that, in this affair of the choice, ‘fortune’ might prove perverse; in 
which case she bids fortune ‘go to hell’ for her perverseness; for herself she meant 
not to hazard it by infringing her oath; ‘it’ relates to the choice, which she had then 
been debating internally how it should be decided, whether by fortune’s act or her own. 
HEATH (p. 117): The meaning is, ‘If the worst I fear should happen, and it should 
prove ir the event that I, who am justly yours by the free donation I have made you 


ACT III, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 137 


Let Fortune goe to hell for it, not I. 22 

I fpeake too long, but ’tis to peize the time, 

To ich it, and to draw it out in length, 

To ftay you from eleétion. 25 
Baf. Let me choofe, 

For as I am, I liue vpon the racke. 
Por. Vpon the racke Baffanio, then confeffe 

What treafon there is mingled with your loue. 


Laff. None but that vglie treafon of miftruft. 30 
Which makes me feare the enioying of my loue: 
There may as well be amitie and life, 32 
22. goe to hell pay the due C. Clarke. itch F,. eche Rowe+. eke Johns. et sey. 
for it} Om. Q,. 24. ich tt] eche it out Pope ii. 
not [| not me Han. _ to draw it out] to dravv out Q,. 
23. peize| poize Rowei. peece Rowe ii draw it out Ff, Rowe i. 
+. piece Johns. Cap. Ktly, Dyce iii, Wh. 28. Baffanio,] Baffanio? Rowe ii et 
ii. petse Dyce i, Del. Huds. faxse Coll. seq. 
(MS). 31. the enioying | th’ inioying Qa. 
24. ich] F,F,. eckQ,. echQ,. eech Q,. 32. life] ef Daniel. 


of myself, should yet not be yours in consequence of an unlucky choice, let fortune go 
to hell for robbing you of your just due, not I for violating my oath.’ 

22. not I] See ABBorTT, § 216, where instances are given (among them, Ham. III, 
ii, 231, and Z. I, iv, 54) of JZ, thou, and he used for me, thee, and him, ‘when they 
stand quasi-independently at some distance from the governing word or preposition.’ 

23. peize] STEEVENS: From the French Zeser, and therefore means ¢o retard by 
hanging weights. See Rich. III: V, iii, 105. HENLEY: To ‘peize’ is to weigh or 
balance; and figuratively, to keep in suspense, to delay. So, in Sir Philip Sidney’s 
Apology for Poetry : «Not speaking words as they changeably fall from the mouth, but 
peyzing each sillable.’ CoLLiErR (ed. ii): The change to favse of the (MS) is by no 
means required, although it is very likely the word of some old performer in the part 
of Portia. K&rIGHTLEY (ZxJ. p. 150): Rowe’s correction, rece, is, I think, right. 
CLARENDON: The word is used in the sense of fotse in King John, Il, i, 575. ALLEN 
cites Arthur Brooke’s Romeus and Juliet: ‘Which thing when he had wayde, and 
when he understoode That the agreement twixt them twayn was lawfull, honest, good, 
And all thinges peysed well,’ &c.—line 2927. 

24. ich] HALLIWELL; The Editors have not noticed the readings of the Qq and 
Ff here, which, though possibly misprints in this case, are genuine archaic forms. 
Eche, from Anglosaxon écan, is found in medieval English; and ich, to eke out, is 
giver. by Kennett in MS Lansd., 1033, as a provincialism. 

30. mistrust] EcctEs: Possibly, ‘ mistrust,’ extreme diffidence, or anxiety as to his 
choice, is as destructive to his peace as actual ‘treason’ is to the tranquillity of a state. 

31. feare the] ABBOTT, § 200, gives instances where the preposition for is omitted 
after ‘fear’ and other verbs, a simpler explanation than that of Eccles, who says that 
not is to be understood before ‘ enjoying,’ like, as Allen suggests, the Lat. vereor ut.— 
Ep. 

32 life] In one of Walker’s valuable chapters he gives a large number of instances 


138 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act II, SC. ii. 


’Tweene fnow and fire, as treafon and my loue. 33 
Por. 1,but I feare you fpeake vpon the racke, 
Where men enforced doth fpeake any thing. Ri 35 


35. doth] do or doe Qq et cet. 

oe ee eee 
where < word has been corrupted by its proximity to another word much resembling it, 
either in sound or spelling. In the present instance Walker suggests that the true word 
is eague, and that it was perverted by the printer through its nearness to ‘life,’ four 
lines farther on. So highly did Dyce approve of this suggestion, that, conservative as 
he professed to be, he adopted Zeagwe in his text in his Third Edition, as did also Hud- 
son. It may be right, but two objections to it are possible. First: Is not change need- 
less? ‘Life’ may be here, as in many another case (see Schmidt), equivalent to Zv- 
ing; secondly, and this objection lies to not a few of Walker’s instances, are the two 
words so near together that the first, which is under the compositor’s eye, could have 
been affected by the second, which we can scarcely presume that he has yet seen? 
Where the second is affected by the first, which has preceded it in the mind of the 
compositor, the case is different, and several lines may intervene, even five or six, espe 
cially if they are in the same speech. But when the reverse is the case, the nearness 
of the second to the first must be close, closer, I fear, than in the present instance, 
before we can, I think, admit of a substitution through proximity.—ED. 

34, 35. HUNTER (i, 326): It is an admirable quality of Shakespeare’s free and noble 
spirit that in all questions of politics and morals he is ever on the side of justice and 
humanity. He has here given us what is the great argument against the use of torture, 
folded up, as his manner is, in small space, fit to circulate from hand to hand, and thus 
produce a combination of sentiment and judgement in the whole community against 
what was a common but iniquitous practice of the time. Let us observe, also, to the 
honour of this great teacher of truth, that such a sentiment as this, which in the reign 
of Victoria would find a respondent and approving voice from all, in the reign of Eliza- 
beth would be coldly received by those at least who guided the public counsels or con- 
aucted private examinations, if they found not sedition in it, and matter for a Star Cham- 
ber inquiry. At the very time when Shakespeare’s actors were repeating these words 
at the Black Friars, or on the Bankside, the secret chambers of the Tower were actu- 
ally echoing the groans of suspected persons who were subjected to this unreasonable 
mode of extorting information. Shakespeare must have known this, and I hope that 
it was because he knew it that he sent the thrilling words through the crowds that 
resorted to his theatre. He has at least taken care that they should be connected with 
the idea of treason, [See lines 29, 30, and 33.] Portia is throughout a little senten- 
tious, and in line 37 gives a counterpart expression to one of our English stock-prov- 
erbs: ‘Confess, and die.’ I cannot quit this passage without again calling attention 
to the boldness as well as to the wisdom of it. In Jardine’s Essay on the Use of Tor- 
ture in England, 1836, we have sufficient proof of the frequent use of it in the reigns 
of Elizabeth and James, but we have not evidence that either the Law or the Church 
remonstrated against what he shows to be a new practice in England. Is it too much 
to claim for Shakespeare that he was the first who raised his voice expressly against it, 
and, heedless of the conseuences to himself, showed the iniquity and the folly of what 
they were doing, to the politicians who commanded the application of it? Let some 
other person produce an earlier instance. I know of none. [In Silvayn’s Oratory (see 
Appendix), which contained a ‘ Declamation’ ‘of a Jew who would for his debt haue 


ACT IU, Se. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 139 


Baffl. Promife me life, and ile confeffe the truth. 36 
Por. Well then, confeffe and liue. 
Baff. Confeffe and loue 
Had beene the verie fum of my confeffion: 
O happie torment, when my torturer 40 
_ Doth teach me anfwers for deliuerance : 
But let me to my fortune and the caskets. 
Por, Away then, I am lockt in one of them, 
If you doe loue me, you will finde me out. 
Nerryffa and the reft, ftand all aloofe, 45 
Let muficke found while he doth make his choife, 
Then if he loofe he makes a Swan-like end, 
Fading in mufique. That the comparifon 
May ftand more proper, my eye fhall be the ftreame 
And watrie death-bed for him : he may win, 50 
And what is mufique than ? Than mufique is 
Euen as the flourifh, when true fubieéts bowe 
To a new crowned Monarch : Such it is, 


As are thofe dulcet founds in breake of day, 54 
47. Then] (Aside) Zhen Anon. (ap. 49. proper] just Pope+. 
am.). 51. than] then Q.Ff. 
loofe] lofe Q,. Than] Then Q,Q, Ff. 
48, &c. mufique| muficke Q.. 53. crowned | crownd Q,. 


a pound of the flesh of a Christian,’ Shakespeare might have found more than one 
illustration of the effects of the ‘racke.’ The ‘26 Declamation’ reads: ‘A Iudge 
.... caused two men suspected of murther to be racked: they confesse the fact, and 
are put to death. Some certaine time after their execution, he which was supposed to 
be murthered returned home; whervpon the kinsman of those that were executed 
accused the iudge, saying,’ &c. Again, the 58th Declamation is ‘ of a sorceress, which 
poysoned her son in law, . . . . ard is not onely suspected for his death but accused and 
conuinced thereof; wherefore she being laid vpon the racke.... accused her owne 
daughter, so that she was adiudged to be burned with her mother.’ See also the trial 
of Dr Lopez, in Appendix, p. 398.—ED.] 

47. Swan-like] See Douce (i, 262); or Oth. V, ii, 309, of this Edition. 

48. Eccies: I cannot but think that the cadence of the foregoing line, and the 
pause in this, have a fine effect in impressing the idea communicated to the mind. 
ALLEN: The ‘the’ after ‘that’ must be absorbed. Thus scan: Fading | in Mt | sic. 
That’ | compa | rison. 

52. flourish] CLARENDON: At the coronation of English sovereigns, the moment 
of putting on the crown is announced by a flourish of trumpets. [See Appendix, 
‘Date of the Play.’—Eb.] 

54. dulcet sounds] HALLIWwELL: An allusion to the custom of playing musi¢ 
nnder the windows of the bridegroom’s bedroom on the morning of his marriage. 


140 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act Ii, SC. ii 


That creepe into the dreaming bride-groomes eare, 55. 
And fummon him to marriage. Now he goes 

With no leffe prefence, but with much more loue 

Then yong Al/cides, when he did redeeme 

The virgine tribute, paied by howling Troy 

To the Sea-monfter : I ftand for facrifice, 60 
The reft aloofe are the Dardanian wiues: 

With bleared vifages come forth to view 

The iffue of th’exploit : Goe Hercules, 


Liue thou, I liue with much more difmay 64 

59. virgine| virgin Q,. Rowe i. thou, J hve — Johns. z20u, J 
virgine tribute] Virgin-tribute ¥F, live ; Rowe ii et cet. (subs.). 

F,, Rowe+. 64. much] Q,F,, Wh. i, Rife. mzch 

paied| paydQ,. payed Q.,. much Q,¥F,, Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. i. 


62. bleared | bleated Johns. (misprint). much-much Dyce, Sta. much, much Q., 
64. thou, I liue] thou, I liue, ¥,F,, Rowe et cet. 


57. presence] JOHNSON: With the same dignity of mien. 

57- more loue] CLARENDON: Because Hercules rescued Hesione not for love of 
the lady, but for the sake of the horses promised him by Laomedon. MALONE: See 
Ovid, Metamorph. xi, 199 et seqq. 

60-63. HUNTER (i, 327): There is something very Greekish in this; something 
which seems to show that Shakespeare was acquainted with the structure of the Greek 
drama, and he shows his acquaintance with it at the proper time, when Portia compares 
herself to the virgin devoted by Laomedon to the sea-monster. 

64. Liue thou] Through an oversight the CAMBRIDGE EDITORS attribute to Hal- 
liwell an assertion that Roberts’s Quarto reads ¢hen for ‘thou;’ whereas Halliwell 
merely quotes Johnson’s note as it stands in the Variorum of 1821, and, in fact, in 
every Variorum after Steevens’s of 1793, where the note first appeared in its present 
shape. The Cambridge Editors add: ‘It [i. e. ¢ken] is not so in our copy.’ Nor is 
it so in mine, nor, if I am right, was it so in the copy of Dr Johnson, in whose note, 
as I believe, thew is a misprint. The point of that note was to call attention to other 
readings in this and the following line, and not to any variation between chow and then. 
—ED. 

64. Liue thou] See AxszoTt, § 361, for other instances of where the subjunctive 
is indicated by placing the verb before the subject. See also ‘Live Roderigo, &c., 
Oth. V, i, 17. 

64. much] WHITE (ed. i): The repetition ‘much much’ in Q, has been universally 
followed. The repetition is tame and prosaic to a degree; and the fact that while % 
occurs in the edition from a copy of which the Folio was printed, it is omitted in the 
Folio itself, instead of justifying the restoration, proves, if it prove anything, that the 
omission was intentional. Had the word been found in Q,, but not in Q,, and did it 
enhance as much as it deforms the beauty of the passage, its absence might be reason- 
ably attributed to a mere perpetuation of an error left uncorrected in the copy furnished 
tu the printer. The pause which a proper reading of the passage requires after ‘Live 
thou, I live,’ entirely perfects the elocutionary rhythm of the line; and Shakespeare, 


ACT III, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 141 


I view the fight, then thou that mak’ft the fray. 65 
flere Muficke. 


A Song the whil/t Baffanio comments on the 
Caskets to him/felfe. 


Tell me where ts fancie bred, 69 


65. 7] 7oQ.. within. Rowe. 
66. Here Muficke] Om. Qq. Music 69. is] his Warb. 


who thought only how his verse would sound in an actor’s mouth, not how it would 
look to a critic’s eye, often used this freedom. [Before putting forth his Second Edi- 
tion, White may have read Walker’s chapter (C7i#. ii, 141) on the ‘Omission of Re- 
peated Words,’ and the numerous examples there given may have converted him; but, 
however this may be, certain it is that in his later edition he silently adopts the text of 
Q,- Yet is the testimony in his First Edition valuable as showing that at least this line 
cannot be cited as an unquestionable proof of the inferiority of Q, toQ,. The full text 
of the two Quartos is as follows: Q, has, ‘ Liue thou, I liue with much more difmay To 
view the fight, then thou that mak’ft the fray.’ Q, has, ‘ Liue thou, I liue with much 
much more difmay, I view the fight, then thou that mak’ft the fray.’ Although the 
punctuation in both is defective, yet with its bad punctuation, Q, after all, gives a mean- 
ing, which can scarcely be said of Q,; the transcriber of the text for Q, gives us the 
better text, but he did not understand it, and hence his ill-placed commas. The tran- 
scriber of Q., being more intelligent than the other, saw that something was wrong 
and did his best to correct it, either by punctuation or by changing ‘I’ to‘ To.’ With 
proper punctuation, such as Rowe (ed. ii) supplied (see Text. Notes), Q, gives us the 
better text.—Eb. | 

65. that mak’st] EccLEs: To consider Bassanio as a spectator of the combat waged 
by himself, though but metaphorical, would be a very unusual mode of thinking and 
speaking. The objection might be obviated by a change of this sort, ‘than thou mazn- 
tain’ st the fray.’ 

69-74. RusHTON (WV. & Quw. 4th, xii, p. 304): In the Zuphues of Lily is the fol- 
lowing: ‘For as by Basill the Scorpion is engendred, and by meanes of the same 
hearb destroyed: so love, which by time and fancze ts bred in an idle head, is by time 
and fancie banished from the 4ea7t. or as the Salamander which being a long space 
nourished in the fire, at the last quencheth it, so affection having taking holde of the 
fancie, and living as it were in the minde of the lover, in tract of tyme altereth and 
changeth the heate, and turneth it to chilnesse’ [Zuphues and his England, 1580, p. 
298, ed. Arber]. WEISS (p. 312): Portia bids the music play. Bassanio must be at- 
tempered to his choice; the song’s key must have an instinct for the proper casket’s 
key. Unconsciously she breaks her oath; for what benign influence selected the song 
that is now sung? Some star, whose tenant was her father? Or was it Nerissa’s doing, 
who determined to convey a hint to the lover? [The maid gave a hint in the Peco- 
rone-—ED.] Or did Gratiano hit upon it, who had got from Nerissa a promise of her 
love if the choice went to suit her? A hint indeed! It is the very breadth of broad- 
ness, and a lover is not dull, A song that did good sexton-service, for fancy’s knell is 
rung indeed. The strain reminds Bassanio of notices in his experience: that error 
‘ides its grossness in ornament; vice assumes some mark of virtue; beauty is for sale 


142 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT III, SC. ii. 


Or in the heart, or in the head: 70 
How begot, how nourifhed. Replie, replie. 

It is engendred in the eyes, 

With gazing fed, and Fancie dies, 


In the cradle where it hes : 74 
7o, Or in] In Johns. +, Var. Knt et cet. 
71. nourifhed.] nourifhed ? Qq. 72. engendred] engendered Q,. 
Replie, replie] Om. Rowe. Reply eyes] eye Qq, Pope, Theob. Han, 
(as a stage direction) Han Johns. Steev. Warb. Cam. ; 
Mal.’go, Huds. As a separate line, Pope 73. fed,] fed; Cap. et seq. 


by weight, and is a show which cunning puts on to entrap wise men; in short, as the 
song says, fancies (which sometimes in Shakespeare mean genuine passion, but here it 
hints only a passing sentiment) come by gazing, have no life deeper than the eyes 
where they are born. ‘So may the outward shows be least themselves.’ This fortune 
hunter, after all, is Portia’s counterpart. The melody woven out of air glides into his 
hand, and becomes a clew to bliss, Oh, the woman thrills! in touching the lead his 
hand has clutched her heart, and forces from her words that are outbreaks of that 
which is everlastingly the Woman. They assail, they challenge man to say what is so 
great as love. This polished, clear, sagacious, gifted, balanced woman dares man to 
say love is not greatest of all. 

69. where] Axssort, by referring to § 136, apparently understands this as a con- 
traction for whether, which, I think, it is; as far as the sense is concerned, it is imma- 
terial. —ED. 

69. fancie] STEEVENS: Love. GEORGE FLETCHER (Fraser's Maga., May, 1850, 
p- 507): ‘Fancy,’ we must observe, in the writings of Shakespeare, and in the lan- 
guage of his time, signifies that uneasy season of love which precedes the certainty of 
its thorough requital. Thus, in any case, ‘ Fancy dies In the cradle where it lies,’ since 
it either expires on finding itself hopeless of requital, or becomes merged in the perfect 
enjoyment of mutual love. CLARENDON: Fancy, here, seems to be censured as a feel- 
ing neither bred in heart nor in brain, but in the eye only, penetrating no deeper, and 
lasting only while its object is in sight. 

71. Replie, replie] JoHNsON: These words, in all the old copies, stand as a mar- 
ginal direction. [Capell printed this Song in two stanzas, which he calls ‘1. V.’ and 
‘2. V.,’ and ‘reply, reply’ as the last line of the first stanza, and added this note :] For 
this Song’s form the present Editor is accountable: the words ‘reply, reply’ shew it to 
be a song in two parts, or by two Voices: [therefore Capell’s ‘1. V.’ and ‘2. V.’ mean 
First Voice and Second Voice] follow’d by a Chorus of divers assistant voices, which 
‘all’ indicates. KNIGHT: These words are unquestionably part of the song; the 
mutilation whereof, in the belief that the words were a stage-direction, is certainly one 
of the most tasteless corruptions of the many for which the Editors of Shakespeare are 
answerable. CAMBRIDGE EpiTors: These words seem to be required, as part of the 
song, by the rhythm, and (if we read eye with the Qq) by the rhyme also. 

72, eyes,] In a modern text I think there should be a semicolon after this word, 
which is, to me, better in the plural than in the singular; the singular, common as it is, 
always conveys to me more or less the idea of mayhem.—ED. 

74. CAPELL: The matter of this song is both pleasing and suitable, and, in one 
place, satirical; for the sentence, beginning—‘ard fancy dies? is expressive of love’s 


ACT III, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 143 


Let vs all ring Fancies knell. 75 
Ile begin it. 
Ding, dong, bell. 

All. Ding, dong, bell. 


Baff. So may the outward fhowes be leaft themfelues 
The world is ftill deceiu’d with ornament. 80 
In Law, what Plea fo tanted and corrupt, 
But being feafon’d with a gracious voice, 
Obfcures the fhow of euill? In Religion, 
What damned error, but fome fober brow 
Will bleffe it, and approue it with a text, - 85 
Hiding the grofeneffe with faire ornament : 
There is no voice fo fimple, but affumes 
Some marke of vertue on his outward parts ; 
How manie cowards, whofe hearts are all as falfe 


As ftayers of fand, weare yet vpon their chins go 
76. Roman in QqFf, Rowe, Pope, Rowe et seq. 

Theob. Han. Warb. 88. marke] Om. Q,. 
76, 77. As one line, Johns. Cap. et seq. his] its Theob, Warb. Johns. 
81. tanted | tainted Qq Ff. 90. feayers] Q,Q,, Knt, Huds. /raiers 


87. voice] Q,. voyce Q,Q,. vice Ff, Q,- fayres FF ,. ftairs F, Rowe et cet 


changeableness, which has both its birth in the eye from one object, and its extinction 
or death from others. Eccies: This line cannot refer to the eye or eyes, in which 
JSancy is engendered, but rather to the shortness of its duration, as dying while still in 
its crad/e, i. e. in infancy. 

77. HALLIWELL: This burthen was formerly a serious one, appropriately significant 
of a knell. 

79. JOHNSON: He begins abruptly; the first part of the argument has passed in his 
mind, Ecctes: Or perhaps this line refers to the subject of the Song; that the objects 
of fancy afford only that short-lived enjoyment just alluded to. 

82. season’d] CLARENDON: This carries on the metaphor suggested by ‘tainted’ 
in the preceding line. 

85. approue] Dyce (G/oss.): That is, ratify, confirm. 

88, marke] Through the compositor’s carelessness this word is omitted in Q,; it 
can be scarcely called a different text. 

go. stayers] KNIGHT: The propriety of the image appears to us to justify the 
restoration of the original word in this passage. Cowards in their falseness,—their 
assumption of appearances without realities,—may be compared to stairs of sand, 
which betray the feet of those who trust to them; but we have here cowards appear- 
ing ready to face an enemy with ‘beards of Hercules and frowning Mars;’ they are 
false as stayers of sand—banks, bulwarks of sand,—that the least opposition will throw 
down,—vain defences,—feeble ramparts. Dyce (Remarks, p. 55) calls attention to 
the shifting and uncertain spelling of ‘stairs’ in Taylor's Workes, and adds that 


144 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ill, sc. ii. 


The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars, gI 
Who inward fearcht, haue lyuers white as milke, 

And thefe affume but valors excrement, 

To render them redoubted. Looke on beautie, 

And you fhall fee ’tis purchaft by the weight, 95 
Which therein workes a miracle in nature, 

Making them lighteft that weare moft of it: 

So are thofe crifped fnakie golden locks 

Which makes fuch wanton gambols with the winde 

Vpon fuppofed faireneffe, often knowne_ IOu 
To be the dowrie of a fecond head, 


98. cri/ped] crispy Theob. Warb. 99. makes] F£Q,, Rowe. maketh Q, 
Johns. Q,. make Pope et cet. 


Knight’s ‘defence and explanation of “stayers” is of more than Warburtonian subtlety, 
and will assuredly never carry conviction to a single Englishman,—though, perhaps, it 
may receive the commendation of Tieck, with his imperfect knowledge of the lan- 
guage, and in gratitude for the respect with which Mr Knight has treated “zs vagaries.’ 
Hupson, nevertheless, retains the old spelling, and explains it ‘in the sense of frofs, 
supports, or stays. The word is to be pronounced, here, as one syllable; as “ cowards” 
also is.’ ALLEN: I wonder if there be not here an allusion to the mzrage in the sandy 
desert ? 

93. excrement] MALONE: That is, what a little before is called the ‘deard of 
Hercules.’ See Wint. Tale, IV, iv, 734. STAUNTON: A brave man’s beard. The 
meaning is,—cowards, who inwardly are false and craven, by the assumption of what 
is merely the excrescence of true valour, think to be considered indomitable. 

94. beautie] HeaTH (p. 117): By ‘beauty,’ I apprehend, is meant only artificial 
beauty, which is procured by painting, and is mere adventitious show and ornament 
superinduced upon true and real nature, like that false hair the mention of which im- 
mediately follows. ‘This factitious beauty, though purchased by weight, the more it is 
laid on, the more lightness it indicates in the wearer. 

98. crisped] STEEVENS: That is, curled. RoLFE: Milton (Comus, 984) speaks 
of ‘crisped shades and bowers,’ referring to the leaves waved and curled by the 
wind. 

99. Which makes] Axsort (§ 247): The relative (perhaps because it does not 
signify by inflection any agreement in number or person with its antecedent) frequently 
takes a singular verb, though the antecedent be plural. 

100. Vpon supposed fairenesse] CLARENDON connects this with the ‘snakie 
golden locks,’ and paraphrases it, ‘surmounting fictitious beauty.’ But RoLFE para- 
phrases it, ‘on the strength of their fictitious beauty,’ and thinks that it is ‘closely con 
nected with the preceding line.’ 

tor. Mrs Furness (MS): Conf. Sonnet, 68, 7: ‘To live a second life on second 
head,’ where, in the preceding line, the word ‘sepulchre’ also occurs. 

1o1. dowrie] MALONE: The prevalence of this fashion in Shakespeare’s time is 
evinced by the following passage in an old pamphlet, entitled: Zhe Homestie of this 


ACT III, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 145 


The fcull that bred them in the Sepulcher. 102 
Thus ornament is but the guiled fhore 
To a moft dangerous fea : the beautious fcarfe 104 


103. gutled] guilded Ft. gilded Rowe, Pope, Han. Cap. gui/ty Warb. 


Age, proving by good Circumstance that the World was never honest till now, by Bar- 
nabe Rich, 1615 :—‘ My lady holdeth on her way, perhaps to the tire-maker’s shop, 
where she shaketh her crownes to bestow upon some new fashioned attire, upon such 
artificial deformed Zerizwigs, that they were fitter to furnish a theatre, or for her that in 
a stage-play should represent some hag of hell, than to be used by a Christian woman.’ 
Again, ibid > ‘These attire-makers within these fortie yeares were not known by that 
name ; and but now very lately they kept their lowzie commodity of periwigs, and their 
monstrous attires closed in boxes ;—and those women that used to weare them would 
not buy them but in secret. But now they are not ashamed to set them forth upon 
their stalls,—such monstrous mop-powles of haire, so proportioned and deformed, that 
but within these twenty or thirty yeares would have drawne the passers-by to stand 
and gaze, and to wonder at them.’ STEEVENS, in a note on Zimon, IV, iii, 144, has 
collected many references to this practice. He says that Stowe informs us that 
‘women’s periwigs were first brought into England about the time of the massacre of 
Paris.” 

103. guiled] STEEVENS: That is, treacherous. ‘Guiled’ stands for gucling. Ca- 
PELL: Gilded [of the Ff] is a well-chosen epithet; expressing the glitter of cliffs and 
rocks, and of the sea’s beach, when the sun lyes upon them. Ecc.es: If gilded be 
the right word, it may, perhaps, bear an allusion to the golden Jocks just before men- 
tioned. COLLIER: The (MS) alters gutlded to guiling ; it may have been the custom 
to use the word guz/ing in the old Corrector’s time; but as Shakespeare and other 
writers of that period often employed the passive participle instead of the active, and 
vice versé, we have introduced no alteration; by ‘guz/ed’ Shakespeare certainly meant 
guiling,—of that there is no question, WALKER (C7r##. i, 291): For ‘guiled,’ com- 
pare: ‘To me came Tarquin armed; so beguiled With outward honesty, but yet defiled 
With inward vice,’ &c.—R. of ZL. 1544. Still I suspect ‘guiled” Lrttsom [foot-note 
to Walker]: I believe the verb ¢o gui/e was unknown to Shakespeare. However that 
may be, I have little doubt that the poet was thinking of Raleigh’s ‘ Discovery of Gut- 
ana,’ and wrote guilded. CLARENDON: That is, full of guile, deception, treacherous. 
So IV, i, 196, ‘blest,’—i. e. endowed with blessing; and in x Hen. JV I, iii, 183: 
‘Revenge the jeering and disdain’d contempt Of this proud King,’ where ‘disdain’d’ 
means full of disdain. So probably in Meas. for Meas. III, i, 121: ‘the delighted 
spirit’ means the spirit capable of delight. ABBOTT, § 294, gives a list of participles 
formed from adjectives, and of participles derived from nouns, with respective modi- 
fications of meaning. ROLFE: Marsh (Lect. on Eng. Lang., p. 655) gives examples 
of ‘passive participles with active meaning,’ as well-spoken, fair-spoken, &c. ‘Well 
read’ is similar. {Clarendon’s interpretation, sustained by Abbott, is, to me, unques- 
tionably correct, and we need not suppose that a passive participle is here used for an 
active one. Just as ‘delighted’ in Meas. for Meas. and in O¢h. I, iii, 320, means 
endowed with delights, ‘deliciis exornata’ as Sidney Walker gives it, so here ‘ guiled’ 
means endowsd, infested with guiles. It is the same construction in ‘ Your loop’d and 


window’d raggedness,’ Lear, III, iv, 31.—Eb.] 
10 


146 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [Acr ilt, SC. ii. 


Vailing an Indian beautie ; In a word, 105, 


105. an Indian beautie] an Indian idol Cartwright. an /ndian gipsy Walker. 
beauty F,, Rowe+, Cap. an Indian an Indian favour Lettsom. an Indian 
dowdy Han. Deformity Lansd. an In- swarthy, or Indian sooty Herr. an In- 
dian: beauty, Coll. ii, iti (MS). an Jn- dian deity Schmidt. an Indian bosom 
dian feature Ktly, Huds, an Indian Parry. 
beauty Qq F,F,, Steev. et cet. an Indian 


2 3 


105. Indian beautie] THEOBALD (Nichols’s ///ust. ii, 307): There is a glaring 
contrast betwixt gilded shore and dang’ rous sea ; but is there the same betwixt deauteous 
scarf and Indian beauty ? 1 suspect both the pointing and the text wrong. Read: ‘ the 
beauteous scarf Veiling an Indian.—Beauty’s, in a word, The seeming truth which cun- 
ning Dames (or tires, or trims) put on,’ &c. [This réading, ‘Indian; beauty’s,’ was 
adopted by Harness, and CoLLIER’s (MS) reads ‘Indian: beauty,’] CaPELL: If we 
lay stress upon ‘Indian,’ we shall have no occasion to back it with the Oxford editor’s 
dowdy. ECCLES: One of the causes, no doubt, for suspecting a corruption here is that 
the words ‘beauteous’ and ‘beauty’ come so close together, but in that the writer 
might have designed something like an antithesis. A. E. BRAE (WV. & Qu. 1852, 
Ist, v, 483) gives the following reasons for retaining ‘beautie’: First, The argument 
of Bassanio is directed against the deceptiveness of ornament in general, of which seem- 
ing beauty is only one of the subordinate illustrations. These illustrations are drawn 
from Jaw, religion, valour, and beauty; all of which are finally summed up in the 
passage in question, beginning ‘Thus ornament,’ &c. Therefore this summing up 
cannot refer singly to deauty, no more than to any other of the subordinate illustrations, 
but it must have general reference to adventitious ornament, against which the collected 
argument is directed. Secondly, The word ‘ beauty’ is necessarily attached to ‘ Indian’ 
as designative of sex : ‘an Indian,’ unqualified by any other distinction, would imply a 
male; but an ‘ Indian beauty’ is at once understood to be a female. Thirdly, The repe- 
tition, or rather che opposition, of ‘beauteous’ and ‘beauty’ cannot seriously be objected 
to by any one conversant with the phraseology of Shakespeare. ‘The beauteous scarf’ 
is the deceptive ornament which leads to the expectation of something beneath it better 
than an /udian beauty! ‘Indian’ is used adjectively, in the sense of wld, savage, 
hideous,—just as we, at the present day, might say a ‘ Hottentot beauty ;’ or as Shake- 
speare himself in other places uses the word ‘Ethiop.’ BLACKWooD’s MAGAZINE 
(Aug. 1853): We still confess a partiality for the old text, both in words and in point- 
ing. ‘An Indian beauty’ may mean the worst species of ugliness, just as ‘a Dutch night- 
ingale’ means atoad. HALLIWELL: /do/ has been suggested for ‘ beauty.” Dyck (ed. 
i): [Harness’s punctuation] may be dismissed at once as erroneous, because it utterly 
subverts the whole construction of the passage. The word ‘beauty’ in which the diffi- 
culty lies, would seem to be a misprint caught from the preceding ‘ beauteous;’ unless 
we suppose (and it is difficult to suppose so) that ‘an Indian beauty’ may mean—what 
is a beauty among the Indians, but nowhere else. STAUNTON: I have always suspected 
an error of the press in this passage. The printer appears to have caught the word 
‘beauty,’ of all others the most inappropriate here, from the ‘beauteous’ of the pre- 
ceding line, and permitted it to usurp the place of the original expression; but what 
that was must be left to the reader’s sagacity to determine. WHITE: Ornament, not 
beauty, is here the subject of Bassanio’s reflection. ‘Indian’ is used in a derogatory 
sense; and the occurrence of ‘beauteous’ and ‘beauty’ in the same sentence is not at 
all unlike Shakespeare’s manner. Barry (i, 157): I propose to read ‘an Jyaian’s 


ACT III, SC, ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 147 
a eal 
[105. Vailing an Indian beautie il 
blackness,’ which expresses in the most direct way what was manifestly in the author’s 
mind. [But by the time Bailey reached his second volume this manifestness was 
not quite so manifest. He says, ii, 214]: It has since occurred to me that the word 
body would form an emendation equal at least in point of appropriateness, and more 
easily changed into the received text. KEIGHTLEY (Zxcpositor, p. 150): Unlesa we 
take it ironically—which is unworthy of the poet—‘beauty’ here is nonsense. It 
plainly owes its origin to the preceding ‘beauteous.’ Hanmer read dowdy ; Sidney 
Walker, gz/sy—both bad. I read, with the utmost confidence, feature as the only 
word suited to the place. [Keightley had already proposed this, in V. & Qu. 1863, 
3d, iv, 121.] E. L, Swirte (. & Qu. 1863, 3d, iv, 203): Let me attempt to restore 
the antithesis of the passage: ‘ Veiling an Indian Deity,’ the Oriental idols being, as 
travellers tell us, gaudily attired and awfully ugly. [As WHITE did not himself, in 
either of his editions, allude to the explanation which he gave in his Shakespeare's 
Scholar, it is not worth while to do more than allude to it here. In his Second Edition 
he explains ‘Indian beauty’ as ‘one with thick lips and a black skin.’] CowneEn- 
_CLARKE: It is just possible that Shakespeare may have written ‘suttee’ (spelt, per- 
haps, ‘sutie’ in the MS, and the printer, being unacquainted with the word, made it 
out ‘beautie’), having met with the name in the works of his day; as Diodorus men- 
tions an instance of a suttee three hundred years before the Christian era. By the term 
‘suttee’ is now meant a Hindoo woman, who performs the sacrifice of burning herself 
on her deceased husband’s funeral pile; but formerly it may have been known merely 
as a name for an Indian woman. However, we merely suggest the possibility of 
Shakespeare’s having used the word ‘suttee’ here; as we have always taken the pas- 
sage as it stands to be merely another form of ‘a brow of Egypt,’ which he employs 
to signify a dark-complexioned, ill-favoured woman. CLARENDON: Various guesses 
have been made as to the word which we should substitute for ‘beauty,’ [among 
others] ‘visage,’ ‘beldam;’ but it is impossible to pronounce positively which is the 
right, if any. Perhaps ‘bosom’ may be better than all these, if we consider how a 
scarf is worn. ALLEN: We require some word like Zozsoner, or one that fascinates, 
or kills with the evil eye, or the like. Shakespeare must (in that case) have read or 
heard of some such veiled danger to his countrymen in their plantations among the 
Indians. It is unnecessary to confine one’s self to the ductus literarum, for ‘beauty’ 
was probably brought down by the compositor from the preceding line. ReEv. JOHN 
Hunter: Montaigne (Zssays, ii, 12, Florio’s Translation) says of beauty: ‘The Indians 
describe it black and swarthy, with blabbered thick lips, with a broad and flat nose.’ 
[If Shakespeare read this in Montaigne, he read it in French; Florio’s translation was 
not published until 1603. One thing is clear to us all in this passage, and it is, that 
the antitheses which have preceded must be kept up. We have uniformly had the out- 
ward shows of ornament contrasted with the thing itself, the sham with the reality, 
from a gracious voice seasoning a tainted plea down to a beauteous scarf ornamenting 
—something repulsive; what that something is each student will have to decide for him- 
self; for me, the original suffices. An Indian beauty is assuredly not an English 
beauty. ‘In the estimation of Europeans,’ says Sydney Smith, in his Lectures on 
Moral Philosophy, Lecture xii, ‘ part of the beauty of a face is the color of the cheek ; 
not that there is something in that particular position of red color, which, I believe, is 
of itself beautiful,—but habit has also connected it with the idea of health, An 
Indian requires that his wife’s face should be the color of good marketable sea-coal ; 
another tribe is enamoured of deep orange; and a cheek of copper is imesistible to a 


148 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act i, Sc. ii, 


The feeming truth which cunning times put on 106 
To intrap the wifeft. Therefore then thou gaudie gold, 

Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee, 

Nor none of thee thou pale and common drudge 


’Tweene man and man : but thou, thou meager lead 110 

Which rather threatneft then doft promife ought, 

Thy paleneffe moues me more then eloquence, 112 
107. Therefore then]Q,. Then Pope+. 111. chreatneft| threaten? Q,. 

Therefore Q, Ff, Rowe, Cap. et seq. 112. palenef[e] palenesQ,. plainness 
108. food] foole Q,. Warb.. Theob. Han. Johns. Cap. Steev. 
109. pale] stale Farmer, Dyce iii. Mal.’90, Dyce i, Sta. Wh. i, Del. Rlfe, 

drudge drudg F ,. Huds. 


fourth.’ In the foregoing discussion, allusion is made by Brae, Singer, and Dyce to 
an Anonymous edition of Shakespeare, printed by Scott and Webster in 1833. This 
is one of the many reprints of Harness’s edition, wherein the note on this passage 
reads: ‘I have deviated slightly from the Folio, [where the text] by no means serves 
to illustrate the reflexion which Bassanio wishes to enforce.’ Collier’s (MS) reads 
‘beauty,’ herein differing slightly from the ‘beauty’s’ of Theobald and Harness, a dif- 
ference which escaped the notice of some of the critics.—ED.] 

107, 108. If in line 108 Q, is inferior to Q, in printing foof for food, it is superior 
to Q, in line 107 by omitting the ‘then’ which mars the metre. 

108. Midas] WALKER (C77. i, 152) devotes a Chapter to Ovid’s influence on 
Shakespeare, and cites this allusion to Midas, and to Thisbe, and to Medea in Act V, 
as among the many examples. But I do not find that Walker has anywhere noted 
that it was chiefly Golding’s Translatidn that was impressed on Shakespeare’s memory 
See note on V, i, 1.—Ep, 

109. pale] FARMER: I would rather give the character of silver, ‘Thou s¢a/e, and 
common drudge ’Tween,’ &c. WALKER (C77. i, 305): From this punctuation it 
would seem that Farmer makes sta/e a substantive. HALLIWELL: It may be men- 
tioned, that stave and common appear together in the context in a passage in Hen. JV; 
and that s¢a/e is misprinted fa/e in the first edition of Tro. and Cress. Dyce (ed. iii): 
The words stale and pale are frequently confounded by early transcribers and printers. 
[It is the drudge’s overwork between man and man that makes him ‘pale.’—Ep.] 

112. palenesse] WARBURTON: Bassanio is displeas’d at the golden casket for its 
gaudiness, and the silver one for its pa/eness ; but, what! is he charm’d with the leaden 
one for having the very same quality that displeas’d him in the silver? The poet cer- 
tainly wrote, ‘Thy /ainness ,’ this characterizes the lead from the silver, which ¢ pale- 
ness’ does not, they being both fa/e. Besides, there is a beauty in the antithesis 
between pAzinness and eloquence; between paleness and eloguence none. So it is 
said before of the leaden casket: ‘This third, du// lead, &c. FARMER: The ‘ pale- 
ness’ of lead is for ever alluded to. ‘ Diane declining, pale as any ledde,’ says Stephen 
Hawes. In Fairfax’s Zusso, we have— The lord Tancredie, pale with rage as lead.’ 
Again, Sackville in his Legend of the Duke of Buckingham : ‘Now pale as lead, now 
cold as any stone.’ And in the old ballad of The King and the Beggar : ‘She blushed 
scarlet red, Then straight again as pale as lead.’ As to the antithesis, Shakespeare has 
already made “in AZid. NV. D.: ‘When? says Theseus, ‘I have seen great clerks look 


_ACT IH, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 149 


And here choofe I, ioy be the confequence. 113 
Por. How all the other paffions fleet to ayre, 

As doubtfull thoughts, and rafh imbrac’d defpaire: 

And fhuddring feare, and greene-eyed iealoufie. 


O loue be moderate, allay thy extafie, 1t7, 
114-120. [Aside. Lansdowne, Cam. 117. O...moderate| Be moderate, love! 
Glo. Cla, Rife, Wh. ii. Han. 
116. /auddring] /hyddring Qaq. O loue] Separate line, Glo. Wh. ii. 


pale, | read as much as from the rattling tongue Of saucy and audacious eloquence.’ 
CAPELL: Opposition between the terms that compose it appearing manifestly an inten- 
tion in [line 112], ‘palines’ (the word of the original Quarto) must have been a cor- 
ruption, and that for s/ainmess, in the manuscript—-plaines. MALONE: By laying an 
emphasis on ‘ Thy,’ (‘7Z%y paleness,’ &c.) Warburton’s objection is obviated. Though 
Bassanio might object to silver, that ‘pale and common drudge, lead, though pale also, 
yet not being in daily use, might, in his opinion, deserve a preference. A. E. BRAE 
(WV. & Qu. 1852, Ist, vi, 59): I am convinced that Warburton’s suggestion of plain- 
ness is right. ‘There is no relation between ‘paleness’ and ‘eloquence,’ in the sense 
required by the context. ‘ Paleness’ can only move ‘more than eloquence’ when the 
feeling to be excited is compassion ; but plainness has just that sort of opposition tc 
eloquence, which the tenour of the passage requires. Moreover, Jlaimmess has an 
obvious reference—which paleness has not,—to the preceding line: ‘ Which rather 
threat’nest than doth promise aught.’ And it is also an appropriate continuation of 
meagre, in the sense of poor, barren, unassuming. STAUNTON: We admit Warburton’s 
emendation, but demur to the reasoning by which he sought to establish it. The p/aix- 
mess which moves Bassanio more than eloquence is clearly not alone the unpretending 
appearance of the leaden coffer, as Warburton seems to have thought, but the plain 
speaking of the inscription on it,—‘ Which rather threat’nest,’ &c., contrasted with the 
tempting labels of its neighbours. BAILEY (ii, 215) not only adopts ‘ plainness’ on the 
score of antithesis, but ‘being of opinion,’ he says, ‘that “eloquence”’ is in this case 
exceptionable, because utterly misplaced, I propose that it should be exchanged for a 
word resembling it, which makes as perfect an antithesis as can be desired. Let us 
read: “ Thy plainness moves me more than elegance,” and we obtain a line which 
perfectly expresses all that is wanted. The last word is certainly not frequent in our 
author’s writings; he uses it, in fact, only once in his dramas’ [an error; Shakespeare 
uses ‘elegancy’ in Love Lab. L., but never elegance. From Capell we can infer with 
what ease the mistake of ‘paleness’ for A/ainness might arise, and Brae and Staunton 
show that threats lie in A/aznzess, but not in ‘paleness;’ and therefore, I think, War- 
burton’s emendation should be adopted. The single dead fly in this ointment is that 
Capell is not quite right in saying that Aa/izes is the original word in the Qto. Q, and 
Q, are the same as F;; Q, has palenes. Capell’s own copy of Q, is now before me, 
wherein he has laboriously marked in red ink the variations between it andQ,. In 
the present word ‘palenesse,’ he has erased the three final letters, sse, and written 
above them the single letter s. The ¢ he has not changed to z, The presumption is, 
therefore, that his spelling, Aa/ines, is an oversight.—ED. ]. 

115. As] That is, to wit, namely. See WALKER (Crit. i, 127), or ABBOTT, § 113. 


Conf. Ham. I, iv, 25. 
117. O loue] To =~wid an Alexandrine, WALKER (Vers. 268) and ABsoTT (§ 512) 


£50 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ill, Sc. ii. 


In meafure raine thy ioy, fcant this exceffe, 118 
I feele too much thy bleffing, make it leffe, 
For feare I furfeit. 

Baf. What finde I here ? 


Faire Portias counterfeit. What demie God 122 
118. raine]Q,F,. rangeQ,. reineQ,. surfeit in’t Anon. (ap. Cam.). 
rein Sing. Coll. ii, iti, Cam. Glo. Wh. ii. 121. What...[] What do I find Han, 
rain ¥F,, Rowe et cet. Ha! what find I Cap. 
120. /urfeit| surfeit me Steev. conj. 122. demie God | demy-god F ,. 


would read this as an interjectional line by itself ‘in spite of the rhyme,’ says the 
former. Unquestionably, there is abundant propriety in this treatment of interjections, 
exclamations, &c., but is it not, after all, only scansion for the eye? The voice must make 
the pause whether the exclamation be in a separate line or not. As long as the rhythm 
is smooth, I cannot believe that Shakespeare’s ear was offended by an Alexandrine. 
—Eb. 

118. raine] JOHNsoN: I once believed Shakespeare meant reia. The words ‘rain’ 
and rein were not in these times distinguished by regular orthography, ‘There is no 
difficulty in the present reading; only, where the copies vary some suspicion of error is 
-always raised. MALONE: ‘Rain’ is supported by ‘It rain’d down fortune show’ring 
on thy head.”’—z Hen. JV: V,i, 48. ToLtet: Compare the following, which ap- 
proaches very near to the present reading, if we adopt rez : ‘—being chaf’d, he can- 
not Be rein’d again to temperance.’—Cor. III, iii, 27. CoLLiEr (ed. i): It may rea- 
sonably be doubted whether we ought to read ‘rain’ or vein. Dyce (Remarks, p. 
37): To doubt that ‘rain’ is the right reading, appears to me most wmreasonable. 
COLLIER (ed. ii): I was formerly for ‘rain;’ but Portia, I am convinced, means only 
curb your joys, restrain them, and she therefore follows up the exclamation by ‘scant 
this excess.’ Dycer (S¢trictures, &c. p. 66): Is it usual to talk of retming anything ‘in 
measure’? and do not the words ‘scant this excess,’ which Mr Collier adduces in sup- 
port of vez, distinctly prove that it is the wrong reading? CLARENDON: Most editors 
after Malone [among them Clarendon.—Ep.] print ‘rain;’ but veim rests on higher 
authority and makes good sense. [To me, veim is much to be preferred. Portia adjures 
love to be moderate, to allay its ecstasy, to rein in its joy by due restraint, lest she die 
in this excess. If rei be the right word, then Q, comes nearer to it than the range 
of Q,, yet the latter is not wholly meaningless. Clarendon speaks of veiw as resting 
on a ‘higher authority’ than that of many modern editors. I find it hard to consider 
a compositor as of any authority here whatsoever, least of all, far least of all, the com- 
positor who set up the Third Quarto for Laurence Hayes.—ED.] 

120. To complete the rhythm of this line and the next, Steevens proposed to add 
me after ‘surfeit.’ Hanmer and Capell both added a syllable to line r21. If the 
attempt to adjust broken lines to the full measure of whole ones be not waste time, 
then it seems to me that Lettsom’s conjecture, given by Dyce (ed. iii), of on’t after 
‘surfeit,’ is the most plausible. The fact should never be lost sight of that these plays 
were written to be spoken and acted, not to be read and studied, nor even printed.— Ep. 

122. counterfeit.] STEEVENS: A /ikeness, without comprehending any idea of fraud. 
{For other instances in Shakespeare, see SCHMIDT. HUNTER (i, 328) gives an instance 
from Harington’s Life of Ariosto, in his translation of the Orlando - ‘His counterfeit 
was taken by Tytiano, that excellent drawer, &c ] 


ACT III, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 15! 


Hath come fo neere creation ? moue thefe eies ? 123 
Or whether riding on the bals of mine 
Seeme they in motion? Here are feuer’d lips 125 


Parted with fuger breath, fo fweet a barre 

Should funder fuch fweet friends ; here in her haires 

The Painter plaies the Spider, and hath wouen 

A golden meth t’intrap the hearts of men 

Fafter then gnats in cobwebs: but her eies, 13¢ 
How could he fee to doe them ? hauing made one, 

Me thinkes it fhould haue power to fteale both his 


And leaue it felfe vnfurnifht: Yet looke how farre 133 
124. whether] whither Q.Q.. Glo, Cla. Rlfe, Wh. ii. 
bals] ball’s Q.. : 132. Me thinkes| Me-thinks Q, 
126. fuger breath] sugar’d breath Pope, Methinks F ,. 
Han. sugar-breath Dyce iii. 133. unfurnifnt| unfinish’d Rowe, 
127. haires] hair Han. Pope, Theob. Warb. Coll. iii (MS). adf- 


129. 2’intrap] tyntrap Q,. to entrap Jurnish'd Anon. (ap. Hal.). 
Cap. Steev. Mal. Knt, Dyce i, Sta. Cam. 


124. Or whether] See Anzort, § 136, for other instances of the use of ‘ whether ' 
after ‘or,’ where ‘we should omit one of the two.’ 

127. Should] In the sense of oug&z, as in ‘I should be obscured,’ sara, II, vi, 51 

131. hauing] ABBOTT, § 466, cites this as one of the instances where the v is soft 
ened in pronunciation and the word pronounced as a monosyllable. ‘It may seem 
difficult for modern readers to understand how the v could be dropped. But it presents 
no more difficulty than the v in ever, over.’ See also Walker (Vers. 103). [The 
Scotch find no difficulty in dropping the v in have, love, brave, &c. See note on ‘ pov- 
erty,’ IV, i, 285; and also on ‘riveted,’ V, i, 188.—ED.] CLARENDON: The nomina. 
tive is changed, leaving the words ‘having made one’ without a verb to follow. 

133. vnfurnisht] JoHNsSON: Perhaps it might be, ‘leave Azmse/f unfurnish’d. 
Monck Mason: ‘ Unfurhished’ must mean ‘unfurnished with a companion or fellow.’ 
Conf. this passage in Fletcher’s Lover's Progress [II, i, p. 47, ed. Dyce] where Alci- 
don says to Claringé, on delivering Lydian’s challenge: ‘ You are a noble gentleman, 
Will’t please you bring a friend? we are two of us, And pity either, sir, should be un- 
furnish’d,’ i. e. unfurnished with an antagonist. HENLEY: Dr Johnson’s emendation 
would altogether subvert the poet’s meaning. If the artist, in painting ome of Portia’s 
eyes, should lose both his own, that eye which he had painted must necessarily be Z/? 
unfurnished, or destitute of his fellow. MALONE: That is, it must leave itself incom- 
plete; unaccompanied with the other usual component parts of a portrait—viz. another 
eye, kc. STEEVENs: A hint for this passage appears to have been taken from Greene’s 
History of Faire Bellora, afterward published under the title of A Pazre of Turtle 
Doves: ‘If Apelles had beene tasked to have drawne her counterfeit, her two bright- 
burning lampes would have so dazled his quicke-seeing sences, that quite despairing to 
expresse with his cunning pensill so admirable a worke of nature, he had been inforced 
to have staid his hand, and left this earthly Venus unfinished.’ BAILEY (i, 159) : ‘Un. 
furnished’ seems exceedingly vague, if not entirely destitute of sense, and could scarcely 


152 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act ul, SC. ii, 


The fubftance of my praife doth wrong this fhadow “ 
In vnderprifing it, fo farre this fhadow 135 
Doth limpe behinde the fubftance. Here’s the fcroule, 
The continent, and fummarie of my fortune. 


You that choofe not by the view 

Chance as faire, and choofe as true: 

Since this fortune fals to you, 140 
Be content, and feeke no new. . 

Tf you be well pleafd with this, 

And hold your fortune for your bliffe, 

Turne you where your Lady ts, 

And claime her with a louing kiffe. 145 


Baf. A gentle fcroule : Faire Lady, by your leaue, 
I come by note to giue, and to receiue, 
Like one of two contending in a prize 
That thinks he hath done well in peoples eies : 


Hearing applaufe and vniuerfall fhout, 150 

Giddie in fpirit, ftill gazing in a doubt 

Whether thofe peales of praife be his or no. 152 
135. unaderprifing wt | underprizing it 146. [Kissing her, Rowe. After line 


Q,. underpryfing it Q,. underprifing 147, Coll. Wh. i. 
Ae I51. feill...a| gazing still in Pope+. 
142. pleafd] Q,Q,. pleas’d Q,. pleafed 152. peales| pearles Q,. 

Ff. 


have proceeded from any writer who had a passable command of language. Fortunately 
there is a word used by Shakespeare elsewhere, which so exactly expresses what he evi- 
dently meant to say here, that I have little doubt it was the epithet which ‘ unfurnished ' 
has ‘pushed from its stool.’ It is unfellowed. If 1 mistake not, to name this emenda- 
tion is to ensure its reception. 

133. how] ABBOTT, § 46, gives the following additional instances of the use of 
‘how’ for as.—V. and A. 815; Jb. 67; similarly, Gascoigne (MA&tzner) has: ‘How 
many men, so many minds.’ 

137. continent] Dyce: That which contains anything. 

147. note] HALIIWELL: This seems to be an allusion to a bill or note for money 
or anything lent, which is both given and received, or, possibly, to an ordinary receipt. 
The metaphor is also carried out afterwards, ‘—until confirm’d, sign’d, ratified by you.’ 
CLARENDON: To give a kiss and receive the lady. 

151. Pope’s reading certainly gives a smoother rhythm to this line, and the temp- 
tation is strong to adopt it. As the line now stands there seems no way but to make 
‘spirit’ a monosyllable: ‘Giddy in spirit | still gaz | ing in | a doubt;’ where, in addi- 
Hon, the accent falling on zz is objectionable.—Ep, 


ACT III, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 153 


So thrice faire Lady ftand I euen fo, 153 
As doubtfull whether what I fee be true, 
Vntill confirm’d, fign’d, ratified by you. 155 


Por. You fee my Lord Bafiano where I ftand, 
Such as I am ; though for my felfe alone 
I would not be ambitious in my with, 
To wifh my felfe much better, yet for you, 
I would be trebled twenty times my felfe, 160 
A thoufand times more faire, ten thoufand times 
More rich, that onely to ftand high in your account, 
I might in vertues, beauties, liuings, friends, 
Exceed account : but the full fumme of me 


Is fum of nothing : which to terme in groffe, 165 
156. /ee my] FF ,. /ee, my F,, Rowe, 165. /um of nothing -| Ff. (summeF,), 
Pope, Han. Knt. /ee me Qq et cet. Rowe, Pope, Han. Knt, Coll. Sing. Dyce, 
Baffiano] F,. Sta. Wh. Ktly, Clarke, Del. Rife. /wmme 


162. More rich,| Separate line, Mal. of Something ; Q,Q,- fume of fomething : 
Steev. Knt, Dyce i, Cam. Glo. Clarke, Q,. sum of something, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Cla. Wh. ii. Closing line 161, Coll. Sing. Cap. Steev. Mal. Rann, Hal. Cam. Glo. 
Hal. Sta. Wh. i, Ktly, Del. Rlfe, Huds. sum of—something, Cla. sum of—some- 

onely| Om. Ff, Rowe+, Cap. thing ; Huds. 
terme| sum Daniel. 


156. my] Assuredly the Qq are right here.—Ep. 

162. More rich] To avoid the Alexandrine which those two syllables, as the line 
stands, render inevitable, Malone printed them in a line by themselves, and he has a 
highly respectable following. Collier accepts an Alexandrine, but prefers to inflict the 
black disgrace on line 161; he therefore transferred ‘More rich’ to the end of that 
line, whereby he not only gained in smoothness, but by avoiding an awkward czesura 
after ‘to, he gives Abbott (§ 501) the chance to say that the line, 161, thus amended, 
is only an ‘ apparent Alexandrine’ after all, and to call it ‘a trimeter couplet.’—ED. 

163. liuings] Dyce: Possessions, fortune. [An ecclesiastical meaning of this 
word is not as likely to occur to us Americans as to an Englishman.—ED.] 

165. sum of nothing] WARBURTON: We should read ‘ some of something,’ i. e. 
only a piece, or part of an imperfect account; which she explains in the following line. 
HeatH: The common reading is, ‘sum of something.’ The meaning, I apprehend, 
is this: The full sum of me is (to express myself in gross) the sum of what may be 
expected to be found in an unlessoned girl. CAPELL: After telling us, in expressions 
of great warmth, what she would be if wishes could make her such, and on what ac- 
count she would be, she descends with exquisite modesty to what she zs, and in these 
expressions asserts a title to ‘something,’ or to be something, was any estimate made 
of her; and, that even this may not appear too much, the something which she pre- 
tends to is defin’d and ascertain’d by her presently in terms of the greatest sweetness. 
STEEVENS: The purport of the text [of the Qq] seems to be this: —the full sum of 
me—lIs sum of something; i. e. is not entirely ideal, but amounts to as much as can 
be found in—‘an unlesson’d girl,’ &c. Monck Mason: I prefer the Folo, as it is 


154 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT III, SC. ile 


Is an vnleffoned girle, vnfchool’d, vnpractiz’d, 166 
Happy in this, fhe is not yet fo old 
But fhe may learne : happier then this, = 168 


166. vnlefoned | unleffon'd Q,Q,. vn- happy then in this Pope+. happier than 
leffond Q,. this in that Cap. Ec. then happier in thes 

168. happier then this] Qq. happier Dyce iii, Huds. happier than this Johns. 
then in this Ff, Rowe, Coll. iii. more et cet. 


Portia’s intention in this speech to undervalue herself. HALLIWELL: The reading 
of the Folio appears, at first view, to be the most obvious; but having regard to the 
author’s fondness for a jingle, and to the circumstance that ‘nothing’ will scarcely 
suit the passage immediately following it, the other and older lection may be preferred. 
The sum (or whole) of me is sum (or whole) of something, which, to term in gross, 
&c. There should only be a comma after something. WHITE: Portia enumerates, so 
modestly and yet with dignity and self-respect, traits and conditions all of which are 
negative. She is an wmlesson’d girl, wzschool’d, xspractis’d, mot yet so old but she 
may learn, not bred so dull but she 7zay learn, mistress of herself and her belongings 
before, ‘ but now this house, these servants, and this same myself, are yours, my lord.’ 
Here, indeed, is sum of nothing; but how sum of something? But even were not 
the first expression so appropriate, and the second so inappropriate, were their fitness 
for the context equal, the appearance of one in forty Quartos would, as against the 
appearance of the other in the one authentic Folio, only show that an error, or a passage 
in an unrevised form had been repeated forty times. There must be some other reason 
for deviating from the authorized text than the mere preference of any editor, or the 
occurrence of a variation in other editions. CLARENDON: We have retained the Qq 
reading, introducing a dash after ‘of.’ We understand Portia to hesitate for a word 
which shall describe herself appropriately. The Folio reading, ‘nothing, which to 
term in gross,’ &c., would be a singular anti-climax if it were not a direct self-contra- 
diction. Hupson (ed. iii): The dash before something is to indicate that the fair 
speaker hesitates for a term with which to describe herself modestly, yet without any 
affectation of modesty. ROLFE: The Folio reading is more in keeping with the nega- 
tive characteristics which follow than the Qq reading. KNIGHT, SINGER, COLLIER, 
and STAUNTON all agree substantially with Monck Mason. [Whether we read ‘some- 
thing’ or ‘nothing,’ I think a dash should precede it. Then the choice of the word 
will depend on the light in which we here regard Portia. If she is speaking with 
deliberation and choosing her words, she probably said ‘sum of—something,’ which 
clearly and rationally any sem whatever must imply. Nor does the expression lack 
a certain archness in keeping with the occasion. But if, on the other hand, we see 
Portia, brimming over with joy, and in wild, careless, exuberant exaggeration, wish- 
ing herself twenty times trebled, and a thousand times fairer, and ten thousand times 
richer, and in virtues, beauties, livings, friends beyond all calculation, then, I think, we 
shall know of a surety that in such a mood Portia would exclaim that the full sum of 
jer was the ‘sum of—nothing.’—Ep.] 

165. which] Eccies: Perhaps Shakespeare here, as elsewhere, considered ‘ which’ 
both as nominative and accusative. 

168, 169. But] AssorTt, §127: Sometimes du follows an adjective qualified by 
the negative with so, as in the present two instances. So Chaucer: ‘I am bt dede, 
— Knights Tale, where, omitting the negative », we should say, ‘I am du¢ deal.’ 


ACT III, SC, ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 155 


Shee is not bred fo dull but fhe can learne ; 

Happieft of all, is that her gentle fpirit 170 
Commnits it felfe to yours to be direéted, 

As from her Lord, her Gouernour, her King. 


My felfe, and what is mine, to you and yours 173 
169. dred] bread F,. Dyce iii, Rlfe, Huds. 
170. zs] im Coll. ii, iii (MS), Wh. i, 172. King.| King, Rowe. 


168. happier then this] CAPELL pronounces his emendation (‘happier than this 
in that’) ‘necessary for sense as for measure;’ to which CLARENDON assents. MA- 
LONE tried to mend the metre in the line as it stands, by saying that ‘learn’ is here a 
dissyllable. Whereupon STEEVENS: Till the reader has reconciled his ear to the dis- 
syllabical pronunciation of ‘learn,’ I beg his acceptance of amd, a harmless monosyl- 
lable which I have ventured to introduce for the sake of obvious metre. [To me it 
seems clear that we have here, in reality, but one and the same reading in all the Ff 
and Qq. The ‘in’ of FFF, is present to the ear in F, in the final » sound of ‘then,’ 
an absorption to which the Elizabethan ear was more accustomed than ours, so accus- 
tomed, indeed, that the compositors of the Qq and F, omitted the zz altogether. If this 
be so, the full text of the later Ff supplies all that Capell found ‘ necessary for sense as 
for measure,’ without his emendation, which is to my ear harsh.—ED. ] 

170. is] COLLIER (ed, ii): The emendation 2 of the (MS) is comparatively trifling, 
but happy and elegant. Portia means that she is happiest of all, in as much as her gen 
tle spirit will in future be directed by Bassanio. WHITE (ed. i): There can be no 
reasonable doubt [of the correctness of Collier’s (MS) emendation]. Portia first says 
that she is ‘happy zz this, she is not yet so old,’ &c., which is equivalent to ‘ happy in 
that she is not yet so old,’ &c. Next, when speaking in the comparative, she uses a 
similar ellipsis of ‘she is not bred’ for ‘2 that she is not bred.’ But in the last clause 
no such ellipsis can be supposed; and yet the conditional form ‘in that’ is required by 
the structure of the sentence and the sequence of the thoughts; and it is restored to 
the text by the correction of a highly probable typographical mistake of a single letter. 
CLARENDON supports the QqFf by making ‘ Happiest’ neuter: ‘The happiest thing 
of all is, &c.; and ApBort, § 404, explains the old text by supposing an ellipsis: 
‘Happiest of all is (2¢ or ¢his)’ &c. [But both of these methods are to me unsatisfac- 
tory; a shifting of the construction is always more or less awkward, and to be avoided ; 
here it is needless when we have as trifling a change as is offered by Collier’s (MS).— 
Ep. 

ae WEIsS (p. 322): Does this language seem to you slavish and old-fashioned ? 
And do you, madam, declare that you never saw the man yet for whom you would so 
demean yourself? Then I shall know that just at present you are not in love. Per- 
haps you never have been; for it is the perfect language of a woman’s first hours which 
follow love’s declaration, when she feels that her life and soul are to be made complete 
by marriage. She storms herself with questions never before suggested. What could 
he see in her? What has she got to repay this exquisite flattery, this shuddering 
delight at being summoned out of millions of her sex? The first impulse is to spill 
the soul in a libation to the deity of the hour; let the whole of it drench my lover; let 
me not dare to reserve a portion to teach me a first selfish lesson. All, all 1s yours, my 
king! Come, drain it at the chalice of my lips! 


156 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act ill, sc. i 


Is now conuerted. But now I was the Lord : 

Of this faire manfion, mafter of my feruants, 175 

Queene ore my felfe : and euen now, but now, 

This houfe, thefe feruants, and this fame my felfe 

Are yours, my Lord, I giue them with this ring, 

Which when you part from, loofe, or giue away, 

Let it prefage the ruine of your loue, 180 

And be my vantage to exclaime on you. 
Baff. Maddam, you haue bereft me of all words, 

Onely my bloud fpeakes to you in my vaines, 

And there is fuch confufion in my powers, 

As after fome oration fairely fpoke 185 

By a beloued Prince, there doth appeare 

Among the buzzing pleafed multitude, 


Where euery fomething being blent together, 188 
174. But now I] [but now Pope, Han. even now ; Rowe. 
the Lord | the Lady Rowe. Lady 178. Lord] Lords Q.. 
Pope, Han. 179. loofe] lofe Q,. 
175. mafter| mistress Rowe, Pope, 182. Maddam] Madame Q,. Madam 
Han. OL 
176. felfe: and euen now,]| self, and 183. vaines] Q,. veines Q,. 


174. conuerted] AsBBOTT, § 472: Za following d or ¢ is often not written (this 
elision is very old), and when written, often not pronounced. [An additional illus- 
tration of that absorption by the ear of similar final sounds of which we have just had 
an example in line 168. ‘See also ‘riveted,’ V, i, 188, and Shakespeare passim.—ED. ] 

174, 175. Lord... master] CAPELL: [Rowe’s change] is injurious; the former 
of these terms seeming to have been chosen intentionally to express the greater 
dominion. EccLzs: Portia’s words will have a more natural effect if stress be laid 
upon the pronoun: ‘but now / was the lord,’ &c. 

176. euen now] ABBOTT, § 38: ‘ Zvex now,’ with us, is applied to an action that 
has been going on for some long time and s¢z// continues, the emphasis being laid on 
‘now.’ In Shakespeare the emphasis is often to be laid on ‘even,’ and ‘even now’ 
means ‘ exactly or only now,’ i. e. ‘scarcely longer ago than the present:’ hence ‘ dzé 
now.’ Often ‘but even now’ is used in this sense: Mer. of Ven.1,i, 40. On the 
other hand, both ‘evex now’ and ‘du¢ now’ can signify ‘just at this moment,’ as in 
the present instance. See also V, i, 296. 

181. vantage] Dyce: Opportunity. CLARENDON: The position of one who is 
‘master of the situation.’ 

183. Onely] ABBOTT, § 420, refers to this as an instance of the transposition of the 
adverb. But I doubt if it be an adverb here. Is it not an adjective? Bassanio’s 
tongue is silent; only his blood, his blood alone, in his happy blushes, can speak, &c, 
It is, perhaps, not unworthy of note, that the spelling, almost invariable, of this word, 
‘n the Folio, reflects the probable Shakespearian pronunciation of one, i. e. like the 
present own.—ED. 


185. spoke] See ABPOTT, § 243, for instances of curtailed forms of past participles. 


ACT III, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 157 


Turnes to a wilde of nothing, faue of ioy ry 
Expreft, and not expreft : but when this ring 190 * 
Parts from. this finger, then parts life from hence, 
O then be bold to fay Baffanio’s dead. 
Ner. My Lord and Lady, it is now our time 
That haue ftood by and feene our wifhes profper, 
To cry good ioy, good ioy my Lord and Lady. 195 
Gra. My Lord Baffanio,and my gentle Lady, 
I wifh you all the ioy that you can with: 


For I am fure you can wifh none from me: 198 
189. wilde] void Coll. conj. 192. Baffanio’s] Baffanio zs Q.. 
192. O] 6 Q.. 


194. our] ALLEN: I conjectured your,—a very easy and unobjectionable change, 
considering that our and your are so frequently interchanged in Shakespeare and his 
fellow-dramatists (cf. Walker, Crzt. ii, 7), and felt very confident I was right, at first, 
because I referred ‘our’ to the wishes of Nerissa and Gratiano for their own connec- 
tion; and that would give a sense too grossly selfish to be tolerated,—i. e. we wish you 
joy, because your success makes ws successful. Whereas, your indicates that the main 
interest (in the mind even of Nerissa and Gratiano) lay in the wishes and hopes of 
Portia and Bassanio; that is, it is uow time that we, who have seen your hopes realized, 
should follow up your mutual congratulations (for which we have been giving you time) 
with owr wishing of joy. For ‘our’ is certainly emphatic; and the emphasis appears 
to indicate that we are now to do what you have been doing before. But it now 
occurs to me, that Nerissa may be understood to have a less selfish,—in fact, a very 
generous and delicate—sentiment in her mind, and that ‘our’ is the happiest expression 
of it, viz. that she and Gratiano felt Portia and Bassanio’s cause to be their own, (out 
of affection and not out of self-interest,) and that to indicate such unselfish interest on 
their part they said: We have stood by and seen our wishes prosper. The objection 
to this last interpretation (apparently happy as it may be) is, that it makes the subordi- 
nates too patronizing. It would do very well in the case of parents, especially where 
the parents had been contriving a match,—but not so well in that of even a lady in 
a rank so far inferior to that of the noble and world-renowned heiress. I am still 
inclined, therefore, to adhere to my emendation. [To my thinking, the text needs no 
change. The unselfish sense in which Prof. Allen says ‘our’ may be interpreted, is 
the unselfish sense in which I think it must be interpreted, if we catch here an echo 
of that heartsome, fervent wish of Nerissa with which the Second Act closed: ‘ Bas- 
sanio, lord Love, if thy will it be !/—Eb.] 

198. from] HANMER: That is, distinct from me and my wishes. CAPELL: That 
is, you can wish for nothing, the obtaining of which would rob me of joy. JOHNSON: 
That is, none away from me; none that I shall lose, if you gain it. STAUNTON: 
Rather, it means: none beyond what I wish you. ABBOTT, §158: That is, none dif- 
ferently from me; none which I do not wish you. This is probably the correct inter: 
pretation. CLARENDON: Being all-sufficient to each other, you cannot wish to deprive 
me of any joy to add to your own. RoLreE: That is, none sway from me, since you 
have enough yourselves. 


ee 


158 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT III, SC. IL 


And when your Honours meane to folemnize 
The bargaine of your faith : I doe befeech you 200 
Euen at that time I may be married too. 

Baf. With all my heart, fo thou canft get a wife. 

Gra. Ithanke your Lordfhip, you gaue got me one. 
My eyes my Lord can looke as {wift as yours: tN. 
You faw the miftres, I beheld the maid: 205 
You lou’d, I lou’d for intermiffion, 
No more pertaines to me my Lord then you; 
Your fortune ftood vpon the caskets there, 
And fo did mine too, as the matter falls: 
For wooing heere vntill I fwet againe, 210 
And {wearing till my very rough was dry 


201. too.| to. Qq. Cam. Glo. Ktly, Cla. Wh. ii. 

203. gaue] haue Qq Ff. 209. 400,] to Q,Q,- 

206. lou'd for intermiffion, | Q,Q,F F,. 210. heere] heete¥,. heat¥F,. Herd 
lov'd for intermiffion. Q,F , Rowe, Pope, Rowei. Her Roweii. ere Pope et seq. 
Cam, Glo. Wh. ii. /ov’d for intermission ; Swet) fweat FF, 

Sta. loved, for intermission Cla. lowd: 211. rough] Q,Ff. roofeQ,. tongue 
for intermission Theob. et cet. Coll. (MS). . 


208, caskets] Casket Q,Q,, Pope+, 


202. so] ABBOTT, § 133: ‘So’ is used with the future and the subjunctive to denote 
provided that. See also line 217, post. 

205. maid:] WHITE: Nerissa was no servant-maid, according to modern notions, but 
an attendant friend, as well born and bred, perhaps, though not as wealthy, as Portia 
herself. Such a relation was common of old. It existed between Gratiano and Bassanio, 
whose intercourse is that of equals, and the former of whom is evidently a gentleman 
in every sense of the word. Bassanio says to him and to Nerissa: ‘Our feast shall be 
much honour d in your marriage.’ [See HUNTER on The Actors’ Names, az/e, p. xii.] 

206. intermission] THEOBALD: This passage has been nonsensically pointed thro’ 
all the Editions. If loving for intermission can be expounded into any sense, I confess 
I as yet am ignorant, and shall be glad to be instructed in it. But till then I must beg 
leave to think the sentence ought to be thus regulated: ‘ You lov’d, I lov’d :—For In- 
termission No more pertains,’ &c., i. e. standing idle; a Pause, or Discontinuance of 
Action. And such is the signification of z¢ermissto amongst the Latines. STAUNTON 
[see Text. Notes]: If ‘intermission’ is not used, as I think it probably is, for pastime, 
Gratiano may mean ‘for fear of intermission,’ i. e. to avoid delay or loss of time. [In 
spite of Staunton’s good plea for the old text, I cannot but think that Theobald’s punc- 
tuation and interpretation are right—ED.] 

207. No more, &c.] STAUNTON: I owe my wife as much to you as to my own 
efforts. [To understand this we must bear in mind Staunton’s punctuation in the pre- 
eeding line: ‘You lov’d, I lov’d for intermission ;’] 

210. heere] Note in Text. Notes the evolution of ere into heat—Ep. 

210. swet] For the form, see ABBOTT, § 341. 

211. rough] JIALLIWELL: If the ordinary reading be incorrect, perhaps we may 


ACT II, SC, ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 159 


With oathes of loue, at laft, if promife laft, 212 
I got a promife of this faire one heere 
To haue her loue : prouided that your fortune 
ss her miftreffe. 215 
Por. Is this true Nerriffa? 
Ner. Madam it is fo, fo you ftand pleas’d withall. 
Baff, And doe you Gratiano meane good faith ? 
Gra. Yes faith my Lord. 
Baff, Our feaft fhall be much honored in your mar- 220 
riage. 
Gra. Weele play with them the firft boy for a thou- 
fand ducats. 
Ner. What and ftake downe? 
Gra. No, we fhal nere win at that fport, and ftake 225 
downe. 
But who comes heere ? Lorenzo and his Infidell ? 


What and my old Venetian friend Salerio? 228 
217. 2s fo, fo] Ff, Rowe. is, fo Qaq, 228, 229, 238. Salerio] QqFf. Salanio 

Pope et seq. Rowe+. Solanio Knt, Hal. Dyce, Sta. 
224-226. In sens. obsc. Clarke, Del. Huds. Coll. iii. 


substitute south. [Let the better spelling of Q, be noted in its favour. Is it not 
strange that this word has not as yet attracted that winsome band of readers who say 
(as Grant White has somewhere said that they say), ‘Come, let’s sit down and amend 
Shakespeare’? Halliwell’s suggestion is good, but the list of words which can be 
substituted for ‘rough’ is not exhausted; no pent-up Quarto need contract our powers, 
the whole boundless Dictionary is ours.—ED. ] 

220. shall] This means more, I think, than the mere future.—ED. 

227. Infidell] THEOBALD (Nichols’s ///ust. ii, 310): How comes it to pass, that 
there is no more notice taken of Jessica, and that Bassanio and Portia take no notice 
of her at all? Was she still in the habit of a boy, and appeared as Lorenzo's page ? 
[Theobald forgets Jessica’s junketings at Genoa.—Ep.] That there might be no occa- 
sion of taking notice of her, and hearing her story, which could not be so properly done 
if Bassanio [sic] had a letter to deliver of such consequence, and that required so much 
haste; and much less, if Bassanio had read it. But then again, if she was in man’s 
cloaths, how comes Gratiano to say to Nerissa—Bid her welcome, without intimating 
at least that she was a woman in man’s apparel? And again is it not a little odd that 
Jessica [afterwards] mixes herself in discourse about the Jew her father’s desire of 
revenge on Antonio, and still not one civil word is addressed to her by bassanio or 
Portia? [See Theobald’s note, line 250.] 

228. Salerio] The questior here is whether this Salerio represents a new character 
or is merely the compositor’s sophistication of Solanio or Salarino, Rowe and his fol- 
lowers treated it apparently as a mere misprint, and silently changed it to Salanio. 
Capell retains it, but believes it to be an abbreviation for Salerino, which, in the Stage. 


160 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT III, SC. ik 


Enter Lorenzo, Ieffica, and Salerio. 


Baf. Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hether, ae 230 

If that the youth of my new intereft heere 

Haue power to bid you welcome : by your leaue 232 
Scene III. Pope+. - Salerio? from Venice. Q,. Enter...Sale- 
229. Enter...Salerio.] Enter...Salerio rino, Cap. 

a meffenger from Venice Q,Q,. Enter... 230. hether] Q,. Aither Q, et cet. 


direction, he prints in full. Steevens and his followers not only retain it in the text, 
but, induced by the Stage-direction in the Qq, add it as a distinct character to the Dra- 
matis Personz, in addition to Salanio and Salarino. Knight changed it to Solanio. 
‘*Gratiano,’ he says, ‘calls this Salerio “my old Venetian friend ;” and there is no rea- 
son whatever for not receiving the name as a misprint of Solanio or Salanio.’ ‘It 
appears to us,’ Knight continues, ‘not only that there is no necessity for introducing a 
new character, Salerio, but that the dramatic propriety is violated by this introduction. 
In the First Scene of this Act the servant of Antonio thus addresses Solanio and Sala- 
rino: “Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house, and desires to speak with you 
both.” To the unfortunate Antonio, then, these friends repair. What can be more 
natural than that, after the conference, the one should be dispatched to Bassanio, and 
the other remain with him, whose “ creditors grow cruel”? We accordingly find in the 
Third Scene of this Act that one of them accompanies Antonio when he is in custody 
of the gaoler. In the confusion in which the names are printed, it is difficult to say 
which goes to Belmont and which remains at Venice. We have determined the mat- 
ter by the metre of this line, and of the subsequent lines in which the name is men- 
tioned.’ Dyce agrees with Knight in regarding ‘Salerio’ as a decided error,—and in 
thinking it altogether unlikely that Shakespeare would, without necessity and in viola- 
tion of dramatic propriety, introduce a new character, ‘ Salerio,’ in addition to Solanio 
and Salarino. ‘The name of the friend who remains at Venice is rightly given in Q,, 
Salarino;’ see III, iii, 1. The Cambridge Editors follow Steevens and add ‘Salerio’ 
to the Dramatis Persone. To Knight’s and Dyce’s objection that the introduction of 
this new character would be in violation of dramatic propriety, they urge that: ‘tried 
by this standard Shakespeare’s violations [where?—Ep.] of dramatic propriety are 
frequent indeed, and it is no part of an Editor’s duty to correct them.’ [Writing for a 
company of actors so few in number that an attendant cannot be spared for the task, 
but a Prince of Denmark must himself drag a dead body off the stage, it does not seem 
likely that a prudent playwright (whatever else he might have been) would, without 
excellent reason, add to the number of the Dramatis Personz. If, however, a new 
character must be introduced late in the play, that playwright is, indeed, poverty- 
stricken in nomenclature who to avoid confusion can think of no name sharply dif- 
ferent from any with which the audience is already familiar, Furthermore, granting 
that a new character is introduced here, at this late day, when the play is mcre than 
half over, does it not add to the confusion, or to the patchiness, to term him ‘an old 
friend’? Wherefore, in view of all the circumstances, I agree with Rowe and Capell 
in the snnposition that we have here either So/anio or Sa/arino, more likely the former, 
and for the reason given by Dyce.—ED. ] 
231. If that] For ‘kat as a conjunctional affix, see ABBOTT, § 287. 


ACT III, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 161 


I bid my verie friends and Countrimen 233 
Sweet Portia welcome. 
Por. So do I my Lord, they are intirely welcome. 235 


Lor. I thanke your honor ; for my part my Lord, 
My purpofe was not to haue feene you heere, 
But meeting with Sa/erio by the way, 
He did intreate mee paft all faying nay 
To come with him along. 240 
Sal. I did my Lord, 
And I haue reafon for it, Signior Anthonio 
Commends him to you. 
Bag Ere I ope his Letter 
I pray you tell me how my good friend doth. 245 
Sal. Not ficke my Lord, vnleffe it be in minde, 
Nor wel, vnleffe in minde : his Letter there 
Wil fhew you his eftate. 
Opens the Letter. 


Gra. Nerriffa, cheere yond ftranger, bid her welcom. 250 
233. verte] Om. Q,. 243. [Gives Bassanio a letter. Theob. 
235. they... welcome] Separate line, 244. his] this FF, Rowe, Coll. ii. 

Cap. et seq. 248. Opens...] He opens...Q,. open 
intirely| entirely Q,. --- Q,Q,- Bassanio opens... Rowe. 
242. I haue| haue Ff. 250, 257. yond | Q, Ff. yon Q,, Knt, 


for it] fort Pope+, Dyce iii, Hal. Sta. Cam. yon’ Cap. Steev. Mal. 
Huds. : 


233. verie] BIBLE WorD-BOOK: In the phrases ‘ very and eternal God ;’ ‘ very God 
of very God;’ ‘art thou my very son Esau?’ very has its original sense of ¢rue, from 
French wraz, Old French vera, which again are referred by Diez to the Lat. veracus, 
not verax. 

237. to haue seene] See ABBOTT, § 360, for other examples of the Complete 
Present Infinitive. 

240. along] See ABBOTT, § 30. 

247. vnlesse in minde] EccLEs: Unless he is comforted and supported by forti- 
tude. 

248. estate] BrsLz Worp-BooK: This word in the Bible and Prayer-book, and in 
old writers generally, is not restricted to the meaning now usually put upon it, but has 
the same breadth of signification which is still given to the word state. Queen Eliza- 
beth, in a letter to Sir Thomas Heneage (Leycester Corr. p. 241), speaks of a ‘ counsell 
of estate’ and Lord Bacon constantly uses this form of the word in the sense in which 
it is used in the Collect for Good Friday, ‘for all estates of men.’ Latimer defines as 
part of the duty of a king, ‘ To see to all estates ; to provide for the poor ; to see victuals 
good cheap.’—Serm. p. 215. 

249. Opens, &c.] See Appendix, ‘The Text,’ p. 275. 

250. THEOBALD: The Poet has shewn a singular art here in his conduct with rela. 

II 


162 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT III, 6C. ii. 


Your hand Salerio, what’s the newes from Venice? 251 
How doth that royal Merchant good Axthonio; 
I know he vvil be glad of our fucceffe, ~ 
We are the Ja/ons, we haue won the fleece. 

Sal. I would you had vvon the fleece that hee hath 255 
loft. 

Por. There are fome fhrewd contents in yond fame 
Paper, q 2 58 


255. Zwould| Would Pope+, Huds. 257. farewd | /hrowd Q,, Cap. 
’ Would Steev.’93, Var. Knt, Sing. 


tion to Jessica. As the audience were already apprized of her story, the opening it 
here to Portia would have been a superfluous repetition. Nor could it be done prop- 
erly while a letter of such haste and consequence was to be delivered, and on which 
the main action of the play depended. Jessica is, therefore, artfully complimented in 
dumb shew; and no speech made to her, because the Scene is drawn out to a great 
length by more important business. [Thus Theobald has answered his own questions 
at line 227.] 

252. royal Merchant] WaRrsurTON: In the beginning of the 13th Century the 
Venetians gave liberty to any subject of the Republic, who would fit out vessels, to 
make themselves masters of the isles of the Archipelago, and other maritime places; 
and to enjoy their conquests in sovereignty; only doing homage to the Republic for 
their several principalities. By virtue of this license, the Sanudos, the Justiniani, the 
Grimaldi, the Summaripos, and others, all Venetian merchants, erected principalities in 
several places of the Archipelago (which their descendants enjoyed for many genera- 
tions), and became thereby truly and properly royal merchants. Which, indeed, was 
the title generally given them all over Europe. JOHNSON: This epithet was, in our 
poet’s time, more striking and better understood, because Gresham was then commonly 
dignified with the title of the royal merchant. HUNTER (ew Just. i, 308): Shake- 
speare did not use this term without having an eye to the peculiar force of the expres- 
sion. This is remarked by Warburton, who does not appear to have caught its precise 
effect. A ‘royal merchant’ in the Middle Ages was a merchant who transacted busi- 
ness for a sovereign of the time. Thus King John calls Brand de Doway, ‘ homo nos- 
ter et dominicus mercator noster.’ See a protection granted to him, Rotuli Selecti 
1834, p. 23. 

254. Iasons] Doucz (i, 264): The meaning is, Antonio, with his argosie, is not 
the successful Jason; we are the persons who have won the fleece. 

255. I would | you’d won | the fleece, | &c. 

255. fleece] DANIEL (p. 37): Salerio brings the news that all Antonio’s ships have 
been lost, and here, I believe, puns on the words fleece and Jieets. Qy. print fleets, in 
future, in Salerio’s speech ? 

257. shrewd] Skeat (Dict. s. v.): Malicious, wicked; cunning, acute. The older 
sense is malicious, mischievous, scolding or shrew-like, as in Mid. NV. D. Ill, ii, 323. 
Middle English, schrewed, shrewed, accursed, depraved, wicked; ‘schrewed folk,’ i. e. 
wicked people, Chaucer. Schrewed is, literally, ‘accursed,’ past participle of schvewen, 
to curse, beshrew; and the verh is formed from the Middle English adjective schrewe, 
evil, malicious 


ACT II, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 163 


That fteales the colour from Bafianos cheeke, 

Some deere friend dead, elfe nothing in the world 260 

Could turne fo much the conftitution 

Of any conftant man. What, worfe and worfe? 

With leaue Baffanic I am halfe your felfe, 

And I muft freely haue the halfe of any thing 

That this fame paper brings you. 265 
Bag. O fweet Portia, 

Heere are a few of the vnpleafant’{t words 

That euer blotted paper. Gentle Ladie 

When I did firft impart my loue to you, 

I freely told you all the wealth I had 270 

Ran in my vaines: I was a Gentleman, 
And then I told you true : and yet deere Ladie, 

_ Rating my felfe at nothing, you fhall fee 

How much I was a Braggart, when I told you 

My ftate was nothing, I fhould then haue told you 275 

That I vvas worfe then nothing : for indeede 

I haue ingag’d my felfe to a deere friend, 


Ingag’d my friend to his meere enemie 278 
259. feeales] Qq Ff, Rowe, Cap. Steev. 271. vaines:...Gentleman,]| veins. ... 
85, Sta. Cam. Glo. Rlfe, Cla. Wh. ii. gentleman, Rowe. veins, ...gentleman ; 
steal Pope et cet. Pope et seq. 
Baffianos] F,. vaines] Q,. veines Q, et cet. 
264. LT muft freely| muft freely Ff, 274. Braggart] beggar ¥ . 
Rowe. Lmu/ft Q,, Pope+, Dyce iii, Huds. 275. haue] bave ¥,. 
268, &c. Ladie] Lady Qq Ff. 277. haue] had Allen. 


262. constant] Douce: Grave. CLARENDON: Steady, even-minded, self-pos- 
sessed, CRAIK (/ud. Ces. II, iv): Firm, resolute. 

264. As this line stands here in the Folio, it contains unquestionably, to the eye ot 
flesh, twelve syllables, and is therefore (I turn pale while I write it) an Alexandrine, 
Pope, believing that there was no way but this, cut out ‘freely’ and breathed so after- 
wards, let us hope. Dyce applauded the deed, and was upheld by Lettsom, who 
observed to him that ‘freely’ had ‘crept in here from the fifth line below,’—a crablike 
feat which always fills me with amaze. On the other hand, instructed by Abbott, 
§ 494, I can only say,—I would request you,—or I would entreat you,—not to fear, not 
to tremble; my life for yours. If you think this is a real Alexandrine, it were pity of 
my life; no, it is no such thing; it is only an ‘apparent Alexandrine;’ it is really a 
respectable Iambic pentameter, like all the rest, only, ‘the last foot contains, instead 
of one extra syllable, two extra syllables, one of which is slurred. And I’ | must freé | 
ly have | the half | of dsything. —Ep. 

267. vnpleasant’st] For similar instances of this contraction, see ABBOTT, § 473. 

278. meere] Unqualified. See Shakespeare passim. 


164 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ill, Sc. it. 


To feede my meanes. Heere is a Letter Ladie, 
The paper as the bodie of my friend, 280 
And euerie word in it a gaping wound = 
Iffuing life blood. But is it true Salerzo, 
Hath all his ventures faild, what not one hit, 
From Tripolis, from Mexico and England, 
From Lisbon, Barbary, and India, 285 
And not one veffell fcape the dreadfull touch 
Of Merchant-marring rocks? 
Sal. Not one my Lord. 


Befides, it fhould appeare, that if he nae 289 
279. Heere is] Heer’s Q.. 283. what] what, Q,F,. 
280. as] is Pope, Han. 284. and | from Rowe+. 
282. life blood] life-blood Rowe. 286. And] Has Eccles conj. 
283. Hath] Have Rowe et seq. _ Scape ’scaped Pope+, Ec. 


280. as] Walker (C7. iii, 55), not knowing that he was anticipated by Pope, sug- 
gested zs. But Dyce (ed. iii) says that he prefers the old reading, and I think he 
speaks for all of us. ‘The paper [being] as the body,’ &c., is one of Allen’s adver- 
3aria.— ED, 

282. Issuing] CLARENDON: The verb is generally neuter, except in the phrases, 
‘to issue an edict,’ ‘issue a proclamation.’ 

284. Mexico] TH. Exze (Sh. Jakréuch, xiv, 178), after a thorough and searching 
examination of this play for the purpose of detecting in it violations of local manners 
and customs, discovers barely three or four. The first is the reason assigned for Bas- 
sanio’s hasty departure at nine in the evening (II, vi, 73), because ‘the wind is come 
about.’ ‘This reason is not applicable,’ says Elze, ‘to a passage through the lagoon to 
the mouth of the Brenta; it applies only to a seacoast.’ Next, the allusion to Mexico 
here and at I, iii, 20, is English, not Venetian. ‘The Republic never had any direct 
communication with Mexico, nor even with America.’ Lastly, the organization of the 
Court in the Trial Scene is not exactly correct. See Elze’s note, IV, i, 1, and also Ozh. 
I, ii, 51. ‘ These,’ he says in conclusion, ‘are all the instances which I have been able 
to find in the Merchant of Venice and in Othello that deviate from local truth. Little 
enough, indeed! And when we consider that even historians, and travellers like Tom 
Coryat, rarely are free from far worse errors of this kind, it is astounding that the Poet, 
untrammelled by restrictions laid on writers of travels, has not often offended against 
reality, but has been so exactly true to it. Shakespeare’s knowledge of Venice and 
of Padua seems inconceivable, his fidelity in depicting them, marvellous ; assuredly it 
may be said that the Merchant of Venice and the First Act of Othello have not merely 
Venice for their background, but are actually played in the very city.’ 

286. scape] RoLFE: Not to be printed ‘’scape.’ It is found in prose. 

288. EccLes: The supposed universality of Anthonio’s losses is not a little injurious 
to the probability of the fable. 

289. should] It is not easy to define this ‘ should: ” as the past tense of sha// there 
seems to be somewhat too much compulsion in it; Abbott, § 324, suggests a verb shall, 
like the German so//en, which means 7s fo, not ane ought. Perhaps it is of this sha 


ACT III, SC.ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 165 


The prefent money to difcharge the Iew, 290 
He would not take it : neuer did I know 

A creature that did beare the fhape of man 

So keene and greedy to confound a man. 

He plyes the Duke at morning and at night, 

And doth impeach the freedome of the ftate 295 
If they deny him iuftice. Twenty Merchants, 

The Duke himfelfe, and the Magnificoes 

Of greateft port haue all perfwaded with him, 

But none can driue him from the enuious plea 


Of forfeiture, of iuftice, and his bond. 300 
lef. ‘When I was with him, I haue heard him fweare 

To Tuball and to Chus, his Countri-men, 302 
300. forfeiture, of | forfeiture of F, 302. Countri-men| FF. Country-men 

Fs Q,Q,. countrey-men Q,. countrimen ¥,, 
301. heard him] heard hiw Q.. countrymen F. 


that ‘should’ is here the past tense. Rolfe refers to Abbott, § 322, where instances 
are given of ‘should’ as the past tense of the usual shad/,; he may be right. The 
‘Elizabethan use of should is to me always difficult to analyze. Compare Stephano’s 
question about Caliban: * Where the devil should he learn our language ??—Ep. 

291. He] Note the facile shifting of the subject.—Ep. 

292, 293. man] Where are our happy emenders of Shakespeare that they have no 
sat down before these two lines, each ending (dreadful thought!) with the same word ? 
What arguments founded on logic, propriety, ductus hiterarum, &c., &c., might there 
not be alleged to prove that the former line should read: ‘A creature that did bear 
the human shape’ !—Ep. 

293. confound] Clarendon explains this word by examples from M/acb., King John, 
Jeremiah, and Isaiah. Tt somehow seems to me that my Yankee ears have, at times, 
detected the sound of a word, which I thought was the same as this, in one of the 
verses of ‘God Save the Queen,’ on which I have not hitherto supposed that Britons 
needed a commentary.—ED. 

295. impeach the freedome] CLARENDON: That is, denies that strangers have 
equal rights in Venice. RoLFE: Compare, however, IV, i, where Shylock says: ‘If 
you deny me, let the danger light Upon your charter and your city’s freedom,’ as if 
the freedom depended upon a charter, which might be revoked by the power that had 
granted it. The thought here may be the same. 

297. Magnificoes] ‘The chiefe men of Venice are by a peculiar name called Mag- 
nifici, i, Magnificoes.’—Minsheu, Guide into Tongues, 1617, s. v. Magnificent. 

298. perswaded with] ABBoTT, § 194: That is, argued with. ROoLFE: It is the 
only instance in which Shakespeare joins ‘ with’ to this verb. 

299. enuious] DyceE: Malicious. 

302. Countri-men] WALKER (C7%z. ii, 141) calls attention to this spelling in the 
Folio, as also to puppi-dog, ladiship, ladi-bird, honisuckle, peniworth, not indeed pecu- 
liar to it, being common to all the publications of that age, but which he notes as use 
ful for the purposes of collation, &c. 


166 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act tii, SC. it 


That he would rather haue Azthonio’s fleth, 303 
Then twenty times the value of the fumme ‘ 
That he did owe him : and I know my Lord, 305 


If law, authoritie, and power denie not, 
It will goe hard with poore Anthonio. 
Por. Is it your deere friend that is thus in trouble? 
Baf. The deereft friend to me, the kindeft man, 
The beft condition’d, and vnwearied fpirit ; 310 
In doing curtefies: and one in whom. 
The ancient Romane honour more appeares 
Then any that drawes breath in Italie. 
Por. What fumme owes he the Iew? 
Baff. For me three thoufand ducats. 315 
Por, hat, no more? 
Pay him fixe thoufand, and deface the bond: 
Double fixe thoufand, and then treble that, 
Before a friend of this defcription 
Shall lofe a haire through Baffano’s fault. 320 
Firft goe with me to Church, and call me wife, 
And then away to Venice to your friend: 
For neuer fhall you lie by Portas fide : 
With an vnquiet foule. You fhall haue gold 324 


310. condition’d, and | condition’d: An 319. this] his Walker. 
Warb. Johns. condition’d, most Lansd. 320. Shall Should Cap. Var. 
unwearied | unweary'd Rowe+. through] through my Ff, Rowe+. 
unwearied’st Hunter, Coll. ii, iii (MS). thorough Steev.’78, 85, Sta. Coll. iii. 
316, 317. One line, Qq. Baffano’s] F,. 


310. yvnwearied] See II, i, 53. 

313. Then any] ALLEN: Read ‘Than’ any’ [where ‘7am’ represents the absorp 
tion of the preposition zz. See line 168 above]. 

319. this] After seeing the many instances which WALKER (C7. ii, 219) has gath- 
ered from the Folio where ¢4zs and zs have supplanted one another, I think we shall 
be inclined to accept his change in this passage of ‘this’ into 42s.—Ep. 

320. To aid the scansion, Malone tells us that ‘hair’ is used as a dissyllable; and 
Steevens printed ‘thorough.’ 

320. Shall] BosweELt says that this is ‘sou/d in the folio and quarto H [i. e. 
Q,]; shail in quarto R.’ [i. e. Q,]. A serious misprint; how it arose it is ditrcult to 
say. Perhaps Boswell found some note by Capell which he misinterpreted. Capell 
has should; it is unusual for him to adopt a reading differing from all authorities with- 
out a word of comment, but I can find none here. As is indicated in the Text Notes, 
the four Folios and the three Quartos have all the same word: ¢shall.’—Ep. 

321. Church] CLARENDON: Not ‘temple,’ as in II, i, 50. 


ACT III, Sc. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 167 


To pay the petty debt twenty times ouer. 325 
When it is payd, bring your true friend along, 

My maid Nerriffa, and my felfe meane time 

Will liue as maids and widdowes ; come away, 

For you fhall hence vpon your wedding day : 

Bid your friends welcome, fhow a merry cheere, 330 
Since you are deere bought, I will loue you deere. 

But let me heare the letter of your friend. 


Sweet Baffanio, my /hips haue all mifcarried, my Credt- 
tors grow cruell, my eftate ts very low, my bond to the Tew ts 
forfert, and fince in paying it, itis impoffible I fhould liue, all 335 
debts are cleerd betweene you and I, if I might fee you at my 
death: notwithfianding, vfe your pleafure, if your loue doe not 
perfwade you to come, let not my letter. 


Por. O loue! difpach all bufines and be gone. 339 
329. your] my Rowe. before otwithstanding). 
330, 331. In margin by Pope, Han. 336. fee] Ff, Rowe, Rife. but fee Qq 
331. deere bought] dear-bought Dyce. et cet. 
333- Sweet] Baff. [reads] Sweet Rowe at] as Q.. 

et seq. 337- death :] death. Q,. 
336. and I,] and me, Pope+, Cap. 339. Por.] Om. Q.. 

Steev.’85. and J. Harness (with a dash difpach| ¥,. dispatch Q,. 


325. twenty times] WHITE (ed. ii): In her enthusiasm and her love, Portia talks 
largely. In Shakespeare’s time sixty thousand ducats were equal to at least one million 
of dollars now. 

330. cheere] STEEVENS: Countenance. ([Cotgrave gives: Chere: f. The face, vis- 
age, countenance, fauour, looke, aspect of a man; also, cheere.] 

331. Eccues: Portia could not possibly intend by these words ungenerously to remind 
Bassanio of the benefits she had conferred upon him. They must, I think, relate to that 
anxiety and distress of mind which she had undergone during the time that his fate was 
in suspense ; possibly, too, to the grief she was now about to suffer in his absence, [Not 
only during the time that Bassanio’s fate was in suspense, but during the time when her 
own fate hung on the chance decision of her suitors, when her little body was aweary 
of the world.—ED.] 

336. you and I] AspoTt, § 205: Sometimes euphony and emphasis may have 
successfully contended against grammar. This may explain / in ‘and I,’ ‘but I,’ fre- 
quently used for me. ‘’Tween you and I’ seems to have been a regular Elizabethan 
idiom. The sound of @ and / before me was avoided. See several examples in § 209. 
Harness: According to the general way of printing this passage, the seeing Bassanio 
at his death has been made the condition of Antonio’s forgiving him his debt. Such 
a want of generosity is inconsistent with the tenderness and nobleness of Antonio. 
The present punctuation [see Text. Notes] was suggested by Mr Charles Kemble. 

339. CAPELL (ii, 66): To the exclamation that follows the letter, the name (Portia) 


or 


168 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [AcT ill, SC. ih 


Baff. Since I haue your good leaue to goe away, 340 
I will make haft ; but till I come againe, 
No bed fhall ere be guilty of my ftay, ee 
Nor reft be interpofer twixt vs twaine. Exeunt, 


343. Wor] No Q,, Theob. Warb. Johns. ii. 
Steev. Mal.’90, Hal. Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. 343. twaine] two Rowe i. 


is prefix’d in all editions but one, Q,; it’s absence from that Quarto, and the absence 
from every Quarto and Folio too of the words that direct a reading by the person she 
speaks to, create suspicion—that she herself is the vegder, for all her ‘hear,’ having the 
letter put into her hands by Bassanio, who found himself incapable to obey her in that: 
persons of feeling will be apt to think, with the editor, that there is in this a propriety, 
as well as a good dramatic effect, and her instant exclamation when over does cer- 
tainly follow more naturally and with better grace than at present. [It was while at 
the harmless drudgery of collation, and long before I had read Capell’s excellent note, 
that I was struck with the omission in the Qq and Ff of any intimation that it falls to 
Bassanio to read the letter, as is his wont on the stage. Add to this that in Q, Por- 
tia’s name is not prefixed to line 339; although the letter is in Italics and this line in 
Roman, yet the suggestion was unavoidable that it is Portia who reads the letter. (Such 
suggestions, let me add, are more likely to arise with the full text in view than when it 
is looked at piecemeal in Textual Notes.) But Portia says, ‘Let me Acar the letter of 
your friend, which is, doubtless, the reason why Rowe inserted the Stage-direction to 
Bassanio to read it. Whereupon it occurred to me that all difficulties would disappear 
if Bassanio, in obedience to Portia, were to begin the letter, and, when he falteringly 
reaches the words ‘if I might see you at my death,’ were to pause,—unable to master 
his emotion. Portia then tenderly takes the letter from him, finishes it aloud, and, im 
a transport of agony, cries, ‘O love! dispatch all business and begone.’—Eb. ] 


ACT III, SC. ili.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 169 


[Scene LT. 


Enter the Iew, and Solanio, and Anthonio, 
and the Laylor. 


few. Taylor, looke to him, tell not me of mercy, 

This is the foole that lends out money gratis. 

Taylor, looke to him. 5 
Ant. Heare me yet good Shylok. 
few, Ile haue my bond, fpeake not again{ft my bond, 

I haue fworne an oath that I will haue my bond: 

Thou call’dft me dog before thou hadft a caufe, 


But fince I am a dog, beware my phangs, 10 
The Duke fhall grant me iuftice, I do wonder 
Thou naughty Iaylor, that thou art fo fond 12 
Scene IV. Pope+. Scene III. Rowe +.  Gaoler Johns. Jazlor Cap. 
et cet. : 3. not me] me not Rowe i. 
1. Enter...Solanio] F,F,, Cap. Hal. 4. lends] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Hal. Wh. i, 
Enter...Salarino Q,, Knt, Dyce, Sta. Cam. Rlfe, Huds. J/en¢t Qq et cet. 
Glo. Clarke, Cla. Huds. Coll. iii, Wh. ii. 8. J haue] I’ve Pope+, Dyce iii, 
Enter...SalerioQ,Q,. Enter...Salanio F,, Huds. 
Steev. Mal. Coll. i, Sing. Wh. i, Ktly. 9. call’dft) call’? ¥, Rowe i. 
Enter...Solarino Rowe+. 10. phangs| phangesQ,. fangs Q,. 
3, 5, 12. Zaylor] QqFf. Goaler Rowe Il. 2uftice,| iuftice; Q,. Justice. Rowe. 


I. GENTLEMAN (Dram. Censor, i, 285): In this Scene we are certain our author 
might have very much improved both characters, had extending them occurred to his 
imagination; characters of importance should never be brought on for trifling purposes, 

3. LoRD CAMPBELL: It appears from this Scene that the action on the bond had 
been commenced and Antonio had been arrested on mesne process. In lines 12, 13, 
Shylock threatens the Jailer with an action for ‘escape,’ for allowing Antonio to come 
for a short time beyond the walls of the prison. 

4. lends] CoLLizR: Now that Antonio is ruined and in prison, it is more proper 
for Shylock to speak in the past with the Qq, than in the present with the Folio, An- 
tonio has nothing now to lend. HALLIWELL: On the supposition that Shylock is here 
speaking with a violent sneer, the present tense seems preferable; although, of course, 
as a strict matter of fact the past tense is correct. 

12, naughty] STAUNTON: In the present day this is commonly employed to express 
some venial or childish trespass. In old language it bore a stronger meaning, and was 
used indifferently with wicked, bad, base, &c. Thus, Leonato says of the villain Bora- 
chio,—‘ this naughty man shall face to face be brought to Margaret.’—Much Ado, V, 
n. And Gloster, in King Lear, addresses the savage and relentless Regan, when she 
plucks his beard, as: ‘ Vaughty lady.’ 

12, 13. so fond To] Aszort, § 281: As sometimes the antecedent and sometimes 
the relative may be omitted without injury to the sense, so in relative constructions, 


179 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ut, SC. iii. 


To come abroad with him at his requeft. 13. 
Ant. I pray thee heare me fpeake. 
Tew. Ile haue my bond, I will not heare thee fpeake, _ 15 


Ile haue my bond, and therefore fpeake no more. 
Ile not be made a foft and dull ey’d foole, 
To fhake the head, relent, and figh, and yeeld 
To Chriftian interceffors : follow not, 
Ile haue no fpeaking, I will haue my bond. Ezz Jew. 20 
Sol. It is the moft impenetrable curr 
That euer kept with men. ; 
Ant. Let him alone, 
Ile follow him no more with bootleffe prayers : 
He feekes my life, his reafon well I know ; 25 
I oft deliuer’d from his forfeitures 
Many that haue at times made mone to me, 
Therefore he hates me. 
Sol, Jam fure the Duke will neuer grant 


this forfeiture to hold. 30 
14. pray thee] prethee Q,. 26. from] him Q,. 
15. dond,| bond: Q,. 29. I...Duke] Separate line, Pope et 
17. dull ey'd] dull-ey'd Q,. seq. 
25. life,| life; Rowe. 29, 30. J...hold] Prose, Ff, Rowe. 


€. g.50....45,50.... that, &c., one ot the two may be omitted. Thus, here: so 
fond (as) to come abroad,’ &c. 

12. fond] STEEVENS: That is, so foolish. KNIGHT: We are inclined to think that 
it here means indulgent, tender, weakly compassionate. 

17. dull ey’d] In my copy of Q, there is between these words a hyphen, faint, rt 
is true, but distinct enough to have attracted my notice, and the notice of Capell, who 
was not dull eyed; he underscored it with red ink as a varia lectio. In Ashbee’s faith- 
ful Facsimile it may still be detected as a dot. In my copy of Grigg’s photographic 
Facsimile it has vanished.—ED. 

17. foole] COWDEN-CLARKE: By the way in which the Jew uses this term here,— 
twice in this short Scene, and each time in conjunction with benevolence,—Shakespeare 
well marks Shylock’s characteristic idea, that kindness, compassion, and good feeling 
are synonymous with folly. 

18, the] ABBOTT, § 92: French influence is perceptible here in this use of the arti- 
cle, instead of the possessive pronoun. 

22. kept] SINGER: That is, dwelt. In some of the midland counties in England, 
the common dwelling-room is still called the keeping-room. STAUNTON: To ‘keep,’ 
in the sense of to five or dwell, is still preserved at the University; ‘Where do you 
teep ?’ being frequently heard with the meaning of ‘ Where do you reside ?? 

29, 31. LORD CAMPBELL: All this has a strong odor of Westminster Hall. 

30. forfeiture to hold] To the instances which he alleges where a noun and 


ACT III, SC. iii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 171 


An. The Duke cannot deny the courfe of law: 31 


31. law.... Venice, | law,... Venice: Theob. conj. (subs.), Cap. Ec. Knt, Sta. Ktly, Hads. 


infinitive are used as subject or object, ABBOTT, § 354, says that perhaps this present 
example may be added, ‘though “forfeiture” may be personified, and “ grant” used 
like allow.’ 

31, &c. THEOBALD, in a letter to Warburton, dated 1729 (Nichols’s ///ust. ii, 310), 
suggested a comma after ‘law,’ a full stop after ‘ Venice,’ and to read ’ 7w// for « Will.’ 
WarxzurTon: As the reason here given seems a little perplexed, it may be proper to 
explain it. If, says he, the duke stop the course of law, it will be attended with this 
inconvenience, that stranger merchants, by whom the wealth and power of this city is 
supported, will cry out of injustice. For the known stated law being their guide and 
security, they will never bear to have the current of it stopped on any pretence of equity 
whatsoever. CAPELL (ii, 66): In this division and reading [of the Folio], the nomi- 
native to ‘impeach’ is ‘commodity ;’ which, whatever sense shall be put on it, cannot 
rationally be said—to impeach a State’s justice. In the next place, ‘denied’ is a repe- 
tition of the term [two lines above], and the relative by which it is govern’d should 
have reference (in course) to the terms which ‘deny’ governs, i. e. ‘course of law,’ 
which are not its reference under the punctuation [of the Folio]. There are such 
objections to that punctuation and the former reading [‘ Will,’ line 34], that it is not 
seen by the Editor how they can be maintained: and as the minute alterations that he 
has made in those articles [see Text. Notes] remove both these objections, and (withal) 
develop the speaker’s reasoning with great clearness, they are given into by him with 
much readiness, and (’tis fancy’d) will be by others. ‘For’ has its common sense of— 
by reason of; and ‘commodity’ is—commodious privileges: and the words in which 
Antonio declares his reason why a denial of law’s course would impeach the State’s 
justice, imply—that the State was bound to let the law have its course with all nations, © 
as its profits rose out of all. MALONE: That is, for the denial of those rights to strangers 
which render their abode at Venice so commodious and agreeable to them, would much 
impeach the justice of the State. The consequence would be, that strangers would not 
reside or carry on traffic here; and the wealth and strength of the State would be dimin- 
ished. In The Historye of Italye, by W. Thomas [1561, fol. 85], there is a chapter on 
‘ The libertee of straunger’s in Venice’ [in which he says: ‘ Al men, specially strangers, 
haue so muche libertee there, that though they speake very ill by the Venetians, so they 
attempt nothinge in effect against theyr astate, no man shal control theim for it..... 
And generally of all other thynges, so thou offende no man priuately, no man shal 
offende the: whyche vndoubtedly is one pzincipall cause, that draweth so many 
straungers thither.’—ap. Clarendon]. KnicHT: The construction of this passage, as 
it stands in all the old copies, is exceedingly difficult; and the paraphrases of Warbur- 
ton and Malone do not remove the difficulty. In their reading, which is ordinarily 
followed, ‘commodity’ governs ‘impeach.’ But ‘commodity’ is used in the sense of 
traffic—commercial intercourse ; and, although the traffickers might impeach the justice 
of the State, the traffic cannot. Capell, neglected and despised by all the commenta- 
tors, has, with the very slightest change of the original, supplied a text which has a 
clear and precise meaning, and this we have followed: The Duke cannot deny the 
course of law on account of the interchange which strangers have with us in Venice; 
if it be denied, ’¢w2/7 much impeach the justice of the State. CoLLier (ed. i): The 
sense of these lines is quite clear, though the construction may be a little involved. 
Antonio says that if the commodity or advantage which strangers enjoy in Venice be 


172 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [acr ill, sc. it, 


For the commoditie that ftrangers haue - 32 
With vs in Venice, if it be denied, 

Will much impeach the iuftice of the State, 

Since that the trade and profit of the citty 35 
Confifteth of all Nations. Therefore goe, 

Thefe greefes and loffes haue fo bated mee, 

That I fhall hardly fpare a pound of flefh 


To morrow, to my bloudy Creditor. 39 
34. Will)’ Twill Theob. conj. Cap. Ec. Cla. Wh. ii. 
Kut, Sta. Ktly, Huds. 36. Therefore] Thercforr F ,. 
the State] his ftate Q,, Cam. Glo. 37. haue] hath Q,. 


denied, that denial will much impeach the justice of the State, which derives its profit 
from all nations. No change of the ancient text seems necessary. SINGER: It must 
be borne in mind that Antonio was a citizen of Venice, and Shylock one of the 
strangers. FLALLIWELL: The grammatical construction of this passage is exceed- 
ingly involved, but the meaning seems to be: for the privilege which strangers have 
in Venice, if the letter of the law be denied, will call into question the justice of the 
State, which derives its trade and profit from commerce with all nations. Strangers 
were especially fayoured in Venice. STAUNTON: We adopt the slight alteration pro- 
posed by Capell; for the construction of the original is so perplexed that it seems 
impossible to extract from that any clear sense. Possibly, ‘For the commodity that 
strangers have’—is in the same predicament with other lines in these plays; and being 
intended by the author to be cancelled, was carelessly inserted by the old printers, 
together with the better expression of the same idea which follows it: ‘Since that the 
trade and profit of the city Consisteth of all nations.’ ‘Without this unaccommodating 
line, the passage is perfectly logical and easy: ‘The duke cannot deny the course of 
1aw With us in Venice; if it be denied, ’Twill much impeach the justice of the State; 
Since,’ &c. WHITE (ed. i): It is more in Shakespeare’s free style to repeat ‘deny’ 
with reference to another subject (i. e. ‘the commodity,’ &c.), than to write so precise 
a passage as Capell’s text gives. CLARENDON: For the refusal of the usual facilities 
enjoyed by strangers in Venice will bring in serious question the justice of the State. 
Dyce (ed. iii): The proper punctuation of this passage is very doubtful. ALLEN: 
Capell must be right. [The difficulty in this puzzling passage lies in determining to 
what ‘it,’ in ‘if z¢ be denied,’ refers. It can refer either to ‘course of law’ or to ‘com- 
moditie.’ Capell referred it to the former; Malone to the latter; and under these two 
leaders all subsequent commentators have, in effect, ranged themselves. At present, I 
prefer Malone.—ED. ] 

34. iustice] KEIGHTLEY (Zxf. p. 151): I am rather dubious of ‘justice,’ and 
should prefer zvterest or traffic. 

35. Since that] See Assort, § 287; or Macéb. IV, iii, 106; or Oth. I, i, 75; or 
Lear, IV, vi, 215. 

37. bated] RoLFEe: Reduced, lowered. Cf. ‘bated breath,’ I, iii, 128, It shoutd 
not be printed "dazed, it is not a mere metrical contraction of abated, but a distinct 


word (cf. wake and awake, &c.), often found in prose writers. See examples in Web- 
sters Dict. 


ACT Il, SC.iv.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 173 


Well Taylor, on, pray God Baffanio come 40 
To fee me pay his debt, and then I care not. Exeunt. 


[Scene [V] 


Enter Portia, Nerrifja, Lorenzo, Ieffica, and a man of 
Portias. 


_ Lor. Madam, although I fpeake it in your prefence, 
You haue a noble and a true conceit 
Of god-like amity, which appeares moft ftrongly 5 
In bearing thus the abfence of your Lord. 
But if you knew to whom you fhew this honour 
How true a Gentleman you fend releefe, 
How deere a louer of my Lord your husband, 
I know you would be prouder of the worke 10 
Then cuftomary bounty can enforce you. 
Por. J neuer did repent for doing good, 
Nor fhall not now : for in companions 


d 


That do conuerfe and wafte the timetogether, 14 
40. on,] on ; F, et seq. 5. god-like] gold-like Q,. 
Scene V. Pope+. Scene IV. Rowe, mofe| Om. Pope, Han. 

Cap. et seq. 7. fnew fhow Q,. 
I. aman of Portias] a servant of Por- 8. releefe] relief to Rowe+. 

tia’s. Rowe. 12, 13. for...Vor] of...dnd Pope+. 
3. your] you F.. 


5. amity] WALKER (Vers. 201): The 2 in zy is almost uniformly dropt in pronun- 
ciation. [Where see many examples; see also ABBOTT, § 467. As ALLEN says, this 
‘amity’ is as between Bassanio and Anthonio.—ED. ] 

8. Gentleman] CLARENDON: This is in the dative case. We, in modern English, 
use such a dative, i. e. without the preposition ¢0, only when it comes between the verb 
and its accusative, as ‘you send the gentleman relief.’ [See also ABBorTT, § 394, for 
the omission of the preposition in relative sentences; and I, i, 135; II, vi, 11; and 
IV, i, 406.] 

9. louer] MALONE: In Shakespeare’s time this was applied to those of the same 
sex who had an esteem for each other. Ben Jonson concludes one of his letters to Dr 
Donne by telling him: ‘ He is his true lover.’ See our author’s Sommets, passim; also 
‘bosom lover,’ line 19 in this Scene. 

11. EccLes: Than such common acts of bounty as you are in the continual habit 
of performing can incline you 40 Je. CLARENDON: You would be prouder of the work 
than ordinary benevolence can constrain you to be. 

14. waste] HALLIWELL: Here used in its primitive sense, to consume, spend, pass, 
not necessarily w’ 4 any idea of unprofitableness. ROLFE: Cf. Milton (Sonnet to Mp 


174 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act ill, SC. iv 


Whofe foules doe beare an egal yoke of loue, 15 
There muft be needs a like proportion 

Of lyniaments, of manners, and of fpirit ; 

Which makes me thinke that this Axthonio 

Being the bofome louer of my Lord, 

Mutt needs be like my Lord. If it be fo, 20 
How little is the coft I haue beftowed 

In purchafing the femblance of my foule ; 

From out the ftate of hellifh cruelty, 


This comes too neere the praifing of my felfe, 24 
15. egal] F., Cap. Dyce, Coll. ii. egal/ 19. bofome louer| bofome-louer Q,, 
Q,- equal Q, et cet. Pope+, Ktly. 
17. lyniaments,] Q,F,Q, “4ineaments, 22. foule ;] foule, Q,. foul F,. 
QF LF, “neaments Warb., Johns. 23. cruelty,| cruelty. Rowe. cruelty ? 


1g. In parenthesis, Q,. 


I 


Pope. cruelty! Coll. misery. Q,, Cam. 
Glo, Cla. Wh. ii. 


Lawrence): ‘Help waste a sullen day;’ where, however, the idea of ‘killing time’ is 
more evident than here. 

15. egal] SreeveNs: Commonly used for egza/ in Shakespeare’s time. [See Text. 
Notes. ] 

16. needs] See Apport, § 25. 

17. lyniaments, of manners,] WARBURTON: The wrong pointing has made this 
fine sentiment nonsense; as implying that friendship could not only make a similitude 
of manners, but of faces. The true sense is,—/ineaments of manners, i. e. form of the 
manners, which, says the speaker, must needs be proportionate. STEEVENS: The poet 
only means to say,—that corresponding proportions of body and mind are necessary for 
those who spend their time together. Soin 2 Hen. JV: ‘Dol. Why doth the prince 
love him so then? a/. Because their legs are both of a bigness, &c. Every one will 
allow that the friend of a toper should have a strong head, and the intimate of a sports- 
man such an athletic constitution as will enable him to acquit himself with reputation 
in the exercises of the field. The word ‘lineaments’ was used with great laxity by 
our ancient writers. In Zhe learned and true Assertion of the Original, Life, &c. of 
King Arthur, translated from the Latin of John Leland, 1582, it is used for the human 
frame in general. Speaking of the removal of that prince’s bones, he calls them ‘ Ar- 
thur’s lineaments three times translated ;’ and again, ‘all the lineaments of them remain- 
ing in that most stately tomb, saving the shin bones of the king and queen,’ &c. Again 
in Greene’s Farewell to Follie [vol. ix, p. 255, ed. Grosart], ‘Nature had so curiously 
performed his charge in the lineaments of his bodie,’ Again in Chapman’s 7i/th Iliad : 
‘Took the weariness of fight From all his nerves and lineaments.’ Again in the Twenty- 
third Ihad ; ‘So overlabour’d were His goodly lineaments with chase of Hector.’ 

23. From out] See ABBOTT, § 157. 

23. cruelty] I cannot but think that misery of Q, is the purer text. Is it not toa 
soon for Portia to know the full depth of Shylock’s ‘cruelty’? The utter bankruptcy 
of a Royal Merchant is mzsery enough.— Ep, 

24. the praising] For the substantive use of the verbal with ¢he before it and of 


ACT III, SC.iv.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 175 


Therefore no more of it : heere other things 25 
Lorenfo 1 commit into your hands, 

The husbandry and mannage of my houfe, 

Vntill my Lords returne ; for mine owne part 

I haue toward heauen breath’d a fecret vow, 

To liue in prayer and contemplation, 30 
Onely attended by Werriffa heere, 

Vntill her husband and my Lords returne: 


There is a monaftery too miles off, 33 
25. heere other things | here other things, 26. Lorenfo] Q,. Lorenzo Q,. 

F,F,, Pope. Here are other things. Rowe. hands,| hands F,. 

Hear other things. Thirlby, Theob. et 27. mannage| Q,. manage Q,. 

seq. 29. Secret] sacred Coll. (MS). 


after it, see ABBOTT, § 93, where it is said that it seems to have been sometimes regarded 
as colloquial. 

24, 25. This comes... of it] CowDEN-CLARKE: There is exquisite subtlety and 
refinement of modesty in this passage. There is the delicacy of a mind that dreads 
even to disclaim merit lest it seem to imply that there exists merit to be disclaimed ; 
and there is the sensitiveness of a profound love, which feels it a kind of egoism to 
laud that being who is but another self. 

25. heere] THEOBALD: Portia, finding that her reflections come too near self- 
praise, says, She’ll say no more of that sort; but call a new subject. This was also 
suggested by Dr Thirlby. [See Nichols’s Lz#,. Hist. ii, 225.] 

27. husbandry] See ‘ Borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry,—Ham. I, iii, 77; 
and, ‘There’s husbandry in heaven,’ MM¥acéd. II, i, 4. CLARENDON: Stewardship; 
oixovouia in the literal sense. 

27. mannage] See ABBOTT, § 451, for a list of words used as nouns by Shakespeare, 
to which ‘we should append -a¢on or -ition, -ure or -ing. Almost all of these words 
come to us through the French.’ 

29. secret] COLLIER (ed. ii): Sacred, says the old (MS); perhaps he himself mis- 
heard the word, or perhaps it was a variation by the actor whom he saw. There is nu 
reason for disturbing the old text. 

32. her husband and my Lords] Compare ‘As soul and body’s severing,’— 
Hen. VIIT: Ul, iii, 16; ‘Shall be your love and labour’s recompense,’-—ich. 77. II, 
iii, 62, cited by ABBOTT, § 397, who says that ‘probably this idiom arises partly from 
the readiness with which a compound phrase connected by a conjunction is regarded 
as one and inseparable.’ See also Walker (C7?z. i, 218), or Schmidt (Zex. p. 1419, 
§ 6). 

is monastery] TH. Euze (Sh. Jahrd. xiii, p. 143): Monasteries there were in 
abundance at that time everywhere in Italy, but as it happens there really was a Con- 
vent not far from the locality selected by the poet for Belmont. About three English, 
or Italian, miles from Stra, landwards from the right bank of the Brenta, lay the village 
of Saonara. Here, in the 16th Century, stood a Benedictine Convent, whose occupants, 
it is true, in 1558 united with the Nuns of the same order at St Anna’s in Padua, but the 
Convent buildings survived down to the present century. [Dr Karl Elze maintains that 
Belmont must have been on the banks of the Brenta; and Th. Elze, in this learned 


176 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [acr ill, SC. iv. 


And there we will abide. I doe defire you 
Not to denie this impofition, 35 
The which my loue and fome neceffity 
Now layes vpon you. 
Lorenf. Madame, with all my heart, 
I fhall obey you in all faire commands. 
Por. My people doe already know my minde, 4c 
And will acknowledge you and J/effica 
In place of Lord Bafanio and my felfe. 
So far you well till we fhall meete againe. 
Lor. Faire thoughts & happy houres attend on you. 
Iefi. 1 with your Ladifhip all hearts content. 45 
Por. I thanke you for your wifh, and am well pleas’d 
To with it backe on you: faryouwell Je/fica. Exeunt. 
Now Baltha/er, as I haue euer found thee honeft true, 
So let me finde thee ftill : take this fame letter, 
And vfe thou all the indeauor of a man, 50 
In fpeed to Mantua, fee thou render this 


34. we will] will we Q,, Cam. Glo. true Walker. 


Cla. Rife, Wh. ii. 47. faryouwell) farewell Q,. 
37. layes| lay Han. Hal. 48. Mow Balthafer] Separate line, Pope 
you] me Q,. et seq. 
41. acknowledge] acknowledg F . Balthafer] Balthazar Ff. 
43. So...well] Q,. So fare you well honeft true| honeft-true Dyce, Cam 
Ff Q; And fo farewell Q,, Cam. Glo. Ktly, Glo. Del. Cla. Rlfe, Wh. ii. 
Cla. Wh. ii. 50. the indeauor| th’ indeuour Qa, 
46. pleas’d] ’pris’d Warb. conj. Pope+. 
47, 48. Lines end you... Baltaser, ... 51. Mantua] Padua Theob. et seq. 


Essay, narrows the locality to the neighbourhood of Dolo, around which, from La Mira 
to Stra, on both banks of the Brenta, the magnificoes of Venice had, and still have, 
their palatial residences. Belmont, therefore, must be supposed to have been not far 
from the high road between Padua and Fusina, because Lorenzo met Salerio on the 
road from Venice with the letter from Anthonio, and the park gate where Portia’s 
coach awaited her, must have been on or near a highway fit for travel. Hence, Th. 
Elze’s allusion to Stra in the extract which I have just given.—ED.] 

48. thee] Note the instant change of address, to a servant. Portia uses chiefly 
thou to Nerrissa, but Nerrissa invariably, I think, addresses Portia as you. See I, ii, 
35.—ED. 

48. honest true] WALKER (Crit. i, 23): Write honest-true. See also ABBOT, 
§ 2, for parallel instances where ‘two adjectives are combined, the first being a kind of 
adverb qualifying the second.’ 

51. Mantua] THEOBALD: ’Tis evident to any diligent reader that we must restore, 
as I have done,—‘In speed to Padua,’ it was there, and not at ‘ Mantua,’ Bellaric 
liv’d. So aflerwards: ‘A messenger, with letters from the Doctor, new come from 


ACT Ill, SC.iv.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 177 


Into my cofins hand, Doétor Bedario, 52 
And looke what notes and garments he doth giue thee, 
Bring them I pray thee with imagin’d {peed 


Vnto the Traneét, to the common Ferrie 55 
52. cofins| cofin Q.. Ktly, Del. Coll. iii, Wh. ii. 


55. Lranect] Traject Rowe+, Sing. 


Padua” And again: ‘Came you from Padua, from Bellario? And again; ‘It 
comes from Padua, from Bellario.’ Besides, Padua, not ‘Mantua,’ is the place ot 
education for the Civil Law in Italy. 

52. cosins] KrIGHTLEY: This word was used, in its primitive sense of consan- 
guineus, of any one that was akin. 

54. imagin’d] STEEVENS: That is, with celerity like that of imagination. So in 
the Chorus before Hen. V: II: ‘Thus with imagin’d wing our swift scene flies. 
Again, in Ham. I, v, 30: ‘Wings as swift As meditation.’ Eccirs: Here, however, 
[ incline rather to think it is put for imaginable. - ABBOTT, § 375: The passive parti- 
ciple is often used to signify not that which was and is, but that which was, and, there- 
fore, can be hereafter. In other words, -ed is used for -adde. 

55. Tranect] STEEVENs: This appears to be derived from ¢ranare, and was prob- 
ably a word current in the time of Shakespeare, though I can produce no example of 
it. CAPELL (G/oss.): A Ferry- or Passage-boat: possibly from some provincial Italian 
Word of that Import, springing of—¢ranare, to swim or pass over, that does not appear 
in their Dictionaries. [In his Motes, p. 67, CAPELL says:] Of this word’s sense, and 
derivation you have the Editor’s opinion at large in the Glossary; to which integrity 
calls upon him to add that no example is found of it: notwithstanding which, the word 
must be adher’d to, and not it’s substitute—zrayect, a word that has some examples, but 
not many, and signifying—place of passage; whereas ‘tranect’ is—vehicle, and ex- 
plain’d so by the Poet himself in the very words it is follow’d by. MALONE: Twenty 
miles from Padua, on the river Brenta, there is a dam or sluice to prevent the water of 
that river from mixing with that of the marshes of Venice. Here the passage-boat is 
drawn out of the river, and lifted over the dam by acrane. From hence to Venice 
this distance is five miles. Perhaps some novel-writer of Shakespeare’s time might 
have called this dam by the name of the ‘tranect.’ See DuCange in v. Zrana. 
KnicuT: No other example is found of the use of this word in English, and yet there 
is little doubt that the word is correct. 7ranare and ¢trainare are interpreted by Florio 
not only as fo draw, which is the common acceptation, but as ¢o ass or swim over. 
Thus, the ‘tranect’ was, most probably, the Zow-doa¢ of the ferry. Ismp. (///ust.): If 
Shakespeare had been at Venice (which, from the extraordinary keeping of the play, 
appears the most natural supposition), he must surely have had some situation in his 
eye for Belmont. There is a ‘common ferry’ at two places, Fusina and Mestre. The 
Fusina ferry would be the one if Portia lived in perhaps the most striking situation, 
under the Euganean Hills. But the Mestre ferry is the most convenient medium be- 
tween Padua and Venice. There is a large collection of canal-craft there. It is eight- 
een English miles from Padua, and five from Venice. Supposing Belmont to lie in the 
plain N.-W. from Venice, Balthazar might cut across the country to Padua, and meet 
Portia at Mestre, while she travelled thither at a lady’s speed—M[artineau ?]. Hun- 
TER (i, 328): The ferries at Venice were called traghetti, trajects, as we learn from 
Coryat (Crudities, i, 210) There are in Venice thirteen ferries or passages, which 

12 


178 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act iil, SC. iv. 


Which trades to Venice ; wafte no time in words, 56 
But get thee gone, I fhall be there before thee. 

Balth. Madam, I goe with all conuenient fpeed. 

Por. Come on Neriffa, I haue worke in hand 
That you yet know not of; wee’ll fee our husbands 60 
Before they thinke of vs? 

Nerriffa. Shall they fee vs ? 

Portia. They thall Nerriffa : but in fuch a habit, 
That they fhall thinke we are accomplifhed 
With that we lacke ; Ile hold thee any wager 65 
When we are both accoutered like yong men, 


56. words] word Q,. 65. that] what Rowe ii+, Steev. Mal. 
57. get thee) get hee F,. 66. accoutered | apparreld Q,, Pope+. 
58. [Exit. Q,. accoutred Rowe, Cap. et seq. 


they commonly call Traghetti.” HALLIWELL: ‘And that men may passe speedily, 
besides this bridge, there be thirteen places called ¢raghetti, where boats attend called 
gondole, which, being of incredible number, give ready passage to all men.’—Mory- 
son’s /tinerary, i, 77. ‘Tranect’ is probably a corruption. SINGER: I adopt Rowe’s 
alteration, which corresponds with ¢raghetto, as explained by Florio, in v. ‘a ferrie, a 
passage, or gozell over, or from, shore to shore;’ and with the Latin zvajectzs, which is 
quite in Shakespeare’s manner to have in mind. STAUNTON: ‘Tranect’ is probably a 
misprint for ¢vaject. WHITE: ‘7raject’? may be correct on the authority of Coryat. 
KEIGHTLEY (Zxf. 152): Rowe, I think properly, reads Traject, COLLIER: The (MS) 
makes no change, and none is necessary. DycE and CLARENDON: Rowe’s ¢raject is, 
perhaps, the right reading. COWDEN-CLARKE: The Italian ¢vanare or ¢trainare also 
means to draw or drag; and it is possible that the Venetian ferry-boat was drawn 
through the water by a process still in use in some places. One of the present Editors 
saw a ferry-boat at Rotterdam made to traverse the stream, from the man on board lay- 
ing hold of a rope strained across the canal for the purpose. KarL ELzE (Zssays, 1873, 
p- 279): The ferry to Venice was at that time at Fusina, at the mouth of the Brenta. 
The nonsensical word ‘tranect’ proves that copyist and compositors possessed no 
knowledge of this word, and still less of the thing itself. Even the word ¢raject, cor- 
rectly restored by Theobald, is not a genuine English word, otherwise the poet would 
not have added the explanation, ‘the common ferry,’ which he surely did, only to make 
the meaning clear to his readers and hearers. What visitor does not here at once recog: 
nize the Venetian traghetto (tragetto)? And whence did the poet get a knowledge of 
the traghetto? Coryat is out of the question, and Vecellio, even if we knew that 
Shakespeare had read the book, which we do not, has not a word about the traghetto, 
so that the disbelievers in an Italian journey of Shakespeare cannot account for his 
knowledge by any other means than by oral communication. [Elze contends, in this 
fine Essay, on The Supposed Travels of Shakespeare, that the simplest of all explana- 
tions of this exact local knowledge of Italy is that Shakespeare had himself journeyed 
thither.— Ep. ] 

66. accoutered] Although this word has been generally adopted since the days of 
Capell, I am not sure that afparreld of Q, is not the more satisfactory word. If Portia 


ACT 11, sc. iv.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 17g 


Ile proue the prettier fellow of the two, 67 
And weare my dagger with the brauer grace, 

And fpeake betweene the change of man and boy, 

With a reede voyce, and turne two minfing fteps 70 
Into a manly ftride ; and fpeake of frayes 

Like a fine bragging youth: and tell quaint lyes 

How honourable Ladies fought my loue, 

Which I denying, they fell ficke and died. 


I could not doe withall : then Ile repent, 75 
70. minfing| mincing Q,. +, Cap. Steev. Mal.’90. withal F y Rowe 


75. withall] QqFF,. with all Rowe ii i, Var. et seq. 


had in mind the Doctor’s cap and gown which Dr Bellario was to send her, I doubt if 
she would speak of them as accoutrements. On.the other hand, she refers, almost in 
the same breath, to her dagger and as though she were to be dressed like a bragging 
Jack. Hence I am inclined to prefer Q., which obviates all difficulties. 

The Elizabethan audiences seemed to find especial pleasure in seeing female cha- 
racters disguised as men, to judge from the lightness with which, throughout the drama, 
women slipped into doublet and hose. Rosalind and Imogen occur to us at once; in 
Beaumont and Fletcher there are many more of these disguises than in Shakespeare, 
e. g.: Aspatia in Zhe Maid’s Tragedy, Euphrasia in Philaster, Alathe in The Night- 
Walker, and in Love's Pilgrimage Theodosia retains her disguise from her first entrance 
down to the Fifth Act,and Leocadia from her first entrance down to the very last scene 
of the Fifth Act—Ep. 

72. quaint] Dyce: Ingenious, artful, clever. ; 

75. doe withall] In a note on Meas. for Meas. Steevens, under the pseudonym, 
Collins, shows that this phrase was at times used indelicately. In a note on this 
present passage, ‘ Collins’ refers to his former note with the implication that Portia so 
uses the phrase here. Whereupon GIFFORD, in a note on Jonson’s Silent Woman, V, 
1, 39, thus vindicates the phrase, and Portia, with such proof as has been accepted by all 
editors and commentators ever since: ‘In one of the prettiest speeches surely that ever 
was penned, that of Portia to Nerissa, she describes the appearance she shall make and 
the language she shall hold when “ accoutred like a man.” The line “I could not do 
withal,” or rather, a corruption of it, the commentators, who are always routing in the 
mire of impurity, explain in the most indecent manner. I will not say of Portia, as ot 
Desdemona, that her “motion blushed at herself,” yet she was assuredly a woman of 
modesty, and therefore little likely to use the language of a brothel, or to attribute the 
manners of one to the “ honourable ladies who sought her love.” The fact is, that the 
phrase, so shamelessly misinterpreted, is, in itself, perfectly innocent, and means neither 
more nor less than, 1 COULD NOT HELP IT. In Morte Arthur, where Guinever is 
accused of poisoning one of the Knights of the Round Table, the King says to her, 
“None of them will say well of you, nor none of them will doe battle for you, and 
that shall be great slaunder for you in this court. Alas! said the queen, 7 cannot doe 
withall,” (I cannot help it,) “and now I miss sir Launcelot,” Part III, c. 108. In 
the trial of Udall, lord Anderson says: “ You had as good say you were the author.” 
Udall. “ That will not follow, my lord: but if you think so, J cannot do withai” (1 


180 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act Ul, SC. iv. 


And with for all that, that I had not kil’d them ; 76 
And twentie of thefe punie lies Ile tell, 
That men fhall fweare I haue difcontinued fchoole 
Aboue a twelue moneth : I haue within my minde 
A thoufand raw tricks of thefe bragging Iacks, 80 
Which I will practife. 
Nerrif. Why, fhall wee turne to men? 
Portia. Fie, what a queftions that ? 
If thou wert nere a lewd interpreter : 


78. I haue| I’ve Pope+, Dyce iii, 82. Why] Om. Pope+. 
Huds. 83. gucftions] question’s Q, F, et seq. 
79. moneth| month Q,. 84. nere] near Rowe et seq. 
L haue) I’ve Dyce iii, Huds. interpreter :| interpreter ? Rowe 
within] in Pope+. interpreter ! Theob. 


cannot help it).—State Trials, fol. vol. I, p. 162. And in that excellent old play, the 
Little French Lawyer, Dinant, who is reproached by Clerimont for not silencing the 
music, which endangered his safety, replies : “7 cannot do withal ;” (I cannot help it ;) 
“T have spoke and spoke; I am betrayed and lost too.” I make no apology for this 
long note. Shakespeare is in every hand; and it is therefore incumbent on all those 
who feel a due respect for youth and innocence, to take every opportunity of removing 
the impurities with which his pages are wantonly overcharged. As the sense of the 
words is now fully ascertained, we have a right to expect that the stupid and indecent 
comments of Collins and others on it shall be henceforth omitted. “W2tha/, the read- 
ing of the old copies,” Mr Malone tells us, “was corrected”’ (corrected, with a ven- 
geance!) “to wzth all by Mr Pope.’ Notwithstanding this cheering assurance, thé 
future editors of Shakespeare will do well to let him speak his own language, and to 
print the iine as it stands above, and as it ought always to have stood: “I could not do 
withal.”’ Dyck (Remarks, p. 57): Though after Gifford’s decisive note, this phrase 
is not likely to be again misinterpreted, I may cite the following passage from Pals- 
grave’s Lesclarcissement de la Lang. Fr. 1530: ‘I can nat do withall, a thyng lyeth 
nat in me, or I am nat in faulte that a thyng is done,’ Fol. clxxx (Table of Verbes). 
HALLIWELL: A very common phrase, equivalent to I could not help it, it was not my 
fault. ‘If he beare displeasure agaynst me, I can nat do withal. Sil indigne contre 
moy, je nen puis mays.’—Palsgrave, 1530. The phrase occurs more than once in 
Florio’s Second Frutes, 1591. ‘Beare witnes, my masters, if hee dye of a surfet, I 
cannot doo withall; it is his owne seeking, not mine,’—Nash’s Have with You to 
Saffron Walden, 1596. See further examples in Middleton’s Works, iv, 26, ed. 
Dyce; Webster's Works, iii, 215, ed. Dyce. There is a proverbial phrase: ‘to look 
as if one could not do withal,’ which has a different signification. See instances 
of it in Pick’s Festum Voluptatis, 1639, p. 37; Heywood’s Late Lancashire Witches, 
1634. 

78. That] For other instances of the omission of so before ¢hat, see ABBOTT, § 283, 
or Lear, IV, vii, 47; Ham. IV, vi, 211. 


80. Iacks] MaLonz: In our author’s time, a term of contempt. See Much Auto, 
I, i, 186, 


ACT 111, SC.iv.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 181 


But come, Ile tell thee all my whole deuice 85 
When I am in my coach, which ftayes for vs 

At the Parke gate ; and therefore hafte away, 

For we muft meafure twentie miles to day. Exeunt. 


85. my] my my Q,,. 


85. all my whole] CLARENDON: A similar pleonasm occurs in s Hen. V7: I, i, 
126. 

86. coach] HALLIWELL: Coaches had become exceedingly common at the time 
this present Comedy was written; and in 1601 was introduced into Parliament a bill 
‘to restrain the excessive use of coaches within this realm of England.’ It should be 
recollected that Portia is not speaking of Venice. In that city there were no coaches. 
See Coryat’s Crudities, 1611, p. 225. [From the following note of TH. EuzE (SA. 
Jahrbuch, xiii, 148), it would seem that Shakespeare is a better authority than the ‘Od- 
combian Legge-stretcher,’ as Tom Coryat called himself: ‘In 1562 there were coach- 
makers (carrozzerz) in Venice, who with the Saddlers formed a branch of the Guild 
of Upholsterers. By a law of Venice of 8 October 1562 no coaches were allowed to 
have silk cushions or covers, or any lavish expense of gold or silver, except for the 
handles of the coach-doors, under penalty of 20 ducats fine for every infraction of the 
law.’] 

88. twentie miles] Eccies: This is, it may be presumed, nearly the whole dis 
tance from Belmont to Venice. ELZE (Zssays, p. 279): This may be spoken at ran- 
dom, and she wishes, perhaps, by a vague statement to conceal the true state of things. 
Twenty, like forty, very frequently indicates an indefinite number. It is however, an 
exceedingly remarkable coincidence that the distance between Venice and Dolo [one 
of the possible localities of Belmont] is exactly twenty Italian miles, and the Italian 
mile is the same as the English. Can Shakespeare have known this, and is his state- 
ment, after all, to be taken literally ? [Portia just before speaks of telling ‘twenty puny 
lies.” Halpin contends that Venice is only ten miles away, and that ‘twenty miles’ 
means to Venice and back again. See ‘ Duration of the Action’ in Appendix.—ED. ] 


182 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [AcrIll, Sc. v. 


[Scene V.] 
Enter Clowne and Ieffica. 


Clown. Yes truly ; for looke you, the finnes of the Fa- 
ther are to be laid vpon the children, therefore I promife 
you, I feare you, I was alwaies plaine with you, and fo 
now I fpeake my agitation of the matter : therfore be of 5 
good cheere, for truly I thinke you are damn’d, there is 
but one hope in it that can doe you anie good, and that is 
but a kinde of baftard hope neither. 
Ieffica. And what hope is that I pray thee? 
Clow. Marrie you may partlie hope that your father 10 
got you not, that you are not the Iewes daughter. 
lef. That were a kinde of baftard hope indeed, fo the 
fins of my mother fhould be vifited vpon me. 
Clow. Truly then I feare you are damned both by fa- 


ther and mother : thus when I fhun Sc//a your father, I 15 
Scene VI. Pope+. Scene V. Cap. et Glo. Cla. Huds. Wh. ii. 
seq. 5. be of] be aQ, Q. be o? Cap. 
1. [A garden. Cap. 6. there ts] ther ts Q,. 
Enter Clowne...] Enter Launcelot 8, 12. bafard hope] baftard-hope Fy 
. Rowe. Rowe. 
2, &c. Clo.] Laun. Rowe. 15. L/hun] you /hun Rowe+. 
3,4. promife you] promife yeQ,, Cam. 15, 16. Z fall] you fall Rowe. 


4. feare you] For other instances of the omission of the preposition, see ABBOTT, 
§ 200. 

5. agitation] EccLEs: Cogitation is probably the word about which Launcelot 
blunders here. 

12. so] STAUNTON: ‘So’ means zm that case. 

12, &c.] CHARLES COWDEN-CLARKE (Sh. Characters, p. 406): I have no desire to 
hypercriticise, or to see more in our poet than he himself intended; but the very circum- 
stance of Jessica’s trifling with the Clown upon her conversion from the faith of her 
fathers, strikingly harmonizes with her general tone of character. She would have 
turned Mohammedan, or Buddhist, or Spinning Dervish, or Spinning Jenny, or spin- 
ning anything, and danced a polka at her new faith; flimsy, thoughtless, and unstable. 

15. Scilla] MALonE: Alluding to the well-known line of a modern Latin poet, 
Philippe Gualtier, in his poem entitled Alexandreis : ‘ Incidis in Scyllam, cupiens vitare 
Charybdim” STEEVENS: Philip Gualtier de Chatillon (afterward bishop of Megala) 
was born toward the latter end of the 12th Century. In the fifth book of his heroic 
Poem, Darius (who, escaping from Alexander, fell into the hands of Bessus) is thus 
apostrophized : ‘Quo tendis inertem Rex periture fugam? nescis, heu! perdite, nescis 
Quem fugias, hostes incurris dum fugis hostem: Incidis in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Cha- 


AcT 1, sc. v.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 183 


fall into Charibdis your mother ; well, you are gone both 16 
waies. 

lef. I fhall be fau’d by my husband, he hath made me 
a Chriftian. 

Clow. Truly the more to blame he, we were Chrifti- 20 
ans enow before, e’ne as many as could wel liue one by a- 
nother : this making of Chriftians will raife the price of 
Hogs, if wee grow all to be porke-eaters, wee fhall not 
fhortlie haue a rafher on the coales for money. 


Enter Lorenzo, 25 


lef. Mle tell my husband Lancelet what you fay, heere 
he comes. 
Loren. 1 fhall grow iealous of you fhortly Lancelet, 
if you thus get my wife into corners? 
lef. Nay, you need not feare vs Lorenzo, Launcelet 30 
and I are out, he tells me flatly there is no mercy for mee 
in heauen, becaufe I am a Iewes daughter : and hee faies 
you are no good member of the common wealth, for 
in conuerting Iewes to Chriftians, you raife the price 
of Porke. 35 
Loren. I fhall anfwere that better to the Common- 


21. enow] enough Rowe. 28. zealous] tealious Q,. 
ene asl in as Q,. 36-38. An overlooked fragment of the 
26, Lancelet] Launcelet Q,Q,. Old Play which Sh. rewrote. Ep. conj. 


27. comes.| come? Q,. 


rybdim.’ The author of the line in question (who was unknown to Erasmus) was first 
ascertained by Galeottus Martius, who died in 1476, and we learn from Henricus Gan- 
davensis de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis (i. e. Henry of Gaunt) that the Alexandreis had 
been a common school-book. HALLIWELL gives many examples of the proverbial use 
of this allusion, which Vergil has made familiar to every school-boy, and adds: ‘ There 
is an old Somersetshire proverb of a similar effect: “ He got out of the muxy, and fell 
into the pucksy.”’’ 

18. husband] HENLEY: From St. Paul, 1 Corinthians, vii, 14: ‘The unbelieving 
wife is sanctified by the husband.’ 

21. enow] CLARENDON: ‘Enow’ seems to be generally used of numbers, enough 
of quantity. The same distinction holds in some provincial dialects where both forms 
are still current. 

24. coales] HaLLIWELL: A ‘rasher on the coals’ was a favourite article of food 
in Shakespeare’s time, and is mentioned with the red-herring as a capitai incentive for 
the lover of wine in Nash’s Pierce Penilesse, 1592. ‘The mystical hieroglyphick of 
xashers 0’ th’ coals.’—Decker’s Gull’s Hornbook, 1609. 

36-41. See Appendix, p. 321. 


184 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT III, SC. v. 


wealth, than you can the getting vp of the Negroes bel- 37 
lie : the Moore is with childe by you Launcelet? 
Clow. Itis much that the Moore fhould be more then 
reafon : but if fhe be leffe then an honeft woman, fhee is 40 
indeed more then I tooke her for. 
Loren. How euerie foole can play vpon the word, I 
thinke the beft grace of witte will fhortly turne into fi- 
lence, and difcourfe grow commendable in none onely 
but Parrats : goe in firra, bid them prepare for dinner?” 45 
Clow. ‘That is done fir, they haue all ftomacks ? 
Loren. Goodly Lord; what a witte-fnapper are you, 
then bid them prepare dinner. 


Clow. That is done to fir, onely couer is the word. 49 
38. Moore ts| Moore's Q,. Good my Anon. (ap. Hal.). 
42. the word | a word Han. 48. then] than Q,. 
44. onely| Om. Rowe ii+. 49. That is] That’s Q,. 
47. Goodly] Good Pope+, Coll. ili. to fir] too fir F, et seq. 


39. more] STEEVENS: So in Zhe Fair Maid of the West, 1631: ‘And for you 
Moors thus much I mean to say, I’ll see if more I eat the more I may.’ 

40. lesse] CAPELL (ii, 68): A change of ‘less’ into more makes the jingle fuller. 
HALLIWELL: The original better expresses the speaker’s amusing way of blundering. 
STAUNTON: The quibble here on ‘ more’ and ‘less,’ petty as it is, has been repeated in 
Tit. And.: ‘ Nurse. O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor? Aaron. Well, more or 
ess, or ne’er a whit at all, Here Aaron is,’ &c. 

45. ELZE (Zssays, p. 110): This conversation is unquestionably the prelude to 
the penalty imposed on Shylock in the Trial scene; it gives, as it were, the chord 
and key-note to it. Herein lies its importance, otherwise it would be an idle excres- 
cence. But what is the key-note? When we remember Launcelot’s ridiculous allu- 
sions to cheiromancy and to dreams, it might not, perhaps, be easy to discern here in 
his talk with Jessica anything deeper than witty derision of Theology and the conver- 
sion of Jews. As far as the conversion of the Jews is concerned, it is not impossible 
that some contemporary incident may have given point to Shakespeare’s wit and fun. 
Be this, however, as it may, the serious correlative to this humorous treatment of the 
subject can scarcely be other than that here, under the jingling of the Clown’s bells, 
Shakespeare expresses his own personal disapproval of the religious conversion imposed 
on Shylock. And, moreover, no baptism will help the Jew in the least; spite of his 
assumed Christianity, he is, and will remain, damned. To Shakespeare the main 
spring of religion is the practice of duty and morality, not dogmas. Hence, he could 
not possibly have approved of Shylock’s treatment, either by the State or by society. 

47. Goodly] Tyrwuitr: Surely this should be corrected, as it is by Pope. Far- 
MER: It should be: Good ye Lord! MHALLIWELL: There does not appear to be any 
clear necessity for alteration. ALLEN: I have heard in New England: ‘O, goody 
Lord! and ‘O, goody (Lord or God euphemistically suppressed.) Farmer may, 
therefore, be nearly right—i. e. Goody Lord may be right. 


ACT III, SC.v.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 185 


Loren. Will you couer than fir? 50 
Clow. Not fo fir neither, I know my dutie. 
Loren. Yet more quarreling with occafion, wilt thou 
fhew the whole wealth of thy wit in an inftant ; I pray 
thee vnderftand a plaine man in his plaine meaning : goe 
to thy fellowes, bid them couer the table, ferue in the 55 
meat, and we will come in to dinner. 
Clow. For the table fir , it fhall be feru’d in , for the 
meat fir , it fhall bee couered , for your comming in to 
dinner fir, why let it be as humors and conceits fhall go- 


uerne. Exit Clowne. 60 
Lor. O deare difcretion, how his words are futed, 

The foole hath planted in his memory 62 
50. than] then F,. 61. Suted | suited Rowe. 


53. inftant ;| inftant ? Q,. 


50. couer] See II, ix, 46. 

52. occasion] Eccizs: That is, opportunity afforded by another speaker to play 
upon his words. CLARENDON: Quibbling on every opportunity, taking every oppor 
tunity to make perverse replies. SCHMIDT: At odds with the matter in question, 
turning it into ridicule without reason. 

61. deare discretion] Eccirs: That faculty of the mind most opposite to, and 
inconsistent with, this disposition to quibble, for which Launcelot was so remarkable. 
CLARENDON: Faculty of discrimination, which Launcelot’s misapplied words shewed 
him to lack. See Ham. Il, ii, 490: ‘Well spoken, with good accent and good discre- 
tion.’ SCHMIDT: Good sense, common sense, reason, wisdom. 

61. suted] JOHNSON: I believe the meaning is, What a series or suite of words he 
has independent of meaning; how one word draws on another without relation to the 
matter. MoncK MAson: Lorenzo expresses surprise that a fool should apply his 
words so properly. Eccirs: I doubt whether Lorenzo does not mean how éadly, 
rather than how wed/, ‘his words are suited,’ that is, in how unnatural a manner those 
‘good words’ were connected with matter of so frivolous a character, CAPELL: To 
Lorenzo’s reflections the reader is wish’d to pay some attention: after which, it is pos- 
sible he may be of opinion that the poet’s ‘play upon words,’ which he may have often 
arraign’d him for, is less a matter of choice in him than of indulgence to what appears 
from these very passages to have been the taste of his times. HALLIWELL: This is 
spoken ironically, Launcelot’s words being anything rather than ‘suited,’ or agreeing 
with the context; or, perhaps, ‘suited’ may here mean simply arranged; or, how they 
are matched to suit a perverted meaning. ALLEN: Lorenzo pities ‘discretion’ (sound, 
sober sense, and fair meaning) for the way in which it is ‘defied’ [or defeated= dis. 
featured] by the ‘tricksy words’ [fantastically seed, or dressed up] by the fool, 
‘Suited’ is equivalent to either: First, dressed-up (as an operation performed upon the 
words themselves), tricked-out; or, secondly, matched (here ill-matched) with the 
matter. 

62, ALLEN suggests the excellent punctuation: ‘The fool hath planted in his mem- 


186 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ull, Sc. v. 


An Armie of good words, and I doe know 63 
A many fooles that ftand in better place, 
Garnifht like him, that for a trickfie word - 65 


Defie the matter:how cheer’ft thou /e/ica, 
And now good fweet fay thy opinion, 
How doft thou like the Lord Bafiiano’s wife? 
lef. Paft all expreffing, it is very meete 
The Lord Bafanio liue an vpright life 70 
For hauing fuch a bleffing in his Lady, 
He findes the ioyes of heauen heere on earth, 


And if on earth he doe not meane it, it ore 
65. Garnifht | Garnifh'd Q,. 73,74. meane it, it Is] F,. mean 7, 
66. Defie] Defeat Allen conj. it Is FF, Rowe, Cap. Steev. Rann, Mal. 

cheer ft| cherfe Q, farfe Qu Knt, Wh. meane it, it in Q,. meane, In 

Pope+. Q,. merit it, In Popet+, Dyce it, iii, 

Teffica,] Ieffica? Q,. Huds. Coll. iii. earn i, zt Js Bailey. 
68. Baffiano’s] F,. meane tt, then In Q, et cet. 


70. Baffanio] Baffianio F,. 


ory, An army,’ &c., and calls attention to a corresponding punctuation which he pro- 
poses in IV, i, 383: ‘ Thou hast not, left, the value of a cord.’—Ep. 

64. A many] ABBoTT, § 87: A was frequently inserted before a numeral adjective 
for the purpose of indicating that the objects enumerated are regarded collectively as 
one. We still say ‘a score,’ ‘a fo(u)rt(een)-night.” The @ in ‘a many men,’ ‘a few 
men,’ is, perhaps, thus to be explained. Compare ‘72s nineteen years, —Meas. for 
Meas. I, iii, 21, with ‘7¢s many summers, —Hen. VIII; Il, ii, 360. 

66. cheer’st] According to Schmidt’s Zex. this is the only instance in Shakespeare 
of cheer used intransitively, and, although this of itself would not be any reason for dis- 
carding it, yet when we have a word in Q, against which not only no possible objec- 
tion can be made, but which is also a usual, familiar mode of address, I think we may 
be allowed to regard chez/? with suspicion, especially when the ductus literarum, far ft 
and cher/?, suggests a probable misreading. —Ep. 

73- meane it] HALLIWELL: This may be, possibly, an error for ‘find it,’ or some 
word of like import. STAUNTON: Both the Quarto and Folio are equally unintelligi- 
ble. What can be made of ‘mean it’? Mean what? The commentators afford us 
no assistance here, although the sense is more ambiguous than in many passages on 
which they have expended whole pages of comment. The allusion applies to the 
belief that suffering in this life is a necessary preparation for happiness hereafter. 
Haply we should read, ‘he do not moan, it zs In reason,’ &c. The meaning of Jessica 
appears to be this: It is meet Bassanio live virtuously ; for, possessing, with such a wife, 
the joys of Paradise, he could not plead suffering here as an atonement for his errors, 
and, in reason, therefore, would be excluded from heaven. WALKER whose library 
was small, did not know, when he conjectured (C77. iii, 110), ‘ merit it,’ 77s,’ that he 
had been anticipated by Pope as far as merit is concerned. ‘Merit, says Walker, ‘in 
the sense of mereri. The word was, perhaps, written merite, which comes nearer to 
“meane” in appearance. At any rate, the text, as it stands, is wrong.’ In a foot-note, 


ACT 111, SC.v.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 187 


Is reafon he fhould neuer come to heauen ? 
Why, if two gods fhould play fome heauenly match, 75 


LetTsom, Walker’s admirable editor, remarks, after giving the various readings of the 
Qq and Ff, and after stating that Pope had anticipated Walker, ‘I should say that 
Heyes’s quarto [Q,] gives the unsophisticated nonsense of the MS from which it was 
printed; Roberts’s [Q,] boldly altered the second # to ¢hem, to gain an empty shadow 
of sense; while F, played the same game with the text of Heyes’s quarto by substi- 
tuting zs for zm at the beginning of the second line. An early transcriber seems to 
have corrupted merit into “mean it;” this vitiated all succeeding copies. The neo- 
phyte Jessica had evidently been reading the parable of Lazarus and Dives. She 
preaches up a righteous life, with her father’s ducats in her pocket.’ GRANT WHITE: 
Heyes’s quarto differs from Roberts’s by having z# instead of ¢hen ; a partial correction 
which makes nonsense, until it is completed in the Folio by changing ‘Zn’ to ‘Is.’ 
KEIGHTLEY: Here ‘it’ seems to mean ‘to live an upright life;’ rather a harsh con- 
struction. It is not likely that the poet used ‘mean’ in the sense of mener, Fr., yet it 
seems to be used so sometimes in Piers Ploughman, CLARENDON: The reading of F, 
is evidently a conjectural emendation. There is some corruption in this passage for 
which no satisfactory emendation has been proposed. That of Pope is, perhaps, the 
most plausible. arn it, then, or merit them, might be suggested. But we rather 
require a word with the sense of appreciate. HUDSON [reading meré¢ it]: ‘It’ refers 
to dlessimg, in the second line above. ROLFE: ‘ Mean it,’ i.e. intend to Ave an upright 
Uife. [1 have reserved CAPELL to the last, because he gives, what is to me, emphati- 
cally the true interpretation. It was first set forth in his Glossary, as follows : ‘to mean 
it, observe the Mean, enjoy Blessings moderately,’ and was afterward thus alluded to in 
his Motes, p.68: ‘As unfit a choice as the last [that is, Pope’s change of “ accoutered,” 
in the preceding Scene, to afparelled] is made by the same gentlemen in this [present 
passage]; but their operations on this line set them high in the rank of critics; for, 
instead of weighing the speaker’s reasoning, and collecting (as had been easily done 
from that reasoning) the undoubted and proper sense of her “ mean it,” change is pro- 
ceeded to; and their phrase of alteration is—merit zt, /w beginning their next line: 
How consequential this is to what has preceded, will not escape the considerer; but 
the present and true reading, he will find so abundantly; and though he may see some 
extravagance in the s*ntiment that is convey’d by that reading, he will not be apt to 
condemn it, taking with it the occasion and speaker, and it’s affinity in extravagance to 
the thought that comes from her next.’ The same interpretation occurred to Prof. Cor- 
SON, who says, in a privately-printed Note, that ‘“ mean” is the noun in the sense of 
middle between two extremes, as in “‘ golden mean” (as a noun it occurs in I, ii, 8; 
“to be seated in the meane”’), and in the passage before us is used as a verb, and 
the pronoun “it” is used indefinitely, as was very commonly done after intransitive 
verbs, and especially after nouns used as verbs... .,. This passage therefore means that 
‘if on earth he do not observe a mean in his pleasures, it is reason,” &c.’ If this be 
the true interpretation of ‘meane,’ and I think it is, it may be noted to its credit that 
Q, affords us an irreproachable text: ‘And if on earth he doe not meane it, then In 
reason he should neuer come to heauen.’ This line occasioned a discussion in Votes 
& Qu. 1877, 5th, viii, pp. 5, 1 4, &c., which, perhaps, let me add in all due humility, 
would not have arisen had there been a new Variorum Edition at that date, wherein 
all the notes of the Commentators could have been found on the same page with the 
text and its various readings.—ED. ] 


188 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act ill, Sc. v. 


And on the wager lay two earthly women, 
And Portia one : there muft be fomething elfe 
Paund with the other, for the poore rude world 
Hath not her fellow. 
Loren. Euen fuch a husband 
Haft thou of me, as fhe is for a wife. 
lef. Nay, but aske my opinion to of that ? 
Lor. I will anone, firft let vs goe to dinner ? 
lef. Nay, let me praife you while I haue a ftomacke? 
Lor. No pray thee, let it ferue for table talke, 
Then how fom ere thou fpeakft’mong other things, 
I fhall digeft it? 
lef. Well, Ile fet you forth. Exeunt. 


76. 


85 


78. Paund] Pawn'd Q,. 86. how fom ere] F,. how fo mereQ.. 


80, 81. Zuen...me] One line, Q,. 


81. for a] for Q,Q.. F. how/oere Q,, Pope et seq. 


how foereQ,. howfom ere F,, howfome’re 


82. to of ] too of F, et seq. *mong| mong Qq. ’mongft F , 


83. anone] anon Q,. Rowe. 
85. pray thee] prethee Q.. 87. digef2] difgeft Qa. 


78. Paund] Eccies: That is, staked. 


81. of me] ABBOTT, §172: Of is used metaphorically with verbs of construction, 
as in the modern— They make an ass of me.’— 7welfth NV. V,i, 19. But of is also 
thus found without verbs of construction [as here, and in many other examples]. 

87. Note throughout this Scene the poverty of the compositor’s ‘case,’ in the substi- 


tution of interrogation marks for periods.—Eb. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] 


THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 189 


SS ee Se eee 


Actus Quartus. 


[Scene L.] 
Enter the Duke, the Magnificoes, Anthonio, Baffanio, and 


Gratiano. 


Duke. 
Ant. 
Duke. 


What, is Anthonto heere? 
Ready, fo pleafe your grace? 
I am forry for thee, thou art come to anfwere 5 


A ftonie aduerfary, an inhumane wretch, 


Actus Quartus] Om. Qq. 

[Scene I. Rowe. 

[The Senate-house in Venice. Theob. 
Venice. A Court of Justice. Cap. 

I, Enter... Magnificoes] Enter...Sena- 
tors Rowe. Enter, in state, ... Magnificoes, 
Officers of the Court, &c., and seat them- 


selves; then, Enter Antonio, guarded, 
Cap. 

2. Gratiano.] Gratiano, at the Bar. 
Theob. Gratiano, Salerino, Solanio, and 
others. Cap. 

5. Lam] 1’m Pope+, Dyce iii, Huds. 

6. inhumane] inhumaine Q.. 


In CHARLES KEAn’s revival of this play in 1858, the Doge was represented as 
attended by six Senators in red; the authority for this is a picture at Hampton Court 
Palace, where the Doge of Venice in state is receiving Sir Henry Wootton, ambassador 
from James the First. The picture is by Odoardo Fialletti, better known as ar 
engraver than as a painter, who was living in Venice at the time. 

TH. Exze (Sh. Jahrbuch, xiv, 178): Although this Scene is correctly laid in a Court 
of Justice, it is incorrect that Senators should appear as Judges, and the presence of the 
Doge, as presiding officer at least, is an anachronism. If a civil case, the proceedings 
would have been before one of the Supreme Courts, of which, at that time, Venice had 
two, each composed of Forty Judges, hence the names: Quarantia al civil vecchia, dat- 
ing from 1425, and zova, dating from 1462. Over neither of these did the Doge pre- 
side. But if a criminal case, then it lay before a Supreme Court, likewise of Forty 
Judges, entitled Quarantia al criminal. Over this latter Court the Doge did originally 
preside, but from the time of the Doge Marco Cornaro (1365-67) his place was supplied 
by three Counsellors. But who would ever think of criticising Shakespeare, even if 
Shakespeare knew these facts, for introducing the Doge for the sake of mere scenic 
effect ? 

Hupson (p. 77): The Trial Scene, with its tugging vicissitudes of passion and its 
hush of terrible expectation,—now ringing with the Jew’s sharp, spiteful snaps of mal- 
ice, now made musical with Portia’s strains of eloquence, now holy with Antonio’s ten- 
der breathings of friendship, and dashed, from time to time, with Gratiano’s fierce jets 
of wrath and fiercer jets of mirth,—is hardly surpassed in tragic power anywhere; and 
as it forms the catastrophe proper, so it concentrates the interest of the whole play. 

4. Ready] The answer, to this day, when cases are called in Court. 

6, 7. inhumane... Vncapable] AxBsort, § 442: Un- for modern im-,; in- for 
un-. We appear to have no definite rule of distinction even now, since we use 


190 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. 1. 


Vncapable of pitty, voyd, and empty 7 
From any dram of mercie. 

Ant. I haue heard 5 
Your Grace hath tane great paines to qualifie 10 
His rigorous courfe : but fince he ftands obdurate, 
And that no lawful meanes can carrie me 
Out of his enuies reach, I do oppofe 
My patience to his fury, and am arm’d 
To fuffer with a quietneffe of {pirit, . 15 
The very tiranny and rage of his. ‘ 

Du. Go one and cal'the Iew into the Court. 

Sal. He is ready at the doore, he comes my Lord. 


Enter Shylocke. 


Du.Make roome, and let him ftand before our face. 20 
Shylocke the world thinkes, and I thinke fo to 


10, 11. Three lines, ending pazmes... Cam. Ktly, Glo. Rife, Cla. Wh. ii. e's 
courfe...obdurate Q.. Pope et cet. 
10, tane] ta’ne F,. ta’en Rowe. 21, fo to] fo to, Q,Q,. fo too F, et seq. 


18, He ts] QqFf, Cap. Sing. Dyce i, 


ungrateful, ingratitude; unequal, zzequality. Umn- seems to have been preferred by 
Shakespeare before ¢ and 7, which do not allow z#- to precede except in the form im-. 
Jn- seems also to have been in many cases retained from the Latin, as in the case of 
‘imgratus,’ ‘zrfortunium,’ &c. ROLFE: Shakespeare uses both zzcapadle (six times) 
and uncapadble (twice). 

8. From] CLARENDON: Elsewhere Shakespeare always uses of as we do, with 
‘void’ and ‘empty.’ ALLEN: We still say ‘clear from, ‘free from.’ 

8. dram] ALLEN: Any very minute quantity, applicable equally to what is liquid 
and to what is solid. But as ‘mercy’ is spoken of afterward by Portia as liquid, it is 
probable that Shakespeare, when he here used the word ‘dram,’ had in his mind a 
drop. 

10. qualifie] Dycr: To soften, to moderate, to abate, to weaken. [Cf. Cassio’s 
‘craftily qualified’ cup,—O¢h. II, ii, 56.] 

11. obdurate] See ABzBorr, § 490, for a long list of words wherein the accent is 
nearer the end than with us. 

12. And that] See ABBoTT, § 285, for other instances like the present, where ¢hat 
is omitted and then inserted, e. g. ‘ Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave, And 
that thou teachest.’—Son. 39. 

13. enuies] STEEVENS: It here means hatved or malice. KNIGHT: See Maré, 
xy, 10, ‘He knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy.’ 

16, tiranny] ScumipT (Zex.): Cruelty, injurious violence. 

19. Enter] BooTH: Slowly, until in front of the Duke, then bow to him. Show 
great deference to the Duke throughout the Scene, but to none else, except, of course, 
to Portia, while she seems to favour your suit. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE Ig! 


That thou but leadeft this fafhion of thy mallice 22 
To the laft houre of a, and then ’tis thought 

Thou’lt fhew thy mercy and remorfe more {trange, 

Than is thy ftrange apparant cruelty ; 25 
And where thou now exaét’ft the penalty, 

Which is a pound of this poore Merchants flefh, 

Thou wilt not onely loofe the forfeiture, 

But touch’d with humane gentleneffe and loue: 

Forgiue a moytie of the principall, 30 
Glancing an eye of pitty on his loffes 

That haue of late fo hudled on his backe, 

Enow to preffe a royall Merchant downe ; 

And plucke commiferation of his ftate 


From braffie bofomes, and rough hearts of flints, 35 
22. mallice] Q,. malice Q.. Knt, Coll. i, ii, Hal. Sta. 
24. Thow lt] thowit Q,. Thouw'lt Q,. 29. humane] humaine Q,. human 
25. firange apparant| firange appa- Rowe. 

rent F. strange-apparent Walker, Dyce 30. moytie] moiety FF. 

ii. 33. Znow] QqFf, Coll. Dyce, Hal. Wh. 
26. Om. Rowe. ‘ Rife, Clarke. Zxough Rowe et cet. 

exac?’ f2| exacts Qq. 34. his frate] this fates Q.. 

28. loofe] lofe F,, Rowe+, Ec. Var. 35. fiunts] Q,. flint Q, et cet. 


24. remorse] Pity. See Osh. III, iii, 426 and 532. 

25. apparant] JOHNSON: That is, seeming; not real. 

26. where] JOHNSON: For whereas. For other instances, see ABBOTT, § 134. 

28. loose] COLLIER: Perhaps we ought to take this in the sense of release. BAR- 
RON FIELD (.S2. Soc. Papers, iii, 133): Certainly, ‘ Loose’ is right. It is a bond; and 
to loose is the correlative of to bind. See Matt. kvi, 19. But Jose and Joose are the same 
word, and both are generally in the old Editions cose. See, in this play, I,i, 84. Hat- 
LIWELL: The spelling is of no importance. To ‘loose,’ to release, makes good sense ; 
but Jose, that is, give up in your own loss, lose it by your own will, seems the more 
likely reading. WALKER (C77z. ili, 55): Shakespeare would have written ‘ comsent to 
lose,’ or the like. Write Joose, i. e. release, remit. The ‘loose’ of F, may be either 
the one or the other. Jonson, Zfigram lviii, ‘And so my sharpness thou no less dis- 
joints, Than thou didst late my sense, /osimg my points.’ Read Joosing; a play upon 
words. [Hereupon LETTsow, in a foot-note: ‘It would seem from this that the words 
were not merely spelt, but pronounced, alike.’] Dyck (ed. iii): That is, remit, release. 

30. moytie] Used by Shakespeare to express any portion, In z Hen. /V Il,1, 
96, it means a third; and it may also mean a third in Lear, I, i, 6. One of the many 
advantages of having the original text before us is that, as here, the spelling guides us 
to the scansion. We see at once that movety is a dissyllable-—En. 

33. Enow] See ‘ Christians enow before’ in the preceding Scene. 

33. royall Merchant] See III, ii, 252. 

35. flints] See ‘multitudes * I, ix, 35. 


192 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [acrtv, Sci. 


Pr 


From ftubborne Turkes and Tarters neuer traind 36 
To offices of tender curtefie, 
We all expect a gentle anfwer Iew ? 

Tew. I haue poffeft your grace of what I purpofe, 


And by our holy Sabbath haue I fworne 40 

To haue the due and forfeit of my bond. 

If you denie it, let the danger light 42 
36. Tarters] Tartars Q,Q,F, et seq. 40. Sabbath] Sabaoth Q,, Cap. Sab- 
39. Iew.] Shy. Rowe. baoth Q,. 


38. gentle] CLARENDON: A pun on Gentile is doubtless here intended. [To me, 
this is doubtful. I do not forget how dearly Shakespeare loved a pun, and how, at 
times, its attractions are irresistible to him, or that, in this very Scene, Anthonio puns 
in his dying farewell to Bassanio. Dr Johnson says that a quibble had ‘a malignant 
power over Shakespeare’s mind,’ and that it was to him ‘the fatal Cleopatra for which 
he lost the world, and was content to lose it;’ so that I do not object to a pun here as 
beneath the dignity of the Doge or of the occasion, but because it seems to mar the 
gracious urbanity, and, more than all, the exquisite tact of this speech, and defeat its 
very purpose. ‘The present is not the first occasion when the Doge has talked with 
Shylock about the bond, and ta’en great pains to qualify his rigorous course; and he 
therefore must have known Shylock’s temper and temperament well enough by this 
time to be convinced that any disparaging allusion to the Hebrew faith (which, as a pun, 
this would be) would instantly evoke a bitter spirit of implacable antagonism.—ED. ] 

39. possest] See ante, I, iii, 65. Booru: These first eight lines should be spoken 
firmly, but with great respect in tone and manner. At the allusion to his oath by his 
‘holy Sabbath,’ the right hand should be raised with palm upward, and with an incli- 
nation of the head. 

40. Sabbath] WHITE: Sabaoth of Q, has no such peculiar fitness that the word 
of the authentic Edition should be set aside for it; for sadaotk is merely the Hebrew 
for hosts or armies. But it is possible that Shakespeare might have been misled by 
the expression, ‘Lord God of Sabaoth,’ which occurs in the New Testament, into the 
supposition that ‘sabaoth’ signified something peculiarly high and holy to the Jews. 
CLARENDON: The same mistake occurs in Bacon’s Advancement of Learning, Bk. ii, 
24: ‘Sacred & inspired Diuinitie, the Sabaoth and port of all men’s labours and pere 
grinations.’ Spenser also confounds the signification of the two words: ‘ But thence- 
forth all shall rest eternally With him that is the God of Sabbaoth hight: [O Thou great 
Sabbaoth God, graunt me that Sabaoth’s sight.]’—Faerie Queene [Bk. vii, c. 8, unper- 
fite. It is not perfectly clear to me that Spenser has here confounded the two words. 
Clarendon does not cite the line in brackets. But it is a matter of small moment; the 
canto is very ‘ vnperfite,’ and consists of only eighteen lines—Ep.] Dr Johnson, in the 
First Edition of his Dictionary, treated Sabbath and Sabaoth as identical words; and 
Sir Walter Scott has, /vanhoe, ch. x: ‘The gains of a week, ay, the space between 
two Sabaoths.’ But the error has been corrected in later editions. 

41. due and forfeit] ALLEN: Hendiadys; the forfeit which is due. 

42, 43. GOULD (The Tragedian, p. 79): These two lines were given [by the elder 


Booth] with an outreaching and arching motion of the arm and hand, palm downward, 
like the stoop of a bird of prey. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 193 


Vpon your Charter, and your Cities freedome. 43 
You’l aske me why I rather choofe to haue 
A weight of carrion flefh, then to receiue 45 


Three thoufand Ducats? Ile not anfwer that: 
But fay it is my humor; Is it anfwercd? 
What if my houfe be troubled with a Rat, 


And I be pleas’d to giue ten thoufand Ducates 49 
44. You'l] Youle Q.. Q, Ducats :...that? Q,. 
45. then] than F,. 47. But fay it ts| But, say, it ts Cap. 
46. Ducats ?...that :] Ducats ?...that, anfwerca | F,. 


43. Charter, and your Cities freedome] WuiTe: Here Shakespeare puts a 
threat into Shylock’s mouth which would have little terror for the Doge of Venice. 
But, according to his habit, he availed himself of associations which were familiar and 
significant to his audience. 

46, 47. Ile... humor] Warsurton: This Jew is the strangest Fellow. He is 
asked a question ; says he will not answer it; in the very next line says he has answered 
it, and then spends the nineteen following lines to justify and explain his answer. Who 
can doubt, then, but we should read: ‘Tl zow answer that, By saying ’tis, &c.? 
HEATH: The common reading means: ‘I will not give a direct answer to the question 
you ask, nor give you a particular account of the motives of my present proceeding; But 
suppose it is my particular fancy to act thus; Will you accept that for an answer?’ He 
must be almost as strange a man as Mr Warburton represents the Jew, who thinks a 
serious expostulation of a supreme magistrate, on a most extraordinary proceeding, in 
any measure answered by the person addressed telling him, ’Tis my humour, or partic- 
ular fancy, to act thus. Every man of common sense immediately sees that refusing 
to give any answer, and the giving such an answer as this, amount to the same thing. 
Nor doth the Jew throughout the nineteen lines which follow, assign any other reason 
for a conduct so shocking than a settled hatred of, and antipathy to, Anthonio, which 
is just the same with what he here calls his ‘humour,’ and, therefore, he may be justly 
said to persist in his declared resolution not to answer the Duke’s question. Accord- 
ingly, Bassanio immediately replies, ‘That is no answer.’ JOHNSON: The Jew being 
asked a question which the law does not require him to answer, stands upon his right, 
and refuses; but afterwards gratifies his own malignity by such answers as he knows 
will aggravate the pain of the enquirer. I will not answer, says he, as to a legal or 
zerious question, but since you want an answer, will this serve you? SIR WALTER 
Scort (ap. Singer): The worthy Corporal Nym hath this apology usually at his fin- 
gers’ ends, and Shylock condescends to use his extravagant cruelty as a humour, or 
irresistible propensity of the mind. The word ‘humour’ is not used in its modern sig- 
nification, but for a peculiar quality which sways and masters the individual through 
all his actions. In Rowland’s Zpigrams, No. 27 amply illustrates this phrase: ‘Aske 
Humors why a fether he doth weare? It is his humour (by the Lord) heele sweare,’ 
&c. HALLIWELL: ‘Humour’ is probably here employed in the sense attached to the 
word as commonly used in Shakespeare’s time, an indescribable exaggeration of its 
meaning as applied to whim, caprice, or any propensity. Any peculiar quality or turn 
of mind was a ‘humour.’ 

13 


194 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [scT Iv, sc, i, 


To haune it bain’d ? What, are you anfwer’d yet? 50 
Some men there are loue not a gaping Pigge: 
Some that are mad, if they behold a Cat: 


And others, when the bag-pipe fings i’th nofe, 53 
50. bain’d] baind Qq. brain’d Rowe. 51. Pigge] pig Q,. 
bane’d Pope. 53. 2’th] ith Q,Q,- 


51. loue] For many other examples of the omission of the relative, see ABBOTT, 
§ 244. 

51. gaping Pigge] STEEVENS: So in Webster’s Dutchess of Malf [III, ii, p. 240, 
ed. Dyce]: ‘He could not abide to see a pig’s head gaping; I thought your grace 
would find him a Jew.’ See Hen. VIII; V, iv, 3 [where Steevens interprets ‘ gaping’ 
as shouting or roaring, and adds that ‘ perhaps the “ gaping pig”? mentioned by Shylock 
has been misinterpreted’]. MALONE: By ‘gaping pig,’ Shakespeare, I believe, meant 
a pig prepared for the table. So in Fletcher’s Eider Brother [II, ii]: ‘ Ask ’em any- 
ching Out of the element of their understanding, And they stand gaping like a roasted 
pig.’ Again, in Nashe’s Pierce Penilesse [p. 55, ed. Grosart] (a passage which per- 
haps furnished our author with his instance): ‘The causes conducting vnto wrath are 
as diuers as the actions of a man’s life. Some will take on like a mad man, if they 
see a pigge come to the table.’ KnicHT: We are inclined to think that Shylock 
alludes to the squeaking of the living animal. He is particularizing the objects of 
offence to other men; and he would scarcely repeat his own dislike to pork, so strongly 
expressed in the First Act. [Knight cites a passage from Donne’s Devotions, ‘in which 
the doctrine of antipathies is put in a somewhat similar manner.’] HALLIWELL quotes 
‘a curious enumeration of antipathies given in the ewe Metamorphosis, a poem written 
early in the Seventeenth Century.’ GRANT WHITE: Shakespeare may have meant 
either the roasted or the living, squealing pig; and let not the doubt which, disturb our 
souls, ; 

53. bag-pipe] WARBURTON: This incident Shakespeare seems to have taken from 
J.C. Scaliger’s Zxot. Exercit. against Cardan,—a book that our author was well read 
in, and much indebted to for a great deal of his physics, it being then much in vogue. 
In his 344 Exercit., Sect. 6, he has these words: ‘ Narrabo nunc tibi jocosam Sympa- 
thiam Reguli Vasconis Equitis. Is dum viveret, audito phormingis sono, urinam illico 
facere cogebatur,’ And to make this jocular story still more ridiculous, Shakespeare, I 
suppose, translated ‘ phorminx’ by ‘bag-pipe.’ But what I would chiefly observe from 
hence is this, that as Scaliger uses the word ‘sympathiam,’ which signifies, and so he 
interprets it, ‘communem affectionem duabus rebus,’ so Shakespeare translates it by 
‘affection ;’ which shows the propriety of the full stop after that word in the next line. 
FARMER: In an old translation from the French of Peter de Loier, entitled, 4 Treatise 
of Spectres, or Strange Sights, Visions, &c., we have this identical story from Scaliger; 
and, what is still more, a marginal note gives us, in all probability, the very fact alluded 
to, as well as the word of Shakespeare : ‘ Another gentleman of this quality lived of late 
in Devon, neere Excester, who could not endure the playing on a dag-pipe.’ We may 
justly add that ‘affection,’ in the sense of sympathy, was formerly technical, and so 
used by Lord Bacon, Sir K. Digby, and many other writers. MALONE: The story of 
the Devonshire gentleman, I believe, first appeared in the margin of De Loier’s book 
in 1605, some years after this play was printed; but it might have been current in con- 
versation before, or it may have found its way into some other book of that age, 


ACT IV, SC. i] 


THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 195 


Cannot containe their Vrine for affeCtion. 
Mafters of paffion fwayes it to the moode 55 


54, 55- Vrine...of] QqFf (Maifers 
Q.F,), Warb. Mal. Var. Coll. i, Wh. i. 
urine for affection. Masterless Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. urine, Sor affection ; 
Master of Johns. urine; for affection, 
Mistress of Thirlby, Cap. Steev.’93, Var. 
°03, Var.’13, Cam. Glo. Ktly, Dyce iii. 


urine: for affections, Masters of Hawkins, 
Steev. 78, ’85. urine; for affection, Mas- 
ter of Rann, Knt, Sing. Dyce i, ii, Hal. 
Coll. ii, iii, Sta. Clarke, Del. Wh. ii. 

55. /wayes it sways us Han. sway it 
Warb. Hawkins, Steev. ’70, ’78, ’85, Mal. 
Var. Coll. i, Wh. i 


urine. For affection, Masters of Steev.’70. 


54, 55. Cannot... moode] The earliest critical attempt at emending this passage 
is almost the best of all, and in its substitution of a comma after ‘affection,’ has been 
adopted by a large majority of Editors since, and including, Capell. In Nichols’s 
Lust. of Lit. ii, 225, there is, under date of 1729, the list of changes which Dr 
THIRLBY sent to Theobald. The list is a bare one; the changes are proposed with- 
out comment. In it there stands, at this passage: ‘for affection, Master (or Mistress) 
of passion, sways it,’ &c. THEOBALD, in his subsequent Edition, speaks with praise 
of this emendation, but does not adopt it. He had mildly suggested it to Warburton 
in his correspondence (p. 311 of Nichols), and, although Warburton’s reply has not 
been preserved, I cannot but think that Theobald was brow-beaten out of it by his 
‘most affectionate friend,’ who, in his own Edition, thus dogmatically decides the ques- 
tion : ‘ “ Masters of passion.” This is certainly right,’ says WARBURTON. ‘ He is speak- 
ing of the power of sound over the human affections, and concludes, very naturally, that 
the ‘masters of passion” (for so he finely calls the musicians) sway the passions or affec- 
tions as they please, alluding to what the ancients tell us of the feats that Timotheus 
and other musicians worked by the power of music. Can anything be more natural ?” 
HEATH: I have no doubt but the old reading is the genuine one; it undoubtedly means : 
‘The masters of passions, that is, such as are possessed of the art of engaging and man- 
aging the human passions, influence them by a skillful application to the particular lik- 
ings and loathings of the person they are addressing; this is a proof that men are 
generally governed in their conduct by those likings or loathings; and, therefore, it is 
by no means strange or unnatural that I should be so, too, in the present case. RITSON 
(Remarks, p. 54): [The punctuation of the Folio] is surely defensible. The meaning 
is, that some men, when they hear the sound of a bag-pipe, are so affected therewith, 
that they cannot, &c. For those things which are masters over passion make it like or 
loath whatever they will, MALONE (who also preferred the old text, or, at least, merely 
a colon after ‘affection’): These lines mean, I believe,—Cannot, &c., on account of 
their being affected by the noise of the bag-pipe; or, in other words, on account of an 
involuntary antipathy to such a noise. In the next line, which is put in apposition with 
that preceding, the word ‘it’ may refer either to ‘passion’ or ‘affection.’ ‘/¢’ (‘sway 
it’), in my opinion, refers to ‘affection,’ that is, to the sympathetic feeling. STEEVENS: 
That affections and passions anciently had different significations, may by known from 
the following instance in Greene’s Wever Too Late [p. 174, ed. Grosart. See also ITI, 
i, 54, of the present play]: ‘ His hart was fuller of Jasstons than his eyes of affections.’ 
Affections, as used by Shylock, seems to signify imaginations or prejudices. A passage 
somewhat similar is in O7. I, iii, 251. CAPELL: The terms affection and passion are 
of philosophic precision, intimating—the impressing and the impress’d. A/istress has 
its justness, being spoken of mind; nor is the word it sprang out of so remote trom it 


196 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Act Iv, sc. i. 


[54, 55. for affection. Masters of passion] 

as a modern reader will think, for the form that mzs¢ress wears in old books is not un- 
frequently—maistres. COLMAN: I must confess that I cannot discover on what prin- 
ciple all the Editors since Theobald and Hanmer have followed the punctuation of 
Thirlby. It is impossible, I think, for any reader accustomed to the manner of our old 
writers, not to feel a certain harshness in the new regulation of the text, or, indeed, to 
doubt for a moment that the old books gave the line correctly as at that time spoken 
on the stage, and originally written by the author. I never heard, excellent and very 
Shylock as he is, Macklin’s full stop in the middle of the line without a shock; and 
the following words of the line not only soften the expression, but are most easy and 
natural. We still apply the verb affect in the same sense that Shylock here uses the 
noun derived from it. [This: affection, Colman thinks, must be sympathy and it is 
brought in as a contrast to the ‘gaping pig’ and to the ‘cat,’ where antipathy predom 
inates; the ‘grand Desideratum,’ therefore, is some word, or phrase, or line expressive 
of an irresistible influence over our ZAings and Joathings, as well as governing the verb 
‘sways. Colman continues:] On the whole, therefore, I conceive that the original 
punctuation should be maintained, the word J/azsters in the old copies should be read 
Mistress, and that the imperfection in the sense, according to that reading, arises from 
a line or two lost or dropt at the press, in which the words Sympathy and Antipathy, 
so congenial to the argument, had most probably a place. [This line Colman accord- 
ingly supplies, and reads the passage thus:] ‘Cannot, &c., for affection. Sovereign, 
Antipathy, or Sympathy, Mistress of passion, sways it,’ &c. KNIGHT: Shylock himself, 
in a previous Scene, has distinguished between affection and passion [III,i, 54]. The 
distinction, indeed, is a very marked one in the original use of the words. Affection 
is that state of the mind, whether pleasant or disagreeable, which is produced by some 
external object or quality. Passton is something higher and stronger—the suggestiv. 
state of mind—going to a point by the force of its own will. The distinction is very 
happily preserved in Greene’s Vever Too Late. Keeping in view this distinction, we 
have a key to this very difficult passage, whose meaning then, is, that affection, eithe 
for love or dislike,—sympathy or antipathy,—being the master of passion,—sways 2 
(Passion) to the mood of what 7 (affection) likes or loaths. If we were to adopt the 
reading which Malone prefers: ‘Masters of passion sway zt, &c., of what z¢ likes,’ &c., 
the second z¢ would be inconsistent with the sense, and we ought to read—‘ Of what 
they like or loath.’ COLLIER (ed. i): This passage has occasioned a good deal of con- 
troversy, but the difficulty seems to be to find a difficulty; in the old copies ‘sway’ is 
pmnted sways, making a false concord, the nominative case being ‘ masters;’ the pro- 
noun ‘it,’ of course, in both instances, agrees with ‘passion.’ Shylock, in the preced- 
ing lines, speaks of those who are not ‘masters of passion.’ Dyce (Remarks, p. 57): 
The preceding part of the passage clearly shews that there must be a pause at ‘urine;’ 
as also that ‘for affection’ must be connected with the next line. Shylock states three 
circumstances: first, that some men dislike a gaping pig; secondly, that some are mad 
if they see a cat; thirdly, that some, at the sound of a bag-pipe, cannot contain their 
urine; and he then accounts for these three peculiarities on a general principle. 
Knight’s alteration [in reality, Rann’s,—ED.] is greatly preferable [to Thirlby’s] be- 
cause it deviates from the old Editions only by omitting a single letter. With respect 
to Collier’s reading, I have further to observe, that ‘ Masters of passion’ (if we under- 
stand the words in the sense which, as his note shews, he supposes them to bear) were 
the very persons of whom Shylock would carefully avoid all mention. CoLLrEeR (ed. 
iu): T formerly punctuated this line differently, but I am now satisfied that ” was in 


ACT IV, SC, i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 197 


Of what it likes or loaths, now for your anfwer : 56 
As there is no firme reafon to be rendred 

Why he cannot abide a gaping Pigge? 

Why he a harmleffe neceffarie Cat ? 


Why he a woollen bag-pipe : but of force 60 
56. zt] she Ktly. ’13, Sing. Ktly, Clarke. -4o//en Dyce, Coll. 
oaths, loathes: Q,. loaths. F. i, iii. wauling Huds. wailing Cart- 


58, 59. Pigge ?...Cat ?] pix, ...cat, ie wright. swelling Hawkins. waudlen 
60. woollen] wollen F,. wawling Cap. Brae. welean or willne Oliver (VV. & Qu. 
conj. swollen Hawkins, Steev. Var.’03, 5th, viii, 63). 


error. ‘ Affection,’ here meaning sympathy, is the nominative to ‘sways,’ ‘ Master of 
passion’ being, as it were, in parenthesis. The only variation from the old Editions is 
reading JZaster for ‘ Masters.’ The (MS) makes no change. STAUNTON: The true 
source of the difficulty, however, may lie neither in ‘ masters’ nor ‘ affection,’ but in 
the comparatively insignificant preposition ‘of.’ If ‘ of’ is a misprint for our, the pas- 
sage would run: ‘For affection Masters our passion, sways it,’ &c. [Staunton notes 
also that the F, omits ‘it’ after ‘sways.’ I think this must be a misprint. The ‘it’ 
is present in the copy of the Cambridge Editors, in my copy, and in Staunton’s own 
Photo-lithographic Edition—Ep.] WALKER, who (Crit. i, 252) cites ‘Masters’ in 
this line as an instance of the interpolated s (see II, ix, 35), says, ‘point undoubtedly, 
and, I think, read as follows: “ For affection, Master of passion, sways it,” &c. At 
any rate, there is no necessity, as far as the s is concerned, for reading mazstresse ; 
which spelling, moreover, occurs nowhere else in the Folio, as far as I recollect.’ 
GRANT WHITE: Change is unnecessary, and comment would seem superfluous. The 
Folio accidentally omits ‘it’ [after ‘sways.’ I am afraid this assertion was taken, with- 
out due verification, from Staunton.—Ep.] The difficulty seems to have arisen entirely 
from a misapprehension of the meaning of ‘ masters of passion ;’? by which Shylock does 
not mean mez who are able to control the passions of themselves or others, but such 
agencies as those of which he has just been speaking. ‘Passion’ is used in its more 
radical sense, and not with reference to any one of the passions, a common use in 
Shakespeare’s day. ‘ Affection’ means, of course, ‘the being affected,’ in this case, 
by the sound of the bag-pipe—also, of old, a common use of the word; and thus the 
masters of passion are those things or occurrences that move either the sympathy or 
antipathy of any man, and ‘sway’ it to the mood of what it likes or loaths. KEIGHT- 
LEY (Zxp. p. 152): For ‘Of what it likes, &c., I read, *Of what she likes,’ &c.; the 
‘it’ was evidently caused by that in the preceding line. ABBOTT (p. 481, Note 10), in 
regard to the confusion of Masters and Mistress, refers to Temp. II, i, 5, and to ‘ Where 
be thy mastres,man? I would speak with er.’—Beau. & Fl., The Coxcomé, HU, iii, 
9 [which is, perhaps, scarcely parallel, because the speaker is disguised as an Knish foot- 
man, and gabbles nonsense. In the margin of my copy of Dyce’s Remarks, Lettsom 
has written, with pencil, ‘for affection’s Master of passion, sways it, &c. I follow 
Thirlby, as modified by Rann.—Wp.]. 

58, 59, 60. he] ALLEN: Like 6 péy, 6 028, 6 68. 

60. woollen] JoHNson: As all the editors agree with complete uniformity in read- 
ing ‘woollen, I can hardly forbear to imagine that they understood it. But I never 
saw a ‘woollen bag-pipe,’ nor can well conceive it. I suppose the author wrote wooden, 
meaning that the bag wes leather, and the pipe of zvood. [HEATH made ind ependently 


198 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act lv, Sc.i 


Mutt yeeld to fuch ineuitable fhame, 61 
As to offend himfelfe being offended : 


61. frame] sway Bailey. him/elf, F y Rowe, Cap. Steev, Sta. offend, 
62. offend himselfe] QF FQ, fend  —him/elfe Q,, Pope et cet. 


the same conjecture.] CAPELL: Why, in the rudeness of ancient poverty, the bag 
should not have been of woof (that is—cloth of extream coarseness) in some places, 
the editor sees not. ROBINSON: Perhaps it is called ‘woollen’ from the bag being 
generally covered with woollen cloth. STEEVENS: As the aversion was not caused by 
the outward appearance, but merely by the sound, I have adopted szo//en in the text. 
Ritson (p. 54): It is not unusual to see the large skin or bladder of the bag-pipe 
covered with flannel; and, it is possible the word was only used as a descriptive epi- 
thet. Monck Mason (p. 76): I consider swo/’” as one of those amendments which 
carry conviction the moment they are suggested. Douce (i, 264): We have here one 
of the too frequent instances of conjectural readings; but it is to be hoped that all 
future editors will restore the original ‘woollen,’ after weighing not only what has been 
already urged in its support, but the additional and accurate testimony of Dr Leyden, 
who, in his edition of The Complaynt of Scotland, p. 149, informs us that the Lowland 
bagpipe commonly had the bag covered with woollen cloth of a green colour, a practice 
which, he adds, prevailed in the northern counties of England. CoLLixr (ed. ii): 
Bollen is from the (MS) and is doubtless the epithet of the poet, who had used it in 
his Lucrece [line 1417]: ‘Here, one being throng’d, bears back, all boll’n and red.’ 
Bollen is swelled or inflated. ‘Woollen’ is a corruption of dollen, of which swollen 
is merely a translation. Dyce (ed. ii) [see Text. Notes]: In the first place, what 
writer ever used such an expression as a woollen bag-pife in the sense of a bag-pipe 
covered with woollen cloth? (Might he not, with almost equal propriety, talk of @ qwool- 
len lute or a woollen fiddle?) And, in the second place, can anything be more evident 
than that Shylock does not intend the most distant allusion to the material which either 
composed or covered the bag-pipe? J adopt the (MS’s) emendation. (I have repeatedly 
met with old handwriting in which the initial 6 bore such a resemblance to w, that a 
compositor might easily have mistaken it for the latter.) GRANT WHITE: No one who 
has seen a bagpipe, or who knows that the bag is generally, if not always, covered with 
baize or some other cloth, will think either szol/en or bollen worth consideration. CAam- 
BRIDGE Epirors: In an illuminated copy of an Office de la Vierge in the library of 
Trinity College, there is a representation of a bagpipe which appears to be of sheepskin 
with the wool on. We incline, however, to think that Capell’s conjecture wawling 
approaches nearest the truth. STAUNTON in his Addenda and Corrigenda having 
adduced in support of the old reading, a line from Massinger’s 7he Maid of Honour, 
IV, iv: ‘ Walks she on woollen feet ?? Dyce (ed. iii) replied that «woollen dag-pipe”’ 
(if right) means a bag-pipe actually covered with woollen cloth, while “woollen feet” 
is a purely metaphorical expression.’ ALLEN: The logic of the passage requires an 
indifferent or innocent epithet (as in line 59), not waw/ing nor mewling. [The dis- 
pute again burst forth in Motes &° Queries, 5th, vol. viii, pp. 4, 63, 182, 423, but surely 
the bulk of the notes and comments, already given, is sufficiently bollen.—ED.]| 

61. Must] For the omission of the nominative, compare I, i, 108, or see ABBOTT, 
§ 399. 

62. himselfe] STAUNTON: Modern editors point this line: ‘ As to offend, himself 
being offended,’ which renders it near akin to nonsense. [To:the same effect, WALKER 


ACTIV, SC.i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 199 


So can I giue no reafon, nor I will not, 63 
More then a lodg’d hate, and a certaine loathing 
I beare Anthonio, that I follow thus 65 


A loofing fuite againft him? Are you anfwered ? 
Baff. This is no anfwer thou vnfeeling man, 
To excufe the currant of thy cruelty. 
Tew. 1am not bound to pleafe thee with my anfwer. 
Baf Do all men kil the things they do not loue? 7O 
few. Hates any man the thing he would not kill? 
Baf. Euerie offence is not a hate at firft. 
few, What wouldft thou haue a Serpent fting thee 
twice ? 


Ant. I pray you thinke you queftion with the Iew: 75 
64. lodg’d] lodgdQ,. lodged Q,. Q,, Cap. Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. 
66. loofing| lofing Q.. 70. things] thing Ff, Rowe+. 

him ?| him; Q,. 75. you thinke| QqFf, Rowe, Pope. 
67. anfwer] anfwer, Q,. you, think, Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. you 
68. currant] current FF. think; Sing. you, think Theob. i, et 
69, 71, 73. Iew.] Shy. Q,. cet. 
69. anfwer.| anfwers? Q,. anfwers. the lew| a Jew ¥F,, Rowe+. 


(Crit. iii, 56), KEIGHTLEY (Zxfositor, p. 152), and ALLEN. To me also, this punc- 
tuation, that of F,, is the better, but CLARENDON thinks that ‘both the context and 
the rhythm of the verse seem to favour’ a comma after ‘ offend.’ Ep. ] 

64. a certaine] ALLEN: Dele ‘a,’ and read ‘certain,’ i. e. sure, fixed. ‘Certain 
loathing’ repeats ‘lodgéd hate.’ (The ‘a’ was inserted by the compositors under the 
impression that ‘a certain’ was equivalent to ric, quidam, a kind of.) 

66. a loosing suite] CLARENDON: A suit in which I have nothing to gain. [Or 
is it, a suit in which I lose my money? Does not Shylock hope to gain the forfeit of 
his bond ?—Ep.] 

66. answered ?] BoorH: Bow to the Duke. At Bassanio’s exclamation draw your- 
self up, your back toward him, and speak contemptuously, without looking at him. 

72. Eccies: This reply seems to be somewhat foreign to the question of Shylock; 
besides, Bassanio seems to forget that the Jew’s charge against Anthonio, in their first 
interview after the opening of the play, was that he had ‘many a time and oft’ affronted 
him. CLARENDON: ‘Offence’ means resentment of the injured party [i. e. Subjective] 
as well as the injury itself [i.e. Objective]. Bassanio uses the word in the former sense, 
Shylock’s reply alludes to the latter. 

73. BoorH: Turn on him sharply. 

75. KNIGHT: The construction of this line appears to us elliptical,—we believe it 
should be understood thus: ‘I pray you think [if ], you question with the Jew.’ [For 
me, a comma after ‘I pray you,’ removes all difficulty—Ep.] KEIGHTLEY (Zxp. p. 
153): I cannot but adhere to stint your for ‘think you,’ as I have given it in my Edi- 
tion. It seems to me so much more forcible, and more suited to the calm resignation 
of Anthonio; while in the other reading there is something of sneer or irony that is 
unpleasant. Nothing was easier than for the printer to read s¢in¢, the more unusual 


200 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. i. 


You may as well go ftand vpon the beach, 76 
And bid the maine flood baite his vfuall height, - ts 
Or euen as well vfe queftion with the Wolfe, 


The Ewe bleate for the Lambe: hia 79 
77. baite] bateQqF,. beatF,F,. ’bate Ewe bleake for the Lambe: Q,. The Ewe 
Theob. bleate for the Lambe: when you behold, 
78. Or...well| Ff, Rowe. vvell Q,. Ff, Rowe. When you behold the ewe bleat 
You may as well Q,Q,, Pope et cet. . for the lamb; Han. Why he hath made 


79. The...Lambe.] the Ewe bleake for the Ewe bleat for the Lambe: Q, et cet 
the Lambe: Q,. Why he hath made the 


term, as ‘think,’ and then to make your ‘you’ for the sake of sense, and as they are 
pronounced nearly alike. However, judicet lector. BooTH: Shylock listens to all 
this with an expression of mockery. 

75. question] STEEVENS: That is, converse. To reason had anciently the same 
meaning. CLARENDON: Remember you are arguing with Shylock, whose cruel nature 
is known. 

77. baite] Note the ingenious change made by FF, which, if it were in the editio 
princeps, would find, probably, many an advocate whom nothing could persuade that 
‘baite’ was the true word.—ED. 

78, 79. It is scarcely beyond the bounds of probability that these two lines when 
heard from the stage would be adequately intelligible; the connection of thought would 
tide us over the obstruction: the ocean will be governed by its own laws, the wolf will 
be true to his cruel nature, the ewe will bleat for its lamb, the mountain pines will sway 
to the tempest; the words are uttered, our interest is absorbed, the speech hurries for- 
ward, and we see no difficulty. But with the printed page before us we see the havoc 
with the sense that some accident at the printing-press has made. ‘These lines have 
evidently been fretted by a gust of some kind. It was not, however, at the press where 
the Folio was printed; there has been even an attempt at repairing it by the printers 
of that Edition. The accident happened with the unfortunate Q., from which the | 
Folio was printed, and the result is another of the many indications of the haste with 
which the Heyes’s Quarto was issued. According to the Cambridge Editors, Hal- 
liwell has seen a copy of this Qto. in which line 79 was omitted altogether. In 
Ashbee’s Facsimile, the lines run thus: ‘and bid the maine flood bate his vfuall 
height, || vvell vfe queftion with the Woolfe, || the Ewe bleake for the Lambe:’ || The 
very defective copy, then, which Halliwell has seen, shows that there were gradations 
in the accident, or in the repairs of it. It may, therefore, have happened that the copy 
which the compositors of the Folio used, actually read as the text in the Folio gives it; 
or these same compositors may have attempted to amend the passage, and considered 
that they had done their duty by adding, ‘Or euen as,’ and by changing dleake into 
‘bleat.’ However this may be, we have, happily, Q, to refer to, and here again we 
find another proof of its superiority to the copy of Q,, which the compositors of the 
Folio used. Lines 78, 79, there read: ‘You may as well vfe queftion with the Wolfe, \| 
Why he hath made the Ewe bleake for the Lambe:’ This is the text which has 
been adopted, with only two or three exceptions, by all Editors. In dealing with the 
Quartos (and it might almost be affirmed of the Folios also) it is necessary to specify 
the particular copies which are cited, so much do copies of the same date differ. I 

have been particular iust now in speaking of the copy of Q, which was used for the 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 201 


You may as well forbid the Mountaine Pines 80 
To wagge their high tops, and to make no noife 

When they are fretted with the gufts of heauen: 

You may as well do any thing moft hard, 

As feeke to foften that, then which what harder ? 

His lewifh heart. Therefore I do befeech you 85 
Make no more offers, vfe no farther meanes, 

But with all briefe and plaine conueniencie 

Let me haue iudgement, and the Iew his will. 


Baf. For thy three thoufand Ducates heereis fix. 89 
80. Mountaine| mountaine of Qq. 84. what harder ?| EY» Wh.i. what 
81. 20 notfe] a noise Han. Warb. harder, ¥,, Rowe. what’s harder: Qq 
82. fretted | fretten Qq, Coll. Sing. Hal. et cet. 

Wh. i, Cam. Glo. Ktly, Dyce iii, Huds. 86. more] moe Q,Q.. 


84. then] than Ff. 


Folio. This copy was probably like that in the Duke of Devonshire’s library (which 
was used by Pretorius in his Reproduction), and also like that from which Ashbee 
made his Facsimile. But it is clearly different from the Q, in Capell’s library, which, 
I presume, was the one used by the Cambridge Editors, because they make special 
note of the text in the Duke of Devonshire’s copy, and say that ‘Lord Ellesmere’s 
copy agrees with Capell’s /teratim,;’ in Capell’s Q., therefore, the lines must be 
almost exactly as they are in Q,. The copy of Q, which is now before me, and which 
I have used throughout for collation, formerly belonged to Capell, and in it he has, 
in his painful chirography, recorded the varie Jlectiones of Q, and of Q,; his only 
note on these lines is that ‘bleake’ is changed to d/eat in Q,. This long note ona 
trifling matter must find its justification in the lesson, which this passage affords, that 
Quartos and Folios may all alike be treated as proof-sheets, out of which we may, with 
what power of insight Nature has vouchsafed us, prepare our own text, with an abound- 
ing charity for those who do not agree with us,—which, in all likelihood, will comprise 
the rest of mankind.— Ep. 

80. Pines] STEEVENS: This image seems to have been caught from Golding’s Ovid 
[1567, Bk xv, p. 195]: ‘Such noyse as Pynetrees make what tyme the heady easterne 
wynde Dooth whiz amongst them.’ 

8r. to make] AsBorrT, § 382: The Elizabethan authors objected to scarcely any 
ellipsis, provided the deficiency could be easily supplied from the context. Thus the 
present line may be explained, by implying from ‘forbid’ a word of speaking, dz, and 
not by a double negative: ‘To wag their high tops, and [bid them] to make no noise.’ 
[See line 168, fost, «no impediment.’] 

82. fretted] CoLLIER: There seems no reason to abandon the form /reffen, probs 
ably adopted by Shakespeare; if /retfen were not the original word, it is singular that 
it should be found in both Qq, which were evidently printed from different manuscripts. 
GRANT WHITE: It is most probable that Shakespeare wrote /retten, and that ‘ fretted’ 
was a printer’s conformity to the custom of the day; but this canno* be assumed as abso- 
lutely certain. See ABBOTT, § 344, for other instances of irregular participial formations, 
like fretten. 


202 - THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act iv, sc. i. 


Tew. If euerie Ducat in fixe thoufand Ducates go 
Were in fixe parts, and euery part a Ducate, 

I would not draw them, I would haue my bond? 

Du. How fhalt thou hope for mercie, rendring none?” 

Jew. What iudgement fhall I dread doing no wrong? | 
You haue among you many a purchaft flaue, 95 
Which like your Affes, and your Dogs and Mules, 

You vie in abieét and in flauifh parts, 
Becaufe you bought them. Shall I fay to you, 
Let them be free, marrie them to your heires ? 
Why {weate they vnder burthens? Let their beds 100 
Be made as foft as yours : and let their pallats 
Be feafon’d with fuch Viands : you will anfwer 
The flaues are ours. So do I anfwer you. 
The pound of flefh which I demand of him 
Is deerely bought, ’tis mine, and I will haue it. 105 
If you deny me ; fie vpon your Law, 
There is no force in the decrees of Venice ; 
I ftand for iudgement, anfwer, Shall I haue it? 
Du. Vpon my power I may difmiffe this Court, 


Vnleffe Bellario a learned Doétor, I1c 
96. your Affes| you Affes F,. 105. ’tis] 4s Q,. as Q,Q,. # Cap. 
97. parts] part Ff, Rowe+. Mal.’go, Steev. Hal. 


98. you bought | your bought F.. 


g0-92. BooTH: Slowly, with great determination, in subdued tones. 

92. draw] ALLEN: We now speak of drawing money only from a bank, or place 
of deposit. Was it then used of accepting or receiving money in any way? ‘Draw’ 
may be equivalent to choose, that is, if offered at the same time with the bord. 

94. BooTH: With a look and tone of surprise. 

95. JoHNson: This argument, considered as used to the particular persons, seems 
conclusive. I see not how Venetians or Englishmen, while they practise the purchase 
and sale of slaves, can much enforce or demand the law of ‘doing to others as we 
would that they should do to us.’ 

103. So... you] BootH: Respectfully but firmly, and at line 108, bow as 
you ask. 

109. Vpon] ABBOTT, § 192: Upon from meaning superposition, comes to mean in 
accordance with (like ‘after’), as here. 

110. Bellario] JOHNSON: The doctor and the Court are here somewhat unskill- 
fully brought together. That the Duke would, on such an occasion, consult a doctor 
of great reputation, is not unlikely; but how should this be foreknown by Portia? 
TYRWHITT: I do not see any necessity for supposing that ¢h¢s was Joreknown by Por- 
tia. She consults Bellario as an eminent lawyer, and her relation. If the Duke had 
not consulted him, the only difference would have been, that she would have come into 


ACT IV, SC. 1.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 203 


Whom I haue fent for to determine this, Intl 
Come heere to day. 
Sal. My Lord, heere ftayes without 
A Meffenger with Letters from the Door, 
New come from Padua. 115 
Du. Bring vs the Letters, Call the Meffengers. 
Baff, Good cheere Anthonio, What man, corage yet : 117 


113. Sal.] Saler.Q,. Salerio Q.. 116, Meffengers| Meffenger Qa. 
116. Letters,] letters? Q,. Letters. Q;: 117. corage] courage Qq¥ F,. 


Court as an advocate, perhaps, instead of a judge. Kenrick (Rev. of Johnson’s Ed, 
p- 52): Is it not very natural to suppose that, after Bassanio was called away in such 
haste to Venice, his bride Portia would send a messenger to her cousin Bellario, in 
order to ask his opinion of so extraordinary a case, or to interest him in Anthonio’s 
behalf? And can anything be more probable than that he should inform her, on re- 
ceiving such a message, that he was actually sent for to Venice on that very account ? 
For it is to be observed that the Duke speaks as if he had sent for him some consider- 
able time before; for he says, ‘unless Bellario, .. . . come here ¢o-day,’ His power of 
dismissing the Court also, on his not coming, seems founded on some physical or moral 
impediment, that might very naturally occur, to prevent his arrival within the time; so 
that he must be supposed either at such a distance as made it necessary to give him a 
considerable timely warning, or that the extraordinary nature of the cause might make 
him require so much the more time to prepare himself equitably to determine it. This 
being the case, was not here a very apt foundation on which to build Portia’s plot of 
officiating for the doctor? which design she no doubt concerted with him by letter, be- 
fore she sent for the notes and clothes mentioned in III, vy. And that this was really 
the case seems evident from what Portia says to Lorenzo during the absence of Bassa- 
nio, and 4efore she sends Balthazar to Bellario. Lorenzo compliments her on her noble 
conduct ‘in bearing thus the absence of her lord.’ A sufficient intimation, I think, that 
Bassanio must have been gone some time. Again, in Portia’s reply to this compliment, 
we find her speaking very peremptorily and certainly of Anthonio’s deliverance, and 
of the cost already bestowed to effect it. Is it reasonable to think that she would 
express herself thus confidently on a mere suggestion of her own? Besides, what cost 
could she have bestowed? Her having bid her husband pay the bond thrice over was 
nothing; because she could not be sure the money would be taken. Nay, she evi- 
dently does not intend to trust to that acceptance. It is therefore, I think, very evident 
that she had, even at this time, concerted the scheme with her cousin Bellario. It is 
true that the formality with which Portia introduces her charge to Balthazar, when she 
sends him for the notes and clothes, seems to favour the supposition that this was the 
first time she had sent to Bellario, in which case there would be some grounds for Dr 
Johnson’s remark; but we must observe that Balthazar is now to be entrusted with a 
more important charge than he had before been, in merely carrying and bringing back 
a letter; or, it is not unlikely, that Portia entrusted that business with a servant of less 
importance. [See Th. Elze in Appendix: ‘ Dr Bellario;’ and Lady Martin.—ED. ] 

112, BootH: Shylock shrugs his shoulders, and retires apart from the others. 

116. Messengers] Another instance of the superfluous s noted by WALKER (Crit. 
t, 233) and alluded to II, ix, 35, which see. 


204 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. i, 


The Iew fhall haue my flesh, blood, bones, and all, 118 
Ere thou fhalt loofe for me one drop of blood. 
Ant. Jama tainted Weather of the flocke, : 120 


Meeteft for death, the weakefl kinde of fruite 
Drops earlieft to the ground, and fo let me; 
You cannot better be employ’d Baffanio, 
Then to liue ftill, and write mine Epitaph. 


Enter Nerriffa. 125 


Du. Came you from Padua from Bellario? 
Ner. From both. : 
My Lord Bellario greets your Grace. 
Baf. Why doft thou whet thy knife fo earneftly ? 
Tew. To cut the forfeiture from that bankrout there. 13U 
Gra. Not on thy foale : but on thy foule harfh lew 


120. Weather] wether Steev. Q,- 40th. My Lord, Rowe. both. my 
122. carlie/?] soonest Cap. (erratum). lord Pope. both, my lord : Theob. et seq. 
and | Om. Ff, Rowe. 130. forfeiture| forfeit Rowe ii+, 
[Scene II. Pope+. Dyce iii, Coll. iii, Huds. 
125. Enter...] Enter...dress’d like a 131. foale...foule] F,. foule...foule 
Lawyer's Clerk. Rowe. Qq. /foale...foul FF, Theob, Warb. 
127, 128. One line, Qq, Pope et seq. soal...soul Rowe, Johns. Cap. Steev.’85, 


127. both. My Lord] Ff. both, my Mal.’90. soul/...soul Pope. sole...soul 
L.Q,. both? my L.Q,. both: my L. Han. et cet. 


118, 119. BooTH: Shylock smiles scornfully, and slowly drawing his knife, at line 
124, kneels, to whet it. 

129. whet] MuRDOcH ( 7%e Stage, 326): When a young man, acting Shylock, Mr 
Forrest was in the habit of carrying in his gaberdine a small whetstone for sharpening 
the knife. This I never saw, but I was told of it by an old actor of the Bowery Thea- 
tre, New York, who vouched for its truth. BootTH: Whet the knife on the sole of the 
shoe,—not too rapidly. 

130. forfeiture] RITSON: Read forfeit. It occurs repeatedly in the present scene 
for ‘ forfeiture.’ ALLEN: Although ‘forfeiture’ can be scanned, the shorter and sharper 
word is veguired for Shylock. (The several ¢s are all most cuttingly expressive.) 

131. soale ...soule] THEOBALD (in his Shakespeare Restored, p. 168,—that criti- 
cism of Pope’s Edition which Pope answered by making ‘ Tibbald’ the original hero of 
The Dunciad ): I dare venture to restore Him, from the Authority of some of the Folio 
Editions; tho’ I am obliged at the same Time to restore such a Sort of Conceit, and 
Jingle upon two Words, alike in Sound but differing in Sense, as our Author ought to 
have blush’d for, But be That upon his own Head. If I restore his Meaning, and 
his Words, he himself is accountable to the Judges for writing them. ‘Not on thy 
SOLE, but on thy souL, harsh Jew.’ That is, Tho’ thou thinkest that thou art whetting 
thy Knife on the So/e of thy Shoe, yet it is upon thy Sow/, thy immortal Part, that Thou 
doest it, mistaken, inexorable Man! The bare intention of thy Cruelty is so unpar- 
donable, that thou must bring thy very Sou/ into Hazard. I dare affirm, This is the 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 205 


Thou mak’ft thy knife keene : but no mettall can, 132 
No, not the hangmans Axe beare halfe the keenneffe 


132. but] for Pope+. 132. mettall] mettellQ,. mettle Q,. 


very Antithests of our Author; and I am the more confident, because it was so usual 
with him to play on Words in this manner; and because in another of his Plays he 
puts the very same Words in Opposition to one another, and That from the Mouth of 
one of his serious Characters. See Rom. & Jud. I, iv, 15: ‘You have dancing shoes 
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead.” WarBuRTON: This lost jingle Mr Theo- 
bald found again; but knew not what to make of it when he had it, as appears by his 
paraphrase. [which Warburton quotes, and exclaims] Absurd! the conceit is, that his 
soul was so hard that it had given an edge to his knife. STkEVENS: Soin 2 Hen.JV: 
IV, v, 108 : ‘Thou hid’st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts; Which thou hast whetted 
on thy stony heart.’ EccLes: To me, Theobald and Warburton seem to mean pretty 
much the same thing. Both admit that the Jew’s sow/ is supposed, by the figure, to be 
the instrument of rendering the edge more keen. The jingle may incline us to an 
opinion that the vulgar, diphthongal pronunciation of the word ‘soul’ was in use, even 
among polite speakers, in Shakespeare’s days. [It is possible that the difference of 
spelling in the Folio indicates a difference of pronunciation between the two words, 
but with which of the two our modern pronunciation better agrees it is hard to decide. 
The spelling of the same words in Rom. & Jul. gives us no help, but rather adds to 
the perplexity: ‘ You haue dancing fhooes With nimble foles, I haue a foale of Lead ;’ 
nor is Jud. Ces. I, i, 15, any clearer, where the Cobbler says that he is ‘a Mender of 
bad foules.’ As the present Irish pronunciation is supposed to represent in many words 
the pronunciation of Shakespeare, it may be that Eccles, who was an Irishman, has 
given us the true hint, and that sow was pronounced almost dissyllabically sows. This 
was confirmed, I thought, by finding in Com. of Err. II, i, 22: ‘ Indued with intellectuall 
fence and foules Of more preheminence then fifth and fowles;’ but the strength of this 
example was immediately weakened by observing only a few lines before it: ‘The 
beafts, the fifhes and the winged fowles Are their males subjects and at their controules,’ 
which goes to show, even if other evidence were wanting (which is not), that fow/ ap- 
proached more nearly to our pronunciation of soz, than sou/ to fowl. On turning to 
Eis (Zarly Eng. Pron., Part III, p. 903), 1 find that Gill (Logonomia, 1621, pp. 
77, 117) gives sool as the pronunciation of ‘sole,’ and (Jd. 20, 136) soowl as that of 
‘soul.’ This, by making the latter dissyllabic, would leave some slight difference to be 
detected by anice ear. But Hodges, 1643, who, on the score of delicacy of pronun- 
ciation, is not rated by Ellis as high as Gill, in his list of words ‘alike in sound and 
unlike both in signification and writing,’ gives ‘the sole of a shoo, the sowde and body. 
the soles of his shoos, he so/eth his shoos, soules and bodies bought and so/d, the skoos 
are sol’d,’ (Ellis, p. 1021), wherein it is apparently intimated that there is no difference 
whatever in pronunciation. If I remember rightly, Mrs Kemble gave to ‘soul’ the 
slightly dissyllabic sound mentioned by Gill, with a narrower sound to the oo, almost 
like a very broad aa. I once thought that peradventure the s in ‘sole,’ in memory of 
the close connection between soles and shoes, might have had the sound of s# which 
we still retain in sure, sugar, and, until recently, in sewer. But the search was fruit- 
less.—ED. ] 

133. hangmans] Dyce (Gloss.): An executioner. So in Fletcher’s Prophetess, 
III, i, Dioclesian, who had stadsed Aper, is called ‘the hangman of Volusius Aper;’ 


206 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. i. 


Of thy fharpe enuy. Can no prayers pierce thee? 
Iew. No, none that thou haft wit enough to make. 135 
Gra. O be thou damn’d, inexecrable dogge, 

And for thy life let iuftice be accus’d: 

Thou almoft mak’ft me wauer in my faith ; 

To hold opinion with Pythagoras, 


That foules of Animals infufe themfelues 140 
Into the trunkes of men. Thy currifh fpirit 
Gouern’d a Wolfe, who hang’d for humane flaughter, 142 
135. haf] hoaft F,. . 138. faith ;] faith, Rowe. 
136. inexecrable] QqF,, Knt, Cam. 142 humane] humaine Q,. 


Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. zxexorable dy et cet. 


and in Jacke Drum’s Entertainment, Brabant Junior, being prevented by Sir Edward 
from stabding himself, declares that he is too wicked to live: ‘And therefore, gentle 
knight, let mine owne hand Be mine own hangman,’ 1616; compare, too, a play of a 
much later date, the Duke of Buckingham’s Rehearsa/, where Bayes says: ‘I come 
out in a long black veil, and a great huge hangman behind me, with a furr’d cap, and 
his sword drawn; and there tell ’em plainly, that if, out of good nature, they will not 
like my play, ’gad, I’ll e’en kneel down, and he shall cut my head off.’— Works, i, 
p. 21, ed. 1775. 

134. Scan, for the sake of emphasising the proper words: ‘Of thy | sharp énvy, | ” 

| Can no | prayers piérce ¢hee ?? ED. 

135. BootH: Mo—doggedly, without looking up. 

136. inexecrable] MALonE: This was, perhaps, unnecessarily changed in F,. Jn 
was sometimes used, in our author’s time, in composition, as an augmentative or inten- 
sive particle. DyYcCr (Remarks, p. 58): Richardson has given ‘inexecrable’ a place in 
his Dictionary. I agree with Collier [and Capell, too, Dyce might have added] in 
considering it a misprint. CLARENDON: That is, that cannot be execrated enough. 
AxBBoTT: Compare invaluable. [Apart from the fact that ‘inexecrable’ is found 
nowhere else in the language, zzexoradle is so very appropriate after Gratiano’s vain 
prayers, that I cannot but think that the former word is a misprint. I do not quite see 
the parallelism of Abbott’s z#valuable (a word, by the way, not to be found in Shake- 
speare); a thing that cannot be valued enough is invaluable; a thing that cannot be 
execrated enough is, what ?—inexecratable ?—ED.] 

137. for thy life] CAPELL: His meaning is, that as he had before invok’d damna- 
tion upon him, so now he would have ‘justice’ (executive justice) take away his ‘life ;’ 
though it were in wrong and to that justice’s impeachment. Ecc.xs: Is it not as likely 
he may intend to say that ‘justice’ itself merits accasation for permitting a person of so 
unworthy and cruel a character any longer to Live ? 

138. wauer in my faith] BooTH: Shylock now looks up at him with mocking 
wonder. During the rest of this speech he slowly takes from his bosom the bond, and 
at its close, points to the seal, still kneeling. 

142. who... slaughter] CLARENDON says that this is another instance of what 
is called nominativus pendens in Latin, and refers to I, iii, 139: ‘Who if he break,’ 
&c. ABBOTT, § 376, considers it a case of Nominative Absolute. STERVENS: This 
allusion might have been caught from some old translation of Pliny, whc mentions a 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 207 


Euen from the gallowes did his fell foule fleet ; 143 
And whil’ft thou layeft in thy vnhallowed dam, 
Infus’d it felfe in thee : For thy defires 145 


Are Woluith, bloody, fteru’d, and rauenous. 

few. Till thou canft raile the feale from off my bond 
Thou but offend’ft thy Lungs to fpeake fo loud: 
Repaire thy wit good youth, or it will fall 


To endleffe ruine. I ftand heere for Law. 150 
144. whtl'ft] whil? Q,. while? Q,Q,. 150. endleffe| Ff, Rowe, Wh. i. care- 
146. feru’d] Ff, Knt, Sing. Sta. less Pope. cureleffe Qq et cet. 

farw’d Q,Q, ftar’’'d Q, et cet. heere] Om. Q,. 


Parrhasian turned into a wo/f, because he had eaten part of a child that had been con- 
secrated to Lyczean Jupiter. See Goulart’s Admirable Histories, p. 390. [With what 
ridicule Steevens would have greeted this note had it been put forth by luckless Theo- 
bald! The passage referred to in Goulart, contains merely an account of Lycanthropy, 
and not a syllable, that I can find, which has any bearing on these words of Gratiano, 
except that the word ‘wolf’ is common to both. Allen notes that ‘it is singular, that 
while Gratiano says a wolf, he shews he is ¢hinking of a wolvish man, a murderer.’ 
To me it is so singular that (coupled with its grammatical difficulty), I am inclined to 
suspect that there is some corruption here. If Mr S. L. Lee is correct (see his note- 
worthy article on ‘The Jews in England’ in the Appendix) in surmising a connection 
between this play and the fate of Dr Lopez, the Jew, who was hung at Tyburn in 1594, 
the allusion here, vague as it is, is quite pointed enough to have been caught by an audi- 
ence in whose minds the event was so recent. It is not inconceivable that this is one 
of those actor’s additions which Hamlet denounces, and this would measurably account 
for its grammatical awkwardness. The whole passage from ‘Thy currish spirit,’ line 
{41, to ‘Infus’d itself in thee,’ line 145, can be omitted without injury either to the 
sense or to the rhythm, ‘Thus: ‘That souls of animals infuse themselves Into the 
trunks of men. For thy desires Are wolvish, bloody, sterv’d, and ravenous.’—ED. ] 

144. layest] Douce: Is not this a very common misprint for /ay’dst, where the 
preterite is intended? [A query which ALLEN aptly characterizes as ‘a curious piece 
of deliberate bad grammar.’—ED. ] 

146. steru’d] CoLLieR: The meaning of ‘sterv’d’ and starv’d is the same; if there 
were a difference, it might be fit to mark it with a difference of spelling. RoLFe: The 
word is the Anglosaxon steorfan, Old Eng. sterven (frequent in Chaucer), Ger. s¢erben. 
It originally meant to die, but in the latter part of the 16th Century came to be used in 
the narrower sense of perishing with co/d,—a meaning which it still has in the North 
of England (see also 2 Hen. VT: III, i, 343, &c.)—or with hunger. [How did Pope 
pronounce it? ‘But still the Great have kindness in reserve, He help’d to bury whom 
he help’d to starve.’ —Lpistle to Dr Arbuthnot.—ED. ] 

147, BooTH: Now rise, and, after ‘I stand here for the law,’ turn contemptuously 
from Gratiano. 

147. raile] My Father says that the prolonged, grating, guttural tone of utter con 
tempt with which Edmund Kean dwelt on this word has never left his memory.—Ep. 

150, endlesse] I am by no means sure that cureless of the Qq is the better word 


here.—ED, 


208 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [AcT Iv, SC. i. 


Dn. This Letter from Belario doth commend I51 
A yong and Learned Doétor in our Court ; 
Where is he? 
Ner. He attendeth heere hard by 
To know your anfwer, whether you’l admit him. 155 
Du. With all my heart. Some three or four of you 
Go giue him curteous conduét to this place, 
Meane time the Court fhall he are Bellarioes Letter. 


Y Our Grace fhall underfiand, that at the receite of your 

Letter Lam very ficke : but in the tnfiant that your mef- 160 
Senger came, in louing vifitation, was with me a young Do- 
étor of Rome, his name is Balthafar : [ acqguained him with 
the caufe in Controuerfie, betweene the lew and Anthonio 
the Merchant : We turn’d ore many Bookes together : hee 1s 
furnished with my opinion, which bettred with his owne lear- 165 
ning, the greatneffe whereof [cannot enough commend, comes 
with him at my importunity, to fill vp your Graces requeft in 167 


152. in our] Ff, Rowe, Pope. £0 our 162. Balthafar] Balthazer @,@.. 
Qq et cet. acquained] F,. 

159-171. Roman, Q,Q,- 163. caufe] cafe F,F,, Rowe. 

159. [Clerk. [reads] Cap. 165. bettred] dettered Q.Q,F,F,. 


160. in the] at the Rowe+, Steev.’85. 


158, 159. shall] ABBOTT, § 315: Used to denote inevitable futurity without refer- 
sace to will (desire). See also ‘ Fair Jessica shall be my torch-bearer,’ II, iv, 42. 

159. BooTH: Shylock gives deep attention to this letter, and looks quickly and curi- 
ously at Portia until she is on the dais R. H., then he turns to the Duke. 

159. receite] EccLEs: It is probable that Bellario received the Duke’s summons to 
attend this cause about the time, or rather, perhaps, a little before, his cousin made her 
application to him by letter. Whether the doctor’s illness was real, or pretended, is of 
no moment to the business of the play; it is sufficient that it coincided better with Por- 
tia’s project that he should be absent upon this occasion. 

165. opinion] Kenrick (Rev. of Dr Johnson, p. 52): I have known some spec- 
tators impute the device, by which Anthonio evades the penalty of the bond, to the 
ingenuity of Portia. Perhaps this is the case, indeed, with the audience in general. 
But, as I think it a little out of character, in a young lady of her education, to be so 
well versed in the quirks and quibbles of the law, so I conceive there is sufficient 
reason given in the play to suppose that evasion to have been suggested by Bellario. 
For she expressly mentions to the messenger the zofes and clothes. These ‘notes’ 
were, doubtless, the brief or hints for her pleading. And Bellario says in his letter 
‘he is furnished with my opinion.’ 

167. fill vp] CLARENDON: ‘Up’ intensifies the verb to which it is attached, like 
kara in Greek, ‘As true as Troilus,” shall crown up the verse,’— Tyo. and Cress. 
III, ii, 189. On the other hand, in Meas. for Meas. I, ii, 168, ¢ up’ is almost redundant: 
* Whether the tyranny be in his place, Or in his eminence that fills it up.’ 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 209 


my fied. I befeech you, let his lacke of years be no impediment 168 
to let him lacke a reuerend eftimation : for I neuer knewe fo 
yong a body, with fo old ahead, I leaue him to your gracious 170 
acceptance, whofe trial fhall better publifh his commendation. 


Enter Portia for Balthazar. 


Duke. You heare the learn’d Be/lario what he writes, 
And heere(I take it)is the Doétor come. 
Giue me your hand : Came you from old Bellario? 175 
Por. I did my Lord. 
Du. You are welcome : take your place; 
Are you acquainted with the difference 
That holds this prefent queftion in the Court. 
Por. Jam enformed throughly of the caufe. 180 
Which is the Merchant heere? and which the Iew? 
Du. Anthonio and old Shylocke, both ftand forth. 


Por. Is your name Shylocke ? 183 
168. fted] F,. ftead Qq Ff. 177. You are| You're Pope+, Dyce iii, 
172. Enter... ] Enter Portia dress’d like Huds. 

a Doctor of Laws. Rowe. 180, throughly] thoroughly Steev.’85, 
175. Came] come Qq, Cam. Cla. Glo. Ktly. 

Wh. ii. : caufe| Cafe FF, Rowe+. 


168. no impediment] CLARENDON: That is, no hindrance to his receiving. So 
pf is used in Greek, after words signifying to ‘hinder,’ ‘forbid,’ &c., a usage which 
sprang originally from a confusion of thought, similar to that in line 81 of the present 
Scene: ‘Forbid....to make no noise.’ SCHMIDT (p. 1420): This is equivalent 
either to ‘let his lack of years be no motive to let him lack,’ or ‘be no impediment to 
let him have.’ 

171. whose] See ABBOTT, § 263, for other instances of ‘“ who” used for “and 
he,” “for he,” &c.’ Thus here, ‘ whose trial,’ that is, ‘for Azs trial.’ 

173. Bellario what] ABBort, § 414: Instead of saying ‘I know what you are,’ 
in which the object of the verb ‘I know’ is the clause ‘what you are,’ Shakespeare 
frequently introduces before the dependent clause another object, so as to make the 
dependent clause a mere explanation of the object. [One of WALKER’s chapters 
(Crit. i, p. 68) is devoted to examples of this redundancy, which, as he says, corre- 
sponds to the Greek idiom; e.g. 77. B. 409: jdee yap Kara Ouudv adeAdedv, dg Erroveiro. | 

175. Came] Portia’s reply, ‘I did,’ as suggested by Clarendon, shows that this is 
better than Come of the Qq. 

177. place] STAUNTON: In the representation of this scene, pictorially or on the 
stage, it seems never to be remembered that Portia, throughout the trial, appears as a 
judge, not an advocate, and that her proper place, therefore, is on the judgement-seat, 
below the Duke’s throne, rather than on the supposed floor of the Court, in front of the 
stage. BoorH: Portia goes to a table on dais R. H., facing the Duke. 

182. BooTH: Antonio and Shylock advance and bow to the Duke. 

14 


210 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [AcT Iv, Sc. i. 


Tew. Shylocke is my name. 
Por. Of a ftrange nature is the fute you follow, os 35 


Yet in fuch rule, that the Venetian Law 

Cannot impugne you as you do proceed. 

You ftand within his danger, do you not? 
Ant. I, fo he fayes. 


Por. Do you confeffe the bond? ~190 
Ant. Ido. 

Por. Then muft the Iew be mercifull. 

Jew. On what compulfion muft I ? Tell me that. 193 
187. impugne] impunge Q,. 188. [To Anthonio. Rowe. 


188. you not] ye not Q,. 


184. BoorH: After a look of surprise, he replies doggedly. 

185, CAMPBELL (p. 60): The trial is conducted according to the strict forms of legal 
procedure. Portia, the PopESTA or judge, called in to act under the authority of the 
Doge, first inquires if there be any plea of son est factum. 

186, in such rule] ALLEN: So vegu/ar. 

187. impugne] STEEVENS: That is, to oppose, to controvert. 

188, danger] TyRWHITT (Cant. Tales, v. 665): That is, within his reach or con- 
trol. HENLEY: There are frequént instances in Ze Paston Letters of the use of this 
phrase in the same sense; whence it is obvious, from the common language of the 
time, that to be in ded¢ and to be in danger were synonymous terms. GIFFORD (Mas- 
singer’s Fatal Dowry, I, ii): That is, to be in your debt, a common expression in our 
old writers. MALONE: Again, in V. & A. 639: ‘Come not within his danger by thy 
will” KnicHT: The phrase is not used by Portia in the limited and secondary sense 
of being in debt. COLLIER (ed. ii): ‘ Within his danger’ was, in Shakespeare’s time, 
and long before, equivalent merely to zwdebted to him: the phrase has no necessary 
reference to the peril of Anthonio’s position. HALLIWELL: The phrase seems to be 
partially retained in the still common proverb, ‘out of debt, out of danger.’ STAUN- 
TON: Ducange explains the term as follows: ‘Danger, quidquid juri stricto, atque adeo 
confiscationi obnoxium est.’ WEDGWOOD (s. v.): To be in the danger of any one, 
estre en son danger, came to signify to be subjected to any one, to be in his power, or 
liable to a penalty to be inflicted by him or at his suit, and hence the ordinary accepta- 
tion of the word at the present day. ‘In danger of the judgement—in danger of Hell- 
fire.’ SKEAT (s. v.): Old French, damgier (modern French, danger), absolute power, 
irresponsible authority; hence, power to harm, as in [the present passage. Gairdner’s 
Index to The Paston Letters supplies us with the following : ‘I truste right well all the 
aldermen, except Broun and sech as be in his dawnger.’— John Jenney to John Paston, 
vol. i, p. 340, ed. Gairdner.—ED. ] 

190. BooTH: Shylock darts a glance at Anthonio. 

192, must] ABBOTT, § 314: Sometimes used by Shakespeare to mean no more 
than definite futurity, like our ‘is to’ in ‘ He zs Zo be here to-morrow.’ [See II, vi, 47.] 
Somewhat similar, without the notion of compulsion, is the use of it in [the present 
passage. Abbott is, of course, right in saying that Portia uses ‘must’ without any 
notion of compulsion, yet it is exactly in that sense that Shylock takes it—Ep.]. 

193. BooTH: With great assurance, and contemptnously turning away. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 211 


Por. The quality of mercy is not ftrain’d, 


It droppeth as the gentle raine from heauen 195 
Vpon the place beneath. It is twice bleft, 
It bleffeth him that giues, and him that takes, 197 


195. raine] dew Lansdowne. 


194. BooTH: When Portia begins to speak she descends from the dais and advances. 
Douce: In composing these beautiful lines it is probable that Shakespeare recollected 
the following verse in Leclestasticus, xxxv, 20: ‘ Mercy is seasonable in the time of 
affliction, as clouds of rain in the time of drought.’ [There is a tendency, I think, in 
repeating this familiar line, to lay the chiefest emphasis on ‘mercy.’ Is this right? In 
reply to Shylock’s demand for a proof of his compulsion to be merciful, Portia exclaims 
that the very characteristic of mercy is that there can be no compulsion in its exercise. 
Its very nature is to fall like the rain. Should not ‘quality,’ then, receive the greater, 
and ‘mercy’ a secondary, emphasis ?—ED, 

In the Jahrbuch, ix, p. 195, there is a learned article by Wm. Koenig, Ueder die 
Entlehnungen Shakespeare's, &c. In that article (p. 218) passages are cited from 
Rabelais, from Cicero, from a tragedy by Leonoro Verlato, called Rodopeia, and else 
where, which bear certain resemblances to some of the lines and ideas in this speech. 
It is not always easy to take interest in the detection of parallelisms like these, which 
lead us nowhither. In view of Shakespeare’s myriad-mindedness, our wonder is not 
that there are so many, but that there are no more.—ED. ] 

HAZLITT (p. 274): This speech about ‘mercy’ is very well; but there are a thou- 
sand finer ones in Shakespeare. [See in Appendix Charles Cowden-Clarke’s expla- 
nation of the unsympathetic mood which seemed to rule Hazlitt throughout his criti- 
cism of Portia.—ED.] 

194. strain’d] R. S. DAvizs: That is, confined by laws, restricted to a few persons. 
‘You are as free to use it as any one. The rain does not favour the king’s garden any 
more than the peasant’s. It waters all places alike, and mercy should descend as 
equally and impartially.’ [I suppose this is the best possible defence of an erroneous 
interpretation, which overlooks in ‘strain’d’ the answer to Shylock’s question of com- 
pulsion.—ED. ] 

196. twice blest] EccLes: ‘ Mercy’ is made both the d/esser and the dlessed, The 
verb is twice used in the same general sense of, #0 make happy, varying only from pas- 
sive to active. In its first application, however, ‘mercy’ is the representative both of 
the person who exercises that virtue, and also of him who is the object of it; in its 
second, it is made a distinct agent from both, and regarded as conferring happiness 
upon each, It may, perhaps, help to solve this perplexity if we consider ‘mercy’ as 
personified, and ‘blest,’ inasmuch as she enjoys the power of d/essing, i. e. of render- 
ing happy both the giver and receiver; or we may understand the word ‘blest’ in a 
signification which it frequently bears, that of addressed or saluted with benediction ; in 
the first place, on the part of Aim that gives for the pleasure which he derives from 
having acted mercifully, and again, on the part of Aim that takes for the benefit con- 
ferred by the mercy shown him. SEyMowr (i, 125): Would not the sense be better 
expressed if we should read ‘twice-blessing’? Yet I cannot approve this: ‘twice- 
blessed’ certainly does not mean blessed in repetition, as our actresses most vilely utter 
it, but blessed augmentedly, blessed supremely, or in a great degree, as we say, thrice 
happy, withovt any idea of repetition, ‘Blessed’ here is oly. ALLEN refers to III, 


THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, sc. i. 


212 

’Tis mightieft in the mightieft, it becomes 198 
The throned Monarch better then his Crowne. 

His Scepter fhewes the force of temporall power, 200 


The attribute to awe and Maieftie, 

Wherein doth fit the dread and feare of Kings: 

But mercy is aboue this fceptred fway, 

It is enthroned in the hearts of Kings, 

It is an attribute to God himfelfe ; 205 
And earthly power doth then fhew likeft Gods 


206. likeft] LB? Q,. 


ii, 103, ‘the guiled shore,’ where, if ‘guiled’ means endowed with gzwi/es, then ‘blest’ 
may be here equivaleat to endued with the capacity to bless. 

201. awe and Maiestie] ALLEN: ‘Awe,’ properly, of the subject; ‘majesty,’ of 
the king, the cause of ‘awe.’ By hendiadys, both might be taken together, equivalent 
to awful majesty. The subject ‘dreads and fears’ the king, because of that awe-breed- 
ing majesty which is associated with his ¢emforal power. It is implied in what follows, 
that the God-like quality of #zercy, on the other hand, being seated in the Aeart of the 
king, evokes from the subject a corresponding affection of the heart, even Jove. 

204. hearts] EccixEs: This, I think, should be spoken with particular emphasis. 

206, 207. WHALLEY (p. 65): Compare 77¢. And. I, i, 117, tho’ there is a proba 
bility it might not come from Shakespeare: ‘ Wilt thou draw near the nature of the 
gods? Draw near them then in being merciful.’ Which is directly the sense and 
words of a passage in one of Cicero’s finest Orations: ‘Homines ad Deos nulla re 
proprius accedunt quam salutem hominibus dando.’—Orat. pro Ligar. sub fin. 
MALONE: So, in King Edward III, 1596, V,i, 41: ‘And Kings approch the nearest 
vnto God By giuing life and safety vnto men.’ So Sir J. Harrington [Orlando Furioso, 
1591, B. xxiv, st. 30—Colfer]: ‘This noble vertue and divine, Doth chiefly make a 
man so rare and od, As in that one he most resembleth God.’ So Thomas Achely, 
also quoted in Lngland’s Parnassus, under the same head ‘Mercie:’ ‘Then come 
we nearest to the gods on hie, When we are farthest from extremitie, Giving forth sen- 
tence of our lawes with Mercie.’ BLACKEWAY: There is something extremely like 
this in the petition of the Convocation to Queen Elizabeth, in 1580, praying her to 
pardon Archbishop Grindal: ‘ Nihil est tam populare quam bonitas: atque principes ad 
prepotentem Deum nulla re propius accedunt quam offensionibus deponendis et obli- 
viscendis injuriis,’—Fuller’s Church Hist. sub ann. HUNTER (i, 328): It was one of 
the common-places of the time, and might, no doubt, be found in innumerable writers ; 
but it may be doubted whether it is anywhere exhibited in a manner so impressive as 
here. Such sentiments, so far as they respect the course of public punishments, it was 
of more importance to urge in Shakespeare’s time than now ; when the single mind 
of the monarch, unswayed by counsel, and with no very determinate principles, often 
decided the fate of persons convicted of crimes, of which a very remarkable instance 
occurred in the time of Shakespeare, when James I secretly determined to save the lives 
of the Lords Grey and Cobham, convicted of treason, when every one beside thought 
that their execution was certain, CLARENDON: It is possible that Shakespeare in writ- 
ing this passage intended to compliment Elizabeth, whose rule (whatever be the judge- 
ment of recent historians) was certainly held by her subjects to be mild and merciful. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 213 


When mercie feafons Iuftice. Therefore Iew, 207 
Though Iuftice be thy plea, confider this, 
That in the courfe of Iuftice, none of vs 
Should fee faluation : we do pray for mercie, 210 
And that fame prayer, doth teach vs all to render 
The deeds of mercie. I haue fpoke thus much 
To mittigate the iuftice of thy plea: 
Which if thou follow, this ftri€t courfe of Venice 
Muft needes giue fentence ’gainft the Merchant there. 215 
Shy. My deeds vpon my head, I craue the Law, 
The penaltie and forfeite of my bond. 
Por. Is he not able to difcharge the money ? 
Baf. Yes, heere I tender it for him in the Court, 219 


214. courfe] Court Qq, Pope et seq, 


206. Gods] Booru: At the mention of the sacred name, Shylock bows reverently, 
which none of the Christians do. Cooke, when commended for this, said it was Mack- 
lin’s ‘business,’ and, according to my belief, Burbage did it,—perhaps at Shakespeare’s 
suggestion. 

208. Iustice] Shylock’s plea was ‘judgement,’ not justice.—Eb. 

210, 211. BLACKSTONE: Portia, referring the Jew to the Christian doctrine of salva- 
tion and the Lord’s Prayer, is a little out of character. R.T. (Amon. ap. SEYMOUR, 
i, 125): Besides that it is supposed the Lord’s Prayer consists of expressions in use 
among Jews, their Scriptures abound with passages recommending mercy, particularly 
Lcclesiasticus, xxviii. WORDSWORTH (p. 111): The learned judge was probably not 
aware that the Lord’s Prayer was not composed by our Lord as containing anything 
which would be new and strange to His disciples, but as putting together, in a short 
form, all that was most valuable in the Jewish liturgies already known to them. See 
Lightfoot, ii, 159, 439; Grotius on S. Matthew, vi, 9; who also refers to Ecclesiasticus, 
xxviii. The Biblical critics, therefore, who, like Burkitt, except the particular clause 
which Portia refers to—viz. ‘As we forgive them that trespass against us,’ from the 
foregoing representation in regard to the origin of the several petitions of the Lord’s 
Prayer, have, in all probability, made that single exception without sufficient reason, 
Besides, it is to be borne in mind that many of the Jews, though they-did not accept 
Christ as their Messiah, yet they did accept Him as ‘a teacher come from God.’ And 
certainly it is not correct to suppose that the Christian doctrine of salvation is not also 
the doctrine of salvation to the faithful Jew. 

211. that same prayer] Dunlap’s Zzfe of Cooke: Shakespeare here makes Por- 
tia, in her zeal, quote the Lord’s Prayer, but the great actor, by his look and the shake 
of his head and of his hand, gives a comment on the text, by rejecting the application 
to himself, or to those of his belief. 

216. BooTH: After a pause. HENLEY: An imprecation adopted from that of the 
Jews to Pilate: ‘His blood be on us, and our children.’ 

216. Law,] In a modern text there should be here either a dash, as Allen suggests, 
or 2 colon. to indicate that what follows in the next line is what the law gives him.—En. 


214 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. 1. 


Yea, twice the fumme, if that will not fuffice, 220 
I will be bound to pay it ten times ore, 
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart: 
If this will not fuffice, it muft appeare 
That malice beares downe truth. And I befeech you 
Wreft once the Law to your authority. 225 
To do a great right, do a little wrong, 
And curbe this cruell diuell of his will. 
Por. It muft not be, there is no power in Venice 
Can alter a decree eftablifhed : 
’Twill be recorded for a Prefident, : 230 
And many an err2r by the fame example, 
Will rufh into the ftate: It cannot be. 


Tew. A Daniel come to iudgement, yea a Daniel. 233 
220. twice] thrice Ritson, Coll. iii. 230. Prefident] Ff, Rowe. precedent 
229. alter] altar Q,. Qq. 


220. twice] CAPELL (ii, 70) : When Portia, towards the page’s bottom, mentions this 
offer, she calls it—an offer of ‘thrice’ the sum; and this ¢h7zce is the sum accepted by 
Shylock ; from whence some might be apt to infer an error in the term of this passage: 
but Portia had ground enough for her ¢4r7cc from what Bassanio says afterwards, and 
the Jew (as was right) catches at the term in her offer. COLLIER: Portia afterward 
speaks of ‘thrice thy money.’ This may have been a mere inadvertence, a mishear- 
ing, or a misprint. CLARENDON: As Bassanio offers ten times the sum, Portia is 
authorized to offer thrice the sum in his name, as omne majus continet in se minus. 
Or Bassanio here may be supposed to offer twice the sum 77 addition to his previous 
tender of the sum itself; thrice the sum in all. RoLre: We see no necessity for 
bringing the two passages into mathematical agreement. 

224. truth] THEOBALD (SA. Restored, p. 167): How does Malice bear down Truth 
in this process? What one circumstance is there in the cause whereby Truth or False- 
hood can come into question ?...,. 1 make not the least question but our poet made Bas- 
sanio say, ‘ That malice bears down ruth. HEATH (p. 121): I apprehend that the word 

truth’ here denotes that supreme rule of right and equity by which all human actions 
ought to be directed. JOHNSON: ‘ Malice’ oppresses honesty ; a ¢vwe man, in old Jan- 
guage, is an honest man. We now call the jury good men and true. (In his Edition, 
Theobald says that, ‘upon more mature advice,’ he believes ‘the text needs no altera- 
tion. Truth may mean here reason; the reasonable offers of accommodation which 
we have made.’] 

228, &c. BooTH: Shylock’s face expresses joy and astonishment. Portia utters ‘It 
cannot be,’ line 232, with great decision; lines 233, 234, Shylock utters almost wildly 
(not too loud), and kisses the hem of Portia’s gown. 

231. error] SCHMIDT ( Zrans/ation) : Portia’s point of view is not that of the moras- 
ist, but of the statesman; and ‘error’ is here not a mistake, but a departure from the 
prescribed path. Compare Off. V, ii, ‘It is the very error of the moon; she comes 
more nearer earth than she was wont,’ &c.; also A/zd. WV. D. V, i, 250. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 215 


O wife young Iudge, how do I honour thee. 
Por. I pray you let me looke vpon the bond. 235 
lew. Heere ’tis moft reuerend Doétor, heere it is. 
Por. Shylocke, there’s thrice thy monie offered thee. 
Shy. An oath, an oath, I haue an oath in heauen: 

Shall I lay periurie vpon my foule? 

No not for Venice. 240 
Por. Why this bond is forfeit, 

And lawfully by this the Iew may claime 

A pound of flefh, to be by him cut off 

Neereft the Merchants heart ; be mercifull, 

Take thrice thy money, bid me teare the bond. 245 
few. When it is paid according to the tenure. 


234 and throughout. Judge] Jude F,. 237. offered | offerd Pope. 
do I] I do Qgq, Cap. Coll. Hal. 240. Vo not] Not not Q,. 
Dyce, Cam. Glo. Cla. Huds. Wh. ii. 246. tenure] tenour Q,. 


235. let me] Om. F,F,. 


233. THEOBALD (Nichols, ///ust. ii, 312): There is no fault in sense here; I think 
the pointing is not exactly as the poet designed it. I like it better, ‘A Daniel! Come 
to judgement :—yea, a Daniel!’ For this reading not only extols the advocate, but 
expresses the Jew’s impatience for a sentence. [This was not repeated in Theobald’s 
Edition.—Ep.] HUNTER (i, 329): One would rather have expected to have found 
Solomon in this place. [Solomon is added in Lansdowne’s Version—Ep.] But see 
the Story of Susannah and the Elders; and also Ezekiel, xxviii, 3, and Daniel, vi, 3 
WorpswortH (p. 87): Daniel, according to the History of Susannah and the Elders, 
v. 45, was a ‘young youth’ when he convicted the Elders ‘ of false witness by their own 
mouth.’ His detection also of the imposture of the priests of Bel, as we read in the 
Apocryphal History of Bel and the Dragon, may have contributed to suggest the pro- 
priety of the allusion. 

234. thee] ABBOTT, § 233: Zhow is the rhetorical, you the conversational, pronoun. 
This explains the apparent liberty which Shylock takes here. 

236. BooTH: With great haste he draws forth both the bond and his knife, Portia 
utters the next line impressively, and Shylock replies as solemnly. 

238-240. HAwkIns (Life of Kean, i, p. 151) : Kean replaced the conventional, sol- 
emn severity of manner with a tone of humour bordering on the ludicrous; it was the 
bitter ironical joke of a man who saw no obstacle standing between him and the con- 
summation of his cherished purpose. 

244. Neerest... heart] HALLIWELL: This seems, at first sight, at variance with 
what is stated in the First Act: ‘To be cut off and taken in what part of your body 
pleaseth me;’ but it may be presumed that the selection of the part was made by Shy. 
lock before the bond was actually drawn up. 

244. be mercifull] BootH: Shylock shrugs his shoulders and shakes his forefinger 
after the Italian custom. Line 246 he speaks quickly, preventing the act. 

246. Dunlap’s Lf of Cooke (i, 122): The audience were surprised and delighted 
by the abruptness of his reply to Portia’s request that he would permit the bond to be 


216 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. i, 


It doth appeare you are a worthy ludge: 247 
you know the Law, your expofition 
Hath beene moft found. I charge you by the Law, 
Whereof you are a well-deferuing pillar, ~, 250 
Proceede to iudgement : By my foule I fweare, 
There is no power in the tongue of man 
To alter me : I ftay iucere on my bond. 
An. Mott heartily I do befeech the Court 
To giue the iudgement. 255 
Por. Why then thus it is: 
you muft prepare your bofome for his knife. 
Tew. O noble fudge, O excellent yong man. 
Por. For the intent and purpofe of the Law 
Hath full relation to the penaltie, 260 
Which heere appeareth due vpon the bond. 
Tew. ’?Tis verie true : O wife and vpright ludge, 
How much more elder art thou then thy lookes? 
Por. Therefore lay bare your bofome. 
lew. I, his breft, 265 
So fayes the bond, doth it not noble Iudge? 
Neereft his heart, thofe are the very words. 
Por. It is fo: Are there ballance heere to weigh the 
flefh ? 269 


250. pillar] piller Q,Q,. 268. Jt...weigh] One line, Cap. et seq. 
262, 265, 270, 273, 276. Iew.] Shy. (except Hal. Sta.). 

be ballance heere| ballances here 
264. your] thy is Rowe. - Rowe. scales Pope+. 


torn: ‘ When it is pazd according to the tenour,’ he replies, indicating a degree of 
apprehension lest she shoud tear it, and, at the same time, a malignant recognition 
of the penalty due. 

253. on] ABBOTT, § 180: Metaphorically for in dependence on. 

259-261. EccLEs: The intention and meaning of the law, framed for the determi- 
nation of similar cases, is clearly applicable to, and strongly in favour of, Shylock’s 
right to exact the penalty. Booru: Shylock watches the effect of Portia’s words on 
the faces of the Duke and Senators. 

263. more elder] For double comparatives, see ABBOTT, § IT. 

265. BoorH: Shylock takes the bond eagerly from Portia, and, when returning it 
to her after ‘those are the very words,’ looks at Anthonio. 

268. ballance] HALLIWELL gives several instances where ‘balance’ was used in 
Shakesneare’s time as a plural noun. CLARENDON: This is the only instance where 
it is thas used by Shakespeare. It is common to find a confusion in the Number of 
nouns ending in a sibilant. [See O¢d. I, iii, 357; WALKER’s Vers. 243; ABBOTT, 


ACT IV, SC. i] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 217 


few, I haue them ready. 270 
Por. Haue by fome Surgeon Shylock on your charge 

To ftop his wounds, leaft he fhould bleede to death. 
few. It is not nominated in the bond? 
Por. It is not fo expreft : but what of that? 

’*Twere good you do fo much for charitie. 275 
few. I cannot finde it, ’tis not in the bond. 


270. [Producing scales. Coll. ii. 273. Zt zs not] Ff, Rowe, Wh.i. Js 
272. /hould | Ff, Rowe+, Knt, Wh. i. it fo Qq et cet. 
do Qq et cet. 


§471. Difficult as is the scansion of this line as it stands in the Folio, I prefer it to 
the ‘running-on’ scansion of Capell, which here strikes me as peculiarly unhappy. If 
the line must be divided, I should prefer to consider ‘It is so’ as the first fragment, 
and supply any defect in metre by a pause after it. Thus says Coleridge (Zudle Talk, 
p. 80, ed. Morley): ‘Shakespeare’s rhythm is so perfect that you may be almost sure 
that you do not understand the real force of a line, if it does not run well as you read 
it. The necessary mental pause after every hemistich, or imperfect line, is always equal 
to the time that would have been taken in reading the complete verse.’—ED. ] 

273. Whether it is better to read this, despite the interrogation mark, as an assertion, 
with the Folio, or as a question, with the Quartos, I, for one, cannot decide. Booth’s 
Shylock ‘places the scales on the dais and takes the bond from Portia.’ In this case 
Shylock must ask, ‘Is it so nominated?’ before he examines the bond. If he examines 
the bond first, he must say, ‘It is not so nominated’ at the conclusion of his examina- 
tion and as he returns the bond to Portia. It is, however, immaterial, and may be safety 
left to the actor.—ED. 

275. ’Twere...do] ABBOTT, § 370, explains the irregular sequence of tenses 
here by supposing that a present tense is implied: ‘It were ad zs good.’ At the word 
‘charity,’ says BootH, ‘ Shylock rivets his gaze on Anthonio until he has returned the 
bond to Portia,’ which he does while uttering line 276. 

276. Hawkins (Life of Kean, i, 152): Kean substituted a chuckle of transport for 
the savage sneer with which the line had been rendered by Cooke and Macklin. This 
was a fine touch of nature. ‘The most ferocious and deadly passions,’ writes one of 
the critics in justification of this innovation, ‘relapse into an almost paroxysm of joy 
when the victims are placed in their power; as the poet has made death grin horribly 
a ghastly smile at the prospect of an abundant food for his savage appetite.’ 

276, LADY MARTIN (p. 43): At this point I have always felt in the acting that my 
desire to find extenuations for Shylock’s race and for himself leaves me, and my heart 
grows almost as stony as his own. I see his fiendish nature fully revealed. I have 
seen the knife sharpened to cut quickly through the flesh; the scales brought forward 
to weigh it; have watched the cruel, eager eyes, all strained and yearning to see the 
gushing blood welling from the side ‘nearest the heart,’ and gloating over the fancied 
agonies and death-pangs of his bitter foe. This man-monster, this pitiless, savage 
nature, is beyond the pale of humanity; it must be made powerless to hurt. I have 
felt that with him the wrongs of his race are really as nothing compared with his own 
remorseless hate. He is no longer the wronged and suffering man; and I longed to 
pour down on his L.:ad the ‘justice’ he has clamoured for, and will exact without pity. 


218 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. i. 


Por. Come Merchant, haue you any thing to fay ? 277 
Ant. But little ; Iam arm’d and well prepard. 
Giue me your hand Bafanio, fare you well. 
Greeue not that I am falne to this for you: ~, 280 
For heerein fortune fhewes her felfe more kinde 
Then is her cuftome. It is ftill her vfe 
To let the wretched man out-liue his wealth, 
To view with hollow eye, and wrinkled brow 
An age of pouerty. From which lingring penance 285 
Of fueh miferie, doth fhe cut me off: 
Commend me to your honourable Wife, 
Tell her the proceffe of Anthonio’s end : 
Say how I lou’d you ; fpeake me faire in death: 
And when the tale is told, bid her be iudge, 29U 
Whether Baffanio had not once a Loue: 


277. Come] You Qgq, Coll. i, ii, Cam. such deep Ktly. sordid Lloyd (ap. Cam.). 


Glo, Cla. Rlfe, Wh. ii. so much Cam. Edd. conj. sech-like, or 
282. her cuftome] his cuftome Ff. searching Cla. conj. 
286. /uech] fuch a Ff, Rowe+, Cap. 291. Loue] lover Coll. ii, iii (MS), 


Steev. ’93, Knt, Coll. iii, Dyce iii, Huds. Dyce iii, Huds. 


285. pouerty] A dissyllable, as in the Scotch Azrtye, at this day. Whenever v 
comes between two vowels, Shakespeare’s printers, almost invariably, use a z, an indi- 
cation, I think, that the v sound in such cases was, in pronunciation of the very light- 
est, so light as to be practically absent. That this practice has survived in several com- 
mon words is familiar enough, e. g. er, ne’er, del, &c. Note also, the Scotch /o’e. 
See also note on ‘hauing,’ III, ii, 131, and ‘riueted,’ V, i, 188. This fact explains, I 
think, the confusion which is found in the Folio in the use of ‘lie’ for Zve, on which 
Walker has a chapter, but does not detect what I am here, with much diffidence, 
proposing as its cause. The printers, accustomed to pronounce ive almost like X’e, 
occasionally even so spelt it. If I am right in thus suggesting this vanishing sound 
of v between vowels, we can understand a pun of Mercutio’s, which is otherwise lost ; 
he accuses Benvolio (III, i, 12) of being ‘as soon moved to be moody and as soon 
moody to be moved.’ Is it not clear that he said ‘as soon mo’ed to be moody and as 
soon moody to be mo’ed’ ?—Ep. 

286. sueh miserie] The Textual Notes show the attempts that have been made tu 
cure the scansion of this line. Clarendon would accent ‘ misery’ on the second sylla- 
ble, citing as a precedent the use of a similar accent in Xing John, III, iv, 35: ‘And 
buss thee as thy wife. Misery’s love.’ But Abbott, § 490, says that this line from King 
John proves nothing, that the pause-accent is sufficient to justify misery, and thinks it 
more probable, wherein I quite agree with him, that in the present line the ‘a,’ which 
is supplied by F, has dropped out after ‘such.’—Ep. 

289. speake me faire] An omission, not unusual, of the preposition, which, in this 
vase, as the context shows, is ¢f In the same phrase, as ABBOTT, § 200, points out, in 
Rom. & Ju!. Ill, i, 158, ‘Romeo that spoke him fair,’ the preposition is Zo. 

291. Loue] Collier says that the use of this word in the sense of over is not com- 


_—— 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 219 


Repent not you that you fhall loofe your friend, 292 
And he repents not that he payes your debt. 
For if the Iew do cut but deepe enough, 
Ile pay it inftantly, with all my heart. 295 
Baf. Anthonio, | am married to a wife, 
Which is as deere to me as life it felfe, 
But life it felfe, my wife, and all the world, 
Are not with me efteem’d aboue thy life. 
I would loofe all, I facrifice them all 300 
Heere to this deuill, to deliuer you. 
Por. Your wife would giue you little thanks for that 
If fhe were by to heare you make the offer. 
Gra. I haue a wife whom I proteft I loue, 


I would fhe were in heauen, fo fhe could 305 
292. not you] but you Qq, Hal. Cam. 300. I Sacrifice] I'd sacrifice Rowe. 
Glo, Cla. Wh. ii. ay, sacrifice Pope et seq. 
295. inftantly] prefently Q,, Cam. Glo. 302, 303. [Aside. Hal. 
Cla. Wh. ii. 304. whom] who Qq. 


mon. As Anthonio has been once before (III, iv, 19) styled the ‘lover’ of Bassanio, 
it seems extremely probable that that is the true word here.—ED. 

292. not] CoLLIEr prefers this ‘not’ to ‘ but’ of the Qq as perhaps more consistent 
with what Anthonio says above. HALLIWELL: Either reading can be supported. The 
Qq—only repent, give but a tear for the loss of your friend; the Ff,—obliterate me 
from your memory, let not my death interfere at all with your happiness, and I shall 
give up my life without a sigh. CLARENDON: Surely Anthonio would wish his friend 
to regret his loss. In both lines ‘repent’ is used in the sense of regret, sorrow for ; as 
in Mid. N. D. Il, ii, 111: ‘I do repent The tedious minutes I with her have spent.’ 

295. instantly] Synonymous with ‘presently’ of Q,; see I, i, 193, and line 404 
of this present scene; also O¢h. V, ii, 66.—ED. 

295. with all my heart] CLARENDON: A jest like this enhances the pathos. 
Men at the point of death have a natural tendency to beguile the misery of the time 
by playing upon words. Compare the death scene in King John, V, vii. So Shake- 
speare makes Gaunt jest on his name in Rich. 77: II, 73. So also Sophocles makes 
Ajax ‘play nicely with his name,’ line 430. 

297. Which] ABzort, § 266: Where so dear, such, &c. is implied in the antece 
dent, we may expect, as here, ‘ which’ (§ 278) in the relative. 

300, 304. DR JasTROw ( Young Israel, Mai, 1876): This braggadocio dealing with 
the dearest relationship of life sounds to Shylock like rank blasphemy. He could use 
the half, or the whole, of his wealth as a make-weight to his friendship, but to put wife, 
or child, in the balance—at this very hour, it sounds like sacrilege. 

301. BootH: Shylock manifests impatience during these speeches,—smiles grimly 
at mention of his cutting deep enough, and contemptuously at the Christians’ willing- 
ness to sacrifice their wives for friendship; give a scarcely-audible sneer at each of 
their protestations. 


220 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. i. 


Intreat fome power to change this currifh lew. 306 
Ner. ’Tis well you offer it behinde her backe, 

The with would make elfe an vnquiet houfe. (ter 
Jew. Thefe be the Chriftian husbands: I haue a daugh- 

Would any of the ftocke of Barrabas 310 


Had beene her husband, rather then a Chriftian. 
We trifle time, I pray thee purfue fentence. 
Por. A pound of that fame marchants flefh is thine, 


The Court awards it, and the law doth giue it. 314 
307, 308. Aside. Hal. 310. Barrabas] Baraddbas Coll. i, in. 
309. [Aside. Rowe et seq. (generally). 313. marchants) merchants Qq. 


L haue] I’ve Pope+. 


309. haue] ALLEN: I fee/ that Shylock must have said ‘I ad a daughter.’ A 
similar misprint occurs in III, ii, 277 [q. v. Text. Notes]. 

309. daughter] The Second Quarto and the first three Folios have no punctuation 
after this word. The First and Third Quartos have a comma (I am not quite sure that 
it is not a full stop in Q,), and are followed therein by F,, Rowe, and Pope. Theobald 
increased this comma to a semicolon, and has been followed, I think, with but one ex- 
ception, by all Editors to the present time; Dyce, in his Third Edition, puts a comma 
and a dash after it. It is of no great moment, because the sense is clear under any 
punctuation; but by introducing a semicolon we obliterate an example of what Walkea 
(Crt. i, 55) describes as ‘an instinctive striving after a natural arrangement of words, 
inconsistent indeed with modern English grammar, but perfectly authorized by that of 
the Elizabethan age.’ Among many instances, Walker gives the following: ‘ No, no, 
my lord, This milky gentleness and course of yours Though I condemn it not, yet, 
under pardon, You are much more at task for want of wisdom,’—Lear, I, iv, 335; 
‘But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt The least of you shall share his part thereof.’ 
—Rich. IIT: V, iii, 267.— Ep. 

309-311. BooTH: With intense hate in look, and subdued tones; between your 
teeth, as it were. 

310. Barrabas] Dyce (Remarks, p. 59): The word, I believe, was invariably made 
short in the second syllable by the poetical writers of Shakespeare’s days: in Marlowe’s 
Jew of Malta, * Barrébas’ occurs seventy-eight times. ALLEN: Shakespeare followed 
the pronunciation of his day, and that was the Reuchlinian, that is, he pronounced by 
the Greek, not by the Latin, accents, BapaZGac. CLARENDON: It is thus spelt in Tyn- 
dale’s and Coverdale’s versions. STEEVENS: Our poet might otherwise have written: 
‘Would any of Barabbas’ stock had been Her husband, rather than a Christian !’ 

312. trifle time] CAPELL: These words seem to betray a consciousness in the poet 
that he had a little wander’d from the 7d zpémov of character, in these several reflec- 
tions preceding that begin with one from Bassanio: but desire (and some necessity 
indeed) of throwing into his dialogue something that should enliven it just at that 
time, begat this small trespass; which, the necessities of his piece’s nature ccnsider’d, 
may be pardon’d even by the severest. 


312. pursue] See ABBOTT, § 492, for a list of words in which ‘the accent is nearer 
the beginning than with us.’ 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 221 


lew. Moft rightfull Iudge. 315 
Por. And you muft cut this fleth from off his breaft, 
The Law allowes it, and the Court awards it. 
few. Moft learned Iudge, a fentence, come prepare. 
Por. Tarry a little, there is fomething elfe, 


This bond doth giue thee heere no iot of bloud, 320 

The words exprefly are a pound of flefh: 

Then take thy bond, take thou thy pound of fleth, 322 
320. tot] tote Q,Q,. jot F, et seq. Mal. Steev.’93, Coll. Hal. Dyce. Sta. 


322. Then take] Take then Qaq, Cap. Cam, Rlfe, Wh. ii. 


315 Booru: With back to audience, and knife raised high above his head. 

318 Booru: ‘Most learned Judge’ is uttered with an exultant voice, not too loud, 
and ‘A sentence’ is spoken with a low bow to the Duke. CoL.ier (ed. ii): At the 
exclamation, ‘Come, prepare!’ the actor is directed by the (MS) to show the scales 
again, ‘This may only explain the manner of a particular actor, in order to give 
greater effect to his part. 

319-326. HaYNEs ( Outlines of Equity, p. 19): The popular belief that the law exacts 
a literal fulfillment of contracts has ever been deeply rooted. We trace it distinctly in 
the drama and in works of fiction. Perhaps one of the most remarkable instances 
is that of Shylock’s bond..... And how is the intended victim rescued? By the 
merest verbal quibble. I should be sorry to profane Shakespeare or to approach the 
creations of his genius in the same spirit that I should a Report in Meeson and Welsby. 
Considerable latitude is to be allowed to the dramatist; but when I see Antonio saved 
by a species of construction, according to which, if a man contracted for leave to cut a 
slice of melon, he would be deprived of the benefit of his contract unless he had stipu- 
lated, in so many words, for the incidental spilling of the juice, one cannot help recog- 
nizing in the fiction of the immortal poet an intensified representation of the popular 
faith—that the Jew regarded the /efter, not the sfzrit, As to the tender coming too 
late, that was in strict historical accordance with the law. At Common Law, if a bond 
was once forfeited by non-payment of principal and interest on the day stipulated, the 
whole penalty must have been paid..... It is clear that, had the scene of Shake- 
speare’s play been laid in England, and not in Venice, the proper advice for Portia to 
have given would have been to file a bill in Chancery. But I confess I cannot say that 
the play would have been improved. C. K. Davis (Law in Shakespeare, p. 117): It 
may be observed here that the law language of Shakespeare is that of the Common 
Law, and not of the Equity Jurisprudence. No word peculiar to Chancery is, as far 
as I am aware, used by him. Yet he wrote after the time when Waltham had en- 
joined the Shylocks of his day from exacting their penalties, and compelled them to 
take their principal; after Wolsey had expanded the jurisdiction of that Court; and 
after More had administered its benevolent justice in such cases. He was contempo- 
rary with Ellesmere, and with that memorable contest between the Courts of Equity 
and Law, in which the former insisted upon its power to give relief, against the strict 
letter of the Common Law, from penalties and forfeitures, even after judgement. Had 
Shakespeare been a Chancery lawyer he might have caused an injunction to be served 
on Shylock, and avoided the unsatisfactory and quibbling process by which Portia res- 
cued the Merchant from the knife of the Jew. 


222 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [AcT IV, SC. i, 


But in the cutting it, if thou doft fhed 323 
One drop of Chriftian bloud, thy lands and goods 
Are by the Lawes of Venice confifcate : 325 


Vnto the ftate of Venice. 
Gra. O vpright ludge, 
Marke Iew, 6 learned ludge. 
Shy. Is that the law? 
Por. Thy felfe fhalt fee the Act: 330 
For as thou vrgeft iuftice, be affur’d 
Thou fhalt haue iuftice more then thou defireft. 
Gra. O learned Iudge, mark Iew, a learned Iudge. 
Tew. I take this offer then, pay the bond thrice, 
And let the Chriftian goe. 335 
Baff. Heere is the money. 
Por. Soft, the Iew fhall haue all iuftice, foft, no hafte, 
He fhall haue nothing but the penalty. 
Gra. O Iew, an vpright Iudge, a learned Iudge. 


Por. Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flefh, 340 
327, 328. One line, Pope et seq. 337- Soft,] Soft, (as a separate line) 
334. this] his Q,, Cap. Walker, Dyce Cap. et seq. 

iii, Huds. 340. cut off] cut of Q,. 


323. the cutting it] See I, ii, 96; III, iv, 24, or Abbott, § 93. 

325. confiscate] See ABBOTT, § 342, for a list of verbs ending in -Ze, -¢, and -d, 
which, on account of their already resembling participles in their terminations, do not 
add -ed in the participle or past tense. Words like mscreate, consecrate, confiscate, 
being directly derived from Latin participles, stand on a different footing, and may 
themselves be regarded as participial adjectives, without the addition of d. 

326. BoorH: Shylock staggers backward and drops the knife. 

329. BooTH: Ina choked tone of amazement to the Duke, bowing. His opinion 
of Portia is now changed; all he says is addressed to the Duke, except ‘I am content,’ 
when he looks steadily at Portia. 

334. this offer] CAPELL (in his note on line 220, having approved of Portia’s offer 
of ‘thrice,’ continues): The Jew (as was right) catches at the term in her offer, whom 
he mistakes for a doctor: who, being now out of favour with him, he calls it—¢ As 
offer’ with marks of signal displeasure, when 42s is utter’d in tone, action, and look. 
STEEVENS: Perhaps we should read Ais, i. e. Bassanio’s, who offers ¢wice the sum. 
Mason: This offer is right, Shylock specifies the offer he means, which is; ‘to have 
the bond paid thrice.’ MALONE: He means, I think, to say, ‘I.take ¢hzs offer that 
has been made me.’ Bassanio had offered at first but ‘ice the sum, but Portia had 
gone further—‘there’s ¢hrice thy money,’ &c. The Jew naturally insists on the larger 
sum. ALLEN: Capell must be right. Dyce (ed. iii): Malone’s attempt to reconcile 
the inconsistency of the old Eds. is very far from happy. [I much prefer his.—ED. ] 


337. all iustice] ALLEN: Namely, that wh’ch is wholly justice, unmixed with either 
equity or mercy. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 223 


Shed thou no bloud, nor cut thou leffe nor more 341 
But iaft a pound of flefh : if thou tak’ft more 
Or leffe then a iuft pound, be it fo much 
As makes it light or heauy in the fubftance, 
Or the deuifion of the twentieth part 345 
Of one poore fcruple, nay if the fcale doe turne 
But in the eftimation of a hayre , 
Thou dieft, and all thy goods are confifcate. 
Gra. A fecond Daniel, a Daniel lew, 
Now infidell I haue thee on the hip. 350 
Por. Why doth the Iew paufe, take thy forfeiture. 


342. tak’ft] cut? Q,, Cam. Cla. Glo. 345. Or] On Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. 
Wh. ii. Of Ktly. 

343. de zt] Ff, Rowe, Coll. Wh.i. de’¢ deuifion] diuifion Q,Q,- 
but Pope+, Dyce iii, Huds, de zt but Qq 346. doe] Om. Pope +, Steev. ’85. 
et cet. 350. thee] you Qq, Cap. Cam. Cla. Glo 


351. thy] the Pope+. 


343. just pound] AxpsBort, § 14: That is, exac¢, as in Latin. [It is a ‘just pound 
in the title-pages of the Qq and in Silvayn’s Declamation.] 

343. be it] On rhythmical grounds I prefer this reading to the de z¢ dut of the Qq. 
Be it but must be contracted de’t but, which is, to me, cacophonous. Moreover, the duz 
is scarcely needed; it comes with much force two or three lines further on, where its 
strength may, perhaps, be a little weakened by its anticipation here.—Ep, 

344. substance,] CoLLIER: Balance according to the (MS), which may be right; 
but as ‘scale’ is mentioned just afterwards, we make no change. REV. JOHN HUNTER 
(who omits the comma): In the amount of a twentieth, or even the fraction of a twen- 
tieth. The twentieth part of a scruple is a grain, CLARENDON: That is, in the mass, in 
the gross weight. There is a climax in Portia’s threat: first, if it be lighter or heavier, 
i. e. according to ordinary tests; then, if it weigh less or more by a single grain; thirdly, 
if the scale be uneven by a single hair’s breadth. The turning of the scale is estimated 
in the first instance by the eye. Possibly, however, it may mean that the weigh¢ of a 
hair would redress the balance. [I think it refers to weight. ED. ] 

351. pause] In this ‘pause’ does Shakespeare intimate to us that the balance is 
trembling between Tragedy and Comedy? The choice between them lies in Shy- 
lock’s power. Is he debating it? The end is not yet; he can yet make that end 
Tragic, and I am rash enough to say that I am not altogether sure he should not 
so make it. Up to this point it cannot be said that Shylock’s character excites our 
admiration. Socially, he is grossly ill-treated, and for that we pity him; otherwise 
he is simply a cruel and vindictive creditor, highly intellectual, of course, as all of 
Shakespeare’s chief characters are, but a persecuted Jew he is not; that, however, he 
at once becomes, and compels our sympathy, when the law, which ought to have sup- 
ported him, crushes him. Nothing convinces me more clearly that this is not a ‘ten- 
denz-drama,’ wherein is infused a subtle plea of toleration for the Jews, than that, 
instead of a Jewish Tragedy, Shylock suffers it to end as a Christian Comedy. Shy- 
lock had sworn by his holy Sabbath to fulfil the bond, and, if the representative of a 


224 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE  [acriv, SC. i. 


“ 


Shy. Giue me my principall, and let me goe. 352 
Baff. \haue it ready for thee, heere it is. 
Por. He hath refus’d it in the open Court, 

He fhall haue meerly iuftice and his bond. 355 
Gra. A Daniel ftill fay I,a fecond Daniel, 

I thanke thee Iew for teaching me that word. 
Shy. Shall I not haue barely my principall ? 
Por. Thou fhalt haue nothing but the forfeiture, 


To be taken fo at thy perill Iew. : 300 
Shy. Why then the Deuill giue him good of it: 

Ile ftay no longer queftion. 362 
355. He] And Q,. 360. taken fo] Ff. /o taken Qq et cet. 
358. haue barely] barely have Pope+. 362. longer] longer heere in Q,. 


race, no perjury must taint his soul; cureless ruin has fallen on him; his life is gone, 
since there is no law for him in Venice; a Christian, worse than if of the stock of 
Barrabas, claims his daughter; to his ancient grudge is added the curse of his nation; 
since his fall, then, is inevitable, let him redeem his vow and drag down Anthonio 
with him. Anthonio’s gushing blood will hide all former stains on the Jewish gaber- 
dine. When, therefore, after the ‘pause’ for making up his mind, Shylock drops the 
knife to clutch the money, we see that his oath was hollow, and that he is still will- 
ing to wear the badge of sufferance and to be footed over the threshold like a stranger 
cur. No one of course can say with assurance why at this dividing of the ways Shake- 
speare decided in favour of comedy. If he objected to the many corpses on the stage, 
he got well over that aversion by the time he had written Ham/e¢. In my secret heart 
I like to believe that Shakespeare had fallen in love with Portia, as why should he not, 
with the most perfect of his creations? and though he might have thought that as a work 
of art the play should be a tragedy, yet that the vision of Portia’s troubled, agonised face 
was more than he could bear, and her streaming eyes were more intolerable to him than 
Anthonio’s streaming breast; it is to Portia, in more ways than one then, that I hope 
the Merchant owes his life. And as for Shylock, I find relief in the assurance, which 
a knowledge of his character as revealed on the Trial affords, that it cannot be long 
before his financial prospects are as fair as ever. One half of his present property, 
which he is allowed to retain, is probably a much larger sum than he started with in 
life; and the wide-spread notoriety which will accrue to him from this trial, and which 
is believed in these modern days of advertising to be ‘the soul of business,’ cannot but 
stand him in admirable and remunerative stead.—Ep. 

352. BoorH: After a brief struggle. Bassanio offers the bag of money; Shylock 
takes it, but Gratiano seizes it from him. 

354, 355. BoorH: As Portia says this she descends from the dais, gives the bond to 
Shylock, and goes to the table. As Shylock replies he throws the bond at Anthonio’s 
feet. Or Portia may throw the bond at Shylock’s feet, who stamps on it with impotent 
rage. When Portia says that the law hath yet another hold on him, Shylock shows 
great alarm. 

362. If it were not for the metre, the reading of Q, seems to me an improvement ; 

Ile stay no longer here in question.’ If ‘question’ be pronounced as a trisyllable, 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 225 


Por. Tarry Iew, 363 
The Law hath yet another hold on you. 
It is enacted in the Lawes of Venice, 365 


If it be proued againft an Alien, 

That by direét, or indirect attempts 

He feeke the life of any Citizen, 

The party gainft the which he doth contriue, 

Shall feaze one halfe his goods, the other halfe 370 
Comes to the priuie coffer of the State, 

And the offenders life lies in the mercy 

Of the Duke onely, gainft all other voice. 


In which predicament I fay thou ftandft: 374 
366. an] any Q,. Steev. ’85, Mal.’go. 
370. feaze] feize Q.. 371. coffer] cofter Q,. 


one] on Q,Q,F,, Rowe+, Cap. 


and ‘Tarry, Jew,’ regarded as an interjectional line by itself, the metre is smooth 
enough.—Eb. 

364. ROLFE (Shakespeariana, p. 33, Jan., 1886): It is a significant fact,—to me at 
least, for I believe that no commentator or critic has referred to it,—that the dramatist, 
after using the ‘bad law’ from the old tale, makes Portia go on to say, ‘ The law hath 
yet another hold on you’—namely, on account of his having sought the life of Antonio. 
Note at what length this is dwelt upon, and how much stress Portia lays on it. Note 
also that this is xot im the various forms of the old story, but is Shakespeare’s own addi- 
tion thereto. I have no doubt that he added it solely because he knew that the original 
‘law’ was ‘bad’ and was not willing to rest his case upon it, as a writer unfamiliar 
with legal matters would naturally have done. He kept the ‘bad law’ for stage effect, 
but added the ‘good law’ to satisfy his conscience or his sense of justice. REv. JOHN 
TIuNrER: The charge now to be brought against the Jew is probably what Bellario’s 
letter refers to in the words, ‘he is furnished with my opinion;’ the mode in which 
Shylock has been already defeated appears to be the suggestion of Portia’s own in- 
genuity; Bellario stated that his opinion would be ‘bettered with the young doctor’s 
learning.’ 

368. seeke] See ABBOTT, § 368, for instances of the Subjunctive in subordinate 
clauses, denoting a purpose. 

369. contriue] STAUNTON: In Zam. of Sh. I, ii, Shakespeare for once uses ‘con- 
trive’ in its scholastic sense to consume, spend, and the like, from the Latin contero, 
contrivi. Here and elsewhere it medns to scheme, to devise, to plot, and comes from 
the old French compound controuver. Thus Jul. Ces. Il, iii: ‘If not, the fates with 
traitors do contrive;’ and Ham.I,v: ‘Nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother 
aught.’ 

370. seaze] That is, take possession of. The usual law term. See O/h. V, ii, 443. 

372. in] ABBoTT, § 163: This example illustrates the apparently capricious change 
in the use of prepositions. We should now say ‘a¢ the mercy.’ 

374. predicament] CLARENDON: Originally, a term in logic, the Latin equivalent 
for category. Wilson, Arte of Logike, 1567, has a chapter, ‘ Of the Predicaments, called 

15 


226 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act Iv, sc. i. 


For it appeares by manifeft proceeding, 375 
That indire@tly, and direétly to, 
Thou haft contriu’d againft the very life 
Of the defendant : and thou haft incur’d 
The danger formerly by me rehearft. 
Downe therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke. 380 
Gra. Beg that thou maift haue leaue to hang thy felfe, 
And yet thy wealth being forfeit to the ftate, 
Thou haft not left the value of a cord, 
Therefore thou muft be hang’d at the ftates charge. 
Duk. That thou fhalt fee the difference of our fpirit, 385 
I pardon thee thy life before thou aske it: 


For halfe thy wealth, it is Axthonzo’s, 387 
376. to] too F, et seq. 379. formerly] formorly Q,. formally 
377. haft| had Ff. Warb. conj. Dyce iii, Huds. 

contriwd againft| contriued 385. /ralt] may’st Pope+. 

gainft Q,. contriued again QQ, difference diffrence Q,. 

378. incurd | incurdQ,Q,. incurrd Spirit) /pirits Q,, Cam. Glo. Cla 
3° Rife, Wh. ii. 


in English the most generall wordes.’ The word must have become very common, as 
it is put into the mouth of the Nurse in Rom. and Jul. III, iii, 86. 

379. formerly] WARBURTON: This danger was a judicial penalty, which the speaker 
had just before recited, in the very terms and formality of the law itself; we should 
therefore read formally. CLARENDON: ‘Formerly’ was used in legal documents for 
above. 

380. Downe] ANoNnyMous (ap. Halliwell): This latter part of Portia’s address so 
completely brings to mind the conclusion of every sentence of single felony pronounced 
by the clerk of the arraigns, who concludes his address to each culprit with, ‘Down 
upon your knees, and crave the benefit of the statute,’ that I cannot sometimes help 
thinking but Shakespeare also must have borne it in mind when he wrote the passage. 

381. BooTH: Shylock is about to kneel; Gratiano holds him by the shoulder while 
he addresses him, and then drops him. When Shylock says, ‘ Nay, take my life,’ and 
so on, he is still kneeling, with head very low, and speaks with a trembling, tearful 
voice. When Portia asks, ‘What mercy can you render him, Anthonio?’ Shylock 
rises quickly, as if stung. 

383. hast not left] ALLEN: Not the negative of Aast-/ef?, but ‘thou hast not, 
remaining, the value,’ &c. See III, v, 62. 

385. shalt] See Apgort, § 348, for instances of the future where we should use 
the Subjunctive. 

385. our spirit] EccLEs: That is, my spirit, or the ‘spirit’ of us who profess Chris- 
tianity as opposed to hime, requires that our should be pronounced with emphasis; 

our spirits’ (of the Qq) must signify your spirit and mine. HALLIWELL: The sig- 
nification of the Qq reading suits less with the dignity and position of the speaker. 


386, 391. pardon] See Scumipt’s Zex. for parallel passages where it means to 
absolve, to release, to rem 


ACT iV, SC.i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 227 
The other halfe comes to the generall ftate, 388 
Which humbleneffe may driue vnto a fine. 

Por. J for the ftate, not for Azthonio. 39C 


Siy.- Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that, 
You take my houfe, when you do take the prop 
That doth fuftaine my houfe : you take my life 
When you doe take the meanes whereby I liue. 
Por. What mercy can you render him Azthonio ? 395 
Gra. A halter gratis, nothing elfe for Gods fake. 
Ant. So pleafe my Lord the Duke, and all the Court 


To quit the fine for one halfe of his goods, 398 
394. whereby] wherby Q,. 398. quit] quite F 
396. Gods fake] Godfake Q.. Sor) from Han. 


390. MALONE: That is, the State’s moiety may be commuted for a fine, but not 
Anthonio’s. 

391. Nay... all] GouLp (Zhe Tragedian, p. 74): Kean, after making the audi- 
ence hate him, did, by one of his sudden turns of power, and by the pathos of his voice 
in these words, produce an entire revulsion of feeling in the listener, so that pity took 
the place of execration. 

393- you take my life] HaLLIWELt: ‘ He that taketh away his neighbour’s living, 
slayeth him.’—Zcclestasticus, xxxiv, 22. 

398-402. THEOBALD (Nichols’s ///ust. ii, 312): Dr Thirlby, by a change of these 
lines, gives Anthonio a much more generous way of thinking. I will submit his read- 
ing to you: ‘ To quit their fine of one-half of his goods; | I am content ¢o let Azm have 
the other | In use, to render it upon his death | Unto the gentleman that stole his daugh- 
ter.’ THEOBALD: The Jew had forfeited his whole substance; one moiety thereof to 
go to the State, and the other to the Defendant. Anthonio proposes that the State 
should be content with fining him only that moiety which was confiscated to them: 
that, as to the other, which Anthonio might equally claim to himself, he only desires 
to hold the benefit, paying interest for it to the Jew during his life; and, upon the 
Jew’s demise, to have it immediately vested in his Son and Daughter. JOHNSON: 
The terms proposed have been misunderstood. Anthonio declares that, as the Duke 
quits one-half of the forfeiture, he is likewise content to abate his claim, and desires 
not the property but the wse or produce only of the half, and that only for the Jew’s 
life, unless we read, as perhaps is right, ‘upon my death.’ RITSON (p. 55): Anthonio 
tells the Duke that if he will abate the fine for the State’s half, he (Anthonio) will be 
contented to take the other, zm trust, after Shylock’s death, to render it to his daugh- 
ter’s husband. That is, it was, during Shylock’s life, to remain a¢ zzterest in Antho- 
nio’s hands, and Shylock was to enjoy the produce of it. Mason (p. 76): Anthonio’s 
offer is, that he will quit the fine for one-half of his fortune, provided that he will let 
him have it at interest during the Jew’s life, to render it at his death to Lorenzo. That 
is the meaning of the words /o let me have in use. LEWIN (The Law of Trusts, 6th 
ed., 1875, chap. i, p. 13): That a trust was anciently known as a mse, appears from the 
Mer. of Ven. Thus, when Shylock had forfeited one-half of his goods to the State to 
be commuted far a fine, and the other half of his goods to Antonio, the latter offered 


228 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. i. 


“ 


I am content : fo he will let me haue 

The other halfe in vfe, to render it 400 
Vpon his death, vnto the Gentleman 

That lately ftole his daughter. 

Two things prouided more, that for this fauour 
He prefently become a Chriftian : 404 


401. Vion] Until Han. 

that, if the Court, as representing the State, would forego the forfeiture of the one-half, 
he (Antonio) would be content. himself to hold the other half in se, that is, in ¢rzst 
for Shylock for life, with remainder, after Shylock’s death, for Jessica’s husband. This 
interpretation clears Antonio’s character from the charge of selfishness to which it would 
be exposed if he were to keep the half for his own use during his life. ANONYMOUS 
(cited by Halliwell): That is, in trust for Shylock during his life, for the purpose of 
securing it at zs (not my, as suggested by Johnson) death to Lorenzo. Some critics 
explain i zse, upon interest, a sense which the phrase certainly sometimes bore, but 
that interpretation is altogether inconsistent, in the present passage, with the generosity 
of Anthonio’s character. In conveyances of land, where it is intended to give the 
estate to any person after the death of another, it is necessary that a third person should 
be possessed of the estate, and the wse be declared to the one after the death of the 
other; or the estate to the future possessor would be rendered insecure. This is called 
a conveyance to uses, and the party is said to be possessed, or rather sezsed, to the zse 
of such an one, or to the use that he render or convey the land to such an one, which 
is expressed in law French by the terms sezsze a/ use, and in Latin, sezs¢tus in usum ali- 
cujus, viz. A. B.or C. D. This latter phrase Shakespeare has rendered with all the 
strictness of a technical conveyancer, and has made Anthonio desire to have one-half 
of Shylock’s goods in wse, to render it upon his (Shylock’s) death, to Lorenzo; which 
is by no means an unfrequent mode of securing a future estate; and in our author’s time 
nothing was more common than for A to convey to B 7m usum, or to the use that he 
should on a certain day enfeoff C, or convey to C. Suppose a gift to A et heredibus 
suis, in usum, quod redderet B, and we have the exact words of Anthonio. CLAREN- 
DON: Bassanio was wealthy enough for both himself and Anthonio, and Shakespeare 
knew that Anthonio’s argosies were ‘richly come to harbour suddenly,’ 

402. BoorH: Shylock shrinks at this; and at the word ‘Christian’ utters a short, 
sharp groan, staggers backward, and raises his right hand with the palm upward—face 
also upraised, with a look of utter despair, until the Duke has spoken, then collapses. 

404. presently] That is, at once. See line 295. 

404. Christian] HALLIWELL: According to Coryat’s Crudities, 1611, p. 234, ‘all 
their goodes are confiscated as soone as they embrace Christianity; and this I heard is 
the reason, because, whereas many of them doe raise their fortunes by usury, in so 
much that they doe sometimes not only sheare, but also flea many a poor Christian’s 
estate by their griping extortion, it is therefore decreed by the Pope, and other free 
princes in whose territories they live, that they shall make a restitution of all their ill- 
getten goods, and so disclogge their soules and consciences, when they are admitted by 
holy baptisme into the bosome of Christ’s Church.’ It is just possible there may be 
some connection between this regulation and the termination of the trial by Shylock’s 
compelled recantation of his faith. 


ACT IV, SC. i] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 229 


The other, that he doe record a gift 405 
Heere in the Court of all he dies poffeft 
Vnto his fonne Lorenzo, and his daughter. 
Duk. He fhall doe this, or elfe I doe recant 
The pardon that I late pronounced heere. 
Por. Art thou contented lew? what doft thou fay? 410 
Shy. Iam content. 
Por. Clarke, draw a deed of gift. 
Shy. I pray you giue me leaue to goe from hence, 
I am not well, fend the deed after me, 414 


406. poffe/?] possess’d of Cap. conj. 412. Clarke] Clearke Q,. 


407. FRANGolIs VicToR Huceo (p. 48): The reconciliation decreed by the sentence 
of the Judge is consecrated by the lawful union of Lorenzo and Jessica, In marrying 
the daughter of Shylock to a Venetian gentleman, Shakespeare braved public opinion, 
which forbade as a sacrilege a misalliance between Jewish blood and Christian blood ; 
in despite of furious prejudice he proclaimed the equality of the hostile races, and has, 
for all time, united and mingled them in the same love as in the same faith. Thanks 
to the brave inspiration of the pcet, the terrible drama unfolds of itself into a delicious 
comedy. The immemorial animosity of the forefathers vanishes on the lips of infants 
in the lispings of tenderness. The oaths of hate, the shrieks of rage, the imprecations 
which have resounded through ages of bitter generations die away in a splendid night, 
amid the balmy shadows of tropical flowers and under intoxicating bowers of oranges 
and laurels in a duet of kisses. 

410. say ?] BootH: Shylock, thus addressed, raises both head and hands as if about 
to appeal to Portia, checks himself, and says very slowly, as head and hands drop, ‘I am 
content.’ His last words are uttered plaintively. As Shylock is leaving Gratiano seizes 
his left arm, and at the conclusion of the taunting speech with which he addresses him, 
casts Shylock’s hand from him. Shylock bows low to the Duke, and slowly totters 
towards the door,—he meets Anthonio, and shrinks with abhorrence; raises his hand 
(as on previous occasions), which slowly descends upon the back of his head as it 
droops upon his breast,—falls against the door, which slowly opens. The Curtain 
should be ‘timed’ to Shylock’s exit. 

411. Iam content] Rev. DR Kou.er (Jewish Advance, 13 Dec., 1878): These 
three words might have spared unto millions of Jews their lives and saved fearful, innu- 
merable agonies. No,a thousand timesno! Shylock has no Jewish blood in his veins; 
else with that very knife that was to pay Antonio’s forfeited bond he would have spilled 
it to the very last drop. 

411. Hawkins (Life of Kean, i, 152): The sudden change of Shylock’s whole 
appearance when the cause turned against him; the happy pause in ‘I am con- 
tent,’ as if it almost choked him to bring out the word; the partial bowing down of his 
inflexible will when he said, ‘I pray you give me leave to go from hence, / am not 
well,’ the horror of his countenance when told of his enforced conversion to Chris- 
tianity, and, to crown all, the fine mixture of scorn and pity with which he turned and 
surveyed the ribald Gratiano,—all exhibited a succession of studies to which words fail 
to do justice. He retired, as Shakespeare intended he should retire, with the audience 


possessed in his favour. 


230 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. 1 


And I will figne it. 415 
Duke. Get thee gone, but doe it. 
Gra. In chriftning thou fhalt haue two godfathers, 417 
417. Gra.] Shy. Q,. Dyce, Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. 


thou fhalt| /halt thou Qq, Cap. 


414. GEORGE FLETCHER (Fraser's Magazine, p. 705, June, 1850): Shylock, then, 
instead of losing his life and all his property, keeps his life and one-half of his goods. 
But let us here consider a little of what value these can be to him in the moral posi- 
tion wherein he now finds himself. First, while seeking revenge for his baffled covet 
ousness, he had received the additional and deeper wound inflicted on his Jewish love 
of offspring by the stealing of his daughter. And then, while pursuing vengeance for 
this latter injury above all, he finds himself subjected to the last and bitterest grief and 
humiliation, of consenting to abjure his faith and profess himself a Christian, Antho- 
nio, indeed, with the same want of insight into Jewish character in general, and into that 
of Shylock in particular, which had made him exclaim on occasion of Shylock’s pre- 
tended reconciliation: ‘This Hebrew will turn Christian,—he grows kind,’ now pro- 
poses, in sincere charity to his defeated enemy, and care for his salvation, ‘that he 
presently Become a Christian ;’ believing in pure kindness and simplicity of heart that 
such a compulsory profession might bring with it a sincere conversion. For, otherwise, 
this demand of his, far from having anything of a merciful character, would have been 
the greatest refinement of malice on his part; since, as we see, its fulfilment must have 
inflicted on the hereditary religious pride and pertinacity of the Jew a refinement of 
moral torture more dreadful to him far than death itself. This part of Shylock’s sen- 
tence, indeed, is clearly meant by the dramatist as his death-blow, and fherefore the 
most merciful blow that could now be dealt him. For, what motive has even Shylock 
now to live and get money? His ‘own flesh and blood’ has ‘rebelled;’ and all the 
produce of his ‘bargains’ and his ‘ well-won thrift’ is doomed, by this last judgement 
upon him, still to be inherited by this sole apostate daughter and her misbelieving hus- 
band,—by her whom he regards as faithless alike to her house, her nation, and her 
God,—and respecting whom he has exclaimed but a moment before, ‘ Would any of 
the stock of Barrabas Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!’ The last and 
bitterest infliction, however, he can escape;—from apostasy in his own person he has 
an alternative,—to die ;—and this is plainly what, at his final exit, he is going to do. 
His inflexibility is majestic to the last. He sues not for mercy,—he asks not his own 
life—he says, on the contrary, ‘ Nay, take my life and all, since you do take The 
means whereby I live.’ If, then, he would prefer death to beggary, yet more, as his 
whole behaviour through the piece has shown us, would he prefer it to apostasy, 
When he blankly utters the bare words, ‘I am content,’ and faintly adds, ‘Let me go 
hence, I am not well,’—we feel that he is tottering to his death-bed,—his only remain- 
ing refuge,—and one of which no auditor can wish to deprive him. SouTHEsK (Sas- 
katchewan, &c., 1875, p. 409): Are we to understand that Shylock, Judas-like, com- 
mitted suicide when he left the Court? There is something peculiar in his exclamation, 
‘I am not well.” A man of his stern character would have scorned to acknowledge 
any feeling of illness at such a time, unless he intended to end illness and health alike 
by ending his life. Besides, he would never really have consented to become a Chris- 
tian, and his ready acceptance of that condition showed that he meant to break it,— 
and for that there was but one way. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 231 


Had I been iudge, thou fhouldft haue had ten more, 418 
To bring thee to the gallowes, not to the font. vit. 
Du, Sir I intreat you with me home to dinner. 420 


Por. I humbly doe defire your Grace of pardon, 
I muft away this night toward Padua, 
And it is meete I prefently fet forth. 


Duk. 1am forry that your leyfure ferues you not: 424 
419. not to] Q, FfQ,, Rowe, Knt, Sing. 421. doe] Om. Q,. 
Ktly. ot Q, et cet. Grace of | Graces Q,, Han. Johns. 
420. with me home] Ff, Rowe, Knt, 424. [ am] J/’m Pope+, Dyce iii, 
Wh. i. home with me Qq et cet. Huds. 
to] Om. Q,. 


418. ten more] THEOBALD: That is, a jury of twelve men. STEEVENS: So in 
Jonson’s The Devil ts an Ass, V, iii, ‘1 will leave you To your godfathers in law. Let 
twelve men work.’ MALONE: This appears to have been an old joke. Soin A Dia- 
logue both pleasaunt and pietifull, &c., by Dr W. Bulleyne, 1564: ‘I did see him aske 
blessinge to xii godfathers at ones.’ CAPELL: This is an application of English usages 
to a state that did not observe them. 

419. FRANGOIS VICTOR HuGo (p. 46): Shylock is defeated, but, ponder it well, he 
can be condemned only by a tribunal which is higher than all tribunals. Verily, it is 
not Shylock that is ‘ tarried’ by Portia; it is the /ex ¢a/ionzs that Portia’s ‘tarry a little’ 
strikes, it is that rigorous justice which is only rigorous injustice, it is that vengeful leg- 
islation which promulgates all the edicts of princes, and which mercilessly sustains all 
established magistracies,—parliaments, absolutisms, inquisitions, star chambers, assizes, 
—it is that process of reprisal which tortures, mangles, breaks, quarters, hangs, beheads, 
assassinates the assassin, which washes blood with blood and punishes the fault in com- 
mitting the crime. It is not the Jew that is sentenced, it is Judaism. Such is the true 
bearing of the halt that is called. In point of fact, Shylock has gained what is far bet- 
ter than his own cause, he has gained the cause of a whole people; he has reclaimed 
the ignored rights of his race, and established them by this condemnation of the code 
of extermination which weighed them down. 

419. bring] CLARENDON: Used ina double sense. The sentence [qu. verdict ?] 
of a jury brought a man to the gallows; the godfathers brought, i. e. accompanied, a 
convert to the font. 

Exit] MacponaLp ( 7he /magination, p. 165) : I suspect Shakespeare sends the old 
villain off the stage at the last with more of the pity of the audience than any of the 
other dramatists of the time would have ventured to arouse, had they been capable of 
doing so. I suspect he is the only human Jew of the English drama up to that time. 

421. of pardon] See ABBOTT, § 174, for instances of a similar use of of; or I, iii, 
54. ALLEN: Is not this use of the preposition a relic of the Norman French? Modern 
French has de with the Infinitive after a verd of asking: ‘Je vous prie de me pardon- 
ner’ (although not with a xoun). The of in these phrases is nearly equivalent to for 
(I ask for pardon). Here, again, the French have de, and the Irish of ‘The boy 
will be the better ofa beating.’ (This Irish use of of may have arisen either from the 
English of the conquerors, or from the French idiom, imported by the Priests and 
Gentlemen who had received their education at St. Omer’s.) 


232 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT Iv, Sc. i. 


Anthonio, gratifie this gentleman. 425 
For in my minde, you are much bound to him. 
Exit Duke and his traine. 
Baff. Moft worthy gentleman, I and my friend 
Haue by your wifedome beene this day acquitted 
Of greeuous penalties, in lieu whereof, 430 
Three thoufand Ducats due vnto the Iew 
We freely cope your curteous paines withall. 
An. And ftand indebted ouer and aboue 
In loue and feruice to you euermore. 
Por. He is well paid that is well fatisfied, 435 
And I deliuering you, am fatisfied, 
And therein doe account my felfe well paid, 
My minde was neuer yet more mercinarie. 
I pray you know me when we meete againe, 
I wifh you well, and fo I take my leaue. 440 
Baff. Deare fir, of force I muft attempt you further, 
Take fome remembrance of vs as a tribute, 
Not as fee : grant me two things, I pray you 
Not to denie me, and to pardon me. 
Por. You preffe mee farre, and therefore I will yeeld, 445 
Giue me your gloues, Ile weare them for your fake, 


425. gratifie] greatifie F.. 443. as] Q,Q,, Sta. as a2 Q, Ff et 
426. [Scene III. Pope+. cet. 

430. lieu] lew Q,. lewe Q.. things, | things ; Rowe, Pope. 
432. curteous| curtious Q,. courtious 446. [To Ant. Cam. Glo. Cla. Rlfe, 
ys Huds. Wh. ii. 

438. more] mere Anon. (ap. Cam.). them] ’em Theob. ii, Warb. 


425. gratifie] ALLEN: Like yapi{ouai, make a gratification, that is, a present, a 
reward. 

432. cope] RICHARDSON (Dict. s. v.): Junius thinks it is from the Anglosaxon 
Ceap-an, to traffic, to exchange; to buy or sell (to pay—Jer. of Ven.), and that it 
may have been extended to any kind of exchange. HALLIWELL: The meaning is, 
evidently,—we freely offer the ducats in return for your ‘courteous pains.’ STAUN- 
TON: Zo cope seems to be used here in the sense of encounter or meet, and not in that 
of exchange. DYCE (Gloss.): To pay, to reward (see Richardson’s Dict.). ScHMIDT 
(Zex.): To meet, to have to do with, to encounter. [The present passage given in 
illustration.] CLARENDON: To requite, give an equivalent for. 

432. withall] ApBoTT, § 196: This emphatic form of wth is used for with after 
the object at the end of a sentence. 

446, 447. CLARENDON: We have inserted the Stage directions, ‘70 Ant.’ ‘Jo Bass.’ 
It seems natural that as Antonio had been requested to ‘gratify’ his deliverer, Portia 
should take something from him as well as from Bassanio, whose obligation was less; 


ACT IV,Sc.i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 233 


And for your loue Ile take this ring from you, 447 
Doe not draw backe your hand, ile take no more, 
And you in loue fhall not deny me this? 
Baf. This ring good fir, alas it is a trifle, 450 
I will not fhame my felfe to giue you this. 
Por. I wil haue nothing elfe but onely this, 
And now methinkes I haue a minde to it. 
Baf. There’s more depends on this then on the valew, 
The deareft ring in Venice will I giue you, 455 
And finde it out by proclamation, 
Onely for this I pray you pardon me. 
Por. I fee fir you are liberall in offers, 
You taught me firft to beg, and now me thinkes 
You teach me how a beggar fhould be anfwer’d. 460 
Baf. Good fir, this ring was giuen me by my wife, 
And when fhe put it on, fhe made me vow 
That I fhould neither fell, nor giue, nor lofe it. 


Por. That fcufe ferues many men to faue their gifts, 464 

447. [To Bass. Cam. Glo. Cla. Rife, upon Q,, Pope. depends on this, than ts 
IIuds. Wh. ii. Theob. on this depends than is Han. 

449. this ?] QLFLF,. this. Q, et cet. 455. will J] Swill Q,. 

454. depends...on] then this depends 460. beggar] begger Qq. 


and if she had already taken Bassanio’s gloves there would have been less reason for 
asking the ring. The emphatic ‘you’ closing line 447, seems also to bear out our inter- 
pretation. [An interpretation which carries instant conviction.—ED. ] 

451. to giue] See I, i, 45, or ABBOTT, § 356. 

454. then on the] CAPELLI (ii, 71): None will be at a loss for this line’s meaning. 
Might not the word ‘on’ rise out of some defect in the manuscript, or (rather) blot in 
it, and the proper reading be this? ‘There’s more depends on this than the stone’s 
value;’ the line is clearer this way, and without fault in the expression: the comma that 
follows ‘this’ belongs to moderns, for old editions have none of it. [In Q, we have a 
downright compositor’s sophistication, unless we choose to make a blind defence of the 
line, and imagine that its incoherence indicates Bassanio’s stammering embarrassment, 
—ED.] 

464. scuse] Both Abbott (§ 460) and Clarendon imply that the full form is excuse, 
* Scuse,’ which Shakespeare uses elsewhere only in O7h. IV, i, 93, Halliwell says is an 
archaic, not a contracted form, and gives the two following instances: ‘ Ile devise some 
scuse,—Famous Historye of Captaine Thomas Stukeley, 1605 [in a prose speech by the 
Page, line 214, ed. Simpson, where, in sooth, Simpsor. p ints it ‘’scuse’], and ¢ Pharicles 
.... therefore trickt up his talke with this cunning scuse,’—Greene’s Mamitiia, 1593 
[p. 179, ed. Grosart, where, strangely enough, the text reads not ‘scuse,’ but semse. At 
whose door, Halliwell’s or Grosart’s, lies the heinous charge of confounding em and cu, 
is not of pressing moment, since, owing to Grosart’s excellent Index to Greene’s Works, 


234 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. i 


And if your wife be not a mad woman, 4605 
And know how well I haue deferu’d this ring, 
Shee would not hold out enemy for euer 
For giuing it to me: well, peace be with you. Aveunt. 

Ant. My L. Baffanio, \et him haue the ring, 
Let his deferuings and my loue withall 470 
Be valued again{ft your wiues commandement. 


465. And] An Cap. et seq. Wh. valew'd gainft Q,, Pope+, Cap. 

466. this] the Q,, Pope+, Cam, Glo. Steev. 85, Dyce, Ktly. valued gainft Q.. 
Cla. Rife, Wh. ii. valued ’gainft Q, et cet. 

467. enemy] enmity Rowe+.~ 471. wiues] wife’s Rowe et seq. 

469. My Z.] Q,Q, My Lord Q, et commandement | Q,F,Q,F,, Pope 
cet. +, Cap. Steev. Mal. Coll. ii, Rlfe. come- 

471. valued againf?] Ff, Rowe, Hal. maundement Q,. commandment ¥, et cet. 


we can find two other examples of ‘scuse.’ On p. 210 of Mamitlia, Pharicles, ‘to cloake 
the cause of his care, coyned this pretie scuse;’ and as this coyning of scuses appears to 
have been a foible of Pharicles, I am inclined to think that Halliwell is correct in the 
former instance and Grosart wrong. Again in Greene’s Defence of Conny-Catching, 
1592, ‘He thought it good to visit some other of his wiues (for at that instant hee had 
sixteene aliue), and made a scuse to his wife .... to go into Yorkshire,’ p. 89.—ED. ]. 

465. And if ] Needlessly changed, since the days of Capell, to dz 7f MurRay, in 
the Mew Lng. Dict., under And, as a Conditional Conjunction, says: ‘ This conditional 
use of amd may have originated from ellipsis, as in the analogous use of so, e. g. “ll 
cross the sea, so it please my lord” (Shaks.); cf. “and it please; or it may be con- 
nected with the introductory amd in, “And you are going?” A direct development 
from the original prepositional sense, though @ frzori plausible, is on historical grounds 
improbable. Modern writers, chiefly since Horne Tooke, have treated this as a distinct 
word, writing it az, a spelling occasionally found circa 1600, especially in an’ ’t=and 
it,’ Again, under An =7/, the same excellent authority says: ‘In this sense ax, an’, is 
rare before 1600, when it appears occasionally in the dramatists, especially before z¢, as 
an’ ’t please you, an’ t were, kc. As the preceding sense was not at this time written 
an, modern writers have made a conventional distinction between the two forms, an’ 
for and, Latin e¢, being dialectal or illiterate, but a’ or az for and, Latin, sd, archaic, 
or even literary. Except in an’ ’¢, av is found only once in F, of Shakespeare [* Nay 
then two treyes, an if you grow so nice,’—Love’s Lad. Lost, V, ii, 232]; but modern 
editors substitute it for the full awd usual in Shakespeare and his contemporaries. Dua- 
lectally, the two senses are alike an’; the intensified and if, an 2f, common in the 17th 
Century, remains in the South-western dialect as #7f’—En. 

467. enemy] STEEVENS: So in Much Ado, I, i, 91: ‘1 will hold friends with you, 
lady.’ 

471. commandement] WALKER (Vers. p. 126): In commandment, payment, 
entertainment, and some other words in -ment, the e, which, originally, in all such 
words, preceded the final syllable (and which was still in certain instances retained,) 
was sometimes pronounced, and sometimes omitted. In the Folio (and probably in all 
other books of that time) the word which we now write commandment, is, when used 
as a trisyllable, printed command’ ment ; [herein Walker is in error; see Dyce, post | 


ACT IV, SC. ii.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 235 


Baff, Goe Gratiano, run and ouer-take him, 472 
Giue him the ring, and bring him if thou canft 
Vnto Anthonios houfe, away, make hafte. Exit Grati. 
Come, you and I will thither prefently, 475 
And in the morning early will we both 
Flie toward Belmont, come Anthonio. Exeunt, 


[Scene /1.| 
Enter Portia and Nerriffa. 


Por. Enquire the Iewes houfe out, giue him this deed, 
And let him figne it, wee’ll away to night, 
And be a day before our husbands home: 4 


474. Exit...] Exeunt... Q.. 1. Enter...] Enter Neriffa. Qq. Re- 
[Scene II. Street before the Court. enter... Theob. 
Cap. et seq. 


the entire word being a quadrisyllable, commandement. So it was pronounced as late, 
apparently, as 1672. Wallis, the grammarian, lived 1616-1703; the first edition of his 
grammar was published in 1653; the third in 1672; from which latter I quote, p. 52: 
: non dubito fuisse quondam pronuntiatam [the ein miles, finely, advancement, 
&c,.] non minus quam in voce commandement mandatum, ubi adhuc pronunciari solet.’ 
A writer in The Saturday Magazine, Aug. 17, 1844, ‘On the Language of Uneducated 
People,’ says that many cockneys still pronounce it thus, Dyce (ed. iii): Here ‘com- 
mandment’ is to be read as a quadrisyllable; and so again ina line in x Hen, VI. I, 
iii, which the Folio gives thus, ‘ From him I haue expresse commandement,’ &c. (In 
all the other passages in Shakespeare where it occurs in his blank verse it is a trisylla- 
ble.) But the sfe//ing of this word in the old copies goes for nothing; e. g. in King 
John, VV, ii, the Folio has: ‘Haue I commandement on the pulse of life ?” hough 
‘commandement’ there is a trisyllable. And I cannot understand why several of the 
modern Editors should print ‘ commandement’ here and in the above-mentioned line 
of Hen. V/, while in a great number of other words, which, if the orthography is to 
be suited to the metre, require the addition of a syllable, they content themselves with 
the usual spelling; for instance, they print ‘dazzled,’ ‘ children,’ ‘England, ‘remem- 
brance,’ ‘juggler, ‘handling, ‘ enfeebled, &c. &c., when, to be consistent, they ought 
to have printed ‘dazzeled,’ ‘childeren,’ ‘Engéland,’ ‘rememberance,’ ‘juggeler,’ 
‘handeling,’ ‘enfeebeled,’ &c. &c. 

475. presently] At once. 

2. COWDEN-CLARKE: It is worth noting how Shakespeare, in his short and appa- 
rently insignificant Scenes, makes them serve fullest dramatic purpose. Here, the 
very first thing, Portia fulfils in careful, practical, professional way, the duty of convey- 
ing the deed to Shylock for signature; and afte, wards, by her desiring Gratiano to 
show her clerk the way to the Jew’s house, the oopurtunity for Nerissa to obtain her 
husband’s ring is naturally brought about. 


236 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT IV, SC. ii. 


This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo. 5 
Enter Gratiano. 
Gra. Faire fir, you are well ore-tane: 
My L. Baffanio vpon more aduice, 
Hath fent you heere this ring, and doth intreat 
Your company at dinner. 10 
Por. That cannot be; 
Hlis ring I doe accept moft thankfully , 
And fo I pray you tell him : furthermore, 
I pray you fhew my youth old Shylockes houfe. 
Gra. That will I doe. 15 
Ner. Sir, I would fpeake with you: 
Ile fee if I can get my husbands ring 
Which I did make him fweare to keepe for euer. 
Por. Thou maift I warrant, we fhal haue old {wearing 
That they did giue the rings away to men ; 20 
But weele out-face them, and out-fweare them to: 
Away, make hafte, thou know’ft where I will tarry. 
Ner. Come good fir, will you fhew me to this houfe. 


Exeunt. 
12. His] This Q,, Pope+, Steev. Mal. 17. [To Portia. Pope et cet. Aside. 
Sing. Ktly. Cap. 
I doe] do 1 Rowe. 19. [Aside. Cap. 
13. him +] him. Q,. 23. houfe.| houfe? QF. 


8. aduice] STEEVENS: That is, upon more reflection or deliberation. [See I, 
i, 152.] 

19. old] Dyce (Gésss.): Used as an augmentative in colloquial language, meaning 
‘plentiful, abundant, great.’ I believe I was the first to remark that the Italians use 
(or at least formerly used) ‘ vecchio’ in the same sense: ‘ Perché Corante abbandonava 
il freno, E dette un vecchio colpo in sul terreno,—Pulci, Morg. Mag., C. xv, st. 54; 
‘E so ch’egli ebbe di vecchie paure.’—Zd. C. xix, st. 30. It is rather remarkable that 
Florio, in his Dzct., has not given this meaning of ‘ vecchio.’ CoLLIER: Shakespeare 
is full of instances of this augmentative ‘old’ applied to words of almost every de- 
scription ; it is needless to cite instances. ROLFE: Compare the slang phrase of our 
day, ‘a high old time.’ 


ACT V, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 237 


Acius Quintus. 


[Scene I] 


Enter Lorenzo and leffica. 


Lor. The moone fhines bright. In fucha night as this, 
When the fweet winde did gently kiffe the trees, 


And they did make no nnyfe, in fuch a night 4 
Actus Quintus] Om. Qq. Avenue to Portia’s House. Cap. 
[Belmont. Rowe. A Grove or Green 2. Two lines, Q.. 

place before Portia’s House. Theob. 4. nnyfe| noyfe Q,. 


HAZLITT (p. 275): The graceful winding up of this play in the Fifth Act, after the 
tragic business is despatched, is one of the happiest instances of Shakespeare’s know- 
ledge of the principles of the drama. 

OECHELHAEUSER, whose eminence among German critics as one who has given 
especial attention to Scenic arrangement entitles him to a respectful hearing, in the 
Fourth Vol. of the Sk. Jahrbuch, p. 348, reviews a work called Das Burgtheater, by 
Heinrich Laube. This work, written, as Oechelhaeuser says, by a well-known dram- 
atist, with a thorough knowledge of stage management, of independent character, and 
of keen critical judgement, is of enduring value, and from it the reviewer quotes the 
following, to which, as he says, he gives his unreserved assent: The Mer. of Ven. was 
given with an entirely new arrangement of the Acts and Scenes. [Laube is speak- 
ing of the production of the play under his management on the Vienna stage in 1851. ] 
The Scenes before Shylock’s house constituted one Act, and the scattered wooing 
Scenes were likewise brought together. Thereby the progress of the whole was ren- 
dered smoother and more connected. The chief change, however, was in the last Act. 
The great Trial Scene evidently concludes the Fourth Act; and the Fifth Act merrily 
finishes, at Belmont, the love-affairs of the play, which have long been ripe. The com- 
mentators, making a virtue of necessity, even applaud this finale. The real need lies 
in the demand for a final Act wherewith to conclude the piece after the chief interest 
of the play is over. They pronounce a musical, lyric ending a virtue, because it sets 
on a bright piece a bright, beautiful crown. The public thinks differently. As soon 
as Shylock’s fate is sealed in the Fourth Act, the public usually begins to arise and 
prepare to leave. To it Shylock’s case is the main interest of the play. In vain do 
the commentators cry that the Shylock business is only a great episode. The public 
heeds them not, but follows its own impression. And this impression rests on indis- 
putable, zesthetic laws. The discord between the tone of the comedy and the tragic 
tone of Shylock’s fate cannot be denied, It cannot be denied that the deadly agony of 
that part of the play is not in accord with a Comedy; or that the Trial Scene, with its 
question of life or death, makes a far deeper impression than all the rest, and that a 
whole Act following thereon is, to the audience, intrusive and superfluous. In no zs- 


238 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT V, SC. i. 


ee ee 
[Scene I. Enter Lorenzo and Iessica.] 


thetic sense are last Acts to be used to clear up a play; the weaker cannot effectively 
follow the stronger. In a drama the strict law of an ever-increasing interest is not to 
be ignored, and commentators had much better acknowledge it instead of making a 
virtue of necessity. No one denies that this last Act, with its beautiful language, is 
valuable; but with all its value as a final Act, it is a fault in composition. To render 
this defect as little conspicuous as possible is the work of Scenic arrangement. We 
begin, therefore, on our stage, the last Act with the Trial Scene, which occupies three- 
quarters of it. It is followed by the short Scene of the giving of the rings, and then, 
while music plays, the Scene changes to the Garden of Belmont. Thus we are pre- 
pared to resign ourselves to the repose of the music and the sweet words of the lovers ; 
we see,—after some free excisions of the text,—the whole company approach from 
Venice by torchlight; in a few minutes the jesting puzzle of the rings is solved, and the 
end is reached without our being conscious of any jarring influence from the weaker 
theme on the previous interest in the play. Thus, without any intervals between Acts 
and by a quick evolution of the Scenes, we carry home the impression of a joyous play, 
and are not struck by any dissonance in the notes of the chord. Whoever has seen the 
play as thus arranged at our Burgtheater,—and during sixteen years I have questioned, 
I know not how many,—has acknowledged that the awkwardness of the last Act is 
quite concealed, and that in spite of Shylock’s tragic fate, the impression is that of a 
pleasant comedy. The text is not changed, merely shortened, and the aim of our 
mode of representation is attained merely by a change of Scenes and Acts. 
Hunter (ew Jil, i, 309): The ‘poet’s pen’ has nowhere given more striking 
proof of its power than in the Scene of the Garden of Belmont. We find ourselves 
transported into the grounds of an Italian palazzo of the very first class, and we soon 
perceive them to be of surpassing beauty and of almost boundless extent. It is not a 
garden of parterres and flowers, but more like Milton’s ‘ Paradise,’ full of tall shrubs 
and lofty trees,—the tulip tree, the poplar, and the cedar. But it is not, like Milton’s, 
a garden in which the hand of Nature is alone visible. There are terraces and flights 
of steps, cascades and fountains, broad walks, avenues, and ridings, with alcoves and 
banqueting-houses in the rich architecture of Venice. It is evening; a fine evening 
of summer, which tempts the masters of the scene to walk abroad and enjoy the breezes 
which ruffle gently the foliage. The moon is in the heavens, full orbed and shining 
with a steady lustre; no light clouds disturbing the deep serene. On the green sward 
fall the ever-changing shadows of the lofty trees, which may be mistaken for fairies 
sporting by the moonlight; where trees are not, the moonbeams sleep upon the bank 
The distant horn is heard; and even sweeter music floats upon the breeze. .... For 
the four moonlights in classical or quasi-classical story the poet did not draw on kis 
imagination, but his memory. It is not that Troilus, Thisbe, Dido, and Medea might 
have done what they did when the moon was shining in full splendour, as on that 
night in the Garden of Belmont, but the poet had read that they did what they are 
described as having done, in the moonlight.’ This, at least, is the fact in respect of 
three out of the four, and with respect to the fourth an explanation may be given which 
will bring it within the same category. The first is Troilus. [Steevens was the first, 
I believe, to note, which he did without further remark, that ‘the image’ of Troilus 
mounting the Trojan walls ‘is from Chaucer’s Troilus and Cresseide, Book v, 666.— 
Ep.] Though this is a classical name, and the story is a tale of Troy, yet cannot the 
story be traced to any of the ancient poets. [See Clarendon’s note, fost.] It seems 
to have been to Chaucer that Shakespeare was indebted for his knowledge of it: The 


ACT V, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 239 


[Scene I. Enter Lorenzo and lessica.] 

next is Thisbe. Every one remembers ‘Quam procul ad lune radios Babylonia Thisbe 
Vidit” [Ovid, Metamorphoses, iv, 99.] But for the suggestion of this also, and even 
of the two which follow, it seems that Shakespeare was indebted to Chaucer; that, in 
fact, the old folio of Chaucer was lying open before him when he wrote this dialogue, 
and that there he found Thisbe, Dido, and Medea, as well as Troilus. It is at least 
certain that Thisbe, Dido, and Medea do occur together in Chaucer’s Leyend ef Good 
Women, which in the folio immediately follows the 7rod/us. Neither Vergil nor Ovid 
represents Dido as standing by moonlight ‘on the wild sea-bank,’ as she is so pictur- 
esquely depicted by Shakespeare, and the idea of placing a willow in her hand is mod- 
ern,—‘ The willow worn of forlorn paramours;’ but Chaucer, when he speaks of Dido, 
says, ‘It fell upon a nyght Whan that the moone upreysed had her light, This noble 
Quene unto her reste y-wente; She sigheth sore,’ &c. But the truth seems to be that 
Shakespeare has transferred to Dido what he found in Chaucer’s Legend concerning 
Ariadne: 


* And to the stronde barefote faste she went, 
And cryed, “ Theseus, myn herte swete! 
Where be ye, that I may not wyth yow mete? 
And myghte thus with bestes ben yslayne.” 
The holowe roches answerde her agayne. 
No man she sawe, and yet shone the moone, 
And hye upon a rokke she went soone 
And sawe hys barge saylynge in the see. 
Cold waxe hire herte, and ryghte thus sayde she: 
“ Meker then ye fynde I the bestes wilde!” 
(Hath he not synne, that he hire thus begylde ?) 
She cried, ‘‘O turne agayne for routhe and synne, 
Thy barge hath not al thy meyny ynne.” 
Hire kerchefe on a pole styked shee, 
Ascaunce that he shulde hyt wel ysee, 
And hym remembre that she was behynde, 
And turne agayne, and on the stronde hire fynde.’— 
[Lines 2187-2203, ed. Corson. | 


There can be scarcely a doubt that this is the parent of the image of Dido; and the 
merit of Shakespeare consists in a skilful adaptation, and in having produced in a few 
strokes an effect superior to that which the older poet has produced with so much 
labour, and with no mean success. [Malone was the first to recall Chaucer’s descrip- 
tion of Ariadne.—Ep.] There remains only Medea. In the Medea of Chaucer we have 
no moon, nor even the going out at night to gather herbs. What Shakespeare here 
owes to Chaucer is the suggestion of the character, Seeing Medea in The Legend of 
Good Women, his mind was directed to Ovid, the Latin poet with whom he seems to 
have been best acquainted, and he there found: ‘ As soone as that she shone Most full 
of light, and did behold the earth with fulsome face, Medea with hir haire not trust so 
much as in a lace, But flaring on hir shoulders twaine, and barefoote, with hir gowne 
Ungirded, gate hir out of doores and wandred vp and downe Alone the dead time of 
the night.’ [Golding’s Owzd, p. 83, ed. 1567.] I quote from Golding, because it is 
evident that Shakespeare was accustomed to read Golding, without at all meaning to 
insinuate that he might not have gone at once to the original, or that he might not have 


240 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT V, sc. i, 


Troylus me thinkes mounted the Troian walls, 5 
5. methinkes| me-thinkesQ,. methinks Cam. Cla. Trojm Q,. 
Bee 5. walls] wall Ff, Rowe+, Cap. 
Troian] Troyan Q,F,F,, Rowe, Steev. 785. ; 


remembered in this and the other instances Vergil or Ovid themselves. [There is little 
doubt in my mind that Shakespeare remembered the translation and not the original, 
and that he was familiar with these pages of Golding. Only a few lines further on, in 
this very description, occurs that invocation which assuredly lingered in Shakespeare’s 
memory. The original reads ; ‘ Aureeque, et venti, montesque, amnesque, lacusque, Dique 
omnes nemorum, dique omnes noctis adeste.’ Thus Golding : ‘Ye Ayres and windes: ye 
Elues of Hilles, of Brookes, of Woods alone, Of standing Lakes, and of the Night ap- 
proche ye euerychone.’ Who does not at once recall Prospero’s invocation; ‘ Ye elves 
of hills, brooks, standing lakes and groves’?—Ep.] I believe, however, that he was 
indebted in the first instance to Chaucer; and that this is, perhaps, the best instance 
of the Chaucerisms which it is suspected lurk in greater abundance than is yet known 
in the writings of Shakespeare. It is pleasant thus to trace the pedigree of favourite 
passages, and to see one poet doing silent homage to the genius of another. STEEv- 
ENS notes that Gower, in his Confessio Amantis, has a description of Medea by ‘sterre 
light.’ VERPLANCK: The beauty and truth of this exquisite night-scene need not be 
pointed out to the American reader, who is familiar under his own skies with such 
moons pouring floods of liquid radiance, and such nights ‘but little paler than the 
day,’—such as many an English traveller and many a poet have described with won- 
der and delight when seen in Italy or the East. It is the intense feeling of reality in 
this scene that, to my mind, gives strong confirmation of the opinion that Shakespeare 
had, at some period prior to this drama, wandered under the skies and moons of Italy. 
Still it is not conclusive. England has her own brighter nights, which the poet’s fancy 
might light up to the golden star-paved heavens and the brilliant moonlight gazed upon 
by lovers’ eyes from the gardens of Belmont. Luoyp (p. 554, Singer’s ed.) : It is worth 
giving a note to the hints this Act contains of the stage management of what is apt to 
be tedious, a long darkened scene. In the first speech we have, ‘The moon shines 
bright,’ and again, ‘ How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon yon [sic] bank,’ but by the 
time that Portia enters to converse for some time in front, unobserved by Lorenzo and 
his wife, the moon is overcast. ‘When the moon shone,’ says Nerissa, ‘we did nat 
see the candle,’ and consistently Lorenzo had said just before, ‘Come, ho, and wake 
Diana with a hymn;’ now Portia, with a parallelism that should have saved the line 
from a bad reading, exclaims, ‘ Peace, ho, the moon sleeps with Endymion, And would 
not be awakened.’ When Bassanio approaches, however, the cloud again withdraws. 
‘Por, This night, methinks, is but the daylight sick, It looks a little paler; ’tis a day, 
Such as the day is when the sun is hid;’ and Bassanio accordingly, unlike Lorenze 
shortly before, recognizes Portia by sight, and not by voice alone, and the stage remains 
fully moonlit to the end. 

2. In] See II, iv, 2. WHALLEY refers to an imitation of this passage in the old 
Comedy of Wily Beguiled. See Appendix, ‘The Date of Composition.’ 

5. Troylus] WALKER (Vers. p. 165): ‘Troilus’ in Shakespeare is always a dis- 
syllable. In the Folio Zo. and Cress. throughout, ....and to a great extent in the 
old English poetry, it is written 7roy/us, as if the name were formed immediately from 
Troy. 

§ Troian walls] STEEVENS: This image is from Chaucer’s Troilus and Cresstide ; 


ACT V, SC. i] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 241 


And figh’d his foule toward the Grecian tents 6 
Where Crefed lay that night. 

lef. In fuch a night 
Did Thisie fearefully ore-trip the dewe, 
And faw the Lyons fhadow ere hiuifelfe, 10 
And ranne difmayed away. 

Loren. In fuch a night 
Stood Dido with a Willow in her hand 


Vpon the wilde fea bankes, and waft her Loue 14 
6. foule] soul out Allen. 14. wilde] wide Rowe i. 
7. Creffed] CreffadaQ,. Cressetd Pope. waft | wavd Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Cresstd Theob. et seq. Steev. Var. Coll. Hal. Wh. i, Del. Dyce iii, 


Il. dif nayed] QqFf, Theob. Warb. Huds. 
Johns. dismay’d Rowe et cet. 


‘Upon the wallis fast eke would he walke,’—Bk v, 666. CLARENDON: The story of 
Troilus and Cressida was probably already familiar to an English audience through a 
play on the subject, which Shakespeare afterwards took for the groundwork of his 
drama. Guido da Colonna, about 1260, worked up the old Latin tales, professedly 
translations of Dares Phrygius and Dictys Cretensis, but really late forgeries, into his 
romance called (Historia de Bello Trojano, which became immensely popular, and was 
the basis of Chaucer’s poem of Zrotlus and Cresseide. 

13. Willow] STEEVENs: This passage contains a small instance out of many that 
might be brought to prove that Shakespeare was no reader of the classics. ‘And 
why ?’ indignantly asks KNIGHT. ‘Because the Dido of the classics is never represented 
with a willow! Shakespeare was not, like many of Steevens’s day who had made 
great reputations with slender means, a mere transcriber of the thoughts of other men. 
He has here given us a Zzcture of the forsaken Dido, which was perfectly intelligible 
to the popular mind. Those who remember Desdemona’s Willow-song need no 
laboured comment to show them that the willow was emblematic of the misery that 
Dido had to bear.’ 

14. wilde sea bankes] The Fourth Folio has ‘ wilde sea-banks,’ and this hyphen 
has retained its place in every edition, I think, since then, except Capell’s, the Globe, 
Clarendon, and White’s Second Edition. I think it is wrong. If a hyphen be needed 
at all, it should connect ‘ wilde’ and ‘sea;’ it was the sea that was wild, not the banks. 
Perhaps, it was this incongruity which led Rowe in his first edition to change ‘wild’ 
into wide. In my copy of Capell there is a very dim mark between ‘sea’ and ‘ wild,’ 
which is possibly a hyphen, but I think not. Since writing this, I find that Allen has 
noted in his MS a hyphen where I have suggested it. Now, I am sure it is right.- 
ED. 

14. waft] WALKER (C77. iii, 57) thinks that in all probability this is a corruption, 
but gives another instance of it elsewhere than in Shakespeare, as well as the present 
tense wafts, in Ham. I, iv, 61; and he also compares with this form, saft for saved in 
several instances from Chapman. Abbott (§ 341), however, is much more likely to be 
right, I think, in regarding it as an instance of the absorption in the final ¢, for the sake 
of euphony, of the -ed of the past indicative; and in § 342 he gives another example 
from King John, Il, i, 73: ‘A braver choice of dauntless spirits Than now the Eng- 

7s 


242 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT V, SC. i. 


To come againe to Carthage. 15 
Ief. In fuch a night 
Medea gathered the inchanted hearbs 
That did renew old E/on. 
Loren. In fuch a night 
Did Jefica fteale from the wealthy Iewe, 20 
And with an Vnthrift Loue did runne from Venice, 
As farre as Belmont. 
lef. In fuch a night 
Did young Lorenzo fweare he lou’d her well, 
Stealing her foule with many vowes of faith, 25 


17. gathered] QqF¥f. gatherd Rowe Steev. Sing. Walk. Coll. iii, Dyce iii, Huds. 


et seq. 23, 24, 27, 28. Jn...Did] One line, 
18. Efon] AXfon Rowe. Mal. ’go. 
23, 27. In] And in F,, Pope+, Cap. 24. loud) loued Q,Q,. 


lish bottoms have waft o’er.’? As the textual notes show, Theobald is the first to print 
wav d.—ED. 

17. Medea] MINTO (p. 387): One of the pictures that the moonlight pours in upon 
these happy hearts is the sorceress Medea gathering her enchanted herbs,—a conception 
in the finest harmony with the soft mysterious light of the moon. But the other three 
are pictures of sighing, ill-starred, forlorn lovers, Troilus, Thisbe, and Dido. The 
moonlight hours are peculiarly sacred to lovers, and their placid influence tends to 
tranquillity and sadness, Happy successful love is akin to sadness; it is unsatisfied 
sighing that raises tempests in the soul, and confident hope or reckless despair that 
inspires to heroic deeds. In the moment of assured success the lover may be seated 
in the highest pinnacle of triumph, in rapture at having won the world’s dearest pos- 
session; but triumph soon gives place to more tranquil joy, and falls naturally into the 
common pathetic key of love and soft diffused sadness. Shakespeare shows in many 
passages his deep feeling for the pathos and witchery of moonlight, and his delight in 
music under such circumstances appears to have been ecstatic. 

20, steale] Could not Lorenzo have chosen a less suggestive word? But, after all, 
are there not two distinct, and utterly different, Jessicas? This Jessica, whose awaken- 
ing soul can be saddened by sweet music, is not the Jessica of Venice, gilded with 
stolen ducats. In this growth of character is there one of Shakespeare’s indications 
of Long Time lying perdue ?—Ep. 

23. In] WuiTE (ed. i): It must be confessed that the addition of Ad in F, helps 
the metre, and is not out of place in the concluding plea and rejoinder of the ‘ night- 
ing;’ but no addition is necessary, and, therefore, except upon authority, which F, 
lacks, none can be admitted. CoLLiER (ed. ii) says, (and Dyck, ed. iii, repeats the 
assertion,) that it is only in some copfes of F, that this 4md is found. ‘If we are 
authorised,’ he continues, ‘in inserting words for any such reason, what is to be done 
with the lines in which Carthage and Aison are mentioned where there is a redundant 
syllable?’ ‘No alteration is necessary,’ says BOSWELL; ‘two hemistichs frequently 
occur at the end of one speech and the commencement of another.’ [The ‘ And’ is 
in my copy of F,, and also, apparently, in that of the Cambridge Editors. —ED.] 


ACT V, SC. i] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 243 


And nere a true one. 26 
Loren. In fuch a night 
Did pretty /efica (like a little throw) 
Slander her Loue, and he forgaue it her. 
lef. 1 would out-night you did no body come: 30 
But harke, I heare the footing of a man. 


Enter Meffenger. 
Lor. Who comes fo faft in filence of the night? 
Mef. A friend. (friend ? 
Loren. A friend, what friend ? your name I pray you 35 


Mef. Stephano is my name, and I bring word 


28. /hrow] Q,F{Q,, Cap. j/hrew Q,, Stephano. Theob. 

Rowe et cet. 34. friend ?| Q,. friend. Q,. 
30. no body] nobody Q,, Sing. 35. A friend,| Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
32. Enter...] Enter a... Qq. Enter Warb, 


26. ABBOTT, § 510, would complete the metre by reading ever for ‘nere.. ‘And 
nev | er a | true 6ne | In sich | a night.’ [But this sacrifices the emphasis, which, I 
think, must fall on ‘true.’ I prefer to let the pause between the speeches complete 
the metre——ED. ] 

32. HUNTER (i, 315): The dramatic skill as well as the poetic power of Shakespeare 
may be eminently illustrated from this Scene. Delightful as such discourse in such cir- 
cumstances is, it must not be too long continued, as it conduces nothing to the business 
of the drama. Yet the poet had not delivered his whole mind, and he meant still 
longer to ravish the ears of young and old with this sweet and virtuous discourse. It 
is that he might not seem inattentive to the business of the Scene, and that the audi- 
ence might not grow impatient for the progress of the story, that he here introduces 
the two servants with intelligence of the approach of Portia and Bassanio, This was 
enough for the purpose. Orders are given for preparations to receive them, and for the 
music. Then the dialogue proceeds. 

33. in silence] ABBOTT, § 89: Zhe was frequently omitted before a noun already 
defined by another noun, especially in prepositional phrases. See I, i, 61; II, i, 17, 
and ‘In number of our friends,’—/z/. Ces. III, i, 216; ‘On most part of their fleet,’ 
Oth. II, i, 28. 

36. Stephano] CLARENDON: Both here and in line 60 the accent is on the second 
syllable. Shakespeare had learned the true pronunciation when he wrote The Tempest, 
V, i, 277: ‘Is not this Stéphano, my drunken butler? Tu. Evze (Sh. Jahrbuch, xiii, 
148): The reproach of a false accent in Stephano, Rémeo, Desdemona, Andrénicus 
loses its force when we consider how very common it is in every language to change 
proper names in form, in gender, and in accent. Livérno becomes Léghorn in Eng- 
lish, Livourne in French; Milano is in English Milan, in German Mailand; Firénze is 
turned into English Florence, and Venézia itself is in English Venice, French Venise, 
German Venedig. The Germanic races prefer an accent on the penult, and hence 
Shakespeare has the same right to say Steph4no, as Schiller has to say Alcala. It is 
common to hear English travellers speak of the ‘Chiesa San Stephano,’ and Germans 
ecarcely understand the Italian Roméo and Desdémona. 


LIBRARY ST. MARY'S COLLEGE 


244 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT V, SC. L 


My Miftreffe will before the breake of day 37 
Be heere at Belmont, fhe doth ftray about 
By holy croffes where fhe kneeles and prayes - 
For happy wedlocke houres. 40 
Loren. Who comes with her? 
Mef. None but a holy Hermit and her maid: 
I pray you it my Mafter yet rnturn’d? 
Loren. He is not, nor we haue not heard from him, 
But goe we in I pray thee /e/fica, 45 
And ceremonioufly let vs vs prepare 
Some welcome for the Miftreffe of the houfe, 


Enter Clowne. 


Clo. Sola, fola : wo ha ho, fola, fola. 49 
37, 47, 75. Miftreffe] miferis Q,. 44. we haue not }have we yet Rowe+. 
38. Belmont,| Belmont ; Q; 46. us us] F,. 

40. wedlocke| wedlockes Q,. 48. Enter...] Enter Launcelot. Rowe. 
43. 24) Fy. 2s OF et cet. 49. ha ho,| ha, ho Qq. ha, ho, F ,. 
rnturn’d | ¥,. 


39. crosses] KnicHT: These holy crosses still, as of old, bristle the land in Italy, 
and sanctify the sea. Besides those contained in churches, they mark the spot where 
heroes were born, where saints rested, where travellers died. They rise on the sum- 
mits of hills, and at the intersections of roads; and there is now a shrine of Madonna 
del Mare in the midst of the sea between Mestre and Venice, and another between 
Venice and Palestrina, where the gondolier and the mariner cross themselves in pass- 
ing, and whose lamp nightly gleams over the waters, in moonlight or storm. The days 
are past when pilgrims of all ranks, from the queen to the beggar-maid, might be seen 
kneeling and praying ‘for happy wedlock hours,’ or for whatever else lay nearest their 
hearts; and the reverence of the passing traveller is now nearly all the homage that is 
paid at these shrines.—M [artineau ?] 

42. Hermit] Dr Johnson, in his Edition, has here a needless note to the effect that 
he could not perceive the use of this hermit, of whom nothing is seen or heard after- 
wards. This was never repeated in any of the subsequent Editions which he issued in 
collaboration with Steevens; but it was the text for a coarse onslaught by Dr Kenrick, 
in which he called Dr Johnson ‘a blockhead,’ and was afterwards berated for it by 
Barclay. In thus becoming a part of the history of Shakespearian criticism, it has to 
be noted here.—ED. 

46. ceremoniously] I cannot find that Schmidt, in his invaluable Appendix, has 
anywhere noted this kind of adverbial hypallage. Probably he thought that having 
collected many examples of a similar interchange of adjectives, the same observation 
would apply to adverbs; and so, in effect, it does. But it is well to note the instances 
when they occur, as ALLEN, in his MS, has done here, and afterwards in line 301, 
‘Your argosies Are richly come to harbour.’ Of course the present line means, ‘ Let 
us prepare some ceremonious welcome,’ &c.—ED. 

49. STAUNTON: Cauncelot is imitating the horn of the courier, or ‘post,’ as he was 


ACT V, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 245 
Loren. Who calls? 50 
Clo. Sola, did you fee M. Lorenzo, & M. Lorenzo, fola, 

Lor. Leaue hollowing man, heere. (fola. 
Clo. - Sola, where, where ? 
Lor Teere = 


Clo. Tel him ther’s a Poft come from my Matter, with 55 
his horne full of good newes, my Mafter will be here ere 


morning fweet foule. 


51. M...Lorenzo,] M7. Lorenzo, & M. 
Lorenzo Q,. J. Lorenzo, JZ, Lorenzo, 
Q,, &. Lorenzo, and M. Lorenza, F,, 
M. Lorenzo, and M. Lorenzo, Q,. A. 
Lorenzo, and Mrs. Lorenza, FF, Mr. 
Lorenzo and Mrs. Lorenzo ? Rowei. Mr. 
Lorenzo and Mrs. Lorenza? Rowe ii. 


By. 


Lorenzo and Mistress Lorenzo Steev. et 
cet. 
52. hollowing] hollaing Mal. hallosing 
Coll. 
57. morning | morn Ktly conj. 
[Exit Clo. Cap. et seq. 
[weet foule| Given to Loren. Rowe 


master Lorenzo and mistress Lorenza 
Pope+, Cap. Master Lorenzo? Master 
Lorenzo, Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. aster 


et seq. 
Soule] love Ff, Rowe+, Cap. 


called, who always wore that appendage suspended from his neck. HALLIWELL: The 
postman’s horn is often seen figured in the water-marks of paper of the 17th Century, 
and would appear to have often been a real horn. 

51. M. Lorenzo, & M. Lorenzo] The Textual Notes will show the evolution of 
these words, through a process of unnatural selection, into ‘Master Lorenzo and Mis- 
tress Lorenzo,’ as they now stand in the majority of modern Editions. It has all along 
been clear that F, was printed from Q,; it seems to me not unlikely that in the faulty 
composition of this Q,, the ampersand is a misprint for an interrogation mark; this 
ampersand was printed out in full in F, and a misprint added, ‘Lorenza.’ This acci- 
dental feminine termination was accepted in full faith by the printer of F,, and ‘ Mrs 
Lorenza’ stood forth confessed, That the feeble joke is wholly the printer’s, and not 
Shakespeare’s, and that Lorenzo alone is called, is shown, I think conclusively, by 
Clarendon, who calls attention to the fact that in line 55 Launcelot says, ‘Tell Azm,’ 
not § Tell them.’ —ED. 

51. All that Launcelot says in this Scene is clearly prose, and is so reinted in all 
editions except in White’s ed. ii, where this line is divided after the first ‘ Lorenzo.’ 
But this division arose, I am sure, from a mere oversight. That careful Editor printed 
from the Globe Edition, where, for typographical reasons, the line had to be so divided, 
and this fact escaped White’s notice.—ED. 

57. CAPELL (ii, 72): That he [‘the first modern,’ i. e. Rowe] should not be bold 
enough, nor any one after him, to put an Zx7¢ for the Clown [see Text. Notes] when 
he has made his speech, is among the wonders of their Editions: but it rose, first, from 
their not considering that his continuance on the stage were in the last degree faulty ; 
and, next, from their having no right conception of the odd, but proper, mode of his 
entry: This, if rightly perform’d, should be--with a whip in his hand; with which 
he runs slashing about, circling the two people he Ao//ows for without once looking on 
them; and having empty’d his budget, goes out slashing as he came in. 

57 sweet soule] As Walker, it his Article LXxxv (Crit. ii, 177), gives (accord- 


246 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act v, Sc. i 


Loren. Let’s in, and there expect their comming. 58 
And yet no matter : why fhould we goe in? 
My friend Stephen, fignifie pray you ; 60 


Within the houfe, your Miftreffe is at hand, 

And bring your mufique foorth into the ayre. 

How {weet the moone-light fleepes vpon this banke, 

Heere will we fit, and let the founds of muficke 

Creepe in our eares foft ftilnes, and the night 65 
Become the tutches of fweet harmonie : 

Sit Jefica, looke how the floore of heauen 


Is thicke inlayed with pattens of bright gold, 68 
60. friend] good friend Cap. 65. eares} cares ; Ff, Rowe et seq. 
Stephen] Stephano Q, Ff et seq. » 67. floore] vault as quoted by Hallam. 
Signifie...you] I pray you, signify, 68. inlayed | inlay’d Rowe et seq. 
Ktly. patiens| Q,Q,, Johns. Cap. pattents 
Signifie| FF. fignifie, F,. fignifie Q,. patterns Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Z Qgq et cet. Coll. patens Warb. Hal. patines Mal. et 
62. [Exit Stephano. Theob. cet. 


ing to my count) about seventy instances in the Folio of unquestionable errors in the 
assignment of speeches, including cases in which two speeches have been confused or 
the like, I think we need feel no hesitation in here following Rowe, and in giving 
these two words to Lorenzo.—ED. 

60. signifie] It is easy to see how the compositor, following his ear, came to omit 
the 7—Epb. 

63. sleepes] KNIGHT: One characteristic of an Italian garden is that its trees and 
shrubs are grown in avenues and gathered into thickets, while the grass-plots and turfy 
banks are studded with parterres of roses and other flowers, which lie open to the sun- 
shine and the dews. The moonlight thus seeps upon such lawns and banks, instead 
of being disturbed by the flickering of overshadowing trees.—M [artineau ?] 

65. in] See ABBorT, § 159, for instances of 2 used with verbs of motion; also IJ, 
vill, 45. 

66 76. tutches] ScumipT (Lex.): The act of the hand on a musical instrument. 

68. pattens] WARBURTON: We should read pazens, a round, broad plate of gold 
borne in heraldry; [‘ This is a mistake,’ says HUNTER (i, 318), ‘such a plate of gold is 
called a dezant.’] the cover of the sacramental cup. MALONE: A fatine (from patina, 
Lat.) is the small flat dish or plate used with the chalice in the administration of the 
Eucharist. It was commonly made of gold. Dycr (Remarks, p. 59): By adopting 
the gross misprint pa/terms, Mr Collier has done much to injure the picturesqueness of 
a passage which an eminent writer has pronounced to be ‘the most sublime, perhaps, 
in Shakespezre.’ [See Hallam, fost.] What are ‘patterns of gold’? and how could 
the ‘floor of heaven’ be ‘INLAID’ with ‘patterns’? The not uncommon word fatten, 
paten, patin, or patine, means a plate. ‘The Patime of a Chalice, Calici operculum, 
patina.’—Coles’s Dict. HUNTER (i, 318): The formidable objection to ‘patten’ is 
that nothing, at any period, so called, can be supposed to have been used to represent a 
star. To get quit of this difficulty the word was turned into patize. There is no hap 


ACT V, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 247 


[68. Is thicke inlayed with pattens of bright gold,] 

piness or propriety in likening stars to dishes, not even golden ones. I have no doubt 
that pattern was the word from the beginning, and that Lorenzo was speaking of the 
stars as in their constellations, not individually; and the constellations may not unsuit- 
ably be spoken of as patterns, just as we speak of the pattern of mosaic work, &c. 
[When Hunter printed the foregoing note, it is not likely that he had seen the Re. 

marks, &c. of his friend Dyce, which must have been issued while his own ///ustra- 
tions, &c. were going through the press. Though Dyce, therefore, did not influence 
Hunter, Hunter’s opinion evidently impressed Dyce; when, nine years later, Dyce 
issued 4 Few WVotes, &c., his tone is perceptibly less peremptory. On p. 66, after 
citing Hunter, he reiterates his belief ] that Zatterms is ‘a gross misprint,’ and cites two 
passages from Sylvester’s Du Bartas: ‘Th’ Almighties finger fixed many a million 
Of golden scutchions [the original has ‘platines dorees’—Dyce] in that rich pavillion,’ 
—The Fourth Day of the First Week, p. 33, ed. 1641; and ‘ That sumptuous canapy, 
The which th’ un-niggard hand of Majesty Poudred so thick with shields [the original 
has ‘escussons’—Dyce] so shining cleer,’ &c.—/d., p. 34. COLLIER (ed. ii): The 
question here is between fasterns and ‘pattens:’ the Rev. Mr Dyce prefers ‘pattens,’ 
but cites no older authority than Coles’s Dict... the Promptorium Parvulorum would 
have been better, and there he might have found, ‘ Patena, or pateyne of a chalys.’— 

p- 385, ed. Cam. Soc. But the truth is, that Shakespeare had no such far-fetched 
allusion: he was thinking of the ‘patterns of bright gold’ which inlaid the floor of 
heaven. Mr Dyce asks, ‘how could the floor of heaven be inlaid with patterns?’ Just 
like any other ornamental floor; ornamental floors are always inlaid with patterns, and 
generally of stars. Dyce (ed. iii) repeats that Shakespeare means that the floor of 
heaven is thickly inlaid with plates or circular ornaments of gold; adduces the two fore- 
going passages from Sylvester’s Dz Bartas ; and adds that Mr Lettsom observes, ‘Pat 
terns seems to me rather a sophistication than a misprint.’ VERPLANCK thinks that 
‘ pattern, in its modern sense, for the plan of a carpet or other similar work (which alone 
could give any sense here), is more modern than Shakespeare’s text.’ CLARENDON: 
The ‘ patine’ is the plate used in the Eucharist, and the image is thus much finer and 
more suitable to ‘the floor of heaven’ than the common-place patterns. [I find a diffi- 
culty in accepting the usual interpretation of this passage. It certainly does seem that 
‘orb’ refers to ‘ patines,’ and that the ‘patines’ are the stars; and if this reference is 
not to be evaded, then I yield; but under the protest that to compare merely luminous 
points, always silvery, to golden objects of manifest dimension, thickly inlaying the floor 
of heaven like a tessellated pavement, is, to me, to say the least, strained. The planets 
at their brightest might look like silver patines, but then not enough of them are visible 
at any one time thickly to inlay the skies. The very first words of this Scene are, ‘The 
moone shines bright,’ and if any one impression of external nature is given to us up to 
this point deeper than another, it is that the landscape is flooded with brilliancy, so 
bright that Medea could have even selected from among other flowers her enchanted 
herbs. If the ‘patines’ are the stars, here my difficulty culminates. When the moon 
shines thus dazzlingly, as we all know, the stars are scarcely visible, and those that 
are the brightest on moonless nights are but as the ‘smallest orbs’ now; not only, 
moreover, would they be unlike patines of bright gold, but they could not thickly 
inlay the floor of <zaven. Shakespeare knew, quite as well as Sir Henry Wotten, 
that when ‘the Q.zen’ rose the ‘meaner beauties of the night’ were dimmed. But 
may it not be that, after all, the patines are mot the stars? We infer that they are 
because Lorenzo refers to the stars in he next line. But there may well bea full 


248 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT V, SC. i, 


There’s not the fmalleft orbe which thou beholdft 

But in his motion like an Angell fings, 7O 
Still quiring to the young eyed Cherubins ; 
Such harmonie is in immortall foules, 

But whilft this muddy vefture of decay 


Doth grofly clofe in it, we cannot heare it: 74 
71. young eyed | young-ey'd Rowe et Theob. Warb. 
seq. 74. in it] Q, Ff. us in it Rowei. ts 
Cherubins]| Cherubims FF, Rowe in Rowe ii+. 7 im Q,Q, eccet. 77 ours 
+, Steev. Ktly. , Bailey. on z¢ Spence. 
72. ts in] listen Bailey. [Enter Musick and Domesticks of Por- 
tmmortall foules| immortal sounds tia. Cap. 


stop and a pause after ‘pattens of bright gold,’ before Lorenzo’s thoughts expand 
into the music of the spheres. Are we not all familiar with summer nights, when, 
here and there, the skies are thick inlaid with broken clouds, like flaky disks of 
curdled gold which slowly drift across the heavens, and veil at times the brightnesu 
of the moon? Are not these resplendent tiles on heaven’s floor ‘the patines’ through 
whose rifts faint stars gleam forth? When Lorenzo begins to speak, a mass of clouds 
with golden iridescent edges was rising heavenward and just touching the silvery 
circle of the moon; as he finished, the light of the moon was waning, half dimmed 
by the first thin edges of the fleecy clouds: ‘Diana is drowsy and must be waked.’ 
By the time that Portia had reached Belmont the patines had veiled the moon, the 
heavens were darkened; she was greeted by the beams of a candle, unseen ‘ when the 
moon shone ;’ slumber had succeeded drowsiness and the ‘moon sleeps with Endymion.’ 
The clouds float onward, the patines of bright gold glide past,—Bassanio arrives; the 
moon shines forth; the ‘night is but a little paler than the day.’ See Lloyd’s note, 
line 1, ante—ED.] 

71. quiring] ScumipT (Zex.): To sing in concert, and be tuned accordingly. As 
a verb only here, and in Cor. III, ii, 113. 

71. Cherubins] An English form of a Chaldee plural, which probably came to us 
through the French. See O7h. IV, ii, 73: ‘Still’ in this line is used, as it very com- 
monly is, in the sense of a/ways, continually —ED. 

74. JOHNSON: That this line is corrupt must be allowed, but it gives reason to sus- 
pect that the original was: ‘Doth grossly close zt iz.’ Yet I know not whether from 
this any thing better can be produced than the received reading. Perhaps ‘harmony’ 
is the power of perceiving harmony, as afterwards: Music in the soul is the quality of 
being ‘moved with concord of sweet sounds.’ This will somewhat explain the old 
copies, but the sentence is still imperfect; which might be completed by reading : Such 
harmony is in ¢#’ immortal sow/, But while this muddy vesture of decay Doth grossly 
close z 77, we cannot hear it. MALONE: ‘Such harmony,’ &c. is not an exclamation, 
but an illustration. The whole runs thus: ‘There is not one of the heavenly orbs but 
sings as it moves, still quiring to the cherubin. Similar to the harmony they make is 
that of immortal souls ;’ or, in other words, ‘each of us has as perfect harmony in our 
souls as the harmony of the spheres, inasmuch as we have the quality of being moved 
by sweet sounds (as he expresses it afterwards); but our gross terrestrial part, which 
environs us, deadens the sound, and prevents our hearing.’ ‘It’ in ‘ Doth grossly close 


ACT V, Sc. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE | ~~ 249 


(74. Doth grosly close in it, we cannot heare it :] be 

i in,’ I apprehend, refers to ‘harmony.’ It may be objected that as this nternalhar- 
mony is not an object of sense, it cannot be heard;—but Shakespeare is not always 
exact in his language; he confounds it with that external and artificial harmony which 
zs capable of being heard. This hath been imitated by Milton in his Arcades, 71: 
‘the heavenly tune, which none can hear Of human mould, with gross unpurged ear,’ 
[Had Malone looked into his Plato he would not have said that Milton had here imi- 
tated Shakespeare.—ED.] STEEVENS: The passage may be well explained by Hooker 
in his Zcclesiastical Polity, b. v. [published singly, in 1597,—Malone] : ‘ Touching musi- 
cal harmony, whether by instrument or by voice, it being but of high and low sounds 
in a due proportionable disposition, such, notwithstanding is the force thereof, and so 
pleasing effects it hath in that very part of man which is most divine, that some have 
been thereby induced to think, that the soul itself by nature is or hath in it harmony.’ 
For this quotation I am indebted to Dr Farmer. Du Bots ( Zhe Wreath, p. 60): The 
correspondent passage in Plato is in his tenth book De Republica; where he speaks 
of the harmony of the Spheres, and represents a Syren sitting on each of the eight 
orbs, and singing to each in its proper tone, while they are thus guided through the 
heavens, and consent in a diapason of perfect harmony, the Fates themselves chanting 
to this celestial music: é7? dé rv kbkAwy airov dvwber é¢’ Exdotov BeByxévar Lecpyva 
ovuurrepidepopérvnv, gurviv lav ieioav ava révov éx macdv dé dKTd obadv piav dppoviav 
fuuguveiv. [chap. xiv, 617, ed. Hermann. ‘ Upon each of its circles stands a siren, who 
travels round with the circle, uttering one note in tone; and from all the eight notes 
there results a single harmony,’—Davies and Vaughan, p. 413. For the authorities 
concerning this doctrine of the harmony of the spheres, see Smith’s Dict. s. v. Pythag- 
oras.—ED.] KNIGHT quotes a passage from Coleridge’s Remorse, III, 1; and CLAR- 
ENDON finds here reminiscences of /od, xxxviii, 7: ‘The morning stars sang together.’ 
Eze in his Essay on The Tempest (p. 7) thinks that this description of the music of 
the spheres is taken from Montaigne’s Essay On Custom (book i, chap. xxii), which, 
as Elze confesses, would prove that Shakespeare read it in the original. Florio’s 
translation was not put forth until 1603. 

74. close in it] KnicuT: The verb in this case is probably compound—c/ose-zn it. 
[Unquestionably. There is no need to change the Folio.—Ep.] CoLLieR and Dycr 
unite in referring ‘it’ to the soul, and not to ‘harmony.’ [Wherein the present Editor 
entirely agrees.] HALLAM (Lit. of Europe, vol. iii, chap. iii, 11) translates a passage 
from Campanella, De Sens Rerum (1617 ?), which he says he ‘can hardly read with- 
out recollecting the most sublime passage, perhaps, in Shakespeare,’ and thereupon 
quotes the present lines 67-74. W. W. Lioyp, whose Critical Essays enrich Singer’s 
Second Edition (in fact, these Essays constitute the best claim of that Edition to the 
student’s consideration), sets forth at length, in a letter to The Atheneum, of 12th 
May, 1877, the Platonic mythus, and its modifications by Cicero in the Somnium Scip- 
tonis, and by Dante, and in the Timeeus as far as they are all applicable in their asso- 
ciations to the elucidating of this present passage, and thus concludes: ‘ We must not 
press Shakespeare’s grammar and construction too pedantically. Here, as in many an 
ancient writer, the reader, for delight, skips gaily along through passages which convey 
to him an unquestionable and perspicuous sense, and is surprised and vexed to be 
recalled by a grammarian who is caught in mid-thicket by thorns of syntactical irreg- 
ularity, and struggles vainly to disentangle poetry and prose, and accommodate the 
words to the only meaning they can possibly have bee1 intended to express. An inter- 
pretation like the following is, at least, intelligible, and forces nothing cruelly: “ Such 


250 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT v, SC. i. 


Come hoe, and wake Diana with a hymne, 75 
With fweeteft tutches pearce your Miftreffe eare, 
And draw her home with muficke. 

Jefi. 1am neuer merry when I heare fweet mufique. 

Play muficke. 

Lor. The reafon is, your fpirits are attentiue : 80 
For doe but note a wilde and wanton heard 
Or race of youthful and vnhandled colts, 
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud, 
Which is the hot condition of their bloud, 
If they but heare perchance a trumpet found, 85 
Or any ayre of muficke touch their eares, . 


75. with a| with him a Q,. 78. [am] I’m Pope+, Dyce iii, Huds, 
hymne] himne QQ, 79. Play...] Muficke playes. Q,. 
76. tutches pearce|] Q,. touches pierce 85. but heare perchance | perchance but 
On heare Q,, Pope+, Steev.’85. 


harmony is in the immortal souls of the planetary spheres, but this harmony we cannct 
hear while the earthly vesture of decay closes in our own souls.’ There is technical 
confusion, no doubt, unless the good wit and the familiar associations of the hearer can 
be relied on to catch the idea that is just sufficiently, in such case, intimated. That 
which cannot be heard is manifestly the harmony of the heavenly, immortal, animated 
starry spheres, and what is closed in is, as manifestly, the grammatical construction 
apart, the human soul, immortal also, and in virtue of identical and common participa- 
tion in the divinely-given intelligence which is ascribed by Plato and Platonizers to the 
stars. But as harmony is here apprehended as resident in immortal souls, it is also 
resident in the “closed-in’”’ human soul, and thus we justify the reading as no less 
consistent than the conception which the sympathetic reader adopts without inquiry, 
“while the earthly vesture of decay closes in” our soul with its natural harmony, we are 
incapacitated, so long as it is thus closed in, from benefit of sympathy, from hearing 
the external harmony of the immortal souls of the stars.’ 

77. draw] MALONE: Shakespeare was, I believe, here thinking of the custom of 
accompanying the last waggon-load, at the end of harvest, with rustic music. [Heaven 
save the mark! and, doubtless, in the preceding line ‘ pearce your Mistresse eare,’ refers 
to the well-known operation for ear-rings !—ED. | 

78. COWDEN-CLARKE: For the sake of this one line (a line that was an especial 
favourite with one of the profoundest musicians we ever knew), we feel inclined to for- 
give Jessica anything we may have charged her with elsewhere. Her avowal of the 
effect that music has upon her shows her to be capable of amelioration; and we may 
trust that this, her appreciation of a woman like Portia, and her husband’s loving influ- 
ence, may ultimately soften her into excellence. But thus it is that Shakespeare ever 
-hrows in redeeming points, making his characters illustrate ‘the good and ill together ’ 
that exist in human nature. 

82. vnhandled colts] MALONE: We find the same thought, Zemp. IV, i, 176 :— 
‘Then I beat my tabor, At which, like unback’d colts, they prick’d their ears, Advanced 
their eye-lids, lifted up their noses, As they smelt music,’ 


acTV,SC.i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 251 


You fhall perceiue them make a mutuall ftand, 87 
Their fauage eyes turn’d to a modeft gaze, 

By the fweet power of muficke : therefore the Poet 

Did faine that Orpheus drew trees, ftones, and floods. 90 
Since naught fo ftockifh, hard, and full of rage, 

But muficke for time doth change his nature, 


The man that hath no muficke in himfelfe, 93 
89. therefore] Thus Pope, Han. 92. for time] F,. for the time Q, et 
90. trees] teares Ff. cet. 


87. make] See II, vii, 44, or Abbott, § 349, for the omission of Zo. 

87. mutuall] CLARENDON: Common. This word is applied to signify what is com 
mon to more than two in Zro. & Cress. I, iii, 348: ‘And choice, being mutual act of 
all our souls.’ Also, Md. V. D. IV, i, 122: ‘Every region near seem’d all one mutual 
cry.’ 

89. Poet] KEIGHTLEY (p. 154): I think we should read this in the plural, Avess, 
as no particular poet was regarded as the author of this myth. [It is, nevertheless. 
told in Shakespeare’s favorite Latin author, Ovid, books x and xi.—ED.] 

92, 93. HUNTER (i, 321): These lines might open the question of the effect of music 
on irrational animals, and the margins might overflow with the discordant opinions of 
critics. For the purpose of legitimate annotation it is sufficient to show that this was 
the opinion of Shakespeare’s age, and of the persons for whose entertainment he 
wrote; and it happens that we have the testimony of a learned foreigner, who visited 
England a little before the time of Shakespeare, that a lion in the Tower, which is 
described as of extraordinary size, afforded a remarkable instance of brute susceptibil- 
ity to the power of music. The traveler was Henry Stephens, [and the passage is to 
be found p. 65, De Vitis Stephanorum, Amst., 1683; in it Stephens describes how, on 
a visit to the Tower, he beheld with amazement the huge beast not only desist from 
devouring his food, but walk back and forth as though dancing (tanguam tripudiantem) 
when he heard by chance a young boy play on an organ]. 

93, &c. WARBURTON: The thought here is extremely fine; as if the being affected 
with music was only the harmony between the zzzermad (‘ music in himself’) and the 
external music (‘concord of sweet sounds’), which were mutually affected like unison 
strings. The whole speech could not choose but please an English audience, whose 
great passion, as well then as now, was Jove of music. ‘ Jam vero video naturam,’ says 
Erasmus, in Praise of Folly, ‘ut singulis nationibus, ac pene civitatibus, communem 
yuandam insevisse Philautiam: Atque hinc fieri, ut Britannz, preter alia, Formam, 
Musicam, & lautus Mensas proprié sibi vindicent.’ STEEVENS: This present passage, 
which is neither pregnant with physical and moral truth, nor poetically beautiful in an 
eminent degree, has constantly enjoyed the good fortune to be repeated by those whose 
inhospitable memories would have refused to admit or retain any other sentiment or 
description of the same author, however exalted or just. The truth is, that it furnishes 
the vacant fiddler with something to say in defence of his profession, and supplies the 
coxcomb in music with an invective against such as do not pretend to discover all the 
various powers of language in inarticulate sounds. Our ancient statutes have often 
received the best comment by means of reference to the particular occasion on which 
they were framed. Dr Warburton has, therefore, properly accounted for Shakespeare’s 


252 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT V, SC. 1. 


[93- The man that hath no musicke in himselfe, ] 
seeming partiality to this amusement. He might have added that Peacham requires 
of his Gentleman only to be able ‘to sing his part sure, and at first sight, and withal 
to play the same on a viol or lute.’ Let not, however, this capricious .sentiment of 
Shakespeare descend to posterity unattended by the opinion of the late Lord Chester- 
field on the same subject. In his 148th Letter to his son, who was then in Venice, 
his lordship, after having enumerated music among the i//ibera/ pleasures, adds: ‘If 
you love music, hear it; go to operas, concerts, and pay fiddlers to play to you; but I 
must insist upon your neither piping nor fiddling yourself. It puts a gentleman into a 
very frivolous and contemptible light; brings him into a great deal of bad company, 
and takes up a great deal of time which might be much better employed. Few things 
would mortify me more, than to see you bearing a part in a concert, with a fiddle undex 
your chin, or a pipe in your ‘mouth.’ Again, Letter 1 53: ‘A taste of sculpture and 
painting is, in my mind, as becoming, as a taste of fiddling and piping is unbecoming 
a man of fashion. The former is connected with history and poetry, the latter with 
nothing but dad company. Again: ‘Painting and sculpture are very justly called lib- 
eral arts; a lively and strong imagination, together with a just observation, being abso- 
lutely necessary to excel in either; which, in my opinion, is by no means the case with 
music, though called a liberal art, and now in Italy placed above the other two; a proof 
of the decline of that country.’ Douce (i, 269): Had the sentiments in Mr Steevens’s 
note been expressed by Dr Johnson, disorganized as he was for the enjoyment of music, 
it would not have been matter to wonder at; but that such a man as Mr Steevens, whose 
ordinary speech was melody, and whose correct and elegant ear for poetical concord is 
so frequently manifested in the course of his Shakespearian labours, should have shown . 
himself a very Timon in music, can only be accounted for by supposing that he regarded 
the speech in question as a libel on his great colleague’s organization. He has here 
assumed a task which Dr Johnson would, for obvious reasons, have declined, and with 
the feeble aid of an illiberal passage from Lord Chesterfield’s Letters. MONCK MASON: 
I doubt, indeed, whether there be any human being that is totally insensible to the 
powers of harmony; but if there be any such, we may naturally suppose that the same 
sluggish motion of the blood, the same rigid texture of the nerves, the same hardened 
construction of body or mind, from whatever cause it may proceed, that makes them 
incapable of harmony, may also render them unsusceptible of the finer feelings of 
humanity, and, of course, more fit than the rest of mankind for rapine, premeditated 
murder, and such horrid crimes as require in the perpetrators a certain degree of hard- 
ness and insensibility. PyE (p. 76): I confess even I, who would almost as soon stand 
up to my neck in water in winter as sit out a concert, should have no great opinion of 
that man who was dead to the effect of a pathetic song set to a simple melody. [It is 
difficult to decide, as we have had more than once to note, whether Steevens is in jest 
orin earnest. I am by no means sure that this attack on music was not a trap whereby 
to lure some honest Goodman Dull into a defence of it. If so, Steevens was certainly 
rewarded; the foregoing notes-are greatly abridged; and I have omitted Eccles alto- 
gether,—but Pye, the Poet Laureate, alone would have repaid him. As Knight says, 
‘the interest of the dispute wholly consists in the solemn stupidity with which it is con- 
ducted.’ The true light in which to view Lorenzo’s exclamation is, I think, exactly put 
by CowpEN-CLARKE:; ‘ That Shakespeare promulgated the axiom: ‘The man that hath 
no music,” &c, as a solemnly delivered and deliberately uttered dogma, no one, we 
should think, wouid imagine; but that it is in consonance with the poetical creed as te 
the weight of refining influence in music, held by men from the remotest ages, and that 


ACT V, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 253 


Nor is not moued with concord of fiveet founds, 

Is fit for treafons, ftratagems, and fpoyles, 95 
The motions of his fpirit are dull as night, 
And his affections darke as Erobus, 

Let no fuch man be trufted : marke the muficke. 


Enter Portia and Nerriffa. 


Por. That light we fee is burning in my hall : 100 
How farre that little candell throwes his beames, 
So fhines a good deed in a naughty world. (dle? 
Ner. When the moone fhone we did not fee the can 103 
94. moued|Q,. moou'd Q,. tia. Q. 
97. Erobus] Terebus Q.Q.. Tenebris 101. candell] Q,. candle Q,. 
Q,- Erebus Ff. 103, 102, candle ?] Q,F,F,. candle, 


g9. Enter...] Enter Nerriffa and Por- Qret cet: 


it is precisely one of those ardent expressions inspired by the immediate hearing ot 
music, and by the impressions and emotions it produces, no one who has experienced 
those impressions and emotions will doubt.’—Ep. ] 

96. spirit] See WALKER (C77. i, 193), where he says that ‘it may safely be laid 
down as a canon, that the word “spirit,” in our old poets, whenever the metre does 
not compel us to pronounce it dissyllabically, is a monosyllable. And this is almost 
always the case.’ After citing very many examples, of which the present line is one, 
he sums up: ‘ Perhaps it would be desirable, wherever the word occurs as a mono- 
syllable, to write it spvzg/z, in order to ensure the proper pronunciation of the line. I 
prefer sprigh¢ to sprite ; inasmuch as the latter invariably carries with it a spectral asso- 
ciation; although the old writers, in those passages where they write the word mono- 
syllabically, use sometimes the one form, sometimes the other.’ In citing the present 
line Walker, who trusted to his memory, writes motions for ‘motions,’ or it may be an 
oversight of Lettsom; the recurrence here of the same sound sf7i/e and might seems 
to have given him pause, and he thinks that they were not exactly the same; in 7he 
Historye of Romeus and Juliet he finds instances where for the sake of euphony it must 
be pronounced, as it is there once spelled, spvete.—ED. 

99. HunTER (i, 320): There is a dramatic purpose worthy of notice in the words 
which Portia utters when she first appears upon the scene. They were meant to con- 
nect the present with the past; the defeated attempt of Shylock on the life of Antho- 
nio with the scenes of Belmont; and the spectators are thus led to look upon Portia 
returning to the house in which the scene of the caskets had been presented, crowned 
with the honours of the good deed she had done in freeing the merchant. There is 
also great dramatic skill shewn in the dialogue which now ensues between Portia and 
Nerissa. It is not quite unlike that to which we have been listening with such charmed 
ears between Lorenzo and Jessica; yet it is less philosophical, and so leads gently to 
the change from those sweet discourses to the business of the story, to which it is now 
necessary to proceed. 

102. HALLIWELL: Compare Matthew, v, 16: ‘Let your light so shine before men 
that they may see your good works,’ &c. 


254 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [AcT v, sc. i. 


Por. So doth the greater glory dim the leffe, 
A fubftitute fhines brightly as a King 105 
Vntill a King be by, and then his ftate 
Empties it felfe, as doth an inland brooke 


Into the maine of waters : mufique, harke. Muficke. 
Ner. It is your muficke Madame of the houfe. 
Por. Nothing is good I fee without refpect, 110 


Methinkes it founds much fweeter then by day? 
_Ner. Silence beftowes that vertue on it Madam. 
Por. The Crow doth fing as fweetly as the Larke 


When neither is attended : and I thinke 114 
108. Muficke.] Om. Qq. 109. Madame] Madam, F,. 
109. your ...the] the... your Rowe, 112. that] the Rowe ii+. 


Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 


102. naughty] CowDEN-CLARKE: Formerly used with greater force of meaning 
than at present. [See III, iii, 12.] Here it means ‘evil,’ ‘wicked,’ ‘corrupt;’ yet, 
somehow, its lighter form of expression harmonizes well with the light-hearted mood, 
the condition of internal happiness, that possesses Portia at this moment of her return 
from having successfully fulfilled a project for rescuing her husband’s friend from 
peril. Her sweet cheerfulness, her readiness to find everything doubly bright, doubly 
melodious, has the exquisite charm of a spirit at ease with itself, from conscious 
rectitude. 

105. as] For other instances of the omission of the first as, see ABBOTT, § 276. 

110. respect] JOHNSON: Not absolutely good, but relatively good, as it is modified 
by circumstances. HHALLIWELL: Portia is told by her attendant it is her own music, 
which she now finds sweeter than she ever noticed it before. Then she says nothing 
is good but by looking upon it through the circumstances in which it is placed, looking 
with a particular meaning, a reflection of mind. She proceeds to say that the crow 
and the lark sing equally sweet when not attended ; that is, when the mind is not fixed 
particularly on them. It is the proper time, and state or preparation of mind, that gives 
the charm its full force. STAUNTON: By ‘respect,’ in this place, is meant regard, atten- 
tion, consideration, ‘Nhen the mind is pre-engaged, it is influenced but little by the 
beautiful in Nature or in art: ‘ The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark, When neither 
zs attended.’ CRAIK ( Jud. Cas. IV, iii, 69): Respect in Shakespeare means, commonly, 
no more than what we now call regard or view. Thus, in Mid. NV. D. I, i, Lysander 
says of his aunt, ‘She respects me as her only son;’ and in II, i, Helena says to 
Demetrius, ‘ You, in my respect, are all the world.’ So, [in the present line,] Portia 
means merely that nothing is good without reference to circumstances, or that it is only 
when it is in accordance with the place and the time that any good thing can be really 
or fully enjoyed. So, afterwards, Nerissa to Gratiano: ‘ You should have been respect. 
ive ;’ that is, you should have been mindful (of your promise or oath). 

114. attended] Abbott, § 200, regards this as an instance of the omission of the 
preposition zo, wherein Clarendon, Schmidt, and Rolfe agree; all hold it to be equiv- 
alent to attended to, marked. Clarendon says: ‘The difference is in the hearer’s mind, 
not in the songs themselves, and the nightingale is reputed the first of songsters, because 


ACT v, sc. i] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 255 


The Nightingale if fhe fhould fing by day 115 
When euery Goofe is cackling, would be thought 

No better a Mufitian then the Wren ? 

How many things by feafon, feafon’d are 

To their right praife, and true perfeétion : 

Peace, how the Moone fleepes with Endimion, 120 


117. Wren ?| Wren. Q,. Renne? Q. Coll. i. mow Coll. ii, iii (MS). oa / or 
120. how] QqFf, Rowe+, Cap. Knt, ho! Mal. et cet. 


she sings at a time when she can best be heard, when the hearer’s attention is not dis- 
tracted.’ The same view is held by Halliwell and Staunton, as is seen in the preced- 
ing notes. Nevertheless, I venture to think that a possible meaning of ‘attended,’ in 
this place, has been overlooked. To represent Portia as saying that the crow sings as 
sweetly as the lark if it is not attended to, is to impute to her a remark which, though 
perhaps profoundly true, is, I fear, not truly profound. Would it not be quite as true 
to say that they sing equally well if we do not hear them at all? It seems to me that 
the whole point of Portia’s reflections is that nothing is good without respect, and of 
this law she had found an illustration in the moon and the little candle, when the less 
glory is dimmed if attended by a greater glory; or in a substitute who is nothing if 
attended by a king; and again it is the attendant circumstances alone which prevent 
the lark and the crow from being equally good; even the nightingale, if ill-attended, 
is no better musician than a wren. She sums up in saying, ‘ How many things dy sea- 
som season’d are,’ It is by its fit ‘season’ that the lark and the nightingale must be 

attended’ in order to receive ‘right praise.’ Wherefore, I think, ‘ attended’ is not, 

. perhaps, equivalent to attended to, but may be used absolutely.—ED. 

115. Nightingale] MALONE: So in Sonmet 102: ‘As Philomel in summer’s front 
doth sing, And stops his pipe in growth of riper days; Not that the summer is less 
pleasant now, Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night; But that wild 
music burdens every bough, And sweets grown common lose their dear delight. 

120. Peace, how] MALone: The oddness of the phrase: ‘Yow the moon would 
not be awak’d!’ first made me suspect the passage to be corrupt; and the following 
line in Rom. & Jul. IV, v, 65: ‘Peace, hoa, for shame!’ suggested the emendation, 
and appeared to me to put it beyond a doubt. Again, in As You Like Ut, V, iv, 
131: ‘Peace, hoa! I bar confusion.’ Again, in Meas. for Meas. I, iv, 6: ‘Hoa! 
peace be in this place!’ Again, /é¢d. III, i, 44: ‘Hoa! peace here.’ In Ant, & 
Cleop. the same mistake, I think, has happened. Portia first enjoins the music to 
cease: ‘Peace, hoa!’ and then subjoins the reason for her injunction: ‘The moon,’ 
&c. Tyrwhitt seems to be of opinion that the interjection /7o was formerly used to 
command a cessation of noise, as well as of fighting. See Cant. Tales, vol. iv, p, 230. 
BoswEL.: The old reading, I think, is right. ow, as Johnson observes, is some- 
times used as a mere affirmative. HUNTER (i. 319, foot-note): There is not a more 
inexcusable defeat committed on the text of Shakespeare by any Editor than is done 
by Malone in this exquisite passage. He not only would read, but actually prints, as 
his text: ‘Peace, hoa!’ And this because, as he says, of the oddness of the phrase: 
‘How the moon,’ &c. But can any one read the words as they stand in Shakespeare, 
and not recognize in a moment one of the commonest and most intelligible of English 
phrases by which we express admiration? All the beauty of the expression 1s lost by 


256 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT V, SC. i. 


[120. Peace, how the Moone sleepes with Endimion, ] 

the change: Portia looks upwards and observes the steady, still, settled, and almost 
imperceptible motion of the fair planet of the night, and thus expresses her admiration 
of the soft beauty of the scene. KNIGHT: Malone thinks that Portia uses the words 
as commanding the music to cease. This would be a singularly unladylike act of Por- 
tia, in reality as well as in expression. We apprehend that, having been talking some- 
what loudly to Nerissa as she approached the house, she checks herself as she comes 
close to it, with the interjection—‘ Peace /’—equivalent to Azshk, and then gives the poet- 
ical reason for being silent: How the moon sleeps, &c. ‘The Stage-direction: Masze 
ceases, is a coincidence with Portia’s Peace / but not a consequence of it. HALLIWELL: 
The exclamation 4o is constantly thus printed in old plays.. The moon is not now 
shining, as appears from what Nerissa had previously said, and from Lorenzo recogniz- 
ing Portia by the voice; she is sleeping with Endymion, and out of sight. Portia is 
merely giving a playful reason for desiring silence, and the moon being obscured, she 
says that luminary is sleeping with Endymion and would not be disturbed. COLLIER 
(ed. ii): Mow seems to have been misprinted ‘how’ in the old copies, and modern 
Editors, not knowing what to do with it, have usually converted it into an interjection, 
ko! Portia is assigning a reason for the cessation of the music, viz. because it will 
wake the moon, now sleeping with Endvmion. The emendation zow is from the 
(MS). Dyce: I adopt Malone’s alteration, and [after what Hunter has said] I am 
forced, at the risk of being tedious, to state fully the grounds of my conviction that 
Malone’s is the true reading. I. Shakespeare would hardly have employed such a 
phrase as, ‘How the moon sleeps,’ &c.; he would have interposed some adverb (or 
adverbial adjective) between ‘how’ and ‘zke moon, &c.: so, previously, in this Scene 
we have, ‘ How sweet the moonlight sleeps,’ &c. II. ‘Ho’ was often written with the 
spelling ‘ How ;’ and I may add, that previously in the present play [TI, vi, 30], where 
Lorenzo. calls out, ‘Ho! who's within ? Q, has, ‘Howe whose within ?’? (In like 
manner examples are not wanting of ‘Low’ being put for ‘Zo,’ as in Hubert’s Ea- 
ward the Second, p. 32, ed. 1629, ‘Low now (quoth he) I haue my heart’s desire.’) 
III. That Portia is enjoining the musicians to be silent, is proved by the Stage-direc- 
tions of the old Eds. Soin /w/. Cas. I, ii, Casca silences the music with ‘Peace, ho! 
Cesar speaks ;’ and again [as in the examples cited by Malone]. IV. It is quite nat- 
nral that immediately after the command, ‘Peace, ho /’ we should have the reason for 
that command, viz. ‘The moon sleeps,’ &c.; while, on the contrary, there is (as Malone 
aays) an ‘oddness’ in ‘ Peace’ being followed by a mere exclamation, ‘ How ¢he moon 
sleeps, &c. {In answer to Knight] I see no impropriety in a lady ordering her own 
musicians, in her own domain, to leave off playing; and as to the ‘ expression,’—Mr 
Knight seems to have forgotten both that on the next page we have ‘o’ from the 
mouth of Portia, ‘A quarrel, Zo, already!’ and that ‘Zo,’ in our early writers, does not 
necessarily convey the idea of bawling. It is really difficult to believe that Mr Knight 
can be serious when he goes on to say, ‘ Portia, having been talking somewhat loudly, 
&c., checks HERSELF as she comes close to the house,’ &c. (If she speaks szano, how 
happens it that Lorenzo immediately exclaims, ‘That is the voice, Or I am much 
deceiu’d of Portia’?)—and that ‘the Stage-direction is a COINCIDENCE with Portia’s 
Peace !’—.a coincidence more surprising than any upon record. [The Text. Notes 
show how decided is the majority in favour of Malone’s emendation.— Ep. ] 

120. Moone... Endimion] Parry (Longman’s Modern Series, Mer. of Ven. 
ad loc.) cites, ‘In the ancient, poetical, and proverbial language of Elis, people said: 
“Selene (the Moon) loves and watches Endymion,” instead of “it is getting late;” 


ACT V, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 257 


And would not be awak’d. 121 
Muficke ceafes. 
Lor. That is the voice, 
Or I am much deceiu’d of Portia. 
Por. He knowes me as the blinde man knowes the 125 
Cuckow by the bad voice? 
Lor. Deere Lady welcome home? 
Por. We haue bene praying for our husbands welfare 
Which fpeed we hope the better for our words, 
Are they return’d ? 130 
Lor. Madam, they are not yet: 
But there is come a Meffenger before 
To fignifie their comming. 
Por. Go in Nerriffa, 
Giue order to my feruants, that they ee 135 
No note at all of our being abfent hence, 
Nor you Lorenzo, leffica nor you. 
A Tucket founds. 
Lor. Your husband is at hand, I heare his Trumpet, 
We are no tell-tales Madam, feare you not. 140 
Por. This night methinkes is but the daylight ficke, 
It lookes a little paler, ’tis a day, 


Such as the day is, when the Sun is hid. 143 
121. [Observing Lor. and Jess. Cap. 128. husbands welfare] husband health 
Muficke...] Om. Qq. Q,. Ausbands healths Pope+, Cam. Glo, 
125, 126. Prose, Ff, Rowe. Ending Cla. Ktly, Wh. ii. 
lines, £nowes...vorce Q,. Ending lines, 134. 72] Om. Pope+. 
Cuckow...voice Q,Q, et cet. - 138. A Tucket founds] Om. Qq. 
126. Cuckow] CuckoQ,. cuckoeQ,Q,. 139. 4zs] a Rowe i. 


voice ?] Q,F,. voice. Q,. 


« Selene embraces Endymion,” instead of “the sun is setting and the moon is rising ;” 
Selene kisses Endymion into sleep,” instead of “it is night.” ’"—Max MULLER [Chefs 
from a German Workshop, ii, p. 80, New York, 1872]. 

120, Capell’s Stage-direction here is ‘ observing Lor. ane Jes.,’ from which I infer 
(for I can find no note on it) that he supposes the ‘moon’ and ‘Endymion’ to be applied 
by Portia to the happy lovers. When Lorenzo speaks, line 123, Capell has the Stage- 
direction ‘ réstmg.’— Ep. 

125. blinde man] CLARENDON: This must refer to a proverb importing that there 
are cases in which a blind man is at no disadvantage as compared with any other man. 
(Moreover, the intimation is given us that the moon is now wholly obscured and that 
the scene is quite dark.— ED. ] 

138. Tucket] STEEVENS: 7Zocca/a, Italian, a fivurish o1. a trumpet. 

17 


258 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [act v, Sc. i 


Enter Baffanio, Anthonio, Gratiano, and thew 
Followers. 145 


Baf. We fhould hold day with the Antipodes, 
If you would walke in abfence of the funne. 
Por. Let me giue light, but let me not be light, 
For a light wife doth make a heauie husband, 
And neuer be Baffanio fo for me, 150 
But God fort all: you are welcome home my Lord. 
Baff. 1 thanke you Madam, giue welcom to my friend 
This is the man, this is Axchonio, 
To whom I am fo infinitely bound. 
Por. You fhould in all fence be much bound to him, 155 
For as I heare he was much bound for you. 
Anth. No more then I am wel acquitted of. 
Por. Sir, you are verie welcome to our houfe: 
It muft appeare in other waies then words, 
Therefore I fcant this breathing curte fie. 160 
Gra. By yonder Moone I fweare you do me wrong, 
Infaith I gaue it to the Iudges Clearke, 
Would he were gelt that had it for my part, 


Since you do take it Loue fo much at hart. 164 
150. fo for] fo from ¥f, Rowe, Pope, 161. [To Nerissa. Rowe. 

Theob, Han. Warb. 162, 176, &c. Judges] Judg’s F,. 
I51. youare|yareQ,. you're Popet+, Clearke| Clarke Qq. Clerk FF ,. 


Dyce iii, Huds. 


144, &c. GuizoT (Notice, &c., p. 5): In thus depicting the reunion of Portia and 
Bassanio, Shakespeare has shown that he is almost the sole poet who has not feared to 
pause over a picture of perfect happiness ; he knew his own power to fill up the outlines. 

146, 147. MALONE: If you would always walk in the night, it would be day with 
us, as it now is on the other side of the globe. 

148. light] JoHNson: There is scarcely any word with which Shakespeare so much 
delights to trifle as with “ghz, in its various significations. STEEVENS: Most of the old 
dramatic writers are guilty of the same quibble. 

155. sence] WALKER (Vers. 248): Is ‘sense’ in this passage singular or plural ? 
CLARENDON: That is, in all reason. Compare, for this meaning of the word, Meas. 
for Meas. V, i, 47: ‘Poor soul, She speaks this in the infirmity of sense.’ 

158. our house] CowDEN-CLARKE: How delicate this little touch of generosity 
and modesty; she has just endowed her husband with her property. 

160. breathing curtesie] MALONE: This verbal, complimentary form, made up 
only of breath, i. e. words. So, in Timon. III, v, 59: ‘You breathe in vain.’ So, in 
Macb, V, iii, 27: ‘ mouth-honour, breath,’ 


ACT V, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 259 


_ Por. A quarrel hoe alreadie, what’s the matter ? 165 
Gra. About a hoope of Gold, a paltry Ring 

That fhe did giue me, whofe Poefie was 

For all the world like Cutlers Poetry 

Vpon a knife ; Loue mee, and leaue mee not. 
Ner. What talke you of the Poefie or the valew: 170. 

You fwore to me when I did giue it you, 

That you would weare it til the houre of death, 

And that it fhould lye with you in your graue, 

Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths, 


You fhould haue beene refpeétiue and haue kept it. 175 
167. giue me] give to me Steev. con). Glo. Cla. Del. Coll. iii, Wh. ii. 

Coll. ii, ili, Dyce ii, iii, Huds. give me; 171. 7] Om. Q,. 

one Lettsom. 172. the houre] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Wh. i. 


167,170. Poefe] pofieQ,Q,. posy Cap. your houre Qq et cet. 
Mal.’g0, Steev. Sing. Hal. Dyce, Cam. 


167. CAPELL (ii, 73) asserts that this verse is ‘purposely incomplete, and of four 
feet only, “‘me” being redundant.’ STEEVENS suggested the insertion of 40 after 
‘give;’ it was also added by CoLLier’s (MS), and adopted by Dyck. KEIGHTLEY 
(Expositor, p. 154) would punctuate: ‘That she did give me, whose—poésy was.’ 
HALLIWELL says, and truly, ‘the sense absolutely requires Zosy ; the spelling proves 
nothing.’ ABBOTT, § 508, thus scans the line, as one where a foot is omitted after a 
marked pause: ‘That shé | did give me, | ’ | whose po | sy was.’ 

167. Poesie] RoLFEe: A motto inscribed on the inner side of a ring. The fashion 
of putting such ‘posies’ on rings prevailed from the middle of the 16th to the close 
of the 17th century. Inscriptions on the outside of rings have been common from 
the old Greek and Roman times. In 1624 a little book was published with the quaint 
title, Love's Garland, or Posies for Rings, Handkerchiefs, and gloves ; and such pretty 
tokens that lovers send their loves. [Arber, in his English Garner, vol. i, p. 611, has 
reprinted, from Harl. MS 6910, a collection of Love Posies, many hundred in number 
from a MS written about 1596.—ED.] 

169. knife] REED: Knives, as Sir John Hawkins observes, were formerly inscribed, 
by means of agua fortis, with short sentences in distich. In Dekker’s Setiromastix, 
Sir Edward Vaughan says: ‘ You shall swear by Phoebus, who is your poets good lord 
and master, that hereafter you will not hire Horace to give you posies for rings, hand- 
kerchers, or £zves, which you understand not.’ [Halliwell gives several specimens of 
this ‘cutler’s poetry’ with wood-cuts. ] 

169. leaue] STAUNTON: And give me not. So in 7wo Gent. IV, iv, 79: ‘It 
seems you loved not her, to leave her token.’ [See also ‘ leaue,’ line 191, and ‘left,’ 
line 217.] 

172. the houre] That there aie so many yous and yours in this speech may be a 
reason against adding another one (which the Qq have here), or it may be a reason in 
favour of it. I rather prefer the Folio.—Eb. 

175. respectiue] That is, mindful. See CRaIx,s. v. ‘respect,’ line 110 above 
‘Respective lenity,’ in Rom. & /ul. III, i, 116, is paraphrased, by a majority of Edi- 
tors, ‘ considerate gentleness.’—ED 


260 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT V, SC. i, 


Gaue it a ludges Clearke: but wel I know 176 
The Clearke wil nere weare haire on’s face that had it. rf 
Gra. He wil, and if he liue to be a man. 
Nerriffa. 1, ifa Woman liue to be a man. 
Gra. Now by this hand I gaue it to a youth, 180 
A kinde of boy, a little fcrubbed boy, 
No higher then thy felfe, the Iudges Clearke, 
A prating boy that begg’d it as a Fee, 
I could not for my heart deny it him. 


Por. You were too blame, I muft be plaine with you, 185 
176. but wel I know] no God’s my 178. and | an Pope et seq. 

Tudge Qq, Coll. et seq. (except Rife). — 179. J,] 74 Ff, Rowe. Ay, Pope et 
177. on’s] on his Cap. Steev. Mal. Ktly, seq. 

Del. 185. 400] to Q,Q,F, et seq. 


176. wel I know] CoLuier: The Folio, perhaps in consequence of the statute of 
James I, substituted this phrase for the Quarto’s. 

178. and if ] See IV, i, 465. 

181. scrubbed] Warton: It is certain from the context and from the tenour of the 
story, that Gratiano does not here speak contemptuously of the Judge’s clerk. He only 
means to describe the person and appearance of this supposed youth, which he does by 
insinuating what seemed to be the precise time of his age, that of a young stripling. I 
am therefore of opinion that Shakespeare wrote stubted. In many counties it is a com- 
mon provincialism to call young birds, not yet fledged, stubbed young ones. But, what 
is more to our purpose, Hearne, a plain, unaffected writer, in the Preface to his History 
and Antiquities of Glastonbury, ed. 1722, says that ‘Saunders must be a stubbed boy, 
if not a man, at the dissolution of Abbeys,’ &c. It therefore seems to have been a com- 
mon expression for s¢rifling, the very idea which the speaker intends to convey. If 
the emendation be correct here, we should also change it in Nerissa’s speech, line 285. 
STEEVENS : I believe ‘scrubbed’ and stubbed have a like meaning, and signify stunted 
or shrub-like. So in Holland’s Pny + ‘But such will never proue faire trees, but 
skrubs only.’ [Bk 13th, chap, iv, p. 386. That scrub and shrub were not exactly the 
same, may be inferred, I think, from another passage in Holland’s Pixy, where, in Bk 
12th, chap. vii, p. 362, we find: ‘ Wee haue made means to haue the Pepper tree grow- 
ing among vs; and verily a little scrubby plant it is, or shrub, rather.—Ep.] VER- 
PLANCK: We retain the same use familiarly on this side of the Atlantic in ‘scrub 
oak,’ a name given from the first settlement of the country to the dwarf or bush oak. 
GRANT WHITE: But is not ‘scrub oak’ a corruption of shrub oak? and are not 
‘scrub’ and ‘shrub’ originally the same word? HALLIWELL: ‘Scrubbed’ is used 
here in contempt, the scornful way in which Gratiano talks of the disguised Nerissa 
increasing the humour of the scene. It is unlikely the word should have been twice 
printed scrubbed if that had not been the correct reading. Dyce (Gloss.): Here 

scrubbed’ is generally explained stunted ; but Cotgrave has ‘Marpaut. An ill-fauoured 
scrub, a little ouglie or swartie wretch;’ and Coles, ‘A Scrub (mean person), Homo 
misellus, and ‘Scrubbed, sgualidus.’ 

185. too blame] AxBBorT, § 73: ‘Too’ is often used in the Folio, in the phrase, «I 
am too blame.’ See Of. III, iii, 244 and 328. This is so common in other Eliza- 


AcTV,SC.i:] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 261 


To part fo flightly with your wiues firft gift, 186 
A thing ftucke on with oathes vpon your finger, 
And fo riueted with faith vnto your fleth. 
I gaue my Loue a Ring, and made him fweare 
Neuer to part with it, and heere he ftands: 190 
I dare be fworne for him, he would not leaue it, 
Nor plucke it from his finger, for the wealth 
That the world mafters. Now in faith Gratiano, 
You giue your wife too vnkinde a caufe of greefe, 
And ’twere to me I fhould be mad at it. 195 
Laff. Why I were beft to cut my left hand off, 
And fweare I loft the Ring defending it. 
Gre. My Lord Baffanio gaue his Ring away 
Vnto the Iudge that beg’d it, and indeede 
Deferu’d it too : and then the Boy his Clearke 200 
That tooke fome paines in writing, he begg’d mine, 


188. /o riueted | riveted Pope+, Steev. 196. [Aside. Theob. et seq. 
85, Dyce iii. zzveted so Cap. Steev.’93, 198. Gre.] F,. 
Var. Sta. so rivetted Ktly. 200. 700] to Qq. 


195. And] An Theob. et seq. 


bethan authors, that it seems to require more explanation than a simple confusion 
between fo and foo. Perhaps ‘blame’ was considered an adjective, and oo may have 
been, as in Early English, used for excessively. [Even in a modernized text it is doubt- 
ful if this ‘too’ should not be retained.— ED. ] 

188, so riueted] This line is cited by ABBOTT, § 472, as one of the examples, of 
which we have had many, of the absorption of ‘-ed following d or 4, and it is thus 
scanned ‘by him: ‘And s6 | riveted | with faith | unté | your flésh.’’ Dyce (ed. iii) : 
The ‘so’ in this line was evidently repeated by mistake from the ‘so’ just above it, in 
the preceding line but one. [Wherefore Dyce returned, as he so often does in his last 
Edition, to the reading of Pope. To me, as good a way as either Dyce’s or Abbott’s, 
is to read 7vzve¢t almost, if not quite, as a monosyllable. When vw comes between two 
vowels, its presence, as a general rule, was, I think, merely suggested, sometimes so 
faintly as to be practically non-existent. This explains (I speak with diffidence) the 
reason why the old printers, in such cases, always used w for v. See ‘hauing,’ ITI, ii, 
131, and ‘ pouerty,’ IV, i, 285.—ED. ] 

194. too vnkinde a] ABBOTT, § 462: Syllables ending in vowels are frequently 
elided before vowels in reading, though not in writing. Thus: ‘ You give | your wife 
| 400 unkind | a cause | of grief.’ [It is doubtful to me if this elision is permissible 
here, where ‘too’ is an emphatic word. WALKER’S suggestion is preferable, and was 
adopted by Dyce. In Crit. i, 87, the former says, ‘De/e “a” ; read too znkind cause;’ 
as e. g., Lear, III, iv, ‘—nothing could have subdued nature To such a lowness, but © 

his ankind daughters.’—ED. ] 

195. And ’twere] See IV, i, 465. 

196. I were best] See I], viii, 36. 


262 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE (ACT V, Sc. i. 


And neyther man nor mafter would take ought 202 
But the two Rings. 
Por. What Ring gaue you my Lord? , 
Not that I hope which you receiu’d of me. 205 
Baff. If 1 could adde a lie vnto a fault, 
I would deny it : but you fee my finger 
Hath not the Ring vpon it, it is gone. 
Por. Euen fo voide is your falfe heart of truth. 
By heauen I wil nere come in your bed 21u 
Vntil I fee the Ring. . ‘ 
Ner. Nor I in yours, til I againe fee mine. 
Baff. Sweet Portia, 
If you did know to whom I gaue the Ring, 
If you did know for whom I gaue the Ring, 215 
And would conceiue for what I gaue the Ring, 
And how vnwillingly I left the Ring, 
When nought would be accepted but the Ring, 
You would abate the ftrength of your difpleafure ? 
Por. Ifyou had knowne the vertue of the Ring, 220 
Or halfe her worthineffe that gaue the Ring, 
Or your owne honour to containe the Ring, 


You would not then haue parted with the Ring: 223 
202. neyther| F,. neither Qq Ff. 218. nought | naught Q,Q,, Steev. Var, 
209. Euen]| And even Ff, Rowe. Coll. Wh. 

212. Two lines, Qq, Theob. et seq. 221. Or halfe] Of haffe Q.. 


222. containe| retain Pope+, Steev. 


214. HALLIWELL: Jingling lines similar to those in this and the next speech, no 
fewer than nine ending with the same word, are met with in other dramatists. _Com- 
pare Zhe Fayre Mayde of the Exchange, 1607: ‘Ferd. I have a brother, rival in my 
love; I have a brother hates me for my love; I have a brother vows to win my love; 
That brother, too, he hath incenst my love, To gain the beauty of my dearest love; 
What hope remains, then, to enjoy my love? Azthony. I am that brother rival in his 
love; I am that brother hates him for his love; Not his, but mine; and I will have 
that love, Or never live to see him kiss my love’—[p. 36, Ed. Sh. Soc.]. WALKER 
(Crit. iii, 58) adds the following: King John, III, i, 12-15; Rich. L// +I, iii, 292- 
294; Com. Err. I, ii, 89,90. HALEs (quoted by Furnivall, /troduction to Gervinus, 
p. xxxvii, foot-note) cites Hdward [7 ; II, i, where ‘the sun’ ends eight consecutive 
lines. 

222. to containe] COLLIER (ed. ii): This was used in Shakespeare’s time for ¢e 
retain, to which it was altered in the (MS). This was a change of language intro- 
duced between the date when the play was written and when the old corrector inserted 
his eme-dations,—an interval of about half a century. MALONE: See IV, i, 54. 


ACT V, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 263 


What man is there fo much vnreafonable, 
If you had pleas’d to haue defended it 225 
With any termes of Zeale : wanted the modeftie 
To vrge the thing held as a ceremonie: 
Nerriffa teaches me what to beleeue, 
Ile die for’t, but fome Woman had the Ring? 
Baff. No by mine honor Madam, by my foule 230 
No woman had it, but a ciuill Door, 
Which did refufe three thoufand Ducates of me, 
And beg’d the Ring; the which I did denie him, 
And fuffer’d him to go difpleas’d away: 
Euen he that had held vp the verie life 235 
Of my deere friend. What fhould I fay fweete Lady ? 
I was infore’d to fend it after him, 
I was befet with fhame and curtefie, 
My honor would not let ingratitude 


So much befmeare it. Pardon me good Lady, 240 
226. Zeale :] zeale, Q.. 234. difpleas'd away] away difpiea/d 
227. ceremonie.| ceremony ? Q,. ve 
230. mine honor| my honor Qa, Cap. 235. had held up] did uphold Q,, Pope 

Mal. Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. +, Cam, Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. 

232. Which] Who Pope+, Steev.’85. 237. infore’d | enforc'd Q,. 


224. much] See ABBOTT, § 51, for examples of ‘much’ ‘used as an ordinary adjec- 
tive, like the Scotch mickie.’ 

225. had pleas’d to have defended] AxsorTrT, § 360: It is now commonly as- 
serted that such expressions as ‘I hoped ¢o have seen him yesterday’ are ungrammat- 
ical. But in the Elizabethan, as in Early English authors, after verbs of hoping, in- 
tending, or verbs signifying that something ought to have been done, but was not, the 
Complete Present Infinitive is used. We still retain this idiom in the expression, ‘I 
would (i. e. wished to) have done it.’ ‘I ought (i.e. was bound) to have done it.’ 

226. wanted] CLARENDON: That is, as to have wanted. This lax construction is 
due to the intervening parenthesis. The following words are grammatically faulty, 
though the general sense is clear. What man would have been so unreasonably want- 
ing in modesty as to urge you to give up the thing you held as a sacred emblem? 

226. modestie] ALLEN: That is, moderation. Cf. II, ii, 183. 

227. ceremonie] ScuMIpT (Zex.) finds three significations in which this word is 
used: First, external form, outward rite; secondly, any thing or observance held 
sacred [as here]; and thirdly, ritual and solemn performance of a sacred act. CLAR- 
ENDON: In Hakluyt’s Voyages, quoted by Richardson, a crucifix is called a ceremony 

231. ciuill Doctor] A Doctor of Civil Law. 

235. he] CLARENDON: ‘He’ is used, not Azm, as if the words ‘the which... 
away’ were rmerely parenthetical. 

237. ALLEN: It indicates the gentleman and the soldier in Bassanio, that he does 
not expose Anthonio as the one that ‘enforced’ him to give the ring. 


264 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [Avy v, SC. i 


And by thefe bleffed Candles of the night, 241 
Had you bene there, I thinke you would haue beg’d 
The Ring of me, to giue the worthie Doctor ? 
Por. Let not that Doétor ere come neere my houfe,» 
Since he hath got the iewell that I loued, 245 
And that which you did fweare to keepe for me, 
I will become as liberall as you, 
Ile not deny him any thing I haue, 
No, not my body, nor my husbands bed: 
Know him I fhall, I am well fure of it. 250 
Lie not a night from home. Watch me like ape: 
If you doe not, if I be left alone, 
Now by mine honour which is yet mine owne, 
Ile haue the Doétor for my bedfellow. 
Nerrifa. And I his Clarke: therefore be well aduis’d 255 
How you doe leaue me to mine owne prote¢tion. 
Gra. Well, doe you fo : let not me take him then, 
For if I doe, ile mar the yong Clarks pen. 
Ant. Iam th’vnhappy fubieét of thefe quarrels. 
Por. Sir, grieue not you, 260 
You are welcome notwithftanding. 
Baf. Portia, forgiue me this enforced wrong, 
And in the hearing of thefe manie friends 


I fweare to thee, euen by thine owne faire eyes 264 
241. And] Ff, Rowe+, Wh.1. for 254. the] Ff, Rowe, Wh.i. shat Qq 

Qg et cet. et cet. 
242. thinke| think, Theob. et seq. (ex- my | mine Q.. 

cept Han. Wh, Cam. Glo. Cla. Rife). 257. him] him, Coll. Dyce, Cam. Glo. 
243. the) thee FF. [Non recte. ¢hez ad tempus refert, et 258 
251. Argos] Q,Q0,F,, Rowe. Argus in sens. obsc. explicat.—ED.] 

Be et cet. 260, 261. One line, Qq, Pope et seq. 
253. mine owne| my own Pope+t, 261. You are] You're Dyce iii, Huds. 

Steev. Mal. Knt. 264. euen] ev’ Pope+. 


241. Candles] MALONE: The same expression is to be found in the Sommets, in 
Macbeth, and in Rom. & Jul. 

242, I thinke] Theobald inserted an unhappy comma after ‘think,’ which has 
retained its place in the majority of Editions to the present day. White was the first 
to reject it and restore the original. ‘The difference,’ says WHITE (ed. i), ‘ though 
slight in itself, is material in point of style; for, according to the Folio, “think”? has 
for its subject all the sentence that follows it; but in the text usually given, “I think ” 
is interjectional, and “ you would have begged,” &c., is the predication.’ TI also prefer 
‘And’ at the beginning of line 241, to For of the Qq.—En. 


AcTv,Sc.i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 265 


Wherein I fee my felfe. 265 
Por. Marke you but that? 
In both my eyes he doubly fees himfelfe : 
In each eye one, fweare by your double felfe, 
And there’s an oath of credit. 
Baf. Nay, but heare me. 270 
Pardon this fault, and by my foule I fweare 
I neuer more will breake an oath with thee. 
Anth. I once did lend my bodie for thy wealth, 
Which but for him that had your husbands ring 
Had quite mifcarried. I dare be bound againe, 275 
My foule vpon the forfeit, that your Lord 
Will neuer more breake faith aduifedlie. 
Por. Then you fhall be his furetie : giue him this, 
And bid him keepe it better then the other. 
Ant. Heere Lord Baffanio, fwear to keep this ring. 280 
Baf. By heauen it is the fame I gaue the Doétor. 
Por. Thad it of him : pardon Bafanio, 
For by this ring the Doétor lay with me. 


Wer. And pardon me my gentle Gratano, 284 
265. my felfe.| myself— Rowe et seq. 274. [To Por. Rowe et seq. 
267. my] mine F£Q,, Pope+. husbands ring| husband Ring 
273. [To Bass. Rowe. (Oh 
thy] Ff, Rowe. zs Qq et cet. 282. pardon] Ff. pardon me Qq et 
wealth| weal Theob. Warb. cet. 


268. double] MALONE: Used in a bad sense for—full of duplicity. 

273. thy] WHITE (ed. i): ‘Thy’ is plainly a corruption. It is possible that it is 
a misprint for ¢he or that, which had been underlined, and that Shakespeare meant 
Anthonio to say that he lent his body for that happiness (i. e. of both Bassanio and 
Portia), which else would have miscarried. [This is a plausible suggestion; but I 
doubt if ‘which’ refers to ‘wealth.’ Does it not refer to the lending, to the pledge, 
of which Antonio’s dody was the forfeit? The happiness of Portia and Bassanio 
would not have been utterly and forever blasted by Anthonio’s death. It was not the 
wealth or happiness that might have miscarried, but the risk which Anthonio himself 
personally, ran for the sake of Bassanio.—ED.] 

273. wealth] THEOBALD: I have ventured, against the Authority of the Copies, to 
substitute zwea/ here; i. e. for his welfare, benefit. ‘Wealth’ has a more confined sig- 
nification. Though I must own that qwea/ and ‘wealth,’ in our author’s time, must be 
in some measure synonymous; as they are now in the words Common-weal and Com- 
monwealth. JOHNSON: ‘For his wealth’ is—for his advantage ; to obtain his happiness. 
‘Wealth’ was, at that time, the term opposite to adversity or calamity. STEEVENS: 
So in The Litany ; ‘In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our wealth.’ 

276. My soule] ALLEN: A dearer pledge than ‘my body.’ 


266 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT v, Sc. i 


For that fame {crubbed boy the Doétors Clarke 285 
In liew of this, laft night did lye with me. 
Gra. Why this is like the mending of high waies 
In Sommer, where the waies are faire enough : 
What, are we Cuckolds ere we haue deferu’d it. 
Por. Speake not fo groffely, you are all amaz’d ; 290 
Heere is a letter, reade it at your leyfure, 
It comes from Padua from Bellario, 
There you fhall finde that Portia was the Doétor, 
Nerriffathere her Clarke. Lorenzo heere 
Shall witneffe I fet forth as foone as you, ~ 205 
And but eu’n now return’d: I haue not yet 
Entred my houfe. Axthonio you are welcome, 
And I haue better newes in ftore for you 


Then you expect : vnfeale this letter foone, 299 

286. Hew] QF. “eu Q,. 296. but eu'n| euen but Qq, Pope+, 

this] thee Wh. i. Coll. Dyce, Wh. Cam. Glo. Cla. dzzt even 

288. where| when Coll. ii, iii (MS), Rowe, Cap. Steev. Mal. Sing. Ktly. 
Sing. Ktly, Dyce iii, Huds. 299. Then] than Q.,. 


286. In... this] White, accepting ‘in lieu’ in its present use, changed ‘this’ to 
thee. Halliwell considers the alteration ‘plausible,’ and also attributes the modern 
meaning to ‘in lieu.? But Dyce sets them both right by answering the former’s ques- 
tion: ‘What meaning has “in lieu of ¢4zs’’ here’? as follows: ‘It means “in consid- 
eration of this (ring).’”’ Compare, earlier in this play, IV, i, 430, “in lieu (i. e. in con- 
sideration) whereof,” &c.; and 7he Tempest, I, ii: ‘‘ Which was, that he, in lieu 0’ (i.e. 
in consideration of ) the premises,—Of homage,” &c.’ And Schmidt (Zex.s, v.) adds 
four or five more examples. White returned to the original text in his Second Edition. 
—ED. 

288. where] CAPELL (ii, 73): When may appear a properer term in some eyes to 
follow ‘summer’ than ‘where ;’ but ‘where’ heightens the comparison; for, with that, 
this absurd summer-mending is said, too, to be of ‘ways’ that did not want it at any 
time. [As White says, this change to when is ‘very plausible, but not necessary.” The 
aptness of Gratiano’s simile is a little obscure. I suppose he means that his wife aimed 
at the purification of his character before it was stained.—EpD. 

296. eu’n now] See III, ii, 176. It is not impossible, for grammatical reasons, that 
this line should be punctuated : ¢ And, but e’en now return’d, I have not yet,’ &c.—Ep. 

298. Eccirs: There is not, perhaps, to be found in the dramatic writings of any poet 
a more lame, awkard [szc], and inartificial expedient for suddenly bringing on a gen- 
eral satisfaction in the catastrophe, than that which is here had recourse to. How Por- 
tia should possess the means of acquiring intelligence respecting this happy reverse of 
Anthonio’s fortune earlier than himself, who is just arrived from the very same place, 
is a matter wonderful to be conceived, and that she should desire to conceal from the 


knowledge of the company, a circumstance, in its nature so singular and curious, is 
little less extraordinary. 


ACT V, SC. i.] THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 267 


There you fhall finde three of your Argofies 300 
Are richly come to harbour fo dainlie. 
You fhall not know by what ftrange accident 
I chanced on this letter. 
Antho. Yam dumbe. 
Baff, Were you the Doétor, and I knew you not? 305 
Gra, Were you the Clark that is to make me cuckold. 
Ner. I,but the Clark that neuer meanes to doe it, 
Vnleffe he liue vntill he be a man. 
Baff. (Sweet Doétor) you thall be my bedfellow, 
When I am abfent, then lie with my wife. 310 
An, (Sweet Ladie) you haue giuen me life & liuing; 
For heere I reade for certaine that my fhips 
Are fafelie come to Rode. 
Por. How now Lorenzo? 
_ My Clarke hath fome good comforts to for you. 315 
Ner. I,and Ile giue them him without a fee. 
There doe I giue to you and /efica 
From the rich Iewe, a fpeciall deed of gift 
After his death, of all he dies poffeff’d of. 
Loren. Faire Ladies you drop Manna in the way 320 
Of ftarued people. 
Por. It is almoft morning, 
And yet I am fure you are not fatisfied 
Of thefe euents at full. Let vs goe in, 


And charge vs there vpon intergatories, 325 
301. /odainlie] suddenly Rowe. 324. Let vs] Let’s Q.. 
313. Rode] Rodes F,, Rhodes FF, 325. upon] on Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Rowe. road Pope et seq. intergatories| F,Q., Mal. Steev. 
BIG eicOOr 700 Oe. Hal. intergotories Q,Q,. interrogatories 
319. of.] off. Q,. FF, Rowe, Han. Johns. interrgatories 


323. Z am] Ime Q,. J’m Pope+, Theob. Warb. inter gatories Cap. et cet. 
Dyce iii. 

301. richly] See line 46 of this scene. 

311. liuing] STauNToN: Riches, resources. [See III, ii, 163.] 

320. Manna] Warburton commended the use of this word, as peculiarly appro- 
priate, by Jessica. The unlucky slip did not escape Edwards (Canons of Criticism, 
p. 212), and he did not waste the chance. 

324. Of] See ‘I am provided of a Torch-bearer,’ II, iv, 25; eee § 171. 

324. at full] ALeNn: Either, first, equivalent to ‘fully satisfied ;’ or, secondly, a 
confusio duarum locutionum : ‘You are not satisfied [but would like to know of these 
events] at full, (I lean to tue latter.) 


268 THE MERCHANT OF VENICE [ACT V, SC. 1. 


And we will anfwer all things faithfully. 326 
Gra. Let it be fo, the firft intergatory 
That my Nerriffa fhall be fworne on, is, 
Whether till the next night fhe had rather ftay, 
Or goe to bed, now being two houres to day, 330 
But were the day come, I fhould wifh it darke, 
Till I were couching with the Doétors Clarke. 
Well, while I liue, Ile feare no other thing 
So fore, as keeping fafe Merriffas ring. 
Exeunt. 335 


FINIS. 


327. intergatory|] F,Q,, Mal. Steev. Q,Q,, Theob. et seq. 


Hal. intergotory Q,Q,. interrogotory 332. Till] That Q,, Cap. Steev. Mal. 
F,F,, Rowe, Han. Johns. inter gatory Sing. Dyce, Sta. Cam, Glo, Ktly, Wh. ii. 
Theob. Warb. zzter'gatory Cap. et cet. Doctors| Om. Q,. 

330. bed, now] bed now Q,. bed now, 334. In sens. obsc, 


325. intergatories] CAMPBELL (p. 62): In the Court of Queen’s Bench, when a 
complaint is made against a person for a ‘contempt,’ the practice is that before sentence 
is finally pronounced he is sent into the Crown Office, and being there ‘charged upon 
interrogatories,’ he is made to swear that he will ‘answer all things faithfully.’ 

327. intergatory] In Praetorius’s Facsimile of Q, taken from the Duke of Devon- 
shire’s copy, this word appears as zz¢ergory. Another instance, to be added to IV, i, 
78, 79, in support of the assumption that this defective copy is an early impression.— 
ED. 

329. Whether] Contracted to whe’r. See WALKER, Vers., p. 103; or ABBOTT, 
§ 466. 

334. Mrs JAMESON (i, 93): Shylock and his machinations being dismissed from 
our thoughts, and the rest of the dramatis persone assembled together at Belmont, all 
our interest and all our attention are riveted on Portia, and the conclusion leaves 
the most delightful impression on the fancy. The playful equivoque of the rings, the 
sportive trick she puts on her husband, and her thorough enjoyment of the jest, which 
she checks just as it is proceeding beyond the bounds of propriety, show how little she 
was displeased by the sacrifice of her gift, and all are consistent with her bright and 
joyous spirit. In conclusion, when Portia invites her company to enter her palace to 
refresh themselves after their travels, and talk over ‘these events at full,’ the imagi- 
nation, unwilling to lose sight of the brilliant group, follows them in gay procession 
from the lovely moonlit garden to marble halls and princely revels, to splendour and 
festive mirth, to love and happiness ! 


~ al ’ 


APPENDIX 


< < f 


= a 
, ' tS 
P 
i 
’ = ; 
; << 
a 
- 
- — 
i y FE 
F i! 
- 3 
; 
- 


3? 


eh ee ie 


APPENDIX 


erga des, Xe a 


THE TEXT of The Merchant of Venice is derived from two Quartos and the Furst 
Folio. 

The earliest mention of the Play in the Stationers’ Registers occurs in the following 
entry (Arber’s 7ranscrift, vol. iii, p. 122) : 


eri? Julit [1598, Anno 4o™mo 
Regine Elizabeth] 

James Robertes Entred for his copie vnder the handes of bothe the wardens, a 
booke of the Marchaunt of Venyce or otherwise called the Jewe 
of Venyce. PROUIDED that yt bee not prynted by the said James 
Robertes or anye other whatsoeuer without lycence first had from 
the Right honorable the lord Chamberlen . . .. . vjd 


The Zroviso in this entry is noteworthy. The company of actors to which Shake- 
speare belonged was known as ‘the Lord Chamberlain’s Servants.’ This ‘booke,’ 
then, which Robertes entered, must have been a play which was acted by this company ; 
only on this ground could the Lord Chamberlain have been interested in granting or 
withholding his license. There was no patent for the exclusive printing of ‘plaie- 
bookes,’ and it could have been only as the protector of ‘his servants’’ interests that 
the Lord Chamberlain could withhold the license. It may be that this caution on the 
part of the Wardens of the Stationers’ Company is a tribute to the popularity of the 
play, since even the Wardens knew to what Company it belonged, or it may be that 
no play was entered without some kind of proof shown that it was done under author- 
ity; although this, I think, is doubtful. Some of the ‘stolne and surreptitious copies’ 
of which Heminge and Condell complained, appear to have been issued without any 
authority. 

How James Robertes obtained this book, which aroused the suspicions of the War- 
dens, must remain a mystery. ‘ How he caught it, found it, or came by it, or whereof 
it was born, we are yet to learn.’ Possibly through some friendly actor, or possibly 
James Robertes’s reputation, in the estimation of the Wardens, was none of the fairest. 
Perhaps the cloud of a fine which had been imposed on him still hung over him. He 
was one of the older Printers and Stationers of the city, and ought to have been respect- 
able. Ten years before this he had influence enough at Court to obtain from the Queen 
a patent for the exclusive printing of ‘ Almanackes and Pronostycacyons,’ a remunerative 
branch of the trade, if we may judge by the size of the annual editions. And four years 
before, he had purchased Charlwood’s estate in upwards of forty works, and he had been 
bold enough to poach upon even the Queen’s Printer’s manor and issue ‘ Catechismes,’ 
but for this offence he had been fined by the Wardens of the Stationers’ Company 


After this he seems to have turned his attention to ‘plaie-bookes;’ for the next time 
27% 


272 APPENDIX 


that his name appears in the Stationers’ Registers, as far as I can discover, after the 
note of this fine, is in the foregoing entry of Zhe Merchant of Venice, with its cau- 
tionary proviso. Two years later he entered two other pieces, which were played by the 
same Company; one was ‘A morall of Clothe breches and veluet hose, and the other, 
‘The Allarum of London,’ and in both cases he was enjoined from printing ‘ without 
further and better Aucthoritie.” Wherefore, in view of all this, it looks much as though 
the solution of the mystery of the proviso in the foregoing entry of the Merchant of 
Venice, lies in mistrust of Robertes and of his lawful ownership. 

The ‘lycence from the Right honorable the lord Chamberlen’ Robertes apparently 
failed for a while to obtain. That he did eventually obtain it is to be presumed from 
the publication of the book two years later; although when it appeared there was no 
reference on the title-page to the Lord Chamberlain’s servants or to any others, an 
omission which occurs in only about half a dozen of all the Shakespearian Quartos, 
and which Robertes himself was careful to supply on the title-page of his Quarto of the 
Midsummer Night’s Dream. 

When Robertes at last published his Quarto, it had the following title-page: THE | 
EXCELLENT | Hiftory of the Mer- | chant of Venice. | With the extreme cruelty 
of Shylocke | the Iew towards the faide Merchant, in cut- | img a 2ujt pound of his 
fiefh. And the obtaining | of Portia, by the choyfe of | three Caskets. | Written by 
W. SHAKESPEARE. | (Vignette) | Printed by /. Roberts, 1600. | 

This has been in recent times, by common consent, called THE FIRST QUARTO, 

If we turn again to the Stationers’ Registers, we find (vol. iii, p. 175, ed. Arber) the 
following entry : 

38 octobris [1600, 42 Regine] 
Thomas haies Entred for his copie under the handes of the Wardens and by Con- 
sent of master Robertes. A booke called che booke of the merchant 
PUGH a BG} Soe 6 Oe 6 Oo Bo 6 


An additional reason for the supposition that Robertes had at last obtained due 
authority from the Lord Chamberlain, is that the ‘Consent of master Robertes’ is 
deemed requisite for the validity of this entry. Without that authority Robertes’s prop- 
erty in the book, based merely on his previous entry, would have been void, and the 
Wardens would have disregarded his claim in favour of Heyes, who evidently pro- 
duced the permission of the Lord Chamberlain, since no allusion is made to the need 
of it. Heyes was a young ‘master Stacioner,’ and as this was only the second book 
he had ever entered, it is natural to suppose that he would select not only a popular 
book, but one in which his title would be secure as far as registering could make it 

The book shortly appeared with the following title-page: The moft excellent | 
Hiftorie of the Merchant | of Venice. | VVith the extreame crueltie of Shylocke the 
fewe | towards the fayd Merchant, in cutting a iuft pound | of his flefh: and the 
obtayning of Portia | by the choyfe of three | chefts. | As ct hath beene diuers times 
acted by the Lord | Chamberlaine his Seruants. | Written by William Shakefpeare. 
(Vignette) | AT Lonpon, | Printed by 7. &. for Thomas Heyes, | and are to be fold 
in Paules Church-yard, at the | figne of the Greene Dragon. | 1600. | 

This is THE SECOND QUARTO. 

It is to be noted that reference is made to the company of actors; and also that it is 
printed by I. R., who has been generally assumed to be James Robertes, but Halliwell 
thinks that this ‘supposition has been adopted without close examination,’ and adds 
that ‘some of the probabilities are in favour of another attribution of those initials, the 
‘types used in the two Editions belonging, at all events in part, to different fonts; and 


ID EGR IIIA E 273 


‘one positive coincidence only being to be traced in the materials employed, viz. a 
device, that might possibly have been obtained independently of the type.’ 

The difficulty that meets us, in supposing that ‘I. R.’ may stand for some other name 
than James Robertes, is that there was no other printer in London at that time, as far 
as I can find from Arber’s lists, whose name these initials would represent. James 
Robertes was the only ‘I. R.’ then, and for some years afterwards. Moreover, as we 
learn from other entries in the Registers, it was not unusual for a printer who assigned 
his claim, to stipulate that he should have the printing of the book. 

Furthermore, the difference between the fonts of type is by no means conclusive that 
both books were not printed by the same Master Printer. As Arber shows (vol. ii, p. 
22), it was customary for Master Printers to give out work to Journeymen Compositors, 
who, being for the most part householders, set up the copy at their own homes. Cer- 
tainly we may assume that this would be done in cases where there was need of haste; 
and I think it most likely that that need existed here. Haste assuredly goes far to 
explain the carelessness with which this Heyes Quarto was set up and printed. Frag 
mentary lines, which are utterly incomprehensible, such as ‘the Ewe bleake for the 
Lambe,’ would not have been allowed to stand by any proof-reader or pressman unless 
haste could have been pleaded in excuse. 

No second impression of this Quarto did Thomas Heyes issue, and on the 8th of 
July, 1619, his son, Laurence Hayes, entered it again on the Register, in order to 
revive the claim in a book which had been his father’s. Laurence Hayes did not, how- 
ever, print it for many years, not until 1637. This is THE THIRD QuaRTO, and has 
no intrinsic value. It is merely a careless reprint of a careless book, to which we are 
indebted for, I think, only one real emendation, and that is merely a change in spelling 
on the part of the compositor; it is ‘In measure veime thy joy,’ III, ii, 118, which Sin- 
ger, Collier, and the Cambridge Editors prefer to ‘raine’ of the Second Quarto. The 
only other contribution which this Third Quarto makes is in the list of ‘ The Actors’ 
Names,’ which here appeared for the first time. 

In 1652 this play was issued for a FOURTH time as a Quarto, but the late Mr Bolton 
Corney (Votes and Queries, 2d Series, vol. x, p. 21) asserted, from an examination of 
his own copy, that this is merely the Third Quarto with a new title-page inserted. 

It was reserved to Professor HALES to detect the one gleam of interest which ema- 
nates from this Fourth Quarto. In a communication to 7he Atheneum, 15 December, 
1877, and reprinted in his Votes and Essays, p. 215 (a book which should be in the 
hands of every Shakespeare student), Prof. Hales calls attention to the date of this 
Qto, 1652. ‘It may have been,’ he says, ‘a mere coincidence,—it is undoubtedly a 
‘fact worth remarking,—that just at the time of this re-issue the Jews were beginning 
‘to ask for re-admission into England, and the consideration of their request to be seri- 
‘ously entertained. It was not till October, 1655, that Manasseh Ben Israel came over 
‘in person; not till the following December that the celebrated discussion at Whitehall 
‘took place; but for some years previously, that earnest and able patriot had been urging 
‘the claims of his people upon English consideration. He had petitioned “ Barebone’s 
‘ Parliament,”’ and still earlier the Long Parliament. .... And the cause he advocated 
‘was not without friends moved by motives far different from his. During the Dutch 
‘war, which began in May, 1652, both Blake and Monk recommended the re-admis- 
‘sion of the Jews “as a means of damaging the commerce of Holland, and Cromwell 
‘appeared favourable to it.” Thus, just about the time of the republication of the 

famous portrait of Shylock, the question of the return of his race was “in the air,”— 
was a kindling question if not a burning one..... The idea of a Jewish immigration 
18 


274 APPENDIX 


‘ was bitterly resented. The clergy, the lawyers, the populace were all at one on the 
*subject..... The old clamour against the Jewerie was revived, especially in the city, 
‘ where the merchants were jealous of the wealth of the Hebrews..... Amongst the 
‘ State Papers of the Restoration is a “remonstrance addressed to the King concerning 
« «the English Jews, showing the mischiefs accomplished by them... . notwithstanding 
‘their... . banishment by Edward the First at the desire of the whole Kingdom; yet 
« «they have since returned, renewed their usurious and fraudulent practices, and flourish 
«so much, that they endeavored to buy St Paul’s for a synagogue in the late usurper’s 
‘“time.” .... It must be allowed that the re-exhibition of Shylock in 1652 could 
‘scarcely have tended to soften this general disposition. Whether William Leake had 
‘any sinister intentions when he had that Qto reprinted there would seem no means 
‘of knowing..... There may or may not have been animus in the man; but he cer- 
‘tainly did the Jews no good turn when at such a time he reissued the Merchant of 
‘ Venice. For by “the general” little heed is paid to the profound skill and the Catho 
‘lic humanity with which the Jew is treated in that play; .. . . it would see in Shylock 
‘only an atrocious monster, infamous for its greed, execrable for its spite. And such a 
‘ figure, seen at such a time, could scarcely have promoted the cause of the outcasts of 
* Israel.’ 

This ends the series of Quartos, which, although four in number, furnish, in reality, 
but two separate texts, the First, Robertes’s, and the Second, Heyes’s. 

For a third text we turn to THE FoLio of 1623, and, if we hope for novelty, are dis- 
appointed. The text there given is not an independent one, but is a reprint of Heyes’s 
Quarto, and the inferior Quarto at that. 

In their address ‘To the great Variety of Readers,’ Heminge and Condell lead us 
to expect that in the First Folio we shall find Shakespeare’s own text, direct from his 
manuscript, which had ‘scarse a blot;’ and yet, here in this play, we know (as any 
one can prove for himself by the Textual Notes of this Edition) that they have repro- 
duced the printed page of the Second Quarto. 

The explanation is not difficult if we do not hold Heminge and Condell to the very 
strictest account, but grant them a certain latitude of expression. A printed copy of a 
play, which had been used at the theatre for twenty years, and had changes of the text 
here and there, and Stage-directions added, might perhaps pass, in the opinion of Shake- 
speare’s fellow-actors, as quite adequately making good their assertion. Moreover, it 
may well have been then the custom, as it is now, for compositors to charge less for 
setting up from printed copy than from MS. Why they selected the poorer Quarto we 
cannot possibly know for certain,—we can surmise that it was because Thomas Heyes 
announced on his title-page that he had followed the acting of the Lord Chamberlain’s 
Servants. 

The number of places where the Folio, in varying from the Second Quarto, shows 
any genuine revision of the text, is not large. The most noticeable is where ‘the 
Scottish lord’ of Queen Elizabeth’s time is changed ‘to ofher lord’ of King James’s 
(see notes on I, ii, 73); and where, out of deference to 3 Jac. I, c. 21, the name of 
‘God’ is stricken out and the phrase varied, as in I, ii, 106, and V, i, 176. Where, 
in the Quartos, Shylock tells Gratiano (IV, i, 150) to repair his wit or it will fall to 
‘ cureless ruin,’ the change of the Folio to ‘exd/ess ruin’ is, perhaps, for the better, but 
is scarcely likely to have been authorized by Shakespeare. The most noticeable dis- 
tinction, however, between the Quartos and the Folio, and which stamps the latter as a 
Playhouse-copy, is in the Stage-directions throughout the play in reference to Music 
In the Folio a flourish of Cornets announces the arrival, each time that he appears, and 


I0SGE TIDE 275 


the departure, of the Prince of Morocco, and a flourish of Cornets heralds the Prince 
of Arragon. At all these entrances and exits the Quartos are silent. Whilst Bassanio 
comments on the Caskets, both Quartos and Folios have the same Stage-direction, but 
the Folio adds, in the imperative mood of a genuine Stage-copy, ‘Here musicke.’ Al- 
though these facts show, I think, conclusively that the First Folio is printed from a 
Stage-copy, they do not give any clew in discovering why its Editors preferred the Sec- 
ond Quarto as a text to print from. But the Stage-directions will, I think, again help 
us here. In the Fifth Act, where Diana has to be waked with a hymn, the Stage- 
direction in the First Quarto is ‘ Musicke playes;’ in the Second Quarto and First 
Folio it is ‘ Play musick,’ unquestionably the direction of a Stage-copy. Again, when 
Bassanio, after the choice of the Caskets, receives Anthonio’s letter from Salerio, the 
Stage-direction (III, ii, 249) in the First Quarto is, ‘He opens the Letter,’ which is 
not the command or direction of a Stage-copy; nor is ‘Opens the Letter’ of the Folio; 
but in the Second Quarto it is a command to the actor—‘ Open the letter.’ 

Thus, then, in none of these instances do the Stage-directions indicate that the First 
Quarto was a Stage-copy; whereas, in two of them, they show that the Second Quarto 
was a Stage-copy, and hence, enable us to surmise, with some faint probability, the 
reason why Heyes’s, and not Robertes’s, Quarto, superior though the latter be in punc- 
tuation, in spelling, and in intelligent supervision, was selected by Heminge and Con- 
dell to be used in printing the Folio. Not that there are no indications in Robertes’s 
Quarto that it was transcribed from a Stage-copy; but the indications we find in it are 
common to it and to Heyes’s Quarto. Both Quartos and the Folio, in the insertion of 
£xit, anticipate by a line or two the actual Zxz¢ of the actor, as in II, ii, 166; but it 
is in the Stage-directions over and above these, that we can, I think, detect a longer 
use as a Stage-copy of the original of Heyes’s Quarto. 

I have spoken of the First Quarto, Robertes’s, as better than the Second Quarto, 
Heyes’s. The reasons therefor are to be found in the notes on the various passages as 
they occur in the text; they can be weighed to much better advantage there than if 
tabulated here. It is by no means to be supposed that Robertes’s is uniformly better 
than Heyes’s; there are many instances where it is inferior, much inferior, but these 
instances are counterbalanced, I think, by the number and character of the passages 
where it is superior. Roughly speaking, there are a dozen instances of inferiority to 
more than double that number of superiority; always thought, that I do not refer to 
mere typographical errors, though even on that score the First Quarto is far better com- 
posed than the Second Quarto. 

In thus rating the First Quarto above the Second Quarto, I am countenanced by 
CoLuier, DELIUS, and the CAMBRIDGE EpiTors. The first says: ‘The Edition of 
© Robertes’s is, on the whole, to be preferred to that of Heyes’s;’ the last: ‘Q, seems 
“to have been printed by a more accurate printer, or “overseen” by a more accurate 
‘ corrector than Q,, and therefore, ceteris paribus, we have preferred the authority of 

Q,” GRANT WHITE believes that Robertes’s Quarto was a ‘stolne and surreptitious’ 
copy, and, therefore, on moral grounds, prefers Heyes’s Quarto, which received the 
sanction of the Folio Editors. On the other hand, FLEAY and FuRNIVALL prefer the 
Second Quarto. 

In the following list are the lines which I have noted during my collation as giving 
indications more or less pronounced of the superiority of Q,, Robertes, over Q,, Heyes. 
To many of them I have called attention in the Commentary; for the rest reference 
must be had to the Textual Notes. It is not unlikely that to another student, in many 
of these instances, the superiority of one reading over another may seem not merely 


276 APPENDIX 


fanciful, but even wholly wanting, and second thoughts might show the same to me; 
but, nevertheless, I add the list for the benefit of any one who has time to waste after 
all the duties of life in ‘teaching the orphan boy to read, and the orphan girl to sew’ 
have been fulfilled. so 


Lines containing words or punctuation, wherein Q, is better than Q,- 

I, ii, 31, 32; I, iii, 65, 66; II, i, 32, ‘out-stare’; II, i, 35, he vs a; I, i, 49, to us 
unto; II, ii, 19; Il, ii, 130, is 3 Il, ii, 160%) Il, n, 1725 111, 5 25. as) verses 
III, i, 102, in one night; III, ii, 65 (doubtful) ; III, ii, 107, ‘then’ of Q, superfluous ; 
ILI, ii, 211, roof; ITI, iv, 23, misery vs cruelty; III, iv, 66, apparreld vs accoutered , 
III, v, 66, far’st vs cher’st ; III, v, 73, ‘then’ for ‘it’; IV, i, 79; IV, 1 O2sEViets SEs 


Lines containing words or punctuation, wherein Q, ts inferior to Q,- 
I, ii, 41; II, i, 8; II, vi, 75 (very bad); II, ix, 65; III, i, 38, 39; III, i, 121; HI, u, 
64, 65; III, ii, 88; III, ii, 118, range vs raine; IV, i, 454. 


In both lists some errors are noted which are purely typographical, and the lists make 
no sort of pretence to completeness. 


To sum up—we have, theoretically, three texts, the two Quartos and the Folio; but 
the Folio followed Q,; this leaves but two texts. The Quartos, though they were not 
set up from the same copy, are yet almost identical; it was only through a compositor’s 
fault that a line was omitted in the First Quarto. Therefore, practically, there is but 
one text. How near this text came to Shakespeare’s hand it is impossible to say. It 
is highly improbable that Robertes printed either his own or Heyes’s Quarto direct 
from Shakespeare’s manuscript; at best it could have been but a transcript from a 
Stage-copy, and had he used the same transcript for Heyes that he used for himself, 
there would have been a much closer resemblance than is observable, even making all 
allowances for careless journeyman-printing and for haste. I think it therefore likely 
that there were two transcripts, and that the transcriber of the copy for the Second 
Quarto was not only a more illiterate man, but also one with certain peculiarities of 
pronunciation or spelling, such as the persistent use of ax for a, as in graunt, aun- 
swere, glauncing, &c., and in the antiquated ze for y. This peculiarity was undoubt- 
edly in the copy, and was not due to the compositor, who would not be likely to set up 
two types where one alone was called for. 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 277 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 


SINCE it is impossible to know, with unquestionable certainty, the year in which this 
flay was written, it is pleasing to reflect that no single line of it depends on this know- 
ledge for its wisdom or its wit. Nevertheless, great stress is laid on the importance of 
the investigation, and much learning and time has been expended in its pursuit, It is 
hot easy, I think, to take interest in knowledge thus barren, for, granting that our calcu- 
lations could be made with such nicety as that we could discover even the month and 
the day,—what would it avail us? Would it add a charm to Portia’s ‘ quality of mercy,’ 
if we knew that it was written in 1594,—in August,—on the fifth day,—on Wednesday, 
—in the afternoon—at twenty minutes past three o’clock? Would it not be quite as 
profitable to speculate on the quality of the paper on which it was written? Is it any 
tribute to Shakespeare’s genius that we should busy ourselves over what is not even 
the setting of the gem, but no more than the jeweller’s case in which it is sent home? 
It is not by such facts as these that we may hope to find out the man, Shakespeare. 
If he is not to be found in the plays themselves, he is not to be found in the dates 
when he wrote them. And he zs not in the Plays themselves,—if he were, the plays 
would fall to the level of Ben Jonson’s or of Francis Beaumont’s. It is because Shake- 
speare is zof there that his plays are heaven-high above the plays of all other dramatists. 
Shylock is Shylock; he is not Shakespeare behind a mask, dressed up as Shylock. Could 
we at any instant catch a glimpse of Shakespeare himself peeping through the divinity 
that hedges his creations, that instant there will be revealed a flaw in that creation, 
Are there any such flaws? From the highest to the lowest his characters are absolutely 
ume to themselves, from fairest Portia, handing the leaden key to Bassanio, to the 
Carrier, better bitten with fleas than ne’er a king in Christendom; nowhere can we 
detect William Shakespeare. His genius, his intellect, is everywhere, in all, and through 
all, from the first line to the last; but he, the man, the individuality, is nowhere. He 
went out of himself and into his characters, leaving age, and sex, and idiosyncrasies 
behind. Therefore in prefixing this or that date to any of these Plays, what else is it 
but re-arranging that Chronological Table, which, by courtesy, we now call a Life of 
Shakespeare, and which he who knows more about it than all the rest of us styles, 
as modestly as truthfully, merely ‘Outlines’? Of the real Life we know absolutely 
nothing, and I, for one, am genuinely thankful that it is so, and gladly note, as 
the years roll on, that the obscurity which envelops it is as utter and as impenetrable 
as ever. 

At the same time, this subject of the Date of Composition has occupied, and profit 
ably occupied, the time and attention of eminent Shakespeare scholars. It therefore 
behooves the Editor of an edition like the present faithfully and impartially to deal 
with the subject, unmindful of the lack of interest in it which he himself may feel. 


Of positive external proof of the Date of Composition we have as the earliest date 
one solitary fact. 

In the year 1598, when Shakespeare was thirty-four years old, Francis Meres, 
‘ Mafter of Arts of both Vniuerfities,’ published his Pal/adis Tamia. Wits Treasury, 
Being the Second Part of Wits Common wealth, and, in a chapter which he calls ‘A com- 
paratiue difcourfe of our Englifh Poets, with the Greeke, Latine, and Italian Poets,’ six 
times mentions Shakespeare in company with other poets, Sir Philip Sidney, and Mar- 
low, and Spenser, and others by whom ‘the Englifh tongue is mightily enriched, and 
‘ gorgeouslie inuefted in rare ornaments and refplendent habiliments ;’ and then men- 


278 APPENDIX 


tions him thus particularly in a passage which has become threadbare and outworn in 
the memory of every student of Shakespeare, and which only necessity’s sharp pinch 
compels me to repeat here: ‘ As the foule of Zuphorbus was thought to liue in Pythag- 

oras: fo the fweete wittie foule of Odd liues in mellifluous and hony-tongued Shake- 
‘ fpeare, witnefle his Venus and Adonis, his Lucrece, his fugred Sonnets among his pri- 
‘uate friends, &c. ; 

‘As Plautus and Seneca are accounted the beft for Comedy and Tragedy among 

‘the Latines: fo Shake/peare among the English is the moft excellent in both kinds for 
the ftage; for Comedy, witneffe his Gentiemen of Verona, his Errors, his Loue labors 
loft, his Loue labours wonne, his Midfummers night dreame, and his Merchant of 
‘Venice: for Tragedy, his Richard the fecond, Richard the third, Henry the fourth, 
‘ King John, Titus Andronicus, and his Romeo and Luliet. 

‘As Epius Stolo faid, that the Mufes would fpeake with P/autus tongue, if they 
‘would fpeake Latine: fo I fay that the Mufes would fpeake with Shake/peares fine 
‘ filed phrase, if they would fpeake Englith.’ 

To no other English poet does Meres give such high praise, and of no other drama- 
tist does he enumerate so many plays. 

This is, chronologically, the first instance where Shakespeare’s name is connected 
with Zhe Merchant of Venice. It is not the first allusion to the play itself. That 
allusion, as we have seen, is found in Robertes’s entry in the Stationers’ Registers, on 
the 22d of July of this year. Meres’s Wit’s Treasury was not there entered by Cuth- 
bert Burbie until the 7th of September, and the actual appearance of the book from the 
press may have been much later. The date on any title-page may mean, according to 
Arber, any time between the 25th of March of one year, and the 24th of March of the 
next. At any rate, ‘Master’ Francis Meres must have first composed and written his 
enthusiastic praise before the book was printed, and he probably did so early in 1598, 
long before Robertes tried to print his unauthorized copy. 

Meres’s allusion in 1598 may, therefore, stand as our earliest, positive, External Proof, 
bearing on the Date of Composition. It was Bishop Percy (Religues, &c., i, 191) who, 
in 1765, first, I think, called attention to it. 

Just as Malone was finishing his Edition of Shakespeare in 1790, an old folio account- 
book of Philip Henslowe was found at Dulwich College. The founder of Dulwich Col- 
lege was an actor, Edward Alleyn, a name to be held in reverence for all time; not only 
did he found this College, which he called ‘ The College of God’s Gift,’ but he endowed 
besides thirty small almshouses in different London parishes, Alleyn had married the 
step-daughter of Philip Henslowe, and was a partner with his step-father-in-law in the- 
atrical management during the latter’s life, and at his death Alleyn succeeded to most 
of his property. Thus it happened that Henslowe’s papers were found with Alleyn’s 
at Dulwich College. Henslowe was evidently a shrewd, active man of business, and 
although bred to the trade, it is presumed, of a dyer, yet was, at one time, the servant of 
a well-to-do widow, and was doubtless of unusual personal attractions and good quali- 
ties, for the servant married the mistress. In what way Henslowe became concerned in 
theatrical matters is not known; -> appears to have had, in addition, several other busi- 
uess ventures, such as Iron Mines and Pawnbroking, and in 1592 he was the proprietor 
of the Rose Theatre. In this account-book, which Malone found, Henslowe has sét 
down the various sums which he received from the performances of plays. Now, 
although at no time, I believe, did Henslowe have the management of the company 
of actors to which Shakespeare belonged, which was, from first to last, one and the 
same company, and at the time of Robertes’s entry was called the Lord Chamberlain’s 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 279 


Company, yet, for some reason or other, possibly, as Collier suggests, while the Globe 
Theatre was building, the Lord Chamberlain’s men did, for two years, from June, 1594, 
to July, 1596, unite, or at least occupy the same theatre at Newington Butts, with the 
Lord Admiral’s men, Henslowe’s Company. 

Here, then, are the daily receipts of a man who had a pecuniary interest in every 
play which Shakespeare either wrote or acted in during two long years. At last, if we 
are young and ardent in Shakespeare-study, we may hope for some clear, well-defined 
fact concerning Shakespeare, but, if we are old and gray, we shall know beforehand 
that the impenetrable veil will descend; names of actors and of poets, even their 
handwriting, we have in abundance, but ‘the greatest name in all literature’ ‘ glares 
by its absence ;’ and, as though the more to tantalize us, in place of substance, which 
a few careless strokes of Henslowe’s pen would have afforded, we have vague shad- 
ows, misty intimations which we must set our wits abroach to define. To add to our 
difficulties, Henslowe was, even for those times, a very illiterate man; his writing was 
crabbed and illegible, his spelling was phonetic (therein anticipating some later com- 
mentators), and his ear was not always of the nicest; thus, on ‘the 6 of febery,’ he 
records his receipts ‘at tittus and ondronicus.’ 

Malone extracted from this account-book of Henslowe such items as he thought 
worthy of preservation, and printed them in Vol. I, Part ii, p. 288, ed. 1790, and they 
are repeated in the Variorum Editions down to and including 1821. They are, how- 
ever, inaccurately reproduced, which may be, perhaps, attributed, as Collier suggests, to 
Malone’s failing eyesight. When a new play was performed, Henslowe was wont to 
record the fact by inserting me, the first two letters of the word ew, somewhere in con- 
nection with the item; this ze Malone either overlooked or disregarded, and thereby 
impaired the value of his list; and instead of repeating the title of the play as often as 
it occurred, he simply appended to its first entry the number of times which it was sub- 
sequently to be found, and his counting was not always correct, or else mine is not. 

However, the entire book was deciphered, and reprinted by ‘ The Shakespeare Soci- 
ety’ in 1845, under the supervision of Collier. 

With its value in regard to other plays of Shakespeare we are not here concerned. It 
is enough to note that during the two years above mentioned the titles occur of plays 
which are either the same as those of Shakespeare or very similar to his. All that is 
of present moment to us is, that in the Shakespeare’s Society’s Reprint, on p. 35, Hens- 
lowe begins a new leaf in his Ledger as follows: 


‘In the name of God Amen, beginninge at Newington, my Lord Admeralle and my 
Lorde chamberlen men, as foloweth. 1594.’ 


The first entry is ‘3 of June,’ and records his receipts ‘at Heaster and asheweros,’ and 
so on, daily, until on p. 40 we find the following: 


25 of aguste 1594 e Rd at the Venesyoncomodey . ....-.- - I vj 


‘This,’ says Malone, ‘is probably Zhe Merchant of Venice.’ 

Upon our acceptance or rejection of this supposition of Malone depends, as far as 
External Proof is concerned, the movable date of this play. If we accept it, we can 
push back the date four years earlier than the 1 598 of Meres and Robertes. 

In his note ad /oc. in the Reprint, Collier is inclined to reject this supposition : ‘ Had 
it been,’ he says, * 7ze Merchant of Venice, Henslowe would probably have called it 
by that name; we have already had The Merchant of Emden, 


280 APPENDIX 


In view of Henslowe’s lawless spelling and pronunciation, it is almost rash to say 
what change a title might not receive in his accounts ; but it seems to me noteworthy: 
(and, as far as I know, it has not been noticed) that in the use of this title: ‘The 
Venesyon comodey,’ Henslowe, barring an occasional vagary in spelling, is uniformly 
faithful. It was acted eight times before the close of the year and three times in the 
early part of the next, and it is always recorded under the same title. It is not impos- 
sible that Henslowe wished to avoid any confusion with that popular play, Zhe Jew of 
Malta, or with The Merchant of Emden; but then, on the other hand, he was liable 
to confound ‘The Venesyon comodey’ with what he was pleased to write ‘ The greas- 
yon comodey,’ or ‘The frenshe comodey,’ so that the uniformity of the title supports 
the belief that it was the genuine name of one of the many plays which have been lost, 
and in which there was no character of so pronounced a type as Shylock. At the same 
time it is to be remembered that during these two years, in Henslowe’s diary, occur the 
names of several plays which at that date are supposed to be, in part at least, Shake- 
speare’s,—for instance, 7%tus Andronicus, Hamlet, T aming of a Shrew, and Henry V. 

Of Znternal Proofs over and above those of style, and of maturity, there are very 
few. 

Malone believed that he had discovered in the play an allusion to a contemporary 
event which was sufficiently pronounced, when coupled with other facts, to enable 
him to determine the Date of Composition. On the passage in III, ii, where Portia 
exclaims :—‘ He may win, And what is music then? then music is Even as the flourish 
when true subjects bow To a new crowned monarch,’ Malone has the following :— 
‘ Shakespeare is fond of alluding to events of the time he wrote, and the coronation of 
‘Henry the Fourth of France, who was crowned at Chartres in the midst of his trae 
‘subjects in 1594, (Rheims, where that ceremony ought to have taken place, being 
“possessed by the rebels,) seems to have excited great interest in England. The fol- 
‘lowing is an extract from a pamphlet published on that subject, entitled “The Order 
* of Ceremonies observed in the Anointing and Coronation of the Most Christian 
‘French King of Navarre, Henry IIII of that Name, celebrated in our Lady Church 
«in the Cittie of Chartres, uppon Sonday the 27 of February, 1594. Faithfully trans- 
‘lated out of the French Coppie, printed at Roan, by Commaundment of the said 
«Lord. By B.A. London.’ 

« After describing various parts of the Ceremonial, the writer proceeds thus :— Then 
* “the said Archbishop, holding the King by the hand, caused him to sit down, saying, 
*«¢Tn hoc regni solio,’ &c..... After him all the other peeres kissed him... . say- 
‘ing thus: ‘Vivat Rex in zternum,’ &c. Then the people gave a great shout, cry- 
*“ing, God save the King, and immediately the harquebuzes shot off, and after them 
*“the great ordinance, and the trumpets, cornets, hauthois, drommes, and other instru- 
*“ ments sounded ; and the said Lord Archbishop begun, Te Deum laudamus, &c..... 
‘ “Here we are to note that so often as the King returned ever so little to the body of 
‘the church, the people being infinite in number, cryed God save the King; and the 

“church rung with theyr cries, and with harquebuze shot..... The people with 
“great acclamation and signes of joy, cryed God save the King; the cannons and 
«small shotte played their parts, the ¢vumpettes, drommes, and other instruments 
*“ sounded and played,’’ 


Whence MALONE’s date for this play is 1594, and, in order of compositio1 , the 
ninth. 


STEEVENS cites Meres and the Stationers’ Registers, and dates it accordingly 1598, 
and places it the sixteenth in order of composition, 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 281 


CHALMERS, accepting Farmer’s suggestion in regard to Silvayn’s Ovator, published 
in 1596 (this suggestion will be dealt with in discussing the Source of the Plot), 
believed that proof was thus furnished that ‘the Merchant of Venice may have been 
‘ written either in 1597 or in 1596. From this state of uncertainty we may be relieved 
‘by attending to an allusion which did not catch the commentator’s eyes: The mer- 
‘chant exclaims: “Nor is my whole estate Upon the fortune of ¢his present year.” 
‘ The question, then, is, what year was it, which was a year of dread to traders? Mon- 
‘day, the chronicler, shall answer the question: After taking notice of the losses of 
‘Spain, from the capture of Hulst in 1596, he adds: Then did the “King of Spain 
‘“ dispense with himself for payment of his debts, which made many merchants in 
‘Spain, /taly, Antwerp, Amsterdam, and Middleburgh, to become danguerouts,”— 
‘ Monday's Briefe Chronicle, 1611, p. 422. While the balance was thus vibrating, 
‘between the years 1596 and 1598, this curious fact fixes it for 1597.’ 

Douce is non-committal. If the author of an old Latin play, acted in 1597, took 
the incident of a Jew’s whetting his knife from Shakespeare, then Shakespeare’s play 
must have been acted before that date. If he took it from the ballad of Gernutus, then 
Shakespeare borrowed from the same source, and we need’a copy of the play to which 
Gosson alludes (see fos/, Source of the Plot) to set all right. 

In the opening of the Fifth Act, where Lorenzo and Jessica try to ‘ out-night’ each 
other, WHALLEY remarked that their speeches, beginning ‘In such a night,’ were imi- 
tated in the old comedy of Wily Beguiled. The passage in Wily Beguiled (p. 365. 
ed. Hawkins) is as follows: . 


Sophos. See how the twinkling stars do hide their borrow’d shine 
As half asham’d, their lustre is so stain’d 
By ZLelia’s beauteous eyes, that shine more bright 
Than twinkling stars do in a winter’s night: 
In such a night did Pars win his love. 
Lelia. In such a night, #xeas prov’d unkind, 
Sophos. In such a night, did 77oz/ws court his dear. 
Lelia. In such a night, fair Phyl/is was betray’d. 
Sophos. Vl prove as true as ever Tvoz/us was. 
Lelia. And I as constant as Penelope. 


Although this imitation does not, as Whalley says, enable us to ascertain the date ot 
Wily Beguiled, yet ‘it proves it to have been written after Shakespeare’s Merchant of 
Venice.’ Whereupon Malone said that ‘Wily Beguzled was written before 1596, being 
‘mentioned by Nashe in one of his pamphlets published in that year.’ If Malone is 
right in this reference, the Merchant of Venice must have been written a year or two at 
least before 1596. But HALES, a good authority, has shown (Azheneum, 4 Sept., 1875) 
that Malone was mistaken; Nashe’s words (in Have with You to Saffron Walden, p. 158, 
ed. Grosart) do not refer to the play of Wily Beguiled, but, ‘ more probably, Nashe’s phrase 
* [“ Wily Beguily ”] is one of those reduplications that are so common in English, and 
‘of which Nashe was particularly fond.’ ‘Dr Brinsley Nicholson’ (another good 
authority) ‘concludes,’ says Hales, ‘that the play was written “in or after 1601.’’’ 
FLEAY, however, says (Life and Work of Sh., p. 133, 1886): ‘About this same time 
‘[July, 1597] the play of Wily Beguiled was acted.’ For this assertion Fleay has, 
doubtless, ample proof; but I have failed to find it, either in Henslowe’s diary or in 
Fleay’s own book. Be that as it may, the agreement is general that, whatever the date, 


282 APPENDIX 


Wil) Beguiled imitated the Merchant of Venice, not only in this Scene, but in Shylock’s 
outcries for his daughter and his ducats (see p. 368, ed Hawkins) ; and in still another 
place, detected by Hales (Atheneum, 17 July, 1875), where ‘that venture harder to 
achieve Than that of Jason for the golden fleece’ recalls Bassanio’s speech in the First 
Scene. 

DRAKE (vol. ii, p. 385) accepts Chalmers’s chronology, and on Chalmers’s 
grounds. 

SKOTTOWE (vol. i, p. 360) places the date, ‘without hesitation, in 1597. Shake- 
speare’s obligations to Ze Orator prove that this play was subsequent to 1596, and its 
mention by Meres that it was previous to 1598. 

KNIGHT, without specifying any particular year, pleads for a much earlier date than 
any hitherto assigned, and where all is conjecture, one may be as liberal as the air. 
After enumerating all the plays which were written by Shakespeare before the 17th 
Century, Knight asks : ‘What is the sum, then, of the work which we hold to have 
‘been produced by Shakspere before the close of the 16th Century? Mine Comedies, 
‘ eight Histories (taking the Second and Third Parts of Henry VJ, as remodelled by 
‘him), and ¢hree Tragedies. The common theory is that he began to write for the 
‘stage in 1591; he having been, as Mr Collier has unquestionably proved, a large pro- 
‘ prietor in the Blackfriars’ Theatre in 1589. We ask that the author of twenty plays, 
‘which completely changed the face of the dramatic literature in England, should be 
‘supposed to have begun to write a little earlier than the age of twenty-seven; that we 
‘ should assign some few of these plays to a period antecedent to 1590. We have rea- 
‘son to believe that, up to the close of the 16th Century, Shakspere was busied as an 
‘actor as well as an author. It is something too much to expect, then, even from the 
‘fertility of his genius, occupied as he was, that he should have produced twenty plays 
‘in nine years; and it is still more unreasonable to believe that the consciousness of 
‘ power, which he must have possessed, should not have prompted him to enter the lists 
‘ with other dramatists (whose highest productions may, without exaggeration, be stated 
‘as every way inferior to his lowest) until he had gone through a probation of six or 
“seven years’ acquaintance with the stage as a humble actor. We cannot reconcile it 
‘to probability that he who ceased to be an actor when he was forty, should have been 
‘contented to have been only an actor until he was twenty-seven. Impelled by these 
‘convictions, we have somewhat pertinaciously clung to the belief that Shakspere, by 
‘commencing his career as a dramatic writer some four or five years earlier than is gen- 
‘ erally maintained, may claim, in common with his less illustrious early contemporaries, 
‘the praise of being one of the great founders of our dramatic literature, instead of being 
‘the mere follower and improver of Marlowe, and Greene, and Peele, and Kyd. With- 
‘ out sacrificing anything, we hope, to this theory we have endeavoured in balancing 
‘ the evidence for the date of this play, not to be driven too easily into the belief that it 
‘ could not have been produced before the ten last years of the 16th Century. But we 
‘have given all the evidence which we could find, [that is, the Stationers’ Registers 
‘and Meres,] leaving the reader to decide for himself.’ 

COLLIER refers to Meres, and says that we have no means of knowing how long 
before Meres’s time the play was written; and, in connection with Malone’s conjecture 
that Henslowe’s Venyson comodey was The Merchant of Venice, emphasizes the fact 
that Shakespeare’s Company was playing with Henslowe’s Company at that time,—a 
consideration which much influenced STAUNTON, who thinks that there is ‘now very 


‘little doubt that the Merchant of Venice was written and acted some years before’ 
1598. 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 283 


HALLIWELL, while acknowledging that there is no other certain information than 
that of the Stationers’ Registers and Meres, suggests, on the strength of the imitation 
in Wily Beguiled, that ‘it was probably written before the year 1596. And if, in 
‘addition to this, there is added the circumstance of several expressions which occur 
‘in the Trial Scene in Shakespeare being similar to others in Zhe Orator, published 
‘in the same year, we may arrive not unreasonably at the conclusion that Zhe Mer- 
‘chant of Venice was a new and favorite play in 1596. Another slight indication, 
‘tending towards a similar conclusion, may be found in the circumstance that the pro- 
‘nunciation of Stephano is erroneously given in this Comedy, but that after Shake- 
* speare had taken a part in the representation of Zvery Man in his Humour, produced 
‘in 1598, where the same name occurs with its correct accent, he altered the cadence 
“when he had occasion to write it in a subsequent composition.’ 

C. BATHURST (Remarks on the Differences in Shakespeare's Versification, &c., Lon- 
don, 1857, p. 57): ‘The Merchant of Venice is very natural, sometimes excursive, not 
‘ratiocinative. The verse, generally, uniform and flowing. One weak ending. Some 
‘breaks. The speeches, where the speakers change, fit into the verse, but not always. 
‘It is remarkably one of those plays which were written when Shakespeare’s mind was 
“at ease, original, and independent. Neither disturbed by the rivalship of others, nor 
‘stimulated to take pains to write in a more active and dramatic style than naturally 
‘occurred to him in the course of his composition. He never, as I conceive, took pains, 
‘in the cool, deliberate way in which most writers of merit have done; but he certainly 
‘ «lashed his sides with his tail,” as Longinus says, out of Homer, as to Euripides, in 
‘such plays as Macbeth, and others of his highest class. 

‘This year 1598 is something like an epoch, I think; partly on account of Meres’s 
‘list, however uncertain; partly, because, as appears to me, there is really a material 
‘change of style about this time; but also, because it was in this year that Ben Jonson 
‘came out, and with a play of great force and popularity, very Man in his Humour, 
‘which was likely to have an effect on Shakespeare, both directly and indirectly, as 
‘influencing the public taste.’ 

GRANT WHITE, in his First Edition, finds warrant for the decided opinion that this 
play was new in 1594. ‘The play itself bears evidence that it was written at a time 
‘when Shakespeare had obtained, by observation and experience, the highest use of 
‘his powers as a playwright, and when his faculties as a poet and philosopher were 
‘approaching their grand maturity, while it yet betrays in every line the ardor and 
‘hopefulness of youth. Judged, therefore, on its own evidence, Zhe Merchant of Ven- 
‘ice is one of the earliest productions of Shakespeare’s middle period, and this indica- 
‘tion agrees well with the external evidence which would assign it to his thirtieth year.’ 
In his Second Edition, Grant White reaffirms his belief: ‘ At what particular time before 
‘ 1598 Shakespeare did this beautiful piece of work we can only infer from the internal 
¢ evidence of style and versification, and from Henslowe’s diary. These confirm each 
‘other. The play, we may be sure, was written in 1594, when Shakespeare was thirty 
¢ years old.’ 

The CowDEN-CLARKES come to the same conclusion, founded on Henslowe’s diary. 
In 1594, Shakespeare was ‘thirty years of age, in the very prime of intellectual vigour, 
¢and we can well imagine this fine play to have been the product of his pen at that 

period of his life. There is a strength of purpose in it as a drama, a tone of experi- 
‘ence in its views of men and life, a masterly treatment of character, and, withal, a 
‘wealth of romance about its story, that mark it for a composition on kis arrival at 
‘manly matu-ty.’ 


284 APPENDIX 


Det1us, on the faith of Henslowe’s diary and the imitation in Wily Beguiled, and 
on the evidence of style and versification, sets it down in 1594. 

Dyce, in his Third Edition, thinks that it may have been some years on the stage 
before Meres mentioned it, and that Malone’s supposition about Henslowe’s ‘ Venesyon 
comodey’ is not improbable. ; 

It is a little uncertain whether or not the CLARENDON Editors accept the item in 
Henslowe’s diary as referring to The Merchant of Venice. They express a judicious 
doubt as to its identity with the ‘ Venesyon comodey,’ and yet they speak of ‘its first 
production in 1594’ as though it were an established fact. 

‘The Venesyon comodey,’ they say, ‘may be Shakespeare’s Merchant. But consider- 
‘ing that the dramatists of that time were fond of laying their scenes in Italy, this iden- 
‘tification is very uncertain. There are, however, in the play itself, indications which 
‘would lead us to suppose that its first composition was earlier than 1598, such as the 
‘many classical allusions, the frequent rhymes, and occasional doggerel verses. The 
« “fooling” of Launcelot, too, has a strong resemblance to that of his almost namesake 
‘in Zhe Two Gentlemen of Verona. On the other hand, the loftiness of thought and 
‘ expression, the grace and freedom of the versification in general, point to a later time, 
‘and would lead us rather to class this play with 7welfth Night, As You Like It, and 
‘ Much Ado About Nothing, than with the earlier plays, Love’s Labour's Lost and The 
‘ Two Gentlemen of Verona. On the whole, we incline to think that the play was in 
‘ great part rewritten between the time of its first production in 1594 and its publication 
‘in 1600. The slight discrepancies may be due to this cause, particularly that in’ [I, 
ii, 120. See Hunter’s note, ad loc.] 

Hupson inclines to 1598, the date of Meres’s allusion. ‘How long before that 
‘time,’ he urges, ‘the play was written we have no means of knowing; but, judging 
‘from the style, we cannot well assign the writing to a much earlier date.’ As to 
Henslowe’s Venesyon comodey, Hudson is ‘by no means certain that it refers to Shake- 
‘speare’s play; while the workmanship here shows such maturity and variety of power 
‘as argue against that supposal. It evinces, in a considerable degree, the easy, unlabour- 
‘ing freedom of conscious mastery; the persons being so entirely under the author’s 
‘control, and subdued to his hand, that he seems to let them act and talk just as they 
‘have a mind to. Therewithal, the style throughout is so even and sustained; the word 
‘and character are so fitted to each other; the laws of dramatic proportion are so well 
‘observed; and the work is so free from any jarring or falling out from the due course 
‘and order of art; as to justify the belief that the whole was written in the same stage 
‘of intellectual growth and furnishing.’ 

On the other hand, RoLre relies on Henslowe’s diary, and thinks ‘there is good 
‘reason to believe that the play was written and acted as early as 1594. 

In FLEAy’s first published list (Mew Shakspere Society's Trans., Series I, p. 10) of 
the Succession of Shakespeare’s plays founded on metrical grounds, the date assigned 
to the Merchant of Venice is 1597. But in his Shakespeare Manual (p. 34), he says 
that he prefers 1596. ‘Malone,’ he there says, ‘identifies this play with The Venesyon 
‘ comedy acted at the Rose in 1594. But Shakespeare’s plays were not at any time 
‘acted there.’ Yet Fleay himself says, p. 82, that the Lord Chamberlain’s men acted 
at the Rose in 1594; and Shakespeare belonged to that Company, and it acted his 
plays. Moreover, I cannot find that Malone says that the ‘ Venesyon comodey’ was 
acted at the Rose; his conjecture merely is affixed to Henslowe’s item, and there, as 
we have seen above, Henslowe expressly states that the performances were ‘at New- 
ington,’ where the Lord Chamberlain’s men were playing with the Lord Admiral’s 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 285 


men. I am afraid that Fleay has given hardly enough weight to these facts, or else 
that there is an oversight in his statement, on p. 82, that the Lord Chamberlain’s men 
acted at the Rose. 

However, in his Hist. of the Life and Work of Shakespeare, 1886, Fleay returns 
to his former date, 1597. ‘Early in this year,’ he says, p- 30, ‘was almost certainly 
‘produced The Merchant of Venice, founded on an old play of Dekker’s called Joseph 
‘the Jew of Venice, written c. 1592, and acted in 1594 by the Admiral’s men, but not 
“now extant.” Again on p. 197: ‘The Merchant of Venice, or Jew of Venice, was no 
‘doubt founded on an old play called The Jew of Venice, by Dekker. It seems from 
‘the title of the German version of this play that the Jew’s name was Joseph. The 
‘name Fauconbridge in I, ii (where Portia’s suitors are enumerated, compare 720 Gen- 
‘¢lemen, I, ii) points to a date soon after John ; and the “merry devil” of II, iii, 2, 
‘a phrase never elsewhere used in Shakespeare, indicates contemporaneity with Zhe 
‘ Merry Devil of Edmonton, produced in the winter of 1596. Again, the manifest 
‘imitations of this play in Wily Beguiled, which I show elsewhere to date in the sum- 
‘mer of 1597, give a posterior limit, which must be decisive. This play has no sign 
‘whatever of having been altered; the Clarendon Press guesses, founded on the dis- 
‘crepancy of the number of suitors (iv for vi) are as worthless as Mr Hales’s proof, 
‘referred to by Mr Halliwell (Outlines, p. 251) of the date of Wily Beguiled. The 
‘conclusive evidence of imitation in this play is the conjunction of the “In such a 
*“ night” lines with the “ My money, my daughter” iterations of Gripe.’ I think that 
there is another indication of alteration besides the ‘Clarendon Press guesses.’ See 
post, in ‘Source of the Plot,’ p. 321. 

It is to be regretted that Fleay does not give his authority for the assertion that Dek- 
ker’s play of the Jew of Venice, which was not entered on the Stationers’ Registers 
until 1653, was written about 1592, or, as he says on p. 310, ‘about 159.’ That the 
comedy of Josephus, a Jew of Venice, twice played by the English Comedians in Dres- 
den in 1626, might possibly be a version of Dekker’s Jew of Venice was first suggested 
by Cohn (Shakespeare in Germany, p. cxvili); but the assertion that it is the founda- 
tion of the Merchant of Venice, and that it was written in 1591 or 1592, is Fleay’s own 
surmise. It is also to be regretted that Fleay does not cite the parallel passages in 
Dekker’s Jew and Shakespeare’s Merchant in proof that one was founded on the 
other. I believe, however, not an authentic line of Dekker’s Jew has survived. 
Fleay’s conjecture must therefore stand on its own merits. At present, as far as the 
Date of the Composition of the Merchant of Venice is concerned, nothing further need 
be said about the identity of Dekker’s Jew and the German /ud von Venedig. The 
latter deserves notice when we come to consider the Source of the Plot, and will be 
there treated in full. 

In enumerating the Internal Proofs mention should not be omitted of Lrx’s theory 
that a close connection exists between the date of the Merchant of Venice and the fate 
of Dr Lopez, who was hanged at Tyburn in May, 1594. The parallelism is certainly 
striking in some particulars, but the date, May, is very, very close to ‘25 aguste,’ if we 
are to believe that the ‘ Venesyon comodey’ and the Merchant of Venice are the same, 
which Lee assumes. See Jost, ‘The Jews in England.’ 

In discussing the Date of the Composition of Orhel/o, the Accounts of the Revels at 
Court in 1604 were of importance. The curious history of that forgery of what Hal- 
liwell-Phillipps believes to be a genuine record was given at length in Othello, pp. 347- 
357, and need not be repeated here; where, whether forged or not, the date 1604 can 
have no bearing on the Date of the Composition of the Merchant of Venice. However, 


286 APPENDIX 


merely as a matter of curiosity, it may be noted that in the forged pp. 204, 205 cf the 
Extracts from the Account of the Revels at Court, published by the Shakespeare Soctety, 


1842, occur the following entries: 


[1606] 
sie sae On Shrousunday A play of the Marchant of Venis Shaxberd. 
* % * * * 
By his Matis On Shroutusday A play cauled The Martchant of Shaxberd. 
players Venis againe comauded by the Kings Mate, 


According to a list of the Order of Succession, founded on the ‘ Numbers of Light 
and Weak Endings in the Several Plays,’ by Prof. INcRAM (ew Shakspere Soc. 
Trans., Series I, p. 450), The Merchant of Venice stands ninth. 


To recapitulate : 
The Date of Composition of the Merchant of Venice is assigned by MALONE, 
STAUNTON, GRANT WHITE, COWDEN-CLARKE, DELIUS, ROLFE, LEE, to . 1594 
By HALLIWELL to ‘before’; by FURNIVALL ‘about’ . c ° 4 « 1596 


By CHALMERS, DRAKE, SKOTTOWE, FLEAY . f 5 : ° a + = ESO7 
By STEEVENS, BATHURST, HUDSON : C : 5 5 - fs - 1598 
By KNIGHT to no precise date, but ‘ very early.’ 


By CoLiier, Dyce to ‘some years before.’ . : 5 : “ . 1598 
CLARK and WRIGHT (i. e. CLARENDON) think it ‘ was rewritten between 1594 
and 1600,’ 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT 287 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT 


IT Is lightly seen that in this play there are two stories intertwined, Zhe Pound of 
Flesh, or, as it is frequently styled, Ze Bond Story, and The Three Caskets; some 
critics, indeed, add a third, that of Jessica, but this, I think, is an over-refinement of 
analysis ; at all events, there are assuredly two, and each of them lends itself so readily 
to a symbolical interpretation, that it is not surprising to find them, more or less dis- 
guised, widely scattered and ascending even into the early literature of: many nations. 
By the story of Zhe Three Caskets, a pious monk enforces the moral of the deceitful- 
ness of appearances and the temptations of the human soul, in the Gesta Romanorum, 
or we may find ¢he Pound of Flesh set forth in the Mahébhdrata as inculcating the 
beauty of self-sacrifice. 

The task, however, now before us is to discover, if we may, the shape in which these 
materials lay to Shakespeare’s hand; and in order to do this not only must our range 
be wide, but many a stray fragment must be examined for possible finger-marks, and 
many a dust-heap must be sifted. 

From the records which have come down to us it is to be inferred that the audiences 
of Shakespeare’s time constantly demanded novelty in the attractions of the stage. The 
playwrights were kept busy, and must have worked at a rate of speed which, though 
perhaps not without its parallel in Greece, is, I think, quite unknown among drama- 
tists now-a-days. Collier has made the computation, by means of Henslowe’s diary 
that the audiences of that day required a new play, upon an average, every seven- 
teen or eighteen days, including Sundays. In addition to satisfying this demand fo 
novelty, it follows as of course that the playwrights and poets had to keep touch with 
every gale and vary of the public, and this struggle for popularity, which meant daily 
bread, not unnaturally fomented intense rivalry between the different companies of 
actors. Into this scramble Shakespeare was ushered, it is generally agreed, in 1591, 
and in it he continued about twenty years, and wrote, in whole or in part, about forty 
plays—that is, on an average for the whole period, one every six months. Thus driven 
by the necessity of speed on the one hand, and by anxiety to catch the popular fancy 
on the other, is it any wonder that Shakespeare never stopped to devise a plot? What 
need was there that he should doso? The manager of the company had many an 
old play which, at one time or another, had been submitted to the test of public 
approval, and had been found not lacking in qualities more or less dramatic, or in 
points which had caught the fancy of the hour, even though it were by no greater 
charm than by the dismal repetition of the word ‘Revenge!’ To such plays, if 
selected for revision, a certain amount of popularity was thus assured in advance, 
and as for the plot,—the barest skeleton sufficed for Shakespeare. He knew that he 
could remodel it into fair proportions and relume it with life. Of all that goes to make 
np one of his dramas, the plot in itself, in its mere outlines, is of less importance than 
any other element in it. Of course, in the nature of things, it is not to be supposed 
that after he had selected the old play to be rejuvenated he either adhered to it closely, 
or refused hints from other sources. Old ballads, books of travels, histories, the gossip 
of the day,—all were put under contribution. As Emerson says: ‘Every master has 
‘found his materials collected, and his power lay in his sympathy with his people, and 
‘in his love for the materials he wrought in.’ 

And we know the result. 

I can find nc trace of any attempt to identify the source of the plot of this play earlier 
than that of WARTON, who, in his Odservations on the Fairy Queen, 1754, in a foot-note 


288 APPENDIX 


(p. 128, ed. 1762), says that, ‘in all probability,’ the story of The Merchant of Venice 
‘is founded upon the following antient ballad,’ which he ‘met with in Mus. Ashmol. 
‘Oxon, cod. impress. A. Wood.’ Warton did not give the whole ballad, but merely 
the first stanza and some of the concluding stanzas. The whole of it was printed by 
Bishop Percy in Zhe Connoisseur for 16 May, 17543 this text he did not follow subse- 
quently, in his Redigues, 1765, vol. i, p. 191, but there printed from an ancient black- 
letter copy in the Pepys Collection. There is really no difference in the texts; the few 
variations here and there might readily have arisen from mere transcription. Percy’s 
text, as in his Redigues, is here given; it has been reprinted by Editors more frequently 
than the other: 


A new Song, shewing the crueltie of GERNUTUS, a JEWE, who lending to a mer 
chant an hundred crownes, would have a pound of his fleshe, because he could not pay 
him at the time appointed. To the tune of Black and yellow. 


THE First PART. 


N Venice towne not long agoe 

A cruel Jew did dwell, 
Which lived all on ufurie 

As Italian writers tell. 


Gernutus called was the Jew, 
Which never thought to dye, 

Nor never yet did any good 
To them in ftreets that lie. 


His life was like a barrow hogge, 
That liveth many a day, 

Yet never once doth any good, 
Until men will him flay. 


Or like a filthy heap of dung, 
That lyeth in a whoard 

Which never can do any good, 
Till it be fpread abroad. 


So fares it with the ufurer, 
He cannot fleep in reft, 

For feare the thiefe will him purfue 
To plucke him from his neft. 


His heart doth thinke on many a wile, 
How to deceive the poore ; 

His mouth is almoft ful of mucke, 
Yet ftill he gapes for more. 


His wife muft lend a fhilling, 
For every weeke a penny, 

Yet bring a pledge, that is double worth, 
If that you will have any. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—GERNUTUS 


And fee, likewife, you keepe your day, 
Or elfe you loofe it all: 

This was the living of the wife, 
Her cow fhe did it call. 


Within that citie dwelt that time 
A marchant of great fame, 

Which being diftreffed in his need, 
Unto Gernutus came: 


Defiring him to ftand his friend 
For twelve month and a day, 

To lend to him an hundred crownes; 
And he for it would pay 


Whatfoever he would demand of him, 
And pledges he fhould have, 

No (quoth the Jew with flearing lookes) 
Sir, afke what you will have. 


No penny for the loane of it 
For one yeare you fhall pay; 
You may doe me as goode a turne, 
Before my dying day. 


But we will have a merry jeaft 
For to be talked long; 

You fhall make me a bond, quoth he, 
That fhall be large and ftrong : 


And this fhall be the forfeyture ; 
Of your owne flefhe a pound. 
If you agree, make you the bond, 

And here is a hundred crownes. 


With right good will! the marchant faye: 
And fo the bond was made. 

When twelve month and a day drew on 
That backe it fhould be payd, 


The marchant’s fhips were all at fea, 
And money came not in; 

Which way to take, or what to doe 
To thinke he doth begin : 


And to Gernutus ftrait he comes 
With cap and bended knee, 
And fayde to him, Of curtefie 
I pray you beare with mee. 


My day is come, and I have not 
The money for to pay: 

And little good the forfeyture 
Will doe you, I dare fay. 


290 APPENDIX 


With all my heart, Gernutus fayd, 
Commaund it to your minde: 

In thinges of bigger waight then this 
You fhall me ready finde. 


He goes his way; the day once paft 
Gernutus doth not flacke 

To get a fergiant prefently ; 
And clapt him on the backe: 


And layd him into prifon ftrong, 
And fued his bond withall; 

And when the judgement day was come, 
For judgement he did:call. 


The marchants friends came thither faft, 
With many a weeping eye, 

For other meanes they could not find, 
But he that day muft dye. 


THE SECOND PART. 


Of the Jews crueltie; fetting foorth the mercifulneffe of the Judge towards the 
Marchant. To the tune of Blacke and yellow. 


Some offered for his hundred crownes 
Five hundred for to pay ; 

And fome a thoufand, two or three, 
Yet ftill he did denay. 


And at the laft ten thoufand crownes 
They offered him to fave, 
Gernutus fayd, I will no gold, 
My forfeite I will have. 


A pound of flefhe is my demand, 
And that fhall be my hire, 

Then fayd the judge, Yet my good friend, 
Let me of you defire 


To take the flefh from fuch a place, 
As yet you let him live; 

Do fo, and lo! an hundred crownes 
To thee here will I give. 


No: no: quoth he, no: judgement 
For this it fhall be tride, 

For I will have my pound of flefhe 
From under his right fide, 


It grieved all the companie 
His crueltie to fee ; 
For neither friend nor foe could helpe 
But he mutt fpoyled bee, 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—GERNUTUS 291 


The bloudie Jew now ready is 
With whetted blade in hand, 
To fpoyle the bloud of innocent, 

By forfeit of his bond. 


And as he was about to ftrike 
In him the deadly blow: 

Stay (quoth the judge) thy crueltie; 
I charge thee to do io. 


Sith needs thou wilt thy forfeit have, 
Which is of flefh a pound: 

See that you fhed no drop of bloud, 
Nor yet the man confound. 


For if thou doe, like murderer, 
Thou here fhalt hanged be: 

Likewife of flefh fee that thou cut 
No more than longes to thee; 


For if thou take either more or leffe 
To the value of a mite, 

Thou fhalt be hanged prefently 
As is both law and right. 


Gernutus now waxt franticke mad, 
And wotes not what to fay; 

Quoth he at laft, Ten thoufand crownes, 
I will that he fhall pay ; 


And fo I graunt to fet him free. 
The judge doth anfwere make; 

You fhall not have a penny given; 
Your forfeyture now take. 


At the laft he doth demaund 
But for to have his owne. 

No, quoth the judge, doe as you lift 
Thy judgement fhall be fhowne. 


Either take your pound of flefh, quoth he. 
Or cancell me your bond. 

O cruel judge, then quoth the Jew, 
That doth againft me ftand! 


And fo with griping grieved mind 
He biddeth them fare-well, 

‘Then’ all the people prays’d the Lord, 
That ever this heard tell. 


Good people, that do heare this fong, 
For trueth I dare well fay, 

That many a wretch as ill as hee 
Doth live now at this day; 


192 APPENDIX 


That feeketh nothing but the. fpoyle 
Of many a wealthey man, 

And for to trap the innocent 
Devifeth what they can. 


From whome the Lord deliver me, 
And every Chriftian too, 

And fend to them like fentence eke 
That meaneth fo to do. 


‘It may be objected,’ says Warton, ‘that this ballad may have been written after, 
and copied from Shakespeare’s play. But if that had been the case, it is most likely 
that the author would have preserved Shakespeare’s name of Shylock for the Jew; 
and nothing is more likely than that Shakespeare in copying from this ballad, should 
alter the name from Gernutus to one more Jewish; and by alteration of the name 
his imitation was the better disguised. Another argument is, that the ballad has the 
air of a narrative written before Shakespeare’s play; I mean that if it had been 
written after the play, it would have been much more full and circumstantial. At 
present, it has too much the nakedness of an original. Besides, the first stanza 

‘informs us that the story was taken from some Italian novel. Thus much, therefore, 
‘is certain, that is, that Shakespeare either copied from that Italian novel, or from this 
‘ballad. Now we have no’translation, I presume, of such a novel into English; if 
‘then it be granted, that Shakespeare generally took his Italian stories from their Eng- 
‘lish translations, and that the arguments above concerning the prior antiquity of this 
‘ballad are true, it will follow that Shakespeare copied from this ballad.’ 

It is strange that Warton did not see that there was another source from which 
Shakespeare could have drawn his plot, for he goes on to refer to an extract from Gos- 
son’s Schoole of Abuse, apparently quite unconscious of its important bearing on the 
question, which critics since his time, and following his lead, have found in it. This 
extract will be duly set forth further on. 

As I have said, Bishop Percy reprinted the whole of this ballad, of which Warton 
had given but a few stanzas, in Zhe Connoisseur for May 16, 1754; at least it is to be 
inferred that the anonymous contributor was Bishop Percy; in the remarks on the bal- 
lad in his Religues, Bishop Percy repeated substantially the arguments in Zhe Connois- 
seur, which he would not have done had they not been his own, 

It seems to be pretty generally conceded, and for the reasons adduced by Warton, 
that Gernutus preceded Shylock; and Dyce and the CLARENDON EpITors go so far 
as to say that perhaps Shakespeare derived some hints from the ballad,—which I think 
doubtful. The points wherein there is an agreement, such as whetting the knife, &c., 
are commonplace enough, and were probably found in the original story or play which 
was the common source of both ballad and comedy. KwnicuT agrees with Warton 
that Gernutus preceded Shylock, but not because it would otherwise have been ‘ more 
full and circumstantial,’ and points in proof of this to Jordan’s Ballad (see Appendix, 
post), which was unquestionably written after the play, in 1664, and yet is much ess 
full and circumstantial than the old ballad of Gernutus. But it is in the omission of 
Portia from the old ballad that Knight finds the strongest confirmation that Gernutus 
preceded the comedy. HALLIWELL, on the other hand, inclines to the belief that the 
comedy preceded the ballad, no copy of which, he says, ‘of the time of Shakespeare 

is known to exist; but as it was the common practice to continue the republication 
of such pieces during several generations, it is possible, notwithstanding the epithet 


al 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—NORTHERN LORD 293 


‘new in the title to one copy of it, that it may be a reprint of a composition belonging 
‘to the Elizabethan era. The simplicity of the ballad story, however, is no proof of 
‘its antiquity; for several writers of the 17th Century were accustomed to adopt the 
‘ merest outline incidents of a novel or play, and construct with them, often with altered 
‘names, those doggerel songs which were so popular amongst the lower classes up to a 
*‘ comparatively recent period. On the whole, unless some evidence could be adduced 
‘of the existence of the ballad of Gernutus in the 16th Century, the probability seems 
‘in favour of its having been constructed either on Shakespeare’s play, or on the more 
‘ancient drama of the Jew, mentioned by Gosson. The incident of the Jew whetting 
“his knife is one very likely to have been remembered by a writer who was forming a 
‘ballad from his recollections of the performance of the comedy; and it is the only 
‘very remarkable coincidence to be traced in the two productions. It may, however, 
‘be worth mentioning that the Jew, in the ballad, grants the loan without pecuniary 
‘interest, and speaks of the bond as a “merrie jest.” The name Gernutus might 
‘either have been borrowed from the older play, or have been suggested by that of a 
‘personage introduced in the comedy of the Zhree Ladies of London, 1584, where a 
‘ Jew, of a very different character from Shylock, is introduced, whose name is Geron- 
‘tus. The writer of the ballad, indeed, professes to derive his tale from an Italian 
‘source; but little reliance can be placed upon a statement of this kind in a compo- 
‘sition belonging to a class in which deceptive assertions of origin and antiquity are 
‘of continual occurrence.’ 

There is one expression in the ballad which seems to me to indicate the antiquity 
either of the ballad itself or of the source whence it was derived, and that is where 
‘the wife’ calls her usurious means of living ‘her cow.’ Hunter (i, 306) says that the 
application of the word is not peculiar to this ballad, but that a salt-pit, in the salt dis- 
tricts, in the reign of Henry the Second, was known by the name Vacca. Still, from 
internal evidence and after what has been said above, I think we may dismiss all 
thoughts that this ballad, whatever its date, in any wise contributed to the Merchant 
of Venice. 

Before we leave the region of Ballads, it is proper to mention another whose claims 
are put forward by HUNTER (i, 301), as follows: 

‘It has occurred to no one to observe that, besides the ballad of Gerrutus, we have 
*in the popular literature of England another ballad containing incidents which bear a 
* close resemblance to the part of this play which relates to the bond, as it contains also 
* other incidents which are very like the part of Cymbeline which relates to Posthumus, 
*Jachimo, and Imogen. This ballad continued to be occasionally printed, even till 
‘within the present century. The copy which I possess is entitled Zhe Morthern 
‘ Lord. The verse is exceedingly low and groveling, but the story is full of romantic 
‘incidents. This ballad is little, if at all, known within the range of Shakespearian 
‘ criticism, so that an abstract of it may be acceptable. Of its age I can pronounce no 

opinion which would be of any value; but it appears to me not of modern date, that 
‘is, there are expressions which seem to belong to the earlier ages of the existing 
‘ ballad-poetry, and that the incidents are too numerous, and of too romantic a cast, to 
* allow of its being considered a modern invention. 

«A certain lord has two daughters, the one “ brown,” the other “ fair.’ A knight 
who presents himself to the father as a suitor is informed that with the brown he 
will give as a portion her weight in gold, and that he expects to receive her weight 

‘in go'd from the person to whom he gives the fairer daughter. The knight, of 
course, selects the beaity, and to raise the money has recourse to a Jew usurer, who 


294 APPENDIX 


supplies him with it, taking his bond for the repayment at a certain day, and in de- 
‘fault he is to lose several ounces of his flesh. They marry; in due time a son is born, 
‘ and time also brings round the day when the money is to be repaid, or the forfeit taken. 
* The knight, as the time of repayment drew near, is not prepared with the money, and 
‘the lady urges upon him, as the only resource, that they should fly beyond sea. They 
‘go to Germany, where the Emperor, having learned the circumstances under which 
‘they had come into his dominions, built for them a “court,” and showed them great 
‘respect, and the rather because they came from Britain, “That blest land of fame.” ’ 

‘ Here they lived for some time in great felicity, till a “ Dutch lord,”’ who was in the 
‘ Emperor’s court, wagered with the knight a ton of gold that he would “ enjoy his lady . 
“gay,” and that he would produce a diamond ring from her finger in proof. The 
‘Dutch lord has recourse to what is the approved stratagem on such occasions; he 
‘ bribes a waiting-maid of the lady, who steals the’ ring and gives itto him. When 
‘the English knight sees the ring in the stranger’s possession he almost swoons; and 
‘then, in a state of distraction, flies to his house, and, meeting the lady, who had come 

to the gate to welcome him, he throws her at once headlong into the moat. 

«So cruel a murder shocks every one, and the knight is brought to trial, convicted, 
‘and sentenced to death. While he is awaiting the execution of his sentence, there 
‘suddenly appears in the Emperor’s court another English knight attired in green, who 
‘ easily prevails upon the Emperor to grant a second hearing of the case. At this hear- 
‘ing the maid is brought to make confession of her guilt, and the court become struck 
‘with the possibility that the crime of murder may not have been committed, as the 
* evidence went no further than to prove that the lady was thrown into the moat. The 
‘life of the knight is thus saved, and he claims and receives from the Dutch lord the 
‘ton of gold which he had justly won. 

‘ His mind bent on revenge, the Dutch lord sends information to the Jew where his 
‘debtor was living. The exasperated Jew instantly repairs to the Emperor, and claims 
‘in his court, not the money due him, but the penalty of the bond. While this claim 
‘is under consideration, the green knight again appears; mean as the verse is, a shott 
‘ specimen need not be withheld : 


‘Said the noble knight in green, 

¢« Sir, may not your articles be seen ?” 
«Ves, that they may,” replied the Jew, 
*« And I resolve to have my due.” 


* Lo, then, the knight began to read : 

‘ At length he said, “I find, indeed, 

‘« Nothing but flesh you are to have:” 

‘ Answers the Jew, “ That’s all I crave.” 


‘The poor distressed knight was brought: 

‘ The bloody-minded Jew, he thought 

* That day to be revenged on him, 

* And part his flesh from limb to limb, 

‘ The knight in green said, “ Mr Jew, 
‘«There’s nothing else but flesh your due, 
‘« Then see no drop of blood you shed, 
‘For if you do, off goes your head ’”’ 


‘The Jew hereupon acts as Shylock in the play. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—LETI 295 


‘The father now appears. The report has reached him that his daughter has been 
‘drowned by her husband. He brings with him “many brave horses,” one of which 
‘is purchased of him immediately by the green knight. The father is clamorous for 
‘ justice, insisting that his child must have been murdered, and finally the knight is 
‘brought out to execution on his former sentence. At this juncture the knight in 
‘green again appears with the steed which he had purchased, and, to the surprise of 
‘every one, but most of all of the father, he runs his sword through the body of the 
‘noble animal, and lays it dead upon the place. The father expressing his astonish- 
‘ment at such an act, the knight in green argues with him that, as he had purchased 
‘the horse, he surely might do with it what he pleased; and then presses home upon 
‘him that he, having sold his daughter, the purchaser had an equally entire proprie- 
‘torship in her. Now comes the dénouement. The green knight retires, and re- 
‘appears in splendid female habiliments, when the father and husband recognize the 
‘lady who had been supposed to be drowned, and the Emperor “ proclaims a universal 
66 joy.” 

‘Whether it may ultimately turn out that this ballad is earlier than the date of 
‘this play as an English ballad, and as it is evidently in some way connected with 
‘two of Shakespeare’s plays, and has hitherto remained unnoticed, or at least not 
‘publicly noticed, either by the commentators on Shakespeare or the collectors 
‘of the ballad poetry of England, the preceding notice of it will not be thought 
‘ misplaced.’ 


To return once more to Bishop Percy. His note in the Religues (vol. i, p. 189, 
1765) is as follows: 

‘In the Life of Pope Sixtus V, translated from the Italian of Greg. Leti, by the 
‘Rev. Mr. Farneworth [p. 401, ed. 1779], is a remarkable passage to the following 
‘effect: It was reported in Rome that Drake had taken and plundered St. Domingo 
‘in Hispaniola, and carried off an immense booty. This account came in a private 
‘letter to Paul Secchi, a very considerable merchant in the city, who had large con- 
‘cerns in those parts, which he had insured. Upon receiving this news, he sent for 
‘the insurer, Sampson Ceneda, a Jew, and acquainted him with it. The Jew, whose 
‘interest it was to have such a report thought false, gave many reasons why it could 
‘not possibly be true, and, at last, worked himself into such a passion, that he said, 
¢« Tl] lay you a pound of my flesh it is a lye.” . Such sort of wagers, it is well known, 
‘are often proposed by people of strong passions, to convince others that are incredu- 
“lous or obstinate. Nothing is more common than to say, “I’ll lay my life on it;” 
‘<Tll forfeit my right hand, if it is not true,” &c. Secchi, who was of a fiery, hot 
‘temper, replied, “If you like it, I’ll lay you a thousand crowns against a pound of 
‘your flesh, that it is true.” The Jew accepted the wager, and articles were imme- 
‘diately executed betwixt them, the substance of which was, That if Secchi won, he 
‘should himself cut the flesh, with a sharp knife, from whatever part of the Jew’s 
“body he pleased. Unfortunately for the Jew, the truth of the account was soon 
‘confirmed; and the Jew was almost distracted when he was informed that Secchi 
‘had solemnly sworn he would compel him to the exact performance of his contract, 
‘and was determined to cut a pound of flesh from that part of his body which it is 
*not necessary to mention. A report of this transaction was brought to the Pope, 
¢ who sent for the parties, and being informed of the whole affair, said, “When con- 
‘stracts are made, it is just they should be fulfilled, as we intend this shall. Take a 
‘ “knife, therefore, Secchi, and cut a pound of flesh from any part you please of the 


296 APPENDIX 


‘«Jew’s body. We would advise you, however, to be very careful; for if you cut but 
“a scruple, or a grain, more or less than your due, you shall certainly be hanged; go, 
«and bring thither a knife, and a pair of scales, and let it be done in our presence.” 
© The merchant, at these words, began to tremble like an aspen leaf, and throwing him- 
‘self at his Holiness’s feet, with tears in his eyes, protested, “It was far from his 
« “thoughts to insist upon the performance of the contract.” And being asked by the 
Pope what he demanded, answered, “ Nothing, holy father, but your benediction, and 
‘«that the articles may be torn in pieces.” Then, turning to the Jew, he asked him, 
“What he had to say, and whether he was content?” The Jew answered, “He 
“thought himself extremely happy to come off at so easy a rate, and that he was per- 
‘«fectly content.” “But we are not content,” replied Sixtus, “nor is there sufficient 
‘“ satisfaction made to our laws; we desire to know what authority you have to lay 
“«such wagers? The subjects of princes are the property of the state, and have no 
‘ “right to dispose of their bodies, nor any part of them, without the express consent 
‘ “of their sovereigns.” They were both immediately sent to prison, and the governor 
‘ordered to proceed against them with the utmost severity of the law, that others 
‘might be deterred, by their example, from laying any more such wagers. The Gov- 
‘ernor, thinking to please Sixtus, and willing to know what sort of punishment he had 
‘a mind should be inflicted upon them, said, “ Without doubt, they had been guilty of 
‘ “a very great crime, and he thought they deserved each of them to be fined 1000 
*« crowns.” ‘To be fined, each of them, 1000 crowns!” answered Sixtus. “ Do you 
‘think that sufficient? What! shall any of our subjects presume to dispose of his 
«life without our permission? Is it not evident that the Jew has actually sold his 
«life, by consenting to have a pound of flesh cut from his body? Is not this a direct 
‘suicide? And is it not likewise true that the merchant is guilty of downright, pre- 
‘meditated murder, in making a contract with the other, that he knew must be the 
*“ occasion of his death if he insisted upon its being performed, as it is said he did ? 
«« Shall two such villains be excused for a simple fine?” The Governor alleging, 
‘« That Secchi protested he had not the least design of insisting upon the performance 
‘of the contract, and that the Jew did not at all imagine he would when he laid the 
‘ “wager,” Sixtus replied, “ These protestations were only made out of fear of pun- 
‘«ishment, and because they were in our presence, and therefore no regard ought to 
* “be had to them; let them both be hanged; do you pass that sentence on them, and 
‘we shall take care of the rest.” In a word, they were both condemned to death, to 
‘the great terror and amazement of everybody, though no one durst open his mouth, or 
‘call it an unjust sentence. As Secchi was of a very good family, having many great 
‘friends and relations, and the Jew one of the most leading men of the synagogue, 
‘they both had recourse to petitions; strong application was made to Cardinal Mon- 
‘talto, to intercede with his Holiness, at least to spare their lives. Sixtus, who did not 
‘really design to put them to death, but to deter others from such practices, at last con- 
‘sented to change the sentence into that of the galleys, with liberty to buy off that too 
‘by paying each of them 2000 crowns, to be applied to the use of the hospital (which 
‘he had lately founded), before they were released.’ 
T have here given a much fuller extract from Leti than is given by Percy, who thus 
continues in reference to Farneworth’s translation : 
‘ The Editor of that book is of opinion, That the scene between Shylock and Anto- 
‘nio is taken from this incident. But Mr Warton has, with more probability, referred it 
‘to the [ballad of Gernutus], which would seem to have taken its rise from some such 
‘story. After all, we should be glad to know what authority Leti, who wrote in the 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—IL PECORONE 297 


time of Charles II, had for the foregoing fact, or, at least, for connecting it with the 
taking of St. Domingo by Drake; for this expedition did not happen till 1585, and it 
is very certain that a play of the Jew was mentioned by Gosson in 1579.’ 

As far as this story of Secchi and Ceneda is concerned, no one, I think, who has 
read that very entertaining farrago of improbable gossip which Leti wrote as a Life 
of Pope Sixtus V, will consider it as veracious history, or as any other than one of those 
pleasing little stories with which Leti lightened his pages. Douce considers it ‘a mere 
‘ fabrication, grafted on one of those that Leti had met with on the same subject ;’ and 
HALLIWELL echoes the same opinion, adding that, ‘ Leti refers the narrative to the 
‘time of Elizabeth, but it was neither written nor printed till some time after the death 
‘of Shakespeare.’ 


To CAPELL belongs the credit of having discovered a story whose main features so 
strongly resemble the story of The Bond that it has been widely accepted as the basis 
of Shakespeare’s play. ‘The Jew of Venice,’ says Capell (vol. i, p. 63), ‘was a story 
‘exceedingly well known in Shakespeare’s time; celebrated in ballads: and taken 
(perhaps) originally from an /fal/ian book, intit!)?d—“Il Pecorone;” the author of 
‘which calls himself,—Ser Giovanni Fiorentino; and writ his book, as he tells you 
‘in some humorous verses at the beginning of it, in 1378, three years after the death 
‘of Boccace: it is divided into giornata’s, and the story we are speaking of, is in the 
‘first novel of the giornata guarta; Edit. 1565, octavo, im Vinejia. This novel 
‘Shakespeare certainly read; either in the original, or (which I rather think) in some 
‘translation that is not now to be met with, and form’d his play upon it. It was trans- 
‘lated anew, and made publick in 1755, in a small octavo pamphlet, printed for JZ. 
‘ Cooper ; and at the end of it, a novel of Boccace (the first of day the tenth) which, 
‘as the translator rightly judges, might possibly produce the scene of the caskets, sub- 
‘stituted by the Poet in place of one in the other novel, that was not proper for the 
‘stage.’ 

Although we of these latter days do not agree with the earlier Editors in our esti- 
mate of Shakespeare’s learning, and cannot think with Steevens that if Shakespeare 
was indebted to an Italian novelist, ‘it #zzst have been through the medium of a trans- 
lation,’ yet there is no difficulty in supposing that a translation of /7 Pecorone existed 
and was widely read, albeit no single copy has survived. Apparently, England was 
flooded at that time with translations of Italian stories, if we may judge by the hot 
indignation which their popularity and profusion excited in the breast of admirable 
Roger Ascham, who, in his Scholemaster, 1570, inveighs most bitterly against the 
introduction into England of ‘the Religion, the learning, the policie, the experience, 
the maners of /ta/ie” and then continues (p. 78, ed. Arber): ‘ These be the inchante- 
mentes of Circes, brought out of //a/ie, to marre men’s maners in England; much, by 
example of ill life, but more by preceptes of fonde bookes, of late translated out of 
italian into English, sold in euery shop in London, commended by honest titles the 
soner to corrupt honest maners; dedicated ouer boldlie to vertuous and honourable 
personages, the easielier to begile simple and innocent wittes.’ Again (on p. 81), 
‘There be moe of these vngratious bookes set out in Printe within these fewe 
monethes, than haue bene sene in England many score yeare before.’ 

We need have no compunction, therefore, in supposing that Shakespeare was famil- 
iar with Ser Giovanni in English. The first translation, however, which is known to 
us is that referred to by Capell, and of which Dr Johnson, 1n his Edition, gives the 
following epitome, which, with some few changes, I much prefer to the original literal 


298 APPENDIX 


translation, which they who list can find in Collier’s Shakespeare Library, vol. ii, p. 65, 
&c., or in Hazlitt’s reprint of the same: 


There lived at Florence a merchant, whose name was Bindo. He was rich and 
had three sons. Being near his end, he called for the two eldest, and left them heirs ; 
to the youngest he left nothing. This youngest, whose name was Giannetto, went to 
his father and said: What has my Father done? The father replied, Dear Giannetto, 
there is none to whom I wish better than to you. Go to Venice to your godfather, 
whose name is Ansaldo; he has no child, and has wrote to me often to send you 
thither to him. He is the richest merchant amongst the Christians; if you behave 
well, you will certainly be a rich man. ‘The son answered, I am ready to do whatever 
my dear father shall command; upon which he gave him his benediction, and in a few 
days died. 

Giannetto went to Ansaldo, and presented the letter given by his father before his 
death. Ansaldo reading the letter, cried out, My dearest godson is welcome to my 
arms. He then asked news of his father. Giannetto replied, He is dead. I am 
much grieved, replied Ansaldo, to hear of the death of Bindo; but the joy I feel in 
seeing you mitigates my sorrow. He conducted him to his house, and gave orders to 
his servants that Giannetto should be obeyed, and served with more attention than had 
been paid to himself. He then delivered him the keys of his ready money; and told 
him, Son, spend this money, keep a table, and make yourself known; remember that 
the more you gain the good-will of everybody, the more you will be dear to me. 

Giannetto now began to give entertainments. He was more obedient and courteous 
to Ansaldo, than if he had been an hundred times his father. Everybody in Venice 
was fond of him. Ansaldo could think of nothing but him: so much was he pleased 
with his good manners and behaviour. 

It happened that two of his most intimate acquaintances designed to go with two 
ships to Alexandria, and told Giannetto he would do well to take a voyage and see the 
world, I would go willingly, said he, if my father Ansaldo will give leave. His com- 
panions go to Ansaldo, and beg his permission for Giannetto to go in the spring with 
them to Alexandria; and desire him to provide him a ship. Ansaldo immediately pro- 
cured a very fine ship, loaded it with merchandise, adorned it with streamers and fur- 
nished it with arms; and, as soon as it was ready, he gave orders to the Captain and 
sailors to do everything that Giannetto commanded. It happened one morning early 
that Giannetto saw a gulph, with a fine port, and asked the Captain how the port was 
called? He replied, That place belongs to a widow lady, who has ruined many gen- 
tlemen. In what manner? says Giannetto. He answered, This Lady is a fine and 
beautiful woman, and has made a law that whoever arrives here must be her wooer, 
and if he can win her he must take her for his wife, and be lord of all the country; 
but if he cannot win her, he loses everything he has brought with him. Giannetto, 
after a little reflection, tells the Captain to get into the port. He was obeyed; and in 
an instant they slide into the port so easily that the other ships perceived nothing. 

The lady was soon informed of it, and sent for Giannetto, who waited on her imme- 
diately. She, taking him by the hand, asked him who he was? whence he came? and 
-f he knew the custom of the country? He answered, That the knowledge of that 
custom was his only reason for coming. The lady paid him great honours, and sent 
for barons, counts, and knights in great number, who were her subjects, to keep Gian- 
netto company. These nobles were highly delighted with the good breeding and man- 
ners of Giannetto; and all would have rejoiced to have him for their lord. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT--IL PECORONE 299 


The night being come, the lady said, It seems to be time to go to bed; and immedi- 
ately two damsels enter with wine and sweetmeats. The lady entreats him to taste the 
wine; he takes the sweetmeats, and drinks some of the wine, which was prepared with 
ingredients to cause sleep. He then goes into the bed, where he instantly falls asleep 
and never wakes till late in the morning; but the lady rose with the sun and gave 
orders to unload the vessel, which she found full of rich merchandize. After nine 
o’clock the women servants go to the bedside, order Giannetto to rise and be gone, for 
he had lost the ship. The lady gave him a horse and money, and he leaves the place 
very melancholy, and goes to Venice. When he arrives, he dares not return home for 
shame; but at night goes to the house of a friend, who is surprised to see him, and 
inquires of him the cause of his return? He answers, his ship had struck on a rock 
in the night, and was broke in pieces. 

This friend going one day to make visit to Ansaldo, found him very disconsolate. I 
fear, says Ansaldo, so much, that this son of mine is dead, that I have no rest. His 
friend told him that he had been shipwrecked, and has lost his all, but that he himself 
was safe. Ansaldo instantly gets up and runs to find him, My dear son, says he, you 
need not fear my displeasure; it is a common accident; trouble yourself no further. 
He takes him home, all the way telling him to be cheerful and easy. 

The news was soon known all over Venice, and every one was concerned for Gian- 
netto. Some time after, his companions arriving from Alexandria very rich, demandea 
what was become of their friend, and having heard the story ran to see him, and re- 
joiced with him for his safety; telling him next spring he might gain as much as he 
had lost the last. But Giannetto had no other thoughts than of his return to the lady; 
and was resolved to marry her, or die. Ansaldo told him frequently not to be cast 
down. Giannetto said he should never be happy till he was at liberty to make another 
voyage. Ansaldo provided another ship of more value than the first. He again 
entered the port of Belmonte, and the lady looking on the port from her bed-chamber, 
and seeing the ship, asked her maid if she knew the streamers? The maid said, it 
was the ship of the young man who arrived last year. You are in the right, answered 
the lady; he must surely have a great regard for me, for never any one came a second 
time; the maid said, she had never seen a more agreeable man. He went to the cas- 
tle, and presented himself to the lady; who, as soon as she saw him, embraced him, 
and the day was passed in joy and revels. Bed-time being come, the lady entreated 
him to go to rest; when they were seated in the chamber, the two damsels enter with 
wine and sweetmeats; and having eaten and drunk of them, they retire, and immedi- 
ately Giannetto falls asleep, and the lady lay down by his side; but he waked not the 
whole night. In the morning the lady rises, and gives orders to strip the ship. He 
has a horse and money given to him and away he goes, and never stops till he gets to 
Venice; and at night goes to the same friend, who with astonishment asked him, what 
was the matter? Iam undone, says Giannetto. His friend answered, You are the 
cause of the ruin of Ansaldo, and your shame ought to be greater than the loss you 
have suffered. Giannetto lived privately many days. At last he took a resolution of 
seeing Ansaldo, who rose from his chair, and running to embrace him, told him he was 
welcome: Giannetto with tears returned his embraces. Ansaldo heard his tale: Do 
not grieve, my dear son, says he, we have still enough; the sea enriches some men, 
others it ruins, 

Poor Giannetto’s head was day and night full of the thoughts of his bad success. 
When Ansaldo inquired what was the matter, he confessed he could never be con- 
tented till he should be in a condition to regain all that he had lost. When Ansaldo 


300 APPENDIX 


found him resolved, he began to sell everything he had to furnish this other fine ship 
with merchandise; but as he wanted still ten thousand ducats, he applied himself te 
a Jew at Mestri, and borrowed them on condition that if they were not paid on the 
feast of St John in the next month of June, the Jew might take a pound of flesh from 
any part of his body he pleased. Ansaldo agreed, and the Jew had an obligation 
drawn, and witnessed, with all the form and ceremony necessary; and then counted 
him the ten thousand ducats of gold; with which Ansaldo bought what was still want- 
ing for the vessel. ‘This last ship was finer and better freighted than the other two, 
and his companions made ready for the voyage, with a design that whatever they 
gained should be for their friend. When it was time to depart Ansaldo told Gian- 
netto, that since he well knew of the obligation to the Jew, he entreated that if any 
misfortune happened he would return to Venice, that he might see him before he 
died; and then he could leave the world with satisfaction; Giannetto promised to do 
everything that he conceived might give him pleasure. Ansaldo gave him his blessing, 
they took their leave, and the ships set out. 

Giannetto had nothing in his head but to steal into Belmonte; and he prevailed 
with one of the sailors in the night to sail the vessel into the port. It was told the 
lady that Giannetto was arrived in port. She saw from the window the vessel, and 
immediately sent for him. Giannetto goes to the castle, the day is spent in joy and 
feasting; and to honour him a tournament is ordered, and many barons and knights 
tilted that day. Giannetto did wonders, so well did he understand the lance, and was 
so graceful a figure on horseback ; he pleased so much, that all were desirous of having 
him for their lord. 

The lady, when it was the usual time, catching him by the hand, begged him to 
take his rest. When he passed the door of the chamber, one of the damsels in a 
whisper said to him, Make a pretence to drink the liquor, but touch not one drop. 
The lady said, I know you must be thirsty, I must have you drink before you go to 
bed; immediately two damsels entered the room and presented the wine. Who can 
refuse wine from such beautiful hands? cries Giannetto: at which the lady smiled. 
Giannetto takes the cup, and making as if he had drank, pours the wine into his 
bosom. The lady thinking he had drank, says aside to herself with great joy, You 
must go, young man, and bring another ship, for this is condemned. Giannetto went 
to bed and began to snore as if he slept soundly. The lady perceiving this, laid her- 
self down by his side, Giannetto at once exclaimed, Now I have gained the trial, and 
you must marry me. When Giannetto came out of his chamber he was knighted, and 
placed in the chair of state; had the sceptre put into his hand, and was proclaimed 
sovereign of the country, with great pomp and splendour; and when the lords and 
ladies were come to the castle, he married the lady in great ceremony. 

Giannetto governed excellently, and caused justice to be administered impartially. 
He continued some time in this happy state, and never entertained a thought of poor 
Ansaldo, who had given his bond to the Jew for ten thousand ducats. But one day, 
as he stood at the window of the palace with his bride, he saw a number of people 
pass along the piazza, with lighted torches in their hands. What is the meaning of 
this? said he. The lady answered, They are artificers going to make their offerings 
at the Church of St John, this day being his festival. Giannetto instantly recollected 
Ansaldo, gave a great sigh, and turned pale. His lady enquired the cause of his sud- 
den change. He said he felt nothing. She continued to press with great earnestness, 
till he was obliged to confess the cause of his uneasiness, that Ansaldo was engaged 
for the money, that the term was expired; and the grief he was in was lest his father 


a 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—IL PECORONE 301 


should lose his life for him; that if the ten thousand ducats were not paid that day, he 
must lose a pound of his flesh. The lady told him to mount on horseback, and go by 
land the nearest way, to take some attendants, and an hundred thousand ducats; and 
not to stop until he arrived at Venice; and if he was not dead to bring Ansaldo to 
her. Giannetto takes horse, with twenty attendants, and makes the best of his way to 
Venice. 

The time being expired, the Jew had seized Ansaldo, and insisted on having a pound 
of his flesh. He entreated him only to wait some days, that if his dear Giannetto arrived, 
he might have the pleasure of embracing him; the Jew replied he was willing to wait, 
but, says he, I will cut off the pound of flesh according to the words of the obligation ; 
Ansaldo answered, that he was content. 

Several merchants would have jointly paid the money; the Jew would not harken to 
the proposal, but insisted that he might have the satisfaction of saying, that he had put 
to death the greatest of the Christian merchants. Giannetto making all possible haste 
to Venice, his lady soon followed him in a lawyer’s habit, with two servants attending 
her. Giannetto, when he came to Venice, goes to the Jew, and (after embracing An- 
saldo) tells him he is ready to pay the money, and as much more as he should demand. 
The Jew said he would take no money, since it was not paid at the time due, but that 
he would have the pound of flesh. Every one blamed the Jew; but as Venice was a 
place where justice was strictly administered, and the Jew had his pretensions grounded 
on publick and received forms, their only resource was entreaty; and when the mer- 
chants of Venice applied to him he was inflexible. Giannetto offered him twenty thou- 
sand, then thirty thousand, afterwards, forty, fifty, and at last, an hundred thousand 
ducats. The Jew told him if he would give him as much gold as Venice was worth, 
he would not accept it; and, says he, you know little of me, if you think I will desist 
from my demand. 

The lady now arrives in Venice, in her lawyer’s dress; and alighting at an inn, the 
landlord asks of one of the servants who his master was? The servant answered, that 
he was a young lawyer who had finished his studies at Bologna. The landlord upon 
this shows his guest great civility; and when he attended at dinner, the lawyer inquir- 
ing how justice was administered in that city; he answered, justice in this place is too 
severe, and related the case of Ansaldo. Says the lawyer, this question may be easily 
answered. If you can answer it, says the landlord, and save this worthy man from 
death, you will get the love and esteem of all the best men of this city. The lawyer 
caused a proclamation to be made, that whosoever had any law matters to determine, 
they should have recourse to him: so it was told to Giannetto that a famous lawyer 
was come from Bologna, who could decide all cases in law. Giannetto proposed to 
the Jew to apply to this lawyer. With all my heart, says the Jew; but let who will 
come, I will stick to my bond. They came to this judge and saluted him. Giannetto 
did not remember him; for he had disguised his face with the juice of certain herbs. 
Giannetto and the Jew each told the merits of the cause to the judge; who, when he 
had taken the bond and read it, said to the Jew, I must have you take the hundred 
thousand ducats, and release this honest man, who will always have a grateful sense 
of the favour done to him. The Jew replied, I will do no such thing. The judge 
answered, it will be better for you. The Jew was positive to yield nothing. Upon 
this they go to the tribunal appointed for such judgements; and our judge says to the 
Jew, Do you cut a pound of this man’s flesh where you choose. The Jew ordered 
him to be stripped naked; and takes in his hand a razor, which had been made on 
purpose. Giannetto seeing this, turning to the judge, this, says he, is not the favour J 


402 APPENDIX 


asked of you. Be quiet, says he, the pound of flesh is not yet cut off. As soon as 
the Jew was going to begin, Take care what you do, says the judge, if you take more 
or less than a pound, I will order your head to be struck off; and beside, if you shed 
one drop of blood you shall be put to death. Your paper makes no mention of the 
shedding of blood, but says expressly that you may take a pound of flesh, neither more 
nor less. He immediately sent for the executioner to bring the block and axe; and 
now, says he, if I see one drop of blood, off goes your head. At length the Jew, after 
much wrangling, told him, Give me the hundred thousand ducats, and I am content. 
No, says the judge, cut off your pound of flesh according to your bond ; why did you 
not take the money when it was offered? The Jew came down to ninety, then to 
eighty thousand; but the judge was still resolute. Giannetto told the judge to give 
what he required, that Ansaldo might have his liberty; but he replied, let me manage 
him. Then the Jew would have taken fifty thousand; he said, I will not give you a 
penny. Give me at least, says the Jew, my own ten thousand ducats, and a curse con- 
found you all. The judge replies, I will give you nothing; if you will have the pound 
of flesh, take it; if not, I will order your bond to be protested and annulled. The 
Jew seeing he could gain nothing, tore in pieces the bond in a great rage; Ansaldo 
was released, and conducted home with great joy by Giannetto, who carried the hun- 
dred thousand ducats to the inn to the lawyer. The lawyer said, I do not want 
money; carry it back to your lady, that she may not say that you have squandered it 
away idly. Says Giannetto, my lady is so kind, that I might spend four times as much 
without incurring her displeasure. How are you pleased with the lady? says the law- 
yer. I love her better than any earthly thing, answers Giannetto. Nature seems to 
have done her utmost in forming her. If you will come and see her, you will be sur- 
prised at the honours she will shew you. I cannot go with you, says the lawyer; but 
since you speak so much good of her, I must desire you to present my respects to her. 
I will not fail, Giannetto answered; and now let me entreat you to accept of some of 
the money. While he was speaking, the lawyer observed a ring on his finger, and 
said, if you will give me this ring, I shall seek no other reward. Willingly, says 
Giannetto; but as it is a ring given me by my lady, to wear for her sake, I have some 
reluctance to part with it, and she, not seeing it on my finger, will believe that I have 
given ittoa woman. Says the lawyer, she esteems you sufficiently to credit what you 
tell her, and you may say you made a present of it to me; but I rather think you want 
to give it to some former mistress here in Venice. So great, says Giannetto, is the love 
and reverence I bear to her, that I would not change her for any woman in the world. 
After this he takes the ring from his finger, and presents it to him. I have still a 
favour to ask, says the lawyer. It shall be granted, says Giannetto. It is, replied he, 
that you do not stay any time here, but go as soon as possible to your lady. It appears 
to me a thousand years till I see her, answered Giannetto; and immediately they take 
leave of each other. The lawyer embarked and left Venice. Giannetto took leave of 
his Venetian friends, and carried Ansaldo with him, and some of his old acquaintance 
accompanied them. 

The lady arrived some days before; and having resumed her female habit, pretended 
so have spent the time at the baths; and now gave orders to have the streets lined with 
tapestry ; and when Giannetto and Ansaldo were landed, all the court went out to meet 
them. When they arrived at the palace, the lady ran to embrace Ansaldo, but feigned 
anger against Giannetto, tho’ she loved him excessively: yet the feastings, tilts, and 
diversions, went on as usual, at which all the lords and ladies were present. Gian- 
netto seeing that his wife did not receive him with her accustomed good countenance, 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—IL PECORONE 303 


called her and would have saluted her. She told him she wanted not his caresses; I 
am sure, says she, you have been lavish of them to some of your former mistresses. 
Giannetto began to make excuses. She asked him where was the ring she had given 
him? It is no more than what I expected, cries Giannetto, and I was in the right to 
Say you would be angry with me; but I swear by all that is sacred, and by your dear 
self, that I gave the ring to the lawyer who gained our cause. And I can swear, says 
the lady, with as much solemnity, that you gave the ring to a woman; therefore, swear 
no more. Giannetto protested that what he had told her was true, and that he said 
all this to the lawyer when he asked for the ring. The lady replied, you would have 
done much better to stay at Venice with your mistresses, for I fear they all wept when 
you came away. Giannetto’s tears began to fall, and in great sorrow he assured her 
that what she supposed could not be true. The lady seeing his tears, which were dag- 
gers in her bosom, ran to embrace him, and in a fit of laughter showed the ring, and 
told him that she was herself the lawyer, and how she obtained the ring. Giannetto 
was greatly astonished, finding it all true, and told the story to the nobles and to his 
companions; and this heightened greatly the love between him and his lady. He 
then called the damsel, who had given him the good advice in the evening not to 
drink the liquor, and gave her to Ansaldo for a wife; and they spent the rest of their 
lives in great felicity and contentment. 


Douce says (i, 280) : ‘A part of the novel in the Pecorone is most likely of Oriental 
‘ origin, and might have been transmitted to Ser Giovanni from the same source that 
‘supplied Boccaccio and many of the. French minstrels with their stories, viz. the 
« Crusades.’ 

SKOTTOWE (i, 321) : ‘The similarity between the novel and the play is striking. In 
‘both the money engaged for by the bond is borrowed, not for the use of the borrower, 
‘but to enable a young man to obtain the hand of a wealthy lady resident at Belmont. 
‘ The forfeiture of the same portion of flesh is stipulated on failure of payment, and the 
‘flesh, in both instances, is to be taken from what part of the merchant’s body pleased 
‘the Jew; who, in each case, is offered ten times the amount of his debt by the person 
‘for whom it was contracted. The bride, in both cases, arrives at Venice disguised as 
‘a lawyer, and interposes the same insurmountable obstacles to the exaction of the 
‘bloody penalty. Both the fair judges refuse pecuniary recompense; both request from 
‘the fingers of their husbands rings which they themselves had given to them, and the 
“same species of Jadinage is the consequence of compliance when the ladies resume 
‘their own characters at Belmont.’ 

SPEDDING (Cornhill Maga., March, 1880, p. 282): ‘I suppose nobody who reads 
‘this story and knows the play,—two conditions which do not seem to have been 
‘ generally united,—will doubt that Shakespeare had either read or heard it, and that 
“it was from this... . that he derived his idea, not only of the forfeiture of the pound 
‘of flesh, but of the entire train of incidents, and the characters and relations of the 
‘persons of the drama..... The changes which he introduced were only such as the 
© conversion of a narrative into an actable play required. The action had to be brought 
‘within compass; the stage to be peopled; the persons to speak and act, instead of 
‘being described; new incidents to be invented or imported for entertainment and 
‘variety. But all this he did in careful conformity with the fundamental conception 

of the several characters as indicated in the old story. Giannetto’s first two voyages 
being ignored, the play begins at once with the preparations for the third, which 
involves the bargain with the Jew; whereby, without sacrificing anything material, 


304 APPENDIX 


‘the action is considerably shortened. The original condition of the marriage, being 
‘at once unpresentable to a Shakespearian audience and irreconcilable with the lady’s 
‘character as shown in the sequel, is rejected altogether; but, in substituting for it the 
‘device of the three caskets, care is taken to preserve all the essential features of the 
‘situation. Bassanio, having run in debt by living beyond his income, resolves to try 
‘his chance with a great heiress,—a lady for whom in her father’s time he had con- 
‘ ceived an affection, which he had reason to believe was mutual,—but who could only 
‘be sought in marriage upon the perilous condition of losing all if a riddle were not 
‘rightly read. To furnish himself for the adventure he has to borrow money from his 
‘kinsman and dearest friend and benefactor, Antonio; who, in order to supply him 
‘without delay, borrows it from Shylock on the security of the pound of flesh. Thus 
‘we have Bassanio and Antonio essentially in the same condition towards each other 
*as Giannetto and Ansaldo when parting for the final voyage; while Bassanio, as soon 
‘as he has chosen the right casket, is in exactly the same position as Giannetto after 
‘the successful performance of his appointed task; and in all the scenes that follow 
‘we have only to imagine Giannetto in Bassanio’s place, and we feel that he would 
‘have both spoken and acted in the same way,—that the characters are, in fact, iden- 
‘tical. So, again, the Ansaldo of the story and the Antonio of the play are only two 
‘ portraits of the same man by different artists, one of whom sees further into him than 

the other. We are not told by the novelist that Ansaldo suffered from a constitutional 
‘depression of spirits, but it probably occurred to Shakespeare as necessary to account 
‘ for that extraordinary indifference to all mortal accidents (the happiness of his adopted 
“son excepted), which, in the degree to which it is carried in the novel, he appears to 
‘have thought impossible in nature after all, and has, therefore, shown in Antonio 
‘much mitigated; for whereas, Ansaldo, knowing himself to be ruined, signs the bond 
‘with a clear presentiment of the consequence, and yet asks Giannetto for nothing 
‘more than a promise that he will see him before he dies, Antonio when he signs, 
‘though short of ready money for the moment, is still in the full flow of his fortunes, 
‘and laughs at the idea of being called on to pay the forfeit. It is true that when the 
‘danger fronts him, and cannot be escaped, he meets it as patiently, and with as much 
‘apparent indifference, as Ansaldo,—making no vain remonstrance, not complaining of 
‘the rigour of the law, but justifying its execution, and content to die, provided only 
‘that he may see Bassanio again before he is put to death. But there is a great differ- 
‘ence between accepting such a fate with equanimity when it is inevitable, and delibe- 
‘rately incurring it when it is foreseen and may be declined. 

‘Then, again, the absolute inoffensiveness of Ansaldo, who does not seem to have 
uttered a harsh word, or entertained an unkind thought against anybody,—with whom 
‘the very man who is avowing his determination to take his life, though all Venice were 
‘ offered him to spare it, does not pretend any cause except his being the greatest of the 
* Christian merchants,—seemed to make the Jew’s proceeding too monstrous to be endur- 
‘able by an English audience. Such malice needed some provocation to make it cred- 
‘ible enough for the human imagination, and a probable cause of provocation readily 
‘offered itself in the disputes which must have occurred on the Rialto between two 
‘such men. A man who would enforce his contract for a pound of flesh in such a 
‘case was sure in all his transactions to take advantages of the helpless, which a lib- 
‘eral and beneficent merchant would be sure to be disgusted with and interfere to 
‘thwart. On such occasions feelings would be expressed and words uttered which 

would not sting the less for being just and well deserved. And that this was the 
real history of the revengeful hatred on one side, and the contemptuous dislike on 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—GESTA ROMANORUM 305 


‘the other, we are made to understand at once, as soon as they meet, by the imntating 
‘and sarcastic speech of Shylock (finding himself for the first time at an advantage) 
‘and the angry retort which it provokes from Antonio. This revelation of their 
‘respective feelings towards each other shows ground enough for Shylock’s malice to 
‘bring it within the range, not indeed of human sympathy, which was not intended, but 
‘of possibility in human nature. We can imagine nature so diseased and perverted as 
‘to be capable of it without ceasing to be human. .... If the characters of Bassanio, 
‘Antonio, and Shylock are manifestly and directly derived from Ser Giovanni’s story, 
“it need hardly be said that the lady of Belmonte suggested the idea of Portia, every 
‘one of whose qualities, as we see them brought out in the play by Shakespeare’s own 
‘hand,—the generosity, the affection, the spirit, the intellect, the gayety, and playful- 
‘ness,—he found hints of in the novelist’s account of the lady’s proceedings between 
‘her discovery of Ansaldo’s position and her reception of him and her husband at 
‘Belmonte. What need, then, have we to seek further, either for the source of the 
‘plot, or the choice of the subject, or the manner of its treatment ?’ 


Thus far we have examined the Bad/ad source started by Warton, the Zefi source by 
Farneworth, and the Pecorone source by Capell, and all of them dealing with the Pound 
of Flesh or the Bond Story. Still harping on that, we must now go back to Tyrwhitt, 
who, in the Variorum of 1773, suggested that a ‘common remoge origin’ might be found 
for both the Bond and the Casket Stories in the Gesta Romanorum, a collection of 
stories presumably compiled towards the end of the 13th Century in England.* ‘The 
Gesta Romanorum, in its original form,’ says its admirable Editor, Mr Herrtage, in the 
Early English Text Society's Series, ‘is a collection of fictitious narratives in Latin, 
‘compiled from Oriental apologues, monkish legends, classical stories, tales of chron- 
‘iclers, popular traditions, and other sources, which it would be now difficult and per- 

haps impossible to discover.’ 

Tyrwhitt was obliged to say ‘remote’ origin, because ‘the completest copy’ he had 
ever seen (Harl. 2270) was not only a MS, but in Latin, and, in Tyrwhitt’s days, it 
was not to be supposed that, in that form and in that language, it was either accessible 
or intelligible to Shakespeare. 

An English translation, however, did exist, and was popular in Shakespeare’s time. 
Originally it was printed by Wynkyn de Worde, presumably, according to Herrtage, in 
1510-15, and of this issue but one single copy survives; Dr Farmer cites it, and Tyr- 
whitt may have seen it, and it is now one of the treasures of St John’s College, Cam: 
bridge. 

The editions that were popular in Queen Elizabeth’s reign were brought out by one 
Richard Robinson, and to the number of no less than six between 1577 and r6or. 
Although Robinson speaks of having ‘translated’ the Gesta Romanorum, and that it 
was ‘ by mee perused, corrected, and bettered,’ yet it is known from the very few copies 
(only two) that survive of all these six editions, that he retained the same number and 
the same order of the stories as in Wynkyn de Worde. Now, in Wynkyn de Worde, 
and in Robinson’s re-issue, the Bond Story is not to be found. The Casket Story is 
there, but the Bond Story is not.f I think, therefore, we may hold Tyrwhitt justified 
in thinking that the Gesta Romanorum was only a ‘remote’ source of the Bond Story. 


Se Emme 
* Oesterley, as quoted by Herrtage, p. xvii. er 
+ My authorities for all that I say about the Gesta Romanorum are Warton’s Ast. of Eng. Poetry, 
1781, iii, xlix; Douce, i, 27z, and the admirable exhaustive Introduction by S. J. Herrtage, of the 
Early Eng. Text Soctety. 
20 


306 APPENDIX 


Nevertheless, an early English version of the Gesta Romanorum containing this 
Story does exist, but it is a Manuscript (Harl. 7 333) of the time of Henry the Sixth, 
about 1440. ‘This version Douce printed for the first time, I think; and he did so, not 
because he believed it to be the direct source of Shakespeare’s plot, but as ‘an inter- 
esting specimen of ancient English.’ ; 

It is scarcely worth while to reprint it word for word here; it is readily accessible in 
Douce, in the Zarly English Text Society’s Series, and it is also given entire in Halliwell. 
Substantially it is the same story as in the Pecorone, but instead of the drugged wine 
there was ‘bi-tweene the shete and the couerlyte of the bed a letter of swiche vertu, 
*that who so euer gothe to bed he shall anon falle in to a dede slepe.’ This secret 
was told to the knight by Virgile, ‘the philesofere,’ whom he consulted, and the knight 
exorcised the spell by removing the letter. The bribe of ‘an c. marke of florens,’ 
which ‘the mayde’ demanded, the knight had been obliged to borrow of a marchaunt 
‘in conducion, that yf thowe kepe not thi day of payment, hit shalle be lefulle to me 
“for to draw awey alle the flesh of thi body froo the bone, with a sharp swerde.’ In 
the charms of his love’s society the knight ‘ for-gate the marchaunt; and the day of 
‘payment was passid by the space of xiiij dayes.’ The knight offered his creditor 
double payment, in vain. The merchant refused, even for the wealth of the whole 
city, to forgo the penalty, and ‘anon he made the knighte to be I-take, and lad to the 
* castell, and sette him in a safe warde, abydinge the Iustice.’ On the trial the Judge 
decides that as the contract was made with the knight’s full consent, and by his own 
act, ‘he shal Resseyve as he servithe; and therefore this merchaunt shalle haue cove- 
‘naunt, as lawe wolle.’ But the ‘damysell’ was not idle; through spies she learned 
that the knight had fallen under the law, and thereupon ‘she kytte of al the longe her 
‘of hir hede, and cladde hir in precious clothing like to a man;’ and went to the 
palace and announced to the Judge that she had come to deliver the knight from the 
merchant. After the Judge had again expounded the law, the ‘damisell turnid to the 
‘marchaunt and saide, “der frend, what profite is it to the that this knighte that 
‘ « stondithe her redy to the dome, be slayne? it wer better to the to have monye, than 
*«to have him slayne.”’ . ‘“‘ Thou spekist al in veyne,” quod the merchaunt, “ for with 
* “ oute dowte I wolle have the lawe, sithe he bonde him so frely; and therefor he 
‘«shalle have noon other grace than lawe wolle; for he come to me, and I not to 
*«“him; I desirid him not thereto a-yenste his wille.” ‘To the offer of his “monye 
*« double,” or of any amount that he chose to demand, the merchant replied, “ thow 
‘«harde me neuer seye, but that I wolde have my covenaunt kepte.” “Sothely,” 
‘seyde she, “and thou shalt, trowe me,’”’ whereupon she calls all to witness how much 
‘she had offered and how the merchant steadily refused and demanded the lawe, “and 
«that likithe me moche. And therefor, lordinges, that bethe her, herithe me what I 
*«shalle seye.” She acknowledges that the knight had bound himself that the “ mar- 
«« chaunt shulde have power to kitte his fleshe fro the boons, but there was no coue- 
«« naunt made of sheding of blode; there of was nothing I-spoke. And therefor late 
‘« him set hond on him anoon; and yf he shede ony bloode with his shavinge of the 
‘« fleshe, for sothe then shalle the kynge have good lawe vpon him.” And when the 
‘ marchaunt harde this, he said, “ yef me my monye, and I foryeve my accion.” “For 
‘“sothe,” quod she, “thowe shalt not have oo penye; for a-for al this companye I 

“proferid to the al that I myght, and thou forsoke hit, and saydist withe a lowde 
“voyse, I shalle have my covenaunte; and therfor do thi beste withe him, but loke 
‘ “that thow shede no blode, I charge the, for it is not thin, ne no covenaunt was there 
*“of.” Thenne the marchaunt seynge this, yede awey confus, and so was the knightes 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PERSIAN MS 307 


lyf sauid, & no penye I-payde. And she yede home ayene, and dude of that clothinge, 

& clothid hir as she was afor, like toa woman. And the knighte yede home a-yene; 

and the damisell turnid, and met him, and askid howe he had I-spedde, as thowhe 

she had not knowen ther of. “A! lady,” quod he, “this day was I in poynt to be 

“dede for thy love, but as I was in point to be dampnid, there came in sodeynlye a 
‘« knite, a fair and wel I-shape, the whiche I sawe neuer afor; and he deliuerid me 
“by his Excellent wisdam, bothe from dethe and eke from payment of moneye.” 
‘« Thenne were thow,” quod she, “vnkynde, that woldest nat bidde that knighte to 
* “mete, that so faire had savid the.” He aunswerde there to, & saide, that he come 
‘sodenly, and sodenly yede. Thenne seide she, “knowiste thow him, if thou seye 
‘«him?” “yee,” quod he, “ Right wele.”” She yede vp, and cladde hir as she dide 
‘afore ; and then she yede forthe, and the knighte knewe her thenne wele, and for Toye 
‘fel dovne vpon hire, and saide, “ blessid be thow, & the houre in the whiche I fyrste 
‘knew the!’ And he wepte; and aftir he weddid hir, and livid & deyde in the 
‘service of god; and yelde to god goode sowlis.’ 


In the Variorum of 1793, Malone brought forward ‘a Persian manuscript in the pos 
‘session of Ensign Thomas Munro,’ at Tanjore. The age of the MS could not be 
determined ; several leaves at the beginning and the end were lacking. It contained 
the following story, translated by Mr Munro: 

‘It is related that in the town of Syria a poor Mussulman lived in the neighbour- 
‘hood of a rich Jew. One day he went to the Jew, and said, ‘“‘Lend me roo dinars, 
* «that I may trade with it, and I will give thee a share of the gain.” This Mussul- 
‘man had a beautiful wife, and the Jew had seen and fallen in love with her, and 
‘thinking this a lucky opportunity, he said, “I will not do thus, but I will give thee a 
‘hundred dinars, with this condition, that after six months thou shalt restore it to 
‘me. But give me a bond in this form, that if the term of the agreement shall be 
«« exceeded one day, I shall cut a pound of flesh from thy body, from whatever part I 
*«“ choose.” The Jew thought that by this means he might perhaps come to enjoy the 
‘Mussulman’s wife. The Mussulman was dejected, and said, “ How can this be ?” 
* But as his distress was extreme, he took the money on that condition, and gave the 
‘bond, and set on a journey; and in that journey he acquired much gain, and he was 
“every day saying to himself, ‘‘God forbid that the term of the agreement should pass 
‘«‘away, and the Jew bring vexation upon me.” He therefore gave a hundred gold 
‘ dinars into the hand of a trusty person, and sent him home to give it to the Jew. But 
‘the people of his own house, being without money, spent it in maintaining themselves, 
«When he returned from his journey, the Jew required payment of the money, and the 
‘pound of flesh, The Mussulman said, “I sent thy money a long time ago.” The 
‘ Jew said, “ Thy money came not to me.” When this, on examination, appeared to 
‘be true, the Jew carried the Mussulman before the Cazi, and represented the affair. 
‘ The Cazi said to the Mussulman, “ Either satisfy the Jew, or give the pound of flesh.” 
© The Mussulman not agreeing to this, said, ‘Let us go to another Cazi.’” When they 
‘ went, he also spoke in the same manner. The Mussulman asked the advice of an 
‘ingenious friend. He said, “Say to him, Let us go to the Cazi of Hems. Go there, 
‘ «for thy business will be well.” Then the Mussulman went to the Jew, and said, 


#6] shall be satisfied with the decree of the Cazi of Hems;” the Jew said, “I also 


«shall be satisfied.” Then both departed for the city of Hems. When they pre- 
«sented themselves before the judgement-seat, the Jew said, “O my Lord Judge, this 
t “man borrowed an hundred dinars of me, and pledged a pound of flesh from his own 


308 APPENDIX 


“body. Command that he give the money and the flesh.” It happened that the 
‘Cazi was the friend of the father of the Mussulman, and for this respect, he said ta 
‘the Jew, “ Thou sayest true, it is the purport of the bond;” and he desired that they 
‘should bring a sharp knife. The Mussulman, on hearing this, became speechless, 
‘The knife being brought, the Cazi turned his face to the Jew, and said, ** Arise, and 
«cut one pound of flesh from the body of him, in such a manner, that there may not 
‘be one grain more or less, and if more or less thou shalt cut, I shall order thee to 
‘«be killed.” The Jew said, “I cannot. I shall leave this business and depart.” 
‘The Cazi said, “Thou mayest not leave it.’ He said, “ O Judge, I have released 
‘«“him.” The Judge said, “It cannot be; either cut the flesh or pay the expense of 
‘his journey.” It was settled at two hundred dinars: the Jew paid another hundred, 
‘and departed. 

STEEVENS: ‘To the collection of novels, &c., wherein the plot of the foregoing play 
‘occurs, may be added another, viz. from Roger Bontemps en Belle Humeur. In the 
‘story here related of the Jew and the Christian, the Judge is made to be Solyman, 
‘ Emperor of the Turks. See the Edition of 1731, tom. ii, p. 105. 

‘ Perhaps this Tale (like that of Parnell’s Hermit) may have found its way into every 
‘language.’ 

Douce (i, 278) says that a similar story is related in Gladwin’s Persian Moonshee, 
story 13 (which Halliwell gives, and which appears to have been copied in a transla- 
tion of ‘Tales told in the Deccan,’ as pointed out by Mr G. L. Gomme in Zhe Athe- 
nazum, 18 Oct., 1880): ‘And another, likewise from an Oriental source, in the Bretzsh 
‘ Magazine for 1800, p.159. In Tyron, Recueil de plusteures plaisantes nouvelles, &c., 
‘ Anvers, 1590, a Christian borrows 500 ducats of a Jew at Constantinople on condition 
‘of paying two ounces of flesh for usury. At the expiration of the term the Christian 
‘refuses to pay more than the principal. The matter is brought before the Emperor 
‘Solyman, who orders a razor to be brought, and admonishes the Jew not to cut off 
‘more or less than the two ounces, on pain of death. The Jew gives up the point. 
‘The same story occurs in the 7resor des récreations, Douay, 1625, p. 27; in Docte 
‘nuge Gaudenst7, Jocost, 1713, p. 23; in the Courier facetieux, Lyon, 1650, p. 109; 

in the Chasse ennuy, Paris, 1645, p. 49; in Corrozet’s Divers propos mémorables, 1577, 
‘p. 77.’ [Of this, also, Halliwell gives a translation, which was published in London, 
1602. It is merely the same old story.] ‘It has been imitated by Antony Munday 
‘in his Astrepho, &c., 1580. Instead of the cutting off a pound of flesh, it is agreed 
‘that one of the party’s eyes shall be pulled out.’ 

It is over eighty years ago that Douce collected these various versions, and since 
then here and there others have been added. Simrock thinks that the conclusion 
* that the story is of ‘Oriental origin is too hasty; the East has, in many forms, received 
‘reflex impressions from the West, and has taken back, for the fictions which it lent, a 
‘rich return of others transplanted thence. The internal form of the story must decide 
‘its origin,’ 

SIMROCK, again, thinks that the real meaning of the story is.to represent the triumph 
of the eguitas over the jus strictum. By the severe Roman law of The Twelve Tables 
creditors could cut to pieces their debtors upon proof of their debt, and without any 
express provision when the loan was made, and they need be under no restriction as 
to the exact amount of their slice. [See Muirhead, post—Ep.] When, therefore, 
this old law has to be revived by express agreement, and is further restricted to absolute 
exactness, then Simrock thinks we have the meaning of the Bond Story. ‘Our opin- 
‘ion,’ says Simrock \p. 56), ‘that the story contains an old law anecdote, and one, too, 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—THE MAHABHARATA 309 


tul of the most meaning and incident that can exist, is supported by the form of the 
‘fable in the old Meistergesang of Kaiser Karls Recht, printed at Bamberg in 1493, 
‘the contents of which are thus given in the Cld German Museum, ii, 279: “ A rich 
*“merchant left his whole possession to his son, which he squandered in the first year. 
‘He then borrows a thousand guilders of a Jew, to try his fortune abroad. The con- 
‘dition is the one already known. He returns with great gain, but does not find the 

“« Jew at home, and so overstays the time; at least, the Jew maintains that he has not 
‘fulfilled the contract, because the time has elapsed. They conclude to travel to the 
‘Emperor Charles (this must be Charlemagne) that he may decide the dispute. On 
‘“the road the merchant falls asleep on his horse, and runs over and kills a child who 
‘was in the way. The child’s father proclaims him for a murderer, and follows him, 
*“to make good his accusation, to the Emperor’s court. Here the merchant is taken 
““into custody, but by a new misfortune falls out of the window, and kills an old 
«night who was sitting below ona bench. The son of this knight now comes for- 
“«“ward as plaintiff against the merchant, so that the Emperor has three causes to 
*“decide. The dispute with the Jew is settled in the well-known manner; the claim 
‘as to the child he settles in a less satisfactory way. ‘Let him beget thee another.’ 
«« Nay,’ said the man, ‘I will rather say nothing more of my loss.’ He advises the 
“son of the old knight, as the most satisfactory manner of avenging his father, to go 
* “up into the chamber, have the merchant placed upon the bench, and the young man 
« «may then fall upon him and kill him. But the young knight fears he may miss him, 
‘and so gives up his claim to vengeance.” ’ 

M. D. Conway ( The Wandering Jew, 1881, p. 128) maintains that the chief features 
of the story have a deep meaning and lie at the very foundations of our moral nature. 
* Side by side, in all ages and races, have struggled with each other the principle of 
‘ Retaliation and that of Forgiveness.’ The following legend was related to him by a 
Hindu as one he had been told in his childhood: ‘ The chief of the Indian triad, Indra, 
‘pursued the god Agni, Agni changed himself into a dove in order to escape; but 

Indra changed himself to a hawk, to continue the pursuit. The dove took refuge 
‘with Vishnu, second person of the triad, the Hindu Saviour. Indra, flying up, de- 
“manded the dove; Vishnu, concealing it in his bosom, refused to give up the dove. 
‘Indra then took an oath, that if the dove were not surrendered he would tear from 
‘Vishnu’s breast an amount of flesh equal to the body of the dove. Vishnu still 

refused to surrender the bird, but bared his breast. The divine hawk tore from it the 
“exact quantity, and the drops of blood,—the blood of a Saviour,—as they fell to the 
‘ground wrote the Scriptures of the Vedas. The earliest version, probably B. C. 300, 
‘is the story in the Mahabharata (Vana parva) of the trial of the best of mankind, 
‘King Usinara. Indra and Agni, wishing to test his fidelity to the laws of righteous- 
‘ness, assume the forms of falcon and pigeon. The latter (Agni), pursued by the for- 
‘mer (Indra), seeks and receives the king’s protection, The falcon demands the 
‘ pigeon, and is refused on the ground that it is written that, to kill a twice-born man, 
“to kill a cow, and to abandon a being that has taken refuge with one, are equal sins. 
‘ This is a quotation from the laws of Manu. The falcon argues that it is the law of 
‘nature that it shall feed on pigeons, and a statute against nature is no law. He (the 
‘ falcon) will be starved, consequently his mate and little ones must perish, and thus, in 
‘ preserving one, the king will slay many. The falcon is offered by Usinara other food, 
‘a boar, bull, gazelle,—but the falcon declares that it is not the law of its nature to 

eat such things. The king then declares that he will not give up the pigeon, but he 

will give anything else in his power which the falcon may demand. ‘The falcon 


j10 APPENDIX 


‘replies that he can only accept a quantity of the king’s own flesh equal in weight to 
‘the pigeon’s body. Usinara gladly accedes to this substitution. Balances are pro- 
« duced, and the pigeon is placed in one scale. The king cuts off a piece of his flesh 
‘that appears large enough, but is insufficient; he cuts again and again, but still the 
‘ pigeon outweighs his piled-up flesh. Finally, all his flesh gone, the king gets into the 
scale himself, The two gods then resume their divine shape, announce to Usinara 
‘that for the sacrifice he has made he will be glorified in all worlds throughout eter- 
‘nity, and the king ascends transfigured into heaven.’ [Many variations of this legend 
have been collected by the learned author, and are duly set forth in the highly interest- 
ing volume from which the foregoing extract is taken, but lack of space forbids more 
than this reference to them here. ] 5 
But however interesting all these stories, and their geographical distribution, may 
be in an archeological view, surely their connection” with Shakespeare’s Shylock and 
Anthonio is the thinnest gossamer. I have, nevertheless, thought it my duty, in an 
edition like the present, to give them all, or allusions to them, seeing that various edi- 
tors, commentators, and critics have at times laid stress on one or other of them, or at 
least alluded to them with approbation, as possible sources of the Plot. 


There remains one other book to which reference has been made several times, and 
in which two or three points of resemblance have been detected, which are so emphatic 
that, as we have seen by the allusions in the preceding pages, the date of this volume 
has much influenced several editors in fixing the date of Shakespeare’s comedy. 

It was Dr FARMER who first called attention to this book, whereof the long title 
runs thus: Zhe Orator: Handling a hundred feuerall Difcourfes, in forme of Decta- 
mations: Some of the Arguments being drawne from Titus Liuius and other ancient 
Writers, the reft of the Authors owne inuention: Part of which are of matters hap- 
pened in our Age. Written in French by Alexander Siluayn, and Engiifhed by L. P. 
London. Printed by Adam Islip, 1596. ‘The initials L. P. stand, as the Dedication 
shows, for Lazarus Piot, which again, according to Ritson, stands for Anthony Munday. 

This volume is of more than usual attractiveness, whereof but little intimation 
is given in the title. It consists of a number of incidents, historical and imaginary, 
involving in the mere statement questions of morality on which much can be said 
for both sides; the questions are not of that chop-logic nature which at one time was 
the delight of Schoolmen, and which Rabelais ridiculed in his books at St Victor: 
utrum Chimera in vacuo bombinans possit comedere secundas intentiones, but many 
of them are questions which have an interest even at the present day, such as, for 
instance, ‘ Declamation 81, Of a Chirurgion, who murthered a man to see the mouing 
of a quicke heart,’ wherein some of the arguments of the advocates of vivisection are 
duly set up and overthrown. Other ‘ Declamations’ are referred to at IIT 4i, 34, and 
again in the account of the Jud von Venedig, post. The Declamation, however, which 
in many particulars bears a striking resemblance to Shylock’s speech in the Trial Scene, 
is the Ninety-fifth, and is as follows: 


DECLAMATION. 95. 
Of a Few, who would for his debt haue a pound of the flefh of a 
Chrifitan. 


A lew vnto whom a Chriftian Marchant ought nine hundred crownes, would haue 
Summoned him for the fame in Turckie: the Merchant, becaufe te would not be ay: 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—SILVAYN'S ORATOR 311 


credited, promifed to pay the aid fumme within the tearme of three months, and if he 
paied tt not, he was bound to giue him a pound of the flefh of his bodie. The tearme 
being paft fome fifteene daies, the Iew refufed to take his money, and demaunded the 
pound of flefh: the ordinarie Iudge of that place appointed him to cut a tuft pound 
of the Chriftian’s flefh, and if he cut either more or leffe, then his owne head ‘Should be 
[mitien off: the Iew appealed from this fentence, unto the chiefe inde, faying : 


Impoflible is it to breake the credite of trafficke amongft men without great detriment 
vnto the Commonwealth: wherefore no man ought to bind himfelfe vnto fuch coue- 
nants which hee cannot or wil not accomplifh, for by that means fhould no man feare 
to be deceaued, and credit being maintained, euery man might be affured of his owne; 
but fince deceit hath taken place, neuer wonder if obligations are made more rigorous 
& ftrict then they were wont, feeing that although the bonds are made neuer fo ftrong, 
yet can no man be very certaine that he fhal not be a lofer. It feemeth at the firft 
fight, that it is a thing no leffe ftrange then cruel, to bind a man to pay a pound of the 
flefh of his bodie, for want of money: Surely, in that it is a thing not vfuall, it appear- 
eth to be fomewhat the more admirable, but there are diuers others that are more 
cruell, which becaufe they are in vfe feeme nothing terrible at all: as to binde al the 
bodie vnto a moft lothfome prifon, or vnto an intollerable flauerie, where not only the 
whole bodie but alfo al the fences and fpirits are tormented, the which is commonly 
practifed, not only betwixt thofe which are either in fect or Nation contrary, but alfo 
euen amongft thofe that are all of one fect and nation, yea amongft neighbours and 
kindred, & euen amongft Chriftians it hath ben feene, that the fon hath imprifoned the 
father for monie. Likewife in the Roman Commonwealth, fo famous for laws and 
armes, it was lawfull for debt, to imprifon, beat, and afflict with torments the free Citti- 
zens: How manie of them (do you thinke) would haue thought themfelues happie, if 
for a fmall debt they might haue ben excufed with the paiment of a pound of their 
flesh? Who ought then to maruile if a Iew requireth fo fmall a thing of a Chriftian, 
to difcharge him of a good round fumme? A man may aske why I would not rather 
take filuer of this man, then his flefh: I might alleage many reafons, for I might fay 
that none but my felfe can tell what the breach of his promife hath coft me, and what 
I haue thereby paied for want of money vnto my creditors, of that which I haue loft 
in my credit: for the miferie of thofe men which efteeme their reputation, is fo great, 
that oftentimes they had rather indure anything fecretlie then to haue their difcredit 
blazed abroad, becaufe they would not be both fhamed and harmed. Neuertheleffe, J 
doe freely confeffe, that I had rather lofe a pound of my flefh, then my credit fhould 
be in any fort cracked: I might alfo fay that I haue need of this flefh to cure a friend 
of mine of a certaine maladie, which is otherwife incurable, or that I would haue it to 
terriffie thereby the Chriftians for euer abufing the Iewes anie more hereafter: but I 
will onelie fay, that by his obligation he oweth it me. It is lawfull to kill a fouldior if 
he come ynto the warres but an houre too late, and alfo to hang a theefe though he 
fteale neuer fo little: is it then fuch a great matter to caufe fuch a one to pay a pound 
of his fleth, that hath broken his promife manie times, or that putteth another in danger 
to lofe both credit & reputation, yea and it may be life and al for greife? were it not 
better for him to lofe that which I demand, then his foule, alreadie bound by his 
faith? Neither am I to take that which he oweth me, but he is to deliuer it me: And 
efpeciallie becaufe no man knoweth better then he where the fame may be fpared te 
the leaft hurt of his perfon, for I might take it in fuch a place as hee might thereby 
happen to lofe his life: what a matter were it then, if I fhould cut of his [head], fu,- 


312 ; APPENDIX 


pofing that the fame would weigh a iuft pound, although it were with the danger of 
mine owne life? I beleeue I fhould not; becaufe there were as little reafon therein, 
as there could be in the amends wherevnto I fhould be bound: or els if I would cut 
off his nofe, his lips, his eares, and pull out his eies, to make of them altogether a 
pound, fhould I be fuffered? Surely I thinke not, becaufe the obligation dooth not 
fpecifie that I ought either to chufe, cut, or take the fame, but that he ought to giue 
me a pound of his flefh. Of euery thing that is fold, he which deliuereth the fame 1s to 
make waight, and he which receiueth, taketh heed that it be iuft: feeing then that 
neither the obligation, cuftome, nor law doth bind me to cut, or weigh, much leffe vnto 
the aboue mentioned fatisfaction, I refufe it all, and require that the fame which is due 
fhould bee deliuered vnto me. 


The Chriftians Anfwere. 


It is no ftrange matter to hére thofe difpute of equitie which are themfelues moft 
vniuft; and fuch as haue no faith at all, defirous that others fhould obferue the fame 
inuiolable, the which were yet the more tollerable, if fuch men would bee contented 
with reafonable things, or at the leaft not altogether vnreafonable: but what reafon is 
there that one man fhould vnto his own preiudice defire the hurt of another? as this 
Tew is content to lofe nine hundred crownes to haue a pound of my flefh, whereby is 
manifeftly feene the antient and cruell hate which he beareth not only vnto Chriftians, 
but vnto all others which are not of his se¢ét: yea, euen vnto the Turkes, who ouer- 
kindly doe fuffer fuch vermine to dwell amongft them, feeing that this prefumptuous 
wretch dare not onely doubt, but appeale from the iudgement of a good and iuft Iudge, 
& afterwards he would by fophifticall reafons prooue that his abhomination is equitie: 
trulie I confeffe that I haue fuffered fifteene daies of the tearme to paffe, yet who can 
tell whether he or I is the caufe thereof, as for me I thinke that by fecret meanes he 
hath caufed the money to bee delaied, which from fundry places ought to haue come 
voto me before the tearm which I promifed vnto him; Otherwife, I would neuer haue 
been fo rafh as to bind my felfe fo ftrictly; but although he were not the caufe of the 
fault, is it therefore faid, that he ought to bee fo impudent as to goe about to prooue it 
no ftrange matter that he fhould be willing to be paied with mans fleth, which is a thing 
more natural for Tigres, then men, the which alfo was neuer heard of; but this diuell 
in fhape of a man, feeing me oppreffed with neceffitie propounded this accurfed obliga- 
tion vnto me. Whereas hee alleageth the Romanes for an example, why doth he not 
as well tell on how for that crueltie in afflicting debtors ouer greeuoufly, the Common- 
wealth was almoft ouerthrowne, and that fhortly after it was forbidden to imprifon men 
any more for debt. To breake promife is, when a man fweareth or promifeth a thing, 
the which he hath no defire to performe, which yet vpon an extreame neceflitie is 
fomewhat excufable; as for me, I haue promifed, and accomplifhed my promife, yet 
not fo foone as I would; and although I knew the danger wherein I was to fatisfie the 
crueltie of this mifcheeuous man with the price of my flefh and blood, yet did I not 
flie away, but fubmitted my felfe vnto the difcretion of the Iudge who hath iustly 
repreffed his beaftlineffe. Wherein then haue I falfefied my promife, is it in that I 
would not, (like him) difobey the iudgement of the Iudge? Behold I will prefent a 
part of my bodie vnto him, that he may pay himfelfe, according to the contents of the 
iudgement, where is then my promife broken? But it is no maruaile if this race be fo 
obftinat and cruell againft vs, for they doe it of fet purpofe to offend our God whom 
they haue crucified ; and wherefore? Becaufe he was holie, as he is yet fo reputed of 
this wohy Turkifh nation: but what fhall I fay? Their own bible is full of their 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—CURSOR MUNDI 313 


ebellion againft God, againft their Priefts, Iudges, & leaders. What did not the verie 
Patriarks themfelues, from whom they haue their beginning? They fold their brother, 
and had it not been for one amongft them, they had flaine him euen for verie enuie, How 
manie adulteries and abhominations were committed amongft them? How manie mur- 
thers? 4é/alon did not he caufe his brother to be murthered? Did he not perfecute 
his father? Is it not for their iniquitie that God hath difperfed them, without leauing 
them one onlie foot of ground? If then, when they had newlie receiued their law 
from God, when they faw his wonderous works with their eies, and had yet their Iudges 
amongft them, they were fo wicked, What may one hope of them now, when they haue 
neither faith nor law, but their rapines and vfuries? And that they beleeue they do « 
charitable work, when they do fome great wrong vnto anie that is not a Jew? It may 
pleafe you then moft righteous Iudge to confider all thefe circumftances, hauing pittie 
of him who doth wholly fubmit himfelfe vnto your iuft clemencie; hoping thereby to 
be deliuered from this monfters crueltie. 

The reader will readily recognize the parallels to the Jew’s argument: ‘It is impos- 
sible to break the credit of trafick amongst men without great detriment to the Com- 
monwealth ;’ to his reference to ‘binding the body vnto an intollerable slavery,’ and to 
the passage: ‘A man may ask why I would not rather take silver of this man,’ &c. 


In his Preface to The Legends of the Holy Rood (Early Eng. Text Soc., 1871), Di 
MorRIs calls attention to the fact that in one of the legends ‘we get the story, so well 
known to us all, in the Merchant of Venice, of the merchant and the pound of flesh.’ 
The Legend thus referred to is from the Cursor Mundi, which Dr Mons subse- 
quently printed 2 extenso. 

Miss L. TouLMIN SMITH, in an admirable note read at a meeting of the Mew Shak- 
spere Society in April, 1875, shows that this story in the Cursor Mundi, dating as it 
does from about the end of the 13th Century, is the very earliest reference to the Bond 
Story in English. Miss Smith gives the following paraphrase of it: 

‘A Christian goldsmith in the service of Queen Eline (mother of Constantine) 
‘owed a sum of money to a Jew; if he could not pay it by a certain term he was 
‘to render the weight of the money wanting in his own flesh. The day came, the 
“money was unpaid, the Jew would have his judgement, and came to the court of 
‘Queen Eline, where Benciras and Ansiers, two messengers who had been sent by 
‘Constantine to beg his mother to seek for the Holy Cross, were sitting as judges. 
‘ The Jew bore a sharp knife in his hand, the Christian stood naked before them, but 
‘the Jew would not hear of ransom,—no more than a rush! Benciras and Ansiers 
‘ promise the Jew he shall have right judgement, and ask how he will treat the man if 
the be adjudged to him. ‘ How?” said the Jew, “the worst that I can or may by my 
‘Jaw. I shall first put out his eyes, then have his hands that he works with, tongue, 
* “and nose, and so on till I have my covenant.” The judges answer, “It seems you 
‘ “ will not spare him, take his flesh, he grants you that, so that you save his blood; if 
‘he lose a drop of blood the wrong is on you; though his flesh were bought or sold, 
‘he never thought to sell his blood.” The Jew swore at this; 


‘ Then said the Jew, “by Saint Drightin 
 “ Me think the worse part is mine, 

*« To take the flesh if I assay 

¢« Then the blood will run away; 

‘« Fordon ye have me with your dome 
«« That ye Romans brought from Rome 


314 APPENDIX 


« « Curses therefore may they have 
¢« All that such a dome me gave!’ 


‘Then said Benciras, “All has heard you abuse us in your ire, the queen has sent us 
««hers to do righteousness, and we have told you truth.” The Queen, being sure 
‘that the Christian was safe, bade them adjudge the Jew to give up to her all his 
‘goods and that he should lose his abusive tongue. The Jew found this so keen a 
‘ judgement that he cried out, “I would rather tell you where your Lord’s rood-tree lies 
‘than be thus condemned,” and Queen Eline forgives him on condition of his show- 
‘ing where the cross 1s hid, which he does.’ 

Chronologically, the next appearance, as it seems, of the Bond Story is in a MS 

(Harl. 7322), in Latin indeed, but written in England, for the benefit of preachers. It 
was discovered by T. Wright after he had published his Latin Stories for the Percy 
Society, and is given by Halliwell at the end of the'translation of Simrock’s notice of 
the present play: ‘The scene of the tale is laid in Denmark :—In Dacia erat quidam 
‘homo habens duos filios, quorum senior est maliciosus et parcus, junior autem non 
‘tantum liberalis sed prodigus. Cum autem junior hospitalitati omnia quz habuit 
“expendisset, accidit ut duos homines peterent ab eo hospitium. Ile autem, quan- 
‘quam nihil haberet unde honeste eos reciperet, propter tamen verecundiam e€os 
‘recepit. Cum autem nihil haberet unde cibaria eis pararet preter unam vaccam, 
‘eam occidit. Deficiente igitur pane et potu, fratrem seniorem adivit, subsidium ab 
‘eo requirens; qui respondit se sibi nihil penitus daturum, nisi emeret. Contestante 
‘autem juniori se nihil habere, respondit senior, ‘Immo,’ inquit, ‘carnem tuam habes, 
‘vende mihi ad latitudinem manus mez de carna tua in quibus et in quadruplum 
ubicunque voluero recipere.’ Junior parvipendens pepigit cum eo, testibus adhibi- 
‘tis. Modus autem et istius patrize est sic vel alibi sub quavis falsitate scripti vel 
‘chirographi ita nisi sub teste licet emere vel vendere. Recedentibus igitur hospiti- 
‘bus et consumptis cibariis, pactum poposcit senior frater. Negat junior, et adductus 
‘est coram rege, et sententiatus coram juniore ut ad locum suppliciorum deducatur, 
‘et accipiat senior tantum de carne quantum pactum est vel in capite vel circa cor. 
‘Misertus autem sui populus eo quod liberalis erat, nunciaverunt filio regis que et 
‘quare hec facta fuerant, qui statim misericordia motus, induit se, et palefridum 
‘ascendens secutus est miserum illum sic dampnatum; et cum venisset ad locum 
*supplicii, videns eum populus qui ad spectaculum confluxerant, cessit sibi. Et allo- 
‘quens filius regis fratrem illum seniorem crudelem, et dixit ei: ‘Quid juris habes in 
‘isto?’ Respondit: ‘Sic,’ inquit, ‘pacti sumus, ut pro cibariis tantundem de carne 
‘sua mihi daret, et condempnatus est ad solutionem per patrem tuum regem.’ Cui 
‘filius regis, ‘ Nihil,’ inquit, ‘aliud petis nisi carnem?’ Respondit, ‘Nihil. Cui 
‘ filius, ‘Ergo sanguis suus in carne sua est;’ et ait filius isti condempnato, ‘Da mihi 
sanguinem tuum,’ et statim pepigerunt, insuper fecit sibi condempnatus homagium. 
‘Tunc dixit filius regis fratri seniori, ‘Modo cape ubicunque volueris carnem tuum; 
sed si sanguis meus est, si ex eo minimam guttam effunderis, morieris.’ Quo viso, 
recessit senior confusus, et liberatus est junior per regem.’ 


Concerning the source of the second story, 7he Choice of Three Caskets, there is less 
diversity of opinion than in regard to The Bond Story. 

Dr FARMER was the first to show its similarity to a tale in the Gesta Romanorum, 
and asserted that Shakespeare had ‘closely copied some of the language’ in the latter; 
the copying, I think, can be applied only to the mottoes on the caskets, which would 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—GESTA ROMANORUM 315 


be likely to retain much of their phraseology wheresoever found, and even of these 
Shakespeare did not ‘copy’ all three. 

In what was stated above in regard to the Gesta Romanorum in connection with the 
Bond Story, it will be remembered that an English translation was printed, circa 15 10~ 
15, by Wynkyn de Worde. This translation contained only forty-three stories out of 
the hundred and more found in other MSS; among them, though the Bond Story was 
lacking, this of the Three Caskets was given. As it was this translation which Rich- 
ard Robinson issued in six editions between 1577 and 1601, ‘by mee perused, cor- 
rected, and bettered,’ it is likely that it was in one of Robinson’s re-issues that Shake 
speare read the story, if he used it at all as the source of his Plot.* 

Robinson’s version is reprinted in Collier’s Shakespeare's Library, ii, 102. It is The 
Thirty-second Historie. ‘There is small interest for us in the beginning of it, wherein 
it is told that there was ‘a mightie Emperor, named Anselme,’ who dwelt in Rome, 
and how, for the sake of confirming peace and good-will, it was decided that the Empe- 
ror’s son should marry the daughter of the ‘King of Ampluy.’ It then proceeds as 
follows: ‘Therefore when the letters of covenant and compact were sealed, the king 
‘furnished a faire ship, wherein he might send his daughter with many noble knights, 
‘ladyes, and great riches, unto the emperour, for to have his sonne in marriage. 

* Now when they were sayling in the sea toward Rome, a storme arose so extremee- 
‘lye and so horribly, that the ship all to brast against a rock of stone, and they were 
‘all drowned, save onely that yong lady, which fixt her hope and heart so firmely on 
‘God, that she was saved. And about three of clocke the tempest ceased, and the 
‘lady drave foorth over the waves in the broken ship, which was cast up againe, but 
‘an huge whale followed after, readie to devoure both the ship and her; wherefore 
‘this faire yong lady when night came, smote fire with a stone, wherewith the ship 
‘was greatly lightened, and then the whale durst not adventure toward the ship, for 
‘feare of the light. At the cock-crowing, this yong lady was so weary of the great 
‘tempest and trouble of the sea, that she slept, and within a little while after the fire 
*surceased, and with that came the whale and devoured this virgin. But when she 
*wakened and found her selfe swallowed up in the whale’s belly, shee smote fire, and 
‘ within a little while shee wounded the whale with a knife in many places, and when 
‘the whale felt himselfe wounded, according to his nature, he began to swim to land. 

‘There was at that time dwelling in that country an earle that was a noble man, 

named Parris, the which for his recreation walked by the sea shore, and as he was 
* walking thus, he saw where the whale was comming towards the land, wherefore he 
‘turned home againe, and gathered many strong men and came thither againe, and 
* caught the whale, and wounded him very sore, and as they smote, the mayden that 
‘was in his belly cried with an high voice and said, O gentle friends have mercie 
‘and compassion on me, for I am a kings daughter and a true virgin from the houre 
*of my birth unto this day. When the earle heard this he wondred greatly and 
“opened the side of the whale and tooke her out. And when she was thus delivered, 
“shee told him forthwith whose daughter she was, and how shee had lost all her goods 
‘in the sea, and how shee should have beene married unto the emperour’s sonne. And 

* According to a ‘ Table of the Stories’ in the Gesta Romanorum., given in Herrtage’s edition for 
the Early English Text Society, p. xxix, this story is the Ninety-ninth in the Anglo-latin Text, MS, 
Harl. 2270; the Sixty-sixth in the English Version, MS, Harl. 7333; the Thirty-second in W. de 
Worde’s edition; and the Hundred and Ninth in Latin Printed Editions, I think it well to note this, 


because different Editors cite different editions. Tyrwhitt quoted from Harl. 2270, Warton from 
the Latin Printed Edition, as did, likewise, Douce, and it was from Harl. 7333 that the Bond Story 


was given above.—Ep, 


316 APPENDIX 


‘when the earle heard this hee was right glad, wherefore hee comforted her the more, 
‘and kept her stiil with him till she was well refreshed. And in the meane time he 
‘sent messengers to the emperour, giving him to know how the kings daughter was 
* saved. Pe 

‘ Then was the emperour right glad of her safety and comming, and had ,reat com- 
« passion on her, saying: Ah faire lady, for the love of my sonne thou hast suffered 
‘much woe, neverthelesse if thou be worthie to be his wife, soone shall I prove. 

« And when he had thus said, he commanded to bring forth three vessels, the first 
‘was made of pure gold, beset with precious stones without, and within full of dead 
‘mens bones, and thereupon was ingraven this posey: Whoso chooseth me shall finde 
‘that he deserveth. 

‘ The second vessel was made of fine silver, filled with earth and wormes, and the 
‘superscription was thus: Whoso chooseth me shall finde that his nature desireth. 

‘The third vessel was made of lead, full within of precious stones, and the super- 
* scription, Who so chooseth me shall finde that God hath disposed to him. 

‘ These three vessels the emperour shewed to the maiden and said, Lo, here daugh- 
‘ter, there be faire vessels, if thou choose one of these, wherein is profit to thee and to 
‘other, then shalt thou have my sonne: but if thou choose that wherein is no profit te 
‘thee nor to none other, soothly thou shalt not marrie him. 

‘When the mayden saw this, she lift up her hands to God and said: Thou, Lord, 
‘that knowest all things, grant me grace this houre so to choose, that I may receive 
‘the emperours sonne. And with that she beheld the first vessell of gold, which was 
“ engraven, and read the superscription, Who so chooseth me, &c., saying thus : Though 
‘this vessel be full precious and made of pure gold, neverthelesse I know not what is 
‘within, therefore my deare lord, this vessel will I not choose. 

« And then she beheld the second vessel that was of pure silver, and read the super- 
‘scription, Who so chooseth me shall finde that his nature desireth. Thinking thus 
‘within her selfe, If I choose this vessel, what is within it I know not, but well I wot 
‘there shall I finde that nature desireth, and my nature desireth the lust of the flesh, 
‘therefore this vessel will I not choose. When she had seene these two vessels, and 
‘ given an answere as touching them, shee beheld the third vessell of lead, and read the 
‘superscription, Who so chooseth me, shall finde that God hath disposed. Thincking 
‘ within her selfe this vessel is not passing rich, nor throughly precious: neverthelesse, 
‘the superscription saith: Who so chooseth mee, shall finde that God hath disposed : 
‘and without doubt God never disposeth any harme, therefore now I will choose this 
*vessell, by the leave of God. 

‘When the emperour saw this, hee said, O faire mayden open thy vessell, and see 
‘if thou hast well chosen or no. And when this yong lady had opened it, shee found 
‘it full of fine gold and precious stones, like as the emperour had told her before. 

‘And then said the emperour, O my deere daughter, because thou hast wisely 

chosen, therefore shalt thou marry my sonne. And when he had so said, he ordained 
‘a marriage, and married them together with great solempnitie and much honour, and 
‘they lived peaceably a long time together.’ 

In the Latin Printed Editions, one of which Warton used, fasties or loaves are sub- 
stituted for the ‘ vessels.’ 

According to Warton (iii, xlix, ed. 1781), the ‘remote but original source’ of this 
story is one which is told by the hermit Barlaam to King Avenamore (in which the 
‘vessels’ or *pasties’ are called arcel/e), written in Greek about the year 800 by 
Joannes Damascenus, a Greek monk of St Saba in Syria, and translated into Latin 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—BARLAAM AND FOSAPHAT 317 


before the 13th Century, entitled Barlaam and Josaphat. The Greek text, according 
to Clarendon is published in the Jehrbiicher der Literatur, vol. xxvi, p. 42. The 
principal story of Barlaam and Josaphat is told with no little dry humour by Dunlop 
(pp. 35-40, ed. 1845), who says that its ‘many beautiful parables and apologues bear 
evident marks of an Oriental origin.’ They were incorporated, according to Warton, 
in the Speculum Historiale of Vincent of Beauvais, who wrote about the year 1290. 
Thence they trickled, with more or less purity, into the Cento Novelle Antiche (Nov. 
Ixv), thence into the somewhat turbid pool of Boccaccio’s Decameron, into the Golden 
Legend, and finally into the Ges¢a. 

Warton gives a translation, from the original Greek of Barlaam and Josaphat, ot 
the conclusion of the story. For the beginning we are indebted to Clarendon, as fol- 
lows: ‘A certain rich and glorious king, attended by the officers of his court, is riding 
‘with regal pomp in a gilt chariot, when he is met by two men of mean appearance in 
‘squalid and threadbare garments. The king descends from his chariot and salutes 
‘them. His courtiers are disgusted, and remonstrate with him through the medium 
‘of the king’s brother. They are then taught a lesson of the folly of judging by 
‘external appearances.’ [Warton thus concludes:] ‘The king commanded four chests 
‘to be made; two of which were covered with gold, and secured by golden locks, but 
‘filled with the rotten bones of human carcasses. The other two were overlaid with 
‘pitch, and bound with rough cords; but replenished with precious stones and the 
‘most exquisite gems, and with ointments of the richest odour. He called his nobles 
‘together, and, placing these chests before them, asked which they thought the most 
‘valuable. They pronounced those with the golden coverings to be the most precious, 
‘ supposing they were made to contain the crowns and girdles of the king. The two 

chests covered with pitch they viewed with contempt. Then said the king, I pre- 
‘sumed what would be your determination; for ye look with the eyes of sense. But 
*to discern baseness or value, which are hid within, we must look with the eyes of the 
‘mind. He then ordered the golden chests to be opened, which exhaled an intolerable 
‘stench, and filled the beholders with horror.’ ‘In the Metrical Lives of the Saints,’ 
adds Warton, ‘written about the year 1300, these chests are called four fates, that is, 
‘four vats, or vessels.’ 

Warton says that ‘a like story’ is in the Confessio Amantis, and believes that Gower 
copied it from the foregoing; and Gower’s beginning the story (liber v, p. 203, ed. 
Pauli) : ‘In a cronique this I rede,’ gives colour to the belief. But Clarendon suggests 
(wherein, I think, all will fully agree) that this cannot be; ‘for,’ as they say, ‘not only 
‘are the details different, there being two caskets instead of four, and both of the same 
‘ external appearance, but the moral lesson sought to be conveyed is entirely dissimilar. 
“It is told of a king whose officers complained that their promotion was not in propor- 
‘tion to their service. To prove to them that it was all of fortune, the king adopted 
“the device of making his coffers so exactly alike that no one could tell one from the 
‘other. The one was filled with fine gold and precious stones, the other with straw 
¢and rubbish. The courtiers were asked to choose, and of course their choice fell 
‘upon the latter. The contents of the other were then d‘splayed, and the moral 
6 follows : 

‘Lo, saith the king, now may ye se, 
‘ That there is no defaulte in me; 

‘ Forthy my self I woll acquit 

« And bereth ye your owne wit 

“Of that fortune hath you refused.’ 


318 APPENDIX 


After finishing this story Gower goes on to tell another, of which the moral is about 
the same, or, as he expresses it, ‘Somdele to this matere like,’ concerning ‘ Frederike, 
of Rome, that time emperour,’ who put to the test the faith of two ‘ beggers’ (one of 
whom trusted in God, and the other in the king) by means of ‘two pastees,’ in one 
of which was a capon, and in the other a ‘great richesse of floreins.’ This version, 
Sir Frederic Madden says, according to Clarendon, came from the Chronicle of Laner- 
cost, compiled about the year 1346, wherein the beggars are blind. 

A form, in which this version of the story, in its essential features, viz. where for- 
tune or the will of God is the arbiter, is to be found also in the Gesta, Chapter 109, of 
the Latin Printed Editions, and is thus given by Douce (i, 277): ‘A smith had lost a 
‘chest of money, which being carried by the sea to the shores of a distant country, 
‘ was taken up by an inn-keeper, who, not suspecting that it contained anything, threw 
‘it carelessly aside. Having occasion one day for some fuel to warm his guests, he 
‘broke up the chest, and finding the money, laid it by safely, till some one should 
arrive to claim it. The smith soon afterwards appeared; and having publicly 
‘declared his loss, the inn-keeper resolved to ascertain if it were the will of Provi- 
‘dence that he should make restitution. He therefore caused three pasties to be 
‘made; the first he filled with earth, the second with dead men’s bones, and the third 
‘with money. He then invited the smith to dinner, and gave him the choice of the 
‘pasties. The smith fixed on those with the earth and bones, and relinquished the 
‘others. The host now concluded that it was not the will of Heaven that he should 
“restore the money; he therefore called in the blind and the lame, opened the other 
‘ pasty in their presence, and divided the treasure between them.’ (I can find no such 
story in Herrtage’s edition of the Gesta, wherein Chap. 109 of the Latin Editions is 
tabulated as the same as Robinson’s Thirty-second Historie, given above from Collier’s 
Reprint.) 

The source of these versions is evidently the same as of that version which Boccaccio 
gives in The First Story of the Tenth Day. Boccaccio, Gower, and the Chronicle of 
Lanercost are all so nearly contemporaneous that it is not easy to decide from whose 
hands we receive the earliest version. 

Dr Johnson gives Boccaccio’s story at full length. Dunlop (p. 239, ed. 1845) gives 
an abbreviation, which is amply sufficient: ‘A noble Italian, called Ruggieri, entered 
‘into the service of Alphonso, King of Spain. He soon perceives that his majesty is 
‘extremely liberal to others, but thinking his own merits not sufficiently rewarded, he 
‘asks leave to return to his own country. This the king grants after presenting him 
‘with a fine mule for his journey, Alphonso directs one of his attendants to join him 
‘on the road, to note if he make any complaint of the treatment he had received, and, 
‘if he should, to command his return. The mule having stopped in a river and refus- 
‘ing to go on, Ruggieri said she was like the person who gave her. Ruggieri being 
in consequence brought back to the capital, and his words reported to the king, he is 
‘introduced into the presence of his majesty and asked why he had compared him to 
‘the mule. “Because,” replied Ruggieri, “the mule would not stop where it cugnt, 
*“but stood still when it should have gone on; in like manner you give where it is 
‘not suitable, and withhold where you ought to bestow.” On hearing this, the king 
‘ carries him into a hall, and shows him two shut coffers’ [the rest I give from Payne’s 
admirable translation for The Villon Society] ‘and said to him in presence of many, 
‘“Messer Ruggieri, in one of these coffers is.my crown, the royal sceptre and orb, 
‘together with many goodly girdles and ouches and rings of mine, and, in fine, every 

“precious jewel I have; and the other is full of earth. Take, then, one, and be that 


— 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—ESSICA. GOSSON 319 


‘“which you shall take yours; and you may thus see whether of the twain hath been 
‘ungrateful of your worth, myself or your ill-fortune.” Messer Ruggieri, seeing that 
* it was the king’s pleasure, took one of the coffers, which, being opened by Alphonso’s 
‘cummandment, was found to be that which was full of earth; whereupon, quoth the 
‘king Jaughing, “ Now can you see, Messer Ruggieri, that that I tell you of you for- 
*“tune is true; but certes your worth meriteth that I should oppose myself to her 
‘might. I know you have no mind to turn Spaniard, and therefore I will bestow 
‘upon you neither castle nor city in these parts; but this coffer, of which fortune 
‘“ deprived you, I will in her despite shall be yours, so you may carry it off to your 
‘ “own country, and justly glorify yourself of your worth in the sight of your country- 
‘“men by the witness of my gifts.” Messer Ruggieri accordingly took the coffer, and 
* having rendered the king those thanks which sorted with such a gift, joyfully returned 
‘therewith to Tuscany.’ 

‘ Quere,’ says Douce as a final word (ii, 276), ‘if the general construction of all 
‘these stories have not been borrowed from the trick related to have been put by Pro- 
‘metheus on Jupiter with the two bull-skins filled with flesh and bones ?” 


The elopement of Jessica and her theft of jewels has been construed into a third 
subsidiary plot, and its origin traced by Dunlop (p. 254) to the Fourteenth Tale of 
Massuccio di Salerno, who flourished about 1470: ‘It is the story of a young gentle- 
‘man of Messina, who becomes enamoured of the daughter of a rich Neapolitan 
‘miser. As the father kept his child perpetually shut up, the lover has recourse to 
‘stratagem, Pretending to set out on a long journey, he deposits with the miser a 
“number of valuable effects, leaving, among other things, a female slave, who prepos- 
‘sesses the mind of the girl in favour of her master, and finally assists in the elope- 
‘ment of the young Jady, and the robbery of her father’s jewels, which she carries 
*along with her..... It is not improbable that the avaricious father in this tale, the 
‘ daughter so carefully shut up, the elopement of the lovers managed by the interven- 
‘tion of a servant, the robbery of the father, and his grief on the discovery, which is 
‘represented as divided between the loss of his daughter and ducats, may have sug- 
gested the third plot in Shakespeare’s drama,—the love and elopement of Jessica and 
* Lorenzo.’ 


Thus far we have been dealing with the plot of this play as if it were a mosaic, 
which Shakespeare had combined into one group by gathering its diverse elements 
from diverse sources, and he has been greatly praised for showing so much dramatic 
and artistic skill in the combination. But Warton in the last century supplied us with 
a hint, which admits the possibility that Shakespeare was indebted for the framework 
at least of this drama to an older play, in which the Bond Story and the Casket Story 
were already combined. 

The note in which Warton calls attention to the Ballad of Gernutus concludes 
with: ‘I shall only add that it appears from Gosson’s Schoole of Abuse, printed in 
“1579, that the character of a cruel and covetous Jew had been exhibited with good 
‘applause before Shakespeare’s Shylock appeared.’ (See p. 292, ante.) 

Gosson, who had been himself a writer of plays, and even an actor, was evidently 
serious-minded young man: the ‘disorder in every playhouse’ greatly offended him 
and before his twenty-sixth year he published, in 1579, ‘Zhe Schoole of Abu/e, contein- 
‘ing a plesaunt inuectiue against Poets, Pipers, Plaiers, Jesters and such like Cater- 
‘ pillers of a Commonwelth, Setting vp the Flagge of Defiance to their mischieuous 


320 APPENDIX 


exeicise, and ouerthrowing their Bulwarkes, by Prophane Writers, Naturall reason, 
‘and common experience: A discourse as pleasaunt for Gentlemen that fauour learn- 
‘ing, as profitable for all that wyll follow vertue. By Stephan Gosson, Stud. Oxon.’ 
It was dedicated, but without permission, ‘To the right noble Gentleman, Master 
‘Philip Sidney Esquier,’ but Master Sidney was thereat by no means pleased, and, 
according to a letter of Spenser’s to Gabriel Harvey, Gosson ‘was for hys labor 
‘scorned; if at leaste it be in the goodnesse of that nature to scorne.’ We, at least, 
should be grateful for this dedication, in that to the indignation stirred up by it and by 
the book itself we probably owe Sidney’s Apologie for Poetrie. As is to be expected 
from the title of his book, Gosson’s hand falls heavily on the ‘ Caterpillers ;’ ‘ Cookes,’ he 
says, ‘did neuer shewe more crafte in their iunckets to vanquish the taste, nor Paintere 
‘in shadowes to allure the eye, then Poets in Theaters to wounde the conscience,’ and 
as for the Players, they ‘are the Basiliskes of the world, that poyson, as well with the 
‘beame of their sighte, as with the breath of their mouth.’ After many pages of this 
lashing he relents, and acknowledges that there are some players that are ‘ sober, dis- 
“creete, properly learned honest householders,’ and so also he confesses (p. 40, ed, 
Arber) that ‘some of their Playes are without rebuke: which are as easily remembered 
‘as quickly reckoned. The twoo prose Bookes plaied at the Belsauage, where you 
‘shall finde neuer a woorde without wit, neuer a line without pith, neuer a letter 
‘placed in vaine. The /ew and Pfolome, showne at the Bull, the one representing the 
* greedinesse of worldly chusers, and bloody mindes of Usurers: The other very liuely 
* discrybing howe seditious estates, with their owne deuises, false friendes, with their 
* own swoordes, and rebellious commons in their owne snares are ouerthrowne: neither 
‘with Amorous gesture wounding the eye: nor with slouenly talke hurting the eares 
‘of the chast hearers.’ 

At last we seem to have encountered something substantial. Here is a play, in which 
first, the chief character is a Jew; secondly, in which the choice of the caskets is 
adumbrated in the ‘greedinesse of worldly chusers,’ and thirdly, where the ‘bloody 
mindes of Usurers’ may be typified in Shylock; small wonder, indeed, that so many 
critics and editors have set up their rest on ‘the /ew, mentioned by Gosson’ as the 
immediate Source of the Plot of the Merchant of Venice. 

Douce refers to the ‘mistake that has been committed by those who speak of 
* Shakespeare’s zzztations of the sources of this play, and who forget that one on the 
‘same subject had already appeared, and which might have furmished him with the 
‘whole of the plot.’ Again, in referring to Tyrwhitt’s conjectures concerning the 
Gesta Romancrum, Douce says: ‘ He also had forgotten the elder drama mentioned 
* by Gosson.’ 

STEEVENS: ‘It is therefore not improbable that Shakespeare new-wrote his piece, 
*on the model [of Gosson’s /ew], and that the elder performance, being inferior, was 
* permitted to drop silently into oblivion.’ 

SKOTTOWE (i, 330) thinks the loss of Gosson’s Jew is ‘justly a subject of regret, for 
‘as it combined within its plot the two incidents of the bond and the caskets, it would, 
‘in all probability, have thrown much additional light on Shakespeare’s progress in the 
‘ composition of his highly-finished comedy.’ 

But Knicut holds back; he thinks that Skottowe ‘ somewhat leaps to a conclusion’ 
that Gosson’s Jew was the original of Shylock. ‘As all we know of this play,’ he 
continues, ‘is told us by Gosson, it is rather bold to assume that it combined the two 
‘incidents of the bond and the caskets. The combination of these incidents is per- 
‘haps one of the most remarkable examples of Shakespeare’s dramatic skill... .. The 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—GOSSON 321 


‘rude dramatists of 1579 were not remarkable for the combination of incidents. It 
* was probably reserved for the skill of Shakespeare to bring the caskets and the bond 
“in juxtaposition. We cannot absolutely deny that Gosson’s play might have furnished 
‘our poet with the whole of the plot; but it is certainly an abuse of language to say 
‘that it dd furnish him, because the Jew shown at the Bull deals with “ worldly 
*“chusers” and the “bloody mindes of Usurers.”’ 

SINGER (2d ed., 1856) : ‘It cannot be doubted that Shakespeare, as in other instances, 
‘availed himself of this ancient piece.’ 

CoLLIER, after quoting Gosson, says: ‘It is possible, therefore, that a theatrical per- 

formance should have existed, anterior to the time of Shakespeare, in which the sep- 
‘arate plots were united; and it is not unlikely that some novel had been published 
“which gave the same incidents in a narrative form.’ 

HALLIWELL refers to the fact, derived from the Stationers’ Registers, that the Mer- 
chant of Venice was originally also entitled the Jew of Venice, and then, after quoting 
Gosson’s reference to the /ew, continues: ‘The coincidence of this description with 
‘the subject of the Merchant of Venice is so remarkable, that when we add to it the 
‘identity of title, little doubt can fairly remain that the play mentioned by Gosson in 
£1579 contained similar incidents to those in Shakespeare’s play, and that it was, in 
‘all probability, the rude original of the Merchant of Venice..... That Shakespeare 
‘adopted any of the dialogue of this ancient composition is highly improbable, but that 
‘he may have been indebted to it for the general outline of the structure of his plot, 
‘and that the title also was originally adopted from it, may be admitted without much 
‘fear of incurring a serious error.’ 

STAUNTON: ‘ The expression worldly chusers is so appropriate to the choosers of the 
caskets, and the bloody mindes of usurers so applicable to the vindictive cruelty of 
Shylock, that it is very probable Shakespeare in this play, as in other plays, worked 
upon some rough model already prepared for him.’ 

CLARENDON: ‘It is clear the plot of a play [as described by Gosson] must have 
‘been essentially the same as that of the Merchant of Venice, and that we have here 
‘combined, if not for the first time, the two stories of the caskets and the pound of 
‘flesh, which had previously a separate existence in many forms.’ 

DELIUs is inclined to think with Knight that the description in Gosson is too vague 
to authorize so bold an assumption as that the Merchant of Venice was founded on the 
Jew. 

Ro.FE thinks it probable that the plots of the two dramas were ‘essentially the 
‘same,’ and that Shakespeare ‘worked upon some rough model already prepared for 
‘him.’ 

GRANT WHITE (2d ed.) : ‘ This play [Gosson’s Jew], manifestly, Shakespeare worked 
£ over into the Merchant of Venice, as we have it.’ 

In this general agreement I beg to be included, and, while accepting fully the 
improbability of Shakespeare’s having adopted any of his predecessor’s dialogue, I 
think it not unlikely that here and there, in two places at least, we may discern in 
the dialogue traces of the old play. One of these is noted by Hunter. The Serving- 
man in the second scene tells Portia that ‘the four strangers’ wish to take leave ot 
her, whereas six strangers have been enumerated; and Hunter suggests that in the 
first draught of the play there were, perhaps, but four. See I, ii, 120. 

Again, I think we have an outcropping of the old play in Lorenzo’s unpleasant 
banter with Launcelot. Lorenzo’s allusion is not explained by anything whatsoever 
ir. the course of the story; it serves no purpose (albeit Daniel does allude to it in his 

ai 


322 APPENDIX 


computation of time); it has ‘neither wit, manners, nor modesty,’ but is an unsightly 
excrescence which, I trust, is to be thus accounted for. 

Finally, Epwarp Scott (Atheneum, 2 July, 1881) has discovered, in an unpub- 
lished letter of Spenser, an allusion which corroborates the supposition that Gosson’s 
Jew is the prototype of Zhe Merchant of Venice. The letter is from Spenser to his 
friend Gabriel Harvey, wherein ‘he signs himself thus: “He that is fast bownde vnto 
«the in more obligations then any marchant in Italy to any Jewe there.” This letter 
‘ was a reply to one from Harvey, dated 1579, and enclosed a whimsical bond between 
‘the two friends in allusion to the bond of the Jew..... It is evident, I think, that 
«Spenser and Harvey had lately together paid a visit to the Bull, had enjoyed the 
‘representation of this piece, tke Jew, and it had made such an impression on their 
‘minds that their correspondence at this time is full of allusions to it.’ 


Although in the foregoing pages nearly everything is given that has been supposed 
to have contributed to Shakespeare’s Plot, there yet remains a Tragedy which, it has 
been claimed, influenced him more or less in the composition of the play. 

This tragedy, which naturally occurs to every one, is Marlowe’s Jew of Malta, the 
mere similarity of the titles suggests some parallelisms at least. It was probably written 
about 1589 or 1590, according to COLLIER, whom Dyce quotes without dissent; and 
was very popular, to judge from the frequency with which it occurs in Henslowe’s 
diary. The part of the Jew, named Barabas, was ‘presented by so unimitable an actor 
as Master Alleyn,’ as we learn from the Dedication by Heywood, who, in 1633, put 
forth the first edition. From the play itself we learn that the actor wore an artificial 
nose, presumably of extraordinary proportions. Of the character itself, CHARLES LAMB 
says (Specimens of Dram. Poet.), ‘Marlowe’s Jew does not approach so near to Shake- 
‘speare’s as his Edward the Second does to Richard the Second. Shylock, in the 
‘midst of his savage purpose, is a man. His motives, feelings, resentments, have 
‘something human in them. “If you wrong us, shall we not revenge?” Barabas 
‘is a mere monster, brought in with a large painted nose to please the rabble. He 
‘kills in sport, poisons whole nunneries, invents infernal machines. He is just such 
‘an exhibition as, a century or two earlier, might have been played before the Lon- 
‘doners dy the Royal Command, when a general pillage and massacre of the Hebrews 
‘had been resolved on in the cabinet.’ 

‘ Marlowe,’ says Dyce (Works, i, xxi), ‘violated the truth of nature, not so much 
‘from his love of exaggeration, as in consequence of having borrowed all the atro- 
‘ cities of the play from some now-unknown novel, whose author was willing to flatter 
‘the prejudices of his readers by attributing almost impossible wickedness to a son of 
‘Israel. 0.00 That Shakespeare was well acquainted with this tragedy cannot be 
‘doubted ; but that he caught from it more than a few trifling hints for the Merchant 
*of Venice will be allowed by no one who has carefully compared the character of 
‘Barabas with that of Shylock.’ 

Ezz, whose opinions are always entitled to a respectful hearing, maintains with 
earnestness (Sh. Jahrbuch, vi, 133, 1871) that ‘the prototype of Shylock, beyond all 
‘ conjecture, is to be found in Marlowe’s Jew of Malta, without which, in all probabil- 
‘ity, the Merchant of Venice would never have been written.’ Elze is not to be under- 
stood as asserting that Shakespeare copied Marlowe; on the contrary, Shakespeare 
observed Barabas in order to know what to avoid in Shylock. After giving an epitome 
of Marlowe’s play, Elze continues (p. 137): ‘Can there be any doubt, after all this, 
‘that we have here, it not the prototype, at least the germ and suggestion of Shylock ? 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—FEW OF MALTA 323 


To such a master of the human heart as Shakespeare the temptation was irresistible 

to transform this Barabas into a genuine Jewish usurer, and out of this mouthing and 
‘impossible criminal to create a real, live man, with human motives, passions, and 
‘actions. Barabas, of all men, was the one best suited to be the claimant in a lawsuit 
‘over a pound of flesh ; in his avarice and in his thirst for revenge for the long series 
‘of wrongs he stood forth not only as the inexorable enemy of the Christians, but also 
‘through his daughter supplied the opportunity of bringing him into relationship of a 
‘ different kind with the Christian world. Accordingly, we cannot doubt but that Mar- 
‘lowe’s Barabas and his daughter are to be regarded as the true starting-point of Shake 
‘speare’s play. The novel in the Pecorome not only leaves the character of the Jew 
‘wholly undeveloped, but also makes no allusion to any daughter.’ 

WarD (Hist. Eng. Dram. Lit., 1875, i, 188) is inclned to go farther than Elze: 
‘Between Shylock and Barabas there is doubtless a very marked difference; but that 
‘the two plays are, so far as their main subject is concerned, essentially written in the 
‘same spirit, I cannot hesitate in affirming. It is, I am convinced, only modern read- 
“ers and modern actors who suppose that Shakespeare consciously intended to arouse 
‘the sympathy of his audience on behalf of the Jew. The sympathy which, notwith- 
‘standing, is aroused, is in truth merely the adventitious result of the unconscious tact 
‘with which the poet humanized the character. In both Shakespeare’s and Marlowe’s 
‘plays the view inculcated is, that on the part of a Jew fraud is the sign of his tribe, 
‘whereas on the part of Christians counter-fraud, though accompanied by violence, is 
‘worthy of commendation. This I cannot but regard as the primary effect of the 
‘whole of either play; but just as Shakespeare, in working out character and action, 
‘could not fail incidentally to indicate his consciousness of a counter-argument ad 
* Christianos, so Marlowe puts into the mouth of Barabas the following plea in defence 
‘of his conduct: “It’s no sin to deceive a Christian. For they themselves hold it a 
«principle: Faith is not to be kept with heretics; But all are heretics that are not 
‘Jews; This follows well.” Apart, however, from the much grosser developement of 
‘the evil tendencies of the Jew in Marlowe, the caricature (for such it is) of Barabas 
‘is, in general, far more coarsely drawn than the character of Shylock in Shakespeare. 
‘ As to other resemblances, I will not dwell on the similarity of the situation between 
‘father and daughter in the two plays, which is essential to the conception of either. 
‘ But it seems worth while to enumerate certain passages too closely approaching one 
‘another to have done so by accident, which have occurred to me in reading Marlowe’s 
* play: 

Jew of Malta, 1,i: First appearance of Bar. He enumerates his argosies. 
Mer. of Ven. 1. iii: First appearance of Shyl. He enumerates the argosies of Ant. 


Jew of Malta,1,i: ‘These are blessings promised to the Jews, 
And herein was old Abraham’s happiness,’ &c. 
Mer. of Ven. I, iii: Passage about Jacob, with a reference to Abraham, ending : 
‘This was a way to thrive, and he was bless’d; 
And ¢hift is blessing, if men steal it not.’ 


Jew of Malta, 1, ii: ‘You have my goods, my money and my wealth, &c. 
.... You can request no more’ 
(Unless you wish to take my life). 
Mer. of Ven. IV, i: Greatly improved in Shylock’s speech : 
‘ Nay, take my life and a 1,’ &c. 


324 APPENDIX 


ae 


Jew of Malta, Ib. ‘What, bring you Scripture to confirm your wrongs ee 
Mer of Ven.I, iii: ‘The devil can cite Scripture for his purposes.’ 


Jew of Malta, Il, i: ‘Oh my girl, = 
My gold, my fortune, my felicity.... 
Oh, girl, oh, gold, oh, beauty, oh, my bliss.’ 

Mer. of Ven. II, viii: ‘ My daughter !—O my ducats!—O my daughter! .... 
Justice! the law! my ducats, and my daughter!’ * 


Jew of Malta, I, ii: Barabas and Slave (against hearty feeders in general). 
Mer. of Ven. 11, v: Shylock and Launcelot Gobbo. 


‘There are several other parallel passages (some not very striking) in Waldron s 
‘edition of Ben Jonson’s Sad Shepherd, p. 209 seg. ; among them the following speech 
of Barabas, to which I need not apply the Shakespearian parallel: “I learned in Flor- 
“ence how to kiss my hand, Heave up my shoulders when they call me dog, And 
«duck as low as any barefoot friar.” ....The number of these parallel passages 
‘might be perhaps increased. They prove, as it seems to me, conclusively that Mar- 
“lowe’s Jew of Malta was present to Shakespeare’s mind when he wrote his Merchans 
‘ of Venice’ [Ward then proceeds to show the immeasurable superiority of the /ez 
of Shakespeare to that of Marlowe. ] 

SWINBURNE (p. 151): In the Merchant of Venice there is hardly a single character 
from Portia to old Gobbo, a single incident from the exaction of Shylock’s bond to the 
computation of hairs in Launcelot’s beard and Dobbin’s tail, which has not been more 
plentifully beprosed than ever Rosalind was berhymed. Much wordy wind has also 
been wasted on comparison of Shakespeare’s Jew with Marlowe’s; that is, of a living 
subject for terror and pity with a mere mouthpiece for the utterance of poetry as mag- 
nificent as any but the best of Shakespeare’s. 


In the preceding pages, in ‘The Date of Composition,’ mention was made of the 
record in Henslowe’s Diary of a ‘new’ play, called by that illiterate manager ‘the 
Venesyon comodey,’ acted on the 25 August, 1594. 

This Venetian comedy, Fleay assumes to be a lost play of Dekker’s, which he calls 
Joseph the Jew of Venice; on this play Fleay asserts (Life and Work of Sh., pp. 30, 
197) that the Merchant of Venice was founded. (It was not entered in the Stationers’ 
Registers until 9 Sept., 1653, as given by Fleay, p. 360, and there the title is simply 
The Jew of Venice). 1 cannot find that Fleay anywhere supplies the proof of this 
identity of ‘the Venesyon comodey’ with Dekker’s Jew of Venice, or any proof, other 
than in the similarity of the title as given in Robertes’s entry, that the Merchant of 
Venice was founded upon either. 

In an old German Almanac, published in 1626, there is a MS list of performances by 
‘the English Comedians’ at the Dresden Court. This list was printed for the first 
time, I think, by CoHN in his valuable Shakespeare in Germany, 1864, p. cxv; it 
appears from it that on the 13th of July and on the 5th of November of that year, 1626, 
a @vmedy was given called Josephus, a Jew of Venice, which Cohn surmised to be the 
same as that contained in a MS in the Imperial Library in Vienna, and, from a descrip- 
tion which he received from the Librarian in that city, he inferred it to be a ‘ mix- 


* There is a strong resemblance to both these passages in Ben Jonson’s The Case is Altered, V, 
i —Ward. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—DER ¥UD VON VENEDIG 325 


‘ture of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice and Marlowe’s Jew of Malta” ‘It is also 
‘possible,’ adds Cohn, ‘that this play is a version of Thomas Dekker's Jew of Venice, 
‘which appears to be irrecoverably lost.’ In 1611, ‘A German comedy, The Jew, of 
Venice, from the English, was acted in Halle by the English Comedians (Cohn, p. 
Ixxxix), and as this is the very title of Shakespeare’s play given in Robertes’s entry on 
the Stationers’ Registers, Cohn, with praiseworthy zeal, claims for this performance, 
and for Halle, the honour of ‘the earliest authentic evidence that one of Shakespeare’s 
‘masterpieces had been performed during the poet’s lifetime in Germany ;’ but by the 
ume Cohn had reached, in his history, the records of 1626 and of ‘Josephus the Jew 
of Venice,’ he had grown more cautious, and his faith that the German and the Eng- 
lish Jews were twins, or even cater-cousins, was somewhat shaken; and he circum- 
spectly surmises, as we have seen, that Joseph may have been Shakespeare’s Shylock 
and Marlowe’s Barabas rolled into one, or even Dekker’s lost wanderer; at any rate 
he wisely refrained, where all is vague, from any positive assertion. 

In 1884, JOHANNES MEISSNER, in Vienna, printed the MS, alluded to by Cohn, of 
Josephus, the Jew of Venice, from the Imperial Library, and prefaced it with a highly 
interesting account of the English Comedians in Germany in those early times. This 
MS dates from the 17th Century, ‘ probably from the second half of the century ;’ but 
Meissner traces it back, under slight variations in title, or rather ‘under the various 
descriptions given of it by spectators,’ to 1674, in Dresden; to 1651, by the Dresden 
Comedians, in Prague; to 1626, by Green’s troupe, in Dresden; to 1611, in Halle, 
and, finally, in 1608, to Green’s troupe, in Graz. The whole story presents an exceed- 
ingly valuable chapter in Dramatic History, but naturally it is much more interesting 
to Germans than to us. It is to the presence in Germany of these English strolling 
players, with their garbled versions of plays of which they retained the whiff and wind 

from the London stage, that Germany owes the first germ of its Drama of to-day. In 
accepting from Germany the fine volumes of the German Shakespeare Society, let us 
quench our blushes in the thought that they are but the repayment to us of a debt. 

What is with Cohn a bare surmise, viz. that in Josephus, the Jew of Venice, we may 
have Dekker’s lost play, becomes, if I understand him aright, a conviction to Fleay, 
and hence, as we have seen above, his assertion that Josephus was Dekker’s play, and 
that Dekker’s play was the ‘ Venesyon comodey’ of 1594, and that the Venetian com- 
edy was the foundation of the Merchant of Venice. It therefore behooves us to exam- 
ine well this German play, which, thanks to Meissner, can now be satisfactorily done.* 

Thus runs the title: Comocdia Genandt Dass Wohl Gesprochene Uhrtheil Eynes 
Weiblichen Studenten oder Der Jud Von Venedig ; or, in English, A Comedy called 
The Righteous Judgement of a Girl Graduate, or the Jew of Venice. The Dramatis 
Persone are: King of Cyprus; Prince of Cyprus, in love with Ancilletta; Duke of 
Venice; Barrabas, a Jew, afterwards Joseph; Florello, a Counsellor of Venice; An- 
cilletta, his daughter, beloved of the Prince; Grimaldi, Santinelli, Ancilletta’s lovers; 
Pickleherring, servant to the Prince; Franciscina, maid to Ancilletta and beloved by 
Pickleherring; the Prince’s Steward, Counsellors, &c. 

The play opens at the palace in Cyprus, where the young Prince begs his father to 
banish the Jews, who have by their tricks and usury gained enormous wealth and beg- 
gared the Cypriotes of all classes, both rich and poor, high and low; moreover, worse 
things are to be feared from them than beggary,—‘ we know what they lately did at 
«Malta. It may well happen that they betray this kingdom to the Turks.’ (It is not 


cane 
* Genks (Geschichte der Sh’'n Dramen in Deutschland, 1870, p. 409) gives a short synopsis of it, 
which is gond as far as it goes. 


326 APPENDIX 


worth while to emphasize by comments the various parallelisms as they arise, which 
recall either Marlowe’s Jew of Malta or The Merchant of Venice. A parallelism is 
supposed to be indicated by quotation marks.) The old King grants his son’s request, 
and orders are issued for the banishment of the Jews and the confiscation of their 
goods, whicu evil stroke is due to the Prince, and supplies the motive for the hatred 
of him by Barrabas. Pickleherring enters. This character is, perhaps, the most 
prominent in the play, and presents a study of the manners and refinement of the 
times, which may be curious, but is certainly repulsive. It is inconceivable that such 
language and actions could ever have been tolerated in public. What this favorite 
character says is not fun but filth. There is nothing in the whole range of the old Eng- 
lish drama with which I am acquainted, and I will confess to many a quagmire, that is 
not sweet and wholesome beside this Pickleherring’s disgusting vileness. Towards 
the end of the play he is somewhat less outrageous,. partly perhaps because there is an 
end to all things, and that end was reached in the earlier Scenes; and partly because 
whatever similarity is to be noted between this play and Shakespeare’s Merchant is 
more pronounced towards the conclusion. 

Pickleherring enters and presents certain petitions to the King, of which only one 
is translateable. It is ‘from a dead fellow who was standing before a door, and 
another fell from the roof and killed him, and now the dead fellow petitions that the 
other be put to death too,’ The petition was granted by commanding ‘the fellow 
who fell from the roof to stand underneath and the dead man’s friend to go up and fall 
down on him and kill him.’ In Silvayn’s Orator, which, as we have seen, p. 310, 
is supposed to have influenced the speech of Shylock before the Court, the 27th 
‘Declamation’ is: ‘Of him that falling downe from the top of his house slew another 
‘man, against whom the sonne of the slaine man demandeth iustice ;’ the Judge decides 
‘that the said plaintife should ascend vp to the top of the same house, and throwing 
*himselfe downe vpon the defendant should kill him if he could.” Zhe date of the 
‘Venesyon comodey’ ts 1594; the date of the Orator ts 1596, if the subject of the 
foregoing petition be taken from Zhe Orator, can the Venesyon comodey and the Jud 
von Venedig be the same? 

The Prince decides to go to Venice, not only to see that city in the lovely spring 
weather, but to form an alliance with it against the Turks, although there is not much 
danger to be apprehended from them, because they had been ‘/a¢ely’ so terribly de- 
feated by ‘Sefi of Persia’ (Meissner notes that this battle took place in August, 1605). 
The King parts reluctantly with his son, and hesitates to expose the heir of the throne 
to the raging sea in a few ‘boards’ nailed together. 

The Jew is sent for, and the decree of confiscation and banishment announced to 
him by the Prince. He pleads in vain for permission to remain, but the Prince is inex- 
orable ; he must depart penniless on the morrow with his wife and children. 

In the last Scene of this Act the Jew returns disguised as an old soldier, with a patch 
over one eye, and requests, and obtains, permission to go to Venice in the same ship with 
the Prince. In a soliloquy the Jew vows vengeance on the tyrannical Christian, and if 
he can find no other means of killing the Prince, he has secreted enough gold and 
jewels about his person to bribe some banditti to assassinate him. Though not printed 
as verse, the Act closes with a rhymed couplet: I’ll find some means to regain my pelf, 
The Prince shall die, I’ll kill him myself. 

In the next Act we are in Florello’s house in Venice, and Santinelli and Grimaldi 
are wooing Ancilletta. Florello insists upon his daughter’s making choice of one or 
other, “at she protests that she cannot choose, they are both so excellent, and ‘ rehearses 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—DER ¥UD VON VENEDIG 327 


their admirable qualities;’ the one is noble and the other of good fatnily, the one is 
handsome and the other finely formed, the one is rich and the other not poor; one ig 
friendly, the other magnanimous, &c. &c.; where qualities are so evenly divided she 
cannot decide; they must wait a year, and whichever during that time makes himself 
more agreeable, him she will espouse. The lovers must perforce acquiesce, and after 
Ancilletta has gone decide that, to kill time, they will make merry during the Carnival. 

The Prince, Pickleherring, and the disguised Jew reach Venice in safety, and while 
they are talking over the adventures of the voyage they see Ancilletta and her maid, 
Franciscina, approach on their way to church, and the Prince falls at once in love with 
the mistress, and Pickleherring with the maid. The Prince orders Pickleherring tc 
follow them and find out where they live and who is the Father of the lady; when 
the clown returns he tells the Prince that the Father lives ‘in the Broad street, on the 
‘right hand, on the left side.’ 

The Second Act also closes with a rhyming couplet, but as Pickleherring utters one 
of the lines, it is untranslateable. 

In the Third Act, Ancilletta reveals to Franciscina how deeply she is enamoured 
with the Prince, and Franciscina acknowledges that she is just as deeply in love with 
Pickleherring; all four contrive to meet in the street, and mutual yows are exchanged 
all round, in the course of which we discover from the style of Franciscina’s conversa- 
tion that she and Pickleherring are well matched. The plot, whereby future interviews 
are to be had, is devised by Ancilletta, who is to tell her Father on her return that she 
has had a fainting fit in the street; thereupon she will take to her bed, and grow worse 
and worse, and Franciscina is to bring her a newspaper wherein there is the advertise- 
ment (which the Prince is to insert) of a celebrated French Doctor. This Doctor, she 
will tell her Father, that she must see, and will keep on telling him until the Prince, 
disguised as a Doctor, is sent for, and her continued illness will afford continued oppor- 
tunities for interviews, and for becoming better acquainted with her Father. The Scene 
closes in rhyme, but it is Franciscina who this time has the last word, and, like Pickle- 
herring’s, it is equally untranslateable. 

The Jew now appears in fine array; he has made a good use of his time and talents, 
and is already richer than he was in Cyprus. He exults in his advantage over the 
Prince, in that he has thrown off his disguise, but the Prince must still remain incog- 
nito until the arrival of his credentials, which were to follow him. Of old he was 
called Barabas; he has now assumed the name of Joseph. It is true, he says, I am 
not Joseph of Arimathea, but just wait, my Prince; let me only get you in my clutches, 
and I’ll be the Joseph who will help you into your grave. 

The Doctor’s cap and gown, which the Prince must don, together with his false 
beard, Pickleherring hires from the Jew Joseph, and is so peremptory in his demand 
that the Jew has no time to sprinkle poison in them as it occurred to him todo. The 
Third Act closes in prose. 

Ancilletta’s plot succeeds. The Prince is called in, and appears disguised as a 
French Doctor and talks broken German in the presence of the Father, but when the 
latter is called away the lovers renew their vows of fidelity. 

In the mean time the Prince’s remittances from Cyprus have not yet arrived. Pickle- 
herring is therefore dispatched to the Jew to borrow two thousand ducats. When the 
Jew is apprised of the request, he utters, according to the Stage direction, ‘ very slowly’ 
(langsahm aussgesprochen) ‘two thousand ducats is a great sum.’ Whereupon Pickle- 
herring replies: Who said anything about two thousand ducats? he doesn’t want two 
thousand ducats, but only 2000 ducats (spoken very fast). 


328 APPENDIX 


When the Prince meets Joseph at the appointed hour to receive the money, the latter 
is already prepared with the bond, whereby the Prince is to bind himself to repay to the 
pious Jew Joseph, within one month at the farthest, the aforesaid two thousand ducats 
without defalcation, but if otherwise, then the pious Jew Joseph is hereby empowered 
to cut a ‘just pound of flesh’ from whatsoever part of the Prince’s body it pleaseth 
him. That is a remarkable bond, says the Prince, who would ever let his body be 
maimed for the sake of money? what do you mean, with your pound of flesh? and 
why don’t you exact the customary interest? I am, replies the Jew, everywhere known 
as the pious Jew Joseph. That name I wish to keep, and to that end I take no interest 
from any one, least of all from a stranger, and for so short a term; but in order that the 
bond may not fail through insufficiency, I have inserted, instead of interest, this pound 
of flesh, seeing that I need the one as little as the other. 

Prince. Why didn’t you exact some other penalty than flesh, if there is no trickery 
here ? 

Sew. The thought just occurred to me, upon my word. Sir, you are very suspicious. 
You won’t trust me, and yet I, on your mere name, must trust you for two thousand 
ducats. 

Prince. But to cut a pound of flesh out of one’s body—that requires circumspection. 

Sew. Oh, very well sir; if you won’t trust me, I’ll keep both the money and the 
bond. ‘But just think, what could I do with a pound of flesh.’ We are forbid by 
our laws to eat flesh of any kind, and should I undertake to eat human flesh ? 

Prince. Then I have no treachery to fear? 

Sew. I swear by the God of my fathers that the pound of flesh is mere verbiage. 

The Prince signs the bond, and after his exit the Jew says he has signed this bond, 
and ‘ Venice is a state where strangers are well received and can collect their debts ;’ 
at any rate, should he fail to get the pound of flesh, he will give the Prince such a 
slash with a poisoned knife that he’ll not want anything more. There is no rhyming 
couplet at the end of the Fourth Act. 

The Fifth Act opens with an interview between Florello and Ancilletta, in which 
the Father objects to any further employment of the French Doctor, on account of the 
mystery which hangs round him, and forbids Ancilletta to leave the house during his 
absence at the Council. No sooner, however, had he gone than Ancilletta determines 
to seek her lover through the streets, and for that purpose dispatches Franciscina to the 
Jew for two students’ costumes, in which she and her maid can wander everywhere 
unrecognized. 

In the next Scene the Prince’s two thousand ducats are all gone, mostly lost at play, 
and Pickleherring has to apply to the Jew for a thousand more. The Jew says that what 
he has already lent comprises almost his whole fortune, but ‘I will go to my neighbour 
and get enough to help your master.’ Ay, do so, replies Pickleherring, ‘you are, my 
Jew, the quintessence of all Hebrews;’ you are only a Jew, but better than a Christian, 
especially than one who is not so good. as you are. The Jew departs, and returns, not 
with the money, but with bailiffs, who arrest the Prince and carry him off. Pickleher- 
ring storms at the Jew, and while words are high the Scene at the back opens and dis- 
closes the Duke in council with Florello, Santinelli, and Grimaldi. The Duke learns 
the cause of the uproar, and commands the Jew to produce the Prince. “As the Prince 
enters the Duke is much struck with his noble bearing, and Florello feels for him 
strange compassion. The Prince acknowledges his signature to the bond, and the Jew 
demands the penalty. But, says the Duke, addressing the Jew, ‘do you feel no com- 
passion’ for this comely youth? you call yourself tle pious Jew; you show no piety now. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—DER ¥UD VON VENEDIG 329 


Look you, Jew, the two thousand ducats which he owes you, I will lend him. But 
I am not content therewith, the Jew replies, I will prove my right to be called the 
pious Jew Joseph by living up to strict justice, and will not yield one hair’s breadth 
from it. The time is up, he has not paid me, and ‘I will have nothing but my judge- 
ment.’ 

Hlorello. The Jew is stiff-necked and immoveable, we must find a way to help this 
young man without violating justice. Harkye, Jew, you’ll be content if I give youa 
thousand ducats in lieu of your judgment, just to help out this young nobleman? 

Jew. No, not for one second. It is my duty to give taxes and money to my gracious 
masters, and not they to me. I hold myself fast and immoveable by my promised 
pledge, and will in no wise let myself be diverted from it. 

Prince. Look to it, Jew, lest you be punished for your cruelty, 

Duke. Who are those people that are coming in? 

florello. It appears to be a young gentleman with his servant. 

Duke. Inquire out, who he is and what he wants; it seems as though he had some 
business here. 

Enter Ancilletta and Franciscina disguised. 

Pickleherring. I say, stubbed [Kurtzer] Sir, who are you? 

Ancilletta. 1 am a student [.Studtosus] from Badua. I pray you pardon me, my 
lords, if I disturb this trial. Doctor Camillo sends me hither, and begs to be excused 
for being incapacitated to appear, but since he has understood that an extraordinary 
lawsuit was pending, he instructed me as to what I should say in the matter in his 
behalf, 

Duke. You are welcome, young man, assume the duties of your Master. You will 
achieve the greatest honour if you can devise any relief for this defendant, and he him- 
self will be indebted to you for all time. 

Ancilletta. Are not two thousand ducats in controversy ? 

Few. Yes, he owes them to me. 

Ancilletta. And what is the pledge? a pound of flesh to be cut from his body. 

Few. That is all I ask. 

Ancilletta. Let me hear the bond. [The Few reads it.] Do you confess it all? 

Prince. Yes, my signature proves it. 

Ancilletta. The affair is all right, 

Pickleherring. How about the pound of flesh ? 

Duke. Camillo is a wise man, he must direct us to a judgment whereby we can at 
once clear up this tangled business. 

Ancilletta. 1 do not see how we can get at the Jew; wherefore, Jew, cut the guaran- 
tied pound of flesh out of his body. 

Few. Sacra Justia, Sancta Justitia! a second [anderer] Daniel, a second Daniel! 

Pickleherring. Rascally Jew, thievish coward! Master, let them know that you’re 
a Prince, perhaps they’ll let you off. 

Prince. Rather will I die than disobey my Father. 

Pickleherring. Then say you’re a hog, Jews can’t eat that. 

ew. Hold on, Christian, now I will pay you an old debt, which perhaps you have 
forgotten. [Draws a sharp knife, and is about to cut. 

Pickleherring. Tf you spoil my Master’s side, I’ll take a bigger piece out of you. 

[Makes a lunge at the Few. 

Yew. What are you about, Pickleherring? Let me alone. 

- Ancilletta. Hold! 


330 APPENDIX 


Pickleherring. Jew, you must hold up! 

Ancilletta. Be quiet, both of you! Jew, the bond expressly states a pound of flesh; 
if you cut more or less by a single grain, and shed only one drop of blood, you are 
guilty of death and have lost your life. a 

Sew. How, gracious Sir; how is it possible to cut living flesh without shedding 
blood, and how can I do it? 

Duke. You have heard the decision, conform to it or await your punishment. 

Pickleherring. Sacra Justitia, Sancta Justitia! a second Daniel! 

Sew. Why, gracious Sir, it was all mere banter. Do you suppose that I would give 
away so much money for a pound of flesh? what should I do with it? I was not in 
earnest; I only wanted to scare him. If I am paid my two thousand loaned and my 
thousand besides, which you promised me, I am content, and will willingly release 
him. . 

Duke. Just a little while ago you would take nothing but the pound of flesh; but 
because you did not at once accede, you shall now have neither flesh nor money. 

ew. You cannot thus deprive me of my two thousand ducats, therefore let them be 
paid to me so that I can go home to my house. 

Floreilo. Neither from us nor from the stranger shall you receive a stiver. 

Duke. If you won’t go home without your money, you shall be hurried to prison te 
teach you to take such bonds from people. 

Pickleherring. Sacra Justitia, Sacra Justitia! asecond Daniel, a second Daniel! You 
mouse-head ! [He gives him the finishing stroke (Dat ipsi colaphum). 

Few. O ye Christians, ye unrighteous Judges, you help only each other, and rob the 
poor Jews of their own! 

Duke. What does the rascal say? Quick there, thrash him and thrust him forth. 

[Ae ts beaten off the stage. 

Duke. Now you are clear of your debt and your pledge, but this young man you 
have greatly to thank, through his cleverness the Jew was paid and you were set free. 
Such friendship can be repaid only by unending gratitude. 

The Prince expresses his willingness to testify his gratitude with his life, and hopes 
that the Studiosus will some day come to Cyprus, which the Studiosus promises to do; 
and in order that the bond of friendship may be strengthened, she begs Florello to act the 
part of a Father and to recommend her to the Prince’s safekeeping in the strongest possible 
terms. Florello joins their hands and tells the Prince to receive the Student from him 
as though from a Father, and to love the Student with all his heart, for he has done you 
such a service that if you desert him let heavenly grace desert you; but if you live fast- 
bound and united to him, let all heavenly blessings hover over you. Ancilletta throws 
off her disguise, confesses that she did not come from Dr Camillo, and thanks her 
Father for having betrothed her to her lover. Florello repudiates the betrothal, but at 
last consents, just as the Prince’s Steward arrives and the Prince’s incognito is at an 
end. The Prince takes Ancilletta, and Pickleherring Franciscina. The Duke wel- 
comes the Prince, and on the spot concludes an offensive and defensive alliance with 
Cyprus, and bursts into rhyme as the curtain falls: 


In ties of friendship close is noble Cyprus bound, 

The Prince a lovely bride has here in Venice found, 
We keep our peace at home and all our foes can scare. 
The smiles of Heaven are ours, so let the Turk beware! 


Whether or not this wretched, wretched stuff is the ‘ Venesyon comodey,’ or an 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—DER ¥UD VON VENEDIG 331 


adaptation of it, cannot, of course, with our present information be decided. To say 
that it is the Jew of Venice by Dekker shows not the least possible respect to Dekker’s 
memory. Meissner suggests that if it really be Dekker’s play, a reason may be found 
for the long delay in publishing it in England (it was not entered on the Stationers’ 
Registers till 1653), in the fact that the MS was travelling around in Germany. It 
cannot have been Gosson’s play; there is not a trace of the ‘greediness of worldly 
choosers.’? Can it possibly have been the play on which Shakespeare modelled the 
Merchant of Venice? 1 cannot imagiv.e that any one will seriously maintain it. The 
solitary striking resemblance to be f.und is in the exclamation: ‘a Daniel, a second 
Daniel ;’ but this is far more likely to have been copied from Shakespeare than that 
Shakespeare copied it. If the dates of Silvayn’s Orasor, 1596, and of the ‘late’ battle 
with the Turks, 1605 (p. 326) be accepted as Internal Proofs of the date of the Play, 
the whole question is settled at once; but, however desirable it might be to settle it 
thus decisively, we must remember that such allusions might have been added or 
inserted at any time. They prove, however, conclusively that this particular version 
of the play, azd the only version we possess, is over ten years subsequent to the date 
of the Venesyon comodey, and over five years later than the Quartos of the Merchant 
of Venice. I find it impossible to believe that Fleay would ever have asserted that it 
was the foundation of Shakespeare’s play had he ever read it. It is the positiveness 
of Fleay’s assertion, and the high position which Fleay holds among Shakespeare 
scholars, that have made it seem at all worth while to devote so much space to it. 


The conclusion, therefore, of the whole subject of the Source of the Plot is, that 
The Merchant of Venice was founded on the play mentioned by Gosson, and that on 
the one or the other the Italian novel of 77 Pecorone exercised decided influence, with 
a possible reading by Shakespeare of Silvayn’s Orator. 


332 APPENDIX 


DURATION OF THE ACTION 


THERE have been at least three attempts to calculate the days and hours during 
which the events of this play occur. The first is by EcCLEs, in 1805, who makes certain 
changes in the arrangement of the Scenes and n. ‘he division into Acts in.the first half 
of the play; his computation of time will, therefore, to that extent differ from any other. 
He does not end his First Act with the interview between Anthonio, Bassanio, and 
Shylock, but extends it into Act II, so as to include the arrival of the Prince of Mo- 
rocco. ‘The First Scene of our Act II is, therefore, the Fourth Scene of Eccles’s Act I, 
and then, having Morocco in hand, he thinks that the Prince should proceed to his 
choice of the caskets without delay, and therefore he transposes what is our Seventh 
Scene of that Second Act (containing Morocco’s failure) to follow this Fourth Scene. 
Eccles’s First Act, therefore, has five Scenes, the two additional Scenes being respect 
ively II, i, and II, vii. His Act II begins with Gobbo’s soliloquy, and all the subse 
quent Acts and Scenes follow as in other editions. The reasons he gives for these 
changes are twofold: First, in no other way can he harmonize the indications of time, 
and, secondly, for dramatic effect; each Act of the first three contains a trial scene of 
the Caskets. 

His computation of time is, then, as follows: 

The First Day is consumed in the first three Scenes of Act I. It begins in the 
forenoon before dinner, to which meal frequent reference is made; ana as a messenger 
brings word that the Prince of Morocco ‘ will be here ¢o-night, the day is supposed to 
close with his arrival, and the SeconpD Day begins with his interview with Portia. 
This interview cannot be on the night of his arrival, because Portia tells him that his 

hazard shall be made after dinner,’ It therefore begins a new day, whose close sees 
Morocco’s discomfiture. 

Eccles now encounters the difficulty of disposing of the long pause in the action 
which apparently has to take place while Anthonio’s bond to Shylock is running its 
three months’ course. These months Bassanio must spend somewhere, either at Ven- 
ice or at Belmont. Eccles compromises. Obstacles to Bassanio’s departure may have 
arisen which keep him at Venice long beyond his original intention, and when he does 
at last reach Belmont ‘it will be highly proper to imagine that, won by the charms of © 
‘his mistress’s society, he may be induced to defer, for a considerable time after his 
‘ arrival there, the determination of his fate.’ Eccles recognizes the fact that by hasten- 
ing Bassanio’s departure before nine o’clock, ‘when the wind had come about,’ as An- 
thonio said, a day might be saved and Bassanio start for Belmont just as Morocco was 
leaving, but this would involve a three months’ state of suspense at Belmont; and 
Eccles wisely relinquished it, as ‘fraught witn no little degree of improbability.’ 

Wherefore Eccles supposes a considerable time to have elapsed before he begins a 
new day, the THIRD, with the Second Act, and Launcelot Gobbo’s soliloquy. ‘The 
‘time of the day is andetermined; Bassanio, however, upon his entrance desires that 
‘supper may be ready by five of the clock.”’ And this day continues until Bassanio 
sets sail at nine o’clock at night for Belmont. 

The next morning, the FourTH Day, Salarino and Salanio meet and describe Shy- 
lock’s frenzy over the loss of his ducats and his daughter (II, viii). 

As Belmont ‘ lay at no very great distance from Venice,’ ‘it may well be considered’ 
that Bassanio reaches there on this same day. 

How mu+h time certainly elapses after Bassanio’s arrival and the Scene between 
Salanio, Salaring and Shylock (III, i) Eccles cannot decide, but 2s, before its close, 


DURATION OF THE ACTION—ECCLES 333 


Shylock asks Tubal to ‘bespeak an officer a fortnight before,’ he supposes that this, 
the Firru Day, is about that length of time before the Scene where Bassanio makes 
choice of the caskets (III, ii). 

That choice is made on the SIxTH Day, in the forenoon. The marriage ceremony 
takes place; Bassanio leaves for Venice; Portia commits the charge of her house to 
Lorenzo and Jessica, and follows Bassanio to Venice; and Lorenzo and Jessica pass 
their merry jests with Launcelot—all, according to Eccles, before dinner-time, which 
we know was about noon. In the afternoon of this day the Scene shifts to Venice, 
and Shylock refuses Anthonio’s appeals. This must be the day before the trial, be- 
tause Anthonio says that ‘ his griefs and losses have so bated him that he shall hardly 
spare a pound of flesh ¢o-morrow to his bloody creditor.’ 

The SEVENTH and last day opens in the Court of Justice in Venice; and, after the 
trial, very late at night, Portia reaches Belmont, followed by Bassanio. 

As will be seen by the foregoing Journal, the greatest obstacle encountered by 
Eccles, and, indeed, by all who examine the subject critically, is to account for the 
term of three months during which the Jew’s bond runs. By his transposition of 
Scenes Eccles gains somewhat in ease in the general computation of time, but no 
inere shifting of Scenes will obliterate the three long months, and Eccles, with evi- 
dent reluctance, is forced to suppose that Bassanio remains in Venice until that term 
has nearly expired. 


Professor Wilson’s theory, or, as he calls it, his ‘ great discovery,’ that Shakespeare 
makes use of two different computations of time, by one of which time is protracted 
and by the other contracted, was set forth at length in Othello (p. 358 et seg.), and 
need not be repeated here. Unfortunately, Wilson did not apply his theory to this 
play, and we therefore can have no such brilliant exposition of its application as we 
had in the tragedy last mentioned. 

No sooner had Wilson announced his discovery than the Rev. N. J. HALPIN asserted 
that he had independently made the same discovery, and by way of proof at once issued 
a small volume entitled 7e Dramatic Unities of Shakespeare, Dublin, 1849; in it he 
pronounced his theory identical with Wilson’s, and proceeded to apply it to The Mer- 
chant of Venice. His application, however, does not, I think, substantiate the claim 
to identity of theory; indeed, a careful examination of his book leads me to believe 
that, so far from lighting upon the same discovery, Halpin did not even clearly com- 
prehend what Wilson’s discovery really was. The mere title of his book shows his 
bias ; he seems anxious to prove that Shakespeare duly observed the Three Unities, and 
that, when dealing with the Unity of Time, Shakespeare rightly adhered to a limit, longer, 
it is true, than Aristotle’s twenty-four hours, but logically, and naturally, better. What 
the duration of this limit is, Halpin thinks that Shakespeare has himself told us where 
Iago says of Cassio, that ‘He’ll watch the horologe a doudle set, that is, according 
to Italian computation, forty-eight hours. Therefore, Shakespeare’s Unity of Time, 
according to Halpin, is within forty-eiyht or fifty-six consecutive hours. ‘ By this lim- 
‘ itation, transactions which, according to our experience in life, would #aturally occupy 
‘weeks or months, nay years, are dramatically drawn within the compass of a few con- 
‘secutive hours; just as the almost interminable views of the landscape are represented, 
‘in all verisimilitude, on the uniform plane surface of canvas. Indeed, Shakespeare 
‘appears to have done for time what the painter has done for space,—thrown it into 
‘ PERSPECTIVE, and given to the vemo/e and to the near its proper and distinctive place, 
‘ colouring, and character.’ 


334 APPENDIX 


It is one thing to undertake to harmonize what Wilson calls Shakespeare’s ‘ Long 
Time and Short Time,’ but it is a much harder task to have to prove that the Long 
Time is, dramatically, no longer than forty-eight hours, which is what Halpin now 
undertakes; and it is not surprising that thus heavily handicapped, with this additional 
weight, he should stagger and succumb. 

Halpin asserts that the dramatic time of this play is compressed to within less than 
the forty-eight hours, viz., within thirty-nine consecutive hours. 

The proof is as follows, as much as possible in his own language : 

‘ The transaction naturally divides itself into two distinct periods,—and the interval 
‘ between them. 

‘1. The first period ranges from the opening of. the action and the borrowing of 
‘ Shylock’s money to the embarkation of Bassanio for Belmont. 

‘2, The second includes the time between his arrival at Belmont and his return to 
‘it, with Anthonio, after the trial. 

«3, And the interval between these two periods is concurrent with the time of the 
‘bond, whatever that may be. Let us now examine each period of visible action by 
‘the dates exactly laid down in the text; and then fix the zuterval by the same 
cule.’ 

We all agree that the play opens before dinner, ‘say at eleven o’clock in the fore- 
noon,’ and since Halpin assumes that Bassanio, as soon as he has ‘touched the ducats,’ 
begins to make rapid preparations for his journey, there is no difficulty in computing 
the time up to the hour of embarkation at nine P. M., which period is ‘ exactly limited 
‘to ten consecutive hours, viz: 

‘From the opening of the action to dinner-time . . . . « I hour 
‘From dinner-time (12 o’clock) to supper (5 o’clock) . . . 5 hours 
‘ From supper to the embarkation (g o’clock) . . . . . . 4 hours 

«First Period 0-7 30 ao) che erento on oe et ane TOMOUTS 

‘The Second Period of action degzms with Bassanio’s arrival at Belmont, and end. 
‘with his return to it, with Antonio, after the trial.’ 

In the Second Scene of Act Third, Halpin assumes that Bassanio has his first inter- 
view, in the capacity of a suitor, with Portia; and ‘the dialogue shows there has been 
‘no delay between the announcement of his arrival and his waiting on the lady. She 
‘prays him to pause, to tarry,—but he is too impatient to let a moment interpose be- 
‘tween his arrival and the decision of his fortune.’ 

«Considering the very early hours which our forefathers, from the highest rank to the 
‘lowest, were used to keep in Shakespeare’s time, it is not too early,’ says Halpin, ‘to 
‘assign this Scene and the departure of Bassanio for Venice to about eight o’clock in 
‘the morning.’ 

From what Portia says to Nerissa in regard to their journey, that ‘we must measure 
‘twenty miles to-day,’ Halpin infers that Venice and Belmont are ‘but ten miles apart,’ 
‘and that the distance might be easily traversed, with a pair of horses to her coach, in 
‘a couple of hours. Taking, then, eggh¢ o’clock A.M. for the time of the Casket scene, 
‘and allotting fowr hours for the marriage ceremony, the preparations for the journey, 
‘and the journey itself, Portia may have arrived at Venice by oon, and taken her place 
‘in court after the trial had been begun.’ 

As soon as the trial is over, which takes only the time of its representation, Portia 
sets out on her return to Belmont, and the whole party reassemble in Portia’s garden 
‘at the final close of the dramatic action, at no later hour than about fwo o'clock of the 
‘morning after the trial; that is to say, the Second Portion of the visible action cannot 


DURATION OF THE ACTION—HALPIN 335 


have occupied more time than between eight o’clock A. M. of one day, and two o’clock 
in the forenoon of the succeeding, that is to say, in eighteen consecutive hours. 

Thus Halpin disposes his two periods, and, for the sake of argument, we may 
grant his arrangement, though not without much lifting of eyebrows, and shrugging 
of shoulders, here and there. 

Now comes the Third Period, the interval between the two, the interval within 
which lies the term of the three months’ bond. This interval, so Halpin expresses it 
as his ‘conviction,’ is ‘really but @ single night; that night, to wit, which intervenes 
‘between Bassanio’s embarkation and his arrival at Belmont.’ ‘And that, conse- 
* quently, the received period of the bond is an *Wusory period.’ 

Halpin then proceeds to prove that, as Jessica’s flight from Venice was contempora- 
neous with Bassanio’s embarkation, and as, furthermore, she arrived at Belmont shortly 
after Bassanio had reached there, the interval between the two periods was from nine 
in the evening of one day to eight in the morning of the next, the day on which the 
bond expires, and was, therefore, eleven hours. 

Thus we have tem hours for the First Period; eighteen hours for the Second, and 
eleven for the Interval between the two. In all, ¢hirty-nine hours. 

But how about the bond? We seem to get no light on the solution of that three 
months’ puzzle. If only we can ignore that, our path is plain as way to parish church, 
But, unfortunately, Halpin does not ignore it. I say ‘unfortunately’ because, in solv- 
ing it, he betrays, I fear, that he has failed to comprehend Shakespeare’s art in deal- 
ing with time, and that instead of detecting, with Wilson, Shakespeare’s legerdemain, 
he has, no less than Eccles, fallen a victim to it. Instead of accepting the drama as 
it stands and endeavoring to reconcile its apparent discrepancies, Halpin introduces a 
device which, while it certainly helps out Halpin, not only throws a deeper shade on 
Shylock, but, in my opinion, I am sorry to say, degrades the whole play ; and for which 
T cannot see that he has a tittle of evidence. 

«The bond,’ says Halpin (p. 35), ‘upon which ostensibly the money is lent is a bond 
‘for “three thousand ducats at three months ;”’ that upon which it is rea//y advanced 
‘is a bond substituted for the former, through the affected good nature and kindliness 
‘of Shylock. ‘The first was, of course, the ordinary mercantile bond of the country, 

bearing the usual interest, payable at a certain specified date, and, doubtless, subject 
*to the usual penalty of double the amount on forfeiture. Of the second, we know 
‘little or nothing beyond the penalty on forfeiture,—“a pound of flesh,” &c. It is a 
«merry bond” drawn, signed, and sealed in “a merry sport.” It bears no interest, 
‘indeed, but we are left in ignorance of the sum really advanced, or of the time and 
‘place when and where it should become payable. The Jew’s own description of the 
‘instrument is in the following ambiguous terms :—seal me there Your sing/e bond; 
‘and in a merry sport If you repay me not on such a day, In such a place, such sum 
‘or sums as are express’d in the condition, /e¢ the forfeit Be nominated, for, &c. To 
‘lure the merchant more effectually into his snare, the Jew represents this proffer as an 
‘act of disinterested kindliness. And further, to disarm Antonio and Bassanio of all 
‘suspicion, he sneers at the absurdity of their supposing that, in any case, he would 
‘think of exacting the forfeiture. A penalty like this was not, with due time for 
‘ preparation, likely to be incurred; still less, under such professions, to be enforced. 
‘The terms are agreed to, and Shylock proceeds alone [Italics are mine. This over- 
‘sight on the part of Halpin is inexplicable] to give the notary “ directions for this 
‘merry bond.” Antonio, in his reliance on the Jew’s reasoning and assurances, signs 
‘and seals the instrument, perhaps without examination; and the deed being legally 


336 APPENDIX 


‘drawn up, and the penalty not unprecedented, he must abide the consequences of his 
own rash act. 

‘Correct, however, in its technical forms, as this “merry bond” may have been, we 
* yet know that in some respects it was fraudulent in its substance; for, at the trial, 
‘Shylock is charged with having “Jdirectly and directly too Contrived ‘against the 
‘ “very life of the defendant.” Directly, by proceeding with knife, scales, and weights 
‘to exact the fatal forfeiture; and indirectly, no doubt by some fraudulent contrivance 
‘in the deed. What could this fraud have been? Comparing the date of the exe- 
“cution of the bond with the date of its expiring, we are led to the irresistible conclu- 
‘sion, that the fraud lay either in the omission of any date or period at all, or the sub- 
‘stitution of a false one; and, in the latter case, we must suppose it was payable, 
‘according to a very usual practice among merchants, at sight or on demand. This | 
‘view entirely reconciles the apparent discrepancy .between the actual time of Bas- 

sanio’s journey to Belmont and the time of the bond’s arrival at maturity.’ Halpin 
hen goes on to prove that Anthonio never was a bankrupt at all. He learns at Bel. 
mont, within twenty-four hours after signing the bond, that his ships have come in. 
‘Nothing but surprise could have reduced him to a state of forfeiture; and nothing 
‘could have reduced him to such a surprise, except the fact that the bond was zmcon 
‘ ditionally payable on demand or at sight.’ 

Although this pure invention of a second, fraudulent bond to which Anthonio tamely 
and silently submits is fanciful enough and wide enough of the mark of revealing Shake- 
speare’s art, yet in dealing with the ‘protractive allusions,’ Halpin shows even more 
clearly that he failed to appreciate Wilson’s ‘discovery.’ Instead of accepting these 
allusions as intentional blinds, creating a false show of time, Halpin goes to work to 
show that they are all mistakes, not on Shakespeare’s part, but on ours, for supposing 
them to be what in reality they are not; we think that they refer to the three months’ 
bond, whereas, says Halpin, they refer to the substituted bond, payable ina day. In 
the conference between Shylock and Tubal, Halpin acknowledges that Tubal has been 
to Genoa, ‘but it does not appear that he went thither in quest of Shylock’s daughter.’ 
‘ Tubal is a manifest liar,’ continues Halpin; ‘he reports the loss of one of Anthonio’s 
‘ argosies, ... . but we know (at the last) that Anthonio has sustained no loss at all,— 
‘no wreck,—and that Tubal’s story is a falsehood invented for the nonce. Again, if by 
‘ his speech, as given in all the editions, Tubal means to say that Jessica had “spent in 
«« Genoa, as he heard, one night, fourscore ducats,” we know also he must be a liar; 
‘for Jessica was not in Genoa at all. In fact, she had not reached many miles from 
‘Venice when, between that city and Belmont, she and her lover were overtaken by 
‘Salerio, who was hastening to acquaint Bassanio with the news of Anthonio’s misfor- 
‘tune.’ But, rightly regarded, Tubal is not the liar that he seems; he is more sinned 
against than sinning; he is a victim of punctuation, so it appears from Halpin, who 
says that in Tubal’s speech: ‘Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, one night,’ 
&c., the words ‘in Genoa’ should be in parentheses, as they were in answer to Shy- 
lock’s ‘where ?—in Genoa?’ and were just added, ‘in order to answer, ere he forgot.’ 
‘Your daughter spent—(in Genoa)—as I heard,’ &c. Shylock’s instruction to Tubal 
to ‘bespeak him an officer a fortnight before,’ suggests to Halpin ‘ nothing more than 
“the extreme impatience of the cruel creditor to glut his revengeful animosity with the 
‘utmost certainty and with the shortest delay.’ 

Jessica’s report of what she had heard her Father swear to Tubal and to Chus about 
his eagerness for Anthonio’s flesh, Halpin explains by saying that Jessica is referring to 
‘conversations 4ri0r to the bond..... Since the day on which the bond was con- 


DURATION OF THE ACTION—DANIEL 337 


‘tracted she has never been at home so as to overhear any of her Father’s conver 
*sations with his countrymen on the subject. In fact she has had but a single inter 
‘view with him between that day and her elopement, and having ourselves been ea 
‘and eye witnesses to that interview, we know that no such conversation took place 
‘between her Father and his countrymen on that occasion.’ 

Anthonio’s speech that he should ‘hardly spare a pound of flesh 7o-morrow’ to his 
bloody creditor, Halpin pronounces a ‘ miscalculation of the Merchant, not the poet ;’ 
Anthonio may have thought that he would not have been brought to trial until ‘to- 
morrow,’ &c. 

Unless a theory which we believe to be erroneous bids fair to become popular, and 
we fear the spread of contagion, it seems to be a sad waste of time or labour to refute 
it. No such fear need be anticipated from this theory of Halpin. There is no likeli- 
hood that a convert will be found to this thimblerigging device of a substituted bond, 
which its author never would have started, I think, had he had an inkling of Professor 
Wilson’s ‘dual time.’ It is well to note it as an inexplicable vagary of a clever scholar, 
and there an end. 


In 1879, Mr P. A. DANrEL contributed to Zhe New Shakspere Society a Time- 
Analysis of the Plots of Shakspere’s Plays, and, of course, therein, a ‘time-analysis’ 
of the present play. He followed the usual arrangement of Acts and Scenes, and, 
therefore, does not go step by step with Eccles. The latter, as we have seen, allotted 
Seven Days to the action; the Seventh and last day he devoted to the trial and to the 
return to Belmont. Of this day Daniel makes two,—one for the trial, and one for the 
return to Belmont,—on the ground that when Nerissa returns her ring to Gratiano she 
says that the Doctor’s clerk was with her ‘last night.’ Otherwise, Daniel’s compu- 
tation, as far as the number of days is concerned, is the same as Eccles’s. In regard 
to the disposition of the three months, however, there is this difference :. Eccles sup- 
poses that Bassanio remains chiefly at Venice; and Daniel, that Bassanio sojourns at 
Belmont. 

Daniel’s computation is as follows: 

Day 1. ActI. Jnterval—say a week. 

Day 2. Act II, i-vii. /terval—one day. 

Day 3. Act II, viiiand ix. /#/erva/—bringing the time to within a fortnight of 
the maturity of the bond. 

Day 4. Act III,i. /terva/—rather more than a fortnight. 

Day 5. Act III, ii-iv. 

Day 6. Act III, v-Act IV. 

Days 7 and 8. Act V. 

It is needless to remark that Daniel does not believe in Shakespeare's art of dealing 
with time as set forth by Wilson. 

Daniel’s disposition of the three months’ term must be told in his own words: 

‘In Act III, Sc.i (Day No. 4) we arrived at the conclusion that all but a fortnight of 
‘the three months of the bond had expired. [Shylock had told Tubal to bespeak him 
‘an officer “a fortnight before.” ] More than a fortnight’s interval, therefore (allowing 

for Salerio’s journey, and the time passed by him in Venice after the arrest, during 
‘which the chief citizens interceded with Shylock on behalf of Anthonio), must be 
‘supposed between Sc. i and Sc. ii-iv of this Act. So far all is clear; the difficulty is 
‘to account for Bassanio’s proceedings since his arrival at Belmont. We cannot fix 


‘the time of his arrival with precision; but granting the first week’s interval, spent ir 
aa 


330 APPENDIX 


“Venice in preparing for his journey, and his arrival at Belmont on the second day 

after his embarkation, we still are but nine days from the signing of the bond, and 
“now, when he makes his choice of the caskets, more than three full months of the 
‘bond have expired. We allowed Morocco a week in which to make his suit to Por- 
‘tia; to Arragon we could only afford one day; but Bassanio has taken the uncon- 
“scionable time of some twelve weeks! And yet when he at last determines to risk 
‘his fortunes in the choice of the caskets, Portia addresses him with, “I pray you 
‘ “tarry; pause a day or two..... I would detain you here some month or two Before 
«you venture for me,” &c. This speech apart, however, we need not find much diffi- 
‘culty in allowing for a somewhat lengthy sojourn at Belmont of Bassanio and his 
‘suite. The dialogue between him and Portia is that of two persons who, by long 
‘intercourse, are mutually certain of each other’s love, and tremble lest fate should 
‘divide them. It is certain, also, that Bassanio is ‘no new-comer, for he refers to the 
‘ time—*“ When I did first impart my love to you,” &c., and the mere sound of this 
‘line carries us back a long way into time past. We must suppose—and the poet 
‘intended we should suppose—that Bassanio has been following Antonio’s advice, 
‘and staying “the very riping of the time” (II, viii, 43). And Portia and he have 
“not been alone in their wooing; Gratiano has been hard at it too, wooing till he sweat 
‘again, and “at last’? Nerissa has promised him her hand if Bassanio achieve her 
‘ mistress.’ 

Daniel’s computation bears the mark of conscientious fidelity; his weakest point, I 
think, is where, for the sake of proving Bassanio’s prolonged stay at Belmont before 
choosing the casket, he is forced to disregard, or to obliterate, Portia’s entreaty to Bas 
sanio to ‘pause a day or two,’ and that she would ‘detain him some month or two 
before he ventured ;’ which, considering that, according to Daniel, Bassanio had been 
there already two full months, betokens in Portia a kindly, hospitable nature, to say the 
least. As Daniel most truly says, ‘there is not much difficulty, thzs speech apart, — 
a dangerous, although a very convenient, freedom to take in nice calculations. For 
the rest, if Wilson’s theory of Shakespeare’s Double Time be correct, it would seem as 
if with Daniel every illusion of Shakespeare’s legerdemain had succeeded, except, per- 
haps, Daniel’s failure to note that Bellario said in his letter to the Duke, that he had 
“turned o’er many books’ with the young Doctor. Still, as so much of that letter was 
fabricated, Daniel may have thought that this was a fabrication also; albeit, it is not 
without importance if considered as an intentional indication of prolonged time. 


The CowbDEN-CLARKES are the only Editors who have adopted Wilson’s Doubt 
Time. Not only have they noted indications of it in this present play, but in their 
extremely valuable Shakespeare Key (which every Shakespeare student should own), 
they have collected the instances, which they consider proofs of it, in all of Shake- 
speare’s Plays. 


It seems to me that whatever Professor Wilson says of the Double Time in O¢helo 
is applicable to the Double Time in the Merchant of Venice, and that Shakespeare’s 
consummate art is shown here no less than there. Wilson claimed for Shakespeare 
originality in the use, or in the invention, of this art. Original it unquestionably was, 
as far as Shakespeare’s knowledge of it was concerned, but I think it can be shown 
that the same art was employed in The Agamemnon, by Shakespeare’s greatest prede- 
cessor in Tragedy. 


In Ofhello, through this art, we accept as perfectly natural the gradual change of 


DURATION OF THE ACTION 339 


intense love to a murderous frenzy of jealousy, all within the space of thirty-six hours, 
Days and weeks are compressed into minutes and hours, not only without our detecting 
any improbability, but with a full faith that events have followed their natural, orderly 
course, 

Here in the Merchant of Venice, by the same thaumaturgy, three months are to be 
compressed into as many days, a harder task than in Othello, in so far as the limit is 
fixed. At the very outset we are told that the bond is to be for so much money ‘and 
Jor three months. There is no attempt to weaken the impression. As soon as it is 
firmly fixed, then Shakespeare begins at once to ‘hurl his dazzling spells into the 
spongy air.’ He knew, none better, that just as soon as the ducats were pursed, Bas- 
sanio, swift as the thoughts of love, must fly to Portia. Did not Bassanio know, had 
he not himself told Anthonio, that the wide world knew Portia’s worth, and the four 
winds blew in from every coast renowned suitors? Could he afford to risk an hour’s 
delay? In that longing sigh, ‘Oh, my Anthonio,’ did he not breathe his soul out 
for the means to hold a rival place with the many Jasons? As soon, therefore, as 
he has received the means from Shylock, he comes before us full of eager, bustling 
haste,—supper must be ready, at the very farthest, by five of the clock,—letters must 
be delivered,—his servant must make purchases and stow them aboard,—he must 
return in haste,—he must go for Gratiano to come at once to his lodging,—and then 
after all the commissions, full of feverish impatience, he bids his servant,—‘ hie thee,— 
go.’ But—and here we catch the first glimpse of Shakespeare’s spell—the three 
months have begun to run, and against the swift current of Bassanio’s haste there must 
be some check. Bassanio tells his servant to ‘ put the liveries to making.’ This takes 
time. Liveries are not made ina day. Next, Bassanio tells Launcelot that Shylock 
had spoken with him that very day about Launcelot’s change of masters. This sounds 
as though Bassanio and Shylock had met casually in the street; surely they would not 
mingle the business of signing such a bond and of handing over so large a sum of 
money with discussing the qualities of servants. But these two checks will serve well 
enough for the thin edge of the wedge; and Bassanio’s eager haste returns again, and 
he excuses himself to Gratiano on the plea that he has ‘business.’ In this bustling, 
feverish, hurrying mood we leave him, and do not see him or hear him again until he 
has reached Belmont, and is entreating Portia to let him choose, to let him to his for- 
tune and the caskets, for, as he is, he ‘ ives upon the rack.’ What man is there, whose 
blood is not snow-broth, but knows that Bassanio has sped to Belmont with all speed 
of wind and tide. 

But Shakespeare’s magic will be busy with us before we see Bassanio again. Nearly 
a fourth of the play is carried on (herein revealing Shakespeare’s art in the mere con 
struction of his dramas), and days and weeks and months must pass before us, con- 
suming the time of the Bond. 

A new interest is excited. Jessica and her fortunes are introduced. Time obliterates 
Shylock’s antipathy to eating with Christians, We are taken to Belmont to see the 
Prince of Morocco and watch his choice of the casket. We are brought back to Ven 
ice to find Shylock so publicly furious over the loss of his ducats and his daughter that 
‘all the boys in Venice follow him,’ Rumours, too, are in the air of the loss of Anthonio’s 
ships. Salarino talked with a Frenchman about it ‘yesterday.’ Again we are taken to 
Belmont; by this mere shifting of scenes, back and forth, from Belmont to Venice, and 
from Venice to Belmont, is conveyed an impression of the flight of time. The deliberate 
fool, the Prince of Arragon, fails in his choice, and departs. Lest we should be too 
much absorbed in all this by-play and lose our interest in Bassanio, we are told imme- 


340 APPENDIX 


diately after Arragon has left that a young Venetian has alighted at the gate. We are 
not told outright that it is Bassanio, yet we know that he is on the way, and it must be 
he. But before we actually see him, fresh from Venice as we know he is, although it 
is so long since we saw him and so much has happened, more spells must be woven 
round us; there must be the very riping of the time. 

One is always conscious that between the Acts of a play a certain space of time 
elapses. To convey this impression is one of the purposes for which a drama is divided 
into Acts. Thus here, after merely intimating that Bassanio has reached Belmont, an 
entr’acte artfully intervenes, and when the curtain again rises we are all the more ready 
to accept any intimations of the flight of time which may be thrown out. Accordingly, 
when the Third Act opens with Salanio’s question: ‘What news on the Rialto?” 
Salarino replies that ‘i yet dives there unchecked’ that Anthonio has lost a ship. 
Furthermore, the wreck has taken place not on any sea-coast near at hand, from 
which communication could be speedy, but on the remote Goodwins, almost as far off 
as it could be, within the limits of Europe; even for rumour to reach Venice from so 
remote a quarter implies much time; it could be brought only by slow argosies o1 heavy 
carracks, and days and weeks might elapse before any arrived direct from the scene 
of the disaster, and for many a long day the rumour might live unchecked. Much 
more time was implied to an Elizabethan audience, in this distance between the Good- 
wins and Venice, than it is to us. 

Then Shylock enters, still so deeply cut by his daughter’s flight that his first words 
are reproaches to Salarino and Salanio for being privy to it; but evidently his first 
ebullition has cooled, and time has brought some self-control. It must have been days, 
nay, weeks. Have not Anthonio’s bearing and deportment undergone a gradual change 
that only time can bring about? Shylock says, that Anthonio scarce dare show his 
head on the Rialto; this is not the work of hours, but of days, perhaps weeks. 
Anthonio’s smug air upon the mart is spoken of as a thing long past: ‘he that was 
used to come so smug upon the mart.’ Then comes in with startling effect, ‘/et Aine 
look to his bond.’ By this one allusion the three months shrink; we feel the first 
cold chill of Anthonio’s fast-approaching peril, and this impression is deepened with 
every repetition of the allusion by Shylock: ‘let him look to his bond! He was wont 
[again, how long ago that seems!] to call me usurer. Let him look to his bond! 4e 
was wont to lend money for a Christian courtesy. Let him look to his bond!’ This 
is one of the masterstrokes of art in the play. Except one fleeting allusion to it by 
Salarino, we have heard nothing of the bond. We have watched Jessica elope with 
her lover, and gilded with ducats glide out of sight in a gondola, the Prince of Morocco 
has come and gone, the Prince of Arragon has strutted forth and back, the Rialto, with 
its busy life and whispered rumours of Anthonio’s losses, has passed before us day after 
day, week after week, the smug merchant has broken down, and now all of a sudden 
looms up the fateful bond, and its term is shrivelling as a scroll. To deepen this 
impression of the Long Time that has elapsed, Tubal returns from his weary quest 
after Jessica; he tells Shylock that he offen came where he heard of her; he must have 
kept moving from place to place, because Shylock groans over the money that was 
spent in the search. Then, too, another of Anthonio’s ships has been cast away 
coming from Tripolis, much nearer home than the Goodwins; and some of the ship- 
wrecked sailors have reached Genoa, nay, have even talked with Tubal. There is nc 
hope for Anthonio now, his bankruptcy is sure; and so close has the limit come that 
Tubal must go, and go at once, to secure an officer for Anthonio’s arrest ; within a fort- 
night the term will have expired and the bond be forfeit. 


DURATION OF THE ACTION 341 


The minute-hand that has recorded for us so many varied events is fast catching up 
with the hour-hand. 

There is no entr’acte now. We are taken at once to Belmont, at last to meet Bas 
sanio in happy torment, full of eagerness and haste, fresh from Venice, unwilling to 
piece the time or stay one minute from his election. With the success of Bassanio’s 
hazard and with the winning of his prize, the only obstacle to the completion of the 
full term of the bond disappears. There is no longer need of further delay. Time’s 
steeds may now be fiery-footed and gallop apace. Yet even at this last minute two more 
spells from the past are to be cast around the present, and our imaginations must untread 
again the long weeks that have passed since the bond was signed. Salerio brings 
word from Venice that morning and night Shylock is plying the Duke for justice, and 
that twenty merchants, the Duke himself, and the magnificoes, have been pleading 
with the Jew for mercy. And Jessica, too, who left Venice when Bassanio left it, has 
reached Belmont after her merry junketings at Genoa, (which we accept without ques- 
tioning their possibility,) and adds a masterstroke of legerdemain by saying that she 
had heard her Father swear to Tubal and to Chus that he would rather have Anthonio’s 
flesh than twenty times the value of the bond. We never stop to think that she left 
Venice within a few hours after the signing of the bond, and had seen her Father but 
once, and then for only a few minutes. Her words summon up pictures of many a 
discussion between the three old usurers in the seclusion of Shylock’s house, and tell 
plainly enough of the gradual hardening of Shylock’s heart. Thus the mighty 
magician ‘ winds him into us easy-hearted men, and hugs us into snares;’ and so com- 
pletely entangled are we that there is no jar now when Anthonio’s letter says that his 
ships have all miscarried, his creditors grow cruel, his estate is very low, and hzs bond 
to the Jew forfeit ! 

The minute-hand is on the stroke of the hour. But one more fleeting impression 
and the hammer falls. Anthonio says that his griefs and losses have so bated him that 
he will hardly have a pound of flesh to spare for his ‘ bloody creditor ¢o-morrow.’ The 
royal Merchant’s gaunt and haggard looks tell of many a weary week, and the bond 
expires to-morrow ! 

Although it was necessary that Portia should hasten to Venice as rapidly as Bassanio, 
yet some time must be given to her to master her brief; she might have done it while 
on the ferry, after receiving Bellario’s notes and garments from Balthasar at the Tra- 
ject, and probably did do so; but Bellario’s letter to the Duke supplies the requisite 
time, if any be needed, in our imagination, by saying that he and the young Doctor 
‘had turned over many books together,’ evidently a faithful and prolonged consultation, 
ending in an ‘opinion,’ the result of laborious and learned research. 

How long the home journey from Venice to Belmont lasted, whether it took one 
day or two days, is a matter of small moment. Nothing was at stake, no art is 
demanded, nothing has to be smoothed away; we need neither Long Time nor Short 
Time. For aught that concerns the dramatic action, it might have taken a month. All 
that is needed is that Portia should reach home first, and that Bassanio should follow 
hard after. When Nerissa tells Gratiano that the Doctor’s Clerk had been in her com- 
pany ‘last night,’ she had already given Gratiano the ring, or was in the act of handing 
it to him; the jest was revealed, her eyes were dancing with merriment, and he would 
know in a flash that what was true of /ast night, be it in Belmont or Venice, was equally 
true of every night since she had been born. 


It is to Dr W. W. Goodwin. of Harvard Coliege, that I owe the suggestion that tn 


342 3 APPENDIX 


The Agamemnon an illustration might be possibly found of a treatment of Dramatic 
Time similar to Shakespeare’s Double Time. In representing the arrival of Agamem- 
non at Argos within a few hours of the fall of Troy, Aischylus has been charged by 
many an Editor with a violation of the Unity of Time. Dr Goodwin suggested that a 
solution of the difficulty might be traced in the Herald’s speech to the Chorus. It is 
greatly to be regretted that a pressure of many duties has kept these pages from being 
enriched with Dr Goodwin’s promised investigation of the questicn, and that the task 
has therefore fallen, instead, to my unskilful hands. 

In the first place, if there be in Zhe Agamemnon a violation of the Unity of Time, 
Zschylus committed it either wittingly or unwittingly. To say that he committed it 
unwittingly is almost unthinkable. From the very structure of a Greek tragedy, a 
downright violation of the Unity of Time, during the continued presence of the Chorus, 
would be a defect glaring alike to auditors and author; if to our eyes there appears to 
be such a violation, the presumption is strong, so strong as to amount almost to a cer 
tainty, that the defect lies in our vision, not in the play itself. 

This apparent violation, then, AZschylus must have committed wittingly; and if so, 
an analysis of the tragedy will show, I think, that in dealing with time he waved over 
his audience, with a master’s art, the same magician’s wand that Shakespeare wields, 
and that by subtle, fleeting impressions of the flight of time a false show of time is 
created, which is accepted by us for the real. We must remember that in listening to 
Shakespeare or to Aischylus we are subject to their omnipotent sway, and that when 
they come to us ‘with fair enchanted cup, and warbling charms,’ we are powerless to 
‘fence our ears against their sorceries.’ 

The opening Scene of 7he Agamemnon reveals the tired Watchman on the Palace 
top at Argos. Of a sudden he sees on the distant horizon the flash of the fire on Mt 
Arachnzeum, the signal that Troy is taken. 

The Chorus enters, and the Watchman hastens to tell Clytemnestra. 

When the Queen enters, and is asked by the Chorus to tell how long it is since the 
city had fallen, she replies that ‘it was this night, the mother of this very day’ (Tie 
viv Texobone ga¢ Tod evdpdvyc, Aéyw, line 279). 

The Chorus, knowing how far it is from Troy, and how many days and nights must 
pass in journeying thither, expresses surprise that the news could travel so fast; where- 
upon Clytemnestra explains that it was through the aid of Hephaistos; a fire was lit 
on Ida, then on the Hermzan crag of Lemnos, then on Mount Athos, and so on, till 

the great beard of flame’ flashed on the roof of the Atreidz, and ‘this very day the 
Achzans hold Troy’ (Tpoiav "A yatol 190° Exovo" év jpuépa, line 320). 

The opening hour of the Tragedy has struck. It is the morning after the night dur- 
ing which Troy was taken. The release of the weary Watchman from his sleepless 
years, Clytemnestra’s description of the speed, the speed of light, with which the bea- 
con-fires had brought the news, her rejoicings over the end of the warriors’ hardships, 
all emphasize it. No impression with regard to Anthonio’s three months’ bond is con- 
veyed more clearly than that here, in Argos, it is but a few hours since Troy had fallen. 

‘The voyage from Troy to the bay of Argos,’ says Dr Goodwin, in a letter, ‘ would 
‘now be a good day’s journey for a fast steamship. So I think we are entitled to at 
‘least a week of good weather for the mere voyage, leaving out the storm and the 
‘delays.’ That much time, then, will it take Agamemnon to reach his home, if he 
starts within an hour after he has conquered Troy. But the drama has begun, the 
Chorus is on the stage, and before it leaves the stage Agamemnon must arrive, here in 
Argos, and yet all traces of improbability must, if possible, be concealed. 


DURATION OF THE ACTION —ZSCHYLUS 343 


The time during which the Chorus is on the stage is Eschylus’s Short Time, and 
torresponds to Bassanio’s journey from Venice to Belmont. fEschylus’s Long Time is 
Agamemnon’s week’s voyage from Troy to Argos, corresponding to Anthonio’s three 
months’ bond. The same power that can compress three months at Venice into one 
day at Belmont, must expand a few hours at Argos into a se’en nights’ voyage from 
Troy. 

The task in Zhe Agamemnon is the reverse of the task in The Merchant of Venice. 
Shakespeare must compress a long term into a short one, while fEschylus must dilate a 
short time into a long one. Shakespeare presents to us the spy-glass, and bids us see 
what is distant close at hand; while Aischylus reverses the glass, and what is but an 
arm’s length from us recedes to the verge of the horizon. 

To a certain extent and for many purposes, what Shakespeare can effect by Acts and 
the shifting of Scenes, Aischylus can bring about by means of the Chorus. Yet here 
it is not easy to see how the Chorus can help him; nothing that the Chorus could say 
would lessen the shock to our sense of the fitness of things if Agamemnon himself 
were to be brought at once upon the scene. Old Argive citizens compose this Chorus; 
they have remained here quietly in Argos; of Agamemnon, or of his journey, they can 
tell us nothing. 

Of a sudden Clytemnestra sees a Herald hastening from the shore. In thus introdu- 
cing a Herald, art is shown. Heralds always travel in advance of their lords, and this 
Herald, as far as we know, may possibly have left Troy before its fall, That it is a Her- 
ald from the Argive king we feel sure, and having accepted the fact of his presence, we 
sink into a receptive mood for any impression which his story can impart. But while 
he is yet at a distance, Clytemnestra sees that he is travel-stained with dust and grime.* 
Thus is the spell begun, the magician is at work. We accept the Herald without a shade 
of suspicion; what can be more natural than that he should have travelled with extreme 
haste? The thrill of joy at the sight of one who can bring us news is heightened by 
waving olive branches, the pledges of peace and victory, which he bears aloft. Thus 
artfully is the Herald announced before he enters on the stage; when at last he does 
enter and breaks out into a thrilling greeting of his home, criticism is forgotten in joy 
and sympathy. 

We must remember, and we cannot too deeply remember, that both 7ze Agamemnon 
and The Merchant of Venice were written, not to be studied and pored over, line by line, 
and analyzed sentence by sentence, but to be acted; to be communicated by the speak- 
ing voice to the hearing ear and interpreted by the quick thought. It is by a repetition 
of faint, fleeting, subtle impressions, felt but scarcely heeded at the time, that a deep, 
abiding effect may be at last produced. The ‘snowflake on the river’ may be but ‘a 
moment there, then gone for ever;’ yet let but enough fall and the stream is locked in 
frost. 

What need to hurry with our questionings how the Herald came hither; he stands 
before us, and his story will tell us all. 

In order to appreciate the delicacy with which A®schylus smooths away the objec- 
tions to this speedy appearance of the Herald, we must bear in mind that every allu- 
sion to the flight of time since the hour that Troy has fallen, however light and evan- 
ee I a hie eee ee a 


* Thus I prefer to paraphrase the Kaos mnadod Edvoupos Supia Kdves ; although it may, and per- 
haps ought to, refer to the dust raised by the Herald as he hurries forward. I think it no disgrace 
to confess that I know of no harder Greek to master, with every aid that Notes and Translations 
ean yield, than The Agamemnon, and those who know it best will be most tolerant, 1 am sure, of 


my version or perversion. 


344 APPENDIX 


escent the allusion may be, helps to make that hour recede into the past ; and, for my 
purpose, I think I may be permitted to claim every possible impression which I can 
detect, of this nature, however fleeting, and then to multiply its effect on Grecian ears 
many times over. How clearly must it not have spoken to those ears, when it can 
penetrate even my adder’s sense! > 

Thus, when the Herald in his first speech (lines 523 ef seg) says that Agamemnon 
must be welcomed back, who has, with the crowbars of the just gods, levelled Troy to 
the ground, with all its towers and fanes, and that all earth’s seed lies scattered on 
the ground, is not Time’s thievish progress intimated here? Can walls, and towers, 
and temples be toppled over in a minute? Can harvests be burnt, and acres ploughed 
up, for leagues around, in an hour? Lost in the thought of these great tasks and of 
the mighty victory, we never stop to count the days; but the succession of pictures 
creates the flight of time, andthe hour of Troy’s fall begins to recede. 

Too much, however, is not demanded of us at once; the Chorus here speaks; and 
then Clytemnestra exults in the assurance that the beacon-fires are true, and we are 
gently prepared for Agamemnon’s approach by the message which the Chorus is to 
deliver when he arrives, telling him of her fidelity during his absence. Hereupon the 
Chorus asks after Menelaus, and the Herald reluctantly confesses that his fate is un- 
known. The Chorus presses for a more exact reply, and asks whether he set sail with 
all the rest of the fleet and then left them, or whether a storm snatched him away, but 
the Herald only ambiguously replies that it was even so. The Chorus returns to the 
point, and asks what rumours there were about him in the fleet, among the sailors. 
* No one knows anything about him,’ replies the Herald; ‘the sun, the nourisher of the 
* earth, alone can tell his fate.’ 

It seems needless to point out how insidiously, up to this point, the passage of time 
has been worked in by a succession of pictures, every one of which is suggested by a 
word or phrase which could not have fallen unheeded on Grecian ears. Troy has been 
conquered; and burnt; and razed to the ground; and reduced to a desolate ruin; the 
Greeks have divided the spoils; and allotted the trophies to be hung up in temples 
(577); the armies have been gathered together; and embarked in their fleet; and have 
advanced on their voyage; and been overtaken by a storm; and after the storm sufficient 
time has elapsed for the fleet to be collected; their losses counted; and ‘rumours to live 
unchecked’ as to the fate of their companions, 

(And Troy fell only last night !) 

Trusting to the effect already produced, the Poet advances more boldly. Moreover, 
on the emotion, the uncritical emotion, excited in his auditors by the absorbing interest 
of the Tragedy he has a right to count. 

Urged by the Chorus, the Herald hereupon describes this frightful storm which fell 
upon the fleet ‘dy night’ (line 653 ef seg.), when fire and sea combined against it, and 
Thracian blasts dashed all the ships together; and ‘ when ¢he fair light of the sun arose, 
we saw the Aigean Sea enamelled like a meadow (av6obv) with the drowned corpses 
of sailors and of Greeks.’ 

To all the previous indications of the flight of time, which were but delicate, artfl 
hints, there must be now added the explicit description of a wight of storm, when the 
fleet was well on its way (the blasts came down from Thrace), and the next morning 
afterwards when the sun shone bright and clear, 

Is not the goal won? The days of gloom, the night of storm, the smiling morrow, 
have passed before us; we have lived through them all, and the journey from Troy to 
Argos is accomplished. To Grecian eyes has not every league been measured ? 


DURATION OF THE ACTION—AZSCHYLUS 345 


Not to disturb this impression, but to deepen it by repose, the Chorus breaks in with 
four Strophes and four Antistrophes, wherein no allusion to the journey is found,—that 
is left as something fixed and settled; but it anathematizes Helen, and at the close, so 
far away have our thoughts been carried that any allusion to the journey from Troy to 
Argos seems like a thrice-told tale; that journey has become a fact around which no 
shadow of mistrust can cling. 

Thus heralded, thus prepared for, Agamemnon enters, and the task is done. After 
the spells that have been woven around us, we find no more violation of probability in 
Agamemnon’s appearance, from Troy, at that minute than in the expiration of the three 
months’ Bond within the hour after Bassanio has chosen the leaden casket; and is there 
a man, who, when sitting at the play, can say with truth that, on that score, he ever felt 
a jar? 


I do not think it is claiming too much thus to urge that the two greatest dramatic 
poets of the world used a kindred skill in producing kindred dramatic effects. If we 
find those effects in their dramas, their hands put them there, and to imagine that we 
can see them and that the mighty poets themselves did not, is to usurp a position 
which I can scarcely conceive of any one as willing to occupy. 


346 APPENL IX 


LANSDOWNE’S VERSION 


THERE have been in the history of this play two noteworthy Revivals; the first by 
MACKLIN and the second by Kean. Although on the score of genius no comparison 
between the two actors can be made, yet the revival by Kean did not imply, perhaps, 
as great a revolution of popular feeling as the revival by Macklin. It is one thing to 
elevate and refine, to convert ‘snarling malignity’ into the ‘ depositary of the vengeance 
of arace,’ but it is another and a bolder flight, I suggest, to transform a character, as 
Macklin transformed Shylock, from the grimacings of low Comedy to the solemn sweep 
of Tragedy. This was Macklin’s achievement, and the best way to estimate its pro- 
portions is to examine the Thing which had supplanted Shakespeare. To turn back. 
and read the page in the history of the Drama is a depressing duty. Our cheeks grow 
hot enough with shame over Dryden, or Shadwell, or Otway, or when ‘ Tate put his hook 
into the nostrils of the Leviathan ;’ but all is as nothing to the sight of Shylock drink- 
ing to his ‘ Mistress, Money,’ and shouting a toast to ‘Interest upon Interest,’ or to the 
desecration of Portia’s refined mouth by the objections put into it, to her German suitor. 

In estimating this Version, which held sway for more than a generation, two facts, 
at least, we should remember. 

First, that it was written in ‘the teacup times of hood and hoop, while yet the patch 
was worn,’ and that in those Dark Ages of the Drama, as in all ages, ‘the drama’s 
laws, the drama’s patrons give,’ and the men and women behind the footlights merely 
respond to the men and women before the footlights; and, Secondly, that it is scarcely 
to be called a modern version. Let us, at least, push the odium as far back as possi- 
ble. The Fourth Folio was only fifteen years old when George Granville wrote this 
Jew of Venice ; and Rowe, the first real Editor of Shakespeare, did not issue his edi- 
tion until eight years afterwards. If due weight be given to these two considerations, 
I think we shall be inclined to leniency, and even wonder, perhaps, that as much of 
Shakespeare as we find here was left untouched. 

Although it may fairly be called an uncommon book, it would be a waste of space 
to reprint the whole of its forty-seven quarto pages here; extracts erring on the side of 
fulness, and containing all the passages where Shakespeare is improved, must suffice, 

This Version by GEORGE GRANVILLE, VISCOUNT LANSDOWNE (he was only thirty- 
three years old when he wrote it), appeared in 1701, and held the stage for exactly 
forty years. It bore the following title: Zhe Jew of Venice. A Comedy. As it is 
Acted at the Theatre in Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by His Majesty's Servants. Lon 
don, Printed for Ber. Lintott at the Post-House in the Middle Temple-Gate, Fleetstreet 
T701, 

Hereupon follows : ‘ Advertisement to the Reader. The Foundation of the following 
Comedy being liable to some objections, it may be wonder’d that any one should make 
Choice of it to bestow so much labour upon; But the judicious Reader will observe so 
many Manly and Moral Graces in the Characters and Sentiments, that he may excuse 
the Story for the sake of the Ornamental parts. Undertakings of this kind are justi- 
fied by the Examples of those Great Men who have employ’d their Endeavours the 
same Way. ‘The only dramatique attempt of Mr. Waller was of this Nature, in his 
alterations of The Maid’s Tragedy; To the Earl of Rochester we owe Valentinian ; 
To the Duke of Buckingham, 7he Chance; Sir William Davenant and Mr Dryden 
umited n restoring The Tempest ; Troilus and Cresida, Timon, and King Lear were the 
works of three succeeding Laureats. Besides many others too numerous to mention,’ &c. 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 


Then we have :— 
PROLOGUE. 


The Ghosts of Shakespear ana Dryden arise Crown’d with Lawrel, 
Written by Bevill Higgons, Esq; 
Dry. This radiant Circle, reverend Shakespear, view ; 
An Audience only to thy Buskin due. 
Shakes. A Scene so noble, antient Greece ne’er saw, 
Nor Pompey’s Dome, when Rome the World gave law. 
I feel at once both Wonder and Delight, 
By Beauty warm’d, transcendently so bright, 
Well, Dryden, might’st thou sing; well may these Hero’s fight. 
Dry, With all the outward lustre which you find, 
They want the nobler Beauties of the Mind. 
Their sickly Judgments, what is just, refuse, 
And French Grimace, Buffoons, and Mimicks choose; 
Our Scenes desert, some wretched Farce to see; 
They know not Nature, for they tast not Thee. 
Shakes. Whose stupid Souls thy Passion cannot move, 
Are deaf indeed to Nature and to Love. 
When thy gyftian weeps, what eyes are dry! 
Or who can live to see thy Roman dye. 
Dryd. Thro’ Perspectives revers’d they Nature view, 
Which give the Passions images, not true. 
Strephon for Strephon sighs; and Sapho dies, 
Shot to the soul by brighter Szpho’s Eyes ; 
No Wonder then their wand’ring Passions roam, 
And feel not Nature, whom th’ have overcome. 
For shame let genial Love prevail agen, 
You Beaux Love Ladies, and you Ladies Men. 
Shakes. These crimes unknown, in our less polisht Age, 
Now seem above Correction of the Stage; 
Less Heinous Faults our Justice does pursue, 
To day we punish a Stock-jobbing Jew. 
A Piece of Justice, terrible and strange ; 
Which, if pursued, would make a thin Exchange. 
The Laws Defect the juster Muse supplies, 
Tis only we, can make you Good or Wise, 
Whom Heav’n spares the Poet will chastise. 
These Scenes in their rough Native Dress were mine; 
But now improv’d with nobler Lustre shine ; 
The first rude Sketches Shakespear's Pencil drew, 
But all the shining Master-stroaks are new. 
This Play, ye Criticks, shall your Fury stand, 
Adorn’d and rescu’d by a faultless Hand. 
Dryd. 1 long endeavour’d to support thy Stage 
With the faint Copies of thy Nobler Rage, 
But toyl’d in vain for an Ungenerous Age. 
They starv’d me living; nay, deny’d me Fame, 
And scarce now dead, do Justice to my Name. 


348 APPENDIX \ 


Wou’d you Repent? Be to my Ashes kind, 
Indulge the Pledges I have left behind. 
[A foot-note in the Second Edition, 1713, referring to the last two lines, says that 
‘the Profits of this Play were given to Mr Dryden’s Son.’] 


DRAMATIS PERSONZ.—MEN: Bassanio, Mr Betterton; Antonio, Mx Verbruggen; 
Gratiano, Mr Booth; Lorenzo, Mr Baily; Shylock, Mr Dogget; Duke of Venice, Mr 
Harris. 

WoMEN: Portia, Mrs Bracegirdle; JVerissa, Mrs Bowman; Jessica, Mrs Porter. 


Act Ia )SCENED. 


Anto. Ihold the World but as a Stage, Gratiano, 
Where every Man must play some certain Part, 
And mines a serious one. 
Grat. Laughter and Mirth be mine, 
Why should a Man, whose blood is warm and young, 
Sit like his Grandsire, cut in Alablaster ! 
Sleep, when he wakes, and creep into the Jaundice, 
By being peevish! I tell thee what, Antonio / 
I love thee, and it is my Love that speaks ; 
There are a sort of Men, whose Visages 
Do cream and mantle, like a standing Pond; 
And do a willful Stillness entertain, 
Screwing their Faces in a politick Form, 
To cheat Observers with a false Opinion 
Of Wisdom, Gravity, profound Conceit ; 
As who should say, I am, Sir, an Oracle, 
Oh my Axzonio / I do know of these, 
Who therefore only are reputed Wise, 
For saying nothing; But more of this 
Another time. “Let you and I, Lorenzo, 
Take a short turn: Once more, my Friends, be merry, 
All have their Follies; merry Fools are best, 
Lorenzo, come, Sir Gravities, farewell, 
Pll end my Exhortation after Dinner. [xeun¢ Grat. and Lorenz. 
Bass. Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, &c. 
[And so on, without change, down to line 140.) 
Bass. To you, Antonio, 
I owe the most in Money and in Love, 
Anto. My Friend can owe me nothing; we are one. 
The Treasures I possess, are but in trust, 
For him I love. Speak freely your Demand, 
And if it stand, as you your self still do, 
Within the Eye of Honour, be assur’d 
My Purse, my Person, my extreamest Means, 
Are all my Friend’s. 
[Here follow lines 150-162.} 
Anto. You know me well, and herein spend but time, 
To wind about my Love with Circumstance. 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 


Believe me my Bassanio, ’tis more wrong 
Thus to delay the Service of your Friend 
Than if you had made waste of all I have; 
Is this to be a Friend? With blushing Cheek, 
With down-cast Eyes, and with a faltring Tongue 
We sue to those we doubt: Friendship is plain, 
Artless, familiar, confident, and free, 
Ask then as you would grant, were yours the Power, 
Were yours the Power, so would I ask of you; 
No longer hesitate. Give me to know 
What you would have me do, and think it done. 
Bass. Then briefly thus. In Belmont is a Lady 
Immensely rich, and yet more fair than rich, 
And vertuous as she’s fair; sometimes from her Eyes 
I have receiv’d kind speechless Messages. 
Her Name is Portia; You have heard her Fame, 
From the four Corners of the World; the Winds 
Blow in, from every Coast, adoring Crowds ; 
The watry Kingdom, whose ambitious Head 
Spets in the Face of Heaven, is no Bar 
To zmulous Love, as o’er a Brook they come 
To Anchor at her Heart; Her sunny Locks 
Hang on her Temples, like a golden Fleece, 
For which these many /asov’s sail in Quest. 
O my Axfzonio, had I but the Means 
To hold a Rival-Place with one of ’em. 
Anto. The Means be thine, if I can find the Means, 
My present Fortunes are, thou know’st, at Sea. 
No Money, nor Commodity is left me 
To raise immediate Sums. Therefore go forth, 
Try what my Credit can in Venzce do, 
It shall be rack’d even to the uttermost 
To furnish thy Desires: Nay, no set Speech 
Of formal Thanks, which I must blush to hear. 
Go, presently enquire. And so will I, 
Where money is; In Friendship, who receives, 
Obliges, by Acceptance, him that gives. Lxeunt. 
Scene changes to Belmont. Later Portia and Nertssa. 
Port. In short, Verissa, my little Body is weary of this 
Great World. 
Neriss. Ut might indeed, if your Wants were as great as your 
Plenty. 
For aught I see, they are as sick, who surfeit 
With too much, as those who starve with too little; 
From whence I conclude, that Happiness is seated in 
The Mean: Superfluity brings Care, Care both 
Robs us of our Time, and shortens our Days, 
But Competency is the easiest and the longest Liver. 
Port. Good Sentences, and weil pronounc’d. 


35° 


APPENDIX 


Neriss. They would be better, if well follow’d. 
Port. It is a good Divine, who follows his own Teaching ; 
I could easier instruct Twenty, what were good to do, 
Than be one of the Twenty, to follow my own Instruction. 
The Brain may devise Laws for the Blood; but the hot 
Part will be sure to get the better of the cold; but what 
Is all this to my choosing a Husband ? 
[And so on, as in the original, down to line 30, ‘chooses you, 
Neriss. I have Superstition 
Enough to believe the Benefit Lot is destin’d for 
The best Deserver. 
Love is at best, but a Lottery to all, . 
Your Case looks different, but is in Effect the same 
With the rest of the World; For it is Fortune that 
Always decides—— 
And now pray discover to whom of this Retinue of Suitors 
Stand your Affections most inclined. 
Never was Woman so surrounded as you are. 
Port. Penelope was but a poor Princess to Portia, 
But come, out with your List; Read me the Names, 
And according as I describe, guess at my Inclinations, 
Neriss. What a long List is here! Alas for poor Men, that 
Among so many, but one can be happy! 
Port. Alas! for poor Woman! that when she might have so 
Many, she must have but one; but come, a Truce 
To moral Reflections: Read, read. 
Neriss. Imprimis, here in the Front, stands Monsieur /e Compte 
Your French Lover. 
Port. Of himself, thou mean’st; He has more Tricks than 
A Baboon: If my Bird sings, he strait falls into a capering; 
He will fence with his own Shadow; nor is his Tongue 
Less nimble than his Heels; I would as soon marry 
My Squirrel, or my Monkey. 
Veriss. What think you then of your Englishman, he comes next. 
Port. The Frenchman’s Ape: No, give me an Original, 
‘Whatever it be. The Ape of an Ape must needs be a strange Monster. 
Neriss. Myn Heer van Gutts, the Dutchman, how like you him? 
Port, Very vilely in the Morning, when he is sober, and 
More vilely in the Afternoon, when he is drunk; 
At best, he is worse than a Man; and at worst, no better 
Than a Beast: I will do anything, Verissa, e’re 1’ 
Be marry’d to a Sponge. 
Neriss. For anything I find, this Lottery is not likely to be 
Fair drawn: For if he should choose the right Casket, 
You'll refuse to perform your Father’s Will. 
Port. Therefore, I prithee, set a Bumper of Rhenish 
On the contrary Casket, for if the Devil be within, 
And the Temptation without, I know he will 
Choose it. 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 351 


La Seignora Guits ! oh hideous! what 
A Sound would there be in the Mouth of an 
Ltalian ? 

Enter Servant. 

Serv. Some of the Strangers, Madam, desire to take 
Their Leaves: And there are others just arriv’d, and 
Alighting at the Gate. 

Port. Would some one would come, to whom I could bid 
Welcome, as heartily, as I can bid all these Farewel. 

There is a Man, /Verzssa, such a Man; But what we wish, 
Either never arrives, or is always longest in coming : 
Fellow, go before: Merissa, come! Whilst we shut 

Out one Lover, another knocks at the Gate. 

Neriss. This Lottery will certainly be drawn full. Zxreunt. 

[Zhe next Scene adheres to the original with but trifling changes down to line 145 
Shylock repels any imputation of Anthonio's honesty : ‘When aman is rich, we say 
He is a good man, As on the contrary, when he has nothing we say a Poor Rascal; 
tis the Phrase, ’tis the Phrase.’ He omits the pun on ‘Pyrats,’ and closes his refusal 
to eat or drink or pray with Christians by the assertion ; ‘that’s flat.’ He passes over 
the account of Jacob and Laban with ‘You know the Story.’ Anthonio omits line 105 
‘A goodly apple rotten at the heart.’] 

Shyl. And youw’ll 
Not hear me,—were this offer kind ? 

Bassa. This were Kindness. 

Shyl. This Kindness will I show; nay, more, I’ll take 
Antonio's single Bond: And that we may henceforth 
Be Friends, no Penalty will I exact 
But this, meerly for Mirth—— 

If you repay me not on such a Day, in such a Place, 
Such Sum or Sums as are express’d— Be this 

The Forfeiture. 

Let me see, What think you of your Nose, 

Or of an Eye— or of— a pound of Flesh 

To be cut off, and taken from what Part 

Of your Body— I shall think fit to name, 

Thou art too portly, Christian ! 

Too much pamper’d— What say you then 

To such a merry Bond? 

Anto. The Jew grows witty; I’ll seal to such a Bond, 
And say there is much Kindness in the Jew. 

Bassa, You shall not seal to such a Bond— 

There is some Trick, some farther Fetch in this; 
You shall not seal to such a Bond for me. 

Anto. Fear not, my Friend, within two months, that is 
A month before the Bond expires, I expect Returns 
Of thrice three times the value of this Bond. 

Shyl. O Father Adraham, what these Christians are! 
Whose own hard Dealings teaches ’em to suspect 
The Truth of others Pray tel’ me, should he fail 


352 APPENDIX 


His Day— what should I get by the Exaction 
Of the Penalty? A Pound of Man’s Flesh? 
Not to be sold nor eaten: 
To buy his Favour I propos’d these Terms, ~, 
Such as I thought could bear no wrong 
Construction; but since you’re so suspicious 
Fare you well. [ going. 
Anto. Stay, Shylock, I will seal as you propose. 
Shy, Then meet me at the Notary’s, 
Give him Directions to prepare the Bond, 
In the meantime, I’ll fetch the Duccats, 
See to my House, least some unthrifty Knave 
Be on the Guard! Christian, thy Hand 
I'll presently be with you. L£xit Jew. 
Anto. Thou’rt now a very gentle Jews; 
This Hebrew will turn Christian, he grows kind. 
Bassa. I like not yet the Terms, 
A Villain, when he most seems kind, 
Is most to be suspected. 
Anto. There is not the least Danger, nor can be, 
Or if there were, what is a pound of Flesh? 
What my whole Body, every Drop of Blood, 
To purchase my Friend’s Quiet! Heav’n still is good 
To those who seek the Good of others: Come, Bassanio, 
Be chearful, for ’tis lucky Gold we borrow. 
Of all the Joys that generous Minds receive, 
The noblest is, the God-like Power to give. Exeunt. 

[ This closes Act I, As will be seen by the Dramatis Persone, Morocco, Arragon, 
Gobbo, Salarino, Salanio, and Tubal are all omitted. With Il, v, 14, ‘1 am bid forth 
to supper, Jessica,’ Lansdowne begins his Act II, and, omitting Gobbo, adheres to the 
original down to line 57, when, with ‘¥ast bind, fast find,’ Shylock exit. Jessica then 
says] 

Jess. Alas! what Sin is it in me 
To be asham’d to be my Father’s Child ? 
But how can he be said to have given me Life, 
Who never suffer’d me to know, 
What ’tis to live. O Lorenzo! 
Keep but thy Word to Night, and thou shalt be 
A Father, and a Husband both to me. Exit. 

[Enter Lorenzo and Gratiano. The former repeats, substantially, his words in Il, 
iv, 32-40: ‘She hath directed How I shali take her,’ &c., whereto Gratiane 
replies | 

Young, handsome, willing, with Gold and Jewels to Boot! 
Plague on’t, when shall I have such Luck ? 
Enter Jessica, in the Balcony. 
Jess. Who are you? Tell me for more Certainty, 
Albeit I swear that I do know your Voice, 
ZT love the Repetition of thy Name. 
( With trifling verbal alterations to line 58.} 


LANSDOWNE’S VERSION 353 


Grat. Now, by my Soul, a Gentile, and no Jew, 
She robs her Father with a Christian’s Grace. 
Lor. Beshrew me, but I love her from my Soul! 
For she is Fair, or else my Eyes are false; 
And true she is. What Proofs could she give more? 
And Oh she’s kind; she loves me, and I love, 
A greater Bliss, scarce Heav’n it self can boast 
Than mutual Love. 
Lxnter Jessica shutting the Door after her. 
Jess. Shut Doors after you; fast bind, fast find, 
These were his last Words; Thus I avoid the 
Curse of Disobedience! Be thou shut till I 
Open thee. 
. Lor. So whilst old Zaéan snor’d in Bed, 
Jacob with sprightly Rachel fled. 
Jess. His Gold, and Gems of Price they took, 
And eke the Flower of every Flock. [Holds up a Bag. 
Lor. But not one precious thing was there 
That could with Jessica compare. 
L£xnter Antonio. 
Ant. Fy, Fy, my Friends, why do 7ou loyter thus ? 
Gratiano and Lorenzo, for Shame make haste: 
Bassanio frets, that you are wanting, 
He has sent twenty times to look you out. 
Grat. Matters of State, Aztomio, Matters of State, 
A Rape and a Robbery: Matters of State 
Matters of State, Antonio. 
Ant. Away, away, for Shame. [2xzz. 
Lor. Farewel, Gratiano;: Excuse me to Bassano. 
Come /esstca, this must be your way and mine. [ Bxcunt 
Grat. Jew, Turk and Christian differ but in Creed ; 
In ways of Wickedness, they’re all agreed : 
None upwards clears the Road. They part and cavil, 
But all jog on—unerring to the Devil. [2 xeunt. 
Scene opens, and discovers Bassanio, Antonio, Shylock, and cthers, sitting, as at an 
Entertainment. Musick playing: During the Musick, Gratiano enters, and takes his 
Place. 
Anto. This to immortal Friendship; fill it up— 
Be thou to me, and I to my Bassanzo, 
Like Venice and her Adriatick Bride, 
For ever link’d in Love. 
Bassa. Thou joyn’st us well: And rightly hast compared ; 
Like Venice on a Rock, my Friendship stands 
Constant and fix’d; but ’tis a barren Spot; 
Whilst like the liberal Adriatick, thou 
With Plenty bath’st my Shoars— 
My Fortunes are the Bounty of my Friend. 
Anto. My Friend’s the noblest Bounty of my Fortune 
Sound every Instrument of Musick there, 
23 


354 APPENDIX 


To our immortal Friendship. [All drink. Loud Musick. 
Bassa. Let Love be next, what else should 

Follow Friendship ? 

To Love, and to Love’s Queen; my charming Portia, 

Fill; till the rosy Brim reflects her Lips; 

Then Kiss the Symbol round : 

Oh, in this Lottery of Love, where Chance 

Not Choice presides: Give, give, ye Powers, the Lot, 

Where she her self would place it: Crown her Wish, 

Tho’ Ruin and Perdition catch Bassaxio ; 

Let me be wretched, but let her be blest. [Drink, and Musick again. 
Grat. Mine’s a short Health: Here’s to the Sex in general ; 

To Woman; be she Black, or Brown, or Fair; 

Plump, Slender, Tall, or Middle-statur’d— 

Let it be Woman; and ’tis all I ask. [Drink again, Musick as before. 
Shyl. Ihave a Mistress, that out-shines ’em all— 

Commanding yours—and yours tho’ the whole Sex: 

O may her Charms encrease and multiply ; 

My Money is my Mistress! Here’s to 

Interest upon Interest. _ [Drinks. 
Anto. Let Birds and Beasts of Prey howl to such Vows, 

All generous Notes be hush’d; Pledge thy self, Jew :. 

None here will stir the Glass— [AW Rise. 

Nor shall the Musick sound: O Bassano! 

There sits a Heaviness upon my Heart 

Which Wine cannot remove; I know not 

But Musick ever makes me that. 
Bassa. The Reason is your Spirits are attentive, &c. 

| Hereupon follows what Lorenzo says to Jessica about music in V, i, 80-98, anu 
ends with the words : ‘Mark the Music,’ and this ‘Music’ which Bassanio requested 
his friends to mark, turns out to be a Masque composed by Lord Lansdowne, called 
PELEUS AND THETIS, and consists of about a hundred and fifty lines of dreary inan- 
ites, wherein certain stanzas appear to have been special favorites of his lordship, — 
thus : 

Thetis. Accursed Jealousy ! 
Thou Jaundice in the Lover’s Eye 
Thro’ which all objects false we see; 
Accursed Jealousy ! 

Again: 

But see! the mighty Thund’rer’s here, 
Tremble, Peleus, tremble, fly. 

The Thunderer! the mighty Thunderer! 
Tremble, Peleus, tremble, fly. 

These are so good that his lordship thought they would bear repeating, and after serv- 
ing their turn from the mouth of Thetis they are repeated as a Chorus. If Antonio 
knew that Bassanio had this Masque in preparation, we need find no difficulty in 
accounting for that ‘Heaviness’ which sat upon Antonio's heart, beyond the power of 

wine to remove.’ The last we see of Peleus and Thetis they are warbling a duet, 
whereof the refrain cannot be judiciously gainsaid ; 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 


Be true, all ye Lovers, whate’re you endure, 
Tho’ cruel the Pain is, how sweet is the cure !’ 


Hereupon the play is resumed by Antonio's exclaiming :] 


With such an Air of true Magnificence, 
My noble minded Brother treats his Friends: 
As hardly has been known to /taly. 
Since Pompey and Lucullus entertain’d; 
To frame thy Fortunes ample as thy Mind, 
New Worlds should be created. 

Enter Servant, 


Serv. The Master of the Ship sends word the Wind is 


Come about: And he desires you would haste Aboard. 


Bassa., turning to Anto.| Oh my lov’d Friend! till now I never knew 


The Pangs of parting Friendship. 
At distance I have tasted of the Pain, 
When the rude Morn has sunder’d us away, 
To our Repose: But, by my Soul, I swear 
Even then my Eyes would drop a silent Tear, 
Repugnant still, to close, and shut out thee. 
Anto. You go for your advantage, and that Thought 
Shall keep Antonio comforted. 
Bassa. The Traject is from hence to Belmont short, 
And Letters may come daily: Such Intercourse 
Is all the Cordial absent Friends enjoy : 
Fail not in that. Your trouble shall be short, 
I will return with the best speed I can. 
Anto. Be not too hasty, my Bassanio neither ; 
Slubber not Business for my sake, my Friend, 
But stay the very ripening of thy Love. 
Be gay, assiduous, and employ such Arts, 
As best incline the Fair: Love is not seiz’d, but won; 
Hard is the Labour; You must plant and prune, 
And watch occasion just: This Fruit is nice, 
*Twill promise Wonders, and grow fairly up; 
Seem hopeful to the Eye, look ripe, and then 
A sudden Blast spoils all. 
Enter another Servant. 
Serv. The Master of the Ship has sent agen. 


Bassa. One more Embrace: To those who know not Friendship 


This may appear unmanly Tenderness ; 
But ’tis the Frailty of the bravest Minds, 
Anto. J ask but this, Bassanio ; 
Give not your Heart so far away, 
As to forget your Friend. 
Come, is all ready? I must hasten you. 
Grat. If you were ready to part, 
*Tis all we stay for now. 
Bassa. Shylock, thy Hand, be gentle to my Friend, 
Fear not thy Bond, it shall be justly paid, 


355 


356 APPENDIX 


We soon shall meet again, 
Always, I hope, good Friends. 
Oh my Antonio / ’tis hard, tho’ for a Moment, 
To lose the Sight of what we love. 
Shyl. aside.| These two Christian Fools put me in mind 
Of my Money: Just so loath am I to part with that. 
Bassa. Gratiano, lead the way: Shylock, once more farewel. 
We must not part, but at the Ship, Avonio- 
Lovers and Friends, should they for Ages stay, 
Would still find something left, that they would say. [Zxeunt. 


Act III. Scene 1. 
Enter Portia, Bassanio, Nerissa, Gratiano, and their. Train. Nerissa ane Gratiano 
discourse apart, 

Bass. Why if two Gods should play some Heavenly match 
And on the Wager lay two earthly Beauties, 
And Portia, one, there must be something more 
Pawn’d with the other; for the poor rude World 
Has not her Equal: But alas, the while 
Should Hercules and Lychas play at Dice 
Who were the better Man? The greater throw 
Might turn by Fortune from the weaker Hand; 
So were a Gyant worsted by a Dwarf 
And so may I, having no Guide but Chance, ~ 
Miss that, which one unworthier may obtain, 
And dye with the Despair. 

Port. Therefore forbeare to chuse, pause for a while 
Before you hazard; for in chusing wrong 
You lose for ever; Therefore, I pray forbear 
For something tells me, but it is not Love, 
I would not lose you; I could teach you 
How to chuse right: But then I am forsworn, 
So will I never be 
Yet should you miss me 
I should repent that I was not forsworn ; 
For oh, what heavier Curse for Perjury 
Could Heav’n provide, than losing all my Hope? 
I speak too much; tho’ Thought will have no bound, 
A Virgin’s Tongue should shame to hint a Thought, 
At which a Virgin’s Cheek should blush. 
Think it not Love, yet think it what you please, 
So you defer a Month or two, 
For fain I would detain you as a Friend, 
Whom as a Lover I might lose, 
Should you persist to venture the rash throw. 
Tis better still to doubt, and still to hope, 
Than knowing of our Fates, to know 
That we have lost for ever. 

Bassa. Doubt is the worst Estate: ’Tis better once 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 


To die, than still to live in Pain. 
Desire is fierce, nor brooks the least delay. 
Fortune and Love befriend me: I’m resolv’d; 
My Life, and all my Earthly Happiness 
Sits on the Chance: Where may I find the Casket! 
Port. Yet, let me persuade you: If for your self 
You cannot fear, tremble for her 
For her, to whom you have so often sworn, 
More than your self, you love her. Think! oh Think! 
On Portia’s Fate: Who may not only lose 
The Man, by whom she wishes to be won, 
But being lost to him, remain expos’d 
To some new Choice; another must possess 
What Chance denies to you. O fatal Law! 
Lost to each other were a cruel Doom, 
But ’tis our least Misfortune; I may live 
To be enjoyed by one I hate. And you 
May live to see it. 
Bassa. To love, and to be lov’d, yet not possess 
No greater Curse could be, but what thou fear’st, 
Yet I will on: With double Flames I burn, 
Knowing that Portia loves me; all my fear 
Was for her Love: Secure of that I go 
Secure of the Reward: Lead me to the Caskets. 
Port. Away then, and find out where Portia’s lock’d. 
Thy Courage is an Omen of Success 
If Love be just, he’ll teach thee where to chuse. 
Nerissa, show him, since he is resolv’d, 
The rest all stand aloft, while Musick plays 
That if he lose, like Swans we may expire, 
In softest Harmony; but if he win 
Ah what is Musick then 
[And so on to line 63, ‘The issue of the Exploit. Goe Hercules.’] 
Love that inflames thy Heart inspire thy Eyes, 
To chuse aught where Portia is the Prize. 
[Portia and the rest stand at a distance observing soft 
Musick. Till re-enter Bassanio in each Hand a Casket. 
Bassa. Who chuses me, shall get what he deserves, 
The like Inscription bears this Silver Casket. 
Shall get what he deserves; who chuse by outward show, 
Entic’d by gilded Baits and flattering Forms, 
Who look not to th’ Interiour: But like the Martlet, 
Build in the Weather on the outward Wall, 
Even in the force and Road of Casualty, 
What may their Merit be? agen let me consider. 
[ Walks about thinking. 
Grat. Take the Gold, Man, or the Silver: plague on’t 
Would I were to chuse for him. 
Bass. Shall get what he deserves: Let none presume 


357 


SIMA AnU CY RAARV'C CALICLE 


358 APPENDIX 


Without the Stamp of Merit to obtain. 

Oh that Estates, Degrees and Offices, 

Were not deriv’d Corruptly: and that clear Honour 

Were purchas’d by the Merit of the Wearer, 

How many then would cover who stand bare! 

How many be commanded, who command! 

How much low Peasantry would then be glean’d 

From the true seed of Honour! And how much Honour 
Pickt from the Chaff and ruine of the Times, 

To be new varnisht: Let me not be rash, 

There yet remains a Third: well will I weigh 

F’er I resolve. [Z-x. 

Grat. Take the Gold, I say; pox on Lead; what is it good 
For, but to make Bullets, ’tis the image of 
Death and Destruction. 

Re-enter Bassanio with a Casket of Lead 

Bass. The World is still deceiv’d with Ornament ; 

In Law what Plea so tainted or corrupt, 

But being season’d with a gracious voice, 

And cover’d with fair specious Subtleties 

Obscures the show of Reason. In Religion 

What dam’d Error, but some sober brow 

Will bless it, and approve it with a Text. 

There is no Vice so artless, but assumes 

Some Mark of Vertue on its outward Parts 
Hiding the Grossness with fair Ornament. 

How many Cowards with Livers white as Milk 
Have Backs of Brawn, and wear upon their Chins 
The Beards of Hercules and frowning Mars, 
Look even on Beauty; what are those crisped Locks 
That make such wanton Gambols with the Wind ? 
What, but the Dowry of a Second Head: 

The Skull that bred ’em in the Sepulcher. 

Thus Ornament is as a beauteous Scarf 

Veiling Deformity. Therefore thou gawdy Gold 
Hard Food for Midas, I will none of thee. 

Nor none of thee, Silver, thou Common Drudge 
*Twixt Man and Man. But thou, thou meager Lead, 
Which rather threaten’st, than do’st promise ought, 
Thy sullenness moves more than Eloquence. 

And here I fix: Joy be the Consequence. 

Grat, Undone, undone: I’ll not stand to’t, Verissa, PL 
Chuse for myself. 

Port. [ Aside.] How all the other Passions fleet to Air 
As doubtful Thoughts, and rash, embraced Despair, 
Tormenting Fears, and Green-ey’d Jealousy. 

O! Love! be moderate; allay this Extacy. 
In measure pour thy Joy, stint this excess : 
I feel too much thy Blessing, make it less, 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION \ (30) V_ 49° 


For fear I surfeit. X 
Bass. What find I here? [ Opening the casket. ay 
The Portraiture of Portia. a 
What Demi-God has come so near Creation, move these Eyes! 
Or whether riding on the Balls of mine, 
Seem they in Motion? Here are sever’d Lips 
Parted with sweetest Breath: The very odour 
Seems there express’d, and thus invites the Taste! [Aisstng the Picture 
And here agen, here in her lovely Hair, 
The Painter plays the Spider, and has woven 
A golden Snare, to catch the Hearts of Men: 
But then her Eyes! 
How could he gaze undazled upon them, 
And see to imitate: Let me peruse the Motto. 
Reads.] Who chuses me; let him whose Fate it is, 
Turn to the Fair, and claim her with a Kiss. 
A gentle Schrole; fair Lady, by your Leave, 
I come by note, to give and to receive, 
Like one of two contending for a Prize, 
Who thinks he has done well, looks round to mark 
(Hearing applause and universal Shout) 
Whether those Peals of Praise are meant to him 
So stands Bassanio; full of Hopes and Fears, 
Still anxious what to trust, and what believe, 
Till you confirm his hopes. 
Port. ad Choice decided, and not only Chance: 
As Fortune has dispos’d me, so had I. 
Myself, and what is mine, to you and yours 
Is now converted. But now I was the Lady 
Of this fair Mansion, Mistress of these Servants, 
Queen o’er my self, even now, and in a Moment 
This House, these Servants, and my self their Queen, 
Are yours, my Lord. I plight ’em with this Ring, 
Which when you part from, lose or give away, 
Let it presage the Ruin of your Love 
And stand, as a Record, that you were false, 
A follower of my Fortunes not of me, 
And never meant me fair. 
Bassa. Dye first, Bassanio, My Mistress, and my Queen, 
As absolute as ever shall you reign, 
Not as the Lord, but Vassal of your Charms, 
Not as a Conqueror, but Acquisition. 
Not one to lessen, but enlarge your Power; 
No more but this, the Creature of your Pleasure, 
As such receive the passionate Bassanio, 
Oh there is that Confusion in my Powers, 
As Words cannot express: But when this Ring 
Parts from this Finger, then part Life from thence; 
Then say, and be assured, Bassanio’s dead. 


360 


APPENDIX 


[Gratiano and Nerissa seem in earnest dispute. 
Grat. 1 say, a Bargain’s a Bargain, and I will have Justice. 
Neriss. I say, we drew Stakes. 
Grat. That was only in Case I had lost, Child. 
Port. A Dispute between our Friends! What’s the matter, Cozen? 
Grat. Yl tell you, Madam, the Matter in short, and you shall be 
Judge ; 
I happen’d to say to this Lady, that it was her Destiny to 
Have me; she consented to put it to Tryal, and agreed 
To be determined by the Choice, my Friend should make 
If he had you— I should have her; and here 
Stand I to claim her Promise, 
Port. Is this true, Nerissa ? 
Nerissa. Ay! but he recanted; and said afterwards, he 
Would chuse for himself. 
Grat, Why sure so I can, now I know the right Casket. 
What sort of a Tramontane, do you take me to 
Be? You are gone that way too, as I take it. 
Neriss. Then Madam, all my Hope is, that you won’t let 
Me keep my Word. 
Grat. ’Tis false, to my certain Knowledge she hopes 
Otherwise—/Verissa / we'll play with ’em the first 
Boy for 1000 Ducats. 
Neriss. Methinks this looks like the last Act of a Play. 
All Parties are agreed; there remains nothing but 
To draw the Curtain, and put out the Lights. 
Grat. <A good hint, my Love: Let you and I make our Axz 
About that same last Act, as you call it. 
Bassa. rejoice, Gratiano, that my good Fortune 
Thus included yours. 
Oh that Axtonio knew of our Success, 
It would o’re-joy him. Prithee Gratiano, 
Send a special Messenger to Venice, 
To inform him of our Fortunes— 
Shylock shall now be paid, my Friend is safe, 
And Happiness, on every side surrounds us. 
[Gratiano going out, meets Lorenzo, Jessica, azd a 
Servant from Antonio entring. 
Grat. Lorenzo, and his pretty Infidel, 
Salerio too, Antonio's Servant; If I mistake him not, 
Look here, Bassanio; here is News from Venice. 
Bassa, Lorenzo, Welcome! Salerio too! what News 
From my Antonio? Oh, ’tis the best of Friends! 
Y’are welcome hither. By your Leave, my Love, 
Tho’ my interest here be yet but young, I 
Take upon myself to bid my Friends most welcome 
Port. SodoI my Lord. 


[And so on, with a few verbal changes, and omissions, among the latter Jes 


gica’s spe-ch about her father, and Tubal and Chus, down to line 3728.| 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 361 


Port. Will live as Maids and Widows. Let none reply 
For I will have it thus. 
Bassa. O Love! O Friendship! 
Was ever Man thus tortured! 
Grat. What, not one quarter of an hour to pack up 
My Baggage ? 
Wer. Whereabouts is the last Act now Gratiano ? 
Grat. Faith Child, I have the Part ready 
If I might have leave to play it. 
Port, Away ye Triflers. 
Nay then Bassanio I must thrust you from me: 
*Tis hard for both to be divided thus 
Upon our Wedding-day. But Honour calls, 
And Love must wait. Honour, that still delights 
To tyrannize o’er Love. Farewel, my Lord, 
Be chearful in this Tryal: As you prove, 
Your Faith in Friendship, I shall trust your Love. 
[She conducts him to the Door. Exit Bass., Grat. 
Loren. Madam, if you knew to whom you show this Honor, 
How true a Lover of your Lord! 
Port. I never did repent of doing good ; 
Nor shall I now; But we have much to do 
In other things; Therefore to you, Lorenzo, 
And to this Lady, whose pardon I should crave, 
For having stood so much unnoted by me, 
I will commit as to my Lord’s best Friends, 
The Husbandry, and Conduct of my House 
Until my Lord’s Return; For my own part 
I have to Heav’n breath’d a secret Vow, 
To live in Prayer and Contemplation, 
Only attended by /Verissa here, 
Until her Husband and my Lord come back. 
There is a Monastery two miles off 
And there we will abide. I do desire you 
Not to deny this Imposition, which 
My Love and some Necessity 
Now lays upon me. 
Loren. Madam with all our Hearts; 
We will observe your Pleasure. 
Port. Come on, WVevissa ; I have Work in hand 
That thou yet know’st not of. Salthazar, 
Thou art honest; so let me find thee still. 
Follow me in; I have some short Directions 
For you all. [2xcunp. 

[ The next Scene is a combination of the Third and First Scenes of Act Ill. It ts 
laid in ‘a Prison in Venice,’ and opens with Shylock’s command to the Jailer ; ‘ Jailer, 
‘looke to him, Tell not me,’ &c., and so on, for about twenty lines of the original. Shy- 
lock says hell not be made a ‘soft relenting Fool,’ zzstead of ‘ dull-eyed,’ and instead 
of heaving, after saying in line 20, ‘1 will have my Bond,’ he remains, and Anthonve 


362 } APPENDIX 


asks: ‘Thou wilt not take my Flesh; what’s that good for?’ Shylock replies in the 
familiar passage in III, i, ‘To bait fish withal,’ and continues to the end of it with 
scarcely a variation ; instead of saying Anthonio ‘mocked at his gains,’ he says, ‘Te- 
pin'd at his gains,’ and at the close : ‘The Charity you practise I will Imitate: And it 
shall go hard, but I will improve By the instruction.” Whereupon -] 
Anto. Thou art the most impenetrable Curr 
That ever kept with Men. 
Shyl. My Daughter too! None knew so well as you of my 

Daughters flight. Why there, there, there is a 

Diamond gone, cost me 2000 Ducats in /ran/fort. 

A Ring too, it was my Turkis; I had it of Leah 

When I was a Batchelour; besides Gold, and many other 

Precious Jewels. Would my Daughter were dead 

At my Foot, so the Jewels were in her Ears. 

Would she were Hears’d, so the Ducats were in the 

Coffin. No News, and I know not how much 

Spent in the Search: Loss upon Loss. The Theif [szc] gone 

With so much, and so much to find the Theif; 

And no Satisfaction, no Revenge: But thou art 

Caught, and thou shalt pay the whole Theif’s bill. 

Thou who wast wont to lend out money for a Christian 

Curtesy; Thou Christian Fool, pay thy Debts: 

Jaylor, I say, look to him. [7hrusts him after the Jailor and Exeunt. 

[ The Fourth Act opens with the Trial Scene. The variation in the first 1g6 lines 
ts wholly in omissions. Anthonio’s speech (ll. 9-16) ts omitted, as also is Shylock's 
answer to the Duke (ll. 51-66) ; also Shylock’s discomfiture of Bassanto (ll. 68-74) 
At line 75 Anthonio says :] 

I pray you think you question with a Jew 
You may as well expostulate with Wolves ; 
You may as well go stand upon the Beach, 
And bid the Waves be still, and Winds be husht; 
You may as well forbid the Mountain Pines 
To wag their Tops and dance about their Leaves, 
When the rude Gusts of Heav’n are whistling round 
As seek, &c. 

[When Shylock, at line 108, asks: ‘Shall I have it?’ the Duke replies.| 
The Court will first advise. Here is a Letter 
From fam’d Be/lario, which does much commend 
A young and learned Doctor in our Court, 
Whose Wisdom shall direct us. Where is he? 
Call in the Council. 

[Anthonio’s speech, ‘1 am a tainted wether of the flock,’ &c., 2s omitted, At line 

148, Shylock says :} 
Thou but offends thy Lungs to speak so loud. 
Thy Curses fall on thy own Head, for thus 
Ensnaring thy best Friend, thou didst it, and not I, 
I stand for Law. Thy Prodigality brought him 
70 this. 
Bass. Inhumane Dog! 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 363 


Ofic. Room for the Council there. 
Enter Portia disguis'd like a Lawyer, Nerissa 
like her Clerk, with Bagg and Papers. 

Duke. Take your Place. 
Are you acquainted with the Difference 
Which holds the present Question in the Court ? 

Port. 1 am instructed fully in the Case, &c. 

[ To line 185, Portia’s speech is improved, as follows -) 

The Quality of Mercy is not strain’d; 
It drops as does the gentle Dew from Heav’n 
Upon the Place beneath: It is twice blest, 
It blesses him that gives and him that takes 
Tis mightiest in the mightiest: It becomes 
The Crown’d Monarch, better than his Crown 
It is the first of sacred Attributes, 
And Earthly Power does then seem most Divine, 
When Mercy seasons Justice. I have spoke thus much 
To mitigate the Rigour of thy Plea; 
For if thou followest this strict Course of Law 
Then must Antonio stand condemn’d. 

[From this line to line 271 the improvements are trifling. Shylock exclaims: +A 
Daniel, a Daniel : So ripe in Wisdom And so young in years! A second Solomon.’ 
But in Antonio's dying speech the opportunity is too good to be thrown away, and 
Shakespeare's ‘rough native dress’ zs made by his lordship to ‘shine with nobler lustre,’ 
as follows :} ‘ 

An Age of Poverty, from which lingering Penance 
She kindly cuts me off: Once more farewell : 
Grieve not my Friend, that you thus lose a Friend, 
For I repent not thus to pay your Debt 
Even with my Blood and Life: Now do your Office, 
Cut deep enough be sure, and whet thy Knife 
With Keenest Malice; for I would have my Heart seen by 
My Friend. 
Shyl. Doubt it not, Christian; thus far I will be Courteous. 
Duke. Antonio, is this all thou hast to say ? 
Anto, ’Tis all. 
Bassa. Stand off, I have a word in his behalf, 
Since even more than in his Avarice, 
In Cruelty, this Jew’s insatiable ; 
Here stand I for my Friend. Body for Body, 
To endure the Torture. But one pound of Flesh 
Is due from him; Take every piece of mine, 
And tear it off with Pincers. Whatever way 
Invention can contrive to torture Man, 
Practice on me: Let but my Friend go safe, 
Thy Cruelty is limited on him ; 
Unbounded let it loose on me: Say, Jew, 
Here’s Im srest upon Interest in Flesh ; 
Will tha, content you ? 


364 APPENDIX 


Ant», It may him, not me. 
Bassa. Cruel Antonio. 
Anto. Unjust Bassanio. [ Jew laughs. 
Bassa. Why grins the Dog? ~. 
Shyl. To hear a Fool propose: Thou shallow Christian ! 
To think that I’d consent: I know thee well, 
When he has paid the Forfeit of his Bond, 
Thou canst not chuse but hang thy self for being 
The Cause: and so my Ends are serv’d on both. 
Proceed to Execution. 
Bassa. Then thus I interpose. 
Lee and stands before Antonio: The Jew starts back. 
Antonio interposes.] 
Anto. Forbear aun this is certain Death 
To both. 
Bassa. In one, both die: Since it must be, 
No matter how. 
Duke. Before our Face this Insolence! And in a Court 
Of Justice. Disarm and seize him. 
Port. Spare him, my Lord; I have a way to tame him. 
Hear me one word. 
Shyl, Hear, hear the Doctor: Now for a Sentence 
To sweep these Christian Vermin, coupled 
To the Shambles. O ’tis a Solomon! 
Port. Hark you, Shylock, I have view’d this Bond, 
And find it gives thee not one drop of Blood; 
The Words expressly are—A Pound of Flesh, 
No more. Take thou that Flesh, 
But in the cutting it, if thou dost shed 
One drop of Christian Blood, thy Lands and Goods 
Are, by the Laws of Venice, mark you me, 
Confiscate to the State. [Shylock starts surprised. 
Shyl. Humph. 
Bassa.. O, upright Judge! Mark, Jew. O learned Judge! 
Forgive, most potent Duke, and Reverend Seigniors, 
That thus enfore’d by my Despair—— 
Duke, We do forgive thee, and admire thy Virtue 
More than we blame thy Passion. But proceed. 
Port. Shylock, thy self shall see the Act, 
And Letter of the Law: For as thou urgest Justice. 

[From this line 330, for the rest of the Act, the original is followed, with here and 
there the change of a word, or an omission of a line or two; of improvements, the fob 
lowing are the most noticeable :} 

Duke. Get thee gone; but do it. [2xtt Shylock. 
Port. Clerk, draw a deed of gift. [ The Duke and Court rise. 
Duke. Antonio, I rejoice at this Conclusion; 

And I congratulate with you Bassanio, 

Your Friends escape: You will de well 

To gratify that learned Councellor 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 365 


For in my Mind you both are in his Debt. 
[Exit Duke with his Train, the Court breaking up. 
Bassa. Let me embrace the Man, by whom my Friend 4 
Has Life: For in that Life I live— 
3000 Ducats due on Shylock’s Bond 
I freely offer to requite your Pain. 

[Portia refuses them and asks for the ring, which Bassanio withholds, but makes no 
allusion to its being the gift of his wife, presumably because reference to the marriage 
ceremony was omitted after the Casket Scene. After Portia and Nerissa have left, 
Antonio says -] 

My Lord Bassanio, let him have the Ring; 
Let his Deservings, and my Love withal, 
Be valu’d against every other Scruple, 
Bassa. Prithee Gratiano, run and overtake him: 
Give him the Ring; and bring him, if thou can’st, 
To my Ax~onio’s House away, make haste, [£xit Gratiano. 
Once more, let me embrace my Friend, welcome to Life, 
And welcome to my Arms, thou best of Men: 
Thus of my Love and of my Friend possess’d ) 
With such a double Shield upon my Breast, 
Fate cannot pierce me now, securely blest. 

[As they go off, Portia and Nerissa re-enter; Gratiano follows, and presents the 
Ring; he then undertakes to show Shylock’s house to Nerissa, and the Act closes as 
follows :} 

Grat. Come on, Sir; The first Cause I have to split, 
You shall have all my Practice. 
Neriss. That may be sooner than you dream of, 
Sir, I follow you. 
So many Shapes have Women for Deceipt, 
That every Man’s a Fool, when we think fit. 


[Zxeunt. 
[Act V opens with Lorenzo and Jessica.] 
Loren. The moon shines bright. In such a Night as this 
Did pensive 7roz/us mount the Trojan Wall, 
Sighing his Soul towards the Grecian Tents, 
Where beauteous Cressid lay 
[ The allusion to Thisbe is omitted, and Jessica refers to Dido. Lorenzo replies with 
Medea, and, the reference to Jessica’s stealing from Venice being omitted, Jessica refers 
to Lorenzo. At line go Jessica says she hears a footing, and Portia enters with 
Nerissa.] 
Port. ‘That light we see is burning in my Hall. 
Loren. ’Tis sure the voice of Portia. 
Port. He knows me as the Blind Man does the Cuckow, 
By the bad Voice. Lorenzo, :s it you? 
Loren. Madam, you are most welcome. 
Port, We have been praying for my Lords Success, 
Who fares we hope the better for our Pray’rs: 
Is he return’d ? 
Loren. Madam, not yet. But here are Letters from him, 


366 APPENDIX 


Will give a good Account of his Proceeding, 
And that he will be here to night; 
We were walk’t out to wait his Coming. 
Port. Give Order to my Servants, that they take 
No Note at all of our being absent hence; 
And let our Musick play, and every thing 
So direct as we were here in formal Expectation 
Of his return —— ; 
This Night methinks is but the Day-light sick ; 
It looks a little paler. ’Tis a Day, 
Such as the Day is when the Sun is hid. 
Enter Bassanio, Antonio, Gratiano, and Followers. 
Bass. We should hold day with the Antipodes, 
If you would walk in Absence of the Sun? 
My Portia, this was kind to meet me thus. 
Port. O never more let any Cause of Grief 
Divide my Lord and me. 
[Gratiano runs to Nerissa, who discourse apart. 
Bass. Nothing can: Here, Madam, is my Friend, 
Let me present him to you: This is Aztonzo 
Whom, if you love Bassanio, you must love. 
Port. I should behold him with a jealous Eye, 
Who has so large a Share in my Lord’s Heart. 
To Ant.] Having his Leave, you’ll not deny me yours, 
To make a third in Friendship: I doubly joy 
That you are safe and here. 
Anto. I thank you, Madam, 
Port. Play all our Instruments of Musick there, 
Let nothing now be heard but sounds of Joy, 
And let those glorious Orbs that we behold, 
Who in their Motions, all like Angels sing, 
Still Quiring to the blew-ey’d Cherubims, 
Join the Chorus; that in Heav’n and Earth 
One universal Tune may celebrate 
This Harmony of Hearts. Soft Stilness, and the Night 
Become the Touches of Sweet Harmony. [AMusic. 
Grat, By yonder Moon and Stars, I swear you wrong me, 
By Heav’n, I gave it to the Lawyer’s Clerk. 
Port, A quarrel! what, already ? 
[As in the original, substantially, the variations chiefly omissions, down to line 266.) 
Port. Let not that Man, whoe’er he is, come near me: 
Since he has got the Jewel that I priz’d, 
I shall become as liberal as you, 
And nothing can deny the Man that has it. 
A Ring it was of wondrous Mystery, 
And Sanctify’d by Charms to rivet Love: 
Whoever has it, has the sure Command 
Of me, my Person, and of all that’s mine: 
The dire Enchantment was so strongly wrought; 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 


One Mind directs us, and one Bed must hold us: 
Know him I shall, I must; nay, I will know him 
I feel the Effects already, Watch me like Argos, 
If you do not, if I be left alone, 
Now by my Honour, which is yet entire, 
That Man and I are one. 
Veriss. Just such a Ring was mine: 
Methinks I love that Lawyer’s Clerk already, 
Just as I love myself. 
Bassa. Forgive me this first Fault; 
T’ll trust thy Honour above any Charms: 
My Love is built upon Esteem so strong, 
As cannot doubt your Virtue. 
Grat. Iam not quite so liberal of good Thoughts ; 
But this I’ll say, if I can catch this Clerk, 
His Pen shall split for’t. 
Anto. Jam the unhappy Subject of this Quarrel 
By my Perswasion—— ? 
Port. Sir, grieve not you; 
You’re welcome notwithstanding, 
[ Walks about as in a Passion. 
Bassa. But hear me, Portia ; 
Pardon this Error; by my Soul, I swear, 
By what is dearer to me than my Soul, | 
Your precious self- 
Anto. I dare be bound for him; 
My Life upon the Forfeit, that your Lord 
Shall never more break Faith. 
Port. You have been oft his Surety, and 
Have paid for’t dearly. 
Anto. No more than I am well acquitted of. 
Port, Then be his Surety still: Here is a Ring, 
Of the same Virtue, and so qualify’d 
With equal Spells. This only can retrieve 
With Counter-Magick what the other lost. 
Antonio, give him this: But make him swear 
To keep it better. 
Anto. Here, Lord Bassanio. Swear to keep this Ring, 
Bassa. By Heav’n! _ [ Starts. 
This is the same I gave the Lawyer. 
Port. Why so it is; I had it from him: You see 
How quick an Operation is in Magick, 
We have met already. 
Bassa. Met! how have you met! 
Neriss. Met— why by Art Magick, to lie together ; 
Ask that same scrubbed Boy, the Lawyer’s Clerk. 
Grat. Why this is worse and worse. 
Bassa. Antonio! this was your doing. [Angrily. 
Anto. Take your Revenge, and kill me. 


368 


APPENDIX 


Bassa. 1am answer’d—— Is it then true? 
And can it be? That by the secret Workings 
Of Mystick Words, and Spells, and dire Compounds, 
Potions and Invocations horrible, 
Nature can be so led? What then is Virtue? 
And what Security has Love or Reason, 
Thus subjected to every Hell-born Hagg 
Who, by such Conjurations can dis-join 
United Hearts? Uniting the Averse! 
How, wretched Man! how can’st thou boast free Will ? 
If this in very deed be true. I’ll not suppos'’t 
But then that Ring! How could she have it: ’Tis Witchcraft! 
Damn’d, damn’d Witchcraft; And I will fathom Hell, 
But I will find a Fiend shall Counter-work 


The Devil that has done this. [Portia and Nerissa /augh. 
Port. 
Neue ia, aoa 


Grat. Is this true, Nerissa! are we ther two Scurvy 
Cuckcolds by Art Magick! 

Port. Ha, ha, ha; Well; since you grow so serious, 
I will be serious too: Read this Bassanzio, 

The Adventures writ at large: Look not so sullen; Lord, 
But read it. Lorenzo here and Jessica 

Can witness for me: I set out almost 

As soon as you. And am but even now return’d, 

I have not yet enter’'d my House: But 

For farther Proof, Clerk, give Lorenzo 

The Writings sign’d by Shylock. 

Neriss. YVIl give ’em without Fee; Here Lorenzo, 
Here is a Deed of Gift to you and Jessica, 

Of all the Jew, your Father, dies possess’d of. 

Loren. See Jessica, is this his hand? 

Jess. °Tis his own signing. 

Loren. What Prodigy is this ? 

Bassa. Yam struck dumb with wonder. 

Grat. Was Portia then the little Smerking Lawyer, 
And Werissa the Clerk? T’ll never forgive such a 
Trick. Art-Magick do you call it? 

Neriss, Nay, but Gratiano. 

Grat. Away, away. [Dispute aside. 

Port, Antonio! Here are Letters too for you; 

Ask me not yet, by what strange Accident 
They fell into my Hands— but read ’em. 

Bass. Amazement has bereft me of all Words. 

Ant, Why here I read, for certain, that my scatter’d Ships, 
Are safely all arriv’d at Rhodes, 

With their whole Cargo. 

Port. Doubt it not, Antonio, ’Tis most true, 

Virtue like yours; such Patience in Adversity, 


LANSDOWNE'S VERSION 


And in Prosperity such Goodness, 
Is still the Care of Providence. 
Ant. My Life and Fortunes have been all your Gift; 
Dispose ’em, and command ’em, Madam, 
As you please. [Gratiano and Nerissa cavance 
Weriss, What can you bear no Jests, but of your own 
Making? 
Grat. You have so scar’d me with your Art Magick, 
That I shail scarce be a true Man these two Days; 
But therein lies my Revenge: And so shake 
Hands from this Day forwards. 
As the most precious of all Gems, I swear! 
Nerissa’s Ring shall be Gra¢iano’s Care. 
fort. All look amaz’d, in every Face I see 
A thousand Questions: ’Tis time we should go in, 
There will I answer all: Cease your Astonishment, 
My Lord; by these small Services to you 
And to your Friends, I hope I may secure 
Your Love; which, built upon meer Fancy, 
Had else been subjected to Alteration. 
With Age and Use the Rose grown Sick and Faint, 
Thus mixt with friendly Sweets, secures its Scent. 
Bassa. The Sweets of Love shall here forever blow: 
I needs must Love, rememb’ring what I owe. 
Love, like a Meteor, shows a short-liv’d Blaze, 
Or treads thro’ various Skies a wandring Maze, 
Begot by Fancy; and by Fancy led; 
Here in a Moment, in a Moment fled; 
But fixt by Obligations, it will last ; 
For Gratitude’s the Charm that binds it fast. [Axeunt omnes 
24 


370 APPENDIX 


ACTORS 


WHEN Collier published his History of English Dramatic Poetry in 1831, he men- 
tioned (vol. i, p. 430) a MS Elegy on the Death of Richard Burbaage, consisting of 
eighty-six lines, wherein allusion was made to the performance by BURBADGE of certain 
characters in the plays of Shakespeare and of others. The Shakespearian characters 
thus specified were Hamlet, Lear, and Othello. This MS then belonged to Haslewood, 
and is now in the Huth Library. : ; 

When, five years later, Collier printed his Mew Particulars regarding the Works of 
Shakespeare, he mentioned (p. 27) a second MS, belonging to Heber, and then went 
on to say: ‘I have since met with a third copy of the same Elegy, in which the list 
‘of characters is enlarged... . to no fewer than twenty, of which twelve are in plays 
‘of Shakespeare.’ : 

This third copy Collier afterwards printed in full, in his Memoirs of Actors (Shake- 
speare Society, 1846, p. 52), and also in the Second Edition of his History of English 
Dramatic Poetry (1879, vol. iii, p. 299). The lines are increased from eighty-six to 
one hundred and twenty-four, and the number of Shakespearian characters from three 
to twelve. To account for this enlargement, Collier suggests that perhaps ‘the author 
‘had not intended in the first instance to give Burbadge’s characters, because they 
‘were matters of notoriety at the time, although he afterwards thought fit to introduce 
‘them, in order to render his tribute more complete.’ 

These lines Ingleby has not admitted to his Centurie of Prayse, and Miss TOULMIN 
SMITH (p. 132, 2d ed.) says that the original of them has ‘not yet come to light.’ The 
inference, therefore, is that doubts attach to their genuineness. It is proper that this 
fact should be stated; the Z/egy, as given by Collier, is our sole authority for the tra- 
dition that Burbadge was not only the original actor of Shylock, but that he wore a 
red-haired wig. 

It is thus entitled: ‘A FUNERAL ELEGY, ON THE DEATH OF THE FAMOUS ACTOR, 
RICHARD BURBADGE, who died on Saturday in Lent, the 13th of March, 1618 ,? and 
the lines which relate to Shylock, all that concern us here, are as follows: 


‘ Heart-broke Philaster, and Amintas too, 

‘ Are lost forever; with the red-hair’d Jew, 

‘ Which sought the bankrupt merchant’s pound of flesh, 
‘By woman-lawyer caught in his own mesh, 

‘ What a wide world was in that little space, 

‘ Thyself a world—the Globe thy fittest place!’ &c. 


“The next actor whose name is associated with Shylock is THomMAs DoccEeT. He 
appears in the Dramatis Personz prefixed to Lansdowne’s Version. Of his interpre- 
tation of the part I can find no details whatever; we can infer that it was comic 
from the fact that Dogget was a comic actor, and it is difficult to imagine, considering 
the text that was used, how it could have received any other interpretation. We fre- 
quently hear it asserted that ‘Shylock’ was at one time acted as a comic part, an asser- 
tion which should not be made without qualification; it was not Shylock, but a thing 
called ‘Shylock’ in Lansdowne’s Version, There is no ground for the belief that Shy- 
lock was ever presented on the stage in a comic light. To assert it is to imply that 
Lansdowne’s ‘ Shylock’ and Shakespeare’s Shylock are identical. 

Downes, the Prompter at the Theatre in Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields for over forty years, 
gives us, in his Ro-cius Anglicanus (p. 52, ed. Knight), the earliest description of Dog- 


ACTORS—DOGGET, MACKLIN 371 


get. Downes was fond of high-sounding words: to say that an actress left off acting 
when she was married is far too homespun for Downes; from him we learn that “by 
force of Love she was erept the Stage ;’ in an Opera called Zhe British Enchanters 
(Lord Lansdowne’s, by the way), ‘making Love,’ says Downes, ‘the Acme of all Ter- 
restrial Bliss, infinitely arrided both sexes and pleas’d the Town;’ wherefore we may 
be puzzled, but not startled, by learning that ¢ Mr Dogget, On the Stage, he’s very Aspect- 
‘abund, wearing a Farce in his Face; his Thoughts deliberately framing his Utterance 
“Congruous to his Looks: He is the only Comick Original now Extant: Witness, Bev, 
‘ Solon, Nikin, The Jew of Venice, &c.’ 

_ Colley Cibber was the personal friend, an¢! at one time partner, of Dogget, and gives 
(Apology, &c., p. 287) an account of his acting, to which high praise is accorded, ‘In 
‘dressing a character to the greatest exactness, he was remarkably skilful; the least 
‘article of whatever habit he wore seem’d in some degree to speak and mark the dif- 
‘ferent humour he presented..... His greatest success was in characters of lower 
Sutter rsttas In songs, and particular dances too, of humour, he had no competitor.’ 

Lansdowne’s Version continued on the stage forty years, but to the credit of the pub- 
lic taste, be it noted, it does not appear to have been popular. 

At the end of that time there happened to be in London an actor of some eminence 
who had discernment enough to perceive the dramatic capabilities of Shylock, and who 
determined to try the verdict of the public. He was an Irishman named McLaughlin, 
but this name had been dropped, with his brogue, on coming to London, and converted 
into the less guttural MACKLIN. Macklin was attached to the Drury Lane Company, 
and in 1741 persuaded Fleetwood, the manager, to revive Shakespeare’s Merchant of 
Venice. 

Of this important event in the stage history of the Play we have accounts by Kirk- 
man and by Cooke, both substantially the same. The former better describes the 
opposition encountered by Macklin before the performance; the latter the performance 
itself. 

KirKMAN (Memoirs of Charles Macklin, 1799, vol. i, p. 256): During the rehearsal 
of the play Mr Macklin did not let any person, not even the players, see how he intend- 
ed to act the part. He merely repeated the lines of the character, and did not, by so 
much as one single look, tone, gesture, or attitude, disclose his manner of personating 
this cruel Israelite. The actors declared that Macklin would spoil the performance ; 
and Mr Quin went so far as to say that he would be hissed off the stage for his arro- 
gance and presumption. Nay, even the manager himself expostulated with him con- 
cerning the propriety of his persevering in his intention of having 7he Merchant of 
Venice represented in opposition to the judgement of so eminent a personage as Lord 
Lansdowne; to the opinion of Mr Quin and the rest of the actors; and, indeed, to the 
voice of the public, who had so often testified their approbation of the noble Lord’s 
play. Thus did Mr Fleetwood argue with Macklin, and strenuously urge him to aban- 
don his resolution. His character as an actor might (he said) be materially injured by 
a perseverance in his determination, and ultimately by a failure in the performance of 
the part; but Mr Macklin, supported throughout by his sound sense and acute discrim- 
ination, continued firm to his purpose, and had 7he Merchant of Venice announced for 
representation on the 14th of February. 

On the first night of the representation, no sooner were the doors of the theatre 
opened than the house was crowded in every part. Some came from motives of pleas- 
ure, some to express their disapprobation; some to support the actor, and a great num- 
ber appeared merely to gratify their curiosity. 


372 APPENDIX 


Before the curtain rose the manager appeared in the green-room in great distress. 
The actors were anticipating the reception that awaited them, and indulging themselves 
in malicious remarks upon the headstrong conduct of Macklin. It is impossible for us 
to describe the feelings of poor Shylock at this precise juncture. _ 

[The rest is better told by Cooke, who professes to give it in Macklin’ s own 
words :—] 

CooxE (Life of Macklin, 1806, p. 92, 2d ed.): The long-expected night at last 
arrived, and the house was crowded from top to bottom with the first company in town. 
The two front rows of the pit, as usual, full of critics, ‘who, sir’ (said the veteran), 
“I eyed through the slit in the curtain, and was glad to see there, as I wished, in such 
a cause, to be tried by a special jury. When I made my appearance in the green- 
room, dressed for the part, with my red hat on my head, my piqued beard, loose black 
gown, &c., and with a confidence I never before assumed, the performers all stared at 
one another, and evidently with a stare of disappointment. Well, sir, hitherto all was 
right,—till the last bell rung; then, I confess, my heart began to beat a little; how- 
ever, I mustered up all the courage I could, and, recommending my cause to Provi- 
dence, threw myself boldly on the stage, and was received by one of the loudest thun- 
ders of applause I ever before experienced. 

‘The opening Scenes being rather tame and level, I could not expect much applause ; 
but I found myself well listened to,—I could hear distinctly in the pit the words, “ Very 
well,—very well, indeed !—This man seems to know what he is about,” &c. &c. These 
encomiums warmed me, but did not overset me,—I knew where I should have the pull, 
which was in the Third Act, and reserved myself accordingly. At this period I threw 
out all my fire; and, as the contrasted passions of joy for the Merchant’s losses, and 
grief for the elopement of Jessica, open a fine field for an actor’s powers, I had the 
good fortune to please beyond my warmest expectations. The whole house was in an 
uproar of applause, and I was obliged to pause between the speeches, to give it vent, 50 
as to be heard. When I went behind the scenes after this Act, the manager met me 
and complimented me very highly on my performance, and significantly added : “ Mack- 
lin, you was right at last.” My brethren in the green-room joined in his eulogium, but 
with different views. He was thinking of the increase of his treasury; they only for 
saving appearances, wishing at the same time I had broke my neck in the attempt. 
The Trial Scene wound up the fulness of my reputation: here I was well listened to; 
and here I made such a silent, yet forcible, impression on my audience, that I retired 
from this great attempt most perfectly satisfied. 

‘On my return to the green-room, after the play was over, it was crowded with nobil 
ity and critics, who all complimented me in the warmest and most unbounded manner; 
and the situation I felt myself in, I must confess, was one of the most flattering and 
intoxicating of my whole life. No money, no title could purchase what I felt; and 
let no man tell me after this what Fame will not inspire a man to do, and how far the 
attainment of it will not remunerate his greatest labours. By G—, sir, though I was 
not worth fifty pounds in the world at that time, yet, let me tell you, I was Charles the 
Great for that night.’ 

A few days afterwards Macklin received an invitation from Lord Bolingbroke to dine 
with him at Battersea. He attended the rendezvous, and there found Pope and a select 
party, who complimented him very highly on the part of Shylock, and questioned him 
about many little particulars relative to his getting up the play, &c. Pope particularly 
asked him why he wore a red hat? and he answered, because he had read that Jews 
in Italy, particularly ir Venice, wore hats of that colour. ‘And pray, Mr Macklin,’ 


ACTORS—MACKLIN 373 
said Pope, ‘do players in general take such pains?’ ‘I do not know, sir, that they do; 
but as I had staked my reputation on the character, I was determined to spare no trou- 
ble in getting at the best information.’ Pope nodded, and said, ‘It was very laudable.’ 

Macklin took this play for his benefit on the nineteenth night, and had an overflow 
ing audience; several noblemen of the first distinction took what is commonly called 
gold tickets; and Lord Bolingbroke made him a present of twenty guineas. The play 
had a successful run through the whole of the season, and for many seasons afterwards ; 
it established his reputation as an actor, and not a little added to his discernment as a 
critic in reviving a piece which, perhaps, except for his research, might have been lost 
to the stage for ever. 

KIRKMAN (vol. li, p. 427): Several years before his death, Mr Macklin happened 
to be in a large company of ladies and gentlemen, among whom was the celebrated 
Mr Pope. The conversation having turned upon Mr Macklin’s age, one of the ladies 
addressed herself to Mr Pope, in words to the following effect: ‘Mr Pope, when Mack- 
lin dies, you must write his epitaph.’ ‘That I will, madam,’ said Pope; ‘nay, I will 
give it now?’ 

‘ Here lies the Jew 
That Shakespeare drew.’ 


The whole company highly approved of this epitaph, and Mr Macklin has often 
related this anecdote in our hearing with great glee; and a more just, comprehensive, 
and concise inscription never was written. 

GENTLEMAN (Dramatic Censor, 1770, i, 291): There is no doubt but Mr Macklin 
looks the part of Shylock as much better than any other person as he plays it; in the 
level scenes his voice is most happily suited to that sententious gloominess of expres- 
sion the author intended; which, with a sullen solemnity of deportment, marks the 
character strongly; in his malevolence there is a forcible and terrifying ferocity; in 
the Third Act scene, where alternate passions reign, he breaks the tones of utterance 
and varies his countenance admirably; in the dumb action of the Trial Scene, he is 
amazingly descriptive. 

[Macklin is supposed to have been born in May, 1690. If this were so, he was nigh 
his hundredth year when, in May, 1789, he undertook to play Shylock once more. 
Although his exact age cannot be determined, it is undeniable that at this time he was 
extremely old, and that the thread of life was stretched beyond the limit when it is 
pleasant either to hold it, or to behold it. Of this attempt Cooke gives the following 
account :] 

His last appearance on the Stage was on the 7th of May, 1789, in Shylock for his 
own benefit. The Manager, Fleetwood, had Mr Ryder under-study the part, ready 
dressed to supply Macklin’s deficiencies if necessary. 

When Macklin had dressed himself for the part, which he did with his usual 
accuracy, he went into the Green-Room, but with such ‘lack-lustre’ eyes, as plainly 
indicated his inability to perform, and coming up to Mrs Pope said, ‘ My dear, are you 
to play to-night ?,—*Good God! to be sure I am, Sir. Why, don’t you see I am 
dressed for Portia?’—‘ Ah! very true; I had forgot. But who is to play Shylock ?’ 
The imbecile tone and the inane look, with which this last question was asked, caused 
a melancholy sensation in all who heard it. At last Mrs Pope, rousing herself, said, 
«Why you, to be sure; are not you dressed for the part?” He then seemed to recol- 
lect himself, and, putting his hand to his forehead pathetically exclaimed, ‘God hele 
me—my memory, I am afraid, has left me 


374 APPENDIX 


He, however, went upon the Stage and delivered two or three speeches of Shy- 
lock in a manner that evidently proved he did not understand what he was repeating. » 
After a while, he recovered himself a little and seemed to make an effort to rouse 
himself; but in vain— Nature could assist him no further; and, after pausing some 
time, as if considering what to do, he came forward, and told the audience, ‘ That he 
now found he was unable to proceed in the part, and hoped they would accept Mr 
Ryder, as a substitute, who was already prepared to finish it.’ The audience accepted 
his apology with mingled applause of indulgence and commiseration—and he retired 
from the stage for ever. [He lived eight years longer, until 1797.] 

[P. 405]: All the succeeding Shylocks, though just and pleasing portraits of the 
character, wanted the original firmness and colouring of Macklin’s pencil. There 
was, besides his judgment which went to the study of every line of it, such an iron- 
visaged look, such a relentless, savage cast of manners, that the audience seemed to 
shrink from the character, nor could they recover the true tone of their feelings till 
the merchant was liberated from the fangs of such a merciless creditor, Cooke seems 
to be nearest the original of any we have seen. 

LICHTENBERG, whose notices of the actors and actresses whom he saw in London are 
all too short, gives us in a few sentences a vivid description of Macklin. His letter is 
dated the 2d of December, 1775 ( Vermischte Schriften, iii, 266, Gottingen, 1867) :-— 

I have seen the Shylock of Macklin, so well known for his high deserts, his law- 
suit, and his physiognomy. [This lawsuit was brought by Macklin against certain citi- 
zens, who, in their opposition to him as an actor, behaved so riotously one evening that 
they obliged the manager to discharge Macklin before they would allow the play to 
proceed. Macklin gained his suit, and was awarded exemplary damages. In this 
lawsuit the public took extraordinary interest, involving, as it did, the right to hiss an 
actor, on which point Lord Mansfield decided that, ‘Every man that is at the play. 
house has a right to express his approbation or disapprobation instantaneously, accord- 
ing as he likes either the acting or the piece. That is a right due to the theatre,—an 
unalterable right,—they must have that.—Ep.] You know that the announcement 
of Macklin as Shylock sounds as attractively on the play-bill as Garrick in Hamlet. 
It was the evening on which he appeared for the first time after his suit was decided. 
When he appeared he was received with great applause, thrice given, each time lasting 
a quarter of a minute. It is not to be denied that the sight of this Jew suffices to 
awaken at once, in the best-regulated mind, all the prejudices of childhood against this 
people. Shylock is none of your petty cheaters, who can talk for an hour over the 
excellence of a pinchbeck watch-chain. He is slow, calm in his impenetrable cun- 
ning, and when he has the law on his side he is unflinching, even to the extreme of 
malice. Picture to yourself a somewhat strong man, with a sallow, harsh face and a 
nose which is by no means lacking in any one of the three dimensions, a long double 
chin or dewlap; and in making his mouth, Nature’s knife seems to have slipped and 
gone all the way to his ears, at least on one side, so it seemed to me. His cloak is 
black and long, his pantaloons also are long and broad, and his hat three-cornered and 
red, probably in accordance with the style of the Italian Jews. The first words which 
he utters are spoken slowly and deliberately: ‘Three thousand ducats. The th and 
the s twice occurring and the last s after the ¢ have a lickerish sound from Macklin’s 
lips, as if he were tasting the ducats and all that they can buy; this speech creates 
for the man, upon his first appearance, a prepossession which is sustained throughout, 
Three such words, thus spoken and at the very first, reveal a whole character. In the 
Scene in which he first misses his daughter he appears hatless, with hair all flying, 


ACTORS—KEAN 375 


some of it standing up straight, a hand’s breadth high, just as if it had been lifted up 
by a breeze from the gallows. Both hands are doubled up, and his gestures are quick 
and convulsive. To see a man thus moved, who had been hitherto a calm, deter- 
mined villain, is fearful. 

BOADEN (Life of Kemble, i, 440): As I paid much attention to Macklin’s perform- 
ances, and personally knew him, I shall endeavor to characterize his acting and dis- 
criminate it from that of others. If Macklin really was of the old school, that school 
taught what was truth and nature. His acting was essentially manly,—there was 
nothing of trick about it. His delivery was more level than modern speaking, but 
certainly more weighty, direct, and emphatic. His features were rigid, his eye cold 
and colourless; yet the earnestness of his manner, and the sterling sense of his 
address, produced an effect in Shylock that has remained to the present hour unrival- 
led. Macklin, for instance, in the Trial Scene, ‘stood like a Tower,’ as Milton has 
it. He was ‘not bound to please’ any body by his pleading; he claimed a right, 
grounded upon Law, and thought himself as firm as the Rialto. To this remark it 
may be said, ‘ You are here describing Shylock.’ True; I am describing Macklin, 
[This was written eleven years after Kean’s first appearance as Shylock, but Boaden 
makes no allusion to him. Boaden was an enthusiastic admirer of Kemble, whose 
school of acting differed widely from that of Kean.] 


Macklin’s interpretation of Shylock appears to have been the standard until the 
appearance of Edmund Kean in 1814; of this appearance I shall give the accounts 
both of Dr Doran, and of Kean’s biographer, Hawkins. If there is repetition, it can 
dono harm. The story is in itself so dramatic that custom cannot stale it. 

Doran (Their Majesties’ Servants, 2d ed., 1865, p. 428): Howard died [Kean’s 
elder son, to whom he was passionately attached, and who lived but five years] and 
Kean played, danced, sorrowed, and hoped,—for the time at which he was to go up 
to London was at hand; and thither they went, at the close of the year 1813. When 
that season of 1813-14 opened, Drury was in a condition from which it could be 
relieved only by a genius ;—and there he stood in that cold hall, a little, pate, restless, 
dark-eyed man, in a coat with two or three capes, and nobody noticed him! In Cecil 
Street his family were living on little more than air; and he was daily growing sick, 
as he stood, waiting in that hall, for an audience with the manager, and subject to the 
sneers of passing actors. Even Rae, handsome and a fool, affected not to know him, 
though they had played together, when Rae’s mother was matron at St George’s Hos 
pital; and they had acted together at the Haymarket in 1806, when Rae led the busi 
ness and Kean was but a supernumerary! Arnold treated him superciliously, with a 
‘young man! as he condescended to speak and put him off. Other new actors 
obtained trial parts, but there was none for that chafed, hungry little man in the capes. 
Even drunken Tokely, like himself, from Exeter, could obtain a ‘first appearance,’ 
but Kean was put off. Stephen Kemble played Shylock, and failed! why not try a 
new actor? The Committee did so, and Mr Huddart, from Dublin, went on as Shy- 
lock, and was never heard of more. And the poor stroller looked through the dark- 
ness of that miserable passage the while, and murmured, ‘Let me but get my foot 
before the floats, and 7’// show them—!’ 

The permission came. Would he,—no he must play Richard. ‘ Shylock, or 
nothing!’ was his bold reply. He was afraid of the littleness of his figure (which 
he had heard scoffed at) being exposed in the ‘trunks’ of Glo’ster. He hoped to 
hide it under the gown of Shylock. The Jew, or nothing! The young fellow, he 


376 APPENDIX 


was but six-and-twenty, was allowed to have his way. At the one moriing rehearsal, 
he fluttered his fellow-actors, and scared the manager, by his independence and origi- 
nality. ‘Sir, this will never do!’ cried Raymond, the acting manager. ‘It is quite 
an innovation; it cannot be permitted.’ ‘Sir,’ said the poor, proud man; ‘I wish it 
to be so;’ and the players smiled, and Kean went home, that is, to his lodgings, in 
Cecil Street, on that snowy, foggy 26th of January, 1814, calm, hopeful, and hungry. 
‘To-day,’ said he, ‘I must dine.’ 

Having accomplished that rare feat, he went forth alone and on foot. ‘I wish,’ he 
remarked ‘I was going to be shot!’ He had with him a few properties which he was 
bound to procure for himself, tied up in a poor handkerchief, under his arm. His wife 
remained with their child at home. Kean tramped on beneath the falling snow, and 
over that which thickly encumbered the ground—solid here, there in slush—and bye 
and bye, pale, quiet, but fearless, he dressed in a room shared by two or three others, 
and went down to the wing by which he was to enter. Hitherto no one had spoken 
to him, save Jack Bannister, who said a cheering word; and Oxberry, who had ten- 
dered him a glass and wished him good fortune. ‘By Jove!’ exclaimed a first-rater, 
looking at him, ‘Shylock in a black wig! Well!!’ In the good old times the wig 
was of a Judas colour. 

The house could hold, as it is called, £600; there was not more than a sixth of that 
sum in front. Winter without, his comrades within, all was against him. At length 
he went on, with Rae as Bassanio, in ill-humour, and groups of actors at the wings to 
witness the first scene of a new candidate. All that Edmund Kean ever did was 
gracefully done; and the bow which he made in return to the welcoming applause 
was eminently graceful. Dr Drury, the head-master of Harrow, who took great inter- 
est in him, looked fixedly at him as he came forward. Shylock leant over his crutched 
stick with both hands; and, looking askance at Bassanio, said, ‘Three thousand 
ducats ?? paused, bethought himself, and then added, ‘Well?’ He zs safe! said Dr 
Drury. 

The groups of actors soon after dispersed to the green-room. As they reached it, 
there reached there, too, an echo of the loud applause given to Shylock’s reply to Bas- 
sanio’s assurance that he may take the bond,—‘I w2// de assured I may!’ Later came 
the sounds of the increased approbation bestowed on the delivery of the passage end- 
ing with, ‘and for these courtesies, I’ll lend you thus much moneys.’ The Act came 
to an end gloriously; and the players in the green-room looked for the coming among 
them of the new Shylock. He proudly kept aloof; knew he was friendless; but felt 
that he was, in himself, sufficient. 

He wandered about the back of the stage, thinking, perhaps, of the mother and child 
at home; and sure, now, of having at least made a step towards triumph. He wanted 
no congratulations ; and he walked cheerfully down to the wing where the scene was 
about to take place between him and his daughter, Jessica, in his very calling to whom, ~ 
‘Why Jessica! I say’—there was, as some of us may remember, from an after-night’s 
experience, a charm, as of music. The whole Scene was played with rare merit; but 
the absolute triumph was not won till the Scene (which was marvellous in his hands) 
in the Third Act between Shylock, Solanio, and Salarino, ending with the dialogue 
between the first and Tubal. Shylock’s anguish at his daughter’s flight; his wrath at 
the two Christians who make sport of his anguish; his hatred of all Christians, gener- 
ally, and of Antonio in particular; and then his alternations of rage, grief, and ecstasy, 
as Tubal relates the losses incurred in the search of that naughty Jessica, her extrava- 
gances, and then the ill-luck that had fallen on Antonio,—in all this there was such 


ACTORS—KEAN 377 


originality, such terrible force, such assurance of a new and mighty master, that the 
house burst forth into a very whirlwind of approbation. ‘What now?’ was the cry in 
the green-room. The answer was, that the presence and the power of the genius were 
acknowledged with an enthusiasm which shook the very roof. How so select an 
audience contrived to raise such a roar of exultation, was a permanent perplexity to 
Billy Oxberry. 

Those who had seen Stephen Kemble’s Shylock, and that of Huddart, this season, 
must have by this time confessed that the new actor had superseded both. He must 
himself have felt that, if he had not yet surpassed Cooke, and Henderson, and Macklin, 
he was tending that way; and was already their equal. Whatever he felt, he remained 
reserved and solitary; but he was now sought after. Raymond, the acting manager, 
who had haughtily told him his innovations ‘would not do,’ came to offer him oranges. 
Arnold, the stage-manager, who had young-manned him, came to present him, ‘sir!’ 
with some negus. Kean cared for nothing more now than for his Fourth and last Act; 
and in that his triumph culminated. His calm demeanour at first; his confident appeal 
to justice; his deafness when appeal is made to him for mercy; his steady joyousness 
when the young lawyer recognizes the validity of his bond; his burst of exultation 
when his right is confessed; his fiendish eagerness when whetting the knife ;—and 
then the sudden collapse of disappointment and terror, with the words,—‘ Is ¢ha¢—the 
LAw ?’—in all, was made manifest that a noble successor to the noblest of the actors 
of old had arisen. Then, his trembling anxiety to recover what he had before refused ; 
his sordid abjectness, as he finds himself foiled at every turn; his subdued fury; and, 
at the last (and it was always the crowning glory of his acting in this play), the with- 
ering sneer, hardly concealing the crushed heart, with which he replied to the jibes of 
Gratiano, as he left the court ;—all raised a new sensation in an audience, who acknow- 
ledged it in a perfect tumult of acclamation. As he passed to his dressing-room, Ray- 
mond saluted him with the confession that he had made a hit; Pope, more generous, 
avowed that he had saved the house from ruin. 

And then, while Bannister was dashing through Dick, in Zhe Apprentice, I seem to 
see the hero of the night staggering home through the snow, drunk with delicious 
ecstasy, all his brightest dreams realized, and all his good impulses surging within him. 
He may be in a sort of frenzy as he tells of his proud achievement; but, at its very 
wildest, he exclaims: ‘ Mary, you shall ride in your carriage, yet!’ and taking his son, 
Charles, from the cradle, swears he ‘shall go to Eton;’ but therewith something over- 
shadows his joy, and he murmurs, ‘If Howard had but lived to see it!’ .... 

His audiences rose from one of £100 to audiences of 4600; and £20 a week 
rewarded efforts, for far less than which, he subsequently received £50 a night. He 
was advanced to the dignity of having a dressing-room to himself. Legislators, poets, 
nobles, thronged his tiring-room, where Arnold took as much care of him as if on his 
life hung more than the well-being of the theatre..... And old Nance Carey turned 
up, to exact £50 a year from her not too delighted son..... He played, in this first 
season, Shylock fifteen times, Richard twenty-five, Hamlet eight, Othello ten, Iago 
eight and Luke four; and in those seventy nights the delighted treasurer of Drury 
Lane struck a balance of profit to the theatre amounting in round numbers to £17,000. 

F. W. Hawkins (Life of Kean, 1869, vol. i, p. 124): The 26th of January at 
length arrived. Morning dawned upon a miserable, dreary aspect; a heavy fall of 
snow which had taken place a few days previous was melting away before a sudden 
and unexpected thaw; a drizzling rain kept falling the whole day; and a cloudy atmo 
sphere, hiding the sun from view, projected a melancholy gloom over the whole me- 


378 APPENDIX 


tropolis. The one morning rehearsal of The Merchant of Venice had been fixed for 12 
o'clock, and precisely at the appointed time Kean made his appearance at the theatre. 
The rehearsal was proceeded with. A bombshell exploding in the midst of the slender 
company could not have startled them more than the thoroughly original interpretation 
which Kean gave to each line of his part. Raymond, the acting manager, protested 
against the ‘innovation,’ as he termed it. ‘Sir,’ returned Kean, proudly, ‘I wish it to 
be an innovation.’—* It will never do, depend upon it,’ remarked the stage manager, 
with a patronizing air that was excessively galling —‘ Well, sir,’ rejoined Kean, ‘ per- 
haps I may be wrong; but if so, the public will set me right.’ Notwithstanding the 
bold originality in question, his rehearsal was remarkably ineffective; and the per- 
formers, taking his intentional tameness as a criterion of what the public performance 
would be, predicted his failure with energetic liberality. The rehearsal concluded, 
Kean returned home to enjoy with his wife the unusual luxury of a dinner. He 
remained at home until six o’clock, when the striking of the church clocks warned him 
that it was time to depart. Snatching up a small bundle containing the few necessaries 
with which he was bound to provide himself, he kissed his wife and infant son, and 
hurriedly left the house. ‘I wish,’ he muttered, ‘I was going to be shot.’ With his 
well-worn boots soaked with the slush, he slunk in at the stage door, and proceeded 
to a small, dilapidated dressing-room in the remotest part of the house, occupying it 
in common with three or four of the secondary actors. He quickly exchanged his 
dripping threadbare apparel for the more comfortable gaberdine of Shylock, slipped 
his feet into the traditional Venetian slippers, and taking a little 4/ack wig from his 
little bundle, adjusted it to his head, heedless of or inattentive to the astonishment 
depicted on the faces of his companions, Nevertheless, they did not attempt to ex- 
postulate with him; the reserved manner he had invariably maintained rendered ¢hat 
out of the question; but the news spread like wildfire, that the little man in the capes 
had rejected the conventional red wig. Arnold lamented such extraordinary conduct; 
Raymond tapped his forehead significantly when he heard of ‘the black wig.’ Both 
kept aloof. Not so Bannister and Oxberry. The former, with his characteristic good 
nature, came to give him’an encouraging word; Oxberry, with a closer eye to business, 
to give him a glass of brandy and water. Gratefully accepting both, he issued from 
the dressing-room, and, proud in the consciousness of the approaching triumph, walked 
slowly to the wings, where he was heartily greeted by Dr Drury. Peeping through 
the eyelet-hole in the curtain, he surveyed a dreary, hopeless aspect. The announce- 
ment of ‘Mr Kean, from Exeter,’ carried with it no charm; another addition to the 
list of failures, for which the public were indebted to the discrimination of the mana- 
gers, was anticipated; and ‘there was that sense of previous damnation which a thin 
house inspires.’ The boxes were empty; there were about fifty people in the pit, 
‘some quantity of barren spectators and idle renters being thinly scattered to make up 
a show.’ Undaunted by the discouraging aspect of affairs, he awaited the decisive 
moment. 

The cherished hope of twenty years is realized. He is before the floats of Drury- 
Lane, and is going to show them what an obscure strolling player can do. His fine 
Italian countenance, the lightness of his step, the piercing brilliancy of his eye, the 
expressiveness of his gesture, and the buoyancy and perfect self-possession of his man- 
ner, impress the scanty audience in his favour. His personal disadvantages are so 
great that it is at once evident that a success can only be achieved by sheer excellence, 
exposed to the discriminating test of the understanding. But there can be no doubt 
that he will pass triumphantly through the rigid severity of the ordeal. There is an 


ACTORS—KEAN 379 


animating soul in all he says and does, which at once gives a high interest to his act- 
ing, and excites those emotions which are always felt in the presence of genius—a 
union of power with a fine sensibility. It is giving fire to his eye, energy to his tones, 
such a variety and expressiveness to all his gestures that you might have said, his 
body thinks, 

The Scene begins. The manner in which he acknowledges the applause usually 
accorded to a stranger is a study for a painter. There is nothing of the sullen gaol 
delivery common to the traditional Shylocks of the stage; a vague expectation is 
excited. He takes up his position, leans across his cane, and looks askance at Bas- 
sanio as he refers to the three thousand ducats. ‘He is safe,’ cried Dr Drury. The 
Scene goes on. ‘I will be assured I may’ is given with such truth, such significance, 
such beauty, that the audience bursts into a shower of applause; then !—as he himself 
expressed it, ‘then, indeed, I felt, I knew, I had them with me.’ 

In that part where, leaning on his stick, he told the tale of Jacob and his flock with 
the garrulous ease of old age and animation of spirit that seems borne back to the olden 
time, and the privileged example in which he exults, he shows them that a man of 
genius has lighted on the stage. His acting here is all a study. ‘There is one present 
who notes with delight ‘the flexibility and indefiniteness of outline about it, like a fig- 
ure with a landscape background; Shylock is in Venice with his money-bags, his 
daughter, and his injuries; but his thoughts take wing to the East; his voice swells 
and deepens at the mention of his sacred tribe and ancient law, and he dwells with 
joy on any digression to distant times and places, as a relief to his rooted and vindic- 
tive purposes.’ The audience is then stirred to enthusiasm by the epigrammatic point 
and distinctness with which he gives the lines: ‘ Hath a dog money? Is it possible A 
cur can lend three thousand ducats ?’ &c. 

The Act drop falls; all doubts as to a splendid success have been removed. In the 
interval between this and his appearance in the Fifth Scene of the Second Act, there 
was an obyious disposition on the part of those who had previously contemned him to 
offer their congratulations; but, as if divining their intentions, he shrank from obser- 
vation, and only emerged from his concealment as the scene came on between Shylock 
and Jessica, in his very calling to whom, ‘ Why, Jessica, I say,’ there was a charm as 
of music. [Hawkins here quotes much of the foregoing extract from Dr Doran, and 
thus concludes :] 

With every limb trembling from excitement, the hero of the night returned to his 
damp and threadbare apparel; and, having received with a hurried carelessness the 
congratulations offered to him, he waited on Arnold in the manager’s room. He was 
formally informed that their expectations had been exceeded. To Kean, the announce- 
ment was quite superfluous. In an almost frenzied ecstasy he rushed through the wet 
to his humble lodging, sprang up the stairs and threw open the door. His wife ran to 
meet him; no words were required, his radiant countenance told all; and they mingled 
together the first tears of true happiness they had as yet experienced. He told her of 
his proud achievement, and in a burst of exultation exclaimed, ‘ Mary, you shall ride 
in your carriage, and Charley, my boy,’ taking the child from the cradle and kissing 
him, ‘you shall go to Eton, and’—a sad remembrance crossed his mind, his joy was 
overshadowed, and he murmured in broken accents,—‘ Oh, that Howard had lived to 
see it!—but he is better where he is.’ 

Hazuitt (Characters of Shakespeare's Plays, 1817, p. 276): When we first went 
to see Mr Kean in Shylock, we expected to see what we had been used to see, a de- 
crepid old man, bent with age and ugly with mental deformity, grinning with deadly 


- 


380 APPENDIX 


malice, with the venom of his heart congealed in the expression of his countenance, | 
sullen, morose, gloomy, inflexible, brooding over one idea, that of his hatred, and fixed 
on one unalterable purpose, that of his revenge. We were disappointed, because we 
had taken our ideas from other actors, not from the play. There is-no proof there 
that Shylock is old, but a single line, ‘ Bassanio and o/d Shylock, both stand forth,’— 
which does not imply that he is infirm with age,—and the circumstance that he has 
a daughter marriageable, which does not imply that he is old at all. It would be too 
much to say that his body should be made crooked and deformed to answer to his 
mind, which is bowed down and warped with prejudices and passion. That he has 
but one idea, is not true; he has more ideas than any other person in the piece; and 
if he is intense and inveterate in the pursuit of his purpose, he shows the utmost elas- 
ticity, vigour, and presence of mind in the means of attaining it. But so rooted was 
our habitual impression of the part from seeing it caricatured in the representation, that 
it was only from a careful perusal of the play itself that we saw our error. The stage 
is not, in general, the best place to study our author’s characters in. It is too often 
filled with traditional common-place conceptions of the part, handed down from sire 
to son, and suited to the taste of the great vulgar and the small. ‘’Tis an un- 
weeded garden; things rank and gross do merely gender in it!’ If a man of genius 
comes once in an age to clear away the rubbish, to make it fruitful and wholesome, 
they cry, ‘’Tis a bad school; it may be like nature, it may be like Shakespeare, but it 
is not like us.’ Admirable critics! [Hazlitt is here apparently making amends for 
his earlier opposition to Kean. I doubt if in a more deliberate mood he would have 
rated the stage thus low as an interpreter of Shakespeare. Clearly he was vexed that 
Macklin’s interpretation had held possession of him so long, and his vexation is a suffi- 
cient excuse for his mixing up quotations from Hamlet and Othello, and for mistaking 
Bassanio for Anthonio. 


In The Music of Nature, by WILLIAM GARDINER, is the following valuable record 
of the quality of Edmund Kean’s voice. It is much to be regretted that the record is 
so brief and that more passages are not noted. Such a record as this transmits to pos- 
terity a more vivid sense of an actor’s power, and of one of the secrets thereof, than 
pages of praise as vague as it is lavish can convey :— 

[P.57]. Musically speaking, he is the best orator, who, to his natural speaking voice, 
unites the upper and lower voices, that is, the voce de testa and the voce de petto. Mr 
Kean possesses these qualifications in the highest degree. He has at his command 
the greatest number of effects, having a range of tones from F below the line to F 


above it— 


the natural key of his voice being that of Bb, a note lower than Talma’s. His hard 
guttural tone upon G is as piercing as the third string of a violoncello; whilst his mezzo 
and pianissimo expressions are as soft as from the voice of a woman. He has three 
distinct sets of tones; as if he occasionally played upon a flute, clarionet, and bassoon, 
which he uses as the passion dictates. In the Scene with Lady Anne [Rich. LIT. 
I, ii] his notes are of the most touching and persuasive kind, often springing from the 
harmonies of his natural voice, which he elicits with exquisite delicacy. We instance 
the peculiar softness of the following expressions : 


ACTORS—IRVING 381 


fe) t—te p— 5 
= Lea ETE 
aa: 23 pe al Fee ae al 
eee ee NS 
Se 


You mock me, mo - ther. Re - mem - ber. 


But the same voice, when moved with a ruder stroke, gave the yell and choked 
utterance of a savage [Shyloc, I, iii, 46]: 


et SE SS pee Serre SE —— we a —— [eee recs 
al Ga ieee 
7: ee a 
Oh! if I cancatchhim once up -on the hip. 


2 ———————— 


SS SE ee a ee 


His tones of furious passion are deep-seated in the chest, like those of the lion and 
tiger; and it is his mastery over these instinctive tones by which he so powerfully 
moves his audience. At times he vomits a torrent of words in a breath, yet avails 
himself of all the advantages of deliberation. His pauses give a grandeur to his per- 
formance, and speak more than words themselves [Shydock, IV, i, 240]: 


Ong see ais eee cls s Welhiee Pe ok le no, not for Ven-ice. 


HAwKIns (Life of Kean, i, 342): [When DowTon acted Shylock] the great point 
of novelty consisted in the introduction of some Jewish friends into the court, and 
when, on being told that one of the conditions of his release was his becoming a Chris- 
tian, Shylock fell fainting in their arms, and in this state was carried off, the tittering 
which had been excited from the Scene with Tubal was exchanged for roars of 
laughter. Dowton was deeply mortified, and anathematized Kean, Shylock, and 
the audience with all the vigour of a ‘good hater.’ He never boasted of his Shylock 
again ! 


The Theatre (December, 1879, p. 292): IRvING evidently believes that Shake- 
speare intended to enlist our sympathies on the side of the Jew, and the conception is 
embodied in a manner altogether new to the stage. The fierceness associated with the 
character since Macklin appeared in it is not absent. Except in the scene with Tubal, 
where passion will out, the bearing of this Shylock is distinguished by a comparatively 
quiet and tranquil dignity,—perhaps we ought rather to say the superb dignity of the 
Arabian race. The whole force of an ‘old, untainted religious aristocracy’ is made 
manifest in his person. He feels and acts as one of a noble but long-oppressed nation, 
as a representative of Judaism against the apostate Galilean, as an instrument of ven- 
geance in the hands of an offended God. In point of intelligence and culture he is 
far above the Christians with whom he comes into contact, and the fact that as a Jew 


382 APPENDIX 


he is deemed far below them in the social scale is gall and wormwood to his proud 
and sensitive spirit..... Exhibited in this light, not so much as a man grievously 
wronged in his own person as a representative of a great but oppressed tribe, Shylock 
acquires on the stage what Shakespeare evidently intended to impart to the character,— 

a sad and romantic interest, an almost tragic elevation and grace. 

In Mr Irving’s performance, as in the play, Shylock appears under three different 
aspects. First of all he is the usurer, then the outraged father, and finally the venge- 
ful creditor. Mr Irving’s appearance is in harmony with this view of the part. He 
comes forward as a man between fifty and sixty years of age, infirm enough to need 
the support of a stick, with an iron-gray wisp of beard, and wearing a sober brown 
gaberdine, an Oriental shawl girdle, and a close-fitting black cap with a yellow line 
across it. The law of Venice, it may be remembered, required Jews living in that city 
to wear a red hat as a distinctive sign of their tribe, but in this instance an actor may 
well be pardoned for dispensing with historical accuracy. A picturesque background 
is at the outset provided for this striking figure by a view of the Palace of St Mark, 
with a quay on which porters are landing bales of merchandise. Mr Irving’s acting 
here is studiously quiet in tone, but full expression is given to the religious fervour of 
the Jew, the sense of wrong which rankles in his bosom, the undercurrent of sarcasm 
in his affected humility, and the cynical humour which breaks forth in, ‘I will be 
assured I may,’ and other passages. It is as he utters the words,—‘ Antonio shall 
become bound,—well?’ that the idea of vengeance crosses his mind. In the Scene 
where the loan is agreed upon we have a fine illustration of the text; the Jew touches 
Antonio on the heart, and, seeing the merchant recoil from him, apologizes for his error 
by a bow in which we can perceive all the bitterness induced by the hard distinction 
drawn between Christian and Jew. The background of the Scene of Jessica’s elope- 
ment is formed of Shylock’s house at night, with a bridge over the canal which flows 
by it, and with a votive lamp to the Virgin on the wall. There a barcarolle is sung by 
some Venetians in a gondola, and a number of masqueraders rush merrily past. The 
noise having subsided, the curtain drops, to be raised again a few moments afterwards, 
—a pleasing innovation,—to exhibit Shylock returning without any suspicion of Jes- 
sica’s treachery to his plundered and deserted home. The Scene which follows the 
discovery of Jessica’s flight is sustained by Mr Irving with great power. His reason 
seems to reel under the heavy blow it has received, and the brief allusion to his dead 
wife is full of pathos and tenderness. The father is here more visible than the usurer. 
Then comes the fierce thirst for revenge which follows the news of Antonio’s ill-for- 
tune. By the time of the Trial, however, the storm has sul sided into a dead calm. 
Bidden to appear in the Duke’s Court,—a fine medi~,al chamber, with portraits of 
Venetian dignitaries of times gone by on the “ails, and with a crowd of deeply-inter- 
ested spectators, including Tubal and other Jews, at the back,—he slowly and gravely 
comes in, The tone in which he replies to the appeals for mercy is even more signifi- 
cant than are his words. He stands there like a figure of Fate,—pitiless, majestic, 
implacable. The hour of vengeance has at length struck, and he will not be balked 
of his prey. There is no necessity for deference now; the law is on his side. His 
face wears a hard, set expression, relieved at long intervals by a glance of bitter hate 
towards Antonio, or a faint smile of triumph. Nor is this superb calm less conspicuous 
when the cause turns against him. The scales drop from his hands, but that is all. For 
a time he seems to be turned to stone, to be as immovable as a statue. The Christian, 
as might have been expected, has again conquered. Eventually, crushed by the condi- 
tions on which his life is spared, he stalks with a heavy sigh from the Court, only stop- 


ACTORS—BOOTH 383 


ping to cast a look of deep pity at the ribald youth who is barking like a cur at his 
heels. 


[The only introduction that the following letter needs is the statement that it was 
written to the Editor with no thought of publication, but was merely the continuance 
of a verbal discussion and the vindication of a position then maintained. It seems, 
however, to supplement so well the suggestions, from the same hand, in the Commen- 
tary on the foregoing pages, that at the request of the Editor, it is here printed, with 
the permission of—] 

Epwin BootH: My notion of Shylock is of the traditional type, which I firmly 
believe to be ‘the Jew which Shakespeare drew.’ Not the buffoon that Dogget gave 
according to Lord Lansdowne’s Version, but the strongly marked and somewhat gro 
tesque character which Macklin restored to the stage, and in which he was followed 
by Cooke, by Edmund Kean, and by my Father. ’Tis nonsense to suppose that Shy- 
lock was represented in other than a serious vein by Burbadge, merely because he 
‘made up,’ doubtless after some representation of Judas, with red hair to emphasize 
the vicious expression of his features. Is there any authority for the assertion which 
some make that he also wore a long nose? What if he did? A clever actor once 
played the part of Tubal with me, and wore red hair and a hook’d nose. He did not 
make the audience laugh; ’twas not his purpose; but he looked the very creature that 
could sympathize with Shylock. His make up was admirable. He’s the son of the 
famous John Drew, and is an excellent actor, now a leading member of Daly’s Com- 
pany. Let Burbadge have the long nose, if you will, but I am sure that he never 
under Shakespeare’s nose made the character ridiculous. No, not till Lansdowne’s bas- 
tard came did the Jew make the unskilful laugh and the judicious grieve. From that 
time, perhaps, until Macklin restored the original method of representing the character, 
it was treated as a ‘low comedy’ part. I doubt if Macklin or Cooke wore red wigs 
for Shylock,—but no matter, Burbadge did, and neither was he nor were they funny. 
If Edmund Kean was the first to wear black hair when red was the usual color worn 
at that time, ’tis easily accounted for, when you reflect that he was very poor and prob- 
ably had a very limited stock of stage ‘props’—he doubtless had no other old man’s 
wig (except a white one for Lear) and the ‘ black bald’ did service for Sir Giles Over- 
reach, and several other elderly gentlemen besides Shylock. I know that such was my 
Father’s case, and also mine in my strolling days. I believe that Burbadge, Macklin, 
Cooke, and Kean (as did my Father) made Shylock what is technically termed a ‘ cha- 
racter-part,’—grotesque in ‘make up,’ and general treatment, not so pronounced, per- 
haps, as my personation has been sometimes censured for. I think Macready was the 
first to lift the uncanny Jew out of the darkness of his native element of revengeful 
selfishness into the light of the venerable Hebrew, the Martyr, the Avenger. He has 
had several followers, and I once tried to view him in that light, but he doesn’t cast a 
shadow sufficiently strong to contrast with the sunshine of the comedy,—to do which 
he must, to a certain extent, be repulsive, a sort of party that one doesn’t care to see 
among the dainty revellers of Venice in her prime. Antonio’s liver-trouble is gloom 
enough for them, but to heighten the brilliancy for us a heavier cloud is necessary, and 
it take: the form of Shylock,—‘ an inhuman wretch, uncapable of pity, void and empty 
From uny dram of mercy.’ It has been said that he is an affectionate father and a 
faithful friend. When, where, and how does he manifest the least claim to such com- 
mendation? ‘Tell me that, and unyoke! ’Twas the money value of Leah’s ring that 
he grieved over, not its associations with her, else he would have shown some affection 


384 APPENDIX 


for her daughter, which he did not, or she would not have called her home ‘a hell, 
robbed and left him. Shakespeare makes her do these un-Hebrew things to intensify 
the baseness of Shylock’s nature. If we side with him in his self-defence, tis because 
we have charity, which he had not; if we pity him under the burthen’of his merited 
punishment ’tis because we are human, which he is not,—except in shape, and even 
that, I think, should indicate the crookedness of his nature. His refusal to accept 
thrice the amount he loaned seems to have given some critics the idea that as a great 
Avenger of his wronged people he rises above all selfish considerations, but had he 
accepted, what a lame and impotent conclusion it would have been! No, this other 
un-Jewlike action was necessary for stage-effect. ; 

Do not forget, while you read the poet’s plays, that he was a player, and, mark 
you! a theatrical manager with a keen eye to stage-effects; witness the ‘gag’ of 
Shylock’s sharpening the knife,—a most dangerous ‘bit of business,’ and apt to cause 
a laugh; be careful of that ‘point.’ Would the heroic Hebrew have stooped to such 
a paltry action? No, never, in the very white-heat of his pursuit of vengeance! But 
vengeance is foreign to Shylock’s thought; ’tis revenge he seeks, and he gets just 
what all who seek it get,—‘sooner or later,’ as the saying is. Had his motive been 
the higher one, Shakespeare would have somehow contrived his success without doubt ; 
but Shylock had grown too strong for him. ’Tis said, you know, that he had to kill 
Mercutio, else the merry fellow would have killed the tragedy ; so Shylock would have 
killed the comedy had he been intended to typify Vengeance. The storm-cloud of his 
evil passions having burst, he is forgotten in the moonlight of fair Portia’s gardens. 


GENTLEMAN (Dram. Censor, i, 296): Mrs WOFFINGTON, whose deportment in a 
male character was so free and elegant, whose figure was so proportionate and delicate, 
notwithstanding a voice unfavourable for declamation, must, in our opinion, stand fore- 
most as Portia; her first Scene was supported with an uncommon degree of spirited 
archness; her behaviour during Bassanio’s choice of the caskets conveyed a strong pic- 
ture of unstudied anxiety ; the trial scene she sustained with amiable dignity, the speech 
upon mercy she marked as well as anybody else; and, in the Fifth Act, she carried on 
the sham quarrel in a very laughable manner; to sum up all: while in petticoats she 
showed the woman of solid.sense and real fashion; when in breeches, the man of 
education, judgement, and gentility. 


Mrs CLIVE was a ludicrous burlesque on the character; every feature and limb con- 
trasted the idea Shakespeare gives us of Portia; in the spirited scene she was clumsy, 
and spoke in the same strain of chambermaid delicacy she did Lappet or Flippanta; in 
the grave part, she was awkwardly dissonant; and, as if conscious she could not get 
through without the aid of trick, flew to the pitiful resource of taking off the peculiarity 
of some judge or noted lawyer; from which wise stroke she created laughter in a scene 
where the deepest attention should be preserved, till Gratiano’s retorts upon the Jew 
work a contrary effect. 


BoabEN (Life of J. P. Kemble, i, 326) : It was compensation rich, and rich enough, 
to hear from the lips of Mrs Stppons the triumphant delirium of joy when Bassanio had 
chosen the right casket. 


Accomling to the Jahrbuch, xii, p. 212, it appears that about 1780 Shylock was 
given as a serious character by REINECKE for the first time on the German stage, and, 
to judge from a contemporary account, his interpretation must have been much the 


ACTORS—REINECKE 385 


same as Macklin’s. In a notice of a later performance in Mannheim by Reinecke, I 
find a curious contemporary criticism referred to by Genée (p. 272), to the effect that 
the public were not satisfied with the scarcely perceptible Jewish accent with which 
Reinecke spoke the part, and the partial failure of the play was attributed to this cause. 
The public demanded that the Jewish accent should be very decided and sustained 
throughout. Genée agrees with the public of that day, if I understand him aright. 

The prevalence of this practice of imparting a foreign accent to Shylock’s words, I 
find confirmed in the caution against its extreme use which Oechelhauser (Zinleitung, 
P- 22) deems it proper to give; ‘especially,’ as he says, ‘since Shakespeare and his 
‘translator, Schlegel, have adequately indicated, by the turn of expression, phraseology, 
‘&c., the Jewish mode of speech. It is only in moments of extreme excitement, as 
‘Rétscher explains, that a more emphatic dialectic, and, in especial, a Jewish, colour- 
‘ing is permissible. Charles Kean pronounced Shylock’s words wholly free from any 
‘trace of dialect; this is carrying it too far.’ 

The passage in Rétscher, to which Oechelhauser refers, is evidently to be found in 
his Charactergebilde (Dresden, 1864, p. 53), where, it is said, that ‘the actor who per- 
‘sonates Shylock must keep in view the intimation of the Poet and show the stamp 
‘of Shylock’s nationality, particularly in the pronunciation, but the actor must never 
‘deviate into an absolute copy or counterfeit of the Jewish speech. A delicate shade 
‘must be shown between a stamp of nationality and the Jewish tone and style of the 
‘lower classes. If the actor fails to indicate any Jewish element at all, the character 
‘will lose its deepest basis. Shylock will then stand on a plane above his national 
* characteristics..... It is natural, however, that when he is deeply moved, in moments 
‘of wild wrath, the national peculiarities will be more unrestrained and ring out more 
‘clearly than in moments of brooding cunning or calculating deliberation. In the for- 
‘mer the natural man is revealed involuntarily, in the latter he is under the restraints 
‘induced by Christian intercourse.’ 

Can it be that it is the use of the word ‘monies’ which has induced the belief among 
our German brothers that Shylock ‘talks Jewish’? It is impossible to recall any other 
word or phrase which can hint at such a supposition; and even the use of this word by 
Shylock fails to help us when we hear his ‘ monies’ spoken of by a Grecian Senator in 
Timon of Athens. The knot is too intrinse for me to unloose. If it were not for its 
antiquity, as indicated in the criticism on Reinecke, we might infer that the adoption 
of this Jewish accent was due to the suggestions of Schlegel (see Extract from Schlegel, 
post), wherein Rétscher is anticipated. But evidently Schlegel merely followed the 
public opinion of his day and the practice of the stage. 

As was quoted in regard to Lansdowne’s Version, ‘the drama’s laws the drama’s 
patrons give ;’ and German actors must bow to the decision of the German public; but 
I cannot forbear remarking that any such practice on our stage would be abhorrent. 
Undoubtedly, it would mark the Jew, but it would mark a Jew of the lowest class, 
socially and intellectually, to which class Shylock does not belong; its befitting accom- 
paniments would be three old hats and a spasmodic cry of ‘Old Clo’,’ The smallest 
hint of a Jewish accent would be monstrous and revolting here, where, between native 
Jews and Christians of the educated classes, there is no difference whatever in language 
or pronunciation to be detected. 

25 


386 APPENDIX 


COSTUME 
SHYLOCK 

Douce (i, 251): Shylock’s dress should be a scarlet hat lined with black taffeta. 
This is the manner in which the Jews of Venice were formerly distinguished. See 
Saint Didier, Histoire de Venise. In the year 1581 they wore ved caps for distinction’s 
sake, as appears from Hakluyt’s Voyages, p. 179, ed. 1589; and also from Lord Veru- 
lam, in his Essay on Usury. [See note on ‘ usance,’ I, iii, 45.] 

CoLLier (New Particulars, &c., 1836, p. 38. Foot-note to Jordan’s Ballad, where 
reference is made to Shylock’s nose. See p. 462 of this Appendix): I have little 
_ doubt that the part of Shylock was originally played in a false nose as well as a false 

beard. Of old, it was the custom so to dress Jews and usurers on the stage; we know 
that such was the case with Barrabas, in Marlowe’s Jew of Malta, before 1593, in which 
Ithamore exclaims: ‘Oh, brave master, I worship your nose for this ;’? and Rowley, in 
his Search for Money, 1609, speaks in express terms of ‘the artificial Jew of Malta’s 
nose.’ 

HunTER (i, 307): Shylock was a Levantine Jew [see Hunter’s grounds for this 
assertion, p. ix, Actors’ Names, ame], and, therefore, on the stage, if it is intended 
that strict regard shall be paid to propriety in matters of costume, he ought, according 
to Coryat, to appear in a yellow turban. [See Halliwell, Zost.] 

KNIGHT: Vecellio expressly informs us that the Jews differed in nothing, as far as 
regarded dress, from Venetians of the same professions, whether merchants, artisans, 
&c., with the exception of a yellow bonnet, which they were compelled to wear by order 
of the government. In confirmation of the assertion in Hakluyt’s Voyages [mentioned 
by Douce] that Jews wore red caps for distinction’s sake, we remember to have met 
somewhere with a story that the colour was changed from ved to yellow, in conse- 
quence of a Jew having been accidentally taken for a cardinal! Yellow has always 
been in Europe a mark of disgrace. Tenne (i. e. orange) was considered by many 
heralds as stainant. The Jews in England wore yellow caps of a peculiar shape as 
early as the reign of Richard I. As late, also, as the year 1825 an order was issued 
by the Pope that ‘the Jews should wear a ye//ow covering on their hats, and the women 
a yellow riband on the breast, under the pain of severe penalties.’—Vide Examiner, 
Sunday newspaper, Nov. 20th, 1825. 

HALLIWELL (p. 321): Coryat, in his Crudities, ed. 1611, p. 230, says:.‘I was at 
the place where the whole fraternity of the Jews dwelleth together, which is called 
the Ghetto, being an iland; for it is inclosed round about with water. It is thought 
there are of them in all betwixt five and sixe thousand. They are distinguished and 
discerned from the Christians by their habites on their heads; for some of them doe 
weare hats and those redde, onely those Jews that are borne in the Westerne parts of 
the world, as in Italy, &c., but the Easterne Jewes, being otherwise called the Levant- 
ine Jewes, which are borne in Hierusalem, Alexandria, Constantinople, &c., weare tur- 
bents upon their heads, as the Turkes doe; but the difference is this: the Turkes weare 
white, the Jewes yellow. By that word turbent I understand a rowle of fine linnen 
wrapped together upon their heads, which serveth them instead of hats whereof many 
have bin often worne by the Turkes in London.’ On p. 232, speaking of the Jews 
when at the synagogue, Coryat observes that ‘every one of them, whatsoever he be, 
man or childe, weareth a kinde of light yellowish vaile, made of linsie woolsie (as I 
take it) over his shoulders, something worse than our coarser Holland, which reacheth 
a little beneath the middle of their backes.’ 


COSTUME—ANTHONIO. PORTIA 387 


Epwin Bootu (MS): My costume for Shylock was suggested by one of a group of 
Oriental figures in a picture by Gérdme (‘ The Nautch Girl,’ I think it was called), It 
consists of a long, dark-green gown, trimmed at the edge of the skirt with an irregular 
device of brown colour. A dark-brown gaberdine, with flowing sleeves and hood, lined 
with green and trimmed as the gown. A variegated scarf about the waist, from which 
depends a leather pouch. Red leather pointed shoes, and hat of orange-tawny colour, 
shaped somewhat like the Phrygian cap, but with a rim of about two inches, turned up. 

Head grey and pretty bald; beard of same colour and quite long. Ear-rings and 
several finger-rings, one on the thumb and one on forefinger; a long knotted staff. 
Complexion swarthy; age about sixty, I judge, from what is said of it by one of the 
young gallants when he is bemoaning the loss of his daughter, but ’tis difficult to deter- 
mine the years of such natures. 

[IRvinc’s costume is somewhat described on p. 382.] 


ANTHONIO 

E. W. Gopwin (Zhe Architect, 3 April, 1875, p. 196): Antonio, with whom we 
may class Shylock and Tubal, for the difference between them was only in the colour 
of their caps, would be attired like any other merchant, i. e. in doublet, trunk hose, 
stockings and shoes, old men wearing over all a gown reaching to the heels, with 
sleeves tight in lower arm and loose above. The gown was fastened in front, from top 
to bottom, with buttons and buttonholes sewn in braids, and the skirt was open at the 
sides, fastened by four or five buttons at the bottom, likewise on braids, It was girded 
at the waist with a silk sash, having small tassels depending in front. Over the dress, 
gowned or not, was worn a large cape or short cloak of silk or brocade, light or heavy 
according to the season, with a collar as before mentioned. Round the neck the mer- 
chant wore a ruff, and ruffs again appear at the wrists. The cap was sometimes high 
and hat-shaped, with a narrow brim, and sometimes flat and largely projecting, like the 
modern Scotch cap. Like the nobles and gentlemen, they indulged in the luxury of 
gloves. [Portia asks Anthonio for his gloves—Ep.] The Jew was distinguished from 
the Christian by being compelled to have his cap made of a tawny-yellow material, 
sometimes so tawny as to appear almost like a faded red. 


PORTIA 

GODWIN: Portia would do her shopping probably at Padua, and would thercfore 
follow the fashions of the mainland. The chief difference we have to note is the 
absence of the square-cut body. High-necked bodies, with fine cambric ruffs, was the 
every-day attire usually worn by Paduan ladies of noble birth. On state occasions, on 
festivals, and at receptions, the dress, though still high on the shoulders, was open in 
front, terminating at a point a little above the waist. There is also a marked differ- 
ence to be observed between the dress of a maiden and that of a married woman, and 
there is no question that the Paduan ladies (wives or not) indulged in a considerably 
extensive wardrobe. So, too, there was more than one mode of dressing the hair (false 
hair was by no means unusual). In some cases it was crimped, parted in the middle, 
brought round to the back over the ears, and rolled up 2 /a grec , in others it fell loosely 
down the back az naturel, confined, however, at the poll by a delicately-wrought band 
or tiara of goldsmith’s work; but the more usual plan was to arrange the front hair in 
massive cals, assuming somewhat the form of a couple of low horns, and carried 
down each side in smaller curls to the ears, the hair behind being strained (sometimes 
crimped) and fastened up into a plait, with strings of pearls interwoven. From this 
plait depended the veil, which sometimes also appears to have covered the head up to 


388 APPENDIX 


a point between the horned curls or rolls, over which it could be raised like a double 
hood. The veil itself was also worn in various ways, and as it was often arranged 
with the utmost grace and made of the finest material,—a sort of silken gauze, 
enriched with gold, interwoven and even sometimes embroidered and. decorated 
further with pearls and gems,—its lovely film-like effect, like an iridescent mist over 
the rich materials of the gown, can be better imagined than described. The gown, 
with the exception already noted, was cut like the Venetian dress, and was made of 
silk, brocade, gold cloth, or costly velvet. Over the shoulders was worn a chain, 
usually of gold set with jewels, and suspending a large jewel or cross. The pouch or 
gipciere worn at the girdle was not quite yet abandoned, and Portia may wear one or 
not as she pleases. Gowns with the skirt open up the front and with loose hanging 
sleeves were also used by the ‘Sposa di Padoua.’? Rings were worn on the first, third, 
and fourth fingers. Earrings of pearls and jewels ‘appear, and sometimes we see a 
string of pearls, one end attached to the ear and the other looped up to the back hair. 
The veil is occasionally omitted, and a stiff semi-circular collar of lace is seen standing 
up behind the neck and reaching as high as the poll. Portia’s stockings would be of 
silk or the finest thread worked with clocks and even open seams. Her shoes, of 
slipper form, would be of morocco, or of velvet embroidered with gold, cork being 
used for the soles. On her journey to Venice she would use a velvet mask or visor, 
and gloves highly perfumed and embroidered with gold or silver. A pocket looking- 
glass, with ladies of rank, was not an uncommon possession, and was sometimes set 
in the back of the fan, which was usually made of nine or more ostrich feathers, the 
handle set with pearls and jewels and fastened to the end of the girdle-chain, if the 
lady was married. The pocket handkerchief was of large size and of fine cambric, 
having an embroidered border, and a tassel at each corner. Finally, on going abroad 
ladies wore, in the winter and later autumn, a mantle or pelisse over the gown, reach- 
ing to below the knee, open in front to the neck, and with long, loose, open, hanging 
sleeves. Over this came the veil, and a round velvet hat, with a broad brim, completed 
the costume, whose chief glory consisted in its richly embroidered or woven or cut 


patterns. 
Crvit_ Docror 


KNIGHT: Vecellio also furnishes us with the dress of a Doctor of Laws, the habit 
in which Portia defends Antonio. The upper robe was of black damask cloth, velvet, 
or silk, according to the weather. The under one of black silk, with a black sash, the 
ends of which hang down to the middle of the leg; the stockings of black cloth or 
velvet; the cap of rich velvet or silk. 

Gopwin: The D.C. L. of Padua wore a tight doublet, silk belt, trunk hose, and 
stockings, all of black; velvet in winter, silk in summer. Over these he put on his 
official robe or gown, ungirdled, having an upright collar and long, capacious open 
sleeves reaching nearly to the ground. This was made of velvet, silk, or damask, 
covered with rich pattern, cut, embroidered, or woven, according to the nature of the 
material. (All the patterns cut on veivet or in brocade and damask were large. I 
have seen none which could be drawn within less compass than twelve inches square. ) 
On his head he wore a tolerably high cap, made with a narrow brim and a flat top, and 
on his feet were seen the usual slipper-shoes. His clerk would wear a black cloth 
doub!st, trunks, stockings, and ruffs, but no robe or gown. 


LNVERRISSA 


Gopwin: Nerissa, ‘the waiting-maid,’—or as we should now call her, the lady’s 
maid,—-must be dressed as the confidential servant of a noble and wealthy lady, 


COSTUME--FESSICA. DOGE 389 


neither too rich nor yet too poor. There will still be the ruffs at neck and wrists, but 
of less delicate material than those on Portia; the skirt of her gown will be shorter 
than her ladyship’s, and there will be an absence of ornament, except, perhaps, as a 
border to the dress. She must wear a ring or two, and from her girdle would hang a 
pouch and huswife. She would also have a short veil of plain lawn or cambric, which 
she might use as a hood, pinned under the chin. 


JESSICA 

KnicHT: Jewish females, Vecellio says, were distinguished from Christian women 
by their being ‘highly painted’ and wearing yed/ow veils, but that in other respects 
their dresses were perfectly similar. 

EpwIn Booty (MS): Jessica should wear a yellow sash or veil of the same colour 
as Shylock’s cap, 

Gopwin: As the daughter of a rich merchant of Venice, Jessica would be dressed 
in the ordinary costume of a Venetian gentlewoman. A tightly-fitting body, square- 
cut neck before and behind, waist high at the sides and coming down low to a point 
both before and behind; the body laced across a stomacher; frilled shoulder-pieces ; 
sleeves loose above, and tightly fitting to lower arm; lawn or cambric ruffs at the 
wrist; flowing skirt; a necklet of pearls; slipper-shaped shoes, raised on sloping 
chopines ; front hair arranged in short massive curls on forehead, the rest strained back 
and done up in plait, from which depended the veil, that in the costume of a Jewess 
would be yellow. The dress was of no particular colour, and the skirt underneath 
was open in front, and tied together at intervals. 


DOGE 

KNIGHT: Czesar Vecellio describes at some length the alterations made in the Ducat 
dress by several princes, from the close of the twelfth century down to that of the six- 
teenth, the period of the action of the play before us; at which time the materials of 
which it was usually composed were cloth of silver, cloth of gold, and crimson velvet, 
the cap always corresponding in colour with the robe and mantle. Coryat, in his 
Crudities, says: ‘The fifth day of August being Friday... . I saw the Duke in some 
of his richest ornaments. .... He himself then wore two very rich robes, or long gar- 
ments, whereof the uppermost was white cloth of silver, with great massy buttons of 
gold; the other cloth of silver also, but adorned with many curious works made in 
colours with needlework.’ Howell, in his Survey of the Signorte of Venice, London, 
1651, after telling us that the Duke ‘always goes clad in silk and purple,’ observes, 
that ‘sometimes he shows himself to the public in a robe of cloth of gold and a white 
mantle; he hath his head covered with a thin coif, and on his forehead he wears a 
crimson kind of mitre, with a gold border, and, behind, it turns up in the form of a 
horn; on his shoulders he carries ermine skins to the middle, which is still a badge of 
the Consul’s habit; on his feet he wears embroidered sandals [Vecellio, a much better 
authority, says ‘slippers ’—KNIGHT], tied with gold buttons, and, about his middle, a 
most rich belt, embroidered with costly jewels, in so much, that the habit of a Duke, 
when at festivals he shews himself in the highest state, is valued at about 100,000 
crowns. 

Gopwin (The Architect, London, 3 April, 1875): The Doge’s dress consists of an 
ermine cape or tippet reaching to the elbow, shaped with a slight upright collar, entirely 
open from the throat downwards, and having six large buttons on the left edge. These 
buttons were sometimes very costly, and always important features. Under the cape 
appears a robe or cloak with a train, which is horne by one of the Doge’s esquires. 


390 APPENDIX 


The robe is covered with a large rich pattern of conventional branch and leaf, and a 
similar pattern is seen on the gown, which nearly touches the ground, and has large 
open sleeves reaching below the knee, is trimmed with fur, is open down the front 
and gathered in at the waist by a belt. On the head was worn the curious. horn-shaped 
biretta, and beneath this a closely-fitting white cap, coming down under it so as to 
cover the ears and the back of the head. Strings were attached to the front edges of 
this cap, sometimes tied under the chin, but often allowed to hang loose. The every- 
day biretta was of red velvet, with a deep border of gold embroidery. The state one 
had jewelled borders, and crests of gold knobs or jewels on the top of the border, and 
edging the central line or seam from the front to the back. Whatever the colour of the 
robe, the biretta must be of the same colour and material, except only its deep gold 
border or band. 
BASSANIO, SOLANIO, &C. 

KnicuT: ‘Young lovers,’ says Vecellio, ‘wear generally a doublet and breeches of 
satin, tabby, or other silk, cut or slashed in the form of crosses or stars, through which 
slashes is seen the lining of coloured taffeta; gold buttons, a lace ruff, a bonnet of rich 
velvet or silk with an ornamental band, a silk cloak, and silk stockings, Spanish mo. 
rocco shoes, a flower in one hand and their gloves and handkerchief in the other.’ 
This habit, he tells us, was worn by many of the nobility, as well of Venice as of other 
Italian cities, especially by the young men before they put on the gown with the sleeves, 
‘a comito,’ which was generally in their eighteenth or twentieth year. 

Gopwin: Bassanio, as a noble of Venice, would be dressed in doublet, trunk hose 
to below the knee, stockings and shoes, and over all, in the house, a houpelande, 
with hanging sleeves of much the same shape as that worn in the 15th century. But 
abroad he would change the over-garment for the large-sleeved gown or toga. The 
cream of the aristocracy—that is, the chiefs or heads of the leading families—adopt, 
commonly, crimson for the colour of the underdress, and black for the gown. Gloves, 
having stiff wrist-bands attached, are worn or carried in the hand, and the cap is a 
plain, round, flat-topped, limp sort of pork-pie hat. The gown was shaped at the neck 
so as to produce a stand-up collar, and over one shoulder was worn the long, narrow 
strip which distinguished nobles: and magistrates—altogether not a very picturesque 
costume. Svlanio, Salarino, Gratiano, and Lorenzo may be attired in eminently pic- 
turesque dresses. The long gown reaching to the feet, with its ugly baggy sleeves, 
forms no part of the ordinary Venetian habit. The scholars and young gentlemen 
wore short cloaks with collars, slashed doublets thick set with buttons down the 
front, slashed sleeves, rather easy in the upper part, but tight on the forearm, slashed 
trunk hose, with three or four buttons at the side of the knee, stockings, and light, 
slipper-like shoes. Round the neck they wore ruffs like those adopted by all Western 
Europe in the last quarter of the 16th century. The hat or cap was a tall bag-like 
structure with a stiff narrow rim. They wore ruffs at the wrist, and carried swords. 


Morocco. ARRAGON 

Gopwin: The Prince of Morocco would wear a loose and full white cotton gown 
with capacious sleeves and high neck, girded with a sash of delicate crape-like mate- 
rial full of coloured stripes and gold, the ends of which were deeply fringed and hung 
as low as the knee. On his head he would wear a spotlessly white turban, shaped 
like a small pillow, bound round the centre with a broad band. The skirt of his dress 
would be tucked through his girdle, hanging therefrom in irregular and graceful folds 
nearly to the ground. On his legs red morocco buskins, and his shoes of leather of 


COSTUME—MAGNIFICOES, &c. 391 


another colour, both often richly embroidered with gold and silver. Large rings of 
gold depend from his ears, and across his breast glitters his leathern sword-belt, loaded, 
I might almost say, clogged, with precious stones. The Prince of Arragon would be 
dressed like a noble in the Court of the King of Spain. The most important points 
to be noticed is the shortness of the trunks, which are only just visible below the 
doublet, the short cloak, and the increased length of the skirt of the doublet. Rufts 
appear round the neck and wrists, and on the head a tall bag-like hat with very nar- 
row brim. The cloak was usually of ‘purple’ (crimson) silk or velvet, lined with 
costly material, sometimes richly embroidered with gold. It was worn occasionally 
with a hood, and was often wrapped round the breast in a careless-looking, but emi 
nently artistic, manner. 
MAGNIFICOES, &C. 

KnicuT: The Chiefs of the Council of Ten, who were three in number, wore ‘red. 
gowns with long sleeves, either of cloth, camlet, or damask, according to the weather, 
with a flap of the same colour over the left shoulder, red stockings, and slippers.’ The 
rest of the Ten, according to Coryat, wore black camlet gowns with marvellous long 
sleeves, that reach almost down to the ground. 

The ‘ Clarissimoes’ generally wore gowns of black cloth faced with black taffeta, 
with a flap of black cloth edged with taffeta, over the left shoulder; and ‘all these 
gowned men,’ says the same author, ‘do wear marvellous little black caps of felt, with- 
out any brims at all, and very diminutive falling bands, no ruffs at all, which are so 
shallow, that I have seen many of them not above a little inch deep.’ The colour of 
their under-garments was also generally black, and consisted of ‘a slender doublet 
made close to the body, without much quilting or bombast, and long hose plain, with- 
out those new-fangled curiosities and ridiculous superfluities of panes, pleats, and other 
light toys used with us Englishmen. Yet,’ he continues, ‘they make it of costly stuff, 
well beseeming gentlemen and eminent persons of their places, as of the best taffetas 
and satins that Christendom doth yield, which are fairly garnished also with lace of the 
best sort.’ 

Gogzo 

Gopwin: Launcelot Gobbo, as the Jew’s servant, would not be a servant in livery, 
but would have a plain doublet, not unlike a Norfolk shirt in general outline, trunks, 
stockings, shoes, and a high cap with a narrow brim. As Bassanio’s servant, he would 
be in livery like Leonardo, or Balthazar and Stephano, servants to Portia, whose doub- 
lets would be covered with guards, or braids and buttons set very closely together. 

Old Gobbo would wear a kind of blouse with turn-over collar, cut down to the waist 
in front and tied together with two or three bows. The skirt would be open at the 
sides, belted round the waist with a leathern strap, and beneath it would appear the 
ends of loose breeches, bare knees, turn-over coarse stockings, and tied shoes. The 
neck and throat were bare. 


RICHARD GRANT WHITE (Jntroduction, p. 144): The Merchant of Venice has 
never been put on the stage in the costume of the time at which it was written; and 
gorgeous as that costume was, it is by no means certain that much would be gained 
by absolute correctness in this particular. Should the Duke and Magnificoes enter in 
their cumbrous and all-enveloping mantles, with their queer little bird’s nests of caps 
perched upon gray and bearded heads, the grave Antonio with a bonnet like an 
inverted porringer shadowing his melancholy countenance, Bassanio with one half a 
yard high, taller before than behind, and puffed out like a pillow with bombast, which 


392 APPENDIX 


also swelled his fantastically decorated breeches to an enormous size, Portia in the stiff 
and clumsy skirt and stomacher of a Venetian lady of rank of that day, formidable 
with bristling ruffs, and with her hair engineered into two little conical turrets of curls 
upon her forehead, one over each eye,—it is to be feared that the splendour and faith- 
fulness of the scene would be forgotten in its absurdity, and that the audience would 
explode in fits of uncontrollable laughter as the various personages came upon the 
stage. Any Italian costume, rich, beautiful, and sufficiently antique to remove the action 
out of the range of present probabilities, will meet the dramatic requirements of this 
play; but the orange-tawny bonnet, that mark of an outcast race, ought not to be 
missed from the brow of Shylock. 

Gopwin: We must remember that the officials in a Venetian Court kept their hats 
on in presence of the Doge, that the manners of the period were characterized by 
courtesy combined with a stately, dignified action, and that what we call stiffness of 
manner was then regarded as quite the correct thing. But modern actors and actresses 
rarely hold the mirror high enough to reflect the mien, deportment, or bearing of the 
men and women of a past age. The air or look of gentlemen and ladies during the 
great period of the Renaissance can be ascertained from the documents and the pic- 
tures of the time, and if an actor fails to reproduce it he is not fitted to play in the 
comedies of the great dramatist of that period. Correctness of costume, and scenery, 
and properties, and furniture is all very well, but if through it all we see 19th-century 
action, modern style, the mode of Robertsonian society, or the special graces and 
charms which are the delight of our own time, but which would have been looked 
upon as antics, or at the least as bad form, in the Courts of Philip or Elizabeth, then 
the picture must be discordant, and the dramatic representation woefully incomplete. 
[It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that there is one requisite which Godwin has 
overlooked, and that is, that the characters should all talk in Italian—Ep.] 


SCENERY 

EDWARD W. GopwiIn ( 7%e Architect, London, 27 March, 1875): The architectural 
scenery, divided between Venice and Belmont, may be said to consist at most of five 
Scenes, viz.: VENICE: 1, A street or public place. 2, The street before Shylock’s house. 
3, A court of justice. BELMONT: 4, A grand hall. 5, A garden. The short Third 
Scene of the Second Act contains nothing but what might just as well be said on the 
doorstep of Shylock’s house as inside a room; so that this may be included in the 
Scene numbered 2 in the above list. 

So, too, I see scarcely any reason why the talk between Portia and Nerissa in I, ii, 
or in III, iv, should not have happened in the grand hall or apartment where the cas- 
kets are placed. If there were choice flowering shrubs placed in this room, so that the 
lady and her maid might busy themselves about them while they are conversing, and 
if a corridor at the back of this hall led from some other part of the house into the 
garden, so that one might pass the hall of the caskets without necessarily entering it, 
there is nothing in the text inconsistent with these two Scenes being located in the 
same room as the more important Casket Scenes..... If we wish still further to 
abridge our stock of scenery, the Scenes Nos. 1 and 2 may be easily made one, and 
we shal] thus have brought the play into the compass of four set Scenes. .... It is 
essential first of all that the Scene-painter should bear well in mind that in 1 590 Ven- 
ice was neither a city of palaces nor a city of ruins, and that along her canals and 
streets two great styles of art, broadly speaking, prevailed, and a third was gradually 
usurping the place of both; these three styles were the Byzantine, the Gothic, and the 


COSTUME—SCENER Y 393 


Renaissance..... Photographs of the old houses of Venice are so common and so 
readily to be had, that the only difficulty left to a Scene-painter is the archzological 
one—that of recognizing any deductions or additions in detail that may have been 
made to any medizeval house sizce 1590. Moreover, the red brick of Venice is full 
of such charming colour, and the weather stains upon the stone and marble give such 
delicious tone to these materials, that one hesitates to write a word that would tend to 
dispel the vision. But yet, if we desire to realize the Venice of Shakespeare, we shall 
have to cover most of the brick with veneer of marble, either plain or in coloured dia- 
per, or with stucco decorated with painted diapers, and the few exceptions to this rule 
would be the very smallest and poorest houses and the earliest of the Byzantine works. 
--..- Another point for the Scene-painter to bear in mind is, that the streets and open 
places were usually paved with red brick arranged in simple patterns, and most com- 
monly in that known as herring-bone. A third very important thing to remember in 
connection with the Venice of the merchant Antonio is the universality of agplied col- 
our as distinguished from the parti-coloured comstruction adopted by the rest of Western 
Europe. The coloured marble pattern on the Ducal Palace was by no means a solitary 
example..... In houses of less pretension the stucco was painted in two or three sim- 
ple earth colours, with small diapers. [Godwin gives diagrams of the setting of these 
several Scenes, and also a list of Venetian buildings which might be used as guides in 
depicting the architecture. For the Trial Scene he selects the Sa/a dello Scrutinio in 
the Ducal Palace, and refers the Scene-painter to photographs; the setting of this Scene 
he pronounces] one of the most difficult problems among the scenic questions of Shake- 
speare’s plays. We have to maintain the dignity of the strict Court of Venice, to find 
room not only for the Doge and the Magnificoes, but for officials who might attend as 
senators, magistrates, doctors of law, &c.; we have to provide for a crowd of lawyers, 
—some of them young men,—so that Portia may not appear Zoo singular; we must not 
forget the question, ‘ Which is the merchant here and which the Jew?’ showing that 
both plaintiff and defendant were absorbed in the two opposing crowds of Christians 
and Israelites, and we must remember that, although the secret tribunal of the Council 
of Ten had its fearful power somewhat curtailed in 1582, its servants were still to be 
seen watching and listening wherever two or three were gathered together. Under 
these circumstances I again propose a diagonal set for this Scene [where the left side 
of the angle is taken up with the raised platform for the Doge and Magnificoes; in 
front of it the lawyers’ table, at which, in the very centre of the stage, stands Portia; 
to her left and in front of her stands Antonio; on her right, at the end of the lawyers’ 
table, in advance of Antonio, and the nearest character to the footlights, stands Shy- 
lock. Bassanio’s position is on the platform, among the nobles around the Doge.] 
The fittings should be of sumptuous carved wood almost covered with gilding..... 
The table for the lawyers might have a rich cover of crimson velvet reaching to the 
floor, but cut up at the angles and fastened by a number of long loops of gold lace or 
braid, as may be seen in pictures of the time. On the table we might see the folios of 
the statutes of Venice with their magnificent binding and gilded clasps; inkstands of 
bronze, chased and moulded of circular form and of about the size of the common lead 
office-inkstand of the present day; the portfolios of the lawyers and learned doctors, 
12 to 18 inches square, beautifully worked in leather. The deed or bond would be on 
a small strip of vellum, well creased and tearable at the creases; the scales were just 
the same as we have now. Shylock, being a merchant in jewels and precious metals, 
would have probably brought his own private scales; [He says that he has them ready, 
—Ep.] the knife was doubtless the glaive-shaped instrument then common; the letter 


594 APPENDIX 


was folded longwise, with the direction in one corner, tied with silk and sealed. [For 
the Casket Scene Godwin also recommends a diagonal set, with an arcade on both 
sides; on one side is an ascending staircase, and a corridor leading to the garden on 
the other, near the back a platform for the caskets; from the arches are hung curtains 
having large patterns in broad stripes, like those preserved in the Kensington Mu- 
seum.] In looking at the furniture of the time we shall find that the candles or lights 
were held in sconces of regoussé metal, brackets and lamps suspended from the ceil- 
ing. Chinese porcelain vases for flowers, some carved and gilded chests, a table and 
chair of the same description, cabinets, Limoges enamels, mirrors, majolica, lapis lazuli 
cups, crystals, Eastern rugs, a movable clock, Murano glasses, antique statues, and a 
parrot or some love-birds in a cage or on a stand may be brought in to help the Scene, 
Among the musical instruments we may have the violin, tambourine, harp, and theorho, 
all illustrated in Poliphilus, and some specimens to be seen at South Kensington... .. 
But whether a theatrical manager does or does not attend to these things; whether he 
wishes to do right, or whether, owing to profound ignorance respecting the manners, 
customs, and general surroundings of any past time which distinguishes the modern 
stage and its ‘ patrons,’ he thinks it a matter of very small moment, one thing he must 
do, and that is provide three caskets. Now for these things, the style which was the 
most costly and the most sumptuous in the lifetime of Lady Portia’s father was that 
introduced from Damascus, and which has always gone under the name of damas- 
cened work. Iron or steel caskets, most elaborately wrought with sharp mouldings 
and carvings, were covered on the plain surfaces with rich ornament pressed in of golc 
or silver, and in the examples before us the sides of the caskets might be panelled, and 
in each panel refoussé work of gold and silver for two of them, and cast work of lead 
for the third. .... Portia’s counterfeit would be probably enclosed in a flat, wide frame 
of the same style of art, or of walnut inlaid with rich patterns of ivory, mother-of-pearl, 
lapis lazuli, &c. 

The Fifth Act, and indeed the whole episode of the rings, might be very well omitted 
in modern stage representation. 

[In Collier’s English Dramatic Poetry (vol. iii, p. 170, second edition) there is a 
sentence which is to me profoundly true :—‘ We decidedly concur with Malone in the 
general conclusion, that painted moveable scenery was unknown on our early stage; 
and it is a fortunate circumstance for the poetry of our old plays, that it was so; the 
imagination of the auditor only was appealed to, and we owe to the absence of painted 
canvas many of the finest descriptive passages in Shakespeare, his contemporaries, and 
immediate followers. The introduction of scenery, we apprehend, gives the date to the 
commencement of the decline of our dramatic poetry. —~ED.} 


' 


SEWS IN ENGLAND 495 


JEWS IN ENGLAND 


From the fact that the Jews were expelled from England by Edward the First in 
1290, and were not permitted to return until 1650, under Cromwell, it has been inferred 
that Shakespeare could have acquired no personal knowledge of them unless he had 
obtained it abroad. That, however, he might have had opportunities of seeing them 
in London has been for a long time suspected; not only does Bacon refer to them 
familiarly, but in Coryat’s Crudities (vol. iii, p. 303, ed. 1776) we have one clear 
assurance that Jews in his day were born and bred in England. When in Constan- 
tinople, in 1608, Coryat narrates at length his visit to ‘the house of a certaine English 
‘Tew, called Amis, borne in Crootched Friers in London, who hath two sisters more 
‘of his owne Iewish Religion, commorant in Ga/a/a, who were likewise borne in the 
‘same place.’ 

Furthermore, that a certain Dr Lopez, a Jewish resident ot London, had been exe- 
cuted in 1594 for treasonable practices, was known from Stowe’s Annals, but the first 
to call attention to a possible connection between the notoriety of this execution and 
the appearance of The Merchant of Venice was, I think, FREDERICK HAWKINS, in an 
article on Shylock and other Stage Jews, which appeared in The Theatre, November, 
1879. As an investigation of Dr Lopez’s case did not come within the scope of his 
article, Mr Hawkins restricted himself to the simple statement that ‘it was amidst the 
excitement induced by the supposed iniquities of Dr Lopez... . that Zhe Merchant 
of Venice appeared,’ and briefly rehearsed the most prominent incidents connected with 
the trial. 

In the following February, 1880, S. L. LEE, in the Gentleman’s Magazine, set forth the 
result of an examination, apparently thorough, of the State Papers at the time of Lopez’s 
trial, in an article called Zhe Original Shylock, whereof a condensation is here given: 

S. L. LEE: On the evidence of contemporary records we can safely assert that Jews 
were residing in England throughout Shakespeare’s life-time, and that opportunities of 
more or less intimate intercourse with them were for many years open to him. 

We need not go very far to find two important pieces of evidence to show that at 
the beginning and at the end of the sixteenth century the presence of Jews in this 
country was acknowledged by the highest authorities. In the State Papers relating to 
the marriage of Katharine of Arragon with Arthur, Prince of Wales, we are told that 
Henry VII had a long interview with a Spanish envoy to discuss the presence of Jews 
in England. [The foot-notes wherein the author cites his authorities are not here 
reprinted, through lack of space.—Ep.] Similarly, in a very rare tract descriptive of 
English society, and evidently written within the first quarter of the seventeenth cen- 
tury, we are informed that ‘a store of Jewes we have in England; a few in Court; 
many i’ th’ Citty, more in the Countrey.’ These witnesses can leave little doubt of 
the fact that Jews were known here before their formal re-admission under Cromwell, 
and many disconnected notices in addition can be produced to prove it in fuller detail. 
Indeed, from a great mass of private correspondence we are enabled to trace the for- 
tunes of a Jewish family, named Lopez, living in England near the beginning of the 
second quarter of the sixteenth century. 

This discovery promises to throw light on contemporary stage history. It is cer- 
tainly significant that, rarely as the Jew has made his appearance on the English stage, 
he was the hero of no less than three plays [Gosson’s ‘ Jew showne at the Bull,’ Mar- 
lowe’s Barrabas, and Shakespeare’s Shylock], all written and produced within the same 
fifteen years, and that during these very years a Jewish doctor—Roderigo Lopez by 


396 APPENDIX 


name (the head of the family to which we have referred)—held a very prominent 
position in London and at Court, and shared with actors an intimacy with those noble- 
men who were the warmest patrons of the drama. It is, perhaps, a more remarkable 
circumstance that in the same year, and just before the earliest form of Zhe Merchant 
of Venice was first produced, this Jew became the victim of what bears all the appear 
ance of a Court intrigue, and through his trial and execution brought his family and 
faith into such notoriety that one theatrical manager at least found it to his advantage 
to utilize it. In a more minute examination of this man’s public and private relations 
than has yet been attempted, we intend to inquire if any grounds exist on which we 
may (within the limits of historical probability) establish a connection between his 
career and the creation and development of Shakespeare’s. Jew. 

[The early history of Lopez is hidden in obscurity. All authorities, however, are 
agreed that he was descended from a Spanish Jewish family. There are records of 
two of that name, one in 1515, and the other in 1550, and both doctors; the latter was 
known to be a ‘Jewe borne.’ The supposition is reasonable that they were of the 
same family; it is not unlikely, then, that Roderigo was born in England;] and as in 
the year 1594 he is represented in a contemporary engraving and in written documents 
as being well advanced in years, we may place the date of his birth between 1520 and 
1530. He probably obtained his medical education (as was the usual custom) at some 
Southern university. But he returned to England comparatively early in life, and 
joined the recently formed College of Physicians. He rapidly gained reputation in 
‘his faculty.’ In 1569 he was selected to read the Anatomy Lectures of the year 
and in 1575 his name appears almost at the head of the list of the chief doctors of 
London, quoted by Stowe. Some years before he had married a Jewess named Sarah 
who apparently had wealthy relations in Antwerp, and he soon became the father of a 
large family of daughters. 

Lopez, who numbered among his patients the chief statesmen of the day, was for a 
long time attached to the household of Lord Leicester. With the Earl he lived on 
terms of great intimacy, ‘being withal a man very observant and officious, and of a 
pleasing and appliable behaviour.’ But the connection is noticeable on other grounds. 
While Lopez was attending him professionally, Leicester frequently summoned to Ken-_ 
ilworth a number of actors, many of whom came from the neighbouring town of Strat- 
ford, and he subsequently incorporated the chief of them by special license as ‘the Earl 
of Leicester’s company of servants and players.’ [To this company, under its various 
titles, Shakespeare belonged throughout his career.—Ep.] At the head of them stood 
James Burbadge, a fellow-townsman of Shakespeare, whose son Richard became the 
dramatist’s most intimate friend. The invention of the kind of beard that has been 
for centuries a stage-tradition with Shylock is attributed to him, and in this detail he 
seems to have imitated, to judge from a portrait of the day, the Jewish physician, to 
whom his father doubtless had previously introduced him on one of the occasions when 
all three were enjoying Leicester’s hospitality. 

In 1586, Lopez became sworn physician to Queen Elizabeth. The promotion gave 
him new prominence in political society. 

In 1590, Lopez obtained an additional claim to public attention. A foreigner, flee 
ing from the wrath of King Philip of Spain, sought protection at the Court of St James. 
An illegitimate connection of the royal family of Portugal, he had, on the death of the 
king in 1580, laid claim to the throne, and gathered round him a Jarge body of adhe- 
rents... The Duke of Alva was despatched to put an end to him, but the pretender 
was fortunate enough to escape, about 1588, to England, 


JEWS IN ENGLAND.-LEE 397 


In London he was received with wild enthusiasm. The Spanish fever was at its 
height, and so long as it lasted the refugee was sure to be the popular idol. His real 
name was the ordinary Portuguese one of Antonio Perez, but he was known popularly 
as King Antonio, and references to him as to a royal personage abound in contempo 
rary records..... Antonio, in spite of his extravagant pretensions, was a person of 
singularly small intelligence. Portuguese was the only language he could speak or in 
which he could correspond. An interpreter was therefore required before he could 
maintain any regular intercourse with his new friends. Among the courtiers Lopez 
was famed for a more or less intimate knowledge of five European languages, and he 
was accordingly invited by the Queen and Essex to come to Antonio’s assistance. The 
doctor complied with the invitation, and from that date he was closely associated in the 
public mind with their hero Antonio. .... At first all went well, .... but before two 
years had passed the intercourse [between Essex and Lopez and Antonio] showed 
itself to be wanting in harmony. Lopez was old, and his health had begun to fail. 
He grew irritable, and endured with impatience Essex’s impetuosity. His enthusiasm 
for Antonio was cooling, whose conduct was characterized by intense arrogance and 
by an incapacity to show gratitude. Sharp words, therefore, occasionally passed be- 
tween Antonio and his chief adviser. The young courtiers took the part of their for- 
eign protégé, and seized the opportunity of taunting the doctor with his religious pro- 
fession, the number of his daughters, and his anxiety to see them matched to wealthy 
suitors. [In 1592, Essex endeavoured to make Lopez a political tool in a Spanish 
intrigue, and Lopez revealed the plan to the Queen, who told Essex that she regarded 
it ‘as a mean expedient.’] Essex, angry at this betrayal of his confidence, retaliated 
by advising Antonio to treat with less forbearance the doctor’s uncertain temper, and to 
complain of his irritability to the Queen. [ Lopez, not to be outdone, divulged to Anto- 
nio some professional secrets ‘which did disparage to Essex’s honour;’ this led to an 
open rupture, and Antonio sided with the Earl.] This gross act of ingratitude so 
enraged Lopez that it is said he swore an oath that he would have his revenge. 

With Antonio’s followers Lopez had always been on very good terms. Some were 
of Jewish descent, and had often stayed with him at his house in London. Their 
master’s temperament had proved as little agreeable to them as to the doctor. [Of this 
discontent the Spanish emissaries of King Philip took advantage, and secretly offered 
large rewards to have Antonio assassinated. Lopez was drawn into the plot, and 
50,000 crowns were guaranteed to him if he would undertake to be the instrument, 
whereupon Lopez incautiously declared that ‘Don Antonio should die the first illness 
that befel him.’] But another plot was hatching of still greater importance. If Don 
Antonio, the impostor, was Philip’s enemy, much more so was Queen Elizabeth, the 
INS aa oe As soon as Lopez had been inveigled into the minor plot, the conspirators 
revealed to him the greater..... Lopez declared that he had received too many favours 
from Elizabeth to allow him to listen to the villanous proposal, and returned no further 
answer. But aware that any disclosure on his part would balk him of his revenge on 
Antonio, he made no open communication of the conspiracy, and contented himself 
with letting drop vague hints of the Spanish king’s designs in Elizabeth’s presence, 
who so little understood them that she charged Lopez with breach of courtesy in 
speaking of such matters before her. [A letter addressed to one of the conspirators 
fell into the hands of Essex, and as the offender was staying at the time with Lopez, 
suspicion fell on the doctor ;« whereupon] Essex obtained permission to examine his 
papers, but with so unsatisfactory a result that Elizabeth told Essex that ‘he was a 
rash and ‘emerarious youth to enter into a matter against the poor man which he could 


308 APPENDIX 


not prove.’ But the rumour ran among the courtiers that ‘like a Jew he had burned 
all his papers a little before.’ 

The rebuff Essex had received roused him to more vigorous exertions. Those 
already accused were further examined, and they were threatened with the ‘manacles’ 
unless they returned the answers their questioners were seeking to obtain. So plausible 
a story was thus concocted that Lopez was implicated beyond all chance of extrication, 
and Essex declared to his friends that he could make the whole business ‘as clear as 
the noon-day.’ Little more than a week, therefore, after Lopez’s first accusation, Lon- 
don was startled by the news that ‘old Dr Lopez is in the Tower for intelligence with 
the King of Spain.’ ‘ 

Four weeks later the trial took place. In the interval, Lopez, to avoid the rack, 
had, after many vehement denials, confessed that he was aware of the twofold plot. 
Shortly after, Essex obtained a commission from the Queen to preside at the trial, in 
conjunction with the Lord Mayor and others of Her Majesty’s advisers. The case for 
the Crown was confided to Solicitor-general Coke, and the Guildhall was prepared for 
the scene of the proceedings. 

From the first, feeling in the City rose high against the Doctor. He was, the report 
went, of a religious profession that fitted him for any ‘execrable undertaking.’ The 
preservation of the two lives that had seemed so nearly threatened was attributed to a 
miraculous intervention of Providence. Antonio received every mark of sympathy 
from the citizens. The law-officers pressed to the full the advantage that these senti- 
ments gave them. Coke laid especial stress on the fact that Lopez was a Jew. This 
‘perjured and murdering traitor and Jewish doctor,’ he said, ‘is worse than Judas him- 
self.’ His judges spoke of him as ‘that vile Jew;’ and ‘wily and covetous,’ ‘mer- 
cenary’ and ‘corrupt,’ were the mildest of the epithets that assailed him. 

Lopez saw the futility of a long defence. He merely asserted that he had much 
belied himself in his confession ‘to save himself from racking.’ But the statement 
had no weight with his judges: ‘a most substantial jury found him guilty of all the 
treasons, and judgment was passed with the applause of the world.’ Even Sir Robert 
Cecil, Lopez’s former friend, acquiesced in the justice of the verdict. 

But the result of the trial does not seem to have been universally satisfactory. The 
Queen refused to sign the death-warrant, and the judges who had been excluded from 
the case did not advise in the matter. For more than seven weeks after the trial 
Lopez remained in the Tower, and it was not till one of Essex’s partisans had been 
raised to the Bench as Lord Chief Justice that the Queen was induced to proceed with 
the execution of the sentence. On his representation that ‘much scandal and dis- 
honour would ensue’ from further delay, she signed the necessary orders for the hang- 
ing of Lopez at Tyburn. 

At the gallows the Doctor made an endeavour to address the vast mob that had col- 
lected to see him die, but his first utterances were interrupted with the cruelest jeers. 
Exasperated by the treatment he received from the unruly crowd, he contented him- 
self with crying out, before the hangman adjusted the noose, that he loved the Queen 
and Antonio as well as he loved Jesus Christ. The irony called forth loud peals of 
laughter, and as the bolt fell the people shouted, ‘He is a Jew!’ The excitement that 
his death created was not allowed by the Government to subside immediately. No 
less than five official accounts of Lopez’s treason, with many semi-official pamphlets, 
were prepared for publication, to keep the facts of this important case well before the 
public mind. 


No one living in London at the time could have been ignorant of Lopez’s history and 


FEWS IN ENGLAND—LEE 399 


fate, and it cannot surprise us that the caterers for public amusements gave expression 


to the popular sentiments respecting him. ... . The entries in Henslowe’s diary inform 
us that Zhe Jew formed the subject of no less than twenty representations between 
May, 1594, and the end of that year... .. Barrabas, in Marlowe’s Jew of Malta, ren- 


ders with great faithfulness the bitter hate that the Hebrew had for the Christian, but 
even a greater fidelity to Jewish customs is expressed in another characteristic of 
Barrabas. He is fond of quoting foreign languages. His French is passable, but the 
jargon he more frequently indulges is a mixture of Spanish and Italian... .. To whom 
Marlowe was specially indebted for this knowledge cannot be determined, but, as he 
never travelled, we may, with great probability, attribute it to some Jew residing in Lon- 
don at the time, perhaps to some member of Lopez’s family, if not to Lopez himself. 

But however that may have been, there can be no doubt at all that circumstances 
connected with the Jewish doctor’s career reached the ears of Shakespeare. Through- 
out the year of the execution the dramatist was living in London, and opportunities 
were open to him of hearing fuller details than those in the popular reports. He was 
on terms of considerable intimacy with Essex’s friend Southampton, and it is not im 
possible that he formed some acquaintance at the same time with the Earl himself. In 
their company he may not unfrequently have met the Doctor. 

[In conclusion, Lee refers to certain important points connected with the story of 
Lopez and The Merchant of Venice which he finds: first, in the name Antonio; sec- 
ondly, in the date of Henslowe’s ‘ Venesyon comodey,’ which Lee supposes to be the 
first rough draft, whose existence was surmised by Hunter, brought out hastily in 
August, within three months of Lopez’s execution in May. Thirdly, ‘in their devo- 
tion to their family,’ says Lee, ‘the two Jews closely resemble each other. Neither 
Lopez nor Shylock, in good fortune or in bad, fail to exemplify the Jewish virtue of 
domesticity.’ Perhaps the less emphasis that is laid on this point in Shylock’s case the 
better, and for alluding to it at all Mr Lee is responsible, not the Editor. Fourthly 
and lastly, the reference to the rack, which is noteworthy; Gratiano’s reference to the 
twelve jurymen to send Shylock to the gallows; and in the allusion also by Gratiano to 
the wolf who was hanged for human slaughter, to which attention was called ad oc.] 

That we have succeeded in discovering the actual original of Shylock we are.not pre- 
sumptuous enough to imagine. Our knowledge of Lopez is only fragmentary, and it 
is quite possible that had we the means of learning their characters and lives, Lopez’s 
cousin, his Jewish friend Geronimo, and any of the ‘other divers kinsmen here,’ to 
whom Coke referred at the Doctor’s trial, would present as striking a likeness to Shy- 
lock as Roderigo himself. What we may fairly claim to have proved is that Jews were 
residing in England in Shakespeare’s day, and that the Jew of Venice bears evidence 
of having had a contemporary prototype. We have placed, at least beyond all reason- 
able doubt, the fact that one Jew of England came into considerable prominence while 
the dramatist was growing up to manhood, and that he was treated with great indignity 
because of his religious belief towards the end of his remarkable career, which closed 
only a few months before The Merchant of Venice appeared ; and we have shown what 
grounds there are for believing that Shakespeare and Burbadge came into contact with 


this famous Jew. 


400 APPENDIX 


A DRAMATIC REVERIE 


IN The Monthly Chronicle, November, 1838, there is to be found an article called Shy- 
lock, A Critical Fancy. This ‘Fancy’ had been suggested, so said the writer, by an article 
which had appeared some time previously in another magazine, entitled ‘A Lawyer’s 
Criticism on Shakespeare,’ in which the assertion was made, half in jest, half in earn- 
est, that the distress in Zhe Merchant of Venice ‘turns chiefly upon an embarrassment 
with which no /awyer can seriously sympathize,’ and that Anthonio’s difficulties ‘ arise 
entirely from his gross oversight in not effecting an insurance upon his various argosies. 
He should have opened a set of policies at once upon the Rialto, where marine assur- 
ance was perfectly well understood.’ The writer in 7he Monthly Chronicle then goes 
on to fancy what Shylock might have said had he been better prepared with physio- 
logical knowledge to meet the quibble in regard to flesh without blood, &c. 

The writer, anonymous in the Chronicle, now turns out to have been the late RICH- 
ARD HeEncist Horne. The ‘Fancy,’ much amplified, has been kindly lent to the 
Editor, in the original MS, by the present owner, Mr Harry Epwarobs, of New York. 
The additions to Shakespeare’s Scene are in blank verse, and show great vigour. It 
appears that this ‘Fancy’ was submitted to a public test in 1850, at Sadler’s Wells, 
when that theatre was under the management of Mr Phelps. On the 16th of Maya 
performance was given in ‘aid of the Grand Exhibition of 1851,’ and a portion of 
Henry VIII was acted; it was followed by ‘Shylock, A Scene from 7he Merchant 
of Venice, wherein the part of Shylock was undertaken by Mr R. H. Horne himself, 
and Portia by Miss Glynn. 

On the first page of the MS is the following note by the author: 

‘Tt is not for a moment intended, in the present alteration of a Scene from Zhe Mer- 
‘ chant of Venice, either to follow the example of those who so grossly mangled the 
‘ Acting Copies of Shakespeare some years ago, nor to suggest that presumption to 
‘others. It is simply attempted to embody in action, on @ special occasion, a dramatic 
‘speculation as to what might have passed through Sfy/ock’s mind on Kstening to cer- 
‘tain parts of Portia’s line of defence, supposing the same trial (granting all other 
‘ circumstances) had occurred in Venice in the present century. : 

‘The idea of this Scene was first put forth in an early number of a monthly journal 
‘ conducted some years ago by Sir E. Bulwer Lytton and Sir David Brewster.’ 

Then follows: SHYLOCK IN 1850. A Dramatic Reverie. By R.H. Horne. Add 
IV. Scene—The Court of Justice. [The Fourth Act opens as usual, and continues 
as acted down to the following speech, line 319:] 

Portia. ‘arry a little—there zs something else. 
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood. 
The words expressly are ‘a pound of flesh.’ 
Take then thy bond !—take thou thy pound of flesh; 
But, in the cutting it, if thou dost shed 
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods 
Are by the laws of Venice confiscate 
Unto the State of Venice. 

Shylock. Peace, false Judge! 
There’s no such thing as flesh devoid of blood! 
Flesh is made up of vessels, and they’re filled 
With blood alone,—nay, blood is liquid flesh. 
Oh, thou false Judge! Most treacherous, wicked Judge! 


A DRAMATIC REVERIE 4oL 


3end to your butcher for your daily meal— 
What will you say if he do sell a pound 
Of skin and empty veins? Till you can show me 
Flesh that is bloodless, be’t what kind it may, 
My claim is good; one flesh alone exists, 
And that hath blood, for each includes the other. 
Doth all your wisdom in a quibble end 
Like bubbles, blown by Law? 
[The Duke and the Magnificoes look confounded. 
Portia stands troubled and perpiexed. 
Portia. Yet——fear the Law! 
Shylock. This bond holds blood !—out on your cullender wits ! 
If Laws be folly, all are fooled by them. 
I am your fool in suffering these delays. 
But Ae is mine, by wisdom and by law. 
A Jew may be the dog 
That’s hated by a Christian’s charity, 
But not the dupe of words / 
Bassanio. O Jew, forbear! 
Shylock. Forbear!—I came here to be paid a debt. 
Bassanio. Lash not thyself to fury, like a beast! 
Shylock. "Tis ye who have lashed me thus: I’ll have my bond! 
Trifle no more—there is no power in Venice 
To alter a decree established ; 
Said not the Doctor so ?—then was he wise, 
But afterwards he spake as doth a fool; 
Nay worse; he damned his soul with lies, to save 
That Christian beast who spat upon my beard. 
[The Court ts thrown into utter perplexity, and remain silent. 
Portia. [After a troubled pause] The Jew shall have all justice; 
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh ; 
Yet, Shylock, see thou cut not less nor more 
But just a pound of flesh; if thou tak’st more 
Or less, than just a pound, be it so much 
As makes it light or heavy in the substance 
Or the division of the twentieth part 
Of one poor scruple ;—nay, if the scale do turn 
But in the estimation of a hair, 
Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate. 
Shylock. [With deadly bitterness] VM not take more; I'll take it by degress. 
Therefore not more,—since thou’d’st be so exact ; 
Be not thou hasty, treacherous young Judge; 
I am not bound to take it all, at once. 
Bassanio. O villanous Jew! thou’d’st torture him to death! 
Shylock (calmly] If in some days after the half be paid, 
He chance to die—that is no fault of mine; 
My bond doth say a pound; but doth not say 
That I must take the whole immediately. 
We're not compell’d to ruin thus our debtors. 


402 


APPENDIX 


I'll take it by instalments—would you jeer me? 
Old Shylock hath his jest! 
Portia, But since the whole 
Is offered and not taken, thou canst have 
No claim hereafter. 
Shylock. 1 do claim all, now. 
Portia. ‘Take then the pound of flesh and blood, fierce Jew! 
But see you spill not aught that is mot yours. 
Shylock. Why must I have this care—look ye to that; 
It is the very nature of all flesh 
When cut to bleed; and here my bond declares 
That—from the Christian breast of one who scoffs 
At me, my tribe, and ever used to mock 
My prosperous dealings, I shall forthwith cut 
A pound in forfeit! No more words,—prepare ! 
Portia. "His wasted blood shall yet bring ruin on thee. 
Shylock. Let ruin come !—so I can once behold 
That streaming breast, I care not if his blood 
Swell to a second Galilean Sea, 
And with its humming and abhorrent surge 
Sweep away Venice! Now! now! stand aside! 
Duke [rising]. Restrain him !—sure some devil speaks in him! [AJ rise. 
Keep back the bearded vulture! 
Portia [as by a sudden thought]. The ruin thou defiest shall fall upon thee! 
Thy vengeance be thy sentence, e’en by the bond 
Which thou so fiercely urgest! By its terms, 
Purport, and stratagem, thou seek’st the life 
Of a Venetian citizen; for which crime 
The Law unwinds itself from that man’s neck 
And with a terrible and just recoil 
Springs back on thee! Shylock! one half thy goods 
Are forfeit to Antonio! The other half 
Comes to the privy coffer of the State, 
And thine offending life lies in the mercy 
Of the Duke only. 
Gratiano, O upright Judge! mark, Jew !—O learned Judge! 
Shylock. Is that the law? 
Portia. Thyself shalt see the act. 
For, as thou urgest justice be assured 
Thou shalt have justice more than thou desirest. 
[Shylock drops the scales and knife. 
Gratiano. O learned Judge! Mark, Jew;—a learned Judge! 
Shylock. J take his offer then,—pay the bond thrice 
And let the Christian go. 
Bassanio, Here is the money. 
Portia. Soft. 
fhe Jew shall have all justice, —soft !—no haste. 
Shylock, Give me my principal, and let me go. 
Bassanio, Ihave it ready for thee; here it is. 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE 403 


Portia. He hath refused it in the open Court; 
He shall have merely justice. 
Shylock [drawing out his bond] Shall I not barely have my principal ? 
Portia. ‘Thou shalt have nothing. 
Shylock. Why then the devil give him good of it. 
Pll stay no longer question. 
Portia. ‘Tarry, Jew. 
The law hath yet another hold on you. 
Duke. ‘That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit, 
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it; 
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio’s; 
The other half comes to the general state, 
Which humbleness may drive into a fine. 
Portia. Ay, for the State; not for Antonio, 
Shylock [dropping his bond]. Nay take my life and all, pardon not that, 
You take my house, when you do take the prop 
That doth sustain my house; you take my life 
When you do take the means whereby I live. 
[The rest of the Scene adheres to the original text, except that the Stage-direction 
reads, Exit Shylock wildly]. 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE 


It is only within recent times that special attention has been bestowed upon the 
Legal Principles involved in the Trial Scene, or in Shakespeare’s dealing with the 
forms of Legal Procedure. As long as Shylock was held to be a wolfish, bloody, 
inexorable dog, it made but little difference how he was defeated or his victim saved ; 
_a Jew had no rights which a Christian was bound to respect. Even charming, gen- 
tle Mrs Inchbald believed that Shakespeare’s purpose in writing the play was to 
‘hold up the Jew to detestation,’ and such undoubtedly was the general impression 
created by the ‘snarling malignity’ of Macklin’s Shylock. But when Edmund Kean, 
in 1814, revealed a Jew almost more sinned against than sinning, and one who simply 
bettered the instruction of Christian example, the ‘pit rose at him’ and a revulsion of 
feeling began. From that hour a reaction in favour of Shylock set in, until now it is 
generally agreed that up to a certain point he was the victim of a downright quibble, 
and that even on the third point, that of conspiracy, his conviction was, perhaps, of 
doubtful propriety. 

Chronologically, the earliest voice, as far as I know, which was raised in defence of 
Shylock and in denunciation of the illegality of his defeat is that of an Anonymous 
Contributor to a volume of Zssays by a Society of Gentlemen at Exeter, printed in 
1792. The Essay is called ‘An Apology for the Character and Conduct of Shylock,’ 
and is signed ‘T. 0.’ The Essayist’s plea for Shylock is, that if his character is cruel 
it was made so by ill-treatment; that the derision with which his daughter’s flight was 
treated was calculated to embitter the sweetest nature, let alone that of an outcast of 
society; that his Mosaic law authorized him to exact ‘an eye for an eye, a tooth for a 
tooth ;’ that money-making was the sole occupation the laws suffered him to follow; 
that he knowingly violated no divine or human law; and, finally, the Essayist depicts 
an imaginary performance of the play by Hebrews in a future so far ahead that Shake- 


404 APPENDIX 


speare is but a traditionary ‘old British bard,’ and reproduces a criticism of the acting 
which appeared the following morning in the columns of The Jebusite Morning Post, ot 
The Jerusalem Daily Advertiser. ‘The criticism begins thus: ‘On the fourth day of 
the first week in the month of Nisan was represented the tragedy of “Shylock,” writ- 
ten by Nathan Ben Boaz, The plot is borrowed from an old British bard, who flour- 
ished about the beginning of the 17th century of their zra; and who composed it 
under the influence of the spirit of inveterate malice against our nation for which, in 
that and many preceding ages, the Europeans were notorious. .... Shylock, the hero 
of the drama, is represented as an exemplary follower of the law, and as having 
acquired a considerable property by adhering to that precept, which enjoins lending to 
the stranger upon usury. The critic then proceeds to relate the various indignities 
which are heaped on Shylock, under which he ‘ would have sunk but for the conso- 
lation he received from Antonio’s having forfeited his bond.’ ... . ‘Shylock expects to 
show the world an example that a son of Abraham is not to be wronged and trampled 
on with impunity. His firmness and patriotic sentiments on the Trial deserve the high- 
est commendation. His resentment though severe is just ; he had endured irreparable 
wrongs, and had a right to expect the most exemplary vengeance for their atonement. 
The law, however, on which he founds his claim, is evaded by shameful sophistry. 
Shylock is permitted to take the pound of flesh, but is warned at the same time that 
if he sheds “one drop of Christian blood his lands and goods are confiscate to the 
State, by the laws of Venice.” But how can we suppose its legislators could have 
foreseen and obviated the fulfilling of so singular a contract as that between the Mer- 
chant and Shylock? that, in their great wisdom, they could enact a decree by which a 
man is allowed to take his debtor’s forfeiture, yet is punished for not performing an 
impossibility in taking it? Can we imagine that Shylock’s notary could have drawn, 
or himself have signed, such a bond that fazrly admitted such an interpretation or 
incurred such a penalty? Yet on this absurd, perverted construction of a plain con- 
tract is Shylock condemned. 

‘ Another quibble of equal weight is urged against him; that having a right to cut 
from the Merchant’s breast a pound of flesh, and a pound ov/y, if he took more or less 
than that,—even the minutest particle,—he should suffer death; as if the spirit of the 
bond did not clearly imply that he was limited to take no more than a pound! Shy- 
lock is found guilty of death by this curious exposition of the Venetian laws.’.... 
The condition that he become a Christian he complies with, ‘but at the inhuman 
proposal not an eye was to be seen unmoistened with tears in our theatre.’....¢On 
examining Shakespeare’s numerous commentators, and other records of the times, it 
appears that no censure was ever cast, no unfavourable sentiment entertained of the 
unjust judge, the injurious merchant, the undutiful daughter, and prodigal lover... .. 
What an idea does this give of the English nation when such sentiments could be 
applauded! What a striking instance does it afford of the lax state of morality!’ .... 
‘The sudden yet natural death of the benevolent Merchant is well imagined. The 
turbulent frenzy of the judge, brought on by the recollection of his corrupt decision, 
and the tender melancholy of the daughter, who bewails her misconduct too late, are 
equally affecting, and demonstrate the author’s perfect knowledge of the human heart. 
The moral sense may be a while suppressed or perverted, but conscience, some time or 
other, will resume its dominion and severely punish the violators of her laws.’ 

Twenty-five years later, HAzLITT spoke a good word for Shylock, but so far from 
seeing ‘hat he was the victim of a legal quibble, Hazlitt expressly referred to the 

sound naxims of ‘urisprudence’ which characterized the trial. 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE 405 


Mrs JAMESON, with a vision clearer than Hazlitt’s, speaks of Portia’s eagerness to 
rave Antonio by any appeal rather than by ‘the legal quibble with which her cousin 
Bellario has armed her.’ 

CAMPBELL, in 1838, was the first among Editors to maintain openly that Shylock 
was an ill-used man, with nothing unnatural in his character, and that he was over- 
come ‘only by a legal quibble.’ 

In the same year, 1838, C. A. BRowN espoused Shylock’s cause, and discerned in 
the play a plea for toleration not alone of the Jews, but of all others; yet he failed 
to notice any legal ill-treatment of Shylock. 

CHARLES KNIGHT, too, speaks bravely for him, but makes no allusion to the quibble 
other than in quoting, without comment, the paragraph by Mrs Jameson, wherein she 
refers to it. 

Horne’s Dramatic Reverie, which immediately precedes the present topic, should 
not be overlooked in tracing the developement of the belief that Shylock was the vic- 
tim of illegality, although in that striking modification of the Trial Scene, Shylock 
appeals not so much to a law of the land as to a law of language, and it is there 
tacitly conceded that on the last point, that of indirectly conspiring against the life ot 
a Venetian citizen, he was justly condemned. ‘ 

In chronological order, HAYNES (from whose Lectures, under the title of Outlines 
of Equity, an extract is given at IV, i, 319) must here follow; the exact date I can- 
not give. The American Reprint of his volume, published in 1858, affords no clue 
whatsoever as to the date of the English original, but, for the present purpose, 1852- 
58 is near enough. Lord Cranworth is mentioned by Haynes as the Chancellor of the 
day, and his tenure of the great seal was during these years. 

In order to account for the knowledge of law as shown in these plays, Malone, nigh 
a hundred years ago, conjectured (ed. 1790, i, 104) that Shakespeare, on leaving the 
Grammar School, had been placed in the office of some country attorney or the sene- 
schal of some manor court. In the process of time this suggestion became more and 
more widely accepted, until, in 1859, at the request of Collier, LoRD CAMPBELL exam- 
ined the plays throughout for the purpose of arriving at some decision, and his fina. 
admission is that such a view as conjectured by Malone may be right, and that while 
there is weighty evidence for it, there is nothing conclusive against it. Although Lord 
Campbell professes to have read all the plays with some care for the purpose of detect- 
ing the legal references in them, and has made several notes on 7he Merchant of Ven- 
7ce, the legal principles involved in the Trial Scene do not seem to have attracted his 
serious attention; he says explicitly that ‘the trial is duly conducted according to the 
strict forms of legal procedure.’ 

In 1872, there appeared in The Albany Law Journal the Report of a decision of 
the Supreme Court of New York, on Appeal, of the case of Shylock v. Antonio. ‘The 
bare statement of the title indicates plainly enough that this ‘ Report’ is a travestie, and 
as such, pure and simple, it cannot yield sufficient interest to justify its reproduction 
here. But it is more than a mere travestie : the statement of the points of law involved 
is lucid and the law controlling them is well taken; it ought not, therefore, to be over- 
looked because of the form in which its wisdom is presented. Anthonio could pun in 
his dying farewell to Bassanio, and he has read his Shakespeare to little purpose who 
does not know that in the channels fretted in the cheeks the tears of sorrow and of 
mirth find alternate course. Moreover, this ‘ Report’ is of importance historically, inas- 
much as it antic’pates some of the points which were afterwards brought forward by 
one of the most =minent of German Professors of Jurisprudence in a pamphlet which 


406 APPENDIX 


has had, and is still having, wide-spread popularity throughout Europe, and in which 
the treatment of Shylock in the Trial Scene is used as an illustration. 

In the following abstract of the ‘Report’ I have omitted many local and temporary 
allusions; the date of the number of the Law Journal in which it appeared is the 
Thirtieth of March, p. 193; and it may be added that in a later number of this same 
Journal (27 December, 1879, p. 502) the author is stated to be EseK COWEN, Esq. 
of Troy, New York. 

The case is set forth with due formality, and the opinion by the Court is thus given: 

In order fully to understand this case, it will be necessary to refer to certain facts, 
not very material, perhaps, to its final determination. The defendant, Antonio, is an 
Italian merchant, doing an extensive business in the city of New York as an importer. 
Prior to the transactions which resulted in this suit he had been remarkably successful, 
had made much money, which he spent in a princely manner, and stood well in soci- 
ety, in spite of a tendency to mental unsoundness, We say ‘mental unsoundness,’ 
though there is no direct proof on the subject, because it seems to be conceded that he 
lent money to his friends without interest, which would, in most business circles, be 
considered evidence to warrant a commission de /unatico. He had a sporting friend 
of the same nationality, by the name of Bassanio, who, having been completely 
‘cleaned out’ (as the vile phrase is) by a season at Saratoga, conceived a novel 
method of restoring his fortunes. It seems that an eccentric resident of Venango 
county, Pennsylvania, having made a large fortune by speculations in oil lands, left 
the whole of it to his daughter on condition that she should take for her husband the 
suitor who should prove most proficient in the ancient and noble game of ‘ Thimble 
Rig.’ As Bassanio had been accustomed to witness this game at horse-races, he felt 
confident that if he had an opportunity he could tell in which box the ‘little joker’ 
was. But he had no money to take him to Venango county, and no acquaintance 
with railroad officials sufficiently intimate to justify him in asking for a pass. In this 
extremity he applied to the defendant fora loan. Antonio would gladly have com- 
plied, but just before he had invested every dollar he could raise in contraband goods 
and vessels for running the Southern blockade..... The two friends then applied to 
the plaintiff, a gentleman of the Hebrew persuasion, for a loan of 3000 dollars upon 
Antonio’s credit. For several reasons the plaintiff was little inclined to look upon the 
defendant with favour. Besides, his unjustifiable habit of lending money without 
interest, which, as Shylock very properly observed, had a tendency to ‘lower the rate 
of usance,’ Antonio chewed tobacco freely, and expectorated with great carelessness 
upon all objects in his vicinity. Indeed, it appeared in evidence, without objection, 
that the defendant had frequently spit upon Shylock’s ‘ Jewish gaberdine.’ The Court 
is not exactly certain as to what a ‘gaberdine’ is; no definition was attempted by either 
counsel upon the argument; but we may safely assume that it is a garment which is not 
improved by contact with tobacco, and such incidents will go far to excuse, if they do 
not justify, the somewhat vindictive manner in which the suit was prosecuted. The 
plaintiff, however, at the time of this application, concealed his feelings and told Anto- 
nio that he would charge him no interest, but would merely take a bond conditioned 
to the effect that, if the loan was not paid when due, the borrower would forfeit a 
pound of flesh nearest his heart. Bassanio pretended to demur, but Antonio was con- 
fident that the loan would be paid when due; and this somewhat singular business 
transaction was concluded as above stated. Bassanio went to Venango county, 
gaessed the right box, and married the heiress. Antonio’s fate was far different... . . 
His ships were sunk by the blockading-squadron. And when Bassanio returned fiom 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE 407 


his wedding-tour, he found all Antonio’s effects sold out by the sheriff and numerous 
executions returned unsatisfied. He found, too, that the plaintiff had already com- 
menced this action to enforce the forfeiture on the bond. As soon as the cause was at 
issue, ,... all parties agreed to accept as referee a young and unknown lawyer by the 
name of Balthazar, which arrangement was the more singular, as he does not appear 
to have been a relative of any of the judges. 

And just here arises one of the most curious questions of the case. It is asserted 
by the counsel for the appellant that this referee was in fact a woman, that her maiden 
name was Mary Jane Portia, and that she was the same oleaginous heiress whom Bas 
sanio had just married; and the decision itself furnishes the strongest internal evidence 
that it is the work of one of that pernicious sex which ‘brought sin into the world and 
all our woe,’ and has been bringing sinners into the world ever since with a similar 
disregard of consequences. 

In this case the facts were conceded by all the parties, and after a tender, in open 
court, of three times the amount of the debt had been made and refused, this referee 
of uncertain sex proceeded to pronounce judgement. His (or her) conclusions of law 
were as follows : 

1st. That the bond was valid, and that the plaintiff was entitled to his pound of 
flesh, 

2d. That he was entitled to exactly a pound of flesh, neither more nor less, and not 
to a drop of blood; and that if he drew blood, or took a grain of flesh more or less 
than a pound, he would be guilty of murder. 

3d. That under an ancient and obsolete ordinance of the city of New York, passed 
in the time of Peter Stuyvesant, the plaintiff was liable to capital punishment ‘for 
practising against the life of a Christian.’ 

4th. That he could only escape this punishment by giving half his fortune to his 
daughter (who had just married a Christian) and by turning Christian himself. 

On hearing the latter portion of this decision, the plaintiff felt a considerable abate- 
ment of his enthusiasm and inquired in a tremulous tone, ‘if that was the law.’ On 
being assured that it was, he offered to take the amount of his bond and discontinue 
without costs; to which proposition this astonishing referee replied that the plaintiff had 
forfeited all claim to his money by refusing it in open court! The plaintiff being with- 
out counsel, no stay of proceedings was obtained; and the decree of the referee was 
carried into effect, the plaintiff being baptized, we presume, by the sheriff of the city 
and county of New York. Upon a subsequent appeal the judgement was affirmed by 
the General Term, and the plaintiff appealed:to this Court. 

Upon hearing the first conclusion of law announced by the referee, the plaintitt 
exclaimed in his delight, ‘O! wise young judge! A Daniel come to judgment!’ and 
during the remainder of the decision, one Gratiano, a sort of ‘next friend’ of the 
defendant, made the court-house ring with cries of ‘A Daniel! A Daniel come to 
judgment!’ It is the unanimous opinion of this court that these allusions to the 
lamented Webster, from whichever side they proceeded, were most unfortunate, 
Nothing could be more unlike the calm, clear judgement of that lawyer and statesman 
than this truly feminine decision, half-civil decree, half-criminal sentence, and the 
other half commutation of punishment. No part of it bears the slightest semblance 
40 any principle of law or equity ever recognized in a civilized country. 

The first conclusion of law, though apparently in favor of the plaintiff, was utterly 
erroneous for two reasons: Ist, It is well settled that, when a bond contains a condition 
that is unreasonable and absurd, it will be considered as good only for the sum actually 


408 APPENDIX 


secured or lent on the faith of it. As in the familiar case where a party, in consider- 
ation of a sum of money, agreed to give the price of the twenty-fourth nail in a horse’s 
shoe, at the rate of a penny for the first nail, two for the second, and so on in geo- 
metrical progression, This bond was not only unreasonable, but provided for the com- 
mission of a capital crime, and was clearly void under the principle to which I have 
adverted. 2d, The bond was extinguished by the tender of the amount of the loan 
which it was given to secure. This Court has explicitly decided that a tender of the 
debt, even after it is due, extinguishes all collateral securities. Kortright v. Cady, 21 
N. Y. 343, and the tender at the trial was sufficient to cancel the bond if it ever pos- 
sessed any validity. 

But, if the referee’s first proposition of law is sound, the second becomes a stupendous 
absurdity. It is a familiar rule of construction that the right to do a certain act confers 
the right to the necessary incidents of that act. The’referee holds that the plaintiff had 
a right to cut off a pound of the defendant’s flesh. Now as no one can cut an exact 
pound of flesh to a grain, as no one can do it without drawing blood, it seems too plain 
for argument that the parties could have intended no such restrictions, and the Court 
had no right to supply them. If the bond was valid, the plaintiff could have subjected 
himself to no penalty by simply taking what it gave him. 

We have not before us the statute referred to in the third conclusion of the referee, 
but we have great doubts whether the plaintiff, upon any reasonable construction of its 
terms, could be held liable for taking a bond voluntarily signed by the defendant. It 
does not seem to us that this was ‘ practising against the life’ of the defendant, within 
the meaning of the law..... 

The pretence that the plaintiff had forfeited his debt by the refusal of the tender was 
extremely shallow. Nothing is better settled than that a tender does not extinguish the 
debt, but only things collateral thereto, such as interest..... But the climax of usurpa- 
tion and cruelty was tocome. The plaintiff was not only required to despoil himself 
for his daughter’s benefit, but to embrace Christianity for his own..... It is certainly 
difficult for us to see how any benefit could arise to the Christian Church if all the 
criminals in the land were compelled to adopt that religion at—if the expression is 
admissible—the point of the halter. We do not mean to deny the power to the legis- 
lature to prescribe the union of the criminal with some religious body as a penalty for 
crime. If coupled with the obligation of hearing two average sermons a week, we 
are not prepared to say that the punishment would not be exemplary..... And 
here we pause to set ourselves right before the public. Absorbed in our arduous 
duties, we can pay but little attention to general literature, but we read the public 
prints, and we cannot ignore the fact that this case has created much interest in the 
minds of the community. If we are rightly informed, the facts have formed the basis 
of a powerful drama, which has lately been placed upon the stage, and the conduct of 
the referee has been loudly applauded by audiences unlearned in the law, who doubtless 
saw in her the embodiment of the classical idea of justice—namely, a woman with her 
eyes completely blinded. 

To prevent any misunderstanding, therefore, we assert most positively that our decis- 
ion upon this point is not influenced by the feeling which seems to have actuated one 
of the witnesses, who objected to the conversion of the daughter of the plaintiff, Miss 
Jessica Shylock, upon the ground that ‘the making of so many new Christians would 
raise the price of pork.’ The Court is of the opinion that, in moderation, a pork diet 
is both healthful and invigorating, and that sausages, when their origin is not involved 
in too much obscurity, are a ‘dish fit for a judge.’ 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE—IHERING 409 


But, if we know our own hearts, we would not allow a slight advance in the price 
pf a favourite esculent to stand in the way of the genuine conversion of the humblest 
Hebrew in the land. And in this, we believe that we speak the sentiment of the 
American people, even outside of Chicago and Cincinnati; while in those two cities, 
the fact that such a fulfilment of Scripture would tend to raise the price of pork 
would doubtless be considered the strongest possible reason for the conversion of the 
whole world. To their citizens no two events could appear more desirable than that 
‘the knowledge of the Lord should cover the earth as the waters cover the sea,’ and 
that ‘prime mess’ should go up a dollar a barrel. Personal motives, therefore, have 
nothing whatever to do with our decision. It is the law of the land and our own feel- 
ings of duty that call upon us to relieve the plaintiff from his unfortunate position. We 
have thus disposed of the questions raised by this appeal, but we cannot close without 
a word of warning to Mrs Bassanio..... The result of the whole matter is that... . 
the entire decree of the referee must be reversed.... All the judges concurring, 
ordered accordingly. 


The question of the Law of the Trial Scene was again brought forward in this same 
Journal (16 January, 1875, p. 45) in a communication from Emporia, Kansas, signed 
‘W. A. R.,’ wherein it was maintained that the downright unsoundness of the law 
which ruled against Shylock’s Bond rendered the claim that Bacon wrote the play 
‘most pretentious and unfounded.’ Whereupon, in reference to Shakespeare’s share 
of responsibility for the unsound law, the Editor of Zhe Albany Law Journal thus 
judiciously comments: ‘ Many considerations must here be taken into account. For 
‘instance, the Scene is laid in Venice, and we are not to assume without positive proof 
‘that the Venetian Law was similar to the Common Law of England..... It is evi- 
‘dent from the spirit of the play that the judge regarded the contract as void, even 
‘civilly, and he doubtless adopted the legal fiction of so strictly construing the con- 
‘tract as that, without nominally declaring it void, he practically nullified it. This 
‘case may then be an evidence of Shakespeare’s legal ingenuity. .... In considering 
* Shakespeare’s law, we must always take into account the conditions of time, place, 
‘and circumstance, and how much is intended for dramatic effect.’ 


In 1872, there appeared in Germany a remarkable book by Dr IHERING, called The 
Strugele for Law, which, before two years had elapsed, had been translated nine- 
teen times, and into sixteen different languages. With the subject of the book itself 
we are not here concerned; it suffices to say that its central idea may be tersely ex- 
pressed in a saying of Kant, which the learned author quotes in the Preface to his 
Eighth Edition, and which, as he says, he had not seen when he wrote the book: 
* Whosoever prefers to be a worm must not complain if he is trodden under foot.’ But 
what is of moment to us is, that in the course of his treatise, Prof. Ihering strongly 
condemns the treatment of Shylock. Although in the substance of his remarks the 
learned professor had been anticipated (all unconsciously by him), yet the prominence 
of his position and the great popularity of his book gave an emphasis to Shylock’s ill- 
treatment which it had not hitherto received. Two opponents to Ihering appeared; 
the first, A. PIETSCHER, Landsgericht-Prasident, in a brochure entitled Jurist and Poet ; 
in which, in a bold, dashing way, it is acknowledged that Portia treated the Jew unfairly, 
but the meeting of trickery with trickery is justified; a second, who, it would be, per- 
haps, more correct to say followed Ihering, rather than was called forth by him, is 
Prof Dr KouLer. whose book bears the title, Shakespeare before the Forum of Juris 


410 APPENDIX 


prudence ; wherein there is no attempt to show that, by the use of legal phraseology, it 
is to be inferred that Shakespeare had spent some years of his life in a lawyer’s office, 
but it is maintained that in Shakespeare’s works, as in no other poet’s, there live and 
stir the grand ideas of abstract justice, the elemental principles of law, coeval with 
man’s nature, and which the history of the world, in all nations, reveals as in a process 
of evolution. Zhe Merchant of Venice, as disclosing the evolution of the Law of 
Debtor and Creditor, was selected as an example by the learned jurist, who, in oppo- 
sition to Ihering, believes that, viewed from loftier ground, the treatment of Shylock 
is in harmony with the growth or development of the truest justice. The book is 
especially interesting in its history of the realistic interpretation of the law of the XII 
Tables, to which appeal is frequently made by critics, in justification of Shylock’s 
attempt to regard human flesh as an equivalent for a debt; but I am forced to select 
only those extracts from all three authors, Ihering, Pietscher, and Kohler, which have 
impressed me as best illustrating the legal treatment of Shylock on the Trial. 

The extracts are as follows, beginning with Dr RUDOLF voON IHERING (Professor at 
Gattingen: Der Kampf um’s Recht, Wien, 1886, 8te Aufl., p. 58): 

It is hatred and revenge that take Shylock to court to get his pound of flesh from 
the body of Anthonio, but the words the poet puts into Shylock’s mouth are just as true 
as from the mouth of any other. It is the language which an injured sense of right 
always speaks in all times and in all places; the force, not to be shaken, of the con- 
viction that law must for ever remain law; the lofty strain and pathos of a man, con- 
scious that he pleads not merely for his own person, but for the enacted law. 

“I crave the law.’ In these four words Shakespeare has marked the true relation 
of law in its subjective sense to law in its objective sense, and the significance of the 
struggle for law, in a way that no philosopher learned in the law could have done more 
strikingly. With these words the case is at once changed, and it is not the claim of 
Shylock which is on trial, but the law of Venice. To what mighty, gigantic propor- 
tions does not the figure of Shylock dilate as he utters these words! It is no longer the 
Jew demanding a pound of flesh; it is Venice herself that knocks at the door of the 
court,—Azs rights and the rights of Venice are one; with zs rights, the rights of 
Venice are struck down. And when, under the weight of the decision of a Judge 
who nullifies law by a miserable quibble, Shylock succumbs, and, the butt of bitter 
scorn and jeers, totters away with trembling knees, who can help feeling that in his 
person the law of Venice also is broken down, that it is not Shylock the Jew who 
staggers off, but the typical figure of the Jew of the Middle Ages, that pariah of society, 
who cried for law in vain? The mighty tragedy of his fate lies not in the denial of 
his right, but in that he, a Jew of the Middle Ages, has faith in the law,—we might 
say, just as if he were a Christian !—a faith firm as a rock which nothing can shake, 
and which the Judge himself sustains; until the catastrophe strikes him like a thunder- 
bolt, shivering his delusion to atoms, and teaching him that he is nothing but the de- 
spised medizeval Jew, whose rights are in the same breath acknowledged, and, by fraud, 
denied. 

[In the foregoing, where reference is made to the nullification of the law by a 
‘miserable quibble’ of the Judge, Ihering has the following foot-note :] It is just here 
that in my opinion the deep tragic interest lies which Shylock wrings from us. He 
is indeed cheated out of his rights. So at least must a jurist regard the case. The 
Poet of course is free to make his own jurisprudence, and we do not regret that Shake- 
speare has done it here, or rather that he has kept the old story unchanged. But 
when the jurist undertakes to criticise it, he cannot say otherwise than that the bond 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE—IHERING 411 


was in itself null and void, in that its provisions were contrary to good morals; the 
Judge, therefore, on this very ground should from the very first have denied it. But 
since he did not so deny it, since the ‘second Daniel’ acknowledged its validity, it 
was a wretched quibble, a disgraceful, pettifogging trick, to withhold from the plaintiff 
the right to draw blood after the right had been granted to take the flesh. Just as 
well might a Judge acknowledge the right of entry on land, but forbid the right to 
make footprints, because this was not expressly stipulated. One might almost believe 
that this drama of Shylock had been played in the most ancient days of Rome; for the 
stuthors of the Twelve Tables held it necessary, in reference to the maiming (i partes 
secare) of a debtor by his creditors, to declare expressly that the creditors should be 
unrestricted as to the size of the piece to be taken. (St plus minusve secuerint, sine 
fraude esto!) 

[The extract which follows is from the Preface to the Eighth edition of the Kampf 
um’s Recht, wherein the strictures of Pietscher and Kohler are discussed. Chrono- 
logically, therefore, it should follow instead of precede these strictures, but as what I 
have selected is merely explanatory of Dr Ihering’s own view, it is better inserted here. ] 

(P. xi.) What I maintained in my first edition is not, that the Judge was bound to 
acknowledge the validity of Shylock’s bond, but that after that validity had been ac- 
knowledged, he had no right afterwards, in the enunciation of the judgement, to nullify 
it by a contemptible quibble. The Judge was free to pronounce Shylock’s bond valid 
or invalid. He pronounced it valid, and Shakespeare represents the case as if, accord- 
ing to the law, he could not have decided otherwise. No one in Venice doubted the 
validity of the bond; the friends of Anthonio, Anthonio himself, the Doge, the Court, 
all were unanimous that the Jew had the law on his side. And in absolute trust in 
his right, acknowledged by all, Shylock appeals to the Court for aid, and the ‘wise 
Daniel,’ after in vain attempting to induce the vindictive creditor to renounce his claim, 
recognizes that claim as valid. And now after the decree of the Court has been pro- 
nounced, after every doubt of the right of the Jew has been overruled by the Judge 
himself, and not a word of dissent is uttered, after the whole assembly, the Doge in- 
cluded, have admitted that inevitable claim of the law,—then, when the successful 
suitor, in full assurance of his cause, is about to take what the sentence of the Court 
has authorized, he is balked by that very same Judge, who had solemnly recognized 
his right, by an objection, a quibble too wretched and worthless to merit any serious 
refutation. Is there ever flesh without blood? ‘The Judge who admitted Shylock’s 
right to cut a pound of flesh from the body of Anthonio, by that very admission recog - 
nized Shylock’s right to the blood inseparable from the flesh; and he who has a right 
to cut a pound, may, if he pleases, take less. Both rights are denied to the Jew; he 
must take the flesh without blood, and he must take a just pound, neither more nor 
less. Have I said too much in affirming that the Jew is cheated out of his right? To 
be sure it is done in the interest of Humanity, but does wrong, committed in the inter- 
est of Humanity, cease to be wrong? And if ever the end sanctifies the means, why 
was not the wrong committed betimes in the sentence,—why, not until azey the sen- 
tence, was it first revealed ? 

A. PieTscHER (Landgerichts-Prasident : Jurist und Dichter, Dessau, 1881, p. 13): 
Im truth there is nothing genuinely tragic about Shylock. Hence the poet called the 
piece, not The Jew, but The Merchant, of Venice, and termed it a Comedy, not a 
Tragedy. Ue knew nothing of the modern sympathy with a ‘persecuted race,’ and 
surely Shylock was not regarded by him as typical of one. He needed for his drama 
a usurer, not a Jew, —confessions of faith or nationalities have nothing to do with the 


412 APPENDIX 


central idea of the piece,—and in accordance with the views of his day he took him 
very naturally from the race of Jews. Then, to be sure, Shylock became for him not 
merely the ‘usurer,’ but a mortal and a Jew with human passions and the character- 
istics of his race. 

(P. 16.) When the Jew has demanded ‘ What judgement shall I jared doing no 
wrong?’ he must be driven from this pharasaical pretext. It is doing him an unmer- 
ited honour to impute to him the will, at any dictate of mercy, to put an end to the 
contest between his legal rights and the baseness of his claim. For once this flinty 
heart must be made to feel that he himself may need mercy, and all other means must 
be exhausted before proceeding to use his own weapons against him. If Ihering finds 
Shylock typical, let us, too, find him typical. He typifies all who mercilessly insist 
upon their rights. All such are admonished that there are other and higher duties 
than maintaining one’s rights, and our jurists are herein instructed who call a legal 
contest for justice, a duty..... Even Shylock demands the law, he ‘stands for judge- 
ment,’—we have seen how this imposes upon Ihering,—but we know well enough how 
hollow these high-sounding words are, and that the man cares nothing for the law, 
but only that by means of it he may feed his hatred, and above all his greed..... 
It is the wretched envy of a business rival that instigates him. And when this ‘man 
of law’ invokes ‘his deeds upon his head,’ and his bold invocation is answered, it is 
brought home to every one that whoever pursues his own rights in violation of the dic- 
tates of ‘mercy,’ is himself crushed by merciless Right. 

(P. 19.) Iam much afraid that Anthonio would have had to succumb, if Ihering 
had been of his counsel. His only plea was turpis causa ; if that would not carry him 
through, he would have given up his client. But his chance of making this plea good, 
before the Doge and the Senatc, was small; they had probably from the first noticed 
that in this case an abominable design lay concealed under legal forms, but they could 
not have known how these latter were to be evaded. JI believe that I dare assert that 
at that time in Venice the consideration that ‘a contract against morals was void’ was 
not yet recognized or regarded as a valid plea. For this consideration, or more prop- 
erly its recognition in law, belongs only to the higher grades of culture, and always 
even then depends on the prevailing estimate of what is immoral, and its fed sig-_ 
nificance and worth will have to remain, I suppose, a pious wish. 

(P. 21.) Ihering is particularly hostile to the way in which Portia deals with Shy- 
lock, which he terms quibbling and pettifogging. 

For my part, commend me to our Portia, who, in true woman’s fashion, does not 
allow herself to be in the least disconcerted by the pathetic appeal: ‘If you deny me, 
fie upon your law! There is no force in the decrees of Venice;’ but steadily regarding 
the present case alone, takes no thought whatever of any dangerous consequences, 
[Portia never heard this appeal ; it was made before she entered the Court—Ep.] If 
the law of Venice is so bad that it will help a scoundrel to ruin an honest man, it is 
worthless and does not deserve the least consideration. When a man stands in peril 
of his life he does not stop to choose his weapon,—the first is the best,—and just so 
in the present case, it may be permissible to meet chicanery with chicanery, pettifogging 
with pettifogging. Did it really escape our learned jurist, what the poet with sovereign 
humour has scourged with joyous jest, that a legal contest, if it is a fight, is subject to 
all the chances of a fight, and that in it often enough cunning must be overcome by 
cunning? To observe it may be unwelcome, but it may be observed, nevertheless, 
every day in courts of justice. A lawsuit is therein like a duel or a fight, and the talk 
is of ‘winners’ and ‘losers.’ When Portia’s plea that flesh and not blood is in the 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE—PIETSCHER 413 


bargain, is met by Ihering with the replication that blood is implied, and that the plea 
is frivolous, he may be met with the rejoinder that bargains of this nature are to be 
strictly interpreted, and in doubtful points against him in whom the power lay of mak- 
ing the terms of the agreement more explicit. And so it could go on with surrejoinders 
and rebutters for a good long while. But is it really ‘a wretched quibble’ which is 
here used against Shylock? What was the Jew after? The life of Anthonio. There 
is not the least doubt of that. For the pound of flesh in itself he cared not a jot. Well, 
then, why did he not have that stated clearly in his bond? He dared not; and hence 
he used the ambiguous phrase, ‘a pound of flesh.’ And to his own words he is now 
kept. Is that unjust ? 

The discomfiture of the Jew is not the lamentable downfall of a hero; it is the vic- 
tory of cunning by greater cunning; the rogue is caught in his own snare. No tears 
need fall; there can be here only the smiling satisfaction of a genuine comedy. But 
why did not the prudent man anticipate the possibility of the objection which Portia 
afterwards actually made? Or else why did he not consult a jurist who could have 
told him that the Twelve Tables of Rome had contemplated exactly that possibility 
(st plus minusve secuerint sine fraude esto), and that, since the laws of Venice had 
not yet attained to that wise prevision in the interest of revengeful creditors, it would 
be necessary to stipulate expressly for it in the bond? The clever man was not clever 
enough, and a cleverer overcame him. 

Nevertheless, it is to be unhesitatingly admitted that the wound which law and right 
received in the victory over Shylock is not healed,—a wound received at the hands of 
Shylock, not Portia; it is only skinned over. To overcome cunning with cunning, to 
take advantage of an opponent’s weakness, cannot be termed executing justice. /fthe 
Jew had been more careful, the Merchant would have been lost. But even this point 
Shakespeare did not overlook. Through the mouth of Portia he shows [that ‘the law 
hath yet another hold’ on Shylock]. Here, then, at last comes forth the violated 
majesty of abstract law, punishing, crushing him who dared presume to make law aid 
wrong. The violation of private rights yields place to the deeply outraged State of Ven- 
ice that now demands atonement for itself. And so the Jew, because he stood upon his 
law, gets more law than he desired, a different law from that for which he hoped. 

Dr JosEPH KOHLER (Professor in Witrzburg: Shakespeare vor dem Forum der Juris- 
prudenz, Wirzburg, 1883, p. 6): In point of fact, the Trial Scene is no Jurisprudence 
unto itself, it is no ideal imaginary farce, inserted merely to serve poetic purposes ; it is 
rather a typical representation of the developement of Law, in all ages; it bears within 
it the Quintessence of the Present and Future of Law, it contains a Jurisprudence pro- 
founder than ten Pandects, and opens to us a deeper insight into the history of Law 
than all the legal histories from Savigny to Ihering. 

Dr Kohler enters at once on the discussion of the validity of Shylock’s bond, which, 
he maintains, is to be regarded not in the light of the jurisprudence of to-day, but of 
that period when debtors could be forced to pay with their flesh. Qui non habet in 
aere, luat in cute. He then proceeds, by a review of the comparative jurisprudence 
of all nations, to prove that the cruel law of the Twelve Tables, which gave to cred- 
itors the right to cut up debtors, and whereof Shylock’s bond was the legitimate 
descendant, has received from the earliest times a realistic interpretation; and thus 
concludes [p. 19]: Hence we see that the holding of the body of the debtor as 
security for the debt is an institution of universal application, and where by chance it 
is modified and assumes a milder type, we are not to ascribe it te superior culture, but 
to an inferior estimate of the rights of property. 


4r4 APPENDIX 


(P. 71.) This developement from the barbarous practices of ancient times to milder 
forms was gradual, it did not take place all at once, there were many intermediate 
steps before the idea of right was fully recognized. Before the law reached the point 
of rendering null and void such contracts as that of Shylock, there had to be a reac- 
tion against them in the popular mind, not on the score of legality, but on the score 
of morality and social decency. Long before the law branded as illegal the execution 
of such practices against insolvent debtors, popular opinion regarded such practices, 
even when countenanced by the law, as disgraceful and inimical to the interests of 
society. There is many a practice even now interdicted in good society of which the 
law takes no cognizance. Literary thieving, long before the idea of an author’s rights 
was legally acknowledged, was held to be disgraceful, and at this very day, plagiarism, 
that infringes no author’s rights, is nevertheless utterly condemned throughout the lit- 
erary world; and when, in the course of legislation, the successful attack against usury 
had not been effected, the usurer was none the less excluded from respectable society, 
and usury was regarded as degrading, 

(P. 78.) He is a hero who, for the sake of a high ideal, disinterestedly challenges 
society; but he who tramples under foot the dictates of society, only in order to drain 
the cup of law for his own selfish interests, is a pariah, who outrages himself because 
he rates his own interests higher than decency and honesty, and thereby opposes those 
conditions whereunder alone a well-ordered society can exist. This is Shylock’s 
position. 

(P. 79.) When Shylock says that he ‘can give no reason, nor he will not, more 
than a lodged hate and a certain loathing that he bears Anthonio,’ he utters the most 
shameless profanation which the sanctity of justiee can experience, far more disgrace- 
ful than any violation of the law; it is an abuse of law by means of law, an abuse 
which paralyzes law; it is a degradation of law, and a degradation of a court of jus- 
tice into a tool of the lowest aims. Must the court yield the law to Shylock? What 
a tragic situation! Almost the most tragic of all situations, I think, is that of a judge 
who sees himself the tool of an infamous scoundrel, an aider and abettor in an act of 
atrocious infamy, and with no loophole of escape. 

(P. 80.) In this tragic situation the play reaches its highest point, the dramatic ten- 
sion has reached that strain to which some solution must immediately succeed. May 
not justice, we ask anxiously, just for this one time yield a little, and give his dues to 
the hard-hearted creditor? Shakespeare has answered us through Portia. Even the 
ancient Celtic law-book, the Sewchus Mor, announced that ‘there are three periods at 
which the world is worthless; the time of a plague; of a general war; and of the 
dissolution of express contracts, Hence there is no escape: judgement must be given 
against Anthonio. There is the valid deed, a right pushed @ /’outrance by a creature 
who knows no remorse, no human ruth,—like Junius Brutus, the judge must veil his 
face and sacrifice Anthonio. We all know the way in which the second Daniel solved 
it; we all feel light-hearted at the sunny ray which pierced that deadly gloom, just as 
when the Devil, to whom a soul has been covenanted, loses his game and is bilked 
ef his prey. But can the solution be justified at the Forum of Jurisprudence, where 
we must deal not with an ideal metaphysical justice, but with actual, human justice ? 
It seems that this must be answered in the negative. [Kohler then proceeds to apply 
the tests of the law, such as ommne majus in se continet minus, &c., and also condemns 
Pietscher’s expedient of meeting cunning with cunning, and concludes that, apparently, 
Thering’s position is irrefragable, and yet asks how is it possible that our feelings so 
deceive us that, when we see the play on the stage, our legal conscience receives no 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE—KOHLER 415 


pricks? The answer to this he finds in that inner consciousness of what is right and 
just in the breast of the judge], that instinct for the right in the soul of the judge 
which has not fully worked itself out into open acknowledgement, and is still lying 
perdu in the ostensible reasons of the wise Daniel. 

The age in which the time of the play is cast is when, in the course of the develope- 
ment of law and right, such a bond as Shylock’s was opposed not merely to public 
sentiments of morality and decency, but to law and equity. Personal mutilation of 
insolvent debtors was already beginning to be repugnant to the judicial mind as some- 
thing rude, and as beyond the pale of civilized law, and no longer to be granted as of 
unquestionable right. Thus it was that a process was in operation which belongs to 
the growth of legal life,—that process, namely, whereby the lawyer accepts the princi 
ples which obtained at former times, and moulds them anew. [Kohler then traces the 
growth of various legal ideas, now everywhere accepted, by means of this process of 
absorption, whereby the public sentiment of what is right finds expression through 
the judges, whose hearts are quickened by the pulses of the people, and a judicial 
conscience is created which judges are bound not only to obey, but also to interpret. ] 

(P. 88.) At last we can see the springs which set in motion the sentence of the 
wise Daniel; the sentence is good, but its premises are bad; which is, after all, much 
to be preferred to a bad sentence with good premises; let us only have good sentences, 
and good reasons will soon follow. Such has been the way of the world from the earliest 
times. Long before the rights of an inventor were formulated into laws, the sentiment 
prevailed of a right of property in what is immaterial, and at this day in England and 
in France [and in America—ED.] we hear of property in names, and signs, and trade- 
marks. It is not difficult to demonstrate that such judicial construction is untenable; 
but is it sound policy, at the dictates of German pedantry, to throw overboard precious 
goods which do not happen to have been secured in befitting cases? Are we justified 
in spilling the precious contents because the cask is ugly and offensive to the eye of a 
jurist? Irregular judicial premises are often, although, of course, not always, the lad- 
der on which the consciousness of legal right mounts ever higher. Such irregular 
premises urge themselves on the judge most especially when some rigid inflexible legal 
dictum has survived from ancient times, and like a ruin of the past no longer harmo- 
nizes with to-day. Such a dictum no jurisprudence in the world would dare openly 
oppose, but the comedy is eminently respectable whereby it is evaded in a thousand 
byways. I will not express an opinion as to the justification of this proceeding. I 
neither praise it nor blame it; I maintain it only as a fact in the universal history of 
evolution, which proves through all ages the developement of law and right, in the 
Orient as well as in the Occident. 

(P. 90.) It is a trial of world-wide fame which the Poet unfolds before us; it bears 
the victory of a refined consciousness of law and right over the dark night which 
weighed heavily from of old on the courts,—a victory concealed behind pretexts, which 
assumes the mask of false springs of action, because it is necessary; but it is a victory, 
a great, a powerful victory, a victory not alone in this particular case, but a victory in 
the history of law and right; it is the sun of progress which once more casts its quick- 
ening beams on the judicial bench, and the kingdom of Sarastro triumphs over the 
powers of night. And when Shylock succumbs, it is not, as Thering supposes, under 
the weight of a false sentence, but it is because the voice of the second Daniel has 
reached the inmost recesses of the heart of the usurer, who is after all a man, and 
crumbles to ruin a whole laborious structure of logic. If he felt that his rights were 
violated. why did he not, with all the keenness of his analytic intellect, dissipate into 


416 APPENDIX 


thin air the false pretexts of the wise and righteous Daniel? We forsooth can do it, 
albeit we are jurists far less skilled and formal than Shylock. But from the very first 
in his inmost heart he knew that his aim was through and through unrighteous, but he 
believed it to be concealed and assured by the legislation of the day; he believed that 
he had a charm against every possible legal or logical attempt to evade his plea. He 
knew that he had ventured on a slippery path, where right and wrong join hands, and 
where it needed but the least jar to bring him to grief; he foresaw that the judge 
would use every possible, conceivable evasion to avoid the execution of the Law, and 
what he foresaw was verified. 

(P. 95.) Asa lawyer there is yet one thing lying heavy on my heart. Was no in. 
justice done to Shylock in not only denying his bond, but in condemning him, and in 
condemning him almost to the destruction of his means of life? Grant that Shylock 
had sought the life of Anthonio, he had at least sought it by legal forms, by judicial 
procedure; and he sought it under an appeal to law that was still formally recognized 
as law, albeit that the popular conscience of law and right had already superseded it. 
Such a one can, with as little propriety, be deemed punishable for an attempt to kill as 
a creditor could be pronounced guilty of an attempt at false imprisonment who should 
bring suit after the cause of action had ceased to exist, or at least had ceased to exist 
in the opinion of many, but not of all, lawyers. In this regard, there has been an in- 
justice; but such an injustice is founded on universal history, it is a universal necessity ; 
and in the admission of this element, Shakespeare, as an historian of law and right, 
has surpassed even himself. No progress in the world, although it be the progress of 
law and right, is possible without injustice to the individual ; every great advance taken 
by society is made over corpses, just as every health-giving walk costs the lives of many 
an innocent little creature. Shylock’s non-suit and subsequent punishment are needed 
to crown the victory gained by the new conception of law and right. 

(P. 99.) And just as we hail the conclusion of Faust with joyful huzzas, and exult 
in the defeat of the Devil for all his contract sealed with blood, so we greet with huzzas 
the bond of Shylock torn to shreds; and when he totters off bent, bowed, and with 
knocking knees, we know of a surety that Justice has shed abroad its beams, and the 
goblins of night, that have hitherto fluttered round a wretched tallow candle, hence- 
forth will hide in their gloomy recesses. The victory over Shylock reveals the higher 
potency of human law, just as the victory over the Devil reveals the higher potency 
of divine law; the Devil remains black even when he steps before the court with his 
paper and blood, and Shylock remains a foe to Law even when he boasts of his parch- 
ment and seal.* 


es 

* The Law of the XII Tables, which is supposed to permit the mutilation of insolvent debtors, 
tas been so frequently cited in connection with Shylock’s claim, that it is perhaps as well to note 
that doubts have been cast on the correctness of this interpretation of the ancient Roman Law. Dr 
James Murrueap, of Edinburgh, shows (Historical Introduction to the Private Law of Rome, 1886, 
Pp. 202 e? seg.) that the phrase in that Law, cafite poenas dato, does not refer to death or slavery, but 
was used in opposition to ona ; and that the debtor paid the penalty with his person, in his services, 
in contradistinction to his means. ‘ But for the mistaken notion,’ says Dr Muirhead, ‘that a cred- 
itor was entitled after the expiry of the three months to put his debtor to death,—of which there is 
not a single instance on record,—it is unlikely that so many would have thought of imputing to the 
partis secanto such an inhuman meaning as that a plurality of creditors might cut the body of their 
addictus in pieces, and each take a share.’ The whole difficulty lies, so thinks Dr Muirhead, in the 
arrangement of the provisions of the XII Tables, and he, therefore, with great ingenuity, solves it 
by a slight re-arrangement, whereby the plurality of creditors, referred to by Aulus Gellius (from 
whom we derive our fullest account of this Law), is made to apply only to the special case where 
‘co-heirs take proceedings against a debtor of their predecessor’s ;’ and the explanation of the whole 
question is, that ‘ where there was but one creditor . . . . the debtor definitely became his creditor’s 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE—DOYLE 417 


In The Overland Monthly for July, 1886, there appeared, as a letter addressed to 
Mr LAWRENCE BaRRETT, an article by Mr JouN T. Dov Le, entitled ‘ Shakespeare’s 
Law—The Case of Shylock.’ It supplies information in regard to the legal procedure 
of the Trial Scene which I have searched for in vain elsewhere, and presents Portia’s 
conduct of the Trial in a light certainly novel. The substance of it is as follows: 

JoHN T. DoyLe: The Trial Scene has always seemed inconsistent with Shake- 
speare’s supposed legal learning, for the proceedings in it are such as never could have 
occurred in any court administering English law. Save in the fact that the Scene pre- 
sents a plaintiff, a defendant, and a judge—characters essential to litigation under any 
system of procedure—there is no resemblance in the proceedings on the stage to any- 
thing that could possibly occur in an English court or any court administering English 
law. No jury is impanelled to determine the facts, no witnesses called by either side; 
on the contrary, when the court opens, the Duke who presides is already fully informed 
of the facts, and has even communicated them in writing to Bellario, a learned judge 
of Padua, and invited him to come and render judgement in the case; and the extent 
of his power was to adjourn the court unless the Doctor arrived in season. Such an 
occurrence as this, we all know, could never take place in a court proceeding accord- 
ing to English methods..... From my boyhood I regarded it as an instance of the 
failure of the cleverest men (not themselves lawyers) to introduce a lawsuit into fiction 
without violating the common rules of procedure. To make the situation dramatic 
they invariably make it impossible. I concluded that the failure of others might be 
excused, when even Shakespeare missed it. Subsequent experience convinced me, 
however, that he did not miss it, after all. This is how it happened. 

In 1851-52, I passed several months in the neighbouring Republic of Nicaragua. 
It was at that time, perhaps, the least known and least frequented of the Spanish- 
American States. Originally explored and colonized by an expedition from Panama, 
its communications with Europe and all the outer world were maintained almost 
wholly from the Pacific side of the continent; its commerce was insignificant, travel 
never reached it, and it had probably kept up the customs and practices in vogue 
under the Spanish rule with less variation than any of the colonies. The affairs of the 
company I represented having become considerably entangled by the transactions and 
omissions of the former agent, I found myself, ere long, involved in half a dozen law- 
suits, the proceedings of which gave me a new light on the Shylock case. To explain 
this, I will briefly relate what occurred in the first of them. The course of the others 
was similar. 


‘ free-bondman, .... but where co-heirs were concerned, as bondage and service to all of them 
‘ would have been inconvenient, if not impossible, when they were not to continue to possess the 
‘inheritance in common, the debtor was sent over Tiber and sold as a slave, and the price got for 
‘him divided amongst them. If one or other got more than his fair share, no harm was done, for 
‘the disproportion would eventually be redressed by an action of partition.” Dr Muirhead’s re- 
arrangement, is as follows :—‘ Tertiis nundinis addicitor, Capite poenas dato, Si plures sunt, trans 
Tiberim peregre venum danto: partis secanto. Si plus minusve secuerint, se fraude esto.” ‘On the 
third market-day there shall be a decree of addiction. The addictus shall then pay the penalty with 
his person. If there be several creditors to whom he is awarded, let them sell him beyond Tiber and 
divide the price. If any of them have got more or less than his fair share, this shall not prejudice 
them.’ Dr Kohler advocates the old orthodox interpretation of this law, and alleges in support 
of his view an imposing array of comparative jurisprudence in which he is, as Dr Muirhead says, 
‘ profoundly versed ;” it is, therefore, only just to add that Dr Kohler refers (p. 8) to the attempts 
which have been made to give a milder interpretation to this Law, and that he believes them to be 
utterly wrong. Of course his remark does not apply to Dr Muirhead, whose volume had not then 
been published. It is to Mr J. Foster Krrx that I am indebted for having my attention called to 
this interesting and learned book by Dr Muirhead,—Ep. 
27 


418 APPENDIX 


Business having brought me to the city of Grenada, 1 was one day accosted on the 
street by a dapper little man, carrying an ivory-headed cane, who, calling me by name, 
said, ‘£7 alcalde le Hama’— The alcalde sends for you.’ I thought the invitation 
rather wanting in courtesy, and, to pay like with like, intimated that I was busy then, 
without saying whether I would wait on His Honor or not. The little man simply 
repeated his message and left. A person present, seeing that I showed no disposition 
to move, then informed me that the dapper little man with the cane was an a/guazii, 
and that, by his verbal notice, I had been legally summoned to the alcalde’s court, to 
which I was recommended to go without unnecessary delay. I accordingly repaired 
at once to the court-room in the jxzgado, as directed. : 

Proceedings of some sort were going on at the moment, but the alcalde suspended 
them, received me very courteously, and directed some one present to go and call Don 
Dolores Bermudez, the plaintiff, into court. The substance of Mr Bermudez’s com- 
plaint against the company was then stated to me, and I was asked for my answer to 
it. I sent for my counsel, and the company’s defence was stated orally. The contract 
out of which the controversy arose was produced, and perhaps a witness or two were 
examined, and some oral discussion followed; those details I forget, for there was 
nothing in them that struck me as strange. There was, in fact, little if any dispute 
about the facts of the case, the real controversy being as to the company’s liability and 
its extent. We were finally informed that on a given day we should be expected to 
attend again, when the Judge would be prepared with his decision. 

At the appointed time we attended accordingly, and the Judge read a paper in which 
all the facts were stated, at the conclusidn of which he announced to us that he pro- 
posed to submit the question of law involved to Don Buenaventura Selva, a practising 
lawyer of Grenada, as a ‘jurisconsult,’ unless some competent objections were made to 
him. JI learned then that I could challenge the proposed jurisconsult for consanguin- 
ity, affinity, or favor, just as we challenge a juror. I knew of no cause of challenge 
against him; my counsel said he was an unexceptionable person; and so he was 
chosen, and the case was referred to him. Some days after, he returned the papers to 
the alcalde with his opinion, which was in my favour, and the plaintiff’s case was dis- 
missed. 

In the course of the same afternoon, or the next day, I received an intimation that 
‘Don Buenaventura expected from me a gratification—the name in that country for 
what we call a gratuity—and I think the sum of two hundred dollars was named. 
This did not harmonize with my crude notions of the administration of justice, and I 
asked for explanations, They were given in the stereotyped form used to explain 
every other anomaly in that queer country, ‘Costumbre del pais.’ 1 thought it a cus- 
tom more honoured in the breach than in the observance, and declined to pay. I 
found out afterwards that this was a mistake; that under their system of administration 
the Judge merely ascertains the facts, and as to the law and its application to the case 
reference is had to a jurisconsult, or doctor of the law; and that he, after pronouncing 
his decision, is entitled to accept from either party—in practice always from the suc- 
cessful one—a ‘guiddam honorarium, or gratification, his service to the court being 
gratuitous, just as that of an amicus curi@ is with us. 

With this experience, I read the case of Shylock over again, and understood it bet- 
ter. It was plain that the sort of procedure Shakespeare had in view, and attributed 
to the Venetian court, was exactly that of my recent experience. The Trial Scene 
opens on the day appointed for hearing judgement; the facts had been ascertained at 
& previous session, and Bellario had been selected as the jurist to determine the law 


LAW IN THE TRIAL SCENE—DOYLE 419 


applicable to them, The case had been submitted to him in writing, and the Court 
was awaiting his decision. The defendant, when the case is called, answers as is done 
daily in our own courts : ‘Ready, so please your Grace.’ Shylock is not present. Ina 
common law court his absence would have resulted in a nonsuit, but not so here; he 
is sent for, just as my adversary was, and comes. After an ineffectual attempt to move 
him to mercy, the Duke intimates an adjournment unless Bellario comes, and it is 
then announced that a messenger from him is in attendance; his letter is read, and 
Portia is introduced. Bellario’s letter excuses his non-attendance on the plea of ill- 
ness, and proposes her, under the name of Balthazar, as a substitute. ‘I acquainted 
him with the cause of the controversy,’ &c., and ending, ‘/ eave him to your gracious 
acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his commendation.’ The Duke, of course, 
had the right, so far as concerned himself, to accept the substitution of Balthazar for 
Bellario; but Shylock, I take it, would have had the right to challenge the substitute; 
and perhaps it is to avoid this, by disarming his suspicions, that all Portia’s utterances 
im the case, until she has secured his express consent to her acting, are favourable to 
him. Thus: ‘Of a strange nature is the suit you follow, Yet in such rule that the 
Venetian law Cannot impugn you as you do proceed;’ and again, after her splendid 
appeal for mercy: ‘I have spoken thus much, To mitigate the justice of thy plea, 
Which, if thou follow, this strict court of Venice Must needs give sentence ’gainst the 
merchant here.’ 

Shylock would have been mad to object to a judge whose intimations were so clearly 
in his favour. He first pronounces her ‘A Daniel come to judgement! yea, a Daniel!’ 
This does not, however, amount to an express acceptance of her as a substitute; it is 
but an expression of high respect, consistent, however, with a refusal to consent to the 
proposed substitution. She carries the deception still further, pronounces the bond 
forfeit, and that ‘ Lawfully, by this the Jew may claim A pound of flesh, to be by him 
cut off Nearest the merchant’s heart;’ and again pleads for mercy. 

The poor Jew, completely entrapped, then ‘charges her by the law to proceed to 
judecement. Antonio does the same, and both parties having thus in open court 
accepted her as such, she is fairly installed as the /udex substitutus for Bellario, and 
almost immediately afterwards suggests the quibble over the drop of blood and the just 
one pound of flesh, on which Antonio escapes. 

To complete the parallel to my Nicaragua experience above recounted, we find, after 
the trial is over and the poor discomfited Jew has retired from the court, the Duke 
says to the defendant, whose life has been saved by Portia’s subtlety, ‘ Antonio, gratify 
this gentleman,’ &c.; and Bassanio offers her the three thousand ducats which were 
the cundition of the bond. 

One difficulty yet remained in the case, which the above explanation did not touch, 
and which to me was still a stumbling-block, viz.: In the play the action is promoted 
by Shylock to enforce against Antonio the penalty of his bond; it concludes with a 
judgement against the plaintiff that his estate be forfeited, one-half to the common- 
wealth, the other to the defendant, and that his life lie at the mercy of the Duke, 
Justice, perhaps, but excessively raw justice, such as we would think could only be 
meted out in the court of a Turkish cadi, who fines the plaintiff, imprisons the de- 
fendant, and bastinadoes the witnesses. Yet a few years since I met with a case in a 
Mexican court involving just as marked a departure from all our notions of the proper 
course of justice as this. A question arose in this city as to the disposition of the 
estate of a gentleman who died at Mazatlan, where he had been slain in an encounter 
with his partner, while discussing in anger the state of their accounts. There had 


420 APPENDIX 


been a trial over the case in Mexico. The surviving partner put forward claims before 
our court, which caused me, in behalf of the next of kin of the deceased, to send to 
Mexico for a complete transcript of the judgement-record there. [Mr Doyle here gives 
an account of the official inquiry as to the cause of death before the alcalde, who] con- 
ducted the trial with pretty evident partiality to the survivor, whom, at the conclusion 
of it, he acquitted. [Thereupon, after some intermediate proceedings], the Fiscal, on 
behalf of the State, intervenes, and appeals to the Supreme Court. There the wit- 
nesses are re-examined; they contradict each other badly, and break down..... The 
judgement below is then reversed, the defendant sentenced to death, and the alcalde, 
before whom the trial had been had below, is sentenced to a fine of $100 for his par- 
tiality and misconduct : 

After reading this record it occurred to me that, in a court proceeding according to 
such methods as these, a judgement against the plaintiff of forfeiture of life and goods 
might be supposed, even in an action on a bond, without grossly violating probability ; 
and it seems to me that Shakespeare was acquainted (however he acquired the know- 
ledge) with the modes of procedure in tribunals administering the law of Spain, as 
well as with those of his own country; if like practice did not obtain in Venice, or if 
he knew nothing of Venetian law, there was no great improbability in assuming it to 
resemble that of Spain, considering that both were inherited from a common source, 
and that the Spanish monarchs had so iong exercised dominion in Italy. 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—ROWE. HALLAM 421 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS 


RowE (Some Account of the Life, &c., of Mr. William Shakespear, 1709, p. xix): 
To these I might add that incomparable Character, Shylock the Jew, in The Merchant 
of Venice ; but tho’ we have seen that Play Receiv’d and Acted as a Comedy, and the 
Part of the Jew perform’d by an excellent Comedian, yet I cannot but think it was de- 
sign’d Tragically by the Author. There appears in it such a deadly Spirit of Revenge, 
such a savage Fierceness and Fellness, and such a bloody designation of Cruelty and 
Mischief, as cannot agree either with the Stile or Characters of Comedy. The Play it 
self, take it all together, seems to me to be one of the most finish’d of any of Shake- 
spears. The Tale indeed, in that Part relating to the Caskets, and the extravagant 
and unusual kind of Bond given by Azxzonio, is a little too much remov’d from the 
Rules of Probability: But taking the Fact for granted, we must allow it to be very 
beautifully written, There is something in the Friendship of Antonio to Bassanio 
very Great, Generous, and Tender, ; 


CHARLES GILDON (Remarks on the Plays of Shakespeare, Rowe’s edition, vol. vii, 
p. 321, 1710): The Ignorance that Shakespear had of the Greek Drama threw him 
on such odd Stories as the Novels and Romances of his time cou’d afford, and which 
were so far from being natural that they wanted that Probability and Verisimilitude, 
which is absolutely necessary to all Representations of the Stage. The Plot of this 
Play is of that Number. But the Errors of the Fable and the Conduct are too visible 
to need Discovery. This Play has receiv’d considerable Advantages from the Pen of 
the honorable George Granville, Esq. 

The Character of the Jew is very well distinguish’d by Avarice, Malice, implacable 
Revenge, &c. But the Incidents that necessarily show those Qualities are so very 
Romantic, so vastly out of Nature, that our Reason, our Understanding is everywhere 
shock’d; which abates extremely of the Pleasure the Pen of Shakespear might give 
us. This is visible in Shylock’s speech to the Doge, for all the while that Distinction 
of Character, which is beautiful and otherwise pleases you, the Incredibility of such a 
Discourse to such a Prince, and before such a Court of Judicature, has so little of 
Nature in it, that it is impossible to escape the Censure of a Man of Common Sense. 
The Character of Portia is not everywhere very well kept, that is, the Manners are not 
always agreeable or convenient to her Sex and Quality; particularly where she scarce 
preserves her Modesty in the Expression. .... Tho’ there are a great many Beauties 
in what our modern Gentlemen call the Writimg in this Play, yet it is almost every- 
where calm, and touches not the Soul, there are no sinewy Passions, which ought 
everywhere to shine in a serious Dramatic Performance, such as most of this is. 


Dr Jonson: Of Zhe Merchant of Venice the style is even and easy, with few 
peculiarities of diction, or anomalies of construction. The comic part raises laughter, 
and the serious fixes expectation. The probability of either the one or the other story 
cannot be maintained. The union of two actions in one event is, in this drama, em‘- 
nently happy. Dryden was much pleased with his own address in connecting the owo 
plots of his Spanish Friar, which yet, I believe, the critic will find excelled wy this 


play. 


HAiam (Jntroduction to the Literature of Europe, 1837, vol. ii, chap. vi): The 
Merchant of Venice is generally esteemed the best of Shakespeare’s comedies..... 


422 APPENDIX 


In the management of the plot, which is sufficiently complex without the slightest con- 
fusion or incoherence, I do not conceive that it has been surpassed in the annals of any 
theatre. Yet there are those who still affect to speak of Shakespeare.as a barbarian ; 
and others who, giving what they think due credit to his genius, deny him all judge- 
ment and dramatic taste. A comparison of his works with those of his contemporaries, 
—and it is surely to them that we should look,—will prove that his judgement is by no 
means the least of his rare qualities. This is not so remarkable in the mere construc- 
tion of his fable, though the present comedy is absolutely perfect in that point of view ; 
and several others are excellently managed, as in the general keeping of the characters 
and the choice of incidents. If Shakespeare is sometimes extravagant, the Marstons 
and Middletons are seldom otherwise. The variety of characters in The Merchant of 
Venice, and the powerful delineation of those upon whom the interest chiefly depends ; 
the effectiveness of many scenes in representation; the copiousness of the wit, and the 
beauty of the language, it would be superfluous to extol; nor is it our office to repeat a 
tale so often told as the praise of Shakespeare. In the language there is the com- 
mencement of a metaphysical obscurity which soon became characteristic; but it is, 
perhaps, less observable than in any later play. The sweet and sportive temper of 
Shakespeare, though it never deserted him, gave way to advancing years, and to the 
mastering force of serious thought. What he read we know but very imperfectly; yet, 
in the last years of the century, when five and thirty summers had ripened his genius, 
it seems that he must have transfused much of the wisdom of past ages into his own 
all-combining mind. In several of the historical plays, in Zhe Merchant of Venice, 
and especially in As You Like Jt, the philosophic eye, turned inward on the mysteries 
of human nature, is more and more characteristic. 


THOMAS CAMPBELL (Remarks, &c., 1838, p. xxxv): In the picture of the Jew there 
is not the tragic grandeur of Richard III; but there is a similar force of mind, and the 
same subtlety of intellect, though it is less selfish. In point of courage I would give 
the palm to Shylock, for he was an ill-used man and the champion of an oppressed 
race; nor is he a hypocrite, like Richard. In fact, Shakespeare, whilst he lends him- 
self to the prejudices of Christians against Jews, draws so philosophical a picture of the 
energetic Jewish character, that he traces the blame of its faults to the iniquity of the 
Christian world. Shylock’s arguments are more logical than those of his opponents, 
and the latter overcome him only by a legal quibble. But he is a usurer and lives ov 
the interest of lent moneys; and what but Christian persecution forced him to live by 
these means? But he is also inhuman and revengeful. Why? because they called 
him dog, and spat upon his Jewish gaberdine. They voided their rheum upon him, 
and he in return wished to void his revenge upon them. All this is natural, and Shy. 
lock has nothing unnatural about him. His daughter Jessica is a very faithful picture 
of a love-inclined young woman; betraying the Oriental warmth of her race, together 
with their craftiness. But she is not to be taken as a true sample of a Jewish daugh- 
ter, for among no people are the ties of domestic life held more sacred than among the 
Hebrews. 

Throughout this whole piece there is a flow of incident and richly-imagined lan- 
guage that bears us, on a spring-tide of interest, to the settlement of the plot in the. 
Trial Scene, which is a drama in itself. Yet there Shakespeare does not forsake us, as 
a vulgar writer would have done. On the contrary, he prolongs our voluptuous sym- 
pathy, in the union of the happy characters, by a little pleasantry about the mngs and 
by a moonlight serenade of music. Our imaginations retire from the play soothed and 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—EDINBURGH REVIEW. SNIDER 423 


gratified, and perhaps with more hints to our understanding respecting the charity 
which we owe to the Jews than Shakespeare has ventured to insinuate. 


EDINBURGH REVIEW (1840, vol. lxxi, p. 481): In Zhe Merchant of Venice the 
poetical elevation is obtained by a migration into a foreign and southern region; the 
tideless bosom of the Adriatic reflects the Venetian palaces, the pine trees and fountains 
and terraces of Portia’s villa, and the deep-blue sky of the Italian clime. But every- 
where, in the garden or the Doge’s hall, on the little « campo’ of the Rialto, or beneath 
the penthouse that projects from the Jew’s den, we feel that we are still in the world, 
among men jostling one another on the crowded highway of life and hurrying towards 
the common goal. Here action is in its appropriate place; and here, therefore, adven- 
ture and surprise are accumulated upon each other; the drama invades the domain of 
the romantic novel, but, unlike most usurpers, ameliorates the region into which it has 
intruded. During four acts of the play we are hurried from one crisis to another, 
each of the two leading plots is in itself improbable and even revolting; but the harsh- 
ness of each balances and conceals that of the other. Poetical fancy, likewise, wedded 
to the charm of love, disguises the story of the caskets; while that of the pound ot 
flesh is ennobled at once by variety and unsurpassed truth of character, by the most 
vigorous strokes of passion, and by a temperate judgement which is the most admirable 
feature of the piece. At length the perplexities and dangers are overcome; love and 
hatred have both received their reward, and most poets would have dropped the cur- 
tain on their characters. But Shakespeare saw that something was still wanting. If 
the play had closed there, it would have deserved to be called a tragi-comedy in a 
reproachful sense of the term; it would have been a play, in which it was impossible 
either by reflection or by the surer test of feeling, to determine which of the two 
opposed aspects of life was intended to be exhibited as the prominent one. The main 
action of the piece in both its branches had touched the very frontier of that region 
within which it was designed to move. The scenes at Belmont had been prevented 
from becoming tragic by mere accident; the judgement-scene is really and sublimely 
tragic, in everything except the artifice which gives the turn to its catastrophe. The 
feeling which genuine comedy should leave on the mind, the perception of those rela- 
tions of man to higher powers which make his very weakness the fountain of happi- 
ness and reconciliation, is assuredly not that which rests on the mind as we retire 
slowly from the piazza of St Mark, still agitated by the perils of the trial, and perhaps 
not less moved by the blow which has smitten down into broken-hearted abasement 
Shylock’s whole soul, his intellectual strength, his bitterly pregnant humour, his He- 
brew devotion, and his hatred for those who have oppressed and insulted his nation 
and his name. The Fifth Act, forming what Coleridge in similar instances calls ‘a 
lyrical movement,’ gradually and gently relieves the heart from its oppression. A 
sportive love trick, introduced purposely in the preceding scene, furnishes its materials ; 
the tragic ideas, removed to a distance, serve but to heighten the new impression by 
contrast, and thus justify for themselves the place they hold; and the drama closes in 
music by moonlight, amidst the placid gladness of rescued innocence and united love, 


D. J. SNIDER (System of Shakespeare's Dramas, St Louis, 1877, vol. i, p. 305) : The 
general movement of the play lies in the conflict between the Right of Property and 
the Existence of the Individual, and in the Mediation of this conflict through the Fam- 
ily, whicl. owes its origin in the present case to that same individual whom it rescues. 
That is, the Family, represented by Portia, the wife, returns and saves the man who 


424 APPENDIX 
aided, by his friendship and generosity, to bring it into being. All the characters of 
the play, though possessing peculiarities of their own, must be seen in their relation to 
this fundamental theme of the work. i 

There are three central movements, which may be named in order: The Conflict, 
the Mediation, the Return. Of the first movement there are two threads, showing, 
respectively, the Property-conflict and the Love-conflict, though the former is raised to 
the highest spiritual significance by the underlying religious element. These two 
threads, moreover, are interwoven in the subtlest manner; still, an analysis has to tear 
them apart temporarily. In the first thread the antagonists are Antonio, the Christian, 
and Shylock, the Jew. Antonio is the centre of a group of five friends, who, in a vari- 
ety of ways, ingraft themselves upon the action; around Shylock also are to be placed 
his daughter, Jessica, his clownish servant Gobbo,—both of whom are leaving him and 
going over to his opponents,—and his friend Tubal. The contrast between the two 
men in their personal relations is this : Antonio is the object of the warmest friendship, 
while Shylock is disrupting his own family,—driving away daughter and servant. The 
second thread unfolds the Love-conflict, which has here three phases, represented by 
Portia, Jessica, and Nerissa. The second Movement,—the Mediation,—has the same 
two threads: the Property-conflict is brought to a successful conclusion by Portia, dis- 
guised as a lawyer; the Love-conflict has ended in all three cases with a happy solu- 
tion, namely, marriage. But both friends and lovers have been torn asunder in the 
performance of their various functions; hence the Third Movement will be the Return, 
which brings all to Belmont,—the blissful abode of harmony. 

(P. 307.) The Collision which supplies the nerve of the play may be stated, in a 
general form, to be between Christianity and Judaism. But mark! it is not between 
these religions as dogmatic systems of Theology, but as realized in the practical life of 
Hs BO We desire to lay stress upon an important fact. Shakespeare has nowhere, 
in any of his dramas, made religion, as such, the principal motive. This was no doubt 
intentional on his part, for no man understood the concrete nature of religion—religion 
as determining the conduct of mankind—better than he. In this form he uses it con- 
tinually, But to make men die for an abstract principle of Theology, Shakespeare 
utterly refused,—and he was right. 

(P. 313.) Put a man in the world with this notion: ‘I am the favorite of the Al- 
mighty; the rest of mankind is only so much material to make money out of, which I 
can use as I please,’ and you have Shylock. It is curious to observe how the Poet 
paints him as penetrated with the morality of the Old Testament. He tells the story 
of Jacob’s deceiving Laban, as Scriptural proof that his end was justifiable: ‘This was 
the way to thrive, and he was blest; And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not.’ Note 
that only one exception is made,—no stealing; everything else is allowable. The reason 
is manifest. Theft would annihilate property, and, with the destruction of it, his end 
also must perish, for that end itself is Property. Hence his motto is: Thrift, but no 
Theft. 

(P. 316.) Let us now take up the second thread,—the Love-conflict,—in which 
Portia is the main figure, supported, however, by Nerissa and Jessica. Portia is the 
third great character of the play, and in importance stands quite on a par with Antonio 
and Shylock. Her function is mediatorial; in fact, she may be called the grand 
mediatrix of the entire drama. In her we see the instrumentality by which the main 
results of the drama are brought about. Through her courtship by Bassanio, Antonio 
comes into the power of the Jew by means of the loan. At her house all the person- 
ages of the play assemble, and the wooing is done. Moreover, she accomplishes the 


— 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—SNIDER 425 


fescue of Antonio, which is the main mediation of the poem. The great principle of 
which she is the bearer may be termed the Right of Subjectivity. She asserts the 
validity of the Internal and Spiritual against the crushing might of externality; but she 
does not deny the Right of the Objective in its true limitation. Only when this Ob- 
jective becomes destructive of its end and self-contradictory, as in the case when the 
Law was about to murder Antonio, does she place a limit to it and invoke a higher 
principle. Her struggle is with legality and prescription asserting themselves in 
spheres where they do not belong; but, in relations where this contradiction no longer 
appears, she is the most ethical of women. In the Family her subordination is com- 
plete,—indeed, devout. We shall see that all her acts have one end and one impel- 
ling motive,—devotion to her husband, an absolute unity with his feelings and inter- 
ests; in other words, subordination to the Family. She vindicates the Right of Sub- 
jectivity for herself, in order that she may obtain the one whom she really loves,— 
without which principle, it need hardly be said, the true existence of the Family is 
impossible. 

(P. 325.) Shylock ranks as one of the most perfect characterizations in Shake- 
speare. How complete in every respect! How vividly does he rise up before us! 
Not merely his physical appearance, but his entire spiritual nature stands forth in the 
plainest lineaments. In fact, we feel as if we knew him better than we could possibly 
have done in real life. The Poet has laid open the most hidden recesses of character, 
has portrayed him in the most diverse relations, with a truth and fulness unapproached 
and unapproachable. We ask ourselves, Whence this completeness, this richness, this 
concreteness, of characterization? If we wish to see the infinite difference upon the 
same subjects, compare Shylock with the best efforts of other dramatists. Take 
L’ Avare, by Moliére. Placed by the side of Shylock, how meagre and unsatisfactory ! 
Can we get at the ground of this extraordinary superiority ? First, we should say that 
Shylock is something more than mere avarice; he has a deeper motive in his nature, 
and his greed for gain is only one of its manifestations. It is true that his end in life 
is Thrift, as before stated, but that end is the offspring of his moral and spiritual being, 
—of his religion. Everything goes back to this centre. Shylock is a Jew,—one of the 
‘peculiar people.’ In all his actions this deepest principle of his faith and his con- 
sciousness wells out; given the motive, he marches logically to its consequences. Thus 
we have arrived at an absolute spiritual unity in the man. The second reason for the 
transcendent excellence of this characterization is the breadth which it exhibits. The 
activities of Shylock embrace quite the totality of Life. We see him in his family, in 
business, in civil relations, in social relations, in morality, in religion. We behold him 
brought into contact with every essential form of society ; and he acts in them, brings his 
principle to the test through them. Nor is he plunged into them from the outside, but 
is brought into living relation with them. Hence the concreteness, the perfection, the 
complete individualization of character. But it is different with L’Avare. How lim- 
ited is the range of the piece in this respect! Harpagon almost descends to the com- 
mon miser,—cut off from the world in obscurity, dirt, and rags,—holding fast to his 
money-bags. His niggardliness in his household, his tyranny in his family, and an 
example of his extortionate usury express quite all that we see of him. This is not 
Shylock, who is exhibited in many more, and also far more important, relations,— 
who sees the world and grapples with it in all its essential forms; this is what gives 
content and concreteness to his character. Hence the Harpagon of Moliére is empty, 
—almost like an abstract personification of avarice; in fact, it is a meagre caricature 
compared with the Shylock of Shakespeare. But it gives occasion to many laughable 


426 ~ APPENDIX 


incidents and situations; this was what Moliére wanted; he sought for predicaments 
more than for characters. 

(P. 328.) But does Portia really give any hint to Bassanio which of the caskets to 
choose? It will be recollected that it was forbidden her in her father’s will to tell this 
secret. A suspicious circumstance is the introduction of a song during the choice of 
Bassanio, which the previous choosers did not have the benefit of. Hence one is 
inclined to scrutinize closely the meaning of the song. It is somewhat enigmatic, yet 
its general purport may be stated to be: ‘Do not choose by the eye,—by the glittering 
outside,—for it is the source of all delusion.” Hence Portia, after observing with the 
greatest care all the formalities of her father’s will, breaks it just at the point of its con- 
flict with her subjective right. This is done so delicately by her that it is scarcely per- 
ceived ; still, it is none the less real. Thus she starids here as the grand bearer of the 
Right of Subjectivity, in its special form of Love versus Obedience, to the will of the 
parent. 

(P. 338.) To aid the readers who may desire to grasp these results in the more 
difficult, yet more precise, forms of philosophical statement, the following summary is 
given: The collision is between Antonio and Shylock, and is mediated by Portia. Its 
logical basis is the contradiction between the Objective as realized in the institutions of 
Reason, and the Subjective as the individual side of man. The former undertakes to 
crush the latter, through which alone it had existence, for it is posited by the Subject- 
ive; hence it becomes contradictory of itself, and is negated. The Subjective, since 
it is not universal, is, in its turn, a new self-contradiction, and, hence, a negation of 
itself,—which results in its subsuming itself under the Objective. So Portia asserts the 
Right of Subjectivity only to end in subordinating herself to one of the forms of object- 
ive reality,—the Family. 


Hupson (Jnutroduction to The Merchant of Venice, Boston, 1879, p. 54): Critics 
have too often entertained themselves with speculations as to the Poet’s specific moral 
purpose in this play or that. Wherein their great mistake is the not bearing in mind 
that the special purposing of this or that moral lesson is quite from or beside the pur- 
pose of Art. Nevertheless a work of Art, to be really deserving the name, must needs 
be moral, because it must be proportionable and true to Nature; thus attuning our 
inward forces to the voice of external order and law; otherwise it is at strife with the 
compact of things; a piece of dissonance; a jarring, unbalanced, crazy thing, that will 
die of its own internal disorder..... As to the moral temper of Zhe Merchant of 
Venice, critics have differed widely, some regarding the play as teaching the most com- 
prehensive humanity, others as caressing the narrowest bigotries of the age. This dif- 
ference may be fairly taken as an argument of the Poet’s candour and even-handedness. 
A special pleader is not apt to leave the hearers in doubt on which side of the question 
he stands, In this play, as in others, the Poet, I think, ordered things mainly with a 
view to dramatic effect; though to such effect in the largest and noblest sense. And 
the highest praise compatible with the nature of the work is justly his, inasmuch as he 
did not allow himself to be swayed either way from the right measures and proportions 
of Art. For Art is, from its very nature, obliged to be ‘without respect of persons.’ 
Impartiality is its essential law, the constituent of its being. And of Shakespeare could 
it least of all be said :—‘ he narrow’d his mind, And to party gave up what was meant 
for mankind.’ He represented men as he had seenthem. And he could neither repeal 
nor ignore the old law of human nature, in virtue of which the wisest and kindest of 
‘nen are more or less warped by social customs and prejudices, so that they come to do, 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—SHYLOCK 427 


and even to make a merit of doing, some things that are very unwise and unkind; 
while the wrongs and insults which they are thus led to practise have the effect of 
goading the sufferers into savage malignity and revenge. Had he so clothed the latter 
with gentle and amiable qualities as to enlist the feelings all in their behalf, he would 
have given a false view of human nature, and his work would have lost much of its 
instructiveness on the score of practical morality. For good morals can never be 
reached by departures from truth. A rule that may be profitably remembered by all 
who are moved to act as advocates and special pleaders in what they think a good 
cause. 

[For the sake of convenience I have attempted to classify the following Extracts 
under their several subjects.—ED. ] 


SHYLOCK 
HAazuitt (Characters of Shakespeare's Plays, 1817, p. 269): In proportion as Shy- 
lock has ceased to be a popular bugbear ‘ baited with the rabble’s curse,’ he becomes a 
half-favourite with the philosophical part of the audience, who are disposed to think 
that Jewish revenge is at least as good as Christian injuries. Shylock is a good hater’; 
‘a man no less sinned against than sinning.’ If he carries his revenge too far, yet he 
has strong grounds for ‘the lodged hate he bears Anthonio,’ which he explains with 
equal force of eloquence and reason. He seems the depository of the vengeance of 
his race; and though the long habit of brooding over daily insults and injuries has 
crusted over his temper with inveterate misanthropy, and hardened him against the 
contempt of mankind, this adds but little to the triumphant pretensions of his enemies. 
There is a strong, quick, and deep sense of justice mixed up with the gall and bitter- 
ness of his resentment. The constant apprehension of being burnt alive, plundered, 
banished, reviled, and trampled on might be supposed to sour the most forbearing 
nature, and to take something from that ‘milk of human kindness’ with which his 
persecutors contemplated his indignities.* The desire of revenge is almost inseparable 
from the sense of wrong; and we can hardly help sympathizing with the proud spirit 
‘hid beneath his Jewish gaberdine, stung to madness by repeated undeserved provoca- 
tions, and labouring to throw off the load of obloquy and oppression heaped upon him 
and all his tribe by one desperate act of ‘lawful’ revenge, till the ferociousness of the 
means by which he is to execute his purpose, and the pertinacity with which he adheres 
to it, turn us against him; but even at last, when disappointed of the sanguinary revenge 
with which he had glutted his hopes, and exposed to beggary and contempt by the let- 
ter of the law on which he had insisted with so little remorse, we pity him, and think 
him hardly dealt with by his judges. In all his answers and retorts upon his adver- 
saries he has the best, not only of the argument, but of the question, reasoning on 
their own principles and practice. They are so far from allowing any measure of 
equal dealing, of common justice or humanity between themselves and the Jew, that 
even when they come to ask a favour of him, and Shylock reminds them [of their 
treatment of him], Anthonio, his old enemy, instead of any acknowledgement of the 
shrewdness and justice of the remonstrance, which would have been preposterous in a 
respectable Catholic merchant in those times, threatens him with a repetition of the 
same treatment. After this, the appeal to the Jew’s mercy, as if there were any com- 
mon principle of right and wrong between them, is the rankest hypocrisy or the blind- 


est prejudice. 


SKoTTOWE (Life of Shakespeare, etc., 1824, vol. i, p. 325): Shylock is abhorred 
and execrated; but the skill of the poet has endued him with qualities which preserve 


. 


428 APPENDIX 


him from contempt. His fierceness, cruelty, and relentlessness are dignified by intel- 
lectual vigour. His actions are deliberate, they are the emanations of his bold and 
masculine understanding. Let the art with which he negotiates his bond be contem- 
plated; consider his coolness, his plausible exaggeration of the dangers to which 
Antonio’s property is subjected; his bitter sarcasms and insulting gibes; all efforts of 
the mind to induce a belief of his indifference and to disguise his real design; follow 
him into court, behold him maintaining his superiority in argument, unmoved by insult 
and unawed by power, till disappointment leaves him nothing to contend for and an- 
guish stops his speech, and then let his claims to intellectual distinction be decided on. 


C. A. BRown (Shakespeare's Autobiographical Poems, 1838, p. 276): Toleration is 
an intolerable word, never used by our poet, unless,’possibly, in a disapproving manner, 
under cover of Dogberry’s ignorance,—‘ most tolerable, and not to be endured.’ To 
call it therefore in kindlier words,—respect for another’s sincere opinions,—has hitherto 
made but slow progress in the world; though, bereaved of Zhe Merchant of Venice, it 
might have been slower. No argument in its favour could be more complete, or put in 
a stronger light, than that which we find here. Shylock, a usurer, a suspicious father, 
and altogether a bad man, compels us to grant him a portion of our involuntary good- 
will, solely on account of his being persecuted for constancy in his creed; and, thwarted 
in his hopes of a hateful revenge, we look at his ominous scales, balance his injuries 
against his rancour, and cannot forbear granting him our pity when he is defeated. 
How careful the author has been to maintain our fellow-feeling, and to make Shylock’s 
religion meet persecution at every step! Not only Antonio is his reviler,—he runs the 7 
gauntlet of abuse through Venice; his daughter forsakes and robs him because of his 
religion; wherever he turns, his misfortunes are a subject of exultation; and his fall is 
hailed with insulting open triumph, His claim to be enrolled among his fellow-beings, 
in that powerful language, ‘Hath not a Jew eyes?’ &c. has nothing urged against it, 
uor could a word be said in denial, yet his claim is allowed by none, and he is never 
treated with a show of respect until he is feared. We acknowledge his right, and we ~ 
are glad to see him at last, by any resource, treated with respect; we only recoil at his 
appalling vengeance. On the other hand, Antonio is a man justly honoured for every 
virtue, with one exception,—a want of charity, a good feeling, a decent behaviour 
towards a fellow-creature, purely because he is an unbeliever. The religious animosity 
of Shylock was no more than retaliation. Antonio, indeed, may have had reason to 
accuse Shylock of extortion; but his calling him ‘misbeliever’ and ‘dog,’ spitting on 
him, and spurning him, force us instantly to side with the usurer against the christian 
of unblemished fame. When reminded of these injuries, the virtuous merchant is 
ready to repeat them, so unconscious is he of acting with injustice. Representing the 
persecutor, on all other points truly estimable, and the persecuted in no degree esti- 
mable, yet entirely unanswerable in his defence, puts personal merit out of the ques- 
tion, and places the argument on the broadest principle, including the worst as well as 
the best among believers and infidels. Shakespeare strove to alleviate the bitter per- 
secutions, not only towards the Jews, but towards all others. Catholics and Protestants, 
though the burnings in Smithfield existed no more in his day, were fearfully hateful to 
each other, when good men were contaminated by evil, and worse men by revenge 
retdering the persecutor blind to his want of charity, and giving all the truth of rea 
soning to the persecuted, however unreasonable might be the creed to the more power- 
ful party. For the benefit of those who could apply, or might hereafter apply, Antonio 
and Shylock to themselves, Shakespeare portrayed them. Should any one think the 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—SHYLOCK 429 


application was unthought of and accidental, let him contend that wheat grows into 
nourishment by chance, or try what philosophic works he can write by chance. 


W. W. Lioyp (p. 550): In the case of Bassanio the mind glides pretty easily 
over extravagance by confidence in his nature and motives, but many have been stag- 
gered by what is only another enunciation of the same principle, in the flight of Jessica 
with her father’s ducats and jewels, A chief difficulty has arisen from the maudlin 
sentimentality that has been bestowed on the murderous Jew. .... Shylock is ready to 
impute his disgraces to antipathy to his race and envy of his gains, but the poet leaves 
us in no uncertainty that his gains were those of a usurer, in the sense which, under 
any dispensation of political economy, involves at least dishonesty, dishonour, cruelty, 
and fraud. The arts by which a victim is enmeshed and ruined by a usurer are even 
now not obsolete; and, under defective laws, might have flourished tenfold..... The 
Jew is the very impersonation of avarice, meanness, and cruelty, as Antonio of gener- 
ous and sympathetic liberality, and the hellish intention of his treacherous bond is 
already patent. 

(P. 551.) The plea of the Jew, in exacting forfeiture of the bond, is the epitome 
of the very history and genius of Judaism regarded from its most unfavourable side, 
bigoted reliance in the fulfilment of precept by the letter, and disregard of spirit and 
purpose, and obstinate claim of privilege by interpretation of terms in covenant or 
bond, to the neglect of the foregone intention of the bond, in subjection to which alone 
it can be reasonably valid. All are familiar with the spirit of Pharisaism to claim 
privilege by natural descent from the favoured Abraham, and to disallow in others the 
value of the very qualities to which the favour of Abraham was ascribed; to cleanse 
the outside of the platter and to be scrupulous of days and meats, but take little thought 
of the impurities of the heart. Those only, however, can have full conception of the 
degradation of the human mind by slavery to written text, who have had some glimpses 
of the Rabbinical literature that is a monument of a tyranny in comparison with which 
Egyptian bondage was enfranchisement. The iron of this slavery has entered into the 
very soul of Shylock, and his appeal to his bond, as identified with justice, embodies 
the very soul and being of ceremonialism. The bond is signed, is sealed, is admitted, 
and he rests upon it as on a rock; borne out by this, he fears no judgement, as doing 
no wrong. The word of law is to him sanctity, and he has no sense of the ends for 
which law was framed. So he has an oath in heaven, he has sworn by the sacred Sab- 
bath; bonds and obligations again invalid, by incongruity of purport, with all the ends 
for which oaths are sacred. Such oaths are air, such bonds are waste paper; even the 
very rights of nature and paternity are dissolved by cruelty and malice, and no amount 
of wealth can purchase the happiness or power of which the moral conditions are for- 
feit; the ark of his trust and veneration is, like the gilded casket, but a painted sepul- 
chre, and within are dead men’s bones. 


Gites (Human Life in Shakespeare, 1868, p. 124): But when the sense of loss 
and the sense of wrong arise in harder natures [than in Lear and Othello]; when the 
heart does not bleed out of wounded affection, but is bitter with the gall of vindictive 
pride; when the sense of loss and the sense of wrong merge, but do not lose their 
personal, their individual consciousness in an abstract fierceness which gathers into the 
embrace of its detestatiom whole centuries of loss and wrong inflicted on millions of a 
race, and this detestation is concentrated into an impassioned antipathy such as hered 
itary persecution can excite and the most energetic inheritor of enmity can feel; or 


430 APPENDIX 
when the loss and wrong experienced are not traced to the weakness of the victim 
himself and to the vices of his injurers, but are made the crime of the human species, 
__when such conditions of hatred are embodied and expressed we have-the characters 
of Shylock and of Timon. These men do not move pity, but awaken terror. Shylock 
is inwardly a dark nature; also he is inwardly a strong nature. In purpose, will, and 
passion he is a man of energy; and, by the bigotry of society, his energy is restricted 
to one mode of power,—the power of money. Money engages his activity, but does 
not exhaust his being. To have potency, he must have money. Having any amount 
of money, he may still be trodden on as a reptile; but wanting money, he is a reptile 
without a sting. Contempt is around him, as the light of day; he breathes, as he 
walks, an atmosphere of odium; but the light does not shame him; the atmosphere 
does not sicken him; he has the stout vitality of a proud constitution, and though he 
cringes, and bows, and smiles, and seems as servile as a dog, mean as his scorners 
think him, their lowest idea of Azm is reverence itself, compared with his highest idea 
of them. The lords of Venice may call the Jew a slave, but he is an aristocrat in 
every drop of his blood; and more value does he set on any drop that trickles in a 
Hebrew beggar’s veins than the richest streams they can boast of from their upstart 
sires. They may use foul words to him, but that is their ow discredit; they may spit 
on him, but that is ¢ze¢v infamy, and not zs; he cannot give them blow for blow, but 
he can give them bigotry for bigotry; he refuses their doctrine, he willingly accepts 
their example. .... Christians represent all who have done the worst to his people in 
any age, on any soil; his personal foes stand before him for all that is worst even in 
Christians; and one man he has in the fangs of his power whom he deems the worst 
of his foes. Here is a wrath, which might fill the hollow globe that holds the stars, 
conveyed into a single point,—the anger of many generations condensed into one 
heated bolt, against one devoted head. The evil done to his people and to himself he 
cannot here repay; but he will prove that he has the disposition to repay it with more 
of usury than the most greedy miser ever craved, dreamed, or imagined. Shylock’s 
law with the Christians is the law of enmity; he is zealous to obey it, to make it per- 
fect in revenge; for him revenge is sanctity; and to immolate Antonio, as the fulfil- 
ment of it, assumes the merit and the glory of solemn and sacrificial righteousness. 
But as the hating passions, however provoked, react ever with misery on the individual 
who indulges them, so the contrivances of Shylock for the torture of others accomplish 
only the destruction of himself. 


Rev. JOHN HunTER (p. xv): Shakespeare, the interpreter of nature and humanity, 
felt that the prejudices against the Jews were cruelly immoderate. He could not, 
indeed, represent the Jew of Venice as magnanimous or in any respect amiable, for 
this would have been inconsistent with the general character of the Jews, arid would 
have been so opposed to popular prejudice that the public representation of the play 
would not have been tolerated; but while he had prepared avarice, malignity, and 
cruelty, as the colours with which he meant to portray the Jew of Venice, he saw that 
Shylock’s moral deformity might be in great measure justly attributed to the influence 
of social circumstances, and he felt that the Jew, even in a temper of malignity, might 
convincingly show to Christians that their persecuting spirit impressed on his tribe the 
character which the Jews bore in society. Shylock, accordingly, is a man whose intel- 
lectual power is not to be despised, a man who can deeply feel, and powerfully expos- 
tulate against, the indignity to which he is subjected. He cannot be allowed any 
Christian advocate among the dramatis persone, but he himself can forcibly demon- 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—SHYLOCK 431 


strate that it is far more reasonable in him to act according to what was said ‘by them 
of old time’—‘an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth’—than it is for Christians to 
boast of the excellence of that gospel charity which their conduct habitually violates. 
And herein was the dramatist a faithful and skilful monitor to professing Christians, 
Had the Jew been enabled to resent in proper time, and with proper impunity, any 
wrongs that might have been inflicted upon him, his resentment would have had vent, 
and might have left his heart capable of charity; but he had to endure, without retali- 
ation, injury and insult, time after time, until his heart became hardened as a stone that 
would whet keenly the knife of vengeance should legal justice ever give him an oppor- 
tunity of obtaining redress. 


J. W. HAues ( The Atheneum, 15 Dec., 1877): By ‘the general’ little heed is paid 
to the profound skill and the catholic humanity with which the Jew is interpreted. 


_ ‘The general’ sees only a monster, and hisses and hates. A more careful eye observes 


that this monster is accounted for,—that the great poet is considering the problem how 
such ossifications come to be. He is ‘anatomizing’ Shylock, seeing ‘what breeds 
about’ his ‘heart.’ ‘Is there any cause in nature that makes these hard hearts ??4 The 
Christian who looks frankly and faithfully at this work will not find matter for exulta- 
tion or for ridicule, but only for shame and sadness. Shylock had been made the hard, 
savage, relentless creature we see him by long and cruel oppression. He inherited a 
nature embittered by centuries of insult and outrage, and his own wretched experience 
had only aggravated its bitterness. } Sufferance ? had been, and was, the badge of ail 
his tribe; it was his badge./ As fetters corrode the flesh, so persecution corrodes the 
heart, } Shakespeare, truly detesting this dreadful being, yet bethinks him, we say, how 
he became so. He was once a man,—at least, his breed was once human; and Shake- 
speare, no less than the supreme creative genius of our own age, recognized in the Jew 
splendid capacities and powers, however, so far as he knew the race, misapplied and 


’ debased ; was no less fascinated by a character of such singular force and ineradicable 


nationality. 


Hupson (p. 72): As avarice was the passion in which Shylock mainly lived, the 
Christian virtues which thwarted this naturally seemed to him the greatest of wrongs. 

With these strong national traits are interwoven personal traits equally strong. 
Thoroughly and intensely Jewish, he is not more a Jew than he is Shylock. In his 
hard, icy intellectuality and his dry, mummy-like tenacity of purpose, with a dash, now 
and then, of biting, sarcastic humour, we see the remains of a great and noble nature, 
out of which all the genial sap of humanity has been pressed by accumulated injuries. 
With as much elasticity of mind as stiffness of neck, every step he takes but the last 
is as firm as the earth he treads on. Nothing can daunt, nothing disconcert him; 
remonstrance cannot move, ridicule cannot touch, obloquy cannot exasperate him; 
when he has not provoked them, he has been forced to bear them; and now that he 
does provoke them, he is hardened against them. Ina word, he may be broken; he 
cannot be bent. : 

(P. 74.) Thus his religion, his patriotism, his avarice, his affection, all concur to 
stimulate his enmity; and his personal hate thus reinforced overcomes for once his 
greed, and he grows generous in the prosecution of his aim, The onl pean he will 
vouchsafe for taking the pound of flesh is, ‘if it will feed nothing else, it will feed my 
revenge ;’ a reason all the more satisfactory to him, forasmuch as those to whom he 
gives it can neither allow it nor refute it; and until they can rail the seal from off his 


432 APPENDIX 


bond, all their railings are but a foretaste of the revenge he seeks. In his eagerness to 
taste that morsel sweeter to him than all the luxuries of Italy, his recent afflictions—the 
loss of his daughter, his ducats, his jewels, and even the precious ring given him by 
his departed wife—all fade from his mind. In his inexorable and imperturbable hard- 
ness at the trial there is something that makes the blood to tingle. It is the sublimity 
of nalice. We feel that the yearnings of revenge have silenced all other cares and 
all other thoughts. In his rapture of hate the man has grown superhuman, and his 
eyes seem all aglow with preternatural malignity. Fearful, however, as is his passion, 
he comes not off without moving our pity. In the very act whereby he thinks to 
avenge his own and his brethren’s wrongs, the national curse overtakes him. In 
standing up for the letter of the law against all pleadings of mercy, he has strength- 
ened his enemies’ hands, and sharpened their weapons, against himself; and the terrible 
Jew sinks at last into the poor, pitiable, heart-broken Shylock. 

Early in the play, when Shylock is bid forth to Bassanio’s supper, and Launcelot 
urges him to go, because ‘my young master doth expect your reproach,’ Shylock 
replies, ‘So do I his.’ Of course he expects that reproach through the bankruptcy of 
Antonio, This would seem to infer that Shylock has some hand in getting up the 
reports of Antonio’s ‘losses at sea ;’ which reports, at least some of them, turn out false 
in the end. Further than this, the Poet leaves us in the dark as to how those reports 
grew into being and gained belief. Did he mean to have it understood that the Jew 
exercised his cunning and malice in plotting and preparing them? It appears, at all 
events, that Shylock knew they were coming before they came. Yet I suppose the 
natural impression from the play is, that he lent the ducats and took the bond ona 
mere chance of coming at his wish. But he would h+ =, grasp so eagerly at a bare 
possibility of revenge, without using means to turn it into something more. This 
would mark him with much deeper lines of guilt. Why, then, did not Shakespeare 
bring the matter forward more prominently? Perhaps it was because the doing so 
would have made Shylock appear too deep a criminal for the degree of interest which 
his part was meant to carry in the play. In other words, the health of the drama 
as a work of comic art required his criminality to be kept in the background. He 
comes very near overshadowing the other characters too much, as it is. And Shy- 
lock’s character is essentially tragic; there is none of the proper timber of comedy 
in him. 


FREDERICK HAwKINs (The Theatre, Nov., 1879, p. 194): The sympathy enjoyed 
by Shylock is designedly aroused in the interest of the great but downtrodden race he 
represents. The man who exhausted worlds and then imagined new, whose mind was 
such that at times he seemed to touch some awful secret of the Cosmos, whose works 
are hghted up by wisdom, generosity, and tenderness,—such a man could have had no 
share in an outburst of vulgar envy and fanaticism. He saw the Jews as they were, 
and so seeing them wrote Zhe Merchant of Venice in order to exhibit one of their 
number at a disadvantage as a direct result of the unreasoning prejudice against them. 
He more than counteracted with one hand what he seemed to do with the other. In 
availing himself of the greatest popular madness of his time he sought to appease it. 
His play might have been regarded as an attack upon the Jews, but in reality it 
defended them. Much of the true significance of the play is to be appreciated only 
by those who read between the lines, for even if Elizabethan audiences and readers 
had been well-disposed towards the Jews, the dramatist was too great a master of his 
art to preach his moral. No pains appear to have been spared to dignify the character 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—SHYLOCK 433 


of Shylock. The whole force of an old untainted religious aristocracy is breathed in 
scme of his speeches. He is filled with a generous enthusiasm for his sacred tribe and 
ancient law, His avarice, a vice forced on him by circumstances, is relieved by gleams 
of an originally noble nature. He has so deep a veneration for the memory of his dead 
wife that ‘a wilderness of monkeys’ would not compensate for the loss of the ring she 
had given him in youth. He is tenderly attached to his daughter, whom he leaves in 
charge of his house and his keys. Many of the graces of intellect, too, are engrafted 
upon him, as may be seen from his wealth of ideas and the felicitous language in 
which they are expressed. 

(P. 195.) In the Trial Scene Shylock’s reason seems to have been shaken by the 
flight of his daughter; and the knowledge that Antonio has assisted her to get away, a 
circums‘anoz often overlooked, may account in some measure for the increased malig- 
nity he here displays towards the Merchant. 

[The foregoing view, that in 7he Merchant of Venice we have a ‘plea for toleration,’ 
evoked a discussion in the next number of Zhe Theatre (December, 1879), which I 
should like to transfer to these pages, but lack of space restricts me merely to a para 
graph here and there. Mr Spedding’s contribution I give in full, not only for the sake 
of the clarum: et venerabile nomen, but for the sound, wholesome truths which, as I 
think, it sets forth.] 


THEODORE MARTIN: I can find no trace of any ‘plea for toleration.? Nobody in 
the play urges anything in the nature of such a plea. Jew and Christian are alike 
intolerant.,... Even after the discipline of suffering and peril which had brought him 
face to face with death, Antonio seeks to force upon Shylock a renunciation of his faith, 
not from any belief that this could operate a change in his convictions or in his cruel 
nature, but in the very harshest spirit of intolerance. Everybody in the court, the 
Duke himself, indeed, seems to think this a‘most proper and reasonable demand. .... 
While I cannot think that a plea for religious liberty was in Shakespeare’s thoughts in 
writing this play, I frankly admit that it indirectly inculcates the un-wisdom of religious 
persecution in the mischief it works upon the persecutors as well as upon the perse- 
cuted..... Only in Portia is the sweet and humble spirit of Christianity illustrated. 
. ... Save in the words which fell from Portia, there is not in the play, to my mind, a 
trace of any recognition of the great doctrine of religious toleration. That Shakespeare 
held by that doctrine as stoutly as man ever did, I can have no doubt, but I see no 
symptom of an intention to expound, or even to illustrate it. ‘I cannot find it in the 
bond.’ 


An Actor: The tendency of the play is undoubtedly to show that ‘the worst pas- 
sions of human nature are nurtured by undeserved persecution and obloquy.’? How 
far this tendency was a matter of deliberate design we shall never know, but Mr Haw- 
kins’s arguments are hardly overthrown by the fact that the principle of religious tole- 
ration is not expressly enforced in the text. 


F, J. FurNIvALL: Had a plea for toleration been Shakespeare’s object, would he 
have clinched the argument that Shylock uses with that ‘shall we not'revenge ?’ the 
claim that Jews had a right to turn devils as freely as Christians had? Was there no 
nob e Jew in history, no suffering one, specially no woman, in romance, through whom 
he could have put forth his plea more effectively than through Shylock? Assuredly 


there were many. 
28 


434 APPENDIX 


FRANK MARSHALL: It is not necessary to suppose that Shakespeare had any especial 
views with regard to the removal of Jewish disabilities in his portrayal of the character 
of Shylock. Shakespeare was not a doctrinnaire ; he was essentially a dramatist, and 
possessed in a greater degree than any other author the faculty of entering into the 
feelings of the characters which he introduced into his plays. 


IsRAEL Davis: Shakespeare was too thoroughly an artist to write a play with a 
moral purpose. In regard to the essence of a drama, he was guided irresistibly by a 
keen appreciation of the real nature of men’s thoughts and feelings. Shylock is an 
interesting character, not evil by nature, but made evil by the treatment to which he 
has been subjected. The moral suggests itself, that if the Jew had been treated in a 
better way he would have been a better man; and Shakespeare cannot have been 
unconscious that he preached that moral, although the purpose of his play was to 
preach no lesson, but to describe human life..... It was a greater step for Shake 
speare, in the sixteenth century, to create the Shylock of The Merchant of Venice 
than for George Eliot, in our own times, to imagine the Mordecai of Daniel Deronda. 


DaviIp ANDERSON: I see no reason why the Jewish race should be ashamed of 
Shylock; and I venture to suggest that at the period of the play there may have been 
hundreds of such characters in the cities and towns of Italy. Save for his revengeful 
spirit, the Jew compares favourably with the other principal characters of the play. 


James SPEDDING: The best contribution I can offer to this discussion is the expres 
sion of an old man’s difficulty in accepting these new discoveries of profound moral 
and political designs underlying Shakespeare’s choice and treatment of his subjects. 
I believe that he was a man of business,—that his principal business was to pro- 
duce plays which would draw. I believe that he took the story of the caskets and of 
the pound of flesh because he thought he could combine them (I forget whether he 
found them together or put them together) into a good romantic comedy that was 
likely to succeed; and I think he managed it very well. But if, instead of looking 
about for a story to ‘please’ the Globe audience, he had been in search of a subject 
under cover of which he might steal into their minds ‘a more tolerant feeling towards 
the Hebrew race,’ I cannot think he would have selected for his hero a rich Jewish 
merchant plotting the murder of a Christian rival by means of a fraudulent contract, 
which made death the penalty of non-payment at the day, and insisting on the exac- 
tion of it. Ina modern Christian audience it seems to be possible for a skilful actor to 
work on the feelings of an audience so far as to make a man engaged in such a busi- 
ness an object of respectful sympathy. But can anybody believe that, in times when 
this would have been much more difficult, Shakespeare would have chosen such a case 
as a favourable one to suggest toleration to a public prejudiced against Jews? A law- 
yer retained to defend a man who has kicked his wife to death will try to prove that 
his client was an injured husband, and had served her right, and this may succeed with 
a jury that have had experience of conjugal provocations. But if his business were to 
plead for a mitigation of the severity of the law against husbands, he would surely 
keep his injured friend’s case as far out of sight as he could. I do not believe, in fact, 
that Shakespeare, either in choosing the subject or treating it, was thinking about Jew- 
ish grievances or disabilities at all either way. What he had to think about was, how 
he could introduce into a comedy, without putting everything out of tune, an incident 
so shocking, and a project so savage, that ‘the imagination almost refuses to approach 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—PORTIA 435 


it.’ And I think he managed this also very skilfully, by first depriving Shylock of all 
pretence of grievance or excuse, which was done by the offer of all the money due 
him upon his bond, with twice as much more to compensate him for the very short 
time he had had to wait for it beyond the appointed day,—an offer which leaves him 
without any conceivable motive for preferring the pound of flesh except the worst,— 
and then dismissing him with a punishment very much lighter than he deserved. 


MACDONALD (The Jmagination, 1883, p. 125): There is for every one of Shake- 
speare’s characters the firm ground of humanity, upon which the weeds, as well as the 
flowers, glorious or fantastic, as the case may be, show themselves. His more heroic 
persons are the most profoundly human. Nor are his villains unhuman, though inhu 
man enough. Compared with Marlowe’s Jew, Shylock is a terrible man beside a 
dreary monster, and, as far as logic and the /ex ¢alionis go, has the best of the argu- 
ment. It is the strength of human nature itself that makes crime strong. Wicked- 
ness could have no power of itself; it lives by the perverted powers of good. And so 
great is Shakespeare’s sympathy with Shylock even, in the hard and unjust doom that 
overtakes him, that he dismisses him with some of the spare sympathies of the more 
tender-hearted of his spectators. Nowhere is the justice of genius more plain than in 
Shakespeare’s utter freedom from party-spirit, even with regard to his own creations. 
Each character shall set itself forth from its own point of view, and only in the choice 
and scope of the whole shall the judgement of the poet be beheld. He never allows 
his opinion to come out to the damaging of the individual’s own self-presentation. He 
knows well that for the worst something can be said, and that a feeling of justice and 
his own right will be strong in the mind of a man who is yet swayed by perfect selfish- 
ness. Therefore the false man is not discoverable in his speech, not merely because 
the villain will talk as like a true man as he may, but because seldom is the villainy 
clear to the villain’s own mind. 


PORTIA 

Hazlitt (Characters of Shakespeare's Plays, 1817, p. 273) : Portia is not a very great 
favourite with us; neither are we in love with her maid, Nerissa. Portia has a certain 
degree of affectation and pedantry about her, which is very unusual in Shakespeare’s 
women, but which, perhaps, was a proper qualification for the office of a ‘civil doctor,’ 
_which she undertakes and executes so successfully. The speech about Mercy is very 
well; but there are a thousand finer ones in Shakespeare. We do not admire the 
scene of the caskets, and object entirely to the black Prince Morochius. We should 
like Jessica better if she had not deceived and robbed her father; and Lorenzo, if he 
had not married a Jewess, though he thinks he has a right to wrong a Jew. ‘The dia- 
logue between the newly-married couple by moonlight in Act V is a collection of 

classical elegancies.* 


# CHARLES CowDEN-CLARKE (Shakespeare-Characters, London, 1863, p. 393): I have always 
regretted that Hazlitt set down that passage. It has been often quoted; and, as his staid opinion, 
it has awakened a natural opposition to him en the part of those critics who could better perceive 
the true beauties of Portia’s character than they knew of, or could discern, the variable moods of 
Hazlitt’s temperament. Every one who knew him would feel convinced that he penned these words 
under some temporary fit of spleen, some wayward, momentary feeling of petulance against high- 
bred women. Hazlitt was very sensitive—personally sensitive—on the score of women’s liking 
toward himself; and he occasionally made some curious mistakes, such as many men who are at 
once self-diffident and self-confident, intellectually proud and constitutionally shy (for all the quab- 
ties are perfectly compatible), often do make about women and women’s preferences. ; Even fe Ne 
writings these peculiarities are plainly perceptible. Turn to his Essay “On Great and Tasde Ehines, 
where be professes his admiration for ‘humble beauties, servant-maids and shepherd-girls ;’ his own 


436 APPENDIX 


Mrs JAMESON (Characteristics of Women, 2d ed., 1833, vol. i, p. 66): Portia, Isa- 
bella, Beatrice, and Rosalind may be classed together, as characters of intellect, 
because, when compared with others, they are at once distinguished by their mental 
superiority. In Portia it is intellect kindled into romance by a poetical imagination. 
.... The wit of Portia is like attar of roses, rich and concentrated..... As women 
and individuals, as breathing realities, clothed in flesh and blood, I believe we must 
assign the first rank to Portia, as uniting in herself in a more eminent degree than the 
others, all the noblest and most lovable qualities that ever met together in woman. 

Portia is endued with her own share of those delightful qualities which Shakespeare 
has lavished on many of his female characters; but, besides the dignity, the sweetness, 
and tenderness which should distinguish her sex generally, she is individualized by 
qualities peculiar to herself; by her high mental powers, her enthusiasm of tempera- 
ment, her decision of purpose, and her buoyancy of spirit. These are innate; she has 
other distinguishing qualities more external, and which are the result of the circum- 
stances in which she is placed. Thus she is the heiress of a princely name and count- 
less wealth; a train of obedient pleasures have ever waited round her; and from 
infancy she has breathed an atmosphere redolent of perfume and blandishment. 
Accordingly, there is a commanding grace, a high-bred, airy elegance, a spirit of mag- 
nificence in all that she says and does, as one to whom splendour had been familiar 
from her very birth. She treads as though her footsteps had been among marble pal- 
aces, beneath roofs of fretted gold, o’er cedar floors and pavements of jasper and por- 
phyry—amid gardens full of statues, and flowers, and fountains, and haunting music. 
She is full of penetrative wisdom, and genuine tenderness, and lively wit; but as she 
has never known want, or grief, [not when her father died >—ED.] or fear, or disap- 
pointment, her wisdom is without a touch of the sombre or the sad; her affections are 
all mixed up with faith, hope, and joy; and her wit has not a particle of malevolence 
or causticity. 

(P. 72.) We are not told expressly where Belmont is situated ; but as Bassanio takes 
ship to go thither from Venice, and as we find [Portia] afterwards ordering horses from 
Belmont to Padua, we will imagine Portia’s hereditary palace as standing on some 
lovely promontory between Venice and Trieste, overlooking the blue Adriatic, with the 
Friuli Mountains or the Euganean hills for its background, such as we often see in one 
of Claude’s or Poussin’s elysian landscapes. In a scene, in a home like this, Shake- 
speare, having first exorcised the original possessor, has placed Portia; and so endowed 
her that all the wild, strange, and moving circumstances of the story become natural, 
probable, and necessary in connection with her. That such a woman should be chosen 
by the solving of an enigma is not surprising; herself and all around her, the scene, 


words, declaring, too, that he ‘admires the Clementinas and Clarissas at a distance,’ while the 

Pamelas and Fannys of Richardson and Fielding sake the blood tingle.’ But at the very time 
that he tries to exalt the ignorant charmers, he permits the reader to perceive that they provoke 
him with their inapprehensiveness. And in another Essay, entitled ‘On the Disadvantages of Intel- 
lectual Superiority,’ he, with much bitterness, takes up the opposite side of the question, saying, 
where he is speaking of the wooing of men of letters, ‘ Women of education may have a glimpse of 
their meaning, may get a clue to their characters ; but to all others they are thick darkness. If tha 
mistress smile at their zdea/ advances, the maid will laugh outright.’ Here we find that the pretty 
ignorants had lost their fascination for him; that he saw through their insufficiency to form the solid 
and permanent delight of a man of intelligence; whereas, when he wrote that line, ‘ Portia is not a 
very great favourite with us,’ the Fannys and the Pamelas chanced to be in the ascendant. His 
imagination was beguiling him with some image of captivating simpletonism ; frequently and oddly 
confounded with simplicity, when he asserted that ‘ Portia has a certain degree of affectation and 
pedantry about her.” 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—PORTIA 437 


the courtry, the age in which she is placed, breathe of poetry, romance, and enchant- 
ment. 

(P. 74.) But all the finest parts of Portia’s character are brought to bear in the Trial 
Scene. There she shines forth all her divine self. Her intellectual powers, her ele- 
vated sense of religion, her high honorable principles, her best feelings as a woman, are 
all displayed. She maintains at first a calm self-command, as one sure of carrying her 
point *n the end; yet the painful, heart-thrilling uncertainty in which she keeps the 
whole court, until suspense verges upon agony, is not contrived for effect merely; it is 
necessary and inevitable. She has two objects in view: to deliver her husband’s friend, 
and to maintain her husband’s honour by the discharge of his just debt, though paid 
out of her own wealth ten times over. It is evident that she would owe the safety 
of Antonio to anything rather than to the legal quibble with which her cousin Bel- 
lario has armed her, and which she reserves as a last resource. Thus all the speeches 
addressed to Shylock in the first instance are either direct or indirect experiments on 
his temper and feelings. She must be understood from the beginning to the end as 
examining with intense anxiety the effect of her own words on his mind and counte- 
nance; as watching for that relenting spirit which she hopes to awaken either by reason 
or persuasion. She begins by an appeal to his mercy, in that matchless piece of elo- 
quence which falls upon the heart like “gentle dew [sc] from heaven,’”—but in vain. 
She next attacks his avarice. Then she appeals in the same breath both to his avarice 
and his pity. 

All that she says afterwards—her strong expressions, which are calculated to strike a 
shuddering horror through the nerves—the reflections she interposes—her delays and 
circumlocution to give time for any latent feeling of commiseration to display itself,—all, 
all are premeditated and tend in the samé manner to the object she has in view. 
Thus: ‘You must prepare your bosom for his knife,’ ‘ Therefore lay bare your bosom.’ 
These two speeches, though addressed apparently to Antonio, are spoken af Shylock, 
and are evidently intended to penetrate 42s bosom. In the same spirit she asks for the 
balance to weigh the pound of flesh, and entreats of Shylock to have a surgeon ready. 

So unwilling is her sanguine and generous spirit to resign all hope, or to believe that 
humanity is absolutely extinct in the bosom of the Jew, that she calls on Antonio, as a 
last resource, to speak for himself. His gentle, yet manly resignation—the deep pathos 
of his farewell, and the affectionate allusion to herself in his last address to Bassanio— 
are well calculated to swell that emotion which, through the whole scene, must have 
been labouring suppressed within her heart. 

At length the crisis arrives, for patience and womanhood can endure no longer, and 
when Shylock, carrying his savage bent ‘to the last hour of act,’ springs on his victim 
—*A sentence! come, prepare!’ then the smothered scorn, indignation, and disgust 
burst forth with an impetuosity which interferes with the judicial solemnity she had at 
first affected; particularly in the speech: ‘Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh,’ 
&c. But she afterwards recovers her propriety, and triumphs with a cooler scorn and 
a more self-possessed exultation. 

It is clear that, to feel the full force and dramatic beauty of this marvellous scene, 
we must go along with Portia as well as with Shylock; we must understand her con- 
cealed purpose, keep in mind her noble motives, and pursue in our fancy the undercur- 
rent of feeling working in her mind throughout. The terror and the power of Shy- 
lock’s character,—his deadly and inexorable malice,—would be too oppressive; the pain 
and the pity too intolerable, and the horror of the possible issue too overwhelming, but 
for the intellectual relief afforded by this double source of interest and contemplation. 


438 APPENDIX 


I come now to that capacity for warm and generous affection, that tenderness of heart, 
which render Portia not less lovable as a woman than admirable for her mental endow- 
ments. The affections are to the intellect what the forge is to the metal; it is they which 
temper and shape it to all good purposes, and soften, strengthen, and purify it. What 
an exquisite stroke of judgement in the poet, to make the mutual passion of Portia and 
Bassanio, though unacknowledged to each other, anterior to the opening of the play! 
Bassanio’s confession very properly comes first, and prepares us for Portia’s half- 
betrayed, unconscious election of this most graceful and chivalrous admirer. Our 
interest is thus awakened for the lovers from the very first; and what shall be said 
of the Casket Scene with Bassanio, where every line which Portia speaks is so worthy 
of herself, so full of sentiment and beauty, and poetry, and passion? Too naturally 
frank for disguise, too modest to confess her depth:of love while the issue of the trial 
remains in suspense, the conflict between love and fear and maidenly dignity causes 
the most delicious confusion that ever tinged a woman’s cheek, or dropped in broken 
utterance from her lips. 

(P. 83.) A prominent feature in Portia’s character is that confiding, buoyant spirit 
which mingles with all her thoughts and affections. And here let me observe, that I 
never yet met in real life, nor ever read in tale or history, of any woman, distinguished 
for intellect of the highest order, who was not also remarkable for this trusting spirit, 
this hopefulness and cheerfulness of temper. ... . Inthe Casket Scene she fears indeed 
the issue of the trial, but while she trembles, her hope is stronger than her fear. 

(P. 86.) Her subsequent surrender of herself in heart and soul, of her maiden free- 
dom, and her vast possessions, can never be read without deep emotion; for not only 
all the tenderness and delicacy of a devoted woman is here blended with all the dig- 
nity which becomes the princely heiress of Belmont, but the serious, measured self- 
possession of her address to her lover, when all suspense is over and all concealment 
superfluous, is most beautifully consistent with the character. It is, in truth, an awful 
moment, that in which a gifted woman first discovers that, besides talents and powers, 
she has also passions and affections; when she first begins to suspect their vast import- 
ance in the sum of her existence; when she first confesses that her happiness is no 
longer in her own keeping, but is surrendered for ever and for ever into the dominion 
of another! ‘The possession of uncommon powers of mind are so far from affording 
relief or resource in the first intoxicating surprise—I had almost said terror—of such 
a revelation, that they render it more intense. The sources of thought multiply beyond 
calculation the sources of feeling; and, mingled, they rush together, a torrent deep as 
strong. Because Portia is endued with that enlarged comprehension which looks 
before and after, she does not feel the less, but the more: because from the height of 
her commanding intellect she can contemplate the force, the tendency, the conse- 
quences of her own sentiments,—because she is fully sensible of her own situation, 
and the value of all she concedes,—the concession is not made with less entireness 
and devotion of heart, less confidence in the truth and worth of her lover, than when 
Juliet, in a similar moment, but without any such intrusive reflections,—any check but 
the instinctive delicacy of her sex,— flings herself and her fortunes at the feet of her 
Jover: ‘ And all my fortunes at thy foot I’ll lay, And follow thee, my lord, through all 
the world.’ if Portia’s confession, which is not breathed from a moonlit balcony, but 
spoken openly in the presence of her attendants and vassals, there is nothing of the 
passionate self-abandonment of Juliet nor of the artless simplicity of Miranda, but a 


conssiousness and a tender seriousness approaching to solemnity, which are not less 
touching, 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS--PORTIA 439 


(P. 92.) And in the description of her various suitors in the first scene with 
Nerrissa, what infinite power, wit, and vivacity! She half checks herself as she is 
about to give the reins to her sportive humour: ‘In truth, I know it is asin to be a 
mocker,’ But if it carries her away, it is so perfectly good-natured, so temperately 
bright, sc lady-like, it is ever without offence; and so far, most unlike the satirical 
poignant, unsparing wit of Beatrice, ‘ misprising what she looks on.’ In fact, I can 
scarcely conceive a greater contrast than between the vivacity of Portia and the vivacity 
of Beatrice. Portia, with all her airy brilliance, is supremely soft and dignified ; every- 
thing she says or does displays her capability for profound thought and feeling as well 
as her lively and romantic disposition; and as I have seen in an Italian garden a foun- 
tain flinging round its wreaths of showery light, while the many-coloured Iris hung 
brooding above it, in its calm and soul-felt glory; so in Portia the wit is ever kept sub- 
ordinate to the poetry, and we still feel the tender, the intellectual, and the imaginative 
part of the character as superior to, and presiding over, its spirit and vivacity. 


C. A. BRown (p. 279): Portia is a greater favourite with me than with Hazlitt; but 
I do not think her quite so amiable as she is described by Mrs Jameson. Laying down 
the law, in which Portia seems to rejoice, cannot be perfectly amiable, though it were 
in a male counsel; for then we could feel no more than admiration at his professional 
talents. It is true, circumstances forced her into that situation; and, feudal lady as 
she was, she executes her task thoroughly. All she does is consistent; yet I much 
question if she does not experience a triumphant delight while she detains the Court 
in suspense. Shakespeare has done much in softening the objection; but, somehow, 
it could not be entirely overcome. 


W. W. Luioyp (p. 552): In some respects Portia has always appeared to me the 
most wonderful of all Shakespeare’s feminine creations, The part she was to play in 
the Scene of the Trial gave the leading condition of her character, the possession of 
the highest intellectual endowments that are compatible in woman, with the age and 
the susceptibilities for tender and romantic love. The power of the poet, however, is 
less wonderful, even in the wondrous Trial Scene, than in the exhibition of the blend- 
ing of the logical and intellectual element in the very web of rapture and passion 
when Bassanio stands before the caskets. A spirit of inference, a sequence of dedue- 
tion, run through the very confusion of her agitated hopes, and govern and correct by 
apprehensive standards the comparisons that crowd upon her imagination. In her, 
meet and adjust themselves all the perfections of all the other less perfect characters 
of the play. She is as sympathetic as Anthonio, but, with equal abhorrence of cruelty, 
she avoids an outbreak of vituperation against the Jew, and zealously gives him every 
chance of retiring, appealing first to the finer chords of humanity, and, when these fait 
to respond, to the coarser motives of lucre; and when the Duke, with precipitateness 
which he has afterwards to qualify, remits part of the fine, she reserves the rights of 
Anthonio, ‘ Ay, for the State, not for Anthonio,’ not merely by way of sustaining her 
assumed character of legal accuracy, but to allow him the opportunity, which he only 
employs when she still more directly furnishes him the cue, to render some proportion 
of mercy. Nay, I may here add, in her first declaration of the consequences of shed- 
ding a drop of Christian blood, she names only the forfeiture of lands and goods. 
Whenever again the play is worthily represented, I believe that, during the intermedi- 
ate speeches, the changing demeanour of Shylock would give reason to apprehend 
that, as he had already subjected avarice to revenge, he would even have risked all 


440 APPENDIX 


to glut his cruel purpose, and that it is therefore that Portia now adds other conse- 
quences, ‘ Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate,’ and so pursues his sentence to 
the end. In the novel the Jew’s defeat turns entirely on the matter of the blood-shed- 
ding, which, in itself, is little better than a quibble; Shakespeare wisely retained and 
put this first to degrade the literal principle of the Jew to the uttermost, by exhibiting 
him foiled at the weapons of his own cunning, when wielded with simplicity and 
straightforwardness; but the dignity of the moral, which is that of Portia’s character, 
required and supplied the more substantial reference to criminality of murderous intent. 


Rev. JoHN Hunter (p. xviii): There is, indeed, a methodical style-in the expres- 
sion even of Portia’s most impassioned thoughts, which has induced some critics to 
impute to her a degree of affectation unusual in Shakespeare’s delineations of female 
character; but we believe that the dramatist has herein observed a most judicious con- 
sistency, and that the language in which Portia describes her emotions is not less indic- 
ative of genuine feeling for containing some reflex of that peculiar aptitude of mina 
which she displays in the Trial Scene. There she is methodical amidst all her excite- 
ment of anxiety for the honour of her husband..... Though the appeals by which she 
endeavours to make the Jew relent are characterized by an observance of formal argu- 
ment, we should remember that she is all the while actuated by intense solicitude in the 
utterance of these appeals. 


Mrs F. A. KeMBLE (Ad/antic Monthly, June, 1876): I chose Portia, then as now 
my ideal of a perfect woman,— 


‘The noble woman nobly planned, 

‘To warn, to comfort, and command 3 

‘The creature not too bright or good 

‘For human nature’s daily food ; 

‘For transient sorrows, simple wiles, 

‘Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles ;’ 


the wise, witty woman, loving with all her soul, and submitting with all her heart to a 
man whom everybody but herself (who was the best judge) would have judged her 
inferior; the laughter-loving, light-hearted, true-hearted, deep-hearted woman, full of 
keen perception, of active efficiency, of wisdom prompted by love, of tenderest unself- 
ishness, of generous magnanimity ; noble, simple, humble, pure; true, dutiful, religious, 
and full of fun; delightful above all others, the woman of women. 


Hupson (p. 65): Being to act for once the part of a man, it would seem hardly pos- 
sible for her to go through the undertaking without more of self-confidence than were 
becoming in a woman; and the student may find plenty of matter for thought in the 
Poet’s so managing as to prevent such an impression. For there is nothing like osten- 
tation or conceit of intellect in Portia. Though knowing enough for any station, still 
it never once enters her head that she is too wise for the station which Providence or 
the settled order of society has assigned her..... Portia’s consciousness of power does 
indeed render her cool, collected, and firm, but never a whit unfeminine; her smooth 
command both of herself and of the matter she goes about rather heightens our sense 
of her modesty than otherwise; so that the impression we take from her is, that these 
high mental prerogatives are of no sex; that they properly belong to the common free- 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS---PORTIA 441 


hold of woman and man. Some of her speeches, especially at the trial, are evidently 
premeditated ; for, as any good lawyer would do, she of course prepares herself in the 
case betorehand; but I should like to see the masculine lawyer that could premeditate 
anything equal to them. 

(P. 68.) How nicely Shakespeare discriminates things that really differ, so as to 
present in all cases the soul of womanhood, without a particle of effeminacy ! and how 
perfectly he reconciles things that seem most diverse, pouring into his women all the 
intellectual forces of the other sex, without in the least impairing or obscuring their 
womanliness !—all this is not more rare in poetry than it is characteristic of his work- 
manship. Thus Portia is as much superior to her husband in intellect, in learning, and 
accomplishment, as she is in wealth; but she is none the less womanly for all that. 
Nor, which is more, does she ever on that account take the least thought of inverting 
the relation between them. In short, her mental superiority breeds no kind of social 
displacement, nor any desire of it. Very few of the Poet’s men are more highly 
charged with intellectual power, While she is acting the lawyer in disguise, her speech 
and bearing seem to those about her in the noblest style of manliness... .. Yet to us, 
who are in the secret of her sex, all the proprieties, all the inward harmonies of her 
character, are exquisitely preserved. 


LaDy MARTIN (Shakespeare's Female Characters, 1885, p. 30 e¢ seg.): To know 
how Portia has been able to accomplish [the rescue of Bassanio’s friend] we must go 
back to her youth. I think of her as the cherished child of a noble father,—a father 
proud of his child’s beauty, and of the promise which he sees in her of rare gifts, both 
of mind and heart, These gifts he spares no pains to foster. He is himself no ordi- 
nary man. He anticipates the danger to which the beautiful and wealthy heiress may 
be exposed; and it was by one of those ‘good inspirations’ which, as Nerissa says, 
‘holy men have at their death,’ that he fixed upon the device of the three caskets, 
‘whereof who chooses his meaning chooses’ his beloved daughter. From the first his 
aim has been to train her to succeed him in his high position, With this view he has 
surrounded her with all that is beautiful in art and ennobling in study, and placed hea 
in the society of scholars, poets, soldiers, statesmen, the picked and noblest minds of 
her own and other lands. Amid this throng of honoured guests, not the least honoured, 
we may be sure, was the learned ‘cousin, Dr Bellario.’ This cousin of hers we may 
suppose to have been a constant visitor at princely Belmont, and, indeed, to have been 
her instructor in jurisprudence, a not unfitting branch of the future heiress of Belmont’s 
education. One can imagine how the girl Portia would rush to him for help in her 
youthful perplexities. Perhaps they have, even in these early days, ‘turned over many 
books together.’ Her father may have seen with pleased surprise the bias of her mind 
toward such studies; and this, as well as her affection for her learned teacher, may 
have led him to take her to some of the famous trials of the day,so that when her own 
hour of trial comes, when heart and head must alike be strong, and her self-possession 
is taxed to the uttermost, she knows at least the forms of the court, and through no 
technical ignorance would be likely to betray herself. If this were not so, how could 
she, however assured of her power to overcome the Jew, have dared to venture into the 
presence of such an assembly as that ‘ great court of Venice,’ where any failure would 
have been disastrous, not merely to herself, but to Bellario? 

.... During the time, brief as it can be made, of the preparations for the marriage 
ceremony, Portia will have heard all the particulars of the ‘ merry bond’ she will have 
discovered that money alone, however squandered, cannot shake the obdurate Jew’s 


442 APPENDIX 
determination, Accustomed by her peculiar training to look with a judicial mind upon’ 
serious matters, she, after many :Juestionings about its terms, hits by a happy instinct, as 
I believe, upon the flaw in the bond. She will say nothing of this to Bassanio, but 
hurries him away with her wealth to use as his own; and then herself hastens towards 
Venice, after despatching a messenger to Bellario with a letter informing him of her 
approach, as well as of her belief that she has found a flaw in the bond, and requesting 
his presence at the trial. We find her before her departure in the brightest spirits, feel- 
ing virtually assured of success, and even jesting in her new happiness with Nerissa. 
This state of mind, it appears to me, could not have been possible had Portia known 
what was before her. She is at ease, because she is sure of the full sympathy of her 
friend and cousin, Bellario, and counts with confidence on his presence in Venice to 
take the lead in court. : ; 

In the play we see that Portia sends Balthazar to Dr Bellario, and bids him wait for 
her at ‘the traject.’ But either her mind must have changed, or she must have met 
messengers from Bellario on the road, who tell her of his illness and inability to help 
her in person. Consequently she hurries on to Padua; but when they meet—for that 
they do meet is certain—all her first joyful anticipations receive a woeful shock. She 
finds her dear old friend grievously sick. What is to be done? There is no help 
near; no time to be lost! The Jew ‘plies the Duke at morning and at night.’ Bel- 
lario’s aid, she learns, has been summoned already by the Duke as a last resource. In 
this extremity, with no other help at hand, Bellario no doubt proposes that Portia shall 
go in his stead, recommended by him as a ‘young Doctor of Rome,’ then visiting him. 
This must be done or all is lost. Bellario confirms her belief as to a flaw in the bond, 
and furnishes her with his ‘own opinion’ upon all the points of law most vital to the 
question. They ‘turn o’er many books together,’ and Portia proceeds to Venice fur- 
nished, as Bellario writes to the Duke, with the Doctor’s opinion, ‘ which, bettered with - 
his own learning (the greatness whereof I cannot enough commend), goes with him, 
at my importunity, to fill up your Grace’s request in my stead.’ All this suggests to me 
that Portia’s eye had beeti the first to see the flaw in the bond, and that her own 
impression had been confirmed by the great lawyer. 

Grave and anxious must have been her thoughts as she crossed the lagoons by ‘the 
common ferry that trades to Venice.’ Hers was not a mind, however, to shrink before 
difficulty ; and, confirmed as she had been by the opinion of the great Doctor of Laws, 
she feels sure of success, if she can but be true to herself and ‘forget she is a woman.’ 
All the gay light-heartedness with which she started from Belmont has vanished under 
this unexpected aspect of affairs. With what trepidation, with what anxious sense of 
responsibility must she find herself engaged in such a task, the mark for every eye! 
Nothing but her deep love and grateful happy heart could sustain her through such a 
trial. To cease to be a woman for the time is not so hard, perhaps, to one who has all 
her life been accustomed to a position of command and importance; but, in the pecu- 
liar circumstances of this case, the effort must have been one of extreme difficulty. 


[If the desire assail us to knit up the ravell’d sleave of Portia’s early life, we must 
not forget the gay and pretty web that Mrs CowpEN-CLARKE has woven in her Gir 
hood of Shakespeare's Heroines.—ED.] 


LVERRISSA 
Mrs JAMESON (p. 104): Nerissa is a good specimen of a common genus of charac- 
ters; she is a clever, confidential waiting-woman, who has caught a little of her lady’s 
elegance and romance; she affects to be lively and sententious, falls in love, and makes 


\ 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—FESSICA 443 


her favour conditional on the fortune of the caskets, and, in short, mimics her mistress 
with good emphasis and discretion. WNerissa and the gay, talkative Gratiano are as 
well matched as the incomparable Portia and her magnificent and captivating lover. 


JESSICA 

C. A. BRown (p. 280): I cannot see that Jessica is intellectual or kind-hearted. 
Her eulogy on Portia, appropriately dashed with her new-fledged piety, is elegantly 
cold, like a dedication; and her classical moonlight talk with Lorenzo, though very 
elegant, has nothing to do with the affections, and is more a proof of ready wit and a 
good education than of intellect. 

Jessica, the pretty Jewess,—I beg pardon, ‘ Mistress Lorenzo,’ the Christian, —has her 
character, such as it is, hit off by a few masterly strokes. Beauty is her best recom- 
mendation. I imagine she is small of stature; a little plump, with a delicate hand 
and foot, and remarkable for a well-turned ankle. Her eye is full and lustrous; there 
is great richness in her lips, especially when she smiles; she has a profusion of glossy 
black ringlets; and there is a touch of slyness in addition to her native expression of 
countenance. To these charms, she possesses, we know, an arch and pleasant style 
of chatting, well suited to the hours of dalliance. Here she is at home; even more 
than when she talks with her ‘merry devil’ Launcelot. But when she has to speak as 
a lady, which she seldom attempts, we perceive a constraint, arising from her former 
recluse life, and perhaps from a poorness in her ideas where her inclinations are not 
her prompters..... When at Belmont she speaks of her father as of a person in whose 
company she once happened to be; the first words, ‘ When I was with him,’ are pain- 
fully unfeeling to those inclined to sympathize for a father whom she has robbed; but 
there were none such in the company, because the man was a Jew, and she knew that 
opinion was in her favour. With one of firmer intellect, even in those days, fashion 
would not have confounded wrong with right; but Jessica was born to be cajoled by 
fashion. She could lose ‘fourscore ducats at a ae and exchange a turquoise ring 
for a monkey, as unconcernedly as she stole them from a Jew, because she could 
reconcile them all to the fashion of the day. 


GILES (p. 147): Shakespeare has done the grandest justice to this elemental force 
of affection in woman’s nature, He presents it to us in every mode of beauty and 
truth. In his less serious plays, all the characters whom he intends for lovable have 
not only graces and charms, but natural femininely sensibilities. One exception there 
is,—which not even Shakespeare can make me like,—and that is the pert, disobedient 
hussy Jessica. Her conduct I regard as ina high degree reprehensible; and those 
who have the care of families must, I think, feel as Ido. She was a worthless minx, 
and I have no good word to say of her. ‘If the fellow who ran away with her had, 
like old Pepys, left a diary behind him, I am quite sure that we should learn that his 
wife turned out an intolerable vixen. She se.fishly forgot the duty of a daughter when 
she should have most remembered it. Why should she, a maiden of Israel, leave her 
poor old father, Shylock, alone in the midst of his Christian enemies ? What if he 
was wrong? The more need he had of fer, What if most wrong? Even then, 
even in the madness of defeated vengeance, in the misery of humbled pride, when 
regarded as most guilty, when. there was nothing in the world for him but contempt 
without pity, the child of his home—his only child—should have had in her woman’s 
heart a shelter for her scorned father. But was she not a good girl? Did she not 
turn Christian? Well, as to her turning Christian, I view the matter as honest Gobbo 


444 APPENDIX 


did; it merely increased the number of pork-eaters. Besides, she turned Christian for 
a husband. Changes of religion for husbands, or z7#h them, may do for the childrez 
of kings; it is not to be commended in the children of the people. wa 


Hupson (p. 62): Jessica’s elopement, in itself and its circumstances, puts us to the 
alternative that either she is a bad child or Shylock is a bad father. And there is 
enough to persuade us of the latter; though not in such sort but that some share of the 
reproach falls to her. For if a young woman have so bad a home as to justify her in 
thus deserting and robbing it, the atmosphere of the place can hardly fail to leave some 
traces in her temper and character. 


ANTONIO 

Rev. JoHN HunTER (Jntroductory Remarks, Longmans’ Series, London, 1 872, p. 
xiv): Antonio is a good man,—a man whom we love for his high integrity, his disin- 
terested liberality, his devoted friendship; but his rashness in signing the bond sug- 
gested to the dramatist the propriety of characterizing him as deficient in worldly pru- 
dence, and too easy and unwary in his dealings with mankind. It was certainly 
through simplicity, though not what Shylock calls ‘low simplicity,’ that Antonio con- 
demned interest; it was through simplicity that he thought lightly of the condition 
stipulated in the bond; he was imprudent in allowing himself to forget, or in failing 
to exert himself that he might be prepared for, the day of payment; he was incautious 
in venturing the whole of his wealth in argosies upon the ocean. That he was a rich 
merchant we may suppose to have been owing more to patrimonial inheritance than to 
his own mercantile sagacity and success. That he should be found unable, though a 
wealthy man, to lend three thousand ducats, was necessary to give occasion for the 
bond; and the inability is made to arise out of that incautiousness by which Shake- 
speare has so consistently characterized him, 


BASSANIO 

W. W. Luioyp (Critical Essay, Singer's 2d ed., 1856, p. 546): In coarser terms, 
from a less favourable point of view, Bassanio has lived like a prodigal, run in debt 
with his friends, and now coolly proposes to his chief creditor to make a serious addi- 
tion to his debt, on the speculation that it will give him a chance to pay all by that very 
precarious, as well as undignified, resort of making up to an heiress. How is it that in 
treading the play we never withdraw our sympathies from the hero of transactions that 
affect us in common life with the unpleasant associations of dissipation, imprudence, 
impudence, and meanness? The reason, I apprehend, is partly because we are read- 
ing a romance, and we accept the compatibility of whatever phenomena the poet 
chooses to group in the moral as in the material world. Portia has faith that the lot- 
tery of the caskets will give her infallibly the husband who deserves her, and we are 
not disposed to check agreeable sympathy with the generous liberality, in mind and 
purse, of the Merchant of Venice by any mistrust, shabby it would seem to us, of the 
desert of his friends or the co-operation of natural chances with his free intentions. Cha- 
tacter gives confidence; truth is bondsman for troth. We believe Bassanio on the same 
ground that Antonio does; we approve of the consent of Antonio on the same grounds 
that made Bassanio think it not wrong to ask it. The character of an act or a proceed- 
ing is founded at last on the motive, and the motive is the man, and poetry and romance 
are allowed to invent perfections of humanity that may yet be unattainable; and thus 
in a poetic drama we admire and sympathize with a debt-burdened suitor to a wealthy 


'¢ 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS—GRATIANO. LAUNCELOT 445 


lady, because there is no moral impossibility in the nature of things, of such a suit, even 
when the contingencies of dowry are recognized, being in truth unsordid,—though, prac- 
tically speaking, it will usually be a fool who allows himself, or herself, to think it can be 
otherwise. In brief, we look on with unhesitating, unalarmed confidence in the power 
of a pure spirit of unselfishness to pass untainted through the very dens and haunts of 
selfishness, and to vindicate its purity in a transaction which only selfishness makes 
wrong. Soundness at heart in a recipient makes imprudence prudent, and our faith is 
made happy when Bassanio, who has nothing either to give or hazard, chooses the 
casket of least promising exterior..... Even in setting forth his project to Antonio, 
the leading tone of his description makes her wealth but one accessory of her attrac- 
tions, and, as a lover should, he passes on with more fervour to observe—and she is 
fair,’ and yet again to the crowning praise which no lover of Portia could overlook and 
be worthy,—‘ and fairer than that word, of wondrous virtues.’ Hence we confide most 
absolutely in the ingenuousness of Bassanio, and if he appears to engage his friend 
somewhat inconsiderately to a bond, or even to the merest transaction with Shylock, 
we are prepared to ascribe this to the eagerness of a lover who has such cause to love 
as encouragement from Portia. 


GRATIANO 

CHARLES COWDEN-CLARKE (Shakespeare-Characters; Chiefly those Subordinate, 
1863, p. 402): Gratiano is a most delightful and most natural character. He is one 
of those useful men in society who will keep up the ball of mirth and good-humour, 
simply by his own mercurial temperament and agreeable rattle; for he is like a bab- 
bling woodside brook, seen through at once, and presenting every ripple of its surface 
to the sunbeams of good-fellowship. If a picnic were proposed, Gratiano would be 
the man for the commissariat department; and the wines shall be unimpeachable in 
quantity as well as quality; the ladies shall lack no squire of dames, and the men no 
stimulus to keep their gallantry from rusting. And, what is better than all, if a friend 
be in adversity, Gratiano will champion him with good words and deeds, if not with 
the most sagacious counsel. He would no doubt talk a man off his legs; and, there- 
fore, Shakespeare brings him as a relief against the grave men, Antonio and Bassanio, 
who, being both anxious on account of worldly cares, resent his vivacity, and they are 
at all events as peevish as he is flippant and inconsiderate. Bassanio says of Gratiano, 
that he ‘speaks an infinite deal of nothing.’ The best of it is, that Bassanio himself 
advances no claim to be the censor of his lively companion; for, in comparison with 
him, he is dull in capacity; and the very observation just quoted follows one of the 
most agreeable and sensible speeches in the play, made by ‘the infinite-deal-of-noth- 
ing’ Gratiano. Shakespeare has made the best apology for the Merchant and his 
friend; but his own love of cheerfulness with good temper could not fail to throw 
liberally into Gratiano’s scale, and he has nowhere produced a better defence of natu- 
tal vivacity. Moreover, he has not made Gratiano selfishly boisterous, indulging his 
own feelings only; he first manifests a solicitude for Antonio’s lowness of spirits, and 
then he rallies him. These are the small and delicate lights thrown into his characters 
that render them exhaustless as studies, and give us that indefinable, rather, perhaps, 
that unrecognized and unconscious, interest in all they say and do, and which, to the 
same extent, appears to be the almost undivided prerogative of Shakespeare alone, 


LAUNCELOI 
C. A. Brown (p. 281): My notion of Launcelot, as I have seen him, has not been 
eflected from the stage. ‘The patch is kind enough;’ yet he is amazingly wrapped 


446 APPENDIX 


up in himself, and his soliloquies are intense on that darling subject. An obtrusive fea- 
ture in his character is the conceit in his skull that he is better than he should be. 
Having been called by one who did not see him ‘master’ and ‘ young gentleman,’ he 
insists, over and over again, on his being ‘ young master Launcelot,’ and at last styles 
himself ‘the young gentleman.’ All this, like everything he says, is a mixture of 
vanity and drollery,—on the latter he stakes his fame as awit. Nature seVEE formed 
a more egregious coxcomb,—he is Lord Foppington in low life, as far as his imbecility 
can reach, In the same strain he talks of his ‘manly spirits’ and of the Jew’s having 
‘done him wrong,’ as if he and his master were on an equality. No doubt his solace 
as a servant was, that he must, sooner or later, owing to his intrinsic “merit, come to 
excellent fortune. He spells his fate on his palm; where, though neither coronet 
nor mastership offers itself to his imagination, there*is something of equal value to the 
young animal,—‘ eleven widows, and nine maids, is a simple coming-in for one man.’ 
His jokes are generally failures, but, coming from him, they are laughable. .... [The 
banter between him and Lorenzo gives the latter occasion to observe], ‘ How every fool 
can play upon a word!’ which, together with what follows, may be mistaken for a self- 
condemnation, made at hazard, on the part of Shakespeare. By no means; the diffi- 
culty is to play well upon a word; besides, as Launcelot then and afterwards proves, 
the poverty of a jest may be enriched in a fool’s mouth, owing to the complacency 
with which he deals it out; and because there are few things which provoke laughter 
more than feebleness in a great attempt at a small matter. 


GERMAN CRITICISMS 


A. W. SCHLEGEL (vol. ii, p. 169): Zhe Merchant of Venice is one of Shakespeare’s 
most perfect works: popular to an extraordinary degree, and calculated to produce the 
most powerful effect on the stage, and at the same time a wonder of ingenuity and art 
for the reflecting critic. Shylock the Jew is one of the inconceivable master-pieces of 
characterization of which Shakespeare alone furnishes us with examples. It is easy for 
the poet and the player to exhibit a caricature of national sentiments, modes of speak- 
ing, and gestures. Shylock, however, is everything but a common Jew; he possesses 
a very determinate and original individuality, and yet we perceive a light touch of Juda- 
ism in everything which he says and does. We imagine we hear a sprinkling of the 
Jewish pronunciation in the mere written words, as we sometimes still find it in the 
higher classes, notwithstanding their social refinement. In tranquil situations what is 
foreign to the European blood and Christian sentiments is less perceivable, but in pas- 
sion the national stamp appears more strongly marked. All these inimitable niceties 
the finished art of a great actor can alone properly express. .... The letter of the law 
is Shylock’s idol; he refuses to lend an ear to the voice of mercy, which speaks to him 
from the mouth of Portia with heavenly eloquence; he insists on severe and inflexible 
justice, and it at last recoils on his own head. Here he becomes a symbol of the gen- 
eral history of his unfortunate nation. .... The danger that hangs over Antonio till 
towards the conclusion of the Fourth Act, and which the imagination is almost afraid 
to approach, would fill us with too painful an anxiety if the poet did not also provide 
for our entertainment and dissipation, This is particularly effected by the Scenes at 
the country-seat of Portia, which transport the spectator into quite another sphere, 
And yet they are closely connected, by the concatenation of canses and effects, with 


GERMAN CRITICISMS—UCLRICI 447 


the main business: the preparations of Bassanio for his courtship are the cause of 
Antonio’s subscribing the dangerous bond; and Portia again, by means of the advice 
of her cousin, a celebrated counsel, effects the safety of the friend of her lover. But 
the relations of the dramatic composition are still here admirably observed in another 
manner. The trial between Shylock and Antonio, though it proceeds like a real event, 
still remains an unheard-of and particular case. Shakespeare has, consequently, asso- 
ciated with it a love-intrigue not less extraordinary; the one becomes natural and prob- 
able by means of the other. A rich, beautiful, and clever heiress, who can only be 
won by the solving of a riddle; the locked caskets; the foreign princes who come to 
try the adventure; with all this wonderful splendour the imagination is powerfully 
excited. The two Scenes in which the Prince of Morocco, in the language of Eastern 
hyperbole, and the self-conceited Prince of Arragon, make their choice of the caskets, 
merely raise our curiosity and give employment to our wits; in the Third Act, where 
the two lovers stand trembling before the inevitable choice, which in one moment must 
unite or separate them for ever, Shakespeare has lavished all the seductions of feeling, 
all the magic of poetry. We share in the rapture of Portia and Bassanio at the fortu- 
nate choice; we easily conceive why they are fond of each other, for they are both 
deserving of love. The Trial Scene, with which the Fourth Act is occupied, is 
alone a perfect drama, concentrating in itself the interest of the whole. The knot is 
now untied, and according to the common ideas of theatrical satisfaction, the curtain 
might drop. But the poet was unwilling to dismiss his audience with the gloomy im- 
pressions which the delivery of Antonio, accomplished with so much difficulty, con- 
trary to all expectation, and the punishment of Shylock, were calculated to leave 
behind ; he has, therefore, added the Fifth Act by way of a musical after-piece in the 
piece itself, 


Unrici (Shakespeare’s Dramatic Art, ii, p. 121, Bohn’s Ed. 1876, trans. by L. 
Dora Schmitz): As regards the lawsuit between Antonio and the Jew, there can, as I 
think, be scarcely any doubt that its meaning and significance coincide with the old 
legal maxim: Summum jus summa injuria. Every one who knows the maxim and 
its legal significance will unconsciously, when witnessing the celebrated Trial Scene, be 
struck with its applicability here. For the maxim merely maintains that an acknow- 
ledged and positive law turns into its opposite and becomes a wrong when carried to 
the extreme point of its limited nature and one-sided conception, and when driven to 
its extreme consequence. Shylock holds fast to the law: forbearance, gentleness, kind- 
liness, and all the lovely names which greet the happy on the threshold of life and 
accompany them on their paths, he has never known; injustice, harshness, and con- 
tempt stood around his cradle, hate and persecution obstructed every step of his career. 
With convulsive vehemence, therefore, he clutches hold of the law, the small morsel 
of justice which cannot be withheld even from the Jew. _ This legal, formal, external 
justice Shylock obviously has on his side, but by taking and following it to the letter, 
in absolute one-sidedness, he falls into the deepest, foulest wrong, which then neces- 
sarily recoils ruinously upon his own head. The same view of the dialectic and 
double-edged nature of justice, which is here set forth in its utmost subtilty, 1s, how- 
ever, I think, also exhibited in manifold lights and shades throughout the other parts 
of the play. The determination of Portia’s father, which deprives her of all participa- 
tion in the choice of a husband, is indeed based upon paternal right, but this very right 
—even though justified by the best intentions of anxious affection—is again, at the 
same time a decided wrong, and Portia has good reason for complaining: ‘O, these 


448 APPENDIX 


naughty times Put bars between the owners and their rights.’ Who would have cast a. 
stone at her had she broken her vow, and guided her well-beloved, amiable, and 
worthy lover by hints and intimations in making the right choice? The wrong, which 
is here again contained within what is in itself right, would have fallen with tragic 
force, had not accident—in the form of a happy thought, as in the lawsuit—led to a 
happy result. Jessica’s flight and her marriage in opposition to her father’s will is, 
according to generally recognized principles, a flagrant wrong. And yet, who would 
condemn her for withdrawing herself from the power and rights of such a father, of 
whom she is justly ashamed, and to obey whom truly is a matter of impossibility to her 
conscience and to her innocent heart? Here, again, therefore, we find a point of right 
at strife with the demands of morality and asserting itself emphatically; Shakespeare 
himself brings it forward clearly enough in Act II, Sc. iii, and still more so in Act III, 
Sc. v, in the conversations between Launcelot and Jessica. The penalty which the 
Court imposes upon the Jew, and by which he is compelled to sanction the marriage of 
his daughter with Lorenzo, also neutralizes the conflicting elements more in an exter- 
nal and accidental manner than by true and internal adjustment. Lastly, right and 
wrong are no less carried to their extreme points, and consequently placed in a bal- 
ancing state of uncertainty, in the quarrel between the two loving couples about the 
rings which they had parted with, in violation of their sworn promises—a scene with 
which the play closes. Here, again, we have a sufficiently distinct reflex of the maxim, 
Summum jus summa injuria ; here again right and wrong are brought to such straits, 
are driven to such extremes, that the two are no longer distinct, but pass over directly 
one into the other. Thus we see that the meaning and significance of the many, 
apparently, heterogeneous elements are united in one point: they are but variations of 
the same theme. 

(P. 126.) Shakespeare, as I think, has clearly enough intimated that he does not in 
any way consider Shylock a tragic character. Shylock’s conduct, in general, makes 
rather a decidedly comic impression, and particularly in the scene of the outburst of his 
sorrow and rage at the elopement of his daughter and the loss of his ducats, which 
alternates in the sharpest contrast with his diabolical expressions of joy at the losses 
experienced by Antonio. His very behaviour at the Trial Scene has somewhat the 
flavour of comedy, because his whole being, his appearance, his manner of expressing 
himself in word and gesture, are obviously described intentionally in such a way as 
always to verge upon caricature. And if the punishment which overtakes him is, 
nevertheless, offensive to our finer feelings, we must bear in mind that the scene of the 
play is laid in the sixteenth century, and that Shylock forfeits our pity owing to his 
inhuman, almost devilish, wickedness and hardness of heart, and has lost all claim to 
humane treatment. Moreover, owing to the desultory, irregular manner in which the 


sentence is pronounced, we feel that it is doubtful whether all the points will be strictly 
adhered to, 


GERVINUS (Commentaries, vol. i, p. 326; trans. by Miss F. E. Bunnett, 1863): We 
could after our own fashion say in a more abstract and pretentious form, that the inten- 
tion of the poet in Zhe Merchant of Venice was to depict the relation of man to prop- 
erty. The more commonplace this might appear, the more worthy of admiration is 
that which Shakespeare, in his embodiment of this subject, has accomplished with 
extraordinary, profound, and poetic power. 

(P. 329.) Thus has Shakespeare, in the poem before us, represented a genuine 
brotherhood between the pictures he sets forth of avarice and prodigality, of hard usury 


GERMAN CRITICISMS HEINE 449 


and inconsiderate extravagance, so that the piece may just as well be called a song of 
true friendship. 

(P. 333.) Portia is superior to all circumstances; that is her highest praise: she 
would have accommodated herself to any husband, for this reason her father might 
have felt himself justified in prescribing the lottery. 

(P. 334.) Between both, Portia and Antonio, stands Bassanio, the friend of one, 
the lover of the other, utterly poor between two boundlessly rich, ruined in his circum- 
stances, inconsiderate, extravagant at the expense of his friend. He seems quite to 
belong to the parasitical class of Antonio’s friends. In disposition he is more inclined 
to the merry Gratiano than to Antonio’s severe gravity; he appears on the stage with 
the question: ‘When shall we laugh?’ and he joins with his frivolous companions in 
all cheerful and careless folly. This time he borrows once more three thousand ducats, 
to make a strange Argonautic expedition for the Golden Fleece, staking them ona 
blind adventure, the doubtful wooing of a rich heiress. His friend breaks his habit 
of never borrowing on credit; he enters into an agreement with the Jew upon the bloody 
condition, and the adventurer accepts the loan with the sacrifice. And before he sets 
forth, even on the same day and evening, he purchases fine livery for his servants with 
this money, and gives a merry feast as a farewell, during which the daughter of the 
invited Jew is to be carried off by one of the free-thinking fellows. Is not the whole, 
as if he were only the seeming friend of this rich man, that he might borrow his 
money, and only the seeming lover of this rich lady, that he might pay his debts with 
her money ? 

(P. 336.) When Bassanio perceives the portrait he divines indeed his happiness, 
but he ventures not yet to hope it, and, in spite of his agitation, he seems absorbed only 
with the work of art. 

(P. 339.) Shylock is the contrast, which we hardly need explain; although indeed, 
in this age of degeneration of art and morals, lowness and madness could go so far as 
to make a martyr on the stage of this outcast of humanity. The poet has certainly 
given to this character, in order that he may not sink quite below our interest, a per- 
ception of his pariah condition, and has imputed his outbursts of hatred against Chris- 
tians and aristocrats partly to genuine grounds of annoyance. Moreover, he has not 
delineated the usurer from the hatred of the Christians of that time against all that was 
Jewish, else he would not have imparted to Jessica her lovely character. 

(P. 342.) Thus delicately feminine, Jessica has no scruples of conscience to steal 
herself the ducats and the jewels of her father. A new relation to possession it 
brought to view in this nature; it is that of the inexperienced child, who is quite unac- 
quainted with the value of money, who innocently throws it away in trifles, having 
learned in her paternal home neither domestic habits nor economy. In this, Lorenzo 
is only too congenial with her, although he would have her believe that he was as a 
man what Portia is as a woman; Antonio, who knows them better, takes both under 
his guardianship, and manages their inheritance for them. 


HEINE (Sdémmtliche Werke, Philadelphia, 1856, vol. v, p. 324): When I saw this 
Play at Drury Lane, there stood behind me in the box a pale, fair Briton, who at the 
end of the Fourth Act, fell to weeping passionately, several times exclaiming, ‘The 
poor man is wronged!’ It was a face of the noblest Grecian style, and the eyes were 
large and black. I have never been able to forget those large and black eyes that wept 
for Shylock ! 

When I think of those tears I have to rank 7he Merchant of Venice with the Trag- 

29 


450 APPENDIX 


edies, although the frame of the Piece is decorated with the merriest figures of Masks, 
of Satyrs, and of Cupids, and the Poet meant the Play for a Comedy. Shakespeare 
intended perhaps, for the amusement of ‘the general,’ to represent a tormented Were- 
wolf, a hateful, fabulous creature that thirsts for blood, and of course loses his daughter 
and his ducats, and is ridiculed into the bargain. But the genius of the Poet, the 
Genius of Humanity that reigned in him, stood ever above his private will; and so it 
happened that in Shylock, in spite of all his uncouth grimacings, the Poet vindicates 
an unfortunate sect, which, for mysterious purposes, has been burdened by Providence 
with the hate of the rabble both high and low, and has reciprocated this hate—not 
always by love. yh ree 

But what do I say? The genius of Shakespeare rises above the little squabble of 
two religious sects, and the Drama shows us neither Jew nor Christian exclusively, but 
oppressor and oppressed, and the mad, bitter exultation of the latter when they can pay 
back to their haughty tormentors with interest the shames they have suffered. There is 
not the slightest trace in this Play of a religious difference, and Shakespeare shows us 
in Shylock only a man whom Nature bids to hate his enemy, as in Antonio and his 
friends the Poet by no means describes the followers of that Divine teaching which 
commands us to love our enemies. When Shylock says to the man who wants to bor- 
row money of him, ‘Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,’ &c., Antonio replies, ‘I 
am as like to call thee so again, to spet on thee again, to spurn thee too.’ 

Where here is the love of a Christian? Verily, it would have been a satire on 
Christianity had Shakespeare meant to represent it in the persons who are enemies to 
Shylock, and who are hardly worthy to unloose the latchets of his shoes. The bank- 
rupt, Antonio, is a poor-spirited creature, without energy, without strength enough to 
hate, or, of course, to love, with the heart of a worm, whose flesh is really worth nothing 
else but ‘to bait fish withal.’ He never pays back the three thousand ducats to the 
cheated Jew. Bassanio, too, never returns him his money, and the fellow is a down- 
right ‘ fortune-hunter,’ as an English critic calls him; he borrows money to ‘show a 
more swelling port’ with, and to capture a rich heiress and a fat marriage-portion. 

As for Lorenzo, he is an accomplice in a most infamous burglary, and under Prussian 
laws he would have been condemned to fifteen years in the penitentiary, and to be 
branded, and to stand in the pillory, for all his sensibility to the alluring charms, not 
only of stolen ducats and jewels, but of moonlit landscapes and of. music. As to the 
other noble Venetians who appear on the scene as the comrades of Antonio, they do 
not seem to hate money very much, and for their poor friend, when he is in ill luck, 
they have nothing but words, coined air. Our good pietist, Franz Horn, here makes 
the very watery, but very correct, remark : ‘The question very reasonably occurs: How 
was it possible that Antonio could be reduced to such a condition? All Venice knew 
and esteemed him; his good acquaintance knew all about the terrible bond, and that 
the Jew would not remit a tittle of it. Nevertheless, they let day after day pass, until 
at last the three months are over, and with them all hope of deliverance.’ It would 
have been easy enough for those good friends, whole troops of whom the princely mer- 
chant appears to have had around him, to contribute the sum of three thousand ducats 
to save a human life—and such a life! but anything of that sort would have been 
rather inconvenient, and so nothing, nothing whatever, is done by these dear, good 
friends, just because they are only so-called friends, or, if you please, only half or three- 
quarters friends. They pity the excellent merchant who gave them such fine dinners, 
uncommonly, but with due regard to their own ease they denounce Shylock, as only 
heart and tongue can when no danger is involved, and then probably think they have 


GERMAN CRITICISMS—HEINE 451 


fulfilled the duty of friendship. Much as we must hate Shylock, we can hardly blame 
him if he has, as he well may have, a little contempt for these people..... 

In truth, with the exception of Portia, Shylock is the most respectable person in the 
whole Play. He loves money, he does not hide this love—he cries it out aloud in the 
marketplace, but there is something that he prizes above money; satisfaction for a tor- 
tured heart—righteous retribution for unutterable shames ; and although they offer him 
the borrowed sum tenfold, he rejects it, and the three thousand, ay and ten times three 
thousand, ducats he would not regret if he can but buy a pound of his enemy’s flesh 
therewith. 

Ay, Shylock does indeed love money, but there are things which he loves still more, 
among them his daughter, ‘Jessica, my girl.’ Although he curses her in his rage, and 
would see her dead at his feet with the jewels in her ears and the ducats in the coffin, 
he loves her more than ducats and jewels. Debarred from public intercourse, out 
cast from Christian society, and thrust back upon a narrow domestic life, to the poor 
Jew there remains only devotion to his home, and this is manifested in him with the 
most touching intensity. When in the Trial Scene, Bassanio and Gratiano declare 
their readiness to sacrifice their wives for their friend, Shylock says to himself, not aloud, 
but aside: ‘These be the Christian husbands; I have a daughter; Would any of the 
stock of Barrabas Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!’ 

Upon this passage, upon these few words spoken aside, we base the sentence of 
condemnation that we must pass on the fair Jessica. It was no unloving father whom 
she forsook, whom she robbed, whom she betrayed.—Shameful treachery! She even 
makes common cause with the enemies of Shylock, and when at Belmont they say 
all manner of evil things about him, Jessica never casts down her eyes, her lips never 
lose colour, but she says the worst of her father.—Horrible fault! She has no heart, 
but only a light mind. She wearies of the secluded, ‘sober’ house of the embittered 
Jew, that seems to her at last a hell, She has an ear only for the stirring drum and 
wry-necked fife. Did Shakespeare intend here to pourtray a Jewess? In sooth, no. 
He paints only a daughter of Eve, one of those pretty birds who, as soon as they are 
fledged, flutter away to their dear little husbands. So Desdemona follows the Moor, 
so Imogen follows Posthumus. It is the way with woman. In Jessica there is observ- 
able a certain hesitating modesty, which she cannot overcome, at putting on boy’s 
clothes. In this particular we may perhaps recognize a trait peculiar to her race, and 
which lends to its daughters so wonderful a charm..... 

(P. 332.) What Mrs Jameson says of Portia, contrasted with Shylock, is not only 
beautiful, it is true. If we regard the latter in the usual light as the representative of 
the stern Jew, hostile to all Art, Portia, on the contrary, represents that after-bloom of 
Greek Art which, in the 16th century, impregnated the world, from Italy out, with its 
delightful fragrance, and which we at the present day love and treasure under the name 
of ‘the Renaissance.’ Portia is at the same time the representative of the serene good 
fortune which is the opposite of the gloomy lot that Shylock represents. What a rosy 
bloom, what a ring of purity, is there in all her thoughts and speeches! How warm 
with joy are her words, how beautiful all her images, mostly borrowed from mythology ! 
How sad, on the contrary, how incisive and repulsive, are the thoughts and speeches of 
Shylock, who uses only Old Testament similitudes! His wit is spasmodic, caustic; his 
metaphors he seeks among the most repulsive objects, and even his words are discords 
crashed together, shrill, hissing, acrid. As are the persons, so are their abodes. As 
we see how the servant of Jehovah, who will suffer in his ‘sober house’ the like- 
ness neither of Gotl nor of man, the created image of God, even stopping up the ears 


se epmrmnamirf™ paarr'C CTRAILCLE 


452 APPENDIX 


thereof, the casements, that into it the sounds of shallow foppery may not enter,—so we 
see, on the other hand, the costly, tasteful villeggiatura life in the beautiful palace at 
Belmont, where all is light and music, where, among pictures, marble statues, and lofty 
laurel trees, the suitors in their brilliant array wander, meditating on the love-riddle, 
and from amid all this splendour Signora Portia shines forth like a goddess, « Her 
sunny locks Hanging on her temples.’ 

By such a contrast the two chief persons of the drama are so individualized that one 
might swear they are not the work of a poet’s fancy, but real human beings, born of 
woman. Indeed, as neither time nor death can touch them, they are more alive than 
the ordinary creatures that Nature makes. The immortal blood, eternal ‘poesy, pulsates 
in their veins. When thou comest to Venice and wanderest through the Doge’s palace, 
thou knowest very well that neither in the Senate Chamber nor upon the Giant Stairs 
wilt thou meet Marino Faliero;—in the Arsenal thou wilt, ’tis true, be reminded of old 
Dandolo, but in none of the gilded galliots wilt thou seek the blind hero ;—if thou seest 
at one corner of the street Santa a serpent hewn in stone, and at another corner the 
winged lion with the head of the serpent in his claws, there comes, perhaps, the 
remembrance of the proud Carmagnole, yet only for a moment; but, far more than 
of all such historical persons, thou thinkest in Venice of Shakespeare’s Shylock, who 
is still alive, while those others have long mouldered away in the grave; and on 
the Rialto thine eye looks for him everywhere, and thou thinkest he must be found 
there, behind some pillar, in his Jewish gaberdine, with his cautious, calculating face, 
and every now and then thou fanciest that thou hearest his grating tones: ‘ Three thou- 
sand ducats,—well.’ 

At least I, wandering hunter after dreams that I am, I looked round everywhere on 
the Rialto to see if I could not find Shylock. I could have told him something that 
would have pleased him—namely, that his cousin, Herr von Shylock in Paris, had 
become the mightiest baron in Christendom, invested by her Catholic Majesty with 
that Order of Isabella which was founded to celebrate the expulsion of the Jews and 
Moors from Spain. But { found him nowhere on the Rialto, and I determined to seek 
my old acquaintance in the Synagogue. The Jews were just then celebrating their Day 
of Atonement, and they stood enveloped in their white talars, with uncanny motions 
of the head, looking almost like an assemblage of ghosts. There the poor Jews © 
had stood, fasting and praying, from earliest morning ;—since the evening before they 
had taken neither food nor drink, and had previously begged pardon of all their 
acquaintances for any wrong they might have done them in the course of the year, 
that God might thereby also forgive them their wrongs—a beautiful custom, which, 
curiously enough, is found among this people, strangers though they be to the teaching 
of Christ. 

Although I looked all round the Synagogue, I nowhere discovered the face of Shy- 
lock. And yet I felt he must be hidden under one of those white talars, praying more 
fervently than his fellow-believers, looking up with stormy, nay frantic wildness, to 
the throne of Jehovah, the hard God-King! I saw him not. But towards evening, 
when, according to the Jewish faith, the gates of Heaven are shut, and no prayer 
can then obtain admittance, I heard a voice, with a ripple of tears that were never 
wept by eyes. It was a sob that could come only frum a breast that held in it all the 
martyrdom which, for eighteen centuries, had been borne by a whole tortured people. 
It was the death-rattle of a soul sinking down dead tired at heaven’s gates. And I 
seemed to know the voice, and I felt that I had heard it long ago, when, in utter 
despair it moaned out, then as now, ‘Jessica, my girl!’ 


GERMAN CRITICISMS—HEBLER. KREYSSIG 453 


HEBLER (Shakespeare's Kaufmann von Venedig, 1854, p. 66) cites the following 
words of Luther, which have been frequently quoted by subsequent German commen- 
tators (and they may be well cited again as an illustration of the intense prejudice 
against the Jews): ‘Know, then, thou dear Christian, that, next to the Devil, thou 
canst have no bitterer, fiercer foe than a genuine Jew, one who is a Jew in earnest. 
The true counsel I give thee, is that fire be put to their synagogues, and that, over 
what will not burn up, the earth be heaped and piled, so that no stone or trace of them 
be seen for evermore.’ 


F. Kreyssic (Vorlesungen iiber Shakespeare, Berlin, 1862, vol. iii, p. 358): To 
these two bizarre fables Shakespeare joins the principal incidents of a wanton tale of 
abduction from Masuccio di Salerno. He moulds into one the stories of the daughter 
of the King of Apulia and the bride of Gianetto, lets the suitors choose the caskets, 
devotes himself to the noble character of the merchant who sacrifices himself for his 
friend, takes the light, hot blood of Lorenzo and Jessica into the service of poetic just- 
ice,—and then lets the sun of his genius rise upon this chaos of odd entanglements 
and incredible fictions. Under its beams the sharp outlines of the Piece are softened 
into lines of beauty, contradictions are reconciled, the little poetic world gains its due 
proportions, its own perspective and colouring. The Actual is nowhere copied, and yet 
its inner, essential laws are not violated. The facts indeed belong to the fabulous; all 
the firmer and the more real is the soil out of which the motives and characters spring ; 
and in applying ourselves to work through the ever-involved details to a point of view 
commanding the whole, we are compensated at every step for the difficulty of the jour- 
ney by an abundance of single beauties. It is as if we were seeking the spot where 
we may see the whole, in some charming, thickly-overgrown park. The path leads us, 
hy artificial windings, through green, fragrant woods. Lovely pictures open on the 
right and on the left, side-paths are lost in the shrubberies; flowers and fruits tempt us 
to linger and enjoy them. We have no fatigue, no weariness to fear, but we must take 
care to mark the way, lest in the beautiful labyrinth we miss our goal. But, metaphor 
aside, in few of his Pieces does Shakespeare play hide-and-seek with his readers and 
commentators as happily as here. The wisdom everywhere introduced, cropping out 
in the action and in the scenes, allures us, in a peculiar degree, to seek ever more 
curiously for a ‘moral’ in the Play. 

(P. 367.) At the conclusion of Bassanio’s choice the finely balanced character of 
Portia is fully shown in her exquisite address to her lover. Shakespeare here pourtrays 
the ideal woman, made for practical life, for lasting happiness, material and spiritual. 
She is neither the ethereal original of a higher, lost humanity, nor the alluring, deceit- 
ful form behind which a malignant fate lurks for its victim. Equally removed from 
the lofty beauty of a Urania and from the treacherous charm of a Pandora, Portia 
dwells in the happy medium, where spiritual and sensuous life unite in health, strength, 
and beauty. Juliet’s enthusiastic heroism would be foreign to her. We may imagine 
that she would have cut short the Balcony Scene with some sharp witticism, unless, 
perhaps, she would have declined altogether to enjoy the night air except in congenial 
company. Wherein an Othello was lacking she would very soon have discovered, and 
Cassio might have relied upon a calm hearing. Even Shakespeare’s choice heroes, 
Henry and Percy, would have had to mend their manners somewhat to siand before 
her refined taste. She is the personification of the fact that the finest ornament ot 
social and domestic life, and its nobler moral well-being, are in the hands of woman, as 
it is hers, when she is not equal to that office, to destroy its bloom irrevocably. Portia 


454 APPENDIX 


tells the secret of woman’s true, happy influence in the marriage state when she, the 
prudent, the cultivated, the much-wooed, gives herself up to the fortunate suitor with 
these words: § but the full sum of me Is sum of nothing, which to term in gross, 
Is an unlessoned girl,’ &c. (III, ii.). And these words immediately find their full con- 
firmation, Far removed from the false demand for exclusive devotion, her love keeps 
open eye and ear for duty, even though its summons should come at the most unseason- 
able hour, Her whole behaviour is a protest againt that comfortless idea of domestic 
virtue which sacrifices the respectability of husband and father, according to the degree 
of selfishness with which it postpones the claims of friendship and fatherland to the 
only business of increasing the res familiaris. Not for a moment does she hold back 
the husband she has just won from the duty he owes to his friend. She does even 
more. Exalted above all trivial considerations by the gravity of the occasion, she ven- 
tures to test her woman’s wit in this deadly crisis, In her noble speech upon the 
blessedness of mercy the earnestness and tenderness of her woman’s nature are pro- 
foundly impressive. But with her sound, practical sense she does not expect, by this 
poesy, to gain the victory in the hard world. As wise and keen as she is tender- 
hearted, she does not hesitate to fight the foe with his own weapons. And then,— 
surest sign of a sound understanding,—in the jubilee of success all excitement is toned 
down to the quiet grace of a genial, arch humour. A due sense of proportion is the 
groundwork of her character. This appears most emphatically in the conversation 
with Nerissa, in which, without any apparent necessity for it, Shakespeare engages her 
as she returns home from her successful enterprise: ‘ Nothing is good, I see, without 
respect.’ And again: ‘How many things by season season’d are To their right praise 
and true perfection!’ This is a way of thinking essential to a healthy view of practical 
life. It completes here one of the most beautiful pictures of womanhood which the 
Poet has created, not exactly for its poetical and ideal charm, but for its true and har- 
monious development. 

(P. 374.) In Lorenzo and Jessica we descend a step stilllower. Here the humour 
breaks out into reckless excess. The whole relation between them could not but have 
appeared immoral and repulsive, if the Poet had not reconciled us to it zsthetically by 
two equally effective means which justify to our feelings the happy ending. First of 
all, this hot love, athirst only for pleasure, certainly violates the law. But it violates it 
by disregarding a blood-relationship which stands out in sharp contrast to the majesty of 
the law: Jessica has good reasons for feeling ashamed of being her father’s child, and for 
calling herself a daughter of his blood, not of his heart. Her father’s house has been 
a hell to her; later on, it becomes evident enough that she was a mere addition to the 
old man’s money and wealth, perhaps only a burdensome addition. So, without scru- 
ple, she takes from that hell the stones with which to pave the way to her heaven. 
Only one trait has she inherited from her forefather, Jacob—practical sense. She 
knows excellently well that one cannot live on love alone, and she has evidently not 
been brought up to practise any extraordinary generosity. It is not without significance 
that Shakespeare puts into the mouth of Lorenzo, the bold child of fortune and pleas- 
ure, that fine praise of music, that sweet language of the heart, the mysterious tie bind- 
ing together the world of thought and the world of feeling. Thus the haughty levity 
of the cavalier receives the consecration of Beauty, and the success which circumstances 


accord to his bold adventure is made poetically possible, although it is strictly without 
moral grounds, 


(P. 381.) Zhe Merchant of Venice, in our opinion, was written neither to glonfy 
friendship, nor to condemn the usurer, nor, finally to represent any moral idea, rich 


GERMAN CRITICISMS —KARL ELZE 455 


and manifold as are the moral allusions which the thoughtful reader carries away with 
him, together with the esthetic enjoyment of this work of Art. The essential and 
definite aspect of life here illustrated admonishes us that lasting success, sure, practical 
results can be secured only by a just estimate of things, by prudent use and calm endur- 
ance of given circumstances, equally far removed from violent resistance and cowardly 
concession. Strong feeling and clear, good sense hold the scales in the pervading cha- 
racter of the whole Drama; fortune helps the honest in so far as they boldly and wisely 
woo its favour ; but rigid Idealism, although infinitely more amiable and estimable, shows 
itself as scarcely less dangerous than hard-hearted selfishness. 


Karu Eze (Zssays, 1871; translated by Miss L. Dora Schmitz, London, 1874, 
p- 90): Shylock’s relation to his daughter is a point where least can be said in his 
excuse. The ossification of his mind and feelings, his selfishness and bitterness, have 
also entered his family life, and, like corrosive acids, have eaten and destroyed it. 
While his co-religionists are wont to hold family ties in high estimation, and to keep 
their domestic life in a certain patriarchal holiness, so as to escape from the pressure 
of the outer world, Shylock, according to Jessica, makes his home a hell. He does 
not succeed in leaving harshness, avarice, hatred, and revenge out of doors, and in 
being gentle, kind, and generous within the bosom of his family; it is, indeed, an 
almost impossible task. Can the early death of his wife have contributed to this? 
But the remembrance of her attaches only to the turquoise which she has given him. 
If we may infer Shylock’s conjugal love from his paternal love, there can be as little 
said of the one as of the other, and, consequently, we can scarcely suppose that had 
Leah lived longer she would have exercised a softening and ennobling influence upon 
her husband’s character. His ducats, and his jewels, and the feeling of revenge against 
his Christian oppressors have so completely taken possession of his heart, that there is 
not even the smallest space left for conjugal or paternal love. Jessica is nothing to 
him but the keeper of his house and the guardian of his treasures. She leads the life 
of a prisoner; she is to shut the ears of the house, and, according to Oriental custom, 
is not allowed to put her head out of the window to gape at ‘ varnished’ Christian fools, 
who are an abomination to her father. That she should possess any claim to the enjoy- 
ment of life Shylock never dreams; his withered soul never supposes that hers is ex- 
panding in youthful excitement and desire. Why does he not surround her life with 
at least such ornaments and finery as young girls are accustomed to regard as a great 
part of their happiness? Why does he not place her under the motherly care of a 
companion, instead of leaving her completely to herself at home while he goes about 
his money transactions? Why? From greed, selfishness, and hard-heartedness. The 
want of fatherly feeling on his part necessarily produces a want of filial feeling on hers. 
She indemnifies herself by a confidential relation with the servant, who is a kind-hearted 
creature and a merry devil (‘the patch is kind enough,’ says Shylock), and thus makes 
the domestic hell somewhat endurable; besides, he serves her as Aostillon d’ amour. 

(P. 105.) From the beginning Antonio has abused and ill-treated the Jew, but this 
is the only stain on his character. Otherwise he is distinguished by gentleness, benev- 
olence, and kind-heartedness, and it cannot be conceived that his hatred of the Jew 
would amount to such cruelty, and this at the very moment when, in regard to the con- 
fiscation of the Jew’s property, he gives an unmistakable proof of his generosity. His 
demand for the conversion arises, in all probability, from an entirely different motive, 
and we shall hardly err in seeking it in the general religious conviction of the Middle 
Ages, according to whict none but believers in Christianity could partake of salvation 


450 APPENDIX 


and eternal blessedness. That the Jews are eternally lost is known even to Marlowe’s. 
Barabas, who says: ‘1 am a Jew, and therefore am I lost.’ It is well known that this 
conviction rose to the belief that it was a meritorious work to assist the non-Christians 
to the blessings of Christianity, even against their own wish, by forcing them to become 
converts. From this point of view Antonio’s demand and the Doge’s action appear in 
a different light, and it is easily understood that they should regard the proposed con- 
version as a proof of mercy as well. They intended to save Shylock’s soul from eter- 
nal perdition. There is no need of further discussion to show how this doctrine of the . 
Romish Church contained the germ of the most terrible fanaticism, and how it went 
hand in hand with the fiercest hatred of Jews and heretics; proofs of this may be 
found in almost every page of the history of the Middle Ages. ‘At the time of the 
‘great European persecution of the Jews, in the year-1349,’ says Menzel in his “story 
of the Germans, ‘all the Jews in Strasburg who refused to kiss the crucifix, nine hun- 
dred in number, were burned on one huge pile of wood: the Brandgasse or Rue Bra- 
Ze still bears its name in memory of this terrible scene. Only children were spared, 
and they were baptized before the eyes of their parents. Eleven hundred Jews escaped 
death by kissing the cross and becoming Christians.’ The Jews, therefore, had only 
the choice between conversion and death, exactly as Shakespeare has shown in his 
play. The public of that day saw no objection to the enforced conversion, but rather 
found it quite correct, and considered it a merciful punishment. Those who found 
pleasure in Marlowe’s Jew of Malta must have revelled in Shylock’s despair and Gra- 
tiano’s mockery. ‘To undo a Jew is charity and not sin,’ says Ithamore in Marlowe, 
at the end of the Fourth Act. 

(P. 111.) If Shakespeare, from his broader and more tolerant religious standpoint, 
disapproved of the enforced conversion of Jews, why did he make it a condition in 
Shylock’s case? The Jew might, of course, have come off with the fine only, even 
had it been heavier. The contrasts in the play, designed as a comedy, would then 
have been less harsh, and the stage effect would scarcely have been less. However, 
as has been said, Shakespeare considered a dramatic poem as a mirror, not a kaleido- 
scope; it is nowhere his custom to embellish or to suppress; he gives us the world 
and history as they are, even at the risk of every now and then resembling a natural- 
istic landscape-painter; nay, he possesses an undeniable predilection for sharp and 
definite outlines, even although they are not always within the confines of the 
beautiful. Moreover, his public wished above all things to see Shylock crushed, 
just as in Lessing’s Matham the Patriarch insists upon having the Jew burned. 
Nay, it seems questionable whether we ourselves would approve of a representa- 
tion of the play in which the condition of baptism were omitted for once, by way 
of trial. 


IBID. (Shakespeare Jahrbuch, 1873, vol. viii, p. 59): This drama is impregnated, in 
an inimitable manner, with a thoroughly Italian air, with an aroma of Italy, more read- 
ily felt than analyzed and defined. All is fresh and true to nature to a degree that can- 
not be surpassed. Byron, who considered it essential that the Poet should write from 
his own observation and experience, and could not himself write but upon this condi- 
tion, although he lived several years in Venice never succeeded in attaining to this 
perfect truth to nature. Shakespeare, with incomparable art gives us slight allusions and 
hints, apparently insignificant particulars, which suggest trains of thought leading our 
sympathies in a certain way and giving the imagination a direction to a determined aim. 
By these means we are transported, without being aware of it, completely into an Ital- 


GERMAN CRITICISMS—KARL ELZE 457 


tan atmosphere, and in the Fifth Act into the enjoyment of an Italian night, which 
could not be more vivid were we actually there on the spot. We are led into the bus- 
tle of the Bourse on the Rialto, and we see in the distance the gondola which is bear- 
ing Jessica away with her lover. To appreciate the art and beauty of Shakespeare in 
this respect we have only to compare Zhe Merchant of Venice and Ben Jonson’s Voi- 
pone, the scene of which is also laid in Venice. Jonson shows a thorough knowledge 
of the Italian tongue and of Italian, and especially Venetian, manners and localities. 
He lays on the local colouring as thick as one’s hand, but it is everywhere the work 
of a book-learned student aiming with evident self-satisfaction to display the learning 
patched up from books ad hoc. One sees the design throughout, and is put out of tune. 
Jonson imagines he is making his personages genuine Italians by making them speak a 
great deal, and wherever possible, in Italian phrases, about the institutions, manners, 
and localities of their native land. Thus we hear them tell, in a motiey medley, of 
Avocatori, Mercatori, Commendatori, Notario, of the Piazza San Mark, Zan Fritada, 
Sforzato, ciarlitani, scartoccios, the mal caduco; vertigine in the head, moscadelli, 
unguento, osteria, Pantalone di Besogniosi, ragion del Stato, Procuratia, the Scrutineo, 
canaglia, tremorcordia, Signiory of the Sanita, saffi, the Forty, the Ten, the Lazaretto, 
Bolognian sausages, Piscaria, the monastery of San Spirito, the grand Canale, &c.; all 
the Italian poets are introduced by name: Petrarca, Tasso, Dante, Guarini, Ariosto, 
Aretin, and Cieco di Hadria—*T have read them all,’ says (in the name of the poet ?) 
Lady Politick Would-be. Had Ben Jonson wished to be thoroughly logical, he should 
have gone a step further, and made his Italians speak Italian, as Chapman does in his 
Alphonsus with the German princess Hedwig. But, instead of this, they are often not 
true to their parts, betraying by their speech their acquaintance with the Cock-pit, with 
Smithfield Fair and Fleetstreet; the native sixpence is found (II, i) in one and the same 
line with the Italian moccinigo and Bagatine, which is a blunder from Jonson’s own 
point of view; he should at least have avoided English local colour. It is, so to speak, 
the negative side of local colouring when the Poet uses nothing that in respect of the 
locality disturbs the illusion of the hearer or reader. Jonson’s whole treatment is 
purely from the outside, wherein the Poet is lost in the Philologist, and it is remarkable 
that he could have reckoned upon the knowledge and intelligence of his Public; his 
hearers must have listened with open mouths; he ought to have furnished Volpone, as 
well as his A/asgues, with explanatory annotations. How utterly different is Shake- 
speare’s way! Here and there he lets his characters still be English, although this is 
hardly observable in The Merchant of Venice, but he breathes into them Italian souls, 
Italian passion, Southern glow and enjoyment of life. While Shakespeare treats cos- 
tume and scenery only incidentally, Jonson, especially in the scenes where English 
travellers are introduced, actually enlarges our knowledge of travelling as it was in his 
day. We learn that an English traveller had to have a ‘license,’ that he presented 
himself, as at this day, to my lord the Ambassador, that, above all things, he must 
‘have the languages, such is the standing phrase; Sir Politick gives as the reason of 
his travelling to Venice that he wanted ‘to learn the language’ (II, i); we learn 
further that in Venice one must go about with a silver fork, and finally that Lady 
Would-be in Venice learned ‘ives, fashions, and behaviour’ from the courtesans, just 
as at the present day the ugliest fashions are set by the Parisian demi-monde. 

Such is Jonson’s local colouring compared with Shakespeare’s. One may safely 
say, that it would have been better in this respect, as in all else, for Jonson’s poetry 
if he had had no more Greek and Latin—Italian included—than his friend Shake- 


speare 


458 APPENDIX 


DR BELLARIO 

Tu. ELzE (Shakespeare Jahrbuch, 1878, xiii, 149): When in the Pecorone the 
much-married mistress of Belmonte, after the celebration of the marriage festivities, 
appears like a Dea ex machiné in the disguise of a young judge fresh from his studies 
in Bologna, and saves poor Ansaldo from his mortal peril, we acquiesce in the old fairy 
tale, as it might almost be termed, without any demur. In 7) he Merchant of Venice, 
on the contrary, according to our present ideas, a similar dénouement appears at first 
sight fantastic, unsatisfactory, nay, childish. The charming Portia, who becomes even 
before her wedding-night a ‘grass widow,’ suddenly conceives the girlish, romantic 
plan of saving, under the disguise of a judge, the life of the noble friend of her newly- 
wedded lord, and—Shakespeare here avails himself of the convenient vicinity of Bel- 
mont to Padua—she deems it all-sufficient to provide herself with the counsel and the 
garments of her cousin, Bellario, a highly-respected lawyer in Padua. She has not 
withal the slightest knowledge of Dr Bellario’s having been summoned by the Duke to 
Venice for this very case. This unexplained, lucky accident comes to her aid, and so 
she suddenly appears as his substitute and deputy before the Supreme Court of the 
Republic in the Doge’s palace, over which the Doge himself presides. Here she 
appears, not with the legal opinion of her cousin as a kind of Crown lawyer, or of the 
Law Faculty in Padua, but as a veritable and downright judge. Such a proceeding in 
a State having a clearly-defined system of legal procedure—which was emphatically 
true of Venice at that period—seems, at least to the reader of the present day, almost, 
if not quite, incomprehensible. But if we accept this too as an echo of earlier medizeval 
law (as in the story of the Pecorone), there remains only this alternative: Either Por- 
tia’s whole plan, with its accidental coincidence with Bellario’s being summoned by the 
Doge, is a poorly-contrived, improbable fable, and therefore scarcely worthy of a great 
dramatist,—or an expedient of this kind must have appeared to the poet and to his 
contemporaries as not at all out of the way, nay, quite natural and customary, at least 
in Venice, This latter is possible only in case there were at that time in Padua men 
whose position, reputation, and public weight in the Venetian State were of such a 
nature that they could furnish an original for Dr Bellario. Then, assuredly, this cha- 
racter in 74e Merchant will present nothing remarkable or incredible to any one. 

Shakespeare brings this Dr Bellario plainly and distinctly before us, withovt intro- 
ducing him personally, by a few allusions and by the appearance of his substitute, 
even Portia herself disguised as Dr Balthazar. He is an elderly man (‘old Bellario,’ 
as he is called), ‘a learned Doctor’ of Laws, erudite, famous everywhere, highly 
respected by the Doge and Signorie, and often called on to counsel and to decide; in 
complicated civil cases an experienced, sharp-witted barrister; in criminal cases (for 
parties ‘standing in danger’) an eloquent advocate, and in all respects, by everybody, 
held in highest confidence and esteem. 

Now, since Shakespeare laid the time of the action of this play in his own days, he 
had this advantage: That at that very time there was living in Padua a professor in the 
University there whose characteristics fully and entirely corresponded to all these quali- 
ncations and requisites in the play. OTTONELLO DiscaLzio, born in 1536 of a distin- 
guished patrician family, which at an earlier period had produced a celebrated jurist of the 
same name, was at that time the most eminent Professor of Law, especially of Civil Law, in 
the University of Padua. Profound knowledge, acuteness, and eloquence pre-eminently 
distinguished him. The Government of the Republic continually consulted him, and 
heaped him with honours, commissions, and embassies. For the extraordinary services 
whic. he thus rendered to the State he received the conspicuous distinction of the 


GERMAN CRITICISMS—DR BELLARIO 459 


Order of San Marco. The Emperor of Germany also made him a Knight and a 
Pfalzgraf, and other Princes their counsellor. Various invitations to take up his resi- 
dence at foreign courts he declined. Many a defendant in civil cases he rescued from 
the perils of legal procedure; for more than twenty years he was the kindly protector 
and friend of the German law-students in Padua. In the seventy-first year of his age, 
in 1607, he died in Padua. Upon the monuments erected to his memory by his widow 
in the Church of the Eremites, and by the law-students in the Church of St Anthony, 
he is termed: ‘ Primarius juris civilis interpres ;’—‘eximia juris utriusque scientia et 
admirabili disputandi ac dicendi acumine et copia excellens, patriae in honoribus, lega- 
donibus consilliisque utilissimus, privatorum in judiciis pericula singulari eloquentia 
propulsans.’ We need not indicate how admirably the words of these inscriptions fit 
Dr Bellario, and even Shakespeare’s very words. Let the name Bellario be substituted 
for Discalzio, and even to scholars the actual existence of the former is rendered cred- 
ible. And no one can justly argue that Shakespeare could not have had as thorough a 
knowledge of this distinguished contemporary of his, this Discalzio, as of the country 
on the Brenta between Padua and Venice. 

We do not desire to ascribe to the personality which has just been depicted more 
influence on Shakespeare’s work than it really has. It may well be that in all times 
and among all peoples there have been Jurists of like wisdom, character, and repute to 
Ottonello Discalzio, but only one, occupying in Venice such a position as his, can be 
regarded and accepted as the prototype of Bellario. If we imagine Bellario as filling 
a position like Discalzio’s, then it is easily conceivable that Portia, knowing her cousin’s 
reputation and high position with the Doge and Signorie, could presume that in a case 
of such importance and notoriety as that of Shylock versus Antonio, he would be called 
on for an opinion, and perhaps even be summoned to Venice. Her surmise proves cor- 
rect, and thereby her plan succeeds. ‘Thus, by a side-light from Discalzio, Bellario 
emerges from the twilight of romantic invention into the clear, bright light of real life, 
and Portia’s adventure, from a novelistic freak of a girl, becomes an intelligible and sen- 
sible act. 

[Im his concluding section Th. Elze describes the University of Padua at the close 
of the sixteenth century, when so great was the University’s reputation everywhere that 
there were at that time representatives of twenty-three nations among its students. 
From the lists of these students it appears ‘that not a few Englishmen took up their 
abode in Padua for a longer or shorter time for the purpose of study, and all cf whom 
assuredly must have visited Venice also; and it is also to be inferred that the number 
of English travellers who visited the city of the Doges must have been much larger 
than is commonly supposed. Hereby is disclosed another source, not hitherto noticed, 
whence a knowledge of Venetian manners and customs reached England. And if it 
has been hitherto impossible to prove that Shakespeare drew his knowledge of Venice 
and Padua and the region around from personal observation, it is quite possible to sup- 
pose that he obtained it by word of mouth, either from Italians living in England, or 
from Englishmen who had pursued their studies in Padua.’ 

Among the names that Th. Elze gives may be noticed two Danes—one, Rosenkranz, 
in 1587-89, and another, Giildenstern, in 1603. A list is given from the Records at 
Padua, extending from September, 1591, to October, 1594, during which time twenty- 
five English students were matriculated. Thus in: 

1591, on 29 Nov., D. Thomas Sackavillus, nobilis, Anglus—cum naevo sub dextra 
aure. [A birthmark or scar is always itemized. This is, as Th. Elze notes, the son 
of the author of the Mirror for Magistrates.] 


aba APPENDIX 


1592. 22 Jan., D. Franc. Tusser, Anglus—cum cicatrice in suprema parte pollicis » 
sinistri. 

15 Sept., D. Ricard. Sands, Anglus—cum parva cicatrice in facie. oe 

1593. 21 Nov., D, Fynes Morison, Anglus—cum cicatrice sub oculo dextro ; 
and others; but the foregoing are names which become afterwards familiar to all Shake- 
speare students. ] 


W. OECHELHAUSER* (Shakespeare's Dramatische Werke, Weimar, 1877, p. 14) 
Passive, inactive réles like Antonio’s generally require less attention to by-play. But 
the great Trial Scene is an exception; here by-play in the circle of his friends is indis- 
pensable on the part of Antonio, And furthermore, as the Poet has given Antonio but 
few words to say, he must in dumb show fully, and warmly, express his gratitude to 
Portia, which is unfortunately much neglected by Actors. Portia, too, must emphasize 
this by-play, lest at the conclusion of the Trial, Antonio, on whose fate the whole plot 
turns, should become too completely overshadowed. ; 

(P. 16.) Bassanio’s situation in the exciting Trial Scene must not be forgotten by the 
actor for a moment; morally regarded, he suffers greater torture than Antonio, who 
suffers only for himself. On this account, at every step of the Trial, Bassanio must 
pourtray in all possible ways through by-play his distress and anxiety, as well as his 
boundless joy over the deliverance of his friend, hard as it may be in a scene which 
fills an entire long Act. The highest expression of his sympathy for Antonio (the full 
significance whereof is rarely appreciated) lies in the words, ‘ Antonio, I am married 
to a wife,’ &c. Here, at the moment when every hope for Antonio’s relief appears to 
have vanished, expression must be given in the most impressive way to the intensest 
anguish, but most actors regard this passage only as the occasion for the roguish remarks 
of Portia which follow. Generally too little is made of Bassanio’s thanks, and Anto- 
nio’s also, to Portia, so that an almost cold, frosty sound is imparted to Bassanio’s grace- 
ful words. In the final scene at Belmont, where he again enters the realm of love and 
happiness, Bassanio’s earnest and dignified vindication in regard to the ring gives us the 
pleasing and distinct idea of a pure and noble character, deserving of his good fortune. 

(P. 21.) Shakespeare in his Shylock did not cater to the blind hatred of the Jews 
prevalent in his time, but stood forth with large-hearted boldness for the oppressed, and 
threw upon the persecutors of the Jews their well-merited share in producing the 
extreme degeneracy of the people to which Shylock belongs. 

The conclusion of the Trial Scene is a special confirmation of my idea that in the 
characterization the typical Jew, as such, should by no means predominate over the 
typical miser. When the Doge announces the confiscation of half of Shylock’s property, 
Shylock breaks out into passionate complaints, declaring his money to be his life; but 
when his becoming a Christian is made the condition of his retaining the other half, he 
simply says: ‘I am content.’ Money is more to him than his faith, the miser is 
stronger than the Jew. But this trait belongs to the individual, not to the race, for in 
the world’s history no people but just the Jews have with greater decision and energy 
subordinated every earthly consideration to their devotion to their faith, notwithstanding 
centuries of terrible persecution and their innate thirst for gold. The miser in Shylock 
has sprung up on common human soil; only his cunning, his hatred, his thirst for 
revenge on his Christian oppressors reflect the representative of degenerate Judaism, 
a 

* Especial attention is bestowed by Oechelhauser in the Introduction of each play in his transla- 


tion (which is an adaptation of Schlegel and Tiech’s) on the costume, on the scenery, or stage-set- 
ting, and particularly on directions to actors. 


JORDAN'S BALLAD 4bi 


Greed for gold and hatred of Christians are the springs of his actions, and upon their 
working the character of Shylock is formed. 

(P. 23.) In his brief appearance in the Second Act with Jessica and Launcelot, 
where he puts no restraint upon himself, Shylock shows himself as the dirty miser, 
always the cross domestic tyrant who has made the house ‘a hell’ to his daughter. 
No word of love or kindness to his child, only the command to keep the doors fastened 
and not go to the window to see the maskers pass. The tender farewell of his daugh- 
ter that many actors represent him as taking is in obvious opposition to the design of 
the Poet, and not only do the subsequent outbreaks of heartless rage give the lie to it, 
but it would cast a sad reflection upon Jessica’s character. On the contrary, Shylock 
should be represented as turning his back on Jessica at his departure without any leave- 
taking. Jessica says expressly she is not the daughter of his heart. She loves him 
not, because she is not loved. 


JORDAN’S BALLAD 


As this Ballad has been frequently cited by Editors and Commentators, it must find 
a place in this volume. Its chief interest lies in the proof which it yields that an argu- 
ment for age cannot be judiciously founded merely on the extreme simplicity of the 
ballad style—the ground, it will be remembered, on which several critics claimed a high 
antiquity for the ballad of Gernutus. Incidentally, it gives us a glimpse of Shylock, 
with red hair and a hooked nose, in the days halfway between Burbadge and Dogget. 
It was first reprinted by Collier (ew Particulars, p. 38), who prefaced it as follows: 

‘After the death of Burbadge in 1619-20, I do not recollect any trace of the per- 
‘formance of The Merchant of Venice until Lord Lansdowne revived the play in 
‘1701, with alterations. So much does Shakespeare’s production seem to have been 
‘forgotten in 1664, that Thomas Jordan made a ballad of it, and printed it as an orig- 
‘inal story (at least without any acknowledgement) in his Royal Arbor of Loyal 
‘ Poesie in that year..... Jordan felt authorized to take such liberties with the story 
‘that he has represented the Jew’s daughter, instead of Portia, as assuming the office 
‘of Assessor to the Duke of Venice in the Trial Scene, for the sake of saving the life 
‘of the Merchant, with whom she was in love. Here, also, he describes Shylock as 
‘having a red beard, and mentions some other particulars of his dress and appearance, 
‘ regarding which he doubtless spoke from the custom of the stage, Jordan having himself 
‘been an actor before the temporary suppression of theatres by the Puritans, though he 
‘could hardly have seen Burbadge.’ [I have followed the text given by HALLIWELL (p. 
321), which bears evidence of being reprinted with closer fidelity than that by Collier.] 


Tue Forrerrure, a Romance; tune—Dear, let me now this evening dye. 


1. You that do look with Christian hue, 
Attend unto my sonnet, 
T’le tell you of as vilde a Jew, 
As ever wore a bonnet. 
No Jew of Scotland I intend, 
My story not so mean is: 
This Jew in wealth did much transcend 
Under the States of Venice, 
2. Where he by usury and trade, 
Did much exceed in riches; 
His beard was red; his face was made 
Not much unlike a witches. 


462 


APPENDIX 


His habit was a Jewish gown, 
That would defend all weather ; 

His chin turn’d up, his nose hung down, 
And both ends met together. 


. Yet this deformed father had 


A daughter and a wise one, 
So sweet a virgin never lad 
Did ever set his eyes on. 

He that could call this lady foul 
Must be a purblinde noddy ; 
But yet she had a Christian soul 

Lodg’d in a Jewish body. 


. Within the city there did live, 


If you the truth will search on’t, 
One whose ill fate will make you grieve, 
A gallant Christian Merchant ; 
Who did abound in wealth and wit, 
In youth and comely feature, 
Whose love unto a friend was knit 
As strong as bonds of nature. 


. A gentleman of good renown, 


But of a sinking fortune, 
Who having no estate of ’s own, 
Doth thus his friend importune : 
Friend, lend me but one thousand pound, 
It shall again be paid ye, 
For I have very lately found 
A fair and wealthy lady. 


. The Merchant then makes this reply : 


Friend, I am out of treasure, 
But I will make my credit flye, 
To do my friend a pleasure. 
There is a Jew in town (quoth he), 
Who, though he deadly hate me, 
Yet cause my wealth is strong at sea, 
This favour will not bate me. 


. When they were come unto the Jew, 


He did demand their pleasure : 
The Merchant answers, I of you 
Would borrow so much treasure. 
The Jew replies, you shall not ha’t, 
If such a summe would save ye, 
Unless in three moneths you will pay’t, 
Or forfeit what I’de have you (sic). 


. If at the three moneths end you do, 


As you shall sign and seal to’t, 
Not pay the money which is due, 
Whereere I have a minde to’t, —— 
Tle cut a pound out of your flesh, 
The Merchant is contented, 
Because he knew in half that time, 
His shipping would prevent it. 


. Ill news by every ship comes in, 


His ships are drown’d and fired ; 
The Jew his forfeiture doth win, 

For three moneths are expired. 
He is arrested for the debt; 

The Court must now decide it: 
The flesh is due, and now the Jew 

Is ready to divide it. 


MUSIC COLA 


to. The Merchant's friend that had the gold, 4 
Now being richly married, Tam 
Offer’d the summe down three times told, 
To have his friend’s life spared. 
*T would not be took, but strait steps in 
One in Doctor’s apparel, 
Who, though but young, doth now begin 
Thus to decide the quarrel. 
II. Jew, we do grant that by the law, 
A pound of flesh your due is, 
But if one drop of blood you draw, 
We'l show you what a Jew is: 
Take but a pound, as ’twas agreed, 
Be sure you cut no further, 
And cut no less, lest for the deed 
You be arraign’d for murther. 
12. The Jew inrag’d doth tear the bond, 
And dares not do the slaughter, 
He quits the Court, and then ’twas found 
The Doctor proves his daughter, 
Who for the love she long time bore, 
From a true heart derived, 
To be his wife, and save his life, 
This subtle slight contrived. 
13. The Court consent and they are wed; 
For hatching of this slaughter 
The Jew’s estate is forfeited, 
And given to his daughter. 
She is baptiz’d in Christendome, 
The Jew cryes out he’s undone; 
I wish such Jews may never come 
To England, nor to London. 


MUSIC 


All that glisters is not gold, &c. 
Act II, Scene vii, Lines 67-75. 
ALFRED RoFFE (Handbook of Shakespeare Music, London, 1878, p. 45): A duet 
taken from this scroll was composed by Mr Charles Horn, and sung in the Merry Wives 
when that play was musically performed many years ago. 


Tell me where ts fancy bred, &c. 
Act III, Scene ii, Lines 69-78. 

RoFFE: Besides the well-known setting of this song, in the duet form, by Srr_Jo#n 
STEVENSON, it has at least four other settings. The earliest I have as yet become aware 
of is a solo by Dr Arve, which was sung in Twelfth Night by the celebrated Mrs 
Clive. I am informed that the play was revived at Drury Lane Theatre, on January 
17, 1741, when Olivia was personated by Mrs Clive. Dr Arne’s setting of this song 
for Olivia is in the key of D minor, and is elegant and pensive in its character, It is 
reprinted in Mrs Caulfield’s collection, and only there, that I am aware of. The bur- 
den, ‘Let us all ring fancy’s knell,’ has here been omitted by the Doctor; it could not 
have been felt to be in any sort of harmony with such a person as the love-lorn lady 


of Twelfth Night. 
Another of the settings is by Mr &. /. S. Srzvews, and is for the comparatively very 


464, APPENDIX 


unusual combination of three sopranos and a tenor. The composition is decidedly out © 
of the strict gice category, inasmuch as it possesses an instrumental bass. In the sec- 
ond movement the effect of the ‘knell’ is assigned to this instrumental bass, so that M~ 
Stevens’s work, in this case, is rather to be considered as an accompanied quartet than 
asa glee. Mr Wizzram Linzer has set these words as a dialogue duet for first and 
second attendant, with a chorus in three parts for sopranos and base. Then there is a 
setting by Mr Joww Harrow, concerning which it may interest amateur ladies to be told 
that it was sung by Miss Poole, with @ chorus of female voices only, in The Merchant 
of Venice. The composition is in two movements, the first an andante con moto up to 
the word ‘reply.’ ‘Let us all ring fancy’s knell’ forms an allegro movement. The 
chorus is written in three parts, for soprano, mezzo-soprano, and contralto voices. The 
whole together would, as I conceive, form a very pleasing addition to the somewhat 
limited repertory of ladies’ music. 


Tur New SHAKSPERE Society (List of Songs, &c., Series VIII, Miscellanies, No. 
3, p. 28) adds the following :— 

Rev. L. Ricxmonp, about 1810 or 1820. Round. 

M. BarrHoLomEw (Mrs Mounsey), Part Song. Soprano, Alto, Tenor, Bass. 
Novello. 

G. A, MACFARREN, 1869. Part Song. S., A., T., B. Novello. 

B. Luerzen, 1877, Duettino, Brighton. 

C. Pinsuti, about 1880, Part Song. A., T., T., B. Novello. 

C. Pinsuri. The same arranged for S., C., T., B. 

J. G. CaLcorr, 1883. Part Song. S.,S., C. Novello. 


In such a night as this, &c. 


Act V, Scene i, Lines 2-29. 
NEw SHAKSPERE SOCIETY :— 


Sir A, S, SULLIVAN, 1865. Duet for Soprano and Tenor, introduced in the Cantata 
of Kenilworth. 


How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank, &c. 
Act I, Scene v, Lines 63-77. 

ROFFE (p. 47): There have been at least six pieces of music connected with these 
parts of Lorenzo’s beautiful address to Jessica. One of these is a setting for three 
voices, with a distinct pianoforte accompaniment, constituting it rather a trio than a glee. 
It is the composition of Mr AZ, P. Kine. A second setting, in the form of a little duet 
for soprano voices, was by Mr Cuarzzes Dignum. This duet is to be found in a vol- 
ume of Mr Dignum’s miscellaneous vocal compositions, the date about 1800 (?). Both 
these settings are confined to the four lines 63-66, There is also a pleasing duet to 
these lines, set by Mr 7xomas Hurcuinson,in or about 1807. It is written for a 
soprano and a tenor. 

Mr Joun Percy (the composer of ‘ Wapping Old Stairs’) has set these words in the 
solo form. Mr Percy’s composition, if without any very marked character, has a cer- 
tain degree of elegance, but it is not easy to see the expediency of some peculiar deal- 
ings with the words. For instance, stopping at the first two lines and a half, ‘ How 
sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank! Here will we sit, and let the sounds of 
music Creep in our ears,’ the composer proceeds with the following lines from Twelfth 
Night (with alterations) :—*Oh! it comes o’er me like the gentle south, That o’er the 
violet breathes, and charms the soul.’ After this the other line and a half of Loren- 


MUSIC 465 


zo’s speech are admitted, with two additional syllables, thus :—<‘ Soft stillness and the 
night Do we/l become the touches of sweet harmony.’ 

Again, not many years ago, appeared a setting from Lorenzo’s speech by Miss £. 
NayYcLor, as an accompanied duet. This composition has two movements, the first clos- 
ing at the words ‘ Become the touches of sweet harmony,’ while the second is an ai/e- 
vo, written to the last three lines of Lorenzo’s same speech, specially addressed to 
the musicians when they enter—‘Come, ho, and wake Diana,’ &c. 

Finally, ix. 1866, in the notice of a performance by Mr Henry Leslie’s choir, we are 
told of a part-song, composed by Mr Zzszzz himself, to Shakespeare’s lines—* How 


sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!’ It appears that the choir gained an encore 
in this part-song. 


NEw SHAKSPFRE SOCIETY adds the following :— 

Sir A. S. SULLIVAN, 1865. Recitative for Tenor before the Duet for Soprano and 
Tenor, introduced into the Cantata of Kenilworth. 

TY. BLANCHARD. Song. 

Jj. G. CaLcor7T, 1883. Part Song. S.C. T., B., B. First sung by Leslie’s choir, 
Feb. 2, 1883. 

J. G. Catcorr, 1883. The same arranged as a Trio. S.,S., C. 


for do but note a wild and wanton herd, &°¢. 
Act V, Scene i, Lines 81-98. 
RorFFe: There is a song on these words composed by Mr 7. Cooxs, and sung by 
Mr Braham in the operatized Taming of the Shrew. The opening is in recitative, and 
there is an air of varied movements. The close is made upon the words— Let no 
such man be trusted.’ 


NEw SHAKSPERE SOCIETY: See Geneste’s English Stage, ix, 418. 


Miss HELEN A. CLARKE (Shakespeariana, January, 1888, p.17): The Merchant of 
Venice has been turned into an Opera by a modern Italian, Srevor PETRELLA, and is 
said to possess merit. This play, however, as far back as 1787, fell into the clutches 
of one of the insatiable army of mediocre German composers, /. 4. /usr, and was per- 
formed at Amsterdam, let us hope for the first and last time. 

[When this play was produced in Philadelphia in 1878 with extraordinary mag- 
nificence, under the management of W. D. Gemmill, the Song in Oxberry’s Edition 
‘ My bliss too long my bride denies,’ II, vi, 30, was set to music by Mr Szwow Hass. 
L&R, and published as a Serenade-Barcarole, with Solo and Chorus.| 

go 


PLAN OF THE WORK, &c. 


In this Edition the attempt is made, to give, in the shape of TEXTUAL NoTEs, on the 
same page with the Text, all the Various Readings of The Merchant of Venice, from the 
First Quarto to the latest critical Edition of the play; then, as COMMENTARY, follow 
the Notes which the Editor has thought worthy of insertion, not only for the purpose 
of elucidating the Text, but as illustrations of the history of Shakespearian criticism. 
In the APPENDIX will be found discussions of subjects, which on the score of length 
could not be conveniently included in the Commentary. 

- The List or EDITIONS COLLATED IN THE TEXTUAL NOTES, is as follows: 


Tue Firsr Quarto (Roberts) .. «+ [Q,]-- tie os Shoe Goo, US 
Tue Szeconp Quarto (Heyes.  Ash- 

bee’s Facsimile) Se ge 6. [UO poe a6 a ie te LOOO 
Tue First Foio os an Att 4124) nore oe oe oe e» 1623 
Tue SEconD FOLIO «+ oe 56 [Bil oc ost ators oo mee kOS2 
7B THIRD QUARTO .. ae -- [Q]-- BG a0 oe eee L037, 
THe THIRD Fotio os ie -- [F,] -. a0 ee ee e+ 1664 
Tue FourTH Folio... oe oat EP je oe ee ee »» 1685 
Rowe (First Edition) .. ee .. [Rowei] .. oe oe ee 1709 
Rowe (Second Edition)..  .. .. [Roweii] .. «6 «2 «+ 1714 
Pope (First Edition) .. «. sro td (ROPE!) rele se oe esl 723 
PorE (Second Edition) .. oe siete [PE Opesii\| Meets ceo os oe 1728 
THEOBALD (First Edition) oo | re = DHCOD. i} Sere) | este ene omer 7 25 
THEOBALD (Second Edition) .. «» [Theob. ii] .. oe an «+ 1740 
HANMER .. ate oho ene oe fran: oie ee os e. 1744 
WARBURTON ye are 0 e+ [Warb.] ae oe an ee 1747 
JOHNSON .. oie oe oe -+ [Johns.] o8 oe ot e- 1765 
(CET dn Go Ge Oe Pace [Kea] 6G) aya soce (Qk 
JOHNSON and STEEVENS. . oe ~« [Steevi773]) >. hn 56 se: 3773 
JOHNSON and STEEVENS. . ie wie [LStEEV 2 70)] tele on oe se 1778 
JOHNSON and STEEVENS. . ane -- ([Steev.’85] .. 40 oe oe. 1785 
MALONE .. «2 «+e «+ «+ [Mal.] J GO ho LUGS 
STEEVENS .. 5g ote arc .. [Steev.] 1793 


RANN ore seM 0 ste ele) a een Rann) oe ci: = aoe (?) 1794 
REED’s STEEVENS an ate «. [Var.’03] .. 5:0 SiG -- 1803 
ECCLES =. Bis oie oe chet LCs lee os 5G ee «+ 1805 
REED’S STEEVENS a6 ae So (ME SYEN) o- ae eC 1813 
BOSWELL’s MALONE .. ole vee Vary oe ee oe : 1821 
KRIGH Dy. 0 Side: Sas ee RY oe ee) heen sme OA 
CoLLikR (First Edition) . . csi -+ (Coll. i] ore Sah 1842 
HALLIWELI (Folio Edition) .. .. [Hal.] Role aco oc re 1856 


SINGER (Second Edition) mit -. (Sing. ii] 

Dyce (First Edition) .. ar +» [Dycei] 

COLLIER (Second Edition) 
466 


a0 3.5 ae «- 1856 
ve oe ee «+ 1857 
ve > LCollD in] ier re -. 1858 


PLAN OF THE WORK 467 


STAUNTON oe +.  «. [Sta] vn “Soc | se ytd) SGI tS 
R. GRANT WHITE (First Edition) -. [Wh. i] oC ae ++ «2 1861 
CAMBRIDGE (CLARK and WRIGHT) .. [Cam.] ale oe 55 «. 1863 


GLOBE (CLARK and WRIGHT) .. ». [Glo] 6 ane oe er LSOd 
KEIGHTLEY as [Ktly] ba os .- 1864 
CHARLES and MAry Cownnn- CLARKE [Clarke] .. ie oa (?) 1864 
Dyce (Second Edition) . meee Dyce 1] earn. on ee -. 1866 
CLARENDON (CLARK and Wrice) -- (Cla.] as a6 ae -. 1869 
DeEttus (Third Edition) . . ore +. [Del.] Ogu © aca on Delo72 


Dyce (Third Edition) .. 5 yea WY Ceyit | ies ae Che «. 1875 
COLLIER (Third pee oe a  4Reolbsihys a5 oc os oa) 1877 
HupDSon .. ‘ 5 So tog Pei Gas as ae -+ 1879 
ROLFE .. . [Rlfe] ae me xe -. 1883 
R. GRANT Wurre iSceona Edition) a MAES 55 MG ee ane! FER 


In the TEXTUAL NorTEs the symbol Ff indicates the agreement of the Second, 
Third, and Fourth Folios. The agreement of the three Quartos is indicated by Qq. 

The omission of the apostrophe in the Second Folio, a peculiarity of that edition, is 
not generally noted. 

The sign + indicates the agreement of Rows, PopE, THEOBALD, HANMER, WAR- 
BURTON, and JOHNSON. 

When WARBURTON precedes HANMER in the Textual Notes, it indicates that HAN- 
MER has adopted a suggestion of WARBURTON’S. 

The words ef cet. after any reading indicate that it is the reading of a// other editions. 

The words ef seg. indicate the agreement of all subsequent editions, 

The abbreviation (szds.) indicates that the reading is substantially given, and that 
immaterial variations in spelling, punctuation, or stage directions are disregarded. 

COLL. (Ms) refers to COLLIER’S annotated Second Folio, 

An Emendation or Conjecture which is given in the Commentary is not repeated in 
the Textual Notes; nor is conj. added to any name in the Textual Notes unless it hap- 
pens to be that of an editor, in which case its omission would be misleading, 

The colon is used as equivalent to ‘namely.’ 

All citations of Acts, Scenes, and Lines in Romeo and Juliet, Macbeth, Hamlet, Lear, 
and Of¢kello refer to this edition of those plays; in citations from other plays the GLOBE 
EDITION is followed. 

I have not called attention to every misprint in the Folio. The Textual Notes will 
show, if need be, that they are misprints by the agreement of all the Editors in their 
2orrection. 

Nor is notice taken of the first Editor who adopted the modern spelling, or who sub- 
stituted commas for parentheses, or changed ? to !. 

Otherwise, even insignificant variations in spelling and punctuation in the Quartos 
and Folios are recorded, that every aid may be supplied not alone for comparing the 
Texts in general, but for deciding from which text the Folio was printed. 

Hitherto, before going to press, I have verified the collation, in the Textual Notes, 
of all the Editions, In the present volume this verification has been restricted to the 
collation of the Quartos and Folios. 


Again be it urged in palliation of the obtrusive First Person Singular, that the mon- 
archical ‘we’ implies the semblance of an authority which it is the farthest removed 


468 APPENDIX 


from the Editor's wish, to claim; moreover, the impression in him is ineradicable, thar . 
the Editorial ‘we’ when it stands for only one wee editor smacks ineffaceably of the 
Three Tailors of Tooley Street. ‘ As long as the notes of other editors are given on the 
same page with his, the greater glory will dim the less, and his inland brook will be 
lost in the main of waters. 


I cannot but think that some of the most valuable notes in the foregoing pages are 
to be found under the name of Allen. They are the marginalia of the late Professor 
GEORGE ALLEN, from whose daughters I lately received several plays thus annotated,- 
a precious gift. It scarcely need be added that they were written with no view to pubh- 
cation, but are, what their fragmentary style reveals, the jottings, for his own use merely, 
of a keen critic, accustomed by a life-long study of Greek to the close analysis of 
thought and language. How much these brief notes have lost through the lack of 
their author’s revision cannot but be sadly apparent to all who recall the wide range 
of Professor Allen’s learning. 


Again for this Play, as for Orkedlo, Mr Epwin Boor kindly furnished me with a 
Prompt-book, wherein he had noted his interpretations; they are to be found duly 
recorded in the Commentary. 


A work in six volumes, called Déscoveries in Hieroglyphics, &c. by ROBERT DEVER. 
ELL was published in London in 1813, and again, a second edition in 1816. In this 
work Hamlet, Lear, Othello, and the present play are reprinted with explanatory notes 
and wood-cuts. But, as was mentioned in Ofhe//o, the interpretations are the witless, 
almost incoherent, ravings of a pure lunatic; to have cited them only to raise a laugh, 
and they could be cited for no other purpose, would have been simply heartless. 


The List or Books, from which citations have been made at first hand, is here 
given, chiefly for the purpose of setting them forth in chronological order, and as a 
means of identification. To save space in the Commentary the volumes are generally 


cited with extreme brevity. It may be added that it is not to be supposed that the —~ 


List represents all the volumes that have been fruitlessly examined for stray notes of 
value; were all included the List would be twice, if not thrice, as large. A list of 
Dictionaries is added, for the sake of convenient chronological reference : 


ASCHAM: Scholemaster (Arber)  .. +A se os os o* +s 1570 
Gosson: Schole of Abuse (Arber) .. +8 we 36 6 oe ++ 1579 


SILVAYN: Zhe Orator aie o% 56 sé oie sis Ac «. 1596 
MrreES: Palladis Tamia .. ate on oan at aia ae o. 1598 
GOULART: Admirable Histoires .. Se ns ats ek OZO 
HOLLAND: Translation of Plinie’s Natural Fon ie do Se we 1G 35 
ASCHAM: Zoxophilus (Arber) oe Sos AR ae +. 1640 


HOWELL: Jnstructions for Forraine T; or (Aber 
LANSDOWNE: The Jew of Venice ee ed., 171 pe 
GILDON: Remarks, &c. A . 
THEOBALD: Shakespeare Ridared ae 

Peck: New Memoirs of Milton 

CoLLEY CIBBER: Afology .. 

Upton: Observations, &c. .. 


ats as a8 io LOAe 

ae aie Ek ZOE 
ad a nite ie een ty fhe) 
6 a 56 se) 1720 
ae ere Oe .+ 41740 


Sic a Ss oe - 1740 
ave ae Chic aie ste) 1740 


PLAN OF THE WORK 


WHALLEY: Enquiry into the Learning of Shakespeare. . 
GREY: Critical, Historical, and Explanatory Notes a0 on 
WARTON: Observations on The Fairy eae a ed., 1762) .. 


The Connoisseur ae és ate < 5 ae ate 
BLACKSTONE’S Commentaries ae aie ac ae ails 
EDWARDS: Canons of Criticism .. oe : : 


Percy: Religues of Ancient English Doar a0 : OG 
‘HEATH: Revisal of Shakespeare's Text ..  «. 
KENRICK: Review of Johnson a oe os 


_ TYRWHITT: Observations, &°c. ate a5 6 ave c 
FARMER: Essay on the Learning of ip ataneare! : 36 ere 
GENTLEMAN: Dramatic Censor .. oe oe oe 
Mrs GRIFFITH: Morality of Sixkepear?s Deane a oe 
CorYAT’s Crudities (2d ed.).. oe 59 oe oe 


CAPELL’S Votes, &¢. .. a0 ane chic ig oe oc 
FARNEWORTH: Lefi’s Life of SixtusV ...- .. a os 
LE TouRNEUR: Shakespeare, traduit de I’ Anglois, Paris sie 
Warton: History of English Poetry, vol. iii 50 ois 
Ritson: Remarks, &c. ae Ath a6 ac ad a6 
Daviss: Dramatic Miscellanies .. a oi ee oe 
MoncK MASON: Comments, &c. .. 
Downes: Roscius Anglicanus (ed. Weldron: Sh Knight, 1887) 
Essays by a Society of Gentlemen, Exeter .. aie aie ob 
Du Bots: The Wreath er are ae oe oe ee 
CHALMERS: Supplemental Apology .. oe a 30 an 
KIRKMAN: Memoirs of Macklin .. os ove os oe 
E. H. SEyMour: Remarks, &c. .. Ae ae an 50 
Cooke: Life of Macklin (2d ed.) .. 6 oe aces 8D 
Douce: J//ustrations of Shakespeare, &c. . « a Ar oe 
PYE: Comments on the Commentators vs ee an oe 
DunuaP: Life of Cooke, London .. : . 
R. DEVERELL: Discoveries in Hi Piece a &e. (2d a 5 1816) 
A. W. SCHLEGEL: Lectures, trans. Y Black, London .. A 
COLERIDGE: Biographia Literaria. an oe oe ee 
DRAKE: Shakespeare and His Times ae ° oe o° 
Hazuitt: Characters of Shakespeare's Plays, &e. 50 oe 
Nicuots: Literary Illustrations, &c.,vol.ii . ee ac 
OxBERRY: Acting Edition .. 6 of oe OK) 
Horn: Shakespeare's Schauspiele rihutert. Leipzig Ac 
“SKOTTOWE: Life of Shakespeare .. At ae a sis 
BoavEn: Life of J. P. Kemble .. 58 56 ao eno 
BoaDEN: Memoirs of Mrs Siddons . . Ad oe qo oe 


HARNESS: Shakespeare's Dramatic Works on ob os 
CouiiER: History of English Dramatic Poetry (ed. ii, 1879) .. 
Gat: Lives of the Players .. 0 ee eo oe 


Smmrock: Quellen des Shakespeare's, Berlin OG Gn 

Mrs JAMESON: Characteristics of Women .. ee ee oe 
FARREN: Essay on Shylock .. ee Gc 0 oe ee 
CoLLiER: iVew Facts, &c. .. oie a6 oun ai ate 


469 


1748 
1754 
1754 
1754 
1765 
1765 
1765 
1765 
1765 
1766 
1767 
1770 
1775 
1776 
1779 
1779 
1781 
1781 
1783 
1784 
1785 
1789 
1796 
1799 
1799 
1799 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1807 
1813 
1813 
1815 
1817 
1817 
1817 
1817 
1820 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1827 
1830 
1831 
1831 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1835 


wo APPENDIX 


CoLLieR: Mew Particulars, & ce. .. oe i 
GARDINER: Music of Nature (Boston Reprint) .. 


HALLAM: Introduction to the Literature of Europe (New York, 1866) 
Tuomas CAMPBELL: Dramatic Works of Shakespeare .. 
C. A. Brown: Shakespeare's pete Poems .. 


CoLuiER: Further Particulars, &¢. ae 
SHAKESPEARE SociETY: Revels Book .. oe 
Lewin: Law of Trusts ate 68 
COLLIER: Shakespeare Library (Haste es ., 1875) 
Dyce: Remarks, &c. 6 ive 
Dunuop: History of Fiction (ee ii) ae we 
SHAKESPEARE SOCIETY: Henslowe’s Diary 5.6 


HunTER: Mew J1lustrations, &c. .. S10 oe 
SHAKESPEARE SOCIETY: Memoirs of Actors «. 
VERPLANCK: Shakespeare's Works, New York .. 
HAPin: Dramatic Unities .. 


Rev. SYDNEY SMITH: Lectures on Moral Philosophy (New York) 


MARLOWE: Jew of Malia (ed. Dyce) oe oe 
COLLIER: Votes and Emendations .. oe oe 
SINGER: Shakespeare's Text Vindicated .. oe 
Dyce: Few Votes, &c. ate ae as 
HEBLER: Kaufmann von Venda Ben oe fc 
LaMB: Specimens of Dramatic Poetry (Bohn’s ed.) 
W.S. WALKER: Shakespeare's Versification ee 
R. G. WHITE: Shakespeare Scholar ne ss 
HEINE: Saémmtliche Werke, Philadelphia . . oe 
COLLIER: Seven Lectures of Coleridge, &c. an 


HAYNES: Outlines of Equity ie a oe 
CHARLES KEAN: Acting Edition .. 


G. L. CrAIk: English of Shakespeare (ed. i) Loan 


Dyce: Strictures, &c. iis a 5 
WALKER: Critical Examination of the Tes ext, &c. 


5. JERVIS: Proposed Emendations . 


BATHURST: Remarks on the Differences in Shakespeare's Poetry, &¢. 


LorD CAMPBELL: Shakespeare's Legal Acquirements, New York 


ee 


Dr J. C. BUCKNELL: Shakespeare's “Medical Knowledge 


ANON: Alter Ego. Line Studie zu Shakespeare’s Kaufmann, Hamburg 


F. Kreyssic: Vorlesungen iiber Shakespeare, Berlin 
S. BAILEY: Zhe Received Text Ae 
C. COWDEN-CLARKE: Shakespeare Charan &e, 
GERVINUS : Commentaries, trans. by F. E. Bunnett 
W. BELL: Shakespeare's Puck 5 
H, THEO, ROETSCHER : Charactergebilde .. 
A. COHN: Shakespeare in Germany oe oe 
BisHop WoRDSWORTH: Shakespeare and the Bible 
W. R. ARROWSMITH: Shakespeare's Editors, &c. 
Dr DorRAN: Their Majesties Servants 

R. CARTWRIGHT: Mew Readings .. . 
W W. SKEAT: William of Palerne (E. E. T. Soc.) 


PLAN OF THE WORK 


G.C. LicnTEnsere: Vermischte Schriften, Gottingen .. 
THos. KEIGHTLEY: Shakespeare Expositor oe oe 
Guizor: Luvres Completes de Shakespeare, Paris on 
H. Gites: Human Life in Shakespeare .. . 
T. R. GouLp: The Tragedian os 
W. L. Rusuton: Shakespeare's Tetaneany Deatuace 
E. Montkcut: Cuvres Completes de Shakespeare, Paris 
ELuis: Early English Pronunciation (E. E. T. Soc.) .. 
F. W. Hawkins: Life of Edmund Kean.. on 


R. GENEE: Geschichte der Shakespeare schen Dramen, bc Leipzig .. 


E. A. ABBOTT: Shakespearian Grammar. . ee oe 
P. A. DANIEL: Wotes and Emendations .. ee ee 
JAMES GAIRDNER: Zhe Paston Letters .. oe oe 
Fr. V. Huco: Guvres Completes de Shakespeare, Paris. . 
REv. JOHN HUNTER: Merchant of Venice ee pe 
RUSKIN: Munera Pulveris, New York ..  .. oe 
W. Koenic: Ueber Shakespeare, Leipzig .. alc ee 
KARL ELZE: Essays, trans. by Miss Schmitz, London .. 
MINTO: Characteristics of English Poets .. oe oe 
R. PROoELSS: Kaufmann von Venedig, Leipzig .. a8 
EARL OF SOUTHESK: Saskatchewan uC oe oe 
A. W. WARD: Aistory of English Dramatic Poetry .. 
G. H. Lewes: On Actors and the Art of Acting. . os 
J. Weiss: Wit, Humour, and Shakespeare, Boston ete 


H. Utrici: Shakespeare's Dramatic Art, trans, by Miss Schmitz 


F, G. FLEAY: Shakespeare Manual 6 5 Sic 
G. FREYTAG: Technik des Dramas (ed. iii), Tee 56 


W. OECHELHAUSER: Der Kaufmann von Venedig, Weimar 


D. G. SNIDER: System of Shakespeare's Dramas, St Louis 
R. Morris: Legends of the Holy Rood (E. E. T. Soc.).. 
A. RorFe: Handbook of Shakespeare Music, London .. 
W. HERTZBERG: Libell of Englishe Policte oe oe 
EpwINn BootH: Prompt-Book of Zhe Merchant of Venice 


H. FritscHe: Der Kaufmann von Venedig, erklart, Berlin .. 


S. J. HERRTAGE: Gesta Romanorum (E. E.T. Soc.) .. 
C. M. INGLEBY: Centurie of Prayse ate ae oe 
THE COWDEN-CLARKES: The Shakespeare Key .. oe 
J. G. HERR: Scattered Notes, &c., Philadelphia . . oe 
J. E. Murpocu: Zhe Stage, Philadelphia. . 34 oe 
A. C. SWINBURNE: A Study of Shakespeare on oe 
M. D. Conway: Zhe Wandering Jew .. Ge oe 
A. PIETSCHER: Jurist und Dichter, Dessau oe oe 
C. K. SALAMAN: Jews as they Are, London ore oe 
F. F. Hearn: Shakespeare as a Lawyer, Boston. . a0 
' Gro. MACDONALD: 7he Jmagination, Boston .. 


Jos. KoHLER: Shakespeare vor dem Forum der nant Warzburg 


J. MEISSNER: Die Englische Commoedianten, &°c., Wien 
C. K. Davis: Law in Shakespeare, St Paul iG 36 
T. Parry: Merchant of Venice, Longmans’ Series oe 


472 APPENDIX 


J. W. Haves: Motes and Evsays .. : Ys 50 an -. 1884 > 
D. P. CassEL: Litteratur und Symbolik, rece : 3 o. 1884 
HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS: Outlines of the Life of Sioiepeaee et ve «. 1885 
Lapy MARTIN: Shakespeare's Female Characters sis) Coe SAiael Mr aoeS 


H. Hemnemann: Shylock und Nathan, Frankfurt, A. M. SO HE -. 1886 
R. G. WHITE: Studies in Shakespeare .. ae oe 6 aie -. 1886 
J. Payn: Boccaccio (Villon Society) te c .» 1886 
J. MurrHeEaD: Hist. Introd. to the Private Law o Rene Eainbergs ne . 1886 
F. G. FLeay: Life and Works of Shakespeare .. os te os re 1886 
R. v. InERING: Der Kampf um’s Recht (ed. viii), Wien oe ee -. 1886 


Pror. H. Corson: Privately Printed Notes ae 5 SO nie Bity FAG 
R. S. Davies: Act IV, Scene i (Brown’s Series), Hull . ee he eS 
F. J. FURNIVALL: Forewords to Q, & to Q, MT Mie a wc we 
J. D. MorELL: Merchant of Venice, London oe 3 F we i. neds 
Rev. D. Morris: Merchant of Venice (Collins’ Eng. eres. ae aes Gh 
W. C. RussELL: Representative Actors .. 0 a o- on ca ite 


DICTIONARIES 


Cooper’s Latin Dictionary. . as ane ae ors ane cd eel S73 
Fiorio: His firste Fruites .. an oe os os os ar He 1575 
BARET’s Alvearie .. ane ait ats ore ais ae -- 1580 
Fiorio’s Worlde of Warde AG ois se ic oie e- 1598 
COTGRAVE: Dictionarie of the French tae English Tongues .. ote -- I6II 
MINSHEU: Guide Into Tongues .. oe ac ah ats oe Sem LOr7 
BULLOKAR: English Expositor .. ws C40 ae ais oe .+ 1621 


MINSHEU’s Spanish Dictionary .. oe oe os oe -- 1623 
NArRES: Glossary (ed. Halliwell and Wasa: 1867) oie 5.5 oe veeloee 
RICHARDSON’S Dictionary .. A 50 54 ae oa -- 1838 
HALLIWELL’S Archaic Dictionary . wie 3.0 xe ane -- 1847 


EASTWOOD and WRIGHT: Bible Word Book AL a aN oe -. 1866 
WEDGWOOD: Dictionary of English me (2d ed.) ae ** mie Lisl 


ScHMIDT: Shakespeare Lexicon .. , SC ie ote as <9  LS72 
LATHAM’S Johnson .. ate 5c sic 50 5 -+- 1882 
SKEAT: Ztymological Dittonary ie 6 a5 OL 50 aie a loos 
Murray’s New Enclish Dictionary we one 0 ae aie -. 1884 
JOURNALS: 

The Academy JSahrbiicher der deutschen Shakespeare 

The Architect Gesellschaft 

The Atheneum Monthly Chronicle 

Blackwood’s Magazine New Shakspere Society 

Albany Law Journal Votes and Queries 

Cornhill Magazine Overland Monthly 

Edinburgh Review Shakespeariana 

Fraser's Magazine Temple Bar 

Gentleman’s Magazine The Theatre 


Jewish Advance Young Israel 


a-, aS a prefix. . an 
Absorption of -ed .. 
Accoutered .. 
Actor, An, on Shylock 
Address = to prepare. . 
Advice ° ° 
Advised = Seliberate 
Affection Se ee 
Affections, passions .. 
Alabaster, spelling of 
Alas, the while 
Aleven 56 


Anderson, D., on Shylock 


And if. ra ee ee 
Angel, a coin.. ore 


Anon. defence of Shylock .. 


Anthonio’s sadness .. 
Appropriation . . oe 
Approve oe o 
Argosy, derivation of 


As=forso .. aS 
As=towit .. coe 
Assume aie mie 


Attended, used absolutely .. 


Aweary <2 oe 


Bag-pipe ae oe 
Balance 
Barlaam and [ones 


Barrabas ae ae 
Bated .. 54 ave 
Beholding .. oe 


Bellario, original of .. 
Beshrew wee aie 
Beshrow Oe a 


Bible used by pens 


Black Monday oe 
Blest .. 5 eis 
Boaden on Macklin. . 
Boccaccio .. 


PAGE 

27 

os) 50 
eek 
e+ 433 
«. 114 
236 
17,59 
195 

127 

II 

58 

A 76 
«2 434 
ee z34. 
105 

404 

; 2 
Go. 22 
eo. 144 
. 3 
19, 42 

- 4149 
ape 17 
++ 254 


. 194 
216 
A hy) 
220 
172 
ee 45 
een 5S 
s\°) 100 
136 
42 
Se 489 
5 60 
375 
318 


Bond, single .. os 
Booth on Shylock 
Break his day a0 
Break up 


Breed of barren ai 
Brown on Shylock .. 
‘Seon Portian i). 
s6 Fon Jessica 7.7. 
«on Launcelot 
Burbadge, Elegy on. . 
But, after negative adj. 
By, after to mean .. 


Campbell, Lord, on Trial Scene 


Campbell, T., Criticism 
Caskets, source of .. 
Cater-cousins. . ae 
Ceremony .. 


C. C.-Clarke on Hazlitt 
C3 on Jessica 
se on Gratiano 


C. C.-Clarke, Mrs, on Portia’s Salhioed 


Charter ane ~ 
Cheer.. 54 4.0 
Cheer’st 55 ac 
Cherubins .. so 
Circumstance 

Civility ae oc 


Clear .. : 

Clive, Mrs, as Portia - 
Close init .. ee 
Coach.. 56 ane 
Come by 
Commandement 
Commodity .. 50 
Complexion .. oe 
Composition, Date of 
Compremyzed oe 
Conceit = conceive 
Condition=temper .. 


° 


474 


Confound ae Sc ae 
Confusions .. a6 G0 
Constant we a6 aid 
Contain = retain ate ae 
Continent ate ave sic 
Contrive 36 ara 6c 
Costume, Shylock .. a 
«  Anthonio, Portia .. 
Civil Doctor, Nerrissa 
“ Jessica, Doge ss 
«  Bassanio, &c. 


« — Gobbo, &c. oe 
Counterfeit .. 5 39 
Countri-men fecineey Sp 
Cover =~ ee 


Cover, wearing the hat de 
Cowen, Shylock v. Anthonio 

Crisped ac ae ae 
Cursor Mundi 56 oe 
Cutler’s poetry ee AD 


Danger AC . oe 
Daniel on Duration of Action 
Dare yess ane 3A oe 
Date of Composition Sie 


Davis, C. K., on the Bond .. 
Davis, Israel, on Shylock .. 
Day, break his 

Decline of Dramatic Poetry” 
Desire, pronounced dzssoluté 


Discovery .. oe oe 
Discretion .. sis 5¢ 
Disgrace 


Dish of doves 


Distance from Belmont to Venies : 


Dogget as Shylock .. se 


Dotan: 50 ae 
fioublete duplicity Be aa 
Double negative ate ee 
Do withal 


Dowton as Shylock .. 
Doyle on the Trial Scene 
Dram .. 

Draw (the petal 

Ducat, the value of . 

Dulcet sounds fat 
Duration of Action .. os 


INDEX 


PAGE 


165 


PAGE 

Eanlings ae . oe e+ 43 
Eccles on Duration of Action=_.. 332 
-ed, absorption of .. «+ e+ 156 
Edinburgh Review, Criticism a0 423 
Egal .. ie a At co 1073 
Elze, Karl, Criticism ae oe 455 
< Shakespeare and Jonson. 457 
Elze, Th.,on Dr Bellario .. .. 458 
Enow and enough .. ae 183, 191 
Equal = exact «2 oe a 54 
Error .. ss aie a0 ontan4 
Estate =state. . ae = sO 


Estates Bf 58 ote o. 116 
Ethical Dative Sua 56 43, 71 
Even now =exactly now .. -. 156 
Ewe bleate, &c. ate opis +. 200 
Excrement .. oe oe «. 144 
Eye of honour ee o* Ao, Ly) 
Fall, transitive a0 ee oe §=644 


False hair .. od aio ~.s 144 
Fancy .. 50 aie me ois ae 


Farneworth, Source of Plot sa 295 
Fear = frighten oe oe Bio es 
Fear, omission of for sa 137,182 
Fearful, active and passive .. Hp SU 
Fia=via are Sic AG oo 103 
Find forth .. os 50 Sh Ly 
Fleece = fleets, a pun On e. 162 


Flight .. oe che oe roe 7, 
Folios, The .. oie te Se YK, 
Fond .. an ee oe 
Fool, an adj. .. ee oe ee TIS 
Formerly aie sie 56 s. 226 
Four strangers oe ee ve) 63k 
Fretted oe ee ee 
Freytag on Repetition ee ee 113 
Fulsome Hi ° 
Furnivall on Shylock. . 


Gaberdine .. de od o. 116 
Gardiner on Kean’s voice .. s- 380 


Gear 36 ad Fp 77 
Genitive of aproniion (melancholy 
bait) me 14 


Genitive of eposton (childhood 


proof ) ni 6 oe Aig Welt:) 
Genowa 


INDEX 475 


PAGE PAGE 
Gentle = gentile, a pun oe +» 100} Hudson on Shylock . . oe - 431 
Gernutus Ae bo 3h «. 288 « on Portia c é 
Gervinus, Criticism .. ire -- 448 “on Jessica .. a roma 4ad 
Gesta Romanorum .. ae ++ 305] Humility Sc ae a prem l 27, 
Gildon, Criticism .. Sc ++ 421/ Hunter, John, on Shylock .. +. 43¢ 


Giles on Shylock .. ore wa 420 G on Portia .. +. 440 
“ on Jessica DO oe *+ 443 te on Anthonio.. «+ 444 
Ginger a0 a) ae .. 124|/Husbandry .. ate ae os 195 


Gobbo, origin of name orn «» Xi| Hyrcanian .. on crete LOS. 
Gondilo aS aoe aie «. ‘109 


Goodwins, The ae sie pene l23 # dropped in #4 Sei AP one 


Gossips oe an oe «124 
Ich = eke axe se qo. EG 
pee: Schole of Abuse ig ee fi Thering on the Trial eee e- 408 
sctde oe ae ae Impeach ee oe AG sia) OS 
Gower’s Confessio Asaaatie’ é Sey lp pear 5 
poe te ae ee ee ee In, with verbs of motion .. an baa 
fy one ris $i + 232) Indian beauty aa os e. 146 


Gree .. aie ava ac hie ke) 
Guard =embroider .. ane od yA 
Guiled.. ee oe oe en t45 


Inexecrable .. oe 50 »- 206 
Infinitive after J had rather 220 
Infinitive and pres. part. confused .. 71 
In lieu oie ts On op eats 
Insculpt oie aie oe aeetOS 


Instantly = presently . . a =6 219 
= om Shylock» .« os Ba he: Intergatories .. oe oe -- 268 


Hallam, Criticism .. a *+ 421 lTotermission .. AG os es 158 
{ates a e ots +3 ++ 205) Internal proofs of Date .. e. 280 
pte rome ot GIINET o2 outs Irving as Shylock .. .. .. 381 
Peas a menesysiable 7. + 5T| Tssuing, used actively Someone LOA 
Hawkins, Life of Kean .. an OT Peete ae - Be i Meee 

G on Dr Lopez as «+ 395 

« on Shylock 5 oe LE 
Haynes on the Bond Gacy oe 220) Jacks san aie ° oc .. 180 
Hazlitt on Shylock .. a «+ 427] James’s Act to restrain Abuses .. 31 
«on Portia .. ac .. 435] Jameson, Mrs, on Portia .. oe 430) 


Hales on Fourth Qto ae e273 
« on Wily Beguiled .. eer 


Hear thee .. eye bt itis ol fs) “ on Nerrissa .. o- 442 
Heavens, forthe .. ms wn 03)| Jasonesy. a are Ss -. 162 
Hebler quotes Luther Ob «+ 453| Jaundice ste one Souk ei 
Heels, with thy ae a .. 62] Jessica, origin of name ae Han pk 


Heine, Criticism .. «.. «++ 449|Jessica, source of storyof .. .. 319 
Henslowe’s Diary .. os .. 278] Jewish accent in Shylock .. TOS 
Heyes’s Stationers’ Entry .. .. 272|Jew of Malta ai sie 5 BEE 
High-day .. 36 ss w. t22iJewseye =. os 23) 90 
Hip, onthe .. 54 oi +. 38] Jews’ orange-tawny poanets 510 Sit whe} 
His, as an antecedent ore .» 57 Jobbe = Gobbo ae oe ca 4 3 
Hood, by my .. 0 oe .. 100| Johnson, Dr, Criticism 56 os 42I 
Horne’s Dramatic Reverie .. .. 400| Jordan’s Ballad AD oe -- 461 
How=as.. 46 “e .. 152|Jud von Venedig .. oe 76 324 


Hudson, Criticism .. #6 .. 426|Just pound .. 50 oe co PR 


476 


PAGE 
Kean .. mi os 375 
Kemble, Mrs, on Portia 440 
Kept .. 26 Ae ae 170 
Key rhyming with may .. 106 
Knapt.. C5 é 7 ren kd 
Kohler on the Trial Scene: z enna ls 
Kreyssig, Criticism .. eG 453 


Lamb, Charles, on Marlowe’s Jew. . 
Lansdowne’s Version 55 
Launcelot .. ns ae 
Law in Trial Scene .. oie 
Leave =give .. ee ake 


322 


346 
62 


403 


Leti, Gregorio se ota 295 
Liberal Ao 78 
Lichtenberg on Macklin 374 
Lieu oie wa 266 
Likely .. se ar 12I 
Lineaments .. 56 174 
Line of life .. 56 76 
Livings oe an we 153 
Lloyd on Shylock .. a0 ea 20) 

«© on Portia AiG a 439 

« on Bassanio .. oe 444 
Loose=lose .. 0 10, I9I 
Eopez; pram ae ae we 200; 305 
Lover .. a8 AG 173 
Luther on Jews oe a + 453 
Macdonald on Shylock oie 435 
Macklin es o° ele say Sil 
Mahabharata .. an ae Ge ese) 
Magnificoes .. os oe ane LOS 
Mark, save the; origin of phrase .. 64 


Marlowe’s Jew aie oA ae 
Marriage, a trisyllable 
Marshall on Shylock : 
Martin, Theo., on Shylock ., 


«+ 433 
Martin, Lady, on Portia .. 0 44an 
Martlet se ae ae 115 
Masking in Venice .. ac 83 
Massuccio di Salerno oe - 319 
Master of passion .,. an 195 
May=can .. sie Ae 33 
Mean by, an idiom .. te 115 
Mean it at oe oe -. 186 
Medea A ate ae sq ele 
Meer .. an ats oe ae kOR 


INDEX 


PAGE 


Overland Monthly .. . 


Melancholy bait me re os 4 
Meres, Palladis Tamia Arie rare CY 
Me thoughts .. a oe eo 41 
Mexico ae oe oe -- 164 
Mind of love.. sie os By oN 
Misconstered . . are oe vs 378 
Moath, a rhyme oe «+ 120 
Modesty = moderation 78, 263 
Monastery .. ANG aie seek § 
Mortifying .. oe oe aoe GL 
Much much .. 140 
Muirhead on the ie of XII Tables 416 
Music .. ° oe 463 
Music in his soa ee oie ae Ph 
Must =the future .. oi er 2KS 
Mutual : d ee oe 251 
My lord, used ceoely a Go Let 
Narrow seas, the .. ae E23 
Naughty ars SE ws, ) 160, 7254! 
Nazarite ard as HS eS O! 
Needs . ails site 85, 174 
Neither = = monoeylabe ots Be et! 
Nerrissa, spelling of . 40 Ho} Sl 
Nice. 46 55 Je Are Ly) 
Nominated .. oe 
Northern Lord, The balled of the... 293 
INote ware os aS an ee 152 
Ocean, a trisyllable .. gin as 3 
Oechelhauser on the Acting -. 460 
O’erstare 50 ac 50 pemesS 
Of = for AR 56 0 aoe 0) 
Of=resulting from .. a Be ed 
Of, with verbs of fulness .. Os 
Old, augmentative .. ae II, 236 
Omission of alineinQ, .. +. 101 
Onely, spelling of .. sc «- 156 
Ore.Or a6 a5 an 60 1) 
Oracle,an .. on 5 13 
| Orange-tawny Doane! at 38, 46 
Orelook a5 o5 os aut 30 
Ostent . ive ae ote *- 79 
Other = thes we 6 es 9 
Other substituted for Scottish s« 28 
Outcropping of Old Play .. 31, 321 


417 


PAGE 

Padua, English Students at «+ 459 
Pains. ae are ane 78 
Pale... 56 rs 148 
Paleness we 148 
Parallelisms .. 55 Se eR 
Pardon we Se mo | eS 
Part =depart .. tc aie 108 
Passion oc a8 195 
Passions 26 sit 5a el el27 
IRateh= Sc A oe aol 
Patines a6 one oe se GMS) 
Peace how .. 255 
Pecorone, Il .. 3 ahs 298 
Peepir.. Se os be 8 
Peize: 5. C ate 137 
Perhaps I “a 36 a sa, GH 
Persian MS .. ar ee Sen sey/ 
Persuaded with 56 56 aot TOS 
Phillhorse sve A 70 
Pietscher on the Trial ‘acess sg 7h Gh 
Pig wee « one ie oe we 104 
Piled = peeled oe ae see 43 
Pirates, a pun are An 35 
Plot, Source of 5 =e «2 287 
Plural, Northern E. E. ins... 53, 136 
Poetry, Cutler’s 6 56 «=. 259 
Ores srs oe oe on 16 
Portia, a blonde ae ate x 
Portia, derivation of name .. xi 
Posy .. we Ext 259 
Poverty, a Gavilsble on 218 
Prayer se An Sc si, SEL; 
Predicament .. os ae Avy IS 
Prefer . ac os 56 an GPS 
oe So On -» 140 
Bra iemmediately a5 21, 228 
Prest .. ere oe 19 
Prevented .. sd ous ate 9 
Prodigal ae a6 cent 20 
Profanity, 3 Jac.I,c.2r .. Suh OSL 
Proper = very . - 28 
Proximity, ebedifation’ cnroeen 137 
Publican 50 os a 37 
Pun, fleets= fleece .. Oh 162 
“ gentle =gentile 56 -. 192 
“on heart... Bc sc eeztO 
« on light .. Ao 5 258 
“pirates .. a6 oe 35 


Quaint oe an : oe 
Quaintly AC oe 6 ° 
Qualify an an ee oe 
Quarto, First . S56 oe 460 
Cs Second . oe 
Quartos, Third and Rothe One 
Question se oe oe o- 
Rack .. ae a sa oe 
Raine or rein. . oe 58 os 
Ready.. ae o° ee aa 
Reason = talk, Ove 23, 
Red Cross, the badee of Riese 
Regreets oe . oe oe 
Reinecke as Shylock ore a 
Relative omitted .. oe ae 
Remorse = pity ce oe AD 
Respect ae ee oe te 
Respective .. ee oe o. 
Rest, set up my oe oe oe 
Rialto. . cao oe ee an 
Ripe .. ee oe o° oe 
Riveted, a dissyllable nie Ae 
Robertes, Stationers’ Entry .. 
Round hose .. Ac oe os 
Rowe’s Criticism .. one ole 
Royal merchant ee temerO2; 
Ruin and chaff ee ee a 
s, final, interpolated .. oe 78, 
Sabbath ao a oe 55 
Sadar. ee 2° oe oe 
Salanio, Salarino .. oo cn 
Salerio, a new character .. oe 
Sand-blind .. ar se an 
Scape.. ee oe oe ee 
Scarfed ate a oe . 
Scenery an oe o° oe 
Schlegel, Criticism .. a sis 
Scrubbed Ad otc ae Si 
Scuse .. ae oe oe an 
Scylla .. oe oe axe we 
Seas, the narrow a0 IG ae 
SHO oa oe ee oe os 
Self, an adj. .. GK oe ee 
Sensible aie Se oe o 
Sentences = maxims. . o oe 
Set up my rest oe a oe 


478 


PAGE 
208 
16 


Shall=may .. . 


Shall=owe .. i ai Bh) pach 
Should ee me 98, 151, 164 
Should, Shakespeare’s use of 29 
Shrewd oe an 6 162 
Shrine = image : 104 
Shylock, derivation of ix 


Shylock v. Anthonio. . Ob ore 
Sibilla . . oe oe aja AO 


30 
Silvayn’s Orator oe Sin 310 
Single bond .. faa hcl SO 
Sixtus V Ae ° AD ae 205) 
Skottowe on Shylock ols sa Pee) 
Smack Ge an oe hie Od 
So...aS = aS...as oe oe 32, 169 
So omitted before ¢hat 5A #5) 380 
Su =provided that .. B03 eo Licks 
Sole oe oe ven 2O4: 


Solemnized, accent .. AG ate 
Some, with nouns of time .. 


Something = somewhat oie 16 
Sometime = formerly. . o no 238) 
Sonties arn an Ge aicOO 
Soon = nightfall ite ae ce | ites0) 
Sophy .. 56 ae At SO 
Sort=alot .. are ae ee gO 


Snider, Criticism .. oe ma 2s 
Speak fair .. St An Se ee 
Spedding on Jessica... “\, +. 99 

se on Shylock ais e+ 434 
Spets.. ce ae oe arom 7) 
Spirit, a monosyllable ae 78, 253 
Squandered = scattered ie fe eS 
Stairs of sand oe oe -«) £43 
Statute 3 Jac. I, c. 21 oe «+ 31 
Stephano oe o° oe oo 243 
Sterved ome oe ona a PXOY/ 
Still=constantly .. sol Bk 75140 
Strond, pronunciation sre 22 20 
Suited . 2 ue a6 2. 185 
Sum of nolune os oe e+ 153 
Superfluous s .. oe an e+ 203 
Supposition .. ee oe 34 
Swan-like ., a ce «2 139 


Table=the palm .. 
Tawny Moor.. ae Wee 


75 


+. 55] Wealth aie Ais 


INDEX 


PAGE. 
Termination ra several adjec- 

tives - as ; aheeOO 
The, cuitied a ee oe 9 
The, peteding’ a ea AND Sq ls 
The Text) 7. ole ole wemeee 7k 
This, misprint for Azs es .- 166 
Thou, when used .. Ac 24, 176 
Thought = anxiety oc ou 7 
Thy and zhe confounded ... ioe Tey) 
Time = life : oe At eEO 
|To, omitted .. ate ae 53, 104 
To=for, about, in, &c. an rath of 
To-night ius at 88 
Too blame .. oe a6 260 
Too too a ote fe vee 98 
Torture ane oo aie os0 isd 
Touches ane Aw aie sa) 240) 
Tranect Ad °° oe 07-7, 
Translations of Italian novels Ae ey 
Trassell ue be a SB eH! 
Troylus, a dissyllable 36 2 240 
Tubal, costume Tc 56 Se L083 
“origin of name aie on x 
Tucket 58 0 aie ae eky/ 
Twenty miles ee oe -. XSI 
Twice blest .. ee a ao 2K 
Ulrici, Criticism AG oe 2+ 447 
Unfurnished .. & =- Bo. 7a 
Unpleasant’st. . AO oe +2 163 
Unwearied .. aye se -. 166 
Upon .. oe oe an sre PLO 
Usance or aie 5D 38, 46 
Used, was .. Bee: one tein 
Vailing oe oe a 7 
Vailing an Indian beanty fe o» 146 
Varnished faces Ane oe IO west) 
Vaste .. we ae ae 2 104 


Venice, glory of os ot ae 3 


Verbal, substantive use of .. «sun l74 
Very=true .. ‘8 a «. 61% 
Wit me.s Ae ae Pe - 63 
Waft .. At ote ate oo 241 
Ward on Marlowe’s Jew .. oma 23 
Waste.. vie oe AID Soret ok 


Well to live .. ' 
Whalley on Wily Eereledt 
What, an exclamation 
Where=whether .. 
Whiles F6 38 
Whither=whe’re .. 
Who, antecedent implied 
Who, misprint for which 
Who = whom as 
Whose = and he Ac 
Withal, todo.. ad 
Woffington, Mrs, as Peat 
Wolf .. 56 ale 


INDEX 


PAGE 
.»- 67] Woolen So . 
eeezor Wenn ecrthelio! 
87 | Wroath ait 
.+ 141| Wry-neck’t fife oe 
ee 32 
268 
13| Yet, before a negative 
~« 102| Youland I << are 
97 | You, when used 
209 | Younker Bo 
.- 179| Your, dissyllable 
«+ 384| Yours, monosyllable. . 
206! You were = monosyllable 


Pe es 


a 


— 


~ARAA 


0141 0364 


Shakespeare, William 


oEMct 


Mites 


Dpaeemoter: tl wise-h er Bes z 4 male . oath iN / 4 : As 
IGP e cn ma ree. . , —4 : : . ; . } 3 a é 
oS RPS AO rd ine * . Rud ered ’ ," i — 7 7.8 oh ad 4 , S ° ¢ 

at é a Sara ro ; Sh tT a ; Bt A 


bad Ai ul ie ee 
as 


Were h ENAHS et 
re hw Webs 


ae 
~~ 


hone» 5 ; P $ ‘ 
at Rive tat 
$ ye ee 8 

. 4. 


tie Se: 


