i 


r4S 

■  _ 


rC  vx 

V  vx- 


A  V  •, 

**’•  -  '•'■*  *  •*  \S". 


.  n  y 

Is 


vy 


■ 


i 


^  -•  r,9 <■*'  vV. ;,V 


The  Tempest 


A  NEW  VARIORUM  EDITION 


j-f?* 

/? 


OF 


HAKESPEAR 


EDITED  BY 

HORACE  HOWARD  FURNESS 


The  Tempest 


TWELFTH  IMPRESSION 


PHILADELPHIA  &  LONDON 
J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 


Copyright,  1892,  by  H.  H.  Furness. 


Copyright,  1920,  by  H.  H.  Furness,  Jr. 


PRINTED  BY  J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 
AT  THE  WASHINGTON  SQUARE  PRESS 
PHILADELPHIA,  U.  S.  A. 


Z£,  IT 


IN  MEMORIAM 


PREFACE 


Of  all  Shakespeare's  plays,  The  Tempest  is  almost  the  very  best 
In  the  way  of  Text  that  has  come  down  to  us  ;  and  yet,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  this  general  excellence,  there  is  scarcely  one  of  its  five  Acts  which 
does  not  contain  a  word  or  a  phrase  that  has  given  rise  to  eager  dis¬ 
cussion  ;  in  one  instance,  the  controversy  assumes  such  extended  pro¬ 
portions  that  in  its  presence  even  Juliet’s  ‘  runawayes  eyes  may  wink  ’ 
and  veil  their  lids  in  abashed  inferiority. 

Few  plays  have  afforded  in  general  the  material  for  as  voluminous 
an  amount  of  comment.  Whether  this  material  really  exist  in  the 
Play  itself,  or  whether  it  be  not  in  a  measure  due  to  the  position  of 
the  Play  as  the  first  in  the  Folio,  and  hence  an  example  of  the  prov¬ 
erbial  thoroughness  of  new  undertakings,  it  is  impossible  to  say,  but 
certain  it  is  that  with  the  exception  of  Hamlet  and  Julius  Ccesar  no 
play  has  been  more  liberally  annotated  than  The  Tempest. 

Unquestionably,  a  large  portion  of  this  attention  from  editors  and 
critics  must  be  owing  to  the  enduring  charm  of  the  Play  itself,  domi¬ 
nated  as  it  is  by  two  such  characters  as  Prospero  and  Ariel,  whose 
names  have  become  almost  the  symbols  of  an  overruling,  forgiving 
wisdom,  and  of  an  ‘  embodied  joy  whose  race  has  just  begun.’  There 
is  yet  a  third  character  that  shares  with  these  two  my  profound  won¬ 
der,  and,  as  a  work  of  art,  my  admiration.  It  is  not  Miranda,  who, 
lovely  as  she  is,  is  but  a  girl,  and  has  taken  no  single  step  in  that 
brave  new  world  just  dawning  on  the  fringed  curtains  of  her  eyes. 
‘  To  me,’  says  Lady  Martin,  in  a  letter  which  I  am  kindly  permitted 
to  quote,  ‘  Miranda’s  life  is  all  to  come.’  We  know,  indeed,  that  to  her 
latest  hour  she  will  be  the  top  of  admiration,  but,  as  a  present  object, 
the  present  eye  sees  in  her  only  the  exquisite  possibilities  of  her 
exquisite  nature.  In  Caliban  it  is  that  Shakespeare  has  risen,  I 
think,  to  the  very  height  of  creative  power,  and,  by  making  what  is 
absolutely  unnatural  thoroughly  natural  and  consistent,  has  accom¬ 
plished  the  impossible.  Merely  as  a  work  of  art,  Caliban  takes  pre¬ 
cedence,  I  think,  even  of  Ariel. 


vi 


PREFACE 


It  is  interesting  to  note  the  uniformity  of  the  estimate  of  Caliban’s 
character  by  the  critics.  While  all  acknowledge  his  power  and  his 
attractiveness,  scomings,  loathings,  and  revilings  are  nevertheless 
heaped  on  him ;  indeed,  I  can  recall  but  one  solitary  voice  really 
raised  in  his  favour:  ‘in  some  respects,’  says  Coleridge,  ‘Caliban 
‘is  a  noble  being.’  It  has  become  one  of  the  commonplaces  in  crit¬ 
icisms  on  the  Play  to  say  that  Caliban  is  the  contrast  to  Ariel  (some¬ 
times  varied  by  substituting  Miranda  for  Ariel),  and  that  as  the 
tricksy  sprite  is  the  type  of  the  air  and  of  unfettered  fancy,  so  is 
the  abhorred  slave  typical  of  the  earth  and  of  all  brutish  appetites  ;  the 
detested  hag-seed  is  then  dismissed  blistered  all  o’er  with  expressions 
of  abhorrence  and  with  denunciations  of  his  vileness,  which  any  print 
of  goodness  will  not  take.  Is  there,  then,  nothing  to  be  said  in  favour 
of  Caliban  ?  is  there  really  and  truly  no  print  of  goodness  in  him  ? 
Kindly  Nature  never  wholly  deserts  her  offspring,  nor  does  Shake¬ 
speare.  We  may  be  very  sure  that  he,  who  knew  so  well  that  there  is 
always  some  soul  of  goodness  in  things  evil,  would  not  have  abandoned 
even  Caliban  without  infusing  into  his  nature  some  charm  which  might 
be  observingly  distilled  out.  Why  is  it  that  Caliban’s  speech  is  always 
rhythmical  ?  There  is  no  character  in  the  play  whose  words  fall  at  times 
into  sweeter  cadences  ;  if  the  AJolian  melodies  of  the  air  are  sweet,  the 
deep  bass  of  the  earth  is  no  less  rhythmically  resonant.  We  who  see 
Caliban  only  in  his  prime  and,  a  victim  of  heredity,  full  grown,  are 
apt  to  forget  the  }rears  of  his  childhood  and  of  his  innocency,  when 
Prospero  fondled  him,  stroked  him,  and  made  much  of  him,  and 
Miranda  taught  him  to  speak,  and  with  the  sympathetic  instinct  of 
young  girlhood  interpreted  his  thoughts  and  endowed  his  purposes 
with  words.  When  Caliban  says  that  it  was  his  mistress  who  showed 
him  the  man  in  the  moon  with  his  dog  and  his  bush,  what  a  picture  is 
unfolded  to  us  of  summer  nights  on  the  Enchanted  Island,  where,  how¬ 
ever  quiet  lies  the  landscape  in  the  broad  moonlight,  every  hill  and 
brook  and  standing  lake  and  grove  is  peopled  with  elves,  and  on  the 
shore,  overlooking  the  yellow  sands  where  fairies  foot  it  featly,  sits 
the  young  instructress  deciphering  for  the  misshapen  slave  at  her  feet 
the  features  of  the  full-orbed  moon.  With  such  a  teacher,  in  such 
hours,  would  it  be  possible  for  Caliban,  even  were  he  twice  the  monster 
that  he  is,  to  resist,  at  the  most  impressible  age,  the  subtle  influence  of 
the  atmosphere  of  poetry  which  breathed  in  every  nook  and  comer  of 
the  Enchanted  Island  ?  The  wonder  is  not  that  he  ever  after  speaks 
in  rhythm  ;  the  wonder  would  be  if  he  did  not. 


PREFACE 


vii 


Let  our  surprise  at  Caliban’s  language  cease  when  it  is  remembered 
that  he  learned  it  from  Prospero  and  Miranda,  and  had  never  heard  it 
from  other  mortal  lips. 

It  was  by  Miranda’s  pure  loveliness  and  rare  refinement  that  the 
soul  of  poetry  was  distilled  out  of  that  evil  thing.  Without  this  poetic 
feeling  in  Caliban,  and  its  expression,  whence  would  come  our  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  pervading  life  of  enchantment  which,  by  Prospero’s  wand, 
has  converted  that  ‘  vninhabited  Island  ’  into  the  one  magic  isle  of  our 
imaginations,  forever  floating  in  unknown  summer  seas  ?  It  is  from 
Caliban  we  learn  that — 

The  Isle  is  full  of  noyses, 

Sounds,  and  sweet  airs,  that  give  delight  and  hurt  not.’ 

Is  there  no  gratitude  due  for  such  a  glimpse  of  the  isle  as  that  ?  or 
for  this? — 

*  Sometimes  a  thousand  twangling  instruments 
Will  hum  about  mine  ears ;  and  sometimes  voices, 

That  if  I  then  had  waked  after  long  sleep 
Will  make  me  sleep  again,  and  then  in  dreaming, 

The  clouds  methought  would  open,  and  shew  riches 
Ready  to  drop  upon  me,  that  when  I  waked 
I  cried  to  dream  again.’ 

Moreover,  had  there  lurked  for  Caliban  no  gentle  feeling  whatsoever 
in  Shakespeare’s  heart,  never  would  he  have  given  us,  I  think,  such  a 
picture  as  this  of  the  deformed  slave’s  childlike  simplicity.  It  is  this 
human  and  poetical  side  of  Caliban’s  character,  to  which,  as  I  ven¬ 
ture  to  think,  we  have  paid  hardly  sufficient  attention,  and  which  the 
general  and  abhorrent  repulsiveness  of  his  nature  causes  us  to  overlook. 

It  is  a  hackneyed  cry  against  Caliban  that  he  is  utterly  sensual, 
caring  for  nothing  but  what  he  can  eat  or  drink.  When  in  his  eager¬ 
ness  to  show  Stephano  all  the  fairest  treasures  of  the  isle,  he  says, 
*  I’ll  show  thee  a  jay’s  nest,’  did  he,  may  I  ask,  contemplate  this  object 
as  an  article  of  diet?  or  did  not  the  sight  of  a  nest  with  its  ‘twin  dupli¬ 
cate  eggs  ’  send  through  Caliban’s  soul  the  same  thrill  that,  to  this  hour, 
‘  gars  a  boy’s  heart  loup  richt  up  intil  heaven,’  and  make  of  that  hum¬ 
bler  nest  of  a  jay  quite  as  much  a  theme  for  exultation  and  a  resource  of 
pure  joy  as  a  ‘  swan’s  nest  among  the  reeds  ’  ?  Surely  it  is  not  claim¬ 
ing  too  much  in  urging  that  the  same  doubt,  which  may  be  cast  over 
the  ‘jay’s  nest’  as  an  article  of  food,  may  be  extended  to  the  ‘  nimble 
marmoset’  ;  but  when,  in  the  same  speech,  Caliban  says  that  some- 


vm 


PREFACE 


•times  I’ll  get  thee  young  scamels  from  the  rock,’  there  I  yield,  and 
acknowledge  that  his  baser  appetite  controls  his  higher.  What 
‘  scamels  ’  are,  or  are  not,  may  be  learned  from  the  portentous  mass  of 
notes  on  the  word,  extending  to  two  of  the  following  pages,  wherein 
there  has  been  proposed  as  a  substitute  every  article  of  food  known  to 
man  which  begins  and  ends  with  s,  from  ‘  shamois  ’  to  ‘  sea-owls.’  For 
my  part,  I  unblushingly  confess  that  I  do  not  know  what  ‘  scamels  ’ 
are,  and  that  I  prefer  to  retain  the  word  in  the  text  and  to  remain  in 
utter,  invincible  ignorance.  From  the  very  beginning  of  the  Play  we 
know  that  the  scene  lies  in  an  enchanted  island.  Is  this  to  be  forgot¬ 
ten  ?  Since  the  air  is  full  of  sweet  sounds,  why  may  not  the  rocks  be 
inhabited  by  unknown  birds  of  gay  plumage  or  by  vague  animals  of 
a  grateful  and  appetising  plumpness  ?  Let  the  picture  remain,  of  the 
dashing  rocks,  the  stealthy,  freckled  whelp,  and,  in  the  clutch  of  hia 
long  nails,  a  young  and  tender  scamel. 

If  the  depth  of  the  impression  made  by  an  imaginary  character  may 
be  gauged  by  the  literature  which  that  character  calls  forth,  then  must 
Hamlet  and  Falstaff  admit  Caliban  to  a  place  between  them.  An  emi¬ 
nent  Professor  has  devoted  a  stout  octavo  volume  to  the  proof  that  in 
Caliban  we  find  the  exact  ‘  link  ’  which,  in  any  scheme  of  Evolution, 
is  '  missing  ’  between  Man  and  the  Anthropoids  ;  the  late  and  hon¬ 
oured  Mr  Robert  Browning  has  given  utterance  to  the  theological 
speculations  which  he  imagined  might  have  visited  Caliban’s  dark¬ 
ened  and  lonely  soul ;  and  a  brilliant  Member  of  The  French  Institute, 
of  world-wide  fame,  has  written  a  philosophical  drama  bearing  the 
name  of  ‘  Caliban.’  No  other  unreal  character,  except  the  two  I  have 
mentioned,  Hamlet  and  Falstaff,  has  called  forth  such  noteworthy  or 
such  voluminous  tributes. 

As  an  object-lesson  of  prime  importance,  I  have  reprinted  in  the 
Appendix,  Dryden’s  Version.  Unless  it  be  made  thus  accessible, 
few,  I  am  afraid,  would  take  the  trouble  of  looking  it  up  in  Dry¬ 
den’s  Works,  or  in  Davenant’s,  and  of  reading  it ;  unless  we  read  it, 
no  imagination,  derived  from  a  mere  description,  can  adequately  de¬ 
pict  its  monstrosity,— to  be  fully  hated  it  must  be  fully  seen.  Than 
this  Version,  there  is,  I  think,  in  the  realm  of  literature  no  more 
flagrant  instance  to  be  found  of  lese-majesty.  It  is  hard  to  decide 
whether  or  not  Dryden’s  reputation  be  additionally  damaged  by  the 
revelation  lately  made  by  an  eminent  German  scholar,  that  the  muti¬ 
lations,  or  rather  the  additions,  for  which  Dryden  took  to  himself 


PREFACE 


IX 


credit  as  tlie  author,  are  wholesale  ‘  conveyances  ’  from  a  play  of  Cal¬ 
deron.  After  all,  it  is  doubtful  if  any  tinct  be  hereby  added  to  the 
grainfed  spots  in  Dryden’s  conduct. 

One  thing,  however,  wre  should  bear  in  mind :  Dryden’s  Version 
is  the  fruitage  of  Dryden’s  times.  ‘The  drama’s  laws  the  drama’s 
‘patrons  give,’  and  Pepys  is  witness  that  the  house  was  ‘mighty 
'  full  ’  when  this  Version  was  presented. 

To  one  minor  detail  I  beg  to  call  attention.  Shakespeare's  sea¬ 
manship  during  the  tempest  in  the  First  Scene  is  beyond  criticism. 
No  order  of  the  Boatswain  is  superfluous, — no  order  is  omitted 
that  skill  can  suggest  to  save  the  craft.  Turn  to  Dryden,  where, 
amidst  a  wild  and  incoherent  mass  of  nautical  nonsense,  orders  are 
issued  which,  if  obeyed,  would  drive  the  ship  straight  to  destruction 
on  the  rocks. 

A  hundred  years  after  Dryden’s  day,  in  speaking  of  adaptations 
and  versions  of  Shakespeare,  Lessing,  Germany’s  greatest  and  truest 
Shakespearian  scholar,  exclaimed:  ‘Upon  the  most  insignificant  of 
‘  his  beauties  there  is  an  impress  stamped,  which  to  all  the  world  pro- 
‘  claims  :  “lam  Shakespeare’s  !”  Woe  to  the  alien  beauty  who  pre- 
‘  sumes  to  place  herself  beside  it !’ 

No  story,  legend,  drama,  or  novel  has  been  yet  discovered  which 
was  used  by  Shakespeare  as  the  foundation  for  The  Tempest.  Specu¬ 
lation  has  been  wide  and  wild  in  regard  to  fragmentary  sources,  here 
and  there,  whence,  it  is  maintained,  Shakespeare  drew  various  details 
of  his  Play.  The  one  source,  however,  which,  it  has  been  assumed, 
points,  more  than  all  others,  to  a  common  origin  is  an  old  German  Com¬ 
edy,  unearthed  eighty  years  ago  by  Tieck,  called  The  Fair  Sidea.  The 
joy  of  a  discoverer  filled  Tieck,  and  the  joy  of  possession  in  a  comedy, 
which  would  bring  them  so  near  to  Shakespeare,  filled  German  schol¬ 
ars  ;  and  from  the  temperate  suggestion  by  the  former  that  in  The  Fair 
Sidea  we  had  a  version  merely  of  the  old  play  which  was  re-made  into 
The  Tempest ,  the  enthusiasm  waxed  higher  and  higher,  unchecked  as 
it  should  have  been  by  English  scholars,  until  we  now  hear  the  posi¬ 
tive  assertion  that,  in  writing  7 he  Tempest ,  Shakespeare  went  ‘  direct  ’ 
to  the  Nuremberg  Notary. 

Under  these  circumstances  I  have  not  considered  the  time  or  space 
as  misapplied  which  has  been  devoted  to  this  play  of  The  Fair  Sidea, 
an  examination  of  it,  I  am  convinced,  will  serve  to  correct  the  wild  and 
whirling  words  of  the  present  day  and  restore  Tieck’s  earliest,  mode- 


X 


PREFACE 


rate  judgement,  or  at  least  a  modification  of  that  judgement.  It  cannot 
be  said  that  there  is  really  any  ground  common  to  The  Tempest  and 
to  The  Fair  Sidea.  One  or  two  mere  points  of  contact  there  are, 
but  they  are  points  of  altogether  minor,  nay,  of  minimum,  import¬ 
ance. 

German  scholars  have  asserted,  that  in  the  two  comedies  there  is 
the  same  fundamental  idea  of  the  reconciliation  of  hostile  fathers  by 
the  marriage  of  their  children.  There  is  no  such  reconciliation  in  The 
Tempest.  Of  a  righteous  Duke,  deposed  and  exiled  by  treachery ;  of 
the  rotten  carcase  of  a  butt,  with  the  father  and  little  child  ;  of  a  desert 
island  full  of  enchantment ;  of  a  tempest  raised  by  magic  ;  of  a  ship¬ 
wreck  ;  of  conspiracies,  and  of  distracted  senses  ;  of  love  at  first  sight 
and  the  game  at  chess,— in  The  Tempest ,  there  is  never  a  hint  in  Die 
schone  Sidea ,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  sets  forth  a  bloody  battle 
wherein  the  lawless,  wanton  aggressor  is  defeated  and  justly  exiled  ; 
an  incantation  which  raises  a  devil  spitting  fire  ;  a  treacherous  seizure 
of  a  young  prince  and  his  brutal  treatment  by  the  heroine  ;  a  recon¬ 
ciliation  and  elopement  of  the  young  couple  ;  a  telltale  devil  stricken 
dumb  by  enchantment  ;  pursuit  of  the  young  pair  by  the  enraged 
father;  the  bride’s  detection  by  means  of  the  reflection  of  her  face 
in  a  well  (an  incident  winch  could  not  but  survive  in  every  version 
of  the  story)  ;  a  rival  in  the  affections  of  her  betrothed  ;  his  oblivion 
of  the  past,  and  the  restoration  of  his  memory  by  a  love  philtre,— 
of  all  these  essential  points  in  The  Fair  Sidea ,  where  is  there  a 
trace  in  The  Tempest?  In  the  course  of  the  former  story  the  cap¬ 
tive  prince  is  forced  under  blows  and  ill  treatment  (and  at  the  hands 
of  the  heroine,  forsooth  !)  to  split  and  pile  up  some  wood,  and,  at 
the  time  of  his  capture,  when  he  attempts  to  draw  his  sword, 
he  finds  it  fast  in  its  scabbard  by  the  spell  of  the  wicked  magi¬ 
cian.  These  are  the  two  incidents  which  are  supposed  to  be  identical 
with  Ferdinand’s  log-bearing,  and  with  his  disarming  by  Prospero ; 
and  these  it  is,  which  have  been  urged  as  an  all-sufficient  justification 
of  the  belief  in  a  close  kinship  between  The  Tempest  and  The  Fair 
Sidea.  May  not  as  much,  or  more,  be  said  in  favour  of  Greene’S 
Friar  Bacon ,  where  the  weapons  of  no  less  than  four  men  are  spell¬ 
bound,  and  where  dumbness  is  brought  on  by  a  stroke  of  magic.  If 
once  we  adopt  such  fragmentary,  insignificant  incidents  as  the  source 
of  The  Tempest ,  we  might  as  well  extend  the  scope  and  admit  as  one 
of  the  originals  of  Ferdinand’s  log-bearing  task  the  nursery-rhyme 
behest  of  ‘  Five,  six,  pick  up  sticks  ;  seven,  eight,  lay  them  straight  !’ 


PREFACE 


xi 


And  yet,  to  be  perfectly  just  to  The  Fair  Sidea,  we  may  concede 
somewhat  in  the  direction  of  Tieck’s  demands  ;  and  if  even  two 
trivial  matters  of  detail  be  found  common  not  only  to  the  German 
Comedy,  but  to  others,  and  to  The  Tempest ,  our  belief  may  be  strength¬ 
ened  that  somewhere,  perhaps,  in  the  limbo  of  lost  Plays,  the  ghost  is 
flitting  which  Shakespeare  recalled  to  life  and  light,  and  clad  with 
ethereal  beauty. 

To  my  father,  the  Rev.  Dr  Furness,  I  am  indebted  for  the  trans¬ 
lation  of  the  extracts  from  Herman  Grimm,  from  Franz  Horn,  and 
from  Franqois-Victor  Hugo.  The  debt  of  gratitude  which  I  spring 
to  pay,  it  seldom  falls  to  the  happy  lot  of  mortal  to  incur.  The  aid 
afforded  by  the  hand,  whose  cunning  more  than  ninety  years  have 
not  abated,  is  hereby  gratefully  and  reverently  acknowledged  by  the 
white-haired  son. 


February,  1892. 


H.  H.  F. 


I 


The  Scene,  an  vn-inhabited  Ifland 


Names  of  the 

1.  The  Scene,  an]  The  Scene  an,  an 
F3.  Scene,  the  sea  with  a  ship,  after¬ 
wards  an  Johns.  Scene,  at  sea ;  and  on 
different  Parts  of  an  Cap. 

2.  This  list  of  the  ‘  Names  of  the 


Attors. 

Actors  ’  in  the  Folio,  follows  the  Epi¬ 
logue  at  the  end  of  the  play.  It  is  here 
transposed  merely  out  of  deference  to 
the  time-honoured  custom  of  beginning 
a  play  with  the  Dramatis  Personae. 


I.  In  discussing  the  ‘  Date  of  the  Composition’  (see  Appendix)  great  emphasis  is 
laid  by  Malone  and  others  on  the  influence  which  the  early  accounts  of  the  Bermudas 
had  on  Shakespeare’s  construction  of  the  present  play,  and  many  agreements  are  there 
detected  between  those  islands  and  Prospero’s  island.  Hence  a  vague  notion  seems 
to  have  floated  abroad  that  one  of  the  *  still-vex’d  Bermoothes  ’  was  the  actual  scene 
of  The  Tempest. — Chalmers,  indeed,  with  his  headlong  vehemence,  explicitly  refers 
to  the  Bermudas  as  the  scene  of  Prospero’s  magic  and  of  Stephano’s  drunken  king¬ 
dom.  Even  Thomas  Moore,  the  Poet,  shared  this  error.  In  a  footnote  to  an  Epis¬ 
tle,  written  in  1804,  from  the  Bermudas,  ‘  to  the  Marchioness  Dowager  of  D - 11,’ 

Moore  says :  ‘  Among  the  many  charms  which  Bermuda  has  for  a  poetic  eye,  we  can¬ 
not  for  an  instant  forget  that  it  is  the  scene  of  Shakespeare’s  Tempest,  and  that  he  here 
conjured  up  the  “  delicate  Ariel,”  who  alone  is  worth  the  whole  heaven  of  ancient 
mythology.’  Stranger  still,  Mrs  Jameson  (i,  292)  says :  ‘  The  Bermuda  Isles,  in  which 
Shakespeare  has  placed  the  scene  of  The  Tempest,  were  discovered  in  his  time,’  &c. 
It  was  to  fetch  dew  from  the  Bermoothes  that  Prospero  called  up  Ariel. 

Hunter  was  the  first  to  attempt  to  give  not  only  a  geographical  location  to  this 
« vn-inhabited  Island,’  but  also  to  show,  with  any  degree  of  minuteness,  that  there 
was  an  island,  which,  by  meeting  all  requirements,  must  have  been  the  identical 
island  on  which  Prospero  and  Miranda  lived  so  many  years.  In  his  Disquisition, 
Hunter  says  that  the  suggestion  that  this  island  is  Lampedusa  was  made  to  him  by 
Rodd,  the  bookseller;  in  his  Illustrations  which  came  out  in  1845,  six  years  after 
the  Disquisition,  he  says  that  he  was  told  that  the  suggestion  had  been  already 
made  by  Douce.  By  whomsoever  the  first  discovery  was  made,  or  from  whom¬ 
soever  the  first  suggestion  was  derived,  Hunter  was  the  earliest  to  recount  the 
arguments  in  favour  of  Lampedusa,  and  these  arguments  are,  in  the  main,  as  fol¬ 
lows:  Lampedusa’s  geographical  position  would  meet  all  the  exigencies  of  the 
story;  sailors  from  Algiers  would  conveniently  and  naturally  land  Sycorax  on  its 
shores;  Prospero,  if  committed  to  the  sea  off  an  Italian  coast,  and  tossed  by  winds 
and  waves,  would  most  likely  drift  to  Lampedusa;  Alonzo,  sailing  from  Tunis  and 
steering  for  Naples,  could  be  caught  in  the  storm  raised  by  Prospero,  and  landed  on 
Lampedusa,  whose  dimensions,  about  thirteen  miles  in  circuit,  are  what  Prospero’s 
island  may  be  imagined  to  have  had.  When  noticed  by  Shakespeare’s  contempo¬ 
raries,  Lampedusa  is  generally  connected  with  storms,  and  the  Fires  of  St  Elmo  are 
often  seen  there.  It  was,  and  still  is,  a  deserted  island  or  nearly  so,  and  is  known 

4 


2 


NAMES  OF  THE  ACTORS 


The  Scene,  an  vn-inhabited  island. 

among  the  mariners  of  the  Mediterranean  familiarly  as  the  Enchanted  Island.  ‘  It 
was  never  inhabited,’  says  Captain  Smyth,  a  modern  writer,  in  1824,  ‘on  account,  it 
‘  is  gravely  said,  of  the  horrible  spectres  that  haunted  it,’  and  ‘  on  account  of  the 
‘  phantasms,  spectres,  and  horrible  visions  that  appear  in  the  night.’  ‘  Crusius,  in 
‘  iS84>’  adds  Hunter,  ‘  has  these  few  words  relating  to  the  supernatural  appearances  : 

“  Noctes  ibi  spectris  tumultuosEe.”  ’  The  ‘  troglodytic  caves  ’  of  the  rocky  coast  of 
Lampedusa  supply  ‘  the  hard  rock  ’  in  which  Prospero  ‘  stied  ’  Caliban,  and  furnish 
‘  the  cellar  for  Stephano’s  ‘  whole  butt  of  wine.’  In  Lampedusa  there  was  a  her¬ 
mit  s  cell  the  prototype  of  Prospero’s  ‘  full  poor  cell.’  There  is  another  point  of 
resemblance  between  the  real  and  the  ideal  island  which  Hunter  pronounces  ‘  too 
‘  remarkable  to  be  passed  over  and  too  peculiar  to  have  existed  at  all  ’  were  there  no 
connection  between  them ;  it  is,  that  ‘  Malta  is  supplied  with  fire-wood  from  Lampe¬ 
dusa.’  Hence  the  task  which  Prospero  sets  Ferdinand  of  piling  logs,  and  hence 
Caliban’s  continual  grumbling  over  <  the  collecting  of  fire-wood.’  ‘And  here  we  may 

remark,  as  illustrating  that  realization  of  every  scene,  and  that  consistency  which 
‘  runs  through  all  the  works  of  Shakespeare,  that  they  were  logs  of  pine  which  Fer- 
‘  dinand  was  employed  in  piling.  This  does  not  appear  directly  in  anything  which  is 
•  said,  but  may  be  inferred  from  what  Miranda  says  :  “  When  this  bums  ’Twill  weep 
‘  “  for  having  wearied  you.”  Nor  is  it  distinctly  affirmed  in  terms  that  pine  trees 
‘  were  of  the  natural  growth  of  the  island,  but  we  collect  it  from  the  fact  that  it  was 
‘  in  a  cloven  pine  that  Ariel  was  imprisoned.’  Wherefore,  in  view  of  all  these  cor¬ 
respondences,  Hunter  concludes  that  it  would  be  ‘  by  no  means  improper  in  any 
‘  future  editor  of  Shakespeare  were  he  to  place  at  the  foot  of  the  Dramatis  Persona 
‘  the  words,  Scene,  Lampedusa, — just  as  Verona  is  put  down  as  the  Scene  of 
‘  Romeo  and  Juliet.' 

It  is  almost  superfluous  to  remark  that  no  single  editor,  and  of  critics  but  one,  has 
been  found  who  has  been  willing  to  exchange  Shakespeare’s  magic  island  for  the 
troglodytic  caves  of  Hunter’s  Lampedusa,  although  we  must  acknowledge,  I  think,  the 
ingenuity  with  which  Hunter  converts  to  his  advantage  the  local  allusions  in  the  play. 

Knight,  whose  edition  followed  hard  upon  Hunter’s  Disquisition,  says:  ‘We 
‘  believe  that  the  poet  had  no  locality  whatever  in  his  mind,  just  as  he  had  no  notion 
‘  of  any  particular  storm.  Tempests  and  enchanted  islands  are  of  the  oldest  materials 

‘of  poetry . We  believe  the  island  sunk  into  the  sea,  and  was  no  more  seen, 

‘  after  Prospero  broke  his  staff  and  drowned  his  book.’ 

In  Collier’s  Further  Particulars,  p.  56,  there  is  a  ballad  called  The  Enchanted 
Island;  as  it  was  written  evidently  later  than  The  Tempest,  it  gives  us  no  help  in 
questions  of  Date  or  Plot.  But  as  it  is  alluded  to  by  several  editors,  I  have  reprinted 
it  in  full  in  the  Appendix.  One  of  the  concluding  stanzas  is  charming : 

‘  F rom  that  daie  forth  the  Isle  has  beene 
By  wandering  sailors  never  seene. 

Some  say  ’tis  buryed  deepe 
Beneath  the  sea,  which  breakes  and  rores 
Above  its  savage  rockie  shores, 

Nor  ere  is  lcnowne  to  sleepe.’ 

Halliwell  considers  it  worthy  of  remark  ‘  that  according  to  Mr  Thoms,  there 
exists  amongst  the  Jews  a  tradition  that  the  tempest  which  dispersed  the  fleet  of 


NAMES  OF  THE  ACTORS 


3 


The  Scene,  an  vn-inhabited  island. 

1  Charles  V  off  the  coast  of  Lampedusa,  was  raised  by  the  magical  skill  of  an  Alge- 
‘  rine  Jew ;  a  slight  corroborative  evidence  that  this  island  was  the  locality  in  which 

‘the  tale  was  at  first  laid . It  is  clear  [from  the  instances  collected  by  Hunter] 

*  that  Lampedusa  was  exactly  the  island  that  would  have  been  selected  by  a  romance- 
‘  writer  of  the  sixteenth  century  for  the  situation  of  a  tale  involving  the  agency  of 
‘  magic  and  enchantment.  When  Shakespeare  came  to  adopt  some  of  the  circum- 
‘  stances  from  this  ancient  source,  he  heightened  the  romantic  interest  of  his  ideal 
‘  drama  by  placing  the  scene  in  “  an  vn-inhabited  island,”  and  studiously  avoiding  all 
‘  reference  to  it  as  having  a  geographical  existence.  The  few  allusions  which  deter- 
‘  mine  the  outline  of  the  narrative  to  belong  to  the  Mediterranean  are  not  sufficiently 
‘  historical  to  demand  that  the  mysterious  island  of  Prospero  should  be  identified,  in 
‘  the  play,  with  any  real  locality.’  Halliwell  has,  I  think,  here  intimated  the  true 
source  of  whatever  correspondences  there  are  to  be  found  between  Shakespeare’s 
unreal  island  and  a  real  island ;  the  oversight,  if  it  be  one,  in  the  reference  in  I,  ii, 
to  a  son  of  the  Duke  of  Milan,  may  be  likewise  due  to  the  original  drama  or  romance 
which  Shakespeare  has  here  rewritten,  or  adapted  to  the  stage. 

Lowell  [Among  my  Books,  1870,  p.  199)  :  ‘  Shakespeare  is  wont  to  take  some 
familiar  story,  to  lay  his  scene  in  some  place  the  name  of  which  is,  at  least,  familiar, 
— well  knowing  the  reserve  of  power  that  lies  in  the  familiar  as  a  background  when 
things  are  set  in  front  of  it  under  a  new  and  unexpected  light.  But  in  The  Tempest 
the  scene  is  laid  nowhere,  or  certainly  in  no  country  laid  down  in  any  map.  No¬ 
where,  then  ?  At  once  nowhere  and  anywhere, — for  it  is  in  the  soul  of  man,  that 
still-vexed  island,  hung  between  the  upper  and  the  nether  world,  and  liable  to  incur¬ 
sions  from  both.’ 

The  critic,  who  is  referred  to  above,  as  the  only  one  willing  to  follow  Hunter  in 
fixing  on  a  real  island  for  Prospero,  is  Theodor  Elze;  but  he  repudiates  Hun¬ 
ter’s  navigation.  When  Prospero  was  expelled  from  Milan,  argues  Elze  (Sh.  Jahr- 
buck,  xv,  p.  251),  he  must  have  been  taken  to  the  nearest  seaport,  which  is  Genoa, 
thence  he  was  drifted  southwards  in  the  direction  of  some  island  off  the  African 
coast.  When  Alonzo  sailed  from  Tunis  to  Naples  he  must  have  steered  north- 
north-east.  Now  the  point  where  these  two  courses  intersect  will  be  found  to  be 
pretty  near  a  group  of  islands,  and,  supposing  that  shortly  after  leaving  Tunis 
Alonzo’s  fleet  was  struck  by  a  westerly  storm  and  driven  farther  to  the  east,  we  shall 
see  that  he  must  have  been  wrecked  on  the  island  Pantalaria.  Hunter’s  Lampedusa, 
urges  Elze,  is  too  far  to  the  east  to  permit  of  the  assumption  that  when  Sycorax  was 
banished  from  Argier  she  was  carried  past  the  nearer  island  to  the  further  one.  Just 
as  Hunter  found  that  Lampedusa  answered  to  every  need  of  the  drama,  so  Elze  finds 
Pantalaria  equally  responsive  with  its  fresh  springs,  brine-pits,  barren  place  and  fer¬ 
tile  ;  and  if  Lampedusa  has  the  advantage  in  its  being  deserted,  Pantalaria  surpasses 
it  in  the  name  of  the  town,  ‘  Seiaxghihir,  which,  at  all  events,  suggests  by  assonance 
the  name  of  Sycorax.’  Furthermore,  on  the  opposite  coast  of  Africa,  between  Tunis 
and  Hammamet,  stands  the  town  of  Calibia,  known  as  such  from  the  days  of  Diego 
Ribeyro’s  chart  in  1529.  ‘Whence  we  have  the  simplest  and  most  natural  expla- 
‘  nation  of  the  name  of  Caliban,  that  is,  an  inhabitant  of  Calibia,  instead  of  the  far- 

‘  fetched  and  wonderful  metathesis  of  Cannibal . And  when  all  this  lay  so  near 

‘  to  the  scene  of  his  drama  why  should  Shakespeare,  who,  forsooth,  connected  Tunis 
with  Carthage  and  Widow  Dido,  have  to  devise,  out  of  an  American  word,  a  name 
that  all  the  while  lay  ready  to  his  hand  ?’ 


4 


NAMES  OF  THE  ACTORS 


Alonfo ,  K.  of  Naples:  j 

Sebaflian  his  Brother. 

Profpero,  the  right  Duke  of  Millaine.  5 

Anthonio  his  brother,  the  v fur  ping  Duke  of  Millaine. 
Ferdinand,  Son  to  the  King  of  Naples. 

Gonzalo,  an  honefl  old  Councellor.  8 

3.  K.]  King  Ff.  6.  the... Millaine]  usurper  of  his  Do- 

4.  Sebaftian]  Sebaftain  F  .  minion.  Cap. 

5.  right]  rigat  F3.  rightfull  Theob.  8.  honed]  honoft  F,. 

5,  6.  Millaine]  Millan  Rowe.  Milan  Councellor]  Counsellor  of  Naples. 

Pope.  Theob. 

Perhaps  Bell  should  be  mentioned  as  one  who  gives  a  locality  to  Prospero’s 
island.  In  his  Shakespeare' s  Puck  (ii,  308)  he  gives  his  opinion,  without  any  reasons 
for  it,  that  ‘  it  could  only  have  been  Corcyra  which  was  intended.’ 

Sir  Edward  Strachey  ( Quarterly  Rev.  July,  1890,  p.  1x7)  :  What  a  charming 
place  the  island  must  have  been  if  we  take  it  as  it  was  seen  by  those  in  whom  the  eye 
of  poetry,  romance,  and  love  was  open ;  by  old  Gonzalo  as  well  as  by  young  Ferdi¬ 
nand  j  nay,  even  by  the  monster  Caliban,  who  has  always  a  touch  of  poetry  in  him ! 
....  Think  of  the  land  in  which,  as  in  their  proper  home,  Prospero  addresses  the 
spirits  of  earth,  air,  and  sea.  Think  of  Ariel,  the  very  genius  of  the  isle,  with  the 
cowslip’s  bell  for  a  home,  its  honey  for  food,  and  the  bee  and  the  bat  for  his  fellows 

in  work  or  in  play.  Let  us  think  of  all  this,  and  then  see  if  this  island,  lying  in  the 

blue  Mediterranean,  somewhere  between  Naples  and  Tunis,  under  that  deep  Italian 
sky,  must  not  have  been  (as  the  Neapolitan  says  of  his  own  lovely  shore)  ‘  a  piece  of 
heaven  fallen  upon  earth,’  a  true  Atlantis  of  Poesy ! 

5,  12.  Prospero,  Stephano]  Every  Man  in  his  Humour  was  acted  at  The  Rose 
in  1595  or  1596,  and,  in  a  list  of  the  actors,  Jonson  gives  merely  the  name  ‘Will 
Shakespeare,’  without  specifying  the  character  assumed ;  two  of  these  characters,  in 
the  4to  edition  of  the  play,  are  Prospero  and  Stephano. — Farmer  uses  this  latter  fact 
as  an  argument  that  The  Tempest  was  certainly  of  a  later  date  than  The  Mer.  of  Ven., 
in  which  <  the  pronunciation  of  Stephano  ’  is  ‘  always  wrong,’  but  in  The  Tempest \ 
after  having  been  taught  by  Jonson  in  Every  Man  in  his  Humour ,  Shakespeare  uses' 
Stephano  ‘always  right.’— Halliwell  thinks  that  this  statement  is  too  strong, 
seeing  that  the  indications  of  the  accent,  Stephano,  in  the  Tempest  are  ‘  exceedingly 
indistinct  ;  which  is  true,  the  indications  are  indistinct,  and  yet  in  one  instance  (which 

is  quite  enough  for  Farmer)  the  accent  is  as  decided  as  could  be  wished : _ ‘  Is 

nbt  |  this  Stbph  |  ano  |  my  drtrnk  |  en  Butler?’— V,  i,  329. -Malone  thinks  it  not 
improbable  that  ‘  our  poet  ’  had  in  his  thoughts  Dent’s  trans.  of  the  History  of  Philip 
de  Comines,  1526,  p.  293,  where  an  account  is  given  of  Alphonso  or  Alonzo  of  Naples, 
and  his  son  Ferdinand,  when  they  were  assailed  by  Charles  VIII  of  France.  On  p. 
294  reference  is  made  to  ‘Cardinall  Ascoigne,  brother  to  the  Duke  of  Milan  and  Pros¬ 
pero  Calonne  ’ ;  and  a  little  lower  down  on  the  same  page  there  is  mention  of  ‘  Lord 
Galcot  of  Mirandala.’  ‘  Did  not,’  asks  Malone,  ‘  these  personages  suggest  the  names 
‘of  Prospero  and  (by  contraction)  Miranda?  Prospero,  however,  had  before  been 
‘introduced  into  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  and  was,  indeed,  the  name  of  a  riding- 
‘  master  in  Ixsndon  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  who  was  probably  a  Neapolitan.’ 

3.  4.  6,  7,  8.  Alonso,  Sebastian,  Anthonio,  Ferdinand,  Gonzalo]  Malone 


NAMES  OF  THE  ACTORS 


5 


Adrian ,  &  Francifco ,  Lords. 

Calibati,  a  faluage  and  deformed  Jlaue.  10 

Trinculo,  a  Iester. 

9.  Francisco]  Francisco,  son  to  the  usurping  Duke  of  Milan.  Sta.  conj. 

suggests  Eden’s  History  of  Travaille,  1577  (wherein  Shakespeare  found  the  name  of 
the  god  Setebos),  as  the  probable  source  of  all  these  names. 

8.  Gonzalo]  In  five  places,  in  Fx,  this  is  spelled  Gonzallo;  viz. :  II,  i,  290;  III, 
iii,  2;  V,  i,  74;  V,  i,  80;  V,  i,  242.— Ed. 

9.  Francisco]  See  Staunton’s  hypothesis,  I,  ii,  509. 

4, 10.  Anthonio,  Trinculo]  W.  A.  Wright  refers  to  the  use  of  these  two  names  by 
Tomkis  in  his  play  of  Albumazar,  1614-15,  as  incidentally  favouring  the  supposition 
that  The  Tempest  was  a  comparatively  recent  play  at  that  time. — The.  Elze  (Jahrb. 
xv>  2S3) :  Trinculo  from  trincare,  trincone,  clearly  points  to  the  preference  for  bottles 
and  beakers. 

10.  Caliban]  Dr  Farmer’s  derivation  of  this  name  as  merely  a  metathesis  of 

Cannibal  has  been  generally  accepted.  To  me  it  is  unsatisfactory.  There  should 
be,  I  think,  something  in  the  descriptions  of  cannibals,  either  of  their  features  or  of 
their  natures,  to  indicate  some  sort  of  fellowship  with  a  monster  like  Caliban.  No 
such  description  has  been  pointed  out.  None  of  the  manifold  accounts  of  early  voy¬ 
ages  to  the  Caribbean  Sea,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discover,  attributes  to 
cannibals  any  other  characteristic  than  that  of  eating  human  flesh ;  it  is  their  one 
constant  quality.  Moreover,  Shakespeare  needed  none  of  this  help  in  vivifying  his 
characters,  which  the  mere  extrinsic  associations  of  a  name  could  supply.  What  name 
soever  he  gave  to  Caliban,  the  deformed  slave  would  have  made  it  typical  for  all  time. 
Is  it  likely,  moreover,  that,  when  The  Tempest  was  acted  before  the  motley  audience 
of  the  Globe  Theatre,  there  was  a  single  auditor  who,  on  hearing  Prospero  speak  of 
Caliban,  bethought  him  of  the  Caribbean  Sea,  and  instantly  surmised  that  the  name 
was  a  metathesis  of  Cannibal  ?  Under  this  impression,  the  appearance  of  the  mon¬ 
ster  without  a  trace  of  his  bloodthirsty  characteristic  must  have  been  disappointing. 
Other  derivations  of  the  name  have  been  proposed,  but  none  of  them,  I  think,  with 
better  success.  In  N.  Sr  Qu.  3d  S.  vi,  p.  202,  H.  C.  thinks  that  ‘  it  is  possible  that 
‘  Shakespeare  was  acquainted  with  parts  of  the  story  of  the  Ramayana,’  and  in  that 
case  Caliban  would  be  ‘  Kalee-ban,  meaning  the  satyr  of  Kalee,  the  Hindoo  Proser- 
<pine.’ — Dr  Nicholson  (N.  Sr  Qu.  4th  S.  i,  p.  291)  thinks  that  ‘Perhaps,  too,  the 
‘  origin  of  the  name  is  to  be  found  in  the  Caribs  of  the  isles  and  the  Spanish  main 
« rather  than  in  the  transposition  of  the  syllables  of  the  word  cannibal.’ — In  N.  dr* 
Qu.  4th  S.  vii,  p.  56,  T.  E.  Winnington  asks  ‘if  a  drinking-cup,  can  have 

‘suggested  the  name.’ — Phillpotts  (p.  xviii)  remarks  that  Caliban’s  name  can 
hardly  have  any  more  connection  with  the  word  Cannibal  than  ‘  his  nature  has.  The 
‘  mention  of  his  mother’s  country  points  to  a  Moorish  origin  for  his  name,  which  may 
‘possibly  be  the  Kalebfln,  or  “vile  dog,”  of  Arabic  slang.’ — Finally,  The.  Elze 
( Jahrb .  xv,  252),  in  a  passage  which  is  quoted  above  in  the  discussion  of  the  loca¬ 
tion  of  the  ‘  vn-inhabited  Island  ’  suggests,  with,  what  I  must  confess  seems  to  be, 
more  plausibility  than  any  other  suggestion,  that  the  name  comes  from  the  region 
called  Calibia  on  the  Moorish  coast.  In  this  case,  I  think,  Shakespeare  possibly 
inherited  the  name  from  the  old  story  or  drama  which  is  the  foundation  of  this  play. 
—Ed. 


6 


NAMES  OF  THE  ACTORS 


Stephano,  a  drunken  Butler.  1 2 

Majler  of  a  Ship. 

Boate-Swaine. 

Marriners.  1 5 

Miranda ,  daughter  to  Profpero. 

Ariell,  an  ayrie  fpirit.  17 

16.  Miranda]  Malone,  in  a  foregoing  note,  queries  whether  Miranda  be  not  a 
contraction  of  Mirandala.  Such  a  contraction  is  neither  likely  nor  needed.  An 
‘  Earl  of  Miranda,’  apparently  a  prominent  courtier  at  the  Court  of  Spain,  is  men 
tioned  (Winwood’s  Memorials,  ii,  312)  by  James’s  ambassador  at  Madrid,  Sir  George 
Cornwallis,  in  a  letter  to  the  Earl  of  Salisbury,  in  1607.  This  fact  shows  merely  that 
the  name  is  not  an  invention  of  Shakespeare. — Ed. 

17.  Ariell]  Malone  :  A  name  taken  from  the  sacred  writings :  ‘  Woe  to  Ariel,  to 
Ariel,  the  city  where  David  dwelt!’ — Isaiah  xxix,  I.  See  also  the  fourth  and  sixth 
verses,  which  may  have  particularly  struck  our  author,  and  induced  him  thus  to 
denominate  Prospero’s  principal  ministering  spirit :  ‘  And  thou  [Ariel]  shalt  be 
brought  down,  and  shalt  speak  out  of  the  ground,  and  thy  speech  shall  be  low  out 
of  the  dust,  and  thy  voice  shall  be  as  of  one  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit,  out  of  the 
ground,' — ‘  Thou  shalt  be  visited  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  with  thunder,  and  with  earth¬ 
quake,  and  with  great  noise,  with  storm  and  tempest,  and  the  flame  of  devouring  fire.' 
[After  reading  this  note,  one  almost  doubts  if  Malone,  when  he  wrote  it,  had  read 
the  play. — Ed.] — Hunter  (i,  181) :  ‘An  airy  spirit’  says  the  old  personce,  whence 
perhaps  the  choice  of  the  name,  which  literally  signifies  the  Lion  of  God,  or  the 
Strong  Lion,  and  is  used  by  the  prophet  Isaiah  as  a  personation  of  the  city  of  Jeru 
salem. — Thoms  ( Three  Notelets ,  p.  21) :  That  Shakespeare  learned  the  name  of  Ariel 
from  his  Bible,  and  selected  it  from  the  resemblance  its  sound  bore  to  the  character 
of  his  quaint  spirit,  and  that  some  of  the  feats  and  attributes  of  that  spirit  were  sug¬ 
gested  by  the  words  of  Isaiah,  is  extremely  probable ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  is 
important  to  know,  as  confirmatory  of  the  Hebraistic  character  of  this  glorious  play, 
that  Ariel  not  only  answers  to  the  description  of  the  Jewish  spirits,  Schedim,  but  that 
Ariel  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  seven  princes  of  angels  or  spirits  who  preside  over 
waters  under  Micael  the  arch-prince.  Heywood  [Notes  on  Bk  iv,  Hierarchie  of  the 
Blessed  Angels ]  furnishes  us  with  the  following  illustration  of  the  belief  upon  which 
the  character  and  agency  of  Ariel  in  The  Tempest  is  founded  :  ‘  Saint  Augustine,  in 
his  booke  De  Cognitione  Verce  Vita,  is  persuaded  that  spirits  by  God’s  permission 
can  raise  Stormes  and  Tempests,  and  command  raine,  hail,  snow,  thunder,  and  light 
ening  at  their  pleasures.’ — Staunton  :  According  to  the  system  of  witchcraft  or  magic 
which  formed  an  article  of  popular  creed  in  Shakespeare’s  day,  the  elementary  spirits 
were  divided  into  six  classes  by  some  demonologists,  and  into  four, — those  of  the  Air, 

of  the  Water,  of  the  Fire,  and  of  the  Earth , — by  others . Ariel  is  here  called 

‘  an  ayrie  spirit.’  The  particular  functions  of  this  order  of  beings,  Burton  tells  us, 
are  to  cause  ‘  many  tempests,  thunder,  and  lightnings,  tear  oaks,  fire  steeples,  houses, 
strike  men  and  beasts,  make  it  rain  stones,  &c.,  cause  whirlwinds  on  a  sudden,  and 
tempestuous  storms.'  But  at  the  behest  of  the  all-powerful  magician  Prospero,  or  by 
his  own  influence  and  potency,  the  airy  spirit  in  a  twink  becomes  not  only  a  spirit  of 
fire, — one  of  those,  according  to  the  same  authority,  which  ‘  commonly  work  by 
blazing  stars,  fire  drakes,  or  ignes  fatui;  ....  counterfeit  suns  and  moons,  stars 


NAMES  OF  THE  ACTORS 


7 

18 


Iris 

Ceres 

Iu?io  V 

Nymphes 

Reapers. 


Spirits. 


20 

22 


20.  Spirits]  Spirits,  employ’d  in  the  22.  Other  spirits,  attending  on  Pros- 

Masque.  Theob.  presented  by  Spirits.  pero.  added  by  Theob. 

Cam. 


oftentimes,  and  sit  upon  ship-masts,’ — but  a  naiad  or  spirit  of  the  water  also ;  in  fact, 
assumes  any  shape,  and  is  visible  or  unseen  at  will. — W.  A.  Wright:  The  word 
occurs  as  the  name  of  a  man  in  Ezra  viii,  1 6. 


THE 


TEMPEST. 


A  6lus  primus ,  Scena  prima. 


A  tempejiuous  noife  of  Thunder  and  Lightning  heard :  En¬ 
ter  a  Ship-inajler ,  and  a  Botefwaine. 

Mafler. 

Ote-fwaine. 

Botef.  Heere  Matter :  What  cheere  ? 

Majl.  Good  .*  Speake  to  th’Mariners  :  fall 
too’t,  yarely,  or  we  run  our  felues  a  ground, 
beftirre,  beftirre.  Exit. 


1.  Scena]  Scoena  Fa. 

2,  3.  A  tempeftuous,  &c.]  On  a  Ship 
at  Sea.  A  tempestuous,  &c.  Pope.  A 
Ship  at  Sea.  A  great  Storm  with  Thun¬ 
der  and  Lightning.  Cap. 

Enter  a]  Enter  F3F4.  Enter, 
upon  Deck,  a  Cap.  Enter. ..severally. 
Dyce. 


3.  Botefwaine]  Botefwaine,  as  on  ship¬ 
board  shaking  off  wet.  Coll.  MS. 

4.  Mafler.]  Mafler,  F4. 

5.  Bote-/waine\  Botefwain  F4. 

7.  Good\\  Good,  Rowe  + ,  Wh.  et  seq. 
Good.  Coll. 

too’t,']  to't,  Pope,  Han.  to't  Theob.  + 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce. 

8.  a  ground ]  a-ground  F3F4. 


I.  Actus,  &c.]  Coleridge  {Notes,  p.  85) :  The  Tempest  is  a  specimen  of  the 
purely  romantic  drama,  in  which  the  interest  is  not  historical,  or  dependent  upon 
fidelity  of  portraiture,  or  the  natural  connection  of  events,  but  is  a  birth  of  the  imag¬ 
ination  and  rests  only  on  the  co-aptation  and  union  of  the  elements  granted  to,  or 
assumed  by,  the  poet.  It  is  a  species  of  drama  which  owes  no  allegiance  to  time  or 
space,  and  in  which,  therefore,  errors  of  chronology  and  geography, — no  mortal  sins 
in  any  species, — are  venial  faults  and  count  for  nothing.  It  addresses  itself  entirely 
to  the  imaginative  faculty;  and  although  the  illusion  may  be  assisted  by  the  effect  on 
the  senses  of  the  complicated  scenery  and  decorations  of  modem  times,  yet  this  sort 
of  assistance  is  dangerous.  For  the  principal  and  only  genuine  excitement  ought  to 
come  from  within, — from  the  moved  and  sympathetic  imagination ;  whereas,  where  so 
much  is  addressed  to  the  mere  external  senses  of  seeing  and  hearing,  the  spiritual 

vision  is  apt  to  languish,  and  the  attraction  from  without  will  withdraw  the  mind  from 

Q 


10 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


[Actus  Primus.] 

the  proper  and  only  legitimate  interest,  which  is  intended  to  spring  from  within.  The 
romance  opens  with  a  busy  scene  admirably  appropriate  to  the  kind  of  drama,  and 
giving,  as  it  were,  the  key-note  of  the  whole  harmony.  It  prepares  and  initiates  the 
excitement  required  for  the  entire  piece,  and  yet  does  not  demand  anything  from  the 
spectators,  which  their  previous  habits  had  not  fitted  them  to  understand.  It  is  the 
bustle  of  a  tempest  from  which  the  real  horrors  are  abstracted;  therefore  it  is  poetical, 
though  not  in  strictness  natural,  and  is  purposely  restrained  from  concentrating  the 
interest  in  itself,  but  used  merely  as  an  induction  or  tuning  for  what  is  to  follow. — 
Ibid.  ( Seven  Lectures ,  &c.  p.  109)  :  In  this  play,  Shakespeare  has  especially  appealed 
to  the  imagination,  and  he  has  constructed  a  plot  well  adapted  to  the  purpose.  Accord 
ing  to  his  scheme,  he  did  not  appeal  to  any  sensuous  impression  (the  word  ‘  sensuous 
is  authorised  by  Milton)  of  time  and  place,  but  to  the  imagination,  and  it  is  to  be 
borne  in  mind  that  of  old  and  as  regards  mere  scenery,  his  works  may  be  said  to  have 
been  recited  rather  than  acted, — that  is  to  say,  description  and  narration  supplied  the 
place  of  visual  exhibition  :  the  audience  were  told  to  fancy  that  they  saw  what  they 
only  heard  described ;  the  painting  was  not  in  colours,  but  in  words.  This  is  par¬ 
ticularly  to  be  noticed  in  the  first  scene, — a  storm  and  its  confusion  on  board  the 
king’s  ship.  The  highest  and  the  lowest  characters  are  brought  together,  and  with 
what  excellence !  Much  of  the  genius  of  Shakespeare  is  displayed  in  these  happy 
combinations, — the  highest  and  the  lowest,  the  gayest  and  the  saddest;  he  is  not 
droll  in  one  scene  and  melancholy  in  another,  but  often  both  the  one  and  the  other 
in  the  same  scene.  Laughter  is  made  to  swell  the  tear  of  sorrow,  and  to  throw,  as 
it  were,  a  poetic  light  upon  it,  while  the  tear  mingles  tenderness  with  the  laughter 
Shakespeare  has  evinced  the  power,  which  above  all  other  men  he  possessed,  of  intro¬ 
ducing  the  profoundest  sentiments  of  wisdom  where  they  would  be  least  expected,  yet 
where  they  are  most  truly  natural.  One  admirable  secret  of  his  art  is,  that  separate 
speeches  frequently  do  not  appear  to  have  been  occasioned  by  those  which  preceded, 
and  which  are  consequent  upon  each  other,  but  to  have  arisen  out  of  the  peculiar  cha¬ 
racter  of  the  speaker. — Sir  Edward  Strachey  ( Quarterly  Rev.  July,  1890,  p.  n6) : 
Although  The  Tempest  was  neither  the  earliest  nor  the  last  of  Shakespeare’s  Plays, 
it  was  by  a  happy,  if  perhaps  unconscious,  intuition  that  the  editors  of  the  First  Folio 
put  it  at  the  head  of  their  volume.  It  is  a  mimic,  magic  tempest  which  we  are  to 
see :  a  tempest  raised  by  Art,  to  work  moral  ends  with  actual  men  and  women,  and 
then  to  sink  into  a  calm.  And  in  such  a  storm  and  calm  we  have  the  very  idea  of  a 
Play  or  Drama,  the  fitting  specimen  and  frontispiece  of  the  whole  volume  of  Plays 
before  us. 

4,5.  Master.  Bote-swaine]  Capt.  John  Smith  in  his  Accidence  for  Young  Sea¬ 
men,  1626  (p.  789,  ed.  Arber),  says  that  ‘The  Maister  and  his  Mate  is  to  direct  the 
course,  command  all  the  Saylors,  for  steering,  trimming,  and  sayling  the  Ship.’  On 
p.  790,  ‘  The  Boteswaine  is  to  haue  the  charge  of  all  the  Cordage,  tackling,  sailes, 
fids,  and  marling  spikes,  needles,  twine  and  saile-cloth,  and  rigging  of  the  shippe.’ — 
Ed. 

5-18.  In  the  Hew  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  1874,  Pt  ii,  p.  277,  Simpson  cites  these  lines, 
which  he  divides  into  trochaic  and  dactylic  measures,  as  an  instance  of  Shakespeare’s 
rhythmical  prose. 

7.  Good  :]  Dyce  :  Compare  what  presently  follows, — ‘  Nay,  good,  be  patient  ’  and 
'Good,  yet  remember  whom  thou  hast  aboard’  (‘ Good ’  meaning  ‘Good  friend,’  or 
Good  fellow  ’).  Here  those  who  follow  F,  forget  that  this  is  one  of  the  passages  in 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


II 


[7.  Good :] 

the  Folio  where  the  colon  is  equivalent  to  a  comma, — and  make  the  Master  reply  that 
the  cheer  is  ‘  good,’  while  in  the  same  breath  he  says  that  they  are  in  danger  of  run¬ 
ning  aground. — Hudson  :  ‘  Good  ’  here  carries  something  of  an  evasive  force ;  as, 

<  Let  that  go,’  or  *  No  matter  for  that.’ — Phillpotts  :  This  is  equivalent  to  ‘  I  am 
glad  you  are  at  hand  ’ ;  not  referring  to  ‘  friend  ’  or  *  fellow  ’  understood.  [It  is  very 
certain  that  Dyce  is  right  and  that  ‘  Good  ’  does  not  refer  to  ‘  cheer  ’ ;  its  full  mean¬ 
ing,  both  here  and  where  it  occurs  afterwards,  may  then  be  safely  left  to  private  judge¬ 
ment.  I  incline,  in  the  present  case,  to  the  interpretation  of  Phillpotts. — Ed.] 

7,  8.  fall  .  .  .  ground]  ‘  In  this  naval  dialogue,’  said  Dr  Johnson,  ‘  perhaps  the 
first  example  of  sailor’s  language  exhibited  on  the  stage,  there  are,  as  I  have  been 
told  by  a  skilful  navigator,  some  inaccuracies  and  contradictory  orders.’  Malone, 
according  to  Boswell,  received,  through  Sir  George  Beaumont,  the  following  ‘  most 
satisfactory  refutation  ’  of  Dr  Johnson’s  criticism,  from  the  second  Lord  Mulgrave : 
The  first  scene  of  The  Tempest  is  a  very  striking  instance  of  the  great  accuracy  of 
Shakespeare’s  knowledge  in  a  professional  science,  the  most  difficult  to  attain  without 
the  help  of  experience.  He  must  have  acquired  it  by  conversation  with  some  of  the 
most  skilful  seamen  of  that  time.  [Mention  here  follows  of  Smith’s  Accidence,  1626, 
and  Manwaring’s  Seaman' s  Dictionary,  the  earliest  on  the  subject,  to  show  how 
difficult  it  was,  at  that  time,  to  acquire  from  books  any  knowledge  of  seamanship.] 
It  is  a  curious  circumstance  that  Shakespeare  should  have  been  so  fortunate  in  his 
instructor,  and  so  correct  in  the  application  of  his  knowledge. — The  succession  of 
events  is  strictly  observed  in  the  natural  progress  of  the  distress  described ;  the  expe¬ 
dient!  adopted  are  the  most  proper  that  could  have  been  devised  for  a  chance  of 
safety :  and  it  is  neither  to  the  want  of  skill  of  the  seamen  or  the  bad  qualities  of  the 
ship,  but  solely  to  the  power  of  Prospero,  that  the  shipwreck  is  to  be  attributed. — The 
words  of  command  are  not  only  strictly  proper,  but  are  only  such  as  point  to  the  object 
to  be  attained,  and  no  superfluous  ones  of  detail.  Shakespeare’s  ship  was  too  well 
manned  to  make  it  necessary  to  tell  the  seamen  how  they  were  to  do  it,  as  well  as 
what  they  were  to  do. — He  has  shown  a  knowledge  of  the  new  improvements,  as  well 
as  the  doubtful  points  of  seamanship ;  one  of  the  latter  he  has  introduced,  under  the 
only  circumstances  in  which  it  was  indisputable. — The  events  certainly  follow  too 
near  one  another  for  the  strict  time  of  representation ;  but  perhaps,  if  the  whole  length 
of  the  play  was  divided  by  the  time  allowed  by  the  critics,  the  portion  allotted  to  this 
scene  might  not  be  too  little  for  the  whole.  But  he  has  taken  care  to  mark  inter¬ 
vals  between  the  different  operations  by  exits.— [The  different  operations  are  success¬ 
ively  explained  and  will  be  found  in  their  due  place  in  the  commentary.  On  the 
present  passage  is  the  following  comment:]  Land  discovered  under  the  lee.  the 
wind  blowing  too  fresh  to  haul  upon  a  wind  with  the  topsail  set.  This  first  command 
is  therefore  a  notice  to  be  ready  to  execute  any  orders  quickly. 

8.  yarely]  Steevens  :  That  is,  readily,  nimbly.  Our  author  is  frequent  in  his 
use  of  this  word. — Malone:  ‘  Yare’  is  used  as  an  adjective  in  V,  i,  267. — Skeat: 
Anglosaxon,  gearu,  gearo,  ready,  quick,  prompt. — W.  A.  Wright:  Ray  gives  it  as  a 
Suffolk  word,  and  in  the  speech  of  the  Lowestoft  boatman  at  this  day,  ‘  hear,  hear  ’  is 
probably  only  a  disguised  form  of  ‘yare,  yare.’— Br.  Nicholson  (in  New  Sh.  Soc. 
Trans.  1880-2,  Pt  i,  p.  56)  notes,  that  ‘yare’  is  used  ‘  four  times  by  Shakespeare  as 
a  nautical  term,  and  four  times  as  a  land  one  ’ ;  and  gives  an  instance  from  Harsnet’s 
Popish  Impostures  1603,  p.  143,  where  the  two  terms  in  the  phrase  ‘  yare  and  ready  ’ 
seem  equivalent. 


12 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


Enter  Mariners.  10 

Botef.  Heigh  my  hearts,  cheerely,  cheerely  my  harts  : 
yare,  yare :  Take  in  the  toppe-fale  :  Tend  to  th’ Matters 
whittle  :  Blow  till  thou  buril  thy  winde,  if  roome  e- 
nough.  I4 

1 1.  Heigh]  Hey  F3F4>  F4,  Rowe  + .  my  hearts ;  cheerly ,  Cap. 

my  hearts,  cheerely ,]  my  hearts,  14.  [Exeunt  mariners,  aloft.  Cap. 

IX.  hearts]  Deighton  :  4  My  heartie*  ’  is  still  a  term  in  use  among  sailors. 

12.  13.  toppe-sale  .  .  .  roome  enough]  Mulgrave:  The  topsail  is  taken  in. 
‘ Blow  ti]1  thou  burst  thY  wind,  if  room  enough.’  The  danger  in  a  good  sea-boat  is 
only  from  being  too  near  the  land :  this  is  introduced  here  to  account  for  the  next 
order  [in  line  43]. — W.  A.  Wright  gives  us  some  observations  to  the  same  effect, 
made  to  him  by  his  friend,  Captain  E.  K.  Calver,  R.  N.,  a  name  well  known,  in 
naval  circles,  to  both  hemispheres :  4  The  craft  is  in  a  storm,  and  the  Boatswain’s 
anxiety  is  evidently  not  about  the  strength  of  the  wind,  but  the  room  at  disposal,— 
u  Blow  till  thou  burst  thy  wind,  if  room  enough * 

13.  whistle]  Anon.  (. Shakespeare ,  a  Seaman ,  St.  James's  Maga.  July,  1862):  A 
silver  whistle,  suspended  from  the  neck  by  a  lanyard,  is  the  modem  boatswain’s  badge 
of  office,  and  it  is  familiarly  termed  his  call.  But  in  Shakespeare’s  days,  and  long 
before,  a  great  whistle  (not  of  silver,  but  of  virgin  gold)  was  the  honourable  ensign 
of  a  naval  commander,  even  of  the  highest  rank.  The  celebrated  Sir  Edward  How¬ 
ard,  Lord  High  Admiral  in  the  reign  of  Bluff  King  Hal,  died  a  glorious  death  whilst 
in  the  act  of  boarding  an  enemy’s  ship,  and  4  when  he  saw  the  danger  to  which  he 
was  exposed,  he  took  his  chain  of  gold  nobles,  which  hung  about  his  neck,  and  his 
great  gold  whistle,  the  ensign  of  his  office,  and  threw  them  into  the  sea,  to  prevent 
the  enemy  from  possessing  the  spoils  of  an  English  Admiral.’ 

13.  Blow  .  .  .  winde]  Sympson  (according  to  Heath,  p.  1),  conceiving  that  this 
phrase  lacked  dignity,  believed  that  it  should  read  4  Blow,  till  thou  burst  thee,  wind !’ 
an  emendation  which  apparently  struck  Steevens  so  favourably  that  in  advocating  it, 
he  forgot  to  mention  Sympson’s  name,  and  so  has  received  the  credit  of  it  ever  since.’ 
—Dr  Johnson  proposed  4  Blow,  till  thou  burst,  wind,’  &c.,  and  Rann,  4  Blow,  till 
thou  burst,  thou  wind.’  In  Rann’s  edition  conjectural  readings  are  printed  simply 
in  Italics,  without  naming  the  author.  The  conjecture  just  cited,  therefore,  should  in 
strict  correctness  be  given  as  Anonymous,  but  to  save  space  both  here  and  hereafter 
all  these  conjectures  of  unknown  origin  I  shall  incontinently  attribute  to  Rann 
Whatsoever  obscurity  befalls  Englishmen  in  this  phrase  envelops  with  manifold 
blackness  our  German  brothers,  so  profoundly,  indeed,  in  the  case  of  Dr  Schumann 
{Pr°g.  d.  Thomasschule  in  Leipzig,  1876,  p.  28,  n.)  that  for  him  light  is  to  be  found 
only  in  interpreting  the  phrase  as  addressed  by  the  Boatswain  not  to  the  Wind,  but, 
with  a  stroke  of  4  gallows-humour  ’  ( galgenh umoristiche) ,  to  the  Master,  whose  whistle 
is  not  quite  up  to  the  emergency.  4  Naturally,’  adds  the  author,  4  the  words  are  to  be 
supposed  as  spoken  aside.’  When  will  our  German  brothers,  for  whose  aesthetic  criti¬ 
cisms  we  hope  to  be  always  duly  grateful,  learn  that  as  regards  the  text  of  Shakespeare 
it  is  4  Hands  off !’  ?  Where  the  best  of  Englishmen  fail,  it  is  worse  than  useless  for  Ger¬ 
mans  to  attempt.  4  Wind  ’  has  survived  in  the  Prize  Ring  to  this  hour,  in  the  sense  of 
lungs,  and  if  this  word  had  been  used  by  Shakespeare  here,  we  should  have  bst  the 
grim  humour  of  the  passage  and  perhaps  have  been  spared  this  superfluous  note  -El  >. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


»3 

15 


Enter  Alonfo,  St  bajiian,  Anthonio,  Ferdinando, 

Gonzalo ,  and  others. 

Alon.  Good  Botefwaine  haue  care  :  where’s  the  Ma¬ 
tter  ?  Play  the  men. 

Botef.  I  pray  now  keepe  below. 

Anth.  Where  is  the  Matter,  Bofon  ?  20 

Botef.  Do  you  not  heare  him  ?  you  marre  our  labour, 

Keepe  your  Cabines  :  you  do  afsift  the  ftorme. 

Gonz.  Nay,  good  be  patient. 

Botef.  When  the  Sea  is  :  hence,  what  cares  thefe  roa-  24 


15.  Ferdinando]  Ferdinand  Rowe  et 
seq. 

17.  haue  care ]  have  a  care  Dryden, 
Coll,  ii  (MS). 

18.  Play]  Ply  Upton,  Quincy  MS. 

20.  Bofon ]  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Knt,  Wh.  Sta. 

boatswain  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 

20-27.  As  verse,  lines  ending  heare 


him?. ..you  do. ..hence... King ? ...vs  not 
...aboord.  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  15). 

22.  you  do  afsijl]  you  assist  Pope, 
Han. 

24.  hence, ~\  hence.  Rowe.  Hence — 

Theob.  Hence !  Johns. 

cares]  Ff,  Cam.  Glo.  Wr.  Wh.  ii, 
Dtn.  care  Rowe  et  cet. 


15.  Enter,  &c.]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  ‘  From  the  cabin,’  says  the  MS :  the  characters 
most  likely  ascended  through  a  trap-door. 

18.  Play  the  men]  Steevens:  That  is,  act  with  spirit.  So  in  Chapman’s  Iliad, 
Bk  ii  *  — thou  shalt  know  what  souldiers  play  the  men,  And  what  the  cowards.’ — 
Malone :  So  in  a  Samuel  x,  12 :  ‘let  us  play  the  men  for  our  people.’ 

20.  Boson]  Knight  thinks  that  this  variation  from  the  usual  ‘  Botefwaine  ’  can 
be  scarcely  accidental.  It  is  used  by  the  usurping  Duke,  whose  language  is,  for  the 
most  part,  flippant  and  familiar,  while  that  of  the  King  is  throughout  the  play  grave 
and  dignified.  But  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  1)  says  that  this  ‘  variation  ’  arose  merely 
from  the  unsettled  state  of  our  early  orthography,  and  gives,  as  proof,  a  prose  tract 
of  Taylor,  The  Dolphin's  Danger,  &c.,  where  within  a  page  or  two  the  word  is 
spelled  Boatswaine,  Boatson,  and  Boson. — Grant  White  (ed.  i),  however,  is  not 
satisfied,  and  asks :  Is  it  not  very  strange  that  throughout  this  scene  the  abbreviated 
prefix  is  invariably  ‘  Botes,'  and  that  although  the  word  occurs  eight  times  in  the  text 
and  stage-directions  of  the  Folio,  it  is  in  every  case  spelled  at  full  length,  except 
where  it  is  used  by  this  coarse  and  flippant  man,  who,  even  to  secure  the  attention  of 
his  fellow-conspirator  about  their  plot,  is  obliged  to  say  to  him,  ‘  I  am  more  serious 
than  is  my  wont  ’  ?  So  fortunate  an  accident  should  not  be  amended.  [It  certainly 
should  not  be  amended,  but  whether  or  not  the  use  of  it  betokens  ‘  coarseness  ’  and 
‘  flippancy  ’  is  doubtful. — Ed.] 

22.  the  storm]  Steevens:  So,  Pericles,  III,  i,  19,  ‘  do  not  assist  the  storm.’ — W. 
A.  Wright  :  The  coincidence  between  the  two  plays  is  remarkable.  [Few  readers 
of  Shakespeare  will  forego  the  pleasure  of  comparing  this  scene  with  the  first  fifty 
lines  of  Pericles,  III,  i. — Ed.] 

24.  cares]  For  similar  instances,  in  this  play,  where  a  singular  verb  precedes  a 
plural  subject,  see  I,  ii,  562  ;  IV,  i,  292 ;  V,  i,  258.  For  instances  in  other  plays,  see 
Abbott,  §  335.  This  class  might,  perhaps,  be  differentiated  from  that  wherein  a 
plural  nominative  is  followed  by  a  singular  verb,  a  class  too  large  to  be  set  down  as 


14 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 

rers  for  the  name  of  King  ?  to  Cabine:  filence  :  trouble  2? 
vs  not. 

Gon.  Good,  yet  remember  whom  thou  haft  aboord. 

Botef.  None  that  I  more  loue  then  my  felfe.  You  are 
a  Counfellor,  if  you  can  command  thefe  Elements  to  fi¬ 
lence,  and  worke  the  peace  of  the  prefent,  wee  will  not  30 
hand  a  rope  more,  vfe  your  authoritie :  If  you  cannot, 
giue  thankes  you  haue  liu’d  fo  long,  and  make  your 
felfe  readie  in  your  Cabine  for  the  mifchance  of  the 
houre,  if  it  fo  hap.  Cheerely  good  hearts  :  out  of  our 
way  I  fay.  Exit.  35 

Gon.  I  haue  great  comfort  from  this  fellow  :  methinks 


27.  Good,']  Good :  Pope. 

28.  None]  None,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
more  loue]  love  more  Han. 

30.  peace]  prease  or  press  Warb.  conj. 


(withdrawn). 

30.  of  the]  o'the  Cap.  (Errata). 

31.  hand]  handle  Johns.  Var.’73,  Var. 
’78. 


misprints,  and,  perhaps,  not  large  enough  to  substantiate  Abbott’s  theory  that  we  have 
here  a  relic  of  the  old  Northern  plural  in  s.  Both  classes  combined  show,  I  think, 
that  Elizabethan  ears  simply  were  not  as  sensitive  as  ours  to  the  distinction  between 
the  singular  and  plural.  It  is  not  a  hundred  years  ago  that  excellent  writers  used 
‘you  was.’  Miss  Berry  must  have  heard  it  frequently  from  Horace  Walpole,  who 
constantly  uses  it  in  his  Letters.  To  our  ears  now  it  is  abhorrent.  Grant  White 
occasionally  attributes  this  discordant  use  of  the  singular  and  plural  to  mere  careless¬ 
ness  on  Shakespeare’s  part;  which  is  doubtful.  First,  it  is  quite  as  likely,  except 
where  it  is  necessitated  by  the  rhyme,  to  be  the  language  of  the  compositor  as  of 
Shakespeare,  and,  secondly,  for  the  reason  I  have  just  given.  See  ‘  My  old  bones 
akes,’  III,  iii,  5,  and  ‘  His  teares  runs  downe,’  V,  i,  20. _ Ed. 

24.  roarers]  W.  A.  Wright:  A  blustering  bully,  in  Shakespeare’s  time.  ‘A  lady 
to  turn  roarer,  and  break  glasses.’ — Massinger,  The  Renegado,  I,  iii. 

25.  To  Cabine]  See  Abbott,  §  90,  for  other  instances  for  the  omission  of  the  after 
prepositions. 

30.  peace  of  the  present]  Theobald  :  That  is,  peace  on  the  present,  at  this 
instant.  Abbott,  §  176 :  ‘Of’  signifying  coming  from,  belonging  to,  when  used  with 
time,  signifies  during. — Steevens  :  ‘  That  is,  of  the  present  instant.'  In  Notes  Qu. 
6th  S.  viii,  464,  Ingleby  gives  a  conjecture  by  Brae,  viz. :  that  ‘  present  ’  is  a  mis¬ 
print  for  tempest.  ‘  Save  t — m  for  r — n  it  is  an  anagram,’  says  the  former,  ‘  and  it  is 

the  title  of  the  play . This  I  deem  one  of  the  finest  and  most  unquestionable  of 

all, emendations  of  the  text  that  the  learning  and  sagacity  of  the  critics  have  given 
us.  [The  triumph  might  be  great  if  the  contest  were  severe;  but  the  text  as  it 
stands  is  perfectly  intelligible,  and  any  change  whatsoever  is  quite  needless.  In  con¬ 
struction  tae  phrase  is  exactly  parallel  to  ‘the  mischance  of  the  hour’  three  lines 
further  on,  and  that  no  one  would  think  of  changing. _ Ed.] 

36.  Gon.]  Johnson  :  It  may  be  observed  of  Gonzalo,  that,  being  the  only  good 
man  that  appears  with  the  King,  he  is  the  only  man  that  preserves  his  cheerfulness 
in  the  wreck  and  his  hope  on  the  island.— Coleridge  (Seven  Lectures,  &c.  p.  iii)  ; 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


15 

he  hath  no  drowning  marke  vpon  him,  his  complexion  37 
is  perfect  Gallowes  :  ftand  fafl.  good  Fate  to  his  han¬ 
ging,  make  the  rope  of  his  deftiny  our  cable,  for  our 
owne  doth  little  aduantage :  If  he  be  not  borne  to  bee  4c 

hang’d,  our  cafe  is  miferable.  Exit. 

Enter  Botefwaxne. 

Boief.  Downe  with  the  top-Maft  :  yare,  lower,  lower,  43 

41.  Exit.]  Exeunt.  Theob.  42.  Enter...]  Re-enter...  Pope  et  seq. 

An  ordinary  dramatist  would,  after  this  speech,  have  represented  Gonzalo  as  moral¬ 
ising,  or  saying  something  connected  with  the  Boatswain’s  language ;  for  ordinary 
dramatists  are  not  men  of  genius ;  they  combine  their  ideas  by  association,  or  by 
logical  affinity ;  but  the  vital  writer,  who  makes  men  on  the  stage  what  they  are  in 
nature,  in  a  moment  transports  himself  into  the  very  being  of  each  personage,  and, 

instead  of  cutting  out  artificial  puppets,  he  brings  before  us  the  men  themselves . 

In  this  part  of  the  scene  we  see  the  true  sailor  with  his  contempt  of  danger,  and  the 
old  counsellor  with  his  high  feeling,  who,  instead  of  condescending  to  notice  the 
words  just  addressed  to  him,  turns  off,  meditating  with  himself,  and  drawing  some 
comfort  to  his  own  mind  by  trifling  with  the  ill  expression  of  the  boatswain’s  face, 
founding  upon  it  a  hope  of  safety. — Halliwell  (p.  12)  :  This  speech  is  extracted 
by  Cotgrave  in  his  English  Treasury,  l655>  with  several  unauthorised  alterations, 
e.  g. :  ‘  I  have  great  comfort  from  this  fellow  in  this  danger  ....  mark  about  him  .  .  . 
doth  little  kelp  us.' 

38.  Gallowes]  Cotgrave  (s.  v.  Noyer) :  ‘  Hee  that’s  borne  to  be  hanged  needs 
feare  no  drowning.’ 

39.  cable]  Holt  extols  the  excellence  of  the  sea-terms  and  sea-phrases  used 
throughout  this  scene,  ‘  for,  unless  where  Gonzalo  mentions  the  “  cable  ”  (which  is  of 
no  use  but  when  the  ship  is  at  anchor,  and  here  it  is  plain  that  they  are  under  sail), 
there  is  not  one  improperly  used.’  There  is  no  exception  here ;  ‘  cable  ’  is  used 
strictly  in  its  technical  sense.  Gonzalo’s  hopes  were  anchored  on  the  Boatswain’s 
gallows  complexion,  and  the  cable  of  that  anchor  was  the  hangman’s  rope. — Ed. 

43,  &c.  Maginn,  in  an  admirable  Review  of  Farmer’s  Essay  (a  Review  which 
appeared  in  Sept.,  Oct.,  Dec.,  1839,  in  Fraser,  and  is  far  too  little  known),  expresses 
his  conviction,  founded  on  the  present  passage,  and,  in  fact,  on  this  whole  scene, 
that  Shakespeare  had  read  Rabelais,  and  read  him,  too,  in  the  original ;  in  Shake¬ 
speare’s  time,  Rabelais  had  not  been  translated.  Maginn  contends  that  Shake¬ 
speare  was  familiar  with  French,  and  adduces  in  proof  what  he  asserts  to  be  the 
similarity  between  this  scene  and  the  tempest  in  Liv.  IV,  chap,  xviii-xxii,  of  Rabe¬ 
lais.  (Attention  was  called  to  this  similarity  in  1754  by  Grey,  i,  7.)  The  brawl¬ 
ing  boatswain  in  the  present  play,  says  Maginn,  ‘  is  evidently  taken  from  Friar 
John.  There  is  the  same  emergency,  the  same  riotous  courage,  bristling  energy,  and 
contempt  for  the  apprehensions  of  others.’  Like  Gonzalo,  Friar  John,  also,  takes 
comfort  in  the  thought  that  Panurge  is  born  to  be  hanged.  Gonzalo’s  wish  for  ‘  an 
acre  of  barren  ground,’  &c.  is  taken,  so  thinks  Maginn,  from  Panurge’s  ‘  Pleust  a 
Dieu  .  .  .  .  ie  feusse  en  terre  ferme  bien  a  mon  ayse !  O  que  troys  et  quatre  foys 
heureux  sont  ceulx  qui  plantent  choulx,’  &c.  The  drift  if  opinion  in  these  later  days 
is  certainly  towards  Maginn’s  position,  and  opposed  to  Farmer  with  his  proofs  of 


i6 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  L 

—  44 


bring  her  to  Try  with  Maine-courfe.  A  plague- 


44.  her  to  Try]  F3F3,  Sing,  her  to ; 
try  Wh.  her  too.  Try  Wilson,  her  to 
try  F4  et  cet. 

with]  with  the  Heath,  wi'  th' 


Wh. 

44-48.  As  verse,  lines  ending  plague. . . 
than. ..again  ! ...drown  ?...sink  ?  Walker 
{Crit.  i,  15). 


Shakespeare’s  ignorance.  But  I  cannot  think  that  Maginn  is  strengthened  by  his 
present  claim.  In  the  five  chapters  devoted  to  the  storm,  Rabelais  runs  riot,  with  his 
wildest  humour,  in  every  phrase  or  word  connected  with  a  ship,  a  storm,  or  the  sea ; 
every  conceivable  command  in  the  management  of  a  ship,  no  matter  how  contradict¬ 
ory,  is  there  shrieked  forth  with  all  the  lawlessness  of  the  wind.  If  Maginn  had 
asserted  that  Dryden  in  his  Version  of  the  Tempest  had  imitated  Rabelais,  there  could 
be  no  contradiction, — both  Dryden  and  Rabelais  are  equally  absurd.  The  mere  fact 
that  Shakespeare’s  sea-craft  is  perfect  forbids  the  belief  that  he  obtained  it  from  Rabe¬ 
lais.  Unquestionably  there  are  many  parallelisms  to  be  found  in  Shakespeare  and 
Rabelais.  Koenig  (Sh.  Jahrb.  ix,  195)  has  collected  a  number  of  them,  and  more 
are  yet  to  be  found.  The  final  list,  however,  cannot,  I  am  afraid,  contain  the  present 
scene. — Ed. 

43,  44.  Downe  .  .  .  course]  Mulgrave:  The  gale  increasing,  the  topmast  is 
struck  to  take  the  weight  from  aloft,  make  the  ship  drift  less  to  leeward,  and  bear  the 
mainsail  under  which  the  ship  is  laid  to.  The  striking  of  topmasts  was  a  new  inven¬ 
tion  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  which  he  here  very  properly  introduces.  Sir  Henry  Man- 
waring  says,  ‘  It  is  not  yet  agreed  amongst  all  seamen,  whether  it  is  better  for  a  ship 
to  hull  with  her  topmast  up  or  down.’  In  the  Postscript  to  the  Dictionary,  he  after¬ 
wards  gives  his  own  opinion  :  ‘  If  you  have  sea  room,  it  is  never  good  to  strike  the 
topmast.’  Shakespeare  has  placed  his  ship  in  the  situation  in  which  it  was  indis¬ 
putably  right  to  strike  the  topmast,  when  he  had  not  sea  room.  [See  line  57.] — 
Calver  :  The  special  danger  was  that  of  being  cast  upon,  or  pressed  upon,  a  lee 
shore,  and  like  a  good  sailor  the  Boatswain  did  that  which  any  good  sailor  would  do 
in  the  present  day,  he  struck  those  masts  which  would  be  a  hindrance  to  his  getting 
off  a  lee  shore  (from  their  producing  resistance  and  not  propulsion),  and  set  that 
canvas  which  would  help  to  safety.  ‘Down  with  the  topmast!’  that  is,  strike  or 
lower  the  topmast  down  to  the  cap,  as  it  holds  wind  and  retards  the  ship ;  and  evi¬ 
dently  the  main  topmast,  as  only  one  is  mentioned.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  illus¬ 
trations  of  ships  of  the  period  generally  represent  them  without  a  fore  topmast. 

‘  Yare,  yare  !’  carefully  and  quickly;  4  lower,  lower !’  the  topmast.  Rigged  as  vessels 
now  are — with  long  topmasts  and  short  slings  and  trasses — a  course,  or  square  main¬ 
sail  or  foresail,  could  not  be  set  with  the  topmast  struck  or  lowered ;  but  with  the 
carracks  or  rudimentary  ships  of  Elizabeth’s  age  (and  it  is  probable  Shakespeare’s 
ship  was  one  of  them),  with  their  short  or  pole-like  topmasts,  and  lower  yards  slung 
a  third  of  the  mast  down,  such  an  operation  would  be  comparatively  easy.  4  Bring 
her  to  try  with  main-course.’  The  main-course  and  mainsail  are  one  and  the  same, 
and  the  reason  the  Boatswain  wanted  this  set  was  because  it  is  a  sail  of  great  size  in 
the  body  of  the  ship ;  and  propelled  by  it  the  ship  quickens  her  rate,  keeps  closer  to 
(or  in  the  direction  of)  the  wind,  and  makes  less  lee-way  (or  drift).  ‘Bring  her  to 
try  with  main-course ;  ”  that  is,  see  if  she  will  bear  the  main-course  and  whether  it 
will  be  sufficient ;  but  in  a  little  time,  as  the  occasion  seemed  to  be  more  urgent  and 
the  effect  of  the  single  sail  unsatisfactory,  the  Boatswain  cries,  ‘  Lay  her  a-hold, 
a-hold!’  &c.  [See  line  57.] 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


7  HE  TEMPEST 


17 


A  cry  within.  Enter  Sebajiian,  Anthonio  &  Gonzalo.  45 

vpon  this  howling :  they  are  lowder  then  the  weather, 
or  our  office  :  yet  againe?  What  do  you  heere?  Shal  we 
giue  ore  and  drowne,  haue  you  a  minde  to  finke  ? 

Scbaf.  A  poxe  o’your  throat,  you  bawling,  blafphe- 
mous  incharitable  Dog.  50 


45.  A  cry,  &c.]  After  howling ,  line  46, 
Pope  et  seq. 

Enter...]  Re-enter...  Theob.  After 
office,  line  47,  Cap.  et  seq. 


47.  office:  yet\  office.  Yet  Rowe  et 
seq. 

50.  incharitable ]  uncharitable  Rowe 
+  ,  Sing. 


43.  lower,  lower]  In  a  communication  to  the  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  Admiral  Dupont 
said  that  ‘lower’  would  be  interpreted,  he  thought,  by  a  seaman,  as  an  imperative — 
i.  e.  lower  away  ! — Ed. 

44.  bring  her  to]  Grant  White  (ed.  i)  :  As  this  is  here  printed  nothing  could  be 
more  awkward,  even  if  it  were  correct.  But,  as  Mr  W.  W.  Story  suggested  to  me,  the 
Boatswain’s  order  is,  plainly,  that  the  vessel  shall  be  brought  to,  and  by  the  main 
course,  or  main  sail.  The  Folio  text  is  clear  enough  in  this  regard,  although  the  point 
after  ‘  to,’  is  omitted.  [See  Halliwell’s  quotation  from  Capt.  Smyth  at  the  end  of  the 
next  note.] 

44.  Try  with  Maine-course]  Capell  (iii,  7)  :  This  phrase  receives  seemingly 
confirmation  from  Hakluyt’s  Voyages,  1598,  i,  277:  ‘and  when  the  barke  had  way, 
we  cut  the  hawser,  and  so  gate  the  sea  to  our  friend,  and  tryed  out  al  that  day  with 
our  maine  course.’ — IIalliwell  adds  another  quotation  from  Hakluyt,  iii,  848:  ‘we 
sometimes  tried  under  our  maine  coarse.’ — Steevens  :  This  phrase  occurs  also  in 
Smith’s  Sea  Grammar,  1627,  p.  40,  under  the  article  ‘  How  to  handle  a  Ship  in  a 
Stcrme :  Let  us  lie  at  Trie  with  our  maine  course ;  that  is,  to  hale  the  tacke  aboord, 
the  sheat  close  aft,  the  boling  set  up,  and  the  helme  tied  close  aboord.’ — Halliwell  : 
‘  To  try,'  says  Captain  Smyth,  ‘  is  a  sound  phrase ;  it  means  to  lay  the  ship  with  her 
side  close  to  the  wind,  and  lash  the  tiller  to  the  lee-side.’  The  literal  meaning  would 
be,  to  work  with  the  main-sail ;  but  the  nautical  one  implies  something  more. 

44.  Maine-course]  Capt.  John  Smith,  in  his  Accidence  for  Young  Sea-men,  1626 
(p.  795,  ed.  Arber),  gives  in  his  enumeration  of  sans  :  ‘  The  maine  saile,  the  fore  sayle 
called  sometimes  the  fore  course ;  the  main  course  or  a  paire  of  courses,’  &c. 

44.  A  plague - ]  Br.  Nicholson  (vV.  Qu.  3d  S.  xi,  251) :  It  has  been 

generally  supposed  that  this  long  dash  has  been  misplaced,  and  is  intended  as  a  mark 
of  interruption.  But  it  is  never  so  used  throughout  the  play,  and  its  intent  has,  I 
think,  been  misunderstood.  Sebastian  immediately  afterwards  replies,  ‘  — you  bawl¬ 
ing,  blasphemous,  incharitable  dog.’  Now  it  is  remarkable  that,  contrary  to  this  and 
contrary  to  the  custom  of  boatswains  and  sailors,  our  boatswain  has  never  yet  brought 
out  a  single  curse  or  oath.  Hence,  I  believe  that,  as  elsewhere,  the - repre¬ 

sents  words  omitted  in  the  printing,  or  left  by  the  author  to  the  gagging  of  the  actor ; 
and  that  in  our  present  instance  it  represents  oaths  or  curses,  the  introduction  of 
which,  according  to  the  statute,  was  illegal.  There  are  no  less  than  five  omissions  so 
marked  in  Middleton’s  A  Chaste  Mind  in  Cheapside. 

49.  blasphemous]  Halliwell  (p.  1 2) :  This  term  was  not  always  used  in  its 
modem  sense.  According  to  a  letter  dated  1604,  Stone,  a  fool,  ‘was  well  whipt  in 
3 


1 8  THE  TEMPEST  [act  I.  sc.  i. 

Botef.  Worke  you  then.  g  j 

Anth.  Hang  cur,  hang,  you  whorefon  infolent  Noyfe- 
maker,  we  are  leffe  afraid  to  be  drownde,  then  thou  art. 

Gonz.  I’le  warrant  him  for  drowning,  though  the 
Ship  were  no  ftronger  then  a  Nutt-fhell,  and  as  leaky  as  55 
an  vnftanched  wench. 

Botef.  Lay  her  a  hold,  a  hold,  fet  her  two  courfes  off 
to  Sea  againe,  lay  her  off.  c8 


53.  drownde ]  drown'd  F3F4.  57.  two  courfes  off]  two  courses;  off 

54-  for]  from.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Holt  et  seq.  {two  courses.  Off  Wh.) 

Steev.  Mai. _  58.  [Cry  again.  Cap. 

Bridewell  for  a  blasphemous  speech  that  there  went  sixty  fools  into  Spaine  besides  my 
lord  Admiral  and  his  two  sons.’ 

54.  for]  Abbott,  §I54:  In  this  instance  ‘for’  may  either  mean  against  or  for 
what  concerns. 

57>  58-  Lay  .  .  .  her  off]  Mulgrave:  The  ship,  having  driven  near  the  shore, 
the  mainsail  is  hawled  up ;  the  ship  wore,  and  the  two  courses  set  on  the  other  tack, 
to  endeavour  to  clear  the  land  that  way.  [See  line  73.]— Calver  :  To  understand 
this  order,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  the  Boatswain’s  view  of  the  circumstances 
in  which  he  was  placed.  He  did  not  care,  he  said,  about  the  force  of  the  wind,  but 
he  was  afraid  they  had  not  sea-room.  ‘Blow,  till  thou  burst  thy  wind,  if  room 
enough !’  makes  this  clear,  and  that  there  was  sufficient  cause  for  alarm  upon  this 
point  is  also  apparent  from  a  passage  in  the  second  scene,  where  Prospero,  questioning 
Ariel  with  reference  to  the  ship  and  her  perils,  asks,  ‘  But  was  not  this  nigh  shore  ?’ 

* Close  by>  my  master !n  short,  the  Boatswain,  in  the  first  instance,  did  what 
appeared  to  him  to  be  needed;  but  now,  after  a  short  interval,  whether  owing  to  the 
sluggishness  of  the  ship  or  to  the  lee-shore  being  closer  than  he  had  imagined,  he, 
unceasingly  alive  to  the  danger,  and  oblivious  of  the  taunts  of  the  passengers,  gave 
the  above  order :  ‘  Lay  her  a-hold,  a-hold  !’  Keep  her  to  the  wind  or  as  close  to  the 
wind  as  possible.  ‘  Set  her  two  courses  ’ :  foresail  as  well  as  mainsail,  or  twice  the 
amount  of  canvas  already  spread ;  and ‘off  to  sea  again;  lay  her  off’:  an  indication 
of  the  object  of  the  order,  or  of  the  necessity  for  gaining  sea-room  so  as  to  avoid 
shipwreck. 

57.  two  courses]  Holt  (p.  19) :  The  courses  here  meant  are  two  of  the  three 
lowest  and  largest  sails  of  a  ship,  which  are  so  called  because,  as  largest,  they  con¬ 
tribute  most  to  give  her  way  through  the  water,  and  consequently  enable  her  to  feel 
her  helm,  and  steer  her  course  better,  than  when  they  are  not  set  or  spread  to  the 
wind.  Therefore  this  speech  should  be  pointed  thus :  ‘  Lay  her  ahold,  ahold ;  set 
her  two  courses;  off  to  Sea  again;  lay  her  off.’  It  being  a  command  to  set  these 
two  larger  sails  in  order  to  carry  her  off  to  sea  again,  she  being  too  near  in  shore. 

‘  do  lay  her  ahold,’  signifies  to  bring  her  to  lie  as  near  the  wind  as  she  can  in  order 
to  get  clear  of  any  Point,  or  head  of  land.  [This  explanation  and  pimctuation  of 
Holt  has  been  adopted  by  every  subsequent  editor  except  Capell,  who  says  that  this 
punctuation  ‘appears  advisable  no  way;  first,  the  order  is  not  simply  to  set  her  courses, 
but  so  to  set  them  that  the  ship  might  get  “off  to  sea  again,”  to  “lay  her  off”  by  that 
setting ;  and  next,  the  speech’s  flow  is  against  it.’ — Ed.] 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


19 


Enter  Mariners  wet. 

Mari.  All  loft,  to  prayers,  to  prayers,  all  loft.  60 

Botef.  What  muft  our  mouths  be  cold  ? 

Gonz.  The  King,  and  Prince,  at  prayers,  let’s  affift  them, 
for  our  cafe  is  as  theirs. 

Sebaf.  I’am  out  of  patience. 

An.  We  are  meerly  cheated  of  our  hues  by  drunkards,  65 
This  wide-chopt-rafcall,  would  thou  mightft  lye  drow¬ 
ning  the  wafhing  of  ten  Tides. 

Gonz.  Hee’l  be  hang’d  yet, 

Though  euery  drop  of  water  fweare  againft  it.  b9 


60.  [Exeunt.  Theob. 

62.  Prince,  at  prayers ]  Prince  at 
prayers,  F4.  Prince  are  at  prayers, 
Rowe.  Prince  at  prayers  !  Pope.  Prince 
at  pray'rs  ?  Han. 

let's. ..them]  let  us. ..’em  Pope  +  . 
let  us. ..them  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll. 

63.  As  a  balf  verse,  Pope  et  seq. 


64.  Pam]  F2.  Pm  F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,Wh. 
Dyce,  Sta.  I  am  Steev.  et  cet. 

66.  wide-chopt-rafcall]  wide-chopl 
rafcal  F4. 

67.  the...  Tides]  One  line,  as  a  half 
verse,  Pope  et  seq. 

69.  fweare]  fware  F3F4. 


61.  mouths  be  cold]  Birch  (p.  523) :  The  Boatswain  thinks  of  the  different 
fiquid  and  results,  when  he  should  have  to  take  in  sea-water  instead  of  engulphing 
fiery  spirits. — Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p.  7) :  That  is,  ‘  must  our  mouths,  so  lately 
warm  with  brave  oaths,  now  be  cold  with  cowardly  prayers  ?’  Cf.  ‘  thou  rascal,  thou 
fearful  rogue,  thou  hast  been  praying  ....  is  this  a  time  To  discourage  our  friends 
with  your  cold  orisons  ?' — B.  &  FI.  The  Sea  Voyage,  I,  i.  [This  interpretation  of 
Allen  is  ingenious,  and  probably  touches  the  reason  why  this  particular  phrase  was 
put  in  the  mouth  of  the  Boatswain,  but  the  phrase  itself  means,  I  think,  simply  to 
die ;  we  have  it  in  this  sense  in  B.  &  Fl.’s  Scornful  Lady,  II,  ii,  where  Savil,  who 
is  not  at  sea,  but  in  the  house  of  the  Elder  Loveless,  says,  ‘  Would  I  had  been  cold  i’ 
the  mouth  before  this  day,  And  ne’er  haue  liued  to  see  this  dissolution.’ — Ed.] 

65.  meerly]  In  its  original  Latin  meaning. 

66.  wide-chopt]  Croft:  It  is  held  that  men  with  wide  chops  are  weak  and 
doltish. 

67.  washing  of  ten  Tides]  ElzE:  An  allusion  to  the  singular  mode  of  exe 
cution  to  which  pirates  were  condemned  in  England.  ‘  Pirats  and  robbers  by  sea  are 
condemned  in  the  court  of  admiraltie,  and  hanged  on  the  shore  at  lowe  water  marke, 
where  they  are  left  till  three  tides  haue  ouerwashed  them.’ — Harrison’s  Description 
of  England,  p.  229,  ed.  Furnivall. — Hales  (Essays,  294)  cites  Murray’s  Handbook 
for  Kent  s.  v.  Execution  Dock,  Wapping,  in  corroboration  of  Elze’s  extract  from  Har¬ 
rison,  and  adds  another  allusion  to  this  form  of  punishment  in  Green's  Tu  Quoque 
(Hazlitt’s  Dodsley,  vol.  xi,  p.  188),  where,  in  a  note,  Stow  is  cited  as  pointing  out  ‘  the 
usual  place  of  execution  for  hanging  of  Pirates  and  Sea-rovers  at  the  lew-water 
mark,’  there  to  remain  till  three  tides  had  overflowed  them.  ‘  Evidently,’  says  Hales, 
‘Antonio’s  phrase  is  a  mere  exaggeration  of  such  a  sentence.  For  such  a  “  wide- 
chapped  rascal  ”  as  the  Boatswain,  three  tide-washings  are  not  enough, — let  him  have 
ten.’ 


20 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc,  i. 


And  gape  at  widft  to  glut  him.  A  confufed  noyje  within.  70 
Mercy  on  vs. 

We  fplit,  we  fplit.  Farewell  my  wife,  and  children, 

Farewell  brother :  we  fplit,  we  fplit,  we  fplit. 

Anth.  Let’s  all  finke  with’  King 

Seb.  Let’s  take  leaue  of  him.  Exit.  75 

Gonz.  Now  would  I  giue  a  thoufand  furlongs  of  Sea, 
for  an  Acre  of  barren  ground:  Long  heath,  Browne 
firrs,  any  thing;  the  wills  aboue  be  done,  but  I  would 
faine  dye  a  dry  death.  Exit.  79 


70.  to  glut ]  to  'glut  Cap.  conj. 

70,  73.  A  con fufed . .  .fplit ]  In  margin, 
as  Stage  direction  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.). 

71.  Mercy]  Seb.  Mercy  Han. 

73.  Farewell  brother ]  Brother,  fare¬ 
well  Pope  + .  Alon.  Brother,  farewell 
Johns,  conj.  (withdrawn).  Farewell,  my 
brother  Ktly. 


74.  with'\  F2.  with  F3F4.  wV  the 
Cap.  wi’  th'  Wh.  with  the  Rowe  et  cet 
[Exit.  Theob.  et  seq.  (subs.). 
77,78.  Long. .firrs]  ling, heath,  broom, 
furze  Han.  Sing.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Wr.  Huds. 
Dtn.  brown  heath,  long furze  Ktly. 

78.  firrs]  frs  F  .  Furze  Rowe. 

79.  Exit.]  Om.  Ff. 


70.  to  glut]  Johnson  :  Shakespeare  probably  wrote  f  englut,  to  swallow  him. 
For  which  I  know  not  that  glut  is  ever  used  by  him.  To  englut  occurs  frequently. 
Yet  Milton  writes  ‘glutted  offal’  for  swallowed,  and,  therefore,  perhaps,  the  present 
text  may  stand. 

71.  Mercy,  &c.]  Johnson  :  All  these  lines  have  been  hitherto  given  to  Gonzalo, 
who  has  no  brother  on  the  ship.  It  is  probable  that  the  lines  succeeding  the  ‘  con¬ 
fused  noise  within  ’  should  be  considered  as  spoken  by  no  determinate  characters. — 
Theobald,  in  a  private  letter  to  Warburton  (Nichols,  ii,  243),  anticipated  Johnson  in 
suggesting  that  these  lines  represented  the  confused  noise  behind  the  scenes. — 
Capell,  however,  was  the  first  to  carry  out  the  idea  in  his  text,  by  putting  them,  as 
a  stage  direction,  in  the  margin,  and  by  separating  the  exclamations  by  dashes. 

73.  we  split]  Mulgrave:  The  ship  not  being  able  to  weather  a  point,  is  driven 
on  shore. 

74.  with’  King]  A  valuable  example  of  the  absorption  of  the  definite  article,  thus 
emphatically  indicated  by  the  printer,  and  possibly  so  indicated  in  Shakespeare’s  MS. 
Another  instance  occurs,  although  printed  without  the  apostrophe,  in  I,  ii,  131.  The 
present  is  one  of  several  noteworthy  instances  of  the  unusual  care  with  which  this  play 
is  printed. — Ed. 

77>  7 Long  heath,  Browne  firrs]  For  Hanmer’s  emendations  see  Text.  Notes. 
Of  the  original  text  Capell  says  :  ‘  There  is  a  stiffness  in  giving  epithets  to  [“  heath  ” 
and  “  furze  ”]  that  suits  neither  the  genius  nor  situation  of  the  speaker,  and  [Han¬ 
mer’s]  alteration  takes  off  that  stiffness,  bringing  no  new  one  in  its  room,  for  it  is  easy 
and  natural.  It  has  been  objected  that  “  ling  ”  and  “  heath  ”  are  synonyma  and  mean 
the  same  plant:  but  this  may  be  doubted;  or,  if  true,  a  poem  is  not  the  better  for 
such  preciseness.’ — Farmer  :  [Hanmer]  has  been  charged  with  tautology.  I  find 
in  Harrison’s  description  of  Britain,  prefixed  to  our  author’s  good  friend  Holinshed, 
p.  91 :  lBrome,  heth,firze,  brakes,  wliinnes,  ling,'  &c. — Knight  :  ‘  Long  heath  ’  and 
brown  furze  ’  are  quite  intelligible,  and  are  much  more  natural  than  an  enumeration 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


21 


[77,  78.  Long  heath,  Browne  firrs] 

of  many  various  wild  plants. — Halliwell  also  thinks  Hanmer’s  change  unnecessary. 

The  epithet  “long”  merely  refers  to  the  large  expanse  of  heath.  “I  have  con¬ 
sumed  all,  plaied  away  long  acre.”  ’ — A  Yorkshire  Tragedy ,  1619. — Walker  ( Crit. 
iii,  1)  feels  assured,  and  he  carries  with  him  Dyce,  W.  A.  Wright,  Hudson,  Phill- 
potts,  and  Deighton,  that  Hanmer’s  reading  is  the  true  one.  ‘  The  balance ,’  he 
says,  *  requires  it.  Besides,  what  are  long  heath  and  brown  furze  ?'  [Lyte’s  Herbat, 
■would  have  told  him  what  ‘long  heath’  is.] — ‘  Ling,’  says  Keightley  [Exp.  208), 
‘  was  probably  a  word  unknown  to  Shakespeare.’  [See  Farmer’s  quotation  from  Har¬ 
rison,  supra.] — Phillpotts  pronounces  ‘  the  uselessness  of  these  epithets  [“  long  ” 
and  “  brown  ”]  to  be  manifest,’  and  as  justifying  ‘  Hanmer’s  excellent  emendation.’ 

The  difference,’  he  adds,  ‘  between  the  spikes  of  ling  and  the  bell-like  flowers  of  the 
Aeath  must  have  been  easily  seen  on  the  Warwickshire  heaths.’  [There  can  be  no 
doubt,  however,  that  they  bore  the  same  name  in  Shakespeare’s  day.  ‘  Heath  Hather, 
and  Lyng  is  called  in  high  and  base  Almaigne,  Heyden :  and  is  thought  of  the  later 
writers  to  be  that  plant  which,’  &c. — Lyte’s  Herbal ,  1576,  p.  678. — Ed.] — Beisly 
(p.  12):  I  believe  Shakespeare  wrote  ‘long  heath,’  because  ling  and  heath  or  heth 
are  names  for  one  and  the  same  plant,  and  Shakespeare  would  not  have  called  this 
plant  by  two  different  common  names. — Grindon  (p.  238),  on  the  other  hand,  says 
that  ‘  Ling  [Calluna  vulgaris )  is  very  different  from  the  genuine  Heaths,  or  Ericas,  sc 
there  is  no  tautology  in  the  introduction  of  the  word.’  [The  insurmountable  dif¬ 
ficulty  in  accepting  Hanmer’s  change  is,  to  me,  that  ‘  Long  Heath  ’  is  the  real  name 
of  a  plant,  just  as  much  as  is  ‘  Long  Purples.  Lyte,  in  his  Herbal,  1576,  p.  677,  says 
of  Heath :  ‘  There  is  in  this  Countrie  two  kindes  A  Heath,  one  whiche  beareth  his 
flowers  alongst  the  stemmes,  and  is  called  long  Heath.  The  other  bearing  his  flowers 
in  tutteys  or  tuftes  at  the  toppes  of  the  branches,  the  which  is  called  smal  Heath.’ 
Further  on,  he  says :  ‘  Heath  groweth  vpon  mountaynes  that  be  drie,  hungrie,  and 
barren.’  To  similar  localities  he  allots  ‘  Furze  or  thorne  Broome,’  which  ‘  groweth,’ 
he  says,  p.  668,  ‘  in  vntoyled  places,  by  the  way  sides.’  Wherefore,  the  names  of 
both  plants  were  suggested,  I  think,  by  the  word  ‘  barren  ’  in  Gonzalo’s  wish  for  ‘  an 
acre  of  barren  ground,’  and  in  calling  the  furze  ‘  brown  ’  an  additional  hue  of  deso¬ 
lation  is  imparted  by  suggesting  that  the  acre  is  so  barren  that  even  the  weeds  on  it 
are  dried  up  and  discoloured.  In  Hanmer’s  emendation  the  four  names  really  repre¬ 
sent  only  two  plants ;  for,  however  scientifically  we  may  have  subdivided  genera  now¬ 
adays,  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  as  witness  Lyte,  ling  and  heath  were  the  same  and  furze 
and  broom  the  same.  Such  a  mere,  bare  iteration,  without  adding  anything  whatso¬ 
ever  to  the  picture,  grates  me  as  somewhat  un-Shakespearian. — Ed.] 

79.  Anon.  [Shakespeare,  A  Seaman,  St  James's  Maga.  July,  1862)  :  Take  up  your 
Shakespeare  and  read  the  opening  scene  of  The  Tempest.  A  ship  is  off  an  unknown 
lee-shore,  labouring  heavily ;  a  storm  is  raging ;  lightning  is  flashing ;  thunder  is  bel¬ 
lowing  ;  waves  are  madly  roaring ;  ‘  men’s  hearts  are  failing  them  for  fear  ’ ;  confusion 
and  terror  are  holding  a  carnival  on  board.  We  appeal  to  all  intelligent  readers, — and 
especially  to  seamen, — to  answer  whether  they  think  it  probable  that  Shakespeare 
could  have  intuitively  penned  that  scene  if  he  had  spent  his  life  entirely  ashore  ?  The 
thing  is  incredible.  We  know  that  Shakespeare  was  so  marvellously  gifted  that  he 
could  conceive  and  accurately  depict  characters  and  scenes  of  nearly  every  age  and 
kind ;  but  even  his  transcendent  imagination  had  its  bounds ;  and  it  is  rather  too 
much  to  expect  us  to  creilit  that  he  could  have  written  the  first  scene  of  The  Tempest 
unless  he  had  previously  had  some  practical  acquaintance  with  the  sea,  and  ships,  and 


22 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Scena  Secunda. 

Enter  Profpero  and  Miranda. 

Mira.  If  by  your  Art  (my  deereft  father)  you  haue  % 

1.  Scena]  Scaena  Fa.  cell  of  Prospero.  Theob, 

[The  Inchanted  Island.  Pope.  A  3.  If...you\  One  line,  Seymour,  St» 
part  of  the  Inchanted  Island,  near  the  conj. 

seamen.  Every  epithet  in  the  scene  is  exactly  proper  and  in  admirable  keeping  j 
every  sea-phrase  is  correct ;  every  order  of  the  boatswain’s  is  seamanlike  and  pre 
cisely  adapted  to  the  end  in  view.  There  is  nothing  lubberly  about  the  whole  affair, 
nothing  to  which  a  seaman  of  the  nineteenth  century  would  object  in  a  professional 
point  of  view, — that  is,  taking  into  consideration  the  build  and  rig  of  ships  in  Shake¬ 
speare’s  days.  The  boatswain  did  all  that  was  in  his  power,  as  a  seaman,  to  enable 
the  ship  to  ‘  claw  off’  shore.  And  what  a  grand  old  sea-dog  is  he  !  Neither  Smol¬ 
lett,  nor  Marryatt,  nor  even  Fenimore  Cooper,  ever  drew  a  more  graphic  character. 
In  the  space  of  a  single  page  we  learn  to  know  him  as  thoroughly  as  though  he  lived 
and  moved  in  our  presence.  He  is  a  matchless  specimen  of  the  old,  old  school  of 
mariners, — much  akin  to  the  ancient  seaman  so  minutely  painted  by  Chaucer.  A 
thorough  seaman  is  he ;  a  fine,  hardened,  blustering,  dogmatic,  domineering  old  fel¬ 
low,  whose  shaggy  beard  has  been  outspread  in  a  hundred  tempests ;  one  not  apt  to 

spare  either  himself  or  his  subordinates  in  the  way  of  duty . His  voice  outroars 

wind  and  sea ;  he  will  be  heard  and  obeyed ;  he  feels  that  the  safety  of  the  ship  and 
all  on  board  depends  on  the  ready  exercise  of  his  skill  and  judgement ;  he  knows  his 
own  value  at  this  awful  crisis.  ....  We  love  and  venerate  this  tarry  old  mariner. 
Shakespeare  drew  him  from  the  very  life.  [In  a  note  on  ‘  glasses,’  V,  i,  266,  Br. 
Nicholson  proves  that  it  is  almost  impossible  that  Shakespeare  could  have  been  evei 
at  sea. — Ed.] 

2.  Warburton  :  Nothing  was  ever  better  contrived  to  inform  the  audience  of  the 
story  than  this  scene.  It  is  a  conversation  that  could  not  have  happened  before,  and 
could  not  but  happen  now. — Coleridge  (p.  86) :  Prospero’s  speeches,  till  the  entrance 
of  Ariel,  contain  the  finest  example,  I  remember,  of  retrospective  narration  for  the 
purpose  of  putting  the  audience  in  possession  of  all  the  information  necessary  for  the 
understanding  of  the  plot.  Observe,  too,  the  perfect  probability  of  the  moment  chosen 
by  Prospero  (the  very  Shakespeare  himself,  as  it  were,  of  the  tempest)  to  open  out  the 
truth  to  his  daughter,  his  own  romantic  bearing,  and  how  completely  anything  that 
might  have  been  disagreeable  to  us  in  the  magician  is  reconciled  and  shaded  in  the 
humanity  and  natural  feelings  of  the  father.  In  the  very  first  speech  of  Miranda  the 
simplicity  and  tenderness  of  her  character  are  at  once  laid  open, — it  would  have  been 
lost  in  direct  contact  with  the  agitation  of  the  first  scene.  The  opinion  once  prevailed, 
but  is  happily  now  abandoned,  that  Fletcher  alone  wrote  for  women, — the  truth  is, 
that  with  very  few,  and  those  partial  exceptions,  the  female  characters  in  the  plays  of 
Beaumont  and  Fletcher  are,  when  of  the  light  kind,  not  decent;  when  heroic,  com¬ 
plete  viragoes.  But  in  Shakespeare  all  the  elements  of  womanhood  are  holy,  and 
there  is  the  sweet  yet  dignified  feeling  of  all  that  continuates  society,  as  sense  of 
ancestry  and  of  sex,  with  a  purity  unassailable  by  sophistry,  because  it  rests  not  in  the 
analytic  processes,  but  in  that  sane  equipoise  of  the  faculties,  during  which  the  feel¬ 
ings  are  representative  of  all  past  experience, — not  of  the  individual  only,  but  of  all 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


23 


Put  the  wild  waters  in  this  Rore ;  alay  them : 

The  skye  it  feemes  would  powre  down  (linking  pitch, 
But  that  the  Sea,  mounting  to  th’  welkins  cheeke, 


5 


4.  Pore  ,•]  Pore,  F4. 

5.  Jlinking~\flaming  Sing.  conj.  kind- 


6.  th’]  the  F4< 

cheeke\  heat  Coll.  MS.  cheeks 
Verges. 


ling  Verges  (N.  &  Qu.  3d,  vii,  337). 


those  by  whom  she  has  been  educated,  and  their  predecessors,  even  up  to  the  first 
mother  that  lived.  Shakespeare  saw  that  the  want  of  prominence,  which  Pope  notices 
for  sarcasm,  was  the  blessed  beauty  of  the  woman’s  character,  and  knew  that  it  arose 
not  from  any  deficiency,  but  from  the  more  exquisite  harmony  of  all  the  parts  of  the 
moral  being,  constituting  one  living  total  of  head  and  heart.  He  has  drawn  it,  indeed, 
in  all  its  distinctive  energies  of  faith,  patience,  constancy,  fortitude, — shown  in  all  of 
them  as  following  the  heart,  which  gives  its  results  by  a  nice  tact  and  happy  intuition, 
without  the  intervention  of  the  discursive  faculty,  sees  all  things  in  and  by  the  light 
of  the  affections,  and  errs,  if  it  ever  err,  in  the  exaggerations  of  love  alone.  In  all 
the  Shakespearian  women  there  is  essentially  the  same  foundation  and  principle ;  the 
distinct  individuality  and  variety  are  merely  the  result  of  the  modification  of  circum¬ 
stances,  whether  in  Miranda  the  maiden,  in  Imogen  the  wife,  or  in  Katherine  the 
queen. — Ibid.  ( Sez>en  Lectures,  p.  112)  :  Shakespeare  had  pre-determined  to  make  the 
plot  of  this  play  such  as  to  involve  a  certain  number  of  low  characters,  and  at  the 
beginning  he  pitched  the  note  of  the  whole.  The  first  scene  was  meant  as  a  lively 
commencement  of  the  story ;  the  reader  is  prepared  for  something  that  is  to  be  devel¬ 
oped,  and  in  the  next  scene  he  brings  forward  Prospero  and  Miranda.  How  is  this 
done?  By  giving  to  his  favourite  character,  Miranda,  a  sentence  which  at  once 
expresses  the  violence  and  fury  of  the  storm,  such  as  it  might  appear  to  a  witness  on 
the  land,  and  at  the  same  time  displays  the  tenderness  of  her  feelings, — the  exquisite 
feelings  of  a  female  brought  up  in  a  desert,  but  with  all  the  advantages  of  education, 
all  that  could  be  communicated  by  a  wise  and  affectionate  father.  She  possesses  all 
the  delicacy  of  innocence,  yet  with  all  the  powers  of  her  mind  unweakened  by  the 
combats  of  life. 

3.  your  .  .  .  you]  Note  that  throughout  this  dialogue  Miranda  invariably  addresses 
her  father  in  the  second  person  plural  of  respect,  and  he  as  invariably  speaks  to  bet 
in  the  second  person  singular  of  tenderness,  except  in  line  17. — Ed. 

6.  cheeke]  Staunton:  Although  we  have  in  Rich.  II:  III,  ii,  ‘the  cloudy 
cheeks  of  heaven,’  and  elsewhere,  ‘  welkin’s  face  ’  and  ‘  heaven’s  face,’  it  may  well 
be  questioned  whether  cheek,’  in  this  place,  is  not  a  misprint.  A  more  appropriate 
and  expressive  word  than  heat  of  Collier’s  MS,  one,  too,  sanctioned  in  some  measure 
by  its  occurrence  in  Ariel’s  description  of  the  same  elemental  conflict,  is  probably 
crack  or  cracks  :  ‘  the  fire,  and  cracks  of  sulphurous  roaring,  the  most  mighty  Nep¬ 
tune  seem  to  besiege,’  &c.  In  Miranda’s  picture  of  the  tempest,  the  sea  is  seen  to 
storm  and  overwhelm  the  tremendous  artillery  of  heaven ;  in  that  of  Ariel,  the  sky’s 
ordnance,  ‘  the  fire  and  cracks,’  assault  the  ‘  mighty  Neptune.’  Crack,  in  the  emphatic 
sense  it  formerly  bore  of  crash,  discharge,  or  explosion,  is  very  common  in  our  old 
writers.  [Very  far  from  being  one  of  Staunton’s  happiest  emendations. — Ed.] 

6.  See  Abbott,  §  456,  for  his  scansion  of  many  similar  lines  where  unaccented 
syllables  are  slurred ;  as  here,  ‘  to  the  wel-,’  forms  one  foot.  See  line  293  in  this 


scene. 


24 


THE  TEMPEST 


[4CT  I,  sc.  ii. 

7 


Dalhes  the  fire  out.  Oh  !  I  haue  fuffered 
With  thofe  that  I  faw  fufifer:  A  braue  veffell 
(Who  had  no  doubt  fome  noble  creature  in  her) 

Dafh’d  all  to  peeces  :  O  the  cry  did  knocke  10 

Againft  my  very  heart  :  poore  foules,  they  perifh’d. 

Had  I  byn  any  God  of  power,  I  would 
Haue  funcke  the  Sea  within  the  Earth,  or  ere 
It  ihould  the  good  Ship  fo  haue  fwallow’d,  and 
The  fraughting  Soules  within  her.  1 5 

Prof.  Be  colledled, 

No  more  amazement  :  Tell  your  pitteous  heart 
there’s  no  harme  done. 

Mira.  O  woe,  the  day. 

Prof.  No  harme :  20 

I  haue  done  nothing,  but  in  care  of  thee 


7.  fuffered~\  suffer’d  Pope. 

9.  creature ]  creatures  Theol .  +  ,  Steev. 
Var.  Hal.  Sing.  Coll.  Dyce,  .ta.  Ktly, 
Clke,  Dtn. 


12.  byn\  bin  Fa.  been  F  F4. 

15.  fraughting]  fraighted  Pope,  Han. 
fraighting  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap. 
freighting  Steev.  Mai. 


9.  no  doubt]  Coleridge  ( Seven  Lectures,  p.  1x2) :  The  doubt  here  intimated 
could  have  occurred  to  no  mind  but  to  that  of  Miranda,  who  had  been  bred  up  in  the 
island  with  her  father  and  a  monster  only;  she  did  not  know,  as  others  do,  what  sort 
of  creatures  were  in  a  ship ;  others  never  would  have  introduced  it  as  a  conjecture. 
This  shows,  that  while  Shakespeare  is  displaying  his  vast  excellence,  he  never  fails 
to  insert  some  touch  or  other,  which  is  not  merely  characteristic  of  the  particular  per¬ 
son,  but  combines  two  things, — the  person,  and  the  circumstances  acting  upon  the 
person. 

9.  creature]  Knight  (who  follows  Fa)  :  Miranda  means  to  say  that  in  addition 
to  those  she  saw  suffer, — the  ‘  poor  souls  ’  that  perished, — the  common  sailors, — there 
was  no  doubt  some  superior  person  on  board, — some  noble  creature. — Collier  is  not 
as  aristocratic  as  Knight,  in  restricting  the  1  poor  souls  ’  to  the  humble  sailors,  but 
believes  that  in  this  class  are  included  all  those  on  board ;  he  therefore  upholds  his 
MS  and  Theobald  in  reading  creatures.  1  Creature  ’  is  undoubtedly  collective  here  ; 
and  Coleridge,  in  the  preceding  note,  has  shown  us  that  Miranda  did  not  know  what 
kind  of  persons  were  in  a  ship. — Ed. 

13.  or  ere]  See  Abbott,  §  131,  for  the  explanation  of  this  idiom,  where  ere  is 
added  to  or  for  emphasis.  Abbott  refers  to  Matzner,  iii,  451.  Or  see  Macb.  IV,  iii, 
173,  or  Hamlet,  I,  ii,  183,  of  this  edition.  It  is  repeated  at  V,  i,  116,  of  this  play. 

14.  and]  For  other  instances  in  this  play  of  ‘  weak  endings,’  see  lines  66,  69,  and 
168  in  this  scene ;  III,  i,  7 ;  III,  iii,  125  ;  IV,  i,  171.  See  also  Abbott,  §  457. 

15.  fraughting  Soules]  Dyce:  The  souls  who  compose  the  fraught  or  freight. — 
W.  A.  Wright:  Cotgrave  lias  ‘Freter.  To  hire  a  ship  of  burden;  and  to  fraught  or 
%oad  her,  hired.’  ‘  Freture  :  A  fraughting,  loading,  or  furnishing  of  a  (hired)  ship.’ 

19-21.  O  woe,  &c.]  Johnson:  I  know  not  whether  Shakespeare  did  not  make 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


25 


(Of  thee  my  deere  one  ;  thee  my  daughter)  who  22 

Art  ignorant  of  what  thou  art  .  naught  knowing 

Of  whence  I  am  .•  nor  that  I  am  more  better 

Then  Prof  per o ,  Matter  of  a  full  poore  cell,  25 

And  thy  no  greater  Father. 

Mira.  More  to  know 
Did  neuer  medle  with  my  thoughts. 

Prof.  ’Tis  time 

I  fhould  informe  thee  farther  :  Lend  thy  hand  30 

And  plucke  my  Magick  garment  from  me :  So, 


23.  art .  naught ]  art ,  nought  Ff. 

24.  I  am  more]  I  am  more,  or  Rowe 
ii.  I'm  more,  or  Pope,  Han. 

25.  full poore]  full-poor  Theob.  Warb. 


Cap. 

29.  ’  Tis  time']  ’  Tis  true,  F  ,  Rowe  1. 
31.  [Lays  down  his  mantle.  Pope  et 
seq. 


Miranda  speak  thus  :  ‘  0,  woe  the  day  !  No  harm  ?’  To  which  Prospero  properly 
answers  :  ‘  I  have  done  nothing,’  &c.  Miranda,  when  she  speaks  the  words,  ‘  O,  woe 
the  day !’  supposes,  not  that  the  crew  had  escaped,  but  that  her  father  thought  differ¬ 
ently  from  her,  and  counted  their  destruction  ‘  no  harm.’  [This  excellent  emendation, 
which  almost  carries  conviction,  occurred  independently  to  Walker,  Crit.  ii,  iSS. — 
Elze  (p.  128)  emends  the  emendation  by  making  Miranda  interrupt  her  father  when 
he  has  said  ‘  Tell  your  piteous  heart — ’  by  ejaculating  ‘  O,  woe  the  day !’  after  Pros¬ 
pero  has  completed  his  sentence,  then  Miranda  queries,  ‘  No  harm  ?’  The  gain,  how¬ 
ever,  seems  hardly  sufficient  to  justify  so  large  a  change. — Ed.] 

24.  Of  whence]  For  other  examples  of  this  redundant  of,  see  Abbott,  §  179. — 
Phillpotts,  however,  connects  ‘of’  with  ‘knowing.’  ‘Nought  knowing  of  [the 
Rnswer  to  the  question]  whence  I  am.’ 

24.  more  better]  For  other  examples  of  a  double  comparative,  see  Shakespeare 
passim,  or  Abbott,  §  ii. 

25.  full]  Dyce:  That  is,  complete.  [See  ‘drops  full  salt,’  line  183,  also  ‘Full 
fadom  hue,’  line  460.] 

28.  medle]  It  makes  but  little  difference  whether  we  accept  Steevens’s  interpre¬ 
tation,  to  mix,  Ritson’s,  to  interfere,  to  trouble,  or  Collier’s,  to  mingle.  Barnaby 
Googe  (  Whole  Art  of  Husbandry,  1596,  p.  98)  speaks  of  ‘  the  lees  of  Wine  medled 
with  water.’ — Ed. 

30.  Lend  thy  hand]  Warburton  ( Nichols ,  Must,  ii,  636)  assumes  that  in  order 
to  make  Miranda  fall  in  love  at  first  sight  with  Ferdinand,  Prospero  felt  it  to  be  neces¬ 
sary  first  to  attune  her  mind  by  deeply  exciting  the  emotion  of  pity,  and  then  to  weave 
a  spell  around  her.  ‘  This,’  he  says,  ‘  is  insinuated  to  the  audience  ’  by  Prospero’s 
request  that  Miranda  should  lend  a  hand  in  plucking  off  the  magic  garment.  ‘  The 
touch  communicated  the  charm,  and  its  efficacy  was  to  lay  her  asleep.  This  is  the 
reason  that  Prospero  so  often  questions,  as  he  goes  on  in  his  story,  whether  she  was 
attentive,  being  apprehensive  the  charm  might  operate  too  quick,  before  he  had  ended 
hie  relation.’  [‘  The  ever  thought-swarming,  but  idea-less  Warburton  1’  exclaims 
Coleridge  in  a  note  on  Othello. — Ed.] 

31.  So,]  This,  I  think,  is  addressed  to  Miranda,  and  should  have  either  a  full  stojx 


26 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Lye  there  my  Art :  wipe  thou  thine  eyes,  haue  comfort,  32 

The  direfull  fpectacle  of  the  wracke  which  touch’d 
The  very  vertue  of  compaffion  in  thee  : 

I  haue  with  fuch  prouifion  in  mine  Art  35 

So  fafely  ordered,  that  there  is  no  foule 


34.  in  thee  .•]  in  thee,  FjF^. 

35.  prouifion\  compaffion  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  prevision  Hunter,  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 
Sing.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

36.  ordered ]  ordedd  Rowe  et  seq. 


36.  there  is  no  foule~\  there  is  no  soui 
lost  Rowe,  there's  no  soul  lost  Pope,  Han. 
Warb.  there  is  no  foyle  Theob.  there 
is  no  loss  Cap.  there  is  no  evil  Bailey. 
there  is  no  hurte,  Gould,  there  is  no  soul — 
Steev.  et  seq.  (subs.). 


or  a  dash,  after  it.  Prospero  uses  the  same  word  when  Ariel  is  helping  to  disease 
him  and  to  don  his  Hat  and  Rapier  in  the  Fifth  Act. — Ed. 

32.  Lye  there  my  Art]  Steevens  :  Sir  William  Cecil,  lord  Burleigh,  lord  high 
treasurer,  &c.  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  when  he  put  off  his  gown  at  night, 
used  to  say,  Lie  there.  Lord  Treasurer. — Fuller’s  Holy  State,  p.  257. — Dyce  [Few 
Notes,  p.  10)  to  this  instance  of  Steevens  adds :  So  in  A  Pleasant  Commodie  called 
Looke  about  you,  which  was  printed  in  1 600  (and  therefore  preceded  The  Tempest'), 
Slcinke  puts  off  his  hermit’s  robes  with  a  similar  expression :  ‘Lye  there  religion  ’ ; 
and  in  Chettle’s  Tragedy  of  Hoffman  (also  an  earlier  play  than  The  Tempest)  Lor* 
rique,  throwing  off  the  disguise  of  a  French  doctor,  says,  ‘ Doctor  lie  there.  Lorrique, 
like  thyself  appeared  I  may  add,  that  in  Shadwell’s  Virtuoso,  Sir  Samuel  Harty 
lays  aside  his  female  dress,  with  the  words,  ‘So,  tyrewoman,  lie  thou  there.' — Voss 
( Anmerkungen ,  &c.,  p.  150)  :  Shakespeare  here  very  skilfully  separates  Prospero  the 
man  from  Prospero  the  magician.  A  magician,  devoted  body  and  soul  to  his  art,  can 
claim  but  little  of  our  sympathy ;  witness  even  the  most  loveable  and  charming  of  the 
magicians  and  genii  in  the  Arabian  Nights  ;  they  stand  remote  from  us  as  superhuman 
and  supernatural  beings.  But  Prospero’s  magic  resides  only  in  his  Mantle,  Staff,  and 
Book ;  Prospero  himself  remains  akin  to  us. 

33.  wracke]  Hunter  (i,  186) :  A  delicate  ear  will  perceive  that  something  is  lost 
In  point  of  melody  by  the  uncalled-for  change  of  ‘  wrack  ’  to  wreck. — White  :  This 
orthography  of  the  Folio  is  uniform,  legitimate,  and  characteristic,  and  should  not  be 
disturbed. 

34.  vertue  of  compassion]  Johnson  :  The  most  efficacious  part,  the  energetic 
quality ;  in  a  like  sense  we  say,  ‘  The  virtue  of  a  plant  is  in  the  extract.’ 

35.  prouision]  Hunter  (i,  186)  quotes  a  passage  from  ‘ Modem  Policies,  a  book 
attributed  to  Sancroft,  of  which  a  fifth  edition  was  published  in  1654,  which  seems 
to  suggest  and  justify  the  change  to  prevision.' — Dyce,  who  adopts  prevision,  cites 
in  confirmation  II,  i,  329,  ‘  My  master  through  his  art  foresees  the  danger,’  &c. 
—  White  regards  prevision  as  not  improbable. —  But  Mrs  Kemble  (. Atlantic 
Monthly,  Sept,  i860)  does  not  agree  to  the  value  of  the  change.  ‘It  is  very  true,’ 
she  says,  ‘  that  /revision  means  the  foresight  that  his  art  gave  him,  but  /revision 
implies  the  exercise  of  that  foresight  or  /revision ;  it  is  therefore  better,  because  more 
comprehensive.’ 

36.  no  soule]  Theobald  explains  his  conjecture  of  foyle  as  damage,  loss,  detri¬ 
ment,  but  Holt  (p.  22)  says  that  ‘  the  traces  of  the  letter  might  have  been  followed 
nearer  in  soyl,  and  with  better  authority  of  context.’ — This  emendation  of  soil,  i  e. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


2  7 


No  not  fo  much  perdition  as  an  hayre  37 

Betid  to  any  creature  in  the  veffell 

Which  thou  heardft  cry,  which  thou  faw  ft  ftnke  :  Sit 
For  thou  muft  now  know  farther.  [downe,  40 

Mira.  You  haue  often 
Begun  to  tell  me  what  I  am,  but  ftopt 
And  left  me  to  a  booteleffe  Inquifition, 

Concluding,  ftay  .•  not  yet. 

Prof.  The  howr’s  now  come  45 


37.  an  hayre ]  an  hair’s  Cap.  conj.  a 
hair  Sing.  Clke. 

38.  Betid]  Betide  Ff,  Rowe. 

39.  40.  Sit  ...farther]  One  line,  F3F4, 


Rowe. 

41.  often ]  oft  Sta.  conj. 

43.  a  booteleffe]  thebootleffe  Ff,  Rowe 
Pope,  Han. 


stain,  spot,  Johnson  afterwards  put  forth,  remarking  at  the  time  that  Holt  ‘  had  a 
glimpse  of  it,  but  could  not  keep  it.’  The  emendation  which  Holt  himself  advocated 
was  that  ‘  soul  ’  was  a  term  of  endearment  applied  by  Prospero  to  Miranda,  and  he 
suggested  that  the  line  be  thus  arranged  :  So  safely  order’d,  soul,  that  there  is  no,  No 
not  so  much,’  &c.  or  ‘  So  safely  ordered  that  there  is  no, — soul,  No  not  so  much,’  &c. 
It  seems  almost  impossible  to  give  the  following  note  from  Capell  without  appearing 
to  hold  him  up  to  ridicule,  than  which  nothing  is  further  from  my  intention ;  but  it  is 
worth  while  to  give  it  if  only  to  reveal  one  of  the  difficulties  of  an  editor  who  under¬ 
takes  to  paraphrase  his  authorities :  ‘  The  alter’d  and  the  altering  word  of  this  sen¬ 
tence,’  says  Capell  (ii,  55)>  ‘approach’d  nearer  to  one  another  than  will  be  judg’d 
from  the  latter’s  orthography;  but  it’s  former  was  —  losse,  and  under  that  form  might 
most  readily  be  corrupted  to, — soule  :  that  it  was  the  reading  intended,  the  line  after 
is  evidence ;  for  that  line  is  explanatory  of  the  term  that  preceded,  carrying  it  to  an 
excess  that  is  not  convey’d  by  it  nakedly,  as  is  Shakespeare’s  manner  elsewhere.’ 
‘  Had  Capell  come  to  me,’  said  Dr  Johnson  on  one  occasion,  ‘  I  would  have  endowed 
lias  purposes  with  words.’ — Staunton  believes  that  Capell’s  loss  is  the  true  read¬ 
ing. — Kenrick  {Review,  p.  2)  :  Shakespeare  very  probably  wrote  ill,  there  is  no  ill, 
No,  not  so  much,’  &c.  To  betide  is  to  befall,  to  happen  to,  and  would  here  be  very  im¬ 
properly  used  with  soil;  for  even  supposing  there  was  no  impropriety  in  saying  a  son 
might  betide  a  suit  of  cloaths ;  no  idiom  will  bear  a  soil  betiding  to  a  creature,  wheD 
its  cloathing  only  was  meant. — Heath  rightly  interprets  and  paraphrases  the  original 
text.  ‘  The  participle  lost  must  be  supplied  from  the  word  “  perdition,”  in  the  next 
line.  The  import  is  exactly  the  same  as  if  the  poet  had  written,  I  have  so  safely 
ordered  that  there  is  no  soul, — Why  do  I  say  soul  ?  No  there  is  not  so  much  per¬ 
dition  as  an  hair  betid  to  any  creature  in  the  vessel.  The  construction  is  of  the  kind 
called  by  grammarians  anacoluthonl  Steevens  followed  the  suggestion  of  Heath 
by  putting  a  dash  after  *  soul,’  and  has  herein  been  followed  by  every  editor,  I  think, 
except  the  Cambridge  Editors,  who  have  a  comma. — Ed. 

38.  Betid]  For  other  instances  of  the  omission  of  -ed  in  the  participles  of  verbs 
ending  in  - te ,  -t,  or  -d,  see  Shakespeare  passim,  or  Abbott,  §  342. 

45.  The  howr’s  now  come]  In  the  course  of  an  argument  to  prove  that  The 
Tempest,  instead  of  being  among  Shakespeare’s  late  plays,  is  one  of  his  early  plays 
Hunter  brings  forward,  very  modestly,  certain  indications,  as  he  conceives  them,  of 


28 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 

46 


The  very  minute  byds  thee  ope  thine  eare, 

Obey,  and  be  attentiue.  Canft  thou  remember 
A  time  before  we  came  vnto  this  Cell  ? 

I  doe  not  thinke  thou  canft,  for  then  thou  was’t  not 
Out  three  yeeres  old.  5^ 

Mira.  Certainely  Sir,  I  can. 

Prof.  By  what  ?  by  any  other  houfe,  or  perfon  ? 

Of  any  thing  the  Image,  tell  me,  that 
'Hath  kept  with  thy  remembrance. 

Mira.  ’Tis  farre  off:  55 

And  rather  like  a  dreame,  then  an  affurance 
That  my  remembrance  warrants :  Had  I  not 
Fowre,  or  flue  women  once,  that  tended  me  ?  58 

47.  Canfi  thou\  Canst  Pope,  Han.  5°-  Out]  Full  Pope.  Quite  Coll.  MS. 

48.  [Sitting  down.  Coll,  ii  (MS).  54.  with]  in  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

immaturity  in  the  art  of  dramatic  composition.  ‘  One  practised  in  the  dramatic  art,’ 
he  observes  (i,  124),  ‘  would  hardly  have  given  us  such  a  scene  as  the  Second  of  the 
First  Act,  where  we  have  a  long  dialogue  between  Prospero  and  Miranda,  which  is 
plainly  intended  for  the  audience,  and  not  to  carry  on  the  business  of  the  play.’  The 
best  reply  that  has  been  made  to  blunter  in  this  regard  is  to  be  found  in  a  highly 
valuable  Essay  by  Dr  C.  C.  Hense  on  Die  Antikes  in  Shakespeare' s  Drama  (Shake¬ 
speare  Untersuchungen,  &c.,  1884),  wherein  (p.  481)  it  is  maintained  that  this  dia¬ 
logue,  so  far  from  being,  what  Hunter  pronounces  it,  an  indication  of  immaturity,  is  an 
example  of  ‘  genuine  dramatic  art  in  the  antique  meaning  of  the  term.  It  is  Pros¬ 
pero  himself  who  relates  his  own  and  Miranda’s  story ;  the  decisive  hour  has  come  in 
which  not  only  the  audience,  but  more  especially  Miranda,  must  be  instructed  in  the 
circumstances  of  her  past  in  view  of  the  important  future.  No  other  human  being 
can  tell  this  story  but  Prospero  himself;  at  the  approach  of  the  great  moment  of  rescue 
he  lives  over  again,  with  vivid  intensity,  all  that  misery  into  which  he  was  plunged 
by  the  treachery  of  his  brother,  and  which  was  alleviated  by  the  kindness  of  Gonzalo. 
Precisely  thus  it  is  that  Philoctetes  in  Sophocles,  just  before  the  all-important  hour  of 
his  release,  narrates  the  depth  and  duration  of  the  misery  of  his  past  life.  The  fate 
of  himself  and  of  his  daughter  was  a  secret  of  Prospero.  A  secret  is  one  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  a  drama  of  fate ;  in  the  CEdipus  of  Sophocles  the  unfortunate  hero  guards 
a  secret  through  many  years,  and  not  until  the  moment  before  the  unhappy  denoue¬ 
ment  does  he  divulge  it  to  Jocasta.’ 

45,  46.  Allen  (Phila.  Sh.  Soc .)  proposes  to  punctuate  *  The  hour’s  now  come — 
The  very  minute, — bids  thee  ope  thine  ear ;’  with  the  relative  (as  often  elsewhere") 
understood  before  bids. 

50.  Out]  Steevens  :  That  is,  quite  three  years  old,  three  years  old  full-out,  com¬ 
plete.  See  ‘  And  be  a  boy  right  out,’  IV,  i,  112. 

56-58.  Coleridge  (Seven  Lectures ,  p.  114) :  Here  I  cannot  help  noticing  a  fine 
touch  of  Shakespeare’s  knowledge  of  human  nature,  and  generally  of  the  great  laws 
of  the  human  mind.  [These  lines  cited.]  This  is  exquisite!  In  general  our 
remembrances  of  early  life  arise  from  vivid  colours,  especially  if  we  have  seen  them 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


29 


Prof.  Thou  hadft  ;  and  more  Miranda  :  But  how  is  it 
That  this  liues  in  thy  minde  ?  What  feeft  thou  els  60 

In  the  dark-backward  and  Abifme  of  Time  ? 

Yf  thou  remembreft  ought  ere  thou  cam’ft  here, 

How  thou  cam’ft  here  thou  maift. 

Mira.  But  that  I  doe  not. 

Prof.  Twelue  yere  fince  ( Miranda )  twelue  yere  fince,  65 
Thy  father  was  the  Duke  of  Millaine  and 

A  Prince  of  power:  67 

61.  dark-backward ]  dark  backward  65.  Twelue  yere  ...yere\  Tis  twelveyean 
F3F4.  ...years  Pope  +  . 

in  motion ;  for  instance,  persons  when  grown  up  will  remember  a  bright  green  door, 
seen  when  they  were  quite  young ;  but  Miranda,  who  was  somewhat  older,  recollected 
four  or  five  women  who  tended  her.  She  might  know  men  from  her  father,  and  her 
remembrance  of  the  past  might  be  worn  out  by  the  present  object;  but  women  she 
only  knew  by  herself,  by  the  contemplation  of  her  own  figure  in  the  fountain,  and  she 
recalled  to  her  mind  what  had  been.  It  was  not  that  she  had  seen  such  and  such 
grandees,  or  such  and  such  peeresses,  but  she  remembered  to  have  seen  something 
like  the  reflection  of  herself ;  it  was  not  herself,  and  it  brought  back  to  her  mind  what 
she  had  seen  most  like  herself. 

61.  backward]  For  other  examples  of  the  adverbs  backward  and  inward  used  as 
nouns,  see  Abbott,  §  77. 

65.  Twelue  yere  since,  &c.]  Capell  :  In  this  line  the  first  ‘  year’  is  a  dissyllable, 
and  both  have  the  force  of  plurals. — Walker  (  Vers.  p.  136)  in  his  article  on  such 
words  as  fear ,  dear,  fire,  your,  &c.,  which  suffer  dissolution,  cites,  as  an  example,  this 
line,  and  says,  ‘  Coleridge  observes  on  “  the  apparently  defective  metre  [of  this  pres¬ 
ent  line  that]  the  actor  should  supply  the  time  by  emphasis,  and  pause  on  the  first 
syllable.”  But  the  defect  is  merely  apparent;  the  use  of  the  same  word  as  a  mono¬ 
syllable  and  as  a  diss'Ilable  in  the  same  line  is,  perhaps,  more  strange  in  appearance 
than  in  reality.’ — Abbott,  §  480,  thus  scans :  ‘  Twelve  ye  |  ar  since  |  Miran  |  da, 
twelve  |  year  since  ’ ;  ‘  where  the  repeated  “  year  ”  is  less  emphatic  than  the  former.’ 
See  also  line  424  of  this  scene,  which  also  Abbott  thus  scans  :  ‘  Who  hadst  |  deserv  |  ed 
mo  |  re  than  |  a  prison.’ — Cambridge  Editors  ( Preface ,  ed.  iii,  p.  xix) :  We  are 
rightly  told  that *  *  year  ’  may  be  a  dissyllable.  Yet  that  one  word  should  bear  two  pro 
nunciations  in  one  line  is  far  more  improbable  than  that  the  unaccented  syllable  before 

*  twelve  ’  is  purposely  omitted  by  the  poet ;  and  few  readers  will  not  acknowledge  the 
solemn  effect  of  such  a  verse.  [The  consensus  of  opinion  points  to  the  dissyllabic  pro 
nunciation  of  ‘  year.’  I  beg  emphatically  to  dissent,  not  only  on  rhythmical  but  on 
other  grounds.  By  such  a  division  and  prolongation  of  ‘  year  ’  an  emphasis  is  imparted 
which  does  not  befit  the  sense.  It  is  the  number  of  years  that  looms  up  before  Pros- 
pero’s  memory,  not  the  mere  fact  that  years  instead  of  months  had  passed.  As  to  the 
rhythm,  I  am  quite  willing  to  stand  within  the  shadow  of  so  fine  a  master  as  Guest, 
who  (i,  240)  by  thus  scanning  brings  the  music  and  the  meaning  into  accord  :  ‘  Twelve 

|  years  since  |  Miran  |  da :  twelve  |  years  since.’  This,  I  presume,  is  the  scansion 
of  the  Cambridge  Editors,  although  their  preference  is  not  at  once  evident. — Ed  ] 

66,  69  See  I,  ii,  14. 


30 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
68 


Mira.  Sir,  are  not  you  my  Father? 

Prof.  Thy  Mother  was  a  peece  of  vertue,  and 
She  faid  thou  waft  my  daughter  ;  and  thy  father  70 

Was  Duke  of  Millaine ,  and  his  onely  heire, 

And  Princeffe  ;  no  worfe  iffued. 

Mira.  O  the  heauens, 

What  fowle  play  had  we,  that  we  came  from  thence  ? 

Or  bleffed  was’t  we  did?  75 

Prof.  Both,  both  my  Girle. 

By  fowle-play  (as  thou  faift)  were  we  heau’d  thence, 

But  bleffedly  holpe  hither. 

Mira.  O  my  heart  bleedes 

To  thinke  oth’  teene  that  I  haue  turn’d  you  to,  80 

Which  is  from  my  remembrance,  pleafe  you,  farther; 

Prof.  My  brother  and  thy  vncle,  call’d  Anthonio  :  82 


71.  and  his]  thou  his  Han.  Steev.’73, 
Sing.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Dtn.  and  thou 
his  Johns,  conj.  Glo.  Jeph.  Wh.  ii.  and 
you  his  Gould. 

72.  And]  A  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 
Mai.  Sleev.’93,  Var.  Dyce,  Sta.  Clke, 
Ktly,  Wrt,  Jepb.  Huds.  Dtn,  Cam.  iii. 


77-  faift  heau'd]  fay  eft  ...  heaved 
Ff. 

78.  holpe]  help' d  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb. 

79.  O  my]  My  Pope,  Han. 

81.  remembrance ,]  remembrance. 

Rowe. 


72.  And  Princesse  ;]  Dyce  has  the  following  note  to  vindicate  Pope’s  change  to 
‘A  Princess  ’ :  ‘  In  the  Two  Gent.  IV,  i,  Fx  and  F2  have  “  For  practising  to  steale 
away  a  Lady  And  heire,”  &c. ;  in  Henry  VIII :  II,  iv,  all  the  Folios  have  “  on  the 
debating  And  marriage  ’twixt  the  Duke  of  Orleanes,”  &c. ;  in  Lear,  I,  i,  the  Qq 
have  “  She  is  here  selfe  and  dower” ;  and  in  our  author’s  cxxixth  Sonnet  the  Quarto 
has  “  and  very  wo,” — in  all  four  places  “  and  ”  being  a  mistake  for  “  a.”  ’  After  all, 
I  think,  Knight’s  text  is  to  be  preferred,  which  adheres  to  the  Folio,  and  merely 
erases  the  semicolon  after  ‘  Princess  ’ ;  ‘  thy  father  was  Duke  of  Milan,  and  no  worse 
issued  was  his  only  heir  and  princess.’ — Ed. 

78.  holpe]  See  Abbott,  §  343,  for  forms  of  similar  past  participles. 

80.  teene]  Grief,  trouble. 

81.  from]  For  many  other  examples  of  this  use  of  from,  in  the  sense  of  apart 
from,  away  from,  without  verbs  of  motion,  see  Abbott,  §  158. 

82.  &c.  Capell  :  There  is  great  perplexity  in  the  construction  of  this  speech,  owing 

evidently  to  the  number  of  circumstances  parenthetically  thrown  into  it ;  which  mode 
of  speaking  is  not  used  without  design ;  but  effected, — here,  and  in  other  places,  par¬ 
ticularly  of  this  scene, — to  mark  a  branch  of  Prospero’s  character,  which  is — garru¬ 
lity . The  speaker  himself  is  lost  in  his  own  deviations ;  and  reduced  to  the 

necessity  of  beginning  his  tale  anew. — In  the  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  Minutes,  15  Nov.  1864, 
attention  was  called  to  the  network  of  anacolutha  in  this  and  the  following  speech  of 
Prospero.  The  subject,  ‘  My  brother,’  is  dropt,  and  taken  up  again  as  ‘  he,  whom,’  and, 
finally,  in  4  Thy  falfe  vncle,’  before  its  verb  (but  only  after  another  interruption)  is 
reached  in  4  new  created.’  A  parenthesis  begins  with  4  as  at  that  time  ’ ;  but  it  ceases 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


3* 

83 


1  pray  thee  marke  me,  that  a  brother  fhould 
Be  fo  perfidious  :  he,  whom  next  thy  felfe 
Of  all  the  world  I  lou’d,  and  to  him  put  85 

The  mann&ge  of  my  ftate,  as  at  that  time 

Through  all  the  fignories  it  was  the  firft,  87 


83,84.  me... perfidious .•]  me ,  ( that ... 
perfidious  I')  Pope  et  seq.  (subs.). 

86-90.  as  at...fiudie]  In  parenthesis, 
Theob.  + . 


86-93.  as  at.. ./Indies']  In  parenthesis, 
Cap. 

86.  time]  time  F3F4. 

87.  Through]  Though  F2. 


to  be  treated  as  a  parenthesis,  and  eddies  into  the  main  current  of  expression  at 
‘  Thefe  being  all  my  ftudy.’ 

82.  Anthonio]  Hunter  ( Disquisition ,  p.  138)  criticises,  and  justly,  the  needless 
changes  made  by  modern  editors,  and  asks,  with  reference  to  this  name,  always 
changed  to  Antonio,  whether  a  nice  ear  will  not  be  sensible  that  something  is  lost. 
Hunter  is,  I  think,  unquestionably  right  on  general  principles.  Whether  or  not  in 
the  case  of  this  particular  name,  with  such  names  as  Thotnas  and  Thames  before  us, 
wTe  should  pronounce  the  th  like  the  Greek  theta,  we  really  have  not  the  means  of 
knowing.  In  Anthony  and  Cleopatra  Corson  has  ingeniously  detected  a  pun  which 
rests  on  this  Greek  pronunciation,  in  a  line  which  is  otherwise  wellnigh  inex¬ 
plicable.  If  this  pronunciation  of  the  Greek  theta  in  Anthony  obtains  in  one  of 
Shakespeare’s  plays,  viz :  in  Anth.  and  Cleop.,  it  is  not  unreasonable,  in  lack  of 
opposing  proof,  to  suppose  that  it  should  prevail  in  all. — Ed. 

83.  I  pray  thee  marke  me,]  This  phrase  is  almost  universally  printed  by  modem 
editors  with  a  dash  before  and  after  it.  Knight  thus  disapproves :  ‘  The  reader  will 
observe  with  what  admirable  skill  such  interjectional  expressions  as  “  Dost  thou  attend 
me  ?” — “  Thou  attend’st  not.” — “  I  pray  thee  mark  me,” — are  subsequently  introduced, 
to  break  the  long  continuity  of  Prospero’s  narrative.  But  here,  in  the  very  beginning 
of  his  story,  for  Prospero  to  use  a  similar  interruption  quite  unnecessarily  is  not  an 
evidence  of  the  same  dramatic  skill.  He  simply  means  here  to  say,  and  the  original 
punctuation  warrants  us  in  believing  so, — I  pray  thee  note  how  a  brother  could  be  so 
perfidious.’  Knight  makes  his  paraphrase,  which  is  good,  a  faint  degree  stronger  than 
the  line  in  Fx  by  omitting  the  comma  after  1  me.’ — Ed. 

86,  87.  as  at  that  time  Through]  Hunter  (i,  187)  adopts  the  Though  of  F2, 
where,  as  he  says,  it  is  to  be  read  as  if  followed  by  of  (‘  such  kind  of  elision  being 
extremely  common  in  the  early  editions  of  these  plays’), — and  the  whole  passage 
may  be  adjusted  thus : 

‘  As  at  that  time, 

Though  of  all  the  seignories  it  was  the  first, 

And  Prospero  the  prime  duke ;  (being  so  reputed 

In  dignity :)  and  for  the  liberal  arts 

Without  a  parallel.  These  being  all  my  study,’  &c. 


«  Shakespeare  meant  to  point  to  the  pre-eminence  which  was  claimed  for  the  Duchy 
of  Milan  above  all  the  other  duchies  of  Europe,  Botero  saying  expressly  that  “  Milan 
claims  to  be  the  first  duchy  in  Europe,”  and  its  University  of  Pavia  was,  at  the  period 
to  which  the  action  of  this  play  is  to  be  referred,  in  high  reputation.  The  sense  now 
becomes  complete  and  consecutive,  though  the  expression  is  dramatic  and  colloquial: 


32 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i.  sc.  ii. 


[86,  87.  as  at  that  time  Through] 

“  Though  Milan  was  accounted  the  first  of  the  great  seignories,  and  Prospero,  as  th.-i 
Duke  of  Milan,  was  regarded  the  prime  duke  in  Europe  (having  the  general  reputa¬ 
tion  and  allowance  of  this  precedence  and  dignity)  ;  and  had  also  the  higher  reputa¬ 
tion  for  the  liberal  arts ;  he  neglected  the  affairs  of  State,  threw  the  government  on  his 
brother,  and  devoted  himself  entirely  to  those  studies.”  ’ — That  which  to  Capell  is 
‘  garrulity  ’  in  this  speech  becomes  in  Knight’s  eyes  an  1  easy  conversational  flow,’  and 
is  amongst 1  the  finest  things  in  the  play.  One  idea  grows  out  of  another  without  any 
very  strict  logical  arrangement,  for  Prospero  speaks  out  of  the  fulness  of  his  heart. 
We  follow  the  punctuation  of  the  original.’ — Meiklejohn  :  This  hesitation  and  invo¬ 
lution  in  Prcspero’s  speech  arise  from  the  fact  that  he  is  bent  on  an  impossibility, — 
that  of  making  Miranda  understand  the  crisis  in  his  past  history,  which  is  comparable 
to  nothing  in  her  experience. — Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  1864) :  The  vulgar  text  uni¬ 
formly  puts  a  comma  after  ‘  as,’  and  thus  makes  it  equivalent  to  because.  This  makes 
Prospero  guilty,  First,  of  a  non  sequitur  (‘  because  his  dukedom  gave  him  a  rank 
above  all  the  other  Italian  Dukes,  he  therefore  gave  up  the  administration  of  it  to  his 
brother’),  and,  Secondly,  of  a  falsehood;  for  his  real  reason  (as  he  distinctly  says 
below)  was,  that  he  was  himself  absorbed  in  secret  studies.  Seeking  for  some  escape 
from  this  double  difficulty,  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me,  that,  by  removing  the  comma, 
we  get  an  expression  precisely  equivalent  to  the  only  one  of  the  kind  that  had 
attracted  my  attention  before,  viz  :  the  as-at-this-time  in  the  Prayer-Book  Collect  foi 
Christmas,*  which  (thirty  odd  years  ago)  I  settled  in  my  mind  (against  the  com¬ 
mentators)  must  be  a  more  or  less  precise  and  emphatic  now.  I  considered,  namely, 
that  at-this-time  was  simply  equal  to  now  ;  that  ar-at-this-time  was  equal  to  as-now  or 
now- as ;  and  that  now-as  would  be  one  of  the  correlatives  of  the  recognised  whenas. 
It  was  easy  enough  to  go  further  and  say,  that  as-at-tha.t-time  would  be  equal  to 
as-then  or  then-as,  and  that  then-as  would  be  the  other  correlative  of  whenas.  I  did 
not,  indeed,  imagine,  that  either  now-as  and  then-as,  or  as-now  and  as-then,  could  be 
found  in  any  of  our  old  authors,  but  Johnson  taught  me  that  as  how  was  used  by  so 
late  a  writer  as  Addison,  and  I  remembered  that  the  exact  equivalent  of  as  then  was 
current  in  German,  under  the  form  of  alsdann.  There  was  reason  to  believe,  there¬ 
fore,  that  more  such  adverbial  forms,  with  as  prefixed  or  suffixed — perhaps,  even,  sys 
terns  of  correlatives  with  as  (analogous  to  whereby  and  thereby,  &c.) — once  existed  in 
the  old  colloquial  language  of  both  England  and  Germany.  Turning  to  the  Deutsches 
Worterbuch  of  the  brothers  Grimm,  I  not  only  found  (vol.  i,  p.  258a)  that  als  ( =  as) 
was  used  with  such  adverbs  as  yesterday,  to-day,  to-morrow,  &c.,  in  Opitz  and  other 
old  authors,  and  to  this  day  (vol.  i,  p.  247a)  in  the  spoken  language  of  the  Rhine  and 
Main  lands,  but  also  perceived  that  a  similar  use  of  as  in  English  was  known  to  these 
German  philologists.  Verifying  this  statement,  I  met  in  Chaucer’s  Legende  of  Goode 
Women,  1  This  thoghte  hire  was  felicite  as  here'  (2587),  ‘  us  nedeth  trewely  Nothing 
as  now'  (1491),  lAs-in-that-poynt ....  Thou  folwest  him  certayn  ’  (2547),  and  ‘  as -in- 
love  trusteth  no  man  but  me’  (2568).  Professor  Corson’s  MS  Select  Glossary  of  La 
Mort  d' Arthur  (kindly  lent  me)  furnishes  seventeen  examples,  including  not  only  as 
at  this  time  and  as  at  that  time,  as  to-night  and  as  to-morrow,  but  also  as  at  bed  and 
at  board.  In  the  Paston  Letters  (Bohn’s  ed.  vol.  ii,  p.  156),  the  Duke  of  Norfolk 
writes,  that  ‘  the  King  would  have  set  forth  as  upon  Monday  ’ ,-  and  in  the  Homily  for 
Good  Friday  (near  the  beginning)  we  have  1  as  about  this  time.’  As  then  occurs  also 

*  The  words  of  the  Collect  are :  ‘Almighty  God,  who  hast  given  us  thy  only-begotten  Son  to  take 
our  nature  upon  him,  and  as  at  this  time  to  be  born  of  a  pure  Virgin,’  &c. 


*CT  I.  sc.  ii.]  THE  TEMPEST 

And  Profpero ,  the  prime  Duke,  being  fo  reputed 
In  dignity  ;  and  for  the  liberall  Artes, 

Without  a  paralell  ;  thofe  being  all  my  ftudie, 

The  Gouernment  I  caft  vpon  my  brother, 

And  to  my  State  grew  ftranger,  being  tranfported 
And  rapt  in  fecret  ftudies,  thy  falfe  vncle 
(Do’ft  thou  attend  me  ?) 

Mira,  •  Sir,  moil  heedefully. 

Prof.  Being  once  perfected  how  to  graunt  fuites, 
how  to  deny  them  :  who  t’aduance,  and  who 
To  trafh  for  ouer-topping ;  new  created 


33 

88 

90 


95 


98 


88,  89.  And... dignity]  In  parenthesis, 
Coll.  Wh. 

90 .  Jludie,]  study  ;  Rowe. 

92.  Ji ranger]  a  stranger  Ktly  conj. 

93.  rapt]  wrapp'd  Steev.’73,  ’78. 
fiudies,]  studies.  Rowe. 

94.  Do'Ji]  Doejl  F,F3. 


94.  me  P]  Om.  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 

97.  who. ..who]  Cap.  Hal.  Wh.  Dyce, 
Glo.  Sta.  Wr.  Dtn,  Cam.  iii.  whom... 
whom  Ff  et  cet. 

98.  To  trajh]  To  plash  Han.  Too 
rash  Wilson.  To  thrash  Marsh,  ap. 
Cam. 


in  Jeremy  Taylor’s  Sermon  on  the  Marriage- Ring :  ‘because  as  then  it  was,  when 
they  were  to  flie.’  Nor  is  the  passage  in  The  Tempest  absolutely  the  only  one  in 
which  Shakespeare  so  uses  as  :  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  V,  i,  70,  Isabella  declares  Lucio 
to  have  been  ‘  as  then  the  meffenger  ’ ;  in  Sonn.  xlvi,  ‘  The  clear  eye’s  moiety  and 
the  dear  heart’s  part  ’  is  determined  ‘  as  thus  ’ ;  and  the  reading  of  Fj  in  Twelfth 
Eight,  II,  ii,  33,  may  stand,  if  we  consider  *  such  as  ’  to  be  a  composite  form  equiva¬ 
lent  to  ‘  precisely  such  ’ :  ‘Alas  !  our  frailty  is  the  caufe,  not  we ;  For  fuch-as  we  are 

made,  if  fuch  we  be.' - Since,  therefore,  the  logic  of  the  passage  rejects  ‘  as  ’  in 

the  sense  of  because ,  and  since  we  have  abundant  authority  for  another  use  of  ‘  as,’ 
hitherto  (apparently)  forgotten  by  English  philologists,  we  may  safely  read,  with  a 
mere  return  to  the  punctuation  (in  this  phrase)  of  F, : 

‘  Pro.  My  brother  and  thy  uncle,  called  Antonio — 

- He — whom  next  thyfelf 

Of  all  the  world  I  lov’d,  and  to  him  put 

The  manage  of  my  date - (as  at  that  time 

Through  all  the  fignories  it  was  the  first) 

-  THY  FALSE  UNCLE,’  &C. 

88.  the]  For  Abbott’s  scansion,  see  §457;  for  his  pronunciation  ‘  Prosp’ro,’  see 
§  469 ;  and  for  ‘  being,’  see  next  note. 

90.  being]  Abbott,  §470:  Words  in  which  a  light  vowel  is  preceded  by  a  heavy 
vowel  or  diphthong  are  frequently  contracted.  Thus,  ‘  Without  |  a  parall  |  el,  these  | 
being  all  |  my  study.’  Cf.  ‘  doing  ’  in  II,  i,  312. 

97-  who]  For  instances,  which  might  be  many  times  multiplied,  of  ‘  who  ’  fot 
whom,  see  Abbott,  §  274;  again,  in  line  271  of  this  scene,  and  IV,  i,  6. 

98.  trash  for  ouer-topping]  There  is  here,  undeniably,  I  think,  a  blending  of 
tw«  metaphors.  *  Trash  ’  refers  to  hunting,  and  ‘  over-top  ’  to  gardening,  or,  at  least. 

3 


34 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  u. 


The  creatures  that  were  mine,  I  fay,  or  chang’d  ’em, 

Or  els  new  form’d  ’em ;  hauing  both  the  key,  ioo 

Of  Officer,  and  office,  fet  all  hearts  i’th  ftate 

99.  mine,  /]  mine ;  I  Theob.  101.  i’th]  e'th  F„.  o'th  F3F4,  Rowe. 

99,  ioo.  ’em]  them  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  i’th  Jiate]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

Var.  Knt.  Coll.  Sing.  Hal.  Ktly,  Clke.  Steev. 

if  there  is  no  proof  that  ‘  over-top  ’  refers  to  gardening,  it  certainly  cannot  refer  to 
hunting.  A  hundred  years  ago  there  was  much  controversy  over  ‘trash’  and  its 
meaning,  until  Steevens  decided  the  question  by  proving  that  the  word  was  even  then 
a  hunter’s  phrase,  signifying  a  weight  or  hindrance  fastened  on  the  neck  of  a  dog 
when,  by  superior  speed,  he  does  not  hunt  even  with  his  companions.  The  dis¬ 
cussion  arose  over  the  line  in  Othello,  II,  i,  336 :  ‘  this  poor  trash  of  Venice  whom  I 
trace,’  and  is  given  at  length  in  the  notes  thereon  in  this  edition.  Of  the  present  line 
Steevens  says,  that  he  has  met  with  over-topping  ‘  in  books  containing  directions  foi 
gardeners  published  in  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth,’  but  he  cites  none,  nor  indeed 
is  any  really  needed ;  the  meaning  of  the  word  is  manifest.  He  quotes,  however, 
from  Warner’s  Albion's  England,  1602,  x,  ch.  57 :  ‘Who  suffreth  none  by  Might,  by 
Wealth,  or  Blood,  to  ouer-top :  Plimselfe  giues  all  Preferment,  and  whom  listeth  him 
doth  lop.’ — In  a  note  on  the  line  in  Othello,  Monck  Mason  (p.  410)  observes  that 
Shakespeare  had  probably  in  view  in  this  speech  of  Prospero  ‘  the  manner  in  which 
Tarquin  conveyed  to  Sextus  his  advice  to  destroy  the  principal  citizens  of  Gabii,  by 
striking  off,  in  the  presence  of  his  messengers,  the  heads  of  the  tallest  poppies,  as  he 
walked  in  his  garden.  ‘  To  trash ,'  says  Nares  ( Gloss,  s.  v.),  ‘  from  being  joined  witli 
overtopping,  has  been  supposed  to  allude  to  lopping  of  trees,  but  if  we  examine  the 

context,  no  such  violent  measure  seems  there  suggested . It  is  opposed  only  to 

advance,  and  seems  to  mean  no  more  than  that  those  who  were  too  forward,  he  kept 
back,  did  not  advance.  To  cut  them  off  would  have  been  a  measure  to  create 
alarm.’— W.  R.  Arrowsmith  (TV.  <5^  Qu.  1st  S.  vii,  p.  566) :  Overrun,  overshoot, 
overslip  are  terms  in  hunting ;  overtop  never. — Halliwell  calls  attention  to  Dryden’s 
Version,  where  the  phrase  is  paraphrased,  ‘  whom  to  advance,  or  lop  for  overtopping.' 
— Staunton  :  In  the  present  day  sportsmen  check  the  speed  of  very  fleet  hounds  by 
tying  a  rope,  called  a  dog-trash,  round  their  necks,  and  letting  them  trail  it  after  them ; 
formerly  they  effected  the  object  by  attaching  to  them  a  weight,  sometimes  called  in 
jest  a  clogdogdo. 

99.  ’em]  Both  Jephson  and  Phillpotts  say  that  this  is  a  remnant  of  Anglo- 

Saxon,  and  stands  for  hem,  the  accusative  of  hi.  But  it  is  to  me  doubtful  if  this  be 
any  more  true  of  Shakespeare’s  language  here,  than  it  is  of  our  own. _ Ed. 

100.  the  key]  Sir  J.  Hawkins  :  This  is  meant  of  a  key  for  tuning  the  harpsi¬ 
chord,  spmnet,  or  virginal.  [This  is  possibly  true,  but  I  think  the  first  and  obvious 
meaning  is  the  same  as  when  we  speak  of  the  ‘  keys  of  office,’  then,  secondly,  by  the 
association  of  ideas,  this  ‘  key  ’  suggested  the  ‘  tune  ’  which  follows.  I  doubt  if  ‘  tune,' 
in  anticipation,  suggested  the  ‘  key.’ — Ed.] 

101.  i’  th  state]  Steevens  justifies  his  omission  of  these  words  by  asking  ‘  what 
hearts,  except  such  as  were  “  i’  th  state,”  could  Alonzo  incline  to  his  purposes  ?’  A 
question  which  Knight  brands  as  of  ‘  a  most  knowing  flippancy.’  By  the  following 
scansion  Abbott,  §  497,  would  make  this  line  an  alexandrine  only  in  appearance: 

‘  Of  offic  |  er,  and  off  |  ice  set  |  all  hearts  |  i’  th’  state.’ 


4CT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


35 

102 


To  what  tune  pleas’d  his  eare,  that  now  he  was 
The  Iuy  which  had  hid  my  princely  Trunck, 

And  fuckt  my  verdure  out  on’t :  Thou  attend’ ft  not  ? 

Mira.  O  good  Sir,  I  doe. 

Prof.  I  pray  thee  marke  me  : 

I  thus  negle6ting  worldly  ends,  all  dedicated 
To  clofenes,  and  the  bettering  of  my  mind 
with  that,  which  but  by  being  fo  retir’d 
Ore-priz’d  all  popular  rate  :  in  my  falfe  brother  i  io 

Awak’d  an  euill  nature,  and  my  truft 
Like  a  good  parent,  did  beget  of  him 
A  falfehood  in  it’s  contrarie,  as  great 
As  my  truft  was,  which  had  indeede  no  limit, 

A  confidence  fans  bound.  He  being  thus  Lorded,  115 


105.  O  good]  Good  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  O,  yes,  good  Cap. 

106.  me  .•]  me  then.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb. 

I...me ]  Transposed  to  follow  line 
104,  Steev. 

107.  dedicated ]  dedicate  Ritson,  Steev. 


Sing.  Ktly. 

109.  that,  which']  that  which.  Pope. 
that,  which,  Cap. 

being fo  retir’d]  being  retired  Ff, 

Rowe. 

1 13.  it's]  F,F3,  Cap.  its  F^. 

1 15.  Lorded]  loaded  Coll.  MS. 


102.  that]  That  is,  *  so  that.’ 

104.  my]  Hudson  reads  the  because  ‘“my”  has  been  probably  repeated  by  mis¬ 
take  from  the  preceding  line.’ 

105.  O]  This  monosyllabic  exclamation  takes  the  place  of  a  whole  foot.  See 
Abbott,  §  482.  Cf.  V,  i,  80. 

1x2.  good  parent]  Johnson  :  Alluding  to  the  observation  that  a  father  above  the 
common  rate  of  men  has  commonly  a  son  below  it.  Heroum  filii  noxcz. 

1 13.  it’s]  W.  A.  Wright:  There  are  ten  instances  in  Shakespeare  of  this  form 
of  the  neuter  possessive  pronoun.  See  line  457  of  this  scene,  and  The  Bible  Word¬ 
book  (Eastwood  and  Wright),  p.  274.  The  earliest  example  there  given  is  from 
Florio’s  Worlde  of  Wordes,  1598.  It  does  not  occur  in  the  Authorized  Version  of 
1 61 1,  and  the  only  passage  in  which  it  appears  in  modem  Bibles  is  Lev.  xxv,  5,  where 
the  original  had  ‘  That  which  groweth  of  it  owne  accord,’  &c. ;  it  own  ’  retained  its 
place  as  late  as  1673,  ‘its  own’  being  substituted  for  the  first  time  in  a  London  edi¬ 
tion  printed  in  that  year. — Note  on  II,  i,  170]. — Abbott,  §  228 :  It  is,  however,  very 

common  in  Florio’s  Montaigne . Perhaps  the  dislike  of  its,  even  in  the  eighteenth 

century,  aided  the  adoption  of  the  French  idiom  lever  la  tlte :  ‘Where  London’s 
column,  pointing  to  the  skies,  Like  a  tall  bully  lifts  the  head  and  lies.’ — Pope,  Moral 
Essays,  iii,  340. — Meiklejohn  :  Milton,  who  died  1674,  does  not  use  the  word. 
[See  II,  i,  170.] 

1 15.  sans]  W.  A.  Wright  :  This  French  preposition  appears  to  have  been  brought 
into  the  language  in  the  fourteenth  century,  and  occurs  in  the  forms  *  saun,’  ‘  sanz,’ 

‘  sauntz,’  ‘  saunz,’  and  ‘  saunce.’  It  may,  perhaps,  have  been  employed  at  first  in  purely 
French  phrases,  such  as  ‘  sans  question,’  Love's  Lab.  L.  V,  i,  91 ;  ‘  sans  compliment,' 


36 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
116 


Not  onely  with  what  my  reuenew  yeelded, 

But  what  my  power  might  els  exa£t.  Like  one 
Who  hauing  into  truth,  by  telling  of  it, 

Made  fuch  a  fynner  of  his  memorie 
To  credite  his  owne  lie,  he  did  beleeue 


117.  exadl.  Like\  exact ;  like  Rowe. 
118,119.  Who... Made"]  Who  loving  an 

untruth ,  and  telling  V  oft  Makes  Han. 

1 1 8.  hauing  into~\  hating  an  Wilson. 
into  truthl\  unto  truth  Warb.  Cap. 

Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh. 
Ktly,  Sta.  Clke,  Jephson,  Hunter,  Rife, 
Wrt,  Rugby,  Morris,  to  untruth  Coll,  ii, 
iii  (MS),  in  untruth  Hoadly  ap.  Hal. 


120 

adding  unto  Duffus  Hardy  ap.  Cam. 
come  into  trust  Herr,  has  against  the 
truth  Orger.  sinn'd  to  truth  Wetherell 
(Athen.  8  Sept.  ’66).  sin  to  truth — H.  D. 
(Ib.  15  Sept. ’66). 

1 18.  telling ]  quelling  Jervis. 

of  it ]  oft  Theob.  conj.  Warb. 
Jephson. 

1x9.  memorie\  memory  as  Anon. 


King  John ,  V,  vi,  16.  But  Shakespeare  uses  it  with  other  words,  as  here  and  in 
Hamlet ,  III,  iv,  79,  ‘  sans  all,’  and  other  passages.  Compare  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii, 
166.  Nares  quotes  instances  from  Ben  Jonson,  Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  Massinger, 
and  others.  So  that  it  appears  to  have  had  an  existence  for  a  time  as  an  English 
word.  Cotgrave  gives  ‘  Sans.  Sanse,  without,  besides  ’ ;  and  Florio  has  ‘  Senza,  sans, 
without,  besides.’ 

1 15.  Lorded]  That  is,  made  a  Lord,  according  to  Abbott,  §  294.  Cf.  ‘the 
azur’d  vault,’  V,  i.  50. 

118-120.  Who  hauing  .  .  .  owne  lie]  Under  date  of  29  May,  1729,  Theobald 
wrote  to  Warburton  (Nichols,  ii,  243)  on  this  passage  :  ‘  Here  you  propose  to  substitute 
— injured  Truth — as  a  cure  for  the  sense.  I  will  tell  you  how  I  have  read  and  con¬ 
ceived  it ;  and  then  submit  it  to  you,  whether  there  needs  any  recourse  to  that  change  : 
“  Who  having  into  Truth,  by  telling ’t  oft,”  &c. — i.  e.  says  Prospero,  My  brother  has 
behaved  so  like  a  common  Liar  that  tells  his  false  stories  so  often  over,  till  he  deceives 
even  his  own  memory,  and  credits  his  own  lie  into  a  truth ;  that  is,  believes  his  own  lie 
to  be  true ;  as  Antonio  acted  the  outward  face  and  deputation  of  power  so  long,  till  he 
began  to  imagine  himself  the  real  duke.’ — [I  cannot  find  that  Warburton  anywhere 
repeated  his  conjecture  of  injured  truth,  but  the  text  of  his  subsequent  edition  comes 
very  near  to  the  reading  which  Theobald  suggested,  and  yet  no  allusion  is  made  to 
Theobald]  :  ‘  Who  having  unto  truth,  by  telling  oft,’  that  is,  Warburton  feels  obliged 
to  paraphrase,  by  often  repeating  the  same  story,  made  his  memory  such  a  sinner  unto 
truth  as  to  give  credit  to  his  own  lie. — Heath  (p.  6)  believes  not  only  that  ‘  the  pas 
sage  is  corrupted,  but  that  a  line,  too,  hath  been  dropped.’ — Steevens  :  There  is,  per¬ 
haps,  no  correlative  to  which  the  word  ‘  it  ’  can  with  grammatical  propriety  belong. 
‘  Lie,’  however,  seems  to  have  been  the  correlative  to  which  the  poet  meant  to  refer, 
however  ungrammatically. — Steevens,  1778,  records  the  following  emendation  by 
Musgrave  :  ‘  Who  having  sinn'd  to  truth,  by  telling  oft  Makes  such  a  sinner  of  his 
memory  too  To,’  &c.- — Malone  :  There  is  a  very  singular  coincidence  between  this 
passage  and  one  in  Bacon’s  Hist,  of  Henry  VII :  ‘  [Perkin  Warbeck]  did  in  all 
things  notably  acquit  himself;  insomuch  as  it  was  generally  believed  that  he  was 
;ndeed  Duke  Richard.  Nay,  himself  with  long  and  continual  counterfeiting,  and 
with  oft  telling  a  lye,  was  turned  by  habit  almost  into  the  thing  he  seemed  to  be ;  and 
from  a  liar  to  be  a  believer.’ — Boswell  :  The  sentence  is  involved,  but  not,  I  think 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


37 


[118.  Who  hauing  into  truth,  by  telling  of  it,] 
ungiammatical :  Who  having  made  his  memory  such  a  sinner  to  truth  as  to  credit  his 
own  he  by  telling  of  it.  [Quoted  by  Dyce  in  his  first  and  second  editions;  in  his 
.  ird  he  quotes  merely  the  following  from]  Arrowsmith  (p.  45)  :  Perhaps  the  ensu¬ 
ing  extracts  will  help  to  facilitate  the  apprehension  of  words  so  joined  as  in — ‘  telling 
of  it  into  truth.’  [Arrowsmith  had  before  said  that  the  comma  after  <  truth  ’  is  super¬ 
fluous,  and  that  the  phrase  really  should  be  as  he  has  just  quoted  it]  :  ‘  Some  feasible 
line  of  frontier  which  may  also  be  discussed  into  familiarity:— The  Titties ,  10  Oct. 

1862.  ‘  Till  he  has  thought  a  distasteful  apprehension  into  an  action  of  murder.' _ 

South,  Semi.  9,  p.  281,  vol.  x,  ed.  1744.  ‘  Yet  vice  can  never  be  praised  into  virtue.' 

Ibid.  Serm.  8,  p.  190,  vol.  viii.  ‘Swears  him  into  name.' — Jonson’s  Time  Vindi¬ 
cated.  ‘By  thanking  thus  the  courtesy  to  life.' — Jonson’s  Underwoods.  ‘  To  tell  a  lie 
into  truth,’  the  language  here  attributed  to  Shakespeare,  is  not  a  whit  more  forced  or 
ungrammatical  than  <  to  discuss  a  frontier  into  familiarity,’  ‘  to  think  an  apprehension 
into  an  action,’  ‘  to  praise  vice  into  virtue,’  *  to  swear  a  youth  into  name,’  or  <  to  thank 
a  courtesy  to  life.’ — Collier  says  of  his  MS  emendation  that  it  seems  ‘  clearly  right, 
requiring  no  sophisticated  explanation.’  But  Lettsom,  in  Blackwood,  Aug.  1853,  ob¬ 
serves,  in  reference  to  it,  that  ‘  if  one  flaw  is  mended,  another  and  a  worse  one  is  made. 
By  reading  to  untruth  we  obtain,  indeed,  a  proper  antecedent  to  “ it,”  which  otherwise 
must  be  looked  for,  awkwardly  enough,  in  the  subsequent  word  « lie.”  But  as  a  set¬ 
off"  against  this  improvement,  we  would  ask,  How  can  a  man  be  said  to  make  his 
memory  a  sinner  to  untruth  ?  This  would  mean,  if  it  meant  anything,  that  the  man’s 
memory  was  true ;  and  this  is  precisely  what  Prospero  says  Antonio’s  memory  was 
not.’  On  the  other  hand,  Staunton  says  that  this  emendation  of  Collier’s  MS  is 
‘ entitled  t0  more  aspect  than  it  has  received.’  Mrs  Kemble  goes  even  further,  and 
asserts  that  it  does  ‘  immense  service  to  the  text  ’  and  ‘  carries  its  own  authority  in  its 
manifest  good  sense.’— Singer  :  Shadwell,  in  his  Preface  to  The  Sullen  Lovers,  has 
the  following  passage,  which  may  serve  to  show  that  the  idea  was  familiar  at  least  to 
him :  ‘  like  men  that  Lye  so  long,  till  they  believe  themselves.’ — John  Hunter 
{Longman's  Series )  :  Through  his  manner  of  stating  it,  that  is,  his  misrepresentation 
of  it.  The  commonly  received  interpretation  of  the  text  here  makes  the  pronoun  ‘  it  ’ 
refer  to  the  noun  ‘  lie,’  and  thus,  as  I  think,  imputes  to  Shakespeare  a  very  gross 
impropriety  of  arrangement.— W.  A.  Wright  :  For  the  construction  ‘  by  telling  of  it  ’ 
compare  Ant.  dr*  Cleop.  II,  i,  8  :  ‘  So  find  we  profit  by  losing  of  our  prayers  ’ ;  where 

‘  losinS  ’  is  a  verbal  noun-  See  Abbott,  §  178 . Bacon  had  the  same  idea  in  his 

mind  when  he  wrote  (. Advancement  of  Learning,  i,  4,  §  8,  p.  34,  ed.  Wright)  ‘he 
that  will  easily  believe  rumours  will  as  easily  augment  rumours,  and  add  somewhat  to 
them  of  his  own ;  which  Tacitus  wisely  noteth,  when  he  saith,  Fingunt  simul  cre- 
duntque  :  so  great  an  affinity  hath  fiction  and  belief.’ — Phillpotts  :  With  the  orig¬ 
inal  reading  ‘  into  truth  ’  may  it  not  be  for  ‘  who  having  by  telling  of  it  credited  his 
own  lie  into  truth,  making  thereby  a  sinner  of  his  memory  ’  ?  The  full  construction 
then  will  be  ‘  Who  made  such  a  sinner  of  his  memory  that  he  credited  his  own  lie 
into  truth  by  telling  of  it.’  The  sentence  would  have  run  :  ‘  Who  having  into  truth, 
by  telling  of  it,  credited  his  own  lie.’  But  the  words  ‘  made  such  a  sinner  of  his 
memory,’  which  should  have  been  parenthetical,  attracted  ‘credited’  into  ‘to  credit’ 
to  suit  themselves.— Bulloch  ( Studies ,  &c.  p.  17) :  The  difficulty  is  in  the  word 
‘  having,’  which  would  appear  to  be  a  portion  of  the  verb  ‘  made,’  but  is  only  a  nomi¬ 
native  similar  to  the  kindred  word  *  telling  ’  in  the  same  line . ‘  Having  ’  is  there¬ 

fore  a  participid  noun,  and  the  preceding  relative  pronoun  should  be  in  the  possessivo 


38 


THE  TEMTEST 


[act  i,  sc.  iL 


[u8.  Who  hauing  into  truth,  by  telling  of  it,] 
case,  as  also  another  possessive  should  precede  ‘  telling,’  and  the  passage  should  run 
thus :  ‘  Whose  having  in  the  truth,  by  his  telling  of  it. — Furnivall  (A7".  Qu.  5th 
S.  vii,  143)  :  The  difficulty  has  arisen  from  not  seeing  that  ‘  having  into,’  like  have 
at,  have  to,  so  often  in  Shakespeare  (see  Schmidt’s  Lex.  i,  519)  means  ‘  cutting,  slash¬ 
ing  into,  attacking  ’  truth,  that  is,  inventing  a  lie.  Compare  our  modem  ‘  have  into 
him  ’ ;  ‘  slip  into  him.’  The  passage  then  reads,  ‘  like  one  who,  inventing  a  lie,  by 
telling  it  repeatedly,  made  himself  believe  it,’  as  George  IV  at  last  persuaded  him¬ 
self  that  he  had  led  a  charge  of  cavalry  at  Waterloo. — R.  M.  Spence  (Ar.  &->  Qu.  5th 
S.  vii,  184,  1877)  :  I  think  I  have  at  last  managed  to  pick  the  lock  of  this  difficult 
passage.  The  seemingly  hopeless  confusion  has,  I  think,  arisen  from  a  wrong  setting 
of  the  types  by  which  the  first  and  second  halves  of  two  lines  have  been  wrongly 
joined  together.  The  arrangement  I  suggest  is  :  *  Who  having  unto  truth  his  mem¬ 
ory  Made  such  a  sinner  of,  by  telling  of  it  To  credit  his  own  lie,’  &c.  By  thus  trans¬ 
posing  the  second  halves  of  lines  118  and  119  and  with  [Warburton’s  change  of 

‘  into  ’  to  unto ]  all  confusion  is  removed. — R.  & - (TV  Qu.  5th  S.  vii,  p.  324, 

1877)  :  I  presume  to  suggest  that  [the  difficulty]  may  be  got  over,  perhaps,  by  changing 
the  phrase  to  loving  an  untruth,  i.  e.  loving  the  ideal  for  the  real ;  the  shadow  for 

the  substance . I  would  read  and  point :  ‘  Who, — loving  an  untruth, — by  telling 

of  it.’ — Hudson  (Robinson’s  Epit.  of  Lit.  Dec.  1878,  p.  195):  The  reading  I  pro¬ 
pose  is :  ‘  Who  having  unto  truth,  by  falsing  it.’  With  this  reading  the  pronoun  ‘  it  ’ 
may  either  refer  to  ‘  truth  ’  or  be  used  absolutely.  The  poet  has  many  like  instances 
of  the  latter  usage,  as,  to  prince  it,  for  to  act  the  prince,  and  to  monster  it,  for  to  be  a 
monster. ....  As  the  verb  to  false  was  passing  out  of  use  before  1623,  it  seems  to  me 
nowise  unlikely  that  false  should  have  got  misprinted  tell.  [Here  follow  many 
instances  of  the  use  of  false  in  the  sense  of  treating  falsely,  to  falsify,  to  forge,  to  lie . 
Hudson  adopted  this  conjecture  in  the  text  of  his  Harvard  Edition.] — Brae  (Robin  ■ 
son’s  Epit.  of  Lit.  Apr.  1879,  P-  57)  :  It  seems  to  have  escaped  the  attention  of  com- 
menters  on  this  passage  that  to  believe  is  not  a  function  of  memory,  but  of  the  judge¬ 
ment;  a  propriety  of  distinction  that  would  not  fail  to  be  recognised  by  Shakespeare. 
....  The  function  of  memory  is  that  of  a  witness ;  and  if,  from  any  cause,  memory 
be  deceptious,  it  may  be  said  to  bear  false  witness  and  so  become  a  sinner.  Hence 
the  verb  to  credit,  attributed  to  memory  in  this  passage,  cannot  have  its  more  usual 
meaning  of  to  believe,  for  that  would  be  to  attrib  tte  to  memory  an  improper  function ; 
but  it  must  have  another  of  its  meanings,  viz  :  to  accredit,  or  give  favourable  charac¬ 
ter  to. — Let  the  whole  image  be  attentively  considered,  and  it  will  be  seen  to  com¬ 
pletely  harmonise  with  this  meaning.  A  lie,  pretending  to  the  character  of  truth, 
being  brought  before  the  judgement  for  examination,  cites  the  memory  as  witness  to 
character ;  and  memory,  misled  by  a  frequent  repetition  of  the  tale,  is  betrayed  into 
the  sin  of  bearing  false  witness,  and  credits  the  lie  into  truth. — This  transition  from 
lie  to  truth  has  its  proper  expression  in  the  preposition  ‘  into,’  and  is  incompatible  with 
Warburton’s  ill-judged  alteration  to  unto.  By  unto  the  idea  of  transmutation  of  one 
character  into  another  is  lost ;  the  meaning  of  believe  is  given  to  ‘  credit  ’ ;  the  action 
which  belongs  to  ‘credit’  is  transferred  to  ‘sinner’;  and  the  object  of  ‘it’  is  ren¬ 
dered  ambiguous.  Thus  a  totally  different  interpretation  is  forced  upon  the  several 
parts,  and  certain  difficulties  of  construction  are  suggested  that  have  no  existence  in 

the  original . The  true  key  to  the  passage  is  to  treat  ‘  credit  ’  as  an  active  vert, 

with  ‘  lie  ’  for  its  object ;  and  with  the  meaning  of  authorise  or  certify  to  character. 
That  such  is  the  function  that  Shakespeare  would  attribute  to  memory  is  strengthened 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


39 


He  was  indeed  the  Duke,  out  o’th’  Subftitution  121 

And  executing  th’outward  face  of  Roialtie 


121.  out  o' th'~\ from  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 


by  another  passage  in  the  same  scene,  where  Miranda  is  trying  to  recall  some  recol¬ 
lection  of  her  infancy :  ‘  ’Tis  far  off  And  rather  like  a  dream  than  an  assurance  That 
my  remembrance  warrants.’  Here  ‘  warrants  ’  is  precisely  the  meaning  that  I  am 
contending 'for  in  ‘  credit.’  But  in  Pericles  [V,  i,  124]  there  is  a  passage  with  a  still 
closer  resemblance . Pericles  cites  his  ‘  senses  ’  (his  sight  and  hearing)  as  wit¬ 

nesses  ‘  to  credit  ’  Marina’s  ‘  relation,’  but  not  into  truth ,  for  it  is  truth  already. — D. 
Morris  ( Collins'  English  Classics)  :  ‘  It  ’  is  interpreted  by  most  to  refer  to  ‘  lie,’  but  by 
understanding  the  before  ‘  telling’  (by  the  telling  of  it),  then  it  may  with  propriety  be 
taken  to  refer  to  ‘  truth,’  so  that  the  phrase  would  mean  ‘  by  his  manner  of  telling  or 
stating  truth.’  ....  The  meaning  probably  is :  ‘  Who  having  made  such  a  sinner  of 
his  memory  against  truth,  by  his  way  of  telling  it,  as  to  credit  his  own  lie.’ — [Two 
conclusions  will  be  forced,  I  think,  upon  any  reader  who  has  read  carefully  the  fore¬ 
going  comments :  First,  that,  however  loud  the  outcry  by  the  critics  against  this 
involved  sentence,  Shakespeare  has  been,  as  usual,  eminently  successful  and  pecu¬ 
liarly  happy  in  conveying  his  precise  meaning  to  one  and  all.  There  is  not  the  small¬ 
est  variation  in  the  universal  apprehension  of  the  essential  meaning  of  Prospero’s 
speech.  Secondly,  if  we  may  judge  Dy  results,  and  by  the  absence  of  unanimity 
among  the  *  emenders,’  Shakespeare’s  own  words,  which  all  understand,  are  vastly  to 
be  preferred  to  any  modification,  which,  however  acceptable  to  him  who  proposes  it, 
appears  to  be  incomprehensible  to  all  others. — Ed.] 

121.  He  .  .  .  substitution]  There  have  been  three  attempts  to  cure  this  malignant 
Alexandrine.  Steevens  and  Walker  tried  surgery;  the  former  excised  ‘indeed’  and 
the  latter  ‘  the.’  If  the  knife  must  be  used,  Steevens’s  operation  is  the  better.  ‘  Omit 
“  indeed,”  ’  he  tells  us,  *  and  throw  the  emphasis  on  “  was.”  ’  It  is  almost  incompre¬ 
hensible  that  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  1),  with  his  sensitive  ear,  should  have  failed  to  per¬ 
ceive  how  false  to  due  emphasis  his  prosaic  line  becomes  by  his  treatment :  ‘  He  was  | 
indeed  |  Duke,  out  |  o’  th’  subs  |  titution.’ — Abbott,  §  501,  gives  the  ailment  another 
name,  and  considers  the  patient  cured.  He  calls  the  line  a  Trimeter  Couplet,  and  at 
once  the  Alexandrine  is  non-existent.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  intrusion  among  heroic 
verses  of  an  Alexandrine,  even  with  its  exact  caesura,  ever  jarred  on  Elizabethan  ears. 
The  elasticity  and  the  flexibility  of  the  heroic  measure,  whereby  every  word  in  the 
English  language  can  be  woven  into  the  line,  which  cannot  be  said  of  any  other 
metre,  were  chief  among  the  elements  which  made  it  the  great  metre  of  the  drama. 
As  a  part  of  that  elasticity,  an  incorrigible,  rhythmical  Alexandrine  was,  I  think,  con¬ 
sidered  perfectly  legitimate.  It  is,  perhaps,  necessary  merely  to  call  attention  to  cer¬ 
tain  words  in  the  next  line,  one  of  which  Abbott,  §  462,  would  pronounce  th'  out¬ 
ward,  and  another,  which  both  Walker  (  Vers.  120)  and  Abbott,  §  458,  would  pro¬ 
nounce  roy'lty. — After  all,  this  whole  question  of  Alexandrines  seems  to  resolve  itself 
into  a  question  of  preference.  Evidently  there  are  some  ears,  and  musical  ears  too, 
which,  as  long  as  a  line  can  be  recited  with  five  accents  in  it,  and  only  five,  are  toler¬ 
ant  of  contractions  and  absorptions,  of  ‘  burrs  ’  and  ‘  slurs.’  As  the  object  of  art  is 
to  give  pleasure,  all  must  be  allowed  to  pronounce  these  lines  as  it  pleases  them  best. 
In  future,  however,  the  reader  will  be  referred  merely  to  the  paragraphs  on  scanning 
in  Abbott  and  Walker. — Ed. 


40 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
123 


With  all  prerogatiue  :  hence  his  Ambition  growing : 

Do’ftthou  heare? 

Mira.  Your  tale,  Sir,  would  cure  deafeneffe.  125 

Prof.  To  haue  no  Schreene  between  this  part  he  plaid, 

And  him  he  plaid  it  for,  he  needes  will  be 

Abfolute  Millaine ,  Me  (poore  man)  my  Librarie 

Was  Dukedome  large  enough  :  of  temporall  roalties 

He  thinks  me  now  incapable.  Confederates  1 30 


123.  his~\  is  Fz. 

123, 124.  growing... heare  ?]  One  line, 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Wh. 

124.  Do'flthoii\  Dost  Steev.  Var. 
heare  /]  hear ,  child ?  Han.  hear , 

girl  ?  Cap. 


128.  Millaine]  Millanie  in  Capell’s  F, 
ap.  Cam.  Ed. 

129.  enough  .•]  enough  for;  Ktly. 
roalties ]  roialties  Ff.  realties 

Wilson. 


123.  Abbott,  §  497. 

124.  Abbott,  §  511. 

126,  127.  To  haue,  &c.]  Capell:  That  is,  that  there  might  be  no  further  call  for 
his  appearing  an  actor,  and  so  continuing  the  imposition  upon  me  whom  he  person¬ 
ated,  which  was  open  to  all  besides,  ‘  he  needs  will,’  &c. — Daniel  (p.  xo) :  In  line 
127  read,  ‘And  them  he  play’d  it  for.’  Prospero  was  the  screen  behind  which  the 
tiaitorous  Antonio  governed  the  people  of  Milan;  and  to  remove  this  screen  from 
between  himself  and  them  he  conspired  his  brother’s  overthrow. — Hudson  pro¬ 
nounced  this  emendation  eminently  judicious,  and,  remarking  that  he  ‘  never  could 
make  any  sense  out  of  the  old  text,’  adopted  it  in  his  own.  I  cannot  agree  with 
either  Capell  or  Daniel  or  Hudson.  The  meaning  is  to  me  clear  that  Antonio  would 
no  longer  have  the  outward  face  of  royalty,  no  not  so  much  as  a  screen  between  him 
and  royalty  itself,  between  the  shadow  and  the  substance,  the  role  of  duke  and  the 
duke  himself. — Deighton  has  anticipated  me  in  paraphrasing  it,  ‘  that  there  might  be 
nothing  between  the  part  assumed  and  the  reality,  he  was  determined  to  become 
Duke  without  any  restrictions.’ — Ed. 

128,  129.  Jephson  :  These  lines  are  utterly  irregular;  the  rhythm  appears  to  me 
to  run  thus :  ‘Absolute  |  Milan.  |  For  me  |  poor  man,  |  my  li  |  brary  |  Was  duke  | 
dom  large  |  enough  |  of  tem  |  poral  roy  |  aides.’  But  then  there  are  two  redundant 
syllables  at  the  end  of  each  line ;  the  lines  are  too  long  by  a  foot. 

128,  129.  Me  .  .  .  enough]  Malone:  That  is,  large  enough  for.  [Under  Cym- 
beline,  V,  v,  464 :  ‘  Whom  heavens  ....  Have  laid  most  heavy  hand,’  Malone  col¬ 
lected  five  or  six  similar  examples  of  the  omission  of  prepositions,  but  this  number  can 
be  increased  tenfold  by  referring  to  Abbott,  §§  198-202.  That  there  is,  however,  no 
need  of  resorting  to  any  such  explanation  here,  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p.  11)  shows 
by  proposing  the  following  punctuation :  ‘  Me — “ poor  man  !  my  library  Was  dukedom 
large  enough  ” — of  temporal  royalties  He  thinks  me  now  incapable.’  ‘  Me  ’  requires 
no  as  for  understood,  but,  after  having  been  dropt  by  an  anacoluthon,  it  is  taken  up 
again  in  ‘  He  thinks  me  ’ ;  the  words  in  italics  do  not  express  Prospero’s  own  opinion 
about  himself,  and  are  not  his,  but  his  brother’s.  Antonio  calls  him  ‘  poor  man,’  &c. 
because  he  thinks  him  (as  Prospero  explains)  incapable  if  temporal  rule.  To  me  this 
arrangement  carries  conviction. — Ed.] 


ACT  x,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


41 


(fo  drie  he  was  for  Sway)  with  King  of  Naples  131 

To  giue  him  Annuall  tribute,  doe  him  homage 
Subiedl  his  Coronet,  to  his  Crowne  and  bend 
The  Dukedom  yet  vnbow’d  (alas  poore  Millaine) 

To  moft  ignoble  {looping.  135 

Mira.  Oh  the  heauens  : 

Prof.  Marke  his  condition,  and  th’euent,  then  tell  me 
If  this  might  be  a  brother. 

Mira.  I  fhould  finne 

To  thinke  but  Noblie  of  my  Grand-mother,  140 

Good  wombes  haue  borne  bad  fonnes. 

Pro.  Now  the  Condition. 

This  King  of  Naples  being  an  Enemy  143 


13 1,  drie ]  ripe  Wilson. 

with]  Ff.  wi'thl  Rowe  +  ,Wh. 
Rife.  wV  the  Cap.  Cam.  Glo.  Wr.  with 
the  Steev.  et  cet. 

135.  moft]  much  Ff,Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Sing. 

137.  his]  the  Han. 

th’euent]  the  event  Steev.  Var. 


Sing.  Dyce. 

140.  but]  not  Pope,  Han. 

141,  142.  As  one  line,  given  to  Pros- 
pero.  Theob.  conj.  Han.  Huds. 

141.  borne]  bore  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

142.  the  Condition]  his  conduct  Gould. 

143.  This]  On  which  this  Wheler  MS 
ap.  Hal. 


130.  Confederates]  W.  A.  Wright  :  This  appears  to  be  generally  employed  in  a 
bad  sense.  So  in  Henry  VIII :  I,  ii,  3,  ‘  confederacy  ’  is  equivalent  to  plot ,  con¬ 
spiracy. 

131.  drie]  Steevens:  That  is,  so  thirsty.  Thus  in  Tro.  and  Cress.  II,  iii,  234, 

•  his  ambition  is  dry.’ — W.  A.  Wright  :  Still  common  in  provincial  English.  See  1 
Hen.  IV:  I,  iii,  31,  ‘When  I  was  dry  with  rage.’  [To  be  dry  with  or  from  any¬ 
thing  is  common  enough  in  this  country,  and  is  expressive,  but  to  be  dry  for  a  thing 
is,  I  imagine,  never  heard,  and  the  present  is  the  only  instance,  according  to  Schmidt, 
of  its  use  by  Shakespeare.  If  this  be  so,  neither  of  the  foregoing  examples  is  exactly 
parallel. — Ed.] 

131.  with  King]  See  I,  i,  74;  Dyce  remarks  that  here  most  probably  the  MS 
had  the  same  mark  of  elision  [as  in  the  line  referred  to],  to  which  the  printer  did 
not  attend.  Perhaps  Shakespeare  meant  us  to  pronounce  the  words  as  Rowe  has 
printed  them. 

138.  might]  For  examples  of  this  use,  instead  of  could,  see  Abbott,  §  312. 

140.  but  Noblie]  Steevens:  That  is,  otherwise  than. — See  Abbott,  §  124. — 
Phillpotts  :  Here  ‘  but  ’  means  except.  So  ‘  but  gif’  is  Scotch  for  unless  ;  and  ‘  he 
is  but  a  poor  creature  ’  comes  from  ‘  He  ri  is  but’  i.  e. *  *  he  is  nothing  but.’  ‘  But  ’ 
originally  is  be-out  (by-  or  at-out),  like  ‘  with-out’ ;  as  in  Scotch,  ‘  Touch  not  the  cat 
but  [without]  a  glove.’  Secondly,  ‘  But  ’  has  also  superseded  the  A.  S.  ‘  ac,’  Lat. 
‘  at,’  Greek  aXhb..  ‘  N’  is  this  mssden  dead,  ac  heo  slrepd  ’  means  ‘  This  maiden  is 
not  dead,  but  she  sleepeth.’  Hence  the  modem  use,  ‘  Why  you  won’t  fight  him,  will 
you.  Bob?’  ‘  Egad,  but  I  will,  Jack.-  Hence,  thirdly,  ‘  but  ’  comes  to  be  equivalent 
to  French  mais,  Lat.  magi r,  ‘rather.’ 


42 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i.  sc.  ii 


To  me  inueterate,  heat  kens  my  Brothers  fuit, 

Which  was,  That  he  in  lieu  o’th’  premifes,  145 

Of  homage,  and  I  know  not  how  much  Tribute, 

Should  prefently  extirpate  me  and  mine 

Out  of  the  Dukedome,  and  confer  faire  Millaine 

With  all  the  Honors,  on  my  brother :  Whereon 

A  treacherous  Armie  leuied,  one  mid-night  150 

Fated  to  th’  purpofe,  did  Anthonio  open 

The  gates  of  Millaine ,  and  ith’  dead  of  darkoneffe 

The  minifters  for  th’  purpofe  hurried  thence 

Me,  and  thy  crying  felfe. 

Mir.  Alack,  for  pitty  :  155 

I  not  remembring  how  I  cride  out  then 


144.  hearkens ]  hears  Pope,  Han. 
hearks  Theob. 

145.  lieu  o'th'  premifes]  view  o'  the 
promises  Wilson. 

149.  Whereon]  Whereupon  Wheler 
MS  ap.  Hal. 


151.  purpose] practice  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

153-  minijlers ]  Minister  Rowe,  Pope. 
156.  out]  on’t  Theob.  (ed.  ii),  Cap. 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  it  Lettsom.  o’er  7 
Kinnear. 


144.  hearkens]  To  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  1)  the  pause  seemed  too  slight  to  admit  of 
the  extra  syllable,  and  he  suggested  harks  or  hearks,  not  knowing  that  he  had  been 
anticipated  by  Theobald.  Abbott,  §  495,  supposes  that  the  extra  syllables  are  in 
‘  inveterate  at  the  end  of  the  third  foot :  ‘  To  me  |  inveterate,  |  hearkens  |  my  broth  | 
er’s  suit.’ 

I4S> *  *46.  in  lieu  .  .  .  homage]  M.  Mason  :  ‘  In  lieu  ’  means  here  in  considera¬ 
tion  of. — Knight  deserts  the  punctuation  of  F,,  as  does  also  Staunton,  and  reads 

•  in  lieu  o’  the  premises  of  homage,’  wherein  I  can  see  no  advantage.  The  ‘  prem¬ 
ises  ’  probably  included  other  particulars  beside  homage  and  tribute.  For  a  striking 
instance  of  ‘  in  lieu,’  signifying  in  consideration  of,  where  this  present  line  is  cited, 
see  notes  on  Mer.  of  Ven.  V,  i,  286 :  <  In  lieu  of  this  last  night  did  lie,’  &c.— Ed. 

149.  Thus  scan,  according  to  Abbott,  §  454 :  ‘  With  all  |  my  (sic)  hon  |  ours  on  | 
my  brother :  |  whereon.  An  extra  syllable  is  frequently  added  before  a  pause,  espe¬ 
cially  at  the  end  of  a  line ;  but  also  at  the  end  of  the  second  foot ;  and,  less  fre¬ 
quently,  at  the  end  of  the  third  foot,  and,  rarely,  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  foot  [as 
here],  but  see  line  167,  post :  ‘  So  dear  |  the  love  |  my  peo  |  pie  bore  me ;  |  nor  set.’ 

ISI-  purpose]  Collier  s  MS  and  his  text  (ed.  ii)  read  practice,  meaning  ‘  con¬ 
trivance  or  conspiracy,’  ‘and  we  have,’  says  Collier,  purpose,”  in  its  proper  sense, 
only  two  lines  below.  We  may  be  pretty  sure  that  Shakespeare  would  not  have  used' 
the  same  word  in  both  places.’— Staunton  pronounces  this  change  an  improvement 
as  does  also  Mrs  Kemble,  and  Dyce  (ed.  ii)  adopted  it  in  his  text. 

154.  thy  crying  self]  Coleridge  (Seven  Lectures,  p.  116) :  The  power  of  poetry 
is,  by  a  single  word  perhaps,  to  instil  that  energy  into  the  mind,  which  compels  tha 
imagination  to  produce  the  picture.  Here  by  introducing  a  single  happy  epithet 
‘  cr>'ing>’  a  complete  picture  is  presented  to  the  mind,  and  in  the  production  of  such 
pictures  the  power  of  genius  consists. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


43 

157 


Will  cry  it  ore  againe  :  it  is  a  hint 
That  wrings  mine  eyes  too’t. 

Pro.  Heare  a  little  further, 

And  then  I’le  bring  thee  to  the  prefent  bufineffe  160 

Which  now’s  vpon’s :  without  the  which,  this  Story 
Were  moft  impertinent. 

Mir.  Wherefore  did  they  not 
That  howre  deflroy  vs  ? 

Pro.  Well  demanded,  wench  :  165 

My  Tale  prouokes  that  queflion :  Deare,  they  durft  not, 

So  deare  the  loue  my  people  bore  me :  nor  fet 
A  marke  fo  bloudy  on  the  bufineffe ;  but 
With  colours  fairer,  painted  their  foule  ends. 

In  few,  they  hurried  vs  a-boord  a  Barke,  1 70 

157.  hint']  hent  Coll.  conj.  163.  Wherefore]  Why  Pope  +  . 

158.  too't]  Om.  Farmer,  Steev.’93.  166.  Deare]  Om.  Han. 

161.  vpon's]  upon  us  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  167.  bore  me]  bore  Pope. 

Var.  Knt,  Hal.  Sing.  Ktly,  Sta. 

157 .  cry  it]  W.  A.  Wright:  That  is,  either  ‘will  cry  my  crying,’  in  which  case 

*  it  ’  refers  to  the  previous  line ;  or  it  may  he  that  ‘  it  ’  is  here  used  indefinitely,  as  in 
line  445  :  ‘  Foote  it  featly.’  Cf.  Lear,  IV,  i,  55,  ‘  I  cannot  daub  it  further.’  The 
usage  still  remains  in  such  phrases  as  ‘  to  fight  it  out.’  [Cf.  Pope’s  ‘  Whether  the  fair 
one  sinner  it  or  saint  it.’] 

157.  hint]  Steevens  and  Dyce:  That  is,  suggestion.  See  II,  i,  6. — W.  A. 
Wright  :  Subject,  theme. 

158.  too’t]  W.  A.  Wright:  That  is,  to  do  it,  referring  to  the  crying  of  the  pre¬ 
vious  line. 

161.  the  which]  Abbott,  §  270:  The  question  may  arise  why  the  is  attached  to 
which  and  not  to  who.  (The  instance  of  ‘the  whom  ’  in  Wint.  Tale,  IV,  iv,  539,  is, 
perhaps,  unique  in  Shakespeare.)  The  answer  is  that  who  is  considered  definite 
already,  and  stands  for  a  noun,  while  which  is  considered  an  indefinite  adjective ; 
just  as  in  French  we  have  ‘  /cquel,’  and  not  ‘  /<?qui.’ 

1 61.  now’s  vpon’s]  Collier  calls  attention  here  to  the  fact  that  The  Tempest  is 
printed  with  unusual  accuracy  in  regard  to  contractions. 

162.  impertinent]  In  its  original,  Latin  meaning. 

165.  demanded]  W.  A.  Wright:  ‘Demand,’  like  the  French  demander,  was 
formerly  used  for  to  ask,  simply  without  the  idea  which  now  attaches  to  it  of  asking 
with  authority  or  as  a  right. 

167.  deare]  Staunton  ( Athen .  16  Nov.  1872):  There  is  nothing  essentially 
wrong  in  this,  but  I  have  a  strong  impression  that  Shakespeare  wrote  ‘  they  durst  not 
so  dare  the  love,’  &c.  Connect  what  follows — ‘  nor  set  A  mark,’  &c. 

167.  me]  See  line  149,  above. 

167.  nor]  W.  A.  Wright:  This  word  might  be  omitted  with  advantage  to  th* * 
metre  and  without  injuring  the  sense.  [Hudson  followed  this  suggestion.] 

168.  but]  See  line  14,  above. 


44 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Bore  vs  fome  Leagues  to  Sea,  where  they  prepared  \y  i 

A  rotten  carkaffe  of  a  Butt,  not  rigg’d, 

172.  Butt~\  F2F3>  Knt,  Coll,  i,  Wrt,  D.  Morris,  Cam.  iii.  But  F4<  boat  Rowe  et 

cet.  hulk  Kinnear. 


170.  In  few]  Staunton:  To  be  brief;  in  a  few  words. — For  other  adjectives 
used  as  nouns,  see  Abbott,  §  5. 

172.  carkasse]  Rushton  (Al  III.  by  Old  Authors,  i:,  58)  cites  the  ‘carkasse  of 
a  ship,’  from  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  i,  4. 

172.  Butt]  Knight:  It  is  clear  we  are  not  justified  in  adopting  the  modern  sub¬ 
stitution  of  boat.  Whether  the  idea  of  a  wine-butt  was  literally  meant  to  be  conveyed 
may  be  questionable ;  but  the  word,  as  it  stands  in  the  original,  gives  us  the  notion  of 
a  vessel  even  more  insecure  than  the  most  rotten  boat. — Hunter  (i,  159) :  I  think 
boat  would  not  have  been  mistaken  by  a  compositor  for  ‘  butt,’  or  that  such  an  error 
(if  error)  could  by  possibility  have  escaped  the  eye  of  the  corrector  of  the  press,  01 
if  it  passed  in  the  First  Folio,  would  have  remained  uncorrected  in  the  Second.  At 
the  same  time  the  expression  ‘  the  very  rats  instinctively  had  quit  it,’  suits  better  with 
a  boat  than  with  a  butt.  It  is  also  evident  that  no  butt  we  can  conceive  of  would 
have  received  and  floated  such  a  freight ;  but  then  we  are  on  a  tale  of  enchantment, 
not  one  of  actual  fact,  and  it  is  perhaps  as  difficult  to  conceive  of  a  boat  receiving 
such  a  freight  and  ‘  without  tackle,  sail,  or  mast  ’  conveying  those  who  are  committed 
to  it  from  the  Italian  coast  to  near  the  coast  of  Africa.  I  have  no  doubt  that  when 
the  story  is  found  on  which  Shakespeare  wrought  in  this  play,  we  shall  find  there  a 
justification  of  this  hard  reading.— Dyce  {Remarks,  3),  after  ridiculing  Knight  and 
Collier  for  retaining  ‘  butt,’  adds  :  ‘  Surely  the  context  alone  is  sufficient  to  stave  the 
“  butt  ”  ;  “  not  rigg’d,  Nor  tackle,  sail,  nor  mast.”  (If  the  vessel  in  question  had  really 
been  a  butt,  would  Prospero  have  complained  of  such  deficiencies  ? — deficiencies 
which  no  human  ingenuity  could  have  supplied.)  “  The  very  rats  instinctively  had 
quit  it.”  (Do  these  animals  live  in  butts? — The  rats  “instinctively”  had  left  the 
boat ,  they  knew  by  instinct  that  it  was  likely  to  go  to  pieces.)’ — Br.  Nicholson 
(A^.  &>  Qu.  3d  S.  v,  226)  :  The  question  is  whether  this  is  a  misprint,  or  an  unknown 
nautical  term.  For  my  own  part,  I  had  long  held  the  latter  opinion,  and  for  this 
reason,  that  we  find  Othello  saying :  ‘  here  is  my  butt  And  very  sea-mark  of  my 
utmost  sail.’  Now  there  is  no  reason  of  circumstance  why  Othello,  the  soldier,  should 
use,  or  go  off  into,  a  sea-simile,  unless  this,  that  the  sound  of  the  word  ‘  butt,’  by  the 
laws  of  association,  brought  vaguely  before  his  mind  (that  is  to  Shakespeare’s  fruitful 
and  versatile  imagination)  the  idea  of  the  sea,  and  so  led  him  to  speak  no  longer  of 

a  land  butt,  but  of  a  sea  beacon . My  only  doubt  was  whether  the  word  was  an 

English  sea-term,  or  one  borrowed  by  Shakespeare  from  the  Italian  original,  and  used 
as  other  words  are  used  in  other  plays,  to  give  a  local  colouring  to  the  tale.  It  may 
yet  be  found  to  have  been  English,  but  at  present  I  have  found  it  only  in  Italian. 
[From  Vauzon’s  Diz.  Univ.  d.  L.  Italiana  it  appears  that  Botto  is  ‘  a  kind  of  galliot, 
Dutch  or  Flemish,’  and]  that  a  Dutch  galliot  (s.  v.  Gale-a-otta )  is  in  rig  similar  to 
the  old  Welsh  sloops ;  and  as  to  the  shape  of  the  hull,  it  has  very  rounded  ribs,  very 
little  run,  and  flattish  bottom,  the  ribs  joining  the  keel  almost  horizontally,  a  sort  of 
tub  of  a  thing.  There  being,  therefore,  in  the  Italian  harbour,  or  possibly  lying  on 
the  beach,  some  old  rotten  hulk  of  this  kind,  too  rotten  to  be  taken  home,  or  to  be 
even  worth  the  trouble  of  breaking  up,  the  nobleman  in  charge  of  Prospero  was 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


45 


i8o 


Nor  tackle,  fayle,  nor  mart,  the  very  rats  173 

Inftin6tiuely  haue  quit  it :  There  they  hoyft  vs 
To  cry  to  th’  Sea,  that  roard  to  vs  ;  to  figh  1 75 

To  th’  windes,  whofe  pitty  fighing  backe  againe 
Did  vs  but  louing  wrong. 

Mir.  Alack,  what  trouble 
Was  I  then  to  you  ? 

Pro.  O,  a  Cherubin 

Thou  was’t  that  did  preferue  me ;  Thou  didft  fmile 
Infufed  with  a  fortitude  from  heauen, 

When  I  haue  deck’d  the  fea  with  drops  full  fait,  1 


173.  /«y&]  nor  fayle  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Cap. 

174.  hauc~\  had  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  Glo.  Ktly, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Wh.  ii. 

176.  To  th’]  To  Pope,  Han. 


180.  Cherubin]  Cherubini  F4,  Rowe  + 
Steev.  Mai.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 

183.  deck'd  the  fea]  lack'd.  The  sea, 
Wilson. 

deck'd ]  brack'd  Han.  mock'd 
Warb.  dew'd  Rann  conj.  degfd  Huds. 


ordered  to  take  it  in  tow,  into  mid-sea,  and  well  out  of  sight  of  land,  and  then  turn 
it  adrift  with  Prospero  in  it. — W.  A.  Wright  :  No  other  instance  is  known  of  ‘  butt  ’ 
in  this  sense,  although  buss,  which  has  been  conjectured,  is  still  used  at  Yarmouth  for 
a  herring-boat,  and  the  A.  S.  butse  carlas,  sailors,  is  found  in  the  Saxon  Chronicle, 
anno  1066.  Catch  (compare  ketch  or  keech,  a  tub)  was  the  name  of  a  small  vessel. 
[A  noteworthy  instance  of  the  impropriety  of  meddling  with  Shakespeare’s  text,  or 
of  attempting  to  adjust  Shakespeare’s  knowledge  to  our  ignorance.  Unquestionably, 
‘  butt,’  albeit  now  lost  to  us,  is  the  true  word.  Nicholson’s  note  tends  singularly  to 
confirm  Hunter’s  prophecy. — Ed.] 

174.  haue]  Dyce  (ed.  i)  :  Our  old  writers  sometimes  use  have  where  we  should 
use  had. — Halliwell  (p.  18)  :  This  is  altered  very  indistinctly  but  apparently  to 
had  in  a  copy  of  Fx,  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  Earl  of  Inchiquin,  and  is  cor¬ 
rected  in  a  nearly  coeval  hand. — W.  A.  Wright  :  For  a  similar  change  from  the 
past  to  the  present  in  a  description,  see  line  238  of  this  scene,  and  Wint.  Tale,  V, 
ii,  83. 

174.  quit  .  .  .  hoyst]  See  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  324)  for  forms  of  past  tenses  and 
participles,  from  verbs  ending  in  t  and  also  (though  less  numerous)  in  d,  where  the 
present  remains  unaltered.  Or  Abbott,  §§341,  342-  Or  lines  38,  246  of  this 
scene. 

175.  cry  .  .  .  roard]  Steevens:  Compare  Wint.  Tale,  III,  iii,  100:  ‘How  the 
poor  souls  roared,  and  the  sea  mocked  them.’ 

180.  Cherubin]  As  this  word  was  probably  adopted  from  the  French  or  the  Italian, 
it  is  mere  accident  that  it  is  the  Chaldee  plural,  and  not  the  Hebrew,  Cherubim. — Ed. 

183.  deck’d]  Warburton  :  I  imagine  that  Shakespeare  wrote  mock'd,  i.  e.  lent 
the  sea  this  trifling  addition  of  salt-water.  For  when  anything  is  given  or  added,  the 
effect  of  which  is  not  felt  or  perceived,  it  was  in  the  language  of  that  time  properly 
called  mocking— Heath  (p.  7)  :  The  word  may  signify  to  cover,  tegere,  in  which 
sense  the  Anglosaxons  used  it.  See  Lye’s  Etymologicon.  Thus  the  earth  if  said 


46 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Vnder  my  burthen  groan’d,  which  raif’d  in  me 
An  vndergoing  ftomacke,  to  beare  vp 
Againft  what  fhould  enfue. 


185 


Mir.  How  came  we  a  fhore  ? 


187 


184.  Vnder]  And  at  Orger. 


to  be  decked  with  flowers,  that  is,  either  adorned  or  covered  with  them.  If  any 
alteration  in  this  place  is  necessary,  I  think  it  should  be  in  favour  of  the  con¬ 
struction,  which  may  be  easily  re-established  by  a  very  small  change,  thus :  ‘  When  I, 
•who  deck’d,’  &c. — Holt  (p.  24) :  That  is,  adorned  the  sea  with  the  trophies  of 
human  weakness,  Tears. — Johnson:  ‘To  deck  the  sea,’  if  explained  ‘to  honour, 
adorn,  or  dignify,’  is  indeed  ridiculous,  but  the  original  import  of  the  verb  deck  is  to 
cover ;  in  some  parts  they  yet  say  deck  the  table.  This  sense  may  be  borne,  but  per¬ 
haps  the  poet  wrote  fleck'd,  which  I  think  is  still  used,  in  rustic  language,  of  drops  fall¬ 
ing  upon  water. — Thomas  White  (ap.  Fennell,  p.  14) :  I  have  not  the  least  doubt 
Shakespeare  wrote,  ‘  When  I  have  eik'd  the  sea,’  &c,  i.  e.  increased  the  sea.  This 
emendation  was  proposed  many  years  ago  (I  think)  in  The  Monthly  Review,  though 
I  am  not  the  author  of  it.  [Hereupon  follow  many  examples  of  the  augmenting  of 
the  sea,  or  rivers,  or  brooks  with  tears.] — Malone  :  To  deck,  I  am  told,  signifies,  in 
the  North,  to  sprinkle.  See  Ray’s  Diet,  of  North  CountTy  Words,  in  verb,  to  deg  and 
to  deck ;  and  his  Diet,  of  South  Country  Words  in  verb,  dag ;  the  latter  signifies  dew 
upon  the  grass, — hence  daggle-tailed.  In  Cole’s  Latin  Diet.  1679,  we  find :  ‘  To  dag, 
collutulo,  irroro.’ — Reed  :  A  correspondent,  who  signs  himself  Eboracensis,  proposes 
that  this  contested  word  should  be  printed  degg’d,  which,  he  says,  signifies  sprinkled, 
and  is  in  daily  use  in  the  North  of  England.  The  sprinkling  of  clothes  before  iron¬ 
ing  them  is  by  the  maidens  universally  called  degging. — Knight  :  In  the  Glossary 
of  the  Craven  Dialect  we  find  that  to  deg  is  to  sprinkle.  We  cannot  certainly  receive 
‘  deck’d  ’  in  the  usual  sense  of  adorned.  Its  other  meaning  of  covered  still  gives  us  a 
forced  idea. — Collier,  Staunton,  Dyce,  White  all  agree  that,  if  it  be  not  a  cor¬ 
ruption  of  the  old  Provincialism  degged,  it  means  the  same  :  sprinkled. — Bailey  (ii, 
156)  says  that  the  process  of  sprinkling  clothes  before  ironing  them  was,  in  his  child¬ 
hood,  termed  lecking,  and  that  ‘in  The  Dialect  of  Leeds,  recently  published,  leek  is 
defined  “  to  sprinkle  water,”  and  leeks  as  equivalent  to  “  droppings.”  ’  He  therefore 
proposes  to  read  in  the  present  line  leck'd. — W.  A.  Wright:  In  Carr’s  Glossary  of 
Craven  it  is  said,  ‘  to  deg  clothes  is  to  sprinkle  them  with  water  previous  to  ironing.’ 
On  this  Professor  Sedgwick  noted,  ‘  To  make  damp  is  the  meaning.’  In  Atkinson’s 
Glossary  of  the  Cleveland  Dialect,  ‘  dagg  ’  or  ‘  degg  ’  is  explained,  ‘  to  sprinkle  with 
water,  to  drizzle,’  and  ‘  flagged,’  ‘  wet,  bedaggled.’  In  Brockett’s  Glossary  of  North 
Country  Words,  we  find :  ‘  Dag,  to  drizzle  ’ ;  ‘  Dag,  a  drizzling  rain,  dew  upon  the 
grass  ’ ;  and  ‘  Daggy,  damp,  wet.’  The  three  forms,  ‘  deck,’  ‘  deg,’  and  ‘  dag,’  are  no 
doubt  connected  with  the  Icelandic  deigr,  ‘  damp,  wet.’ 

185.  stomacke]  Dyce:  Stubborn  resolution,  courage.  The  present  phrase  sig¬ 
nifies  an  enduring  stubbornness. — W.  A.  Wright:  Cf.  2  Place.  vii,  21 :  ‘stirring  up 
her  womanish  thoughts  with  a  manly  stomach.’  In  the  sense  of  ‘  pride  ’  it  occurs  in 
the  Prayer-book  Version  of  Psalm  ci,  7,  and  in  Hen.  VIII :  IV,  ii,  34. 

187.  we  a  shore]  Abbott,  §  462 :  Syllables  ending  in  vowels  are  also  frequently 
elided  before  vowels  in  reading,  though  not  in  writing.  Thus :  ‘  Against  I  what 
ihould  |  ensue  |  How  came  |  we  a-shore?’ 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


47 

Pro.  By  prouidence  diuine,  1 88 

Some  food,  we  had,  and  fome  frefh  water,  that 
A  noble  Neapolitan  Gonzalo  190 

Out  of  his  Charity,  (who  being  then  appointed 
Matter  of  this  defigne)  did  giue  vs,  with 
Rich  garments,  linnens,  fluffs,  and  neceffaries 
Which  fince  haue  fteeded  much,  fo  of  his  gentlenefle 
Knowing'  I  lou’d  my  bookes,  he  furnifhd  me  195 

From  mine  owne  Library,  with  volumes,  that 
I  prize  aboue  my  Dukedome. 

Mir.  Would  I  might 
But  euer  fee  that  man. 

Pro.  Now  I  arife, 

188.  diuine, ]  Ff,  Knt,  Sing,  divine ; 

Rowe,  divine.  Pope  et  cet. 

190.  Neopolitan]  F2. 

191.  -who ]  Om.  Pope  +  ,  Glo.  Ktly, 

Wh.  ii.  he  Cap. 

194.  much,fo\  much.  So  Rowe. 

gentlenejfe\  gentlejfe  Anon.  ap. 

Meiklejohn. 


200 

196.  mine ]  my  Pope  +  ,  Steev.  Mai. 
Var.  Coll. 

200.  I  arife~\  Ariel Theob.  conj.  (Nich. 
III.  ii,  246).  I  may  rise  Bailey,  (given 
to  Mir.)  P.  rises  (stage  direct.)  Cartwright. 
I  arrive  Herr. 

[Puts  on  his  Robe.  Coll.  (MS). 
Resumes  his  robe.  Dyce.  Aside  to  Ariel 
above.  Sta. 


188.  diuine,]  Knight  objects,  and  properly,  I  think,  to  the  period  which  is 
almost  universally  put  after  this  word.  ‘  Prospero’s  entire  narrative  is  the  answer  ’  to 
Miranda’s  question.  Keightley  omits  even  the  comma,  which  is,  perhaps,  best  of 
all.— Ed. 

191.  who]  W.  A.  Wright:  This  reading,  although  it  makes  the  construction 
confused,  is  most  likely  the  true  one.  Such  careless  constructions  are  not  unusual  in 
Shakespeare.  By  substituting  was  for  ‘  being  ’  the  clause  may  be  read  parenthetically, 
as  it  is  in  the  Folios. 

194.  gentleness]  Walker  (  Ver.  p.  272)  observes  that  the  trisyllabic  termination 
of  a  line,  which  is  so  frequent  in  the  dramatists  of  a  later  age,  occurs  very  seldom 
indeed  in  Shakespeare.  Consequently,  he  believes  (  Vers.  p.  191)  that  “  gentleness  ’ 
here,  like  gentlemen  elsewhere,  is  pronounced  as  a  dissyllable.  [After  all,  these  devices 
to  reduce  the  foot  to  its  metrical  size  by  contractions  and  by  elisions  recall  the  attempts 
of  the  elder  sister  to  squeeze  her  foot  into  Cinderella’s  slipper;  the  mutilation  of  her 
foot  was  as  painful  as  it  was  in  vain. — Ed.] 

199.  But  euer]  Abbott,  §  39 :  ‘  Ever,’  in  this  passage,  seems  contrary  to  modem 
usage.  ‘  But,’  however,  implies  a  kind  of  negative,  and  *  ever  ’  means  at  any  time. 

200.  I  arise]  Warburton  :  That  is,  Now  I  come  to  the  principal  part  of  my 
story,  for  the  sake  of  which  I  told  the  foregoing. — Heath  (p.  7)  :  Warburton’s  inter¬ 
pretation  falls  very  little  short  of  being  ridiculous.  Prospero  having  sat  down  with 
Miranda  at  the  time  he  laid  aside  his  magic  garment,  and  being  now  come  almost  to 
the  end  of  his  narrative,  arises  to  give  his  orders  to  Ariel. — Capell  (p.  57) :  The 
sense  is  merely, — Now  I  get  up :  which,  though  it  be  odd  enough  in  Prospero  to  say, 


48 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  it 


[200.  Now  I  arise] 

yet,  that  he  does  say  it,  seems  plain  enough  from  what  is  instantly  added, — ‘  Sit  still  ’ ; 
words  address’d  to  Miranda,  who  is  rising  upon  seeing  him  rise. — Blackstone  : 
Perhaps  these  words  belong  to  Miranda.  The  story  being  ended  (as  Miranda  sup¬ 
poses),  she  first  expresses  a  wish  to  see  Gonzalo,  and  then  observes  that  she  may  now 
arise,  as  the  story  is  done. — Steevens  :  The  words  may  signify,  ‘  now,  I  rise  in 
my  narration,’ — ‘  now  my  story  heightens  in  its  consequence.’  We  still  say  that  the 
interest  of  a  drama  rises  or  declines.  [This  is  merely  a  paraphrase  of  Warburton. — 
Ed.] — Collier  (Notes,  &c.  1853,  p.  5) :  Put  on  robe  again  is  written  in  the  MS. 
This  refers  back  to  line  32,  ‘  lie  there  my  art.’  ....  The  great  propriety  of  Prospero’s 
removal  of  his  robe  of  power  during  his  narration  to  his  daughter  is  evident ;  he  did 
not  then  require  its  aid,  but  just  before  he  concluded,  and  just  before  he  was  to  pro¬ 
duce  a  somnolency  in  Miranda  by  the  exercise  of  preternatural  influence,  he  resumed 
it. — Collier  (ed.  ii,  1858) :  We  are  to  presume  that  he  left  his  seat  with  the  words, 
*  Now,  I  arise,’  and  that  Miranda  took  it,  on  some  indication  of  her  father’s  wish  that 
she  should  do  so.  Commentators  have  not  known  how  to  account  for  the  sudden 
somnolency  of  the  heroine.  Nobody  has  seen  that,  Prospero  having  put  off  his  magic 
robe,  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  put  it  on  again,  and  that  he  was  thus  enabled  to 
accomplish  what  he  wished,  viz :  to  produce  drowsiness  on  the  part  of  his  daughter. 
— Staunton  :  The  purport  of  these  words  has  never  been  satisfactorily  explained, 
because  they  have  been  always  understood  as  addressed  to  Miranda.  If  we  suppose 
them  directed,  not  to  her,  but  aside  to  Ariel,  who  has  entered,  invisible  except  to 
Prospero,  after  having  ‘  Perform’d  to  point  the  tempest,’  and  whose  arrival  occasions 
Prospero  to  operate  his  sleepy  charm  upon  Miranda,  they  are  perfectly  intelligible. 
That  they  were  so  intended  becomes  almost  certain  from  Prospero’s  language  pres¬ 
ently,  when  the  charm  has  taken  effect;  see  lines  219,  220, post. — Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  I 
cannot  dispel  the  obscurity  which  has  always  hung  over  these  words. — Br.  Nichol¬ 
son  (N.  dr”  Qu.  3d  S.  ix,  28,  1866)  :  There  may  be  some  doubt  as  to  the  exact  stage 
action,  but  the  only  real  difficulty  is,  why  Prospero,  when  rising,  should  take  the  trou¬ 
ble  to  say  that  he  is  doing  so.  But  whether  he  sees  Ariel,  or  whether,  as  is  more 
likely,  through  the  prevision  of  his  art,  he  is  now  aware  that  the  time  for  second 
action  is  at  hand,  he  becomes  somewhat  rapt  and  inattentive  to  Miranda  and  her 
words.  Something  similar  occurs  when  the  danger  from  Caliban  draws  on.  He 
speaks  this,  therefore,  half  to  himself,  and  as  in  answer  to  his  thought  thus  occultly 
influenced.  Then,  when,  as  is  natural,  his  daughter  would  rise  with  him,  he  turns  to 
her  with  ‘  sit  still,’  and,  girt  with  readiness,  finishes  the  story,  and  compels  her  to 
sleep. — W.  A.  Wright:  These  words  do  not  refer  to  a  climax  in  Prospero’s  narra¬ 
tive,  as  Steevens  thinks,  but  rather  to  a  crisis  in  his  fortunes.  At  this  point  his  fate 
culminated,  and  his  reappearance  from  obscurity  was  a  kind  of  resurrection,  or  like 
the  rising  of  the  sun.— Br.  Nicholson  (A^.  &■»  Qu.  6th  S.  iii,  263,  1881)  returned 
again  to  the  subject,  but  adds  little  beyond  emphasizing  what  Collier  had  long  ago 
said.  ‘  The  whole  difficulty,’  says  Nicholson,  ‘  has  arisen  from  forgetting  that  Pros¬ 
pero  had  doffed  his  robe,  and  that  to  resume  his  rSle  of  magician  he  must  resume  that 
robe.’ — [I  fail  to  see  much  force  in  the  explanations  which  have  been  given,  nor  have  I 
any  faith  in  the  medicinable  power  of  a  stage-direction.  It  is  only  very,  very  rarely 
that  Shakespeare’s  text  needs  any  stage-directions.  All  needful  hints  to  the  actor  are 
clearly  given  him  in  the  text.  When  Prospero  says  *  pluck  my  magick  garment  from 
me.  So,  Lye  there  my  art  ’  is  there  a  conceivable  need  of  inserting  in  the  margin, 
as  a  stage-direction,  <  He  lays  down  his  garment  ’  ?  Is  there  an  intelligence  so  feeble 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


49 


Sit  ftill,  and  heare  the  laft  of  our  fea-forrow :  201 

Heere  in  this  Hand  we  arriu’d,  and  heere 

Haue  I,  thy  Schoolemafter,  made  thee  more  profit 

Then  other  Princeffe  can,  that  haue  more  time 

For  vainer  howres ;  and  Tutors,  not  fo  carefull.  205 

204.  Princejfe ]  F2F3>  Prirtcejjf  F4,  cesses  Cam.  i,  Glo.  Wrt,  Dtn. 

Knt,  Coll.  Ktly,  Wh.  ii.  Princes  Rowe  + ,  205.  howres~\  lores  Bailey,  joys  Ktly 

Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Wh.  i.  Prin-  conj. 
cess’  Hal.  Dyce,  Sta.  Clke,  Cam.  iii.  Prin- 

that  it  cannot  supply  that  fact  from  the  context  ?  If  there  be,  and  it  will  persist  in 
reading  its  Shakespeare,  we  must  surely  regret  not  that  there  are  so  many  stage-direc¬ 
tions  in  modern  editions,  but  that  there  are  so  few,  and  after  Prospero’s  command  to 
Miranda  to  wipe  her  eyes,  we  must  with  alacrity  hasten  to  add  the  stage-direction : 

‘  Uses  her  handkerchief.’  If  Shakespeare  intended  that  Prospero  should  here  ‘  arise  ’ 
to  put  on  his  magic  garment,  I  think  he  would  have  instructed  the  actor  with  the  same 
minuteness  as  when  he  told  him  to  put  it  off.  As  he  has  not  done  so,  I  cannot  think 
that  the  words  have  any  reference  thereunto.  If,  after  all,  they  have  such  a  reference, 
then  I  retreat  to  that  humiliating  refuge  of  the  weak  and  the  timid,  and  conjecture 
that  one  ‘  or  more  lines  have  been  lost.’  If,  on  the  other  hand,  ‘  arise  ’  is  here  used 
figuratively,  then  in  the  exercise  of  the  right  of  private  judgement  we  may  put  on  it 
what  interpretation  we  please.  If,  however,  the  word  does  not  refer  to  the  magic 
garment,  nor  bear  a  figurative  meaning,  but  is  the  sophistication  of  the  printer,  then, 
I  think,  from  the  ductus  literarum,  Theobald’s  suggestion  of  Ariel  deserves  con¬ 
sideration. — Ed.] 

204.  Princesse]  That  any  editor  in  these  days  would  venture  to  follow  Rowe,  and 
adopt  Princes  in  his  text,  is  more  than  doubtful.  The  fact  is  now  generally  accepted 
(thanks  to  Walker,  Vers.  246,  and  Abbott,  §  471)  that  it  is  sufficient  for  a  word  to 
terminate  in  the  sound  of  s  to  be  regarded  by  the  ear  as  a  plural.  Thus  here,  that 
‘  Princesse  ’  is  a  plural  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  verb  ‘  haue.’  To  be  sure,  the  same 
may  be  said  of  Rowe’s  Princes ,  but  then  in  order  to  make  princes  feminine,  we  have 
to  find  contemporary  authorities,  which  is  not  impossible.  Grant  White  (ed.  i) 
gives  one  or  two  instances  where  in  1581  Queen  Elizabeth  was  alluded  to  as  a 

*  Prince,’  and  W.  A.  Wright  refers  to  an  exactly  similar  instance  in  Bacon’s 
Advancement  of  Learning.  In  As  You  Like  It,  I,  ii,  159  (of  this  ed.),  we  have  ‘  the 
Princesse  cals  for  you,’  and  Orlando  replies,  ‘I  attend  them  with  all,’  &c.,  where,  I 
have  but  little  doubt,  the  error  lies  in  the  printer’s  mistake  of *  *  cals  ’  instead  of  call. 
In  both  cases  the  drift  of  modern  opinion  is  in  favour  of  printing,  for  the  eye, 
<  Princess.’  The  Third  Cambridge  Edition  has  thus  printed  it  here,  deserting  its  for¬ 
mer  reading.  Halliwell  was  the  earliest  to  adopt  ‘  Princess,’  and  as  his  Folio  Edition 
is  mainly  archaeological,  he  should  receive  credit  when  it  is  equally  good  in  the  matter 
of  text.  In  1 797,  Richard  Sill,  under  the  name  of  Chas.  Dirrill,  printed  some 
Remarks  on  Shakespeare's  Tempest;  his  quality  may  be  tasted  in  his  note  on  ‘  still- 
vexed  Bermoothes,’  where  he  refers  the  reason  for  the  use  of  ‘  still-vex’d,’  not  to 
storms,  but  to  ‘  rats.’  In  the  present  line  he  would  read  :  ‘  Than  other  princess  can, 
that  has  more  time,’  &c.,  which  he  paraphrases  :  *  I  have  made  thee  more  profit  than 
(any)  other  princess  can  (have  made),  that  has  more  time  for  vainer  hours,’  &c.  El). 

205.  howres]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.) :  1  Hour  ’  is  equivalent  to  the  employment 

4 


50  THE  TEMPEST  [act  I,  SC.  il 

Mir.  Heuens  thank  you  for’t.  And  now  I  pray  you  Sir,  206 
For  ftill  ’tis  beating  in  my  minde ;  your  reafon 
For  rayfing  this  Sea-ftorme  ? 

Pro.  Know  thus  far  forth, 

By  accident  moft  ftrange,  bountifull  Fortune  210 

(Now  my  deere  Lady)  hath  mine  enemies 
Brought  to  this  fhore :  And  by  my  prefcience 
I  finde  my  Zenith  doth  depend  vpon 
A  moft  aufpitious  ftarre,  whofe  influence 

If  now  I  court  not,  but  omit;  my  fortunes  21? 

Will  euer  after  droope :  Heare  ceafe  more  queftions, 

Thou  art  inclinde  to  fleepe :  ’tis  a  good  dulneffe, 

And  giue  it  way :  I  know  thou  canft  not  chufe  : 

Come  away,  Seruant,  come ;  T  am  ready  now, 

Approach  my  Ariel.  Come.  Enter  Ariel.  220 

Ari.  All  haile,  great  Mafter,  graue  Sir,  haile :  I  come 


215.  omit ;]  omit ,  Rowe. 

218.  I...chufe\  As  an  Aside,  Johns. 
[Miranda  sleeps.  Theob. 

219.  I  am\  I'm  Pope  + ,  Cap.  Dyce  ii, 


iii,  Huds. 

220.  [Scene  III.  Pope  +  . 

221.  haile:  I  come"]  haile  I  come  Ff. 
hail !  I  come  Rowe. 


of  an  hour,  and  therefore  (like  the  corresponding  word  in  German,  Stunde )  equivalent 
to  a  lesson. 

2X1.  deere  Lady]  Steevens  :  That  is,  now  my  auspicious  mistress. 

213,  &c.  Capei.L  refers  to  Jul.  Cas.  IV,  iii,  218  for  comparison. 

213.  Zenith]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.):  There  is  here,  perhaps,  an  imaginative 
blending  of  ideas  :  ‘  My  fortune  depends  on  a  star,  which, — being  now  in  its  zenith, — 
is  auspicious  to  me.’ 

214.  influence]  Cotgrave:  ‘ Influence :  f.  A  flowing  in;  (and  particularly)  an 
influence,  or  influent  course,  of  the  Planets ;  their  vertue  infused  into,  or  their  course 
working  on,  inferior  creatures.’  This  astrological  sense  is  that  in  which  it  is  most 
frequently  used  by  Shakespeare.  Cf.  the  almost  thread-bare  quotation  from  Milton’s 
L' Allegro  :  ‘  ladies  whose  bright  eyes  Rain  influence  and  judge  the  prize.’ — Ed. 

218.  And]  W.  A.  Wright  :  ‘  And  ’  appears  to  be  used  to  mark  the  consequence, 
and  is  almost  equivalent  to  therefore  or  and  therefore.  Cf,  Much  Ado,  IV,  i,  287 : 
‘  Beat.  I  was  about  to  protest  I  loved  you.  Ben.  And  do  it  with  all  thy  heart.’ 
And  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii,  104 :  ‘  I  almost  die  for  food ;  and  let  me  have  it.’ 

220.  Enter  Ariel]  H.  Coleridge  (p.  132) :  As  Ariel’s  presence  throughout  the 
play  is  manifest  to  none  but  Prospero,  it  were  an  improvement  in  the  acting  if  this 
dainty  spirit  were  personated  by  a  voice  alone.  No  human  form,  however  sylph-like, 
but  must  belie  the  words  of  the  invisible  and  tricksy  Ariel. 

220.  Coleridge  (p.  88) :  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  Miranda  is  never  brought 
into  comparison  with  Ariel,  lest  the  natural  and  human  of  the  one  and  the  super¬ 
natural  of  the  other  should  tend  to  neutralise  each  other. 

221,  &c.  Henley  called  attention  to  an  imitation  of  this  speech  by  Fletcher  in 


ACT  I,  SC.  il.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


5* 

222 


To  anfwer  thy  beft  pleafure ;  be’t  to  fly, 

To  fwim,  to  diue  into  the  fire :  to  ride 
On  the  curld  clowds  :  to  thy  ftrong  bidding,  taske 
Ariel ,  and  all  his  Qualitie.  225 

Pro.  Haft  thou,  Spirit, 

Performd  to  point,  the  Tempeft  that  I  bad  thee. 

Ar.  To  euery  Article. 

I  boorded  the  Kings  fhip;  now  on  the  Beake, 

Now  in  the  Wafte,  the  Decke,  in  euery  Cabyn,  230 

I  flam’d  amazement,  fometime  I’ld  diuide 

222.  be't~\  be  it  Ff,  Rowe.  231.  amazement, ]  amazement.  Rowe. 

225.  Qualitie ]  qualities  Pope,  Theob.  fometime ]  Knt,  Hal.  Dyce,  Cam. 

Han.  Warb.  Glo.  Wrt.  fometimes  Ff  et  cet. 


Tke  Faithful  Shepherdess  [V,  v,  p.  119,  ed.  Dyce.  This  fact  would  be  of  use  in 
fixing  the  Date  of  Composition  of  The  Tempest,  if  we  were  quite  sure  of  the  date 
of  The  Faithful  Shepherdess.  Gifford  says,  it  ‘was  brought  out  in  1610,  perhaps 
before  ’ ;  Dyce  agrees  with  him.  The  passage  to  which  Henley  refers  is  not  so 
parallel  that  a  charge  of  imitation  can  be  brought  against  it.  Although  it  is  not  the 
only  imitation  of  Shakespeare  by  Fletcher  in  that  play,  the  presumption  that  Henley 
is  right  is  scarcely  possible.  See  Appendix,  p.  349. — Ed.] 

222-225.  Jourdain  (p.  13 7)  would  emend  and  divide  the  lines  as  follows:  ‘To 
answer  thy  behest  or  pleasure ;  be  ’t  To  fly,  to  swim,  to  dive  into  the  fire,  To  ride  on 
the  curl’d  clouds :  t’  thy  strong  bidding  Task  Ariel  and  all  his  quality.’ 

225.  Qualitie]  Steevens:  That  is,  all  his  confederates,  all  who  are  of  the  same 
profession.  So  in  Hamlet,  II,  ii,  452.  Dyce,  while  giving  the  meaning  of  the  word 
in  general  as  ‘  a  profession,  a  calling,  an  occupation,’  agrees  with  Steevens  as  to  its 
meaning  in  the  present  passage.  Steevens’s  reference  to  Hamlet’s  ‘  give  us  a  taste  of 
your  quality  ’  is  inappropriate ;  Hamlet  uses  the  word  technically,  as  referring  to  the 
profession  of  an  actor. — Ed. 

227.  to  point]  Steevens  :  That  is,  to  the  minutest  article.  See  Schmidt 
Lex.  11. 

229.  Beake]  Murray  {New  Eng.  Diet.) :  The  pointed  and  ornamented  projec¬ 
tion  at  the  prow  of  ancient  vessels,  especially  of  war-galleys.  ‘  Crushedde  and  brused 
in  their  foore  partes  with  the  beckes  of  the  Corynthyans.’ — Nicolls,  Thucyd.  155°- 

230.  Waste]  Johnson:  The  part  between  the  quarter-deck  and  the  forecastle; 
[to  this  Wright  adds :]  being  usually  a  hollow  space,  with  an  ascent  of  several  steps 
to  either  of  these  places. 

231.  &c.  Capell  (iii,  7)  :  ‘  I  do  remember  that  in  the  great  and  boysterous  storme 
of  this  foule  weather,  in  the  night,  there  came  upon  the  toppe  of  our  maine  yarde 
and  maine  maste,  a  certaine  little  light,  much  like  unto  the  light  of  a  little  candle, 
which  the  Spaniards  called  the  Cuerpo  santo,  and  saide  it  was  S.  Elmo,  whom  they 

take  to  bee  the  advocate  of  Sailers . This  light  continued  aboord  our  ship  about 

three  houres,  flying  from  maste  to  maste,  and  from  top  to  top ;  and  sometimes  it  would 
be  in  two  or  three  places  at  once.’ — Hakluyt’s  Voyages,  1598,  iii,  450. — Cotgrave 
Furole  :  f.  A  litde  blaze  of  fire  appearing  by  night  on  the  tops  of  souldiers’  launces,  o- 


52  THE  TEMPEST  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

And  burne  in  many  places ;  on  the  Top-maft,  232 

The  Yards  and  Bore-fpritt,  would  I  flame  diftinftly, 

Then  meete,  and  ioyne.  Ioues  Lightning,  the  precurfers 

O’th  dreadfull  Thunder-claps  more  momentarie  235 

And  fight  out-running  were  not ;  the  fire,  and  cracks 

Of  fulphurous  roaring,  the  moft  mighty  Neptune 

Seeme  to  befiege,  and  make  his  bold  waues  tremble,  238 


233.  Bore-fpritt]  Bolt-fprit  Rowe  +  , 
Mai.  bowsprit  Steev.  et  seq. 

234.  Lightning ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 
lightnings  Tlieob.  et  cet. 

235.  O'th]  CyPope  +  . 


235.  Thunder  -  claps']  thunder  -  clap 
Cap. 

238.  Seeme]  Seem’d  Rowe  ii  + ,  Steev. 
Mai.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


at  sea  on  the  sayleyards,  where  it  whirles,  and  leapes  in  a  moment  from  one  place  to 
another ;  some  Mariners  call  it  S.  Hermes  fire ;  if  it  come  double  tis  held  a  signe  of 
good  lucke,  if  single,  otherwise.  [Eight  or  ten  sources  are  enumerated  in  Douce,  i, 
4,  wherefrom  a  repetition  of  the  foregoing  information  may  be  obtained.  In  Sea- 
Words  and  Phrases  along  the  Suffolk  Coast,  by  the  late  Edward  Fitzgerald  (the 
author,  rather  than  the  translator,  of  the  best  portions  of  the  Rubaiyat  of  Omar 
Khayyam),  there  is  the  following :  Composant.  Some  years  ago  a  young  sailor  was 
telling  me  of  a  “  composite  ”  lighting  on  each  mast  of  a  yawl  during  a  stormy 
night.  I  didn’t  understand  the  word,  though  I  knew  the  meaning;  an  older  sailor 
explained  that  “  composant  ”  was  the  proper  word.  I  was  not  wiser  till  I  chanced 
upon  the  explanation  in  Dampier' s  Voyages.  [An  account  from  Dampier  here  fol¬ 
lows,  of  the  appearance,  on  a  certain  occasion,  of  a  Corpus  sant ;  Dampier  concludes  :] 
I  have  heard  some  ignorant  seamen  discoursing  how  they  have  seen  them  creep,  or, 

as  they  say,  travel,  about  in  the  scuppers . But  I  did  never  see  any  one  stir  out 

of  the  place  where  it  was  first  fixt,  except  upon  deck,  where  every  sea  washeth  it 
about,  ....  and  therefore  I  do  believe  it  is  some  jelly.’  [Fitzgerald  then  resumes]  : 
‘  Dampier’s  men  probably  called  the  word  corpusant  or  corposant,  whence  composant, 
and  after  the  invention  of  certain  candles  peculiar  to  the  nineteenth  century,  composite. 
What  wise  children  now  call  it  I  don’t  know,  whether  phosphorescence,  electricity,  or 
what  not.  But  they  will  doubtless  smile  with  kindly  pity  at  “  old  Dampier’s  jelly  ”  ; 
though  when  we  were  children  any  theory  of  “jelly”  would  have  gone  a  long  way 
in  finding  favour  with  us.’ 

233.  Bore-spritt]  An  unusual  form,  but  of  which  Murray  [New  Engl.  Diet.) 
gives  two  other  examples.  ‘  The  origin  [of  bowsprit]  seems  to  lie  between  Low 

Germ.,  Du.,  and  Eng . But  against  the  compound  bow-sprit  being  of  English 

rise  are  the  late  appearance  of  bow  in  the  language,  and  the  numerous  perverted  forms 
with  bore,  boar,  bolt,  bold,  bole,  boule,  which  seem  to  show  that  the  connection  with 
bow  was  not  evident  to  English  sailors,  either  in  sense  or  pronunciation.’ 

233.  distinctly]  Staunton  :  That  is,  separately. — [See  II,  i,  231,  where  it  quali¬ 
fies  a  sound.] 

234,  &c.  Grey  (i,  11)  surmises  that  this  latter  part  of  Ariel’s  speech  was  ‘taken 
from  some  buskin  writer  of  the  time  by  way  of  ridicule.’ 

238.  Seeme]  This  printer’s  error  for  seem'd  is  one  of  the  instances  cited  by 
Walker  [Crit.  ii,  65)  of  the  confusion  of  the  final  d  and  final  e.  Cf.  ‘ boile,’  V.  i 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


53 


Yea,  his  dread  Trident  fhake. 

Pro.  My  braue  Spirit,  240 

Who  was  fo  firme,  fo  conftant,  that  this  coyle 
Would  not  infe6t  his  reafon? 

Ar.  Not  a  foule 

But  felt  a  Feauer  of  the  madde,  and  plaid 

Some  tricks  of  defperation ;  all  but  Mariners  245 

Plung’d  in  the  foaming  bryne,  and  quit  the  veffell ; 

Then  all  a  fire  with  me  the  Kings  fonne  Ferdinand 
With  haire  vp-ftaring  (then  like  reeds,  not  haire) 

Was  the  firft  man  that  leapt ;  cride  hell  is  empty, 

And  all  the  Diuels  are  heere.  250 

Pro.  Why  that’s  my  fpirit : 

But  was  not  this  nye  fhore  ? 

Ar.  Clofe  by,  my  Mafter.  253 


239.  dread]  dead  Ff. 

240.  My  braue]  My  brave ,  brave 
Theob.  Warb.  Cap.  That's  my  brave 
Han.  Ktly. 

244.  madde]  mind  Rowe  ii,  Pope, 


Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

245.  but]  but  the  Hunter,  Ktly. 

246,  247.  veffell ; ...with  me]  vessel,... 
with  me;  Rowe. 

249,  250.  Was. ..And]  One  line,  F4. 


72,  and  ‘  entertaine,’  line  87  in  the  same  scene.  In  the  present  case  the  compositor 
probably  followed  his  ear ;  *  seeme  to  ’  has  the  sound  of  the  past  tense.  Knight, 
however,  upholds  ‘  seem  ’  because  it  makes  the  past  present. 

239,  240.  shake  .  .  .  braue]  To  read  this  line  metrically  Farmer  would  make  a 
dissyllable  of  ‘  shake,’  and  Abbott,  §  484,  of  ‘  brave.’  See  also  Text.  Note,  ‘  my 
braue.’ 

244.  the  madde]  Steevens  :  Not  a  soul  but  felt  such  a  fever  as  madmen  feel 
when  the  frantic  fit  is  upon  them. 

245.  but]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.)  suggested  that  the  text  really  contained  a  the, 
which  being  pronounced  like  a  t,  was  assimilated  to  the  t  in  ‘  but,’  and  so  lost  to  the 
ear,  but  that  its  presence  may  have  been  indicated  in  the  MS  by  an  apostrophe,  which 
was  carelessly  dropped  by  the  printer.  [In  this  note,  written  nigh  thirty  years  ago, 
Allen  was  the  first,  I  think,  to  call  attention  to  the  process,  with  which  we  are  all 
now  familiar  under  the  name  of  ‘  absorption.’  See  ‘  at’  nostrils,’  post  II,  ii,  68,  and 
‘  with’  king,’  I,  i,  74 ;  also  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vi,  6,  in  this  ed.] 

246.  quit]  See  line  1 74  of  this  scene. 

248.  vp-staring]  Dyce  (Few  Notes,  10) :  Many  readers  of  Shakespeare  are  per¬ 
haps  not  aware  how  common  this  expression  was  formerly.  It  not  only  found  a  place 
in  the  most  serious  poetry,  as  here,  and  in  Chapman’s  Hero  and  Leander  (Marlowe’s 
Works,  iii,  91,  ed.  Dyce),  but  belonged  to  the  phraseology  of  daily  life :  ‘Les  cheveu.x 
luy  dressent.  His  haire  stares,  or  stands  annend,’ — Cotgrave,  sub  Dresser ;  and  com¬ 
pare  Florio’s  Diet.,  sub  Arricciare.  [For  a  similar  adverbial  compound  see  Jul. 
Cces.  IV,  iii,  280,  or  Abbott,  §  429.  Staring  is  still  in  common  use,  in  thij  country, 
in  reference  to  the  coat  of  horses  when  they  are  ill. — Ed.] 


54 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  il 


Pro.  But  are  they  ( Ariell )  fafe  ? 

Ar.  Not  a  haire  perifhd  : 

On  their  fuftaining  garments  not  a  blemifh, 

But  frefher  then  before :  and  as  thou  badft  me, 

In  troops  I  haue  difperfd  them  ’bout  the  Ifle : 

The  Kings  fonne  haue  I  landed  by  himfelfe, 

Whom  I  left  cooling  of  the  Ayre  with  fighes, 

In  an  odde  Angle  of  the  Ifle,  and  fitting 
His  armes  in  this  fad  knot. 

Pro.  Of  the  Kings  fhip, 

The  Marriners,  fay  how  thou  haft  difpofd, 

And  all  the  reft  oWFleete  ? 

Ar.  Safely  in  harbour 

Is  the  Kings  fhippe,  in  the  deepe  Nooke,  where  once 


255 


260 


265 

267 


256.  fuftaining^  unstaining  Spedding,  Huds.  sea-staining  Spedding  ap.  Cam. 

sea-drenched  Gould. 


254.  But .  .  .  safe]  Dirrill  (p.  61) :  It  appears  remarkable  that  Shakespeare 
should  make  Prospero  ask  this  question,  and  others  of  the  same  purport.  It  certainly 
was  needless ;  for  his  prescience  informed  him  that  they  were  all  safe.  He  had  before 
this  declared  to  Miranda  that  there  was  no  harm  done ;  that  there  was  not  so  much 
perdition  as  an  hair.  Perhaps  it  might  be  in  order  to  give  the  audience  an  opportunity 
of  being  more  fully  acquainted  with  the  particulars. 

256.  sustaining]  Steevens  :  That  is,  their  garments  that  bore  them  up  and  sup¬ 
ported  them.  Cf.  Ham.  IV,  vii,  176 :  ‘  Her  clothes  spread  wide,  And,  mermaid-like, 
awhile  they  bore  her  up.’ — M.  Mason  (p.  4),  on  the  other  hand,  maintained  that 
Steevens  could  not  be  right,  because  all  garments  except  cork -jackets  would  have 
dragged  the  wearer  down ;  therefore  he  says  that  ‘  sustaining  ’  here  means  enduring , 
garments  which  bore  without  being  injured  the  drenching  of  the  sea.  In  the  earliest 
Variorum,  1773,  Steevens  gives,  from  Edwards’s  MSS,  the  emendation  sea-stained, 
because,  said  the  author  of  the  note,  ‘  it  was  not  the  floating  of  their  cloaths,  but  the 
magic  of  Prospero  which  preserved,  as  it  had  wrecked,  them.’ 

260.  cooling  of]  For  other  examples  of  the  use  of  of  after  verbals,  signifying  in 
the  act  of,  see  Abbott,  §  178. 

263,  264.  Of  .  .  .  Marriners]  Hanmer  was  the  first  to  desert  the  punctuation  of 
the  Folio,  and,  by  striking  out  the  comma  after  ‘  ship,’  construed  the  sentence  :  ‘  How 
hast  thou  disposed  of  the  mariners  of  the  king’s  ship  ?’  He  has  been  followed  by 
almost  every  subsequent  edition,  except  Knight’s,  which  restored  the  comma,  and  the 
Globe  Edition  and  its  followers,  which  omitted  both  commas.  The  Folio  is  clearly 
right  (the  Third  Cam.  Ed.  has  returned  to  it) ;  <  the  marriners  ’  is  parenthetical  — 
Ed. 

264.  thou  hast]  Walker,  in  his  valuable  chapter  ( Crit.  ii,  246)  on  the  Tran* 
position  of  Words,  queries  whether  these  should  not  be  hast  thou;  just  as  we  have 

say  again,  where  didst  thou,’  &c.,  IV,  i,  1 94,  post.  See  also  IV,  i,  1 1 ,  post. 

266.  Safety  m  harbour]  See  II,  i,  357. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


55 


Thou  calldft  me  vp  at  midnight  to  fetch  dewe  268 

From  the  ftill-vext  Bermoothes ,  there  fire’s  hid ; 

The  Marriners  all  vnder  hatches  ftcnved,  270 

Who,  with  a  Charme  ioynd  to  their  fuffred  labour 
I  haue  left  afleep :  and  for  the  reft  o’th’  Fleet 
(Which  I  difpers’d)  they  all  haue  met  againe, 

And  are  vpon  the  Mediterraman  Flote 

Bound  fadly  home  for  Naples ,  275 

Suppofing  that  they  faw  the  Kings  fhip  wrackt, 

And  his  great  perfon  perifh. 

Pro.  Ariel ,  thy  charge 
Exaftly  is  perform’d ;  but  there’s  more  worke  : 

What  is  the  time  o’th’day  ?  280 


269.  Bermoothes]  Bermudas  Theob. 

271.  Who]  Whom  Han.  Johns.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll. 

272.  I  haue]  I've  Pope  +  ,Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 


274.  are. ..Flote]  all. ..float  Coll  ii,  iii 
(MS). 

vpon]  on  Pope. 

275-277.  Two  lines,  ending  that... 
perish.  Ktly. 


269.  still-vext  Bermoothes]  Hanmer  noted  that  here  is  the  Spanish  pronuncia¬ 
tion  of  the  Bermudas;  and  W.  A.  Wright  has  added  several  varieties  of  the  spell¬ 
ing  :  ‘  I  would  sooner  swim  to  the  Bermootha’s  on  ....  bladders,’  &c.  Webster, 
Duchess  of  Malfy ,  III,  ii  [p.  243,  ed.  Dyce,  where,  however,  it  is  spelled  Ber¬ 
moothes]  ;  ‘  an  engine  That’s  only  fit  to  put  in  exection  Barmotho  pigs.’ — lb.  Devils 
Law-Case,  III,  ii  [p.  62,  ed.  Dyce];  ‘victual  out  a  witch  for  the  Burmoothes.’— 
Fletcher,  Women  Pleased,  I,  ii  [p.  16,  ed.  Dyce,  also  cited  by  Warburton].  The 
islands  are  called  ‘  still-vext,’  that  is,  constantly,  always  vexed  by  tempests,  from  the 
accounts  of  them  which  early  voyagers  brought  home,  and  which  were  so  unvarying  in 
their  character  that,  as  Hunter  says,  the  Bermudas  became  a  commonplace  in  Shake¬ 
speare’s  time  whenever  storms  and  tempests  were  the  theme.  This  present  passage 
plays  a  large  share  in  the  speculations  concerning  the  ‘  Date  of  the  Composition  ’  of 
this  play ;  and  as  all,  I  believe,  of  the  references  to  it  are  gathered  together  under  that 
heading  in  the  Appendix,  to  that  Appendix  the  reader  must  be  now  referred.— Ep 

271.  Who]  See  I,  ii,  97,  or  IV,  i,  6. 

272.  for]  For  examples  of  ‘for,’  in  the  sense  of  as  regards,  see  Abbott,  §  149- 

272.  the  rest  o’th’  Fleet]  Holt  (p  26) :  Had  not  Shakespeare  thus  accounted 

for  the  dispersion  of  the  fleet,  either  Alonso  and  his  people  must  have  had  help,  or 
more  have  been  shipwrecked  with  him,  either  of  which  would  have  spoiled  the  plot, 
and  are  both  thus  happily  and  skilfully  avoided. 

274.  are]  Staunton  :  What  is  gained  by  Collier’s  MS  alteration  we  cannot  dis¬ 
cern. 

274.  Flote]  Dyce  {Gloss.)  :  Flood,  wave,  sea.  Minsheu  has  ‘A  flote  or  waue. 
G.  Flot.  L.  Fluctus.’ — W.  A.  Wright  :  Like  A.  S.  and  Fr.  flot,  and  Germ,  fluth. 

280-282.  What  .  .  .  Glasses]  Grey  (i,  11) :  ‘At  least  two  glasses  ’  should  seem 
more  properly  spoKe  Dy  Ariel.  For  why  should  Prospero  ask  the  time  of  day  if  he  knew 
it  better  than  Ariel  ?  [Upton  (p.  259)  had  made  the  same  conjecture,  and  Theobald,  in 


56 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  iL 


Ar.  Paft  the  mid  feafon.  281 

Pro.  At  leaft  two  Glaffes  :  the  time  ’twixt  fix  &  now 
Muft  by  vs  both  be  fpent  moft  precioufly. 

Ar.  Is  there  more  toyle?  Since  y  doft  giue  me  pains, 

Let  me  remember  thee  what  thou  haft  promis’d,  285 

Which  is  not  yet  perform’d  me. 


281,  282.  Pa/i ...Glajfes\  One  line  (given  to  Ariel).  Upton,  Grey,  Theob.  conj  Warb, 

1729,  proposed  it  in  a  private  letter  to  Warburton,  who  adopted  it  in  his  edition  with¬ 
out  a  word  of  acknowledgement  to  him  whom  he  was  calling  his  ‘  dearest  friend  ’  in  pri¬ 
vate,  and  whom  he  treated  afterwards  in  public  with  supercilious  cruelty.] — Holt  (p. 
27) :  In  the  hurry  of  his  mind,  Prospero  might  have  forgot  the  general,  and  yet,  as  soon 
as  that  was  recalled  to  his  memory,  very  naturally  recollected  the  particular  time,  even 
to  minuteness. — Capell  (59  a ) :  Imagine  the  head  of  Prospero  rais’d  after  this  question, 
and  the  sun  look’d  at,  and  reason  admits  well  enough  of  his  being  his  own  answerer, 
which  he  is  in  marine  language. — Johnson  :  This  passage  need  not  be  disturbed,  it 
being  common  to  ask  a  question,  which  the  next  moment  enables  us  to  answer ;  he 
that  thinks  it  faulty,  may  easily  adjust  it  thus :  '■Pros.  What  is  the  time  o’  the  day  ? 
Past  the  mid  season  ?  Ariel.  At  least  two  glasses. — Halliwell  :  Prospero  says  ‘  at 
least  two  glasses  ’  to  impress  upon  Ariel  how  brief  was  the  period  of  the  day  that 
remained,  and  the  consequent  necessity  of  rapidity  and  vigorous  action. — Staunton 
ingeniously,  but  ‘very  erroneously,’  thinks  Dyce,  obviated  any  re-distribution  of 
speeches  by  punctuating  Prospero’s  reply  as  follows :  ‘At  least  two  glasses — the  time, 
’twixt  six  and  now — Must  by  us  both  be  spent,’  &c. — W.  A.  Wright  :  This  arrange¬ 
ment  of  Staunton  would  make  it  four  in  the  afternoon,  which  hardly  answers  to 
Ariel’s  ‘  Past  the  mid-season.’  [Wright’s  criticism  of  Staunton’s  arrangement  is  well 
founded;  by  that  arrangement  the  ‘Duration  of  the  Action’  is  restricted  not  only  to 
the  two  hours  between  four  and  six,  but  had  Shakespeare  here  used  ‘  glass  ’  correctly 
in  its  technical  sense,  which,  woe  worth  the  day,  he  did  not,  the  duration  of  the  play 
would  be  confined  to  one  single  hour.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Shakespeare 
here,  and  even  elsewhere  in  other  plays,  uses  ‘  glass  ’  as  equivalent  to  one  hour ,  instead 
of  using  it  in  its  nautical  sense  of  a  half  hour.  That  ‘  glass  ’  was  a  half-hour  glass  in 
Shakespeare’s  own  day  we  may  learn  from  the  following  citation  from  Hakluyt’s  Voy- 
ages,  i.  436  (given  in  The  Century  Did.  s.  v.  ‘  Glass  ’)  :  ‘If  you  should  omit  to  note 
those  things  at  the  end  of  euery  foure  glasses,  ....  note  it  diligently  at  the  end  of 
euery  watch,  or  eight  glasses.’-  See  also  Smyth’s  Sailor’s  Word  Book,  s.  v.  ‘Glass.’ 
See  Nicholson’s  note,  V,  i,  266.  Daniel  in  his  good  ‘  time-analysis  ’  of  The  Tempest 
comes  to  the  same  conclusion  as  to  the  meaning  of  ‘  glass  ’  in  the  present  passage. 
‘Alonso’s  “three  hours”  [V,  i,  219],  says  Daniel,  ‘  followed  shortly  afterwards  by 
the  Boatswain’s  “  three  glasses,”  must  decide  this  measure  of  time  for  The  Tempest 
to  be  a  one-hour  glass.’  Dr  Johnson’s  explanation,  without  his  ‘  adjustment  ’  of  the 
text,  is  to  me  all-sufficient. — Ed.] 

284.  pains]  W.  A.  Wright  :  Labours,  tasks.  We  use  the  word  in  this  sense  in 
the  phrase  ‘  take  pains  ’ ;  but  ‘  give  pains,’  in  the  sense  of  impose  tasks,  is  obsolete. 
See  Meas.  for  Meas.  V,  i,  246. 

286.  me]  For  other  examples  of  Ethical  Datives,  see  Abbott,  §  220,  also  see  lines 
301,  583  of  this  scene. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


57 

287 


Pro.  How  now?  moodie? 

What  is’t  thou  canft  demand  ? 

Ar.  My  Libertie. 

Pro.  Before  the  time  be  out  ?  no  more  : 

Ar.  I  prethee, 

Remember  I  haue  done  thee  worthy  feruice, 

Told  thee  no  lyes,  made  thee  no  miftakings,  ferv’d 
Without  or  grudge,  or  grumblings;  thou  did  promife 
To  bate  me  a  full  yeere. 

Pro.  Do’ ft  thou  forget 


287.  now  ?  moodie  ?]  now,  moody  ? 
Dyce. 

288.  What]  Which  Ff. 

293.  made  ...ferv'd]  made  no  mis- 
takings,  serv'd  thee  Cap.  conj. 


293.  made  the e]  made  Rowe  ii  4- , 
Steev.  Sing.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly,  Jeph. 
Clke,  Rife,  Huds.  Hunter. 

294.  grumblings]  grumbling  Coll .  MS. 

did]  didji  f3f4. 


287,  &c.  moodie  ?]  Douce  (i,  7)  :  The  spirits  or  familiars  attending  on  magicians 
were  always  impatient  of  confinement.  Thus  we  are  told  that  the  spirit  Balkin  is 
‘wearied  if  the  action  wherein  he  is  employed  continue  longer  than  an  hour;  and 
therefore  the  magician  must  be  careful  to  dismiss  him.’ — Scot’s  Discovery  of  Witch¬ 
craft,  1665,  p.  228. — Wilson  (p.  81)  :  According  to  the  ideas  of  an  age  which  still 
believed  in  magic,  Prospero  has  usurped  the  lordship  of  nature,  and  subdued  to  his 
will  the  spirits  of  the  elements,  by  presumptuous,  if  not  altogether  sinful,  arts.  They 
are  retained  in  subjection  by  the  constant  exercise  of  this  supernatural  power,  and 
yield  him  only  the  reluctant  obedience  of  slaves.  This  has  to  be  borne  in  remem¬ 
brance  if  we  would  not  misinterpret  the  ebullitions  of  imperious  harshness  on  the  part 
of  Prospero  towards  beings  who  can  only  be  retained  in  subjection  by  such  enforced 
mastery.  [See  Appendix,  ‘Ariel.’] 

290.  no  more]  Knight  :  We  understand  this — say  no  more. 

293.  made  thee]  Ritson  proposed  to  omit  this  second  ‘  thee,’  the  repetition  of  a 
word  being  a  common  error;  wherein  Staunton  agrees  with  him. — Abbott,  §  460 : 
It  is  more  probable  that  this  second  ‘  thee,’  not  ‘  mis-,’  is  slurred. — Allen  ( Phila .  Sh. 
Socl) :  By  the  assimilation  of  d  and  th  and  the  sequence  of  the  liquid  n  to  the  mute 
th  in  ‘  made  thee  no,’  the  three  words  form  a  very  natural  and  pleasing  anapaest, — 
nay,  ‘  made  thee  ’  could  readily  be  pronounced  as  one  syllable,  and  so  form  the 
thesis  of  an  iambus. 

296,  &c.]  Johnson  :  That  the  character  and  conduct  of  Prospero  may  be  under¬ 
stood,  something  must  be  known  of  the  system  of  enchantment  which  supplied  all  the 
marvellous  found  in  the  romances  of  the  Middle  Ages.  This  system  seems  to  be 
founded  on  the  opinion  that  the  fallen  spirits,  having  different  degrees  of  guilt,  had 
different  habitations  allotted  to  them  at  their  expulsion,  some  being  confined  in  hell, 
‘  some  (as  Hooker,  who  delivers  the  opinion  of  our  poet’s  age,  expresses  it)  dispersed 
in  air,  some  on  earth,  some  in  water,  others  in  caves,  dens,  or  minerals  under  the 
earth.’  Of  these,  some  were  more  malignant  and  mischievous  than  others.  The 
earthy  spirits  seem  to  have  been  thought  the  most  depraved,  and  the  aerial  the  less 
vitiated.  Thus  Prospero  addresses  Ariel :  ‘  Thou  wast  a  spirit  too  delicate  To  act  her 
earthy  and  abhorred  commands.’  Over  these  spirits  a  power  might  be  obtained  by 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


58 

From  what  a  torment  I  did  free  thee  ?  Ar.  No.  297 

Pro.  Thou  do’ft  :  &  thinkft  it  much  to  tread  y  Ooze 
Of  the  fait  deepe  ; 

To  run  vpon  the  fharpe  winde  of  the  North,  3°° 

To  doe  me  bufineffe  in  the  veines  o’th’  earth 
When  it  is  bak’d  with  froft. 

Ar.  I  doe  not  Sir. 

Pro.  Thou  lieft,  malignant  Thing :  haft  thou  forgot 
The  fowle  Witch  Sycorax,  who  with  Age  and  Enuy  305 


298,  299.  Two  lines,  ending  think' st, 
deep.  Steev. 

298.  thinkjf\  thinkeji  Ff,  Rowe. 
299-308.  Of...born?~\  Seven  lines, 


ending  sharp,  in,  frost,  thing!  Sycorax 
hoop  ?  bom  ?  Ktly. 

298,  299.  Ooze ...  deepe~\  One  line, 
Rowe  i. 


certain  rites  performed  or  charms  learned.  The  power  was  called  The  Black  Art  or 
Knowledge  of  Enchantment.  The  enchanter  being  (as  King  James  observes  in  his 
Demonology )  ‘  one  who  commands  the  devil,  whereas  the  witch  serves  him.’  Those 
who  thought  best  of  this  art,  the  existence  of  which  was,  I  am  afraid,  believed  very 
seriously,  held  that  certain  sounds  and  characters  had  a  physical  power  over  spirits, 
and  compelled  their  agency ;  others,  who  condemned  the  practice,  which  in  reality 
was  surely  never  practised,  were  of  opinion,  with  more  reason,  that  the  power  of 
charms  arose  only  from  compact,  and  was  no  more  than  the  spirits  voluntarily  allowed 
them  for  the  seduction  of  man.  The  art  was  held  by  all,  though  not  equally  criminal, 
yet  unlawful,  and,  therefore,  Casaubon,  speaking  of  one  who  had  commerce  with 
spirits,  blames  him,  though  he  imagines  him  one  of  the  best  kind,  who  dealt  with 
them  by  way  of  command.  Thus  Prospero  repents  of  his  art  in  the  last  scene.  The 
spirits  were  always  considered  as  in  some  measure  enslaved  to  the  enchanter,  at  least 
for  a  time,  and  as  serving  with  unwillingness ;  therefore  Ariel  so  often  begs  for  lib¬ 
erty;  and  Caliban  observes  that  the  spirits  serve  Prospero  with  no  good  will,  but  hate 
him  rootedly. — Of  these  trifles  enough. 

298.  Ooze]  The  bottom,  not  the  margin  of  the  sea.  See  III,  iii,  125. 

300.  run]  Upton  (p.  222) :  I  would  rather  read  ride,  which  is  the  Scripture 
expression ;  see  Job  xxx,  22 ;  Isaiah  xix,  I ;  Psalm  lxviii,  4. 

301.  me]  Ethical  Dative. 

304.  malignant  Thing]  PHILA.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Without  Ariel’s  assistance  at  this  crisis 
Prospero  will  be  unable  to  take  advantage  of  his  ‘  auspicious  star,’  and  hence  his 
excitement  at  the  signs  of  the  former’s  disaffection. 

305.  Sycorax]  Douce  (i,  8),  in  a  note  on  Caliban’s  first  speech,  ‘As  wicked  dew,' 
&c.,  surmises  that  the  following  passage,  from  Batman  vppon  Bartholome,  not  only 
illustrates  that  speech,  but  that  Shakespeare  ‘  was  indebted  to  it,  with  a  slight  altera¬ 
tion,  for  the  name  of  Caliban’s  mother :  “  The  raven  is  called  corvus  of  Corax  .... 
tt  is  sayd  that  rauens  birdes  be  fed  with  deaw  of  heauen  all  the  time  that  they  have 
no  blacke  feathers  by  benefite  of  age.”— Lib.  xii,  c.  10.’— Lloyd  (Singer,  ed.  ii,  p. 
103)  :  Sycorax  Shakespeare  probably  found  in  some  novel,  to  us  unknown.  Her 
name,  I  suppose  it  has  been  remarked  before,  is  Greek.  Psychorrhagia  is  the  death 
struggle;  and  Psychorrhax  may  be  translated  ‘ heartbreaker  ’  (^vyoppi/i).— Clement, 
whose  remarkable  essay  places  The  Tempest  among  the  Historical  Plays,  finds  in  this 


act  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  TEMPEST 

Was  growne  into  a  hoope  ?  haft  thou  forgot  her  ? 

Ar.  No  Sir. 

Pro.  Thou  haft  :  where  was  (he  born  ?  fpeak  :  tell  me  : 
Ar.  Sir,  in  Argier. 

Pro.  Oh,  was  (he  fo  :  I  muft 
Once  in  a  moneth  recount  what  thou  haft  bin , 

Which  thou  forgetft.  This  damn’d  Witch  Sycorax 
For  mifchiefes  manifold,  and  forceries  terrible 


59 

306 


310 


3i3 


306.  growne]  gownc  Fa. 
308.  me  /]  me,  say.  Han. 
31 1.  moneth~\  month  F4. 


313.  and  forceries  terrible ]  and  sor¬ 
ceries  too  terrible  Rowe  i.  sorceries  too 
terrible  Han. 


play  throughout,  allusions  to  contemporary  events  and  to  the  personages  of  the  day. 
From  his  ‘  inner  consciousness  ’  he  has  evolved  not  only  a  remarkable  derivation  of 
the  witch’s  name,  but  even  a  more  remarkable  allusion  thereunder  hidden.  ‘  This 
Sycorax,’  he  says  (p.  81),  ‘has  a  satirical  name,  which  the  readers  of  The  Tempest 
scarcely  notice.  Why  is  the  name  Greek?  For  Greek  it  is;  sukon  means  a  fig,  rax, 
a  poisonous  spider.  I  dislike  philological  trifling,  otherwise  there  might  from  the 
name  be  easily  derived  sic  o  rex !  [The  exclamation  point  is  Dr  Clement’s,  not 
— Ed.],  but  I  take  the  name  just  as  it  stands.  The  exalted  personage,  whom 
the  poet  desired  here  to  indicate,  could  have  been  brought  upon  the  stage,  even  after 
her  death,  such  was  the  danger,  only  under  some  similar  unintelligible  designation. 
The  hateful  hag  is,  I  believe,  Queen  Elizabeth,  who  could  be  as  sweet  as  a  fig,  and 
could  weave  webs  as  poisonous  as  the  bunch-backed  spider  [ dickbauchige  is  the 
diametrical  opposite  of  ‘  bunch-backed,’  I  know,  but  I  cannot  find  it  in  my  heart  to 
apply  it,  even  in  a  translation,  to  the  good  Queen  Bess. — Ed.]. — Hales  ( Comhill 
Mag.  Feb.  ’76,  p.  213  ;  also  Essays,  p.  113)  :  Sycorax  is,  we  believe,  of  Shakespeare’s 

own  formation . And  we  think  the  conjecture  that  it  is  compounded  of  the  Greek 

avc  (vc  is  a  variant)  and  K.6pa$,  and  is  therefore  a  contraction  of  Syokorax,  can  scarcely 
be  despised.  As  both  sows  and  ravens  are  associated  with  witchcraft  and  such  super¬ 
stitions,  the  compound  might  serve  not  ill  to  denominate  that  ‘  foul  witch,’  « damned 
witch,’  of  whose  ‘  earthy  and  abhorred  commands  ’  Prospero  speaks  with  such  genu¬ 
ine  loathing . The  mere  grossness  of  the  one  animal  and  the  supposed  malignity 

of  the  other  may  be  referred  to ;  and  so  the  name  Sycorax  be  designed  to  express  a 
horrid  mixture  of  those  two  characteristics, — something  bestial  and  fiendish  withal. — 
Phillpotts  :  Mr  Moberly  suggests  that  Sycorax,  as  an  Algerine  witch,  would  have 
an  Arabic  name,  possibly  ‘  Shokereth  ’  (the  deceiver),  which  would  be  equivalent  to 
Sycorax. — Theodor  Elze  {Jahrbuch,  xv,  p.  253)  finds  on  the  island  of  Pantalaria 
which  he  suggests  as  the  original  of  Prospero’s  isle,  a  small  town  called  from  remote 
antiquity  Seiaxghihir,  wherein,  he  says,  there  may  be  at  least  a  sound  reminding  us  of 
Sycorax. 

309.  Argier]  Collier  :  The  name  for  Algiers  till  about  the  Restoration. 

313.  Anon.  (ap.  Grey  i,  Ii)  :  This  verse  may  be  relieved  several  ways,  either  by 
striking  out  ‘  sorceries,’  or  putting  it  in  the  place  of  *  mischiefs  ’ ;  or  by  reading  many 
for  ‘  manifold  ’ ;  or  what,  I  think,  is  more  like  Shakespeare,  by  leaving  out  ‘  and.’— 
Afsott,  §  494,  holds  it  to  be  only  an  apparent  Alexandrine,  and  presumably  sup. 


6o 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


To  enter  humane  hearing,  from  Argier 

Thou  know’ll;  was  banifh’d  :  for  one  thing  the  did  315 

314.  hearing ]  earing  Cap.  conj.  315.  Jhe  did~\  she  had  Crosby,  Huds 


poses  it  to  be  made  presentable  by  ‘  slurring  ’  the  final  foot,  ‘  terrible,’  whereby  it 
would  seem  that  the  pronunciation  can  be  best  represented  by  the  Southern  Negro 
pronunciation,  turrble. 

315.  one  thing  she  did]  Boswell:  What  that  one  thing  was  which  saved  the 
life  of  Sycorax  the  poet  has  nowhere  informed  us.  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  adds 
support  to  the  opinion  that  there  was  some  novel  upon  which  the  fable  of  The  Tem¬ 
pest  was  founded,  in  which  this  circumstance  was  mentioned,  to  which  Shakespeare 
thought  it  sufficient  to  refer. — Lamb  [Works,  iii,  260,  ed.  Moxon,  1870) :  How  have 
I  pondered  over  this,  when  a  boy  !  How  have  I  longed  for  some  authentic  memoir 
of  the  witch  to  clear  up  the  obscurity ! — Was  the  story  extant  in  the  Chronicles  of 
Algiers  ?  Could  I  get  at  it  by  some  fortunate  introduction  to  the  Algerine  ambassa¬ 
dor?  Was  a  voyage  thither  practicable?  The  Spectator  (I  know)  went  to  Grand 
Cairo  only  to  measure  a  pyramid.  Was  not  the  object  of  my  quest  of  at  least  as 
much  importance  ?  The  blue-eyed  hag, — could  she  have  done  anything  good  or 
meritorious  ?  might  that  Succubus  relent  ?  then  might  there  be  hope  for  the  devil.  I 
have  often  admired,  since,  that  none  of  the  commentators  have  boggled  at  this  pas¬ 
sage, — how  they  could  swallow  this  camel, — such  a  tantalising  piece  of  obscurity, 
such  an  abortion  of  an  anecdote. — At  length,  I  think,  I  have  lighted  upon  a  clue 
which  may  lead  to  show  what  was  passing  in  the  mind  of  Shakespeare  when  he 
dropped  this  imperfect  rumour.  In  the  ‘  accurate  description  of  Africa,  by  John 
Ogilby  (Folio),  1670,’  page  230,  I  find  written  as  follows:  [The  entire  extract  is  too 
long  for  insertion  here.  It  describes  the  preparations  which  Charles  V  made  in  1541 
to  besiege  Algier,  and  narrates  his  success  by  land  and  sea.  The  Turks  made  a 
vigorous  resistance,  but  were  reduced  to  so  great  an  extremity  that  they  lost  courage 
and  resolved  to  surrender  to  the  emperor.  The  account  then  proceeds :]  ‘  But  as 
they  were  thus  intending,  there  was  a  witch  of  the  town,  whom  the  history  doth  not 
name,  which  went  to  seek  out  Assam  Aga,  that  commanded  within,  and  pray’d  him 
to  make  it  good  yet  nine  days  longer,  with  assurance  that  within  that  time  he  should 
infallibly  see  Algier  delivered  from  that  siege,  and  the  whole  army  of  the  enemy  dis¬ 
persed,  so  that  Christians  should  be  as  cheap  as  birds.  In  a  word,  the  thing  did  hap¬ 
pen  in  the  manner  as  foretold;  for  upon  the  twenty-first  day  of  October  in  the  same 
year,  there  fell  a  continual  rain  upon  the  land,  and  so  furious  a  storm  at  sea,  that  one 
might  have  seen  ships  hoisted  into  the  clouds,  and  in  one  instant  again  precipitated 
into  the  bottom  of  the  water.  [The  emperor  suffered  so  heavily  that  he  raised  the 
siege  and  retreated  to  Sicily.]  In  the  mean  time  that  witch,  being  acknowledged  the 
deliverer  of  Algier,  was  richly  remunerated  and  the  credit  of  her  charms  authorised.’ 
Can  it  be  doubted  for  a  moment  that  the  dramatist  had  come  fresh  from  reading  some 
older  narrative  of  this  deliverance  of  Algier  by  a  witch,  and  transferred  the  merit  of 
the  deed  to  his  Sycorax,  exchanging  only  the  *  rich  remuneration,’  which  did  not  suit 
his  purpose,  to  the  simple  pardon  of  her  life  ?  [This  Note  appeared  first  in  Tht 
London  Magazine  for  1823 ;  it  has  been  quite  misunderstood,  apparently,  or  forgotten, 
by  a  writer  in  Notes  &■*  Qu.  2d  S.  ii,  284.  Weighing  one  consideration  with  another, 
I  think  this  note  of  Lamb  yields  quite  as  good  an  exp’anation  as  that  of  Boswell,  and 
a  far  better  explanation  than  that  which  is  commonly  extracted  from  line  317  I  con- 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


61 


They  wold  not  take  her  life  :  Is  not  this  true  ?  Ar.  I,  Sir.  3 16 
Pro.  This  blew  ey’d  hag,  was  hither  brought  with 
And  here  was  left  by  th’Saylors  ;  thou  my  flaue,  (child,  318 

3x6.  not  this]  this  not  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  317.  blew  ey’d ]  blue  dry'd  Spretiger. 
Han. 


fess  there  is  for  me  not  a  little  force  in  what  a  Quarterly  Reviewer  urges  in  regard  to 
this  last  theory,  which  accounts  for  the  mercy  shown  to  Sycorax  by  supposing  that 
Caliban  was  unborn ;  the  Reviewer  (vol.  lxv,  p.  473)  says :  4  We  feel  assured  that  no 
such  thought  ever  entered  the  mind  of  Shakespeare.  He  knew  not  what  that  44  one 
thing”  was,  nor  did  he  ever  give  his  imagination  the  trouble  of  ascertaining  it.  He 
wanted  it  for  the  purpose  of  his  play,  as  an  excuse  for  saving  a  wretch,  who,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  laws  and  the  opinions  of  his  age,  was  guilty  of  death ;  and  he  left  it  a  deed 
without  a  name ,  not  to  be  known  by  any  for  ever  but  Hell,  and  Night,  and  Setebos.’ 
Eckermann  relates  that  on  one  occasion  Goethe  said  to  him,  4  People  write  to  ask  me 
what  I  meant  by  such  and  such  a  thing  in  Faust.  As  if  I  knew,  or  could  tell !’  I 
have  but  little  doubt,  in  regard  to  many  and  many  a  passage  in  these  plays,  that  what 
was  true  of  Goethe,  is  true  of  Shakespeare.  A  writer  in  Fraser,  however,  scouts  this 
idea  of  the  Quarterly  Reviewer.  Sycorax  4  could  not  have  been  pardoned,’  he  says 
(Fraser’s  Maga.  June,  1840,  p.  742),  4  because  she  had  done  what  was  fit  only  to  be 
known  in  hell.  It  must  have  been  some  circumstance  exciting  compassion,  not  hor¬ 
ror.’  He  therefore  proposes  to  read  4  for  one  thing  she  hid,’  or  4  perhaps  Shakespeare 
wrote  more  graphically, — 44  for  yon  thing  she  hid,”  pointing  in  the  direction  of  Cali¬ 
ban.’ — Ed.] — Krauth  (Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  p.  16)  :  The  Incubus  and  Succuba  are  not 
poetic  creations,  but  part  of  the  faith  of  the  Middle  Ages, — heartily  held  by  the 
wisest  and  best  men,  and  confirmed  by  supposed  eye-witnesses.  See  Hector  Boethius, 
who  has  almost  a  Caliban  (Paris  edit.  1574,  p.  149),  and  Zwingeri,  Thesaurus  Fit. 
Human.  2300,  who  gives  a  great  many  legends.  The  idea  of  the  4  demon  lover  ’  has 
been  thought  to  be  scriptural :  Gen.  v,  2 ;  Jude  vi,  7.  The  Rabbins,  and  the  Koran, 
the  Christian  fathers,  and  the  Pagan  classics,  have  the  same  idea.  The  Mediaeval 
legends  are  full  of  it.  The  use  of  it  in  modem  poetry  by  Byron,  Moore,  and  Cole¬ 
ridge  is  familiar. 

317.  blew  ey’d]  Staunton:  It  must  be  confessed  that  blear-ey'd,  a  common  epi¬ 
thet  in  our  old  plays,  seems  more  applicable  to  the  4  damn’d  witch  Sycorax.’  Thus  in 
B.  and  Fl.’s  The  Chances,  IV,  ii :  4  Get  me  a  conjurer ;  Inquire  me  out  a  man  that 
lets  out  devils  ....  any  blear-ey’d  people  With  red  heads,  and  flat  noses  can  perform 

it.’ _ W.  A.  Wright  :  4  Blue-ey’d  ’  does  not  describe  the  colour  of  the  pupil  of  the 

eye,  but  the  livid  colour  of  the  eyelid,  and  a  blue  eye  in  this  sense  was  a  sign  of 
pregnancy.  See  Webster,  Duchess  of  Malfy,  II,  i:  4  The  fins  of  her  eyelids  look 
most  teeming  blue.’  In  As  You  Like  It,  III,  ii,  4  a  blue  eye  and  sunken  ’  is  charac¬ 
teristic  of  a  lover. — Cowden-Clarke  :  The  dull,  bleared,  neutral  colour  f-een  in  the 
eyes  of  old  crones. — Phili. POTTS  :  Probably  this  means  that  her  eyes  had  the  cold, 
startling  blue  which  suggests  malignity  so  strongly. — Grant  White  (Studies,  324) : 
I  wish  to  record  my  conviction  that  Shakespeare  had  in  mind  that  pale-blue,  fish-like, 
malignant  eye,  which  is  often  seen  in  hag-like  women. — Littledale  (H.  Qu.  5th 
S.  v,  345)  :  In  B.  &  FI.  Honest  Man’s  Fortune,  V,  iii,  speaking  of  various  quack 
devices,  this  cure  for  a  black  eye, — as  raw  beefsteak  is  now-a-days  considered  of 
excellent  virtue, — is  given :  4  Or  bring  in  rotten  pippins  To  cure  blue  eyes.’  —A 


62 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


As  thou  reportft  thy  felfe,  was  then  her  feruant, 

And  for  thou  waft  a  Spirit  too  delicate  320 

To  a£t  her  earthy,  and  abhord  commands, 

Refufing  her  grand  hefts,  fhe  did  confine  thee 
By  helpe  of  her  more  potent  Minifters, 

And  in  her  moft  vnmitti gable  rage, 

Into  a  clouen  Pyne,  within  which  rift  325 

Iinprifon’d,  thou  didft  painefully  remaine 
A  dozen  yeeres  :  within  which  fpace  fhe  di’d, 

And  left  thee  there  :  where  thou  didft  vent  thy  groanes 

As  faft  as  Mill-wheeles  ftrike :  Then  was  this  Ifland  329 

319.  was]  Ff,  Rowe  ii.  wast  Rowe  321.  earthy]  earthly  Rowe  ii,  Pope, 

i.  Han. 

320.  And for]  And,  for  F3F4.  327.  within]  in  Cap.  conj. 


Symons  (. Irving  Shi) :  Euripides  uses  the  word  Kvavavyfc, — literally  dark-blue-gleam¬ 
ing, — which  Browning  renders  ‘  blue  brilliance  ’  in  his  Balaustion’s  Adventure,  p.  46. 
And  on  the  next  page  Browning  speaks  of  ‘  the  blue-eyed  black -winged  phantom.’ 
Here,  of  course,  the  reference  is  to  the  lurid  blue-black  colour  of  thunder-clouds,  and 
it  is  possible  Shakespeare  may  have  meant  this  in  describing  his  witch  as  ‘  blue-eyed.’ 
[Is  it  not  possible  to  accept  the  blueness  as  referring  not  only  to  the  dark  eyelids  and 
circles  round  the  eyes,  but  also  to  the  pupil  itself,  where  the  arcus  senilis,  as  the  oph¬ 
thalmologists  call  it,  is  wont  to  give  the  baleful  expression  which  we  associate  with 
witches  ?  Instances  are  as  plenty  as  blackberries  where  what  we  now  call  blue  eyes 
were  by  Shakespeare  called  grey  eyes.  There  are  two  in  Rom.  &=  Jul.,  where  the 
Friar  speaks  of  ‘  The  grey-ey’d  morn,’  and  Mercutio  of  ‘  Thisbe,  a  grey  eye  or  so,’ 
Since,  then,  our  ‘  blue  eyes  ’  and  Shakespeare’s  ‘  blue  eyes  ’  are  not  the  same,  I  think 
we  are  at  liberty  to  include,  in  the  present  phrase,  whatsoever  tends  to  add  abhorrence 
to  the  repulsive  witch. — Ed.] 

3x9,  320.  was]  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  126)  has  collected  forty-five  or  fifty  examples 
from  Shakespeare  and  his  contemporaries  of  the  substitution  of  r  for  st  in  the  second 
person  singular  of  the  verb.  In  some  cases,  doubtless,  this  substitution  can  be 
ascribed  to  the  much-enduring  compositor,  but  after  making  all  due  allowance  for 
his  errors  there  remain,  unquestionably,  instances  due  wholly  to  the  poets  themselves, 
e.  g.  in  Shakespeare’s  Sonnet  xix :  ‘  Make  glad  and  sorry  seasons,  as  thou  fleets  .... 
To  the  wide  world  and  all  her  fading  sweets,’  the  rhyme  is  conclusive  that  Shake¬ 
speare  wrote  ‘  fleets  ’  instead  of  fleet' st.  In  this,  and  in  the  majority  of  the  cases,  it  is 
noteworthy  that  the  verb  ends  in  t ;  clearly,  then,  it  is  the  cacophonous  sound  1st  which 
was  avoided,  and  intentionally  avoided.  As  it  happens  in  this  present  case,  the  ‘  was  ’ 
being  followed  by  *  then,’  the  ear  detects  the  t  and  is  satisfied,  no  matter  whether  it 
belongs  to  the  ‘  was  ’  or  to  the  ‘  then.’ — Ed. 

321.  earthy]  W.  A.  Wright:  Gross,  material,  opposed  to  spiritual.  Prospero 
calls  Caliban  ‘  Thou  earth,  thou.’ 

322-325.  confine  thee  .  .  .  Into]  Abbott,  §  159:  ‘Into’  is  sometimes  found 
with  verbs  of  rest,  implying  motion,  as  here.  See  also  ‘  confin’d  into  the  Rocke,’ 
line  423,  post. 


act  i,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


63 


(Saue  for  the  Son,  that  he  did  littour  heere,  330 

A  frekelld  whelpe,  hag-borne)  not  honour’d  with 
A  humane  fhape. 

Ar.  Yes  :  Caliban  her  fonne. 

Pro.  Dull  thing,  I  fay  fo  :  he,  that  Caliban 
Whom  now  I  keepe  in  feruice,  thou  beft  know’ll  335 

What  torment  I  did  finde  thee  in ;  thy  grones 
Did  make  wolues  howle,  and  penetrate  the  breafls 
Of  euer-angry  Beares ;  it  was  a  torment 
To  lay  vpon  the  damn’d,  which  Sycorax 

Could  not  againe  vndoe :  it  was  mine  Art,  340 

When  I  arriu’d,  and  heard  thee,  that  made  gape 
The  Pyne,  and  let  thee  out. 

Ar.  I  thanke  thee  Mafter. 

Pro.  If  thou  more  murmur’d,  I  will  rend  an  Oake 
And  peg-thee  in  his  knotty  entrailes,  till  345 

Thou  haft  howl’d  away  twelue  winters. 

Ar.  Pardon,  Mafter, 

I  will  be  correfpondent  to  command 

And  doe  my  fpryting,  gently.  349 


330.  Soti]  Sunne  Fa.  Sun  F3F4. 
he]  Ff.  she  Rowe. 

Hit  our]  litter  Rowe. 

335.  feruice,  thou ]  service.  Thou 
Row  e. 

338.  euer-angry']  even  angry  Wilson. 


338.  torment]  torture  Walker  ( Crit. 

i,  296). 

345.  peg-thee]  Fa. 

346.  Thouhafl]  Thou’st  Pope  + ,  Dyce 

ii,  iii,  Huds. 

349.  fpryting]  spiriting  Cap. 


333.  Krauth  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p.  17)  for  this  speech  suggested  two  solutions :  1st. 
Ariel  is  absent-minded,  his  thoughts  still  running  on  his  promised  liberty,  but,  recalled 
to  himself  by  Prospero’s  pause,  he  catches,  as  is  natural  in  such  cases,  at  the  last  phrase 
still  sounding  in  his  ears,  and  assents  thereto  as  in  vain  proof  of  his  attention  to  the  rest. 
Prospero  of  course  detects  it  and  calls  him  ‘  dull.’  2dly.  That  Ariel’s  rebellious  spirit 
is  not  yet  subdued,  and,  growing  impatient  of  Prospero’s  prosy  repetition  of  well- 
known  facts,  tries  to  stop  him  by  interruption  and  hearty  assent. — Jephson  :  Ariel 
contradicts  Prospero;  he  says  that  the  island  was  honoured  with  a  human  shape, 
namely  Caliban,  forgetting  that  Prospero  had  just  excepted  him ;  and  Prospero,  beitt-g 
irritated  with  Ariel,  replies,  ‘Dull  thing ,  I  say  so’  ;  that  is,  ‘  I  say  that  Caliban  wss 
on  the  island.’ 

338.  euer-angry]  Is  this  an  echo  from  Paris  Garden,  which  was  close  to  the 
Globe  Theatre? — Ed. 

348.  correspondent]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Used  to  this  day  in  a  religious  sense  by 
Catholic  writers  in  reference  to  grace. 

349.  gently]  As  opposed  to  *  moodie  ’  and  ‘  malignant.’ 

349.  spryting]  Walker  {Crit.  i,  193) :  It  may  safely  be  laid  down  as  a  canon 


64 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  I,  SC.  11. 

35° 


Pro.  Doe  fo  :  and  after  two  daies 
I  will  difcharge  thee. 

Ar.  That’s  my  noble  Matter : 

What  fhall  I  doe  ?  fay  what  ?  what  fhall  I  doe  ? 

Pro.  Goe  make  thy  felfe  like  a  Nymph  o’th’  Sea, 

Be  fubieft  to  no  fight  but  thine,  and  mine  :  inuifibie  355 

To  euery  eye-ball  elfe :  goe  take  this  fhape 
And  hither  come  in’t :  goe  :  hence 
With  diligence.  Exit. 

Pro.  Awake,  deere  hart  awake,  thou  halt  flept  well, 

Awake.  360 

Mir.  The  ftrangenes  of  your  ftory,  put 


350.  dates']  days ,  Ariel  Anon  (ap. 
Grey). 

35°j  35r-  two... thee]  One  line,  Cap. 
conj. 

354.  like  a]  like  to  a  Ff,  Rowe+, 
Cap.  Steev.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Dtn. 

355-358.  Four  lines,  ending  mine, 
else,  hence,  diligence  Elze  (Rob.  Epit. 


Lit.). 

355.  thine, and]  Om.  Ro^re  ii  + ,  Cap. 
Steev.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Dtn. 

357.  in’t]  in  it  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Johns.  Cap. 

goe]  Om.  Han.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
357>  358.  One  line,  Pope  et  seq. 

358.  Exit.]  Excit.  F4. 


that  the  word  spirit,  in  our  old  poets,  wherever  the  metre  does  not  compel  us  to  pro¬ 
nounce  it  dissyllabically,  is  a  monosyllable. 


350.  There  is  no  known  process  whereby  this  line  can  be  made  to  fadge  with 
iambic  trimeters.  It  is  scarcely  worth  while  to  record  the  failures ;  any  one  can  make 
one  for  himself. — Ed. 

354-  Nymph  o’th’  Sea]  ‘There  does  not  appear  to  be  sufficient  cause,’  says 

Steevens,  ‘  why  Ariel  should  assume  this  new  shape,  as  he  was  to  be  invisible  to  all 
eyes  but  those  of  Prospero.’  ‘  Nor  that  the  Clown  in  Twelfth  Night,’  retorts  Thos. 
White,  ‘should  put  on  a  gown  and  beard  to  personate  Sir  Topaz,  the  priest,  as  Mal- 
volio  was  confined  in  a  dark  room.  We  may  say  of  Shakespeare  what  Fabius  says 
of  Cicero  :  “  In  vitium  ssepe  incidit  secures  tam  parvse  observationis.”  Shakespeare 
has  closely  followed  King  James’s  Demonologia  [wherein,  in  Bk  iii,  chap.  3,  speak¬ 
ing  of  the  passage  through  the  air  of  witches,  it  says],  “in  this  transporting,  they 
say  themselves,  that  they  are  invisible  to  any  other  except  amongst  themselves.”  * 
It  is  doubtful  if  this  apt  illustration  is  at  all  weakened  by  the  late  date  of  the 
Demonology,  viz  :  1616,  the  year  of  Shakespeare’s  death.  Such  a  belief  was  current, 
not  because  King  James  wrote  it  in  his  book,  but  he  wrote  it  in  his  book  because  it 
was  current,  and  if  current,  Shakespeare  assuredly  knew  it.  The  Phila.  Sh.  Soc 
‘'u8Sests  that  ‘  thus  in  character  Ariel  can  best  sing  a  sea-nymph’s  song  ’ ;  which  is 
doubtful ;  any  limitation  of  Ariel’s  powers  is  rash.  If  we  must  have  a  reason  over 
and  above  the  popular  belief,  I  think  W.  A.  Wright’s  suggestion  the  happiest,  that  in 
a  sea-nymph’s  form  Ariel  would  be  in  harmony  with  the  scene  to  the  audience. _ Ed. 

355-  Steevens:  The  redundancy  in  this  line,  and  the  ridiculous  precaution  that 
Ariel  should  not  be  invisible  to  himself,  plainly  prove  that  the  words  ‘and  thine’ 
were  the  interpolations  of  ignorance. — Dyce  pronounces  the  Folio  text  ‘most 
ridiculous.' 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


65 

362 


Heauinefle  in  me. 

Pro.  Shake  it  off :  Come  ori, 

Wee’ll  vifit  Caliban ,  my  flaue,  who  neuer  364 

362.  [Waking.  Coll,  ii  (MS).  Cam.  i  conj.  Heart-heaviness  Bulloch. 

Heauinejfe']  Strange  heaviness  A  heaviness  Anon.  (ap.  Cam.). 

361,  362.  Johnson:  Why  should  a  wonderful  story  produce  sleep?  I  believe 
experience  will  prove  that  any  violent  agitation  of  the  mind  easily  subsides  in  slum¬ 
ber,  especially  when,  as  in  Prospero’s  relation,  the  last  images  are  pleasing. — Voss  (p. 
156)  :  That  wondrous  tales  are  more  apt  to  dispel  sleep  than  to  invite  it,  the  innocent 
girl  knew  just  as  little,  as  when  afterwards  she  showed  that  she  did  not  know  that  one 
can  weep  for  joy. — Mrs  Kemble  (p.  117) :  Within  reach  of  the  wild  wind  and  spray  of 
the  tempest,  though  sheltered  from  their  fury,  Miranda  had  watched  the  sinking  ship 
struggling  with  the  mad  elements,  and  heard  when  ‘  rose  from  sea  to  sky  the  wild  fare¬ 
well.’  Amazement  and  pity  had  thrown  her  into  a  paroxysm  of  grief,  which  is  hardly 
allayed  by  her  father’s  assurance  that  ‘  there’s  no  harm  done.’  After  this  terrible 
excitement  follows  the  solemn  exordium  to  her  father’s  story :  ‘  The  hour’s  now  come, 
The  very  minute  bids  thee  ope  thine  ear,  Obey  and  be  attentive.’  The  effort  she  calls 
upon  her  memory  to  make  to  recover  the  traces  of  her  earliest  impressions  of  life, — 
the  strangeness  of  the  events  unfolded  to  her, — the  duration  of  the  recital  itself,  which 
is  considerable, — and,  above  all,  the  poignant  personal  interest  of  its  details,  are  quite 
sufficient  to  account  for  the  sudden  utter  prostration  of  her  overstrained  faculties  and 
feelings,  and  the  profound  sleep  that  falls  on  the  young  girl.  Perhaps  Shakespeare 
knew  this,  though  his  commentators,  old  and  new,  seem  not  to  have  done  so ;  and 
without  a  professed  faith,  such  as  some  of  us  moderns  indulge  in,  in  the  mysteries  of 
magnetism,  perhaps  he  believed  enough  in  the  magnetic  force  of  the  superior  physical 
as  well  as  mental  power  of  Prospero’s  nature  over  the  nervous,  sensitive,  irritable 
female  organisation  of  his  child  to  account  for  the  ‘  I  know  thou  canst  not  choose  ’ 
with  which  he  concludes  his  observation  on  her  drowsiness,  and  his  desire  that  she 
will  not  resist  it.  The  magic  gown  may,  indeed,  have  been  powerful ;  but  hardly 
more  so,  I  think,  than  the  nervous  exhaustion,  which,  combined  with  the  authoritative 
will  and  eyes  of  her  lord  and  father,  bowed  down  the  child’s  drooping  eyelids  in  pro- 
foundest  sleep. 

364.  visit]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  2) :  That  is,  look  after  him.  Two  Noble  Kinsmen , 
I,  i,  ‘  the  visitating  Sun,’  the  inspecting,  the  surveying. 

364.  Caliban]  Hunter  (i,  1S3) :  There  is  a  good  deal  that  is  Hebraistic  in  this 
play,  as  might  be  expected  where  there  is  so  much  of  the  Chaldee  philosophy.  ... 
The  most  remarkable  circumstance  under  this  head  is  that  Caliban,  who  is  generally 
represented  as  a  creation  purely  and  entirely  of  Shakespeare’s  own  invention,  is,  as 
to  his  very  peculiar  form,  of  Oriental  origin.  He  is,  in  fact,  as  to  form,  no  other  than 
the  fish-idol  of  Ashdod,  the  Dagon  of  the  Philistines,  a  word  of  which  the  principal 
element  is  the  Hebrew  word  for  fish . It  is  a  great  question  in  Rabbinical  litera¬ 

ture  in  what  manner  the  two  elements  of  fish  and  man  were  combined  in  the  figure 

of  Dagon . Abarbinel  contends  that  the  true  form  of  Dagon  was  a  figure  ‘  shaped 

like  a  fish,  only  with  hands  and  feet  like  a  man  ’ ;  and  this  is  precisely  the  form  of 
Shakespeare’s  Caliban, — ‘  a  fish,  legged  like  a  man,  and  his  fins  like  arms.’  Nothing 
can  be  more  precise  than  the  resemblance ;  the  two  are,  in  fact,  one,  as  far  as  form  is 
concerned.  Caliban  is  thus  a  kind  of  tortoise,  the  paddles  expanding  in  arms  and 
S 


66 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 

Yeelds  vs  kinde  anfwere.  365 

Mir.  ’Tis  a  villaine  Sir,  I  doe  not  loue  to  looke  on. 

Pro.  But  as  ’tis 

We  cannot  miffe  him  :  he  do’s  make  our  fire, 

Fetch  in  our  wood,  and  ferues  in  Offices  369 

366.  I.. .on]  Separate  line,  Pope  et  369.  ferues  in]  femes  Ff,  Rowe,  serv- 

seq.  eth  Coll.  MS. 

hands,  legs  and  feet ;  and,  accordingly,  before  he  appears  upon  the  stage,  the  audi¬ 
ence  are  prepared  for  this  strange  appearance  by  the  words  of  Prospero  :  ‘  Come  forth  ! 
thou  tortoise .’  ....  With  the  form  Shakespeare  really  gave  him,  everything  which  he 
says  or  does  is  consistent ;  yet  it  was  a  difficult  figure  to  manage  on  the  stage,  and  so 
the  actors  appear  to  have  found  it,  for  the  fish  character  of  Caliban  is  sunk,  and  when 
he  now  appears  it  is  as  a  species  of  monkey.  Indeed,  this  difficulty  must  have  been 
felt  from  the  beginning,  and  Shakespeare  could  hardly  have  introduced  a  figure  so 
unmanageable  upon  the  stage  as  a  compound  of  fish  and  man,  but  under  constraint; 
that  is,  the  figure  of  Caliban  was  prescribed  for  him  by  the  writer  of  the  story  on 
which  he  wrought,  borrowed  by  him  from  the  figure  of  Dagon  of  Ashdod.  The 
moral  attributes,  the  action,  and  the  talk  of  Caliban  may,  however,  be  well  believed 
to  be  Shakespeare’s  own. — Br.  Nicholson  (Ar.  S’  Qu.  4th  S.  i,  291) :  Throughout 
Caliban  is  a  beast  of  burden,  and  being  morally  such,  he  would  be  physically  fitted 
for  his  office.  From  Trinculo’s  jest  we  learn  that  he  was  not  a  standard,  but  of 
dwarf’s  stature.  His  lower  limbs  were  large,  for  the  lesser  legs  were  Trinculo’s,  and 
as  he  was  of  dwarf’s  stature,  the  difference  must  have  been  in  a  girth  of  limb  resem¬ 
bling  that  of  a  turtle.  The  corresponding  feet  to  such  limbs  would  be  large  and 
‘splay.’  The  corresponding  arms,  short  and  strong,  would  be  such  as,  with  their  claw¬ 
fingered  hands,  would  resemble  what  sailors  call  the  fore-fins  of  a  turtle,  and  as  such 
enable  us  to  understand  how  he  fed  himself  before  Prospero’s  arrival,  and  why,  with 
a  consciousness  of  his  greater  powers,  he  offered  with  his  long  nails  to  dig  pig-nuts, 
or  climb  for  jays’  nests,  or  clamber  o’er  precipitous  cliffs  for  young  sea-birds.  Simi¬ 
larly,  if  the  hardly  human  face  were  fashioned  like  that  of  a  tortoise,  the  eyes  would 
be  ‘  deep-set  ’  by  nature  as  well  as  by  drink,  and  he  would  be  *  dim-eyed  ’  and  ‘  beetle- 
browed.’  Lastly,  the  scabby  spottings  of  the  ‘  freckled  whelp,’  who  calls  Trinculo 
‘  Thou,  scurvy  patch,’  would  be  the  loathsome  leprosy  that  had  spread  itself  over  all 
the  other  deformities,  and  also  the  analogue  of  the  spotted  and  patch-like  scales  of 
the  tortoise,  and  the  hard,  rough,  knotted,  diseased-like  look  of  its  skin  and  wrinkled 
neck.  [Nicholson  referred  to  this  subject  again  in  N.  &>  Qu.  4th  S.  iii,  431,  where 
he  hints  that  Sir  Politic  'Would-be’s  make-up  as  a  turtle  in  Volpone,  V,  ii,  might  have 
been  one  of  the  remembrances  which  led  to  the  conception  of  Caliban.] 

368.  misse]  M.  Mason  :  That  is,  we  cannot  do  without  him. — Malone  :  This 
provincial  expression  is  still  used  in  the  midland  counties. — [Halliwell:  I  have 
not  met  with  a  confirmation  of  Malone’s  remark. — W.  A.  Wright:  It  does  not 
appear  to  be  recorded  in  any  local  glossary.] — Voss  (p.  156)  :  This  word  is  here 
used  in  its  genuine  German  meaning,  missen,  entbehren. — Halliwell  :  See  B.  &  FI. 

Mad  Lover,  II,  i :  ‘  I  will  have  honest,  valiant  souls  about  me ;  I  cannot  miss  thee.’ _ 

W.  A.  Wright  :  Compare  Lyly’s  Euphues  and  his  England,  p.  264  (ed.  Arber) : 
‘  Bringing  vnto  man  both  honnye  and  wax,  each  so  wholsome  that  wee  all  desire  it, 
both  so  necessary  that  we  cannot  misse  them.’ 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


67 

That  profit  vs  :  What  hoa  :  flaue  :  Caliban  :  370 

Thou  Earth,  thou  :  fpeake. 

Cal.  within.  There’s  wood  enough  within. 

Pro.  Come  forth  I  fay,  there’s  other  bufines  for  thee : 

Come  thou  Tortoys,  when  ?  Enter  Ariel  like  a  water- 
Fine  apparifion :  my  queint  Ariel ,  Nymph.  375 

Hearke  in  thine  eare. 

Ar.  My  Lord,  it  fhall  be  done.  '  Exit. 

Pro.  Thou  poyfonous  flaue,  got  by  y  diuell  himfelfe 
Vpon  thy  wicked  Dam  ;  come  forth.  Enter  Caliban.  379 


373.  Come']  Om.  Anon.  (ap.  Grey). 

374.  Come]  Come  forth  Steev.  Ktly, 
Huds. 

Come. ..when  ?]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
when  ?]  when  ?  I  say,  come  forth 

Anon.  (ap.  Grey),  then  A - c  (Gent. 

Mag.  1820). 


375-377-  an  aside.  Cap.  Sta. 

375.  apparifton  ...queint]  apparition 
...quaint  Ff. 

379-  forth.]  forth,  thou  tortoise  Pope, 
Han. 

[Scene  IV.  Pope. 


372.  Coleridge  ( Seven  Lectures,  p.  120)  :  Another  instance  of  admirable  judge¬ 
ment  and  excellent  preparation  is  to  be  found  in  the  creature  contrasted  with  Ariel, — 
Caliban ;  who  is  described  in  such  a  manner  by  Prospero  as  to  lead  us  to  expect  the 
appearance  of  a  foul,  unnatural  monster.  He  is  not  seen  at  once ;  his  voice  is  heard ; 
this  is  the  preparation ;  he  was  too  offensive  to  be  seen  at  first  in  all  his  deformity, 
and  in  nature  we  do  not  receive  so  much  disgust  from  sound  as  from  sight.  After 
we  have  heard  Caliban’s  voice  he  does  not  enter  until  Ariel  has  entered  like  a  water- 
nymph.  All  the  strength  of  contrast  is  thus  acquired  without  any  of  the  shock  of 
abruptness,  or  of  that  unpleasant  sensation  which  we  experience  when  the  object 
presented  is  in  any  way  hateful  to  our  vision.  [For  Coleridge’s  analysis  of  Caliban’s 
character,  see  Appendix.] 

374.  Tortoys]  Br.  Nicholson  [N.  dr’  Qu.  4th  S.  i,  291)  :  While  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  this  exclamation  of  Prospero  is  used  in  reference  to  Caliban’s  unwilling 
sloth,  there  is  as  little  doubt  that  it  was  suggested  by  his  make,  and  intended  to  pre' 
pare  the  spectators  for  the  similitude  that  was  about  to  appear. 

374.  when]  Malone:  This  expression  of  impatience  occurs  often  in  our  old 
dramas. 

375.  queint]  W.  A.  Wright:  Cotgrave’s  explanation  of  the  French  original  of 
this  word  covers  all  the  senses  in  which  it  is  used  by  Shakespeare.  He  says,  ‘  Coint 
.  .  .  .  Quaint,  compt,  neat,  fine,  spruce,  briske,  smirke,  smug,  daintie,  trim,  tricked  vp.’ 

379.  Enter  Caliban]  Rowe  ( Life  of  Shakespeare,  p.  xxiv,  ed.  1709):  Shake¬ 
speare’s  magic  has  something  in  it  very  solemn  and  very  poetical :  And  that  extrav¬ 
agant  character  of  Caliban  is  mighty  well  sustain’d,  shews  a  wonderful  invention  in 
the  author,  who  could  strike  out  such  a  particular  wild  image,  and  is  certainly  one  of 
the  finest  and  most  uncommon  Grotesques  that  was  ever  seen.  The  observation,  which 
I  have  been  inform’d  three  very  great  men  concurr’d  in  making  [Ld  Falkland,  Ld  C. 
J.  Vaughan,  and  Mr  Selden. — Foot-note]  was  extremely  just.  ‘  That  Shakespear  had 
not  only  found  out  a  new  character  in  his  Caliban,  but  had  also  devis’d  and  adapted 
a  new  manner  of  language  for  that  character  V’avbttrton  :  What  they  [i.  e.  the 


68 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 

Cal.  As  wicked  dewe,  as  ere  my  mother  brulh’d  380 

With  Rauens  feather  from  vnwholefome  Fen 
Drop  on  you  both  :  A  Southweft  blow  on  yee,  382 

380.  wicked ]  cursed  Cartwright.  382.  SouthwejT\  south-west  wind  Ktly. 

three  men  mentioned  by  Rowe]  meant  by  it,  without  doubt,  was  that  Shakespeare  gave 
his  language  a  certain  grotesque  air  of  the  savage  and  antique ;  which  it  certainly  has. 
But  Dr  Bentley  took  [the  phrase]  ‘  new  language  ’  literally ;  for  speaking  of  a  phrase 
in  Milton,  which  he  supposed  altogether  absurd  and  unmeaning,  he  says,  ‘  Satan  had 
not  the  privilege,  as  Caliban  in  Shakespeare,  to  use  new  phrase  and  diction  unknown 
to  all  others  ’ ;  and  again,  ‘  to  practise  distances  is  still  a  Caliban  style.’ — Note  on 
Paradise  Lost ,  iv,  945.  But  I  know  no  such  ‘  Caliban  style  ’  in  Shakespeare,  that 
hath  new  phrase  and  diction  unknown  to  all  others. — Johnson  :  Whence  these  critics 
derived  the  notion  of  a  new  language  appropriated  to  Caliban,  I  cannot  find;  they 
certainly  mistook  brutality  of  sentiment  for  uncouthness  of  words.  Caliban  had 
learned  to  speak  of  Prospero  and  his  daughter;  he  had  no  names  for  the  sun  and 
moon  before  their  arrival ;  and  could  not  have  invented  a  language  of  his  own,  with¬ 
out  more  understanding  than  Shakespeare  has  thought  it  proper  to  bestow  upon  him. 
His  diction  is  indeed  somewhat  clouded  by  the  gloominess  of  his  temper  and  the 
malignity  of  his  purposes ;  but  let  any  other  being  entertain  the  same  thoughts,  and 
he  will  find  them  easily  issue  in  the  same  expressions.  [Dryden,  however,  said  (see 
Appendix)  that  Caliban’s  ‘  language  was  as  hobgoblin  as  his  person.’ — Ed.] — D. 
Wilson  (p.  90) :  The  talk  of  the  ship’s-crew  is  not  only  coarse,  but  even  what  it  is 
customary  to  call  brutal;  while  that  of  Stephano  and  Trinculo  accords  with  their 
debased  and  besotted  humanity.  Their  language  never  assumes  a  rhythmical  struc¬ 
ture,  nor  rises  to  poetic  thought.  But  Caliban  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  rhythm 
of  the  breezes  and  the  tides.  His  thoughts  are  essentially  poetical,  within  the  range 
of  his  lower  nature ;  and  so  his  speech  is,  for  the  most  part,  in  verse.  He  has  that 
poetry  of  the  senses  which  seems  natural  to  the  companionship  with  the  creatures  of 
the  forest  and  the  seashore.  Even  his  growl,  as  he  retorts  impotent  curses  upon  the 
power  that  has  enslaved  him,  is  rhythmical.  Bogs,  fens,  and  the  infectious  exhala¬ 
tions  that  the  sun  sucks  up,  embody  his  ideas  of  evil ;  and  his  acute  senses  are  chiefly 
at  home  with  the  dew,  and  the  fresh  springs,  the  clustering  filberts,  the  jay  in  his  leafy 
nest,  and  the  blind  mole  in  its  burrow. 

380.  wicked]  Heath  (p.  9) :  This  epithet  is  intended,  I  think,  to  express  the 
wickedness  of  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  gathered. — Johnson  :  That  is,  having 
baneful  qualities.  So  Spenser  says,  wicked  weed ;  so,  in  opposition,  we  say  herbs  or 
medicines  have  virtues.  Bacon  mentions  ‘  virtuous  bezoar  ’  and  Dryden  ‘  virtuous 
herbs.’ — Steevens  :  Under  Henry  VI  the  Parliament  petitioned  against  hops,  as  a 
wicked  weed. — Dyce  :  Though  ‘  kicked,’  as  an  epithet  to  ‘  dew,’  makes  very  good 
sense  (meaning  baneful'),  I  suspect  that  it  is  not  Shakespeare’s  word,  and  that  it  has 
been  repeated  by  mistake  from  the  line  above.  [Is  it  not  precisely  because  it  is  in 
Prospero’s  speech,  and  applied  to  his  mother,  that  Caliban’s  retort  repeats  it,  and  in 
the  same  connection? — Ed.] 

382.  A  Southwest]  Douce  (i,  9) :  In  Batman  vppon  Bartholome,  lib.  xi,  c.  3, 

we  find :  ‘  This  Southern  wind  is  hot  and  moyst . Southern  winds  corrupt  and 

destroy;  they  heat  and  maketh  men  fall  into  siclcnesse.’  Shakespeare  was  extremely 
well  acquainted  with  this  work. — Lettsom  (in  a  note  on  a  remark  of  Walker 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  TEMPEST 

And  blifter  you  all  ore. 

Pro.  For  this  be  fure,  to  night  thou  fhalt  haue  cramps, 
Side-ftitches,  that  fhall  pen  thy  breath  vp,  Vrchins 

( Crit.  iii,  Si),  that  Shakespeare  mostly  speaks  disparagingly  of  the  south  wind  as 
rotten,  foggy,  adds :)  This  no  doubt  is  true,  and  it  may  lead  us  to  infer  that  the 
greatest  of  poets  was  a  person  of  a  somewhat  relaxed  habit  of  body,  and  required  a 
bracing  air  to  be  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  health. — W.  A.  Wright,  in  proof  of  the 
noxious  character  attrbuted  to  southerly  winds,  refers  to  Cor.  II,  iii,  34,  35  ;  lb.  I,  iv 
30;  As  You  Like  It,  III,  v,  50;  Tro.  Cress.  V,  i,  21 ;  and  Cymb.  II,  iii,  136. 

382,  383.  you  .  .  .  yee  .  .  .  you]  Abbott,  §  236 :  Ye  is  nominative,  you  accusa¬ 
tive.  This  distinction,  however,  though  observed  in  our  version  of  the  Bible,  was 
disregarded  by  Elizabethan  authors,  and  ye  seems  to  be  generally  used  in  questions, 
entreaties,  and  rhetorical  appeals.  Ye  and  your  seem  used  indiscriminately  in  [V,  i, 
4°-43>  &c.].  Sometimes  ye  seems  put  for  you  when  an  unaccented  syllable  is  wanted. 

385.  Vrchins]  Steevens:  That  is,  hedge-hogs.  Perhaps  here  put  for  fairies. 
Milton  in  his  Masque  speaks  of  *  urchin  blasts,’  and  we  still  call  any  little  dwarfish 
child  an  urchin.  The  word  occurs  in  the  next  Act. — Malone  :  In  Merry  Wives 
IV,  iv,  49:  ‘Like  urchins,  ouphes,  and  fairies.’  [I  am  inclined]  to  think  that 
‘  urchins  ’  here  signifies  beings  of  the  fairy  kind. — Douce  (i,  9) :  Although  ‘  urchins  ’ 
sometimes  mean  hedge-hogs,  it  is  more  probable  that  in  this  place  they  denote  fairies 
or  spirits.  In  a  very  rare  old  collection  of  songs,  set  to  music  by  John  Bennett. 
Edward  Piers  or  Pierce,  and  Thomas  Ravenscroft,  composers  in  the  time  of  Shake¬ 
speare,  [there  is  The  Urchins'  Dance,  as  follows :]  ‘  By  the  moone  we  sport  and  play, 
With  the  night  begins  our  day ;  As  we  friske  the  dew  doth  fall,  Trip  it  little  urchins 
all,  Lightly  as  the  little  bee.  Two  by  two,  and  three  by  three,  And  about  goe  wee, 
goe  wee.’  [The  context  of  itself  almost  suffices  to  show  that  Vrchins  could  not  here 
mean  hedge-hogs ;  the  exercise  which  the  latter  can  work  is  passive,  the  harm  they 
can  do  is  to  ‘  lye  tumbling  in  the  bare-foote  way,  and  mount  their  pricks  at  the  foot¬ 
fall,’  but  here  more  active  malice  is  needed ;  they,  must  work  all  kinds  of  torment.  It 
is  not  difficult  to  see  how  the  uncanny,  nocturnal  habits  of  this  animal  came  to  be 
attributed  to  the  obsession  of  fairies,  and  thence  the  name  itself  attributed  to  a  class 
of  malicious  spirits.  Steevens  referred  to  Reginald  Scot  as  an  authority  for  the  word. 
The  passage  itself  is  given  in  Thom’s  Three  Notelets,  p.  80 ;  the  sentence  containing 
the  name  is  worth  reproducing  here  for  its  remarkable  catalogue  :  ‘  In  our  childhood 
our  mothers  maids  have  so  terrified  us  with  an  ouglie  divell  having  homes  on  his 
head,  fier  in  his  mouth,  ....  eies  like  a  bason,  fanges  like  a  dog,  clawes  like  a  beare, 
a  skin  like  a  Niger,  and  a  voice  roring  like  a  lion,  whereby  we  start  and  are  afraid 
when  we  hear  one  crie  Bough ;  and  they  have  so  fraied  us  with  bull  beggers,  spirits, 
witches,  urchens,  elves,  hags,  fairies,  satyrs,  pans,  faunes,  sylens,  kit  with  the  cansticke, 
tritons,  centaurs,  dwarfes,  giants,  imps,  calcars,  conjurers,  nymphes,  changlings,  Incu¬ 
bus,  Robin  good-fellowe,  the  spoome,  the  mare,  the  man  in  the  oke,  the  hell  waine, 
the  fierdrake,  the  prickle,  Tom  thombe,  hob  gobblin,  Tom  tumbler,  boneles,  and  such 
other  bugs,  that  we  are  afraid  of  our  owne  shadowes :  in  so  much  as  some  never  feare 
the  divell,  but  in  a  darke  night ;  and  then  a  polled  sheep  is  a  perillous  beast,  and 
manie  times  is  taken  for  our  father’s  soule,  speciallie  in  a  churchyard.’ — Seventh 
Book,  chap.  15,  p.  122,  ed.  Nicholson. — W.  A.  Wright  refers  to  Harsnet’s  Declara¬ 
tion  of  Popish  Impostures,  1603,  p.  14,  where  ‘urchins’  is  used  for  ‘hobgoblins’; 
and  another  reference  to  the  same  book,  p.  135,  is  given  in  the  New  Sh.  Soc  Trans. 


69 

383 

385 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
386 


70 

Shall  for  that  vaft  of  night,  that  they  may  worke 

386.  Shall. ..vafl  of  night. ..worke]  Ff.  386.  for  that  vafl]for  that,  fast  Anon. 

Shall. ..waste  of  night ,  work  Rowe  i.  (ap.  Sta.).  for  that  want  T.  Warton  (ap. 
Shall, ...vast  of  night. ..work,  Rowe  ii  et  Ingleby). 
seq. 

1880-5,  Pt  ii,  p.  19*,  where  much  of  the  list,  just  given  from  Scot’s  Discovery,  is  referred 
to  and  repeated.  W.  A.  Wright  adds  that  the  word  is  still  used  in  the  north  of 
England,  and  refers  to  Carr  and  Brockett.  On  the  other  hand,  Jephson  says  that 
urchins  are  hedge-hogs,  adding :  ‘  Prospero  threatens  Caliban  that  hedge-hogs  shall 
run  over  him  and  prick  him  with  their  spines  during  the  vast  time  of  night  during 
which  they  go  abroad.’ — Ed.] 

386.  for  that  vast]  Capell  (60a)  :  The  sense  of  ‘  vast  ’  approaches  to  waste,  and 
we  apprehend  by  it  an  idea  of  ‘  night  ’  as  a  waste  part  of  time. — Steevens  :  This 
means  the  night,  which  is  naturally  empty  and  deserted,  without  action;  or  when 
all  things  lying  in  sleep  and  silence,  make  the  world  appear  one  great  uninhabited 
waste.  So  in  Ham.  I,  ii,  198 :  ‘  In  the  dead  waste  [vast,  QJ  and  middle  of  the 
night.’  It  may,  however,  be  used  differently  in  Pericles,  III,  i,  1 :  ‘  Thou  god  of  this 
great  vast.’  It  should  be  remembered  that  in  the  pneumatology  of  former  ages  these 
particulars  were  settled  with  the  most  minute  exactness,  and  the  different  kinds  of 
visionary  beings  had  different  allotments  of  time,  suitable  to  the  variety  or  conse¬ 
quence  of  their  employments.  During  these  spaces  they  were  at  liberty  to  act,  but 
were  always  obliged  to  leave  off  at  a  certain  hour,  that  they  might  not  interfere  in 
that  portion  of  night  which  belonged  to  others.  To  this  limitation  of  time  Shake¬ 
speare  alludes  in  Lear,  III,  iv,  120 :  ‘he  begins  at  curfew  and  walks  till  the  first 
cock.’ — Thomas  White  :  The  passage  is  drawn  with  inaccurateness  and  indistinc¬ 
tion.  ‘  Urchins  ’  shall  what  ?  That  they  may  work.  I  suspect  ‘  for  that  ’  should  be 
forth  at,  and  ‘  exercise  ’  a  substantive.  Forth  for  go  forth,  according  to  the  old  ellip¬ 
tical  mode  of  writing,  is  common . Urchins  in  the  dead  waste  and  middle  of  the 

night  shall,  ‘  at  my  strong  bidding,’  go  forth  and  work  all  exercise  on  thee.  [The 
foregoing  note  was  written  in  1793,  and  ought  therefore  to  be  placed  chronologically 
before  Steevens’s,  but  it  did  not  appear  in  print  till  1853,  in  Fennell’s  Repository .] 
— W.  A.  Wright:  That  is,  shall,  during  that  desolate  period  of  night  when  they 
are  .permitted  to  work,  all  practise  upon  thee.  The  First  Folio’s  punctuation  has 
given  occasion  to  a  very  plausible  conjecture,  which,  however,  can  only  be  regarded 
as  ingenious,  though  it  has  been  graced  with  the  epithet  ‘  palmarian  ’  [in  the  Church 
and  State  Rev.  I  Ap.  1864.  After  giving  Thomas  White’s  emendation  Wright  con¬ 
tinues  :]  The  objections  to  this  emendation  appear  to  lie  in  the  two  phrases,  ‘  at  vast 
of  night  ’  and  ‘  work  exercise.’  So  far  as  can  be  ascertained  ‘  vast  of  night  ’  denotes 
an  interval  of  time  between  certain  limits,  and  not  a  definite  point  of  time,  and  there¬ 
fore  would  not  be  used  with  the  preposition  ‘  at.’  We  have  of  course  the  adverbial 
phrase  ‘  at  night,’  but  ‘  at  vast  of  night  ’  does  not  seem  a  natural  expression.  The 
same  remark  applies  to  ‘  work  exercise.’  With  ‘  vast  ’  in  the  sense  of  desolate,  here 
applied  to  time  as  elsewhere  to  space,  compare  Ham.  I,  ii,  198. — Ingleby  ( Still  Lion, 
1875,  p.  12a)  strongly  upholds  White’s  emendation,  and  denies  that  to  work  an  exer¬ 
cise  is  pleonastic ;  ‘  it  means,’  he  says,  ‘  to  perform  a  penal  act.'  Prospero’s  phrase, 
‘  therefore,  means  “  that  they  may  perform  on  thee  all  the  penalties  I  have  allotted 
them.”  ’  Subsequently,  replying  to  R.  H.  Legis,  who  had  said  (TV.  &->  Qu.  5th  S. 
vii,  283)  that  White’s  emendation  is  no  improvement,  but  destructive,  and  that  ‘  they 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


71 

387 


All  exercife  on  thee  :  thou  fhalt  be  pinch’d 
As  thicke  as  hony-combe,  each  pinch  more  flinging 
Then  Bees  that  made  ’em. 

Cal.  I  muft  eat  my  dinner  :  390 

This  Ifland’s  mine  by  Sycorax  my  mother, 

Which  thou  tak’ft  from  me:  when  thou  cam’ ft  firft 
Thou  ftroakft  me,  &  made  much  of  me :  wouldft  giue  me 
Water  with  berries  in’t :  and  teach  me  how 
To  name  the  bigger  Light,  and  how  the  leffe  395 


388.  hony -combe ]  honey-combs  Pope  + , 
Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

389.  made ]  make  S.  Verges  (N.  &  Qu. 
H,  vii,  337). 

’em]  them  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt,  Hal.  Sing.  Ktly. 


392.  cam' Jl]  Ff,  Wh.  ii.  cam'st  here 
Ritson,  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
earnest  Rowe  et  cet. 

393.  JlroakJl]  stroak'dst  Rowe  et 
seq. 

made]  mad’st  Rowe  et  seq. 


may  work  all  exercise  on  thee  ’  is  not  good  sense,  Ingleby  acknowledged  that  *  some 
corroboration  is  required  for  the  peculiar  use  of  “  exercise,”  which  indeed  is  employed 
by  Shakespeare  for  penance  undergone  and  not  for  punishment  inflicted.’  Delius  is 
the  only  editor,  I  believe,  who  has  adopted  White’s  emendation. — Schmidt  has  fol¬ 
lowed  it  in  his  Lexicon,  where  he  defines  ‘  exercise  ’  in  this  phrase  as  *  occupation  in 
general,  ordinary  task,  habitual  activity,’  definitions  which  look  suspiciously  like  those 
devised  for  special  occasions.  Only  three  other  examples  are  cited  by  him  under  this 
head,  viz:  Wint.  T.  I,  ii,  166;  3  Hen.  VI:  IV,  vi,  85;  Per.  I,  iv,  38;  of  these  the 
first  alone  can  be  construed,  I  think,  as  at  all  appropriate.  Prospero’s  phrase  Schmidt 
here  interprets  as  meaning  ‘  all  their  wonted  mischievous  doing.’  By  universal  Eng¬ 
lish  editorial  consent  White’s  very  ingenious  and  very  plausible  emendation  is  con¬ 
demned.  To  the  peculiar  use  of  ‘  vast  ’  by  Elizabethan  writers  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  38) 
devotes  a  chapter. — Ed.] 

391,  & c.  JephsoN:  There  is  something  pathetic  in  Caliban’s  complaint,  and  even 
sublime  in  the  simplicity  of  his  language.  How  fine  is  the  expression,  ‘  How  to  name 
the  bigger  light,’  &c. ;  and  were  it  not  for  Prospero’s  answer  and  Caliban’s  brutal 
exultation  in  his  attempted  crime,  all  our  sympathies  would  be  in  his  favour. 

393.  stroakst  .  .  .  made]  Whether  Shakespeare  or  the  compositor  is  responsible 
for  these  imperfect  words,  the  ear  has  been  the  guide  in  either  case.  The  abhorrent 
harshness  of  strokedst  me  and  madest  much  of  me,’  so  far  from  suggesting  a  caress, 
justifies  almost  any  literal  alleviation.  See  also  ‘  strongest  suggestion,’  IV,  i,  30. — Ed. 

394.  berries]  W.  A.  Wright  :  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  this  were  intended  as 
a  description  of  the  yet  little-known  coffee.  ‘  The  Turkes,’  says  Burton  (Anat.  of 
Melan.  Part  ii,  Sect.  5,  Memb.  I,  Subsec.  5),  ‘haue  a  drinke  called  coffa  (for  they  use 
no  wine),  So  named  of  a  berry  as  blacke  as  soot,  and  as  bitter  (like  that  blacke  drinke 
which  was  in  vse  amongst  the  Lacedemonians,  and  perhaps  the  same),  which  they  sip 
still  of,  and  sup  as  warme  as  they  can  suffer.’  This  passage  occurs  for  the  first  time 
in  the  fourth  edition  of  Burton,  1632,  and  it  shows  that  the  virtues  of  this  drink  were 
as  yet  only  known  in  England  by  report.  [See  Strachey,  Appendix,  p.  314.] 

395.  Wordsworth  (p.  54) :  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Mosaic  record  of  tha 
creation  of  the  sun  and  moon  gave  occasion  to  these  words  of  Caliban. 


72 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  it 


That  burne  by  day,  and  night :  and  then  I  lou’d  thee 
And  fhew’d  thee  all  the  qualities  o’th’  Ifle, 

The  frefh  Springs,  Brine-pits;  barren  place  and  fertill , 
Curs’d  be  I  that  did  fo :  All  the  Charmes 
Of  Sycorax:  Toades,  Beetles,  Batts  light  on  you  : 

For  I  am  all  the  Subjects  that  you  haue, 

Which  firft  was  min  owne  King :  and  here  you  fty-me 
In  this  hard  Rocke,  whiles  you  doe  keepe  from  me 
The  reft  o’th’  Ifland. 

Pro.  Thou  moft  lying  flaue, 

Whom  ftripes  may  moue,  not  kindnes :  I  haue  vs’d  thee 
(Filth  as  thou  art)  with  humane  care,  and  lodg’d  thee 
In  mine  owne  Cell,  till  thou  didft  feeke  to  violate 
The  honor  of  my  childe. 

Cal.  Oh  ho,  oh  ho,  would’t  had  bene  done  : 

Thou  didft  preuent  me,  I  had  peopel’d  elfe 
This  Ifle  with  Calibans. 

Mira.  Abhorred  Slaue, 


396 


400 


405 


410 


413 


399.  Curs'd ]  Cursed  Steev.  ’93  et 
seq. 

be  I  that~\  be  I  that  /Ff,  Rowe  + 

Cap. 

402.  Which~\  Who  Pope  + . 

Jly-me~\  Ff. 

406.  not~\  nor  Fa. 


407.  lodg'd  thee ]  lodg’d  F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 

410.  would' /]  Iwou'd it  Pope  + ,  Ktly. 
’ would  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Hal. 
Sta. 

413.  Mira.]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  Pros. 
Dry.  Tbeob.  et  seq. 


398.  place]  Owing  to  the  very  common  absorption  of  the  plural  j  in  words  end¬ 
ing  in  the  sound  of  j,  the  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  suggests  that  ‘  place  ’  is  here  used  for 
places. 

402.  min]  Can  this,  possibly,  be  a  mere  phonetic  spelling  of  mine  ? — Ed. 

410.  Oh  ho,  oh  ho]  Steevens  :  This  savage  exclamation  was  originally  and 
constantly  appropriated,  by  the  writers  of  our  ancient  Mysteries  and  Moralities,  to  the 

Devil;  and  has,  in  this  instance,  been  transferred  to  his  descendant,  Caliban. _ 

Malone  :  So  in  the  verses  attributed  to  Shakespeare :  ‘  O  ho !  quoth  the  devil,  ’tis 
my  John  a  Combe.’  But  Shakespeare  was  led  to  put  this  ejaculation  in  the  mouth  of 
the  savage  by  the  following  passage  :  ‘  They  [the  savages]  seemed  all  very  civil  and 
very  merry,  showing  tokens  of  much  thankfulness  for  those  things  we  gave  them, 

which  they  express  in  their  language  by  these  words — oh,  ho!  often  repeated.’ _ 

Rosier" s  Account  of  Captain  Weymouth's  Voyage,  Purchas,  iv,  1661. — W.  A.  Wright: 
It  would  have  been  well  if  Steevens  had  given  a  single  instance  in  support  of  his 
positive  assertion,  which  has  not  been  confirmed  by  an  examination  of  the  old  plays. 
Perhaps,  also,  Shakespeare  may  have  been  capable  of  putting  so  very  common  an 
exclamation  into  the  mouth  of  Caliban  without  having  it  suggested  to  him  in  the  way 
indicated  by  Steevens  and  Malone.  The  latter  would  hardly  have  maintained  tliaj 
Oh  ho  !  in  this  passage  is  an  ejaculation  expressive  of  thankfulness. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


73 


[413.  Abhorred  Slaue,] 

413.  Mira]  Theobald:  I  am  persuaded  the  author  never  design’d  this  speech 
for  Miranda.  In  the  first  place  ’tis  probable  Prospero  taught  Caliban  to  speak,  rather 
than  left  that  office  to  his  daughter.  In  the  next  place,  as  Prospero  was  here  rating 
Caliban,  it  would  be  a  great  impropriety  for  her  to  take  the  discipline  out  of  his  hands ; 
and,  indeed,  in  some  sort  an  indecency  in  her  to  reply  to  what  Caliban  was  last  speak¬ 
ing  of.  I  can  easily  guess  that  the  change  was  first  deriv’d  from  the  players,  who,  not 
loving  that  any  character  should  stand  too  long  silent  on  the  stage,  to  obviate  that 
inconvenience  with  regard  to  Miranda,  clap’d  this  speech  to  her  part.  [Theobald 
also  noted  that  Dryden  had  given  this  speech  to  Prospero.]— Capell  :  What  [Theo¬ 
bald]  says  of  the  change’s  cause  may  be  right,— that  it  sprang  of  players’  not  liking 
that  a  character  of  Miranda’s  importance  should  stand  so  long  on  the  stage  without  a 
share  of  the  dialogue.— Philadelphia  Sh.  Soc.  :  Rev.  Dr  Krauth  urged  that  the 
distribution  as  it  stands  in  be  retained,  because  :  1st.  That  the  strong  language  was 
such  as  would  naturally  spring  from  the  inborn  purity  of  a  woman ;  and  this,  too, 
without  attributing  to  Miranda  any  precocious  knowledge  of  the  extent  of  Caliban  s 
offered  insult.  She  knew  that  his  intentions  were  of  such  vileness  as  to  arouse  the 
utmost  wrath  of  her  calm  father,  and  to  bring  upon  him  the  severest  punishment.  In 
her  first  allusion  to  Caliban  she  calls  him  a  ‘  villain  ’ ;  and  the  epithet  ‘  flave  seems 
to  have  been  her  father’s  ordinary  style  of  address  to  him.  2d.  That  if  this  speech 
be  attributed  to  Prospero,  a  most  charming  picture  of  Miranda’s  youth  will  be  lost, 
which  needs  but  to  be  contemplated  to  be  appreciated.  3d.  The  supposition  that 
Miranda  was  the  youthful  instructress  of  Caliban  receives  a  confirmation,  suggested 
by  Mr  Dickson,  in  Caliban’s  assertion,/^,  II,  ii,  149.  where,  in  reply  to  Stephano’s 
announcement  that  he  was  the  man  in  the  moon,  Caliban  says  :  ‘  I  have  feen  thee  in  her 
—My  miftrefs  fhowed  me  thee.’  [With  Dr  Krauth  the  present  editor  then  agreed, 
and  has  not  since  then  seen  reason  to  change  his  opinion. — Ed.]  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Dean,  Judge  Sharswood,  and  Prof.  Ai.len,  maintained  :  that  the  speech  is, 
—if  not  unfeminine,— utterly  discrepant,  in  tone,  from  everything  else  Miranda  says, 
while  it  is,  in  every  respect,  identical  in  character  with  the  speeches  of  Prospero  which 
precede  and  follow  it.  It  is  a  continuation  of  the  history  of  Caliban’s  education  ;  and 
Prospero  should  be  the  one  to  continue  it,  for  Caliban  had  begun  it  by  saying  that 
Prospero  was  his  teacher.  Prospero  stood  pressingly  in  need  of  Caliban’s  services 
from  the  moment  of  his  landing  on  the  island.  He  therefore  must  have  begun  to 
educate  him, — and  Caliban  says  he  did, — when  he  first  came.  But  at  that  time 
Miranda  was  ‘  not  full  out  three  years  old  ’ ;  so  that, — while  her  father  taught  him 
<  how  to  name  the  bigger  light  and  how  the  less,’  she  could  hardly  have  been  compe¬ 
tent  so  early  even  to  ‘  fhow  him  the  man  i’  the  moon  and  his  dog  and  his  bufh,  far 
less  to  *  endow  his  purpofes  with  words  to  make  them  known,’  when  he  did  not  *  know 
his  own  meaning.’  It  may  be  added,  too,  that,— while  such  error  in  the  names  of  the 
speakers  is  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  the  known  carelessness  of  the  compositors  of 
F  ,— the  capitals  M  and  P  (in  Mira,  and  Pro.)  are  so  much  alike,  in  the  hand-writing 
of  the  time,  that  they  might  easily  be  mistaken  the  one  for  the  other.  Staunton 
(. Athenaum ,  16  Nov.  1872)  :  A  careful  examination  of  this  speech  and  its  surround¬ 
ings  convinces  me  that  it  is  Miranda’s.  It  lacks  much  of  the  delicacy  and  gentleness 
which  pervade  her  language  in  other  scenes,  yet  not  more  than  is  natural,  considering 
the  crime  her  father  had  just  laid  to  Caliban’s  charge.  Moreover,  if  it  sounds  harsh 
for  her,  it  is  infinitely  too  mild  for  Prospero  when  compared  with  his  previous  and 
subsequent  language  to  this  4  poisonous  slave.’  [Staunton’s  final  reason  is  the  same 


74 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  t,  sc.  ii. 


Which  any  print  of  goodneffe  wilt  not  take, 

Being  capable  of  all  ill :  I  pittied  thee, 

Took  pains  to  make  thee  fpeak,  taught  thee  each  houre 
One  thing  or  other :  when  thou  didft  not  (Sauage) 
Know  thine  owne  meaning ;  but  wouldft  gabble,  like 
A  thing  moft  brutifh,  I  endow’d  thy  purpofes 
With  words  that  made  them  knowne  :  But  thy  vild  race 
(Tho  thou  didft  learn)  had  that  in’t,  which  good  natures 
Could  not  abide  to  be  with  ;  therefore  waft  thou 
Deferuedly  confin’d  into  this  Rocke,  who  hadft 


423 


42a 


415 


414.  Which]  Who  Dry.  Pope,  Han. 


Shew...wouldst  Warb.  Cap. 

418.  meaning;  but]  Ff.  meaning , 


wilt]  will  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 


Johns.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Ktly,  Sta.  Clke. 


but  Pope. 

420.  vild]  wild  Wilson. 

423,  424.  who...prifon]  Om.  Pope, 


417,  418.  didft  ...  Know  ...  wouldji] 


touldst ...  Shew ...  didst  Han.  couldst ...  Han.  Separate  line,  Theob.  et  seq. 

as  that  put  forth  by  Theobald  and  Capell,  that  without  this  speech  Miranda  would 
have  been  too  much  of  a  ‘  dummy  in  the  scene.’ — Ed.] 

415.  capable]  Staunton:  Here,  as  in  many  other  places,  ‘capable’  signifies 
impressible ,  susceptible. 

418.  Know]  Warburton  argues  speciously  for  his  emendation  shew.  ‘Sure  a 
brute,’  he  says,  ‘  to  which  Caliban  is  compared,  doth  know  its  own  meaning,  that  is, 
knows  what  it  would  be  at.  This,  indeed,  it  cannot  do,  it  cannot  shew  its  meaning 
to  others.  Besides,  Prospero  expressly  says  that  Caliban  had  ‘purposes’;  which, 
in  other  words,  is  that  he  did  ‘know  his  own  meaning.’ — Heath  (p.  u):  When 
Prospero  first  met  with  Caliban,  the  latter  would  gabble  out  certain  uncouth  noises 
like  the  jabbering  of  an  ape,  destitute  of  any  determinate  meaning ;  and  though  he 
had,  indeed,  purposes,  yet  he  had  never  adapted  any  of  these  noises  to  a  particular 
expression  of  them,  nor,  perhaps,  could  signify  them  twice  successively  by  the  same 
precise  sound.  So  that,  though  he  had  purposes,  and  knew  the  purposes  he  had,  yet 
it  may  very  properly  and  truly  be  said  that  he  did  not  know  his  own  meaning ;  that 
is,  the  meaning  of  that  gabble  he  was  perpetually  uttering  without  any  certain  design 
or  determinate  signification.— Capell  (60a) :  The  whole  animal  world,  each  individ¬ 
ual  of  it,  cannot  but  have  knowledge  of  what  itself  purposes ;  and  to  a  large  part  of 
it  is  given  means  of  expressing  these  purposes,  by  look,  action,  or  sound ;  Caliban,  as 
a  brute,  had  his  purposes,  and  some  means  of  expressing  them;  but  short  of  wtiat  his 
human  part  might  have,  and  of  what  it  had  at  this  time  through  Prospero’s  teaching. 

W.  A.  Wright  :  The  text  as  it  stands  signifies  ‘  know  how  to  attach  meaning  to 
the  sounds  thou  didst  utter.’ 

420.  race]  Steevens  :  That  is,  original  disposition,  inborn  qualities. — Staunton  : 
That  is,  nature,  essence. 

421.  (Tho  thou  didst  learn)]  A  skillful  touch.  Caliban’s  rhythmical  language 
and,  at  times,  poetic  imagery  prove  that  he  had  been  an  apt  pupil,  and  that  he  did 
indeed  learn. — Ed. 

423>  424-  Deseruedly  .  .  .  Deseru’d]  This  repetition  of  almost  the  same  word 


Acr  i,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


75 


Deferu’d  more  then  a  prifon. 

Cal.  You  taught  me  Language,  and  my  profit  on’t  425 

Is,  I  know  how  to  curfe  :  the  red-plague  rid  you 
For  learning  me  your  language. 

Prof.  Hag- feed,  hence  : 

Fetch  vs  in  Fewell,  and  be  quicke  thou’rt  belt 

To  anfwer  other  bufineffe  :  fhrug’ft  thou  (Malice)  43° 

If  thou  negle£tft,  or  doffc  vnwillingly 

What  I  command,  lie  racke  thee  with  old  Crampes,  43* i,  2 


424.  Deferu'd~\  deserv'd  death  Nich¬ 
olson  (N.  &  Qu.  Ill,  ix,  28). 

429.  quicke  thou' rt  beff\  F2F3.  quick , 
thou  art  beji  F4.  quick ,  thou  wer't  best 
Rowe,  quick  ( thou  'wert  best )  Pope-f 


{thou  wert ’  Warb.).  quick,  thou  'ert 
best  (corrected  to  thou  wert  in  Errata), 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Hal.  quick 
thou'rt  best,  Coll,  et  cet. 


attracted  Walker’s  attention.  (The  nine  syllable  line  which  Theobald,  followed  by 
all  modem  editors,  made  by  transferring  ‘  who  hadst  ’  of  line  423  to  the  beginning  of 
line  424,  Walker  says  is  ‘  an  alien  to  Shakespeare.’)  ‘  It  is  possible,’  he  says  ( Crit . 

i,  287),  ‘  he  may  have  written  “ Jtistly  confin’d  into  this  rock  who  hadst  Deserv  d  more 
than  a  prison,”  or  the  like.  But,  strange  as  it  seems,  I  cannot  help  suspecting  that 
«  deservedly  ”  has  been  foisted  into  the  text :  “  therefore  wast  thou  Confin’d  into  this 
rock,  who  hadst  deserv’d  More  than  a  prison.”  Note  the  difference  in  the  flow.’ 

423.  confin’d  into]  See  line  322,  above. 

424.  See  line  65,  above. 

426.  red-plague]  Grey  (i,  13)  suggests  that  this  might  refer  to  the  red  crosses  set 
upon  the  doors  of  houses  infected  with  the  pestilence  in  Shakespeare’s  time  ;  in  ‘  pre¬ 
ceding  plagues  they  sometimes  made  use  of  black  crosses.’ — Steevens  says  roundly, 
without  offering  any  authority,  that  the  ‘  erysipelas  was  anciently  called  the  “  red- 
plague.”  ’—Dr  Krauth  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc .)  believed  that  the  ‘  red-plague  ’  is  leprosy 
from  the  descriptions  in  Levit.  xiii.  See  also  Coriol.  IV,  i,  3;  Tro.  dr  Cress.  II,  i, 

20. _ Halliwell:  In  the  General  Practise  of  Physicke,  1605,  p.  675,  three  different 

kinds  of  plague  sore  are  mentioned :  ‘  sometimes  it  is  red,  otherwhiles  yellow,  and 

sometimes  blacke,  which  is  the  very  worst  and  most  venimous.’ - An  early  MS 

medical  commonplace-book,  in  my  possession,  says,  ‘  the  plague  and  pestilence,  or 
red  plage,  doth  moste  abounde  from  Midsomer  to  Autume,’  &c.  The  same  volume 
prescribes  blood-letting  every  twenty-four  hours  for  this  disease,  which  Steevens  erro¬ 
neously  supposed  was  the  erysipelas. 

426.  rid]  Malone  :  That  is,  destroy. 

427.  learning]  The  use  of  this  word  in  the  sense  of  teaching  is  still  far  from 
uncommon  in  this  country.- -W.  A.  Wright  refers  to  the  Prayer-Book  Version  of 
Psalm  xxv,  4:  ‘  Lead  me  forth  in  thy  truth  and  learn  me.’— See  Abbott,  §  291. 

429.  thou’rt  best]  For  this  perverted  phrase,  see  Abbott,  §  230.  Observe  in  the 
Textual  Notes  the  embarrassment  which  the  apostrophe  caused  the  early  editors. 

432.  old]  Abbott  refers  to  the  Porter’s  ‘  old  turning  of  the  key  ’  in  Macb.  II,  iii, 

2.  But  I  doubt  if  the  two  are  parallel ;  ‘  old  turning,’  ‘  old  swearing,’  ‘  old  coil,  and 
the  like,  whereof  Schmidt  will  give  examples,  have  an  air  of  jocularity  which  cannot 


76 


THE  TEMPES1 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Fill  all  thy  bones  with  Aches,  make  thee  rore,  433 

That  beafts  fhall  tremble  at  thy  dyn. 

Cal.  No,  ’pray  thee.  435 

I  inuft  obey,  his  Art  is  of  fuch  pow’r, 

It  would  controll  my  Dams  god  Setebos ,  437 

434.  That"]  The  Rowe  i.  436-438.  [Aside.  Cap.  et  seq. 


possibly  lie  in  Prospero’s  speech.  *  Old  cramps  ’  refer,  I  think,  to  the  cramps  which 
Caliban  had  aforetime,  and  of  whose  power  he  had  experience. — Ed. 

433.  Aches]  J.  P.  Kemble  (Boaden’s  Life,  ii,  520) :  If  the  old  use  and  pronun¬ 
ciation  of  the  word  aches  can  be  decided  by  authority,  I  should  think  Baret,  in  his 
Alvearie ,  1580,  conclusive  on  the  question  :  ‘The  Ache  or  payne  of  body  or  minde  To 
haue  ache,  payne,  or  grief :  to  be  sory.  Vide  Ake.'  And  under  A  he,  to  which  the 
reader  is  referred,  ‘Ake  is  the  Verbe  of  this  substantiue  Ach,  ch  being  turned  into  k.' 
So  that  it  appears  that  anciently  the  monosyllabic  and  dissyllabic  pronunciation  dis¬ 
tinguished  the  verb  and  the  substantive. — Boswell  :  That  ache  was  pronounced  in 
the  same  way  as  the  letter  h  is  placed  beyond  a  doubt  by  Much  Ado,  III,  iv,  56, 
where  a  joke  is  founded  upon  it.  Taylor,  the  water-poet,  at  a  much  later  period,  in  his 
The  World  runs  on  Wheels,  has :  ‘  Every  cart-horse  doth  know  the  letter  G  very  under¬ 
standing^  ;  and  H  hath  he  in  his  bones.’  Swift  has  the  same  pronunciation  in  his 
City  Shower :  ‘  Old  aches  throb,  your  hollow  tooth  will  rage.’ — Dyce  :  Here  is  an 
instance  from  Blackmore :  ‘  Cripples,  with  aches  and  with  age  opprest,  Crawl  on  their 
crutches  to  the  grave  for  rest.’ — Eliza,  1705,  ix,  p.  249. — Staunton  is  entirely  cor¬ 
rect  when  he  says  that  the  distinction  between  the  substantive  and  the  verb,  the  one 
ache  and  the  other  ake,  is  invariably  marked  in  the  Folio.  That  the  substantive  ache 
was  pronounced  soft  is  clear  enough  from  Baret’s  Alvearie,  from  Beatrice,  in  Much 
Ado,  from  Taylor,  the  water-poet,  and,  finally,  W.  A.  Wright  gives  in  full  the  excel¬ 
lent  epigram  from  Heywood,  merely  referred  to  by  Boswell :  ‘  Of  the  letter  H  ’  (p. 
hi,  Spenser  Soc.  Reprint'),  ‘  H  is  worst  among  letters  in  the  crosse  row,  For  if  thou 
finde  him  other  in  thine  elbow,  In  thine  arme,  or  leg,  in  any  degree,  In  thine  head, 
or  teeth,  in  thy  toe  or  knee,  Into  what  place  soever  H  may  pike  him,  Where  euer  you 
find  ache,  thou  shalt  not  like  him.’  See  ‘  My  old  bones  akes,’  III,  iii,  5.— Walker 
(Vers.  117)  queries  whether  it  were  not  pronounced  atch,  and  quotes  the  rhyme  of 
‘  match  ’  with  ‘  ach,’  from  Spenser’s  Shepherd's  Calendar,  viii ;  and  ‘  atch  ’  from  Har 
rington ;  and  the  rhyme  of  ‘  catches  ’  and  ‘  aches  ’  from  Hudibras.  ‘  Compare,’  adds 
Walker,  *  bake  and  batch,  &c.  Yet  would  Butler  have  scrupled  to  rhyme  atch  with 
aitch  ?  Was  the  word  pronounced  both  ways  ?’ 

437.  Setebos]  Farmer:  Perhaps  Shakespeare  had  read  Eden’s  History  of  Tra- 
vayle,  1577,  p.  134.  [The  passage  here  referred  to,  and  of  which  Farmer  gives  only  a 
few  lines,  is  to  be  found  in  the  account  of  Magellan’s  voyage,  on  which  he  started  in  Au¬ 
gust,  1519.  When  in  ‘the  49  degree  and  a  halfe  vnder  the  pole  Antartyke  they  espyed’ 
a  giant,  ‘  so  bygge,  that  the  heade  of  one  of  owr  men  of  a  meane  stature,  came  but  to 
his  waste,’  he  had  ‘  a  large  heade  and  great  eares  lyke  vnto  a  mule,  with  the  body  of 
a  camel,  and  tayle  of  a  horse.  The  feete  of  the  giant  were  foulded  in  the  skynne 
after  the  manner  of  shoos.  Vppon  his  cheekes  were  paynted  two  hartes,  and  redde 
circles  abowt  his  eyes.  The  heare  of  his  headde  was  coloured  whyte.’  After  reading 
this  description,  and  learning  that  when  a  looking-glass  was  shown  him  he  started 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


77 

438 


And  make  a  vaffaile  of  him. 

Pro.  So  flaue,  hence.  Exit  Cal. 

Enter  Ferdinand  &  Ariel,  inuijible  playing  &  finging.  440 
Ariel  Song.  Come  vnto  thefe  yellow  fands, 
and  then  take  hands  : 

Curtjied  when  you  haue,  and  kijl 

the  wilde  waues  whijl:  444 


439.  Exit  Cal.]  Om.  F3F4. 

440.  Scene  V.  Pope  + . 

[Musick.  Re-enter  Ariel,  invis¬ 
ible,  Ferd.  following.  Cap. 

441.  460.  Ariel  Song]  Ariel’s  Song 


444.  In  parenthesis,  Warb.  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Between  commas  or  dashes : 
Hal.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Dyce,  Ktly,  Jeph.  Sta. 
Clke,  Hunter. 


back  in  such  affright  that  he  ‘  ouerthrewe  two  that  stoode  nearest  about  hym,’  can  we 
wonder  that  he  has  survived  in  the  Geographies  of  our  infant  days  as  the  typical 
Patagonian  ?  Two  of  these  giants  the  ‘  Capitayne  Magellan  tooke  by  deceyte  by 
loading  them  with  presents  and  then  causing  shackels  of  iren  to  be  put  on  theyr 
legges,  makynge  signes  that  he  wold  also  giue  them  those  chaynes ;  but  they  begunne 
to  doubte,  and  when  at  last  they  sawe  how  they  were  deceaued  they  rored  lyke  bulles 
and  cryed  vppon  theyr  greate  deuyll  Setebos  to  helpe  them.’  One  of  these  two  giants 
remained  with  Magellan  for  several  months.  ‘  On  a  tyme,  as  one  made  a  crosse  before 
him  and  kyssed  it,  shewynge  it  vnto  hym,  he  suddeynely  cryed  out  Setebos,  and 
declared  by  signes  that  if  they  made  any  more  crosses,  Setebos  wold  enter  into  his 
body  and  make  him  brust.’— A  briefe  Declaration  of  the  Vyage  or  Navigation  made 

abowte  the  Worlde _ by  Antonie  Pygafetta,  .  .  .  .  in  the  -which  Ferdinando  Maga- 

lianes,  a  Portugale  (whom  sum  caule  Magellanus),  was  generall  Capitayne  of  the 
nauie,  1526.  Arber’s  Reprint,  p.  252.  It  is,  perhaps,  noteworthy  that  just  before 
this  account  (which  is  greatly  abridged)  of  these  Patagonian  giants,  there  were  two 
separate  occasions  on  which  ‘  the  fyers  cauled  saynte  Helen,  saynte  Nicholas,  and 
saynt  Clare  appered  vppon  the  mast  and  cabels  of  the  shyppes.’ — Ed.] 

440.  inuisible]  Steevens  :  In  the  wardrobe  of  the  Lord  Admiral’s  men,  15981 
was  ‘a  robe  for  to  goo  invisibell.’  [Henslowe’s  Diary,  Sh.  Soc.  Reprint,  p.  277O 

441,  &c.  E.  W.  Gosse  (  Athenceum,  4  Dec.  1874)  compares  with  this  song  Hero’s 
first  speech  to  Leander  (Marlowe’s  Works,  iii,  p.  19,  ed.  Dyce),  ‘  where  she  is  letting 
him  know  how  he  can  find  her  tower,  and  describes  it  as  standing  “  where  all  is  whist 
and  still,  Save  that  the  sea  playing  on  yellow  sand.  Sends  forth  a  rattling  murmur  to 
the  land.”  It  appears  to  me,’  continues  Gosse,  ‘  beyond  all  question  (and  I  may  be 
allowed  to  add  that  Mr  Swinburne,  who  of  all  men  living  ought  to  understand  best 
the  relations  between  Shakespeare  and  Marlowe,  entirely  concurs  with  me)  that  an 
echo  of  the  dead  shepherd’s  words,  written  when  Shakespeare  himself,  though  so 
nearly  of  the  same  age  as  Marlowe,  was  still  quite  incapable  of  forming  lines  of  such 
magical  music,  was  ringing  in  the  ears  of  the  younger  poet  when  he  wrote  the  song 
in  The  Tempest,  and  if  so  it  is  not  wholly  unimportant  as  giving  another  minute  clue 
to  the  feeling  the  greatest  of  writers  had  for  the  wonderful  creature,  who,  had  he 
lived,  might  have  grown  into  a  greater  poet  still  than  Shakespeare.  [As  great,  per¬ 
haps,  in  some  respects,  but  where  in  Marlowe,  among  lesser  traits,  is  the  promise  of 
the  infinite  wit  that  can  set  the  whole  world  on  a  roar  ?  Ed.] 

443.  kist]  Steevens  :  As  was  anciently  done  at  the  beginning  of  some  dances 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


78 


[443,  444.  kist  the  wilde  waues  whist:] 
bo  in  Hen.  VIII :  I,  iv,  95 :  ‘I  were  unmannerly  to  take  you  out,  And  not  to  kiss 
you.’ 

444.  the  wilde  waues  whist]  Steevens  :  That  is,  the  wild  waves  being  silent. 
So  in  Spenser’s  Faerie  Queene,  b.  vii,  c.  7  [line  533]  :  ‘  So  was  the  Titaness  put 
downe,  and  whist.’  And  Milton  seems  to  have  had  our  author  in  his  eye.  See  stanza 
5  of  his  Hymn  on  the  Nativity :  ‘  The  winds  with  wonder  whist,  Smoothly  the 
waters  kiss’d.’  So,  again,  both  Lord  Surrey  and  Phaer,  in  their  translations  of  the 
Becond  book  of  Virgil :  ‘  Conticuere  omnes,  They  whisted  all  ’ ;  and  Lily,  in  his 
Maid's  Metamorphosis,  1600:  ‘But  everything  is  quiet,  whist,  and  still.’ — Knight’s 
indignation  is  stirred  by  the  treating  of  this  line  as  a  parenthesis  by  Warburton, 
although  it  is  Steevens  whom  Knight  supposes  to  be  the  culprit.  ‘  This  is,’  he 
says,  ‘  one  of  the  many  instances  of  a  poetical  idea  being  utterly  destroyed  by  false 
punctuation.  If  Steevens  is  right,  and  the  wild  waves  are  silent,  then,  of  course,  the 
spirits  have  courtesied  (paid  courtesies  to)  themselves,  and  kissed  themselves.  But 
look  at  the  exquisite  beauty  of  the  invocation,  as  written  by  the  poet :  When  you  have 
courtesied  to  the  wild  waves,  and  kissed  them  into  silence.’ — Staunton  is  ready  to 
accept  both  punctuations ;  if  an  allusion  to  the  old  ceremony  of  curtsying  and  kissing 
is  intended,  then  the  parenthesis  is  right;  but  the  punctuation  of  the  Folio,  however, 
affords  ‘  an  intelligible  and  poetic  meaning.’ — Halliwell  doubts  if  Knight’s  inter¬ 
pretation  be  correct,  ‘  the  ear  requiring  a  pause  ’  after  ‘  kiss’d.’  ‘  The  allusion,’  he 
adds,  ‘  is  to  the  ancient  custom  of  kissing  at  dances,  which  occasioned  the  indignant 
censure  of  Stubbes,  who  amusingly  calls  it,  ‘  clipping,  culling,  kissing  and  bussing, 
smouching  and  slabbering  one  of  another.’—  Dyce,  too,  believes  Steevens  is  right  in 
his  parenthesis  (and,  what  is  a  little  remarkable  in  that  vacillating  editor,  retains  the 
same  opinion  throughout  his  three  editions)  ;  ‘  the  poet  had  an  eye,’  he  thinks,  ‘  to  the 
ceremonies  which  were  formerly  observed  at  the  commencement  of  certain  dances.’ — 
Jourdain  (p.  138)  denies  that  ‘whist’  means  silent.  ‘  Why  should  the  waves  be 
silent  ?’  he  asks,  ‘  Surely  they  are  wanted  to  pipe ;  and  with  the  secondary  Anglosaxon 
verb  hiuistlian,  to  pipe,  fife,  before  us,  I  submit  that  whist  is  the  base  of  whistle,  and 
that  the  poet  best  explains  his  own  meaning  in  “  To  dance  our  ringlets  to  the  whist¬ 
ling  wind,  ....  Therefore  the  winds,  piping  to  us  in  vain,"  & c. — Mid.  N.  D.  II,  i. 
The  “  wild  waves  ”  were  required  to  keep  time  as  the  music.’  A  similar  view  was 
taken  twenty-five  years  later,  in  1885,  by  C.  A.  Ward  (N.  &  Qu.  6th  S.  xii,  104), 
to  whom  the  passage  seems  to  mean  that  the  ‘  sad  sea  waves  will  whist-le  their  low 
dirge  as  you  “  foot  it,”  ’  &c.  This  note  of  Ward  is  unintelligible  to  me;  he  plumply 
denies  the  existence  of  Steevens’s  remark,  and  yet  refers  to  Milton’s  Hymn,  which 
Steevens  cites. — Jephson  also  virtually  accepts  the  parenthesis,  and  pronounces  the 
line  a  nominative  absolute,  a  parenthetic  member  of  the  sentence,  not  depending  on 
any  other.  ‘A  form  of  the  word  is  still  used  by  the  vulgar  in  Ireland,  who  say 
“  whist,”  meaning  be  silent.  Whist,  the  game  at  cards,  is  said  to  be  so  called  because 
those  who  play  it  must  be  hushed  or  silent.’ — Br.  Nicholson  (N  &  Qu.  3d  S.  ix, 
27,  1866)  would  punctuate  so  as  ‘  to  indicate  that,  as  was  the  custom,  they  were  to 
take  hands  when  or  after  that  they  had  curtsied  and  kissed,  and  the  next  line  I  would 
make  a  separate  invocation,  thus  :  “  Come  unto  these  yellow  sands ;  And  then  take 
hands,  Curt’sied  when  you  have,  and  kissed : —  Ye  wild  waves  whist ! — Foot  it  featly,”  ’ 
&c.  See  line  446  for  Nicholson’s  arrangement  of  the  rest  of  the  song. — Cambridge 
Editors  :  This  punctuation  [i.  e.  the  Folio’s,  except  in  the  omission  of  the  comma 
lifter  ‘  have  ’]  seems  to  be  supported  by  what  Ferdinand  says  in  lines  455,  456,  &c 


act  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  TEMPEST 


79 


Foote  it  featly  he  ere,  and  there ,  and  fweete  Sprights  beare  445 
the  burthen.  Burthen  difperfedly. 


445,  446.  beare  the  burthen]  the  bur¬ 
then  beare  Dryden,  Pope  et  seq. 


446.  difperfedly]  dispersedly  within. 
Dyce. 


[To  this  note  W.  A.  Wright,  in  the  Clarendon  Edition,  adds :]  But  if  we  take 
‘kiss’d’  to  refer  to  the  fairies,  who,  before  beginning  their  dance,  courtsy  to  and  kiss 
their  partners,  the  words,  ‘  the  wild  waves  whist,’  must  be  read  parenthetically,  ‘  the 
wild  waves  being  silent,’  and  as  it  is  Ariel’s  music  that  stills  the  waves  and  not  tire 
fairies,  this  seems  to  be  the  better  reading. — Allen  (. Phila .  Sh.  Soc.) :  Perhaps  the 
Folio  can  be  better  sustained  by  conceiving  the  action  thus :  the  nymphs  are  formed 
on  the  sands  for  a  dance ;  the  waves  are  converted  by  the  poet’s  imagination  into  a 
crowd  of  spectators,  restless  and  noisy  until  the  spectacle  shall  begin;  when  the 
nymphs  indicate,  by  taking  hands,  courtesying  to,  and  kissing,  partners,  that  they  are 
beginning,  the  waves  are  hushed  by  the  signal  into  silent  attention ;  and  thus  the 
nymphs  do,  in  effect,  ‘  kifs  the  wild  waves  whift,’  although  they  actually  kiss,  not  the 
•waves,  but  each  other.  [Allen’s  interpretation  is  to  me  the  best. — Ed.] 

445.  Foote  it  featly]  Dyce  {Few  Notes,  p.  11) :  This  expression,  which  is  now 
so  familiar  to  us  from  Ariel’s  song,  was  certainly  an  unusual  one  in  the  days  of 
Shakespeare,  who  probably  caught  it  from  a  line  in  Lodge’s  Glaucus  and  Scilla, 
1589:  ‘Footing  it  featlie  on  the  grassie  ground.’ — Sig.  A2. 

445,  &c.  Capell’s  arrangement  has  been  generally  adopted  from  his  day  to  the 
present ;  in  the  few  cases  in  which  it  has  been  discarded  it  was  probably  not  under¬ 
stood.  The  whole  song  is  Ariel’s,  interrupted  only  by  the  burthen,  which  is  simply 
the  barking  of  dogs  behind  the  traverses.  Capell  prints  thus  : 

foot  it  featly  here  and  there  ; 
and,  sweet  sprites  the  burthen  bear. 

Hark,  hark  I 

bur.  Bowgh,  wowgh  [ dispersedly . 

the  watch-dogs  bark  : 

bur.  Bowgh,  wowgh  \dispersedly. 

Hark,  hark  !  I  hear 
the  strain  of  strutting  chanticlere 
cry,  Cock-a-doodle-do. 

Capell  hereupon  comments:  ‘There  is  direction  [in  F,]  for  a  “burthen”  or  chorus, 
but  no  words  for  it ;  it  came  in  therefore  at  the  words :  “  Hark,  hark !”  and  consisted 
of  a  musick  that  seem’d  to  come  from  all  parts  of  the  stage  (for  that  is  meant  by  the 
word  “  dispersedly  ”),  imitative  of  the  barking  of  dogs ;  and  this  burthen  which  comes 
twice  over  is  follow’d  by  another  at  the  second  “  Hark,  hark  !”  the  nature  of  which 
Ariel  tells  you;  and,  in  both,  catches  the  first  notes  that  usher  them  in,  and  accom¬ 
panies  them  with  his  voice;  as,  in  the  next  song,  he  does  manifestly  another  wild  air 
that  makes  the  burthen  of  that :  Both  were  favourites,  seemingly,  of  the  times  they 
were  made  for :  for  with  the  latter  song’s  burthen,  they  had  been  treated  afore  [see 
Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii,  77] ;  and  of  the  first’s  second  burthen,  the  editor  has  seen  a 
trace’  in  some  musick  belonging  to  that  age.’— Br.  Nicholson  continues  the  note 
of  which  a  portion  was  given  at  line  444  :  ‘  Ariel  distinctly  calls  upon  the  sweet 


8o 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Harke ,  Jiarke,  bowgh  wawgh :  the  watch-Dogges  barke , 
bowgh-wawgh. 

Ar.  Hark ,  hark ,  I  he  are,  the  flraine  of flrutdng  Chanticlere 
cry  cockadidle-dowe. 

Fer.  Where  fhold  this  Mufick  be  ?  Pth  aire,  or  th’earth  ? 
It  founds  no  more  :  and  fure  it  waytes  vpon 


447 

450 

452 


447,  448.  bowgh  wawgh]  In  separate 
lines,  as  the  burthen,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
Var.  Coll.  Hal.  Sing.  Dyce,  Ktly,  Sta. 
Clke,  Wrt. 

450.  cry]  A  stage  direction.  Daniel, 
Perring. 

bprites  to  bear  the  burden,  and  “  Bow, 
response  from  sea-nymphs.  Hence  I  v 


450.  cockadidle-dowe]  Cock  a  doodle 
do  Dryden. 

451.  Pth  aire ,  or  th' earth  ?~\  in  air , 
or  earth  ?  Pope,  Han.  i’th  air,  or  earth 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


”  is  not  sweet,  nor  a  likely  mode  of 
add  [as  follows:] 


“  [Spirits  dispersedly. Hark,  hark  ! 

[  Within.]  Bow,  wow. 
[Spirits.]  The  watch-dogs  bark. 

[  Within. ]  Bow,  wow.” 


‘  further  still,  as  there  was  then,  as  now,  a  growing  tendency  to  increased  stage  deco¬ 
ration,  machinery,  and  shows,  I  think  that  there  was  intended  to  be  an  actual  dance 
of  sea-nymphs  around  about  the  disconsolate  Ferdinand ;  just  as  there  was  a  dance 
of  fairies  around  Heme’s  Oak  and  Sir  John,  or  of  witches  around  the  cauldron  in 
Macbeth.  The  “  Hark,  hark  !”  is  by  them,  and  in  this  view  the  “  dispersedly  ”  indi¬ 
cates  their  breaking  off  suddenly  from  the  circling  dance  and  unjoining  hands  at  the 
alarm  of  the  watch-dogs,  just  as  they  finally  disperse  at  the  cock-crow.’ — Daniel  (p. 
10)  suggests  that  ‘  the  burthen  heard  “  dispersedly  ”  is  the  barking  of  dogs  and  the 
crowing  of  cocks,’  and  that  therefore  ‘  cry  ’  is  not  a  part  of  Ariel’s  song,  but  is  a 
stage-direction.  This  suggestion  Hudson  adopted  in  his  text. 

451,  &c.  Strachey  ( Quarterly  Rev.  July,  1890,  p.  119):  Here,  following  our 
meth'od  of  interpretation  [which  is,  that  these  elves  and  spirits  represent  the  natural, 
elemental  powers  and  charms  of  the  island],  we  should  say  that  Ferdinand  falls  into 
a  reverie,  which  is  so  heightened  by  the  soft  sunny  scene  and  climate  around  him, 
that  while  he  gazes  idly  and  pensively  on  the  waters,  and  the  yellow  sands,  and  the’ 
green  fields,  he  feels  as  though  all  nature  were  instinct  with  life ;  he  watches  the 
ebbing  and  flowing  tide  till  those  countless  ripples  seem  to  be  the  footsteps  of  fairies 
who  dance,  and  kiss  into  gentleness  the  waves  of  late  so  wild ;  he  looks  on  the  land¬ 
scape  till  he  hears,  or  seems  to  hear,  the  barking  of  dogs  and  crowing  of  cocks,  tell¬ 
ing  him  that  the  homes  of  men  are  not  far  distant,  and  that  after  all  he  may  not  be  so 
utterly,  hopelessly  alone  and  cast  away  as  he  had  seemed  just  now ;  and  then,  when 
these  brighter  fancies  are  driven  back  by  the  sudden  recurrence  of  the  sad  thought 
that  his  father  is  drowned,  even  this  grief  becomes  imaginative  under  the  influence 
of  the  place.  His  father  has  not  perished,  but  suffered  a  rich  and  strange  transforma¬ 
tion  below  the  waters,  while  sea-nymphs  ring  his  knell  in  each  rolling  wave,  to  which 
he  listens  till  it  seems  to  him  again  that  *  this  is  no  mortal  business.’ 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


Si 


Some  God  ’oth’Iland,  fitting  on  a  banke,  453 

Weeping  againe  the  King  my  Fathers  wracke. 

This  Muficke  crept  by  me  vpon  the  waters,  455 

Allaying  both  their  fury,  and  my  paffion 
With  it’s  fweet  ayre  :  thence  I  haue  follow’d  it 
(Or  it  hath  drawne  me  rather)  but  ’tis  gone. 

No,  it  begins  againe.  459 


453.  'oth'~\  of  the  Steev. 

Hand ,  fitting ]  Ff.  Island.  Sit¬ 
ting  Pope  et  seq. 

454.  Weeping  ...  wracke .]  weeping 

against  the  Duke  ;  my  Father’s  wrack'd. 


Dry. 

454.  againe ]  against  Rowe  i,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap. 

wracke Ff.  wreck,  Rowe  ii  et 

seq. 


454.  againe]  Malone  :  In  tbe  books  of  Shakespeare’s  age  ‘  again  ’  is  sometimes 
printed  instead  of  against  [i.  e.  opposite  to],  which,  I  am  persuaded,  was  our  author’s 
word.  The  placing  Ferdinand  in  such  a  situation  that  he  could  still  gaze  upon  the 
wrecked  vessel  is  one  of  Shakespeare’s  touches  of  nature.  ‘Again,’  in  its  ordinary 
sense,  is  inadmissible ;  for  this  would  import  that  Ferdinand’s  tears  had  ceased  for  a 
time  ;  whereas  he  himself  tells  us,  afterwards,  that  from  the  hour  of  his  father’s  wreck 
they  had  never  ceased  to  flow ;  see  line  506,  post.— Steevens  :  By  the  word  ‘  again  ’ 

I  suppose  the  Prince  means  only  to  describe  the  repetition  of  his  sorrows.  Besides, 
it  appears,  from  Miranda’s  description  of  the  storm,  that  the  ship  had  been  swallowed 
by  the  waves,  and,  consequently,  could  no  longer  be  an  object  of  sight. — Malone  : 
Miranda  supposed  that  this  was  the  case,  but  we  learn  from  Ariel  that  this  was  not  so. 
See  line  264,  above. — Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  (in  support  of  ‘  againe  ’)  :  Ariel  brings  Ferdi¬ 
nand  to  land  ‘  by  himself.’  The  ‘  fever  of  the  mad  ’  left  him ;  and— no  longer  seeing 
the  ship  (which  was  already  hidden  ‘  in  the  deep  nook  ’) — he  believed  his  father  to 
have  perished,  and  gave  way  to  a  burst  of  grief  for  his  loss.  Then  some  impulse  of 
hope  against  hope,  or  some  secret  agency  of  Ariel’s,  aroused  him,  and  he  wandered, 
in  search  of  his  father.  During  his  exertions,  and  while  he  still  felt  some  ray  of  hope, 
his  grief  would  be  less  passionate.  But  when — after  reaching  ‘  an  odd  angle  of  the 
isle  ’ — he  had  relapsed  into  despair,  he  then  sat  down  upon  a  bank,  and,  giving  way 
to  a  fresh  burst  of  grief,  wept  again  the  king  his  father’s  wreck.  It  was  at  this  point 
that  Ariel — in  pursuance  of  the  whispered  instructions  of  Prospero — caused  the  faery 
music  to  creep  over  the  waves  of  the  sea,  opposite  to  the  seat  of  Ferdinand,  and — 
having  aroused  him — led  him,  by  the  same  influence,  to  move  along  the  shore,  paral¬ 
lel  with  the  sweet  air,  until  he  had  reached  the  cave  and  the  presence  of  Miranda.— 
Aishoit,  §  27:  ‘Again’  is  used  for  again  and  again,  i.  e.  repeatedly,  and  hence 
intensively  almost  like  amain. 

455.  crept]  The  Third  Cambridge  Edition  (1891)  notes  creept  as  the  reading 
of  F  .  It  is  not  so  in  my  copy.  These  variations  in  copies  of  the  same  edition  should 
be  carefully  noted.  They  help  to  emancipate  us  from  the  delusion  that  in  the  Folio 
we  have  the  text  as  Shakespeare  wrote  it.  It  is  well  to  be  constantly  reminded  that 
between  us  and  Shakespeare  there  is  a  barrier  of  compositors,  and  to  cling  too 
tenaciously  to  the  printed  text,  or  to  set  up  our  rest  on  collation,  is  to  fall  into  the 
•  modern  Manicheeism,  the  worship  of  the  Printer  s  devil.  Ed. 

457.  it’s]  See  line  1 13  of  this  Scene. 


82 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Ariell  Song.  Full  f adorn  fiue  thy  Father  lies , 

Of  his  bones  are  Corrall  made : 

Thofe  are  pearles  that  were  his  eies, 
Nothing  of  him  that  doth  fade , 

But  doth  fuffer  a  Sea-change 
Into  fomething  rich ,  &  Jlrange : 
Sea-Nimphs  hourly  ring  his  knell. 

Burthen  :  ding  dong. 
Harke  now  I  he  are  them ,  ding-dong  bell. 

460.  fadom]  fathom  Dry. 

461.  are]  is  Dry. 

Corrall]  corals  Ktly. 


460 


465 

468 


467,  468.  Transposed,  Pope  + ,  Cap. 
Steev.  Mai. 


460.  fadom]  W.  A.  Wright:  In  this  spelling  the  Folios  are  not  uniform,  for  in 
As  You  Like  It,  IV,  i,  210,  the  First  Folio  reads,  ‘that  thou  didst  know  how  many 
fathome  deepe  I  am  in  love.’  Nor  is  Shakespeare  consistent  in  using  the  singular 
and  plural  forms  of  the  word,  for  we  find  both  used  for  the  plural.  Compare  Rom. 
&  Jut.  I,  iv,  85,  ‘Of  healths  five  fathom  deep’;  and  Tro.  dr  Cress.  I,  i,  50,  ‘  Reply 
not  in  how  many  fathoms  deep  They  lie  indrench’d.’ 

460,  &c.  On  p.  202  (ed.  Bohn)  of  his  Dramatic  Poets  Lamb  gives  the  funeral 
dirge  for  Marcello  from  Webster’s  White  Devil  (p.  146,  ed.  Dyce),  which  Cornelia, 
the  mother,  sings : 

‘  Call  for  the  robin-red-breast,  and  the  wren, 

Since  o’er  shady  groves  they  hover, 

And  with  leaves  and  flowers  do  cover 
The  friendless  bodies  of  unburied  men. 

Call  unto  his  funeral  dole 

The  ant,  the  field-mouse,  and  the  mole, 

To  rear  him  hillocks,  that  shall  keep  him  warm, 

And  (when  gay  tombs  are  robb’d)  sustain  no  harm  ; 

But  keep  the  wolf  far  thence,  that’s  foe  to  men. 

For  with  his  nails  he’ll  dig  them  up  again.’ 

‘  I  never  saw,’  says  Lamb,  ‘  anything  like  this  Dirge,  except  the  Ditty  that  reminds 
Ferdinand  of  his  drowned  father  in  The  Tempest.  As  that  is  of  the  water,  watery; 
so  this  is  of  the  earth,  earthy.  Both  have  that  intenseness  of  feeling,  which  seems  to 
resolve  itself  into  the  elements  which  it  contemplates.’ 

4^3;  464-  Steevens  :  The  meaning  is,  everything  about  him  that  is  liable  to  alter¬ 
ation  is  changed. — Phillpotts  :  Compare  this  with  the  fine  passage  in  Rich.  IIP:  I, 
iv,  26,  describing  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  with  its  ‘  Heaps  of  pearl,  Inestimable  stones, 
unvalued  jewels,  All  scatter’d  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  Some  lay  in  dead  men’s 
skulls ;  and  in  those  holes  Where  eyes  did  once  inhabit  there  were  crept,  As ’t  were 
in  scorn  of  eyes,  reflecting  gems,’  &c. ;  and  notice  the  happy  way  in  which  the  trag¬ 
edy  contrasts  the  relics  of  mortality  with  the  lost  treasure,  while  the  lighter  drama 
fuses  them  into  all  that  is  most  lovely  and  pure  in  nature. 

467.  Burthen:  ding  dong]  In  Wilson’s  Cheerfull  Ayres  or  Ballads,  1660,  these 
ivords  are  omitted,  but  at  the  end  there  follows  :  ‘  Ding  Dong,  Ding  Dong,  Bell.’ _ Ed. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


83 


Fer.  The  Ditty  do’s  remember  my  drown’d  fathei, 
This  is  no  mortall  bufines,  nor  no  found 
That  the  earth  owes :  I  heare  it  now  aboue  me. 


470 


Pro.  The  fringed  Curtaines  of  thine  eye  aduance, 
And  fay  what  thou  fee’ft  yond. 


473 


471.  owes)  owns  Pope  +  . 


472.  Scene  VI.  Pope  +  . 


469.  Ditty]  W.  A.  Wright:  Properly  the  words  of  a  song.  Compare  Bacon, 
Essay  xxxvii,  p.  156  (ed.  Wright),  ‘And  the  Ditty  High  and  Tragicall;  Not  nice  or 
Dainty  ’ ;  and  Ecclesiasticus  xliv,  5,  ‘  Such  as  found  out  musical  tunes,  and  recited 
verses  in  writing  ’ ;  where  the  marginal  note  on  the  word  ‘  verses  ’  {Hr])  is  ‘  ditties.’ 
See  also  Massinger,  The  Guardian,  iv,  2,  ‘A  well-penn’d  ditty.’ 

469.  remember]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  That  is,  commemorate.  Cf.  ‘  Dc  this  in 
remembrance  of  me.’ 

471.  owes]  Krauth  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  p.  20)  :  It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  in 
the  verse  ‘  So  shall  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  bind  the  man  that  owneth  this  girdle,’  Acts 
xxi,  II,  in  Tyndale,  of  1526,  it  reads  ‘  owneth,’  but  in  the  latest  Tyndale,  of  1534,  it 
is  ‘  oweth,'  and  so  in  Cranmer,  Genevan,  Bishops,  and  in  the  first  and  all  the  early 
editions  of  the  Authorised  Version ;  and  it  is  so  given  in  all  the  original  editions  of 
Cruden’s  Concordance.  In  the  verse  *  he  that  owneth  the  house  shall  come  and  tell 
the  priest,’  Levit.  xiv,  35,  Tyndale,  1530,  reads  ‘  oweth l  as  also  Cranmer,  Genevan, 
Bishops,  and  Authorised  Version,  but  Coverdale,  1535,  1  owneth.'  The  change  was 
probably  made  in  Blayney’s  ed.,  1769,  the  Standard  Edition. 

472.  Of  this  line  Capell  says,  that  it  ‘  has  not  it’s  parallel  anywhere  for  stiffness 
and  quaintness.’ — Steevens  :  Compare  Per.  Ill,  ii,  99  :  ‘  Her  eyelids  ....  Begin  to 
part  their  fringes  of  bright  gold.’ — Dickson  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc.)  cited,  to  show  that 
Shakespeare  expressed  the  direction  of  the  eye  towards  a  distant  object  by  the  word 
« advance,’  or  its  equivalent,  Hen.  V:  V,  Chorus :  ‘  your  eyes  advance  ....  straight 
back  again  to  France  ’ ;  Rom.  Sr  Jul.  II,  iii,  5  :  ‘ere  the  sun  advance  his  burning 
eye  ’ ;  All's  Well,  II,  iii,  58  :  ‘  Fair  maid,  send  forth  thine  eye  ’ ;  in  the  present  play, 
IV,  i,  201:  ‘Advanced  their  eyelids.’ — Coleridge  {Seven  Lectures,  p.  124):  Pros- 
pero  has  just  told  Miranda  a  wonderful  story,  which  deeply  affected  her,  and  filled 
her  with  surprise  and  astonishment,  and  for  his  own  purposes  he  afterwards  lulls  her 
to  sleep.  When  she  awakes  Shakespeare  has  made  her  wholly  inattentive  to  the 
present,  but  wrapped  up  in  the  past.  An  actress  who  understands  the  character  of 
Miranda  would  have  her  eyes  cast  down  and  her  eyelids  almost  covering  them,  while 
she  was,  as  it  were,  living  in  her  dream.  At  this  moment  Prospero  sees  Ferdinand,  and 
wishes  to  point  him  out  to  his  daughter,  not  only  with  great,  but  with  scenic  solemnity, 
he  standing  before  her,  and  before  the  spectator,  in  the  dignified  character  of  a  great 
magician.  Something  was  to  appear  to  Miranda  on  the  sudden  and  as  unexpectedly 
as  if  the  hero  of  a  drama  were  to  be  on  the  stage  at  the  instant  when  the  curtain  is 
elevated.  It  is  under  such  circumstances  that  Prospero  says,  in  a  tone  calculated  at 
once  to  arouse  his  daughter’s  attention,  ‘  The  fringed  curtains,’  &c.  Turning  from 
the  sight  of  Ferdinand  to  his  thoughtful  daughter,  his  attention  was  first  struck  by 
the  downcast  appearance  of  her  eyes  and  eyelids :  and  in  my  humble  opinion  the 
solemnity  of  the  phraseology  assigned  to  Prospero  is  completely  in  character,  recol¬ 
lecting  his  preternatural  capacity,  in  which  the  most  familiar  objects  in  natuie  present 
themselves  in  a  mysterious  point  of  view. 


84 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Mira.  What  is’t  a  Spirit  ? 

Lord,  how  it  lookes  about:  Beleeue  me  fir,  475 

It  carries  a  braue  forme.  But  ’tis  a  fpirit. 

Pro.  No  wench,  it  eats,  and  fleeps,  &  hath  fuch  fenfes 
As  we  haue :  fuch.  This  Gallant  which  thou  feeft 
Was  in  the  wracke :  and  but  hee’s  fomething  ftain’d 
With  greefe  (that’s  beauties  canker)  y  might’fi:  call  him  480 
A  goodly  perfon  :  he  hath  loft  his  fellowes, 

And  ftrayes  about  to  finde  ’em. 

Mir.  I  might  call  him 
A  thing  diuine,  for  nothing  naturall 

I  euer  faw  fo  Noble.  485 

Pro.  It  goes  on  I  fee 

As  my  foule  prompts  it  .*  Spirit,  fine  fpirit,  lie  free  thee 
Within  two  dayes  for  this. 

Per.  Moft  fure  the  Goddeffe 
On  whom  thefe  ayres  attend  :  1 
May  know  if  you  remaine  vpo 
And  that  you  will  fome  good  i: 

How  I  may  beare  me  heere  :  n 
(Which  I  do  laft  pronounce)  is 
If  you  be  Mayd,  or  no  ? 

474.  What  is’t]  What !  is’t  Daniel. 
is’t  a]  Ff.  is’t,  a  Rowe-|-.  is’t  ? 
a  Cap.  et  seq. 

482.  ’em]  them  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Knt, 

Hal.  Sing. 

486.  [Aside.  Pope. 

.  It  goes  on]  It  goes  Cap. 

479.  but]  For  this  use  of  ‘  but,’  meaning  except ,  see  Abbott,  §  1 20. 

489.  Farmer  (p.  43) :  It  seems  that  Shakespeare,  in  The  Tempest,  hath  been  sus¬ 
pected  of  translating  some  expressions  of  Virgil ;  witness  the  O  Dea  certe.  [Presum¬ 
ably,  Farmer  is  here  answering  a  genuine  criticism;  but  I  have  been  unable  to  find, 
earlier  than  Farmer  himself,  any  such  claim  for  Shakespeare  here,  as  that  which  the 
learned  Fellow  of  Emmanuel  here  proceeds  to  deride,  and,  as  he  thinks,  to  demolish, 
by  showing  that  Stanyhurst,  in  his  Vergil,  1583,  translates  O  Dea  certe  by  ‘  No  doubt, 
a  goddesse.’  Farmer  is  usually  a  pattern  of  exactness,  but  it  does  look  here  as  though 
he  were  pommelling  a  foe  of  his  own  creation. — Ed.] 

492.  that]  See  Abbott,  §  285,  for  other  examples  of  the  omission  of  ‘that’  at 
the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  and  then  inserting  it  to  connect  a  more  distant  clause 
with  the  conjunction  on  which  the  clause  depends. 

495.  Mayd]  With  but  two  or  three  exceptions  the  perversion  of  F4,  made,  held  a 
place  in  all  editions,  down  to  Singer’s  first  edition  in  1826;  since  then  every  editor 


Vouchfafe  my  pray’r 
n  this  Ifland, 
nftrudlion  giue 
ny  prime  requeft 
(O  you  wonder) 


490 


495 


486.  I  fee]  Om.  Steev.’93. 

487.  fine  fpiidt]  Om.  Han. 

490.  [Kneeling.  Coll,  ii  (MS). 

495.  Mayd]  Maid  F3-  made  F4, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb  Mai. 
Steev.’93,  Var. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


85 

496 


Mir.  No  wonder  Sir, 

But  certainly  a  Mayd. 

without  exception,  I  believe,  has  followed  the  First  Folio,  whose  reading  is  so  clearly 
right  that  it  would  be  scarcely  worth  while  to  give  much  space  to  the  comments 
thereon,  were  it  not  that  one  of  the  objects  of  this  edition  is  to  give,  to  a  certain  ex¬ 
tent,  the  history  of  Shakespearian  ciiticism. — Wa.RBUR.ton,  accepting  made  in  Ferdi¬ 
nand’s  speech,  conceived  that  Miranda,  an  utter  stranger  to  the  flattery  invented  by 
vicious  and  designing  men,  ‘  prettily  ’  illustrated  the  *  singularity  of  her  character  by 
the  pleasant  mistake  ’  of  her  answer.  ‘  It  could  not  enter  into  her  imagination  that 
any  one  should  be  willing  to  have  his  fellow-creature  believe  that  he  thought  her  a 
goddess,  or  an  immortal.’ — Johnson  (one  of  the  exceptions,  who  read  ‘maid’) 
thinks  that  Warburton  ‘  has  here  found  a  beauty  ’  which  Shakespeare  ‘  never  intended. 
Ferdinand  asks  her  not  whether  she  was  a  created  being,  a  question  which,  if  he 
meant  it,  he  has  ill  expressed,  but  whether  she  was  unmarried ;  for  after  the  dialogue 
which  Prospero’s  interruption  produces,  he  goes  on  pursuing  his  former  question  :  “  O, 
if  a  virgin,  I’ll  make  you  Queen  of  Naples.”  ’ — Farmer  upholds  Warburton,  and 
cites  a  passage  from  Fletcher’s  Sea  Voyage  (a  drama  closely  imitating  The  Tempest), 
where  Albert  addresses  the  ladies  in  his  desert  island  as  ‘  goddesses  ’ ;  and  also  a  pas¬ 
sage  from  The  Faerie  Queene,  Bk  III,  Canto  v,  St.  35,  where  Timias  asks  Belphoebe, 
‘Angell  or  Goddesse,  doe  I  call  thee  right  ?’  &c.  The  wonder  is  that  Farmer  was  so 
moderate  in  the  number  of  his  citations. — T.  Warton  supplemented  Farmer’s  quo¬ 
tations  by  citing  Milton’s  Comus,  265 :  ‘  an  imitation  which  explains  Shakespeare.’ 
— Malone,  also  an  advocate  of  IQ,  cited  Dryden’s  Version;  Lodge’s  description 
of  Fawnia,  the  Perdita  of  Winter's  Tale;  and  urges,  as  adding  strength  to  his  posi¬ 
tion,  that  there  is  no  article  prefixed  to  maid, — Steevens  also  followed  his  friend, 
Dr  Farmer,  deserting  for  once  his  associate-editor,  of  whose  association  he  had  boasted 
that  his  own  was  the  only  name  that  had  ever  appeared  on  the  same  title-page  with 
Dr  Johnson’s,  and,  furthermore,  despite  the  common-sense,  epigrammatic  decision  in 
favour  of  ‘maid’  by  Monck  Mason  ( Comments  on  Beau.  Sr  FI.  p.  5),  to  the  effect 
that  ‘  readers  are  to  determine  whether  they  will  adopt  a  natural  and  simple  expres¬ 
sion  which  requires  no  comment,  or  one  which  the  ingenuity  of  many  commentators 
has  but  imperfectly  supported.’ — Holt  (p.  34)  and  Capell  (61  a)  both  uphold  the 
First  Folio.  The  former  says :  ‘  sure  the  knowledge  whether  she  was  single  was  very 
material  and  very  natural.  Ferdinand  felt  a  growing  passion,  and  was  willing  to  be 
satisfied  as  soon  as  possible  whether  that  grand  obstacle  of  her  being  already  engag’d 
stood  in  his  way.’  Capell  says  of  the  word  ‘  maid,’  ‘  the  user  of  it  imagining  just  at 
that  time  that  he’s  addressing  a  goddess;  which  mistake  he  comes  out  of  towards  his 
speech’s  end,  as  his  question  demonstrates.’  With  the  Variorum  of  ’21  the  discus¬ 
sion  closes,  except  a  faint  echo,  where  Collier,  in  his  first  edition,  says  (he  omitted 
the  remark  in  his  later  editions)  that  ‘  Miranda’s  answer  is  to  be  taken  in  the  same 
sense  as  Ferdinand’s  question,’  where  ‘  maid  ’  is  used  in  its  general  sense ;  and  Dyce 
( Few  Notes,  p.  11)  thereupon  observes  with  emphasis,  ‘  I  differ  entirely  from  Mr  Col¬ 
lier  about  the  meaning  of  Miranda’s  answer.  She  plays  on  the  word  maid :  “  But, 
certainly  a  maid,"  i.  e.  a  virgin.’  In  Massinger’s  Great  Duke  of  Florence,  III,  i, 
Sanazarro  says  to  Cozmo :  ‘  I  have  seen  a  maid,  sir;  But,  if  that  I  have  judgement, 
no  such  wonder  As  she  was  deliver’d  to  you.’  If  this  illustrate  the  present  passage 
at  all,  and  Gifford  thinks  it  does,  it  merely  shows  that  the  modem  interpretation  is 
right. — Ed. 


86 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
498 


Fer.  My  Language  ?  Heauens  : 

I  am  the  beft  of  them  that  fpeake  this  fpeech, 

Were  I  but  where  ’tis  fpoken.  500 

Pro.  How  ?  the  beft  ? 

What  wer’t  thou  if  the  King  of  Naples  heard  thee  ? 

Fer.  A  fingle  thing,  as  I  am  now,  that  wonders 
To  heare  thee  fpeake  of  Naples:  he  do’s  heare  me, 

And  that  he  do’s,  I  weepe  :  my  felfe  am  Naples ,  505 

Who,  with  mine  eyes  (neuer  fince  at  ebbe)  beheld 
The  King  my  Father  wrack’t. 

Mir.  Alacke,  for  mercy. 

Fer.  Yes  faith,  &  all  his  Lords,  the  Duke  of  Millaine 
And  his  braue  fonne,  being  twaine.  510 

498.  [Rising.  Coll,  ii  (MS).  507.  wrack' t~\  wreck'd  Han. 

506.  neuer]  ne'er  Pope  + ,  Cap. 


502.  thou]  Throughout  the  rest  of  this  Scene,  as  in  the  opening  Scene  of  As 
You  Like  It,  it  is  worth  while  to  note  the  varying  moods  expressed  by  the  use  of 
‘thou’  and  ‘you.’  Skeat’s  excellent  rule  (  William  of  Paleme,  Pref.  xlii)  should  be 
remembered,  that  ‘  Thou  is  the  language  of  a  lord  to  a  servant,  of  an  equal  to  an  equal, 
and  expresses  companionship,  love,  permission,  defiance,  scorn,  threatening;  whilst 
ye  is  the  language  of  a  servant  to  a  lord  and  of  compliment,  and  further  expresses 
honour,  submission,  entreaty.’ — Abbott,  §  232,  says,  furthermore,  that  a  master  find¬ 
ing  fault  often  resorts  to  the  unfamiliar  you,  see  line  516.  Note  also  the  change  of 
address  in  the  Fifth  Act,  where  Prospero  reveals  himself.  At  times,  however,  mere 
euphony,  I  think,  or  the  position  of  the  word  in  the  line,  appears  to  have  decided  the 
choice. — Ed. 

503.  single]  W.  A.  Wright:  Ferdinand  plays  upon  the  word.  He  believes  that 
himself  and  the  King  of  Naples  are  one  and  the  same  person ;  he  therefore  uses  this 
epithet  with  a  reference  to  its  further  sense  of  solitary,  and  so  feeble  and  helpless. 
Compare  Macb.  I,  vi,  16. 

509,  510.  Duke  .  .  .  sonne]  Theobald  (ed.  ii) :  Here  seems  a  slight  forgetful¬ 
ness  in  our  poet.  Nobody  was  lost  in  the  wreck,  and  yet  we  have  no  such  character 
as  the  Duke  of  Milan’s  son.  No  doubt  in  his  first  plan  he  had  mark’d  out  such  a 
character,  but,  on  second  thought,  found  it  unnecessary. — Halliwell  was  the  first  to 
suggest  that  this  difficulty  might  be  attributed  to  the  old  play  or  novel  on  which  this 
drama  is  founded. — Holt  is  the  only  one  who  has  attempted  to  defend  the  text, 
which  he  does  lamely.  *  If  ’tis  considered,’  observes  Holt,  ‘  as  an  enumeration  of 
some  of  the  highest  of  the  lords,  who,  with  the  king,  suffered  shipwreck,  which  does 
not  necessarily  imply  being  drown’d,  being  himself  an  instance  of  the  contrary,  it 
may  very  grammatically  be  referr’d  to  the  king’s  brave  son,  meaning  himself;  who 
might  with  great  propriety  be  reckon’d  one  of  his  father’s  lords,  tho’  with  as  great 
good  manners  he  mentions  the  duke  first.  And  then  the  sense  will  be,  I  am  King 
of  Naples  myself,  who  beheld  the  king,  my  father,  and  all  his  lords  wreck’d ;  his 
brave  son  and  the  Duke  of  Milan  being  two  of  those  lords.  Shakespeare  mnd« 


ACT  I.  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


87 

511 


Pro.  The  Duke  of  Millaine 
And  his  more  brauer  daughter,  could  contrull  thee 
If  now  ’twere  fit  to  do’t :  At  the  firft  fight 
They  haue  chang’d  eyes  :  Delicate  Ariel, 
lie  fet  thee  free  for  this.  A  word  good  Sir,  5 1 5 

I  feare  you  haue  done  your  felfe  fome  wrong :  A  word. 

511—515.  The... this]  Aside,  Wk.  Dyce  516.  you  haue ]  you've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce 

Coll.  Cam.  Sta.  Clke.  ii,  iii. 

5 13—5 15-  At... this]  Aside,  Cap. 

use  of  this  harsh  construction  for  the  sake  of  the  antithesis  in  “son”  and  “daugh¬ 
ter.”  ’  It  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  Holt  that  Ferdinand  would  scarcely 
have  spoken  of  himself  as  a  *  brave  ’  young  man,  or  that  Ferdinand’s  living  presence 
was  a  refutation  of  the  belief  that  the  same  fate  had  overtaken  him  which  he  was 
sure  had  overtaken  his  father.  It  is  clear  that  Ferdinand  believed  himself  to  be  the 
sole  survivor  of  the  wreck,  and  that  the  antithesis  used  by  Prospero  referred  to  a  son, 
real  or  imaginary,  of  the  usurping  Milan,  and  merely  for  the  sake  of  an  antithesis 
like  this  it  is  hardly  necessary  that  an  actual  character  should  be  supplied  and 
added  to  the  list  of  Dramatis  Personae.  It  is  certainly  possible  that  there  is  here 
neither  an  oversight  nor  a  remnant  of  the  older  play  or  novel.  Staunton,  however, 
thinks  otherwise;  he  suggests  ( Athenaeum ,  16  Nov.  1872)  that  Francisco  is  the  cha¬ 
racter  here  referred  to,  and  that  in  the  list  of  ‘Actors’  Names  ’  he  should  have  been 
styled  ‘  son  to  the  usurping  Duke  of  Milan  ’ ;  but  that  the  editor  of  the  Folio,  instead 
of  thus  designating  him,  carelessly  coupled  him  with  Adrian  as  one  of  the  ‘  Lords.’ 
Otherwise  we  are  ‘  driven  to  suppose,’  says  Staunton,  ‘  that,  to  shorten  the  repre¬ 
sentation,  the  character  as  delineated  by  Shakespeare  was  altogether  struck  out  by  the 
actors,  while  the  allusion  to  it  was  inadvertently  retained.’ — Ed. 

512.  more  brauer j  For  other  instances  of  double  comparatives,  see  Abbott,  §  ii, 
or  Shakespeare,  passim. 

512.  controll]  Johnson:  That  is,  confute  thee,  unanswerably  contradict  thee.— 
Walker  (Crit.  ii,  303)  has  collected  eight  or  ten  instances,  as  late  even  as  in  Swift, 
where  ‘  control  ’  is  used  in  this  sense.  To  Staunton’s  question,  therefore,  whether 
‘  control  ’  be  not  here  a  misprint  for  console,  Dyce  answers  emphatically,  ‘  Surely  not,’ 
and  refers  to  Johnson  and  Walker,  as  just  cited. 

513.  At  the  first  sight]  Coleridge  (p.  88) :  It  is  love  at  first  sight,  and  it 

appears  to  me  that  in  all  cases  of  real  love  it  is  at  one  moment  that  it  takes  place. 
That  moment  may  have  been  prepared  by  previous  esteem,  admiration,  or  even  affec¬ 
tion, _ yet  love  seems  to  require  a  momentary  act  of  volition,  by  which  a  tacit  bond 

of  devotion  is  imposed,— a  bond  not  to  be  thereafter  broken  without  violating  what 
should  be  sacred  in  our  nature.  How  finely  is  this  true  Shakespearian  scene  con¬ 
trasted  with  Dryden’s  vulgar  alteration  of  it,  in  which  a  mere  ludicrous  psychological 
experiment,  as  it  were,  is  tried,— displaying  nothing  but  indelicacy  without  passion. 
Prospero’s  interruption  of  the  courtship  has  often  seemed  to  me  to  have  had  no  suf¬ 
ficient  motive ;  still,  his  alleged  reason,  ‘  Lest  too  light  winning  make  the  prize  light, 
is  enough  for  the  ethereal  connections  of  the  romantic  imagination,  although  it  would 
not  oe  so  for  the  historical. 

516.  Steevens  :  That  is,  I  fear  that  in  asserting  yourself  to  be  the  King  of  Naples 
you  have  uttered  a  falsehood,  which  is  below  your  character,  and  consequently  injuri- 


88 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  u. 

Mir.  Why  fpeakes  my  father  fo  vngently  ?  This  5  *7 

Is  the  third  man  that  ere  I  faw :  the  firft 
That  ere  I  figh’d  for :  pitty  moue  my  father 
To  be  enclin’d  my  way.  520 

Fer.  O,  if  a  Virgin, 

And  your  affedlion  not  gone  forth,  lie  make  you 
The  Queene  of  Naples. 

Pro.  Soft  fir,  one  word  more. 

They  are  both  in  eythers  pow’rs  :  But  this  fwift  bufines  525 

I  muft  vneafie  make,  leaft  too  light  winning 

Make  the  prize  light.  One  word  more  :  I  charge  thee 

That  thou  attend  me :  Thou  do’ft  heere  vfurpe 

The  name  thou  ow’ft  not,  and  had  put  thy  felfe 

Vpon  this  Ifland,  as  a  fpy,  to  win  it  530 

From  me,  the  Lord  on’t. 

Fer.  No,  as  I  am  a  man.  532 


517-520.  [Aside.  Cap. 

517.  vngently~\  urgently  Ff,  Johns. 

518.  ere  I  faw~\  I  e'er  saw  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Steev.’85.  I  saw  e'er 
Mai. 

525-527.  [Aside.  Johns. 

525.  They  are~\  They're  Pope  +  ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii. 

pow'rs\  pcr.v'r  F4,  Rowe  +  ,Wh.  ii. 


526.  leaf]  lejl  F4  et  seq. 

527.  One  word  more ]  Sir,  one  word 
more  Pope  + ,  Cap.  One  word  more,  sir 
Ktly. 

527,  528. 1...me~\  To  Ariel.  Pope,  Han. 
I  charge  thee — Dost  thou  attend  me  ? — 
Wilson. 

532.  I am~\  I  Rowe  ii.  I'm  Pope  + , 
Dyce  ii,  iii. 


ous  to  your  honour.  See  Mer.  Wives,  IV,  ii,  161. — Krauth  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p.  21): 
Ferdinand,  by  assuming  a  name  he  ‘  owed  ’  not,  and  thereby  disguising  himself,  proved 
that  he  had  come  to  the  island  for  no  good  purpose,  most  probably  as  a  spy  and  as  a 
usurper,  and  had  thereby  done  himself  the  wrong  and  injury  of  the  severe  penalty 
which  he  had  incurred. — Cambridge  Editors  :  See  this  phrase  used  in  a  similar 
sense  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  ii,  39. — Jephson  :  You  have  done  yourself  ‘  some  injus¬ 
tice  ’  in  making  yourself  out  to  be  King  of  Naples. — W.  A.  Wright  :  A  polite  way 
of  saying,  ‘  you  are  much  mistaken,’  or  something  plainer  still.  See  Mer.  Wives,  III, 
ii,  221. 

521,  522.  For  the  ellipses  here,  see  Abbott,  §  387.  Also  ‘  if  heed  me,’  II,  i,  234. 

525.  both  in  eythers  pow’rs]  Abbott,  §  12:  In  this  passage  ‘both’  seems  put 
for  each,  or  ‘  either  ’  used  for  each  other.  There  may,  however,  be  an  ellipsis  of  each 

after  ‘  both.’  Compare  ‘A  thousand  groans  ....  Came  (one)  on  another’s  neck.’ _ 

Sonn.  131.  It  is  natural  to  conjecture  that  this  is  a  misprint  for  one  or  others.  But 
compare,  ‘  I  think  there  is  not  half  a  kiss  to  choose  Who  loves  another  best.’ —  Wint. 
T.  IV,  iv,  176. 

528.  attend  me]  For  other  examples  of  the  omission  of  the  preposition,  see 
Abbott,  §  200 ;  again,  see  §  369,  for  the  subjunctive  after  verbs  of  command  and 
•ntreaiy,  as  in  ‘  that  they  grinde,’  IV,  i,  286. 


ACT  i,  sc.  ii.]  THE  TEMPEST 


89 


Mir.  Ther’s  nothing  ill,  can  dwell  in  fuch  a  Temple,  533 
If  the  ill-fpirit  haue  fo  fayre  a  houfe, 

Good  things  will  ftriue  to  dwell  with’t.  533 

Pro.  Follow  me. 

Prof.  Speake  not  you  for  him  :  hee’s  a  Traitor :  come, 
lie  manacle  thy  necke  and  feete  together : 

Sea  water  fhalt  thou  drinke :  thy  food  fliall  be 

The  frefh-brooke  Muffels,  wither’d  roots,  and  huskes  540 

Wherein  the  Acorne  cradled.  Follow. 

For.  No, 

I  will  refift  fuch  entertainment,  till 
Mine  enemy  ha’s  more  pow’r. 

He  dr  awes,  and  is  charmed  from  mouing.  543 

Mira.  O  deere  Father, 

Make  not  too  rath  a  triall  of  him,  for 

Hee’s  gentle,  and  not  fearfull.  54& 


534.  a  houfe\  an  house  Rowe  + ,  Steev. 
Mai.  Var. 

537.  Prof.]  Repeated  from  line  536, 
the  last  line  of  preceding  page,  Ff. 
[To  Mirand.  Johns. 


537.  not  you]  you  not  Rowe  ii,  Pope, 
Han. 

540.  Muff  el r]  Muscles  Rowe,  muscels 
Johns. 

547.  rajh~\  harsh  Heath. 

548.  and]  tho ’  Han.  Quincy  MS. 


533.  can]  For  the  omission  of  the  relative,  see  Abbott,  §  244. 

535.  with’t]  Allen  (Phi la.  Sh.  Soc.  p.  21) :  Miranda’s  thesis  is  that  the  breast 
of  Ferdinand  is  a  temple,  in  which  no  ill  thing  or  being  does  or  can  dwell.  Her 
proof  is :  Grant  that  the  ill  spirit  may  have  originally  seized  upon  the  temple  as  his, 
good  things  (or  good  spirits) — recognising  it  to  be  rightfully  their  own — would  have 
expelled  the  ill  spirit  and  so  have  held  it  themselves,  to  the  total  exclusion  of  any¬ 
thing  ill.  (For  surely  Miranda  would  spoil  her  logic  by  making  the  good  spirits, 
fight  for  the  fair  house  and  succeed  only  so  far  as  to  be  joint-tenants  in  it  with  the 
ill  spirit.) — Either,  therefore,  I.  For  ‘with ’t’  read  in  V,  or  2.  ‘With  ’  =  Lat.  apud,. 
Germ,  bey ,  Fr.  chez,  preposition  of  residence  in,  of  which  use  no  example  is  known 
elsewhere. 

536,  537.  Pro.  .  .  .  Pros.]  This  division  of  Prospero’s  speech  is  due  to  a  printer’s 
error;  line  536  is  the  last  line  on  one  page  of  the  Folio,  and  line  537  is  the  first  line 
on  the  next. 

548.  gentle,  and  not  fearfull]  Warburton:  Miranda  had  frequently  beheld 
Caliban  under  that  kind  of  discipline  with  which  her  father  here  threatens  Ferdi 
nand.  The  perversity  of  Caliban’s  nature  and  the  cowardliness  of  it  made  punishment 
easy  to  be  inflicted.  Out  of  tenderness  both  to  her  father  and  her  lover  she  cries,  ‘  he’s 
gentle  ’ — not  like  the  savage  Caliban,  and  so  deserves  not  punishment,  this  she  gath¬ 
ered  from  his  preceding  conversation,  ‘  and  not  fearful ,’  like  that  coward,  and  so  is 
not  to  be  easily  managed.  This  she  collected  from  his  drawing  his  sword. — Holt: 
In  five  words  Shakespeare  has  expressed  all  the  tender  fear  that  duty  and  a  growing 


po 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Prof.  What  I  fay, 

My  foote  my  Tutor  ?  Put  thy  fword  vp  Traitor, 


550 


55a  foote\  fool  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  tool  Bulloch. 


affection  could  show,  4  He’s  gentle,’  and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  ill  treated ;  ‘  and 
not  fearful,’  and  therefore  it  may  be  dangerous  to  attempt  it. — Capell  (62a)  :  The 
‘  trial  ’  spoken  of  by  Miranda  can  be  no  other  but  one  suggested  by  sight  of  Ferdi¬ 
nand’s  4  sword,’  and  very  nature  demands  that  her  first  fears  upon  the  occasion  should 
be  for  her  4  father  ’ ;  hence  the  epithet  ‘  rash,’  importing  disparity  between  the  threat¬ 
en’d  and  threat’ner,  the  odds  lying  against  the  latter;  and  that  the  gentleness  of  the 
former,  collected  from  his  behaviour,  might  not  encourage  to  trial,  there  is  added 
‘  but  not  fearful,’  suppressing  the  other  matter,  and  leaving  it  to  his  collection  she 
speaks  to.  Read,  therefore,  as  above,  dismissing  the  copulative. — Ritson  :  Do  not 
rashly  determine  to  treat  him  with  severity,  he  is  mild  and  harmless ,  and  not  in  the 
least  terrible  or  dangerous. — Steevens  :  4  Fearful  ’  signifies  both  terrible  and  timor¬ 
ous. — Malone  :  ‘  Fearful  ’  was  much  more  frequently  used  in  the  sense  of  formidable 
than  that  of  timorous. — Smollett  (. Humphrey  Clinker,  ii,  182,  quoted  by  Reed)  : 
How  have  your  commentators  been  puzzled  by  [this  passage]  as  if  it  was  a  paralogism 
to  say  that  being  gentle,  he  must  of  course  be  courageous ;  but  the  truth  is,  one  of  the 
original  meanings,  if  not  the  sole  meaning,  of  that  word  was  noble,  high  minded ;  and 
to  this  day  a  Scotch  woman  in  the  situation  of  the  young  lady  in  The  Tempest  would 
express  herself  in  nearly  the  same  terms.  Don’t  provoke  him ;  for,  being  gentle,  that 
is,  high  spirited,  he  won’t  tamely  bear  an  insult.  Spenser,  in  the  very  first  stanza 
of  the  Faerie  Queene,  says :  4  A  gentle  knight  was  pricking  o’er  the  plain,’  which 
knight,  far  from  being  tame  and  fearful,  was  so  stout  that  4  Nothing  did  he  dread, 
but  ever  was  ydrad.’ — Staunton  believes  this  interpretation  of  Smollett  to  be  the 
true  one  :  ‘  he  is  of  a  lofty  spirit  and  not  to  be  intimidated.’ — W.  A.  Wright  :  The 
natural  sense  of  these  words  is  conveyed  by  taking  ‘  fearful  ’  to  mean  4  capable  of 
inspiring  fear,  terrible,’  although  there  may  also  be  a  covert  play  upon  the  other  sig¬ 
nifications  both  of  ‘  gentle  ’  and  4  fearful.’  In  this  case  4  gentle  ’  must  be  regarded  as 
equivalent  to  4  of  gentle  birth,’  4  high-born,’  and  in  a  secondary  sense  high-spirited  and 
dangerous  to  provoke.  But  the  word  is  nowhere  used  by  Shakespeare  in  this  second¬ 
ary  sense.  [To  me  the  simplest  meaning,  as  given  by  Ritson,  is  here  the  best. 
Miranda  has  just  said  that  there  could  be  nothing  ill  in  such  a  temple,  and  she  now 
says,  as  a  sequence,  that  he  is  gentle  and  not  terrible,  using  both  4  gentle  ’  and  4  fear¬ 
ful  ’  in  their  usual  acceptations. — Ed.] 

550.  foote  my  Tutor]  Malone  :  Compare  Lyly’s  Euphues  (p.  261,  ed.  Arber) : 
Then  how  vaine  is  it  ...  .  that  the  foote  should  neglect  his  office  to  correct  the  face.’ 
— Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  3) :  Read  fool.  Was  it  a  proverb?  B.  and  FI.  Pilgrim,  IV, 
ii :  4  When  fools  and  mad  folks  shall  be  tutors  to  me,  And  feel  my  sores,  yet  I  unsen- 
sible,’  &c. — Br.  Nicholson  (N.  &•  Qu.  5th  S,  xi,  363) :  Compare  the  First  Part  of 
Homily  xxxiii,  Against  Disobedience  and  Wilful  Rebellion, — a  sermon  which  Shake¬ 
speare  had  probably  heard  or  read  more  than  once ;  4  what  a  perilous  thing  were  it  to 
commit  unto  the  Subjects  the  judgement  which  Prince  is  wise  and  godly  ....  and 
which  is  otherwise;  as  though  the  foot  must  judge  of  the  head.’ — p.  355,  ed.  Oxf. 
1683.  Again  (IV.  Qu.  6th  S.  viii,  242)  Nicholson  cites  another  parallel  passage, 
viz :  4  the  cleane  fooles  of  this  world  are  pattemd  ....  that  the  braine  is  now  lodged 
in  the  foote,  and  thereupon  comes  it  that  many  make  their  head  their  foote.’ _ Armin’s 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


91 


Who  mak’ft  a  fhew,  but  dar’ft  not  ftrike :  thy  confcience  551 
Is  fo  poffeft  with  guilt :  Come,  from  thy  ward, 

For  I  can  heere  difarme  thee  with  this  fticke, 

And  make  thy  weapon  drop. 

Mira.  Befeech  you  Father.  555 

Prof.  Hence  :  hang  not  on  my  garments. 

Mira.  Sir  haue  pity, 
lie  be  his  furety. 

Prof.  Silence  :  One  word  more 

Shall  make  me  chide  thee,  if  not  hate  thee  :  What,  560 

An  aduocate  for  an  Impoftor?  Hufh  : 

Thou  think’ft  there  is  no  more  fuch  fhapes  as  he, 

(Hauing  feene  but  him  and  Caliban :)  Foolifh  wench, 

To  th’moft  of  men,  this  is  a  Caliban , 

And  they  to  him  are  Angels.  565 

Mira.  My  affedfions 

Are  then  moft  humble :  I  haue  no  ambition 
To  fee  a  goodlier  man. 

Prof.  Come  on,  obey  : 

Thy  Nerues  are  in  their  infancy  againe.  570 


551.  mak'Jf]  makes  Ff. 

552.  Is /o]  Is  Ff,  Rowe.  Is  all  Pope, 
Han. 

Come,from\  Come  from  Ff  et  seq. 

553.  heere~\  hear  F3. 


556.  garments ]  garment  Rowe  ii  4- . 
562.  there  w]  Ff,  Dyce,  Cam.  Glo. 
Wrt,  Wh.  ii,  Dtn.  there  are  Rowe  et 
cet. 

564.  To  th ’]  To  the  Cap. 


Nest  of  Ninnies,  1608,  p.  56,  ed.  Grosart.  Still  again  (New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  1880-2, 
Part  i,  p.  31)  the  same  critic  cites:  ‘goe  tell  the  Duke  I  must  speake  with  him. 
Manasses.  Presently  Sir,  [ — Aside]  He  go  fetch  the  head  to  giue  the  foote  a  posset.’ 
— Day’s  lie  of  Guls,  1606,  Sig.  B 2.  ‘From  these  examples,’  concludes  Nicholson, 
‘  we  may,  I  think,  infer  that  this  attacked  phraseology  was  both  understood  and 
known.’ — Kinnear  (p.  10)  :  Read  ‘ thy  tutor!’  that  is,  I  can  command  thee  with  my 
foot.  [ Stamps  his  footI\  [Few  instances  can  show  better  how  completely  Dyce  was 
under  the  influence  of  Walker,  an  admirable  influence,  it  is  to  be  confessed,  if  it  be 
not  supreme,  than  this,  where,  on  the  authority  of  only  one  quotation,  barely  germane 
at  that,  the  elder  and  more  cautious  editor  surrendered  his  judgement  to  the  younger 
critic.  Schlegel’s  translation  is  noteworthy :  ‘  will  das  Ey  die  Henne  meistern,’ — shall 
the  egg  rule  the  hen  ?  W.  A.  Wright  cites,  appositely,  ‘  show  lord  Timon  that  mean 
eyes  have  seen  The  foot  above  the  head,’ — Timon,  I,  i,  94,  and  adds,  compare  in  the 
same  sense,  though  with  a  play  upon  the  word  ‘  base,’  Fletcher,  Woman  Pleased,  I,  i, 
‘  If  thy  base  will  be  thy  master.’ — Ed.] 

552.  ward]  Johnson:  Desist  from  any  hope  of  awing  me  by  that  posture  of 
defence. 

562  there  is]  See  I,  i,  24. 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 

571 


92 

And  haue  no  vigour  in  them. 

Fer.  So  they  are  : 

My  fpirits,  as  in  a  dreame,  are  all  bound  vp : 

My  Fathers  Ioffe,  the  weakneffe  which  I  feele, 

The  wracke  of  all  my  friends,  nor  this  mans  threats,  575 

To  whom  I  am  fubdude,  are  but  light  to  me, 

Might  I  but  through  my  prifon  once  a  day 
Behold  this  Mayd  :  all  corners  elfe  o’th’Earth 
Let  liberty  make  vfe  of :  fpace  enough 

Haue  I  in  fuch  a  prifon.  580 

Prof.  It  workes  :  Come  on. 

Thou  haft  done  well,  fine  Ariell:  follow  me, 

Harke  what  thou  elfe  [halt  do  mee. 

Mira.  Be  of  comfort, 

My  Fathers  of  a  better  nature  (Sir)  5&5 

Then  he  appeares  by  fpeech  :  this  is  vnwonted 
Which  now  came  from  him. 

Prof.  Thou  fhalt  be  as  free 
As  mountaine  windes ;  but  then  exa<5tly  do 

All  points  of  my  command.  590 


575.  nor ]  and  Rowe  + ,  Ktly,  Huds. 
or  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing,  nay 
Ktly  conj.  now  Wagner  (Jhrb.  xiv). 

576.  are]  were  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


576.  but]  Om.  Cartwright,  Huds. 

581.  It  workes]  As  an  Aside.  Cap. 

582.  [To  Ariel.  Theob. 

588.  [To  Ariel.  Han. 


570.  Nerues]  Cotgrave,  cited  by  Wright,  has:  ‘  Nerf:  A  Synnow;  (and  thence, 
might,  strength,  force,  power).’ 

573.  as  in  a  dreame]  Wright  refers  to  Virgil,  Aeneid,  xii,  908-912 :  *  Ac  veluti 
in  somnis,’  &c. 

575.  nor]  W.  A.  Wright:  ‘Nor’  is  used  inaccurately  where  and  or  or  would 
be  in  place.  The  origin  of  the  error  is  probably  a  confusion  of  two  constructions, 
Shakespeare  intending  perhaps  at  first  to  employ  some  such  word  as  heavy,  and 
then  substituting  ‘  but  light.’  It  is  analogous  to  the  use  of  the  double  negative. 
[It  may  be,  possibly,  an  instance  of  the  not  infrequent  omission  of  neither  before 
‘nor’  (for  examples  see  Abbott,  §396),  and  ‘but’  is  used  in  the  sense  of  other¬ 
wise  than,  just  as  Hamlet  says,  ‘  It  cannot  be  but  I  am  pigeon-liver’ d.’  Neither  the 
wreck  of  my  friends  nor  this  man’s  threats  are  otherwise  than  light  to  me,  &c. — 
Ed.] 

578.  Steevens  quotes  a  passage,  corresponding  in  meaning  and  in  charm,  from 
Chaucer,  Knight's  Tale,  line  1230. 

586.  by  speech]  Grey’s  emendation  (i,  15)  of  ‘  by’s  speech  for  by  his’  is  clearly 
right ;  it  is  a  common  case  of  absorption.  Miranda,  moreover,  refers  to  her  father’! 
speech  on  this  special  occasion,  not  to  his  speech  in  general. — Ed. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


93 


Ariell.  To  th’fyllable. 

Prof.  Come  follow  :  fpeake  not  for  him  Exeunt. 


A  tins  Secundus.  Sccena  Prima. 


Enter  Alonfo,  Sebafiian ,  Anthonio,  Gonzalo ,  Adrian , 

Francifco,  and  others. 

Gonz.  Befeech  you  Sir,  be  merry ;  you  haue  caufe, 

(So  haue  we  all)  of  ioy ;  for  our  efcape  \ 

Is  much  beyond  our  Ioffe ;  our  hint  of  woe 
Is  common,  euery  day,  fome  Saylors  wife, 

The  Matters  of  fome  Merchant,  and  the  Merchant  8 


591-  Toth']  To  the  Cap.  8.  Maflers]  master  Johns.  Cap.  Steev. 

2.  Another  Part  of  the  Island.  Pope.  ’85,  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Dtn. 

6.  hint]  stint  Warb.  dint  Weston,  masters  Cam.  i  conj.  Ktly.  mariners 

Bulloch.  Bulloch. 

7.  common ,]  common  ;  Pope.  fome  Merchant ]  some  vessel  Ktly. 


5.  Keightley  ( Expositor ,  p.  210)  :  I  make  the  transposition  ‘  you  have  cause  of  joy, 
— so  have  we  all  ’  boldly ;  for  surely  neither  Shakespeare  nor  any  other  writer  would 
put  a  parenthesis  between  a  noun  and  its  genitive.  Gonzalo  is  speaking  quite  calmly. 
We  have  an  exactly  similar  printer’s  error  in  ‘Add  more,  from  thine  invention,  offers.’ 
— Ant.  Cleop.  Ill,  10. 

6.  hint]  See  I,  ii,  157.  Johnson:  ‘Hint’  is  that  which  recalls  to  the  memory. 
The  cause  that  fills  our  minds  with  grief  is  common.  [When  Warburton  submitted 
his  far-fetched  stint  to  Theobald,  the  latter  mildly  reminded  him  (Nichols’s  Illust.  ii, 
244)  that  in  many  passages  Shakespeare  uses  ‘  hint  ’  for  argument,  theme,  cue,  &c. ; 
wherein  Theobald  was  exactly  right.  Collier  says,  ‘  Gonzalo  seems  to  call  it  a  “  hint 
of  woe,”  in  reference  to  its  comparative  triflingness  and  ordinary  occurrence,’  which, 
I  think,  is  doubtful.  M.  H.  [Gent.  Maga.  Apr.  1790)  proposes  kin,  a  Hebrew 
measure ;  and  Weston  (p.  1)  ‘  makes  no  doubt  but  that  it  was  once  our  dint  of  woe ; 
that  is,  the  impression  of  woe  upon  us  is  common  and  ordinary.’ — Ed. 

8.  Masters  of  some  Merchant]  Steevens:  If  the  passage  be  not  corrupt  (as 
I  suspect  it  is)  we  must  suppose  that  by  ‘  masters  ’  our  author  means  the  owners  of  a 
merchant’s  ship,  or  the  officers  to  whom  the  navigation  of  it  had  been  trusted.  I 
suppose,  however,  that  our  author  wrote,  ‘  The  mistress  of  some  merchant.’  Mistress 
was  anciently  spelt  maistresse  or  maistres. — Chalmers  [Apology,  p.  589) :  I  presume 
to  think  Shakespeare  intended  it  should  be  understood :  ‘  The  master  of  some  mer¬ 
chant-man  ;  the  merchant  ’ ;  Shakespeare  was  thinking,  in  the  concrete  form,  of  the 
sailor’s  wife,  not  wives ;  of  the  merchant,  not  merchants ;  and  if  propriety  require 
that  we  should  continue  his  concatenation  of  thought,  we  must  say  the  master  of  some 
merchant-man,  not  masters  of  some  merchant  men.  Merchant-man  was  misprinted 
*  merchant  and.’  [In  a  foot-note  Chalmers  acknowledges  that  he  cannot  find  author¬ 
ity  foi  merchant-man  in  the  nautical  language  of  the  day,  but  he  attributes  the  com- 

X 


94 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Haue  iuft  our  Theame  of  woe :  But  for  the  miracle, 
(I  meane  our  preferuation)  few  in  millions 
Can  fpeake  like  vs :  then  wifely  (good  Sir)  weigh 
Our  forrow,  with  our  comfort. 


io 


Alcnf.  Prethee  peace. 


13 


pound  to  the  genius  oi  Shakespeare,  who  ‘  improved,  with  his  usual  happiness,  the 
existing  phraseology.’] — Malone  :  Merchant  was  used  for  a  merchant-man.  So, 
Dryden,  in  his  Parallel  of  Poetry  and  Painting ,  ‘  Thus  as  convoy-ships  either  accom¬ 
pany  or  should  accompany  their  merchants.’ — Prose  Works,  1801,  iii,  306. — Keight- 
ley  :  The  word  ‘  merchant  ’  occurs  here  in  two  different  senses ;  and  when  this  play 
was  written  Shakespeare  had  long  since  abstained  from  such  practices.  One  of  them, 
therefore,  must  belong  to  the  printer ;  if  the  first,  then  we  might,  and,  I  think,  should, 
read  vessel,  if  the  second,  owner.  ‘  Merchant  ’  certainly  occurs  in  the  sense  of  mer¬ 
chantman.  See  B.  and  FI.  Coxcomb,  I,  iii  [p.  132,  ed.  Dyce]. — Halliwell  (p.  31) 
quotes  from  The  Lover's  Melancholy,  ‘A  young  lady  ....  was  conveyed  like  a  ship- 
boy  in  a  merchant,  from  the  country  where  she  lived.’ — [II,  i,  p.  36,  ed.  Dyce,  who 
remarks  in  a  foot-note  :  ‘  This  is  the  expression  which  so  greatly  perplexed  Steevens, 
who  has  made  woeful  work  with  it  in  The  Tempest .’] — W.  A.  Wright  adds  another 
example,  from  Marlowe,  First  Part  of  Tamburlaine,  I,  ii  [p.  27,  ed.  Dyce],  ‘And 
Christian  merchants,  that  with  Russian  stems  Plough  up  huge  furrows  in  the  Caspian 
Sea,  Shall  vail  to  us,’  &c. 

9.  of  woe]  Steevens  :  These  words  appear  to  me  as  an  idle  interpolation.  Three 
lines  before  we  have  ‘  our  hint  of  woe.' — Dyce  agrees  with  Steevens. — Staunton 
( Athenceum ,  16  Nov.  1872)  :  The  iteration  of  ‘woe’  here  is  intolerable,  and  is  due, 
no  doubt,  to  the  appearance  of  the  word  three  lines  above.  Should  we  not  read  ‘  of 
grief'  ? 

13— io5-  Pope  :  All  that  follows  after  the  words  ‘  Prethee  peace  ’  to  the  words  ‘  You 
cram  these  words,’  &c.  seems  to  have  been  interpolated  (perhaps  by  the  Players),  the 
verses  there  beginning  again ;  and  all  that  is  between  in  prose,  not  only  being  very 
impertinent  stuff,  but  most  improper  and  ill-plac’d  drollery  in  the  mouths  of  unhappy, 
shipwreckt  people.  There  is  more  of  the  same  sort  interspers’d  in  the  remaining 
part  of  the  Scene. — Theobald  had  the  temerity,  for  which  he  paid  dearly  enough, 
to  pronounce  ‘  Mr  Pope’s  criticism  injudicious  and  unweigh’d,’  by  showing  that,  with¬ 
out  this  passage,  the  reference  to  the  marriage  of  Alonso’s  daughter  ‘  there '  would  be 
unintelligible,  and  that  the  ‘  dialogue  was  design’d  to  be  of  a  ridiculous  stamp  to 
divert  and  unsettle  the  king’s  thoughts  from  reflecting  too  deeply  on  his  son’s 
suppos’d  drowning.’ — Capell:  Pope’s  charges  ‘lye  against  [the  passage]  most  cer¬ 
tainly  almost  beyond  palliating:  but  of  it’s  authenticity,  we  have  other-guess  evi¬ 
dence  ;  and  in  that  very  speech  first,  which,  according  to  this  opinion,  should  follow 
the  present  speech :  For  what  can  be  made  without  it  (as  is  said  by  the  next  modern 
[i.  e.  Theobald])  of  that  wish  which  begins  in  his  second  line,  by  readers  who,  but 
in  what  intervenes,  have  heard  nothing  of  any  “daughter”  he  has,  or  where  she’s 
•*  married  ”  to  ?  The  condemn’d  passage  is  not  without  other  proofs  of  authentick- 
ness,  but  this  one  is  sufficient :  And  in  case  of  what  is  objected  to  it,  it  may  be 
observ’d, — that  the  levities  of  Sebastian  and  partner  open  to  us  their  characters,  and 
prepare  us  for  what  is  coming;  showing  them  nothing  touch’d  with  their  own  and 
their  king’s  deliverance,  and  their  common  condition ;  and  their  behaviour  on  this 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


95 


Seb.  He  receiues  comfort  like  cold  porredge. 

Ant.  The  Vifitor  will  not  giue  him  ore  fo.  15 

Seb.  Looke,  hee’s  winding  vp  the  watch  of  his  wit, 

By  and  by  it  will  ftrike. 

Gon.  Sir. 

Seb.  One :  Tell. 

Gon.  When  euery  greefe  is  entertaind,  20 

That’s  offer’d  comes  to  th’entertainer. 


14-49.  Crossed  out  by  Coll.  MS. 

15.  Vt/itor]  adviser  Han.  'viser  Warb. 
adversary  Quincy  MS. 

hint]  Om.  Rowe+. 

16,  17.  As  prose,  Pope. 

18.  SYr.]  Sir, —  Theob. 


19.  One ]  On  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

20.  21.  When... off ed  d]  One  line,  Cap. 

As  prose,  Pope. 

21.  offer'd ]  offer'd ;  Pope  +  .  offer'd. 
Cap. 

entertainer.]  entertainer —  Rowe. 


occasion  sets  off  and  heightens  the  love,  loyalty,  and  sobriety  of  the  other  parties 
attending,  and  chiefly  Gonzalo’s.’ — Holt  refers  to  lines  178-185  of  this  Scene,  and 
then  asks :  ‘  Who  does  not  see  this  evidently  satirizes  that  fault  for  which  the  poet  has 
been  so  often  unjustly  upbraided?’ — Jephson  :  No  poet  of  genius  inferior  to  Shake¬ 
speare's  would  have  ventured  to  introduce  so  comic  a  scene  in  circumstances  so  trag¬ 
ical.  It  is  indeed  true  to  life,  but  it  would  not  have  occurred  to  any  one  who  had  not 
observed  the  apparent  inconsistency  of  human  nature.  Men  of  noble  disposition  and 
of  high  birth  and  breeding  can  be  cheerful  and  even  witty  under  misfortunes  that 
would  bow  inferior  natures  to  the  earth ;  as,  for  instance,  Csesar  among  the  Cilician 
pirates,  Sir  Thomas  More  on  the  scaffold,  and  Lord  Balmerinoch  in  the  Tower;  but 
to  make  unfeeling  jests  upon  better  men,  while  it  argues  perhaps  the  daring  spirit 
which  is  fostered  by  high  rank,  is  the  part  of  the  reckless  and  the  wicked,  such  as 
were  Sebastian,  who  soon  after  plots  to  murder  his  brother,  and  Antonio,  who  had 
abused  his  brother  Prospero’s  confidence  to  dethrone  him.  [See  Coleridge,  note  on 
line  207.] 

15.  Visitor]  Johnson:  Why  Dr  Warburton  should  change  ‘visitor’  to  'viser,  for  ad¬ 
viser,  I  cannot  discover.  Gonzalo  gives  not  only  advice  but  comfort,  and  is  therefore 
properly  called  ‘  the  visitor,’  like  others  who  visit  the  sick  or  distressed  to  give  them 
consolation.  In  some  of  the  Protestant  churches  there  is  a  kind  of  officers  termed  con- 
Bolators  for  the  sick.  [Compare  Matthew  xxv,  36  :  ‘  I  was  sick  and  ye  visited  me.’] 

16.  &c.  Coleridge  (p.  89) :  In  this  play  are  admirably  sketched  the  vices  gener¬ 
ally  accompanying  a  low  degree  of  civilisation;  in  this  Scene,  as  in  many  other  places, 
Shakespeare  has  shown  the  tendency  in  bad  men  to  indulge  in  scorn  and  contemptu¬ 
ous  expressions  as  a  mode  of  getting  rid  of  their  own  uneasy  feelings  of  inferiority  to 
the  good,  and  also,  by  making  the  good  ridiculous,  of  rendering  the  transition  of  others 
to  wickedness  easy.  Shakespeare  never  puts  habitual  scorn  into  the  mouths  of  other 
than  bad  men,  as  here  in  the  instances  of  Antonio  and  Sebastian. 

17.  strike]  W.  A.  Wright:  The  invention  of  striking  watches  is  ascribed  to 
Peter  Hele,  of  Nuremberg,  about  the  year  1510. 

19.  Tell]  That  is,  count.  Phillpotts:  Compare ‘the  tale  of  bricks,’ &c.  ‘Every 
shepherd  tells  his  tale.'  So  Psalm  xlviii,  12  :  ‘  Tell  ye  the  towers  thereof’ ;  and  the 
tellers  of  a  division  in  Parliament  [and  the  ‘paying-teller’  of  a  bank]. 


96 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Seb. 

A  dollor. 

22 

Gon. 

Dolour  comes  to  him  indeed,  you  haue  fpoken 

truer  then  you  purpos’d. 

Seb. 

fhould. 

You  haue  taken  it  wifelier  then  I  meant  you 

25 

Gon. 

Therefore  my  Lord. 

Ant. 

Fie,  what  a  fpend-thrift  is  he  of  his  tongue. 

Alon. 

I  pre-thee  fpare. 

Gon. 

Well,  I  haue  done  :  But  yet 

30 

Seb. 

He  will  be  talking. 

Ant. 

Which,  of  he,  or  Adrian,  for  a  good  wager, 

32 

22.  dollor ]  dollar  Cap.  et  seq. 

24.  purpos'd ]  propos' d  Rowe  ii,  Pope, 
Han.  Theob.  Warb.  he  propos'd  Han.  ii 
(misprint  ?). 

27.  Lord.]  lord —  Theob. 

28.  is  he]  he  is  Han.  ii,  Steev.’85. 

29.  fpare]  spare  me  Walker,  Huds. 


32.  Which,  of  he,]  F2F3.  Which  0/ he, 
F4,  Rowe  i.  Which  of  them,  he,  Rowe 
ii-f ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.i.  Which, 
or  he  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS).  Which  of  him 
and  S.  Verges. 

32,  33.  As  prose,  Pope. 


21.  entertainer]  Jephson  :  At  this  point  Sebastian,  taking  advantage  of  the 
equivocal  meaning  of  ‘  entertain  ’  and  ‘  entertainer,’  and  pretending  to  suppose  that 
Gonzalo  means  by  ‘  entertainer  ’  an  inn-keeper,  interrupts  him  by  saying  ‘A  dollar.’ 

23-  Dolour]  In  two  other  places,  according  to  Schmidt’s  Lex.,  there  are  similar 
puns  on  these  words,  Meas.for  Meas.  I,  ii,  50,  and  Lear,  II,  iv,  54. 

32.  Which,  of  he,  or]  Staunton  :  See  Mid.  H.  D.  Ill,  ii,  337,  ‘  try  whose 
right,  Of  thine  or  mine,  is  most  in  Helena.’ — Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  353),  in  a  paragraph 
on  the  use  of  former,  the  comparative  to  which  foremost  is  the  superlative,  quotes  this 
passage  from  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  B.  i,  p.  63 :  « the  question  arising,  who  should  be  the 
fotmer  against  Phalantus,  of  the  blacke,  or  the  ill-apparelled  knight,’  &c.,  ‘  i.  e.’  ex¬ 
plains  Walker,  ‘  whether  the  black  or  the,  &c.  should  be  the  first  to  wage  combat 
with  Phalantus.’  Whereupon  Lettsom,  Walker’s  editor,  remarks  that  this  example 
‘shows  that  the  first  Folio  is  right  in  Which  of  he  or.' — Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Like  the 
French :  Lequel  preferez-vous  de  Corneille  ou  de  Racine. — Abbott,  §  206,  says  of 
this  passage  merely  ‘he  for  him.'  In  V,  i,  19  we  have  ‘him’  for  he. 

32-41.  M.  Mason:  The  meaning  is  this:  Antonio  lays  a  wager  with  Sebastian 
that  Adrian  would  crow  before  Gonzalo,  and  the  wager  was  a  laughter.  Adrian 
speaks  first,  so  Antonio  is  the  winner.  Sebastian  laughs  at  what  Adrian  had  said, 
and  Antonio  immediately  acknowledges  that  by  his  laughing  he  has  paid  the  bet. 
*  You'r  paid  ’  [of  the  Folio,  instead  of  ‘  You've  paid  ’]  will  answer  as  well  if  these 

words  be  given  to  Sebastian  [as  Theobald  had  given  them]  instead  of  to  Antonio. _ 

Knight  followed  the  Folio,  although  agreeing  with  Theobald,  that  ‘  you’re  paid  ’ 
belongs  to  Sebastian. — Grant  White  (ed.  i) :  Antonio  won  the  wager,  and  was  paid 
by  having  the  laugh  against  Sebastian.  The  prefixes  were  misplaced  in  the  Folio. 
[White,  in  the  text  of  this,  his  first  ed.,  prefixes  Ant.  to  1.  40  and  Seb.  to  1.  41.]  It 
did  not  occur  (he  goes  on  to  say)  to  those  who  proposed  that  both  speeches  should  be 
given  to  Sebastian  [among  whom  was  White  himself,  in  his  second  edition]  that  b« 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


97 


Firft  begins  to  crow  ?  33 

Seb.  The  old  Cocke. 

Ant.  The  Cockrell.  35 

Seb.  Done  :  The  wager  ? 

Ant.  A  Laughter. 

Seb.  A  match. 

Adr.  Though  this  Ifland  feeme  to  be  defert. 

Seb.  Ha,  ha,  ha.  40 

Ant.  So  :  you’r  paid. 

Adr.  Vninhabitable,  and  almoft  inacceflible. 

Seb.  Yet 
Adr.  Yet 

Ant.  He  could  not  miffe’t.  45 

Adr.  It  muft  needs  be  of  fubtle,  tender,  and  delicate 
temperance. 

Ant.  Temperance  was  a  delicate  wench. 

Seb.  I,  and  a  fubtle,  as  he  mod  learnedly  deliuer’d. 

Adr.  The  ayre  breathes  vpon  vs  here  moft  fweetly.  50 

Seb.  As  if  it  had  Lungs,  and  rotten  ones. 

Ant.  Or,  as  ’twere  perfum’d  by  a  Fen.  * 

Gon.  Heere  is  euery  thing  aduantageous  to  life. 

Ant.  True,  faue  meanes  to  Hue.  54 


39.  de/ert.]  desert —  Rowe,  desart — 
Han. 

40, 41.  One  line,  spoken  by  Seb.  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Hal.  Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Sta. 
Ktly,  Huds.  Dtn. 


41.  you’r]  you’ve  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
Var. 

42.  inaccej/lble.]  inaccessible —  Rowe. 
45.  miJJ'e’t]  miss  it  Mai. 


who  lost  the  wager  was  of  course  not  to  laugh,  but  to  be  laughed  at;  according  to  the 
old  proverb :  ‘  Let  them  laugh  that  win.’— Br.  Nicholson  {N.  Gr  Qu.  3d  S.  ix,  27), 
anticipated  by  Grant  White  in  this  transposition  of  names,  paraphrases :  ‘  Ha,  ha !  laughs 
Antonio,  gleeful  at  having  backed  the  right.  As  you  have  taken  the  laugh,  says  Sebas¬ 
tian,  you  may  keep  it  in  payment.’ — Krauth  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p.  24) :  Theobald’s 
text  should  stand,  on  the  ground,  that  Antonio  had  won  the  laugh  at  Sebastian’s 
expense,  but  Sebastian  pretends  to  take  it  as  if  he  were  to  pay  by  laughing  at  Antonio. 

_ Ingleby  {Still  Lion,  157)  :  ‘  Laughter  ’  may  be  the  cant  name  for  some  small  coin 

(a  doit  or  a  denier)  commonly  laid  in  betting.  At  present  the  only  meaning  of  the 
word  {laughter,  lafter,  lawter)  is  a  setting  of  eggs  laid  at  one  time. 

45.  misse’t]  Hunter  {Longman’ s  Series ) :  That  is,  ‘  yet  ’  was  sure  to  be  the 
next  word.  [Is  not  ‘  misse  ’  here  used  as  Prospero  uses  it  when  he  says  of  Caliban, 
« we  cannot  misse  him,’  I,  ii,  368  ?  Uninhabitable  as  this  island  is,  neither  Adrian 
nor  the  rest  could  do  without  it  just  then. — Ed.] 

47.  temperance]  Steevens  :  That  is,  temperature ;  in  the  next  line  it  is  a  proper 


name 


7 


>8 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  L 

55 


Seb.  Of  that  there’s  none,  or  little. 

Gon.  How  lufh  and  lufty  the  graffe  lookes  ? 

How  greene  ? 

Ant.  The  ground  indeed  is  tawny. 

Seb.  With  an  eye  of  greene  in’t. 

Ant.  He  miffes  not  much.  60 

Seb.  No  :  he  doth  but  miftake  the  truth  totally. 

Gon.  But  the  rariety  of  it  is,  which  is  indeed  almoft 
beyond  credit. 

Seb.  As  many  voucht  rarieties  are. 

Gon.  That  our  Garments  being  (as  they  were)  drencht  65 
in  the  Sea,  hold  notwithftanding  their  frefhneffe  and 
gloffes,  being  rather  new  dy’de  then  ftain’d  with  falte 
water.  68 


56.  luff)  fresh  Wilson.  rarities  F3F4. 

56,  57.  One  line,  Pope.  63.  credit.']  credit —  Rowe. 

61.  doth]  does  Rowe  ii  +  .  67.  gloffes]  gloss  Jervis,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 

62,  64.  rariety  ...rarieties]  rarity...  Huds. 

56.  lush]  Malone:  That  is,  juicy,  succulent ;  as  appears  from  the  following  in 
Golding’s  Ovid,  1587,  Met.  xv:  ‘Then  greene,  and  voyd  of  strength,  and  lush,  and 
foggye,  is  the  blade,  And  cheeres  the  husbandman  with  hope’  [p.  189];  where  the 
original  is :  ‘  Tunc  herba  recens,  et  roboris  expers,  Turget,  et  insolida  est,  et  spe  dr- 
lectat  agrestem.’ — Dirrill  :  If  we  might  read  lush,  it  would  then  signify  gramett 
pingue. — Deighton  :  Skeat  (s.  v.  luscious )  having  observed  that  Chaucer  uses  the 
M.  E.  lusty  (which  with  the  suffix  -ous  becomes  lusti-ous  and  so  luscious)  in  the  sense 
of  pleasant,  delicious,  goes  on  :  ‘  Shakespeare  has  lush  (short  for  lush-ious)  in  the  sense 
of  luxuriant  in  growth,  where  Chaucer  would  certainly  have  said  lusty  ;  the  curious 

result  being  that  Shakespeare  uses  both  words  together . The  equivalence  of  the 

words  could  not  be  better  exemplified.’ 

59.  eye  of  greene]  Steevens  :  An  ‘  eye  ’  is  a  small  shade  of  colour.  Thus,  in 
Sandys’s  Travels,  lib.  i :  ‘  His  under  an  upper  garments  are  lightly  of  white  sattin, 
or  cloth  of  silver  tissued  with  and  eye  of  green,  and  wrought  in  great  branches  ’  [p 
57,  ed.  1615]. — Malone:  ‘  Eye’  was  anciently  used  for  a  small  portion  of  anything. 
So  in  A  True  Declaration  of  the  Estate  of  the  Colonie  in  Virginia,  1600,  p.  44: 
4  Not  an  eye  of  sturgeon  as  yet  appeared  in  the  river.’ — Hunter  (. Longman's  Series ) : 
Here  intended  to  include  a  quibbling  reference  to  green-eyed  credulity  or  simplicity. 
— Phillpotts  :  The  jesting  pair  mean  that  the  grass  is  really  tawny  ( tanned ,  dried 
up),  and  that  the  only  ‘  green  ’  spot  in  it  is  Gonzalo  himself. 

66.  freshnesse]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  This  is  plural.  Walker’s  rule  (  Vers.  p.  243) 
here  applies.  The  plural  affix  is  sometimes  added  in  the  First  Folio  where  the  metre 
shows  that  it  is  not  to  be  pronounced,  and  it  is  sometimes  omitted  in  printing  where 
the  sense  requires  it  to  be  supplied.  [I  now  doubt  whether  Walker’s  rule  applies 
here.  If  it  applies,  I  think  we  should  have  had  gloss  instead  of  ‘  glosses.’  Dyce,  who 
was  quite  as  ready  as  anyone  to  apply  Walker’s  rule,  failed  to  see  its  present  appli¬ 
cation.  See  next  note. — Ed.] 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


99 


Ant.  If  but  one  of  his  pockets  could  fpeake,  would 
it  not  fay  he  lyes?  70 

Seb.  I,  or  very  falfely  pocket  vp  his  report. 

Gon.  Me  thinkes  our  garments  are  now  as  frefh  as 
when  we  put  them  on  firft  in  Affricke,  at  the  mairiage 
of  the  kings  faire  daughter  Claribel  to  the  king  of  Tunis. 

Seb.  ’Twas  a  fweet  marriage,  and  we  profper  well  in  75 
our  returne. 

Adri.  Tunis  was  neuer  grac’d  before  with  fuch  a  Pa¬ 
ragon  to  their  Queene. 

Gon.  Not  fince  widdow  Dido's  time. 

Ant.  Widow  ?  A  pox  o’that :  how  came  that  Wid-  80 
dow  in  ?  Widdow  Dido  ! 

Seb.  What  if  he  had  faid  Widdower  ALneas  too  ? 

Good  Lord,  how  you  take  it  ? 

Adri.  Widdow  Dido  faid  you  ?  You  make  me  ftudy 
of  that :  She  was  of  Carthage,  not  of  Tunis.  85 

Gon.  This  Tunis  Sir  was  Carthage. 

Adri.  Carthage  ?  Gon.  I  affure  you  Carthage. 

Ant.  His  word  is  more  then  the  miraculous  Harpe. 

Seb.  He  hath  rais’d  the  wall,  and  houfes  too.  89 

88,  89.  His. ..too.']  Given  to  Seb.  Cam.  i,  Glo.  Ktly,  Wh.  ii,  Dtn. 


67.  glosses]  Dyce  (eds.  ii,  iii) :  This  is  manifestly  an  error  for  the  old  spelling 
of  the  singular,  glosse  (which  the  Folio  has  in  Macb.  I,  vii :  ‘  in  their  newest  glosse  ’). 
This  correction  was  suggested  to  me  by  Mr  Swynfen  Jervis. 

69.  pockets]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sk.  Soc.) :  Not  that  there  was  anything  in  the  state 
of  the  pockets,  in  particular,  to  give  the  lie  to  Gonzalo’s  assertion  of  a  universal  dry¬ 
ness,  but  because  the  pocket,  at  its  opening,  looked  like  a  mouth,  and  was  therefore 
qualified  to  be  the  spokesman  for  the  whole  of  the  garment — Deighton  :  In  the 
drenching  his  pockets  would  have  become  so  full  of  mud,  &c.  that  they  would  give 
the  lie  to  Gonzalo’s  remark.  Anthonio’s  remark  is  probably  made  for  the  sake  of 
bringing  in  the  quibble  in  Sebastian’s  answer.  [Neither  of  these  explanations  car¬ 
ries  conviction ;  albeit  Deighton’s  last  remark  points  to  a  practice  in  which  we  all 
know  Shakespeare  indulged,  in  his  humorous  dialogues. — Ed.] 

78.  to  their  Queene]  See  III,  iii,  75,  ‘hath  to  instrument,’  or  Luke  iii,  8:  ‘We 
have  Abraham  to  our  father,’  or  for  other  examples,  see  Abbott,  §  189. 

81.  Widdow  Dido]  Ritson  (p.  236)  has  a  note  to  show  that  a  ballad  called 
‘  Queene  Dido  ’  was  a  ‘  great  favourite  with  the  common  people.’ 

85.  of  that]  For  other  examples  of  this  use,  where  ‘of’  means  about,  concerning 
see  Abbott,  §  174. 

88,  89.  Phillpotts  :  If  Gonzalo  makes  Carthage  and  Tunis  into  one  city,  his  word 
has  more  power  than  Amphion’s  harp,  which  raised  the  walls  of  Thebes. — Or,  as  W, 


IOO 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  L 


Ant.  What  impofsible  matter  wil  he  make  eafy  next  ?  90 

Seb.  I  thinke  hee  will  carry  this  Ifland  home  in  his 
pocket,  and  giue  it  his  fonne  for  an  Apple. 

Ant.  And  fowing  the  kernels  of  it  in  the  Sea,  bring 
forth  more  Illands. 

Gon.  I.  Ant.  Why  in  good  time.  95 

Gon.  Sir,  we  were  talking,  that  our  garments  feeme 
now  as  frefh  as  when  we  were  at  Tunis  at  the  marriage 
of  your  daughter,  who  is  now  Queene. 

Ant.  And  the  rareft  that  ere  came  there. 

Seb.  Bate  (I  befeech  you)  widdow  Dido.  IOO 

Ant.  O  Widdow  Dido  ?  I,  Widdow  Dido. 

Gon.  Is  not  Sir  my  doublet  as  frefh  as  the  firft  day  I 
wore  it  ?  I  meane  in  a  fort. 

Ant.  That  fort  was  well  fifh’d  for.  104 


95.  [To  Adr.  C.  Clke. 

/.]  Ay.  Rowe.  I- —  Johns.  Ay  ? 
Cap.  Given  to  Alon.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds.  (who  reads  Ah  f)  Hunter,  Dtn. 


95.  [To  Adr.  Clke. 

96.  [To  Alon.  Clke. 

102.  Sir  my  doublet ]  my  doublet  Sir 
Ff,  Rowe  +  . 


A.  Wright  says,  ‘  the  reference  maybe  to  the  harp  of  Apollo,  which  raised  the  walls 
of  Troy.’ 

95-  I]  Staunton  :  This  sigh  or  exclamation,  which  the  two  next  speeches  show 
indisputably  to  have  been  uttered  by  the  king  upon  awaking  from  his  trance  of  grief, 
has,  hitherto,  been  assigned  to  Gonzalo.  [See  Text.  Notes.] — W.  A.  Wright  :  But 
it  seems  appropriate  to  Gonzalo,  who  is  not  quite  certain  what  these  running  com¬ 
ments  of  Sebastian  and  Antonio  mean,  and  makes  a  half-enquiring  exclamation. — 
Cowden-Clarke  :  We  take  this  to  be  said  by  Gonzalo  in  confirmation  of  his 
assurance  to  Adrian  of  Tunis  being  Carthage.  The  speakers  are  to  be  supposed  as 
arranged  in  two  separate  groups :  Gonzalo  engaged  with  King  Alonso  and  the  rest, 
while  Sebastian  and  Antonio  remain  apart  together,  commenting  sneeringly  on  the 
others. 

96.  talking,  that]  Abbott,  §  200 :  here  used  like  saying  that. 

104.  That  sort]  Dirrill  :  This  is  an  example  of  Mr  Whiter’s  doctrine  of  asso¬ 
ciation.  Any  person  who  has  ever  observed  the  fishermen  drawing  their  nets  will 
readily  see  that  the  words  ‘sort’  and  ‘  fresh  ’  in  Gonzalo’s  speech  convey’d  the  idea 
to  Shakespeare  of  making  Antonio  say  ‘  well  fish’d  for.’  When  the  net  is  drawn,  the 
fish  are  always,  what  they  term,  sorted ;  some  are  thrown  back  again  into  the  water, 
and  other  are  carried  sorted  to  market. — Hunter  (. Longman's  Series )  :  There  is  here 
a  punning  allusion  to  chance  or  luck  as  one  of  the  meanings  of  the  word  *  sort.’- 
Hudson  :  A  punning  allusion,  probably,  to  one  of  the  meanings  of  ‘  sort,’  which  was 
lot  ox  portion;  from  the  Latin  sors. — Phii.lpotts:  You  did  well  to  qualify  your 
Statement  by  ‘  in  a  sort  ’ ;  ‘  fished  for,’  of  course,  having  the  double  meaning  of  ‘  bring¬ 
ing  ii  the  word’  and  ‘recovering,’  in  allusion  to  his  ducking. — Deighton:  You 
fished  a  long  time  before  you  succeeded  in  catching  that  word  *  sort  ’ ;  you  have 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


IOI 


Gon.  When  I  wore  it  at  your  daughters  marriage.  105 

Alon.  You  cram  thefe  words  into  mine  eares,  againft 
the  ftomacke  of  my  fenfe  :  would  I  had  neuer 
Married  my  daughter  there  :  For  comming  thence 
My  fonne  is  loft,  and  (in  my  rate)  fhe  too, 

Who  is  fo  farre  from  Italy  remoued,  1 10 

I  ne’re  againe  fhall  fee  her  :  O  thou  mine  heire 
Of  Naples  and  of  Millaine ,  what  ftrange  fifti 
Hath  made  his  meale  on  thee  ? 

Fran.  Sir  he  may  hue, 

I  faw  him  beate  the  furges  vnder  him,  1 1 5 

And  ride  vpon  their  backes  ;  he  trod  the  water 

Whofe  enmity  he  flung  aflde  :  and  brefted 

The  furge  moft  fwolne  that  met  him  :  his  bold  head 

’Boue  the  contentious  waues  he  kept,  and  oared 

Himfelfe  with  his  good  armes  in  lufty  ftroke  120 

To  th’fhore  ;  that  ore  his  waue-worne  bafls  bowed 

As  ftooping  to  releeue  him  :  I  not  doubt  1 22 

1 14.  Fran.]  Gon.  Rann  conj.  122.  releeue"]  receive  Ktly  conj. 

1 20.  Jlroke]  flrokes  F4,  Rowe  +  . 


repeatedly  tried  to  make  out  that  our  garments  are  as  fresh  as  if  they  had  never  been 
immersed  in  the  sea,  and  now  at  last  you  qualify  your  assertion  by  the  word  *  sort. 
In  ‘  fished  ’  there  is  possibly  an  allusion  also  to  their  difficulty  in  fishing  themselves 
out  of  the  water. 

107.  sense]  Steevens  :  That  is,  both  reason  and  natural  affection. — Monck 
Mason  :  In  this  place  ‘  sense  ’  means  feeling. — W.  A.  Wright  :  But  surely  Alonzo 
only  intends  to  say  that  these  words  of  Gonzalo  are  forced  into  his  ears  without  his 
wishing  to  hear  them,  as  food  is  crammed  into  the  mouth  of  one  who  has  no  desire  to 
eat. 

109.  rate]  Estimation,  opinion.  See  I,  ii,  no. 

1 14.  Fran.]  Kinnear  (p.  11)  refers  to  11.  251-255,  where  Gonzalo  is  spoken  of 
as  having  ‘  almost  persuaded  the  king  his  son’s  alive,’  as  proof  that  this  present  speech 
should  be  given  to  Gonzalo,  ‘  who  alone  gave  utterance  to  such  a  belief.  At  the  end 
of  the  scene  he  again  says,  “  For  he  [Ferdinand]  is  sure  i’  the  island.”  Francisco, 
a  mere  attendant,  does  not  speak  during  the  scene,  and  utters  only  three  words  dur¬ 
ing  the  entire  play,  III,  iii,  55,  and  those  probably  belong  to  Antonio.’ 

1 15-123.  It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  believe  that  Shakespeare  wrote  these 
lines,  in  which  there  seems  to  be  but  one  trace  of  him,  and  that  is  ‘  oared.’  I  cannot 
but  think  that,  if  anywhere,  we  have  a  survival  of  the  old  play  here. — Ed. 

1 1 9.  oared]  Compare  Milton,  Par.  Lost ,  vii,  438:  * — the  swan,  with  arched  neck 
Between  her  white  wings  mantling  proudly,  rows  Her  state  with  oary  feet,’  where¬ 
upon  Peck  {Memoirs,  &c.  p.  184)  observes:  ‘“Oarie,”  a  new-made  word;  but  none 
of  our  author’s  mintage.  He  owes  it  to  Shakespeare’s  [Tempest].’ 


102 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  L 
123 


He  came  aliue  to  Land. 

Alon.  No,  no,  hee’s  gone. 

Seb.  Sir  you  may  thank  your  felfe  for  this  great  Ioffe,  125 
That  would  not  bleffe  our  Europe  with  your  daughter, 

But  rather  loofe  her  to  an  Affrican, 

Where  fhe  at  leaft,  is  banifh’d  from  your  eye, 

Who  hath  caufe  to  wet  the  greefe  on’t. 

Alon,  Pre-thee  peace.  1 3° 

Seb.  You  were  kneel’ d  too,  &  importun’d  otherwife 
By  all  of  vs  :  and  the  faire  foule  her  felfe 
Waigh’d  betweene  loathneffe,  and  obedience,  at 
Which  end  o’th’beame  fhould  bow :  we  haue  loft  your 
I  feare  for  euer:  Millaine  and  Naples  haue  (fon,  135 

127.  loofe ]  lose  Rowe. 

129.  wet]  whet  Rann  conj.  weigh 
Wilson. 

133.  Waigh'd]  Swayed  S.  Verges. 
at]  as  Coll,  ii  (MS),  Om.  Ktly. 

134.  o'thl]  the  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Cap.  Steev. 

’85,  Ktly.  o"t  th'  Spence  (N.  &  Qu.  V, 

122.  not  doubt]  See  ‘  the  ewe  not  bites,’  V,  i,  45 ;  ‘  I  not  know,’  lb.  line  128 ;  ‘  I 
not  doubt,’  lb.  line  357 ;  or  Abbott,  §  305. 

129.  Who]  For  instances  of  who  personifying  irrational  antecedents,  see  Shake¬ 
speare,  passim ,  or,  if  necessary,  Abbott,  §  264.  In  the  present  case  ‘  who  ’  may 
refer  either  to  ‘eye’  or  ‘she.’ 

131.  You  were]  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  202)  :  Thou  wert  (sometimes  written  in  the  old 
poets  Th ’  wert),  you  were ,  I  was,  &c.  occur  frequently  both  in  Shakespeare  and  contem¬ 
porary  dramatists  in  places  where  it  is  clear  they  must  have  been  pronounced  as  one  syl¬ 
lable,  in  whatever  manner  the  contraction  was  effected.  [As  in  the  present  instance. 
See  also  Ham.  IV,  v,  14;  Oth.  I,  ii,  34;  Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  viii,  36,  of  this  ed. — Ed.] 

134.  should  bow]  Capell  (63  a) :  You  may  read  1  she'd  bow,’  i.  e.  she  would 
bow;  in  which  reading  bow  is  a  verb  reciprocal;  in  either  ‘weigh’d’  will  have  the 
sense  of — consider’d,  ponder’d,  was  a  long  time  ere  she  could  determine.  [Malone 
has  always  received  the  credit  of  this  emendation ;  even  the  Third  Cambridge  Edi¬ 
tion  ascribes  it  to  him.  Indeed,  so  often  does  the  toe  of  Malone  come  close  to 
the  heel  of  Capell,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  believe  that  Malone  was  igno¬ 
rant  of  his  predecessor’s  presence.] — Collier  (ed.  ii)  follows  his  MS  in  changing 
‘  at,’  in  the  preceding  line,  to  as,  and  then  observes  :  ‘  The  meaning  is  now  clear  that 
she  balanced  between  lothness  and  obedience,  as  to  which  end  of  the  beam  should 
bow  down. — Abbott,  §  400 :  In  this  line  either  she  is  omitted,  or  ‘  should  ’  is  for  she 
would,  ox  ‘o’’  has  been  inserted  by  mistake. — W.  A.  Wright:  The  text  is  prob¬ 
ably  correct,  it  being  omitted,  as  is  not  uncommonly  the  case  in  Shakespeare.  See 
Abbott,  §§  399,  404.  The  antecedent  of  this  omitted  it,  is  the  balancing  or  inde¬ 
cision  of  Claribel  described  in  the  preceding  line.  [I  incline  to  think  that  Capell’* 
*olution  is  the  best  after  all. — Ed.] 


viii,  504). 

I34-  fhould]  she'd  Cap.  conj.  Mai. 
Steev.  Knt,  Coll,  i,  Hal.  Sing.  Wh. 
Dyce,  Sta.  C.  Clke. 

we  haue]  we've  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


103 

136 


Mo  widdowes  in  them  of  this  bufineffe  making, 

Then  we  bring  men  to  comfort  them : 

The  faults  your  owne. 

A/on.  So  is  the  deer’ft  oth’lofle. 

Gon.  My  Lord  Sebajlian , 

The  truth  you  fpeake  doth  lacke  fome  gentleneffe, 

And  time  to  fpeake  it  in  :  you  rub  the  fore, 

When  you  fhould  bring  the  plaiher. 

Seb.  Very  well.  Ant.  And  mold  Chirurgeonly. 

Gon.  It  is  foule  weather  in  vs  all,  good  Sir,  145 

When  you  are  cloudy. 

Seb.  Fowle  weather  ?  Ant.  Very  foule.  147 


136.  Mo]  More  Rowe. 

137.  them:]  them  withal  Anon.  (ap. 
Grey). 

137,  138.  Then  ...faults]  One  line, 
Han.  Steev.  Mai.  Coll. 

One  line,  Cap. 


139.  oth’]  of  the  Han.  Mai.  Steev. 
Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Hal.  Sing. 

139,  140.  One  line,  Cap. 

142.  time  to]  th'  time  you  Han. 
147-190.  Crossed  out,  Coll.  MS. 


136.  Mo]  W.  A.  Wright:  This  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Authorised  Ver¬ 
sion,  but  is  changed  to  more  in  modem  editions.  See  Numbers  xxii,  15,  ‘  And  Balak 
sent  yet  againe  Princes,  moe,  and  more  honourable  than  they.’ 

137.  Then  we  bring]  Johnson  :  It  does  not  clearly  appear  whether  the  king  and 
these  lords  thought  the  ship  lost.  This  passage  seems  to  imply  that  they  were  them¬ 
selves  confident  of  returning,  but  imagined  part  of  the  fleet  destroyed.  Why,  indeed, 
should  Sebastian  plot  against  his  brother  in  the  following  Scene,  unless  he  knew  how 
to  find  the  kingdom  he  was  to  inherit  ? 

137, 138.  Abbott,  §  495,  follows  Capell  in  reading  these  two  lines  as  one,  and  scans 
the  line  thus  made  by  supposing  that  two  extra  syllables  are  inserted  at  the  end  of  the 
third  foot :  *  Than  we  |  being  men  |  to  com fort  them  [’em).  |  The  fault’s  |  your  own.’ 

139,  140.  Walker  [Vers.  169),  not  knowing  that  he  had  been  anticipated  not 
only  by  Capell,  but  by  the  Folio  itself,  proposed  to  divide  these  lines,  and  contract 
‘  deer’st  oth’  ’  as  it  stands  in  the  text. 

139.  W.  A.  Wright  :  In  the  same  intensive  sense  ‘  dearest  ’  is  used  in  Ham.  I,  ii, 
182,  ‘Would  I  had  met  my  dearest  foe  in  heaven.’  But  a  still  more  instructive  pas¬ 
sage  is  Rich.  Ill :  V,  ii,  21,  which  is  printed  thus  on  the  authority  of  the  Quartos: 
‘  Which  in  his  greatest  need  will  shrink  from  him  ’ ;  while  the  First  Folio,  followed 
by  the  rest,  has,  ‘  Which  in  his  deerest  neede  will  flye  from  him.’  [In  a  note  on 
Ham.  I,  ii,  182,  Caldecott  well  defines  the  use  of  ‘  dear  ’  as  importing  the  excess, 
the  utmost,  the  superlative  of  that  to  which  it  may  be  applied ;  and,  even  more  con¬ 
cisely,  W.  A.  Wright  observes,  in  a  note  on  the  same  passage:  ‘dear’  is  used  of 
‘  whatever  touches  us  nearly,  either  in  love  or  hate,  joy  or  sorrow.’  The  notes  on 
this  word  by  Home  Tooke,  Singer,  Caldecott,  Dyce,  and  Craik  are  given  in  this  edi¬ 
tion,  on  Rom.  Jul.  V,  iii,  32. — Ed.] 

147.  Very  foule]  Br.  Nicholson  (MS)  suggests  Water  fowl  as  a  tentative 


104 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 
148 


Gon.  Had  I  plantation  of  this  Ifle  my  Lord. 

Ant.  Hee’d  fow’t  with  Nettle-feed. 

Seb.  Or  dockes,  or  Mallowes.  150 

Gon.  And  were  the  King  on’t,  what  would  I  do  ? 

Seb.  Scape  being  drunke,  for  want  of  Wine. 

Gon.  I’th’Commonwealth  I  would  (by  contraries) 

Execute  all  things  :  For  no  kinde  of  Trafficke  154 

148.  plantation  ]  the  plantation  Rowe  151.  on’t]  of  it  Han.  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 

+  ,Steev.’85.  the  planting  Han.  Quincy  Knt. 

MS.  /]  I  not  Wagner  (Sh.  Jhrb.  xiv, 

Lord.~\  lord —  Pope.  291). 


change.’  ‘  In  the  true  shipwreck  they  were  partly  fed  by  the  great  quantities  of  sea 
fowl  which  they  caught.  In  Jourdan’s  Statement  (p.  408,  Var.’2i)  the  second  para¬ 
graph  begins :  “  Another  sea-fowle  there  is,”  words  which  show  that  the  previous 
“There  is  fowle”  means,  There  is  sea-fowle.  Secondly,  it  gave  Shakespeare  an 
opportunity  of  introducing  one  of  his  quibbles  or  puns,  while  otherwise  I  see  no 
relevancy  nor  sense.  Sebastian  looking  upward  at  the  now  bright  sky  says  mock- 
ingly,  “  Foul  weather?”  and  Shakespeare  supposing  them  to  have  seen  these  frequent 
flights  of  sea  fowl,  or  at  that  moment  to  witness  them  somewhere  beyond  the  then 
stage,  says  by  Anthonio  “  Water-fowl,”  he  continuing,  but  in  a  different  way,  Sebas¬ 
tian’s  mocking  allusion  to  Gonzalo’s  words.  Thirdly,  besides  punning,  Shakespeare, 
to  some  at  least  of  his  audience,  shows  that  he  is  alluding  to  the  shipwreck  of  Somers.’ 

148.  plantation]  Grant  White  :  That  is,  had  I  the  colonization,  not  the  plant¬ 
ing,  of  this  isle.  See  Bacon’s  Essay  Of  Plantations.  [Sebastian  and  Anthonio  take 
it  of  course  in  its  ordinary  sense. — Ed.] 

154,  &c.  Capell  (63  b) :  This  speech,  and  one  that  comes  after  it,  prove  the 
writer’s  acquaintance  with  one  he  has  not  been  trac’d  in  by  any,  annotator  or  editor; 
for  thus  old  Montaigne,  speaking  of  the  Indian  discovery  and  of  the  new  people’s 
manners :  ‘  C’est  une  Nation,  diray-je  a  Platon,  en  laquelle  il  n’y  a  aucune  esperance 
de  trafiq,  nulle  cognoissance  de  Lettres,  nulle  science  de  nombres,  nul  nom  de  Magis¬ 
tral,  ny  de  superiority  politique,  nul  usage  de  service,  de  richesse,  ou  de  pauvrete,  nuls 
contracts,  nulles  successions,  nuls  partages,  nulles  occupations  qu’  oysives,  nul  respect 
de  parents  que  commun,  nuls  vestements,  nulle  agriculture,  nul  metal,  nul  usage  de 
vin  ou  de  bled.  Les  paroles  mesmes,  qui  signifient  le  mensonge,  la  trahison,  la  dis¬ 
simulation,  l’avarice,  l’envie,  la  detraction,  le  pardon,  inouyes.’ — Essais  de  Montaigne , 
vol.  i,  p.  270,  Bruxelles,  1659.  The  person  who  shall  compare  this  passage  with  the 
translations  of  it  that  were  extant  in  Shakespeare’s  time  will  see  reason  to  think 
he  read  it  in  French.  [The  general  belief  now  is  that  Shakespeare,  in  this  instance, 
did  not  go  to  the  original  French,  but  to  Florio’s  translation,  which,  as  given  by  W. 
A.  Wright,  is  as  follows :  ‘  It  is  a  nation,  would  I  answer  Plato,  that  hath  no  kinde 
of  traffike,  no  knowledge  of  Letters,  no  intelligence  of  numbers,  no  name  of  magis 
trate,  nor  of  politike  superiority ;  no  vse  of  service,  of  riches,  or  of  povertie ;  no  con¬ 
tracts,  no  successions,  no  partitions,  no  occupation  but  idle ;  no  respect  of  kinred,  but 
common,  no  apparell  but  naturall,  no  manuring  of  lands,  no  vse  of  wine,  corne,  or 
mettle.  The  very  words  that  import  lying,  falshood,  treason,  dissimulations,  covet¬ 
ousness,  envie,  detraction,  and  pardon  were  never  heard  of  amongst  them.’ _ Bk  i.  c. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


105 


Would  I  admit :  No  name  of  Magiftrate: 

Letters  fhould  not  be  knowne  :  Riches,  pouerty, 
And  vfe  of  feruice,  none  :  Contract,  Succefsion, 
Borne,  bound  of  Land,  Tilth,  Vineyard  none : 


155 


158 


156.  Riches']  wealth  Pope  + .  no  riches 
Wagner. 


or  Ktly. 


158.  bound ]  boundary  Wagner  (Sh. 
Jhrb.  xiv,  291). 


Riches,  pouerty ]  poverty,  riches 
Cap.  riches,  and  poverty  Anon.  (ap. 
Cam.). 


Tilth]  tilth,  meadow,  Hal.  conj. 
Vineyard]  vineyard,  olives  Han. 


158.  Borne]  Bourn  Rowe.  Bourn,  vineyard,  olive  Cap. 

30,  p.  102.  Rushton  (Sh.  Illust.  by  Old  Authors,  i,  5 1)  gives  extracts  from  the  Eccle - 
siazusae  (588-606)  of  Aristophanes,  which  are  parallel  in  thought  and  expression  to 
Gonzalo’s  description  of  his  ideal  Commonwealth. — Hense  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  xv,  134) 
supposes  that  Shakespeare  made  use  also  of  Ovid’s  description  of  the  Golden  Age 
( Met.  i,  98-102),  but  this  is  unlikely,  I  think;  had  he  done  so,  we  should  have  found 
some  traces  of  Golding,  and  none,  I  think,  can  be  detected.  There  is  a  large  erasure 
here,  from  line  145  to  line  190,  in  Collier’s  MS,  which  Mommsen  (Perkins-Shake- 
speare,  p.  407)  takes  to  be  an  indication  that,  in  the  time  of  Collier’s  annotator,  the 
description  of  Gonzalo’s  commonwealth  had  ceased  to  be  amusing,  derived  as  it  was 
from  a  book  that  was  becoming  antiquated. — Ed.] 

156-158.  Steevens, ’93,  thus  regulates  and  changes  these  lines:  ‘ Letters  should 
not  be  known ;  no  use  of  service,  |  Of  riches,  or  of  poverty ;  no  contracts,  |  Succes¬ 
sions  ;  bound  of  land,  tilth,  vineyard,  none,’  and  justifies  his  work  by  a  reference  to 
the  phraseology  of  the  extract  from  Florio,  adding :  Probably  Shakespeare  first  wrote 
(in  the  room  of  partition,  which  did  not  suit  the  structure  of  his  verse)  bourn  ;  but, 
recollecting  that  one  of  its  significations  was  a  rivulet,  and  that  his  island  would  have 
fared  ill  without  fresh  water,  he  changed  bourn  to  bound  of  land,  a  phrase  that  could 
not  be  misunderstood.  At  the  same  time  he  might  have  forgot  to  strike  out  ‘  bourn,’ 
his  original  word,  which  is  now  rejected ;  for  if  not  used  for  a  brook  it  would  have 
exactly  the  same  meaning  as  ‘  bound  of  land.’  There  is,  therefore,  no  need  of  the 
dissyllabical  assistance  recommended  [by  Malone,  who  suggests :  ‘And  use  of  service, 
none ;  succession  |  Contract,  bourn,  bound  of  land,  tilth,  vineyard,  none.’  In  Malone’s 
ed.,  1790,  he  proposed:  ‘And  use  of  service,  contract,  succession  |  None;  bourn, 
bound  of  land,  tilth,  vineyard,  none,’  but  as  this  was  not  repeated  in  1821  we  may 
charitably  suppose  that  it  was  withdrawn.— Walker  (Crit.  ii,  16)  suggests  that  ‘  after 
“  tilth,”  pasture,  or  some  synonymous  word,  seems  to  have  been  lost.’ — Ed.] — Allen 
(Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  p.  27)  :  Steevens,  Malone,  Walker,  and  Keightley  have  tampered  so 
violently  with  this  verse  only  because  they  had  not  observed  the  use  which  Shake¬ 
speare  makes  of  what  classical  metricians  know  as  mom  vacua  (empty  times),  i.  e. 
the  omission  of  the  unaccented  syllable  of  a  foot  and  accepting  a  pause  or  rest  of  the 
same  length  instead.  The  Camb.  Edd.  (vol.  i,  p.  xvii)  have  noted  the  fact  that  *  there 
is  a  large  number  of  [Shakespeare’s]  verses  which  a  modem  ear  pronounces  to  want 
their  first  unaccented  syllable.’  This  (I  would  add)  takes  place  not  only  when  the 
preceding  verse  ends  with  a  superfluous  unaccented  syllable  (in  which  case  the  two 
verses  are  still  to  the  ear  two  normal  Iambics),  as  ante,  I,  ii,  373>  374  :  ‘  Come  forth 
I  fay  !  there’s  other  bufiness  f6r  thee  :  C6me,  thou  tortoife  !  when  ?’  but  also  when  the 
concurrence  of  the  accented  syllable  at  the  end  of  the  preceding  verse  with  that  at 


io6 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  xi,  sc.  i. 


No  vfe  of  Mettall,  Corne,  or  Wine,  or  Oyle : 

No  occupation,  all  men  idle,  all : 

And  Women  too,  but  innocent  and  pure  : 

No  Soueraignty. 

Seb.  Yet  he  would  be  King  on’t. 

Ant.  The  latter  end  of  his  Common-wealth  forgets 
the  beginning. 

Gon.  All  things  in  common  Nature  fhould  produce 
Without  fweat  or  endeuour :  Treafon,  fellony, 

Sword,  Pike,  Knife,  Gun,  or  neede  of  any  Engine 
Would  I  not  haue  :  but  Nature  fhould  bring  forth 
Of  it  owne  kinde,  all  foyzon,  all  abundance 

163.  Yet]  And  yet  Pope  + ,  Steev.  Mai.  170.  if]  F„  Ktly.  it's  F3,  Cap.  its  F,. 

the  beginning  of  the  second  creates  a  pause  and  compels  the  ear  to  take  notice  of  the 
solution  of  continuity,  as  in  ante,  I,  ii,  274,  275 :  ‘And  are  upon  the  Mediterranean 
fldte  Bofind  fadly  home  for  Naples.’  But  the  Camb.  Edd.  do  not  appear  to  have 
noted  that  in  the  verse,  which  is  thus  practically  made  Trochaic,  Shakespeare  some¬ 
times  omits  also  the  first  unaccented  syllable  after  the  beginning,  as  in  that  just  cited, 
in  which  the  omission  of  the  unaccented  syllable  between  ‘  Bound  ’  and  ‘  fadly  ’  in¬ 
duces  a  pause  precisely  as  long  as  the  Thesis  of  a  Trochee;  and  such  is  the  only 
peculiarity  a  perfectly  legitimate  one — of  the  verse  in  question,  *  Bohm,  bohnd  of 
land,  tilth,  vineyard,  n6ne.’  A  very  interesting  exemplification  of  this  process  is  given 
in  Much  Ado ,  V,  iii,  12-21,  a  Song,  in  which  four  "Trochaic  dimeter  catalectic  verses 
are  followed  by  two  tristichs;  whereof  the  two  first  verses  are  precisely  like  the  first 
four  of  the  song,  in  rhythm,  and  differ  only  in  the  fact  that  the  Thesis  of  the  first 
Trochee  is  omitted  and  replaced  by  a  pause ;  while  the  third  verse,  which  looks  a 
great  deal  shorter  than  its  predecessors  of  either  kind,  is  still  the  same  in  rhythm, 
with  the  Thesis  of  the  second  Trochee  omitted,  e.  g.  x.  Pardon,  gdddefs  6f  the  night!  * 
2.  Http  fis  to  flgh  and  grdan.  3.  Heavily,  heavily- !— Shakespeare  has  thus  written 
Bacchiacs  and  Cretics  without  knowing  it. 

156.  Abbott,  §471,  scans  this  line  by  pronouncing  ‘riches’  as  a  monosyllable. 
See  I,  ii,  204. 

165.  Warburton:  All  this  dialogue  is  a  fine  satire  on  the  Utopian  treatises  of 
government,  and  the  impracticable,  inconsistent  schemes  therein  recommended— 
Holt  (p.  41) :  It  may  with  greater  justice  be  regarded  as  a  compliment  to  Sidney’s 
Arcaaia  and  Bacon’s  New  Atlantis ;  the  praises  being  put  in  the  mouth  of  Gonzalo 

a  good  and  wise  man,  and  the  sneers  in  those  of  Sebastian  and  Antonio,  two  no  very 
favourable  characters.  3 

167.  endeuour]  W.  A.  Wright:  In  the  time  of  Shakespeare  this  word  had  much 
more  the  idea  of  laborious  effort  attached  to  it  than  no  v.  See  Trench,  On  the 
Authi/nsed  Version  of  the  New  Testament,  p.  44. 

168.  Engine]  Steevens:  An  instrument  of  war,  or  military  machine. 

170.  it  owne]  See  I,  ii,  113. 

170.  foyzon]  Cotgrave:  *  Poison :  f  Store,  plentie,  abundance,  great  fullnesse 
enough.’  According  to  Skeat  (s.  v.),  from  the  Latin  fusionem,  acc.  of  fusio,  a  pour! 


l6o 


165 


170 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


107 


To  feed  my  innocent  people.  171 

Seb.  No  marrying  ’mong  his  fubiedls  ? 

Ant.  None  (man)  all  idle  ;  Whores  and  knaues, 

Gon.  I  would  with  fuch  perfection  gouerne  Sir : 

T'Excell  the  Golden  Age.  175 

Seb.  ’Saue  his  Maiefty.  Ant.  Long  hue  Gonzalo. 

Gon.  And  do  you  marke  me,  Sir  ?  (me. 

Alon.  Pre-thee  no  more:  thou  doft  talke  nothing  to 

Gon.  I  do  well  beleeue  your  Highneffe,  and  did  it 
to  minifter  occafion  to  thefe  Gentlemen,  who  are  of  180 
fuch  fenfible  and  nimble  Lungs,  that  they  alwayes  vfe 
to  laugh  at  nothing. 

Ant.  ’Twas  you  we  laugh’d  at. 

Gon.  Who,  in  this  kind  of  merry  fooling  am  nothing 
to  you  :  fo  you  may  continue,  and  laugh  at  nothing  ftill.  185 

176.  ’ Saue ]  Save  Fv  God  save  Walker,  177.  And]  And—  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

Huds.  178-  Two  lines,  Cap. 

Gonzalo]  King  Gonzalo  Elze.  185.  nothing ]  nothiog  F4. 

ing  out,  hence,  profusion. — W.  A.  WRIGHT  quotes  Forby’s  Vocabulary  of  East 
Anglia,  where  it  is  defined  as  ‘  Succulency ;  natural  nutritive  moisture,  as  in  herb¬ 
age.’ — Col.  Mallery  {Phi la.  Sh.  Soc.)  suggests  that  ‘  “  abundance  ”  here  is  but  a 
translation  of  the  archaic  “  foyzon,”  a  process  to  which  poets  and  orators  habitually 
resort.’ 

175.  T’Excell]  For  other  examples  of  the  omission  of  as,  see  Abbott,  §  281. 

176.  ’Saue]  Walker  [Crit.  i,  215)  connects  this  exclamation  of  Sebastian  with 
Antonio’s  echo  as  a  possible  verse,  and  suggests  that  the  former  originally  said :  ‘  God 
save  his  majesty,’  but  that  ‘  the  name  of  God  was  omitted  by  the  editor  of  the  Folio 
out  of  deference  to  the  well-known  act  of  Parliament  against  profaneness.’ — [1  Jac. 
c.  21.  It  militates  slightly  against  Walker’s  suggestion  that  line  175  is  so  carefully 
printed  that  ‘  To  excell  ’  is  abbreviated  to  ‘  T’excell,’  which  looks  as  though  it  were 
intended  to  connect  that  line  with  Sebastian’s  exclamation.  In  either  case  Walker’s 
suggestion  of  the  omitted  name  holds  good,  and  ‘  save  his  majesty  ’  may  be  regarded 
as  a  fair  example  of  what  Abbott  happily  styles  (§513)  an  amphibious  verse,  which 
may  serve  duly  both  as  the  end  of  one  verse  and  as  the  beginning  of  the  next.  Hud¬ 
son  followed  Walker’s  suggestion  and  division  of  the  lines. — Ed.] 

177.  And]  W.  A.  Wright,  in  the  Third  Cambridge  Edition,  conjectures  that  this, 
although  spoken  by  Gonzalo,  should  be  printed  after  ‘  age  ’  in  line  175  ;  ‘  T’excell  the 
Golden  Age,  and —  ’  hereby  indicating  the  boisterous  and  unmannerly  interruption 
of  Sebastian  and  Antonio.  Gonzalo  then  resumes :  ‘  Do  you  mark,’  &c. 

178.  talke  nothing]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.:  The  ovdev  7iy«f  of  Greek, — thou  sayest 
that  which  has  in  it  no  reality,  what  is  false,  or  nothing  to  the  purpose. 

181.  sensible]  That  is,  sensitive;  thus  frequently  used.  W.  A.  Wright  com¬ 
pares  this  expression  of  ‘  sensible  and  nimble  ’  to  the  lungs  that  are  ‘  tickle  o  the 
sere  ’  in  Ham.  II,  ii,  317- 


108 

THE  TEMPEST 

[act  ii,  sc.  i. 

Ant. 

What  a  blow  was  there  giuen  ? 

186 

Seb. 

Gon. 

And  it  had  not  falne  flat-long. 

You  are  Gentlemen  of  braue  mettal:  you 

would 

lift  the  Moone  out  of  her  fpheare,  if  fhe  would  continue 
in  it  hue  weekes  without  changing.  190 

Enter  Ariell  playing  folemne  Muficke. 

Seb.  We  would  fo,  and  then  go  a  Bat-fowling.  192 

187.  And~\  An  Pope  et  seq.  Rowe  i. 

188.  of  braui\  of  a  brave  F3F4,  191.  Om.  Pope.  Solemn  Musick.  Cap. 

187.  And]  This,  of  course,  is  equivalent  to  if  It  is  almost  always  thus  written  in 
the  Folio,  and  is  quite  needlessly,  I  think,  changed  to  an  in  modem  editions.  See 
II,  ii,  123,  where  ‘  and  if’  occurs  on  the  same  principle  probably  as  ‘  most  unkindest. 
—Ed. 

187.  flat-long]  Morris  {Eng.  Accidence ,  §311,  referred  to  by  W.  A.  Wright) : 
There  were  some  adverbs  in  Old  English,  originally  dative  feminine  singular,  ending 
in  -inga,  -unga,  -linga,  -lunga.  A  few  of  these,  without  the  dative  suffix,  exist  under 
the  form  -ling  or  -long,  as  head-long,  sideling,  sidelong,  darkling,  failing,  and  flatlong. 
— W.  A.  Wright  quotes  Hollyband’s  Dictionarie  :  ‘Frapper  du  plat  de  l’espee,  to 
strike  with  a  sword  flatling.’  And  Spenser,  Faerie  Queene,  V.  v,  18 :  ‘  Tho’  with  her 
sword  on  him  she  flatling  strooke.’  [In  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  iii,  310,  ed.  1598,  we  read, 
in  the  description  of  Pamela’s  execution,  that  ‘  the  pittilesse  sworde  had  such  pittie  of 
so  precious  an  object  [i.  e.  Pamela’s  neck]  that  at  first  it  did  but  hit  flatlong.’ _ Ed.] 

189.  if  she  would]  I  doubt  if  strict  rules  can  be  laid  down  in  regard  to  Shake¬ 
speare’s  use  of  should  or  would.  If  we  can  be  assured  that  the  language  is  really 
Shakespeare’s,  and  not  his  printer’s,  we  might  perhaps  detect  in  every  instance  some 
subtle  reason  for  his  use  of  the  one  or  the  other.  Should  is,  frequently,  more  difficult 
to  explain  than  would,  wherein  the  idea  of  will  or  duty  can  be  almost  always  dis¬ 
cerned;  see  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii,  289 :  ‘  Besides,  it  should  appear,  that  if  he  had  the 
present  money,’  &c. ;  As  You  Like  It,  I,  ii,  220 :  ‘  Thou  shouldst  have  pleased  me 
better,’  &c. — Abbott,  §  329,  says  ‘  it  is  a  natural  and  common  mistake  to  say  would 
is  used  for  should  by  Elizabethan  writers.’ — W.  A.  Wright,  in  a  note  on  this  present 
passage,  says  ‘  “  would  ”  here  is  certainly  used  for  the  conditional  should ,’  and  after 
quoting  the  foregoing  remark  of  Abbott,  adds :  *  But  it  cannot  be  denied  that  Eliza¬ 
bethan  writers  employed  would  in  constructions  in  which  we  now  use  should.'  In¬ 
deed,  it  is  not  unnatural  that  it  should  have  been  so  in  days  when  the  usage  of  words 
was  less  rigid  than  now.  Can  it  be,  however,  in  the  present  case  that  ‘  would  ’  is  not 
Shakespeare’s  word,  but  the  printer’s  ?  And  that  it  is  due  to  the  ‘  would  ’  in  the  line 
almost  directly  above  it  ?  We  admit  this  error  by  proximity  in  many  another  case, 
and  why  may  we  not  admit  it  here  ?  There  is  to  me  always  a  lurking  weakness  in 
such  an  explanation,  I  confess,  and  yet  if  it  be  ever  allowable,  it  might  surely  be  per¬ 
mitted  here,  where  the  use  of  ‘  would  ’  is  almost  inexplicable. — Ed. 

191.  Ariell]  Collier’s  MS  adds  above,  invisible,  which  ‘accords,’  says  Collier 
(ed.  ii),  ‘with  Prospero’s  direction  that  the  spirit  was  not  to  be  seen.  We  must  sup¬ 
pose  that,  by  some  contrivance,  Ariel  floated  above  the  actors.’ 

192.  Staunton  :  The  instructions  for  ‘  Bat-fowling’  in  Markhanl’s  Hungers  Pre¬ 
vention,  &c.  afford  an  accurate  description  of  this  sport :  ‘  For  the  manner  of  Bat- 


Arx  ii,  sc.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


109 

193 


Ant.  Nay  good  my  Lord,  be  not  angry. 

Gon.  No  I  warrant  you,  I  will  not  aduenture  rny 
difcretion  fo  weakly  :  Will  you  laugh  me  afleepe,  for  I  195 
am  very  heauy. 

Ant.  Go  fleepe,  and  heare  vs.  197 

197.  ztf.]  us  not  Ktly.  197.  [Gon.  Adr.  Fra.  and  Train,  sleep. 

Cap. 


fowling  it  may  be  vsed  either  with  Nettes,  or  without  Nettes :  If  you  vse  it  without 
Nettes  (which  indeede  is  the  most  common  of  the  two)  you  shall  then  proceede  in  this 
manner :  First,  there  shall  be  one  to  cary  the  Cresset  of  fire  (as  was  shewed  for  the 
Lowbell )  then  a  certaine  number  as  two,  three,  or  foure  (according  to  the  greatnesse 
of  your  company),  and  these  shall  haue  poales  bound  with  dry  round  wispes  of  hay, 
straw,  or  such  like  stuffe,  or  else  bound  with  pieces  of  Linkes  or  Hurdes,  dipt  in 
Pitch,  Rosen,  Grease,  or  any  such  like  matter  that  will  blaze. — Then  another  com¬ 
pany  shal  be  armed  with  long  poales,  very  rough  and  bushy  at  the  vpper  endes,  of 
which  the  Willow,  Byrche,  or  long  Hazell  are  best,  but  indeed  according  as  the 
country  will  afford  so  you  must  be  content  to  take. — Thus  being  prepared  and  com- 
ming  into  the  Bushy,  or  rough  ground  where  the  haunts  of  Birds  are,  you  shall  then 
first  kindle  some  of  your  fiers  as  halfe,  or  a  third  part,  according  as  your  prouision  is, 
and  then  with  your  other  bushy  and  rough  poales  you  shall  beat  the  Bushes,  Trees, 
and  haunts  of  the  Birds,  to  enforce  them  to  rise,  which  done  you  shall  see  the  Birds 
which  are  raysed,  to  flye  and  play  about  the  lights  and  flames  of  the  fier,  for  it  is  their 
nature  through  their  amazednesse,  and  affright  at  the  strangenes  of  the  light  and  the 
extreame  darknesse  round  about  it,  not  to  depart  from  it,  but  as  it  were  almost  to 
scorch  their  wings  in  the  same ;  so  that  those  who  have  the  rough  bushye  poales,  may 
(at  their  pleasures)  beat  them  down  with  the  same,  &  so  take  them.  Thus  you  may 
spend  as  much  of  the  night  as  is  darke,  for  longer  is  not  conuenient ;  and  doubtlesse 
you  shall  finde  much  pastime,  and  take  great  store  of  birds,  and  in  this  you  shall 
obserue  all  the  obseruations  formerly  treated  of  in  the  Lowbell ;  especially,  that  of 
silence,  vntill  your  lights  be  kindled,  but  then  you  may  vse  your  pleasure,  for  the  noyse 
and  the  light  when  they  are  heard  and  seene  a  farre  of,  they  make  the  birds  sit  the 
faster  and  surer’  [1621,  pp.  98-100. — W.  A.  Wright], — According  to  Thornbury, 
this  practice  gave  its  name  to  a  thieves’  trick.  *  Bat-fowling,’  he  says  (Sh.'s  England , 
i,  339),  ‘  was  practised  about  dusk,  when  the  rogue  pretended  to  have  dropped  a  ring 
or  a  jewel  at  the  door  of  some  well-furnished  shop,  and,  going  in,  asked  the  ’prentice 
of  the  house  to  light  his  candle  to  look  for  it.  After  some  peering  about,  the  bat-fowler 
would  drop  the  candle  as  if  by  accident.  “  Now,  I  pray  you,  good  young  man,”  he 
would  say,  “to  do  so  much  as  light  the  candle  again.”  While  the  boy  was  away  the 
rogue  plundered  the  shop,  and  having  stole  everything  he  could  find,  stole  away  him¬ 
self.’  [Thombury’s  book  would  be  extremely  valuable  if  his  authorities  were  only 
given — Ed.] 

194,  195.  aduenture  .  .  .  weakly]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  I  will  not  shew  myself  so 
weak,  as  thus  to  risk  [my  character]  for  discretion. 

197.  heare  vs]  Keightley  (Exp.  211):  A  negative  has  been  effaced  or  omit¬ 
ted.  Surely  the  very  last  thing  that  Anthonio  could  have  wished  was  that  he 
should  hear  them;  and  how  could  he  if  he  went  to  sleep?  [Coleridge  supposes  that 


no 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Alon.  What,  all  fo  foone  afleepe  ?  I  with  mine  eyes  198 

Would(with  themfelues)  fhut  vp  my  thoughts, 

I  finde  they  are  inclin’d  to  do  fo.  200 

Seb.  Pleafe  you  Sir, 

Do  not  omit  the  heauy  offer  of  it : 

It  fildome  vifits  forrow,  when  it  doth,  it  is  a  Comforter. 

Ant.  We  two  my  Lord,  will  guard  your  perfon, 

While  you  take  your  reft,  and  watch  your  fafety.  205 

A/on.Thanke  you  :  Wondrous  heauy. 

Seb.  What  a  ftrange  drowfines  poffeffes  them  ?  207 


199,  200.  Would. ..I finde  One  line, 
Pope  et  seq. 

203.  It  fildome ]  It  fieldome  F3>  It 
feldom  F4.  Sleep  seldom  Grey. 
forrow,] forrow  ;  F4> 

It...  Comforter]  One  line,  Rowe 
ii  +  ,  Cap. 


204,  205.  will...refi]  One  line,  Rowe 
ii  et  seq. 

206.  Wondrous]  Tm  wondrous  Grey. 
[All  sleep  but  Seb.  and  Ant. 
Rowe.  Alonso  sleeps.  Cap.  Exit  Ariel. 
Mai. 


there  was  as  yet  no  thought  of  a  conspiracy. — Ed.]  Not  we  may  also  see  is  required 
by  the  metre.  The  latter  part  may  be  a  half-aside. — W.  {N.  &  Qu.  3d  S.  ix,  254) 
suggests  that  perhaps  Anthonio’s  reply  refers  directly  to  Gonzalo’s  ‘  Will  you  laugh  us 
asleep  ?’  and  is  to  be  interpreted,  ‘  Go  sleep  and  hear  us  ’  ( laugh  understood). — Phila. 
Sh.  Soc.  (p.  28) :  Gonzalo’s  question  may  be,  perversely,  construed  to  mean :  ‘  Will 
you  laugh  [at]  me  while  asleep  ?’  Antonio  accordingly  answers,  ‘  Go  to  sleep,  and 
then  you  will  hear  whether  we  laugh  [at]  you  in  your  sleep  or  not.’  [See  Coleridge, 
in  line  207.] — Halliwell  (p.  32) :  A  very  obscure  speech.  Gonzalo  asks  them  to 
laugh  him  to  sleep,  for  he  is  very  drowsy.  Antonio  replies,  ‘  Go  to  sleep  and  hear  us 
laugh,’  the  sound  of  which  laughter,  from  a  little  distance,  would  soothe  the  drowsy 
counsellor  into  slumber.  Antonio’s  speech,  by  the  common  idiom  of  inversion,  is 
equivalent  to,  ‘  Hear  us,  and  go  sleep.’ 

202.  heauy  offer]  W.  A.  Wright:  ‘Heavy’  is  here  used  proleptically,  or  bv 
anticipation.  ‘  The  heavy  offer’  is  the  offer  which  brings  drowsiness  or  heaviness. 

207,  &c.  Coleridge  ( Seven  Lectures,  p.  122) :  How  well  the  poet  prepares  the 
feelings  of  the  reader  for  this  plot,  which  was  to  execute  the  most  detestable  of  crimes 
and  which,  in  another  play,  Shakespeare  has  called  ‘  the  murder  of  sleep.’  Antoniv 
and  Sebastian  at  first  had  no  such  intention ;  it  was  suggested  by  the  magical  sleep 
cast  on  Alonzo  and  Gonzalo ;  but  they  are  previously  introduced  scoffing  and  scom- 
ing  at  what  was  said  by  others,  without  regard  to  age  or  situation, — without  any  sense 
of  admiration  for  the  excellent  truths  they  heard  delivered,  but  giving  themselves  up 
entirely  to  the  malignant  and  unsocial  feeling  which  induced  them  to  listen  to  every¬ 
thing  that  was  said,  not  for  the  sake  of  profiting  by  the  learning  and  experience  of 
others,  but  of  hearing  something  that  might  gratify  vanity  and  self-love,  by  making 
them  believe  that  the  person  speaking  was  inferior  to  themselves. — This,  let  me 
remark,  is  one  of  the  grand  characteristics  of  a  villain ;  and  it  would  not  be  so  much 
a  presentiment,  as  an  anticipation  of  hell,  for  men  to  suppose  that  all  mankind  were  as 
wicked  as  themselves,  or  might  be  so,  if  they  were  not  too  great  fools.  Pope  objected 


KCT  XI,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPES 


III 


Ant .  It  is  the  quality  o’th’Clymate.  208 

Seb.  Why 

Doth  it  not  then  our  eye-lids  finke?  I  finde  210 

Not  my  felfe  difpos’d  to  ileep. 

Ant.  Nor  I,  my  fpirits  are  nimble  : 

They  fell  together  all,  as  by  confent 

They  dropt,  as  by  a  Thunder-ftroke  :  what  might 

Worthy  ‘Sebajlian?  O,  what  might?  no  more:  215 

And  yet,  me  thinkes  I  fee  it  in  thy  face, 

What  thou  fhould’ft  be  :  th’occafion  fpeaks  thee,  and  217 


208-212.  Lines  end,  it. . . myself. . .nim¬ 
ble,  Elze. 

210,211.  Doth. ..Hoi"]  One  line,  Rowe 
ii  et  seq. 

213,  214.  all.. ..confent... dropt, ]  all... 
consent, ...dropt  Pope. 


2x4.  what  might"]  F2,  Cap.  Ilal.  what 
might :  F3.  -what  might,  F4  et  cet. 

215.  Sebaftian  ? . . .  might  /*]  Sebastian 
— ...might —  Rowe. 

217.  thl occajion]  The  occasion  Rowe, 
Johns.  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Dyce,  Cam. 


to  this  conspiracy  [see  note  on  line  13,  above],  but  in  my  mind,  if  it  could  be  omitted, 
the  play  would  lose  a  charm  which  nothing  could  supply. 

214.  Thunder-stroke]  Holt  (p.  42,  suggesting,  ‘  They  fell  together,  all  as  b* 
Consent ;  They  dropt,  as  ’  &c.)  :  A  preternatural  cause  seems  manifestly  intended  b) 
introducing  Ariel  with  solemn  music,  which  was  to  have  only  that  somniferous  effect 
there  being  nothing  consequent  following  on  his  entrance  but  the  sudden  drowsiness 
which  seizes  Gonzalo,  Alonzo,  Adrian,  and  Francisco. 

215,  &c.  Coleridge  ( Lectures ,  &c.  p.  89) :  The  scene  of  the  intended  assassina¬ 
tion  of  Alonzo  and  Gonzalo  is  an  exact  counterpart  of  the  scene  between  Macbeth 
and  his  lady,  only  pitched  in  a  lower  key  throughout,  as  designed  to  be  frustrated  and 
concealed,  and  exhibiting  the  same  profound  management  in  the  manner  of  familiar¬ 
ising  a  mind,  not  immediately  recipient,  to  the  suggestion  of  guilt,  by  associating  the 
proposed  crime  with  something  ludicrous  or  out  of  place, — something  not  habitually 
matter  of  reverence.  By  this  kind  of  sophistry  the  imagination  and  fancy  are  first 
bribed  to  contemplate  the  suggested  act,  and  at  length  to  become  acquainted  with  it. 
Observe  how  the  effect  of  this  scene  is  heightened  by  contrast  with  another  counter¬ 
part  of  it  in  low  life, — that  between  the  conspirators  Stephano,  Caliban,  and  Trinculo, 
in  which  there  are  the  same  essential  characteristics. — Macdonald  ( The  Imagina¬ 
tion,  p.  126)  calls  attention  to  the  different  treatment  of  the  same  subject  in  Mac¬ 
beth ;  in  King  John,  where  the  king  tempts  Hubert  to  kill  Arthur;  in  As  You  Likt 
It,  in  the  scene  between  Oliver  and  Charles  the  wrestler;  and  in  Hamlet ,  where 
Claudius  urges  Laertes  to  kill  Hamlet. 

217.  should’st]  The  meaning  of  ought  is  here  clear  enough,  as  it  is  in  Macb.  I, 
iii,  45,  ‘  You  should  be  women.’  See  Abbott,  §  323,  for  other  examples. 

217.  speaks  thee]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Delius  understands :  the  occasion  expresses 
thee,  i.  e.  shows  thee  as  what  thou  canst  be  and  what  (in  posse)  thou  art  now.  Rather, 
perhaps :  the  occasion  (Greek  naip6 f,  Lat.  occasio,  a  critical  or  favourable  moment) 
Bpeaks  [to]  thee  [and  orders  thee  to  act  as  it  suggests],  and, — as  a  consequence  of 
such  obedience  to  occasion, — I  see  a  crown  on  thy  head.  The  use,  however,  of 


1 12 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 

My  ftrong  imagination  fee’s  a  Crowne  218 

Dropping  vpon  thy  head. 

Seb.  What?  art  thou  waking  ?  220 

Ant.  Do  you  not  heare  me  fpeake  ? 

Seb.  I  do,  and  furely 
It  is  a  fleepy  Language  ;  and  thou  fpeak’ft 
Out  of  thy  fleepe  :  What  is  it  thou  didft  fay  ? 

This  is  a  ftrange  repofe,  to  be  afleepe  225 

With  eyes  wide  open  :  ftanding,  fpeaking,  mouing : 

And  yet  fo  faft  afleepe. 

Ant.  Noble  Seba/iian, 

Thou  let’ft  thy  fortune  fleepe  :  die  rather  :  wink’ft 
Whiles  thou  art  waking.  230 

Seb.  Thou  do’ft  fnore  diftindlly, 

There’s  meaning  in  thy  fnores. 

Ant.  I  am  more  ferious  then  my  cuftome  :  you 
Muft  be  fo  too,  if  heed  me :  which  to  do, 

Trebbles  thee  o’ re.  235 

Seb.  Well  :  I  am  ftanding  water. 

Ant.  lie  teach  you  how  to  flow.  237 


218.  fee's]  fees  F4- 

230,242.  Whiles]  Whilst  Rowe  + . 

234.  fo  too]  so  Pope,  Han. 

if  heed]  if  you  heed  Rowe,  Pope, 


Han.  Ktly.  if  ye  heed  Hunter. 

235.  Trebbles  thee  o' re]  Troubles  thee 
o' er  Rowe  ii,  Pope.  Troubles  thee  not 
Han.  Troubles  thee  sore  Quincy  MS. 


‘  speak  ’  in  the  sense  of  to  call  or  order  seems  to  require  confirmation.  There  is,  to 
be  sure,  the  sea-phrase  to  speak  a  ship.  Something  like  a  parallel  may  be  found  in  I, 
ii,  46 :  *  The  very  minute  bids  thee  ope  thine  ear.’ 

231.  distinctly]  That  is,  articulately,  with  separate  tones.  See  I,  ii,  233. 

234.  if  heed  me]  See,  for  a  similar  ellipsis,  I,  ii,  521. 

235.  Trebbles  thee  o’re]  Theobald  :  That  is,  makes  thee  thrice  what  thou  now 
art.  Compare,  ‘  I  would  be  trebled  twenty  times  myself.’ — Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii,  154. 
— Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  There  appears  to  be  here  somewhat  of  zeugma,  or  suggestive 
construction,  i.  e.  the  idea  of  necessity  expressed  by  ‘  must  ’  suggests  a  similar  filling 
up  before  ‘  heed.’  ‘To  do  ’  also  may  be  emphatically  antithetic  to  another  verb  con¬ 
nected  in  sense  with  ‘  heed.’  Thus  :  you,  too,  must  be  serious,  if  you  [are  to]  heed 
me  [in  telling]  that,  to  do  which  trebles  thee  o’er. — Wilson  (  Caliban ,  p.  230)  would 
read  thus  :  ‘  you  Must  be  so  too,  if— heed  me, — which  to  do ’t  Rebels  thee  o’er,’  and 
expounds  as  follows :  ‘  The  previous  talk  with  Gonzalo,  and  the  darker  hints  since, 
have  been  carried  on  with  quip,  pun,  and  inuendo.  If  we  understand  Sebastian’s 
reply,  “  Well,  I  am  standing  water,”  as  a  play  on  the  word  “  rebels,”  i.  e.  “  ripples 
thee  o’er,”  it  is  no  worse  pun  than  others  which  have  preceded  it ;  and  hence  follows 
metaphorical  talk  of  flowing,  ebbing,  and  running  near  the  bottom.’ 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


”3 

238 


Seb.  Do  fo  :  to  ebbe 
Hereditary  Sloth  inftrudts  me. 

Ant.  0  /  240 

If  you  but  knew  how  you  the  purpofe  cherifh 
Whiles  thus  you  mocke  it  :  how  in  ftripping  it 
You  more  inueft  it  :  ebbing  men,  indeed 
(Molt  often)  do  fo  neere  the  bottome  run 

By  their -owne  feare,  or  floth.  243 

Seb.  ’Pre-thee  fay  on, 

The  fetting  of  thine  eye,  and  cheeke  proclaime 
A  matter  from  thee ;  and  a  birth,  indeed, 

Which  throwes  thee  much  to  yeeld. 

Ant.  Thus  Sir :  250 

Although  this  Lord  of  weake  remembrance;  this 
Who  fhall  be  of  as  little  memory 
When  he  is  earth’d,  hath  here  almoft  perfwaded 
(For  hee’s  a  Spirit  of  perfwafion,  onely 

Profefles  to  perfwade)  the  King  his  fonne’s  aliue,  255 


244.  fo... bottoms]  so,. ..bottom,  Rowe. 
247.  proclaims ]  proclaims  Ktly. 

249.  throwes~\  throws  F  ,  Rowe,  throes 
Pope. 


250.  Thus  Sir  :]  Why  then  thus  Sir . 
Han.  Thus,  sir,  I  say  Ktly  conj. 

254,  hee’s]  he' as  Han.  i. 

255.  perfwade )  the  King]  persuade  the 
King,  Johns. 


241-243.  Steevens:  A  judicious  critic  in  The  Edinburgh  Magazine,  Nov.  1786, 
offers  the  following  illustration  of  this  obscure  passage  :  ‘  O  if  you  but  knew  how  much 
even  that  metaphor,  which  you  use  in  jest,  encourages  to  the  design  which  I  hint  at ; 
how  in  stripping  the  words  of  their  common  meaning,  and  using  them  figuratively,  you 
adapt  them  to  your  own  situation !’ — Phillpotts  :  The  more  Sebastian,  by  putting  for¬ 
ward  his  natural  indolence,  seems  to  decline  entering  into  Antonio’s  counsels,  the  more, 
as  Antonio  can  perceive,  he  is  really  inclined  to  slip  into  them  as  into  a  garment. 

236.  standing  water]  Jephson  :  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  ‘  I  am  stagnant,  slow 
of  understanding  and  action  ’ ;  for  Antonio  follows  up  the  metaphor  by  saying  he  will 
teach  Sebastian  how  ‘  to  flow,’  and  Sebastian  rejoins  that  his  natural  or  hereditary 
slothfulness  teaches  him  rather  ‘to  ebb.’ 

251.  this  Lord]  Johnson:  This  lord,  who  being  now  in  his  dotage,  has  outlived 
his  faculty  of  remembering ;  and  who,  when  once  laid  in  the  ground,  shall  be  as  little 
remembered  himself,  as  he  can  now  remember  other  things. 

255.  Professes  to  perswade)]  Capell:  That  is,  persuading  is  his  profession,  his 
only  profession ;  the  words  are  spoke  of  Francisco. — Johnson  :  Of  this  entangled 
sentence  I  can  draw  no  sense  from  the  present  reading,  and  therefore  imagine  that 
the  author  gave  it  thus :  ‘  For  he,  a  spirit  of  persuasion,  only  Professes  to  persuade  the 
king,  his  son's  alive,'  of  which  the  meaning  may  be  either  that  *  he  alone,  who  is  a 
spirit  of  persuasion,  professes  to  persuade  the  king,’  or  that  ‘  he  only  professes  to  per- 
8 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  L 


1 14 


[255.  Professes  to  perswade)] 

suade  ’ ;  that  is,  ‘  without  being  so  persuaded  himself,  he  makes  a  show  of  persuading 
the  king.’ — Kenrick  (p.  11)  :  There  is  no  necessity  for  altering  the  text  any  farther 
than  to  transpose  the  comma,  placed  after  ‘  persuasion,’  to  the  end  of  the  line.  The 
meaning  then  is  :  ‘  He  hath  almost  [not  quite]  persuaded  the  king ;  for  he  is  the  spirit 
of  persuasion  only,  he  professes  to  persuade  ’ ;  that  is,  ‘  He  has  only  almost  persuaded 
the  king ;  he  hath  no  solid  argument  or  weighty  reason  to  enforce  what  he  says ;  he 
hath  only  the  mere  volatile  spirit  of  persuasion;  that  superficial  vapour  of  words 
which  exhales  and  carries  with  it  only  the  appearance,  the  mere  show  or  profession 
of  persuading.’ — Monck  Mason  :  The  obscurity  here  arises  from  the  word  ‘  he’s,’ 
which  is  not  an  abbreviation  of  he  is,  but  of  he  has,  and  partly  from  the  omission  of 
the  pronoun  who  before  ‘  professes,’  by  a  common  poetical  ellipsis.  Supply  the  de¬ 
ficiency  and  the  sentence  will  run  thus  :  ‘  hath  here  almost  persuaded  (For  he  has  a 
spirit  of  persuasion,  who  only  Professes  to  persuade),  the  king,  his  son’s  alive.’ — 
Steevens  :  I  cannot  help  regarding  the  words  ‘  professes  to  persuade  ’  as  a  mere 
gloss  or  paraphrase  on  ‘  he  has  a  spirit  of  persuasion.’  This  explanatory  sentence, 
being  written  in  the  margin  of  an  actor’s  part,  or  playhouse  copy,  was  afterwards 
injudiciously  incorporated  with  our  author’s  text.  Read  the  passage  without  these 
words,  ‘  — almost  persuaded  (For  he’s  a  spirit  of  persuasion  only),  The  king,  his  son’s 
alive ;  ’tis  as  impossible,’  &c.,  and  nothing  is  wanting  to  its  sense  or  metre.  [Steevens 
adopted  this  reading  in  his  ‘own  edition’  of  1793.] — Dyce  says  of  this  passage, 
‘something  is  surely  wrong  here,’  and  quotes,  without  dissent,  Steevens’s  note. — 
Staunton  goes  further  and  adopts  Steevens’s  idea  that  the  entanglement  may  have 
arisen  from  the  retention  of  Shakespeare’s  first,  as  well  as  his  reconsidered,  thought. 
— [I  cannot  agree  with  Dyce  that  something  is  surely  wrong.  Antonio,  at  the  very  out¬ 
set,  must  counteract  in  Sebastian’s  mind  all  belief  in  Ferdinand’s  escape  which  has 
just  been  so  positively  asserted  to  the  king.  If  Ferdinand  has  survived,  Sebastian  is 
not  the  heir  to  the  throne,  and  the  conspiracy  will  come  to  naught.  He  therefore, 
parenthetically,  weakens  these  assertions  by  saying  that  their  author,  when  he  made 
them,  was  merely  exercising  his  calling,  as  a  courtier  and  as  a  counsellor,  in  the  arts 
of  persuasion ;  ‘  he  is  the  very  soul  of  persuasion,’  he  says,  ‘  and,  to  practise  it,  his 
only  profession.’  If  under  the  word  ‘professes  ’  we  can  detect  an  insidious  hint  that 
it  is  insincere  lip-service,  all  the  better.  What  is  to  me  somewhat  more  puzzling  here 
than  this  ‘  entanglement  ’  is,  to  whom  is  Antonio  referring,  to  Gonzalo  or  to  Francisco  ? 
I  had  never  a  doubt  on  the  subject  until  I  found  that  Capell,  whom  we  can  never 
afford  to  overlook,  asserted  positively  that  it  is  Francisco ;  and  he  is  followed  by 
Hunter  (of  Longman’s  Series)  and  Hudson.  On  the  other  hand,  Jephson  and  Phill- 
potts  say  that  it  is  Gonzalo ;  all  other  editors  are  silent  in  this  regard,  but  from  their 
references  to  the  ‘  dotard,’  &c.  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  they  mean  Gonzalo.  Unques¬ 
tionably,  it  is  Francisco  who  gives  the  florid  account  of  Ferdinand’s  remarkable  swim¬ 
ming  (and,  indeed,  it  is  to  the  rhetorical  flourishes  in  this  speech  that  Jephson  thinks 
Antonio  here  refers  as  proofs  that  Francisco  was  merely  exercising  his  profession),  but 
Francisco  is  such  a  very  subordinate  character  that  this  prominence  can  scarcely  be 
given  to  him  here.  The  description  of  Ferdinand’s  swimming  is  his  sole  utterance 
throughout  the  play,  except  three  words,  ‘  They  vanished  strangely,’  in  the  Fourth  Act. 
Whereas,  to  show  how  prominent  Gonzalo  is,  would  be  mere  waste  time.  I  cannot 
but  think  that  ‘  this  lord  of  weak  remembrance,’  who  will  be  forgotten  as  soon  as  ‘  he 
is  earth’d,’  is  identical  with  ‘  this  ancient  morsel,  this  Sir  Prudence,’  whom  Antonio 
afterwards  incites  Sebastian  ‘  to  put  for  aye  to  the  perpetual  wink.’ — Ed.] 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


”5 

256 


’Tis  as  impofsible  that  hee’s  vndrown’d, 

As  he  that  fleepes  heere,  fwims. 

Seb.  I  haue  no  hope 
That  hee’s  vndrown’d. 

Ant.  O,  out  of  that  no  hope,  260 

What  great  hope  haue  you?  No  hope  that  way,  Is 
Another  way  fo  high  a  hope,  that  euen 
Ambition  cannot  pierce  a  winke  beyond 

But  doubt  difcouery  there.  Will  you  grant  with  me  264 


261.  that  -way,  Is]  that  way  :  Is  Ff. 

262.  a  hope]  an  hope  Rowe+,  Steev. 
Mai.  Var. 

264.  But ...  difcouery]  What ...  dis¬ 
covers  Orger. 


264.  doubt]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cam.  Glo. 
Jeph.  Wrt,  Huds.  Wh.  ii,  Dtn.  drops 
Han.  drowns  Herr,  doubts  Cap.  et 
cet. 

with]  Om.  Gould. 


263.  winke]  Deighton  :  As  the  eye  of  ambition  is  alluded  to,  distance  is  here 
appropriately  measured  by  a  ‘  wink  ’ ;  so  in  V,  i,  34 :  ‘  My  purpose  doth  extend  Not 
a  frown  further.’ 

264.  But  .  .  .  there]  Warburton  :  The  meaning  is,  that  Ambition  would  be  so 
affected  with  the  pleasing  prospect  that  it  would  doubt  whether  the  discovery  it  there 
made,  of  future  greatness,  was  a  real  representation,  or  only  what  Shakespeare,  in 
another  place,  calls  a  Dream  of  Advantage. — Heath  :  Ambition,  which  cannot  carry 
its  utmost  view  beyond  the  prospect  this  ‘  no  hope  ’  opens  to  it,  doubts  even  the  dis¬ 
covery  which  it  actually  makes,  or  may  make,  if  it  pleases.  In  saying  which  Antonio 
alludes  to  the  difficulty  he  found  in  making  Sebastian  comprehend,  or  at  least  to  own 
he  comprehended,  the  scope  he  had  been  so  long  aiming  at. — Capell  :  ‘  There  ’  is — 
beyond  the  object  alluded  to,  i.  e.  a  crown :  ‘  no  hope,  that  way  (says  the  speaker)  is 
another  way  so  high  a  hope,  that  even  ambition  cannot ,  with  all  its  efforts,  discover 
glimpse  of  anything  desirable  beyond  it,  and  even  doubts  whether  there  is  anything  to 
be  discover'd.'  In  making  ‘  doubts  ’  drops,  [Hanmer]  shews  his  having  taken  the 
passage  in  nearly  the  same  way ;  and,  in  truth,  his  change  receives  some  authority 
from  the  discretive  particle  ‘  But,’  with  which  ‘  doubts  ’  has  not  that  accordance  that 
might  be  wish’d. — Johnson  :  This  is  the  utmost  extent  of  the  prospect  of  ambition, 
the  point  where  the  eye  can  pass  no  further,  and  where  objects  lose  their  distinctness, 
so  that  what  is  there  discovered  is  faint,  obscure,  and  doubtful. — Jephson  :  That  is, 
must  be  uncertain  of  discovering  or  discerning  anything  there;  the  prospect  is  so 
beyond  the  reach  of  human  sight. — W.  A.  Wright  :  To  *  doubt  discovery  there  ’ 
must  mean  to  be  uncertain  about  what  it  finds  there ;  the  point  being  at  the  extreme 
limit  of  ambition’s  vision. — Hudson  bravely  confesses  that  the  passage  1  has  long 
been  a  poser  ’  to  him,  and  that  he  has  met  with  no  sufficient  explanation  of  it.  ‘  Pos¬ 
sibly,’  he  adds,  ‘  we  ought  to  read,  “  Nor  aught  discover  there."  ’ — Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  : 
‘  But  doubt  ’  can  be  considered  as  equal  to  without  doubting,  or  the  ‘  cannot  ’  is  men¬ 
tally  carried  on  :  *  cannot  pierce  a  wink  beyond — [cannot]  but  doubt  discovery  there.' 
[This  last  interpretation  seems  to  be  the  best  way  of  dealing  with  the  adversative 
« but,’  and  even  this  is  far  from  satisfactory.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  sense  requires  a 
word  akin  either  to  finds  or  to  Hanrrer’s  drops.  The  Cambridge  Edition  recoids  the 
conjecture,  douts,  by  Br.  Nicholson,  a  conjecture  which  vanity  forces  me  to  think 


ii6 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  L 
265 


That  Ferdinand  is  drown’d. 

Seb.  He’s  gone. 

Ant.  Then  tell  me,  who’s  the  next  heire  of  Naples  ? 

Seb.  Claribell. 

Ant.  She  that  is  Queene  of  Tunis :  fhe  that  dwels 
Ten  leagues  beyond  mans  life  :  fhe  that  from  Naples  270 

Can  haue  no  note,  vnleffe  the  Sun  were  poft : 

The  Man  i’th  Moone’s  too  flow,  till  new-borne  chinnes  272 

267.  K/yfo’r...  Naples?]  One  line,  Pope.  271.  pojl  :~\post,  Rowe. 

well  of;  it  occurred  to  me  independently.  Pout,  of  course,  is  equivalent  to  doff. 
Nicholson’s  conjecture  appears  nowhere,  I  believe,  in  print;  it  was  probably  com¬ 
municated  in  MS  to  the  Cambridge  Editors.  When  ambition  has  pierced  to  its 
furthest  wink,  there  discovery  ceases  and  the  crown  is  found. — Ed.] 

270.  mans  life]  Steevens  :  That  is,  at  a  greater  distance  than  the  life  of  man  is 
long  enough  to  reach. — Croft  ingeniously  fixed  the  distance  to  be  eighty  leagues, 
because  ‘man’s  life’  in  Scripture  is  computed  at  seventy  years. — Hunter  (i,  1 66) : 
It  seems,  indeed,  to  me  that  there  is  one  proof  that  The  Tempest  is  a  translated,  not 
an  original,  composition  [in  this  phrase],  where  Man's  Life  ....  appears  to  be  the 
name  of  some  African  city  turned  into  English  on  the  principle  of  translation  which 
gives  us  ‘  Old  Free-Town  ’  in  Rom.  <5r»  Jul.  and  ‘  The  Place  of  Depth  ’  in  Com.  of 
Err.,  and  in  Mandevile  ‘  Evil  Town,’  and  in  The  Acts  ‘  Mars  Hill.’  And  we  find, 
accordingly,  Leo  Africanus  speaking  of  a  city  south  of  Tunis,  known  by  the  name 
of  Zoa,  which  may  well  be  supposed  to  have  been  the  place  the  name  of  which  is 
thus  represented  on  this  erroneous  principle  of  translation. — W.  A.  Wright  cha¬ 
racterises  this  note  of  Hunter  as  a  piece  of  ‘  curious  ingenuity,’  and  adds :  ‘  as  if 
a  distance  of  “thirty  miles  beyond  Zoa”  would  be  an  appreciable  distance  in 
Antonio’s  inflated  description.’  [Moreover,  Lampedusa,  where  Hunter  is  con¬ 
vinced  that  Antonio  then  was,  is  north  of  Tunis ;  to  be  consistent,  therefore,  should 
not  Hunter  have  amended  the  text  so  as  to  read  ‘  ten  leagues  this  side  o’  Mans- 
Life  ’  ?— Ed.] 

271.  no  note]  Pope’s  comments  are  so  rare  that  when  he  speaks  we  are  pre¬ 
pared  to  find  some  intricate  knot  unloosed ;  he  here  observes  that  ‘  no  note  ’  means 
‘no  advices  by  letter.’— Heath  :  That  is,  no  notice  of  any  kind,  by  messenger  or 
otherwise. — Holt  (p.  44)  has  here  a  long  note  showing  how  Antonio,  in  his  strong 
propensity  to  mischief,  forgets  all  the  circumstances  that  make  against  him. — Steevens  r 
Shakespeare’s  great  ignorance  of  geography  is  not  more  conspicuous  in  any  instance 
than  in  this,  where  he  supposes  Tunis  and  Naples  to  have  been  at  such  an  immeasur¬ 
able  distance  from  each  other.— W.  A.  Wright:  Steevens  appears  to  have  overlooked 
the  fact  that  Antonio’s  language  is  intentionally  exaggerated  and  that  Sebastian  is 
fully  aware  of  it.— Phila.  Sh.  Soc.:  Cf.  Bacon,  Essays,  xlix,  p.  442  (ed.  Whately), 
where,  under  ‘  advantage  be  not  taken  of  the  note,’  the  Editor  cites  this  passage  from 
The  Tempest. 

272.  The  .  .  .  slow]  From  Pope  to  the  present  day  these  words  have  been  en¬ 
closed  in  a  parenthesis.  With  this,  in  itself,  Brae  ( Robinson's  Epit.  of  Lit.  15  Feb. 
i879»  P-  33)  does  not  find  fault,  but  condemns  the  oversight  of  not  including  in  the 
same  parenthesis  ‘unless  the  sun  were  post,’  thereby  disclosing,  he  alleges,  the 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


117 

273 


Be  rough,  and  Razor-able  :  She  that  from  whom 
We  all  were  fea-fwallow’d,  though  fome  caft  againe, 


27 3,  274.  Be...We\  One  line,  Huds. 

273.  that  from  whom~\  Ff,  Hal.  Ktly, 
Cam.  Wrt.  for  ■whom  Pope,  that  for 
■whom  Coll.  MS.  from  whom  coming 
Sing,  that  from  whom  coming  Ktly. 
that— from  whom  ?  Spedding,  Glo.  'twas 
for  whom  Huds.  she's  that  from  whom 


Huds.  conj.  (withdrawn),  that  from — 
whom  Fumivall  (N.  &  Qu.  5>  vii,  143). 
from  whom  Rowe  et  cet. 

274.  We  all  were ]  We  were  Pope  +  , 
Cap.  We  were  all  Steev.  Knt,  Hunter. 
caJT\  cast  up  Ktly  conj. 


‘  humourous  comparison  between  the  sun’s  motion  and  that  of  the  moon,  the  latter 
seeming  to  lag  behind  the  sun  by  nearly  an  hour  every  day.  But  this  little  physical 
allusion  is  made  nonsense  of  when  the  two  members  of  the  comparison  are  dissevered 
by  one  being  inclosed  in  a  parenthesis  from  which  the  other  is  excluded ;  the  hyper¬ 
bolical  extravagance  does  not  consist  in  the  idea  of  sun  being  post,  but  in  his  being  a 
better  post  than  the  man  in  the  moon.’ 

273.  that  from  whom]  Capell  :  The  place  is  most  defectively  worded ;  for  we 
must  supply  in  it — in  coming, — ‘  she  in  coming  from  whom  ’ ;  nor  is  the  sequel  much 
perfecter;  are  is  understood  before  ‘cast,’  and  again  after  ‘And,’ — ‘though  some  are 
cast  again  And  are  (by  that  destiny),’  &c. — Malone:  ‘  She  that  from  whom’  cannot 
be  right.  The  compositor’s  eye  probably  glanced  on  a  preceding  line,  ‘  she  that  from 
Naples.’ — In  N.  6°  Qu.  5th  S.  vii,  324,  1877,  J[ames]  S[pedding]  thus  explains  his 
proposed  punctuation  (‘she  that — From  whom?  We  all,’  &c.)  :  The  question  ‘from 
whom  ?’  taken  in  connection  with  the  four  lines  preceding,  can  mean  nothing  more  or 
less  than  ‘  from  whom  can  she  have  note  ?'  which  meaning  is  exactly  to  the  purpose 
of  the  speaker.  Ferdinand,  son  and  heir  to  the  King  of  Naples,  being  drowned,  his 
sister  Claribel,  now  Queen  of  Tunis,  is  next  in  succession ;  after  her,  Sebastian,  the 
king’s  brother.  Antonio  suggests  to  Sebastian  that  if  the  king  were  dead  he  might  take 
the  crown,  Tunis  being  so  far  off  that  Claribel  would  know  nothing  about  it.  ‘  From 
whom  ’  could  she  hear  the  news,  the  ship  having  been  lost,  with  all  on  board  except 
themselves,  and  those  whose  silence  they  might  now  make  sure  of?  He  breaks  off 
abruptly  and  changes  his  construction.  But  what  he  says  is  intelligible  and  to  the 
purpose.  To  leave  a  sentence  unfinished  and  begin  another  is  common  enough  in 
English  speech.  But  that  any  Englishman  of  any  time,  county,  or  education,  if  he 
meant  to  say  *  she,  in  returning  from  whose  house  I  was  wrecked,’  would  say  either 
‘  whom  [Qu  .from  whom  I  was  wrecked  ’  or  ‘  she  that  from  whom  I  was  wrecked,’ 
is  to  me  incredible. — W.  A.  Wright:  If  [the  Folio]  is  correct,  and  there  is  no  great 
reason  to  doubt  it,  there  is  a  confusion  of  two  constructions :  Antonio  beginning  a 
fresh  sentence  as  he  had  done  the  three  previous  ones  with  ‘she  that,’  and  then 
changing  abruptly  to  ‘  from  whom,’  which  made  the  preceding  relative  superfluous. — 
Mrs  Kemble  {Notes,  &c.  p.  141) :  It  seems  curious  to  me  that  no  one  bethought 
themselves  of  transposing  ‘  She  that  ’  into  That  she,  which  would  have  been  Shake¬ 
spearian,  and  justified  the  retention  of  the  otherwise  incomprehensible  ‘that.’ — Hud¬ 
son  :  The  old  text  rather  looks  as  if  a  full  stop  were  intended  at  ‘  razorable,’  and  a 
new  construction  there  to  begin.  At  one  time  I  thought  of  reading  ‘  She's  that  from 
whom,’  which  makes  ‘  that  ’  a  demonstrative  pronoun,  and  thus  removes  the  absurdity 
of  its  being  a  relative  pronoun.  But  it  seems  to  me  better  to  substitute  'twas,  ‘  She 
'tivas  for  whom,’  and  so  to  get  rid  of  ‘  that  ’  altogether.  Nor  is  the  change  at  all 


1 1 8 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 
275 


(And  by  that  deftiny)  to  performe  an  aft 
Whereof,  what’s  paft  is  Prologue  ;  what  to  come 
In  yours,  and  my  difcharge. 

Seb.  What  ftuffe  is  this  ?  How  fay  you  ? 

’Tis  true  my  brothers  daughter’s  Queene  of  Tunis , 

So  is  fhe  hey  re  of  Naples ,  ’twixt  which  Regions  280 

There  is  fome  fpace. 

Ant.  A  fpace,  whofe  eu’ry  cubit  282 

275.  And]  May  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  276.  pajl  £5]  pajl  in  Ff,  Rowe. 

Warb.  Art  Wagner  (Jhrb.  xiv).  277.  In]  Is  Pope  +  .  ' S  in  Daniel. 

defliny]  destin'd  Holt,  Musgrave,  difcharge.]  discharge —  Rowe. 

Steev.’93. 

violent.  And  my  theory  is  that  ‘  she  that  from  ’  got  repeated  from  the  third  line 
above.  As  to  the  change  of  ‘  from  ’  into  for ,  perhaps  it  is  not  strictly  necessary,  as 
‘from’  may  possibly  yield  the  same  meaning. 

274.  cast]  This  means  not  only  to  throw ,  but  also,  very  often,  to  throw  up. 
as  here. — W.  A.  Wright:  ‘Cast,’  which,  in  theatrical  language,  is  to  assign 
their  parts  to  actors,  seems  to  have  suggested  the  ‘  act  ’  and  ‘  prologue  ’  which  fol¬ 
low.  [To  these  theatrical  terms  the  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  added  ‘  discharge,’  in  line 
277 ;  see  Mid.  N.  D.  I,  ii,  95  :  ‘I  will  discharge  it  in  either  your  straw-colour 
beard,’  &c.] 

275,  276.  Capell  :  These  are  soundings  of  Sebastian,  and  have  a  darkness  inten¬ 
tional  which  the  deficiencies  [of  expression]  heighten ;  the  pointing  of  his  reply  [i.  e. 
a  dash  after  ‘  this  ’  in  line  278]  is  calculated  to  convey  an  idea  of  the  suddenness  of 
his  perception  of  the  tendency  of  what  he  calls  *  stuff,’  a  suddenness  that  requires  a 
start  in  the  actor. 

275.  And  .  .  .  destiny]  Holt  (p.  47) :  These  words  want  no  alteration,  unless 
the  noun  ‘  destiny  ’  is  made  a  verb,  destin'd.  [This  emendation  Steevens  adopted  in 
his  edition  of  1793,  but  attributed  it  to  ‘the  late  Dr  Musgrave,’  and  to  Dr  Musgrave 
it  has  been  attributed  ever  since.  There  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  either  Steevens 
or  Musgrave  acted  otherwise  than  in  good  faith,  and  it  is  possible  that  Musgrave  ante¬ 
dated  Holt.  I  do  not  know  where  Musgrave’s  note  is  to  be  found  except  on  Steevens’s 
page  in  1793;  Holt’s  note  was  printed  in  1749.  In  adopting  this  emendation  Steevens 
properly  printed  the  phrase :  ‘And,  by  that,  destin’d,’  &c.,  and  it  was  so  punctuated 
in  Reed’s  Variorum  of  1803  and  1813;  when  Boswell  printed  Malone’s  Variorum 
in  1821  he  returned  to  ‘  destiny,’  but  he  overlooked  the  commas,  so  that  the  phrase  in 
that  edition  now  appears  as  ‘And,  by  that,  destiny,’  &c.,  clearly  a  misprint,  although 
it  is  not  specified  in  the  list  of  Errata. — Ed.] — Johnson  :  Perhaps  we  might  better 
say,  ‘And  that  by  destiny.’  It  being  a  common  plea  of  wickedness  to  call  tempta¬ 
tion  destiny.  [In  this  conjecture  Staunton,  who  has  generally  received  the  credit  for 
it,  was  anticipated  by  Johnson.] — Phila,  Sh.  Soc.  :  The  conjecture  destin'd  is  need¬ 
less  ;  the  sense  thereby  given  is  equally  to  be  elicited  from  the  text  as  it  stands,  i.  e.  the 
verb  ‘  were  ’  crops  out  again  after  ‘  destiny,’  with  the  expression  of  necessity;  ‘  by  that 
destiny  [we  are]  to  perform  an  act,’  &c. 

277.  In  .  .  .  discharge]  Steevens  :  That  is,  depends  on  what  you  and  I  are  to 
perform.  [For  the  use  of  the  pronoun  ‘  yours,’  see  note  on  III,  iii,  117.] 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


II9 

283 


Seemes  to  cry  out,  how  fhall  that  Claribell 
Meafure  vs  backe  to  Naples  ?  keepe  in  Tunis , 

And  let  Sebajlian  wake.  Say,  this  were  death  285 

That  now  hath  feiz’d  them,  why  they  were  no  worfe 
Then  now  they  are  :  There  be  that  can  rule  Naples 
As  well  as  he  that  fleepes  :  Lords,  that  can  prate 
As  amply,  and  vnneceffarily 

As  this  Gonzallo  :  I  my  felfe  could  make  290 

A  Chough  of  as  deepe  chat  :  O,  that  you  bore 
The  minde  that  I  do ;  what  a  fleepe  were  this 
For  your  aduancement?  Do  you  vnderftand  me? 

Seb.  Me  thinkes  I  do. 

Anl.  And  how  do’s  your  content  295 

Tender  your  owne  good  fortune  ? 


283,  284.  how... Naples?]  As  a  quo¬ 
tation,  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Hal. 
Sing.  Dyce. 

283,285.  how. ..wake]  As  a  quotation, 
Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  Jeph.  Glo.  Clke,  Wrt, 
Rife,  Huds.  Dtn. 

283.  Jhall  that]  shalt  thou  Han. 


284.  Meafure  vs]  Measure  it  Han. 
backe  to]  backe  by  Ff,  Rowe. 
keepe]  sleep  Johns,  conj.  keep  her 

Herr. 

291.  of  as]  give  as  Wilson. 

292.  were]  was  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns. 


283-285.  Brae  ( Rob .  Epit.  of  Lit.  15  Feb.  1879):  This  may  be  reclaimed  by 
simple  transposition  of  the  existing  words  :  ‘  seems  to  cry  out  “  How  measure  us  back 
to  Naples  f”  That  Claribel  shall  keep  in  Tunis,  and — Let  Sebastian  wake  !’  The 
line  before  ‘  Let  Sebastian  wake  ’  breaks  off  suddenly  by  aposiopesis. 

283-285.  how  .  .  .  wake]  Unquestionably,  all  this  is  what  every  cubit  cries  out 
and  should,  of  course,  be  printed  as  a  quotation. 

284.  to  Naples]  Tyrwhitt,  misled  by  the  later  Folios  and  Rowe,  emended 
what  he  supposed  to  be  the  true  text  by  what  he  called  a  ‘  spirited  turn.’  ‘  How  shall 
that  Claribel  Measure  us  back?  B’w’y’,  Naples;  keep  in  Tunis,’  &c.  'B'w'yf  he 
explains,  ‘  is  a  common  corruption,  in  conversation,  of  good  b’w’y’. ’ 

291.  Chough]  Harting  (p.  115):  The  Red-legged  Crow, — the  Cornish  Chough 
as  it  is  sometimes  called.  Instances,  we  believe,  are  on  record  of  choughs  being 
taught  to  speak,  but  Shakespeare  appears  to  have  entertained  no  great  opinion  of  their 
talking  powers.  He  speaks  of  ‘  Chough’s  language,  gabble  enough,  and  good  enough,’ 
All's  Well ,  IV,  i,  22,  and  [here  in  The  Tempest], — Jephson:  The  meaning  is,  ‘I 
myself  could  teach  a  chough  to  talk  as  deeply  as  this  Gonzalo.’  ‘  Chat  ’  is  used  in 
contempt. 

291.  chat]  W.  A.  Wright:  That  is,  able  to  talk  as  profoundly. 

295,  296.  Daniel  (p.  11) :  Why  should  Antonio  ask  Sebastian  whether  his  content 
waited  on  a  good  fortune  he  did  not  possess  ?  He  is  tempting  him  to  join  in  an  act 
which  shall  achieve  that  good  fortune  (the  kingship  of  Naples),  and  to  ask  him 
whether  he  is  satisfied  already  seems  absurd.  To  ask  him  if  he  consents  to  join  in  an 
action  which  shall  secure  the  object  of  his  ambition  is  much  more  to  the  purpose 
Read,  therefore,  ‘And  how?  do  you  consent  T’  endeav ’>  your  own  good  fortune  ?’ 


120 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 
297 


Seb.  I  remember 

You  did  fupplant  your  Brothet  Profpero. 

Ant.  True : 

And  looke  how  well  my  Garments  fit  vpon  me,  300 

Much  feater  then  before  :  My  Brothers  feruants 
Were  then  my  fellowes,  now  they  are  my  men. 

Seb.  But  for  your  confcience. 

Ant.  I  Sir  :  where  lies  that  ?  If  ’twere  a  kybe 
’Twould  put  me  to  my  flipper :  But  I  feele  not  305 

This  Deity  in  my  bofome :  ’Twentie  confciences 
That  ftand  ’twixt  me,  and  Millaine,  candied  be  they,  307 


298.  Brothet~\  Fj. 

300.  how  weir\  how  feat  Cap. 

303.  confcience .]  conscience  ?  Glo.  Wrt, 
Wh.  ii,  Dtn.  conscience , —  Theob.  et  cet. 
(subs.). 

304-308.  Lines  end ,  that?. ..flipper:... 
bofome. ...  Millaine, ...  mollefi  ...Brother. 
Pope  + . 

304.  where~\  but  where  Cap.  and  where 


Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

304.  ’twere]  it  were  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Sing.  Coll.  Hal.  Dyce  i,  Sta. 

306.  ’  Twentie"]  Ten  Pope+. 

307.  That]  Might  Jervis. 

Jland]  stood  Han. 

307,  308.  candied... mollefi :]  Candy' d 
were  they,  would  melt  ere  they  molested. 
Han. 


300.  how  well]  Capell’s  text  here  reads  ‘how  feat'  ;  I  can  find  no  reference 
whatsoever  to  the  change  in  his  Notes,  his  Various  Readings,  or  in  his  Errata.  It 
has  entirely  escaped  the  notice  of  every  editor,  I  believe,  from  that  day  to  this. — Ed. 

304.  kybe]  A  chilblain,  or  chap  in  the  heel. 

306,  307.  ’Twentie  .  .  .  stand]  Keightley  (p.  212) :  I  must  confess  I  do  not 
understand  this  passage.  Surely,  as  he  was,  as  he  had  just  said,  in  actual  possession 
of  Milan,  his  conscience  could  not  ‘  stand  ’  between  him  and  it.  Perhaps,  however, 
we  are  to  view  ‘  stand  ’  as  in  the  conjunctive  mood,  and  expressing  a  condition. 

306.  ’Twentie]  Elze,  in  a  note  on  Ham.  II,  ii,  160,  has  gathered  (Notes,  &c. 
1889,  p.  227-235)  an  interesting  and  valuable  list  of  examples  of  the  use  of  indefinite 
numbers,  such  as  ten,  twenty,  forty. 

306.  consciences]  Walker  (  Vers.  251)  cites  this  in  his  list  of  examples  of 
words  ending  in  a  plural  sound  which  are  to  be  pronounced  the  same  in  both  singular 
and  plural.  ‘  The  termination  es,'  he  says,  ‘  was  frequently  added  in  writing,  even 
where  it  was  not  pronounced.’ 

307.  candied]  Upton  (p.  202) :  We  must  read,  Discandy'd,  i.  e.  dissolved.  ‘  Dis- 
candy’  and  ‘melt’  are  used  as  synonymous  terms  in  Ant.  Cleof.  IV,  xii,  22. 

*  Candied  ’  is  that  which  is  grown  into  a  consistency,  as  some  sorts  of  confectionery 
ware.  So  in  Timon,  IV,  iii,  225.— Warburton  :  That  is,  ‘  Ten  consciences,  now 
frozen  up  with  cold,  now  dissolved  with  heat,  should  ne’er,’  &c. — Johnson  :  I  think 
we  may  safely  read, *  *  Candied  be  they  or  melt.’  That  is,  let  my  conscience  be  dried 
up  and  lie  unactive,  or  melt  and  run  quite  away.  [This  was  not  repeated  in  the 
Variorum  of  1773;  in  its  place  is  the  following:]  I  had  rather  read:  ‘  Would  melt, 
ere  they  molest.’  That  is,  Twenty  consciences,  such  as  stand  between  me  and  my 
hopes,  though  they  were  congealed,  would  melt  before  they  could  molest  me,  or  pre¬ 
vent  the  execution  of  ray  purposes. — Capell:  That  is,  though  they  were  ‘  candy’d, 


ACT  ii,  sc.  i.]  THE  TEMPEST  121 

And  melt  ere  they  molleft  :  Heere  lies  your  Brother,  308 

No  better  then  the  earth  he  lies  vpon, 

If  he  were  that  which  now  hee’s  like  (that’s  dead)  310 

Whom  I  with  this  obedient  fteele  (three  inches  of  it) 

Can  lay  to  bed  for  euer  :  whiles  you  doing  thus,  312 

308.  And  melt]  Would  melt  Johns.  312.  whiles ]  whilst  Rowe  Om. 

conj .  Cap.-  Pope  + . 

your]  you  F4- 

and  (as  is  the  nature  of  hard  substances  pressing  upon  the  flesh)  might  be  expected 
to  give  me  trouble,  yet,  sooner  than  do  so,  they  would  melt  [see  Text.  Notes]  :  Would 
written  by  its  abbreviation  W’d  might  very  easily  pass  into  ‘And,’  with  compositors 
who  attended  rarely  to  sense. — Malone:  ‘  Let  twenty  consciences  be  first  congealed 
and  then  dissolved,  ere  they,’  &c. — Keightley  (p.  212) :  I  do  not  see  clearly  the 
meaning  of *  *  candied  ’  and  ‘  melt  ’  in  this  place. — Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Antonio  has  in 
mind  some  expression  for  the  conscience  equivalent  to  Pope’s  (‘  The  God  within  the 
mind,’)  and  cites  it  only  to  express  his  contempt  for  the  opinion — the  demonstrative 
‘  this,’  in  its  power  to  indicate  that  which  is  talked  about  and  at  the  same  time  despised, 
being  quite  like  the  Greek  ovrof.  What  follows  exhibits  a  process  of  what  Words¬ 
worth  terms  the  Dramatic  Imagination.  Antonio  would  naturally  have  said,  that  this 

*  Deity  in  the  bofom,’  which  weak  men  prate  about,  would  not  (were  the  deed  to  do 
again)  stand  ’twixt  him  and  Milan,  as  it  had  not  before — that  were  twenty  such  gods 
to  plant  themselves  in  his  way,  they  should  be  to  him  but  so  many  statues  of  deities 
formed  by  congelation,  and  (like  them)  should  melt,  before  they  could  molest  him. 
But — under  the  influence  of  an  imaginative  seizure — the  villain  (who  but  pretends  to- 
ease  of  conscience)  conceives  of  the  gods,  whom  he  affects  to  despise,  as  in  living 
presence  barring  his  way,  and  he  exclaims  to  them  (as  if  of  them)  ‘  candied  be  they 
and  melt !’ — Phillpotts  :  ‘  Candied  ’  here  seems  to  be  *  turned  to  sugar  so  as  to  melt 
easily.’ — Jephson,  however,  gives  to  ‘candied’  an  entirely  different  interpretation, 
suggested  by  Chaucer’s  description  of  the  ‘  Poor  Parson  of  a  Town  ’  in  Canterbury 
Tales  :  ‘  He  waited  after  no  pomp  ne  reverence,  Ne  maked  him  a  spicld  conscience ,’ 
which  he  explains  as  meaning  that  the  Poor  Parson’s  conscience  was  ‘  not  sophisti¬ 
cated  by  the  subtleties  of  casuistry,  compared  to  far  fetched  spices,  but  guided  by  the 
plain  words  of  Scripture.  So  here  Antonio  means,  “  If  twenty  consciences  stood  .... 
let  them  be  candied,” — that  is,  sophisticated ;  then  the  word  suggests  another  meta¬ 
phor,  and  he  continues, — “  and  melt  away.”  A  spiced  or  candied  conscience,  in 
short,  means  what  we  should  call  a  “  nice  conscience  ” — a  conscience  that  can  justify 
anything  by  subtle  distinctions.’  [I  doubt  if  Antonio  wished  to  hold  any  debate  with 
his  conscience,  or  to  win  it  over  by  any  subtle  distinctions ;  it  was  entirely  indifferent 
to  him;  twenty  of  them,  let  them  be  hard  and  let  them  be  soft  (for  we  have  a  right  to 
suppose  that  ‘  melt’  is  an  apocopated  past  participle),  they  would  never  molest  him. 
—Ed.] 

310  (that’s  dead)]  Steevens:  These  words  (as  Dr  Farmer  observes  to  me)  are 
evidently  a  gloss  or  marginal  note,  which  had  found  its  way  into  the  text.  Such  a 
supplement  is  useless  to  the  speaker’s  meaning,  and  one  of  the  verses  becomes  re¬ 
dundant  by  its  insertion.  [They  are  omitted  in  Steevens  T793,  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  and 
‘Whom  I,’  from  the  next  line,  inserted.] 


122 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  n,  sc.  i. 


To  the  perpetuall  winke  for  aye  might  put 
This  ancient  morfell  :  this  Sir  Prudence,  who 
Should  not  vpbraid  our  courfe  :  for  all  the  reft 
They’l  take  fuggeftion,  as  a  Cat  laps  milke, 

They’l  tell  the  clocke,  to  any  bufineffe  that 
We  fay  befits  the  houre. 

Seb.  Thy  cafe,  deere  Friend 
Shall  be  my  prefident  :  As  thou  got’ft  Millame , 

Fie  come  by  Naples  :  Draw  thy  fword,  one  ftroke 
Shad  free  thee  from  the  tribute  which  thou  paieft, 

And  I  the  King  fhall  loue  thee. 

Ant.  Draw  together : 

And  when  I  reare  my  hand,  do  you  the  like 
To  fall  it  on  Gonzalo. 

Seb.  O,  but  one  word. 

Enter  Ariell  with  Mujicke  and  Song. 

Ariel.  My  Mafter  through  his  Art  forefees  the  danger 
That  you  (his  friend) are  in,  and  fends  me  forth 
(For  elfe  his  proie<5t  dies)  to  keepe  them  liuing. 


313 

315 


320 


325 


330 


317,  318.  bufmeffe ...houre]  hour... 
business  Farmer  conj.  (ap.  Cam.). 

327.  0,]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

[they  talk  apart.  Cap. 

328.  Enter...]  Re-enter...  Mai.  Ariel 
descends  Coll.  MS. 

with... Song]  invisible.  Cap. 


330.  you  ( his  friend )]  these ,  his 
friends ,  Johns,  conj.  Steev.’93.  you. 
his  friends ,  Wh.  ii.  his  yon  friends 
Heath,  yon,  his  friends  Wagner  (Jhrb. 
xiv). 

331.  them\you  Han.  Quincy  MS.  thee 
Hal.  conj.  Dyce,  Clke,  Rife,  Huds. 


314.  morsell]  Warburton  substitutes  Moral ;  ‘  that  is,’  he  explains,  ‘  this  man  of 
old-fashioned  honesty’;  and  Dr  Johnson  pronounced  the  substitution  ‘very  elegant 
and  judicious.’  Unquestionably,  it  is  a  happy  suggestion,  but  there  is  not  the  smallest 
justification  for  its  insertion  in  a  passage  which  is  free  from  all  difficulty. — Holt  : 
Used  contemptuously,  as  in  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  102 :  ‘A  king  of  shreds  and  patches.’ — 
Capell:  This  may  have  allusion  to  Gonzalo’s  thin  habit;  as  one  reduc’d  so  by  age 
that  he  was  scarce  a  morsel  to  the  devourer  who  was  approaching. — Johnson  :  As  we 
say  a  piece  of  a  man. 

315.  Should]  Here  used  for  would.  See  line  189  above,  or  Abbott,  §  322. 

316.  suggestion]  Johnson:  That  is,  any  hint  of  villainy.  See  IV,  i,  30. 

316.  as  a  Cat,  &c.]  ‘That  is,’  says  Halliwell  (p.  33),  ‘quietly.’  Rather,! 
think,  readily,  naturally. — Ed. 

326.  fall  it]  For  other  instances  of  intransitive  verbs  used  transitively,  see  Shake¬ 
speare  passim;  or  Abbott,  §  291. 

327.  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  This  should  be  punctuated,  ‘O,  but — one  word,’  i.  e.  ‘but’ 
is  not  used  here  in  the  sense  of  ‘  only  one  word  ’ ;  it  indicates  that  a  difficulty  had 
arisen  in  the  mind  of  Sebastian,  to  remove  which  he  asks  for  one  word  apart. 


ACT  II.  SC.  i.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


123 


Sings  in  Gonzaloes  eare. 
While  you  here  do  fnoaring  lie , 

Open-ef  d  Confpiracie 
His  time  doth  take  : 

If  of  Life  y ou  keepe  a  care , 

Shake  off  Jlumber  and  beware. 


332 

335 

337 


337.  Shake  off]  Shake  of  F3. 


33°>  331-  you  (his  friend)  .  .  .  them]  Johnson:  The  sense  of  the  passage  as  it 

now  stands  is  this :  He  sees  your  danger  and  will  therefore  save  them . Ariel 

speaks  to  himself  as  he  approaches  : *  * — That  these  his  friends  are  in.’  These,  written 
with  a  y,  did  not  much  differ  from  you. — Steevens  [who  adopted  Johnson’s  emenda¬ 
tion]  :  Ariel,  finding  that  Prospero  was  equally  solicitous  for  the  preservation  of  Alonso 
and  Gonzalo,  very  naturally  styles  them  both  his  friends  without  adverting  to  the  guilt 
of  the  former. — Malone  thinks  that  the  confusion  arises  from  the  lack  of  a  single 
letter,  s ;  he  therefore  turns  ‘project’  into  projects,  and  to  justify  the  verb  in  the  sin¬ 
gular  after  it  he,  almost  needlessly,  adduces  examples  of  similar  construction ;  *  to 
keepe  them  living,’  therefore,  refers  to  projects.  This  emendation  Malone  did  not 
adopt  in  his  text,  but  Halliwell  adopted  it  as  ‘  necessary  to  the  construction  of 
Ariel’s  speech  ’  and  ‘  as  less  violent  than  any  other.  On  the  supposition,’  concludes 
Halliwell,  ‘  that  Ariel  was  alluding  especially  to  Gonzalo,  “  them  ”  might  be  altered 
to  thee,  but  on  the  whole  [Malone’s  emendation]  seems  preferable.’ — This  change  of 

*  them  ’  to  thee  occurred  independently  to  Dyce,  who  adopted  it  in  his  text,  with  the 
following  note :  ‘As  far  as  the  phraseology  is  concerned  we  should  be  warranted  in  read¬ 
ing,  “  That  you,  his  friends,  are  in  ....  to  keep  them  living  ”  ;  for  similar  changes 
of  person  occur  in  some  other  passages  of  Shakespeare  (and  in  our  old  writers,  pas¬ 
sim),  but  I  cannot  think  (though  Steevens  thought  otherwise)  that  Ariel,  under  any 
circumstances,  would  style  Alonso  one  of  Prospero’s  friends,  when  Prospero  himself 
uses  such  terms  as  the  following:  “The  King  of  Naples,  being  an  enemy  To  me 
inveterate,”  &c.  “  Most  cruelly  Did  thou,  Alonso,  use  me  and  my  daughter.”  Malone’s 
[emendation]  introduces  what  appears  to  me  a  rather  awkward  construction ;  besides, 
the  plural  projects  is  at  variance  with  the  language  of  two  later  passages  in  this  play : 
“  Now  does  my  project  gather  to  a  head,”  &c.  and  “  or  else  my  project  fails.”  The 
alteration  which  I  have  made  here, — that  of  “  them  ”  to  thee, — suggested  itself,  I  find, 
to  Mr  Halliwell  also.’  In  1863  Dyce  added  ‘  I  now  find  that  Hanmer  substituted 
“to  keep  you  living.”  But,  as  various  passages  of  our  author  show,  there  is  not  the 
least  objection  to  thee  and  you  in  the  same  sentence.’ — Staunton  pronounces  Dyce’s 
reading  ‘  preferable  to  any  alteration  of  the  passage  yet  suggested ;  but  we  are  not 
convinced  that  change  is  required.’  [It  seems  to  have  been  generally  assumed, 
owing  to  the  directness  of  address,  that  Ariel  whispers  this  in  Gonzalo’s  ear.  Capell 
is  the  solitary  editor,  I  believe,  who  has  marked  it  as  an  aside,  wherein  I  think  he  is 
right.  Ariel  soliloquises  and  is  reviewing  what  he  has  to  do ;  Gonzalo,  the  especial 
friend,  is  in  imminent  danger,  and  must  be  at  once  protected ;  and  all  of  them  must 
be  kept  alive,  just  as  he  had  saved  them  in  the  tempest  when  not  a  hair  perished. 
This  is  in  accord  with  what  Dr  Johnson  intimated,  and  with  what  W.  A.  Wright 
says,  that  ‘  Ariel  is  half  apostrophising  the  sleeping  Gonzalo  and  half  talking  to  him¬ 
self.’— Ed.] 


124 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  II.  SC.  L 

338 


Awake ,  awake. 

Ant.  Then  let  vs  both  be  fodaine. 

Gon.  Now,  good  Angels  prefeme  the  King.  340 

Alo.  Why  how  now  hoa ;  awake  ?  why  are  you  drawn  ? 
Wherefore  this  ghaftly  looking  ? 

Gon.  What’s  the  matter  ? 

Seb.  Whiles  we  flood  here  fecuring  your  repofe, 

(Euen  now)  we  heard  a  hollow  burft  of  bellowing  345 

Like  Buis,  or  rather  Lyons,  did’t  not  wake  you  ? 

It  Brooke  mine  eare  moft  terribly. 

Alo.  I  heard  nothing. 

Ant.  O,  ’twas  a  din  to  fright  a  Monfters  eare ; 

To  make  an  earthquake :  fure  it  was  the  roare  350 

Of  a  whole  heard  of  Lyons. 

Alo.  Heard  you  this  Gonzalo  ? 

Gon.  Vpon  mine  honour,  Sir,  I  heard  a  humming, 

(And  that  a  ftrange  one  too)  which  did  awake  me : 

I  fhak’d  you  Sir,  and  cride :  as  mine  eyes  opend,  355 

I  faw  their  weapons  drawne  :  there  was  a  noyfe, 


339.  340.  Then. ..Angels]  As  one  line, 
Sta.  Walker,  Dyce,  Cam. 

340.  Gon.]  Ariel.  Hal.  conj. 

[They  wake.  Rowe. 

341.  Alo.]  Gon.  Hal.  conj. 
awake  ?]  awake  !  Han. 

341,  342.  Continued  to  Gonzalo. 
Sta. 

342.  this]  thus  Coll.  MS. 


343.  Gon.]  Alon.  [waking]  Sta.  Hal. 
conj. 

344.  Whiles]  Whilst  Rowe.  While 
Pope  + . 

346.  did’t]  did  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt,  Coll.  Hal.  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 

347.  mine]  mime  F3. 

352.  Gonzalo?]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

[To  Gonzalo.  Johns. 


34F,  342.  Why  .  .  .  looking]  Staunton  :  This  speech  is  erroneously  given  to  the 
king,  as  we  think  is  evident  from  the  language,  the  business  of  the  scene,  and  from 
what  Gonzalo  presently  says :  ‘  I  heard  a  humming  ....  which  did  awake  me ;  I 
shak’d  you,  sir,  and  cried,’  &c.  [This  admirable  emendation  of  Staunton  Dyck 
adopted  in  his  Second  Edition,  and  added  to  its  value  by  stage-directions,  as  follows  :] 

Gon.  [waking]  Now,  good  angels 

Preserve  the  king  ! — [  To  Seb.  and  Ant.]  Why,  how  now  ! — [  To  Alon.]  Ho,  awake  !— 
[To  Seb.  and  Ant.]  Why  are  you  drawn  ?  wherefore  this  ghastly  looking? 

Alon.  [waking]  What’s  the  matter  ? 

34I  drawn]  Johnson  :  Having  your  swords  drawn. 

345,  &c.  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Dr  Krauth  called  attention  to  the  progressiveness  of 
lying  here  displayed.  I.  Bellowing  like  bulls,  or  2.  rather  lions.  3.  A  din  to  fright 
a  monster’s  ears.  4.  To  make  an  earthquake.  Then,  5.  The  bathos  of  the  anticli¬ 
max,  ‘  the  roar  of  a  whole  herd  of  lions.’ 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


125 

357 


That’s  verily  :  ’tis  beft  we  (land  vpon  our  guard ; 

Or  that  we  quit  this  place :  let’s  draw  our  weapons. 

Alo.  Lead  off  this  ground  &  let’s  make  further  fearch 
For  my  poore  fonne.  360 

Gon.  Heauens  keepe  him  from  thefe  Beafts  : 

For  he  is  fure  i’th  Ifland. 

Alo.  Lead  away.  (done. 

Ariell.  Profpero  my  Lord,  fhall  know  what  I  haue 
So  (King)  goe  fafely  on  to  feeke  thy  Son.  Exeunt.  365 


Sccena  Secunda. 


Enter  Caliban,  with  a  burthen  of  Wood  (a  noyfe  of 
Thunder  heard.) 

Cal.  All  the  infeftions  that  the  Sunne  fuckes  vp 
From  Bogs,  Fens,  Flats,  on  Prof  per  fall,  and  make  him  5 

By  ynch-meale  a  difeafe ;  his  Spirits  heare  me, 


357.  verily]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll,  i,  Wh. 
Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Rlfe,Wrt.  verity  Pope 
et  cet. 

'tis  bejl  we]  'Best  Steev.’93. 
vpon  our]  on  Pope  + . 


362.  [Exit  with  the  others.  Dyce. 

364,  365.  [Aside.  Cap. 

2.  Changes  to  another  part  of  the 
Island.  Pope. 

5.  [throwing  down  his  Burthen.  Cap. 


357.  verily]  Abbott,  §  78 :  We  still  say,  ‘  that  is  well,'  but,  perhaps,  no  other 
adverb  (except  soon )  is  now  thus  used.  Shakespeare,  however,  has  ‘That’s  verily’ 
in  the  Tempest ;  ‘That’s  worthily,’  Cor.  IV,  i,  53;  Lucius’  banishment  ‘  was  wrong¬ 
fully ,’  Tim.  IV,  iv,  16.  Some  verb,  as  said  or  done,  is  easily  understood.  ‘  In  har¬ 
bour  ’  has  the  force  of  a  verb  in  ‘ Safely  in  harbour  Is  the  king’s  ship  ’  [I,  ii,  266,  ante. 
Pope’s  verity  is  doubtless  good,  Keightley  pronounces  it  ‘  most  certain,’  but  the  fore¬ 
going  examples  are  quite  sufficient  to  justify  the  Folio. — Ed.] — Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  : 
The  quiet,  dry  sarcasm  of  Gonzalo.  He  has  heard  no  bellowing,  only  ‘  a  humming.’ 

*  There  was  a  noise,  That's  verily  ’ — the  fact  sifted  of  the  monstrous  exaggerations. 

357.  ’tis  best  we]  Steevens:  As  the  verse  would  be  too  long  by  a  foot  if  the 
words *  *  ’tis  ’  and  ‘  we  ’  were  retained,  I  have  discarded  them  in  favour  of  an  elliptical 
phrase,  which  occurs  in  our  ancient  comedies  as  well  as  in  our  author’s  Cymb.  Ill,  vi 
25  :  ‘  Best  draw  my  sword,’  i.  e.  it  were  best  to  draw  it. — Dyce  :  Steevens  was  most 
probably  right. 

361.  these  Beasts]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  A  quiet  thrust  at  the  exaggeration,  and  an 
insinuation  against  Antonio  and  Sebastian.  Gonzalo’s  suspicion,  aroused  by  Ariel’s 
words,  has  been  strengthened  by  finding  Antonio  and  Sebastian  with  drawn  swords, 
and  by  their  extravagant  inventions. 

6.  ynch-meale]  W.  A.  Wright:  The  adverbial  termination  ‘ -meal,’  as  in  ‘piece- 


126 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 

7 


And  yet  I  needes  mull  curfe.But  they’ll  nor  pinch, 

Fright  me  with  Vrchyn-fhewes,  pitch  me  i’th  mire, 

Nor  lead  me  like  a  fire-brand,  in  the  darke 
Out  of  my  way,  vnlefle  he  bid  ’em  ;  but  10 

For  euery  trifle,  are  they  fet  vpon  me, 

Sometime  like  Apes,  that  moe  and  chatter  at  me, 

And  after  bite  me  :  then  like  Hedg-hogs,  which 

Lye  tumbling  in  my  bare-foote  way,  and  mount 

Their  pricks  at  my  foot-fall :  fometime  am  I  15 

All  wound  with  Adders,  who  with  clouen  tongues 

Doe  hiffe  me  into  madneffe  :  Lo,  now  Lo,  Enter 

Here  comes  a  Spirit  of  his,  and  to  torment  me  Trinculo, 

For  bringing  wood  in  flowly :  I’le  fall  flat, 

Perchance  he  will  not  minde  me.  20 

Tri.  Here’s  neither  bufh,  nor  fhrub  to  beare  off  any 
weather  at  all :  and  another  Storme  brewing,  I  heare  it  22 


7.  nor]  not  F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 

10.  ’em]  them  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Hal. 
12.  Sometime]  Sometimes  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 

Apes]  ape  Steev.’85  (misprint?). 


13.  after]  after,  Johns. 

17.  Enter...]  After  line  20,  Dyce. 

1 8.  and]  now  Pope,  Han.  sent  Cam. 
i  conj. 

22.  brewing]  a-brewing  Ktly. 


meal,’  ‘  limb-meal,’  is  from  the  A.  S.  malum,  the  dative  of  nuzl,  a  part,  used  adverb¬ 
ially,  both  alone  and  in  composition.  For  ‘limb-meal,’  see  Cymb.  II,  iv,  147,  ‘  O  that 
I  had  her  here,  to  tear  her  limb-meal !’  In  the  Wicliffite  Version  of  Wisdom  xviii, 
25,  we  find  ‘  hipyll-melum,’  in  heaps. 

8.  Vrchyn-shewes]  See  I,  ii,  385.  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  That  is,  reels,  dances, 
and  various  appearances  of  the  Elves.  See  Farad.  Lost,  i,  780 :  ‘  faery  elves,  Whose 
midnight  revels  ....  some  belated  peasant  sees,  ....  At  once  with  joy  and  fear  his 
heart  rebounds.’  [Compare  also  Milton,  Comus,  845:  ‘Helping  all  urchin  blasts, 
and  ill-luck  signs,’  &c.  for  another  example  of  ‘  urchin  ’  as  an  adjective. — Ed.] 

12,  13.  that  .  .  .  which]  Abbott,  §  261 :  When  the  relative  is  necessarily  em¬ 
phatic,  as  at  the  end  of  a  verse,  we  may  sometimes  expect  that  to  be  replaced  by 
which,  for  that  and  no  other  reason  [as  in  the  present  passage.  See  also  IV,  i,  85  ; 
V,  i,  41,  87]. 

12.  moe]  W.  A.  Wright:  So  Cotgrave,  ‘  Moue :  f.  A  moe,  or  mouth;  an  (ill- 
fauoured)  extension,  or  thrusting  out,  of  the  lips  ’ ;  and  again,  ‘  Grimacer.  To  make 
a  face,  or  a  wry  mouth ;  to  mowe.’  Douce  quotes  from  Harsnet’s  Declaration  of 
Popish  Impostures  a  passage  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  supposed  possession  of  young 
girls ;  ‘  They  make  anticke  faces,  gim,  mow  and  mop  like  an  ape,  tumble  like  a  hedge- 
hogge,’  &c. 

16.  wound]  Johnson :  Enwrapped  by  adders  ‘wound  ’  or  twisted  about  me. 

18.  and]  Abbott,  §  96,  calls  attention  to  the  emphatic  use  here  of  ‘and,’  equiv¬ 
alent  to  and  that  to. 

22.  weather  at  all]  Phila  Sh.  Soc.:  Punctuate  ‘weather,  at  all!’  to  indicate  the 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


127 


fing  ith’  winde:  yond  fame  blacke  cloud,  yond  huge 
one,  lookes  like  a  foule  bumbard  that  would  thed  his 
licquor:  if  it  fhould  thunder,  as  it  did  before,  I  know 
not  where  to  hide  my  head:  yond  fame  cloud  cannot 
choofe  but  fall  by  paile-fuls.  What  haue  we  here,  a  man, 
or  a  fifh  ?  dead  or  aliue  ?  a  fifh,  hee  fmels  like  a  fifh :  a 
very  ancient  and  fifh-like  fmell :  a  kinde  of,  not  of  the 


24.  foule]  full  Upton,  Jervis.  24.  bumbard]  bombard  Han. 

connexion:  ‘there’s  no  flirub  at  all  to  bear  off  any  weather.’ — Worcester  defines 
‘  bear  off’  to  carry  away ;  but  it  seems  to  be  rather  a  very  Greek-like  example  of  com¬ 
position  by  Zeugma  or  suggestive  composition,  in  which  the  preposition  belongs,  not 
to  the  verb  expressed,  but  to  another  which  is  understood  and  suggested.  The  mean¬ 
ing,  in  that  case,  will  be :  there  is  no  bush  or  shrub  at  all  to  receive  and  bear  the 
heavy  onset  of  the  storm,  and  so  to  keep  it  off  from  me. 

24.  foule]  If  Tyrwhitt’s  surmise  (in  As  You  Like  It,  III,  iii,  35)  be  correct,  which,  I 
am  afraid,  it  is  not,  that  when  Audrey  ‘  thanks  the  gods  she  is  foule,’  her  pronunciation 
of  ‘  foule  ’  was  merely  the  rustic  way  of  pronouncing  full,  then  that  same  pronunciation 
might  possibly  be  applicable  here,  as  Upton  conjectured.  The  blackness  of  the  clouds 
suggested  the  bumbard,  and  their  threatening  aspect  the  fullness  that  was  about  to  fall 
by  pailfuls.  The  force  of  ‘  foule,’  as  in  the  text,  is  not  at  once  apparent. — Ed. 

24.  bumbard]  Theobald  :  A  large  vessel  for  holding  drink,  as  well  as  the  piece 
of  ordnance  so  called. — Steevens  :  Ben  Jonson,  in  his  Masque  of  Augurs,  speaks 
of  ‘  a  bumbard  of  broken  beer.’ — Halliwell:  A  very  large  leathern  drinking  vessel, 
used  for  the  purpose  of  distributing  liquor  to  a  number  of  persons,  or  employed  for  fill¬ 
ing  smaller  vessels  at  a  meal.  Heywood,  Philocothonista,  1635,  p.  45,  gives  the  follow¬ 
ing  notice  of  them :  ‘  Other  bottles  wee  have  of  leather,  but  they  are  most  used  amongst 
the  shepheards  and  harvest  people  of  the  countrey ;  small  jacks  wee  have  in  many  ale¬ 
houses  of  the  Citie  and  suburbs,  tipt  with  silver,  besides  the  great  black-jacks  and 
bumbards  at  the  Court,  which  when  the  Frenchmen  first  saw,  they  reported,  at  their 
retume  into  their  countrey,  that  the  Englishmen  used  to  drinke  out  of  their  bootes  ’ 
The  ‘bombard-man,’  mentioned  by  Ben  Jonson  in  his  Love  Restored  (ed.  1616,  p. 
991),  was,  according  to  Gifford,  one  of  the  people  who  attended  at  the  buttery-hatch, 
and  carried  the  huge  cans  of  beer  to  the  different  offices.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
Prince  Henry  calls  Falstaff  a  ‘  huge  bombard  of  sack  ’ ;  and  Coles  has,  ‘  a  bumbard, 
tankard,  cantharus.'  [Several  examples  are  added  of  the  word  in  old  authors.] 

29.  fish-like  smell]  Steevens  (connecting  this  passage  with  ‘  Misery,’  &c.  in 
line  42)  :  One  would  almost  think  that  Shakespeare  had  not  been  unacquainted  with 
a  passage  in  Chapman’s  Odyssey,  bk  iv :  ‘  the  sea-calves  savour  was  So  passing  sowre. 
....  It  much  afflicted  us ;  for  who  can  please  To  lie  by  one  of  these  same  sea-bred 
whales  ?’  [We  have  been  taught  by  the  older  commentators  that  Shakespeare  was 
deficient  in  seeing  and  in  hearing ;  they  prove  to  us,  by  numberless  examples,  that  he 
never  trusted  those  faculties  in  himself,  but  always  went  for  his  allusions  or  for  his 
illustrations,  to  some  older,  or  to  some  foreign,  or  to  some  classic  authority.  Would  he 
have  done  so,  by  any  possibility,  had  he  been  other  than  blind  and  deaf?  His  eyes 
and  his  ears  we  have  been  thus  compelled  to  resign.  But  we  did  hope  that  when  stale 
poor-johns  were  the  theme  Shakespeare  would  not  be  forced  to  seek  an  authority  for 


(28 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


neweft  poore-Iohn :  a  ftrange  fifh :  were  I  in  England  30 
now  (as  once  I  was)  and  had  but  this  fifh  painted ;  not 
a  holiday-foole  there  but  would  giue  a  peece  of  filuer : 
there,  would  this  Monfter,  make  a  man :  any  ftrange 
beaft  there,  makes  a  man :  when  they  will  not  giue  a 
doit  to  relieue  a  lame  Begger,  they  will  lay  out  ten  to  fee  35 
a  dead  Indian :  Leg’d  like  a  man ;  and  his  Finnes  like 

31.  this]  his  F3.  32.  a  holiday ]  an  holy-day  F4,  Rowe, 

Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 


an  ancient  and  fish-like  smell,  but  could  confidently  follow  his  nose ;  that  organ,  at  least, 
we  trusted  would  be  spared  to  us.  But  even  this  hope,  as  we  see  above,  Steevens  has 
rudely  brushed  aside,  and  Shakespeare’s  nose  is  now  for  ever  wiped  away. — Ed.] 

30.  poore-Iohn]  Dyce  :  Hake,  salted  and  dried. 

31.  fish  painted]  The  shining  hour  offered  by  this  pointed  allusion  was  busily 
improved  by  Steevens  and  Malone,  who  gathered  many  references  to  exhibitions  of 
strange  fishes  in  Shakespeare’s  time.  And  Halliwell  favours  us,  over  and  above, 
with  a  large  picture  of  a  ‘gigantic  owl’  exhibited  in  1591* — Ed. 

33.  make  a  man]  Johnson  :  That  is,  make  a  man’s  fortune. 

35.  doit]  Halliwell  (p.  34)  quotes  Coryat’s  Crudities  to  the  effect  that  eight 
doits  *  goe  to  a  Stiuer,  and  ten  Stiuers  do  make  our  English  shilling.’ 

35.  lame]  E.  A.  Meredith  (p.  5) :  I  venture  to  suggest  that  Shakespeare  wrote 
live,  and  not  ‘  lame.’  The  two  words,  if  carelessly  written,  look  very  much  alike,  but 
live  seems  the  natural  and  true  word,  and  gives  force  to  the  contrast,  viz :  that  the 
English  sight-seer  would  spend  ten  times  as  much  on  seeing  a  dead  Indian  as  in 
relieving  a  live  countryman. 

36.  dead  Indian]  Steevens  suggests  that  here  and  in  Stephano’s  ‘  men  of  Inde  ’ 
(line  63)  we  may  have  an  allusion  to  the  Indians  brought  home  by  Frobisher.  [This 
allusion  we  cannot  afford  to  overlook ;  it  is  held  by  more  than  one  of  the  disputants 
to  be  of  great  importance  in  settling  the  date  of  the  composition  of  this  play ;  through 
the  discussion  this  dead  Indian  skips  in  so  lively  a  manner  that  it  is  well  to  question 
him.  This  has  been  done  for  us  pretty  thoroughly  by  Halliwell,  who  believes  that 
Chalmers’s  dead  Indian  (see  Appendix,  Date  of  Composition),  dying  as  he  did  in 
1611,  died  too  late,  much  too  long  after  Trinculo’s  dead  Indian.  From  his  session  as 
Rhadamanthus,  Halliwell  rises  with  the  belief  that,  as  far  as  probabilities  go,  he  has 
identified  the  Indian  in  life  and  in  death,  he  has  even  discovered  his  name,  nay,  he 
even  presents  us  with  a  picture  in  little  of  the  man  in  his  habit  as  he  lived  and  accom¬ 
panied  by  his  wife.  (I  hope  here  be  truths.)  It  appears  that  Sir  Martin  Frobisher 
on  two  successive  voyages  brought  home  Indians.  His  first  venture  ended  in  a  down¬ 
right  tragedy ;  when  the  savage  who  was  to  be  taken  home  as  a  specimen  ‘  founde 
himself  in  captiuitie,  for  very  choler  and  disdain  he  bit  his  tong  in  twaine  within  his 
mouth ;  notwithstanding  he  died  not  thereof,  but  liued  till  he  came  in  Englande,  and 
then  he  died  of  colde  which  he  had  taken  at  sea.’  Frobisher’s  next  venture  in  1577 
was  more  successful.  It  consisted  of  a  man,  a  woman,  and  a  child.  The  man  unfor¬ 
tunately  died  at  Bristol,  but  was  taken  to  London,  and  afterwards  buried  in  St  Olave’s 
church-yard.  This  group  attracted  *  a  great  deal  of  attention,’  says  Halliwell,  *  and 
appear  to  have  been  far  more  celebrated  than  the  Indian  brought  over  on  the  first 


ACT  II.  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


129 


Armes  :  warme  o’ my  troth  :  I  doe  now  let  loofe  my  o-  37 
pinion  :  hold  it  no  longer ;  this  is  no  fifh,  but  an  Iflan- 
der,  that  hath  lately  fuffered  by  a  Thunderbolt :  Alas, 
the  ftorme  is  come  againe :  my  bell  way  is  to  creepe  vn-  40 
der  his  Gaberdine :  there  is  no  other  (helter  herea¬ 
bout :  Mifery  acquaints  a  man  with  ftrange  bedfel- 
lowes  :  I  will  here  Ihrowd  till  the  dregges  of  the  ftorme 
be  paft.  • 

Enter  Stephano  Jinging.  45 

Ste.  I  Jhall  no  more  to  fea ,  to  fea ,  here  Jhall  I  dye  afhore. 


39.  [Thunder.  Cap.  45.  Scene  III.  Pope+. 

43.  dregges ]  drench  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS).  singing.]  singing;  a  Bottle  in  his 

rage  Bailey.  hand.  Cap. 

44.  [Creeping  under  Cal.  Cap. 

voyage.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  man’s  body  was  publicly  shown  in  London, 
otherwise  it  would  be  difficult  to  account  for  its  having  been  removed  from  Bristol ; 
and  as  the  poet’s  father  was  in  the  metropolis  for  a  short  time  about  this  period,  it  is 
most  likely  an  account  of  the  “  dead  Indian  ”  reached  Shakespeare  in  one  way  or 
other,  even  if  it  were  merely  in  the  shape  of  a  pictorial  ballad.’  If  we  once  begin  to 
indulge  in  speculations  founded  on  what  is  ‘most  likely’  or  on  what  is  ‘  not  improbable  ’ 
(the  besetting  sin  of  all  who  deal  with  Shakespeare’s  biography),  we  might  as  well  con¬ 
dense  our  notes  on  such  a  passage  as  the  present  to  the  remark  that  when  Shakespeare 
referred  to  a  dead  Indian  it  is  ‘  most  likely  ’  that  he  had  seen  one.  Halliwell  gives  a 
wood-cut  of  the  group,  copied  from  a  drawing  preserved  in  a  manuscript  in  the  Library 
of  Canterbury  Cathedral,  entitled  A  boke  of  drawing  of  the  shapes  ....  of  diverse 
beasts,  & c.,  by  William  Burch,  1590.  From  this  drawing  we  learn  that  the  savage  was 
called  Collinshough  and  his  wife  Agnot. — Ed.]  ‘  On  the  whole,’  concludes  Halli¬ 
well,  ‘  admitting  it  to  be  possible  that  Shakespeare  alludes  to  some  exhibition  of  a 
later  date,  yet  as  the  body  of  the  personage  who  came  over  in  1577  was  the  only 
“  dead  Indian  ”  known  to  have  been  sent  to  London,  the  probabilities  are  at  present  in 
favour  of  Collinshough  being  the  individual  mentioned  in  The  Tempest.  The  only 
other  notice  I  am  acquainted  with,  that  is  at  all  applicable,  relates  to  the  “  mummied 
princes,”  which  were  amongst  the  sights  of  the  city  some  years  afterwards.  It  occurs  in 
some  verses  written  by  Henry  Peacham,  about  the  year  1609,  which  gives  a  curious  list 
of  most  of  the  popular  exhibitions  ’  [of  the  time.  This  list  is  also  given  by  Staunton]. 

37,  38.  let  .  .  .  hold]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  *  I  do  now  let  loofe  my  opinion — hold  it 
no  longer.’ — Such  should  be  the  punctuation  (a  dash  or  dots,)  to  indicate,  that  the 
Jester,  after  having  coined  the  unusual  expression  *  to  let  loose,’  explains  it  by  the 
usual  one  ‘  to  hold.’ 

41.  Gaberdine]  Cotgrave :  ‘ Gaban .  A  cloake  of  Felt,  for  rainie  weather;  a  Gabar¬ 
dine.’  See  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  iii. 

43.  dregges]  Collier  (see  Text.  Notes) :  Trinculo  could  care  little  about  the 
1  dregs  ’  of  the  storm ;  it  was  from  the  violence  of  it  that  he  wished  to  obtain  shelter. 
[Is  it  not  strange  that  Collier  did  not  see  that  ‘  dregs  ’  refers  to  the  liquor  of  the  bum- 
bard,  and  that  Trinculo  was  going  to  shroud  himself  until  the  very  last  drop  of  the 
storm  was  past  ? — Ed.] 
q 


130 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  il 


This  is  a  very  fcuruy  tune  to  fing  at  a  mans 
Funerall:  well,  here’s  my  comfort.  Drinkes. 

Sings.  The  Majier ,  the  Swabber ,  the  Boate-fwaine  &  I ; 
The  Gunner ,  and  his  Mate 
Lou'd  Mall,  Meg,  and  Marrian,  and  Margerie , 

But  none  of  vs  car'd  for  Kate. 

For  fhe  had  a  tongue  with  a  tang , 

Would  cry  to  a  Sailor  goe  hatig : 

She  lod d  not  the  fauour  of  Tar  nor  of  Pitch, 

Yet  a  Tailor  might  fcratch  her  where  ere  fhe  did  itch. 

Then  to  Sea  Boyes,  and  let  her  goe  ha?ig. 

This  is  a  fcuruy  tune  too  : 

But  here’s  my  comfort.  drinks. 

Cal.  Doe  not  torment  me  :  oh. 

Ste.  What’s  the  matter  ? 

Haue  we  diuels  here  ? 

Doe  you  put  trickes  vpon’s  with  Saluages,  and  Men  of 


47,  48.  As  prose,  Pope. 

51.  and  Marrian]  Marrian  Pope, 
Han. 

58,  59.  One  line,  Pope. 


47 


50 


55 


60 


63 


61,  62.  One  line,  Pope. 

63.  vpon’s']  upon  us  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt. 

Saluages ]  Ff.  savages  Johns. 


47.  scuruy]  This  disease,  although  by  no  means  restricted  to  a  sea-life,  has  been 
one  of  the  most  dreaded  scourges  of  sailors  from  the  days  of  Vasco  da  Gama,  in 
1497,  down  to  the  beginning  of  the  present  century. — Ed. 

49,  &c.  Anon.  (Sh.  a  Seaman ,  St  James's  Mag.  July,  1 862)  :  Has  Shakespeare 
bequeathed  us  a  sea-song  ?  What  think  you  of  Ariel’s  song  ?  If  you  object  that  it 
is  not  a  sailor’s  sea-song, — not  such  a  1  stave  ’  as  hardy  tars  would  delight  to  sing  on 
the  forecastle, — we  can  introduce  from  the  same  drama  a  genuine  mariner’s  song. 
Stephano  sings  a  certain  jolly  sea-song.  Hearken  to  the  shrewd  and  diverting 
knave  as  he  trolls  away,  bottle  in  hand,  and  monarch  of  all  he  surveys.  There’s 
good  stuff  in  that  song ;  the  writer  must  have  smelt  salt  water ;  snuffed  the  sea-breeze 
with  a  hearty  relish,  and  often  had  his  jacket  wetted  with  the  spray.  The  oldest 
sea-song  with  which  we  are  acquainted  is  *  The  Mariner’s  Song  ’  in  the  comedy  of 
Common  Conditions,  1576 ;  and  the  next  oldest  is  ‘  The  Mariner’s  Glee  ’  in  Deutero 
melia,  1609.  As  The  Tempest  was  produced  or  written  prior  to  the  latter  date,  Ste- 
phano’s  ditty  is  possibly  the  second  oldest  sea-song  extant. 

63.  Saluages]  Reed  :  The  Folio  reads  ‘  salvages,’  and  rightly.  It  was  the  spell¬ 
ing  and  pronunciation  of  the  time. — Dyce  :  So  says  worthy  Isaac  Reed, — who  ought 
to  have  known  that  the  Folio,  like  other  books  of  that  date,  is  quite  inconsistent  in  its 
spelling,  e.  g.  [I,  ii,  417,  ante ]  it  has  ‘  sauage  ’ ;  in  Love's  Lab.  L.  IV,  iii,  it  has  ‘a 
rude  and  sauage  man  of  Inde  ’ ;  and  again  in  the  same  play,  V,  ii :  ‘  That  we  (like 
sauages)  may  worship  it.’  In  Shelton’s  Don  Quixote,  Part  Sec.  p.  261,  ed.  1620,  we 
find,  ‘  foure  Sauages  entred  the  garden,’  &c.,  and  six  lines  after,  ‘  the  Saluage  replied,’ 
&c 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


13* 

Inde ?  ha?  I  haue  not  fcap’d  drowning,  to  be  afeard 
now  of  your  foure  legges :  for  it  hath  bin  faid ;  as  pro-  65 
per  a  man  as  euer  went  on  foure  legs,  cannot  make  him 
giue  ground:  and  it  fhall  be  faid  fo  againe,  while  Ste- 
phano  breathes  at’  noftrils. 

Cal.  The  Spirit  torments  me:  oh. 

Ste.  This  is  fome  Monfter  of  the  Ifle,  with  foure  legs  ;  70 

who  hath  got  (as  I  take  it)  an  Ague :  where  the  diuell 
fhould  he  leame  our  language  ?  I  will  giue  him  fome  re- 
liefe  if  it  be  but  for  that :  if  I  can  recouer  him,  and  keepe 
him  tame  ,  and  get  to  Naples  with  him,  he?s  a  Pre-  74 

64.  afeard ]  afraid F4,  Rowe  + ,  Steev.  68.  at'  noftrils)  at  his  nostrils  Rowe 

^5-  ii  + .  at's  nostrils  Wh.  Cam.  i,  Glo.  Jeph. 

65.  bin  faid ,•]  been  faid  F,.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  at  noftrils  Ff  et  cet. 


63,  64.  Men  of  Inde]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Cf.  « Like  as  the  man  of  Inde  may 
change  his  skin.’  -Jer.  xiii,  23,  Coverdale,  Matthews,  Cranmer,  Bishops. — Deighton 
thinks  that  ‘  savages  and  men  of  Inde  ’  looks  like  a  quotation. 

68.  at’  nostrils]  Walker  [Crit.  ii,  176) :  The  apostrophe  is  meant,  I  suppose,  to 
indicate  that  it  is  a  contraction  of  at  th'  nostrils,  or,  perhaps,  secundum  Eboracenses, 
at  t’  nostrils. — Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Read  ‘  at  th’  noftrils  ’  =  ‘  at  the  noftrils.’  There  is 
also  an  apostrophe  after  the  /  (at’,)  in  IVint.  Tale,  IV,  iv,  693,  ‘  at’  Palace.’  This, 
without  doubt,  indicates  the  presence  of  a  the  with  the  vowel  elided  and  the  th  pro¬ 
nounced  (as  even  now  in  Yorkshire,  according  to  Walker)  like  t  (as  in  t’other).  It 
would  thus  appear,  that  there  was  the  same  repugnance  to  duplicating  the  t  in  pro¬ 
nunciation  (and  therefore  sometimes  in  writing )  as  to  that  of  the  s  observed  by 
W  alker. — W.  A.  Wright  adds  the  following  additional  examples :  ‘  He  foamed 
at  mouth,’  Jul.  Cess.  I,  ii,  255 ;  ‘  at  gate,’  Cor.  IV,  i,  47 ;  ‘  at  upper  end  o’  the  table  ’ 
lb.  IV,  v,  204. 

72.  should  he  leame]  Allen  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  p.  34) :  An  example  of  the  use 
of  ‘shall  in  what  Guest  (ap.  Craik.  Jul.  Cces.  sp.  181)  considers  its  primary  sense,  to 
owe.  ‘He  lhould  learn  our  language ’  =  he  owes  (i.  e.  ought)  to  learn  it.  But  this 
affirms  a.  future  duty.  ‘  Where  ffiould  he  learn  our  language  ?’  would  therefore  mean, 
where  ought  he  to  be  in  order  to  learn  our  language,  which  he  now  does  not  know  ?’ 
But  Stephano  really  says  :  ‘  He  speaks  our  language  !  Where  can  he  have  learned 
it  ?’  The  drunken  butler  has  thus  been  guilty  of  an  imaginative  blending  of  two 
propositions  and  two  times,  precisely  like  that  which  the  subtle  mind  of  the  Greeks 
produced  in  the  idiom,  of  which  Aristophanes,  Clouds,  174:  'H aOrrv  yaheitTi)  Karaxt- 
oavn  luKpdrovr,  gives  a  notorious  specimen ;  i.  e.  the  real  time  of  the  action  expressed 
by  the  verb  learn  is  so  obviously  fixed  as  past  by  the  nature  of  the  proposition,  that  it 
can  be  left  to  take  care  of  itself,  without  any  exponent ;  while  the  form  of  tense 
employed  (viz :  the  Present)  belongs  to  and  indicates  the  other  verb,  which  is  shown 

by  the  facts  of  the  situation  to  have  been  in  the  mind  of  Stephano ;  whose  speech _ _ 

kept  in  the  shape  of  a  single  question— would  be  :  ‘  Where  the  devil  ffiould  he  havt 
learned  our  language,  fo  that  he  is  now  f peaking  it  ?’ 


THE  TEMPEST 


132 


[act  ii,  sc  ii. 


fent  for  any  Emperour  that  euer  trod  on  Neates-lea-  75 
ther. 

Cal.  Doe  not  torment  me  ’prethee:  I’le  bring  my 
wood  home  fafter. 

Ste.  He’s  in  his  fit  now ;  and  doe’s  not  talke  after  the 
wifeft ;  hee  fhall  tafte  of  my  Bottle :  if  hee  haue  neuer  80 
drunke  wine  afore,  it  will  goe  neere  to  remoue  his  Fit : 
if  I  can  recouer  him,  and  keepe  him  tame,  I  will  not  take 
too  much  for  him ;  hee  fhall  pay  for  him  that  hath  him, 
and  that  foundly. 

Cal.  Thou  do’ft  me  yet  but  little  hurt;  thou  wilt  a-  85 
non,  I  know  it  by  thy  trembling :  Now  Profper  workes 
vpon  thee. 

Ste.  Come  on  your  wayes :  open  your  mouth  .•  here  88 


77,  78.  Two  lines  of  verse,  Steev.  Dyce 
ii,  iii. 

79.  his  Jit ]  a  Jit  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han. 
82.  I  will  not  take]  I  cannot  ask 
Han. 

85-87.  Thou... thee]  Three  lines  of 


verse  (ending  hurt...  trembling...  thee] 
Johns.  Dyce  ii,  iii.  (ending  wilt... trem¬ 
bling... thee]  Grey,  Steev.  (ending  wilt 
...now. ..thee]  Ktly.  Two  lines  of  verse 
(ending  anon... thee]  Wh. 

86,  87.  thy. ..thee]  my  ...me  Han. 


77-  Doe  not,  &c.]  Grant  White  (ed.  i) :  Caliban  always  speaks  in  measured 
rhythm;  but  because  his  lines  are  sometimes  irregular,  and  sometimes  of  more  than 
five  feet,  many  of  his  speeches  have  been  printed  as  prose  from  the  first  edition  to  the 
present,  in  which  all  appear  in  the  form  of  verse.  [White  overlooked  the  fact  that 
Grey  (i,  19),  in  I754>  expressed  the  belief  that  ‘everything  that  Caliban  says,  not 
only  in  this  present  Scene,  but  through  the  whole  play,  was  design’d  by  the  author  for 
metre,  either  for  verse,  or  Hemistics’;  and  that  Steevens,  in  1793,  and  Reed  in  his 
two  Variorums,  1803,  1813,  exactly  followed  Grey’s  hint. — Ed.] 

83.  too  much]  Steevens  :  This  means,  any  sum,  ever  so  much. — Monck  Mason  : 
That  is,  I  will  not  take  for  him  even  more  than  he  is  worth. — Ritson  :  Stephano  evi¬ 
dently  proposes  to  sell  his  monster  for  a  good  round  price ;  which  it  would  have  been 
rather  difficult  for  him  to  do  if  he  were  determined  [according  to  Steevens]  not  to 
take  any  sum,  ever  so  much  for  it.  He  means  that  he  could  not  rate  his  purchase  too 
high :  Let  me,  says  he,  get  ever  so  much  for  him,  it  shall  not  be  more  than  enough. — 
Quincy  ( MS  Corrections  in  a  Fourth  Folio,  p.  7)  :  Both  words  have  been  erased  by 
the  corrector,  and  the  number  100  written  in  the  margin.  That  this  number  might 
have  been  easily  mistaken  for  the  word  ‘  too  ’  in  the  Manuscript,  and  the  ‘  much  ’ 
afterwards  inserted  as  a  common  sequent,  is  all  that  can  be  said  in  its  favour. 

86.  trembling]  Steevens  :  This  tremor  is  always  represented  as  the  effect  of 
being  possessed  by  the  devil.  See  Com.  of  Err.  IV,  iv,  54 :  ‘  Mark  how  he  trembles 
in  his  ecstasy.’— W.  A.  Wright:  See  Harsnet’s  Declaration  of  Popish  Impostures 
(1603),  pp.  58,  59,  ‘All  the  spirits  with  much  adoe  being  commaunded  to  goe  downe 
into  her  left  foote,  they  did  it  with  vehement  trembling,  and  shaking  of  her  leg.’ 

88.  your  wayes]  Editor  of  Am.  Ed.  1805  (Qu.  Joseph  Dennie?) :  The  mean¬ 
ing  of  this  expression  appears  to  have  escaped  the  attention  of  the  various  conrnen 


ACT  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  TEMPEST 

is  that  which  will  giue  language  to  you  Cat ;  open  your 
mouth ;  this  will  (hake  your  fhaking,  I  can  tell  you,  and 
that  foundly .*  you  cannot  tell  who’s  your  friend;  open 
your  chaps  againe. 

Tn.  I  fhould  know  that  voyce  : 

It  fhould  be, 

But  hee  is  dround;  and  thefe  are  diuels;  O  de¬ 
fend  me. 

Ste.  Foure  legges  and  two  voyces ;  a  moft  delicate 
Monfter :  his  forward  voyce  now  is  to  fpeake  well  of 
his  friend ;  his  backward  voice,  is  to  vtter  foule  fpeeches, 
and  to  detraf! :  if  all  the  wine  in  my  bottle  will  recouer 
him,  I  will  helpe  his  Ague:  Come:  Amen,  I  will 
poure  fome  in  thy  other  mouth. 

Tri.  Stephano. 

Ste.  Doth  thy  other  mouth  call  me  ?  Mercy,  mercy : 

This  is  a  diuell,  and  no  Monfter :  I  will  leaue  him  ,  I 
haue  no  long  Spoone. 

89.  you  Cat]  you,  cat  Rowe,  a  cat 
Han.  your  cat  Cam.  i  conj.  yon  cat 
Gould. 

94,  95.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq. 

94.  be,']  be —  Ff. 

tators.  These  words,  as  applied  to  Caliban,  who  is  supposed  to  be  lying  on  his  face, 
must  be  understood  :  ‘  Come  on  your  side;  open  your  mouth  ’  &c.  The  position  of 
Caliban,  not  permitting  him  to  drink  from  the  bottle.  Stephano,  in  the  phrase  of  a 
mariner,  naturally  addresses  him  ‘  Come  on  your  side.' 

89.  Cat]  Steevens  :  Alluding  to  the  old  proverb  that  ‘  good  liquor  will  make  a 
cat  speak.’ 

101.  Amen]  Capell:  A  benediction  pronounc’d  for  Caliban  after  his  draught, 
then  a  third  time  administer’d.— Steevens  :  It  means,  stop  your  draught;  come  to  a 
conclusion.— W.  A.  Wright  :  That  is,  hold,  stop !— Hudson  :  Stephano  is  fright¬ 
ened,  and  put  to  his  religion;  and  A?nen  !  is  the  best  he  can  do  towards  praying. 
Halliwell  (p.  37)  :  This  is  altered  to  againe  in  early  MS  in  a  copy  of  Fa,  which  was 
sold  by  one  Sarah  Jones  in  1649,  the  MS  notes  apparently  having  been  written  pre¬ 
viously  to  the  latter  date. 

X06.  long  Spoone]  Capell  :  Meaning,  he  had  not  the  heart  to  associate  with 
him,  as  the  Vice  was  made  to  do  with  the  Devil  in  the  ancient  moralities ;  in  which 
it  was  a  piece  of  humour  to  make  the  Devil  and  him  feed  of  the  same  custard  or  some 
such  dish ;  the  Devil  on  one  side  and  the  Vice  on  the  other,  with  a  ‘  spoon  ’  of  vast 
length :  These  two  furnish’d  much  the  same  sport  in  those  times  as  is  exhibited  upon 
our  stage  by  the  Doctor,  or  Pierrot,  and  Harlequin.  A  piece  of  drollery  something 
like  this  was  practis’d  at  their  great  city-feast,  when  the  mayor  enter’d  upon  his  office, 
at  which  time  his  lordship’s  Fool  was  made  to  jump  into  a  great  custard. 


98.  fpeake  well ]  fpeake  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

99.  vtter ]  spatter  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns,  sputter  Anon. 


133 

90 

95 

100 

io5 


»34 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  iL 


Tri.  Stephano :  if  thou  beeft  Slephano ,  touch  me,  and  \Qt) 
fpeake  to  me :  for  I  am  Trinculo ;  be  not  afeard,  thy 
good  friend  Trinailo. 

Ste.  If  thou  bee’ft  Trinculo  :  come  foorth  :  I’le  pull  no 
thee  by  the  leffer  legges :  if  any  be  Trinculo1  s  legges, 
thefe  are  they :  Thou  art  very  Trinculo  indeede :  how 
cam’ft  thou  to  be  the  fiege  of  this  Moone-calfe?  Can 
he  vent  Trinculo1  si 

Tri.  I  tooke  him  to  be  kil’d  with  a  thunder-ftrok  ;  but  1 15 
art  thou  not  dround  Stephano :  I  hope  now  thou  art 
not  dround :  Is  the  Storme  ouer-blowne  ?  I  hid  mee 
vnder  the  dead  Moone-Calfes  Gaberdine,  for  feare  of 
the  Storme  :  And  art  thou  liuing  Stephano  ?  O  Stephano , 
two  Neapolitanes  fcap’d  ?  120 

Ste.  ’Prethee  doe  not  turne  me  about,  my  ftomacke 
is  not  conftant. 

Cal.  Thefe  be  fine  things,  and  if  they  be  not  fprights  : 
that’s  a  braue  God,  and  beares  Celeftiall  liquor :  I  will 
kneele  to  him.  125 

Ste.  How  did’ft  thou  fcape  ? 

How  cam’ft  thou  hither  ? 

Sweare  by  this  Bottle  how  thou  cam’ft  hither :  I  efcap’d 
vpon  a  But  of  Sacke,  which  the  Saylors  heaued  o’re-  129 


108,  153.  afearcT\  afraid  Rowe.  123-125.  Three  lines,  ending  fprights 

1 1 5.  thunder-Jlrok~\  Fx.  ...liquor. ..him.  Grey,  Johns,  et  seq. 

123.  [Aside.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  126-128.  Lines  run  on,  Pope. 

and~\  an  Pope  et  seq. 

113.  Moone-calfe]  An  abortion  or  monstrosity.  Any  Lat.  Diet.  s.  v.  Mola  will 
give  references  to  Pliny,  which  those  curious  in  such  matters  can  look  up,  either  in 
the  original  or  in  the  corresponding  translations  in  Holland’s  Pliny. — Douce  says  (i, 
15)  that  the  ‘best  account  of  this  fabulous  substance  maybe  found  in  Drayton’s  poem 
cf  that  title,’  which  is  incomprehensible. — Dyce  (Gloss.)  quotes  Douce,  without  dis¬ 
sent,  which  is  more  incomprehensible  still,  and  makes  one  doubt  if  that  poem  had 
been  carefully  read  by  either  of  them. — Ed. 

123.  and  if]  See  II,  i,  187. 

129.  Sacke]  ‘  It  seems  to  be  admitted,  on  all  uands,  that  the  term  Sack  was  orig¬ 
inally  applied  to  certain  growths  of  Spain . Dr  Percy  has  the  credit  of  restoring 

the  original  interpretation  of  the  term.  In  a  manuscript  account  of  the  disbursements 
by  the  chamberlain  of  the  city  of  Worcester,  for  the  year  1592,  he  found  the  ancient 
mode  of  spelling  to  be  seek,  ....  and  thence  concluded  that  “  Sack  ”  was  merely  a 
corruption  of  sec,  signifying  a  dry  wine.  Minshew  ....  renders  the  term  vin  sec ; 
and  Cotgrave  gives  the  same  translation.  The  most  satisfactory  evidence,  however 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


*35 


boord,  by  this  Bottle  which  I  made  of  the  barke  of  130 
a  Tree,  with  mine  owne  hands,  fince  I  was  cart  a’- 
fhore. 

Cal.  I’le  fvveare  vpon  that  Bottle,  to  be  thy  true  fub- 
ie£t,  for  the  liquor  is  not  earthly. 

St.  Heere  :  fweare  then  how  thou  efcap’dft.  135 

130I  Bottle ]  bottle  !  Rowe.  ietH  Ktly. 

13 1.  !32-  a'-Jhore ]  Fa.  134.  [Kneeling.  Coll,  ii  (MS). 

133.  [Aside.  Sta.  135.  thou  efcafdji\  escap’dst  thou  t 

I33>  x34-  Two  lines,  first  ends  thy  Pope  + . 

Steev.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. ;  first  ends  fub- 

in  support  of  this  opinion  is  furnished  by  the  French  version  of  a  proclamation  for 
regulating  the  prices  of  wines,  in  1633,  where  the  expression  vins  secs  corresponds 
with  the  word  “  sacks  ”  in  the  original  copy  (Rymer’s  Fcedera,  Tome  viii,  Part  iv,  p. 
46).  It  may  also  be  remarked  that  the  term  sec  is  still  used  as  a  substantive  by  the 
French,  to  denote  a  Spanish  wine  (“  on  dit  aussi  quelquefois  absolument  du  sec ,  pour 
dire,  du  vin  d’Espagne.” — Diet,  de  Trevoux ) ;  and  that  the  dry  wine  of  Xerez  is  dis¬ 
tinguished  at  the  place  of  its  growth  by  the  name  of  vino  seco.  These  several  author¬ 
ities,  then,  appear  to  warrant  the  inference  that  “Sack”  was  a  dry  Spanish  wine. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  numerous  instances  occur  in  which  it  is  mentioned  in  con¬ 
junction  with  wines  of  the  sweet  class.’  [To  reconcile  this  discrepancy  an  elaborate 
examination  here  follows  of  the  characters  ascribed  to  Sack  by  the  few  writers  who 
have  described  it,  with  a  side  reference  to  the  general  custom  of  the  English  to  add 
sugar  to  their  wines,  which  is  generally  considered  a  proof  that  the  wines  thus  treated 
were  dry.]  ‘  The  conclusion  at  which  we  thus  arrive  is  so  far  satisfactory,  as  it  proves 
that  the  wines  formerly  known  under  the  name  of  “Sacks,”  though  they  may,  upon 
the  whole,  have  been  inferior,  yet  differed  in  no  essential  quality  from  those  with 
which  we  are  at  present  supplied  by  the  same  countries  which  originally  produced 
them,  and  which  are  still  held  in  such  deserved  estimation.  They  probably  first  came 
into  favour  in  consequence  of  their  possessing  greater  strength  and  durability,  and 
being  more  free  from  acidity  than  the  white  wines  of  France  and  Germany ;  and  owed 
their  distinctive  appellation  to  that  sub-astringent  taste  which  characterises  all  wines 
prepared  with  gypsum.’ — Henderson’s  Hist,  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Wines,  pp.  298- 
308.  Cited  by  Dyce,  Gloss. 

135.  In  both  the  First  and  the  last  Cambridge  Editions  the  punctuation  of  this  line 
by  Pope  is  said  to  be  :  ‘  swear  then  :  how  escapedst  thou  ?’  (In  the  last  edition,  1891, 
‘  escapedst  ’  is  properly  corrected  to  ‘  escap’dst.’)  In  neither  Pope’s  first  nor  in  his 
second  edition,  that  is,  in  my  copies,  is  the  line  so  punctuated ;  it  reads  :  ‘  swear  then, 
how  escap’dst  thou  ?’  This  would  not  have  been  worth  a  second  thought,  and  would 
have  been  set  down  to  that  percentage  of  misprints  which  is  absolutely  inevitable  in 
every  mortal  book,  had  not  Dyce,  in  both  his  second  and  third  editions,  quoted  the 
line  as  from  Pope  with  exactly  the  same  punctuation  and  with  even  an  additional 
variation.  Pope’s  line,  in  my  copies,  runs  thus :  ‘Ste.  Here :  swear  then,  how  es¬ 
cap’dst  thou?’  Dyce  says:  ‘Pope  gave,  “Ste.  Here,  swear,  then:  how  escapedst 
thou?”  ’  When  the  exactest  of  men  thus  print,  it  tempts  one  to  suppose  that,  as  with 
the  Folios,  so  with  Pope,  different  copies  of  the  same  date  vary.  I  felt  quite  assured 


*36 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii, 


Tri.  Sworn  afhore  (man)  like  a  Ducke:  I  can  fwim  136 
like  a  Ducke  i’le  be  fworne. 

Ste.  Here,  kiffe  the  Booke. 

Though  thou  canft  fwim  like  a  Ducke,  thou  art  made 
like  a  Goofe.  140 

Tri.  O  Stephano,  ha’ ft  any  more  of  this  ? 

Ste.  The  whole  But  (man)  my  Cellar  is  in  a  rocke 
by  th’fea-fide,  where  my  Wine  is  hid  : 

How  now  Moone-Calfe,  how  do’s  thine  Ague  ? 

Cal.  Ha’ft  thou  not  dropt  from  heauen  ?  145 

Ste.  Out  o’th  Moone  I  doe  affure  thee.  I  was  the 
Man  ith’  Moone,  when  time  was. 

Cal.  I  haue  feene  thee  in  her :  and  I  doe  adore  thee  : 

My  Miftris  fhew’d  me  thee,  and  thy  Dog,  and  thy  Bufh.  149 


136.  Sworn]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  swum 
Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Wrt,  Wh,  ii,  Dtn. 
swam  Mai.  et  cet. 

137.  *■’/<•]  Ff. 

138.  139.  Lines  run  on,  Pope. 

140.  like ]  life  F2. 


143,  144.  Lines  run  on,  Pope. 

148,  149.  As  verse,  Steev. 

148.  I  haue]  I've  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

149.  and  thy  Dog,  and  thy  Bufh]  thy 
dog  and  bush  Steev.’93. 

and  thy  Bufh]  and  bush  Knt. 


of  this  when  I  found  Stephano’s  ‘  Marrian,’  line  51,  recorded  in  the  First  Cambridge 
Edition,  as  given  by  Pope,  Mirian.  But  ‘  Marrian,’  in  the  last  edition,  proves  that 
Mirian,  in  the  first,  was  a  misprint;  the  supposition,  therefore,  that  the  copies  of 
Pope  vary,  falls  to  the  ground.— Ed.— Ritson  proposed  that  the  line  should  be 
printed  thus :  ‘Ste.  [ to  Cal.]  Here,  swear  then.  [To  Trin.]  How  escap’dst  thou?’ 
‘The  speaker,’  Ritson  explains,  ‘would  naturally  take  notice  of  Caliban’s  proffered 
allegiance.  Besides,  he  bids  Trinculo  kiss  the  book  after  he  has  answered  the  ques¬ 
tion  ;  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  rectitude  of  the  proposed  arrangement.’  ‘  But,’  says 
Dyce,  ‘  Ritson’s  alteration  is  opposed  by  a  portion  of  Stephano’s  preceding  speech : 
“swear,  by  this  bottle,  how  thou  earnest  hither.”  ’ — Br.  Nicholson  (M  Qu.  3d 
S.  ix,  27)  :  Stephano  having  asked  Trinculo  to  swear  on  the  bottle  how  he  had 
escaped,  exemplifies  precept  by  practice,  and  taking  the  oath  himself  and  kissing  the 
book  explains  how  he  got  safe  to  shore.  T*»en,  in  answer  to  the  monster’s  offer  of 
fealty,  he  swears  him,  and  as  Trinculo,  thirsty  and  afraid  of  Caliban’s  swallow,  would 
possess  himself  of  the  bottle,  he  repulses  him  with :  ‘  And  swear  then,  how  thou 
escapedst  ’ ;  before  I  give  it  to  you,  answer  my  former  question.  When  Trinculo  has 
explained,  he  also  gets  the  book  to  kiss. — Delius,  however,  with  great  plausibility, 
says  that  Stephano  does  not  appear  to  hear  the  interruptions  of  Caliban,  and  that  he 
first  turns  to  him  with  the  words :  ‘  How  now,  moon-calf?’  line  144. — Hudson,  also 
believed  the  whole  line  to  be  addressed  to  Trinculo,  ‘  as  the  whole  context  clearly 
requires  it.  Probably  the  transcriber  or  compositor  supposed  the  speech  addressed 
to  Caliban,  and  sophisticated  it  into  logical  harmony  with  the  idea  by  changing  man 
[as  Hudson  reads  in  his  text]  into  “  then.”  ’ 

I47-  Man  ith  Moone]  The  mass  of  folk-lore  which  has  gathered  around  thij 
man  ’  is  highly  interesting,  but  is  scarcely  appropriate  here. — Ed. 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


1 37 
150 


Ste.  Come,  fweare  to  that :  kiffe  the  Booke :  I  will 
furnifh  it  anon  with  new  Contents.*  Sweare. 

Tri.  By  this  good  light,  this  is  a  very  fhallow  Mon- 
fter :  I  afeard  of  him?  a  very  weake  Monfter: 

The  Man  ith’  Moone  ? 

A  moil  poore  creadulous  Monfter : 

Well  drawne  Monfter,  in  good  footh. 

Cal.  lie  fhew  thee  euery  fertill  ynch  ’oth  Ifland :  and 
I  will  kiffe  thy  foote :  I  prethee  be  my  god. 

Tri.  By  this  light,  a  moft  perfidious,  and  drunken 
Monfter,  when’s  god’s  a  fleepe  he’ll  rob  his  Bottle.  160 

Cal.  lie  kiffe  thy  foot.  He  fweare  my  felfe  thy  Subie<5t. 

Ste.  Come  on  then  :  downe  and  fweare. 

Tri.  I  fhall  laugh  my  felfe  to  death  at  this  puppi -hea¬ 
ded  Monfter.*  a  moft  fcuruie  Monfter:  I  could  finde  in 
my  heart  to  beate  him.  165 

Ste.  Come,  kiffe. 

Tri.  But  that  the  poore  Monfter’s  in  drinke  : 

An  abhominable  Monfter. 

Cal.  I’le  fhew  thee  the  beft  Springs  :  I’le  plucke  thee 
Berries  :  I’le  fifh  for  thee;  and  get  thee  wood  enough.  170 

A  plague  vpon  the  Tyrant  that  I  ferue ; 

I’le  beare  him  no  more  Stickes,  but  follow  thee,  thou 
wondrous  man.  173 


151.  with  new]  with  the  new  Ff, 
Rowe  i. 

Contents']  Contexts  Daniel. 

153.  weake]  Jhallow  Ff,  Rowe+. 
154-156.  Lines  run  on,  Pope. 

156.  drawne]  sworn  Daniel. 

157,  158.  Two  lines  of  verse,  Johns. 

157.  thee]  the  F3F4. 

//land]  Ijle  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap. 
Steev.’85. 

158.  I  will]  Om.  Ritson,  Steev.’93. 


I’ll  Dyce. 

160.  when’s]  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Wh.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Rife,  Dtn.  when 
his  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 

162.  [Cal.  lies  down.  Coll,  ii  (MS). 

1 65.  him.]  him —  Pope  et  seq.  (subs,). 

167,  168.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq. 

169, 170.  /’ lejhew... Berries]  One  line, 
Pope  et  seq. 

172,  173.  thou. ..man]  One  line,  Pope 
et  seq. 


I49.  My  Mistris]  A  corroborative  proof  that  the  Folio  is  right  in  giving  to 
Vliranda  the  lines  I,  ii,  413-424.  She  there  tells  Caliban  that  in  the  days  of  his 
nnocency  she  ‘taught  him  each  hour  one  thing  or  other.’ — Ed. 

159,  160.  perfidious  .  .  .  rob]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Sod) :  Caliban,  apparently, 
while  he  speaks  of  kneeling  to  kiss  Stephano’s  foot,  makes  such  demonstrations  that 
Trinculo  thinks  it  all  a  mere  trick  to  get  the  bottle.  Plence  the  ‘  perfidious  ’  and  the 
‘  robbing.’ 


i38 


THE  TEMPEST 


[aci  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Trt.  A  mod  rediculous  Monfter,  to  make  a  wonder  of 
a  px>re  drunkard.  175 

Cal.  I  ’prethee  let  me  bring  thee  where  Crabs  grow ; 
and  I  with  my  long  nayles  will  digge  thee  pig-nuts ; 
fhow  thee  a  Iayes  neft,  and  inftrudl  thee  how  to  fnare 
the  nimble  Marmazet :  Fie  bring  thee  to  cluflring 
Philbirts,  and  fometimes  Fie  get  thee  young  Scamels  180 
from  the  Rocke :  Wilt  thou  goe  with  me  ? 


176-181.  Lines  end, grow;... pig-nuts; 
...how. ..bring  thee  ...get  thee  ...me  ?  Pope 
et  seq. 

178.  Iayes ]  Jay's  P'3F4- 

179.  Marmazet']  marmoset  Cap. 

180.  Scamels]  Ff.  Shamois  Theob. 


Warb.  Sea-malls  Han.  Sea-mels  Mai. 
Ktly.  sea-mells  Steev.’93,  Var.  C.  Clke. 
Staniels  Theob.  conj.  Huds.  muscles 
Wilson,  chamals  or  stamels  Ingleby  (ap. 
Cam.),  conies  Kinnear. 

1 81.  Rocke]  ock  Pope  i,  ii. 


176.  Crabs]  Of  course,  the  apple  of  that  name. 

!77-  pig-nuts]  Grindon  [Sh.  Flora ,  p.  265) :  Shakespeare  here  gives  preference 
to  the  less  usual,  though  quite  as  suitable,  English  name  of  that  very  pretty  and  inter¬ 
esting  plant,  the  Bunium  fiexuosutn  [  Chenopodium  denudatum ,  ap.  Ellacombe]  of  the 
botanists.  In  England,  in  its  way,  the  pig-nut  is  unique.  The  aerial  portion  reminds 
one  of  hemlock,  of  which,  indeed,  this  plant  is  a  near  ally,  only  that  every  part  is  in 
miniature,  and  that  the  umbels,  before  blooming,  are  pendulous.  The  usual  height 
of  the  stem  is  about  fifteen  inches.  Below  the  surface  of  the  ground  it  bends  to  and 
fro  in  the  most  curiously  irregular  manner,  diminishing  in  thickness  at  every  turn,  till 
at  last  we  reach  the  round,  brown  nut,  white  inside,  and  of  a  pleasant  nutty  flavour. 
There  is  no  pulling  it  up  by  force.  Shakespeare  had  learned  in  his  boyhood  that  the 
pig-nut  is  won  alone  by  patience  and  perseverance. 

178.  Iayes  nest]  See  V,  i,  104. 

179.  Marmazet]  W.  A.  Wright:  The  animal  known  at  present  by  this  name 
is  a  native  of  South  America,  but  the  word  is  found  in  the  language  long  before  the 
discovery  of  America.  In  Maundevile’s  Travels  (ed.  Halliwell,  1866),  p.  210,  we 
read,  t  in  that  Hille  and  in  that  Gardyn,  ben  many  dyverse  Bestes,  as  of  Apes,  Mar- 
mozettes,  Babewynes,  and  many  other  dyverse  Bestes.’  The  following  definition 
occurs  in  an  early  Latin  and  English  Dictionary,  Bibliotheca  Eliot®  (1548)  :  ‘  Cerco- 
pithecus,  an  ape  with  a  taile,  called  a  marmoset.’ 

180.  Philbirts]  Ellacombe  (p.  87) :  Dr  Prior  has  decided  that  ‘  Filbert  ’  is  a  bar¬ 

barous  compound  of  phillon  or  feuille,  a  leaf,  and  beard ,  to  denote  its  distinguishing 
peculiarity,  the  leafy  involucre  projecting  beyond  the  nut.  But  in  the  times  of  Shake¬ 
speare  the  name  was  more  poetically  said  to  be  derived  from  the  nymph  Phyllis . 

The  Nut,  the  Filbert,  and  the  Cobnut  are  all  botanically  the  same,  and  the  two  last 
were  cultivated  in  England,  long  before  Shakespeare’s  time,  not  only  for  the  fruit,  but 
also,  and  more  especially,  for  the  oil.  [The  derivation  is  uncertain.] 

180.  Scamels]  Theobald  :  Shakespeare  must  certainly  either  have  wrote  Shamois , 
1.  e.  young  kids ;  or  Sea-malls.  The  Sea-mall,  or  Sea-mell,  or  Sea-mew  (according 
to  Willoughby)  is  that  bird  which  is  call’d  Lams  cinereus  minor ;  it  feeds  on  fish 
and  frequents  the  banks  of  lakes.  It  is  not  impossible,  but  our  Poet  might  here  intend 
this  bird.  Or  again  (and  which  comes  near  to  <  Scamel  ’  in  the  traces  of  the  Letters) 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


139 


[180.  Scamels] 

Ray  tells  us  of  another  bird,  call’d  the  Stannel ,  of  the  Hawk  species.  It  is  no  matter 
which  of  the  three  readings  we  embrace,  so  we  take  a  word  signifying  the  name  of 
something  in  Nature.— Holt  (p.  57)  :  The  shell-fish,  called  the  Limpet,  are  called 
in  some  countries  Scams ;  they  are  found  on  the  Rocks,  and  are  by  many  reckoned 
delicious  food ;  and  from  these  Shakespeare  might  take  the  liberty  to  form  a  diminu¬ 
tive,  and  make  his  word  *  Scamels.’ — Steevens  :  An  e,  by  careless  printers,  was 
easily  changed  into  a  c,  and  from  this  accident,  I  believe,  all  the  difficulty  arises,  the 
word  having  been  spelt  by  the  transcriber  seamels.  Had  Holt  told  us  in  what  part 
of  England  limpets  are  called  scams,  more  regard  would  have  been  paid  to  his  asser¬ 
tion.  I  should  suppose,  at  all  events,  a  bird  to  have  been  design’d,  as,  young  and  old 
fish  are  taken  with  equal  facility ;  but  young  birds  are  more  easily  surprised  than  old 
ones.  Besides,  Caliban  had  already  offered  to  ‘  fish  ’  for  Stephano. — Malone  :  In 
Lincolnshire,  as  I  learn  from  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  the  name  sea-mall  is  applied  to  all 
the  smaller  species  of  gulls. — In  the  Shakespeare  Society's  Papers,  iii,  170,  J.  Allies 
proposed  as  a  possible  conjecture  the  word  samol,  the  name  of  a  plant,  referred  to  in 
Whitaker’s  Hist,  of  Manchester,  ii,  130,  as  a  ‘peculiar  favourite  of  the  Druids,’  and 
which  was  ‘probably  the  seamar,  or  wild  trefoil,  to  which  the  Irish  Britons  pay  a  par¬ 
ticular  attention  at  the  present  day,  wearing  it  in  their  hats  on  St  Patrick’s  Day  under 
the  diminutive  appellation  of  seamrog.’ — Hunter  (i,  155):  To  Theobald’s  sugges¬ 
tions  may  be  added  samphire  and  squirrel.  Sea-mew  may  seem  the  most  probable 
‘scamel,’  seamel,  sea-mew,  as  Melrose  is,  in  popular  speech,  Mewrus. — Anon.  {Gent. 
Mag.  June,  1844)  :  The  true  reading,  we  think,  is  that  which  has  escaped  all  com¬ 
mentators,  viz:  seegell.  ‘  Adpoq,  gavia,  a  seacob  or  seegell;’  see  Avium  principua 
rum  historia  per  G.  Turnerum,  1544.  The  seagull  or  seamew  in  Suffolk  is  always 
called  the  ‘  seacob,’  therefore  the  seegell  is  the  common  seamew.  [The  same  con¬ 
tributor,  a  year  later,  in  June,  1845,  upheld  this  emendation  on  the  ground  that] 
‘  Caliban  was  a  gross  sensual  monster,  whose  belly  was  his  god ;  all,  therefore,  he 
promised  to  give  Trinculo  were  things  that  could  be  eaten,  pignuts,  young  jays,  mar¬ 
mosets,  filberds,  and  young  sea-gulls,  but  no  one  would  think  of  hawks  as  provender 
[this  is  an  allusion  to  Dyce’s  staniel. — Ed.],  except  the  Knight  in  Boccacio.’  [Dyce 
answered  this  criticism  by  asking,  in  his  subsequent  edition :  ‘  did  Caliban  mean 
that  his  new  friend  should  eat  “  the  nimble  marmoset  ”  ?’  The  thrust  would 
have  been  driven  closer  home,  I  think,  if  Dyce  had  asked  whether  Caliban  expected 
Stephano  to  eat  jays-nests. — Ed.] — Knight:  We  believe  there  is  no  such  word  as 
sea-mell  or  sea-mall,  although  there  is  sea-maw  or  sea-mew. — Dyce,  in  his  Remarks 
(p.  5),  proposed  staniels,  unaware  that  Theobald  had  in  fact  anticipated  him; 
he  became  aware  of  it,  however,  before  his  edition  of  Shakespeare  appeared, 
and,  as  he  incorporated  in  a  note  in  that  edition  his  former  ‘  Remarks,’  that 
note  is  here  substantially  given :  ‘  “  Scamels  ”  has  been  explained  as  the  diminu¬ 
tive  of  scams,  and  as  meaning  limpets.  But  I  have  little  or  no  doubt  that  it  is  a 
misprint;  for  who  gathers  young  limpets  ?  and,  besides,  the  words  “  from  the  rock  ” 
would  seem  to  be  equivalent  to  from  the  cliffs.  Of  Theobald’s  conjecture,  stannels,  I 
was  not  aware  when  in  my  Remarks,  &c.  I  wrote  as  follows :  Knight  is  mistaken  in 
supposing  that  there  is  no  such  word  as  sea-mall.  R.  Holme,  after  describing  the 
Sea-mew,  has  a  separate  article  on  “  The  Sea  Mall ;  the  bill  white,  but  yellow  to¬ 
wards  the  tip,  bending,”  &c. — Academy  of  Armory,  1688,  ii,  262.  But  though  there 
is  undoubtedly  such  a  word  as  sea-mall,  and  though  perhaps  there  is  also  such  a  word 
•s  sea-mell,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  “  scamels  ”  {without  a  hyphen  and  with  a 


140 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Ste.  I  pre’thee  now  lead  the  way  without  any  more  182 


182.  Ste.]  Cal.  Ff. 


tingle  l)  should  be  a  misprint  for  either  sea-malls  or  sea-mells.  Qy.  is  the  right  read¬ 
ing  staniels  ?  In  the  first  place,  staniels  comes  very  near  the  trace  of  the  old  letters. 
Secondly,  staniels  accords  well  with  the  context,  “  from  the  rock  ” ;  for  the  “  Kestrel, 
Stannel,  or  Windhover  ....  is  one  of  our  most  common  species  [of  Hawks],  espe- 
cially  in  the  more  rocky  situations  and  high  cliffs  on  our  coasts,  where  they  breed.”— 
Montagu’s  Ornith.  Diet.  Thirdly,  in  another  passage  of  Shakespeare,  where  nobody 
doubts  that  the  genuine  reading  is  staniel,  all  the  old  eds.  exhibit  the  gross  misprint 
stallion :  “And  with  what  wing  the  stallion  checks  at  it!” — Twel.  Night,  II,  v.’ — 
White  (ed.  i)  :  The  question  is  not  of  great  consequence;  and  the  original  word  is 
quite  as  likely  to  be  right  as  either  of  those  which  it  has  been  proposed  to  substitute. 
— Jourdain  :  I  propose  to  read  scalions  ( Scalion ,  chibboll,  or  yong  ciue. — Minsheu, 
1617),  or  sarcel,  which  I  find  in  Phillips’s  New  World  of  Words,  167 8.  Minsheu 
gives  sarcelle  as  the  French  for  Teal;  and  Cotgrave :  ‘ Cercelle  [The  water  fowle 
called)  a  Teale  ’ ;  so  that  sarcels  may  be  the  word  we  want. — Rev.  John  Hunter  : 
I  prefer  to  trust  stamels  as  the  true  reading,  because  stamel  was  a  common  name  for  a 
light-red  colour,  and  might  designate  some  bird  of  that  colour. — Harting  (p.  269) : 
It  is  evident  that  the  sea-mall,  sea-mew,  or  sea-gull  is  intended,  the  young  birds  being 
taken  before  they  could  fly.  Young  sea-gulls  were  formerly  considered  great  deli¬ 
cacies,  and  in  the  old  ‘  Household  Books  ’  we  often  find  such  entries  as  the  follow¬ 
ing  :  ‘  Item,  it  is  thought  goode  that  Sea-gulles  be  hade  for  my  Lordes  own  mees  and 
non  other,  so  they  be  goode  and  in  season,  and  at  jd.  apece,  or  jd.  ob.  at  the  moste.’ — 
Meissner  (p.  141)  having  found  in  Strachey’s  True  Repertory,  &c.,  printed  in  Pur- 
chas,  an  account  (p.  1741)  of  some  birds  which  ‘for  their  blindnesse  (for  they  see 
weakly  in  the  day)  and  for  their  cry  and  whooting  we  called  the  Sea  Owle,’  suggests 
that  sea-owls  might  be  preferable  even  to  Theobald’s  sea-mells,  especially  since  ‘Ariel 

seems  to  refer  to  these  sea-owls  in  the  line  :  “  There  I  couch  when  owls  do  cry.”  ’ _ 

W.  A.  Wright:  There  is  reason  to  suppose,  as  Caliban  says  ‘sometimes,’  that  the 
word  must  be  the  name  of  a  bird,  and  Mr  Stevenson,  in  his  Birds  of  Norfolk,  ii,  260, 
tells  us  that  the  female  Bar-tailed  Godwit  is  called  a  ‘  scamell  ’  by  the  gunners  of 
Blakeney.  But  as  this  bird  is  not  a  rock-breeder,  it  cannot  be  the  one  intended  in 
the  present  passage  if  we  regard  it  as  an  accurate  description  from  a  naturalist’s  point 
of  view.  We  must  suppose  therefore  either  that  the  description  is  not  strictly  accu¬ 
rate,  or  that  in  Shakespeare’s  time  the  word  ‘  scamel  ’  may  have  had  a  wider  applica- 
Bulloch  (p.  21) :  ‘  Scamels  ’  is  more  likely  to  have  been  a  coinage  put  into 
the  mouth  of  Caliban,  a  generic  term  signifying  different  creatures,  birds  or  quad¬ 
rupeds,  frequenters  of  rocky  heights,  and  named  by  him  as  scambles,  from  the  verbs 
scamble  and  scumbling.—).  D.  (N.  &  Qu.  5th  S.  xii,  5,  1879)  maintains  that  the 
original  word  is  right  and  of  Scandinavian  origin.  In  old  Norse,  skama  means  a  pod 

or  husk,  but  primarily  a  shell,  and  ‘  scamel  ’  will  mean  a  little  shell . We  shall 

not  be  far  wrong  if  we  identify  it  with  the  limpet.  I  propose,  therefore,  to  read : 

‘  Young  limpets  from  the  rock.’ 

181.  Rocke]  If  we,  at  this  late  day,  are  puzzled  over  ‘scamels,’  can  we  picture 
the  amazement  which  must  have  filled  the  souls  of  our  forebears  when  they  read  in 
Pope’s  edition,  both  the  first  and  the  second,  that  not  only  did  Caliban  propose  to  get 
scamels,’  but  they  were  to  be  ‘  scamels  from  the  ock  ’ ! — Ed. 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


141 

talking.  Trinculo,  the  King,  and  all  our  company  elfe  183 
being  dround,  wee  will  inherit  here :  Here ;  beare  my 
Bottle:  Fellow  Trinculo ;  we’ll  fill  him  by  and  by  a-  185 
gaine. 

Caliban  Sings  drunkenly. 

Farewell  Matter ;  farewell,  farewell. 

Tri.  A  howling  Monfter:  a  drunken  Monfter. 

Cal.  No  more  dams  Pie  make  for  fifk ,  190 

Nor  fetch  in  firing ,  at  requiring, 

Nor  fcrape  trenchering ,  nor  wafk  difh , 

Bari!  barf  Cacalyban 

Has  a  new  Mafler )  get  a  new  Man.  194 

188.  In  Italics,  or  as  part  of  Caliban’s  Hal.  Sing.  Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Sta. 
song,  Rowe  ii  et  seq.  C.  Clke,  Dtn. 

192.  trenchering]  trencher  Pope  +  ,  193.  Cacalyban]  Ca-Caliban  Cap. 


184.  Cambridge  Editors  (1863) :  Before  ‘  here ;  bear  my  bottle  ’  Capell  inserts  a 
stage -direction  [‘  To  Cal.’], but  it  appears  from  III,  ii,  68,  that  Trinculo  was  entrusted 
with  the  office  of  bottle-bearer. — 1891.  Dr  Nicholson  thinks  that  in  this  scene  Trinculo 
had  a  bottle  of  his  own. — Dyce,  after  quoting  the  foregoing  note  as  it  appeared  in 
the  First  Cambridge  Edition,  adds :  ‘  Perhaps  so.  But  in  a  still  later  scene  Trinculo 
talks  of  “  our  bottles .”  ’  [See  Stage-Directions,  III,  ii,  Textual  Notes.] 

188.  Farewell,  &c.]  Collier  :  It  may  be  questioned  whether  Caliban  is  to  sing 
these  words,  and  in  the  old  copies  they  are  not  printed  in  Italic  type,  like  his  song, 
although  we  have  the  stage-direction  [to  that  effect].  Neither  is  the  line  in  the  same 
measure  as  his  song. 

192.  trenchering]  Ritson  (p.  6) :  The  word  is  not  so  very  improper  [as  to  be 
discarded  for  trencher].  Housing  is  one  of  the  same  kind.  Rightly  trencher en, 
housen.  The  participle  beholden  is,  by  a  similar  mistake,  everywhere,  in  the  old 
editions,  beholding. — Dyce  {Remarks,  p.  5)  :  Read  trencher.  That  ‘  trenchering  ’  is 
an  error  of  the  printer  (or  transcriber),  occasioned  by  the  preceding  words  ‘fir mg’ 
and  ‘  requiring,’  is  beyond  a  doubt. — White:  Surely  [the  editors  who  read  trencher] 
must  all  have  forgotten  that  Caliban  was  drunk,  and  after  singing  ‘  firing  ’  and  ‘  requir¬ 
ing,’  would  naturally  sing  ‘  trenchering.’  There  is  a  drunken  swing  in  the  original 
line  which  is  entirely  lost  in  the  precise,  curtailed  rhythm  of  [the  emended  line]. 

193.  Ban’]  Malone,  instigated  probably  (though  he  does  not  say  so)  by  Capell 
( Notes,  vol.  i,  pt  ii,  p.  183),  says  that  ‘  perhaps  our  author  remembered  a  song  of  Sir 
Philip  Sidney’s :  “  Da,  da,  da — Deridan.”  ’  If  Shakespeare  did  remember  it,  his 
memory  partially  deserted  him;  it  recalled  only  about  a  quarter  of  the  jargon,  which, 
in  full,  is :  ‘Fa  la  la  la  leridan,  dan  dan  dan  deridan ;  Dan  dan  dan  deridan  deridan 
dei.’ — Arcadia,  p.  486,  ed.  1598;  as  the  song  is  there  said  to  be  written  ‘  To  the  tune 
of  a  Neapolitan  Villanell,’  let  us  hope  that  the  music  imparted  a  charm  which  the 
unaccompanied  words  cannot  be  said  to  possess.  Caliban’s  words  are  not  a  refrain, 
but  the  effect  of  his  intoxication. — Ed. 

194.  get  a  new  Man]  Capell:  Before  [these  words]  supply  Old  master;  he 
explains  it  in  action  by  a  contemptuous  throwing-out  of  his  arm  towards  Prospero’s 


THE  TEMPEST 


142 


[act  hi,  sc.  L 


Freedome,  high-day,  high-day  freedome,  freedome  high-  195 
day,  freedome. 

Ste.  O  braue  Monfter  ;  lead  the  way.  Exeunt. 


APtus  Tertius.  Sccena  Prima. 


Enter  Ferdinand  {beating  a  Log.) 

Fer.  There  be  fome  Sports  are  painfull ;  &  their  labor 
Delight  in  them  fet  off :  Some  kindes  of  bafeneffe 
Are  nobly  vndergon  ;  and  moft  poore  matters  5 

Point  to  rich  ends :  this  my  meane  Taske 
Would  be  as  heauy  to  me,  as  odious,  but 
The  Miftris  which  I  ferue,  quickens  what’s  dead, 

And  makes  my  labours,  pleafures :  O  She  is 

Ten  times  more  gentle,  then  her  Father’s  crabbed ;  10 

And  he’s  compos’d  of  harfhneffe.  I  muft  remoue 

Some  thoufands  of  thefe  Logs,  and  pile  them  vp, 

Vpon  a  fore  iniun<5tion ;  my  fweet  Miftris 

Weepes  when  fhe  fees  me  worke,  &  faies,  fuch  bafenes 

Had  neuer  like  Executor :  I  forget :  1 5 

But  thefe  fweet  thoughts,  doe  euen  refrefh  my  labours, 


195.  high-day']  hey-day  Rowe. 

2.  Prospero’s  Cave.  Pope.  Before  Pros- 
pero’s  Cell.  Theob. 

3.  dr*]  but  Pope  + ,  Steev. 

4.  fet]  sets  Rowe  et  seq. 

5.  moft  poore]  most-poor  Warb. 

6.  7.  Point...  Would  be]  One  line, 
Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 


7.  as]  as  ’tis  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Dyce  ii, 
iii. 

1 1 .  remoue]  move  Pope  + . 

15.  Executor]  executer  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns. 

16.  labours]  labour  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Johns.  Hal.  Sing.  Sta.  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Hunter,  Huds.  Kinnear. 


cell. — Steevens  :  When  Caliban  sings  this  last  part  of  his  ditty,  he  must  be  supposed 
to  turn  his  head  scornfully  towards  the  cell  of  Prospero,  whose  service  he  had  de¬ 
serted.  [As  will  be  seen,  Steevens  merely  echoes  Capell,  as  so  often  happens,  but  in 
this  case  I  doubt  if  the  words  apply  to  Prospero.  I  think  the  second  ‘  get  ’  is  used 
in  the  sense  of  become.  He  has  a  new  master,  and  will  become  a  new  man. Ed.] 

3.  be]  In  a  majority  of  cases  the  use  of  ‘be’  is  determined,  I  think,  by  euphony. 
See  Abbott,  §  300 ;  and  for  the  common  omission  of  the  relative  before  ‘  are  ’  com¬ 
pare  a  line  quite  parallel  to  this,  I,  ii,  533:  ‘There’s  nothing  ill  can  dwell,’  &c.,  or 
see  Abbott,  §  244. 

3.  painfull]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Not  such  as  cause  pain  or  distress,  but  such  as 
require  the  player  to  take  pains  or  employ  labour. 

3,  4.  Malone  :  Cf.  ‘  The  labour  we  delight  in  physiclcs  pain.’ — Afacb.  II,  iii,  55. 

3-16.  their  labor  .  .  .  my  labours]  Allen  (Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  p.  36) :  The  ques- 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


M3 


[3-16.  their  labor  .  .  .  my  labours] 

don, — and  it  is  a  perplexing  one, — is,  which  is  the  Nom.  to  ‘set  off’ — ‘labour’  or 
‘  delight  ’  ?  First,  it  may  be  ‘  labour  ’ ;  and  then  the  meaning  will  be,  ‘  The  labour 
(pains)  of  the  sports  is  a  foil  to,  and  thus  sets  off  [i.  e.  heightens,  brings  out),  the 
delight ,  which  is  taken  in  them.’  This  is  favoured  by  the  ‘  and,’  which  may  thus 
retain  its  natural  force,  and  is  not  made  to  do  duty  for  the  adversative  but,  as  also  by 
the  fact,  that  such  is  the  sense,  in  which  ‘  set  off’  is  most  frequently  used  by  Shake¬ 
speare.  E.  g. :  ‘  like  bright  metal  on  a  sullen  ground,  My  reformation  ....  Shall 
fhow  more  goodly  ....  Than  that  which  hath  no  foil  to  fet  it  off." — 1  Hen.  IV:  I, 
ii,  204.  *  If  the  prince  put  thee  into  my  fervice  for  any  other  reafon  than  to  fet  me 

off-' — 2  Hen.  IV:  I,  ii,  13.  ‘It  is  place,  which  leffens  and  /els  off.’ — Cymb.  Ill,  iii, 
13.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sequence  of  Nom.,  Acc.,  Verb,  appears  to  be  less  natural 
than  Acc.,  Nom.,  Verb.  But  if  this  construction  be  accepted,  the  reading  ‘  labours 
fet  off’ — inasmuch  as  it  removes  all  ambiguity — is  more  likely  to  be  the  true  one,  than 
‘labour  fetr  off.’  Secondly,  ‘  delight  ’  may  be  the  Nom.,  and  then  the  meaning  must 
be,  either  ( a )  ‘  delight  [in  the  sports]  sets  off,  like  an  ornament,  the  labour,  which 
accompanies  them,’  or  (b)  ‘  delight  [in  the  sports]  cancels,  removes,  is  a  set-off  against, 
the  labour.’  Shakespeare  has  ‘set  off’  once,  at  least,  in  the  former  sense  ( a ) :  ‘  He 
hath  a  kind  of  honour  fets  him  off,  More  than  mortal  feeming.’ — Cymb.  I,  vi,  170., 
But  this  would  be  making  labour  the  principal,  and  delight  a  mere  accessary,  in  sports. 
In  the  latter  sense  (£)  ‘  set  off’  occurs  two  or  three  times.  E.  g.  :  ‘  By  my  hopes, 
The  prefent  enterprife  fet  off  his  head,  I  do  not  think  a  braver  gentleman  ....  is 
now  alive.’ — 1  Hen.  IV:  V,  i,  88.  (Here  ‘set  off ’  =  taken  from  his  account,  says 
Steevens.)  ‘And  wherein  It  ihall  appear,  that  your  demands  are  juft,  You  fhall  enjoy 
them,  everything  fet  off  That  might  fo  much  as  think  you  enemies.’ — 2  Hen.  IV:  IV, 
i,  143.  The  strongest  argument,  however,  in  favour  of  construing  ‘  delight  ’  as  the 
Nom.,  is  derived  from  observing  the  manner  in  which  the  same  proposition,  so  under¬ 
stood,  recurs  in  the  speech.  Let  the  skeleton  be  printed  thus,  to  indicate  what  sen¬ 
tences  are  parallel : 

‘  There  be  fome  J 'ports  are  painful,  and  their  labor* 

Delight  in  them  sets  off  :  fome  kinds  of  bafenefs 

Are  nobly  undergone ;  and  mofl-poor  matters 

Point  to  rich  ends.  This  my  mean  talk 

Would  be  as  heavy  to  me,  as  odious ;  but 

The  mistress  which  I  serve  quickens  what’s  dead 

And  makes  my  labours  pleasures. - 

- 1  forget : 

But  these  sweet  thoughts  do  even  refresh  my  labours.’ 

That  is :  When,  to  illustrate  his  proposition  by  repeating  it  under  other  forms,  Ferdi¬ 
nand  says,  First,  that  his  mistress  quickens  what’s  dead,  Secondly,  that  his  mistress 
makes  pleasures  of  his  labours.  Thirdly,  that  his  sweet  thoughts  of  Miranda  do  even 
refresh  his  labours,  we  can  hardly  doubt,  that  such  proposition  lay  in  his  mind  under 
the  corresponding  form  of  ‘  the  delight,  which  I  am  experiencing,  cancels  my  labouis.’ 
If  against  this  apparently  decisive  argument  it  be  urged,  that  in  that  case  ‘  and  ’ 
becomes  unwarrantably  equivalent  to  but  (as  Pope  and  others  have,  in  fact,  written 
it),  it  may  be  replied,  that  where  the  two  propositions  were  at  once  felt  to  be  adversa¬ 
tive,  Shakespeare  might  choose  (after  the  manner  of  the  Parataxis  or  Coordination  so 


[ACT  III,  sc.  i. 


THE  TEMPEST 


I44 

Moft  bufie  left,  when  I  doe  it. 

17.  Moji  bufte  lefl,~\  Cam.  Glo.  Wrt, 
Wh.  ii.  Moji  bufie  leajl ,  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt 
ii.  Least  busie  Pope,  Han.  Most  busie 
less,  (or  busy-less,  or  busiless )  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Sing,  i,  Knt  i,  Hal.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Dtn. 
Most  busy,  least  Heath,  Coll.  Dyce  i, 
C.  Clke,  Hunter,  Fumivall,  Rife.  Most 
busiest  Holt,  Sing,  ii,  Wh.  i,  Kinnear, 


Enter  Miranda  17 

Irving.  Most  busied  Beisly  (N.  &  Qu. 
3d  S.  v,  229).  Most  busy  lost  Whistler 
(N.  &  Qu.  3d  S.  viii,  432).  Line  omitted, 
Cartwright  conj. 

17.  Mofi...it.~\  Most  busy  left  when 
idlest  Cam.  i  conj.  Jeph.  Most  busyliest 
when  jaded  Bulloch  (N.  &  Qu.  July, 
1876).  Most  busily  then  I  do  it,  or  Most 
lustily  then  I'll  to  it  Orger. 


frequent  in  Homer)  to  dispense  with  a  special  exponent  of  the  relation  and  to  make 

use  of  a  mere  connective. — As  I  had  proposed  to  write  labors  for  ‘  labor,’  if  a  Nom., 

to  do  away  with  all  ambiguity,  so  I  have  given  ‘labour?’  Acc.  (along  with  ‘  fetr  off’ 
Sing.)  with  the  same  view.  It  is  an  easy  emendation — the  loss  of  a  final  s,  at  the  end 
of  a  line,  being  an  ordinary  misprint.  Besides,  Shakespearian  Grammar  seems  almost 
imperatively  to  require  it.  Cf.  post  III,  iii,  88 :  ‘  Your  fwords  are  now  too  malfy  for 
your  Jlrengths.'  And  so  everywhere  the  Poet  expresses  himself  collectively  and  not 

(as  we  should  do)  distributively. 

5.  most  poore  matters]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  This  maybe  understood  either  as  the 

superlative  of  ‘  poor,’  equivalent  to  ‘  matters  most  poor  ’  [see  Warburton,  Text.  Notes]  ; 

or  it  may  be  equivalent  to  ‘  the  greater  part  of  poor  matters.’  ‘  Matters  ’  (equivalent 
to  7T pay /card),  not  things,  objects,  but  transactions,  operations. 

8.  which]  Abbott,  §  265 :  ‘  Which  ’  is  often  used  for  that  where  the  personal 
antecedent  is  vocatively  used  or  preceded  by  the  article  [as  here.  Compare  I,  ii, 
414:  ‘Abhorred  slave,  Which,’  &c.]. 

13.  sore  iniunction]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  That  is,  ‘  upon  an  injunction  laid  upon 
me  under  a  sore  penalty.’ 

^S- 1 7-  I  forget  .  .  .  doe  it]  This  passage  has  received  a  greater  number  of  emen¬ 
dations  and  staggers  under  a  heavier  weight  of  comment  than,  I  believe,  any  other 
in  Shakespeare,  not  excepting  even  Juliet’s  ‘  runaways  eyes  ’ ;  and  yet  the  passage 
is  by  no  means  incomprehensible  as  it  stands;  in  fact,  one  can  scarcely  read  it,  or 
hear  it,  without  at  once  apprehending  its  drift.  It  is,  possibly,  to  this  clearness  that 
all  the  attention  bestowed  upon  it,  is  due.  When  an  ailment  is  on  the  surface  aud 
is  manifest,  there  is  no  lack  of  infallible  nostrums.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  wise 
words  of  Dr  Johnson  have  been  so  little  heeded.  ‘  In  perusing  a  corrupted  piece,’ 
says  that  great  man,  ‘  an  emendatory  critic  must  have  before  him  all  possibilities  of 
meaning,  with  all  possibilities  of  expression.  Such  must  be  his  comprehension  of 
thought  and  such  his  copiousness  of  language.  Out  of  many  readings  possible,  he 
must  be  able  to  select  that  which  best  suits  with  the  state,  opinions,  and  modes  of 
language  prevailing  in  every  age,  and  with  his  author’s  particular  cast  of  thought  and 
turn  of  expression.  Such  must  be  his  knowledge  and  such  his  taste.  Conjectural 
criticism  demands  more  than  humanity  possesses,  and  he  that  exercises  it  with  most 
praise  has  very  frequent  need  of  indulgence.’  Be  this  indulgence  granted  in  advance, 
and  an  act  of  such  heroic  charity  will  e’en  refresh  our  labours  in  wading  through  the 
following  pages.  A  majority  of  the  emendations  is  really  concerned  only  with  the 
three  words,  ‘  most  busie  lest,’  but  I  have  deemed  it  best  to  include,  chronologically 
under  these  words,  comments  and  emendations  of  the  whole  sentence. — Pope  changed 
the  words  of  the  Folios  into * * *  4 5 * * 8  Least  busie  when  I  do  it,’  and  contented  himself  with 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


145 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

recording  ‘  Most  busy  least  ’  at  the  foot  of  the  page,  and  was  duly  followed  by  Han- 
MER,  his  solitary  admirer,  who,  in  addition,  substituted  Nay  at  the  beginning  of  line 
16  instead  of  ‘But.’— To  Theobald  is  due  an  emendation  which,  of  all  that  have 
been  proposed,  has  received  by  far  the  largest  number  of  followers.  His  text  reads: 

I  forget;  But  these  sweet  thoughts  do  ev’n  refresh  my  labour,  Most  busie-less,  when 
I  do  it  ’ ;  his  modest  note  thereon  states  that  ‘  the  corruption  [of  the  Folio]  is  so  very 
little  remov’d  from  the  truth  of  the  text,  that  I  can’t  afford  to  think  well  of  my  own 
sagacity  for  having  discover’d  it.’— Dr  Johnson  adopted  it,— not  only  adopted  it,  but 
actually  incorporated  busyless  in  his  Diet,  as  Shakespeare’s  own  word;  Johnson’s 
latest  editor,  Latham,  strongly  condemns  it,  however,  as  a  derivation.  *  The  proper 
use  of  - less  is,’  says  the  latter,  *  to  stand  as  an  affix  to  a  substantive,  denoting  the 
absence  of  the  character  which  that  substantive  suggests.  Noiseless  means  “  without 
noise,”  and  the  strictly  grammatical  compound  meaning  “without  business”  is  the 
awkward  word  business-less ;  there  being  not  only  no  such  substantive  as  busy,  but  a 
good  reason  against  coining  one,  viz:  the  fact  of  -y  =  Anglosaxon  -ig,  being  a  charac¬ 
teristic  adjectival  ending.’ — The  first  antagonist  of  busie-less  was  Holt  :  ‘  If,1  he  said 
(p.  58),  ‘  Ferdinand  was  busy-less  in  his  labour,  i.  e.  if  his  work  consisted  in  doing 
nothing,  he  stood  in  no  need  of  these  sweet  thoughts  to  refresh  him  under  the  pressure ; 
and  if  his  thoughts  were  busy-less  during  his  labour,  they  contributed  nothing  to  his 
refreshment;  so  that  let  [these  editors]  make  their  Busy-less  an  adjective  to  either 
“  thoughts  ”  or  “  labour,”  and  to  one  of  them  it  must  be,  or  it  is  useless  in  the  sen¬ 
tence,  it  conveys  no  clearer  idea  than  the  old  reading.  But  why  may  not  this  passage 
be  understood  thus  :  But  these  sweet  least  thoughts  (of  Miranda  his  mistress)  do  even 
refresh  my  most  busy  labour,  when  I  do  it.  Though  ’tis  not  impossible  but  the  orig¬ 
inal  was  a  double  superlative,  which  was  no  uncommon  mode  of  expression  in  those 
days,  and  then  it  may  stand  thus :  “ Most  busiest  when  I  do  it,”  which  may  signify 
either,  those  thoughts  being  most  busy  when  he  is  at  work,  or  that  they  refresh  his 
busiest  or  greatest  labour  when  he  does  it.’ — Heath  is  ‘  persuaded  that  the  [text  of 
the  Folios]  is  genuine,  and  wants  no  other  assistance  than  that  of  a  comma  after  the 
word  “  busy.”  The  sense  of  the  passage  then  is :  “I  forget  myself,  and  while  the 
thoughts  of  my  mistress  employ  my  whole  attention,  the  business  enjoined  on  me 
suffers  by  the  delay ;  but  upon  recollection,  this  is  really  not  the  case ;  for  I  find  such 
refreshment  from  those  sweet  thoughts  that  I  am  most  busy  when  I  am  employed  in 
them,  and  my  labour  is  more  advanced  by  the  alacrity  with  which  they  inspire  me, 
than  retarded  by  the  delay  which  they  occasion.  I  am  in  truth  more  effectually  com¬ 
pleting  the  task  set  me  by  these  intervals  of  interruption  than  if  I  wTere  incessantly  at 
work  about  it,  as  I  am  thereby  enabled  to  exert  myself  with  double  vigour  whenever 
I  resume  it.”  If  any  one  is  offended  with  the  inverted  order  of  the  words  “  least 
when  I  do  it  ”  for  “  when  least  I  do  it,”  he  is  at  liberty  to  alter  accordingly  if  he 
pleases.  For  my  own  part,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  Shakespeare  left  us  the  text  in 
the  order  it  now  stands.’ — Capell,  who  adopted  Theobald’s  emendation,  believes 
that  a  paraphrase  can  alone  give  a  *  full  conception  of  the  passage  at  large,  which 
take  in  these  words:  I  talk  and  quite  forget  my  task;  Yet  I  will  think  of  her  too; 
for  those  sweet  thoughts  lighten  my  work;  and  when  I  am  most  employ’d  in  it, 
thinking  of  her  I  scarce  feel  that  I’m  employ’d  in ’t  at  all ;  am  least  engag’d  by  my 
business  (most  unengag’d  by  it)  when  engag’d  by  such  thinking.  The  sentiment 
’twill  be  allow’d  is  most  natural ;  but  that  the  expressions  convey  it  properly  no  favourer 
of  the  poet  will  have  the  hardiness  to  assert  in  good  earnest.’  It  is  fortunate  for  us 
10 


146 


THE  TEMPEST 


[ACT  III,  sc.  1 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

that  after  one  of  Capell’s  paraphrases  we  always  have  the  original  to  go  to. — A  long 
silence  followed  Capell,  which  was  first  broken  by  Malone,  who  remarked  not  very 
profoundly :  ‘  Perhaps  Ferdinand  means  to  say,  “  I  forget  my  task ;  but  that  is  not  sur¬ 
prising,  for  I  am  thinking  of  Miranda,  and  these  sweet  thoughts,”  &c.  He  may, 
however,  mean  that  he  “  forgets  or  thinks  little  of  the  baseness  of  his  employment.” 
Whichsoever  be  the  sense,  And  or  For  should  seem  more  proper  [in  line  16]  than 
“But.”’ — In  1819,  Zachary  Jackson,  for  ‘I  forget:  But’  proposed  ‘I  forgiv't: 
For,'  and  explained  that  what  Ferdinand  forgave  was  ‘  the  iron-heart  ’  of  Prospero. 
For  ‘  most  busie  lest  ’  he  proposed  ‘  most  busie  left,'  on  the  really  plausible  ground 
that  in  a  printer’s  case  the  long  f  and  f  were  next  to  each  other  and  most  liable  to 
become  mixed.  It  was  because  Jackson  was  himself  a  printer  that  his  emendations 
have  once  in  a  very  great  while  some  value.  The  meaning  of  most  busy  left  is  ex¬ 
plained  by  the  fact  that  when  Ferdinand  had  finished  his  daily  task  he  was  left  more 
busy  with  his  reflections  than  while  at  work.  Zachary  Jackson’s  volume,  with  its 
mass  of  presumptuous  foolishness,  was,  once,  forever  banned  from  these  pages,  together 
with  Lord  Chedworth,  Seymour,  and  Andrew  Becket,  but  in  this  case  Jackson  has  a 
follower,  an  eminently  respectable  follower,  and  therefore  must  perforce  be  here 
admitted. — Voss  ( Anmerkungen ,  1825,  p.  172)  would  read:  ‘  I  forget  By  these  sweet 
thoughts  that  even  refresh  my  labours.’ — Singer  adopted  Theobald’s  busy-less  in  his 
first  edition  (1826),  and  sneered  at  it  in  his  second  (1856),  wherein  he  adopted  Holt’s 
busiest,  without  a  word  of  intimation  that  it  was  not  his  own ;  but  this  was  more  suo, 
and,  therefore,  not  surprising. — Knight  also  followed  one  reading  in  his  first  edition, 
and  another  in  his  second,  but  for  this  vacillation  neither  Dyce  nor  Grant  White 
can  reproach  him  ;  they  have  done  the  same.  Collier,  indeed,  is  the  only  modem 
editor  who  through  all  his  editions  ‘  has  looked  on  [this  phrase  in  The]  tempest  and 
is  never  shaken.’  In  sooth,  the  best  proof  of  the  exceeding  difficulty  in  making  the 
manifest  meaning  of  this  passage  cohere  with  the  words  is  afforded  by  the  different 
readings  adopted  by  several  editors  in  their  successive  editions.  Grant  White,  in 
his  Shakespeare  Scholar,  in  1854,  said  that  ‘nothing  could  be  more  graceless  and 
inappropriate  ’  than  most  busiest ;  three  years  later,  in  his  first  edition,  he  pronounced 
this  identical  graceless  phrase  a  ‘happy  conjecture,’  and  adopted  it  in  his  text! 
Twenty-five  years  later,  in  his  second  edition,  he  discarded  Holt’s  emendation  (which, 
by  the  way,  through  an  oversight  he  attributes  to  Holt  White),  and  adopted  the  First 
Folio'.  Again,  Dyce,  in  his  first  edition,  doubted  the  existence  of  the  word,  which, 
in  his  second  edition,  he  adopted.  But  this  is  anticipating;  to  return  to  the  chrono¬ 
logical  order :  Collier  adhered,  in  all  of  his  three  editions,  to  Heath’s  comma.  In 
his  second,  his  note  is  :  ‘  The  corrected  folio  of  1632  puts  it  thus  :  “  Most  busy,  blest 
when  I  do  it,”  meaning  that  though  Ferdinand  is  most  busy,  still  he  is  blest,  while  he 
works,  by  the  sweet  thoughts  of  Miranda.  Surely  this  is  a  natural  explanation,  and 
it  only  supposes  that  the  letter  b  had  dropped  out  before  lest  of  the  Folio.  We,  how¬ 
ever,  do  not  make  this  change,  nor  any  other,  because,  understanding  “  lest  ”  of  the 
Folio  as  least  (the  form  it  took  in  the  Folio  of  1632),  we  do  not  see  the  difficulty  of 
the  passage.  Ferdinand  is  so  refreshed  by  the  thoughts  of  Miranda  that,  even  when 
“most  busy,”  he  “least”  feels  the  toil  he  is  undergoing.’ — A.  E.  B[rae]  in  N.  &• 
Qu.  1st  S.  ii,  338,  1850)  proposed  to  interpret  these  words  as  though  ‘a  transposition 
had  taken  place  between  the  words  “  least  ”  and  “  when.”  “  Most  busy  token  least 
I  do  it  ”  or  “  Most  busy  when  least  employed.”  Has  not  the  pause  in  Ferdinand’s 
labour  been  hitherto  too  much  overlooked  ?  What  is  it  that  has  induced  him  to  for- 


ACT  III  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


*47 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

£*/his  task?  Is  it  not  these  delicious  pauses  of  labour,  making  these  pauses  still 
more  refreshing  and  renovating?  In  the  apologetic  sense  which  I  would  confer 
upon  the  last  two  lines  of  Ferdinand’s  speech  the  word  “  But  ”  becomes  not  only 
appropriate,  but  necessary.’— In  the  same  vol.  of  N  &  Qu.  p.  429,  The  Comma, 
which  Heath  and  Collier  moved,  ‘  humbly  protested  against  removal,’  and,  adhering 
to  the  Folio,  1632,  except  in  the  omission  of  s  in  ‘labours,’  interpreted  the  words 
•  most  busy  least  ’  as  ‘  an  emphatic  way  of  saying  “  least  busy  when  I  do  it,”  to  wit, 
the  labour.’— In  N.  &  Qu.  (1st  S.  iii,  229,  1851)  Ache  calls  attention  to  the  paral¬ 
lelism  between  this  passage  and  the  ‘  nunquam  se  minus  otiosum  esse,  quam  cum 
otiosus.’  Cicero,  De  Off.  iii,  cap.  i. — In  the  same  vol.  of  N.  Qu.  (p.  251)  John 
Taylor  conjectures  ‘  as  the  true  reading  “  these  sweet  thoughts  do  even  refresh  my 
labours  Most  business ,  when  I  do  it.”  Thus  the  change  of  a  single  syllable  is  suf¬ 
ficient  to  make  good  English,  good  sense,  and  good  metre  of  a  passage  otherwise 
defective  in  these  three  particulars.  It  retains  the  j  in  “  labours,”  keeps  the  comma 
in  its  place,  and  provides  an  antecedent  for  “it.”’ — Halliwell  (1853)  follows 
Theobald,  and  of  Holt’s  emendation  says  that  it  ‘  seems  to  imply  a  sense  exactly 
opposite  to  what  is  intended.’  ‘A  recent  anonymous  critic,’  he  continues,  ‘  boldly 
alters  the  line  to  “  My  business,  and  rest  me  while  I  do  it.”  Busy-less  is  an  unusual 
word,  but  it  is  so  naturally  (though,  perhaps,  not  quite  grammatically)  formed,  its  rare 
occurrence  is  not,  in  itself,  a  sufficient  reason  for  its  rejection.  Sylvester,  in  his  trans¬ 
lation  of  Du  Bartas,  has  another  and  a  more  singular  compound,  “  too  busie-idle  and 
over-bold.”  If  Holt’s  interpretation  were  correct  the  original  words  would  possibly 
be  most  busil'est  for  most  busilyest.'  This  busilyest  of  Halliwell  should  be  carefully 
noted.  Of  it  Halliwell  could  have  properly  said,  Sic  vos  non  vobis,  &c. — In  N.  <5r> 
Qu.  (1st  S.  viii,  124,  1853)  Icon  suggests  that  the  ‘it’  should  be  omitted  as  mere  sur- 
plusage  :  ‘  Most  busy,  least  when  I  do.’  ‘  The  sense  requires  that  the  thoughts  should 
be  “most  busy”  when  the  hands  “do  least.”’  Contemporaneously,  even  to  the 
very  month,  with  ‘Icon’s’  suggestion,  Lettsom  in  Blackwood's  Magazine  (Aug. 
1853)  observes  that :  ‘  Our  only  doubt,  in  restoring  the  old  reading,  is  in  regard  to 
the  word  “it.”  Perhaps  it  would  be  as  well  away,  and  we  might  read  more  perspic¬ 
uously,  “ Most  busy — least  when  I  do.”  The  measure  being  already  redundant,  the 
word  could  be  spared.  But  its  absence  or  presence  makes  little  or  no  difference,  and, 
with  it,  or  without  it,  we  hope  to  see  this  restoration  of  the  original  text.’  Twenty- 
four  years  later,  in  N.  Qu.  5th  S.  vii,  p.  83,  1877,  H.  Wedgwood  made  the  same 
emendation,  and  expressed  great  surprise  that  it  had  never  before  occurred  to  any 
one.  (A  sad,  very  sad  example  of  the  crying  need  of  a  ‘  New  Variorum  Edition  ’ !) — 
Anon  (. Fraser's  Maga.  March,  1853)  :  What  if  the  passage  ran  originally  as  follows : 

4  Such  baseness  ||  Had  never  like  executor,  but  sweet  thoughts  ||  Do  even  refresh  my 
labours ;  I  forget  ||  My  business,  and  rest  me  while  I  do  it.  ||’ — Dyce  (ed.  i,  1857)  :  I 
was  formerly  inclined  to  believe  that  Theobald’s  emendation  had  restored  the  very 
word  of  Shakespeare  ;  but  I  now  doubt  if  so  odd  a  compound  as  busiless  ever  occurred 
to  anybody  except  the  critic  himself;  and  in  my  uncertainty  about  the  passage  I  have 
given  [Heath’s  reading].  As  to  ‘  it  ’  referring  to  the  plural  ‘  labours,’  compare  (among 
other  passages  in  these  plays)  ‘  My  powers  are  crescent,  and  my  auguring  hope  Says 
it  will  come  to  the  full. — Ant.  &•  Cleop.  II,  i.  (W.  W.  Lloyd  ( Athenaum ,  16  Feb. 
’78)  very  justly  says  that  this  single  example  is  not  conclusive,  ‘  the  metaphorical 
crescent  gives  a  dominating  bias  to  the  idiom.’) — STAUNTON  (1858)  :  Whatever  may 
have  been  the  word  for  which  ‘  lest  ’  was  misprinted,  ‘  Most  busy  ’  and  that  word  bore 


148 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iii,  sc.  i. 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

reference,  unquestionably,  not  to  Ferdinand’s  task,  but  to  the  sweet  thoughts  by  which 
it  was  relieved.  We  have  substituted  felt  as  a  likely  word  to  have  been  mis-set  ‘  lest;’ 
but  are  in  doubt  whether  still,  in  its  old  sense  of  ever,  always,  is  not  preferable  :  ‘  Most 
busy  still,  when  I  do  it.’ — Simon  Verges  [the  pseudonym  of  Swynfen  Jervis]  (A' 
6°  Qu.  2d  S.  vii,  p.  338,  1859)  suggested,  without  comment,  *  Most  busy  when  I  do 
rest.' — Brae  (in  his  Collier,  Coleridge,  and  Shakespeare,  i860,  p.  134)  prints  lines  16 
and  17  thus  :  ‘  But  these  sweet  thoughts  do  even  refresh  my  labour’s  Most  busy  hest, 
when  I  do  it,’  wherein  the  emendation  ‘  simply  consists  in  the  change  of  the  initial 
letter  /  for  h  (the  confounding  of  which  is  a  misprint  of  the  commonest  possible  occur¬ 
rence),  and  yet  it  does  not  leave  one  single  point  of  the  original  difficulty  unsatisfied. 
This  “lest”  or  “least”  becomes  hest  or  heast  (for,  by  a  singular  coincidence,  both 
words  were  spelled  both  ways),  and  the  s  in  “  labours  ”  becomes  the  sign  of  the  pos¬ 
sessive  case.  Hest  must  be  understood  as  a  task  or  imposition,  a  sense  in  which  it 
occurs  in  a  previous  Scene  of  the  play.’ — In  i860,  Sidney  Walker  added,  indirectly, 
much  strength  to  Theobald’s  busy-less,  to  which  he  devotes  a  chapter  (No.  CVI,  Crit. 
ii,  285),  and  whereon  his  notes  are  as  follows:  ‘  I  have  met  with  no  other  instance  of 
this  ungrammatical  formation,  either  in  Shakespeare,  or  in  any  other  of  the  Elizabethan 
poets.  {Kindless,  in  Ham.  II,  ii,  “  treacherous,  kindless  villain,”  is  unnatural,  from 
kind,  the  common  old  English  word  for  nature.)  I  have  found  one  instance  in  an 
earlier  writer,  Surrey,  ed.  1831,  p.  7  :  “  sickless  for  to  consume.”  And  one  in  a  con¬ 
temporary,  Kyd,  Translation  of  Gamier’s  Cornelia,  i,  Dodsley,  vol.  ii,  p.  250 :  «  Less 
hapless,  and  more  worthiless  thou  might’st  Have  made  thine  ancestors,”  &c.  [see 
Dyce’s  note  on  this,/0.tf].  For  this  latter  can  scarcely,  I  think,  be  a  corruption  of 
worthless.  Dr  Nares,  also,  in  a  MS  note  in  my  copy  of  repr.  Fol.,  has  expressed  a 
doubt  of  Theobald’s  emendation. — 'E Kiyu.  Spenser,  F.  Q.  B.  iii,  C.  iii,  St.  lix,  seems 
scarcely  in  point :  “  for  endless  monuments  Of  his  successe  and  gladful  victorie.” 
Sylvester’s  Dubartas,  Week  i,  Day  i,  ed.  1641,  p.  4,  col.  2 :  “Alas !  how  faithless  and 
how  modestless,  Are  you,”  &c.  vii,  p.  60,  col.  2, — “  Fond  Epicure,  thou  ....  Imagin- 
est  a  God,  so  perfectless,”  &c.  col  I, — “  How  th’  air’s  glib-gliding firmness  body  bears 
Such  store  of  fowls,”  &c.  Firmless,  I  conjecture,  II,  ii,  iv,  p.  142,  col.  2;  see  context, 
“ — yet  firm-less  in  affects,  It  falls  in  love,”  &c.  IV,  iii,  p.  220,  col.  2,  “ — Serpents 
crawling  o’re  The  Lybians  pest-full,  and  un-blest-full  shore.’”  Walker’s  editor, 
Let^som,  after  describing  the  fragmentary  condition  of  Walker’s  MSS  in  regard  to 
this  chapter,  adds :  ‘  The  quotation  from  Surrey  may  be  thought  inapplicable,  since 
Chaucer  once  uses  sike  as  a  substantive,  and  Surrey  may  have  been  influenced  by  this 
in  forming  the  compound  sickless ;  but  the  examples  from  Kyd  and  Sylvester  cer¬ 
tainly  make  for  Theobald’s  conjecture.  Collier’s  Old  Corrector  has  been  severely 
attacked  for  reading  busy,  blest,  but  if,  as  I  suspect,  he  wrote  busy-blest,  intending  it  as 
a  compound  adjective,  the  old  gentleman  scarcely  deserved  the  castigation  he  received. 
I  may  be  allowed  to  conclude  this  long,  unsatisfactory  note  by  suggesting  that  in  the 
Second  Folio  (as  far  as  relates  to  this  passage)  “least”  merely  represents  a  peculiar 
pronunciation,  not  even  now  quite  obsolete  among  uneducated  people,  of  “  lest,”  and 
that  consequently  there  is  no  intentional  difference  of  meaning  between  the  text 
of  the  First  Folio  and  that  of  the  second.  If  this  notion  is  correct,  the  Second 
Folio  affords  no  support  to  those  recent  texts  that  have  “least”  in  the  sense  of 
minime.' — Baii.ey  {Received  Text,  &c.  1862,  i,  124)  suggests  four  alterations  :  ‘  Read, 
“  I  forget  all  But  these  sweet  thoughts  that  ev’n  refresh  my  labour  Most  busily  when 
I  do  it,”  and  paraphrase :  “  I  forget  all  but  these  sweet  thoughts  that  even  refresh  mv 


ACT  III.  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


149 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

labour  when  I  most  busily  do  it,”  or,  in  other  words,  “  when  I  work  the  hardest.”  ’— 
In  the  First  Cambridge  Edition  (1863)  the  editors  Clark  and  Glover  record  in  the 
Textual  Notes  a  conjecture,  by  Spedding,  of  Most  busiest  when  idlest  for  the  ‘  Most 
busie  lest,  when  I  doe  it  ’  of  the  Ff,  and  a  conjecture  of  their  own  also  for  the  same 
line,  viz :  Most  busy  left  when  idlest.  In  their  Notes  at  the  end  of  the  play  they 
remark  that  ‘  the  spelling  “  doe  ”  makes  Mr  Spedding’s  conjecture  idlest  for  “  I  doe 
it”  more  probable.’  Also,  in  their  Textual  Notes,  they  record  ‘  Most  busiliest'  as  a 
conjecture  by  Bullock  (i.  e.  Bulloch).  But,  as  we  have  seen,  Halliwell  had  antici¬ 
pated  this  conjecture,  at  that  time,  by  ten  years.  Bulloch  [Studies,  1875,  P-  21) 
says  that  busiliest  was  his  first  conjecture  in  emending  Shakespeare’s  text,  and  that  it 
was  made  in  1862.  Ingleby,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  expressed  his  emphatic 
preference  for  this  emendation,  which  he  always  ascribed  to  Bulloch.  (See  Sh. 
Hermeneutics,  1875,  p.  *37  5  Robinson’s  Epit.  of  Lit.  15  Feb.,  1879;  and  in  N.  &• 
Qu.)  Lastly,  Most  busiest  is  attributed  by  Clark  and  Glover  not  to  Holt,  as  it 
should  be,  but  to  Holt  White,  an  oversight  which  has  misled  every  critic  and  editor 
who  has  used  the  Cambridge  Edition — and  who  has  not? — down  to  this  hour. 
Happily  this  error  is  corrected  in  the  Third  Edition,  now  issuing  (1891),  but, 
unluckily,  Bulloch  still  remains. — Dyce  (ed.  ii,  1863)  :  After  much  consideration 
I  now  adopt,  in  this  very  difficult  passage,  the  reading  of  Theobald  as  far  more 
satisfactory,  on  the  whole,  than  any  of  the  numerous  emendations  which  have  been 
proposed.  [Dyce  here  quotes  from  Walker  the  citations  from  Sylvester’s  Dubartas, 
and  at  the  end  of  them  adds]  :  Walker  also  cites  *  Kyd,  Translation  of  Gamier’s 
Cornelia,’  as  affording  an  instance  of  worthiless ;  but  on  turning  to  the  rare  old 
4to  of  Kyd’s  Cornelia,  1594,  I  find  that  it  there  has  ‘  worthily,’  and  consequently 
that  the  worthiless  which  Walker  unsuspectingly  quotes  is  one  of  the  thousand 
blunders  of  Dodsley  and  his  editors.  [On  Spedding’s  conjecture  ‘  Most  busiest 
when  idlest  ’]  Lettsom  remarks :  ‘  It  appears  to  me  to  invert  the  sense  required 
by  the  context,  which  is  (at  least  if  this  half-line  refers  to  Ferdinand  himself,  and 
not  to  his  thoughts)  “  Most  idlest  when  most  busiest.”  ’  .  .  .  .  Mr  John  Forster 
writes  to  me  as  follows :  ‘  I  hope  you  will  not  hesitate  to  adopt  Theobald’s  busy¬ 
less.’  [Forster  then  proceeds  to  criticise  the  readings  of  Pope,  Spedding,  and  Holt; 
the  last  he  attributes  to  Holt  White,  an  error  whereof  the  probable  source  has 
just  been  alluded  to.  (Holt  White,  by  the  way,  was  a  ‘  scholarly  gentleman,’  who 
contributed  a  number  of  notes  to  the  Variorum  of  1821.  He  lived  at  Enfield  a  hun¬ 
dred  years  ago,  and  to  his  ‘  fine  library  ’  Charles  Cowden-Clarke,  when  a  lad,  had 
free  access.)] — J.  Wetherell  ( Athenceum ,  16  Jan.  1864)  would  read :  ‘  I  forget.  But 
these  sweet  thoughts  do  even  refresh  my  labour,  Most  busy  rest,  when  I  do  it,’  and 
thus  paraphrases :  ‘  These  sweet  thoughts  on  his  gentle  mistress  so  influence  Ferdi¬ 
nand  that  his  labour,  whilst  he  passively  contemplates  it,  is  “even  refreshed”  by 
them — but  when  he  does  it  (actively),  it  becomes  no  labour  at  all — mere  rest.’  In 
the  next  No.  of  The  Athenceum  the  editor  announces  that  he  had  received  ‘  about  a 
hundred  ’  further  suggestions  on  this  phrase,  that  nearly  all  the  readings  thus  offered 
had  been  anticipated,  and  that,  perhaps,  a  majority  were  in  favour  of  Holt  White’s 
<  busiest.’  A  few  months  later,  in  the  same  journal,  Ingleby  gave  in  his  adhesion  to 
Wetherell’s  ‘  rest,'  and  pronounced  it  ‘  palmarian,’  an  estimation  which  he  afterwards 
transferred  to  Halliwell’s  conjecture,  which  he  attributed  to  Bulloch. — Jephson 
(1864)  adopted  the  conjecture  of  Clark  and  Glover  in  the  First  Cambridge  Edition, 
and  in  his  notes  on  ‘  Most  busy  left ’  remarked,  ‘  This  is  unintelligible.’  [See  Zach- 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  in,  sc.  i. 


ISO 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

ary  Jackson,  ante.'] — Wellesley  ( Stray  Notes,  &c.  1865,  p.  1) :  Spedding’s  admirable 
emendation  is  a  key  to  the  whole  passage,  which  only  needs  a  more  correct  punctua¬ 
tion  and  orthography :  ‘  these  sweet  thoughts  do  even  refresh  my  labours  Most,  busy ; 
least,  when  idlest.’  Ferdinand  is  far  from  repining  at  his  task,  since  it  procures  him 
that  sweet  sympathy  which  he  would  lack  if  he  were  unemployed.  ‘  These  sweet 
thoughts  of  Miranda’s  pity  “when  she  sees  me  work,”  refresh  me  in  my  labours. 
They  refresh  me  even  most  when  I  am  most  busy,  and  least  when,  comparatively 
speaking,  I  am  idlest.’  [An  entirely  new  view  of  the  passage,  in  which  I  doubt  if 
Spedding  would  have  recognised  his  own  emendation.] — Fish  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p.  41 
1866)  :  Retain  the  text  of  the  First  Folio  and  paraphrase :  ‘  In  these  reflections  I 
forget  my  labours,  which  are  even  refreshed  with  the  sweetness  of  the  thoughts,  and 
I  am  really  most  busy  in  mind  while  I  am  least  busy  with  my  task, — occupied  with 
my  thoughts,  idlest  with  my  hands.’ — Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p.  42)  :  I  can  make 
nothing  more  satisfactory  out  of  the  *  crux  ’  than  what  follows. — I.  Hermeneutical 
torture,  applied  to  the  reading  of  the  Ff,  to  my  feeling,  merely  adds  distortion  to 
lameness.  2.  ‘  I  doe  it,’  referred  to  the  noun  ‘  labours,’  seems  to  me  an  un-Shake- 
spearian  abomination — as  certainly  corrupt  as  the  ‘left’  or  ‘leaft’  of  the  Ff.  3.  To 
discover  the  real  train  of  thought  we  must  go  back  to  ‘  I  forget.’  4.  If  Ferdinand  is 
to  be  understood  as  keeping  the  log  on  his  shoulder  until  Miranda  makes  him  put  it 
down,  then  ‘  I  forget  ’  means  that  the  sweet  thoughts  of  Miranda  neutralise  his  sense  of 
pain  and  weariness.  In  that  case  the  reading  might  be  :  ‘  Most  busy  when  least  idle  ’ 
— adopting  Brae’s  transposition,  with  Spedding’s  conj.  of  ‘idle’  (from  the  ear,  nol 
from  the  ductus  litterarum )  in  place  of  *  I  doe  it.’  5.  But  perhaps  Ferdinand  lays 
the  log  down  as  he  begins  to  soliloquise,  and  only  resumes  it  at  ‘  I  forget,’  or  (better 
still)  perhaps  the  stage -direction  ‘  hearing  a  log  ’  is  not  Shakespeare’s.  Perhaps  (*.  e.) 
Ferdinand  enters  to  get  a  log  to  bear  to  the  pile,  and  does  not  lift  it  until  ‘  I  forget.’ 
In  that  case,  the  best  reading  externally  is  the  remarkably  happy  one  of  the  Camb. 
Edd. :  ‘  Most  busy  left  when  idleft.’  6.  If,  however,  Mr  Furness’s  reference  of  ‘  1 
doe  it  ’  to  ‘  I  forget  ’  be  sound — but  I  am  now  afraid  it  is  not — then  Holt  and  Singer’s 
reading  becomes  the  best :  ‘  Moll  bufiejl  when  I  do  it.’ — R.  L.  Ashhurst  [Phila. 
Sh.  Soc.)  :  I  am  disposed  to  adopt  Heath’s  suggestion  of  placing  a  comma  after 
‘  bufie,’  otherwise  retaining  the  reading  of  the  Ff.  I  interpret  thus :  ‘  I  am  fo  re- 
frefhed  by  thefe  fweet  thoughts,  that  when  moll  bufy  (in  actual  work)  I  am  leaft  bufy 
in  feeling  ’ ;  i.  e.  *  My  labour  is  least  burdensome  to  me  when  I  forget  myself  in  these 
charming  meditations.’  I  see  no  inconsistency  in  uniting  Mr  Collier’s  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  the  beginning  of  this  passage  with  Mr  Furness’s  happy  suggestion  of  refer¬ 
ring  ‘ doe  it’  to  ‘  forget.’ — S.  Dickson  [Phila.  Sh.  Soc.) :  That  is,  ‘  My  labours  are 
moft  bufy  leaft,’ — to  be  read  with  a  pause  after  ‘  bufy,’  and  emphasis  on  ‘  leaft  ’ ;  i.  e. 

‘  Most  busy  in  the  least  degree  ’ ;  i.  e.  *  least  most  busy  ’ ;  i.  e.  ‘  least  busy  ’ ;  i.  e.  ‘  least 
irksome  and  annoying  ’ ; — (for  which  sense  of  ‘  busy  ’  Worcester  cites  Waller :)  ‘  When 
I  doe  it  ’ ;  i.  e.  ‘  forget  and  think  these  sweet  thoughts  ’ ;  or  more  briefly :  ‘  My  labours 
are  least  wearisome  when  occupied  with  these  thoughts.’  The  punctuation  for  this 
interpretation  is  a  dash  after  ‘  labours,’  to  show  that  busy  agrees  with  it — the  comma 
after  ‘least’  being  struck  out. — Keightley  [Exp.  213, 1867)  adopts  Heath’s  comma, 
and  puts  a  dash  after  ‘  it  ’  at  the  end  of  the  line  to  indicate  that  ‘  the  entrance  of 
Miranda  causes  Ferdinand  to  break  off.’ — Halliwell  (p.  40,  1868) :  The  pronoun 
it  ’  refers  to  ‘  labours,’  and  numerous  examples  might  be  cited  of  that  pronoun  being 
applied  to  a  preceding  plural  substantive  :  *  — let  your  eyes,  As  you  observe  the  house, 


ACT  Ilf,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


15* 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

but  where  I  point  it  Make  stay,  and  take  a  view,  and  then  you  have  found  it.’ _ The 

Loyal  Subject.  [I  think  Halliwell  has  here  misapprehended ;  ‘  it  ’  refers  to  ‘  house,’ 
not  ‘ eyes.’]— Daniel  {Notes,  See.  1870,  p.  13):  I  suspect  that  ‘lest’  is  a  misprint 
for  rest.  What  is  it  that  Ferdinand  forgets  ?  The  punctuation  of  the  Folios  would 
lead  us  to  suppose  that  while  thinking  of  his  mistress  he  forgets  to  go  on  with 
his  labour ;  yet  Miranda,  entering  immediately  after,  begs  him  not  to  work  so  hard. 
While  the  thoughts  of  his  mistress  (she  who  makes  his  labours  pleasures )  throng  upon 
him,  what  he  really  forgets  is  the  tedium  of  his  labour.  Read,  therefore,  and  punc¬ 
tuate  :  ‘  I  forget  But  (all  but)  these  sweet  thoughts — do  even  refresh  me ;  labour’s 
Most  busy  rest  when  I  do  it,’  i.  e.  Having  forgotten  all  but  these  sweet  thoughts,  I  do 
even  refresh  myself;  labour  is  but  a  most  busy  kind  of  rest  while  I  am  engaged  in  it. 
See  Macb.  I,  iv,  44 :  ‘  The  rest  is  labour  which  is  not  used  for  you.’  The  converse 
of  which  exactly  represents  the  idea  which  I  suppose  Ferdinand  to  express :  ‘  The 
labour  which  is  used  for  you  is  rest.' — John  Hunter  ( Longman's  Series,  1870) :  The 
construction  undoubtedly  is :  ‘  Most  busy  when  I  do  it  least  ’ ;  the  inversion,  ‘  least 
when  I  do  it,’  being  quite  in  Shakespeare’s  manner. — Rolfe  (1871)  follows  Heath, 
and  adopts  the  paraphrase  given  by  Fish  of  The  Phila.  Sh.  Soc. — Wilson  ( Caliban , 
&c.  1873,  p.  232)  :  Query:  ‘  Do  even  refresh  my  labour  Most  baseless  when  I  do  it.’ 
Baseless  would  thus  stand  in  apposition  to  the  ‘  baseness  ’  of  his  previous  comment : 
‘some  kinds  of  baseness  are  nobly  undergone,’  &c. — W.  A.  Wright  (1874) :  Holt’s 
conjecture  {most  busiest  has  been  carried  a  step  further  by  Mr  Spedding  in  giving 
what,  upon  the  whole,  appears  the  best  suggestion  yet  made,  ‘  Most  busiest  when 
idlest.’  A  very  slight  change  would  make  a  certain  sense,  ‘  Most  busy  left  when  I  do 
it  ’ ;  that  is,  when  I  indulge  these  thoughts.  [See  Zachary  Jackson  and  Jephson.] — 
J.  Beale  (N.  Qu.  5th  S.  iv,  365,  1875)  suggests  that  the  line  be  thus  read  and 
interpreted :  “  ‘  do  even  refresh  my  labour  Most,  when  busy -less  (  =  leisurely)  I  do  it ' 
(i.  e.  my  labour).  Ferdinand’s  busy -less  matching  Miranda’s  ‘  skill-less.’  ”  [In  the  6th 
volume  of  the  same  series,  p.  226,  Beale  proposed  a  second  emendation,  viz :]  to  take 
‘  labours  ’  in  the  possessive  case,  singular  or  plural,  and  instead  of  busyless  to  read 
busy  haste.  We  shall  then  have,  ‘  even  refresh  my  labour’s  Most  busy  haste,  when  I 
do  it,’  i.  e.  forget.  That  is  to  say,  ‘  although  in  musing  on  Miranda  I  forget,  or  miss 
count  [of  the  logs],  and  have  to  make  up  for  lost  time  in  consequence,  these  sweet 
thoughts  do  nevertheless  refresh  even  the  most  busy  haste  or  greatest  pressure  of  my 
labours,  to  which  I  am  thereby  subject,  in  performing  my  ignominious  and  laborious 
task  ’ ;  the  word  ‘  even  ’  or  ever,  if  preferred,  seeming  to  emphasize  ‘  busy,’  the  adjec¬ 
tive  to  haste,  as  now  suggested.  Otherwise  we  might  read,  objectively,  *  my  labours 
— most  least  busy — when  I  do  it  ’  —  ‘  my  labours — most  busy  least — when  I  do  it  ’ 
(i.  e.  forget),  and  confirm  the  very  text. — J.  S.  Phillpotts  {Rugby  Ed.,  1876)  thus 
paraphrases  [reading  ‘  — labours,  Most  busy  least,  when  I  do’t  ’]  :  But  (though  I  for¬ 
get  my  work,  I  am  not  lazy ;  for)  these  sweet  thoughts  even  refresh  my  labours,  i.  e 
make  my  labours  fresh  again.  The  sweet  thoughts  which  made  my  labours  pleasures 
occupy  me  so  intensely  that  they  make  my  pleasures  back  into  labours  again.  ‘  Re¬ 
fresh  ’  is,  however,  generally  taken  as  ‘  refresh  (me  after)  my  labours,’  but  then  there 
is  no  point  in  the  ‘  even.’  The  whole  speech  is  a  study  of  oxymoron  in  the  strictest 
sense  of  the  term.  The  sports  are  painful,  the  baseness  noble,  poor  is  rich,  dead  is 
quick,  labour  is  pleasure,  and  then,  as  the  crown  of  all,  the  pleasure  is  so  pleasant 
that  it  becomes  more  laborious  than  the  labour.  It  seems  to  me  simplest  to  take 
[‘  Most  busy  least,’  &c.]  as  it  stands,  treating  it  as  an  oxymoron,  ‘  Least  most  busy, 


152 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iii,  sc.  i. 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

when  I  do  it  (the  carrying),’  i.  e.  ‘  I  am  least  busy  at  the  time,  when  any  one  would 
think  I  am  most  busy;  viz:  when  I  am  carrying  the  logs.  I  am  really  most  busy 
when  I  am  apparently  resting,  because  then  I  think  of  my  love.’  (It  might  also  be 
‘  Most  busy — least,’  i.  e.  ‘  I  am  most  busy  when  thinking,  least  (busy)  when  working.’) 
As  he  says  ‘  do  it  ’  he  shoulders  the  log  which  he  had  put  down  while  speaking.  The 
paradoxes  are  meant  to  portray  the  ‘exaggeration  of  love.’  Compare  Sonnet  xxvii; 

and  Pom.  Jul.  I,  i,  186-200 . It  once  occurred  to  me  that  ‘lest’  or  ‘least’ 

might  be  another  form  of  ’less,  i.  e.  unless.  ‘  Most  busy,  least  ’  (i.  e.  ’less,  or  unless) 
when  I  do  it,’  i.  e.  ‘  Most  busy  at  all  times,  except  when  I  do  it  ’  (my  laborious  work)  ; 
his  care  for  Miranda  being  so  intense  that  he  is  never  really  occupied  except  when  he 
has  leisure  to  think  of  her.  [Here  follow  examples  of  ‘  least  ’  =  unless  and  ’less  — 
unless .] — R.  M.  Spence  (A7-,  dr3  Qu.  5th  S.  vii,  p.  143, 1877) :  Omit  the  colon  after  ‘  for¬ 
get,’  and  for  ‘  lest  ’  substitute  rest.  Read  and  punctuate  thus  :  ‘  I  forget  But  these  sweet 
thoughts :  do  even  refresh  my  labours  Most  busy :  rest  when  I  do  it.’  By  ‘  But  ’  I 
understand  all  except.  Ferdinand  forgot  everything  except  the  ‘  sweet  thoughts  ’  of 
Miranda’s  sympathy.  We  are  to  suppose  him,  while  speaking,  piling  up  log  after  log. 
Hence  he  speaks  in  short,  broken  sentences,  as  one  so  employed  would  naturally 
do. — Corson  {Am.  Bibliopolist,  p.  14,  Feb.  1877;  also  N.  cr3  Qu.  5th  S.  vii,  p.  3, 
1877):  It  does  not  appear  that  the  proper  bearing  of  ‘even’  has  been  recognised. 
That  any  one’s  labours  should  be  refreshed  by  sweet  thoughts  of  his  mistress,  is  a  fact 
to  be  generally  assumed.  But  to  understand  ‘  even  ’  as  bearing  upon  ‘  refresh,’  would 
be  somewhat  contrary  to  such  assumption.  The  word  evidently  points  to  ‘  most  busy  ’ 
as  qualifying  ‘  labours,’  the  meaning  being,  ‘  But  these  sweet  thoughts  do  refresh  even 
my  most  busy  labours.’  I  would  therefore  remove  the  comma  after  ‘  labours  ’  and  put 
it  after  ‘  busy.’  That  would  make  it  necessary  to  connect  ‘  lest  ’  in  some  way  with 
‘  when  I  do  it.’  The  verb  ‘  do  ’  is  a  pro-verb,  representing  the  verb  think  implied  in 
‘  thoughts  ’ ;  and  the  clause  ‘  when  I  do  it  ’  is  a  loose  way  of  saying  ‘  when  I  think,  or 
indulge  in,  sweet  thoughts  of  my  mistress.’  Now  the  mode  in  which  his  most  busy 
labours  are  refreshed  by  sweet  thoughts  of  his  mistress,  is  indicated  by  ‘  I  forget,’  that 
is,  he  is  rendered  oblivious  to  them. — If  the  interpretation  thus  far  is  correct,  there 
must  be  an  idea  veiled  in  ‘  lest  ’  which  reflects  or  points  to  ‘  I  forget,’  as  a  conse¬ 
quence  of  ‘  when  I  do  it.’  That  idea  is  revealed  by  the  change  of  one  letter,  e  for  o. 
The  w&rd  should  be  lost,  in  the  sense  of  being  completely  absorbed  in  anything,  and 
oblivious  to  all  other  things.  Lady  Macbeth  says  to  her  husband :  ‘  Be  not  lost  so 
poorly  in  your  thoughts.’ — The  passage  might  be  paraphrased  thus :  ‘  But  these  sweet 
thoughts  do  refresh  even  my  most  busy  labours,  lost,  as  I  am,  to  myself  and  to  those 
labours,  when  I  indulge  in  them.’  I  would  punctuate  thus :  ‘  — do  even  refresh  my 
labours  Most  busy, — lost,  when  I  do  it  ’  [see  Whistler,  Text.  N.]. — Jabez  [i.  e.  C.  M. 
Ingleby]  (JV.  dr3  Qu.  5th  S.  vii,  p.  224,  1877)  upholds  busiliest  (which  he  attributes  to 
Bulloch,  instead  of  to  its  rightful  owner,  Halliwell).  ‘  It  has  been  asserted,’  he  says,  ‘  that 
“  it  ”  may  refer  to  “  labours.”  I  know  of  but  one  such  case  in  all  Shakespeare,  viz : 
Love’s  Lab.  L.  I,  i :  “If  you  are  arm’d  to  do,  as  sworn  to  do,  Subscribe  to  your  deep 
oaths,  and  keep  it  too.”  The  passage,  “  Poor  breathing  orators,”  &c.  {Rich.  Ill:  IV, 
iv)  is  misquoted  in  England's  Parnassus,  1600,  or  it  would  be  another  instance.  I  be¬ 
lieve  such  instances  are  too  rare  to  be  our  authority  in  the  interpretation  of  this  passage.’ 
[Ingleby  refers  ‘  it  ’  to  ‘  forget.’  Immediately  following  this  communication  of  ‘  Jabez,’ 
J.  D.  asserts  that  ‘  lest  ’  was  ‘  formerly  used  as  a  noun,  with  the  meaning  of  pleasure 
or  delight,’  and  thereupon  adduces  many  authorities,  and  one  example  from  Chaucer. 


ACT  III,  sc.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


151 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

to  which  he  might  have  added  many  another.  J.  D.  thus  paraphrases  :  *  “  Most  busy 
lest,  i.  e.  Most  busy  pleasure  it  is,  whenever  I  do  it.’  Immediately  treading  on  J. 

D.’s  heels,  J.  Beale  proposes  his  third  reading  and  pointing :  I  forget _ But  these' 

sweet  thoughts  do  even  refresh — my  labours ,  Most  busy,  feast  when  I  do  it,”  the  itali¬ 
cized  words  and  punctuation  conveying  as  much  as  I  might  wish  to  be  understood.’ 
Immediately  following  J.  Beale,  R.  H.  Legis  proposes  ‘  Most  busy  best,'  unaware- 
that  he  had  been  long  before  anticipated  by  Brae.  At  the  close  of  this  last  contribu¬ 
tion  the  long-suffering  Editor  of  Notes  and  Queries  announced  that  ‘ This  discussion 
must  positively  close  here.’  But  as  well  might  he  forbid  the  mountain  pines  to  wag 
their  high  tops  and  to  make  no  noise  when  they  are  fretten  with  gusts.  Silence 
reigned  for  only  five  years,  during  which  the  emenders  ceased  to  be  most  busie  lest 
Shakespeare  should  remain  unexplained.  But  when,  in  1882  (6th  S.  vi,  p.  24),  J.  D. 
again  knocked  for  admittance,  merely  with  a  handful  of  examples  of  the  use  of  ‘  lest  ’ 
in  the  sense  of  pleasure,  which  he  might  have  carried  in  before,  if  he  had  only  had 
them  ready,  what  heart  so  hard  as  to  refuse  admission  ?  The  door  once  open,  why 
should  not  H.  Wedgwood  (an  honoured  and  honourable  name)  be  allowed  to  tell 
how  his  emendation  came  to  him  in  a  dream  ? — a  source  which  to  us  non-Spiritualists- 
has  been  usually  believed  to  be  subject  to  a  contrary  interpretation.  It  is  to  be 
regretted  that  in  the  wider  range  which  the  delighted  spirit  enjoys  when  unhemmed« 
in  by  its  muddy  vesture,  it  was  not  suggested  that  the  emendation  was  by  no  means- 
new.  (I  beg  leave  to  say,  parenthetically,  that  personally  I  have  mistrusted  all  lesser 
Spiritualist  influences  in  the  elucidation  of  Shakespeare’s  text  ever  since  Shakespeare 
himself  once  ‘  materialised  ’  for  me  at  a  stance,  and  manifested  extreme  displeasure 
and  immediately  ‘  de-materialised  ’  when  I  ventured,  most  respectfully,  to  ask  him  the 
meaning  of  ‘  Ullorxa  ’  in  Timon  of  Athens.)  After  J.  D.’s  and  Wedgwood’s  entrance,, 
the  doors  of  Notes  and  Queries  seem  to  have  been  thrown  open  as  of  old.  In  the 
same  volume  (p.  261)  H.  H.  Vaughan  discusses  the  subject  as  though  discussed  for 
the  first  time,  but  without  adding  anything  to  our  enlightenment.  He  approves  of 
Halliwell’s  busyliest  (which,  following  the  Cambridge  Edition,  he  ascribes  to  Bul¬ 
loch),  and  says  that*  forget’  has  for  its  object ‘these  sweet  thoughts.’  In  quoting' 
line  14  he  reads,  ‘  sees  my  work,’  and  by  an  extraordinary  oversight  says :  ‘  I  think 
it  most  likely  that  Shakespeare  wrote  *  sees  me  work  ’  and  ‘  those  sweet  thoughts,’ 
which  by  a  very  natural  error  became  ‘see  my  work’  and  ‘ these  sweet  thoughts.’ — 
— W.  W.  Lloyd  ( Athenaum ,  16  Feb.  1878)  :  This  play  abounds  in  elliptical  phrases, 
and  indirect  constructions,  and  with  a  certain  allowance  on  this  score,  the  simple, 
earliest  emendation,  ‘  Most  busy,  least  when  I  do  it  ’  (  =  when  I  do  it  least),  seems  all! 
that  is  strictly  required.  But  even  so,  this  may  probably  be  one  of  the  very  frequent 
cases  where  an  intermediate  line  has  been  lost,  which  would  have  made  the  construc¬ 
tion  in  one  degree  less  Thucydidean.  The  correction  of  labour  for  ‘  labours  ’  is. 
required  in  any  case  to  give  a  direct  reference  to  ‘  it.’ — Hudson  (1879)  reads  in  his 
text  ‘ — do  even  refresh  my  labour ;  Most  busy  when  I  do  it  least]  and  in  his  note 
says :  ‘  With  the  old  reading  it  is  uncertain  what  “  most  busy  ”  refers  to  or  is  predicate 
of;  that  is  to  say,  whether  the  meaning  be  “/  being  most  busy”  or  “these  sweet 
thoughts  being  most  busy.”  For  the  latter  sense  the  best  reading  I  have  met  with  is 
“  most  busiest.”  But  had  this  been  the  poet’s  thought  he  would  probably  have- 
written  :  “  Most  busy  they,  when  I  do  it.”  On  the  whole,  it  seems  much  better  to  con¬ 
nect  lest  or  least  with  what  follows,  and  not  with  what  precedes.  But  I  suspect 
after  all,  that  the  poet  first  wrote  most  busie,  then  interlined  lest  or  least  as  a  correc. 


*54 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  III,  sc  1. 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

tion,  and  that  the  two  got  printed  together;  so  that  we  ought  ’  [to  follow  Pope’s  read 
ing] . — Herr  ( Scattered  Notes,  &c.  1879,  p.  88) :  Read,  ‘ — refresh  my  labour,  Most 
busy  beat,  when  I  do  it,’  and  paraphrase  :  ‘  “  — these  sweet  thoughts  even  most  busy 
throb  in  my  mind  when,”  &c.  Compare  how  the  poet  employs  beat  or  beating  in  con¬ 
nection  with  thoughts,  mind,  pulse,  and  heart,  to  either  of  which  the  word  most  aptly 
applies,  so  proving  by  analogy  that  “  least  ”  is  a  misprint  for  beat.'  [Here  follow 
many  examples  of  the  use  of  ‘beat.’] — E.  A.  Meredith  ( Some  New  Emendations, 
&c.  1883,  p.  5) :  It  seems  to  me  clear  that  ‘most’  and  ‘least’  cannot  stand  together 
in  the  line,  and  that  one  or  the  other  was  written  as  a  gloss  for  the  one  which  Shake¬ 
speare  wrote.  Either  ‘  most  busie  when  I  do  it  ’  or  ‘  least  busie  when  I  do  it  ’  is  intel¬ 
ligible.  ‘  Most  busie,’  however,  would  refer  to  ‘  these  sweet  thoughts  ’  of  which  he 
has  just  spoken,  and  ‘  least  busie  ’  to  his  feelings  when  at  work.  ‘  Studio  fallente 
laborem.’  I  am  disposed  to  believe  that  Shakespeare  wrote:  ‘ — do  even  refresh  my 
labour ;  Most  busie — when  I  do  it.’  These  sweet  thoughts  being  most  busy  when  he 
was  at  work.  Some  actor  or  copyist,  not  understanding  ‘  busie  ’  as  referring  to  these 
‘  thoughts,’  probably  wrote  ‘  least  ’  as  a  gloss  in  his  copy,  and  both  words  were  by  the 
printer  incorporated  in  the  text. — W.  F.  Prideaux  (N  &■»  Qu.  6th  S.  vii,  p.  444, 
1883)  proposed  anew  Theobald’s  busyless,  and,  misled  by  Vaughan,  seriously  argued 
that  ‘  the  collocation  of  ideas  ’  would  be  destroyed  by  the  substitution  of  ‘  me  ’  for  my. 
— F.  A.  Leo  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  xix,  p.  265,  1884)  would  read:  ‘ — refresh  my  labour 
Most  busily  when  I  do  it,’  and  thus  explains :  ‘  My  sweet  and  busy  thoughts  refresh 
my  labour  (they  refresh  it  by  their  busy  doing,  in  a  busy  way — busily!).’ — H.  B. 
Sprague  ( Shakespeariana ,  March,  1884) :  Punctuate  thus:  ‘  Most  busy,  least,  when 
I  do  it.’  Explain  thus :  Most  busy,  least  busy,  when  I  do  this  work,  i.  e.  when  I 
think  of  Miranda’s  love,  toil  is  even  restful.  The  line  is  the  exact  converse  of  Macb. 
[as  quoted  above].  With  Macbeth  repose  is  labour;  with  Ferdinand  labour  is  repose. 
— Sir  P.  Peering  (1886,  p.  19) :  The  two  superlatives  ‘most  busy’  and  ‘least  ’  are 
ranged  alongside  of  each  other  for  antithesis’  sake,  without,  however,  being  syntacti¬ 
cally  connected  with  the  same  noun,  ‘  most  busy  ’  referring  to  ‘  me,’  which  is  contained 
in  the  possessive  pronoun  ‘  my  ’  or  (if  you  like)  to  the  possessive  case  ‘  my,’  ‘  least  ’  to 
the  noun  ‘labours.’  Ferdinand  says:  ‘These  sweet  thoughts  do  even  refresh  my 
labours,  which  labours,  for  all  that  I  am  superlatively  busy,  are  least  laborious,  when 
I  am  actually  engaged  in  them.’ — Deighton  (1889)  adopts  Theobald’s  busyless, 
for  the  reasons  given  by  Walker  and  Dyce. — J.  M.  D.  Meiklejohn  (1889)  :  I  am 
most  busy,  when  I  am  least  occupied  with  my  labour,  because  then  my  thoughts  are 
most  active.  The  order  of  the  words  is  changed  to  emphasize  the  opposition  of 
‘  most  ’  and  ‘  least.’ — [After  a  silence  on  the  subject  fo<  twelve  years,  R.  M.  Spence, 
in  N.  Qu.  (7th  S.  vii,  p.  403,  1889),  offers  another  explanation,  which  sheds,  as  he 
thinks,  so  much  light  that  he  trusts  ‘  the  crux  which  has  haunted  the  passage  so  long 
has  fled  for  ever.’  He  retains  the  first  part  of  his  former  note  as  far  as  concerns  ‘  I 
forget  (all)  But  these  sweet  thoughts,’  but  as  for  the  second  part,  he  lets  loose  his 
opinion,  holds  it  no  longer,  that  the  text  should  be  ‘  Most  busy :  rest,’  but  adopts  Holt’s 
busiest,  and  supposes  ‘  labours  ’  to  be  the  nominative  to  ‘  refresh  ’ ;  he  gives  the  passage 
thus :  ‘  I  forget  (all)  But  these  sweet  thoughts ;  do  even  refresh  (me)  my  labours 
Most  busiest.’  ‘  The  subordinate  clause,  “  when  I  do  it,”  should  present  no  difficulty. 
It  is  equivalent  to  “  when  I  do  so.”  In  prose  the  whole  passage  would  read  thus : 
“  I  forget  everything  but  these  sweet  thoughts,  and  when  I  do  so  my  busiest  labours, 
instead  of  wearying,  even  refresh  me.’  In  his  honest  desire  to  give  honour  where 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


155 


[17.  Most  busie  lest] 

honour  is  due,  Spence,  erroneously,  gives  Holt’s  busiest  to  Iiolt  White,  and  Halli- 
well  s  busihest  to  Bulloch. — On  p.  504  of  the  same  volume  H.  Wedgwood  repeats 
for  the  third  time  his  anticipated  emendation  of  ‘  when  I  do  it  ’  into  ‘  when  I  do,' 
and  lays  stress  on  the  fact  that  the  emendation  came  to  him  ‘  in  his  sleep,’  but  ‘  wi  h- 
out  any  corresponding  dream.’ — On  the  same  page  H.  Ingleby  accepts  Spence’s 
omission  of  the  ‘  semicolon  ’  after  ‘  forget,’  but  ‘  would  preserve  the  Folio  punctuation 
in  the  next  line,  and  understand  the  relative  pronoun.’— In  N.  &  Qu.  (7th  S.  viii,  p. 
303,  1889)  Br.  Nicholson  answers  the  possible  objection  of  making  ‘it’  refer,  as 
he  refers  it,  to  the  plural  antecedent  ‘  sweet  thoughts  ’ :  ‘If  the  objector  be  at  all 
well  read  in  our  old  authors,  he  will  remember  the  sometimes  loose,  and  the  some¬ 
times,  to  us,  apparently  loose,  manner  in  which  they  used  their  pronouns,  and  in  espe¬ 
cial  he  will  remember  how,  in  explanation  of  this  sometimes  only  apparent  looseness, 
it  not  infrequently  happens  that  the  writer  is  thinking  of  and  referring  more  to  his 
thought  than  to  his  previous  expression  of  that  thought.  Here  Ferdinand,  or  Shake¬ 
speare,  uses  “it”  as  referring  to  and  agreeing  with  that  “constant  thinking  of  her” 
rather  than  to  his  fore  expression  of  the  same  in  « these  sweet  thoughts.” — One  exam¬ 
ple  of  a  similar  use  of  “it”  [see  ‘  Jabez,’  in  this  regard,  ante]  from  Cymb.  V,  i,  15, 
will,  I  think,  sufficiently  exemplify  this  sometimes  Elizabethan  custom.  Posthumus 
exclaims  to  the  gods  :  “  You  some  permit  To  second  ills  with  ills,  each  elder  worse, 
And  make  them  dread  it.”  Here  the  “  it  ”  most  unmistakeably  refers  not  to  the 
doer’s  last  committed  crime,  but  to  his  “  guilty  career,”  as  described  in  the  second 
line,  which,  mysterious  and  even  seemingly  wrong,  ends  in  justifying  the  ways  of  God 
to  man.  There  comes,  says  our  moralist,  a  time  when  even  such  criminals  look  back 
on  their  career,  if  not  with  horror,  yet  with  dread.  But  as  he  is  thinking  more  of 
this  criminal  career  where  ills  are  seconded  with  ills,  each  elder  worse,  than  of  the  ills 
themselves,  he,  where  nineteenth  century  writers  would  use  “  dread  them,”  uses 
“  dread  it.”  I  would  add  what  may  be  a  second  possible,  though  not,  perhaps,  very 
probable,  explanation  of  Shakespeare’s  use  of  “  it  ”  in  our  present  passage.  It  may  have 
been  done  of  set  purpose,  lest  his  hearers  should  erroneously  refer  the  more  literally 
grammatical  them  to  Ferdinand’s  just  six  words  before  expressed  “labours,”  which, 

besides  their  nearness  in  expression,  were  to  the  on-loolcers  visibly  in  the  plural.’ _ F. 

A.  Marshall  ( Irving  Sk.  1890) :  If  I  ventured  on  any  emendation,  it  would  be  to 
substitute  ever  for  ‘  even,’  by  which  slight  alteration,  perhaps,  the  sequence  of  Ferdi¬ 
nand’s  thoughts  would  be  more  easily  followed.  ‘  These  sweet  thoughts  do  always 
refresh  my  labours’;  then  he  adds,  as  a  sort  of  afterthought,  ‘and  they  are  most 
busy,  i.  e.  busiest  in  refreshing  them,  when  I  am  actually  occupied  in  my  labour.’  We 
might  have  expected  them  instead  of  •  it,’  but  the  change  to  the  singular  is  very  nat¬ 
ural.  Does  it  not  refer  to  the  ‘  sore  injunction  ’  or  to  the  ‘  mean  task  ’  which  her 
*  crabbed  father  ’  enjoins  him  to  do  ?  Indeed,  if  we  give  to  ‘  it  ’  this  meaning,  and 
remember  that  it  would  include,  as  a  contrast  to  the  sweet  tenderness  of  his  ‘  sweet 
mistress,’  the  equally  sweet  thoughts  which  her  tender  sympathy  suggests,  ‘  it  ’  is  more 
forcible  than  them. — D.  Morris  ( Collins'  Eng.  Classics,  n.  d.) :  Pope’s  emendation 
6eems  to  accord  best  with  the  sense  of  the  passage.  [I  have  reserved  to  the  last  any 
reference  to  an  interpretation  of  this  passage  offered  by  S.  Hickson  in  N.  dr5  Qu. 
(ist  S.  ii,  p.  337,  1850),  which  anticipates  the  interpretation,  that,  nigh  thirty  years 
ago,  occurred  to  me  independently,  and  from  which  I  have  never  yet  seen  any 
reason  to  depart.  To  me  the  Folio  text  is  exactly  correct  as  it  stands.  On  the 
general  meaning  of  the  passage  almost  every  critic,  to  a  man,  is  agreed,  and  nothinf 


156 


THE  TEMPEST  [act  hi,  sc.  i.. 

Mir.  Alas,  now  pray  you  and  Profpero.  1 8 

Worke  not  fo  hard  :  I  would  the  lightning  had 
Burnt  vp  thofe  Logs  that  you  are  enioynd  to  pile:  20 

Pray  fet  it  downe,  and  reft  you  :  when  this  burnes 
'Twill  weepe  for  hauing  wearied  you  :  my  Father 
Is  hard  at  ftudy  ;  pray  now  reft  your  felfe, 

Hee’s  fafe  for  thefe  three  houres. 

Fer.  O  moft  deere  Miftris,  25 

The  Sun  will  fet  before  I  fhall  difcharge 
What  I  muft  ftriue  to  do. 

Mir.  If  you’l  fit  downe 

lie  beare  your  Logges  the  while  :  pray  giue  me  that, 

lie  carry  it  to  the  pile.  30 

18.  Profpero.]  Prospero  at  a  distance  Dyce  ii,  iii. 
unseen.  Rowe.  30.  carry  it~\  carry  7  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

20.  you  are ]  thou  art  Ff,  Rowe  i.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 
thou’rt  Rowe  ii  +  .  you're  Han.  Cap. 

is  more  wearisome  in  the  foregoing  discussion  than  the  uniform  paraphrase  which 
each  one  has  deemed  himself,  very  properly,  compelled  to  give.  The  last  two  lines 
are,  it  seems  to  me,  Ferdinand’s  apology  to  himself  for  pausing  in  his  work,  and  are 
therefore  purposely  begun  by  the  adversative  or  apologetic  ‘  But.’  He  has  been 
neglecting  his  task  to  think  on  Miranda,  then,  recollecting  himself,  says,  in  effect,  ‘  I 
am  forgetting  my  work — But  when  I  do  thus  forget,  my  mind  so  teems  with  thoughts 
that  I  am  really  most  busy  when  I  seem  to  be  least  busy,  and  by  these  sweet  thoughts 
I  am  even  refreshed  for  my  work.’  In  a  word,  ‘  it  ’  refers  to  ‘  forget.’  To  Hickson, 
chronologically,  this  interpretation  belongs,  and  the  fact  that  it  occurred  to  me  inde¬ 
pendently  adds  whatsoever  value  such  coincidences  may  be  thought  to  possess. — Ed.} 

17.  Enter  Miranda]  For  remarks  on  this  scene,  see  Appendix,  ‘  Miranda.’ 

28-30.  If  .  .  .  pile]  Dyce  :  This  speech,  though  printed  as  blank  verse,  will  read 
as  a  couplet.  Nor  is  it  impossible  that  Shakespeare  originally  intended  couplets  [here 
and  in  III,  iii,  67-69],  but  afterwards  changed  his  mind.  [To  these  two  rhyming 
couplets,  where  the  lines  are  so  divided  that  the  rhyming  words  do  not  come  at  the 
end  of  the  lines,  but  within  them,  Br.  Nicholson  adds  a  third :  ‘  Our  months  be 
cold.  The  king  and  prince  at  prayers  ||  Let’s  assist  them,  for  our  case  is  their’s,’  I, 
i,  61-63 ;  and  in  view  thereof  urges  that  ‘  the  laws  of  chance  do  not  allow  of  three 
such  accidents  in  the  short  course  of  one  play ;  while,  in  practice,  in  concordance 
therewith,  no  three — no,  not  even  two,  such  examples  can  be  found  within  the  whole 
range  of  the  Elizabethan  drama.’  Thence  he  concludes  that  in  The  Tempest  Shake¬ 
speare  used  material  drawn  from  some  other  play  which  he  had  perhaps  discarded, 
and  that  Shakespeare  was  prompted  thereto  by  the  haste  with  which  it  was  necessary 
to  bring  out  the  play,  not  only  in  order  to  catch  the  popular  interest  of  the  day  in  Sir 
George  Somers’s  shipwreck,  but,  also,  perhaps  to  stimulate  the  Virginia  colonisation 
schemes,  in  which  Shakespeare  himself  may  have  had  a  share.  See  notes,  III,  iii,  67.} 

30.  lie  .  .  .  pile]  Joseph  Warton  ( Adventurer ,  iii,  41,  1753) :  It  is  by  selecting 
such  little  and  almost  imperceptible  circumstances  that  Shakespeare  has  more  truly 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


157 

31 


Fer.  No  precious  Creature, 

1  had  rather  cracke  my  finewes,  breake  my  backe, 

Then  you  fhould  fuch  difhonor  vndergoe, 

While  I  fit  lazy  by. 

Mir.  It  would  become  me 
As  well  as  it  do’s  you  ;  and  I  fhould  do  it 
With  much  more  eafe :  for  my  good  will  is  to  it, 

And  yours  it  is  againft. 

Pro.  Poore  worme  thou  art  infedted, 

This  vifitation  fhewes  it. 

Mir.  You  looke  wearily. 

Fer.  No,  noble  Miftris,  ’tis  frefh  morning  with  me 
When  you  are  by  at  night :  I  do  befeech  you 
Cheefely,  that  I  might  fet  it  in  my  prayers, 

What  is  your  name  ?  45 

Mir.  Miranda ,  O  my  Father, 

I  haue  broke  your  heft  to  fay  fo. 

Fer.  Admir’d  Miranda ,  48 


32.  I  had]  I  'ad  Pope  + ,  Sing.  Ktly, 
Rife. 

39.  [Aside.  Cap. 

Poore. ..art~\  One  line,  Han. 
infedled]  Infected  and  Han. 


44.  In  parenthesis,  Pope  et  seq. 
(subs.). 

46.  Miranda,]  Miranda.  F3F4. 

47,  51.  I  haue]  I've  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds. 


painted  the  passions  than  any  other  writer ;  affection  is  more  powerfully  expressed  by 
this  simple  wish  and  offer  of  assistance  than  by  the  unnatural  eloquence  and  witti¬ 
cisms  of  Dryden,  or  the  amorous  declamations  of  Rowe. 

38.  it  is]  Anon  (ap.  Grey,  i,  23) :  ‘  It  is  ’  seems  to  be  an  interpolation.  It  makes 
the  verse  too  long,  and  spoils  the  uniformity  of  the  construction  which  went  before. 
— Steevens  adopted  this  suggestion,  which  he  attributes  to  Dr  Farmer. — Knight 
denounced  it  as  spoiling  the  force  of  the  passage. 

39.  worme]  Dyce  :  Used  in  the  sense  of  creature  as  a  term  of  commiseration, 
sometimes  of  contempt.  [In  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  iii,  281,  ed.  1598,  Clinias,  in  Dame- 
tas’s  challenge,  which  is  intentionally  absurd,  is  called  the  ‘  wickedest  worme  that 
■euer  went  upon  two  legs.’ — Ed.] 

39,  40.  infected  ...  visitation]  W.  A.  Wright:  Prospero  adopts  language 
which  was  familiar  when  the  plague  was  of  common  occurrence. 

47.  hest]  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  :  Shakespeare  uses  this  word  but  three  times,  and  only 
in  this  play;  unless  ‘hest’  of  Q,  in  1  Hen.  IV:  II,  iii,  65,  be  accepted  rather  than 
haste  or  hast  of  the  other  Qq  and  the  Ff. — R.  L.  Ashhurst  (73.)  suggested  that  the 
threefold  use  of  ‘  hest  ’  in  The  Tempest  seems  to  be  an  argument  for  the  early  date 
of  the  play,  since  the  only  other  place  is  in  an  early  Quarto.  Growing  ignorance  of 
its  meaning  seems  to  have  substituted  haste  in  all  the  later  editions. 

48,  49.  After  ‘  Miranda  ’  Rowf.  (ed.  ii)  placed  the  exclamation  mark,  which  has 


158 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  in,  sc.  i. 


Indeede  the  top  of  Admiration,  worth 
What’s  deereft  to  the  world :  full  many  a  Lady 
I  haue  ey’d  with  beft  regard,  and  many  a  time 
Th’harmony  of  their  tongues,  hath  into  bondage 
Brought  my  too  diligent  eare  :  for  feuerall  vertues 
Haue  I  lik’d  feuerall  women,  neuer  any 
With  fo  full  foule,  but  fome  defe£t  in  her 
Did  quarrell  with  the  nobleft  grace  the  ow’d, 

And  put  it  to  the  foile.  But  you,  O  you, 

So  perfect,  and  fo  peetleffe,  are  created 
Of  euerie  Creatures  beft. 


59 


55 


50 


58.  peetleffe]  F,. 


been  uniformly  adopted ;  and  after  ‘  Indeede  ’  Theobald  placed  a  comma,  which 
has  been  generally  adopted;  but  Knight  holds  that  the  phrase  is  ‘much  more  ele¬ 
gant  ’  without  it. 

57.  foile]  Jephson:  ‘Foil’  is  from  the  old  French  afoler,  to  defeat.  Ferdinand 
says  he  never  before  saw  a  woman  in  whom  some  defect  did  not,  as  it  were,  contend 
with  the  noblest  grace  she  had  and  defeat  it. — W.  A.  Wright:  Perhaps  this  word 
was  suggested  to  Shakespeare  by  the  contrast  between  the  grace  and  the  defect  which 
is  as  a  foil  to  it,  although  in  this  sense  the  result  would  have  been  the  opposite  of  what 
is  intended.  The  word  ‘  quarrel  ’  points  to  the  struggle  between  the  grace  and  the 
defect,  in  which  the  former  is  worsted. — Phillpotts  :  There  is  difficulty  in  making 
out  clearly  the  various  senses  of  the  word  ‘  foil.’  When  Hamlet  says,  ‘  I’ll  be  your 
foil,  Laertes,’  he  means,  ‘  I  will  b&  like  the  worthless  leaf  which  sets  off  a  jewel.’ 
This  first  is  from  Fr.  feuille ,  Lat.  folium ,  a  leaf.  The  ‘  foil  ’  with  which  Hamlet 
fights  is,  of  course,  a  blunted  weapon,  and  with  it  he  hopes  to  ‘  foil  ’  Laertes.  We 
can,  perhaps,  account  for  both  these  latter  senses  from  the  O.  Fr.  ‘  De  tes  commande- 
menz  ne  foliai'  (I  did  not  go  astray  from  thy  commandments)  ;  whence  also  affolei 
is  said  of  a  compass-needle  which  will  not  point  true;  so  that  a ‘foil’  is  not  an 
unnatural  name  for  that  which  has  had  its  point  blunted,  and  therefore  cannot  accu- 
ratel/point  at  anything.  ‘  To  foil  a  lance-thrust  ’  is,  in  the  same  way,  to  turn  it  aside, 
to  make  it  go  astray ;  and  the  word  when  generalised  comes  to  mean,  to  ‘  defeat  the 
attacks  of  an  adversary.’  Wedgwood  compares  Yx.  fouler,  to  trample  on.  [Skeat 
says  that,  in  the  sense  of  defeat,  ‘  foil  ’  is  corrupted  from  the  O.  Fr.  fouler,  as  defile  is 
from  defouler.] 

58.  peetlesse]  My  copy  of  Fx  agrees  with  Booth’s  reprint  in  this  reading. 

Keightley  says  that  ‘  the  Folio  reads  peetiessel  As  it  is  not  noticed  by  the  Cam.  Edd. 
their  copy  was  probably  correct.  This  is  possibly  one  of  the  many  discrepancies  in 
the  different  copies  of  that  volume,  whereof  the  wholesome  lesson  is  that  in  dealing 
wita  the  Folio  we  are  dealing  not  with  Shakespeare,  but  with  printers  who  changed 
the  text  as  the  book  was  passing  under  their  hands  through  the  press. _ Ed. 

59.  euerie  Creatures  best]  Johnson:  Alluding  to  the  picture  of  Venus  by 
Apelles. — Steevens  :  Perhaps  Shakespeare  had  only  in  his  thoughts  a  fable  related 
in  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  iii  [p.  385,  ed.  1598],  where  the  beasts  having  obtained  per¬ 
mission  of  Jupiter  to  make  themselves  a  king,  created  one  of  ‘every  creature’s  best.' 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


159 


Mir.  I  do  not  know 

One  of  my  fexe ;  no  womans  face  remember, 

Saue  from  my  glaffe,  mine  owne:  Nor  haue  I  feene 
More  that  I  may  call  men,  then  you  good  friend. 

And  my  deere  Father:  how  features  are  abroad 
I  am  skilleffe  of ;  but  by  my  modeftie  65 

(The  iewell  in  my  dower)  I  would  not  wifh 
Any  Companion  in  the  world  but  you  : 

Nor  can  imagination  forme  a  fhape 
Befides  your  felfe,  to  like  of :  but  I  prattle 

Something  too  wildely,  and  my  Fathers  precepts  'Io 

I  therein  do  forget. 

Fer.  I  am,  in  my  condition 
A  Prince  {Miranda)  I  do  thinke  a  King 
(I  would  not  fo)  and  would  no  more  endure 
This  wodden  flauerie,  then  to  fuffer  75 


62.  mine ]  my  Cap. 

65,  89.  I  am]  Tm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds. 

65.  by  my]  my  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 

71.  I  therein  do]  I  do  Pope,  Han. 
Therein  Steev.’93. 


75.  This  wodden]  This  woodden  Ff. 
This  sudden  Wilson.  At  home  this 
wooden  Elze  (p.  140). 

to  fuffer]  I  would  suffer  Pope  + , 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Ktly.  to  suffer  tamely 
Dyce  ii,  iii. 


A  similar  praise  is  also  bestowed  by  [Donis]  on  bis  mistress :  ‘  She  is  her  selfe 
of  best  things  the  collection  ’  [I,  i,  p.  75>  e<F  IS9^-  Cf.  also  As  You  Like  It,  III, 
ii,  151.] 

61.  no  womans  face  remember]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Til.  ii,  247)  asks  War- 
burton  if  ‘  Miranda  has  not  here  forgot  herself  a  little  ?  In  I,  ii,  she  remembers  to 
have  had  four  or  five  women  attendants.’  Although  anyone  can  answer  this  ques¬ 
tion  for  himself  by  recalling  that  Miranda  might  very  well  remember  her  attendants 
without  remembering  a  feature  of  their  faces,  yet  such  minute  criticism  as  Theo¬ 
bald’s  should  not,  I  think,  go  unnoticed ;  no  detail  is  trivial  that  helps  to  complete 
the  picture. — Ed. 

74,  75.  would  ...  to  suffer]  This  sentence  has  been  pronounced  ‘  undoubtedly 
mutilated  ’  by  several  editors,  down  even  as  late  as  Dyce  (ed.  ii),  first,  because  it  was 
supposed  to  be  ungrammatical,  and  secondly,  because  of  the  apparently  defective 
metre  of  line  75.  (For  the  emendations  see  Textual  Notes.)  Malone  defended 
the  grammar  by  adducing  several  parallel  examples  where  to  is  omitted  and  inserted 
in  the  same  sentence ;  to  these  examples  Abbott,  §  350,  added  many  more,  and 
therefrom  formulated  the  rule  that  ‘  to  is  often  omitted  in  the  former  of  two  clauses 
and  inserted  in  the  latter,  particularly  when  the  finite  principal  verb  is  an  auxiliary, 
or  like  an  auxiliary,’  as  in  Timon,  IV,  ii,  33 :  ‘Who  would  be  so  mock’d  with  glory  ? 
or  to  live,’  &c. — W.  A.  Wright  also  adds  the  following  examples  of  the  same  con¬ 
struction  :  Prayer-book  Version  of  Psalm  lxxviii,  4,  8,  ‘  That  we  should  not  hide,  .... 
but  to  shew,’  &c.,  ‘  That  they  might  put  their  trust  in  God,  and  not  to  forget,’  &c. — 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  m,  sc.  L 


160 

The  flefh-flie  blow  my  mouth  :  heare  my  foule  fpeake.  76 

The  verie  inftant  that  I  faw  you,  did 
My  heart  flie  to  your  feruice,  there  refides 
To  make  me  flaue  to  it,  and  for  your  fake 

Am  I  this  patient  Logge-man.  80 

Mir.  Do  you  loue  me  ? 

Fer.  O  heauen  ;  O  earth,  beare  witnes  to  this  found, 

And  crowne  what  I  profeffe  with  kinde  euent 
If  I  fpeake  true :  if  hollowly,  inuert 
What  beft  is  boaded  me,  to  mifchiefe :  I, 

Beyond  all  limit  of  what  elfe  i’th  world 
Do  loue,  prize,  honor  you. 

Mir.  I  am  a  foole 
To  weepe  at  what  I  am  glad  of. 

Pro.  Faire  encounter 

Of  two  moll;  rare  affedlions :  heauens  raine  grace 

86.  what ]  aught  Han.  Coll.  MS.  90.  [Aside.  Cap. 

what's  Ktly. 

Secondly:  the  metre  of  line  75  has  been  justified  by  Abbott  (§478),  on  the  theory, 
to  which  I  find  it  impossible  to  accede,  that  ‘  -tr  final  was  sometimes  pronounced 
with  a  kind  of  “burr,”  which  produced  the  effect  of  an  additional  syllable;  just  as 
“  Sirrah  ”  is  another  and  more  vehement  form  of  “  Sir.”  ’  Accordingly,  the  line  is 
thus  scanned  :  ‘  This  wood  |  en  sla  |  very,  than  |  to  suff  j  er.’  Or,  again,  as  in  Ham. 

I,  iii,  1 17:  ‘Lends  the  |  tongue  vows;  |  these  bla  |  zes  daugh  |  ter’;  or,  As  You 
Like  It,  IV,  iii,  91 :  <  Like  a  |  ripe  sis  |  ter :  |  the  worn  |  an  low.’  A  prolongation, 
by  a  ‘  burr,’  or  otherwise,  of  an  unaccented  syllable  is,  to  my  ear,  so  abhorrent  that  a 
discord,  if  need  be,  is  far  preferable;  but  there  need  be  no  discord  in  a  verse  wherein 
there  is  a  pause,  as  here. — Ed. 

S6.  what  else]  For  other  examples  of  ‘  what  ’  in  elliptical  expressions  meaning 
any} see  Abbott,  §  255.— Allen  (Phiia.  Sh.  Soc.) :  Keightley  conjectures  ‘  what’r 
elfe.’  Undoubtedly  's  for  is  is  wanted;  but,  instead  of  being  thus  thrust  into  the 
verse  ab  extra,  it  should  be  discovered  where  it  lies  hid  within  the  verse — merged, 
that  is  (under  Walker’s  rule),  in  the  fe  of  ‘  elfe,’  although  Walker  himself  was  not 
aware  of  the  fact.  Shakespeare  wrote  as  in  Ft.  Read,  therefore,  without  doubt : 

‘  Beyond  all  limit  of  what  elfe’j  i’  the  world.’ — I  do  violently  suspect,  moreover,  that 
the  entire  sentence  should  read  thus:  ‘Aye !  Beyond  all  limit  of  what  elfe  V  i’  the 
world  Do  I  love,  prize,  honour  you.’  That  ‘  aye  ’  is  habitually  written  ‘  I  ’  in  the 
Folios  everybody  knows.  It  is  wanted  here  in  answer  to  Miranda’s  question ;  but 
the  compositor,  not  understanding  this,  took  ‘  I  ’  to  be  the  pronoun,  and  then  dropped 
the *  1 1  ’  after  ‘  do  ’  as  an  accidental  repetition  in  the  MS. 

88,89.  Steevens:  Cf.  Rom.  &  Jul.  Ill,  ii,  103:  ‘Back,  foolish  tears,  back  to 
your  native  spring!  Your  tributary  drops  belong  to  woe,  Which  you  mistaking  offer 
up  to  joy.’— W.  A.  Wright:  Cf.  Macb.  I,  iv,  33:  ‘My  plenteous  joys,  Wanton  in 
fulness,  seek  to  hide  themselves  In  drops  of  sorrow.’ 


»5 


90 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


On  that  which  breeds  betweene  ’em. 

Fer.  Wherefore  weepe  you  ? 

Mir  :  At  mine  vnworthineffe,  that  dare  not  offer 
What  I  defire  to  giue ;  and  much  leffe  take 
What  I  fhall  die  to  want :  But  this  is  trifling, 

And  all  the  more  it  feekes  to  hide  it  felfe, 

The  bigger  bulke  it  fliewes.  Hence  bafhfull  cunning, 
And  prompt  me  plaine  and  holy  innocence. 

I  am  your  wife,  if  you  will  marrie  me ; 

If  not,  lie  die  your  maid  :  to  be  your  fellow 
You  may  denie  me,  but  lie  be  your  feruant 
Whether  you  will  or  no. 

Fer.  My  Miftris  (deereft) 

And  I  thus  humble  euer. 

Mir.  My  husband  then  ? 

Fer.  I,  with  a  heart  as  willing 
As  bondage  ere  of  freedome :  heere’s  my  hand. 

Mir.  And  mine,  with  my  heart  in’t ;  and  now  farewel 
Till  halfe  an  houre  hence. 

Fer.  A  thoufand,  thoufand.  Exeunt. 

Pro.  So  glad  of  this  as  they  I  cannot  be, 

Who  are  furpriz’d  with  all ;  but  my  reioycing 


161 

92 


95 


100 


105 


no 


113 


92.  ’em']  thetn  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt. 

97.  all  Ike]  yet  the  or  still  the  Grey. 

feekes]  feekt  F3F4. 

105.  [Kneeling.  Coll,  ii  (MS). 

107.  [Rising.  Coll,  ii  (MS). 


107.  ai]  fo  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
III.  Exeunt.] Exeunt. ..severally. Cap. 
1 13.  with  all]  withal  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Huds. 
Clke,  Wh.  ii,  Dtn. 

reioycing]  rejoying  F2. 


96.  die  to  want]  W.  A.  Wright:  That  is,  die  for  wanting.  [For  many  other 
examples  of  the  infinitive  thus  used,  see  Abbott,  §  356.] 

97.  it  ...  it  selfe]  Capell  :  [Here  is  a  line]  from  Miranda  whose  sweetness  may 
not  be  seen  without  op’ning :  her  ‘  it  ’  and  her  ‘  itself,’  which  comes  after,  relate  to 
nothing  express’d  by  her;  but  to  what  the  character’s  delicacy  does  not  admit  of 
naming, — love. 

101.  fellow]  Steevens:  That  is,  companion.  See  I,  ii,  481. 

1 13.  are]  Hudson:  ‘Are’  is,  I  have  no  doubt,  a  misprint  for  am.  Prospero  is 
himself  surprised,  as  indeed  he  well  may  be,  that  his  wish  has  been  crowned  far 
beyond  his  expectations ;  and  it  is  most  natural  that  he  should  be  expressing  that  sur¬ 
prise  ;  but  the  lovers,  I  take  it,  are  not  at  all  surprised  at  what  has  sprung  up  in  their 
hearts ;  it  seems  to  them  the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world. 

1 13.  with  all]  Capell,  accepting  this  reading  of  the  Folio,  supposed  that  ‘a  sub¬ 
stantive  is  wanting  ’  after  ‘  all  ’ ;  ‘  but  this,’  he  says,  *  we  get  at  grammatically,  a  term 
of  the  line  before  it  inferring — gladness  ; — Upon  whom  “  all  ”  gladness  is  come,  sud- 
11 


1 62 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iii,  sc.  ii. 


At  nothing  can  be  more :  lie  to  my  booke, 
For  yet  ere  fupper  time,  muft  I  performe 
Much  bufineffe  appertaining. 


i*5 

Exit. 


Sccena  Secunda. 


Enter  Caliban ,  Stephano,  and  Tri?iculo. 

Sie.  Tell  not  me,  when  the  But  is  out  we  will  drinke 
water,  not  a  drop  before ;  therefore  beare  vp,  &  boord 
ein’  Seruant  Monfter,  drinke  to  me. 


1 1 6.  appertaining .]  appertaining  to 
my  project.  Ktly. 

2.  The  other  Part  of  the  Island.  Pope. 
Enter...]  Enter  S.  and  T.  reeling; 


Cal.  following,  with  the  bottle.  Cap. 
Enter  Cal.  S.  and  T.  with  a  bottle.  Johns. 

3.  me,~\  me ;  Rowe  ii. 

4.  drop  before ]  drop ,  before  F2F3. 


denly  and  by  surprize.’ — Theobald,  however,  had  silently  substituted  ‘  withal,’  and 
has  had  ever  since  a  respectable  following. — Steevens  proposed  to  make  the  same 
change  as  though  for  the  first  time,  and  also  suggested  that  ‘  the  sense  might  be  clearer 
were  we  to  make  a  slight  transposition :  “  So  glad  of  this  as  they,  who  are  surpriz’d 
With  all,  I  cannot  be—”  ’ — Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  3)  confirmed  Theobald’s  change,  and 
Abbott,  §  196,  accepting  it  as  the  true  reading,  thus  remarks:  ‘Sometimes  this  is 
understood  after  “  withal,”  so  that  it  means  with  all  this ,  and  is  used  adverbially  [as 
here,  where  it  means]  “surprised  with,  or  at,  this.”  Here,  however,  perhaps,  and 
elsewhere  certainly,  “with”  means  in  addition  to,  and  “with- all  (this)”  means 
besides.’  [Theobald’s  change,  besides  having  a  force  of  its  own,  really  includes  the 
Folio’s  reading. — Ed.] 

1 14.  booke]  See  note  on  III,  ii,  94. 

2.  See  II,  ii,  184. 

5.  Seruant  Monster]  Theobald:  I  can’t  help  taking  notice,  on  this  occasion, 
of  the  virulence  of  Ben  Jonson,  who,  in  the  Induction  to  his  Bartlemew  Fair,  has 
endeavoured  to  throw  dirt,  not  only  at  this  single  character,  but  at  this  whole  play ; 
‘  there  be  never  a  servant  monster  in  the  fair,  who  can  help  it,  he  says,  nor  a  nest 
of  antiques  ?  he  is  loth  to  make  nature  afraid  in  his  plays,  like  those  that  beget  tales, 
tempests,  and  such  like  drolleries.’— [p.  370,  ed.  Gifford] Capell  also  noted  this 
pointed  allusion,  as  he  supposed  it  to  be,  and  was  also  the  first  to  detect  its  possible 
bearing  on  the  Date  of  Composition  of  The  Tempest.  (See  Essay  on  this  subject  in 
Appendix.)  Gifford  is,  of  course,  up  in  arms  to  defend  Jonson,  which  he  does  with 
success.  But  small  faith  is  to  be  placed,  I  think,  in  the  sneers  which  are  constantly 
imputed  to  Jonson.  I  can  detect  nothing  whatsoever  in  the  preceding  allusion,  if  it 
really  be  an  allusion,  that  smacks  in  the  least  of  ill-nature,  far  less  of  virulent  malig¬ 
nity.  ‘  “  Servant-monster,”  ’  says  Gifford,  ‘  is  undoubtedly  to  be  found  in  The  Tem¬ 
pest;  but  I  am  yet  to  learn  that  the  expression  was  the  invention  of  Shakespeare  or 
even  peculiar  to  him  ;  though  he  has  applied  it  with  inimitable  humour.  The  reader 
is  now  to  learn  that  the  town  in  those  days  abounded  with  exhibitions  of  what  were 


act  hi,  sc.  ii.]  THE  TEMPEST  ,6j 

Trin.  Seruant  Monfler  ?  the  folly  of  this  Hand,  they  6 
fay  there’s  but  hue  vpon  this  Ifle ;  we  are  three  of  them, 
if  th’other  two  be  brain’d  like  vs,  the  State  totters. 

Ste.  Drinke  feruant  Monfter  when  I  bid  thee,  thy 
eies  are  almoft  fet  in  thy  head.  10 

Trin.  Where  fhould  they  bee  fet  elfe  ?  hee  were  a 
braue  Monfter  indeede  if  they  were  fet  in  his  taile. 

Ste.  My  man-Monfter  hath  drown’d  his  tongue  in 
facke  .•  for  my  part  the  Sea  cannot  drowne  mee,  I  fwam 
ere  I  could  recouer  the  fhore,  hue  and  thirtie  Leagues  15 

off  and  on,  by  this  light  thou  fhalt  bee  my  Lieutenant 
Monfter,  or  my  Standard. 

Trin.  Your  Lieutenant  if  you  lift,  hee’s  no  ftandard. 

Ste.  Weel  not  run  Monfieur  Monfter.  io 


8.  th’other]  the  other  Rowe.  Knt,  Sta.  Cam.  (subs.),  on,. ..light.  Cap. 

io.  head]  heart  Ff.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Hal.  (subs.). 

16.  on,... light"]  on;. ..light  Rowe+, 


familiarly  called  monsters,  i.  e.  creatures  of  various  kinds  which  were  taught  a  thou¬ 
sand  antic  tricks ;  the  constant  concomitants  of  puppet-shows.  “  I  would  not  have 
you,”  says  Machin,  “  step  into  the  suburbs,  and  acquaint  yourself  either  with  monsters 
or  motions .” — Dumb  Knight.  And  Jonson  himself,  in  a  subsequent  part  of  this  play, 
makes  Bristle  tax  Haggise  with  loitering  behind  “  to  see  the  man  with  the  monsters." 
Elephants,  camels,  bears,  horses,  &c.  were  all  accompanied  by  apes,  who  amused  the 
spectator  by  assuming  a  command  over  them.  Nor  is  the  custom  nor  the  language 

yet  obsolete . It  is  impossible  to  look  at  the  part  of  Trinculo  without  seeing  that 

it  bears  an  immediate  reference  to  this  custom ;  and  we  may  form  some  idea  of  the 
roar  of  the  old  theatre  at  hearing  him  and  his  associate  unwittingly  characterise  them¬ 
selves  as  monsters  by  adopting  the  well-known  expression.’ 

6.  the  .  .  .  Hand]  The  only  explanation,  I  think,  which  has  ever  been  given  of 
this  puzzling  phrase  is  the  plausible  and  dramatic  interpretation  of  Br.  Nicholson, 
who  supposes  that  after  Stephano’s  challenge  to  Caliban,  ‘  Servant-monster,  drink  to 
me !’  Trinculo,  the  professional  Jester,  apes  the  manners  of  his  betters,  and,  all  of 
them  feeling  themselves  monarchs  of  all  they  surveyed,  proposes  as  a  toast  ‘  The 
folly  of  this  Island  !’ 

16.  by  this  light]  Capell  connected  this  oath  with  Stephano’s  exploit  in  swim¬ 
ming  instead  of  with  his  appointment  of  Caliban  to  a  lieutenancy,  and  his  note  on  the 
change  must  not  go  unrecorded ;  in  it  he  out-Capelled  himself :  ‘  Thou  shall  be  my 
lieutenant,  &c.  Words  which  all  former  copies  have  prefac’d  with  that  oath  which 
is,  in  this,  annex’d  to  Stephano’s  lie ;  and  as  from  this  mode  of  pointing  results 
humour  plenty,  and  none  or  next  to  none  from  the  other,  it  becomes  a  duty  to  close 
with  it,  that  facility  consider’d  which  produces  faults  of  this  sort :  in  this  case,  a  point 
only  was  drop’d  following  light.’ 

18.  standard]  That  is,  of  course,  standard-bearer  or  ensign,  with  a  punning  allu¬ 
sion  to  his  drunkenness. 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii 


ib4 

Trin.  Nor  go  neither:  but  you'l  lie  like  dogs,  and  yet  20 
fay  nothing  neither. 

Ste.  Moone-calfe,  fpeak  once  in  thy  life,  if  thou  beeft 
a  good  Moone-calfe. 

Cal.  How  does  thy  honour?  Let  me  licke  thy  fhooe  : 

He  not  ferue  him,  he  is  not  valiant.  25 

Trin.  Thou  lieft  moft  ignorant  Monfter,  I  am  in  cafe 
to  iuftle  a  Conftable :  why,  thou  debofh‘d  Fifh  thou, 
was  there  euer  man  a  Coward,  that  hath  drunk  fo  much 
Sacke  as  I  to  day  ?  wilt  thou  tell  a  monftrous  lie,  being 
but  halfe  a  Fifh,  and  halfe  a  Monfter  ?  30 

Cal.  Loe,  how  he  mockes  me,  wilt  thou  let  him  my 
Lord? 

Trin.  Lord,  quoth  he  ?  that  a  Monfter  fhould  be  fuch 
a  Naturall  ? 

Cal ,  Loe,  loe  againe  :  bite  him  to  death  I  prethee.  35 

Ste.  Trinculo,  keepe  a  good  tongue  in  your  head  :  If 
you  proue  a  mutineere,  the  next  Tree.*  the  poore  Mon- 
fteFs  my  fubie6t,  and  he  fhall  not  fuller  indignity. 

Cal.  I  thanke  my  noble  Lord.  Wilt  thou  be  pleas’d 
to  hearken  once  againe  to  the  fuite  I  made  to  thee  ?  40 


24,  25.  As  verse,  Knt. 

27.  deboJh‘d~\  debauched  Coll.  Cam.  i, 
Jeph.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

29.  tell  <z]  tell  me  a  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Cap. 

37.  mutineere ,]  mutineer —  Dyce. 
Tree  .•]  tree —  Rowe. 


39,  40.  As  verse,  Anon.  (ap.  Grey), 
Cap.  Steev.  (the  latter,  followed  by 
Huds.,  omits  to. ..to  in  line  40)  Dyce  ii, 
iii. 

40.  to  hearken  once  againe ]  once  again 
to  hearken  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 


27.  debosh'd]  To  be  pronounced,  I  think,  with  a  long  o,  if  we  are  to  recognise 
its  kinship  with  the  French  desbauchl.  Collier  called  attention  to  an  old  mode  of 
spelling  in  Beau.  &  Fl.’s  Four  Plays  in  One,  ‘  deboist.’  It  is  not  improbable  that  the 
two  words  ‘  debosh’d  ’  and  ‘  deboist  ’  were  pronounced  much  alike,  the  s  in  the  latter 
being  probably  pronounced  like  the  sh  in  the  former,  as,  indeed,  it  is  so  spelled, 
deboisht,  and  referred  to  deboshed,  in  Sherwood’s  Eng.  dr  Fr.  Diet,  appended  to 
Cotgrave.  Under  Desbauchl  Cotgrave  gives  :  ‘  Deboshed,  lewd,  incontinent,’  &c. — 
Ed. 

31,  32.  my  Lord]  Anon.  (Grey,  i,  23):  Here  is  a  syllable  too  much;  all  Call 
ban’s  speeches  are  designed  to  be  metre ;  we  should  correct,  I  think,  by  striking  out 
‘  my,’  as  Trinculo  immediately  repeats  it. 

37-  mutineere]  Dyce  :  It  is  questionable  if  Shakespeare  did  not  write  here  muti- 
ner,  the  more  usual  spelling  of  the  word,  as  in  Coriol.  I,  i,  254. 

40.  Steevens  here  reads  as  one  line :  *  To  hearken  once  again  the  suit  I  mada 
thee.’— Dyce  thinks  the  reading  *  most  probable.’ 


act  hi,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


165 

41 


Ste.  Marry  will  I :  kneele,  and  repeate  it, 
I  will  ftand,  and  fo  fhall  Trinculo. 


Enter  Ariell  inuifible. 

Cal.  As  I  told  thee  before,  I  am  fubietft  to  a  Tirant, 
A  Sorcerer,  that  by  his  cunning  hath  cheated  me 
Of  the  Ifland. 

Ariell.  Thou  lyeft. 

Cal.  Thou  lyeft,  thou  iefting  Monkey  thou  : 

I  would  my  valiant  Mafter  would  deftroy  thee. 

I  do  not  lye. 

Ste.  Trinculo,  if  you  trouble  him  any  more  in’s  tale, 
By  this  hand,  I  will  fupplant  fome  of  your  teeth. 

Trin.  Why,  I  faid  nothing. 

Ste.  Mum  then,  and  no  more  :  proceed. 

Cal.  I  fay  by  Sorcery  he  got  this  Ifle 
From  me,  he  got  it.  If  thy  Greatneffe  will 
Reuenge  it  on  him,  (for  I  know  thou  dar’ft) 

But  this  Thing  dare  not. 

Ste.  That’s  moft  certaine. 


41,  42.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq. 

44,  46.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq.  (ex¬ 
cept  Steev.  Knt,  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Rife). 

Four  lines,  ending  thee. . .  Tirant 
...hath...IJland.  Steev.  Three  lines,  end¬ 
ing  to... cunning... i/land.  Ktly. 

51,  52.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq. 


55>  S6-  IJle  From,  me,  he]  Isle,  From 
Me,  he  F4.  Isle,  From  me  he  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  Isle ;  From  me  he  Theob. 
et  seq.  (subs.). 

58.  dare  not.]  dares  not —  Theob.  ii, 
Warb.  Johns,  dares  not ;  Han.  dare 
not,  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.). 


43-  inuisible]  Collier  :  Of  old,  performers,  who  were  to  be  supposed  unseen 
by  the  other  actors,  and  yet  were  to  be  seen  by  the  auditors,  wore  a  particular 
kind  of  dress,  understood  to  indicate  their  invisibility;  one  of  the  most  curious 
items  in  ‘  Henslowe’s  Diary  ’  is  that  of  ‘  a  robe  for  to  go  invisible.’— .S/J.  Soc.  1845, 
p.  277. 

44- 46.  As  .  .  .  Island]  Dyce:  I  quite  agree  with  Steevens  in  thinking  that  Cali¬ 
ban  was  intended  always  to  speak  in  verse ;  and  I  therefore  believe  that  the  present 
speech  is  corrupted,  because  it  defies  any  tolerable  metrical  arrangement.  [In 
Steevens  s  metrical  attempt  he  was  forced  to  notify  the  public  that  ‘  tyrant  ’  was  to  be 
pronounced  as  a  trisyllable,  but  he  did  not  tell  us  how. — Ed.] 

58.  dare]  Abbott,  §  361 :  The  subjunctive  ‘he  dare’  is  more  common  than  ‘ he 
dares  ’  in  the  historical  plays,  but  far  less  common  in  the  others.  The  only  difference 
between  the  two  is  a  difference  of  thought,  the  same  as  between  ‘  he  can  jump  six 
feet  ’  and  ‘  he  could  jump  six  feet,’  i.  e.  if  he  liked.  Compare  [the  present  passage] 
‘this  thing  dare  not,’  i.  e.  ‘would  not  dare  on  any  consideration’;  stronger  than 
dares.’ 


1 66 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Cal.  Thou  (halt  be  Lord  of  it,  and  lie  ferue  thee.  60 

Ste.  How  now  (hall  this  be  compaft  ? 

Canft  thou  bring  me  to  the  party  ? 

Cal.  Yea,  yea  my  Lord,  lie  yeeld  him  thee  afleepe, 

Where  thou  maift  knocke  a  naile  into  his  head. 

Ariell.  Thou  lieft,  thou  canft  not.  65 

Cal.  What  a  py’de  Ninnie’s  this?  Thou  fcuruy  patch : 

I  do  befeech  thy  Greatneffe  giue  him  blowes, 

And  take  his  bottle  from  him :  When  that’s  gone, 

He  (hall  drinke  nought  but  brine,  for  He  not  fhew  him 
Where  the  quicke  Frefhes  are.  70 

Ste.  Trinculo ,  run  into  no  further  danger : 

Interrupt  the  Monfter  one  word  further  ,  and  by  this 
hand,  He  turne  my  mercie  out  o’doores,  and  make  a 
Stockfifh  of  thee. 

Trin.  Why,  what  did  I  ?  I  did  nothing :  75 

He  go  farther  off. 

60.  thee']  In  Italics,  Han.  75,  76.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq. 

61.  now]  Om.  Pope,  Han.  76.  go  farther ]  goe  no  further 

61,  62.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq.  Rowe,  Pope,  Cap.  Hal. 

71,  72.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq. 


60.  lie]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  5) :  Rather,  I  think,  'I will  serve  thee  ’ ;  for  I  doubt 
whether  an  emphasis  was  intended  to  be  laid  on  *  thee.’  [Hanmer  thought  otherwise  ; 
see  Text.  N. — Ed.] 

66.  py’de]  Johnson  :  This  line  should  certainly  be  given  to  Stephano.  *  Pied  ’ 
alludes  to  the  striped  coat  worn  by  fools,  of  which  Caliban  could  have  no  knowledge. 
Trinculo  had  before  been  reprimanded  and  threatened  by  Stephano  for  giving  Caliban 
the  lie;  he  is  now  supposed  to  repeat  his  offense.  Upon  which  Stephano  cries  out  [as 
in  line  66],  Caliban  now  seeing  his  master  in  the  mood  that  he  wished,  instigates 
him  to  vengeance  :  ‘  I  do  beseech,’  & c.  [This  note  was  withdrawn  in  the  Variorum 
Editions  which  were  issued  after  Dr  Johnson’s  death. — Ed.] — Steevens  :  Trinculo 
is  a  jester,  and  therefore  wears  the  party-coloured  dress  of  one  of  these  characters. 

66.  patch]  W.  A.  Wright  cites  from  Florio’s  New  Worlde  of  Wordes  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  Ital . pazzo,  viz:  ‘foolish,  fond,  mad,’  &c.  ‘Also  a  foole,  a  gull,  an  idiot, 
a  madman,  a  naturall.’ — SkeAT,  however,  says  that  the  supposition  that  ‘patch’  is  a 
nickname  from  the  dress  is  most  probably  right.  ‘  It  is  independent  of  the  Ital.  pazzo, 
a  fool,  a  madman,  which  is  used  in  a  much  stronger  sense.’  Douce’s  long  not$ 
with  others,  is  given  in  Mer.  of  Fen.  II,  v,  49 :  ‘  The  patch  is  kind  enough 

74.  Stockfish]  Dyce:  That  is,  beat  thee  as  a  stockfish  (dried  cod)  is  beaten 
before  it  is  boiled. — W.  A.  Wright:  Compare  Hollyband’s  Fr.  Diet.  1593,  ‘je  te 
frotteray  d.  double  carrillon,  I  will  beate  thee  like  a  stockefish.’  Cotgrave  (s.  v.  Caril¬ 
lon)  has :  ‘  I  will  beate  thee  like  a  stockfish,  I  will  swinge  thee  while  I  may  stand 
ouer  thee.’ 

76.  lie  go]  The  difference  here  between  the  F,  and  the  other  Folios  is  of  small 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  TEMPEST 

Ste.  Didft  thou  not  fay  he  lyed  ? 

Ariell.  Thou  lieft. 

Ste.  Do  I  fo  ?  Take  thou  that, 

As  you  like  this,  giue  me  the  lye  another  time. 

Tnn.  I  did  not  giue  the  lie :  Out  o’your  wittes,  and 
hearing  too  ? 

A  pox  o’your  bottle,  this  can  Sacke  and  drinking  doo : 
A  murren  on  your  Monfter,  and  the  diuell  take  your 
fingers. 

Cal.  Ha,  ha,  ha. 

Ste.  Now  forward  with  your  Tale:  prethee  Hand 
further  off. 

Cal.  Beate  him  enough  :  after  a  little  time 
lie  beate  him  too. 

Ste.  Stand  farther :  Come  proceede. 

Cal.  Why,  as  I  told  thee,  ’tis  a  cuftome  with  him 
I’th  afternoone  to  fleepe :  there  thou  maift  braine  him, 
Hauing  firft  feiz’d  his  bookes  :  Or  with  a  logge 


167 

77 


80 


85 


90 


94 


79.  Take  thou]  Take  you  F3F4,  Rowe 
i,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Johns. 

[Beats  him.  Rowe. 

80.  As]  An  Ktly  conj. 

81-85.  Lines  ran  on,  Pope  et  seq. 


81 .  giue  the ]  give  thee  the  F4,  Rowe  + , 
Steev.’85,  Hal.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

84.  murren ]  murrain  F3F4,  Rowe. 
91.  farther ]  frirther  Ff. 

93.  there ]  then  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds.  where  Jervis. 


moment.  In  the  latter  Trinculo’s  refusal  to  go  betokens  an  independence  of  spirit 
which  he  certainly  shows  on  no  other  occasion. — Ed. 

81.  giue  the  lie]  Surely  F4  has  here  the  true  reading. — Ed. 

87,  88,  91.  It  is  just  possible  that  these  commands  to  stand  further  off  are  addressed 
not  to  Trinculo,  but  to  Caliban.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  close,  confidential  atti¬ 
tude  taken  by  Caliban  brings  into  painful  emphasis  one  of  his  characteristics,  which 
Trinculo  described  as  ancient  and  fish-like. — Ed. 

93.  there]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  But  Caliban  is  speaking  of  the  proper  time  to  kill 
Prospero,  viz :  when  he  is  asleep,  not  of  the  place  where  he  is  to  be  killed.  [See 
Text.  Notes.]  Afterwards,  when  again  Caliban  mentions  that  Prospero  will  be  asleep, 
he  asks  :  ‘  Wilt  thou  destroy  him  then?' — Dyce  (ed.  ii) :  Though  in  my  former  edi¬ 
tion  I  retained  the  old  reading,  I  now  hold  the  alteration  [by  Collier’s  MS]  to  be 
absolutely  necessary. 

94.  bookes]  Hunter  (i,  181) :  It  is  a  curious  point  in  bibliography  what,  specific¬ 
ally,  the  books  of  the  Magicians  were.  It  is  strange  that  not  one  (as  far  as  is  known) 
has  come  down  to  our  times  if  they  were  anything  more  than  the  harmless  treatises 
on  natural  science  of  the  middle  ages,  books  of  real  science,  with  geometrical  figures, 
or  works  in  the  Oriental  languages,  read  backwards.  When  Hugh  Draper  of  Bristol, 
an  astronomer,  was  charged  with  practising  as  a  sorcerer,  he  confessed  that  he  had 
done  so ;  but  that  since  he  so  misliked  his  science  that  he  burned  all  his  books  (Bay 


1 63 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Batter  his  skull,  or  paunch  him  with  a  ftake, 

Or  cut  his  wezand  with  thy  knife.  Remember 
Firft  to  poffeffe  his  Bookes  ;  for  without  them 
Hee’s  but  a  Sot,  as  I  am ;  nor  hath  not 
One  Spirit  to  command  :  they  all  do  hate  him 
As  rootedly  as  I.  Burne  but  his  Bookes, 

He  ha’s  braue  Vtenfils  (for  fo  he  calles  them) 
Which  when  he  ha’s  a  houfe,  hee’l  decke  withall. 
And  that  mod  deeply  to  confider,  is 


103 


IOO 


95 


98.  nor']  and  Pope,  Han. 

102.  a  houfe]  an  house  Rowe  + ,  Steev. 


102.  decke]  deck't  Han.  Walker,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds.  deck  it  Ktly. 


’85- 


ley’s  Hist,  of  the  Tower,  App.  57).  Simon  Penbrook,  in  1578,  being  charged  with 
being  a  conjurer,  fell  down  dead  in  St  Saviour’s  church,  when  five  books  were  found 
upon  him  (Beard’s  Theatre,  &c.  p.  126).  It  is  a  rule  laid  down  in  the  Summa 
Angelica,  article  Sors,  that  a  necromancer  is  not  to  be  considered  purged  unless  he 
has  burned  his  books.  [Halliwell  says  that  to  this  cause  is  perhaps  to  be  attributed 
the  great  rarity  of  these  books  of  the  magicians,  and  he  agrees  with  Hunter  in  not 
having  seen  any  one  that  is  ‘  fairly  entitled  to  the  honour  of  being  accepted  for  the 
real  book,  which  was  presumed  to  invest  the  necromancer  with  his  power.’]  Surely 
they  must  be  something  more  than  books  of  natural  science,  used  as  we  may  imagine 
an  impostor  might  use  them.  It  is  strange,  however,  that  not  one  book  which  can  be 
certainly  fixed  upon  as  one  of  this  class  should  have  escaped.  I  speak  only  of  manu¬ 
scripts  in  English  libraries ;  foreign  libraries  may  contain  such.  [Probably  many  are 
still  to  be  found  in  Germany,  to  judge  from  the  reprints  by  Scheible  of  Stuttgart. 
Any  ‘  Hollenzwang  ’  of  Dr  Faustus  would  serve  the  turn,  with  its  intricate  formulas 
for  raising  spirits  of  every  description,  and  full  of  angelic  and  cabalistic  writing ; 

‘  The  Sixth  and  Seventh  Book  of  Moses,’  translated  for  the  first  time,  I  believe,  in 
1725,  out  of  the  Chaldee  original,  may  be  highly  recommended;  it  descends  to  such 
homely  details  of  life,  as  taking  a  drink  of  water  at  night,  an  extremely  risky  act,  it 
appears,  owing  to  the  fondness  of  devils  for  water  jars,  possibly  for  coolness’  sake ; 
the  formula,  however,  is  graciously  given  (p.  391),  which  renders  the  act  innocuous. 
In  Has  Kloster,  iii,  p.  1157,  Stuttgart,  1847,  a  lithographic  reproduction  is  given  of  a 
parchment  MS  preserved  in  the  Grand-ducal  Library  at  Weimar,  which  amply  fulfils 
every  ideal  of  a  magic  book.  Its  title  is :  1  Praxis  Magica  Faustiana  oder  der  von 
Doct  Johann  Faust,  Practicirte  und  beschworne  Hollen  Zwang.  Passau,  Anno  1527.’ 
—Ed.] 

98.  Sot]  Of  course,  Caliban  cannot  here  use  this  word  in  its  modem  meaning  of  a 
confirmed  drunkard,  but  rather  in  the  contemporary  French  meaning  of  ‘  sot,’  which 
Cotgrave  gives  (s.  v.)  as :  ‘  asse,  dunce,  dullard,  blockhead,  loggerhead,  growtnoll, 
iobemoll,  growthead,  ioulthead,’  &c. — Ed. 

ioi.  Vtensils]  Abbott,  §  492,  says  that  this  is  ‘perhaps’  accented  on  the  first 
syllable.  Evidently,  to  avoid  this  accentuation,  an  anonymous  conjecture  of  O  he  for 
1  He  ’  is  recorded  in  the  Third  Cambridge  Edition. 

103.  that]  For  that  that  or  that  which.  The  omission  of  the  relative  is  so  com¬ 
mon  that  attention  need  scarcely  be  called  to  it.  See,  for  similar  omissions,  ‘  There’s 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


169 


The  beautie  of  his  daughter :  he  himfelfe 

Cals  her  a  non-pareill :  I  neuer  faw  a  woman  105 

But  onely  Sycorax  my  Dam,  and  fhe ; 

But  fhe  as  farre  furpaffeth  Sycorax, 

As  great’ft  do’s  leaft. 

Ste.  Is  it  fo  braue  a  Lafle  ? 

Cal.  I  Lord,  fhe  will  become  thy  bed,  I  warrant,  no 

And  bring  thee  forth  braue  brood. 

Ste.  Monfter,  I  will  kill  this  man :  his  daughter  and 
I  will  be  King  and  Queene,  faue  our  Graces :  and  Trin- 
culo  and  thy  felfe  fhall  be  Vice-royes  : 

Doft  thou  like  the  plot  Trinculo  ?  1 1 5 

Trirt.  Excellent. 

Ste  Giue  me  thy  hand,  I  am  forry  I  beate  thee : 

But  while  thou  liu’ft  keepe  a  good  tongue  in  thy  head. 

Cal.  Within  this  halfe  houre  will  he  be  afleepe, 

Wilt  thou  deftroy  him  then?  120 

Ste.  I  on  mine  honour. 

Ariel l.  This  will  I  tell  my  Matter. 

Cal.  Thou  mak’ft  me  merry  :  I  am  full  of  pleafure, 

Let  vs  be  iocond.  Will  you  troule  the  Catch  124 


105.  neuer  faw  a ]  ne’er  saw  Pope  + , 
Steev.’93,  Knt,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

106.  fhe]  her  Han. 

108.  great’ Jl]  greatest  Rowe  + ,  Steev. 
Mai.  Knt. 


1 08.  do's  leaf]  does  the  least  Rowe  +  . 
114,  1 15.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq. 

1 1 6,  1 1 7.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et 
seq. 

122.  [Aside.  Cap.  Allen. 


nothing  ill  can,’  &c.  I,  ii,  533  >  or>  ‘  There  be  some  sports  are,’  &c.  Ill,  i,  3 ;  or, 
Abbott,  §  244. 

105.  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  86):  The  verse  is  not  irregular  [Walker  {Vers.  p.  101) 
had  already  said  that  a  six-footed  verse  is  not  infrequent  in  Shakespeare  where  an 
extra  foot  is  admitted,  when  it  follows  immediately  after  a  pause  on  the  latter  syl¬ 
lable  of  the  third  foot],  but  it  is  inharmonious,  I  think,  and  Hanmer’s  [i.  e.  Pope’s] 
reading  seems  to  be  right. — Abbott,  §  503,  accepts  this  line  as  six-footed ;  ‘  although,’ 
he  adds,  ‘  it  is  against  Shakespearian  usage  to  pronounce  “  non-pareil  ”  a  dissyllable, 
as  in  Dorsetshire,  “  a  nhnprel  apple,”  yet  Caliban  here  may  be  allowed  to  use  this 
form.  I  believe  “  nonp’rel  type  ”  is  still  a  common  expression.’ 

X06.  she]  For  this  somewhat  rare  use  of  ‘she’  for  her  (which  Grant  White  pro¬ 
nounces  ‘  mere  carelessness  ’  on  Shakespeare’s  part)  see  Oth.  IV,  ii,  5,  in  this  ed., 
where  to  Abbott’s  three  examples  (§  21 1)  five  more  are  added;  this  present  example 
escaped  me. — Ed. 

124.  troule]  Steevens:  See  Jonson,  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  I,  ii :  ‘If  he 
read  this  with  patience,  I’ll  troll  ballads.’  [Its  derivation  is  uncertain.  W.  A. 
Wright  says  that  it  means  ‘  to  run  glibly  over,’  and  pronounces  it]  ‘  an  imitative  word. 


170 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii 
125 


You  taught  me  but  whileare? 

Ste.  At  thy  requeft  Monfter,  I  will  do  reafon, 

Any  reafon  :  Come  on  Trinculo ,  let  vs  fing. 

Sings. 

Flout' em,  and  cout'em:  and  skowt'em ,  and  flout' em, 

Thought  is  free.  1 30 

Cal.  That’s  not  the  tune. 

Ariell  plaies  the  tune  on  a  Tabor  and  Pipe. 

Ste.  What  is  this  fame  ? 

Tin.  This  is  the  tune  of  our  Catch,  plaid  by  the  pic¬ 
ture  of  No-body.  135 

126,  127.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq.  seq. 

127.  Any]  And  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  1 29, 1 30.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  + .  Three 

129.  cout]  skout  or  scout  Rowe  ii  et  lines,  Glo.  Wrt,  Wh.  ii,  Dtn. 

In  Serenius’  Swedish  Diet,  we  find  “  holla  samma  trail ,  to  sing  the  same  song  over 
and  over.”  Littleton  in  his  English-Latin  Diet,  has :  “  To  troll  along  his  words. 
Volubiliter  loqui,  sive  rotunde.”  ’  [But  this  scarcely  explains  its  use  when  it  is 
not  applied  to  singing,  as,  for  instance,  in  ‘troll  the  bowl’;  see  Beau.  &  FI. ’3 
Knight  of  the  Burning  Pestle,  II,  viii,  where  Merrythought  sings :  ‘  Troul  the  black 
bowl  to  me,’  and  Dyce,  in  a  note,  observes  that  the  line  is  probably  a  catch,  quoted  by 
Hawkins  (Hist,  of  Music,  iii,  22)  from  Ravenscroft’s  Pammelia,  i6og  :  ‘  Trole,  trole  the 
bowl  to  me,  And  I  will  trole  the  same  again  to  thee,’  &c.  Oliphant  (Musa  Mad- 
rigalesca,  p.  234)  suggests  that  the  word  trole  is  from  the  Fr.  troler.  to  draw  or  lead. 
But  Cotgrave’s  definition  of  tr oiler  is :  ‘  Hounds  to  trowle,  raunge.  or  hunt  out  of 
order,’  and  Trollerie  is  ‘  a  trowling  or  disordered  raunging,  a  hunting  out  of  order  ’ ; 
which  apparently  influenced  Skeat  (s.  v.  troll)  to  define:  ‘  To  troll  the  bowl,  to  send 
it  round,  to  circulate  it  ’ ;  and  ‘  to  troll  a  catch  is,  probably,  to  sing  it  irregularly,’ 
which,  whatever  its  derivation,  would  decidedly  best  suit  the  present  condition  of 
Caliban. — Ed.] 

124.  Catch]  W.  A.  Wright:  A  catch  is  a  part-song.  Cotgrave  has,  ‘Strambot: 
m.  A  Iyg,  Round,  Catch,  countrey  Song.’  Chappell  (Pop.  Mus.  of  the  Olden  Time , 
p.  I08)  says,  ‘  Catch,  Round  or  Roundelay,  and  Canon  in  unison,  are,  in  music,  nearly 
the  same  thing.  In  all,  the  harmony  is  to  be  sung  by  several  persons ;  and  is  so  con¬ 
trived,  that,  though  each  sings  precisely  the  same  notes  as  his  fellows,  yet,  by  begin¬ 
ning  at  stated  periods  of  time  from  each  other,  there  results  a  harmony  of  as  many 
parts  as  there  are  singers.  The  Catch  differs  only  in  that  the  words  of  one  part  ar* 
made  to  answer,  or  catch  the  other;  as  “  Ah  !  how,  Sophia,”  sung  like  “  a  house  o' 
fire,”  “Burney’s  History,”  like  “burn  his  history,”  &c.’ 

125.  whileare]  Abbott,  §  137  :  ‘  This  is  equivalent  to  a  time  before,  i.  e.  formerly ,’ 
ir,  as  W.  A.  Wright  defines  it,  ‘only  a  short  time  since.’ 

13a  Thought  is  free]  W.  A.  Wright:  Perhaps  the  burden  of  a  song.  See 
Twelfth  N.  I,  iii,  73.  And  Lyly,  Euphues  and  his  England,  p.  281  (ed.  Arber)  : 
why  then  quoth  he,  doest  thou  thinke  me  a  foole,  thought  is  free  my  Lord  quoth  she.’ 
[In  Skelton’s  Phyllyp  Sparowe,  line  1201,  we  find  :  ‘  Thought  is  franke  and  fre.’—  Ed.1 

135.  No-body]  Reed:  The  allusion  is  here  to  the  print  of  No-body,  as  prefixed 


ACT  III,  SC.  11.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


171 

Ste.  If  thou  beeft  a  man,  fhew  thy  felfe  in  thy  likencs  :  136 

If  thou  beeft  a  diuell,  take’t  as  thou  lift. 

Trin.  O  forgiue  me  my  finnes. 

Ste.  He  that  dies  payes  all  debts  :  I  defie  thee  ; 

Mercy  vpon  vs.  140 

Cal.  Art  thou  affeard  ? 

Ste.  No  Monfter,  not  I. 

Cat.  Be  not  affeard,  the  I  fie  is  full  of  noyfes, 

Sounds,  and  fweet  aires,  that  giue  delight  and  hurt  not : 
Sometimes  a  thoufand  twangling  Inftruments  145 

Will  hum  about  mine  eares ;  and  fometime  voices, 

That  if  I  then  had  wak’d  after  long  fleepe, 

Will  make  me  fleepe  againe,  and  then  in  dreaming, 

The  clouds  methought  would  open,  and  fhew  riches  149 


136,  137.  Prose,  Pope  et  seq. 

136.  thy]  the  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 

138.  fmnes~\fcn  F4,  Rowe  i. 

139.  140.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et 
seq. 

140.  [Music  again.  Gall,  ii  (MS). 


1 41,  143.  affearcT\  afraid  Rowe  + . 

145.  Sometimes ]  Sometitne  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

twangling ]  twanging  Pope-f. 

146.  fometime~\fometimes  Ff,  Rowe  + , 
Steev.’8s,  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Rife. 


to  the  anonymous  comedy  of  No-body  and  Some-body ;  without  date,  but  printed 
before  1600. — Halliwell  thinks  that  the  more  likely  reference  is  to  an  engraving 
on  an  old  ballad,  called  the  Well-spoken  Nobody ,  whereof  he  gives  a  facsimile.  The 
engraving  occupies  an  entire  page  of  his  Folio  edition,  and  represents  a  tatterde¬ 
malion  man  surrounded  by  broken  household  utensils,  and  bearing  the  motto :  ‘  No¬ 
body  is  my  name  that  beareth  everybodyes  blame.’  There  is,  however,  no  attempt  to 
portray  the  man  as  having  no  body;  he  is  amply  provided  therewith,  whereas,  in  the 
picture  alluded  to  by  Reed,  the  man  has  merely  head,  arms,  and  legs,  and,  therefore, 
literally,  ‘  no-body,’  exactly  as  Ben  Jonson  describes  him,  as  cited  by  Halliwell  him¬ 
self.  Nobody  is  introduced  *  attyred  in  a  paire  of  breeches,  which  were  made  to 
come  up  to  his  neck,  with  his  armes  out  at  his  pockets.’  This  old  comedy  of  Nobody 
and  Somebody  was  reprinted  in  1877  f°r  Private  Circulation  by  Alexander  Smith, 
Esq.  of  Glasgow,  and  is  valuable  for  allusions  to  manners  and  customs.  It  was  cited 
in  Lear,  II,  i,  as  affording  the  only  other  known  allusion  to  the  custom  of  scattering 
far  and  wide  the  picture  of  a  criminal  as  an  aid  to  his  speedy  arrest.  Its  editor  ascer¬ 
tained  from  the  Trans,  of  the  Stationers'  Registers  that  its  date  was  1606,  which  can 
have  no  special  bearing  on  the  date  of  this  play,  because  it  is  possible  that  the  preset  t 
reference  to  *  the  picture  of  No-body  ’  may  be,  not  to  the  picture  on  the  title-page  of 
the  comedy,  but  to  the  sign  over  the  stationer’s  shop;  it  was  ‘  Printed  for  John  Trundle 
and  are  to  be  sold  at  his  shop  in  the  Barbican,  at  the  signe  of  No-body.’  John 
Trundle  was  a  stationer  from  about  1598  to  about  1625 — Ed. 

145.  Sometimes]  Dyce  here  prefers  sometime  for  the  sake  of  uniformity  with  the 
next  line,  and  also  with  Caliban’s  speech,  II,  ii,  12-15. 

146-149.  Will  .  .  .  had  wak’d  .  .  .  Will  .  .  .  would]  Allen  (j Phila.  Sh.  Soc.}> 


172 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii 
ISO 


Ready  to  drop  vpon  me,  that  when  I  wak’d 
I  cri’de  to  dreame  againe. 

Ste.  This  will  proue  a  braue  kingdome  to  me, 

Where  I  fhall  haue  my  Muficke  for  nothing. 

Cal.  When  Profpero  is  deftroy’d. 

Ste.  That  fhall  be  by  and  by  :  1 55 

I  remember  the  ftorie. 

Trin.  The  found  is  going  away, 

Lets  follow  it,  and  after  do  our  worke. 

Ste.  Leade  Monfter,  i^q 

1  So-  that  when\  when  Pope,  Han.  152—163.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et  seq 

then  when  Theob.  ii,  Johns.  157.  Trin.]  Cal.  Daniel,  Huds. 

A  striking  example  of  the  use  of  ‘  will  ’  to  express  a  custom,  in  the  present  as  well  as 
in  the  preterite.  At  the  middle  of  his  speech  (‘  and  then,  in  dreaming  ’)  Caliban 
changes  from  the  expression  of  habitual  occurrence,  without  reference  to  time,  by  the 
present  tense,  to  that  of  habitual  occurrence  in  past  time,  by  the  preterite  tense.  He 
does  this,  because  one  remarkable  dream  at  that  moment  recurs  to  his  memory,  and 
finally  carries  him  away  from  even  habitual  occurrence  in  past  time  (‘  the  clouds 
would  open  ’)  to  one  particular  incident  (‘when  I  wak’d,  I  cry’d  to  fleep  again.’)— 
In  line  147,  uniformity  of  syntax  requires  ‘  if  I  then  have  wak’d  ’ ;  and  it  is  difficult 
to  discover  any  possible  justification  for  the  use  of  the  pluperfect.  It  cannot  be,  that 
Caliban  had  already  begun  to  shift  ground  in  his  mind  from  present  to  past  time ;  for 
then  he  would  have  said  ‘  would  (and  not  will )  make  me  sleep  again.’  It  is  just 
conceivable,  that  the  pluperfect  might  be  used  to  denote  the  more  immediate  prece¬ 
dence  of  the  waking  to  the  being  made  to  sleep  again ;  but  that  is  what  there  seems 
to  be  no  reason  to  denote.  I  am,  therefore,  disposed  to  correct  by  substituting  have 
for  ‘  had.’  Have,  in  the  handwriting  of  the  day,  with  the  left  side  of  the  v  rising  in 
a  curve  above  the  line,  might  easily  be  mistaken  by  the  compositor  for  a  d  with  the 
right  stroke  bent  to  the  left. 

I5S\  by  and  by]  Staunton:  By  and  by,  as  well  as  presently,  now  imply  some 
brief  delay ;  but  in  old  language  they  usually  meant  immediately. — W.  A.  Wright  : 
That  is,  immediately.  [Rather,  I  think, presently,  shortly,  as  in:  ‘  Imbowelled  will 

I  see  thee  by  and  by,  Till  then,  in  blood,  by  noble  Percy  lie.’ — 1  Hen.  IV:  V, 

iv,  109,  cited  under  4  in  the  analysis  of  this  adverbial  phrase  in  Murray’s  Hew 

Eng.  Diet.  The  drunken  crew  were  coming  under  the  effects  of  the  charm  which 

Ariel  afterwards  told  Prospero  that  he  flung  around  them,  and  Stephano  was  ready 

to  postpone  the  braining  of  Prospero  in  order  to  follow  the  music. — Ed.] 

I57» *  I * * * * * *S8-  Daniel  (p.  13) :  Give  this  speech  to  Caliban.  Stephano  replies  to 

it,  ‘Lead,  monster;  we’ll  follow.’  And  Trinculo  adds,  ‘I’ll  follow.’  [Is  it  in 
character  that  Caliban,  who  was  so  eager  to  destroy  Prospero,  and  who  had  such 

painful  experience  of  Prospero’s  power,  should  propose  an  aimless  pursuit  of  what 
he  knew  was  unreal  ?  The  music  could  awaken  no  curiosity  in  him.  He  had 
heard  it  too  often.  It  excited  the  curiosity  of  the  others,  not  of  him.  It  is 
Stephano  who  says,  ‘  I  would  I  could  see  this  taborer.’  See  the  last  note  of  this 
Scene. — Ed.] 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


*73 

160 


Wee’l  follow :  I  would  I  could  fee  this  Taborer, 

He  layes  it  on. 

Trin.  Wilt  come? 
lie  follow  Stephano.  Exeunt.  163 

160.  /his]  his  FjF^.  phano.  Anon.  (ap.  Grey),  Ritson,  Dyce 

162,  163.  Trin.  Wilt ...  Stepbano]  ii,iii,Huds.  Trin.  Wilt  cosne  ?  Ste.  I’ll 
Steph.  Wilt  come  ?  Trin.  I'll  follow  Ste-  follow  Cap. 


160.  Taborer]  Wedgwood  (s.  v.  Tabor — Tambour — Tambourine — Timbrel ) : 
The  sound  of  a  blow  is  very  generally  represented  by  the  syllables  tab,  tap,  dab,  dob, 
top,  or  the  like.  Thus  the  Spaniards  represent  the  beating  of  the  drum  by  tapatan  or 
taparapatan,  as  we  by  rubadub  or  dubadub. — Steevens  :  With  several  of  the  inci¬ 
dents  in  this  Scene  compare  the  description  of  the  desert  of  Lop,  in  Asia,  by  Marco 
Paolo  (of  whose  travels  there  was  an  English  translation  by  John  Frampton  in  1579)  : 
* — You  shall  heare  in  the  ayre  the  sound  of  tabers  and  other  instruments,  to  put  the 
trauellers  in  feare,  &c.  by  euill  spirites  that  make  these  soundes,  and  also  do  call 
diuerse  of  the  trauellers  by  their  names,’  &c.,  ch.  36.  Thus,  too,  Milton :  ‘And  airy 
tongues,  that  syllable  mens’  names  On  sands,  and  shores,  and  desert  wildernesses.’ — 
Comus,  208. 

162,  163.  The  distribution  of  speeches  has  here  given  rise  to  emendation.  The 
earliest  to  propose  a  change  is  the  *  learned  and  ingenious  person,  dead  some  time 
ago,’  whose  notes  Grey  recorded  under  the  title  of  Anonymous.  His  note  here 
reads:  ‘I  should  rather  think  “wilt  come?”  was  spoken  by  Stephano.  To  which 
Trinculo  replies :  “  I’ll  follow  Stephano.”  ’  This  change  anticipates  Ritson  {Remarks, 
1783,  P-  6;  Cursory  Crit.  1792,  p.  35)  by  thirty  years,  although  to  Ritson  it  has  been 
attributed  by  Dyce  (who  adopted  it)  and  by  the  Cam.  Ed. — Keightley  gives  it  his 
approval. — Capell  interprets  the  situation  differently.  ‘  The  “  wilt  come,”  ’  he  says 
{66  b),  ‘of  [Trinculo]  makes  a  line  by  itself  in  both  Folios;  and,  under  it,  is  in  them 
— He  follow  Stephano ;  which,  if  meant  for  the  other  words’  speaker,  had  been  in 
line  along  with  them,  and  so  might  have  been ;  Caliban  leads  the  way,  as  he’s  order’d ; 
Trinculo  follows;  but,  finding  he  is  not  follow’d,  turns  back  and  addresses  Wilt  come 
to  the  orderer,  who  is  in  search  of  his  “  taborer,”  throwing  his  eyes  about  him.’  The 
force  of  the  argument  which  Capell  draws  from  the  separation  of  the  lines  in  the 
Folio  is  weakened,  I  think,  by  the  place  which  these  lines  occupy  on  the  page.  They 
are  the  last  in  the  column  and  at  the  end  of  a  Scene,  and  I  suppose  that  they  were 
purposely  expanded  by  the  compositor  to  fill  up  what  would  otherwise  be  a  vacant 
space.  There  is,  what  I  think,  a  parallel  case  in  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vi,  1 5-21 ,  where, 
in  order  to  ‘  space  out  ’  the  column,  ‘  stark  prose,’  as  Dyce  truly  calls  it,  was  converted 
into  verse  of  very  short  lines. — In  the  interpretation  of  the  present  passage  Heath 
(p.  25)  has  anticipated  me ;  his  note  reads :  ‘  The  first  words  [i.  e.  Trinculo’s  “  Wilt 
come  ?”]  are  addressed  to  Caliban,  who,  vexed  at  the  folly  of  his  new  companions  idly 
running  after  the  music,  seems,  for  some  little  time,  to  have  stayed  behind.’  This 
is  to  me  decidedly  the  true  interpretation.  Trinculo  asks  Caliban  ‘  Wilt  come  ?’ 
and  then  adds,  by  way  of  further  persuasion,  ‘  I  am  going  to  follow  Stephano.’  The 
last  line  was  turned  into  an  address  to  Stephano  by  Steevens  in  1778,  and  the  comma 
before  ‘  Stephano,’  for  which  Steevens  is  the  sole  authority,  has  given  a  wrong  twist 
to  the  meaning  in  every  edition  (except  Knight’s)  ever  since ;  at  least,  so  it  seems, 
to  the  present  Ed. 


*74 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iii,  sc.  iii. 


Scena  Tertia. 


Enter  Alonfo ,  Sebajlian,  Anthonio ,  G on z alio, 
Adrian ,  Francifco,  &c. 

Gon.  By’r  lakin,  I  can  goe  no  further,  Sir, 

My  old  bones  akes  :  here’s  a  maze  trod  indeede 
Through  fourth  rights,  &  Meanders  :  by  your  patience, 
I  needes  mull  reft  me. 

Al.  Old  Lord,  I  cannot  blame  thee, 

Who,  am  my  felfe  attach’d  with  wearineffe 
To  th’dulling  of  my  fpirits  :  Sit  downe,  and  reft : 

Euen  here  I  will  put  off  my  hope,  and  keepe  it 
No  longer  for  my  Flatterer.*  he  is  droun’d 


2.  Changes  again.  Pope.  Changes  to 
another  Part  of  the  Island.  Theob. 

5.  akes ]  Ktly,  Rife,  ake  Ff  et  cet. 
maze  trod~\  maze-trod  Ktly. 


6.  fourth  rights ]  forth  rights  F2. 
forth-rights  F3F4  et  seq.  sore  frights 
Wilson. 

12.  Flatter er\  flatterers  Ff. 


4.  By’r]  Probably  pronounced  Beer.  Of  course,  ‘  lakin  ’  is  lady  kin. 

5.  akes]  For  the  grammar,  see  I,  i,  24 ;  for  the  pronunciation  of  ache ,  see  I,  ii,  433. 

6.  fourth  rights]  Hunter  {Disquisition,  &c.  p.  130) :  It  would  not  be  easy  to 
find  this  word  in  any  other  writer  than  Shakespeare,  in  whose  Tro.  dr  Cress.  Ill,  iii, 
158,  it  again  occurs.  In  both  places  it  evidently  means  no  more  than  straight  liner 
— Knight  :  There  is  an  allusion  here  to  an  artificial  maze,  which  is  sometimes  con¬ 
structed  of  straight  lines  (‘  forth-rights  ’),  sometimes  of  circles  (‘  meanders  ’).  [Knight’s 
definition  reads  suspiciously  like  one  which  has  been  devised  to  suit  the  text.  Gon- 
zalo  does  not  refer  literally  to  a  carefully-plotted  maze,  such  as  that  at  Hampton 
Court.  He  might  have  used  the  word  labyrinth,  without  referring  to  one  similar  to 
that  of  Crete.  But  Halliwell  (p.  46),  strangely  enough,  takes  ‘maze’  in  its  tech¬ 
nical  sense  of  a  maze  artificially  constructed,  and  asks :  ‘  Are  we  to  suppose  that  Pros 
pero,  Miranda,  or  Caliban  had  amused  themselves  in  this  way?’ — Ed.] 

9.  attach’d]  Murray  {New  Eng.  Diet) :  The  development  of  signification  seems 
to  have  been  thus :  I.  The  regular  O  F.  sense  was  ‘  to  fasten,’  as  In  mod.  Eng.,  where, 
however,  this  sense  is  of  quite  recent  adoption  from  mod.  F.  2.  The  earlier  Eng. 
sense  of  ‘  arrest,  seize  ’  arose  in  A  F.  and  Eng.  as  an  elliptical  expression  for  ‘  attach 
by  some  tie  to  the  control  or  jurisdiction  of  the  court,’  i.  e.  so  that  it  shall  have  a  hold 
on  the  party.  A  man  might  thus  be  atlachk  or  1  nailed  ’  par  le  cors  by  his  body,  par 
ses  avers  et  par  ses  chateus  by  his  goods  and  chattels,  par  pleges  by  sureties  for  his 
appearance  (Britton).  In  the  first  two  cases  the  attachment  consisted  in  arrest  and 
detention.  3.  The  It.  equivalent  is  attaccare  :  in  the  16th  c.  the  It.  attaccare  batta- 
glia,  to  join  battle,  attaccarsi  a,  to  fasten  (oneself)  upon,  ‘  attack,’  was  first  imitated 
with  Fr.  attacher ,  and  then  adopted  in  Fr.  as  attaquer  /  whence  Eng.  Attack,  and 
occasional  17th  c.  use  of  attach. 


I 


ACT  hi,  sc.  iii.]  THE  TEMPEST 

Whom  thus  we  ft  ray  to  finde,  and  the  Sea  mocks 
Our  fruftrate  fearch  on  land :  well,  let  him  goe. 

■Ant.  I  am  right  glad,  that  he’s  fo  out  of  hope : 

Doe  not  for  one  repulfe  forgoe  the  purpofe 
That  you  refolu’d  t’effedl. 

Seb.  The  next  aduantage  will  we  take  throughly. 
Ant.  Let  it  be  to  night, 

For  now  they  are  opprefs’d  with  trauaile,  they 
Will  not,  nor  cannot  vfe  fuch  vigilance 
As  when  they  are  frefh. 

Solemne  and  Jirange  Muficke :  and  Profper  on  the  top  {inui- 
Jib  lei)  Enter feuerall Jirange Jhapes ,  bringing  in  a  Banket-, 
and  dance  about  it  with  gentle  actions  of  falutations ,  and 
minting  the  King,  &c.  to  eate,  they  depart. 


175 

13 

15 


20 


25 


15.  [Aside  to  Seb.  Han. 

that  he's"]  that's  he  Pope  i,  ii. 
18-27.  All  marked  as  aside,  Cap. 

18.  Two  lines,  Pope  et  seq. 

throughly]  thoroughly  Steev.’93, 
Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Hal.  Sing.  Ktly. 

20.  trauaile ]  travell  F3F4. 

22.  they  are']  they're  Pope  + ,  Jeph. 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

23,  &c.  after  line  27,  Pope  et  seq. 


(subs.). 

23.  Solemne... Muficke]  After  line  27, 
Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Wrt,  Rife, 
Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

and  Profper,  &c.]  Enter  Prospero, 
&c.  (after  line  29),  Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Wrt,  Rife,  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

on  the  top]  above  Mai.  et  seq. 

25.  falutations]  salutation  Rowe  ii 
et  seq. 


16.  forgoe]  W.  A.  Wright  :  The  First  Folio  spells  this  word  correctly,  so  far  as 
regards  the  first  syllable,  everywhere  ‘  forgo  ’  or  ‘  forgoe.’ 

23.  on  the  top]  Collier  :  Meaning,  perhaps,  in  some  machine  let  down  with 
ropes  from  the  ceiling,  or  possibly  only  in  the  balcony  at  the  back  of  the  stage. 

24—26.  Enter,  &c.]  Hunter  ( Disquisition ,  &c.  p.  114):  There  might  be  among 
the  original  spectators  of  this  play,  some  who  believed  in  the  power  of  [magicians]  to 
produce  the  delusive  visions  and  the  aerial  music  which  fill  so  large  a  space  in  it. 
[P.  125.  The  following  are]  some  notices  of  the  power  which  some  persons  in  the 
Middle  Ages  possessed,  of  producing  delusions  of  various  kinds,  resembling  those 
which  we  find  in  this  play.  Chaucer  has  given  a  very  lively  description  of  what 
could  be  done  by  an  accomplished  tregetour.  Persons  seated  in  the  great  hall  of  a 
castle  saw  a  barge  come  sailing  in  or  a  lion  prowl  about  a  room ;  suddenly  the  stone 
floor  would  become  a  green  mead,  in  which  sprung  daisies  and  butter-cups ;  a  vine 
would  be  trailed  along  the  wall,  and  grapes  would  appear  in  little  green  bunches, 
which  would  soon  be  enlarged,  coloured,  and  ripened.  Chaucer  tells  us  that  he  had 
actually  seen  this,  possibly  when  he  was  abroad ;  but  Aubrey,  in  a  MS  on  Remains  of 
Gentilism,  &c.  speaks  of  an  exhibition  resembling  this,  ....  at  which  his  grand¬ 
father  was  present . John  Melton,  author  of  that  sensible  tract,  The  Astrologaster, 

describes  an  exhibition  which  he  had  himself  witnessed  at  Cambridge,  in  the  reign 
of  James  I,  in  which  an  orange  plant  was  seen  to  spring  in  the  midst  of  a  room,  to 
grow  up  into  a  goodly  tree,  and  finally  to  bear  fruit,  which  went  on  enlarging  and 


176 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iii,  sc.  iii 


Seb.  I  fay  to  night :  no  more.  27 

Al.  What  harmony  is  this  ?  my  good  friends,  harke. 

Gon.  Maruellous  fweet  Muficke. 

Alo.  Giue  vs  kind  keepers,  heaues  :  what  were  thefe  ?  30 

Seb.  A  liuing  Drolerie :  now  I  will  beleeue 
That  there  are  Vnicornes  :  that  in  Arabia 

There  is  one  Tree,  the  Phoenix  throne,  one  Phoenix  33 

30.  heauls]  heaven  Roweii+.  heavens  30.  were']  are  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
tf  et  cet.  31.  will]  well  Daniel. 


ripening  in  the  presence  of  the  spectators. — We  who  have  witnessed  the  phantasma¬ 
goria  and  the  diorama  may  conceive  the  possibility  of  deceptions  such  as  these; 
though,  I  confess,  it  seems  as  if  in  these  dioptrical  illusions  there  was  greater  skill  in 
former  ages  than  is  manifested  in  these  times.  [Hunter  here  quotes  at  length  two 
anecdotes,  one  from  Melton’s  Astrologaster,  1620,  p.  75;  and  the  other  from  Beard’s 
Theatre  of  God's  Judgments,  1631,  p.  121.  The  former  is  given  on  the  authority  of 
Erasmus,  and  tells  how  a  Roman  priest  invited  a  company  of  ladies  to  a  banquet, 
where  they  partook  of  a  variety  of  rare  and  strange  dishes ;  but  about  half  an  hour 
after  their  return  home  ‘  their  stomachs  began  to  call  upon  them  for  meat,’  and  they 
were  as  hungry  as  if  they  had  eaten  nothing,  which,  the  priest  afterwards  revealed  to 
them,  was  the  truth,  for  *  his  art  did  delude  both  the  eye  that  thought  it  saw  such 
things  and  the  palate  that  seemed  to  taste  those  delicates,’ — in  sooth,  the  bare  imag¬ 
ination  of  a  feast.  The  second  anecdote  is  to  the  same  effect,  only  that  what  was  in 
the  former  a  solitary  occasion,  in  the  present  case  appears  to  have  been  the  standing 
characteristic  of  the  hospitality  of  ‘  the  Lord  of  Ome  ’ ;  after  his  guests  had  departed, 
although  they  had  partaken  of  the  best  of  fare,  « they  pined  for  want  of  food,  having 
neither  eaten  nor  drunk  save  in  imagination  only,’  and  ‘  their  horses  fared  no  better 
than  their  masters.’  Hunter  thus  concludes:]  Shakespeare  has  shown  his  accus¬ 
tomed  good  sense  by  representing  the  banquet  as  only  shown  to  the  king  and  his  fol¬ 
lowers,  not  partaken  of  by  them . I  have  no  pleasure  in  repeating  that  such  and 

such  eminent  commentator  is  mistaken ;  but  I  cannot  forbear  adding  that  the  note  of 
Steevens  [as  below]  misleads,  as  he  entirely  mistakes  the  kind  of  illusion  which 
Prospero,  by  his  magic  art,  practised  on  the  strangers. 

31.  Drolerie]  Steevens:  Shows,  called  drolleries,  were,  in  Shakespeare’s  time, 
performed  by  puppets  only.  From  these  our  modem  drolls ,  exhibited  at  fairs,  &c. 
took  their  name.  So  in  Beau,  and  Fl.’s  Valentinian,  II,  ii :  <  I  had  rather  make  a 
drollery  till  thirty.’ — Malone  :  ‘A  living  drollery  ’  is  one  not  represented  by  wooden 
machines,  but  by  personages  who  are  alive. 

33.  Phcenix]  From  Pliny  we  get  all  our  knowledge  of  this  bird.  In  Lib.  x,  cap. 
li  (Holland,  i,  271)  we  find :  ‘  The  Phoenix  of  Arabia  passes  all  other  [birds.  I  know 
not]  whether  it  be  a  tale  or  no  that  there  is  neuer  but  one  of  them  in  all  the  world, 
and  the  same  not  commonly  seen.  By  report  he  is  as  big  as  an  Aigle  :  for  colour,  as 
yellow  and  bright  as  gold  (namely,  all  about  the  necke) ;  the  rest  of  the  bodie  a  deep 
red  purple ;  the  taile  azure  blew,  intermingled  with  feathers  among  of  rose  carnation 
color ;  and  the  head  brauely  adorned  with  a  crest  and  penach  finely  wrought ;  hauing 
a  tuft  and  plume  thereupon,  right  faire  and  goodly  to  be  seen.  Manilius,  the  noble 
Roman  Senatour . was  the  first  man  of  the  long  Robe  who  wrot  of  this  bird  at 


ACT  III,  SC.  iii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


1 77 


At  this  houre  reigning  there. 

Anf.  lie  beleeue  both  :  35 

And  what  do’s  elfe  want  credit,  come  to  me 
And  lie  befworne  ’tis  true :  Trauellers  nere  did  lye, 

Though  fooles  at  home  condemne  ’em. 

Gon.  If  in  Naples 

I  fhould  report  this  now,  would  they  beleeue  me  ?  40 

If  I  fhould  fay  I  faw  fuch  Iflands ; 

(For  certes,  thefe  are  people  of  the  Ifland) 

Who  though  they  are  of  monftrous  lhape,  yet  note 

Their  manners  are  more  gentle,  kinde,  then  of  44 


37.  ’tis  true ]  to’t  Steev.  conj. 
nere  did  lye']  ne’er  lied  Han. 

38.  ’em]  Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Cap.  Wh.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Cam.  Glo.  Jepb.  Wrt,  Rife,  Huds. 
Dtn.  them  Mai.  et  cet. 

41.  IJlands]  IJlanders  Ff  et  seq. 


44.  Their... kinde]  One  line,  reading 
of  a  more  gentle  kind  Sing.  (MS). 

gentle,  kinde]  gentle-kind  Theob. 
Johns.  Steev.  Hal.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  Glo 
Jeph.  Clke,  Ktly,  Wrt. 


large,  &  most  exquisitely.  He  reporteth  that  neuer  man  was  known  to  see  him  feed¬ 
ing,  ....  that  he  liueth  660  yeares,  and  when  he  groweth  old,  and  begins  to  decay, 
he  builds  himselfe  with  the  twigs  and  branches  of  the  Canell  or  Cinamon  and  Frank 
incense  trees ;  and  when  he  hath  filled  it  with  all  sort  of  sweet  Aromaticall  spices, 
yeeldeth  vp  his  life  thereupon.  He  saith,  moreouer,  that  of  his  bones  and  marrow 
there  breedes  at  first  as  it  were  a  little  worme  :  which  afterward  prooueth  to  be  a 
prettie  bird.  And  the  first  thing  that  this  yong  new  Phoenix  doth,  is  to  perform  the 
obsequies  of  the  former  Phoenix  late  deceased :  to  translate  and  cary  away  his  whole 
nest  into  the  citie  of  the  Sun,  neere  Panchea,  and  to  bestow  it  full  deuoutly  there 

vpon  the  altar . Brought  he  was  hither  also  to  Rome,  ....  and  shewed  openly 

to  be  seen  in  a  full  hall  and  generall  assembly  of  the  people,  as  appeareth  vpon  the 
public  records :  howbeit,  no  man  euer  made  any  doubt,  but  he  was  a  counterfeit  Phoe¬ 
nix,  and  no  better.’ — Ed. — Malone  refers  to  The  Phoenix  and  Turtle,  2  :  ‘  Let  the 
bird  of  loudest  lay,  On  the  sole  Arabian  tree  ’ ;  and  also  to  Lyly’s  Euphues  and  his 
England :  ‘ — as  there  is  but  one  Phoenix  in  the  world,  so  is  there  but  one  tree  in 
Arabia,  where-in  she  buyldeth  ’  [p.  312,  ed.  Arber] ;  also  to  Florio’s  Worlde  of 
Wordes,  1598:  ‘Pasin,  a  tree  in  Arabia,  whereof  there  is  but  one  found,  and  vpon  it 
the  Phenix  sits.’ 

40.  beleeue  me  ?]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc .)  would  substitute  a  dash  for  this  inter¬ 
rogation  mark,  which  is  to  be  removed  to  the  end  of  the  speech. 

44.  gentle,  kinde]  The  hyphen  by  which  Theobald  joined  these  words  has  been 
adopted  by  some  of  the  best  editors ;  Walker  includes  it  in  the  long  list  which  he 
gives  ( Crit .  i,  21-55)  of  compound  epithets.  Unquestionably,  we  should  join  with  a 
hyphen  two  adjectives,  where  the  former  is  clearly  used  adverbially,  as,  e.  g.  in  ‘  But 
earthlier-happy  is  the  rose  distill’d,’  but  we  should  be  very  sure  before  doing  so  that 
this  adverbial  relation  exists.  Would  it  be  right  to  add  a  hyphen  in  ‘  Not  all  the 
water  in  the  rough,  rude  sea’?  Yet  would  Walker  add  it,  and  even  more  errone¬ 
ously,  I  think,  in  that  condensed  definition  of  life :  *  This  sensible,  warm  motion.’ 


12 


178 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iii,  sc.  iii 


Our  humaine  generation  you  fhall  finde 
Many,  nay  almoft  any. 

Pro.  Honeft  Lord, 

Thou  haft  faid  well  .•  for  fome  of  you  there  prefent ; 

Are  worfe  then  diuels. 

Al.  I  cannot  too  much  mufe 
Such  fhapes,  fuch  gefture,  and  fuch  found  exprefling 
(Although  they  want  the  vfe  of  tongue)  a  kinde 
Of  excellent  dumbe  difcourfe. 

Pro.  Praife  in  departing. 

Fr.  They  vanifh’d  ftrangely. 

Seb.  No  matter,  fince  (macks. 

They  haue  left  their  Viands  behinde ;  for  wee  haue  fto- 
Wilt  pleafe  you  tafle  of  what  is  here  ? 

Alo.  Not  I.  (Boyes 

Gon.  Faith  Sir,  you  neede  not  feare :  when  wee  were 
Who  would  beleeue  that  there  were  Mountayneeres, 
Dew-lapt,  like  Buis,  whofe  throats  had  hanging  at’em 


45 


50 


55 


60 

62 


47~49)  54-  As  aside,  Cap. 

50.  mufe\  FsF3,  Knt,  Hal.  Dyce,Cam. 
Glo.  Jeph.  Wrt,  Rife,  Wh.  ii.  muse ;  Cap. 
muse —  Ktly.  mufe,  F4  et  cet. 

51.  geflure...found~\  gestures... sounds 
Coll.  MS. 

S3-  excellent  dumbe~\  Hyphened, 
Walker. 

55-  Fr.]  Ant.  Kinnear  conj. 


56.  No~\  ’  Tis  no  Han. 

57-  They  haue~\  They've  Pope  + ,  Jeph. 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

58.  Wilt ]  Will’t  Cap.  (in  Errata)  et 
seq. 

59.  Alo.]  Ant.  Han. 

62.  'em ]  them  Steev.’93,  Var.  Knt, 
Coll.  Hal.  Sing.  Ktly. 


By  reading  it  sensible-warm  Walker  makes  the  phrase  almost  tautological.  So  in  the 
present  case,  I  think,  the  same  results  follow  the  conversion  of  ‘  gentle  ’  into  a  mere 
adverb,  qualifying  ‘kind’;  its  full  force  is  needed  to  qualify  ‘manners.’  Again,  I 
cannot  agree  with  Walker  in  writing,  in  line  53,  excellent-dumbe ;  was  it  the  super 
lative  dumbness  of  the  discourse  that  Alonzo  praised,  or  an  excellent  kind  of  dis 
course  which  was  also  dumb? — Ed. 

50.  muse]  Steevens  :  That  is,  admire,  wonder  at.  So  in  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  85  :  ‘  Do 
not  muse  at  me.’— W.  A.  Wright  :  Not  elsewhere  in  Shakespeare  used  in  such  a 
construction.  [Which  makes  Keightley’s  pause  after  it,  and  broken  sentence  plaus¬ 
ible.— Ed.] 

54.  Praise,  &c.]  Capell  :  That  is,  stay  your  praises,  ’till  you  see  how  your  enter¬ 
tainment  will  end. — Steevens  :  It  is  a  proverbial  expression.  Gosson,  in  his  pam 
phlet  entitled  Playes  confuted  in  five  Actions,  &  c.  (no  date),  acknowledges  himself  to 
Lave  been  the  author  of  a  morality  called  Praise  at  Parting. 

55>  S6-  Walker  ( Vers.  24)  suspects  some  corruption  or  misarrangement  here. _ 

Abbott,  §  487,  suggests  ‘perhaps’:  ‘They  van  |  ish’d  strung  |  ely.  |  No  mat  |  ter 
tince.’ 


4CT  III,  SC.  iii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


Wallets  of  flefh  ?  or  that  there  were  fuch  men 
Whofe  heads  flood  in  their  brefts  ?  which  now  we  finde 
Each  putter  out  of  fiue  for  one,  will  bring  vs 


179 

63 

65 


65.  putter  out ]  putter-out  Cap.  et  seq.  Ktly.  of  one  for  five  Thirlby,  Mai.  Var. 
(subs.).  Hal.  Dyce,  Huds.  of  five  for  ten  Thirlby. 

of  fiue  for  one]  on  five  for  one  at  five  for  one  Daniel. 

Theob.  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Sing.  Wh.  i, 

63.  Wallets  of  flesh]  Grey  (i,  29) :  Compare  4  Quis  tumidum  guttur  miratur  in 
Alpibus ?’ — Juvenal,  Sat.  xiii,  168.  [These  ‘wallets  of  flesh’  have  been  always 
understood  as  referring  to  goitre,  to  which  the  allusions  are  many  throughout  out 
early  English  literature.  The  disease  was  familiar  to  the  Romans  as  a  characteristic 
of  Switzerland,  as  we  learn  from  Juvenal ;  it  was  common  in  France,  and  it  is  by  no 
means  improbable  that  it  was  well  known  of  old  in  England ;  where  it  is  now  known 
as  ‘  the  Derbyshire  neck.’  Is  it  likely  that  instances  of  a  disease  thus  widely  dis¬ 
seminated  and  generally  known  would  form  the  stock  of  travellers’  stories,  and  that 
any  putter  out  of  five  for  one  would  be  discredited  who  gave  an  account  of  it  ?  Be 
this,  however,  as  it  may,  I  doubt  if  any  goitre  could  ever  have  been  called  a  ‘  wallet  ’ ; 
pendulous,  monstrous  they  may  have  been,  even  to  the  extent  of  being  supported  on 
wheels  pushed  in  front  of  the  patient,  but  ‘  wallets  ’  they  were  not.  Certainly  not  in 
the  every-day  meaning  of  wallet,  or  in  the  only  meaning  in  which  Shakespeare  uses 
it,  as  in  Tro.  and  Cress.  :  ‘  Time  hath,  my  lord,  a  wallet  at  his  back,’  &c.  The  moun¬ 
taineers  may  have  been  dew-lapp’d,  but,  assuredly,  their  goitres  were  not  wallets.— 
Skeat,  I  know,  uses  this  very  passage  to  prove  that  wattles  and  wallets  are  the  same, 
but  then  it  is  on  the  assumption  that  ‘  wallets  ’  are  goitres,  whereas  I  do  not  think  that 
the  ‘  wallet  ’  Gonzalo  refers  to  is  a  goitre  at  all,  but  a  genuine  wallet  of  flesh  hang¬ 
ing  from  the  throat,  and  such  a  wallet  we  find  in  that  compilation  of  travellers’  tales 
of  the  Middle  Ages,  gathered  by  Gesner  and  translated  by  Topsell,  1698.  In  his 
chapter  on  The  Satyre  (p.  14)  we  read  :  ‘  Satyres  haue  no  humain  conditions  in  them, 
nor  other  resemblance  of  men  beside  their  outward  shape ;  though  Solinus  speake  of 
them  like  as  of  men.  They  cary  their  meat  vnder  their  chin  as  in  a  store-house,  and 
from  thence  being  hungry  they  take  it  forth  to  eate,  making  it  ordinary  [i.  e.  dinner¬ 
time]  with  them  euery  day,  which  is  but  annuall  in  the  FormiccB  lions.’  (These  lions, 
we  afterwards  learn,  ate  only  once  a  year.)  Here  we  have  the  4  wallet  of  flesh  ’ ; 
and  the  wood-cut  illustrates  it.  The  Satyre  is  represented  as  holding  in  his  left  hand 
a  pipe,  while  his  right  hand  is  thrust  into  a  wallet  hanging  under  his  chin  and  formed 
of  flesh,  for  clothing  of  any  kind  he  has  none.  It  is  not  difficult  to  surmise  that  the 
Pouched  Apes  gave  rise  to  the  story. — Ed. 

64.  Whose  heads,  &c.]  Grey  (i,  29)  refers  to  Pliny  (Bk  V,  cap.  8,  p.  96,  Hol¬ 
land’s  trans.)  for  an  account  of  the  4  Blemmyi,’  who,  4  by  report,  haue  no  heads,  but 
mouth  and  eies  both  in  their  brest.’ — Malone  :  See  Hakluyt’s  Voyages,  1598 :  4  On 
that  branch  which  is  called  Caora  are  a  nation  of  people,  whose  heads  appear  not 
above  their  shoulders.  They  are  reported  to  have  eyes  in  their  shoulders,  and  their 
mouths  in  the  middle  of  their  breasts.’  [See  Notes  on  Oth.  I,  iii,  167,  in  this  ed.] 

65.  of  fiue  for  one]  This  phrase,  which  much  troubled  the  early  editors,  refers  to 
a  custom  which  in  effect  reverses  the  modem  Travellers'  Insurance  Companies. 
Theobald  discovered  the  exact  explanation  of  it  in  Jonson’s  Every  Man  out  of  his 
Humour,  but  yet  failed  thoroughly  to  comprehend  it  •  he  believed  that  the  phrase, 


i8o 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iii,  sc.  iii. 


[65.  putter  out  of  flue  for  one] 

which  really  needs  no  change  whatever,  needed  the  substitution  of  on  for  ‘  of.’  Pun- 
tarvalo,  in  Jonson’s  comedy,  II,  i,  p.  72,  ed.  Gifford,  says :  ‘I  do  intend  ....  to 
travel,  and  ....  I  am  determined  to  put  forth  some  five  thousand  pound  to  be  paid 
me  five  for  one  upon  the  return  of  myself,  my  wife,  and  my  dog  from  the  Turk’s 
court  in  Constantinople.  If  all  or  either  of  us  miscarry  in  the  journey,  ’tis  gone ;  if 
we  be  successful,  why,  there  will  be  five  and  twenty  thousand  pound  to  entertain  time 
withal.’  The  vain-glorious  knight  therefore  was  a  speculator  on  the  chances  of  re¬ 
ceiving  five  for  his  one,  exactly  as  the  Folio  has  it,  ‘  a  putter  out  of  five  for  one.’ 
‘  Five  for  one  ’  may  well  have  been  a  phrase  used  by  those  who  lent  money  on  such 
travellers  risks. — Steevens  cited  passages,  referring  to  the  custom,  from  Chapman 
and  Shirley’s  The  Ball ,  1639,  and  from  Amends  for  Ladies,  also  in  1639,  which  merely 
prove  the  continued  prevalence  of  the  custom  long  after  Shakespeare’s  day,  and  do 
not  enlarge  our  knowledge.  Steevens  also  cites  a  sentence  from  Barnaby  Riche’s 
Faults,  and  Nothing  but  Faults,  1607,  to  show  that  a  lower  rate  of  premium,  of  ‘two 
or  three  for  one,’  was  sometimes  accepted. — Malone  :  It  appears  from  Moryson’s 
Itinerary,  1617,  I,  198,  that  ‘this  custom  of  giving  out  money  upon  these  adventures 
was  first  used  in  court,  and  among  noblemen  ’ ;  and  that  some  years  before  his  book 
was  published,  ‘  bankerouts,  stage-players,  and  men  of  base  condition  had  drawn  it 
into  contempt,’  by  undertaking  journeys  merely  for  gain  upon  their  return.  [In  a 
foot-note  to  the  speech  of  Puntarvalo,  just  given,  Gifford  approves  of  Malone’s  read¬ 
ing  (see  Text.  Notes),  and  condemns  Steevens’s,  i.  e.  Theobald’s,  as  one  ‘  which  to 

the  ears  of  Shakespeare  and  his  audiences  would  have  been  intolerable.’) _ Halli- 

wei.l  remarks  that  ‘  this  curious  method  of  assurance  ....  is  continually  alluded  to 
by  old  writers  ’ ;  and  thereupon  gives  nearly  five  folio  pages  of  extracts  in  illustra¬ 
tion,  among  them  two  blank  forms  of  the  Legal  Instruments  used  on  such  occasions 
from  West’s  Symboleography,  1605,  and  The  Second  Part  of  the  Young  Clerk's  Guide, 
&c.  1652.— The  Cambridge  Editors:  See  Beau,  and  Fl.’s  The  Noble  Gentleman, 
I,  i  [p.  1 19,  ed.  Dyce]  :  ‘The  return  will  give  you  five  for  one.’  Marine  is  about  to 
travel.— Dyce,  in  his  first  edition,  asserts  that  the  words  of  the  Folio  do  not  bear  the 
meaning  of  ‘  at  the  rate  of  five  for  one.’  He  therefore  adopts  Thirlby’s  reading,  and 
cites,  as  additional  justification,  Gifford’s  remark,  given  above.  In  his  second  and 
third  edition  he  repeats  his  note  and  adds  the  note  of  the  Camb.  Edd.,  just  cited, 
a  note,’  he  says,  ‘  in  which  they  evidently  confound  “ putting  out  five  for  one  ”  with 
“  receiving  five  for  one,”  and  show,  besides,  that  they  are  imperfectly  acquainted  with 
the  story  of  the  play  from  which  they  quote.’  It  is  well,  perhaps,  to  note  that  Thirlby’s 
conjecture,  with  Theobald’s  discussion  of  it  and  of  the  passage,  is  to  be  found  in  Nichols’s 
Illustrations,  &c.  ii,  pp.  224,  244,  258;  and  that  a  parallel  passage  has  been  adduced 
by  Dr  Br.  Nicholson  in  New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  1880-82,  Pt  i,  p.  32,  to  wit:  “‘  lie 

put  out  one  million  to  use  after  the  rate  of  seuen  score  to  the  hundreth.” _ Day’s  lie 

of  Guls,  1606;  that  is,  he,  the  “putter  out,”  would  in  reality  put  out  one  hundred 
to  be  repaid  at  the  rate  of  one  hundred  and  forty.’  Again  in  his  admirably  edited 
Scot  s  Discovery  of  Witchcraft,  p.  547,  he  finds  an  instance  almost  exactly  similar  to 
the  present  in  ‘  a  thousand  for  one  that  fell  out  contrary.’  ‘  The  putting  out  of  five 
for  one,  says  Nicholson,  ‘  is  considered  as  one  action,  and  is — pace  Dyce _ the  receiv¬ 

ing,  as  [Knight]  says,  at  the  rate  of  five  for  one,  the  putter  out  being  he  who  puts 
out  in  the  hope  of  receiving  five  for  one.’— Allen  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc.)  :  ‘  I  would  add, 
in  support  of  Ft,  that  there  is  a  tendency,  in  all  languages,  to  make  the  current 
phrases  of  law,  business,  &c.,  elliptical,  because  they  are  so  perfectly  understood  by 


act  III,  sc.  iii.]  THE  TEMPEST 

Good  warrant  of. 

Al.  I  will  ftand  to,  and  feede, 

Although  my  laft,  no  matter,  fince  I  feele 
The  beft  is  paft  :  brother :  my  Lord,  the  Duke, 

Stand  too,  and  doe  as  we. 

Thunder  and  Lightning.  Enter  Ariell  ( like  a  Harpey)  claps 
his  wings  vpon  the  Table,  and  with  a  quient  deuice  the 
Banquet  vanijhes. 

69.  Lord,]  lord  Pope  et  seq.  70.  too]  to  F  et  seq. 

70.  Scene  IV.  Pope  + . 


I8l 

66 


70 


73 


everybody  that  some  of  the  words  of  the  phrase  can  be  left  for  the  hearer  to  supply 
for  himself.  So  the  Greeks  treated  the  terms  connected  with  actions  and  prosecutions 
at  law,  all  of  which  were  readily  understood,  because  transferred  from  the  vocabulary 
of  the  chase.  Demosthenes,  accordingly  ( De  Corona ),  says :  « It  is  not  the  same  to 
me  to  lose  your  favour,  as  it  is  for  Alschines  not  to  catch  his  indictment  ”  (e/xiv  tj)v 
ypa<p7jv) — where  the  full  expression  would  be  “  to  catch  him  that  is  trying  to  run  away 
(ilciv  tov  Qevyovra)  and  by  this  means  to  carry  through  his  indictment  (vcmv  tt/v 
ypatpijv.)”  It  thus  appears  that  in  the  formula  actually  used  the  verb  is  made  to 
govern  grammatically  what  it  does  not  govern  logically. — In  like  manner,  while 
“  putter-out  ”  is  grammatically  followed  by  the  Genitive  “  of  five,”  it  is  logically  fol¬ 
lowed  by  some  Genitive  equivalent  to  “of  a  capital  sum” — so  that  the  whole  phrase, 
as  filled  up,  would  read :  “  each  putter-out  of  a  principal  for  a  return  of  five  pounds 
for  each  pound  left  in  deposit.”  ’ — One  of  Schmidt’s  few  errors  is  his  interpretation 
of  ‘  putter  out  ’  as  ‘  one  who  puts  to  sea.’  It  is  properly  criticised  by  Hales  {Notes, 
&c.  p.  182)  and  Grant  White  ( Studies ,  &c.  p.  310.) — Ed. 

67-69.  I  .  .  .  last,  no  .  .  .  past]  Mason  :  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  passage 
was  intended  to  be  in  rhyme,  and  should  be  printed  as  a  rhyming  couplet. — Dyce 
quotes  Mason  and  remarks :  ‘  But  a  greater  objection  to  such  an  arrangement  than 
what  would  arise  from  breaking  the  ovvatyua  of  the  blank  verse  at  the  commencement 
of  this  speech,  is  presented  by  the  words  with  which  it  concludes,  “  Brother  ....  as 
we  ” ;  for  they  cannot  with  any  propriety  be  reduced  to  a  single  line ;  and  there 
would  be  no  little  awkwardness  in  cutting  them  up  into :  |  «  Brother  |  My  lord  the 
duke,  stand  to,  and  do  as  we.”  |  ’ — Keightley  {Exp.  214)  :  Dyce  properly  rejects 
Mason’s  arrangement,  but  [as  to  his  remark  on  the  remainder  of  the  speech,  was  he] 
unaware  of  the  existence  of  six-foot  lines  in  these  plays  ?  The  true  reason  for  reject¬ 
ing  this  arrangement  is  that  in  this  play  Shakespeare  does  not  employ  couplets.  [See 
notes  on  III,  i,  28.] 

71.  Harpey]  Peck  {Milton,  p.  207),  in  a  note  on  Paradise  Regained,  ii,  400, 
remarks  that  both  Milton  and  Shakespeare  ‘here  translate  Virgil,  iii.’ — Steevens 
gives  the  passage  from  Phaer’s  translation,  1558:  ‘ — fast  to  meate  we  fall.  But 
sodenly  from  downe  the  hills,  with  grisly  fall  to  syght,  The  Harpies  come,  and  beat¬ 
ing  wings,  with  great  noys  out  thei  shright,  And  at  our  meate  they  snatch.’ 

72,  73.  quient  deuice  .  .  .  vanishes]  Dyce:  This  means  that  the  machanist  of 
the  theatre  was  to  do  his  best  to  make  it  seem  that  the  harpy  had  devoured  the  ban¬ 
quet  (compare  what  Prospero  says,  presently,  of  this  harpy,  ‘  a  grace  it  had  devour¬ 
ing ’),  and  to  contrive  some  method  for  the  disappearing  of  the  table. 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  hi,  sc.  iii. 


182 

Ar.  You  are  three  men  of  finne,  whom  deftiny 
That  hath  to  inftrument  this  lower  world,  75 

And  what  is  in’t :  the  neuer  furfeited  Sea, 

Hath  caus’d  to  belch  vp  you ;  and  on  this  Ifland, 

Where  man  doth  not  inhabit,  you  ’mongft  men, 

Being  mold  vnfit  to  liue  :  I  haue  made  you  mad  ; 

And  euen  with  fuch  like  valour,  men  hang,  and  drowne  80 

Their  proper  felues  :  you  fooles,  I  and  my  fellowes 

Are  minifters  of  Fate,  the  Elements 

Of  whom  your  fwords  are  temper’d,  may  as  well 

Wound  the  loud  windes,  or  with  bemockt-at-Stabs 

Kill  the  ftill  clofing  waters,  as  diminifh  85 


75)  7^.  That... in' t]  In  parenthesis, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Mai. 
Var.  Knt. 

75-  instrument]  injlruments  F4, 
Rowe  i. 

76.  in't  .•]  in' t,  Rowe. 

77.  belch  vp  you ]  belch  you  up  F4, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  belch  up 
Theob. +  ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll. 
Sing.  Huds.  belch  up ;  yea,  Sta.  conj. 
Huds. 


79.  I  haue ]  I've  Jeph.  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

79,  80.  liue  :...And]  live, — ...As  S 
Verges. 

79.  [Seeing  them  draw.  Cap. 

81.  you ]  Ye  Johns. 

[They  draw  their  swords.  Han. 

83.  Of  whom]  Of  which  Han. 

84.  bemockt-at-Stabs]  bemockt-at  Stabs 
Rowe. 


74)  77-  whom  .  .  .  you]  Abbott,  §  249 :  The  supplementary  pronoun  is  generally 
confined  to  cases  where  the  relative  is  separated  from  its  verb  by  an  intervening  clause, 
and  where  on  this  account  clearness  requires  the  supplementary  pronoun.  Thus 
[among  many  other  examples]  ‘  Whom,  Though  bearing  misery,  I  desire  my  life  Once 
more  to  look  on  him.'—Wint.  T.  V,  i,  138;  and  ‘  Who,  if  he  break,’  kc.—Mer  op 
Ven.  I,  iii. 

75.  to  instrument]  This  idiom  is  familiar  from  Luke  iii,  8  :  ‘  We  have  Abraham 
to  our  father.’ — Ed. 

77.  vp  you]  Collier:  It  seems  clear  that  ‘you’  is  too  much  for  the  sense  verse, 
and  grammatical  construction,  and  we  have  omitted  it,  because  we  think  it  crept  into 
the  old  text  by  mere  inadvertence.— Dyce  :  The  old  text  is  undoubtedly  right.  Com¬ 
pare  Wint.  T.  V,  i,  138  [cited  above  in  Abbott’s  note,  line  74].  When  Collier  pro¬ 
nounced  ‘  you  ’  to  be  ‘  too  much  for  the  verse,'  it  must  have  escaped  him  that  the  Folio 
has  ‘  caus’d ’—not  causld.— Hudson  :  ‘You’  coming  in  after  ‘belch  up’  is,  to  say 
the  least,  extremely  awkward.  And,  as  we  have  ‘  you  ’  again  in  the  next  line,  right 
under  ‘  yea,’  the  misprint,  if  it  be  one,  is  easily  accounted  for.  The  correction  is 
Staunton’s. 

^3-  Of  whom]  Abbott,  §  264:  In  almost  all  cases  where  who  refers  to  an  irra¬ 
tional  antecedent,  an  action  or  personal  feeling  is  implied,  so  that  who  is  the  subject. 
Whom  is  rare.  [See  II,  i,  129.] 

84.  bemockt-at-Stabs]  For  other  examples  of  words  compounded  with  prepo¬ 
sitions,  see  Abbott,  §  431. 


act  hi,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


183 

86 


One  dowle  that’s  in  my  plumbe :  My  fellow  mlnifters 
Are  like-invulnerable :  if  you  could  hurt, 

Your  fwords  are  now  too  maflie  for  your  ftrengths, 

And  will  not  be  vplifted  :  But  remember 
(For  that’s  my  bufineffe  to  you)  that  you  three 
From  Millaine  did  fupplant  good  Profpero , 

Expos’d  vnto  the  Sea  (which  hath  requit  it) 

Him,  and  his  innocent  childe:  for  which  foule  deed, 

The  Powres,  delaying  (not  forgetting)  haue 
Incens’d  the  Seas,  and  Shores ;  yea,  all  the  Creatures  95 

Againft  your  peace :  Thee  of  thy  Sonne,  Alonfo 
They  haue  bereft ;  and  doe  pronounce  by  me  97 

86.  dowle]  down  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Ivtly.  88 .  Jlrengths]Jlrength  F  ,  Rowe. 

plumbe]  plumb  F4.  plume  Rowe  92.  requit  it]  requited  Wilson, 

et  seq. 


85.  still]  That  is,  always,  ever,  as  in  Shakespeare  passim;  compare  ‘still-vexed 
Bermoothes.’ 

86.  dowle]  Tollet  communicated  to  Steevens  the  following  extracts  from  Hu¬ 
mane  Industry ;  or,  A  History  of  most  Manual  Arts,  1661,  p.  93,  which  fully  explain 
the  meaning  of  this  word :  ‘  The  wool-bearing  trees  in  Ethiopia,  which  Virgil  speaks 
of,  and  the  Eriophori  Arbores  in  Theophrastus,  are  not  such  trees  as  have  a  certain 
wool  or  dowl  upon  the  outside  of  them,  as  the  small  cotton ;  but  short  trees  that  bear 
a  ball  upon  the  top,  pregnant  with  wool,  which  the  Syrians  call  Cott,  the  Grecians 
Gossypium,  the  Italians  llombagio,  and  we  Bombase.’  ‘  There  is  a  certain  shell-fish 
in  the  sea,  called  Pinna,  that  bears  a  mossy  dowl  or  wool,  whereof  cloth  was  spun 
and  made.’  Again,  p.  95,  ‘  Trichitis,  or  the  hayrie  stone,  by  some  Greek  authors, 
and  Alumen  plumaceum,  or  downy  alum,  by  the  Latinists :  this  hair  or  dowl  is  spun 
into  thread,  and  weaved  into  cloth.’ — Malone:  Cole,  in  his  Lat.  Diet.  1679,  inter¬ 
prets  ‘  young  dowle  ’  by  lanugo. — Walker  (Crit.  iii,  5) :  Note  the  spelling  in  2  Hen. 
IV  •  IV,  v,  32  :  ‘  There  lies  a  dowlney  feather  ....  that  light  and  weightlesse  dowlne.’ 
I  suspect  that  dowlne  was  the  old  spelling,  then  growing  out  of  use  ;  and  that  dowle 
in  The  Tempest  is  only  a  corruption  of  dowlne.  In  the  very  same  line  the  Folio  has 
‘plumbe’  for  plume. — F.  A.  Carrington  (N.  6°  Qu.  2d  S.  vii,  p.  483,  1859) :  In 
Gloucestershire  the  plumage  of  young  goslings  before  they  have  feathers  is  called 
dowle.  I  believe  that  any  plumage  that  I  should  call  down  they  would  call  dowle. 
— Dyce  :  I  find  the  rare  verb  bedowl  in  An  Eclogue  by  Davies,  appended  to 
Browne’s  Shepheards  Pipe :  ‘  What  though  time  yet  hannot  bedowld  thy  chin  ?’ 
1620. 

83-87.  swords  .  .  .  invulnerable]  Ritson:  So  in  Phaer’s  Virgil  fed.  1558,  ap. 

Collier]  Book  iii :  ‘  Their  swords  by  them  they  laid . And  on  the  filthy  birds 

they  beat . But  fethers  none  do  from  them  fal,  nor  wound  nor  Strok  doth  bleed, 

Nor  force  of  weapons  hurt  them  can.’ 

87.  like-invulnerable]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc .)  :  Not  ‘  like  those  who  are  invul¬ 
nerable,’  but  ‘invulnerable  alike  [with  me].’  Write,  therefore,  ’like  for  alike,  just  as 
1  ’las  ’  is  written  for  alas. 


184  THE  TEMPEST  [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 

Lingring  perdition  (worfe  then  any  death  98 

Can  be  at  once)  fhall  ftep,  by  ftep  attend 

You,  and  your  wayes,  whofe  wraths  to  guard  you  from,  100 
Which  here,  in  this  molt  defolate  Ille,  elfe  fals 
Vpon  your  heads,  is  nothing  but  hearts-forrow, 

And  a  cleere  life  enfuing. 

He  vanifkes  in  Thunder:  then  (to  foft  Mujickel)  Enter  the 

Ptapes  againe,  and  daunce  (with  mockes  and  mowes)  and  105 
carrying  out  the  Table. 

Pro.  Brauely  the  figure  of  this  Harpie ,  haft  thou 
Perform’d  (my  Ariel T)  a  grace  it  had  deuouring : 

Of  my  Inftru<5tion,  haft  thou  nothing  bated 

In  what  thou  had’ft  to  fay  :  fo  with  good  life,  1 10 

And  obferuation  ftrange,  my  meaner  minifters 


100.  wraths ]  wrath  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

guard ]  guards  F4. 

101.  fals ]  fall  Han. 

102.  if]  there's  Han 
hearts-forrow ]  Ff.  heart-sorrow 

Cam.  Glo.  Jepb.  Wh.  ii,  Dtn.  heart’s- 


-sorrow  or  heart's  sorrow  Rowe  et 
cet. 

105.  mockes]  mopps  Theob. 

107.  [Aside.  Cap. 

Harpie,  haft)  harpy' st  Allen. 
Iio.  life)  list  Johns,  conj.  will  S. 
Verges. 


98,  99.  death  .  .  .  once]  Allen  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc .) :  A  singular  interposition  of 
the  verb — a  species  of  Tmesis.  The  actual  order  is  ‘  worse  than  any  death-at-once 
can  be.’ 

100,  101.  wraths  .  .  .  Which  .  .  .  fals]  Abbott,  §  247,  classes  this  with  many 

other  examples  of  a  singular  verb  following  a  relative  with  a  plural  antecedent. _ W. 

A.  Wright  holds  ‘  falls  ’  to  be  a  singular  by  attraction,  the  singular  substantive  ‘  isle  ’ 
occurring  immediately  before,  whereof  Abbott,  §  412,  gives  many  examples. 

10?.  is]  For  other  examples  of  this  ellipsis  of  there  is,  see  Abbott,  §  404. 

103.  cleere]  Johnson  :  Pure,  blameless,  innocent. 

109.  bated]  Albeit  a  mere  contraction  of  abate,  it  is  sufficiently  independent  to  be 
correctly  printed  without  the  sign  of  contraction. 

1 10.  good  life]  Johnson :  This  may  mean  ‘with  exact  presentation  of  their  sev¬ 
eral  characters,  with  observation  strange  of  their  particular  and  distinct  parts.’  So  we 
say,  ‘  he  acted  to  the  life.'  [A  paraphrase  which  Dyce  adopts.] — Steevens  :  In 
Twelfth  N.  II,  iii,  ‘  good  life  ’  seems  to  be  used  for  innocent  jollity :  ‘  Would  you,’ 
says  the  Clown,  ‘  have  a  love  song,  or  a  song  of  good  life  ?'  [Staunton  refers  to 

this  use  of  the  phrase  in  Twelfth  At.,  and  says  it  is  as  ambiguous  there  as  here.] _ Hen- 

LEY :  To  do  anything  with  good  life  is  still  a  provincial  expression  in  the  west  of  Eng¬ 
land,  and  signifies  ‘  to  do  it  with  the  full  bent  and  energy  of  the  mind.’ _ Collier  : 

That  is,  probably,  with  all  appearance  of  actual  existence — as  if  what  was  done  were 
real,  and  no  delusion.— W.  A.  Wright:  With  lifelike  truthfulness  and  rare  attention 
to  their  several  parts.  [See  IV,  i,  9,  where  ‘  strange  ’  is  used  in  the  same  sense  as 
here.] 


act  III,  sc.  iii.j  THE  TEMPEST 

Their  feuerall  kindes  haue  done :  my  high  charmes  work, 
And  thefe  (mine  enemies)  are  all  knit  vp 
In  their  diftradlions  :  they  now  are  in  my  powre ; 

And  in  thefe  fits,  I  leaue  them,  while  I  vifit 
Yong  Ferdinand  (whom  they  fuppofe  is  droun’d) 

And  his,  and  mine  lou’d  darling. 

Gon.  I’th  name  of  fomething  holy,  Sir,  why  Hand  you 
In  this  ftrange  ftare  ? 

Al.  O,  it  is  monftrous  .*  monftrous  : 

Me  thought  the  billowes  fpoke,  and  told  me  of  it, 

The  windes  did  fing  it  to  me :  and  the  Thunder 
(That  deepe  and  dreadfull  Organ-Pipe)  pronounc’d 


1S5 

112 


115 


120 


123 


114.  now]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

1 15.  while]  whilst  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

Xl6.  whom]  who  Han.  S.  Verges. 

117.  mine]  Ff,  Hal.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. 
Glo.  Jeph.  Wrt,  Wh.  ii.  my  Rowe  et 


cet. 

1 1 7.  [Exit  Prospero  from  alwve. 
Theob. 

1 18.  fomething  holy.  Sir,]  fomething, 
holy  Sir,  F4. 


1 1 2.  kindes]  Steevens:  Thus  in  Ant.  <Se  Cleop.  V,  ii,  264:  ‘the  worm  will  do 
his  kind.’ 

116.  whom  .  .  .  droun’d]  Abbott,  §  410:  So  in  Matt,  xvi,  13,  all  the  versions 
except  Wickliffe’s  have :  ‘  Whom  do  men  say  that  I,  the  Son  of  man,  am  ?'  Wick- 
lifife  has  ‘  Whom  seien  men  to  be  mennes  sone  ?’  This  passage  explains  the  idiom.  It 
is  a  confusion  of  two  constructions,  e.  g.  ‘  Ferdinand  who,  they  suppose,  is  drowned ,’ 
and  ‘  whom  they  suppose  to  be  drowned.' 

1 17.  mine]  Abbott,  §  238:  Mine,  hers,  theirs  are  used  as  pronominal  adjectives 
before  their  nouns.  In  the  [present  line]  ‘  mine  ’  is  only  separated  by  an  adjective 
from  its  noun :  *  mine  lov’d  darling.’  More  remarkable  are  ‘ yours  and  my  dis¬ 
charge,’  II,  i,  277,  supra;  ‘  By  hers  and  mine  adultery.’ — Cymb.  V,  v,  186;  ‘  Even 
in  theirs  and  in  the  commons’  ears.’ — Coriol.  V,  vi,  4.  It  is  felt  that  the  ear  can¬ 
not  wait  till  the  end  of  the  sentence  while  so  slight  a  word  as  her  or  their  remains 
with  nothing  to  depend  on.  The  same  explanation  applies  to  mine,  which,  though 
unemphatic  immediately  before  its  noun,  is  emphatic  when  separated  from  its 
noun. 

120.  it]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soe.) :  That  is,  ‘my  trespass,’  my  crime  against  Pros¬ 
pero.  Alonzo  shrinks  from  the  more  definite  expression  of  what  so  suddenly  harrows 
up  his  conscience. 

120,  &c.  Bucknill  (p.  58) :  Ariel  charms  Alonzo,  Sebastian,  and  Antonio  into 
madness.  The  intention  of  suicide  is  expressed  by  Alonzo,  that  of  desperate  fight, 
the  other  two.  The  phrensy  of  Alonzo  is  also  distinguished  by  the  fixed  idea  of  his 
own  guilt,  and  a  state  resembling  hallucination  founded  upon  it.  These  lines  [120- 
127]  afford  a  beautiful  example  of  the  transition  of  absorbing  emotion  into  perverted 
sensation  through  the  influence  of  excited  fancy,  representing  the  lunatic  of  ‘  imag¬ 
ination  all  compact.’  It  is  the  very  opposite  of  matter-of-fact  reason. 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  hi,  sc.  iii. 


1 86 


The  name  of  Profper :  it  did  bafe  my  Trefpaffe, 

Therefore  my  Sonne  i’th  Ooze  is  bedded;  and  125 

Fie  feeke  him  deeper  then  ere  plummet  founded, 

And  with  him  there  lye  mudded. 

Seb.  But  one  feend  at  a  time, 
lie  fight  their  Legions  ore. 

Ant.  He  be  thy  Second.  Exeunt.  1 30 

Gon.  All  three  of  them  are  defperate :  their  great  guilt 
(Like  poyfon  giuen  to  worke  a  great  time  after) 

Now  gins  to  bite  the  fpirits :  I  doe  befeech  you 
(That  are  of  fuppler  ioynts)  follow  them  fwiftly, 

And  hinder  them  from  what  this  extafie  135 

May  now  prouoke  them  to. 

Ad.  Follow,  I  pray  you.  Exeunt  omnes.  137 


124.  Profper]  Prospero  Anon.  (ap. 
Grey). 

bafe ]  bass  Johns.  Steev.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Wrt,  Hucls.  Wh. 
ii,  Dtn. 

my]  thy  F4> 

127, 128.  with  him... But]  Om.  Steev. 


conj. 

129.  [Exit.  Cap. 

132.  poyfon]  yoyfon  F  . 

great  ]  long  Walker,  Huds. 

133.  the]  their  Allen,  Daniel. 
doe]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 


124.  base]  Heath  :  It  served  as  the  bass  in  a  concert,  to  proclaim  my  trespass  in 
the  loudest  and  fullest  tone. — Steevens  :  So  in  the  Faerie  Queene,  ii,  12,  33  :  ‘ — the 
rolling  sea,  resounding  soft,  In  his  big  base  them  fitly  answered.’ 

125.  and]  See  I,  ii,  14. 

132.  poison  .  .  .  after]  Holt:  Seamen  are  strongly  persuaded  that  the  Africans, 
especially  on  the  Guiney  Coast,  can  temper  Poison  so  as  to  operate  at  any  precise 
time  and  in  any  limited  degree,  and  that  during  the  interval  the  patient  shall  feel  no 
effect  from  the  dose.  [Steevens  makes  a  similar  assertion,  but  gives  no  authority, 
and  then  adds :]  So  in  the  celebrated  libel  called  Leicester’s  Commonwealth :  *  I 
heard  him  once  myselfe  in  publique  act  at  Oxford,  and  that  in  presence  of  my  lord 
of  Leicester,  maintain  that  poison  might  be  so  tempered  and  given,  as  it  should  not 
appear  presently,  and  yet  should  kill  the  party  afterwards  at  what  time  should  be 
appointed.’ 

133.  the  spirits]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Sod) :  Current  English  certainly  requires 
their  instead  of  ‘  the,’  and  perhaps  we  should  so  write,  at  any  rate ;  nothing  could  be 
easier  to  mistake  than  the  MS  character  for  th  (much  like  a  y),  followed  by  the  r 
above  the  line  for  that  with  the  e. 

135.  extasie]  Nares  :  In  the  usage  of  Snakespeare  and  some  others  it  stands  for 
every  species  of  alienation  of  mind,  whether  temporary  or  permanent,  procee  ling 
from  joy,  sorrow,  wonder,  or  any  other  exciting  cause ;  and  this  certainly  suits  with 
the  etymology,  iKoraaLQ. 


A.CT  IV,  SC,  i.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


1 8  7 


A6ius  Quartus .  Scena  Prima. 


Enter  Profpero ,  Ferdinand ,  and  Miranda . 
Pro.  If  I  haue  too  aufterely  punifh’d  you, 
Your  compenfation  makes  amends,  for  I 
Haue  giuen  you  here,  a  third  of  mine  owne  life, 


2.  Prospero’s  Cave.  Pope.  Prospero’s 
(Jell.  Theob. 

5-  a  third ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Johns. 
Cap.  Steev.’SS,  MaL’90,  Coll,  i,  Cam. 


Jeph.  Wh.  ii.  a  thrid  Tollett,  Glo.  Wrt, 
Phillpotts.  the  thread  Heath,  the  end 
Bailey,  a  thread  Theob.  et  cet. 


5.  third]  The  difficulty  of  a  threefold  division  of  Prospero’s  life  occurred  to  Theo¬ 
bald,  who,  in  a  letter  to  Concanen  (Mist’s  Journal,  16  March,  1727-28;  Nichols’s 
I/lust,  ii,  199),  suggested  the  emendation  which  afterwards  appeared  in  his  edition, 
and  which  since  then  has  been  adopted  by  a  majority  of  editors,  who  were  not  taught 
caution,  as  they  might  have  been,  by  its  very  obviousness.  In  his  edition  Theobald’s 
note  is  as  follows :  ‘  Why  is  she  only  a  third  of  his  own  life  ?  He  had  no  wife  living, 
nor  any  other  child  to  rob  her  of  a  share  in  his  affection ;  so  that  we  may  reckon  her 
at  least  half  of  himself.  Nor  could  he  intend  that  he  lov’d  himself  twice  as  much 
as  he  did  her;  for  he  immediately  subjoins  that  it  was  “she  for  whom  he  liv’d.”  In 
Othello,  when  Iago  alarms  the  Senator  with  the  loss  of  his  daughter,  he  tells  him 
“  you  have  lost  half  your  soul.”  And  Dimidium  animce  mece  is  the  current  language 
on  such  occasions.  There  is  no  room  for  doubt,  but  I  have  restored  to  the  poet  his 
true  reading;  and  the  thread  of  life  is  a  phrase  most  frequent  with  him.’  Hereupon 
follow  several  examples  of  Shakespeare’s  use  of  the  phrase  ‘  thread  of  life.’  In 
Mist’s  Journal  Theobald  refers  to  the  old  way  of  spelling,  thrid,  and  cites  an  example 
where  a  spider’s  thread  is  misprinted  ‘  third  ’  in  Lingua,  IV,  vi. — Holt  disapproves 
of  Theobald’s  change,  and  supposes  that  ‘  the  old  Gentleman,’  as  he  is  pleased  to  call 
Prospero,  may  have  computed  Miranda  and  himself  as  two-thirds  and  his  future 
princely  son-in-law  as  the  remaining  third. — Nor  will  Heath  accede  to  Theobald’s 
emendation.  The  thread  of  life  refers  to  Clotho’s  distaff.  ‘  But,’  says  Heath,  ‘  it  was 
never  imagined  that  more  threads  than  one  were  spun  for  any  one  man.  Whereas  “  a 
thread  ”  supposes  that  the  threads  of  Prospero’s  life  were  more  than  one,  and  that  he 
gave  away  one  of  them  in  giving  away  his  daughter.  This  objection  will  indeed  be 
obviated  if  we  read,  “  The  thread  of  my  own  life.”  ....  But  I  much  doubt  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  any  alteration  at  all,  it  being  a  liberty  commonly  taken  by  poets,  in  a  view 
either  of  exaggerating  or  depreciating,  to  put  a  certain  number  or  proportion  for  an 
uncertain.’ — Capell  believes  that  if  the  next  line,  ‘  Or  that  for  which  I  live,’  had 
been  ‘  reflected  on  thoroughly  by  editors  and  their  remarkers,’  Theobald’s  correction 
‘  had  not  been  fallen-in  with  ’  so  readily;  <  for  that  poetical  thread  of  the  fates’  spin¬ 
ning  is  not  what  we  live  “  for,”  but  what  we  live  by.'  The  three  thirds  of  Prospero’s 
life  Capell  then  assumes  to  be :  his  realm,  his  daughter,  and  himself;  ‘  the  daughter 
he  gives  away,  keeping  all  his  concern  for  her;  the  realm  he  hop’d  to  return  to,  ...  . 
and  when  retir’d  to  his  Milan,  then  (as  be  tells  us  in  almost  his  last  speech),  “  every 
third  thought  should  be  his  grave”;  words  that  seem  to  derive  themselves  from  the 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


1 88 


[5.  a  third  of  mine  owne  life] 

expression  in  this  passage.’ — JOHNSON  adheres  to  the  Folio,  but  gives  no  explana¬ 
tion.  ‘  Prospero,’  he  remarks,  ‘  in  his  reason  subjoined  why  he  calls  her  the  third  of 
his  life,  seems  to  allude  to  some  logical  distinction  of  causes,  making  her  the  final 
cause.’ — Hawkins:  Thread  was  formerly  spelled  ‘third,’  as  in  Mucedorus ,  1619: 
‘  when  the  sisters  shall  decree  To  cut  in  twaine  the  twisted  third  of  life.’  [Knight 
remarks  that  ‘third’  has  become  thred  in  the  edition  of  1668.  Hazlitt,  whose  text 
(Dodsley,  vii)  is  based  on  the  Qto  of  1598,  prints  thread,  as  does  also  Collier  in  his 
reprint,  1877,  and,  lastly,  in  the  best  and  latest  edition  of  Mucedorus  by  Warnke 
and  Pkoescholdt,  containing  a  collation,  word  for  word,  of  all  the  many  editions, 
presumably  as  accurate  as  it  is  scholarly,  the  word  is  printed  (p.  44)  thread,  and  not 
a  solitary  varia  lectio  is  recorded.  Therefore,  in  this  matter,  which  is,  after  all,  of 
very  small  importance,  our  trust  must  rest  in  the  word  of  Sir  John  Hawkins.  Since 
writing  the  foregoing  I  have  just  noticed  that  Collier  (ed.  i)  states  that  ‘  Hawkins 
misquotes  Mucedorus,  no  doubt  unintentionally,’  and  I  should  at  once  cancel  what 
I  have  written,  were  it  not  that  W.  A.  Wright,  who  is,  I  think,  punctilious  in  veri¬ 
fying  citations,  quotes  Hawkins  and  adopts  his  spelling.  Four  other  modem  edi¬ 
tors  also  cite  Mucedorus,  one  on  the  authority  of  Hawkins,  and  three  on  their 
own.] — Steevens  :  The  following  quotation  should  seem  to  place  the  meaning 
beyond  all  dispute:  In  Acolastus,  a  comedy,  1540,  is  this  passage:  ‘ — one  of 
worldly  shame’s  children,  of  his  countenance  and  threde  of  his  body.’  [I  regret 
that  I  cannot  verify  this  quotation  ] — Tollett  :  ‘A  third  of  mine  own  life  ’  is  a  fibre 
or  a.  part  of  my  own  life.  Prospero  considers  himself  as  the  stock  or  parent  tree,  and 
his  daughter  as  a  fibre  or  portion  of  himself,  for  whose  benefit  he  himself  lives.  In 
this  sense  the  word  is  used  in  Markham’s  English  Husbandman,  ed.  1635,  p.  146: 
‘  Cut  off  all  the  maine  rootes,  within  half  a  foot  of  the  tree,  only  the  small  thriddes  or 
twist  rootes  you  shall  not  cut  at  all.’  Again,  ibid. :  ‘  Every  branch  and  thrid  of  the 
root.’  This  is  evidently  the  same  word  as  thread,  which  is  likewise  spelt  thrid  by 
Lord  Bacon. — In  Collier’s  first  edition  he  followed  the  original  ‘third,’  but  his  MS 
having  written  thrid  (i.  e.  thread)  in  the  margin,  he  accepted  this  correction  as  final, 
and  adopted  it  in  his  subsequent  editions. — Dyce  ( Few  Notes,  p.  13)  emphasizes  his 
preference  for  thread  by  remarking  ‘  that  in  the  language  of  poetry,  from  the  earliest 
times,  a  beloved  object  has  always  been  spoken  of,  not  as  the  third,  but  as  the  HALF, 
of  another’s  life  or  soul  (so  Meleager,  djuov  fiev  ipvxvs,  and  Horace,  Animce  dimidium 
mece).'  Whereupon  Collier,  in  his  next  edition,  says  of  Dyce’s  note  that  if  it 
proves  anything,  it  shows  that  we  ought  probably  to  read  ‘  third  ’  and  not  thread  ;  ‘  it 
is  surely  more  expressive  for  Prospero  to  say  that  he  had  given  away  a  “  third  ”  than 
a  mere  thread  of  it.  We  only  wonder  that  Mr  Dyce,  when  referring  to  Greek  and 
Latin  authorities,  did  not  introduce  English  authorities  to  show  that  a  man’s  wife  was 
often  termed  “  his  better  half.”  ’ — Dyce’s  friend  Hunter  also  reproached  him  ( A 
Few  Words,  &c.  p.  5)  for  not  recollecting  the  Carmen  Nuptiale  [line  62]  of  Catullus, 
wherein  we  find  ‘  Virginitas  non  tota  tua  est :  ex  parte  parentum  est :  Tertia  pars  patri 
data,  pars  data  tertia  matri,  Tertia  sola  tua  est.’  ‘  Father,  mother,  and  daughter  are 
to  bound  together  that  they  form  but  one  soul,  one  life ;  so  that  each  was  but  the 
third  part  of  one  whole.  This  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  ancient  poet,  and 
this,  as  seems  to  me,  is  the  sense  of  “the  third  of  mine  own  life.”  ’ — Dyce  ( Gloss . 
s.  v.  thread),  repeated  his  remark  from  A  Few  Notes,  and,  after  adding  another  exam¬ 
ple  from  Mabbe’s  Trans,  of  Cervantes’s  Exemplarie  Navels,  thus  concludes  :  ‘  This 
remark,  however,  which  I  still  think  holds  good  against  the  reading  of  the  Folio,  had 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


Or  that  for  which  I  line  :  who,  once  againe  6 

I  tender  to  thy  hand :  All  thy  vexations 

Were  but  my  trials  of  thy  loue,  and  thou 

Haft  ftrangely  ftood  the  teft :  here,  afore  heauen 

1  ratifie  this  my  rich  guift :  O  Ferdinand ,  10 

Doe  not  fmile  at  me,  that  I  boaft  her  of, 


6.  who]  Ff,  Rowe,  Hal.  Wh.  Dyce, 
Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Wrt,  Huds.  Rife,  Dtn. 
•whom  Pope  et  cet. 

7.  tender ]  render  Rowe  i. 

9.  ftrangely ]  ftrongly  Sherwen,  Dan¬ 


iel. 

9.  teft]  reft  Ff. 

10.  O]  Om.  Han. 

1 1 .  her  oft]  of  her  Ktly.  her  off  Ff 
et  cet. 


no  weight  with  the  late  Joseph  Hunter  (a  lover  of  subtleties),  who,  in  a  printed  Lettei 
addressed  to  me,  defended  that  reading,  attaching  to  it  a  ridiculously  forced  meaning; 
nor  has  my  remark  had  any  influence  on  the  Cambridge  Editors,  who  retain  here  the 
misprint,  or,  rather,  the  old  spelling  (due  to  some  scribe  probably),  *  third.’ — Grant 
White  (ed.  i)  :  ‘  Third  ’  is  rather  arithmetical  than  poetical,  and  takes  us  too  far  into 
vulgar  fractions.  We  regard  it  as  } ;  and  it  might  as  well  be  ft,  or  ft.  Prospero 
means  to  tell  Ferdinand  that  he  has  given  him  a  thread,  a  fibre  of  his  existence, — 
one  of  his  very  heart-strings.  [Grant  White  adopted  the  arithmetical  |  in  his  ed.  ii.] 
— Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.)  :  In  favour  of  considering  ‘third’  as  written  by  Metathe¬ 
sis  for  thrid=  ‘  thread,’  it  may  be  noted  that  similar  substitutions  were  usual  in  Greek, 
especially  where  the  same  Liquid  (r)  was  concerned — e.  g.  fiapdvc  for  jipadvc,  r/pftm- 
tov  for  fjpapTov,  Rvkv6(  for  Rwarf,  &c. — Keightley  :  It  is  easy  to  conceive  how 
Miranda  might  be  regarded  as  a  thread  or  integral  portion  of  her  father’s  life,  but  not 
how  she  could  be  a  *  third  ’  of  it. — J ephson  :  A  ‘  third  of  mine  own  life  ’  means  ‘  a 
fibre  of  my  own  existence.’ — E.  Magnusson  ( Athenceum ,  26  July,  1884)  maintains 
that  ‘  Prospero  had  been  married  and  had  only  one  child,  Miranda.  His  life’s  tri¬ 
unity  had  once  upon  a  time,  then,  consisted  of  his  now  departed  wife,  his  child,  and 
himself.  ....  Could  any  one  imagine  Shakespeare  talking  of  “  living  for  a  thread  of 
his  own  life  ”  ?’  The  true  interpretation,  it  seems  to  me,  is  Capell’s. — Ed. 

6.  who]  For  instances  of  ‘  who  ’  for  whom  see  Shakespeare  passim  ;  in  this  play, 
I,  ii,  97  and  271 ;  and  Abbott,  §  274. 

9.  strangely]  Johnson  :  Used  by  way  of  commendation,  merveilleusement,  to  a 
wonder ;  the  same  is  the  sense  in  III,  iii,  111. — John  Sherwen  ( Gent.  Mag.  Sept. 
1811)  :  In  Shakespeare’s  age  ‘strong’  was  often  written  and  pronounced  as  it  is  now 
vulgarly  spoken  in  the  north  of  England,  strong,  which,  if  the  final  e  be  added,  it 
becomes  strange.  The  meaning  here  is  ‘  thou  hast  strongly  os  strangly  stood  the  test.’ 

11.  her  of]  Keightley:  Of  course  Shakespeare  wrote  ‘of  her.'  The  editors, 
without,  I  believe,  an  exception,  have  ‘  boast  her  off] — a  phrase  unknown  to  the  poet. 
— introduced  by  the  editor  of  F2,  who  had  little  or  no  idea  of  emendation  by  transpo¬ 
sition.  [Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  246)  has  a  chapter  on  The  Transposition  of  Words,  and 
one  of  his  instances  occurs  in  this  play,  I,  ii,  264.  I  have  but  little  hesitation,  there¬ 
fore,  in  accepting  a  remedy  so  simple ;  especially  when  the  alternative  is  the  reading 
of  the  Second  Folio,  which  somehow  carries  with  it  the  image  of  an  auctioneer’s  exag¬ 
geration  and  volubility,  which  is,  as  Sydney  Smith  would  say,  ‘  infinitely  distressing.’ 
—Ed.] 


190 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


For  thou  fhalt  finde  the  will  out-ftrip  all  praife  12 

And  make  it  halt,  behinde  her. 

Fer.  I  doe  beleeue  it 

Againft  an  Oracle.  15 

Pro.  Then,  as  my  gueft,  and  thine  owne  acquifition 
Worthily  purchas’d,  take  my  daughter:  But 
If  thou  do’ft  breake  her  Virgin-knot,  before 
All  fanftimonious  ceremonies  may 

With  full  and  holy  right,  be  miniftred,  20 

No  fweet  afperfion  fhall  the  heauens  let  fall 
To  make  this  contradl  grow;  but  barraine  hate, 

Sower-ey’d  difdaine,  and  difcord  fhall  beftrew 

The  vnion  of  your  bed,  with  weedes  fo  loathly 

That  you  fhall  hate  it  both  :  Therefore  take  heede,  23 

As  Hymens  Lamps  fhall  light  you. 

14.  doe]  Om.  Pope  + .  20.  right]  rite  Rowe  et  seq. 

16.  guejl]  gift  Rowe  et  seq.  21.  afperfion]  aspersions  Rowe  i, 

17.  But]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


16,  &c.  See  Holt’s  theory  of  the  date  of  this  play  in  Appendix,  Date  of  Compo¬ 
sition. 

19.  sanctimonious]  W.  A.  Wright:  That  is,  holy.  Used  now,  as  in  the  only 
other  passage  of  Shakespeare  where  it  occurs,  of  a  holiness  which  is  only  assumed. 
See  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  ii,  7. 

21.  aspersion]  Allen  [Phi la.  Shi.  Soci) :  Shakespeare  was  probably  led  to  use 
here  the  Latinized  word  ‘  afperfion  ’  by  his  knowledge  of  what  is  now  familiarly 
called  the  Asperges — the  form  of  blessing  the  congregation,  preparatory  to  High  Mass, 
by  the  Priest’s  sprinkling  them  with  holy  water,  while  the  choir  chant  the  Psalm : 
‘Asperges  me  hyssopo ,’  &c. 

26.  As]  R.  L.  Ashhurst  ( Phila .  Sk.  Soc.)  :  The  ensuing  speech  of  Ferdinand 
shows'  this  ‘  as  ’  to  be  used  in  adjuration :  ‘  Hymen’s  lamps  ’  must  be  therefore  under¬ 
stood  metaphorically, — ‘As  you  desire  to  be  lighted  on  your  way  through  life  by  the 
true  blessing  of  a  happy  marriage,’ — and  not  literally  of  the  nuptial  ceremony  merely. 
— Allen  (16.) :  I  am  fully  alive  to  the  weight  of  the  argument  drawn  from  the  paral¬ 
lelism  between  this  line  and  that  which  next  follows;  nevertheless,  I  still  cling  (with 
a  faint  hold)  to  the  interpretation :  ‘  Take  heed,  (and  act  towards  each  other,  only) 
as  Hymen’s  lamps  shall,  by  their  light,  give  you  authority.’  This  is  supported  by  its 
obvious  reference  to  the  beginning  of  Prospero’s  charge,  of  which  these  words  form 
the  conclusion,  and  by  the  consideration  that  Hymen  was  the  god — not  of  married 
life — but  of  the  marriage  celebration  alone. 

26.  Lamps]  Elze  ( Notes ,  &c.  1889,  p.  1 4  0  •  Read  lamp.  Shakespeare  is  well 
aware  that  Hymen  has  but  one,  or,  properly  speaking,  torch  [see  line  108].  The  s 
in  ‘  lamps  ’  has  evidently  intruded  into  the  text  by  anticipation  of  the  initial  s  in 
*  shall  ’ ;  it  is  the  reverse  of  what  is  called  absorption.  See  Ham.  I,  i,  162  :  ‘  planeu 
rtrike’;  Mid.  N.  D.  II,  ii,  121  :  ‘  I  orelooke  Loues  Tories.’  [Hereupon  follow  sev- 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  TEMPEST 

Fer.  As  I  hope 

For  quiet  dayes,  faire  Iffue,  and  long  life, 

With  fuch  loue,  as  ’tis  now  the  murkieft  den, 

The  moft  opportune  place,  the  flrongft  fuggeftion, 
Our  worfer  Genius  can,  fhall  neuer  melt 
Mine  honor  into  luft,  to  take  away 
The  edge  of  that  dayes  celebration, 

When  I  fhall  thinke,  or  Phoebus  Steeds  are  founderd, 


191 

27 


30 


34 


29.  loue,  ...now~\  love. ..now,  Rowe. 
love... now:  Pope. 

7 A]  is  Cap. 


29.  den ]  e’en  or  ev’n  or  even  Anon. 
Huds. 

34.  Phoebus]  Phoedus  F2F3.  Phoeduus 


eral  other  apposite  examples,  which  strengthen  this  correction  by  the  learned  critic, 
whom  Germany  for  many  a  long  year  will  be  unable  to  replace. — Ed.] 

29.  den]  C.  T.  (A/i  &>  Qu.  5th  S.  ii,  64,  1874)  :  Is  it  not  probable  that  Ferdinand 
here  specifies  time,  place,  and  inclination  ?  Consequently,  instead  of  ‘  den,’  we  should 
read  e'en  or  ev' n.  It  is  easy  to  see  how,  without  much  assistance  from  bad  penman¬ 
ship,  one  word  may  have  lapsed  into  the  other.  The  tautology  in  the  use  of  both 
‘  den  ’  and  ‘  place  ’  indicates  a  slovenliness  of  composition,  not  to  say  confusion  of 
thought,  which  we  do  not  often  find  in  Shakespeare. — Hudson  adopted  this  sugges¬ 
tion  mainly  on  the  ground  that  ‘  the  natural  logic  of  the  passage  plainly  requires  some 
word  denoting  time.’ — W.  J.  Bernhard  Smith  (H.  &>  Qu.  5th  S.  ii,  405,  1874) 
gave  an  all-sufficing  answer,  I  think,  to  this  emendation  by  referring  to  the  Hdneid, 
iv,  124:  ‘the  Vergilian  episode,’ he  added,  ‘  was  a  favourite  with  both  poets  and 
painters,  and  no  doubt  there  was  many  a  “den”  or  “spelunca”  in  Prospero’s  isle.’ 

30.  opportune]  Of  course,  with  the  accent  on  the  second  syllable.  For  a  long 
list  of  words  ‘  where  the  accent  is  nearer  the  end  than  with  us,’  see  Abbott,  §  490. 

30.  strongst]  The  contraction  here  and  in  I,  ii,  393,  is  a  slight,  but  noteworthy, 
proof,  among  others,  of  the  care  with  which  this  play  is  printed. — Ed. 

30.  suggestion]  Dyce:  That  is,  temptation.  See  II,  i,  316. 

31.  Genius]  W.  A.  Wright:  ‘In  mediaeval  theology,  the  rational  soul  is  an 
angel,  the  lowest  in  the  hierarchy  for  being  clothed  for  a  time  in  the  perishing  vesture 
of  the  body.  But  it  is  not  necessarily  an  angel  of  light.  It  may  be  a  good  or  evil 
genius,  a  guardian  angel  or  a  fallen  spirit,  a  demon  of  light  or  darkness.’ — Edinburgh 
Review,  July,  1869,  p.  98. 

31.  can]  Used  in  its  original  meaning,  as  in  Ham.:  ‘They  can  well  on  horse¬ 
back.’ — Capell  says  that  it  ‘  rises  from  out  the  speaker’s  endeavour  to  express  him¬ 
self  strongly;  “can”  is  can  suggest,  a  diminutive  hebraism.’ — Keightley:  As  it  is 
difficult  to  make  any  good  sense  here  of  ‘  can  ’  alone,’  we  should  perhaps  read  ‘  can 
make  ’  or  ‘  can  give?  making  ‘  Genius  ’  a  trisyllable,  and  the  line  of  six  feet. 

34.  founderd]  ‘  Of  all  other  sorances,  Foundering  is  soonest  got,  and  hardlyest 
cured,  ....  [it]  commeth  when  a  horse  is  heated,  being  in  his  grease  and  very  fat, 
and  taketh  thereon  a  suddaine  cold  which  striketh  downe  into  his  legs,  and  taking 
away  the  vse  and  feeling  thereof.  The  signe  to  know  it  is,  the  horse  cannot  go,  but 
wil  stand  cripling  with  al  his  foure  legs  together.’ — Topsell,  The  Hist,  of  Foure-footea 
Beasts,  1608,  p.  400. 


192 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv.  SC.  L 

35 


Or  Night  kept  chain’d  below. 

Pro.  Fairely  fpoke  ; 

Sit  then,  and  talke  with  her,  (he  is  thine  owne ; 

What  Aricll ;  my  induftrious  feruat  Ariell.  Efiter  Anell. 

Ar.  What  would  my  potent  matter  ?  here  I  am. 

Pro.  Thou,  and  thy  meaner  fellowes,  your  laft  feruice  40 
Did  worthily  performe :  and  I  mud  vfe  you 
In  fuch  another  tricke :  goe  bring  the  rabble 
(Ore  whom  I  giue  thee  powre)  here,  to  this  place : 

Incite  them  to  quicke  motion,  for  I  mutt 

Beftow  vpon  the  eyes  of  this  yong  couple  45 

Some  vanity  of  mine  Art :  it  is  my  promife, 

And  they  expe<5t  it  from  me. 

Ar.  Prefently  ? 

Pro.  I  .•  with  a  twincke. 

Ar.  Before  you  can  fay  come,  and  goe,  50 

And  breathe  twice ;  and  cry,  fo,  fo : 

Each  one  tripping  on  his  Toe, 

Will  be  here  with  mop,  and  mowe. 

Doe  you  loue  me  Matter?  no? 

Pro.  Dearely,  my  delicate  Ariell:  doe  not  approach  55 

Till  thou  do’tt  heare  me  call. 

Ar.  Well.-  I  conceiue.  Exit. 

Pro.  Looke  thou  be  true:  doe  not  giue  dalliance 
Too  much  the  raigne :  the  ftrongelt  oathes,  are  ttraw 
To  th’fire  ith’  blood  :  be  more  abftenious,  60 


36.  Fairely\  Most  fairly  Han.  ’  Tis 
fairly  Ktly. 

38-57.  As  an  aside.  Cap. 

39.  Scene  II.  Pope  +  . 

43.  giue"]  gave  Elze. 

46.  vanity\  rarity  Walker. 

47.  from\for  F4. 


54.  Mafler  ?  no  l]  master ,  now  f  N. 
Crosland  ( Athen .  Aug.  ’70). 

no  no.  Rowe  i,  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Knt. 

57.  Well.-]  Well  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Well 
Rowe  et  cet. 

59.  raigne]  rein  F4. 

60.  abftenious ]  Fx. 


38.  What]  Simply  a  mode  of  calling,  not  necessarily  of  impatience,  like  Shylock’s 
‘  What,  Jessica.’ 

42.  rabble]  This  is  not  used  slightingly  of  the  band  of  lesser  spirits,  but  simply 
in  the  sense  which  Cotgrave  gives  to  ‘  Tas,  A  heape,  a  pile,  a  bundle ;  a  deale,  sort, 
rabble,  companie,  troupe.’ — Ed. 

46.  vanity]  Steevens  :  That  is,  an  illusion.  So,  in  the  romance  of  Emare,  ‘  The 
emperour  sayde  on  hygh,  Sertes,  thys  ys  a  fayry,  Or  ellys  a  vanyti.’ — [Ritson’a 
Fotnancefs,  ii,  208,  ap.  Dyce], 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


“33 

Or  elfe  good  night  your  vow.  6l 

Fer.  I  warrant  you,  Sir, 

The  white  cold  virgin  Snow,  vpon  my  heart 
Abates  the  ardour  of  my  Liuer. 

Pro .  Well.  6s 

Now  come  my  Ariel!,  bring  a  Corolary, 

Rather  then  want  a  Spirit ;  appear,  &  pertly.  Soft  mujick. 

No  tongue :  all  eyes  :  be  filent.  Enter  Iris .  68 


64.  ardour]  ardours  F4>  Rowe  i.  66,  67.  Corolary  ...pertly]  whole  array 

66,  67.  Corolary... want  a  Spirit]  choir  ...presently  Wilson. 
of  Lares. ..wanton  spirits  Bulloch.  67.  Scene  III.  A  masque.  Pope  +  . 

68.  [To  Ferdinand.  Theob. 

63.  64.  heart  .  .  .  Liuer]  Capell  :  This  seems  to  be  the  converse  of  a  physical 
maxim  which  the  poet  might  read  in  Sir  Thomas  Elyot’s  Castle  of  Health  :  ‘  Here  is 
to  be  noted  that  the  heat  of  the  heart  may  vanquish  the  colde  of  the  liver.’ _ ed.  1610. 

66.  Corolary]  Heath  :  That  is,  bring  more  spirits  than  are  sufficient  rather  than 
want  one.  Steevens  :  See  Cotgrave  :  ‘  Corolaire  :  A  Corollarie;  a  surplusage,  ouer- 
plus,  addition  to,  vantage  aboue  measure,’  &c. 

68.  No  tongue]  Johnson  :  Those  who  are  present  at  incantations  are  obliged  to 
be  strictly  silent,  ‘  else,’  as  we  are  afterwards  told,  *  the  spell  Is  marr’d.’ 

68.  Enter,  &c.]  Capell  :  This  masque  was  written  in  compliance  with  fashion, 
the  time  swarming  with  them  (witness  the  works  of  Jonson,  which  in  manner  are 
sunk  by  them)  and  against  the  grain  seemingly,  being  weak  throughout,  faulty  in 
rimes,  and  faulty  in  its  mythology ;  matters  not  within  the  province  of  Ceres,  such  as 
‘  sheep  ’  and  ‘  vines,’  are  attributed  to  her  both  in  the  speech  of  Iris  and  the  ill-riming 
song;  and,  were  modems  follow’d  in  some  of  the  speech’s  readings, flowers  likewise, 
it’s  ‘  pioned  ’  and  ‘  tilled  ’  being  in  them ,—pionied  and  tulip' d.  The  propriety  of 
other  matters  that  follow, — as  the  ‘  broom-groves  ’  that  yield  a  ‘  shadow  ’  for  walking 
in;  the  ‘pole-clipt  vineyard’  (once  imagin’d  a  hop-ground)  and  the  ‘sea-marge, 
sterile,  and  rocky-hard  ’  for  Ceres  to  ‘  air  ’  herself, — is  past  the  editor’s  fathoming,  and 
must  be  left  by  him  to  heads  of  more  reach. — Hartley  Coleridge  {Margin,  ii, 
132)  :  There  is  not  much  either  of  melody  or  meaning  in  this  masque.  Prospero 
when  his  spell  enforced  attendance  of  the  spirits,  should  have  furnished  them  with 
smoother  couplets  and  sager  discourse.  But  perhaps  it  is  as  good  as  the  masques  in 
which  the  queen  and  her  ladies  performed,  and  to  have  made  it  better  would  have  been 
disloyal  emulation.  There  are  lines  in  it,  too,  which  smack  of  the  poet.  Iris,  in  her 
invocation  to  Ceres,  is  delightfully  agricultural,  the  second  verse  is  a  harvest  in  itself. 
The  third  might  have  been  written  on  Latrigg  before  it  was  ploughed.  In  announcing 
herself  .as  at  once  the  bow  and  the  messenger  of  Juno,  she  slips  into  the  common  con¬ 
fusion  of  mythology,  which  scarce  any  of  the  ancients,  save  Homer,  have  wholly 
avoided.  Shakespeare  manifestly  turns  the  Heathen  Deities  into  the  elementary 
powers,  resolving  the  Greek  anthropomorphism  into  its  first  principles.  Ceres  is  the 
earth. — Hense  ( Antikes ,  &c.  p.  483)  :  The  masque  of  the  goddesses  in  The  Tempest 
is  pre-eminent  for  its  lyric  beauty.  Here  in  this  comedy  also  the  poet  remained  faith¬ 
ful  to  that  lyric  feeling  which  in  all  his  creations  breaks  forth  so  richly,  so  graceniliy, 
"o  penetratingly,  and  so  strikingly  Herein  Shakespeare  resembles  the  antique  drama- 

13 


IQ4 


THE  TEMPEST 


[ACT  IV,  SC.  ». 


Ir.  Ceres ,  moft  bounteous  Lady,  thy  rich  Leas 

Of  Wheate,  Rye,  Barley,  Fetches,  Oates  and  Peafe ;  70 

Thy  Turphie-Mountaines,  where  liue  nibling  Sheepe, 

•\nd  flat  Medes  thetchd  with  Stouer,  them  to  keepe :  72 

69.  thy\  the  Ff,  Rowe.  72.  thetchd  with~\  Ff,  Rcwe  i.  with 

70.  Fetches ]  vetches  Cap.  thatch’d  Han. 

71.  Turphie ]  tufty  Anon.  (ap.  Grey).  Stouer ]  clover  F2  MS  (ap.  Hal.). 

fists . The  Greek  and  Latin  dramatists,  with  a  true  discernment  of  style,  have 

avoided  prose  throughout ;  Shakespeare  has  purposely  employed  prose  in  those  scenes 
wherein  the  tone  of  realism  and  the  requirements  of  his  characters  have  demanded 
it;  but  that  prosaic,  poverty-stricken  starvation  whereunder  in  later  times  whole 
dramas  have  been  written  in  prose  throughout,  he  never  felt,  and  would  have  scorned 
to  feel  it ;  it  has  been  noticed  that  even  Caliban  speaks  in  verse,  and  some  passages 
are  in  verse  even  in  The  Merry  Wives.  In  that  sensitiveness  to  the  needs  of  style 
whereby  he  adapts  verse  to  situation,  he  is  comparable  to  the  ancients.  The  Cam¬ 
bridge  Editors  suggest  (see  note  on  line  168)  that  this  Masque  was  not  composed 
by  Shakespeare;  and  Fleay  ( Sh.  Manual,  p.  54)  cites  the  suggestion,  'without  dis¬ 
sent.  *  But,’  says  Stokes  (p.  163),  ‘  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  lines  105-107,  which 
refer  to  the  main  plot,  seem  to  fit  in  so  naturally  that  this  supposition  is  improbable ; 
especially  if  we  remember  what  Mr  Fleay  has  himself  said  (in  his  Canons  for  the 
Use  of  Metrical  Tests,  New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  1874,  ii,  314),  “In  such  cases  as  the 
Masque  in  The  Tempest,  &c.,  a  different  rhyming  treatment  was  clearly  adopted 
deliberately  beforehand,  in  order  to  differentiate  this  part  of  the  work  from  the 
rest.”  ’ — Subsequently,  in  his  Life  and  Work  of  Sh.,  Fleay  is  more  explicit  in  his 
belief  as  to  the  authorship.  ‘  The  lines,’  he  observes  (p.  249),  ‘  forming  the  Masque 
are  palpably  an  addition,  probably  made  by  Beaumont  for  the  Court  performance 
before  the  Prince,  the  Princess  Elizabeth,  and  the  Palatine  in  1612-13 !  or  else  before 
the  King  on  1st  November,  1612  ( The  Winter's  Tale  being  acted  on  5th  November). 
This  addition  consists  only  of  the  heroics,  11.  69-117,  144-155;  the  mythological  per 
sonages  in  the  original  play  having  acted  in  dumb  show.  In  the  stage-directions 
(1.  81)  of  the  dumb  show  “Juno  descends”;  in  the  text  of  the  added  verse  1.  114, 
she  “  comes,”  and  Ceres  “knows  her  by  her  gait.”  ’  [See  also  Fleay’s  note,  1.  155.] 

70.  Fetches]  W.  A.  Wright:  As  thus  spelt  it  is  still  the  common  provincial  pro¬ 
nunciation  of  the  word.  In  the  Authorised  Version  of  Isaiah  xxviii,  25,  27;  and  in 
Ezek.  iv,  9,  it  is  spelt  fitches.  In  Chaucer,  Troilus  and  Cressida,  iii,  887,  we  have 
the  spelling  as  in  the  Folio. 

72.  thetched]  W.  A.  Wright  :  Compare  the  spelling  of  thresh  and  thrash. 

72.  Stouer]  Steevens  :  This  signifies,  in  Cambridgeshire  and  other  counties,  hay 
made  of  coarse,  rank  grass,  such  as  even  cows  will  not  eat  while  it  is  green.  ‘  Stover  ’ 
is  also  used  as  thatch  for  cart-lodges  and  other  buildings  that  deserve  but  rude  and 
cheap  coverings.  So  in  Drayton’s  Polyolbion,  xxv,  145  :  <  To  draw  out  Sedge  and 
Reed,  for  Thatch  and  Stover  fit.’— Nares  :  Fodder  and  provision  of  all  sorts  for 
cattle ;  from  estovers,  law-term,  which  is  so  explained  in  the  Law  Dictionaries.  Both 
are  derived  from  estouvier,  in  the  Old  French,  defined  by  Roquefort :  ‘  Convenance, 
n6cessit6,  provision  de  tout  ce  qui  est  nicessaire.— Dictionn.  de  la  Langue  Rom.— 
W.  A.  Wright:  This  is  the  term  now  applied  to  the  coarser  hay  made  of  clover  and 
artificial  grasses,  which  is  kept  for  the  winter  feed  of  cattle.  But  in  Shakespeare’s 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  TEMPEST 

Thy  bankes  with  pioned,  and  twilled  brims 


195 

73 


73.  bankes"]  becks  S.  Verges. 

pioned]  pionied  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns,  peonied  Steev.’93,  Hal.  pansies 
pied  Bailey.  peonid  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 


73'  twilled ]  tulip' d  Rowe  4- ,  Van’73. 
tilled  Holt,  Cap.  Coll,  ii  (MS),  Sing.  ii. 
lilied  Heath,  Steev.’93,  Rann,  Wh.  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Coll,  iii,  Rife,  willow' d  Jervis, 
Ktly.  twisted  Fa  MS  (ap.  Hal.). 


time  the  artificial  grasses  were  not  known  in  England,  and  were  not  introduced  tilt 
about  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  In  Cambridgeshire  I  am  informed  that 
hay  made  in  this  manner  is  not  called  ‘stover  ’  till  the  seeds  have  been  threshed  out. 
In  the  sixteenth  century  the  word  was  apparently  used  to  denote  any  kind  of  winter 
fodder  except  grass  hay.  For  instance,  in  Tusser’s  Five  Hundred  Points  of  Good 
Husbandry ,  we  find,  ‘  Thresh  barlie  as  yet,  but  as  need  shall  require,  fresh  threshed 
for  stouer,  thy  cattle  desire.’— [p.  44,  ed.  1614].  And  again,  ‘  Serue  Rye-straw  out 
first,  then  wheat-straw  and  pease,  then  Oat-straw  and  Barly,  then  hay  if  ye  please : 
But  serue  them  with  Hay,  while  the  straw  stouer  last,  then  loue  they  no  straw,  they 
had  rather  to  fast.’— [p.  49,  ed.  1614].  ‘  Stover  ’  is  enumerated  by  Ray  among  the 

South-  and  East-Country  words  as  used  in  Essex,  and  is  to  be  found  in  Moor’s 
Suffolk  Words  and  Forby’s  Vocabulary  of  East  Anglia. 

7 3-  bankes  .  .  .  pioned  .  .  .  twilled]  The  Textual  Notes  will  show  how  this  agri¬ 
cultural  phrase,  from  our  lack  of  agricultural  knowledge,  has  turned  its  halcyon  beak 
to  every  gale  and  vary  of  the  critics.  •  Twilled  ’  became  tulip' d  at  the  very  start,  held 
its  own  for  a  while,  and  then  disappeared  until  it  emerged  for  one  gaudy  night  in  the 
Variorum  of  1773.  ‘Pioned’  had  a  little  longer  life,  but,  I  suspect,  only  because 
Rowe,  Pope,  and  Hanmer,  supposing  that  it  meant  peonied ,  thought  it  also  spelt 
peonied.  Holt  was  the  earliest  to  attempt  any  rational  emendation  of  ‘  twilled  ’  or 
any  definition  of  ‘  pioned.’  His  note,  in  substance,  reads  :  ‘  Here  is  evidently  only  an 
error  of  the  press,  which  is  easily  rectified  by  throwing  out  the  w,  and  reading  tilled; 
the  poet  meant  only  to  show  the  fertility  of  the  banks  of  rivers,  and  the  cause  of  that 
fertility,  there  being  “  pioned,”  i.  e.  trench'd  or  dug,  and  “  tilled  ”  or  manured ;  in 
opposition  to  the  barrenness  of  the  sea-shore,  which  he  a  little  after  calls  «  sea-marge, 
sterile  and  rocky-hard.”  ’  This  emendation  has  not  lacked  applause.  It  either  antici¬ 
pates,  or  is  anticipated  by,  Collier’s  MS. — Next  follows  Heath  :  ‘  “  Twilled,”  though 
evidently  corrupt,  suggests  the  true  word,  to  wit,  lillied.  That  lillies  grow  on  the 
banks  of  rivers  we  have  Milton’s  authority  in  his  Arcades,  v,  97.’  This  emendation 
has  met  with  more  approval  than  any  other ;  and,  indeed,  so  heartily  did  it  accord 
with  Steevens’s  sense  of  the  ‘  fitness  of  things,’  that,  as  elsewhere  observed  (I,  i, 
13),  he  forgot  to  mention  the  name  of  its  author;  he  found  a  corroboration  of  lilied 
in  the  fact  that  the  water-lily  is  mentioned  as  a  preserver  of  chastity  by  Pliny, 
xxvi,  10  [ii,  p.  256,  Holland  s  trans.],  and  by  Fenton,  in  his  Secrete  Wonders  of 
Nature,  1569;  in  confirmation  of  his  reading  peonied  (which  he  ascribes  to  Hanmer, 
and  has  thereby  misled  later  editors)  he  cites  Lyte’s  Herbal  (on  the  information  of 
Tollett)  to  the  efifect  that  one  kind  of  peonie  ‘  some  call  Mayden  or  Virgin  Peonie  ’  [p. 
338,  ed.  1578].  ‘In  Ovid’s  Banquet  of  Sense,  by  Chapman,  1625,  I  meet,’  con¬ 
tinues  Steevens,  ‘  with  a  stanza  in  which  twill-pants  are  enumerated  among  flowers  : 

“  Immortal  amaranth,  white  aphrodill,  And  cup-like  twill-pants  strew’d  in  Bacchus’ 
bowers.”  If  twill  be  the  ancient  name  of  any  flower,  the  old  reading  “  pioned  ”  and 
“  twilled  ”  may  stand.’  [‘  Twill-pant,’  says  W.  A.  Wright,  ‘  is  merely  a  corruption  of 
“  tulipant,”  a  tulip.’]  Dr  Johnson,  by  the  way,  had  given  up  the  line  in  despair  and 


196 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


[73.  pioned,  and  twilled  brims] 

confessed  that  he  did  not  understand  it,  and  Capell,  also,  made  the  same  confession 
in  his  note  (see  line  68)  on  the  whole  masque. — At  this  stage  of  the  discussion,  as  the 
first  vindicator  of  the  Folio,  Henley  appears,  (whom  Dyce  pronounces  *  the  most  pro¬ 
voking  of  all  the  annotators  on  Shakespeare.’)  His  note  is  substantially  as  follows : 
'  Can  the  word pionied  anywhere  be  found?  On  the  banks  of  what  rivers  do  peonies 
grow  ?  Or  can  they  and  the  lilies  be  the  produce  of  “  spongy  April  ”  ?  Or  whence 
can  it  be  gathered  that  Iris  here  is  at  all  speaking  of  the  banks  of  a  river  ?  and,  as 
the  bank  in  question  is  the  property,  not  of  a  water-nymph,  but  of  Ceres,  is  it  not  to 
be  considered  as  an  object  of  her  own  care  ?  Hither  the  goddess  of  husbandry  is 
represented  as  resorting,  because  at  the  approach  of  spring  it  becomes  necessary  to 
repair  the  banks  (or  mounds)  of  the  flat  meads ,  whose  grass,  not  only  shooting  over, 
but  being  more  succulent  than  that  of  the  turfy  mountains ,  would,  for  want  of  pre¬ 
caution,  be  devoured,  and  so  the  intended  stover  (hay  or  winter  keep),  with  which 
these  meads  are  proleptically  described  as  thatched,  be  lost. — The  giving  way  and 
caving  in  of  the  brims  of  those  banks,  occasioned  by  the  heats,  rains,  and  frosts  of 
the  preceding  year,  are  made  good  by  opening  the  trenches  from  whence  the  banks 
themselves  were  at  first  raised,  and  facing  them  up  afresh  with  the  mire  those  trenches 
contain.  This  being  done,  the  brims  of  the  banks  are,  in  the  poet’s  language,  “  pioned 
and  twilled.”  Warton,  in  a  note  on  Comus,  cited  a  passage  in  which  pioners  are 
explained  to  be  diggers  (rather  trenchers ),  and  Steevens  mentions  Spenser  and  the 
author  of  Muleasses  as  both  using  pioning  for  digging.  “  Twilled  ”  is  obviously 
formed  from  the  French  touiller,  which  Cotgrave  interprets  “  filthily  to  mix  or  mingle ; 
confound  or  shuffle  together;  bedurt;  begrime;  besmear,” — significations  that  confirm 
the  explanation  here  given. — This  “  bank  with  pioned  and  twilled  brims  ”  is  described 
as  “  trimmed,  at  the  behest  of  Ceres,  by  spongy  April,  with  flowers,  to  make  cold 
nymphs  chaste  crowns.”  These  flowers  were  neither  peonies  nor  lilies,  for  they  never 
blow  at  this  season,  but  “  lady-smocks  all  silver-white,”  which,  during  this  humid 
month,  start  up  in  abundance  on  such  banks.’  [This  interpretation  is  adopted  sub¬ 
stantially  by  Jephson,  and  by  D.  Morris,  and  by  Rev.  John  Hunter,  also,  in  so  far 
as  he  says  that  the  phrase  refers  ‘  not  to  flowers,  but  to  the  form  of  the  banks.’  This 
note,  the  best  that  Henley  ever  wrote,  stirred  Steevens,  not  to  a  defense  of  his  own 
interpretation,  but  to  abuse  of  the  plaintiff,  and  his  scorn  (in  which,  in  his  blind  wrath, 
he  involves  poor  Shakespeare  himself)  is  so  cutting  and  so  neat  that  it  must  not  be  for¬ 
gotten.  It  is  as  follows :  ‘  Mr  Henley’s  note  contends  for  small  proprieties,  and 
abounds  with  minute  observation.  But  that  Shakespeare  was  no  diligent  botanist 
may  be  ascertained  from  his  erroneous  descriptions  of  a  cowslip  (in  The  Tempest  and 
Cymbeline ),  for  who  ever  heard  it  characterised  as  a  bell-shaped  flower,  or  could  allow 
the  drops  at  the  bottom  of  it  to  be  of  a  crimson  hue  ?  With  equal  carelessness,  or 
want  of  information,  in  The  Winter’s  Tale  he  enumerates  “  lilies  of  all  kinds  ”  among 
the  children  of  the  spring,  and  as  contemporaries  of  the  daffodil,  the  primrose,  and 
the  violet ;  and  in  his  celebrated  song  (one  stanza  of  which  is  introduced  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  Act  IV  of  Meas.for  Meas.)  he  talks  of  pinks  “that  April  wears.”  It  might 
be  added  (if  we  must  speak  by  the  card )  that  wherever  there  is  a  bank  there  is  a 
ditch;  where  there  is  a  ditch  there  may  be  water;  and  where  there  is  water  the 
aquatic  lilies  may  flourish,  whether  the  bank  in  question  belongs  to  a  river  or  a  field. 
— These  are  petty  remarks,  but  they  are  occasioned  by  petty  cavils. — It  was  enough 
tor  our  author  that  peonies  and  lilies  were  well-known  flowers,  and  he  placed  them  on 
any  bank,  and  produced  them  in  any  of  the  genial  months  that  particularly  suited  hit 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


197 


[73.  pioned,  and  twilled  brims] 

purpose.  He  who  has  confounded  the  customs  of  different  ages  and  nations,  might 
easily  confound  the  produce  of  the  seasons.— That  his  documents,  de  Re  Rusticd, 
were  more  exact  is  equally  improbable.  He  regarded  objects  of  Agriculture,  &c.  in 
the  gross,  and  little  thought,  when  he  meant  to  bestow  some  ornamental  epithet  on 
the  banks  appropriated  to  a  goddess,  that  a  future  critic  would  wish  him  to  say  their 
brims  were  filthily  mixed  or  mingled,  confounded,  or  shuffled  together,  bedirted,  be¬ 
grimed,  and  besmeared.  Mr  Henley,  however,  has  not  yet  proved  the  existence  of 
the  derivative,  which  he  labours  to  introduce  as  an  English  word ;  nor  will  the  lovers 
of  elegant  description  wish  him  much  success  in  the  attempt.  Unconvinced,  there¬ 
fore,  by  his  strictures,  I  shall  not  exclude  a  border  of  flowers  to  make  room  for  the 
graces  of  the  spade,  or  what  Mr  Pope,  in  his  Bunded,  has  styled  “  the  majesty  of 
mud.’  ’] — As  far  as  the  critics  of  the  Variorum  Editions  are  concerned,  Boswell 
closed  the  discussion.  He  states  that  ‘  an  anonymous  correspondent  suggested  to  Mr 
Malone  that  “twilled  brims  ”  meant  banks  fringed  with  thickly-matted  grass,  resem¬ 
bling  the  stuff  called  twilled  cloth.  Mr  Boaden  has  observed  to  me  that  Mr  Steevens 
might  [have  cited  in  opposition  to  Henley]  Bacon’s  Essay  on  Gardens,  where,  in  an 
enumeration  of  the  flowers  which  are  in  season  at  different  periods  of  the  year,  we 
find:  “In  April  follow  the  double  white  violet;  the  wall-flower;  the  stock-gilly¬ 
flower;  the  cowslip;  flower-de-luces;  and  lilies  of  all  natures;  rosemary  flowers; 
the  tulipa;  the  double  peony  f  &c.’ — Croft  ( Annotations ,  &c.  p.  1) :  That  is,  lev¬ 
elled  en  parterre ;  to  twill  is  a  term  in  weaving  to  raise  the  warp  above  the  woof,  to 
produce  a  figure,  as  in  diaper-work  :  ‘April  comes  with  his  hack  and  bill,  To  raise  a 
flower  on  every  hill.’ — Knight  upholds  Henley  in  asking  whether  the  banks  of  a 
river  were  meant  at  all,  and  pronounces  Steevens’s  assertion  that  Shakespeare  was  no 
‘  naturalist  ’  [sic]  to  be  ‘  utterly  without  foundation,’  and  then  continues  :  ‘  It  is  manifest 
that  the  banks  of  a  river  are  not  meant.  The  address  is  to  Ceres.  Her  rich  leas,  her 
turfy  mountains,  her  flat  meads  precede  the  mention  of  her  banks.  The  “  banks  ” 
are  the  artificial  mounds  by  which  the  flat  meads  and  the  rich  leas  are  divided;  or 
they  are  the  natural  ridges  in  grove  and  grassplot,  which  Shakespeare  has  himself 
described  as  the  home  of  the  wild  thyme  and  the  violet.  Spongy  April  betrims  these 
banks,  at  the  command  of  Ceres,  not  with  peonies  and  lilies, — not  with  the  flowers 
of  the  garden  and  the  flowers  of  the  valley, — but  with  her  own  pretty  hedge-flowers. 
....  Any  one  who  has  seen  the  operation  of  banking  and  ditching  in  the  early  spring, 
so  essential  to  the  proper  drainage  of  land,  must  recognise  the  propriety  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  epithets.  He  was  a  practical  farmer;  he  saw  the  poetry  even  of  the  hum¬ 
blest  works  of  husbandry.’ — Collier  (ed.  i)  follows  the  Folio,  and  ‘  cannot  discover 
any  unintelligibility  in  it,  taking  “  pioned  ”  as  dug,  and  “  twilled  ”  as  ridged,  or  made 
up  in  ridges,  a  sense  it  yet  bears  with  some  kinds  of  linen.’  In  his  ed.  ii  Collier  fol¬ 
lowed  his  MS;  in  his  ed.  iii,  he  followed  Heath. — Halliwell  adopts  feonied, 
covered  with  the  peony,  a  verb  formed  similarly  to  Warton’s  [«V]  lillied ;  and 
“twilled,”  interwoven  with  flowers;  at  the  same  time  admitting  that  after  a  careful 
perusal  of  all  that  I  have  met  with  on  this  difficult  passage,  I  am  neither  satisfied 
with  any  of  the  explanations  of  the  critics  nor  perfectly  with  my  own.’ — Staunton 
prefers  the  reading  and  interpretation  of  Steevens  to  that  of  any  other,  but  does  not 
think  it  desirable  to  alter  the  old  text. — C.  W.  Bingham  (JV.  dr5  Qu.  3d  S.  iii,  p.  438, 
1863) :  Mr  Bentham,  one  of  the  highest  botanical  authorities  of  our  day,  says  of  the 
piony :  ‘  Not  indigenous  to  Britain,  but  appears  to  have  been  naturalised  in  the 
rocky  clefts  of  the  “  Steep  Holme  ”  island  in  the  Severn.’  If  it  grew  wild  any- 


198 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  xv,  sc.  i. 


[73.  pioned,  and  twilled  brims] 

where  else  in  Britain,  which  it  does  not,  it  would  not  be  on  the  brim  of  river  banks, 
jut  in  hilly  districts,  as  it  does  throughout  Southern  Europe  and  Central  Asia.— 
Keant  White:  In  the  text  of  the  Folio  ‘  pioned ’  may  mean  dug,  and  ‘twilled,” 
ridged ;  and  were  this  line  only  involved,  these  words,  being  so  explained,  should 
stand.  But  dug  and  ridged  banks  cannot  ‘  make  cold  nymphs  chaste  crowns  ’ ;  for 
these  we  must  go  to  pionied  and  lillied  banks.  [Dyce,  in  both  of  his  last  two  edi¬ 
tions,  quotes  this  remark  with  approval.] — Keightley  (Exp,  216) :  ‘  Banks  ’  may  be 
either  the  margins  of  streams  or  hillocks,  or  slight  elevations  of  land ;  but  ‘  brims,’ 
which  can  only  be  the  edges  or  margins  of  hollows,  shows  that  it  is  the  former  that 
is  meant.  ‘  Pioned  ’  seems  to  be  a  word  of  Shakespeare’s  own  creation ;  for,  rinding 
the  word  pioneer  in  common  use  and  pyonings, — a  word  of  Spenser’s  coinage, — in 
the  Faerie  Queene  (ii,  10,  63),  signifying  defences,  the  work  of  pioneers,  he  thought 

himself  at  liberty  to  form  a  verb  pion . My  own  opinion  is,  that  the  sense  which 

Shakespeare  gave  to  his  ‘  pioned  ’  was  fenced,  and  that  ‘  twilled  ’  was  a  pnnter’s  error. 
[In  the  change  to  willow' d  Keightley  was,  unconsciously,  doubtless,  anticipated  by 
Jervis.] — T.  S.  Baynes  (Edin.  Rev.  Oct.  1872):  ‘The  chief  difficulty  lies  in  the 
word  “  pioned,”  and  we  had  long  felt  that  the  solution  must  be  looked  for  in  the  local 
use  of  the  term.  We  could  not  but  believe  that  there  must  be  some  flower,  most 
probably  a  water-flower  or  one  living  in  marshy  ground,  that  was  provincially  known 
as  a  peony.  In  confirmation  of  this  view,  we  were  informed  some  time  since  by  a 
clergyman  who  was  for  many  years  incumbent  of  a  parish  in  the  northern  part  of  the 
county,  that  peony  is  the  name  given  in  Warwickshire  to  the  marsh  marygold.  Know¬ 
ing  that  he  had  long  resided  in  the '  neighbourhood  of  Stratford,  taking  an  active 
interest  in  country  life,  we  asked  him  if  there  was  any  wild  flower  that  the  coun¬ 
try  people  called  a  peony,  and  he  promptly  answered  that  there  was,  and  it  soon 
appeared  from  the  description  that  it  must  be  the  marsh  marygold.  Here  was  at  last 
a  ray  of  light.  And  on  a  little  reflection  it  was  not  difficult  to  see  why  the  name  of 
the  peony  should  have  been  transferred  to  the  marsh  marygold.  The  flowers,  though 
differing  in  colour,  have  a  remarkable  similarity  in  general  growth  and  shape,  espe¬ 
cially  in  the  early  stage,  when  the  fully-formed  bud  is  ripe  for  blowing.  The  buds 
of  both  present  the  unusual  appearance  of  perfectly  rounded  globes  or  spheres  at  the 
extremity  of  a  thick  leafless  stalk,  the  sepals  being  firmly  locked  or  folded  together 

over  the  substance  of  the  flower  into  a  bud  as  round  as  a  marble . This  globular 

bud  is  so  distinctive  in  the  marsh  marygold  that  it  has  been  seized  on  as  a  ground  of 

naming  the  flower . In  many  parts  of  England  they  are  called  blobs,  or,  from  the 

size  of  the  flower,  horse-blobs,  blob  being  an  archaic  word  for  rounded  knob;  only 
another  form,  in  fact,  of  bleb,  an  older  term  for  foam-bell  or  water-bubble.  Thus, 
water-blobs  is  a  local  name  for  water-lilies,  on  account  of  the  rounded,  cup-like  shape 

of  the  bud.  In  the  same  way,  the  marsh  marygold  is  locally  the  horse-blob . We 

may  be  sure  that  the  marsh  marygold  had  often  caught  Shakespeare’s  eye,  and  it  is 
exactly  the  flower  which  [the  present  line  from  The  Tempesf\,  viewed  in  relation  to 
the  whole  context,  requires  in  order  to  make  the  meaning  complete.  It  haunts  the 
watery  margins  as  the  constant  associate  of  reeds  and  rushes,  blooms  in  “  spongy 
April,”  and  in  common  with  other  water-flowers  is  twined  with  sedge  “  to  make  cold 
nymphs  chaste  crowns.”  With  regard  to  the  form  of  the  word,  as  in  the  First  Folio, 
Shakespeare  writes  it  as  it  was  universally  pronounced  among  those  who  used  it.  In 
‘he  midland  and  western  counties  the  peony  is  a  great  favourite  in  rustic  gardens,  and 
is  looked  upon  as  an  important  element  of  floral  decoration  in  all  rural  festivities 


ACT  XV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


199 


[73.  pioned,  and  twilled  brims] 

especially  at  Whitsuntide,  school-feasts,  and  club-walkings.  And  we  can  certify 
from  personal  experience  that  in  these  districts  the  word  is  pronounced  as  Shake¬ 
speare  spells  it,  pi-o-ny,  with  a  strong  emphasis  on  the  first  syllable  and  the  full  Eng¬ 
lish  sound  of  the  vowel,  as  though  it  were  spelt  pye-o-ny. — The  other  obscure  and 
disputed  word  ‘  twilled  ’  may  be  disposed  of  more  rapidly.  Twills  is  given  by  Halli- 
well  as  an  older  provincial  word  for  reeds,  and  it  was  applied  like  quills  to  the  serried 
rustling  sedges  of  river  reaches  and  marshy  levels.  The  word  is,  indeed,  still  retained 
in  its  secondary  application,  being  commercially  used  to  denote  the  fluted  or  rib-like 
effect  produced  on  various  fabrics  by  a  kind  of  ridged  or  corded  weaving.  Twilled 
cloth  might  equally  be  described  as  reeded  cloth, — cloth  channelled  or  furrowed  in  a 
reed-like  manner.  «  Twilled  ”  is,  therefore,  the  very  word  to  describe  the  crowded 
sedges  in  the  shallower  reaches  of  the  Avon  as  it  winds  round  Stratford.  It  was, 
indeed,  while  watching  the  masses  of  waving  sedge  cutting  the  water-line  of  the 
Avon,  not  far  from  Stratford  Church,  that  we  first  felt  the  peculiar  force  and  signif¬ 
icance  of  the  epithet.  And  although  the  season  was  too  far  advanced  for  the  reeds  to 
be  brightened  by  the  flowers  of  the  marsh  marygold,  the  plant  was  abundant  enough 
to  glorify  the  banks  in  the  early  spring.  The  whole  line,  therefore,  gives  a  vivid  and 
truthful  picture  of  what  is  most  characteristic  of  watery  margins  at  that  period  of  the 
year.’  [Hudson,  Phillpotts,  and  Deighton  accept  this  interpretation  of  Baynes.] 
W.  A.  Wright,  in  answer  to  Baynes’s  assertion,  on  the  authority  of  Halliwell,  that 
twills  ’  means  reeds,  and  hence  sedges,  replies  :  ‘  But  Halliwell,  following  Ray,  gives 
‘  Twills  ’  as  equivalent  to  ‘  quills,  reeds,’  for  winding  yarn.  By  the  common  inter¬ 
change  of  t  and  k  sounds,  as  in  twitch  and  quitch,  twilt  and  quilt,  ‘  twill  ’  is  another 
form  of  quill,  but  there  is  no  authority  for  going  further  and  saying  that  it  means  reed, 
the  name  of  a  plant.  Indeed,  it  is  questionable  whether  these  two  participles  are 
derived  from  the  names  of  flowers  or  plants  at  all,  for  after  they  are  employed  to 
describe  the  brims  of  Ceres’  banks,  these  brims  are  said  to  be  betrimmed  by  ‘  spongy 
April  ’ ;  so  that  ‘  pioned  and  twilled  ’  would  appear  to  be  descriptive  of  the  banks 
before  they  are  ornamented  with  flowers.  [Hereupon  Wright  refers  to  the  explana¬ 
tions  of  Henley  and  others  given  above,  and  concludes]  :  It  seems  quite  possible  that 

*  pioned  and  twilled  ’  may  be  terms  which  describe  some  operations  in  agriculture,  and 
therefore  in  the  absence  of  any  absolutely  certain  conjectural  emendation  they  ara 
retained  in  the  [i.  e.  Wright’s]  text. — In  N.  &>  Qu.  (5th  S.  viii,  385,  1877)  E.  E. 
F.  criticises  Prof.  Baynes’s  statement  that  the  peony  is  the  marsh  marygold.  ‘  I  do 
not,’  he  says,  ‘  for  one  moment  doubt  the  writer’s  good  faith ;  but  in  a  matter  of  so 
much  importance  we  want  to  be  absolutely  and  perfectly  sure.  Many  years  ago  I 
knew  South  Warwickshire  well,  and  took  a  great  interest  in  botany  and  in  provincial¬ 
isms,  but  I  do  not  remember  that  the  marsh  marygold  was  called  by  any  other  name 
than  horse-blob  and  water-blob.  On  the  other  hand,  the  common  garden  peony  was 
called  “  pianut.”  ’ — To  the  same  effect  J.  T.  Burgess  writes  to  the  same  periodical 
(5th  S.  ix,  p.  405,  1878)  that  he  has  *  never  heard  the  term  peony  applied  to  the  marsh 
marygold  ( Caltha  palustris),  or  found  anyone  who  had.  The  marsh  marygold  is  the 

*  winking  marybuds  ”  of  Shakespeare,  and  is  known  as  May -blobs,  water-blobs,  and 
Moll-blobs.  “  Pioned  ”  is  the  pied,  parti-coloured,  or  variegated  edges  of  the  twilled 
or  ribbed  banks.’ — For  this  latter  interpretation  he  was  arraigned  by  Dr  Nichol¬ 
son  (5th  S.  x,  p.  3,  1878),  whose  own  interpretation  (mainly  Henley’s)  is  as  follows: 

1  The  “  pioned  and  twilled  brims  ”  mean  the  dug  and  grimy  edges  (o'  upper  edges) 
of  the  banks  of  Ceres.  If  the  reader  objects  to  this  meaning  of  “pioned,”  he  can 


200 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  IV,  sc.  L 


[73.  pioned,  and  twilled  brims] 

substitute  the  French  meaning  of  “small  twigged”  or  bushy  hedged . Spongy 

April  betrims  these  brims  so  that  maidens,  either  in  the  rural  pastimes  of  May  or  on 

May-day,  may  be  adorned  with  garlands  of  the  white  hawthorn  flower . Because 

April  betrims  the  hedges  for  this  purpose,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  are  necessarily 
fit  for  use  in  that  month  or  before  it  ends.’ — On  the  same  page  with  this  note  of  Nich¬ 
olson,  E.  McC.,  writing  from  Guernsey,  calls  attention  to  the  practice  of  keeping  up 
the  banks  of  small  streams  which  wind  through  ‘  flat  meads  by  a  sort  of  wattling 
made  of  stakes  driven  into  the  earth  and  intertwined  with  small  branches.  “  Twilled  ” 
will  certainly  bear  the  sense  of  woven  ;  and  may  not  “  pioned  ”  be  a  local  word,  now 
disused,  allied  to,  or  derived  from,  the  French  pieu,  a  stake  ?’ — In  the  same  volume 
of  N.  Qu.  p.  424,  V.  S.  Lean  follows  Henley  and  Knight  in  defining  *  bank,’ 
ind  interprets  the  passage  as  referring  to  ‘  the  hollow  gullies  formed  by  the  watershed 
scoring  the  breast  of  the  hill ;  which  action  the  prudent  Owner  has  supplemented  by 

the  labour  of  the  pioner  or  drainer  with  his  pipes  and  tiles . I  derive  “  pioned,” 

then,  from  this  preliminary  work  of  trenching  the  ground,  and  “  twilled  ”  from  Fr. 
tuyau  (“  a  pipe,  ....  canell,”  Cotgr.),  through  its  Eng.  form  tewell ,  a  funnel  (Chau¬ 
cer,  H.  of  Fame,  iii,  559),  the  laying  of  which  completes  the  system  of  drainage.’ — 
Brae  [Robinson's  Epit.  of  Lit.  p.  173,  Nov.  1878):  We  ought  to  see  the  chaste 
crown  of  cold  nymphs  in  the  graceful  and  sober  foliage  that  fringes  aquatic  brims ;  in 
the  rushes,  the  sedges,  the  salices,  and,  above  all,  in  the  beautiful  and  delicate  ferns, 
rather  than  in  the  tulips,  the  lilies,  or  in  the  vulgar  garishness  of  the  peony  and  other 
suggested  flaunts,  more  appropriate  to  the  coronals  of  Bacchantes  than  to  the  modest 
wreaths  of  chaste  nymphs.  Ever  since  the  Greeks  bestowed  upon  brakes  and  ferns 
the  distinguishing  epithet  of  Pteris,  winged,  those  plants  have  been  described  in  tech¬ 
nical  botany  as  alated,  pennated,  &c.  Now  pennated  is  pinioned,  and  pinioned  dif 
fers  very  slightly  and  very  probably  from  *  pioned,’ — indeed,  the  two  missing  letters 
which  constitute  the  only  difference,  might  be  omitted  in  hasty  writing  by  any  one 
My  interpretation,  then,  is  that  ‘  pioned  ’  is  a  misprint  for  pinioned,  the  misprint  con¬ 
sisting  in  not  repeating  two  letters  already  existing  in  the  same  word  and  therefore  the 
easier  left  out.  The  accompanying  characteristic,  so  far  from  presenting  any  difficulty 
to  this  interpretation,  strongly  supports  it.  ‘  Twilled  ’  is,  in  fact,  quilled ;  and  quill  is  not 
only  synonymous  with  pinion  in  its  meaning  of  wing-feather,  but  it  has  an  extended 
application  to  the  whole  family  of  quill-stemmed  aquatic  plants, — sedges,  reeds, 
rushes,  Sic.,  the  first  of  which  is  especially  named  as  furnishing  crowns  for  the 
naiads.  Twill  is  a  very  common  pronunciation  of  quill  in  many  parts  of  England ; 
and,  indeed,  in  some  of  the  northern  counties  if  a  person  should  send  one  of  the  lower 
class  for  ‘  quills  ’  for  writing,  unless  he  caled  them  twills  he  would  be  scarcely  under¬ 
stood.  Moreover,  there  is  one  sense  in  which  ‘  twill  ’  survives,  even  in  correct  phrase¬ 
ology  :  a  reed  or  quill  for  weaving  is  technically  called  ‘  twill,’  as  may  be  found  in 
English  dictionaries.  Thus  pinioned  and  ‘  twilled  ’  mutually  confirm  and  support 
each  other,  combining  in  appropriateness  to  the  foliage  upon  the  edges  of  streams. — 
Ray  ( North  Country  IVords,  s.  v.) :  ‘A  twill,  a  spoole,  from  quill.  In  the  south  they 
call  it  winding  of  quills,  because  anciently,  I  suppose,  they  wound  the  yarn  upon 
quills  for  the  weavers,  tho’  now  they  use  reeds.  Or  else  reeds  were  called  quills,  as 
in  Latin,  calami.'  Skeat  (s.  v.  twill)  says :  ‘  Ray  tells  us  that  North  E.  twill  means 
a  spool,  and  he  asserts  that  it  is  a  corruption  of  quill.  I  doubt  it;  for  Swed.  dial. 
tvill  is  to  turn  round  like  a  spindle,  to  become  entangled,  as  thread  (Rietz) ;  Norweg. 
tvilla  is  to  stir  milk  round  and  round,  also  to  twist  into  knots,  as  a  thread ;  tvila,  sb 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


201 


Which  fpungie  Aprill ,  at  thy  heft  betrims  ; 

To  make  cold  Nymphes  chart  crownes ;  &  thy  broome-  75 
Whofe  fhadow  the  difmiffed  Batchelor  loues,  (groues  ; 

75,  76.  broome-groues]  brown  groves  Han.  Warb.  Colt  ii,  iii  (MS),  Ktly,  Huds. 

is  a  twist  or  knot  in  a  thread.  Twist ,  twill ,  twine  appear  to  be  closely  related  words. 

Twilled,  in  The  Tempest,  is  yet  unexplained.’  [I  doubt  if  there  be  any  corrup¬ 
tion  in  this  line  which  calls  for  change.  We  have  simply  lost  the  meanings  of  wordi 
which  were  perfectly  intelligible  to  Shakespeare’s  audience.  As  agricultural  01 
horticultural  terms  ‘  pioned  ’  and  ‘  twilled  ’  will  be  some  day,  probably,  sufficiently 
explained  to  enable  us  to  weave  from  them  the  chaste  crowns  for  cold  nymphs.  In 
the  mean  time  I  see  no  reason  why  we  should  not  accept  Henley’s  interpretation  as 
the  best  means  of  enabling  spungy  April,  in  Emerson’s  fine  phrase,  to  ‘  turn  the  sod 
to  violet.’ — Ed.] 

75.  cold  Nymphes  chast]  Keightley:  I  have  here  transposed  the  adjectives.  We 
are  to  take  ‘  cold,’  as  so  frequently,  in  the  sense  of  cool,  which  agrees  well  with  flowers 
growing  on  the  edge  of  a  stream,  while  it  seems  absurd  to  call  them  <  chaste.’  ‘  Nymphs  ’ 
is  evidently  maidens ;  for  if  the  Naiades  were  meant  there  would  be  an  article. 

75>  76-  broome-groues]  Heath  (p.  29)  :  For  what  reason  [Hanmer  altered  this 
to  ‘  brown  groves  ’]  I  cannot  conceive.  Ceres  was  certainly  not  the  goddess  of  the 
woods ;  and  those  very  ‘  broom  groves  ’  seem  to  be  expressly  hinted  at,  in  the  very 
words  of  Ceres  which  follow  a  little  below  :  ‘  my  bosky  acres,’  which  very  properly 
express  a  broom-brake,  as  it  is  called. — Steevens:  ‘Broom,’  in  this  place,  sig¬ 
nifies  the  Spartium  scoparium,  of  which  brooms  are  frequently  made.  Near  Gam- 
lingay,  in  Cambridgeshire,  it  grows  high  enough  to  conceal  the  tallest  cattle  as  they 
pass  through  it ;  and  in  places  it  is  cultivated  still  higher ;  a  circumstance  that  had 
escaped  my  notice  till  I  was  told  of  it  by  Professor  Martyn. — Mason  (p.  9) :  In  the 
old  Scotch  song  of  *  My  dady  is  a  canker’d  carle,’  a  lover  is  placed  in  a  broom-grove  : 
*  But  let  them  say,  or  let  them  do,  ’Tis  a ’  ane  to  me ;  For  he’s  low  down,  he’s  in  the 
broom,  Is  waiting  for  me.’ — Nares  (s.  v.)  :  As  the  broom  or  genista  is  a  low  shrub, 
it  has  been  doubted  what  ‘  broom-groves  ’  can  be.  Perhaps  birchen  groves  may  be 
intended. — Collier  (ed.  ii) :  *  Broom  ’  does  not  grow  up  into  *  groves  ’  and  the  ‘  dis- 
mused  bachelor  ’  sought  the  deep  shadow  of  the  ‘  brown  groves  ’  [according  to  the 
MS]. — Halliwell:  In  Lyte’s  Herb  all,  1578,  p.  663,  two  kinds  of  broom  are  men¬ 
tioned  :  ‘  the  one  high  and  tawle,  the  other  lowe  and  small,’  the  former  ‘  groweth 
commonly  to  the  length  of  a  long  or  tawle  man.’  ....  There  is  a  notice  in  the  ancient 
romance  of  Guy  of  Warwick,  preserved  in  the  Auchinleck  MS  at  Edinburgh,  of  three 
hundred  Saracens  being  concealed  ‘  in  a  brom  field.’  See  the  Abbotsford  Club  ed. 
292.  ‘  I  could  finde  with  all  my  heart  to  sip  up  a  sillybub  with  him  in  my  father’s 

broome  pasture.’ — Two  Lancashire  Lovers,  1640,  p.  222. — Staunton:  A  more 
unhappy  alteration  [than  Hanmer’s  and  Collier’s  MS]  can  hardly  be  conceived,  since 
it  at  once  destroys  the  point  of  the  allusion ;  yellow,  the  colour  of  the  broom,  being 
supposed  especially  congenial  to  the  ‘  lass-lorn  and  dismissed  bachelor.’  See  Burton, 
Anat.  of  Melancholy,  Part  iii,  Sec.  2 :  ‘  So  long  as  we  are  wooers,  and  may  kiss  and 
coll  at  our  pleasure,  nothing  is  so  sweet ;  we  are  in  heaven,  as  we  think ;  but  when 
we  are  once  tied,  and  have  lost  our  liberty,  marriage  is  an  hell ;  give  me  my  yellow 
hose  again.’ — Keightley  :  I  have  adopted  Hanmer’s  brown,  though  contrary  to  my 
rule,  as  I  have  met  no  earlier  authoi  ity  for  this  use  of  l  *• own  than  Milton.  The  poet’s 


202 


THE  TEMP  ESI 


[act  iv,  sc.  L 


[75,  76.  broome-groues] 

word  may  have  been  broad  or  trim.  The  broom  never  attains  a  height  to  justify 
the  terming  it  a  ‘  grove.’  I  doubt  if  ‘  grove  ’  is  ever  used  of  any  but  forest  trees. — 
Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce,  Gloss. ) :  Is  the  word  ‘  grove  ’  ever  applied  to  shrubs  by  the 
Elizabethan  writers  ?  Hanmer’s  ‘  brown  groves  ’  has  been  before  the  public  for  mors 
than  a  century,  and  has  been  vigorously  assailed  by  men  of  eminent  learning  and 
ability,  but  no  instance  of  this  [i.  e.  of  ‘  grove  ’  applied  to  shrubs]  has  been  produced, 
and  therefore  I  conclude  that  none  exists.  The  notion  of  disconsolate  lovers  betaking 
themselves  to  groves  is  common  enough  in  poetry ;  Shakespeare  himself  has  placed 
Romeo  in  a  sycamore  grove  when  Rosaline  was  cruel,  and  we  may  judge  from  this 
the  sort  of  grove  he  would  select  for  young  gentlemen  in  the  like  case.  Till  it  can  be 
shown  that  a  growth  of  broom  may  be  called  a  grove,  it  seems  idle  to  dispute  about 
the  height  of  the  shrub.  In  Babington’s  Botany  it  is  said  to  be  2  Jj  or  3  feet  high,  and 
this  is  certainly  the  usual  height  to  which  it  grows  on  Hampstead  Heath,  though 
occasionally  a  plant  may  be  found  taller ;  I  am  told  that  in  Italy  it  grows  to  the  height 
of  6  or  7  feet,  but  that  surely  is  no  great  matter. — The  defences  set  up  for  the  old 
reading  [broom- groves]  appear  to  me  singularly  weak.  ‘  Ceres,’  says  Heath,  ‘  was 
certainly  not  the  goddess  of  the  woods.’  Very  true;  and  just  as  certainly  she  was 
not  the  goddess  of  ‘  broom-brakes,’  or  of  ‘  vineyards,’  or  of  ‘  bosky  acres,’  or  ‘  turfy 
mountains,’  or  ‘unshrubb’d  downs,’  or  of  *  flowers,’  or  the  ‘sea-marge,  sterile  and 
rocky-hard  ’ ;  all  of  which  Heath  has  overlooked.  It  seems  that  in  the  present  masque 
Ceres  appears  as  the  Goddess  of  the  Earth,  Arj/ii/rr/p.  That  this  was  the  original  cha¬ 
racter  of  the  Greek  goddess  is  probable  from  the  etymology  of  her  name ;  but  how 
Shakespeare  came  so  to  describe  her  is  a  question  for  those  who  have  studied  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  his  learning.  He  may  have  picked  up  a  good  deal  of  out-of-the-way  classical 
learning  from  Jonson.  [Dyce  questions  this. — Ed.]  I  think,  however,  we  are  war¬ 
ranted  rather  in  asking  why  woods  are  left  out  in  this  passage  than  why  they  are 
brought  in. — Mason’s  quotation  from  the  old  Scotch  song  proves  nothing  as  to  broom- 
groves,  for  the  song  merely  mentions  ‘  broom.’  Mason  accordingly  is  not  warranted 
in  saying  that  the  ‘  songstress  places  her  lover  in  a  broom  -grove.'  As  to  Halliwell’s 
300  Saracens  hid  in  a  broom  field,  the  last  word  ( field )  is  surely  incompatible  with 
groves.  Besides,  the  same  thing  might  happen,  and,  indeed,  has  happened,  in  a  field 
of  wheat.  In  The  Adorning  Herald  of  4  July,  1861,  there  is  an  American  account 
of  3000  rebels  ‘  concealed  in  a  thick  undergrowth  and  wheat  fields.’  This,  however, 
would  not  warrant  such  a  phrase  as  wheat-groves. — I  must  confess  that  Staunton’s 
note,  with  the  quotation  from  Burton’s  Anatomy,  appears  to  me  far  more  unhappy 
than  Hanmer’s  alteration.  Shakespeare  says  nothing  of  the  blossom  of  the  broom ; 
he  only  speaks  of  its  shadow.  Shakespeare  could  not  have  been  guilty  of  so  far¬ 
fetched  an  allusion,  and  such  a  perversion  of  language.  I  know  of  no  passage  in 
which  the  colour  yellow  is  represented  as  ‘especially  congenial  to  lass-lorn  bachelors.’ 
Still,  I  am  aware  of  several  passages  where  yellow  is  mentioned  as  the  colour  ai  jeal¬ 
ousy,  but  for  the  most  part  with  reference  to  married  people,  not  bachelors ;  I  dare¬ 
say  however,  there  are  similar  allusions  to  the  jealousy  of  the  unmarried  also.  Jokes 
about  yellow  hose,  &c.  are  common  enough.  But  in  this  passage  from  Burton  the 
phrase  refers  neither  to  jealousy  nor  to  unsuccessful  love.  Surely  the  context  shows 
that  here  ‘  give  me  my  yellow  hose  again  ’  means  ‘  give  me  my  bachelor’s  days  again 
(when  I  wore  yellow  hose, — which  were  once  in  high  fashion,  and  are  still  worn  by 
<he  boys  of  Christ’s  Hospital, — and)  when  I  was  kissing  and  colling  my  intended 
and  not  satiated  with  a  wife.’ 


AC  T  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


2.01 

Being  lafle-lorne  :  thy  pole-clipt  vineyard,  77 

And  thy  Sea-marge  ftirrile,  and  rockey-hard, 

77-  pole -dipt]  pale- dipt  Warb.  Han. 

77.  pole-clipt]  Holt,  after  criticising  Warburton’s  pale-dipt,  concludes:  ‘The 
old  reading  is  Tightest;  the  poles,  and  not  the  vines,  being  dipt  or  twin’d  round,  and 
here  used  to  show  that  the  author  meant  a  vineyard  properly  so  called,  and  not 
espalier  or  Wall-Vines.’— Heath  suggests,  in  opposition  to  the  same  emendation, 
that  Warburton  might  have  recollected  that  <  dipt  ’  signifies  also  pruned,  and  conse¬ 
quently  that  the  compound  word  might  here  signify  that  the  vines  by  proper  pruning 
were  trained  up  to  the  poles  which  supported  them.  [We  all  know,  now,  that  Holt 
is  right  and  Heath  is  wrong;  as  Steevens  rightly  says  :  ‘  To  clip  is  to  twine  round 
or  etnbrace.  The  poles  are  dipped  or  embraced  by  the  vines  ’ ;  but  Delius,  as  I  have 
found  once  before,  pinned  his  faith  to  Heath,  whose  interpretation  he  adopts,  and  per¬ 
haps  thereby  misleads  the  excellent  Schmidt  into  the  definition,  in  his  Lex.,  of  ‘pole- 
dipt  ’  as  ‘  hedged  in  with  poles.’]  Steevens  adds  that  ‘  vineyard  ’  is  ‘  here  used  as  a 
trisyllable.  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh .  Soc.  p.  56) :  The  line  appears  to  want  a  syllable. 
Steevens  is  for  supplying  it  by  pronouncing  <  vineyard  ’  in  three  syllables —vin-e-ydrd. 
But  this  is  arbitrary  and  violent.  If  an  e  must  be  got  by  archaically  accenting  some 
<f-mute,  it  should  be  looked  for  at  the  end  of  a  word  rather  than  at  the  end  of  a  syl¬ 
lable  merely — i.  e.  4  po-16  dipt  ’  should  be  resorted  to  in  preference  to  ‘  vin-e-yard.’ 
But  even  in  this  case  there  is  still  a  choice  between  the  more  and  less  archaic.  It  is 
true,  that  poets  of  the  later  Old  English  period  did  occasionally  accent  the  final  e 
(Marsh’s  Eng.  Lit.  p.  465 ;)  but  the  f-sound  prefixed  (in  the  form  of y)  to  the  Past 
Participle  was  practically  much  less  archaic  in  many  words,  because  kept  in  circu¬ 
lation  by  Spenser.  Even  in  the  ordinary  unrhymed  dialogue  Shakespeare  has 
adopted  this  form— as  a  g.  in  ^  Hen.  VL:  I,  i,  4  :  ‘  Her  words  yclad  with  wisdom’s 
majesty’;  and  Steevens  himself  proposes  to  read  {post  IV,  i,  206)  ‘  filth-y  mantled’ 
for  the  ‘  filthy-mantled  ’  of  Fx.  To  ‘  yclipt  ’  there  could  be  still  less  objection,  on  the 
score  of  archaic  incongruity,  than  to  any  other  similar  form,  inasmuch  as — by  virtue 
of  being  at  the  same  time  the  Participle  of  two  Verbs,  ‘  clip  ’  to  embrace  and  the 
every-day  4  clip  ’  to  call — it  was  as  current  and  modem  as  4  loved.’  If  it  should  be 
objected,  that  a  compositor  was  not  likely  to  set  up  4  dipt  ’  for  4  yclipt,’  it  might  be 
answered,  that  the  compositor’s  4  copy  ’  was  probably  the  work  of  a  scribe,  writing 
from  dictation,  who  was  as  likely  to  adopt  one  spelling  as  another  of  what,  either  way, 
had  the  same  sound  and  the  same  signification.  And,  finally,  when  the  two  readings 
are  left,  in  the  last  resort,  to  the  judgement  of  the  ear,  I  cannot  conceive  how  there 
can  be  the  balancing  of  a  moment  between  them.  Read,  therefore  :  Being  lafs-l6m ; 
thy  p6\e -yclipt  vineyard.  (For  Professor  Corson  has  noted  (Chaucer’s  Legende,  p. 
xvi),  that  in  Old  English  poetry  the  accent  usually  falls  on  the  last  syllable  of  the 
Present  Participle  in  ing.)— Abbott,  §  487,  thus  scans  these  lines :  4  Whose  shad  |  ow 
the  |  dismiss  |  ed  bache  |  lor  loves,  Being  |  lass-lorn  |  thy  pole  |  dipt  vin  |  e’-yarcL. 
And  thy  |  sea-marge,  |  sterile  |  and  rock  |  y- hard.’ 

78.  rockey-hard]  Brae  {Roy.  Soc.  of  Lit.  Trans,  x,  Part  iii,  p.  499,  1873) :  The 
unwitting  intrusion,  by  Heminge  and  Condell,  of  a  hyphen  between  these  two  words 
has  caused  them  ever  since  to  be  regarded  as  a  compound  adjective  attaching  to  4  sea- 
marge,’  although  *  sea-marge  ’  has  already  its  own  adjective  in  ‘sterile.’  If  anything 
were  necessary  to  show  that  this  intrusion  of  a  hyphen  has.  in  itself,  no  authority 


204 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Where  thou  thy  felfe  do’ft  ayre,  the  Queene  o’th  Skie, 

Whofe  watry  Arch,  and  meffenger,  am  I.  80 

Bids  thee  leaue  thefe,  &  with  her  foueraigne  grace,  Iuno 
Here  on  this  graffe-plot,  in  this  very  place  defcends. 

To  come,  and  fport :  here  Peacocks  flye  amaine  .* 

Approach,  rich  Ceres,  her  to  entertaine.  Enter  Ceres. 

Cer.  Haile,  many-coloured  Meffenger,  that  nere  85 

Do’ft  difobey  the  wife  of  Iupiter : 

Who,  with  thy  faffron  wings,  vpon  my  flowres 
Diffufeft  hony  drops,  refrefhing  fhowres, 

And  with  each  end  of  thy  blew  bowe  do’ft  crowne 

My  boskie  acres,  and  my  vnfhrubd  downe,  90 


81,  82.  Iuno  defcends.]  Transposed  to  descent.  Hal. 
line  1 14,  Theob.  Juno  commences  her  83.  here']  her  Rowe  et  seq. 


•worthy  of  the  slightest  consideration,  it  is  presented  in  the  same  speech  by  the  similar 
intrusion  of  a  hyphen  in  ‘  turphie-mountains,’  where  it  ought  not  to  be,  and  by  its 
omission  a  little  further  on  in  the  compound  phrase  ‘  hony  drops,’  where  it  ought  to 
be,  and  with  which  it  is  printed  in  all  modern  editions. — If,  like  mountain,  <  hard  ’ 
had  a  signification  as  a  noun  only,  and  not  also  another  and  more  familiar  significa¬ 
tion  as  an  adjective,  then  it  would  long  since  have  been  received  as  a  noun,  with 
‘rocky’  as  its  qualifying  adjective;  and  the  hyphen  would  have  been  no  more  toler¬ 
ated  in  ‘  rocky-hard  ’  than  in  ‘  turfy-mountains.’ — The  noun  hard  is  well  known  in 
nautical  phraseology  as  a  jetty  or  landing-place  for  boats,  and  also  as  an  embankment 
for  the  repair  of  ships,  called  a  ‘  careening  hard.’ — But  in  this  address  to  Ceres  it 
surely  means  one  of  those  elevated  areas  or  platforms,  exposed  to  the  wind,  which 
were  anciently  used  for  the  winnowing  of  corn  by  flinging  it  up  into  the  air  from 
sieves,  so  that  the  chaff  might  be  blown  away  and  the  grain  fall  back  upon  the  rocky 
hard.  As  such  it  is  peculiarly  applicable  to  Ceres,  and  explanatory  of  the  phrase 
‘  where  thou  thyself  dost  air.’ 

81,  82.  Juno  descends]  Collier  (ed.  i) :  She  was  probably  let  down  slowly  by 
some  machine,  and  did  not  reach  the  stage  until  Iris  and  Ceres  were  concluding  their 
speeches.  [In  Collier’s  second  edition  it  is  stated  that  slowly  is  added  by  the  MS  to 
this  stage-direction.] — Dyce  (ed.  ii)  quotes  the  foregoing  note  of  Collier,  and  adds: 
‘  I  much  doubt  if  Juno  was  visible  to  the  audience  so  soon ;  in  old  plays  (printed 
from  the  prompter’s  copies)  stage-directions  are  very  often  placed  prematurely,  as 
warnings  to  the  performers  to  be  ready.’ 

85,  87.  that  .  .  .  Who]  See  II,  ii,  12. 

87.  saffron  wings]  Douce:  See  Phaer’s  Virgil,  SS.n.,  end  of  Bk  IV  [Sig.  G4, 
ed.  1620]  :  <  Dame  Rainbow  down  therefore  with  saffro  wings  of  dropping  sheurs, 
Whose  face  a  thousand  sundry  hewes  against  the  sunne  deuours,  From  heauen 
descending  came — .’ 

90.  boskie]  Steevens  :  That  is,  woody.  <  Bosky  acres  ’  are  fields  divided  from 
each  other  by  hedge-rows.  Boscus  is  Middle  Lat.  for  wood.  So  Milton  [Comus, 
313]  :  ‘And  every  bosky  bourn  from  side  to  side.’  Again  in  King  Edward  I:  ‘  Hale 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


205 


Rich  fcarph  to  my  proud  earth  :  why  hath  thy  Queene  91 

Summond  me  hither,  to  this  fhort  gras’d  Greene  ? 

Ir.  A  contract  of  true  Loue,  to  celebrate, 

And  fome  donation  freely  to  eftate 

On  the  bles’d  Louers.  95 

Cer.  Tell  me  heauenly  Bowe, 

If  Venus  or  her  Sonne,  as  thou  do’ft  know, 

Doe  now  attend  the  Queene  ?  fince  they  did  plot 
The  meanes,  that  duskie  Dis,  my  daughter  got, 

Her,  and  her  blind-Boyes  fcandald  company,  100 

I  haue  forfworne. 

Ir.  Of  her  focietie 
Be  not  afraid  :  I  met  her  deitie 
Cutting  the  clouds  towards  Paphos :  and  her  Son 
Doue-drawn  with  her :  here  thought  they  to  haue  done  105 
Some  wanton  charme,  vpon  this  Man  and  Maide, 

Whofe  vowes  are,  that  no  bed-right  fhall  be  paid 
Till  Hymens  Torch  be  lighted  :  but  in  vaine, 

Marfes  hot  Minion  is  returnd  againe, 

Her  wafpifh  headed  fonne,  has  broke  his  arrowes,  1 10 

92.  Jhort  gras'd ]  Jhort graf s' d  F3F+.  107.  bed-right ]  bed-rite  Steev.  Hal 

short-grass  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Sing.  Dyce,  Glo.  Sta.  Jepb.  Ktly. 

Warb.  short-graz’d  Coll.  109.  Marfes]  Mar’s  F3  et  seq. 

him  from  hence,  and  in  this  bosky  wood  Bury  his  corpse.’  [This  latter  quotation 
ought  to  have  shown  Steevens  that  his  definition  of  woody  is  wrong ;  neither  Peele 
nor  any  one  else  could  be  guilty  of  the  tautology,  ‘  woody  wood  ’ ;  in  a  note  on  it  in 
King  Edward  I,  Dyce  (Peele’s  Works,  i,  175)  quotes  this  present  passage  in  The 
Tempest,  as  authorising  us  to  understand  ‘bosky’  as  in  the  sense  of  shrubby ;  and  this 
evidently  correct  definition  is  given  by  Murray  ( New  Eng.  Diet.  s.  v.),  who  says  it 
means :  ‘  Consisting  of  or  covered  with  bushes  or  underwood ;  full  of  thickets,  bushy.’ 
Strangely  enough,  Dyce  seems  to  have  forgotten  his  own  definition  when  he  came  to 
compile  his  Glossary  ;  there  he  gives  not  only  Steevens’s  woody  as  the  only  definition 
of  ‘  bosky  ’  in  this  passage,  but  also  Steevens’s  random  remark  about  hedge-rows,  as 
given  above. — Ed.] 

94.  estate]  That  is,  bestow,  settle.  For  other  instances,  see  Schmidt. 

99.  that]  For  other  instances  where  ‘  that  ’  means  so  that,  see  Abbott,  §  283,  or. 
perhaps,  §  284,  where  examples  are  given  of  ‘  that  ’  implying  when. 

107.  bed-right]  W.  A.  Wright:  The  Folios  do  not  always  distinguish  between 
[ right  and  rite'] ;  see  above,  line  20.  In  the  present  instance  the  reading  of  the  Folios 
is  preferable.  A  ‘  right  ’  may  be  paid,  but  a  ‘  rite  ’  must  be  performed.  There  is, 
however,  great  confusion  between  the  words  in  old  writers.  For  instance,  in  Chap¬ 
man’s  Bussy  d'Ambois  [Works,  ii,  41)  :  ‘Then  come  my  loue,  Now  pay  those  Rites 
to  sleepe  Thy  faire  eyes  owe  him.’ 


20 6 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Swears  he  will  fhoote  no  more,  but  play  with  Sparrows,  1 1 1 
And  be  a  Boy  right  out. 

Cer.  Higheft  Queene  of  State, 

Great  Iuno  comes,  I  know  her  by  her  gate. 

Iu.  How  do’s  my  bounteous  fitter?  goe  with  me  115 

To  blei'fe  this  twaine,  that  they  may  profperous  be, 

And  honourd  in  their  Iffue.  They  Sing. 

Iu.  Honor ,  riches ,  marriage ,  bleffing , 

Long  continuance ,  and  encreajing , 

Hourely  ioyes,  be  Jiill  vpon  you ,  1 2c 

Iuno  Jings  her  blejjings  on  you. 

Earths  increafe,  foyzon  plentie ,  122 


1I3-  Highepp  High  Pope  + .  High'st 
Cap.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Cam.  Glo.  Wrt,  Huds. 
1 14.  gate]  gait  Johns. 

Enter  Juno.]  Cap. 

1 18.  marriage,  bleffing]  marriage  bleff¬ 


ing  Rowe,  marriage-bleffing  Theob. 

122.  Earths]  Cer.  Earth's  Theob.  el 
seq.  Cer.  Earthes  Wrt  conj.  Kinnear. 

foyzon]  and  foyzon  Ff,  Rowe  + , 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


114.  her  gate]  Farmer  took  the  trouble  to  disprove  Wh alley’s  innocent  remark 
that  the  hint  for  this  allusion  might  have  been  taken  from  the  *  Divum  incedo  Regina  ’ 
of  Vergil,  by  showing  that  a  similar  phrase  was  used  by  Taylor,  the  Water-poet. 

1 16.  prosperous]  Meissner  (p.  80,  foot-note):  Clearly  a  play  upon  the  name 
Prospero.  It  behooves  the  children  of  Prospero  (Ferdinand  and  Miranda)  to  show 
themselves  to  be  genuine  Prosperos,  and  be  honoured  in  their  issue  as  fully  as  Pros¬ 
pero  was  honoured  in  his  (in  Miranda).  The  very  name  Prospero  indicates  the 
ideal  man,  one  who  had  been  born  under  a  prosperous  star  and  had  been  developed 
under  particularly  prosperous  conditions.  [Can  the  grief  of  the  judicious  be  here 
restrained  from  breaking  forth  ? — Ed.] 

122.  From  Theobald’s  distribution  of  speeches,  whereby  Ceres  sings  the  rest  of 
this  song,  and  which  has  here  been  universally  followed,  Holt  (p.  73)  dissents  on 
the  score  that  there  might  have  been  only  one  voice  in  the  stage  company  capable  of 
smgmg  this  song;  that  it  was  not  inappropriate  for  Juno,  as  the  highest  queen,  to  pro 
nounce  the  blessings  which  Ceres  had  bestowed;  and,  lastly,  that  we  might  quite  as 
pioperly  introduce  Bacchus,  Vertumnus,  Flora,  and  Pomona  as  speaking  their  partic¬ 
ular  shares  of  the  benediction.  I  doubt  if  sufficient  weight  has  been  given  to  the  two 
latter  reasons  specified  by  Holt.  In  addition,  the  stage-direction  says,  ‘  They  sing.’ _ Ed. 

122.  foyzon]  Collier:  The  conjunction  and  added  by  F3  is  not  only  quite  need¬ 
less,  but  gives  the  measure  a  jigging  turn,  in  all  probability  intended  by  the  poet  to  be 
avoided.  [‘  Which  is  exactly  what  the  absence  of  the  conjunction  does,’  says  Dyce. 
To  modem  ears  this  line  lacks  a  syllable.  The  Textual  Notes  show  how  the  syllable 
has  been  supplied  in  the  Folios.  Abbott,  §  484,  suggests  that  the  time  of  a  second 
syllable  is  to  be  found  in  the  long  vowels  of  the  second  syllable  of  ‘  increase,’  and  thus 
divides  the  line :  ‘  Earth’s  in  |  crease,  |  foison  |  plenty.’  Allen,  and  W.  A.  Wright 
decide  that  it  is  found  in  a  dissyllabic  pronunciation  of  ‘  Earth’s,’  which  Allen  would 
find  in  a  resolution  of  the  two  vowels  at  the  beginning:  tarth's ;  and  Wright  in  the 
addition  of  a  vowel  sound  to  the  r  at  the  end :  earths,  for  which  he  has  the  analog* 


ACT  IV,  sc.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


207 


Barnes ,  and  Garners ,  neuer  empty.  123 

Vines,  with  clujiring  bunches  growing, 

Plants,  zvtth  goodly  burthen  bowing'.  125 

Spring  come  to  you  at  the  farthejl, 

In  the  very  end  of  II ante Jl. 

Scarcity  and  zvant  Jhall  fhun  you, 

Ceres  blefjing  fo  is  on  you. 

Fer.  This  is  a  moft  maiefticke  vifion,  and  130 

Harmonious  charmingly :  may  I  be  bold 

125.  v>tth~\  Fj.  ...ai  farthest  D.  Wilson. 

126.  Spring]  Rain  Coll.  MS.  13 1.  charmingly ]  charming  lay  Han. 

Spring. ..at  the  fartheft]  Offspring  charming  Lays  Warb. 

of  Mid.  N.  D.  II,  i,  7:  ‘Swifter  than  the  moon’s  sphere.’  And  IV,  i,  101,  as  it 
stands  in  Qz :  ‘  Trippe  we  after  nights  shade.’  And  Love's  Lab.  L.  V,  ii,  332  :  ‘  To 
show  his  teeth  as  white  as  whale’s  bone.’  What  is,  to  me,  hostile  to  both  of  these  latter 
solutions  of  the  difficulty  is  that  they  make  the  noun  ‘  increase  ’  a  trochee,  whereas 
Shakespeare  always,  I  think,  makes  it  an  iamb.  The  same  objection  may  be  urged 
against  ‘  Earth’s  rich  increase,’  a  conjecture  by  ‘  Jacob,’  recorded  in  the  Third  Cam¬ 
bridge  Edition.  Wherefore  it  seems  to  me  that  the  simplest  way  is  to  accept  the  and 
of  the  Folios. — Ed.] 

126.  Spring]  Staunton  :  See  the  Faerie  Queene,  III,  vi,  42  :  ‘  There  is  continuall 
spring,  and  harvest  there  Continuall,  both  meeting  at  one  time.’  See  also  Amos  ix,  13  : 
‘  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  the  plowman  shall  overtake  the  reaper, 
and  the  treader  of  grapes  him  that  soweth  seed.’ — Keightley  :  No  one  ever  has 
made,  or  can  make,  sense  of  this.  The  fact  is,  as  the  context  plainly  shows,  that  the 
poet’s  word  was  Shall.  With  this  simple  change  the  whole  passage  becomes  cleat 
and  grammatical,  and  forms  a  parallel  to  the  fairy-blessing  at  the  end  of  Mid.  N.  D. 
— Mrs  Kemble  (p.  150)  :  I  think  the  passage  simply  means  that  spring  shall  rapidly 
succeed  autumn,  leaving  the  dreary  winter  out  of  the  calendar,  a  blessing  Shakespeare 
has  borrowed  from  that  proclaimed  to  the  Jews  in  that  wonderful  and  awful  chapter 
of  promises  and  threats,  the  26th  of  Leviticus :  ‘And  your  threshing  shall  reach  unto 
the  vintage,  and  the  vintage  shall  reach  unto  the  sowing  time.’  From  the  same  chap¬ 
ter  he  takes  the  words  ‘  Earth’s  increase.’  ....  It  is  impossible  to  read  his  plays  atten¬ 
tively  without  perceiving  that  his  mind  was  absolutely  imbued  with  the  style  oi 
thought  and  expression  of  our  Bible.  And,  strange  to  say,  an  intimate  familiarity 
with  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  its  language  is  infinitely  more  perceptible  in  his 
profane  (not  to  use  the  word  in  any  but  its  technical  sense)  plays  than  in  the  great 
sacred  epic  of  our  English  tongue,  the  Paradise  Lost,  whose  learned  author  had 
assuredly  the  Bible  in  his  heart,  but  so  great  a  store  of  Greek,  Latin,  and  Italian  lore 
in  his  head  that,  though  the  subject  of  his  poem  is  purely  biblical,  the  style  seldom, 
if  ever,  recalls  that  of  the  Bible. 

131.  charmingly]  Hanmer’s  and  Warburton’s  emendations  died  early  of 
inanition,  living  only  long  enough  to  suggest  ‘Harmonious:  charmingly!’  to  Holt, 
and  ‘  Harmoniously  charming  ’  to  Steevens.  Staunton,  with  truth,  says  that 
‘charmingly’  here  imports  magically,  not  delightfully. — Ed. 


208 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 
132 


To  thinke  thefe  fpirits  ? 

Pro.  Spirits,  which  by  mine  Art 
I  haue  from  their  confines  call’d  to  ena£t 
My  prefent  fancies.  135 

Fer.  Let  me  liue  here  euer, 

So  rare  a  wondred  Father,  and  a  wife  137 


134.  from  their ]  from  all  their  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

to  enadf\  t'  enadl  Pope,  Han. 
I37.  wondred. ..wife']  wonder  and  a 


father  wise  Sta. 

1 37.  wife~\  Ff,  Coll,  i,  Hal.  Wh.  Dyce 
i,  Sta.  Ktly,  Wrt,  Rife,  Dtn,  Cam.  iii. 
wife  Rowe  et  cet. 


137.  rare  a  wondred]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  129) :  That  is,  so  rare-wonded d  a  father. 
[For  many  other  similar  transpositions  of  the  indefinite  article,  see  Abbott,  §  422.] — 
W.  A.  Wright:  ‘Wonder’d’  is,  able  to  perform  wonders.  The  participle  is  formed 
from  the  noun,  as  ‘  gifted,’  not  from  the  verb.  [See  ‘  guiled  shore,’  Oth.  Ill,  ii,  103, 
or  Abbott,  §  294,  where  the  good  general  rule  is  given  that  participles  formed  from 
an  adjective  mean  ‘  made  (the  adjective),’  and  derived  from  a  noun,  mean  ‘endowed 
with  (the  noun).’] 

137.  wise]  Grant  White  (Sh.  Scholar ,  p.  94) :  To  read  wife  is  to  degrade  the 
poetical  feeling  of  the  passage. — Staunton:  It  is  pretty  evident  that  Ferdinand 
expresses  a  compliment  to  father  and  daughter;  and  equally  so  that  the  lines  were 
intended  to  rhyme ;  with  the  very  slight  change  we  have  ventured  [see  Text.  N.]  the 
passage  fulfils  both  conditions.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  same  rhyme  occurs  in  the 
opening  stanza  of  the  Pass.  Pil.  :  ‘  what  fool  is  not  so  wise  To  break  an  oath,  to  win 
a  paradise  ?’  a  stanza  quoted  in  Love's  L.  L.  IV,  iii. — A.  I.  Fish  (. Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p. 
57) :  It  appears  that  copies  of  the  First  Folio  here  differ;  that  some  are  to  be  found 
that  read  ‘  wife  ’  and  others  that  read  ‘  wife  ’ ;  and  that  the  change  was  made  while 
the  sheets  were  passing  the  press,  but  which  reading  first  appeared  can  never  be 
known.  The  copy  of  the  First  Folio  in  the  British  Museum,  the  one  at  the  Bridge- 
water  House,  and  the  eight  [seven. — Ed.]  copies  used  by  Mr  Booth  in  collating  his 
elegant  reprint  just  finished,  all  read  ‘  wise,’  if  the  photograph  and  the  fac-simile 
reprint  may  be  trusted.  The  reprint  of  1807  also  reads  ‘  wise  ’ ;  so  does  Mr  Forrest’s 
copy  of  the  First  Folio;  so  does  the  copy  in  the  Astor  Library  in  New  York.  If  the 
collation  of  the  Camb.  Edd.  is  to  be  relied  on,  the  remaining  Folios  all  read  ‘  wise.’ 

‘  Wise  ’  is  certainly  the  reading  of  the  Soc.’s  copies  of  F2  and  F4.— In  Pope’s  Ed. 
Rowe’3  reading  is  followed;  but  whether  Rowe  made  the  change,  or  printed  from  a 
Folio  in  which  the  change  already  existed,  is  not  known.  It  has  been  generally  sup- 
posed  that  Rowe  printed  from  a  copy  of  F4 ;  if  so,  he  made  the  change,  unless  some 
copy  of  that  Folio  existed  wherein  a  change  had  been  made  while  passing  the  press. 
It  is  known  that  Rowe  did  not  pretend  to  have  collated  the  Folios ;  it  is  also  known 
that  Pope  did  pretend  to  have  so  done,  but  in  truth  never  actually  did.  Staunton 
changes  the  reading,  apparently  misled  by  the  notion  that  a  rhyme  was  here  intended, 
and  he  actually  produces  from  the  Pass.  Pil.  and  Love's  Lab.  just  such  a  rhyme ;  but 
all  the  early  texts  are  against  him,  and  such  wide  deviations  from  all  recognized  read¬ 
ings,  however  acute,  cannot  be  received  with  favour.  It  has  been  suggested  in  favour 
of  ‘wise’  that  the  verb  is  in  the  singular;  but  to  this  it  maybe  answered  that  singular 
verbs  and  plural  nominatives  are  too  frequent  in  the  F,  to  found  and  determine  a 


act  iv.  sc.  i.]  THE  TEMPEST 

Makes  this  place  Paradife. 

Pro.  Sweet  now,  filence  : 

Iuno  and  Ceres  whifper  ferioufly, 

There’s  fomething  elfe  to  doe :  hufh,  and  be  mute 
Or  elfe  our  fpell  is  mar’d. 

Iuno  and  Ceres  whifper ,  and fend  Iris  on  employment. 
Iris.  You  Nimphs  cald  Nayades  of  y  windring  brooks, 
With  your  fedg’d  crownes,  and  euer-harmeleffe  lookes, 
Leaue  your  crifpe  channels,  and  on  this  greene-Land 


209 

138 

140 


145 


138.  Makes]  Make  Pope  +  ,  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Coll,  ii,  iii,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

1 39.  Sweet  now,  filence  .•]  Now  silence, 
sweet !  Han.  Cap.  Sweet ;  now  silence  ! 
Johns.  O  sweet,  now  silence  !  Ktly. 

140.  Om.  Han. 

143.  Transposed  to  follow  138,  Cap. 

144.  Nayades]  Ff,  Rowe.  Nayads 
Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Naiades  Dyce.  Naiads 
Steev.  et  cet. 


144.  windring ]  Ff,  Cap.  Cam.  Glo. 
Jeph.  Wrt.  winding  Rowe  + ,  Hal.  Sing. 
Dyce  i,  Ktly,  Clke,  Wh.  ii,  Coll.  iii. 
wandring  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Wh.  i. 
windering  Knt.  wandering  Coll,  i,  ii, 
Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

145.  J. 'edg’d ]  J edge  Coll,  ii  (MS), 
Walker,  Sing.  Huds. 

146.  greene- Land]  green  land  Theob. 
ii  et  seq. 


reading. — W.  A.  Wright:  Rowe  conjectured  wife  independently.  Both  readings 
of  course  yield  an  excellent  sense,  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  latter  seems  to 
bring  Ferdinand  from  his  rapture  back  to  earth  again.  He  is  lost  in  wonder  at  Pros- 
pero’s  magic  power.  It  may  be  objected  that  in  this  case  Miranda  is  left  out  alto¬ 
gether,  but  the  use  of  the  word  ‘  father  ’  shows  that  Ferdinand  regarded  her  as  one 
with  himself.  [In  my  copy  of  the  First  Folio  the  letter  which  is  to  make  a  wise  wife 
or  a  wife  wise  is  of  such  a  doubtful  shape  that  no  one,  I  think,  would  be  willing  to 
decide  which  end  o’  th’  beam  should  bow.  Personally,  seeing  that  I  much  prefer 
wise,  I  incline  to  believe  that  it  is  ‘  wise  ’  in  my  copy. — Ed.] 

139.  Sweet  now]  W.  A.  Wright  :  It  would  seem  more  natural  that  these  words 
should  be  addressed  to  Miranda.  If  they  are  properly  assigned  to  Prospero,  we 
should  have  expected  that  part  of  the  previous  speech  would  have  been  spoken  by 
Miranda.  They  might  form  a  continuation  of  Ferdinand’s  speech,  which  would  then 
be  interrupted  by  Prospero’s  ‘  Silence  !’  Otherwise  the  difficulty  might  be  avoided 
by  giving  ‘  Sweet  ....  to  do  ’  to  Miranda  and  the  rest  of  the  speech  to  Prospero. — 
Ei.ze  (p.  143),  accepting  Wright’s  suggestion  that  these  words  are  to  be  given  to 
Miranda,  believes  that  her  speech  ends  with  ‘  seriously.’ 

144.  windring]  Collier  :  Possibly  winding  is  the  true  word.  If  wandering  be 
not  right,  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  the  letter  r  in  the  misprint. — Lettsom  :  Perhaps 
the  true  reading  is  wiring.  This  word  occurs  in  P.  Fletcher’s  Purple  Island,  C.  iv, 
St.  21 :  ‘  Then  in  small  streams  (through  all  the  Island  wiring)  Sends  it  to  every  part, 
both  heat  and  life  inspiring.’ — MS  Note  in  the  present  editor’s  copy  of  Dyce’s  Remarks. 

146.  crispe]  Steevens  :  That  is,  curling,  winding.  So  in  1  Hen.  IV:  I,  iii, 
106:  ‘hid  his  crisp  head  in  the  hollow  bank.’  ‘Crisp,’  however,  may  allude  to  the 
little  wave  or  curl  (as  it  is  commonly  called)  that  the  gentlest  wind  occasions  on  the 
surface  of  waters. — Dyce  :  This  does  not  mean  ‘  winding  channels,’  but  ‘  channels 

14 


210 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Anfwere  your  fummons,  Iuno  do’s  command. 

Come  temperate  N implies,  and  helpe  to  celebrate 
A  Contract  of  true  Loue :  be  not  too  late. 

Enter  Certaine  Nimphes. 

You  Sun-burn’d  Sicklemen  of  Auguft  weary, 

Come  hether  from  the  furrow,  and  be  merry, 

Make  holly  day :  your  Rye-ftraw  hats  put  on, 

And  thefe  frefh  Nimphes  encounter  euery  one 
In  Country  footing. 

Enter  certaine  Reapers  ( properly  habited :)  they  ioyne  with 
the  Nimphes, in  a gracefull dance ,  towards  the  endwhere- 
of,  Profpero  Jiarts  fodainly  and  fpeakes,  after  which  to  a 
Jlrange  hollow  and  confufed  noyfe,  they  heauily  vanifh. 
Pro.  I  had  forgot  that  foule  confpiracy 
Of  the  beaft  Calliban,  and  his  confederates 
Againft  my  life :  the  minute  of  their  plot 
Is  almoft  come :  Well  done,  auoid :  no  more. 

Fer.  This  is  ftrange :  your  fathers  in  fome  paffion 


147 

150 


155 


160 


164 


147.  your]  our  Huds. 

153.  holly  day]  holy-day  F  . 
156.  Scene  IV.  Pope  +  . 

159.  heauily]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

160.  [Aside.  Johns. 


163.  [To  the  Spirits.  Johns. 

164.  Jlrange]  most  strange  Theob.  ii, 
Plan.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Steev.’93,  Dyce 
ii,  iii. 


with  a  curl  on  the  surface  of  the  water  ’ ;  compare  in  Browne’s  Brit.  Pastorals,  B.  i, 
Song  5,  p.  133,  ed.  1625 ;  ‘  He  long  stands  viewing  of  the  curled  streamed 

146.  greene-Land]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  6) :  Perhaps  it  is  worth  noticing  that  the 
Folio  prints  ‘  greene-land.’  ‘Land’  is  lawn.— W.  A.  Wright:  This  is  the  ‘  short - 
grass’d  green  ’  of  line  92,  and  we  should  rather  have  expected  laund,  which  occurs 
[elsewhere]  as  a  form  of  lawn. 

155.  footing]  Fleay  ( Life  and  Work,  &c.  p.  250,  Foot-note) :  Compare  with  this 
Masque  that  by  Beaumont,  written  for  the  Inner  Temple,  1613  : 


1.  ‘  Thy  bank  with  pioned  and  twilled  brims  ’  (  Tempest ). 

‘  Bordered  with  sedges  and  water  flowers  ’  ( Inner  Temple  Masque ). 

‘  Nayades  with  sedged  crowns  ’  ( Tempest ). 

2.  ‘  Blessing  ....  and  increasing’  ( Tempest ). 

‘  Blessing  and  increase  ’  ( Inner  Temple  Masque ). 

3.  The  main  part  played  by  Iris  in  both. 

4.  The  dance  of  the  Naiads  in  both.  Many  of  the  properties  could  be  utilized  in 
both  performances.  [See  note  on  1.  68.] 

164.  This  is]  Walker  ( Vers.  p.  80)  conjectures  that  the  *  is  ’  is  absorbed  in 
This,’  which  should  be  printed,  This’.  Of  Theobald’s  addition  of  most,  Walker 
says.  The  expression,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is,  in  spite  of  Matilda’s  reply,  too  strong, 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


21 1 


That  workes  him  ftrongly. 

Mir.  Neuer  till  this  day 
Saw  I  him  touch’d  with  anger,  fo  diftemper’d. 

Pro.  You  doe  looke  (my  fon)  in  a  mou’d  fort, 
As  if  you  were  difmaid :  be  cheerefull  Sir, 

Our  Reuels  now  are  ended  :  Thefe  our  attors, 
(As  I  foretold  you)  were  all  Spirits,  and 
Are  melted  into  Ayre,  into  thin  Ayre, 

And  like  the  bafeleffe  fabricke  of  this  vifion 
The  Clowd-capt  Towres,  the  gorgeous  Pallaces, 


165 


170 


174 


167.  anger,  fo]  anger  so  Theob.  ii  et 
*eq. 

168.  You ]  Why,  you  Han.  Sure,  you 
Oyce  ii,  iii.  Hay  you  Nicholson. 

doe]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 

Johns. 


168.  looke. ..fort]  my  son,  look  in  a 
movid  sort  Seymour,  Huds.  look  in  a 
mov’d  sort,  my  son  Ktly. 

mou’d]  most  moved  E.  Hills  (N. 
&  Qu.  4,  xi,  152). 

173.  this  vifion]  their  vifion  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  th'  air-visions  Warb. 


and  disproportionate  to  the  occasion.  The  contracted  “ passion,”  too,  at  the  end  of 
the  line,  is  unlikely.’  [Note  the  extraordinary  misprint  of  *  Matilda,’  which  escaped 
Lettsom’s  eye.— Ed.] — Dyce:  But,  in  my  opinion,  the  addition,  most,  is  quite  justi¬ 
fied  by  Miranda’s  reply;  and  already  in  the  present  play  we  have  had  the  ‘  contracted 
“  passion  ”  at  the  end  of  the  line,’  I,  ii,  456. 

168.  You  doe,  &c.]  Abbott,  §  483 :  Perhaps,  aware  of  Ferdinand’s  comment 
on  his  passion,  Prospero  turns  to  Ferdinand  and  says,  ‘  It  is  you  who  are  moved  ’ 
in  ‘  You  |  do  look  |  my  son  |  in  a  |  mov’d  sort.’  Otherwise  the  reading  of  the  line 
so  as  to  avoid  accenting  ‘my’  seems  difficult. — Cambridge  Editors:  This  line, 
however,  can  scarcely  have  come  from  Shakespeare’s  pen.  Perhaps  the  writer  who 
composed  the  Masque  was  allowed  to  join  it,  as  best  he  might,  to  Shakespeare’s 
words,  which  recommence  at  ‘  Our  revels  now  are  ended,’  &c.  [See  note  on  1.  68.] 

171.  and]  See  I,  ii,  14. 

173-178.  W.  Bispham  (N  &  Qu.  7th  S.  v,  182,  1888)  calls  attention  to  the  trans¬ 
position  and  omission  in  these  six  lines  which  occur  in  the  inscription  on  the  monument 
to  Shakespeare  in  Westminster  Abbey,  whereby  line  177  is  omitted  and  line  173  sub¬ 
stituted  for  it,  a  transposition  which  the  needs  of  the  case  seem  amply  to  justify. _ Ed. 

!74>  &c-  Steevens  :  The  exact  period  at  which  this  play  was  produced  is  un¬ 
known.  In  the  year  1603  The  Tragedy  of  Darius,  by  William  Alexander,  after¬ 
wards  Earl  of  Sterling,  made  its  appearance,  and  there  I  find  the  following  passage : 


‘  Let  greatnesse  of  her  glascie  scepters  vaunt ; 

Not  sceptors,  no,  but  reeds,  soone  brus’d,  soone  broken  .- 
And  let  this  worldlie  pomp  our  wits  inchant, 

All  fades,  and  scarcelie  leaues  behinde  a  token. 

Those  golden  pallaces,  those  gorgeous  halles, 

With  foumiture  superfiuouslie  faire  : 

Those  statelie  courts,  these  sky-encountring  walles 
Evanish  all  like  vapours  in  the  aire.’ — [ap.  Staunton.] 


212 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  L 

The  folemne  Temples,  the  great  Globe  it  felfe,  175 

Yea,  all  which  it  inherit,  fhall  diffolue, 

And  like  this  infubftantiall  Pageant  faded 

Leaue  not  a  racke  behinde  :  we  are  fuch  ftuffe  178 

178.  racke]  rack  F3F4.  track  or  trace  L.  H.  (Nichols’s  III.  ii,  631).  track  Han 
wreck  Hal.  Dyce.  wrack  Sing.  Ktly. 


Lord  Sterling’s  play  must  have  been  written  before  the  death  of  Queen  Elizabeth 
(which  happened  on  the  24th  of  March,  1603),  as  it  is  dedicated  to  James  VI,  King 
of  Scots.  Whoever  should  seek  for  this  passage  (as  here  quoted  from  the  4to,  1603 
[1604,  ap.  Staunton])  in  the  Folio  Edition,  1637,  will  be  disappointed,  as  Lord  Ster¬ 
ling  made  considerable  changes  in  all  his  plays  after  their  first  publication.  [See 
Appendix,  ‘Date  of  Composition.’] — E.  Tew  (A7!  dr3  Qu.  4th  S.  xi,  234,  1873)  calls 
attention  to  the  parallelism  between  these  lines  and  Lucretius,  i  [1 105-1109,  edt 
Lachman.  It  is  interesting  to  note  the  occurrence  of  the  same,  or  a  similar,  thought 
to  great  poets ;  but  to  imagine  that  Shakespeare  took  this  imagery  from  Lucretius  is 
about  as  reasonable  as  to  suppose  that  Lucretius  took  it  from  Shakespeare.  More 
than  a  parallelism,  Tew  does  not  claim. — Ed.] 

1 75-178.  These  lines  Allen  (. Phila .  Sh.  Soc .)  would  thus  punctuate:  ‘the  great 
globe  itself — Yea,  all  which  it  inherit — shall  dissolve,  And,  like  this  insubstantial  vis¬ 
ion,  faded,  Leave  not  a  rack  behind  ’ ;  that  is,  ‘  understanding  “  faded  ”  to  agree  with 
“  globe,”  and  to  be  equal  to  “  fading  ”  or  “  having  faded.”  ’ 

176.  inherit]  That  is,  to  possess;  e.  g.  ‘Such  delight  ....  shall  you  this  night 
inherit  at  my  house.’ — Rom.  and  Jul.  and  ‘  But  to  the  girdle  do  the  gods  inherit.’ — 
Lear ,  &c. ;  but  may  it  not  be  that  ‘  it,’  in  this  sentence,  is  the  nominative,  and  ‘  which  ’ 
the  accusative  ?  The  s  needed  to  convert  ‘  inherit  ’  into  inherits  is  present  in  the  s 
of  the  succeeding  ‘shall.’  Is  there  not  a  stricter  propriety  in  saying  ‘the  great  globe 
itself,  yea,  everything  which  it  possesses,’  rather  than  ‘  everything  which  possesses  it  ’  ? 
—Ed. 

177.  pageant]  Malone:  See  Stowe’s  account  of  the  pageants  exhibited  in  1604 
(not  many  years  before  this  play  was  written),  on  King  James’s  passing  triumphantly 
from  The  Tower  to  Westminster:  on  which  occasion  seven  gates  or  arches  were 
erected  in  different  places  through  which  the  procession  passed.  Over  the  first  gate 
‘  was  represented  the  true  likeness  of  all  the  notable  houses,  Towers ,  and  steeples 
within  the  citie  of  London.’ — ‘  The  sixt  arche  or  gate  of  triumph  was  erected  above 
the  Conduit  in  Fleete-streete,  whereon  the  Globe  of  the  world  was  seen  to  move,  &c. 
At  Temple-bar  a  seaventh  arche  or  gait  was  erected,  the  fore-front  whereof  was  pro¬ 
portioned  in  every  respect  like  a  Temple,  being  dedicated  to  Janus,  &c.  The  citie  of 
Westminster  and  dutchy  of  Lancaster,  at  the  Strand,  had  erected  the  invention  of  a 
Rainbow,  the  moone,  sunne,  starres,  advanced  between  two  Pyramides,’  &c. — Annals, 
p.  1429,  ed.  1605.  See  also  his  Survey  of  London,  p.  802,  ed.  1618:  ‘ — some  of 
them,  like  Midsummer  pageants,  with  towers,  turrets ,’  &c.  Perhaps  our  poet  remem¬ 
bered  Spenser’s  Ruines  of  Time,  1591  [lines  92-99]. 

178.  racke]  The  chief  contest  over  this  word  did  not  begin  until  the  days  of 
Malone ;  before  then  it  was  a  mere  discussion  of  the  various  meanings  of  the  word 
‘  rack  ’  as  applied  to  clouds.  Malone  suggested  wrack,  i.  e.  wreck,  and  thereaftet 
the  discussion  was  divided. — Hanmer  defines  ‘  rack  ’  as  the  ‘  course  or  driving  of  tha 
clouds,’  but  nevertheless  changed  it  in  this  place  to  track.  This  may  have  led  Upton 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


213 


[178.  Leaue  not  a  racke  behinde] 

(Crii.  Obs.  p.  210)  to  define  it  as  track  or  path,  as  it  is  used,  he  says,  <  in  the  northern 
parts’  (in  which  assertion  he  was  subsequently  upheld  by  Brockett,  Gloss.). — War- 
BURTON  explains  ‘  rack  ’  as  ‘  the  vestige  of  an  embodied  cloud  [whatever  that  may 
mean],  which  hath  been  broken  and  dissipated  by  the  winds.’ — Capell  calls  it  ‘the 
thin  remains  of  a  cloud,  broken  by  the  wind,  and  flying  before  it;  also,  the  wind’s 
action  on  such  a  cloud.’— Steevens  :  ‘  The  winds  ’  (says  Bacon  \_Sylva  Sylvarum, 
cent,  ii,  §  115. — Wright])  ‘in  the  upper  region  (which  move  the  clouds  above,  which 
we  call  the  rack,  and  are  not  perceived  below)  pass  without  noise.’  I  should  explain 
the  word  *  rack  ’  somewhat  differently,  by  calling  it  ‘  the  last  fleeting  vestige  of  the 
highest  clouds,  scarce  perceptible  on  account  of  their  distance  and  tenuity.’  What 
•was  anciently  called  the  ‘  rack  ’  is  now  termed  by  sailors  the  scud.  The  word  is  com¬ 
mon  to  many  authors  contemporary  with  Shakespeare.  [Hereupon  many  examples 
follow,  and  many  more  might  have  been  added  not  only  from  Shakespeare’s  contempo¬ 
raries,  but  from  his  predecessors  and  his  followers.] — Malone  [whose  note  is  so  import¬ 
ant  that  it  is  given  entire]  :  Rack  is  generally  used  for  a  body  of  clouds  or  rather  for 
the  course  of  clouds  in  motion.  So  in  Ant.  <5^  Cleop.  IV,  xiv,  10 :  ‘  That  which  is 
now  a  horse,  even  with  a  thought.  The  rack  dislimns.’  But  no  instance  has  yet  been 
produced  where  it  is  used  to  signify  a  single  small  fleeting  cloud,  in  which  sense  only 
can  it  be  figuratively  applied  here.  I  incline  to  think  that  ‘  rack  ’  is  a  misspelling  for 
wrack,  i.  e.  wreck,  which  Fletcher  likewise  has  used  for  a  minute  broken  fragment. 
See  his  Wife  for  a  Month,  where  we  find  the  word  misspelt  as  it  is  in  The  Tempest: 
‘  He  will  bulge  so  subtilly  and  suddenly,  You  may  snatch  him  up  by  parcels,  like  a 
tea-rack  [V,  ii,  ad  fin.,  where  Dyce  silently  prints  ‘sea- wreck.’  This  conjecture  of 
wreck  for  ‘  rack,’  by  the  way,  appeared  first  in  1793].  It  has  been  urged  ‘  that  objects 
which  have  only  a  visionary  and  insubstantial  existence  can,  when  the  vision  is  faded, 
leave  nothing  real,  and  consequently  no  wreck  behind  them.’  But  the  objection  is 
founded  on  misapprehension.  The  words  ‘  — leave  not  a  rack  (or  wreck)  behind  ’ 
relate  not  to  ‘  the  baseless  fabric  of  this  vision,’  but  to  the  final  destruction  of  the 
world,  of  which  the  towers,  temples,  palaces  shall  ( like  a  vision  or  pageant)  be  dis¬ 
solved,  and  leave  no  vestige  behind. — Whiter  (whose  volume  has  never,  I  thinly 
received  its  full  meed  of  attention)  chronologically  followed  Malone,  and  by  sug¬ 
gesting  the  train  of  thought  which  prompted  the  use  of  the  word  ‘rack,’  vindi¬ 
cated  the  original  text.  ‘Our  commentators,’  says  Whiter,  p.  195,  ‘have  justly 
observed  that  the  famous  passage  in  The  Tempest  may  receive  some  illustration  from 
the  Pageant;  and  we  may  add  that  as  the  reflections  (which  it  contains)  were  made 
at  the  close  of  an  exhibition  of  this  nature,  it  is  but  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the 
imagery  would  be  strongly  impregnated  with  the  same  ideas  by  which  these  reflections 

were  originally  suggested . Our  commentators  have  not  been  aware  that  [the 

phrase  “the  rack  dislimns”  in  Ant.  &>  Cleop.)  refers  to  the  Pageant;  and,  therefore, 
they  have  not  seen,  first,  that  the  word  “  rack  ”  is  the  true  reading  in  The  Tempest; 
and,  secondly,  that  it  appears  to  have  a  peculiar  reference  to  the  subject  of  the 
Pageant.  To  remove,  however,  all  our  doubts  on  this  occasion,  let  us  mark  the  fol¬ 
lowing  quotation  from  Jonson,  Hymencei  [p.  59,  ed.  Gifford]  :  “  Here  the  upper  part 
of  the  scene,  which  was  all  of  clouds,  and  made  artificially  to  swell,  and  ride  like  the 
RACK,  began  to  open  ;  and  the  air  clearing,  in  the  top  thereof  was  discovered  Juno  sit¬ 
ting  on  a  throne,  supported  by  two  beautiful  peacocks . Above  her  the  region  of 

fire,  with  a  continual  motion,  was  seen  to  whirl  circuiarly,  and  Jupiter  standing  in  the 
top  (figuring  the  heaven)  brandishing  his  thunder;  beneath  her  the  rainbow,  Iris 


214 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


[178.  Leaue  not  a  racke  behinde] 

and  on  the  two  sides  eight  ladies,  attired  richly  and  alike  in  the  most  celestial  col¬ 
ours,  who  represented  her  powers,  as  she  is  the  Governess  of  Marriage.”  ....  The 
word  in  question  is  here  introduced  on  the  very  subject,  and  with  the  same  personages 
annexed  to  it,  which  constitute  the  insubstantial  pageant  exhibited  by  Prospero.  We 
have  in  both  cases  a  Hymeneal  masque,  with  Juno  and  Iris  among  the  characters. 
Having  thus  established  the  truth  of  the  reading  beyond  all  possibility  of  doubt,  we 
have  now  to  enquire  how  the  obvious  spirit  of  the  passage  can  be  reconciled  with  the 
text;  as  every  one  agrees  that  “leave  not  a  rack  behind”  must  signify  that  not  a  vestige, 
not  the  smallest  part  of  the  whole,  shall  be  left  behind ;  but  the  difficulty  consists  in 
discovering  how  the  word  “  rack  ”  is  introduced  on  this  occasion  bearing  such  a  sense. 
Let  the  reader,  therefore,  be  informed  that  the  poet,  occupied  as  his  mind  now  is  with 
a  peculiar  train  of  ideas  and  imagery,  does  not  affix  to  the  word  “  rack  ”  its  general 
and  abstracted  sense,  but  applies  it  to  a  body  of  “  clouds  in  motion  ”  when  considered 
as  a  constituent  part  in  the  machinery  of  a  Pageant.  In  exhibiting,  therefore,  the 
ruins  of  a  fabric  in  which  the  solidity  of  the  globe  itself,  and  such  mighty  edifices  as 
towers,  temples,  and  palaces,  were  dissolved,  what  could  possibly  appear  more  incon¬ 
siderable  and  evanescent  than  that  part  of  the  spectacle  which  represented  the  light 
and  flimsy  texture  of  the  passing  clouds  ?  Mark  then,  says  Prospero,  the  little  pageant 
that  has  just  passed  before  your  eyes,  and  is  now  vanished  into  air.  It  is  thus  that 
the  great  Pageant  of  the  world  shall  itself  finally  be  no  more ;  not  even  the  minutest 
portion  of  this  vast  machinery  shall  escape  the  general  destruction, — not  a  rack,— 
not  an  atom  shall  remain.’ — After  Whiter  comes  Horne  Tooke,  very  dogmatic,  and, 
therefore,  only  partly  right:  ‘  Rack  ’  (Div.  of  Turley,  p.  599,  ed.  1857)  means  merely 
That  which  is  Reeked.  And  whether  written  rak,  wraich,  reck,  roik,  or  reeke,  is  the 
same  word  differently  pronounced  and  spelled.  It  is  merely  the  past  tense,  and 
therefore  part  participle,  of  the  Anglosaxon  verb  Recan,  exhalare,  To  Reek;  and  is 
surely  the  most  appropriate  term  that  could  be  employed  by  Shakespeare  in  this  pas¬ 
sage  of  The  Tempest;  to  represent  to  us  that  the  dissolution  and  annihilation  of  the 
globe  and  all  which  it  inherit  should  be  so  total  and  complete ;  they  should  so  melt 
‘  into  ayre,  into  thin  ayre ,’  as  not  to  leave  behind  them  even  a  Vapour,  a  Steam,  or  an 
Exhalation,  to  give  the  slightest  notice  that  such  things  had  ever  been. — 1  Rack,’  says 
Knight,  ‘  is  the  smallest  feathery  cloud, — the  cirrus  of  modem  science.’ — Collier, 
in  his  first  edition,  follows  Home  Tooke.  ‘ «  Rack,”  ’  he  remarks,  ‘  is  vapour,  from 
reek,'  and  adds,  ‘  The  word  “  rack  ”  was  often  used  in  this  way,’ — an  unguarded 
remark,  for  which  he  was  brought  severely  to  task  by  Dyce,  who,  in  a  note  on  ‘  a  rack 
(i.  e.  wreck)  of  honour,’  in  The  Woman' s  Prize  (Beau.  &  FI.  vol.  vii,  p.  137),  quotes 
the  last  five  words  of  it  in  small  capitals,  and  sternly  comments :  ‘  Now,  the  truth  is, 
it  was  never  so  used  ’ ;  and  then  goes  on  to  say,  ‘  Though  “  the  rack  ”  (i.  e.  the  thin 
vapoury  clouds;  see  vol.  ii,  120,  vol.  v,  10,  and  present  vol.  p.  66)  is  an  expression 
very  frequently  employed  by  our  early  writers,  no  passage  can  be  adduced  in  which 
“a  rack"  (a  single  vapoury  cloud)  is  mentioned.  Brockett  (  Gloss,  of  North  Country 
Words)  gives  “  Rack,  a  track,  a  trace,”  and  insists  that  this  is  the  meaning  of  the 
word  as  used  in  The  Tempest.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  he  is  right ;  if  not,  “  a 
rack  must  be,  as  in  the  passage  of  our  text  [i.  e.  The  Woman’s  Prize]  a  misprint 
for  “a  wrack,"  i.  e.  a  wreck.'  This  was  in  1844;  nine  years  later  Dyce  again  took 
up  the  subject  in  his  Few  Notes,  &c.  He  begins  (p.  13)  with  the  emphatic  statement : 

I  believe  Malone’s  objection  to  the  reading,  “ a  rack,”  is  unanswerable,’  and  then 
offer  quoting  Malone’s  objection  in  full,  and  ending  with  Malone’s  suggestion  that 


ACT  IV,  sc.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


215 


[178.  Leaue  not  a  racke  behinde] 

*  rack  ’  is  a  misspelling  for  wrack ,  i.  e.  wreck,  Dyce  concludes  :  ‘  I  am  now  thoroughly 
convinced  that  such  is  the  case.  In  authors  of  the  age  of  Elizabeth  and  James,  I 
have  repeatedly  met  with  ‘  rack  ’  put  for  wrack  ;  and  in  all  the  early  editions  of  Mil¬ 
ton’s  Par.  Lost  which  I  possess, — viz:  the  first,  1667;  the  second,  1674;  the  third, 
1678;  the  fourth,  1688;  and  the  eighth,  1707, — I  find:  “ — or  all  the  elements  At 
least  had  gone  to  rack"  [i.  e.  wrack  =* wreck],  B.  iv,  990.  “A  world  devote  to 
universal  rack  ”  [i.  e.  wrack  =  wreck].’ — Hunter  [New  III.  i,  185)  urges  Malone’s 
objection  to  ‘  rack,’  which  ‘  like  the  kindred  word  welkin  is  never  used  but  with  the 
definite  article,  “  the  rack,”  “  the  welkin,”  while  in  Shakespeare  it  is  “  a  rack.”  At 
least  this  reading  should  be  justified  by  the  production  of  some  other  passage  in 
which  we  found  a  poet  or  a  prose  writer  speaking  of  a  rack,  since  something  may  be 
said  in  favour  of  wreck  or  wrack,  as  Shakespeare  wrote.  Not  only  will  the  forms 
into  which  the  materials  were  arranged  disappear, — “the  cloud-capt  Towers,”  &c. — 
but  their  very  wracks,  wrecks,  ruins,  will  vanish  from  human  sight,  as  the  pageant  has 
utterly  faded  away.’ — A  discussion  arose  in  Notes  6°  Queries  in  1851  (vol.  iii,  p.  218; 
iv,  pp.  121,  158,  193;  v,  p.  390;  2d  S.  vol.  i,  p.  425;  lb.  vol.  ii,  p.  44)  which  turned 
largely  on  the  derivation  of  the  word,  and  in  which  those  who  preferred  wreck  were 
in  the  minority.  In  1881  (6th  S.  iv,  p.  444)  Br.  Nicholson  vouches  that  ‘  the  rack  ’ 
is  now  the  nautical  term  used,  and  quotes  Admiral  Smyth’s  definition  of  it :  ‘  The 
superior  stratum  of  clouds,  or  that  moving  rapidly  above  [and  it  may  be  in  a  contrary 
direction  to — B.  N.]  the  scud.’  Nicholson  hereupon  adds  what  is  the  best  answer 
yet  given  to  Malone’s  argument,  pronounced  by  Dyce  to  be  ‘  unanswerable,’  as  fol¬ 
lows  :  ‘  The  rack  generally  is  not  merely  a  stratum  of  continuous  cloud,  but  more  or 
less  a  congeries  of  clouds  more  or  less  separated  the  one  from  the  other ;  and  in  R. 
Armin’s  Italian  Taylor  and  his  boy,  1608,  we  find:  “  Lookt  like  the  angry  cloudes 
in  blackes,  Which  threaten  shewers  of  raine;  Yet  ride  upon  the  moving  raclces,  As  it 
would  to  the  maine.” — Grosart’s  Rep.  p.  185.  The  grammar  and  exact  sense  are 
here,  as  not  infrequently  in  Arinin,  rather  confused,  but  though  “  it  ”  may  refer  either 
to  the  “cloudes”  or  to  the  “  rackes,”  it  is  clear  from  “blackes”  that  the  plural 
“  rackes  ”  is  no  misprint.  Hence,  there  being  a  plural,  “  a  rack  ”  as  a  single  insub¬ 
stantial  cloudlet  may  have  been  permissible.’ — Halliwell  accepted  Malone’s  criti¬ 
cism  as  sound,  and  followed  it  by  adopting  wreck  in  his  text.  ‘  The  choice,’  ht  says, 
‘  is  clearly  between  wreck  and  rack,  regarding  the  latter  in  the  sense  of  a  vapoury, 
moving  cloud.  Wrack  is  the  most  usual  old  Drthography  of  wreck,  so  that  it  is  deal 
the  spelling,  of  this  word  so  much  varied  that  an  editor  may  be  left  to  his  own  judge¬ 
ment  in  selecting  the  particular  use  of  it  in  the  present  instance.’  In  reply  to  the 
objection  that  no  passage  can  be  adduced  in  which  ‘a  rack’  is  used,  Halliwell  cites 
a  passage  in  one  of  Lydgate’s  poems  (MS,  Ashmole,  39,  f.  5  r)»  which  would  lead 
to  the  inference  that  it  may  have  been  so  employed :  ‘As  Phebus  doeth  at  mydday  in 
the  southe,  Whan  every  rak  and  every  cloudy  sky  Is  voide  clene,’  &c. — Dyce’s  note, 
ad  toe.,  repeats  what  has  been  given  above  from  his  Few  Notes,  and  adds :  *  Since  the 
publication  of  the  volume  just  quoted,  Dr  Richardson  has  favoured  me  with  a  lettei 
containing  an  elaborate  defence  of  “  Leave  not  a  rack  behind  ” ;  but  his  arguments 
have  only  strengthened  my  conviction  that  it  is  wrong.  A  portion  of  his  pleading  in 
favour  of  “  rack  ”  runs  thus :  *  Prospero  the  magician  has  presented  a  vision  of  base¬ 
less  fabric,  and  the  actors  and  agencies  of  it  are  melted  into  thin  air ;  and  he  pro¬ 
nounces — that,  like  this  baseless  fabric,  the  fabric  of  the  great  globe  itself  shall  dis¬ 
solve,  that  is,  melt ;  and,  like  this  faded  or  evanished  unsubstantial  pageant,  shall  by 


216 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


[178.  Leaue  not  a  racke  behinde] 

this  dissolution  (not  destruction  or  disruption)  leave  not  (the  only  possible  relict  of 
such  visionary  unsubstantial  pageant)  a  rack  behind.  All  likeness  would  be  lost  ty 
the  substitution  of  wreck, — a  mass  of  solid  ruins.”  Now,  I  cannot  but  think  that  in 
the  above  minute  analysis  of  the  simile  Dr  Richardson  shows  himself  over-subtle. 
Shakespeare,  I  believe,  meant  nothing  more  than  this :  “As  the  unsubstantial  pageant 
had  wholly  vanished,  so  the  great  substantial  globe  itself  should  pass  away  without 
leaving  a  single  fragment  behind.”  ’  And  to  this  view  Dyce  was  faithful  throughout 
his  three  editions. — Collier,  in  his  second  edition,  defends,  and,  as  I  think,  justly, 
not  his  unguarded  remark,  but  his  text.  In  reply  to  Dyce’s  observation  that  ‘  a  rack  ’ 
is  unprecedented  he  urges  that  ‘  there  are  many  unprecedented  expressions  in  Shake¬ 
speare,  which  he  introduced  for  poetical  force  and  variety,  and  we  are  not  to  abandon 
the  beautiful  and  appropriate  image  afforded  by  “  rack,”  i.  e.  thin  vapour,  for  the 
commonplace  and  trite  word  wrack  or  wreck,  merely  because  in  other  writers  what 
Shakespeare  terms  “  a  rack  ”  only  occurs  as  “  the  rack.”  Those  who,  like  Mr  Dyce, 
prefer  “Leave  not  a  wrack  behind,”  have  the  choice  before  them;  we  prefer  “rack,” 
and  we  challenge  the  production  of  an  instance  from  the  whole  of  the  Folio,  1623,  in 
which  “  wrack,”  i.  e.  wreck,  is  printed,  as  in  the  place  in  question,  “  racke.”  What 
Prospero  means  is  that  the  pageant  had  so  entirely  faded  as  not  even  to  leave  the 
slightest  trace  behind  it.’ — Cartwright  :  By  submitting  to  the  hard,  dry  fact  that 
neither  ‘  rack  ’  nor  ‘  wreck  ’  can  be  used  without  vitiating  the  language,  we  are  re¬ 
warded  with  the  happy  discovery  of  the  true  reading  in  the  homely  and  expressive 
word  scrap, — ‘  Leave  not  a  scrap  behind.’ — A.  I.  Fish  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p.  59),  in 
answer  to  Malone’s  objection  that  ‘  rack,’  in  the  sense  of  a  single  small  fleeting  cloud, 
can  be  only  figuratively  applied  here,  asks  pertinently  why  it  should  not  be  so  applied 
here  ?  ‘  Suppose,  too,  this  very  interpretation  is  found  in  the  original,  which  is  thought 
by  Malone  to  have  suggested  this  passage.  Let  the  reader  turn  to  Lord  Sterling’s 
Darius  :  “  These  stately  courts,  these  sky-encountering  walls,  Evanish  like  the  vapours 
of  the  air.”  ’ — Halliwell  (p.  53)  :  Perhaps  the  following  quotation  is  the  most 
favourable  one  yet  pointed  out  as  regards  the  reading  *  rack  ’ :  ‘  Oure  life  shal  passe 
away  as  the  trace  of  a  cloude,  and  com  to  naught  as  the  mist  that  is  driven  awaye 
with  the  beames  of  the  sunne,  and  put  down  with  the  heat  thereof.’ — The  Poke  of 
Wysedome,  Cranmer’s  Bible,  ed.  1562. — W.  A.  Wright  prefers  ‘  rack,’  i .  e  ‘  the  mass 
of  clouds,’  and  notes  that  ‘  wreck  ’  is  ‘  the  reading  on  the  monument  to  Shakespeare  in 
Westminster  Abbey,  which  was  erected  in  1740.’  [Of  the  same  mind  are  Rev.  John 
Hunter,  the  Cowden-Clarkes,  Jephson,  Phillpotts,  D.  Morris,  Meiklejohn, 
Hudson,  Rolfe,  Deighton.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  a  discussion  like  the  foregoing 
was  inevitable  in  pre-philological  days.  Home  Tooke  is  largely  responsible  for  it  by 
confounding  two  distinct  words,  derived  from  different  roots,  and,  in  the  vague  orthog¬ 
raphy  of  old  times,  frequently  spelt  alike,  viz :  rack  and  reck.  The  former,  rack,  is, 
according  to  Skeat  (s.  v.),  the  same  word  with  wrack,  and  allied  to  wreck.  It 
means,  according  to  Wedgwood,  ‘  the  drift  of  the  sky,  from  the  Old  Swedish  wrceka. 
Old  Norse,  reka,  to  drive ;  rek,  drift,  motion.’  The  latter,  reck,  is  to  smoke,  to  steam, 
from  the  Teutonic  base,  according  to  Skeat,  Reck,  to  smoke,  reek,  and  familiar  in 
modem  German  as  rauch.  Essentially  different  as  these  two  words  are,  it  is  readily 
seen  with  what  ease  they  may  be  confounded  when  applied  to  clouds,  which  may  be 
driven  across  the  sky,  or  rest  there  as  an  exhalation.  From  the  Anglosaxon  wrecan, 
to  drive,  to  im^el,  comes  Chau  :er’s  wrak  and  our  wreck.  So  that  Dyce  has  a  right 
to  sa)  in  the  present  passage  that  ‘lack’  is  wreck,  and  the  discussion  is  thereby 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


217 


As  dreames  are  made  on ;  and  our  little  life 

Is  rounded  with  a  fleepe :  Sir,  I  am  vext,  180 

179.  on]  of  Steev.’93,  Var.  Sing.  Ktly,  C.-Clke. 

narrowed  to  mere  personal  preference.  The  only  interpretation  that  appeals  to 
Dyce  is  that  not  a  fragment,  not  a  material  atom,  is  left  behind;  the  only  interpreta¬ 
tion  acceptable  to  others  is  that  not  a  vaporous  film  even  is  left  behind.  That  the 
latter  is  the  better,  to  me,  personally,  res  ipsa  vociferatur.  Therefore  it  is  that  I  have 
reserved  to  the  last  Staunton’s  excellent  note;  with  me  it  is  decisive,  not  alone 
because  it  adheres  to  ‘  rack,’  but  because  it  shows  why  that  word  of  all  others  was 
here  used,  a  reason  which  was  unquestionably  derived  from  Whiter,  to  whom,  in  fact, 
Staunton  refers  the  reader.  The  note  is  as  follows :  ‘  While  it  is  evident  that  by 
“  rack  was  understood  the  drifting  vapour,  or  scud,  as  it  is  now  termed,  it  would 
appear  that  Shakespeare,  in  the  present  instance,  as  in  another  occurring  in  Ant.  &• 
Cleop.  [as  given  above],  was  thinking  not  more  of  the  actual  clouds  than  of  those 
gauzy  semblances,  which,  in  the  pageants  of  his  day,  as  in  the  stage-spectacles  of  ours, 
were  often  used  partly  or  totally  to  obscure  the  scene  behind.  Ben  Jonson,  in  the 
descriptions  of  his  masques,  very  frequently  mentions  this  scenic  contrivance.  Thus 
in  his  Entertainment  at  Theobalds :  “  The  King  and  Queen,  with  the  princes  of 
Wales  and  Lorrain,  and  the  nobility,  being  entered  into  the  gallery  after  dinner,  there 
was  seen  nothing  but  a  traverse  of  white  across  the  room ;  which  suddenly  drawn, 
was  discovered  a  gloomy  obscure  place,  hung  all  with  black  silks,"  &c.  Again,  in 
his  Masque  of  Hymen  :  “At  this,  the  whole  scene  being  drawn  again,  and  all  cov¬ 
ered  with  clouds,  as  at  night,  they  left  off  their  intermixed  dances,  and  returned  to 
their  first  places.”  The  evanishing  of  the  actors,  then,  in  Prospero’s  pageant, — who 
“melted  into  air,  into  thin  air,” — was  doubtless  effected  by  the  agency  of  filmy  cur¬ 
tains,  which,  being  drawn  one  over  another  to  resemble  the  flying  mists,  gave  to  the 
scene  an  appearance  of  gradual  dissolution ;  when  the  objects  were  totally  hidden, 
the  drapery  was  withdrawn  in  the  same  manner,  veil  by  veil,  till  at  length  even  that 
too  had  disappeared,  and  there  was  left,  then,  not  even  a  rack  behind.’ — Ed.] 

J79-  dreams]  Voss  ( Anmerk .  p.  185)  cites  parallel  passages  from  Pindar,  Pyth. 
viii,  95  :  6vaP  Mpunoq;  ^Eschylus,  Prom.  550;  Sophocles,  Aias.  126.  And 

Hense  (Antikes,  p.  473)  adds  others  from  Aristophanes,  Aves,  686;  Euripides,  Aeol. 
fr.  25  (Nauck,  fragm.  tragicorum  grcecorum,  p.  295). 

179.  on]  This  is  universally  interpreted  as  meaning  of,  and  I  suppose  that  is  its 
meaning  here,  as  in  so  many  other  places.  Still,  something  could  be  said  in  favour 
of  retaining  its  ordinary  meaning  of  upon. — Ed. 

180.  rounded]  Knight  :  We  have  been  asked  the  meaning  of  this  passage,  it 
being  supposed  that  ‘  rounded  ’  was  used  in  the  sense  of  terminated ;  and  that  one 
sleep  was  the  end  of  life.  This  was  not  Shakespeare’s  philosophy ;  nor  would  he 
have  introduced  an  idea  totally  disconnected  with  the  previous  description.  ‘  Rounded  ’ 
is  used  in  the  sense  of  encompassed.  The  ‘  insubstantial  pageant  ’  had  been  presented ; 
its  actors  had  *  melted  into  thin  air ;’  it  was  an  unreality.  In  the  same  way  life  itself 
is  but  a  dream.  It  is  surrounded  with  the  sleep  which  is  the  parent  of  dreams.  Here 
we  have  the  shadowing  out  of  the  doctrine  of  Berkeley ;  and  we  have  no  doubt  that 
Shakespeare,  to  whom  all  philosophical  speculation  was  familiar,  may  have  entertained 
the  theory  that  our  senses  are  impressed  by  the  Creator  with  the  images  of  things 
which  form  our  material  world, — a  world  cf  ideas, — of  dream-like  unreal! ies.— 


218 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  IV,  SC.  1. 


Beare  with  my  weakeneffe,  my  old  braine  is  troubled  :  1 8 1 


Dyce:  Knight’s  exposition  is,  I  suspect,  more  ingenious  than  true. — Birch,  whose 
book,  a  really  fine  tribute  to  the  myriad-mindedness  of  Shakespere,  was  written,  be  it 
remembered,  to  prove  that  Shakespeare  was  a  materialist  and  atheist,  thus  epitomises 
(p.  55)  this  speech  as  ‘  a  signal  and  brilliant  consummation  of  the  poet’s  materialistic 
teachings.  In  language  most  laboured,  unequivocal,  and  emphatic  we  are  told  that 
the  great  globe  and  all  humanity  shall  dissolve  and  leave  no  wreck  of  identity  behind. 
To  present  ambiguity  in  the  supposition  that  only  matter  is  the  pageant  that  shall 
fade,  i:  is  reiterated  that  “  we  are  such  stuff  as  dreams  ”  are  made  of, — that  when 
“  our  revels  are  ended,  our  little  life  is  rounded  by  a  sleep enforcing  the  same  mate¬ 
rial  ideas  peculiar  to  Seneca  and  Cicero, — to  ancient  and  modern  atheists.’  Again 
(p.  527)  he  says  of  this  same  speech:  ‘  Nothing  can  be  more  conclusive  of  the  end 
of  all  things,  great  and  small.  Perpetual  change  of  matter  is  proclaimed, — perpetual 
loss  of  identity,  which  is  the  case  with  ourselves ;  as  those  spirits  vanished,  so  shall 
we  disappear.  As  these  illusions,  so  are  our  dreams,  and  as  these  dreams  are 
rounded  by  a  sleep,  so  are  our  lives.  We  slept  and  knew  not  before  we  came  into 
the  world;  so  we  shall  when  we  leave  it,  of  such  stuff  as  to  eternity  and  identity  are 
we  made.  As  is  a  dream  in  a  sleep,  so  is  life  in  eternity.  Of  such  “stuff,”  not  a 

very  ennobling  term,  are  we  made . Knight,  by  mentioning  Berkeley  about 

dreams,  wishes  to  have  it  supposed  that  Shakespeare  had  the  same  philosophy  as  the 
no-matter  Bishop.  His  intention  was  avowed, — it  was  to  support  religion  and  points 
of  faith ;  but  we  have  no  such  spiritualism  in  Shakespeare, — all  indicates  materialism. 
....  To  us,  it  appears,  “  life  rounded  by  a  sleep  ”  expresses  exactly  what  Cicero  said, 
and  the  poets  of  antiquity,  that  you  returned  in  death  to  what  you  were  before  you 
were  bom ;  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  existence  comprised  in  a  circle  of  per¬ 
petual  night.  “A  mind  firm  and  enlightened  is  without  inquietude ;  it  despises  death, 
which  places  man  back  in  the  same  state  where  he  was  before  he  was  born.” — Cicero 

de finibus . “  Our  revels  ended  ”  expresses  the  pleasures  of  life  ended  as  well  as 

the  pangs.  Life  rounded  with  a  sleep  seems  well  expressed  by  Seneca  in  consola¬ 
tions  to  a  friend,  though,  for  the  same  purpose  as  Shakespeare  has  in  speaking  of 
death,  he  makes  the  consolation  to  consist,  as  Shakespeare  does  generally,  in  its  being 
the  termination  of  our  pains.  “  Death  finishes  all  our  pains ;  beyond,  there  remains 
nothing  to  suffer;  it  restores  us  to  that  profound  tranquillity  in  which  we  were  softly 
extended  before  that  we  saw  the  day.”  ’ — W.  A.  Wright  defines  ‘  rounded  ’  as  ‘  fin¬ 
ished  off,  as  with  a  crown ;’  and  refers  to  Mid.  N.  D.  IV,  i,  56 :  ‘  For  she  his  hairy  tem¬ 
ples  then  had  rounded  With  coronet  of  fresh  and  fragrant  flowers ;’  where,  however, 
'rounded’  being  directly  connected  with  a  crown,  is  not  precisely  similar  to  the 
present  ‘  rounded,’  which  is  by  all  other  editors,  I  think,  defined  simply  as  ‘  completed, 
finished.’  Birch’s  interpretation,  with  his  accusation  of  materialism  and  atheism,  arises 
from  the  pernicious  practice  of  imputing  to  Shakespeare  personally  the  sentiments 
expressed  by  his  dramatic  characters.  The  comparison  of  death  to  sleep  must  have 
been  coeval  with  conscious  life  and  with  the  first  sight  of  death ;  that  we  are  dreams 
is  an  argument  for  our  immortality.  ‘  Our  birth  is  but  a  sleep  and  a  forgetting,’  says 
The  Immortal  Ode.  •  To  die  ?  to  sleep ; — no  more.’  The  wheel  comes  full  circle, 
and  our  little  life  is  rounded  with  a  sleep. — Ed. 

18  Warburton  finds  in  the  sense  of  ingratitude  a  sufficing  cause  for  Prospero's 
great  emotion  of  anger,  which  seems  strange  when  it  is  considered  that  the  cause  of 
it  was  ‘  the  plot  of  a  contemptible  savage  and  two  drunken  sailors.’  But  Caliban’s 


act  IV,  sc.  i.]  the  TEMPEST 

Be  not  difturb’d  with  my  infirmitie, 

If  you  be  pleas’d,  retire  into  my  Cell, 

And  there  repofe,  a  turne  or  two,  lie  walke 
To  ftill  my  beating  minde. 

Fer.  Mir.  We  with  your  peace.  Exit. 

Pro.  Come  with  a  thought ;  I  thank  thee  Ariell:  come. 


219 

182 


185 

187 


183.  you]  thou  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 

185.  minde ]  heart  Gould. 

186.  your ]  you  F  ,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Hal.  Walker. 


186.  Exit.]  Exe.  Fer.  and  Mir.  Theob. 

187.  thee]  you  : —  Theob. Warb.  Johns. 
Steev.’93,  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  ye  Cap.  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 


ingratitude  recalled  his  brother’s,  and  ‘  that  these  two,  who  had  received  at  his  hands 
the  two  best  gifts  mortals  are  capable  of,  Regal  power  and  the  Use  of  Reason,  that 
these  should  conspire  against  the  life  of  the  donor,  would  surely  afflict  a  generous 
mind  to  its  utmost  bearing.’ — To  the  same  effect  Phillpotts,  but  with  far  more 
insight  and  vigour :  <  Why  was  Prospero  so  moved  with  anger  at  such  a  time  ?  Not 
certainly  from  the  absurd  plot  of  Caliban  and  his  confederates,  which  he  can  frustrate 
in  a  moment;  but  from  a  sense  of  all  injuries,  past  and  present,  surging  on  his  mind 
at  once.  Therefore  he  seems  to  think,  “  Life  is  but  a  dream,  the  time  of  a  sleep, 
unsubstantial,  fleeting.  It  can  at  best  have  little  in  it  that  is  sound  or  contenting;  yet 
this  little  is  usurped  upon  by  men’s  wickedness.  What  these  contemptible  enemies 
are  now  vainly  planning  was  accomplished  years  ago  by  still  baser  opponents,  who 
have  succeeded  for  years  past  in  maiming  and  mutilating  my  life,  making  me  the 
inhabitant  of  a  desert  isle,  with  Caliban  for  my  sole  subject,  when  I  should  have  been 
gracing  “  the  first  of  the  signories  ”  of  Italy.  Hence  his  “  beating  mind,”  and  the 
necessity  of  a  few  moments’  retirement  to  still  it,  and  also  to  rid  himself  of  an  Italian’s 
strong  wish  for  vengeance  on  his  old  enemies,  now  so  completely  in  his  power— a 
wish  which  he  conquers  only  when  spurred  to  compassion  by  Ariel’s  sympathy.’ 

187.  The  Textual  Notes  afford  hardly  scope  enough  to  give  intelligibly  the  various 
readings  of  this  line.  Theobald  was  the  first  to  deviate  from  the  Folio  (for  his  fol¬ 
lowers,  see  Text.  Notes)  thus :  ‘  Come  with  a  thought ; — I  thank  you : — Ariel,  come,’ 
where  ‘  I  thank  you  ’  is  evidently  intended  to  be  addressed  to  his  departing  children. 
— Capell’s  variation  from  Theobald  is  of  the  slightest:  ‘  Come  with  a  thought,— I 
thank  ye— Ariel,  come.’— Steevens  says  expressly  that  these  thanks  are  in  reply 
to  the  joint  wish  of  Ferdinand  and  Miranda,  and  followed  Theobald  in  changing 
‘  thee  ’  to  you. — Dyce  (ed.  i)  accepts  Steevens’s  explanation,  but  retains  ‘  thee,’ 
because  ‘  it  is  certain  that  “  thee  ”  was  sometimes  used  when  more  persons  than  one 
were  addressed ;  as  in  a  Hen.  IV:  II,  iii,  “  I  pray  thee,  loving  wife,  and  gentle  daugh¬ 
ter,  Give,”  &c.’ — Staunton  quite  agrees,  both  in  text  and  note,  with  Dyce,  who,  by 
the  way,  prints  :  *  Come  with  a  thought ! — I  thank  thee.— Ariel,  come  !’  ‘  Thee,'  says 

Staunton,  ‘however  ungrammatical,  appears  to  have  been  sometimes  used  in  a  plural 
sense;  thus,  in  Ham.  II,  ii,  the  prince,  addressing  the  players,  says:  “I’m  glad  to 
see  thee  well.”  ’—Grant  White  (ed.  i)  was  the  first  to  interpret  the  line  as  it  stands 
in  the  Folio.  He  derides  the  idea  of  ‘  making  Prospero  thank  Ferdinand  and  Miranda 
for  their  salutation  !’  and  explains  that  ‘  the  authentic  text  plainly  makes  the  magician, 
as  he  summons  the  sprite,  thank  him  (according  to  his  habit)  for  the  masque  which 
he  had  so  deftly  managed.’— Dyce,  in  his  next  edition,  changed  his  text  as  follows ; 


220 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Enter  Ariell.  188 

Ar.  Thy  thoughts  I  cleaue  to,  what’s  thy  pleafure  ? 

Pro.  Spirit :  We  muft  prepare  to  meet  with  Caliban.  190 

Ar.  I  my  Commander,  when  I  prefented  Ceres 
I  thought  to  haue  told  thee  of  it,  but  I  fear’d 
Leaft  I  might  anger  thee. 

Pro.  Say  again,  where  didft  thou  leaue  thefe  varlots  ? 

Ar.  I  told  you  Sir,  they  were  red-hot  with  drinking,  195 
So  full  of  valour,  that  they  fmote  the  ayre 
For  breathing  in  their  faces  :  beate  the  ground 
For  killing  of  their  feete ;  yet  alwaies  bending 
Towards  their  proie<5t :  then  I  beate  my  Tabor, 

At  which  like  vnback’t  colts  they  prickt  their  eares,  200 

Aduanc’d  their  eye-lids,  lifted  vp  their  nofes 

As  they  fmelt  muficke,  fo  I  charm’d  their  eares 

That  Calfe-like,  they  my  lowing  follow’d,  through 

Tooth’d  briars,  fharpe  firzes,  pricking  goffe,  &  thorns,  204 


188.  [Prospero  comes  forward  from  the 
Cell ;  enter  Ariel  to  him.  Theob. 

190.  Spirit  .•]  Separate  line,  Theob.  et 
seq. 

193.  LeaJT\  Leji  F4  et  seq. 


194.  Say]  But,  say  Han.  Well ;  say 
Cap.  Huds.  Say  yet  Nicholson  (N.  & 
Qu.  1866). 

204.  goffe]  gorse  Coll. 


‘  [  To  Ariel ]  Come  with  a  thought ! — I  thank  ye  [. Exeunt  Fer.  and  Mir.] — Ariel, 
come  !’  and  in  reply  to  Grant  White  says,  ‘  surely  the  words  “  We  wish  your  peace  ” 
cannot  possibly  be  regarded  as  a  “salutation;”  they  form  a  very  proper  reply  to 
what  Prospero  has  just  said,  “  I  am  vex'd;  Bear  with  my  weakness ;  my  old  brain  is 
troubled ,”  &c.’  Dyce  then  goes  on  to  withdraw,  as  without  foundation,  his  former 
remark  that  ‘  thee  ’  was  sometimes  used  when  more  than  one  person  was  addressed. 
‘As  to  the  passage  in  2  Hen.  IV,  we  must  suppose  (if  “  thee  ”  be  not  a  mistake  for 
ye)  that  the  full  construction  is  “  I  pray  thee,  gentle  wife,  and  thee,  gentle  daughter,” 
&c.,  and  as  to  the  passage  which  Staunton  cites  from  Ham.  the  posidon  of  thee  in  the 
sentence  determines  that  it  is  an  error  for  ye.  Moreover,  the  Folio  has  in  Coriol.  I,  i, 
“  He  that  will  give  good  words  to  thee,  will  flatter,”  &c  ,  where  the  author  must  have 
written  ye  ox  you.' 

190.  to  meet  with]  Johnson  :  That  is,  to  counteract,  to  play  stratagem  against 
stratagem.  ‘  The  parson  knows  the  temper  and  pulse  of  every  person  in  the  house, 
and  accordingly  either  meets  with  their  vices,  or  advanceth  their  virtues.’ — Herbert’s 
Country  Parson  [chap.  x. — W.  A.  Wright,  who  also  cites :  ‘  Crafty  varlets  make 
thee  a  traitor  to  old  Harry’s  life  !  Well,  well,  I’ll  meet  with  some  of  them.’ — Row¬ 
ley’s  When  you  see  me  you  know  me  (p.  69,  ed.  Elze)]. 

194.  For  the  attempts  to  mend  the  metre  of  this  line  (which  Dyce  says  can  hardly 
be  right),  see  Text.  N.  Abbott,  §  484,  would  allow  the  voice  to  rest  on  ‘  Say  ’  long 
enough  to  dispense  with  an  extra  syllable. 

joi  eye-  ids]  See  I,  ii,  472. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


221 


Which  entred  their  fraile  fhins  :  at  laft  I  left  them 
I’th’  filthy  mantled  poole  beyond  your  Cell, 

There  dancing  vp  to  th’chins,  that  the  fowle  Lake 
Ore-ftunck  their  feet. 

Pro.  This  was  well  done  (my  bird) 

Thy  fhape  inuifible  retaine  thou  ftill : 

The  trumpery  in  my  houfe,  goe  bring  it  hither 

For  ftale  to  catch  thefe  theeues.  Ar.  I  go,  I  goe.  Exit. 


205.  Jhins]  skins  so  quoted,  Warb.  208.  Ore-fiunck ]  O' erswaytd  Cart- 

206.  filthy  mantled ]  filth  -y mantled  wright. 

Steev.  conj.  filthy -mantled  Cam.  feet]  fill  Wilson. 

your]  you  Fa. 

204.  pricking  gosse]  Tollett  :  The  low  gorse  that  only  grows  on  wet  ground, 
and  which  is  well  described  by  the  name  of  whins  in  Markham’s  Farewell  to  Hus¬ 
bandry.  It  has  prickles  like  those  of  a  rose-tree  or  a  gooseberry. — Beisly  (p.  12)  : 
This  is  the  Genista  anglica,  petty  whin,  called  goss  in,  and  previously  to,  the  time  of 
Shakespeare.  In  the  15th  Henry  VI  (1436),  Humfrey,  Duke  of  Gloster,  had  license 
to  enclose  200  acres  of  land, — ‘  pasture,  wode,  hethe,  virses,  and  gorste,  bruere  et 
jampnorum,’ — and  to  form  thereof  a  park  at  Greenwich.  From  this  it  appears  that 
‘  furze  ’  and  ‘  gorse  ’  were  then  treated  as  distinct  plants,  and  Shakespeare  so  consid¬ 
ered  them. — W.  A.  Wright:  That  is ,  gorse.  In  the  same  way  a  waterfall  in  West¬ 
moreland  and  Cumberland  is  called  either  a  ‘  foss  ’  or  a  ‘  force.’  Professor  Sedgwick 
used  to  maintain  that  the  latter  was  a  corruption  introduced  by  the  Lake  Poets ;  but 
both  forms,  *  foss  ’  and  ‘  fors,’  are  found  in  Icelandic,  the  former  being  more  modem 
Cotgrave  gives  ‘Ajous :  m.  Furze,  Gorse  ’ ;  and  ‘  Genest  espineux.  Furres,  Whinnes, 
Gorse,  Thorne-broome.’  It  is  not  clear  that  there  was  any  distinction  between  ‘  furze ' 
and  ‘  goss.’  Gerarde,  in  his  Herbal ,  says,  ‘  There  be  diuers  sorts  of  prickley  Broome, 
called  in  our  English  toong,  by  sundry  names  according  to  the  speech  of  the  countrey 
people  where  they  do  growe,  in  some  places  Furzes,  in  others  Whinnes  and  Gorsse, 
and  of  some  pricklie  Broome’  (p.  1138,  ed.  1597). 

208.  feet]  Bulloch  (p.  24)  conjectures  feat, ‘  implying  that  the  filth  they  had 
passed  through  had  overstunk  their  nefarious  project.’ — Ingleby  (SA  the  Man,  &c.  ii, 
16)  proposed  the  same  emendation,  *  meaning  fit  =  fytte  =  dance.’ — Both  the  Cam.  Ed. 
and  Dyce  record  fear  as  a  conjecture  of  Spedding.  In  a  foot-note  Ingleby  (as  above) 
says  of  this  conjecture,  fear,  ‘we  know  [it]  to  have  been  a  bantling  of  Mr  Staunton’s.' 

21 1.  trumpery,  &c.]  Holt  suggests  that  without  this  episode  ‘there  would  have 
been  no  manifest  reason  why  the  assassins  should  not  immediately,  on  their  appear¬ 
ance,  enter  the  cave  and  perpetrate  their  villainy ;  which  if  they  had,  the  stage  must 
have  stood  still  during  that  time,  and  which  this  “  trumpery  ”  alone  totally  prevents, 
as  it  diverts  them  from  their  main  design,  and  yet  keeps  the  scene  busy,  and  shows 
Shakespeare  perfectly  understood  the  jeu  du  theatre.' 

212.  stale]  Steevens  :  A  word  in  fowling,  used  for  a  bait  or  decoy  to  catch  birds. 
— W.  A.  Wright:  See  Markham’s  Hunger's  Preuention  (1621),  p.  28:  ‘In  the 
very  hearte  or  midst  of  the  haunte  you  shall  first  pinne  downe  a  stale,  which  should 
be  a  liue  foule  formerly  taken,  of  the  same  kinde  which  they  are  that  now  haunt  the 
place,  and  for  which  you  now  lay.’ 


222 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Pro.  A  Deuill,  a  borne-Deuill,  on  whofe  nature 
Nurture  can  neuer  fticke  :  on  whom  my  paines 
Humanely  taken,  all,  all  loft,  quite  loft, 

And,  as  with  age,  his  body  ouglier  growes, 

So  his  minde  cankers ;  I  will  plague  them  all , 
Euen  to  roaring :  Come,  hang  on  them  this  line. 


218 


215 


213 


213.  on ]  in  so  quoted,  Abbott,  §  476. 
215.  all,  all]  are  all  Han.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 


218.  on  them]  them  on  Rowe  et  seq. 
[Prospero  remains  invisible. 


all  are  Walker,  Ktly,  Huds. 


Theob. 


213.  This  line  Abbott,  §  476,  would  scan  by  contracting  only  the  first  ‘  devil  ’  into 
de  il,  then  by  prolonging  the  o  sound  of  ‘  bom,’  gain  sufficient  time  to  let  the  ictus  fall 
on  the  first  syllable  of  ‘  devil.’ 

215.  all,  all]  To  me  this  is  exactly  right,  and  any  change  worse  than  needless.— 
Ed. 

217.  cankers]  Malone:  Lord  Essex,  in  an  hour  of  discontent,  said  of  Queen 
Elizabeth .  that  she  grew  old  and  canker’d,  and  that  her  mind  was  become  as 
crooked  as  her  carcase  ’ ;— a  speech,  which  according  to  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  cost 
him  his  head. 

218.  line]  Hunter  {Disquisition,  &c.  p.  57):  If  you  look  for  the  word  ‘line- 
grove’  in  any  Verbal  Index  to  Shakespeare  you  will  not  find  it;  for  the  modem  edi¬ 
tors,  in  their  discretion,  have  chosen  to  alter  the  line  in  which  it  occurs,  and  we  now 
read,  ‘  In  the  lime- grove  which  weather-fends  your  cell  ’ ;  an  alteration  this,  you  will 
say,  of  no  great  pith  or  moment,  but  observe  the  effect  of  it.  When  Prospero  says 
to  Ariel,  ‘  Come,  hang  them  on  this  line,’  he  means  on  one  of  the  line  trees  near  his 
cell,  which  could  hardly  have  been  mistaken,  if  the  word  of  the  original  copies,  line 
grove,  had  been  allowed  to  keep  its  place.  But  the  ear  having  been  long  familiar  to 
lime-grove,  the  word  suggested  not  the  branches  of  the  tree  so  called,  but  a  cord  line, 
and  accordingly,  when  the  play  is  presented,  such  a  line  is  actually  drawn  across  the 
stage,  and  the  glittering  apparel  is  hung  upon  it.  Anything  more  remote  from  poetry 
than  this  can  scarcely  be  imagined.  There  ensues  some  clumsy  joking  about  the  ‘  line  ’ 

among  the  clowns  as  they  steal  through  the  line-grove  with  murderous  intent . 

The  jests  are  worthless,  suited  to  the  clownish  character  of  the  clowns  who  utter  them'. 

- I  introduce  them  only  to  observe  that  they  all  refer  to  the  line  trees,  and  not 

{proh  pudor  /)  to  a  clothes-line. — The  line  tree  and  the  lime  tree  are  the  same.  The 
change  has  been  made  because  the  latter  is  now  the  more  usual  appellation ;  but  as 
late  as  Elisha  Cole  the  other  was  the  more  familiar  term :  « line  tree,  tilia,  a  tall  tree, 
with  broad  leaves  and  fine  flowers.’  The  linden  is  a  more  refined  appellation.  Shake¬ 
speare  was  probably  led  to  form  the  grove  of  this  particular  tree  by  what  he  had 
observed  of  the  use  of  it  in  the  neighborhood  of  London:  ‘The  female  line,’  says 
Gerarde,  ‘  or  linden  tree,  waxeth  very  great  and  thick,  spreading  forth  her  branches 
wide  and  far  abroad,  being  a  tree  which  yieldeth  a  most  pleasant  shadow,  under  and 
within  whose  boughs  may  be  made  brave  summer-houses,  and  banquetting  arbours.’ 
We  may  imagine  in  a  grove  of  trees  such  as  these,  alcoves  and  bowers  of  delight  in 
harmony  with  the  young  and  lovely  Miranda. — Knight  says  that  after  a  careful 
examination  he  is  convinced  that  the  players  are  right  in  stretching  up  a  clothes-line  • 
and  opposes  Hunter’s  interpretation  for  the  following  reasons :  First,  on  the  score  of 


ACT  rv.  sc.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


223 


[218.  Come,  hang  on  them  this  line] 

printing ;  nowhere  here  is  ‘  line  ’  spelt  with  a  capital  or  in  Italics,  as  it  would  be  were 
a  tree  indicated.  On  the  contrary,  where  the  tree  is  meant,  as  in  line  14  of  the  next 
Act,  it  is  spelt  ‘Line-groue.'  Secondly,  Hunter  gives  no  example  of  <  line  ’  used 
without  the  adjunct  of  tree  or  grove.  In  the  quotation  from  Gerarde  the  word  tree 
belongs  as  much  to  line  as  to  linden.  Thirdly,  the  ‘  clumsy  joking  ’  of  the  clowns 
about  ‘  losing  your  hair  ’  and  ‘  bald  jerkin  ’  is  not  ‘  worthless  *  as  far  as  concerns  an 
explanation  of  the  meaning  of  ‘line.’  Steevens  has  observed  (see  post)  that  clothes¬ 
lines  were  usually  made  of  hair.  They  were  especially  so  made  in  Shakespeare’s 
day,  says  Knight.  ‘In  a  wood-cut  of  twelve  distinct  figures  of  trades  and  calk 
ings  of  the  time  of  James  I  (see  Smith’s  Cries  of  London,  p.  15)  we  have  the  cry  of 
“Buy  a  hair-line!"  The  “clumsy  joking”  would  be  intelligible  to  an  audience 
accustomed  to  a  hair-hne.  It  is  not  intelligible,  according  to  Hunter’s  assertion  that 
the  word  suggested  a  cord-line.'  Fourthly,  Knight  urges  the  unlikelihood  that  drunken 
clowns  could  have  distinguished  a  line  tree  from  an  elm  tree  or  a  plane  tree.  The 
very  word  ‘  frippery  ’  shows  that  they  had  in  mind  an  old-clothes  shop,  with  its  clothes 
hung  on  a  stretched  line,  whence  the  joke  about  stealing  by  ‘  line  and  level.’  Lastly, 
to  Hunter’s  assertion  that  scarcely  anything  can  be  more  remote  from  poetry  than 
clothes-line,  Knight  replies  that  the  entire  Scene  where  the  clowns  are  tricked  by 
Ariel  was  intended  to  be  the  antagonist  of  poetry,  essentially  ludicrous,  and,  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  extent,  gross.  The  ‘  pool  ’  through  which  they  were  hunted  had  nothing  poetical 
about  it,  and  compared  with  a  fountain  or  a  lake  it  was  as  the  hair-line  to  the  lint r- 
tree.  Dyce  {Few  Notes,  &c.  p.  14)  :  With  all  my  respect  for  Mr  Hunter’s  learned 
labours,  I  must  confess  that  I  think  him  entirely  wrong  in  the  matter  of  the  ‘  line.’ 
If  no  other  objections  could  be  urged  against  his  acceptation  of  the  word  line,  we 
surely  have  a  decisive  one  in  the  joke  of  Stephano,  ‘jerkin,  you  are  like  to  lose  youi 
hair,  a  joke  to  which  it  is  impossible  to  attach  any  meaning  unless  we  suppose 

that  the  line  was  a  hair-line . In  Lyly’s  Midas,  a  barber’s  apprentice  facetiously 

says  :  ‘All  my  mistres’  lynes  that  she  dryes  her  cloathes  on,  are  made  only  of  mustachio 
stuffe  [i.  e.  of  the  cuttings  of  mustachios].’  1592. — Staunton  also  opposed  Hunter. 

‘  It  is  hardly  possible,’  he  says,  ‘  to  conceive  that  the  coarse  jesting  of  the  clowns  .... 
could  have  been  provoked  by,  or,  indeed,  would  have  been  applicable  to,  any  other 
object  than  the  familiar  horse-hair  line,  which  was  formerly  used  to  hang  clothes  on.’ 
— Hunter,  however,  was,  quite  naturally,  unmoved.  His  observations  were  repeated 
in  his  New  Illustrations  (i,  178),  and  in  A  Few  Words,  &c.  (p.  8)  he  replied  to 
Dyce’s  objection  that  his  interpretation  did  not  explain  Stephano’s  jokes.  ‘  What 
“now,  jerkin,  you  are  like  to  lose  your  hair”  means,’  says  Hunter,  ‘I  do  not  quite 
understand,  and  I  am  sure  it  is  not  worth  searching  into.  It  probably  has  no  positive 
meaning ;  but  it  certainly  does  not  necessarily  imply  any  connection  with  a  clothes¬ 
line,  even  though  it  were  made  of  twisted  hair . I  adhere  to  what  I  have  ven¬ 

tured  to  promulgate,  and  still  more  should  be  disposed  to  maintain  that  when  the 
clowns  are  jesting  about  the  word  “  line  ”  ....  the  passages  are  better  explained,  if 
any  sense  worth  searching  for  is  to  be  found  in  them,  by  referring  them  not  to  the 
clothes-line,  but  to  the  line  trees  under  which  they  were  furtively  creeping  to  the  cell 
where  they  thought  to  surprise  Prospero  in  his  sleep.’ — Hunter’s  best  defender  is 
Brae,  who,  denouncing  a  clothes-line  in  such  a  scene  as  the  ‘  lowest  depth  of  bar¬ 
barity,’  undertakes  to  explain  those  jokes  of  Stephano,  which  proved  the  stumbling- 
blocks  to  the  acceptance  of  Hunter’s  ‘  line.’  Brae  ( Trans,  of  Royal  Soc.  Lit.  2d 
Ser.  vol.  x,  Pt.  iii,  p.  466!  trusts  a  good  deal  to  Stephano’s  calling  as  a  butler,  and 


224 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


[218.  Come,  hang  on  them  this  line] 

when  Knight  asks  how  such  drunken  fellows  could  have  distinguished  one  tree  from 
another,  Brae  replies,  ‘  What  more  obvious  than  that  in  full  summer  the  delicious 
shade  and  fragrance  of  the  lime  would  make  it  the  resort  of  the  al fresco  symposium, 
and  that  the  butler  would  often  be  required  to  bring  flasks  and  goblets  to  the  line. 
Hence  he  would  hail  it  as  an  old  and  familiar  acquaintance,  of  which  the  seat  beneath 
[where  Ferdinand  and  Miranda  watched  the  masque]  would  instantly  remind  him.’ 
‘There  is  one  peculiarity,’  continues  Brae,  ‘in  Stephano’s  recognition  which  has  not 
been  adverted  to, — his  addressing  the  tree  as  “  Mistress  Line  ” ;  and  I  cannot  see 
how  the  advocates  for  the  clothes-line — unless  by  some  metempsychosis  of  a 
laundry-maid — are  to  explain  this  salutation  if  addressed  to  their  object.  But  to 
the  tree  its  application  is  easily  explained;  it  is  an  allusion  to  Philyra,  a  nymph 
as  inseparably  associated  with  the  line,  or  tilia,  as  Daphne  is  with  the  laurel.’ 
This,  too,  Stephano  had  learned  in  his  capacity  of  butler;  he  had  ‘doubtless’ 
often  overheard  the  story  of  Mistress  Line  discussed  beneath  the  fragrant  shade 
of  her  branches,  and  without  understanding  the  classical  story  might  have  merely 
learned  to  imitate  his  betters  in  calling  the  tree  ‘  Mistris  line.’  To  Knight’s 
objection  that  tree  is  always  an  adjunct  of  line,  Brae  cites  Holinshed,  who,  in  his 
chapter  on  ‘  Woods  and  Marishes,’  says  :  ‘  We  are  not  without  the  plane,  the  vgh,  the 
sorfe,  the  chestnut,  the  line ,  the  black  cherrie,  and  such  like.’  To  Dyce’s  assertion 
that  it  is  impossible  to  attach  any  meaning  to  the  allusions  to  losing  the  hair  and 
proving  bald,  unless  we  suppose  the  line  was  a  hair-line,  Brae  opposes  the  explana¬ 
tion  :  ‘  To  air  is  to  hang  near  the  fire,  or  out  of  doors,  to  dry  or  freshen ;  and  in  some 
parts  of  the  country  the  expression  to  take  an  air  (scilicet,  of  the  fire)  is  in  common 
use.  Now,  without  going  into  the  question  of  the  probable  sameness  of  pronunciation 
in  Shakespeare’s  time  of  hair  and  air,  it  is  sufficient  for  the  present  purpose  to  observe 
that  even  supposing  one  of  these  words  was  then,  as  now,  aspirated  and  the  other  not, 
that  circumstance  would  be  no  bar  to  an  equivoke  between  them  by  persons  of  Ste¬ 
phano’s  class,  especially  as  there  are  examples  of  similar  equivokes  between  hair  and 
heir;  and  in  one  or  two  other  places  in  Shakespeare  hair  and  air  are  to  this  day 
disputed  readings.  Now,  when  Stephano  perceives  the  rich  garments  hanging  abroad, 
as  it  were,  for  an  air,  he  says  that  the  jerkin  when  taken  down  will  lose  its  air;  and 

prove,  he  adds — his  wit  just  catching  at  the  equivoke — a  bald  jerkin . So,  again, 

‘  we  steal  by  line  and  level  ’  is  but  mere  sound, — the  echo  of  the  tree’s  name  suggest¬ 
ing  a  familiar  phrase.  The  humour  seems  to  consist  in  the  very  absence  of  all  sense 

and  fitness  as  contrasted  with  Stephano’s  drunken  exuberance  of  praise . There 

is  another  joke  which,  in  my  opinion,  must  be  understood  as  a  continued  equivoke 
upon  the  name  of  the  tree.  Trinculo  says  ‘  put  some  lime  upon  your  fingers.’  But 
how  an  equivoke  upon  the  name  of  the  tree  if  we  are  to  call  it  line,  and  not  lime  f 
Hereupon  Brae  shows  that  ‘  lime,’  viscum,  was  sometimes  spelled  and  written  line, 
and  infers  that  Shakespeare  may  have  intended  it  to  be  so  spelled  in  this  case.  And, 
secondly,  from  many  examples  that  ‘  an  absolute  convertibility  existed  between  lime 
and  line  in  almost  every  sense  to  which  either  of  these  forms  could  be  applied ;  so 
that  one  form  might  be  indifferently  spoken,  written,  and  understood  for  the  other, 
even  in  equivoke.’  Lastly,  Brae  says  ‘  the  only  explanation  necessary  of  “  now  is  the 
jerkin  under  the  line  ”  is  that  the  name  of  the  tree  again  suggests  the  echo  of  a  famil¬ 
iar  nautical  phrase  [see  Nicholson’s  explanation,  post]  ;  or  it  might  be  that  he  would 
have  often  heard  the  allusion  applied  in  the  same  way  in  those  under-line  symposia 
SDoken  of  before.’ — [The  tendency  of  the  latest  criticism  is,  I  think,  to  approve  of 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


225 


Enter  Ariell,  loaden  with  glijiering  apparell ,  &c.  Enter 
Caliban,  Stephano,  and  Trinculo,  all  wet. 

Cal.  Pray  you  tread  foftly,  that  the  blinde  Mole  may 
not  heare  a  foot  fall :  we  now  are  neere  his  Cell. 

St.  Monfter,  your  Fairy,  w  you  fay  is  a  harmles  Fairy, 
Has  done  little  better  then  plaid  the  Iacke  with  vs. 

Tnn.  Monfter,  I  do  fmell  all  horfe-piffe,  at  which 
My  nofe  is  in  great  indignation. 

Ste.  So  is  mine.  Do  you  heare  Monfter :  If  I  fhould 
Take  a  difpleafure  againft  you  :  Looke  you. 

Trin.  Thou  wert  but  a  loft  Monfter. 

Cal.  Good  my  Lord,  giue  me  thy  fauour  ftil, 

Be  patient,  for  the  prize  He  bring  thee  too 

Shall  hudwinke  this  mifchance :  therefore  fpeake  foftly, 

All’s  hufht  as  midnight  yet. 

Tnn.  I,  but  to  loofe  our  bottles  in  the  Poole. 

Ste.  There  is  not  onely  difgrace  and  difhonor  in  that 


220 


225 


230 


235 


219.  Scene  V.  Pope  +  .  223-228.  Prose,  Pope  et  seq. 

222.  heart...  CelT\  One  line,  Rowe  ii  230.  Good~\  Good,  good  Hun.  Cap.  O 
et  seT  good  Ktly.  Nay,  good  Huds. 

Hunter’s  interpretation ;  Singer  leans  to  it,  Hudson  ‘  rather  agrees  with  it,’  and  W. 
A.  Wright  adopts  it.  For  myself,  I  accept  it  gladly,  as  I  should  any  possible  expla¬ 
nation  rather  than  a  clothes-line. — Ed.] 

219.  Collier  remarks  that  the  stage-directions  are  more  particular  and  correct  in 
this  play  than,  perhaps,  in  any  other. 

221.  blinde  Mole]  Warton  (  The  Adventurer,  iii,  38)  :  Shakespeare  seems  to  be 
the  only  poet  who  possesses  the  power  of  uniting  poetry  with  propriety  of  character ; 
of  which  I  know  not  an  instance  more  striking  than  the  image  Caliban  makes  use  of 
to  express  silence,  which  is  at  once  highly  poetical,  and  exactly  suited  to  the  wildness 

of  the  speaker . I  always  lament  that  our  author  has  not  preserved  this  fierce  and 

implacable  spirit  in  Caliban,  to  the  end  of  the  play;  instead  of  which  he  has,  I  think 
injudiciously,  put  into  his  mouth  words  that  imply  repentance  and  understanding. — 
Halliwell  :  See  Topsell,  Hist.  &c.  [ed.  1608,  p.  499]  :  ‘  These  Moles  have  no  eares, 
and  yet  they  heare  in  the  earth  more  nimbly  and  perfectly  then  men  can  above  the 
same,  for  at  every  step  or  small  noise  and  almost  breathing,  they  are  terrified  and 
ran  away.’ 

224.  the  Iacke]  Johnson  :  That  is,  he  has  played  Jack  with  the  lantern ;  am 
led  us  about  like  an  ignis  fatuus,  by  which  travellers  are  decoyed  into  the  mire. 
[Either  the  same  that  Caliban  speaks  of  as  ‘  firebrands,’  II,  ii,  9 ;  or,  else,  as  W.  A. 
Wright  explains,  ‘played  the  knave,  deceived.  See  Much  Ado,  I,  i,  186,’  and  see 
‘Jack’  as  used  by  the  old  Nurse  in  Rom.  <Sr  Jul.  II,  iv,  160,  which,  I  think,  is  the 
better  interpretation. — Ed.] 

230.  Lord]  Dyce  :  Is  this  a  dissyllable  here ;  as  it  sometimes  is  ?  I  think  not. 
[Abbott,  §  484,  thinks  it  is.] 

IS 


226 


THE  TEMPEST 


[ACT  IV,  sc.  i, 

Monfter,  but  an  infinite  lofife.  236 

Tr.  That’s  more  to  me  then  my  wetting : 

Yet  this  is  your  harmleffe  Fairy,  Monfter. 

Ste.  I  will  fetch  off  my  bottle, 

Though  I  be  o’re  eares  for  my  labour.  240 

Cal.  Pre-thee  (my  King)  be  quiet.  Seeft  thou  heere 
This  is  the  mouth  o’th  Cell :  no  noife,  and  enter : 

Do  that  good  mifcheefe,  which  may  make  this  Ifland 
Thine  owne  for  euer,  and  I  thy  Caliban 

For  aye  thy  foot-licker.  245 

Ste.  Giue  me  thy  hand, 

I  do  begin  to  haue  bloody  thoughts. 

Tnn.  O  King  Stephano ,  O  Peere  :  O  worthy  Slephano , 

Looke  what  a  wardrobe  heere  is  for  thee. 

Cal.  Let  it  alone  thou  foole,  it  is  but  trafh.  250 

Tn.  Oh,  ho,  Monfter :  wee  know  what  belongs  to  a 
frippery,  O  King  Stephano. 

Ste.  Put  off  that  gowne  ( Trinculo )  by  this  hand  lie 
haue  that  gowne. 

Tri.  Thy  grace  fhall  haue  it.  (meane  255 

Cal.  The  dropfie  drowne  this  foole,  what  doe  you 


237-240.  Prose,  Pope  et  seq.  246-249.  Prose,  Pope  et  seq. 

240.  o’ re}  o'er  head  and  Han.  Quincy  256.  dropfie}  deep  sea  Wilson. 

MS. 


243-  good  mischeefe]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Socl)  :  A  grammarian  must  not  fail  to 
call  attention  to  poor  Caliban’s  Oxymoron. 

244.  I]  For  other  examples  of  ‘  I  ’  used  for  me,  see  Abbott,  §  209. 

248.  King  .  .  .  Peere]  Warburton  :  The  humour  of  this  consists  in  the  allusion 
to  the  old  ballad  of  ‘  King  Stephen  was  a  worthy  peer,’  which  celebrates  that  king’s 
parsimony  with  regard  to  his  ‘  wardrobe.’  [The  ballad  as  it  appears  in  Percy’s  Folio 
Manuscript  is  given  in  the  note  on  Othello,  II,  ii,  106  of  this  edition.  The  version 
as  it  appears  in  Percy’s  Reliques  (i,  174,  ed.  1765)  has  the  following  stanza- 

‘  King  Stephen  was  a  worthy  peere, 

His  breeches  cost  him  but  a  crowne, 

He  held  them  sixpence  all  too  deere ; 

Therefore  he  calld  the  taylor  Lowne.’] 

252.  frippery]  Steevens:  A  shop  where  old  clothes  were  sold.  The  person 
who  kept  one  of  these  shops  was  called  a  fripper.  Strype,  in  h>s  Life  of  Stowe,  says, 
that  these  frippers  lived  in  Birchin  Lane  and  Comhill.  [Cotgrave  :  ‘ Friperie  :  f.  A 
friperie ;  Brokers  shop,  street  of  Brokers,  or  of  Fripiers.’  And  ‘ Fripier  m.  A 


ACT  IV,  sc.  i.]  THE  TEMPEST 

To  doate  thus  on  fuch  luggage  ?  let’s  alone 
And  doe  the  murther  firft:  if  he  awake, 

From  toe  to  crowne  hee’l  fill  our  skins  with  pinches, 
Make  vs  ftrange  ftufte. 

Ste.  Be  you  quiet  (Monfter)  Miftris  line,  is  not  this 


227 

257 


260 


257.  let’s  alone ]  let's  along  Theob.  i,  iii,  Hal.  Wh.  ii. 

Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Steev.  Coll,  ii,  Ktly,  259.  toe]  too  Fa. 

Clke,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  let  it  alone  260.  Jluffe.]  stuff—  Ktly. 

Han.  Mai.  Var.  left  alone  Rann,  Coll. 

Fripier ;  or  broker ;  a  mender,  or  trimmer  vp  of  old  garments,  and  a  seller  of  them 
so  mended.’] 

257.  To  doate]  The  gerund,  for  by  doating. 

257.  let’s  alone]  Steevens  :  This  may  mean  ‘  let  you  and  I  only  go  to  commit 
the  murder,  leaving  Trinculo,  who  is  so  solicitous  about  the  trash  of  dress,  behind 
us.’  [‘A  preposterous  suggestion.’— Dyce.]— Malone  justifies  his  text  by  remarking 
that  ‘  Caliban  had  used  the  same  expression  before,’ — ‘  the  very  reason,’  says  Dyce 

*  (“  Wl11  be  evident  to  any  one  who  carefully  compares  the  two  passages),  why  it 
should  not  be  repeated  here.’  ‘Has  none  of  the  commentators  then,’  Dyce  ( Pew 
Notes,  p.  15)  goes  on  to  ask,  ‘been  led  by  the  words,  “And  do  the  murder  first,”  to 
the  lection  obviously  required  in  what  immediately  precedes?  Yes;  Theobald’s 
sagacity  did  not  forsake  him  here ;  but  his  certain  emendation  is  now  only  to  be 
found  among  the  rubbish  of  the  Variorum  Shakespeare,  in  a  very  foolish  note  by 
Malone,  which  concludes  with,  “Mr  Theobald  reads — “Let’s  along”  !’  [Theo¬ 
bald  has  no  note  on  the  subject.]— Knight  :  [Hanmer’s  text]  is  good  enough  and 
probable. — Collier  (ed.  i)  ;  In  the  original  manuscript  it  probably  stood  ‘  Let  ’t 
alone  ’ ;  an  abbreviation  for  the  sake  of  the  verse. — Staunton  in  a  note  on  ‘  Alone, 
alone  ’  {Love's  L.  L.  IV,  iii,  384)  refers  to  the  present  lection  in  The  Tempest,  and 
to  another  instance  of  it  in  Beau.  &  Fl.’s  Loyal  Subject,  III,  v,  p.  68,  ed.  Dyce, 
where,  with  the  sense  of  along,  it  is  spelled  ‘  alone,’  and  that  it  cannot  be  a  mis¬ 
print  is  proved  by  its  rhyming  with  ‘gone.’  Here,  in  The  Tempest,  Staunton 
says  of  Theobald’s  along  that,  ‘  if  “  alone  ”  was  not  sometimes  used  in  the  same 
sense,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  right  w'ord.’ — Grant  White  (ed.  i)  does  not  find 
Steevens  s  note  as  preposterous  as  Dyce  finds  it;  he  pronounces  the  meaning  ‘  Let  us 

do  the  murder  alone,  without  the  Fool’s  aid,’  ‘  obvious  and  appropriate.’ _ W.  A. 

Wright:  If  the  reading  of  the  Folio  be  the  true  one,  it  must  be  explained  by  sup¬ 
posing  the  verb  of  motion  omitted,  as  in  Macb.  IV,  iii,  136:  ‘  Now,  we’ll  together.’ 
It  would  then  be  addressed  to  Stephano  only.  [A  verb  of  motion  is  equally  required 
whether  we  read  alone  or  along.  If  Caliban’s  idea  is  ‘  let  us  go  all  by  ourselves  with¬ 
out  the  fool  and  do  the  murder,’  I  see  no  necessity  for  the  word  ‘  first  ’ ;  but  ‘  first  ’  is 
important  if  he  wishes  to  hurry  Stephano  along  to  do  the  murder,  and  then  come 
back  for  the  luggage.  Therefore,  I  think,  that  in  view  of  Staunton’s  examples, 

‘  alone  ’  and  along  were  probably  so  nearly  alike  in  pronunciation  as  to  be  almost 
interchangeable;  the  sense  of  the  context,  therefore,  can  alone  be  our  guide.  Here* * 

I  think,  it  is  in  favour  of  along. — Ed.] 

260.  stuffe]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.)  :  If  you  persist  in  stopping  to  appropriate 
this  ‘  trash,’  he  will  pinch  our  skins  black  and  blue,  and  thus  make  us  into  a  ‘  stuff’  as 
strange  in  one  way  as  th  ise  variegated  stuffs  appear  to  you  in  another. 


228 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  IV,  sc.  i. 


my  Ierkin  ?  now  is  the  Ierkin  vnder  the  line :  now  ler-  262 
kin  you  are  like  to  lofe  your  haire,  &  proue  a  bald  Ierkin. 

Trin.  Doe,  doe ;  we  fteale  by  lyne  and  leuell ,  and’t 
like  your  grace.  265 

Ste.  I  thank  thee  for  that  ieft ;  heer’s  a  garment  for’t : 

Wit  fhall  not  goe  vn-rewarded  while  I  am  King  of  this 
Country :  Steale  by  line  and  leuell,  is  an  excellent  paffe 
of  pate  :  there’s  another  garment  for’t. 

Tri.  Monfter,  come  put  fome  Lime  vpon  your  fin-  270 
gers,  and  away  with  the  reft. 

Cal.  I  will  haue  none  on’t :  we  fhall  loofe  our  time,  272 

264.  and'f\  an't  Cap.  Knt  et  seq.  272.  none ]  done  F2. 


262.  vnder  the  line]  Steevens  :  ‘An  allusion  to  what  often  happens  to  people 
who  pass  the  line.  The  violent  fevers  which  they  contract  in  that  hot  climate  make 
them  lose  their  hair.’ — Edwards's  MSS.  As  a  further  elucidation  it  may  be  observed 
that  the  lines  on  which  clothes  are  hung  are  usually  made  of  twisted  hors t-hair. — 
Br.  Nicholson  (N  6°  Qu.  3d  S.  v,  49,  1864) :  The  meaning  is  the  jerkin  is  put  as 
were  the  stakes  at  tennis,  and  so  could  be  taken  by  the  winner.  See  Florio’s  Sec¬ 
ond  Frutes,  ch.  2,  p.  25  :  ‘  T.  Let  vs  keepe  the  lawes  of  the  court.  G.  That  is,  stake 
money  vnder  the  line  (sotto  la  cor  da ),  is  it  not  so  ?  T.  Yea  sir,  you  hitt  it  right.  H. 
Here  is  my  monie,  now  stake  you.’ — Whereupon  W.  A.  Wright  remarks  that  ‘  the 
phrase  may  have  another  meaning,  derived  from  the  same  game,’  and  adds :  ‘  In  Hey- 
wood’s  Proverbs  and  Epigrams  (Spenser  Soc.  p.  35)  we  find :  “  Thou  hast  striken 
the  ball  vnder  the  lyne,”  meaning,  “  Thou  hast  lost.”  ’  [See  also  Brae’s  explanation, 
above. — Deighton’s  explanation  is  also  ingenious,  that  Stephano  says  this  ‘  as  he 
tucks  the  jerkin  under  his  belt.’] — Staunton  ( Athenaum ,  16  Nov.  1872)  quotes  from 
a  small  tract  called  Groans  from  Newgate ;  or,  an  Elegy  upon  Edward  Dun,  Esq., 
the  Cities  Common  Hangman,  who  Dyed  Naturally  in  his  Bed,  the  nth  of  September, 
1663,  &c.  the  following  concluding  lines  :  ‘  It  was  (oh,  Death  !)  an  unjust  thing,  Thou 
should’st  deny  him  his  own  swing ;  Sure,  sure,  thou  hadst  some  great  designe,  Or  else 
thou  ’adst  took  him  under-line.'  ‘  The  last  words,’  says  Staunton,  ‘show  conclusively 
that  although  Stephano  may  have  alluded,  as  has  been  generally  surmised,  to  the  loss 
of  hair  common  to  those  who  visit  hot  climates,  it  was  not  a  tree  but  a  cord  on  which 
the  clothes  were  suspended,  for  under  the  line  was  plainly  a  slang  phrase,  like  “  a 
Tyburn  tippet,”  “a  horse’s  nightcap,”  “the  sheriff’s  picture-frame,”  and  other  popu¬ 
lar  sayings  of  the  time,  to  signify  the  punishment  of  hanging  by  the  neck.’  [Staun¬ 
ton’s  date,  1 663,  is  rather  late,  but,  still,  slang  phrases  have  an  enduring  vitality,  and, 
overlooking  this  small  flaw,  the  explanation  seems  to  be  the  best  that  has  yet  been 
offered. — Ed.] 

264.  Doe,  doe]  Rev.  John  Hunter  :  This  is  said  in  approval  of  Stephano’s  pun¬ 
ning,  being  an  abbreviation  of  That  will  do.  [This  explanation  is  doubtful,  but  to 
propose  a  better  one  (unless  it  be  that  it  refers  to  Stephano’s  ‘  Be  you  quiet  ’)  demands 
more  dramatic  instinct  than  has  been  bestowed  on  the  present  Ed.] 

268,  269.  passe  of  pate]  W.  A.  Wright  :  That  is,  witty  sally. 

270.  Lime]  Johnson  :  That  is,  bird-lime. 


act  IV,  sc.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


229 


And  all  be  turn’d  to  Barnacles,  or  to  Apes 

273.  or  to]  or  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 


273.  Barnacles]  Collins:  ‘There  are,’  says  Gerarde,  in  his  Herbal,  1597,  p. 
1391,  ‘  in  the  north  parts  of  Scotland  ....  certaine  trees,  whereon  doe  growe  certaine 
shell-fishes,  ....  which  falling  into  the  water,  doe  become  foules,  whom  we  call 
Bam  aides,  in  the  north  of  England  Brant  Geese,  and  in  Lancashire  tree  Geese,’  &c. 
Commend  me,  however,  to  Holinshed  (vol.  i,  p.  38),  who  declares  himself  to  have 
seen  the  feathers  of  these  ‘  barnacles  ’  « hang  out  of  the  shell  at  least  two  inches.’ 
And  the  same  account  of  their  generation  is  given  in  Drayton’s  Polyolbion,  27th  Song 
[ad fin.  in  the  account  of  Fumesse.  For  the  pardonable  error  of  mistaking  Holin¬ 
shed  for  Harrison,  Collins  was  taken  severely  to  task  by  Douce  (i,  23),  who  presumed 
that  the  note,  just  given,  would  ‘  not  be  thought  worth  retaining  in  any  future  edition,’ 
and  who  accused  Collins  of  making  ‘  Gerarde  responsible  for  an  opinion  not  his  own.’ 
As  Collins  quoted  Gerarde’s  exact  words,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  why,  as  W.  A. 
W  right  says,  Douce  should  make  this  charge ;  furthermore,  in  his  zeal  to  vindicate 
Harrison,  Douce  asserts  that  ‘  the  fish  barnacle,  or  Lepas  anatifera,  is  undoubtedly 
furnished  with  a  feathered  beard.’  The  rest  of  Douce’s  note  is  good :  ‘  The  real 
absurdity  was  the  credulity  of  Gerarde  and  Harrison  in  supposing  that  the  barnacle 
goose  was  really  produced  from  the  shell  of  the  fish.  Dr  Bullein  not  only  believed 
this  himself,  but  bestows  the  epithets  “ignorant”  and  “incredulous”  on  those  who 
did  not ;  and  in  the  same  breath  he  maintains  that  christal  is  nothing  more  than  ice. 
See  his  Buhuarke  of  Defence,  &c.  1562,  f.  12.  Caliban’s  “  barnacle  ”  is  the  clakis  or 
tree-goose.  Every  kind  of  information  on  the  subject  may  be  found  in  the  Physica 
C-unosa  of  Jaspar  Schot,  the  Jesuit,  who,  with  great  industry,  has  collected  from  a 
multitude  of  authors  whatever  they  had  written  concerning  it.  See  lib.  ix,  c.  22.  The 
works  of  Pennant  and  Bewick  will  supply  every  deficiency  with  respect  to  rational 
knowledge.’— W.  A.  Wright  supplements  Collins’s  extract  from  Gerarde  as  follows : 
Gerarde  then  goes  on  to  tell  what  he  had  himself  seen  in  ‘  a  small  Ilande  in  Lanca¬ 
shire  called  the  Pile  of  Fouldres,’  where  branches  of  trees  were  cast  ashore,  ‘  wheron 
is  found  a  certaine  spume  or  froth,  that  in  time  breedeth  vnto  certaine  shels,  in  shape 
like  those  of  the  muskle,  but  sharper  pointed,  and  of  a  whitish  colour.’  In  process 
of  time  the  thing  contained  in  these  shells  ‘  falleth  into  the  sea,  where  it  gathereth 
feathers,  and  groweth  to  a  foule,  bigger  then  a  Mallard,  and  lesser  then  a  Goose ; 
hauing  blacke  legs  and  bill  or  beake,  and  feathers  blacke  and  white,  spotted  in  such 
maner  as  is  our  Magge-Pie,  called  in  some  places  a  Pie-Annet,  which  the  people  of 
Lancashire  call  by  no  other  name  then  a  tree  Goose;  which  place  aforesaide,  and  all 
those  parts  adioining,  do  so  much  abound  therewith,  that  one  of  the  best  is  bought  for 
three  pence :  for  the  truth  heerof,  if  any  doubt,  may  it  please  them  to  repaire  vnto  me, 
and  I  shall  satisfie  them  by  the  testimonie  of  good  witnesses.’ — [Harrison’s  description 
is,  I  think,  the  best  (Holinshed,  i,  38,  1586) ;  it  bears  an  earnest  air  of  scientific  inves¬ 
tigation  :  ‘  I  haue  beene  verie  desirous  to  vnderstand  the  vttermost  of  the  breeding  of 
bamacls,  &  questioned  with  diuers  persons  about  the  same.  I  haue  red  also  whatso- 
euer  is  written  by  forren  authors  touching  the  generation  of  that  foule,  &  sought  out 
some  places  where  I  haue  been  assured  to  see  great  numbers  of  them :  but  in  vaine 
Wherefore  I  vtterlie  despaired  to  obteine  my  purpose,  till  this  present  yeare  of  Grace 
1584,  and  moneth  of  Maie.’  He  then  goes  on  to  say  that  he  saw  some  ships  in  the 
*  James,  lately  arrived  beyond  seas,  on  whose  sides  he  perceived  ‘  an  infinit  sort  of 


230 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  XV,  SC.  L 


With  foreheads  villanous  low. 

Ste.  Monfter,  lay  to  your  fingers  :  helpe  to  beare  this  275 
away,  where  my  hogfhead  of  wine  is,  or  lie  turne  you 
out  of  my  kingdome :  goe  to,  carry  this. 

Tri.  And  this. 

Ste.  I  ,  and  this. 

A  noyfe  of  Hunters  heard.  Enter  diners  Spirits  in  Jhape  28a 
of  Dogs  and  Hounds ,  hunting  them  about:  Profpero 
and  Ariel  fetting  them  on. 

Pro.  Hey  Mountaine,  hey.  283 

281.  Dogs  and]  Om.  Rowe  et  seq.  282.  [Calib.  Steph.  and  Trine,  driven 

Profpero]  Profper  F3F4>  out  roaring.  Tbeob. 

rhels,’  and  having  obtained  ten  or  twelve  of  the  largest  he  found  in  one  of  them  ‘  the 
proportion  of  a  foule  more  perfectlie  than  in  all  the  rest,  sauing  that  the  head  was  not 
yet  formed,  bicause  the  fresh  water  had  killed  them  all  (as  I  take  it)  and  thereby  hin¬ 
dered  their  perfection.  Certainlie  the  feathers  of  the  taile  hoong  out  of  the  shell  at 
least  two  inches,  the  wings  (almost  perfect  touching  forme)  were  garded  with  two 
shels  or  sheeldes  proportioned  like  the  selfe  wings,  and  likewise  the  brestbone  had 
hir  couerture  also  of  the  shellie  substance,  and  altogither  resembling  the  figure  which 
Lobell  and  Pena  doo  giue  foorth  in  their  description  of  this  foule :  so  that  I  am  now 
fullie  persuaded  that  it  is  either  the  barnacle  that  is  ingendred  after  one  maner  in 
these  shels,  or  some  other  sea-foule  to  vs  as  yet  vnknowen.  For  by  the  feathers 
appearing  and  forme  so  apparant,  it  cannot  be  denied,  but  that  some  bird  or  other 
must  proceed  of  this  substance,  which  by  falling  from  the  sides  of  the  ships  in  long 
voiages,  may  come  to  some  perfection.’  In  the  same  volume  of  Holinshed,  in  the 
Description  of  Scotland  by  Hector  Boetius,  there  is  an  account  (p.  17),  highly  cir¬ 
cumstantial,  of  a  tree  cast  up  by  the  sea  which  was  ‘  worm-eaten  and  full  of  yoong 
geese.’ — Halliwell  gives  a  list  of  authorities  on  this  subject  and  an  illustration. 
An  entertaining  account  is  given  by  Max  Muller  (. Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Lan- 
guage,  ii,  552>  Am.  ed.)  of  what  he  supposes  to  have  been  the  origin  of  this  myth. 
He  shows  that  the  shells  were  regularly  and  properly  called  bemaculcB,  and  that  Bar¬ 
nacle-geese  were  caught  in  Ireland,  which  were  eaten  by  the  priests  in  Lent,  owing 
to  the  belief  that  these  geese  were  not  birds,  but  shell-fish;  that  this  belief  was 
readily  adopted  in  France,  where  (so  Prof.  Muller  assumes)  these  geese  were  called 
Hibemiculce ,  and  if  the  first  syllable  were  dropped  they  would  be  called  Bemiculce, 
which  is  so  closely  allied  with  Bernaculce  that  the  two  were  supposed  to  be  one  and 
the  same,  and  that  hence  arose  the  myth.  As  this  name  for  the  geese,  Hibemicuhz, 
could  arise  only  out  of  Ireland,  this  theory  of  Prof.  Muller’s  does  not  account  for  the 
existence  of  the  myth  in  Ireland  before  it  appears  to  have  spread  to  France,  and 
where  the  geese  were  called,  according  to  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  not  the  diminutive 
Bemicula: ,  but  Bernaca,  However,  the  story  is  entertaining,  and  a  discussion,  in 
these  pages,  barren  until  it  can  be  determined  with  assurance  into  which  of  the  two 
Caliban  was  in  dread  of  being  turned,  into  the  crustacean  or  into  the  goose. _ Ed. 

274.  foreheads]  Steevens  :  Low  foreheads  were  anciently  reckoned  among 
deformities  See  Ant.  Sr  Cleop.  Ill,  iii,  35. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


231 


Ari.  Siluer :  there  it  goes,  Siluer. 

Pro.  Fury,  Fury:  there  Tyrant,  there:  harke,  harke.  285 
Goe,  charge  my  Goblins  that  they  grinde  their  ioynts 
With  dry  Convultions,  fhorten  vp  their  finewes 
With  aged  Cramps,  &  more  pinch-fpotted  make  them, 

Then  Pard,  or  Cat  o’Mountaine. 

Ari.  Harke,  they  rore.  29a 

Pro.  Let  them  be  hunted  foundly :  At  this  houre 
Lies  at  my  mercy  all  mine  enemies  : 

Shortly  fhall  all  my  labours  end,  and  thou 

Shalt  haue  the  ayre  at  freedome  :  for  a  little 

Follow,  and  doe  me  feruice.  Exeunt.  295 


A£lus  quintus  :  Sccma  Prima. 


Enter  Profpero  (in  his  Magicke  robes )  and  Ariel. 

Pro.  Now  do’s  my  Proie£l  gather  to  a  head  : 

My  charmes  cracke  not :  my  Spirits  obey,  and  Time  4 


285.  Fury,']  Hey,  Fury,  Ktly. 

286.  that  they ]  that  thou  F3. 

287.  dry]  wry  Warb.  conj.  (Nichols, 
ti,  p.  247)  Wilson. 

288.  aged~\  agued  Wilson. 


292.  Lies ]  Ff,  Jeph.  Wrt,  Rife,  Dtn. 
Lye  Rowe  et  cet. 

2.  Before  the  Cell.  Theob. 

4.  cracke ]  breake  Wilson. 


286.  grinde]  The  subjunctive,  see  I,  ii,  528. 

287,  &c.  Convultions  .  .  .  Cramps,  &c.]  Bucknill  (p.  58) :  The  punishments 
here  inflicted  are  half-medical,  half-magical,  and  certainly  do  not  represent  a  scientific 
description  of  aguish  disease. 

289.  Cat  o’Mountaine]  W.  A.  Wright:  Topsell  [p.  577]  says,  ‘The  greatest 
therefore  they  call  Panthers,  as  Bellunensis  writeth.  The  second  they  call  Pardals, 
and  the  third  least  of  all,  they  call  Leopards,  which  for  the  same  cause  in  England 
is  called  a  Cat  of  the  Mountain.’  ....  It  was  probably  one  of  the  smaller  varieties 
of  the  leopard,  and  the  name  was  not  strictly  confined  to  one  animal.  In  The  Merry 
Wives,  II,  ii,  27,  Falstaff  reproaches  Pistol  with  his  ‘  cat-a-mountain  looks.’ 

292.  Lies]  For  a  similar  singular,  see  I,  i,  24. 

4.  cracke]  It  is  not  easy  exactly  to  define  the  use  of  this  word  here.  Allen 
thinks  it  refers  to  magic  bands ;  Prospero  afterwards  says  ‘  my  charms  I’ll  break? 
and  further  on  tells  Ariel  to  ‘  untie  the  spell  ’  around  Caliban ;  that  Shakespeare 
applies  the  word  ‘  crack  ’  to  strings,  is  seen  in  this  play  where  Ferdinand  says  ‘  I  had 
rather  crack  my  sinews,’  and  in  Lear,  V,  iii,  216:  ‘the  strings  of  life  Begin  to  crack.' 
— W.  A.  Wright  defines  its  present  use  as  ‘without  a  flaw.’  There  may  be  even 


232 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 

5 


Goes  vpright  with  his  carriage :  how’s  the  day  ? 

Ar.  On  the  fixt  hower,  at  which  time,  my  Lord 
You  faid  our  worke  fhould  ceafe. 

Pro.  I  did  fay  fo, 

When  firft  I  rais’d  the  Tempeft :  fay  my  Spirit, 

How  fares  the  King,  and’s  followers  ?  10 

Ar.  Confin’d  together 
In  the  fame  fafhion,  as  you  gaue  in  charge, 
lull  as  you  left  them ;  all  prifoners  Sir 
In  the  Line-groue  which  weather-fends  your  Cell, 

They  cannot  boudge  till  your  releafe  :  The  King,  15 

His  Brother,  and  yours,  abide  all  three  diftra6ted, 

And  the  remainder  mourning  ouer  them,  17 


10.  fares]  fare  Cap.  conj. 

and’s]  and  his  Cap.  Steev.’85, 
Mai.  Var.  Hal.  Sing.  Ktly. 

and’s  followers  ?]  and  his  ?  Steev. 

’93- 

11.  together ]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

13.  them...  &V]  them,  sir  ;  all  prisoners 
Reed ’03,  ’13,  Var.’2i. 


1 3.  all]  all  your  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Cap.  all  are  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 
Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

14.  Line-groue]  Ff,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh. 
Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Clke,  Wrt,  Rife.  Lime 
grove  Rowe  et  cet. 

15.  your]  you  F3F^,  Rowe  i,  Johns. 
Hal.  Sing. 


a  third  interpretation,  as  containing  a  reference  to  the  crucibles  and  alembics  of 
magicians ;  of  this  Deighton  has  an  adumbration  in  surmising  that  it  refers  to  ‘  a 
pitcher  or  dish  which  is  not  cracked.’ — Ed. 

4.  Time]  Warburton  :  Time  is  usually  represented  as  an  old  man  bending 
under  his  load.  He  is  here  painted  as  in  great  vigour,  and  walking  upright  to  denote 
that  things  went  prosperously  on. 

io,  II.  These  two  lines  must  be  accepted  as  metrical  in  themselves,  without  attempt¬ 
ing,  in  order  to  make  one  line,  to  pen  them  within  the  limits  of  a  certain  number  of 
syllables.  In  the  attempt  to  force  them  into  one  line  Steevens  discards  ‘  followers  ’ 
under  the  convenient  plea  that  it  is  *  evidently  a  gloss  ’ ;  and  it  is  doubtful  if  the 
treatment  suggested  by  Abbott  be  not  quite  as  violent;  under  the  section  on 
Dropped  Prefixes  (§  460)  the  latter,  after  remarking  that  ‘  Sometimes,  perhaps,  the 
prefix,  though  written,  ought  scarcely  to  be  pronounced,’  thus  scans  the  line  :  ‘  How 
fares  |  the  king  |  and’s  follow  |  ers  ?  (Con)  |  fined  |  together.’ 

13.  The  Textual  Notes  will  show  the  attempts  that  have  been  made  to  render  this 
line  metrical;  of  them  all,  Reed’s  is  to  be  preferred,  I  think,  as  the  simplest;  it  in¬ 
volves  no  other  change  than  a  transposition  of  words.  Abbott,  §  484,  would  make 
both  ‘  all  ’  and  ‘  prisoners  ’  dissyllables.  Reed’s  change  has  been  overlooked  not  only 
by  Collier  and  Dyce,  but  by  the  Cam.  Edd. 

14.  Line-groue]  See  IV,  i,  218. 

16.  Brother]  Walker  (Vers.  108)  cites  this  as  a  possible  instance  of  the  con¬ 
traction  of  this  word  into  a  monosyllable,  like  whe'er  for  whether,  or  e’en  for  even. 
The  dialect  of  the  Southern  negroes  makes  such  a  contraction  familiar,  albeit  comic. 
—Ed. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


233 

18 


Brim  full  of  forrow,  and  difmay :  but  chiefly 
Him  that  you  term’d  Sir,  the  good  old  Lord  Gonzallo, 

His  teares  runs  downe  his  beard  like  winters  drops  20 

From  eaues  of  reeds  :  your  charm  fo  ftrongly  works  ’em 
That  if  you  now  beheld  them,  your  affedtions 
Would  become  tender. 

Pro.  Doft  thou  thinke  fo,  Spirit? 

Ar.  Mine  would  ,  Sir,  were  I  humane.  25 

Pro.  And  mine  fhall. 

Haft  thou  (which  art  but  aire)  a  touch,  a  feeling 
Of  their  afflidiions,  and  fhall  not  my  felfe, 

One  of  their  kinde,  that  rellifh  all  as  fharpely, 

Paflion  as  they,  be  kindlier  mou’d  then  thou  art  ?  30 

Thogh  with  their  high  wrongs  I  am  ftrook  to  th’  quick, 

Yet,  with  my  nobler  reafon,  gainft  my  furie 

Doe  I  take  part :  the  rarer  Adtion  is 

In  vertue,  then  in  vengeance :  they,  being  penitent, 

The  foie  drift  of  my  purpofe  doth  extend  35 

Not  a  frowne  further  :  Goe,  releafe  them  Ariell , 


18.  19.  Brim. ..Hint]  One  line,  Mai. 

19.  Him]  He  Han.  Huds. 

that  you]  you  Steev.’93,  Var. 

Sir]  Om.  Pope  + ,  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 

Huds. 

20.  teares  runs]  teares  run  Ff  et 
seq. 

■winters  drops]  Winter  drops  F4, 
Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.’85,  Dyce,  Huds. 

21.  reeds]  reed  Cap.  conj. 


21.  ’em]  them  Steev.’93,  Var.  Knt, 
Coll.  Wb.  i,  Ktly. 

29,  30.  Jharpely,  PaJJion]  Jharply 
Pajfion  F3F4,  Rowe,  Hal.  Wh.  Dyce, 
Rife,  sharply  Passion'd  Pope,  sharply, 
Passion'd  Han. 

31.  Thogh]  Fx. 

32.  gainjl]  againjl  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 

33.  34.  Adtion... vertue]  virtue. ..par¬ 
don  Daniel. 


19.  Him  that]  ‘Him’  is  here  for  he;  in  II,  i,  32  we  have  ‘he’  for  him.  See 
Abbott,  §  208,  if  need  be. 

29.  all]  Holt  :  The  meaning  here  is  either  ‘  he  relish’d  all  Passion  as  sharply  ’  or 
‘he  relish’d  Passion  all  (i.  e.  full)  as  sharply  as,’  &c.  [In  this  latter  adverbial  sense, 
which  is  assuredly  correct,  Walker  [Crit.  iii,  6)  also  understands  it;  he  calls  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  corresponding  phrase  in  Dryden’s  Version  :  ‘  who  as  sharply  relish  passion 
as  they,’  &c.] — Dyce:  The  earlier  Folios  have,  in  opposition  to  the  sense,  a  comma 
after  ‘  sharply.’ 

30.  Passion]  Theobald:  That  is,  feel  the  force  of  passion;  am  mov’d  by  it.  So 
in  Two  Gent.  IV,  iv,  172:  *’twas  Ariadne  passioning  For  Theseus’  perjury,’  and  in 
Ven.  and  Ad.  1059  :  ‘  Dumbly  she  passions,’  &c. 

34-36.  Capell  thus  punctuates  and  amends  these  lines :  ‘  they  being  penitent,  The 
sole  drift  of  my  purpose,  wrath  doth  end ;  Not  a  frown  further :’  and  also  gives  us 
this  note,  whereof  the  self-complacency,  at  least,  is  intelligible :  ‘  He  must  have  very 
unworthy  notions  of  Shakespeare  who  can  look  on  [line  35,  “  The  sole  drift,”  &c.] 


234 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 

37 


My  Charmes  He  breake,  their  fences  lie  reftore, 

And  they  fhall  be  themfelues. 

Ar.  He  fetch  them,  Sir.  Exit. 

Pro.  Ye  Elues  of  hils,  brooks,  Hading  lakes  &  groues,  40 
And  ye,  that  on  the  fands  with  printleffe  foote 
Doe  chafe  the  ebbing-Neptune,  and  doe  flie  him 
When  he  comes  backe  :  you  demy-Puppets,  that  43 

39.  them. ]  thim  F3.  39.  Scene  II.  Pope  +  . 

in  its  old  reading,  and  without  stop  anywhere,  and  then  ascribe  it  to  him :  purpose 
(nay,  and  the  drift  of  purpose,  too)  extending  a  frown,  is  an  idea  for  Bedlam ;  and 
we  were  certainly  help’d  to ’t  by  some  amender  who  felt  a  breach  in  the  measure,  and 
lengthen’d  “  end ”  to  extend  in  way  of  cure  for  it;  that  administer’d  here  [i.  e.  Capell’s 
own  emendation]  will  scarce  be  objected  to;  the  term  is  everyway  pertinent;  and,  by 
that,  and  the  punctuation,  the  whole  passage  is  now  of  simplest  construction,  and  has 
a  clearness  that  makes  explaining  unnecessary.’  Of  course  the  meaning  of  the  Folio 
text,  in  which  no  one  but  Capell  has  ever  found  any  difficulty,  is  that  Prospero’s  anger 
does  not  extend  as  much  as  a  frown  beyond  their  penitence.  The  Cam.  Edd.  in  record¬ 
ing  this  reading  as  ‘Anon,  apud  Rann  ’  overlooked  the  fact  that  it  is  Capell’s  text. — Ed. 

4°>  43-  Ye  .  .  .  you]  These  seem  to  be  used  here  indiscriminately,  says  Abbott, 
§  236.  See  I,  ii,  382. 

40,  &c.  Warburton  :  Shakespeare  borrowed  this  speech  from  Medea’s  in  Ovid. — 
Holt  :  This  beautiful  incantation  has  shown  beyond  contradiction  that  Shakespeare 
was  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  sentiments  of  the  ancients  on  the  subject  of  enchant¬ 
ments.  Ovid’s  Metamorphoses,  vii,  197-206,  were  his  foundation,  but  he  varied  his 
plan  with  masterly  judgement. — Farmer  (p.  45) :  It  happens,  however,  that  the  trans¬ 
lation  by  Arthur  Golding  is  by  no  means  literal,  and  Shakespeare  hath  closely  fol¬ 
lowed  it. — Malone  :  Shakespeare  evidently  copied  the  translation,  and  not  the  orig 
bal.  [The  following  is  from  the  edition  of  1567,  p.  83,  verso:] 

Ye  Ayres  and  windes :  ye  Elues  of  Hilles,  of  Brookes,  of  Woods  alone, 

Of  standing  Lakes,  and  of  the  Night  approche  ye  euerychone. 

Through  helpe  of  whom  (the  crooked  bankes  much  wondring  at  the  thing) 

I  haue  compelled  streames  to  run  cleane  backward  to  their  spring. 

By  charmes  I  make  the  calme  Seas  rough,  &  make  y  rough  Seas  plaine. 

And  couer  all  the  Skie  with  Cloudes  and  chase  them  thence  againe. 

By  charmes  I  raise  and  lay  the  windes,  and  burst  the  Vipers  iaw. 

And  from  the  bowels  of  the  Earth  both  stones  and  trees  doe  draw. 

Whole  woods  and  Forestes  I  remoue :  I  make  the  Mountaines  shake, 

And  euen  the  Earth  it  selfe  to  grone  and  fearefully  to  quake. 

I  call  vp  dead  men  from  their  graues :  and  thee  O  lightsome  Moone 
I  darken  oft,  though  beaten  brasse  abate  thy  perill  soone. 

Our  Sorcerie  dimmes  the  Morning  faire,  and  darkes  f  Sun  at  Noone. 

The  flaming  breath  of  fierie  Bulles  ye  quenched  for  my  sake 
And  caused  their  vnwieldie  neckes  the  bended  yoke  to  take. 

Among  the  Earthbred  brothers  you  a  mortall  war  did  set 
And  brought  a  sleepe  the  Dragon  fell  whose  eyes  were  neuer  shet.’— 


act  v,  sc.  1.]  THE  TEMPEST 

By  Moone-fhine  doe  the  greene  fowre  Ringlets  make, 


235 


44 


Maginn  [Eraser’s  Maga.  Oct.  1839) :  Shakespeare  was  perfectly  acquainted  with  the 
difference  between  the  enchantments  of  the  ancients  and  those  which  were  suitable  to 
the  character  of  his  Prospero.  Golding,  indeed,  mistook  his  author,  when  he  translated 
‘  Montesque,  amnesque,  lacusque,  Dique  omnes  nemorum,  dique  omnes  noctis  adeste,’ 
by  ‘  ye  elves  of  hills,  of  brooks,  and  woods  alone ,  of  standing  lakes,  and  of  the  night  ’ ; 
for  the  deities  invoked  by  Medea  were  anything  but  what,  in  our  language,  attaches 
to  the  idea  of  elves ;  while  the  epithet  alone,  though,  perhaps,  defensible,  is  intruded 

without  sufficient  warrant  into  the  translation . But  what  was  unsuitable  for  Ovid 

was  perfectly  suitable  for  Shakespeare ;  and  accordingly  he  had  no  scruple  of  borrow¬ 
ing  a  few  words  of  romantic  appeal  to  the  tiny  deities  of  fairy  superstition.  The 
lines  immediately  following  ‘  Ye  ayres  and  winds,’  &c.,  address  the  powers,  which 
with  printless  foot,  dance  upon  the  sands ;  which,  by  moonshine,  form  the  green,  sour 
ringlets,  not  touched  by  the  ewe ;  which  make  midnight  mushrooms  for  pastime ;  which 
rejoice  to  hear  the  solemn  curfew ;  and  not  one  of  these  things  is  connected  with  the 
notions  of  aerial  habitants  of  wood  or  stream  in  classical  days.  When  Shakespeare 
returns  to  Ovid  he  is  very  little  indebted  to  Golding.  We  find,  indeed,  that  Prospero 
boasts  of  having  ‘  bedimmed  the  noontide  sun,’  which  resembles  Golding’s  ‘  Our  sor- 
cerie  dims  the  morning  fair,  and  darks  the  sun  at  noone.'  But  the  analogous  passage 
in  Ovid  would  have  been,  in  its  literal  state,  pf  no  use  to  Prospero  :  ‘  Currus  quoque 
carmine  nostro  Pallet  avi.'  With  this  obligation,  however,  the  compliment  due  tc 
Golding  ceases.  Ope  quorum.  ‘  Through  help  of  whom.’ — Golding.  ‘  By  whose 
aid.’ — Shakespeare.  Vivaque  saxa,  sua  convulsaque  robora  terra,  et  silvas  moveo. 
‘And  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth  both  stones  and  trees  do  draw.' — Golding.  ‘  Rifted 
Jove’s  stout  oak  (robora)  with  his  own  bolt ;  and  by  the  spurs  plucked  up  (sua  con- 
vulsa  terra),  the  pine  and  cedar.’ — Shakespeare.  Manesque  exire  sepulcris.  ‘  I  call 
up  dead  men  from  their  graves.’ — Golding.  ‘  Graves,  at  my  command,  have  wak’d 
their  sleepers ;  oped  and  let  them  forth.’ — Shakespeare.  Ovid  has  contributed  to  the 
invocation  of  Prospero  at  least  as  much  as  Golding. 

41.  ye,  that]  See  II,  ii,  12. 

41.  printlesse  foote]  Steevens:  See  Milton,  Comus,  897 :  ‘  Whilst  from  off  the 
waters  fleet  Thus  I  set  my  printless  feet.’ — Halliwell:  Compare  Ven.  6°  Ad.  148: 
*  Dance  on  the  sands  and  yet  no  footing  seen.’ 

43.  demy-Puppets]  There  must  have  been  some  reason  for  the  use  of  ‘demy,’ 
but  what  it  is  I  cannot  say.  To  translate  it  as  Schmidt  does,  and  define  it  as  ‘  half-a- 
puppet,’  is  merely  what  Dr  Johnson  would  call  ‘motion  without  progression.’  In 
Drayton’s  Moon-calf,  ed.  1748,  p.  177,  we  find,  ‘  Other,  like  beasts,  yet  had  the  feet 
of  fowls,  That  demi-urchins  were,  or  demi-owls.’ — Ed. 

44.  greene  sowre  Ringlets]  Grey  (p.  35)  :  Ringlets  of  grass  are  very  common 
in  meadows,  which  are  higher,  sourer,  and  of  a  deeper  green  than  the  grass  that 
grows  around  them;  and  by  the  common  people  are  usually  call’d  fairy  circles. — 
Douce  :  Though  a  real  or  supposed  acidity  in  this  kind  of  grass  will  certainly  war¬ 
rant  the  use  of  ‘  sour,’  it  is  not  improbable  that  Shakespeare  might  have  written  green¬ 
sward.  [So  also  Collier’s  MS.] — Hunter  ( Disquisition ,  &c.  p.  132) :  The  com¬ 
pound  green-sour  has  been  invented  by  the  modern  editors.  I  believe  no  other 
instance  of  such  a  compound  is  to  be  collected  from  any  other  writer.  [See  Halli- 
well’s  note.]  I  would  propose  :  ‘  By  moon-shine  on  the  green,  sour  ringlets  make.’ 
Or  if  we  suppose  on  to  be  elided :  ‘  By  moon-shine  d’  on  the  green,  sour  ringlets 


236 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  V,  sc.  i. 

Whereof  the  Ewe  not  bites  :  and  you,  whofe  paftime  45 

Is  to  make  midnight-Mufhrumps,  that  reioyce 

To  heare  the  folemne  Curfewe,  by  whofe  ayde 

(Weake  Mafters  though  ye  be)  I  haue  bedymn’d 

The  Noone-tide  Sun,  call’d  forth  the  mutenous  windes, 

And  twixt  the  greene  Sea,  and  the  azur’d  vault  50 

46.  Mufhrumps~\  Mujliromes  F3F4.  Kinnear. 

48.  Mafters']  ministers  Han.  motives  50.  azur’d ]  azure  Walker,  Huds. 


make.’  But  I  should  prefer  the  former  were  it  not  too  obvious. — Knight  :  Why 
cannot  we  be  content  to  retain  the  double  epithet  of  the  Folio  ?  We  know  that  the 
ringlets  are  on  the  green  sward,  and  on  the  green ;  but  the  poet,  by  using  the  epithet 
‘  green,’  marks  the  intensity  of  their  colour.  They  are  greener  than  the  green  about 
them.  That  they  are  ‘  sour  ’  he  explains  by  ‘  Whereof  the  ewe  not  bites.’  No  descrip¬ 
tion  could  be  more  accurate  of  what  we  still  call  fairy-rings. — Halliwell:  The 
compound  epithet  ‘  green-sour  ’  is  exactly  in  Shakespeare’s  manner,  like  another  one, 
‘  white-cold’  [IY,  i,  63].  There  is  surely  no  necessity  for  any  alteration  of  the  orig 
inal  text.  [Dyce  (ed.  i)  expresses  his  agreement  with  Halliwell  and  speaks  for  all 
of  us.  For  the  Folk-lore  in  regard  to  these  Ringlets  see  Brand’s  Popular  Antiquities 
(ii,  480,  ed.  Bohn),  where  also  certain  theories  to  account  for  their  origin  may  be 
found,  such  as  that  they  were  due  to  thunder-bolts,  to  moles,  and  finally  to  a  species 
of  mushroom. — Ed.] 

45.  not  bites]  See  II,  i,  122.  Rushton  {Sh.  Illust.  by  Old  Authors,  i,  41)  : 
‘  Your  misplacing  and  preposterous  placing  is  not  all  one  in  behauiour  of  language, 
for  the  misplacing  is  alwaies  intollerable,  but  the  preposterous  is  a  pardonable  fault, 
and  many  times  giues  a  pretie  grace  vnto  the  speech.  We  call  it  by  a  common  say¬ 
ing,  to  set  the  carte  before  the  horse,  and  it  may  be  done,  eyther  by  a  single  word  or  bv 
a  clause  of  speech  :  by  a  single  word  thus  :  And  if  I  not  performe,  God  let  me  never 
thriue.  For  performe  not :  and  this  vice  is  sometimes  tollerable  inough,  but  if  the 
word  carry  away  notable  sence,  it  is  a  vice  not  tollerable,  as  he  that  said,  praising  a 
woman  for  her  red  lippes,  thus  :  A  corall  lippe  of  hew.  Which  is  no  good  speech,’ 
&c. — Puttenham,  Arte  of  English  Poesie,  iii,  cap.  22  [p.  262,  ed.  Arber], 

46.  Mushrumps]  Halliwell  gives  several  instances  of  this  spelling  from  Beau. 
&  FI.,  Marlowe,  Southwell,  Speed’s  History,  and  Day;  and  W.  A.  Wright  adds 
another  from  Lily. 

48.  Weake  Masters]  Steevens:  Though  you  are  but  inferior  masters  of  these 
supernatural  powers,  though  you  possess  them  but  in  a  low  degree. — Blackstone  : 
That  is,  ye  are  powerful  auxiliaries,  but  weak  if  left  to  yourselves;  your  employment 
is  then  to  make  green  ringlets  and  midnight  mushrooms,  and  to  play  the  idle  pranks 
mentioned  by  Ariel  in  his  next  song;  yet  by  your  aid  I  have  been  enabled  to  invert 
the  course  of  nature.  We  say,  proverbially,  ‘  Fire  is  a  good  servant,  but  a  bad  master .’ 
[In  this  note  I  am  afraid  His  Honor’s  proverb  somewhat  allays  the  good  precedence  ; 

*  master  is  not,  I  think,  used  in  quite  the  same  sense  both  in  the  proverb  and  in  our 
text,  where  it  means  merely  weak  proficients,  weak  adepts,  and  the  sense  would  be 
logically  as  gcod  were  it  even  omitted. — Ed.] 

50.  azur’d  Just  as  in  ‘your  sedg’d  crown,’  IV,  i,  145,  Walker  conjectured 
sedge;  s<  here  he  conjectures  azure  ( Crit .  ii,  69  and  iii,  7),  although  doubtfully; 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


237 


Set  roaring  warre  :  To  the  dread  ratling  Thunder  5 1 

Haue  I  giuen  fire,  and  rifted  Ioues  ftowt  Oke 

With  his  owne  Bolt :  The  ftrong  bafs’d  promontorie 

Haue  I  made  fhake,  and  by  the  fpurs  pluckt  vp 

The  Pyne,  and  Cedar.  Graues  at  my  command  55 

Haue  wak’d  their  fleepers,  op’d,  and  let  ’em  forth 

By  my  fo  potent  Art.  But  this  rough  Magicke 

I  heere  abiure :  and  when  I  haue  requir’d 

Some  heauenly  Muficke  (which  euen  now  I  do) 

To  worke  mine  end  vpon  their  Sences,  that  60 

This  Ayrie-charme  is  for,  I’le  breake  my  ftaffe, 

Bury  it  certaine  fadomes  in  the  earth,  62 


53-  flrong  bafs’d]  strong  bas'd  Rowe. 

56.  Haue..  forth]  Have  open'd,  and 
let  forth  their  sleepers,  wak'd  Warb. 

’em]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Wh. 
Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Rife,  Huds.  them 


Theob.  et  cet. 

61.  is  for]  has  frail' d  Warb. 

62.  Bury. .  fadomes]  Bury 't  a  certain 
f adorn  Warb. 

fadomes]  fathoms  Cap. 


he  finds  ‘  azudd  veins  ’  in  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  ii,  142,  line  14.  The  list  of  instances, 
where  final  d  and  final  e  are  confounded,  which  Walker  gives  in  the  dozen  pages 
of  his  volume,  is  almost  long  enough  to  make  one  accept  at  once  any  conjecture 
founded  on  it.  There  is  a  notable  instance  of  this  confusion  in  ‘  boile,’  line  72  of  this 
Scene. — In  §  294,  Abbott  gives  a  list  of  verbs  formed  from  nouns  and  participles,  and, 
as  a  parallel  case  to  the  present,  where  an  adjective  would  be  quite  as  good  as  the 
participle,  he  cites,  ‘reckoning  time,  whose  million’d  accidents,’  &c.,  Sonn.  115. 
‘Lorded,’  I,  ii,  115,  and  ‘  wondred,’  IV,  i,  137,  in  the  present  play,  are  instances  of 
these  verbs  formed  from  nouns,  but  are  not  parallel  to  the  present  case. — W.  A. 
Wright.  Milton  ( Comus ,  893)  has  ‘azum.’ 

57.  But  this]  Steevens:  Prospero  sets  out  with  along  and  distinct  invocation 
to  the  various  ministers  of  his  art;  yet  to  what  purpose  they  were  invoked  does 
not  very  distinctly  appear.  Had  our  author  written  '■All  this,’  &c.  instead  of  'But 
this,’  &c.  the  conclusion  of  the  address  would  have  been  more  pertinent  to  its  begin¬ 
ning. — Grant  White,  in  reference  to  the  same  idea  that  Steevens  expresses,  suggests 
that  ‘  it  is  possible  that  this  is  the  result  of  inadvertence  on  Shakespeare’s  part ;  but  it 
is  more  than  probable  that  he  purposely,  though  not  at  first  deliberately,  avoided  the 
clear,  determinate  effect  of  a  more  precise  construction.’  [This  wavering  of  thought 
at  the  crisis  of  his  fate  is  pathetic. — Ed.] 

58.  requir’d]  W.  A.  Wright  :  Asked  for.  Both  ‘  require  ’  and  ‘  demand  ’  were 
formerly  used  in  a  sense  slightly  different  from  that  attached  to  them  now.  Compare 
Psalm  cxxxvii,  3  :  ‘  For  there  they  that  carried  us  away  captive  required  of  us  a  song,’ 
where  there  is  no  idea  of  asking  as  a  right. 

61,  62.  To  record  in  the  Text.  Notes  Warburton’s  arbitrary  changes  in  these  lines 
is  amply  sufficient ;  to  give  even  a  digest  of  the  long  notes  which  they  called  forth 
from  Holt  and  Heath  is  not  worth,  as  Mat  Prior  would  say,  the  effusion  of  any  more 
Christian  ink. — Ed. 

62.  certaine]  Edwards  ( Canons ,  &c.  p.  66),  while  quite  aware  that  certain 


238 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


And  deeper  then  did  euer  Plummet  found  63 

lie  drowne  my  booke.  Solemne  mujicke. 

Heere  enters  Ariel  before :  Then  Alonfo  with  a  franticke  ge-  6$ 

Jiure,  attended  by  Gonzalo.  Sebaftian  and  Anthonio  in 
like  manner  attended  by  Adrian  and  Francifco :  They  all 
enter  the  circle  which  Profpero  had  made ,  and  there  Jland 
charm'd:  which  Profpero  obferuing,  fpeakes. 


A  folemne  Ayre,  and  the  beft  comforter, 

To  an  vnfetled  fancie,  Cure  thy  braines 

(Now  vfeleffe)  boile  within  thy  skull :  there  ftand 


65.  Scene  III.  Pope  +  . 

70.  and~\  Om.  Cap.  as  Huds. 

71.  vnfetled...thy~\  unsettled  fancy's 
cure! — Thy  Mai. 

fancie ,  Cure~\  fancy  !  Sure  Har¬ 
ness  conj.  (ap.  Ingleby,  Still  Lion, 
p.  69). 


71.  braines~\  brains  that  Ktly. 

72.  [How  vfelege )  boile ]  Now  useless 
coil ,  Wilson. 

boile  within\  Fa.  boil  within  F 
F4,  Rowe  i,  Mai.  Ktly.  boiling  in  Sing. 
boil'd  within  Rowe  ii  et  cet.  bound 
within  S.  Verges. 


means  an  indefinite  number,  supposes  that  Shakespeare  might  have  intended  to  sig¬ 
nify  that  there  was  ‘  a  certain  precise  determinate  number  of  fadoms,  which  Prospero. 
by  his  art,  knew  of  j  at  which  depth  if  he  buried  his  staff,  it  would  never  more  be 
discovered,  so  as  to  be  used  in  enchantments  ’ ;  which  is  ingenious  and  not  impossible 
—Ed. 

71.  vnsetled  fancie]  Wordsworth  (p.  78) :  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the 
service  which  David  performed  for  Saul,  see  1  Sam.  xvi,  23,  was  present  to  our  poet’s 
mind. 

71.  braines]  Heath  :  Compare  Mid.  H.  D.  V,  i,  4:  ‘  Lovers  and  madmen  have 
such  seething  brains.’— Malone  :  And  Wint.  T.  Ill,  iii,  64 :  <  Would  any  but  these 
boiled  brains  of  nineteen  and  two-and -twenty  hunt  this  weather?’ 

71,  72.  thy]  Ingleby  (Sh.  Hermeneutics,  p.  68)  :  As  two  persons  are  addressed, 
and  ‘you’  is  the  pronoun  properly  applied  to  them  in  line  [73],  it  can  hardly  be 
doubted  that  the  possessive  pronoun  ‘  thy  ’  is  an  error  for  the.  [Hudson  adopted  this 
in  his  text  with  the  following  note  :]  Prospero  is  evidently  speaking  either  to  all  six 
of  the  men  or  else  to  none  of  them.  If  he  is  speaking  to  them  it  should  be  your— 
your;  if  merely  in  reference  to  them,  it  should  be  either  the— the  or  their— their. 
Ingleby’s  correction  is  manifestly  right ;  though,  for  my  part,  I  should  prefer  their— 
their,  but  that  it  involves  more  of  literal  change.  [I  am  afraid  that  here  the  critic  has 
not  only  invaded  the  province  of  the  actor,  but  has  failed  to  master  the  situation.  It 
is  an  assumption  on  Ingleby’s  part  that  ‘  two  persons  are  addressed,’  and  an  incorrect 
one.  Gonzalo’s  brains  did  not  boil  within  his  skull.  Ariel  distinctly  says  that  only 
Alonso,  Sebastian,  and  Anthonio  were  distracted,  and  the  stage-direction  is  explicit 
that  it  is  only  they  who  enter  with  a  ‘  frantic  gesture.’  Prospero  could  use  ‘  thy  ’  only 
to  Alonso,  as  the  one  to  enter  first,  but  he  may  well  have  used  ‘  you  ’  when  he  spell- 
stopped  them  all. — Ed.] 

72.  boile]  Rowe’s  change  to  boil'd  has  been  adopted  by  almost  every  editor.  It 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  TEMPEST 

For  you  are  Spell-ftopt. 

Holy  Gonzallo,  Honourable  man, 

Mine  eyes  ev’n  fociable  to  the  fhew  of  thine 
Fall  fellowly  drops  :  The  charme  diffolues  apace, 
And  as  the  morning  fteales  vpon  the  night 
(Melting  the  darkeneffe)  fo  their  rifing  fences 
Begin  to  chace  the  ignorant  fumes  that  mantle 


239 

73 

75 

79 


74-  Holy]  Noble  Coll,  ii  (MS).  "]6.  fellowly  drops~\fellowy  drops  Rowe 

75.  jhew~\flow  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS).  ii.  fellow-drop  Pope,Tkeob.  Han.Warb. 

Cap. 


is  much  simpler  thus  to  consider  it  as  another  instance  of  tl.t.  confusion  of  final  e  and 
final  d  (see  line  50,  above,  and  line  87,  below)  than  to  suppose  that  there  is  an  omis¬ 
sion  of  the  relative  which. — Ingleby  (Sh.  Hermeneutics ,  68),  however,  strongly  con¬ 
tends  for  this  omission,  which  he  pronounces  ‘  as  plain  as  the  nose  on  one’s  face,’  and 
that  the  ‘brains  were  boiling ,  not  boiled.'  To  which  the  answer  lies  that  having 
entered  ‘  the  circle  which  Prospero  had  made  ’  their  ‘  franticke  gestures  ’  had  ceased, 
leaving  their  brains  useless  as  the  result  of  an  ‘  vnsetled  fancied  It  is  hardly  to  be 
supposed  that  Prospero  would  address  them  as  intelligent  men  while  the  uncomfort¬ 
able  process  of  ebullition  was  going  on  in  their  brains. — Ed. 

74.  Holy]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Noble  as  it  is  corrected  in  the  MS  is,  we  may  be 
confident,  a  restoration  of  the  poet’s  language.  Why  was  Prospero  to  call  Gonzalo 
‘holy’  ?  He  was  ‘noble’  and  ‘honourable,’  but  in  no  respect  ‘holy.’ — Staunton: 
1  Holy,’  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  besides  its  ordinary  meaning  of  godly,  sanctified,  and 
the  like,  signified  also  pure,  just,  righteous,  &c. ;  in  this  sense  Leontes  speaks  of 
Polixenes  as  ‘  holy  ’ :  ‘  You  have  a  holy  father,  A  graceful  gentleman.’ — Wint.  T.  V 
i>  I7°- — Dyce  adds:  In  The  Two  Gent.  IV,  ii,  41  we  have  ‘holy’  applied  to  Silvia, 
a  young  lady  no  more  remarkable  for  her  piety  than  her  neighbours.  [Collier 
deserted  this  correction  in  his  third  edition.] 

75.  ev’n  sociable]  Phillpotts  :  ‘  Even  ’  might  be  either  ‘  even  as  much  as  yours 
seem  ’  or  ‘  even  fall  drops.’  It  is  possible  that  ‘  even  ’  here  may  itself  have  the  sense 
of  ‘fellowly  and  sociable,’  as  ‘their  even  Christian.’ — Ham.  V,  i,  35. 

75.  shew]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  error  [corrected  by  the  MS]  of  ‘  show  ’  for  flcru' 
is  also  transparent,  and  must  have  been  occasioned  chiefly  by  the  mistake  of  the  long 
s  for  f ;  Gonzalo  was  weeping,  and  the  eyes  of  Prospero,  ‘  sociable  to  the  flow  ’  of 
those  of  Gonzalo,  shed  companionable  tears. — [Dyce  pronounces  this  ‘  more  plaus¬ 
ible  than  the  change  in  the  preceding  line.’  If  any  emendation  were  needed,  it  is 
almost  unexceptionable.  But  Staunton  brings  forward  one  or  two  ‘  facts  which 
militate  very  strongly  against  ’  it,  as  he  thinks :  first,  the  word  in  the  Folio  is  ‘  shew,’ 
not  show  ;  and  next  that  the  single  character  Jh  would  be  ‘  fai  less  likely  ’  to  be  mis¬ 
taken  for  the  single  character  fl  than  the  long  s  with  f ;  which  is  a  little  doubtful  or 
at  least,  incapable  of  proof. — Ed. 

76.  Fall]  See  II,  i,  326,  if  need  be. 

76.  fellowly]  For  many  other  examples  ‘  where  -ly  represents  like,  of  which  it  is 
a  corruption,’  see  Abbott,  §  447. 

79.  ignorant]  Here  used  causatively. 


240 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i 


Their  cleerer  reafon.  0  good  Gonzallo  80 

My  true  preferuer,  and  a  loyall  Sir, 

To  him  thou  follow’d; ;  I  will  pay  thy  graces 
Home  both  in  word,  and  deede :  Moft  cruelly 
Did  thou  Alonfo ,  vfe  me,  and  my  daughter : 

Thy  brother  was  a  furtherer  in  the  Aft,  85 

Thou  art  pinch’d  for’t  now  Seba/iian.  Flefh,  and  bloud, 

You,  brother  mine,  that  entertaine  ambition, 

Expelld  remorfe,  and  nature,  whom,  with  Sebajlian 
(Whofe  inward  pinches  therefore  are  moft  ftrong) 

Would  heere  haue  kill’d  your  King  :  I  do  forgiue  thee,  90 

Vnnaturall  though  thou  art:  Their  vnderftanding 

Begins  to  fwell,  and  the  approching  tide  92 


80.  O ]  O  my  Pope  +  ,  Steev.’93,  Var. 
O  thou  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  7),  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

81.  Sir]  suitor  Wilson. 

84.  Did]  Didjl  F3F4  et  seq. 

86.  Thou  art]  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Cap.  Knt, 
Dyce  i,  Sta.  Cam.  Glo.  Wrt,  Rife,  Wh. 
ii,  Dtn.  thou  ’ rt  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 


86.  Sebaftian.  Fle/h,  and  bloud,]  Se¬ 
bastian,  flesh  and  blood.  Theob.  Warb. 
Dyce. 

87.  entertaine]  Sta.  Ktly.  entertain' d 
Ff  et  cet. 

88.  whom]  Ff,  Hal.  Wb.  ii.  who 
Rowe  et  cet. 


80.  O]  See  I,  ii,  105. 

81.  Sir]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  In  the  MS  this  is  changed  to  servant,  and  that  word 
may  have  been  written  with  an  abbreviation,  and  therefore  mistaken ;  but  as  Shake¬ 
speare  not  unfrequently  uses  ‘sir’  as  in  the  text,  we  introduce  no  change,  especially 
as  the  sense  of  the  passage  is  in  no  respect  either  altered  or  strengthened  by  it. 

84.  Did]  This  is  the  first  word  on  the  page.  The  catch-word  at  the  foot  of  the 
preceding  page  is  ‘  Didst.’ 

86.  Sebastian]  Theobald’s  substitution  of  a  comma  after  ‘Sebastian’  and  the 
removal  of  the  full  stop  to  the  end  of  the  line  were  pronounced  by  Capell  an  absurd¬ 
ity  ;  for  what,’  he  asks,  ‘  is  pinching  in  blood  ’  ?  Dyce  answers,  ‘  “  flesh  and  blood  ” 
means,  of  course,  the  whole  man,’  and  adopts  Theobald’s  punctuation — injudiciously 
I  think,  because  ‘  flesh  and  blood  ’  does  not  apply  to  Sebastian,  but  to  ‘  brother  mine.’ 
See  Abbott’s  note  on  ‘  you  ’  in  the  next  line. — Ed. 

87.  You]  Abbott,  §232:  Prospero,  who  has  addressed  the  worthy  Gonzalo  in 
the  friendly  thou,  and  the  repentant  Alonso  in  the  impassioned  thou,  turning  to  his 
unnatural  brother  says,  ‘  Flesh  and  blood,  You  brother  mine,’  but,  on  pronouncing  his 
forgiveness  immediately  afterwards,  he  says,  ‘  I  do  forgive  thee,’  &c.  See  also  lines 
150-152,  &c. 

87.  entertaine]  See  line  50,  above. 

88.  remorse]  Pity. 

91.  Their  vnderstanding,  &c.]  Deighton:  Their  understanding  had  ebbed  to 
its  lowest  point;  but  the  tide  is  turning  and  will  soon  be  at  the  full;  overflowing  with 
bright  waves  the  shore  of  reason,  now  foul  and  muddy  for  want  of  its  (reason’s) 
flood.  ’ 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


Will  fhortly  fill  the  reafonable  fliore  93 

That  now  ly  foule,  and  muddy :  not  one  of  them 
That  yet  lookes  on  me,  or  would  know  me :  Ariell,  95 

Fetch  me  the  Hat,  and  Rapier  in  my  Cell, 

I  will  difcafe  me,  and  my  felfe  prefent 
As  I  was  fometime  Millaine :  quickly  Spirit, 

Thou  fhalt  ere  long  be  free. 

Ariell  fings,  and  helps  to  attire  him.  100 

Where  the  Bee  fucks ,  there  fuck  I, 

In  a  Cow  flips  bell,  I  lie,  102 


93,  94.  Jhore...ly]  F2.  shores. ..lie 
Mai.  Steev.’93,  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Coll. 
Hal.  Wh.  i.  Jhore...lies  F3F4  et  cet. 
95.  That  ye/]  E'en  yet  Wilson. 


95.  or]  e'er  Coll.  MS,  Ktly. 

97.  [Exit  Ariel,  and  returns  imme 
diately.  Theob. 

101.  fuck]  lurk  Theob.  Han. 


93.  reasonable  shore]  W.  A.  Wright  :  The  shore  of  reason  which  has  just  been, 
by  another  figure,  compared  to  clear  water  covered  with  a  scum  of  ignorant  fumes. 

96,  &c.  Hense  (An/ikes,  &c.  p.  482)  calls  attention  to  the  instances  of  anagnorisis, 
or  recognition,  similar  to  the  present  scene,  in  Grecian  poetry,  e.  g.  the  scene  of  the 
recognition  of  Ulysses  by  Penelope ;  and  where  Ulysses  discloses  himself  to  the  group 
of  horrified  suitors.  Again  where  Sophocles  depicts  the  recognition  of  Ulysses  by 
Fhiloctetes. 

101.  suck  I]  Theobald  changed  this  to  ‘ lurk  It  on  the  plea  that  ‘a  spirit  of 
a  refin’d  setherial  essence  ’  could  not  be  *  intended  to  want  food,’  this  superfluous 
emendation  became,  for  many  a  long  year,  ingrained  in  the  popular  memory  by  its 
having  been  adopted  by  Dr  Arne  in  his  musical  setting.  It  has  even  yet  scarcely 
died  out. — Hunter  finds  in  this  line  another  reference  to  the  ‘  line  ’  tree,  whereof 
the  flower  is  an  ‘  eminent  favourite  of  the  bee,  who  quits  even  the  thyme  border  that 
she  may  revel  in  “the  blossom  that  hangs  on  the  bough,” — its  pendulous  flowers.’ 

102.  Cowslips]  Malone:  Compare  Drayton,  Nymphidia :  ‘At  midnight  the 
appointed  hour,  And  for  the  Queen  a  fitting  bow’r,  (Quoth  he)  is  that  fair  cowslip 
flow’r,  On  Hipcut-hill  that  groweth.’  Nymphidia  was  not  written,  I  imagine,  until 
after  1612.  It  was  not  printed  till  1627.  [There  are  many  passages  throughout 
Drayton,  as  we  all  knc  v,  which  reveal  the  powerful  influence  on  him  which  Shake¬ 
speare  had.  A  striking  passage  was  noted  in  As  You  Like  It,  and  in  this  same 
Nymphidia,  a  few  stanzas  lower  down  than  that  above  quoted,  there  is  a  description 
of  Queen  Mab’s  chariot,  whereof  the  horses  were  gnats,  their  harness  gossamer,  the 
coachman  a  fly,  and  the  wheels  of  crickets’  bones,  which  no  one  can  read  without 
being  reminded  of  Mercutio ;  and  again  when  Puck  is  sent  off  by  Oberon,  he  goes, 
according  to  Drayton,  ‘  thorough  brake,  thorough  brier,  Thorough  muck,  thorough 
mier,  Thorough  water,  thorough  fier.’ — Ed.] 

102.  bell]  In  his  note  on  IV,  i,  73  Steevens  said  that  it  was  clear  Shakespeare  was 
no  diligent  botanist,  for  ‘  who  ever  heard,’  he  asked,  ‘  of  a  bell-shaped  cowslip  ?’ — Br. 
Nicholson  (N.  dr  Qu.  3d  S.  ix,  28,  1866)  says  that  ‘Ariel’s  bell  is  the  calyx  of 
the  flower,  which  is  described  to  this  day  in  botanical  works  as  somewhat  bell-shaped, 
and  is  so.’  A  calyx  undoubtedly  may  be  bell-shaped,  but  in  losing  its  corolla,  a  calyx 
16 


242 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


There  I  cow ch  when  Owles  doe  crie ,  103 

On  the  Batts  backe  I  doe  flie 

after  Sommer  merrily.  105 

103.  cowch]  crowch  F3F4,  Rowe  i.  105.  Sommer  merrily]  sunset,  mer- 

souck:  Cap.  Huds.  couch.  Heath,  Var.  rily.  Theob.  Han.  summer:  Merrily, 
Coll,  i,  ii.  Holt. 

loses  all  its  poetry  and  charm.  In  speaking  of  a  cowslip  we  think  only  of  the  corolla, 
which,  as  in  the  case  of  all  monopetalous  plants,  can  be  fairly  enough  termed  a  bell. 
In  a  poetic  generalisation  all  flowers  may  be  called  bell-shaped ;  as  in  the  Hymn  to 
the  Flowers,  by  Horace  Smith,  which  every  one  knows,  or  ought  to  know,  by  heart : 
‘Neath  cloistered  boughs  each  floral  bell  that  swingeth  And  tolls  its  perfume  in  the 
passing  air.’ — Ed. 

103.  There  I  cowch  when  Owles  doe  crie]  The  older  commentators,  Warbur- 
ton,  Heath,  and  Capell,  ‘  abide  all  three  distracted  ’  over  this  line,  which  means, 
in  its  simplest  terms,  merely  that  Ariel  slept  at  night  in  a  cowslip ;  they  were  misled 
by  the  belief  that  an  allusion  to  owls  could  refer  only  to  winter.  Therefore  Heath 
proposed  a  full  stop  after  ‘  couch,’  and  has  been  followed,  substantially,  by  others  from 
whom  we  might  have  expected  better.  Heath’s  note  is  here  given  because  it  has 
been  cited  with  approval  by  a  recent  editor ;  Warburton’s  and  Capell’s  may  be  omitted 
without  loss,  at  least  those  portions  which  refer  to  this  line.  Heath  :  If  Ariel  ‘  couches 
in  the  cowslip  when  owls  do  cry,’  it  follows  that  he  couches  there  in  winter,  for  that, 
from  the  general  notoriety  of  the  fact,  is  the  season  when  owls  do  cry.  How  then 
can  it  consistently  be  said  that  he  constantly  flies  the  approach  of  winter  by  following 
the  summer  in  its  progress  to  other  climates  ?  I  should  imagine,  therefore,  that  Shake¬ 
speare  pointed  the  passage  thus :  ‘  There  I  couch.  When  owls,’  &c. — Steevens 
truthfully  observed :  ‘  Owls  cry  not  only  in  winter.  It  is  well  known  that  they  are  to 
the  full  as  clamorous  in  summer;  Titania,  in  Mid.  N.  D.,  the  time  of  which  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  May,  commands  her  fairies  to  “  keep  back  The  clamorous  owl,  that  nightly 
hoots.”  ’ — Malone,  too,  albeit  he  was  beguiled  by  Heath,  remarked  that  ‘  When  owls 
do  cry  ’  means  simply  at  night. 

104.  Batts  backe]  Walker  (  Vers.  234) :  Such  combinations  as  1  Lud’s  Town  ’ 
(compare  Newtown,  &c.),  ‘  Heaven’s  Gate  ’  (compare  Kirkgate,  Ludgate,  &c.),  and 
others  of  the  same  kind  are  pronounced  as  if  they  were  single  words,  with  the  accent 
on  the  first  syllable.  Thus  Caliban’s  ‘  Shew  thee  a  jay’s  nest,’  &c.  And  here  pro¬ 
nounce  ‘bat’s  back’  as  horseback ;  and  [in  line  203  of  this  Scene]  :  ‘And  I  would 
call  it  fair  play,’  pronounce  fair-play,  unless  there  is  any  corruption  in  the  words  fol¬ 
lowing.  [I  do  not  like  this  holocaust  to  rhythm. — Ed.] 

105.  Sommer]  That  there  is  a  charm,  and  a  great  charm,  in  Theobald’s  emenda¬ 
tion  of  sunset  is  undeniable.  It  is  chiefly  in  the  twilight  that  bats  appear,  and  with 
the  poetry  and  sentiment  of  that  hour  in  summer  they  are  associated.  The  emenda¬ 
tion  first  appeared  in  Theobald’s  Shakespeare  Restored,  a  book  which  so  thoroughly 
angered  Pope  that  for  it  Theobald  was  made  the  hero  of  The  Dunciad ;  and  yet  in 
Pope’s  second  edition  of  Shakespeare  he  could  not  overlook  the  beauty  of  Theobald’s 
change,  and  after  the  word  ‘  summer  ’  noted  that  it  was  ‘  probably  sunset,’  a  remark¬ 
able  concession.  Hunter  could  ‘  hardly  bring  himself  to  reject  it,’  and  Macaulay  (as 
t,cted  by  Cartwright,  p.  6)  wrote :  ‘  Who  does  not  sympathise  with  the  rapture  of 
Ariel,  flying  after  sunset  on  the  wings  of  the  bat  ?’  ‘  Why  after  summer  ?’  asks  Theo- 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  TEMPEST 

Merrily ,  merrily ,  JJiall  I  line  now , 

Vnder  the  bloffom  that  hangs  on  the  Bow. 

Pro.  Why  that’s  my  dainty  Ariell:  I  fhall  miffe 
Thee,  but  yet  thou  fhalt  haue  freedome :  fo,  fo,  fo. 

Io8,  109.  Why...  Thee ]  One  line,  F3F4  et  seq. 

BALD  [Sh.  Rest.  p.  176).  ‘  Is  it  true  that  the  Bat  flies  after  summer?  After  summer, 
that  is,  in  the  winter,  the  Bat  sleeps.  His  food  of  gnats  and  flies  cannot  be  procured 
in  winter.  I  am  apt  to  think  that  the  passage  is  corrupt,  and  that  the  allusion  here  is 
not  to  any  season  of  thenar,  but  rather  to  the  hour  when  bats  fly.  From  the  custom 
and  nature  of  this  bird  [«V],  therefore,  it  seems  to  me  it  ought  to  be  corrected  to  “After 
sun-set  merrily.”  ’  To  this  note,  here  given  only  substantially,  Theobald  added,  in  his 
edition,  that  the  original  text  could  be  right  only  on  the  mistaken  notion  that  bats 
migrated  in  pursuit  of  hot  weather.— Warburton,  paying  no  heed  to  Theobald’s 
allusion  to  the  hibernation  of  bats,  asserts  that  the  ‘  roughness  of  winter  is  represented 
by  Shakespeare  as  disagreeable  to  fairies  and  such  like  delicate  spirits,  who,  on  this 
account,  constantly  follow  summer.  Was  not  this  then  the  most  agreeable  circum¬ 
stance  of  Ariel’s  new  recover’d  liberty,  that  he  could  now  avoid  winter,  and  follow 
summer  quite  round  the  globe  ?’— Steevens  saw  the  difficulty  involved  in  the  natural 
history  of  the  ‘  bird,  but  resorts  to  his  ever-ready  explanation  of  Shakespeare’s  igno 
ranee.  ‘Ariel,  he  says,  ‘  speaks  of  his  present  situation  only ;  nor  triumphs  in  the 
idea  of  his  future  liberty  till  the  last  couplet.  The  bat  is  no  bird  of  passage,  and  the 
expression  is  therefore  probably  used  to  signify  not  that  he  pursues  summer,  but  that 

after  summer  is  past,  he  rides  on  the  warm  down  of  a  bat’s  back . Shakespeare, 

who,  in  his  Mid.  N.  D.,  has  placed  the  light  of  a  glow-worm  in  its  eyes,  might, 
through  the  same  ignorance  of  natural  history,  have  supposed  the  bat  to  be  a  bird  of 
passage.’ — Knight  says  that  in  his  text  he  ‘  follows  the  original  exactly  ’  (which  is  true 
except  that  he  substitutes  colons  and  semicolons  for  commas),  and  that  the  words  of  the 
song  are  the  same  as  the  poet  wrote  them,  but  that  the  punctuation  [of  lines  103, 104] 
ought  to  be  as  follows :  ‘  There  I  couch  when  owls  do  cry  On  the  bat’s  back.  I  do 
fly  After,’  &c.  <  Here,’  adds  Knight,  *  we  have  all  the  conditions  of  Ariel’s  existence 

expressed  in  the  most  condensed  form . In  the  night  when  owls  do  cry,  he 

couches  on  the  bat’s  back.’  This  last  remark  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  blindness 
to  which  we  are  all  liable.  So  clear  was  the  meaning  to  Knight’s  eyes  that  he  did 
not  see  that  according  to  his  punctuation  Ariel  couched  in  a  cowslip  when  Owls  cried 
on  bats’  backs  (which  is  scarcely  to  be  wondered  at). — Dyce  {Remarks,  p.  9)  called 
attention  to  Knight’s  oversight  of  the  full  meaning  of  ‘  There,’  which  clearly  refers 
to  the  ‘  cowslip’s  bell,’  just  as  in  the  first  line  ‘  There  I  suck  ’  refers  to  the  preceding 
‘  Where  the  bee  sucks.’  ‘  In  spite  of  any  objections,’  adds  Dyce,  ‘  that  may  be  brought 
-om  “  natural  history,”  I  believe  that  Shakespeare  intended  to  describe  Ariel  as  flying 
on  the  bat’s  back  in  pursuit  of  summer,  like  the  swallow.’  A  remark  which  carries 
with  it,  I  imagine,  the  assent  of  all.  What  has  ‘  natural  history  ’  to  do  with  The 
Tempest,  where  all  is  unnatural  history?  as  if  a  spirit,  that  could  tread  the  ooze  of  the 
salt  deep,  or  work  i’  the  veins  of  the  earth  when  it  is  bak’d  with  frost,  could  not  fly, 
if  it  chose,  in  perpetual  sunshine,  on  the  back  of  a  bat,  which  was  as  torpid  as  a  stone 
with  the  cold  of  a  dozen  winters. — Walker  (Crit.  iii,  7)  compares  with  this  passage 
Mid.  N.  D.  IV,  i :  ‘  Trip  we  after  the  night’s  shade,’  and  ‘  we  fairies  that  do  run  .... 
From  the  presence  of  the  sun,  Following  darkness  like  a  dream.’ — Ed. 


243 

106 

IO9 


244 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


To  the  Kings  fhip,  inuifible  as  thou  art,  no 

There  fhalt  thou  finde  the  Marriners  afleepe 
Vnder  the  Hatches  :  the  Matter  and  the  Boat-fwaine 
Being  awake,  enforce  them  to  this  place ; 

And  prefently,  I  pre’thee. 

Ar.  I  drinke  the  aire  before  me,  and  returne  1 1 5 

Or  ere  your  pulfe  twice  beate.  Exit. 

Gon.  All  torment,  trouble,  wonder,  and  amazement 
Inhabits  heere :  fome  heauenly  power  guide  vs 
Out  of  this  fearefull  Country. 

Pro.  Behold  Sir  King  120 

The  wronged  Duke  of  Millaine ,  Prof  per 0  : 

For  more  affurance  that  a  liuing  Prince 
Do’s  now  fpeake  to  thee,  I  embrace  thy  body, 

And  to  thee,  and  thy  Company,  I  bid 

A  hearty  welcome.  125 

Alo.  Where  thou  bee’ft  he  or  no, 

Or  fome  inchanted  triflle  to  abufe  me,  127 


1 13.  awake]  awaked  Walker,  Huds. 
120.  Behold]  Lo  Pope,  Han. 

[Attired  as  Duke.  Coll.  MS. 

126.  Alo.]  Ant.  Ingleby  (ap.  Cam.). 
Where  thou  bee’fl]  Ff,  Rowe. 
Be'st  thou  Pope  +  .  Whir  thou  be'st 


Hal.  Dyce,  Sta.  Huds.  Whether  thou 
be'st  Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Wrt,  Wh.  ii. 
Whe'er  thou  be'st  Cap.  et  cet. 

126.  he  or  no]  he  Jervis.  Prospero 
Cartwright. 

127.  triflle]  rival  or  model  Bailey. 


109.  so,  so,  so]  Referring  to  Ariel’s  assistance  in  attiring  him. 

115.  drinke  the  aire]  Johnson:  An  expression  of  swiftness  of  the  same  kind  as 

* t0  devour  the  way,’  in  .2  Hen.  IV:  I,  i,  47,  which  last,  Voss  ( Anmerk .  191)  com¬ 
pares  to *  *  viam  vorabit  ’  of  Catullus,  xxxv,  7. 

1 16.  Or  ere]  See  I,  ii,  13. 

126.  Where]  For  many  other  examples  of  this  contraction  of  Whether,  see 
Walker,  Vers.  103,  or  Abbott,  §  466. 

127.  inchanted  triflle]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  MS  substitutes  devil  for  ‘  trifle,’  but 
we  hesitate  to  insert  it  in  our  text,  because  ‘  trifle  ’  in  this  case  may  be  understood, 
although  it  was  not  unnatural  for  Alonso  to  suppose  he  might  be  addressing  a  fiend 
who  had  assumed  the  shape  and  dress  of  Prospero. — Staunton  :  The  change  of 
Collier’s  MS  is  as  wanton  as  it  is  foolish.  ‘  Trifle  ’  meant  phantom  ;  thus  in  Beau.  & 
FI.,  Bonduca,  V,  ii :  1  In  love  too  with  a  trifle  to  abuse  me.’ — Walker  frit,  i,  164), 
in  his  chapter  on  ‘  peculiar  construction  with  the  adjective,’  suspects  this  to  be  an 
instance  of  the  transposition  of  the  adjective,  i.  e.  some  trifle  produced  by  enchant¬ 
ment  to  abuse  me ;  for,  he  says,  some  trifle  to  abuse  me,  seems  unlike  the  Elizabethan 
English. — Lettsom  (in  a  foot-note)  cites  the  same  line  from  Bonduca,  cited  by 
Staunton,  where  the  very  phrase  occurs,  and  adds  from  Ford,  Fancies,  &c.  IV,  i : 
•  Why  you  know  I  am  an  ignorant,  unable  trifle  in  such  business.’  Sun's  Darling ,  I, 


ACTV,  sc.  i.]  THE  TEMPEST 

(As  late  I  haue  beene)  I  not  know :  thy  Pulfe 
Beats  as  of  flefh,  and  blood :  and  fince  I  faw  thee, 
Th’affliftion  of  my  minde  amends,  with  which 
I  feare  a  madneffe  held  me :  this  muft  craue 
(And  if  this  be  at  all)  a  moft  lfrange  ftory. 

Thy  Dukedome  I  refigne,  and  doe  entreat 

Thou  pardon  me  my  wrongs  :  But  how  fhold  Profpero 

Be  liuing,  and  be  heere  ? 

Pro.  Firft,  noble  Frend, 

Let  me  embrace  thine  age,  whofe  honor  cannot 
Be  meafur’d,  or  confin’d. 

Gonz.  Whether  this  be, 

Or  be  not,  Fie  not  fweare. 

Pro.  You  doe  yet  tafte 
Some  fubtleties  o’th’Ifle,  that  will  nor  let  you 


245 

128 

130 


135 


140 

142 


132.  And']  An  Pope,  Han.  Cap.  et  Wheler  MS.  (ap.  Hal.). 
secl-  134-  my]  thy  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 

And  if  this  be]  If  this  be  true  142.  nor  let]  not  let  F3F4  et  seq. 

i :  ‘  —scourge  hence  this  trifle  ’  /  II,  i :  <  This  lady  call’d  the  Spring,  is  an  odd  trifle.’ 
[According  to  Skeat  the  old  sense  of  ‘  trifle  ’  is  a  delusion  or  trick.] 

12S.  not  know]  See  line  45,  supra,  or  II,  i,  122. 

I33-  Thy  Dukedome]  Steevens  :  The  duchy  of  Milan  being,  through  the  treach¬ 
ery  of  Anthonio,  made  feudatory  to  the  crown  of  Naples,  Alonso  promises  to  resign 
his  claim  of  sovereignty  for  the  future. 

134.  my  wrongs]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  We  have  often  seen  <  my  ’  and  thy  con¬ 
founded  by  the  old  printer,  and  we  can  readily  believe  such  was  the  case  here.  It 

ought  to  be,  as  in  the  MS,  ‘  thy  wrongs,’  i.  e.  the  wrongs  that  I  have  done  to  thee. _ 

Dyce  (ed.  ii)  :  Here  undoubtedly  Shakespeare  wrote  ‘  my  wrongs,’  i.  e.  the  wrongs 
done  by  me  to  thee ;  just  as  he  wrote,  earlier  in  this  Scene,  ‘  their  high  wrongs,’  i.  e. 
the  high  wrongs  done  by  them  to  me ;  and  in  Mid.  N.  D.  II,  i,  ‘  Your  wrongs  (i.  e. 
the  wrongs  done  by  you)  do  set  a  scandal  on  my  sex  ’ ;  so,  too,  Greene,  in  the  con- 
eluding  sentence  of  his  Groatsworth  of  bVit,  &c. ;  ‘  a  whole  booke  cannot  contain 
their  wrongs,’  i.  e.  the  wrongs  done  by  them,  viz :  the  players.  Compare  also,  above, 
1  till  your  release,’  i.  e.  the  release  of  them  by  you ;  and  in  Lear,  IV,  ii :  ‘And  quit 
the  house  on  purpose,  that  their  punishment  (i.  e.  the  punishment  inflicted  by  Corn¬ 
wall  and  Regan  on  Gloster)  Might  have  freer  course.’ 

141,  142.  taste  .  .  .  subtleties]  Steevens  :  A  phrase  adopted  from  ancient  cook¬ 
ery  and  confectionery.  When  a  dish  was  so  contrived  as  to  appear  unlike  what  it 
really  was,  they  called  it  a  subtilty.  Dragons,  castles,  trees,  &c.  made  out  of  sugar 
had  the  like  denomination.  Froissart  complains  much  of  this  practice,  which  often 
led  him  into  mistakes  at  dinner. — Halliwell  :  Although  I  think  « subtleties  ’  is  here 
to  be  accepted  in  one  of  its  then  ordinary  senses,  deceptions,  and  that  there  is  not 
necessarily  a  metaphorical  meaning,  it  would  hardly  be  prudent  to  omit  Steevens’s 
note . The  use  of  the  word  ‘  taste,’  metaphorically  applied,  is  so  very  common 


246 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  V,  sc.  1 

143 


Beleeue  things  certaine  :  Wellcome,  my  friends  all, 

But  you,  my  brace  of  Lords,  were  I  fo  minded 
I  heere  could  plucke  his  Highneffe  frowne  vpon  you  145 

And  iuftifie  you  Traitors  :  at  this  time 
I  will  tell  no  tales. 

Seb.  The  Diuell  fpeakes  in  him  : 

Pro.  No : 

For  you  (moft  wicked  Sir)  whom  to  call  brother  15c 

Would  euen  infe£t  my  mouth,  I  do  forgiue 

Thy  ranked:  fault ;  all  of  them  :  and  require 

My  Dukedome  of  thee,  which,  perforce  I  know  153 


144.  [Aside  to  Seb.  and  Ant.  Johns. 

147.  I  will~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Hal.  Dyce  i, 
Cam.  Glo.  Wrt,  Wh.  ii,  Dtn.  I'll  Pope 
et  cet. 

148.  [Aside.  Johns.  To  Ant.  Cap. 


149.  No  .•]  Om.  Han.  Now,  Allen, 
Huds. 

152.  fault ]  faults  F^,  Rowe+,  Hal. 
Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  Sing.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly. 

153.  thee ]  thre  F2. 


that  it  is  not,  in  itself,  any  argument  in  favour  of  the  theory  of  Steevens.  So  ‘  taste 
grief,’  Rich.  II,  & c. — W.  A.  Wright:  It  denoted  a  device  in  pastry  and  confec¬ 
tionery  work  such  as  is  described  by  Fabyan  in  his  account  of  the  feast  at  the  Coro¬ 
nation  of  Katharine,  queen  of  Henry  V  (Chronicle,  ed.  1542,  ii,  366), ‘And  a  sotyltye 
called  a  Pellycane  syttyng  on  his  nest  with  he  byrdes,  and  an  ymage  of  saynte  Kath- 
eryne  holdyng  a  boke  and  disputyng  with  the  doctoures.’  [It  must  be  confessed  that 
there  is  a  certain  repugnance  to  the  thought  of  similes,  in  the  majestic  mouth  of  Pros- 
pero,  drawn  from  the  kitchen,  and  if  it  were  not  for  that  one  word  ‘  taste  ’  the  idea 
should  be  scouted.  But  with  that  word  preceding,  and  with  the  memory  of  the  delu¬ 
sive  ‘banket’  which  had  just  mocked  their  hunger,  I  am  afraid  Steevens  is  right 
Those  interested  in  ‘  subtleties  ’  may  be  referred  to  the  Early  English  Text  Society's 
reprint  of  Two  Fifteenth-Century  Cookery-Books. — Ed.] 

149.  No]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.) :  The  reading  ‘No’  must  be  corrupt;  for 
nothing  is  more  certain,  than  that  an  aside  is  supposed  to  be  heard  only  by  the  person 
to  whom  it  is  addressed ;  and  Prospero,  therefore,  cannot  have  said  ‘  No  ’  to  what  he 
did  not  hear — not  to  dwell  on  the  singularly  unsatisfactory  dryness  of  this  shortest  of 
adverbs,  left  without  one  additional  word  of  enlargement  or  explanation.  The  truth 
appears  to  be  that  Prospero  was  going  through  a  series  of  addresses  to  the  principal 
personages  before  him  seriatim  ;  he  had  addressed  first  the  King,  then  Gonzalo,  and 
now — after  giving  a  necessary  private  hint  to  Sebastian  and  Anthonio  together,  and 
neither  hearing  nor  caring  for  any  comments  they  might  make — he  takes  up  his 
brother  alone,  with  a  mere  word  of  transition  :  'Now  For  you,  most  wicked  Sir,’  .... 
just  as  in  Ham.  I,  ii,  42  the  King  turns  from  Cornelius  and  Voltimand  to  Laertes 
witii  ‘And  now,  Laertes,  what’s  the  news  with  you  ?’  and  then  (64)  to  Hamlet,  with 
the  same  form :  ‘  But  now,  my  cousin  Hamlet,  and  my  son.’  I  may  add  that  ‘  now  ’ 
was  pronounced  in  Shakespeare’s  day  much  like  ‘  noo  ’  (N.  A.  Rev.  Apr.  1864,  p. 
368),  and  that  therefore  an  amanuensis  might  easily  write  ‘  No  ’  for  it,  under  the 
impression  that  Prospero  was  bound  to  contradict  the  calumnious  charge  of  his  being 
in  league  with  the  Devil. 


ACT  V,  sc.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


247 


Thou  muft  re 4 ore. 

Alo.  If  thou  beeft  Profpero  155 

Giue  vs  particulars  of  thy  preferuation, 

How  thou  haft  met  vs  heere,  whom  three  howres  fince 
Were  wrackt  vpon  this  fhore  ?  where  I  haue  loft 
(How  fharp  the  point  of  this  remembrance  is) 

My  deere  fonne  Ferdinand.  1 60 

Pro.  I  am  woe  for’t,  Sir. 

Alo.  Irreparable  is  the  Ioffe,  and  patience 
Saies,  it  is  paft  her  cure. 

Pro.  I  rather  thinke 

You  haue  not  fought  her  helpe,  of  whofe  foft  grace  165 

For  the  like  Ioffe,  I  haue  her  foueraigne  aid, 

And  reft  my  felfe  content. 

Alo.  You  the  like  Ioffe? 

Pro.  As  great  to  me,  as  late,  and  fupportable 
To  make  the  deere  Ioffe,  haue  I  meanes  much  weaker  170 

Then  you  may  call  to  comfort  you ;  for  I 
Haue  loft  my  daughter. 

Alo.  A  daughter  ?  173 


157.  whom]  Hal.  Wh.  i.  who  Ff, 
Rowe  et  cet. 

161.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Jeph.  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

165.  foft]  sought  Theob.  conj.  (Nich. 
Ill.). 

169.  late,]  late,  sir ;  Cap.  late,  you 
Gould. 


169.  fupportable]  F2.  infupportable 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  portable  Steev. 
’93,  Var.  Huds.  reparable  Wilson. 

172.  my]  my  only  Han. 

173.  A]  Only  Han.  Om.  Cap.  You 
have  lost  a  Wagner  conj. 

daughter  ?]  daughter !  did  you 
say  ?  Cartwright. 


150-153.  You  .  .  .  thee]  See  I,  ii,  516-527. 

161.  woe]  Malone:  That  is,  I  am  sorry  for  it.  See  Abbott,  §  230,  where, 
among  other  examples,  we  find,  in  Cymb.  V,  v,  297,  ‘  I  am  sorrow  for  thee.’ 

169.  as  late]  Johnson  :  My  loss  is  as  great  as  yours,  and  has  as  lately  happened 
to  me. 

169.  supportable]  Capell  added  sir  after  ‘late’  in  order  to  avoid  making  the 
accent  fall  on  the  first  syllable  of  *  supportable,’  ‘  which,’  he  says,  ‘  if  a  conundrum 
may  pass,  is  not  supportable.' — Dyce  thinks  Steevens’s  portable  is  perhaps  right. 

170.  meanes]  Capell  supposes  that  Prospero  here  refers  to  the  fact  that  Alonso 
still  has  a  daughter  to  comfort  him,  whereas  Prospero  has  just  lost  his. 

172,  173.  daughter]  Walker  {Vers.  207),  followed  by  Dyce,  says  ‘daughter’  is 
here  a  trisyllable.  As  neither  critic  specifies  which  of  the  two  ‘  daughters  ’  is  a  tri¬ 
syllable,  the  inference  is  that  the  word  is  to  be  so  pronounced  in  both  places.  To  my 
ear  it  is  abhorrent  enough  in  only  one  case ;  but  if  Prospero  is  to  say  daugh-a-ter,  and 
Alonso,  in  his  anguish,  responds  daugh-a-ter,  can  the  effect  be  anything  else  but  comic  ? 
—Ed. 


248 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


Oh  heauens,  that  they  were  Hiring  both  in  Nalpes 

The  King  and  Queene  there,  that  they  were,  I  with  175 

My  felfe  were  mudded  in  that  oo-zie  bed 

Where  my  fonne  lies  :  when  did  you  lofe  your  daughter  ? 

Pro.  In  this  lafl  Tempeft.  I  perceiue  thefe  Lords 
At  this  encounter  doe  fo  much  admire, 

That  they  deuoure  their  reafon,  and  fcarce  thinke  180 

Their  eies  doe  offices  of  Truth  :  Their  words 

Are  naturall  breath  :  but  howfoeu’r  you  haue 

Beene  iuftled  from  your  fences,  know  for  certain 

That  I  am  Profpero ,  and  that  very  Duke 

Which  was  thruft  forth  of  Millaine ,  who  moft  ftrangely  185 
Vpon  this  fhore  (where  you  were  wrackt)  was  landed 
To  be  the  Lord  on’t :  No  more  yet  of  this, 

For  ’tis  a  Chronicle  of  day  by  day,  188 

174.  Nalpes]  Naples  Ff.  180.  fcarce\fcare  Fa. 

180.  deuoure ]  demure  Gould.  181.  eies ]  eie  Fa.  eye  F3F4< 

179.  admire]  In  its  Latin  sense. 

180.  deuoure  their  reason]  Allen  (Phi/a.  Sh.  Soc .) :  They  stood  agape,— with 
mouths  wide  open, — in  their  ‘admiration,’  i.  e.  amazement;  they  looked  (I  hardly 
dare  to  say  it)  as  if  they  had  swallowed  their  reason. 

181.  Their  words]  Capell  (who  reads  ‘  these  words  ’)  :  Surely  no  astonishment 

could  so  affect  them  as  to  make  them  question  the  reality  of  their  own  existence,  for 
this  (in  effect)  is  the  result  of  [reading  ‘  their  words  ’]  :  of  Prospero’s  they  might ; 
and  we  find,  do,  in  the  sentence  that  precedes ;  where  they  are  not  said  to  doubt 
whether  they  see,  but  whether  they  see  rightly ;  nor  could  it  be  intended  here  that 
they  should  doubt  whether  themselves  spoke,  but  whether  that  was  real  which  they 
heard  others  speak. — Malone  received  a  communication  from  an  anonymous  corre¬ 
spondent  giving  the  same  reasons  as  Capell  for  the  change  to  these.  ‘  Their  doubts 
related  only  to  Prospero,  whom  they  at  first  apprehended  to  be  some  *  inchanted  trifle 
to  abuse  them.  They  doubt,  says  he,  whether  the  words  they  hear  are  spoken  by  a 
human  creature.  Dyce  pronounced  Capell’s  emendation  ‘  not  improbable,’  and 
Hudson  adopted  it.  Halliwell,  however,  thinks  that  precisely  that  astonishment 
seized  them  which  Capell  thought  impossible,  and  that  they  scarcely  think  ‘  the  words 
they  speak  are  really  those  that  would  be  naturally  uttered  by  themselves.’  As  the 
question  resolves  itself  merely  into  one  of  degrees,  whatever  expresses  the  highest 
astonishment  would  seem  to  be  nearest  right. _ Ed. 

182.  howsoeu’r]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  85)  calls  attention  to  this  spelling,  ‘eu’r,’ 
instead  of  the  more  common  ‘  e’er,’  and  refers  to  several  instances  in  Othello,  II,  i, 
181 ;  III,  iii,  521,  where  it  occurs  twice  in  the  same  line  ;  III,  iv,  117  in  this  present 
edition.  ‘  I  have  a  notion,’  concludes  Walker,  ‘  that  Spenser  always  does  this,  but 
that  his  editors  have  altered  it.  This  spelling,  however,  is  much  less  frequent  than 
the  other.’ 

185  Which  .  .  .  who]  See  Apbott,  §  266. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


249 


Not  a  relation  for  a  break-faft,  nor 
Befitting  this  firft  meeting:  Welcome,  Sir; 

This  Cell’s  my  Court :  heere  haue  I  few  attendants, 

And  Subiedts  none  abroad  :  pray  you  looke  in  : 

My  Dukedome  fince  you  haue  giuen  me  againe, 

I  will  requite  you  with  as  good  a  thing, 

At  leaft  bring  forth  a  wonder,  to  content  ye 
As  much,  as  me  my  Dukedome. 

Here  Profpero  disc  oners  Ferdinand  and  Miranda ,  play 
ing  at  Chejfe. 

I93-  you  haue]  you've  Rowe  +  ,  Jeph.  193.  me]  it  me  Hunter. 

Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  '  196.  Scene  IV.  Pope +  . 

198.  Chesse]  Steevens:  Shakespeare  might  not  have  ventured  to  engage  his 
lero  and  heroine  at  this  game  had  he  not  found  Huon  de  Bourdeaux  and  his  Princess 
employed  in  the  same  manner.  See  the  romance  of  Huon,  &c.  chap.  53,  ed.  1601  : 

‘  How  King  Ivoryn  caused  his  daughter  to  play  at  the  chesse  with  Huon,’  &c. _ Dyce 

(Few  Notes,  p.  16)  :  There  may  have  been  something  like  this  in  the  novel  or  tale 
which  furnished  Shakespeare  with  the  materials  for  The  Tempest;  but  if  that  was  not 
the  case,  and  if  The  Tempest  was  first  produced  shortly  before  the  year  1611,  it  is  not 
improbable  that  the  idea  of  1  discovering  ’  Ferdinand  and  Miranda  engaged  at  chess 

was  suggested  in  Bamaby  Barnes’s  Divils  Charter,  1607 . In  that  tragedy  Csesar 

Borgia,  after  taking  Katherine  prisoner  and  making  her  believe  that  he  had  put  to 
death  her  two  sons,  says  :  ‘  Behold  thy  children  living  in  my  tent.  He  discoureth  his 
Tent  where  her  two  sonnes  were  at  Cardes.' — Allen  (Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  p.  67)  :  Steevens 
thinks  that  Shakespeare  occupied  Ferdinand  and  Miranda,  while  by  themselves,  in 
playing  Chess,  because  he  had  read  something  of  the  kind  in  the  romance  of  Huon 
of  Bordeaux.  Certainly  he  was  not  led  to  do  so  by  any  special  interest  of  his  own 
in  the  game.  For,  what  he  was  interested  in  (as,  for  example,  law)  was  often  on  his 
tongue;  but  of  Chess  he  is  said  by  an  authority  in  Twiss  (Chess,  i,  ill)  to  have  made 
no  mention  whatever,  save  in  this  one  place.*  Nay,  here  his  language  is  not  Chess- 
language.  No  Chess-player  would  accuse  his  adversary  of  making  what  is  called  ‘  a 
false  move  ’  in  terms,  that  would  be  just  as  appropriate  to  any  other  game — terms, 
which  (in  fact)  signify  no  more  than  ‘  cheating  ’  at  play.  Suppose,  therefore,  that 
Steevens  were  right — that  Shakespeare  did  accept  a  hint  from  the  romance  of  Huon 
' — he  could  have  been  led  to  do  so  only  by  an  impression,  on  his  part,  of  some  pecu¬ 
liar  appropriateness  in  representing  his  betrothed  pair  as  engaged  in  a  game  of 
<  thcughtful  Chess.’  Now  whence  did  Shakespeare  derive  that  impression  ?  Perhaps 
merely  from  his  knowledge  that — from  the  time  when  Haroun  al  Raschid  sent  a  set 

*  Another  authority  in  Twiss  (Chess,  ii,  125)  does  indeed  remark  that  ‘Shakespeare  seems  to 
have  a  punning  allusion  to  Chess  in  the  First  Scene  of  The  Taming  of  the  Shrew,  where  Katharine 
says :  “  I  pray  you,  Sir,  is  it  your  will  To  make  a  Stale  of  me  amongst  these  Mates  ?”  ’  And  Douce 
(himself  a  writer  on  Chess  antiquities)  is  of  the  same  opinion  (III.  i,  327).  I  would  add  that  there 
may  have  been  an  allusion  to  Chess  in  Mach.  V,  i,  86  :  ‘  My  mind  she  hath  mated  and  amazed  my 
sight  and  that  Shakespeare  would  appear  to  have  been  aware  of  the  story  of  Chess  being  an 
invention  of  Palamedes,  during  the  Siege  of  Troy,  when  he  makes  Troilus  say  (Tro.  <Sr>  Cress.  IV, 
iv,  89) :  ‘  I  cannot  play  at  subtle  games,  to  which  the  Greeks  are  prompt  and  pregnant.’ 


190 

195 

I98 


250 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc  i. 


[198.  Ferdinand  and  Miranda,  at  Chesse] 
of  Chessmen  to  Charlemagne,  and  when  a  son  of  William  the  Conqueror  and  a  son 
of  the  French  king  fought  each  other  with  Chess-pieces  on  the  one  side  and  the 
Chess-board  on  the  other,  down  to  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  herself,  who  was 
fond  of  the  game — Chess  had  always  been  *  The  Royal  Game  ’ — a  deeply  intellectual 
pastime,  above  the  reach  of  the  vulgar,  confined  to  royal  and  princely  personages  and 
to  those  who  lived  in  close  connection  with  them,  learned  ecclesiastics  and  doctors  of 
the  law.  It  may  be  added,  too,  that  Shakespeare — knowing  Chess  to  be  a  preroga¬ 
tive  of  royal  personages — might  consider  it  highly  natural,  that  this  profound  and 
‘  subtle  game  ’  should  have  occupied  the  attention  of  just  such  a  being,  as  he  had  rep¬ 
resented  Prospero  to  have  been,  and  that  this  ‘  rare  wondered  father  ’  should  have 
taught  the  game  to  his  daughter,  to  vary  their  intellectual  employments  when  thus 
left  entirely  alone  by  themselves.  But  I  feel  quite  confident  that  Shakespeare  was 
aware,  still  further,  that  there  was  a  special  and  remarkable  appropriateness  in  repre¬ 
senting  a  Prince  of  Naples  as  a  Chess-player — and  so  skilful  a  player,  to  boot,  that 
Miranda  (the  clever  pupil  of  her  deep  father)  was  playfully  disposed  to  account  for 
his  beating  her  so  easily  only  on  the  supposition  that  he  had  in  some  way  1  played 
false.’  This  special  appropriateness  I  discover  in  the  fact  that  Naples,  precisely 
during  the  lifetime  of  Shakespeare,  was  the  centre  of  Chess-playing,  at  a  period  when 
Chess-skill  had  temporarily  attained  a  height  which  it  never  saw  again  until  the  days 
of  Philidor  or  (more  correctly,  perhaps)  the  marvellous  contests  of  La  Bourdonnais 
and  McDonnel.  At  that  time  (during  the  Regency  of  the  Duke  of  Ossuna)  the  Pal¬ 
ace  of  the  Prince  of  Gesualdo  was  the  stated  resort  of  eminent  players;  and  so  sol¬ 
emnly  did  they  study  the  game  that  they  assumed  the  title  of  L' Academia  degli 
Scacchi.  Here  was  formed  Lionardo  da  Cutri ;  here  Paolo  Boi  of  Syracuse  came  tc 
ascertain  his  real  strength ;  and  here  Alessandro  Salvio,  learned  in  the  law,  not  only 
practised  the  game  and  illustrated  it  in  his  valuable  treatise,  but  also  became  the  Plu¬ 
tarch  of  the  Chess-heroes  of  his  time.*  The  supremacy  of  this  great  Neapolitan 
school  was  likely  to  be  celebrated  all  over  Europe,  because  of  the  chivalrous  adven¬ 
tures  of  its  most  eminent  professors.  Lionardo  da  Cutri  (sumamed  II  Puttino)  jour¬ 
neyed  into  Spain,  where  the  rival  Chess-school  was  flourishing,  and  defeated  the 
learned  ecclesiastic  Ruy  Lopez,  tutor  of  Don  Carlos,  in  the  presence  of  ‘  the  good 
king,’  Philip  the  Second ;  j-  while  from  another  sovereign  he  received,  as  a  chivalrous 
seeker  of  adventures,  the  title  of  ‘  The  Chess  Knight-errant.’  Paolo  Boi  followed 
after  II  Puttino,  and  engaged  in  fierce  contest  with  him  on  the  very  scene  of  his  vic¬ 
tories  ;  and  then  played,  at  Lisbon,  with  Don  Sebastian,  immediately  before  that  mon¬ 
arch’s  fatal  expedition  to  Morocco.  For  twenty  years  he  wandered — now  in  Africa 
ransoming  himself  from  captivity  by  his  skill ;  at  another  time  in  Hungary,  trying  his 
strength  with  Turkish  Delhis,  who  played  on  horseback  without  boards  and  men ; 
and  then  fighting  for  the  cross,  in  sterner  strife,  under  Don  Juan  of  Austria  (appa¬ 
rently  in  the  Battle  of  Lepanto),  and  winning  the  personal  favour  of  the  austere  Pope, 
St  Pius  the  Fifth,  by  the  stainlessness  of  his  knightly  aud  Christian  character.  J  Such 

*  Trattato  dello  Inventione  et  Arte  liberate  del  Gioco  di  Scacchi  dell  Dottor  Alessandro  Salvio 
Napolitano.  In  Napoli ,  MDCIIII.  The  biographical  matter  first  appeared  in  the  second  edition, 
which  bore  the  title  of  II  Puttino ,  altramente  detto,  il  Cavaliero  errante  del  Salvio,  sopra  il gioco 
de'  Scacchi,  con  la  sua  Apologia  contra  il  Carrera,  diviso  in  tre  Libri.  In  Napoli,  1634.  A  third 
edition  (containing  II  Puttino)  appeared  at  Naples  in  1723.  Sarratt’s  imperfect  translation  of  Salvio's 
Treatise  (London,  1813)  omits  the  biography. 

i  About  the  year  1575. 

t  The  adventures  of  Paolo  Boi  are  recorded  by  the  good  priest  Don  Pietro  Carrera  (who  knew 


*CT  V,  sc.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


251 


Mir.  Sweet  Lord,  you  play  me  falfe. 

Fer.  No  my  deareft  loue, 

I  would  not  for  the  world.  (wrangle, 

Mir.  Yes,  for  a  fcore  of  Kingdomes,  you  fhould 


(wrangle, 


202 


200 


200.  my]  Om.  Coll.  MS. 

deareft]  dear  Pope  + .  dead  si 
Cap.  Sta.  Dyce,  Cam.  Glo.  Jeph.  Clke, 


Wh.  ii,  Huds.  Dtn. 


kingdoms.  You  Johns. 


adventures  were  the  surer  to  fly  through  the  mouths  of  men  at  a  time  when  Spain 
(with  her  Neapolitan  kingdom)  was  the  leading  power  in  Europe,  and  when  Italy 
still  attracted  the  eyes  of  the  world.  I  can  have  no  doubt  that  these  rumours  of 
adventure  caught  the  ear  of  Shakespeare;  and  that  he  made  Prospero  discover  the 
Neapolitan  Prince  and  Miranda  playing  at  Chess,  precisely  because  he  was  aware 
that  Naples  was  the  source  and  centre  of  the  Chess  -furore,  which  was  still  at  its 
height  while  his  mind  was  teeming  with  the  wonders  of  The  Tempest. 

In  his  eagerness  to  discover  the  season  of  the  year  wherein  this  play  takes  place, 
Meissner  (p.  105)  decides  that  this  game  of  chess  makes  for  autumn.  ‘What¬ 
soever  other  signification  it  may  have  in  regard  to  the  fundamental  idea  of  the 
drama,  we  could  not  have  helped  being  surprised  had  the  lovers  preferred  to  make 
love  elsewhere  than  in  the  open  air,  under  summer  skies — if  the  summer  skies  were 


202 ■  score]  Warburton  :  That  is,  if  the  subject  or  bet  were  kingdoms.  <  Score  ’ 
here  signifies  not  the  number  twenty,  but  account.— Mr  Smith  (ap.  Grey,  i,  37) : 
The  passage,  in  all  probability,  should  be  thus  restored :  ‘Mir.  Yes  for  a  score  of 
kingdomes,  And  should  I  wrangle,  you  would  call  it  fair  play.’  Yes,  says  Miranda 
you  would  for  a  much  less  thing  than  the  world,  Ay,  for  a  score  of  kingdomes,  and 
should  I  wrangle  (i.  e.  should  I  tell  you,  as  I  do  now,  That  you  plaid  me  false)  you 
would  call  it  fair  play,  as  you  do  now.  [The  name  of  the  author  is  appended  to  his 
note,  as  is  usual  in  Grey’s  volumes;  inadvertently  it  is  here  preceded  by  merely  a 
comma,  so  that  Miranda  is  made  to  address  her  love  thus  archly:  ‘as  you  do 
now,  Mr  Smith.’  This  is  one  of  the  gleams  which  relieves  the  sombre  drudgery  of 
an  editor.  Omitting  the  unwarranted  emendation,  Dr  Johnson’s  interpretation  of  the 
passage  is  the  same  as  Smith’s,  it  is  thus:]  Johnson:  I  take  the  sense  to  be  only 
this :  Ferdinand  would  not,  he  says,  play  her  false  for  the  world;  yes,  answers  she, 

I  would  allow  you  to  do  it  for  something  less  than  the  world,  for  twenty  kingdoms, 
and  I  wish  you  well  enough  to  allow  you,  after  a  little  wrangle ,  that  your  play  was 
fair.— W.  A.  Wright  :  The  usage  of  ‘  should  ’  and  ‘  would  ’  in  this  sentence  becomes 
like  our  own  by  a  very  slight  change,  ‘  for  a  score  of  kingdoms  should  you  wrangle  I 
would  call  it  fair  play.’  This  is  merely  an  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
sentence  would  be  changed  in  adopting  it  to  modem  habit.  Another  modem  form 
would  be  obtained  by  substituting  ‘  might  ’  for  ‘  should.’  [It  is  not  at  once  manifest 
whether  ‘  score  ’  here  is  account,  game  or  the  number  twenty,  but  in  either  case,  I 

him  when  an  old  man)  in  his  very  rare  II  Gioco  degli  Scaccki,  Militello  M.DC  XVII  (of  which  I 
have  the  honour  of  possessing  Mr  Lewis's  copy),  [Prof.  Allen’s  Chess  Library,  one  of  the  most  com- 
plete  in  the  world,  is  now  in  The  Philadelphia  Library  .-Ed.]  and  in  Mr  Lewis’s  excellent  translation 
of  the  same  (London,  1822).— From  the  materials  thus  furnished  by  Carrera  and  Salvio,  George 
Walker  has  worked  up  a  charming  article  in  his  Chess  and  Chess-players  (London,  1850),  pp. 


252 


THE  TEMPEST 


[ACT  V,  sc.  i 

203 


And  I  would  call  it  faire  play. 

Alo.  If  this  proue 
A  vifion  of  the  Ifland,  one  deere  Sonne  205 

Shall  I  twice  loofe. 

Seb.  A  moft  high  miracle. 

Fer.  Though  the  Seas  threaten  they  are  mercifull, 

I  haue  curs’d  them  without  caufe. 

Alo.  Now  all  the  bleffings  210 

Of  a  glad  father,  compaffe  thee  about 
Arife,  and  fay  how  thou  cam’ft  heere. 

Mir.  O  wonder ! 

How  many  goodly  creatures  are  there  heere  ? 

How  beauteous  mankinde  is  ?  O  braue  new  world  215 

That  has  fuch  people  in’t. 

209.  I  haue]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Jeph.  Dyce  210.  [Ferd.  kneels.  Theob. 

ii,  iii,  Huds. 


think,  we  should  expect  that  Miranda,  in  order  to  show  her  boundless  faith  and  love, 
would  exaggerate  Ferdinand’s  vaunt,  and  not  diminish  it,  as  she  does,  according  to 
Mr  Smith  and  Dr  Johnson. — Ed.] 

202.  wrangle]  Holt  (p.  93) :  To  preserve  the  sentiment  we  should  read  wrong 
me  for  ‘  wrangle  ’ ;  fraud,  the  cause,  being  mention’d,  when  she  said  he  play’d  her 
‘  false,’  and  not  ‘  wrangling,’  the  effect,  tho’  ’tis  not  unusual  with  Shakespeare  to  sub¬ 
stitute  the  one  for  the  other.  [Holt  here  anticipates  Staunton,  who  (. Athenceum ,  16 
Nov.  1872)  proposed,  of  course,  innocently,  the  same  change,  on  the  ground  that  ‘  no 
instance  has  ever  been  brought  forward,  either  from  Shakespeare  or  from  any  con¬ 
temporary  author,  where  the  word  ‘  wrangle  ’  bears  the  sense  required  of  it  here.’ 
Staunton  is  undoubtedly  right.  The  ordinary  meanings  of  ‘  wrangle  ’  do  not  strictly 
apply  here.  Sherwood  gives  noiser  as  the  French  for  ‘  wrangle,’  and  Cotgrave  defines 
noiser  as  ‘  to  brawle,  chide,  scould,  brabble,  sqvabble,  wrangle,  brangle,  fall  at  odds, 
or  be  at  variance  with;  goe  to  suite,  or  hold  debate  against.’  But  we  must  pardon 
something  to  the  situation. — Ed.] 

203.  faire  play]  Walker  would  pronounce  these  two  words  as  one,  with  the 
accent  on  the  first — which  verges  on  an  undue  devotion  to  metre,  as  it  seems  to  me. 
See  line  104,  above. — Ed. 

212.  Arise]  With  this  word  before  us,  is  not  the  stage-direction  Ferdinand  kneels 
superfluous  ? — Ed. 

215.  new  world]  Blackwood’s  Magazine  (March,  1833) :  The  whole  wide  world 
is  henceforth,  in  her  imagination,  Paradise.  Oh !  did  it  not  once  seem  so  to  one  and 
all  of  us, — when  our  bliss  bade  the  sun  shine  bright  on  a  day  of  clouds ;  when  we 
could  change  at  will  gloom  into  glory ;  when  at  the  sight  of  a  few  daisies  the  earth 
seemed  all  overspread  with  flowers,  and  flowers  that  knew  no  withering ;  when  the 
inarticulate  voice  of  streams  murmured  to  ours  their  own  unwearied  joy  in  the  wil¬ 
derness  ;  when  we  said  in  our  hearts  the  very  words  of  the  magician’s  child ;  when 
thru  hadst  thine  own  Ferdinand,  and  we  our  own  Miranda ! 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


Pro.  ’Tis  new  to  thee.  (play  ? 

Alo.  What  is  this  Maid,  with  whom  thou  was’t  at 
Your  eld’ffc  acquaintance  cannot  be  three  houres  : 

Is  the  the  goddeffe  that  hath  feuer’d  vs, 

And  brought  vs  thus  together  ? 

Fer.  Sir,  the  is  mortall ; 

But  by  immortall  prouidence,  fhe’s  mine ; 

I  chofe  her  when  I  could  not  aske  my  Father 
For  his  aduife  :  nor  thought  I  had  one  :  She 
Is  daughter  to  this  famous  Duke  of  Millaine, 

Of  whom,  fo  often  I  haue  heard  renowne, 

But  neuer  faw  before :  of  whom  I  haue 
Receiu’d  a  fecond  life ;  and  fecond  Father 
This  Lady  makes  him  to  me. 

Alo .  I  am  hers. 

But  O,  how  odly  will  it  found,  that  I 
Muft  aske  my  childe  forgiueneffe  ? 

Pro.  There  Sir  ftop, 

Let  vs  not  burthen  our  remembrances,  with 


253 

217 


220 


225 


230 


235 


221.  vs  thus]  us  F4. 

222.  Jhe  ir]  she':  Pope-r,  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

225.  aduife]  advice  F4  et  seq. 

235.  Let... remembrances]  One  line, 


Mai.  Steev.’93,  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Ktly, 
Rife. 

235.  remembrances ]  remembrance 
Rowe  ii  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.’85,  Knt,  Glo. 
Jeph.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Wit,  Huds.  Wh.  ii, 
Dtn. 


217.  ’Tis  new  to  thee]  Allen  (Phi/a.  Sh.  Soc.  p.  64) :  May  there  not  be  in  this 
comment  of  Prospero’s  somewhat  of  a  sad  irony  ?  ‘  When  this  world  has  ceased  to 
be  new,  it  will  no  longer,  perhaps,  appear  to  you  so  brave,  its  creatures  so  goodly, 
mankind  so  beauteous.’ 

219.  eld  st]  Walker  ( Vers .  167) :  This  word,  I  imagine,  must  have  been  pro¬ 
nounced,  euphonice  gratid.,  elst. 

2x9.  cannot]  Walker  (  Vers.  159)  thinks  that  cannot,  with  the  accent  on  the  last 
syllable,  was  the  earlier  pronunciation,  and  that  towards  the  end  of  Shakespeare’s 
poetical  career  the  modem  pronunciation,  as  in  the  present  line,  began  to  be  more 
prevalent. 

227.  renowne]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.  p.  64)1  Perhaps  *  renown’  here  is  not 
used  with  reference  to  ‘  famous,’  but  to  ‘  saw,’  i.  e.  it  is  used  in  its  primary  meaning 
(like  the  Fr.  renommle)  of  repeated  or  loud  mention,  common  report.  So  (apud  Rich. 
Diet.)  in  The  Golden  Legend:  ‘They  that  ben  in  hye  estate  of  the  world  a  lyght 
renome  troubleth  them;’  and  in  Beraers’s  Froissart:  ‘It  was  a  common  renome 
through  Englande.’ 

235.  remembrances]  Allen  (Phila.  Sh.  Soc.) :  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that 
Shfdresppare  used  the  plural.  And  yet  I  would  not  disturb  the  ‘with.’  For  the 


254 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 
236 


A  heauineffe  that’s  gon. 

Gon.  I  haue  inly  wept, 

Or  fhould  haue  fpoke  ere  this :  looke  downe  you  gods 
And  on  this  couple  drop  a  bleffed  crowne ; 

For  it  is  you,  that  haue  chalk’d  forth  the  way  240 

Which  brought  vs  hither. 

Alo.  I  fay  Amen,  Gonzallo . 

Gon.  Was  Millaine  thruft  from  Millaine ,  that  his  Iffue 
Should  become  Kings  of  Naples  ?  O  reioyce 
Beyond  a  common  ioy,  and  fet  it  downe  245 

With  gold  on  lafting  Pillers :  In  one  voyage 
Did  Claribell  her  husband  finde  at  Tunis , 

And  Ferdinand  her  brother,  found  a  wife, 

Where  he  himfelfe  was  loft  .*  Profpero ,  his  Dukedome 

In  a  poore  Ifle :  and  all  of  vs,  our  felues,  250 

When  no  man  was  his  owne. 

Alo.  Giue  me  your  hands  : 

Let  griefe  and  forrow  ftill  embrace  his  heart, 

That  doth  not  wifh  you  ioy. 

Gon.  Be  it  fo,  Amen.  255 

Enter  Ariell ,  with  the  M 'after  and  Boatfwaine 

amazedly  following.  257 


236.  A]  An  F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Steev. 

237.  I  haue']  I've  Pope  + ,  Steev.  Mai. 
Jeph.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

252.  [To  Ferd.  and  Mir.  Han. 


255.  Be  it]  Be't  Pope  +  ,  Steev.  Mai. 
Knt,  Hal.  Sing.  Ktly,  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

256.  Scene  V.  Pope  +  . 


solution  of  the  difficulty  is,  that  this  is  a  case  under  Walker’s  rule  by  which  the  final 

although  written,  is  not  pronounced.  I  may  add  here — in  proof,  that  the  Irish  pro- 
Sunciation  of  English  represents  that  of  Shakespeare’s  day — that  I  have  several  time* 
.fcard  a  highly  educated  Irish  clergyman,  even  in  a  sermon,  say :  ‘  Such  are  the  con- 
sequence,'  abhorring  the  repetition  of  the  j  sound  at  the  end  of  a  word  as  markedly 
as  Shakespeare  himself.  [I  think  that  Allen  is  unquestionably  right,  and  that  this 
comes  under  Walker’s  rule  as  fairly  as  ‘  aye  but  their  sense  are  shut  ’ ;  the  strange 
point  about  it  is  that  Walker  himself  never  noticed  it,  but  approved  (Crit.  i,  247)  of 
the  change,  for  the  sake  of  the  metre,  to  remembrance.  Of  course,  in  accordance 
with  Allen’s  view,  the  word  should  be  printed,  in  a  modem  text,  remembrance' ,  to 
indicate  the  elision  of  the  s. — Ed.] 

251.  When]  Johnson:  Perhaps  this  should  be  where. — Steevens:  ‘  When  ’  is 
certainly  right,  i.  e.  at  a  time  when  no  one  was  in  his  senses.  Shakespeare  could  not 
have  written  where  (i.  e.  in  the  island),  because  the  mind  of  Prospero,  who  lived  in 
it,  had  not  been  disordered.  It  is  still  said  in  colloquial  language  that  a  madman  is 
not  his  own  man,  i.  e.  is  not  master  of  himself. 


253.  still]  That  is,  always,  for  ever,  as  still  in  Shakespeare,  passim. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.J 


THE  TEMPEST 


O  looke  Sir,  looke  Sir,  here  is  more  of  vs : 

I  prophefi’d,  if  a  Gallowes  were  on  Land 
This  fellow  could  not  drowne:  Now  blafphemy, 

That  fwear’ft  Grace  ore-boord,  not  an  oath  on  fhore, 
Haft  thou  no  mouth  by  land  ? 

What  is  the  newes  ? 

Bot.  The  beft  newes  is,  that  we  haue  fafely  found 
Our  King,  and  company:  The  next  ;  our  Ship, 
Which  but  three  glaffes  fince,  we  gaue  out  fplit, 


255. 

258 

260 


258.  looke  Sir,  looke  Sir,~\  look  Sir, 
look,  F^F4,  Rowe  i. 

here  if]  Ff,  Cap.  Wh.  Dyce,  Cam. 
Glo.  Jeph.  Wrt,  Rife,  here  are  Pope  et 


cet. 

261.  /wear' JT\  swar’st  Han. 

262,  263.  One  line,  Pope  et  seq. 
264.  fafely]  fafe  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 


258.  here  is]  See  I,  i,  24,  if  need  be. 

261.  swear’st]  Allen  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc .)  :  Read  swar’st.  Gonzalo  is  not  think¬ 
ing  of  the  boatswain’s  general  habit  (of  which  he  knows  nothing),  but  of  the  one 
particular  occasion,  on  which  he  had  sworn  so  blasphemously.  The  two  words  being 
alike  in  sound,  nothing  was  more  natural  than  that  a  writer  from  dictation  (or  a  com¬ 
positor  carrying  the  whole  of  the  line  in  his  head,  but  recollecting  only  the  pronun¬ 
ciation  and  not  the  letters)  should  substitute  the  one  for  the  other.  [Allen  was 
unaware  that  Hanmer  had  anticipated  him.] 

264.  safely  found]  That  is,  found  them  safe. 

266.  three  glasses]  Br.  Nicholson  ( New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  1880-2,  Pt  i,  p.  53) : 
At  a  meeting  last  session  I  ventured  to  dissent  from  the  view  that  the  seaman’s  glass 
in  The  Tempest  was  of  an  hour’s  duration.  This  dissent  was  founded  on  three  con¬ 
siderations  :  that  the  customs  of  the  sea  are  as  unalterable  as  the  laws  of  the  Medes 
and  Persians ;  that  the  seaman’s  glasses  of  the  present  day,  like  the  bells  that  betoken 
them,  mark  half-hours ;  and  that  Shakespeare,  as  shown  especially  by  the  First  Scene 
of  The  Tempest,  seems  to  have  been  unusually  conversant  with  nautical  matters. 
After  referring,  however,  to  the  well-known  passage  in  All's  Well,  II,  i,  159-164,  the 
latter  part  of  which  runs  :  ‘  Or  four  and  twenty  times  the  pilot’s  glass  Plath  told  the 
thievish  minutes  how  they  pass,’  I  retracted  my  opinion,  saying  that  either  the  sea 
custom  had  altered,  or  Shakespeare  was  wrong  in  a  technology,  in  which  one  is, 
according  to  my  experience,  more  apt  to  make  a  mistake  than  in  any  other. —  As  it 
seemed  worth  while  to  pursue  the  subject,  I  consulted  The  Seaman's  Grammar,  by 
Capt.  John  Smith,  Governor  of  Virginia,  published  in  1627,  within  about  three  years 
of  his  death.  In  ch.  ix,  p.  38,  are  these  words :  ‘  — or  each  squadron  [i.  e.  party  or 
half  the  crew]  for  eight  Glasses  or  foure  houres,  which  is  a  watch.’  I  quote  from  the 

first  edition . It  is,  of  course,  true  that  1627  is  after  Shakespeare’s  date ;  but  Smith 

went  to  sea  in  1603  or  earlier,  and,  not  to  speak  of  the  improbability  and  almost 
impossibility  of  such  a  change  in  those  non-changing  times  in  a  profession  least  of  all 
given  to  it,  it  is  a  certainty  that  if  so  important  an  alteration  had  occured  in  Smith’s 
sea-life  he  could  not  but  have  explicitly  noticed  it. — It  follows,  therefore,  that  Shake¬ 
speare  was  wrong  in  All's  Well.  Whether  he  were  wrong  also  in  The  Tempest  is  not 
so  immediately  evident,  and  there  is,  of  course,  an  il  priori  possibility  that  he  might 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


256 


[266.  three  glasses] 

by  that  time  have  learnt  his  error.  Without,  however,  entering  into  the  question  in 
detail,  I  would  say  that,  having  carefully  considered  both  sides  of  the  question,  I 
have  been  compelled,  though  once  of  the  contrary  opinion,  to  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  here  also  he  was  wrong,  and  took  the  seaman’s  glass  to  be  a  full  hour  glass 
instead  of  one  of  half  an  hour.* — This  conclusion  is  of  interest  in  two  points  of  view : 
I.  It  is  the  first  instance  in  which  Shakespeare,  in  his  use  of  technicals,  has  been 
found  wrong.  2.  I  hold  it  a  sure  proof  that  Shakespeare  never  was  at  sea.  I  fully 
admit  that  wherever  else  he  has  used  a  sea  technical  he  used  it  rightly,  and  that  he 
has  made  an  allusion  in  Sonnet  cxvi,  which,  being  misunderstood,  or  rather,  not  under¬ 
stood,  by  landsmen,  has  been  pronounced  a  crux,  though  it  requires  no  emendation  at 
all.  I  admit  also  that  the  handling  of  his  ship  in  The  Tempest  is  intelligent  and  sea¬ 
manlike,  and  has  gained  the  approbation  of  naval  officers.  Admitting,  I  say,  these 
things  as  appearing  to  be  contrary  to  my  supposition,  and,  on  that  supposition,  only  to 
be  explained  with  difficulty,  I  cannot  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  he,  being  wrong  in 
this  point,  the  conclusion  that  he  never  could  have  been  at  sea  at  all  inevitably  fol¬ 
lows. — If  he  had  been,  we  must  suppose  that,  quick,  inquiring,  sagacious  as  he  was 
ever  ready  to  pick  up  even  crumbs  of  information,  he  failed  to  pick  up  what  every 
boy  picks  up  at  once,  and  what  every  one,  sailor  or  passenger,  must  have  picked  up, 
Shakespeare  could  not  have  been  ‘  in  the  cabin  ’  unless  in  a  mere  coasting  craft,  and 
the  steerage  passenger  is  even  more  bound  than  he  ‘  in  the  cabin  ’  to  learn  ships’ 
hours  if  he  would  live.  A  cabin  passenger  of  that  day  was  also  more  bound  to 
attend  to  them  than  he  is  at  present,  when  passenger  ships  have  become  floating 
hotels.  Take,  first,  the  mere  novelty  and  consequent  curiosity:  At  8  A.  M.  he  hears 
eight  bells ;  at  half-past  eight,  one  bell ;  at  nine,  two  bells,  and  so  on.  Then  at  noon, 
when  lunch  is  laid,  and  every  one  sharp  set,  some  curious  doings  evidently  cause 
delay.  At  last  the  chief  officer,  touching  his  cap,  says,  ‘  Eight  bells,  sir.’  ‘  Make  it 
so,’  replies  the  captain.  Eight  bells  are  sounded,  the  watch  below  ‘  tumbles  up  ’  and 
relieves  the  other,  and  lunch  is  begun  on  the  table.  But  half-past  twelve  is  again  one 
bell,  and  one  o’clock  is  sounded  as  two,  &c.  Then,  again,  there  is  more  cause  of 
curiosity.  At  every  eight  bells  or  four  hours,  and  during,  the  dog-watches,  every  two 
hours,  the  watches  change,  a  noticeable  time  now ;  the  boatswain  whistles  and  calls 
loudly,  and  there  is  unusual  bustle.  But  at  that  date  it  was  the  more  noticeable,  for 
every  watch  was  commenced  with  prayer  and  the  singing  of  a  psalm.  Besides,  the 
curious  landsman,  transported  to  a  wholly  new  world,  and  with,  therefore,  his  curios¬ 
ity  and  intelligence  both  awakened,  if  abaft  the  binnacle,  or,  in  other  words,  a  cabin 
passenger,  could  see  and  see  handled  the  running  or  out-run  glass,  and  hear  the  con¬ 
sequent  cry  of  two  (or  so  many)  bells. — But  there  was  more  than  mere  curiosity. 
Those  essential  times  of  life,  and  especially  of  life  at  sea,  the  meal-times  and  the  time 
of  ‘  lights-out,’  are  all  regulated  by  the  glasses  and  their  bells.  If  one  would  live,  he 
must  leam  and  obey  them.  Are  we  to  suppose  that  Shakespeare  never  asked  for  and 
never  received  the  simple  explanation :  We  reckon  by  periods  of  four  hours,  a  watch, 
and  every  half-hour  is  noted  ? — Hence  my  conviction  that  Shakespeare,  having  on 
two  occasions,  and  on  the  second  persistently,  and  late  in  life,  made  the  mistake  that 
the  seaman’s  hour-glass,  like  the  landsman’s  hour-glass,  marked  an  hour’s  length, 
never  could  have  been  at  sea. 

*  As  noticed  by  P.  A.  Daniel,  in  his  Time  Analysis,  p.  119:  ‘Alonso’s  “three  hours,”  followed 
shortly  by  the  Boatswain’s  “  three  glasses,’’  must  decide  this  measure  of  time  for  The  Tempest  to  be 
a  one-hour  glass.’  As  he  also  notes,  the  pilot’s  glass  in  All’s  Well  is  a  two-hour  glass. 


ACT  V.  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


257 

267 


Is  tyte,  and  yare,  and  brauely  rig’d,  as  when 
We  firft  put  out  to  Sea. 

Ar.  Sir,  all  this  feruice 
Haue  I  done  fince  I  went. 

Pro.  My  trickfey  Spirit. 

Alo.  Thefe  are  not  naturall  euens,  they  ftrengthen 


270 

272 


267.  tyte]  tite  F4.  272.  euens]  See  Commentary. 

269-271.  [Aside.  Cap. 


267.  yare]  See  I,  i,  8. 

271.  tricksey]  There  can  be  scarcely  a  better  commentator  than  Cotgrave,  who 
gives :  ‘  Nettelet :  m.  ette  :  f.  Prettie  and  neat ;  minion,  briske,  smug,  trickesie,  smirke.’ 

272.  euens]  This  is  one  of  the  proofs  that,  of  old,  typographical  errors  were  cor¬ 
rected  while  a  work  was  actually  going  through  the  press.  Staunton  called  attention 
in  The  Athenaurn  (16  Nov.  ’72)  to  this  word,  which  is  thus  spelt,  so  he  stated,  ‘in 
Lord  Ellesmere’s  copy,  in  Sir  Henry  Dryden’s,  and  in  that  formerly  belonging  to 
Steevens,  while  in  Mr  Grenville’s  copy,  in  Mr  Cracherode’s,  and  in  that  of  the 
King s  Library  in  the  British  Museum,  the  word  is  correctly  printed  events'  Two 
other  variations  occur  on  this  same  page  of  the  Folio,  ‘  Who  ’  in  line  338,  and  *  Ifle,’ 
line  340.  In  both  instances,  according  to  Staunton,  there  occurs  the  same  distinction 
in  the  copies  just  mentioned ;  the  three  former  read  ‘  Who  ’  and  ‘  Ifle,’  and  the  three 
latter  read  Why  and  IJle.  It  is  needless  to  remark  that  my  copy,  from  which  the 
present  text  is  printed  with  all  the  accuracy  at  my  command,  agrees  with  the  three 
former,  the  uncorrected,  and,  therefore,  earlier  copies,  as  does  also  Staunton’s  own 
Photolithograph.  The  Reprint  of  1 808  and  Booth’s  Reprint  follow  the  corrected 
copies,  and  most  probably  the  Cambridge  Editors  used  one  of  these  copies ;  they 
make  no  note  of  a  varia  lectio.  In  collating  the  Reprint  of  1 808  with  an  original, 
Upcott  probably  used  one  of  these  later  copies;  these  three  variations  could  hardly 
have  escaped  him  had  he  not ;  he  records  only  four  misprints  in  this  play  in  the 
Reprint.  (Let  me  add  parenthetically,  that  prefixed  to  Upcott’s  MS,  which  happens 
to  be  in  my  possession,  there  is  the  following  MS  note  by  Dawson  Turner :  ‘  The 
contents  of  the  following  pages  are  the  result  of  145  days’  close  attention  by  a  very 
industrious  man.  The  knowledge  of  such  a  task  having  been  undertaken  and  com¬ 
pleted  caused  some  alarm  among  the  booksellers,  who  had  expended  a  considerable 
sum  of  money  upon  the  Reprint  of  Shakespeare,  of  which  this  MS  discloses  the 
numerous  errors.  Fearful,  therefore,  lest  this  should  be  published,  they  made  many 
overtures  for  the  purchase  of  it,  and  at  length  Mr  Upcott  was  induced  to  part  with  it 
to  I.  and  A.  Arch,  from  whom  he  expected  a  handsome  remuneration.  He  received 
a  single  copy  of  the  reprint !’  It  is  pleasant  to  recall  that  Campbell  toasted  Napoleon 
for  having  once  shot  a  bookseller.)  Of  course  it  follows  that  the  uncorrected 
copies  were  struck  off  before  the  corrected  copies,  and  might  be  therefore  termed 
the  earlier.  But  the  extremest  caution  should  mark  every  statement  connected 
with  Shakespeare,  how  remote  soever.  In  this  particular  instance,  my  copy  of  the 
Folio  is  earlier  than  that  used  by  the  Cambridge  Editors.  In  six  instances  in  As  You 
Like  It  their  copy  is  earlier  than  mine.  This  fact,  which  is  at  first  somewhat  confus¬ 
ing,  is  to  be  explained,  I  think,  when  we  remember  that  the  volume  was  set  up  piece¬ 
meal  by  ar  indefinite  number  of  journeymen  printers,  and  struck  off  on  at  least  four 

17 


258 


THE  TEMPES2 


[ACT  V,  SC.  1. 


From  ftrange,  to  ftranger :  fay,  how  came  you  hither/  273 
Bot.  If  I  did  thinke,  Sir,  I  were  well  awake, 

I’ld  ftriue  to  tell  you  :  we  were  dead  of  lleepe,  275 

And  (how  we  know  not)  all  clapt  vnder  hatches, 

Where,  but  euen  now,  with  ftrange,  and  feuerall  noyfes 
Of  roring,  fhreeking,  howling,  gingling  chaines, 

And  mo  diuerfitie  of  founds,  all  horrible. 

We  were  awak’d  :  ftraight  way,  at  liberty ;  280 

Where  we,  in  all  our  trim,  frefhly  beheld 

Our  royall,  good,  and  gallant  Ship :  our  Matter 

Capring  to  eye  her :  on  a  trice,  fo  pleafe  you,  283 


27S-  offleepe]  a-sleep  Pope  4- .  asleep 
Cap.  Steev.’85,  Mai.  on  sleep  Var. 

276.  under]  under  the  Hunter. 

279.  mo]  F„  Wrt,  Cam.  iii.  moe  F3F^, 
Dtn.  more  Rowe  et  cet. 


281.  Where]  When  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
our  trim]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt. 
her  trim  Thirlby  (Nich.  Ill.  ii)  Theob. 
et  cet. 


different  presses.  At  the  heads  of  Heminge  and  Condell  anathemas  are  frequently 
hurled  for  the  misprints  in  the  First  Folio,  but  very  mistakenly.  If  we  turn  to  the 
last  page  of  that  book,  we  shall  find  at  the  bottom :  *  Printed  at  the  Charges  of  W. 
Jaggard,  Ed.  Blount,  I.  Smithweeke,  and  W.  Aspley,  1623.’  How  many  journeymen 
these  four  stationers  employed  we  shall  probably  never  know.  Each  journeyman 
may  have  carried  his  work  home  to  his  own  house.  The  upshot  of  it  all  is,  that  when 
we  are  dealing  with  a  book  whereof  it  is  conceivable  that  almost  every  page  may  rep¬ 
resent  a  different  edition,  all  collation  must  be  restricted  to  certain  specified  copies. 
Any  attempt  beyond  this,  to  be  perfect,  would  involve  nothing  less  than  a  collation 
of  every  copy  of  the  First  Folio  in  existence,  which  reduces  the  whole  subject  to 
puerility  and  caricature. — Ed. 

275.  of  sleepe]  Abbott,  §  168:  ‘Of,’  meaning  from,  passes  naturally  into  the 
meaning  resulting  from ,  as  a  consequence  of.  [As  in  the  present  instance,  and  in 
many  others  given  by  Abbott.  In  the  old  Variorum  days  much  discussion  arose  over 
this  ‘of,’  which  Malone  changed  to  on.] 

281.  Where]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.),  unaware  that  he  had  been  anticipated  by 
Dyce,  proposed  When,  because  there  had  been  no  change  of  place  on  the  part  of 
the  men — they  were  still  on  board  ship.  When  roused  from  sleep,  where  they  had 
been  confined,  then  they  saw  the  renovation  of  their  vessel. 

281.  our  trim]  Knight  will  not  accept  Thirlby’s  emendation  of  ‘  her  trim.’  ‘  Our 
trim,’  he  says,  ‘  expresses  what  Ariel  had  mentioned  in  the  First  Act :  “  On  their 
sustaining  garments  not  a  blemish.”  ’ — Keightley  asserts  that  ‘  we  must  of  course 
read  her.  It  was  probably  caused  by  the  “  Our  ”  in  the  next  lint ;  but  from  similar¬ 
ity  of  pronunciation  “  our  ”  is  sometimes  confounded  with  her  and  a.' 

281.  freshly  beheld]  That  is,  beheld  her  fresh  and  fair. 

283.  Capring]  Allen  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc.) :  Hardly,  I  think,  capering  (i.  e,  running, 
for  the  purpose  of  eyeing  her ;  for  he,  with  the  rest,  was  actually  on  board  the  ship, 
but,  rather,  just  as  we  say  ‘  I’m  rejoiced  to  see  you  ’  =  ‘  I’m  rejoiced  at  seeing  you,’  so 
the  Master  fairly  capered  (danced  wilh  joy)  at  seeing  the  ship  in  such  perfect  trim. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


259 


Euen  in  a  dreame,  were  we  diuided  from  them, 

And  were  brought  moaping  hither. 

Ar.  Was’t  well  done  ? 

Pro.  Brauely  (my  diligence)  thou  fhalt  be  free. 
Alo.  This  is  as  ftrange  a  Maze,  as  ere  men  trod, 
And  there  is  in  this  bufineffe,  more  then  nature 
Was  euer  condu6t  of :  fome  Oracle 
Muft  re6lifie  our  knowledge. 

Pro.  Sir,  my  Leige, 

Doe  not  infeft  your  minde,  with  beating  on 
The  ftrangeneffe  of  this  bufineffe,  at  pickt  leifure 
(Which  fhall  be  fhortly  fingle)  I’le  refolue  you, 


285 


290 


295 


284.  them]  her  Ktly  conj. 

285.  moaping ]  Fa.  moping  F  F 

286.  287.  [Aside.  Cap. 

288.  Alo.]  Ar.  Ff. 

292.  Leige]  F„.  Liege  F3F4. 


293.  infejl ]  infect  F4,  Rowe  i. 

294.  leifure]  feifure  Fa.  feizure  F3F4. 
29S-  Jhortly  fingle )]  shortly ,  single 

Rowe  ii  et  seq.  shortly  singled )  Theob. 
conj.  shortly ,  singly  Orger. 


283.  on  a  trice]  Skeat  {Did.  s.  v.)  :  The  whole  phrase  is  borrowed  from  the 
Spanish.  Span,  iris,  noise  made  by  the  breaking  of  glass;  also  a  trice,  a  short  time, 

an  instant;  venir  en  un  iris,  to  come  in  an  instant . The  word  iris  is  imitative. 

Not  to  be  confused  with  Mid.  Eng.  treis,  which  is  of  quite  another  origin . Wedg¬ 

wood  well  compares  the  Low  Scotch,  in  a  crack,  with  the  Spanish  phrase. 

2S5.  moaping]  W.  A.  Wright  :  To  ‘ mope  ’  is,  originally,  to  be  dim-sighted,  but 
is  applied  to  dullness  of  sense  generally.— Allen  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc.) :  Depressed  and 
moping,  because  suddenly  interrupted  in  the  midst  of  their  rejoicing,  separated  from 
Aeir  companions,  and  ‘  enforced  ’  {anti,  113)  to  go,  whither  they  knew  not,  by  some 
irresistible,  supernatural  power. 


290.  conduct]  For  conductor,  as  in  Rom.  &  Jul.  :  ‘Come  bitter  conduct,  come 
unsavoury  guide.’— Allen  {Phila.  Sh.  Soc.):  The  meaning  of  ‘  conduct  ’  here  must 

be  determined,  apparently,  by  considering  it  in  connection  with  the  word  ‘  maze  ’ _ to 

which  ‘  rectify  ’  also  has  evident  reference.  *  This  is  a  maze  in  which  nature  cannot 
be  a  competent  conductor;  and  therefore  we  must  resort  to  a  divine  source— to  an 
oracle — for  the  knowledge  how  to  go  right  in  it.’ 

293.  infest]  Cotgrave:  1  Infester.  To  infest,  annoy,  molest;  rauage,  wast,’ &c. 

295.  single]  The  misprint  of  including  this  word  in  the  parenthesis  was  early 
detected,  and  Rowe’s  change  has  never  been,  I  believe,  gainsaid.  Warburton  and 
Capell  understand  ‘  single  ’  as  referring  to  ‘  my  Liege,’  and  meaning  ‘  to  you  alone, 
in  private,  because  the  conspiracy  against  him  of  his  brother  Sebastian  and  of  his  own 
brother  Anthonio,  would  make  part  of  the  relation,’  And  this  is,  I  think,  the  true 
meaning,  although  W.  A.  Wright  understands  the  word  as  referring  to  Prospero, 
and  paraphrases  it  ‘by  myself’;  and  Delius  suggests  that  it  is  used  adverbially  for 
singly,  that  is,  one  by  one,  which  is  a  little  superfluous ;  it  would  be  somewhat  in  the 
nature  of  an  oration  if  he  were  to  address  them  all  at  once. — Halliwell  (p.  62) 
greatly  doubts  the  propriety  of  placing  a  comma  after  ‘  shortly.’  ‘  The  word  “  single  ” 
may  be  used,’  he  says,  ‘  in  a  somewhat  peculiar  sense.’ — Ed. 


26o 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 
296 


(Which  to  you  fhall  feeme  probable)  of  euery 
Thefe  happend  accidents :  till  when,  be  cheerefull 
And  thinke  of  each  thing  well :  Come  hither  Spirit, 

Set  Caliban ,  and  his  companions  free : 

Vntye  the  Spell;  How  fares  my  gracious  Sir?  300 

There  are  yet  miffing  of  your  Companie 
Some  few  odde  Lads,  that  you  remember  not. 

Enter  Ariell ,  driuing  in  Caliban ,  Stephano ,  and 
Trinculo  in  their  Jlolne  Ap par ell. 

Ste.  Euery  man  fhift  for  all  the  reft,  and  let  305 

298-300.  Come...SpelT\  Aside.  Cap.  305-307.  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et 

302.  Scene  VI.  Pope  + .  seq. 

296.  Which  .  .  .  seeme  probable]  Johnson  :  These  words  seem,  at  the  first 
view,  to  have  no  use ;  some  lines  are  perhaps  lost  with  which  they  were  connected. 
Or  we  may  explain  them  thus :  ‘  I  will  resolve  you  by  yourself,  which  method,  when 
you  hear  the  story  [of  Anthonio’s  and  Sebastian’s  plot],  shall  seem  probable;  that  is, 
shall  deserve  your  approbation.’ — Anonymous  :  Surely  Prospero’s  meaning  is :  ‘  I 
will  relate  to  you  the  means  by  which  I  have  been  enabled  to  accomplish  these  ends ; 
which  means,  though  they  now  appear  strange  and  improbable,  will  then  appear  other¬ 
wise.’ — Halliwell  :  This  parenthetical  sentence  is  to  be  understood  after  the  word 
‘  accidents.’  ‘  I  will  explain  to  you  the  history  of  every  one  of  these  strange  events, 
so  that  you  shall  be  perfectly  satisfied  of  their  occurrence  and  probability.’ — Allen 
(j Phila.  Sh.  Soct) :  ‘  Which  ’  refers  to  the  noun  ‘  resolution  ’  involved  in  the  verb 
‘  resolve,’  i.  e.  there  is  a  constructio  ad  sensum.  ‘  Seem  ’  (as  in  I,  ii,  5)  is  stronger  than 
in  current  English :  it  is  equal  to  ‘  appear,’  ‘  be  shewn  to  be  ’  (like  the  Greek  paivouai 
in  the  passive).  ‘Probable’  (by  what  Walker  calls  Shakespeare’s  incorrect  use  of 
words)  here  means  ‘proved’  {probatum,  not  probabile ).  ‘  I  will  make  a  resolution 

(or  explanation)  which  shall  be  seen  by  you  to  have  been  completely  made  out  and 
proved.’  [I  think  Allen  goes  a  little  further  than  is  necessary  in  holding  ‘  probable  ’ 
to  mean  proved.  It  seems  to  me  quite  sufficient  that  Prospero’s  resolution  should 
appear  ‘  probable  ’  to  Alonso,  especially  if  we  take  ‘  seem  ’  in  its  strongest  sense.- 
Ed.] 

296.  euery]  See  Abbott,  §  12,  for  instances  where  ‘  the  adjectives,  all,  each,  both, 
every,  other,  are  sometimes  interchanged  and  used  as  pronouns  in  a  manner  different 
from  modem  usage.’ 

297.  happend]  W.  A.  Wright  :  For  a  similar  use  of  the  participle,  see  Bacon’s 
Advancement  of  Learning,  i,  8,  §  I  (ed.  Wright,  p.  67)  :  ‘  To  accept  of  nothing  but 
examined  and  tried,’  that  is,  that  which  is  examined  and  tried. 

305.  Euery  .  .  .  rest]  This  drunken  perversion  Meiklejohn  takes  seriously,  and 
observes :  ‘  If  in  the  infinite  complexity  of  human  life  Shakespeare  ever  sought  for 
what  is  called  a  moral,  this  would  be  the  moral  of  the  play ;  and  it  is  significant  of 
Shakespeare’s  art  that  he  puts  it  into  the  mouth  of  one  of  the  lowest  characters  in  it. 
Even  his  brain  has  been  permeated  by  the  plain  meaning  of  these  strange  events. 
The  external  “  is  but  fortune  and  chance  ” ;  conduct  and  fidelity  everything.’  Else¬ 
where  he  says  that  Shakespeare  uses  ‘  nuptial  ’  eight  times  in  the  singular,  and  ‘  only 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  TEMPEST 


No  man  take  care  for  himfelfe ;  for  all  is 
But  fortune  :  Coragio  Bully-Monfter  Corafio. 

Tn.  If  thefe  be  true  fpies  which  I  weare  in  my  head, 
here’s  a  goodly  fight. 

Cal.  O  Setebos ,  thefe  be  braue  Spirits  indeede : 

How  fine  my  Matter  is  ?  Iam  afraid 
He  will  chaftife  me. 

Seb.  Ha,  ha : 

What  things  are  thefe,  my  Lord  Anthonio  ? 

Will  money  buy  ’em  ? 

Ant.  Very  like:  one  of  them 
Is  a  plaine  Fifh,  and  no  doubt  marketable. 

Pr°.  Marke  but  the  badges  of  thefe  men,  my  Lords, 
Then  fay  if  they  be  true  :  This  mifhapen  knaue  ; 


261 

306 


310 


315 


319 


307.  Corafio]  Fx. 

310.  Setebos]  Setebus  Fv 

315.  'em]  them  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 


Knt,  Coll.  Hal.  Wh.  i. 

319.  mijhapen]  misshap'd  Pope  +  , 
Huds. 


five  times  in  the  plural,  number  ’ ;  and  again  that ‘ in  the  Folio  Edition  [the  Epilogue] 
is  printed  on  a  separate  page.’  & 

312.  chastise]  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  8) :  Write  ‘He’ll  chastise  me,’  according  to 
Shakespeare’s  uniform  pronunciation  (if  I  mistake  not).  So,  also,  Tro.  Cress.  V, 
v  :  ‘  Tell  her,  I  have  chastis’d  the  amorous  Trojan.’  Write  ‘  I’ve  chastised.’  It  is’ 
frequently  written  chastice  ;  so  chasticement ;  in  Solyman  and  Perseda,  G  3,  p.  1,  chas- 
tisment.  We  find  this  pronunciation  earlier;  Surrey  has,  ed.  1831,  p.  93  :  <  By  folk 
of  power  what  cruel  works  unchastised  were  done.’  Not  that  chastise  was  unknown 
in  Shakespeare’s  time.  [Here  follow  examples  from  Heywood  and  Rowley.] 

316,  317.  Walker  {Crit.  i,  21)  :  I  do  not  feel  quite  certain  that  Anthonio’s  speech 
ought  not  to  be  printed  as  prose. 

318.  badges]  Stephano  and  Trinculo  are  frequently  referred  to,  erroneously,  as 
sailors;  even  Capell  so  speaks  of  them  in  the  next  note.  This  word  alone  indicates 
their  character ;  household  servants  usually  wore  on  their  arms,  as  a  part  of  their 
livery,  silver  ‘  badges,’  whereon  the  shield  of  their  masters  was  engraved.— Ed. 

319.  true]  Johnson:  That  is,  honest.  A  true  man  is,  in  the  language  of  that 
time,  opposed  to  a  thief.  The  sense  is  :  ‘  Mark  what  these  men  wear,  and  say  if  they 
are  honestf  [An  interpretation  which  is  scarcely  helpful ;  Capell’s  is  perhaps  better, 
which  implies  in  this  address  to  Sebastian  and  Anthonio  *  a  decent  reproof,  putting 
them  indirectly  upon  a  comparison  of  their  own  usurpations  with  the  sailors’  thievery.’ 
—Sebastian  has  just  asked  what  these  creatures  were ;  may  it  not  be  that  Prospero 
here,  by  way  of  answer,  tells  him  to  examine  their  badges  and  see  if  they  are  genuine 
and  if  he  recognises  them?  That  is,  ‘they’  refers  to  ‘badges,’  and  not  to  ‘these 
men.’ — Ed.] 

319.  mishapen]  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  9)  conjectured  misshap'd;  Abbott  said, 

§  460,  with  ‘  great  probability,’  both  of  them  unaware  that  it  was  Pope’s  reading  a 
hundred  and  fifty  years  ago. — Ed. 


262 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


His  Mother  was  a  Witch,  and  one  To  ftrong  320 

That  could  controle  the  Moone ;  make  flowes,  and  ebs, 

And  deale  in  her  command,  without  her  power  :  322 

322.  And... power And  its  power  322.  without ]  with  all  Coll,  ii,  iii 
deal  in  her  command  withal.  Herr.  (MS). 


320.  His  Mother]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Soc.) :  It  may  be  a  question  whether  the 
words  ‘  this  misshapen  knave  ’  are  used  absolute  (as  the  grammarians  say)  =  ‘  as  for 
this  misshapen  knave,’  or  whether  ‘  knave  ’  do  not,  with  the  ‘  his  ’  at  the  beginning  of 
the  next  line,  make  a  real  genitive  =  ‘  this  misshapen  knave’s  mother.’  Such  a  geni¬ 
tive  was  (of  course)  by  no  means  strange  to  Shakespeare.  Cf.  Sonn.  iv :  ‘  Nor  Mars 
— his  sword  nor  war’s  quick  fire,’  &c. 

320,  321.  so  .  .  .  That]  For  other  examples  of  so  followed  by  the  relative  that , 
see  Abbott,  §  279. 

320.  strong]  Reed  :  In  our  ancient  Reports  are  several  cases  where  persons  [who 
had  been  falsely  accused  of  being  witches]  sought  redress  in  court.  And  it  is  remark¬ 
able  in  all  of  them  that  to  the  scandalous  imputation  of  being  ‘  witches,’  the  term  ‘  a 
strong  one  ’  is  constantly  added.  In  Mich.  T.  9,  Car.  I,  the  point  was  settled  [inter 
alia]  that  the  epithet  *  strong ’  did  not  enforce  the  other  words.  See  1  Viner,  422. 

321.  Moone]  Douce  (i,  26):  In  II,  i,  189  Gonzalo  says,  ‘You  would  lift  the 
moon  out  of  her  sphere.’  In  Adlington’s  trans.  of  Apuleius,  1596,  a  book  well  known 
to  Shakespeare,  a  marginal  note  says,  ‘  Witches  in  old  time  were  supposed  to  be  of 
such  power  that  they  could  pul  downe  the  moone  by  their  inchauntment  ’ ;  and  see 
Scot’s  Discoverie,  pp.  174,  226,  227,  250.  [Br.  Nicholson,  in  his  ed.  of  Scot,  calls 
attention  to  a  similar  allusion  on  p.  10.  Douce  gives  many  references  to  Greek  and 
Latin  authors  where  this  belief  in  the  power  of  witchcraft  is  expressed.] 

322.  without  her  power]  Malone  :  He  who  ‘  deals  in  the  command,’  or,  in 
other  words,  executes  the  office  of  another,  is  termed  his  lieutenant  or  vicegerent,  and 
is  usually  authorised  and  commissioned  to  act  by  his  superior.  Prospero,  therefore,  I 
think,  means  to  say  that  Sycorax  could  control  the  moon,  and  act  as  her  vicegerent, 
without  being  commissioned,  authorised,  or  empowered  by  her  so  to  do.  If  Sycorax 
was  strong  enough  as  by  her  art  to  cause  the  sea  to  ebb,  « when  the  next  star  of 
Heaven  meditated  to  make  it  flow,’  she  in  this  ‘  respect  ’  might  be  said  to  control  her. 
[In  all  his  editions  Dyce  holds  that  Malone  has  thus  rightly  explained  the  passage.] 
—Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  MS  puts  an  end  to  the  difficulty,  telling  us  that  ‘  without,’ 
as  we  can  well  suppose,  was  a  blunder  for  with  all;  Sycorax  dealt  in  the  command 
of  the  moon  ‘  with  all  her  power’  in  making  ebbs  and  flows.’ — Knight  (ed.  ii,  reply¬ 
ing  to  Collier)  :  But  how  is  the  difficulty,  if  any,  removed  ?  To  ‘  control  the  moon  ’ 
is  to  interfere  with  the  general  action  of  the  moon.  The  moon  makes  ‘  flows  and 
ebbs  ’  according  to  natural  laws.  If  Sycorax  by  her  witchcraft  would  ‘  deal  ’  in  the 
moon’s  ‘  command  ’  by  an  occasional  suspension  of  natural  laws,  it  could  not  be  said 
that  she  possessed  all  the  power  of  the  moon.  Sycorax  exercised,  locally  and  excep¬ 
tionally,  the  office  of  the  moon,  but  without  her  power  as  a  universal  cause  of  the 
tidal  action. — Lettsom  [Blackwood's  Maga.  Aug.  1853)  :  By  ‘power’  we  are  here 
to  understand  legitimate  authority  [see  Walker’s  note,  post"]  ;  and  of  this  Sycorax  has 
none.  By  means  of  her  spells  and  counter-natural  incantations  she  could  make  ebbs 
and  flows,  and  thus  wielded  to  some  extent  the  lunar  influences ;  but  she  had  none 
of  that  rightful  and  natural  dominion  over  the  tides  of  the  ocean  which  belongs  only 


act  v,  SC.  L]  THE  TEMPEST 

Thefe  three  haue  robd  me,  and  this  demy-diuell ; 

(For  he’s  a  baftard  one)  had  plotted  with  them 
d  o  take  my  life :  two  of  thefe  Fellowes,  you 
Muft  know,  and  owne,  this  Thing  of  darkeneffe,  I 
Acknowledge  mine. 

Cal.  I  fhall  be  pincht  to  death. 

Alo.  Is  not  this  Stephano,  my  drunken  Butler  ? 

Seb.  He  is  drunke  now  ; 

Where  had  he  wine  ? 

Alo.  And  Trinculo  is  reeling  ripe :  where  fhould  they 
Finde  this  grand  Liquor  that  hath  gilded  ’em  ? 


263 

323 

325 


330 

333 


323.  three]  two  Wilson. 

326.  know]  known  F4. 

33°>  331-  Lines  run  on,  Pope  et 
seq. 

331.  Where']  but  how  ?  where  Han. 


333-  Liquor]  ’lixir  Theob.  Han, 
Warb.  Cap. 

gilded]  'guiled  Wilson. 

’em]  them  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt,  Hal. 


to  the  moon.  Our  verdict,  therefore,  is  in  favour  of  the  old  reading  [as  opposed  to 
Collier’s  MS], — Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  9) :  <  Power’  is  here  used  in  its  original  and  ety¬ 
mological  sense  of  power  or  pouvoir ;  potestas,  not  vis  ;  what  we  now  call  authority, 
or  legal  power. — Staunton  (in  a  note  on  Mid.  N.  D.  IV,  i,  150:  4  Without  the  peril 
of  Athenian  law  )  :  That  is,  beyond  the  peril,  &c.  4  Without  ’  in  this  sense  occurs 

repeatedly  in  Shakespeare  and  the  books  of  his  age.  [In  The  Tempest]  4  without  her 
power  ’  means  beyond  her  power,  or  sphere,  as  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  think  the  poet 
wrote.  Thus,  too,  in  Jonson’s  Cynthia's  Revels,  I,  iv :  4  Oh,  now  I  apprehend  you ; 
your  phrase  was  Without  me  before.’  [This  note  of  Staunton  seems  to  me  decisive,— 

although  Dyce  [Gloss,  s.  v.  ‘deal’)  believes  it  to  be  4  quite  erroneous.’ _ W.  A. 

Wright,  corroborating  Staunton,  adds  from  ^  Corinthians  x,  13:  4  But  we  will  not 
boast  of  things  beyond  our  measure.’  And  Chapman,  Pussy  D'Ambois  (  Works,  ii, 
65):  4  Not  I,  it  is  a  worke,  without  my  power.’ — Ed.] 

323.  demy-diuell]  Allen  [Phil a,  Sh.  Sod) :  The  train  of  thought  in  Prospero’s 
mind  I  take  to  be  this :  4  The  misshapen  knave,  whom  you  suppose  to  be  a  mere 
monster  I  call  a  demi -devil,  because  he  really  is  half  a  devil,  as  being  the  bastard 
progeny  of  Satan  and  Sycorax.’  To  indicate  this,  the  verb  4  is  ’  must  receive  an 
emphasis.  It  cannot,  therefore,  stand  (as  in  F,)  4  he’s,’  but  must  be  written  4  he  is.’ 
The  stress  on  4  demi-devil,’  also,  is  not  on  4  demi,’  but  on  4  devil  ’ ;  and  that  on  4  bas¬ 
tard  ’  is  purely  secondary — what  some  elocutionists  call  the  circumflex. 

332.  reeling  ripe]  W.  A.  Wright:  Compare  4  weeping  ripe,’  Love's  L.  L.  V,  ii, 
274 :  4  The  king  was  weeping-ripe  for  a  good  word.’  And  Sidney’s  Arcadia  (ed. 
I598).  i»  P-  61:  ‘But  Lai  us  (euen  weeping  ripe)  went  among  the  rest.’  See  also 
Beau,  and  FI.,  Woman’s  Prize,  i,  1 :  4  Being  drunk  and  tumbling  ripe.’  And  in  the 
same  play,  ii,  1 :  4  He’s  like  little  children  That  lose  their  baubles,  crying  ripe.’ 

333-  grand  Liquor]  Warburton:  Shakespeare,  to  be  sure,  wrote  ‘grand  ’lixir,’ 
alluding  to  the  grand  Elixir  of  the  alchymists  which  they  pretend  would  restore  youth 
and  confer  immortality.  This,  as  they  said,  being  a  preparation  of  gold,  they  called 
Aurum potabile,  which  Shakespeare  alluded  to  in  the  word  ‘gilded,’  as  he  does  again 


264 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  L 


How  cam’ft  thou  in  this  pickle  ? 

Tri.  I  haue  bin  in  fuch  a  pickle  fince  I  faw  you  laft,  335 
That  I  feare  me  will  neuer  out  of  my  bones : 

I  fhall  not  feare  fly-blowing. 

Seb.  Who  how  now  Stephano  ? 

Ste .  O  touch  me  not,  I  am  not  Stephano ,  but  a  Cramp. 

Pro.  You’ld  be  King  o’the  Ifle,  Sirha?  340 

Ste.  I  fhould  haue  bin  a  fore  one  then. 

Alo.  This  is  a  ftrange  thing  as  ere  I  look’d  on.  342 


335;  337-  Lines  run  on,  Pope,  Theob. 
et  seq. 

335.  in...lafl]  One  line,  Han. 

338.  Who]  See  note  on  euens,  line  272. 

340.  o' the]  o'  th'  FjF^. 

Ifle]  See  note  on  euens,  line  272. 


341.  then]  Om.  Han. 

342.  This  is  a  flrange]  ’  Tis  a  flrange 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
This  is  as  strange  a  Cap.  Knt,  Ktly,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

ere  I]  I  ever  Han. 


in  Ant.  Cleop.  I,  v,  37.  [Warburton  here  goes  on  to  show  by  several  quotations 
that  Elixir  seems  to  have  been  a  cant  name  for  sack,  and  hereby  convinces  Capell, 
who  adopted  the  emendation. — Steevens  very  sensibly  remarks :  ‘As  the  alchymists’ 
Elixir  was  supposed  to  be  a  liquor,  the  old  reading  may  stand,  and  the  allusion  holds 
good  without  any  alteration.’  That  ‘  gilded  ’  meant  drunk  may  be  seen  by  referring 
to  Nares  or  to  Dyce;  the  former  supports  Warburton’s  supposition  that  it  may  contain 
an  allusion  to  the  Aurum  potabile.] 

337-  fly-blowing]  Steevens  :  Pickling  preserves  meat  from  ‘  fly-blowing.’ 

339.  Stephano]  Warburton  :  In  reading  this  play,  I  all  along  suspected  that 
Shakespeare  had  taken  it  from  some  Italian  writer,  the  unities  being  all  so  regularly 
observed,  which  no  dramatic  writers  but  the  Italian  observed  so  early  as  our  author’s 
time,  and  which  Shakespeare  has  observed  nowhere  but  in  this  play.  Besides,  the 
persons  of  the  drama  are  all  Italians.  I  was  much  confirmed  in  my  suspicion  when 
I  came  to  this  place.  It  is  plain  a  joke  is  intended,  but  where  it  lies  is  hard  to  say. 
I  suspect  there  was  a  quibble  in  the  original  ....  which  ran  thus :  ‘  I  am  not  Ste  - 
phano,  but  Stajfllato.'  Staflilato  signifying,  in  Italian,  a  man  well  lashed  or  flayed, 
which  was  the  real  case  of  these  varlets,  see  IV,  i,  204.  In  Riccoboni’s  Catalogue 
of  Italian  plays  are  these :  ‘  II  Negromante  di  L.  Ariosto,  prosa  e  verso,’  &  ‘  II  Neg- 
romante  Palliato  di  Gio- Angelo  Petrucci,  prosa.’  But  whether  The  Tempest  be  bor¬ 
rowed  from  either  of  these,  not  having  seen  them,  I  cannot  say.  [This  note,  with  its 
remarkable  conjecture,  would  not  have  been  repeated  here,  were  it  not  for  its  suggestion 
of  a  supposed  source  of  the  plot  of  the  play,  to  which  subsequent  critics  have  referred. 
Heath  remarks  for  ‘  the  reader’s  satisfaction  ’  that  he  has  read  Ariosto’s  Negromante, 
and  that  it  *  hath  not  the  least  resemblance  to  this  play,  either  in  the  fable  or  in  any 
other  respect  whatsoever.  As  to  Petrucci’s  piece,  the  very  book  quoted  by  Mr  War 
burton  might  have  informed  him  that  it  was  not  printed  till  1642,  many  years  after 
Shakespeare’s  death.’  See  Appendix,  ‘  Source  of  the  Plot.’] 

341.  a  sore  one]  Steevens  :  The  same  quibble  occurs  in  2  Hen  VI :  IV,  vii,  9 : 

Mass,  ’twill  be  sore  law  then,  for  he  was  thrust  in  the  mouth  with  a  spear  and  ’tis 

not  whole  yet.’ 

342.  is  a  strange]  Abbott,  §  276 :  In  the  case  of  as  ...  .  as,  the  first  as  is  some- 


ACT  V,  sc.  i.]  THE  TEMPEST 


265 


Pro.  He  is  as  difproportion’d  in  his  Manners 
As  in  his  fhape :  Goe  Sirha,  to  my  Cell, 

Take  with  you  your  Companions :  as  you  looke 
To  haue  my  pardon,  trim  it  handfomely. 

Cal.  I  that  I  will :  and  He  be  wife  hereafter, 

And  feeke  for  grace :  what  a  thrice  double  Affe 
Was  I  to  take  this  drunkard  for  a  god  ? 

And  worfhip  this  dull  foole  ? 

Pro.  Goe  to,  away.  (found  it. 

Alo.  Hence,  and  beftow  your  luggage  where  you 

Seb.  Or  hole  it  rather. 

Pro.  Sir,  I  inuite  your  Highneffe,  and  your  traine 
To  my  poore  Cell :  where  you  lhall  take  your  reft 
For  this  one  night,  which  part  of  it,  lie  wafte 
With  fuch  difcourfe,  as  I  not  doubt,  lhall  make  it 
Goe  quicke  away :  The  ftory  of  my  life, 

And  the  particular  accidents,  gon  by 
Since  I  came  to  this  Ifle :  And  in  the  morne 
Tie  bring  you  to  your  fhip,  and  fo  to  Naples , 

Where  I  haue  hope  to  fee  the  nuptiall 
Of  thefe  our  deere-belou’d,  folemnized, 

And  thence  retire  me  to  my  Mill  aim,  where 


343 

345 


350 


355 


360 


364 


356.  which  part]  which, part  Rowe  363.  belou' d,  folemnized]  beloved  sol- 

et  S®q-  emniz'd  Rowe+,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Knt, 

362.  nuptiall ]  Nuptialls  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Coll.  Clke. 

Cap. 

times  omitted  [as  here.  To  the  instances  given  by  Abbott  add  Ham.  I,  ii,  70 :  ‘  Costly 
thy  habit  as  thy  purse  can  buy,’  and  II,  ii,  206 :  *  You  should  be  old  as  I  am  if,  like 
a  crab,’  &c.,  and  Mer.  of  Ven.  V,  i,  105 :  ‘A  substitute  shines  brightly  as  a  king.’ 
Similar  instances  are  worth  noting,  because  through  forgetfulness  of  this  idiom  Dyce 
and  other  Shakespeare  scholars  here  needlessly  deserted  the  Folio. _ Ed.] 

357.  not  doubt]  See  II,  i,  122,  if  need  be. 

362.  nuptiall]  W.  A.  Wright:  Shakespeare  always  uses  the  singular  form, 

except  in  Othello,  II,  ii,  8,  where,  however,  ‘  nuptialls  ’  is  the  reading  of  the  Oq  only  • 
and  Pericles,  V,  iii,  80.  ’ 

363.  solemnized]  Boswell  :  Solhnmzed  was  the  accentuation  of  the  time.  So 
in  Love's  L.  L.  II,  i,  41 .-  ‘Of  Jaques  Falconbridge  sollmnized.' — Grant  White: 
So,  also,  Milton,  on  the  only  occasion  where  the  participle  is  used  in  his  poems  : 

‘  Ev’ning  and  Mom  solemniz’d  the  Fift  day.’— Bk  vii,  448.— Cambridge  Edition: 

‘  Solemnized  ’  occurs  in  four  other  verse  passages  of  Shakespeare.  It  is  three  times 
to  be  accented  sblemnized,  and  once  [as  in  the  line  cited  by  Boswell], 

364.  retire  me]  See  Abbott,  §  296,  for  examples  of  other  verbs  besides  this, 
which  were  used  by  Shakespeare  re.flexively,  1.  ut  are  now  intransitive. 


266 


THE  TEMPEST 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 

365 


Euery  third  thought  fhall  be  my  graue. 

Alo.  I  long 

To  heare  the  ftory  of  your  life ;  which  muft 
Take  the  eare  ftarngely. 

Pro.  I’le  deliuer  all, 

And  promife  you  calme  Seas,  aufpicious  gales,  370 

And  faile,  fo  expeditious,  that  fhall  catch 

Your  Royall  fleete  farre  off:  My  Ariel',  chicke 

That  is  thy  charge :  Then  to  the  Elements 

Be  free,  and  fare  thou  well :  pleafe  you  draw  neere. 

Exeunt  omnes.  375 

368.  Jlarngely]  F1.  372.  Ariel;  chicks']  Arid, — chick,— 

371.  that  Jhall]  it  shall  Han.  Johns. 


371.  so  .  .  .  that]  Allen  ( Phila .  Sh.  Sod) :  It  is  certainly  thoroughly  Shake¬ 
spearian  to  leave  the  ‘it’  (  =  ‘sail’  or  a  ‘sailing’)  to  be  understood;  yet  it  is  also 
quite  probable  that  he  actually  wrote  ‘  it,’  but  that  the  scribe  who  took  down  the 
words  of  the  ‘  copy  ’  from  dictation  did  not  distinguish  the  second  Asound  from  that 
which  preceded  it  as  the  final  mute  of  ‘  that.’  Perhaps,  therefore,  we  should  either 
write  ‘that’  with  an  apostrophe  (that’)  upon  the  system  (partially  carried  out)  of  Fx, 
or  insert  the  ‘  it  ’  (in  full  or  abbreviated)  at  once  :  ‘  that  it  shall  catch  ’  or  ‘  that ’t  shall 
catch.’  [While  it  is  not  unlikely  that  Allen  is  here  right,  and  that  this  is  an  instance 
of  that  absorption  which  he  was  the  earliest,  I  think,  to  develop  from  Walker’s  rule, 
yet  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  after  so  Shakespeare  uses  that  as  a  relative, 
whereof  we  had  an  instance  in  line  320:  ‘One  so  strong  That  could  control,’  &c. — 
Ed.] 

373.  Elements]  Keightley:  I  confidently  read  element,  that  is,  air,  his  return 
to  which  had  been  already  promised  him. 

375.  Collier  :  It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  other  actors  went  out  or  ‘  drew 

near  ’  to  Prospero  while  he  spoke  the  Epilogue . The  stage-direction  in  the  Folio 

is  ‘  Exeunt  omnes,’  as  if  Prospero  himself  also  withdrew  and  possibly  ret  imed. 


EPI  LOGVE, 

fpoken  by  Profpero. 

NOw  my  Charmes  are  all  ore-throwne , 

And  what  Jlrength  I  hands  mine  owne.  4 

!,  2.  advancing.  Cap.  3.  Now]  Now  now  F  F  . 

2.  Profpero]  Profper  F3F4.  3  4 

1.  Epilogve]  Grant  White  (ed.  i) :  No  one  conversant  with  its  history  need  be 
told  that  the  Prologues  and  Epilogues  of  the  English  Drama  are  generally  written  by 
other  persons  than  the  authors  of  the  plays  themselves.  It  would  be  strange  indeed 
were  Shakespeare’s  an  exception  to  this  general  rule,  surrounded  as  he  was  with 
verse-writing  friends,  and  his  dramas  having  been  written  not  as  literary  performances, 
but  as  acting  plays,  to  become  the  absolute  property  of  the  theatre  in  which  he  was 
shareholder  and  actor.  But  it  needs  not  these  considerations  to  sustain  the  conclusion 
that  some  of  the  Epilogues  which  appear  in  the  First  Folio  were  certainly  not  written 
by  Shakespeare,  and  that  among  them  is  the  Epilogue  of  The  Tempest.  Let  any  one 
who  has  found  that  he  can  trust  his  ear  for  rhythm  and  his  comparative  appreciation 
of  style  read  the  Epilogue  carefully  and  judge.  Did  Shakespeare  write,  ‘And  what 
strength  I  have’s  mine  own,  Which  is  most  faint :  now  ’tis  true,’  &c.  ?  Could  he 
have  written,  ‘  Gentle  breath  of  yours,  my  sails  Must  fill,  or  else  my  project  fails, 
Which  was  to  please :  -Now  I  want,’  &c.  ?  Ben  Jonson  might  have  written  this 
clumsy  verse;  John  Bunyan  could  have  done  it  easily  had  he  been  alive  and  willing; 
but  Shakespeare !  It  is  not  necessary  to  dwell  upon  the  poor  and  commonplace 
thoughts  of  which  the  Epilogue  is  entirely  composed,  though  these  confirm  the  judge¬ 
ment  which  the  miserable  and  eminently  un-Shakespearian  rhythm  compels . 

Will  any  one  familiar  with  his  works  believe,  that  after  writing  such  a  play,  he  would 
write  an  Epilogue  in  which  the  feeble,  trite  ideas  are  confined  within  stiff  couplets,  or 
else  carried  into  the  middle  of  a  third  line,  and  there  left  in  helpless  consternation, 
like  an  awkward  booby,  who  suddenly  finds  himself  alone  in  the  centre  of  a  ball¬ 
room  ? — It  is  to  be  noticed,  too,  that  the  speaker  in  this  Epilogue  asks  the  help  of  his 
hearers’  hands,  to  free  him  from  the  bands  of  necromancy,  and  again,  their  prayers, 
to  save  him  from  despair;  which  puts  the  commentators  to  the  trouble  of  [an  expla¬ 
nation],  Now,  setting  aside  the  fact  that  Prospero  was  a  mighty  master  of  his  art, 
and  had  power  over  devils,  being  in  no  degree  subject  to  them,— which  Shakespeare 
could  not  have  forgotten,— Prospero,  at  the  end  of  Act  V,  is  no  longer  a  magician ; 
he  has  himself  dissolved  the  enchantments  of  the  island,  and  is  but  as  other  men. 
His  petitions  are  well  enough  for  such  an  Epilogue  as  might  have  been  written  by  any 
one  for  theatrical  purposes,  but  absurd  when  we  suppose  them  put  into  his  mouth  by 
the  author  of  The  Tempest.  It  seems  plain  that  this  Epilogue  was  written  for  the 
theatre  by  some  person  other  than  Shakespeare  ;  and  an  examination  of  that  to  Henry 
VIII  can  hardly  fail  to  convince  the  reader  that  they  are  from  the  same  pen.  [White 

267 


268 


EPILOG  VE 


Which  is  moft faint:  now  't  is  true  5 

I  mujl  be  he  ere  confinde  by  you , 

Or  fent  to  Naples,  Let  me  not 
Since  I  haue  my  Duke  dome  got , 

And  pardon'd  the  deceiuer ,  dwell 

In  this  bare  IJland ,  by  your  Spell ,  10 

But  releafe  me  from  my  bands 
With  the  helpe  of  your  good  hands : 

Gentle  breath  of  yours,  my  Sailes 
Mujl  fill ,  or  elfe  my  proieci  failes. 

Which  was  to  pleafe :  Now  I  want  1 5 

Spirits  to  enforce :  Art  to  inchant , 

And  my  ending  is  defpaire , 

Vnleffe  I  be  relied  d  by  praier 
Which  pierces  fo ,  that  it  affaults 

Mercy  it  felfe ,  and  frees  all  faults.  20 

As  you  from  crimes  would  pardon'd  be, 

Let  your  Indulgence  fet  me  free.  Exit.  22 

5.  now]  and  now  P' pe-r.  15.  Now]  For  now  Pope  + .  Now 

that  Wagner  conj. 

goes  on  to  speak  of  the  Epilogue  to  Henry  VIII  and  to  the  Second  Part  of  Henry 
IV,  and  of  Dr  Johnson’s  opinion,  which,  in  regard  to  these,  agrees  with  his  own.  He 
then  gives  the  result  of  an  examination  of  the  way  in  which  the  Epilogues  were 
printed  in  the  Folio,  and  of  the  way  in  which  Exeunt  was  placed  before  or  after 
them,  and  this  result  is  that]  the  player-editors  have  thus  indicated  as  clearly  as  they 
could  by  typographical  arrangement  that  the  Epilogues  to  these  three  plays,  The  Tem¬ 
pest,  2  Hen.  IV,  and  Henry  VIII,  were  by  some  other  hand  than  Shakespeare’s.  In 
the  absence  of  the  author’s  own  testimony  such  a  union  of  external  and  internal  evi¬ 
dence  must  be  accepted. 

12.  hands]  Johnson:  By  your  applause,  by  clapping  hands. — Steevens:  Noise 
was  supposed  to  dissolve  a  spell.  So  in  IV,  i,  68  and  141 ;  so  also  in  Mach 
IV,  i. 

18.  praier]  Warburton:  This  alludes  to  the  old  stories  told  of  the  despair  of 
necromancers  in  their  last  moments,  and  of  the  efficacy  of  the  prayers  of  their  friends 
for  them. — Jephson  :  An  allusion,  I  think,  to  the  custom  prevalent  in  Shakespeare’s 
time  of  concluding  the  play  by  a  prayer,  offered  up  kneeling,  for  the  sovereign.  The 
whole  thing  is,  therefore,  merely  a  fanciful  and  graceful  mode  of  saying  that  the  play 
is  over  and  of  asking  for  the  applause  of  the  audience,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Roman 
dramatists. 

20.  Mercy  it  selfe]  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  9) :  That  is,  the  Almighty. 

20.  frees]  Abbott,  §  200,  suggests  that  perhaps  there  is  here  the  omission  of  a 
preposition,  ‘  frees  from  all  faults,’  as  in  1  deprive  your  sovereignty  of  reason,’  i.  e. 
take  away  the  controlling  prirciple  of  reason. 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX 


THE  TEXT 

There  is  no  dissenting  voice  to  the  opinion  that  The  Text  of  this  play  as  it  has 
come  down  to  us  in  the  Folio, — and  there  is  no  Quarto, — is  of  remarkable  purity.  It 
shares  with  The  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona ,  according  to  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  i),  the 
excellence  of  being  printed  with  more  correctness  than,  perhaps,  any  other  play  in 
that  volume.  It  would  be  needless  to  repeat  here  the  many  instances,  to  which,  when 
they  occurred,  attention  has  been  called  in  the  notes,  where,  as  indications  of  this  cor¬ 
rectness,  abbreviations  or  elisions,  for  the  sake  of  the  rhythm,  are  marked  by  apos¬ 
trophes,  nay,  in  some  instances,  even  the  absorption  of  the  final  /-sound  is  thus  marked, 
a  rhythmical  process  which  it  was  reserved  for  recent  times  fully  to  comprehend  and 
elucidate. 

It  does  not  seem  unlikely,  considering  the  quality  of  the  majority  of  Shakespeare’s 
auditors,  that  his  fame  was  greatest  as  a  writer  of  Comedies.  It  may  possibly  have 
been,  therefore,  with  a  view  to  making  the  volume  as  attractive,  and  therefore  as  sale¬ 
able,  as  possible,  that  Heminge  and  Condell,  in  arranging  the  order  of  the  three 
groups,  Histories,  Tragedies,  Comedies,  put  Comedies  befcre  the  other  two,  and 
among  the  Comedies  placed  that  Comedy  first  in  order  which  they  may  possibly 
have  thought  (and  who  would  not  agree  with  them  ?)  was  first  in  charm,  in  beauty,  in 
attractiveness. 

With  one  exception,  The  Tempest  is  the  shortest  of  all  Shakespeare’s  plays.  In  a 
List  of  the  Plays,  prepared  by  Miss  T.  R.  Smith  and  Mr  Furnivall  {New  Shak- 
spere  Society's  Transactions ,  1880-85,  Pt  ii,  p.  3f),  where  the  plays  are  graded 
according  to  the  number  of  lines,  Hamlet  leads  with  3931  lines  and  The  Comedy  of 
Errors  closes  with  1778,  immediately  preceded  by  The  Tempest  with  2064. 

For  this  brevity  Grant  White  (ed.  ii)  accounted  by  supposing  that  the  text  was 
abridged  for  Stage  purposes ;  to  this  conjecture  he  was  led  by  ‘  the  suddenness  of  the 
action  in  some  scenes  ’ ;  he  adds,  ‘  if  there  were  a  quarto  copy  of  The  Tempest ,  it 
‘  would  probably  add  quite  as  much  to  this  play  as  the  second  quarto  of  Hamlet  does 
‘  to  the  text  of  that  tragedy  printed  in  the  folio.’ 

Fleay’s  opinion  coincides  with  Grant  White’s.  ‘This  play,’  says  the  former 
{Sh.’s  Life  and  Work,  p.  66),  ‘  as  we  have  it,  has  unfortunately  been  abridged  for 
‘Court  performances,  probably  by  Beaumont  in  1612  or  1613.’ 

This  is  quite  possible.  But  we  must  remember  at  the  same  time,  that  a  drama 
had  to  be  confined  within  ‘  the  two  hours’  traffic  of  our  stage,’  and  in  the  case  of  The 
Tempest  no  little  time  must  have  been  demanded  for  the  proper  handling  of  the 
unusual  amount  of  stage-machinery,  required  not  only  for  the  tempest  in  the  First 
Act,  but  for  the  vanities  of  Prospero’s  art  in  the  Fourth.  These  long  ‘  waits  ’  may 
possibly  have  made  up  for  some  of  the  deficiencies  of  the  text. 

Dr  Garnett  ( Universal  Rev.  Apr.  1889,  p.  558)  suggests  ‘two  excellent  and 
indeed  imperative  reasons  ’  for  this  brevity,  on  the  supposition  that  the  play  was  writ 

271 


272 


APPENDIX 


ten  for  representation  at  Court  at  a  time  of  general  festivity,  viz. :  ‘  the  time  of  the 
‘  monarch  and  his  guests  must  not  be  unduly  encroached  upon ;  and  the  piece  must 
‘  not  be  on  too  large  a  scale  to  be  written,  rehearsed,  and  put  on  the  stage  with  great 
‘  expedition.’ 

In  Professor  Ingram’s  Table  (New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  Pt  ii,  p.  450,  1874)  where 
the  plays  are  arranged  in  the  order  of  their  proportion  of  Light  Endings  and  Weak 
Endings,  Love's  Labours  Lost  heads  the  list,  and  The  Tempest  is  the  twenty-ninth, 
followed  by  Cymbeline,  The  Winter's  Tale ,  and  Henry  the  Eighth,  the  last  of  all. 
The  general  agreement  of  this  result,  drawn  from  the  text  itself  of  the  play,  with 
what  is  accepted  as  the  historic  evidence  of  the  date  of  composition,  affords  a  proof 
of  the  value  of  these  metrical  investigations. 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 

In  1749  there  appeared:  An  Attempte  To  Rescue  that  Aunciente,  English  Poet , 
And  Play-  Wrighte,  Maister  Williaume  Shakespere, from  the  Maney  Errours,  faulsely 
charged  on  him,  by  Certaine  New-fangled  Wittes  ;  And  To  let  him  Speak  for  Himself, 
as  right  well  he  wotteth,  when  Freede  from  the  many  Careless  Mistakeings,  of  The 
Heedless  first  Imprinters,  of  his  Workes.  By  a  Gentleman  formerly  of  Greys- Inn. 

The  ‘Attempte  ’  was  restricted  to  the  single  play  of  The  Tempest ;  ‘  the  Gentleman 
of  Greys-Inn  ’  was  one  John  Holt  ;  and  the  ‘  New-fangled  Wittes  ’  were  Theobald 
and  Warburton. 

It  is  hardly  to  be  expected  that  a  man  who  could  announce  himself  to  the  public, 
tricked  out  in  such  fanciful  frippery,  would  receive  much  notice  from  men  like  War- 
burton,  an  incipient  Bishop,  or  like  Theobald,  a  wide-read  scholar,  on  whose  hearth 
extreme  poverty  cast  its  subduing  shadow.  Nor  did  the  public  at  large  seem  to  have 
been  much  more  interested  than  his  victims,  in  the  ‘  Gentleman  of  Greys-Inn.’  About 
a  year  after  this  ‘Attempte  ’  appeared,  and  after  the  public  had  had  the  privilege  of 
judging  of  his  powers,  John  Holt  issued  Proposals  for  a  new  edition  of  Shakespeare, 
with  notes  by  himself.  Apparently  the  public  did  not  respond.  The  edition  never 
appeared.  And  after  all,  it  might  have  proved  a  respectable  edition.  To  the  great 
crux  of  The  Tempest:  ‘most  busy  lest,’  Holt  suggested  an  emendation  which  stands 
second  in  the  list  of  the  recipients  of  popular  approval.  (Unfortunately  by  a  misprint 
in  the  Cambridge  Edition,  this  emendation  by  Holt  was  attributed  to  Holt  White, 
and  to  the  latter  accordingly  has  been  generally  given  the  fame.) 

In  this  ‘Attempte,’  however,  now  before  us,  there  is,  as  far  as  I  know,  the  earliest 
conjecture  in  regard  to  the  ‘  Date  of  the  Composition  ’  of  The  Tempest.  In  speaking 
of  the  Masque,  in  Act  IV,  where  Juno  sings  ‘  Honour,  riches,  marriage-blessing,’  &c., 
Holt  suggested  that  this  Masque  ‘  may  perhaps  give  a  Mark  to  guess  at  the  time  this 
‘  play  was  wrote ;  it  appearing  to  be  a  compliment  intended  by  the  Poet,  on  some 
‘  particular  solemnity  of  that  kind;  and  if  so,  none  more  likely,  than  the  contracting 
‘  the  young  Earl  of  Essex,  in  1606,  with  the  Lady  Frances  Howard ;  which  marriage 
‘  was  not  attempted  to  be  consummated,  till  the  Earl  returned  from  his  travels  four 
‘years  afterwards;  a  circumstance  which  seems  to  be  hinted  at,  in  IV,  i,  18;  imlpss 
‘  any  one  should  choose  to  think  it  designed  for  the  marriage  of  the  Palsgrave  with 
‘  the  Lady  Elizabeth,  King  James’s  Daughter,  in  16x2.  But  the  first  seems  to  carry 
most  weight  with  it  as  being  a  testimony  of  the  Poet’s  gratitude  to  the  then  Lord 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


273 

Southampton,  a  warm  Patron  of  the  Author’s,  and  as  zealous  a  friend  to  the  Essex 
‘  familX :  Ia  either  case»  it;  will  appear,  ’twas  one  of  the  last  Plays  wrote  by  our 
‘Author,  though  it  has  stood  the  first,  in  all  the  printed  editions  since  1623,  which 
4  Preeminence  given  it  by  the  Players  is  no  bad  Proof  of  its  being  the  last,  this 
‘Author  furnished  them  with.’ 

It  is  quite  impossible  to  determine  from  the  foregoing  passage  the  exact  date  to 
which  Holt  gives  the  preference;  it  may  be  1606,  when  the  marriage  of  Essex  was 
contracted,  or  in  1610,  when  the  Earl  returned  from  his  travels  and  lived  with  his 
wife,  or  it  may  be  1612.  He  tells  us,  however,  further  on  (p.  62)  that  ‘  there  is  great 
‘  reason  to  believe  ’  that  this  play  ‘was  not  wrote  till  1612,  or  13,  or,  at  the  earliest, 
not  till  1610,  as  has  been  observed  ’  in  the  passage  just  quoted.  ‘And  this,’  adds 
Holt,  ‘  will  appear  more  probable,  if  it  is  considered  that  Ben  Jonson,  in  the  Intro- 
* ductlon  to  his  Bartholomew  Fair,  after  having  had  a  Fling  at  Shakespear’s  Titus 
‘  Andronicus  as  an  old  Play,  speaks  of  his  Winter’s  Tale,  and  this  Play,  The  Tem- 
‘  pest,  as  recent  performances.’ 

When,  in  the  course  of  his  annotations,  Holt  comes  to  Prospero’s  warnings  to 
Ferdinand,  just  before  the  Masque,  he  finds  in  these  warnings  evidence  sufficient  ‘  to 
‘  fix  the  date  of  this  Play  the  year  1614.’  And  this  date,  after  having  apparently 
wavered  from  1610  to  16x2  or  ’13,  we  may  accept  as  his  last  and  maturest  conclusion. 

The  belief  that  Ben  Jonson’s  Bartholomew  Fair  contained  an  allusion  to  The  Tem¬ 
pest  we  owe  originally  to  Theobald.  In  a  note  on  ‘  servant-monster,’  a  name  which 
Stephano  gives  Caliban,  Theobald  says  that  he  ‘  can’t  help  taking  notice  of  the  virulence 
of  Ben  Jonson,  who,  in  the  Induction  to  his  Bartlemew  Fair,  has  endeavour’d  to 
‘  throw  dirt,  not  only  at  this  single  character,  but  at  this  whole  play !  “  If  there  be 

never  a  Servant- Monster  in  the  Fair,  who  can  help  it  (he  says),  nor  a  nest  of 

Anticks  ?  He  is  loth  to  make  nature  afraid  in  his  plays,  like  those  that  beget 
‘  “  Tales,  Tempests,  and  such  like  Drolleries,  to  mix  his  head  with  other  men’s 
‘  “  heels.”  ’  Theobald  drew  no  inference,  however,  from  this  passage  as  to  the  date 
of  the  composition  of  The  Tempest.  1  hat  was  reserved  for  almost  every  succeeding 
editor  and  critic. 

The  first  attempt  to  ascertain  the  dates  on  which  all  of  Shakespeare’s  plays  were 
written,  and  to  set  them  all  forth  in  Chronological  Order,  was  made  by  Malone. 
There  had  been  stray  conjectures  and  assertions  by  editors  and  commentators  in 
regard  to  separate  plays,  scattered  here  and  there,  throughout  the  notes  on  all  the 
plays ;  and  long  before  Malone  published  his  Chronology,  Capell  had  collected 
a  store  of  facts  bearing  directly  on  the  subject.  But  it  is  the  date  of  publication 
which  decides  priority,  and  to  Malone  this  priority  unquestionably  belongs ;  and,  be 
it  noted,  so  well  did  he  accomplish  the  task  that  out  of  the  thirty-five  plays  whose 
dates  he  supplied,  ten  have  been  undisturbed  from  his  day  down  to  the  latest  investi¬ 
gations,  and  in  eight  others  the  variations  between  Malone  and  The  New  Shakspere 
Society  amount  to  merely  a  year,  or  to  a  fraction  of  a  year,— practically,  a  mathe¬ 
matical  quantity  so  infinitely  small  that  it  may  be  neglected.  Hence,  for  half  of  the 
plays  of  Shakespeare  the  dates  have  been,  in  reality,  determined  for  us  by  Malone, 
and  the  determination  of  the  dates  of  the  other  half  furnishes,  to  this  hour,  an 
admirable  field  for  Shakespearian  critics,  wherein  to  display  their  prowess  in  wrest¬ 
ling,  in  high-jumping,  in  casting  stones,  and  in  putting  hammers. 

It  was  to  Johnson  and  Steevens’s  Variorum  of  1778  that  Malone  contributed 


274 


APPENDIX 


his  ‘  Attempt  to  ascertain  the  Order  in  which  the  Plays  of  Shakespeare  were 
written  ’ — a  noteworthy  contribution  of  painstaking  scholarship.  It  was,  of  course, 
re-issued  in  every  subsequent  Variorum ;  but  each  year  new  facts  were  brought 
to  light,  fresh  allusions  found  either  in  the  plays  or  in  contemporary  literature, 
involving  a  modification  of  the  first  list,  so  that  the  Order  of  the  Plays,  which, 
of  course,  involves  their  dates,  as  given  in  Malone’s  own  edition  of  1790,  dif¬ 
fers  widely  from  that  of  his  first  draught,  and  the  Order  of  his  final  list,  in  1821, 
differs  in  turn  from  that  of  179°-  Whatever  the  changes,  however,  in  the  dates  of 
other  plays  (which  do  not  here  immediately  concern  us),  Malone’s  list,  through  all 
the  Variorums ,  down  to  and  including  that  of  1813,  remained  steadfast  to  the  date 
of  The  Tempest  as  in  1612  (with  Twelfth  Night  following  and  closing  the  list  in 
1614) ;  but  in  the  Variorum  of  1821,  where  Malone’s  final  conclusions  are  given, 
The  Tempest  appears  as  the  last  play  of  all,  and  its  date  is  1611. 

Now,  although  it  would  be  scarcely  worth  the  price  of  the  labour  to  record  at 
length  all  the  reasons  which  induced  Malone  in  his  successive  editions  to  modify  his 
conclusions,  yet,  seeing  that,  as  the  years  went  on,  other  commentators  arose,  who, 
denying  some  of  Malone’s  dates,  urged  others  of  their  own,  it  will  be  best  to  proceed 
historically  and  note  the  grounds  which  Malone  first  brought  forward  as  fixing  the 
date  of  this  play,  and  how  they  were  accepted  or  controverted  by  his  successors. 

In  1778,  Malone  (  Variorum,  vol.  i,  p.  341)  says  as  follows :  1  Though  some  account 

*  of  the  Bermuda  Islands,  which  are  mentioned  in  this  play,  had  been  published  (as 

*  Dr  Farmer  has  observed),  yet  they  were  not  generally  known  till  Sir  George  Somers 
‘  arrived  there  in  1609.  The  Tempest  may  be  fairly  attributed  to  a  period  subsequent 
‘to  that  year;  especially  as  it  exhibits  such  strong  internal  marks  of  having  been  a 
‘  late  production. 

‘  The  entry  at  Stationers’  Hall  does  not  contribute  to  ascertain  the  time  of  its  com- 
‘  position;  for  it  appears  not  on  the  Stationers’ books,  nor  was  it  printed  till  1623, 

‘  when  it  was  published  with  the  rest  of  our  author’s  plays  in  Folio;  in  which  edition, 

‘  having,  I  suppose  by  mere  accident,  obtained  the  first  place,  it  has  ever  since  pre¬ 
served  a  station  to  which  it  indubitably  i.«  "ot  entitled.’  Malone  assumes,  by  the 
way,  that  the  compilers  of  the  Folio  were  bound  to  print  the  plays  in  the  order  in 
which  they  were  written. 

‘  As  the  circumstance,  from  which  this  piece  receives  its  name,  is  at  an  end  in  the 
'  vei7  first  scene,  and  as  many  other  titles,  all  equally  proper,  might  have  occurred  to 
‘Shakespeare  (such  as  The  Enchanted  Island— The  Banished  Duke— Ferdinand 
‘  and  Miranda,  Sic.),  it  is  possible,  that  some  particular  and  recent  event  determined 
‘  him  to  call  it  The  Tempest.  It  appears  from  Stowe’s  Chronicle,  p.  913,  that  in  the 
‘  October,  November,  and  December  of  the  year  1612,  a  dreadful  tempest  happened 
‘  in  England,  “which  did  exceeding  great  damage,  with  extreme  shipwreck  through- 
‘  “  out  the  ocean.”  “  There  perished  ”  (says  the  historian)  “  above  an  hundred 
‘“ships  in  the  space  of  two  hours.”  Several  pamphlets  were  published  on  this 
‘  occasion,  decorated  with  prints  of  sinking  vessels,  castles  toppling  on  their  warders’ 

‘  heads,  the  devil  overturning  steeples,  &c.  One  of  them,  describing  the  appearance 
‘  of  the  waves  of  Dover,  says,  “  the  whole  seas  appeared  like  a  fiery  world,  all  spark- 
“  ling  red.”  Another  of  these  narratives  recounted  the  escape  of  Edmond  Pet  a 
sailor,  whose  preservation  appears  to  have  been  no  less  marvellous  than  that  of 
Trinculo  or  Stephano,  and  so  great  a  terror  did  this  tempest  create  in  the  minds  of 
the  people,  that  a  form  of  prayer  was  ordered  on  the  occasion,  which  is  annexed  to 
5>ne  of  the  publications  above  mentioned. 


275 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 

There  is  reason  to  believe  that  some  of  our  author’s  dramas  obtained  their  names 
'  ' the  Seasons  at  wh5ch  time  ^ey  were  produced.  It  is  not  very  easy  to  account 

for  the  title  of  Tuelfth  Night ,  but  by  supposing  it  to  have  been  first  exhibited  in  the 
' Chnstmas  h°lydays.  Neither  the  title  of  A  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  nor  that 
‘  of  The  Winter’s  Tale  denotes  the  season  of  the  action ;  the  events  which  are  the 
‘  SubjeCt  of  the  latter  occurring  at  the  time  of  sheep-shearing,  and  the  dream  from 
*  whmh  the  former  receives  its  name  happening  on  the  night  preceding  May-day. 
‘These  titles,  therefore,  were  probably  suggested  by  the  season  at  which  the  plays 
‘were  exhibited,  to  which  they  belong;  A  Midsummer  Night’s  Dream  having,  we 
‘  may  presume,  been  first  represented  in  June,  and  The  Winter's  Tale  in  December. 

‘  Perhaps,  then,  it  may  not  be  thought  a  very  improbable  conjecture,  that  this 
‘  Comedy  was  written  in  the  summer  of  1612,  and  produced  on  the  stage  in  the  latter 
‘  end  of  that  year ;  and  that  the  author  availed  himself  of  a  circumstance,  then  fresh 
‘  in  the  minds  of  his  audience,  by  affixing  a  title  to  it  which  was  more  likely  to  excite 
‘  curiosity  than  any  other  he  could  have  chosen,  while  at  the  same  time  it  was  suf¬ 
ficiently  justified  by  the  subject  of  the  drama.’ 

Malone  hereupon  refers  to  Steevens’s  citation,  at  IV,  i,  173,  of  a  passage  from 
Sterling  s  Darius,  which  was  first  printed  in  1 603,  and  asserts  his  belief  that  ‘  Shake- 
‘  speare  borrowed  from  Lord  Sterline.  The  date  which  [Holt]  has  assigned  to  this 
‘  Play  (i6i4)  is  certainly  too  late;  for  it  appears  from  the  MSS  of  Mr  Vertue,that  The 
‘  Tempest  was  acted  by  John  Hemming  and  the  rest  of  the  King’s  company  before 
‘  Prince  Charles,  and  Ladv  Elizabeth,  and  the  Prince  Palatine  Elector,  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  year  1613. 

‘  The  names  of  Trinculo  and  Antonio,  two  of  the  characters  in  this  comedy,  are 
'  likewise  found  in  that  of  Albumazar ;  which  was  first  printed  in  1614;  but  it  is  sup- 
'  posed  by  Dryden  to  have  appeared  some  years  earlier.’ 

Malone,  as  we  have  just  seen,  refers  to  ‘  the  MSS  of  Mr  Vertue  ’  as  conclusive 
authority  in  the  matter  of  dates.  It  is  worth  while  to  make  a  short  digression  here 
in  order  to  see  what  these  MSS  were.  The  calm  assurance  with  which  they  were 
brought  forward  as  a  deus  ex  machina  seems  to  have  annoyed  a  critic  named  Chal¬ 
mers,  who  particularly  objected  to  having  his  fine-spun  theories  coolly  brushed  aside 
by  this  unknown  and  yet  supreme  authority;  he,  therefore,  made  inquiries  {Supple¬ 
mental  Apology,  p.  463),  with  the  result  that  he  was  informed  by  Steevens,  that  the 
MS  book,  from  which  the  irritating  extracts  were  taken,  and  which  were  often  cited 
by  Malone,  as  well  as  by  Steevens  himself,  as  ‘  the  Vertue  MSS,  had  belonged,  with 
‘  several  others  lost,  to  Secretary  Pepys,  and  afterward  to  Dr  Rawlinson,  who  lent 
‘ them  t0  Mr  Vertue.  There  is  a  MS  note,  subjoined  to  the  MSS  of  Vertue,  which 
‘  about  thirty  years  ago  were  lent  to  Mr  Steevens  by  Mr  Garrick.’  Among  the  MS 
books  thus  referred  to,  there  was,  according  to  Peter  Cunningham,  a  volume  of  Lang- 
batne  with  Oldys’s  MS  notes.  These  notes,  it  appears,  were  copied  by  Dr  Percy,  his 
transcript  copied  by  Steevens,  whose  transcript  was  again  copied  into  an  interleaved 
Langbaine  by  Joseph  Haslewood.  From  this  final  transcript  the  items  referring  to 
Shakespeare’s  plays  were  printed  by  Peter  Cunningham  for  The  Shakespeare  SocTety 
[Papers,  vol.  ii,  123),  under  the  title  ‘Plays  acted  at  Court,  Anno  1613  (from  the 
‘  Accounts  of  Lord  Harrington,  Treasurer  of  the  Chamber  to  King  James  I.).’  There 
are  but  eight  items,  all  told,  as  there  given,  whereof  the  only  one  of  immediate  interest 
to  us  is  as  follows :  ‘  Paid  to  John  Heminges  uppon  the  councells  warrant,  dated  at 
‘  Whitehall  xx°  die  Mai  ,  1613,  for  presentinge  before  the  Princes  Hignes,  the  La. 


276 


APPENDIX 


*  Elizabeth,  and  the  Prince  Pallatyne  Elector,  fowerteene  severall  playes,  viz.  one  play 

*  called  Filaster,  one  other  call’d  the  Knott  of  Fooles,  one  other  Much  Adoe  aboute 

*  Nothinge,  the  Mayeds  Tragedie,  the  Merye  Dyvell  of  Edmonton,  The  Tempest,  a 

*  Kinge  and  no  Kinge,  the  Twins  Tragedie,  the  Winters  Tale,  Sir  John  Falstafe,  the 
‘  Moore  of  Venice,  the  Nobleman,  Caesars  Tragedie,  and  one  other  called  Love  lyes 
‘  a  Bleedinge,  all  which  playes  weare  played  within  the  tyme  of  this  accompte,  viz. 
‘  paid  the  some  of  iiij.  (xx).  xiij.  li.  vj.  s.  viij.  d.’  (Halliwell’s  transcript  (vol.  i,  p. 
134)  has  been  followed,  as  probably  more  correct  than  Cunningham’s.) 

This  then  is  the  only  extrinsic  evidence  which  we  possess  of  the  existence  of  The 
Tetnpest  before  it  appeared  in  the  Folio  of  1623.  Be  it  remembered,  therefore,  that 
the  date  is  1613,  and  its  authority  is  Vertue’s  MS.  Any  earlier  date  must  depend  on 
intrinsic  evidence,  furnished  by  the  play  itself. 

As  has  been  said,  the  first  draught  of  Malone’s  chronology  was  published  in  1778. 
Two  years  later  the  second  volume  of  Capell’s  Notes  and  Various  Readings  ap¬ 
peared,  containing  his  remarks  on  The  Tempest.  In  commenting  on  the  phrase  ‘  still- 

*  vex’d  Bermoothes  ’  Capell  cited  a  passage  from  Hakluyt,  where  it  is  said  that  ‘  the 

*  sea  about  the  Bermudas  is  a  hellish  sea  for  thunder,  lightning,  and  Storms  ’ ;  bu| 
Capell  disclaimed  any  intention  of  suggesting  that  Shakespeare’s  phrase  came  from 
Hakluyt;  ‘it  should  rather,’  he  said  (p.  58),  ‘have  been  the  offspring  of  some  fullei 
‘  and  later  relations,  by  print  or  otherwise,  which  should  not  have  been  gathered 
‘earlier  than  1612,  perhaps  later:  These  are  the  reasons: — In  1609  Sir  George 
‘  Somers  ....  was  cast  upon  (the  Bermudas)  by  shipwreck;  stay’d  a  year  on  them; 

‘  return’d  to  them  again  from  Virginia,  and  then  dy’d  on  them;  that  colony  calls  them 
‘  within  it’s  limits ;  and  the  then  managers  of  it  sold  them  to  some  particulars,  mem- 
‘  bers  of  their  society,  who,  in  April,  1612  “sent  thither  a  ship  with  60  persons,  who 
‘  “  arrived  and  remaynd  there  very  safely,”  the  furnisher  of  these  particulars,  and  of 
‘  the  extract  that  follows  them,  speaking  of  the  islands  themselves,  says  further — they 

were  “  of  all  Nations  said  and  supposed  to  be  inchanted  and  inhabited  with  witches 
‘  «  and  devills,  which  grew  by  reason  of  accustomed  and  monstrous  Thunder,  storme 
‘  “  and  tempest  neere  unto  them.”  Now  as  these  particulars  must,  from  the  nature 
‘  of  them,  have  been  the  subject  as  well  of  writings  as  talk  at  the  time  they  were 
‘  passing,  the  presumption  is — first,  that  the  afore-mentioned  epithet  (“still-vexed”) 

‘  rose  from  them;  and  next  that  they  were  also  suggesters  of  Sycorax  and  her  sor- 
‘  ceries,  of  the  preter-natural  Being  subjected  to  her,  and  of  Prospero’s  magic — which, 
‘  if  it  be  allowed,  then  is  this  play  proved  by  it  a  late  composition,  and  weight  added 
‘  to  the  opinion  that  makes  it  the  Poet’s  last ;  a  circumstance  that  might  determine 
‘  the  players  to  place  it  foremost  in  their  published  collection  :— Stratford,  his  place 
‘  of  birth  and  residence,  was  burnt  in  1614;  which  should  in  reason  have  drawn  him 
‘  thither,  and  in  16  he  dy’d.  The  extracts,  and  what  relates  to  these  islands,  are 
‘  from  Howe’s  Continuation  of  Stowe,  Ed.  1631,  fol.  b.  1.’ 

On  p.  66,  Capell  is  somewhat  more  explicit,  and  in  quoting  the  use  by  Ben  Jonson 
of  ‘servant-monster’  in  1614,  draws  the  inference  from  this  date,  which  Theobald 
overlooked,  that  The  Tempest  is  ‘  not  much  older.’ 

In  1795  appeared  what  are  known  in  Shakespearian  literature  as  the  ‘Ireland 

Forgeries,’  the  dishonest  trickeries  of  a  clever,  unscrupulous  boy  of  seventeen,  who 
supposed  that  in  order  to  imitate  the  style  and  spelling  of  Shakespeare’s  days,  it  was 
necessary  only  to  double  all  consonants  and  put  in,  as  he  himself  afterwards  con- 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


2  77 

fessed,  *  as  many  double-yous  and  esses  as  he  could.’  Clumsy  as  this  attempt  was,  it 
nevertheless  deceived  many,  not  alone  among  those  who  made  no  pretence  to  learn¬ 
ing,  but  even  among  those  who  were  held  in  high  repute  as  scholars.  It  was  in  the 
enquiry  into  the  authenticity  of  these  forged  Shakespearian  documents,  and  in  the 
exposure  of  their  falsity,  that  Malone  in  1796  won  great  fame — greater  perhaps  than 
from  any  other  single  investigation  which  he  made,  unless  it  be  from  his  dissertation 
on  The  Three  Parts  of  Henry  VI.  But  his  excellence  was  not  destined  to  go 
uncriticised. 

George  Chalmers  (not  to  be  confounded  with  Alexander  Chalmers,  a  Shake¬ 
spearian  Editor  of  a  later  date),  issued  in  1797  an  octavo  volume  of  six  hundred 
pages  which  he  called  An  Apology  for  the  Believers  in  the  genuineness  of  these  Ire¬ 
land  Papers,  wherein,  while  half  conceding  that  these  Papers  were  spurious,  Chal¬ 
mers  attacked  Malone,  with  the  acrimony  which  was  typical  of  our  gentle  forbears, 
not  for  condemning  these  Ireland  Papers  as  forgeries,  but  for  not  condemning  them 
on  the  proper  grounds,  and  for  errors  in  his  method  of  discussing  them.  The  attack 
was  so  sudden  and  so  sharp,  and  the  Apology  revealed  such  an  intimate  acquaintance 
with  Elizabethan  literature,  wherein  Malone  and  Steevens  had  been  wont  to  consider 
themselves  the  chiefest  authorities  among  men,  that  apparently  Malone’s  breath  was 
taken  away,  and  although  it  was  frequently  reported,  I  believe,  that  he  was  preparing 
an  answer  to  Chalmers,  no  answer  ever  appeared.  It  may  be  that  Malone  was  merely 
obeying  Dr  Johnson’s  rule,  that  a  man  can  be  written  down  by  no  one  but  by  himself, 
and  therefore  left  Chalmers  to  his  fate,  who  within  two  years  published  another  vol¬ 
ume,  larger  even  than  the  former,  which  he  called  A  Supplemental  Apology  for  the 
Believers  as  aforesaid,  and  wherein  the  longest  chapter  is  devoted  to  that  which 
Malone  considered  his  peculiar  province,  viz  :  the  Chronology  of  Shakespeare’s  plays. 
It  is  this  chapter  which  alone  concerns  us  here,  and  in  this  chapter  only  the  conjec¬ 
tures  as  to  the  date  of  The  Tempest. 

I  confess  that  I  have  always  had  a  lurking  admiration  for  Chalmers;  I  place  no 
atom  of  trust  in  his  theories,  but  their  profusion  is  attractive ;  his  learning  seconds  his 
vehemence,  and  his  fertility  of  resource  seems  inexhaustible ;  his  verbal  accuracy  in 
quotations  stands  at  times  in  striking  contrast  with  the  inaccuracy  of  his  conclusions. 
Then  too  his  unblinking  courage  of  his  opinions  compels  our  favour  even  when  it 
carries  him  so  far  as  to  give  up  his  practice  in  the  Colonial  Courts  of  Maryland  and 
return,  a  sturdy,  uncompromising  Tory,  to  England. 

So  completely  does  Chalmers  differ  from  Malone  in  the  Chronology  of  the  plays 
that  there  were  only  five  wherein  he  would  acknowledge  that  Malone  was  right,  viz : 
The  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  Lear,  Macbeth,  Julius  Ccesar,  and  Anthony  and 
Cleopatra. 

As  we  have  seen  above,  Malone,  in  his  earliest  publication,  gives  the  date  of  The 
Tempest  as  1612,  and  founds  his  belief  on  the  account  in  Stowe  of  the  terrible  tem¬ 
pests  which  prevailed  in  England  during  that  year.  Chalmers  maintains  that  the 
date  is  1613,  not  so  much  on  the  score  of  tempests  in  England,  although  they  may 
have  had  their  influence,  as  on  the  reference  to  the  ‘  still  vex’d  Bermoothes,’  whereof 
Shakespeare  found  an  early  notice  in  Raleigh’s  Discoverie,  printed  in  1596,  wherein 
Raleigh  says,  ‘  the  rest  of  the  Indies  for  calms  and  diseases  are  very  troublesome ; 

‘  and  the  Bermudas,  a  hellish  sea  for  thunder,  lightening,  and  storms.’  ‘  Subsequent 
‘  misadventures,’  continues  Chalmers  (p.  579),  ‘in  these  seas,  and  posterior  publica- 
‘  tions  in  London,  kept  the  “  still  vex’d  Bermoothes  ”  constantly  before  the  public  eye. 

>  Jourdan,  who  accompanied  Sir  George  Somers  when  he  was  shipwrecked  on  Ber- 


2  7§ 


APPENDIX 


‘  mudas  in  1609,  published,  in  1610,  A  Discovery  of  the  Bermudas ,  othe'rwise  callea 
‘  the  Isle  of  Divels.  A  ship,  named  the  Plough,  sailed  from  the  Thames  in  April 
‘  1612,  with  adventurers  for  Bermudas,  who  ....  established  the  first  colony  in  thr 
‘  Isle  of  Devils  on  the  nth  of  July,  16x2.  This  enterprise  was  followed  by  the  pub 
‘  licatiou,  in  1613,  of  A  Plaine  Description  of  the  Bermudas,  now  called  Summer 
‘  Islands  ’  [which  was,  in  the  main,  a  republication  of  Jourdan’s  Tract,  says  Chalmers 
in  a  foot-note,  and  retained  the  assertion,  found  in  that  Tract,  that  ‘  the  Islands  of  tbr 
‘  Bermudas,  as  every  man  knoweth,  that  hath  heard,  or  read  of  them,  were  never  ir 
‘  habited  by  any  Christian,  or  heathen,  people,  but  ever  esteemed  and  reputed,  a  mo?* 
‘  prodigious,  and  enchanted,  place,  affording  nothing  but  gusts,  storms,  and  fou’ 
‘  weather  ’].  These  dates,  together  with  the  fact  (from  the  Vertue  MS)  that  The 
Tempest  mas  acted  in  1613,  are  all  sufficing  proofs  to  Chalmers  that  ‘the  true  epoch' 
of  this  play  was  in  1613,  according  to  the  evidence.  Moreover,  in  this  Plaint 
Description  is  to  be  found  some  of  the  contrarieties  in  government  which  Shakespeare 
ridicules  in  Gonzalo’s  speech :  ‘  Had  I  plantation  of  this  isle,’  &c. 

As  an  illustration  of  Chalmers’s  headlong  vehemence,  it  turns  out  that  all  this 
while  he  believes  that  the  ‘still  vex’d  Bermoothes  ’  is  the  scene  of  The  Tempest.  On 
p.  581,  he  says:  ‘Knowing  the  common  opinion,  that  the  Bermudean  isles  were 
‘  enchanted,  and  governed  by  spirits,  Shakespeare  showed  great  judgment  in  causing 
‘  by  enchantment,  the  King’s  ship  to  be  wrecked  on  the  still-vex’d  Bermoothes  with 
‘  allusions  to  the  Shipwreck  of  Somers,  and  the  government  by  spirits.’  Strangely 
enough,  this  idea  that  the  Bermudas  are  the  scene  of  The  Tempest  is  not  confined  to 
Chalmers.  It  crops  up  now  and  again  in  literature,  even  in  Tom  Moore’s  Letters ; 
and,  most  remarkable  of  all  perhaps,  in  Mrs  Jameson’s  Characteristics  of  Women, 
i,  292. 

Where  Gonzalo,  in  the  second  Act,  describes  his  ideal  commonwealth,  it  is  proved, 
as  is  supposed  in  the  notes,  that  Shakespeare  borrowed  from  Florio’s  translation  of 
of  Montaigne,  which  was  published  in  1603.  Now  although  this  date  did  not  really 
interfere  with  Chalmers  s  date  of  1613,  yet  the  difference  of  ten  years  between  the 
two  was  a  little  too  large  to  suit  Chalmers,  and  to  accord  with  a  fresh  impression 
made  by  the  translation,  on  Shakespeare’s  mind;  he  accordingly  assumed  that  Shake¬ 
speare  used  the  second  edition  of  that  translation,  which  appeared  in  1613. 

As  an  example  of  the  facility  wherewith  a  figment  of  his  brain  becomes  to  Chal¬ 
mers  solid  fact,  we  have  his  explanation  of  Stephano’s  allusion  to  a  ‘  dead  Indian,’ 
— an  allusion  which  Malone  confessed  was  beyond  his  power  to  explain.  Not  so 
Chalmers,— he  will  endeavour  to  show  us  the  street  where  the  Indian  died,  albeit,  in 
an  outburst  of  candour,  he  acknowledges  that  he  does  not  ‘pretend  to  know  the 
‘  house.  After  having  thus  whetted  our  appetite,  he  proceeds  to  gratify  it  by  showing 
that,  in  1611,  five  savages  were  brought  from  New  England;  of  these,  in  16x4,  three 
were  returned  to  their  home,  one  ‘  adventured  to  the  European  Continent  ’ ;  and  the 
fifth  Indian  ‘  we  may  easily  suppose  died  in  London  and  was  exhibited  for  a  show  ’ 
(the  Italics  mine).  And  this  is  all  the  conclusion  we  obtain  after  the  swelling  pro¬ 
logue. 

Two  years  later,  in  1 7 9 9 ,  Chalmers  published  his  Supplemental  Apology,  wherein 
he  repeats  his  former  arguments,  wisely  repressing,  however,  his  blundering  confusion 
of  ‘  the  still  vex’d  Bermoothes  ’  with  the  scene  of  the  play,  and  adds  what  is  really 
his  strongest  argument  against  Malone,  if  it  could  be  verified — namely,  that  England 
was  visited  not  merely  by  one  extraordinary  tempest,  but  that  there  were  many  others 
during  1612,  and  an  especial  mention  is  made,  so  he  says,  in  *  Winwood’s  Memorials, 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


279 

•iii,  422,  of  a  great  tempest  of  thunder  and  lightening  on  Christmas  day,  1612.’ 
‘  Thls  mtlmatl0n’’  adds  Chalmers,  ‘  necessarily  carries  the  writing  of  The  Tempest  into 
‘  the  subsequent  year,  since  there  is  little  probability  that  our  poet  would  write  this 
‘  enchanting  drama  in  the  midst  of  the  tempest  which  overthrew  so  many  mansions 
‘  and  wrecked  so  many  ships.’  But,  as  I  have  just  intimated,  I  am  unable  to  verify 
this  reference  to  Winwood.  It  is  certainly  not  to  be  found  in  the  volume  or  on  the 
page  to  which  Chalmers  refers,  where  there  is,  to  be  sure,  an  allusion  to  a  storm,  but 
it  is  not  specified  as  happening  on  Christmas  day,  and  its  havoc  is  wrought  at  Dover. 
Mr  Chamberlain  writes  to  Sir  Ralph  Winwood,  9th  January,  1612,  that  ‘the  Lord 
'  Bruce  sta>’ed  at  Dover>  where  we  hear  these  late  Winds  and  Tempests  have  done 
‘  great  harm  and  in  a  manner  ruined  and  defaced  the  Peer  or  Haven.’  Again,  three 
weeks  later  (p.  428),  Mr  Chamberlain  refers  to  these  storms,  but  he  does  not  say  that 
they  occurred  on  Christmas  day,  according  to  Chalmers’s  citation,  and  he  expressly 
states  that  London  was  exempt.  ‘  We  have  had'  strange  winds,’  says  Winwood’s 
correspondent,  ‘  which  have  been  so  violent  and  continual,  as  I  never  knew  the  like, 
‘  w^h  great  Tempests  of  Thunder  and  Lightning  in  divers  places,  though  not  here  at 
‘  London,  especially  at  a  place  on  Kent  called  Chart ;  where  in  the  Christmas  Holy- 
‘  da>'s’  the  People  being  at  Church,  there  were  35  blasted  with  Lightning,  whereof 
the  Minister  in  the  Pulpit  was  one,  though  they  be  all  since  recovered,  saving  a 
Miller  that  was  struck  dead  in  the  Place,  and  one  more  that  dyed  six  or  seven  days 
after.  After  all,  neither  the  exact  date,  nor  the  exact  phraseology,  is  of  importance 
to  Chalmers’s  argument,  which  is  to  show  that,  if  Shakespeare  named  his  play  after 
some  noteworthy  tempests,  these  fell  too  late  in  1612  for  the  drama  to  have  been 
written  in  that  year.  Malone  must  have  felt  the  force  of  this ;  for  the  storms  which 
he  himself  adduced  from  Stowe  occurred  in  October,  November,  December,  and  in 
die  Variorum  of  1821  he  omitted  all  reference  to  them,  or  to  any  conjecture  that  they 
influenced  the  choice  of  the  name  of  the  play. 

In  1797  a  feeble  criticism  of  Malone  appeared  in  some  Remarks  on  The  Tempest  by 
Chas.  Dirrill,  Esq.,  the  assumed  name,  according  to  Bohn,  of  Richard  Sill.  Dir- 
rill  rejected  Malone’s  arguments,  and  offered  but  little  reason  for  rejection  beyond  his 
personal  dissatisfaction ;  and  ended  at  last  with  the  conclusion  that  The  Tempest  was 
written  ‘between  the  years  1612  and  1616.’  The  qualities  which  Dirrill  possesses 
for  a  leader  may  be  judged  by  his  finding  in  Prospero’s  assertion  that  ‘  the  very  rats 
had  quit  it,  an  allusion  ‘  to  the  English  vessels  which  had  conveyed  those  animals 
‘  to  the  Bermudas.’  And  again  he  finds  the  circumstance  ‘  somewhat  curious  ’  and 
‘  perhaps  worthy  of  observation,’  that  ‘  Shakespeare  should  give  Caliban  the  appel¬ 
lation  of  “Moon-Calf”;  seeing  that  the  chief  or  largest  of  the  Bermuda  Isles, 

‘  should  be  shaped  like  a  half  moon.’ 

Five  or  six  years  after  Chalmers’s  last  word  in  his  Supplemental  Apology,  Douce, 
the  learned  Archeologist,  published  his  Illustrations  of  Shakespeare  (1807)  and 
therein  (i,  5)  expresses  his  belief  that  it  was  the  shipwreck  of  Sir  George  Somers  in 
1609  which  was  the  source  of  The  Tempest;  not  that  any  novelty  was  claimed  for  the 
suggestion,  but  Douce  believed  that  the  particulars  of  this  shipwreck  were  incor¬ 
porated  in  the  drama  to  a  greater  extent  than  was  generally  supposed;  a  discussion 
of  these  various  items  is  not  germane  to  the  present  subject,  but  belong  to  a  study  of 
the  sources  whence  Shakespeare  drew  his  Plot.  All  that  is  necessary  to  note  here  is 
that,  led  by  them,  Douce  placed  the  first  limit  of  his  first  date  in  1609,  and  since  Ben 
Jons^r  alluded  to  The  Tempest  in  his  Bartholomew  Fair ,  the  later  limit  in  1614. 


28o 


APPENDIX 


A  few  months  after  Douce’s  volume  appeared  Malone  printed  privately  an  Essay, 
which  was  afterward  reprinted  in  the  Variorum  of  1821,  wherein  he  claimed  that  he 
had  ‘  discovered  the  source  of  the  incidents  from  which  the  title  and  Part  of  the  Story 
‘  of  The  Tempest  were  derived,’  and  that  he  had  thereby  ascertained  the  true  date 
when  the  play  was  written.  Unalterable  in  the  belief  that  Shakespeare  could  never 
have  devised  a  play  founded  on  a  tempest  without  having  a  tempest  made  to  his 
hand  in  real  life,  Malone,  driven  perhaps  by  Chalmers,  perhaps  by  common  sense, 
from  the  tempests  on  land  in  1612,  discovered  his  long-lost,  indubitable,  genuine 
tempest  in  that  fierce  tornado  which  wrecked  Sir  George  Somers  on  the  Bermudas. 
Malone  did  not  claim  to  have  been  the  first  to  refer  to  Sir  George’s  historic  wreck ; 
this  had  been  referred  to,  as  we  have  seen,  by  several  of  Malone’s  predecessors ;  but 
he  maintained  that  he  had  detected  what  had  escaped  others,  and  had  found  in  the 
peculiar  incidents  attending  that  shipwreck  the  immediate  origin  of  The  Tempest ; — 
and  ‘  that  to  these  incidents  there  is  a  covert  reference  in  various  passages  of  that 

*  comedy; — and  that  the  fate  of  Somers  not  having  been  known  in  England  for  abou: 

‘  fifteen  months  after  he  left  it,  that  is,  not  till  about  September  or  October  in  the  yeat 

*  during  all  which  time  it  was  feared  and  generally  believed  that  he  was  lost; 

‘  and  the  poet,  as  appears  from  a  passage  in  his  play,  having  known  that  he  had 
‘  landed  on  one  of  the  Bermuda  islands  in  safety ;  it  necessarily  follows,  that  this 
‘  Comedy  was  written  after  the  news  of  that  event  had  reached  England ;  and,  as  I 
‘  know  that  it  had  “  a  being  and  a  name  ”  in  the  autumn  of  i6n,the  date  of  the  play 
‘  is  fixed  and  ascertained  with  uncommon  precision,  between  the  end  of  the  year  1610 
‘  and  the  autumn  of  1 61 1 ;  and  that  it  may  with  great  probability  be  ascribed  to  the 
‘  Spring  of  the  latter  year.’ 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  the  foregoing  quotation  Malone  says  that  he  knows 
this  play  was  in  existence  in  the  Autumn  of  1611.  Unfortunately,  he  has  not 
bequeathed  to  us  the  source  of  this  knowledge.  He  makes  the  same  unsupported 
assertion  in  regard  to  the  date  of  Othello.  We  know  him  too  well  to  suppose  that  he 
would  make  such  unqualified  remarks  without  adequate  proofs.  The  dates  1611  and 
1604  are  given  for  performances  of  The  Tempest  and  of  Othello  respectively  in  the 
Revels  Accounts  forged  by  Peter  Cunningham.  That  sixty  years  before  Cunningham 
offered  his  forgery  for  sale  to  the  British  Museum,  Malone  should  have  said  that  he 
knew  these  dates  to  be  true,  deepens  the  mystery  involved  in  these  forged  Revels 
Accounts,  whereof  their  MS  record  is  as  unquestionably  forged  as  their  dates  seem  to 
be  unquestionably  true;  that  is,  if  we  are  to  put  implicit  faith  in  Malone’s  accuracy, 
which,  perhaps,  wre  may  follow  Halliwell’s  example  in  doing.*  The  forged  accounts 
will  be  referred  to  again. 

What  Malone  found  in  the  account  of  Somers’s  shipwreck  to  supply  Shakespeare 
with  material  for  his  play  falls  under  the  Source  of  the  Plot. 

Malone’s  Essay,  however,  neither  convinced  nor  silenced  his  former  assailant,  and 
in  1815  Chalmers  printed  privately  Another  Account  of  The  Incidents  from  which 
the  Title  and  a  Part  of  the  Story  of  Shakespeare' s  Tempest  were  derived ;  and  the 
True  Era  of  it  ascertained,  evincing  the  original  connexion  of  the  Royal  Family  with 
the  Poet  s  drama.  Both  Chalmers  and  Malone  were  agreed  on  two  points :  first,  that 

*  This  puzzle  of  these  Revels  Accounts  may  be  some  day  solved.  At  present  it  is  inscrutable. 
Halliwell  s  treatment  of  it  in  his  Outlines  is  unsatisfactory ;  he  acknowledged,  in  private  correspond¬ 
ence,  that  the  subject  needed  entire  revision;  but  unfortunately  the  lassitude  of  his  fatal  illness  was 
even  then  upon  him,  and  he  was  unable  to  accomplish  the  task.  The  circumstances  of  the  case  are 
set  fo»th  in  full  in  the  New  Variorum  Othello,  p.  351,  and  a  solution  attempted  on  p.  356. 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION  -,g x 

The  Tempest  is  one  of  the  latest  of  Shakespeare’s  dramas ;  and,  secondly,  that  Ben 
Jonson  referred  to  The  Tempest  in  1614.  But  after  leaving  this  common  ground, 
Chalmers  acknowledges  the  force  of  none  of  the  allusions  in  the  play  which  are  so 
manifest  to  Malone ;  but  in  their  stead  allusions,  clear  to  demonstration,  are  visible 
to  him  throughout  the  play,  pointing  to  the  events  of  1612.  For  instance  the 
‘  emPhatic*l  mention  ’  in  the  play  of  the  death  of  the  King’s  son,  ‘plainly  alluded  to 
‘the  real  decease  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  on  the  4th  of  November,  1612;  and  must 
‘  have  made  a  great  impression  on  the  audience.’  ‘  The  allusion  to  the  slow  poison 
‘which  was  made  use  of  in  1612-13  for  destroying  Overbury,  must  have  greatly 
anected  the  audience,  whose  indignation  was  greatly  incited  by  the  fact’  This 
looks  at  first  sight  like  a  slip  on  the  part  of  Chalmers.  It  is  now  generally  accepted 
that  the  Overbury  tragedy  occurred  in  1613.  Chalmers  follows  Camden,  and  says  in 
a  foot-note  that  even  if  1613  be  correct,  and  not  1612,  it  would  prove  only  that  ‘  The 
‘  Tempest  was  written  in  the  Autumn  rather  than  the  Spring  of  1613.’  He  quite 
overlooks  the  fact,  however,  that  it  must  have  been  the  trial  of  Somerset  for  Over¬ 
bury  s  murder  which  emphasized  this  poisoning  in  the  public  mind,  and  this  trial  did 
not  take  place  for  two  full  years  after  Overbury’s  death — not  until  October,  1615. 

Chalmers  then  continues  :  ‘  The  sarcasms  on  King  James’s  temperament  and  prac- 
‘  tice  allude  to  the  events  of  1612.  Mr  Malone  went  back  to  the  year  1609,  for  a 
‘  tempest  to  wreck  Somers’s  ship  on  the  Bermudas :  But  Shakespeare  called  specially 
‘  for  “  this  last  tempest  ”  [in  Act  V,  Prospero  speaks  of  “  the  last  tempest  ”],  which 
‘  lasted  the  three  last  months  of  1612,  and  which  wrecked  so  many  ships  and  did  so 
‘  much  damage.  Nor  is  Somers’s  shipwreck  even  alluded  to  in  The  Tempest.  Shake- 
‘  speare’s  mind  was  drawn  to  the  Bermudas  by  the  colonization  of  that  enchanted 
‘island  by  a  ship  from  the  Thames  in  1612,  and  the  consequent  publications:  Thus 
‘  was  il  in  allusion  t0  these  publications  and  to  that  settlement  on  the  Bermudas  that 
‘  Shakespeare  threw  out  so  many  sarcasms  against  the  colonization  of  that  period, 

‘  which  was  promoted  by  so  many  absurd  and  contradictory  descriptions  of  the  coun- 
‘  try  which  were  published  for  the  delusion  of  settlers.’  As  an  illustration  of  the 
extreme  to  which  Chalmers  continued,  as  in  former  years,  to  push  his  theory  of  the 
allusions  to  contemporary  events  which  are  to  be  detected  in  The  Tempest,  be  it  noted 
that  in  the  so-called  triumphs  or  pageants  at  the  Princess  Elizabeth’s  marriage  there 
were  some  rocks  and  forts  which  were  said  to  resemble  Argier,  and  to  them,  Chal¬ 
mers  proclaimed,  there  was  a  reference  in  the  Argier  whence  Sycorax  was  banished. 

‘  Mr  Malone,’  continues  Chalmers,  ‘  has  wholly  omitted  the  mention  of  the  marriage 
‘  in  the  mask,  which  is  so  emphatically  mentioned  in  the  fourth  Act  of  The  Tempest, 

‘  though  it  be  so  important,  as  it  recalled  to  the  audience  the  real  motive  that  induced 
the  poet  to  write  his  comedy.’  [How  happy  it  is  for  us,  that  in  all  Shakespearian 
questions  there  is  always  one  man  to  whom  Shakespeare’s  inmost  thoughts  are 
known!]  ‘Yes;  Masques  were  common,  as  Mr  Malone  has  observed;  but  a  royal 
‘  marriage  was  very  uncommon,  and  gave  occasion  to  such  triumphs,  pastimes,  mask- 
*  in2s’  and  other  courtly  entertainments,  as  England  had  seldom  seen  before.  Shake- 
‘  speare  in  taking  advantage  of  all  these  popular  entertainments,  like  other  dramatists 
‘  from  that  time  to  the  present,  seized  the  passing  scenes  to  produce  his  comedy  of 
‘  The  Tempest  as  a  sequence  to  those  princely  sports,  in  celebration  of  the  Palatine’s 
‘  marriage  with  the  Princess  Elizabeth  on  the  22d  of  February,  1613.  What  was 
‘  Somers  to  Shakespeare,  or  Shakespeare  to  Somers,  that  our  poet  should  have  written 
‘  such  a  Comedy  on  his  shipwreck  and  death  !  But,  in  this  uncommon  and  splendid 
■marriage  which  drew  so  many  consequences  after  it,  there  was  a  striking  occasion, 


282 


APPENDIX 


which  induced  our  dramatist  to  bring  out  his  appropriate  play :  And  Mr  Malone, 
‘  by  not  adverting  to  this  occasion  and  that  marriage,  has  egregiously  failed  in  his 
‘  account  of  the  incidents  from  which  the  title  and  a  part  of  the  Story  of  Shake- 
‘  speare’s  Tempest  were  derived,  as  well  as  the  true  date  of  its  production.  Mr 
‘  Malone  has  still  more  egregiously  failed  in  showing  the  latent  connection  of  Shake- 
‘  speare’s  Tempest  with  the  royal  family  on  the  British  throne.’ 

Chalmers  insists  on  ‘  the  last  Tempest  ’  (referred  to  by  Prospero,  and  which  must 
have  been  that  in  the  Christmas  holidays  of  1612),  as  the  tempest  which  started  the 
play.  If,  therefore,  this  play  was  completed  for  the  royal  marriage,  which  took  place 
on  the  22d  of  February,  1613,  it  seems  as  though  Chalmers  must  have  supposed  the 
play  to  have  been  written  in  about  seven  weeks,  and  I  am  by  no  means  sure  that, 
with  his  vehement  temperament,  he  did  not  thus  suppose.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  he 
himself  would  have  undertaken,  stans  uno  pede,  to  produce  a  play  within  that  term, 
but  then,  it  may  be  feared,  it  would  not  have  been  The  Tempest.  After  all,  Chalmers 
need  not  be  pressed  thus  closely  to  the  wall.  Whether  or  not  he  remembered  it  I 
cannot  say,  but  the  year  in  those  days  began  on  the  25th  of  March ;  therefore,  between 
the  Christmas  of  1612  and  the  February  of  1613,  more  than  a  year  intervened,  and 
Chalmers  is  saved.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Chalmers  did  not  recall  this  fact ; 
had  he  recalled  it,  he  would  have  been  sure  to  emphasize  it.  At  any  rate,  in  dealing 
with  the  dates  of  these  years,  the  Old  Style  should  be  always  kept  in  mind. 

Even  had  Malone  been  living  when  this  final  criticism  of  Chalmers  was  passed  on 
his  labours,  it  may,  perhaps,  be  doubted  whether  that  criticism  would  have  at  all 
changed  his  views,  or  whether  he  would  have  replied  to  the  attack.  In  the  Variorum 
of  1821,  Boswell,  Malone’s  literary  executor,  could,  of  course,  only  follow  Malone’s 
latest  MSS,  and  in  them,  as  appears  in  that  Edition  (vol.  ii,  p.  465),  Malone  adheres 
to  the  views  expressed  in  his  Essay,  to  the  effect  that  since  he  had  first  investigated 
the  subject,  he  had  collected  information  which  placed  the  question  in  his  opinion 
‘  beyond  a  doubt,  that  this  play  was  founded  on  a  recent  event  and  was  produced  in 
‘  1611.’  In  regard  to  the  other  references  mentioned  in  his  earliest  investigation, 
Malone,  in  his  latest,  reiterates,  in  the  main,  his  belief  in  them ;  he  still  thinks  it  pos¬ 
sible  that  Shakespeare  borrowed  from  Lord  Sterling,  and  that  Ben  Jonson,  in  his 
Bartholomew  Fair  ‘  endeavored  to  depreciate  this  beautiful  comedy  by  calling  it  a 
‘  foolery’  [«V].  And  Malone  now  places  The  Tempest  the  last  on  the  list,  as  Shake¬ 
speare’s  final  composition. 

Both  Chalmers  and  Malone  accepted  as  one  of  their  dates  this  allusion  to  The 
Tempest  by  Jonson  in  1614,  and  it  has  been  likewise  accepted  since  their  day,  by 
many  and  many  an  editor,  from  some  of  whom  we  have  a  right  to  expect  better 
things.  The  passage  occurs  in  the  Induction ;  it  has  been  already  quoted,  but  no 
harm  will  be  done  by  repeating  it ;  it  runs  thus :  1  If  there  be  never  a  servant-monster 
‘  in  the  fair,  who  can  help  it,  he  says,  nor  a  nest  of  antiques  ?  he  is  loth  to  make 
‘  nature  afraid  in  his  plays,  like  those  that  beget  tales,  tempests,  and  such  like  droll- 
‘  eries,  to  mix  his  head  with  other  men’s  heels.’  It  was  Theobald  who  first  suggested, 
as  we  have  seen,  that  there  is  here  in  ‘  servant-monster  ’  a  direct  and  sneering  allusion 
to  Caliban,  and  the  sneer  herein  alleged  was  accepted  by  Steevens,  and  by  Chalmers, 
and  by  Malone.  The  last,  in  referring  to  the  passage,  misquoted  the  word  ‘  drollery  ’ 
and  called  it  foolery  ;  for  this  he  was  brought  to  book  by  Gifford,  in  a  note  on  the 
passage  in  Jonson,  which  is  one  of  the  most  satisfactory  of  Gifford’s  many  satisfactory 
notes,  and  ought  to  have  settled,  for  all  time,  the  question  of  any  covert,  sneering 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION— GIFFORD  283 

allusion  to  Shakespeare.  ‘Foolery]  says  Gifford  (vol.  iv,  p.  370),  ‘  cannot  be  applied 

to  any  work  without  an  intent  to  depreciate  it;  but  this  was  not  Jonson’s  word,  nor 
t  W3S  U  even  ln  bls  contemplation.  The  term  used  by  him  is  “  drollery,”  which  had 
‘  a  precise  and  specific  bearing  upon  the  whole  subject  of  his  Induction.  A  droll  or 
‘  dr°Uery  was  the  appropriate  term  for  a  puppet-show,  and  so  is  applied  by  all  writers 
‘  of  his  time.  Thus  Claudia,  in  the  Tragedy  of  Valentinian,  declares  that  “  she  had 
‘  “^er  make  a  drollery  till  thirty,”  i.  e.  spend  her  youth  in  making  puppet-shows, 

w  ich  she  considers  as  the  lowest  scene  of  degradation ;  and,  so,  indeed,  in  many 

other  places.  The  term  continued  in  use  down  to  the  last  century,  for  Dennis  says 
‘  m  one  of  his  letters,  that  “  he  went  to  see  the  siege  of  Namur,  a  droll,  at  Bartholo- 

*  “  mew  Fair.  ’  Subsequently  to  Jonson’s  time  the  word  was  applied  to  a  farcical 

lalogue  in  a  single  scene;  but  there  is,  I  confidently  believe,  no  instance  of  drollery 
‘  being  used  for  a  legitimate  comedy.  The  reader  now  sees  all  the  advantage  derived 
‘  by  Mr  Malone  from  his  sophistication;  had  he  adhered  to  Jonson’s  own  language, 
‘ 11113  part  of  the  charge  gainst  Mm  could  not  have  been  sustained  for  a  moment.’ 
‘“Servant-monster”  is  undoubtedly  to  be  found  in  The  Tempest;  but  I  am  yet  to 
‘ learn  that  ‘he  expression  was  the  invention  of  Shakespeare,  or  even  peculiar  to  him; 

*  th°Ugh  ^  has  applied  it  with  inimitable  humour.  The  reader  is  now  to  learn  that 
‘  the  town  in  those  days  abounded  with  exhibitions  of  what  were  familiarly  called 
‘  monstersy  i-  e.  creatures  of  various  kinds  which  were  taught  a  thousand  antic  tricks; 

‘ the  constant  concomitants  of  puppet-shows.  “  I  would  not  have  you,”  says  Machin, 
‘“step  into  the  suburbs  and  acquaint  yourself  either  with  monsters  or  motions.”— 

‘  Dumb  Anight.  And  Jonson,  himself,  in  a  subsequent  part  of  this  play,  makes 
‘  Bristle  tax  Haggise  with  loitering  behind  “  to  see  the  man  with  the  monsters Ele- 
‘  phants,  bears,  camels,  horses,  &c.  were  all  accompanied  by  apes,  who  amused  the 
‘  spectators  by  assuming  a  command  over  them.  Nor  is  the  custom,  nor  the  language 
‘  yet  obsolete.  I  have  frequently  seen,  at  a  country  fair,  a  dog  or  bear  called  out  to 

show  his  obedience  to  his  master ,”  an  ape  or  monkey,  that  mounted,  and  drove  him 

*  about  at  will.  This  was  the  servant-monster  of  Jonson’s  age,  but  there  was  yet 
‘  another,  the  clown  who  conducted  the  mummery  of  such  characters  as  the  machinery 
‘  of  the  show  required,  beasts  and  fishes  of  the  most  monstrous  and  uncouth  forms. 

‘ ....  It  is  impossible  to  look  at  the  part  of  Trinculo,  without  seeing  that  it  bears  an 
‘  immediate  reference  to  this  custom;  and  we  may  form  some  idea  of  the  roar  of  the 
‘  old  theatre  at  heanng  him  and  his  associate  unwittingly  characterise  themselves  as 
‘  monsters  by  adopting  the  well-known  expression.  Long  as  this  note  is,  I  am  unwill- 
‘  ing  to  dismiss  it  without  noticing  the  immense  importance  of  the  “  malignity  ”  of 
‘  Jonson  to  the  commentators !  It  settles  dates,  it  decides  controversies,  and  it  occa¬ 
sionally  reconciles  the  bitterest  enemies;  “ your  if  is  not  a  more  excellent  peace¬ 
maker.”  The  Tempest,  “  it  seems,  must  have  been  written  before  1614.”  But 

‘  why  ?  The  answer  is  as  ready  as  a  borrower’s  cap  ;  “  because  Jonson  sneers  at  it  in 
‘  “  that  year !”  And  this  settles  the  contest.’ 

.  The  moral  of  this  g°°d  Msson  has  not  even  yet  sufficiently  leavened  Shakespearian 
criticism :  we  find  critic  after  critic  detecting  allusions  in  Shakespeare’s  plays  which 
are  founded  on  assumptions  quite  as  baseless  as  Jonson’s  alleged  sneers.  This  note 
of  Gifford  has  been  overlooked,  and,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  where  it  has  not  been  over¬ 
looked  its  conclusion  has  been  denied,  as  by  Knight. 

In  the  Fourth  Act  of  The  Tempest,  Prospero  says  of  ‘  These  our  actors,’  that 
they — 


284 


APPENDIX 


Are  melted  into  air,  into  thin  air : 

And,  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  this  vision, 

The  cloud-capp’d  towers,  the  gorgeous  palaces, 

The  solemn  temples,  the  great  globe  itself, 

Yea,  all  which  it  inherit,  shall  dissolve 
And,  like  this  insubstantial  pageant  faded, 

Leave  not  a  rack  behind.’ 

In  a  note  on  this  passage,  in  1778,  Steevens  called  attention  to  the  following  lines 
in  The  Tragedie  of  Darius,  by  William  Alexander,  afterward  Earl  of  Sterling: 

‘  Let  greatnesse  of  her  glascie  scepters  vaunt ; 

Not  sceptours,  no,  but  reeds,  soone  brus’d  soone  broken  : 

And  let  this  worldlie  pomp  our  wits  inchant. 

All  fades,  and  scarcelie  leaues  behinde  a  token. 

Those  golden  Pallaces,  those  gorgeous  halles, 

With  fourniture  superfluouslie  faire  : 

Those  statelie  Courts,  those  sky-encountring  walles 
Evanish  all  like  vapours  in  the  aire.’ 

This  tragedy,  says  Steevens,  must  have  been  written  before  the  death  of  Queen  Eliz 
abeth  (which  happened  on  the  24th  of  March,  1603),  because  it  is  dedicated  to 
James  VI,  King  of  Scots.  Steevens  quotes  the  lines  from  the  Quarto  of  1603,  which 
differ  slightly  in  spelling  from  those  in  the  Quarto  of  1604,  which  are  given  above, 
from  Staunton. 

That  there  is  a  parallelism  between  the  passages  is  evident.  The  date,  therefore, 
of  The  Tragedie  becomes  of  importance,  if  we  decide  that  this  parallelism  is  so  exact 
that  Shakespeare  must  have  copied  from  Lord  Sterling.  If  we  believe  that  Shake¬ 
speare  ‘conveyed’  from  Darius,  we  obtain  a  definite  early  limit,  viz. :  1603,  after 
which  The  Tempest  must  have  been  written,  and  thereupon  all  theories  as  to  an 
earlier  date,  and  there  are  several,  must  be  swept  away.  Staunton  asserts  that  ‘  it 
‘  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  Shakespeare  remembered  the  lines  in  Lord  Sterling’s 
‘  Tragedie .’  W.  Aldis  Wright,  while  granting  that  there  is  sufficient  resemblance 
to  warrant  the  quotation  of  Lord  Sterling’s  lines  as  a  parallel  passage,  thinks  that 
there  is  ‘  hardly  enough  to  justify  any  inference  with  regard  to  priority  of  dates ;’ 
with  this  more  temperate  opinion  I  agree ;  but  little  faith  is  to  be  placed  in  conclu¬ 
sions  drawn  from  parallelisms  which  are  to  be  regarded  as  fortuitous. 

For  many  years  after  Malone’s  death  his  date  for  this  play,  1611,  and  his  asser¬ 
tion  that  it  was  Shakespeare’s  last,  were  generally  accepted.  In  1838,  Campbell 
says :  ‘  The  Tempest  has  a  sort  of  sacredness  as  the  last  work  of  the  mighty  work- 
‘  man.’  In  the  next  year,  however,  in  1839,  the  Rev.  Joseph  Hunter  published  A 
Disquisition  on  the  Scene,  Origin,  Date,  &c.,  of  Shakespeare’s  Tempest,  a  noteworthy 
contribution  to  the  subject;  and  as  the  work  of  one  of  the  most  learned,  albeit  fan¬ 
ciful,  and  gentle-minded  of  Shakespearian  commentators,  it  deserves  particular  atten¬ 
tion,  especially  as  it  discards  all  the  preceding  theories  that  The  Tetnpest  is  one  of 
the  latest  of  Shakespeare’s  plays ;  and  maintains  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  one  of  the 
earliest.  Much  of  Hunter’s  Disquisition  is  taken  up  with  proving  that  Prospero’s 
isle  is  Lampedusa,  a  topic  with  which  we  are  not  here  concerned.  His  first  task  i3 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION— HUNTER  285 

to  disprove  the  belief  of  Malone  and  Chalmers,  that  this  comedy  must  have  been 
written  after  1610;  this  he  attempts  by  showing  that  Shakespeare’s  Tempest  was  not 
suggested  by  the  shipwreck  of  Sir  George  Somers  in  1609,  but  by  Ariosto’s  Orlando; 
and  that  the  reference  to  the  ‘still  vex’d  Bermoothes’  did  not  come  from  Jourdan’s 
00k  in  1612,  but  that  ‘  the  idea  of  a  stormy  sea  was  so  associated  with  the  idea  of 
‘  the  Bermudas,  in  the  minds  of  the  poets  contemporary  with  Shakespeare,  that  this 
‘ island  is  for  ever  being  intruded  upon  us  when  storms  and  tempests  are  their  theme.’ 
Hunter  here  refers  to  ‘  honest  John  Taylor,’  to  Drayton  in  The  Odcombian  Banquet, 
to  Fulk  Grevile  in  Ccelica,  Sonn.  lviii,  to  Chapman  in  his  Epicede  or  Funeral  Song 
on  the  death  of  Prince  Henry,  and  to  Thomas  Tymme  in  his  Silver  Watch  Bell. 
‘  The  Bermudas  was  in  fact  a  commonplace  of  the  time.’ 

Hunter,  therefore,  assumes  that  he  is  no  longer  bound  to  limit  his  inquiry  to  the 
period  between  1610  and  1616  (the  year  of  Shakespeare’s  death),  but  that  he  is  at 
liberty  to  fix,  according  to  the  evidence,  any  date  of  the  play,  early  or  late,  in  the 
poet’s  dramatic  life;  and  it  is  his  impression  that  this  play  is  an  early  work;  ‘  but,’  he 
continues,  ‘  I  lay  no  stress  on  the  circumstances  that  when  the  plays  were  first  col- 
‘ lected  into  a  volume,  the  first  place  was  assigned  to  The  Tempest.  It  is  difficult  to 
‘  discover  a  principle  in  which  the  arrangement  was  made ;  and  it  is  not  difficult  to 
‘  d(vine  other  reasons,  besides  priority  of  composition,  for  the  place  assigned  to  it. 

‘  \  et  it  may  seem  strange  that  if  it  were  the  last  work,  it  should  first  meet  the  eye  in 
‘  sucb  a  collection.  As  little  attention  should  I  be  inclined  to  give  to  what  some 
‘  People  have  imagined  they  perceived  in  this  play— intimations  of  its  being  the  Poet’s 
‘  farewell,  as  if  the  retirement  of  Prospero  were  a  kind  of  adumbration  of  the  retire- 
‘ ment  of  Shakespeare  himself  from  the  practice  of  the  more  innocent  magic  with 
‘  wbich  be  had  so  long  enchanted  his  countrymen.  Others  have  discerned  in  the 
style  and  sentiment  marks  of  a  period  beyond  the  maturity  of  a  Poet’s  life.  But  we 
‘  see  how  extremely  dubious  and  uncertain  reasoning  of  this  kind  is,  when  we  observe 
‘  how  often  the  most  plausible  conclusions  of  this  kind  have  been  dissipated  by  the 
‘  discovery  of  some  decisive  evidence  from  without,  fixing  limits  which  no  reasoning 
‘  from  the  style  or  sentiments  can  justify  any  person  in  overleaping.’ 

While  protesting  against  any  determination  of  the  chronological  order  of  these 
plays  other  than  by  testimony,  apart  from  all  considerations  of  style  and  sentiment, 
yet,  since  this  latter  mode  of  decision  has  been  resorted  to  by  others,  Hunter  ‘  ven¬ 
tures  to  observe,  though  on  a  point  such  as  this,  I  am  bound  to  speak  with  no  small 
‘  self-distrust,  that  I  do  not  discern  those  marks  of  long  practice  in  the  dramatic  art, 

‘  and  of  the  full  maturity  of  a  poet’s  genius,  which  some  have  discovered  in  [  The 
‘  Tempest~\.  Of  the  general  merit  of  its  dramatic  structure  I  am  fully  sensible;  of 
the  skill  with  which  the  characters  are  grouped,  of  the  clearness  with  which  the 
*  storT  is  developed,  and  the  profusion  with  which  some  of  the  choicest  flowers  of 
4  poesy  are  scattered  everywhere  in  the  reader’s  path.  But  then  I  ask  if  this  is  not 
‘ the  case  witb  Tke  Merchant  of  Venice,  with  Romeo  and  Juliet,  with  A  Midsumme* 

‘ Night's  Dream,  all  early  plays;  and  with  As  You  Like  It,  and  Twelfth  Night , 

‘  which,  though  not  so  early  as  those  which  I  have  before  mentioned,  were  all  upon 
‘ the  stage  before  tbe  close  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  ?  I  ask  where  are  we  to  look 
4  for  evidence  of  greater  maturity  of  moral  taste,  of  dramatic  art,  or  poetic  power  in 
4  The  Tempest  than  may  be  discovered  in  the  plays  I  have  just  named  ?  Perhaps 
Romeo  and  Juliet  might  be  excepted,  in  which,  with  all  its  beauties,  and  they  are 
many,  there  are  decided  marks  of  immaturity,  something  which  reminds  one  of  the 
iaste  which  such  a  play  as  The  Jew  of  Malta  was  likely  to  create.  Perhaps  also  in 


286 


APPENDIX 


‘  the  full  maturity  of  his  art  he  would  not  have  so  constructed  his  play  as  to  render 
‘  necessary  the  long  conversation  in  the  second  scene  [between  Prospero  and  Miranda], 
1  which  is  evidently  intended  for  the  information  of  the  audience,  and  not  for  carrying 
1  on  the  business  of  the  drama ;  or  given  us  the  two  constrained  passages  [the  descrip- 

*  tion  by  Francisco  of  Ferdinand’s  swimming,  II,  i,  1 15-122;  and  Alonzo’s  recalling 
‘  his  offence  against  Prospero,  III,  iii,  121-127],  which  seem  to  betray  that  they  were 
‘  written  at  a  time  when  he  was  not  fully  aware  of  his  power,  and  before  he  had  found 
‘  out  the  great  secret  that  he  wrote  best  when  he  committed  himself  fearlessly  to  his 
‘  own  transcendent  genius.  Perhaps,  also,  in  the  maturity  of  his  powers  he  would 
‘  not  have  copied,  or  at  least  not  copied  so  servilely,  the  incantation  of  Medea  in 
‘  Golding’s  Ovid ,  when  he  wrote  the  abjuration  speech  of  Prospero,  or  the  words  of 
‘  Montaigne  in  his  ideas  of  a  new  Commonwealth.  Perhaps,  also,  there  is  some 
‘  want  of  dramatic  skill  in  the  abruptness  of  the  charge  [by  Prospero]  against  Ferdi- 
1  nand,  that  he  had  a  sinister  purpose  in  his  appearance  on  the  island.  I  may  also 
‘  remark,  though  it  is  a  subject  to  which  I  never  recur  without  pain,  that  The  Tempest, 
1  in  common  with  the  other  earlier  plays,  is  disfigured  by  some  of  those  impurities 

*  which  are  more  rarely  found  in  the  late  compositions. 

‘  On  all  this,  however,  I  lay  no  great  stress,  and  only  introduce  it  as  a  set-off 
‘  against  remarks  of  the  same  kind  which  may  have  an  opposite  bearing.  I  go  at 
‘  once  to  the  testimony,  and  in  the  first  place,  ask  you  to  look  at  the  Epilogue,  and  to 
‘  tell  me  whether  it  is  the  work  of  one  who  has  long  been  assured  of  the  public 

*  favour,  and  who  had  won  golden  opinions  from  all  sorts  of  men,  or  of  the  diffident 
‘  aspirant  to  dramatic  fame.  Mark  the  modest  and  timid  address.  To  my  ears  these 
‘  words  [of  Prospero]  are  not  the  words  of  one  who  was  taking  his  leave  of  the 
‘  stage. 

‘  I  would  invite  your  attention,  in  the  next  place,  to  what  has  not,  I  think,  been 
‘  observed  before,  that  a  great  change  seems  to  have  come  over  the  mind  of  Shake- 
‘  speare  soon  after  his  fortieth  year,  respecting  the  kind  of  stories  which  were  best 
‘  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  the  drama,  or  on  which  he  thought  it  most  befitting  him 
‘  to  direct  his  own  genius.’  Hunter  hereupon  enumerates  the  plays  which,  according 
to  Malone  and  Chalmers,  were  produced  after  the  year  1606,  as  follows :  Twelfth 
Night  (it  was  Hunter  himself  who  first  discovered  from  Manningham’s  Diary  that 
Twelfth  Night  was  performed  in  1602,  but  he  is  here  giving  the  chronology  of  the 
plays  only  according  to  Malone  and  Chalmers,  in  which,  as  he  truly  says,  there  are 
some  ‘ very  grievous  mistakes’),  ^4  Winter’s  Tale,  Othello,  Henry  the  Eighth,  Cym- 
beline,  Timon,  Julius  Ccesar,  Anthony  and  Cleopatra,  and  Coriolanus.  Out  of  this 
list  Hunter  eliminates  as  erroneously  or  as  insufficiently  dated,  in  his  opinion,  Twelfth 
Night,  Othello,  Cy7>ibeline,  Henry  the  Eighth,  and  A  Winter’s  Tale.  ‘  Let  us  see,’ 
he  goes  on  to  say,  ‘  what  plays  remain  for  the  latter  period  of  the  Poet’s  life.  They 
are  only  Julius  Ctzsar,  Anthony  and  Cleopatra,  Coriolanus,  Timon ;  and  to  these  I 

*  will  add  Troilus  and  Cressida,  as  possibly  of  this  era.  So  that  it  is  now  evident, 

‘  that  as  Shakespeare  grew  older,  his  muse  grew  severer ;  that  he  forsook  the  lighter 
‘  subjects  in  which,  at  the  beginning  of  his  career,  he  delighted,  and  devoted  himself 

to  what  Sir  William  Alexander  calls  “  Monarchic  Tragedies,”  stories  of  Rome,  and 
‘  Greece,  and  Troy.  If  we  look  a  little  above  them  in  the  list,  we  shall  find  that  the 
‘  next  two  plays  in  the  chronological  arrangement  are  Macbeth  and  King  Lear,  which 
‘  are  of  the  same  grave  character,  and  exhibit  the  high  passions  and  deep  sorrows  of 
‘  the  great. 

‘  Is  it  probable  that  The  Tempest,  a  work  in  every  respect  so  unlike  to  these,  should 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION— HUNTER  287 

•nave  been  produced  contemporaneously  with  them?  That  when  he  was  engaged 
on  themes  such  as  these,  he  should  for  once  have  deviated  into  the  paths  of  romance 
in  which  in  the  early  years  of  his  life  he  had  delighted  to  wander,  that  he  should 
have  mixed  with  them  one  comedy,  and  one  comedy  only  ?  I  am  still  on  probabili- 
‘  ties  only.  Show  me  probabilities  equally  cogent  on  the  other  part. 

‘  Now,  take  a  view  of  the  dramas  which  he  produced  in  the  earlier  period  of  his 
dramatic  career,  while  still  Elizabeth,  whom  he  had  the  good  fortune  to  please,  was 
‘  on  the  throne.  We  will  set  aside  the  English  Histories,  and  with  them  The  Merry 
‘  Wives  may  go.  Little  attention  need  be  paid  to  The  Taming  of  the  Shrew  The 
‘  C°mtdy  °f  Errors>  and  Th‘  T™°  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  as  being  works  of  uncer 
‘ taln’  though  early  date>  of  inferior  power,  and,  perhaps,  not  wholly  his.  View  him 
‘ then  ln  the  vigour  of  his  morning  genius.  The  plays  are  :  Love’s  Labour's  Lost,  A 
Midsummer  Night’s  Dream,  Romeo  and  Juliet,  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  AW: 
Well  That  Ends  Well,  Much  Ado  About  Nothing,  As  You  Like  It,  Twelfth  Niaht 
‘A  Winter's  Tale,  Hamlet,  and  Othello.  It  is  evident  that  The  Tempest  classes  with 
‘  many  of  these  plays.  It  classes  with  them  as  a  romantic  drama.  It  classes  with 
‘ them  “  a  tale  of  France  or  italy.  It  classes  with  several  of  them  in  its  style  and 
sentiments.  I  ask  for  the  countervailing  probabilities  in  favour  of  a  later  date.’ 

In  thus  arguing  from  generalities  that  The  Tempest  is  an  early  play,  we  see  Hun¬ 
ter  at  his  best  and  at  his  strongest.  When  he  descends  to  particulars,  I  am  afraid  he 
becomes  weak,  or  a  little  too  subtle,  and  does  not  altogether  take  us  with  him.  Natu¬ 
rally,  he  sees  that  he  cannot  rest  his  case  here,  but  must  suggest  some  specific  date,  or 
at  least,  give  us  some  limit  before  which,  or  after  which,  The  Tempest  must  have  been 
written.  He  appeals  to  three  sources :  Meres,  Jonson,  and  Raleigh,  and  in  proofs 
derived  from  them,  he  lodges  his  conclusion. 

Every  Shakespeare  student  knows  by  heart  the  list  of  Shakespeare’s  plays  which 
Francis  Meres  enumerates  in  his  Palladis  Tamia,  published  in  1598;  nevertheless 
for  Hunter’s  sake  I  am  constrained  to  repeat  here :  ‘As  Plautus  and  Seneca  are 
accounted  the  best  for  Comedy  and  Tragedy  among  the  Latines :  so  Shakespeare 
‘  among  the  English  is  the  most  excellent  in  both  kinds  for  the  stage for  Comedy, 

‘  witnesse  his  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  his  Errors,  his  Loue  labors  lost,  his  Lone  labours 
‘ wonne,  his  Midsummers  night  dream,  and  his  Merchant  of  Venice:  for  Tragedy, 

‘  his  Richard  the  second,  Richard  the  third,  Henry  the  fourth.  King  John,  Titus 
‘  Andronicus,  and  his  Romeo  and  Juliet.' 

Hunter,  as  I  have  said,  enumerates  this  list  of  Meres,  and  adds :  ‘  The  ques- 
‘  tion  is,  does  Meres  in  this  list  recognize  the  existence  of  The  Tempest  in  1598, 

1  or  does  he  not  ?  11  1S  manifest  that  The  Tempest  is  not  in  his  list  eo  nomine ;  but 

‘  what  play,  I  ask,  did  he  intend  by  Love  Labours  Won  ?  Those  who  answer  out  of 

' book  wiH  say  at  once  All’s  Well  That  Ends  Well. - A  passing  remark  of  Dr 

‘  Farmer,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare,  first  identified  the  All's  Well 
‘  with  the  Love  Labours  Won.  The  remark  has  since  been  caught  up  and  repeated 
‘  by  a  thousand  voices.  Yet  it  was  made  in  the  most  casual,  random,  and  hasty  man- 
‘  ner  imaginable.  It  was  supported  by  no  kind  of  argument  or  evidence ;  and  I  can- 
‘  not  find  that  any  persons  who  have  repeated  it  after  him,  have  shown  any  probable 
grounds  for  the  opinion.  The  leading  feature  of  the  story  of  All’s  Well  cannot  be 
said  to  be  aptly  represented  by  the  title  in  Meres’s  list.  But  this  is  trifling.  If  ever 
' there  was  a  play  which  itself  bespoke  its  own  title  from  the  beginning,  it  is  this.’ 
[Hunter  here  quotes  from  All’s  Well,  IV,  iv,  30-36;  and  V,  i,  25 ;  and  the  Epilogue, 
where  it  each  passage  the  tit'-  of  the  play  is  repeated.]  ‘And  so  much  I  say  again, 


288 


APPENDIX 


‘  with  Dr  Farmer  himself,  for  the  claim  of  this  play.  But  if  not  to  All's  Well,  to 
‘  what  play  of  Shakespeare’s  was  this  title  once  attached  ?  I  answer  that  of  the  exist¬ 
ing  plays,  there  is  only  The  Tempest  to  which  it  can  be  supposed  to  belong ;  and  so 
‘  long  as  it  suits  well  with  what  is  a  main  incident  of  this  piece,  we  shall  not  be  driven 
‘  to  the  gratuitous  and  improbable  supposition  that  a  play  once  so  called  is  lost.’ 

Hereupon  Hunter  points  to  the  labours  of  Ferdinand  in  removing  and  piling  up 
some  thousands  of  logs,  and,  after  quoting  Ferdinand’s  soliloquy,  III,  i,  1-16,  and 
his  words  shortly  after :  ‘  for  your  sake  Am  I  this  patient  logman,’  and  also  Prospero’s 
commendation  in  IV,  i,  7-9 :  ‘All  thy  vexations  Were  but  my  trials  of  thy  love ;  and 
‘  thou  Hast  strangely  stood  the  test,’  Hunter  triumphantly  exclaims  :  ‘  Here,  then,  are 
‘the  Love  Labours.  In  the  end  they  won  the  lady  “  so  perfect  and  so  peerless.’” 
‘ ....  I  suspect  that  the  play  had  originally  a  double  title,  The  Tempest,  or  Love 
1  Labours  Won  ;  just  as  another  of  the  plays  had  a  double  title,  Twelfth  Night,  or 
‘  What  you  Will.  Meres  may  seem  to  have  chosen  to  call  it  by  the  second  title,  for 
‘  the  sake  of  the  opposition  to  the  title  of  the  play  which  he  had  named  immediately 
‘  before  it,  the  Love  Labours  Lost. 

‘  On  the  whole,  then,  I  submit  that  we  have  Meres’s  testimony  to  the  existence  of 
‘  The  Tempest  as  a  play  of  Shakespeare,  in  1598.’ 

It  is  easy  to  sit  in  judgement  and  exclaim  at  the  weakness  in  making  the  plot  of  a 
play  hinge  on  what  to  us  is  merely  one  of  its  episodes,  but  we  must  remember  that 
Hunter  has  proved  himself  again  and  again  to  be  possessed  of  a  clear  mind,  and 
that  any  objections  which  occur  to  us  are  rather  more  likely  than  not,  to  have  occurred 
to  him.  To  Hunter  it  was  quite  sufficient  that  the  task  was  set  Ferdinand,  and  the 
fact  is  of  no  moment  that  we  do  not  know  whether  the  Prince’s  labours  had  extended 
to  a  thousand  logs  or  whether  Miranda  interrupted  him  (the  more  likely  supposition) 
when  he  was  ‘  bearing  ’  his  first.  For  us  who  are  not  convinced  by  Hunter’s  argu¬ 
ments,  it  is  sufficient  to  remember  that  Prospero’s  object  in  subjecting  the  young 
Prince  to  his  power  was  gained  as  much  after  the  first  had  been  carried,  as  after  the 
thousandth,  and  that  the  labour  in  itself  amounted  to  nothing,  and  could  really  win 
nothing ;  Miranda’s  hand  was  not  set  as  the  price  of  it,  and  in  fact  Prospero  had 
adopted  Ferdinand  as  his  future  son-in-law  before  he  was  shipwrecked,  so  that  it 
could  not  have  been  any  labours  of  Ferdinand  that  won  Miranda.  But  it  seemed 
otherwise  to  Hunter.  How  he  could  have  failed  to  note  these  objections  and  others, 
it  is  hard  to  understand ;  luckily,  I  am  not  called  upon  to  explain  it, — Davus  sum, 
non  CEdipus. 

Believing,  then,  Love's  Labour's  Lost  to  be  respondent  to  Love's  Labour's  Won, 
and  that  the  latter  is  The  Tempest,  Hunter  finds  a  ‘  remarkable  correspondency  ’  be¬ 
tween  these  two  plays, — a  correspondency,  moreover,  which  exists  between  these  two 
alone  of  all  the  romantic  dramas, — and  it  is  this :  ‘  that  the  stories  of  these  two  plays 
1  have  a  certain  relation  to  events  and  characters  of  real  history,  so  that  we  are  able 
‘  to  fix  a  chronological  period  near  to  which  the  time  of  the  action  is  to  be  referred. 

‘  In  connection  with  this  there  is  the  further  correspondency,  that  of  all  the  romantic 
‘  dramas  of  Shakespeare,  The  Tempest  and  Love  Labour’s  Lost  are  the  only  two  for 

*  which  no  origins  of  the  stories  have  yet  been  discovered.  I  venture  to  predict,  that 

*  when  the  origins  are  found,  they  will  be  found  in  one  and  the  same  volume  :  some 
‘  very  rare  book  of  romances  or  dramas  in  the  literature  of  France,  Navarre,  Spain. 

‘  or  Italy.’ 

Hunter  now  turns  to  Jonson,  in  whose  Prologue  to  Every  Man  in  his  Humour, 
produced  in  1596,  he  finds  clear  references  to  The  Tempest.  After  a  fine  vindication 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION-HUNTER  28g 

of  the  character  of  Jonson,  to  whom  no  mean  personal  hostility  either  to  Shakespeare 
or  to  his  fellow-dramatists  should  be  attributed,  but  solely  zeal  in  the  service  of  what 
he  deemed  true,  classic,  dramatic  art,  Hunter  continues :  ‘  Shakespeare,  perhaps,  as 
‘ little  approved  some  things  in  Jonson,  as  Jonson  did  the  violations  of  dramatic  pro- 
‘  Prieties>  the  introduction  on  the  stage  of  beings  not  in  rerum  natura,  and  the  occa¬ 
sional  unfiled  expressions  of  Shakespeare . The  Prologue  in  question  may  be 

*  easily  interpreted,  with  that  good  feeling,  which  I  believe  to  have  ever  existed  be- 
‘  tween  [Jonson  and  Shakespeare,  as  meaning  to  say]  :  “  Our  rivals  at  the  other  house 
‘  “  are  attempting  impossibilities,  or  are  degrading  the  stage  by  the  introduction  of 
masques  and  monsters.  We  mean  to  show  you,  in  the  production  of  a  new  poet, 
what  comedy  ought  to  be,  and  what  we  design  to  make  it.”  The  Prologue  is  as 
‘  follows : — 


“  Though  need  make  many  poets,  and  some  such 
As  art  and  nature  have  not  better’d  much ; 

Yet  ours  for  want  hath  not  so  loved  the  stage, 

As  he  dare  serve  the  ill  customs  of  the  age, 

Or  purchase  your  delight  at  such  a  rate, 

As,  for  it,  he  himself  must  justly  hate  : 

To  make  a  child  now  swaddled,  to  proceed 
Man,  and  then  shoot  up,  in  one  beard  and  weed, 

Past  three-score  years;  or,  with  three  rusty  swords, 

And  help  of  some  few  foot  and  half-foot  words, 

Fight  over  York  and  Lancaster’s  long  jars, 

And  in  the  tyring-house  bring  wounds  to  scars. 

He  rather  prays  you  will  be  pleased  to  see 
One  such  to-day,  as  other  plays  should  be ; 

Where  neither  chorus  wafts  you  o’er  the  seas, 

Nor  creaking  throne  comes  down  the  boys  to  please ; 

Nor  nimble  squib  is  seen  to  make  afeard 
The  gentlewomen;  nor  roll’d  bullet  heard 
To  say,  it  thunders ;  nor  tempestuous  drum 
Rumbles,  to  tell  you  when  the  storm  doth  come ; 

But  deeds,  and  language,  such  as  men  do  use, 

And  persons,  such  as  comedy  would  choose, 

When  she  would  shew  an  image  of  the  times, 

And  sport  with  human  follies,  not  with  crimes. 

Except  we  make  them  such,  by  loving  still 
Our  popular  errors,  when  we  know  they’re  ill. 

I  mean  such  errors,  as  you’ll  all  confess, 

By  laughing  at  them,  they  deserve  no  less  : 

Which  when  you  heartily  do,  there’s  hope  left  then, 

You,  that  have  so  grac’d  monsters,  may  like  men.” 

‘The  special  points  of  attack  are:  (i)  The  same  play  exhibiting  a  character  m 
‘infancy  and  age;  (2)  The  Wars  of  York  and  Lancaster;  (3)  The  removal  of  a 
‘  scene  to  a  distant  country  by  means  of  a  chorus ;  (4)  The  descent  of  a  creaking 
‘throne;  (5)  Thunder  and  lightning;  (6)  Monsters.  When  of  these  special  points 
‘  we  find  the  last  three  in  The  Tempest ,  it  can  hardly,  I  think,  be  reasonably  doubted 
‘  that  that  particular  play  was  in  the  view  of  Jonson  when  he  wrote  the  prologue. 


290 


APPENDIX 


The  “  Monster”  must  be  Caliban,  “graced”  as  he  has  always  been  by  the  favour 
of  the  multitude,  nor  graced  unworthily.  The  “  creaking  throne  ”  is  the  throne  of 
‘Juno,  as  she  descends  in  the  masque;  the  “nimble  squib”  is  the  lightning  during 
the  storm,  with  which  the  play  opens;  and  the  “tempestuous  drum”  is  the  thunder 
‘  which  accompanied  the  lightning.  But  observe  the  word  “  tempestuous,”  corre- 

*  sponding  to  the  stage -direction  for  the  first  scene  of  this  play . 

‘  Jonson’s  prologue  being  written  in  1596  is  a  proof  of  the  existence  of  The  Tem- 
‘ pest  in  that  year.  And  to  the  Spring  or  Summer  of  1596  I  am  disposed,  on  a  full 
‘  consideration  of  the  whole  evidence,  to  assign  it.’ 

Assuming  that  Shakespeare  frequently  alluded  to  the  topics  of  the  day,  Hunter 
replies  to  the  inquiry  as  to  what  special  topic  engaged  public  attention  in  the  spring 
and  summer  of  1596,  by  asserting  ‘without  the  slightest  fear  of  contradiction  that  the 
‘  event  which  in  the  early  months  of  that  year  would  be  the  theme  of  wonder,  the 
‘  subject  of  the  conversation  of  the  whole  people  of  London,  was  the  return  of  Sir 
‘  Walter  Raleigh  and  his  companions  from  the  expedition  to  Guiana,  and  the  very 
‘  extraordinary  reports  which  they  made  of  what  they  had  seen  and  heard.’ 

With  what  Hunter  says  in  regard  to  the  pamphlet,  and  its  wild  improbable  mar¬ 
vels,  which  Sir  Walter  published  early  in  that  year  we  need  not  here  concern  our¬ 
selves.  We  are  all  agreed  that  Raleigh  was  Shakespeare’s  authority  for  the  ‘Anthro- 
1  pophagi  ’  and  men  whose  ‘  heads  do  grow  beneath  their  shoulders,’  alluded  to  both 
in  The  Tevipest  and  in  Othello ,  and  furthermore  that  there  may  be  in  The  Tempest  a 
sly,  gentle  allusion  to  Raleigh  in  the  ‘  vouched  rarities,’  ‘  beyond  credit,’  in  the  stories 
brought  back  by  every  ‘  putter  out  of  five  for  one  ’ ;  Hunterfe  object  is  gained  if 
Raleigh’s  pamphlet  in  1596  be  acknowledged  as  the  immediate  precursor  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  play,  ‘  which  was  written  when  the  excitement  produced  by  Raleigh’s  publi- 
‘  cation  was  at  its  height.’ 

When  in  Act  I,  sc.  ii,  Gonzalo  describes  his  ideal  commonwealth,  he  uses,  as  is 
universally  conceded,  not  only  the  ideas,  but  the  very  phraseology,  of  Florio’s  Trans¬ 
lation  of  Montaigne.  The  date  of  this  translation  is  1603,  and,  unless  Hunter  can 
find  some  means  of  evading  the  difficulty,  this  date  must  be  fatal  to  his  theory  that 
The  Tempest  was  written  in  1596.  Hunter’s  ingenuity  is  displayed  as  follows: — 
'  First,  though  we  know  of  no  earlier  edition  of  this  translation  (and  it  is  improbable 
‘  that  there  is  any  earlier  edition  of  it  as  a  whole),  it  is  by  no  means  improbable  that 
‘  a, portion  of  it  may  have  appeared  some  years  before  in  one  of  the  smaller  tracts  of 
‘  Florio,  of  which  there  were  many,  more  perhaps  than  are  now  known  to  exist ;  and 
‘  in  that  portion  of  it  the  passage  in  question  may  have  occurred.  Or,  secondly,  this 
‘  speech  of  Gonzalo’s  may  have  been  added  after  the  original  appearance  of  the  play, 

‘  as  there  is  reason  to  think  was  the  practice  of  Shakespeare . But  I  propose  to 

‘  meet  the  difficulty,  and  not  to  evade  it.  It  is  true  that  no  printed  edition  of  this 

*  translation,  or  any  part  of  it,  is  known  of  an  earlier  date  than  1603.  But  it  is  also 
‘  certain  that  the  translation  was  made  several  years  before ;  for  as  early  as  1599 
‘  license  was  granted  to  Edward  Blount  for  the  printing  of  it,  and  for  proof  that  this 
‘  is  not  the  earliest  period  to  which  we  can  trace  this  translation  I  have  only  to  refer 

you  to  the  Essays  of  Sir  William  Cornwallis,  where  you  will  find  not  only  that  the 
translation  was  made,  but  that  it  was  divulged  before  that  time.  The  first  edition  of 
•these  Essays,  indeed,  bears  date  only  in  1600;  but  they  were  written  some  time 
before,  for  Henry  Olney,  a  friend  of  the  author,  under  whose  care  they  were  printed, 
assigns  as  tfie  reason  for  publishing  an  authentic  edition,  that  copies  were  in  so  many 
hands,  there  was  danger  lest  the  work  might  be  printed  by  some  dishonest  person 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION-HUNTER  291 

‘  surreptitiously.  How  much  time  is  to  be  allowed  for  this  multiplication  of  copies  in 
‘  manuscrlPt>  and  the  original  composition  of  the  Essays,  it  is  impossible  to  esti- 
(  “ate  Wlth  much  exactness;  but  it  may  be  fairly  allowed  to  conjecture  that  three  or 
‘  four  years  may  have  passed,  which  brings  us  near  to  the  date  we  have  assigned  The 
Tempest.  But  in  what  year  soever  Cornwallis  wrote  his  Essays,  in  or  before  that 
year  had  Florio  made  his  translation  of  Montaigne.  For  thus  writes  the  author 
“  F°r  Profitable  recreation  that  noble  French  knight,  the  Lord  de  Montaigne,  is  most 
‘  “  excellent ;  whom  though  I  have  not  been  so  much  beholding  to  the  French  as  to 
‘  “  see  in  his  original,  yet  divers  of  his  pieces  I  have  seen  translated,  they  that  under- 
‘  “  stand  both  languages  say  very  well  done ;  and  I  am  able  to  say  (if  you  will  take 
‘  “  the  word  of  ignorance)  translated  into  a  style  admitting  as  few  idle  words,  as  our 
language  will  endure.  It  is  well  fitted  in  this  new  garment,  and  Montaigne  speaks 
now  good  English.  It  is  done  by  a  fellow  less  beholding  to  nature  for  his  fortune 
than  wit,  yet  lesser  for  his  face  than  his  fortune :  the  truth  is,  he  looks  more  like  a 
‘  “  good  fellow  than  a  wise  man ;  and  yet  he  is  wise  beyond  either  his  fortune  or  his 
education.”  Florio’s  profession  was  that  of  a  French  and  Italian  master,  in  which 
‘  he  was  the  most  eminent  man  of  his  time ;  and  the  portions  of  Montaigne  in  an 
‘  English  translation,  to  which  Cornwallis  alludes,  may  be  supposed  with  likelihood 
‘  enough  to  have  been  prepared  by  him  for  the  use  of  his  scholars.— But  being  seen 
‘  by  Cornwallis,  is  it  too  violent  a  presumption  that  they  may  have  been  seen  by 
‘  Shakespeare  also,  especially  as  the  Florios,  for  there  were  two,  Michael-Angelo  and 
‘  John’  were  noticed  by  the  Herberts  from  the  time  when  Michael-Angelo  dedicated 
‘  a  work  to  Henry,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  in  1553,  to  the  time  of  the  death  of  John 
‘  Florio  in  1625,  who  leaves  his  corrections  of  the  Italian  Dictionary  published  by 
‘  him  to  William,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  whose  connection  with  Shakespeare  is  so  re- 
* markable  a  circumstance  in  the  history  of  both  ?— Shakespeare  is  even  brought  into 
‘  mediate  connection  with  Florio  some  time  before  the  date  which  I  have  assigned 
‘  to  The  Tempest:  Hunter  here  refers  to  the  conjecture,  first  started  by  Warburton 
that  in  Holofemes  in  Love's  Labour’s  Lost  Shakespeare  held  up  Florio  to  ridicule' 
and  concludes  this  portion  of  his  argument  by  expressing  the  belief  that  he  has  said 
‘sufficient  to  show  that  Shakespeare  may  not  improbably  have  seen  portions  of 
‘  Florio’s  Montaigne  in  1596.’ 

In  conclusion,  Hunter  disposes  of  Chalmers’s  ‘  dead  Indian  ’  in  1611,  by  showing 
that  Frobisher  brought  one  to  England  in  1577.  who  died  shortly  after  his  arrival,  and 
that  rathe  account  of  the  expenses  of  Frobisher’s  voyage  there  is  an  entry:  ‘Paid 
‘  William  Cure,  Ducheman,  graver,  for  making  a  mould  of  hard  earth  of  the  Tartar 
‘  man’s  image,  to  be  cast  in  wax.’ 

Hunter’s  arguments  have  been  thus  set  forth  at  length  not  alone  because  he  is  one 
of  the  most  learned  and  most  exact  of  Commentators,  but  because  they  serve  to  show 
how  shifting,  in  default  of  all  positive  evidence,  are  the  grounds  on  which  the  dates 
of  these  plays  rest,  when  so  many  proofs  can  be  not  unreasonably  urged  in  favour  of  a 
date  differing  by  fifteen  years  from  that  which  other  Commentators,  equally  learned  and 
equally  exact,  decide  to  be  the  only  date  possible.  With  me,  to  whom,  however,  the 
whole  subject  of  the  Chronology  of  these  plays  is  indifferent,  as  the  merest  husks'and 
the  driest  hulls  of  Shakespearian  study,  Hunter’s  arguments  have  weight,  especially 
that  wherein  he  disclaims  for  The  Tempest,  solely  in  comparison  with  Shakespeare’s 
other  plays,  any  unusual  depth  of  maturity  or  of  wisdom,  or  any  indications  that  it 
is  the  last  he  wrote. 

This  Disquisition  of  Hunter  raised  much  adverse  criticism,  which  naturally  pro- 


292 


APPENDIX 


duced  its  usual  effect  of  making  the  author  thus  criticised  more  tenacious  than  evet 
of  his  original  opinions,  and  far  more  than  ever  convinced  of  their  truth.  The 
weightiest  argument  against  his  Montaigne  explanation  (that  by  Brae)  Hunter  never 
saw.  When,  six  years  later,  in  1845,  Hunter  published  his  admirable  Illustrations 
he  reiterated  and  emphasised  all  his  former  arguments  for  the  early  date  of  The 
Tempest.  Although  chronologically  it  is  a  little  out  of  place  to  consider  these  Illus¬ 
trations  here,  yet  it  is  best  to  combine  them  with  the  Disquisition,  and  to  give  in  addi¬ 
tion  some  account  of  the  criticism  on  Hunter’s  theory  while  that  theory  is  fresh  in  the 
reader’s  mind.  It  is  thus  that  Hunter  emphasises  his  belief  that  the  log-bearing  of 
Ferdinand  supplied  the  title  of  Love  Labours  Won  :  4  In  what  way  is  it  that  Prospero 
4  makes  trial  of  the  love  of  Ferdinand  for  Miranda  ?  How,  but  by  imposing  upon 
‘  him  certain  labours  ?  The  particular  kind  of  labour  is  the  placing  in  a  pile  logs  of 
4  fire-wood.  He  serves  in  this  as  Jacob  did  for  Rachael,  winning  his  bride  from  her 
4  austere  father  by  them.  In  other  words  he  proves  the  sincerity  of  his  affection  to 
4  the  satisfaction  of  Prospero  by  the  faithfulness  with  which  he  performs  these  labours, 
4  and  thus  his  love  labours  win  the  consent  of  Prospero  to  their  union,  not  win  the 
4  willing  consent  of  Miranda,  as  I  have  been  foolishly  represented  as  contending.’ 
(See  Knight,  post.) 

He  thus  skilfully  reinforces  his  assumption  that  Shakespeare  quoted  from  a  trans¬ 
lation  of  Montaigne  by  Florio  of  an  earlier  date  than  1603 :  4  It  may  be  asked  of 
4  those  who  rely  upon  the  date  of  the  folio  Montaigne,  whether,  if  they  saw  a  quota- 
4  tion  from  one  of  Shakespeare’s  Sonnets  in  any  book,  they  would  come  to  the  conclu- 
4  sion  that  that  book  must  have  been  written  after  the  date  of  the  volume  which  con- 
4  tains  the  first  printed  impression  of  those  sonnets ;  because,  if  they  did,  they  would 
4  assuredly  run  a  great  risk  of  being  in  error,  since  we  have  the  direct  testimony  of 
4  Meres  in  1598  that  the  Sonnets,  or  at  least  some  of  them,  were  at  that  time  well 
4  known  among  Shakespeare’s  friends,  though  they  were  not  printed  until  eleven  years 
4  afterwards :  44  his  sugred  sonnets  among  his  private  friends.”  Or,  if  they  found  a 
4  passage  quoted  from  the  Essays  of  Sir  William  Cornwallis  who  was  a  pupil  of 
4  Florio’s,  and  concluded  at  once  that  the  writing  in  which  it  appeared  was  of  a  later 
4  date  than  the  first  impression  of  those  Essays,  would  they  not  be  in  great  danger  of 
4  error,  when  the  editor  expressly  tells  us  that  his  reason  for  printing  them  was  that 
4  copies  were  already  in  so  many  hands  that  it  was  feared  a  surreptitious  edition  might 
4  bq  printed  by  some  one  who  obtained  possession  of  one  of  those  copies  ?  There  are 
4  other  ways  by  which  people  become  acquainted  with  an  author’s  writings  beside 
4  perusing  them  in  printed  books,  and  it  would  seem  as  if,  in  Shakespeare’s  time, 
4  there  was  more  of  the  private  communication  of  literary  works  than  is  the  case  at 
4  present.  Poetry,  at  least,  of  that  age  abounds,  which  was  first  written  for  a  private 
4  and  special  purpose,  and  lay  long  in  manuscript  open  to  many  eyes,  and  thus  liable 
4  to  be  quoted  before  it  was  committed  to  the  printer.  Dryden,  in  later  times,  is 
4  said  to  have  verses  in  his  translation  of  Virgil  which  really  belong  to  the  Earl  of 
4  Lauderdale,  though  the  Earl  of  Lauderdale’s  translation  was  not  printed  till  some 
4  time  after  the  death  of  Dryden ;  and  no  doubt,  taking  the  whole  field  of  our  lite- 
4  rature,  many  other  similar  instances  might  be  collected.’ 

As  a  general  rule,  mere  opinions,  when  not  enforced  by  reasons,  deserve  scant 
consideration.  It  is  therefore  not  worth  while  to  record  the  bare  dissent  from  this 
theory  of  Hunter’s  by  many  and  many  an  editor  and  critic ;  but  notice  should  be 
taken  of  the  damaging  stroke  given  to  the  assumption  that  Shakespeare  may  have 
seen  portions  of  Florio’s  Montaigne  as  early  as  1596,  by  Brae,  who  brings  forward 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION-HUNTER  293 

reasons  for  assuming,  almost  conclusively,  that  Florio’s  translation  was  not  made  until 
1600  or  after.  Brae  says  {Collier,  Coleridge,  and  Shakespeare,  i860,  p  132) .  .  So 

.  Zt  r;  ZZ  /admitS’-Wihether  riShtly  or  ™gly  shall  not  be  here  discussed,- 
that  The  Tempest  was  partially  indebted  to  the  translation  by  Florio  of  Montaigne 

‘  he  seCts7nqU  y’  Z  k  W  Subseclucntly  *o  that  translator, 

,  an  lmpassabIe  bamer  to  the  dating  of  that  play  earlier  than  1600  His 

.  " -Zt  MSat  ?  tranSl1°n’  alth0Ugh  n0t  printed  tiU  i6o3»  might  yet  have 
,  f1St6d  “  hlS  previously  to  1598,  is  certainly  erroneous :  because  it  may  be  gathered 

,  r  v  Z0100'  n°tiCeS  t0  F1°ri°’S  b0°k  that>  Wkh  tbe  Option  of  one  chap- 
,  hich  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  was  the  25th  of  the  1st  Book,  no  part  of 

•  irrla  onre.xecuted  untii  after  is"- The  ^  j  ^ 

,  U/on  Z  lOn0  5  amwere  t0  the  Lady  of  Bedford's  invitation  to  this  worke,  are 

,  Z  T  H  Z°J59K  Td  dlStmCtly  declare  that  Florio>  although  invited  to  the  work 
,  7  Lady  Bedford,  had  not  even  then  commenced  it.  And  this  external  evidence  is 

<  C°frd  7  Z  mtemal  CVidenCe  °f  thC  transIation  itself>  which,  when  compared 
,  W  Kt  J®  S6Veral  Cdltl0ns  of  1116  original  Published  in  France  up  to  1603,  shows  by 
numberless  verbal  indications  that  the  edition  used  for  the  translation  could  not  have 

,  be6D  T  "a  °De  than  *598,  but  in  all  probability  was  the  Paris  octavo  of  1600 
One  of  these  indications  consists  of  a  remarkable  misprint  so  early  in  the  work  as’ 

, the  lptb  cbaPter  of  tbe  1st  Book,  but  which  is  not  found  in  any  French  edition 
,  Car  ‘er  tk!D  l6°°’  6XCePt  m  a  few  spurious  impressions  of  the  preceding  edition  of 
159b.  This  misprint  occurs  in  a  quotation  from  Virgil  which  is  thus  correctlv 
^pnnted  m  die  Paris  folio  of  i595  Manent  (dit  il)  opera  interrupta  minaeque 
Murorum  ingentes.  The  first  word  is  misprinted  maneant  in  Florio’s  translation. 
Now,  with  respect  to  the  first  appearance  of  this  misprint  in  the  French  editions  Dr 
‘  Payen,  to  whom  the  question  was  referred,  and  who  is,  unquestionably,  the  best 
‘  aUth°nty  m  France  uP°n  tbe  subject,  has  been  so  obliging  as  to  give  the  following 
‘  note :  “  Le  mot  maneant  n’est  pas  4  1595,  il  y  a  manent.  II  y  a  des  exemplaires, 

“  1 598)  purs  sang,  et  des  exemplaires  adulterins:  les  purs  sang  portent  manent,  les 
‘  adultenns  manent  et  maneant:  1600  porte  maneant .”  There  is  evidence,  too,  that 
‘  the  quotation  passed  through  Florio’s  own  hands  as  part  and  parcel  of  the  transla- 
‘  tion ;  inasmuch  as,  although  the  Latin  translation  was  executed  by  another  hand 
‘  from  a  correct  edition,  Florio  himself  Englished  the  French  parenthesis  in  the  body 
‘of  the  quotation  in  this  way —“Maneant  (sayth  he)  opera,  &c.”  evidently  copying 
‘  one  of  the  misprinted  impressions.— This  sort  of  identification,  arising  from  the 
‘  repetition  of  a  misprint  which  exists  only  in  certain  editions,  is  the  most  conclusive 
‘  of  all,  because  it  cannot  be  explained  away  by  the  supposition  of  subsequent  altera- 
‘  tions  after  the  book  had  been  completed.  Had  Florio  ever  written  the  correct  word, 

‘  he  assuredly  would  not  afterwards  alter  it  in  conformity  with  a  misprint. _ One  of 

* tbese  two  positions,  therefore,  must  of  necessity  be  admitted, — either  Shakespeare 
‘  could  not  have  consulted  Florio’s  translation  of  Montaigne’s  Essays  in  the  composi¬ 
tion  of  The  Tempest,  ox  that  play  could  not  have  been  in  existence  in  1598;  still 
‘  less  in  1596,  to  which  Hunter  assigns  it.’ 

One  of  Hunter’s  arguments  is,  as  we  have  seen,  that  The  Tempest  must  have  pre¬ 
ceded  Jonson’s  Prologue  in  Every  Man  in  his  Humour.  On  the  supposition  that  this 
play  was  performed  in  November,  1596,  and  that  The  Tempest  was  so  fresh  in  men’s 
mind  that  they  could  appreciate  Jonson’s  allusions  to  it,  Hunter  was  induced  to  put 
the  date  of  The  Tempest  in  the  spring  of  that  year.  But  in  this  supposition  there  are 
two  assumptions  and  one  positive  error.  The  first  assumption  is  that  the  Prologue,  as 


294 


APPENDIX 


we  have  it,  was  written  when  this  play  was  first  performed.  It  is  not  in  the  quarto 
edition  of  1601,  and  was  first  printed  in  the  folio  edition  of  1616,  and  more  than  one 
editor  has  hence  inferred,  in  order  to  make  the  sneers  at  Shakespeare  hold  good,  that 
it  was  not  written  till  some  time  after  the  first  production,  and  not  long  before  the 
appearance  of  the  folio, — an  inference  which  seems  inoffensive,  to  say  the  least,  to  one 
accustomed,  in  the  field  of  Shakespearian  hypotheses,  to  ‘  Gorgons  and  Chimeras  dire,’ 
but  which  stirred  deeply  Gifford’s  wrath  (Jonson’s  Works,  i,  xxviii)  and  was  de¬ 
nounced  by  him  as  to  be  accounted  for  in  any  rational  being  only  by  the  singular 
power  of  self-delusion. 

The  second  assumption  is  that  a  play  which  Henslowe  calls  the  ‘  comodey  of 
‘  Umers  ’  is  the  same  with  Jonson’s  Every  Man  in  his  Humour.  That  it  is  the  same 
was  first  conjectured  by  Malone  when  he  printed  Henslowe’s  Diary  (iii,  307) ;  and 
this  conjecture  was  accepted  by  Gifford  (vol.  i,  p.  xxv) ;  and  Gifford  was  followed  in 
this  matter  by  Hunter.  As  the  ‘  Umers  ’  was  acted  ten  times,  after  its  first  perform¬ 
ance,  within  the  year,  which  according  to  Henslowe  was  1  S97>  ar*d  as  Jonson  in  his 
folio  1616  expressly  says  that  Every  Man  in  his  Hu?nour  was  first  acted  in  1598,  it 
is  not  possible  for  the  two  plays  to  have  been  the  same.  Fleay  {Hist,  of  Stage,  pp. 
100,  155)  say  that  Umers  is  Chapman’s  Humourous  Day's  Mirth. 

Granting,  however,  that  the  two  plays  are  the  same,  Hunter’s  positive  error  is  in 
the  date,  ‘November,  1596.’  The  ‘Umers’  was  not  performed  for  the  first  time  in 
‘  November,  1596,’  but  in  May,  1597.  Hunter  was  misled  by  Gifford,  who  evidently 
misread  or  misunderstood  Malone’s  transcript  of  Henslowe.  The  latter  begins  a  new 
page,  or  a  new  book,  or  a  new  season  as  follows  :  ‘  In  the  name  of  God,  Amen,  be- 
‘  ginninge  the  25  of  November  1596  as  foloweth;  the  lord  admirall  players,’  then 
follows  the  record  of  plays  during  ‘  disember,’  ‘Janewary  1597,’  ‘  febreary,  ‘marche,’ 

*  aprill,’  and  then  on  the  ‘  11  of  Maye  1597  ’  we  have  ‘  Rd  at  the  comodey  of  Umers.’ 
This,  then,  is  the  true  date,  and  not  the  25  November,  1596,  at  the  head  of  the  list, 
which  Gifford  mistook,  and  after  him  Hunter,  and  apparently  the  Editor  of  the  Clar¬ 
endon  Press  series.  It  is  a  matter  of  very  small  importance,  and  by  no  means  injures 
Hunter’s  date  of  The  Tempest,  except  in  so  far  as  it  weakens  the  force  of  Jonson’s 
satire  by  lengthening  the  distance  between  the  two  plays.  Indeed,  it  is  doubtful  if 
Hunter  would  have  acknowledged  that  his  theory  was  affected  one  jot  by  the  substi¬ 
tution  of  the  true  date  of  the  ‘  Umers,’  nor  even,  for  the  matter  of  that,  of  the  date 
1598  of  Jonson’s  play.  What  is  really  surprising  is  that  Hunter  could  have  main¬ 
tained  his  belief  that  Jonson,  in  that  Prologue,  meant  to  satirise  Shakespeare,  after 
reading  Gifford’s  hot,  indignant,  and  convincing  protest ;  and  that  he  had  read  Gifford 
is  clear,  from  the  fact  that  he  copied  his  error. 

Knight,  a  free  lance  among  editors,  and  the  earliest  rebel  against  the  sway  of 
Farmer,  Steevens,  and  Malone,  denies  that  there  are  any  proofs  to  be  discovered  in 
the  play  itself  that  The  Tempest  is  among  the  very  latest  of  the  plays.  ‘  Shake- 
‘  speare,’  he  says,  ‘  never  could  have  contemplated,  in  health  and  intellectual  vigour 
‘  any  abandonment  of  that  occupation  which  constituted  his  happiness  and  glory. 
We  have  no  doubt  he  wrote  on  till  the  hour  of  his  last  illness.  His  later  plays  are 
unquestionably  those  in  which  the  mighty  intellect  is  more  tasked  than  the  un¬ 
bounded  fancy.  His  later  plays,  as  we  believe,  present  the  philosophical  and  historical 
aspect  of  human  affairs  rather  than  the  passionate  and  the  imaginative.  The  Roman 
historical  plays  are,  as  it  appears  to  us,  at  the  end  of  his  career,  as  the  English  his¬ 
torical  play-  are  at  the  beginning,  Nothing  can  be  more  different  than  the  principle 


THE  DATE  of  COMPOSITION— KNIGHT  295 

‘  of  art  in  which  the  Henry  VI  and  the  Antony  and  Cleopatra  are  constructed.  The 

Oman  plays  denote,  we  think,  the  growth  of  an  intellect  during  five-and-twenty 
‘  yearS‘  The  TemPest  does  not  present  the  characteristics  of  the  latest  plays.  It  has 
‘  the  playfulness  and  beauty  of  the  comedies,  mingled  with  the  higher  notes  of  pas- 
‘  SIOnate  and  solemn  thought  which  distinguish  the  great  tragedies.  It  is  essentially, 
‘  t0°’  Written  wholly  with  reference  to  the  stage,  at  a  period  when  an  Ariel  could  be’ 
‘presented  to  an  imaginative  audience  without  the  prosaic  encumbrance  of  wings. 

‘ .  .  .  .  The  Winter’s  Tale  we  know  was  acted  in  1611 . Comparing  the  style  and 

'  rh^thm  of  Tempest  with  The  Winter’s  Tale,  we  have  little  difficulty  in  believ- 
‘  mg  that  The  Winter’s  T 'ale  is  the  later  play.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  not 

'  disposed  t0  separate  them  by  any  very  wide  interval . The  probability  is  that 

‘  these  plays  [ Pericles ,  Cymbeline ,  and  The  Winter’s  Tale ]  were  produced  in  their 
‘  present  form  soon  after  the  period  of  Shakespere’s  quitting  the  stage,  about  1602  and 
‘  1603,  and  before  the  production  of  Macbeth,  Troilus  and  Cressida,  Henry  VIII,  and 
*  dre  Roman  plays.  The  Tempest  appears  to  us  to  belong  to  the  same  cycle.’ 

The  remainder  of  Knight’s  remarks  on  the  Date  are  mainly  controversial  over 
Hunter’s  Disquisition.  He  denies  that  The  Tempest  can  be  Loves  Labours  Won. 

‘  The  significance’  he  says,  ‘of  Shakspere’s  titles  would  be  at  an  end,  if  even  a  main 
incident  were  to  suggest  a  name,  instead  of  the  general  course  of  the  thought  or 
‘  action.  In  this  case  there  are  really  no  Love  Labours  at  all.  The  lady  is  not  won 
‘  by  the  piling  of  the  logs;  the  audience  know  that  both  Ferdinand  and  Miranda  are 
‘  under  the  influence  of  Prospero’s  spells,  and  the  magician  has  explained  to  them 
why  he  enforces  these  hard  labours.’  Nor  will  Knight  allow  that  Jonson  alludes  to 
The  Tempest  in  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  and  yet  with  apparent  inconsistency, 
and  after  referring  to  Gifford,  he  says  that  the  passage  in  Bartholomew  Fair  still 
looks  like  a  ‘  sly  though  not  ill-natured  ’  allusion  to  Caliban  and  The  Tempest.  And 
after  citing  Hunter  s  somewhat  violent  assumption  that  Shakespeare  may  have  seen  a 
translation  of  Montaigne  which  may  have  existed  before  1596,  Knight  asks,  ‘  Is  this 
evidence  ?' 

In  the  year  1842,  Peter  Cunningham,  an  honoured  member  of  The  Shakespeare 
Society,  and  its  Treasurer,  edited  for  that  Society  Extracts  from  the  Accounts  of  the 
Revels  at  Court  in  the  Reigns  of  Queen  Elizabeth  and  King  James  I.  Malone  had 
already  ( Var .  ’21,  vol.  iii,  pp.  364-409)  printed  transcripts  from  these  accounts 
extending  from  1571  to  1588;  at  the  close  of  the  latter  date  Malone  remarked:  ‘There 
‘  are  no  Revels  Accounts  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  now  extant;’  and  none  have 
since  been  found.  But  Cunningham  discovered  among  the  old  papers  in  Somer¬ 
set  House  two  additional  books  of  these  Accounts  for  expenses  during  1604—5  and 
1611-12.  At  the  beginning  of  these  books  there  were  one  or  two  loose  leaves,  far 
more  precious  than  all  the  rest  put  together ;  on  them  were  the  records  of  the  per¬ 
formance  of  eight  plays  of  Shakespeare,  or,  as  the  name  was  there  spelled,  ‘  Shax 
‘  berd.’  Among  the  recorded  performances  of  1611  appeared  the  following  : 

4  By  *e  Kings  Hallomas  nyght  was  presented  att  Whithall  before  ye  Kings 

Players :  Matie,  a  play  called  the  Tempest.’ 

Now  although  this  date  cannot  give  us  the  date  of  composition  of  the  play,  it 
does  give  a  date  before  which  the  play  must  have  been  written,  and  disposes  of 
Chp’mers’s  date,  1613,  and  corroborates  Malone,  who  said  he  knew  that  The  Tern- 


APPENDIX 


296 

pest  had  a  ‘being  and  a  name  in  the  autumn  of  1611.’  This  date,  as  well  as  all  the 
others  thus  supplied  by  Cunningham’s  research,  was  accepted  by  all  Shakespearian 
editors  down  to  1 868,  and  by  some  even  after  that  year,  wherein  these  newly-discov¬ 
ered  items  on  the  loose  leaves  of  these  Revels  Books  were  found  to  be  forgeries ;  the 
culprit  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  editor.  It  is  a  painful  story  of  the  fall  of  an 
honourable  gentleman,  and  as  a  full  account  of  these  Revels  Books  is  given  in  the 
New  Variorum  edition  of  Othello,  it  need  not  be  repeated  here.  But  the  strangest 
part  of  the  whole  affair — and  yet  why  should  we  wonder  at  any  strangeness  in  con¬ 
nection  with  Shakespeare  ?  is  not  mystery  a  synonym  for  the  few  items  we  possess 
regarding  him  ? — the  strangest  part  of  the  affair  is  that  though  Cunningham’s  entries 
are  unquestionably  forged,  yet  extrinsic  evidence,  subsequently  discovered,  proves 
their  substance  to  be  true;  at  least  so  Halliwell  says  ( Outlines ,  5th  ed.  pp.  547,  609), 
on  whose  authority  solely  I  make  this  statement.  Setting  aside  the  extrinsic  evidence 
afforded  by  a  certain  letter  of  Sir  Walter  Cope  in  regard  to  Love’s  Labour’s  Lost,  I 
must  confess  that,  in  the  case  of  the  other  plays,  the  evidence  does  not  seem  to  be 
absolutely  irrefragable.  Moreover,  in  the  scrap  of  paper  found  among  Malone’s 
MSS,  on  which  Halliwell  founds  his  faith,  there  is  no  mention  at  all  of  The  Tempest, 
nor  is  The  Tempest  item  given  by  Halliwell  in  the  list  (p.  608)  which  he  says  (p. 
607)  is  the  whole  of  the  forged  record,  and  yet  elsewhere  (p.  547)  he  refers  to  this 
Tempest  item  as  a  part  of  the  forged  record,  and  in  his  folio  edition  gives  a  fac -simile 
of  it.  See  as  to  these  forgeries,  Fleay’s  admirable  Hist,  of  the  Stage,  pp.  173,  177. 

As  this  forged,  yet  possibly  true,  date  of  The  Tempest  really  affects  the  theory  of 
no  critics  except  Garnett,  and  Chalmers,  and  Holt,  if  the  last  had  any  theory  at  all, 
which  is  doubtful,  it  is  not  worth  while  to  devote  more  time  or  space  to  it.  It  was 
necessary  to  mention  it,  however,  in  order  to  understand  its  adoption  by  writers 
between  1842  and  1868. 

To  Collier  (1842)  the  internal  evidence,  derived  from  style  and  language,  clearly 
indicates  that  The  Tempest  was  a  late  production,  and  from  the  ‘  involved  and  paren- 
‘  thetical  character  of  some  of  the  speeches  and  from  the  psychological  resemblance,’ 
he  infers  that  it  belongs  to  about  the  same  period  as  The  Winters  Tale.  Collier  also 
believes  that  Jonson  referred  to  The  Tempest  in  his  Bartholomew  Fair ;  also  that  it 
was  from  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  in  1601,  that  Shakespeare  learned  the  correct 
pronunciation  of  Stephano;  and  also  that  Shakespeare’s  knowledge  of  Montaigne 
came  from  the  translation  of  1603.  There  is  one  ingenious  argument  which  Collier 
adduces  ( Introd .  to  Wint.  Tale)  to  prove  that  The  Tempest  preceded  The  Winter’s 
Tale :  in  the  latter  Shakespeare  deserts  the  story  on  which  he  founded  his  play,  in 
the  way  in  which  Perdita  is  exposed  on  the  sea-coast  of  Bohemia.  In  the  original 
story  the  child  is  exposed  in  a  rudderless  boat  to  the  wind  and  wave.  Collier  sur¬ 
mises  that  Shakespeare  was  led  thus  to  vary  the  tale  because  he  had  previously  in 
The  Tempest  represented  Prospero  and  Miranda  turned  adrift  in  the  same  manner, 
and  he  wished  ‘  to  avoid  an  ‘  objectionable  similarity  of  incident  in  his  two  dramas.’ 
Hence  on  all  grounds  Collier’s  date  for  The  Tempest  is  1611.  A  ballad  entitled  The 
Inchanted  Island,  which  Collier  reprints  from  a  MS  volume  in  his  possession,  I  have 
reprinted  in  full  on  p.  315. 

VerplANCK,  in  his  Introduction  to  the  play  in  1847,  concedes  that  the  cumulative 
evidence  of  all  kinds  leaves  no  doubt  that  The  Tempest  belongs  to  the  later  period  of 
its  author’s  genius ;  and  yet  that  it  is  not  the  last  but  rather  anterior  than  subsequent 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION— HALLIWELL  297 

to  some  others ‘impressed  with  the  same  stamp  of  mighty  but  calm  and  subdued, 
‘  energy.’  To  account  for  this,  he  says  that,  assuming  Malone’s  date  of  1612  [ j-zV]  to 
be  correct,  as  the  date  when  the  play  was  performed  at  the  marriage  of  the  Princess 
Elizabeth,  his  theory  is  that  this  performance  was  about  three  years  ‘  after  the  com- 

*  P05*1*011  and  first  representation  of  The  Tempest.  We  know  from  the  history  of 

*  some  ot^er  plays  that  advantage  was  taken  of  such  selections  for  representations  on 
‘  occasions  of  state  festivity,  to  improve  and  give  novelty  to  the  piece  by  revisal  and 
‘  enlargement.  I  suppose  that  Shakespeare  then  gave  to  The  Tempest  the  same  care¬ 
ful  revisal  to  which  he  had  formerly  subjected  Romeo  and  Juliet,  but  with  a  more 

‘  perfect  effect  of  unity,  because  the  original  fabric  was,  as  in  Lear  and  Othello,  of 
‘  the  same  general  tone,  taste,  and  belonging  to  the  same  period  of  the  author’s  intel- 
‘  lectual  character,  with  the  enlargement.  To  this  circumstance  it  may  be  ascribed 
4  that  the  whole  Piece  came  t0  be  regarded  as  its  author’s  final  work  on  retiring  from 
‘ 1116  Public  fieldi  while  in  reality  that  was  true  only  of  some  of  its  nobler  strains,  and 

*  tbe  prophetic  allusions  at  the  end,  which  have  stamped  upon  the  drama  the  last 

*  ^repress  of  its  author’s  genius,  and  left  it  as  his  farewell  to  the  “rough  magic,”  the 
‘  “  heavenly  music,”  and  the  “  airy  charms,”  which  had  for  years  obeyed  the  bid- 
‘  dings  of  his  “  so  potent  art.”  ’ 

Halliwell,  whose  folio  edition  in  1856  follows  Verplanck  chronologically,  is 
undecided  in  regard  to  the  later  or  the  earlier  date.  On  the  whole,  I  think,  he  is 
inclined  to  side  with  Malone,  albeit  Hunter’s  pleadings  have  weight  with  him.  ‘  The 
‘similarities,’  he  says,  p.  315,  ‘between  the  passages  of  Montaigne  and  the  play  are 
‘  clearly  too  great  to  be  attributed  to  accidental  coincidences.  And  it  will,  there- 
‘  fore,  be  conceded  that  The  Tempest  was  written  after  1603,  unless  it  be  thought  that 
‘  Shakespeare  may  have  read  the  Essays  in  their  original  French,  a  suggestion  which 
as  it  relates  to  a  period  wrhen  the  continental  languages  were  very  generally  studied, 

‘ IS  not  t0  be  dismissed  as  altogether  impossible.  Whatever  opinion  may  be  formed' 

4  respecting  the  amount  of  Shakespeare’s  classical  scholarship,  it  is  in  the  highest 
‘degree  probable  that  he  possessed  a  reasonable  acquaintance  with  French'" and 
‘  kalian.  Mr  Hunter  was  the  first  to  intimate  that  The  Tempest  might  be  an  early 
‘  play ;  and  although  for  some  time  I  was  disposed  to  regard  the  passage  from  Mon- 
‘  taigne  as  an  insurmountable  argument  against  such  an  opinion,  yet  on  further  con- 
‘  sideration,  having  reference  to  the  somewhat  apologetic  character  of  Prospero’s  epi- 
‘  and  to  the  uncertainty  of  all  reasoning  on  internal  evidence  when  it  is  applied 
4 10  tbe  working  of  such  a  mind  as  Shakespeare’s,  I  must  candidly  acknowledge  to 
4  tbe  belief  that  Mr  Hunter’s  conclusions  on  this  point  should  not  be  hastily  rejected.’ 
Then  Halliwell  cautiously  adds,  ‘  The  external  testimonies  which  have  been  pro- 
4  duced  in  favor  of  this  view  [viz.  Hunter’s]  are  not,  however,  of  a  satisfactory  cha- 
4  racter.’  Hereupon  Halliwell  dissents  from  Hunter’s  inference  that  Jonson  in  Every 
Man  in  his  Humour  refers  to  The  Tempest,  because,  ‘  apart  from  the  circumstance 
*  tbat  it  is  hardly  likely  a  satire  should  be  aimed  at  Shakespeare  in  a  play  in  which 
‘  he  was  one  of  the  performers,  there  is  really  nothing  [in  the  lines  from  Jonson 
‘  quoted  by  Hunter]  which  may  not  have  applied  to  other  dramas  of  the  time.’  The 
allusion  in  Bartholomew's  Fair  to  The  Tempest  Halliwell  deems  more  distinct,  and 
yet  uncertain,  and  concludes,  ‘  on  the  whole,  that  it  is  more  likely  that  Jonson  there 
‘  refers  to  the  Drolleries  popular  at  Fairs  rather  than  that  he  should  make  a  somewhat 
clumsy  reference  to  a  drama,  the  merits  of  which  he  must,  at  least  in  a  great  degree, 

‘  have  appreciated.’ 


298 


APPENDIX 


Farmer’s  argument  that  The  Tempest  must  have  been  written  after  Every  Man  in 
his  Humour  (which  was  performed  in  1598  and  in  which  Shakespeare  was  one  of  the 
actors),  because  in  the  former  play  the  pronunciation  of  Stephano  is  always  right 
while  in  the  Merchant  of  Venice ,  written  earlier  than  either,  it  is  always  wrong,  Hal- 
liwell  holds  in  light  esteem,  owing  to  the  ‘  fact  that  the  name  very  rarely  occurs  in 
‘  Shakespeare’s  verse  and  the  indications  of  its  accentuation  in  7 he  Tempest  are 
1  exceedingly  indistinct.’  (p.  317.) 

Halliwell  also  dissents  from  Steevens’s  conclusion  that  Prospero’s  celebrated 
speech  in  the  Fourth  Act  was  derived  from  Lord  Sterling’s  Tragedie  of  Darius,  1604. 
‘  Reflections  of  this  kind  belong  to  writers  of  all  ages  and  countries,  and  there  is  not 
‘  a  sufficient  identity  of  language  to  warrant  the  supposition  that  there  must  necessarily 
‘  have  been  any  positive  imitation,  unless,  indeed,  in  the  sense  that  both  authors  may 

*  have  derived  their  chief  idea  on  the  subject  from  that  impressive  passage  in  the 
‘  Revelation  :  “And  I  saw  a  great  white  throne  and  Him  that  sat  upon  it,  from  whose 
1  ;  Face  the  earth  and  heavens  fled  away,  and  there  was  no  place  for  them.”  ’ 

In  conclusion  Halliwell  says  (p.  319)  with  truth:  ‘  There  are  few  kinds  of  reason¬ 
ing  so  uncertain  as  that  which  is  founded  on  the  occurrence  of  a  few  similarities  of 
language  and  incident  traced  in  compositions  that  have  no  real  connection  with  each 
‘  other ;  and  I  have  looked  in  vain  amidst  the  elaborate  arguments  of  Malone  and 
‘  Chalmers  for  a  single  coincidence  between  the  play  and  the  tracts  quoted  by  them, 
‘  that  may  not  be  reasonably  considered  to  be  entirely  accidental.’ 

Thirty  years  later,  in  his  Outlines,  Halliwell  commits  himself  no  further  than  to 
express  his  belief  that  The  Tempest  was  performed  in  1611. 

‘  It  is  highly  probable,’  says  Grant  White,  in  his  First  Edition  in  1857,  ‘  that  The 
1  Tempest  was  written  about  1611  ’ ;  and  he  then  adds,  ‘  The  thoughtful  reader  will 
‘  however,  find  in  the  compact  simplicity  of  its  structure,  in  the  chastened  grandeur 

*  of  its  diction,  and  the  lofty  severity  of  its  tone  of  thought,  tempered  although  the 

*  one  is  with  Shakespeare’s  own  enchanting  sweetness,  and  the  other  with  that  most 
‘  human  tenderness  which  is  the  peculiar  trait  of  his  mind,  sufficient  evidence  that 
‘  this  play  is  the  fruit  of  his  genius  in  its  full  maturity.’ 

Twenty-five  years  later,  in  his  Second  Edition,  Grant  White  modifies  his  earlier 
statement  merely  to  the  extent  of  saying  that  the  play  was  ‘  probably  written  about 
‘  1610.’ 

Dyce  nowhere  assigns  any  date  for  this  play  more  exact  than  that  it  was  written 
after  1603,  the  year  in  which  Florio’s  Montaigne  was  published,  ‘  unless,’  he  adds  in 
his  Third  Edition,  in  1875,  * we  adopt  the  hypothesis  that  Shakespeare  had  seen  (this 
‘  translation)  in  manuscript.’  Possibly  Dyce  had  not  seen  Brae’s  well-taken  point  as 
to  the  date  of  Florio’s  translation ;  but  if  he  had,  it  is  not  impossible  that  he  would 
still  have  made  this  remark  about  a  MS  translation  of  Montaigne.  I  doubt  if  any¬ 
thing  Brae  ever  said  found  favour  in  Dyce’s  eyes. 

In  1857,  Charles  Bathurst  published  Remarks  on  the  Dffeiences  in  Shake¬ 
speare’s  Versification  in  Different  Periods  of  his  Life,  wherein  the  tests  to  decide  the 
order  of  the  plays  were  the  weak  endings,  that  is,  monosyllables  like  and,  of  in,  but, 
&c.,  used  as  unaccented  tenth  syllables  in  the  lines,  and  the  caesura,  or  division  of  the 
pauses,  and  the  use  of  double  endings,  like  the  Italian  metre.  The  limits  of  the 
classes  into  which  he  divides  the  plays  are,  as  he  acknowledges,  somewhat  arbitrary. 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION— FLEA  Y 


299 

lhe  hrst,’  he  says  (p.  4),  <  is  not  so  much  distinguished  from  the  second  in  the  nature 
of  the  verse,  as  in  the  general  incompleteness  of  the  style,  or  at  least,  however  beau- 

*  dful  many  Passages  may  be,  the  absence  of  that  entire  boldness  and  freedom  which 
‘  so  singularly,  according  to  common  ideas,  goes  with  quite  unbroken  passages,  not 

*  infrequently,  in  what  I  have  marked  as  his  second  style.  To  this  last  King  John , 

*  for  lnstance,  and  Romeo  and  Juliet  belong.— In  what  I  call  the  third  style,  his  pecu- 
‘  liar  manner  of  unbroken  verse  is  altered,  but  without  as  yet  falling  into  the  opposite 

*  peculiarity  of  his  later  plays,  which  will  form  his  fourth  style.  Measure  for  Measure 
‘  will  serve  for  a  specimen  of  the  third ;  Anthony  and  Cleopatra  and  The  Winter's 
‘  Tale ,  remarkably,  of  the  fourth  style.’ 

On  p.  143,  Bathurst  discusses  The  Tempest ,  which  is,  he  says,  ‘  in  the  fourth  style 

*  ln  metre»  excessively.  But  we  are  to  observe  that  the  kind  of  metre  does  not  show 
‘  itself  through  every  part  of  a  play,  in  any  instance.  There  are  exact  breaks,  when 

speeches  succeed  each  other.  There  is  rhyme  in  the  Masque. — And  I  think  it  is  in 
‘ the  fourth  style  in  matter  and  language ;  but  of  the  imaginative,  natural,  subdivision, 
‘  not  the  ratiocinative,  and  intricate.  In  the  extraordinary  creations,  of  personages 
which  cannot  exist  in  nature,  he  actually  seems  more  at  home  than  in  real  men  and 
‘  w°men ;  while  at  the  same  time  there  is  nothing  strained,  or  improbable,  about  them. 
* If  this  was  his  last  play,  his  dramatic  life  went  out,  like  the  life  of  Brandimart  in 

*  Ariosto,  in  sweet  music.  Fra  dolce  melodia  sail  nel  cielo.—lX.  is  quite  plain,  and 
‘  most  delightful  to  perceive,  that  the  free,  fanciful,  rich,  natural  mind  and  style  of 

Shakespeare  s  youth  still  existed  again  in  his  age ;  though  sometimes  kept  back  by 
‘  various  causes.  But  the  verse  was  totally  changed  in  the  mean  time. — There  are 
‘parentheses.  It  is  not  excursive,  except  the  passage  about  the  “cloud-capped 
‘  “  towers.”— It  is  very  extraordinary,  after  the  violent  slap  which  Jonson  adminis- 
‘  tered  to  the  violators  of  the  unities,  in  the  Prologue  to  his  first  play,  1598,  that 

*  Shakespeare  should  have  made  himself  liable  to  that  accusation  much  more,  in  some 
‘  of  his  very  last  plays,  than  he  had  ever  done  before.’ 

Nowhere  that  I  can  find  does  Bathurst  fix  on  any  year  for  the  date  of  the  play; 
we  can  infer  from  the  somewhat  hazy  atmosphere  through  which  he  regards  it,  merely 
that  he  holds  it  to  have  been  among  the  very  latest. 

ln  1871,  Dr  W.  A.  B.  Hertzberg,  in  the  Preface  to  Cymbeline ,  which  he  edited 
for  the  Deutsche  Shakespeare- Gesellschaft,  used,  as  a  test  to  determine  the  relative 
chronological  position  of  that  play,  the  proportion  of  eleven-syllable  lines  to  the  reg¬ 
ular  verses.  He  examined  only  seventeen  othe)  plays,  and  beginning  (p.  292)  with 
Love’s  Labour’s  Lost  at  4%,  ended  with  The  Winter's  Tale  at  31.09%,  Cymbeline 
32%,  The  Tempest  32%,  and  Henry  the  Eighth  at  44%.  He  thus  concluded  that 
this  internal  metrical  evidence  was  adequately  corroborated  by  the  external  evidence. 

In  1874,  F.  G.  Fleay,  who  had  been  silently  working  for  many  years  on  this  very 
subject  of  metrical  tests,  tabulated  {New  Shakspere's  Society's  Transactions ,  Part  I, 
p.  16)  all  Shakespeare’s  plays  under  the  number  of  their  prose  lines,  then  blank 
verses,  rhymes,  double  endings,  &c.,  and  by  means  of  rhymes  as  a  test  divided  them 
into  groups.  This  table,  with  some  important  modifications,  and  with  the  addition  of 
the  years  when  Shakespeare  is  supposed  to  have  written  the  plays,  is  the  basis  on 
which  The  New  Shakspere  Society  sets  up  its  rest,  as  it  is  given  (p.  cxxiii)  in  the 
Preface  by  Fgrnivall  in  The  Leopold  Shakespere,  with  the  date  1610. 

According  to  Fleay,  the  plays  in  ‘  The  Fourth  Period  ’  are  Julius  Ccesar  with  34 


300 


APPENDIX 


rhyming  lines,  Coriolanus  with  42,  Anthony  and  Cleopatra  with  42,  The  Tempest  with 
2,  and  Winter* s  Tale  with  none.  Be  it  remembered  that  these  rhyming  lines  are  by 
no  means  the  only  tests  which  Fleay  applies  to  his  groups ;  the  proportion  of  double 
endings  is  a  highly  important  factor;  but  if  the  use  of  rhymes  really  represents  Shake¬ 
speare’s  dramatic  growth,  then  the  contrast  is  striking  between  his  very  early  play, 
Love's  Labour* s  Lost,  with  its  1028  rhyming  lines,  and  The  Winter’s  Tale  with  none. 
Be  it  also  observed  that  when  Fleay  allows  but  2  rhyming  five-measure  lines  (songs 
are,  of  course,  omitted)  to  The  Tempest,  he  does  not  include  the  54  rhyming  lines 
in  the  Masque;  which,  if  rhyme  were  the  only  test,  would  be  a  serious  weakness  in 
any  grouping  founded  on  it.  It  may  be  not  unfairly  inferred  from  this  Masque  that  it 
was  the  subject,  and  not  merely  a  result  of  dramatic  growth  in  Shakespeare,  which 
dictated  his  use  of  rhyme ;  and  that  if  Shakespeare  were  dramatising  a  story  as  light 
and  airy  as  Love  s  Labour  s  Lost ,  he  would  have  filled  it  with  rhymes  whether  be 
were  in  his  twenty-fourth  or  his  fifty-fourth  year. 

In  the  Jahrbuch  of  the  German  Shakespeare  Society  for  1872  (Vol.  VII,  p.  29, 
also  Essays  trans.  by  L.  Dora  Schmitz,  London,  p.  1)  Karl  Elze  urges,  with  his 
wonted  zeal  and  learning,  a  new  date,  1604,  founded  on  an  allusion  in  Jonson’s  Vol- 
pone,  III,  ii,  where  Lady  Politick  Would-Be,  speaking  of  Guarini’s  Pastor  Fido, 
says :  ‘  All  our  English  writers,  I  mean  such  as  are  happy  in  the  Italian,  Will  deign 
‘  to  steal  out  of  this  author,  mainly :  Almost  as  much  as  from  MontagniA  He  has  so 
‘  modern  and  facile  a  vein,  Fitting  the  time  and  catching  the  court-ear,’  &c.  ‘Almost 
‘  ^  much  as  from  Montagnfe !’  exclaims  Elze.  ‘Against  whom  is  this  thrust  directed? 

‘  What  poet  of  the  Elizabethan  period  borrowed  from  Montaigne  ?  We  cannot  discover 
‘  any  except  the  celebrated  lines  in  The  Tempest.  From  the  continual  and  careful 
‘  investigations  of  the  Elizabethan  literature  it  might  be  thought  that  such  passages 

*  couI<i  not  have  remained  undiscovered  if  they  existed . If,  therefore,  the  pas- 

‘  sage  applies  to  The  Tempest,  and  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  say  to  what  else,  the  com- 
‘  position  of  the  latter  must  be  assigned  to  a  date  different  from  that  which  has  been 

‘hitherto  supposed . Volpone  was  acted  as  early  as  1605 . Thus  The  Tern - 

1  pest  would  at  latest  fall  to  the  year  1604,  a  year  after  Florio’s  Montaigne.  This  in 
‘  itself  is  much  more  credible  than  the  supposition  that  Shakespeare,  as  late  as  1611, 

‘  should  have  referred  to  and  made  use  of  this  book,  which  was  then  no  longer  new’ 

‘  If  Shakespeare  was  struck  by  the  surprising  idea  of  the  natural  state,  such  as  he 
‘  met  with  in  Montaigne’s  description,  he  must  doubtless  have  felt  induced  to  make 
‘  an  early  use  of  it.’  It  is  needless  to  remark  that  in  this  essay,  Elze,  as  usual,  shows 
his  familiarity  with  what  had  been  written  both  in  English  and  in  German  on  the 
subject. 

In  1874,  Professor  Ingram  {New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  1874,  Part  ii,  p.  448),  in  a  thor¬ 
ough  and  admirable  manner,  applied  as  one  of  the  tests  for  discovering  the  chronology 
of  the  plays,  the  use  by  Shakespeare  of  ‘  light  ’  and  of  ‘  weak  ’  endings.  {Light  end¬ 
ings,  according  to  the  nice  discrimination  of  Professor  Ingram,  are  words  in  which 
the  voice  can  to  a  certain  small  extent  dwell,  such  as  am,  are,  art,  be,  &c. ;  weak  end¬ 
ings  are  words  so  essentially  auxiliary  to  other  words  that  we  are  forced  to  connect 
them  as  closely  as  possible  with  the  words  to  which  they  belong  in  the  next  line,  such 
as  to,  -with,  at,  of,  &c.)  According  to  the  list  thus  made,  beginning  with  Love's 
Labour’s  Lost  as  No.  1,  and  ending  with  Henry  Villas  No.  33,  The  Tempest  stands 
No.  29,  with  Pericles  No.  28,  and  Cymbeline  No.  30,  and  The  Winter’s  Tale  No.  31. 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION—  WRIGHT  301 

It  is  to  be  remembered  that  all  that  rhythmical  tests  attempt  to  give  is  merely 
evidenceenCe  ^  ^  ^  CaDn0t  give  us  >’ears  or  dates.  without  extrinsic 

Dr  William  Aldis  Wright  finds  in  the  ‘  not  improbable  ’  allusions  in  Bartholo¬ 
mew  Fair  to  The  Tempest  an  ultimate  limit  for  the  date  of  the  latter.  The  superior 
mit  seems  to  be  fixed,  he  thinks,  by  Florio’s  Montaigne  in  1603.  After  rehearsing 
Malone  s  arguments  founded  on  the  Western  voyages  and  shipwrecks,  Wright  thts 
^mperately  concludes  :  ‘it  is  of  course  possible  to  make  too  much  of  coincidences 

4  0  hlS,  rmdV  but’  ln  the  absence  of  positive  proof,  there  appears  to  be  reasonable 
groun  for  the  conclusion  that  The  Tempest  was  written  about  the  end  of  1610  or 
/^e  beginning  of  l6n.’  And,  again,  ‘  Taking  into  consideration  the  internal  evi- 
,  6nCe  denved  from  the  style  and  metre  of  the  play,  these  alone  would  lead  us  to 
assign  it  to  a  late  rather  than  to  an  early  period  in  Shakespeare’s  dramatic  career.’ 

Huoson,  after  reviewing  the  arguments  brought  forward  by  Malone,  concludes 
that  ‘  1610  is  as  early  a  date  as  can  well  be  assigned  for  the  composition.’  «  Concur- 
‘  rent  with  all  this  is  the  internal  evidence  of  the  play  itself.  The  style,  language 
,  ,and  Sen®raI  cast  of  thought,  the  union  of  richness  and  severity,  the  grave,  austere 
beauty  of  character  which  pervades  it,  and  the  organic  compactness  of  the  whole 

‘  structure,  all  go  to  mark  it  as  an  issue  of  the  Poet’s  ripest  years . I  can  hardly 

‘  think  that  Shakespeare  had  any  reference  to  himself  in  the  passage  [where  Prospero 
‘  abjures  his  “rough  magic, ’’  and  buries  his  staff  and  drowns  his  book],  for,  besides 
that  he  did  not  use  to  put  his  own  feelings  and  purposes  into  the  mouth  of  his  cha- 
‘racters,  the  doing  so  in  this  case  would  infer  such  a  degree  of  self-exaltation  as,  it 
seems  to  me,  his  native  and  habitual  modesty  would  scarce  permit.’ 

J.  Surtees  Phillpotts  {Rugby  Edition),  while  granting  that  1610  or  1611 
seems  to  be  the  most  probable  date,  believes  that  there  is  really  no  trustworthy  evi¬ 
dence  for  fixing  on  any  particular  year  between  1610  and  1616,  when  Shakespeare’s 
death  took  place.  ‘  But  in  any  case  the  external  evidence  makes  The  Tempest  one 

‘of  Shakespeare’s  latest  efforts . and  the  internal  evidence  leads  to  the  same 

*  conclusion-’  T1“s  internal  evidence  Phillpotts  finds,  first,  in  reviewing  ‘ as  far  as  we 
‘  can  the  experiences  gone  through  by  Shakespeare  himself’ ;  as  well  as  a  comparison 
of  the  play  with  those  which  were  written  at  about  the  same  time;  and,  secondly,  in 
the  metrical  form.  Under  the  first  head,  it  is  said  that  ‘  The  Tempest,  with  Cymbeline 
‘  and  The  Winter's  Tale,  form  a  group  succeeding  the  great  tragedies,  Othello,  Lear, 
Hamlet,  which  show  Shakespeare’s  mind  to  have  been  grappling  with  the  disap- 

‘  P°lntments  and  trials  of  life . So  little  is  known  of  the  life  of  Shakespeare  that 

‘we  can  only  surmise  that  there  may  have  been  something  in  his  own  lot  which 
‘  f°/?ed  hlm  t0  sucb  contemplation  of  sorrow  and  evil,  and  especially  of  the  baseness 
‘of  ingratitude.’  Secondly,  in  the  metrical  tests,  Phillpotts  adopts  the  tables  made 
out  by  the  New  Shakspere  Society . 

At  the  close  of  a  short  discussion  in  Notes  and  Queries  (7th  S.  i,  72,  150  18S6I 
on  the  Date  of  the  Tempest,  which  showed  that  Hunter’s  theory  of  an  early  date 
can  still  claim  adherents,  Dr  Br.  Nicholson  says  {lb.  p.  298) :  *  In  every  way  the 
‘  versification  and  other  matters  point  to  a  very  late  date.  The  references  to  the  inci- 
‘  dents  of  the  sh.pwreck  of  Somers  ....  abundantly  show  that  our  play  was  written 


302 


APPENDIX 


‘  after  the  news  of  this  disaster  had  reached  England.  These  references  are  more 

*  numerous  than  those  to  contemporary  circumstances  in  England  or  elsewhere  tha* 
‘  occur  in  any  other  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  except  possibly  in  Hamlet. — I  do  not  hold, 
‘  as  did  Hunter,  that  it  and  Love's  Labour's  Won  are  one  and  the  same  play,  but  that 
‘  the  former  was,  at  least  so  far  as  the  versification  is  concerned,  wholly  recast.  What 

*  I  look  on  as  proofs  of  their  innate  identity  seem  to  me  to  prove  both  this  and  the 
‘  hurry  with  which  the  earlier  play  was  remodelled,  so  as  to  attract  and  catch  the 

public  purse  while  the  exciting  news  of  the  disaster  and  the  probable  failure  of  the 
adventurers  were  still  dwelling  in  their  mouths  and  ears.  It  was  this  hurry  which 
I  thought  of  itself  might  have  produced  or  have  preserved  that  which  [has  been 
deemed]  immature,  though  to  [me]  there  is  no  immaturity,  but  rather  the  reverse. 
Similarly,  I  see  not  that  Ariel’s  mention  of  the  Bermoothes  shows  that  Shakespeare 

could  not  have  referred  to  the  shipwreck  of  Somers  there . When  Love's  Labour 

Won  was  written,  he  may  have  had  Lampedusa  in  his  mind — if  his  authority  named 
‘  it — but  when  he  wrote  our  Tempest,  he  without  doubt  was  thinking  of  what  had 
‘  occurred  at  Bermoothes  itself.’  See  also  Nicholson’s  note  on  III,  i,  28-30. 

Fleay  [Life  and  Work  of  Shakespeare,  1886,  p.  248),  after  conceding  that  Malone 
has  shown  that  in  The  Tempest  are  to  be  found  many  particulars  derived  from  Jour- 
dan’s  narrative,  published  in  October,  1610,  says  that  it  does  not  follow,  however 
because  this  October  pamphlet  was  used  in  the  storm  scenes,  that  therefore  ‘  none  of 

*  the  play  was  written  before  that  month ;  but  that  the  date  of  its  first  appearance  was  in 

‘  October  to  November,  1610, 1  have  little  doubt . This  and  [  The  Winter's  Tale’] 

1  were  surely  Shakespeare’s  last  plays . He  began  his  career  with  the  Chamber- 

‘  Iain’s  Company  (after  his  seven  years’  apprenticeship  in  conjunction  with  others, 
1 1587-94)  with  a  Midsummer  Dream.,  he  finishes  with  a  Winter's  Tale,  and  so  his 
‘  playwright’s  work  is  rounded ;  twenty-four  years,  each  year  an  hour  in  the  brief  day 
‘  of  work,  and  then  the  rounding  with  a  sleep.’ 

Deighton  :  ‘  The  more  generally  accepted  date  is  1610  or  1611,  but  whatever  the 

*  precise  year,  internal  evidence,  from  style,  thought,  and  metre,  proves  beyond  doubt 
‘  that  it  belongs  to  Shakespeare’s  latest  period  of  authorship,  and  is  of  the  same  group 
‘  as  Cymbeline,  The  Winters  Tale,  and  King  Henry  the  Eighth.' 

Apparently  Tieck  was  unaware  of  the  existence  of  the  Vertue  MS  when  he  placed 
the  date  of  the  composition  of  this  play  in  1613.  He  does  not  allude  to  it,  but,  while 
urging  that  the  play  refers  to  the  marriage  of  the  Princess  Elizabeth  and  the  Palatine 
supposes  that  The  Tempest  was  written  for  the  opening  of  the  Globe  Theatre  while  the 
memory  of  the  recent  festivities  attending  that  marriage  was  fresh  in  men’s  minds. 
‘Prospero,’  he  goes  on  to  say  (Sh.  Dramat.  Werke,  Berlin,  1826,  vol.  iv,  p.  314),  ‘a 
wise  magician,  who  had  in  lieu  of  other  teachers  educated  his  daughter  himself,  was 
‘  invested  by  Shakespeare  with  a  certain  resemblance  to  King  James,  who  was  like¬ 
wise  fond  of  imparting  instruction  to  his  favorites,  and  had  even  written  a  book  on 

*  magic.’  I  should  have  thought  it  hardly  worth  while  to  record  this  conjecture  of 
Tieck — which,  in  effect,  is  a  repetition  of  Chalmers’s — had  it  not  happened  that  the 
latest  critic  had  revived  the  same  idea  with  reference  to  the  resemblance  between 
Prospero  and  King  James. 

Dr  Garnett  ( Universal  Review,  April,  1889,  p  556)  revives  Chalmers’s  anc 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION— GARNETT  303 

Tieck’s  date,  and,  adducing  arguments  in  its  favour  of  greater  force  than  ever  Chal¬ 
mers  put  forth,  undertakes  to  show,  first,  that  The  Tempest  was  written  for  performance 
before  a  private  audience  and  on  occasion  of  a  marriage;  secondly,  that  the  particular 
audience  and  the  particular  marriage  are  known  by  documentary  evidence,  and  further 
revealed  by  evident  allusions  to  the  personality  of  the  bridegroom  and  to  the  recent 
death  of  Prince  Henry,  and  by  the  introduction  of  King  James  himself  into  the  piece; 
thirdly,  that  there  is  additional  internal  evidence  for  the  date  1613,  and  no  evidence 
for  any  other  date.  It  is  assumed,  from  internal  evidence,  that  The  Tempest  is  a  late 
play,  and  an  allusion  to  the  ‘  still- vexed  Bermoothes  ’  could  hardly  have  been  an  acci¬ 
dent,  but  must  refer  to  the  shipwreck  of  Sir  George  Somers,  made  known  by  Jourdan’s 
pamphlet  in  1610.  <  It  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  Jourdan’s  narrative  must  have  been 
‘  familiar  to  [Shakespeare],  The  numerous  parallels  produced  by  Malone  leave  no 
‘  room  for  question.’  Malone’s  error  consists  in  assuming  that  because  Jourdan’s  nar 
rative  was  ‘published  in  October,  1610,  therefore  the  play  must  have  been  written 
‘  immediately  afterwards.  We  have,  on  the  contrary,  no  right  to  assume  that  the  piece 
‘  was  written  before  the  first  notice  we  have  of  its  representation,’  which  is  derived 
from  \  ertue’s  MS.  The  proofs  that  The  Tempest  was  written  for  private  representa¬ 
tion,  and  for  no  ordinary  audience,  Garnett  finds  in  the  two  following  circumstances : 
First,  its  brevity ;  if  written  for  a  court  performance,  ‘  the  time  of  the  monarch  and 
‘  his  guests  must  not  be  unduly  encroached  upon ;  and  the  piece  must  not  be  on  too 
‘  large  a  scale  to  be  written,  rehearsed,  and  put  on  the  stage  with  great  expedition.’ 
Secondly,  for  the  same  reasons,  <  it  would  be  an  object  to  have  as  few  changes  of 
‘ scene  33  P°ssible-  The  Tempest  is  unique  among  Shakespeare’s  plays  in  this  re- 
‘  spect.  After  the  brief  representation  of  the  deck  of  the  storm-tossed  vessel  with 
‘  which  1116  P,ay  °Pens>  there  is  practically  but  one  scene ;  for  though  the  action  occa- 
‘  siona!1>'  sblfts  from  the  space  before  Prospero’s  cell  to  some  other  part  of  the  island, 
‘everything  is  avoided  which  might  necessitate  a  change  of  decoration.’  [Gar¬ 
nett  does  not  take  me  with  him  here.  I  think  he  overlooks  the  unusually  elaborate 
machinery  required  for  the  appearance  of  the  banquet  in  the  Third  Act,  and  for  its 
instant  disappearance.]  ‘  The  strongest  argument,’  continues  Garnett,  « is  the  intro- 
*  duction  of  two  masques  such  as  were  in  Shakespeare’s  age  usually  presented  to  sov- 

‘  ereigns  on  occasions  of  ceremony . Shakespeare  must  have  had  some  very 

‘  co£ent  motive  for  introducing  this  apparently  aimless  pageantry  into  the  very  heart 
‘  of  his  drama-  This  could  be  nothing  else  than  the  fact  that,  in  one  point  of  view, 

‘  The  Tempest  is  a  spectacular  play  for  the  entertainment  of  princes  and  courtiers  upon 
‘  some  great  occasion ;  and  that  from  another,  the  seeming  impertinence  enabled  him 
‘  to  stamp  his  piece  as  a  hymeneal  drama.  To  condense  our  argument  to  a  point,  this 
‘  nuPtlaI  interlude  is  either  a  mere  idle  excrescence  or  pregnant  with  significance. 

‘  The  former  it  cannot  be,  for  if  it  is  removed  the  Fourth  Act  tumbles  to  pieces,  and 
‘  the  finest  passage  in  the  drama  goes  along  with  it.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  a 
‘  significance,  this  must  relate  to  something  in  the  situation  of  the  spectators,  who  must 
‘  have  been  aware  of  some  circumstance  justifying  its  introduction,  and  this  could  be 
‘  nothing  else  than  a  marriage  deeply  interesting  to  some  persons  among  the  audience.’ 
Vertue’s  MS  reveals  the  occasion  and  the  audience,  and  the  purpose  of  the  drama 
becomes  perfectly  clear.  •  Everything  bespeaks  a  royal  marriage,  and  everything  cor- 
‘  responds  with  the  royal  marriage  of  1613.  The  foreign  prince  come  from  beyond 
‘sea,  the  island  princess  who  has  never  left  her  home,  the  wise  father  who  brings 
about  the  auspicious  consummation  by  his  policy,— all  found  their  counterparts 
among  the  splendid  company  that  watched  the  performance  on  that  February  night. 


304 


APPENDIX 


‘  The  perception  of  the  absolute  appropriateness  of  the  piece  to  the  occasion  must 
have  heightened  their  enjoyment  to  a  degree  which,  even  with  our  vastly  enhanced 
‘  reverence  for  the  genius  of  Shakespeare,  we  cannot  reproduce.  Every  point  would 
‘  be  new  and  bright,  every  allusion  would  be  taken  as  soon  as  made.  What  a  smile, 
‘  for  instance,  must  have  gone  round  at  Gonzalo’s  speech  :  “  Would  they  believe  me 
‘  “  If  I  should  say  I  saw  such  islanders?” — But  that  assembly  numbered  shadows  as 
‘  well  as  men.  The  Tempest  would  hardly  have  existed  in  its  present  form,  and  cer¬ 
tainly  would  have  been  far  from  exemplifying  Shakespeare’s  courtly  tact  and  tender 
‘  humanity,  but  for  the  gloom  thrown  upon  the  marriage  festivities  by  the  recent  death 
‘  of  the  King’s  eldest  son.’  Garnett  here  gives  briefly  the  dates  of  the  negotiation 
for  the  royal  marriage,  and  its  interruption  by  the  sudden  death  of  Prince  Henry  in 
November,  and  of  the  betrothal  in  December,  and  finds  that  in  January  ‘  the  black  is 
‘  wearing  out  and  the  marriage  pomps  preparing  ’ ;  among  these  was  ‘  the  preparation 
‘  of  The  Tempest,  which  may  have  been  commissioned  about  the  end  of  November. 
‘  Shakespeare  thus  found  himself  in  a  position  as  trying  as  ever  tested  the  dexterity 
'  of  a  courtier  or  the  humanity  of  a  man.  How  to  reconcile  the  demands  of  sorrow 
‘  and  joy  on  this  unparalleled  occasion  ?  To  ignore  the  late  affliction  would  be  heart- 
‘  less,  and  an  insult  to  the  King,  but  how  to  recognise  it  without  darkening  the  nup- 
‘  tial  joy,  and  suggesting  omens  as  sinister  as  Marie  Antoinette’s  tapestry  ?  In  the 
‘  entire  range  of  Shakespeare’s  art  there  is  nothing  more  exquisite  than  the  skill  with 
‘  which  he  has  solved  the  problem.  The  recent  calamity  is  not  unrecognised ;  on  the 
contrary,  the  supposed  death  of  the  drowned  Prince  is  a  most  vital  incident,  kept 
'  continually  in  view.  But,  by  a  consummate  stroke  of  genius,  the  woe  is  taken  away 
‘  from  Prospero,  the  representative  of  James,  and  transferred  to  the  house  of  his 

*  enemy.  The  lost  prince  is  duly  mourned,  but  not  by  his  real  father.  James  is 
‘  reminded  of  his  bereavement,  but  it  is  not  obtruded  upon  him.  The  sense  of  loss 

*  mingles,  a  fine  and  almost  imperceptible  element,  with  the  general  cheerfulness.  In 
‘  the  end  the  hitherto  sonless  Prospero  gains  a  son,  as  the  bereaved  James  is  gaining 
‘  one  in  the  Palatine ;  while,  a  compliment  within  a  compliment,  delicate  allusion  is 

*  made  to  the  promise  of  Prince  Charles.  If  this  be  refined  flattery,  it  is  also  refined 

*  humanity.  To  ignore  it  is  to  miss  the  key  to  the  interpretation  of  the  play.  We 

*  should  also  lose  the  best  evidence  we  possess  of  the  speedy  working  of  Shake- 
‘  speare’s  imagination ;  how,  in  quite  another  sense  than  Johnson’s,  “  panting  Time 

*  “  toiled  after  him  in  vain.”  The  supposed  death  of  Ferdinand  is  so  vital  a  portion 
‘  of  the  plot  that  the  play  cannot  have  been  undertaken  without  it.  We  have  seen, 
‘  however,  that  the  incident  which  suggested  it  did  not  occur  until  November  6  pre 

*  ceding  the  marriage,  which  was  solemnised  on  February  14.  The  representation 
‘  must  have  preceded  the  wedding,  otherwise  Prospero’s  exhortation  to  pre-nuptial 
‘  chastity  would  have  lost  all  force.  This  marvellous  work  must  accordingly  have 
‘  been  planned,  written,  and  put  upon  the  stage  within  less  than  three  months.  Noth- 

*  ing  can  give  a  higher  idea  of  the  activity  of  Shakespeare’s  genius ;  while  at  the  same 
‘  time  we  discern  cogent  reasons  for  the  comparative  brevity  of  the  play.’  Garnett 
next  proceeds  to  show  what  Chalmers  maintained,  and  after  him  Tieck,  that  in  Pros¬ 
pero  James  is  represented;  and,  to  prove  this,  vindicates  James’s  character  to  an  extent 
whereto,  I  fear,  he  will  find  but  few  followers.  ‘  It  was  James’s  misfortune,’  he  urges, 
p.  562,  <  that  his  defects  were  mostly  of  an  unkingly  sort,  and  such  as  easily  lend 

themselves  to  ridicule . [Prospero’sJ  character  is  full  of  dramatic  irony.  [He] 

is  wise  and  good  indeed,  but  not  so  much  of  either  as  he  thinks  himself.  He  be¬ 
trays  fretfulness,  irritability,  and  self-importance,  reminding  us  of  the  limitations  of 


THE  DATE  OF  COMPOSITION— RECAPITULATION  305 

‘the  highest  humanity,  and  contrasting  sharply  with  his  preternatural  power.  But 

,  JhSSe  tr^‘tS  do  not  lle  uP°n  the  surface,  and  upon  a  broad  view  of  the  character  it  is 
impossible  to  conceive  one  more  completely  embodying  James's  ideal  of  himself,  or 
more  dexterously,  and  at  the  same  time  truthfully,  bringing  the  really  strong  sides 
of  his  personality  into  view.  A  wise,  humane,  pacific  prince,  gaining  his  ends  not 
by  violence,  but  by  policy;  devoted  to  far-off  purposes  which  none  but  himself  can 
realise,  much  less  fathom;  independent  of  counsellors,  safely  contemptuous  of  foes, 
and  controlling  all  about  him  by  his  superior  wisdom ;  keeping  in  the  background 
‘  till  the  decisive  hour  has  struck,  and  then  interfering  effectually;  devoted  to  lawful 
‘  knowledge;  but  the  sworn  enemy  of  black  magic,— such  was  James  in  James’s  eyes 
‘and  such  is  Prospero.’  In  conclusion  Garnett  refers  to  one  or  two  minor  pointi 
which  are  in  favour  of  the  date  1613,  and  which  have  been  mentioned  by  one  or 
another  critic  in  the  foregoing  pages,  such  as  the  tempestuous  autumn  and  winter  of 
1612,  and  the  atmosphere  of  discovery  and  colonisation  which  can  be  felt,  rather  than 
proved,  in  The  Tempest. 

After  having  listened  patiently  to  all  that  our  betters  have  to  say  on  the  subject 
what,  we  may  ask,  is  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  ?  We  have  seen  that  in' 
order  to  discover  the  date  at  which  Shakespeare  wrote  this  play,  we  have  to  accept  at 
least  two  assumptions:  the  first  is,  that  in  Gonzalo’s  speech  there  is  a  reminiscence, 
at  least,  of  Flono’s  translation  of  Montaigne,— this  assumption  we  may  accept.  The 
other  assumption  by  editors  and  critics  is  one  to  which  I,  for  one,  find  it  difficult,  if 
not  impossible,  to  assent. 

It  is,  namely,  that  the  poets  of  the  Elizabethan  age,— and  not  the  small  poets  either, 
but  the  greatest  and  the  best,— were  continually  forsaking  the  lofty  themes  and  the  high 
aims  of  their  art,  to  gird,  and  snarl,  and  sneer  at  their  contemporaries  or  rivals.  And 
this,  too,  not  in  pnnt,  where  it  would  make  a  permanent  and  effective  impression,  but 
in  eeting  speeches  on  a  public  stage,  before  an  audience  whose  favour  they  desired 
to  win  by  gaining  and  keeping  its  attention  through  a  display  of  their  finest  skill 
As  a  jest's  prosperity  lies  in  the  ear  of  him  who  hears  it,  so  these  allusions,  granting 
that  they  exist,  depended  for  their  point  on  the  knowledge  of  the  hearers  Was 
Caliban  so  ever-present  in  the  thoughts  of  the  rude  audience  at  The  Blackfriars  that 
at  the  bare  allusion  to  a  ‘servant-monster,’  Caliban  was  instantly  recalled  and  ‘heed- 
‘  less  of  grammar,  they  all  cried,  “  That’s  him  ”  ?’  Unless  thus  readily  recognized, 
the  point  of  the  allusion  was  lost.  Where  was  the  sting  if  nobody  saw  it  ?  Jonson’s 
lofty  ideal  as  a  dramatic  poet,  and  his  honest  endeavours  to  elevate  the  stage,  are 
acknowledged  on  all  sides,  but  how  can  they  be  reconciled  with  a  constant  desertion 
of  them  in  mean,  petty  sneers  at  a  friend  whom  in  private  life  he  almost  idolised.  Be 
it  remembered  that  I  refer  only  to  the  Golden  Age  of  the  Elizabethan  drama.  What 
is  true  of  this  Age  may  not  apply  to  other  and  later  Ages. 

It  seems  to  me  that  in  thus  dealing  with  these  dramas,  and  in  the  assumption  of 
diese  allusions,  we  are  forgetting  not  only  the  conditions  of  the  Elizabethan  stage  and 
its  audiences,  but  even  of  human  nature  itself. 

.  LaStly’  1S  there  any  really  valuable  end  to  be  gained  by  an  investigation,  such  ai 
is  set  forth  in  the  preceding  pages,  into  the  years  when  Shakespeare  wrote  this  play? 
Is  there  any  possible  intellectual  gain  in  the  knowledge  of  the  exact  date  ?  Do  we 
thrill  with  pleasure  in  contemplating  the  year  1610  as  that  wherein  The  Tempest  was 
written  ?  Do  Ariel's  songs  sound  the  sweeter  for  it  ?  Are  we  to  be  thankful  to 
Shakespeare  for  having  written  his  plays  in  certain  years,  or  are  we  to  be  thankful  for 


306 


APPENDIX 


the  plays  themselves  ?  As  a  mere  intellectual  exercise  an  elaborate  investigation  may 
prove  beneficial ;  but  a  second-rate  drama,  by  an  insignificant  poet,  will  serve  this 
purpose  quite  as  well  as  The  Tempest,  while,  at  the  same  time,  we  shall  be  saved 
from  the  mortifying  delusion  that  in  pursuing  such  an  investigation  as  the  present  we 
are  really  learning  anything  of  lasting  advantage  to  us  in  regard  to  the  immortal 
plays  of  William  Shakespeare. 

To  recapitulate,  the  Date  of  The  Composition  of  The  Tempest  is  assigned  as 


follows : — 

By  Hunter . to  1596 

“  Knight . to  1602  or  1603 

“  Dyce,  Staunton . after  1603 

“  Elze . to  1604 

“  Verflanck . to  1609 

“  Heraud,  Fleay,  Furnivall . to  1610 

“  Malone,  Steevens,  Collier,  W.  W.  Lloyd,  Halliwell, 

Grant  White  (ed.  i),  Keightley,  Rev.  John  Hunter, 

W.  A.  Wright,  Stokes,  Hudson,  A.  W.  Ward,  D.  Morris  to  1610-1611 

“  Chalmers,  Tieck,  Garnett . to  1613 

“  Holt . to  1614 

“  Capell  (?),  Farmer,  Skottowe,  Campbell,  Bathurst, 

The  Cowden-Clarkes,  Phillpotts,  Grant  White  (ed. 


ii),  Deighton . a  late,  or  the  latest,  play. 

The  voice  of  the  majority  pronounces  in  favour  of  1610-1611.  Let  us  all,  there¬ 
fore,  acquiesce,  and  henceforth  be,  in  this  regard,  shut  up  in  measureless  content. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 

In  Theobald’s  edition  are  to  be  found  the  earliest  Explanatory  Notes  on  Shake¬ 
speare,  and  as  that  editor  lived  long  before  there  was  turned  on  all  Shakespearian 
questions  that  ‘  fierce  light  ’  which  has  since  *  beaten  upon  ’  them,  it  is  not  surprising 
that  what  are  mere  allusions  or  casual  remarks  by  Theobald  have  been,  since  his  day, 
expanded  into  far-reaching  discussions.  In  the  present  play  there  is  a  case  in  point. 
In  a  note  on  the  ‘  still  vex’d  Bermoothes  ’  Theobald  observed  that  the  Bermudas  ‘  are 
‘  likewise  call’d  Summer  Islands,  from  Sir  George  Summers,  who  in  1609  made  that 
‘voyage;  and,  viewing  them,  probably  first  brought  the  English  acquainted  with 
‘  them,  and  invited  them  afterwards  to  settle  a  Plantation  there.’  As  far  as  any  aid 
is  concerned  in  discovering  the  materials  used  by  Shakespeare  in  the  composition  of 
The  Tempest,  this  remark  lay  dormant  until  the  days  of  Malone. 

In  the  mean  time  Warburton  expressed  his  suspicion  that  The  Tempest  had  been 
taken  by  Shakespeare  ‘from  some  Italian  writer;  the  Unities  being  all  so  regularly 
‘observed,  which  no  dramatic  writers  but  the  Italians  observed  so  early  as  our 
Author’s  time;  and  which  Shakespeare  has  observed  nowhere  but  in  this  Play. 
Besides,  the  persons  of  the  Drama  are  all  Italians.'  Attracted  by  the  word  Necro¬ 
mancer,  Warburton  suggested  the  titles  of  two  Italian  Plays  which  he  had  found  in 
Riccoboni’s  Catalogue  :  H  Negromante  di  L.  Ariosto,  and  II  Negromante  Palliato  di 
Gio.  Angelo  Petrucci.  (See  V,  i,  339.) 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PL O T—A  URELI O  AND  ISABELLA  307 

Heath  and  Capell,  however, said  that  Warburton  was  ‘mistaken  in  both  of 
them  ’  Of  The  Tempest  itself,  Capell  says  (i,  68)  that  it  ‘has  rather  more  of  the 
novel  in  it  than  [in  other  plays] ;  but  no  one  has  yet  pretended  to  have  met  with 
1  such  a  novel ;  nor  anything  else  that  can  be  suppos’d  to  have  furnish’d  Shakespeare 
‘with  materials  for  writing  this  play;  the  fable  of  which  must  therefore  pass  for 

*  entlrcly  his  own  production,  till  the  contrary  can  be  made  to  appear  by  any  future 
‘  discovery.’ 

This  remark  of  Capell  is  as  true  now  as  when  it  was  uttered,  as  far  as  concerns 
any  play  or  novel  which  can  be  considered  as  the  one  sole  source  of  The  Tempest,  but 
it  has  long  ceased  to  be  correct,  as  it  is  supposed,  in  regard  to  ‘  the  materials  ’  which 
Shakespeare  gathered  from  various  sources  and  used  in  the  composition  of  the  play. 

Seeing,  therefore,  that  no  single  source  of  the  whole  play  has  yet  been  discovered, 
we  must  forego  the  pleasure  of  a  forthright,  and  be  restricted  to  meanders,  and  need 
not  be  surprised  if  we  find  as  great  a  maze  as  e’er  we  trod.  That  which  many  critics 
maintain  to  be  the  nearest  attempt  at  a  forthright  is  Jacob  Ayrer’s  Schone  Sidea,  which 
must  be  discussed  in  its  turn ;  in  the  mean  while,  however,  we  must  attempt  to  follow 
certain  devious  paths,  with  the  foreknowledge  that  each  can  carry  us  but  a  little  wiy 
and  will  inevitably  end  in  a  blind. 

Malone,  in  his  edition  of  1790,  gave  a  note  by  T.  Warton  to  the  effect  that  Col¬ 
lins,  the  poet,  had  said  that  the  plot  of  The  Tempest  was  derived  from  a  romance 
ealled  Aurelio  and  Isabella,  printed  in  Italian,  Spanish,  French,  and  English  in  1588, 
but  that  Collins  was  mistaken.  What  Warton  said  was  condensed  by  Malone,  and  as 
Malone’s  too  concise  statement  has  been  again  and  again  repeated,  the  impression  has 
been  apparently  received  by  some  editors  that  Collins  erred  in  thinking  that  he  had 
ever  even  seen  a  romance  called  Aurelio  and  Isabella  ;  whereas  the  impression  which 
Warton  means  to  convey  is  that  Collins,  whose  mind  was  then  darkened,  had  been 
mistaken  in  supposing  that  the  plot  of  that  romance  bore  any  resemblance  to  that  of 
The  Tempest.  Boswell  says  that  he  ‘  had  indeed  been  told  by  a  friend  that  he  had 
‘  some  years  ago  actually  perused  an  Italian  novel  which  answered  to  Mr  Collins’s 
‘  description.’  ‘  All  this  is  very  tantalizing,’  says  W.  A.  Wright,  in  the  Clarendon 
Edition;  but  I  strongly  suspect  that  Boswell’s  friend  misunderstood  Collins’s  error, 
and  thought  that  it  lay  in  the  existence  of  a  novel  called  Aurelio  and  Isabella,  and 
not  in  the  supposition  that  this  romance  contained  the  plot  of  The  Tempest.  Hence, 

I  think,  in  this  connection  we  may  forget  Boswell  and  his  friend,  especially  as  Col¬ 
lier  tells  us  that  he  had  ‘  turned  over  the  pages  of,  we  believe,  every  Italian  novelist, 

‘  anterior  to  the  age  of  Shakespeare,  in  hopes  of  finding  some  story  containing  traces 
‘  of  the  incidents  of  The  Tempest,  but  without  success.’  It  needs  but  a  glance  to  see 
that  Aurelio  and  Isabella  has  nothing  whatsoever  in  common  with  The  Tempest.  Its 
closing  words  reveal  its  drift :  ‘  Eynde  of  the  storey  of  Aurelio  and  of  Isabell,  in  the 
‘  whiche  is  disputede  the  whiche  geues  more  occasion  of  sinninge  the  man  vnto  the 
‘  woman,  or  the  woman  vnto  the  man.’  The  four  languages  are  printed  in  parallel 
columns;  the  English  is  translated,  I  think,  from  the  French,  although  apparently  the 
story  was  written  originally  in  Spanish,— a  MS  note  in  my  copy  by  ‘  The  Compiler  of 
‘  Bohn’s  Catalogue  ’  states  that  ‘  the  author  is  Juan  de  Flores.’  As  a  specimen  of  the 
English  we  read,  on  p.  A  3,  where  two  young  knights  conclude  to  conceal  from  each 
other  their  common  love:  ‘And  selfe  lyke  and  yfit  had  bene  possible  vnto  him  selfe 
‘  willingly,  euerye  one  of  them  shuld  haue  hidden  it.’  Perhaps,  after  all,  Collins 
was  right;  in  such  a  whirlwind  of  words  there  ought  to  be  the  germ  of  a  tempest. 


308 


APPENDIX 


Warton’s  unabridged  note,  which,  if  Malone  had  originally  printed  ipsissimis 
Verdis,  might  perhaps  have  saved  some  confusion,  i;.  as  follows  ( Hist,  of  Eng.  Poetry 
vol.  iii,  p.  477) :  ‘  Nor  do  I  know  with  what  propriety  the  romance  of  Aurelio  and 
‘  Isabella,  the  scene  of  which  is  laid  in  Scotland,  may  be  mentioned  here.  But  it  was 
‘printed  in  1586,  in  one  volume,  in  Italian,  French,  and  English.  And  again,  in 
‘  Italian,  Spanish,  French,  and  English  in  1588.  I  was  informed  by  the  late  Mr 
‘  Collins,  of  Chichester,  that  Shakespeare’s  Tempest,  for  which  no  origin  is  yet  as- 
‘  signed,  was  formed  on  this  favourite  romance.  But  although  this  information  has 
‘  not  proved  true  on  examination,  an  useful  conclusion  may  be  drawn  from  it,  that 

*  Shakespeare’s  story  is  somewhere  to  be  found  in  an  Italian  novel,  at  least  that  the 
‘  story  preceded  Shakespeare.  Mr  Collins  had  searched  this  subject  with  no  less 
‘  fidelity  than  judgement  and  industry;  but  his  memory  failing  in  his  last  calamitous 
‘  indisposition,  he  probably  gave  me  the  name  of  one  novel  for  another.  I  remember 

*  he  added  a  circumstance  which  may  lead  to  a  discovery  that  the  principal  character 
‘  of  the  romance,  answering  to  Shakespeare’s  Prospero,  was  a  chemical  necromancer, 
‘  who  had  bound  a  spirit  like  Ariel  to  obey  his  call  and  perform  his  services.  It  was 

*  a  common  pretence  of  the  dealers  in  the  occult  sciences  to  have  a  demon  at  com- 
‘  mand.  At  least  Aurelio,  or  Orelio,  was  probably  one  of  the  names  of  this  romance, 
‘  the  production  and  multiplication  of  gold  being  the  grand  object  of  alchemy.’ 

In  the  discussion  of  ‘  The  Date  of  Composition  ’  it  is  seen  how  important  a  part 
is  played  by  the  popular  interest  which  must  have  attended  (so  the  Commentators 
assume)  the  published  Accounts  of  the  expeditions  which  set  sail  from  England  for 
the  purpose  of  visiting  the  New  World,  or  of  colonising  Virginia,  from  the  days  of 
Raleigh,  in  1596,  down  to  the  year  1612.  With  this  popular  excitement,  or  with  the 
dates  of  these  various  expeditions,  by  whom  commanded,  or  by  what  fate  attended, 
we  are  not  here  concerned.  The  shipwreck  and  the  storm  in  Shakespeare’s  Tempest 
were  enough  to  direct  attention  to  accounts  of  voyages,  and  to  them  Theobald, 
Warburton,  Johnson,  Capell,  Farmer,  and  Steevens  referred,  and  used  them 
here  and  there  in  illustration  of  Shakespeare’s  text.  As  the  1  Bermoothes  ’  are  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  play,  it  was  natural  to  refer  to  the  historic  shipwreck  of  Sir  George 
Somers,  which  had  made  those  islands  famous.  But  none  of  these  editors  or  critics 
had  detected  in  the  accounts  of  this  shipwreck  any  clues  leading  to  The  Tempest  or 
expressed  any  suspicion  that  this  disastrous  storm  gave  rise  to  the  play.  One  of  the 
fullest  and  most  circumstantial  accounts  of  this  storm  is  given  in  a  pamphlet  entitled 
A  Discovery  of  the  Bermudas,  otherwise  called  the  Isle  of  Div els ;  by  Sir  Thomas 
Gates,  Sir  George  Somers,  and  Captain  Newport,  with  divers  others,  1610.  It  was 
written  by  Sil.  Jourdan,  and  Malone  tells  us  ( Var .  ’21,  vol.  xv,  p.  432)  that  it  was 
while  reading  this  narrative  and  Jourdan’s  account  of  the  disaster  that  befell  his 
Admiral  that  ‘  the  passage  in  The  Tempest,  in  which  an  account  is  given  of  the  dis- 
‘  persion  of  Alonso’s  fleet,  and  that  the  king’s  ship  was,  by  those  who  escaped  the 
‘  peril  of  the  storm,  supposed  to  be  lost,  as  well  as  the  peculiar  manner  in  which  that 
‘  sh‘P  is  sai(i  to  have  been  preserved,  struck  me  so  forcibly  that  I  thought  Shakespeare 
‘  must  have  had  the  incidents  attending  Somers’s  voyage  immediately  in  view  when 
‘  he  wrote  his  comedy.’ 

Ever  since  Malone’s  day,  his  opinion  in  regard  to  this  source  of  several  of  the 
incidents  in  The  Tempest  has  been  generally  accepted;  the  passages  in  Jourdan’s 
pamphlet  containing  these  sources  are  as  follows  (they  are  taken  from  Malone’s 
Account  of  The  Incidents  from  which  The  Title  and  Part  of  the  Story  of  Shake 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT-JOURDAN  309 

Spear/S  Tem-Pest  were  derived;  and  its  True  Date  ascertained ,  1808,  p.  22  et 
Beq.) :  r 

‘  Jourdan,  after  informing  his  reader  that  he  was  one  of  those  who  sailed  from  Eng. 
‘  land  with  Sir  George  Somers  and  Sir  Thomas  Gates  in  the  Sea-adventure  [the  name 
‘  of  their  ship,  «  of  about  300  ton  ”],  proceeds  to  relate  the  circumstances  of  the  storm 
‘  '''hlch  haPPened  on  the  25th  of  July,  1609.  They  were  bound  for  Virginia,  and  at 
*  that  time  in  thirty  degrees  north  latitude.  The  whole  crew,  amounting  to  one  hun- 
‘  dred  and  fifty  Pers°ns,  weary  with  pumping,  had  given  all  for  lost  and  began  to 
‘  drink  their  strong  waters,  and  to  take  leave  of  each  other  ’  [these  small  capi¬ 
tals  and  Italics  are  retained  from  Malone’s  reprint],  <  intending  to  commit  themselves 
‘  to  the  mercy  of  the  sea.  Sir  George  Somers,  who  had  sat  three  days  and  nights  on 
* the  pooP’  Wltk  no  fo°d  and  little  rest,  at  length  descried  land,  and  encouraged  them 
‘  (“ANY  FR0M  WEARINESS  having  fallen  asleep)  to  continue  at  the  pumps.  They 
‘  complied ;  and  fortunately  the  ship  was  driven  and  jammed  between  two  rocks, 

‘  “  fast  lodged  and  locked  for  further  budging.”  One  hundred  and  fifty  persons  got 
‘  ashore ;  and  by  means  of  their  boat  and  skiff,  for  this  was  “  half  a  mile  from  land,” 

* t!ley  saveii  sucl1  part  of  their  goods  and  provisions  as  the  water  had  not  spoiled,  all 
‘ the  tacklinS  and  much  of  the  iron  of  their  ship,  which  was  of  great  service  to  them 
‘  in  fitting  out  another  vessel  to  carry  them  to  Virginia. 

“  But  our  delivery,”  says  Jourdan,  “  was  not  more  strange  in  falling  so  oppor- 
“  tunely  and  happily  upon  the  land,  as  [than]  our  feeding  and  provision  was,  beyond 
“  our  hoPes>  and  a11  men’s  expectations,  most  admirable;  for  the  Islands  of  the  Ber¬ 
mudas,  as  every  man  knoweth  that  hath  heard  or  read  of  them,  were  never  inhab- 
“  ITED  an7  efiristian  or  heathen  people,  but  ever  esteemed  and  reputed  a  most 
“  prodigious  and  inchanted  place,  affording  nothing  but  gusts,  storms,  and  foul 
“weather;  which  made  every  navigator  and  mariner  to  avoid  them  as  Scylla  and 
“  Charybdis,  or  as  they  would  shunne  the  Divell  himself:  and  no  man  was  ever 
“  heard  to  make  for  this  place,  but  as,  against  their  wils,  they  have,  by  storms  and 
“  dangerousnesse  of  the  rocks  lying  seven  leagues  into  the  sea,  suffered  shipwracke. 

‘  did  we  ftnde  there  the  ayre  so  temperate  and  the  country  so  abound- 
“  antly  fruitfull  of  all  fit  necessaries  for  the  sustentation  and  preservation  of 
“  man’s  life,  that,  most  in  a  manner  of  all  our  provision  of  bread,  beere,  and  victuall, 

“  being  quite  spoyled  in  lying  long  drowned  in  salt  water,  notwithstanding  we 
“  were  tkere  for  tke  space  of  nine  months  (few  days  over  or  under)  we  were  not 
“  only  well  refreshed,  comforted,  and  with  good  satiety  contented,  but  out  of  the 
“  aboundance  thereof  provided  us  some  reasonable  quantity  and  proportion  of  pro- 
“  vision  to  carry  us  for  Virginia,  and  to  maintain  our  selves  and  that  company  we 

“  found  tllere: - wherefore  my  opinion  sincerely  of  this  island  is,  that  whereas  if 

“  hath  beene,  and  is  still  accounted  the  most  dangerous,  unfortunate,  and  forlome 
‘  PIace  of  tlie  world,  it  is  in  truth  the  richest,  healthfullest,  and  pleasing  land,  (the 
“  quantity  and  bignesse  thereof  considered,)  and  meerely  naturall,  as  ever  man  set 
“  foote  upon.” 

‘  °n  the  28th  of  July  they  landed.  They  all  then  began  to  search  for  provision. 

‘  In  half  an  hour,  Sir  Thomas  Gates  took  as  many  fishes  with  hookes  as  sufficed  the 
‘  whole  company  for  one  day.  When  a  man  stept  into  the  water,  the  fish  came  round 
‘  about  him.  “  These  fishes  were  very  fat  and  sweete,  and  of  that  proportion  and  big- 
“  uesse,  that  three  of  them  will  conveniently  lade  two  men  :  those  we  called  rock- 
“  FISH.  Besides,  there  are  such  aboundance  of  mullets,  that  with  a  seane  might  be 
“taken  at  one  draft  one  thousand  at  the  least;  and  infinite  store  of  pilchards.” 


3io 


APPENDIX 


‘  There  was  also  a  great  plenty  of  cray-fish.  The  country  afforded  such  an  abun- 
1  dance  of  hogs,  that  Sir  George  Somers  brought  in  thirty-two  at  one  time. 

“  There  is  fowle  in  great  aboundance  in  the  islands,  where  they  breed,  that  there 
£  hath  beene  taken  in  two  or  three  howres  a  thousand  at  the  least,  being  of  the  big- 
“  nesse  of  a  good  pigeon. 

“  Another  sea-fowle  there  is,  that  lyeth  in  little  holes  in  the  ground,  like  unto  a 
“  coney -hole,  and  are  in  great  numbers ;  exceeding  good  meat,  very  fat  and  sweet, 
“  (those  we  had  in  the  winter,)  and  their  egges  are  white,  and  of  that  bignesse,  that 
“they  are  not  to  be  knowne  from  hen-egges.” 

‘  The  birds  he  describes  as  exceedingly  tame  :  they  came  so  near  them,  that  they 
‘  killed  many  of  them  with  a  stick.  They  found  great  store  of  tortoises  or  turtles ; 
‘  prickled  pears  in  abundance,  which  continued  green  on  the  trees  all  the  year.  The 
‘  island,  he  adds,  was  supplied  with  many  mulberry  trees,  white  and  red,  palmits  and 
‘  cedar  trees ;  and  no  venemous  creature  was  found  there . 

‘  To  dissipate  the  gloom  and  despondency  occasioned  by  the  disaster  of  the  former 
‘  year,  and  to  shew  the  practicability  and  probable  advantages  of  settling  a  colony  in 
‘  Virginia,  were  the  principal  objects  of  the  pamphlet  published  under  the  authority 
‘  of  the  Council  in  the  latter  end  of  1610;  which  is  written  with  a  vigour,  animation, 
and  elegance  rarely  found  in  the  tracts  of  those  times.  Though  that  part  of  it  with 
which  alone  we  are  concerned,  or  in  other  words,  which  relates  to  Bermuda,  differs 
‘  but  little  in  substance  from  the  account  that  preceded  it,  relating  nearly  the  same 
‘  facts  and  events  in  much  better  language,  it  is  yet  necessary  to  be  briefly  noticed ; 
‘  because  Shakspeare  assuredly  would  not  neglect  to  peruse  this  authentick  narrative* 

*  It  has  indeed  an  additional  claim  to  our  attention ;  for  the  writer  of  this  tract,  hav- 
‘  ing  compared  the  disastrous  tempest  which  wrecked  Sir  George  Somers  and  his 
‘  associates  on  the  island  of  Bermuda,  and  their  subsequent  escape  from  the  immediate 
‘  destruction  which  threatened  them,  to  those  dramatick  compositions  in  which  similar 

*  changes  of  fortune  are  represented,  and  sorrow  and  mirth  artfully  intermingled,  per- 

*  haps  suggested  to  Shakspeare  the  thought  of  forming  these  adventures  into  a  play ; 
‘  and  to  him,  in  some  measure,  we  may  have  been  indebted  for  this  delightful 
‘  comedy. 

“True  it  is”  (says  this  Narrative),  “that  when  Sir  Thomas  Gates,  Sir  George 
“  Summers,  and  Captaine  Newport,  were  in  the  height  of  27,  and  the  24th  of  July, 
“  1609,  there  arose  such  a  storme,  as  if  Jonas  had  been  flying  unto  Tarshish :  the 
“  heavens  were  obscured,  and  made  an  Egyptian  night  of  three  daies  perpetuall 
“  horror ;  the  women  lamented ;  the  hearts  of  the  passengers  failed ;  the  experience 
“  of  the  sea-captaines  was  amased ;  the  skill  of  the  marriners  was  confounded ;  the 
“  ship  most  violently  leaked . 

“  These  islands  of  the  Bermudos  have  ever  been  accounted  as  an  inchaunted 
“  pile  of  rockes,  and  A  desert  inhabitation  for  divels  ;  but  all  the  fairies  of  the 
“  rocks  were  but  flocks  of  birds,  and  all  the  divels  that  haunted  the  woods  were  but 
“  heards  of  swine . 

“  Consider  all  these  things  together.  At  the  instant  of  neede  they  descryed 
“  land ;  halfe  an  hower  more  had  buried  their  memorial  in  the  sea.  If  they  had  fel 
“by  night,  what  expectation  of  light  from  an  uninhabited  desart?  They  fell  be- 
‘  twixt  a  laberinth  of  rockes,  which  they  conceive  are  mouldred  into  the  sea  by 

*  “  A  true  Declaration  of  the  estate  of  the  Colonie  in  Virginia,  with  a  confutation  of  such  scan¬ 
dalous  reports  as  have  tended  to  the  disgrace  of  so  worthy  an  enterprise.  Published  by  advice  and 
direction  of  the  Councell  of  Virginia."  4to,  1610. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— MALONE  3I1 

thunder  and  lightning.  This  was  not  Ariadne’s  threed,  but  the  direct  line  of 
“  God’s  providence.  If  it  had  not  beene  so  NEERE  land,  their  companie  or  provis- 
“ i0D  had  Perished  by  wateri  ^  they  had  not  found  hogs,  and  foule,  and  fish,  they 
“  had  Penshed  by  famine :  if  there  had  not  beene  fuell,  they  had  perished  by  want 
“  of  fire  lf  there  had  not  beene  timber,  they  could  not  have  transported  themselves 
^  Virginia,  but  must  have  beene  forgotten  for  ever. 

“  What  is  there  in  all  this  tragicall-comajdie,  that  should  discourage  us  with 
“  impossibility  of  the  enterprise  ?  when  of  all  the  fleete,  one  onely  ship  by  a  secret 
“  leaks  was  indangered.  and  yet  in  the  gulfe  of  despaire  was  so  graciously  preserved.” 

Thus  much  we  learn  from  Jourdan’s  Narrative  and  A  true  Declaration  ;  hereupon 
Malone  resumes  his  argument,  and  deems  it  of  importance  first  of  all  to  call  attention 
to  the  fact  that  during  <  a  great  part  of  the  year  1610  it  was  supposed  in  England  that 
* tbe  sb'P  containing  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  Virginia  and  Sir  George  Somers,  the 
‘  Admiral,  which  had  been  separated  from  the  fleet,  was  lost;  but  Shakespeare,  when 
he  wrote  his  play,  knew  that  it  was  safe  :  a  circumstance  ascertained  by  Jour- 
‘  dan’s  pamphlet,  and  that  issued  out  by  the  Council.’  ‘  It  now  remains,’  continues 
Malone,  ‘  to  shew  that  Shakspeare,  when  he  wrote  The  Tempest,  had  in  view  the 
‘  Particular  disaster  of  which  so  ample  an  account  has  been  given.  To  fix  as  nearly 
‘  as  possible  the  exact  time  of  his  writing  it,  I  have  said  that  he  knew  that  the  Admi- 
*  ral-slllP  was  safe ;  and  this  appears  by  the  following  lines,  which  manifestly  allude 
to  that  circumstance  and  several  others  attending  the  tempest  that  dispersed  Somers’s 
‘  fleet>  and  finally  wrecked  the  vessel  he  was  in,  on  one  of  the  Bermuda  islands.’ 

‘  “  Prospero.  Hast  thou,  spirit. 

Perform’d  to  point  the  tempest  that  I  bade  thee  ? 

Ariel.  To  every  article. 

I  boarded  the  king’s  ship;  now  on  the  beak, 

Now  in  the  waist,  the  deck,  in  every  cabin, 

I  flamed  amazement. - 

PRO.  Why,  that’s  my  spirit. 

But  was  not  this  nigh  shore  ? 

Ari.  Close  by,  my  master. 

Pro.  But  are  they,  Ariel,  safe  ? 

Ari.  Not  a  hair  perish’d  ; 

On  their  sustaining  garments  not  a  blemish, 

But  fresher  than  before ;  and,  as  thou  bad’st  me, 

In  troops  I  have  dispers’d  them  ’bout  the  isle. _ 

****** 

Pro.  Of  the  king’s  Ship, 

The  mariners,  say,  how  thou  hast  dispos’d, 

And  all  the  rest  o’  the  fleet  ? 

Ari.  Safely  in  harbour 

Is  the  king’s  ship;  in  the  deep  nook  .  . .  . , 

. there  she’s  hid; 

The  mariners  all  under  hatches  stow’d ; 

Whom  with  a  charm,  join'd  to  their  suffeT d  labour, 

I  have  left  asleep  :  and  for  the  rest  o'  the  fleet. 

Which  I  dispers'd,  they  all  have  met  again. 

And  are  upon  the  Mediterrrnean  flote 
Bound  sadly  home  for  Naples  ; 


312 


APPENDIX 


Supposing  that  they  saw  the  king’s  ship  wrhik’d, 

And  his  great  person  perish.” 

*  It  >s  obvious  that  we  have  here  a  covert  allusion  to  several  circumstances  minutely 
4  described  in  the  papers  quoted  in  the  preceding  pages ;  to  the  circumstance  of  the 
4  Admiral-ship  being  separated  from  the  rest  of  Somers’s  fleet,  and  after  a  tremendous 
4  tempest,  being  jammed  between  two  of  the  Bermuda  rocks,  and  “  fast  lodged  and 
4  “  lock’d,”  as  Jourdan  expresses  it,  “  for  further  budging  ” ;  to  the  disaster  happening 
very  near  the  shore,  and  not  a  single  person  having  perished ;  to  the  mariners  hav- 
4  ing  fallen  asleep  from  excessive  fatigue ;  to  the  dispersion  of  the  other  ships ;  to  the 
greater  part  of  them  meeting  again,  as  the  Council  of  the  Virginia  Company  have  it, 
4  “ln  consort  ” ;  and  to  all  those  who  were  thus  dispersed  and  thus  met  again,  being 
‘  “bound  sadly”  for  Virginia,  supposing  that  the  vessel  which  carried  their  Govern- 
4  our  was  lost,  and  that  his  “great  person  had  perished.”  In  various  other  passages 
in  the  second  Act, — where  the  preservation  of  Alonzo  and  his  companions  is  termed 
‘“miraculous”;  where  Stephano  asks,  “  have  we  devils  here?” — where  the  same 
4  Person  makes  a  very  free  use  of  his  bottle,  and  liberally  imparts  it  to  Caliban  and 
4  Trinculo ;  * — where  it  is  said,  “  though  this  island  seem  to  be  desert,  uninhabit¬ 
able  and  almost  inaccessible,  it  must  needs  be  of  subtle,  tender,  and  delicate  tem¬ 
perance”;  that  “the  AIR  breathes  most  sweetly,”  and  that  “here  is  everything 
4  advantageous  to  life  ” ;  we  find  evident  allusions  to  the  extraordinary  escape  of 
4  Somers  and  his  associates,  and  to  Jourdan’s  and  Gates’s  descriptions  of  Bermuda ; 

4  as>  in  the  first  scene  of  the  play,  the  circumstance  of  the  sailors  and  passengers  tak- 
4  ing  leave  of  each  other,  and  bidding  farewell  to  their  wives  and  children,  was  mani- 
4  festly  suggested  by  the  earlier  of  those  narratives.’ 

There  are  several  other  accounts  of  the  shipwreck  of  Sir  George  Somers,  and 
manifold  accounts  of  the  early  ‘plantation’  in  Virginia;  in  fact,  while  investigating 
the  possible  sources  of  The  Tempest,  it  seems  as  though  ‘  Pamphlets,’  and  ‘  Narra- 
4  tives>’  and  ‘  Repertories  ’  hurtle  in  the  air,  and  as  though  the  affairs,  the  misfortunes, 
and  the  experiences  of  the  Colonies  must  have  been,  in  London,  the  only  topic  of 
conversation.  Malone,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  foregoing  Essay  on  the  ‘  Date  of  Com- 
4  position,’  was  convinced  that  The  Tempest  was  written  in  1611.  Therefore,  of  all  the 
publications  from  which  Shakespeare  may  be  supposed  to  have  drawn  his  materials, 
Malone  could  use  those  alone  which  preceded  in  date  the  year  1611.  But  if  we  post¬ 
pone  the  date  of  the  play  to  the  only  year  in  which  we  have  the  only  positive  evi- 
dence  that  it  existed,  viz :  1613,  a  larger  and  a  better  account  of  Sir  George  Somers 
comes  within  our  ken,  between  which  and  the  phrases  and  allusions  in  The  Tempest 
there  are  parallelisms  quite  as  many,  perhaps,  in  number,  and  much  closer  in  charac¬ 
ter.  To  me  personally  there  appears  but  little  need  of  searching  for  any  printed  pub¬ 
lished  account  from  which  to  argue  that  Shakespeare  drew  his  materials.  Surely  he 
needed  no  printed  page ;  he  must  have  met  at  ‘  ordinaries  ’  many  a  man  with  personal 

* ‘In  the  original,  indeed,  strong  waters  are  drunk  on  shipboard  by  those  who  conceived  that 
the  ship  was  sinking ;  in  the  play,  Stephano’s  liquor  is  sack,  and  it  is  drunk  on  the  island  after  his 
escape.  But  Shakspeare,  when  he  borrowed  hints  from  others,  often  made  such  slight  changes. 
Here  the  change  is  easily  accounted  for :  that  pleasantry  in  which  he  delighted  could  not  with  any 
propriety  have  been  introduced  among  men  who  supposed  themselves  at  the  point  of  death. 

‘  In  like  manner,  in  the  original,  the  mariners  fall  asleep  from  excessive  labour,  and  the  hatches 
are  shut  down  during  the  storm;  but  in  the  play  no  mention  is  made  of  these  circumstances  in  the 
first  scene,  where  the  ship  is  represented  as  sinking ;  but  after  the  storm  has  ceased,  and  Alonzo  and 
several  >f  his  associates  are  safely  landed,  Ariel  informs  Prospero  that  the  mariners  are  safelv 
*towed  y 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—  S TEA  CHE  Y 


experiences  to  unfold,  and  with  such  a  man  Shakespeare  would  deal  pretty  much  I 
imagine,  as  Goethe,  according  to  Lowell,  dealt  with  scholars.  ‘  Did  Goethe  wish ’to 
,  Wnte  UP,  E  G/eek  theme  ?’  ^  Lowell>  ‘  He  drove  out  Herr  Bottiger,  for  example 
,  fm°ng,  thatfodder  delicious  t0  him  for  very  dryness,  that  sapless  Arcadia  of  scho¬ 
liasts,  let  him  graze,  ruminate,  and  go  through  all  other  needful  processes  of  the 
•antiquarian  organism,  then  got  him  quietly  into  a  corner  and  milked  him.’  I  believe 
that  Shakespeare  ‘milked’  everybody,  and  we  have  the  cream-ymantled  product  in 
his  plays.  Among  these  publications,  however,  was  one  which  was  too  late  to  suit 
Malone  «  theory,  but  between  which  and  The  Tempest  parallelisms  may  be  detected 
quite  as  distinctly  as  in  Jourdan’s  pamphlet,  or  in  A  true  Discovery.  Not  that  these 
parallelisms  amount  to  much  at  best;  to  me  they  seem  but  little  more  than  are  to  be 
expected  where  the  same  theme  is  treated  by  two  different  persons.  To  both  Halliwell 
and  Hunter  the  parallelisms  which  were  to  Malone  so  remarkable  and  so  convincing 
in  Jourdan’s  pamphlet,  were  either  commonplace  or  non-existent.  To  Dr  Garnett,  on 
the  other  hand, ‘it  seems  marvellous  that  any  one  should  disagree  with  Malone.’ 
The  publication,  however,  to  which  I  allude  was  written  by  William  Strachey  and 
possibly,  printed  in  1612. 


Moreover,  in  recent  times  a  closer  possible  connection  has  been  discovered  between 
this  Strachey  and  Shakespeare  than  was  known  to  Malone.  Meissner  (p.  73)  has 
unearthed  the  interesting  fact,  that  in  1612  Strachey  was  not  only  a  near  neighbor  of 
Shakespeare,  but  a  writer  of  poetry.  Prefixed  to  one  of  Strachey’s  pamphlets  on  The 
Colony  in  Virginea  Britannia,  dated  London,  1612,  there  is  a  Sonnet  addressed  to 
the  ‘  Councell  of  Virginea,’  followed  by  a  Preface  which  is  signed  ‘  From  my  lodging 
‘  in  the  blacke  Friers.  William  Strachey.’  To  these  facts  we  can  apply  the  universal 
solvent  which  subdues  everything  connected  with  Shakespeare’s  biography,  and  say, 
it  is  not  improbable  that  Shakespeare  and  Strachey  were  intimate  friends,  and  it  is 
not  improbable  that  of  all  men  it  was  Strachey  whom,  full  of  adventures,  of  ship¬ 
wrecks,  of  tempests,  of  travellers’  stories,  Shakespeare  ‘  got  quietly  in  the  corner  and 
*  milked.’ 


Whether  or  not  a  pamphlet  by  Strachey  dated  1612,  whereof  Malone  gives  merely 
the  title  (  Var.  ’21,  vol.  xv,  p.  390),  is  identical  with  that  printed  in  Purchas,  I  do  not 
know;  the  latter  is  the  only  one  accessible  to  me.  Under  any  circumstances,  this 
present  discussion  would  be  incomplete  without  some  extracts,  at  least,  from  the 
account  of  this  notable  shipwreck,  by  William  Strachey,  whose  learned  representative 
in  this  generation  has  enriched  the  comments  on  this  play  of  The  Tempest,  in  the  fore¬ 
going  pages. 

The  account  from  which  the  following  extracts  are  taken,  is  in  Purchas,  Part  IV, 
lib.  ix,  ch.  6,  and  is  entitled  :  ‘A  true  reportory  of  the  wracke,  and  redemption  of  Sir 
Thomas  Gates  Knight;  vpon,  and  from  the  Hands  of  the  Bermudas  :  his  coming  to 
Virginia,  and  the  estate  of  that  Colonie  then,  and  after,  vnder  the  gouernment  of  the 
Lord  La  Warre,  July  15.  1610.  written  by  William  Strachy,  Esquire .’  The  first 
section  tells  of  A  most  dreadfull  Tempest  (the  manifold  deaths  whereof  are  here  to  the 
life  described )  their  wracke  on  Bermuda,  and  the  description  of  those  Hands.  Having 
started  from  Plymouth  on  the  2nd  of  June,  1609,  all  went  well  until  ‘on  S.  lames  his 
‘  day,  Iuly  24.  being  Monday  (preparing  for  no  lesse  all  the  blacke  night  before)  the 
‘  cLudes  gathering  thicke  vpon  vs,  and  the  windes  singing,  and  whistling  most 
‘  vnusually*  a  dreadfull  storme  and  hideous  began  to  blow  from  out  the  North-east, 

‘  which  swelling,  and  roaring  as  it  were  by  fits,  some  houres  with  more  violence  then 


*  To  save  space  I  do  not  always  mark  the  breaks  'n  these  extracts.— Ed. 


314 


APPENDIX 


‘  others,  at  length  did  beate  all  light  from  heauen ;  which  like  an  hell  of  darknesse 
‘  turned  blacke  vpon  vs,  so  much  the  more  fuller  of  horror,  as  in  such  cases  horror  and 
‘  fear  vse  to  ouerrunne  the  troubled,  and  ouermastered  sences  of  all,  which  (taken  vp 

<  with  amazement)  the  eares  lay  so  sensible  to  the  terrible  cries,  and  murmurs  of  the 

<  windes,  and  distraction  of  our  Company,  as  who  was  most  armed,  and  best  prepared 

1  was  not  a  little  shaken . Sometimes  (the  storm)  strikes  in  our  ship  amongst 

« women,  and  passengers,  not  vsed  to  such  burly  and  discomforts,  made  vs  looke  one 

<  vpon  the  other  with  troubled  hearts,  and  panting  bosomes :  our  clamours  dround  in  the 

<  windes,  and  the  windes  in  thunder.  Prayers  might  well  be  in  the  heart  and  lips, 

‘  but  drowned  in  the  outcries  of  the  Officers . In  which,  the  Sea  swelled  aboue 

« the  Clouds,  and  gaue  battell  vnto  Heauen . There  was  not  a  moment  in  which 

•  the  sodaine  splitting  ....  of  the  shippe  was  not  expected . During  all  this 

'  time,  the  heauens  look’d  so  black  vpon  vs,  that  it  was  not  possible  the  eleuation  of  the 
«  Pole  might  be  obserued . Onely  vpon  the  thursday  night  Sir  George  Summers 

•  being  vpon  the  watch,  had  an  apparition  of  a  little  round  light,  like  a  faint  starre, 
‘  trembling,  and  streaming  along  with  a  sparkling  blaze,  halfe  the  height  vpon  the 

<  Maine  Mast,  and  shooting  sometimes  from  Shroud  to  Shroud,  tempting  to  settle  as  it 

<  Were  Vp0n  any  of  the  foure  Shrouds :  and  for  three  or  foure  houres  together,  oi 

<  rather  more,  halfe  the  night  it  kept  with  vs,  running  sometimes  along  the  Maine- 
« yard  to  the  very  end,  and  then  returning.  At  which  Sir  George  Summers  called 

diuers  about  him,  and  shewed  them  the  same,  who  obserued  it  with  much  wonder 
and  carefullnesse :  but  vpon  a  sodaine,  towards  the  morning  watch,  they  lost  sight 
«  of  it,  and  knew  not  what  way  it  made.  The  superstitious  Sea-men  make  many  con¬ 
structions  of  this  Sea-fire,  which  neuertheless  is  vsual  in  stormes :  the  same  (it  may 

‘  be)  which  the  Grecians  were  wont  to  call  Castor  and  Pollux . The  Italians  call 

it  (a  sacred  Body )  Corpo  sancto  :  the  Spaniards  call  it  Saint  Elmo . We  threw 

ouer-boord  much  luggage  ....  and  staued  many  a  Butt  of  Beere,  Hogsheads  of 
«  Oyle,  Syder,  Wine  and  Vinegar . It  being  now  the  fourth  morning,  it  wanted 

<  little,  to  haue  shut  vp  hatches,  and  commending  our  sinfull  soules  to  God,  committed 
‘  the  Shippe  to  the  mercy  of  the  Sea  ....  but  see  the  goodnesse  and  sweet  introduc- 

<  tion  of  better  hope,  by  our  merciful  God  giuen  vnto  vs.  Sir  George  Summers,  when 

‘  no  man  dreamed  of  such  happinesse,  had  discouered,  and  cried  Land . Hauing 

« no  hope  to  saue  [the  ship]  by  coming  to  an  anker,  we  were  inforced  to  runne  her 

«  ashoare,  as  neere  the  land  as  we  could . We  found  it  to  be  the  dangerous  and 

«  dreaded  Hand  or  rather  Hands  of  the  Bermuda  ....  which  be  so  terrible  to  all  that 

<  ever  touched  on  them,  and  such  tempests,  thunders  and  other  fearefull  obiects  are 

<  seene  and  heard  about  them,  that  they  be  called  commonly  The  Deuils  Hands,  and 
i  are  feared  and  auoyded  of  all  sea  trauellers  aliue,  aboue  any  other  place  in  the 

<  world . It  being  counted  of  most,  that  they  can  be  no  habitation  for  Men,  but 

<  rather  giuen  ouer  to  Deuils  and  wicked  Spirits . There  is  not  through  the 

«  whole  Hands,  either  Champion  ground,  Valleys,  or  fresh  Riuers.  They  are  full  of 
‘  Shawes  of  goodly  Cedar  ....  the  Berries  whereof,  our  men  seething,  straining,  and 
‘  letting  stand  some  three  or  foure  daies,  made  a  kind  of  pleasant  drinke . Sure 

it  is,  that  there  are  no  Riuers  nor  running  Springs  of  fresh  water  to  bee  found  vpon 
any  of  them :  when  we  came  first  we  digged  and  found  certaine  gushings  and  soft 

<  bublings . True  it  is,  for  Fish  in  euerie  Coue  and  Creeke  wee  found  Snaules, 

«  and  Skulles  in  abundance . A  kinde  of  webbe-footed  Fowle  there  is,  of  the 

<  bignesse  of  an  English  greene  Plouer,  or  Sea-Meawe,  ....  these  gather  themselues 

•  together  and  breed  in  these  Hands  which  are  high  ....  there  in  the  ground  they 


SOURCE  OF  THE  FLO T—INCHANTED  ISLAND  315, 

1  *71  ^  B,TWeS’  Hke  C°nyeS  in  a  Warren>  •  •  •  •  they  were  a  good  and  well 
re  ished  Fowle,  fat  and  full  as  a  Partridge.  There  are  two  or  three  Hands  full  of 

,  BUfrSl.-  •  •  WhiGh  BirdS  f°r  thdr  bIindnesse  (*»  *ey  see  weakly  in  the 
ay)  and  for  their  cry  and  whooting,  wee  called  the  Sea  Owle ;  they  will  bite 

,  CrUdly  Jlth  **  Cr00ked  Bills . Some  dangerous  and  secret  discontents 

nounshed  amongst  vs,  had  like  to  haue  bin  the  parents  of  bloudy  issues  and  mis- 

,  C  IeleS;  '  •  ;  •  what  hath  a  more  adamantine  power  to  draw  vnto  it  the  consent  and 
attraction  of  the  idle,  vntoward,  and  wretched  number  of  the  many,  then  liberty 
‘and  fulnesse  of  sensuality?’ 

In  the  foregoing  extracts  I  have  given  all  the  passages  from  Strachey’s  Repertory 
which  have  seemed  to  me  to  contain  any  allusions  or  phraseology  which  can  be  paral¬ 
leled  in  The  Tempest,  and,  if  the  date  of  that  play’s  composition  be  1613,  which  as 
we  have  seen,  is  our  only  assured  date,  it  is  possible  that  they  all  antedated  It. 


In  his  Farther  Particulars,  1S39,  Collier  brings  forward  a  Ballad  which  at  one 
me  he  believed  to  be  the  long-sought  source  of  The  Tempest,  but  afterwards,  as  he 
sa>-s  (P;  54),  be  became  ‘satisfied  that  it  is  a  later  production,  and  that  the  writer  was 
‘  acquainted  with  The  Tempest,  though  he  does  not  employ  a  single  name  found  in  it 
My  conjecture  is  that  it  was  published  (if  published  at  all,  of  which  we  have  no 
evidence  but  probability)  during  the  period  when  the  theatres  were  closed  (viz.  from 
‘  about  1642  to  1660),  in  order,  by  putting  the  discontinued  dramas  into  easy  rhyme 
to  give  the  public  some  species  of  amusement  founded  on  old  plays,  although  the’ 
‘  seventy  of  the  Puritans  in  those  times  would  not  allow  of  theatrical  entertainments 
‘  Hence  Jordan’s  ballads,  derived  from  The  Mer.  of  Ven.  &c.  [I  have  gone  over  this 
‘  ballad  with  the  Rev.  Mr  Dyce  and  he]  concurs  with  me  in  thinking  that  it  is  poste- 

‘nor  to  Shakespeare’s  Tempest . There  are  such  strong  general  resemblances 

that  I  feel  assured  that  the  writer  of  the  ballad  must  have  known,  if  he  did  not  in 
‘  part  use,  the  play.  The  initials  at  the  end  of  the  MS  led  me,  when  I  first  saw  it  to 
‘  conjecture  that  Robert  Greene,  who  died  in  1592,  might  be  the  author  of  it,  bu’t  it 
‘ 13  decidedl7  of  ^  modem  a  cast  and  structure  for  him,  and,  as  I  before  observed 

‘  my  conjecture  is  that  it  was  written  about  the  period  of  the  Protectorate . It  is 

‘  inserted  in  the  MS  volume  I  have  had  for  years  in  my  possession,  the  particular  con- 

‘  tents  of  which  may  be  seen  in  my  letter  to  the  Rev.  A.  Dyce . Mr  Douce  called 

‘  it  “  one  of  the  most  beautiful  ballads  he  had  ever  read.” _ It  runs  thus  : 


THE  INCHANTED  ISLAND. 

1  In  Aragon  there  livde  a  king, 

Who  had  a  daughter  sweete  as  Spring, 
A  little  playfull  childe. 

He  lovde  his  studie  and  his  booke  ; 

The  toyles  of  state  he  could  not  brooke, 
Of  temper  still  and  milde. 


He  left  them  to  his  Brother’s  care, 

Who  soone  usurpde  the  throne  unware. 
And  turned  his  Brother  forth. 

The  studious  king  Geraldo  hight 
His  daughter  Ida,  deare  as  sight 
To  him  who  knew  her  worth. 


3i6 


APPENDIX 


The  Brother  who  usurpd  the  throne 
Was  by  the  name  Benormo  knowne, 

Of  cruell  hart  and  bolde  : 

He  turned  his  niece  and  Brother  forth 
To  wander  east,  west,  north,  or  south,* 

All  in  the  winter  colde. 

Long  time  he  joumeyd  up  and  downe 
The  head  all  bare  that  wore  a  crowne, 

And  Ida  in  his  hand, 

Till  that  they  reachd  the  broad  sea  side, 

Where  marchant  ships  at  anchor  ride 
From  many  a  distant  land. 

Imbarking,  then,  in  one  of  these, 

They  were,  by  force  of  windes  and  sea* 

Driven  wide  for  many  a  mile ; 

Till  at  the  last  they  shelter  found, 

The  master  and  his  men  all  drownd, 

In  the  inchanted  Isle. 

Geraldo  and  his  daughter  faire, 

The  onelie  two  that  landed  there, 

Were  savde  by  myracle ; 

And,  sooth  to  say,  in  dangerous  houre 
He  had  some  more  then  human  powre, 

As  seemeth  by  what  befell. 

He  brought  with  him  a  magicke  booke 
Whereon  his  eye  did  oft  times  looke, 

That  wrought  him  wonders  great. 

A  magicke  staffe  he  had  alsoe, 

That  angrie  fiendes  compelld  to  goe 
To  doe  his  bidding  straight. 

\ 

The  spirites  of  the  earth  and  aire, 

Unseene,  yet  fleeting  every  where, 

To  crosse  him  could  not  chuse. 

All  this  by  studie  he  had  gaind 
While  he  in  Arragon  remaind, 

But  never  thought  to  use. 

When  landed  on  thinchanted  Isle 
His  little  Ida’s  morning  smile 
Made  him  forgett  his  woe : 

And  thus  within  a  caverne  dreare 
They  livde  for  many  a  yeare  ifere, 

For  heaven  had  wiL’d  it  soe. 

*  for  tne  rnyme  we  snould  read  ‘  south  or  north  and  for  the  sense  -t  answers  equally  well.  The 
transcriber  was  not  a  very  accurate  penman. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—  INCHAN  TED  INLAND 


317 


His  blacke  lockes  turnd  all  silver  gray 
But  ever  time  be  wore  away, 

To  teach  his  childe  intent; 

And  as  she  into  beautie  grewe, 

In  knowledge  she  advanced  to[o], 

As  wise  as  innocent. 

Most  lovelie  was  she  to  beholde ; 

Her  haire  was  like  to  sunn  litt  golde, 
As  blue  as  heaven  her  eye. 

When  she  was  in  her  fifteenth  yeere 
Her  daintie  forme  was  like  the  deere, 
Sportfull  with  majestie. 

The  Demons  who  the  land  had  held, 
By  might  of  magicke  he  expelld, 

Save  such  as  he  did  neede ; 

And  servaunts  of  the  ayre  he  kept, 

To  watch  ore  Ida,  when  she  slept, 

And  on  swift  message  speede. 

And  all  this  while  in  Arragon 
Benormo  raignde,  who  had  a  son 
Now  growne  to  man’s  estate : 

His  sire  in  all  things  most  unlike  ; 

Of  courage  tried,  yet  slow  to  strike, 

Not  turning  love  to  hate. 

Alfonso  was  the  Princes  name. 

It  chanced  posthaste  a  message  came 
Just  then  to  Aragon, 

From  Sicilie  to  son  and  sire, 

Which  did  their  presence  soone  desire 
To  see  Sicilia’s  son 

Fast  tyed  in  the  nuptiall  band 
To  Naples  daughters  lovelie  hand, 

And  they  to  goe  consent. 

Soe  in  a  galley  on  a  day 
To  Sicilie  they  tooke  their  way, 

Thither  to  saile  intent. 

Geraldo  by  his  magicke  art 
Knew  even  the  houre  of  their  depart 
For  distant  Sicilie ; 

He  knew  alsoe  that  they  must  passe 
Neare  to  the  isle  whereon  he  was, 

And  that  revenge  was  nie. 


318 


APPENDIX 


He  callde  his  spirites  of  the  aire, 
Commanding  them  a  storme  prepare 
To  cast  them  on  that  shore. 

The  gallant  barke  came  sailing  on 
With  silken  sailes  from  Arragon, 

And  manie  a  guilded  ore. 

But  gilded  ore  and  silken  saile 
Might  not  against  the  storme  prevaile : 

The  windes  blew  hie  and  loude. 

The  sailes  were  rent,  the  ores  were  brolsa 
The  ship  was  split  by  lightning  stroke 
That  burst  from  angrie  cloude. 

But  such  Geraldoe’s  powre  that  day, 
That  though  the  ship  was  cast  away, 

Of  all  the  crue  not  one, 

Not  even  the  shipboy,  then  was  drownd, 
And  olde  Benormo  on  drie  ground 
Imbracde  his  dearest  son. 

About  the  isle  they  wanderd  long, 

For  still  some  spirite  led  them  wrong, 
Till  they  were  wearie  growne ; 

Then  came  to  olde  Geraldoes  cell. 

Where  he  and  lovelie  Ida  dwell : 

Though  seene  they  were  not  knowne. 

Much  marvelld  they  in  such  a  place 
To  see  an  Eremit’s  wringled  face, 

More  at  the  maid  they  start : 

As  soone  as  did  Alfonso  see 
Ida  so  beautifull,  but  hee 
Felt  love  within  his  hart. 

Benormo  heard  with  griefe  and  shame 
Geraldo  call  him  by  his  name, 

His  brothers  voyce  well  knowne. 

Upon  his  aged  knees  he  fell, 

And  wept  that  he  did  ere  rebell 
Against  his  brother’s  throne. 

Brother,  he  cried,  forgive  my  crime ! 

I  sweare,  since  that  u[n]happie  time, 

I  have  not  tasted  peace. 

Returne  and  take  agaiue  your  crowne 
Which  at  your  feete  I  will  lay  downe. 
And  soe  our  jarres  surcease. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—INCHANTED  ISLAND 


319 


Never,  Giraldo  said,  will  I 
Ascend  that  seat  of  soverainty , 

But  I  all  wrongs  forgett. 

I  have  a  daughter,  you  a  son. 

And  they  shall  raigne  ore  Aragon, 

And  on  my  throne  be  sett. 

My  head  is  all  too  olde  to  beare 

The  weight  of  crownes,  and  kingdomes  care; 

Peace  in  my  bookes  I  finde. 

Gold  crownes  become  not  silver  lockes, 

Like  sunbeames  upon  whitend  rockes, 

They  mocke  the  tranquill  minde. 

Benormo,  worne  with  cares  of  state, 

Which  wordlie  sorrowes  aye  create, 

Sawe  the  advice  was  good. 

The  tide  of  love  betwixt  the  paire, 

Alfonso  young  and  Ida  faire, 

Had  suddaine  reacht  the  flood. 

A  galley,  too,  that  was  sent  out 
From  Sicilie,  in  feare  and  doubt, 

As  having  heard  the  wracke, 

Arrivde  at  the  inchanted  Isle, 

And  tooke  them  all  in  little  while 
Unto  Messina  backe. 

But  ere  his  leave  Geraldo  tooke 
Of  the  strange  isle,  he  burnt  his  booke, 

And  broke  his  magicke  wand. 

His  arte  forbid  he  aye  forswore, 

Never  to  deale  in  magicke  more 
The  while  the  earth  should  stand. 

From  that  daie  forth  the  Isle  has  beene 
By  wandering  sailors  never  seene. 

Some  say  ’tis  buryed  deepe 
Beneath  the  sea,  which  breakes  and  rores 
Above  its  savage  rockie  shores, 

Nor  ere  is  knowne  to  sleepe. 

In  Sicilie  the  paire  was  wed, 

To  Arragon  there  after  sped, 

With  fathers  who  them  blessd. 

Alfonso  rulde  for  many  a  yeare  : 

His  people  lovde  him  farre  and  neare, 

But  Ida  lovde  him  best. 


Finis. 


R.  G. 


APPENDIX 


320 

Collier  hereupon  again  discusses  at  some  length  the  arguments  for  and  against  the 
antiquity  of  the  Ballad,  and  speculates  on  its  origin,  but  as  it  is  acknowledged  by 
him,  and  now  believed  by  all,  to  be  later  than  The  Tempest ,  it  is  not  worth  while  to 
quote  him  further. 

Hunter  ( Disquisition ,  &c.)  cannot  agree  with  Malone  and  others  in  the  belief 
that  Shakespeare’s  tempest  was  a  reminiscence  of  the  accounts  of  Somers’s  ship¬ 
wreck,  or  that  there  was  any  great  similarity  between  them.  ‘  I  now  ask,’  he  says 
(p.  34)  >  ‘  any  one  to  look  at  the  laboured  argument  of  the  two  commentators  [Chal- 
‘  mers  and  Malone],  and  to  compare  the  passages  from  Jourdan’s  work,  which  they 
‘  place  in  apposition  with  passages  in  the  first  scene  of  this  play,  and  then  to  say 
‘  whether  there  is  anything  beyond  that  similarity  which  must  always  exist  when  the 
‘  subject  is  a  storm  at  sea  and  the  wreck  of  a  vessel  on  the  rocky  shore  of  an  island, 
‘  whether  the  subject  be  treated  in  a  work  of  imagination,  like  The  Tempest,  or  in 
‘  such  a  pedestrian  narrative  of  real  occurrences  as  that  of  Jourdan.  Mr  Malone  has 
‘  given  the  argument  all  the  advantage  it  could  derive  from  the  artful  aid  of  capitals 
‘  and  italics,  but  he  seems  to  me  to  fail  in  showing  coincidence  in  anything,  except 
‘  what  has  been  common  to  all  storms  and  all  disastrous  shipwrecks  from  the  begin- 
‘  ning  of  the  world.  For  a  critical  or  unusual  circumstance,  common  to  both,  we  look 

*  in  vain ;  nor  is  a  verbal  conformity,  which  might  betray  that  the  Poet  had  recently 
‘  read  the  narrative  of  Jourdan,  anywhere  to  be  found.  No  parallelism  of  numerous 
‘  particulars,  each  of  common  occurrence.  The  parallelism  on  which  much  reliance 
‘  is  placed,  of  the  safety,  at  last,  of  the  Admiral,  and  the  safety  also  of  Alonso,  fails 
‘  in  this,  that  the  escape  of  Alonso  was  a  necessary  part  of  the  story.  I  would  deal 
<  fairly  with  commentators  from  whose  labours  I  have  received  so  much  pleasure  and 
‘  instruction,  and  quote,  if  I  saw  anything  that  could  be  quoted  with  effect.  But  I 
‘  find  no  such  passage. — Besides,  there  is  in  the  literature  of  the  age  of  Shakespeare 
‘  a  description  of  another  storm  at  sea,  in  which  a  vessel,  having  a  king  and  prince 
‘  on  board,  is  wrecked,  by  a  writer  whose  work  was  more  likely  to  catch  the  atten- 
‘  tion  of  Shakespeare,  and  to  fasten  on  his  imagination,  than  Jourdan’s.  This  descrip- 
‘  tion  is  by  the  pen  of  no  less  celebrated  a  poet  than  Ariosto,  who  of  all  the  Italian 
‘  poets  was  best  known  in  England  in  the  age  of  Elizabeth,  and  who  had,  of  all  the 

‘  Italian  poets,  the  greatest  influence  on  our  literature . The  Orlando,  translated 

‘  by  Harington,  was  published  in  1591.  Shall  we  then  wonder  if  we  find  Shake- 
‘  speare  a  reader  of  Ariosto,  and  indebted  to  him  occasionally  for  an  incident  or  an 
‘  expression  ?  .  .  .  .  The  Tempest  itself  contains  the  most  manifest  evidence  that  he 
‘  read  a  translation  of  the  Latin  of  Ovid  and  of  the  French  of  Montaigne.  I  shall 

*  show  you  that  it  contains  proof  that  he  read  this  translation  of  Ariosto.  Whether 
‘  he  were  necessitated  to  do  so,  or  whether  he  did  it  from  choice,  is  a  question  which 
‘  it  seems  not  to  have  entered  the  mind  of  the  Master  of  Emmanuel  [Dr  Farmer],  to 

*  think  it  necessary  to  ask. 

‘  [P.  38.]  The  storm  described  by  Ariosto  is  the  principal  incident  of  the  forty- 
‘  first  canto  of  the  Orlando.  Shakespeare’s  obligations  to  it  have  never  before  been 
1  suggested.  Of  course,  there  must  be  in  Ariosto,  as  there  are  also  in  Shakespeare, 
incidents  and  circumstances  which  are  common  to  all  storms.  But  what  I  contend 
for  is  this :  that  beside  those  incidents  and  circumstances,  there  are  some  which  are 
sufficiently  critical  and  peculiar,  to  lead  to  the  inference  that  there  was  suggestion 
on  the  part  of  the  earlier  poet,  and  imitation  (a  just  and  proper  imitation)  on  the 
part  of  Shakespeare.  Harington’s  translation  is  not  a  very  common  book,  so  tint 
the  whole  passage  may  bear  transcription : 


321 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT-ARIOSTO 

“  A  friendly  gale  at  first  their  journey  fitted, 

And  bore  them  from  the  shore  full  far  away ; 

But  afterward,  within  a  little  season, 

The  wind  discover’d  his  deceit  and  treason. 

9 

“  First  from  the  poop  it  changed  to  the  side, 

Then  to  the  prore  at  last  it  turned  round ; 

In  one  place  long  it  never  would  abide, 

Which  doth  the  pilot’s  wit  and  skill  confound. 

The  surging  waves  swell  still  in  higher  pride, 

While  Proteus’  flock  did  more  and  more  abound, 

And  seem  to  him  as  many  deaths  to  threaten 
As  that  ships  sides  with  divers  waves  are  beaten. 

10 

’*  N°w  in  their  face  the  wind,  straight  in  their  back, 

And  forward  this,  and  backward  that  it  blows ; 

Then  on  the  side  it  makes  the  ship  to  crack : 

Among  the  mariners  confusion  grows  : 

The  master  ruin  doubts  and  present  wrack, 

For  none  his  will,  nor  none  his  meaning  knows : 

To  whistle,  beckon,  cry,  it  naught  avails, 

Sometime  to  strike,  sometime  to  turn  their  sails. 

11 

“  But  none  there  was  could  hear,  nor  see,  nor  mark. 

Their  ears  so  stopt,  so  dazzled  were  their  eyes, 

With  weather  so  tempestuous  and  dark, 

And  black  thick  clouds  that  with  the  storm  did  rise, 
From  whence  sometimes  great  ghastly  flames  did  spark 
And  thunder-claps  that  seem’d  to  rend  the  skies, 
Which  made  them  in  a  manner  deaf  and  blind, 

That  no  man  understood  the  master’s  mind. 

12 

“  Nor  less,  nor  much  less  fearful,  is  the  sound 
The  cruel  tempest  in  the  tackle  makes ; 

Yet  each  one  for  himself  some  business  found. 

And  to  some  special  office  him  betakes  : 

One  this  untied,  another  that  hath  bound; 

He  the  main  bowling  now  restrains,  now  slacks, 

Some  take  an  oar,  some  at  the  pump  take  pain, 

And  pour  the  sea  into  the  sea  again. 

13 

“  Behold,  a  horrible  and  hideous  blast 

That  Boreas  from  his  frozen  lips  doth  send. 

Doth  backward  force  the  sail  against  the  mast. 

And  makes  the  waves  unto  the  skies  ascend. 


si 


322 


APPENDIX 


Then  brake  their  oars,  and  rudder  eke,  at  last 
Now  nothing  left  from  tempest  to  defend ; 

So  that  the  ship  was  sway’d  now  quite  aside, 

And  to  the  waves  laid  ope  her  naked  side. 

14 

“  Then  all  aside  the  staggering  ship  did  reel. 

For  one  side  quite  beneath  the  water  lay, 

And  on  the  t’other  side  the  very  keel 
Above  the  water  clear  discern  you  may. 

Then  thought  they  all  hope  past,  and  down  toev  kneel, 
And  unto  God  to  take  their  souls  did  pray : 

Worse  danger  grew  than  this  when  this  was  past, 

By  means  the  ship  gan  after  leak  so  fast. 

15 

The  wind,  the  waves,  to  them  no  respite  gave, 

But  ready  every  hour  to  overthrow  them  : 

Oft  they  were  hoist  so  high  upon  the  wave, 

They  thought  the  middle  region  was  below  them 
Ofttimes  so  slow  the  same  their  vessel  drave, 

As  though  that  Charon  there  his  boat  would  shew  them ; 
Scant  had  they  time  and  power  to  fetch  their  breath, 

All  things  did  threaten  them  so  present  death. 

16 

4  Thus  all  that  night  they  could  have  no  release; 

But  when  the  morning  somewhat  nearer  drew. 

And  that  by  course  the  furious  wind  should  cease 
(A  strange  mishap),  the  wind  then  fiercer  grew; 

And  while  their  troubles  more  and  more  increase, 
Behold  a  rock  stood  plainly  in  their  view, 

And  right  upon  the  same  the  spiteful  blast 
Bare  them  perforce,  which  made  them  all  aghast. 

17 

4  Then  did  the  master  by  all  means  essay 
To  steer  out  roomer,  or  to  keep  aloof, 

Or,  at  the  least,  to  strike  sails  if  they  may, 

As  in  such  danger  was  for  their  behoof. 

But  now  the  wind  did  bear  so  great  a  sway, 

His  enterprises  had  but  little  proof; 

At  last,  with  striving,  yard  and  all  was  tom, 

And  part  thereof  into  the  sea  was  borne. 

18 

41  Then  each  man  saw  all  hope  of  safety  past, 

No  means  there  was  the  vessel  to  direct : 

No  help  there  was  but  all  away  are  cast. 

Wherefore  their  common  safety  they  neglect; 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HUNTER 


323 


But  out  they  get  the  ship-boat,  and  in  haste 
Each  man  therein  his  life  strives  to  protect ; 

Of  king  nor  prince  no  man  takes  heed  nor  note, 

But  well  was  he  could  get  him  in  the  boat.” 

L Hereupon  Hunter  prints  the  First  Scene  of  The  Tempest  and  then  resumes:] 
‘  Now,  besides  whatever  of  general  resemblance  there  may  be,  there  are  the  following 
‘  minute  and  critical  circumstances  common  to  both.  We  have  the  master  and  the 
‘  master’s  whistle  in  both.  I  do  not  say  that  to  introduce  the  whistle  might  not  occur 
‘  to  both  poets ;  but  I  think  it  improbable  when  both  were  seeking  to  fix  the  interest 
‘  °n  a  kmg  and  a  Prince  in  Peril  of  drowning.  We  have  the  leaking  of  the  ship  in 
‘both;  the  striking  of  the  sails  in  both;  the  falling  to  prayer  in  both ;  and,  what  is 
‘  more  remarkable,  the  contempt  of  rank  and  royalty  in  both.  I  do  not  say  that  all 
‘  this  may  not  be  accidental,  but  I  think  it  improbable  that  it  should  be  so.’  [Hunter 
enlarges  upon  these  coincidences,  and  refers  to  others;  among  them  he  compares  the 
‘  great  ghastly  flames  ’  in  Ariosto  with  Ariel’s  ‘  flaming  amazement,’  &c.  Of  verbal 
coincidences  he  finds  but  few,  and  although  he  says  but  little  of  them,  I  think  his  best 
friends  would  wish  that  he  had  said  less.  For  instance,  Miranda  begs  her  father  to 

•  allay  the  waters’ ;  the  hermit  who  meets  Rogero  when  he  reaches  the  shore  could 
‘  allay  the  waves’;  the  cry  of  the  perishing  souls  affected  Miranda;  in  Ariosto  *  ’twas 
‘  lamentable  to  hear  the  cries,'  &c.,  &c.  In  reference  to  the  line  in  Shakespeare  : 

‘  Blow  till  thou  burst  thy  wind,  if  room  enough,’  Hunter  asks  if  it  be  not  possible 
that  this  line  as  ‘  originally  written  by  Shakespeare  may  have  approached  nearer  than 
‘ 11  does  at  Present  t0  a  l;ne  in  Ariosto  ’  in  the  17th  stanza :  ‘  To  steer  out  roomer,  or 
‘ t0  keeP  aloof-’  ‘  The  precise  meaning  of  roomer ,’  continues  Hunter,  ‘  I  do  not  pro- 
‘  fess  t0  know>  and  1  have  consulted  persons  acquainted  with  the  language  of  sailors 
‘ ln  vain-  Possibly, — it  is  a  mere  conjecture,— the  original  editors  of  this  wholly  post- 

*  humous  play  found  the  word  as  unintelligible  as  it  appears  to  us,  and  gave  us  the 
‘  Present  reading,  still  keeping  near  in  sound  to  what  was  written  and  spoken.’  1 
regret  that  this  emendation  was  overlooked  in  its  proper  place  in  the  text.  I  am  con 
soled,  however,  by  finding  that  in  the  oversight  I  have  the  comforting  company  of 
the  Cambridge  Editors.  On  the  very  threshold  of  the  play  we  find  that  Hunter  is 
urgent  in  his  claim  for  Lampedusa  as  the  uninhabited  isle.  This  claim  is  now 
strengthened  by  finding  that  one  of  Ariosto’s  two  islands  is  called  Lipadusa.  Hun¬ 
ter  thus  concludes,  p.  50:]  ‘  Whether  the  evidence  I  have  produced,  each  portion  of 
‘  which  I  admit  not  to  be  very  strong,  but  which,  in  the  sum,  I  apprehend  to  be  all- 
4  Powerful,  is  sufficient  to  prove  to  you  that  Shakespeare  was  indebted  (as  far  as  he 
4  was  iudebted  to  any  one)  to  Ariosto  for  the  storm  scene  with  which  the  play  opens, 

‘ 111(1  from  which- 11  derives  its  name,  you  will  admit  that  there  is  much  more  resem- 
4  blance  between  the  storm  of  Ariosto  and  the  storm  of  Shakespeare  than  there  is 
‘  between  Shakespeare’s  storm  and  that  which  is  described  in  the  narrative  of  Jour- 

4  dan; - Am  1  claiming  too  much - if  I  say  that  the  Bermudean  theory  of  the 

‘  origin  of  this  play  is  lost  for  ever  ?’ 

Such  theories,  as  this  of  the  excellent  Hunter,  put  forth  with  so  much  assurance, 
leave  on  my  mind  only  a  painful  impression.  Shakespeare  is  wounded  in  the  house' 
of  his  friends.  He  is  dealt  with  as  though  he  were  a  poet  of  inferior  ability,  leading 
a  parasitic  life  upon  his  superiors  of  every  land  and  of  every  tongue.  Ariosto  can 
be  original,  Shakespeare  cannot.  Ariosto  can  imagine  the  horror  of  a  tempest,  a 
power  beyond  Shakespeare,  it  seems,  who  for  his  description  must  go  to  Ariosto. 


324 


APPENDIX 


The  very  defects  which  Hunter  finds  in  Malone’s  parallelisms  seem  to  be  present  in 
his  own.  The  circumstances  common  to  both  Ariosto  and  Shakespeare  are  merely 
those  which  are  quite  within  the  range  of  any  landsman’s  imagination.  While 
Ariosto’s  description  is  wire-drawn,  and,  if  not  tedious,  far  from  horrifying,  Shake¬ 
speare’s  scene  is  full  of  uproar,  dismay,  horror,  and  despair.  Of  that  which  in  Shake¬ 
speare’s  shipwreck  differentiates  it  from  every  other  like  dramatic  description  that 
ever  was  written,  there  is  in  Ariosto  never  a  hint.  Shakespeare’s  seamanship  is  flaw¬ 
less,  he  handles  his  vessel  with  consummate  skill,  every  phrase  bespeaks  the  mariner. 
Is  there  a  spark  of  likelihood  that  a  man  who  had  so  mastered  the  subject,  either  by 
experience  amid  such  very  scenes  or  by  conference  with  seamen  who  had  lived 
through  them,  would  go  for  a  few  trumpery  phrases  or  ideas  to  a  distant  landlocked 
poet  ?  The  wind  that  whistles  through  Shakespeare’s  cordage  is  to  be  found,  I  fear, 
only  in  the  words  of  Ariosto’s  description. 

After  all,  Hunter  has  a  convert,  Meissner,  who,  granting  to  Shakespeare  no  vestige 
of  originality  in  details,  adopts  all  the  borrowings  from  the  Orlando  which  Hunter 
detects,  and  even  adds  to  the  number.  Meissner,  in  fact — why  should  we  not  acknow¬ 
ledge  it  at  once  ? — has  discovered  Shakespeare’s  workshop,  and  found  in  it  the  most 
remarkable  ‘  lay  out  ’  of  counterfeiting  appliances  and  burglars’  tools  that  the  wmrld 
has  yet  seen,  or  that  literary  ‘  cracksmen  ’  ever  knew. 

In  1811,  Tieck,  in  his  Alt-Englisches  Theater  (p.  xii),  speaks  of  Jacob  Ayrer  as 
the  earliest  writer  in  Germany  to  make  any  real  advance  in  dramatic  composition.  It 
is  doubtful,  however,  whether  this  advance  was  due  to  Ayrer’s  mother-wit  or  to  the 
fact  that  his  plays  appear  to  be  merely  imitations  or  reproductions  of  English  dramas. 
In  almost  all  of  his  comedies  he  introduces  a  Fool  named  *  Jahn,’  whom  he  some¬ 
times  expressly  calls  the  ‘  English  Fool,’  and  who  in  his  actions  resembles  the  Clown 
of  our  old  plays.  ‘We  find,’  says  Tieck,  ‘in  Ayrer’s  Opus  Theatricum  an  adaptation 
*  of  Hieronimo ,  or  The  Spanish  Tragedy  ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  there  is  also 
‘  therein  many  an  old  English  play,  now  lost.’  Perhaps  it  is  worth  while  here  to  note 
that  Tieck  in  the  next  sentence  calls  attention  to  the  curious  problem,  scarcely  solved 
even  to  this  hour,  afforded  by  the  presence  in  Germany  at  the  beginning  of  the  seven¬ 
teenth  century  of  a  company  of  strolling  actors,  calling  themselves  ‘  English  Come- 
‘  dians,’  who  performed  plays  at  first,  strangely  enough,  in  their  own  language,  which 
were  founded  on  the  English  drama  of  that  day,  and  of  whose  influence  traces  may 
yet  be  found  in  Germany  in  the  puppet-shows  still  popular  among  the  common  people. 
This  early  allusion  by  Tieck  to  the  ‘  English  Comedians  ’  seems  to  have  eluded  even 
the  lynx-eyed  Germans,  who  attribute  it  to  Tieck’s  Deutsches  Theater  in  1817.  The 
interesting  subject  of  these  strolling  English  Actors  only  indirectly  concerns  us  here. 
We  may  be  permitted  to  surmise  that  it  was  from  them  that  Jacob  Ayrer  drew  the 
materials  for  many  of  his  plays. 

It  behooves  us  to  learn  somewhat  of  this  Jacob  Ayrer.  There  are  not  lacking 
enthusiastic  students  who  assert  that  the  connection  is  of  the  closest  between  his  Opus 
Theatriam  and  Shakespeare. 

In  the  interval  between  his  Alt-Englisches  Theater  in  181 1  and  his  Deutsches  The¬ 
ater  in  1817,  Tieck  had  recognised  more  old  English  plays  than  only  Hieronimo 
among  Ayrer’s  works,  but  he  knew  very  little  more  of  Ayrer’s  life,  nothing  scarcely 
but  what  can  be  learned  from  the  title-page  of  the  Opus  Theatricum,  viz.  that  he 
was  no  longer  living  when  that  folio  was  published  in  16x8,  and  that  he  had  been  a 
Proctor  and  Notary  in  Niirnberg.  From  internal  evidence  in  one  of  Ayrer’s  plays 


325 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—  TIECK 

Tieck  inferred  that  he  had  died  in  1610.  Later  research  has  been  more  successful, 
and  from  Cohn’s  Shakespeare  in  Germany,  an  invaluable  book  on  this  subject,  we 
earn  (p.  lxi)  that  Jacob  Ayrer  died  in  Niirnberg  in  March,  1605,  and  that  he  rose  to 
official  station  from  what  are  supposed  to  have  been  extremely  humble  circumstances, 
lhe  year  of  his  death  is  alone  of  importance  to  us  in  the  present  investigation. 

In  iSi7,  Tieck  had  detected  in  the  Opus  Theatricum  analogues  of  two  of  Shake¬ 
speare's  plays:  The  lovely  Phoenicia,  an  analogue  of  Much  Ado;  and  The  fair 
Sidea,  an  analogue  of  The  Tempest.  Of  the  latter  he  remarks  (p.  xxii) :  ‘  The  drama 
‘  of  The  fair  Sidea  bears  distinctly  the  stamp  of  an  imitation  of  the  English,  albeit 
‘  we  have  as  yet  found  no  piece  which  the  German  dramatist  could  have  had  at  hand. 
‘  The  relationship  of  die  prince  to  the  magician,  his  subjection  to  the  latter,  and  still 
‘  more  emphatically  his  task  of  bearing  logs,  recall  Shakespeare’s  Tempest,  for  which 
‘  wonderful  drama  English  critics  have  not  as  yet  been  able  to  find  an  origin ;  it  is  to 
*  me  more  tban  likely  that  for  this  work  Shakespeare  drew  the  idea  from  the  same 
‘  ancient  Piece  which  Ayrer  has  here  imitated.  The  scene  and  the  names  the  latter 
‘  seems  t0  have  Ranged  intentionally,  just  as  he  has  thrust  in  the  comic  episode  with- 
4  out  any  reference  to  the  rest  of  the  piece,  quite  after  the  style  of  the  oldest  English 
‘  stage.’  s 

The  claims  which  are  at  the  present  day  put  forward  for  this  Fair  Sidea  by 
German  critics  are  so  emphatic— almost,  it  might  be  said,  so  extravagant— that  it  is 
worth  while  to  examine  the  whole  play.  It  is  admirably  translated  in  Cohn’s  volume, 
the  antiquated  German  being  rendered  with  rare  felicity;  the  translation  is  all  the 
more  remarkable  when  we  consider  that  it  is  translated  into  rhyme,  line  for  line. 
Merely  to  save  space  I  have  here  translated  it  into  prose :  I  wish  to  express  my  thanks 
for  the  aid  which,  in  obscure  passages,  I  have  derived  from  Cohn’s  translation  and 
also  from  the  notes  in  Tittmann’s  reprint. 

Long  and  tedious  as  is  this  old  Comedy,  I  have  deemed  it  best  to  translate  the 
whole  of  it.  I  have  not  dared  to  omit  a  single  passage,  lest  German  critics,  who  have 
displayed  such  remarkable  ingenuity  in  detecting  ‘parallelisms’  and  ‘resemblances,’ 
should  find  in  the  omitted  words  the  one  proof  of  all  others  that  Shakespeare  plagia¬ 
rised  from  Ayrer.  Moreover,  it  is  only  by  reading  the  whole  play,  and  not  a  mere 
synopsis,  that  English  students  can  arrive  at  an  intelligent  conclusion  concerning  the 
claims  that  are  so  stoutly  urged  in  its  behalf. 

The  title-page  of  the  unwieldy  folio  now  before  me  is  noteworthy  for  the  statement 
which  it  makes  in  regard  to  the  share  which  Ayrer  had  in  the  composition  of  these 
plays  a  statement  which  does  not  seem  to  have  received,  in  the  discussion  of  this 
subject,  its  due  weight.  The  title  runs  thus :  Opus  |  theatricum  |  Thirty  |  Inimi¬ 
table  j  beautiful  Comedies  |  and  Tragedies  of  all  kinds  of  Mem  \  orable  ancient  Ro¬ 
man  Histones  and  other  Political  |  stories  and  poems,  Also  six  and  thirty  other  | 
beautiful,  merry  and  entertaing  Shrovetide  plays  |  or  Farces,  |  By  the  late  honorable 
and  learned  Mr  Jacobus  |  Ayrer,  Notarius  Publicus  and  Procurator  to  the  Court  in 
Ria  nberg,  Gathered  |  from  manifold  old  poets  and  writers,  with  especial  assiduity , 
for  his  own  pastime  and  amusement,  |  and  composed  in  German  rhymes  for  the 
Stage,  so  that  everything  can  be  personally  |  represented.  Also  a  Table  of  Contents.  | 
Printed  at  Nurnberg  by  Balthasar  Scherffen.  Anno  mdcxviii. 

In  the  Opus  Theatricum,  The  fair  Sidea  begins  on  the  second  column  of  p.  433, 
recto,  and  ends  on  p.  442,  verso.  As  in  the  First  Folio  the  Dramatis  Personce  are  at 
the  end  of  the  play,  which  thus  begins  :  ‘  Comedy  of  The  fair  Sidea,  what  befell 
HER  TILT.  HER  MARRIAGE.  EMPLOYING  l6  PERSONS,  AND  IN  5  ACTS.’ 


APPENDIX 


326 

Ruprecht,  the  Postman,  enters ,  carrying  a  letter  in  a  cleft  stick ,  and  says  :  [T.his 
‘  and  says  ’  or  ‘  says’  or  merely  S.,  is  repeated  before  every  speech.]  Be  silent  and  just 
listen  to  me,  I  am  carrying  a  challenge  from  Leudegast,  the  mighty  prince,  who  intends 
to  overrun  the  valiant  Ludolf  with  a  great  army  and  see  if  he  will  defend  his  arrogance, 
and  will  not  stop  until  he  has  expelled  him  because  there  is  no  trusting  in  time  of  peace 
one  who  disregards  all  agreements  or  treaties.  If  you  do  not  want  to  come  to  grief  I’d 
advise  you  all  to  look  well  after  your  property.  They  are  already  descending  the  hill 
and  I  must  hurry  off  to  deliver  this  letter.  Exit. 

Enter  Rollus  the  Peasant,  wringing  his  hands,  and  says  :  Ay  but  the  thief  cribbed 
too  much.  I’ve  just  been  kneading  the  flour,  and  there  are  two  loaves  short.  I 
haven’t  had  so  little  to  bake  for  ever  so  long.  If  I  only  catch  that  thief  my  fists 
shall  make  the  flour  run  out  of  his  neck. 

Enter  John  Molitor,  dressed  like  a  miller,  and  says  Tell  me,  Roily,  who  is  that 
man  riding  off  there  so  fast  ?  and  why  is  he  carrying  a  letter  in  a  cleft  stick  ? 

Rollus.  Thou  thief !  may  a  catarrh  catch  thee  !  What’s  that  horseman  to  me  ? 
Just  tell  me  why  thou  stalest  my  flour? 

John  Molitor.  I  swear  I  didn’t. 

Rollus.  Then  your  wife  did,  the  jade. 

John  ( very  earnestly).  Why  certainly,  I  took  only  my  toll  out  of  the  grain  in  your 
sack.  I  didn’t  take  an  atom  of  your  flour. 

Rollus.  That’s  easy  enough  seen.  The  more  grain  you  steal,  the  less  flour  I  get 

_ as  I  know  this  day  to  my  sorrow.  There  ought  to  have  been  twelve  loaves,  and  I 

had  flour  enough  for  only  ten. 

John  M.  If  you’ll  make  your  loaves  smaller  you  can  bake  eighteen. 

Rollus.  Do  you  mean  to  come  here  and  teach  me  how  to  bake  bread,  and  make 
fun  of  me  into  the  bargain  ?  You  downright  rascally  thief,  you !  Cheating  every¬ 
body. 

John  M.  Upon  my  soul,  that’s  a  lie.  I’m  not  in  the  mill  all  the  time.  How 
then  can  I  keep  taking  toll?  My  men  are  downright  pious  and  never  wrong  a 
peasant,  especially  if  they’re  tipp’d  a  bit.  I’m  not  going  to  listen  to  you  any  more, 
the  thing  might  go  too  far.  \_A  drum  is  heard. 

Rollus.  Hark  !  hark  !  There  are  strange  folks  here.  I’ll  go  and  look  after  my 
things,  so  that  no  damage  happens  to  me.  [Exeunt. 

Enter  Ludolff  with  his  daughter  Sidea,  in  heathen  garb,  and  two  attendants. 
Seats  himself,  and  says  angrily  :  Sidea  darling,  daughter  mine,  we  ought  to  receive 
some  message  by  this  time  from  the  prince  in  Littau,  whose  ambassador  we  slew.  He 
is  highly  displeasing  to  us,  and  our  heart  is  full  of  rage.  Just  as  soon  as  we  are  ready 
for  war  we  will  powerfully  attack  him,  and  drive  him  from  his  people  and  his  home. 

Sidea.  My  father,  my  mind  presages  nothing  good.  We  must  be  circumspect 
No  foe  is  to  be  trusted.  Besides,  our  foe  is  strong  withal,  and  very  cunning  and 
desperate.  He  may  offer  resistance,  and  misfortune  befall  us,  and  eternal  blame  be 
ours  for  the  presumption  we  have  hitherto  shown.  Let  your  heart  I  pray  accept 
counsel  from  your  wise  counsellors,  who  know  about  such  things  better  than  I  a  sim¬ 
ple  young  girl. 

Ludolff.  Ho,  guard,  look  out  the  gate.  If  there  are  any  people  outside  who 
wish  to  see  us,  admit  them.  [A  guard  opens  the  gate.  Enter  Ruprecht  the  Postman 
•with  a  letter  in  a  cleft  stick,  and  making  an  obeisance  to  the  prince,  says  .•]  Most  noble 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— THE  FAIR  SIDE  A 


32; 

Prince,  I  am  a  messenger  exempt  from  every  need  and  danger,  nevertheless  I  beg 
for  pace.  Duke  Leudegast,  in  anger,  has  sent  me  hither  with  this  challenge ;  his 
sentiments  you  will  find  therein.  [Prince  Ludolff  takes  the  letter  angrily  from  the 
cleft  stick  and  reads  it,  and  says  in  anger  :]  Thy  prince  is  mighty  kind  to  us  !  Say 
to  him  that  if  he  is  of  heroic  courage  and  wants  to  know  us  better,  let  him  do  what 
he  likes.  We  will  await  him  here,  and  so  cudgel  his  hide  that  he’ll  relinquish  all  his 
presumption.  And  as  for  you,  you  may  clear  out  or  we’ll  make  you  stump  it.  [Exit 
Ruprecht  hawing.]  We  must  now  look  about  us  and  order  a  powerful  army  to  cool 
the  arrogance  of  this  prince, 

Sidea  [sadly],  \e  gods,  have  pity !  This  is  all  on  account  of  poor  me.  Dear 
father  mine,  forego  it. 

Ludolff.  Just  hold  your  jaw.  It’s  got  to  be.  [Exeunt  omnes. 

Enter  Leudegast,  Prince  of  Wiltau  with  his  two  counsellors ,  Franciscus  and  Ele- 
maus,  all  m  armor,  and  says :  Since  the  quarrelsome  Duke  Leupolt  has  brought  on 
war  and  obliged  us  to  enter  his  territory,  let  us  therefore  take  heart,  and  gain  wealth 
and  glory.  No  peace  will  we  ever  make  with  him  again  as  long  as  either  of  us  live. 
We  are  resolved  that  this  enmity  shall  not  cease  until  one  or  the  other  is  driven  from 
throne  and  realm. 

Franciscus.  This  is  why  we  are  armed,  and  are  resolved  to  stake  life  and  limb 
and  do  whatever  is  necessary. 

Elemaus.  Ay,  life  and  limb  and  wealth,  and  everything  in  our  power  will  we 
devote  to  the  conquest  of  the  proud  prince  in  Littau. 

Franciscus.  If  you  will  just  look,  there’s  a  cloud  of  dust  in  the  field  yonder. 
That  is  the  foe,  I  think.  Therefore  look  out,  there  are  going  to  be  blows. 

Leudegast.  Aye,  we  see  the  banners  wave.  Be  bold  and  ready !  A  battle  is  at 
hand !  The  enemy  is  attacking  us  in  the  rear !  Be  on  your  guard !  Advance ! 
advance !  advance ! 

Duke  Ludolff ’s  men  rush  in.  The  battle  rages  long.  Leudolff ’s  people  are  all  slain. 

Leudolff  falls  on  his  knees,  and  says  :  Alas,  misfortune  is  on  my  side.  I  cannot 
fight  an  army  all  alone.  I  therefore  beg  for  grace  and  clemency. 

Duke  Leudegast.  Misfortune  is  your  fault  alone.  And  I  should  have  good  reason 
and  right  in  slaying  you  at  once  by  a  cruel,  bad  death.  But  I  shall  drive  you,  a  dis 
grace  and  a  scoff,  from  your  country.  But  swear  by  mouth  and  hand,  that  you  will 
leave  this  country  and  never  come  back.  But  whatsoever  you  and  your  daughter  can 
carry  away  without  the  help  of  cart  or  wagon,  you  may  keep.  If  you  do  this  you 
must  swear  to  me. 

Ludolff  [plaintively].  Alas,  I  trusted  too  much  in  myself.  Too  securely  built 
upon  my  power.  And  so  the  pit  which  I  dug  for  others  I  have  fallen  into  myself. 

[He  takes  the  oath  and  exit  sadly. 

Leudegast.  Enter  ye  dear  Warriors  and  let  us  take  the  city.  We  have  won 
wealth  and  fame,  destroyed  the  prince’s  arrogance.  We  thank  you  greatly  that  you 
ventured  life  and  limb.  And  now  we’ll  distribute  among  you  all  the  plunder  in  the 
city-  [Exeunt. 

Enter  Leudolff  ivith  Sidea,  he  carries  a  white  silver  staff  in  his  hand,  and  says  : 
Alas,  how  unutterably  bitter  to  me  are  scoff  and  scorn.  My  heart  is  ready  to  break, 
because  I  cannot  take  revenge.  I  have  lost  my  Princedom,  my  Kingdom,  my  wealth, 
honor,  and  glory.  And  although  I  have  no  longer  any  land,  I  will  not  cease  to  use 


APPENDIX 


328 

every  wile  and  guile  until  fortune  once  more  beams  upon  me  and  I  can  be  avenged 
upon  my  foe. 

Sidea.  This  whole  week,  sire,  I  have  had  a  great  pain  in  my  heart.  Not  for  a 
single  hour  could  I  be  joyous.  My  heart  foreboded,  alas,  all  the  scoff  and  scorn  of 
this  sorrow.  ’Twas  no  wonder  that  my  heart  burst  into  a  thousand  pieces.  Of  yore 
I  lived  in  princely  rank — now  I  have  neither  land  nor  people.  Of  yore  I  was 
addressed  as  Princely  lady — now  I  am  a  beggar  girl.  Of  yore  my  welfare  was 
unbounded — it  needs  be  that  I  must  now  eat  grass.  Of  yore  had  I  many  a  suitor — 
now  I  Shall  have  to  die  single,  and  know  not  how  the  end  may  be. 

Ludolff  [ enraged ,  shaking  his  staff  \  Hold  your  jaw,  or  may  Jupiter  blast  you  ! 
Have  patience  with  me  a  minute,  while  I  summon  my  Spirit  to  tell  me  just  what  is  to 
happen  to  us  here  on  earth  until  we  die. 

[  With  his  staff  he  draws  a  circle  with  certain  characters  in  it. 

Sidea .  Alas,  if  you  are  going  to  raise  the  Spirit,  let  me  go  away.  He  is  too  fear 
ful  to  me. 

Ludolff.  Be  silent,  he  is  harmless.  \_He  opens  the  circle  and  knocks  on  the  open¬ 
ing  with  his  little  staff,  thereupon  the  Devil  leaps  from  it,  spits  out  fire,  walking  around 
in  the  circle,  and  says  angrily  .■]  Ludolff,  you’re  a  bad  man.  Owing  to  you,  I  can  get 
no  rest  anywhere.  The  minute  anything  occurs  to  you,  you  think  I  must  be  with  you 
instantly.  Now  I’d  have  you  know  that  I  have  more  conjurers  than  you,  and  can’t 
hop  up  to  you  instantly,  however  cross  you  may  be  about  it.  So  tell  me  at  once  what 
you  want  of  me. 

Ludolff.  You  rascal,  if  you  are  going  to  be  so  proud  release  me  from  my  oath  or 
else  answer  my  questions  at  once. 

Runcifal,  the  Devil.  Tell  me  what  you  want.  If  you  don’t  I’ll  go  back  to  where 
I  came  from.  You  heard  me  say  that  I  had  to  go  on  further. 

Ludolff.  Then  tell  me  in  one  word,  whether  I  can  revenge  myself  on  my  foe. 

Runcifal.  I  can  promise  you  in  truth,  that : — Before  long  it  will  happen  that  you 
can  capture  the  son  of  your  foe,  and  he  will  long  be  your  servant ;  and  after  submit¬ 
ting  to  misery  for  a  long  time,  he  will  be  entirely  freed  from  your  service,  will  then 
return  again  to  his  father’s  house,  thenas  you  will  be  restored  to  honor,  and  fortune 
will  return  to  you.  More  I  cannot  tell  you.  [Exit. 

Ludolff.  If  you  hear  any  huntsmen  in  this  wood  let  me  know  at  once,  and  I  will 
take  the  best  of  care  to  catch  something  myself.  If  I  only  could  catch  that  young 
prince, — if  I  only  could  revenge  myself  on  him,  he’d  have  to  remain  my  slave,  I 
promise  you;  on  him  I’ll  wreak  all  the  evil  his  father  did  to  us.  Let  us  now  enter 
this  hut,  because  just  at  present  we  have  nothing  better.  \_Eveunt. 

Actus  Primus* 

Enter  John  Molitor,  very  dusty  with  flour,  and  says,  laughing :  A  mill  that  has 
water  enough  to  drive  only  three  wheels  can’t  help  being  useful,  and  give  subsistence 
to  a  lazy  miller  as  well  as  to  his  wife  and  child  and  all  his  people.  There  is  no  trade 
on  this  earth  in  which  the  practice  of  evil  deserves  the  hangman.  Because  millers 
are  fond  of  toll  and  empty  the  peasants’  sacks  a  little  too  far,  they  must  be  thieves, 
which  doesn’t  sound  well.  After  all  ’tis  done  only  for  the  sake  of  money.  And  if 
men  had  no  desires  the  world  wouldn’t  last.  And  so  one  man  becomes  a  prosecutor 
another  a  knacker ;  a  third,  an  official  or  a  beadle ;  a  fourth,  a  peasant  in  his  smock ; 
a  fifth,  a  rascal  and  traitor;  a  sixth,  a  murderer;  a  seventh,  a  usurer;  an  eighth  h?s 

*  Actus  Primus,  Pecundus,  &c.  are  always  put  at  the  end  of  the  Act. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT- THE  FAIR  SIDE  A  329 

joyous  spirits;  a  ninth  cleans  out  offices;  the  tenth  devises  evil  deeds;  the  eleventh 
levies  on  goods ;  the  twelfth  is  his  apprentice.  And  so  on  through  all  classes  there’s 
much  that  can  be  blamed,  and  however  much  it  may  be  condemned  yet  men  soon  fall 
into  the  way  of  doing  that  which  alone  yields  joy  and  pleasure.  I’d  never  have  been 
a  miller  if  I  hadn’t  known  so  well  what  great  profit  there  is  in  the  miller’s  trade. 
Every  year  I  fatten  a  few  hogs,  the  butchers  when  they  buy  them  never  ask  how  I 
got  them.  A  fatted  ox  I  have  in  there,  and  I  shall  butcher  it  at  home.  I  make 
cheese  and  try  out  lard,  and  besides  I  have  ready  cash.  But  what  brings  me  great 
discomfort  is,  that  I  lost  my  wife  this  year.  Otherwise,  I’d  rather  be  a  miller  than  the 
best  Doctor  in  town. 

Enter  Rollus,  the  P easant,  with  Ela  his  daughter,  who  carries  a  baby  in  swaddling- 
clothes,  and  says:  See  there,  El,  there  stands  the  beast.  We’ll  bring  your  child  home 
to  him,  and  tell  him  he  must  support  you.  If  he  don’t  I’ll  sue  him. 

Ela.  O  let  us  only  just  get  at  him.  [  They  approach  John  Molitor. 

Rollus.  Holla,  miller,  we’ve  come  at  the  right  time.  You’ve  harmed  my  daugh¬ 
ter  for  me.  Along  of  you  she  has  to  carry  that  child.  You’ve  got  to  tell  her  quickly 
whether  you’ll  make  an  honest  woman  of  her. 

John  Molitor  (scratching  his  head).  You’re  talking  about  very  strange  matters.  I 
must  make  an  honest  woman  of  your  daughter  ?— that’s  a  trade  I  never  learned.  I’m 
rather  short  of  honesty  myself.  If  your  daughter  is  well,  let  her  stay  so,  I’m  not  the 
father  of  the  child. 

Rollus.  Yes,  you  rascal,  you  are.  I’ll  take  my  oath  on  it. 

John  Molitor  {laughing  and  pointing  at  the  peasant).  Just  look  at  that  slanderous 
old  man.  He  takes  his  oath  for  his  daughter,  and  believes  all  that  she  imposes  on 
him. 

Ela.  Ay,  but  it’s  the  truth,  nevertheless,  for  all  your  denials.  You  are  the  child’s 
father.  Just  look  what  a  pretty  little  son. 

John  Molitor.  If  it’s  pretty  it  ought  to  have  been  a  little  girl,  so  that  it  could  take 
after  its  mother.  Give  me  a  chance  to  think  the  matter  over  to-day,  and  then  I’ll  tell 
you  my  intentions. 

Rollus.  V ery  well,  we’re  agreed.  [  They  go  a  little  aside,  whisper  together,  John 
laughs,  then  enters  Dietrich  with  Agnes  his  daughter,  who  also  carries  a  baby.  Diet- 
rich  goes  up  to  John,  and  says  angrily  .■]  Do  I  find  you  here,  you  honest  man  ! 

John  {frightened,  and  scratching  his  head).  Ay,  what  have  I  done  to  you 
pray  ?  ’ 

Dietrich.  You’ve  disgraced  my  daughter  for  me.  Here,  we’ve  brought  the  child 
to  you.  This  will  make  you  bring  it  up.  And,  moreover,  you’ve  got  to  go  to  church 
and  take  my  daughter  in  marriage. 

John  Molitor.  I  acknowledge  no  child  of  your  daughter’s.  I  never  touched  her. 

Dietnch.  Let’s  go  to  Court.  Then,  you’ll  see  what  you  get.  At  the  very  least, 
you’ll  go  to  prison,  and  have  to  maintain  my  daughter  after  all.  I’ll  be  a  good  father- 
in-law  to  you,  and  give  you  besides  a  hundred  guldens. 

John  Molitor.  A  hundred  guldens,  and  mend  my  shoes  gratis  into  the  bargain  ? 
I  need  a  wife.  I  can  do  nothing  with  my  servants  but  quarrel  and  scold.  But 
excuse  me  while  I  go  into  my  house  for  a  while,  I  must  think  the  matter  over. 
[Retires  to  where  Rollus  is  standing  with  his  daughter .]  Hark  ye,  what  will  you 
give  me  to  boot,  if  I  marry  your  daughter  ? 

Rollus.  If  you’ll  marry  my  daughter  I’ll  give  you,  with  her,  a  hundred  guldens. 

John  {pointing  to  the  Shoemaker).  Why,  he  has  offered  me  a  hundred  Thalers. 


33° 


APPENDIX 


and  promises,  besides,  to  mend  all  my  old  shoes  for  nothing.  And  his  daughter  ia 
prettier  than  this  girl. 

Rollus.  If  you  will  go  to  Church  with  her  I’ll  pay  you  a  hundred  and  fifty  dol¬ 
lars  down,  and  in  addition  cart  away  all  your  compost. 

John  ( chuckling ).  After  all,  that’s  pretty  good.  Pardon  me,  I  must  ask  a  ques¬ 
tion.  I’ll  soon  give  you  a  fair  answer.  [Laughs.]  If  they  won’t  bid  any  higher 
there’ll  be  no  sale.  [Going  up  to  the  Shoemaker.]  Hark  ye,  Master  Dietrich,  upon 
my  word  your  daughter  is  not  for  me.  You  offer  too  small  a  dower.  Rollus  has  just 
offered  me  two  hundred  Thalers,  I’d  have  you  know,  and  besides  agrees  to  cart  away 
all  my  compost  as  long  as  he  and  I  live. 

Dietrich  [ astonished ).  I’ll  give  you  two  hundred  guldens.  I  thought  I  had  offered 
enough. 

John.  Just  wait  a  minute,  while  I  go  and  refuse  Rollus. 

[  The  Shoemaker  and  his  daughter  lay  their  heads  together. 

John  [going  up  to  Rollus).  In  a  word,  I  must  tell  you  that  he  is  willing  to  give 
two  hundred  Thalers  and  mend  my  shoes  as  long  as  we  live.  Now  his  daughter 
is  a  Burgher’s  child,  and  better  born  than  a  Peasant’s  child.  Therefore,  I’ll  take 
her. 

Rollus.  Dear  me,  I  should  be  downright  ashamed  of  myself  if  I  were  not  as  good 
as  he.  He  may  promise  well,  but  I  don’t  know  how  he  will  ever  pay.  Never  mind, 
I’ll  give  you  two  hundred  Thalers  as  just  proposed. 

John.  Two  hundred  Thalers  is  a  good  deal  of  money.  I  must  reflect  which 
would  be  most  useful  to  me.  [He  goes  aside,  but  before  turning  to  the  Shoemaker, 
says  /]  I  don’t  like  either  of  the  jades,  so  I’ll  start  a  brawl,  and  while  the  two  are 
beating  each  other  I’ll  steal  away.  [Approaches  Dietrich.]  Why  should  I  take  your 
daughter.  Rollus  says  positively  that  she  is  only  your  bastard,  and  that  you  yourself 
were  bom  out  of  wedlock. 

Dietrich  [angrily).  The  scoundrel  shall  take  his  oath  on  that,  if  he  is  going  to  say 
such  things  of  us.  It  will  cost  him  life  and  limb.  I’ll  beat  him  sky-blue. 

John.  Just  wait,  I’ll  ask  him  first.  [Goes  up  to  Rollus.]  Rollus,  I  don’t  want 
your  daughter.  Go  hear  what  Dietrich  says  of  you,  that  you  are  thought  to  be  a 
rogue,  that  your  father  was  hanged  and  your  brother  executed. 

Rollus  [running  to  the  Shoemaker ).  You  lie  like  a  rogue  and  a  rascal.  Silence, 
I’ll  teach  you  to  lie. 

Dietrich.  Come  on,  you’ll  meet  your  match. 

[  They  fight.  John  laughs,  claps  his  hands,  and  runs  off.  Exeunt  fighting. 

Enter  Leudegast,  Prince  ofi  TVillau  with  Franciscus  and  Elemaus,  his  two  coun¬ 
sellors,  and  Engelbrecht,  his  son,  all,  except  the  Prince,  in  the  habit  of  huntsmen. 

Leudegast.  As  you  wish  to  go  hunting  to-day,  let  me  say  to  you  earnestly,  that 
you  must  look  after  each  other.  You  know  that  our  foe  is  always  on  the  watch,  and 
should  he  find  you  defenceless  in  the  forest,  or  should  he  overcome  you  in  fight,  he 
will  do  you  a  great  injury.  Therefore  be  discreet,  and  keep  all  together. 

Engelbrecht.  We  will  not  separate.  But  should  one  of  us  get  lost  he  can  be 
easily  brought  back  from  his  wandering  by  the  sound  of  the  horns. 

Franciscus.  I  set  little  value  on  Ludolff’s  power.  He  has  no  longer  any  people 
or  country  to  make  us  heed  him.  Moreover,  who  knows  where  he  is  sneaking 
around,  having  crept,  through  fear  of  us,  into  some  bat’s  comer.  You  may  be  suns 
he  is  not  in  the  forest. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— THE  FAIR  SIDE  A 


3  31 

Elemaus.  He’ll  never  more  show  himself  to  us.  We  needn’t  worry  on  his 
account. 

Leudegast.  Well,  then,  depart  in  peace.  The  stag  is  growing  fat,  see  that  you 
stop  the  process.  [Exeunt 

Enter  Ludolff  with  Sidea,  each  with  a  white  staff,  and  says  :  Last  night  my  spirit 
disclosed  to  me  that  the  Duke’s  son,  Engelbrecht,  would  hunt  in  the  forest.  H »  will 
come  to  me  exactly  right,  I  will  track  him  in  the  forest,  catch  him,  and  so  plague  nim 
that  the  like  has  never  before  been  known. 

y 

Sidea.  Verily,  that  is  what  I’d  gladly  see.  If  we  can  only  catch  this  bird  we 
might  fairly  hope  to  gain  control,  once  more,  of  the  whole  princely  government ;  and 
he’d  have  to  pay  us  a  great  ransom;  and  unless  he  is  willing  to  lose  his  life  he’ll  have 
to  reinstate  us. 

Ludolff.  Be  silent,  we  must  be  exactly  ready ;  I  will  shortly  revenge  myself  on 
him  or  kill  myself  and  you.  [Exeunt,  sorrowfully . 

Enter  Engelbrecht  with  his  squire.  They  shout  as  they  enter  :  Holla,  holla,  holla, 
then  come  forward. 

Engelbrecht.  We  have  wandered  far  from  the  paths,  and  no  answer  is  given  to 
our  blasts  on  the  horn.  Look,  look,  what  people  are  they  just  over  there  ?  In  sooth 
they  are  running  towards  us.  Therefore  be  well  on  your  guard. 

[  They  lay  their  hands  on  their  rapiers. 

Enter  Ludolff,  the  Prince,  with  Sidea,  he  carries  in  one  hand  a  drawn  sword,  and 
in  the  other  a  white  staff,  and  says  :  Thou  young  Prince  surrender  thyself. 

Engelbrecht.  Such  booty  thou  shalt  not  gain  this  day.  Squire,  run  him  through 
with  thy  sword. 

[  They  try  to  draw  from  the  scabbards.  Ludolff  strikes  the  weapons  with  his  staff. 

Squire.  I  cannot  draw  my  weapon.  I  believe  it  is  bewitched. 

Engelbrecht.  Ay,  it  is  mere  magic.  I  am  lamed  in  both  hands.  I  can  neither 
bend  nor  turn.  Therefore  since  there  is  no  other  way,  I  must  be  thy  prisoner  and  live 
according  to  thy  pleasure. 

Ludolff.  Give  me  at  once  thy  promise  of  this.  And  as  for  you,  you  saucebox, 
clear  out,  or  I’ll  tread  you  into  the  dirt,  and  hack  off  all  your  four  limbs,  so  that  you’ll 
cease  to  bother  me ;  and  I’ll  let  crows  and  ravens  feed  on  you. 

Squire.  Alas,  an  evil  hunt  have  we.  Gracious  Prince,  in  heavy  sorrow,  at  this 
time  I  take  my  leave  of  you.  [Exit. 

Ludolff.  Now  thou  art  my  very  slave.  As  thy  father  unrighteously  drove  me 
from  home  and  people,  and  heaped  on  me  great  scoff  and  scorn,  so  shalt  thou  be 
parted  from  him  and  all  thy  country.  Thou  shalt  carry  wood  for  my  daughter,  and 
everything  which  she  tells  thee  thou  must  obey  and  accomplish,  or  heavy  blows  shall 
force  thee.  And  should  she  complain  to  me  that  thou  hesitatest  at  anything,  on  the 
spot  I’ll  strike  thee  dead.  [Beats  him  to  the  exit.  Strikes  him  on  the  back  with  his 
staff,  as  does  also  the  daughter,  and  exeunt. 

Actus  Secundus. 

Enter  Dietrich  and  Rollus  running,  with  loud  outcries. 

Rollus.  Stop !  in  all  conscience  ’tis  enough.  In  all  my  bom  days  no  man  ever 
beat  me  so.  And  I  never  did  you  any  harm. 

Dietrich.  I’m  basebom,  am  I  ?  Tell  me  who  told  you  that  lie. 


332 


APPENDIX 


Rollus.  It  never  passed  my  lips.  But  the  miller,  he  said,  that  you  had  called 
me  a  rogue,  and  had  said  my  father  was  hanged  and  my  brother  too — and  that’s  the 
account  I  wanted  to  settle 

Dietrich.  I  never  cal'ed  thee  a  rogue.  I  never  thought  of  thy  father  or  of  thy 
brother  being  hanged. 

Rollus.  It’s  that  miller,  then,  who  has  set  us  on.  Let  the  rogue  himself  be  hung. 
We’ll  accuse  him  before  the  Mayor.  He  shall  pay  for  it,  because  we  were  put  up  to 

[Exeunt  running,  then  re-enter  at  opposite  entrance. 

Dietrich.  The  scoundrel  has  cleared  out. 

Rollus.  Ay,  the  fellow’s  never  at  home,  but  I’ll  not  rest  till  I’ve  found  the  black¬ 
guard.  [ Enter  John,  disguised  as  an  old  woman,  walking  with  a  crutch.']  Dear  old 
lady  tell  us  the  truth,  haven’t  you  seen  John  Miller  ? 

John  Molitor  (in  an  old  woman's  weak  voice).  John  Miller — how  should  I  have 
seen  him;  what  the  devil  have  I  to  do  with  him?  Ask  people  who  know. 

Rollus.  There,  there,  old  mother.  I  know  a  man  I  can  ask.  He’ll  tell  us  in  a 
minute. 

John  (still  like  an  old  woman).  Ay,  if  he  can  do  that,  it’s  no  small  job,  and  I’ll 
go  with  you  too.  Exeunt. 


Enter  Prince  Leudegast  with  Franciscus  and  Elemaus,  and  says  (seating  him- 
self)  :  It  seems  very  strange  to  me  that  you  should  return  home  all  alone,  without  my 
dear  son,  after  my  strict  commands  that  you  should  stay  by  his  side.  Let  us  write  in 
every  direction  to  find  out  where  he  is.  In  his  death  you’ve  killed  me.  That  was  a 
sad  hunting  for  me. 

Franciscus.  In  sooth  it  is  a  downright  sorrow  that  he  should  so  have  escaped  us. 
We  surrounded  a  deer  which  the  young  prince  wanted  to  bring  down.  And  with 
the  deer  he  was  lost  too.  We  called  the  huntsman’s  Holla  after  him,  and  blew  the 
horns  also.  We  supposed  he  would  return,  but  we  could  neither  see  him  nor  hear 
him.  Yet  we  did  not  despair.  We  knew  that  he  had  with  him  his  squire — the  same 
who  is  now  approaching.  [Enter  Squire. 

Prince.  Where  did  you  leave  my  son?  What  happened  to  you  on  the 
chase  ? 

Squire.  Alas,  the  young  prince  is  a  prisoner,  as  he  was  stalking  a  deer  which  he 
wished  to  bring  down  with  his  own  gun.  He  missed  the  deer,  and  we  got  lost  in  the 
forest  and  could  hear  neither  dogs  nor  horns.  While  we  were  stopping  to  think,  a 
woman  sprang  upon  us  and  then  a  man ;  who  boldly  seized  us,  demanded  our  sur¬ 
render,  and  grievously  threatened  us.  But  we  grasped  our  swords  to  rid  ourselves 
of  him,  when,  with  a  staff  he  had  in  his  hand,  he  gave  a  little  stroke  on  our  weapons 
and  we  couldn’t  draw  them.  Such  a  terror  then  seized  us  that  we  had  to  surrender. 
And  after  he  had  severely  threatened  us,  he  bade  me  go  my  ways.  And  has  kept 
your  Highness’s  son,  who  therefore  has  to  endure  everything. 

Leudegast.  Alas,  thou  bad,  unlucky  chase !  What  evil  thou  bringest  upon  my 
house !  And  if  I  had  gone  out,  too,  the  same  would  have  happened  to  me.  How 
shall  I  set  about  releasing  my  son  ?  If  it  is  Ludolff,  our  bitter  foe,  who  has  taken  my 
son,  he  will  surely  take  his  life.  We  must  not  therefore  lose  a  minute. 

Elemaus.  It  is  a  remarkable  story,  of  which  it  is  useless  to  talk  much ;  but  highly 
necessary  to  take  such  counsel  that  every  step  shall  be  taken  wisely. 

Leudegast.  Come,  then,  let  us  consult.  There’s  no  use  in  standing  still.  We 
must  contrive  some  protection  for  my  son.  [  They  all  go  out 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— THE  FAIR  SIDEA 


333 


Enter  Prince  Ludolff,  with  his  staff. 

Ludolff.  Again  my  luck  has  turned.  And  my  enemy  is  in  my  power,  whom  I’ll 
treat  badly  enough.  But  soft,  what  rabble  comes  here  ? 

Enter  Dietrich  and  Rollus,  with  John  Molitor  in  woman's  clothes. 

Dietrich.  Gracious  Sir,  we  two  have  a  secret  to  discuss  with  you.  We  can’t  find 
it  out  in  any  other  way,  and  so  we  beg  the  aid  of  your  magic.  We’ll  pay  you  right 
well.  A  miller  lives  near  us  who  has  put  a  scandal  on  us,  and  we  have  a  sere  com¬ 
plaint  against  him.  But  we  cannot  find  him  at  home,  and  we  believe  this  old  woman 
knows  where  he  is. 

John  Molitor  ( like  an  old  woman).  In  faith,  I  know  neither  where  he  is  nor  who 
he  is. 

Ludolff  { shakes  his  head  and  lays  his  staff  on  John's  head).  Thou  art  a  downright 
Jade.  I  know  you  well,  you  sorry  beldame.  Just  take  that  kerchief  off  your  head 
and  we’ll  soon  find  the  miller. 

[He  knocks  off  the  kerchief  with  his  staff  and  reveals  John  Molitor. 

Dietrich.  Thou  shall  not  leave  here  alive.  We’ll  punish  you  to  our  hearts’  con¬ 
tent,  so  that  hereafter  no  good  man  by  your  means  shall  come  to  grief. 

John.  O  Magician,  I  beg  for  mercy.  Your  art  is  ahead  of  mine. 

Ludolff.  What  punishment  do  you  wish  me  to  inflict  on  him  ? 

Rollus.  Magician,  turn  him  into  a  fox,  to  restrain  his  impudence  hereafter. 

John.  I’ll  eat  your  chickens,  and  do  you  even  more  harm  than  now. 

Dietrich.  Mr  Magician,  if  it  is  possible  make  an  ass  of  him. 

John.  Silly  cobbler,  just  remember  that  if  I  am  turned  into  an  ass  I’ll  ruin  thee. 
Cows,  horses,  and  pigs  shall  bear  nothing  but  asses,  whose  hides  are  good  only  for 
drums.  Where’ll  you  get  your  leather— be  sure,  I’d  give  you  nothing  but  that  of 
asses. 

Dietrich.  Well,  then,  let  him  be  a  man,  and  punish  him  as  much  as  you  please. 

Ludolff.  I’d  already  fixed  it.  He  shall  stay  with  me  here  in  the  forest,  and  to 
guard  against  any  spooniness  *  between  my  daughter  and  Engelbrecht,  he  shall  keep 
a  faithful  eye  on  both  and  report  to  me.  But  first  swear  to  me  that  you’ll  do  it. 

[He  swears.  Exeunt. 

Enter  Sidea  with  the  young  prince  Engelbrecht,  who  is  very  meanly  clad,  and  is 
carrying  some  logs  and  an  axe,  which  he  lays  down. 

Sidea  {threatening  him  with  her  staff).  Unless  you  want  to  get  a  flogging,  you’ll 
split  me  that  wood  up  pretty  quick,  you  abominable,  lazy  dog  ! 

Engelbrecht  {falling  at  her  feet  and  imploring  with  his  hands).  Woe’s  me,  I’m 
utterly  sick  at  heart  and  cannot  go  another  step  in  doing  this  work.  I  am  utterly 
exhausted,  not  an  atom  of  strength  is  left  in  my  body.  ’Twere  better  far  to  kill  me 
at  once  than  to  put  on  me  such  daily  tasks,  such  heavy  work.  I  beg  you,  as  sincerely 
as  I  can,  to  kill  me  outright. 

Sidea  {addressing  the  audience).  Although  his  father  condemns  my  father  to  misery 
and  to  need,  and  I,  his  princely  daughter,  have  cause  enough  for  vengeance,  yet  when 
I  think  over  the  whole  affair  I  have  to  bear  in  mind  that  he,  too,  is  of  princely  birth 

*  I  am  ready  to  confess  my  ignorant  surprise  at  the  antiquity  of  this  word.  The  original,  Idffley 
I  had  always  thought  was  modern  slang  adopted  from  the  English.  But  from  its  presence  here,  ear¬ 
lier  than  1605,  it  seems  as  though  it  were  we  who  had  taken  it  from  the  German.  Let  me  here  add 
what,  perhaps,  I  should  have  mentioned  before,  that  the  difficulties  of  translation  are  increased  by 
the  lack  of  punctuation.  Except  here  and  there,  in  the  stage  directions,  there  are  not  a  dozen  mark! 
of  punctuation,  of  any  kind,  throughout  the  original  play.— Ed. 


334 


APPENDIX 


and  has  done  us  no  harm ;  and,  sooth  to  say,  ought  not  to  have  to  pay  his  father's 
debt.  And,  then,  he  has  such  a  figure  that  on  the  score  of  beauty  I  cannot  hate  him. 
And  if  I  must  lead  this  life  for  a  long  time  here  in  the  forest,  what  a  joy  and  happi¬ 
ness  it  were  if  he  were  to  prove  faithful  to  me  and  take  me  for  his  wedded  wife.  I’d 
like  to  help  him  out  of  all  this  need  and  woe.  I’ll  tell  him  secretly  about  it.  {She 
goes  up  to  him.']  My  Engelbrecht,  what  would’st  thou  do  if,  on  account  of  thy  ser¬ 
vice,  I  were  to  release  thee  and  then  take  thee  in  marriage. 

Engelbrecht  {falling  at  her  feet ).  Ah,  speak  not,  or  my  emotions  will  kill  me. 
All  the  living  gods  in  the  world  could  not  bring  that  about,  but,  if  it  were  possible, 
my  fate  were  then  the  best  of  all.  Yes,  to  thy  love  I  would  devote  myself,  and  serve 
thee  body  and  soul,  and  make  thee  a  princess. 

Sidea.  If  I  could  trust  thee  in  this  matter,  and  thou  wilt  accede  and  aid  me  with 
hand  and  mouth,  I’ll  speak  further  with  thee. 

Engelbrecht.  Ay,  you  ought  to  trust  me,  and  you  ought  also  to  be  my  spouse. 

Sidea.  Art  thou  then  mine  ?  [  They  join  hands. 

Engelbrecht.  Yes. 

Sidea.  Then  I  am  thine.  May  the  gods  remain  with  us !  Nothing  now  but 
death  shall  part  us.  That  thou  mayst  see  how  earnest  I  am,  I’ll  follow  whithersoever 
thou  leadest.  £  They  embrace. 

Enter  Runcifal  the  Devil ,  and  says  :  Sidea,  this  proposal  of  thine  I’ll  go  straight 
and  tell  thy  father.  It’s  eminently  improper  that  thou  shouldst  allow  thyself  to  be 
carried  oft.  [Sidea  takes  her  staff,  strikes  him  on  the  mouth.  He  signifies  that  he  is 
dumb,  and  sorrowfully  departs. 

Sidea.  Now  the  Spirit  cannot  harm  us  by  betraying  us  to  my  father.  Now  we 
can  go  away  from  this  country.  {Exeunt. 

Enter  Prince  Ludolff  with  John  Molitor,  in  a  rage  he  strikes  John  on  the  head 
with  his  staff ,  and  says :  Where  is  Sidea  ?  tell  me  at  once. 

John.  I  don’t  know.  If  she’s  not  in  the  forest,  she’s  with  Engelbrecht. 

Ludolff.  Art  thou  not  my  slave,  whose  duty  ’twas  to  guard  them  ? 

John.  Ay,  ay,  I  know  that  well  enough.  But,  gracious  Sir,  there  are  two  of 
them,  and  they  didn’t  tell  me  where  they  were  going.  So  I  don’t  know  where 
they  are. 

Ludolff \  This  shall  cost  thee  thy  life.  Clear  out  and  find  where  they  are.  And 
if  thou  dost  not  bring  them  back  quickly,  I’ll  cut  thy  head  off. 

[John  Molitor  scratches  his  head  and  Exit. 

Actus  Tertius. 

Enter  Engelbrecht  and  Sidea. 

Sidea.  For  my  part,  I  hope  we  have  now  escaped  from  my  father.  But  I  am  so 
tired  from  walking,  that  if  my  life  and  limb  depended  on  it  I  could  go  no  further. 
Would  that  I  had  stayed  at  home !  But  burning  love  has  driven  me  to  this  risk. 

Engelbrecht.  Pray  do  not  let  this  difficulty  conquer  you.  If  you  can  go  no  fur¬ 
ther  afoot,  you’ll  have  to  be  driven  in  a  coach.  Wait  here  until  I  can  send  a  coach 
back  for  you,  with  servants  to  bring  you  in. 

Sidea.  I  have  stolen  away  from  my  father.  Do  you  think  that  he  will  ever  cease 
from  seeking  me  on  every  road,  and  if  he  should  find  me  here  I’ve  looked  my  last 
on  you,  and  I  must  die  before  his  face. 

Engelbrecht.  The  gods  can  never  will  that.  But  to  prevent  your  father  from 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— THE  FAIR  SIDE  A 


335 


finding  you,  you  must  climb  this  tree.  He  could  pass  under  it  half  a  dozen  times 
before  he’d  ever  find  you.  Besides  you’ll  not  stay  there  long. 

Suiea.  Alack,  my  heart  misgives ;  but  you’ll  forget  me. 

Engelbrecht.  Ah,  sweetheart,  have  no  care.  I  pledge  my  honour  and  my  faith, 
that  I’ll  ne’er  forget  you  while  I  live.  [/A  lifts  her  into  the  tree. 

Sidea.  I  trust  that  I  shall  be  safe  here,  but  pray  don’t  forget  me. 

Engelbrecht.  Why  do  you  harp  on  ‘  forgetting  ’  ?  I’ll  fetch  you  immediately. 

[Exit. 

The  maiden  sits  in  the  tree,  and  says  sorrowfully  :  If  the  prince  for  whom  I  have 
done  so  much  should  betray  me,  I  would  invoke  vengeance  on  him  and  revenge,  all 
my  life. 

Enter  Finelia  the  cobbler’s  wife,  with  a  pitcher  to  fetch  water,  and  says  :  In  this 
wretched  town  there’s  no  good  drinking-water,  so  we  have  to  fetch  it  from  a  dis¬ 
tance.  My  husband  at  home  has  told  me  to  hurry  and  bring  some  water.  Water 
never  makes  folks  dance  and  hop.  So  I  begged  him  to  buy  some  beer — but  the  fool 
is  such  a  skinflint.  [She  goes  to  the  spring  to  draw  water. ]  Ei,  ei,  now  I  can  see 
myself  reflected  in  the  well.  [She  throws  down  the  pitcher  and  walks  simperingly 
around  the  spring.']  The  like  of  me  cannot  around  be  found.  What  an  uncommonly 
lovely  creature  !  What  a  fool  I  was  to  take  up  with  that  wax-end  loony,  that  ugly, 
misshaped  booby  !  I’ve  done  with  him,  I’ll  straight  to  court.  [Exit. 

Enter  Ela,  the  peasant  maid,  with  a  pitcher,  and,  as  she  is  about  to  draw  some 
water,  she  sees  the  reflected  image,  and  says  :  I  cannot  tell  how  surprised  I  am,  now 
that  I  see  my  reflection  and  discover  how  fair  I  am.  Ei,  ei,  what  was  I  thinking  of 
to  wish  to  have  the  miller?  I’m  downright  ashamed  of  it.  And  though  I’ve  loved 
not  wisely,  yet  there  are  many  people  in  the  world  who  don’t  know  it,  and  don’t  care 
for  it.  And  forsooth,  I  must  needs  live  in  a  comer  with  that  fellow !  No,  no,  I’ll 
none  of  the  miller.  I’ll  to  court  as  a  grand  dame. 

[She  also  throws  away  her  pitcher  and  walks  proudly  off. 

Enter  John  Molitor,  and  says :  My  master  raves  awfully  and  swears  I  must  find 
out  his  daughter,  because  I  didn’t  look  sharp  enough  after  her.  He  reviles,  insults, 
and  blackguards  me.  Yes,  indeed,  he  said  it  to  my  face,  that  if  I  didn’t  find  her 
he’d  kill  me.  I’ve  run  round  the  whole  world,  and  have  neither  guttled  nor  guzzled 
a  single  thing.  The  sun  is  mighty  hot.  Look,  down  yonder  is  a  nice  spring,  I’ll 
refresh  myself  there  a  bit.  [He  goes  to  the  spring,  looks  in,  stands  up,  looks  up  into 
the  tree,  and  says  .•]  The  reflection  frightened  me.  What  lovely  dolls  are  hanging  on 
the  tree.  This  is  the  luckiest  spring  in  the  world,  for  here  I’ve  found  the  girl.  I’ll 
go  straight  and  tell  my  master.  He’ll  come  to  fetch  her  right  off.  [Exit. 

Sidea  ( mournfully  in  the  tree).  Alas!  whither  shall  I  fly.  My  dearest  stays  too 
long  away.  The  water’s  reflection  has  betrayed  me  to  John  Molitor,  and  he  will  tell 
my  father.  Alack  1  for  grief  and  woe  !  Here  is  a  new  danger.  Engelbrecht  has 
clean  forgotten  me  !  Oh  woeful  day,  where  shall  I  fly.  I  am  the  wretchedest  crea¬ 
ture  on  earth.  Alas,  with  what  anguish  of  heart  I  quiver !  Oh,  woe  and  calamity, 
I  hear  some  people  coming ! 

Enter  Dietrich  the  cobbler,  and  says  :  I  don’t  know  what  it  means.  I  told  my 
wife  to  fetch  me  some  water.  She  came  back  out  of  her  senses,  says  she  has  seen  in 
the  well  what  a  beautiful  woman  she  is,  and  that  she’ll  stay  with  me  no  more,  but  will 
set  up  as  a  lady.  I  can  never  stand  thirst,  and  if  I  don’t  wish  to  die  of  it  I  must  fetch 
Water  for  myself.  At  the  same  time,  I  will  look  and  see  what  has  made  my  wife  so 
silly.  [He  goes  to  the  well  to  draw  water,  and  says  : J  The  water  gives  a  reflection. 


336 


APPENDIX 


A  beautiful  woman  must  be  sitting  above  the  spring.  [He  looks  around  and  descries 
Sidea,  and  says  .•]  Aha !  now  I  see  her.  Oh,  tender  maiden,  tell  me  what  you  are 
doing  up  there  in  the  tree.  To  whom  do  you  belong  ?  whence  do  you  come  ? 

Sidea  clasps  her  hands,  and  says  ;  Ah,  my  good  friend,  I  beg  you  sore  that  you 
will  help  me  from  this  tree,  and  give  me  shelter  for  only  two  days  that  I  may  rest 
myself  a  while  and  escape  from  my  enemy.  And  if  you  will  aid  me  to  avoid  this 
calamity,  I  will  reward  you  richly. 

Dietrich  the  cobbler  lifts  her  from  the  tree,  and  says  :  Indeed,  I’ll  do  it  willingly 
But  I  am  very  badly  off  at  home. 

Sidea.  When  there,  I’ll  tell  you  everything;  how  I  unluckily  came  hither.  Fa 
I  greatly  feared  that  I  should  be  a  captive  if  I  stayed  there  long,  and  so  encounte> 
woe  and  pain.  [They  go  off  together. 

Enter  Ludolff  the  Prince,  and  says :  Here  I’ll  await  my  Spirit.  If  he  doesn't 
know  where  my  daughter  is,  it’s  all  up  with  the  miller.  I  have  sworn  an  oath  that 
he  must  die  by  my  hand. 

[Hereupon  Ludolff  makes  a  circle  with  his  staff ;  Runcifal  leaps  forth. 

Ludolff.  Inform  me,  Runcifal,  where  my  daughter  has  gone.  I  am  greatly 
enraged  with  you,  because  you  let  her  escape  and  never  told  me. 

[Runcifal  indicates  that  it  was  not  his  fault,  because  he  could  not  speak. 

Ludolff.  What  do  you  mean  ?  Speak  at  once. 

[Runcifal  makes  signs  that  he  cannot. 

Ludolff.  He  is  bewitched,  I  clearly  see. 

[He  strikes  the  Devil  on  the  mouth  with  his  staff. 

Runcifal.  Your  daughter  accepted  the  prince.  And  I  came  along  just  then, 
and  was  going  to  tell  thee  about  it,  when  she  struck  me  on  the  mouth,  so  that  my 
tongue  was  tied  and  not  a  single  word  since  then  have  I  spoken.  How,  then,  could 
I  tell  thee  ?  Thereupon  they  ran  away  from  thee,  and  have  gone  home  to  his  father. 

Ludolff  {mournfully).  Now  at  last  I  am  utterly  ruined.  If  my  John  Molitor 
doesn’t  find  her  my  heart  will  never  again  know  peace.  [ Enter  John  Molitor  with 
a  little  drum  and  pipe  ;  he  pipes  and  the  Devil  begins  to  dance. 

Ludolff  If  thou  art  so  merry,  John,  and  canst  pipe,  tell  me  where  my  daughter  is  ? 

John.  Your  daughter?  [Pipes  again  and  drums. 

Ludolff.  Yes,  my  daughter,  where  is  she  ? 

John.  Marry  come  up,  I’ve  seen  her. 

[Pipes  and  drums  again,  the  Devil  keeps  on  dancing. 

Ludolff.  Where  hast  thou  seen  her,  show  me  ? 

John.  I  saw  her  [pipes  again,  and  then  he  says  .•]  in  a  tree. 

Ludolff  {angrily).  Stop  thy  piping,  and  tell  me  about  my  dear  daughter.  [John 
pipes  and  drums,  the  Devil  dances,  then  some  other  devils  run  out;  they  all  dance,  at 
last  John  stops. 

Ludolff.  I  believe  thou’st  lost  thy  wits,  to  kick  up  such  a  rumpus  here. _ You 

Devils,  clear  right  out. — In  one  word,  tell  me  where  thou  hast  seen  my  daughter  ? 

John.  She  sat  there  on  the  limb  of  a  tree,  the  very  next  one  to  the  spring.  And 
I  am  so  mighty  joyful  now,  because  I’ve  found  her.  Come  hither,  and  we’ll  find  her 
there  yet.  Tis  true  I  didn  t  see  her.  The  reflection  in  the  water  betrayed  her,  just 
as  1  was  about  to  drink. 

Ludolff.  Ah,  if  I  could  only  get  her  again  !  Waste  no  time,  but  go  right  off  and 
help  me  find  my  daughter.  [  Ihey  g0  0p 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— THE  FAIR  SIDEA 


337 

L  'iter  Dietrich  the  cobbler ,  with  his  wife,  and  says  :  Finelia  mine,  tell  me,  I  pray, 
what 's  the  matter,  that  thou’lt  not  treat  me  kindly  any  longer  ? 

Finelia.  I’m  sorry  I  ever  accepted  thee,  and  that  I  live  with  thee.  I’m  a  most 
lovely  woman.  The  like  is  not  in  the  city. 

Dietrich.  Say,  who  told  thee  that  ?  He  was  humbugging  thee. 

Finelia.  The  reflection  which  I  saw  in  the  spring  told  me. 

Dietrich.  Then  come  along  to  the  spring,  and  see  if  thou’st  not  been  plumply 
deceived.  [Finelia  goes  with  him  to  the  spring,  looks  in,  and  says  .•]  My  former  face 
is  gone.  When  I  look  down  now,  I  can’t  mistake  myself  for  any  one  else.  And  I’m 
scarcely  good  enough  for  thee.  But  when  I  threw  away  my  pitcher  I  was  young  and 
fair  like  the  court  dames,  and  then  I  thought  I  was  too  good  for  thee. 

Dietmch.  Never  mind,  Finelia  dear.  Look,  here  comes  the  maiden  whose  face 
was  reflected  in  the  well.  I  found  her  sitting  in  the  tree.  Thy  beauty  was  an  imag¬ 
ined  dream.  It  can’t  compare  with  hers. 

Sidea  enters,  and  says  :  Mr  Cobbler,  I  hope  you’ll  grant  my  prayer,  that  I  may 
have  your  wife’s  clothes  to  wear  on  the  street,  and  that  you  will  let  her  go  with  me 
and  wear  my  clothes.  I’ll  reward  you  richly.  I  only  want  to  go  to  the  Prince’s 
court,  I’ll  soon  send  her  back  to  you. 

Dietrich.  That’s  all  right.  May  the  gods  go  with  you,  and  may  they  all  grant 
that  we  may  soon  meet  again  in  joy.  [  They  all  go  off. 

Enter  Prince  Ludolff  with  John  Molitor. 

John.  On  this  tree,  over  this  spring,  I  found  your  daughter.  But  she’s  no  longer 
there. 

Ludolff.  I  don’t  care  for  thy  findings,  find  out  where  she  has  gone.  You  should 
have  taken  her  with  thee  and  brought  her  home. 

John.  For  joy,  I  never  thought  of  that.  I  thought  that  if  your  grace  should  come 
yourself  and  take  her  down,  it  would  be  a  much  greater  joy.  [Ludolff  beats  him  with 
his  staff,  and  says  .•]  What  a  stupid,  senseless  blockhead  thou  art !  Simpleton  and 
silly  calf!  What  thou  dost  by  halves  thou’lt  pay  with  thy  hide.  [Runcifal  the 
Devil  runs  in,  and  says  .•]  There’s  no  use  in  this  fuss.  I’ve  looked  everywhere  for 
her.  We’ve  been  thwarted  by  cunning.  She’s  gone  to  the  Prince  of  Wiltau,  and  is 
Engelbrecht’s  bride.  So  cease  your  pursuit. 

Ludolff.  My  misery  is  indescribable.  More  sorrow  and  wretchedness  has  befallen 
me.  I’ve  been  sold  and  betrayed.  I  don’t  know  where  to  begin.  Don’t  let  us  delay, 
but  go  at  once  to  my  cave.  There  we  can  discuss  how  I  must  manage. 

[  They  all  go  off. 

Actus  Quartus. 

Enter  Leudegast,  Prince  of  Wiltau,  with  Franciscus  and  Elemaus,  and  says 
mournfully :  How  can  I  tell  the  sorrow  of  my  heart !  That  Engelbrecht,  my  only 
son,  should  be  kept  so  long  in  his  horrible  imprisonment.  We  have  sent  everywhere 
for  him,  but  no  one  has  found  him.  I’m  afraid  he’s  dead.  I’ve  just  won  a  wife  for 
him — namely,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Poland,  whom  we’ve  just  had  fetched  here. 
She’s  waiting  impatiently  for  him;  and  when  she  hears  that  he’s  a  prisoner,  she’ll 
never  be  comforted.  Moreover,  she  won’t  be  kept  here  any  longer.  She’ll  go  home 
to-morrow. 

Franciscus.  We’ll  spare  no  pains,  but  try  every  means  to  find  the  young  prince. 
By  night  and  day,  with  force  of  arms,  Ludolff  must  be  pursued  and  killed  like  a  dog 
Every  hour  he  is  plotting  against  us  and  this  country. 


22 


338 


APPENDIX 


Elemaus.  It  we  are  to  snatch  your  Highness’  son  out  of  Ludolff’s  hands,  we 
must  send  out  a  great  army  and  carry  him  off  by  force.  Unless  I  am  deceived,  there 
are  some  people  at  the  door. 

Leudegast.  Let  them  enter.  Perhaps  it  is  a  messenger  with  unexpected  news  of 
my  son. 

Elemaus  opens  the  door ,  Engelbrecht  enters  in  ragged  clothes,  Prince  Leudegast 
arises,  goes  to  him,  and  says  :  Oh,  see  !  oh,  woe  1  what  shall  we  do  ?  Alas,  be  wel¬ 
come  here,  dear  son.  Alas,  and  wert  thou  bom  a  prince,  and  now  art  in  such  dread¬ 
ful  clothes.  And  where  hast  thou  been  all  this  time  ? — Go  quick  and  bring  to  him 
some  clothes,  new  shoes,  and  eke  a  finger  ring,  and  share  all  good  things  here  with 
me. — But  thou,  pray  tell  me  all  that  has  occurred  to  thee. 

Engelbrecht.  Ludolff  the  prince  took  me  a  prisoner.  Through  him  I  came  to 
great  discomfort.  I  had  to  carry  wood  for  him,  and  to  cut  and  split  it.  And  he 
treated  me  very  badly.  And  he  handed  me  over  to  his  daughter,  who  almost  took 
my  life.  Then  she  took  pity  on  me,  a  poor,  sick,  half-dead  man.  After  that  she  did 
me  no  more  harm,  she  accepted  me  in  marriage.  Came  away  with  me  as  far  as  this 
neighborhood.  When  she  was  able  to  go  no  further,  I  made  her  get  up  in  a  tree  a 
little  distance  from  the  highway,  while  I  came  off  to  get  a  coach.  Wherefore,  Hen- 
Father,  orders  must  be  given  to  bring  Sidea  here.  [I lere  the  counsellors  return  with 
the  clothes,  dress  him,  and  Leudegast  says  .•]  My  dear  son,  dost  thou  lack  aught  else  ? 
Everything  which  thou  desirest  we  shall  graciously  grant.  Also  we  shall  look  about 
for  the  most  lovely  maiden  for  thee,  whom  thou  must  marry.  And  so,  my  son,  thou 
must  remain  at  home,  and  not  expose  thyself  as  heretofore. — Gentlemen,  bring  hither 
the  damsel.  She  has  long  awaited  thee.  She  will  be  highly  delighted.  (Elemaus 
goes  off,  carrying  the  clothes,  returns  with  Julia  the  maiden,  and  says:)  Gracious 
Prince,  I  bring  the  maiden  for  your  gracious  son  to  see,  whom  we  behold  with  joy. 

Julia,  the  maiden.  To  the  gods  will  we  give  praises,  who  have  brought  you  home. 

Engelbrecht.  I  cannot  express  my  joy,  that  an  hour  like  this  has  been  granted  to 
me.  No  creature  in  the  world  can  believe  the  misery  from  which  I  have  escaped. 
But  I  hope  things  will  be  better  in  future.  After  rain  comes  the  sun. 

Leudegast.  Darling  son,  let  us  retire  and  discuss  how  quickest  we  may  celebrate 
the  marriage,  and  order  it  in  the  most  costly  manner,  and  that  it  lacks  nothing. 

[  They  all  go  off,  Engelbrecht  leading  the  maiden. 

Enter  Duke  Ludolff  with  his  John,  and  says  :  John  Molitor,  we  are  done  up.  We 
must  win  or  die.  My  daughter  I  will  have  again  or  stake  my  life.  If  the  young 
Prince  is  going  to  keep  Sidea,  he  must  bring  me  again  into  the  grace  and  favour  of 
his  old  father.  As  it  is  all  thy  fault  that  Sidea  escaped,  thou’lt  have  to  find  out  the 
best  w?.y,  or  with  thy  hide  thou’lt  have  to  pay.  (John  shrinks  back,  and  says  :)  I’ve 
always  been  a  prudent  man,  and  if  your  grace  will  obey  me,  just  put  on  my  clothes 
while  I  put  on  yours,  and  thus  we’ll  go  together  to  Court,  where  we’ll  devise  some 
cunning  practice  to  bring  off  Sidea  or  the  lad ;  whereby  the  old  Prince,  in  order  to 
retrieve  the  disgrace,  will  be  forced  to  restore  your  gracious  Highness  to  favour  and 
conclude  a  peace  with  you. 

Ludolff.  Ay,  marry,  there’s  no  harm  in  trying.  We’ll  put  our  fate  to  the  touch. 
Good  luck  may  favour  us  !  [  They  g0  ^ 

Enter  Julia,  and  says  sorrozvfiilly  :  Alas,  I  have  just  learned  that  Engelbrecht 
has  already  plighted  his  troth  to  Sidea,  the  fairest  of  maidens,  the  daughter  of  the 
Prince  of  Wiltau.  Woe’s  me,  if  that  is  really  true,  the  very  first  thing  tnat  she’ll  do 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— THE  FAIR  SIDE  A 


339 

will  be  to  contest  my  betrothal,  and  I  shall  come  off  second  best,  and  then  remain  the 
jeer  and  sneer  of  rich  and  poor  both  far  and  near.  Woe’s  me,  of  this  nad  I  been 
ware,  they’d  not  have  caught  me  in  this  snare.  The  Prince  I  know  will  make  it  good. 
He  has  promised  silver,  hill,  and  mountain.  If  I  do  not  miss  it  that  way,  perhaps  I 
may  come  off  pretty  well.  But  now  I’ll  retire  to  my  chamber.  [j Exit. 

Enter  Sidea,  with  a  shabby  cloak  over  her  beautiful  clothes ,  and  a  kerchief,  which 
she  can  throw  off  quickly.  She  carries  a  goblet  full  of  a  drink,  and  says  :  Well,  I’ve 
reached  the  court  at  last,  but  have  heard  some  very  bad  news,  namely,  that  Prince 
Engelbrecht  has  utterly  forgotten  the  benefits  I  bestowed  on  him  and  risked  life  and 
limb  in  the  doing.  He  has  lost  sight  of  everything  and  has  at  last  betrothed  another, 
with  whom  to-day  he  celebrates  his  marriage.  But  I’ve  got  a  drink  ready  for  him 
here ;  with  it  I’ll  creep  in  among  the  guests,  and  when  they  are  at  the  merriest  I’ll 
offer  him  the  draught  to  drink.  The  first  drop  he  gulps  will  make  him  recognise 
me,  make  obeisance  to  me  and  call  me  by  name  and  recall  his  promise  to  me,  and 
lead  me  to  the  altar  afterwards,  so  that  what  began  in  sorrow  will  have  a  joyous 
ending.  [She  goes  off. 

Enter  Leudegast,  the  Prince,  with  his  counsellors  Franciscus  and  Elemaus,  and 
with  Julia  and  Engelbrecht  his  son,  and  says  :  This  day  is  the  marriage  day,  so  drive 
all  thoughts  and  care  away.  Princes  and  Lords  are  gathering  here  from  every  coun 
try  far  and  near;  they  wish  to  beautify  this  feast  for  us,  and  it  is,  therefore,  our  duty 
to  show  them  honour.  So  then  be  cheery  all.  After  a  while,  according  to  an  ancient 
custom,  we’ll  go  to  the  Great  Temple  of  Jupiter  and  have  you  there  joined  in  mar¬ 
riage,  with  eating,  drinking  and  music,  with  races,  tourneys,  contests  and  combats, 
and  in  merry  pastimes  drown  all  sorrow.  Bid  welcome,  then,  each  stranger  guest, 
and  honour  all,  your  very  best.  [  They  all  bow.  Enter  Sidea,  disguised,  as  just 
described,  carrymg  her  goblet.  She  gives  them  her  hand,  and  then  says  to  the  Bride¬ 
groom  .•]  Herr  Bridegroom,  I  am  an  ambassador,  perhaps  wholly  unknown  to  you,  yet 
sent  hither  by  a  great  nation.  That  you  may  grandly  refresh  yourself,  and  feel  to-day 
as  you  never  felt  before,  drink  this  wine,  which  is  of  the  best,  and  which  I  here  pre¬ 
sent  to  you  to-day  upon  your  princely  wedding.  [Engelbrecht  takes  the  goblet,  looks 
at  it,  drinks,  clasps  his  hands,  and  says  .•]  Woe’s  me  !  how  abandoned  I  have  been 
to  have  so  scandalously  forgotten  my  darling  Sidea.  Oh  woe  !  woe  !  sorrow  1  anguish 
and  agony !  Woe,  heartbreaking,  sighing,  and  pain !  [He  draws  his  dagger  and 
says:']  My  saddened  heart  I  will  herewith  free  from  further  agony,  and  be  my  own  exe¬ 
cutioner  for  forgetting  my  dearest.  [Sidea  grasps  the  dagger.  All  run  to  them.  Sidea 
says  .•]  With  what  folly  are  you  seized.  Take  comfort,  all  will  be  well.  Summon  up 
your  courage.  What  though  you  deserted  Sidea  in  a  tree  on  a  strange  road,  she’s 
alive  and  brisk  and  well,  and  you  shall  see  her  in  a  trice.  [Sidea  throws  off  the  cloak 
and  kerchief.  Engelbrecht  falls  at  his  father's  feet,  and  says  .•]  Ah,  Herr  Father,  take 
pity  on  me.  She  who  has  just  come  in  is  the  daughter  of  Prince  Ludolff,  he  whose 
temper  was  worse  than  a  wolf’s ;  he  gave  me  to  her  for  her  own.  She  preserved  my 
life,  and  had  she  not  done  so  I  should  have  been  decayed  long  ago.  I  plighted  her 
my  troth,  and  when  she  could  go  no  further,  I  put  her  in  a  tree  in  the  woods  and 
promised  to  fetch  her  right  away,  as  I  told  you,  Herr  Father.  After  that,  I  forgot  it 
and  engaged  myself  to  Julia,  whom  my  conscience  now  reproaches  me  I  cannot  lead 
to  the  altar — rather  will  I  lose  my  life.  [To  Julia  he  says: J  Wherefore,  princely 
maiden,  I  implore  that  you  will  pity  my  anguish  and  release  my  plighted  troth. 

Julia.  It  doesn’t  matter  a  great  deal.  If  you  were  engaged  to  her  before  me,  of 
course  I  ought  not  have  come  hither,  for  the  first  vow  takes  precedence,  I  suppose. 


340 


APPENDIX 


But  I,  poor  fool,  must  now  bear  reproach  from  everybody.  But  you  ought  to  be  even 
more  ashamed  of  yourself  than  I  who  knew  nothing  about  it. 

Leudegast.  Ah,  put  the  best  face  on  the  matter.  It  all  happened  unwittingly. 
That  no  such  reproaches  broad  and  deep  may  befall  you,  as  you  have  just  spoken  of, 
come  with  us  to  the  Church,  and  before  you  leave,  I  will  confer  on  you  a  prince’s 
son,  handsome,  rich,  and  as  good  as  he,  and  you  shall  have  amends  from  us  for  all 
your  injuries,  big  and  little.  [/A  goes  to  Sidea,  gives  her  his  hand,  and  says  .•]  Ah, 
are  you  then  henceforth  my  daughter-in-law  ?  Your  father  is  my  bitterest  foe.  If  he 
were  only  here  to-day  we’d  become  reconciled,  and  henceforth  for  the  rest  of  our 
days  have  no  more  discord.  Accept  my  thanks  for  the  kindness  and  honour  you 
have  done  my  son.  [  There  is  a  knocking.^  Sirrah,  see  who  knocks.  [  The  door  is 
opened,  Prince  Ludolff  with  John  Molitor  enters  and  stands  in  a  corner. ] 

Leudegast.  Who  may  be  those  persons  that  enter  ?  Forsooth,  two  very  ill-mated 
companions.  [Sidea  looks  around;  immediately  recognises  her  father,  and  says 
Oh  woe,  it  is  my  father  dear;  why  did  he  risk  himself  in  here?  [She  says  to  her 
father  :~\  Alas,  Herr  Father,  what  are  you  doing  here  ?  I  am  in  terror  for  you,  that 
you  should  thus  venture. 

Ludolff.  Alas,  canst  thou  be  my  flesh  and  blood  and  betray  me  so  scandalously  t 
[He  goes  to  Leudegast,  and  says  /]  I  pray  your  grace  to  pardon  me.  As  affairs  have 
tinned  out,  I  will  never,  as  long  as  I  live,  do  anything  against  your  grace. 

Leudegast  [giving  him  his  hand~\.  Since  everything  seems  to  be  turning  out  to 
make  us  good  friends,  I  restore  your  land  to  you  and  make  with  you  a  lasting  peace, 
never  to  be  broken,  but  always  upheld ;  the  terms  whereof  shall  be  carefully  laid 
down  after  we  have  consulted  together,  and  sealed  it  with  our  privy  seals,  as  soon  as 
the  wedding  is  over. 

Ludolff.  All  discord  shall  vanish  in  pure  love  and  good  friendship.  And  to 
show  that  the  same  has  power  and  commences  from  this  very  hour,  I  pledge  you, 
hand  and  mouth.  [Ludolff  gives  him  his  hand,  and  says  to  his  son-in-law  .•]  Now 
I  wish  you  all  health  and  happiness,  although  I  did  treat  you  pretty  badly.  After 
all,  it’s  over  now  without  any  harm,  and  everything  is  turning  out  well.  [  To  John.] 
See  here,  take  back  your  clothes  and  take  off  mine.  [He  attires  himself  for  a  wed¬ 
ding.  Leudegast  takes  Julia’s  hand,  and  says  .•]  Since  happiness  again  is  ours  and 
all  hostility  at  an  end,  let’s  all  together  enter  here  and  joyous  be  with  merry  cheer, 
and  let  the  wedding  now  begin.  Julia,  to  you  I  give  as  spouse  our  Prince  Franciscus 
together  with  a  comfortable  fortune,  so  that  your  joy  will  be  the  greater.  [He  takes 
her  to  the  Prince  Franciscus,  joins  their  hands,  and  says  .•]  We  thus  give  you  to  each 
other,  and  let  the  marriage  proceed  at  once. 

Franciscus.  There  is  no  loss,  there  is  great  gain.  Dearest  dear,  be  now  con¬ 
doled  ;  from  all  your  woe  be  freed.  This  marriage  you  shall  never  rue. 

Julia.  If  your  love  to  me  is  in  earnest,  I  am  satisfied  with  it.  All  my  sorrows 
have  vanished  and  I  will  do  everything  you  wish. 

Leudegast.  Since  everything  is  now  arranged,  and  the  time  has  come  for  the 
marriage  to  begin,  all  follow  after  me,  and  every  care  you’ll  put  away;  this  is,  of  all, 
the  happiest  day.  [  They  all  go  out  in  order. 

Actus  Quintus. 

John  Molitor  remains  behind,  and  concludes ;  This  history  shows:  ’Tis  bad  to 
resist  the  strong.  Whenever  circumstances  arise  which  move  us  to  anget,  let  us  con¬ 
trol  ourse’ves.  Consider  if  we  lose  our  cause,  what  harm  and  damage  thence  accrue. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— COHN 


341 


Tis  well  said  that  self-harm  brings  woe.  The  rich  who  are  stronger,  it  is  better  to 
appease  and  mollify,  than  to  stir  up  to  strife.  For  the  strongest  generally  comes  out 
on  top.  And  although  the  weaker  may  find  a  good  chance  afterwards  for  revenge, 
he  mustn’t  count  too  much  on  it.  Let  him  look  out  that  luck  doesn’t  beguile  him 
It  often  happens  that  he  who  is  to-day  on  top  may  shortly  get  a  fall.  For  vengeance 
doesn’t  please  God,  but  as  the  Bible  tells  us  He  will  himself  repay  the  wicked.  There¬ 
fore  so  act  that  each  side  may  yield  a  bit,  and  let  each  so  behave  that  out  of  former 
quarrels  and  contention  eternal  unity  may  follow. 


albert  Cohn,  who,  in  his  Shakespeare  in  Germany ,  has  put  under  lasting  obli¬ 
gations  all  students  of  this  chapter  of  German  Dramatic  History,  observes  (p.  lxviii) : 
‘  Ayrer’s  piece  has  a  thoroughly  legendary  character.  The  apparently  historical  per- 
‘sonages  are  not  to  be  met  with  in  history.  A  Prince  Ludolff  of  Lithuania  has 

*  existed  just  as  little  as  a  Prince  Leudegast  of  the  Wiltau.  The  Wiltau  is  a  fabulous 
‘  name ;  the  nearest  approach  to  it  is  Wilna,  but  it  does  not  appear  that  the  latter  has 
‘  been  ever  so  denominated.*  History  has  no  record  of  any  Polish  Princess  (Julia), 
‘  who  was  engaged  to  be  married  to  a  son  of  a  Prince  of  Wiltau  (Engelbrecht). 
‘  Ludolff  says  to  Sidea,  “  May  Jove,”  &c.,  and  also  in  other  passages  the  heathen  gods 

*  are  introduced.  “  Heathen  clothes  ”  are  expressly  prescribed  for  Ludolff  and  Sidea, 

‘  a  direct  proof  that  Ayrer  placed  the  action  in  an  ante-Christian  period . Ayrer 

‘  is  not  the  inventor  of  this  subject;  he  has  had  either  a  legend  or  a  play  before  him. 

*  A  proof  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  First  Act,  where  Leudegast  says  of  Prince 

*  Ludolff :  “  Duke  Leupold  so  loves  strife  and  brawl  That  now  he’s  challenged  us  to 
“  fall,”  &c.  No  Duke  Leupold  appears  throughout  the  whole  piece,  and  the  men- 
‘  tion  of  one  in  this  passage  is  a  confusion  of  names  which  can  only  be  explained  by 
5  the  supposition  of  a  somewhat  careless  use  of  the  original  sources.’  Unquestionably 
Ayrer’s  play  is  a  mere  adaptation ;  we  are  so  informed  on  the  title-page  of  his  Opus 
Thcatricum  ;  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Leupold  for  ‘  Ludolff’  is  simply  an  over¬ 
sight.  In  a  note  on  IV,  i,  164  of  The  Tempest,  instead  of  Miranda,  Walker  wrote 
Matilda,  and  his  accomplished  editor  Lettsom  never  noticed  it.  On  p.  Ixx,  Cohn 
continues,  ‘  In  all  cases  where  we  are  acquainted  with  the  sources  from  which  Ayrer 

*  derived  his  plots,  we  see  that  he  almost  always  retains  the  original  names  for  his 
principal  persons ;  and  as  it  is  highly  improbable  that  these,  for  the  most  part  purely 

'  German  names,  should  have  occurred  in  an  English  drama  of  the  sixteenth  century 

*  we  cannot  place  much  confidence  in  the  suggestion,  that  any  such  work  was  the 
common  source  of  the  two  plays  in  question.  Ayrer  appears  rather  to  have  worked 
after  some  German  original,  and  this  may  have  come  to  light  in  England  in  the  form 

‘  of  some  metamorphosis  or  other.  Neither  is  it  impossible,  or  even  improbable,  that 
‘  Ayrer’s  piece  itself  may  have  come  to  Shakespeare’s  knowledge  through  the  medium 
‘  of  comedians  who  had  returned  to  England.’ 

Dr  W.  Bell  finds  so  much  similarity  between  Die  schone  Sidea  and  The  Tempest 
that  he  is  convinced  that  either  Ayrer  copied  from  Shakespeare  or  Shakespeare  copied 
from  Ayrer.  But  as  The  Tempest  is  one  of  Shakespeare’s  latest  plays,  and  as  Ayrer 
died  in  1605,  it  follows  that  it  was  not  Ayrer  who  was  the  plagiarist.  ‘Nothing 
‘  would  have  been  more  in  character,’  Bell  says  {Shis  Puck,  ii,  289),  ‘  than  if  Shake- 
‘  speare  had  made  one  of  the  various  wandering  companies  of  English  performers  .... 

*  Caro  ( Englische  Studien,  II.  band,  i.  heft,  p.  159)  says  that  among  ‘  German  orders  “  Wiltau  ” 
is  the  usual  name  for  Wilna.' — Ed. 


342 


APPENDIX 


and  have  listened  to,  if  not  read, — nay,  acted  in, — the  dramas  or  Carnival  Farces 
‘  of  Hans  Sachs  and  Ayrer.’  Bell  then  assumes  that  to  this  residence  of  Shakespeare 
in  Germany  is  due  that  knowledge  of  Folk-lore  which,  as  Bell  thinks,  is  to  be  detected 
profusely  scattered  through  his  plays.  For  instance,  a  story,  taken  down  by  word  of 
mouth  by  Bechstein  ( Deutsches  Marchenbuch,  p.  172),  called  The  Three  Nuts,  con¬ 
tains  the  task  of  log-splitting  set  to  a  captive  prince  by  a  magician,  and  vicariously 
accomplished  by  a  lovely  and  compassionate  princess.  Again,  in  Kuhn’s  Markische 
Sagen,  p.  263,  a  story  is  given  *  which  may  have  helped  to  build  up  another  portion 
‘  of  Shakespeare’s  Tempest  from  German  sources.’  *  It  is  entitled  Die  Konig’s  Toch- 
ter  beim  Popanz,  The  King's  Daughter  at  the  Wizard's.’  Here  we  have  a  ship¬ 
wrecked  Prince,  an  enamoured  Princess  versed  in  magic  arts,  a  conjuring  staff, 
whereby  ‘  when  pursued  the  Princess  turns  herself  into  a  wondrous  flower  and  her 
‘  *over  into  a  bee.’  The  parallelism  which  Bell  discovers  in  this  last  item  may  serve 
as  a  sample  of  the  value  of  the  rest  of  his  criticism.  The  ‘  wondrous  flower,’  Bell 
finds  developed  into  Miranda,  with  a  play  on  the  meaning  of  the  name ;  and  the 
‘  bee  ’  suggested  Ariel’s  ‘  Where  the  bee  sucks.’ 

‘The  resemblance  of  the  Side  a  to  The  Tempest ,’  says  Tittmann  ( SchauspieU 
a.  d.  sechzehnten  Jahrhundert,  1868,  ii,  151),  ‘is  twofold;  it  lies  first  in  the  main 
‘  idea,  which  the  Folk-lore  already  contained,  and  secondly  in  the  attendant  details. 

The  former,  the  reconciliation  of  hostile  Princes  by  the  marriage  of  their  children, 
‘originated  with  neither  of  the  two  poets;  a  similar  adjustment  of  difficulties  is 
‘  repeatedly  found  in  legend  and  history.’  [This  erroneous  statement  is  made  by 
almost  every  German  scholar  who  treats  of  this  subject,  and  in  some  cases  English 
critics  have  been  misled  into  adopting  it.  No  English  reader,  after  a  moment’s 
thought,  will  so  interpret  the  forgiveness  by  Prospero  of  Alonso.  But  the  idea  just 
expressed  by  Tittmann,  and  repeated  by  Meissner,  that  Prospero’s  reconciliation  with 
Alonso  was  brought  about  by  the  marriage  of  Ferdinand  and  Miranda,  seems  to  have 
become  fixed  in  Germany.]  ‘  In  the  combination  of  this  main  idea  the  choice  of  the  de- 
‘  tails  adds  heavily  to  the  weight.  An  accidental  accord  is  hardly  possible.’  Tittmann 
repeats  the  stories  mentioned  by  Bell,  and  adds  another  from  Wolf  (. Deutsche  Mdrchen 
u.  Sagen,  No.  26),  whereof  the  origin  is  to  be  traced,  he  thinks,  to  the  coasts  of  the 
North  Sea,  whence,  as  the  common  property  of  the  Lower  Saxon  stock  in  Germany 
and  England,  Shakespeare  might  have  taken  it,  just  as  Ayrer  might  have  chosen 
another  form  of  it.  ‘  Perhaps  the  Prince  had  to  fight  a  monster  on  the  island,  just  as 
‘  Hagen  had  to  fight  Gabilun,  whereof  the  form  of  Caliban  is  a  survival.  At  all 
‘  events,  that  feature  is  genuine  which  attributes  Prospero’s  power  to  his  mantle,  his 

Wishing-mantle . Ariel  s  pipe  and  tabor  and  John  Molitor’s  music  are  merely 

‘  accidental  parallelisms— these  instruments  are  the  favourite  ones  with  the  Clown  on 
‘  the  English  stage,  and  Ayrer  merely  imitates  a  clown  in  his  John.’  Tittmann  adopts 
the  suggestion  made  by  Cohn,  that  Shakespeare  might  possibly  have  gained  his  know¬ 
ledge  of  these  German  sources  from  the  returning  Comedians,  and  thinks  that  through 
this  hypothesis,  which  is  not  altogether  too  recondite,  a  “  Shakespearian  mystery,” 

‘  as  English  critics  have  termed  the  source  of  the  plot  of  The  Tempest,  may  be  brought 
‘  nearer  to  its  final  solution.’  [Let  me  remark  parenthetically,  that  Tittmann  is,  I 
think,  unhappy  in  the  text  of  Die  schone  Sidea  which  he  has  selected  for  reprinting ; 
and  Meissner,  the  latest  critic,  has  followed  him.  Tittmann’s  text  is  to  me  really  more 
difficult  to  read  than  the  original.  For  ‘  than  ’  of  the  original,  Tittmann  has  tan  ;  fof 
‘  weh,’  he  has  we  ;  and  for  ‘  Eh,’  e,  &c. ;  his  foot-notes,  however,  are  helpful.] 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALLIWELL 


343 


Hitherto  we  have  found  the  German  critics  temperate  in  their  claims  for  Sidea 
as  a  source  for  The  Tempest ;  the  most  that  has  been  urged  by  them  (Bell  was 
an  Englishman)  is  a  common  origin.  We  now  come  to  Meissner,  whose  book 
( Untersuchungen  ilber  Shakespeare's  ‘  Sturm'  1872)  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  octavo 
pages  is  devoted  to  the  investigation  of  the  sources  of  the  plot  of  the  present  play ; 
its  first  chapter  deals  with  Die  schone  Sidea,  and  therein  (p.  13)  Meissner  does  not 
hesitate  to  say  that  for  certain  details  ‘  Shakespeare  profited  by  Ayrer  direct  ’  ( Shake 
speare  Ay  reds  Stuck  direkt  benutzte ).  To  this  extraordinary  conclusion  he  comes 
after  many  pages  of  parallel  columns  with  passages  containing  what  he  calls  ‘  resem¬ 
blances.’  After  reading  them  carefully,  with  all  the  candour  at  my  command,  I  con¬ 
fess  that,  with  two,  possibly  three,  exceptions  (the  hackneyed  ‘  enchantment  of  the 
swords,’  the  ‘logbearing,’  and  possibly  Prospero’s  ‘  cell’  and  Ludolff’s  ‘cave  ’),  I  fail  to 
detect  in  many  instances  anything  more  than  the  merest  chance  resemblance,  and,  in 
the  majority  of  instances,  any  resemblance  whatever.  For  example  :  ‘  Miranda.  My 
‘husband,  then?  Ferd.  Ay,  with  a  heart  as  willing  As  bondage  e’er  of  freedom; 

‘  here’s  my  hand.  Mir.  And  mine  with  my  heart  in’t.’  To  this  passage  Meissner 
(p.  12)  finds  even  a  verbal  parallellism  in  the  following:  ‘  Sidea.  Bistu  denn  mein. 

‘  Engelbrecht.  Ja.  Sidea.  So  bleib  ich  dein  Die  Gotter  bleiben  mit  vns  beyden.’ 
[Here  Meissner  takes  two  lines  from  a  preceding  speech  of  Sidea  where  she  asks 
Engelbrecht  what  he  would  do  if  she  should  release  him  from  his  slavery.]  ‘  Wenn 
‘  ich  dir  deiner  Dienstbarkeit  Zu  wegen  brecht  jetzt  ein  freyheit.’  From  one  learn  all ; 
or  to  take  another  instance,  which  is  here  given  from  The  Tempest  just  as  Meissner 
gives  it,  except  that  it  is  given  in  Shakespeare’s  English  and  in  Cohn’s  (i.  e.  Solly’s) 
translation  of  the  German  :  In  I.  ii. :  ‘  Ariel.  Is  there  more  toil  ?  Since  thou  dost  give 

‘  me  pains . Prospero.  How  now  ?  moody  ?  ....  If  thou  more  murmur’st  I  will 

‘  rend  an  oak.’  To  this,  Meissner  gives  as  a  parallel  from  Sidea  :  ‘  Ludolf  with  a  white 
‘  silver  wand  makes  a  circle  with  some  characters  in  it,  strikes  the  opening  with  his 
‘  wand,  the  Devil  Runcival  leaps  forth,  spits  out  fire,  walks  around  the  circle  and  says 
angrily  :  “  Ludolff,  thou  art  a  wicked  man  ;  For  thee  I  nowhere  tarry  can.  If  thou  an 

“  ill  dost  meditate,  Thou  think’st  I  must  be  with  thee  straight . Ludolff.  Thou 

“rogue!  if  thou  so  proud  wilt  be,”  &c.’ 

From  such  proofs  as  these  the  conclusion  is  drawn  that  Shakespeare  went  direct 
to  Ayrer !  I  remember  that  Hamlet  once  spoke  of  ‘  a  god  kissing  carrion.’ 

Halliwell  (p.  503)  suggests  that  ‘  Prospero’s  prototype  may  be  looked  for,  with 
‘  some  probability  of  the  research  being  successful,  in  the  early  histories  of  Genoa, 
•where,  in  the  year  1477,  according  to  Thomas’s  Historye  of  Italy  e,  1561,  “  Prosperc 
“  Adorno  was  established  as  the  Duke  of  Millain’s  liuetenaunt  there ;  but  he  contin- 
«  ued  scarcely  one  yeare,  tyl  by  meane  of  new  practises  that  he  held  with  Ferdinando, 
“  kyng  of  Naples,  he  was  had  in  suspicion  to  the  Milanese ;  who,  willynge  to  depose 
“  him,  raysed  a  newe  commocion  of  the  people,  so  that  where  he  was  before  the 
“  dukes  liuetenaunte,  now  he  was  made  governoure  [or  duke]  absolutely  of  the  com- 
“  monwealth.”  Prospero  was,  however,  deposed,  and  after  some  other  changes,  the 
“  citesins,  remembering  how  they  were  best  in  quiet,  whan  they  were  subjectes  to 
“  the  Duke  of  Mi'laine,  returned  of  newe  to  be  under  the  Milanese  dominyon ;  and 
“  than  was  Antony  \.dorno  made  governoure  of  the  citee  for  the  duke.”  A  further 
‘  confirmation  that  ti  is  Prospero  was,  in  all  probability,  the  deposed  duke  of  The 
‘  Tempest  will  be  foui.d  in  Della  Origine  et  de  Fatti  delle  Famiglie  Illustri  id  Italia 
<  di  M.  Francesco  Sansovino,  libro  primo,  4to  Vin.  1582,’  wherefrom  Halliwell 


344 


APPENDIX 


gives  a  long  extract  in  the  original,  which,  however,  adds  nothing,  I  think,  to  oul 
knowledge. 

In  the  last  century,  attention  was  called  by  Steevens  to  the  similarity  between 
The  T 'empest  and  Pericles  in  the  storm-scene;  Meissner  ( Untersuchungen  uber  Sh.’s 
1  Sturm  ’)  goes  further,  and  urges  a  resemblance  in  other  respects  between  the  two 
plays ;  in  Cerimon,  Helicanus,  and  Marina  he  finds  the  prototypes  of  Prospero,  Gon- 
zalo,  and  Miranda ;  in  the  last  name  he  questions  if  there  be  not  a  reminiscence  of 
Marina.  He  accepts  Hunter’s  theory  that  the  description  of  the  tempest  was  sug¬ 
gested  by  Ariosto  s  Orlando ,  and  adds  two  or  three  additional  stanzas  to  those 
already  quoted  by  Hunter.  Furthermore,  Meissner  believes  (p.  63),  that  Shake 
speare  derived  his  idea  of  Caliban  from  the  description  in  Ammianus  Marcellinus  of 
the  Huns,  because  the  latter  were  of  old  supposed  to  be  the  progeny  of  the  Devil  and 
witches;  the  Latin  author  was  translated  in  1609  by  Holland.  In  regard  to  this 
theory,  it  is  pleasant  to  learn  from  his  Preface  that  Meissner  does  not  set  upon  it  a 
high  value. 

The  source  of  the  Masque,  Meissner  asserts  to  have  been  the  festivities  at  Stirling 
Castle  when  Prince  Henry  was  baptised.  To  be  sure,  these  festivities  took  place  in 
1594,  and  Shakespeare  did  not  write  his  masque,  so  says  Meissner,  until  eighteen 
years  afterwards,  but  what  are  eighteen  years  to  a  man  who  tabulates  for  future 
use  every  incident  of  the  day  and  every  scrap  of  his  knowledge  ?  But  Meissner’s 
introductory  paragraph  (p.  81),  with  its  intimate  and  assured  knowledge  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  inner  life,  should  not  be  lost.  It  is  as  follows:  ‘The  representation 
‘  of  ^P^ess  by  the  three  figures— Ceres,  Iris,  and  Juno— Shakespeare  borrowed 
‘  from  a  description  of  the  Festival  performance  produced  at  Stirling  Castle  by 
‘order  of  King  James  on  the  occasion  of  the  Baptism  of  Prince  Henry,  with 
‘  extraordinary  magnificence  in  1594.  This  Baptism  was  an  event  of  state  of  the 

‘  first  importance,  and  to  it  many  European  courts  sent  representatives . With- 

‘  out  doubt  these  festivities  excited  great  attention  in  London.  Descriptions  were 
‘  printed,  came  into  Shakespeare’s  hands,  and  were  used  by  him  afterwards  for  his 
‘  Tempest.  It  was,  it  is  true,  eighteen  years  later  when  the  poet  made  use  of  them, 

‘  ancl  h  coul<i  not  have  been  solely  his  memory  that  recalled  them  to  him.  But  we 
‘  must  consider  the  way  in  which  our  poet  worked,  how  he  laboriously  [muhselig] 

‘  gathered  from  his  library  the  material  which  he  needed.  His  idea  was  to  represent 
‘  dramatically,  somehow  or  other,  the  sum  and  substance  of  earthly  happiness.  The 
‘  method  he  sought  and  found  in  these  Baptismal  Festivities.  Perhaps,  too,  there  was 
‘  an  external  occasion  which  awakened  the  memories  of  the  English  Court,  of  Lon- 
‘  don,  and  of  Shakespeare.  To  wit :  Prince  Henry,  whose  career  had  had  this  bril¬ 
liant  opening,  and  whose  later  life  bade  fair  to  fulfil,  to  the  utmost,  all  the  hopes  of 
his  baptism,  died  suddenly,  universally  lamented,  in  the  bloom  of  his  youth  on  the 
‘  6th  of  November,  1612;  that  is,  at  the  time  when,  perhaps,  Shakespeare  was  still 
‘busy  with  The  Tempest 

Meissner  sums  up  the  sources  of  The  Tempest  in  his  Seventh  Chapter,  which,  far  too 
long  to  quote  here,  is  remarkable  for  its  virtual  assumption  that  Shakespeare’s  plays 
are  mere  mosaics,  painfully  composed  by  gathering  from  every  quarter  under  heaven 
all  stray  bits  of  glass  or  glittering  tinsel ;  or,  why  not  add  ?  a  few  odd  silver  spoons 
and  then  let  the  monstrous  magpie  stand  confessed.  But  the  concluding  paragraph 
(p.  95)  of  this  chapter  is  important,  and  it  is  here:  ‘The  foregoing  compilation  and 
grouping  of  the  sources  of  The  Tempest  give  us  an  interesting  glance  into  tl  e  work- 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— MEISSNER 


345 

shop  of  the  poet.  We  see  that  whenever  he  needed  any  action,  or  anything  in  the 
nature  of  a  narrative,  he  did  not  create  out  of  his  own  imagination.  Was  he  lack- 
‘  ing  in  the  inventive  faculty  of  a  novelist,  were  his  powers  weakening  from  age,  or 
m  as  it  from  the  calculation  that  it  would  be  better  for  him  to  let  the  action  influence 
the  characters  from  without,  instead  of  letting  it  develop  freely  and  unrestrained  out 
‘  of  the  characters,  as  it  probably  would  have  developed  had  he  himself,  unaided,  also 
‘  invented  it  ?  Probably  it  was  from  all  these  reasons  combined.  In  the  mean  while, 
however,  we  cannot  avoid  the  inference,  which  indeed  is  confirmed  by  his  other 
works,  that,  in  very  sooth,  in  the  case  of  this  first  of  all  poets  the  inventive  faculty 
‘of  a  novelist— whereof  a  smaller  share  falls  to  the  German  nation  than  to  the 
‘  Romance,  a  smaller  share  to  men  than  to  women — stands  revealed  as  conspicuously 

*  inferior  in  proportion  to  the  development  in  other  directions  of  his  imagination.’ 

It  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  mention,  and  merely  to  mention,  two  or  three  items  on 
which  Meissner  (p.  13)  lays  stress.  The  first  (see  Cohn,  p.  xxv)  is  the  Appointment 
by  Christian,  Duke  of  Saxony,  of  certain  ‘  fiddlers  and  instrumentalists,’  ‘  as  his  true 

*  and  zealous  servants  to  attend  on  him  at  banquets,’  ‘  and  entertain  him  with  music 
‘  and  with  their  art  in  leaping,’  &c.  By  a  decree  of  25th  of  October,  1586,  provision 
was  made  for  their  conveyance  to  Berlin.  Among  the  names  of  these  jumpers  and 
dancers  appear  Thomas  Pope  and  George  Bryan,  both  of  whom  are  supposed  to  have 
been  the  same  who  were  subsequently  attached  to  Shakespeare’s  company  of  actors 
at  the  Blackfriars.  The  second  is  an  Album  (see  Cohn,  p.  xxxv)  of  one  Johannes 
Cellarius  of  Numberg  (which  town  Meissner  italicises),  wherein  appear  the  auto¬ 
graphs  of  the  English  players,  Thomas  Sackeville,  bearing  date  1  February,  1604, 
and  Johan  Breidstrasz,  with  the  date  24  March,  1606.  This  ‘  Breidstrasz  ’  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  the  translation  of  ‘  Breadstreet,’  which,  perhaps,  it  may  be,  although  it  is 
conceivable  that  it  would  have  been  quite  as  easy,  and  certainly  more  correct,  for  the 
owner  to  translate  it  *  Brodstrass.’  In  this  same  Album  there  is  also  the  autograph  of 
John  Doland  (as  it  is  there  spelled)  subscribed  to  the  musical  notation  of  a  ‘  fuga.’ 
The  first  item,  says  Meissner  (p.  14),  ‘points  to  the  intimate  connection  between  the 
‘  Shakespearian  stage  and  Germany,  and  the  second,  to  an  early  intimate  connection 
‘  between  London  artists  and  Numberg,  Ayrer’s  native  town.  Dowland  could  very 

*  easily  have  brought  away  with  him  The  fair  Sidea,  and  handed  it  over  to  Shake- 

*  speare.’  Lastly,  Meissner  cites  an  extract  (Cohn,  p.  lxxxvii)  from  a  MS  chronicle 
of  the  city  of  Nurenberg  to  the  effect  that,  ‘  1613.  On  Sunday,  the  27th  of  June, 
‘ the  Elector  of  Brandenburg’s  servants  and  the  English  Comedians  acted  the 

*  beautiful  comedies  and  tragedies  of  Philole  and  Mariane,  Item,  of  Celide  and 

‘  Sedea,’  &c.  *  With  great  probability,’  adds  Meissner,  ‘  we  may  assume  this  Sedea, 

‘  acted  at  that  time  and  precisely  in  Niimberg,  to  be  our  Fair  Sidea.’  In  Meissner’s 
truly  admirable  book,  Die  Englischen  Comoedianten  zur  zeit  Shakespeares  in  Oester- 
reich ,  1884,  reference  is  made  to  this  same  extract,  and  in  regard  to  Sedea  Meissner 
says  (p.  36)  that  it  is,  ‘  perhaps,  Jacob  Ayrer’s  Fair  Sidea  which  ’  [and  here  he  reveals 
how  twelve  years  have  imbedded  the  idea  in  his  mind]  ‘  Shakespeare  used  for  his 
‘  Tempest.’ 

In  all  the  foregoing  speculations  of  Meissner  (and  it  is  not  Meissner  alone  who 
yields  to  this  influence,  but  all  who  deal  with  Shakespeare  outside  of  his  plays  seem 
to  be  similarly  affected)  we  see  how  the  insanabile  cacoethes  of  taking  assumptions 
for  realities,  of  fancy  for  fact,  leads  to  the  building  of  stately  domes  on  shifting  sand. 
It  is  perhaps  noteworthy  that  the  foregoing  appointment  to  his  household  by  the 
Elector  of  Saxony  of  George  Bryan  and  Thomas  Pope  could  have  lasted  only  a  few 


346 


APPENDIX 


weeks.  The  date  of  the  appointment  is  after  the  25th  of  October,  1586,  and  yet 
Fleay  (Hist,  of  the  Stage,  p.  82)  says  that  Bryan  and  Pope  were,  with  the  rest  of 
Leicester’s  men,  playing  in  London  in  January,  1587.  In  the  lax  orthography  of 
those  days  not  much  importance  can  attach  to  the  spelling  of  proper  names,  but  it 
may  be  remarked  that  in  the  photolithograph  given  by  Cohn  of  these  actors’  auto¬ 
graphs,  the  names  are  written  in  German  characters  and  signed  ‘  Thomas  Poppe  ’  and 
‘  George  Bryand  ’  (or  ‘  Bryane,’  it  is  impossible  to  decide  which).  ‘  Thomas  King  ’  is 
the  only  signature  in  English  characters. 

In  an  Introduction  to  Corneille’s  tragedy  of  Heraklius,  Voltaire  gives  extracts  and 
translations  from  Calderon’s  drama  of  En  esta  vida  todo  es  verdad  y  todo  es  mentira, 
and,  after  a  discussion  of  the  question  whether  Corneille  was  indebted  to  Calderon  or 
Calderon  to  Corneille,  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  what  is  common  to  both  must  be 
conceded  to  Calderon.  This  discussion  attracted  the  attention  of  Herman  Grimm, 
who  upon  further  investigation  discovered  (Fiinfzehn  Essays,  1875,  p.  206)  that  the 
scenes  which  Dryden  and  Davenant  contributed  to  their  Version  of  The  Tempest  are 
to  be  found  word  for  word  in  Calderon’s  Comedy.  After  a  brief  recapitulation  of 
Calderon’s  drama,  Grimm  arrives  at  the  following  conclusions  (p.  216) :  ‘Calderon’s 
‘  play  not  only  furnished  Dryden  with  his  additional  scenes  to  The  Tempest,  but, 

*  apart  from  these  scenes,  stands  in  close  kinship  to  the  original  itself  of  Shakespeare ; 
‘  but  not,  however,  in  such  a  way  that  the  Spanish  poet  can  be  said  to  have  made  use 
‘  of  The  Tempest.  The  resemblance  lies  not  in  the  conduct  of  the  plot  or  the  sequence 
‘  of  scenes,  but  only  in  the  coincidence  of  similar  legendary  fundamental  ideas ;  in 
‘  Calderon  we  find  a  magician  and  his  daughter,  although  only  subordinate  charac- 

‘ters . Of  course  Calderon  was  much  later  than  Shakespeare. — But  now,  on  the 

‘  other  hand,  we  find  in  Shakespeare  Calderon’s  Astolf  and  the  two  young  princes,  but 
‘  in  another  play.  These  three  characters  correspond  to  the  old  man  and  the  two  youths 
‘  in  Cymbeline.  Did  Calderon  weld  together  his  play  out  of  Shakespeare’s  Tempest 
‘  and  Cymbeline  ?  Was  Shakespeare  known  in  Spain  at  that  day  ?  Strangely  enough, 

‘  this  very  episode  in  Shakespeare,  where  Imogen  encounters  the  dwellers  in  the 

*  cave,  is  but  loosely  inserted  in  the  play,  and  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  novel  out 
‘  of  which  all  the  rest  of  the  play  was  elaborated.  Shakespeare  himself,  therefore, 

*  must  have  derived  this  addition  from  elsewhere.  But  how  incomparably  beautiful 
‘  is  the  way  in  which  Shakespeare  has  represented  the  innocence  of  the  youths  who 
‘  take  Imogen  for  a  boy  !  Only  incidentally  is  their  ignorance  intimated,  and  the  del- 
1  icatest  idyll  evolved  from  it.  This  is  our  way  c  f  representing  such  things  poetically. 

Calderon,  the  Spaniard,  goes  straight  to  the  heart  of  the  matter  and  relentlessly 

*  describes  it,  wherein  Dryden  follows  him. — [From  a  comparison  of  the  dramatic 
‘  treatment  in  these  two  plays,  by  Shakespeare  and  by  Calderon,]  it  seems  to  me 
‘likely  [p.  218]  that  Calderon  knew  nothing  of  Shakespeare,  and  that  both  drew 
‘  from  the  same  source.  It  is,  then,  to  the  last  degree  remarkable  that  it  was  Dryden’s 
‘  hand  which  re-endowed,  or  rather  completed  to  the  full,  Shakespeare’s  play  with 

that  which  Shakespeare  himself  had  omitted  or  had  introduced  into  Cymbeline. _ 

But  whence  did  Shakespeare  and  Calderon  draw  their  material  ?  They  could 

hardly  have  had  before  them  any  old  play . Both  works  must  be  traced  back 

to  some  common  novelistic  foundation. — Let  us  seek  further  in  this  direction.  The 
idea  of  celebrating  the  angelic  innocence  of  youth  is  as  old  as  Poesy  itself.  The 
insensibility  of  Adonis  is  its  most  beautiful  expression  in  antiquity ;  the  inexperience 
of  Daphne  in  the  idyll  of  Longus  is  an  example  of  an  even  more  refined  pilfering 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— GRIMM 


347 


of  the  theme.  But  of  touching  beauty,  and  a  blossom  of  the  purest  meaning,  is  an 
Indian  poem  which  tells  how  a  king’s  daughter,  Sanata,  went  forth  to  allure  the 
youth  Rischiasringa  into  her  father’s  realm,  in  order  to  bring  by  his  presence  the 
long-desired  rain,  for  lack  of  which  the  fields  were  burning  up.  The  youth  is  living 
‘  Wlth  his  aSed  father  in  a  grove  ;  both  are  penitents.  Sanata  waits  for  the  absence  of 
‘  the  old  man  that  she  may  approach  Rischiasringa,  who  had  never  seen  a  woman 
‘  and  who  supposes  the  lovely  girl  to  be  a  young  scholastic.  Their  first  meeting,  the 

*  vanishing  of  Sanata,  the  longing  of  Rischiasringa,  the  story  he  tells  his  father, 
‘  Sanata  s  repeated  visits,  and  how  she  lured  him  away,  form  the  loveliest,  fairest 

*  scenes,  and  belong  to  the  best  poetry  I  know.  How  cold  and  insufferable  is  Dry- 

‘  den  s  work  alongside  of  them !  but  Shakespeare’s  Imogen  stands  the  comparison. _ 

4  No  trace  is  to  be  found  of  an  earlier  acquaintance  with  this  poem  in  Europe ;  per- 
4  haps  it  was  known  to  the  story-tellers  in  India  from  whom  Johannes  Damascenus 

received  the  episodes  of  his  Baarlam  and  Josafihat.  Iu  the  fourth  century  this  was 
4  composed  in  Syriac,  thence  translated  into  Greek,  and  its  contents — that  is,  all  the 
4  Ettle  stories  of  which  it  is  made  up — were  known  in  Europe  long  before  Shake- 
‘  speare’s  time. 

‘  (P .  221.)  The  composer  of  Baarlam  owes  his  material  not  only  to  Indian,  but  also 
4  to  Ethiopian  stories.  We  may  hence  infer  that  the  Folk -story  which  forms  the  basis 
4  °f  Calderonian  play  was  widely  known  in  the  Orient.  Separate  features  from 
it  we  again  find  in  other  places.  Perhaps  it  passed,  in  amplified  shape,  through  the 
4  Moors  to  Spain,  and  so  reached  Calderon’s  ears.  The  magic  of  the  old  man,  the 
4  sudden  building  of  the  palace,  which  as  suddenly  vanishes,  remind  us  of  similai 
4  deeds  d°ne  by  Genii  in  Arabian  tales,  as  also  of  the  subterranean  life  which  always 
4  recurs  there.  But  I  am  dealing  only  in  conjectures.  And  as  to  how  the  story  passed 
4  ou*-  °f  Spain  into  England  and  to  Shakespeare,  I  can  only  suggest  that  the  written 
‘statement  of  all  things  is  more  easily  established;  but  only  in  our  times,  when  one 
4  is  sure  that  nearly  everything  gets  into  print,  can  there  be  a  foundation  of  inquiry; 

*  but  for  those  epochs  when  assuredly  there  was  the  very  smallest  amount  of  printing, 

4  and  when  oral  tradition  was  the  chief  way  in  which  stories  were  diffused,  may  it  be 
4  permitted  to  appeal  to  this  mode  of  communication  by  word  of  mouth,  especially 
4  when  no  direct  proofs  can  be  adduced.  We  need  not  wonder  then  if  the  Folk- 

4  story,  which  I  have  suggested,  should  have  travelled  to  England  also . Thus 

4  we  see  a  poetical  idea,  purely  human,  appear  in  an  East  Indian  poem,  we  meet  it 
4  in  Grecian  mythology,  a  Christian  makes  use  of  it  in  a  poem  designed  to  glorify  his 
4  Eaith;  it  comes  to  Italy,  to  Germany,  and  then  takes  on  a  national  significance;  it 

spreads,  enlarged  by  pirating  from  other  popular  legendary  elements,  to  Spain  and 
to  England ;  Shakespeare  makes  use  of  it  in  two  plays,  which  have  no  connection 
‘the  one  with  the  other;  one  piece  from  the  pen  of  Shakespeare  Dryden  changes, 

‘  and  another  from  Calderon  he  makes  use  of  to  the  same  end,  while  from  the  same 
‘  drama  Corneille  takes  the  idea  of  a  tragedy. — Every  country  impresses  on  an  ele- 
‘  mental  subject  its  own  peculiarities.  In  the  primeval  Indian  story  the  chief  emphasis 
4  la*d  on  ^he  disobedience  of  the  youth,  who  is  torn  from  his  consecrated  solitude 
4  by  the  loveliness  of  a  female  form;  in  the  Grecian  myth  it  is  laid  on  the  seductive 
4  wiles  of  Aphrodite,  which  are  wasted  on  the  pure  youthful  soul  of  Adonis ;  in  the 
Oriental  legend,  the  chiefest  stress  is  laid  on  the  contrast  between  the  gloomy  sub¬ 
terranean  life  and  the  sudden  revelation  of  the  true  existence;  the  Spanish  poet 
4  adorns  it  with  wonderful,  heroic,  family  complications,  which  he  surrounds  with  the 
‘brilliancy  of  romance  aid  exclusively  glorifies  the  idea  of  pure  legitimacy;  the 


343 


APPENDIX 


‘  Frenchman  sets  all  this  aside  and  gives  us  a  picture  of  passions  sharpened,  among 
‘  both  men  and  women,  by  politics ;  but  in  England,  out  of  the  original  story  there  is 
‘  framed  a  wonderful,  mysterious  tale  of  the  sea.’ 

In  Englischc  Studien  (II.  band,  i.  heft,  1878,  p.  141)  J.  Caro  argues  zealously 
in  favour  of  a  romance,  or  of  an  epic,  or  of  a  ballad  which  celebrated  the  adventures 
of  Henry  IV.  on  an  expedition,  in  1390,  against  the  Lithuanians,  as  the  remote  source 
of  The  Tempest.  He  maintains  that  the  romantic  history  of  the  Russian  princes  with 
whom  Henry  came  then  in  contact  must  have  been  familiar  themes  in  the  mouths  of 
minstrels  at  feast  and  at  camp-fire,  and  the  similarity  between  these  histories,  with 
their  details  of  groundless  jealousy,  of  exiled  Princes,  of  royal  marriages,  of  rescued 
heirs,  and  the  plots  of  The  Winter’s  Tale  and  of  The  Tempest ,  indicates  the  earliest 
germ  of  both  of  these  Comedies.  He  maintains  (p.  181)  that  the  connection  between 
Russia  and  England  was,  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  of  the  closest,  and  that  when  in  the 
second  half  of  the  sixteenth  century  allusions  were  made  to  voyages  of  discovery, 
the  thoughts  of  Englishmen  turned  not  to  the  West,  but  to  the  East,  especially  to 
Russia.  ‘  It  is  not  going  too  far,’  he  says,  ‘  to  assume  that  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  in 
‘  England,  the  interest  in  Russia  and  in  the  Russians  was  as  deep  and  universal  as  it 
‘  was  in  the  eighteenth  century  in  America  and  in  the  Americans.  In  very  deed  we 
‘  must  assume  that  Shakespeare  stood  aloof  from  the  interests  of  his  time  and  of  his 
‘  surroundings  if  we  believe  that  he  was  not  stirred  by  events  which  moved  the  crown, 
‘  the  court,  and  the  commercial  world,  and  which  the  advent  of  Russian  merchants 
‘  to  London  brought  directly  before  his  eyes.’ — Caro’s  article  is  extremely  interesting 
and  full  of  romantic  details,  which,  however,  seem  to  me  to  bear  only  the  general 
parallelisms,  with  the  story  of  The  Tempest,  to  be  expected  in  the  history  of  such  fluc¬ 
tuating  monarchies  as  those  with  which  Caro’s  name  is  identified  as  the  historian. 

In  the  note  on  ‘  Setebos,’  I,  ii,  437,  a  quotation  is  given  which  shows  that  Shake¬ 
speare  might  have  obtained  the  name  of  this  god  from  Eden’s  History  of  Travayle, 
IS77>  P-  252>  Arber’s  Reprint. 

Malone  is  of  opinion  ( Var .  ’21,  p.  13)  that  for  some  traits  of  Caliban  Shake¬ 
speare  was  indebted  to  a  description  in  Holland’s  Pliny,  bk  vii,  chap,  ii,  of  the  Cho- 
romandse,  ‘  a  savage  and  wild  people ;  distinct  voice  and  speech  they  have  none,  but 

*  in  stead  thereof  they  keep  an  horrible  gnashing  and  hideous  noise ;  rough  they  are 

•  and  hairy  all  over  their  bodies ;  eyes  they  have  red  like  the  houlets,’  &c. 

F or  the  expulsion  of  Prospero  from  Milan  by  his  brother  and  for  the  plots  with 
Alonzo,  Malone  (  Var.  ’21,  p.  6)  suggested  Greene’s  Alphonsus  as  a  possible  source 
of  these  incidents  in  The  Tempest ;  and  for  the  marriage  of  Claribel  in  Tunis  he  sug¬ 
gested  the  Sixth  Tragical  Tale  of  Turberville,  which,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  has  nothing 
in  common  with  The  Tempest  but  the  name  ‘  Tunis.’  These  suggestions  have  deserv¬ 
edly  received  but  little  notice  from  subsequent  critics. 

For  the  former  incident  and  for  the  magical  banquet,  H.  C.  ( Notes  and  Qu.  Ill, 
vi,  202)  suggests  a  parallel  in  the  RamDyana. 

In  N.  and  Qu.  (VII,  iv,  404)  R.  W.  Boodle  surmises  that  the  expressions  used 
by  Ferdinand  when  he  sees  Miranda,  I,  ii,  489,  were  suggested  by  a  scene  in  The 
Rare  Triumphs  of  Love  and  Fortune,  Dodsley,  vi. 

Many  years  ago  Halliwell  discovered,  in  a  volume  of  tracts,  some  doggerel 
verses,  which  he  reprinted  in  1S65,  and  which  were  again  reprinted  ten  years  later 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT—HALLIWELL 


349 


by  Quaritch.  The  sole  claim  on  the  attention  of  Shakespeare  students  which  has 
been  urged  for  these  verses  is  that  they  describe  the  shipwreck  of  Sir  George  Somers 
and  mention  the  ‘  Bermoothawes.’  The  tract  bears  substantially  the  following  title  : 
‘  Newes  from,  Virginia.  The  Lost  Flocks  Triumphant.  With  the  happy  Arriual  of 
that  famous  and  worthy  knight  Sr  Thomas  Gates:  ....  With  the  tnaner  of  their  dis- 
tresse  in  the  Hand  of  Deuils  ( otherwise  called  Bermoothawes)  where  they  remained 

42.  weekes . By  R.  Rich,  Gent.,  one  of  the  Voyage.  London,  1610.’  Three  or 

four  stanzas  will  prove,  I  think,  quite  sufficient.  I  omit  the  first  two,  which  merely 
describe  the  setting  out  of  the  fleet ;  the  third  then  tells  us  how — 

‘  The  seas  did  rage,  the  windes  did  blowe, 
distressed  were  they  then ; 

Their  ship  did  leake,  her  tacklings  breake, 
in  daunger  were  her  men. 

But  heaven  was  pylotte  in  this  storme, 
and  to  an  iland  nere, 

Bermoothawes  call’d,  conducted  then, 
which  did  abate  their  feare. 

‘  But  yet  these  worthies  forced  were, 
opprest  with  weather  againe, 

To  runne  their  ship  betweene  two  rockes, 
where  she  doth  still  remaine. 

And  then  on  shoare  the  iland  came, 
inhabited  by  hogges, 

Some  foule  and  tortoyses  there  were 
they  onely  had  one  dogge. 

*  To  kill  these  swyne,  to  yeild  them  foode 
that  little  had  to  eate, 

Their  store  was  spent,  and  all  things  scant, 
alas  !  they  wanted  meate. 

A  thousand  hogges  that  dogge  did  kill, 
their  hunger  to  sustaine, 

And  with  such  foode  did  in  that  ile 

two  and  forty  weekes  remaine,’  &c. 

It  may  be  permitted  to  surmise  that  had  Malone  known  of  this  tract,  he  would 
have  detected  in  the  prowess  of  this  remarkable  dog  the  hint  which  supplied  Shake¬ 
speare  with  the  dogs,  which  he  afterwards  set  upon  Stephano,  Trinculo,  and  Caliban. 

It  may  be,  perhaps,  as  well  to  recall  here  a  note  of  Henley,  on  I,  ii,  221.  Lack 
of  space  in  the  Commentary  debarred  me  from  giving  in  full  the  passage  from 
Fletcher’s  Faithful  Shepherdess,  which  Henley  suggested  was  an  imitation  of  Ariel’s 
offer  of  service  to  Prospero.  Ariel  says  :  ‘  I  come 

To  answer  thy  best  pleasure ;  be’t  to  fly, 

To  swim,  to  dive  into  the  fire ;  to  ride 

On  the  curl’d  clouds ;  to  thy  strong  bidding,  task 

Ariel,  and  all  his  quality.’ 

The  alleged  imitation  is  in  the  Satyr’s  offer  to  Clorin,  the  Faithful  Shepherdess,  V,  v, 
cd  fin.  • 


350 


APPENDIX 


‘  tell  me,  sweetest, 

What  new  service  now  is  meetest 
For  the  Satyr  ?  Shall  I  stray 
In  the  middle  air,  and  stay 
The  sailing  rack,  or  nimbly  take 
Hold  by  the  moon,  and  gently  make 
Suit  to  the  pale  queen  of  night 
For  a  beam  to  give  thee  light  ? 

Shall  I  dive  into  the  sea, 

And  bring  thee  coral,  making  way 
Through  the  rising  waves  that  fall 
In  snowy  fleeces  ?  Dearest,  shall 
I  catch  thee  wanton  fawns,  or  flies 
Whose  woven  wings  the  summer  dyes 
Of  many  colors  ?  Get  thee  fruit, 

Or  steal  from  heaven  old  Orpheus’  lute  ? 

All  these  I’ll  venture  for,  and  more 
To  do  her  service  all  these  woods  adore.’ 

On  this  passage,  Weber  quotes  Henley’s  note  from  The  Tempest ,  as  giren  at 
I,  ii,  221,  and  Dyce  repeats  Weber,  but  expresses  no  opinion  of  his  own.  1  cannot 
think  that  Dyce  believed  that  any  imitation  by  Fletcher  is  to  be  here  detected.  The 
only  verbal  identity  is  in  the  offer,  by  both  Ariel  and  the  Satyr,  to  dive;  but  Ariel 
offers  to  ‘  dive  into  the  fire,’  and  the  Satyr  ‘  into  the  sea.’  Had  the  imitation  been 
unquestionable,  it  would  have  played  sad  havoc  with  Malone’s  date  of  1611  for  The 
Tempest.  There  is  but  little  doubt  that  The  Faithful  Shepherdess  ‘  was  brought  out,’ 
as  Gifford  says,  ‘in  1610,  perhaps  before.’  Dyce  adds  that  ‘Sir  William  Skip- 
‘  with,  one  of  the  three  friends  to  whom  the  author  dedicates  it,  died  on  the  3rd  of 
‘  May,  1610.’  If  an  imitation  by  Fletcher  had  been  more  pronounced,  or  had  it  been 
seriously  believed  to  have  even  existed  at  all,  this  question  of  dates  would  have 
assumed  importance,  and  have  been  discussed  under  the  Date  of  Composition.  But 
as  it  is,  a  belief  in  the  alleged  imitation  has  never  been  seriously  entertained. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  as  well  to  add  a  few  facts  mentioned  by  Hunter  ( II lust . 
i,  168)  which,  although  they  by  no  means  indicate  any  source  from  which  Shake¬ 
speare  drew  his  plot,  are  more  germane,  perhaps,  to  a  discussion  of  this  subject  than 
to  any  other :  *  There  was  a  real  Alonzo,  King  of  Naples,  having  a  son  named  Fer- 
‘  dinand,  who  in  1495  succeeded  him  in  his  kingdom.  When  he  was  dispossessed 
‘  by  Charles  the  Eighth  of  France,  he  retired  to  the  island  of  Ischia.  Ferdinand  did 
‘  not,  as  in  the  play,  marry  a  princess  of  the  house  of  Milan,  but  the  two  houses  were 
at  that  time  united  by  the  marriage  of  Alonzo  himself  with  Hippolita  Sforza,  a 
daughter  of  Francis,  Duke  of  Milan.  Then  turning  to  the  history  of  Milan,  we 
have  a  banished  Duke  in  Maximilian,  who  was  dispossessed  in  1514  by  Francis  the 
First  of  France.  We  have  also  an  usurping  Duke  of  Milan,  corresponding  to  Anto- 
•  nio,  in  a  brother  of  Maximilian.  To  the  banished  Duke  of  Milan  the  original 
author  of  this  romance  seems  to  have  transferred  qualities  which  belonged  to  Alonzo 
King  of  Naples,  of  whom  it  is  said  that  he  “  renounced  his  estate  unto  his  son  (Fer¬ 
dinand),  took  his  treasure  with  him,  and  sailed  into  Sicily;  where,  for  the  term 
“  of  his  short  life,  that  dured  scarce  one  year,  he  disposed  himself  to  study,  solitari- 
dess,  and  religion.”— Thomas’s  Hist,  of  Italy e,  1549.  [See  also  Hallo  well,  ante. 


DURATION  OF  ACTION— MUSIC 


351 


P-  343>  ar|d  Post  “  On  Costume,”  p.  354-]  But  the  Duke  of  Milan,  called  Fiancis 
may  seem  to  have  had  a  taste  for  the  studies  in  which  Prospero  was  so  great  ar 
adept,  for  I  have  a  treatise  on  Witchcraft,  printed  at  Milan  in  1490,  in  which  the 
reality  of  all  that  goes  under  the  name  of  magic  is  affirmed,  and  the  book  is  dedi¬ 
cated  to  the  duke  by  its  author,  Jerome  Visconti.  The  name  of  Prospero  does  not 
occur  in  either  family.’ 


DURATION  OF  ACTION 

Shakespeare  has  adhered  in  this  play  strictly  to  the  Unity  of  Time.  The  dura¬ 
tion  of  the  action  is  just  about  the  time  required  for  the  performance  on  the  stage. 
The  indications  of  the  time  are  marked  with  emphasis  and  precision.  But  we  have 
to  accept  Shakespeare’s  use  of  the  nautical  term  4  glass,’  and  in  this  instance  he  has 
been  detected  in  a  technical  error.  He  supposed  the  sailor’s  4  glass  ’  to  be  an  hour 
glass  instead  of  a  half-hour  glass.  See  notes  on  I,  ii,  2S0,  and  V,  i,  266.  Making 
this  allowance,  the  action  of  the  play  lasts  from  three  to  four  hours. 

Daniel  {New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  Pt  II.  p.  117)  gives  the  following  ‘Time-analy- 
‘  sis  ’ :  4  In  the  first  scene  on  the  Island,  which  follows  immediately  on  the  shipwreck, 
4  Prospero  asks  Ariel  (I,  ii,  280),  44  What  is  the  time  o’  th’  day  ?  Ariel.  Past  the  mid- 
4 44  season.  Prospero.  At  least  two  glasses  :  the  time  ’twixt  six  and  now  Must  by  us 
4  44  both  be  spent  most  preciously.”  The  opening  scene,  the  shipwreck,  may,  there- 
4  fore,  be  supposed  to  commence  shortly  before  2  p.  m.,  and  it  is  now  just  past  that 
4  hour. — A  little  later  [line  390]  Caliban,  on  being  called  out  by  Prospero,  grumbles : 
4  “  I  must  eat  my  dinner.”  Caliban,  for  those  times,  was  a  late  diner. — At  the  com- 
4  mencement  of  the  last  scene  of  the  play  [V,  i,  5]‘  Prospero  again  asks  Ariel :  44  how’s 
4  “  the  day?”  and  Ariel  replies — “  On  the  sixt  hower,  at  which  time,  my  Lord,  You 
4  44  said  our  worke  should  cease.”  The  time,  therefore,  for  the  whole  action  would  be, 
4  according  to  Prospero  and  Ariel,  little  more  than  four  hours.  The  testimony  of 
4  Alonso  and  the  Boatswain  is,  however,  somewhat  at  variance  with  this  estimate  of 
4  time.  In  this  same  last  scene  Alonso  speaks  of  himself  and  his  followers  as  they — 
44  who  three  hours  since  Were  wrack’d  upon  this  shore.”  And  he  subsequently  says 
4  that  his  son’s  44  eld’st  acquaintance  ”  with  Miranda  44  cannot  be  three  hours." — The 
4  Boatswain,  also,  who  shortly  after  enters,  says, — 44  our  ship — Which  but  three  glasses 

4  “  since,  we  gave  out  split — Is  tight  and  yare,”  &c . It  cannot,  however,  be  over- 

4  looked  in  an  enquiry  into  the  time  of  this  play,  that  though  that  time  is  strictly  lim- 
4  ited  to  a  few  hours  of  one  afternoon,  it  nevertheless  contains  touches  of  a  much  more 
4  extended  period;  for  instance,  Ferdinand,  addressing  Miranda,  III,  i,  42,  says — 44  ’tis 
4  44  fresh  morning  with  me  When  you  are  by  at  night.”  And  yet  they  have  never  been 
4  in  each  other’s  company  at  morning  or  at  night.'  Daniel  concludes  with  noticing 
that  as  a  measure  of  time  for  The  Tempest  a  4  glass  ’  must  be  a  one-hour  glass. 


MUSIC 

Of  inspiring  themes  in  the  plays  of  Shakespeare,  musicians  have  found  tne 
largest  number  in  The  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  and  next  in  The  Tempest ;  in 
the  former,  fifteen  passages  have  been  set  to  music ;  and  in  the  latter,  thirteen.  This 
statement  I  quote  from  Furnivall’s  Introduction  to  the  New  Sh.  Society’s  List  of 
All  t  he  Songs  and  Passages  in  Shakspere  which  have  been  set  to  Music,  1884.  The 


352 


APPENDIX 


thirteen  passages  alluded  to  are  properly  restricted  to  Shakespeare’s  play ;  the  list 
would  be  enlarged  if  Dryden’s  Version  were  included.  I  have  six  additional  themes 
from  that  Version,  published  by  Caulfield.  The  passages  set  to  music,  in  the  New  Sh. 
Society’s  List,  are  as  follows:  ‘Now  I  flam’d  amazement,’  I,  ii,  231— 239;  ‘Come 
unto  these  yellow  sands,’  I,  ii,  441— 450;  ‘  Full  fadom  five  thy  Father  lies,’  I,  ii,  460- 
468:  ‘While  you  here  do  snoaring  lie,’  II,  i,  333-338;  ‘  I  shall  no  more  to  sea,  to 
sea,’  &c.,  II,  ii,  46-57;  ‘No  more  dams  I’ll  make  for  fish,’  II,  ii,  190-196;  ‘Flout 
’em  and  cout  ’em,’  &c,  III,  ii,  129,  130;  ‘  Before  you  can  say  come  and  goe,’  IV,  i, 
5°-S4;  ‘  Honour,  riches,  marriage,  blessing,’  IV,  i,  118-129;  ‘  You  sun-bum’d  Sickle- 
men  of  August  weary,’  IV,  i,  151-155 ;  ‘The  clowd-capt  Towers,’  &c,  IV,  i,  174- 
178;  ‘Now  do’s  my  Proiect  gather  to  a  head,’  V,  i,  3-12;  and  lastly  ‘Where  the 
Bee  sucks,’  V,  i,  101-107. 

Of  the  foregoing,  the  music  of  only  two  has  for  us  any  special  interest,  viz.  ‘  Full 
fadom  five  ’  and  ‘  Where  the  bee  sucks.’  The  interest,  however,  in  these  two  is  not 
merely  special,  but  extraordinary.  There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  the  tunes  have 
survived  to  which  they  were  sung  on  the  stage  in  Shakespeare’s  hearing. 

In  Wilson’s  Cheerfull  Ayres  or  Ballads,  Oxford,  1660,  these  two  songs  are  given 
with  the  name  of  the  composer,  R.  Johnson,  who  was,  according  to  Grove’s  Dic¬ 
tionary  of  Music,  ‘a  lutenist  and  composer,  and  was  in  January,  1573-4,  a  retainer  in 
‘  the  household  of  Sir  Thomas  Kytson.  In  April,  1575,  being  still  in  Sir  Thomas’s 
‘  service,  he  assisted  at  the  grand  entertainment  given  by  the  Earl  of  Leicester  to 
‘  Queen  Elizabeth  at  Kenilworth.  He  subsequently  came  to  London  ....  and  became 
1  a  composer  for  the  theatres.  In  1610  he  composed  the  music  for  Middleton’s  Witch. 

‘  ....  In  1611  he  was  in  the  service  of  Prince  Henry  at  an  annual  salary  of  ^40.  In 
‘  1612  he  composed  the  music  for  Shakespeare's  Tempest .’  With  his  subsequent  com¬ 
positions  or  his  career  we  are  not  here  concerned.  His  claims  as  the  composer  of  these 
two  songs  are  discussed  by  Roffe  {Handbook  of  Shakespeare  Music,  1878,  pp.  86, 
87),  and  fully  substantiated. 

In  the  belief  that  the  original  music  in  Wilson’s  Cheerfull  Ayres  is  of  greater 
interest,  with  all  its  errors  and  its  remarkable  harmony,  than  any  modem  corrected 
version,  I  have  had  the  pages  reproduced  by  ‘  Levytyping.’  The  size  of  the  original, 
an  oblong  quarto,  with  six  staffs  on  a  page,  is  about  two  inches  longer  and  three 
inches  broader  than  the  present  reproduction. 


Canm  Primus. 


5? 


[  6  R.  Jdhnjon. 


UU  fathome  five  thy  Father  lyes ,  of  his  bones  are  Corrall  made 


- - 

^T-i"  . — 

■ 

\ - 

r. 

- 4— J 

^--43=1 

thofe  are  pearles  that  were  his  eyes,  nothing  of  him  that  doth  fade  but  doth 


V-/ 


MUSIC 


353 


fuffer  a  Sea  chang 

■mm 

e  into  fomething 

[=£—4--  I  -  #  —  ■  ■■ 

rich  and  ft range  . 

s—  Tr 

:  —  'It — 

tf- 

- 1=4 - ==fc - - - -  ■ 

~r - ££ 

-4 — L 

[7] 

■  T=fa z±=z 

@ - 1-4- 

Sea  Nymphs  hourly 

ring  his  knell ,  Hark  now  I  beare  them  • 

I- 

^ £ 

:==tS== 

Cantus  Erimus. 


191 


R.  John  [on. 


-** - 1 — 1 

r. — 

H  4-  -b~ 

•  —  t- 

v_. 

When  Owles  doe  ay,  on  the;  Batts  Back  I  doe  fly ,  after  Summer  merrily 


iiii 


■  :;1  1  — Tvi — -J 


Merrily  Merrily  fliaB  I  live  bow  under  the  Bloffome  that  bangs  on  the  Bough 


— T — JTfr- - f—  f - » - s - f - 1- 

- - - : - 1 - 3 

squT~ 

— 12 

L  X.., 

— t - ■ — 

1* - L - i-  ~  .... 

[9] 


Merrily  Merrily  fhall  I  tire  now,  under  the  Biofloffle-  that  Hangs  on  the  Bough. 


23 


354 


APPENDIX 


COSTUME 

The  Costumes  for  the  King  of  Naples  and  his  followers  are  generally  supposed  tc 
be,  I  believe,  those  of  Shakespeare’s  own  day.  ‘  If  the  introduction  of  the  Duke  of 
1  Milan,’  says  E.  W.  Godwin  ( The  Architect ,  io  April,  1875),  ‘  makes  the  historical 
‘  student  uneasy,  then  there  is  no  reason  why  the  costume  should  not  be  put  back 
‘  seventy  years  or  so.  In  the  latter  case  we  should  have  dresses,’  similar  to  those  in 
The  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona ,  for  which  we  should  go  to  the  paintings  of  Tintoretto 
and  of  Titian. 

Malone  (  Var.  ’21,  vol.  xv,  p.  13)  says  that  the  dress  worn  by  Caliban,  ‘  which 

*  doubtless  was  originally  prescribed  by  the  poet  himself  and  has  been  continued,  I 
‘  believe,  since  his  time,  is  a  large  bear  skin,  or  the  skin  of  some  other  animal ;  and 
1  he  is  usually  represented  with  long  shaggy  hair.’ 

‘  The  extent  of  Caliban’s  ichthyological  character,’  says  Halliwell  (p.  334), 
‘  will  be  determined  from  allusions  in  the  play  to  be  comparatively  slight,  perhaps 
1  restricted  to  the  finny  appearance  of  his  arms.  A  misshapen  man,  with  this  pecu- 
‘  liarity,  would  indicate  a  monster  as  unnatural  as  could  with  propriety  be  introduced 
‘  as  a  dramatic  character  taking  an  active  share  in  the  action  of  the  play.  Caliban  is 
‘  certainly  neither  a  Dagon  nor  a  monkey,  the  two  extremes  which  have  been  assigned 
‘  to  him  by  the  critics.’ 

See  the  notes  on  ‘  Caliban,'  I,  ii,  364. 

The  Shakespeare  Society  in  1848  published,  with  notes  by  J.  R.  Planch^, 
some  facsimiles  of  drawings  made  by  Inigo  Jones  of  the  costumes  which  were  used 
in  Ben  Jonson’s  Masques  (among  them  are  two  of  Shakespeare’s  characters;  one 
is  Jack  Cade  and  the  other  Romeo,  as  a  Pilgrim).  Certain  characters  in  the 
Masque  of  The  Fortunate  Isles  and  their  Union  are  here  depicted,  and  one  of  them 
is  labelled  ‘  Aery  Spirit.’ — Collier  suggests  that  ‘very  possibly,’  Ariel  appeared  as 
in  this  sketch,  which  is  thus  described  by  Planch^  (p.  58)  :  ‘  The  Masque  com- 

*  mences  thus :  “  His  Majesty  being  set.  Enter,  running,  Johphiel,  an  Airy  Spirit,  and 
“  (according  to  the  Magi)  the  intelligence  of  Jupiter’s  sphere,  attired  in  light  silks  of 
“  various  colours,  with  wings  of  the  same,  a  bright  yellow  hair,  a  chaplet  of  flowers, 
“blue  silk  stockings,  and  pumps  and  gloves,  with  a  silver  fan  in  his  hand.”  The 
‘  figure  designed  by  Inigo  Jones,  if  intended  for  this  principal  spirit,  presents  us  with 
‘some  variations  from  this  description.  He  is  attired  in  a  tunic,  most  probably  of 
“light  silk,”  as  the  form  of  the  body  is  pretty  clearly  defined  through  it;  and  over 
‘  the  right  shoulder  he  wears  a  scarf  of  similar  material,  and  probably  of  a  different 
‘  colour.  His  wig — for  by  “  a  hair  ”  a  whole  head  of  false  hair  was  signified — no 
‘  doubt  was  of  the  “  bright  yellow  ”  specified;  but  it  is  here  unadorned  by  the  chaplet 
‘  of  flowers.  His  stockings  may  have  been  blue ;  but  he  seems  to  have  been  depicted 

*  in  buskins,  instead  of  pumps ;  and  gloves  are  not  discernible  on  his  hands,  in  neither 
‘  of  which  do  we  behold  a  fan.’ 

In  Henslowe’s  Diary  ( Shakespeare  Society's  Reprint,  p.  277),  among  the  ‘proper¬ 
ties  ’  of  the  Lord  Admiral’s  men  is  ‘  a  robe  for  to  goo  invisibell.’ — See  I,  ii,  440. 

Halliwell  (p.  333) :  The  period  of  the  action  of  this  play,  although  the  story  is 
of  course  entirely  fanciful,  may  be  referred,  for  the  sake  of  those  who  may  require  to 
be  informed  of  the  appropriate  Costume  of  the  characters,  to  the  latter  part  of  the 
fifteenth  century.  There  was  at  this  period  a  real  Alphonso  or  Alonzo,  King  of 
Naples,  who  had  a  son  called  Ferdinand.  [See  Hunter,  Illust.  i,  168,  quoted  ante.] 
The  latter,  although  illegitimate,  was  named  by  the  Pope  as  successor  to  his  father’s 


CRITICISMS  ON  THE  PLAY- JOHNSON  355 

crown  (Thomas’s  Hist,  of  Italye ,  1561,  f.  133) ;  and,  after  he  had  succeeded  to  the 
thione,  was  enabled  to  withstand  the  attack  of  an  invader  by  the  assistance  afforded 
him  by  the  Pope  and  the  reigning  duke  of  Milan.  Previously  to  this,  an  attempt  had 
been  made  by  Charles  the  Eighth  of  France,  at  the  instigation  of  a  former  duke  of 
Milan,  “  to  expulse  Kyng  Alfonso  out  of  Naples,  because  he  had  before  taken  him  for 
“  his  enemy,  for  sekying  to  mainteigne  the  astate  of  Giovanni,  the  sonne  of  Galeazo, 
“  aSaynst  bym.”  The  writer  of  the  romance  on  which  The  Tempest  was  founded 
most  likely  followed  a  not  unusual  custom  in  adopting  the  names  of  some  of  his 

characters  from  real  history . Other  small  coincidences  may  probably  be  traced 

by  further  research;  but  what  is  stated  above,  gleaned  merely  from  the  early  com¬ 
pilation  by  Thomas,  is  sufficient  to  indicate  the  date  to  which  the  action  is  to  be 
referred,  when  a  fact  of  the  kind  is  desired  for  determining  the  nature  of  the  acces¬ 
sories  required  for  the  purposes  of  art  or  representation.  The  costume  of  Prospero, 
when  he  appears  in  his  necromantic  dress,  should  assimilate  to  that  of  the  ancient  magi¬ 
cians,  one  of  whom  is  described  in  a  very  curious  early  MS  in  the  possession  of  Lord 
Londesborough,  as  ‘  being  aperelled  in  a  blacke  cote,  and  cape  cloke,  with  a  payer  of 
‘  blacke  silke  nether  stockes,  gartered  with  blacke  garters  crose  above  the  knee,  hav- 
1  ing  a  velvet  cap  and  a  blacke  fether.’  The  same  authority  says  that  there  was  to  be 
a  magical  parchment  affixed  to  the  sleeve  during  the  process  of  an  enchantment ;  and 
Reginald  Scot,  in  his  Discoverie  of  Witchcraft ,  1584,  gives  the  form  of  one  of  these 
necromantic  symbols,  which  he  says  was  to  be  attached  to  the  magician’s  breast  when 
he  desiied  to  invoke  a  spirit . As  it  may,  however,  be  doubted  whether  Shake¬ 

speare  intended  Prospero  should  be  regarded,  even  in  his  costume,  as  a  type  of  the 
popular  idea  of  a  necromancer,  it  would  probably  be  nearly  sufficient  to  adopt  a  plain 
black  gown  distinguished  by  the  magical  cross,  and  leave  the  rest  to  the  taste  of  the 
artist,  limited  by  a  regard  to  the  period  of  the  action.  (P.  503.)  In  addition  to  what 
has  been  previously  said,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  character  of  Magus  in  the  play 
of  the  Marriages  of  the  Arts,  is  represented  as  being  attired  ‘  in  a  blacke  sute  with  a 
triple  crowne  on  his  head,  beset  with  crosses  and  other  magical  characters ;  in  blacke 
*  shooes,  with  a  white  wand  in  his  hand.’ 

Douce  (i,  30)  :  The  character  of  Trinculo,  who  in  the  Dramatis  Personce  is  called 
a  ‘jester,’  is  not  very  well  discriminated  in  the  course  of  the  play  itself.  As  he  is 
only  associated  with  Caliban  and  the  drunken  butler,  there  was  no  opportunity  of 
exhibiting  him  in  the  legitimate  character  of  a  professed  fool ;  but  at  the  conclusion  of 
the  play,  it  appears  that  he  was  in  the  service  of  the  king  of  Naples,  as  well  as  Ste- 
phano.  On  this  account  he  must  be  regarded  as  an  allowed  domestic  buffoon,  and 
should  be  habited  on  the  stage  in  the  usual  manner.  [Caliban  calls  him  a  ‘  pied 
ninny,’  which  of  itself  indicates  his  dress.] 


CRITICISMS  ON  THE  PLAY 

Dr  Johnson  (1773) :  It  is  observed  of  The  Tempest,  that  its  plan  is  regular;  this 
the  author  of  The  Revisal  [i.  e.  Heath]  thinks,  what  I  think  too,  an  accidental  effect 
of  the  story,  not  intended  nor  regarded  by  our  author.  But  whatever  might  be  Shake¬ 
speare’s  intention  in  forming  or  adopting  the  plot,  he  has  made  it  instrumental  to  the 
production  of  many  characters,  diversified  with  boundless  invention,  and  preserved 
with  profound  skill  in  nature,  exte  isive  knowledge  of  opinions,  and  accurate  obser¬ 
vation  of  life.  In  a  single  drama  are  here  exhibited  princes,  courtiers,  and  sailors 


356 


APPENDIX 


all  speaking  in  their  real  characters.  There  is  the  agency  of  airy  spirits,  and  of  an 
earthly  goblin.  The  operations  of  magic,  the  tumults  of  a  storm,  the  adventures  of 
a  desert  island,  the  native  effusion  of  untaught  affection,  the  punishment  of  guilt, 
and  the  final  happiness  of  the  pair  for  whom  our  passions  and  reason  are  equally 
interested. 

William  Hazlitt  ( Characters  of  Shakespear' s  Plays,  1817,  p.  116) :  The  Tem¬ 
pest  is  one  of  the  most  original  and  perfect  of  Shakespear’s  productions,  and  he  has 
shown  in  it  all  the  variety  of  his  powers.  It  is  full  of  grace  and  grandeur.  The 
human  and  imaginary  characters,  the  dramatic  and  the  grotesque,  are  blended 
together  with  the  greatest  art,  and  without  any  appearance  of  it.  Though  he  has 
here  given  *  to  airy  nothing  a  local  habitation  and  a  name,’  yet  that  part  which  is  only 
the  fantastic  creation  of  his  mind  has  the  same  palpable  texture  and  coheres  ‘  sem- 
blably  ’  with  the  rest.  As  the  preternatural  part  has  the  air  of  reality,  and  almost 
haunts  the  imagination  with  a  sense  of  truth,  the  real  characters  and  events  partake 
of  the  wildness  of  a  dream.  The  stately  magician  Prospero,  driven  from  his  duke¬ 
dom,  but  around  whom  (so  potent  is  his  art)  airy  spirits  throng  numberless  to  do  his 
bidding;  his  daughter  Miranda  (‘worthy  of  that  name  ’)  to  whom  all  the  power  of 
his  art  points,  and  who  seems  the  goddess  of  the  isle ;  the  princely  Ferdinand,  cast  by 
fate  upon  the  haven  of  his  happiness  in  this  idol  of  his  love ;  the  delicate  Ariel ;  the 
savage  Caliban,  half  brute,  half  demon ;  the  drunken  ship’s  crew — are  all  connected 
parts  of  the  story,  and  can  hardly  be  spared  from  the  place  they  fill.  Even  the  local 
scenery  is  of  a  piece  and  character  with  the  subject.  Prospero’s  enchanted  island 
seems  to  have  risen  up  out  of  the  sea ;  the  airy  music,  the  tempest-tossed  vessel,  the 
turbulent  waves,  all  have  the  effect  of  the  landscape  background  of  some  fine  picture. 
Shakespear’s  pencil  is  (to  use  an  allusion  of  his  own)  ‘  like  the  dyer’s  hand,  subdued 
to  what  it  works  in.’  Everything  in  him,  though  it  partakes  of  ‘  the  liberty  of  wit,’ 
is  also  subjected  to  ‘  the  law  ’  of  the  understanding.  For  instance,  even  the  drunken 
sailors,  who  are  made  reeling  ripe,  share,  in  the  disorder  of  their  minds  and  bodies, 
in  the  tumult  of  the  elements,  and  seem  on  shore  to  be  as  much  at  the  mercy  of 
chance  as  they  were  before  at  the  mercy  of  the  wind  and  waves.  These  fellows  with 
their  sea- wit  are  the  least  to  our  taste  of  any  part  of  the  play ;  but  they  are  as  like 
drunken  sailors  as  they  can  be,  and  are  an  indirect  foil  to  Caliban,  whose  figure 
acquires  a  classical  dignity  in  the  comparison. 

.Campbell  (1838)  :  This  drama  is  comparatively  a  grave  counterpart  to  A  Mid¬ 
summer  Night's  Dream.  I  say  comparatively,  for  its  gayety  is  only  less  abandoned 
and  frolicsome.  To  be  condemned  to  give  the  preference  to  either  would  give  me  a 
distress  similar  to  that  of  being  obliged  to  choose  between  the  loss  of  two  very  dear 
friends. —  The  Tempest,  however,  has  a  sort  of  sacredness  as  the  last  work  of  the 
mighty  workman.  Shakespeare,  as  if  conscious  that  it  would  be  his  last,  and  as  if 
inspired  to  typify  himself,  has  made  its  hero  a  natural,  a  dignified,  and  benevolent 
magician,  who  could  conjure  up  spirits  from  the  vasty  deep,  and  command  super¬ 
natural  agency  by  the  most  seemingly  natural  and  simple  means. — And  this  final 
play  of  our  poet  has  magic  indeed ;  for  what  can  be  simpler  in  language  than  the 
courtship  of  Ferdinand  and  Miranda,  and  yet  what  can  be  more  magical  than  the 
sympathy  with  which  it  subdues  us  ?  Here  Shakespeare  himself  is  Prospero,  or 
rather  the  superior  genius  who  commands  both  Prospero  and  Ariel.  But  the  time 
was  approaching  when  the  potent  sorcerer  was  to  break  his  staff,  and  to  bury  it 
fathoms  in  the  ocean — ‘  deeper  than  did  ever  plummet  sound.’  That  staff  has  never 
been,  and  never  will  be,  recovered.  [Attention  has  been  called  (I  cannot  now 


CRITICISMS  ON  THE  PLAY-LLOYD—HUGO 


357 

remember  where)  to  the  trivial,  very  venial  oversight  of  drowning  the  staff  instead 
of  the  book. — Ed.] 

W.  W.  Lloyd  ( Critical  Essay,  Singer’s  Second  Edition,  1856,  p.  94) :  While 
then  the  drama  before  us  is  apparently  so  remote  in  locality  and  detail  from  Virginia, 
it  is  most  curious  to  observe  how  many  of  the  topics  brought  up  by  colonies  and  colo¬ 
nization  are  indicated  and  characterised  in  the  play. — The  wonders  of  new  lands, 
new  races ;  the  exaggerations  of  travellers,  and  their  truths  more  strange  than  exag¬ 
geration  ;  newT  natural  phenomena,  and  superstitious  suggestions  of  them ;  the  perils 
of  the  sea  and  shipwrecks,  the  effect  of  such  fatalities  in  awakening  remorse  for  ill- 
deeds,  not  unremembered  because  easily  committed;  the  quarrels  and  mutinies  of 
colonists  for  grudges  new  and  old,  the  contests  for  authority  of  the  leaders,  and  the 
greedy  misdirection  of  industry  while  even  subsistence  is  precarious ;  the  theories  of 
government  for  plantations,  the  imaginary  and  actual  characteristics  of  man  in  the  state 
of  nature,  the  complications  with  the  indigence,  the  resort,  penally  or  otherwise,  to 
compelled  labour,  the  reappearance  on  new  soil  of  the  vices  of  the  older  world,  the 
contrast  of  moral  and  intellectual  qualities  between  the  civilized  and  the  savage, 
and  the  gradual  apprehension  of  the  wondrous  strangers  by  the  savage,  with  all  the 
requirements  of  activity,  promptitude,  and  vigour  demanded  for  the  efficient  and  suc¬ 
cessful  administration  of  a  settlement, — all  these  topics,  problems,  and  conjunctures 
came  up  in  the  plantation  of  Virginia  by  James  I. ;  and  familiarity  with  them  and 
their  collateral  dependence  would  heighten  the  sensibility  of  the  audience  to  every 
scene  of  a  play  which  presented  them  in  contrasted  guise,  but  in  a  manner  that  only 
the  more  distinctly  brought  them  home  to  their  cardinal  bearings  in  the  philosophy 
of  society — of  man.  [P.  102.]  The  incidental  references  to  Claribel  have  the  effect 
of  adding  another  female  character  to  the  play ;  besides  their  use  in  furnishing  an 
unforced  motive  for  the  voyage  of  Alonso,  they  serve  to  place  him  in  contrast  with 
Prospero  in  respect  of  paternal  sensibility,  while  the  word  Gonzalo  throws  in  at  last, 
reconciles  uneasy  thoughts  about  his  fate,  by  indicating  that  the  African  marriage 
had,  by  good  fortune,  been  of  happier  event  than  Alonso  had  any  right  to  count  on, 
or  had  concerned  himself  about  anticipating. — Gonzalo’s  Utopian  theory  of  a  happy 
island  under  theoretical  government,  presupposes  an  alteration  in  power  and  quality, 
not  only  of  human  nature  but  of  nature  at  large ;  it  prepares  the  edge  and  point  of 
the  next  scene,  where  the  inclemencies  of  the  isle,  the  debasing  labour  rendered 
necessary,  and  the  vile  tendencies  of  imbruted  passion  in  the  occupants,  tend  to 
make  the  fantastic  paradise  a  hell ;  and  the  outcry  of  the  debauched  slave,  ‘  Free¬ 
dom,  hey  day,  freedom,’  echoing  the  philosopher’s  aspiration  for  entire  freedom  from 
all  restraint,  is  only  ominous  of  disaster  and  misery, 

Francois- Victor  Hugo  ( CEuvres  Completes  de  Shakespeare,  1865,  vol.  ii.  Intro¬ 
duction,  p.  87) :  Only  one  man  resisted  this  universal  current  [i.  e.  the  belief  in 
witchcraft  promulgated  by  James]. 

That  man  was  Shakespeare. 

Shakespeare  did  not  as  did  Reginald  Scot. 

He  did  not  reject  the  traditions  of  the  Bible  nor  the  legends ;  he  engrafted  them. 

He  did  not  question  the  existence  of  the  invisible  world ;  he  rehabilitated  it. 

He  did  not  deny  man’s  supernatural  power;  he  consecrated  it. 

James  the  Sixth  said :  Accursed  be  spirits !  Shakespeare  says :  Glory  be  to 
ipir  ts ! 


358 


APPENDIX 


Tliis  side  taken  by  the  poet  was  not  the  premeditation  of  a  tactician.;,  it  was  the 
result  of  a  conviction.  Shakespeare  had  a  profound  belief  in  the  mysterious.  He 
was  not  of  those  who  affirm  that  the  creation  which  begins  with  stones  stops  at  man ; 
he  accepted  fully  the  popular  philosophy  which  makes  an  indefinite  scale  of  beings 
ascend  from  matter  to  idea,  from  evil  to  good,  from  Satan  to  Jehovah,  and  midway 
in  this  scale  places  man,  half  body  and  half  soul.  Convinced  that  there  is  an  inter¬ 
mediate  world  between  man  and  God,  Shakespeare  was  led,  by  logic  itself,  to  a  rec¬ 
ognition  of  all  the  creatures  wherewith  the  Pantheism  of  the  Renaissance  filled  the 
world.  No  !  Legends  did  not  lie.  No  !  Scripture  did  not  lie.  No  !  Mythology  was 
not  a  myth.  No  !  Plato  did  not  lie.  No  !  The  ancient  Druidical  dogma  did  not  lie. 
There  is  room  in  the  Infinite  for  all  the  creatures  of  all  the  Theogonies.  ‘  There  are 
‘  more  things  in  this  world,  Horatio,  than  are  dreamed  of  in  your  philosophy.’  Above 
us,  around  us,  and  below  us  there  are  circling  thousands  of  beings  who  see  us,  and 
whom  we  do  not.  These  beings  animate  creation  everywhere ;  gnomes  and  satyrs 
people  the  earth ;  nymphs,  naiads,  and  undines  people  the  waters ;  lares  and  hob¬ 
goblins  people  houses ;  sylphs  and  salamanders  people  the  air  and  the  fire ;  fairies 
people  the  ether;  spirits  people  atoms!  These  beings  form  a  superior  humanity, 
seeing  further  than  we  and  knowing  more  than  we.  And  we,  junior  humanity,  have 
not  the  right,  forsooth,  to  address  ourselves  to  this  elder  sister !  We  have  not  the 
right,  forsooth,  to  evoke  her,  to  consult  her,  to  conjure  her !  We,  sad  lump  of  flesh 
that  we  are,  must  needs  be  forbidden  in  our  perplexities  to  call  upon  these  luminous 
auxiliaries  !  And  not  only  is  this  appeal  to  be  forbidden  us,  but  it  is  to  be  accounted 
a  crime !  And,  to  punish  these  invocations  to  the  purest  of  spiritual  beings,  fagots  are 
to  be  prepared ! 

It  is  against  these  conclusions  of  the  legislator  that  the  poet  protests. 

The  law  condemns  Faerie ;  Shakespeare  celebrates  it  in  The  Midsummer  Night’s 
Dream.  The  law  condemns  the  magician  to  the  stake ;  Shakespeare  glorifies  him  in 
The  Tempest. 

(Page  90.)  The  Midsummer  Night’s  Dream  depicts  the  action  of  the  invisible 
world  on  man.  The  Tempest  symbolizes  the  action  of  man  on  the  invisible  world. 

In  the  former,  the  work  of  the  poet’s  youth,  man  obeys  the  spirits.  In  the  latter, 
the  work  of  the  poet’s  ripe  age,  it  is  the  spirits  who  obey  man. 

Many  commentators  agree  in  the  belief  that  The  Tempest  is  the  last  creation  of 
Shakespeare.  I  will  readily  believe  it.  There  is  in  The  Tempest  the  solemn  tone 
of  a  testament.  It  might  be  said  that,  before  his  death,  the  poet,  in  this  epopee 
of  the  ideal,  had  designed  a  codicil  for  the  Future.  In  this  enchanted  isle,  full  of 
‘sounds  and  sweet  airs  that  give  delight,’  we  may  expect  to  behold  Utopia,  the 
promised  land  of  future  generations,  Paradise  regained.  Who  in  reality  is  Prospero, 

I  he  king  of  this  isle  ?  Prospero  is  the  shipwrecked  sailor  who  reaches  port,  the  exile 
who  regains  his  native  land,  he  who  from  the  depths  of  despair  becomes  all-powerful, 
the  worker  who  by  his  science  has  tamed  matter,  Caliban,  and  by  his  genius  the  spirit, 
Ariel.  Prospero  is  man,  the  master  of  Nature  and  the  despot  of  destiny ;  he  is  the 
man-Providence  ! 

The  Tempest  is  the  supreme  denoument,  dreamed  by  Shakespeare,  for  the  bloody 
drama  of  Genesis.  It  is  the  expiation  of  the  primordial  crime.  The  region  whither 
it  transports  us  is  the  enchanted  land  where  the  sentence  of  damnation  is  absolved  by 
clemency,  and  where  reconciliation  is  ensured  by  amnesty  to  the  fratricide.  And,  at 
the  close  of  the  piece,  when  the  poet,  touched  by  emotion,  throws  Antonio  into  the 
arms  of  Prospero,  he  has  made  Cain  pardoned  by  Abel. 


CRITICISMS  ON  THE  PLAY— MONTEGUT 


359 

£mile  Mont£gut  ( Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  1865,  vol.  lviii.  p.  732)  :  The  Tem¬ 
pest  is  clearly  the  last  of  Shakespeare’s  dramas,  and,  under  the  form  of  an  allegory, 
is  the  dramatic  last  will  and  testament  of  the  great  poet,  his  adieux  to  that  faithful 
public  whose  applause,  during  the  short  space  of  five  and  twenty  years,  he  had  gained 
for  five  and  twenty  masterpieces,  and  more  than  eleven  others  which,  full  of  imagina¬ 
tion  and  charm,  would  have  made  for  any  lesser  mortal  the  most  enviable  of  crowns ; 
in  a  word,  this  drama  is  a  poetic  synthesis,  or,  as  Prospero  would  express  it  in  the 
language  of  a  magician,  it  is  a  microcosm  of  that  dramatic  world  which  his  imagina¬ 
tion  had  created. 

[Montegut  give  an  ingenious  and  original  reason  for  the  position  of  The  Tempest 
ta  the  Folio :  Although  the  last  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  it  is  in  that  volume  placed 
first,  because,  like  the  emblematic  frontispieces  of  antique  books,  it  prepares  the 
reader  for  the  substance  of  all  that  follows.  No  other  play  will  do  this,  none  other 
is  such  a  synthesis  of  all.  Just  as  three  or  four  well-selected  plants  will  represent  to 
the  experienced  eye  of  a  botanist  the  flora  of  a  hemisphere,  so  the  whole  Shakespearian 
world  is  brought  before  the  imagination  by  the  characters  of  Prospero,  of  Ariel,  of 
Caliban,  and  of  Miranda.  ‘  It  is  of  all  poetic  generalisations  which  have  ever  been 
‘  made,  the  most  refined  and  the  clearest.’] 

After  all,  it  is  quite  possible  that  The  Tempest  was  performed  for  the  first  time  at 
some  marriage ;  but  what  is  inadmissible  is  that  it  was  composed  expressly  for  such 
an  occasion ;  the  length  of  the  drama,  which  far  exceeds  the  customary  length  of  a 
masque,  forbids  such  a  supposition.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  every  indication  that 
we  are  dealing  with  a  work  dreamed  out  at  leisure,  slowly  arranged,  patiently  exe¬ 
cuted,  and  not  with  a  brilliant  improvisation  which  had  to  be  ready  at  short  notice,  at 
a  fixed  hour  for  a  solemnity  which  admitted  of  no  delay. — p.  739.  [If,  however,  it 
be  really  the  fact  that  it  was  written  for  a  marriage,  Montegut  suggests  as  a  possible 
explanation  that  the  demand  for  a  masque  may  have  broken  in  on  Shakespeare’s  retire¬ 
ment  in  Stratford,  where  he  was  busily  occupied  with  writing  out  his  farewell  to  his 
dear  public  in  this  play  of  The  Tempest.  The  demand  came  from  a  source  too  power¬ 
ful  to  be  refused.  Into  this  farewell  piece,  nearly  finished,  Shakespeare  intercalated 
the  masque  in  the  Fourth  Act,  and  the  thing  was  done.  ‘  The  masque  appears  to  have 
been  introduced  somewhat  artificially ;  the  general  action  would  not  be  deranged  by 
its  excision.’ — p.  74°-] 

Prospero  apparently  makes  several  allusions  to  his  own  age,  and  intimates  that  it  is 
the  proper  age  to  retire  from  public  life.  When  Prospero  says  to  Ariel,  ‘  The  time 
‘  ’Twixt  six  and  now  must  by  us  both  be  spent  most  preciously,’  it  is  a  little  dif¬ 
ficult  to  decide  what  Shakespeare  means  by  ‘  the  sixth  hour  ’ ;  because  he  wrote  this 
play  between  his  forty-seventh  and  his  forty-eighth  year,  and  Prospero  seems  to  use 
the  word  ‘hours’  as  the  decades  of  human  life;  but  in  all  other  respects  his  words 
correspond  exactly  to  the  age  which  he  had  then  reached.  Like  Prospero,  Shake¬ 
speare  had  passed  the  ‘  mid-season  ’  or  summer  of  life . [When  Ariel  sings  that 

he  will  fly  ‘  after  summer  merrily  ’  we  must  understand]  not  the  summer  of  the  year, 
but  the  summer  of  life,  implying  that  the  befitting  hour  for  genius  to  retire  is  at  the 
end  of  this  warm  season  when  its  wings  can  expand  in  broad  day,  and  that  after 
mature  age,  or  past  the  ‘  mid-season,’  inspiration  departs  never  to  return.  This  pre¬ 
possession  to  retire  before  age  has  chilled  his  genius  and  while  his  inspiration  is  in 
full  course,  is  perceptible  throughout  the  drama.  [For  proof  of  this  Montegut  appeals 
to  Prospero’s  farewell  to  the  *  elves  of  brooks,  and  standing  lakes  and  groves,’  and  to 
the  Epilogue.] — p.  472. 


360 


APPENDIX 


The  history  of  the  Inchanted  Island,  as  Prospero  reveals  it  in  his  conversaticns,  in 
the  First  Act,  with  Miranda,  Ariel,  and  Caliban, — is  it  not  word  for  word  the  history 
of  the  English  theatre  and  of  the  transformation  which  Shakespeare  wrought  in  it  ? 
....  A  young  man,  driven  from  home  by  domestic  reverses,  pursued  by  poverty,  and, 
perhaps,  by  the  persecutions  of  Sir  Thomas  Lucy  (may  his  name  live  for  ever !)  steps, 

on  the  boards  of  the  English  theatre . Ah,  that  primitive  English  theatre,  what  a 

savage,  inhospitable  place,  where  the  witch  Sycorax,  another  name  for  barbarism, 
hourly  practised  her  abominable  sorceries !  .  .  .  .  She  was  scarcely  just  dead  when 
Shakespeare  arrived  on  this  isle  of  a  theatre  which  he  found  under  the  control  of  a 
gloomy  and  nondescript  genius,  a  scion  worthy  of  her,  Caliban, — let  us  boldly  call 
him  Marlowe, — a  devilish  creature,  with  a  criminal  imagination,  a  soul  of  the  damned, 
whom  education  debased  instead  of  refining,  and  whose  savagery  seemed  merely  to 
increase  under  all  the  resources  of  civilisation.  In  the  audacious  lusts,  in  the  mis¬ 
shapen  thoughts  of  Caliban  can  be  readily  detected  that  spirit  of  sedition  and  impiety 
which  glows  in  the  theatre  of  Marlowe ;  .  .  .  .  but,  misshapen  as  he  is,  this  Caliban  of 
the  English  theatre  is  a  true  son  of  nati  re,  this  ‘  abhorred  slave  ’  of  vice  is  inspired, 
and  he  utters  with  incomparable  power  the  poesy  of  slime  and  of  crime.  Accordingly, 
Shakespeare,  who  could  recognise  this,  neither  denied  its  worth  nor  disclaimed  it. 

‘  This  thing  of  darkness,’  he  says  by  the  mouth  of  Prospero,  ‘  I  acknowledge  mine.’ 
But,  in  taking  possession  of  this  theatre  with  its  bloody  and  perverted  inventions,  he 
heard  the  mournful  voice  of  an  imprisoned  spirit  beseeching  him  to  free  it,  the  sweet 
voice  of  English  genius,  full  of  tenderness,  of  melancholy,  and  of  passion,  which  for 
expression  needed  complete  freedom.  Shakespeare  freed  this  beautiul  spirit  from  the 
prison  where  barbarism  had  confined  it,  and  by  its  aid  humanised  the  savage  theatre. 
Then  the  brambles  burst  into  flower,  the  thickets  were  transformed  into  verdurous 
groves  where  fairies  loved  to  throng,  the  horrible  gloom  of  the  primeval  forests  was 
scattered  by  the  light  of  dazzling  apparitions,  the  foul,  mephitic  vapours  grew  melo¬ 
dious,  and  were  crossed  and  recrossed  by  songs  to  which  even  Caliban  and  his  debased 
companions  could  not  be  insensible,  and  which  will  retain  their  power  as  long  as  there 
are  souls  here  below  open  to  music  and  poesy.  Behold  the  Eden  into  which  Shake¬ 
speare  converted  this  savage  land  !  Nevertheless,  against  this  isle,  thus  transfigured 
by  Prospero,  there  was  many  a  calumny  uttered ;  its  fertility  was  denied,  the  enchant¬ 
ments  of  its  sovereign  called  in  doubt.  Shakespeare,  in  this  allegory  of  his  life,  does 
not  overlook  the  criticisms  of  which  he  was  the  object.  Recall  the  conversation  with 
which  the  Second  Act  opens,  and  the  bitter  sneers  at  the  Inchanted  Isle  spoken  by 
Sebastian  and  Antonio,  some  George  Chapman,  or  some  John  Marston,  egged  on  by 
jealousy  and  hate,  perhaps,  also  by  the  instigations  of  that  dog  of  a  Ben  Jonson  [ce 
dogue  de  Ben  Jonson),  great  poet  and  antipathetic  character,  whose  relations  with 
Shakespeare  were  not  always,  to  his  shame  be  it  spoken,  free  from  hypocrisy.  It  is 
in  vain  that  honest  Gonzalo  extols  the  charms  of  the  isle ;  Antonio  and  Sebastian 
criticise  everything  in  it,  even  the  colour  of  the  soil . Patience,  malignant  scep¬ 

tics  !  The  phantasmagoria  of  the  vanishing  viands  and  of  Ariel  as  a  harpy  will  soon 
conquer  your  incredulity  and  dazzle  you  into  insanity,  and  force  you,  with  repentance, 
to  confess  the  power  of  Prospero-Shakespeare. — p.  746. 

Mrs  F.  A.  Kemble  [MS  note  in  a  copy  of  Hanmer’s  edition,  long  in  her  possession ) : 
The  Tempest  is  my  favourite  of  Shakespeare’s  dramas.  The  remoteness  of  the  scene 
from  all  known  localities  allows  a  range  to  the  imagination  such  as  no  other  of  his 
plays  affords, — not  even  The  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  where,  though  the 


CRITICISMS  ON  THE  PLAY— KEMBLE 


361 

Dramatis  Personae  are  half  of  them  superhuman,  the  scene  is  laid  in  a  wood  *  near 
Athens  ’ ;  and  Theseus  and  Hippolyta,  if  fabulous  folk,  are  among  the  mythological 
acquaintance  of  our  earliest  school  days. — But  the  ‘  uninhabited  island,’  lost  in 
unknown  seas,  gives  far  other  scope  to  the  wandering  fancy.  As  the  scene  is 
removed  from  all  places  with  w  hich  we  hold  acquaintance,  so  the  story,  simple  in  the 
extreme,  has  more  reference  to  past  events  than  to  any  action  in  the  play  itself,  which 
involves  but  few  incidents,  and  has  little  to  do  with  common  experience. — But  chiefly 
I  delight  in  this  play,  because  of  the  image  it  presents  to  my  mind  of  the  glorious 
supremacy  of  the  righteous  human  soul  over  all  things  by  which  it  is  surrounded. 
Prospero  is  to  me  the  representative  of  wise  and  virtuous  manhood  in  its  true  relation 
to  the  combined  elements  of  existence, — the  physical  powers  of  the  external  world, 
and  the  varieties  of  character  with  which  it  comes  into  voluntary,  accidental,  or 
enforced  contact. — Of  the  wonderful  chain  of  being,  of  which  Caliban  is  the  densest 
and  Ariel  the  most  ethereal  extreme,  Prospero  is  the  middle  link.  He — the  wise 
and  good  man — is  the  ruling  power,  to  whom  the  whole  series  is  subject. — First,  and 
lowest  in  the  scale,  comes  the  gross  and  uncouth  but  powerful  savage,  who  represents 
both  the  more  ponderous  and  unwieldy  natural  elements  (as  the  earth  and  water), 
which  the  wise  magician  by  his  knowledge  compels  to  his  service ;  and  the  brutal 
and  animal  propensities  of  the  nature  of  man  which  he,  the  type  of  its  noblest  devel¬ 
opment,  holds  in  lordly  subjugation. — Next  follow  the  drunken,  ribald,  foolish 
retainers  of  the  King  of  Naples,  whose  ignorance,  knavery,  and  stupidity  represent 
the  coarser  attributes  of  those  great,  unenlightened  masses  which,  in  all  communities, 
threaten  authority  by  their  conjunction  with  brute  force  and  savage  ferocity;  and  only 
under  the  wholesome  restraint  of  a  wise  discipline  can  be  gradually  admonished  into 
the  salutary  subserviency  necessary  for  their  civilisation. — Ascending  by  degrees  in 
the  scale,  the  next  group  is  that  of  the  cunning,  cruel,  selfish,  treacherous  worldlings, 
— Princes  and  Potentates, — the  peers,  in  outward  circumstances  of  high  birth  and 
breeding,  of  the  noble  Prospero,  whose  villainous  policy  (not  unaided  by  his  own 
dereliction  of  his  duties  as  a  governor  in  the  pursuit  of  his  pleasure  as  a  philosopher) 
triumphs  over  his  fortune,  and,  through  a  devilish  ability  and  craft,  for  a  time  gets  the 
better  of  truth  and  virtue  in  his  person. — From  these,  who  represent  the  baser  intel¬ 
lectual,  as  the  former  do  the  baser  sensual,  properties  of  humanity,  we  approach  by  a 
most  harmonious,  moral  transition,  though  the  agency  of  the  skilfully  interposed  figure 
of  the  kindly  gentleman,  Gonzalo,  those  charming  types  of  youth  and  love, — Ferdi¬ 
nand  and  Miranda. — The  fervent,  chivalrous  devotion  of  the  youth,  and  the  yielding 
simplicity  and  sweetness  of  the  girl,  are  lovely  representations  of  those  natural  emo¬ 
tions  of  tender  sentiment  and  passionate  desire  which,  watched  and  guided  and 
guarded  by  the  affectionate  solicitude  and  paternal  prudence  of  Prospero,  are  pruned 
of  their  lavish  luxuriance,  and  supported  in  their  violent  weakness  by  the  wise  will 
that  teaches  forbearance  and  self-control  as  the  only  price  at  which  these  exquisite 
flowers  of  existence  may  unfold  their  blossoms  in  prosperous  beauty  and  bear  their 
rightful  harvest  of  happiness  as  well  as  pleasure. — Next  in  this  wonderful  gamut  of 
being,  governed  by  the  sovereign  soul  of  Prospero,  come  the  shining  figures  of  the 
Masque, — beautiful  bright  apparitions,  fitly  indicating  the  air,  the  fire,  and  all  the 
more  smiling  aspects  and  subtler  forces  of  nature.  These  minister  with  prompt  obe¬ 
dience  to  the  magical  behests  of  science,  and,  when  not  toiling  in  appointed  service 
for  their  great  task-master,  recreate  and  refresh  his  senses  and  his  spirit  with  the 
ever-varying  pageant  of  this  beautiful  Universe. — Last — highest  of  all — crowning 
with  a  fitful  flame  of  lambent  brightness  this  poetical  pyramid  'e  existence,  flickers 


362 


APPENDIX 


and  flashes  the  beautiful  Demon,  without  whose  exquisite  companionship  we  nevei 
think  of  the  royal  magician  with  his  grave  countenance  of  command. — Ariel  seems 
to  me  to  represent  the  keenest  perceiving  intellect,  separate  from  all  moral  conscious¬ 
ness  and  sense  of  responsibility.  His  power  and  knowledge  are  in  some  respects 
greater  than  those  of  his  master, — he  can  do  what  Prospero  cannot, — he  lashes  up 
the  Tempest  round  the  island, — he  saves  the  king  and  his  companions  from  the  ship¬ 
wreck, — he  defeats  the  conspiracy  of  Sebastian  and  Anthonio,  and  discovers  the 
clumsy  plot  of  the  beast  Caliban, — he  wields  immediate  influence  over  the  elements, 

and  comprehends  alike  without  indignation  or  sympathy, — which  are  moral  results, _ 

the  sin  and  suffering  of  humanity.  Therefore, — because  he  is  only  a  spirit  of  know¬ 
ledge,  he  is  subject  to  the  spirit  of  love, — and  the  wild,  subtle,  keen,  beautilul,  pow¬ 
erful  creature  is  compelled  to  serve  with  mutinous  waywardness  and  unwilling  sub¬ 
jection  the  human  soul  that  pitied  and  rescued  it  from  its  harsher  slavery  to  sin, _ 

and  which,  though  controlling  it  with  a  wise  severity  to  the  fulfilment  of  its  duties, 
yearns  after  it  with  the  tearful  eyes  of  tender  human  love  when  its  wild  wings  flash 
away  into  its  newly  recovered  realm  of  lawless  liberty. 

Lowell  {Among  my  Books,  1870,  p.  199)  :  If  I  read  The  Tempest  rightly,  it  i* 
an  example  of  how  a  great  poet  should  write  allegory, — not  embodying  metaphysical 
abstractions,  but  giving  us  ideals  abstracted  from  life  itself,  suggesting  an  under-mean¬ 
ing  everywhere,  forcing  it  upon  us  nowhere,  tantalizing  the  mind  with  hints  tnat  imply 
so  much  and  tell  so  little,  and  yet  keep  the  attention  all  eye  and  ear  with  eager,  if 
fruitless,  expectation.  Here  the  leading  characters  are  not  merely  typical,  nut  sym¬ 
bolical, — that  is,  they  do  not  illustrate  a  class  of  persons,  they  belong  to  universal 

Nature . There  is  scarce  a  play  of  Shakespeare’s  in  which  there  is  such  variety 

of  character,  none  in  which  character  has  so  little  to  do  in  the  carrying  on  and  devel¬ 
opment  of  the  story.  But  consider  for  a  moment  if  ever  the  Imagination  has  been  so 
embodied  as  in  Prospero,  the  Fancy  as  in  Ariel,  the  brute  Understanding  as  in  Caliban, 
who,  the  moment  his  poor  wits  are  warmed  with  the  glorious  liquor  of  Stephano,  plots 
rebellion  against  his  natural  lord,  the  higher  Reason.  Miranda  is  mere  abstract 
Womanhood,  as  truly  so  before  she  sees  Ferdinand  as  Eve  before  she  was  wakened 
to  consciousness  by  the  echo  of  her  own  nature  coming  back  to  her,  the  same,  and 
yet  not  the  same,  from  that  of  Adam.  Ferdinand,  again,  is  nothing  more  than  Youth, 
compelled  to  drudge  at  something  he  despises,  till  the  sacrifice  of  will  and  abnegation 
of  self  win  him  his  ideal  in  Miranda.  The  subordinate  personages  are  simply  types; 
Sebastian  and  Antonio,  of  weak  character  and  evil  ambition ;  Gonzalo,  of  average 
sense  and  honesty;  Adrian  and  Francisco,  of  the  walking  gentlemen  who  fill  up  a 
world.  They  are  not  characters  in  the  same  sense  with  Iago,  Falstaff,  Shallow,  or 
Leontes ;  and  it  is  curious  how  every  one  of  them  loses  his  way  in  this  enchanted 
island  of  life,  all  the  victims  of  one  illusion  after  another,  except  Prospero,  whose 
ministers  are  purely  ideal.  The  whole  play  indeed  is  a  succession  of  illusions,  wind¬ 
ing  up  with  those  solemn  words  of  the  great  enchanter  who  had  summoned  to  his 
service  every  shape  of  merriment  or  passion,  every  figure  in  the  great  tragi-comedy 
of  life,  and  who  was  now  bidding  farewell  to  the  scene  of  his  triumphs.  For  in 
Prospero  shall  we  not  recognise  the  Artist  himself, — 

‘  That  did  not  better  for  his  life  provide 
Than  public  means  which  public  manners  breeds, 

Whence  comes  it  that  his  name  receives  a  brand,’ _ 

who  has  forfeited  a  shining  place  in  the  world’s  eye  by  devotion  to  his  art,  and  who 


CRITICISMS  ON  THE  PLAY— RUSK  IN 


363 

turned  adrift  on  the  ocean  of  life  on  the  leaky  carcass  of  a  boat,  has  shipwrecked  on 
that  Fortunate  Island  (as  men  always  do  who  find  their  true  vocation),  where  he  is 
absolute  lord,  making  all  the  powers  of  Nature  serve  him,  but  with  Ariel  and  Caliban 
as  special  ministers  ? 

Ruskin  ( Munera  Pulveris,  ed.  New  York,  1872,  p.  126)  :  Plato’s  slave,  in  the 
Polity ,  who,  well  dressed  and  washed,  aspires  to  the  hand  of  his  master’s  daughter, 
corresponds  curiously  to  Caliban’s  attacking  Prospero’s  cell ;  and  there  is  an  under¬ 
current  of  meaning  throughout,  in  the  The  Tempest  as  well  as  in  The  Merchant  of 
Venice,  referring  in  this  case  to  government,  as  in  that  to  commerce.  Miranda  (‘  the 
wonderful,’  so  addressed  first  by  Ferdinand,  ‘Oh  you  wonder!’)  corresponds  to 
Homer’s  Arte ;  Ariel  and  Caliban  are  respectively  the  spirits  of  faithful  and  imagi¬ 
native  labour,  opposed  to  rebellious,  hurtful,  and  slavish  labour.  Prospero  (‘  for 
hope’),  a  true  governor,  is  opposed  to  Sycorax,  the  mother  of  slavery,  her  name, 

*  Swine-raven,’  indicating  at  once  brutality  and  deathfulness . For  all  these 

dreams  of  Shakespeare,  as  those  of  true  and  strong  men  must  be,  are  ^avTaagara 
1 ?sia,  Kal  axial  rtiv  dvraiv — divine  phantasms,  and  shadows  of  things  that  are.  We 
hardly  tell  our  children,  willingly,  a  fable  with  no  purport  in  it ;  yet  we  think  God 
sends  his  best  messengers  only  to  sing  fairy  tales  to  us,  fond  and  empty.  The  Tem¬ 
pest  is  just  like  a  grotesque  in  a  rich  missal,  ‘clasped  where  paynims  pray.’  Ariel 
is  the  spirit  of  generous  and  free-hearted  service,  in  early  stages  of  human  society 
oppressed  by  ignorance  and  wild  tyranny ;  venting  groans  as  fast  as  mill-wheels  strike ; 
in  shipwreck  of  states,  dreadful ;  so  that  ‘  all  but  mariners  plunge  in  the  brine  and 

*  quit  the  vessel,  then  all  afire  with  me,'  yet  having  in  itself  the  will  and  sweetness  of 
truest  peace,  whence  that  is  especially  called  ‘  Ariel’s  ’  song,  ‘  Come  unto  these  yellow 
‘  sands,  and  there,  take  hands’  *  courtesied  when  you  have,  and  kissed,  the  wild  waves 
‘  whist  ’ ;  (mind,  it  is  ‘  cortesia,’  not  ‘  curtsey  ’),  and  read  quiet  for  ‘  whist,’  if  you  want 
the  full  sense.  Then  you  may  indeed  foot  it  featly,  and  sweet  spirits  bear  the  burden 
for  you, — with  watch  in  the  night  and  call  in  early  morning.  The  vis  viva  in  ele¬ 
mental  transformation  follows — ‘  Full  fathom  five  thy  father  lies,  of  his  bones  are 
‘  coral  made.’  Then,  giving  rest  after  labour,  it  ‘  fetches  dew  from  the  still-vext 

*  Bermoothes,  and  with  a  charm  joined  to  their  suffered  labour,  leaves  men  asleep.’ 
Snatching  away  the  feast  of  the  cruel,  it  seems  to  them  as  a  harpy ;  followed  by  the 
utterly  vile,  who  cannot  see  in  it  any  shape,  but  to  whom  it  is  the  picture  of  nobody,  it 
still  gives  shrill  harmony  to  their  false  and  mocking  catch,  ‘  Thought  is  free  ’ ;  but 
leads  them  into  briers  and  foul  places,  and  at  last  hollas  the  hounds  upon  them. 
Minister  of  fate  against  the  great  criminal,  it  joins  itself  with  the  ‘  incensed  seas  and 
‘  shores,’ — the  sword  that  layeth  at  it  cannot  hold,  and  may  ‘  with  bemocked-at  stabs 
1  as  soon  kill  the  still-closing  waters,  as  diminish  one  dowle  that  is  in  its  plume.’  As 
the  guide  and  aid  of  true  love,  it  is  always  called  by  Prospero  ‘  fine  ’  (the  French  ‘  fine,’ 
not  the  English),  or  ‘  delicate  ’ — another  long  note  would  be  needed  to  explain  all 
the  meaning  in  this  word.  Lastly,  its  work  done,  and  war,  it  resolves  itself  into  the 
elements.  The  intense  significance  of  the  last  song,  *  Where  the  bee  sucks,’  I  will 
examine  in  its  due  place. — The  types  of  slavery  in  Caliban  are  more  palpable,  .... 
the  heart  of  his  slavery  is  in  his  worship  :  ‘  That’s  a  brave  god  and  bears  celestial — 
‘  liquor.’  But,  in  illustration  of  the  sense  in  which  the  Latin  benignus  and  malignus 
are  to  be  coupled  with  Eleutheria  and  Douleia,  note  that  Caliban’s  torment  is  always 
the  physical  reflection  of  his  own  nature — ‘  cramps  ’  and  ‘  side  stitches  that  shall  pen 

*  thy  breath  up;  thou  shalt  be  pinched,  as  thick  as  honey-combs;’  the  whole  nature 


364 


APPENDIX 


of  slavery  beiug  one  cramp  and  cretinous  contraction.  Fancy  this  of  Ariel !  You 
may  fetter  him,  but  you  set  no  mark  on  him ;  you  may  put  him  to  hard  work  and  far 
journey,  but  you  cannot  give  him  a  cramp. 

Dowden  [Shakspere — His  Mind  and  Art,  1875,  p.  425) :  If  I  were  to  allow  my 
fancy  to  run  out  in  play  after  such  an  attempted  interpretation,  I  should  describe  Pros- 
pero  as  the  man  of  genius,  the  great  artist,  lacking  at  first  in  practical  gifts  which 
lead  to  material  success,  and  set  adrift  on  the  perilous  sea  of  life,  in  which  he  finds 
his  enchanted  island,  where  he  may  achieve  his  works  of  wonder.  He  bears  with 
him  Art  in  its  infancy — the  marvellous  child,  Miranda.  The  grosser  passions  and 
appetites — Caliban — he  subdues  to  his  service,  'Mir.  ’Tis  a  villain,  sir,  I  do  not  love 
‘  to  look  on.  Pros.  But  as  ’tis  We  cannot  miss  him  ’ ;  and  he  partially  informs  this 
servant-monster  with  intellect  and  imagination;  for  Caliban  has  dim  affinities  with  the 
higher  world  of  spirits.  But  these  grosser  passions  and  appetites  attempt  to  violate 
the  purity  of  art.  Caliban  would  seize  on  Miranda,  and  people  the  island  with  Cali¬ 
bans  ;  therefore  his  servitude  must  be  strict.  And  who  is  Ferdinand  ?  Is  he  not, 
with  his  gallantry  and  his  beauty,  the  young  Fletcher  in  conjunction  with  whom 
Shakspere  worked  upon  The  Two  Noble  Kinsmen  and  Henry  VIII ?  Fletcher  is 
conceived  as  a  follower  of  the  Shaksperian  style  and  method  in  dramatic  art;  he 
had  ‘  eyed  full  many  a  lady  with  best  regard,’  for  several  virtues  had  liked  several 
women,  but  never  any  with  whole-hearted  devotion,  except  Miranda.  And  to  Fer¬ 
dinand  the  old  enchanter  will  entrust  his  daughter,  ‘  a  thrid  of  his  own  life.’  But 
Shakspere  had  perceived  the  weak  point  in  Fletcher’s  genius — its  want  of  hard¬ 
ness  of  fibre,  of  patient  endurance,  and  of  a  sense  of  the  solemnity  and  sanctity  of 
the  service  of  art.  And  therefore  he  finely  hints  to  his  friend,  that  his  winning  of 
Miranda  must  not  be  too  light  and  easy.  It  shall  be  Ferdinand’s  task  to  remove 
some  thousands  of  logs  and  pile  them,  according  to  the  strict  injunction  of  Prospero. 

‘  Don,t  despise  drudgery  and  dryasdust  work,  young  poets,’  Shakspere  would  seem 
to  say,  who  had  himself  so  carefully  laboured  over  his  English  and  Roman  histories ; 

‘  for  Miranda’s  sake  such  drudgery  may  well  seem  light.’  Therefore,  also,  Prospero 
surrounds  the  marriage  of  F erdinand  to  his  daughter  with  a  religious  awe.  Ferdi¬ 
nand  must  honour  her  as  sacred,  and  win  her  by  hard  toil.  But  the  work  of  the 
higher  imagination  is  not  drudgery— it  is  swift  and  serviceable  among  all  the  ele¬ 
ments,  fire  upon  the  topmast,  the  sea-nymph  upon  the  sands,  Ceres  the  goddess  of 
earth,  with  harvest  blessings,  in  the  Masque.  It  is  essentially  Ariel,  an  airy  spirit,— 
tne  imaginative  genius  of  poetry,  but  recently  delivered  in  England  from  long  slavery 
to  Sycorax.  Prospero’s  departure  from  the  island  is  the  abandoning  by  Shakspere 
of  the  theatre,  the  scene  of  his  marvellous  works :  ‘  Graves  at  my  command  Have 
‘  waked  their  sleepers,  oped,  and  let  them  forth  By  my  so  potent  art.’  Henceforth 
Prospero  is  but  a  man ;  no  longer  a  great  enchanter.  He  returns  to  the  dukedom  he 
had  lost  in  Stratford-upon  Avon,  and  will  pay  no  tribute  henceforth  to  any  Alonzo  or 
Lucy  of  them  all.  Thus  may  one  be  permitted  to  play  with  the  grave  subject  of  The 
Tempest ,  and  I  ask  no  more  credit  for  the  interpretation  here  proposed  than  is  given 
to  any  other  equally  innocent,  if  trifling,  attempt  to  read  the  supposed  allegory. 

J.  Surtees  Phillpotts  ( Rugby  Edition,  1876,  p.  xx)  :  Another  poet  had  depicted 
a  magical  tempest  with  a  shipwrecked  prince  cast  upon  an  enchanted  island,  and  there 
relieved  and  tended  by  a  king’s  daughter.  The  pictures  are  both  beautiful,  but  they 
are  not  the  same,  and  their  iiTerence  is  as  marked  a  feature  in  their  beauty  as  then 


CRITICISMS  ON  THE  PLA  Y—FURNIVALL  365 

likeness. — If  an  uneducated  person  wished  to  understand  the  meaning  of  a  poetical 
creation,  or,  in  other  words,  to  see  in  what  the  essential  unity  of  a  poem  consisted,  he 
could  hardly  do  better  than  exchange  the  details  in  Homer’s  canvas  ( Od .  vi,  244, 
275,  3I0)>  piece  by  piece,  for  those  in  Shakespeare.  He  would  then  see  what  magic 
art  there  is  in  a  poet’s  colouring,  and  how  even  the  most  trivial  details  are  made  to 
throw  a  reflected  light  on  the  main  action  of  the  piece ;  how,  for  instance,  the  attrac¬ 
tiveness  of  the  one  island  enhances  the  fidelity  of  Ulysses,  while  the  barrenness  of 
the  other  blackens  the  guilt  of  Antonio. — Caliban  could  not  be  transferred.  He  is  a 
purely  Celtic  creation,  the  grotesque  demonology  which  made  such  beings  conceivable 
being  wholly  foreign  to  the  sunny  sportiveness  of  an  Hellenic  myth. — Ariel’s  song 
would  not  have  been  a  fit  vehicle  for  conveying  sage  advice  to  Ulysses  in  deadly 
peril,  nor  would  stern-eyed  Athene  have  ever  won  her  liberty  as  a  1  felix  in  amoribus 
*  index,’  even  the  heavenly  grace  she  sheds  on  her  hero  for  the  nonce  being  at  once 
turned  to  the  practical  end  of  winning  him  a  free  passage  to  his  home. — If  we  fancy 
Ulysses  taking  the  place  of  Ferdinand  in  The  Tempest ,  it  is  obvious  that  it  must  have 
been  a  tale  without  an  end,  or  have  had  the  same  end  which  poor  Calypso  found  so 
sad.  Ferdinand  is  fresh  to  the  world ;  he  ‘  carries  a  brave  form,’  unlike  the  toil-worn 
Ulysses ;  he  has  all  his  life  before  him,  with  no  memories  of  long  years  passed  with 
Penelope,  of  never-ending  travels  by  land  and  sea,  ‘  of  the  towns  and  moods  of  many 
‘  men  ’ ;  he  is,  in  short,  Miranda’s  peer. — There  is  a  real  resemblance,  on  the  other 
hand,  between  the  characters  of  Nausicaa  and  Miranda.  Each  stands  before  us  as 
an  ideal  of  maidenhood,  while  the  depths  of  tenderness  in  each  are  half  revealed  to 

us  by  their  expressions  of  pity  and  sympathy . Yet  for  all  its  unrivalled  simplicity, 

Miranda’s  character  marks  the  growth  in  the  conception  of  woman’s  relation  to  soci¬ 
ety  since  the  epic  times.  Nausicaa  is  no  free  agent ;  she  may  have  preferences,  but 
she  does  not  choose;  with  a  Quaker-like  simplicity  we  see  her  preparing  for  her  wed¬ 
ding  with  the  suitor  of  her  father’s  choice.  Shakespeare  required  for  his  Miranda  an 
amount  of  self-assertion  which  to  Nausicaa  would  have  seemed  indecorous. 

Furnivall  ( Leopold  Sh.  Introd.,  1877,  p.  lxxxviii) :  No  play  brings  out  more 
clearly  than  The  Tempest  the  Fourth- Period  spirit  [i.  e.  of  Re-union,  of  Reconciliation, 
and  Forgiveness],  and  Miranda  evidently  belongs  to  that  time ;  she  and  her  fellow, 
Perdita,  being  idealisations  of  the  sweet  country  maidens  whom  Shakspere  would 

see  about  him  in  his  renewed  family  life  at  Stratford . Turn  back  to  the  First- 

Period  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  and  compare  with  its  Stratford  girls,  stained 
with  the  tempers  and  vulgarities  of  their  day,  these  Fourth- Period  creations  of  pure 
beauty  and  refinement,  all  earth’s  loveliness  filled  with  all  angels’  grace ;  and  recognise 

what  Shakspere’s  growth  has  been . The  general  consent  of  critics  and  readers 

identifies  Shakspere,  in  the  ripeness  and  calmness  of  his  art  and  power,  more  with 
Prospero  than  with  any  other  of  his  characters ;  just  as  the  like  consent  identifies  him, 
in  his  restless  and  unsettled  state,  in  his  style  of  less  perfect  art,  with  Hamlet. — When 
we  compare  Prospero’s  *  We  are  such  stuff  As  dreams  are  made  of,  and  our  little  life 
‘  Is  rounded  with  a  sleep,’  with  all  the  questionings  and  fears  about  the  future  life 
which  perplexed  and  terrified  Hamlet  and  Claudio,  we  may  see  what  progress  Shak¬ 
spere  has  himself  made  in  soul.  The  links  of  this  play  with  Pericles  are  the  opening 
storm  in  each,  Thaisa  and  Marina  thought  drowned  or  dead,  and  yet  restored  to  Peri¬ 
cles  ;  Ferdinand,  and  Prospero,  and  Miranda  thought  drowned,  and  yet  restored  to 
Alonso  ;  revenge  forgotten  by  Pericles  in  the  fulness  of  his  joy ;  revenge  overcome  in 
Prosf  ero  by  his  willingness  to  forgive.  With  earlier  plays  we  can  hardly  help  com- 


366 


APPENDIX 


paring  the  faithful,  cheery  Gonzalo,  who  provides  Prospero  and  Miranda  in  their 
danger  with  clothes,  and  food,  and  books,  with  the  faithful  Kent,  and  Gloster  who 
provides  Lear  with  a  room  and  a  litter  to  drive  towards  Dover.  Caliban  is  hinted  at 
in  Troilus  (III,  iii,  264),  while  Prospero’s  speech  to  Miranda,  about  the  zenith  and 
the  star,  is  like  Brutus’s  on  the  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men.  In  his  inattention  to  his 
government,  Prospero  is  like  the  Duke  in  Mcas.  for  Meas.  With  Hamlet  we  have 
the  likenesses  of  Antonio  getting  rid  of  Prospero  and  seizing  his  crown  to  Claudius’s 
murder  of  Hamlet’s  father  and  taking  his  crown ;  and  Prospero’s  warning  to  Ferdi¬ 
nand  that  ‘  the  strongest  oaths  are  straw  to  the  fire  in  the  blood,’  like  Polonius’s  to 
Ophelia  of  the  blazes  when  the  blood  burns,  giving  more  light  than  heat.  But  Pros¬ 
pero,  unlike  Hamlet,  has  been  taught  by  the  discipline  of  his  island  life,  and  as  soon 
as  fortune  gives  him  his  first  chance,  he  acts,  and  obtains  his  end.  As  a  fairy-land 
play,  the  links  of  The  Tempest  with  Midsummer  Night's  Dream  are  strong.  But 
now  it  is  no  longer,  as  in  Shakspere’s  youth,  that  men  and  women  are  toys  for  fairies’ 
whims  to  play  with ;  in  his  age  the  poet  uses  his  magic  to  wield  the  fairy-world  and 
the  powers  of  nature  for  the  highest  possible  end— the  winning  back  to  good,  of  human 
souls  given  over  to  evil.  Contrast,  too,  for  a  moment,  Oberon’s  care  for  the  lovers  in 
the  Dream ,  with  the  beautiful,  tender  feeling  of  Prospero  for  Miranda  and  Ferdinand 
here.  He  stands  above  them  almost  as  a  god,  yet  sharing  their  feelings  and  blessing 
them.  Note,  too,  how  his  tenderness  for  Miranda  revives  in  his  words,  ‘  The  fringed 
‘  curtains  of  thine  eyes  advance,’  the  lovely  fancy  of  his  youth,  her  ‘  two  blue  win- 
‘  dows  faintly  she  upheaveth  ’  (  Ven.  and  Ad.  482).  He  has  seized  in  Miranda,  as  in 
Perdita,  on  a  new  type  of  sweet  country-girl  unspoilt  by  town  devices,  and  glorified 
it  into  a  being  fit  for  an  angels’  world.  And  as  he  links  earth  to  heaven  with 
Miranda,  so  he  links  earth  to  hell  with  Caliban. 

Richard  Grant  White  ( Studies  in  Shakespeare ,  1886,  p.  27) :  Nothing  is  clearer 
to  me,  the  more  I  read  and  reflect  upon  his  works,  than  that,  after  Shakespeare’s  first 
three  or  four  years’  experience  as  a  poet  and  dramatist,  he  was  entirely  without  even 
any  art-purpose  or  aim  whatever,  and  used  his  materials  just  as  they  came  to  his  hand, 
taking  no  more  pains  with  them  than  he  thought  necessary  to  work  them  into  a  play 
that  would  please  his  audience  and  suit  his  company;  while  at  the  same  time,  from 
the  necessities  of  his  nature  and  the  impulse  that  was  within  him,  he  wrought  out  the 
characters  of  his  personages  with  the  knowledge  of  a  creator  of  human  souls,  and 
in  his  poetry  showed  himself  the  supremest  master  of  human  utterance.  The  Tem¬ 
pest  conforms  to  the  unities  of  time  and  place  merely  because  the  story  made  it  con¬ 
venient  for  the  writer  to  observe  them ;  The  Winter’s  Tale  defies  them  because  itn 
story  made  the  observance  of  them  very  troublesome,  and  indeed  almost,  if  not  quite, 
impossible.  There  has  been  a  great  deal  of  ingenious  speculation  about  Shakespeare’s 
system  of  dramatic  art.  It  is  all  unfounded,  vague,  and  worthless.  Shakespeare  had 
no  system  of  dramatic  art. 

Dr  Garnett  {Irving  Shakespeare,  1890,  p.  188)  :  The  Tempest  is  notone  of  those 
plays  whose  interest  consists  in  strong  dramatic  situations.  The  course  of  the  action 
is  revealed  from  the  first.  Prospero  is  too  manifestly  the  controlling  spirit  to  arouse 
much  concern  for  his  fortunes.  Ferdinand  and  Miranda  are  soon  put  out  of  the;r 
pain,  and  Ariel  lies  beyond  the  limits  of  humanity.  The  action  is  simple  and  uni¬ 
form,  and  all  occurrences  are  seen  converging  slowly  towards  their  destined  point 
Nc  play,  perhaps,  more  perfectly  combines  intellectual  satisfaction  with  imaginative 


CRITICISMS— PR  OSPER  O 


367 

pleasure.  Above  and  behind  the  fascination  of  the  plot  and  the  poetry  we  behold 
Power  and  Right  evenly  paired  and  working  together,  and  the  justification  of  Prov¬ 
idence  producing  that  sentiment  of  repose  and  acquiescence  which  is  the  object  and 
test  of  every  true  work  of  art. 


Prospero 

Charles  Cowden-Clarke  (Sh.  Characters,  1863,  p.  279) :  But  with  all  our  admi¬ 
ration  of  and  sympathy  with  the  illustrious  magician,  we  perforce  must  acknowledge 
Prospero  to  be  of  a  revengeful  nature.  He  has  not  the  true  social  wisdom ;  and  he  only 
learns  Christian  wisdom  from  his  servant  Ariel.  By  nature  he  is  a  selfish  aristocrat. 
When  he  was  Duke  of  Milan  he  gave  himself  up  to  his  favourite  indulgence  of  study 
and  retired  leisure,  yet  expected  to  preserve  his  state  and  authority.  When  master  of 
the  Magic  Island  he  is  stern  and  domineering,  lording  it  over  his  sprite -subjects  and 
ruling  them  with  a  wand  of  rigour.  He  comes  there,  and  takes  possession  of  the 
territory  with  all  the  coolness  of  a  usurper ;  he  assumes  despotic  sway,  and  stops  only 
short  of  absolute  unmitigated  tyranny.  His  only  point  of  tender  human  feeling  is 
his  daughter ;  and  his  only  point  of  genial  sympathy  is  with  the  dainty  being  Ariel. 
And  yet  withal,  beneath  Prospero’s  sedate  expression,  we  find  there  lie  real  kindness 
and  affection  for  the  little  embodied  Zephyr ;  for  when,  with  a  sportive  question  and 
child-like,  Ariel  says,  ‘  Do  you  love  me,  master?  No;’  the  master  replies,  ‘  Dearly 
‘  my  delicate  Ariel.’  And  again,  afterwards,  ‘  I  shall  miss  thee ;  but  yet  thou  shalt 
‘  have  thy  freedom,’  showing  that  he  has  a  heart  to  comprehend  the  eagerness  of  the 
airy  sprite  to  be  at  liberty  amidst  the  boundless  elements  of  which  he  is  the  creature. 
The  best  of  Prospero’s  social  philosophy  is,  that  it  consists  not  in  so  obstinate  an 
adherence  to  its  tenets,  but  that  it  suffers  itself  to  be  won  over  to  a  kindlier  and  more 
tolerant  course  when  convinced  that  he  has  hitherto  held  too  strict  a  one.  His  pur¬ 
pose  of  revenge  gives  way  to  mercy  when  assured  that  his  injurers  repent. 

J.  A.  Heraud  ( Shakspere — His  Inner  Life,  &c,  1865,  p.  395)  :  Ariel  is  swayed 
more  by  fear  than  gratitude,  a  fact  which  excites  Prospero’s  anger.  And  here  let  it 
be  remarked  what  necessities  belong  to  dramatic  characterisation.  Although  Shak¬ 
spere  would  not  exhibit  Prospero  with  his  clear  spiritual  will  and  power  obscured 
and  turmoiled  by  the  sensual  appetites  and  passions  that  made  the  lives  of  Antony 
and  Cleopatra  ‘  a  storm  whereon  they  rode  ’ ;  yet,  had  he  depicted  his  benevolent 
magician  as  basking  perpetually  in  the  sunshine  of  an  open  conscience  and  uninter¬ 
ruptedly  serene,  we  should  have  had  a  being  elevated  so  far  above  the  condition  of 
humanity  that  we  could  not  have  sympathized  with  him.  He  therefore  presents  him 
as  chafed  with  certain  obstacles  in  the  magic  sphere  of  his  working,  and  as  occasion¬ 
ally  wroth  with  Ariel  and  Caliban  for  resistance  expressed  or  implied.  He  is  also 
liable  to  perturbation  of  mind  from  forgetfulness,  as  in  the  Fourth  Act,  when  he  sud¬ 
denly  remembers  the  conspiracy  of  Caliban.  And  thus,  with  all  his  moral  excellence, 
Prospero  is  made  to  awaken  our  sympathy  for  a  natural  imperfection.  Meanwhile,  all 
has  the  wonderful  coherence  and  mystery  of  a  dream. 

Edward  R.  Russell  ( Theological  Review,  Oct.  1876,  p.  482)  :  The  Tempest  must 
be  placed  among  the  most  fanciful  products  of  Shakespeare’s  genius,  and,  though  full 
of  gravity  and  serious  incidents,  is  generally  thought  to  derive  any  interest  it  may 


368 


APPENDIX 


have  for  the  reflective  and  emotional  faculties  from  the  fascinating  traits,  of  Miranda, 
Prospero,  and  Ferdinand.  We  must  be  permitted  to  suggest  a  deeper  purpose.  In 
the  Epilogue,  the  poet  says  his  project  was  to  please,  but  be  sure  it  was  to  please  him¬ 
self  as  well  as  his  audience.  Let  any  one  to  whom  the  idea  has  not  previomsly 
occurred,  re-open  his  Shakespeare  with  the  special  intention  of  appreciating  what  we 
may  call  the  Manichasan  element  in  this  delightful  poem.  Postpone  the  pleasure  of 
letting  the  mind  glide  gently  down  the  current  of  the  poet’s  dream.  Cast  a  gaze  of 
scrutiny  into  its  depths.  Fear  not  lest  you  should  be  too  polemical.  The  supreme 
poetic  charm  of  The  Tempest  will  not  be  easily  dissipated.  But  if  for  the  time  you 
manage  to  analyze  this  gossamer  thing  of  beauty,  what  will  you  see  ?  A  man  per¬ 
fectly  wise  and  gracious,  scarcely  distinguishable  in  purity  and  benevolence  from  what 
we  believe  of  God,  and  endowed  by  magical  studies — or  rather  (for  our  present  pur¬ 
pose)  by  the  dramatist’s  will — with  superhuman  power.  Prospero,  by  this  happy 
fiction  of  magic  lore,  is  put,  without  profanity,  almost  in  the  place  of  Deity.  In  one 
passage  [V,  i],  in  which  he  puts  forward  his  humanity,  asking  whether  he  shall  not 
be  as  kindly  moved  as  Ariel  towards  his  prisoners  in  the  lime-grove,  seeing  that  Ariel 
is  but  air,  while  he  is  ‘  one  of  their  kind,  and  relishes  all  as  sharply,  passion  as  they,’ 
it  is  just  possible  that  there  may  be  an  allusion  to  the  sensibility  to  man’s  infirmities 
attributed  in  Holy  Writ  to  the  experiences  on  earth  of  the  great  High  Priest.  How¬ 
ever  this  may  be,  we  have  in  Prospero  a  being  capable  of  calling  forth  spirits,  of 
causing  storms  and  shipwrecks,  miraculous  escapes  and  supernatural  restorations,  and 
indeed  of  doing  everything  very  much  as  the  Deity  can,  according  to  the  received 
theory  of  special  providences.  To  him,  in  the  seemingly  cruel  exercise  of  his  power, 
his  daughter  Miranda  makes  appeal  in  the  celebrated  passage,  spoken  in  sight  of  the 
shipwreck,  beginning:  ‘If  by  your  art,  my  dearest  father,  you  have  Put  the  wild 
‘waters  in  this  roar,  allay  them.’  May  we  not  consider  the  rest  of  the  play  an 
answer,  as  this  passage  is  an  echo,  to  the  weary  doubts  of  ages  in  the  presence  of 
calamities  caused  by  Omnipotence,  which  seems  malevolent  in  not  having  prevented 
them  ?  To  pursue  the  idea  is  here  impossible ;  but  it  will  give  a  new  fruitfulness  to 
the  reading  of  The  Tempest  if  Prospero  be  followed  in  this  mood  through  his  grave 
struggle  with  powers  of  evil,— if  we  note  how  obstinately  the  ill  elements  of  sentient 
life  continue  malign  and  perverse  in  his  despite;  how  cunningly  and  blindly  within 
the  circle  of  his  sway  light-minded  conspirators  tinker  their  petty  schemes ;  how  con¬ 
stantly,  vigilantly,  and  painfully  his  power  has  to  be  exercised  if  exercised  with  effect ; 
how,  omnipotent  though  he  be,  it  is  only  by  moral  discipline  he  can  work  moral  ends ; 
and  how,  contending  with  his  master-mind,  the  very  spirits  with  whom  he  has  peopled 
his  domain,  and  who  are  absolutely  his  slaves,  are  ‘  tricksy  ’  and  scarce  controllable.— 
In  the  light  of  such  a  conception  of  the  poet’s  inner  fancy,  what  analogies  are 
revealed !  Even  the  drunken  sailors  and  Caliban’s  worship  of  his  sorry  sailor-king 
have  their  counterparts  in  God’s  world.  The  ‘  abhorred  slave,  which  any  print  of 
•  goodness  will  not  take,  being  capable  of  all  ill,’  stands  for  much  that  is  incorrigible  in 
the  worser  specimens  of  the  human  race.  The  magical  threat  which  imposes  chaste 
love  on  Ferdinand  symbolizes  moral  laws  more  absolute  than  necromancy.  The  ‘  stuff 
‘  that  dreams  are  made  of’  weaves  itself  into  the  veritable  fabric  of  created  life. 

Spirits  which  by  Prospero’s  ‘  art  ’  have  been  ‘  from  their  confines  called  to  enact  his 
‘  present  fancies,’  may  typify  whole  literatures  on  which  have  been  inscribed  the  pass¬ 
ing  yet  eternal  thoughts  of  Deity.  ‘  The  rarer  action,’  says  Prospero,  is  ‘  In  virtue 
than  in  vengeance ;  they  being  penitent  The  sole  drift  of  any  purpose  doth  extend 
Not  a  frown  further.  And  in  such  words  we  seem  to  hear  the  immortal  secret  of 


CRITICISMS— PR  OS  PER  O 


369 

Heaven’s  discipline,  so  far  as  men  can  rightly  understand  it.  But  most  frequently 
of  all  do  we  perceive  in  gentlest  lineaments  the  shadowy  outlines  of  that  inexplicable, 
never-ending  battle  between  permitted  or  necessary  evil  and  omnipotent  good  which 
puzzles  humanity  from  age  to  age.  When  Prospero  abjures  his  magic,  dissolves  his 
airy  charm,  breaks  his  staff,  buries  it  certain  fathoms  in  the  earth,  and,  deeper  than 
did  ever  plummet  sound,  drowns  his  book,  a  sigh  of  relief  breaks  from  the  bosom 
which  his  charms  have  enthralled.  We  rejoice  to  know  that  the  hollow  of  the 
Divine  hand  is  more  capacious  than  the  amplest  capacity  of  a  poet’s  Atlantean 
genius,  and  its  rectifying  touch  even  kindlier  than  this  most  gracious  creation  of 
Shakespeare’s  tenderest  mood  of  wistful  theological  thought.  That  his  thought  was 
theological  we  cannot  doubt,  ethereal  and  sparkling  as  was  its  expression.  It  is 
unlikely  that  the  scheme  of  The  Tempest  could  have  had  any  other  origin  than  the 
contemplations  to  which  we  attribute  it ;  and  it  is  impossible  that  such  analogies  to 
the  Divine  government  should  have  gone  unnoticed  under  his  eye  as  they  passed  in 
the  act  of  creation  from  his  pen. 

Dr  Garnett  ( Irving  Shakespeare ,  1890,  p.  185) :  Prospero’s  mercy  is  as  com¬ 
plete  [as  that  of  Imogen  or  of  Hermione],  but  it  is  of  another  kind.  It  is  rather  the 
contemptuous  indifference  not  only  of  a  prince,  who  feels  himself  able  to  despise  his 
enemies,  but  of  a  sage  no  longer  capable  of  being  very  deeply  moved  by  external 
accidents  and  the  mutations  of  earthly  fortune.  He  does  not  in  his  heart  very  greatly 
care  for  his  dukedom,  or  very  deeply  resent  the  villainy  that  has  deprived  him  of  it, 
The  happiness  of  his  daughter  is  the  only  thing  which  touches  him  very  nearly,  and 
one  has  the  feeling  that  even  the  failure  of  his  plans  to  secure  this  would  not  have 
embittered  his  life.  Nay,  so  far  does  he  go  in  detachment  from  the  affairs  of  the 
world,  that  without  any  external  enforcement  he  breaks  his  staff  and  drowns  his  book 
and,  but  for  the  imperishable  gains  of  study  and  meditation,  takes  his  place  among 
ordinary  men.  That  this  Quixotic  height  of  magnanimity  should  not  surprise,  that 
it  should  seem  quite  in  keeping  with  the  character,  proves  how  deeply  this  character 
has  been  drawn  from  Shakespeare’s  own  nature.  Prospero  is  not  Shakespeare,  but 

the  play  is  in  a  certain  measure  autobiographical . It  shows  us  more  than  any  • 

thing  else  what  the  discipline  of  life  had  made  of  Shakespeare  at  fifty, — a  fruit  too 
fully  matured  to  be  suffered  to  hang  much  longer  on  the  tree.  Conscious  superiority 
untinged  by  arrogance,  genial  scorn  for  the  mean  and  base,  mercifulness  into  which 
contempt  enters  very  largely,  serenity  excluding  passionate  affection,  while  admitting 

tenderness,  intellect  overtopping  morality,  but  in  no  way  blighting  or  perverting  it, _ 

such  are  the  mental  features  of  him  in  whose  development  the  man  of  the  world  had 

kept  pace  with  the  poet,  and  who  now  shone  as  the  consummate  example  of  both . 

Another  great  poet  has  portrayed  for  us  an  aged,  potent,  and  benevolent  enchanter. 
It  is  interesting  to  compare  Prospero  with  the  Faust  of  The  Second  Part ;  who,  far 
more  distinctly  than  Shakespeare’s  creation,  impersonates  the  author  and  sums  up  his 
final  view  of  life.  It  is  plain  that  the  Time  Spirit  has  been  at  work,  and  that  either 
of  these  poets  would  have  written  differently  in  the  century  of  the  other.  Though 
Shakespeare  was  a  more  practical  man  than  Goethe,  and  quite  exempt  from  what, 
did  reverence  allow,  we  might  describe  as  the  latter’s  *  fads,’  the  Faust  of  The 
Second  Part  is  a  more  practical  and  energetic  person  than  Prospero,  and  much 
more  strongly  impressed  with  the  paramount  duty  of  labouring  for  the  common  weal 
in  his  day  and  generation.  On  the  other  hand,  although  Goethe  was  a  more  highly 
cultivated  man  than  Shakespeare  and  much  more  advanced  in  years.  Iris  Faust  does 
2-1 


370 


APPENDIX 


not  possess  the  calm  superiority  and  pure,  thrice-defecated  refinement  of  Prospero 
The  ex-manager  of  the  Globe,  with  his  constant  eye  to  the  main  chance,  has  pro¬ 
duced  a  pattern  for  scholars ;  the  statesman  and  courtier  has  given  a  model  for  the 
ordinaiy  man.  We  must  ascribe  this  in  great  measure  to  the  different  circumstances 
of  the  periods  of  the  respective  authors . Neither  Faust  nor  Prospero  is  a  per¬ 

fect  character.  Each  has  a  past  to  be  repented  of.  Prospero,  indeed,  has  not,  like 
Faust,  committed  crime ;  but  neither  has  he,  like  Faust,  been  exposed  to  the  temp¬ 
tations  of  a  supernatural  intelligence.  His  errors  have  been  the  product  of  his  own 
nature ;  he  has,  like  the  monarch  [i.  e.  King  James.  See  p.  303  ante']  he  shadows 
forth,  been  too  bookish  for  a  King :  ‘  for  the  liberal  arts  Without  a  parallel ;  these 
‘  being  all  my  study  The  government  I  cast  upon  my  brother,  And  to  my  state  grew 
‘  stranger,  being  transported  And  rapt  in  secret  studies.’— Prospero’s  narrative,  in 
which  this  is  confessed,  is  a  subtle  piece  of  dramatic  irony ;  he  does  not  blame  him, 
self,  or  suspect  that  he  may  be  lowering  himself  in  his  daughter’s  opinion,  or  see 
anything  except  the  treachery  from  which  he  has  suffered,  but  which  he  has  himself 
invited.  There  is,  besides,  a  slight  tinge  of  irony  in  Shakespeare’s  conception  of  his 
wisdom ;  it  is  admirable  and  adequate  to  the  end  it  would  attain,  but  a  little  too  fussy 
and  self-conscious  to  rank  as  the  very  highest  manifestation  of  intellect.  It  is  what 
one  continually  sees  in  men  of  great  parts  and  long  experience,  intimately  persuaded 
that  no  one  can  do  anything  so  well  as  themselves,  and  perhaps  not  without  ground 
for  that  conviction,  but  a  trifle  too  obtrusive  in  the  assertion  of  it.  The  remaining 
deductions  from  Prospero’s  perfection  are  also  conspicuous  in  Faust.  Shakespeare 
and  Goethe,  delineating  aged  men,  have  given  them  a  tinge  of  petulance  and  peevish¬ 
ness.  .  In  Faust  this  becomes  unreasoning  injustice,  and  makes  him,  contrary  to  his 
intention,  re-enact  the  tragedy  of  Naboth’s  vineyard.  In  Prospero  it  is  a  mere  foible 
visible  in  his  somewhat  pedantic  manner  to  his  daughter,  his  susceptibility  when  she 
does  not  give  him  sufficient  attention,  though  knowing  that  he  has  himself  caused  her 
drowsiness,  and  his  tartness  toward  Ariel.  One  can  imagine  how  a  tamed  and  civil- 
isedCahban  might  contrive  to  stir  up  the  populace  against  him,  though  this  is  not 
M.  Renan’s  idea. 


Miranda 

Coleridge  {Lit.  Rem.  ii,  154)  :  With  love,  pure  love,  there  is  always  an  anxiety 
for  the  safety  of  the  object,  a  disinterestedness  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  the 
counterfeits  of  its  name.  Compare  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  II,  Scene  ii,  with  The 
Tempest,  III,  i.  I  do  not  know  a  more  wonderful  instance  of  Shakespeare’s  mastery 
in  playing  a  distinctly  rememberable  variation  on  the  same  remembered  air  than  in 
the  transporting  love  confessions  of  Romeo  and  Juliet  and  Ferdinand  and  Miranda. 
1  here  seems  more  passion  in  the  one,  and  more  dignity  in  the  other;  yet  you  feel  that 
the  sweet  girlish  lingering  and  busy  movement  of  Juliet,  and  the  calmer  and  more 
maidenly  fondness  of  Miranda,  might  easily  pass  into  each  other 


Mrs  Jameson  {Characteristics  of  Women,  ed.  ii,  1S33,  i,  2S0) :  We  might  have 
deemed  it  impossible  to  go  beyond  Viola,  Perdita,  and  Ophelia  as  pictures  of  fem¬ 
inine  eauty ;  to  exceed  the  one  in  tender  delicacy,  the  other  in  ideal  grace,  and  the 
kst  in  simplicity,  if  Shakespeare  had  not  done  this;  and  he  alone  could  have  done  it. 

ad  he  never  created  a  Miranda,  we  should  never  have  been  made  to  feel  how  com¬ 
pletely  the  purely  natural  and  the  purely  ideal  can  blend  into  each  other. 


CRITICISMS— MIRANDA 


371 

The  character  of  Miranda  resolves  itself  into  the  very  elements  of  womanhood. 
She  is  beautiful,  modest,  and  tender,  and  she  is  these  only ;  they  comprise  her  whole 
being,  external  and  internal.  She  is  so  perfectly  unsophisticated,  so  delicately  refined, 
that  she  is  all  but  ethereal.  Let  us  imagine  any  other  woman  placed  beside  Miranda — 
even  one  of  Shakespeare’s  own  loveliest  and  sweetest  creations — there  is  not  one  of 
them  that  could  sustain  the  comparison  for  a  moment ;  not  one  that  would  not  appear 
somewhat  coarse  or  artificial  when  brought  into  immediate  contact  with  this  pure  child 
of  nature,  this  ‘  Eve  of  an  enchanted  Paradise.’ 

What,  then,  has  Shakespeare  done  ? — ‘  O  wondrous  skill  and  sweet  wit  of  the 
‘  man  !’ — he  has  removed  Miranda  far  from  all  comparison  with  her  own  sex ;  he  has 
placed  her  between  the  demi-demon  of  earth  and  the  delicate  spirit  of  air.  The  next 
step  is  into  the  ideal  and  supernatural ;  and  the  only  being  who  approaches  Miranda, 
with  whom  she  can  be  contrasted,  is  Ariel.  Beside  the  subtle  essence  of  this  ethereal 
sprite,  this  creature  of  elemental  light  and  air,  that  <  ran  upon  the  winds,  rode  the 
*  curl’d  clouds,  and  in  the  colours  of  the  rainbow  lived,’  Miranda  herself  appears  a 
palpable  reality,  a  woman,  *  breathing  thoughtful  breath,’  a  woman,  walking  the  earth 
in  her  mortal  loveliness,  with  a  heart  as  frail-strung,  as  passion-touched,  as  ever  flut¬ 
tered  in  a  female  bosom. 

I  have  said  that  Miranda  possesses  merely  the  elementary  attributes  of  womanhood, 
but  each  of  these  stands  in  her  with  a  distinct  and  peculiar  grace.  She  resembles  noth¬ 
ing  upon  earth ;  but  do  we  therefore  compare  her,  in  our  own  minds,  with  any  of  those 
fabled  beings  with  which  the  fancy  of  ancient  poets  peopled  the  forest  depths,  the 
fountain,  or  the  ocean? — oread  or  dryad  fleet,  sea-maid,  or  naiad  of  the  stream? 
We  cannot  think  of  them  together.  Miranda  is  a  consistent,  natural,  human  being. 
Our  impression  of  her  nymph-like  beauty,  her  peerless  grace,  and  purity  of  soul  has 
a  distinct  and  individual  character.  Not  only  is  she  exquisitely  lovely,  being  what 
she  is,  but  we  are  made  to  feel  that  she  could  not  possibly  be  otherwise  than  as  she 
is  portrayed.  She  has  never  beheld  one  of  her  own  sex  ;  she  has  never  caught  from 
society  one  imitated  or  artificial  grace.  The  impulses  which  have  come  to  her,  in  her 
enchanted  solitude,  are  of  heaven  and  nature,  not  of  the  world  and  its  vanities.  She 
has  sprung  up  into  beauty  beneath  the  eye  of  her  father,  the  princely  magician  ;  her 
companions  have  been  the  rocks  and  woods,  the  many-shaped,  many-tinted  clouds, 
and  the  silent  stars ;  her  playmates  the  ocean  billows,  that  stooped  their  foamy  crests, 
and  ran  rippling  to  kiss  her  feet.  Ariel  and  his  attendant  sprites  hovered  over  her 
head,  ministered  duteous  to  her  every  wish,  and  presented  before  her  pageants  of 
beauty  and  grandeur.  The  very  air,  made  vocal  by  her  father’s  art,  floated  in  music 
around  her.  If  we  can  presuppose  such  a  situation  with  all  its  circumstances,  do  we 
not  behold  in  the  character  of  Miranda  not  only  the  credible,  but  the  natural,  the 
necessary  results  of  such  a  situation  ?  She  retains  her  woman’s  heart,  for  that  is 
unalterable  and  inalienable,  as  a  part  of  her  being ;  but  her  deportment,  her  looks, 
her  language,  her  thoughts, — all  these,  from  the  supernatural  and  poetical  circum¬ 
stances  around  her,  assume  a  cast  of  the  pure  ideal ;  and  to  us,  who  are  in  the  secret 
of  her  human  and  pitying  nature,  nothing  can  be  more  charming  and  consistent  than 
the  effect  which  she  produces  upon  others,  who,  never  having  beheld  anything  resem¬ 
bling  her,  approach  her  as  ‘  a  wonder,’  as  something  celestial :  ‘  Most  sure,  the  goddess 
‘  on  whom  these  airs  attend  !’  And  again  :  ‘  What  is  this  maid  ?  Is  she  the  goddess 
‘  who  hath  severed  us,  And  brought  us  thus  together?’ 

Contrasted  with  the  impression  of  her  refined  and  dignified  beauty,  and  its  effect 
on  all  beholders,  is  Miranda’s  own  soft  simplicity,  her  virgin  innocence,  her  total 


37  2 


APPENDIX 


ignorance  of  the  conventional  forms  and  language  of  society.  It  is  most  natural  that 
in  a  being  thus  constituted,  the  first  tears  should  spring  from  compassion,  ‘  suffering 
‘  with  those  that  she  saw  suffer  ’ ;  and  that  her  first  sigh  should  be  offered  to  a  love  at 
once  fearless  and  submissive,  delicate  and  fond.  She  has  no  taught  scruples  of  hon¬ 
our  like  Juliet ;  no  coy  concealments  like  Viola ;  no  assumed  dignity  standing  in  its 
own  defence.  Her  bashfulness  is  less  a  quality  than  an  instinct;  it  is  like  the  self¬ 
folding  of  a  flower,  spontaneous  and  unconscious.  I  suppose  there  is  nothing  of  the 
kind  in  poetry  equal  to  the  scene  between  Ferdinand  and  Miranda.  In  Ferdinand, 
who  is  a  noble  creature,  we  have  all  the  chivalrous  magnanimity  with  which  man,  in 
a  high  state  of  civilization,  disguises  his  real  superiority,  and  does  humble  homage  to 
the  being  of  whose  destiny  he  disposes ;  while  Miranda,  the  mere  child  of  nature,  is 
struck  with  wonder  at  her  own  new  emotions.  Only  conscious  of  her  own  weakness 
as  a  woman,  and  ignorant  of  those  usages  of  society  which  teach  us  to  dissemble  the 
real  passion,  and  assume  (and  sometimes  abuse)  an  unreal  and  transient  power,  she  is 
equally  ready  to  place  her  life,  her  love,  her  service  beneath  his  feet. 

[P.  291.]  As  Miranda,  being  what  she  is,  could  only  have  had  a  Ferdinand  for  a 
lover,  and  an  Ariel  for  her  attendant,  so  she  could  have  had  with  propriety  no  other 
father  than  the  majestic  and  gifted  being  who  fondly  claims  her  as  ‘  a  thread  of  his 
own  life — nay,  that  for  which  he  lives.’  Prospero,  with  his  magical  powers,  his 
superhuman  wisdom,  his  moral  worth  and  grandeur,  and  his  kingly  dignity,  is  one  of 
the  most  sublime  visions  that  ever  swept  with  ample  robes,  pale  brow,  and  sceptred 
hand  before  the  eye  of  fancy.  He  controls  the  invisible  world,  and  works  through 
the  agency  of  spirits ;  not  by  any  evil  and  forbidden  compact,  but  solely  by  superior 
might  of  intellect — by  potent  spells  gathered  from  the  lore  of  ages,  and  abjured  when 
he  mingles  again  as  a  man  with  his  fellow-men.  He  is  as  distinct  a  being  from  the 
necromancers  and  astrologers  celebrated  in  Shakespeare’s  age  as  can  well  be  imag¬ 
ined  ;  and  all  the  wizards  of  poetry  and  fiction,  even  Faust  and  St.  Leon,  sink  into 

commonplaces  before  the  princely,  the  philosophic,  the  benevolent  Prospero. _ The 

characters  [Juliet,  Helena,  Perdita,  Viola,  Ophelia,  Miranda]  which  I  have  here 
classed  together  as  principally  distinguished  by  the  predominance  of  passion  and 
fancy,  appear  to  me  to  rise  in  the  scale  of  ideality  and  simplicity  from  Juliet  to 
Miranda ;  the  last  being  in  comparison  so  refined,  so  elevated  above  all  stain  of  earth, 
that  we  can  only  acknowledge  her  in  connection  with  it  through  the  emotions  of  sym¬ 
pathy  she  feels  and  inspires. 

Heine  [Shakespeare' s  Madchen  und  Frauen,  1839,  Philadelphia  ed.  p.  345) :  Ay, 
truth  is  forever  the  badge  of  Shakespearian  love,  in  whatsoever  shape  it  appear,  be  it 
called  Miranda,  or  Juliet,  or  even  Cleopatra. — Albeit  I  have  mentioned  these  names 
more  by  accident  than  by  design,  yet  it  occurs  to  me  that  they,  too,  represent  the  three 
most  significant  types  of  love.  Miranda  is  representative  of  a  love  which,  without 
historic  influence,  can  develop  its  highest  ideality,  like  a  flower  in  a  virgin  soil  which 
only  fairy  feet  may  tread.  The  songs  of  Ariel  have  moulded  her  heart,  and  sensual¬ 
ity  never  appeared  to  her  but  in  the  revolting,  hateful  shape  of  a  Caliban.  The  love, 
therefore,  which  Ferdinand  inspires,  is  not  merely  naive  but  of  a  holy  sincerity,  of  a 
primeval  purity  verging  on  the  awesome.  Juliet’s  love,  like  her  times  and  surroundings, 
bears  a  more  romantic,  mediaeval  character,  hinting  of  the  renaissance ;  its  glow  is  daz¬ 
zling  like  the  palace  of  the  Scalieri,  and  strong  withal  like  the  noble  clans  of  Lom¬ 
bardy,  who,  rejuvenated  by  Germanic  blood,  loved  as  vehemently  as  they  hated. 
Juliet  represents  the  love  of  a  youthful  period,  rude,  indeed,  but  of  uncontaminated 


CRITICISMS— MIRANDA 


373 

health.  She  is  permeated  with  the  sensual  glow  and  the  strong  faith  of  such  a  time, 
and  even  the  chill  of  the  charnel-house  can  neither  shake  her  trust  nor  cool  her 
ardour.  But  ah,  this  Cleopatra  of  ours, — she  represents  a  civilisation  already  out  of 
joint ;  a  time  when  beauty  has  withered,  when  the  locks,  albeit  curled  by  every  art, 
anointed  with  every  perfume,  are  shot  with  many  a  grey  hair;  a  time  when  the  cup, 
the  lower  it  gets,  the  more  eagerly  it  is  drained.  This  love  is  without  faith  or  fidelity, 
but  none  the  less  wild  and  glowing.  In  angry  consciousness  that  this  glow  is  inex¬ 
tinguishable,  the  impatient  woman  adds  more  oil  and  plunges  like  a  bacchante  into 
the  blazing  flames.  Cowardly  is  she,  and  yet  hurried  on  by  her  own  destructiveness. 
Love  is  always  a  kind  of  frensy,  more  or  less  beautiful ;  but  with  this  Egyptian  queen. 

it  mounts  to  the  most  shuddering  madness . This  love  is  a  mad  comet  which, 

storming  across  the  heavens  in  the  most  unprecedented  orbit  with  its  flaming  train, 
terrifies  the  stars  in  its  path,  where  it  does  not  harm  them,  and  at  last  miserably  col¬ 
lapsing  disappears,  like  a  rocket,  in  a  thousand  sparks.  Ay,  fair  Cleopatra,  like  a  fear¬ 
some  comet  wert  thou ,  and  not  alone  for  thine  own  destruction  didst  thou  glow,  but 

for  all  thy  fellows  didst  thou  bode  harm . In  Anthony’s  downfall,  old  heroic 

Rome  came  to  a  lamentable  end. — But  to  what  shall  I  compare  you,  Juliet  and 
Miranda  ?  Again  I  look  up  to  the  heavens  and  there  seek  your  image.  Perchance 
it  lies  behind  the  stars,  where  my  gaze  cannot  penetrate.  Perhaps  if  the  glowing  sun 
should  have  the  mildness  of  the  moon,  I  could  compare  it,  Juliet,  to  thee !  If  the 
gentle  moon  should  e’en  have  the  ardour  of  the  sun,  I  would  compare  it,  Miranda, 
to  thee ! 

Henry  Giles  ( Human  Life  in  Shakespeare,  1868,  p.  135):  Idealism  is  an 
evident  characteristic  of  all  the  women  in  Shakespeare  that  poetically  interest  our 
feelings  and  imagination.  But  in  some  it  is  so  luminous  as  to  form  a  nimbus  in  which 
they  always  appear  to  our  memory  and  fancy.  Miranda  is  the  first  of  this  order.  She 
has  dwelt  alone,  from  her  infancy,  with  her  father  on  a  desert  island  compassed  by 
ocean  and  the  heavens ;  and  thus  she  has  lived,  fearless  and  delighted,  in  the  midst 
of  mystery  and  beauty.  Quiet  in  the  soul-sleep  of  innocence,  trustful  in  her  father’s 
care  and  power,  she  has  dread  of  nothing.  The  spirits  of  air  are  her  ministers,  the 
brutes  of  earth  are  meek  to  her,  and  even  Caliban  bends  to  her  service.  But  clouds 
gather  in  the  sky;  winds  rush  upon  the  sea;  with  the  storm  comes  her  prince,  and 
with  the  prince  comes  love.  The  visionary  world  is  broken  into  by  the  actual ;  real¬ 
ities  intrude  on  fancies ;  and  out  of  dreams  she  merges  into  passion.  Now  this, _ 

a  fable  in  outward  fact, — is  a  truth  in  the  inward  life.  The  actual,  natural,  genuine 
maiden  does  dwell  much  alone.  Her  life  is  an  island  full  of  enchantments,  girded  by 
immensity.  In  her  intercourse  with  nature  she  sees,  and  hears,  and  feels  the  won¬ 
derful  and  the  lovely ;  filial  affections  are  in  her  heart ;  the  graces  and  charities  of 

maidenhood  are  in  her  manners.  When  this  calm  of  unconsciousness  must  end, _ 

when  the  trouble  darkens,  out  of  which  impassioned  hopes  are  bom, — when  the 
prince  of  her  affections  comes  to  her  in  the  storm,  she  arises  in  the  royalty  of  woman¬ 
hood  to  meet  him.  If  no  prince  should  come,  or  if  he  who  does  come  should  not  be 
a  prince  or  princely,  she  will  yet  be  queenly  in  her  own  womanly  right,  and  by  her 
own  womanly  nature. 

Mrs  F.  A.  Kemble  [Notes,  &c,  1882,  p.  155)  .-  I  would  suggest  to  the  reader’s  con¬ 
sideration  the  curious  felicity  of  the  scene,  where  Ferdinand  and  Miranda  acknow¬ 
ledge  thei*  affection  to  each  other.  I  mean  in  the  harmonious  contrast  between  a  young 


374 


APPENDIX 


prince,  bred  in  a  Court,  himself  the  centre  of  a  sphere  of  the  most  artificial  civilisa¬ 
tion,  and  a  girl,  not  only  without  any  knowledge  of  the  world  and  society,  but  even 
without  previous  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  any  created  man  but  her  father  and 
Caliban. — Brought  up  in  all  but  utter  solitude,  under  no  influence  but  that  of  her 
wise  and  loving  father  on  earth  and  her  wise  and  loving  Father  in  Heaven,  Miranda 
exhibits  no  more  coyness  in  her  acceptance  of  Ferdinand’s  overtures  than  properly 
belongs  to  the  instinctive  modesty  of  her  sex,  unenhanced  by  any  of  the  petty,  pretty 
arts  of  coquetry  and  assumed  shyness,  which  are  the  express  result  of  artificial  female 
training.  The  simple  emotion  of  bashfulness,  indeed,  which  (in  spite  of  her  half- 
astonished,  half-delighted  exclamation — ‘  Do  you  love  me  ?’  that  elicits  her  lover’s 
passionate  declaration)  causes  her  to  ‘  weep  at  what  she’s  glad  of,’  is  so  little  compre¬ 
hensible  to  herself,  that  she  shakes  it  off  with  something  like  self-reproach  as  an  invol¬ 
untary  disingenuousness  :  ‘  Hence,  bashful  cunning;'  and  then  with  that  most  pathetic 
and  exquisite  invocation  to  1  plain  and  holy  innocence,’  offers  her  life  to  her  lover  with 
the  perfect  devotion  and  humility  of  the  true  womanly  nature.  In  the  purity  and  sim¬ 
plicity  of  this  ‘tender  of  affection,’  Ferdinand  made  acquaintance  with  a  species  of 
modesty  to  which  assuredly  none  of  those  ladies  of  the  Court  of  Naples,  ‘  whom  he 
‘  had  eyed  with  best  regard,’  had  ever  introduced  him ;  and  indeed  to  them  Miranda’s 
proceeding  might  very  probably  have  appeared  highly  unladylike,  as  I  have  heard  it 
pronounced  more  than  once  by  —  ladies.  The  young  prince,  however,  was  prob¬ 
ably  himself  surprised  for  a  little  while  into  a  sphere  of  earnest  sincerity  as  different 
from  the  artificial  gallantry  with  which  he  had  encountered  the  former  objects  of  his 
affection  as  the  severe  manual  labour  he  was  undergoing  for  the  sake  of  Miranda 
was  different  from  the  inflated  offers  of  service,  and  professions  of  slavery,  which 
were  the  jargon  of  civilised  courtesy;  that  species  of  language  which  Olivia 
reproves  when  she  says,  ‘  ’twas  never  merry  world  Since  lowly  feigning  was  called 
‘  compliment.’ — The  transparent  simplicity  and  sweet  solemnity  of  the  girl’s  con¬ 
fession  of  love  could  not  but  awaken  an  almost  religious  sense  of  honour  and  ten¬ 
derness  in  the  young  man’s  soul,  and  though  his  Neapolitan  Court  vocabulary 
speaks  a  little  in  the  ‘  admired  Miranda,  Indeed  the  top  of  admiration,’  the  ‘  I 

*  Beyond  all  limit  of  what  else  i’  the  world  Do  love,  prize,  honour  you,’  is  love's 

true  utterance,  as  free  from  sophistication  as  the  girl’s  own  guileless  challenge. _ 

It  is  not  a  little  edifying  to  reflect  how  different  Prospero’s  treatment  of  these  young 
people’s  case  would  have  been  if,  instead  of  only  the  most  extraordinary  of  con¬ 
jurers,  he  had  been  the  most  commonplace  of  scheming  matrons  of  the  present  day. 
He,  poor  man,  alarmed  at  the  sudden  conquest  Ferdinand  makes  of  his  child,  and 
perceiving  that  he  must  ‘  this  swift  business  uneasy  make,  lest  too  light  winning  make 

•  the  prize  light,’  can  bethink  himself  of  no  better  expedient  than  reducing  the  poor 
young  prince  into  a  sort  of  supplementary  Caliban,  a  hewer  of  wood  and  drawer  of 
water :  now,  a  modern  chaperon  would  merely  have  had  to  intimate  to  a  well-trained 
modem  young  lady,  that  it  would  be  as  well  not  to  give  the  young  gentleman  too 
much  encouragement  till  his  pretensions  to  the  throne  of  Naples  could  really  be  made 
out  (his  straying  about  without  any  Duke  of  Newcastle,  and  very  wet,  was  a  good 
deal  like  a  mere  adventurer,  you  know) ;  and  I  am  pretty  certain  that  the  judicious 
mamma  or  female  guardian  of  Miss  Penelope  Smith,  the  fair  British  Islander  who 
became  Princess  of  Capua,  pursued  no  other  system  of  provocation  by  repression. 
An  expert  matrimonial  schemer  of  the  present  day,  I  say,  would  have  devised  by 
these  means  a  species  of  trial  by  torture  for  poor  Ferdinand,  to  which  his  ‘  sweating 

l&bour  ’  as  Prospero’s  patient  log  man  would  have  been  luxurious  idleness. _ But 


CRITICISMS— MIRANDA 


375 


Prospero  was  after  all  a  mere  man,  and  knew  no  better  than  to  bring  up  Miranda  to 
speak  the  truth,  and  the  fair  child  had  been  so  holily  trained  by  him,  that  her  sur¬ 
render  of  herself  to  the  man  she  loves  is  so  little  feminine  after  the  approved  fem¬ 
inine  fashion  that  it  is  simply  angelic. — That  Shakespeare,  who  indeed  knew  all 
things,  knew  very  well  the  difference  between  such  a  creature  as  Miranda  and  a 
well-brought-up  young  lady,  is  plain  enough,  when  he  makes  poor  Juliet,  after  her 
passionate  confession  of  love  made  to  the  stars  and  overheard  by  Romeo,  apologise 
to  him  with  quite  pathetic  mortification  for  not  having  been  more  ‘  strange.’  She 
regrets  extremely  her  unqualified  expressions  of  affection, — assures  Romeo  that  nothing 
would  have  induced  her  to  have  spoken  the  truth  if  she  had  only  known  he  had  heard 
her,  and  even  offers,  if  it  can  be  the  least  satisfaction  to  him,  and  redeem  what  she 
may  have  lost  in  his  esteem  by  her  frankness,  to  ‘  frown  and  be  perverse  and  say  him 
'  nay,’ — and,  in  short,  has  evidently  shocked  her  own  conventional  prejudices  quite  as 
much  as  she  fears  she  has  his,  by  not  having  had  a  chance  of  playing  a  thousand  fan¬ 
tastical  tricks  about  a  passion  which  is  thenceforth  to  govern  her  life,  and  give  her 
over  to  her  early  death.  But  then  Juliet  was  the  flower  of  Veronese  young  ladies, 
and  her  good  mother  and  gossiping  nurse  were  not  likely  to  have  neglected  her  edu¬ 
cation  to  the  tune  of  letting  her  speak  the  truth  without  due  preparation.  Miranda  is 
to  be  excused  as  a  savage, — probably  Ferdinand  thought  her  excusable. 

Anon.  {Shakespeare' s  Garden  of  Girls ,  1885,  p.  264)  :  It  is  with  men  rather  than 
women  that  Miranda  is  so  great  a  favorite.  Few  women  can  understand  her,  and 
fewer  still  believe  in  her.  And  why  ?  Because  she  is  not  sufficiently  of  the  earth, 
earthy.  Not  that  I  attach  any  base  ideas  to  the  epithet  earthy,  for  the  earth  is  the 
mother  of  all  good . Miranda  is  one  of  those  strange  beings  who  are  best  under¬ 

stood  by  those  who  least  resemble  her. — We  cannot  judge  fairly  of  those  who  stand 
in  the  same  line  with  ourselves,  for  we  can  only  obtain  a  sidelong  glance  at  them. 
But  of  altogether  opposite  natures  we  can  make  a  complete  survey,  view  them  from 
behind  and  before,  and  take  their  measure  justly.  Therefore,  I  maintain  that  Miranda 
is  better  understood  by  the  opposite  sex,  and  is  more  appreciated  by  men  than  by 
women.  [P.  270.]  Juliet,  when  she  imagined  all  in  the  house  were  safe  in  bed,  crept 
out  into  the  still,  warm,  summer  air  to  tell  her  bosom’s  secret  to  the  listening  breeze, 
and  found  a  listening  lover.  Miranda,  as  soon  as  she  thinks  her  father  is  hard  at 
study,  strays  instinctively  towards  the  spot  where  she  is  likely  to  meet  Ferdinand. 
Love  teaches  her  guile,  but  it  is  guile  of  a  very  harmless  kind,  and  we  can  only  smile 
complacently,  as,  no  doubt,  the  old  man,  Prospero,  did,  at  the  young  girl  stealing 
away,  unperceived,  as  she  imagines,  to  the  object  of  her  heart’s  newly-aroused  devo¬ 
tion. — There  would  be  a  little  fluttering  of  conscience  at  the  clandestine  interview. 
But  even  good  and  pure  Miranda  must  dissemble  a  little  when  love  assumes  his  sway, 
and  she  forgets  her  father’s  command  when  she  reveals  her  name. 

Dr  Garnett  {Irving  Shakespeart ,  1890,  p.  187):  If  Prospero  is  imperfect,  Mi¬ 
randa  is  perfection,  with  the  abatement  only  that  we  see  her  in  a  peculiar  and  limited 
set  of  circumstances,  and  must  take  her  on  trust  for  the  rest.  She  is  not  a  Cordelia 
or  an  Imogen,  so  tried  in  the  fire  as  to  justify  the  confidence  that  she  could  not  possi¬ 
bly  come  short  in  any  circumstance  of  life.  She  is  rather  a  Perdita,  ‘  a  wave  of  the 
‘  sea,’  caught  and  shown  for  an  instant  in  so  exquisitely  graceful  an  attitude  that  we 
are  only  too  thankful  to  be  sure  that  ‘  she  will  ever  do  nothing  but  that.’  In  some 
respects  this  pair  of  heroines  are  the  most  wonderful  of  all  Shakespeare’s  women,  for 


3  76 


APPENDIX 


nowhere  else  is  such  an  effect  obtained  with  so  little  apparent  effort.  Mere  outlines 
produce  the  impression  of  elaborate  paintings,  and  that  seems  the  freest  exuberance 
of  the  most  careless  genius  which  is  in  reality  the  reward  of  the  profoundest  study 
and  severest  toil.  It  would  be  far  easier  to  create  or  copy  a  Lady  Macbeth  than  a 
Miranda.  It  is  amazing  with  how  few  speeches  and  how  little  action  this  effect  is 
produced.  Certain  it  is  that  when  Mixanda  offers  to  carry  the  logs  for  Ferdinand  she 
seems  to  put  all  the  grace  and  lovingness  of  womankind  into  that  single  act ;  and  that 
no  one  ever  stumbled  at  her  frank  surrender  to,  or  rather,  appropriation  of,  a  prince 
whom  she  has  hardly  seen.— What  volumes  it  speaks  for  Shakespeare’s  freshness  of 
heart  that  Imogen,  Perdita,  and  Miranda  should  be  the  last  creations  of  the  veteran 
dramatist  .'—The  other  human  personages  do  not  require  much  notice.  Being  Shake¬ 
speare’s,  they  are  exactly  what  they  ought  to  be;  but,  unless  Gonzalo  be  excepted, 
they  have  no  other  office  than  that  of  necessary  wheels  in  the  mechanism  of  the  piece. 
Ferdinand  is  a  gallant  young  lover,  rewarded  beyond  his  deserts  as  lovers  sometimes 
are,  and  as  his  prototype  was  expected  to  suppose  himself.  Alonso’s  grief  and  re 
morse  are  conveyed  with  all  the  power  of  which  a  cheerful  subject  admitted. 


Ariel 

Coleridge  ( Seven  Lectures ,  &c,  nS) :  If  a  doubt  could  ever  be  entertained 
whether  Shakespeare  was  a  great  poet,  acting  upon  laws  arising  out  of  his  own  nature, 
and  not  without  law,  as  has  been  sometimes  idly  asserted,  that  doubt  must  be  removed' 
by  the  character  of  Ariel.  The  very  first  words  uttered  by  this  being  introduce  the 
spirit,  not  as  an  angel,  above  man;  not  a  gnome,  or  a  fiend,  below  man;  but  while 
the  poet  gives  him  the  faculties  and  the  advantages  of  reason,  he  divests  him  of  all 
mortal  character,  not  positively,  it  is  true,  but  negatively.  In  air  he  lives,  from  air  he 
derives  his  being,  in  air  he  acts;  and  all  his  colours  and  properties  seem  to  have  been 
obtained  from  the  rainbow  and  the  skies.  There  is  nothing  about  Ariel  that  cannot 

be  conceived  to  exist  either  at  sun-rise  or  at  sun-set;  hence  all  that  belongs  to  Ariel 

belongs  to  the  delight  the  mind  is  capable  of  receiving  from  the  most  lovely  external 
appearances.  His  answers  to  Prospero  are  directly  to  the  question,  and  nothin** 
beyond;  or  where  he  expatiates,  which  is  not  unfrequently,  it  is  to  himself  and  upon 
his  ,own  delights;  or  upon  the  unnatural  situation  in  which  he  is  placed,  though  under 
a  kindly  power  and  to  good  ends. — Shakespeare  has  properly  made  Ariel’s  very  first 
speech  characteristic  of  him.  After  he  has  described  the  manner  in  which  he  had 
raised  the  storm  and  produced  its  harmless  consequences,  we  find  that  Ariel  is  dis¬ 
contented,— that  he  has  been  freed,  it  is  true,  from  a  cruel  confinement,  but  still  that 
he  is  bound  to  obey  Prospero  and  to  execute  any  commands  imposed  upon  him. 
We  feel  that  such  a  state  of  bondage  is  almost  unnatural  to  him,  yet  we  see  that  it  is 
delightful  for  him  to  be  so  employed— It  is  as  if  we  were  to  command  one  of  the 
winds  in  a  different  direction  to  that  which  nature  dictates,  or  one  of  the  waves  now 
rising  and  now  sinking,  to  recede  before  it  bursts  upon  the  shore :  such  is  the  feeling 
we  experience  when  we  learn  that  a  being  like  Ariel  is  commanded  to  fulfil  any 
mortal  behest.— When,  however,  Shakespeare  contrasts  the  treatment  of  Ariel  by 
Prospero  with  that  of  Sycorax,  we  are  sensible  that  the  liberated  spirit  ought  to  be 
grateful,  and  Ariel  does  feel  and  acknowledge  the  obligation;  he  immediately 
assumes  the  airy  being,  with  a  mind  so  elastically  correspondent,  that  when  once  a 
feeling  has  passed  from  it,  not  a  trace  is  left  behind.-Is  there  any  thing  in  nature 


CRITICISMS — ARIEL 


377 

from  which  Shakespeare  caught  the  idea  of  this  delicate  and  delightful  being,  with 
such  child-like  simplicity,  yet  with  such  preternatural  powers  ?  He  is  born  neither 
of  heaven  nor  of  earth;  but,  as  it  were,  between  both,  like  a  May-blossom  kept 
suspended  in  air  by  the  fanning  breeze,  which  prevents  it  from  falling  to  the  ground, 
and  only  finally,  and  by  compulsion,  touching  the  earth.  This  reluctance  of  the 
Sylph  to  be  under  the  command  even  of  Prospero  is  kept  up  through  the  whole  play, 
and  in  the  exercise  of  his  admirable  judgement  Shakespeare  has  availed  himself  of  it, 
in  order  to  give  Ariel  an  interest  in  the  event,  looking  forward  to  that  moment  when 
he  was  to  gain  his  last  and  only  reward — simple  and  eternal  liberty. 

Schlegel  (p.  1S0)  :  In  the  zephyr-like  Ariel  the  image  of  air  is  not  to  be  mis¬ 
taken;  ....  as,  on  the  other  hand,  Caliban  signifies  the  heavy  element  of  earth.  Yet 
they  are  neither  of  them  allegorical  personifications,  but  beings  individually  deter¬ 
mined.  In  general  we  find  in  The  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  in  The  Tempest  in 
the  magical  part  of  Macbeth,  and  wherever  Shakespeare  avails  himself  of  the  popu¬ 
lar  belief  in  the  invisible  presence  of  spirits  and  the  possibility  of  coming  in  contact 
with  them,  a  profound  view  of  the  inward  life  of  Nature  and  her  mysterious  springs, 
which,  it  is  true,  ought  never  to  be  altogether  unknown  to  the  genuine  poet,  as  poetry 
is  altogether  incompatible  with  mechanical  physics,  but  which  few  have  possessed  in 
equal  degree  with  Dante  and  himself. 

Franz  Horn  [Shakespeare' s  Schauspiele  Erlautert,  1823,  ii,  no) :  As  a  contrast 
to  Caliban  we  have  Ariel,  but  by  no  means  a  purely  ethereal,  expressionless  angel, 
rather  a  genuine  spirit  of  air  and  of  pleasure,  graceful  and  free-thoughted,  but  light 
withal,  mischievous,  and  at  times  a  wee  bit  naughty.  He  owes  to  Prospero  his  deliver¬ 
ance  from  the  most  confined  of  all  confined  situations,  but  gratitude  is  no  merely  nat¬ 
ural  virtue  (we  might  almost  add  that  it  is  not  an  atmospheric  virtue).  Accordingly, 
almost  like  a  human  being,  he  has,  not  infrequently,  to  be  reminded  of  it  and  kept  in 
check.  Only  when  promised  to  be  set  free  in  two  days  is  his  amiability  restored,  and 
does  he  take  pleasure  in  carrying  out  his  master’s  plans,  with  delightful  skill,  at  one 
time  as  a  sea-nymph,  at  another  as  the  stage-manager  of  a  masque,  and  as  an  actor, 
or  as  a  harpy,  &c. — We  referred  just  now  to  expressionless  angels,  and  no  explicit 
hint  is  needed  as  to  where  they  are  to  be  found ;  for  no  one  can  deny  that  these 
immortal  winged  ones  (so  charming  in  many  an  old  German  painting),  with  their 
cumbrous  immortal  harps,  and,  if  possible,  even  more  immortal  hallelujahs,  occasion 
in  the  works  of  many  a  poet  a  no  less  immortal  weariness.  Shakespeare  never  falls 
into  this  error,  and  it  is  a  delight  to  observe  in  what  manifold  and  sure  ways  he  always 
deals  with  the  wonderful.  In  The  Tempest  he  attains  his  end  by  the  simplest  means, 
representing  nature,  and  indeed  truly,  as  the  greatest  of  wonders.  In  the  gentlest  of 
ways  he  has  led  us  to  the  faith  that  Prospero,  through  his  higher  power,  is  able  to 
command  nature, — and  how  willingly  do  we  put  faith  in  this  higher  power  in  man ! — 
thus  all  other  wonders  become  perfectly  natural,  and,  to  a  certain  extent,  mere  trifles, 
which  we  see  with  pleasure  play  around  us.  That  higher  power  does  not  by  any 
means  reside  in  Prospero  only.  Ferdinand  and  Miranda,  without  any  visible  magi¬ 
cian’s  wand  or  any  special  preparation,  are  an  overmatch  to  the  wonders  of  nature, 
in  which  they  take  pleasure  merely  as  in  some  delightful  comedy,  for  the  supreme 
wonder  is  in  iheir  own  bosoms  :  Love,  purely  human,  and,  therefore,  divine. 

Skottowe  [Life  of  Sh.,  &c,  1824,  ii,  315)  :  The  most  decisive  instance  of  the 


378 


APPENDIX 


pre-eminence  of  Prospero  as  a  magician  is  the  obedience  of  Ariel.  The  necromancer 
of  ordinary  acquirements  domineered  over  inferior  spirits;  the  more  skilful,  over 
invisible  beings  of  a  more  exalted  nature ;  but  that  artist,  alone,  whose  powerful 
genius  had  led  him  triumphant  through  the  whole  range  of  human  science,  could 
aspire  to  the  control  of  spirits  resident  in  the  highest  regions  of  spiritual  existence. 
Of  this  order  is  Ariel,  and  Shakespeare  has  somewhat  overstrained  the  privilege 
which,  as  a  superior  spirit,  he  enjoyed,  by  releasing  him  from  all  restrictions  upon  the 
time  of  his  appearance.  The  approach  of  day  was  the  signal  for  the  departure  of  all 
spirits,  the  most  wicked  disappearing  first,  and  the  least  criminal  lingering  till  dawn, 
and  even  daylight  itself,  appeared.  Ariel  was  entitled  to  protract  his  stay  to  the  latest 
possible  period  allowed ;  but  all  spirits  were  more  or  less  guilty  of  the  rebellion  for 
which  they  were  banished  heaven ;  and,  as  a  guilty  thing,  the  performance  of  all  his 
labours  between  two  and  six  o’clock  in  the  aftermon,  to  which  they  are  specifically 
fixed,  is  inadmissible. 

In  Notes  and  Queries  (3d  Ser.  vol.  iv,  p.  44,  1863)  Cuthbert  Bede  (Rev.  Edw. 
Bradley)  reproduced,  in  part,  an  early  play-bill,  wherein,  as  Miss  Kemble,  the  future 
Mrs  Siddons  took  the  part  of  Ariel.  The  young  actress  was  but  twelve  years  old, 
and  had  probably  appeared  on  the  stage  many  times  before ;  there  exists,  however, 
only  one  earlier  play-bill,  I  believe  (see  The  Xembles,  by  Fitzgerald,  i,  21),  in  which 
her  name  appears  among  the  Dramatis  Persona ,  but  in  the  present  bill  she  appears 
for  the  first  time  in  a  Shakespearian  character.  ‘At  that  time,  1767,’  says  Cuthbert 
Bede,  ‘  the  managers  of  country  theatres  were  driven  to  various  ingenious  expedients 

*  'n  order  to  evade  those  penalties  upon  unlicensed  play-houses  threatened  by  Sir  Rob- 
‘ert  Walpole’s  “Golden  Rump’'  Act  of  1737,  and  they  usually  advertised  and  charged 

*  f°r  a  concert  in  which  a  dramatic  performance  could  be  introduced  gratis . I 

‘  copy  as  much  of  the  bill  as  relates  to  the  play  and  the  Kembles : 

“Worcester,  April  16th,  1767. 

“  Mr  Kemble’s  Company  of  Comedians. 

At  the  Theatre  at  the  King’s  Head,  on  Monday  evening  next,  will  be  per¬ 
formed  a  Concert  of  Musick,  to  begin  at  exactly  half-an-hour  after  six  o’clock. 
Tickets  to  be  had  at  the  usual  places.  Between  the  parts  of  the  Concert  will  be  pre 
sented,  gratis,  a  celebrated  Comedy  call’d 

\  The  Tempest  ;  or  the  Inchanted  Island. 

(As  altered  from  Shakespeare  by  Mr  Dryden  and  Sir  W.  D’Avenant.) 

With  all  the  Scenery,  Machinery,  Musick,  Monsters,  and  other  Decorations  proper 
to  the  piece,  entirely  new. 

Alonzo  (Duke  of  Mantua),  Mr  Kemble; 

Hyppolito  (a  youth  who  never  saw  a  woman),  Mr  Siddons; 

Stephano  (Master  of  the  Duke’s  Ship),  Mr  Kemble; 

Amphitrite,  by  Mrs  Kemble  ; 

Ariel  (the  Chief  Spirit),  by  Miss  Kemble; 
and  Milcha,  by  Miss  F.  Kemble. 

The  Performance  will  open  with  a  Representation  of  a  Tempestuous  Sea  (m  per¬ 
petual  agitation)  and  Storm,  in  which  the  Usurper’s  Ship  is  Wreck’d;  the  Wreck 
ends  with  a  Beautiful  Shower  of  Fire.— And  the  whole  to  conclude  with  a  Calm 
Sea,  on  which  appears  Neptune,  Poetic  God  of  the  Ocean,  and  his  Royal  Consort 
Amphitrite,  in  a  Chariot  drawn  by  Seahorses,  accompanied  with  Mermaids  Tritons 
&c.” 


CRITICISMS —  CALIBAN 


379 

And  it  was  in  this  fashion  that  The  Tempest  was  produced  by  Mr  Kemble,  twenty 
two  years  later  than  this,  at  Drury  Lane  Theatre.’ 

Sir  Edward  Strachey  ( Quarterly  Review,  July,  1890,  p.  120) :  Let  us  notice 
the  contrast  between  the  man  and  the  spirit  who  ‘  is  but  air,’  and  so  cannot  pretend 
to  more  than  a  transient  and,  as  it  were,  reflected,  touch  of  human  tenderness  and 
pity-  This  contrast,  not  only  here,  but  throughout  the  Play,  may  remind  us  of 
Fouqu6’s  beautiful  conception  of  Undine,  the  elemental  spirit  into  whom  a  human 
soul  is  infused  through  marriage.  Fouqu6  must  have  been  possessed  by  the  same 
idea  as  Shakespeare  as  to  these  elemental  spirits ;  and  each  does  but  embody  in  his 
own  poetic  form  an  idea  which  is  to  be  found  at  the  bottom  of  the  Greek  tales  of 
nymphs,  and  satyrs,  and  hamadryads,  and  of  the  mediaeval  traditions  of  elves,  and 
fairies,  and  water-sprites.  Looking  at  them  from  this  point  of  view,  we  see  that 
Fouqu6  and  Shakespeare  throw  each  much  light  on  the  other’s  mode  of  treating  the 
subject,  and  so  on  the  subject  itself.  But  for  our  present  purpose  the  contrast  is  even 
more  important  than  the  resemblance ;  for  it  shows  us  the  higher  genius,  the  more 
thorough  master)'  of  the  laws  of  nature  and  life,  in  Shakespeare’s  creation.  Fouqu6 
would  have  made  Ariel  a  female  spirit  becoming  Miranda  by  the  power  of  love,  and 
marriage  to  Ferdinand;  but  how  much  finer,  because  truer,  is  Shakespeare’s  Miranda, 
a  real  and  complete  woman  from  first  to  last !  Fouqu6’s  conception  is  indeed  very 
charming,  but  wants  the  reality  of  Shakespeare’s,  without  surpassing  it  in  poetic 
ideality.  Yes,  they  do  not  least  appreciate  and  enjoy  the  presence  of  Ariel  who  are 
most  content  that  he  should  vanish  at  last  into  thin  air,  leaving  us  with  common  mor¬ 
tals  in  the  common  light  of  day,  and  among  the  common  thoughts, — common,  yet 
solemn  even  to  sadness, — with  which  the  Play  concludes.  Prospero  represents  the 
poet  in  the  exercise  of  his  art,  infusing  a  new  life  of  poetry  and  romance  into  all 
nature ;  yet  who  feels  more  deeply,  who  declares  more  plainly,  than  Prospero,  that 
the  time  must  come  to  every  one,  when  not  only  does  each  glorious  vision  fade  into 
the  light  of  common  day,  but  that  light  itself  sinks  into  dusk  and  darkfiess.  The 
romantic  and  the  poetic  cannot  sustain  the  actual,  but,  having  first  themselves  died 
out,  leave  this  to  perish  too. 


CALIBAN 

Dryden  (. Preface  to  Tro.  and  Cress.  1679)  :  To  return  once  more  to  Shakespear; 
no  man  ever  drew  so  many  characters,  or  generally  distinguished  ’em  better  from  one 
another,  excepting  only  Johnson  :  I  will  instance  but  in  one,  to  show  the  copiousness 
of  his  invention ;  ’tis  that  of  Calyban,  or  the  monster  in  The  Tempest.  He  seems 
there  to  have  created  a  person  which  was  not  in  Nature,  a  boldness  which  at  first 
sight  would  appear  intolerable ;  for  he  makes  him  a  species  of  himself,  begotten  by 
an  Incubus  on  a  Witch ;  but  this,  as  I  have  elsewhere  prov’d,  is  not  wholly  beyond 
the  bounds  of  credibility,  at  least  the  vulgar  stile  believe  it.  We  have  the  separated 
notions  of  a  spirit  and  of  a  witch ;  (and  spirits,  according  to  Plato ,  are  vested  with  a 
subtil  body;  according  to  some  of  his  followers,  have  different  sexes)  therefore  as 
from  the  distinct  apprehensions  of  a  horse,  and  of  a  man,  Imagination  has  form’d  a 
Centaur,  so  from  those  of  an  Incubus  and  a  Sorceress,  Shakespear  has  produc’d  his 
Monster.  Whether  or  no  his  generation  can  be  defended,  I  leave  to  Philrv^nny ; 
but  of  this  I  am  certain,  the  Poet  has  most  judiciously  furnish’d  him  with  a  person  a 


380 


APPENDIX 


language,  and  a  character  which  will  suit  him  both  by  Father’s  and  Mother’s  side  : 
he  has  all  the  discontents  and  malice  of  a  Witch,  and  of  a  Devil ;  besides  a  con¬ 
venient  proportion  of  the  deadly  sins ;  Gluttony,  Sloth,  and  Lust,  are  manifest ;  the 
dejecteiness  of  a  slave  is  likewise  given  him,  and  the  ignorance  of  one  bred  up  in  a 
Desart  Island.  His  person  is  monstrous,  as  he  is  the  product  of  unnatural  lust ;  and 
his  language  is  as  hobgoblin  as  his  person;  in  all  things  he  is  distinguish’d  from  other 
mortals. 

Coleridge  ( Seven  Lectures ,  121) :  The  character  of  Caliban  is  wonderfully  con¬ 
ceived  ;  he  is  a  sort  of  creature  of  the  earth,  as  Ariel  is  a  sort  of  creature  of  the  air. 
He  partakes  of  the  qualities  of  the  brute,  but  is  distinguished  from  brutes  in  two 
ways  : — by  having  mere  understanding  without  moral  reason ;  and  by  not  having  the 
instincts  which  pertain  to  absolute  animals.  Still,  Caliban  is  in  some  respects  a  noble 
being ;  the  poet  has  raised  him  far  above  contempt ;  he  is  a  man  in  the  sense  of  the 
imagination ;  all  the  images  he  uses  are  drawn  from  Nature  and  are  highly  poetical ; 
they  fit  in  with  the  images  of  Ariel.  Caliban  gives  us  images  from  the  earth,  Ariel 
images  from  the  air.  Caliban  talks  of  the  difficulty  of  finding  fresh  water,  of  the 
situation  of  morasses,  and  of  other  circumstances  which  even  brute  instinct,  without 
reason,  could  comprehend.  No  mean  figure  is  employed,  no  mean  passion  displayed 
beyond  animal  passion  and  repugnance  to  command. 

A.  W.  Schlegel  ( Lectures  on  Dram.  Literature,  trans.  by  John  Black,  1815,  ii, 
179) :  Caliban  has  become  a  by-word  as  the  strange  creation  of  a  poetical  imagination. 
A  mixture  of  the  gnome  and  the  savage,  half  demon,  half  brute,  in  his  behaviour  we 
perceive  at  once  the  traces  of  his  native  disposition  and  the  influence  of  Prospero’s 
education.  The  latter  could  only  unfold  his  understanding,  without,  in  the  slightest 
degree,  taming  his  rooted  malignity  :  it  is  as  if  the  use  of  reason  and  human  speech 
Ishould  be  communicated  to  a  stupid  ape.  Caliban  is  malicious,  cowardly,  false,  and 
base  in  his  inclinations ;  and  yet  he  is  essentially  different  from  the  vulgar  knaves  of 
a  civilized  world,  as  they  are  occasionally  portrayed  by  Shakespeare.  He  is  rude,  but 
not  vulgar ;  he  never  falls  into  the  prosaic  and  low  familiarity  of  his  drunken  associates, 
for  he  is  a  poetical  being  in  his  way ;  he  always  speaks  in  verse.  He  has  picked  up 
everything  dissonant  and  thorny  in  language,  out  of  which  he  has  composed  his  vocab¬ 
ulary;  and  of  the  whole  variety  of  nature,  the  hateful,  repulsive,  and  pettily  deformed 
have  alone  been  impressed  on  his  imagination.  The  magical  world  of  spirits,  which 
the  staff  of  Prospero  has  assembled  on  the  island,  casts  merely  a  faint  reflection  into 
his  mind,  as  a  ray  of  light  which  falls  into  a  dark  cave,  incapable  of  communicating 
to  it  either  heat  or  illumination,  serves  merely  to  put  in  motion  the  poisonous  vapours. 
The  whole  delineation  of  this  monster  is  inconceivably  consistent  and  profound,  and, 
notwithstanding  its  hatefulness,  by  no  means  hurtful  to  our  feelings,  as  the  honour  of 
human  nature  is  left  untouched. 

Lamb  {Sanity  of  True  Genius,  Works,  ii,  452,  ed.  1870)  :  Where  Shakespeare 
seems  most  to  recede  from  humanity  he  will  be  found  the  truest  to  it.  From  beyond 
the  scope  of  Nature  if  he  summon  possible  existences,  he  subjugates  them  to  the  law 
of  her  consistency.  He  is  beautifully  loyal  to  that  sovereign  directress,  even  when 
he  appears  most  to  betray  and  desert  her.  His  ideal  tribes  submit  to  policy ;  his  very 
monsters  are  tamed  to  his  hand,  even  as  that  wild  sea-brood,  shepherded  by  Proteus. 
He  tames,  and  he  clothes  them  with  attributes  of  flesh  and  blood,  till  they  wonder  at 


CRITICISMS—  CALIBAN 


381 

themselves,  like  Indian  Islanders  forced  to  submit  to  European  vesture.  Caliban, 
the  Witches,  are  as  true  to  the  laws  of  their  own  nature  (ours  with  a  difference)  as 
Othello,  Hamlet,  and  Macbeth.  Herein  the  great  and  the  little  wits  are  differenced, 

— that  if  the  latter  wander  ever  so  little  from  Nature  or  actual  existence,  they  lose 
themselves  and  their  readers.  Their  phantoms  are  lawless ;  their  visions  nightmares. 
They  do  not  create,  which  implies  shaping  and  consistency.  Their  imaginations  are 
net  active,  for  to  be  active  is  to  call  something  into  act  and  form,  but  passive,  as  men 
in  sick  dreams.  For  the  super-natural,  or  something  super-added  to  what  we  know 
of  Nature,  they  give  you  the  plainly  non-natural. 

William  Hazlitt  ( Characters  of  Shakespear' s  Plays ,  1817,  p.  118) :  The  cha¬ 
racter  of  Caliban  is  generally  thought  (and  justly  so)  to  be  one  of  the  author’s  master¬ 
pieces.  It  is  not  indeed  pleasant  to  see  this  character  on  the  stage,  any  more  than  it 
is  to  see  the  god  Pan  personated  there.  But  in  itself  it  is  one  of  the  wildest  and  most 
abstracted  of  all  Shakespear’s  characters,  whose  deformity,  whether  of  body  or  mind, 
is  redeemed  by  the  power  and  truth  of  the  imagination  displayed  in  it.  It  is  the 
essence  of  grossness,  but  there  is  not  a  particle  of  vulgarity  in  it.  Shakespear  has 
described  the  brutal  mind  of  Caliban,  in  contact  with  the  pure  and  original  forms  of 
Nature ;  the  character  grows  out  of  the  soil  where  it  is  rooted,  uncontrolled,  uncouth, 
and  wild,  uncramped  by  any  of  the  meannesses  of  custom.  It  is  ‘  of  the  earth, 
earthy.’  It  seems  almost  to  have  been  dug  out  of  the  ground,  with  a  soul  instinct¬ 
ively  superadded  to  it,  answering  to  its  wants  and  origin.  Vulgarity  is  not  natural) 
coarseness,  but  conventional  coarseness,  learned  from  others,  contrary  to,  or  without.' 
an  entire  conformity  of  natural  power  and  disposition ;  as  fashion  is  the  common-place 
affectation  of  wThat  is  elegant  and  refined  without  any  feeling  of  the  essence  of  it. — 

P.  120.  Master  Barnardine,  in  Measure  for  Measure ,  the  savage  of  civilised  life,  is 
an  admirable  philosophical  counterpart  to  Caliban. 

Skottowe  (ii,  325)  :  Yet  it  admits  of  question,  whether  the  portrait  of  Caliban 
be  a  perfect  and  harmonious  whole.  Whence,  it  may  be  asked,  did  Caliban  obtain 
such  skill  in  the  accurate  and  even  familiar  use  of  words  not  necessary  to  the 
expression  of  common  ideas  ?  Whence  his  clear  notions  of  the  relative  situations  of 
the  governor  and  the  governed  ?  .  .  .  .  Could  all  the  skill  and  diligence  of  Prospero 
have  imbued  his  mind  with  the  knowledge  he  evinces?  Of  explaining  to  the 
‘poisonous  slave,’  his  indisputable  right  to  the  dominion  of  the  island  under  the  ! 
double  claim  of  inheritance  and  possession,  his  able  master  will  not  even  be 
suspected. 

In  1873,  Dr  Daniel  Wilson,  Professor  of  English  Literature  in  University  College, 
Toronto,  published  a  book  called  Caliban  :  The  Missing  Link.  ‘  The  missing  link,’ 
refers  to  that  gap,  not  alone  in  Darwin’s  theory,  but  in  any  theory,  of  evolution,  which 
exists  between  highest  ape  and  the  lowest  savage ;  and  Dr  Wilson’s  purpose  is,  as  he 
states  in  his  Preface,  p.  xi,  to  shew  that  Shakespeare’s  ‘  genius  had  already  created 
‘  for  us  the  ideal  of  that  imaginary,  intermediate  being,  between  the  true  brute  and  j 
‘  man,  which,  if  the  new  theory  of  descent  from  crudest  animal  organisms  be  true, 

‘  was  our  predecessor  and  precursor  in  the  inheritance  of  this  world  of  humanity. 

‘  We  have  in  The  Tempest  a  being  which  is  “  a  beast,  no  more,”  and  yet  is  endowed 
‘  with  speech  and  reason  up  to  the  highest  ideal  of  the  capacity  of  its  lower  nature.’ 
However  charming  the  theory  of  the  origin  of  species  may  be,  *  all  is  vain,  unless  the 


382 


APPENDIX 


*  whole  hypothesis  of  the  descent  of  man,  the  evolution  of  mind,  and  every  step  in 

‘  the  pedigree  by  which  he  is  traced  back  to  the  remotest  of  his  new-found  ancestry, 
‘  be  accepted  as  an  indisputable  fact.’ — p.  7.  ‘  The  not  wholly  irrational  brute,  the 

‘  animal  approximating  in  form  and  attributes  as  nearly  to  man  as  the  lower  animal 
‘  may  be  supposed  to  do  while  still  remaining  a  brute,  has  actually  been  conceived 
‘  for  us  with  all  the  perfection  of  an  art  more  real  and  suggestive  than  that  of  the 
‘  chisel  of  Phidias,  in  one  of  the  most  original  creations  of  the  Shakespearian  drama.’ 
— p.  9.  ‘There  was  obviously  something  marine  or  fish-like  in  the  aspect  of  the 

:  ‘  island  monster.  “  In  the  dim  obscurity  of  the  past,”  says  Darwin,  “  we  can  see  that 
“  the  early  progenitor  of  all  the  vertebrates  must  have  been  an  aquatic  animal  ” ;  in 
‘  its  earliest  stages  “  more  like  the  larvae  of  the  marine  Ascidians  than  any  other 
“  known  form,”  but  destined  in  process  of  time,  through  lancelet,  ganoid,  and  other 
'  kindred  transitions,  to  “  suffer  a  sea-change  Into  something  rich  and  strange.”  In 

*  Caliban  there  was  undesignedly  embodied,  seemingly,  an  ideal  of  the  latest  stages 

‘  of  such  an  evolution.’ — p.  73.  ‘  In  reality,  though  by  some  scaly  or  fin-like  append- 

‘  ages,  the  idea  of  a  fish  or  sea-monster  is  suggested  to  all,  the  form  of  Caliban  is, 
‘  nevertheless,  essentially  human.’ — p.  75.  ‘Caliban  is,  therefore,  to  all  appearance 
‘  in  his  twenty -fifth  year  [Ariel  was  imprisoned  a  ‘  dozen  years  ’  when  Prospero 
arrived  on  the  island,  and  that  was  ‘  twelve  years  ’  before  the  opening  of  the  play] 

‘  as  we  catch  a  first-glimpse  of  this  pre-Darwinian  realisation  of  the  intermediate  link 

‘  between  brute  and  man . We  may  conceive  of  the  huge  canine  teeth  and  pro- 

‘  gnathous  jaws  which  in  old  age  assume  such  prominence  in  the  higher  quadrumana. 

*  Darwin  claims  for  the  bonnet-monkey  “  the  forehead  which  gives  to  man  his  noble 
“  and  intellectual  appearance  ”  ;  and  it  is  obvious  that  it  was  not  wanting  in  Caliban, 

‘  for  when  he  discovers  the  true  quality  of  the  drunken  fools  he  has  mistaken  for  gods, 

‘  his  remonstrance  is,  “  we  shall  all  be  turned  to  apes  with  foreheads  villainous  low.” 

‘  Here  then  is  the  highest  development  of  “  the  beast  that  wants  discourse  of  reason.” 

‘  He  has  attained  to  all  the  maturity  his  nature  admits  of,  and  so  is  perfect  as  the  study 

‘  of  a  living  creature  distinct  from,  yet  next  in  order  below  the  level  of,  humanity.’ _ 

p.  78.  *  Caliban  is  not  a  brutalised,  but  a  natural  brute  mind.  He  is  a  being  in 
‘  whom  the  moral  instincts  of  man  have  no  part ;  but  also  in  whom  the  degradation 

1  of  savage  humanity  is  equally  wanting.  He  is  a  novel  anthropoid  of  a  high  type, _ 

‘  such  as  on  the  hypothesis  of  evolution  must  have  existed  intermediately  between  the 
‘  ape  and  man, — in  whom  some  spark  of  rational  intelligence  has  been  enkindled, 

‘  under  the  tutorship  of  one  who  has  already  mastered  the  secrets  of  nature.’ _ p.  79. 

‘  Prospero  describes  the  pity  with  which  he  at  first  regarded  the  poor  monster,  whose 
‘  brutish  gabble  he  had  trained  to  the  intelligent  speech  which  is  now  used  for  curses. 

‘  In  all  this  do  we  not  realise  the  ideal  anthropoid  in  the  highest  stage  of  Simian  evo- 
‘  lution,  stroked,  and  made  much  of,  like  a  favourite  dog,  fed  with  dainties,  and  at 
‘  length  taught  to  frame  his  brute  cries  into  words  by  which  his  wishes  could  find 
‘  intelligible  utterance  ?  .  .  .  .  But  the  intellectual  development  compasses,  at  the 
‘  utmost,  a  very  narrow  range.’— p.  86.  ‘  Caliban  seems  indeed  the  half-human  link 

■  between  the  brute  and  man ;  and  realises,  as  no  degraded  Bushman  or  Australian 
1  savage  can  do,  a  conceivable  intermediate  stage  of  the  anthropomorphous  existence, 

‘  as  far  above  the  most  highly  organised  ape  as  it  falls  short  of  rational  humanity. 

‘  He  excites  a  sympathy  such  as  no  degraded  savage  could.  We  feel  for  the  poor 
‘  monster,  so  helplessly  in  the  power  of  the  stem  Prospero,  as  for  some  caged  wild 
beast  pining  in  cruel  captivity,  and  rejoice  to  think  of  him  at  last  free  to  range  in 
harmless  mastery  over  his  island  solitude . His  is  a  type  of  development  essen- 


CRITICISMS—  CALIBAN 


383 

lially  non-human, — though,  for  the  purposes  of  the  drama,  endued  to  an  extent  alto¬ 
gether  beyond  the  highest  attainments  of  the  civilised,  domesticated  animal,  with 
the  exercise  of  reason  and  the  use  of  language ; — a  conceivable  civilisation  such  as 
‘  would,  to  a  certain  extent,  run  parallel  to  that  of  man,  but  could  never  converge  to 
‘  a  common  centre.’ — p.  90. 

In  two  succeeding  chapters  Wilson  treats  of  Caliban  as  ‘  the  Metaphysician  ’  and 
as  ‘  the  Theologian,’  at  times,  in  lines  running  parallel  to  Biowning’s  poem,  which  is 
used  by  way  of  illustration.  Wilson’s  emendations  of  the  Text  of  the  play  have  been 
duly  incorporated  in  the  preceding  pages  of  this  volume. 

A.  W.  Ward  (Hist,  of  Eng.  Dramatic  Literature,  1875,  *>  441) :  What  was  the 
origin  of  the  conception  of  Caliban  ?  It  undoubtedly  connects  itself  with  the  general 
idea  of  the  desert  island,  to  which  it  forms  an  all  but  inevitable  supplement.  But  to  the 
influence  of  such  accounts  of  desert  places  and  their  savage  inhabitants  [as  in  Eden’s 
History's  of  Travaile,  in  Ralegh  and  in  Hakluyt]  was  added  that  of  a  literary  tend¬ 
ency  of  this  very  age.  I  refer,  of  course,  to  the  descriptions  of  Utopias,  inhabited 
by  beings  free  from  the  debasing  influences  of  a  false  civilisation,  of  which  the  best 
known  example  is  Sir  Thomas  More’s  De  Optimo  reipublicce  statu  deque  nova  insula 
Utopia  (published  abroad  in  Latin  in  1516,  and  in  its  first  English  translation  in  155 1). 
An  Italian  Civitas  solis,  by  Campanella  in  1600,  is  likewise  noted;  and  the  production 
of  this  class  of  works,  as  is  well  known,  continued  to  be  a  favourite  exercise  of  genius 
and  of  ingenuity  in  many  later  periods  of  our  own  literature ;  indeed,  our  own  gen¬ 
eration  has  had  to  submit  to  a  revival  of  this  at  times  rather  fatiguing  kind  of  inven¬ 
tion.  But  a  more  special  literary  panegyric  of  the  blessings  of  an  uncivilised  state  of 
society  was  in  existence  in  one  of  the  Essays  of  Montaigne,  translated  by  Florio  in 

1603 . It  seems  difficult  to  escape  from  the  conclusion,  that  Shakspere  intended 

his  monster  as  a  satire  incarnate  on  Montaigne’s  ‘  noble  savage.’ 

Phillpotts  (  The  Rugby  Edition,  p.  xvii,  1876)  :  In  Caliban  we  seem  to  catch  an 
echo  of  tales  told  by  prisoners  on  their  return  from  that  Algerine  captivity  which 
overtook  so  many  a  seafarer  of  the  time.  Shakespeare  transmutes  such  rude  accounts 


by  creating  a  being  who,  though  fierce  and  vile  in  every  way,  is  still  penetrated  with 

the  spirit  of  that  surrounding  nature  of  which  he  is  a  part . Caliban  is  the  very 

reverse  of  Ariel.  He  can  feel  neither  gratitude  nor  attachment.  The  only  reverence 
he  shows  for  Prospero  is  a  brutish  fear  of  what  he  may  suffer  from  a  superior  being 
whose  motives  he  imagines  to  be  revenge  or  mere  caprice . The  character  may 


have  had  a  special  bearing  on  the  great  question  of  a  time  when  we  were  dis¬ 
covering  new  countries,  subjecting  unknown  savages,  and  founding  fresh  colonies. 
If  Prospero  might  dispossess  Caliban,  England  might  dispossess  the  aborigines  of 
the  colonies. 

As  another  instance  of  the  deep  impression  on  the  world  of  literature  which  the 
son  of  Sycorax  has  made,  M.  Renan  wrote  (in  1878)  under  the  title  of  Caliban, 
and  as  a  continuation  of  The  Tempest ,  a  philosophical  drama,  which  he  asks  the 
reader  to  regard  merely  ‘  as  the  amusement  of  an  ideologist,  not  as  a  theory ;  a  fan¬ 
tasy  of  the  imagination,  not  as  a  political  thesis  ’ ;  its  political  bearing,  however,  is 
manifest  throughout,  and,  although  much  of  it  is  local  and  temporary,  its  fundamental 
idea  will  be  true  until  the  millennium.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  space  will  permit  of 
only  a  brief  abstract;  anything  short  of  an  unabridged  translation  (of  course  out  of 


3«4 


APPENDIX 


all  question  here)  would  fail  to  give  an  adequate  idea  of  the  keen,  satirical  brilliancy 
of  the  original. 

Prospero  is  represented  as  having  been  accompanied  by  Ariel,  Caliban,  Gonzalo 
and  Trinculo  to  Milan,  where  he  has  been  reinstated  as  Duke;  but,  however  faithful 
he  may  have  been  to  the  promise  of  breaking  his  staff  and  drowning  his  book,  he  has 
evidently  provided  himself  with  a  new  library,  and,  immersed  in  secret  studies,  neglects 
the  duties  of  government  as  much  as  ever.  Caliban  has  the  freedom  of  the  cellar, 
and  it  is  there  we  first  see  him,  and  hear  the  first  mutterings  of  red-republicanism,  or 
perhaps,  socialism,  whereof  eventually  he  becomes  the  exponent.  His  bitterness 
towards  Prospero  is  intense,  his  regret  endless  that  he  was  foiled  in  his  attempt  on 
Prospero’s  life.  ‘  Here  in  this  new  country,’  he  says,  *  I  have  been  promised  my  lib- 
‘  erty.  And  to  this  liberty  I  have  a  right!  Aforetime,  I  never  reflected,  but,  in  this 
‘  plain  of  Lombardy,  my  ideas  have  bravely  expanded.  The  Rights  of  Man  are 
‘absolute.  How  dare  Prospero  prevent  me  from  belonging  to  myself?  ’Tis  true, 
‘  he  lets  me  get  drunk  in  his  cellar ;  but  is  it  not  the  very  first  crime  of  princes  to 
‘  humiliate  the  people  by  benefits  ?  To  wipe  out  this  disgrace  at  the  hands  of  princes 
‘  there  is  but  one  way  :  to  kill  them ;  blood  alone  can  wash  out  this  outrage.’  Ariel 
appears  and  undertakes  to  reason  with  Caliban.  ‘  Why  should  you  revolt  ?’  he  asks. 
‘  Where  could  you  be  better  off  than  here  ?  The  cellar  is  free  to  you,  and  you  know 
‘  the  way  to  it.  If  free,  you  would  be  far  less  happy.’  ‘  Ay,’  responds  Caliban,  ‘  but 
‘  I  am  worked  out  {exploits') .  Spiritless  valet,  can’t  you  see  that  to  be.  exploits  by 
‘  another  man  is  perfectly  insupportable  ?  have  you  no  jot  of  honour  ?  No  mortal  has 
‘  a  right  to  degrade  another.  In  such  a  case,  revolt  becomes  the  most  holy  of  duties.’ 
Thus  the  argument  proceeds,  Caliban  at  every  step  revealing  a  fresh  development  in 
socialistic  views,  until  towards  the  close  there  is  one  penetrating  thrust  at  what  social¬ 
ists  term  ‘  the  Church.’  ‘  Prospero  ruled  us  by  false  pretences.  He  deceived  us,  and 
‘ is  there  anything  more  humiliating  than  to  be  deceived  ?  Those  imps  that  made  me 
‘  tumble  into  quagmires,  those  apes  that  made  me  frantic  by  their  grimaces,  those 
‘  infuriated  cats  which  bit  my  legs,  they  were  horrible,  and  they  were  not  genuine. 

Aha  !  you  scoundrel,  this  injury  I’ll  never  forgive  !  When  the  people  once  discover 
1  that  the  superior  classes  have  led  them  by  superstition,  you  will  see  what  they  will 
‘  do  to  their  ancient  masters.  This  hell  with  which  they  terrify  us  has  never  existed. 
‘  These  monsters,  which  gave  Prospero  his  prestige,  were  imaginary ;  but  they  tor- 
‘  mented  me  just  as  much  as  if  they  had  been  real.’ 

In  the  Second  Act,  Prospero  provides  a  masque  for  the  people  of  Milan  on  a  vast 
and  most  gorgeous  scale,  but  before  it  takes  place,  and  afterwards,  in  the  various 
groups  of  spectators  the  questions  that  agitate  modern  society  are  discussed,  with  a 
ground  tone  of  discontent  and  with  intimations  of  sedition.  In  the  Third  Act  the 
revolution  breaks  out,  and  Caliban  is  in  his  element.  He  mingles  among  the  people, 
says  but  few  words,  but  each  time  strikes  the  key-note  to  which  the  dull  intelli¬ 
gence  of  the  rabble  responds,  until  at  last  all  break  out  in  cries  of  ‘  Vive  Caliban ! 
Caliban,  chef  du  peuple!’  and  Caliban  thus  harangues  them:  ‘This  is  not  the  time 
‘  to  talk.  The  man  who  has  done  you  all  this  wrong  is  wicked,  cunning,  indescrib- 
‘  able.  Our  duty  is  to  catch  him  and  to  hinder  him  from  further  evil.  Do  not  think 
‘  that  this  will  prove  easy.  He  has  under  his  control,  spirits  as  malicious  as  himself, 

‘  especially  a  damned  performer  on  the  pipe  and  tabor  whose  tricks  are  inconceivable. 

‘  On  one  occasion  I  had  an  opportunity  to  drive  a  nail  into  Prospero’s  head.  I  was 
‘  in  the  very  sweat  of  the  pleasure;  piff! — the  whole  chance  was  piped  away.  Dis- 
‘  trust  yourselves ;  ’tis  harder  than  you  suppose.  Confide  to  me  the  order  and  the 


CRITICISMS— RENAN 


385 

march  of  events . First  of  all,  we  must  lay  hold  of  his  books — those  books  of 

hell,  ugh !  how  I  hate  them.  We  must  take  them  and  burn  them.  Some  one  else 
might  use  them.  Down  with  books !  They  are  the  worst  enemies  of  the  People. 
They  who  have  them,  control  their  fellow-creatures.  The  man  who  knows  Latin, 
‘  commands  other  men.  Down  with  Latin !’ 

The  upshot  of  it  all  is,  that  the  revolution  is  successful,  Caliban  is  installed  in 
Prospero’s  palace  and  the  Third  Scene  of  the  Third  Act,  which  is,  I  think,  the 
gem,  finds  Caliban,  alone,  at  night  stretched  on  Prospero’s  bed,  and  he  thus  solil¬ 
oquises  :  *  No,  I  never  would  have  believed  that  it  is  so  sweet  to  reign.  Above  all,  I 
‘  never  would  have  believed  that  by  reigning  one  matured  so  fast.  On  the  trip  from 
4  the  townhall  to  this  palace,  I  changed  more  than  during  all  the  rest  of  my  life.  Ten 
‘  hours  have  passed  since  the  people  brought  me  here  in  their  arms,  and  now — I  do 
‘not  recognise  myself.  I  was  unjust  to  Prospero;  bondage  embittered  me.  But, 
4  now,  lying  here  in  his  bed,  I  judge  him  as  we  judge  our  fellows.  There  was  good 
4  in  him,  and,  in  many  respects,  I  am  disposed  to  imitate  him. 

4  What  can  be  more  odious,  for  example,  than  the  inopportune  impatience  of  these 
4  people,  this  endless  file  of  impossible  petitions  with  which  they  have  just  over¬ 
whelmed  me  ?  What  greed  for  enjoyment !  what  subversive  pretensions  !  They 
4  demand  of  me  to  extract  the  nourishment  for  ten  thousand  men  out  of  a  hogshead 
of  wheat,  and  to  pour  five  hundred  tankards  of  wine  out  of  a  pint.  Tell  that  to  the 
4  marines,  comrades !  As  for  me,  my  decision  is  made :  I  am  not  to  let  myself  be 
4  overridden  by  men  who  suppose  that,  by  placing  themselves  in  advance  of  me,  they 
4  are  going  to  drag  me  with  them  into  the  abyss.  A  government  should  resist, — I  will 
4  resist.  After  all,  Institutions  and  myself  have  interests  in  common.  I  also  am  an 

4  Institution, — it  is  necessary  that  this  should  last.  Property  is  the  ballast  of  society ; _ 

4 1  feel  myself  in  sympathy  with  property-owners. 

‘And  then  over  and  above  the  useful,  there  is  the  ornamental  (I’lclat).  Oma- 
*  ment  is  necessary.  Marry,  fetes,  the  fine  arts,  palaces,  courts  are  the  ornaments  of 
4  life.  I  will  foster  artists.  Literary  men  shed  glory ;  I  must  not  neglect  them.  .  .  . 
4  Prospero  was  always  talking  of  the  welfare  of  humanity.  ’Tis  not  he  who  is  destined 
4  to  achieve  it.  Suppose,  by  chance,  it  should  happen  to  be  I . [/A  falls  asleep.' 

Prospero  sends  Ariel  to  put  to  rout  the  revolutionists,  but  Ariel  returns  defeated, 
bewildered,  and  dust-defiled.  Wherever  Caliban  is  supreme,  Ariel  is  powerless ;  no 
one  listened  to  his  music,  his  songs  were  unheard.  4  Revolution  is  Realism ;  in  what 
4  is  visionary,  ideal,  the  People  have  no  faith.  The  People  have  become  Positivists. 

4  Faith  is  necessary  if  our  ideal  terrors  are  to  be  felt.  What  is  to  be  done  when  the 
4  People  have  become  Positivists  ?’ 

Prospero  having  been  deposed,  the  Inquisition  steps  in  and  claims  him  as  a  prisonei 
for  his  free-thinking  and  sorcery.  Prospero  resists  and  the  Milanese,  Caliban’s  sub¬ 
jects,  sustain  him.  4  Eh  bien,’  says  Gonzalo  to  Prospero, 4  you  see  how  it  is.  Cali  bar 
4  has  one  more  good  quality  still :  he  is  anticlerical.’  4  True,’  answers  Prospero,  and 
then  after  a  moment’s  hesitation,  4  — In  exile  I  shall  find  the  monk  everywhere.  Ma 
4  foi,  vive  Caliban  !’ 

In  the  Fifth  Act,  Caliban  is  seen  in  all  his  regal  splendour,  seated  on  Prospero’s 
throne  and  receiving  homage.  The  Inquisition  appeals  to  him  to  enforce  its  orders, 
and  in  rehearsing  Prospero’s  wickedness  reminds  Caliban  that  at  one  time  Prospero 
had  been  his  mortal  enemy.  4Ah,  no,’  Caliban  interposes,  4  be  silent.  Do  not  recall 
4  those  memories  to  me.  What  has  been,  is  no  longer.  I  am  heit  to  Prospero’s 
4  rights ;  I  must  defend  them.  Prospero  is  my  prot6g<§.  It  is  befitting  that  he  should 
25 


APPENDIX 


4  work  at  his  ease,  with  his  philosophers  and  his  artists,  under  my  patronage.  His 
4  works  will  be  the  glory  of  my  reign.  I  shall  have  my  share  in  them.  I  work  him 
4  (Je  l' exploits') ;  ’tis  the  law  of  the  world.’ 

In  the  closing  scene  Prospero  gives  Ariel  his  liberty,  which  is,  Ariel  says,  his 
4  death.  Prim  mori  quam  f cedar i.  The  air  has  already  reclaimed  in  me  that  which 

4  belongs  to  it . Every  idealist  will  be  my  lover;  every  pure  soul  my  sister;  I 

4  shall  be  the  virgin  snow  on  the  bosom  of  young  girls,  the  glow  in  the  tresses  of  their 
4  hair.  I  shall  blossom  with  the  rose,  I  shall  grow  green  with  the  myrtle,  exhaling 
4  perfume  with  the  carnation,  pale  with  the  olive.  Adieu,  my  master,  remember  thy 
4  Ariel.’  [Ariel  vanishes  and  a  pure,  exquisite  harmony  breathes  around.  Prospero 
falls  senseless.  The  End. 

An  edition  like  the  present  would  be  scarcely  complete  without  at  least  a  reference 
to  Browning’s  Caliban  upon  Setebos ;  or  Natural  Theology  in  the  Island.  The 
essence  of  the  poem  lies  in  its  alternative  title,  which  sets  forth  the  vague  questionings 
of  a  keenly  observant,  but  utterly  untutored,  mind  in  regard  to  the  existence  of  an 
overruling  power,  the  problem  of  evil,  the  mystery  of  pain,  and  the  evidences  of 
caprice,  rather  than  of  law,  in  the  government  of  the  world, — such  restless  longings 
for  a  solution  of  the  mysteries  of  life  as  rise  unbidden  to  the  mind  when  looking  on 
the  ocean,  at  high  noon,  amid  the  full  tide  of  summer  life. 

Caliban,  who  almost  uniformly  speaks  in  the  third  person,  is  represented  as  lying, 
at  midday,  prone, 4  with  elbows  wide,  fists  clenched  to  prop  his  chin,’  near  the  mouth 
of  his  cave,  kicking  both  feet  in  cool  slush,  and  looking  out  over  the  sea,  which  sun¬ 
beams  cross  and  recross.  He  resolves  to  talk  to  himself  just  as  he  pleases  about 4  that 
4  other,  whom  his  dam  called  God.’  Accordingly,  he  shouts  4  Setebos,  Setebos,  and 
4  Setebos !’  but  as  there  is  no  response  he  infers  that  the  god  must  4  dwell  i’  the  cold 
o’  the  moon.’  And  yet  that  god  must  have  made  the  sun,  (which  gives  proofs  of 
power,)  as  well  as  the  clouds,  winds,  and  meteors ;  but  He  did  not  make  the  stars,  they 
effect  nothing;  He  made,  however,  4  the  sun,  this  isle,  Trees  and  the  fowls  here,  beast 
4  and  creeping  thing.  All  these  He  made,  and  more,  Made  all  we  see,  and  us.’  But 
why  did  He  make  them  and  us  ?  It  could  scarcely  have  been  from  spite.  He  would 
hardly  have  made  what  He  4  misliked  or  slighted  or  was  an  eye-sore  to  Him.’  It 
must  have  been  in  4  envy,  littleness,  or  sport  ’  that  He  4  made  what  Himself  would 
4  fain,  in  a  manner,  be. — Weaker  in  most  points,  stronger  in  a  few,'  and  4  yet  mere 
4  playthings  all  the  while.’  Suppose,  in  a  moment  of  intoxication,  I  were  to  wish, 
says  Caliban,  that 4 1  were  born  a  bird  ’ ;  and,  being  unable  to  be  what  I  wished,  I 
could  make  out  of  clay  a  live  bird,  and  will  it  to  fly  to  yon  rock-top 
4  In  which  feat,  if  his  leg  snapped,  brittle  clay, 

And  he  lay  stupid-like, — why,  I  should  laugh ; 

And  if  he,  spying  me,  should  fall  to  weep, 

Beseech  me  to  be  good,  repair  his  wrong, 

Bid  his  poor  leg  smart  less  or  grow  again, — 

Well  as  the  chance  were,  this  might  take,  or  else 
Not  take,  my  fancy ;  I  might  hear  his  cry. 

Or  give  the  manikin  three  legs  for  his  one, 

Or  pluck  the  other  off,  leave  him  like  an  egg, 

And  lessoned  he  was  mine  and  merely  clay. 

Were  this  no  pleasure,  lying  in  the  thyme  .... 

Making  and  marring  clay  at  will  ?  So  He.’ 


CRITjl  usms—br  o  wning 


3  37 

There  is  nothing  nere  of  right  nor  wrong,  but  mere  caprice,— just  as  if  ‘  of  yonder 
crabs  that  march  from  mountain  to  the  sea  ’  I  should  let  twenty  pass,  and  stone  the 
twenty-first.  ‘  As  it  likes  me  each  time,  I  do :  so  He.’ 

But  suppose,  after  all,  that  He  were  good  i’  the  main,  yet  will  He  not  tolerate  any 
vainglory  or  boasting  in  the  things  which  he  Has  created,  they  must  be  submissive  and 
cringe  before  Him.  Suppose  I  were  to  make  a  pipe  whose  sound  could  ensnare  the 
birds,  and  suppose  the  pipe  were  to  boast  and  say, 

‘  “  I  catch  the  birds,  I  am  the  crafty  thing, 

I  make  the  cry  my  maker  cannot  make 

With  his  great  round  mouth;  he  must  blow  through  mine  !” 

Would  not  I  smash  it  with  my  foot  ?  So  He.’ 

But  why  should  Setebos  be  discontented,  why  should  He  be  thus  ill  at  ease  ?  Per¬ 
haps  there  is  a  higher  Ideal,  of  which  Setebos  is  conscious — a  something  quiet  o’er  His 
head,  out  of  His  reach,  that  feels  nor  joy  nor  grief,  both  of  which  in  themselves  are 
really  indications  of  weakness.  But  for  this  higher  power  Caliban  does  not  care ;  he 
cares  only  for  Setebos,  who,  first,  looking  up  and  finding  that  He  cannot  soar  to  what 
is  quiet  and  hath  happy  life,  next  looks  down  here  and  makes  this  bauble  of  a  world 
to  ape  what  is  real  and  better.  Just  as  Caliban,  whose  standard  cannot  rise  above 
himself,  had  once  imitated  Prospero’s  magic  book  by  stitching  a  book  of  broad  leaves 
and  wrote  thereon  prodigious  words,  and  peeled  a  wand  and  called  it  by  a  name, 

*  ’Plays  thus  at  being  Prosper  in  a  way, 

Taketh  his  mirth  with  make-believes :  so  He.* 

Sycorax  had  held  that  the  quiet  made  all  things  and  that  Setebos  alone  was  the 
cause  of  evil.  This  cannot  be,  because  the  stamp  of  imperfection  is  on  all  things,  and 
imperfection  means  misery  and  unquiet. 

Undoubtedly  Setebos  is  busy,  working  all  the  time,  not,  however,  out  of  love  for 
what  He  creates,  but  merely  to  exercise  His  wit  and  strength.  Just  as  Caliban  had 
once  made  a  pile  of  turfs,  and,  with  a  fish  tooth,  scratched  a  moon  on  each,  and  set 
up  some  sticks  endwise,  and  crowned  the  whole  with  a  sloth’s  skull  a-top.  In  the 
work  itself  there  was  not  the  slightest  use,  it  was  done  for  work’s  sole  sake : 

*  ’Shall  some  day  knock  it  down  again :  so  He.’ 

In  the  distribution  of  happiness  there  is  the  same  caprice.  Setebos  has  a  spite 
against  Caliban,  and  favours  Prospero,  who  knows  why  ?  If  He  would  only  tell  the 
secret  of  how  to  please  Him!  Obeying  no  law  Himself,  there  is  no  law  for  obeying 
Him.  If  you  are  lucky  once,  be  sure  you  will  never  be  lucky  in  the  same  way  again. 

If  you  repeat  some  act  that  has  once  pleased  Him,  He  may  grow  wroth, _ never  try 

the  same  way  twice !  Just  as  Caliban  himself  sometimes  spares  a  squirrel  because  it 
is  plucky  and  shows  fight,  or  else  spares  an  urchin  because  it  is  timid  and  shows  fear, 
but  what  would  arouse  his  wrath  would  be  that  either  creature,  because  he  had  spared 
him  so  once,  should  think  that  he  must  spare  him  so  a  second  time.  ‘  He  would  teach 
the  reasoning  couple  what  “must”  means. 

‘  He  does  as  he  likes,  or  wherefore  Lord  ?  So  He.’ 

However,  the  present  state  of  things  will  continue.  Perhaps  Setebos  may  get 
tired  of  this  world  and  so  leave  off  watching  it.  ‘  Plere  are  we,  and  there  is  He, 

‘  and  nowhere  help  at  all.’ 

After  all,  with  this  life  the  pain  will  stop.  Setebos  does  His  worst  in  this  our  life, 
and  saves  the  last  pain  for  the  worst,— with  which,  an  end.  Meanwhile  the  best  way 
to  escape  His  ire  is  not  to  seem  too  happy.  Herein  extremes  meet  and  unrestrained 
free-thinking  merges  into  Puritanic  asceticism.  Therefore,  to  all  outward  seeming, 


388 


APPENDIX 


Caliban  intends  to  appear  as  miserable  as  ever,  will  dance  only  on  dark  nights,  in  the 
sunlight  will  moan,  and  get  under  holes  to  laugh.  If  Setebos  should  catch  him  just 
then,  and  ask  ‘  What  chucklest  at  ?’  to  appease  Him,  he  would  cut  a  finger  off  ‘  or  of 
‘  my  three  kid  yearlings  burn  the  best,’  and  in  the  meanwhile  hope  that  things  will 
somehow  mend,  that  either  the  superior  quiet  will  conquer  Setebos  or  that  Setebos 
Himself  will  grow  old  and  doze,  doze,  which  is  really  as  good  as  if  He  were  dead. 

At  this  point  of  Caliban’s  meditations  a  terrible  thunderstorm  bursts  over  his  head, 
the  white  lightning  flashes  *  there,  there,  there,  there,  there.’  Setebos  has  evidently 
become  cognizant  of  Caliban’s  irreverent  speculations : 

‘  What,  what  ?  A  curtain  o’er  the  world  at  once  ! 

Crickets  stop  hissing ;  not  a  bird —  or,  yes, 

There  scuds  His  raven  that  hath  told  Him  all ! 

It  was  fool’s  play,  this  prattling  !  Ha !  The  wind 
Shoulders  the  pillared  dust,  death’s  house  o’  the  move, 

And  fast  invading  fires  begin  !  White  blaze — 

A  tree’s  head  snaps — and  there,  there,  there,  there,  there, 

His  thunder  follows  !  Fool  to  gibe  at  Him  ! 

Lo !  ’Lieth  flat  and  loveth  Setebos ! 

’Maketh  his  teeth  meet  through  his  upper  lip, 

Will  let  those  quails  fly,  will  not  eat  this  month 
One  little  mess  of  whelks,  so  he  may  ’scape !’ 


WITCHCRAFT 

The  magic  which  Prospero  practises  in  the  ‘  Enchanted  Island  ’  is  so  entirely  his 
own,  and  so  far  removed  from  all  traces  of  vulgar  Witchcraft,  that  it  is  not  worth 
while  to  do  more  than  simply  refer  the  reader,  who  may  be  curious  in  such  matters, 
to  Dr  Drake’s  Shakespeare  and  His  Times,  vol.  ii,  p.  507-525,  where  much  learn¬ 
ing  on  the  subject  is  conveniently  epitomised,  together  with  copious  extracts  from 
Scot’s  Discoverie  of  Witchcraft.  I  cannot  see,  however,  that  any  light  is  thrown  on 
the  character  of  Prospero,  or  that  we  are  taught  a  more  exquisite  appreciation  of 
Ariel,  by  knowledge  the  most  exact  of  the  distinctions  between  Magicians  and  Necro¬ 
mancers,  and  Wizards,  or  between  Elves,  and  Demons,  and  Goblins.  For  me,  it  is 
sufficient  to  try  to  imagine  the  infinite  delight  with  which  Shakespeare’s  audience 
accepted  as  a  real,  genuine,  living  creature  such  a  fairy  as  Ariel,  and  the  breathless 
awe  with  which  every  wave  of  Prospero’s  wand  was  regarded.  To  that  audience, 
Witchcraft  and  Enchantment  were  Facts,  not  to  be  questioned,  and  Caliban  was  as 
veritable  a  possibility  as  Ferdinand.  The  strength  of  the  popular  belief  in  Witches 
and  in  Demon  Lovers,  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  may  be  inferred  from  its  vitality  even 
in  the  days  of  Dryden,  who  asserts,  as  we  have  seen  above  on  p.  379,  that  Caliban’* 
parentage  ‘  is  not  wholly  beyond  the  bounds  of  credibility.’ 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


389 


DRYDEN’S  VERSION 

The  following  version  of  The  Tempest  by  Davenant  and  Dryden  was  written,  as 
we  learn,  not  only  from  the  Epilogue ,  but  also  from  Pepy’s,  in  1667.  Dryden’s  Preface, 
dated  1669,  was  probably  written  for  the  earliest  publication  in  1670.  The  present 
Reprint  is  from  the  earliest  copy  in  my  possession.  I  have  cut  out  about  twenty  or 
thirty  lines,  which  will  not  be  missed.  The  Notes  on  the  First  Scene  were  kindly 
made  for  me  by  Commander  F.  M.  Green,  U.S.N.,  whose  name,  widely  known  and 
honoured  in  naval  scientific  circles,  has  an  authority,  almost,  it  might  be  said,  with- 
out  appeal,  as  that  of  the  ‘  Editorial  Contributor’  on  ‘Naval  and  Nautical  Terms’  in 
The  Century  Dictionary. 

The  following  are  the  references  to  this  Version  in  Pepy’s  Diary.  They  are  taken 
from  Miss  L.  Toulmin-Smith’s  Ingleby’s  Centurie  of  Prayse  (p.  321,  &c.) : 

[1667]  November  7. — At  noon  resolved  with  Sir  W.  Pen  to  go  to  see  The  Tem¬ 
pest,  an  old  play  of  Shakespeare’s,  acted  I  hear  the  first  day . The  house  mighty 

full;  the  King  and  Court  there;  and  the  most  innocent  play  that  ever  I  saw;  and  a 
curious  piece  of  musick  in  an  echo  of  half  sentences,  the  echo  repeating  the  former 
half,  while  the  man  goes  on  with  the  latter ;  which  is  mighty  pretty.  The  play  has 
no  great  wit,  but  yet  good,  above  ordinary  plays. 

November  13.— To  the  Duke  of  York’s  house,  and  there  saw  The  Tempest  again, 
which  is  very  pleasant,  and  full  of  so  good  variety  that  I  cannot  be  more  pleased 
almost  in  a  comedy,  only  the  seamen’s  part  a  little  too  tedious. 

December  12.— After  dinner  all  alone  to  the  Duke  of  York’s  house  and  saw  The 
Tempest,  which,  as  often  as  I  have  seen  it,  I  do  like  very  well,  and  the  house  very 
full. 

1667- 68.  January  6.— Away  to  the  Duke  of  York’s  house,  in  the  pit, _ there 

being  acted  The  Tempest. 

February  3.— To  the  Duke  of  York’s  house,  to  the  play  The  Tempest,  which  we 
have  often  seen,  but  yet  I  was  pleased  again,  and  shall  be  again  to  see  it,  it  is  so  full 
of  variety,  and  particularly  this  day  I  took  pleasure  to  learn  the  tune  of  the  seamen’s 
dance. 

1668- 69.  January  21— Home,  where  I  find  Madam  Turner,  Dyke,  and  The.,  and 
had  a  good  dinner  for  them  &  merry ;  and  so  carried  them  to  the  Duke  of  York’s 

k°use . and  saw  The  Tempest;  but  it  is  but  ill  done  by  Gosnell,  in  lieu  of 

Moll  Davis. 


THE  TEMPEST,  or,  The  Enchanted  Island.  A  Comedy.  As  it  is  now  Acteu 
at  His  Highness  the  Duke  of  York's  Theatre.  London,  Printed  by  T.  N.  for 
Henry  Herringman,  at  the  Blew  Anchor  in  the  Lower  Walk  of  the  New- 
Exchange.  MDCLXXIV. 

Preface. 

THE  writing  of  Prefaces  to  Plays,  was  probably  invented  by  some  very  ambi¬ 
tious  Poet,  who  never  thought  he  had  done  enough  :  Perhaps  by  some  Ape 
of  the  French  Eloquence,  which  uses  to  make  a  business  of  a  Letter  of  Gal¬ 
lantry,  an  examen  of  a  Farce ;  and,  in  short,  a  great  pomp  and  ostentation 
t>f  words  on  every  trifle.  This  is  certainly  the  Talent  of  that  Nation,  and  ought  not 
to  be  invaded  by  any  other.  They  do  that  out  of  gaiety,  which  would  be  an  imposi¬ 
tion  upon  us. 


390 


APPENDIX 


We  may  satisfie  our  selves  with  surmounting  them  in  the  Scene,  and  safely  leave 
them  those  trappings  of  writing,  and  flourishes  of  the  Pen,  with  which  they  adorn  the 
borders  of  their  Plays,  and  which  are  indeed  no  more  than  good  Landskips  to  a  very 
indifferent  Picture.  I  must  proceed  no  farther  in  this  Argument,  lest  I  run  my  self 
beyond  my  excuse  for  writing  this.  Give  me  leave  therefore  to  tell  you,  Reader,  that 
I  do  it  not  to  set  a  value  on  any  thing  I  have  written  in  this  Play,  but  out  of  gratitude 
to  the  memory  of  Sir  William  Davenant,  who  did  me  the  honour  to  join  me  with  him 
in  the  alteration  of  it. 

It  was  originally  Shakespear' s  :  a  Poet  for  whom  he  had  particularly  a  high  vene¬ 
ration,  and  whom  he  first  taught  me  to  admire.  The  Play  it  self  had  formerly  been 
acted  with  success  in  the  Black-Fryers  :  and  our  Excellent  Fletcher  had  so  great  a 
value  for  it,  that  he  thought  fit  to  make  use  of  the  same  Design,  not  much  varied,  a 
second  time.  Those  who  have  seen  his  Sea-  Voyage,  may  easily  discern  that  it  was  a 
Copy  of  Shakespear' s  Tempest :  the  Storm,  the  Desart  Island,  and  the  Woman  who 
had  never  seen  a  Man,  are  all  sufficient  Testimonies  of  it.  But  Fletcher  was  not  the 
only  Poet  who  made  use  of  Shakespear1  s  Plot :  Sir  John  Suckling,  a  profess’d  admirer 
of  our  Author,  has  follow’d  his  footsteps  in  his  Goblins ;  his  Regmella  being  an  open 
imitation  of  Shakespear1  s  Miranda  ;  and  his  Spirits,  though  counterfeit,  yet  are  copied 
from  Ariel.  But  Sir  William  Davenant,  as  he  was  a  Man  of  quick  and  piercing 
imagination,  soon  found  that  somewhat  might  be  added  to  the  design  of  Shakespear, 
of  which  neither  Fletcher  nor  Suckling  had  ever  thought :  and  therefore  to  put  the 
last  hand  to  it,  he  design’d  the  Counter  part  to  Shakespear3 s  Plot,  namely,  that  of  a 
Man  who  had  never  seen  a  Woman  ;  that  by  this  means  those  two  Characters  of  Inno¬ 
cence  and  Love  might  the  more  illustrate  and  commend  each  other.  This  excellent 
Contrivance  he  was  pleas’d  to  communicate  to  me,  and  to  desire  my  assistance  in  it. 
I  confess,  that  from  the  very  first  moment  it  so  pleas’d  me,  that  I  never  writ  any  thing 
with  more  delight.  I  must  likewise  do  him  that  justice  to  acknowledge,  that  my 
writing  received  daily  his  amendments,  and  that  is  the  reason  why  it  is  not  so  faulty, 
as  the  rest  which  I  have  done,  without  the  help  or  correction  of  so  judicious  a  Friend. 
The  Comical  part  of  the  Saylors  were  also  of  his  invention  and  for  the  most  part  his 
writing,  as  you  will  easily  discover  by  the  Style.  In  the  time  I  writ  with  him,  I  had 
the  opportunity  to  observe  somewhat  more  nearly  of  him  than  I  had  formerly  done, 
when  I  had  only  a  bare  acquaintance  with  him :  I  found  him  then  of  so  quick  a  fancy 
that  nothing  was  propos’d  to  him  on  which  he  could  not  suddenly  produce  a  thought 
exfreamly  pleasant  and  surprising :  and  those  first  thoughts  of  his,  contrary  to  the  old 
Latine  Proverb,  were  not  always  the  least  happy.  And  as  his  fancy  was  quick  so 
likewise  were  the  products  of  it  remote  and  new.  He  borrowed  not  of  any  other ; 
and  his  imaginations  were  such  as  could  not  easily  enter  into  any  other  Man.  His 
Corrections  were  sober  and  judicious  :  and  he  corrected  his  own  writings  much  more 
severely  than  those  of  another  Man,  bestowing  twice  the  time  and  labour  in  polishing, 
which  he  us’d  in  invention.  It  had  perhaps  been  easie  enough  for  me  to  have  arro¬ 
gated  more  to  my  self  than  was  my  due,  in  the  writing  of  this  Play,  and  to  have  pass’d 
by  his  name  with  silence  in  the  Publication  of  it,  with  the  same  ingratitude  which 
others  have  us’d  to  him,  whose  Writings  he  hath  not  only  corrected,  as  he  hath  done 
this,  but  has  had  a  greater  inspection  over  them,  and  sometimes  added  whole  Scenes 
together,  which  may  as  easily  be  distinguish’d  from  the  rest,  as  true  Gold  from  coun¬ 
terfeit  by  the  weight.  But  besides  the  unworthiness  of  the  Action  which  deterred  me 
from  it  (there  being  nothing  so  base  as  to  rob  the  dead  of  his  reputation)  I  am  satisfi’d 
I  could  never  have  receiv’d  so  much  honour,  in  being  thought  the  Author  of  anv 


LRYDEA'S  VERSION 


391 

Poem,  how  excellent  soever,  os  I  shall  from  the  joining  my  imperfections  with  the 
Merit  and  Name  of  Shakespear  and  Sir  William.  Davenant. 

Decemb.  i.  John  Driden. 

1669.  J 

Prologue. 


AS  when  a  Tree’s  cut  down,  the  secret  Root 

Lives  under  ground,  and  thence  new  branches  sh-'n' 
So,  from  old  Shakespear' s  honour’d  dust,  this  day 
Springs  up  and  buds  a  new  reviving  Play. 

Shakespear ,  who  (taught  by  none)  did  first  impart 
To  Fletcher  Wit,  to  labouring  Johnson  Art. 

He,  Monarch-like,  gave  those  his  Subjects  Law, 

And  is  that  Nature  which  they  paint  and  draw. 

Fletcher  reach’d  that  which  on  his  heights  did  grow, 
Whilst  Johnson  crept  and  gather’d  all  below. 

This  did  his  Love,  and  this  his  Mirth  digest : 

One  imitates  him  most,  the  other  best. 

If  they  have  since  out-writ  all  other  Men, 

’Tis  with  the  drops  which  fell  from  Shakespear1  s  pen. 

The  Storm  which  vanish’d  on  the  neighb’ring  shore, 

Was  taught  by  Shakespear’ s  Tempest  first  to  roar. 

That  Innocence  and  Beauty  which  did  smile 
In  Fletcher ,  grew  on  this  Enchanted  Isle. 

But  Shakespear’ s  Magick  could  not  copy’d  be, 

Within  that  Circle  none  durst  walk  but  he. 

I  must  confess  ’twas  bold,  nor  would  you  now 
That  liberty  to  vulgar  Wits  allow, 

Which  work  by  Magick  supernatural  things : 

But  Shakespear1  s  Pow’r  is  Sacred  as  a  King’s 
Those  Legends  from  old  Priesthood  were  receiv’d, 

And  he  then  writ,  as  People  then  believ’d. 

But,  if  for  Shakespear  we  your  grace  implore, 

We  for  our  Theatre  shall  want  it  more : 

Who  by  our  dearth  of  Youths  are  forc’d  t’  employ 
One  of  our  Women  to  present  a  Boy. 

And  that’s  a  transformation,  you  will  say, 

Exceeding  all  the  Magick  in  the  Play. 


Dramatis  Personae. 

ALONZO  Duke  of  Savoy,  and  Usurper  of  the  Dukedom  of  Mantua. 

Ferdinand  his  Son. 

Prospero  right  Duke  of  Millain. 

Antonio  his  Brother,  Usurper  of  the  Dukedom. 

Gonzalo,  a  Nobleman  of  Savoy. 

Hippolito,  one  that  never  saw  Woman,  right  Heir  of  the  Dukedom  of  Mantua 
Stephano  Master  of  the  Ship. 

Mustacho  his  Mate. 

Trincalo  Boatswain. 

Ventoso  a  Marriner. 


1 


392 


APPENDIX 


Several  Marriners. 

A  Cabbin  Boy. 

Miranda  and  1  ^ Dauglite rS  to  Prospero )  that  never  saw  Man. 
Donnda  J 

Ariel  an  aiery  Spirit,  attendant  on  Prospero. 

Several  Spirits,  Guards  to  Prospero. 

Caliban 

Sy corax  his  Sister 


j-  Two  Monsters  of  the  Isle. 


THE  ENCHANTED  ISLAND. 

The  Front  of  the  Stage  is  open'd ;  and  the  Band  of  24  Violins ,  with  the  Harpsicals 
and  Theorbo's  which  accompany  the  Voices,  are  plac'd  between  the  Pit  and  the 
Stage.  While  the  Overture  is  playing,  the  Curtain  rises,  and  discovers  a  nesv 
Frontispiece,  join’ d  to  the  great  Pilasters,  on  each  side  of  the  Stage.  This  Frontis¬ 
piece  is  a  noble  Arch,  supported  by  large  wreathed  Columns  of  the  Corinthian 
Order;  the  wreathings  of  the  Columns  are  beautifi'd  with  Roses  wound  round 
them,  and  several  Cupids  flying  about  them.  On  the  Cornice,  just  over  the  Capi¬ 
tals,  sits  on  either  side  a  Figure,  with  a  Trumpet  in  one  hand,  and  a  Palm  in  the 
other,  representing  Fame.  A  little  farther  on  the  same  Cornice,  on  each  side  of  a 
Compass-pediment,  lie  a  Lion  and  a  Unicorn,  the  Supporters  of  the  Royal  Arms  of 
England.  In  the  middle  of  the  Arch  are  several  Angels,  holding  the  King’s  Arms, 
as  if  they  were  placing  them  in  the  midst  of  that  Compass-pediment.  Behind  this 
is  the  Scene,  which  represents  a  thick  Cloudy  Sky,  a  very  Rocky  Coast,  and  a 
Tempestuous  See  in  perpetual  Agitation.  This  Tempest  ( suppos'd  to  be  rais'd  by 
Magick)  has  many  dreadful  Objects  in  it,  as  several  Spirits  in  horrid  shapes  flying 
down  amongst  the  Sailers,  then  rising  and  crossing  in  the  Air.  And  when  the 
Ship  is  sinking,  the  whole  House  is  darken'd,  and  a  shower  of  Fire  falls  upon  'em. 
This  is  accompanied  with  Lightning,  and  several  Claps  of  Thunder,  to  the  end  of 
the  Storm. 

ACT  I. 

Enter  Mustacho  and  Ventoso. 

Vent.  TT  THat  a  Sea  comes  in ? 

V  *  Must.  A  hoaming1  Sea  !  we  shall  have  foul  weather. 

Enter  Trincalo. 

Trine.  The  Scud  2  comes  against  the  Wind,  ’twill  blow  hard. 

Enter  Stephano. 

Steph.  Bosen ! 

Trine.  Here,  Master,  what  say  you  ? 

Steph.  Ill  weather !  let’s  off  to  Sea. 

Must.  Let’s  have  Sea  room  enough,  and  then  let  it  blow  the  Devil’s  Head  ott. 
Steph.  Boy!  Boy!  [Enter  Cabin  Boy. 

Boy.  Yaw,  yaw,  here,  Master. 

Steph.  Give  the  Pilot  a  dram  of  the  Bottle.  [Exeunt  Stephano  and  Boy. 


1  hoaming]  According  to  the  Century  Dictionary,  this  word  is  found  nowhere 
else:  ‘it  is  probably  an  error  (for  combing  in  the  form  of  coaming,  or  else  for 
foaming  ?).’ 

2  Scud]  F.  M.  Green  :  The  scud  never  goes  against  the  wind. 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


393 


Enter  Mariners ,  and  pass  over  the  Stage. 

Trine.  Bring  the  Cable  to  the  Capstorm.1 

Enter  Alonzo,  Antonio,  Gonzalo. 

Alon.  Good  Bosen  have  a  care ;  where’s  the  Master  ?  Play  the  Men. 

Trine.  Pray  keep  below. 

Anto.  Where’s  the  Master,  Bosen  ? 

Trine.  Do  not  you  hear  him  ?  you  hinder  us :  keep  your  Cabins,  you  help  the 
storm. 

Gonz.  Nay,  good  Friend  be  patient. 

Tnnc.  I,  when  the  Sea  is:  hence;  what  care  these  Roarers  for  the  name  of 
Duke  ?  to  Cabin ;  silence ;  trouble  us  not. 

Gonz.  Good  Friend,  remember  whom  thou  hast  aboard. 

Trine.  None  that  I  love  more  than  my  self :  you  are  a  Counseller,  if  you  can 
advise  these  Elements  to  silence,  use  your  wisdom :  if  you  cannot,  make  your  self 
ready  in  the  Cabin  for  the  ill  hour.  Cheerly  good  hearts  !  out  of  our  ways,  Sirs. 

\_Exeunt  Trincalo  and  Mariners. 

Gonz.  I  have  great  Comfort  from  this  Fellow;  methinks  his  complexion  is  per- 
feet  Gallows ;  stand  fast,  good  fate,  to  his  hanging ;  Make  the  Rope  of  his  Destiny 
our  Cable,  for  our  own  does  little  advantage  us ;  if  he  be  not  bom  to  be  hang’d,  we 
shall  be  drown’d.  r pxit 


Enter  Trincalo  and  Stephano. 

Up  aloft,  Lads.  Come  reef  both  Topsails. 

Make  haste,  let’s  weigh,  let’s  weigh,  and  off  to  Sea.  [Ex.  Steph. 

Enter  two  Mariners,  and  pass  over  the  stage. 

Hands  down  !  man  your  Main-Capstorm. 

Enter  Mustacho  and  Ventoso  at  the  other  door. 

Up  aloft !  and  man  your  Seere-Capstorm.2 3 

My  Lads,  my  Hearts  of  gold,  get  in  your  Capstorm-Bar :  Hoa  up,  hoa 

[Exeunt  Mustacho  and  Ventoso. 
Enter  Stephano. 

Hold  on  well !  hold  on  well !  nip  well  there ; 

Quarter-Master,  get’s  more  Nippers.  [Ex.  Steph. 

Enter  two  Mariners,  and  pass  over  again. 

Trine.  Turn  out,  turn  out,  all  hands  to  Capstorm. 

You  dogs,  is  this  a  time  to  sleep?  lubbard. 

Heave  together,  Lads.  [Trincalo  whistles. 

[Exeunt  Mustacho  and  Ventoso. 


Trine. 

Steph. 

Trine. 

Must. 
Vent. 
up,  &e. 

Steph. 


Must,  within.  Our  Vial’s  broke. 

Vent,  within.  ’Tis  but  our  Vial-block  has  given  way.  Come  heave,  Lads !  we 
are  fix’t  again.  Heave  together,  Bullyes. 

Enter  Stephano. 

Steph.  Cut  down  the  Hammocks !  cut  down  the  Hammocks ! 

Come,  my  Lads :  Come,  Bullyes,  chear  up !  heave  lustily. 

The  Anchor’s  a  peek. 


1  Capstorm]  In  Murray’s  New  Eng.  Diet,  this  form  for  Capstern  is  cited  in  the 

present  passage,  but  no  other  example  of  it  is  given. 

3  Seere-Capstorm]  F.  M.  Green  :  A  perfectly  absurd  order.  There  is  no 
such  thing  as  a  ‘  Seere-Capstorm,’  and  there  has  never  been  such  a  thing. 


394 


APPENDIX 


Trine.  Is  the  Anchor  a  Peek  ? 

Steph.  Is  a  weigh  !  Is  a  weigh  ! 

Trine.  Up  aloft  my  Lads,  upon  the  fore-castle  ! 

Cut1 2  the  Anchor,  cut  him. 

All  within.  Haul  Catt,3  Haul  Catt,  &>c.  Haul  Catt,  haul: 

Haul  Catt,  haul.  Below. 

Steph.  Aft,  aft,  and  loose  the  Misen  ! 

Trine.  Get  the  Misen-tack  aboard.  Haul  aft  Misen-sheet ; 

Enter  Mustacho. 

Must.  Loose  the  Main-top-sail ! 

Steph.  Let  him  alone,  there’s  too  much  Wind. 

Trine.  Loose  Fore-sail !  Haul  aft  both  sheets !  trim  her  right  afore  the  Wind.* 
Aft !  aft !  Lads,  and  hale  up  the  Misen. 

Must.  A  Mackrel-gale,  Master. 

Steph.  within.  Port  hard,  port !  the  Wind  veeres  forward,  bring  the  Tack  aboard 
Port  is.  Star-board,  star-board,  a  little  steady ;  now  steady,  keep  her  thus,  no  nearer 
you  cannot  come,  till  the  Sails  are  loose. 

Enter  Ventoso. 

Vent.  Some  hands  down  :  the  Guns  are  loose.  [ Ex.  Must. 

Trine.  Try  the  Pump,  try  the  Pump.  [ Ex.  Vent. 

Enter  Mustacho  at  the  other  door. 

Must.  O  Master  !  six  foot  water  in  Hold. 

Steph.  Clap  the  Helm  hard  a  weather !  Flat,  flat,  flat,  in  the  Fore-sheet  there. 
Trine.  Over  haul  your  fore-boling. 

Steph.  Brace  in  the  Lar-board.4  [Exit. 

Trine.  A  Curse  upon  this  houling.  [A  great  Cry  within. 

They  are  louder  than  the  Weather.  [Entet  Antonio  and  Gonzalo. 

Yet  again,  what  do  you  here  ?  shall  we  give  o’r,  and  drown  ?  ha’  you  a  mind  to  sink  ? 
Gonz.  A  Pox  o’your  Throat,  you  bawling,  blasphemous,  uncharitable  Dog. 

Trine.  Work  you  then  and  be  Pox’t. 

Anto.  Hang,  Cur,  hang,  you  Whorson  insolent  Noise-maker,  we  are  less  afraid 
to  be  drown’d  than  thou  art. 

Trim.  Ease  the  Fore-brace  a  little.5  [Exit. 


1  Cut]  F.  M.  Green  :  Evidently  a  misprint  for  Cat. 

2  Haul  Catt]  Murray’s  New  Eng.  Diet,  cites:  Falconer,  Diet.  Marine,  1789, 
Cat,  is  ....  a  ...  .  strong  tackle,  or  complication  of  pullies,  to  hook  and  draw  the 
anchor  ....  up  to  the  cat-head. 

3  trim  her  right  afore  the  Wind]  F.  M.  Green:  From  the  first  exclamations 
in  this  Scene,  ‘  What  a  sea  comes  in  ?’  ‘  let’s  off  to  sea,’  &c.,  it  is  evident  that  the  wind 
is  blowing  on  shore.  The  effect,  therefore,  of  this  present  order  would  be  to  drive  a 
vessel,  trimmed  ‘  right  afore  the  wind,’  directly  on  shore. 

4  F.  M.  Green  :  The  orders  contained  in  the  preceding  seven  lines  are  incoherent 
and  unintelligible.  A  ‘  fore-bowline  ’  is  an  unimportant,  insignificant  line,  used  only 
in  fair  weather. 

5  Ease  .  .  .  little]  F.  M.  Green  :  This  could  do  neither  good  nor  harm.  In 
fact,  it  may  be  generally  remarked  of  this  whole  Scene,  that  the  words  and  phrases 
put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Boatswain  are  manifestly  used  by  a  person  who  did  not  at 
all  understand  them. 


DR  WEN'S  VERSION 


395 

Gonz.  I’ll  warrant  him  for  drowning,  though  the  ship  were  no  stronger  than  a 
Nut-shell,  and  as  leaky  as  an  unstanch’d  Wench. 

Enter  Alonzo  and  Ferdinand. 

Ferd.  For  my  self  I  care  not,  but  your  loss  brings  a  Thousand  Deaths  to  me. 
Alonz.  O  name  not  me,  I  am  grown  Old,  my  Son ;  I  am  tedious  to  the  World 
and  that,  by  use,  is  so  to  me :  But,  Ferdinand ,  I  grieve  my  Subjects  loss  in  thee  i 
Alas,  I  suffer  justly  for  my  Crimes,  but  why  thou  shouldst — O  Heaven ! 

[A  Cry  within. 

Heark,  Farewel,  my  Son,  a  long  farewel ! 

Enter  Trincalo,  Mustacho,  and  Ventoso. 

Trine.  What  must  our  Mouths  be  cold  then  ? 

Vent.  All’s  lost.  To  prayers,  to  prayers. 

Gonz.  The  Duke  and  Prince  are  gone  within  to  prayers. 

Let’s  assist  them. 

Must.  Nay,  we  may  e’en  pray  too;  our  case  is  now  alike. 

Ant.  Mercy  upon  us,  we  split. 

Gonz.  Let’s  all  sink  with  the  Duke  and  the  Young  Prince.  \_Exeunt. 

Enter  Stephano,  and  Trincalo. 

Trine.  The  Ship  is  sinking.  [A  new  Cry  within. 

Steph.  Run  her  ashore  ! 

Trine.  Luff!  luff!  or  we  are  all  lost!  there’s  a  Rock  upon  the  Star-board-Bow. 
Steph.  She  strikes,  she  strikes  !  All  shift  for  them  themselves.  \_Exeunt. 

Scene  II. 

In  the  midst  of  the  Shower  of  Fire  the  Scene  changes.  The  Cloudy  Sky ,  Rocks,  and 
Sea  vanish  ;  and  when  the  Lights  return  discover  that'  Beautiful  part  of  the  Island, 
which  was  the  Habitation  of  Prospero ;  ’  Tis  compos'd  of  three  Walks  of  Cypress- 
trees,  each  Side-walk  leads  to  a  Cave,  in  one  of  which  Prospero  keeps  his  Daugh¬ 
ters,  in  the  other  Hippolito  :  The  Middle-  Walk  is  of  a  great  depth,  and  leads  to 
an  open  part  of  the  Island. 

Enter  Prospero  and  Miranda. 

Prosp.  Miranda,  where’s  your  Sister  ? 

Miran.  I  left  her  looking  from  the  pointed  Rock,  at  the  Walk’s  end,  on  the  huge 
Beat  of  Waters. 

Prosp.  It  is  a  dreadful  Object. 

Mir.  If  by  your  Art,  my  dearest  Father,  you  have  put  them  in  this  roar,  allay  ’em 
quickly. 

Prosp.  I  have  so  ordered,  that  not  one  Creature  in  the  Ship  is  lost : 

I  have  done  nothing  but  in  care  of  thee, 

My  Daughter,  and  thy  pretty  Sister : 

You  both  are  ignorant  of  what  you  are. 

Not  knowing  whence  I  am,  nor  that  I’m  more 
Then  Prospero,  Master  of  a  narrow  Cell, 

And  thy  unhappy  Father. 

Mir.  I  ne’r  endeavour’d  to  know  more  than  you  were  pleas’  to  tell  me, 

Prosp.  I  should  inform  thee  farther. 

Mir.  You  often,  Sir,  began  to  tell  me  what  I  am, 
but  then  you  stopt. 

Prosp.  The  Hour’s  now  come ;  Obey  and  be  attentive.  Canst  thou  remember  a 


APPENDIX 


396 

time  before  we  came  into  this  Cell  ?  I  don’t  think  thou  canst,  for  then  thou  wert  not 
full  three  years  old. 

Mir.  Certainly  I  can,  Sir. 

Prosp.  Tell  me  the  Image  then  of  any  thing  which  thou  dost  keep  in  thy  remem¬ 
brance  still. 

Mir.  Sir,  had  I  not  four  or  five  Women  once  that  tended  me  ? 

Prosp.  Thou  hadst,  and  more,  Miranda  :  what  seest  thou  else  in  the  dark  back¬ 
ward,  and  abyss  of  Time  ? 

If  thou  remember’st  ought  e’r  thou  cam’st  here,  then  how  thou  cam’st  thou  may’st 
remember  too. 

Mir.  Sir,  that  I  do  not. 

Prosp.  Fifteen  years  since,  Miranda,  thy  Father  was  the  Duke  of  Milan,  and  a 
Prince  of  power. 

Mir.  Sir,  are  not  you  my  Father  ? 

Prosp.  Thy  Mother  was  all  Vertue,  and  she  said,  thou  wast  my  Daughter,  and 
thy  Sister  too. 

Mir.  O  Heavens !  what  foul  Play  had  we,  that  we  hither  came,  or  was’t  a  Bless¬ 
ing  that  we  did  ? 

Prosp.  Both,  both  my  Girl. 

Mir.  But,  Sir,  I  pray  proceed. 

Prosp.  My  Brother,  and  thy  Uncle,  call’d  Antonio,  to  whom  I  trusted  then  the 
manage  of  my  State,  while  I  was  wrap’d  with  secret  Studies :  That  false  Uncle,  hav¬ 
ing  attain  d  the  craft  of  granting  suits,  and  of  denying  them ;  whom  to  advance,  or 
lop,  for  over-topping,  soon  was  grown  the  Ivy  which  did  hide  my  Princely  Trunk, 
and  suck’d  my  verdure  out :  thou  attend’st  not. 

Mir.  O  good,  Sir,  I  do. 

Prosp.  I  thus  neglecting  worldly  ends,  and  bent  to  closeness,  and  the  bettering 
of  my  mind,  wak’d  in  my  false  Brother  an  evil  Nature :  He  did  believe  he  was 
indeed  the  Duke,  because  he  then  did  execute  the  outward  Face  of  Sovereignty. 
Dost  thou  still  mark  me  ? 

Mir.  Your  Story  would  cure  Deafness. 

Prosp.  This  false  Duke  needs  would  be  absolute  in  Milan,  and  Confederates 
with  Savoy's  Duke,  to  give  him  Tribute,  and  to  do  him  Homage. 

Mir.  False  Man ! 

Prosp.  This  of  Savoy,  being  an  Enemy  to  me  inveterate,  strait  grants  my  Brother's 
Suit,  and  on  a  Night,  Mated  to  his  Design,  Antonio  opened  the  Gates  of  Milan,  and 
i’  th’  dead  of  darkness,  hurri’d  me  thence,  with  thy  young  Sister,  and  thy  crying  self. 

Mir.  But  wherefore  did  they  not  that  hour  destroy  us  ? 

Prosp.  They  durst  not,  Girl,  in  Milan,  for  the  Love  my  people  bore  me  ;  in  short, 
Jhey  hurri’d  us  away  to  Savoy,  and  thence  aboard  a  Bark  at  Nissa’s  Port:  bore  us 
6ome  Leagues  to  Sea,  where  they  prepar’d  a  rotten  carcass  of  a  Boat,  not  ligg’d,  no 
Tackle,  Sail,  nor  Mast;  the  very  Rats  instinctively  had  quit  it. 

Mir.  Alack  !  what  trouble  was  I  then  to  you  ? 

Prosp  Thou  and  thy  Sister  were  two  Cherubins,  which  did  preserve  me :  you 
both  did  smile,  infus’d  with  Fortitude  from  Heaven. 

Mir.  How  came  we  ashore  ? 

Prosp.  By  Providence  Divine.  Some  food  we  had  and  some  fresh  Water,  whicn 
a  Nobleman  of  Savoy,  called  Gonzalo,  appointed  Master  of  that  black  design,  gave 
us;  with  rich  Garments  and  all  necessaries,  which  since  have  steaded  much  :  and  of 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


397 

his  Gentleness  (knowing  I  lov’d  my  Books)  lie  furnish’d  me  from  my  own  Library, 
with  Volumes  which  I  prize  above  my  Dukedom. 

Mir.  Would  I  might  see  that  Man. 

Prosp.  Here,  in  this  Island  we  arriv’d,  and  here  have  I  your  Tutor  been.  But 
by  my  Skill  I  find,  that  my  Mid-Heaven  doth  depend  on  a  most  happy  Star,  whose 
Influence  if  I  not  court,  but  omit,  my  Fortunes  will  ever  after  droop :  here  cease  more 
Questions,  thou  art  inclin’d  to  sleep:  ’tis  a  good  dullness,  and  give  it  way;  I  know 
thou  canst  not  chuse.  [She  falls  asleep. 

Come  away,  my  Spirit :  I  am  ready  now,  approach, 

my  Ariel,  Come.  [Enter  Ariel. 

Ariel.  All  hail,  great  Master,  grave  Sir,  hail,  I  come  to  answer  thy  best  pleasure, 
be  it  to  fly  to  swim,  to  shoot  into  the  Fire,  to  ride  on  the  curl’d  Clouds ;  to  thy  strong 
bidding  task  Ariel  and  all  his  Qualities. 

Prosp.  Hast  thou,  Spirit,  perform’d  to  point  the  Tempest  that  I  bad  thee  ? 

Ariel.  To  every  Article.  I  boarded  the  Duke’s  Ship,  now  on  the  Beak,  now  in 
the  Waste,  the  Deck,  in  every  Cabin;  I  flam’d  amazement  and  sometimes  I  seem’d 
to  bum  in  many  places  on  the  Top-mast  the  Yards,  and  Boresprit;  I  did  flame  dis¬ 
tinctly.  Nay  once  I  rain’d  a  shower  of  Fire  upon  them. 

Prosp.  My  brave  Spirit ! 

Who  was  so  firm,  so  constant,  that  this  coil  did  not  infect  his  Reason  ? 

Ariel.  Not  a  Soul  but  felt  a  Feaver  of  the  Mind,  and  play’d  some  tricks  of  Des¬ 
peration;  all,  but  Mariners,  plung’d  in  the  foaming  Brine,  and  quit  the  Vessel;  the 
Duke’s  Son  Ferdinand,  with  Hair  upstaring  (more  like  Reeds  than  Hair)  was  the 
first  man  that  leap’d,  cry’d,  Hell  is  empty,  and  all  the  Devils  are  here. 

Prosp.  Why  that’s  my  Spirit ; 

.  But  was  not  this  nigh  shore  ? 

Ariel.  Close  by,  my  Master. 

Prosp.  But,  Ariel,  are  they  safe  ? 

Ariel.  Not  a  Hair  perish’d. 

In  Troops  I  have  dispers’d  them  round  this  Isle. 

The  Duke’s  Son  I  have  landed  by  himself,  whom  I  have  left  warming  the  Air  with 
sighs,  in  an  odd  Angle  of  the  Isle,  and  sitting,  his  Arms  he  folded  in  this  sad  Knot. 

Prosp.  Say  how  thou  hast  dispos'd  the  Mariners  of  the  Duke’s  Ship,  and  all  the 
rest  of  the  Fleet  ? 

Ariel.  Safely  in  harbour 

Is  the  Duke’s  Ship,  in  the  deep  Nook,  where  once  thou  called’st 
Me  up  at  Mid-night  to  fetch  Dew  from  the 
Still  vext  Bermoothes,  there  she’s  hid, 

The  Mariners  all  under  Hatches  stow’d, 

Whom  with  a  Charm,  join’d  to  their  suffer’d  Labour, 

I  have  left  asleep ;  and  for  the  rest  o’  th’  Fleet, 

(Which  I  disperst)  they  all  have  met  again, 

And  are  upon  the  Mediterranean  Float. 

Bound  sadly  home  for  Italy  ; 

Supposing  that  they  saw  the  Duke’s  Ship  wrack’d, 

And  his  great  Person  perish. 

Prosp.  Ariel,  thy  Charge 
Exactly  is  perform’d ;  but  there’s  more  Work  • 

What  is  the  time  o’  th’  day  ? 


398 


APPENDIX 


Ariel.  Past  the  Mid-season. 

Prosp,  At  least  two  Glasses :  the  time  ’tween  six  and  now  must  by  us  both  be 
spent  most  preciously. 

Ariel.  Is  there  more  Toyl  ?  since  thou  dost  give  me  Pains,  let  me  remember  thee 
what  thou  hast  promis’d,  which  is  not  yet  perform’d  me. 

Prosp.  How  now,  Moodie  ? 

What  is’t  thou  can’st  demand  ? 

Ariel.  My  Liberty. 

Prosp.  Before  thy  time  be  out  ?  no  more. 

Ariel.  I  prethee ! 

Remember  I  have  done  thee  faithful  Service, 

Told  thee  no  Lies,  made  thee  no  Mistakings, 

Serv’d  without  Grudge,  or  Grumbling, 

Thou  didst  promise  to  bate  me  a  full  Year. 

Prosp.  Dost  thou  forget 
From  what  a  Torment  I  did  free  thee  ? 

Ariel.  No. 

Prosp.  Thou  dost,  and  think’st  it  much  to  tread  the  Ooze  of  the  salt  Deep,  to  run 
against  the  sharp  Wind  of  the  North,  to  do  my  Bus’ness  in  the  Veins  of  the  Earth 
when  it  is  bak’d  with  Frost. 

Ariel.  I  do  not,  Sir. 

Prosp.  Thou  ly’st,  Malignant  thing !  hast  thou  forgot  the  foul  Witch  Sycorax 
who  with  Age  and  Envy  was  grown  into  a  Hoop?  hast  thou  forgot  her? 

Ariel.  No,  Sir. 

Prosp.  Thou  hast,  where  was  she  born  ?  speak,  tell  me. 

Ariel.  Sir,  in  Argier. 

Prosp.  Oh,  was  she  so  1 

I  must  once  every  Month  recount  what  thou  hast  been,  which  thou  forget’st.  This 
damn’d  Witch  Sycorax ,  for  Mischiefs  manifold,  and  Sorceries  too  terrible  to  enter 
humane  hearing,  from  Argier  thou  know’st  was  banish’d :  but  for  one  thing  she  did, 
they  would  not  take  her  Life  :  is  not  this  true  ? 

Ariel.  I,  Sir. 

Prosp.  This  blue-ey’d  Hag  was  hither  brought  with  Child, 

And  here  was  left  by  th’  Sailers,  thou,  my  Slave, 

As  thou  report’st  thy  self,  wast  then  her  Servant, 

And  ’cause  thou  wast  a  Spirit  too  delicate 
To  act  her  Earthy  and  abhor’d  Commands; 

Refusing  her  grand  Hests,  she  did  confine  thee, 

By  help  of  her  more  potent  Ministers ; 

(In  her  unmitigable  rage)  into  a  cloven  Pine, 

Within  whose  rift  imprison’d  thou  didst  painfully 
Remain  a  dozen  Years;  within  which  space  she  dy’d, 

And  left  thee  there;  where  thou  didst  vent 
Thy  Groans,  as  fast  as  Mill-Wheels  strike. 

Then  was  this  Isle  (save  for  two  Brats, 

Which  she  did  litter  here,  the  brutish  Caliban , 

And  his  Twin-Sister,  two  freckled  hag-bom  Whelps) 

Not  honour’d  with  a  humane  Shape. 

Ariel.  Yes!  Caliban  her  Son,  and  Sycorax  his  Sister. 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


399 


Prosp.  Dull  thing,  I  say  so ;  he,  that  Caliban ,  and  she  that  Sy corax,  whom  I 
now  keep  in  Service.  Thou  best  know’st  what  torment  I  did  find  thee  in;  thy 
Groans  did  make  Wolves  houl,  and  penetrate  the  breasts  of  ever  angry  Bears,  it  was 
a  Torment  to  lay  upon  the  damn’d,  which  Sycorax  could  ne’r  again  undo :  It  was  my 
Art,  when  I  arriv’d,  and  heard  thee,  that  made  the  Pine  to  gape  and  let  thee  out. 

Arid.  I  thank  thee,  Master. 

Prosp.  If  thou  more  murmurest,  I  will  rend  an  Oak, 

And  Peg  thee  in  his  knotty  Entrails,  till  thou 
Hast  houl’d  away  twelve  Winters  more. 

Ariel.  Pardon,  Master. 

I  will  be  correspondent  to  command,  and  be 
A  gentle  Spirit. 

Prosp.  Do  so,  and  after  two  day’s  I’ll  discharge  thee. 

Ariel.  Thanks,  my  great  Master.  But  I  have  yet  one  request. 

Prosp.  What’s  that,  my  Spirit  ? 

Ariel.  I  know  that  this  day’s  business  is  important,  requiring  too  much  Toyl  for 
one  alone.  I  have  a  gentle  Spirit  for  my  Love,  who  twice  seven  Years  has  waited 
for  my  Freedom :  Let  it  appear,  it  will  assist  me  much,  and  we  with  mutual  joy  shall 
entertain  each  other.  This  I  beseech  you  grant  me. 

Prosp.  You  shall  have  your  desire. 

Ariel.  That’s  my  noble  Master,  Milcha  !  [Milcha  flies  down  to  his  Assistance. 

Mile.  I  am  here  my  Love. 

Ariel.  Thou  art  free  !  welcome,  my  Dear !  what  shall  we  do  ?  say,  say,  what  shall 
we  do  ? 

Prosp.  Be  subject  to  no  sight  but  mine,  invisible  to  every  Eye-ball  else.  Hence 
with  Diligence,  anon  thou  shalt  know  more.  [  They  both  fly  up,  and  cross  in  the  Air. 
Thou  hast  slept  well  my  Child.  [  To  Miranda. 

Mir.  The  Sadness  of  your  Story  put  heaviness  in  me. 

Prosp.  Shake  it  off;  come  on,  I’ll  now  call  Caliban,  my  Slave,  who  never  yields 
us  a  kind  Answer. 

Mir.  ’Tis  a  Creature,  Sir,  I  do  not  love  to  look  on. 

Prosp.  But  as  ’tis  we  cannot  miss  him ;  he  does  make  our  Fire,  fetch  in  oui 
Wood,  and  serve  in  Offices  that  profit  us :  what  hoa !  Slave !  Caliban  !  thou  Earth 
thou,  speak. 

Calib.  within.  There’s  Wood  enough  within. 

Prosp.  Thou  Poisonous  Slave,  got  by  the  Devil  himself  upon  thy  wicked  Dam, 
come  forth.  [ Enter  Caliban. 

Calib.  As  wicked  Dew,  as  e’er  my  Mother  brush’d  with  Raven’s  Feather  from 
unwholesome  Fens,  drop  on  you  both :  A  South-west  blow  on  you,  and  blister  you 
all  o’er. 

Prosp.  For  this,  be  sure,  to  night  thou  shalt  have  Cramps,  Side-stitches,  that  shall 
pen  thy  Breath  up;  Urchins  shall  prick  thee  till  thou  bleed’st,  thou  shalt  be  pinch’d 
as  thick  as  Honey-Combs,  each  Pinch  more  stinging  than  the  Bees  which  made  ’em. 

Calib.  I  must  eat  my  Dinner :  this  Island’s  mine  by  Sycorax  my  Mother,  which 
thou  took’st  from  me.  When  thou  cam’st  first,  thou  stroak’st  me,  and  mad’st  much 
nf  me,  would’st  give  me  Water  with  Berries  in’t,  and  taught’st  me  how  to  name  the 
Bigger  Light,  and  how  the  Less,  that  burn  by  Day  and  Night ;  and  then  I  lov’d  thee, 
and  shewed  thee  all  the  qualities  of  the  Isle,  the  Fresh-springs,  Brine -pits,  Barren 
Places  and  Fertile.  Curs’d  be  I  that  I  did  so :  All  the  Charms  of  Sycorax,  Toads, 


400 


APPENDIX 


Beetles,  Bats,  light  on  thee,  for  I  am  all  the  Subjects  that  thou  hast.  I  first  was  mine 
own  Lord ;  and  here  thou  stay’st  me  in  this  hard  Rock,  whiles  thou  does  keep  from 
me  the  rest  o’  th’ Island. 

Prosp.  Thou  most  lying  Slave,  whom  Stripes  may  move,  not  Kindness :  I  have 
us'd  thee  (Filth  that  thou  art)  with  humane  Care,  and  lodg’d  thee  in  mine  own  Cell, 
till  thou  didst  seek  to  violate  the  Honour  of  my  Children. 

Calib.  Oh  ho,  Oh  ho,  would’t  had  been  done:  thou  didst  prevent  me,  I  had 
peopled  else  this  Isle  with  Calibans. 

Prosp.  Abhor’d  Slave  ! 

Who  ne’er  would  any  print  of  goodness  take,  being  capable  of  all  Ill :  I  pity’d  thee, 
took  pains  to  make  thee  speak,  taught  thee  each  hour  one  or  other  thing  when  thou 
didst  not  (Savage)  know  thy  own  meaning,  but  wouldst  gabble,  like  a  thing  most 
Brutish  I  endow’d  thy  Purposes  with  Words,  which  made  them  known :  But  thy  wild 
Race  (though  thou  didst  learn)  had  that  in’t,  which  good  Natures  could  not  abide  to 
be  with :  therefore  was  thou  deservedly  pent  up  into  this  Rock. 

Calib.  You  taught  me  Language,  and  my  Profit  by  it  is,  that  I  know  to  curse : 
the  red  botch  rid  you  for  learning  me  your  Language. 

Prosp.  Hag-seed  hence ! 

Fetch  us  in  fewel,  and  be  quick 

To  answer  other  business  :  shrug’st  thou  (Malice) 

If  thou  neglectest,  or  dost  unwillingly  what  I  command, 

I’ll  wrack  thee  with  old  Cramps,  fill  all  thy  bones  with  Aches, 

Make  thee  roar,  that  Beasts  shall  tremble  at  thy  Dinn. 

Calib.  No,  prethee ! 

I  must  obey.  His  Art  is  of  such  power 
It  would  controul  my  Dam’s  God,  Selebos, 

And  make  a  Vassal  of  him. 

Prosp.  So,  Slave  hence.  [. Exeunt  Prosp.  and  Calib.  severally. 

Enter  Dorinda. 

Dor.  Oh,  Sister !  what  have  I  beheld  ? 

Mir.  What  is  it  moves  you  so  ? 

Dor.  From  yonder  Rock, 

As  I  my  Eyes  cast  down  upon  the  Seas, 

The  Whistling  Winds  blew  rudely  on  my  Face, 

And  the  Waves  roar’d;  at  first  I  thought  the  War 
Had  been  between  themselves,  but  strait  I  spy’d 
A  huge  great  Creature. 

Mir.  O  you  mean  the  Ship. 

Dor.  Is’t  not  a  Creature  then  ?  it  seem’d  alive. 

Mir.  But  what  of  it  ? 

Dor.  This  floating  Ram  did  bear  his  Horns  above. 

All  ty’d  with  Ribbands,  ruffling  in  the  Wind ; 

Sometimes  he  nodded  down  his  Head  a  while. 

And  then  the  Waves  did  heave  him  to  the  Moon; 

He  clambring  to  the  Top  of  all  the  Billows, 

And  then  again  he  curtsi’d  down  so  low, 

I  could  not  see  him ;  till  at  last,  all  side-long, 

With  a  great  Crack  his  Belly  burst  in  pieces. 

Mir.  There  all  had  perish’t, 


DR  YDEN'S  VERSION 


401 


Had  nol  my  Father’s  Magick  Art  reliev’d  them. 

But,  Sister,  I  have  stranger  News  to  tell  you ; 

In  this  great  Creature  there  were  other  Creatures, 

And  shortly  we  may  chance  to  see  that  thing, 

Which  you  have  heard  my  Father  call,  a  Man. 

Dor .  But  what  is  that  ?  for  yet  he  never  told  me. 

Mir.  I  know  no  more  than  you :  but  I  have  heard 
My  Father  say,  we  Women  were  made  for  him. 

Dor.  What,  that  he  should  eat  us,  Sister  ? 

Mir.  No  sure,  you  see  my  Father  is  a  Man, 

And  yet  he  does  us  good.  I  would  he  were  not  old. 

Dor.  Methinks,  indeed,  it  would  be  finer, 

If  we  two  had  two  young  Fathers. 

Mir.  No,  Sister,  no,  if  they  were  young, 

My  Father  said,  that  we  must  call  them  Brothers. 

Dor.  But,  pray,  how  does  it  come,  that  we  two  are  not  Brothers  then,  and  have 
not  Beards  like  him  ? 

Mir.  Now  I  confess  you  pose  me. 

Dor.  How  did  he  come  to  be  our  Father  too  ? 

Mir.  I  think  he  found  us  when  we  both  were  little, 

And  grew  within  the  Ground. 

Dor.  Why  could  he  not  find  more  of  us  ?  Pray,  Sister,  let  you  and  I  look  up 
and  down  one  day,  to  find  some  little  ones  for  us  to  play  with. 

Mir.  Agreed ;  hut  now  we  must  go  in.  This  is  the  hour 
Wherein  my  Father’s  Charm  will  work, 

Which  seizes  all  who  are  in  open  air : 

Th’  effect  of  his  great  Art  I  long  to  see, 

Which  will  perform  as  much  as  Magick  can. 

Dor.  And  I,  methinks  more  long  to  see  a  Man.  [ Exeunt . 

ACT  II.  Scene  I. 

The  Scene  Changes  to  the  wilder  part  of  the  Island,  ’tis  compos'd  of  diver  sorts  op 
Trees,  and  barren  Places,  with  a  prospect  of  the  Sea  at  a  great  distance. 

Enter  Stephano,  Mustacho,  Ventoso, 

Vent.  r  |  'HE  Runlet  of  Brandy  was  a  loving  Runlet,  and  floated  after  us  out 
J-  of  pure  pity. 

Must.  This  kind  Bottle,  like  an  old  Acquaintance,  swam  after  it. 

And  this  Scollop-shell  is  all  our  Plate  now. 

Vent.  ’Tis  well  we  have  found  something  since  we  landed. 

I  prethee  fill  a  soop,  and  let  it  go  round. 

Where  hast  thou  laid  the  Runlet  ? 

Must.  I’  the  hollow  of  an  old  Tree. 

Vent.  Fill  apace. 

We  cannot  live  long  in  this  barren  Island,  and  we  may 
Take  a  soop  before  Death,  as  well  as  others  drink 
At  our  Funerals. 

Must.  This  is  Prize-Brandy,  we  steal  Custom,  and  it  cost  nothing,  Let’s  have  two 
rounds  more. 

26 


402 


APPENDIX 


Vent.  Master,  what  have  you  sav’d  ? 

Steph.  Just  nothing  but  my  self 

Vent.  This  works  comfortably  on  a  cold  stomach. 

Steph.  Fill’s  another  round. 

Vent.  Look  1  Mustacho  weeps.  Hang  losses,  as  long  as  we  have  Brandy  left. 
Prithee  leave  weeping. 

Steph.  He  sheds  his  Brandy  out  of  his  Eyes :  he  shall  drink  no  more. 

Must.  This  will  be  a  doleful  day  with  old  Bess.  She  gave  me  a  gilt  Nutmeg  at 
parting.  That’s  lost  too.  But,  as  you  say,  hang  losses.  Prethee  fill  again. 

Vent.  Beshrew  thy  heart  for  putting  me  in  mind  of  thy  Wife. 

I  had  not  thought  of  mine  else,  Nature  will  shew  it  self, 

I  must  melt.  I  prithee  fill  again,  my  Wife’s  a  good  old  Jade, 

And  has  but  one  Eye  left :  but  she’ll  weep  out  that  too, 

When  she  hears  that  I  am  dead. 

Steph.  Would  you  were  both  hang’d  for  putting  me  in  thought  of  mine. 

Vent.  But  come,  Master,  sorrow  is  dry  1  there’s  for  you  agen. 

Steph.  A  Mariner  had  e’en  as  good  be  a  Fish  as  a  Man,  but  for  the  comfort  we 
get  ashore :  O  for  an  old  dry  Wench  now  I  am  wet. 

Must.  Poor  heart !  that  would  soon  make  you  dry  agen :  but  all  is  barren  in  this 
Isle :  Here  we  may  lie  at  Hull  till  the  Wind  blow  Nore  and  by  South  ere  we  can  cry, 
A  Sail,  A  Sail,  at  sight  of  a  white  Apron.  And  therefore  here’s  another  to  comfort  us. 

Vent.  This  Isle’s  our  own,  that’s  our  comfort,  for  the  Duke,  the  Prince,  and  all 
their  train,  are  perished. 

Must.  Our  Ship  is  sunk,  and  we  can  never  get  home  agen :  we  must  e’en  turn 
Salvages,  and  the  next  that  catches  his  Fellow  may  eat  him. 

Vent.  No,  no,  let  us  have  a  Government;  for  if  we  live  well  and  orderly,  Heav’n 
will  drive  Shipwracks  ashoar  to  make  us  all  rich ;  therefore  let  us  carry  good  Con¬ 
sciences,  and  not  eat  one  another. 

Steph.  Whoever  eats  any  of  my  Subjects,  I’ll  break  out  his  teeth  with  my  Scep¬ 
ter  .  for  I  was  Master  at  Sea,  and  will  be  Duke  on  Land :  you  Mustacho  have  been 
my  Mate,  and  shall  be  my  Vice-Roy. 

Vent.  When  you  are  Duke,  you  may  chuse  your  Vice-Roy;  but  I  am  a  free  Sub¬ 
ject  in  a  new  Plantation,  and  will  have  no  Duke  without  my  voice.  And  so  fill  me 
th’  other  soop. 

Steph.  Whispering.  Ventoso,  dost  thou  hear,  I  will  advance  thee,  prithee  give  me 
thy  voice. 

Vent.  I’ll  have  no  whispering  to  corrupt  the  Election ;  and  to  show  that  I  have 
no  private  ends,  I  declare  aloud  that  I  will  be  Vice-Roy,  or,  I’ll  keep  my  voice  for 
my  self. 

Must.  Stephano ,  hear  me,  I  will  speak  for  the  people,  because  there  are  few,  or 
rather  none  in  the  Isle  to  speak  for  themselves.  Know  then,  that  to  prevent  the 
farther  shedding  of  Christian  bloud,  we  are  all  content  Ventoso  shall  be  Vice-Roy, 
upon  condition  I  may  be  Vice-Roy  over  him.  Speak,  good  people,  are  you  well’ 
agreed  ?  What,  no  man  answer  ?  well,  you  may  take  their  silence  for  consent. 

Vent.  You  speak  for  the  People,  Mustacho?  I’ll  speak  for  ’em,  and  declare 
generally  with  one  voice,  one  and  all ;  That  there  shall  be  no  Vice-Roy  but  the  Duke, 
unless  I  be  he. 

Must.  You  declare  for  the  people,  who  never  saw  your  Face!  Cold  Iron  shall 
decide  k‘  [Both  draw. 


DR  YUEN'S  VERSION 


403 

Steph.  Hold,  loving  Subjects :  we  will  have  no  Civil  War  during  our  Reign :  1 
io  hereby  appoint  you  both  to  be  my  Vice-Roys  over  the  whole  Island. 

Both.  Agreed  !  agreed  1 

Enter  Trincalo,  with  a  great  Bottle ,  half  drunk. 

Vent.  How  1  Trincalo  our  brave  Boson  ! 

Must.  He  reels  :  can  he  be  drunk  with  Sea  water  ? 

Trine,  sings.  I  shall  no  more  to  Sea  to  Sea, 

Here  I  shall  die  ashore. 

This  is  a  very  scurvy  tune  to  sing  at  a  Man’s  Funeral. 

But  here’s  my  comfort.  [ Drinks. 

Sings.  The  Master,  the  Swabber,  the  Gunner,  and  I, 

The  Surgeon  and  his  Mate, 

Lodd  Mall,  Meg,  and  Marrian,  and  Margery, 

But  none  of  us  cad d  for  Kate. 

For  she  had  a  tongue  with  a  tang, 

Wou'd  cry  to  a  Sailor,  Go  hang  ? 

She  lov'd  not  the  savour  of  Tar  nor  of  Pitch , 

Yet  a  Taylor  might  scratch  her  where  ere  she  did  itch. 

This  is  a  scurvy  Tune  too,  but  here’s  my  comfort  agen.  [ Drinks. 

Steph.  We  have  got  another  Subject  now ;  Welcome, 

Welcome  into  our  Dominions  ! 

Trine.  What  Subject,  or  what  Dominions  ?  here’s  old  Sack, 

Boy :  the  King  of  good-fellows  can  be  no  subject. 

I  will  be  old  Simon  the  King. 

Must.  Hah,  old  Boy !  how  didst  thou  scape  ? 

Trine.  Upon  a  Butt  of  Sack,  Boys,  which  the  Sailors 
Threw  over -board :  but  are  you  alive,  hoa  !  for  I  will 
Tipple  with  no  Ghosts  till  I’m  dead :  thy  hand,  Mustacho, 

And  thine,  Ventoso ;  the  Storm  has  done  its  worst: 

Stephano  alive  too  !  give  thy  Bosen  thy  hand,  Master. 

Vent.  You  must  kiss  it  then,  for,  I  must  tell  you,  we  have  chosen  him  Duke  in  a 
full  Assembly. 

Trine.  A  Duke  !  where  ?  what’s  he  Duke  of? 

Must.  Of  this  Island,  Man.  Oh  Trincalo,  we  are  all  made,  the  Island’s  empty ; 
all’s  our  own,  Boy,  and  we  will  speak  to  his  Grace  for  thee,  that  thou  may’st  be  as 
great  as  we  are. 

Trine.  You  great?  what  the  Devil  are  you  ? 

Vent.  We  two  are  Vice-Roys  over  all  the  Island;  and  when  we  are  weary  of 
Governing,  thou  shall  succeed  us. 

Trine.  Do  you  hear,  Ventoso,  I  will  succeed  you  in  both  your  places  before  you 
enter  into  ’em. 

Steph.  Trincalo,  sleep  and  be  sober ;  and  make  no  more  uproars  in  my  Country. 
Trine.  Why,  what  are  you,  Sir,  what  are  you  ? 

Steph.  What  I  am,  I  am  by  free  Election,  and  you  Trincalo,  are  not  your  self; 
but  we  pardon  your  first  fault,  because  it  is  the  first  day  of  our  Reign. 

Trine.  Umph,  were  matters  carried  so  swimmingly  against  me,  whilst  I  was 
swimming,  and  saving  my  self  for  the  good  of  the  people  of  this  Island. 

Must.  Art  thou  mad,  Trincalo  ?  wilt  thou  disturb  a  setled  Government,  where 
thou  art  a  meer  stranger  to  the  Laws  of  the  Country? 


404 


APPENDIX 


Trine.  I’ll  Lave  no  Laws. 

Vent.  Then  Civil  War  begins.  [Vent,  and  Must.  draw. 

Steph.  Hold,  hold,  I’ll  have  no  bloudshed, 

My  Subjects  are  but  few :  let  him  make  a  Rebellion 
By  himself;  and  a  Rebel,  I  Duke  Stephano  declare  him: 

Vice-Roys,  come  away. 

Trine.  And  Duke  Trincalo  declares,  that  he  will  make  open  War  where  ever  he 
meets  thee,  or  thy  Vice-Roys.  [Exeunt  Steph.  Must.  Vent. 

Enter  Caliban  with  wood  upon  his  back. 

Trine.  Hah !  who  have  we  here  ? 

Calib.  All  the  infections  that  the  Sun  sucks  up  from  Frogs,  Fens,  Flats,  on  Pros- 
pero  fall  and  make  him  by  inch-meal  a  Disease  :  his  Spirits  hear  me,  and  yet  I  needs 
must  curse,  but  they’l  not  pinch,  fright  me  with  Urchin  shows,  pitch  me  i’  th’  mire, 
nor  lead  me  in  the  dark  out  of  my  way,  unless  he  bid  ’em :  but  for  every  trifle  he  sets 
them  on  me ;  sometimes  like  Baboons  they  mow  and  chatter  at  me,  and  often  bite 
me ;  like  Hedge-hogs  then  they  mount  their  prickles  at  me,  tumbling  before  me  in 
my  barefoot  way.  Sometimes  I  am  all  wound  about  with  Adders,  who  with  their 
cloven  tongues  hiss  me  to  madness.  Hah !  yonder  stands  one  of  his  spirits  sent  to 
torment  me. 

Trine.  What  have  we  here,  a  Man,  or  a  Fish  ? 

This  is  some  Monster  of  the  Isle,  were  I  in  England, 

As  once  I  was,  and  had  him  painted ; 

Not  a  Holy- day  Fool  there  but  would  give  me 
Six  pence  for  the  sight  of  him ;  well,  if  I  could  make 
Him  tame,  he  were  a  present  for  an  Emperour. 

Come  hither  pretty  Monster,  I’ll  do  thee  no  harm. 

Come  hither ! 

Calib.  Torment  me  not ; 

I’ll  bring  the  Wood  home  faster. 

Trine.  He  talks  none  of  the  wisest :  but  I’ll  give  him 
A  dram  o’  th’  Bottle,  that  will  clear  his  understanding. 

Come  on  your  ways,  Master  Monster,  open  your  mouth. 

How  now,  you  perverse  Moon-calf!  what, 

I  think  you  cannot  tell  who  is  your  Friend  ! 

Open  your  chops,  I  say.  [Pours  Wine  down  his  Throat. 

Calib.  This  is  a  brave  God,  and  bears  Coelestial  Liquor; 

I’ll  kneel  to  him. 

Trine.  He  is  a  very  hopeful  Monster ;  Monster,  what  sayst  thou,  are  thou  con¬ 
tent  to  turn  civil  and  sober,  as  I  am  ?  for  then  thou  shalt  be  my  Subject. 

Calib.  I’ll  swear  upon  that  Bottle  to  be  true ;  for  the  liquor  is  not  Earthly :  did’st 
thou  not  drop  from  Heaven  ? 

Trine.  Only  out  of  the  Moon,  I  was  the  Man  in  her  when  time  was.  By  this 
light,  a  very  shallow  Monster. 

Calib.  I’ll  shew  thee  every  fertile  inch  i’  th’  Isle,  and  kiss  thy  foot :  I  prithee  be 
my  God,  and  let  me  drink.  [ drinks  agen. 

Trine.  Well  drawn  Monster,  in  good  faith. 

Calib.  I’ll  shew  thee  the  best  Springs,  I’ll  pluck  thee  Berries, 

I’ll  fish  for  thee,  and  get  thee  wood  enough : 

A  curse  upon  the  Tyrant  whom  I  serve,  I’ll  bear  him 


DRYDEN'S  VERS/OJV 


405 


No  more  sticks,  but  follow  thee. 

Tnnc.  The  poor  Monster  is  loving  in  his  drink. 

Calib.  I  prithee  let  me  bring  thee  where  Crabs  grow 
And  with  my  long  nails  will  dig  thee  Pig-nuts, 

Shew  thee  a  Jays-nest,  and  instruct  thee  how  to  snare 
The  Marmazete;  I’ll  bring  thee  to  cluster’d  Filberds; 

Wilt  thou  go  with  me  ? 

Tnnc.  This  Monster  comes  of  a  good  natur’d  race ; 

Is  there  no  more  of  thy  Kin  in  this  Island  ? 

Calib.  Divine,  here  is  but  one  besides  my  self; 

My  lovely  Sister,  beautiful  and  bright  as  the  Full  Moon. 
Trine.  Where  is  she  ? 

Calib.  I  left  her  clambring  up  a  hollow  Oak, 

And  plucking  thence  the  dropping  Honey-combs. 

Say,  my  King,  shall  I  call  her  to  thee  ? 

Trine.  She  shall  swear  upon  the  Bottle  too. 

If  she  proves  handsome  she  is  mine  :  Here,  Monster, 
Drink  agen  for  thy  good  news ;  thou  shaft  speak 
A  good  word  for  me. 

Calib.  Farewel,  old  Master  farewel,  farewel. 

Sing  No  more  Darns  I'll  make  for fish, 

Nor  fetch  in  firing  at  requiring, 

Nor  scrape  Trencher,  nor  wash  Dish, 

Ban,  Ban,  Cackaliban 

Has  a  new  Master,  get  a  new  Man. 

Heigh-day  !  Freedom,  freedom  ! 

Trine.  Here’s  two  Subjects  got  already,  the  Monster, 
And  his  Sister :  well,  Duke  Stephano,  I  say,  and  say  agen, 
Wars  will  ensue,  and  so  I  drink. 

From  this  Worshipful  Monster,  and  Mistriss 
Monster  his  Sister, 

I’ll  lay  claim  to  this  Island  by  alliance : 

Monster,  I  say  thy  Sister  shall  be  my  Spouse : 

Come  away,  Brother  Monster,  I’ll  lead  thee  to  my  Butt. 
And  drink  her  health. 

Scene  Cypress  Tree  and  Cave. 
Enter  Prospero  alone. 

Prosp.  ’Tis  not  fit  to  let  my  Daughters  know  I  kept 
The  Infant  Duke  of  Mantua  so  near  them  in  this  Isle. 
Whose  Father  dying,  bequeath’d  him  to  my  care : 

Till  my  false  Brother  (when  he  design’d  t’  usurp 
My  Dukedom  from  me)  expos’d  him  to  that  fate 
He  meant  for  me.  By  calculation  of  his  birth 
I  saw  death  threat’ning  him,  if,  till  some  time  were 
Past,  he  should  behold  the  face  of  any  Woman : 

And  now  the  danger’s  nigh  :  Hippolito  ! 

Enter  Hippolito. 

Hip.  Sir,  I  attend  your  pleasure. 

Prosp.  How  I  have  lov’d  thee  from  thy  infancy 


[  Gives  him  the  Bottle. 


[ drinks . 


[Exeunt. 


406 


APPENDIX 


Heav’n  knows,  and  thou  thy  self  canst  bear  me  witness. 
Therefore  accuse  not  me  for  thy  restraint. 

Hip.  Since  I  knew  life,  you’ve  kept  me  in  a  Rock, 

And  you  this  day  have  hurri’d  me  from  thence, 

Only  to  change  my  Prison,  not  to  free  me. 

I  murmur  not,  but  I  may  wonder  at  it. 

Prosp.  O  gentle  Youth,  Fate  waits  for  thee  abroad, 

A  black  Star  threatens  thee,  and  death  unseen 
Stands  ready  to  devour  thee. 

Hip.  You  taught  me  not  to  fear  him  in  any  of  his  shapes  s 
Let  me  meet  death  rather  than  be  a  Prisoner. 

Prosp.  ’Tis  pity  he  should  seize  thy  tender  youth. 

Hip.  Sir,  I  have  often  heard  you  say,  no  Creature  liv’d 
Within  this  Isle,  but  those  which  Man  was  Lord  of  ? 

Why  then  should  I  fear  ? 

Prosp.  But  here  are  creatures  which  I  nam’d  not  to  thee. 
Who  share  Man’s  Sovereignty  by  Nature’s  Laws, 

And  oft  depose  him  from  it. 

Hip.  What  are  those  Creatures,  Sir  ? 

Prosp.  Those  dangerous  Enemies  of  Men  call’d  Women. 
Hip.  Women !  I  never  heard  of  them  before. 

What  are  Women  like  ? 

Prosp.  Imagine  something  between  young  Men  and  Angels  5 
Fatally  beauteous,  and  having  killing  Eyes, 

Their  Voices  charm  beyond  the  Nightingales, 

They  are  all  enchantment,  those  who  once  behold  ’em. 

Are  made  their  slaves  for  ever. 

Hip.  Then  I  will  wink  and  fight  with  ’em. 

Prosp.  ’Tis  but  in  vain, 

They’l  haunt  you  in  your  very  sleep. 

Hip.  Then  I’ll  revenge  it  on  ’em  when  I  wake. 

Prosp.  You  are  without  all  possibility  of  revenge, 

They  are  so  beautiful,  that  you  can  ne’r  attempt, 

Nor  wish  to  hurt  them. 

Hip.  Are  they  so  beautiful  ? 

Prosp.  Calm  sleep  is  not  so  soft,  nor  Winter  Suns, 

Nor  Summer  shades  so  pleasant. 

Hip.  Can  they  be  fairer  than  the  Plumes  of  Swans  ? 

Or  more  delightful  than  the  Peacocks  Feathers  ? 

Or  than  the  gloss  upon  the  necks  of  Doves  ? 

Or  have  more  various  beauty  than  the  Rainbow  ? 

These  I  have  seen,  and  without  danger  wondred  at. 

Prosp.  All  these  are  far  below  ’em  :  Nature  made 
Nothing  but  Woman  dangerous  and  fair : 

Therefore  if  you  should  chance  to  see  ’em, 

Avoid  ’em  streight  I  charge  you. 

Hip.  Well  since  you  say  they  are  so  dangerous. 

I’ll  so  far  shun  ’em  as  I  may  with  safety  of  the 
Unblemish’d  honour  which  you  taught  me. 


DR  Y DEN'S  VERSION 


40  7 


But  let  ’em  not  provoke  me,  for  I’m  sure  I  shall 
Not  then  forbear  them. 

Prosp.  Go  in  and  read  the  Book  I  gave  you  last. 

To  morrow  I  may  bring  you  better  news. 

Hip.  I  shall  obey  you,  Sir.  [Ext/  Ilippolito 

Prosp.  So,  so;  I  hope  this  Lessen  has  secur’d  him, 

For  I  have  been  constrain’d  to  change  his  lodging 
From  yonder  Rock  where  first  I  bred  him  up, 

And  here’  have  brought  him  home  to  my  own  Cell, 

Because  the  shipwrack  happen’d  near  his  Mansion. 

1  hope  he  will  not  stir  beyond  his  limits, 

For  hitherto  he  hath  been  all  obedience  : 

The  Planets  seem  to  smile  on  my  designs, 

And  yet  there  is  one  sullen  Cloud  behind, 

I  would  it  were  disperst.  [Enter  Miranda  and  Donnda. 

Plow  !  my  Daughters  !  I  thought  I  had  instructed 
them  enough  :  Children  !  retire ; 

Why  do  you  walk  this  way  ? 

Mir.  It  is  within  our  bounds,  Sir. 

Prosp.  But  both  take  heed,  that  path  is  very  dangerous. 

Remember  what  I  told  you. 

Dcr.  Is  the  Man  that  way,  Sir  ? 

Prosp.  All  that  you  can  imagine  ill  is  there, 

The  Curled  Lion,  and  the  rugged  Bear, 

Are  not  so  dreadful  as  that  Man. 

Mir.  Oh  me,  why  stay  we  here  then  ? 

Dor.  I’ll  keep  far  enough  from  his  Den,  I  warrant  him. 

Mir.  But  you  have  told  me,  Sir,  you  are  a  Man ; 

And  yet  you  are  not  dreadful. 

Prosp.  I  Child !  but  I  am  a  tame  Man ;  old  Men  are  tame 
By  Nature,  but  all  the  danger  lies  in  a  wild 
Young  Man. 

Dor.  Do  they  run  wild  about  the  Woods  ? 

Prosp.  No,  they  are  wild  within  doors,  in  Chambers, 

And  in  Closets. 

Dor.  But,  Father,  I  would  stroak  ’em,  and  make  ’em  gentle, 

Then  sure  they  would  not  hurt  me. 

Prosp.  You  must  not  trust  them,  Child  : 

Well,  I  must  in;  for  new  affairs  requires  my 

Presence  :  be  you  Miranda ,  your  Sisters  Guardian.  [Exit  Prospero. 

Dor.  Come,  Sister,  shall  we  walk  the  other  way  ? 

The  Man  will  catch  us  else :  we  have  but  two  legs, 

And  he  perhaps  has  four. 

Mir.  Well,  Sister,  though  he  have  ;  yet  look  about  you, 

And  we  shall  spy  him  ere  he  comes  too  near,us. 

Dor.  Come  back,  that  way  is  towards  his  Den. 

Mir.  Let  me  alone ;  I’ll  venture  first,  for  sure  he  can 
Devour  but  one  of  us  at  once. 

Dor.  How  dare  you  venture  ? 


408 


APPENDIX 


Mir.  We’ll  find  him  sitting  like  a  Hare  in’s  Form 
And  he  shall  not  see  us. 

Dor.  I  but  you  know  my  Father  charg'd  us  both. 

Mir.  But  whc  shall  tell  him  on’t  ?  we’l  keep  each 
Others  Counsel. 

Dor.  I  dare  not  for  the  World. 

Mir.  But  how  shall  we  hereafter  shun  him,  if  we  do  not 
Know  him  first  ? 

Dor.  Nay,  I  confess  I  would  fain  see  him  too.  I  find  it  in  my 
Nature,  because  my  Father  has  forbidden  me. 

Mir.  I,  there’s  it,  Sister,  if  he  had  said  nothing,  I  had  been  quiet, 
and  if  you  see  him  first,  be  quick,  and  becken  me  away. 

Dor.  Well,  if  he  does  catch  me,  I’ll  humble  my  self  to  him, 

And  ask  him  pardon,  as  I  do  my  Father, 

When  I  have  done  a  fault. 

The  Scene  continues.  Enter  Hippolito. 

Hip.  Prospero  has  often  said,  that  Nature  makes 
Nothing  in  vain :  why  then  are  Women  made  ? 

Are  they  to  suck  the  poison  of  the  Earth 
As  gaudy  colour’d  Serpents  are  ?  I’ll  ask  that 
Question,  when  next  I  see  him  here. 

Enter  Miranda  and  Dorinda peeping. 

Dor.  O  Sister,  there  it  is,  it  walks  about  like  one  of  us. 

Mir.  I,  just  so,  and  has  Legs  as  we  have  too. 

Hip.  It  strangely  puzzles  me  :  yet  ’tis  most  likely 
Women  are  somewhat  between  Men  and  Spirits. 

Dor.  Heark  !  it  talks,  sure  this  is  not  it  my  Father  meant. 

For  this  is  just  like  one  of  us :  methinks  I  am  not  half 
So  much  afraid  on’t  as  I  was ;  see  now  it  turns  this  way. 

Mir.  Heaven !  what  a  goodly  thing  it  is  ? 

Dor.  I’ll  go  nearer  it. 

Mir.  O  no,  ’tis  dangerous,  Sister !  I’ll  go  to  it. 

I  would  not  for  the  World  that  you  should  venture. 

My  Father  charg’d  me  to  secure  you  from  it. 

Dor.  I  warrant  you  this  is  a  tame  Man,  dear  Sister, 

He’ll  not  hurt  me,  I  see  it  by  his  looks. 

Mir.  Indeed  he  will !  but  go  back,  and  he  shall  eat  me  first  : 

Fie,  are  you  not  asham’d  to  be  so  much  inquisitive  ? 

Dor.  You  chide  me  for’t,  and  wou’d  give  your  self. 

Mir.  Come  back,  or  I  will  tell  my  Father. 

Observe  how  he  begins  to  stare  already. 

I’ll  meet  the  danger  first,  and  then  call  you. 

Dor.  Nay,  Sister,  you  shall  never  vanquish  me  in  kindness. 

I’ll  venture  you  no  more  than  you  will  me. 

Prosp.  -within  Miranda,  Child,  where  are  you  ? 

Mir.  Do  you  not  hear  my  Father  call  ?  go  in. 

Dor.  ’Twas  you  he  nam’d,  not  me ;  I  will  but  saj  ny  Prayers, 

And  follow  you  immediately. 

Mir.  We  1,  Sister,  you’l  repent  it. 


Gj  softlj 


[Exeunt. 


[Exit  Miranda. 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


409 


Dor.  Though  I  die  for’t,  I  must  have  the  other  peep. 

Hip.  seeing  her.  What  thing  is  that?  sure  ’tis  some  Infant  of  the  Sun,  dress'd  in 
his  Fathers  gayest  Beams,  and  comes  to  play  with  Birds :  my  sight  is  dazl’d,  and  yet 
I  find  I’m  loth  to  shut  my  Eyes. 

I  must  go  nearer  it - but  stay  awhile ; 

May  it  not  be  that  beauteous  Murderer,  Woman, 

Which  I  was  charg’d  to  shun  ?  Speak,  what  art  thou  ? 

Thou  shining  Vision  1 

Dor.  ■  Alas,  I  know  not ;  but  I’m  told  I  am  a  Woman ; 

Do  not  hurt  me,  pray,  fair  thing. 

Hip.  I  d  sooner  tear  my  Eyes  out,  than  consent  to  do  you  any  harm ;  though  1 
was  told  a  Woman  was  my  Enemy. 

Dor.  I  never  knew  what  ’twas  to  be  an  Enemy,  nor  can  I  e’r  prove  so  to  that 
which  looks  like  you :  for  though  I  have  been  charg’d  by  him  (whom  yet  I  never 
disobey’d)  to  shun  your  presence,  yet  I’d  rather  die  than  lose  it;  therefore  I  hope 
you  will  not  have  the  heart  to  hurt  me :  though  I  fear  you  are  a  Man,  that  dangerous 
thing,  of  which  I  have  been  warn’d.  Pray  tell  me  what  you  are  ? 

Hip.  I  must  confess,  I  was  inform’d  I  am  a  Man, 

But  if  I  fright  you,  I  shall  wish  I  were  some  other  Creature. 

I  was  bid  to  fear  you  too. 

Dor.  Ay  me  !  Heav’n  grant  we  be  not  poison  to  each  other  ! 

Alas,  can  we  not  meet  but  we  must  die  ? 

Hip.  I  hope  not  so !  for  when  two  prisonous  Creatures, 

Both  of  the  same  kind,  meet,  yet  neither  dies. 

I’ve  seen  two  Serpents  harmless  to  each  other, 

Though  they  have  twin’d  into  a  mutual  knot : 

If  we  have  any  venome  in  us,  sure,  we  cannot  be  more 
Poisonous,  when  we  meet,  than  Serpents  are. 

You  have  a  hand  like  mine,  may  I  not  gently  touch  it  ?  [  Takes  her  hand. 

Dor.  I’ve  touch’d  my  Father’s  and  my  Sister’s  hands, 

And  felt  no  pain ;  but  now,  alas !  there’s  something, 

When  I  touch  yours;  which  makes  me  sigh  :  just  so 
I’ve  seen  two  Turtles  mourning  when  they  met ; 

Yet  mine’s  a  pleasing  grief ;  and  so  me  thought  was  theirs : 

For  still  they  mourn’d :  and  still  they  seem’d  to  murmur  too, 

And  yet  they  often  met. 

Hip.  Oh  Heavens  !  I  have  the  same  sense  too :  your  hand 
Methinks  goes  through  me ;  I  feel  it  at  my  heart, 

And  find  it  pleases,  though  it  pains  me. 

Prosp.  Within.  Dorinda  ! 

Dor.  My  Father  calls  again;  ah,  I  must  leave  you. 

Hip.  Alas,  I’m  subject  to  the  same  command. 

Dor.  This  is  my  first  offence  against  my  Father, 

Which  he,  by  severing  us,  too  cruelly  does  punish. 

Hip.  And  this  is  my  first  trespass  too :  but  he  hath  more 
Offended  truth  than  we  have  him : 

He  said  our  meeting  would  destructive  be, 

But  I  no  death  but  in  our  parting  see. 


[Exeunt  several  ways. 


4io 


APPENDIX 


Scene  III.  A  wild  Island. 

Enter  Alonzo,  Antonio,  Gonzalo. 

Gonz.  ’Beseech  your  Grace  be  merry:  you  have  cause,  so  have  we  all,  of  joy,  for 
our  strange  ’scape  ;  then  wisely,  good  Sir,  weigh  our  sorrow  with  our  comfort. 

Alonz.  Prithee  peace,  you  cram  these  words  into  my  Ears,  against  my  stomach ; 
how  can  I  rejoice,  when  my  dear  Son,  perhaps  this  very  moment,  is  made  a  meal  to 
some  strange  Fish. 

Anto.  Sir,  he  may  live,  I  saw  him  beat  the  Billows  under  him,  and  ride  upon 
their  backs ;  I  do  not  doubt  he  came  alive  to  Land. 

Alon.  No,  no,  he’s  gone ;  and  you  and  I,  Antonio ,  were  those  who  caus’d  his 
death. 

Anto.  How  could  we  help  it  ? 

Alonz.  Then,  then  we  should  have  help’d  it,  when  thou  betrai’dst  thy  Brother 
Prospero,  and  Mantua's  Infant  Sovereign,  to  my  power;  and  when  I,  too  ambitious, 
took  by  force  another’s  right :  Then  lost  we  Ferdinand ;  Then  forfeited  our  Navy  to 
this  Tempest. 

Ant.  Indeed  we  first  broke  Truce  with  Heaven ;  you  to  the  waves  an  Infant 
Prince  expos’d,  and  on  the  waves  have  lost  an  only  Son.  I  did  usurp  my  Brother’s 
fertile  Lands,  and  now  am  cast  upon  this  Desart-Isle. 

Gonz.  These,  Sirs,  ’tis  true  were  crimes  of  a  black  dye ;  but  both  of  you  have 
made  amends  to  Heav’n  by  your  late  Voyage  into  Portugal;  where  in  defence  of 
Christianity,  your  valour  has  repuls’d  the  Moors  of  Spain. 

Alon.  O  name  it  not,  Gonzalo  ; 

No  act  but  penitence  can  expiate  guilt ! 

Must  we  teach  Heav’n  what  price  to  set  on  Murder !  what  rate  on  lawless  Power  and 
wild  Ambition  !  or  dare  we  traffick  with  the  Powers  above,  and  sell  by  weight  a  good 
deed  for  a  bad  ?  [A  flourish  of  Musick. 

Gonz.  Musick!  and  in  the  air;  sure  we  are  Shipwrack’d  on  the  Dominions  of 
some  merry  Devil ! 

Ant.  This  Isle’s  Inchanted  ground;  for  I  have  heard  swift  Voices  flying  by  my 
Ear,  and  groans  of  lamenting  Ghosts. 

Alon.  I  pull’d  a  Tree,  and  bloud  pursu’d  my  hand. 

Heav’n  deliver  me  from  this  dire  place,  and  all  the  after-actions  of  my  life  shall  mark 
my  penitence  and  my  bounty.  [Musick  agen  louder. 

Hark,  the  sounds  approach  us  !  [  The  Stage  opens  in  several  places. 

Ant.  Lo  the  Earth  opens  to  devour  us  quick. 

These  dreadful  horrors,  and  the  guilty  sense  of  my  foul  Treason,  have  unmann'd  me 
quite. 

Alon.  We  on  the  brink  of  swift  destruction  stand ; 

No  means  of  our  escape  is  left.  [ Another  flourish  of  Voices  under  the  Stage. 

Ant.  Ah  !  what  amazing  sounds  are  these  we  hear ! 

Gonz.  What  horrid  Masque  will  the  dire  Fiend  present  ? 

Sung  under  the  Stage. 

1.  Dev.  Where  does  the  black  Fiend  Ambition  reside, 

With  the  mischievous  Devil  of  Pride  ? 

2.  Dev.  In  the  lonest  and  darkest  Caverns  of  Hell 

Both  Pride  and  Ambition  does  dwell. 

I.  Dev.  Who  are  the  chief  Leaders  of  the  damned  Host  ? 

3.  Dev.  Proud  Monarchs ,  who  tyrannize  most. 


DR  YD  EX'S  VERSION 


41  * 

1.  Dev.  Damned  Princes  there 

The  worst  of  torments  bear, 

2.  Dev.  Who  in  Earth  all  other  in  pleasures  excell. 

Must  feel  the  worst  torments  of  Hell.  [  They  rie  singing  this  Chorus 
Ant.  Oh  Heav’ns  !  what  horrid  Vision’s  this  ? 

How  they  upbraid  us  with  our  crimes ! 

A  Ion.  What  fearful  vengeance  is  in  store  for  us ! 

1.  Dev.  Tyrants  by  whom  their  Subjects  bleed, 

Should  in  pains  all  others  exceed ; 

2.  Dev.  And  barb  rous  Monarchs  who  their  Neighbours  invade, 

And  their  Crowns  unjustly  get ; 

And  such  who  their  Brothers  to  death  have  betray’d. 

In  Hell  upon  burning  Thrones  shall  be  set. 

3*  Dev.  1  In  Hell,  in  Hell  with  fames  they  shall  reign, 

Chor.  J  And  for  ever,  for  ever  shall  suffer  the  pain. 

Ant.  Oh  my  Soul ;  for  ever,  for  ever  shall  suffer  the  pain. 

A  Ion.  Has  Heav’n  in  all  its  infinite  stock  of  mercy 
No  overflowings  for  us  ?  poor,  miserable  guilty  Men  ! 

Gonz.  Nothing  but  horrors  do  encompass  us  ! 

For  ever,  for  ever  must  we  suffer ! 

Alon.  For  ever  we  shall  perish  !  O  dismal  words,  for  ever ! 

1.  Dev.  Who  are  the  Pillars  of  the  Tyrants  Court? 

2.  Dev.  Rapine  and  Murder  his  Crown  must  support ! 

3.  Dev.  - His  cruelty  does  tread 

On  Orphans  tender  breasts,  and  Brothers  dead  t 

2.  Dev.  Can  Head n  permit  such  crimes  should  be 

Attended  with  felicity  ? 

3.  Dev.  No,  Tyrants  their  Scepters  uneasily  bear, 

In  the  midst  of  their  Guards  they  their  Consciences  fear. 

2.  Dev.  "t  Care  their  minds  when  they  wake  unquiet  will  keep, 

Chor.  J  And  we  with  dire  visions  disturb  all  their  sleep. 

Ant.  Oh  horrid  sight !  how  they  stare  upon  us  ! 

The  Fiends  will  hurry  us  to  the  dark  Mansion. 

Sweet  Heav’n,  have  mercy  on  us  ! 

1.  Dev.  Say,  Say,  shall  we  bear  these  bold  Mortals  from  hence  ? 

2.  Dev.  No,  no,  let  us  show  their  degrees  of  offence. 

3.  Dev.  Let's  muster  their  crimes  upon  every  side , 

And  first  let ’r  discover  their  pride. 

Enter  Pride. 

Pride.  Lo  here  is  Pna. .  who  first  led  them  astray, 

And  did  to  Ambition  their  minds  then  betray. 

Enter  Fraud. 

Fraud.  And  Fraud  does  next  appear, 

Their  wandring  steps  who  led, 

When  they  from  vertue  fed, 

They  in  my  crooked  paths  their  course  did  steer. 

Enter  Rapine. 

Rapine.  From  Fraud  to  Force  they  soon  arrive , 

Where  Rapine  did  their  actions  drive. 


412 


APPENDIX 


Enter  Murder. 

Murder.  There  long  they  cou/d  not  stay  ; 

Down  tht  steep  Hill  they  run , 

And  to  perfect  the  mischief  which  they  had  begun, 

To  Murder  they  bent  all  their  way. 

Around,  around  we  pace, 

Chorus  About  this  cursed  place  ; 

of  all.  While  thus  we  compass  in 

These  Mortals  and  their  sin  £ Devils  vanish. 

Ant.  Heav’n  has  heard  me,  they  are  vanish’d ! 

Alon.  But  they  have  left  me  all  unmann’d  ? 

I  feel  my  sinews  slacken  with  the  fright ; 

And  a  cold  sweat  trills  down  o’r  all  my  Limbs, 

As  if  I  were  dissolving  into  water. 

Oh  Prospero,  my  crimes  ’gainst  thee  sit  heavy  on  my  heart ! 

Ant.  And  mine  ’gainst  him  and  young  Hippolito. 

Gonz.  Heav’n  have  mercy  on  the  penitent. 

Alon.  Lead  from  this  cursed  ground ; 

The  Seas  in  all  their  rage  are  not  so  dreadful. 

This  is  the  Region  of  despair  and  death. 

Ant.  Shall  we  not  seek  some  Fruit  ? 

Alonz.  Beware  all  fruit,  but  what  the  Birds  have  peck’d. 

The  shadows  of  the  Trees  are  pois’nous  too :  a  secret  venom  slides  from  every 
branch  !  my  Conscience  does  distract  me  !  O  my  Son  !  why  do  I  speak  of  eating  or 
repose,  before  I  know  thy  fortune  ? 

[As  they  are  going  out,  a  Devil  rises  just  before 
them,  at  which  they  start,  and  are  frighted. 
Alonz.  O  Heavens  !  yet  more  Apparitions  ! 

Devi)  *ings.  Arise ,  arise  /  ye  subterranean  winds, 

More  to  disturb  their  guilty  minds. 

And  all  ye  filthy  damps  and  vapours  rise, 

Which  use  t'  infect  the  Earth,  and  trouble  all  the  Skies  ; 

Rise  you,  from  whom  devouring  plagues  have  birth: 

You  that  i’  th'  vast  and  hollow  womb  of  Earth, 

Engender  Earthquakes,  make  whole  Countreys  shake, 

And  stately  Cities  into  Desarts  turn  ; 

And  you  who  feed  the  flames  by  which  Earths  entrails  burn. 

Ye  raging  winds,  whose  rapid  force  can  make 
All  but  the  fix'd  and  solid  Centre  shake  : 

Come  dHve  these  Wretches  to  that  part  o'  th'  Isle, 

Where  Nature  never  yet  did  smile  : 

Cause  Fogs,  and  Storms,  Whirlwinds  and  Earthquakes  there : 

There  let  'em  howl  and  languish  in  despair. 

Rise  and  obey  the  pend rful  Prince  o'  th'  Air. 

Two  Winds  rise,  Ten  more  enter  and  dance. 

\t  the  end  of  the  Dance,  Three  winds  sink,  the  rest  drive  Alon  Ant. 
Gonz.  off. 


Dk  YDEN'S  VERSION 


413 


ACT  III.  Scene  I. 

Scene,  A  wild  Island. 

Enter  Ferdinand,  and  Ariel  and  Milclia  invisible. 

Ariel.  /  '  Ome  unto  these  yellow  sands, 

^ — '  And  then  take  hands, 

Curtsf  d  when  you  have,  and  kiss’d 
The  wild  waves  whist. 

'  Foot  it  featly  here  and  there, 

And  sweet  sprights  the  burthen  bear. 

Hark !  hark ! 

Bow  waugh,  the  Watch-dogs  bark. 

Bow  waugh.  Hark  !  hark  !  I  hear 
The  strain  of  strutting  Chanticleer, 

Cry,  Cock  a  doodle  do. 

Ferd.  Where  should  this  Musick  be  ?  i’  th’  air,  or  earth  ?  it  sounds  no  more,  and 
sure  it  waits  upon  some  God  i’  th’  Island :  sitting  on  a  Bank,  weeping  against  the 
Duke;  my  Father’s  wrack’d;  This  Musick  hover’d  on  the  waters,  allaying  both  their 
fury  and  my  passion  with  charming  Airs.  Thence  I  have  follow’d  it,  (or  it  has  drawn 
me  rather)  but  ’tis  gone ;  No  it  begins  again. 

Milcha  sings. 

Full  fathom  five  thy  Father  lies, 

Of  his  bones  is  Coral  made  : 

Those  are  Pearls  that  were  his  Eyes, 

Nothing  of  him  that  does  fade. 

But  does  suffer  a  Sea-change 

Into  something  rich  and  strange  : 

Sea  Nymphs  hourly  ring  his  knell ; 

Hark  !  now  I  hear  'em,  ding  dong  Bell. 

Ferd.  This  mournful  Ditty  mentions  my  drown’d  Father. 

This  is  no  mortal  business,  nor  a  sound  which  the  Earth  owns _ 

I  hear  it  now  before  me ;  however  I  will  on  and  follow  it. 

[Exit  Ferd.  following  Ariel. 

Scene  II.  The  Cypress-Trees  and  Cave. 

Enter  Prospero  and  Miranda. 

Prosp.  Excuse  it  not,  Miranda,  for  to  you  (the  elder,  and  I  thought  the  more 
discreet)  I  gave  the  conduct  of  your  Sisters  actions. 

Mir.  Sir,  when  you  call’d  me  thence,  I  did  not  fail  to  mind  her  of  her  duty  to 
depart. 

Prosp.  How  can  I  think  you  did  remember  hers,  when  you  forgot  your  own  ? 
did  you  not  see  the  Man  whom  I  commanded  you  to  shun? 

Mir.  I  must  confess  I  saw  him  at  a  distance. 

Prosp.  Did  not  his  Eyes  infect  and  poison  you  ? 

What  alteration  found  you  in  your  self? 

Mir.  I  only  wondred  at  a  sight  so  new. 

Prosp.  But  have  you  no  desire  once  more  to  see  him  ? 

Come,  tell  me  truly  what  you  think  of  him  ? 

Mir.  As  of  the  gayest  thing  I  ever  saw,  so  fine,  that  it  appear’d  more  fit  to  be 


414 


APPENDIX 


belov’d  than  fear’d,  and  seem’d  so  near  my  kind,  that  I  did  think  I  might  have  call’d 
it  Sister. 

Prosp.  You  do  not  love  it  ? 

Mir.  How  is  it  likely  that  I  should,  except  the  thing  had  first  lov’d  me  ? 

Prosp.  Cherish  thi  sc  thoughts  :  you  have  a  gen’rous  Soul ; 

And  since  I  see  your  mind  not  apt  to  take  the  light 
Impressions  of  a  sudden  love,  I  will  unfold 
A  secret  to  your  knowledge. 

That  Creature  which  you  saw,  is  of  a  kind 
Nature  made  a  prop  and  guide  to  yours. 

Mir.  Why  did  you  then  propose  him  as  an  object  of  terrour  to  my  mind  i 
You  never  us’d  to  teach  me  any  thing  but  God-like  truths,  and  what  you  said, 

I  did  believe  as  sacred. 

Prosp.  I  fear’d  the  pleasing  form  of  this  young  Man 
Might  unawares  possess  your  tender  Breast, 

Which  for  a  nobler  Guest  I  had  design’d; 

For  shortly,  my  Miranda ,  you  shall  see  another  of  this  kind, 

The  full-blown  Flower,  of  which  this  Youth  was  but  the 
Op’ning  Bud.  Go  in,  and  send  your  Sister  to  me. 

Mir.  Heav’n  still  preserve  you,  Sir. 

Prosp.  And  make  thee  fortunate.  [ Exit  Miranda. 

Enter  Dorinda. 

O,  Come  hither,  you  have  seen  a  Man  to  day, 

Against  my  strict  command. 

Dor.  Who  I  ?  indeed  I  saw  him  but  a  little,  Sir. 

Prosp.  Come,  come,  be  clear.  Your  Sister  told  me  all. 

Dor.  Did  she?  truly  she  would  have  seen  him  more  than  I, 

But  that  I  would  not  let  her. 

Prosp.  Why  so  ? 

Dor.  Because,  methought,  he  would  have  hurt  me  less 
Than  he  would  her.  But  if  I  knew  you’d  not  be  angry 
With  me,  I  could  tell  you,  Sir,  that  he  was  much  to  blame. 

Prosp.  Hah  !  was  he  to  blame  ? 

Tell  me,  with  that  sincerity  I  taught  you, 

How  you  became  so  bold  to  see  the  Man  ? 

Dor.  I  hope  you  will  forgive  me,  Sir,  because  I  did  not  see  him  much  till  he  saw 
me.  Sir,  he  would  needs  come  in  my  way,  and  star’d,  and  star’d  upon  my  Face ;  and 
so  I  thought  I  would  be  reveng’d  of  him,  and  therefore  I  gaz’d  on  him  as  long;  but 
if  I  e’r  come  near  a  Man  again - 

Prosp.  I  told  you  he  was  dangerous;  but  you  would  not  be  warn’d. 

Dor.  Pray  be  not  angry,  Sir,  I  tell  you,  you  are  mistaken  in  him ;  for  he  did  me 
no  great  hurt. 

Prosp.  But  he  may  do  you  more  harm  hereafter. 

Dor.  No,  Sir,  I’m  as  well  as  e’r  I  was  in  all  my  life, 

But  that  I  cannot  eat  nor  drink  for  thought  of  him. 

That  dangerous  Man  runs  ever  in  my  mind. 

Prosp.  The  way  to  cure  you,  is  no  more  to  see  him. 

Dor.  Nay,  pray,  Sir,  say  not  so ;  I  promis’d  him 
To  see  him  once  agen ;  and  )ou  know,  Sir, 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


415 


You  charg’d  me  I  should  never  break  my  Promise. 

Prosp.  Wou’d  you  see  him  who  did  you  so  much  mischief? 

Dor.  I  warrant  you  I  did  him  as  much  harm  as  he  did  me ; 

For  when  I  left  him,  Sir,  he  sigh’d  so,  as  it  griev’d 
My  heart  to  hear  him. 

Prosp.  Those  sighs  were  pois’nous,  they  infected  you : 

You  say,  they  griev’d  you  to  the  heart. 

Dor.  ’Tis  true  ;  but  yet  his  looks  and  words  were  gentle. 

Prosp.  .These  are  the  Day-dreams  of  a  Maid  in  Love. 

But  still  I  fear  the  worst. 

Dor.  O  fear  not  him,  Sir. 

Prosp.  You  speak  of  him  with  too  much  Passion;  tell  me 
(And  on  your  duty  tell  me  true,  Dorintia) 

What  past  betwixt  you  and  that  horrid  Creature  ? 

Dor.  How,  horrid,  Sir  ?  if  any  else  but  you  should  call  it  so,  indeed  1  should  be 
angry. 

Prosp.  Go  too !  you  are  a  foolish  Girl ;  but  answer  to  what  I  ask,  what  thought 
you  when  you  saw  it  ? 

Dor.  At  first  it  star’d  upon  me,  and  seem’d  wild, 

And  then  I  trembled ;  yet  it  look’d  so  lovely,  that  when 
I  would  have  fled  away,  my  feet  seem’d  fasten’d  to  the  ground, 

Then  it  drew  near,  and  with  amazement  ask’d 
To  touch  my  hand ;  which,  as  a  ransome  for  my  life, 

I  gave :  but  when  he  had  it,  with  a  furious  gripe 
He  put  it  to  his  mouth  so  eagerly,  I  was  afraid  he 
Would  have  swallow’d  it. 

Prosp.  Well,  what  was  his  behaviour  afterwards  ? 

Dor.  He  on  a  sudden  grew  so  tame  and  gentle, 

That  he  became  more  kind  to  me  than  you  are ; 

Then,  Sir,  I  grew  I  know  not  how,  and  touching  his  hand 
Agen,  my  heart  did  beat  so  strong,  as  I  lack’d  breath 
To  answer  what  he  ask’d. 

Prosp.  You  have  been  too  fond,  and  I  should  chide  you  for  it 
Dor.  Then  send  me  to  that  Creature  to  be  punish’d. 

Prosp.  Poor  Child  !  thy  Passion,  like  a  lazy  Ague, 

Has  seiz’d  thy  bloud,  instead  of  striving,  thou  humour’st 
And  feed’st  thy  languishing  disease  :  thou  fight’st 
The  Battels  of  thy  Enemy,  and  ’tis  one  part  of  what 
I  threatn’d  thee,  not  to  perceive  thy  danger. 

Dor.  Danger,  Sir? 

If  he  would  hurt  me,  yet  he  knows  not  how  : 

He  hath  no  Claws,  nor  Teeth,  nor  Horns  to  hurt  me. 

But  looks  about  him  like  a  Callow-bird, 

Just  straggl’d  from  the  Nest:  pray  trust  me,  Sir, 

To  go  to  him  agen. 

Prosp.  Since  you  will  venture, 

I  charge  you  bear  your  self  reserv’dly  to  him. 

Let  him  not  dare  to  touch  your  naked  hand. 

But  keep  at  distance  from  him. 


416 


APPENDIX 


Dor.  This  is  hard. 

Prosp.  It  is  the  way  to  make  him  love  you  more; 

He  will  despise  you  if  you  grow  too  kind. 

Dor.  I’ll  struggle  with  my  heart  to  follow  this, 

But  if  I  lose  him  by  it,  will  you  promise 
To  bring  him  back  agen  ? 

Prosp.  Fear  not,  Dorinda  ; 

But  use  him  ill,  and  he’ll  be  yours  for  ever. 

Dor.  I  hope  you  have  not  couzen’d  me  agen. 

Prosp.  Now  my  designs  are  gathering  to  a  head. 

My  Spirits  are  obedient  to  my  charms. 

What,  Ariel  /  my  Servant  Ariel,  where  art  thou  ? 

Enter  Ariel. 

Ariel.  What  wou’d  my  potent  Master?  Here  I  am. 
Prosp.  Thou  and  thy  meaner  fellows  your  last  service 
Did  worthily  perform,  and  I  must  use  you  in  such  another 
Work  :  how  goes  the  day  ? 

Ariel.  On  the  fourth,  my  Lord;  and  on  the  sixth, 

You  said  our  work  should  cease. 

Prosp.  And  so  it  shall ; 

And  thou  shalt  have  the  open  air  at  freedom. 

Ariel.  Thanks,  my  great  Lord. 

Prosp.  But  tell  me  first,  my  Spirit, 

How  fares  the  Duke,  my  Brother,  and  their  Followers  ? 

Ariel.  Confin’d  together,  as  you  gave  me  order, 

In  the  Lime-grove,  which  weather-fends  your  Cell ; 

Within  that  Circuit  up  and  down  they  wander, 

But  cannot  stir  one  step  beyond  their  compass. 

Prosp.  How  do  they  bear  their  sorrows  ? 

Ariel.  The  two  Dukes  appear  like  men  distracted,  their 
Attendants  brim-full  of  sorrow  mourning  over  ’em; 

But  chiefly,  he  you  term’d  the  good  Gonzalo  : 

His  Tears  run  down  his  Beard,  like  Winter-drops 
From  Eaves  of  Reeds,  your  Vision  did  so  work  ’em, 

That  if  you  now  beheld  ’em,  your  affections 
Would  become  tender. 

Prosp.  Do’st  thou  think  so,  Spirit  ? 

Arill.  Mine  would,  Sir,  were  I  humane. 

Prosp.  And  mine  shall  : 

Hast  thou,  who  art  but  air,  a  touch,  a  feeling  of  their 
Afflictions,  and  shall  not  I  (a  Man  like  them,  one 
Who  as  sharply  relish  passions  as  they)  be  kindlier 
Mov’d  then  thou  art?  though  they  have  pierc’d 
Me  to  the  quick  with  injuries,  yet  with  my  nobler 
Reason  ’gainst  my  fury  I  will  take  part ; 

The  rarer  action  is  in  vertue  than  in  vengeance. 

Go,  my  Ariel,  refresh  with  needful  food  their 
Famish’d  Bodies.  With  shows  and  cheerful 
Musick  comfort  ’em. 


[Exit  Dor 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


41? 


Ariel.  Presently,  Master. 

Prosp.  With  a  twinkle,  Ariel.  But  stay,  my  Spirit ; 

What  is  become  of  my  Slave  Caliban , 

And  Sycorax  his  Sister  ? 

Ariel.  Potent  Sir ! 

They  have  cast  off  your  Service,  and  revolted 
To  the  wrack’d  Mariners,  who  have  already 
Parcell’d  your  Island  into  Governments. 

Prosp.  -No  matter,  I  have  now  no  need  of  ’em. 

But,  Spirit,  now  I  stay  thee  on  the  Wing ; 

Haste  to  perform  what  I  have  given  in  charge : 

But  see  they  keep  within  the  bounds  I  set  ’em. 

Ariel.  I’ll  keep  ’em  in  with  walls  of  Adamant, 

Invisible  as  air  to  mortal  Eyes, 

But  yet  unpassable. 

Prosp.  Make  haste  then.  [Exeunt severally. 

Scene  III.  Wild  Island. 

Enter  Alonzo,  Antonio,  Gonzalo. 

Gonz.  I  am  weary,  and  can  go  no  further,  Sir. 

Alonz.  Old  Lord,  I  cannot  blame  thee,  who  am  n»y  self  seiz’d 
With  a  weariness,  to  the  dulling  of  my  Spirits :  [  They  sit. 

Even  here  I  will  put  off  my  hope  and  keep  it  no  longer 
For  my  Flatterers :  he  is  drown’d  whom  thus  we  stray  to  find. 

I’m  faint  with  hunger,  and  must  despair  of  food.  Musick  without 

What  1  Harmony  agen,  my  good  Friends,  heark ! 

Ant.  I  fear  some  other  horrid  Apparition. 

Cive  us  kind  Keepers,  Heaven,  I  beseech  thee  ! 

Gonz.  ’Tis  cheerful  Musick  this,  unlike  the  first. 

Ariel  and  Milcha  invisible,  sing. 

Dry  those  Eyes  which  are  o' flowing. 

All  your  storms  are  overblowing  : 

While  you  in  this  Isle  are  biding, 

You  shall  Feast  without  providing  • 

Every  dainty  you  can  think  of 
E-dry  Wine  which  you  can  drink  of. 

Shall  be  yours  ;  and  want  shall  shun  you, 

Ceres’  blessing  so  is  one  you. 

Alonz.  This  voice  speaks  comfort  to  us. 

Ant.  Wou’d  ’twere  come;  there  is  no  Musick  in  a  Song 
To  me,  my  stomach  being  empty. 

Gonz.  O  for  a  Heavenly  Vision  of  Boyl’d, 

Bak’d  and  Roasted ! 

[Dance  of  fantastic  k  Spirits  ;  after  the  Dance,  a  Table  furnish'd 
with  Meat  and  Fruit  is  brought  in  by  two  Spirits. 

Ant.  My  Lord,  the  Duke,  see  yonder. 

A  Table,  as  I  live,  set  out  and  furnish’d 
With  all  varieties  of  Meats  and  Fruits. 

Alonz.  ’Tis  so  indeed;  but  who  dares  taste  this  feast 
Which  Fiends  provide  perhaps  to  poison  us  ? 

33 


4i8 


APPENDIX 


Gonz.  Why  that  dare  I ;  if  the  black  Gentleman  be  so  ill-natur’d,  he  may  do  his 
pleasure. 

Ant.  ’Tis  certain  we  must  eat  or  famish ; 

I  will  encounter  it,  and  feed. 

Alonz.  If  both  resolve,  I  will  adventure  too. 

Gonz.  The  Devil  may  fright  me,  yet  he  shall  not  starve  me. 

[  Two  Spirits  descend  and  flie  away  with  the  Table . 

Alonz.  Heav’n  !  behold,  it  is  as  you  suspected  :  ’tis  vanish’d. 

Shall  we  be  always  haunted  with  these  Fiends  ? 

Ant.  Here  we  shall  wander  till  we  famish. 

Gonz.  Certainly  one  of  you  was  so  wicked  as  to  say  Grace :  This  comes  on’t, 
when  Men  will  be  Godly  out  of  season. 

Ant.  Yonder’s  another  Table,  let’s  try  that -  [ Exeunt. 

Enter  Trincalo  and  Caliban. 

Trine.  Brother  Monster,  welcome  to  my  private  Palace. 

But  where’s  thy  Sister,  is  she  so  brave  a  lass  ? 

Calib.  In  all  this  Isle  there  are  but  two  more,  the  Daughters  of  the  Tyrant  Pros- 
pero ;  and  she  is  bigger  than  ’em  both.  O  here  she  comes ;  now  thou  may’st  judge 
thy  self,  my  Lord. 

Enter  Sycorax. 

Trine.  She’s  monstrous  fair  indeed.  Is  this  to  be  my  spouse  ?  well,  she’s  Heir 
of  all  this  Isle  (for  I  will  geld  Monster).  The  Trincalo' s,  like  other  wise  Men,  have 
antiently  us’d  to  marry  for  Estate  more  than  for  Beauty. 

Syc.  I  prethee  let  me  have  the  gay  thing  about  thy  neck,  and  that  which  dangles 
at  thy  wrist.  [Sycorax  points  to  his  Bosens  Whistle  and  his  Bottle. 

Trine.  My  dear  Blobber-lips ;  this,  observe  my  Chuck,  is  a  badge  of  my  Sea- 
office  ;  my  fair  Fuss,  thou  dost  not  know  it. 

Syc.  No,  my  dread  Lord. 

Trine.  It  shall  be  a  Whistle  for  our  first  Babe,  and  when  the  next  Shipwrack 
puts  me  again  to  swimming,  I’ll  dive  to  get  a  Coral  to  it. 

Syc.  I’ll  be  thy  pretty  Child,  and  wear  it  first. 

Trine.  I  prethee,  sweet  Baby,  do  not  Play  the  wanton,  and  cry  for  my  goods  e’r 
I’m  dead.  When  thou  art  my  Widow,  thou  shalt  have  the  Devil  and  all. 

Syc.  May  I  not  have  the  other  fine  thing  ? 

Trine.  This  is  a  Sucking-bottle  for  young  Trincalo. 

Calib.  Shall  she  not  taste  of  that  immortal  Liquor  ? 

Trine.  Umph  !  that’s  another  question :  for  if  she  be  thus  flipant  in  her  Water, 
what  will  she  be  in  her  Wine  ? 

[Enter  Ariel  ( invisible )  and  changes  the  Bottle  which  stands  upon  the  ground. 

Ariel.  There’s  Water  for  your  Wine.  [Exit  Ariel. 

Trine.  Well !  since  it  must  be  so -  [Gives  her  the  Bottle. 

How  do  you  like  it  now,  my  Queen  that  must  be  ?  [She  drinks. 

Syc.  Is  this  your  heavenly  Liquor  ? 

I’ll  bring  you  to  a  River  of  the  same. 

T yinc.  Wilt  thou  so,  Madam  Monster  ?  what  a  mighty  Prince  shall  I  be  then  ? 
I  would  not  change  my  Dukedom  to  be  great  Turk  Trincalo. 

Syc.  This  is  the  drink  of  Frogs. 

Trine.  Nay,  if  the  Frogs  of  this  Island  drink  such,  they  are  the  merriest  Frogs 
in  Christen  Join. 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


419 


Calib.  She  does  not  know  the  vertue  of  this  Liquor : 

I  prethee  let  me  drink  for  her. 

Trine.  Well  said,  Subject  Monster.  [Caliban  drinks. 

Calib.  My  Lord,  this  is  meer  Water. 

T nnc.  ’Tis  thou  hast  chang’d  the  Wine  then,  and  drunk  it  up, 

Like  a  debauch’d  Fish  as  thou  art.  Let  me  see’t. 

I’ll  taste  it  my  self.  Element !  meer  Element !  as  I  live. 

It  was  a  cold  gulp,  such  as  this,  which  kill’d  my  famous 
Predecessor,  old  Simon  the  King. 

CaUb.  How  does  thy  honour?  prethee  be  not  angry,  and  I  will  lick  thy  shoe. 
Trine.  I  could  find  in  my  Heart  to  turn  thee  out  of  my  Dominions  for  a  Liquor¬ 
ish  Monster. 

Calib.  O  my  Lord,  I  have  found  it  out;  this  must  be  done  by  one  of  Prostero's 
Spirits. 

Trine.  There’s  nothing  but  malice  in  these  Devils,  I  would  it  had  been  Holy- 
water  for  their  sakes. 

Syc.  ’Tis  no  matter,  I  will  cleave  to  thee. 

Trine.  Lovingly  said,  in  troth ;  now  cannot  I  hold  out  against  her. 

This  Wife-like  virtue  of  hers  has  overcome  me. 

Syc.  Shall  I  have  thee  in  my  arms  ? 

Trine.  Thou  shalt  have  Duke  Trincalo  in  thy  arms : 

But  prithee  be  not  too  boistrous  with  me  at  first ; 

Do  not  discourage  a  young  beginner.  [  They  embrace. 

Stand  to  your  Arms,  my  Spouse, 

And  subject  Monster ;  [Enter  Steph.  Must.  Vent. 

The  Enemy  is  come  to  surprise  us  in  our  Quarters. 

You  shall  know,  Rebels,  that  I  am  marri’d  to  a  Witch; 

And  we  have  a  thousand  Spirits  of  our  Party. 

Steph.  Hold  !  I  ask  a  Truce ;  I  and  my  Vice-Roys 
(Finding  no  food,  and  but  a  small  remainder  of  Brandy) 

Are  come  to  treat  a  Peace  betwixt  us, 

Which  may  be  for  the  good  of  both  Armies, 

Therefore  Trincalo,  disband. 

Trine.  Plain  Trincalo,  methinks  I  might  have  been  a  Duke  in  your  mouth ; 

I’ll  not  accept  of  your  Embassie  without  my  Title. 

Steph.  A  Title  shall  break  no  squares  betwixt  us : 

Vice-Roys,  give  him  his  style  of  Duke,  and  treat  with  him, 

Whdst  I  walk  by  in  state.  [  Ventoso  and  Mustacho  bow,  whilst  Trincalo  puts  on  his  Cap, 
Must.  Our  Lord  and  Master,  Duke  Stephano,  has  sent  us 
In  the  first  place  to  demand  of  you,  upon  what 
Ground  you  make  War  against  him,  having  no  right 
To  govern  here,  as  being  elected  only  by 
Your  own  Voice. 

Trine.  To  this  I  answer,  that  having  in  the  face  of  the  World 
Espous’d  the  lawful  Inheritrix  of  this  Island, 

Queen  Blouze  the  First,  and  having  homage  done  me. 

By  this  Hectoring  Spark  her  Brother,  from  these  two 
I  claim  a  lawful  Title  to  this  Island. 

Must.  Who  that  Monster  ?  he  a  Hector  ? 


420 


APPENDIX 


Calib.  Lo  !  how  he  mocks  me,  wilt  thou  let  him,  my  Lord  ? 

Trine.  Vice-Roys  !  keep  good  tongues  in  your  heads, 

I  advise  you,  and  proceed  to  your  business. 

Must.  First  and  foremost,  as  to  your  claim  that  you  have  answer’d. 

Vent.  But  second  and  foremost,  we  demand  of  you, 

That  if  we  make  a  Peace,  the  Butt  also  may  be 
Comprehended  in  the  Treaty. 

Trine.  I  cannot  treat  with  my  honour  without  your  submission. 

Steph.  I  understand,  being  present,  from  my  Embassadors,  what  your  resolution 
is,  and  ask  an  hour’s  time  of  deliberation,  and  so  I  take  our  leave ;  but  first  I  desire 
to  be  entertain’d  at  your  Butt,  as  becomes  a  Prince  and  his  Embassadors. 

Trine.  That  I  refuse,  till  acts  of  hostility  be  ceas’d 
These  Rogues  are  rather  Spies  than  Embassadors ; 

I  must  take  heed  of  my  Butt.  They  come  to  pry 
Into  the  secrets  of  my  Dukedom. 

Vent.  Trincalo,  you  are  a  barbarous  Prince,  and  so  farewel. 

[Exeunt  Steph.  Must.  Vent. 

Trine.  Subject  Monster !  stand  you  Centry  before  my  Cellar ;  my  Queen  and  1 
will  enter,  and  feast  our  selves  within.  [ Exeunt . 

Enter  Ferdinand,  Ariel  and  Milcha  ( invisible ). 

Ferd.  How  far  will  this  invisible  Musician  conduct 
My  steps  ?  he  hovers  still  about  me,  whether 
For  good  or  ill,  I  cannot  tell,  nor  care  I  much  ; 

For  I  have  been  so  long  a  slave  to  chance,  that 
I’m  as  weary  of  her  flatteries  as  her  frowns. 

But  here  I  am - 

Ariel.  Here  I  am. 

Ferd.  Hah  !  art  thou  so  ?  the  Spirit’s  turn’d  an  Echo : 

This  might  seem  pleasant,  could  the  burthen  of  my 
Griefs  accord  with  any  thing  but  sighs, 

And  my  last  words,  like  those  of  dying  men, 

Need  no  reply.  Fain  I  would  go  to  shades,  where 
Few  would  wish  to  follow  me. 

Ariel.  Follow  me. 

Ferd.  This  evil  Spirit  grows  importunate, 

But  I’ll  not  take  his  counsel. 

Ariel.  Take  his  counsel. 

Ferd.  It  may  be  the  Devil’s  counsel,  I’ll  never  take  it 

Ariel.  Take  it. 

Ferd.  I  will  discourse  no  more  with  thee, 

Nor  follow  one  step  further. 

Ariel.  One  step  further. 

Ferd.  This  must  have  more  importance  than  an  Echo. 

Some  Spirit  tempts  to  a  precipice. 

I’ll  try  if  it  will  answer  when  I  sing 
My  sorrows  V  the  murmur  of  this  Brook. 

He  sings. 

Go  thy  way. 

Ariel  Go  thy  way. 


DR  V DEN'S  VERSION 


421 


Ferd. 

Ariel. 

Ferd. 


Ariel. 

Ferd. 


Why  shouldst  thou  stay  ? 

Why  should  thou  stay  ? 

Where  the  winds  whistle,  and  where  the  streams  creep. 
Under  yond  Willow-tree,  fain  would  I  sleep. 

Then  let  me  alone, 

For  ’tis  time  to  be  gone. 

For  ’tis  time  to  be  gone. 

What  cares  or  pleasures  can  be  in  this  Isle  ? 


Within  this  desart place 
There  lives  no  humane  race  ; 
Fate  cannot  frown  here,  nor  kind  fortune  smile. 
Ariel.  Kind  Fortune  smiles,  and  she 
Has  yet  in  store  for  thee 
Some  strange  felicity. 

Follow  me,  follow  me, 

And  thou  shall  see. 

Ferd.  I’ll  take  thy  word  for  once ; 

Lead  on  Musician. 


[Exeunt  and  return. 


Scene  IV.  The  Cypress-Trees  and  Caves. 

Scene  changes,  and  discovers  Prospero  and  Miranda. 

Prosp.  Advance  the  fringed  Curtains  of  thine  Eyes,  and  say  what  thou  seest 

yODd<*r 


Mir.  Is  it  a  Spirit  ? 


Lord !  how  it  looks  about !  Sir,  I  confess  it  carries  a  brave  form. 

But  ’tis  a  Spirit. 

Prosp.  No  Girl,  it  eats,  and  sleeps,  and  has  such  senses  as  we  have.  This  young 
Gallant,  whom  thou  seest,  was  in  the  wrack;  were  he  not  somewhat  stain’d  with 
gnef  (Beauty’s  worst  canker)  thou  might’st  call  him  a  goodly  Person;  he  has  lost  his 
Company,  and  strays  about  to  find  ’em. 

Mir.  I  might  call  him  a  thing  Divine,  for  nothing  natural  I  ever  saw  so 
noble. 

Prosp.  It  goes  on  as  my  Soul  prompts  it;  Spirit,  fine  Spirit.  I’ll  free  thee  within 
two  days  for  this. 

Ferd.  She’s  sure  the  Mistriss  on  whom  these  Airs  attend.  Fair  Excellence  if 
as  your  form  declares,  you  are  Divine,  be  pleas’d  to  instruct  me  how  you  will  be  wor- 
ship’d ;  so  bright  a  beauty  cannot  sure  belong  to  humane  kind. 

Mir.  I  am,  like  you,  a  Mortal,  if  such  you  are. 

Ferd.  My  language  too!  O  Heav’ns !  I  am  the  best  of  them  who  speak  the 
speech  when  I’m  in  my  own  Country. 

Prosp.  How,  the  best  ?  What  wert  thou  if  the  Duke  of  Savoy  heard  thee  ? 

Ferd.  As  I  am  now,  who  wonders  to  hear  thee  speak  of  Savoy :  he  does  hear 
me  and  that  he  does  I  weep,  my  self  am  Savoy,  whose  fatal  Eyes  (e’r  since  at  ebb) 
beheld  the  Duke  my  Father  wrack’d. 

Mir.  Alack !  for  pity. 


Prosp.  At  the  first  sight  they  have  chang’d  Eyes,  dear  Arid 

1 11  set  thee  free  for  this - young  Sir,  a  word. 

With  hazard  of  your  self  you  do  me  wrong. 

Mir.  Why  speaks  my  Father  so  urgently  ? 


422 


APPENDIX 


This  is  the  third  Man  that  e’r  I  saw,  the  first  whom 
E’r  I  sigh’d  for,  sweet  Heaven  move  my  Father 
To  be  inclin’d  my  way. 

Ferd.  O !  if  a  Virgin !  and  your  affections  not  gone  forth, 

I’ll  make  you  Mistriss  of  Savoy. 

Prosp.  Soft,  Sir !  one  word  more. 

They  are  in  each  others  power,  but  this  swift 
Bus’ness  I  must  uneasie  make,  lest  too  light 

Winning  make  the  prize  light - one  word  more. 

Thou  usurp’st  the  name  not  due  to  thee,  and  hast 
Put  thy  self  upon  this  Island  as  a  Spy  to  get  the 
Government  from  me  the  Lord  of  it. 

Ferd.  No,  as  I’m  a  Man. 

Mir.  There’s  nothing  ill  can  dwell  in  such  a  Temple 
If  th’  evil  Spirit  hath  so  fair  a  House, 

Good  things  will  strive  to  dwell  with  it. 

Prosp.  No  more,  Speak  not  for  him,  he’s  a  Traytor. 

Come  !  thou  art  my  Pris’ner,  and  shalt  be  in 
Bonds.  Sea-water  shalt  thou  drink,  thy  food 
Shall  be  the  fresh-Brook  Muscles,  wither’d  Roots, 

And  Husks,  wherein  the  Acorn  crawl’d;  follow. 

Ferd.  No,  I  will  resist  such  entertainment, 

Till  my  Enemy  has  more  power.  [ He  draws,  and  is  charm'd  from  moving 

Mir.  O  dear  Father  !  make  not  too  rash  a  trial 
Of  him,  for  he’s  gentle,  and  not  fearful. 

Prosp.  My  Child,  my  Tutor !  put  thy  Sword  up,  Traytor. 

Who  mak’st  a  show,  but  dar’st  not  strike :  thy 
Conscience  is  possess’d  with  guilt.  Come  from 
Thy  Ward,  for  I  can  here  disarm  thee  with 
This  Wand,  and  make  thy  Weapon  drop. 

Mir.  ’Beseech  you  Father. 

Prosp.  Hence  :  hang  not  on  my  Garment. 

Mir.  Sir,  have  pity, 

'I’ll  be  his  Surety. 

Prosp.  Silence  !  one  word  more  shall  make  me  chide  thee 
If  not  hate  thee  :  what,  an  Advocate  for  an 
Impostor  ?  sure  thou  think’st  there  are  no  more 
Such  shapes  as  his  ? 

To  the  most  of  Men  this  is  a  Caliban, 

And  they  to  him  are  Angels. 

Mir.  My  affections  are  then  most  humble, 

I  have  no  ambition  to  see  a  goodlier  Man. 

Prosp.  Come  on,  obey  : 

Thy  Nerves  are  in  their  infancy  again,  and  have 
No  vigour  in  them. 

Ferd.  So  they  are  : 

My  Spirits,  as  in  a  Dream,  and  all  bound  up : 

My  Father’s  loss,  the  weakness  which  I  feel, 

The  wrack  of  all  my  Friends,  and  this  Man’s  threats, 


ER  VEEN'S  VERSION 


423 


To  whom  I  am  subdu’d,  would  seem  light  to  me, 

Might  1  but  once  a  day  through  my  Prison  behold  this  Maid : 

All  corners  else  o’  th’  Earth  let  liberty  make  use  of : 

I  have  space  enough  in  such  a  Prison. 

Prosp.  It  works :  come  on : 

Thou  hast  done  well,  fine  Ariel :  follow  me. 

Heark  what  thou  shalt  more  do  for  me.  [  Whispers  Ariel. 

Mir.  Be  of  comfort ! 

My  Father’s  of  a  better  nature,  Sir, 

Than  he  appears  by  Speech :  this  is  unwonted 
Which  now  came  from  him. 

Thou  shalt  be  as  free  as  Mountain  Winds  : 

But  then  exactly  do  all  points  of  my  Command. 

Ariel.  To  a  syllable.  [Exit  Ariel. 

Prosp.  to  Mir.  Go  in  that  way,  speak  not  a  word  for  him : 

I’ll  separate  you.  [ Exit  Miranda. 

Ferd.  As  soon  thou  may’st  divide  the  Waters, 

When  thou  strik’st  ’em,  which  pursue  thy  bootless  blow, 

And  meet  when  ’tis  past. 

Prosp.  Go  practise  your  Philosophy  within, 

And  if  you  are  the  same  you  speak  your  self, 

Bear  your  afflictions  like  a  Prince - That  door  . 

Shews  you  your  Lodging. 

Ferd.  ’Tis  in  vain  to  strive,  I  must  obey.  [ Exit  Ferd. 

Prosp.  This  goes  as  would  wish  it. 

Now  for  my  second  care  Hippolito. 

I  shall  not  need  to  chide  him  for  his  fault, 

His  Passion  is  become  his  punishment. 

Come  forth,  Hippolito. 

Hip.  Entring.  ’Tis  Prosperous  Voice. 

Prosp.  Hippolito l  I  know  you  now  expect  I  should  severely  chide  you:  you 
have  seen  a  Woman  in  contempt  of  my  commands. 

Hip.  But,  Sir,  you  see  I  am  come  off  unharm’d; 

I  told  you,  that  you  need  not  doubt  my  Courage. 

Prosp.  You  think  you  have  receiv’d  no  hurt? 

Hip.  No,  none,  Sir. 

Try  me  agen,  when  e’r  you  please  I’m  ready: 

I  think  I  cannot  fear  an  Army  of  ’em. 

Prosp.  How  much  in  vain  it  is  to  bridle  Nature  !  [ Aside 

Well !  what  was  the  success  of  your  encounter  ? 

Hip.  Sir,  we  had  none,  we  yielded  both  at  first, 

For  I  took  her  to  mercy,  and  she  me. 

Prosp.  But  are  you  not  much  chang’d  from  what  you  were  ? 

Hip.  Methinks  I  wish  and  wish !  for  what  I  know  not, 

But  still  I  wish - yet  if  I  had  that  Woman 

She,  I  believe,  could  tell  me  what  I  wish  for. 

Prosp.  What  wou’d  you  do  to  make  that  Woman  yours  ? 

Hip.  I’d  quit  the  rest  o’  th’  World  that  I  might  live  alone  with 


424 


APPENDIX 


Her,  she  never  should  be  from  me  : 

We  two  would  sit  and  look  till  our  Eyes  ak’d. 

Prosp.  You’d  soon  be  weary  of  her. 

Hip.  O,  Sir,  never. 

Prosp.  But  you’ll  grow  old  and  wrinkl’d,  as  you  see  me  now, 

And  then  you  will  not  care  for  her. 

Hip.  You  may  do  what  you  please,  but,  Sir,  we  two  can  never  possibly  grow  old 
Prosp.  You  must,  Hippolito. 

Hip.  Whether  we  will  or  no,  Sir,  who  shall  make  us  ? 

Prosp.  Nature,  which  made  me  so. 

Hip.  But  you  have  told  me  her  works  are  various ; 

She  made  you  old,  but  she  has  made  us  young. 

Prosp.  Time  will  convince  you. 

Mean  while  be  sure  you  tread  in  honours  paths, 

That  you  may  merit  her :  And  that  you  may  not  want 
Fit  occasions  to  employ  your  virtue,  in  this  next 
Cave  there  is  a  stranger  lodg’d,  one  of  your  kind, 

Young,  of  a  noble  presence,  and,  as  he  says  himself, 

Of  Princely  birth ;  he  is  my  Pris’ner,  and  in  deep 
Affliction  :  visit,  and  comfort  him ;  it  will  become  you. 

Hip.  It  is  my  duty,  Sir.  \_Exit  Hippolito. 

Prosp.  True,  he  has  seen  a  Woman,  yet  he  lives ;  perhaps  I  took  the  moment  of 
his  birth  amiss,  perhaps  my  Art  it  self  is  false :  on  what  strange  ground  we  build  out 
hopes  and  fears,  Man’s  Life  is  all  a  mist,  and  in  the  dark  our  Fortunes  meet  us. 

If  fate  be  not,  then  what  can  we  foresee  ? 

Or  how  can  we  avoid  it,  if  it  be  ? 

If  by  free-will  in  our  own  paths  we  move, 

How  are  we  bounded  by  Decrees  above  ? 

Whether  we  drive,  or  whether  we  are  driven, 

If  ill,  ’tis  ours ;  if  good,  the  act  of  Heaven.  [Exit  Prospero. 

Scene ,  a  Cave. 

Enter  Hippolito  and  Ferdinand 
Ferd.  Your  pity,  noble  youth  doth  much  oblige  me, 

Indeed  ’twas  sad  to  lose  a  Father  so. 

Hip.  I,  and  an  onely  Father  too,  for  sure  you : 

You  had  but  one. 

Ferd.  But  one  Father,  he’s  wondrous  simple  !  [Aside. 

Hip.  Are  such  misfortunes  frequent  in  your  World, 

Where  many  men  live. 

Ferd.  Such  are  we  bom  to. 

But,  gentle  Youth,  as  you  have  question’d  me, 

So  give  me  leave  to  ask  you,  what  you  are  ? 

Hip.  Do  not  you  know  ? 

Ferd.  How  should  I  ? 

Hip.  I  well  hop’d  I  was  a  Man,  but  by  your  ignorance 
Of  what  I  am,  I  fear  it  is  not  so  : 

Well,  Prospero  !  this  is  now  the  second  time 
You  have  deceiv’d  me. 

Ferd.  Sir,  there  is  no  doubt  you  are  a  Man  : 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


425 


But  I  would  know  of  whence  ? 

Hip.  Why,  of  this  World,  I  never  was  in  yours. 

Ferd.  Have  you  a  Father? 

Hip.  I  was  told  I  had  one,  and  that  he  was  a  Man,  yet  I  have  been  so  much 
deceived,  I  dare  not  tell’t  you  for  a  truth ;  but  I  have  still  been  kept  a  Prisoner  for 
fear  of  Women. 

Ferd.  They  indeed  are  dangerous,  for  since  I  came,  I  have  beheld  one  here, 
whose  Beauty  pierc’d  my  heart. 

Hip.  How  did  she  pierce,  you  seem  not  hurt. 

Ferd.  Alas !  the  wound  was  made  by  her  bright  Eyes, 

And  festers  by  her  absence. 

But,  to  speak  plainer  to  you,  Sir,  I  love  her. 

Hip.  Now  I  suspect  that  love’s  the  very  thing,  that  I  feel  too !  pray  tell  me  truly 
Sir,  are  you  not  grown  unquiet  since  you  saw  her  ? 

Ferd.  I  take  no  rest. 

Hip.  Just,  just  my  disease. 

Do  you  not  wish  you  do  not  know  for  what  ? 

Ferd.  O  no  !  I  know  too  well  for  what  I  wish. 

Hip.  There,  I  confess,  I  differ  from  you,  Sir : 

But  you  desire  she  may  be  always  with  you  ? 

Ferd.  I  can  have  no  felicity  without  her. 

Hip.  Just  my  condition  !  alas,  gentle  Sir, 

I’ll  pity  you,  and  you  shall  pity  me. 

Ferd.  I  love  so  much,  that  if  I  have  her  not, 

I  find  I  cannot  live. 

Hip.  How  !  do  you  love  her  ? 

And  would  you  have  her  too  ?  that  must  not  be  : 

For  none  but  I  must  have  her. 

Ferd.  But  perhaps  we  do  not  love  the  same  : 

All  Beauties  are  not  pleasing  alike  to  all. 

Hip.  Why  are  there  more  fair  Women,  Sir, 

Besides  that  one  I  love  ? 

Ferd.  That’s  a  strange  question.  There  are  many  more  besides  that  Beauty 
which  you  love. 

Hip.  I  will  have  all  of  that  kind,  if  there  be  a  hundred  of  ’em. 

Ferd.  But,  noble  Youth,  you  know  not  what  you  say. 

Hip.  Sir,  they  are  things  I  love,  I  cannot  be  without  ’em : 

O,  how  I  rejoyce !  more  Women ! 

Ferd.  Sir,  if  you  love,  you  must  be  ty’d  to  one. 

Hip.  Ty’d  !  how  ty’d  to  her? 

Ferd.  To  love  none  but  her. 

Hip.  But,  Sir,  I  find  it  is  against  my  nature. 

I  must  love  where  I  like,  and  I  believe  I  may  like  all 
All  that  are  fair :  come  !  bring  me  to  this  Woman, 

For  I  must  have  her. 

Ferd.  His  simplicity  [Aside. 

Is  such  that  I  can  scarce  be  angry  with  him. 

Perhaps,  sweet  Youth,  when  you  behold  her, 

V  m  will  find  you  do  not  love  her. 


426 


APPENDIX 


Hip.  I  find  already  I  love  because  she  is  another  Woman. 

Ferd.  You  cannot  love  two  Women  both  at  once. 

Hip.  Sure  ’tis  my  duty  to  love  all  who  do  resemble 
Her  whom  I’ve  already  seen.  I’ll  have  as  many  as  I  can, 

That  are  so  good,  and  Angel  like,  as  she  I  love ; 

And  will  have  yours. 

Ferd.  Pretty  Youth,  you  cannot. 

Hip.  I  can  do  any  thing  for  that  I  love. 

Ferd.  I  may,  perhaps,  by  force,  restrain  you  from  it. 

Hip.  Why  do  so  if  you  can.  But  either  promise  me 
To  love  no  Woman,  or  you  must  try  your  force. 

Ferd.  I  cannot  help  it,  I  must  love. 

Hip.  Well  you  may  love,  for  Prospero  taught  me  Friendship  too :  you  shall  love 
me  and  other  Men  if  you  can  find  ’em,  but  all  the  Angel-women  shall  be  mine. 

Ferd.  I  must  break  off  this  Conference,  or  he  will 
Urge  me  else  beyond  what  I  can  bear. 

Sweet  Youth !  some  other  time  we  will  speak 
Farther  concerning  both  our  loves ;  at  present 
I  am  indispos’d  with  weariness  and  grief, 

And  would,  if  you  are  pleas’d,  retire  a  while. 

Hip.  Some  other  time  be  it  ?  but,  Sir,  remember 
That  I  both  seek  and  much  intreat  your  Friendship, 

For  next  to  Women,  I  find  I  can  love  you. 

Ferd.  I  thank  you,  Sir,  I  will  consider  of  it.  [Exit  Ferdinand. 

Hip.  This  stranger  does  insult,  and  comes  into  my 
World  to  take  those  heavenly  beauties  from  me, 

Which  I  believe  I  am  inspir’d  to  love, 

And  yet  he  said  he  did  desire  but  one. 

He  would  be  poor  in  love,  but  I’ll  be  rich : 

I  now  perceive  that  Prospero  was  cunning ; 

For  when  he  frighted  me  from  Woman-kind, 

Those  precious  things  he  for  himself  design’d.  [Exit. 


ACT  IV.  Scene  I. 

Cypress-  Trees  and  Cave. 

Enter  Prospero  and  Miranda. 

Prosp.  \Z  Our  suit  has  pity  in’t,  and  has  prevail’d. 

-*-  Within  this  Cave  he  lies,  and  you  may  see  him : 

But  yet  take  heed ;  let  Prudence  be  your  Guide ; 

You  must  not  stay,  your  visit  must  be  short.  [She’s  going. 

One  thing  I  had  forgot ;  insinuate  into  his  mind, 

A  kindness  to  that  Youth,  whom  first  you  saw 
I  would  have  Friendship  grow  betwixt  ’em. 

Mir.  You  shall  be  obey’d  in  all  things. 

Prosp.  Be  earnest  to  unite  their  very  Souls. 

Mir.  I  shall  endeavour  it. 

Prosp.  This  may  secure  Hippolito  from  that  dark  danger  which  my  Art  fore¬ 
bodes  ;  for  Friendship  does  provide  a  double  strength  t’  oppose  the  assaults  of  For 
tune-  f  Exit  Prospero. 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


42; 


Enter  Ferdinand. 

Ferd.  To  be  Piis’ner  where  I  dearly  love,  is  but  a  double  tye,  a  Link  of  Fortune 
join’d  to  the  Chain  of  Love ;  but  not  to  see  her,  and  yet  to  be  so  near  her,  there’s  the 
hardship :  I  feel  my  self  as  on  a  Rack,  stretch’d  out,  and  nigh  the  ground,  on  which 
I  might  have  ease,  yet  cannot  reach  it. 

Mir.  Sir !  my  Lord  !  where  are  you  ? 

Ferd.  Is  it  your  Voice,  my  Love  ?  or  do  I  dream  ? 

Mir.  Speak  softly,  it  is  I. 

Ferd.  ■  O  Heavenly  Creature !  ten  times  more  gentle  than  your  Father’s  Cruel, 
how,  on  a  sudden,  all  my  griefs  are  vanish’d ! 

Mir.  How  do  you  bear  your  Prison  ? 

Ferd.  ’Tis  my  Palace  while  you  are  here,  and  love  and  silence  wait  upon  out 
wishes;  do  but  think  we  chuse  it,  and  ’tis  what  we  would  chuse. 

Mir.  I’m  sure  what  I  would. 

But  how  can  I  be  certain  that  you  love  me  ? 

Look  to’t ;  for  I  will  die  when  you  are  false. 

I’ve  heard  my  Father  tell  of  Maids,  who  dy’d 
And  haunted  their  false  Lovers  with  their  Ghosts. 

Ferd.  Your  Ghosts  must  take  another  form  to  fright  me, 

This  shape  will  be  too  pleasing :  do  I  love  you  ? 

O  Heaven  !  O  Earth  !  bear  witness  to  this  sound, 

If  I  prove  false - 

Mir.  Oh  hold,  you  shall  not  swear ; 

For  Heav’n  will  hate  you  if  you  prove  forsworn. 

Ferd.  Did  I  not  love,  I  could  no  more  endure  this  undeserv’d  Captivity,  than  1 
could  wish  to  gain  my  freedom  with  the  loss  of  you. 

Mir.  I  am  a  Fool  to  weep  at  what  I’m  glad  of :  but  I  have  a  suit  to  you,  and 
that,  Sir,  shall  be  now  the  only  trial  of  your  love. 

Ferd.  Y’ave  said  enough,  never  to  be  deny’d,  were  it  my  life;  for  you  have  far 
o’rbid  the  price  of  all  that  humane  life  is  worth. 

Mir.  Sir,  ’tis  to  love  one  for  my  sake,  who  for  his  own  deserves  all  the  respect 
which  you  can  ever  pay  him. 

Ferd.  You  mean  your  Father:  do  not  think  his  usage  can  make  me  hate  him, 
when  he  gave  you  being,  he  then  did  that  which  cancell’d  all  these  wrongs. 

Mir.  I  meant  not  him,  for  that  was  a  request,  which  if  you  love,  I  should  not 
need  to  urge. 

Ferd.  Is  there  another  whom  I  ought  to  love  ? 

And  love  him  for  your  sake  ? 

Mir.  Yes  such  a  one,  who,  for  his  sweetness  and  his  goodly  shape  (if  I,  who  am 
unskill’d  in  forms,  may  judge),  I  think  can  scarce  be  equall’d : 

’Tis  a  Youth,  a  Stranger  too  as  you  are. 

Ferd.  Of  such  a  graceful  feature,  and  must  I  for  your  sake  love  ? 

Mir.  Yes,  Sir,  do  you  scruple  to  grant  the  first  request  I  ever  made?  he’s  wholly 
unacquainted  with  the  World,  and  wants  your  Conversation.  You  should  have  com¬ 
passion  on  so  meer  a  stranger. 

Ferd.  Those  need  compassion  whom  you  discommend,  not  whom  you  praise. 

Mir.  Come  you  must  love  him  for  my  sake  :  you  shall. 

Ferd.  Must  I  for  yours,  and  cannot  for  my  own  ? 

Either  you  do  not  love,  or  think  that  I  do  not : 


428 


APPENDIX 


But  when  you  bid  me  love  him,  I  must  hate  him. 

Mir.  Have  I  so  far  offended  you  already, 

That  he  offends  you  only  for  my  sake  ? 

Yet  sure  you  would  not  hate  him,  if  you  saw 
Him  as  I  have  done,  so  full  of  youth  and  beauty. 

Ferd.  O  poison  to  my  hopes !  [ Aside 

When  he  did  visit  me,  and  I  did  mention  this 
Beauteous  Creature  to  him,  he  did  then  tell  me 
He  would  have  her. 

Mir.  Alas  what  mean  you  ? 

Ferd.  It  is  too  plain:  like  most  of  her  frail  Sex,  she's  false. 

But  has  not  leam’d  the  art  to  hide  it; 

Nature  has  done  her  part,  she  loves  variety : 

Why  did  I  think  that  any  Woman  could  be  innocent, 

Because  she’s  young  ?  No,  no,  their  Nurses  teach  them 
Change,  when  with  two  Nipples  they  divide  their 
Liking. 

Mir.  I  fear  I  have  offended  you,  and  yet  I  meant  no  harm : 

But  if  you  please  to  hear  me -  [A  noise  within. 

Heark,  Sir !  now  I  am  sure  my  Father’s  comes,  I  know 
His  steps ;  dear  Love,  retire  a  while,  I  fear 
I’ve  staid  too  long. 

Ferd.  Too  long  indeed,  and  yet  not  long  enough  :  Oh  Jealousie  ! 

Oh  Love  !  how  you  distract  me  ?  [Exit  Ferdinand. 

Mir.  He  appears  displeas’d  with  that  young  man,  I  know 
Not  why :  but,  till  I  find  from  whence  his  hate  proceeds, 

I  must  conceal  it  from  my  Father’s  knowledge, 

For  he  will  think  that  guiltless  I  have  caus’d  it; 

And  suffer  me  no  more  to  see  my  Love.  [Enter  Prospero. 

Prosp.  Now  I  have  been  indulgent  to  your  wish, 

You  have  seen  the  Prisoner. 

Mir.  Yes. 

Prosp.  And  he  spake  to  you  ? 

Mir.  He  spoke;  but  he  receiv’d  short  answers  from  me. 

Prosp.  How  like  you  his  converse  ? 

Mir.  At  second  sight 
A  Man  does  not  appear  so  rare  a  Creature. 

Prosp.  Aside.  I  find  she  loves  him  much  because  she  hides  it. 

Ix)ve  teaches  cunning  even  to  innocence.  Well  go  in. 

Mir.  Aside.  Forgive  me,  truth,  for  thus  disguising  thee ;  if  I  can  make  him  think 
T  do  not  Love  the  stranger  much,  he’l  let  me  see  him  oftner.  [Exit  Miranda. 

Prosp.  Stay !  stay - 1  had  forgot  to  ask  her  what  she  had  said 

Of  young  Hippolito  !  Oh  !  here  he  comes  !  and  with  him 

My  Dorinda.  I’ll  not  be  seen,  let  [Enter  Hippolito  and  Dorinda. 

Their  loves  grow  in  secret.  [, Exit  Prospero. 

Hip.  But  why  are  you  so  sad  ? 

Dor.  But  why  are  you  so  joyful  ? 

Hip.  I  have  within  me  all  the  various  Musick  of 
The  W  oods.  Since  last  I  saw  y  3u,  I  have  heard  brave  news ! 


DR  YDEN'S  VERS/ON 


429 


I’ll  tell  you,  and  make  you  joyful  for  me. 

Dor.  Sir,  when  I  saw  you  first,  I,  through  my  Eyes,  drew 
Something  in,  I  know  not  what  it  is ; 

But  still  it  entertains  me  with  such  thoughts, 

As  makes  me  doubtful  whether  joy  becomes  me. 

Hip.  Pray  believe  me ; 

As  I’m  a  Man,  I’ll  tell  you  blessed  news, 

I  have  heard  there  are  more  Women  in  the  World, 

As  fair  as -you  too. 

Dor.  Is  this  your  news  ?  you  see  it  moves  not  me. 

Hip.  And  I’ll  have  ’em  all. 

Dor.  What  will  become  of  me  then  ? 

Hip.  I’ll  have  you  too. 

But  are  not  you  acquainted  with  these  Women  ? 

Dor.  I  never  saw  but  one. 

Hip.  Is  there  but  one  here  ? 

This  is  a  base  poor  World,  I’ll  go  to  th’  other ; 

I’ve  heard  Men  have  abundance  of  ’em  there. 

But  pray  where  is  that  one  Woman  ? 

Dor.  Who,  my  Sister  ? 

Hip.  Is  she  your  Sister  ?  I’m  glad  o’  that :  you  shall  help  me  to  her,  and  I’ll 
love  you  for’t.  [  Offers  to  take  her  hand. 

Dor.  Away !  I  will  not  have  you  touch  my  hand. 

My  Father’s  counsel  which  enjoin’d  reservedness,  [ Aside. 

Was  not  in  vain,  I  see. 

Hip.  What  makes  you  shun  me  ? 

Dor.  You  need  not  care,  you’ll  have  my  Sister’s  hand. 

Hip.  Why,  must  not  he  who  touches  hers,  touch  yours  ? 

Dor.  You  mean  to  love  her  too. 

Hip.  Do  not  you  love  her  ? 

Then  why  should  not  I  do  so  ? 

Dor.  She  is  my  Sister,  and  therefore  I  must  love  her : 

But  you  cannot  love  both  of  us. 

Hip.  I  warrant  you  I  can  : 

Oh  that  you  had  more  Sisters  ! 

Dor.  You  may  love  her,  but  then  I’ll  not  love  you. 

Hip.  O  but  you  must ; 

One  is  enough  for  you,  but  not  for  me. 

Dor.  My  Sister  told  me  she  had  seen  another; 

A  Man  like  you,  and  she  lik’d  only  him ; 

Therefore  if  one  must  be  enough  for  her, 

He  is  that  one,  and  then  you  cannot  have  her. 

Hip.  If  she  like  him,  she  may  like  both  of  us. 

Dor.  But  how  if  I  should  change  and  like  that  Man  ? 

Would  you  be  willing  to  penr  that  change  ? 

Hip.  No,  for  you  lik’d  me  first. 

Dor.  So  you  did  me. 

Hip.  But  I  would  never  have  you  see  that  Man ; 

I  cannot  bear  it. 


430 


APPENDIX 


Dor.  I’ll  see  neither  of  you. 

Hip.  Yes,  me  you  may,  for  we  are  now  acquainted ; 

But  he’s  the  Man  of  whom  your  Father  warn’d  you : 

O  1  he’s  a  terrible,  huge,  monstrous  Creature, 

I  am  but  a  Woman  to  him. 

Dor.  I  will  see  him, 

Except  you’ll  promise  not  to  see  my  Sister. 

Hip.  Yes,  for  your  sake,  I  needs  must  see  your  Sister. 

Dor.  But  she’s  a  terrible,  huge  Creature  too ;  if  I  were  not 
Her  Sister,  she  would  eat  me;  therefore  take  heed. 

Hip.  I  heard  that  she  was  fair,  and  like  you. 

Dor.  No,  indeed,  she’s  like  my  Father,  with  a  great  Beard, 

’Twould  fright  you  to  look  on  her, 

Therefore  that  Man  and  she  may  go  together, 

They  are  fit  for  no  body,  but  one  another. 

Hip.  looking  in.  Yonder  he  comes  with  glaring  Eyes,  fly!  fly!  before  he  sees 
you. 

Dor.  Must  we  part  so  soon  ? 

Hip.  Y’  are  a  lost  Woman  if  you  see  him. 

Dor.  I  would  not  willingly  be  lost,  for  fear  you 
Should  not  find  me,  I’ll  avoid  him.  \_Exit  Dorinda. 

Hip.  She  fain  would  have  deceived  me,  but  I  know  her 
Sister  must  be  fair,  for  she’s  a  Woman; 

All  of  a  kind  that  I  have  seen  are  like  to  one 

Another :  all  the  Creatures  of  the  Rivers  and  the  Woods  are  so.  [. Enter  FercL 

Ferd.  O  !  well  encounter’d,  you  are  the  happy  Man ! 
have  got  the  hearts  of  both  the  beauteous  Women. 

Hip.  How  !  Sir?  pray  are  you  sure  on’t? 

Ferd.  One  of  ’em  charg’d  me  to  love  you  for  her  sake. 

Hip.  Then  I  must  have  her. 

Ferd.  No,  not. till  I  am  dead. 

Hip.  How  dead  ?  what’s  that  ?  But  whatsoe’r  it  be, 

[  long  to  have  her. 

Ferd.  Time  and  my  grief  may  make  me  die. 

Hip.  But  for  a  Friend  you  should  make  haste ;  I  ne’r  ask’d 
Any  thing  of  you  before. 

Ferd.  I  see  your  Ignorance ; 

And  therefore  will  instruct  you  in  my  meaning. 

The  Woman,  whom  I  love,  saw  you,  and  lov’d  you. 

Now,  Sir,  if  you  love  her,  you’ll  cause  my  Death. 

Hip.  Be  sure  I’ll  do’t  then. 

Ferd.  But  I  am  your  Friend ; 

And  I  request  you  that  you  would  not  love  her. 

Hip.  When  Friends  request  unreasonable  things. 

Sure  th’  are  to  be  deny’d :  you  say  she’s  fair, 

And  I  must  love  all  who  are  fair ;  for,  to  tell 
You  a  secret,  Sir,  which  I  have  lately  found 
Within  nry  self;  they’re  all  made  for  me. 

Ferd.  That’s  but  a  fond  conceit :  you  are  made  for  one,  and  one  tor  you 


HR  VEENS  VERSION 


431 


Rip.  You  cannot  tell  me,  Sir, 

I  know  I’m  made  for  twenty  hundred  Women. 

(I  mean  if  there  be  so  many  i’  th’  World) 

So  that  if  once  I  see  her,  I  shall  love  her. 

Ferd.  Then  do  not  see  her. 

Hip.  Yes,  Sir,  I  must  see  her. 

For  I  would  fain  have  my  heart  beat  again, 

Just  as  it  did  when  I  first  saw  her  Sister. 

Ferd.  I  find  I  must  not  let  you  see  her  then. 

Hip.  How  will  you  hinder  me  ? 

Ferd.  By  force  of  Arms. 

Hip.  By  force  of  Arms  ? 

My  Arms  perhaps  may  be  as  strong  as  yours. 

Ferd.  He’s  still  so  ignorant  that  I  pity  him,  and  fain 
Would  avoid  Force :  pray  do  not  see  her,  she  was 
Mine  tirst ;  you  have  no  right  to  her. 

Hip.  I  have  not  yet  consider’d  what  is  right,  but,  Sir 
I  know  my  inclinations,  are  to  love  all  Women : 

And  I  have  been  taught,  that  to  dissemble  what  I 
Think,  is  base.  In  honour  then  of  truth,  I  must 
Declare  that  I  do  love,  and  I  will  see  your  Woman. 

Ferd.  Wou’d  you  be  willing  I  should  see  and  love  your 
Woman,  and  endeavour  to  seduce  her  from  that 
Affection  which  she  vow’d  to  you  ? 

Hip.  I  would  not  you  should  do  it,  but  if  she  should 
Love  you  best,  I  cannot  hinder  her. 

But,  Sir,  for  fear  she  shou’d,  I  will  provide  against 
The  worst,  and  try  to  get  your  Woman. 

Ferd.  But  I  pretend  no  claim  at  all  to  yours ; 

Besides  you  are  more  beautiful  than  I, 

And  fitter  to  allure  unpractis’d  hearts. 

Therefore  I  once  more  beg  you  will  not  see  her. 

Hip.  I’m  glad  you  let  me  know  I  have  such  beauty. 

If  that  will  get  me  Women, 

I’ll  never  want  ’em. 

Ferd.  Then  since  you  have  refus’d  this  act  of  Friendship, 
Provide  your  self  a  Sword,  for  we  must  fight. 

Hip.  A  Sword,  what’s  that  ? 

Ferd.  Why  such  a  thing  as  this. 

Hip.  What  should  I  do  with  it. 

Ferd.  You  must  stand  thus,  and  push  against  me, 

While  I  push  at  you,  till  one  of  us  fall  dead. 

Hip.  This  is  brave  sport ; 

But  we  have  no  Swords  growing  in  our  World. 

Ferd.  What  shall  we  do  then  to  decide  our  quarrel  ? 

Hip.  We’ll  take  the  Sword  by  turns,  and  fight  with  it. 
Ferd.  Strange  Ignorance  !  you  must  defend  your  life, 

And  so  must  I :  but  since  you  have  no  Sword, 

Take  this ;  for  in  a  comer  of  my  Cave 


[  Gives  him  his  Sword, 


4.32 


APPENDIX 


I  found  a  rusty  one ;  perhaps  ’twas  his  who  keeps 
Me  Pris’ner  here :  that  I  will  fit. 

When  next  we  meet,  prepare  your  self  to  fight. 

Hip.  Make  haste  then,  this  shall  ne’r  be  yours  agen. 

I  mean  to  fight  with  all  the  Men  I  meet,  and 
When  they  are  dead,  their  Women  shall  be  mine. 

Ferd.  I  see  you  are  unskilful ;  I  desire  not  to  take 
Your  Life,  but  if  you  please,  we’ll  fight  on 
These  conditions ;  He  who  first  draws  bloud, 

Or  who  can  take  the  others  Weapon  from  him, 

Shall  be  acknowledg’d  as  the  Conquerour, 

And  both  the  Women  shall  be  his. 

Hip.  Agreed,  and  ev’ry  day  I’ll  fight  for  two  more  with  you. 

Ferd.  But  win  these  first. 

Hip.  I’ll  warrant  you  I’ll  push  you.  [ Exeunt  severally. 

Scene  II.  The  wild  Island. 

Enter  Trincalo,  Caliban,  Sycorax. 

Calib.  My  Lord,  I  see  ’em  coming  yonder. 

Trine.  Whom  ? 

Calib.  The  starv’d  Prince,  and  his  two  thirsty  Subjects, 

That  would  have  our  Liquor. 

Trine.  If  thou  wert  a  Monster  of  parts,  I  would  make  thee 
My  Master  of  Ceremonies,  to  conduct  ’em  in. 

The  Devil  take  all  Dunces,  thou  hast  lost  a  brave 
Employment  by  not  being  a  Linguist,  and  for  want 
Of  behaviour. 

Syc.  My  Lord,  shall  I  go  meet  ’em  ?  I’ll  be  kind  to  all  of  ’em, 

Just  as  I  am  to  thee. 

Trine.  No,  that’s  against  the  Fundamental  Laws  of  my  Dukedom :  you  are  in  a 
high  place,  Spouse,  and  must  give  good  Example.  Here  they  come,  we’ll  put  on  the 
gravity  of  Statesmen,  and  be  very  dull,  that  we  may  be  held  wise. 

Enter  Stephano,  Ventoso,  Mustacho. 

Vent.  Duke  Trincalo,  we  have  consider’d. 

Trine.  Peace,  or  War? 

Must.  Peace,  and  the  Butt. 

Stepk.  I  come  now  as  a  private  Person,  and  promise  to  live  peaceably  undet 
your  Government. 

Trine.  You  shall  enjoy  the  benefits  of  Peace ;  and  the  first  fruits  of  it,  amongst 
all  Civil  Nations,  is  to  be  drunk  for  joy.  Caliban,  skink  about. 

Steph.  I  long  to  have  a  Rowse  to  her  Graces  Health,  and  to  the  Haunse  in 
Kelder,  or  rather  Haddock  in  Kelder,  for  I  guess  it  will  be  half  Fish.  [Aside. 

Trine.  Subject  Stephano,  here’s  to  thee ;  and  let  old  quarrels  be  drown’d  tr  this 
draught.  [Drinks. 

Steph.  Great  Magistrate,  here’s  thy  Sister’s  health  to  thee.  [ Drinks  to  Caliban. 

Syc.  He  shall  not  drink  of  that  immortal  Liquor : 

My  Lord,  let  him  drink  Water. 

Trine.  O  Sweet-heart,  you  must  not  shame  your  self  to  day. 

Gentlemen  Subjects,  pray  bear  with  her  good  Huswifry  : 


DR  Y DEN'S  VERSION 


433 


She  wants  a  little  breeding,  but  she’s  hearty. 

Must-  Ventoso,  here’s  to  thee.  Is  it  not  better  to  pierce  the  Butt,  than  to  quarrel 
and  pierce  one  another’s  Bellies  ? 

Vent.  Let  it  come,  Boy. 

Trine.  Now  would  I  lay  greatness  aside,  and  shake  my  heels,  if  I  had  but 
Musick. 

Cahb.  O  my  Lord  !  my  Mother  left  us  in  her  Will  a  hundred  Spirits  to  attend  us, 
Devils  of  all  sorts,  some  great  roaring  Devils,  and  some  little  singing  Sprights. 

Syc.  Shall  we  call  ?  and  thou  shalt  hear  them  in  the  air. 

Trine.  I  accept  the  motion :  let  us  have  our  Mother-in-law’s  Legacy  immedi¬ 
ately. 

Calib.  j'.ngs.  IVe  want  Musick ,  we  want  Mirth , 

Up,  Dam,  and  cleave  the  Earth  : 

We  have  now  no  Lords  that  wrong  us, 

Send  thy  merry  Sprights  among  us. 

Trine.  What  a  merry  Tyrant  am  I,  to  have  my 
Musick,  and  pay  nothing  for’t  ? 


[A  T ible  rises,  and four  Spirits  with  Wine  and  Meat  enter, 
placing  it,  as  they  dance,  on  the  Table  :  The  Dance  ended, 
the  Bottles  vanish,  and  the  Table  sinks  agen. 

Vent.  The  Bottle’s  drunk. 

Must.  Then  the  Bottle’s  a  weak  shallow  Fellow,  if  it  be  drunk  first. 

Trine.  Stephano,  give  me  thy  hand : 

Thou  hast  been  a  Rebel,  but  here’s  to  thee :  £  Drinks. 

Prithee  why  should  we  quarrel  ?  shall  I  swear 
Two  Oaths  ?  By  Bottle,  and  by  Butt  I  love  thee : 

In  witness  whereof  I  drink  soundly. 

Steph.  Your  Grace  shall  find  there’s  no  love  lost, 

For  I  will  pledge  you  soundly. 

Trine.  Thou  hast  been  a  false  Rebel,  but  that’s  all  one ; 

Pledge  my  Grace  faithfully. 

Trine.  Caliban, 

Go  to  the  Butt,  and  tell  me  how  it  sounds : 

Peer  Stephano,  dost  thou  love  me  ? 

Steph.  I  love  your  Grace,  and  all  your  Princely  Family. 

Trine.  ’Tis  no  matter  if  thou  lov’st  me  ?  hang  my  Family  : 

Thou  art  my  Friend,  prithee  tell  me  what 
Thou  think’st  of  my  Princess  ? 

Steph.  I  look  on  her,  as  on  a  very  noble  Princess. 

Trine.  Noble  ?  Indeed  she  had  a  Witch  to  her  Mother,  and  the  Witches  are  of 
great  Families  in  Lapland,  but  the  Devil  was  her  Father,  and  I  have  heard  of  the 
Mounsor  De-Viles  in  France;  but  look  on  her  Beauty,  is  she  a  fit  Wife  for  Duke 
Tnncalo  l  mark  her  Behaviour  too,  she’s  tipling  yonder  with  the  Serving  men. 

Steph.  An’t  please  your  Grace,  she’s  somewhat  homely;  but  that’s  no  blemish  in 
a  Princess.  She  is  Virtuous. 

Trine.  Umph  !  Virtuous  !  I  am  loath  to  disparage  her. 

To  tell  thee  true,  I  marri’d  her  to  be  a  great  Man,  and  so  forth :  but  make  no  words 
°n’t,  for  I  care  not  who  knows  it,  and  so  here’s  to  thee  agen :  Give  me  the  Bottle, 
Caliban  !  did  you  knock  the  Butt  ?  how  does  it  sound  ? 

28 


434 


APPENDIX 


Calib.  It  sounds  as  though  it  had  a  noise  within. 

Trine.  I  fear  the  Butt  begins  to  rattle  in  the  throat,  and  is  departing :  give  me 
the  Bottle.  [ Drinks . 

Must.  A  short  life  and  a  merry,  I  say.  [Steph.  whispers  Sycorax. 

Syc.  But  did  he  tell  you  so  ? 

Steph.  He  said  you  were  as  ugly  as  your  Mother,  and  that  he  Marry’d  you  only 
to  get  possession  of  the  Island. 

Syc.  My  Mother’s  Devils  fetch  him  for’t. 

Steph.  And  your  Father’s  too :  Hem  1  Skink  about  his  Grace’s  health  agen.  O 
if  you  will  but  cast  an  Eye  of  pity  upon  me - 

Syc.  I  will  cast  two  Eyes  of  pity  on  thee  :  I  love  thee  more  than  Haws,  or  Black¬ 
berries,  I  have  a  hoard  of  Wildings  in  the  Moss,  my  Brother  knows  not  of  ’em ;  but 
I’ll  bring  thee  where  they  are. 

Steph.  Trincalo  was  but  my  Man  when  time  was. 

Syc.  Wert  thou  his  God,  and  didst  thou  give  him  Liquor  ? 

Steph.  I  gave  him  Brandy,  and  drunk  Sack  my  self :  Wilt  thou  leave  him,  and 
thou  shalt  be  my  Princess  ? 

Syc.  If  thou  canst  make  me  glad  with  this  Liquor. 

Steph.  I’ll  warrant  thee  we’ll  ride  into  the  Country  where  it  grows. 

Syc.  How  wilt  thou  carry  me  thither  ? 

Steph.  Upon  a  Hackney-Devil  of  thy  Mothers. 

Trine.  What’s  that  you  will  do  ?  hah  !  I  hope  you  have  not  betray’d  me  ?  how 
does  my  Pigs-nye  ?  [  To  Sycorax. 

Syc.  Be  gone  !  thou  shalt  not  be  my  Lord,  thou  say’st 
I’m  ugly. 

Trine.  Did  you  tell  her  so - hah  !  he’s  a  Rogue,  do  not  believe  him,  Chuck. 

Steph.  The  foul  words  were  yours  :  I  will  not  ear  ’em  for  you. 

Trine.  I  see  if  once  a  Rebel,  then  ever  a  Rebel.  Did  I  receive  thee  into  Grace 
for  this  ?  I  will  correct  thee  with  my  Royal  Hand.  [ Strikes  Stephano. 

Syc.  Dost  thou  hurt  my  Love  ?  [Files  at  Trincalo. 

Trine.  Where  are  our  Guards  ?  Treason  !  Treason  ! 

[Vent,  Must.  Calib.  run  betwixt. 

Vent.  Who  took  up  Arms  first,  the  Prince  or  the  People  ? 

Trine.  This  false  Traitor  has  corrupted  the  Wife  of  my  Bosom. 

\  [  Whispers  Mustacho  hastily. 

Mustacho,  strike  on  my  side,  and  thou  shalt  be  my  Vice-Roy. 

Must.  I’m  against  Rebels  !  Venioso,  obey  your  Vice-Roy. 

Vent.  You  a  Vice-Roy  ?  [  They  two  fight  off  from  the  rest. 

Steph.  Hah  !  Hector  Monster !  do  you  stand  neuter  ? 

Calib.  Thou  would’st  drink  my  Liquor,  I  will  not  help  thee. 

Syc.  ’Twas  his  doing  that  I  had  such  a  husband,  but  I’ll  claw  him. 

[Syc.  and  Calib. fight ;  Syc.  beating  him  off  the  Stage. 

Trine.  The  whole  Nation  is  up  in  Arms,  and  shall  I  stand  idle  ? 

[Trincalo  beats  off  Stephano  to  the  door.  Exit  Stephano. 

I’ll  not  pursue  too  far,  for  fear  the  Enemy  should  rally  agen,  and  surprise  my  Butt  in 
the  Citadel ;  well  I  must  be  rid  of  my  Lady  Trincalo,  she  will  be  in  the  Fashion 
else;  first,  Cuckold  her  Husband,  and  then  sue  for  a  Separation,  to  get  Alimony. 

[Exit. 


DR  YDEN'S  VERSION 


435 


Ferd. 

Hip. 

Ferd. 

Hip. 

Ferd. 

Hip. 

Ferd. 

Hip. 


Scene  III.  The  Cypress-trees  and  Cave. 

Enter  Ferdinand,  Hippolito,  (with  their  swords  drawn). 

Ferd.  Come,  Sir,  our  Cave  affords  no  choice  of  place, 

But  the  ground’s  firm  and  even  :  are  you  ready  ? 

Hip.  As  ready  as  your  self,  Sir. 

Ferd.  You  remember  on  what  conditions  we  must  fight ; 

Who  first  receives  a  wound  is  to  submit. 

Hip.  Come,  come,  this  loses  time ;  now  for  the 

Women,  Sir.  [  They  fight  a  little,  Ferdinand  hurts  him. 

Sir,  you  are  wounded. 

No. 

Believe  your  bloud. 

I  feel  no  hurt,  no  matter  for  my  bloud. 

Remember  our  Conditions. 

I’ll  not  leave,  till  my  Sword  hits  you  too. 

[Hip.  presses  on:  Ferd.  retires  and  war  as. 
I  m  loth  to  kill  you ;  you  are  unskilful,  Sir. 

You  beat  aside  my  Sword,  but  let  it  come  as  near 
As  yours,  and  you  shall  see  my  skill. 

Ferd.  \  ou  faint  for  loss  of  bloud  :  I  see  you  stagger : 

Pray,  Sir,  retire. 

Hip.  No  !  I  will  ne’r  go  back - 

Methinks  the  Cave  turns  round,  I  cannot  find _ 

Ferd.  Your  Eyes  begin  to  dazle. 

Hip.  Why  do  you  swim  so,  and  dance  about  me  ? 

Stand  but  still  till  I  have  made  one  thrust.  [Hippolito,  thrusts  and  falls. 

Ferd.  O  help,  help,  help ! 

Unhappy  Man  1  what  have  I  done  ? 

Hip.  I’m  going  to  a  cold  sleep,  but  when  I  wake, 

I’ll  fight  agen.  Pray  stay  for  me.  [Swounds. 

lerd.  He’s  gone !  he’s  gone !  O  stay,  sweet  lovely  Youth ! 

Help .  help  .  [ Enter  Prospero. 

Prosp.  What  dismal  noise  is  that  ? 

Ferd.  O  see,  Sir,  see  1 

What  mischief  my  unhappy  hand  has  wrought. 

Prosp.  Alas  !  how  much  in  vain  doth  feeble  Art  endeavour 
To  resist  the  will  of  Heaven  ?  [*«*,  Hippolito. 

He  s  gone  for  ever.  O  thou  cruel  Son  of  an 
Inhumane  Father !  all  my  designs  are  ruin’d 
And  unravell’d  by  this  blow. 

No  pleasure  now  is  left  me  but  revenge. 

Ferd.  Sir,  if  you  knew  my  innocence - . 

Prosp.  Peace,  peace, 

Can  thy  excuses  give  me  back  his  life  ? 

What,  Ariel f  sluggish  Spirit,  where  art  thou?  \ Enter  Ariel 

Ariel.  Here,  at  thy  beck,  my  Lord. 

Prosp.  I,  now  thou  com’st,  when  Fate  is  past  and  not  to  be 
Recall’d.  Look  there,  and  glut  the  malice  of 


436 


APPENDIX 


Thy  Nature.  For  as  thou  art  thy  self,  thou 
Canst  not  but  be  glad  to  see  young  Virtue 
Nipt  i’  th’  Blossom. 

Ariel.  My  Lord,  the  Being  high  above  can  witness 
I  am  not  glad ;  we  Airy  Spirits  are  not  of  a  temper 
So  malicious  as  the  Earthy, 

But  of  a  Nature  more  approaching  good. 

For  which  we  meet  in  swarms,  and  often  combate 
Betwixt  the  Confines  of  the  Air  and  Earth. 

Prosp.  Why  did’st  thou  not  prevent,  at  least  foretel, 

This  fatal  action  then  ? 

Ariel.  Pardon,  great  Sir, 

I  meant  to  do  it,  but  I  was  forbidden 
By  the  ill  Genius  of  Hippolito, 

Who  came  and  threaten’d  me,  if  I  disclos’d  it, 

To  bind  me  in  the  bottom  of  the  Sea, 

Far  from  the  lightsome  Regions  of  the  Air, 

(My  Native  Fields)  above  a  hundred  years. 

Prosp.  I’ll  Chain  thee  in  the  North  for  thy  neglect, 

Within  the  burning  Bowels  of  Mount  Heila  ; 

I’ll  singe  thy  airy  Wings  with  sulph’rous  flames, 

And  choalc  thy  tender  nostrils  with  blew  smoak, 

At  ev’ry  Hickup  of  the  belching  Mountain, 

Thou  shalt  be  lifted  up  to  taste  fresh  air, 

And  then  fall  down  agen. 

Ariel.  Pardon,  dread  Lord. 

Prosp.  No  more  of  pardon  than  just  Heav’n  intends  thee 
Shalt  thou  e’r  find  from  me  :  hence  !  fly  with  speed. 

Unbind  the  Charms  which  hold  this  Murtherer’s 
Father,  and  bring  him,  with  my  Brother,  streight 
Before  me. 

Ariel.  Mercy,  my  potent  Lord,  and  I’ll  outfly  thy  thought.  [Exit  Ariel. 

Ferd.  O  Heavens  !  what  words  are  those  I  heard  ? 

Vet  cannot  see  who  spoak  ’em :  sure  the  Woman 
Whom  I  lov’d  was  like  this,  some  aiery  Vision. 

Prosp.  No,  Murd’rer,  she’s,  like  thee,  of  mortal  mould, 

But  much  too  pure  to  mix  with  thy  black  Crimes ; 

Yet  she  had  faults,  and  must  be  punish’d  for  ’em. 

Miranda  and  Dorinda  !  where  are  ye  ? 

The  will  of  Heaven’s  accomplish’d :  I  have 
Now  no  more  to  fear,  and  nothing  left  to  hope, 

Now  you  may  enter.  [Enter  Miranda  and  Dorinda 

Mir.  My  Love  !  is  it  permitted  me  to  see  you  once  agen  ? 

Prosp.  You  come  to  look  your  last;  I  will 
For  ever  take  him  from  your  Eyes. 

But,  on  my  blessing,  speak  not,  nor  approach  him. 

Dor.  Pray,  Father,  is  not  this  my  Sister’s  Man  ? 

He  has  a  noble  form ;  but  yet  he’s  not  so  excellent 
As  my  Hippolito. 


DR  YDEN'S  VERSION 


437 


Prosp.  Alas,  poor  Girl,  thou  hast  no  Man  :  look  yonder ; 

There’s  all  of  him  that’s  left. 

Dor.  Why,  was  there  ever  any  more  of  him  ? 

He  lies  asleep,  Sir,  shall  I  waken  him  ?  [She  kneels  by  Hippolito  and  jogs  him. 
Ferd.  Alas  !  he’s  never  to  be  wak’d  agen. 

Dor.  My  Love,  my  Love  !  will  you  not  speak  to  me  ? 

I  fear  you  have  displeas’d  him,  Sir,  and  now 
He  will  not  answer  me,  he’s  dumb  and  cold  too ; 

But  I’ll  run  streight,  and  make  a  fire  to  warm  him.  [Exit  Dorinda  running. 

Enter  Alonzo,  Gonzalo,  Antonio.  Ariel  ( invisible ). 

Alonz.  Never  were  Beasts  so  hunted  into  Toils, 

As  we  have  been  pursu’d  by  dreadful  shapes. 

But  is  not  that  my  Son  ?  O  Ferdinand  l 
If  thou  art  not  a  Ghost,  let  me  embrace  thee. 

Ferd.  My  Father !  O  sinister  happiness  !  Is  it 
Decreed  I  should  recover  you  alive,  just  in  that 
Fatal  hour  when  this  brave  Youth  is  lost  in  Death, 

And  by  my  hand  ? 

Ant.  Heaven  !  what  new  wonder’s  this  ? 

Gonz.  This  Isle  is  full  of  nothing  else. 

Prosp.  You  stare  upon  me  as 
You  ne’r  had  seen  me  :  Have  fifteen  years 
So  lost  me  to  your  knowledge,  that  you  retain 
No  memory  of  Prospero  ? 

Gonz.  The  good  old  Duke  of  Milain  ! 

Prosp.  I  wonder  less,  that  thou,  Antonio,  know’st  me  not, 

Because  thou  didst  long  since  forget  I  was  thy  Brother, 

Else  I  never  had  been  here. 

Ant.  Shame  choaks  my  words. 

Alonz.  And  wonder  mine. 

,  Prosp.  For  you,  usurping  Prince,  [To  Alonzo 

Know,  by  my  Art,  you  were  Shipwrack’d  on  this  Isle, 

Where,  after  I  a  while  had  punish’d  you,  my  vengeance 
Wou’d  have  ended;  I  design’d  to  match  that  Son 
Of  yours,  with  this  my  Daughter. 

Alonz.  Pursue  it  still,  I  am  most  willing  to’t. 

Prosp.  So  am  not  I.  No  Marriages  can  prosper 
Which  are  with  Murderers  made;  Look  on  that  Corps: 

This,  whilst  he  liv’d,  was  young  Hippolito,  that 
Infant  Duke  of  Mantua  ;  Sir,  whom  you,  expos’d 
With  me ;  and  here  I  bred  him  up,  till  that  bloud-thirsty 
Man,  that  Ferdinand - 

But  why  do  I  exclaim  on  him,  when  Justice  calls 
To  unsheath  her  Sword  against  his  guilt  ? 

Alonz.  What  do  you  mean  ? 

Prosp.  To  execute  Heav’ns  Laws. 

Here  I  am  plac’d  by  Heav’n,  here  I  am  Prince, 

Though  you  have  dispossess’d  me  of  my  Milain. 


438 


APPENDIX 


Bloud  calls  for  bloud ;  your  Ferdinand  shall  die, 

And  I,  in  bitterness,  have  sent  for  you, 

To  have  the  sudden  joy  of  seeing  him  alive, 

And  then  the  greater  grief  to  see  him  die. 

Alonz.  And  think’st  thou  I,  or  these,  will  tamely  stand, 

To  view  the  Execution  ?  [ Lays  hand  upon  his  Sword. 

Ferd.  Hold,  dear  Father !  I  cannot  suffer  you 
T’  attempt  against  his  life,  who  gave  her  being 
Whom  I  love. 

Prosp.  Nay  then  appear  my  Guards - 

I  thought  no  more  to  use  their  aid ; 

(I’m  curs’d  because  I  us’d  it)  [He  stamps,  and  many  Spirits  appear 

But  they  are  now  the  Ministers  of  Heaven, 

Whilst  I  revenge  this  Murder. 

Alonz.  Have  I  for  this  found  thee,  my  Son  so  soon,  agen, 

To  lose  thee  ?  Antonio,  Gonzalo,  speak  for  pity. 

Ferd.  to  Mir.  Adieu,  my  fairest  Mistriss. 

Mir.  Now  I  can  hold  no  longer ;  I  must  speak. 

Though  I  am  loth  to  disobey  you,  Sir, 

Be  not  so  cruel  to  the  Man  I  love, 

Or  be  so  kind  to  let  me  suffer  with  him. 

Ferd.  Recal  that  Pray’r,  or  I  shall  wish  to  live, 

Though  death  be  all  the  mends  that  I  can  make. 

Prosp.  This  night  I  will  allow  you,  Ferdinand,  to  fit 
You  for  your  death,  that  Cave’s  your  Prison. 

Alonz.  Ah,  Prospero  /  hear  me  speak.  You  are  a  Father 
Look  on  my  Age,  and  look  upon  his  Youth. 

Prosp.  No  more  !  all  you  can  say  is  urg’d  in  vain  : 

[  have  no  room  for  pity  left  with  me. 

Do  you  refuse  ?  help  Ariel,  with  your  Fellows, 

To  drive  ’em  in.  Alonzo  and  his  Son  bestow  in 
Yonder  Cave;  and  here  Gonzalo  shall  with 

Antonio  lodge.  [ Spirits  drive  'em  in,  as  they  are  appointed- \ 

Enter  Dorinda. 

Dor.  Sir,  I  have  made  a  fire,  shall  he  be  warm’d  ? 

Prosp.  He’s  dead,  and  vital  warmth  will  ne’er  return. 

Dor.  Dead  !  Sir,  what’s  that  ? 

Prosp.  His  Soul  has  left  his  Body. 

Dor.  When  will  it  come  agen  ? 

Prosp.  O  never,  never ! 

He  must  be  laid  in  Earth,  and  there  consume. 

Dor.  He  shall  not  lie  in  Earth,  you  do  not  know 
How  well  he  loves  me  :  indeed  he’ll  come  agen ; 

He  told  me  he  would  go  a  little  while, 

But  promis’d  me  he  would  not  tarry  long. 

Prosp.  He’s  murder’d  by  the  Man  who  lov’d  your  Sister. 

Now  both  of  you  may  see  what  ’tis  to  break 
A  Father’s  Precept;  you  would  needs  see  Men,  and  by 
That  sight  are  made  for  ever  wretched. 


DR  YDEN'S  VERSION 


439 


Hippolito  is  dead,  and  Ferdinand  must  die 
For  murd’ring  him. 

Mir.  Have  you  no  pity  ? 

Prosp.  Your  disobedience  has  so  much  incens’d  me,  that 
I  this  night  can  leave  no  blessing  with  you. 

Help  to  convey  the  Body  to  my  Couch, 

Then  leave  me  to  mourn  over  it  alone.  [  They  beat  off  the  Body  of  Hippolito. 

Enter  Miranda  and  Dorinda  again  ;  Ariel  behind  'ert. 

Artel.  I’ve  been  so  chid  for  my  neglect,  by  Prospero, 

That  I  must  now  watch  all,  and  be  unseen. 

Mir.  Sister,  I  say  agen,  ’twas  long  of  you 
That  all  this  mischief  happen’d. 

Dor.  Blame  not  me  for  your  own  fault,  your 
Curiosity  brought  me  to  see  the  Man. 

Mir.  You  safely  might  have  seen  him,  and  retir’d ;  but 
^  011  wou’d  needs  go  near  him,  and  converse  :  you  may 
Remember  my  Father  call’d  me  thence,  and  I  call’d  you. 

Dor.  That  was  your  envy,  Sister,  not  your  love ; 

\  ou  call’d  me  thence,  because  you  could  not  be 
Alone  with  him  your  self ;  but  I  am  sure  my 
Man  had  never  gone  to  Heaven  so  soon,  but 
That  yours  made  him  go. 

Mir.  Sister,  I  could  not  wish  that  either  of  ’em  shou’d 
Go  to  Heaven  without  us,  but  it  was  his  Fortune, 

And  you  must  be  satisfi’d. 

Dor.  I’ll  not  be  satisfi’d  :  my  Father  says  he’ll  make 
Your  Man  as  cold  as  mine  is  now,  and  when  he 
Is  made  cold,  my  Father  will  not  let  you  strive 
To  make  him  warm  agen. 

Mir.  In  spite  of  you  mine  never  shall  be  cold. 

Dor.  I’m  sure  ’twas  he  that  made  me  miserable, 

And  I  will  be  reveng’d.  Perhaps  you  think  ’tis 
Nothing  to  lose  a  Man. 

Mir.  Yes,  but  there  is  some  difference  betwixt 
My  Ferdinand ,  and  your  Hippolito. 

Dor.  I,  there’s  your  judgment.  Your’s  is  the  oldest 
Man  I  ever  saw,  except  it  were  my  Father. 

Mir.  Sister,  no  more.  It  is  not  comely  in  a  Daughter, 

When  she  says  her  Father’s  old. 

Dor.  But  why  do  I  stay  here,  whilst  my  cold  Love 
Perhaps  may  want  me  ? 

I’ll  pray  my  Father  to  make  yours  cold  too. 

Mir.  Sister,  I’ll  never  sleep  with  you  again. 

Dor.  I’ll  never  more  meet  in  a  bed  with  you, 

But  lodge  on  the  bare  ground,  and  watch  my  Love. 

Mir.  And  at  the  entrance  of  that  Cave  I’ll  lie, 

And  echo  to  each  blast  of  wind  a  sigh. 

[Exeunt  severally ,  looking  discontentedly  on  one  anottu*. 

Ariel.  Harsh  discord  reigns  throughout  this  fatal  Isle, 


440 


APPENDIX 


At  which  good  Angels  mourn,  ill  Spirits  smile ; 

Old  Prospero  by  his  Daughters  robb’d  of  rest, 

Has  in  displeasure  left  ’em  both  unblest. 

Unkindly  they  abjure  each  others  Bed, 

To  save  the  living  and  revenge  the  dead. 

Alonzo  and  his  Son  are  Pris’ners  made, 

And  good  Gonzalo  does  their  Crimes  upbraid. 
Antonio  and  Gonzalo  disagree, 

And  wou’d,  though  in  one  Cave,  at  distance  be. 

The  Seamen  all  that  cursed  Wine  have  spent, 

Which  still  renew’d  their  thirst  of  Government; 

And  wanting  Subjects  for  the  food  of  Pow’r, 

Each  wou’d  to  rule  alone  the  rest  devour. 

The  Monsters  Sy corax  and  Caliban, 

More  Monstrous  grow  by  passions  leam’d  from  Man. 
Even  I  not  fram’d  of  warring  Elements, 

Partake  and  suffer  in  these  discontents. 

Why  shou’d  a  Mortal  by  Enchantments  hold 
In  Chains  a  Spirit  of  AJtherial  mold  ? 

Accursed  Magick  we  our  selves  have  taught, 

And  our  own  pow’r  has  our  subjection  wrought ! 


ACT  V. 


Enter  Prospero  and  Miranda. 

Prosp.  W  Ou  beg  in  vain ;  I  cannot  pardon  him, 

J-  He  has  offended  Heaven. 

Mir.  Then  let  Heaven  punish  him. 

Prosp.  It  will  by  me. 

Mir.  Grant  him  at  least  some  respite  for  my  sake. 

Prosp.  I  by  deferring  Justice  should  incense  the  Deity 
Against  my  self  and  you. 

Mir.  Yet  I  have  heard  you  say,  The  powers  above  are  slow 
In  punishing,  and  shou’d  not  you  resemble  them  ? 

Prosp.  The  Argument  is  weak ;  but  I  want  time 
To  let  you  see  your  errours ;  retire,  and,  if  you  love  him, 

Pray  for  him. 

Mir.  And  can  you  be  his  Judge  and  Executioner  ? 

Prosp.  I  cannot  force  Gonzalo,  or  my  Brother,  much 
Less  the  Father  to  destroy  the  Son  ?  it  must 
Be  then  the  Monster  Caliban,  and  he’s  not  here ; 

But  Ariel  strait  shall  fetch  him. 


Enter  Ariel. 

Arid.  My  Potent  Lord,  before  thou  call’st,  I  come, 
To  serve  thy  will. 

Prosp.  Then,  Spirit,  fetch  me  here  my  salvage  slave. 
Ariel.  My  Lord,  it  does  not  need. 

Prosp.  Art  thou  then  prone  to  mischief, 

Wilt  thou  be  thy  self  the  Executioner  ? 

Ariel.  Think  better  of  thy  Aiery  Minister,  who, 


[Exit. 


[ He’s  going. 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


441 


For  thy  sake,  unbidden,  this  night  has  flown 
O’r  almost  all  the  habitable  World. 

Prosp.  But  to  what  purpose  was  all  thy  diligence  ? 

Ariel.  When  I  was  chidden  by  my  mighty  Lord,  for  my 
Neglect  cf  young  Hippolito,  I  went  to  view 
His  Body,  and  soon  found  his  Soul  was  but  retir’d, 

Not  sally’d  out:  then  I  collected 

The  best  of  Simples  underneath  the  Moon, 

The  best  of  Balms,  and  to  the  wound  apply’d 
The  healing  juice  of  vulnerary  Herbs. 

His  only  danger  was  his  loss  of  bloud,  but  now 
He’s  wak’d,  my  Lord,  and  just  this  hour 
He  must  be  dress’d  again,  as  I  have  done  it. 

Anoint  the  Sword  which  pierc’d  him,  with  this 
Weapon-Salve,  and  wrap  it  close  from  Air  till 
I  have  time  to  visit  him  again. 

Prosp.  Thou  art  my  faithful  Servant : 

It  shall  be  done :  Be  it  your  task,  Miranda ,  because  your 
Sister  is  not  present  here,  while  I  go  visit  your 
Dear  Ferdinand ,  from  whom  I  will  a  while  conceal 
This  news,  that  it  may  be  more  welcome. 

Mir.  I  obey  you,  and  with  a  double  duty,  Sir,  for  now 
You  twice  have  given  me  Life. 

Prosp.  My  Ariel,  follow  me.  [Exeunt  severally. 

[Hippolito  discover'd  on  a  Couch,  Dorinda  by  him 

Dor.  How  do  you  find  your  self  ? 

Hip.  I’m  somewhat  cold,  can  you  not  draw  me  nearer 
To  the  Sun  ?  I  am  too  weak  to  walk. 

Dor.  My  Love,  I’ll  try.  [She  draws  the  Chair  nearer  the  Audience. 

I  thought  you  never  would  have  walk’d  agen, 

They  told  me  you  were  gone  away  to  Heaven ; 

Have  you  been  there  ? 

Hip.  I  know  not  where  I  was. 

Dor.  I  will  not  leave  you  till  you  promise  me  you 
Will  not  die  agen. 

Hip.  Indeed  I  will  not. 

Dor.  You  must  not  go  to  Heav’n,  unless  we  go  together; 

For  I’ve  heard  my  Father  say,  that  we  must  strive 
To  be  each  others  guide,  the  way  to  it  will  else 
Be  difficult,  especially  to  those  who  are  so  young. 

But  I  much  wonder  what  it  is  to  die. 

Hip.  Sure  ’tis  to  dream,  a  kind  of  breathless  sleep, 

When  once  the  Soul’s  gone  out. 

Dor.  What  is  the  Soul  ? 

Hip.  A  small  blue  thing,  that  runs  about  within  us. 

Dor.  Then  I  have  seen  it  in  a  frosty  Morning  ran 
Smoaking  from  my  mouth. 

Hip.  But,  dear  Dorinda, 

What  is  become  of  him  who  fought  with  me  ? 


442 


APPENDIX 


Dor.  O,  I  can  tell  you  joyful  news  of  him, 

My  Father  means  to  make  him  die  to  day, 

For  what  he  did  to  you. 

Hip.  That  must  not  be,  my  dear  Dorinda  ;  go  and  beg  yonr 
Father,  he  may  not  die;  it  was  my  fault  he  hurt  me, 

I  urg’d  him  to  it  first. 

Dor.  But  if  he  live,  he’ll  never  leave  killing  you. 

Hip.  0  no  !  I  just  remember  when  I  fell  asleep,  I  heard 
Him  calling  me  a  great  way  off,  and  crying  over  me  as 
You  wou’d  do;  besides  we  have  no  cause  of  quarrel  now. 

Dor.  Pray  how  began  your  difference  first  ? 

Hip.  I  fought  with  him  for  all  the  Women  in  the  World. 

Dor.  That  hurt  you  had  was  justly  sent  from  Heaven, 

For  wishing  to  have  any  more  but  me. 

Hip.  Indeed  I  think  it  was,  but  I  repent  it,  the  fault 
Was  only  in  my  bloud;  for  now  ’tis  gone,  I  find 
I  do  not  love  so  many. 

Dor.  In  confidence  of  this,  I’ll  beg  my  Father,  that  he 
May  live ;  I’m  glad  the  naughty  bloud,  that  made 
You  love  so  many,  is  gone  out. 

Hip.  My  dear,  go  quickly,  lest  you  come  too  late.  [ Exit  Do*. 

Enter  Miranda  at  the  other  door ,  with  Hippolito’s 
Sword  wrapt  up. 

Hip.  Who’s  this  who  looks  so  fair  and  beautiful,  as 
Nothing  but  Dorinda  can  surpass  her  ?  O ! 

I  believe  it  is  that  Angel  Woman, 

Whom  she  calls  Sister. 

Mir.  Sir,  I  am  sent  hither  to  dress  your  wound ; 

How  do  you  find  your  strength  ? 

Hip.  Fair  Creature,  I  am  faint  with  loss  of  bloud. 

Mir.  I’m  sorry  for’t. 

Hip.  Indeed  and  so  am  I,  for  if  I  had  that  bloud,  I  then 
Should  find  a  great  delight  in  loving  you. 

Mir .  But,  Sir,  I  am  another’s,  and  your  love  is  given 
Already  to  my  Sister. 

Hip.  Yet  I  find  that,  if  you  please,  I  can  love  still  a  little. 

Mir.  I  cannot  be  unconstant,  nor  shou’d  you. 

Hip.  O  my  wound  pains  me. 

Mir.  I  am  come  to  ease  you.  [She  unwraps  the  Sword. 

Hip.  Alas !  I  feel  the  cold  Air  come  to  me. 

My  wound  shoots  worse  then  ever.  [She  wipes  and  anoints  the  Sword. 

Mir.  Does  it  still  grieve  you  ? 

Hip.  Now  methinks  there’s  something  laid  just  upon  it. 

Mir.  Do  you  find  no  ease  ? 

Hip.  Yes,  yes,  upon  the  sudden  all  the  pain 
Is  leaving  me :  Sweet  Heaven,  how  I  am  eas’d ! 

Enter  Ferdinand  and  Dorinda  to  them. 

Ferd.  (to  Dor.)  Madam,  I  must  confess  my  life  is  yours, 

I  owe  it  to  your  generosity. 


DRYDEN'S  VERStuJV 


443 


Dor.  I  am  o're  joy’d  my  Father  lets  you  live;  and  proud 
Of  my  good  fortune,  that  he  gave  your  life  to  me. 

Mir.  How  ?  gave  his  life  to  her ! 

Hip.  Alas  I  think  she  said  so,  and  he  said  he  ow’d  it 
To  her  generosity 

Herd.  But  is  not  that  your  Sister  with  Hippolito  ? 

Dor.  So  kind  already  ? 

Ford.  I  came  to  welcome  life,  and  I  have  met  the 
Cruellest 'of  deaths. 

Hip.  My  dear  Dorinda  with  another  Man  ? 

Dor.  Sister,  what  bus’ness  have  you  here  ? 

Mir.  You  see  I  dress  Hippolito. 

Dor.  Y’  are  very  charitable  to  a  Stranger. 

Mir.  You  are  not  much  behind  in  charity,  to  beg  a  pardon 
For  a  Man,  whom  you  scarce  ever  saw  before. 

Dor.  Henceforward  let  your  Surgery  alone,  for  I  had 
Rather  he  should  die,  then  you  should  cure  his  wound. 

Mir.  And  I  wish  Ferdinand  had  dy’d  before 
He  ow’d  his  life  to  your  entreaty, 

Ferd.  {to  Hipl)  Sir,  I’m  glad  you  are  so  well  recover’d,  you 
Keep  your  humour  still  to  have  all  Women. 

Hip.  Not  all,  Sir,  you  except  one  of  the  number. 

Your  new  Love  there,  Dorinda. 

Mir.  Ah  Ferdinand !  can  you  become  inconstant  ? 

If  I  must  lose  you,  I  had  rather  death  should  take 
You  from  me,  than  you  take  your  self. 

Ferd.  And  if  I  might  have  chosen,  I  would  have  wish’d 
That  death  from  Frospero,  and  not  this  from  you. 

Dor.  I,  now  I  find  why  I  was  sent  away, 

That  you  might  have  my  Sister’s  Company. 

Hip.  Dorinda,  kill  me  not  with  your  unkindness, 

This  is  too  much,  first  to  be  false  your  self, 

And  then  accuse  me  too. 

Ferd.  We  all  accuse  each  other,  and  each  one  denies  their  guilt, 

I  should  be  glad  it  were  a  mutual  errour. 

And  therefore,  first,  to  clear  my  self  from  fault, 

Madam,  I  beg  your  pardon,  while  I  say  I  only  love 

Your  Sister.  [7i  Dorinda, 

Mir.  O  blest  word  ? 

I’m  sure  I  love  no  Man  but  Ferdinand. 

Dor.  Nor  I,  Heaven  knows,  but  my  Hippolito. 

Hip.  I  never  knew  I  lov’d  so  much ;  before  I  fear’d 
Dorinda' s  constancy,  but  now  I  am  convinc’d  that 
I  lov’d  none  but  her,  because  none  else  can 
Recompense  her  lc».. 

Ferd.  ’Twas  happy  then  we  had  this  little  trial. 

But  how  we  all  so  much  mistook,  I  know  not. 

Mir.  I  have  only  this  to  say  in  my  defence,  my  Father  sent 


444 


APPENDIX 


Me  hither,  to  attend  the  wounded  Stranger. 

Dor.  And  Hippolito  sent  me  to  beg  the  life  of  Ferdinand. 
Ferd.  From  such  small  errours  left  at  first  unheeded, 

Have  often  sprung  sad  accidents  in  love  : 

But  see,  our  Fathers  and  our  Friends  are  come 
To  mix  their  joys  with  ours. 

Enter  Prospero,  Alonzo,  Antonio,  Gonzalo. 
A/on.  (to  Prosp.)  Let  it  no  more  be  thought  of;  your  purpose. 
Though  it  was  severe,  was  just.  In  losing  Ferdinand 
I  should  have  mourn’d,  but  could  not  have  complain’d. 

Prosp.  Sir,  I  am  glad  kind  Heaven  decreed  it  otherwise. 

Dor.  O  wonder ! 

How  many  goodly  Creatures  are  there  here  1 
How  beauteous  Mankind  is  ! 

Hip.  O  brave  new  World,  that  has  such  People  in’t ! 

Alon.  (to  Ferd.)  Now  all  the  blessings  of  a  glad  Father 
Compass  thee  about, 

And  make  thee  happy  in  thy  beauteous  choice. 

Gonz.  I’ve  inward  wept,  or  should  have  spoken  e’r  this. 

Look  down,  sweet  Heaven,  and  on  this  Couple  drop 
A  blessed  Crown.  For  it  is  you  chalk’d  out  the 
Way  which  brought  us  hither. 

Ant.  Though  penitence  forc’d  by  necessity  can  scarce 
Seem  real,  yet,  dearest  Brother,  I  have  hope 
My  bloud  may  plead  for  pardon  with  you ;  I  resign 
Dominion,  which,  ’tis  true,  I  could  not  keep, 

But  Heaven  knows  too,  I  would  not. 

Prosp.  All  past  crimes  I  bury  in  the  joy  of  this 
Blessed  day. 

Alonz.  And  that  I  may  not  be  behind  in  Justice,  to  this 
Young  Prince,  I  render  back  his  Dukedom, 

And,  as  the  Duke  of  Mantua,  thus  salute  him. 

Hip.  What  is  it  you  render  back  ?  methinks 
.  You  give  me  nothing. 

Prosp.  You  are  to  be  Lord  of  a  great  People, 

And  o’r  Towns  and  Cities. 

Hip.  And  shall  these  People  be  all  Men  and  Women  ? 

Gonz.  Yes,  and  shall  call  you  Lord. 

Hip.  Why  then  I’ll  live  no  longer  in  a  Prison,  but 
Have  a  whole  Cave  to  my  self  hereafter. 

Prosp.  And  that  your  happiness  may  be  compleat, 

I  give  you  my  Dorinda  for  your  Wife ;  she  shall 
Be  yours  for  ever,  when  the  Priest  has  made  you  one. 

Hip.  How  can  he  make  us  one  ?  shall  I  grow  to  her  ? 

Prosp.  By  saying  holy  words,  you  shall  be  joyn’d  in  Marriag* 
To  each  other. 

Dor.  I  warrant  you  those  holy  words  are  charms. 

My  Father  means  to  conjure  us  together. 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


445 


Enter  Ariel,  driving  in  Stephano,  Trincalo,  Mustacho, 

Ventoso,  Caliban,  Sycorax. 

Prosp.  Why  that’s  my  dainty  Ariel.  I  shall  miss  thee, 

But  yet  thou  shalt  have  freedom. 

Gonz.  O  Look,  Sir,  look,  the  Master  and  the  Saylors - 

The  Bosen  too - my  Prophecy  is  out,  that  if 

A  Gallows  were  on  land,  that  Man  could  ne’r 
Be  drown’d. 

Along.,  ( to  Trine.')  Now  Blasphemy,  what  not  one  Oath  ashore  ? 

Hast  thou  no  mouth  by  Land  ?  why  star’st  thou  so  ? 

Trine.  What,  more  Dukes  yet  ?  I  must  resign  my  Dukedom ; 

But  ’tis  no  matter,  I  was  almost  starv’d  in’t. 

Must.  Here’s  nothing  but  wild  Sallads,  without  Oyl  or  Vinegar. 

Steph.  The  Duke  and  Prince  alive  !  would  I  had  now  our  gallant  Ship  agen,  and 
were  her  Master,  I’d  willingly  give  all  my  Island  for  her. 

Vent.  And  I  my  Vice-Roy-ship. 

Trine.  I  shall  need  no  Hangman,  for  I  shall  e’n  hang 
My  self,  now  my  Friend  Butt  has  shed  his 
Last  drop  of  life.  Poor  Butt  is  quite  departed. 

Ant.  They  talk  like  Mad-men. 

Prosp.  No  matter,  time  will  bring  ’em  to  themselves,  and 
Now  their  Wine  is  gone,  they  will  not  quarrel. 

Your  Ship  is  safe  and  tight,  and  bravely  rigg’d, 

As  when  you  first  set  Sail. 

Alonz.  This  news  is  wonderful. 

Ariel.  Was  it  well  done,  my  Lord  ? 

Prosp.  Rarely,  my  Diligence. 

Gonz.  But  pray,  Sir,  what  are  those  mis-shapen  Creatures  ? 

Prosp.  Their  Mother  was  a  Witch,  and  one  so  strong, 

She  would  controul  the  Moon,  make  Flows 
And  Ebbs,  and  deal  in  her  Command  without 
Her  Power. 

Syc.  O  Setebos  !  these  be  brave  Sprights  indeed. 

Prosp.  (to  Calib.)  Go,  Sirrah,  to  my  Cell,  and  as  you  hope  for 
Pardon,  trim  it  up. 

Calib.  Most  carefully.  I  will  be  wise  hereafter. 

What  a  dull  Fool  was  I,  to  take  those  Drunkards 
For  Gods,  when  as  such  as  these  were  in  the  World  ? 

Prosp.  Sir,  I  invite  your  Highness  and  your  Train 
To  my  Poor  Cave  this  night ;  a  part  of  which 
I  will  employ,  in  telling  you  my  story. 

Alonz.  No  doubt  it  must  be  strangely  taking,  Sir. 

Prosp.  When  the  Morn  draws,  I’ll  bring  you  to  your  Ship, 

And  promise  you  calm  Seas,  and  happy  Gales. 

My  Ariel ,  that’s  thy  charge  :  then  to  the  Elements 
Be  free,  and  fare  thee  well. 

Ariel.  I’ll  do  it,  Master. 

Prosp.  Now  to  make  amends 
For  the  rough  treatment  you  have  found  to  day, 


44b 


APPENDIX 


I’ll  entertain  you  with  my  Magick  Art : 

I’ll,  by  my  power,  transform  this  place,  and  call 
Up  those  that  shall  make  good  my  promise  to  you. 

[Scene  changes  to  the  Rocks,  with  the  Arch  of  Rocks, 
and  calm  Sea.  Musick  playing  on  the  Rocks , 
Prosp.  Neptune,  and  your  fair  Amphitrite ,  rise ; 

Oceanus,  with  your  Tethys  too,  appear ; 

All  ye  Sea-Gods,  and  Goddesses,  appear ! 

Come,  all  ye  Tritons ;  all  ye  Nereids,  come, 

And  teach  your  sawcy  Element  to  obey : 

For  you  have  Princes  now  to  entertain, 

4nd  unsoil’d  Beauties,  with  fresh  youthful  Lovers. 

[Neptune,  Amphitrite,  Oceanus  and  Tethys,  appear  in  a 
Chariot  drawn  with  Sea-Horses ;  on  each  side  of  the  Chariot 
Sea- Gods  and  Goddesses,  Tritons  and  Nereids. 

Atom.  This  is  prodigious. 

Ant.  Ah !  what  amazing  Objects  do  we  see  ? 

Gonz.  This  Art  doth  much  exceed  all  humane  skill. 


Amph.  A/T  Y  Lord :  Great  Neptune,  for  my  sake, 

1 V  J.  Of  these  bright  Beauties  pity  take  : 

And  to  the  rest  allow 
Your  mercy  too. 

Let  this  inraged  Element  be  still, 

Let  /Eolus  obey  my  will : 

Let  hbn  his  boystrous  Prisoners  safely  keep 
In  their  dark  Caverns,  and  no  more 
Let  'em  disturb  the  bosom  of  the  deep, 

Till  these  arrive  upon  their  wish' d-f or- Shore. 
Neptune.  So  much  my  Amphitrite’s  love  I  prize. 

That  no  commands  of  hers  I  can  despise. 

Tethys  no  furrows  now  shall  weare, 

Oceanus  no  wrinkles  on  his  brow. 

Let  your  serenest  looks  appear , 

Be  calm  and  gentle  now. 

Nep.  &  \Be  calm,  ye  great  Parents  of  the  Flouds  and  the  Springs, 
Amph.  /  While  each  Nereid  and  Triton  Plays,  Revels,  and  Sings. 
Oceanus.  Confine  the  roaring  Winds,  and  we 

Will  soon  obey  you  cheerfully . 

Chorus  of  -i  Tie  up  the  Winds,  and  we'll  obey. 

Tritons  l  Upon  the  Flouds  we'll  sing  and  play, 
and  Ner.  J  And  celebrate  a  Halcyon  day. 

Nept.  Great  Nephew  AJolus  make  no  noise, 

Muzzle  your  roaring  Boys. 

Amph.  Let  'em  not  bluster  to  disturb  our  ears. 

Or  strike  these  Noble  Passengers  with  fears. 

Nept.  Afford  'em  only  such  an  easie  Gale, 

As  pleasantly  may  swell  each  Sail. 


r  Here  the  Dan 
-j  cers  mingle  with 
f  the  Singers. 

[Dance. 
[Aiolus  appears. 


DRYDEN'S  VERSION 


447 


Amph, 


vEolus  de- ' 
scends. 


While  fell  Sea- Monsters  cause  intestine  jars, 

This  Empire  you  invade  with  foreign  Wars. 

B tit  you  shall  now  be  still, 

And  shall  obey  my  Amphitrite’j  will. 

You  I'll  obey,  who  at  one  stroke  can  make, 

With  your  dread  Trident,  the  whole  Earth  to  quake. 
Come  down,  my  Blusterers,  swell  no  more, 


f  Winds  from  the  four 
Corners  appear. 


t 


Your  stormy  rage  give  o’  r. 

Let  all  black  Tempest  cease - 

And  let  the  troubled  Ocean  rest : 

Let  all  the  Sea  enjoy  as  calm  a  peace, 

As  where  the  Halcyon  builds  her  quiet  Nest. 

To  your  Prisons  below, 

Down,  down  you  must  gc  .• 

You  in  the  Earths  Entrals  your  Revels  may  keep  ; 

But  no  more  till  I  call  shall  you  trouble  the  Deep.  [Winds  fly  down. 
Now  they  are  gone,  all  stormy  Wars  shall  cease  : 

Then  let  your  Trumpeters  proclaim  a  Peace. 

Amph.  Tritons,  my  Sons,  your  Trumpets  sound, 

And  let  the  noise  from  Neighbouring  Shores  rebound, 

Sound  a  Calm. 

Sound  a  Calm. 

Chorus.  Sound  a  Calm. 

Sound  a  Calm. 

Sound  a  Calm. 

[Here  the  Tritons,  at  every  repeat  of  Sound  a  Calm,  changing  their  Figure 
and  Postures,  seem  to  sound  their  wreathed  Trumpets  made  of  Shells. 

A  Symphony  of  Musick,  like  Trumpets,  to  which  four  Tritons  Dance. 

Nept.  See,  see,  the  Heavens  smile,  all  your  troubles  are  past, 

Your  joys  by  black  Clouds  shall  no  more  be  o' recast. 

On  this  barren  Isle  ye  shall  lose  all  your  fears, 

Leave  behind  all  your  sorrows,  and  banish  your  cares. 

Both  /  And  your  Loves  and  your  Lives  shall  in  safely  enjoy  ; 

l  No  influence  of  Stars  shall  your  quiet  destroy. 

Chor.  of  all.  {  Andy°ur  &c- 

l  No  influence,  &c. 

[Here  the  Dancers  mingle  with  the  Singers. 
Oceanus.  We'll  safely  convey  you  to  your  own  happy  Shore, 

And  yours  and  your  Countrey’s  soft  peace  we’ll  restore. 

Tethys  To  treat  you  blest  Lovers,  as  you  sail  on  the  Deep, 

The  Tritons  and  Sea-Nymphs  their  Revels  keep. 

Both  /  Me  swift  Dolphins  backs  they  shall  sing  and  shall  play  ; 

t  They  shall  guard  you  by  night,  and  delight  you  by  day. 

Chor.  of  all.  {  0n  the  svjif1’  &c‘ 

t  And  shall  guard,  &c. 

[Here  the  Dancers  mingle  with  the  Singers. 

[A  Dance  of  twelve  Tritons. 

Afiran.  What  charming  things  are  these  ? 

Dor.  What  Heavenly  Power  is  this  ? 


448 


APPENDIX 


Prosp.  Now,  my  Ariel,  be  visible,  and  let  the  rest  of  your  Aerial  Train, 

Appear,  and  entertain  ’em  with  a  Song; 

[Seene  changes  to  the  Rising  Sun,  and  a  number  of  Aerial  Spirits  in  the 
Air,  Ariel  flying  from  the  Sun,  advances  towards  the  Pit. 

And  then  farewel  my  long-lov’d  Ariel. 

Alon.  Heaven  !  what  are  these  we  see  ? 

Prosp.  They  are  Spirits,  with  which  the  Air  abounds  in  swarms,  but  that  they 
are  not  subject  to  poor  feeble  mortal  Eyes. 

Ant.  O  wonderful  skill ! 

Gonz.  O  Power  Divine  ! 

Ariel  and  the  rest  sing  the  following  Song. 

Ariel.  Where  the  Bee  sucks,  there  suck  I, 

In  a  Cowslip's  Bed  I  lie  ; 

There  I  couch  when  Owls  do  cry. 

On  the  Swallows  wings  I  fly 
After  Summer  merrily. 

Merrily,  merrily  shall  I  live  now, 

Under  the  Blossom  that  hangs  on  the  Bow. 

[Song  ended,  Ariel  speaks,  hovering  in  the  Air. 

Ariel.  My  Noble  Master ! 

May  theirs  and  your  blest  Joys  never  impair. 

And  for  the  freedom  I  enjoy  i’  th’  Air, 

I  will  be  still  your  Ariel,  and  wait 
On  Aiery  accidents  that  work  for  Fate. 

What  ever  shall  your  happiness  concern, 

From  your  still  faithful  Ariel  you  shall  learn. 

Prosp.  Thou  hast  been  always  diligent  and  kind ! 

Farewel,  my  long-lov’d  Ariel,  thou  shalt  find, 

I  will  preserve  thee  ever  in  my  mind. 

Henceforth  this  Isle  to  the  afflicted  be 
A  place  of  Refuge,  as  it  was  to  me  : 

The  promises  of  blooming  Spring  live  here, 

And  all  the  blessings  of  the  ripening  Year. 

On  my  retreat,  let  Heav’n  and  Nature  smile, 

And  ever  flourish  the  Enchanted  Isle.  [. Exeunt 

Epilogue. 

G  Allants,  by  all  good  signs  it  does  appear, 

That  Sixty  seven’s  a  very  damning  year, 

For  Knaves  abroad,  and  for  ill  Poets  here. 

Among  the  Muses  there’s  a  gen’ral  rot, 

The  Rhyming  Monsieur,  and  the  Spanish  Plot : 

Defie  or  Court,  all’s  one,  they  go  to  Pot. 

The  Ghosts  of  Poets  walk  within  this  place, 

And  haunt  us  Actors  wheresoe’r  we  pass, 

In  Visions  bloudier  than  King  Richard's  was. 

For  this  poor  Wretch,  he  has  not  much  to  say, 

But  quietly  brings  in  his  part  o’  th’  Play, 

And  begs  the  favour  to  be  damn’d  to  day. 


THE  VIRGIN  QUEEN 


449 


He  sends  me  only  like  a  Sh’riff’s  Man  here, 

To  let  you  know  the  Malefactor’s  near, 

And  that  he  means  to  die,  en  Cavalier. 

For  if  you  shou’d  be  gracious  to  his  Pen, 

Th’  Example,  will  prove  ill  to  other  Men, 

And  you’ll  be  troubl’d  with  ’em  all  agen. 

Finis. 

[No  words  which  would  not  with  justice  be  called  idle  can  be  expended  on  the 
foregoing  Version.  As  a  comprehensive  commentary  thereon  it  is  interesting  to 
note  that  the  additions  to  the  original,  on  which  Dryden  and  Davenant  plumed 
themselves,  are  wholesale  plagiarisms  from  Calderon’s  play  written  twenty  years 
earlier,  so  says  Herman  Grimm  ( Funfzehn  Essays,  1875,  p.  206),  who  also  says, 
with  humour,  that  such  is  the  quality  of  these  additions  that  the  two  poets  laureate 
might  well  have  contended  for  the  honour  of  having  contributed  the  smaller  share. 
For  the  extracts  themselves,  which  Grimm  adduces  in  proof  of  his  assertion,  I  must 
refer  the  student  to  the  Essay  just  mentioned ;  the  innocence  or  the  guilt  of  Dryden 
does  not  here  concern  us.  But  Calderon’s  play  does  concern  us  as  sharing  (accord- 
ing  to  Grimm)  with  The  Tempest  and  Cymbeline  a  common  origin.  Extracts  from 
Grimm’s  Essay  are  given  in  the  Source  of  the  Plot,  p.  346.] 


THE  VIRGIN  QUEEN 

In  1797,  F.  G.  Waldron,  an  actor,  and  editor  of  The  Literary  Museum,  pub¬ 
lished  The  Virgin  Queen,  a  drama  in  Five  Acts,  *  attempted,'  so  it  says  on  the  title- 
page,  ‘  as  a  Sequel  to  Shakespeare’s  Tempest.'  Prospero’s  haste  in  breaking  his  staff 
and  drowning  his  book  seems  to  have  left  a  painful  impression  on  Waldron’s  mind  as 
a  highly  inconsiderate  and  premature  act,  and  this  ‘  Sequel  ’  is  apparently  designed 
to  emphasize  the  moral  that  it  is  not  safe  to  holla  until  you  are  out  of  the  woods. 

Just  before  embarking  for  Milan,  Caliban  entreats  Prospero  not  to  leave  him  behind 
— the  prospect  of  future  loneliness  appalled  him,  ‘  ’custom’d  to  sort  With  monkies, 
‘  apes,  baboons,  I  felt  not,  ere  My  noble  lord  came  here,  its  irksomeness.’  Prospero 
accedes  to  Caliban’s  pleadings  and  gives  him  permission  to  accompany  the  party  to 
Milan.  Caliban’s  gratitude  is  boundless,  and  his  offers  profuse  to  dig  for  water  in  the 
new  country  whither  they  are  going,  to  scoop  out  a  trim  cell,  to  lick  Prospero’s  feet, 
&c.  &c.  This  trust  in  Caliban’s  sincerity  is  Prospero’s  second  fatal  mistake  ;  his  first 
was  the  breaking  of  his  staff  and  the  drowning  of  his  book,  whereby  he  lost  his  su¬ 
premacy  and  became  an  ordinary  mortal.  At  the  moment  of  leave-taking  Ariel 
reveals  to  Prospero  a  secret,  which  he  had  just  learned,  to  the  effect  that  ‘  the  spirit 
‘  of  that  foul  witch,  Sycorax,  Who  died,  thou  know’st,  upon  this  isle,  great  sir !  From 
‘  the  blue  lake  of  fire,  wherein  ’twas  plung’d,  Will  soon  be  loos’d,  till  the  dread  day 

*  of  doom !’  but  it  appears  that  as  *  she  was  native  of  dark  Afric’s  clime,  On  earth,  in 

*  Africk  only,  can  she  harm  ’ ;  and  Ariel,  therefore,  adjures  Prospero  not  to  touch  that 
land  on  his  homeward  journey.  Ariel  then  bids  Prospero  farewell  with  the  wish  that 
he  were  mortal  for  only  one  moment  that  he  might  *  distil  a  tender  tear.’ 

Once  at  sea,  and  released  from  the  influences  of  the  magic  isle  and  the  terrors  of 
Prospero’s  power,  the  conspirators,  Antonio  and  Sebastian,  return  to  their  plottings, 

and  Caliban’s  bestial  nature  reasserts  itself,  and  he  longs  for  vengeance  on  Prospero 
29 


450 


APPENDIX 


and,  having  been  again  supplied  with  liquor  by  Stephano  and  Trinculo,  relieves  his 
feelings,  as  the  scene  closes,  with  the  following  ditty : 

4 1  gather’d  ripe  clusters  of  grapes  from  the  vine, 

Then  champ’d  ’em,  and  swill’d  ’em,  rejoiced  so  to  dine ; 

Yet,  like  a  dull  ass,  was  raid,  beaten,  and  jeer’d, 

Of  adder,  ape,  urchin,  and  goblin  afear’d  ! 

But,  liquor  celestial  now,  plenteous,  I  quaff, 

At  adder,  ape,  urchin,  and  goblin  can  laugh ; 

Ho,  ho,  ho ;  ho,  ho,  ho  !  I  now  should  not  fear, 

Though  Prosper  and  all  his  curst  spirits  were  here.’ 

In  the  Third  Act  Sycorax  descends  on  the  vessel,  brimming  with  love  for  her  4  long- 
4  lost  boy,’  and  with  vengeance  on  Prospero ;  she  makes  Caliban  invulnerable,  and 
instructs  him  that  he  must  force  the  pilot  to  steer  for  Africa.  Antonio  and  Sebastian 
introduce  themselves  to  Sycorax  and  join  the  plot,  which  is  ingeniously  carried  out  by 
throwing  overboard  all  the  provisions,  thus  forcing  upon  Prospero  the  uncomfortable 
alternative  of  starving,  or  of  making  for  the  nearest  shore,  which  is  Africa.  No  sooner 
have  they  arrived  on  the  shores  of  the  latter,  than  they  find  Claribel  and  her  husband 
in  a  plight  almost  as  bad  as  their  own.  It  appears  that  Claribel  and  her  husband 
Abdallah  are  the  victims  of  a  witch  named  Hyrca,  a  friend  of  Sycorax,  who  has 
driven  them  from  Tunis  to  this  region  of  the  coast.  The  whole  family  of  Prospero 
and  of  Alonso  being  thus  within  the  power  of  the  two  witches,  Hyrca  and  Sycorax, 
the  two  latter  prepare  to  make  the  best  of  their  opportunity,  after  triumphantly 
announcing  that — 

4  Love,  Pity,  Mercy,  hence  !  Revenge  now  reigns  ! 

Sycorax  and  Hyrca  stalk  the  sanguine  plains !’ 

Within  sight  of  Prospero  his  ships  are  burnt,  and  Abdallah  is  told  to  prepare  to  be 
thrown  into  the  raging  flames ;  to  Prospero,  Sycorax  expatiates  on  the  multitude  of 
choice  tortures  she  has  prepared  for  him,  and  winds  up  with  saying  that  she  intends 
Miranda  for  Caliban,  for  which  Caliban  has  the  civility  to  thank  his  4  gentle  dam.’ 
Circumstances  are  about  as  dark  as  can  be  well  imagined  for  Prospero,  whose  repent¬ 
ance  over  his  folly  in  prematurely  dispensing  with  his  power  is  abysmal,  when  grand 
harmonious  music  is  heard.  Ariel  appears  and  presents  to  Prospero  the  precious 
book  for  which  he  had  4  div’d  i’  th’  oozy  Neptune’s  bed,’  and  eke  the  broken  staff 
for  which  he  had  4  into  Tellus’  bosom  deeply  pierced,’  and,  when  found,  had  mended ! 
The  mere  sight  of  these  two  treasures  in  Prospero’s  hands  is  quite  enough  for  Syco¬ 
rax,  Hyrca,  and  Caliban,  who,  without  waiting  for  the  staff  to  be  waved  or  the  book 
opened,  ‘go  off  howling,  amidst  Thunder,  &c.’  (Please  note  the  shuddering  vague¬ 
ness  of  the  4  &c.’)  Ariel,  always  considerate,  had  brought  up  the  rest  of  the  fleet, 
which  replaced  the  burnt  vessels,  and  Prospero  and  Alonso,  with  their  respective 
families,  set  sail  for  Italy,  leaving  behind  Antonio  and  Sebastian,  who  are  destined 
for  their  crimes  to  4  echo  with  their  groans  on  this  strange  shore,  Hyrca’s  dire  shrieks, 

4  curst  Caliban’s  fell  roar !’  Ariel’s  feelings  find  expression  in  an  outburst  of  song, 
which  proclaims  that 4  From  bondage  free,  Sweet  liberty  Shall  Ariel  hence  enjoy  !  I’ 
‘th’  bee’s  quaint  cell,  Or  music-rose  dwell;  Upon  the  Goss’mer  toy!’  &c.  Prospero 
then  explains  that  ‘  Virtue’s  our  magick-staff !  our  book  Pure  piety ! — with  faith  who 
‘  look  Thereon  may  antres  vast  explore.’  A  hymn  to  the  same  effect  is  then  sung 
4  by  the  attendant  spirits,’  and  the  curtain  falls.  Claribel,  I  believe,  is  ‘  The  Virgin 
Queen.’ 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK,  &c. 

In  this  Edition  the  attempt  is  made,  to  give,  in  the  shape  of  Textual  Notes,  on 
the  same  page  with  the  Text,  all  the  Various  Readings  of  The  Tempest,  from  the 
First  Folio  to  the  latest  critical  Edition  of  the  play ;  then,  as  COMMENTARY,  follow 
the  Notes  which  the  Editor  has  thought  worthy  of  insertion,  not  only  for  the  purpose 
of  elucidating  the  text,  but  at  times  as  illustrations  of  the  history  of  Shakespearian 
criticism.  In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  discussions  of  subjects  which  on  the  score 
of  length  could  not  be  conveniently  included  in  the  Commentary. 

LIST  OF  EDITIONS  COLLATED  IN  THE  TEXTUAL  NOTES. 


The  First  Folio  . [FJ . 1623 

The  Second  Folio  . [FJ . 1632 

The  Third  Folio  . [F3] . 1664 

The  Fourth  Folio  . [FJ . 1685 

Rowe  (First  Edition) . [Rowe  i] . I7°9 

Rowe  (Second  Edition) . [Rowe  ii] . 1714 

Pope  (First  Edition) . [Pope  i]  . 1723 

Pope  (Second  Edition) . [Pope  ii] . 1728 

Theobald  (First  Edition)  .  .  .  .  [Theob.  i] . 1733 

Theobald  (Second  Edition)  .  .  .  .  [Theob.  ii] . 1740 

Hanmer . [Han.]  . 1744 

Warburton  . [Warb.]  . 1747 

Johnson . [Johns.]  . 1765 

Capell . [Cap.]  .  (?)  1766 

Johnson  and  Steevens . [Steev. ’73] . 1773 

Johnson  and  Steevens . [Steev. ’78] . 1778 

Johnson  and  Steevens . [Steev. ’85] . 1785 

Rann  . [Rann]  .  (?)  1786 

Malone . [Mai.]  . 1790 

Steevens . [Steev.]  . 1793 

Reed’s  Steevens  . [Var.  ’03] . 1803 

Reed’s  Steevens  . [Var. ’13] . 1813 

Boswell’s  Malone . [Var.]  . 1821 

Knight . [Knt.]  . 1841 

Collier  (First  Edition) . [Coll,  i]  . 1842 

Halliwell  (Folio  Edition)  .  .  .  .  [Hal.]  . 1853 

Singer  (Second  Edition)  . .  .  .  [Sing,  ii] . 1856 

Dyce  (First  Edition) . [Dyce  i]  . 1857 

Collier  (Second  Edition)  .  .  .  .  [Coll,  ii]  .  .  1858 

R.  Grant  White  (First  Edition)  . .  [Wh.  i]  . 1858 

Staunton  . [Sta.]  .  (?)  1859 

Cambridge  (Clark  and  Glover)  .  .  [Cam.]  . 1863 

Globe  (Clark  and  Wright)  .  . .  [Glo.]  .  .  . 1864 

45 1 


452 


APPENDIX 


Keightley  . 

Charles  and  Mary  Cowden-Clarke 
Dyce  (Second  Edition)  .  . 

William  Aldis  Wright  ( Clarendon 

Press  Series')  . 

Dyce  (Third  Edition)  .  . 

Collier  (Third  Edition) 

Hudson . 

R.  Grant  White  (Second  Edition)  .  . 
Cambridge  (Third  Edition,  W.  A. 
Wright) . 


[Ktly] 

•  •  f  •  •  •  I864 

[Clarke] 

•  •  •  •  (?)  I864 

[Dyce  ii] 

[Wrt] 

[Dyce  iii] 

[Coll,  iii]  .  . 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

00 

[Huds.] 

[Wh.  ii] 

[Cam.  iii] 

Rev.  J.  M.  Jephson . 

Rev.  John  Hunter  (. Longmans'  Series)  .  . 

W.  J.  Rolfe . 

J.  S.  Phillpotts  ( The  Rugby  Edition)  .  . 

J.  M.  D.  Mf.iklejohn  . 

K.  Deighton . 

Rev.  D.  Morris  ( Collins'  English  Classics) 


1864 

1870 

1871 

1876 
1889 
1889 
n.  d. 


The  last  seven  editions  I  have  not  collated  beyond  referring  to  them  in  disputed 
passages.  The  same  is  to  a  large  extent  true  of  the  Third  Cambridge  Edition  ;  my 
work  of  collation  was  finished  when  the  volume  containing  this  play  was  issued. 
The  text  of  Shakespeare,  especially  in  The  Tempest ,  has  become,  within  the  last 
twenty-five  years,  so  settled,  that  to  collate  editions  which  have  appeared  within  these 
years  is  a  work  of  supererogation.  The  case  is  different  with  the  Second  and  Third 
Editions  of  editors  like  Dyce,  Collier,  Grant  White,  and  W.  Aldis  Wright, 
wherein  it  will  always  prove  interesting  to  note  the  effect  of  time  in  modifying  their 
opinions. 

In  the  Textual  Notes  the  symbol  Ff  indicates  the  agreement  of  the  Second 
Third,  and  Fouth  Folios. 

The  omission  of  the  apostrophe  in  the  Fa,  a  peculiarity  of  that  edition,  is  not  gen¬ 
erally  noted. 

Nor  is  notice  taken  of  the  first  Editor  who  adopted  the  modem  spelling,  or  who 
substituted  commas  for  parentheses,  or  changed  ?  to  !. 

The  sign  +  indicates  the  agreement  of  Rowe,  Pope,  Theobald,  Hanmer,  War- 
burton,  and  Johnson. 

When  Warburton  precedes  Hanmer  in  the  Textual  Notes,  it  indicates  that 
Hanmer  has  followed  a  suggestion  of  Warburton’s. 

The  words  et  cet.  after  any  reading  indicate  that  it  is  the  reading  of  all  other 
editions. 

The  words  et  seq.  indicate  the  agreement  of  all  subsequent  editions. 

The  abbreviation  (subs.)  indicates  that  the  reading  is  substantially  given,  and  that 
immaterial  variations  in  spelling,  punctuation,  or  stage-directions  are  disregarded. 

.  An  Emendation  or  Conjecture  which  is  given  in  the  Commentary  is  not  repeated 
in  the  Textual  Notes  unless  it  has  been  adopted  by  a  subsequent  editor;  nor  is  coni 
added  to  any  name  in  the  Textual  Notes  unless  the  name  happens  to  be  that  of  an 
editor,  in  which  case  its  omission  would  be  misleading. 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK 


453 


Coll,  (ms)  refers  to  Collier’s  annotated  Fa. 

Quincy (ms)  refers  to  an  annotated  in  the  possession  of  Mr  J.  P.  Quincy. 

In  citations  from  plays,  other  than  The  Tempest,  the  Acts,  Scenes,  and  Lines  of 
The  Globe  Edition  are  followed. 

Under  Phila.  Sh.  Soc.  reference  is  made  to  Notes  of  Studies  on  the  Tempest 
Minutes  of  the  Shakspere  Society  of  Philadelphia,  1864—5,  whereof  sixty  copies  were 
Privately  Printed  for  the  use  of  its  twelve  members.  This  Society,  having  had  a  con¬ 
tinuous  existence  from  its  foundation  in  1851-2,  down  to  the  present  day,  is  now,  I 
believe,' the  oldest  Shakespeare  Society  in  existence.  Allen,  whose  name  appears 
in  connection  with  it,  is  the  same  learned  critic  whose  notes  are  found  in  the  Com¬ 
mentary  in  preceding  volumes  of  this  edition ;  Sharswood,  at  that  time  Justice  of 
the  District  Court,  was  afterwards  Chief  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Pennsyl¬ 
vania;  Krauth  was  Professor  of  Intellectual  and  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University 
of  Pennsylvania,  and,  later,  a  member  of  the  American  Board  of  Biblical  Revision. 
All,  together  with  The  Dean,  A.  I.  Fish,  are  now  among  the  ‘  precious  friends,  hid 
in  death’s  dateless  night.’ 


To  economise  space  in  the  Commentary  I  have  frequently  cited,  with  the  name  of 
an  author,  an  abbreviated  title  of  his  work,  and  sometimes  not  even  as  much  as  that. 
In  the  following  List,  arranged  chronologically,  enough  of  the  full  title  is  given 
merely  to  serve  as  a  reference. 

Be  it  understood  that  this  List  gives  only  those  books  wherefrom  Notes  have  been 
taken  at  first  hand ;  it  does  not  include  books  which  have  been  consulted  in  verifying 
quotations  made  by  the  contributors  to  the  earlier  Variorums,  or  by  other  critics. 
Were  these  included  the  List  would  be  many  times  longer.  Nor  does  it  include  the 
large  number,  especially  in  German,  which  I  have  examined,  but  from  which,  to  my 
regret,  lack  of  space  has  obliged  me  to  forego  making  any  extract. 

Let  it  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  present  edition  aspires  merely  to  be  one  cum 
Notis  variorum  Editorum,  and  no  one  can  be  more  conscious  than  its  Editor  that  it 
is,  at  its  very  best,  a  necessary  evil.  Were  it,  however,  to  attempt  to  be  an  edition 
cum  Notis  omnium  Editorum,  or  Criticorum,  it  would  be  not  only  an  unnecessary, 
but  an  unmitigated,  evil,  and  all  good  men  and  true  should  unite  in  crushing  it. 

Reference  to  this  restriction  is  perhaps  necessary,  because  in  the  case  of  one  of 
the  recent  volumes  of  this  Edition,  the  Editor  was  reproached  in  public  for  not 
having  included  in  his  notes  any  reference  to  a  certain  work  which  treated  at  some 
length  of  the  play  then  in  hand,  and  the  omission  was,  naturally  perhaps,  attributed  to 
the  Editor’s  insufficient  knowledge.  As  it  really  happened,  the  omitted  book  had 
been  for  twenty  years  in  the  Editor’s  library,  and  belongs  to  that  class  of  books — the 
disgrace  of  literature — whereof  the  mere  possession  can  be  excused  only  by  the  claims 
of  a  library  devoted  to  one  subject ;  wherein  everything  good,  bad,  and  indifferent  is 
gathered.  The  character  of  the  book  could  not  assuredly  have  been  known  to  the 
critics.  Any  reference  to  it  had  been,  by  the  Editor,  sedulously  excluded. 

Richard  Eden  :  The  Decades  of  the  newe  worlde  or  west  India,  &-Y.  (ed.  Arber)  1555 


Lyte:  A  Nievve  Her  ball . 1578 

R.  SCOT:  The  Discoverie  of  Witchcraft,  &°c.  (ed.  Nicholson) . 1584 

HOLINSHED:  Chronicles . 1587 

Barnaby  Googe  :  The  Whole  Art  of  Husbandry  . 1596 

Sidney:  Arcadia . 1598 


454 


APPENDIX 


Topsei.l:  The  Historic  of  Poore  Footed  Beastes,  &r*c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  1608 

Histoire  de  Avrelio,  et  Isabelle,  Fille  dv  Roy  d’Escoce,  &*c . 1 608 

R.  Rich:  Newes from  Virginia,  &*c.  (ed.  Quaritch)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1610 

Jacob  Ayrer:  Opus  Theatricum  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1618 

Purchas  his  Pilgrimes.  The  Fourth  Part  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1625 

Captaine  John  Smith  :  An  Accidence  or  Path-way  to  Experience.  Acces¬ 
sary  for  all  Young  Sea-men  (ed.  Arber)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1626 

Hoi  LAND:  Translation  of  Plinie's  Natural  History  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1635 

Dryden  :  Troilus  and  Cressida,  or  Truth  Found  too  Late  .  .  .  .  .  .  1679 

Rowe  :  Some  Account  of  the  Life,  cfc  of  Mr  William  Shakespear  (vol.  i  of 

Works) . 1709 

WiNWOOD:  Memorials  of  Affaires  of  State,  &*c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1725 

Theobald  :  Shakespeare  Restored,  &*c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  1 726 

Peck:  New  Memoirs  of  Milton  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  . .  .  .  .  .  1740 

Drayton:  Works . 1740 

Upton  :  Observations,  &c . 1 746 

Whalley  :  Enquiry  into  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  1748 

Holt  :  An  Attempte  to  Rescue  that  Aunciente  English  Poet,  &>c . 1 749 

Grey  :  Critical,  Historical,  and  Explanatory  Notes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1 754 

Edwards  :  Canons  of  Criticism  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  .  .  1765 

Percy:  Reliques  of  Ancient  English  Poetry . 1765 

Heath:  Revisal  of  Shakespeare's  Text  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1765 

Kenrick  :  Review  of  Johnson  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  ,  .  1765 

Tyrwhitt:  Observations,  &•  c . 1766 

Farmer  :  Essay  on  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1 767 

Capell’s  Notes,  &c.  1779 

Joseph  Warton  :  The  Adventurer  . 1783 

Ritson  :  Remarks,  &*c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1 783 

J.  Monck  Mason:  Comments,  <5 re.  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  .  .  1785 

Thomas  White:  More  Notes  on  Shakespeare  (Fennell’s  Shakespeare  Reposi¬ 
tory,  1853)  1793 

Whiter:  Specimen  of  a  Commentary,  £rc.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1794 

George  Chalmers  :  Apology  for  the  Believers  in  the  Shakespeare  Papers,  <Src.  1 797 
(Charles  Dirrill:  Remarks  on  Shakespeare's  Tempest  .  .  .  .  .  .  1797 

J.  Monck  Mason  :  Comments  on  Beaumont  and  Fletcher  ..  ..  ..  1798 

George  Chalmers  :  Supplemental  Apology  .  .  .  .  . .  . .  .  .  1 799 

The  Plays  of  William  Shakspeare.  Philadelphia  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1805 

Douce:  Illustrations  of  Shakespeare,  &v.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1807 

Malone:  An  Account  of  the  Incidents  from  which  the  Title  and  part  of  the 
Story  of  Shakespeare' s  Tempest  were  derived,  &’c.  (‘  Not  published ; — 

only  eighty  copies  having  been  printed’)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1808 

Stephen  Weston  :  Short  Notes  on  Shakespeare,  &c . 1808 

J.  Croft:  Annotations  on  Plays  of  Shakespeare.  York  ..  ..  ..  1810 

Tieck:  Alt-Englisches  Theater,  &=c.  Berlin . 1811 

Geo.  Chalmers  :  Another  Account  of  The  Incidents  from  which  ....  Shake¬ 
speare's  Tempest  was  derived  (‘  Only  40  Copies  printed  ’)  .  .  .  .  .  .  1815 

Schi.egel  :  Lectures,  trans.  by  Black.  London  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  1815 

Hazlitt:  Characters  of  Shakespeare's  Plays,  <SrY.  ..  ..  ..  ,  1817 

Tieck:  Deutsches  Theater.  Berlin  . 1S1J 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK 


455 


Nichols:  Literary  Illustrations,  Sac.,  vol.  ii  ..  ..  ..  .  .  ,,  1817 

Zachary  Jackson:  Shakespeare's  Genius  Justified  ..  ..  ..  ..  1819 

Skottowe:  Life  of  Shakespeare,  Sac.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1824 

Alte  und  neue  Anmerkungen  zu  Shakespeare's  drarnat.  Werken.  Greifswald  .  .  1825 

Boaden  :  Life  of  J.  P.  Kemble  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1825 

Harness  :  Shakespeare' s  Dramatic  Works  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  1830 

Collier:  Hist  of  English  Dramatic  Poetry  (ed.  ii,  1879) . 1831 

Mrs  Jameson  :  Characteristics  of  Women  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  1832 

Oliphant:  Musa  Madrigalesca  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1837 


Guest  :  Hist,  of  English  Rhythms  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  .  .  1838 

Campbell  :  Dramatic  Works  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1838 


Collier  :  Farther  Particulars  regarding  Shakespeare  and  his  Works  .  .  1839 

Joseph  Hunter  :  A  Disquisition  on  the  Scene,  Origin,  Date,  Sac.  (‘  One  hun¬ 
dred  Copies  only  printed’) . 1839 

Maginn  :  Revieiu  of  Farmer's  Essay  (Fraser’s  Maga.,  Sept.) . 1839 

Dyce:  Remarks,  Sac.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1844 

Hunter:  New  Illustrations,  Sac.  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  ,  ,  1845 

Clement:  Shakespeare's  Sturm,  historisch  beleuchtet.  Leipzig  ..  ..  1846 
Verplanck:  Shakespeare's  Works.  New  York  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  1847 

W.  J.  Birch  :  Philosophy  and  Religion  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  1848 

Hartley  Coleridge  :  Essays  and  Marginalia  . 1851 

Collier  :  Notes  and  Emendations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1852 

Joseph  Hunter:  A  Few  Words  in  Reply,  S Ac.  . 1853 

Lettsom:  New  Readings  in  Shakespeare  (Blackwood’s  Maga.,  Aug.)  ..  1853 

Dyce:  Few  Notes,  Sac . 1853 

J.  P.  Quincy:  MS  Corrections  in  a  Copy  of  the  Fourth  Folio.  Boston  .  .  1854 
Walker  :  Shakespeare' s  Versification  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  1854 

R.  G.  White:  Shakespeare  Scholar  .  .  . .  . .  . .  .  .  .  .  1854 

Lamb  :  Dramatic  Poets  (ed.  Bohn)  . 1854 

Tycho  Mommsen:  Der  Perkins- Shakespeare.  Berlin..  ..  ..  ..  1854 

Collier:  Seven  Lectures  of  Coleridge,  &c.  . 1856 

G.  W.  ThornburY:  Shakespeare' s  England  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  1856 

Heine:  Sdmmtliche  Werke,  vol.  v.  Philadelphia  ..  ..  ..  ..  1856 

Horne  Tooke  :  Diversions  of  Purley  (3d  ed.) . 1857 

Bathurst:  Remarks  on  the  Differences  in  Shakespeare' s  Poetry,  Sfc.  .  .  1857 

Dyce:  Strictures,  &c.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  .  .  .  1859 

Walker:  Critical  Examination  of  the  Text,  &*c.  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  1859 

W.  Bell:  Shakespeare' s  Puck,  and  his  Folk-Lore,  vol.  ii  .  .  .  .  ,  .  1859 

S.  Jervis:  Proposed  Emendations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  i860 

Dr  J.  C.  Bucknill  :  Shakespeare' s  Medical  Knowledge  . i860 

Mrs  Kemble  :  Some  Notes  on  the  Text  of  Shakespeare  (Atlantic  Monthly, 

September)  . i860 

W.  C.  Jourdain  :  Some  Proposed  Emendations,  &"c.  (Transactions  of  The 

Philological  Society)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  .  .  ,  1 860-1 

S.  Bailey:  The  Received  Text  of  Shakespeare . 1862 

Charles  Cowden-Clarke  :  Shakespeare  Characters,  Sac . 1863 

Beisly:  Shakspere's  Garden  . 1864 

Bishop  Wordsworth  :  Shakespeare  and  the  Bible . 1864 

Minutes  of  The  Philadelphia  Shakspere  Society . 1864 


456 


APPENDIX 


W.  J.  Thoms:  Three  Notelets  on  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1865 

Max  MOller:  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language,  vol.  ii.  New  York  .  .  1865 

W.  R.  Arrowsmith  :  Shakespeare' s  Editors  and  Commentators  .  .  .  .  1865 

Francois- Victor  Hugo:  (Euvres  completes  de  Shakespeare.  Paris..  ..  1S65 

Henry  Wellesley  :  Stray  Notes  on  the  Text  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  1865 

R.  Cartwright  :  New  Readings,  &c . 1866 

Rushton  :  Shakespeare  Illustrated  by  Old  Authors  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1867 

Keightley  :  The  Shakespeare  Expositor  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1867 

Henry  Giles:  Human  Life  in  Shakespeare.  Boston  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  1868 

Halliwell:  Selected  Notes  on  The  Tempest  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1868 

Julius  Tittmann  :  Schauspiele  aus  dem  sechzehnten  Jahrhundert.  Leipzig  .  .  1868 

Edward  Fitzgerald  :  Sea  Words  and  Phrases  along  the  Suffolk  Coast. 

Lowestoft  . 1869 

Abbott:  Shakespearian  Grammar  (3d  ed.)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1870 

P.  A.  Daniel:  Notes  and  Emendations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1870 

Lamb  :  Works  (ed.  Moxon)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1870 

Lowell:  Among  my  Books  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1870 

Harting:  The  Ornithology  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1871 

J.  Meissner:  Untersuchungen  uber  Shakespeare's  Sturm.  Dessau  ..  ..  1872 

T.  S.  Baynes:  New  Shakespearian  Interpretations  (Edin.  Rev.,  October)  .  .  1872 

Ruskin  :  Munera  Pulveris.  New  York  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1872 

D.  Wilson  :  Caliban:  the  Missing  Link  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1873 

Coleridge:  Notes  and  Lectures.  Liverpool  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1874 

Dowden  :  Shakespeare :  His  Mind  and  Art  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1875 

A.  W.  Ward  :  Hist,  of  English  Dramatic  Poetry  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1875 

Herman  Grimm:  Fiinfzehn  Essays  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1875 

Ingleby  :  Shakespeare  Hermeneutics  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1875 

J.  Schumann  :  See  und  Seefahrt,  in  Shakespeare' s  Dramen  (Programm  der 

Thomasschule  in  Leipzig)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1875 

F.  G.  Fleay  :  Shakespeare  Manual  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1876 

Furnivall:  Introduction  to  The  Leopold  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  1877 

Ingleby  :  Shakespeare,  The  Man  and  The  Book  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  1877 

Id.  P.  Stokes:  Chronological  Order  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays  .  .  .  .  .  .  1878 

Ernest  Renan  :  Caliban ,  Suite  de  La  Temp'ete,  Drame  Philosophique  .  .  187S 

J.  Bulloch  :  Studies  of  the  Text  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1-878 

A.  Roffe:  Handbook  of  Shakespeare  Music  ,  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  ,  .  1878 

Ellacombe:  Plant  Lore  and  Garden  Craft  of  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  187s 

INGLEBY:  A  Centurie  of  Pray se  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  ,  1879 

The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  The  Shakespeare  Key . 1879 

J.  G.  Herr:  Scattered  Notes  on  Shakespeare.  Philadelphia  .  .  .  .  .  .  1879 

Halliwell- Phillitps  :  Memoranda  on  Shakespeare' s  Tempest.  Brighton  .  .  1880 

Mrs  Kemble:  Notes  upon  Some  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays  .  .  .  .  .  ,  1882 

E.  A.  Meredith:  Some  New  Emendations  in  Shakespeare.  Toronto  .  .  1883 

B.  G.  Kinnear  :  Cruces  Shakespearian ce  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  1883 

L.  H.  Grindon  :  The  Shakespeare  Flora.  Manchester  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  ,  1883 

Geo.  Macdonald  :  The  Imagination.  Boston  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  1883 

C.  C.  Hense:  Shakespeare  Untersuchungen.  Antikes  in  Shakespeare' s  Drama: 

Der  Sturm.  Halle  a.  S.  .  .  . igg^ 

G.  Gould:  Corrigenda  and  Explanations ,  Cfc.  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  1884 


plan  of  the  work  45 7 

J.  W.  Hales:  Notes  and  Essays  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  <  _  1884 

Anonymous:  Shakespeare’s  Garden  of  Girls  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  _  1885 

Halliwell-Phillipps  :  Outlines  of  the  Life  of  Shakespeare  (ed.  v)  .  .  1885 

Sir  Philip  Perring:  Hard  Knots  in  Shakespeare  (ed.  ii) . 1886 

R.  G.  White:  Studies  in  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  _  _  1886 

F.  G.  Fleay  :  Life  and  Work  of  Shakespeare . 1886 

Elzk:  Notes  on  Elizabethan  Dramatists.  Halle,  a.  S . 1889 

The  Irving  Shakespeare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  >  _  1890 

F.  G.  Fleay:  Hist  of  The  Stage,  1559-1642 . X890 

j.  G.  Orger  :  Notes  on  Shakespeare' s  Comedies.  London  .  .  .  .  .  .  n.  d. 

A  List  of  Dictionaries  is  added  merely  for  the  sake  of  their  dates : 

CooiER’s  Latin  Dictionary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  _  <  1 573 

Florio:  His  firste  Fruites  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  #  <  1578 

Baret’s  Alvearie  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  _  %  ^  _  1580 

Florio’s  Worlde  of  Wordes  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  .  .  ^  _  1598 

Minsheu  :  Guide  Into  Tongues  .  .  ..  ..  ..  .  ..  ..1617 

Bullokar  :  English  Expositor  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  1621 

Minsheu’s  Spanish  Dictionary  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  _  _  _  1623 

Cotgrave:  Dictionarie  of  the  French  and  English  Tongues . 1632 

Jamieson:  Scottish  Dictionary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  ,  t  _  1808 

Nares  :  Glossary  (ed.  Halliwell  and  Wright,  1867) .  .  .  1822 

Jamieson  :  Scottish  Dictionary  Supplement  .  .  ,  .  , .  . ,  .  1825 

Richardson’s  Dictionary  . .  .  .  .  .  . .  . ,  t  _  1838 

Halliw ell’s  Archaic  Dictionary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  ,  _  >  1847 

Way  :  Promptorium  Pamulorum  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1865 

Eastwood  and  Wright  :  Bible  Word-Book . 1866 

W  edgwood’s  Dictionary  of  English  Etymology  (2d  ed.)  .  .  .  .  .  .  1872 
Schmidt’s  Shakespeare  Lexicon  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  ,  __  1874 

Stratmann  :  Dictionary  of  the  Old  English  Language  .  ,  .  .  .  ,  1878 

Latham’s  Johnson  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .  .  .  . ,  , ,  t  <  1882 

Skeat:  Etymological  Dictionary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  .  .  ,  1882 

Murray’s  New  English  Dictionary  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  .  . .  , .  1884 

The  Century  Dictionary.  New  York  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .  ,  1889 


INDEX 


PAGE 

Absorption  of  « . 210 

“  of  it . 266 

“  of  s  . 72 


of  the  Definite  Article, 


20,  53 

131 

Abhorred  slave 

73 

Aches,  pronunciation  of 

76 

Admire,  its  Latin  use 

248 

Advance  thine  eye  . . 

83 

Again,  or  against 

81 

Alone  =  along 

227 

Ambition  cannot  pierce  ,  . 

“5 

And  =  and  that  too  .  . 

126 

And  =  if  . 

108 

And  =  therefore 

50 

Anthonio  or  Antonio 

31 

Argiers  . 

59 

Ariel,  criticisms  on  .  . 

376 

Ariosto’s  tempest 

321 

As  at  that  time 

3i 

As  omitted . 

264 

Aspersion . 

190 

At’  nostrils . 

13* 

Attached  . 

174 

Attraction  into  the  singular 

184 

Aurelio  et  Isabelle  .  .  .  . 

307 

Ayrer,  Jacob . 

324 

Azured 

236 

Backward,  a  noun . 29 

Badge  . 261 

Barnacles . 229 

Bat-fowling . I08 

Bathurst,  on  the  Date  .  .  .  .  298 

Bede,  Cuthbert,  on  Early  Play-bill  378 
Bell,  on  Source  of  Plot  .  ,  ,  ,  341 

Bemocked-at  stabs . 182 

Bermoothes . 55 

Berries,  water  with  . .  .  .  71,  314 


Blasphemy,  its  more  general  appli- 
cation 

»1GI 

17 

Blue-eyed 

,  % 

6i 

Boil  within  thy  skull  .  , 

238 

Bore-spritt 

52 

Books  of  magic 

t  # 

167 

Bosky 

204 

Both,  peculiar  use  of 

88 

Brae,  on  Florio’s  Montaigne 

293 

Brevity  of  the  play,  its  cause 

271 

Broom-groves  .  ,  ,  , 

201 

Brother,  a  monosyllable 

,  , 

232 

Browning,  Caliban  upon  Setebos 

,  , 

386 

Bryan,  George,  in  Germany 

345 

Bumbard 

,  , 

I27 

But  ever 

•  . 

47 

But  =  otherwise  than,  except 

41,  84 

But’,  with  absorption  of  def.  art. 

#  # 

53 

Butt  .  . 

,  , 

44 

By  and  by . 

,  , 

172 

By’r  .  . 

174 

Calderon’s  Comedy  .  . 

346 

Caliban,  criticisms  on 

379 

“  his  appearance 

«  . 

65 

“  his  language 

•  # 

67 

“  ‘  hobgoblin 

380 

Calibia 

3 

Campbell,  on  the  Play 

356 

Can 

•  • 

191 

Candied 

I2C 

Canker 

•  • 

222 

Cannot,  pronunciation  of  .  . 

,  . 

253 

Capable  =  impressible 

74 

Capell,  on  Date 

•  • 

276 

“  on  Source  of  Plot  . . 

•  • 

307 

Caro,  on  Plot 

•  • 

348 

Carriage 

,  # 

232 

Cast . 

118 

Catch . 

,  , 

17a 

459 


460 


INDEX 


Cat  0’  mountain 

PAGE 

231 

Demi-puppets 

PAGB 

235 

Chalmers,  on  Date  .  . 

277 

280 

Destiny 

118 

“  on  dead  Indian  .  . 

to 

00 

Devour  their  reason  .  . 

248 

Charms  crack  not  .  . 

231 

Dirrill,  on  Date 

279 

Chastise,  its  accent  . . 

261 

Distinctly  =  separately 

.  . 

52 

Chat  .  . 

119 

Ditty . 

•  . 

83 

Cherubin 

45 

Doit . 

•  . 

128 

Chess . 

249 

Double  comparative 

25.  87 

Chough 

“9 

Doubts  discovery  there 

•  . 

115 

Clarke,  C.-C.,  on  Prospero  .  . 

367 

Douce,  on  Date 

279 

Cohn,  on  The  Fair  Sidea  .  . 

341 

Dowden,  on  the  Play 

.  . 

364 

Cold  i’  the  mouth  =  to  die  .  . 

19 

Dowle 

183 

Coleridge,  on  Ariel  .  . 

376 

Drake,  on  Witchcraft 

•  • 

388 

“  on  Caliban 

380 

Drink  the  air 

244 

“  on  Miranda  .  . 

37° 

Drolleries 

176 

Collier,  on  Date 

296 

Dry  for  sway 

41 

“  on  The  Inchanted  Island  .  . 

315 

Dryden,  on  Caliban 

.  • 

379 

Collins  quoted  by  Warton  .  . 

308 

Dryden’s  Version  .  . 

389 

Composant  .  . 

51 

Duke’s  Son,  an  omitted  character 

.  . 

86 

Conduct  =  conductor 

259 

Duration  of  Action  .  . 

351 

Confederates . 

41 

Dyce,  on  Date 

298 

Confine  into  .  . 

Consciences,  sing,  and  plu. 

pro- 

62 

e  and  d  final,  confounded 

52 

nounced  alike 

120 

Ecstasy 

186 

Control  =  confute 

87 

•ed,  its  omission 

27.  45 

Convulsions  .  . 

231 

Eld’st,  pronunciation  of 

•  • 

253 

Corollary 

193 

Elmo,  Saint  .  . 

.  . 

5i 

Correspondent 

63 

Elze,  on  Date 

3°° 

Costume 

354 

Endeavour,  its  Shakespearian  use 

•  , 

106 

Crabs  .  . 

138 

Engine 

.  , 

106 

Crack  not,  charms  .  . 

231 

Estate  =  bestow  .  . 

205 

Creature,  a  collective  noun .  . 

24 

Ethical  Dative 

#  # 

56 

Crisp  =  curling 

209 

Every,  its  former  use 

,  , 

260 

Cry  it  .  . 

43 

Ev’r  instead  of  e'er  .  . 

248 

Cuerpo  Santo 

5i 

Eye  of  green  .  . 

98 

d  and  e  final,  confounded  .  . 

52 

Fadom 

82 

Daniel,  Time  Analysis 

351 

Fair  Sidea,  The  .  . 

325 

Dare,  in  subj.,  common  in  Historical 
Plays  . 

165 

Faithful  Shepherdess ,  imitation 
The  . 

in 

Sit 

349 

Dash  =  omitted  words 

17 

Fearfull 

89 

Daughter,  a  trisyllable 

247 

Featly 

79 

Dead  Indian . 

128 

Fellow  =  companion 

161 

Dear,  its  meaning  .  . 

103 

Fellowly 

239 

Deboshed . 

164 

Five  for  one  .  . 

179 

Decked  . 

45 

Flat-long 

108 

Deighton,  on  Date  .  . 

298 

Fleay,  on  Date 

299. 

302 

Demand  =  ask 

43 

“  on  Henslowe’s  Umers 

.  . 

294 

INDEX 


461 


Fletcher’s  Faithful  Shepherdess 

PAGE 

•  349 

Flote  . 

•  •  55 

Foil . 

..  158 

Folios,  variations  in  different  copies, 

81 

158,  257 

Foot,  my  tutor 

.  .  90 

For  =  against,  for  what  concerns 

.  .  18 

For  =  as  regards  ,  .  ,  . 

•  •  55 

Foreheads,  low 

•  •  230 

Forth  at  vast .  . 

.  .  70 

Forth-rights . 

•  •  174 

Foule  .  . 

.  .  127 

Foundered . 

.  .  191 

Foyson 

.  .  106 

Fraught  =  freight 

.  .  24 

From,  without  verb  of  motion 

•  •  30 

Freshness,  as  a  plural  .  . 

..  98 

Frippery 

Full  .  . 

•  •  25 

Fumivall,  on  the  Play 

•  •  365 

Gaberdine 

Garden  of  Girls  .  .  .  .  - 

•  •  375 

Garnett,  on  Date 

“  on  the  Play 

•  •  366 

“  on  Miranda 

••  375 

“  on  Prospero 

•  •  369 

Gentle  and  not  fearfull 

. .  89 

Gentleness,  a  dissyllable 

•  •  47 

Gifford,  on  Servant-monster 

.  .  283 

Giles,  on  Miranda  .  , 

Glasses 

56,  255 

Glosses  as  a  singular 

•  •  99 

Green-sour  ringlets  .  . 

••  235 

Greene’s  Alphonsus ,  as  Source 

of 

Plot  . 

•  •  348 

Grimm,  on  Calderon,  and  Dryden’s 

Version . 

•  •  346 

Gorse . 

.  .  221 

Halliwell,  on  Date  .  . 

•  •  297 

Have  used  for  had  .  . 

•  •  45 

Hazlitt,  on  Caliban  .  . 

..  381 

“  on  the  Play 

•  •  356 

Heavy  used  proleptically  .  . 

.  .  IIO 

Heine,  on  Miranda  .  . 

•  •  372 

Henslowe’s  Umers  .  . 

. .  294 

Heraud,  on  Prospero 

•  367 

Hertzberg,  on  Date  .  . 

Hest . 

Him  for  he . 

Hint  . 

Holt,  on  Date 

Holy,  its  former  meaning  .  . 

Horn,  on  Ariel 
Hours 

Hudson,  on  Date  .  . 

Hugo,  F.-V.,  on  the  Play  .  . 

Hunter,  on  Ariosto  .  . 

“  on  Chalmers’s  ‘  dead  Indian  ’ 

“  on  Florio’s  Montaigne  290 
Hymen’s  lamps  . 


PAGH 

299 

157 

233 

43 

272 

239 

377 

49 

301 

357 
320 
291 
,  292 
190 


I  arise 

Ignorant  used  causatively  .  . 

Impertinent  .  . 

Inchanted  Island,  The  Ballad 

Inch-meal . 

In  few  . 

Influence  .  .  . .  ,  .  .  . 

Infinitive  =  gerund  ..  ..  161,227 


47 

239 

43 
315 
1 25 

44 


Ingram,  on  Date 
In  lieu  =  in  consideration  of 
Into,  after  verbs  of  rest,  implying 

motion  . 

Into  truth  by  telling  of  it  .  . 
Intransitive  verbs  used  reflexively  .  . 

“  “  “  transitively 

Is,  absorption  of 

It  own  . 

It’s . ’ 

Jack,  play  the  . 

James  I.  portrayed  in  Prospero 
Jameson,  Mrs,  on  Miranda 
Johnson,  Dr,  on  the  Play  .  . 
Jonson’s  Every  Man  in  his  Humour 
Jourdan’s  Discovery 


300 

42 

62 

36 

265 

122 

210 

106 

35 

225 

305 

37o 

355 

289 

309 


Kemble,  Miss,  as  Ariel  .  .  .  .  378 

“  Mr,  early  Performance  of 
The  Tempest ',  after  a  Concert  .  .  37S 
Kemble,  Mrs  F.  A.,  on  Miranda  .  .  373 

“  on  the  Play  .  .  360 

Key . 34 

King  Stephen  . 226 


402 


INDEX 


PAGE 

FAQ  I 

Knight,  on  Date 

.  . 

294 

Mont6gut,  on  the  Play 

359 

Know  thine  own  meaning  .  . 

.  . 

74 

Moody 

57 

Kybe . 

•  • 

120 

Mooncalf 

134 

Moore,  on  the  Bermoothes  .  . 

I 

Lamb,  on  Caliban  .  . 

381 

Mope  .  . 

259 

“  or  ‘  one  thing  she  did  ’ 

•  • 

60 

More  better  .  . 

25 

“  on  Sanity  of  True  Genius.  . 

380 

Most  busy  lest 

144 

Lampedusa,  Prospero’s  Island 

•  • 

1 

Muse  =  admire  . 

178 

Learning  =  teaching 

•  • 

75 

Mushrumps . 

236 

Let’s  alone . 

227 

Music .  . 

35i 

Lieu  .  . 

42 

Mutiner 

164 

Lime  .  . 

228 

My  foot  my  tutor 

90 

Line  .  . 

222 

Line -grove  .  . 

232 

Nerves  — strength  .  . 

92 

Lloyd,  W.  W.,  on  the  Play 

.  . 

362 

Nicholson,  on  Caliban’s  appeal  anee 

66 

Long  heath  .  . 

20 

“  on  Date . 

301 

Love’s  Labours  Won 

•  • 

287 

No-body  . 

170 

Lowell,  on  the  Play  .  . 

•  ♦ 

362 

Nor  inaccurately  used  for  and  or  or 

92 

Lush . 

98 

Non-pareill  .  . 

169 

Not  bites  . 

236 

Magic  books . 

167 

Not  doubt  .  .  .  .  .  .  102 

265 

Maid  or  made 

84 

Not  know 

245 

Main-course,  try  with  ’ 

•  . 

16 

Nuptial  in  the  Singular 

265 

Malone,  on  Date 

274, 

O 

00 

“  on  Greene’s  Alphonsus 

.  . 

348 

Oared .  . 

IOI 

“  on  Jourdan’s  Discovery 

.  . 

308 

Of  =  about,  concerning 

99 

Marmazet 

.  . 

138 

Of  after  verbals  =  in  the  act  of 

54 

Master’s  whistle 

12 

Of  —  during  .  . 

14 

Masters  of  some  Merchant .  . 

•  • 

93 

Of  redundant 

25 

Matilda  for  Miranda 

.  , 

21X 

Of  =  resulting  from  .  . 

258 

Meddle  —  mingle 

25 

Oh  ho  . 

72 

Medea’s  speech  in  Ovid 

.  . 

234 

Old . 

75 

Me,  Ethical  Dative  .  . 

56 

Omission  of  as 

107 

Meet  with  =  counteract  .  . 

,  , 

220 

“  of  -ed  . 

27 

Meissner,  on  The  Fair  Sidea 

•  • 

343 

“  of  the  after  prepositions  .  . 

14 

“  on  the  Plot 

•  • 

344 

“  of  the  preposition  .  . 

88 

Merchant  =  merchantman  .  . 

•  • 

93 

“  of  the  relative 

89 

Merely 

19 

One  thing  she  did . 

60 

Meres’s  Palladis  Tamia  .  . 

•  • 

t'* 

00 

N 

Ooze . 

58 

Might  —  could 

41 

Opportune,  its  accent 

191 

Mine,  thine,  &c.  =  pronominal  adjec- 

Or  ere 

24 

tives 

185 

Out  =  complete 

28 

Miranda,  Criticisms  on 

•  . 

370 

Ovid . 

234 

Miss  —  do  without  .  . 

66,  97 

Owe . 

83 

Mo . 

X03 

Moe  .  . 

126 

Pageant  . 

212 

Mole . 

225 

Painfull  .  .  .  ,  ,  , 

142 

Montaigne . 

104 

Pains  .  . 

56 

INDEX 

463 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Pantalaria 

3 

Retrospective  narration 

,  , 

22 

Passion  as  they 

233 

Revels  Accounts 

O 

00 

N 

295 

Pass  of  pate  .  . 

228 

Rhyming  couplets  .  . 

156 

Patch  .  . 

166 

Rich,  Nevves  from  Virginia 

349 

Phillpotts,  on  Caliban 

383 

Rid . 

75 

“  on  Date . 

301 

Ringlets,  green-sour 

235 

“  on  the  Play 

364 

Roarers  . 

14 

Phoenix  . 

176 

Rocky-hard . 

203 

Pied . 

166 

Ruskin,  on  the  Play 

363 

Pignuts 

138 

Russell,  E.  R.,  on  Prospero 

367 

Pioned  and  twilled  brims  .  . 

195 

Plantation 

104 

Sack  .  . 

134 

Plural  of  words  ending  in  s 

49 

Saint  Elmo’s  fire 

51 

Plural  subject  preceded  by  sing,  verb 

13 

Sanctimonious 

190 

Point,  to  . 

5i 

Sans  .  . 

35 

Poison  to  worke  a  great  time  after 

186 

Scamels  . 

138 

Pole-clipt 

203 

Schlegel,  on  Ariel  .  . 

377 

Poor-john 

128 

“  on  Caliban 

380 

Pope,  Thomas,  in  Germany 

345 

Score  .  . 

251 

Present,  a  misprint  for  tempest 

14 

Scurvy 

130 

Princess  . 

30 

Seiaxghiher . 

3 

Probable  . 

260 

Sensible  =  sensitive  .  . 

107 

Professes  to  persuade 

”3 

Servant-monster 

162 

Prolepsis 

no 

“  “  in  Bartholomew 

Pronominal  adjectives 

185 

Fair 

273 

Prospero,  criticisms  on 

366 

Setebos 

76 

Prospero  portrays  James  I. 

305 

She  used  for  her 

169 

Provision  or  prevision 

26 

Should  he  learn  our  language 

131 

Putter  out  of  five  for  one  .  . 

179 

Should  =  ought 

in 

“  =  would 

122 

Quaint 

51 

Siddons,  Mrs,  first  Shakespearian 

Quality  . 

67 

performance  as  Ariel 

378 

Sidea,  The  Fair 

325 

Rabble  . 

192 

Single 

86 

259 

Rabelais,  parallelisms  in 

15 

Singular  by  attraction 

184 

Race  =  nature 

74 

Singular  verb  preceding  plural  sub- 

Rack  .  . 

212 

ject 

13 

Rate  =  estimation 

IOI 

Skottowe,  on  Ariel  .  . 

377 

Red-plague  .  . 

75 

“  on  Caliban 

381 

Reeling  ripe  .  . 

263 

Solemnised,  the  accent  of  .  . 

265 

Remember  =  commemorate 

83 

Somers’s  shipwreck  .  . 

309 

Remembrance  as  a  plural  .  . 

253 

Sometimes  or  sometime  .  . 

171 

Remorse  . 

240 

Sort  .  . 

100 

Renan,  Caliban ,  a  philosophical 

Sot . 

168 

drama  . 

383 

Southwest,  a . 

69 

Renown  . 

253 

Spirit,  a  monosyllable 

63 

Require,  its  former  meaning 

237 

s  sound  in  singular  =  plural 

49 

Retire  me  . 

265 

s  substituted  for  st  .  . 

,  # 

62 

464 


INDEX 


PAGE 

PAGfl 

Stale . 

221 

True . 

261 

Standard  . 

163 

True  Declaration ,  &c.,  A  .  . 

310 

Standing  water 

113 

“  Reportory,  &c.,  A 

3*3 

Staring 

53 

Truth  by  telling  of  it 

36 

Stephano,  accent  of .  . 

4 

Try  with’  main  course 

17 

Sterling’s  Darius  .  . 

211 

OO 

Twenty  =  indefinite  number 

120 

Still-vext  Bermoothes 

55 

Twilled  brims 

195 

Stockfish 

166 

Turberville,  as  a  Source  of  Plot 

348 

Stomach  =  courage  .  . 

46 

Stover  . 

194 

Under  the  line 

228 

Strachey,  Sir  Edward,  on  Ariel 

379 

Urchin  . 

69 

“  William  .  . 

313 

Utensil,  its  accent  .  . 

168 

Strangely 

189 

Strong,  applied  to  Witches  .  . 

262 

Vanity 

192 

Subtlety  . 

245 

Variation  in  the  Folios  .  .  81, 

158 

.257 

Suggestion . 

122 

Vast,  for  that 

70 

Sustaining 

54 

Verily 

125 

Sycorax,  the  meaning  of  .  . 

58 

Verplanck,  on  Date  .  . 

296 

Vertue’s  MS  .  . 

275 

Taborer 

17  3 

Virgin  Queen ,  The .  . 

450 

Talking  —  saying 

100 

Visit  =  inspect,  survey 

65 

Teen  .  . 

30 

Visitor  .  .  .  .  .  . 

95 

Tell  =  count  .  . 

95 

Temperance  .  . 

97 

Wager  . 

96 

Ten  tides,  the  washing  of  .  . 

19 

Waldron,  The  Virgin  Queen 

45o 

That,  its  insertion  and  omission 

84 

Wallets  of  flesh 

179 

“  replaced  by  which  .  . 

126 

Warburton,  on  Plot .  . 

306 

“  =  so  that 

35.  205 

Ward,  A.  W.,  on  Caliban  .  . 

383 

“  =that  which  .  . 

168 

Warton’s  reference  to  Collins 

30S 

The,  omitted  after  prepositions 

14 

Washing  of  ten  tides 

19 

The  which  .  . 

43 

Water  with  berries  in’t 

7U 

3i4 

Third  of  mine  own  life 

187 

Ways,  come  on  your 

132 

Thou’rt 

75 

Weak  Endings 

24. 

300 

Thou  and  you 

23,  86 

Weak  masters 

236 

Tides,  the  washing  of  ten  .  . 

19 

What  . 

192 

Tieck,  on  Date 

302 

What  in  elliptical  phrases  =  any 

160 

“  on  Jacob  Ayrer  .  . 

324 

When,  an  expression  of  impatience 

67 

Tittmann,  on  Plot  .  . 

342 

Whether,  contracted  whe'er 

244 

To,  omitted  and  inserted  .  . 

159 

Which,  of  he,  or  Adrian  .  . 

96 

Too  much 

132 

Which,  the  .  . 

43 

Transposition  of  indefinite  article 

208 

Which  =  that 

144 

“  of  words  .  . 

54,  189 

While’er 

170 

Trash  for  overtopping 

33 

Whist  . 

78 

Trembling . 

132 

Whistle,  the  Master’s 

12 

Trice . 

259 

White,  R.  G.,  on  Date 

301 

Tricksy  . 

257 

“  “  on  the  Play .  , 

366 

Trifle  .  . 

244 

Who  for  whom 

33 

Troll . 

169 

Who  having  into  truth 

•  . 

36 

INDEX 


Who,  with  irrational  antecedent 
Wicked  as  a  causative 
Wild  waves  whist  .  . 

Wilson’s  Cheerfull  Ayres  .  . 
Wilson,  D.,  on  Caliban 

Windring . 

Wink  beyond 
Wise,  or  wife 

Witchcraft . 

With’,  absorption  of  article 
W'ith  «=  apud . 

SO 


465 


PAGB 

Without  her  power . 262 

Woe,  I  am . 247 

Worm  .  .  .  ,  .  .  .  ,  157 

Wrangle  . 252 

Wright,  W.  A.,  on  Date  .  .  .  .  301 

Yarely  . . 

Year,  a  dissyllable . 29 

You,  and  thou  .  .  .  .  23,  240  247 

You  were,  as  a  monosyllable  .  .  102 


PAGB 

182 

68 

73 

352 

38i 

209 

”5 

208 

388 

20 

89 


DATE  DUE 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U  SA 

