is 


Sod 


Ni 


‘ 


per PERT STE 


yer ee aS 


a 
paw tudes 


A NEW VARIORUM EDITION 


OF 


SHAKESPEARE 


EDITED BY 


HORACE HOWARD FURNESS 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


ANTHONIE, AND CLEOPATRA 


PHILADELPHIA & LONDON 
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 


Copyright, 1907, by H. H. FurRNEss 


ELECTROTYPED BY LIPPINCOTT’S PRESS 
WESTCOTT & THOMSON, PHILADA. PHILADA. 


IN MEMORIAM 


PAR BSBA Gak 


Ir must be a source of gratification to all lovers of SHAKESPEARE 
that the discussion in regard to the superiority of this or that Text is 
gradually declining, and that what, in the time of our forebears, was a 
furious ebullition, is now subsiding into a gentle simmer, whereof the 
murmur is soothing rather than exciting. It must be acknowledged, 
however, that the flames burned about certain plays more fiercely than 
about others. And it was those ‘stolne and surreptitious copies,’ the 
Quartos, that supplied the fuel. Undoubtedly, the Quartos have at 
times yielded valuable assistance,—notably in Hamd/et and in Richard 
the Third,—more emphatically, however, in supplying deficiencies than 
in elucidating the Text. As to the Text, it is doubtful that any very pro- 
nounced superiority can be observed in those plays whereof we have 
Quartos over those whereof we have none. ‘There have been times, I 
confess, in this present play, when I have been tempted to sigh fora 
Quarto; but the sigh has been stifled by the reflection that, in all 
probability, instead of one point of discussion, we should then have sev- 
eral points, and that there would always be disputants ready to cast up 
to the Quarto the stigma of its birth and refuse to accept its testimony. 
Wherefore, in scanning the whole horizon, I have concluded that man- 
kind is, in general, happier under the grey authority of the Folio, 
and of the Folio alone, which is nearer to SHAKESPEARE than a stolen 
Quarto, and that 

‘Calm pleasures there abide, majestic pains.’ 


In this present play of Anthony and Cleopatra it is the Folio that, 
I must say happily, furnishes our sole Text. There is, to be sure, an 
entry in the Stationers’ Registers which warrants the supposition that a 
Quarto, if it did not actually appear, was at least in contemplation. 
There are two entries on the 2oth of May, 1608, and they are as 
follows : * 


* Stationers’ Registers, Arber’s Reprint, vol. iii, p. 378. 


“i PREFACE 


‘Edward Blount Entred for his copie vnder the andes of Sir 
George Buck knight and Master Warden Seton 
A booke called. The booke of Pericles prynce 
of Tyre og a8 mA ae NS 
Edward Blunt  Entred also for his copie by the lyke Aucthoritie. 
A booke Called Anthony. and Cleopatra... vj 


SHAKESPEARE’S name is not mentioned ; these entries are supposed, 
however, to refer to his P/ays. In neither case was the ‘booke,’ so 
far as we know, in print. Edward Blount did not publish Perzcles 
by itself in that year, nor in any year; it was printed by Henry 
Gosson in 1609. And Anthony and Cleopatra was not printed sepa- 
rately, so faras we know, by anybody in any year. ‘There still remains 
the possibility that it was printed; and it may even yet be discovered, 
under dust and grime, to become the prize of unscholarly wealth. 

For the present play the sole Text that is come down to us is, 
therefore, that of the Folio of 1623, which, in the following pages, is 
reproduced with all the fidelity which unwearied pains can bestow. 

It is not generally realised, I think, to what an extent this First Folio 
survives in all our texts, and how little, how very little, it varies, save 
in spelling and in stage-directions, from the most popular texts of the 
present day. We have heard so much of the ‘corruption of the old 
‘texts,’ of the labour expended, and of the eminent critical ability 
demanded, to render them intelligible, that these original texts are 
come to be regarded as sealed books to all but the most learned eyes ; 
and should they be divested of the emendations of the critics, it would 
be labour lost to attempt to understand them. It may be, perhaps, worth 
the while to examine how far editors and critics have amended SHAKE- 
SPEARE’S language so as to fit it for our comprehension. ‘The present 
is the longest of SHAKESPEARE’S Plays,—it lacks but thirty-six lines 
of four thousand.* Taking as a guide the Camédridge Shakespeare, 
edited by Dr W. Atpis WricuT, which is accepted the world over as 
the standard modernised Text, and examining its ootnotes, we shall find 
that, after omitting stage-directions, metrical divisions of lines, mere 
punctuation, and immoment changes of spelling, the original text of 
this play in the Four Folios has been set aside and emendations by 
editors or critics adopted in sixty instances.+ Iam aware that there 
is not in this calculation the nice accuracy of an astronomical problem, 
in that the omission of punctuation, which at times makes the difference 
between sense and nonsense, may be censured as ill-advised ; yet, mak- 


* The number is given as 3964 on p. 354, Shakspere Society's Transactions for 
1874. ft This list is given in the Appendix, p. 598. 


PREFACE vii 


ing all allowances, nay, doubling sixty and calling it a hundred and 
twenty, there still remain three thousand eight hundred and odd lines of 
this play which come to us exactly as SHAKESPEARE’S printers have trans- 
mitted them, excepting a difference in spelling which would not trouble 
a school-boy withal. Furthermore, there is to be learned from this 
a second lesson, to be deeply conned by all who would airily undertake 
now-a-days to ‘amend Shakespeare.’ With the exception of a con- 
version by Dyce of a ‘how!’ into a ho /; of a change by STEEVENS of 
‘was’ into wast; of a change by Matone of a long f into an f,—with 
the exception of these few alterations, I repeat, there has not been 
admitted into this standard Text of the Cambridge Edition a single 
emendation of a date later than Dr JoHNson’s edition in 1765. Be it 
noted, in passing, that of these sixty emendations that have taken their 
place in the Text, THEoBaLp contributed sixteen,—nearly twice as 
many as those contributed by Rowe, who stands next in rank, with 
nine. 

From what has just been said, it is, I think, manifest that the Text 
of the First Folio, with its three successors, is, in the present play, even 
better than we should expect, in view of the times and circumstances in 
which it was printed. Nay, it may be deemed especially good when 
we consider the terse, condensed style into which SHAKESPEARE’S 
thoughts seem to solidify at impassioned moments. Of course, there 
are here and there inexplicable words and phrases, mistakes of the eye 
and ear on the part of the compositors; but then, is there a play of 
SHAKESPEARE where these are not? They are to be expected when 
an author has never seen the proof-sheets. We should be grateful that 
there are not more. And inasmuch as these textual puzzles are, gener- 
ally, single words, such as ‘ Arme-gaunt,’ * ‘ribaudred,’ f etc., which 
hardly affect the sense, and would pass unheeded were they heard from 
the stage, we need not be greatly cast down when they occur. In sooth, 
I think that they supply a certain charm; they give the imagination 
play. What an imposing grandeur is imparted to Anthony’s deport- 
ment when we learn that ‘he soberly did mount an arme-gaunt steede’ ! 
What image of panoplied gauntness is there here lacking? And that 
Anthony could ‘soberly’ mount this hippogriff betokens a serenity of 
mind that of itself ranks him with the gods. Ah, no; give me Caliban’s 
‘scammels,’ and Anthony’s ‘arme-gaunt steede.’ If arm-gaunt be not 
the true word, I think SHAKESPEARE’s Shade must be grateful to the 
printers for having supplied its place with one so suggestive. 

In connection with the subject of the Text, I trust that I may be 
pardoned for here mentioning a matter that is, in the main, personal. 


* Act I, sc. v, line 56. ¢ Act III, sc. x, line 17. 


viii PREFACE 


In the Preface to Love’s Labour's Lost I set forth at some length 
the reasons for my belief that the compositors followed the voice of a 
reader, and closed my remarks with the assertion that ‘if this surmise 
‘of mine be a fact, it is fatal to emendations founded on the ductus 
‘Litterarum.’ For this assertion I was gently taken to task by a critic,* 
who remarked that I seemed ‘to forget that the compositor’s reader, 
‘if not the compositor himself, must still have used his eyes, and so 
- must have been liable to the same kind of mistake as was made at 
‘times by the compositor when he set directly from written copy.’ I 
now wish to state that, in this particular regard, of the ductus Litterarum, 
my critic is entirely right, and that I was entirely wrong. Be it under- 
stood that my faith remains unshaken in the belief that certain misprints 
are due to the misapprehension by the compositor of the words uttered 
by his reader. That there are many of these misprints has long been 
recognized ; MALone attributed them to transcribers, STEEVENS sur- 
mised that they were possibly due to transcriptions of the plays taken 
down by shorthand during a performance. All that I contend for 
is that they are due to the practice of reading the copy aloud to the 
compositor,—a practice which we now know obtained in early print- 
ing offices. The following is a List of some of these errors of the ear 
in the present play. The Text of the First Folio reads: 


‘To such whose places vnder vs.’ for ‘To such whose Zéace zs under us.’ 


5 iy 25o: 
‘Whose with him.’ “¢ «Who ’s with him.’ Talis. 
‘ vouchsafe to think.’ ‘* “yvouchsafed to think.’ I, iv, 10. 
‘The neere Lust-wearied.’ “¢ «The ze’ er lust-wearied.’ II, i, 48. 
‘shall well greet together.’ “¢ “shall well gvee together.’ II, i, 50. 


‘your proofe were well deserued.’ ‘‘ ‘ your veproof were well deserved.’ 
Ai er ane 


‘The other wayes a Mars.’ <c'*The other, way-he's a Mars’ 

Ih v14as: 
*‘ your so branchlesse.’ “* ¢ yours so branchlesse.’ III, iv, 27. 
‘You reconciler.’ ** © Your reconciler.’ IIL, iv;,.34: 
‘ His Sonnes hither proclaimed.’ ‘‘ ‘ His sonnes he there proclaimed.’ 

TIL vase 4: 
‘ Thantoniad.’ ‘¢ *The Antoniad.’ TIT x6: 
‘thou should’st stowe me after.’ ‘‘ ‘thou should’st tow me after.’ 

III, xi, 64. 
‘Mine Nightingale.’ “¢ * My Nightingale.’ IV, viii, 24. 
‘A toward Cittadell.’ ‘¢ A tower’ d Cittadell.’ IV, xiv, 6. 


* The Atlantic Monthly, February, 1905, p. 283. 


PREFACE ie 


‘Vnarme Eros.’ for ‘Unarm me Eros.’ IV, xiv, 45. 
‘No more but in a Woman.’ ““ “No more dut e’en a Woman.’ 

ING ew,t 03: 
“IT am sure mine Nailes.’ “* *T am sure my Nailes.’ V, ii, 268. 


We are at times inclined to criticise our German brothers for trans- 
lating the names, occasionally historic, which SHAKESPEARE has given 
to his characters. Thus, in German translations, ‘ Hotspur’ becomes 
fleisssporn, ‘ Mistress Quickly’ appears as Frau Hurtig, and ‘Juliet’ 
is styled /udia, and so forth. But it appears that this criticism should 
cease, or at least be measurably abated. For do not we, ourselves, here 
in Anthony and Cleopatra, fall under the same condemnation? In 
the Twelfth Scene of the Ziird Act Cesar addresses by name one of 
his followers, ‘Thidias,’ and bids him go to Cleopatra and try by 
bribery to win her from Anthony. In the next Scene the stage-direc- 
tion reads ‘ Enter Thidias.’ He has his interview, and, during it, 
Cleopatra asks him his name. ‘My name,’ he replies, ‘is Thidias.’ 
Anthony enters, and in his ungovernable fury at the sight of Cesar’s 
ambassador kissing Cleopatra’s hand, orders a servant to tug him away 
to be whipt, and the stage-direction follows, ‘ Hxeunt with Thidius.’ 
When, after the whipping, the servant brings back the ambassador, the 
stage-direction reads, ‘ Enter a Servant with ‘Thidias’; and at the 
conclusion of the interview we have ‘ £x7¢ Thid.’ It is hardly possi- 
ble to have a name more clearly indicated; there is no misspelling, 
but the name is consistently, and clearly, and uniformly spelt ‘ Thidias,’ 
with one trifling variation, Zizdius. And yet THEOBALD as consist- 
ently, as clearly, and as uniformly changed it to Zhyreus/ and has 
been herein followed by every editor since his day. SHAKESPEARE in 
his nomenclature was, as in all things else, exquisite ; the smoothness 
or the befitting harshness of his names is a quality which differentiates 
him from other dramatists of his time. For certain reasons (did he 
ever do anything without reason?) he chose the name ‘ Thidias.’ 
For a certain reason THEOBALD, and every modern editor acquiescing, 
changes ‘Thidias’ to Zhyreus. THEOBALD’s reason, forsooth, was 
that he found in North’s translation of Plutarch the name of Cezesar’s 
ambassador to be Thyreus, and, therefore, concluding that SHakeE- 
SPEARE had blundered, incontinently converted SHAKESPEARE’S Own 
chosen name ‘ Thidias’ into Zhyreus. 

A similar treatment has been dealt to ‘ Camidius,’ whose name has 
been changed to Canidius. Here, however, the liberty is not so fla- 
grant. The spelling in the Folio is not quite as uniform as it is in the 
case of ‘Thidias’; it is in one instance spelt ‘Camidias’* and in 


* Act III, sc. vii, line 24. 


ae PREFACE 


another ‘Camindius.’ * ‘Camidius’ might possibly have been Canzd- 
zZus misread or misheard. But no such excuse can be urged for Zhyrews. 

A moral to be drawn from such liberties with the Text is that 
possibly we may scrutinize too closely the sources whence SHAKE- 
SPEARE drew his plots, especially in the Azstorical. Plays. We learn 
too much, and bring our knowledge to the interpretation of the 
plays. It is possible that, thus biased, our judgement: becomes warped, 
and. we read into a character somewhat that SHAKESPEARE may not, 
possibly, have intended. It seems to me that we should accept 
these plays with our mind the proverbial tadu/a rasa, whence every 
previous record has been wiped away, and all the light we have comes, 
untinted, direct from SHAKESPEARE. In the present play I think two 
characters, at least, have suffered from this extrinsic knowledge on our 
part: Cesar is one and Cleopatra,—yes, even Cleopatra,—is another. 
All that Ceesar says or does we regard as said or done by the Cesar whom 
we have known aforetime. We shut our eyes to noble traits which 
SHAKESPEARE Offers us, and open them only on the crafty image of our 
school-days. Throughout the play, I believe SHAKESPEARE intends 
us to accept Ceesar’s love for Anthony as perfectly sincere and very 
deep-seated. Witness the Scene where Cesar learns of Anthony’s 
personal challenge and of his brutal conduct in having Cesar’s own 
ambassador most disgracefully whipt. With justifiable heat Cesar 
breaks out, and calls Anthony ‘that old Ruffian’; but as he leaves, 
after giving instructions for the disposition of his army, a flood of mem- 
ories of old days comes over him, recalling the echoes of Anthony’s sole 
voice which drove Julius Czsar’s murderers in a mad gallop from Rome, 
and when Anthony had been to him as a protecting elder brother,— 
and with ineffable pity he sighs forth ‘ Poor Anthony!’ That man is 
not to be envied who can read this without emotion. From no cold, _ 
calculating heart did that bitter sigh break forth. Even Ceesar’s affec- 
tion for his ‘ dearest sister,’ as he names her, has been questioned ; and 
the very fervour of his expressions of love, as she stands pitifully before 
him after she has been deserted by Anthony, has been cast up to him 
as a proof of his insincerity. When, as Anthony’s bride, Octavia bade 
farewell to her brother, all the number of the stars had been invoked 
to give light to her fair way. She returns a solitary, unattended, 
deserted wife. If ever there were a time when a brother should lavish 
on a sister all the treasure of his fondest love, surely it was then. 
What end could be gained in such an hour by ‘insincerity’? Would 
not Octavia have detected an insincere ring in her brother’s words 
instantly ? 


* Act IV, sc. vi, line 20. 


PREFACE “i 


On Ceesar’s first appearance, when SHAKESPEARE so frequently gives 
us the key to a character, he rehearses with bitterness all Anthony’s 
misdoings in Egypt, and yet before the Scene closes, as though to show 
how genuinely he loved Anthony, and how true he was to his own fine 
nature, he recalls with fervour what a grand, noble soldier Anthony 
was, what bitter hardships he had borne upon the march, and while 
sharing the lowest lot of the commonest of the host, had even drank 
the gilded puddle that beasts would cough at. And with what anguish 
wrung from his heart of heart does Cesar héar of Anthony’s death! 
His first words are almost of self-reproach, as if he himself had partly 
been the cause, ‘Oh, Anthony, I have followed thee to this!’ and then, 
with ‘ tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts,’ he calls him 

‘my Brother, my Competitor 
‘In top of all design, my mate in empire, 
‘Friend and Companion in the front of War, 
“The Arm of mine own Body, and the Heart 
‘Where mine his thoughts did kindle.’ 

And yet we are told that this man was cold, crafty, and self-seeking, 
and that these words were uttered for effect! Much learning has made 
us mad ! 

Moreover, does it not injure the tragedy as a work of art that the 
Power, representing Justice, which is to crush Anthony should be of a 
character no more elevated than Anthony’s own? Anthony deserved 
to be crushed ; he was false to what he knew to be right. But should 
not the Power that punishes him be more exalted than he? ‘He who 
‘the sword of Heaven would bear Should be as holy as severe.’ 
A man who is pure craft and selfishness ought not to be entrusted 
with the: sword of Heaven. 

Even with more reason than in Ceesar’s character, is it necessary 
that we should accept Cleopatra, at SHAKESPEARE’S hands, with minds 
unbiased by history. We should know no more of her than what we hear 
on the stage. Of her past, of her salad days, we should know nothing 
but what we are told. The first words that she and Anthony utter tell 
of boundless, illimitable love, and this love is maintained to the last 
throb of life in each of them. Although Cleopatra then says that she’ll 
set a bourne how far to be beloved, and Anthony replies that then she © 
must needs find out a new heaven and a new earth, yet it is not Anthony, 
but Cleopatra, who sets no bourne to it. Twice Anthony touches this 
bourne, and twice Cleopatra surmounts and spurns it. Never does — 
Cleopatra waver in her wild and passionate love for Anthony. Even 
in the Scene with Czsar’s ambassador, Thidias, who comes to Cleo- 
- patra with overtures of peace and favour on condition that she will give 


yee PREFACE 


up Anthony, we knowing ones, crammed with history as pigeons are with 
peas, tip each other the wink and lay our fingers on our shrewd noses at 
Cleopatra’s evident treachery when she sends word that she kisses 
Ceesar’s conquering hand, and kneels, with her crown, at his feet. But 
those who read the Queen only by the light thrown by SHAKESPEARE, 
see clearly enough that at this lowest ebb of Anthony’s fortunes this was 
the only course she could prudently take ; to gain time for him she must 
temporise with Czsar. And when Anthony surprises Thidias kissing 
her hand and rages ‘like a thousand hurricanes,’ she patiently waits 
until the tumult of the earth and skies abates, and then calmly asks, 
‘Not know me yet?’ Are we blind that we do not see that SHAKE- 
SPEARE here means to show that Cleopatra has been throughout as true 
as steel to Anthony, ‘ her mailéd Captain,’ and that her protest that, if 
she be cold-hearted toward him, let heaven ‘the zex¢ Czsarion smite,’ 
is as sincere as it is tender and pathetic. From this deep, enduring, 
passionate love she never swerves, and in the very last moments of life 
she calls to Anthony, ‘ 7usband, I come,’ thus sanctifying her love by 
the holiest of bonds. In accepting her right to claim this relationship 
our hearts bow down before SHAKESPEARE, not Plutarch. In this 
expression I find the loftiest note in the tragedy. Amid the ‘ infinite 
variety’ which was hers, the love for Anthony burned with the unflick- 
ering flame of wifely devotion. 

It is not until nigh the close that we are shown, in the ‘dream’ 
which Cleopatra told to Dolabella, the qualities of the god-like Anthony 
which had won and kept the Egyptian Queen’s heart. On the 
other hand, the fascination wherewith Cleopatra enslaved Anthony is 
revealed to us early in the play, and is the key-note of her character. 
Enobarbus (who herein fulfills the office of a Greek Chorus, like the 
Fool in Lear, and, to a lesser degree, Feste in Twelfth Night) says of 
Cleopatra, in words that are become imbedded in the language, 

‘ Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale 
‘ Her infinite variety.’ 
It is the irresistible potency of this infinite variety which, in the very 
first Scene, Anthony avows, when he exclaims, 
‘Fie wrangling queen ; 
‘Whom everything becomes, to chide, to laugh, 
‘To weep; whose every passion fully strives 
‘To make itself, in thee, fair and admired.’ 

When Mrs JAMESON remarks that Anthony’s love for Cleopatra is 
that ‘ of a man declined in years for a woman very much younger than 
‘himself,’ was it necessary to restrict the infatuation to declining years? 
Does manhood, however long its span, hold a single year when subjec- 


PREFACE ‘ xiii 


tion to the highest earthly ideal is not most welcome, and when the 
privilege would not be eagerly claimed, of echoing Anthony’s 
‘O’er my spirit 
‘The full supremacy thou knew’st ; and that 
‘Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods 
‘Command me’ ? 


One Scene there is, however, which must, I think, severely grate every 
reader. It is the Scene,—the last of all,—where Cleopatra falls into a 
towering rage with her Treasurer, Seleucus, for his honesty in refusing 
to countenance the dishonesty of her brief of all she is possessed 
of, in money, plate, and jewels. That she should descend to low, 
unqueenly dishonesty is sordid enough, but that she should attempt, 
while showering opprobrious epithets on her Treasurer, to scratch out 
his very eyes with her nails is a lower depth to which no admiration, 
however ardent, can follow her. Of course, ingenuity has been taxed 
to find excuses for her. We accept her own feeble attempts at apology, 
and sadly acknowledge, the while, that it is the last flickering of her 
tempestuous, ungoverned temper which once more flames up, through 
the ‘ashes of her chance,’ before it dies down for ever,—and the excuse 
is inadequate enough. 

It was reserved to ADOLF Stanr, the learned German historian of 
Cleopatra, so to interpret this Scene as to convert our humiliation into 
approval. Be it remembered that Cleopatra’s last words, as Anthony’s 
dead body is borne away, are 


‘Ah, women, women! Come we have no friend 
‘But resolution, and the briefest end!’ 


And from this resolution to compass the briefest end, she never for one 
minute departs. Before she could even begin her plans she was taken 
prisoner, and her scheme for procuring an asp demanded the closest 
secrecy. What she had most to fear was that Czesar should get some 
inkling of her design. It was, therefore, of the very highest importance 
that Czesar’s mind should be utterly disabused of any suspicion of _ 
her suicidal intent, and that, instead thereof, he should be firmly con- - 

vinced, not only that she intended to live, but that she was becom- 
ing reconciled to the thought of going to Rome. To give Cesar a list 
of her possessions was obligatory; but what proof that she intended 
to live could Cesar have greater than the withholding, from her list, 
treasure sufficient to maintain her hereafter in regal state? ‘This whole 
Scene, then, with Seleucus was pre-arranged in order to deceive Czesar. 
The rage, the fury, the virago were all assumed. One exquisite touch 
there is which must have extinguished, in Czesar’s mind, the last spark 


Say, PREFACE 


of suspicion that she intended to destroy herself. In pleading her 
excuse for thus retaining some of her treasure, she slights to the utter- 
most its value, calling it ‘immoment toys,’ ‘ lady trifles,’ etc., and then 
with infinite cunning she refers to ‘some nobler token’ which she had 
kept apart ‘for Livia and Octavia’ as a friendly greeting,—in Rome, 
of course. In this last of all her encounters Cleopatra triumphed, and 
Czesar was the ass unpolicied. 

Of course, as is known to every one who has studied the play, 
SHAKESPEARE derived this Scene with Seleucus from North’s translation 
of Plutarch, and has here and there used North’s very words and 
phrases, even to the gifts which Cleopatra intended to give Octavia and 
Livia, and, moreover, Plutarch says that Czesar was ‘glad to hear her 
‘say so, persuading himself thereby that she yet had a desire to save 
‘her life.’ All that is claimed for SraHrR’s interpretation is the sug- 
gestion that the display of honesty by Seleucus, and Cleopatra’s violent 
behaviour, had been pre-arranged between the two for effect. If 
Ceesar was deceived by it, the guile becomes finer by its having deceived 
even Plutarch. 


COLERIDGE says that this play should be perused in mental contrast 
with Romeo and Juliet,—as the love of passion and appetite opposed to 
the love of affection and instinct. It is with unfeigned regret that I dis- 
sent from our finest SHAKESPEARE critic,—not on the score of the contrast 
between these two tragedies, but that this play is one involving the 
love of passion and appetite. Where in the play is there any proof 
of it? Where is there any scene of passion? Where is there a word 
which, had it been addressed by a husband to a wife, we should not 
approve? And because they were not married is that love to be 
changed at once into sensuality? Has there not been, in our own day, 
a well-known union, unblessed by the Church, which was founded solely 
on the intellect? Is wandering through the streets and noting the 
quality of the people sensual? Is fishing sensual? Is teasing past 
endurance sensual? Such are the glimpses that we get into the com- 
mon life of this ‘sensual’ pair. If these pastimes be sensual, then 
are tennis and cricket sensual. All the extravagant terms of love, 
such as the demi-Atlas of the world, the paragon of men, the great 
Fairy, and so forth, cannot turn love into passion and appetite. When 
Cleopatra asks for ‘music, moody food of us that trade in love,’ * she 
has no thought of trafficking, mercenary love; such love demands no 
music to sustain it. She and Orsino, in Twelfth Night, were fellow- 
traders in love. With them, Love was the sole thought, the business 


—— 


* Act Il, sci v, liner. 


PREFACE xv 


of their lives, as it is with all true lovers. Was it not Cleopatra’s 
‘infinite variety’ that enthralled and held Anthony’s heart? His love 
for her was not of the senses; for, be it remembered, Cleopatra was 
not beautiful; she had no physical allurements ; but she could laugh 
Anthony out of patience and then laugh him into patience, and dress 
him up in women’s clothes and laugh consumedly at him. And he 
never knew at what instant her mood would change from imperial 
scorn to humble, irresistible tenderness. These are some of the 
charms of infinite variety which are attractive to a man whose grey 
hairs do something mingle with the brown. 

If we read it aright, the whole of the Fifth Act is a vindication of 
Cleopatra. The very first words in it from her lips reveal the change 
which Anthony’s death had wrought: 

‘My desolation does begin to make 

‘A better life.’ 
And this better life reveals to her that greatness is merely relative, — 
that true greatness consists in rising so superior to life that life can be 
cast off with indifference,— 

‘To do that thing that ends all other deeds, 

‘Which shackles accidents, and bolts up change.’ 
From now on, to her last hour, her resolution never falters. Of course, 
she wishes to make the best terms for her children, and it is of impor- 
tance to know how Cesar proposes to treat her. If he is to leave her 
in Egypt her plans can be completed at will after his departure, but 
if he is to send her to Rome immediately, no time is to be lost. But 
before she has any interview with Czesar, she describes to Dolabella, 
under the guise of a dream, the proportions and qualities of the man 
she worshipped as Anthony. Every word springs to her lips, hot from 
the heart. We see her rapt, upturned gaze, and mark the sensitive, 
quivering mouth as she describes the man whom she adored: 

‘His face was as the heavens; and therein stuck 

«A sun and moon, which kept their course, and lighted 

‘ The little O, the earth. 

‘ His legs bestrid the ocean ; his rear’d arm 

“Crested the world ; his voice was propertied 

‘ As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends ; 

‘But when he meant to quail and shake the orb, 

‘He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty 

‘There was no winter in’t; an Anthony it was 

‘That grew the more by reaping.’ 
Where in this description is there a trace of ‘ passion or appetite’ or 
‘sensuality’? It is cruel to ask the question. But to those who ascribe 


Xvi PREFACE 


to her love these debasing qualities it is right that the question should 
be brought home. 


That the student may have close at hand every facility for the study 
of this play, there is reprinted in the Appendix DryDEN’s All for Love, 
the only tragedy with the loves of Anthony and Cleopatra as its theme 
that deserves to stand in the neighborhood of SHAKESPEARE. None 
of Drypen’s other plays attained a popularity as great as this; for full 
eighty years, from 1678 to 1759, it usurped SHAKESPEARE’S tragedy on 
the stage ; and, indeed, in these latter days came perilously and incom- 
prehensibly near to shaking the allegiance of Sir WALTER ScoTr. It 
is an admirable play, and is decried only by those who have never read 
it as attentively as it deserves. DRrYDEN’s own opinion of it, or at least 
of one Scene, and his aim throughout, in its composition, are contained 
in its Preface. It is followed, in the Appendix, by certain criticisms 
of it by those whose opinions are worthy of all respect. DRYDEN has 
been censured for bringing together Octavia and Cleopatra, and their 
interview has been characterised,—unworthily, it seems to me,—as a 
‘scolding match.’ Octavia is, perhaps, a little less queenly than Cleo- 
patra, but both are as dignified as were, probably, any high-born women 
whom DrypDEN had ever seen. One retort there is of Cleopatra which 
would hardly discredit SHAKESPEARE. In the Zhird Act Octavia 
enters, and coldly addresses Cleopatra : 

“I need not ask if you are Cleopatra, 
- Your haughty carriage 


Cleopatra. Shows I am a queen. 
Nor need I ask who you are. 
Octavia. A Roman. 


A name that makes and can unmake a queen. 
Cleopatra. Your Lord, the man who serves me, isa Roman.’ 
It would not be easy, I think, to parallel the neatness of this stab. 
It is almost incomprehensible that DRyDEN should have brought 
himself to depict a Cleopatra so utterly unlike the Cleopatra of him, 
whom, in his Preface, he styled divine. He failed, apparently com- 
pletely, to understand or appreciate SHAKESPEARE’S Egyptian Queen. 
Had he caught but a glimpse of that Queen he could not, one would 

think, present a Cleopatra, who describes herself as 
“a silly harmless household dove, 
‘Fond without art, and kind without deceit.’ 


There is no department within the scope of these volumes which is 
to me more unsatisfactory and more unremunerative than that which 


PREFACE xvii 


deals with Actors. If the fame of Actors be transitory, rarely surviving 
the living presence, the fault lies in the lack of befitting memorials ; the 
details of their acting are not adequately recorded. Emotional impres- 
sions we have in abundance. But these are worthless as far as trans- 
mitting any definite conception of the actor’s art is concerned. _Possi- 
bly, during the actor’s lifetime and while still before the public, these 
effusions may serve as advertisements ; when a man, learned and liter- 
ary, acknowledges publicly, in print, that he has been thrilled, of course 
we all wish to experience the same emotion and flock to the theatre 
for that purpose. But the future fame of the actor has been no whit 
advanced. What definite idea is conveyed to us when we read that in 
such or such a part GARRICK was ‘ most impressive,’ or that KEAN was 
‘superbly grand,’ or that Mrs Srppons was ‘ ineffably tragic’? What 
we want to know are the emphasis, and the accent of words and phrases, 
the pauses, the gesticulation, the expression, and, in addition, what is 
technically known as ‘stage business.’ Without explicit information 
on such points, honest old Downgs’s descriptions are as satisfactory as 
the most elaborate of impressions, when he observes that ‘Mr Dogget 
‘was very aspectabund,’ or that Mr Booth was ‘of form venust,’ or 
that Mr Estcourt could ‘ laetificate his audience.” When GarDINER in 
his Music of Nature * gives, in musical notation, the fluctuations and 
emphasis of Kean’s voice in certain sentences, he does more to transmit 
the great actor, as a living presence, to succeeding generations than 
folios of emotional impressions. When Lady Martin in her Female 
Characters tn Shakespeare (the finest interpretations that have ever 
been written, in my humble opinion) confides to us her own feelings at 
every moment, when she herself was the veritable Hermione, or Portia, 
or Rosalind, she places on record, not alone the scope of her own trans- 
cendant gifts, but also an illuminating guide for all time to both actors 
and public. 


Of all the stories that History has transmitted, none possesses, it 
would appear, such universal interest as a theme for dramatic tragedy 
as the loves of Anthony and Cleopatra. In proof of this pre-eminence 
it is noteworthy that in the Dramatic Literatures of both France and 
Germany, this story is the subject of the earliest tragedy. C/eopatre 
Captive by ESTIENNE JODELLE, in 1552, is chronologically the first 
French tragedy, and Cleopatra by Danie Casper, in 1661, is the first 
German. And in each country there have been successive versions, 
down to Mad. pre GIRARDIN’S, in 1847, and DINGELSTEDT’s, in 1878. 


* See Merchant of Venice, p. 380, of this edition. 


XVili PREFACE 


In the belief that a comparison of the varied treatment of this 
theme would prove to others as interesting as it has proved to myself, 
I have given, in the Appendix, brief abstracts of about twenty Versions ; 
not, be it understood, adaptations to the stage of SHAKESPEARE’S play, 
but distinct treatments of the same tragic fable. I have not included 
those dramas which portray Cleopatra’s life before she met Anthony, 
such as CORNEILLE’s Pompée, C1BBER’S Caesar in Egypt, etc. I have 
made an exception, however, in favour of Zhe False One, by BrEav- 
MONT and FLETCHER. ‘This drama is referred to so constantly in con- 
nection with Shakespeare’s play, that, in an edition like the present, 
it could not well be passed over in silence. A glance at the following 
list of Versions, whereof abstracts are given in the Appendix, will 
show how ever present in the minds of men have been these immortal 
loves of Anthony and Cleopatra: JoDELLE, 1552; GARNIER, 1578; 
CINTHIO, 1583; DANIEL, 1594; May, 1654; DELFINO, 1660; CASPER, 
1661 ; SEDLEY, 1677 ; DRYDEN, 1678 ; DE LA CHAPELLE, 1683 ; BOISTEL, 
1743 3 MARMONTEL, 1750; ALFIERI, 1775 ; BROOKE, 1778 ; AYRENHOFF, 
1783; VON SODEN, 1793 ; KoTZEBUE, 1801 ; Le Citoyen, S. D. M. An. 
XI.—1803; Soumet, 1825; Mad. DE GrRARDIN, 1847; G. CONRAD 
(Prince GrorGE of Prussia), 1868; and DINGELSTEDT, 1878. 

These are not all. There are several others, described by Dr 
GrEoRG HERMANN MOELLER,* but I have been unable to procure 
them, and have deemed the foregoing assuredly sufficient. 

None of these Versions reveals any decided influence of SHAKE- 
SPEARE ; occasionally, there are similarities or parallelisms, which may 
be traced, however, to Plutarch, the source common to all. This 
assertion should be qualified, perhaps, in two instances where SHAKE- 
SPEARE is openly followed up to a certain point, and then there occurs 
a wide divergence ; one is by HENRY BROOKE, the author of Zhe Fool 
of Quality, who introduces the two children of Anthony, and Ptolemy, 
Cleopatra’s brother ; and the other is by DINGELSTEDT, who represents 
Cleopatra’s love for Anthony as turned into fiendish hate by the whip- 
ping of ‘ Thyreus.’ 

In describing these Versions my aim has been to set forth the 
dramatist’s conception of the character of Cleopatra, and I have, there- 
fore, translated chiefly what relates to her. In Anthony’s character 
there is little variety ; his vacillation has been interpreted as weak- 
ness, and this weakness has been converted into tameness, wherein there 
is nothing respectable or lovable. In BorsTeL, however, we find an 
exception. His Anthony is aware of his own vacillation, and, to pre- 


* Auffassung der Kleopatra in der Tragoedienliteratur, etc., Ulm. 1888,—to which 
I am glad to acknowledge my indebtedness in obtaining a list of the Versions. 


PREFACE sie 


clude all chance of change, openly proclaims before his army that he 
repudiates Octavia, and that Cleopatra is his wife and their sovereign 
queen. 

The ‘infinite variety’ which lies in SHaKESPEARE’s Cleopatra seems 
to have invaded the conception of her character by the various dram- 
atists. This conception ranges from a beatification, with a benig- 
nity which enfolds even Octavia, to a blood-thirsty ferocity, which, 
in one instance, attempts to assassinate Antony, and, in another, 
does actually kill Octavia. Sufficient praise is not, I think, awarded 
to JODELLE, whose Cleopatra is really touching in her simple misery, 
and in the plaintive confessions of her many sins. In one regard 
his Version is certainly noteworthy ; although he was trammeled by 
the necessity of following Seneca, he was, nevertheless, sufficiently 
keen-sighted to appreciate the characteristic treatment of Seleucus by 
his heroine and, in defiance of all staid Senecan rule, dared to repro- 
duce her transports of fury in the Scene with him, and to portray her 
attempts to wreak personal vengeance. Herein, for boldness and 
breadth, he transcends all his long line of successors except poor 
Citoyen S. D. M[orcues], who, after the Hirst Act, follows Plutarch 
so slavishly, with one or two noteworthy exceptions, that he seems to 
have inserted this Scene with Seleucus by mere force of habit. When 
we recall the year in which JODELLE’s Cleopatra was written,—in the 
earliest infancy of the modern drama,—our admiration must be kindled 
afresh for a work so worthy of a French Plésade. 

As much cannot be said, it is to be feared, of the earliest offspring 
of the German tragic Muse, the prodigious bantling of DaniEL CasPER 
von LOHENSTEIN, which extends to over four thousand lines of rhymed 
Alexandrines. CaspEr’s knowledge of the Egyptian religion, with its 
elaborate burial rites, was, for his day, profound, and, in Cleopatra’s 
zealous and business-like preparations for embalming the deceased 
Anthony, Casper found a truly delightful field for its display. Cleo- 
patra’s minute instructions to Iras as to the extraction of the hero’s 
brains shall not be repeated here,—it is enough that it has been printed 
once, and forall, in the Appendix. For MaRMONTEL’S extremely weak 
and juvenile version, it is said that the celebrated Vaucanson made an 
automatic aspic which imitated the movements and the hissing of a 
living one. It was forbidden, at that time, to hiss in the theatre, and 
soldiers were actually placed on guard to see that the order was rigidly 
obeyed. When the aspic darted at Cleopatra’s breast it hissed loudly. 
As the curtain fell, a man in the audience asked his neighbour what he 
thought of the play, and received in reply, ‘ Je suis de l’avis de l’aspic !’ 
The mot spread and did much to kill the play. 


<< PREFACE 


In reviewing these Verséons there rise in my memory three that 
possess a surpassing charm: DeELFINO’s, wherein the cold-blooded, 
austere Octavius is converted into a warm-blooded Italian lover and 
the timid, repentant Cleopatra basks for a few short hours in the 
warmth of his love; secondly, Madame DE GIRARDIN’s, which is 
pervaded by an Egyptian atmosphere, and where the intellectual 
side of Cleopatra’s character is emphasised, and where the sight of 
Octavia awakens in the Egyptian Queen, for the first time, a recog- 
nition of the nobleness of virtue; and, lastly, ConRaAD’s, where the 
poetry of life and of art and of love, personified in Cleopatra, comes 
into collision with the harsh, granitic prose of common life, as repre- 
sented in Octavius,—where poesy is crushed, and youth with its enthu- 
siasms, represented in Dolabella, expires on her lifeless body. 


Apart from the interest awakened on their own account by these 
Versions, may there not spring from reading them a delight, keener 
and more triumphant, in seeing how immeasurably SHAKESPEARE has 
surpassed them all? In other lands and in other tongues tragedy after 
tragedy on this theme has been written, and may still be written, but, 
for those whose mother-tongue is English, the tragedy of Anthony and 
Cleopatra has been written once and for all time. 


AUGUST, 1907. 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 


ay 


Dramatis Perfonze 
M Antony. 
* Odtavius Ceefar. 
Lepidus. 4 


I. First given by Rowe. Persons et seq. (subs. ) 
represented. Cap. 4. Lepidus.| milius Lepidus, 
2, 3, 4. Marked as 7riumvirs, Cap. Theob. et seq. 


3. Octavius Cesar] L. Scumirz (Smith, Dictionary, s. v.): Augustus, the first 
Emperor of the Roman Empire, was born B.c. 63; his grandmother was Julia, Julius 
Ceesar’s sister; he was, therefore, Czesar’s grandnephew. He was most carefully 
educated and became very early a great favourite of his granduncle who, being child- 
less, is said to have made his will in favour of Octavius, as Augustus was then called. 
The name Augustus, by which he is best known, was conferred upon him later by the 
Senate. After the death of Cesar, Augustus joined Antonius in prosecuting a war 
against Ceesar’s murderers. In the course of it, the first Triumvirate was formed, con- 
sisting of Antonius, Augustus, and Lepidus, and in the proscriptions of the adherents 
of Brutus and Cassius which followed, Augustus was no less cruel than Antonius. 
After the battle of Philippi where Brutus and Cassius in despair committed suicide, 
and where the victory was mainly gained by Antonius, a new division of the world 
was made by the Triumvirs, and Augustus returned to Italy. Here Fulvia, Antonius’ 
wife, fomented quarrels and insurrections in order to draw her husband away from 
Cleopatra. Augustus, however, succeeded in defeating these garboils and Fulvia’s 
death at Sicyon accelerated a peace between him and Antonius, which was further 
cemented by the marriage of the latter to Octavia, the sister of Augustus. Peace 
seemed to be now restored everywhere, but Augustus was anxious to find some pre- 

_text whereby he could deprive Sextus Pompeius of his provinces which more or less 
controlled the supplies of food for Rome. This pretext was found in an accusation 
that Pompeius upheld piracy, and in a war which followed Augustus was victorious 
and Pompeius fled to Asia, and Lepidus who wanted Sicily from which Pompeius 
had just been driven was deprived of his army and sent to Rome where he ended his 
days as Pontifex Maximus. Having thus disposed of two of his rivals, Augustus felt 
himself strong enough to cope with the third, Antonius, whose arrogant proceedings 
in the East, coupled with his repudiation of Octavia, afforded ample grounds to 
Augustus for representing him as an enemy to Rome. War was now declared against 
Cleopatra, for Antonius was looked upon as merely her infatuated slave. After the 
battle of Actium in September, B.c. 31, and the deaths of Antonius and Cleopatra, 
Egypt was made a Roman province. [His subsequent career has no bearing on this 
play, and is, therefore, omitted. ] 

4. Lepidus] M. 2mil. Lepidus, the Triumvir, is first mentioned in the year B.C. 
52, when the Senate appointed him Interrex. In the civil war between Cesar and 

I I 


2 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


Sex. Pompeius. 5 


5. Sextus Pompeius] Om, Kemble. 


Pompey, Lepidus, who was then Preetor, joined Czsar. On the evening before the 
fatal 15th of March, Czesar had supped with Lepidus who was present on the follow- 
ing day in the Curia of Pompey, in the Campus Martius, and saw Czesar fall by the 
hands of the assassins; Lepidus stole hastily away, and repaired to his troops which 
he was then collecting for his province. In the turbulent times which followed, 
Lepidus endeavoured to remain neutral but was at last compelled again to espouse 
Antony’s side and toward the end of the year the celebrated conference took place 
at Bononia between Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus, which resulted in the Trium- 
virate. In the proscription-lists which followed this conference, Lepidus placed the 
name of his own brother, Paullus, who, to be sure, had been one of the Senators who 
had proclaimed his brother Atmilius a public enemy for having joined Antonius; the 
soldiers, however, who were appointed to kill him allowed him to escape, possibly 
with the connivance of his brother. In B.c. 36, Octavius summoned him to Sicily to 
assist in a war against Sextus Pompeius. Lepidus obeyed, but tired of being treated 
as a subordinate, he resolved to acquire Sicily for himself, and regain his lost power. 
But he did not possess the confidence of his army ; and Octavius found means on his 
arrival to seduce it from its allegiance. Detachment after detachment deserted 
Lepidus, who was at last forced to surrender. All his courage forsook him. He 
put on mourning, and threw himself before the knees of Octavius, begging for life. 
This was granted to him; Octavius then deprived him of his Triumvirate, his army, and 
his provinces, but allowed him to retain his private fortune. Still, insults and the loss 
of honour and rank did not shorten his life; he survived till B.c. 13. Lepidus had no 
decided character and was as incapable of committing great crimes as of performing 
noble acts. He possessed great wealth and was little scrupulous as to the means of 
gaining it. Neither in war, nor in peace did he show any distinguished ability. His 
wife was Junia, a sister of the Brutus who killed Czesar. (Much condensed from an 
unsigned article in Smith’s Dictionary.) 

5. Sextus Pompeius] E. H. Bunsury (Smith, Dictionary, s.v.) : Sextus Pom- 
peius, the younger son of the Triumvir, was born B.C. 75, since he was forty at the 
time of his death in B.c. 35. He did not possess any great abilities. He took arms 
from necessity, as he was first deprived of everything by Cesar, and then proscribed 
by the Triumvirs. His success was owing more to circumstances than to his own © 
merits; the war between the Triumvirs and the republicans, and subsequently the 
misunderstandings between Octavius and Antonius enabled him to obtain and keep 
possession of Sicily. He seems never to have aspired to supreme power. He was 
personally brave, but deficient in refinement, with hardly any knowledge of literature. 
Paterculus says that he could not speak correctly, but this is doubtless an exaggeration. 
In B.C. 38 he sustained a severe loss in the desertion of one of his principal legates, 
Menas, who surrendered to Octavius Sardinia and Corsica together with a large naval 
and military force. After varying fortune in his contests with Octavius, Pompeius 
was at last disastrously defeated by Agrippa, Octavius’s legate, B.c. 36. In the fol- 
lowing year Antonius gathered a large force by land and sea which threatened 
to crush Pompeius; whereupon his friends, among them his father-in-law, and 
his soldiers deserted him; he was obliged to surrender and was put to death, 
B Caen 


DRAMATIS PERSONA 


Enobarbus, lm ton 7 6 
Ventidius, riends and followers of Antony. 
6. Enobarbus,| Domitius Enobarbus, 7. Ventidius] Om. Gar. Kemble. 


Theob. et seq. (subs. ) 


6. Domitius Enobarbus] SmirH (Dictionary, s. v.) : Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus 
[i. e. Red-beard ] had probably no share in the murder of Czesar; but followed Brutus 
into Macedonia after Czesar’s death, and was condemned by the Lex Pedia in B.c. 43 
as one of the murderers. A year or two later Ahenobarbus became reconciled to 
Antony which gave great offence to Octavius. When the open rupture took place 
between Antony and Octavius, Ahenobarbus fled from Rome to Antony, at Ephesus, 
where he found Cleopatra with him, and endeavoured, in vain, to obtain her removal 
from the army. Many of the soldiers, disgusted with the conduct of Antony, offered 
the command to him ; but he preferred deserting the party altogether, and accordingly 
went over to Octavius shortly before the battle of Actium. He was not, however, 
present at the battle; he died a few days after joining Octavius. [WALKER ( Vers. 
186) remarks that this name ‘is frequently used as if it were a trisyllable, in whatever 
way the anomaly is to be explained,’—a remark which reveals Walker’s strength and 
his weakness ; his strength, in that it is a proof of his extraordinary observation, and 
his weakness, in that it makes no allowance for the position of a word in a line, or 
for the liberty permissible in dramatic colloquies. In all the five examples which 
Walker quotes, the name occurs either in a broken line or at the end of a line,—where 
there is always for proper names a certain freedom in rhythm, and where in this par- 
ticular case, the name can be without harshness pronounced as a quadrisyllable ; and 
that it was intended to be so pronounced we can almost positively conclude, because 
when Shakespeare wished it to be a trisyllable it was so spelled, namely: ‘ You see 
we haue burnt our cheekes. Strong Enobarbe’ II, vii, 144.—an instance which 
Walker seems to have overlooked. For those who may be interested in this question, 
I subjoin the places where the name occurs :—I, ii, 153; II, ii, 1; II, ii, 283; II, 
vil, 0445 LEDS 1,645 10D, xii, 15 1V, v, 10;_IV, v, 233 IV, vi,26; LV, vii, 32; 
IV, ix, 12 (42s). It may be possibly worthy of note as a proof of Shakespeare’s 
exclusive dependence on North’s translation, that in Latin the name is not Enobarbus, 
but Aénobarbus or Ahenobarbus, which the Domitian clan bore in memory of the 
appearance, to their founder, of Castor and Pollux who bade him carry the news of a 
victory to Rome and confirmed his faith in their divinity by gently stroking his black 
beard which turned immediately to a red or bronze hue, hence Ahenobarbus. See 
Suetonius at the beginning of his Zzfe of Nero, who was of this family — ED. ] 

7. Ventidius] GEORGE LONG (Smith’s Dictionary, s. v.): ‘P. Ventidius Bassus 
was a native of Picenum, and having fought against the Romans, he was made 
prisoner by Pompeius Strabo, and appeared in his triumphal procession in chains ; 
after this, being manumitted, he was admitted into the Senate in the course of time, 
and was then made Praetor in the time of Cesar, and attained such honour as to con- 
quer the Parthians and to enjoy a triumph for his victory.’ —Dion Cass. xliii, 51. We 
must infer that he was quite a youth when he was captured by the Romans. When 
he grew up to man’s estate, he got a poor living by furnishing mules and vehicles for 
those magistrates who went from Rome to administer a province. In this humble 
employment he became known to Julius Czsar, whom he accompanied into Gaul. 
After Czesar’s death, Ventidius sided with Antonius in the war of Mutina, B.c. 43. In 


4 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


Canidius, ) 8 
Eros, 

Scarus, | rrionds and Followers of Antony. 
Decretas, J 


Demetrius, ‘2 
8. Canidius,| Canidius, Leeutenant- 10. Friends... Axtony] Antonians,Cap. 
General to Antony, Mal. et seq. 11. Decretas} Rowe, Pope, Warb. 
10, Scarus}] Om. Gar. Titius. Dercetas. Theob. et cet. Om. Kemble. 
Kemble. 12. Demetrius] Om. Kemble. 


B.C. 39, Antonius sent Ventidius into Asia to oppose the Parthians under Labienus, 
whom Ventidius defeated and in the following year attacked Pacorus, king of the 
Parthians, whom also he defeated. Pacorus fell in battle and his head was sent 
round to the Syrian cities, thereby inducing them to keep quiet. In the meantime 
Antonius arrived, and so far from being pleased with the success of Ventidius, he 
showed great jealousy of him, and treated him in an unworthy manner. It is said 
that Antiochus had offered Ventidius a thousand talents as the price of peace, and that 
Antonius, who undertook the siege of Samosata, was obliged to be content with three 
hundred. The Senate decreed to Antonius a triumph for the victories of Ventidius; 
and Antonius rewarded his general by dismissing him from his employment. Yet 
the services of Ventidius were too great to be overlooked, and on coming to Rome, 
he had a triumph, B.c. 38. Nothing more is known of him. 

8 Canidius] L. Scumirz (Smith’s Dzct.) : L. Canidius Crassus was with Lepidus 
in Gaul, in B.c. 43, when Antonius was compelled to seek refuge there and was the 
main instrument in bringing about the union between Lepidus and Antony. In 
B.C. 32, when Antonius resolved upon the war with Octavius, Canidius was com- 
missioned to lead the army stationed in Armenia to the coast. On the outbreak of 
the war, many of Antonius’s friends advised him to remove Cleopatra from the army, 
but Canidius who was bribed by the queen, opposed this plan, and she accordingly 
accompanied her lover to the fatal war. Shortly afterward, however, Canidius also 
advised Antonius to send her back to Egypt, and to fight the decisive battle on land 
and not onsea. This time his advice was disregarded. During the battle of Actium, 
Canidius who had command of Antonius’s land forces, could act the part only of a 
spectator. After the unfortunate issue of the sea-fight, Canidius and his army still 
held out for seven days in the hope that Antonius would return; but in the end 
Canidius in despair took to flight, and followed his master to Alexandria, where he 
informed him of the issue of the contest and of the fate of his army. After the fall 
of Antonius, Canidius was put to death by the command of Octavius. He died as a 
coward, although in times of prosperity he had been in the habit of boasting that 
death had no terrors for him. 

10. Scarus] WILLIAM RAmsay (Smith’s Dictionary) : M. A®tmilius Scaurus was 
the son of M. A’milius Scaurus and Mucia, the former wife of Pompey, the Triumvir, 
and consequently the half-brother of Sextus Pompeius. He accompanied the latter 
into Asia after the defeat of his fleet in Sicily, but betrayed him into the hands of the 
generals of Antonius, in B.c. 35. After the battle of Actium, he fell into the power 
of Octavius, and escaped death, to which he had been sentenced, only through the 
intercession of his mother, Mucia. [See Capell’s note, IV, vii, 7.] 


DRAMATIS PERSON 5 


Philo, Friend and Follower of Antony. 13 
Mecznas, \a SUCRE 
: riends to Cefar. 
Agrippa, 15 
13. Philo...] Om. Gar. Kemble. same. (i. e. Antonians), Cap. 
[Adtendants, five; Messengers, 14. Mecenas| Maecenas Cam. Rife. 


six; Soldiers (or Guards), nine; the 


14. Mecznas] THoMas Dyer (Smith’s Dictionary, greatiy condensed): It is 
most probable that Mzcenas (it seems to be agreed that this spelling is right) was 
born between B.c. 73 and 63; his family was of high antiquity and traced its descent 
from an Etruscan source. All that we know of his life is to be gathered from scattered 
notices of him in poets and historians of Rome. Shortly after the appearance of 
Octavius on the political stage, we find the name of Mzcenas in frequent association 
with his; and there can be no doubt that he was of great use to him in assisting him 
to consolidate and establish the empire. In the year B.c. 40, Maecenas took part in the 
negotiations with Antonius which led to the peace of Brundusium, confirmed by the 
marriage of Antonius with Octavia, the sister of Octavius, About two years afterward 
Meecenas seems to have been employed in negotiating with Antonius, and it was 
probably on this occasion that Horace accompanied him to Brundusium, a journey 
which he has described in the Satire, i, 5. In B.c. 36 we find Mecenas in Sicily 
with Octavius, then engaged in an expedition against Sextus Pompeius. From this 
time till the battle of Actium, B.c. 31, history is silent concerning him; but at that 
period we find him again intrusted with the administration of the civil affairs of Italy. 
It has indeed been maintained by many critics that Mzecenas was present at the sea- 
fight of Actium; but the best modern scholars who have discussed the subject have 
shown that this could not have been the case and that he remained in Rome during 
this time. [His subsequent life, familiar to us all as the munificent patron of learn- 
ing and of poets, has no connection with the present play, and is, therefore, omitted. ] 

15. Agrippa] WILLIAM PLATE (Smith, Dzc¢. s.v.): M. Vipsanius Agrippa was 
born B.c. 63, and was descended from a very obscure family. At the age of twenty 
he studied at Apollonia in Illyria, together with young Octavius, afterwards Augustus. 
After the murder of Cesar, Agrippa advised Octavius to proceed immediately to 
Rome. Octavius took Agrippa with him, and in B.c. 43 gave him the delicate com- 
mission of prosecuting Cassius, one of the murderers of Cesar At the outbreak of 
the Perusinian war between Octavius and L. Antonius, Agrippa commanded part of 
the forces of Octavius, and finally besieged L. Antonius in Perusia, and took the 
town. InB.c. 38, Agrippa obtained fresh success in Gaul and contributed much to 
securing the power of Octavius, who recalled him to command the war against Sex. 
Pompeius, and promoted him to the consulship. After this promotion, Agrippa was 
charged by Octavius with the construction of a fleet, inasmuch as Sex. Pompeius was 
master of the sea. This order Agrippa executed with prompt energy. The Lucrine 
lake was transformed into a safe harbour and there he exercised his sailors till they 
were able to encounter the experienced sailors of Pompey. In two naval battles he 
gained such victories that he broke the naval supremacy of Pompey. In B.C. 33, 
although he had been consul, he voluntarily accepted the zdileship, and expended 
immense sums of money on great public works. He restored the aqueducts, and 
constructed a new one, fifteen miles in length. His various splendid buildings were 
adorned with statues by the first artists in Rome, among these buildings was the 


6 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


Dolabella, ) 16 
Proculeius ; 
as > Friends to Czefar.* 
Thidias, 
Gallus, 
: 20 
Mens; } Friends to Pompey. 
Menecrates, 
16. Dolabella] Om. Kemble. 19. Gallus] Om. Gar. 
17. Proculeius| Om. Kemble. [ Messengers, three ; Soldiers, six ; 
* Friends... ] Czesarians, Cap. the same. (i. e. Ceesarians), Cap. 
18. Zhidias,] Rowe, Pope. Thyréus, 20. Menas| Om. Kemble. 
Han. Zhyreus, Theob. etseq. Thyrsus. 21. Menecrates] Om. Gar. Kemble. 


Dion Cassius. 


Pantheon on which his name as the builder may still be read. When the war broke 
out between Octavius and Anthony, Agrippa was appointed commander-in-chief, and 
in the battle of Actium, where he commanded, the victory was mainly owing to his 
skill. [With this event our present interest in him ceases. He was one of the most 
distinguished men of the age of Augustus, and to him, as we all know, Horace 
addressed one of his Odes. ] 

16, Dolabella] P. Cornelius Dolabella was the son of a profligate father of the 
same name and of his first wife, Fabia. (The father’s second wife was Tullia, Cicero’s 
daughter.) Very little is known of him beyond what is given in Plutarch’s Zzfe of 
Antonius. 

17. Proculeius] Concerning the life of Proculeius there is little to add to that 
which Plutarch (who calls him Procleius) has given in his Life of Antony. SMITH 
(Dictionary) says that ‘the great intimacy of Proculeius with Augustus is attested 
by many writers. Dion Cassius speaks of him and Mecenas as the principal friends 
of theemperor. Proculeius put an end to his own life by taking gypsum, when suffer- 
ing from a disease of the stomach.’ 

20. Menas] EpwarD ELDER (Smith’s Dictionary, s. v.—much condensed) : 
Menas, a freedman of Pompey the Great and of Sextus Pompeius, seems to have 
been of a thoroughly mercenary character, and, in looking after the main chance, 
assumed and threw off allegiance with as much indifference ‘as a huntsman, his pack.’ 
In B.C. 39, when Antony and Octavius were feasting on board a ship of Pompeius, 
Menas made to the latter the treacherous proposal given in II, vii, 70-98. When 
Pompeius refused to become an accomplice to the treachery, Shakespeare represents 
Menas as saying aside ‘I’ll never follow thy pall’d fortunes more,’ which was true 
only for a while. When not long after Pompey sent for Menas, the latter put all the 
messengers to death, and agreed to surrender the island of Sardinia with all its garri- 
sons to Octavius, who treated him with great distinction and placed him in command 
of his ships. Just before a re-commencement of hostilities between Pompey and 
Octavius, Menas again played the deserter and went back to his old master. In the 
operations which followed, Menas gained some advantages; but in obedience to what 
he believed to be his interest, he again deserted to Octavius, who received him gladly, 
but very naturally regarded him with distrust. In B.c. 35 Menas was slain at the 
siege of Siscia. 

21. Menecrates] EDwARD ELDER (Smith’s Dictionary, s.v.) : Menecrates, a 


DRAMATIS PERSONA 7, 


Varrius, Friend to Pompey. 22 
Alexas, 
Mardian, s Pcl 
2 evUQaANLS 
Diomedes, Saberg ot 25 
Seleucus, 
Silius, ax Officer in Ventidius’s Army. 
Taurus, Lzeutenant-General to Cesar. 
Euphronius. 
A foothfayer. 30 
Clown. 
Cleopatra, Queen of AEgypt. BZ 
22. Varrius| Om. Gar. Om. Gar. 
24. Mardian| Mardian, an Eunuch. 28. Taurus] Added by Theob. et 
Cap. Om. Kemble. seq. Om. Gar. 
25. Diomedes| Om. Kemble. 29. Euphronius] Added to Friends 
26. Seleucus| Added by Han. et seq. of Antony, Cap. An Ambassador from 
(subs. ) Antony to Cesar. Mal. et seq. Om. 


27. Silius| Added by Theob. et seq. Gar. 


freedman of Sextus Pompeius, was sent by him as commander of a large squadron of 
ships, in B.c. 38, to act against Octavius’s admiral and Menas, the renegade. The 
fleets came to an engagement off Cumae, and Menecrates had the advantage over the 
enemy in manceuvring; but burning with hatred against Menas, he attacked and 
grappled with the ship in which Menas sailed, and though disabled by a severe wound, 
continued to encourage his men until he saw that the enemy was on the point of 
capturing his vessel; he then threw himself overboard and perished. 

22. Varrius] WALKER (C7izt. ii, 323) suggests that this is perhaps L. Varius 
Cotyla, an officer and companion of Antony’s, and that Shakespeare found him in 
North’s Plutarch (p. 919, eds. 1603 and 1612) and perhaps by a slip of memory took 
him for a friend of Pompey’s. ‘The possibility,’ Walker adds, ‘is, however, so 
slight, that it is only just worth mentioning.’ 

28. Taurus] W. SmItH (Dzc¢. s.v.): Statilius Taurus was one of the most dis- 
tinguished of Octavius’s generals. At the battle of Actium, in B.c. 31, Taurus com- 
manded the land-force of Octavius, which was drawn up on the shore. 

32. Cleopatra] W. SMITH (Dicz. s. v.): Cleopatra, the third child and eldest sur- 
viving daughter of Ptolemy Auletes, [the A/zteplayer,] was born towards the end of 
B.C. 69, and was consequently seventeen at the death of her father, who in his will 
appointed her heir of his kingdom in conjunction with her younger brother, Ptolemy, 
whom she was to marry. The personal charms, for which she was so famed, shewed 
themselves in early youth, as we are told by Appian that she made an impression on 
the heart of Antony in her fifteenth year, when he was at Alexandria with Gabinius. 
Her joint reign did not last long, as Ptolemy, or rather Pothinus and Achillas, his 
chief advisers, expelled her from the throne, about B.c. 49. In the following year 
Ceesar arrived in Egypt in pursuit of Pompey, and took upon himself to arrange mat- 
ters between Cleopatra and her brother. According to Plutarch, she made her entry 


ia Qh 


8 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


[32. Cleopatra] 
into Czesar’s apartment in a bale of cloth, which was brought by Apollodorus, her 
attendant, as a present to Cesar. However this may be, her plan fully succeeded, 
and we find her replaced-on the throne, much to the indignation of her brother and 
the Egyptians, who involved Czsar in a war in which he ran great personal risk, but 
which ended in his favour. In the course of it, young Ptolemy was killed, probably 
drowned in the Nile; and Cleopatra obtained the undivided rule. She was, however, 
associated by Czsar with another brother of the same name, and still quite a child, 
with a view to conciliate the Egyptians, with whom she appears to have been very 
unpopular, and she was also nominally married to him. While Czsar was in Egypt, 
Cleopatra lived openly with him, and would have detained him there longer, but for 
the war with Pharnaces, which tore him from her arms. She however joined him in 
Rome, in company with her nominal husband, and there continued the same open 
intercourse with him, living in apartments in his house, much to the offense of the 
Romans. She was loaded with honours and presents by Cesar, and seems to have 
stayed at Rome till his death, B.c. 44. She hada son by him named Cesarion, who 
was afterwards put to death by Octavius. After the death of Caesar, she fled to Egypt, 
and in the troubles which ensued she took the side of the Triumvirate, and assisted 
Dolabella both by sea and land, resisting the threats of Cassius, who was preparing 
to attack her when he was called away by the entreaties of Brutus. She also sailed 
in person with a considerable fleet to assist Antony after the defeat of Dolabella, but 
was prevented from joining him by a storm and the bad state of her health. She had 
however done sufficient to prove her attachment to Czesar’s memory (which seems to 
have been sincere), and also to furnish her with arguments to use to Antony, who in 
the end of the year 41 came into Asia Minor, and there summoned Cleopatra to attend, 
on the charge of having failed to co-operate with the Triumvirate against Ceesar’s 
murderers. She was now in her twenty-eighth year, and in the perfection of matured 
beauty, which in conjunction with her talents and eloquence, and perhaps the early 
impression which we have mentioned, completely won the heart of Antony. The 
first use Cleopatra made of her influence was to procure the death of her younger 
sister, Arsinoé, who had once set up a claim to the kingdom. Her brother, Ptolemy, 
she seems to have made away with before, by poison. Her connexion with Antony 
was interrupted for a short time by his marriage with Octavia, but was renewed on his 
return from Italy, and again on his return from his Parthian expedition, when she 
went to meet him in Syria with money and provisions for his army. According to 
Josephus, Cleopatra during Antony’s expedition went into Judzea, part of which 
Antony had assigned to her and Herod had necessarily ceded, and there attempted 
to win Herod by her charms, probably with a view to his ruin, but failed, and was in 
danger of being put to death by him. The report, however, of Octavia’s having left 
Rome to join Antony, made Cleopatra tremble for her influence, and she therefore 
exerted all her powers of pleasing to endeavour to retain it. From this time Antony 
appears quite infatuated by his attachment, and willing to humour every caprice of 
Cleopatra. We find her assuming the title of Isis, and giving audience in that dress 
to ambassadors, that of Osiris being adopted by Antony, and their children called by 
the title of the Sun and the Moon, and declared heirs of unbounded territories. One 
can hardly wonder that Octavius should represent Antony to the Romans as ‘ bewitched 
by that accursed Egyptian’; and he was not slow in availing himself of the disgust, 
which Antony’s conduct occasioned, to make a determined effort to crush him. War, 
however, was declared against Cleopatra, and not against Antony, as a less invidious 


DRAMATIS PERSONA 9 


Octavia, Szster to Ceefar, and Wife to Antony. ae 


way. Cleopatra, indeed, persuaded Antony to retreat to Egypt, but the attack of 
Octavius frustrated this intention, and the famous battle took place (B.C. 31), in the 
midst of which, when fortune was wavering between the two parties, Cleopatra gave 
a signal of retreat to her fieet, and herself led the way. Cleopatra died B.c. 30, in the 
thirty-ninth year of her age, and with her ended the dynasty of the Ptolemies in Egypt. 
She had three children by Antony: Alexander and Cleopatra, who were twins, and 
Ptolemy Philadelphus. 

33- Octavia] W. SmirH (Dict. s. v.): Octavia, the younger daughter of C. 
Octavius, by his second wife, Atia, and own sister* of the emperor, Augustus, was 
married first to C. Marcellus, Consul B.c. 50, and subsequently to the Triumvir, M. 
Antonius. She lost her husband towards the latter end of B.c. 41; and as Fulvia, 
the wife of Antony, died about the same time, Octavius and Antony, who had lately 
been at variance, cemented their reconciliation by the marriage of Octavia to Antony. 
This marriage caused the greatest joy among all classes, and especially in the army, 
and was regarded as a harbinger of a lasting peace. Octavius was warmly attached 
to his sister, and she possessed all the charms, accomplishments and virtues likely to 
fascinate the affections and secure a lasting influence over the mind of a husband. 
Her beauty was universally allowed to be superior to that of Cleopatra, and her virtue 
was such as to excite even admiration in an age of growing licentiousness and cor- 
ruption. Nor at first did this union disappoint public expectation, By the side of 
Octavia, Antony for a time forgot Cleopatra, and the misunderstandings and jealousies 
which had again arisen between her brother and husband, and which threatened an 
open rupture’in the year 36, were removed by her influence and intervention, But 
Antony had by this time become tired of his wife ; and longed to rejoin Cleopatra. 
The war with the Parthians summoned him to the East. Octavia accompanied him 
from Italy as far as Corcyra, but upon arriving at that island he sent her back to her 
brother, under the pretext of not exposing her to the perils and hardships of the war. 
On arriving in Asia, Antony soon forgot, in the society of Cleopatra, both his wife and 
the Parthians. Octavia, however, resolved to make an effort to regain her husband. 
In the following year, B.c. 35, she set out from Italy with reinforcements of men and 
money to assist Antony in his war against Artavasdes, king of Armenia; but Antony 
resolved not to meet her and sent her a message, when she had arrived as far as Athens, 
requesting her to return home. Octavia obeyed ; she was great-minded enough to 
send him the money and troops, and he mean enough to accept them. On her return 
to Rome, Octavius ordered her to leave her husband’s house and come and reside with 
him, but she refused to do so, and would not appear as one of the causes of the war; 
she remained in her husband’s abode, where she educated Antony’s younger son, by 
Fulvia, with her own children. But this noble conduct had no effect upon the hard- 
ened heart of Antony, who had become the complete slave of Cleopatra; and when 
the war broke out in B.C. 32, he sent his faithful wife a bill of divorce. After the death 
of Antony she still remained true to the interests of his children, notwithstanding the 
wrongs she had received from their father. For Julius, the younger son of Antony, 
by Fulvia, she obtained the special favour of Augustus, and she even brought up with 
maternal care his children by Cleopatra. She died in B.c. II. 


* At II, ii, 139, Shakespeare follows Plutarch, who speaks of Octavia as Czesar’s 
half-sister.—ED. 


10 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


Sete \ Ladies attending on Cleopatra. 
Iras, 35 
Ambaffadors from Antony to Cefar, Captains, 
Soldiers, Meffengers, and other Attendants. 
The SCENE lyes in feveral Parts of the 
Roman Empire. 39 


34, 35. Charmian, Iras] And Cesar sayed furthermore, that Anéonzus was not 
Maister of himselfe, but that C/eopatra had brought him beside himselfe, by her 
charmes and amarous poysons: and that they that shoulde make warre with them, 
should be Mardian the Eunuch, Photinus, and /ras, a woman of Cleopatraes bed- 
chamber, that frizeled her haire, and dressed her head, and Charmion, the which 
were those that ruled all the affaires of Awtonius Empire.—PLUTARCH. See 
Appendix. 

[In the foregoing brief accounts, no attempt is made to show where Shakespeare 
has deserted history. 

CoLLiER: ‘The Tragedie of Anthonie and Cleopatra’ occupies twenty-nine pages 
of the Folio of 1623; viz., from p. 340 to p. 368 inclusive, in the division of ‘ Trag- 
edies.’ Although at the beginning it has Actus Primus, Scena Prima, it is not 
divided into acts and scenes, nor is the defect cured in any of the subsequent folio 
impressions of 1632, 1664, and 1685. They are all without any list of characters. 
—Ep.] 


Meee ERAGE DIE OF 


Anthonie, and Cleopatra. 


Actus Primus. Scena Prima. 


Enter Demetrius and Philo: 


Philo. 5 


Ay, but this dotage of our Generals 
Ore-flowes the meafure : thofe his goodly eyes 


That o’re the Files and Mufters of the Warre, 8 
1. Tragedie] Tragedy Ff. 4. Enter... ] Enter Thyreus and Dolla- 
2. Anthonie,| Anthony, ¥,. Anthony bella; sent from Czsar. Gar. 
F,F,. Antony Rowe et seq. 5. Philo.] Thy. Gar. 
3- Sczena] Scena F,F’. 6-22. Marked as mnemonic, Warb. 
[ Alexandria in Egypt. Rowe. The 6. Generals] Generall F,. General 
Palace at Alexandria in Egypt. Theob. F,F,, Rowe,+. General’s Cap. et seq. 
Cleopatra’s Palace at Alexandria. Steev. 7. Ore...eyes] Two lines, F,. 


1. COLERIDGE (p. 315): Shakespeare can be complimented only by comparison 
with himself: all other eulogies are either heterogeneous, as when they are in refer- 
ence to Spenser or Milton ; or they are flat truisms, as when he is gravely preferred 
to Corneille, Racine, or even his own immediate successors, Beaumont and Fletcher, 
Massinger and the rest. The highest praise, or rather form of praise, of this play, 
which I can offer in my own mind, is the doubt which the perusal always occasions 
in me, whether the ‘Antony and Cleopatra’ is not, in all exhibitions of a giant 
power in its strength and vigour of maturity, a formidable rival of ‘ Macbeth,’ ‘Lear,’ 
‘Hamlet,’ and ‘Othello.’ eliciter audax is the motto for its style comparatively 
with that of Shakespeare’s other works, even as it is the general motto of all his 
works compared with those of other poets. Be it remembered, too, that this happy 
valiancy of style is but the representative and result of all the material excellencies 
so expressed. This play should be perused in mental contrast with ‘Romeo and 
Juliet ;’—as the love of passion and appetite opposed to the love of affection and 
instinct. But the art displayed in the character of Cleopatra is profound ; in this, 
especially, that the sense of criminality in her passion is lessened by our insight into 
its depth and energy, at the very moment that we cannot but perceive that the passion 
itself springs out of the habitual craving of a licentious nature, and that it is supported 
and reinforced by voluntary stimulus and sought-for associations, instead of blossom- 
ing out of spontaneous emotion. Of all Shakespeare’s historical plays, ‘ Antony and 

II 


12 THE TRAGEDIE, OF [ACP'1, SCx1. 


[1. The Tragedie, etc. ] 

Cleopatra’ is by far the most wonderful. There is not one in which he has followed 
history so minutely, and yet there are few in which he impresses the notion of angelic 
strength so much ;—perhaps none in which he impresses it more strongly. This is 
greatly owing to the manner in which the fiery force is sustained throughout, and 
to the numerous momentary flashes of nature counteracting the historic abstraction. 
As a wonderful specimen of the way in which Shakespeare lives up to the very 
end of this play, read the last part of the concluding scene. And if you would 
feel the judgement as well as the genius of Shakespeare in your heart’s core, 
compare this astonishing drama with Dryden’s ‘ All for Love.’ A. W. SCHLEGEL 
(iii, 173) : Antony and Cleopatra may be, in some measure, considered as a con- 
tinuation of Julius Cesar: the two principal characters, Antony and Augustus, 
are in both pieces equally sustained. Antony and Cleopatra is a play of great 
compass, its-progress is less simple than in /w/ius Cesar. The fullness and variety 
of the political and warlike events, which ultimately brought about the union of 
the threefold division of the Roman empire under one master, were perhaps too 
vast to be combined for a distinct survey in one dramatic picture. This it is wherein 
‘precisely lies the great difficulty of the historical drama, it must be at the same time a 
condensed epitome of history and a vivid expansion of it; this difficulty Shakespeare 
has for the most part successfully overcome. Here, however, many things, which occur 
in the background, are intimated only in such a way as to presuppose an intimate 
knowledge of history, and the comprehension of a work of art should never depend 
on any extrinsic information. Many persons of historical importance appear and dis- 
appear in passing ; the preparatory and co-operating circumstances are not adequately 
massed so as not to distract our view. The principal personages emerge, neverthe- 
less, in outline and colour most forcibly, and arrest the imagination. In Antony we 
observe a combination of great qualities, weaknesses, and vices; powerful ambition 
and magnanimous emotions ; we see his degradation in luxurious enjoyment and his 
noble shame at his own lapses,—inspirited to follow noble resolutions which are 
in turn shattered by the seductions of a woman. It is Hercules in the chains of 
Omphale, transferred from the fabulous heroic age to authentic history, and clad in 
the Roman toga. The seductive arts of Cleopatra are displayed without a veil ; she 
is also an ambiguous creature composed of royal pride, feminine vanity, luxury, incon- 
stancy, and genuine attachment. Although the reciprocal passion of herself and 
Antony is morally worthless, it still excites our sympathy as an insurmountable fas- 
cination ; they seem formed for each other, inasmuch as Cleopatra stands quite as 
much alone for her seductive charm as Antony for his splendid deeds. As they die 
for each other, we forgive them for having lived for each other. The open-hearted 
and lavish character of Antony is excellently contrasted with the heartless littleness 
of Octavius Czesar, whom Shakespeare completely saw through, without allowing 
himself to be led astray by the fortune and fame of Augustus. HAazLirr (p. 102): 
Shakespeare’s genius has spread over the whole play a richness like the overflowing 
of the Nile. 

6. Nay, but, etc.] Shakespeare’s art in beginning his plays in the midst of a dia- 
logue is so skilful that there is a certain feeling of loss, as though we had been de- 
prived of some pleasing conversation ; and that if we had come only a minute sooner, 
we should have heard something entertaining. Thus O¢he//o begins :—‘ Tush ! never 
tell me.’ ‘You do not meet a man but frowns.’—Cymbeline. ‘ My lord, I’ll tell 
you.’—Henry V. etc.—Ep. 


ACTA, SCH3.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA Ls 


Haue glow’d like plated Mars: 

Now bend, now turne 10 
The Office and Deuotion of their view 

Vpon a Tawny Front. His Captaines heart, 

Which in the {cuffles of great Fights hath burft 


The Buckles on his breft, reneages all temper, 14 
9. dike] like a Jones ap. Hal. 14. reneages] FF,  veneagues or 
9, 10. Haue....curne| One line, Rowe reniegues Coleridge, Knt, Hal. reneags 

et seq. Wh. reneyes Boswell. reneges F et cet. 
9. Mars.] F,, Sing. Mars, FF, rejects Wray ap. Cam. 

Rowe et cet. stars Gould. temper,| temper ; Theob.+, Cap. 
12. Captaines| Captain’s Rowe. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt. 


14. bref,] breft F,. 


6. Generals] MALONE calls attention to this needless genitive, which, he says, 
was ‘the common phraseology of Shakespeare’s time.’ It is not obsolete at this 
day, among writers who are as careless as were Shakespeare’s printers. The latter 
ignored apostrophes in genitives. It would be rash to say they never used them, but 
I doubt that a single one will be found in the present play. So trivial a matter hardly 
needs verifying on the part of the Ep. 

9. Mars] Shakespeare seems to have been guided only by the rhythm in the use 
of this genitive. Elsewhere he uses (arses and Mars his.—Eb. 

12. Tawny] RoLFe: Tennyson refers to Cleopatra in A Dream of Fair Women, 
as a ‘queen, with swarthy cheeks,’ and some critics have supposed that he forgot she 
was of pure Greek blood, being the daughter of Ptolemy Auletes and a lady of Pontus; 
but in a letter to me he called attention to ‘the polished argent of her breast’ in an- 
other stanza of the same poem. He says that he described her, as Shakespeare does 
in I, v, 33, as ‘ with Phoebus amorous pinches black,’ not as a half-African. 

12. Captaines] Anthony has just been called a ‘General.’ I suppose that that 
title was here avoided lest the ear might confound it with the adjective, ‘ his general 
heart.’ Moreover, although a General is higher in rank than a Captain, has not the 
latter a more martial sound here, implying hand to hand fighting? A General would 
hardly mingle in the ‘scuffles of great fights..—Ep. 

14. reneages] CRAIGIE (4. £. D. s. v. Renegue): An adaptation of medizeval 
Latin, veneg are, formed on ve-RE-+negare, to deny. [Under } 2, where it is used 
intransitively or absolutely, Craigie quotes, Lear, II, ii, 73, ‘Renegue, affirm, and 
turn their halcyon beaks,’ etc., where the Qq read ‘reneag.’ See note ad Joc. in 
this edition, where, as an additional proof that the g was pronounced hard a quota- 
tion from Sylvester’s Dz Bartas is given, ‘All Europe nigh (all sorts of Rights 
reneg’d) Against the 7ruth and Thee, un-holy Leagu’d.’ It is still common in this 
country (noted by Craigie, under 4. 2) among whist-players, in the sense of revoke, 
and sometimes pronounced venzg. It affords another instance of the survival in this 
country of words which are archaic in England.—En. 

14. temper] This may be possibly explained as another of the many instances 
where ‘ temper’ means femperament, constitution. SCHMIDT (Lex. s. v.) gives it, how- 
ever, a separate section, as meaning, ‘ wonted disposition, freedom from excess or 
extravagance, equanimity,’ to which the only parallel that he finds is Lear’s ‘Keep 


14 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr I, sc. i. 


And is become the Bellowes and the Fan 15 
To coole a Gypfies Luft. 


Flourifh. Enter Anthony, Cleopatra her Ladies , the 
Traine, with Eunuchs fanning her. 
Looke where they come: 
Take but good note, and you fhall fee in him 20 
(The triple Pillar of the world) transform’d 


16-19. Zo coole...they come.:| One 17. Anthony,] Anthony, and FF. 
line, Rowe et seq. 17, 18. her...Traine, with] her ladies 

17, 18. After line 19, Rowe,+, Cap. in the train, Pope. with their Trains, 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, Hal. Knut. 


After line 22, Dyce, Sta. 17. Ladies,] Ladies; Ff. 

17. Flourifh.] Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope. 20. in him] him FF, Rowe. 
Flourish within (after Zu/?) Dyce. 21. (Zhe... world)| The... world, 
Flourish without (after come.) Sta. Rowe. TZhe...world Ff, Pope et cet. 


me in temper; I would not be mad.’ I, v, 51. May there not be here, where fighting 
is the theme, a suggestion of the hardening of steel such as Othello refers to when 
he speaks of ‘a Sword of Spain, the ice-brook’s temper’ ?—Ep. 

16. To coole] JOHNSON: Something seems to be wanting. The de//ows and fan, 
being commonly used for contrary purposes, were probably opposed by the author, 
who might perhaps have written, ‘ Zo kindle and to cool.’ M. MAsoNn: Johnson’s 
amendment is unnecessary. The bellows and the fan have the same effects. When 
applied to the fire, they increase it; but when applied to any warm substance, they 
cool it. MALONE: The text is undoubtedly right. The following lines in Spenser’s 
Faerie Queene at once support and explain it, ‘ But to delay the heat, least by mis- 
chaunce It might breake out, and set the whole on fire, There added was by goodly 
ordinaunce, An huge great paire of bellowes, which did styre Continually, and cool- 
ing breath inspyre.’—II, Cant. ix, 267. STAUNTON (A‘hen. 12 Apr. 1873): Some- 
thing appears to have been lost ; but Johnson’s remedy stretches out the line beyond 
all measure. We might better read, ‘To Aeat and cool,’—citing in confirmation, ‘ To 
glow the delicate cheeks which they did coo/.’—II, ii, 239. 

16. Gypsies Lust] JoHNson: ‘ Gipsy’ is here used both in the original meaning 
for an Zgyptian, and in its accidental sense for a dad woman. Irvinc’s Ep.: No 
metaphor, as all who know anything of the gipsies know well, could be less exact 
than that which takes their women as a symbol of lust. They might much more 
correctly stand as a symbol of chastity. 

17. Flourish] BRADLEY (WV. Z. D.s.v.): 7. Music. a. A fanfare (of horns, trum- 
pets, etc.), especially to announce the approach of a person of distinction. 

21. triple Pillar] WarsurTon: ‘Triple’ is here used improperly for ¢hzvd or one 
of three. One of the 7yiumvirs, one of the three masters of the world. STEEVENS: 
Compare, ‘The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved : I bear up the pil- 
Jars of it.’ —Psalm 75, 3. [‘ Triple’ in the sense of ¢hérd is used again where Helena 
tells the king that her father gave her many receipts, ‘ chiefly one, which . . . He bade 
me store up, as a triple eye, Safer than mine own two, more dear.’—A//’s Well, II, i, 


REIT SC; 1, ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 15 


Into a Strumpets Foole. Behold and fee. 22 
Cleo. If it be Loue indeed, tell me how much. 
_Ant.There’s beggery in the loue that can be reckon’d 24 


23. much.| much ? FF, Rowe,+. 


171. In Wotes and Queries, I, iii, 498, A. E. BRAE contended that in both instances 
Shakespeare used the word as the Latins, or at least Ovid, used ¢rzglex, and herein 
lay a proof of Shakespeare’s learning. But when Ovid represents (/é7s, 76) the 
Fates as spinning (only Lachesis spun) ¢viplict pollice, it is to be feared that he 
is in the same condemnation with Shakespeare. WALKER (C77. i, 62) devotes 
a section to instances of an ‘inaccurate use of words in Shakespeare, some of them 
owing to his imperfect scholarship (imperfect, I say, for he was not an ignorant man 
even in this point), and others common to him with his contemporaries.’ Some of 
these instances are ‘ eternal’ for zzferna/, ‘imperious’ for zmzferial, ‘ceremonies’ for 
omens, ‘temporary’ for ¢emporal, the present ‘ triple’ for ¢izrd, and again in this play 
‘competitor’ for colleague (I, iv, 5; V, i, 52), ‘important’ for zmportunate, etc. 
The effect of this list is cumulative, and possibly it is therefore wisest to acknowledge 
at once that Shakespeare has here blundered. At the same time, might we not admit 
that after Shakespeare has used a word twice in an intelligible though illogical sense, 
the word might as well be adopted into the language for daily use? It would 
have a paternity which many a perfectly legitimate word might be content to own. 
—ED. ] 

22. Strumpets Foole] Douce (ii, 73): Many ancient prints conduce to show 
that women of this description were attended by buffoons; and there is good reason 
for supposing, partly from the same kind of evidence, that in their houses such 
characters were maintained to amuse the guests by their broad jokes and seasonable 
antics. [WARBURTON, in the belief that the metaphor, introduced by ‘ Pillar,’ needed 
an antithesis, asserted that we should here, for ‘ Foole,’ read stoo/, because ‘ women 
of this description’ sometimes sat ‘in the laps of their lovers.’ Strangely enough, 
WALKER (C7it. i, 63) had ‘no doubt’ that Warburton was right, and believes ‘that 
‘¢pillar’’? requires it.’ To Walker’s editor, Lerrsom, the emendation ‘appears 
very doubtful.’ Grey (ii, 190) suggested a change, which he ‘imagines would be 
as proper,’ namely: strumpet’s tool, It was reserved to COLERIDGE to put the 
question at rest at once and for ever. ‘ Warburton’s conjecture is ingenious,’ he says 
(p. 317), ‘and would bea probable reading, if the scene opening had discovered 
Antony with Cleopatra on his lap. But, represented as he is walking and jesting 
with her, ‘‘ fool’? must be the word. Warburton’s objection is shallow, and implies 
that he confounded the dramatic with the epic style. The ‘‘pillar’’ of a state is so 
common a metaphor as to have lost the image in the thing meant to be imaged.’— 
Ep.] 

23. Cleo. If it be, etc.] HAzuitT (p. 97) : The character of Cleopatra is a master- 
piece. What an extreme contrast it affords to Imogen! One would think it almost 
impossible for the same person to have drawn both. She is voluptuous, ostentatious, 
conscious, boastful of her charms, haughty, tyrannical, fickle. The luxurious pomp 
and gorgeous extravagance of the Egyptian queen are displayed in all their force and 
lustre, as well as the irregular grandeur of the soul of Mark Antony. Take only the 
first four lines that they speak as an example of the regal style of love-making. 

24. Ant. There’s beggery, etc.] Mrs JAMESON (ii, 150): The character of 


16 THE TRAGEDIEVOR. [ACT'T, S62% 


Cleo. Ile fet a bourne how farre to be belou’d. 25 
Ant. Then muft thou needes finde out new Heauen, 
new Earth. 27 


Mark Antony, as delineated by Shakespeare, reminds me of the Farnese Hercules. 
There is an ostentatious display of power, an exaggerated grandeur, a colossal effect 
in the whole conception, sustained throughout in the pomp of the language, which 
seems, as it flows along, to resound with the clang of arms and the music of the 
revel. The coarseness and violence of the historic portrait are a little kept down ; 
but every word which Antony utters is characteristic of the arrogant but magnani- 
mous Roman, who ‘with half the bulk o’ the world played as he pleased,’ and was 
himself the sport of a host of mad (and bad) passions, and the slave of a woman. 
[Everyone will recall Romeo’s impassioned, ‘ They are but beggars that can count 
their worth’ (II, vi, 32), and Claudio’s, ‘I were but little happy, if 1 could say how 
much’ (Much Ado, II, i, 292). STEEVENS gives, from Theobald, without acknowl- 
edgement, a quotation from Ovid (JAZeéa. xiii, 824) which is possibly parallel. It is 
where Polyphemus is boasting to Galatea of his wealth in flocks and herds ;—* All 
this flock is my own; many others are roaming the valleys; Many are hid in the 
forest, and many are stabled in caverns. Should you ask how many there are, I 
should not be able to tell you. To number the tale of his flock is ever the mark of 
a poor man.’ ‘Hoc pecus omne meum est: multae quoque vallibus errant; Multas 
silva tegit: multae stabulantur in antris: Nec, si forte roges, possim tibi dicere, 
quot sint. Pauperis est numerare pecus.’ Golding’s translation (p. 170 verso), more 
vigorous than mine, is as follows:—‘ This Cattell heere is all myne owne. And 
many mo besyde Doo eyther in the bottoms feede, or in the woodes them hyde, And 
many standing at theyr stalles doo in my Caue abyde. The number of them (if a 
man should ask) I cannot showe. Tush beggars of theyr Cattell vse the number for 
too knowe.? Steevens quotes also from an Epigram, wholly apposite, where Martial 
(Bk. vi, No. 34) begs for kisses, and in answer to the question ‘how many ?’ answers, 
“bid me number ocean’s waves, or the shells scattered on the A“gean shore, or the 
number of bees wandering on the Cecropian mount, or the number of voices and 
applauding hands when the people catch sight of Czesar’s face in the crowded theatre. 
I do not want as many as the clever Catullus begged from Lesbia, that is, any definite 
number, however vast, because ‘ pauca cupit, qui numerare potest.’ —Ep. ] 

25. Ile, etc.] HARTLEY COLERIDGE (ii, 183) : If Antony owed to Cleopatra the 
loss of empire, he is indebted to her for less hateful renown than would else have 
clung to him. Shakespeare and Dryden make the Philippics forgotten, and the 
murderer of Cicero is Tost in the lover of Cleopatra. 

25. bourne] Murray (J. £. D.) : Early modern English dorne, apparently equiv- 
alent to Old Fr. dodne, bone, boune. In English in Lord Berners, and in Shakespeare 
(seven times), then apparently not till the 18th century ; the modern use being due 
to Shakespeare, and in a large number of cases directly alluding to the passage in 
Hfamlet. 2. A bound, a limit [as in the present line]. 3. In Shakespeare’s famous 
passage, Hamdet, III, i, 79, ‘ Borne’ (Qq), probably meant the ‘ frontier or pale’ 
of a country; but has been associated contextually with the goal of a traveller’s 
course. 

26. Then must thou, etc.] JoHNson: Thou must set the boundary of my love 
at a greater distance than the present visible universe affords. 


ACT I, SC. 1.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 17 


Enter a Meffenger. 28 
Mef. Newes( my good Lord )from Rome. 
Ant. Grates me,the fumme. 30 
Cleo. Nay heare them Anthony. 
fuluia perchance is angry : Or who knowes, 22 
28. Enter...] Enter an Attendant. EF. Rate me the sum Rowe. It grates 
Cap. me. Tell the sum Pope, Theob. Han, 
29. Mef.] Att. Cap. Warb. ’T grates me:—the sum Cap. 
Rome.| Rome— Ktly. Grates me :—The sum Sta. Grates me. 
30. Grates me, the fumme] Rate me, The sum Johns. et cet. (subs.) 
the fumme FF, Rate me, the fumm 31. them] zt Pope,+. 


30. Grates me, the summe] JOHNsoN: Be brief, sw thy business in a few words. 
A. E. THISELTON (p. 7) believes that here is an instance where a comma indicates 
merely a grammatical inversion of the sentence and that the phrase is, in fact, ‘The 
sum grates me.’ The meaning is the same, whatever the punctuation, namely, that 
the sum, and not the particulars, of the news is to be delivered. If there be, how- 
ever, an inversion, as Mr Thiselton contends, it is used for dramatic effect, and, it 
seems to me, that this effect will be heightened in proportion as the punctuation is 
emphatic, even to the conversion, as in the majority of modern texts, of the comma 
into a full stop. Time should be given to Anthony at least to stamp his foot with 
vexation. He is too impatient to care for grammar, and any addition, such as ‘ It’ or 
‘°T’ weakens the rasping harshness of ‘ Grates,’ which is a relief and a satisfaction 
to his vexed soul.—Ep. 

31. them] MALONE interprets this as referring to the ‘newes,’ and he may be 
right; as he says, ‘news’ may be plural. But Cleopatra, in lines 42 and 45, speaks 
of the ‘messengers,’ and, in line 62, of the ‘Ambassadors.’ Although only ‘a’ 
messenger enters, it is not impossible that others were seen approaching ; or, what is 
more likely, by exaggerating the number, Cleopatra magnifies the importance of the 
news, and veils her jealousy of any control over Anthony greater than her own, in 
stinging taunts at his subordination toa shrill-tongued woman and a beardless boy.— 
ED. 

31. Anthony] This spelling is as invariable in this play as the spelling ‘ Antony’ 
is in Julius Cesar. 

32. Fuluia] LEonHARD ScumiTz (Smith’s Dict.) : Fulvia was first married to 
P. Clodius, by whom she had a daughter, Claudia, afterwards the wife of Czesar 
Octavius. When Clodius was murdered, she married C. Scribonius Curio; and after 
his fall in Africa, she lived for some years as a widow, until about B.c. 44 she mar- 
ried M. Antony, by whom she became the mother of two sons. Up to the time of 
her marrying Antony, she had been a woman of most dissolute*conduct, but hence- 
forth she clung to Antony with the most passionate attachment, and her only ambition 
was to see her husband occupy the first place in the republic, at whatever cost that 
position might be purchased. When Antony was declared a public enemy, she 
addressed the most humble entreaties to the Senate, praying that they might alter 
their resolution. Her brutal conduct during the fearful proscriptions of B.C. 43 is 
well known; she gazed with delight upon the head of Cicero, the victim of her 
husband. In B.c. 40, while Antony was revelling with Cleopatra in all the luxuries 
of the East, Fulvia, stimulated partly by jealousy and the desire of drawing Antony 


2 


18 THE - TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1,.SC. 1. 
If the fcarfe-bearded C@/ar haue not fent 33 
His powrefull Mandate to you.Do this, or this ; 

Take in that Kingdome, and Infranchife that: 35 


Perform’t, or elfe we damne thee. 

Ant. How,my Loue? 

Cleo. Perchance? Nay,and moft like: 
You mutt not ftay heere longer, your difmiffion 
Is come from C@/ar, therefore heare it Anthony. 40 


34-36. you.Do...thee.| you. ** Do... Perchance ! Dyce. 


this.’ Theob. Johns, et seq. (subs. ) 38. Way....like-| (Nay, and most like,) 
38.. Perchance?| Perchance, Rowe,+, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Mal.. Steev. Var. Perchance,— Coll. like :| like, Rowe. 


back to Italy, and partly by her hostility towards Octavius, resolved upon raising a 
commotion in Italy. She induced L. Antonius, her husband’s brother, to come for- 
ward as the protector of those who were oppressed and reduced to poverty by the colo- 
nies of Octavius. He took his post at Praeneste whither he was followed by Fulvia. 
She afterwards followed him to Perusia, and endeavoured to rouse the inhabitants of 
the north of Italy to assist him, while he was besieged at Perusia by Octavius. When 
Perusia fell into the hands of Octavius, by the treachery of L. Antonius, Fulvia was 
permitted to escape, and went to Brundusium, where she embarked for Greece. Her 
husband, who had in the meantime been informed of the war of Perusia and its result, 
was on his way to Italy. He met Fulvia at Athens, and censured her severely for 
having caused the disturbance. It is said that, from grief at his rough treatment, she 
was taken ill, and in this state he left her at Sicyon while he went to Brundusium. 
Her feelings were so deeply wounded by her husband’s conduct, that she took no 
care of herself, and soon after died at Sicyon, B.c. 40. The news of her death came 
very opportunely for the Triumvirs, who now formed a reconciliation, which was 
cemented by Antony marrying the noble-minded Octavia. 

33. scarce-bearded] Czesar was at this time twenty-three years old. 

35. Take in] REED: That is, subdue, conquer. HALLIWELL (Select. Notes, 7) : 
In 1610 a tract appeared which was entitled,—‘ Newes out of Cleave-land, being 
the true relation of the ¢aking iu of the towne and castle of Gulicke in Germanie.’ 
[See ‘cut the Ionian Sea, And take in Troine.’—III, vii, 28. Merely the antithesis 
involved in ‘Infranchise’ would of itself supply the meaning of ‘take in.’—Ep.] 

36. damne] CoL.ier (ed. ii): The MS alters ‘damne’ to doom ; and although 
‘damne’ certainly sounds rather coarsely in the mouth of Cleopatra, and would 
have done so even in the time of Shakespeare, yet we make no change, recollecting 
that the heroine, in other places, sometimes errs on the score of delicacy, and that 
‘damn’ is the more expressive word, which the poet, on that very account, may have 
preferred. Still ‘damn’ and doom would be spelt with the same letters in short- 
hand, and the transcriber may have misread his note. 

38. Perchance?] The interrogation is to be preferred, I think. Cleopatra is 
questioning the propriety of her ‘ perchance’ in line 32.—ED. 

39. must] The emphatic word. 

40. therefore] Even in this word, there is a taunt—ED. 


ACT TyiSC isi] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 19 


Where’s Fuludas Proceffe? (Ce/ars I would fay) both ? At 

Call in the Meffengers : As I am Egypts Queene, 

Thou blufheft Axthony, and that blood of thine 

Is Ce/ars homager : elfe fo thy cheeke payes fhame, 

When fhrill-tongu’d Faluca fcolds. The Meffengers. 45 
Ant. Let Rome in Tyber melt, and the wide Arch 

Of the raing’d Empire fall : Heere is my fpace, 

Kingdomes are clay : Our dungie earth alike 

Feeds Beaft as Man ; the Nobleneffe of life 


Is to do thus : when fuch a mutuall paire, 50 
41. (Cefars L would fay)] Ff. cheeks pay ¥ ,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Cesar’s, [ would say, Rowe. Casar’s ? Warb. 
I’d say Pope, Theob. Warb. Cesar’s ? 45. Meffengers.| Messengers— Theob. 
L would say Han. Cesar’s, I'd say— Warb. Johns. 
Johns. Caesars I would say? Cap. et 47. rang’ a | F,. raign'd¥ F ,. rais'd 
cet. Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. reign’d 
42. [ am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. Blumhoff. vang’d Johns et seq. 
43. blood | bloud FF. Space| span Gould. 
44. cheeke payes| cheeks payes F,. 48. dungie] dungy Ff. 


41. Processe] The writ or judicial means by which a defendant is brought into 
court, to answer the charge preferred against him. So called because it proceeds or 
issues forth from the court.—Bouvier’s Law. Dict. 

47. raing’d] WARBURTON: Taken from the Roman custom of raising triumphal 
arches to perpetuate their victories. —[Hereupon Warburton cannot refrain from a 
stroke of smug self-praise by exclaiming, ‘extremely noble !’—Ep.]—JoHNnson: I 
am in doubt whether Shakespeare had any idea but of a fabric standing on pillars. 
It is not easy to guess how Dr Warburton missed this opportunity of inserting a 
French word, by reading derang’d. Which, if deranged were an English word, 
would be preferable both to vazsed and rang’d.—[This conjecture was not re- 
peated in the Var. of 1773, where Johnson was associated as an editor with 
Steevens. It is, therefore, to be assumed that it was charitably withdrawn.—ED. ] 
—CAPELL (i, 26): That is, orderly ranged; whose parts are now entire and dis- 
tinct, like a number of well-built edifices.—[Capell, followed by Malone, quotes as 
parallel ‘ bury all, which yet distinctly ranges, in heaps and piles of ruins.’—Cor. III, 
i, 206. But ScumipT (Zex.) differentiates both this use in Cor. and also, ‘ whatso- 
ever comes athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine,’ in Much Ado, II, ii, 7, 
quoted by Steevens, from the use of the word in the present line,—and, I think, 
properly. Capell’s interpretation seems to be just. Compare ‘ whose several ranges,’ 
III, xiii, 7, that is, whose several ranks of war.—ED. ] 

48. Kingdomes are clay: Our dungie earth] Have we not here the same con- 
temptuous scorn for the merely physical, animal life that lies in Hamlet’s words 
where he speaks of being ‘spacious in the possession of dirt’? See V, ii, 8.—Ep. 

50. Is to do thus:] I can recall but one solitary passage in all Shakespeare 
where there is the need, within the scene, of a stage-direction, namely: in Hamlet’s 
interview with Ophelia when Polonius and the King are concealed behind the arras, 
—and there the lack is indeed deplorable. But elsewhere the context, together 


20 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1, SCSi- 


And fuch a twaine can doo’t, in which I binde 51 
One paine of punifhment, the world to weete 
We ftand vp Peereleffe. 
Cleo. Excellent falfhood : 
Why did he marry Fuduia, and not loue her? 55 


52. One] On Ff. 54. [Aside. Johns. 


with that wherewith Northcote said he mixed his colours: ‘brains,’ will supply an 
actor with the appropriate ‘business.’ In the present line, after ‘ thus,’ PorE inserted 
the stage-direction ‘ embracing, and has been followed by every editor, I think, from 
that day to this. I do not forget how much more childlike than at present were the 
men and women of aforetime, whether in the days of the Czsars or in the days of 
Elizabeth, in the outward expression of their emotion, by embracing, by kissing, or by 
the enviable gift, at command, of profuse and prolonged tears. But even with this in 
mind, is it to be considered likely that Anthony would here publicly kiss, embrace, 
or even touch Cleopatra? She was wrangling with him,—teasing him almost past 
endurance, determined to obtain from him some assurance that, whatever the mes- 
sage from Rome, he would not leave her; and is it in character that she should 
tamely submit to be ‘embraced ?’ and then, when released from Anthony’s arms, 
where she had lain like an unresisting dove, renew the wrangling which this 
‘embrace’ had interrupted? All wrangling thereafter would be absolutely stingless. 
They were not standing side by side. Quarrels are not so conducted. They were 
facing each other, and, I imagine, by some such gesture as an obeisance and a sweep- 
ing wave of both hands toward her,—a not uncommon mode of illustrating ‘ thus,’ 
—he showed that his whole existence with her, day by day and hour by hour, was 
the true nobleness of life, compared to which kingdoms are clay. In speaking above 
of stage-directions, I refer to situations where a key is urgently needed. There are, 
in the Ff and Qq, many insertions, such as ‘ 7hey all start.’—Rich. I71: MW, i, 79, 
etc., which are good, but not essential ; experienced actors do not need to be thus 
instructed.—ED. 

51. And such a twaine] STAUNTON (A/hen@um, 12 April, 1873): Here the 
words, ‘such a mutual pair And such a twain’ are tautologous and feeble. Besides 
which, they fail to account for the Queen’s rejoinder, ‘Excellent falsehood!’ I 
cannot but think Shakespeare wrote, ‘ And such a constant twain,’ or ‘ such a faith- 
ful twain.’ Some epithet implying an indefeasible affection seems imperatively 
called for.—[The addition of a disyllable mars the metre, but this would be venial, 
if the need were beyond question. Does not, however, any epithet weaken ‘such ?’ 
which, in its full force, may imply constant, faithful, loyal, steadfast, and all other 
appropriate epithets ?—Ep.] _ 

52. to weete] SkeaTt (1. & Qu. VII, ii, 385) : ‘We do you to wit’ is a per- 
fectly well-known phrase ; literally, it means we cause you to know; practically, it 
means we request you to take notice. Antony says, ‘We bind the world to weet,’ 
z. e, we compel the world to take notice. ‘ Weet’ is a late spelling of wit, verb, to 
know. : 

54. falshood] Deicuron: The abstract for the concrete, as in King John, III, 
iv, 36, ‘O fair affliction, peace!’; Tempest, V, i, 218, ‘Now, blasphemy, That 
swear’ st grace overboard.’ 


ACF, SC. iJ ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 21 


Ile feeme the Foole Iam not. Azthony will be himfelfe. 56 
Ant, But ftirr’d by Cleopatra. 
Now for the loue of Loue,and her foft houres, 58 
56. Ze...Anthony] One line, Pope et 57. But] Buts i.e. But 7s Anon. MS 
seq. ap. Hal. 
fe| I Cap. Cleopatra.] Cleopatra, Rowe ii, 
Anthony...iim/elfe] As Aside, Pope. Cleopatra: Han. Cleopatra,— 
Ktly. Cap. 
him/felfe.| him/elf, ¥ ¥,. 58. her] his Rowe,+, Cap. Var. Ran. 


56. Ile seeme the Foole I am not, etc.] HrysE: The world will deem mea 
fool because I give myself up to one who is faithless ; but I am not a fool because I 
know how faithless he is. Antony will be himself, if he again becomes faithless to 
me. 

57. But stirr’d] Upron (p. 261) continues this to Cleopatra: ‘Antony Will be 
himself, but stirr’d by Cleopatra,’ and marks it as Aside. HEATH (p. 448) thinks 
this emendation of Upton ‘can admit of no dispute.’ CAPELL (i, 26): Cleopatra 
checks herself for asking so idle a question as that about Fulvia, knowing as she 
(forsooth) did, that Antony would be Antony; and is there stopped by a reply of 
most exquisite delicacy,—‘ But, stirr’d by Cleopatra,’—who can say what he will 
be? for that is left to be indicated by the tone in which the words are delivered, and 
the action and look that accompanies them. JOHNSON: ‘ But,’ in this passage, seems 
to have the old Saxon signification of without, unless, except. Antony, says the 
Queen, will recollect his thoughts. Uy/ess kept, he replies, in commotion by Cleo- 
patra. [Emphatically, this is to me ‘obscurum per obscurius..—Ep.] M. MAson 
seems as wide of the mark as Dr Johnson. He observes that ‘by “ Antony will be 
himself,’’ Cleopatra means to say, ‘‘that Antony will act like the joint sovereign of 
the world, and follow his own inclinations, without regard to the mandates of Cesar, 
or the anger of Fulvia.’’ To which he replies, “ If but stirr’d by Cleopatra ;”’ that 
is, ‘‘if moved to it in the slightest degree by her.’’’ Sr1ncEr ‘believes Mason’s 
explanation to be nearly correct; Antony will be himself without regard to Caesar 
or Fulvia. Add if moved ¢o it by Cleopatra.’ NArEs (s. v. But) : Antony’s reply 
may either mean, ‘ du¢ Cleopatra will have the merit of moving him to be so;’ or 
“moved only by Cleopatra.’ KNIGHT, after giving the explanations of Johnson and 
M. Mason, justly says, ‘Surely the meaning is more obvious ;’ he then gives what 
seems to me to be the true interpretation : ‘ Antony accepts Cleopatra’s belief of what 
he will be. He will be himself; but still under the influence of Cleopatra ; and to 
show what that influence is, he continues, “Now for the love of Love,’’ etc.’ 
ABBOTT quotes this passage under § 128, and gives the meaning of ‘but’ as equiv- 
alent to ‘ot except stirr’d,’ ‘only if stirr’d,’—a meaning which is to me more 
than doubtful. The whole difficulty arises, I think, from failing to apprehend the 
meaning of Cleopatra’s last words. ‘TI’ll seem the fool I am not,’ she says, and then 
adds contemptuously, ‘ Antony will be the fool he really is.’ He parries the stab, 
and tries, unsuccessfully, to propitiate her by acknowledging that he will be that 
same fool, but stirr’d to his very soul by love for Cleopatra. Then follows the 
exquisite music of the next four lines, to which there came in reply only the exasper- 
ating parrot-cry, ‘ Hear the ambassadors !’—Ep. 

58. Loue] MALone: That is, the queen of love. Compare ‘Let Love, being 


22 THE TRAGEDIE OF fAcr1, Ses. 


Let’s not confound the time with Conference harfh; 
There’s not a minute of our liues fhould ftretch 60 
Without fome pleafure now. What fport to night? 
Cleo. Heare the Ambaffadors. 
Ant. Fye wrangling Queene: 
Whom euery thing becomes, to chide, to laugh, 


To weepe : who euery paffion fully ftriues 65 

To make it felfe (in Thee)faire, and admir’d. 
No Meffenger but thine, and all alone, to night 67 
61. pleasure now. What] pleasure. 67. Meffenger but thine,| Ff, Rowe, 
Now, what Johns. Pope. Messenger, but thine; Theob. 
65. whoeuery| whofe every Ff, Rowe Han. Warb. Cap. Ran. Sta. Glo. Cam. 
etseqy Messenger but thine— Johns. Messenger ; 
fully) fitly Coll. MS. but thine. Ktly. Messenger; but thine 

66. (7% Thee) ] Ff. 7 thee Rowe Mal. et cet. 
et seq. 67, 68. to night...and note| One line, 


Rowe et seq. 


light, be drowned if she sink.—Com. of Err. III, i, 52. [DyYcr apparently agrees 
with Malone; he refers to the same line in the Com. of Err. But Capell was not 
of this opinion; he followed Rowe in substituting ‘zs soft hours’ for ‘her soft 
hours.’ I cannot believe that there lies herein the faintest reference to the queen of 
love or to her boy. The expression ‘love of love’ means, I think, the love of love 
in the abstract, the very soul of love; just as Hamlet, by ‘heart of heart,’ means 
the innermost shrine of his heart, ‘his heart’s core.’ If z#s had been in common 
use, Shakespeare mighd possibly have said ‘for the love of love and z¢s soft hours,’ — 
but then the exquisite feminine touch of the ‘her’ would have been lost. Tennyson 
uses this very phrase, with others exactly parallel, where he describes ‘ The Poet’ as 
~*Dower’d with the hate of hate, the scorn of scorn, The love of love.’—Ep. ] 

59. confound] MALONE: That is, comseme. So in Cor. I, vi, 17, * How couldst 
thou in a mile confound an hour.’ [Both here and in I, iv, 31, ‘ confound the time’ 
has, I think, a meaning wider than merely to consume; it means Zo lose, to waste, to 
ruin.—ED. | 

61. now] WARBURTON: We should read zew, a sentiment much in character 
of the luxurious and debauched Antony. THISELTON (p- 8) proposes the same 
emendation, for the reason that Plutarch represents Cleopatra as ever devising ‘ sun- 
dry new delights’ for Antony. CAPELL (p. 28): ‘Now’ is here a word of great 
force, for the reasonableness of what is then spoken is all wrapped up in it : by ‘now’ 
is insinuated the speaker’s own advanced age, and that of the lady addressed to; 
which, in the opinion of persons like them, makes it proper that no time be lost in 
the pursuing of what they call—pleasures, JOHNSON adopted an original punc- 
tuation, without comment. 

65. fully] CoLiieR (ed. ii): This may be understood as entirely, and successfully 
‘Strives. 

67. No Messenger but thine, and] That the punctuation here is important is 
manifest by the changes recorded in the Zext. Votes. There can be hardly a ques- 
tion that the punctuation of the Folios is wrong. Cleopatra had neither received 


ACE, SC. i.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 23 


Wee’l wander through the ftreets, and note 68 
The qualities of people. Come my Queene, 
Laft night you did defire it. Speake not to vs. 70 


Exeunt with the Traine. 
Dem. 1s Cefar with Anthonius priz’d fo flight ? 
Philo. Sir fometimes when he is not Azthony, 
He comes too fhort of that great Property 
Which ftill fhould go with Azthony. 75 
Dem. 1am full forry, that hee approues the common 
Lyar,who thus fpeakes of him at Rome ; but I will hope 


of better deeds to morrow. Reft you happy. Lxreunt 78 
70. [As they are going out Enobarbus Knt, Sing. Ktly, Dyce ii, iii. 

pulls Antony’s robe. Kemble. 76-78. that hee...happy.| Three lines, 
71. the] their Rowe et seq. ending Fame... hope... happy. Pope, 
72-75. Om. and II, ii, 218-277 in- Theob. Han. Warb. Three lines, end- 

serted. Gar. ing who...hope...happy / Cap. et seq. 
72. flight light Grey, ii, 190. 77. Lyar...of him] har Fame, Who 


76. L...forry| I’m sorry Pope, Theob. speaks him thus Pope, Theob. Han. 
Han. Warb. J’ full sorry Steev. Var. Warb. 


nor sent a messenger. Malone’s punctuation gives, I think, the true interpretation. 
In Anthony’s complete surrender and acknowledgement that he belongs to Cleo- 
patra, the latter’s victory is gained and her wrangling ceases.—ED. 

68. Wee’l wander, etc.] See North’s Plutarch, in the Appendix. 

72. Czesar with Anthonius] AxsotTT (§ 193): ‘ With’ is, perhaps, here used 
for as regards, in relation to, as in our modern, ‘this has not much weight w7¢i me,’ 
though, perhaps, ‘ with’ may here mean dy, At all events the passage illustrates 
the connexion between ‘with’ and ‘by.’ Compare, ‘His taints and honours, 
waged equal with him.’—V, i, 39. 

76. approues] Murray (J. £. D.): f 2. To attest (a thing) with some au- 
thority, to corroborate, to affirm. Compare, ‘What damned error, but some sober 
brow Will bless it and approve it with a text.’—Mer. of Ven. III, ii, 79. MALONE: 
That he proves the common liar, fame, in his case to be a true reporter. 

77,78. hope of better deeds] Appotr (§ 177): ‘Of’ is sometimes used to 
separate an object from the direct action of a verb: (c) when the verb is not always 
or often used as a transitive verb, as ‘hope’ or ‘like.’ [As in the present instance.] 


24 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT:1, SCo il: 


| [Scene LT.| 


Enter Enobarbus, Lamprius, a Southfayer, Rannius, Lucilli- 
us, Charmian, Iras, Mardian the Eunuch, 


and Alexas. 


Char. \L. Alexas, fweet Alexas, moft any thing A/exas, 
almoft moft abfolute A/exas, where’s the Soothfayer 5 
that you prais’d fo to’th’'Queene? Oh that I knewe this 
Husband, which you fay, muft change his Hornes with 7 


Scene II. Pope et seq. 

The Same. Another Room. Cap. 

1-3. Enter... ] Enter Enobarbus,Char- 
mian, Iras, Alexas, and a soothsayer. 
Rowe,+. Enter Alexas, Charmian, Iras, 
a Soothsayer and others. Cap. et seq. 
(subs. ) 

4-8. Five lines, ending sweet Alexas 
... almost ... soothsayer ... say...garlands. 
Cap. 

4. Z.] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Cap. Lord Johns. et seq. 

5. almof?| nay, almost Cap. 


5. where's] wheres ¥.. 
Soothfayer| South/ayer F,. 
6. fo to’ th’ } to th’ FF, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. 
Oh] Oh! F,, 
6-8. Ohk...Gariands] Two lines, end- 
ing /ay,... Garlands, Walker ( Crit. i, 18). 
7. change| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Johns. 
Wars steev. Var. (03,213. Kntanotas 
charge Theob. et cet. 
change...with| change for horns 
his Han. change his garlands with 
horns Schmidt conj. 


Scene ii] Drxius (52. Jahrbuch, V, 267): The frivolous conversation of Cleo- 
patra’s court, expressive of the thoughtless life there, is carried on in prose. The sooth- 
sayer, in expounding the value of his prophecies, is the only one who uses blank 
verse. On the appearance of the impassioned Cleopatra language assumes a higher 
strain and blank verse is then used by the others. In the dialogue, at the con- 
clusion of the Scene, between Antony and his trusty Enobarbus, the latter as the 
representative of the more elevated humour of the play, speaks in prose, in which 
his satirical remarks on Cleopatra and Fulvia are certainly appropriate. 
himself barely responds to this mood and style of his friend. 

1. Lamprius, ... Rannius, Lucillius] STEEVENs: It is not impossible, indeed, 
that ‘Lamprius, Rannius, Lucillius,’ might have been speakers in this scene as it 
was first written down by Shakespeare, who afterwards thought proper to omit their 
speeches, though at the same time he forgot to erase their names as originally 
announced at their collective entrance. [In Juch Ado, there is a character, Inno- 
gen, who is set down in the Dramatis Personz, and enumerated among those who 
enter at the beginning of the Second Act, and yet she speaks no word throughout 
the play. See Appendix, WYNDHAM, p. 487.—ED. ] 

4. sweet Alexas] COLLIER (ed. ii) reads ‘ost sweet Alexas,’ in accordance 
with a marginal note in his Second Folio; ‘by what follows,’ he says, ‘‘* most” is 
clearly required, and we may be sure that it had, in some way, escaped in the press.’ 
[It cannot be denied that the addition, most, is an improvement; not absolutely 
necessary, but still an improvement. 


Antony 


The next words ‘most anything Alexas’ 
seem almost to demand it. To improve Shakespeare, however, is no more justifiable 
than to deface him.—ED. ] 

7. which you say, must change his Hornes with Garlands] THEOBALD: We 


ACT I, SC. ii. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 25 


[7. which you say, must change his Hornes with Garlands. ] 
must restore, ‘must charge his horns,’ that is, must be an honourable cuckold, must 
have his horns hung with garlands. Charge and ‘change’ frequently usurp each 
other’s place in our Author’s old editions. [Theobald hereupon adds, with his charac- 
teristic scrupulous honesty,—an honesty Warburton knew not,—‘I ought to take 
notice, that Mr Warburton likewise started this emendation.’ In Warburton’s own 
edition, no such scruples harassed him. He gave the emendation as wholly his 
own.] UPTON (p. 304) quotes this passage as an instance where Shakespeare uses 
‘change’ in its secondary sense of ew dress and adorn. CAPELL (i, 27, adopting 
charge): That is, dress them up ‘ with garlands,’ set them forth gayly ; a wanton 
thought, that suits perfectly the person it comes from, and is expressed in words 
equally wanton. [Theobald’s] very slight change is necessary. JOHNSON: I am in 
doubt whether to ‘change’ is not merely to dress, or to dress with changes of gar- 
lands. MALONE: I think the reading, originally introduced by Theobald [charge], 
is the true one, because it affords a clear sense ; whilst, on the other hand, the read- 
ing of the old copy affords none: for supposing change with to mean exchange for, 
what idea is conveyed by this passage? and what other sense can these words bear ? 
The substantive change being formerly used to signify variety (as change of clothes, 
of honours, etc.) proves nothing: change of clothes or linen necessarily imports more 
than one; but the thing sought for is the meaning of the veré to ‘change,’ and no 
proof is produced to show that it signified to dvess ; or that it had any other meaning 
than to exchange. Charmian is talking of her fu¢ure husband, who certainly could 
not change his horns, a¢ present, for garlands, or any thing else, having not yet 
obtained them ; nor could she mean, that when he did get them, he should ‘ change’ 
or part with them, for garlands: but he might charge his horns, when he should 
marry Charmian, with garlands: for having once got them, she intended, we may 
suppose, that he should wear them contentedly for life. The same mistake happened 
in Cor. V, iii, 152, where the same correction was made by Warburton, and adopted 
by all subsequent editors: ‘And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt.’ STEEVENS: 
‘To change his horns w/h (i. e. for) garlands’ signifies, to be a triumphant cuck- 
old; a cuckold who will consider his state as an honourable one. We are not to 
look for serious argument in such a ‘skipping dialogue’ as that before us. KNIGHT 
stands loyally by the First Folio, and interprets ‘change’ by ‘ vary—.give a different 
appearance to.’ STAUNTON follows Knight, and suggests that ‘change’ ‘may mean 
to vary or garnish. Charge is certainly very plausible.’ W. W[ILLIAMs] (Parth- 
enon, 17 May, 1862): It seems to me that when Warburton offered an explanation 
of Shakespeare’s meaning, he also well-nigh restored, unconsciously, the very words 
of the dramatist. He says the horns of Charmian’s husband must be ‘ hung about’ 
with garlands. Now ang was anciently spelt Aange, and, although this orthography 
was dying out at the date of this tragedy, the omission or insertion of the final ¢ 
depended pretty much on the caprice of the compositor. It can scarcely then be 
deemed unreasonable to conclude that the play-house copy from which this tragedy 
was probably printed would have shown Shakespeare’s words to have been ‘ must 
hange his Horns with Garlands.’ ... The insertion of a superfluous initial letter 
was equally likely as a source of error... We find in the old copies of this play, ‘’¢is 
well,’ where Shakespeare must have written ‘is well,’ and ‘stow me after’ for ‘ fow 
me after.’ STAUNTON (Atheneum, 12 April, 1873) : ‘Change’ is unquestionably a 
misprint for chain—of old spelt chayne. The allusion is to the sacrificial ox, whose 
horns were wreathed with flowers. [It is to be regretted that Staunton did not know 


26 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT)I, SCail- 


Garlands. 8 
Alex. Soothfayer. 
Sooth. Your will? IO 


Char. Isthis the Man? Is’t you fir that know things? 

Sooth. In Natures infinite booke of Secrecie, a little I 
can read. 

Alex. Shew him your hand. 

Enob. Bring in the Banket quickly : Wine enough, 15 
Cleopatra’s health to drinke. 

Char. Good fir, giue me good Fortune. 

Sooth. I make not, but forefee. 

Char. Pray then, forefee me one. 

Sooth. You hall be yet farre fairer then you are. 20 

Char. He meanes in flefh. 


fras. No, you fhall paint when you are old. 
Char. Wrinkles forbid. 


Alex. Vex not his prefcience, be attentiue. 24 
9. Soothfayer.| Soothsayer,— Theob. 16. [to some within. Cap. 
Warb. Johns. Cap. 17. Good...me| Separate line, Han. 
11. things] all things Lloyd (M. & 18. 7] Madam, I Han. 
Qu. VII, xi, 82). 20-29. Om. Gar. 
12. Jn...secrecte] One line, Theob. et 20. You...yet] Separate line, Han. 
seq. 21. flefh| face Gould. 
14. [Enter Enobarbus. Cap. et seq. 22. you are] Om. Han. 
15. Banket|] Banquet FF. 24. prefcience) patience FF, Rowe. 


that he was herein anticipated by Zachary Jackson ; else, rather than be seen in such 
company, he would have withheld his hand. Inasmuch as two editors, as eminently 
respectable as Knight and Staunton, have decided that ‘change’ is intelligible, the 
obscurity cannot be so desperate as to demand the substitution of another word, nor is 
there a sufficient reason to disregard the wholesome rule that the more difficult read- 
ing is to be preferred. We must remember that the thought, whatever may be the 
words, is not that of Charmian, but of Alexas, who has evidently taunted the giddy 
girls with indulging in frivolity to its extremest limit,—even to the unparalleled limit 
of indifferently changing the symbols of disgrace with the chaplets of marriage. I 
cannot see any reason for adopting Theobald’s emendation, which, moreover, seems 
to make the husband an active agent in loading his horns with flowers,—a task which 
is not generally supposed to fall to his share. —Ep. ] 

15. Enob. Bring in the Banket, etc.] WI1HELM Koenic (SA. /Jhréd. x, 381) 
calls attention to the fact that no one pays any heed either to the entrance or to the 
command of Enobarbus, and that we hear nothing further from him for more than 
thirty lines,—until he says that it will be his fortune to go drunk to bed. Koenig 
suggests, therefore, that the entrance of Enobarbus be transposed to follow Charmian’s 
exclamation, ‘ Wrinkles forbid,’ line 23, and that Alexas’s command, ‘ Vex not his 
prescience,’ etc. is addressed to him. 


ACT I, SC. ii. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 27 


Char. Huth. 25 
Sooth. You fhall be more belouing, then beloued. 

Char. 1 had rather heate my Liuer with drinking. 

Alex. Nay, heare him. 

Char. Good now fome excellent Fortune: Let mee 


be married to three Kings in a forenoone, and Widdow 30 
them all : Let me haue a Childe at fifty, to whom Herode 
of Iewry may do Homage. Finde me to marrie me with 32m 
25. [to Iras. Cap. 29. Good now] Good now, F ,. 
27. with.| with much Han. 32. me to| me, to Pope, +. 


27. my Liuer] M. Mason: The liver was considered as the seat of desire. In 
answer to the Soothsayer, who tells her she shall be very loving, she says, ‘she had 
rather heat her liver by drinking, if it was to be heated.’ 

29-33. Let mee be married .. . Octauius Cesar] Tu. Z1ELINSKI (Philologus, 
p. 19): Shakespeare imagined Charmion as younger than her mistress; the age of 
fifty, then, would bring her to the birth of Christ. Is it clear who that child is ‘to 
whom Herode of Iewry may do homage’? In Matthew, ii, 8, Herod himself says 
‘Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found him, bring 
me word again, that I may come and worship him also.’ And to whom does he say 
this? To the ‘Holy Three Kings.’ Are not these the same that are included in 
the list of Charmion’s wishes? The fancy deserves a Mystery :—wife to the Holy 
Three Kings, the mother of God, and, withal, Empress of Rome. [It is by no 
means easy to disprove this interpretation, which at first decidedly shocks us. It is 
unavailing to appeal to the text of the Scriptures, where, in the Bishop’s Bible of 
1568,—the Version used by Shakespeare,—the Magi are termed, not Kings but ‘ Wise 
men’; these Wise men had been called ‘ Kings’ centuries before Shakespeare was 
born, and as such had been familiar characters in Christmas carols throughout 
England, and, possibly, are so, to this day. It is also possible that any allusion 
whatever to ‘ Three Kings’ would at once have suggested to Shakespeare’s audience 
the ‘three wise men.’ Furthermore, the ‘Three Kings’ must here be considered as 
a unit or asa single group; Charmian was to be married to them all at once or in one 
forenoon. This play opens in B.C. 40 and extends to B.c. 32; if Charmian be now 
eighteen or twenty, she will be fifty in the year when Christ was born. The refer- 
ences to Herod and the verse in Matthew are a little staggering. I do not like this 
interpretation ; it more than grates me. It imparts to Charmian’s words an air of 
frivolous irreverence, which is to me un-Shakespearian. But there is never anything 
uttered at random by any of Shakespeare’s characters, and the chances are many 
against this wish of Charmian’s being spoken at haphazard and tallying at the same 
time so exactly with dates. Whenever an allusion is thrown out, we must catch it 
of ourselves ; Shakespeare will not point it out tous. It is to be feared that there 
is many an allusion in his plays, less pointed than this, which critics have accepted 
and approved.—ED. } 

31, 32. Herode of Iewry] STEEVENS: Herod paid homage to the Romans, to 
procure the grant of the kingdom of Judea : I believe there is an allusion here to the 
theatrical character of this monarch, and to a proverbial expression founded on it. 
Herod was always one of the personages in the Mysteries of our early stage, on which 


28 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1, SC. ii. 


Odtauius Cefar, and companion me with my Miftris. 33 
Sooth. You fhall out-liue the Lady whom you ferue. 
Char. Oh excellent, I loue long life better then Figs. 35 
Sooth. You haue feene and proued a fairer former for- 
tune, then that which is to approach. 
Char. Then belike my Children fhall haue no names: 
Prythee how many Boyes and Wenches mutft I haue. 
Sooth. If euery of your wifhes had a wombe, & fore- 40 
tell euery wifh, a Million. 


33. marrie me with] marry me, with 39-44. Om. Gar. 

Han. 40, 41. fore-tell] FF, fore-tel F,. 
35. excellent, | excellent ! Theob., Joretel Rowe, Johns.Var. Rann. foretold 
37. then...approach| Separate line, Pope. jertil or fertile Theob. et cet. 

Cap. et seq. &...Million] Ff, Johns. One 
38, 39. Prose Cap. et seq. line, Rowe et cet. 


he was constantly represented as a fierce, haughty, blustering tyrant, so that ‘ Herod 
of Jewry’ became a common proverb, expressive of turbulence and rage. Thus, 
Hamlet says of a ranting player, that he ‘ out-herods Herod.’ And, in this tragedy, 
Alexas tells Cleopatra [III, iii, 6] that ‘not even Herod of Jewry dare look upon 
her when she is angry ;’ i. e. not even a man as fierce as Herod. According to this 
explanation, the sense of the present passage will be—Charmian wishes for a son 
who may arrive at such power and dominion that the proudest and fiercest monarchs 
of the earth may be brought under his yoke. [That this is the specific, theatrical 
Herod to whom Charmian refers has been universally accepted, and will probably so 
remain, in spite of the preceding ingenious note.—ED. ] 

33. Odtauius Czesar] She could not aspire to Anthony without being a rival to 
her mistress. She, therefore, elects the next highest potentate.—Eb. 

35. Oh excellent] CAPELL (p. 27): It has been observed by a gentleman,— 
that this is ‘one of those ominous speeches, in which the ancients were so super- 
Stitious,’ and the observation is just; for the Poet deals largely in them. [Very 
‘ doubtful. ] 

35. I loue long life better than Figs] STEEVENS says that this is a proverbial 
expression. 

38. my Children shall haue no names] JOHNSON: If I have already had the 
best of my fortune, then I suppose ‘I shall never name children,’ that is, I am never 
to be married. However, tell me the truth, tell me, ‘how many boys and wenches?’ 
STEEVENS: A ‘fairer fortune,’ I believe, means—a more reputable one. Her answer 
then implies, that belike all her children will be bastards, who have no right to the 
name of their father’s family. Thus says Launce: ‘That’s as much as to say, 
bastard virtues; that, indeed, know not their fathers, and therefore have no names.’ 
— Two Gent. III, i, 321. MALONE: Compare &. of LZ. ‘Thy issue blurr’d with 
nameless bastardy.’ —line 522. 

40. euery] For other examples of ‘every’ equivalent to every one, see FRANZ, 
§ 219, c.; or ABBOTT, § 12. 

40, 41. fore-tell] THEOBALD: The poet certainly wrote ‘And fertz/ every wish.’ 


ACT I, SC. ii. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 29 


Char. Out Foole, I forgiue thee for a Witch. 42 
Alex, You thinke none but your fheets are priuie to 

your wifhes. 
Char. Nay come, tell /ras hers. 45 
Alex. Wee’l know all our Fortunes. 
Enob. Mine, and moft of our Fortunes to night, fhall 

be drunke to bed. 48 


42. Out] Out, out, Han. 48. be] be to go Rowe,+. be— Cap. 
44. your wi/hes| Separate line, Han. et seq. (subs. ) 
45. come] come, and Han. 


[I make no question that this is Theobald’s own emendation, albeit that Warburton 
repeated it in his edition and made no allusion whatever to him. Consequently, to 
Warburton has the credit pretty generally been given.] JOHNSON: The emendation 
of Dr Warburton is made with great acuteness; yet the original reading may, I think, 
stand. ‘If you had as many wombs as you will have wishes, and I should foretel 
all those wishes, I should foretel a million of children.” ‘And’ is for and if, which 
was anciently, and is still provincially, used for 7 [THISELTON (p, 8) says that 
‘and’ is here illative,—a somewhat unusual function, but the topic is unusual.—Eb. ] 
MALONE will not listen to untold millions of ‘wishes’ unless accompanied by fer- 
tility. COLLIER (ed. ii) adopts fruitful, the emendation of his MS corrector, and 
Dyce (Strictures, p. 201) tells him that the dzctus literarum is not favourable 
to it. 

42. for a Witch] For an analysis of shades of meaning of this ‘for,’ meaning zz 
the quality of, in the capacity of, as, which is far more common in Shakespeare than 
in modern usage, see FRANZ, § 329. 

42. Witch] WALKER ((C77¢. ii, 88): ‘ Witch’ in the sense of a male sorcerer, or 
without any specific reference to sex, frequently occurs in the old writers, [whereof 
many examples follow. In Wint. Zale, Leontes calls Paulina a ‘ witch’ and to 
add to it an especial roughness, calls her a ‘mankind witch.’ Walker concludes 
his article with a quotation from Minsheu’s Guide into the tongues, 1617 (s.v. Con- 
iuration) where the difference is set forth ‘betueene Conjuration, Witchcraft, and 

Inchantment ; ’—‘ the Conturer seemeth by praiers and inuocation of Gods powerfull 

names, to compell the Dzue// to say or doe what he commandeth him: The Witch 
dealeth rather by a friendly and voluntarie conference or agreement betweene him or 
her and the Dizel/ or Familiar, to haue his or her turne serued in /eu or stead of 
blood, or other gift offered vnto him, especially of his or her soule: So that a Con- 
turer compacts for curiositie to know secrets, and worke maruels ; and the Witch of 
meere malice to doe mischiefe ; And both these differ from Juchaunters or Sorcerers, 
because the former two haue personall conference with the Dzwe//, and the other 
meddles but with AZ/edicines and ceremoniall formes of words called Charmes, with- 
out apparition.’ Walker quotes only a portion of the foregoing, but the whole of it 
seems interesting. J. CHURTON CoLLins (Note in The Pinner of Wakefield, III, 
ii, 703) quotes from Latimer: ‘We run hither and thither to witches or sorcerers 
whom we call wise men.’—Sermons preached in Lincolnshire, V. (ed. not given). 
In the edition of 1572, however, this passage runs, ‘ we runne hither and thither to 
wyssardes, or sorcerers, whome we call wyse men.’—Fol. 98, verso.—ED. ] 


30 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. le 


lvras. There’s a Palme prefages Chattity, if nothing els. 

Char. E’ne as the o’re-flowing Nylus prefageth Fa- 50 
mine. 

Tras. Go you wilde Bedfellow, you cannot Soothfay. 

Char. Nay, if an oyly Palme bee not a fruitfull Prog- 
noftication, I cannot f{cratch mine eare. Prythee tel her 
but a worky day Fortune. ; 55 

Sooth. Your Fortunes are alike, 

Tras. But how, but how, giue me particulars. 

Sooth. I haue faid. 

lras. Am I not an inch of Fortune better then fhe? 

Char. Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better 60 
then I : where would you choofe it. 

fras. Not in my Husbands nofe. 

Char. Our worfer thoughts Heauens mend. 


Alexas. Come, his Fortune, his Fortune. Oh let him 64 
49. ¢f nothing els] Separate line, Han. et seq. (subs.) 
50. Z’ ne] £’ en Rowe,+, Cap. Dyce, 57. how, giue| how—give Rowe, Pope. 
Sta. Cam. ven Var.’73 et cet. how ?—give Theob. et seq. (subs. ) 
Nylus| Nile Han. 64. Alexas.] Ff, Rowe, Pope i. Om. 


55. worky day| F, workyday F,. and continuing to Char. Pope ii. Con- 
Workyday F , Rowe,+. worky-day Cap. tinuing to Char. Theob. et seq. 


49-51. There’s . . . Soothsay] WALKER (C7z¢. i, 18) reads ‘There is’ and 
divides the lines thus :—‘ chastity,’ ‘ Nilus’—‘ bedfellow.’ ‘Nilus,’ he observes, 
‘surely indicates verse.’ But why does he begin and end with these two or three 
lines ?—an oasis of verse in a desert of prose. Is it to be imagined that Shakespeare 
would have contemplated with pleasure such patchwork? Especially, since, in order 
to be appreciated, it must be seen on the printed page, a pleasure, which, in this 
play, Shakespeare probably never enjoyed. And in the meantime what becomes of 
Delius’s fine-spun theory in regard to prose and verse? Every line of this portion 
of the scene must be stark prose, or for poor Delius, ‘ nought’s had, all’s spent.’ We 
have read our Shakespeare to little advantage unless we have acquired from him a 
liberality as free as the air, that chartered libertine, and these theories (the very word 
becomes repulsive !) are sent to put that liberality to the test. —Ep. 

53- oyly Palme] There is a parallel thought in O74. III, iv, 36-38. 

54. I...scratch mine eare] F. BRADNACK (Medical Record, N. Y., 1 Feb., 
1879, p. 116) in an amusing list of proofs, drawn from the plays, that Shakespeare 
was at home in matters of physic, quotes the present phrase as evidence that he was 
familiar with ‘ Brachial Paralysis.’ 

64. Alexas. Come, etc.] This sophistication of the compositor, after having 
been adopted in the Folios, by Rowe, and Pope, THEOBALD was the first to detect 
and expose in his Shakespeare Restored, whereof the full title reads :—or, A SPECIMEN 
of the Many ERRORS, as well Committed, as Unamended, by Mr. Pork in his late 
Lidition of this Poet. Designed Not only to correct the said Edition, but to restore 


ACT I, SC, ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 31 


mary a woman that cannot go, fweet Zs, I befeech thee, 65 

and let her dye too, and giue him a worfe, and let worfe 

follow worfe, till the worft of all follow him laughing to 

his graue, fifty-fold a Cuckold. Good Zs heare me this 

Prayer, though thou denie me a matter of more waight : 

good /fs I befeech thee. =70 
lvas. Amen,deere Goddeffe, heare that prayer of the 

people. For, as it is a heart-breaking to fee a handfome 

man loofe-Wiu’d, fo it is a deadly forrow, to beholde a 

foule Knaue vncuckolded: Therefore deere //s keep de- 


corum, and Fortune him accordingly. 75 
67. worfe| worst Warb. (Corrected 71. the] thy Daniel. 

NV. & Qu, VIII, iii, 262.) 74, 75. decorum] Ff, Rowe,+. ae- 
71. Iras.] Char. Ff, Rowe. corum Cap. et seq. 


Amen,| Amen. Cap. 


the True Reading of Shakespeare in all the Editions ever yet publisd. The volume 
which followed did not belie this unfortunate title-page ; it achieved Pope’s undying 
enmity, and, for its author, a chief place in Ze Dunciad. In reference to the pres- 
ent passage Theobald says (p. 157) in substance:—‘ The fact is evidently this: 
Alexas brings a fortune-teller to Iras and Charmian, and says himself, “ We’ll know 
all our fortunes.’’ Well; the Soothsayer begins with the women ; and some jokes 
pass upon the subject of husbands and chastity: after which, the women hoping for 
the satisfaction of having something to laugh at in Alexas’s fortune, call him to hold 
out his hand, and wish heartily that he may have the prognostication of cuckoldom 
upon him. The whole speech, therefore, must be placed to Charmian. There needs 
no stronger proof of this being a true correction, than the observations which Alexas 
immediately subjoins on their wishes and zeal to hear him abused.’ Theobald’s 
Shakespeare Restored was published in 1726; two years afterward appeared Pope’s 
Second Edition wherein the Editor was forced to adopt many, very many of Theo- 
bald’s corrections. It looks, in the present passage, as though Pope, smarting under 
the judicious slashes which Theobald administered, was determined to adopt as little 
of Theobald’s emendation as possible. He therefore omitted the name ‘ Alexas’ 
altogether, and by Italics tried to make Charmian’s speech apply to him, thus: 
‘ Char. Our worser thoughts heav’ns mend. Come, zs fortune, 22s fortune.’-—ED. 

65. that cannot go] That is, that cannot have children. See WV. Z. D. s. v. 7. 

71, 72. prayer of the people] THISELTON (p. 9): This seems to mean ‘that 
universal prayer.’ 

74, 75. decorum] Both here and in V, ii, 21, the compositors give this word in 
Italics, as an indication that it had not yet been adopted into the language. Herein 
they seem to have followed the prevailing fashion. Ina majority of the examples, 
gathered by the /. £. D. extending from Ascham’s Scholemaster, in 1568, down to 
Shakespeare’s time, the word is similarly italicised; and the 7ext. Voles above, show 
that the practice was kept up in all the early editions down to, and including, John- 
son’s,—ED. 


32 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Char. 
Alex. 


Amen. 


[ACT I, SC. ii. 


76 


Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make mee a 


Cuckold, they would make themfelues Whores, but 


they’ld doo’t. 


Enter Cleopatra. 80 


Enob. 
Char. 
Cleo. 
Enob. 
Cleo. 
Char. 
Cleo. 


Not he, the Queene. 
Saue you, my Lord. 
No Lady. 

Was he not heere? 
No Madam. 


Huth, heere comes Azthony. 


85 


He was difpos’d to mirth, but on the fodaine 


A Romane thought hath ftrooke him. 


Enobarbus ? 
Enob. Madam. 


gO 


Cleo. Seeke him,and bring him hither: wher’s A/extas? 


Alex, 
My Lord approaches. 


Heere at your feruice. 


Enter Anthony, with a Meffenger. 
Cleo. We will not looke vpon him : 95 


Go with vs. 
Meffen. Fulua thy Wife, 
Firft came into the Field. 


76. Char.] Iras. Rowe ii. 

Amen] Amen ¥ , Rowe, Pope. 

77. now, | now / Cap. 

80. [Scene III. Pope,+. 

Enter...] Enter...attended (After 
line 82) Cap. et seq. 

83. Saue you, my] Saw you my Ff et 

seq. 

87. fodaine] fudden FF. 

88, 89. A...Enobarbus?] One line, 

Rowe et seq. 

88. Romane] roaming Grey (ii, 191). 
hath had F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Strooke) firuck ¥¥,.  strook Cap. 

89. Enobarbus?] Enodarbus. Rowe. 

Enobarbus,— Theob. Cap. Knt, Dyce. 


Exeunt. 


98 
Enobarbus ! Han. Glo. 

90. Madam.| Madam? Dyce, Glo. 

gt. Alexias?] F,. 

92, 93. One line, Rowe et seq. 

92. Heere| Here, lady, Cap. Here, 
madam, Steev. 

92, 93. feruice. My] service ; see, my 
Han. 

94. Enter...] Enter...and Attendants. 
Rowe. Enter...and Titius. Kemble. 

95, 96. We...vs] One line, Rowe et 
seq. 

96. Exeunt.] Exeunt Cleop. Eno. 
Alex. Iras, Charm. Soothsayer and the 
rest. Cap. 

97, 98. One line, Rowe et seq. 


81. heere comes Anthony] A veiled sneer. Enobarbus knew well enough that 


it was Cleopatra.—Ep. 


95. We will not looke vpon him] Possibly, because he was ‘disposed to mirth;’ 
moreover, she was jealous of every thought that he gave to Rome.—Eb. 


KET, sc. ii.) 


Ant. 
Meffen. 
And the times ftate 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 33 


Againft my Brother Lucius? 
I - but foone that Warre had end, 10C 


Made friends of them, ioynting their force ’gainft Ce/ar, 
Whofe better iffue in the warre from Italy, 
Vpon the firft encounter draue them. 


Ant. Well, what worft. 105 
Meff, The Nature of bad newes infeéts the Teller. 
Ant. When it concernes the Foole or Coward : On. 

Things that are paft, are done, with me. ’Tis thus, 

Who tels me true, though in his Tale lye death, 

I heare him as he flatter’d. 110 
Mef. Labienus (this is ftiffe-newes) 

Hath with his Parthian Force 

Extended Afia : from Euphrates his conquering 113 


99. Lucius ?] Lucius. Ff. 
100, 7:] Ay. (separate line), Johns. 
Ran. Mal. Steev. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Glo. 
100-102. Two lines, ending state... 
Cesar Rowe,+, Ran. Mal. Steev. Knt, 
Coll. Dyce, Glo. Three lines, ending 
soon...friends...Cesar. Han. Cap. 
102. zoynting| joining Coll. MS ap. 
Cam. 
force 
Han. Cap. 
103. 7fue] Jsse Rowe i (misprint), 
warre from Italy,| warre of 
Italy, FF, Rowe, Pope. war, from 
Italy Han. et seq. (subs. ) 
105. Well,| Separate line, Han. Cap. 
Steev. 
worft.| Ff. worse ? Han. Ran. 
worst ? Rowe et cet. 


*gainfi| forces against 


109. hzs] the Rowe ii,+. 

110. him as] as if Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. 

III. this ts ftiffe-newes| Om. Han. 
Gar. Separate line, Cap. 

III-115. (his... whtj?] Lines end 
force ... Euphrates... Syria ... Ionia... 
whilft Steev. Var. Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. Lines end /force...Euphrates... 
Syria...whilst Coll. Sing. Wh. Ktly. 

112, 113. Hath... Afia] One line, 
Rowe, +, Cap. Var.’73, ’78, Ran. Mal. 

113. Extended] thro’ extended Han. 
Cap. 

113, 114. from.../nooke| His congu’r- 
ing banner from Euphrates shook Han. 

113-115. from...whil’f2| Lines end 
shook ... Ionia... Whilst Pope,+, Cap. 
Ran. Mal. 


IoI. the times state] This phrase, when expressed as ‘the state of the times,’ is 


familiar enough.—Eb. 


103. warre from Italy, ] This comma after ‘Italy’ Hanmer was the first to place 


properly after ‘ warre.’ 


III. (this is stiffe-newes)] CAPELL (i, 27) : If this be meant of the style in which 
the Messenger couches his news,—and no other meaning presents itself, —there was 
never a greater truth: The words are expunged in [Hanmer’s] edition ; and had 
been so in this, had they appeared in the light which they now do; which is that of 
—a gloss on the other words, put by heedlessness into the manuscript, and creeping 


thence into print. 


113. Extended] Brapiey (WV. £. D.s. v.): 11. Law. To take possession of 


3 


34 THE’ TRAGEDIE: OF [ACTit, ‘Sc.int, 


Banner fhooke, from Syria to Lydia, 
And to Ionia, whil’———_ 115 
Ant. Anthony thou would’ft fay. 
Mef. Oh my Lord. 
Ant. Speake to me home, 
Mince not the generall tongue, name 
Cleopatra as fhe is call’d in Rome : 120 
Raile thou in Fuluza’s phrafe, and taunt my faults 
With fuch full Licenfe, as both Truth and Malice 
Haue power to vtter. Oh then we bring forth weeds, 


When our quicke windes lye ftill, and our illes told vs 124 
114, 115. from...lonia,| And Syria, 120. /he is] she’s Rowe ii,+,Cap. Ran. 
to Lydia and Ionia ; Han. Mal. Steev. Var. Knt, Dyce ii, iii. 
115. to lonia] Jonia Pope, +, Cap. 121. phrafe) praise Gould. 
116. fay.] say— Theob. et seq. my faults) thy faults FF. 
(subs.) ~ 124. windes] F,. winds FF ,. minds 
117. Oh] Oh, no Ktly. Warb. Han. Ran. Mal. Var.’21, Sing. 


118-120. Speake...Rome] Two lines, Hal. Dyce, Wh. Ktly, Glo. Cam. Coll. 
ending fongue...Rome Rowe et seq. iii, Marshall, Dtn, Huds. Rlfe. 
(subs. ) zlles| 247 Pope, +. 


by a writ of extent; to seize upon (land, etc.) in satisfaction for a debt; to levy 
upon. b. transferred sense. To seize upon, take possession of, by force. [As in the 
present line. ] 

113. Euphrates] The Zext. Votes give Keightley’s division of these lines, but it 
is not easy to understand from them that it is in order to avoid the pronunciation 
‘Euphrates’ that he reads ‘Euphrates avd.’ WALKER (Vers. 172) shows by 
examples from Drayton, Spenser, Fairfax, and Sylvester that Luphrates, with the 
accent on the first syllable, was the common Elizabethan pronunciation. [See 4/- 
pendix, Plutarch. | 

124. our quicke windes] WARBURTON: We should read minds. The m was 
accidentally turned the wrong way at the press. The sense is this: While the active 
principle within us lies immerged in sloth and luxury, we bring forth vices instead 
of virtues, weeds instead of flowers and fruits: But the laying before us our ill 
condition plainly and honestly is, as it were, the first culture of the mind, which 
gives hope of a future harvest. This he says to encourage the messenger to hide 
nothing from him. CAPELL (i, 27): By ‘winds’ are meant—friends ; persons so 
truly such, as to remind those they love of their faults; the observation is certainly 
just ; and the metaphor in which it is wrap’d, a physical truth; and that this isa 
true interpretation, is clear from what immediately follows,—‘ and our ills told us, 
Is as our earing ;’ i. e.—and the telling us our ills or ill actions, is a kind of culture 
to minds that lie waste ;—still pursuing the image he had borrowed from husbandry. 
JOHNSON [reading ‘ winds’]: The sense is, that man, not agitated by censure, like 
soil not ventilated by guzck winds, produces more evil than good. BLACKSTONE: I 
suspect that guick winds is, or is a corruption of, some provincial word, signifying 
either arable lands, or the instruments of husbandry used in tilling them. STEEVENS: 


ACT I, sc. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 35 


[124. our quicke windes] 
This conjecture is well founded. The ridges left in lands turned up by the plough, 
that they may sweeten during their fallow state, are still called wind-rows. Quick 
winds, 1 suppose to be the same as teeming fallows; for such fallows are always 
Sruitful in weeds, HENLEY: When the ‘quick winds lie still,’ that is, 2z a mild 
winter, those weeds which ‘the tyrannous breathings of the north’ would have cut 
off, will continue to grow and seed, to the no small detriment of the crop to follow. 
M. Mason: The words “e sti//, are opposed to caring ; guick means pregnant; and 
the sense of the passage is: ‘When our pregnant mzzds lie idle and untilled, they 
bring forth weeds; but the telling us of our faults is a kind of culture to them.’ The 
pronoun our before guzck, shows that the substantive to which it refers must be some- 
thing belonging to us, not merely an external object, as the wid is, To talk of 
quick winds lying séz//, is little better than nonsense. MALONE: Dr Johnson’s 
explanation is certainly true of soz/, but where did Dr Johnson find the word soz/ in 
this passage? He found only wzzds, and was forced to substitute soz/ ventilated by 
winds in the room of the word in the old copy; as Mr Steevens, in order to extract 
a meaning from it, supposes wizds to mean to fallows, because ‘the ridges left in 
lands turned up by the plough, are termed zzd-rows ;’ though surely the obvious 
explication of the latter word, rows exposed to the wind, is the true one. Hence the 
rows of new-mown grass laid in heaps to dry, are also called w7nd-rows. Our guick 
minds, means, our lively, apprehensive minds. So, in 2 Hen. JV: IV, iii, 107: «It 
ascends me into the drain ;—makes it apprehensive, guzck, forgetive.’ Again, in 
this play: ‘The gzzck comedians,’ etc. The same error is found in King John, V, 
vii, 16 where we have, in the only authentick copy : ‘ Death, having prey’d upon the 
outward parts, Leaves them invisible; and his siege is now Against the wd.’ 
Again, in 7ro. and Cress. FFF: ‘Let it be call’d the mz/d and wand’ring flood.’ 
KNIGHT [reading ‘ winds’]: When do we ‘bring forth weeds’? Ina heavy and 
moist season, when there are no ‘quick winds’ to mellow the earth, to dry up the 
exuberant moisture, to fit it for the plough. The poet knew the old proverb of the 
worth of a bushel of March dust; but ‘the winds of March,’ rough and unpleasant 
as they are, he knew also produced this good. The quick winds then are the voices 
which bring us true reports to put an end to our inaction. When these winds lie 
still we bring forth weeds. But the metaphor is carried farther: the winds have 
rendered the soil fit for the plough; but the knowledge of our own faults,—ills,— 
is as the ploughing itself,—the ‘earing.’ CoLLiEeR [reading ‘winds’]: Perhaps 
‘winds’ ought to be spelt wz¢s, which in Kent and Sussex is an agricultural term 
(in other parts of the country called a dou), meaning ‘two furrows ploughed by the 
horses going to one end of the field and back again.’ See Cooper’s Sussex Glossary, 
1836; also Holloway’s General Provincial Dictionary, 1838. ‘Our quick winds,’ 
therefore, is to be understood as our productive soil. ‘ Earing’ is ploughing ; and its 
use shows that Anthony had agriculture in his thoughts, with reference to ‘ winds’ 
or wints. STAUNTON [reading ‘ winds’]: Warburton’s change is, perhaps, without 
necessity. ‘Quick winds’ may mean guickening winds, and Johnson’s explanation 
of the passage is possibly the true one. DEIGHTON [reading wuds]: It is when our 
active minds are allowed to lie untilled by wholesome truths that they shoot up 
noxious growths, and the telling us of our faults is as the ploughing of the soil which 
roots up such growths. [To mean insuperable difficulty in accepting ‘ winds’ is the 
possessive pronoun ‘our.’ I do not know what these winds are, which we possess 
and, if quiescent, suffer us to bring forth weeds. The agency of our reformation comes 


36 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr 1, sc. ii. 


Is as our earing : fare thee well awhlle. 125 
Mef. At your Noble pleafure. Exit Meffenger. 
Enter another Meffenger. 
Ant. From Scicion how the newes ? Speake there. 
1.Mef, The man from Scicion, 
Is there fuch an one? 130 
2.Mef. He ftayes vpon your will. 
Ant. Let him appeare: 
Thefe ftrong Egyptian Fetters I muft breake, 
Or loofe my felfe in dotage. 


Enter another Meffenger with a Letter. 1 35 


What are you? 
3-Mef. Fuluia thy wife is dead. 


Ant. Where dyed fhe. 138 
125. caring] ear-ring F,. Ear-ring 128. Speake] Speak to him Words. 
are F 129. 1. Mef.] Mes. Rowe. 1. A. 

awhile] F,. awhile F, a while Cap. 
FF, Rowe, +, Cap. 129, 130. The man...an one?] One 
126. Noble] good Words. line, Rowe et seq. 
Exit...] Om. Rowe. Exit first 130. an one] a one Cap. 
Messenger. Theob. 131. 2.Mef.] Attend. Rowe. 2. A. 
127. Enter...] Om. Rowe, Cap. Cap. 
128. Scicion] Szcyon Pope. your) you F,. 
Scicion how the] Sicyon, how the 134. loofe] lofe F,. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Coll. ii. Szcyon, 135. Enter...] After line 136, Rowe. 
ho, the Dyce, Wh. Sta.Glo. Sicyon ho! After line 133, Coll. 
the Coll. iii. Scicton now the Coll. MS. 137. 3.Mef.] 2.Mes. Rowe. 


to us from without, and even then not by arousing these still winds, but by husbandry. 
Could Shakespeare, could any one, suppose that weeds were killed by the wind? 
more especially by a quick wind, one that is ful! of life? And can a wind dis- 
criminate between weeds and wheat, kil] the one and foster the other? Whereas 
by accepting #zznds instead of ‘ windes,’ all is intelligible: when our active minds are 
still, conscience sleeps and evil practices abound.—ED. ] 

125. Is] ApsotT (§ 337): The real nominative is not the noun ‘ills,’ but the 
whole noun clause. Thus, ‘ The telling us of our faults is like ploughing us.’ 

128. From Scicion how the newes ?] Possibly, the reason why Capell did not 
change this ‘how’ into ho, as he wisely converted the ‘How’ of line 153 (thereby 
anticipating Dyce), was because the sense may here be, ‘how is the news from 
Sicyon ?’—Ep. 

131. vpon] For other examples of the use of ‘upon’ involving the idea of waiting 
on, attending to, etc. see FRANZ § 344, a. See also II, i, 52, post. Steevens quotes 
‘Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.’—I, iii, 148. 


ACT, SC. i1.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 27 


Mef. In Sczcion, her length of fickneffe, 
With what elfe more ferious, 140 
Importeth thee to know, this beares. 
Antho. Forbeare me 
There’s a great Spirit gone, thus did I defire it: 
What our contempts doth often hurle from vs, 


We with it ours againe. The prefent pleafure, 145 
139-141. Jn... bears] Lines end, 143. did I defire] I desir d Pope, Han. 
Sicyon...sertous...bears. Pope et seq. 144. contempts doth| comtempt doth 
141. Lmporteth] Importe to F,. Im- Sta. Glo. Rlfe, Dtn. contempis do Ff 
port to F,. et cet. 
142. [Exit second Messenger. Theob. 145. ours] our’s Coll. ii. 


143. Spirit] WALKER (C77z. i, 201) includes this ‘ Spirit’ in his list of numerous 
passages ‘in which the disyllabic pronunciation of sfzvit renders a line positively 
unmetrical or inharmonious to a degree beyond what the poet’s ear could possibly 
have tolerated.’ [From childhood we have been so accustomed to regard sprite as 
the name of a goblin, that its introduction in a solemn line like the present could 
hardly fail to havea jarring effect, for which metrical smoothness would be hardly a 
sufficient compensation.—ED. ] 

144. from vs] WALKER (C7?z. iii, 294): I suspect a word has dropt out :—‘do 
often hurl from ’s, gone We wish it ours again.’ [Walker does not quote the pre- 
ceding line; had he done so, he would have seen at once that his repetition of 
‘gone’ renders his proposed change extremely doubtful.—Eb. 

145. we wish it ours again] THEOBALD refers to ‘ Virtutem incolumen odimus, 
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi.’—AHorace, Odes, III, xxiv, 31. STEEVENS: 
Compare, ‘ We mone that lost, which had we did bemone.’——Sidney’s Arcadia, ii. 
[p. 148, closing line of chant of Basilius; ed. 1598. Compare, for the sentiment, 
209-211, infra.—ED. ] 

145. The present pleasure, etc.] WARBURTON: The allusion is to the sun’s 
diurnal course ; which rising in the east, and by revolution lowering, or setting in the 
west, becomes the opposite of itself. [ROLFE thinks that there is an allusion rather to 
the turning of a wheel, probably suggested by the familiar ‘wheel of Fortune.’ ] 
Jounson: This is an obscure passage. The explanation which Dr Warburton has 
offered is such, that I can add nothing to it; yet, perhaps, Shakespeare, who was 
less learned than his commentator, meant only, that our pleasures, as they are 
revolved in the mind, turn to pain, CAPELL (i, 28): The sentiment contained in 
the passage that begins with these words is, in the main, no other than that con- 
tain’d in the general maxim preceding it, and in the reflections with which it is fol- 
lowed. ToLLer: I rather understand the passage thus: ‘ What we often cast from 
us in contempt we wish again for, and what is at present our greatest pleasure, lowers 
in our estimation by the revolution of time; or by a frequent return of possession 
becomes undesirable and disagreeable.’ STEEVENS: I believe revolution means 
change of circumstances. This sense appears to remove every difficulty from the 
passage.—‘ The pleasure of to-day, by revolution of events and change of circum- 
stances, often loses all its value to us, and becomes to-morrow a pain.’ [KNIGHT 
and DEIGHTON adopt this interpretation of Steevens. ] 


38 THE TRAGE DIE VOPR [ACT 2,*SGyan, 


By reuolution lowring, does become 146 
The oppofite of it felfe : fhe’s good being gon, 
The hand could plucke her backe, that fhou’d her on. 
I muft from this enchanting Queene breake off, 
Ten thoufand harmes, more then the illes I know 150 
My idleneffe doth hatch. 
Enter Enobarbus. 
How now Lnobarbus. 
Eno. What’s your pleafure, Sir? 
Anth. I muft with hafte from hence. 155 
Eno. Why then we kill all our Women. We fee how 


146. lowring| Ff, Rowe,+. lowering Rowe et seq. 
Cap. et cet. 153. How now] How now, F,, Theob. 


148. could] would Gould. +, Sta. Ho/ Cap. Dyce, Hal. Coll. ii, 

149. enchanting] Om.Ff. A gyptian Wh. i. How now / Steev. Glo. Wh. ii. 
Rowe, Pope. Ho now ! Coll. iii. 

151-153. JZy...Enobarbus] One line, 155. hafte] haft FF. 


146. By reuolution lowring] COLLIER (ed. ii, Reading ‘By repetition sour- 
ing’): Our text has been furnished here by the MS and we cannot doubt that it is 
what the poet wrote. The meaning of course is, that pleasure, souring by repetition, 
becomes the reverse of itself. The old compositor misread ‘ repetition’ revolution, 
and ‘sowering’ (as the word was then often spelt) /ower¢ng, and thus made almost 
nonsense of the whole passage. The restoration by the old annotator can hardly 
have been a mere guess. [We are willing, all of us, upon a compelling occasion, to 
listen with condescending benignity to almost any emendation of the text of Shake- 
speare, but—we must draw the line at souving,—a repulsive word, and worse than a 
wilderness of flies in the apothecary’s ointment. In his Third Edition Collier 
returned to the received text, but remarked in a footnote that the reading of the MS 
‘is perhaps right.’ See note on DANIEL’S Cleopatra, Appendix, p. 515.—ED.] 

148. could plucke] HEATH: The verb cou/d hath a peculiar signification in this 
place; it doth not denote power but zzclination. The sense is, ‘ the hand that drove 
her off would now willingly pluck her back again.’ 

150. harmes, more] I doubt the propriety of this comma, which has been uni- 
formly adopted, I believe. I think the sense is: My idleness hatches ten thousand 
more unknown harms than the ills I see at hand.— Ep. 

153. How now] Dyce (Votes, p. 150): It would be impossible, I presume, to 
point out, in any old writer, an instance of ‘ How now!” used as ¢he exclamation of 
a person summoning another into his presence. Here the right reading is indubitably, 
—‘ Ho, Enobarbus!’ I have already shewn [in a note on Love’s Lab. Lost, V, ii, 
45, quoted ad /oc. in this edition—Ep.] that ‘40’ was very frequently spelt ‘ Zow -’ 
and the probability is that in the present passage the author’s manuscript had ‘how ,’ 
to which either some transcriber or the original compositor, who did not understand 
what was meant, added ‘now’ (making the line over-measure). [Dyce in his 
edition, printed four years after his Votes, acknowledged that he was unaware, when 
he wrote the foregoing note, that he had been therein anticipated by Capell. ] 


ACT I, SC. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 39 


mortall an vnkindneffe is to them, if they fuffer our de- 157 
parture death’s the word. 

Ant. I muft be gone. 

£no. WVnder a compelling an occafion, let women die. 160 
It were pitty to caft them away for nothing, though be- 
tweene them and a great caufe, they fhould be efteemed 
nothing. C/eopatra catching but the leaft noyfe of this, 
dies inftantly : I haue feene her dye twenty times vppon 
farre poorer moment : I do think there is mettle in death, 165 
which commits fome louing a¢te vpon her, fhe hath fuch 
a celerity in dying. 

Ant. She is cunning paft mans thought. 

£no. Alacke Sir no, her paffions are made of nothing 
but the fineft part of pure Loue. We cannot cal her winds 170 
_ and waters, fighes and teares: They are greater ftormes 
and Tempefts then Almanackes can report. This cannot 172 


160. a compelling an] a compelling Nicholson ap. Cam. 
Rowe et seq. as compelling an Anon. 167. celerity| alacrity Han. 
ap. Cam. Thiselton. so compelling an 169. 20,] 20; Theob. 


158. the word] DrIGHTON; That is, the watch-word on every lip. Compare 
Jul. Ces. V, v, 43;—‘slaying is the word;’ Cor. III, ii, 142: ‘The word is 
“mildly.”?’ [See also, ‘you were the word of warre,’ II, ti, 57.] 

165. poorer moment] JOHNSON: For less reason; upon meaner motives. 

165. mettle] THISELTON (p. 9): The metaphor is probably taken from the load- 
stone. ‘Aimant’ is the French word for magnet. 

170, 171. her winds and waters, sighes and teares] MALONE: I once idly 
supposed that Shakespeare wrote—‘ We cannot call her sighs and tears, winds and 
waters ;’—which is certainly the phraseology we should now use... . The passage, 
however, may be understood without any inversion. ‘ We cannot call the clamour- 
ous heavings of her breast, and the copious streams which flow from her eyes, by the 
ordinary name of sighs and tears; they are greater storms,’ etc. [It is doubtful that 
Zachary Jackson, or his copesmate Andrew Becket, or Lord Chedworth, who makes 
a good third, ever wrote a more ¢vyimg note than this of Malone. In supposing this 
sentence of Enobarbus to be inverted, Malone betrayed his misapprehension of 
its meaning, and I think that he made his feeble conjecture before he had read 
the rest of the speech. If, in speaking of Mont Blanc we should say ‘ we cannot call 
Mont Blanc a molehill’ is there any phraseology of any time or of any people in 
which this expression would be termed an inversion? However, before he finished 
his comment Malone discovered his error, but he should have cancelled the first por- 
tion of his note. —ED.] 

172. Almanackes can report] HALLIWELL quotes at length Sordido’s consul- 
tation of a ‘ prognostication’ wherein the wind and rain and blustering storms are duly 
foretold for each day of the month, in Jonson’s Every man out of his Humour, I, 1. 


40 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, SC. ii. 
be cunning in her; if it be, fhe makes a fhowre of Raine 173 
as well as Ioue. 

Ant. Would I had neuer feene her. 175 


Eno. Oh fir, you had then left vnfeene a wonderfull 
peece of worke, which not to haue beene bleft withall, 
would haue difcredited your Trauaile. 
Ant. Fuluia is dead. 
ERO. Git: 180 
Ant. Fuluia is dead. 
fino. Fuluia? 


Ant. Dead. 
Eno. Why fir, giue the Gods a thankefull Sacrifice : 
when it pleafeth their Deities to take the wife of a man 185 


from him, it fhewes to man the Tailors of the earth: com- 


175. Would ]’ Would Theob.+, Mal. Glo. Cam, 


Steev. Ktly. 186. tt fhewes| they shew Han. 
178. Trauaile| Travel FF. Tailors] tatlor Pope, Theob. 
180, Sir.] Sir! F,, Rowe,+. Sir? Han. 

Cap. et seq. (subs.) 186, 187. comforting | comforting him 


182. Fuluia?] Fulvia! Dyce, Coll. Rowe, Pope, Han. Warb. 


177. peece of worke] Note the critical eye which appreciates Cleopatra as a piece 
of mechanism to be classed with other wonders.—ED. 

186. it shewes, etc.] JOHNSON: I have printed this after the original, which, 
though harsh and obscure, I know not how to amend. I think the passage, with 
less alteration [than Hanmer’s], for alteration is always dangerous, may stand thus— 
‘It shows to men the tailors of the earth, comforting them,’ etc. CAPELL (i, 28) : 
‘It’ stands for—this action of theirs: His ‘ tailors’ are women, the artificers of other 
women; and in that lies the comfort he speaks of; for ‘when old robes are worn 
out,’ that is—when an old wife is carried to her grave, ‘there are members’ (videlicet, 
of the community) still left ‘to make’ newer and fresher. MALONE: When the 
deities are pleased to take a man’s wife from him, this act of theirs makes them 
appear to man like the tailors of the earth: affording this comfortable reflection, that 
the deities have made other women to supply the place of his former wife; as the 
tailor, when one robe is worn out, supplies him with another. Anon. [ Var.’21]: 
The meaning is this—‘ As the gods have been pleased to take away your wife 
Fulvia, so they have provided you with a new one in Cleopatra; in like manner as 
the tailors of the earth, when your old garments are worn out, accommodate you with 
new ones. Hupson: ‘Shews’ them to him in the sense, probably, of sending 
him to them, or putting him upon using their service. The shrewd humourist means 
to insinuate, I take it, that a wife of long standing is something like an out-worn 
dress; and that a change every little while in that behalf is as pleasant as having a 
new suit of clothes. Was the naughty wag an advocate of free-love? Antony winces 
under the cutting irony of his talk. DEIGHTON detects in ‘there are members’ a 
‘probable allusion to the scriptural narrative of Eve being made out of one of 


ACE, SC. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA AI 


forting therein, that when olde Robes are worne out, 187 
there are members to make new. If there were no more 
Women but Fzduza, then had you indeede a cut, and the 
cafe to be lamented: This greefe is crown’d with Confo- 190 
lation, your old Smocke brings foorth a new Petticoate, 
and indeed the teares liue in an Onion, that fhould water 
this forrow. 
Ant. The bufineffe fhe hath broached in the State, 
Cannot endure my abfence. 195 
Lino. And the bufineffe you haue broach’d heere can- 
not be without you, efpecially that of Cleopatra’s, which 
wholly depends on your abode. 
Ant. No more light Anfweres: 


Let our Officers 200 

Haue notice what we purpofe. I fhall breake 

The caufe of our Expedience to the Queene, 202 
188. members| numbers Han. 197. you, | you ; Theob, et seq. 
190. cafe] case were Rowe,+. Cleopatra’s] Cleopatra Han. 
191. foorth] fourth F,. forth FF ,. 198. abode] aboad FF ,, Rowe, Pope, 
194. broached | broach’d Rowe ii, Theob, Han. Warb. 

Pope. éroachéd Dyce. 199. fight | like Ff, Rowe. 
196. broach’ d | broached Kut, Coll. 199, 200. One line, Rowe et seq. 
197. 4e] de done Anon. ap. Cam, 201. purpofe| propofe FF. 


Adam’s ribs. ORGER (p. 96): Enobarbus, I fancy, is alluding to the Destinies or 
Fates with their shears and thread, and grotesquely calls them the ‘ Tailors of the 
Earth,’ whose business it is to mend old clothes, or make new. This, I think, is 
further supported by words following, ‘Then had you a cut indeed.’ I would 
accordingly propose senders for ‘members.’ 

189. a cut] THISELTON (p. 9): This word has here a double meaning: (1) 
stroke or blow ; (2) shape or fashion. 

192. teares liue] WALKER in his Article, xcI, on ‘ Zze and “ive confounded’ 
( Crit. ii, 209) quotes this line, and adds, ‘Surely Ze.’ [Can there be detected an 
improvement in Ze over ‘live’? Indeed, %e lacks the active vitality which seems 
inherent in ‘live.’ Enobarbus seems to be unusually familiar with the effect of an 
onion on the lachrymal glands. He refers to it again in IV, ii, 47.—ED.] 

202. Expedience] ScumrptT (Zex.) gives to this word the two meanings of 1) 
haste and 2) expedition, enterprise, campaign and under each meaning gives two 
examples, namely, under 1): ‘are making hither with all due expedience.’— “ich. 
Z7: Tl, i, 287; and ‘will with all expedience charge on us.’—Hen. V: IV, iii, 70. 
Under 2): ‘what our council did decree in forwarding this dear expedience.’—z 
Hen. IV: I, i, 33; and the present line. So nice is the distinction between these 
two meanings that it is not easy to decide that the present instance does not come 
under the head of aste.—ED. 


42 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. il. 


And get her loue to part. For not alone 203 

The death of Fu/uia, with more vrgent touches 

Do ftrongly fpeake to vs : but the Letters too 205 

Of many our contriuing Friends in Rome, 

Petition vs at home. Sextus Pompeius ; 207 
203. loue] love Ff, Rowe, Cap. Var. 205. Do] Doth Han. Do's Heath. 

Ran. Mal. Steev. Var. Knt, Coll.i. Zeave to us| t’us Pope, +. 

Pope,+, Dyce, Hal. Wh. Coll. ii, iii( MS), 206. contriuing| continuing Gould. 


Glo. Sta. Ktly, Rlfe. 


203. loue] CAPELL (i, 28): They who alter’d ‘love’ into /eave had not reflected 
sufficiently, who the person is that they gave it to: the person is Antony; Antony 
coming to himself, and beginning to think rather seriously ; who, in that disposition, 
must be suppos’d to consider his own dignity, of which the word /eave is an evident 
breach ; it seems indeed to have been avoided with some study; and ‘love,’ a less 
natural expression, substituted for it: the sense we must take the words in, is as fol- 
lows :—and get her, whose love is so great for me, to consent to my parting. MALONE: 
If the old copy be right, the words must mean, I will get her love to permit and 
endure our separation. But the word ge¢ connects much more naturally with the 
word /eave than with Jove. The same error has happened in 77¢, And. and there- 
fore I have no longer any doubt that /eave was Shakespeare’s word. In that play 
we find: ‘ He doves his pledges dearer than his life,’ instead of—‘ He /eaves.’—[III, 
i, 292. Dyce adopts this conclusion of Malone.] STEEVENS: The old reading may 
mean ;—‘ And prevail on her love to consent to our separation.’ [Thus KNIGHT 
substantially. The original text is not, to me, sufficiently obscure to justify a change. 
Capell’s reason is weighty, and, in addition, it seems somewhat absurd in Anthony 
to send notice to his officers of his intention, and to all his subordinates of his “quicke 
remoue from hence,’ and then to say that he would get Cleopatra’s leave to depart. 
‘ Durior lectio preferenda est.’—ED. ] 

204. more vrgent touches] JOHNSON: Things that touch me more sensibly, 
more pressing motives. 

206. our contriuing Friends] WALKER ((C77z. i, 163): ‘Contriving’ here is not 
managing or plotting, but sojourning; conterentes tempus. See Tam. Shr. I, ii. 
Murray (Xv. £. D. s.v. Contrive, v?. obs.) : Apparently irregularly formed on Latin 
contrivt, pret. of conterere to wear away ; Cf. contrite, contrition ; perhaps associated 
by translators with ‘contrive’ to invent, etc. Zvamsttive. To wear down, wear 
away, consume, spend; to pass, employ (time). Cf. ‘Please ye we may contrive 
this afternoon.’— 7am. Shr. I, ii, 276. [The context is not, I think, in Walker’s 
favour. It was not for the sake of Anthony’s company that his friends, who happened 
to be sojourning in Rome, petitioned him at home, but much was breeding that might 
endanger the sides of the world, and Anthony’s presence was needed to encourage 
those friends, who were looking after his interests. This seems, I think, to favour 
the usual meaning of ‘contriving.’—Ep. ] 

206. Rome] WALKER (C7?#. i, 163): Pronounce ‘ Rome,’ as usual, Room; this 
removes the jingle between ‘ Rome’ and ‘ home.’ 

207. Petition vs at home] JOHNSON: Wish us at home; call for us to reside at 
home. 


AGCEA, SC? 11.1] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 43 


Haue giuen the dare to Ce/ar, and commands 208 
The Empire of the Sea. Our flippery people, 
Whofe Loue is neuer link’d to the deferuer, 210 


Till his deferts are paft, begin to throw 

Pompey the great, and all his Dignities 

Vpon his Sonne, who high in Name and Power, 

Higher then both in Blood and Life, flands vp 

For the maine Souldier. Whofe quality going on, 215 
The fides o’th’world may danger. Much is breeding, 

Which like the Courfers heire, hath yet but life, 

And not a Serpents poyfon. Say our pleafure, 

To fuch whofe places vnder vs, require 


Our quicke remoue from hence. 220 
208. Haue] Hath Ff et seq. Pope, Theob. i, Han. Warb. Say our 
the dare| thee dare FF. pleasure Johns. Say, our pleasure Var. 
209. /lippery] slipp’ry Rowe, +. 73. Say, our pleasure, Theob. ii et cet. 
213. Sonne,| Ff, Rife. son; Rowe 219. whofe places| who've places M. 
et cet. Mason. 
215. guality| quality, Cap. et seq. places...require| Ff, Johns. places 
216. oth] oth’ FF. ...requires Var.’72. place ts...requires 
217. here] hare ¥,F,. hair Rowe. Ff, Rowe et cet. 


218. Say our plea/ure,| Ff, Rowe, 


210, 211. Whose Loue ... deserts are past] See line 145, above. 

214, 215. stands vp For the maine Souldier] ‘Stands up’ is here used as in 
‘We stand up peerless,’ I, i, 53. For other instances of ‘main,’ in the sense of first 
in importance, chief, see SCHMIDT, Lex. 

216. sides o’th’world] This same phrase is used in Cymdé. III, i, 51, also, to 
express the vastness of the Roman empire. 

217. Coursers heire] THEOBALD: Holinshed in his Description of England, 
[Third booke, Chap. iii, p. 224, ed. 1587] has this remark : ‘yet it is beleeued with 
no lesse assurance of some, than that an horse haire laid in a pale full of the like 
water will in short time stirre and become a liuing creature. But sith the certeintie 
of these things is rather prooued by few than the certeintie of them knowne vnto 
manie, I let it passe at this time.” COLERIDGE (p. 317): This is so far true to 
appearance, that a horse-hair, ‘laid,’ as Holinshed says, ‘in a pail of water,’ will 
become the supporter of seemingly one worm, though probably of an immense num- 
ber of small shiny water-lice. The hair will twirl round a finger, and sensibly com- 
press it. It is a common experiment with school boys in Cumberland and West- 
moreland. Hupson (p. 20): I remember very well when the same thing was 
believed by children in Vermont. 

219. places] An error of the ear, not of the eye.—Ep. 

220. Our quicke remoue] JoHNson: I believe we should read: ‘ Their quick 
remove.’ Tell our design of going away to those, who, being by their places obliged 
to attend us, must remove in haste. 


44 THE TRAGEDIE’ OF [ACT I, SC. iii. 


Enob, I fhall doo’t. 221 


[Scene LIT. 


Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Alexas, and Iras. 


Cleo. Where is he? 
Char. I did not fee him fince. 
Cleo. See where he is, 


Whofe with him, what he does: 5 
I did not fend you. If you finde him fad, 

Say I am dauncing : if in Myrth, report 

That Iam fodaine ficke. Quicke, and returne. 


Char. Madam, me thinkes if you did loue him deerly, 
You do not hold the method, to enforce 10 
The like from him. 

Cleo. What fhould I do, I do not? 12 


221. I fhall| 1’ Pope,+. Sir, I 1, Enter...Alexas, and Iras.] Enter 


shall Words. 
dot] doot F,. do it, sir Ktly. 
do it Nicholson ap. Cam. 

Scene IV. Pope,+. Scene III. Cap. 
et seq. 

The same. Another Room. Cap. 

[ Tripods. Vases for perfumes. Grecian 
Statue of Antony with attributes of Her- 
cules. Egyptian Sofas, Tables, Chairs, 
Musical Instruments. Books in Rolls. 
Kemble. 


...[ras, and Alexas. Cap. 
2. he?| he now? Steev. conj. he, 
Charmian ? Anon. ap. Cam. 
3. Z| Madam, J Walker. 
4, 5. One line, Rowe et seq. 
4. [To Alexas. Sta. 
5. Whofe] Who's Ff. 
7. dauncing | dancing FF. 
8. fodaine] /udden ¥ ¥ . 
Quicke] Quickly Ff, Rowe. 
[Exit Alexas. Cap. 


3. since] ABBOTT (§ 62): ‘Since’ when used adverbially as well as conjunction- 
ally, frequently takes the verb in the simple past where we use the complete present, 
[as in the present phrase]. This is in accordance with an original meaning of the 
word, ater (‘sith’). We should still say, ‘I never saw him afer that ;’ and ‘since’ 
has the meaning of after. [See also § 347, for examples of the simple past, ‘did’ for 
complete present with ‘since,’ etc. ] 

4-8. See... sicke] Mrs JAMESON (ii, 126): The whole secret of her absolute 
dominion over the facile Antony may be found in this one little speech. [I think 
that this assertion is a little too sweeping. In mere opposition there can hardly be 
‘infinite variety.’ ED. ] 

6. I did not send you] JouNnson: You must goas if you came without my order 
or knowledge. : 

9, 10. if you did... You do not] DricHToN: The irregular sequence of tenses 
here is due to the stress which Charmian wishes to lay upon the fact that Cleopatra 
could not possibly love Anthony; ‘if you do love him’ would have meant ‘if you 
love, which is possible, though doubtful’ ; ‘if you did love’ means ‘if you loved, 
which is evidently not the case.’ 


AGT TeSC. 110] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 45 


Ch.In each thing giue him way,croffe him in nothing. 
Cleo. Thou teacheft like a foole:the way to lofe him. 


Char. Tempt him not fo too farre. I with forbeare, 15 
In time we hate that which we often feare. 
Enter Anthony. 


But heere comes Anthony. 
Cleo. Iam ficke, and fullen. 
An. Iam forry to giue breathing to my purpofe. 20 
Cleo. Helpe me away deere Charmian, I thall fall, 


14. teacheft...foole:| teachest, like a 17. Enter...] After line 19, Dyce, Sta. 
fool, Johns. Coll. i, ii, Hal. Sing. Ktly. 19. Lam] I’m Pope,+. 
teachest...fool,— Dyce, Sta. 20. purpofe.| purpose,— Cap. Coll. 


15. wh] Ff, Johns. J7wzs Anon. ap. et seq. 
Cam. wish, Rowe et cet. 


14. teachest like a foole:the way, etc.] CoLLierR (ed. ii) claims for his punc- 
tuation (also that of his MS) a priority over all editions; the Zext. Motes show that 
it had been adopted by Johnson. Collier, with pardonable zeal, pronounces the 
punctuation of his MS a decided improvement on that of the Folio, of which, he 
says, ‘there can be no dispute that [its] mode of pointing the passage is wrong,’— 
an assertion, on the part of a veteran editor, so strange, that though it stands off as 
gross as black and white, my eye will scarcely see it. As if there were a phrase, a 
word, a comma in Shakespeare about which ‘there can be no dispute’! And, 
moreover, Collier was unfortunate in making so extravagant a claim for his MS in 
this passage, of all passages, where the majority of editors in favour of the original 
punctuation is so very heavy. The majority has not erred, I think. Never would 
Cleopatra have uttered so tame, so dispassionate a sentence as that which Collier and 
his MS offer to us: ‘thou teachest, like a fool, the way to lose him.’ If the Folio 
err in punctuation, it errs on the side of moderation. Instead of a colon after ‘ foole,’ 
I think a period would be better.—Eb. 

15. too farre] ABBOTT (§ 434) holds this to be a compound epithet: ‘vo-far. 

15. wish forbeare] STAUNTON: That is, I commend forbearance. KErIGHTLEY 
(Exp. 311): ‘Wish’ here signifies recommend, advise. I think we should read 
‘wish you’ [so reads Keightley’s text], as it is always followed by its object when 
used in this sense. JOHN HUNTER: Forbear is my wish. The verb ‘forbear’ is 
here in the imperative mood. DEIGHTON: An elliptical expression for ‘I should 
like to see you forbear to try him so far.’ [The paraphrases just given are all of 
them obvious, but none of them supplies the strength, which the weak expression, 
‘I wish, forbear’ lacks. It is this weakness, this childishness, almost infantile, 
which renders the words suspicious, so it seems to me. Nicholson’s conjecture, 
recorded in the Cam. Ed., ‘the wish forbear’ is plausible, and is certainly stronger 
than the weak ‘I wish.’ It is better than his alternative conjecture, ‘your wish, 
forbear.’ Weakness is, however, no sufficient ground for disturbing the text.—ED. ] 

19. sullen] Into this word we may read all the moods most unlovely in woman, 
from waspishness to gloomy malignity. ‘O!’ exclaims Coleridge, ‘the instinctive 
propriety of Shakespeare in the choice of words.’—Ep. 


46 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iii, 


It cannot be thus long, the fides of Nature 22 
Will not fuftaine it. 
Ant. Now my deereft Queene. 
Cleo. Pray you ftand farther from mee. 25 
Ant. What’s the matter? 
Cleo.I know by that fame eye ther’s fome good news. 
What fayes the married woman you may goe? 


Would fhe had neuer giuen you leaue to come. 29 
22. [Seeming to faint. Rowe, +. 26. matter] marter F,. 
24. deereft] deareft F,, dere? ¥ ,. 28. What] What! F,. 

Queene. | Queen,— Theob. et seq. woman...goe?| Ff. woman ?... 


25. farther | further Steev. Var. Dyce. go, Rowe et seq. 


27. that same eye ther’s some good news] This is a wilful and highly irritating 
misinterpretation of Anthony’s expression. His looks had been, of course, downcast, 
as befitted words which he was ‘ sorry to breathe.’ Cleopatra had instantly divined 
his ‘ purpose,’ and conjectured the purport of his message from Rome; she resolved, 
therefore, that before Anthony could declare it, he should be ‘ chafed’ almost beyond 
endurance ; then, by tenderly yielding, she knew that she could bind him to her 
more strongly than ever. She begins, accordingly, by wilfully misinterpreting his 
looks. —ED. 

28. What sayes the married woman you may goe?] THISELTON (p.9): To 
punctuate this line as it is done both in the Globe and Oxford editions is to spoil the 
antithesis between it and the next. ‘ What’ is exclamatory and expresses surprise : 
‘you don’t mean to tell me.’ It is to be observed that Cleopatra as yet knows 
nothing of the nature of the news from Rome which had aroused Anthony, She had 
only concluded ‘ A Romane thought hath strooke him’ from a sudden subsidence of 
his mirth, and she infers that the news probably involves his speedy departure, and 
is really welcome to him as importing reconciliation with Czesar. Fulvia and Lucius 
had been at war with the latter, and Cleopatra believes or pretends to believe that it 
has been Fulvia’s wish that Anthony should keep out of the way, and that it was 
merely owing to this that he was able to dance attendance on herself. [Rowe’s 
division of the line seems to me to be right; but the interrogation mark of the Folios 
at the end should have been retained. The line contains the two questions : ‘ What 
says the married woman?’ and, in effect, ‘ Does she give you leave to go?’ Then 
follows the antithesis, ‘Would she had never given you leave to come !’—Ep. ] 

28, 29. What sayes the married woman . . . leaue to come] TH. ZIELINSKI 
( Philologus, 1905, Bd. lxiv, Hft. i, p. 17): In this farewell scene between Anthony 
and Cleopatra Shakespeare had in mind Ovid’s Epistle of Dido to Aéneas. First of 
all, the situations are exactly analogous, as every one may see at once; even the 
Poet himself acknowledges it, where he says: ‘Dido and her /Eneas shall want 
troops,’ etc. IV, xiv, 64. Shakespeare’s Cleopatra is developed psychologically, not 
from the Vergilian, but from the Ovidian Dido; from the latter she derives her 
nervousness, although she derives from the English poet,—or rather from Plutarch, 
—that fatal admixture of instinctive, foxlike slyness, which Ovid’s heroine lacks. 
Special points of resemblance the student will find for himself; the most noteworthy 


ACT I, SC. iii;] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 47 


Let her not fay ’tis I that keepe you heere. 30 
I haue no power vpon you : Hers you are. 
Ant. The Gods beft know. 
Cleo. Oh neuer was there Queene 
So mightily betrayed : yet at the fitft 
I faw the Treafons planted. 35 
Ant. Cleopatra. 
Cleo. Why fhould I thinke you can be mine, & true, 
(Though you in fwearing fhake the Throaned Gods) 


Who haue beene falfe to Fuluca? 39 
32. know.| know,— Theob. et seq. 36. Cleopatra] Cleopatra,— Theob. 
(subs. ) et seq. 
34. betrayed | betray’ d Pope et seq. 38. in fwearing| fwearing Ff. with 
jit) F,. swearing Rowe,+. 
35. Treafons| treason Walker (Crit. Throaned| F,. Throned ¥ F,. 
i, 246). 39, 40. One line, Rowe et seq. 
planted) planned Warb. (WN. & 39. beene] bin F,. 


Qu. VIII, iii, 262). 


occurs in line 139 of Ovid’s Epistola VII: Dido Ainee -—‘Sed jubet ire deus. 
Vellem vetuisset adire.’ [Undoubtedly, in this one solitary line there is found a 
notable parallelism between Dido’s words and Cleopatra’s ; but the antithesis be- 
tween going and coming is in itself so marked that it might almost be said to be one 
of daily use. As to the ‘ special points of resemblance which the student will find for 
himself,’ I can merely humbly acknowledge that I have scrutinized closely every 
line of Ovid’s Zfzst/e, and if there be another parallelism there, it has escaped 
me. Not so, however, Zielinski; one passage there is whereto he detects a 
second parallel in this present scene. The passage is, I suppose, for he does not 
specify it :—‘ Forsitan et gravidam Dido, scelerate, relinquas, Parsque tui lateat cor- 
pore clausa meo.’—123, 124. This ‘clausa pars’ Zielinski finds in the ‘one word,’ 
which Cleopatra is at a loss to pronounce, in lines 108-113, until at last Zielinski 
reveals it for her in ‘Oh, my ob/ivzon is a very Anthony.’ Thereupon, after a little 
gentle derision of the commentators for their obtuseness, he finds further confirmation 
where Cleopatra says, ‘’ Tis sweating labour Zo dear such idleness so near the heart, 
As Cleopatra ¢his.’ ‘ Thzs,’ Zielinski suggests, was accompanied by ‘a discreet sig- 
nificant gesture ;’ deckrixdc, as Aristotle has it. ‘ Verily,’ he says, in conclusion, ‘a 
poet understands a poet better than the critics understand him; I refer to Puschkin, 
who has openly imitated these words of Cleopatra in a passage in his lovely “ Nixe”’ 
(Rusalka) : “ Fiirst. Leb’ wohl—Madchen. Nein, wart. ..ich muss dir etwas sagen... 
Weiss nimmer, was. frst. Sodenke nach! Médchen. Fiir dich War ich bereit.. . 
Nein, das ist’s nicht... So wart doch. Ich kann’s nicht glauben, dass du mich auf 
ewig Verlassen willst . . . Nein, dass ist’s immer nicht. . . Jetzt hab’ ich’s : heut war’s, 
dass zum ersten Mal Dein Kind sich unter’m Herzen mir bewegte...’’’ I leave 
this untranslated. For those who read German, a translation is needless, and for 
those who do not, the loss is less than trifling. I think I ought to add that Warburton 
appears to have had the same idea as Zielinski. See note 114-116 7xfra.—ED. ] 
31. vpon] For the various uses of ‘upon,’ see ABBOTT, § IgI. 


48 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iil. 


Riotous madneffe, 40 
To be entangled with thofe mouth-made vowes, 
Which breake themfelues in {wearing. 
Ant. Moft fweet Queene. 
Cleo. Nay pray you feeke no colour for your going, 
But bid farewell, and goe: 45 
When you fued ftaying, 
Then was the time for words : No going then, 
Eternity was in our Lippes, and Eyes, _ 
Bliffe in our browes bent : none our parts fo poore, 
But was a race of Heauen. They are fo ftill, 50 
Or thou the greateft Souldier of the world, 
Art turn’d the greateft Lyar. 
Ant. How now Lady? 
Cleo. I would I had thy inches, thou fhould’ft know 


There were a heart in Egypt. 55 
40. madneffe,| madness ! Rowe, Pope, tr. brows bent Rowe,+. brows, Han. 

Han. brows’ bent, Johns. brows’ bent; Cap. 
43. Queene.] Queen. F,F,. Queen, — et cet. 

Theob. et seq. 49. none our] none of our Han. Ktly. 
45, 46. One line, Rowe et seq. 50. race] ray Han. 
49. browes bent:] F,. brows bent: 52. greatef| greater Ff, Rowe, Pope. 


40. Riotous madnesse] This is her own self-reproach. 

49. browes bent] STEEVENS: That is, the arch of the eye-brows. So, in King 
John: ‘Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?’—IV, ii, 90. SCHMIDT 
(Lex. s.v. Bent. 3) interprets it as meaning the whole forehead. 

49. none our parts] For other instances of the use of certain adjectives, like 
‘none,’ as ‘ pronouns, in a manner different from modern usage,’ see ABBOTT, § 12. 

50. race of Heauen] WARBURTON: That is, had a smack or flavour of heaven. 
Jounson : ‘ Race’ is well explained by Warburton; the ‘ race’ of wine is the taste 
of the soil. MALONE: J am not sure the poet did not mean, ‘ was of heavenly origin.’ 
JoHN HunTER : ‘ Race’ is a suspicious word here, for which I would venture to sub- 
stitute ¢rvace....It should be remarked, however, that ‘race’ had for one of its 
meanings smack or relish. [Between the two interpretations of Warburton and 
Malone subsequent editors have been pretty evenly divided. Warburton carelessly 
wrote ‘ad a smack’ instead of ‘ was a smack ;’ possibly, this weakened his general 
acceptance, but needlessly, I think. ‘Race’ was undoubtedly applied, in Shake- 
speare’s day, to the flavour of wine. CraiciE (WV. £. D.s. v. Race, sd.? 10) gives 
among others a quotation from Massinger; ‘A pipe of rich Canary. . . Is it of the 
right race.’—Vew Way, I, iii. This justifies Warburton’s interpretation of favour. 
Cleopatra says, in effect, there was no single feature, however insignificant, but was 
of a flavour, or, was the very flavour of heaven, The objection to Malone’s inter- 
pretation seems to me to lie in the difficulty of accepting any one single feature as 
a ‘race’ whether of heaven or of earth.—ED. ] 


ACT I, SC, iii. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 49 


Ant. Heare me Queene - 56 
The ftrong neceffity of Time, commands 
Our Seruicles a-while : but my full heart 
Remaines in vfe with you. Our I taly, 
Shines o’re with ciuill Swords ; Sextus Pompeius 60 
Makes his approaches to the Port of Rome, 
Equality of two Domefticke powers, 
Breed fcrupulous faction : The hated growne to ftrength 
Are newly growne to Loue : The condemn’d Pompey, 


Rich in his Fathers Honor, creepes apace 65 
Into the hearts of fuch, as haue not thriued 
Vpon the prefent ftate, whofe Numbers threaten, 67 
58. Seruicles] services Ff. 63. Breed] Ff, Var.’21, Dyce, Glo. 
a-while| Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. Cam. Wh. ii. Breeds Pope et cet. 
awhile Ff, Cap. Ran. Mal. Wh. i. awhzle hated... firength| hated,...strength, 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, Han. Steev. Coll. Rowe et seq. 
et seq. 65. Honor] honour Ff. 
61. approaches| approches F,. apace| a pace FF. 
Rome,| Rome. Rowe et seq. 66. thriued | thriv’n Rowe,+. 


59. in vse] JoHNSON: The poet seems to allude to the legal distinction between 
fuse’ and absolute possession. 

60 ciuill Swords] That is, swords drawn in civil war. 

61. Port of Rome] Dyce (G/oss.) That is, the gate of Rome. 

62, 63. Equality ... powers, Breed] ‘ Breed’ is here plural by attraction from 
‘powers.’ ABBOTT (§ 412) calls it ‘confusion by proximity’ and gives many 
examples to which more could be added. Compare, ‘the voyce of all the Gods, 
Make heauen drowsie,’ etc.—Zove’s Lab. Lost, of this edition, where the subject is 
discussed.—ED. 

63. scrupulous] ScumipT (Zex.) That is, prying too nicely into the merits of 
either cause. Century Dictionary (s.v. 2 +; where the only example is the present 
passage): Given to making objections; captious. Hupson: The opposing parties 
were rigidly sifting each other's claims. 

66. as] The s in this word, which is distinct in the almost perfect Reprint of F,, 
published by Booth, is reduced to a mere scratch in Staunton’s Photolithograph, and, 
in my copy of the original, has disappeared altogether.—ED. 

67. present state, whose Numbers threaten] STAUNTON (4¢hen. 12 April, 
1873) : Should we not read (placing a period after ‘ present state,’) ‘Wars numbers 
threaten’ ? ‘Numbers’ was a term commonly used to express an armed force; and 
the next line,—‘ quietness grown sick of rest,)/—bespeaks an antithesis between 
Peace and War. Compare the whole speech, where the sentences are framed short 
and magniloquent, to imitate the ‘ Asiatic’ style, which, as Shakespeare learned from 
Plutarch, Antony affected. [See Appendix, Plutarch.] 

67. whose Numbers] For a grammatically interesting discussion of the Shake- 
spearian usage of relative pronouns, with a special reference to the use of ¢hat and 
who, which, with numerous examples, see FRANZ, § 206. 


4 


50 ' THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT t, SC. 


And quietneffe growne ficke of reft, would purge 68 
By any defperate change : My more particular, 
And that which moft with you fhould fafe my going, 70 


Is Fuluias death. 
Cleo.Though age from folly could not giue me freedom 
It does from childifhneffe. Can Fuluza dye? 
Ant. She’s dead my Queene. 
Looke heere, and at thy Soueraigne leyfure read 75 
_ The Garboyles fhe awak’d : at the laft, beft, 


70. fafe] fave ¥ , Rowe. salve Theob. 76. beft,| Ff, Johns. Var. ’73, Coll. 
Pope ii, Han. Warb. Sta. Ktly, Wh. i, Rlfe. dest. Rowe,+. 
75. Soueraigne| Souerargne Sta. Pho- best « Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. Steev. 
tolith. Var. Knt, Sing. Dyce, Glo. Cam. Wh. 


ii, Irv. Dtn. Huds. 


68. purge] ScHmipT (Zex.): That is (thus used intransitively), to be cured, to 
be restored to health. 

69. more particular] That is, what is more especially my own personal, private 
reason. This is an unusual use of the comparative. Murray (iV. Z. D. s.v. III, 
B, ¢ 6) quotes from the first line of Heminge and Condell’s Epistle Dedicatorie in 
the First Folio: ‘ Whilst we studie to be thankful in our particular,’ etc. SCHMIDT 
(Zex.) gives ‘who loved him in a most dear particular,—Cor. V, i, 3, where it is 
‘dear’ that is compared, not ‘ particular.’ See IV, ix, 24, ‘in thine own particular,’ 
where it means, ‘in thine own special person.’ —Ep. 

70. should safe my going] ABBoTT (§ 290): It may be said that any noun or 
adjective could be converted into a verb by the Elizabethan authors, generally in an 
active signification [as ‘safe’ in this present line, where the meaning is], ‘ make my 
departure unsuspected by you of dangerous consequences.’ 

73. Can Fuluia dye?] Strrvens: That Fulvia was mortal, Cleopatra could have 
no reason to doubt ; the meaning therefore of her question seems to be: ‘ Will there 
ever be an end of your excuses? As often as you want to leave me, will not some 
Fulvia, some new pretext be found for your departure?’ She has already said that 
though age could not exempt her from follies, at least it freed her from a childish 
belief in all he says. Ritson: I am inclined to think, that Cleopatra means no 
more than—Is it possible that Fulvia should die? I will not believe it. MALONE: 
Though age has not exempted me from folly, I am not so childish, as to have appre- 
hensions from a rival that is no more. And is Fulvia dead indeed? Such, I think, 
is the meaning. Mrs JAMESON (ii, 128): Cleopatra recovers her dignity for a 
moment at the news of Fulvia’s death, as if roused by a blow. And then follows 
the artful mockery with which she tempts and provokes him, in order to discover 
whether he regrets his wife. [It is extremely difficult to decide on which one of 
these three words the emphasis should be laid; each can appropriately bear it. It 
is even more difficult than Lady Macbeth’s, ‘We fail!’ Possibly, none should be 
emphasized, but each uttered slowly, after a pause, as though the speaker were 
revolving many things in her mind.—Ep. | 

76. Garboyles] BRADLEY (WV. Z. D. s. v.): (An adaptation of Old French gar- 


\ 


ACT I, SC. 111°] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 51 


See when, and where fhee died. } Ty. 
Cleo. O moft falfe Loue! 
Where be the Sacred Violles thou fhould’ft fill 79 


79. Violles| viols Ff. vials Pope. 


boutl, garbouille (=Spanish garbullo), adaptation of Italian gardug/io connected with 
Latin dudire, to boil; the origin of the prefixed element is disputed.) Confusion, 
disturbance, tumult ; an instance of this, a brawl, hubbub, hurly-burly. 

76. at the last, best,] STEEVENS: This conjugal tribute to the memory of Fulvia 
may be illustrated by Malcolm’s eulogium on the Thane of Cawdor: ‘nothing in 
his life Became him, like the leaving it.’—I, iv, 7. BoswrELu: Surely it means her 
death was the best thing I have known of her, as it checked her garbot/s. IRvING 
EpDITION: Antony evidently means either, ‘in the last part of the letter is the best 
news,’ or ‘the best thing she ever did was her last act, that is, her leaving me.’ 
ROLFE; These words probably refer to the last part of the letter, or that giving the 
good news of Fulvia’s death. STAUNTON: The commentators will have the word 
‘best’ to relate to the ‘good end’ made by Fulvia. But it is no more than an 
epithet of endearment which Anthony applies to Cleopatra ;—read at your leisure the 
trouble she awakened ; and then at the last, my dest one, see when and where she 
died. [Of course, after ‘best’ Staunton’s text has the comma, of the Folio.] STaun- 
TON (Athen. 12 April, 1873): Very many years ago I protested against the error 
modern editors had committed in altering the punctuation of the old copy by placing 
a colon or semi-colon after ‘best,’ and interpreting it to mean that Fulvia’s death 
was the most becoming act of her life; or that the intelligence of her decease was 
the best part of the news. I showed conclusively, as it appeared to me, that ‘best’ 
in this place was simply a term of endearment, like ‘sweet,’ or ‘love,’ or ‘dear ;’ 
the construction being,—‘ read in these letters all the turmoils she provoked, and, at 
the last, my best one, read when and where she died.’ It seemed to me incredible 
that there could be any question as to this, the obvious meaning, being accepted as 
the true one, when it was once explained. I did not then know that young ignorance 
and old prejudice were not the only or the worst foes a modern restoration of Shake- 
speare’s language had to overcome. I had to learn that the most implacable opponents 
of all improvements in Shakespeare’s text in these days were to be found among 
Shakespeare’s editors. This use of ‘best,’ or of analogous epithets, is very common 
with our early poets. Compare—‘ but that I love thee, dest, O most best ! believe it.’ 
—Hamlet, 111, ii; ‘Gallus, Tibullus, and the des¢-dest Czesar.’—Jonson’s Poetaster, 
V, i; ‘Believe me, Philomuse, i’ faith thou must, The dest-dest seale of wit is wit’s 
distrust.’—Introd. to Marston’s What you Will; ‘Be she with that goodness blest 
Which may merit name of dest.’—George Wither’s song, ‘Shall I wasting in despair ; 
‘_kind, forgive me: Make me not sick in health.’—7Zhe Revenger's Tragedy ; 
‘—But, last, good, thy humour.’—Induct. to Marston’s Antonio and Mellida, where 
the turn of expression is precisely the same as—‘at the last, best, see when,’ etc. 
[Staunton overlooked Florizel’s enamoured words ‘ When you do speak, sweet, I’ld 
have you do it ever’? Had we only dutifully followed the Folio, and disregarded 
Capell’s unfortunate colon, there would never have been, I think, any doubt as to 
the comprehension of Anthony’s epithet ‘best,’ which harmonizes with his eagerness 
to propitiate her whom he had already called his ‘ Queen.’—ED. ] 

79. Sacred Violles] JOHNSON: Alluding to the lachrymatory vials, or bottles of 


52 THE TRAGER DILAOE 


[ACT 1,15. ville 


With forrowfull water ? Now I fee, I fee, 80 
In Fuluias death, how mine receiu’d fhall be. 


Ant. 


Quarrell no more, but bee prepar’d to know 


The purpofes I beare : which are, or ceafe, 


As you fhall giue th’aduice. 


By the fire 


That quickens Nylus flime, I go from hence 85 
Thy Souldier, Seruant, making Peace or Warre, 


As thou affects. 
Cleo. 


Cut my Lace, Charman come, 


But let it be, I am quickly ill,and well, 


So Anthony \oues. 

81. receiu’d /hall be} shall be receiv’ d 
Rowe, +, Cap. 

84. th’ aduice] th’ advices Pope, + ,Cap. 
them aidance Anon. ap, Cam. 


By| Now by Steev. Var.’73, 78. 


85. /lime] smile Rowe ii (misprint). 


gO 
86. Souldier, Seruant ] soldier-servant 
Sta. Coll. iii. 
87. affects] affect ¥,, affect FF, 
et seq. 
89, 90. well, So] well,—So Theob. 
well.» So,Warb. well.—So, Johns. well: 


So Var.’78, 85, Mal. Steev. Var. 


tears, which the Romans sometimes put into the urn of a friend. HALLIWELL: 
These vials are now known to be unguent bottles. 

80, 81. I see, ... shall be] This rhyme grates. 
courage in evading it. 

84. th’aduice. By] ABBoTT (§ 508) in order to complete the metre, suggests, 
what is most true, that ‘a pause, perhaps, may be expected before an oath,’ but 
immediately ruinates the good suggestion by adding: ‘but “ vice” or ** by’’ may be 
prolonged.’ It were better far, brazenly to insert, like Steevens, a superfluous Vow, 
or even a whole Dictionary, than weakly to quaver out ‘ vice’ or ‘ By." Ep. 

87. affects] WALKER (C77v. ii, 128) in his Article to show that ‘s is not infre- 
quently substituted for s¢ in the second person singular of the verb’ has the follow- 
ing: ‘ Qu@re, therefore, in cases where s¢ would produce extreme harshness, and 
where at the same time the old copies have s, whether we ought not to write the 
latter. (In the north of England, and in Scotland (see, for example, Burns fassimz), 
s for st in the second person seems to be the rule.)’ [The propriety of Walker’s 
suggestion can hardly be questioned, I think. There are instances where it is almost 
impossible to pronounce the full form in s¢ and at the same time impart any smooth- 
ness whatever to the verse. In the well-known line where Hamlet asks the Ghost 
why ‘thou dead corse again in complete steel evzsitest thus the glimpses of the 
moon,’ can cacophony further go? Thus to pronounce these two words is to pay too 
dear a price for grammar. Again in Zeav, where the old demented king says ‘thou 
hotly /zstest to use.” In both cases we are forced to use the forms in the Folio and 
say ‘ Revisits thus’ and ‘lusts to.’ Thus, too, in the present line, an ear that would 
shrink under ‘affects’ for affectest is too grammatical to be of use to anybody, much 
less to its owner. When Heine said that to his ears the English language sounded 
like the harsh notes of sea-mews, I think he must have had in memory some of the 
second person singulars of verbs ending in ¢—Ep. ] 

89, 90. and well, So Anthony loues] CapELL (p. 29): Meaning—such is 


One cannot but admire Rowe’s 


ACT, F, SC. iii. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 53 


Ant. My precious Queene forbeare, gI 
And giue true euidence to his Loue, which ftands 
An honourable Triall. 


Cleo. So Fulwia told me. 94 


Antony’s love ; fluctuating and subject to sudden turns, like my health. [Of recent 
editors, STAUNTON and HUDSON are the only ones who adopt this interpretation. } 
MALONE: [At one time] I thought this to be—‘ My fears quickly render me ill ; and 
I am as quickly well again, when I am convinced that Antony has an affection for 
me.’ ‘So’ for so that. If this be the true sense of the passage, it ought to be 
regulated thus :—‘I am quickly ill,—and well agazz, so Antony loves.’ [The inter- 
pretation which Malone rejected is that which has been generally adopted. KNIGHT 
accepts it; COLLIER also, adding: ‘ First Cleopatra tells Charmian to cut her lace, 
then “to let it be,” the necessity being at an end, in consequence, perhaps, of receiv- 
ing some indication of love from Antony.’ IRviNG’s ED., DEIGHTON, and ROLFE 
all adopt Malone’s discarded interpretation. In the use of the indicative ‘loves,’ 
instead of the subjunctive, ABBOTT (§ 363) discerns such complete assurance on 
Cleopatra’s part, that he is inclined to consider ‘So’ as ‘almost’ equivalent to sce. 
Had we only closed our eyes to Warburton’s colon, Steevens’s semi-colon, and John- 
son’s full stop, and opened them on the comma of the Folio, no doubts would have 
ever beclouded our minds. To me, the simple meaning is that whether she is ill or 
well depends entirely on Anthony’s love.—ED. ] 

g2. euidence] CoLLier (ed. ii) : There can be no hesitation in adopting here the 
excellent emendation of the MS, viz.: credence for ‘ evidence’ ; it suits both measure 
and meaning admirably ; for the sake of the metre ‘ evidence’ [must be pronounced] 
ev'dence. Cleopatra was not to give evidence, but belief, to the affection of Antony. 
SINGER (Sh. Vind. 289): The substitution of credence would be specious, but that 
the occurrence of ‘trial,’ in the next line, shows that the old text is right. Cleopatra. 
had just cast a doubt on Antony’s love ; he bids her give ‘true evidence’ in favour 
of it, not bear false witness against it, as she had done, Dyce (S¢ric¢. 201) quotes 
with approval this note of Singer, and adds: Compare ‘Proceed no straiter ’gainst 
our uncle Gloster Than from ¢rue evidence, etc.—2 Hen. V7: III, ii. ‘Give true 
evidence’ is ‘ Bear true witness ;’ but what is ‘Give ¢rwe credence’? STAUNTON: 
Mr Collier’s annotator . . . would poorly read credence, which, like many of his sug- 
gestions, is very specious and quite wrong. The meaning of Antony is this,—‘ For- 
bear these taunts, and demonstrate to the world your confidence in my love by sub- 
mitting it freely to the ¢vza/ of absence.’ 

g2. to his] WALKER (Vers, 77) recommends that these two words should be 
written, Zo’s, Could Walker have vainly imagined that by writing these words thus 
the rhythmical flow of the line would be promoted? If /o’s represents one sound, 
why should it not be written honestly zos ? Does not the apostrophe by indicating an 
omission equally indicate a pause long enough to show that /o’s is not 4os? And if 
there is to be a pause, however brief, it is a pause long enough to give a breathing 
and say 4o his. No flow of rhythm can compensate, to my ear at least, for such slip- 
shod pronunciation of English as ¢o’s. —ED. 

94. So Fuluia told me] It is not, of course, to be supposed that Fulvia ever told. 


54 THE. TRAGE DIET OF [ACT T4SCr ak 


I prythee turne afide, and weepe for her, 95 
Then bid adiew to me, and fay the teares 
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one Scene 
Of excellent diffembling, and let it looke 
Like perfect Honor. 
Ant. You'l heat my blood no more? 100 
Cleo. You can do better yet : but this is meetly. 
Ant. Now by Sword. 
Cleo. And Target. Still he mends. 
But this is not the beft. Looke prythee Charmian, 
How this Herculean Roman do’s become 105 
The carriage of his chafe. 


100. blood no more? blood ; no more. Johns. Cap. Var. Mal. Steev. Var. Knt, 


Rowe et seq. (subs. ) Sing. 

102. dy Sword.] by my Sword. Ff. by 106, 107. The...Lady] As one line, 
my sword— Rowe et seq. Steev, Var. Knt. 

103. Zarget.| target— Theob. Warb. 106. chafe] chief Sta. Hunter. 


Cleopatra this, or anything else. It was Cleopatra’s cutting and cruel way of telling 
Anthony at how high a rate his treatment of Fulvia had led her to prize his love. 
Fulvia had experienced Anthony’s ‘honourable trial ;’ and Fulvia’s experience pro- 
claimed Cleopatra’s; tears shed for Fulvia should be Cleopatra’s ‘true evidence to 
his love.’ Ep. 

97. to Egypt] JoHNson: To me, the Queen of Egypt. 

98. let it] ABBoTT (§ 472): So strong was the dislike to pronouncing two dental 
syllables together, that ‘it’ seems nearly or quite lost after ‘let’ [in the present line. 
To the same effect WALKER, Vers. 77.] 

103. Still he mends] This speaking of Anthony in the third person implies the 
calm critical eye of a disinterested spectator, pronouncing on the excellence of the 
performance with judicial coolness,—unspeakably irritating when the victim’s blood 
is seething. —Ep. 

104. Looke prythee Charmian] This appeal to Charmian is virtually turning 
Anthony into a public exhibition ; and proves the limit of his endurance.—Ep. 

105. Herculean Roman] STEEVENS: Anthony traced his descent from Anton, 
a son of Hercules. [See Appendix, Plutarch. | 

106. chafe] StAuNTON: Can any one who considers the epithet ‘ Herculean,’ 
which Cleopatra applies to Antony, and reads the following extract from Shake- 
speare’s authority, hesitate for an instant to pronounce ‘ chafe’ a silly blunder of the 
transcriber or compositor for chéef, meaning Hercules, the head or principal of the 
house of the Antonii ?_ [Here follows the passage from Plutarch, referred to in the pre- 
ceding note. Twenty years later, Staunton (A¢hen. 12 April, 1873) upheld his emen- 
dation, and closed his remarks, in substance the same as in his note just given, with 
the assertion that Shakespeare ‘ puts into the mouth of Cleopatra the stinging taunt, 
—“ How this Herculean Roman does become the carriage of his chief.’ A sarcasm 
which is rendered absolutely pointless by the fatuous reading of the old text.’] Hunp- 
son: This is obscure. But Cleopatra here assumes that Anthony is but playing a 


ACT I, sc. ili. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 55 


Ant. Ile leaue you Lady. 107 
Cleo. Courteous Lord, one word: 
Sir, you and I muft part, but that’s not it: 
Sir, you and I haue lou’d, but there’s not it : 110 
That you know well, fomething it is I would: 
Oh, my Obliuion is a very Anthony, 


And I am all forgotten. 113 
IIO, 111. but... well,| (but... well,) 113. all forgotten] all-forgotten Cap. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’78, Ran. all forgetting Theob. 


111. Z would ;| would,— Cap. et seq. conj. (withdrawn). 


part ; that his passion is put on for effect. So, if the text be right, the meaning, I 
think, must be, ‘look how well he carries out the resemblance or make-believe of 
being chafed at my words.’ DEIGHTON: That is, see what full justice he does to the 
part he has to play of being in a rage; how well he carries out his assumed rdle. 
MRs JAMESON (ii, 130): This is, indeed, most ‘excellent dissembling ;’ but when 
she has fooled and chafed the Herculean Roman to the verge of danger, then comes 
that return of tenderness which secures the power she has tried to the utmost, and we 
have all the elegant, the poetical Cleopatra in her beautiful farewell. [Although 
these words are a part of the irritating appeal to Charmian, yet they give in one par- 
ticular word the first hint that Cleopatra is relenting and that her mood is changing. 
In her very next speech she is utterly subdued and is the gentle, caressing, heart- 
broken queen, whose very soul is Jost and forgotten in Anthony. It would be unnatu- 
ral to represent this change as taking place as swift as the lightning in the collied 
night, as it would be were it preceded by a ‘stinging taunt’ and ‘sarcasm.’ The 
indication of a change, which though swift, is still gradual, lies in the word ‘ chafe,’ 
—it is Cleopatra’s confession that she has been merely teasing ; when she speaks in 
earnest she lacks words to tell her love, but hitherto it has been mere fun—‘ Look, 
Charmian,’ she says, in effect, ‘how becoming it is to this Herculean Roman to 
have to bear a little teasing ;’ or, in modern slang (perilously near ‘chafe’) ‘to 
bear a little chaff.’ Of course, it is not to be supposed that, however bewitching the 
smile which accompanies these words, Anthony is at once appeased. No man likes 
to be told that he has been teased, although teasing is better than venom. So Anthony 
is dignified and calls Cleopatra ‘lady’ and is almost ludicrously sarcastic in his next 
speech. But,—he is limed. The ‘infinite variety’ has triumphed.—ED. ] 

112, 113. Oh, my Obliuion . . . forgotten] HANMER: ‘All forgotten’ is an old 
way of speaking for, aft to forget everything. CAPELL (i, 29): Intimating by this 
expression,—that Antony’s oblivion was something more than even oblivion itself ; 
the hemistich that follows may be explain’d in these words ;—and the memory I once 
had is all a blot. JOHNSON: It was her memory, not her oblivion, that like Antony 
was deserting her. I think a slight change will restore the passage. The Queen,’ 
having something to say, which she is not able, or would seem not able to recollect, 
cries out, ‘O my oblivion !—’ 7@s a very Antony.’ The thought of which I was in 
quest is a very Antony, is treacherous and fugitive, and has irrevocably left me. 
‘And I am all forgotten.’ If this reading stand, I think the explanation of Hanmer 
must be received. But I will venture another change, by reading, ‘ And I am all for- 
gone.” 1amall deserted and undone. STEEVENS: Cleopatra has something to say, 


56 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ili. 


Ant. But that your Royalty 
Holds Idleneffe your fubieét, I fhould take you 115 
For Idleneffe it felfe. 


which seems to be suppressed by sorrow; and after many attempts to produce her 
meaning, she cries out: ‘O, this oblivious memory of mine is as false and treacherous 
to me as Antony is, and I forget everything.’ Ods/vion, I believe, is boldly used 
for a memory apt to be deceitful. . .. Mr Edwards has proposed in his MS notes: ‘Oh 
me! oblivion is a very Antony,’ etc. HENLEY: Perhaps nothing is more necessary 
here than a change of punctuation ; O my / being still an exclamation frequently used 
in the west of England. M. Mason: The sense of the passage appears to me to be 
this: ‘O, my oblivion! as if it were another Antony, possesses me so entirely, that 
I quite forget myself.’ [Steevens’s paraphrase of ‘my oblivion is a very Antony’ is 
possibly just ; but may it not be that Cleopatra means that she is so utterly lost, heart 
and soul and mind and strength, in Anthony, that even her forgetfulness is become a 
part of him, and that her own individual self is all forgotten? See V, ii, 106.—ED. ] 

114-116, But that... it selfe] WARBURTON: That is, But that your charms 
hold me, who am the greatest fool on earth, in chains, I should have adjudged you 
to be the greatest. That this is the sense is shown by her answer: ‘’Tis sweating 
labour, To bear such idleness so near the heart, As Cleopatra this—.’ HEATH (p. 
450): I apprehend the sense is this; Amz. If I were not sufficiently acquainted with 
you to know, that you have so perfect a command of your own disposition, as to be 
able to put on or dismiss idleness, or childish frowardness, at pleasure, I should take 
you, from your present behaviour, for childishness itself. Ceo. As much idleness as 
you are pleased to call my present disposition, it is sweating labour to bear such idle- 
ness so near the heart, as I do this which you reproach me with. CAPELL (i, 29): Did 
I not know, says Antony, what a mistress you are in the arts of dissembling, and of 
counterfeiting any idle humour you please, I should take the wantonness of your 
present behaviour for real wantonness, and accuse you of little feeling ; and with this 
interpretation, the answer of Cleopatra quadrates perfectly; for it amounts to an 
avowal—that she had indeed been acting a part, and that with the greatest con- 
straint, and most painfully to herself; her motive, as she would have it thought,—to 
keep up Antony’s spirits, and her own, in such a trying juncture as this of their 
parting. STEEVENS: Warburton’s explanation is a very coarse one. The sense 
may be :—But that your queenship chooses idleness for the subject of your conver- 
sation, I should take you for idleness itself. Oran antithesis may be designed between 
royalty and subject. But that I know you to bea queen, and that your royalty holds 
idleness in subjection to you, exalting you far above its influence, I should suppose 
you to be the very genius of idleness itself. MALONE: But perhaps your subject 
rather means, whom being in subjection to you, you can command at pleasure, ‘to 
do your bidding,’ to assume the airs of coquetry, etc. Were not this coquet one of 
your attendants, I should suppose you yourself were this capricious being. Hup- 
son: ‘Idleness’ here means idle or sportive and unmeaning Za/&. And there is an 
antithesis between ‘ royalty’ and ‘subject.’ So the sense is, ‘ But that you are queen 
over your passion for idle discourse, and can command it as your subject, assuming 
it and laying it aside when you choose, I should think you the very genius of idleness 
itself.” ROLFE: But that your sovereignty can make frivolousness subservient to your 
purpose, I should take you for frivolousness itself. 


ACT I, SC, ill.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 57 


Cleo. ’Tis fweating Labour, bi 

To beare fuch Idleneffe fo neere the heart 

As Cleopatra this. But Sir, forgiue me, 

Since my becommings kill me, when they do not 120 

Eye well to you. Your Honor calles you hence, 

Therefore be deafe to my vnpittied Folly, 

And all the Gods go with you. Vpon your Sword 

Sit Lawrell victory, and fmooth fucceffe 

Be ftrew’d before your feete. 125 
Ant. Let vs go. 

Come : Our feparation fo abides and flies, 

That thou reciding heere, goes yet with mee; 

And I hence fleeting, heere remaine with thee. 


Away. Exeunt. 130 
123. Von] On Pope,+. 126, 127. Let...Come.:] As one line, 
124. Lawrell| Mal. Var. ’21, Knt, Pope et seq. 

Dyce, Glo. Hal. Sta. Ktly. Zawrell’d 128. reciding| refiding Ff. 

Ff et cet. goes| goes Ff, Rowe,+. go’st 

Cap. et seq. 


120. my becommings] The things which decome me, befit me. 

124. Lawrell victory] Both CoLLier and Dyce think that ‘ Lawrell’d’ of F, is 
to be preferred. The former suggests that a ¢ has dropt out at the press; and the 
latter ‘suspects that [thus] Shakespeare wrote here.’ But they overlooked certain 
examples which ABBoTT (§ 430) furnishes :—‘ The honey of his music vows’— 
Hamlet Vil, i, 164; ‘The venom clamours of a jealous woman.’ —Com. of Err. V, 
i, 69; ‘ Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud.’—A. of L. 850. ‘The Carthage 
queen.’—Jid. WV. D. I, i, 173. MALONE was assuredly correct when he said that 
this use of a noun for a past participle or an adjective ‘was the language of Shake- 
speare’s time.’ 

128, 129. That thou... remaine with thee] STEEVENS: Compare ‘ She went, 
they staid; or rightly for to say, She staid in them, they went in thought with hyr.’ 
—Sidney, Arcadia, lib. i, [p. 87, ed. 1598.] Thus also in Plautus, Mercator: ‘Si 
domi sum, foris est animus: sin foris sum, animus domi ’st.’ [III, iv, 2.] 


58 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iv. 


[Scene LV.| 


Enter Oétauius reading a Letter, Lepidus, 
and their Traine. 


Cef. You may fee Lepfzdus,and henceforth know, 
It is not Ce/ars Naturall vice, to hate 
. One great Competitor. From Alexandria 5 
This is the newes : He fifhes, drinkes, and waftes 


Scene II. Rowe. Scene V. Pope,+. 1. Octauius] Octavius Cesar Rowe. 
Scene IV. Cap. et seq. 3. [giving him a Letter to read. Cap. 
[Rome. Rowe. Czsar’s Palace at 4. vice] voice F,, Rowe, Pope. 
Rome. Theob. The House of Cesar as 5. One] A Han. Our Heath, Sing. 
modest as possible. Statues of Julius et seq. 
Cesar, Venus, Apollo. Kemble. great | geeat F,. 


5. One great] HEATH (p. 450) : I have little doubt but Shakespeare wrote, Our 
great competitor. That is, that he doth not naturally bear a personal hatred to 
Antony, The whole scope of this scene confirms the emendation, as containing the 
justifying motives of Octavius his present resentment. [JOHNSON, of course inde- 
pendently, made this same conjecture ; and as his Edition and Heath’s Revisal were 
both issued in 1765, it would be difficult to decide the priority, were it not that John- 
son in his Preface refers to Heath’s attack on Warburton.—ED.] CAPELL (i, 30) : 
From the first of these words may be gather’d—that the party who utters it had been 
engag’d in conversation with Lepidus before their entry ; and that a topick of that 
conversation had been,—a charge brought against him by the other, of designing to 
get rid of his partners, and govern singly : The passage being seen in this view, there 
can be no occasion for changing ‘One’ into—A, or into—our, as has been done by 
different gentlemen. BoSswELL: ‘One’ competitor is azy one of his great com- 
petitors. [It is difficult, if not impossible, to uphold the Folio here. By retaining 
‘One’ the inference becomes not unfair that it is Czesar’s natural vice to hate many 
competitors. The whole sentence seems either carelessly written or else dependent 
on the contents of the letter which Czesar has just read. ‘ Vice’ and ‘hate’ both 
seem stronger than the occasion demands. It is not a ‘vice’ to disapprove of immo- 
rality ; nor is it natural that the misdemeanours which Cesar rehearses should inspire 
‘hate,’ however severely they may be condemned. The unanimity with which all 
modern editors have adopted our cannot be here lightly disregarded.—Ep. ] 

5. Competitor] Murray (WV. £. D. s.v. | 2): One associated with another in 
seeking the same common object; an associate, a partner. [Thus again Ceesar calls 
Anthony in that touching lament, when word is brought to him of Anthony’s death: 
‘thou my Brother, my Competitor In top of all designe; my Mate in Empire,’ etc.— 
V, i, 52. See also note on I, i, 21.—ED.] 

6. He fishes] That Fishing should be here found in a list of heinous faults, can- 
not fail to give a profound shock to all gentle and refined natures. It is cheering to 
note, however, that the sympathetic author of Shakespeare as an Angler has had the 
strength to quote (p. 12) the present passage, and manfully forbear all comment.—Ep. 


ACT I, SC. iv.] 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 59 


The Lampes of night in reuell : Is not more manlike 7. 
Then Cleopatra : nor the Queene of Ptolomy 


More Womanly then he. 


Hardly gaue audience 
Or vouchfafe to thinke he had Partners. 


You 10 


Shall finde there a man, who is th’abftraéts of all faults, 


7. reuell| revells Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. 

Is] Om. Pope, Han. 
manlike| manly Rowe ii, +. 

8. Ptolomy] Ptolemy Theob. 

9-12. More...follow.| Lines end, audi- 
ence...partners...abstract...follow. Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. ke...think...man 
-. follow. Johns. he...or...chere...faults 
.. follow. Var.’73. audience...there... 
faults...follow. Knt, Sta. or...there... 
faults...follow, Cap. et cet. 


10. vouch/afe| did vouch/afe Ff,Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. vouchsaf’d 
Johns. et seq. 

he had | that h’ had Pope. that 
he had Theob.+. 

11. finde there] there find Theob. ii, 
Warb. Johns. 

th abjiracts| th abftract FF, 
Rowe. (the abjtract F 3 he abstract 
Pope et seq. 

faults,| faults; Rowe. 
Pope et seq. 


Jaults 


7. reuell] WALKER (C77z. iii, 285), having found a line in Tourneur’s Revenger's 
Tragedy where revels is to be pronounced asa monosyllable, asks, ‘Is revels thus pro- 
To which his editor, LETTSoM, answers, ‘I 

And'even this example is ambiguous.’ 


nounced in a passage in Shakespeare ?’ 

think not except in [the present line]. 
(Perhaps, because the word occurs in the third foot, where extra syllables are at 
times tolerated and perhaps because ‘reels’ may refer to a drunken gait.) Lettsom 
might have been, however, a little more bold. The word occurs again in ‘Our 
Alexandrian Reuels :’—V, ii, 262, where also it may be pronounced as a monosylla- 
ble, if ‘Our’ be a disyllable. And in II, vii, 111, Revels has been spelt outright, as 
I think, ‘ Reeles.’ It is to be remembered that even to this day how easy is the con- 
traction of words containing a v between two vowels, such as ne’er, e’er, etc. In 
Winters Tale, 1V, iv, 511, (of this ed.) in a note on ‘shovels,’ a quotation from 
The Antiquary is given, where Sir Walter spells the word shoo/s. In Ben Jonson, 
‘mar’le’ for marvel is not infrequent, see Zvery Man out of his Humour, I1,i.—ED. 

8. Queene of Ptolomy] Knicur: All the modern editions omit ‘of,’ reading 
‘Queen Ptolemy.’ [The omission is due to a misprint in the Variorum of 1803, 
which was continued in those of 1813, and 1821. These are Knight’s ‘all.’—Ep.] 

10. vouchsafe to] A convincing proof, as it seems to me, that the compositor 
obeyed his ear when taking the words from the mouth of his reader. The dental d 
in ‘ vouchsafed’ was lost in the dental ¢ of ‘to.’ Johnson very properly restored the 
d, but it is sufficiently heard when the line is spoken. Steevens believed that he 
had restored metre to the line by omitting ‘to.’ If what I have said, about the 
absorption of @ in the ¢ of ‘to,’ be correct, the present is not to be classed among the 
instances given by WALKER (C77z. ii, 62) of ‘final d and final ¢ confounded.’ See 
‘dumbe,’ I, v, 58; ‘Tawny fine,’ II, v, 16; ‘Or looke on thine,’ V, i, 49 (although 
this last is doubtful).—Eb. 

11, abstracts] One of the most valuable of WALKER’s chapters, as has been re- 
marked in almost every volume of this edition, is that ‘on the frequent interpolation, 
and frequent omission, of the final s,’ in the first Folio. ‘The interpolation of an s 
at the end of a word,’ says Walker (C7z¢. i, 234), “generally, but not always, a 


60 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, Sc. iv. 


That all men follow. 12 
Lep. I muft not thinke 

There are, euils enow to darken all his goodneffe: 

His faults in him, feeme as the Spots of Heauen, 15 


12-14. That...are] As one line, Cap. There ave F,, Cap. et seq. 


et seq. 14. enow] enough Rowe,+, Cap. Var. 
12. That] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. Mal. Steev. Ran. Var. Sing. 
Warb. 15, 16. of Heauen, More fierie] of 


14. There are,| Theyre Pope,+. ermine, or fires Han. 


noun substantive,—is remarkably frequent in the Folio. Those who are conversant 
with the MS of the Elizabethan age may perhaps be able to explain its origin. Were 
it not for the different degree of frequency with which it occurs in different parts of 
the Folio,—being comparatively rare in the Comedies (except perhaps in 7he Win- 
zer’s Tale), appearing more frequently in the Histories, and becoming quite common 
in the Tragedies,—I should be inclined to think it originated in some peculiarity of 
Shakespeare’s handwriting.’ This possible ‘ peculiarity ’ of Shakespeare’s handwrit- 
ing does not interfere with the suggestion that the compositors composed by the ear. 
Any ‘peculiarity’ in the MS would mislead the reader, whether or not he was at 
the same time the compositor. Other instances of this superfluous s in the present 
play are :—‘ Packt Cards with Czesars,’ IV, xiv, 24; ‘Will... Ballads vs out a 
Tune’—V, ii, 260; and, possibly, ‘She leuell’d at our purposes’—Ibid. 401.—Ep. 

12. all men follow] ‘ All men’ is here the object, not the subject of ‘ follow.’ —Ep. 

14. enow] BrapDLey (J. £. D. s. v. Enough): ...In many dialects, though 
not in all, the word exough (or its local equivalent), is employed in the singular and 
in the adverbial uses, while ENow serves for the plural. In the 18th century this 
distinction was recognized (e.g. by Johnson) as standard English; now, however, 
enow is in literary use entirely superseded, except as an intentional archaism, by 
enough, [IBID, (s. v. Enow, Johnson’s definition is adopted.) : ‘The plural of 
Enoucu.’ Wherefore, by the standard usage of their own century those earlier edi- 
tors, who deserted the Folio, were wrong.—ED. | 

15. His faults in him, etc.] CAPELL (i, 30): The propriety of this similitude 
has been question’d; and, indeed, some reflection is necessary, ere it can be seen: 
The night in which Antony’s faults were set, and by which they were render’d more 
glaring, is—the turbulent state of affairs, and the storm that was then arisen from 
Pompey. JoHNson: If by spots are meant stars, as night has no other fiery spots, 
the comparison is forced and harsh, stars having been always supposed to beautify 
the night ; nor do I comprehend what there is in the counterpart of this simile, which 
answers to night’s blackness. MALONE: The meaning seems to be—‘ As the stars 
or spots of heaven are not obscured, but rather rendered more bright, by the black- 
ness of the night, so neither is the goodness of Antony eclipsed by his evil qualities, 
but, on the contrary, his faults seem enlarged and aggravated by his virtues. That 
which answers to the dlackness of the night, in the counterpart of the simile, is 
Antony's goodness. His goodness is a ground which gives a relief to his faults, and 
makes them stand out more prominent and conspicuous. It is objected, that stars 
rather beautify than deform the night. But the poet considers them here only with 
respect to their prominence and splendour. It is sufficient for him that their scintil- 


ACT I, SC. iv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 61 


More fierie by nights Blackneffe ; Hereditarie, 16 
Rather then purchafte : what he cannot change, 
Then what he choofes. 
Cef. You are too indulgent. Let’s graunt it is not 
Amiffe to tumble on the bed of Prolomy, 20 
To giue a Kingdome for a Mirth, to fit 
And keepe the turne of Tipling with a Slaue, 
To reele the ftreets at noone, and ftand the Buffet 
With knaues that fmels of fweate : Say this becoms him 


(As his compofure muft be rare indeed, 25 
18. Then] Than F Lets ¥F,. Let us Pope et cet. 
19. You are] Youre Pope,+, Dyce 19. not] Om. Ff, Rowe. 
ii, iii. 20. Ptolomy] Ptolemy F.. 
Let's] F,F,, Rowe, Knt, Sing. 24. /mels| /mell Ff et seq. 


lations appear stronger in consequence of darkness, as jewels are more resplendent on 
a black ground than on any other.—Compare 1s Hen. JV « I, ii, 236:—‘ And like 
bright metal on a sullen ground, My reformation, glittering o’er my fault, Shall show 
more goodly, and attract more eyes, Than that which hath no foil to set it off.’ 
[CAPELL, for all his gnarled English, is often our surest guide. His present inter- 
pretation is, to me, by much the most poetical. It was the blackness of the rising 
tempest that gave an unusual brilliance to Anthony’s misdeeds.—Ep. ] 

15. Spots] Quincy (p. 48) : The Corrector reads ‘ stars of Heaven,’ —thus doing 
his best to destroy the felicity of the comparison, and render a striking line tame and 
prosaic. 

16, 17. Hereditarie, Rather than purchaste] LorD CAMPBELL (p. 117): That 
is to say, they are taken by descent, not by purchase. Lay gents (viz., all except 
lawyers) understand by ‘purchase’ buying for a sum of money, called the price ; but 
lawyers consider that ‘ purchase’ is opposed to descen¢,—that all things come to the 
owner either by descent or by purchase, and that whatever does not come through 
operation of law by descent is purchased, although it may be the free gift of a donor. 
Thus, if land be devised to A. in fee, he takes by purchase, or to B. for life, remainder 
to A. and his heirs, B. being a stranger to A., A. takes by purchase; but upon the 
death of A., his eldest son would take by descent. So in 2 Hen. JV: IV, iv, the 
King, who had usurped the crown, says to the Prince of Wales :—‘ For what in me 
was purchas’d Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort.’ z.¢. I took by purchase, you will 
take by descent. 

19, 20. You are... Ptolomy] WALKER (C7iz. iii, 295): Arrange, perhaps,— 
«You are too indulgent: Let’s grant ’tis not amiss | To tumble on the bed of Ptolemy.’ 

21. a Mirth] Fora merry joke. DEIGHTON: It seems doubtful whether ‘To 
give a kingdom’ means to bestow a kingdom on his entertainer, or to squander the 
wealth of a kingdom in a single feast. 

22. turne of Tipling, etc. ] See North’s Plutarch, Appendix. 

23. To reele the streets] For other instances of the omission of prepositions 
after verbs of motion, see ABBOTT § 198. 

25. As his composure, etc.] JOHNSON: This seems inconsequent. I read: 


62 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act 1, sc. iv. 


Whom thefe things cannot blemifh) yet muft Anthony 26 
No way excufe his foyles, when we do beare 

So great waight in his lightneffe. If he fill’d 

His vacancie with his Voluptuoufneffe, 

Full furfets, and the drineffe of his bones, 30 
Call on him for’t. But to confound fuch time, 


27. foyles|] F,. foyls FF, fotls 28. fill’d | fill’ Steev. (misprint). 
Rowe,+, Cap. Var. Coll. Sing. Ktly. 31. Call] Fall Sing. Coll. ii, iii (MS), 
sotls Mal. et cet. Ktly. 


‘ And his composure,’ etc. Grant that this becomes him, avd if it can become him, 
he must have in him something very uncommon, ye/, etc. MALONE: Compare As 
You Like It,‘ what though you have beauty, (As by my faith I see no more in 
you Than without candle may go dark to bed,’)—III, v, 41. AsBorr (§ 111): 
‘As, equivalent to as regards which, though, for, was sometimes used parenthetically 
in a sense oscillating between the relative which, as regards which, and the con- 
junction for, though, since. [Thus Abbott explains the ‘as’ here and in II, ii, 66. 
In both places, as well as in Malone’s quotation from 4s You Like //, ‘as’ appears 
to me to introduce a clause which expresses a reason, and is equivalent to zwas- 
much as, since; of which use examples may be found in the WY. £. D. s. v. IV, 
18.—ED. ] 

27. his foyles] MALONE: For the emendation now made [soz/s] I am answer- 
able. In the MSS of our author’s time, / and 7 are often undistinguishable, and no 
two letters are so often confounded at the press. Shakespeare has so regularly used 
this word in the sense required here, that there cannot, I imagine, be the smallest 
doubt of the justness of this emendation. So, in Hamlet: [Hereupon Malone gives 
examples of soz/ from Hamlet, Love’s Lab. L., Meas. for Meas., 2 Hen. LV, and, 
doubtless, a Concordance would furnish many more.] STEEVENS: If ‘foils’ be inad- 
missible (which I question), we might read—/faz/s. In 7he Winter's Tale, we meet 
with this substantive, which signifies omission, or non-performance : ‘ Mark, and per- 
form it. See’st thou? for the fail Of any point in’t, shall not only be Death to thy- 
self,’ etc. Yet, on the whole, I prefer Malone’s conjecture. COLLIER (ed. ii): 
Malone and modern editors have altered ‘foils’ to soz/s, without sufficient necessity ; 
the ‘ foils’ of Anthony are his vices, his fozd/es (possibly Shakespeare’s word, though, 
according to our dictionaries, not so old), which /oz/, or defeat, the exercise of our 
virtues. [I fail to perceive any gain in substituting soz/s for ‘foils.’ ‘Foils’ isa 
‘synonym of soz/s, and has all its strength. BRADLEY (WV. £. D. s. v. Foil, sb.2, 2. + b) 
gives as its definition ‘ A disgrace, stigma. With mixture of the sense of Fu2/, v.}, 6. 
which means To foul, defile, pollute. In material and immaterial sense.’ ScHMIDT 
(Zex.) also gives a definition of ‘foil’ as ‘blemish, shortcoming’ and quotes the 
present passage asan example. With such evidence before us, is there any sufficient 
reason why we should discard Shakespeare’s word and adopt Malone’s ?—ED. ] 

28. So great waight in his lightnesse] JoHNsoN: The word /ight is one of 
Shakespeare’s favourite playthings. The sense is—His trifling levity throws so 
much burden upon us. 

31. Call on him for’t] JoHNson: ‘Call on him,’ is vés¢¢ him. Says Coesar—If 
Antony followed his debaucheries at a time of leisure, I should leave him to be 


ACT'T, SC. iv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 63 


That drummes him from his fport, and fpeakes as lowd 32 
As his owne State, and ours, ’tis to be chid: 

As we rate Boyes, who being mature in knowledge, 

Pawne their experience to their prefent pleafure, 35 
And fo rebell to iudgement. 


33. ours,’ tis] ours,’ ts Pope,+. 34. rate] rare F,. 
be] he FF. being mature| immature Wan. 
chid:| chid, Han. Warb. Johns. Warb. being immature Ktly. 
chid Cap. et seq. 


punished by their natural consequences, by surfetts, and dry bones. COLLIER (ed. 
ii): Here Mr Singer, with some apparent unscrupulousness, adopts the emendation 
of the corrected Folio, 1632 (Motes and Emendations, p. 487) viz: Fall for ‘Call.’ 
The alteration is trifling, but it never, that we are aware of, was hinted at before 
1853, and all editors, until Mr Singer’s time, printed ‘ Cai,’ etc. He was quite 
right to use #a//, but surely not right to leave it to be supposed that it was his own 
unprompted emendation. STAUNTON: Call him to account for it. [An interpre- 
tation more Shakespearian, I think, than Dr Johnson’s.—ED. ] 

31. confound] See note on ‘confound’ I, i, 59. 

33-36. ’tis to be chid: As we, etc.] HEATH (p. 451): As we rate boys, who, 
when they have attained a sufficient maturity of knowledge to regulate their own 
conduct, sacrifice to their present pleasure, the experience they have had of the ill 
consequences which will certainly follow from such indulgence, and thus rebel 
against their own judgment. According to Hanmer’s reading, the fault of the boy is 
said to proceed from the immaturity of his knowledge, that is, want of sufficient 
experience to teach him that knowledge, at the same time that he is said to have that 
experience, and to act in contradiction to it, and to his judgment founded upon it. 
CAPELL (i, 30): ‘ Being mature’ has been chang’d into—zmmature : but ‘boys’ are 
not usually ‘rated’ for faults before they are of years to know better; nor can they 
‘rebel to judgment,’ till such time as they have some. JOHNSON: By ‘boys mature in 
knowledge’ are meant, boys old enough to know their duty, R.G. WHITE (ed. i): 
Hanmer’s reading, ‘zmmature in knowledge’ is most plausible. For boys are not 
mature in anything, and least in knowledge; and were they mature they would not 
pawn their experience to their present pleasure ; or at least their so doing would not 
be chosen as an illustration here. Without an equivalent to Hanmer’s too great 
change, the passage appears to be inexplicable. DANIEL (p. 80) : Read these four 
lines thus: ‘ he’s to be chid As we rate boys, who, being mature in knowledge, 
Pawns his experience to zs present pleasure, And so vede/s to judgment.’ Boys are 
not mature in knowledge, and cannot pawn experience nor rebel against judgment 
they do not possess ; but Antony being so, and doing thus, is to be chidden asa boy. 
J[oserH] C[rossy] (4. & Qu. V, vii, 464, 1877): The only objection to Daniel’s 
emendation is that it makes no less than five changes in the original text. But the 
same sense and construction may be obtained by only one alteration, and that a 
very slight one,—viz. by reading 7hey’re for ‘’tis,’—placing the parenthetical clause 
between dashes, and closing the first sentence with a note of exclamation after ‘ ours,’ 
thus :—‘ As his own state and ours! They're to be chid—As we rate boys—who, 
being mature in knowledge,’ etc. By this arrangement and pointing, it will be seen 


64 DHE DRA GED ILEAROLG [AcT I, SC. iv. 


Enter a Meffenger. 37 
Lep. Heere’s more newes. 
Mef. Thy biddings haue beene done, & euerie houre 
Moft Noble C@/ar, fhalt thou haue report 40 
How ’tis abroad. Pompey is ftrong at Sea, 
And it appeares, he is belou’d of thofe 
That only haue feard Ce/ar ;: to the Ports 
The difcontents repaire,and mens reports 


Giue him much wrong’d. 45 
Cef. I fhould haue knowne no leffe, 
It hath bin taught vs from the primall ftate 47 


47. bin] been ¥ 


at once that ‘As we rate boys’ is to be construed as a parenthesis, and that ‘who’ 
has for its antecedent ‘they’ of the previous line, viz. persons generally who do so- 
and-so, and does not in any way refer to ‘boys.’ [Hupson adopted this emendation 
of Crosby in his text. I cannot but believe that recent editors would have found 
less difficulty in these lines had they only followed the punctuation of the Folio, with 
a colon after ‘chid,’ instead of adopting Capell’s text where is no punctuation after 
‘chid.’ With ‘chid’ the sense is complete,—Anthony’s conduct deserves to be 
chidden. Then the simile begins. It seems to me idle to discuss whether or not 
boys in general are mature or immature. The ‘ boys’ that Shakespeare had in mind 
in this passage were ‘ mature in knowledge’ and ad ‘ pawn their experience.’ ‘ Boys’ 
is an elastic term. Later on, Anthony calls Cesar a ‘boy.’ Compared with 
Anthony’s fifty-two years thirty-two years may well be a boy’s span, and can any 
one say that such a ‘ boy’ might not be mature enough to recognize the folly of pawn- 
ing experience to present pleasure? The old shepherd in Zhe Winter's Tale thought 
that youths of three-and-twenty knew too much.—ED. ] 

43. haue feard Czesar] JOHNSON: Those whom not Jove but fear made ad- 
herents to Czesar, now show their affection for Pompey. 

43. to the Ports] CoLLier (ed. ii): ‘To the fleets’ in the MS with some plausi- 
bility ; but though we may believe ‘ ports’ to have been caught from the line below, 
we refrain from alteration, inasmuch as ‘ ports’ may be right. We are previously told 
that ‘Pompey is strong at sea,’ and to say that the ‘discontents’ repair ‘to the 
Jicets’ is what might have been expected. [COLLIER adopted fleets in his Third 
Edition.| Dyce (ed. ii): I do not mean to say that the old text is wrong; but there 
is something disagreeable in the two lines [43 and 44] ending with the same sylla- 
ble. [This adds a shade of plausibility to the emendation of Collier’s MS.—Ep.] 

44. discontents] For examples of participles or adjectives, when used as nouns, 
with the inflection of the plural, see, if need be, ABBOTT, § 433. 

45. Giue him] That is, represent him. 

47. primall state] WorDsworTH (p. 337): I am inclined to think there is a 
reference here to the meaning of Cain’s name, ‘a man gotten from the Lord,’ at his 
mother’s wish. See Gev.iv, 1 and margin. Compare the use of the word ‘ primal’ 
in Hamlet III, iii, 37; also with reference to Cain: ‘It hath the primal eldest curse 
upon ’t, A brother’s murder!’ 


ACTA, SC. iv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 65 


That he which is was wifht, vntill he were: 48 
And the ebb’d man, 
Ne’re lou’d, till ne’re worth loue, 50 


Comes fear’d, by being lack’d. This common bodie, 


49, 50. One line, Rowe et seq. 51. fear’'d] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, 
50. nerve worth not worth Mal. conj. Coll. i. dear Ktly. dear’d Theob. et cet. 
Rann. This| The Han. 


51. Comes fear’d, by being lack’d] WARsBuRTON: Let us examine the sense of 
this in plain prose: ‘The earliest histories inform us, that the man in supreme com- 
mand was always wish’d to gain that command, till he had obtain’d it. And he, 
whom the multitude has contentedly seen in a low condition, when he begins to be 
wanted by them, becomes to be “fear’d”’ by them.’ But do the multitude fear a 
man because they want him? Certainly, we must read: ‘Comes dear’d, by being 
lacked,’ z. e. endear’d, a favourite to them. Besides, the context requires this read- 
ing; for it was not fear, but love, that made the people flock to young Pompey and 
what occasioned this reflection. Soin Cordolanus.: ‘I shall be Zov’d, when I am 
lack’d.? MALONE: Something, however, is yet wanting. What is the meaning of 
—‘ne’er lov’d till ze’er worth love?’ I suppose that the second ‘ne’er’ was inad- 
vertently repeated at the press, and that we should read ,‘till o¢ worth love.’ 
KNIGHT [who follows the Folio]: The general reading is deav’d. But it must be 
remembered that Czesar is speaking; and that, in the notions of one who aims at 
supreme authority, to be feared and to be loved are pretty synonymous. COLLIER 
(ed. i, also following the Folio) : Warburton’s alteration is plausible, but does not 
seem necessary. Czsar may mean, that Pompey, by being so much backed by the 
people, has become powerful, and is therefore ‘fear’d.’ Jdzd. (ed. ii, adopting Jov’d 
from his MS): We accept the emendation of the MS with confidence, not lessened 
by the Shakespearian alliteration thus afforded. The meaning is too plain to need ex- 
planation. [In his 72rd Edition COLLIER adopted Warburton’s dear’d.] J. CROSBY 
( Shakespeariana, Dec. 1883, p. 46) suggests that ‘fear’d’ should be ‘spelt ’feer"d, 
abbreviated from affer'd, z. e., estimated at its true worth, appraised, valued.’ 
[This suggestion would be almost conclusive, were it possible to find a single instance 
where affcer is abbreviated to ’/eer, or where even any of the word’s modifications 
is so abbreviated. Not an instance is to be found, I think, in the . Z. D. nor 
in WricHT’s English Dialect Dictionary, where such an abbreviation could not 
fail to be given, if it had been ever used in any English dialect. Czsar is in a 
bitter mood. To his vexation over Anthony’s misdoings is now added the morti- 
fying news that those whose love for him had changed to fear were flocking to 
Pompey. Whereupon he begins to moralize and says that he ought to have known 
that this would be so, because from time immemorial he who is in power was loved 
up to the very moment when he attained that power. Then he became feared and 
people deserted him (just as they had deserted him for Pompey). Next, through 
this desertion, he becomes an ebb’d man. And this ebb’d man (again a victim of 
popular caprice, and now loved when all his power is gone and there is no longer 
profit in loving him), by being missed and wanted again-by the people, comes again 
to be feared. Thus the common people go to and back, hither and yon, like a vaga- 
bond flag on the stream. If this interpretation be just, Warburton’s emendation, 
dear d, is needless, and the text of the Folio may be vindicated.—Ep. ] 


5 


66 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iv. 


Like to a Vagabond Flagge vpon the Streame, 52 
Goes too, and backe, lacking the varrying tyde 
To rot it felfe with motion. 
Mef. Cae/far \ bring thee word, 55 
Menacrates and Menas famous Pyrates 
Makes the Sea ferue them, which they eare and wound 
With keeles of euery kinde. Many hot inrodes 
They make in Italy, the Borders Maritime 


Lacke blood to thinke on’t, and flufh youth reuolt, 60 
No Veffell can peepe forth : but ’tis as foone 
Taken as feene : for Pompeyes name ftrikes more 62 
52. to] Om. Ran. Var. ’03, 713, ’21. 56. Menacrates] Menecrates F,. 
Vagabond | Vagobond F.,,. 57. Makes] Make F, et seq. 
53- too] to F,. eare| tear Grey (ii, 197). 
backe| fro Ktly. 58. keeles] kneels F,. knells F ,. 
lacking Ff, Rowe. lashing Pope. inrodes| Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
lacquying Theob. Han. Warb. Jacguing Warb. Johns. zzroads Han. 
Johns. /ackying Cap lackeying Steev. 59. Laly,| ltaly; Cap. et seq. 
et seq. sacking Gould. 60. fluf/h youth reuolt| fle/h youth revolt 
varrying | ¥.,,. F, jfie/h youth to revolt F,F,, Rowe. 
54. [Enter another Messenger. Cap. Jresh youth revolt Anon. ap. Hal. 
Ran. 61. forth -| forth, Ff et seq. 


53. lacking] THEOBALD: The addition of a single letter [to the word in the 
Folio] will not only give us good sense, but the genuine word of our author into the 
bargain :—‘ Lackeying the varying Tide,’ z. ¢. floating backwards and forwards with 
the variation of the tide, like a page, or lacquey, at his master’s heels. STEEVENS: 
Compare Chapman’s /lad: ‘ My guide to Argos, either shipp’d, or lackeying by thy 
side,’ Bk. 24th, [line 392.] Again, ‘—who would willingly Lackey along so vast a 
lake of brine.’— Odyssey, Bk. 5, [line 130.] Again in Marston’s Antonio and Mel- 
fida, 1602: ‘O that our power Could lackie or keep wing with our desires.’—Second 
Part, Prologue. COLLIER (ed. i): Southern in his Folio, 1685, altered ‘lacking’ 
to backing. THALLIWELL (JVo‘es, etc. p. 13): ‘ Lacking’ is rather a variation of form 
than an error. The same orthography occurs in a MS dated 1615, quoted by Haw- 
kins, in his edition of Ruggle’s Jgxoramus, 1787, Appendix, p. 120. J. CHURTON 
CoLLins (p. 299): Theobald gave us back one of the finest onomatopceic lines in 
Shakespeare :—G@és fo afid back lackéyiiig thé varyitig fide. 

55. Mes.] STEEVENS; Perhaps another Messenger should be noted here, as enter- 
ing with fresh news. HEYSE (p. 146) makes the same suggestion, ‘inasmuch as 
Ceesar had been assured that he should ‘‘ every hour have report How ’tis abroad.” 
That this second messenger brings nothing absolutely new is no more than is to be 
expected from reports every hour.’ 

57. eare] JOHNSON: To ‘ear’ is to glough; a common metaphor. 

60. Lacke blood to thinke on’t] JoHNson: Turn pale at the thought of it. 

60. flush youth] STEEVENS: That is, youth ripened to manhood; youth whose 
blood is at the flow. 


ACT I, SC. iv. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 67 


Then could his Warre refifted. 63 
Cesar. Anthony, . 
Leaue thy lafciuious Vaffailes. When thou once 65 


Was beaten from Medena, where thou flew’ ft 
fhirfius, and Paufa Confuls, at thy heele 

Did Famine follow, whom thou fought’ft againft, 
(Though daintily brought vp) with patience more 


Then Sauages could fuffer. Thou did’ft drinke 70 
65. Vaffailes| F ,. Vaffails F,. Vaffals dena North’s Plut. Johns. et seq. 
F,, Rowe, Knt. wassazls Pope et cet. 67. Hirfius] Hirtius F, et seq. 
(subs. ) Paufa] Panfa Ff. 
66. Was] Wert Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 68. follow,| follow ; Cap. et seq. 
Wast Var.’78 et seq. whom| which Han. 
Was...Medena] From Mutina was fought’ ft) faught’f F. 
beaten Han, 69. with] bore with Wray ap. Cam. 
Medena] Mutina Rowe,+. Mo- 70. Then] Than F,. 


65. Vassailes] STEEVENS: Wasse/ is here put for intemperance in general. HEN- 
LEY: ‘ Vassals’ is, without question, the true reading. KnicHT: Wassal is em- 
ployed by Shakspere in the strict meaning of drunken revelry; and that could 
scarcely be called ‘lascivious.’ On the contrary, ‘leave thy lascivious vassals’ 
expresses Czesar’s contempt for Cleopatra and her minions, who were strictly the vas- 
sals of Antony, the queen being one of his tributaries. Dyce (ed. ii): Knight 
prints ‘vassals,’ though the rest of the speech so distinctly shows that here wassaz/s 
and not ‘vassals’ are in question. COLLIER: Either reading may be right; but 
vassal was not usually, though sometimes, spelt vassaz/e, and nothing is more likely 
than that the old compositor should use vw for w. Czesar has previously accused 
Antony of ‘tippling with a slave,’ and ‘reeling the streets at noon,’ which counte- 
nances wassat/s as an old drinking term; and, in addition, we may state that ‘ vas- 
sailes’ is amended to wassaz/s in the MS. [According to Bartlett’s Concordance, 
‘vassal’ or ‘vassals’? occurs twenty times elsewhere in Shakespeare, which added 
to the present instance make twenty-one; of this number three occur in the present 
play; in a third of the instances it is spelt in the Folio vassazle or vassailes ; it is 
also so spelt in Sonnet 58, In none of these instances, except in the present, has 
there been any suggestion of wassai/; nor can I see any necessity for such a sugges- 
tion here, in spite of the dogmatic assertion of Dyce, whose note, to my regret, I do 
not comprehend. It is really not clear to me that Anthony ought to leave his revelry 
in Egypt, because ‘the rest of the speech so distinctly shows’ that some time pre- 
viously, at Modena, he drank gilded puddles and browsed on bark. The adjective 
which qualifies ‘ vassailes,’ seems to me to be far more appropriate to humankind than 
to drinking bouts. In the present play, it is spelt ‘ vassaile,’ II, vi, 71, and ‘ vassal,’ 
V, ii, 35. It is to be borne in mind that the spelling of the compositors of the Folio 
is so lawless, that any appeal to its uniformity is generally useless.—ED. ] 

67. Hirsius, and Pausa] See Appendix, Plutarch. 

69, 70. more Then Sauages could suffer. etc.] HAzLiTT (p. 99): It is worth 
while to observe that Shakespear has contrasted the extreme magnificence of the 
descriptions in this play with pictures of extreme suffering and physical horror, not 


68 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iv. 


The ftale of Horfes, and the gilded Puddle 71 

Which Beafts would cough at. Thy pallat thé did daine 

The rougheft Berry, on the rudeft Hedge. 

Yea, like the Stagge, when Snow the Pafture fheets, 

The barkes of Trees thou brows’d. On the Alpes, 75 

It is reported thou did’ft eate ftrange flefh, 

Which fome did dye to looke on : And all this 

(It wounds thine Honor that I fpeake it now) 

Was borne fo like a Soldiour, that thy cheeke 

So much as lank’d not. 80 
Lep. "Tis pitty of him. 
Cef. Let his fhames quickely 

Driue him to Rome, ’tis time we twaine 

Did fhew our felues i’th’Field, and to that end 


Affemble me immediate counfell, Pompey 85 
72. daine] dain FF. deign Pope. 83. Rome,| Rome disgrac’ d Mal. conj. 
75. brows’d | brow/fedf FE. "tts time] time zs zt, that Pope,+, 
76. reported | repoted ¥ Cap. Var. “Zs time indeed Steev. conj. 
79. borne| born Pope, Cap. bore tis time at least Words. 

Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. 84. 27'th'] wh F,. ith FF. 

Soldiour| Souldiour F,. Souldier 85. me] we Ff, Rowe, +, Cap. Ran. 

F,. Souldiers F,. Soldier Rowe. Steev. Var. Coll. Sing. Dyce, Wh. Glo. 
80. as lank'd] as I lank'd FF. as Sta. 

lanked Anon. ap. Cam. immediate] immediately F,. im- 
81. ’ Z%s] Zt zs Han. Johns. Var. Ran. mediatly ¥ . 

Steev. Ay, ts Anon. ap. Cam. counfell,| F,.  councel, FAFy. 
82-84. Let...end] Lines end, time... council, Rowe. 

end Ktly. 


less striking—partly perhaps to excuse the effeminacy of Mark Antony of whom 
they are related as having happened, but more to preserve a certain balance of feel- 
ing inthe mind. [See Appendix, Plutarch.] 

71. The stale of Horses] STEEVENS; All these circumstances of Antony’s dis- 
tress are taken literally from Plutarch. [The present item is not in Plutarch.—Ep.] 

71. gilded Puddle] HENLEY: There is frequently observable on the surface of 
stagnant pools, that have remained long undisturbed, a reddish gold-coloured slime. 

81. "Tis pitty of him] AppotT (§ 174): ‘Of’ passes easily from meaning as 
regards to to concerning, about. [This half-line and the preceding, ‘So much as 
lank’d not,’ Abbott (§ 510) combines into one metrical line by ‘ giving the full pro- 
nunciation to’ ‘lank’d.’ But is not thereby the evident intention of throwing the 
emphasis on ‘’Tis’ defeated? For ‘ of,’ see FRANZ, § 364; V, i, 81.—Ep.] 

85. Assemble me immediate counsell] MALoNnE: I do not recollect any 
instance where Shakespeare has introduced this [ethical dative] in solemn dialogue, 
where one equal is speaking to another. Perhaps the second Folio is right. So 
‘Haste we’ II, ii, 194 [‘dispatch we,’ II, ii, 195]. KNnicHT: The modern read- 


ACT, SC. v.]] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 69 


Thriues in our Idleneffe. 86 
Lep. To morrow Cesar, 

I fhall be furnifht to informe you rightly 

Both what by Sea and Land I can be able 

To front this prefent time. go 
C@/.Til which encounter, it is my bufines too. Farwell. 
Lep.Farwell my Lord, what you fhal know mean time 

Of ftirres abroad, I fhall befeech you Sir 

To let me be partaker. 
Cefar. Doubt not fir, I knew it for my Bond. Exeunt 95 


[ Scene V| 


Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras,& Mardian. 
Cleo. Charmian. 
Char. Madam. 3 


89. Both what] With what, both Ktly. 
With what Anon. ap. Cam. 
be able| assemble Anon. ap. Cam. 
90, 91. Zo...encounter| As one line 
Pope et seq. 
90. front] ’front Cap. Var. Ran. 
Steev. Var. Sing. Ktly. 
gl. 2¢zs]’ Tis Pope. 
Farwell | Om. Han. 
92-94. Farwell...partaker| Lines end, 
Lord...abroad...partaker. Pope, +. 
93,94. Str Zo] Om. Pope, +. 
94. partaker| partaker of Ktly. 
95. Doubt | Doubt it Theob.+, Var. 
Ran. 


95. 7... Bond] Separate line, Cap. 
Steev. Var. Knt, Coll. ii, Sing. Dyce, 
Glo. Sta. Ktly. 

Bond | bond. 
Theob. Han. Warb. 

Scene III. Rowe. 
Scene V. Cap. et seq. 

Alexandria. Rowe. Alexandria. A 
Room in the Palace. Theob. 

1. Enter... ] Enter Cleopatra, support- 
ing herself on Iras ; Charmian and Mar- 
dian following. Cap. 

2. Charmian.] Charmian,— Theob. 
et seq. 


farewell Pope, 


Scene VI. Pope. 


fir| Om. Pope. 


ing is ‘ Assemble we,’ and it is justified by the assertion that one equal is speaking 
to another. The commentators forget the contempt Czesar had for Lepidus; they 
forget, too, the crouching humility of Lepidus himself [as shown in lines 93, 94. 
What Knight says about the slight estimation in which Cesar held Lepidus is true 
enough and ingenious enough, but it may be doubted that Cesar would thus give Lepi- 
dus orders as though he were a servant, especially since Lepidus would be himself of 
the council when assembled. I prefer we of F,,—Ep, ]. 

95. I knew it for my Bond] M. Mason: That is, to be bounden duty. [I do 
not see the force of the past tense, ‘knew.’ WALKER ( C7?v. iii, 295) says ‘Of course, 
know,’ and one is inclined to acquiesce. Of the foregoing scene, VISCHER (p. 88) 
remarks that it might be dispensed with altogether or combined with a later one.— 


Ep.] 


70 THE TRAGEDIES OE PACT SC. 


Cleo. Ha, ha, giue me to drinke Mandragoru. 4 
4. Ha, ha,| Ha, ha— Rowe,+. As 4. Mandragoru] Mandragoras Ff, 
separate line, Steev. et seq. (subs.) Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. MMan- 


dragora Johns. et seq. 


4. Ha, ha,] It is not easy to decide how this exclamation should be spelt, expres- 
sive as it is of mingled weariness and impatience. What is, possibly, the modern 
equivalent was spelt by Shakespeare’s compositors five times ‘ heigh ho’ and once ‘ hey 
ho.’ I say ‘modern equivalent’ because Shakespeare does not always employ it to 
express weariness, for example, in the song in As Vou Like Jt, ‘Then heigh ho, the 
holly, This life is most jolly.” In the present instance, howsoever it be spelt, it is 
not laughter, any more than is Othello’s agonized, ‘ Ha, ha, false to me ?? Ep. 

4. giue me to drinke] DEIGHTON: Not ‘give me mandragora to drink,’ but ‘ enable 
me, put it in my power, to drink mandragora,’ as in O¢hello, II, ili, 209, * Give me 
to know How this foul rout began.’ [I think these two instances are hardly parallel. 
Othello demands certain information and follows up this demand with direct ques- 
tions. Cleopatra gives a command which she does not expect to be obeyed ; and 
would probably have refused the smallest sip, had mandragora been really brought to 
her.—ED. | 

4. Mandragoru] In the Zext. Votes of the Cam. Ed. ‘Mandragora’ is given as 
the word in F,. This is possibly an instance, among many, of a variation in copies 
of the same edition. It is clearly ‘Mandragoru’ in my copy of F_; it is so also in 
Vernor and Hood’s Reprint of 1807; in Booth’s Reprint, and in Staunton’s Photo- 
lithograph. Jt is a matter of very small importance, and serves only as a warning 
against a reliance, too implicit, on the spelling of Shakespeare’s compositors.—ED. 

4. Mandragoru] ‘ Mandragora hath that name, for it beareth apples with great 
savour of the greatnesse of the apples of A/actan, and is called Malum terre among 
Latines. And Poets call it Axtropomoros, for the root thereof is some deale shapen 
as a man: the rinde thereof medled with Wine is giuen to them to drinke that shall 
be cut in the body, for they shuld sleepe and not feele the sore cutting. ... And 
Diosco. saith, that Mandragora is a sleeping hearbe. . . . For the rindes thereof sod 
in Wine, cause sleepe, &° abateth all manner sorenesse: and so that time a man 
feeleth vnneth, though he bee cut.’—Batman vppon Bartholome, 1582, Liber XVII, 
Chap. 104, p. 304. Page after page could be quoted of the superstitions which have 
clustered about this plant. All that Cleopatra cared for here and now was its nar- 
cotic power, and that quality is all that a note need set forth. Therefore it is, that 
only the foregoing extract from Bartholome is given,—a book probably less accessible 
to the general reader than many another. Should a student wish, however, to pur- 
sue the subject further, he is referred to :— Lyte’s trans. of Dodoens, ed. 1578, D: 
437; Holland’s Pine, tome II, bk. xxv, ch. 13, ed. 1634; Gerarde’s Herbal, p. 
351, ed. 1633; Lupton’s Thousand Notable things of sundrie sortes, Third Booke, 
43, ed. 1627 (where directions may be found ‘to make a counterfet Mandrage, which 
hath been sold by deceiuers, for much money’); Nares, s.v., Ellacombe, Plant 
Lore, p. 117 ; Grindon, Shakspere Flora, p. 290; Seager, Matural History in Shake- 
speare’s Time, p. 1953 or Othello, III, iii, 384; Rom. & Jul. IV, iii, 47 of this 
Edition. Finally, there is an exhaustive discussion of it, historically and botanically, 
by Prof. FERp. CoHN in the Fiinfundsechzigster Jahres-Bericht der Schlesischen 
Gesellschaft f. vaterlindische Cultur, Breslau, 1888, p. 285.—Eb. 


ACEI, SC. v.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA at 


Char. Why Madam? 5 
Cleo. That I might fleepe out this great gap of time: 
My Anthony is away. 
Char. You thinke of him too much. 
Cleo. O’tis Treafon. 
Char. Madam, I truft not fo. fe) 
Cleo. Thou, Eunuch Mardian? 
Mar, What’s your Highneffe pleafure? 
Cleo. Not now to heare thee fing. I take no pleafure 
In ought an Eunuch ha’s : Tis well for thee, 
That being vnfeminar’d, thy freer thoughts 15 
May not flye forth of Egypt. Haft thou Affections ? 
Mar. Yes gracious Madam. 
Cleo. Indeed? 
Mar. Not in deed Madam, for I can do nothing 
But what in deede is honeft to be done: 20 
Yet haue I fierce Affections, and thinke 


6. times] Ff. time Knt, Dyce, Wh. 11. Mardian?] Mardian— Theob. 
Glo. Cam. time, Rowe et cet. (subs.) 14. ought] aught Theob. ii, Warb. 

8. too much] Separate line, Cap. Steev. Johns. Var.’73 et seq. 

9g. O’ tis] O, that is Han. O/— Cap. 15. unfeminar'd | unfeminaried Ff, 
O, Steev. Of/ zt zs Ktly. Rowe. 

11. Thou, Eunuch|.Thou, Eunuch, 19. i” deed | indeed FF. 
Rowe, Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Coll. 20. in deede]| indeed Ff, Rowe, Pope, 


Wh. Zhou eunuch, Pope,Han. Thou! Han. Warb. Cap. Var.’85, Knt, Sing. 
Eunuch! Var.’73. Thou, eunuch ! Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Ktly, Wh. ii. 
Var.’78, Mal. Steev. Knt. 


Mrs JAMESON (p. 130): Finer still are the workings of her variable mind and 
lively imagination, after Antony’s departure; her fond repining at his absence, her 
violent spirit, her right royal wilfulness and impatience, as if it were a wrong to her 
majesty, an insult to her sceptre, that there should exist in her despite such things as 
space and time; and high treason to her sovereign power, to dare to remember what 
she chooses to forget. 

6, 7. this great gap of time: My Anthony is away] The modern punctuation, 
either with or without a comma after ‘time,’ is, I think, much to be preferred to the 
colon of the Folio, and yet it does not convey exactly the meaning of the Folio. 
According to the Folio, Cleopatra seems to say in effect, ‘That I might sleep out 
this great gap of time. Cannot you understand? My Anthony is away.’—Ep. 

9. O ’tis Treason] STEEVENS deemed this phrase ‘cold and unmetrical,’ he, 
therefore omitted ‘’tis.’ WALKER (C77. iii, 295) agreed with him in the omission. 
And both were anticipated by CAPELL. 

16. May not flye forth of Egypt] For several other examples of this somewhat 
unusual form, ‘ forth of,’ see FRANZ, § 388, ¢) : Compare also, IV, x, 9, ‘ They have 
put forth the Hauen,’ where ‘forth’ is a true preposition. 


72 THE TRAGEDIE OF PACT Ay SC ave 


What Venus did with Mars. 22 
Cleo. Oh Charmion: 

Where think’{t thou he is now? Stands he, or fits he? 

Or does he walke? Or is he on his Horfe? 25 

Oh happy horfe to beare the weight of Anthony! 

Do brauely Horfe, for wot’ft thou whom thou moou’ft, 

The demy Adas of this Earth, the Arme 

And Burganet of men. Hee’s fpeaking now, 


Or murmuring, where’s my Serpent of old Nyle, 30 
( For fo he cals me:) Now I feede my felfe 
With moft delicious poyfon. Thinke on me 32 
23. Charmion.] Charmian ; BI 29. men] man Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Var. 
Charmain; F,. Charmian ! Rowe. Ran. 
24. Stands. he] Stands ¥ ,F,. 29-34. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 
28, demy Atlas] demt- Atlas Steev. et 31, 32. me.)...poyfon. Thinke| me— 
seq. .. .poison—thinks Ktly. 


29. Burganet | Burgonet Ff. 


28. the Arme] COLLIER: By ‘arm’ is probably to be understood weapon. 

29. Burganet] Murray (4. £. D.): An adaptation of Old French dbourguig- 
notte, apparently formed on Bourgogne, Burgundy. b. A helmet with a visor, so 
fitted to the gorget or neck-piece, that the head could be turned without exposing 
the neck. 

29. men] Although the reading of the First Folio should not be disturbed, the 
reading of the Folios, ‘man,’ with its all-embracing scope seems the finer; Anthony is 
the demi-Atlas of the earth, the arm and burgonet of all the inhabitants thereof—Ep. 

29. Hee’s speaking now, etc.] HAzLiTT (p. 97): Few things in Shakespear 
(and we know of nothing in any other author like them) have more of that local 
truth of imagination and character than the passage in which Cleopatra is represented 
conjecturing what were the employments of Antony in his absence. ‘ He’s speaking 
now, or murmuring— Where's my serpent of old Nile?’ Or again, when she says to 
Antony, after the defeat at Actium, and his summoning up resolution to risk another 
fight—‘ It is my birth-day ; I had thought to have held it poor; but since my lord 
is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.’ [This ‘birthday,’ Shakespeare found in 
Plutarch. ] 

31, 32. cals me:) ... Thinke] KrIGHTLEY (£ xf. 312): ‘ For so he calls me— 
Now I feed myself With most delicious poison—thinks on me,’ etc. It is thus I would 
give force to the passage. The appeal to those present is feeble. [In considering 
‘Now I feed myself With most delicious poison’ as parenthetical, Keightley is 
anticipated by Capell. What Keightley may gain in force by continuing in chinks 
the nominative of ‘calls,’ does he not lose in elegance by adopting a commercial style 
in omitting Ze ?—Ep.] 

31. Now I feede my selfe] SEwarn (Preface to Beaumont & Fletcher, p. \xvi) : 
The editions which distinguish Antony’s speech, either by Italics or commas, make 
him only say, ‘ where’s my serpent of old Nile?’ and the rest is Cleopatra’s own. 
But surely it is a strange compliment only to call her a ‘serpent of Nile.” And why 


ACT-1, SC. v.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 73 


That am with Phoebus amorous pinches blacke, 33 
And wrinkled deepe in time. Broad-fronted Ce/ar, 
When thou was’t heere aboue the ground, I was 35 


A morfell for a Monarke : and great Pompey 
Would ftand and make his eyes grow in my brow, 


There would he anchor his Afpeét, and dye 38 
34. time.] Ff, Pope,+, Wh. i. time / 36. Pompey] Pompey’s son Anon. 
Var.’73, Ktly. time ? Rowe et cet. (MS in Editor’s copy of F,). 
36. for a] of a FF ,, Rowe. 


then does she mention it as a wonder that he should say such rapturous things of her 
in her decline of life? No, Antony’s speech should be continued as the metaphor 
is: €Where’s my serpent of old Nile?—Now I feed myself With most delicious 
poison.—’ Both parts belong to him; and then she goes on, ‘ Think,’ says she, ‘ that 
he utters such raptures as these on me, tho’ now wrinkled deep in Time.’ [It is 
almost needless to remark that no one has ever adopted this arrangement.—ED. ] 

32. most delicious poyson] It is poison because the reminiscence ‘ works like 
madness in her veins.’ 

32-34. Thinke on me... wrinkled deepe in time] THEOBALD, in his first 
edition included these lines in quotation marks, for which he has nowhere, that I 
can find, offered any explanation. It is not his custom so to mark mnemonic lines ; 
only Pope and Warburton thus mark them. They were not repeated in his Second 
Ledition. 

33. with Phebus amorous pinches blacke] Haz.itt (Liizabethan Literature, 
p- 52, ed. 1869) says that this line of Cleopatra is the same as the following exclam- 
ation of Eleazer, the Moor, in Lzst’s Dominion :—‘ Now by the proud complexion 
of my cheeks, Ta’en from the kisses of the amorous sun.’—III, iv, p. 140, ed. Haz. 
Dodsley. Collier thinks that Zast’s Dominion was probably written in 1599—1600. 
There is, however, but little parallelism between the two passages. It is only by a 
flight of fancy that ‘kisses’ can turn a fair cheek black (they generally turn it red), 
but an ‘amorous pinch’ is a ‘feeling disputation’ which is sure to be followed by 
black traces. —ED. 

34. wrinkled deepe in time.] It is almost impossible to accept the interrogation 
mark which a large majority of editors have followed Rowe in placing at the end of 
this sentence. Cleopatra is wrapt out of herself by the delicious poison, and apostro- 
phises the absent Anthony, just as, in the next line, she apostrophises the dead 
Czesar.—ED. 

34. Broad-fronted Czsar] SewarD ( Preface to Beaumont & Fletcher, p. \xvi) : 
Is there the least ground from Medals, Statues, or History for this description of 
Cesar? No, but the very reverse. Look on his medals, and particularly on the fine 
bronze at Dr Mead’s, and you’ll find that he has a remarkably sharp forehead. But 
there is a peculiarity in Czesar’s forehead mentioned by all Historians, and con- 
firmed by medals and statues. He was da/d, and boasted that he would cover his 
temples with laurels instead of hair ; and, for that purpose, after he was Dictator, con- 
stantly wore his laurel-crown. I read therefore, ‘ Bad/-fronted Cesar.’ HENLEY 
sees in ‘ broad-fronted’ the very allusion to baldness which Seward denies. 

38. Aspect] For a list of other words ‘in which the accent is nearer the end than 
with us,’ see ABBOTT, § 490. 


74 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. v. 
With looking on his life. 39 


Enter Alexas from Caefar. 40 
Alex. Soueraigne of Egypt, haile. 
Cleo. Wow much vnlike art thou Marke Anthony? 
Yet comming from him, that great Med’cine hath 
With his Tinét gilded thee. 


How goes it with my braue Marke Anthonte? 45 
Alex. Laft thing he did (deere Qu ene) 

He kift the laft of many doubled kiffes 47 
40. Enter... ] Enter Alexas. Rowe, +. 46. Laft thing| The very last thing 
42. unlike art thou| art thou like that Words. 

FF. art thou unlike Rowe,+. Qu ene] F,. 

Anthony?] Ff, Rowe,+. Az- 47. kift...kiffes| kift...kiffes, Ff. ist, 
tony; Coll. Antony! Cap. et cet. ...Rtsses, Theob. 


43, 44. that great Med’cine hath With his Tinct gilded thee] There seems 
to have been, of old, some nicety observed in the spelling of Medicine. Hanmer 
here spells it ‘ Med’cin,’ and Capell, who in his text spells it, ‘ Med’ cine,’ as it is in 
the Folio, says in his Notes that it should have been spelt AZed’cin, because ‘the 
appellation is given to Antony, as being the curer of all her sorrows.’ On the other 
hand, Hanmer in A//’s Well, II, i, 74, ‘1 have seen a medicine That’s able to 
breathe life into a stone,’ spells the word in question, AZedecine, and, in a note, says 
it is ‘here put for a She-physician.’ So that according to Hanmer, we have Mea’ cin, 
masculine, Medecine, feminine. WALKER (C7it. iii, 295) also thinks that ‘ medi- 
cine’ in the present passage means physician. JOHNSON comes nearer the truth, I 
think, when he says that there is here an allusion ‘to the philosophers stone, which, 
by its touch, converts base metal into gold. The Alchemists call the matter, what- 
ever it may be, by which they perform transmutation, a medicine” The particular 
‘medicine’ Cleopatra refers to, is, I think, the e/zxir vitae, which is what Anthony 
certainly was to her, and into this elixir, gold enters as an essential ingredient, hence 
the word ‘gilded.’ There would have been no thought that Anthony was himself 
the physician, I think, had the use of zs been so common that Cleopatra could have 
said ‘that great medicine hath With z¢s tinct gilded thee.’ As to any distinction 
between Med’cin and Mea’ cine, if there be a reference to it in the V. Z. D., it has 
escaped me.—ED. 

47. doubled kisses] CAPELL (i, 30): Should a man be so hardy, as to say— 
that ‘the last of many doubl’d kisses’ is predicated of the ‘ pearl,’ might he expect 
pardon? Grammar is on his side, and the truth of construction; But where find a 
reason why a pearl should be called so? The pearl is met with in oisters that are 
found in some particular seas ; and naturalists tell us,—it is at first a small seed, that 
has a kind of growth in the shell it adheres to; which growth is effected by the 
accession of coat after coat, one enclosing other in the manner of onions: Now, is it 
too great a liberty for a poet to say of it,—that the fish it’s mother forms those coats 
by a repetition of touchings, which he calls—‘ kisses?’ if this will not be allow’d of, 
a better solution must be sought for; and no such offers itself at present. This cir- 
cumstance of the pearl is not in Plutarch: but there is mention in Pliny—of a pearl 


ACTI, sc. v.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 75 


This Orient Pearle. His {peech ftickes in my heart. 48 
Cleo. Mine eare muft plucke it thence. 
Alex. Good Friend, quoth he: 50 


Say the firme Roman to great Egypt fends 

This treafure of an Oyfter : at whofe foote 

To mend the petty prefent, I will peece 

Her opulent Throne, with Kingdomes. All the Eaft, 

(Say thou ) fhall call her Miftris. So he nodded, 55 
And foberly did mount an Arme-gaunt Steede, 


50. Friend] Friends Rowe ii, Pope. M. Mason, Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Hazlitt. 


51. firme] firm ¥F,. an arrogant Boaden, Sing. Ktly, Dtn. 
53. peece| piece FF. pace Warb. a merchant Bulloch. an ardent Kin- 
Han. space Grey. near. an arme-g’ raunt Gould. a barbéd 


56. an Arme-gaunt] Ff. an arm-girt Words. an arm-zoned Joicey (lV. & Qu. 
Han. Coll. ii, Wh. Huds. a@ termagant VII, xii, 342). 


of incredible value, belonging to Cleopatra; and this, it is probable, was Antony’s 
‘petty present.’ [Anthony showed the wild warmth of his love and longing by 
doubled and redoubled kisses. —Ep. ] 

48. Orient] STAUNTON: That is, pellucid, lustrous. [Thus, Milton: ‘ His orient 
liquor in a crystal glass.’—Comus, 65. ] 

51. the firme Roman] WALKER (C77. iii, 295) : What can ‘firm’ mean here? 
Read ‘the first Roman.’ ‘ But,’ asks Dyce (ed. ii) ‘does not “firm’’ mean con- 
stant ?? 

52. at whose foote] THEOBALD (ed. i): This has relation neither to Cleopatra, 
nor her throne; but means, that 27 segue/ of the present sent, he would second it with 
aricher. We have a similar expression in II, ii, 184, ‘ At heele of that, defie him.’ 

53. peece] WARBURTON: This expression of ‘piecing her throne’ is indeed 
tolerable ; but barely so. No bungling carpenter could have expressed his labour 
worse. I suspect that Shakespeare wrote, ‘I will pace Her opulent throne,’ z. e. I 
will erect an imperial throne for her, and every step up to it shall bea kingdom. The 
expression is noble, and the idea vastly magnificent. SEWARD (Preface, p. Ixvii) : 
To piece, to this day signifies to join two pieces together, or to fasten new parts 
to anything, as to pzece a rope, to piece a beam. Iwill join new kingdoms to her 
Dominions, and make her Queen of Asia as well as Egypt. ScHMIDT (Zex, s. v. 
Piece, vb. 3) to the same effect furnishes the following :—‘all of it with our dis- 
pleasure pieced.’—Zear, I, i, 203; ‘I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 
?em,’—Cor. II, iii, 220; and two or three other examples. 

54. opulent] DricHToN: It is perhaps doubtful whether this means ‘already 
opulent,’ or ‘ which shall thereby be made opulent.’ 

56. an Arme-gaunt Steede] WarpurToN: That is, his steed worn lean and 
thin by much service in war. So Fairfax, ‘ His s¢a//-worn steed the champion stout 
bestrode.? SEWARD (Preface, p. Ixvii): Why must Antony . . . have nothing to ride 
on but an old battered lean war-horse? ... By ‘arm’ we all understand the 
shoulder, in Latin aymus ; ‘gaunt’ is /ean or thin... . ‘Arm-gaunt’ therefore sig- 
nifies ¢hin-shouldered, which we know to be one of the principal beauties of a horse. 
Epwarbs (p. 131, where he proposes, independently, the same meaning as Seward) : 


76 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACE a, SCivz 


[56. an Arme-gaunt Steede] 
Mr Warburton here seems to have stolen Don Quixote’s Rosinante, to mount the demi- 
Atlas of his earth. . . . However, he seems to have matched him well, with one from 
Fairfax who is s¢a//-worn. . , . But Mr Warburton, who made this match, has played 
us a Yorkshire trick ; and the odds are prodigiously on old Fairfax’s side; for when 
I come to look upon him in his stable, he is really not a stad/-worn, but a stalworth 
steed; now stalworth or stalwart, signifies bold, courageous, strong. NEATH (p. 
452): ‘ Arm-gaunt’ is in my apprehension, a steed whose armour fitted him, and set 
close about him. JoHNSON: Arm is the Teutonick word for want, or poverty. 
‘Arm-gaunt’ may be therefore an old word, signifying /ean for want, ill fed. 
Edwards’s observation, that a worn-out horse is not proper for Atlas to mount in 
battle, is impertinent ; the horse here mentioned seems to be a post-horse, rather than 
a war-horse. Yet as ‘arm-gaunt’ seems not intended to imply any defect, it perhaps 
means, a horse so slender that a man might clasp him, and therefore formed for 
expedition. MALONE: On this passage, which I believe to be corrupt, I have 
nothing satisfactory to propose. It is clear that whatever epithet was used, it was 
intended as descriptive of a beautiful horse, such (we may presume) as our author 
has described in his Venus and Adonis. M. Mason: I should amend by reading: 
‘a termagant steed, That neigh’d,’ etc. Termagant means furious. So Douglas, 
in Henry IV. is called the ¢termagant Scot, an epithet that agrees well with the 
steed’s neighing so high. Besides, by saying that Antony mounted composedly a 
horse of such mettle, Alexas presents Cleopatra with a flattering image of her hero, 
which his mounting slowly a jaded post-horse, would not have done. STEEVENS: 
When I first met with Mason’s conjecture, I own I was startled at his boldness; but 
that I have since been reconciled to it, its appearance in the present text of Shak- 
speare will sufficiently prove. The sobriety displayed by Antony in mounting a steed 
of temper so opposite, reminds us of a similar contrast in Addison’s celebrated com- 
parison of the Angel: ‘ Ca/m and serene he drives the furious blast.’ BoswELL: 
May I be permitted to throw out a conjecture, as to which I myself have no great con- 
fidence. Gaunt is certainly ¢h7z ; but as it is generally used in speaking of animals 
made savage by hunger, such as a gaunt wolf, a gaunt mastiff, it is possible that it 
may derivatively have acquired the sense of fierce, and an arm-gaunt steed may 
signify a steed looking fierce in armour. NAREs (Gloss. s. v.) : It seems to me that 
Warburton though he failed in his proof, gave the interpretation best suited to the 
text, worn by military service. ‘This implies the military activity of the master; all 
the rest of the senses are reproachful, and are therefore inconsistent with the speech 
which is made to display the gallantry of a lover to his mistress. DycE (Vo/es, p. 
151) quotes Nares with approval, and adds that he has not the slightest doubt that 
Collier’s MS and Hanmer were right in their ‘arm-gz77.”, KNIGHT : ‘ Arm-gaunt’ con- 
veys the notion of a steed fierce and terrible in armour ; and the epithet therefore is not 
to be lightly replaced by any other. CoLLIER (ed. i): ‘ That is, a horse which had 
perhaps become gaunt by bearing arms, However this is doubtful.’ CoLier in his 
Second Edition adopted the change of his MS, erm-girt, ‘which accords with Han- 
mer’s suggestion : avm-girt is, of course, girded with armour.’ In his 72rd Edition, 
he discarded avm-girt and returned to ‘arm-gaunt’ which, he says, ‘is very intelli- 
gible, and not less forcible.’ W. N. L[ettsom?] (MV. & Qu. I, vii, 378, 1853) : 
This appears tome a mere misprint for vampaunt, but whether rampaunt was Shake- 
speare’s word or a transcriber’s sophistication for ramping is more than I can under- 
take to determine. ... At one period to vamp and to prance seem to have been 


ACT I, SC. v.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 77 


[56. an Arme-gaunt Steede] 
synonymous. Spenser makes the horses of night ‘fiercely ramp,’ and Surrey exhibits 
a prancing lion. R. G. WHITE (Sh.’s Scholar, 1854, p. 448) made the same emen- 
dation. PERRING (p. 436) also approves, and, on the supposition that the phrase 
originally stood on a rampaunt, furnishes an imaginary genealogy of the word as we 
now have it, thus :—arampaunt, aramgaunt, armgaunt. SINGER: The epithet, 
arrogant [adopted in Singer’s text], is the happy suggestion of Mr Boaden, and is to 
be preferred, both on account of its more striking propriety and because it admits of 
the original article, ‘an’ retaining its place before it. R.G. WHITE: Being able to 
discover no meaning in ‘ arme-gaunt,’ I hardly hesitate to substitute Hanmer’s avm- 
girt. UHALLIWELL: ‘Arm-gaunt,’ that is, a steed as thin as one’s arm, one worn 
lean and thin by excessive service in war. Chaucer has a similar compound, arm- 
greté, as large as the arm,—‘ His lange heer y-kempt byhynd his bak, As eny raven 
fether it schon for blak. A wrethe of gold arm-gret, and huge of wighte, upon his 
heed, ete.—[ The Knightes Tale, line 1285, ed. Morris.] STAUNTON: If the original 
lection be genuine, which we doubt, ‘ gaunt’ must be understood to mean fierce, eager. 
WALKER ( C7iz. ili, 297) adopts Mason’s ‘ ¢ermagant, of course,’ and adds, ‘ Zerma- 
gant may have been written ¢earmagant, as cleargie, and some other old forms, among 
the rest ¢earme.. .. But I rather think it was written carmagaunt. Uamlet of 1603, 
—“TI would have such a fellow whipt, for o’redoing tarmagant.’’... The old 
spellings, ‘‘ Arme-gaunt’’ and ¢armagaunt render the mistake easily intelligible.’ 
LeETTsoM (Walker’s editor) in a footnote to the foregoing, ‘confesses that he cannot 
agree with Walker in his approbation of Mason,’ and justly says that,‘ Zermagant in 
the sense of violent is essentially a comic word.’ Dyce rehearses various emendations, 
without expressing any opinion other than that Mason’s termagant is ‘very bad.’ 
KEIGHTLEY (Zx/. 312): The best correction seems to be that of Boaden and myself, 
arrogant ; we might also read ardent, or angry. I had, like M. Mason, conjectured 
termagant, but that term is never applied to an animal. JoHN HuNTER: We 
think ‘arm-gaunt’ refers to the angular parts of the horse’s armour, as resembling 
the projecting bones of alean or gaunt animal. ScuHMIpT (Zex.): There is in old 
English another ‘gaunt,’ the German ganz, signifying whole, healthful, lusty, and 
‘arm-gaunt’ may mean completely armed, harnessed, or rather: lusty in arms, full 
of life and spirits even under the weight of arms. R. M. Spence (M. & Qu. 1878, 
V, x, 244): Of the one adjective I make two, ‘arm’d gaunt.’ I regard it as an error 
not of sight but of hearing. Let any one pronounce the two words, and, unless his 
utterance be more than ordinarily distinct, ten to one his avm’d gaunt will reach the 
ear of his auditor as arm-gaunt. In this case the printer has only too faithfully fol- 
lowed the amanuensis. J. D. (4. & Qu. 1879, V, xii, 163) on the authority of 
The Gentleman's Dictionary, 1705, accepts arm as denoting in Shakespeare’s time, 
‘the fore-thigh, or upper part of the fore-leg of a horse. ‘“ Arm-gaunt’’ means, there- 
fore,’ he says, ‘slender in the fore-thigh, or fore-leg, and is equivalent to high-bred.’ 
B. NicHotson (4. & Qu. 1892, VIII, i, 182) suggests that gaunt might have been 
the perfect participle gaumted, where the final -ed had been absorbed in the final ¢ of 
gaunt, and inasmuch as this, ‘as shown by gaundlet, is derived from the French ganz, 
‘‘arm-gaunt’’ is armour-gloved. A poetic metaphor, and one which beautifully 
expresses how the armourer so metal-gloved his steed as not to impede any of his 
natural actions.’ ROLFE: I have no doubt that it is a misprint. The poet’s word 
was not improbably vampaunt, though the article ‘an’ favours arrogant. MURRAY 
(WV. £. D. s.v. Arm. sb}, IIT) : Meaning not certainly known. ? with gaunt limbs. 


78 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act't, SCivv. 


Who neigh’d fo hye, that what I would haue fpoke, 57 
Was beaftly dumbe by him. 
Gleo. What was he fad, or merry ? 


Alex. Like to the time o’th’yeare, between y extremes 60 
57. Aye] high FF. sad ... between... sad...disposition ... note 
58. bea/tly] beastlike Han. Om. Words. him. Han. . 

dumbe| F,. dumb 12 yp Rowe, 59. What] Ff. What! Coll. Wh. 
Pope, Johns. Var.’73, Sing. drown’d What, Rowe et cet. 
Bailey. dumb'd Theob. et cet. JSad,\ F, fad ¥¥,. 
59-62. What...note him.| Lines end, 60. oth’ oth’ Ff. 


[If « Arme-gaunt’ be not a misprint, it is so near it that it might as well be one out- 
right, and live up to its character. Some of the best editors and critics have so 
deemed it. In view of the formidable, not to say appalling combination of equine 
qualities and armourer’s art which has been detected in this adjective, Anthony would 
have been more than mortal had he not approached his steed with extreme caution, 
and mounted it ‘soberly.’—Ep. ] 

58. Was beastly dumbe by him] THEOBALD: Alexas means, the horse made 
such a neighing, that if he had spoke he could not have been heard. I suspect the 
poet wrote, ‘ Was beastly dumd’d by him,’ 2. e. put to silence. Thus in Pericles, V, 
Prologue 5, ‘Deep clerks she dumbs.? WARBURTON: Shakespeare wrote: ‘Who 
neigh’d so /oud, that what I would have spoke Was beastly done by him,’ 7. e. the 
sense of what I would have spoke the horse declared, tho’ in inarticulate sounds. 
[No space on any page can be so precious that room should not be found on it for 
this Warburtonian gem.] COLLIER (Zmend. p. 488): The MS gives, ‘ Was doast- 
fully dumb’ d by him.’ One slight objection to this change is that doas¢fu/ly must be 
read as a disyllable, and such is the case with various words. ... Boastfully might 
be, and probably was, misprinted ‘beastly.’ Dyce (/Voes, p. 152): But why did 
the MS alter ‘beastly’ to doastfully (which I should have thought nobody could 
‘read as a disyllable,’ had not Mr Collier declared that it ‘ #zs¢ be read as such’) ? 
Merely because he happened not to perceive the meaning which Shakespeare evidently 
intended ‘beastly’ to convey, viz. 7 the manner of a beast,—i.e. by inarticulate 
sounds which rendered vain all attempts at speaking on the part of Alexas. SINGER: 
“Dumbe’ was altered by Theobald without necessity. The arrogant steed, says 
Alexas, would let no sound be heard but his own, he neighed so loud that what I 
would have spoke was made unintelligible, no better than the sound of a dumb 
animal. WALKER (C7vit. ii, 61) gives the present ‘dumbe’ as the first example 
under his ‘ Article, lxii,’ which treats of ‘ final d and final e confounded.’ He con- 
cludes, of course, that the true word is dumé’d. This confusion he attributes mainly 
(and his editor, Lettsom, agrees with him) to some peculiarity in the old method of 
writing the final ¢ or d. This may be so, but in a number of cases, this confusion is 
due, I think, either to the imperfect pronunciation of the reader who read aloud the 
copy to the compositor, or else to the failure of the compositor to catch the reader’s 
full pronunciation. See ‘ vouchsafe,’ I, iv, 10; ‘Tawny fine,’ II, v, 16, and ‘Or 
looke on thine,’ V, i, 49.—Ep. 

59. What was he sad, or merry ?] Neither the punctuation of the Folio nor 
that of Rowe, which has been almost uniformly followed, seems to me quite correct. 
I should prefer, as more natural, ‘ What was he, sad or merry ?’—Eb. 


ACFT, SC. v.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 79 


Of hot and cold, he was nor fad nor merrie. 61 
Cleo. Oh well diuided difpofition: Note him, 
Note him good Charmian,’tis the man ; but note him. 
He was not fad, for he would fhine on thofe 
That make their lookes by his. He was not merrie, 65 
Which feem’d to tell them, his remembrance lay 
In Egypt with his ioy, but betweene both. 
Oh heauenly mingle ! Bee’ft thou fad, or merrie, 
The violence of either thee becomes, 
So do’s it no mans elfe. Met’ft thou my Pofts? 70 
Alex, I Madam, twenty feuerall Meffengers. 
Why do you fend fo thicke? 
Cleo. Who’s borne that day, when I forget to fend 
to Anthonie, fhall dye a Begger. Inke and paper Char- 
mian. Welcome my good Alexas. Did 1 Charmian, e- 75 
uer loue C@/ar fo? 
Char. Oh that braue Ce/ar! 
Cleo. Be choak’d with fuch another Emphafis, 
Say the braue Axthony. 


Char. The valiant Ce/ar. 80 
Cleo. By Ifs, I will giue thee bloody teeth, 
If thou with C@/ar Parago nagaine : 82 
61. nor fad] not fad F,F,, Rowe, 72-76. Why...fo?| Ff. Lines end, 
Pope, Han. day, ... Anthonie, ... Charmian. ... Char- 
62. Note him,] Om. Pope, +. mian, .../o ? Rowe et seq. 
63. Charmian] Charmain F,. 82. Parago nagaine] F.. 


70. mans| man Ff et seq. 


68. mingle] For many other words similarly used as nouns, see ABBOTT, § 451. 

68. Bee’st thou] ABsorr (§ 298): Be, Beest, etc. were used in Anglo-Saxon 
generally in a future sense. Hence, since the future and subjunctive are closely 
connected in meaning, de assumed an exclusively subjunctive use ; and this was so 
common, that we not only find ‘if it de’ (which might represent the proper inflected 
subjunctive of dz), but also ‘if thou dest,’ where the indicative is used subjunctively. 

70. So do’s it no mans else] That is, ‘So does it as no man else.’ For other 
examples of the omission of as, see ABBOTT, § 281. ‘ Mans’ is here one of the very 
many instances gathered by WALKER (C7. i, 240) of ‘the final s interpolated and 
omitted in the First Folio,’ see I, iv, 11. 

73, 74. Who’s borne that day, ... shall dye a Begger] There is no hidden 
meaning here, I think ; it is simply that the day shall be ill-omened, or as Constance 
says in King John, ‘This day all things begun, come to ill end.’Ep. 

82. Parago nagaine:] THISELTON (p. 10): The colon after ‘againe’ was prob- 
ably deliberately placed there to indicate by a pause a special emphasis on the suc- 
ceeding ‘My man of men.’ 


80 THE ‘TRAGEDIE. OF 


My man of men. 
Char. 
I fing but after you. 
Cleo. My Sallad dayes, 


[ACTaeSehay. 


By your moft gracious pardon, 


85 


When I was greene in iudgement, cold in blood, 


To fay, as I faide then. 
Get me Inke and Paper, 


But come, away, 


he fhall haue euery day a feuerall greeting, or Ile vnpeo- go 


ple Egypt. 


87-88. zudgement,...blood,...then. | Ff, 
Rowe. judgement,...blood !...then. Pope. 
judgement, ... blood! ...then,— Theob. 
judgement. ... blood! ... then,— arb. 


Exeunt 


89-91. Get...Egypt | Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Lines end, paper ;...greet- 
ing...Ligypt Johns. Var. ’21, Coll. Sing. 
Dyce, Wh. Glo. Cam. Hal. day... Zgypt 


Han. et cet. 

90. a feuerall greeting | feverall greet- 
ing FF ,. several greetings F,, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Warb. 


Johns. Var. ’73. judgement, ...blood;... 
then ! Cap. Hunter, Sta. judgement,— 
..-blood, ...then! Wh.i. judgement !... 
blood, ...then ! Ktly. judgement ;...blood, 
...chen ! Var. ’78 et cet. 


86-88. My Sallad dayes, When I was greene in iudgement, cold in blood, 
To say, as I saide then.] THEOBALD questions the propriety of ‘ sallad,’ and calcu- 
lates the age of Cleopatra, when’ she was in love with Czar, to be twenty years. 
He then goes on to say that, ‘If an A‘gyptian could at those years have reason to 
complain of coldness of blood, she must have a very particular constitution.’ But he 
concludes by upholding Shakespeare, who found his authority in Plutarch’s report that 
Cleopatra was ‘but a young thing’ when she knew Cesar and Pompey, and that she 
fell in love with Anthony in the prime of her beauty. (See Appendix, Plutarch.) WaAR- 
BURTON inflicts what it is difficult to regard as other than an injury to the text, by giving 
what he calls, ‘Shakespear’s best justification’ in ‘restoring his own sense, which is 
done merely by a different pointing :—‘‘ My sallad days: When I was green in 
judgment. Cold in blood! To say asI said then.’’ Cold ix blood, is an upbraid- 
ing expostulation to her maid. Zzose, says she, were my sallad days, when I was 
green in judgment; but your blood ts as cold as my judgment, if you have the same 
opinion of things now as Thad then. This punctuation, and interpretation have been 
substantially followed down to this very hour. BOSWELL remarks that ‘co/d and 
green seem to be suggested by the metaphor sad/ad days.’ Wherein he is right ; what 
he should have added is that both apply, not to Charmian, but to Cleopatra. What to 
her was the temperature of Charmian’s blood? The coldness had been her own, and 
she was finding excuses for having ‘ever loved Czesar so.’ If those were her sallad 
days they were as inevitably both green and cold. The abruptness of the phrase, ‘ To 
say, as I said then!’ intensifies its scorn. It is parallel to her reply in a previous 
scene, ‘Thou teachest like a fool! The way to lose him!’ and in a succeeding 
scene, ‘so tart a favour To trumpet such good tidings.’ —II, v, 48; and in Enobar- 
bus’s speech, ‘ That he should dreame . . . the full Cesar will answer his emptinesse.’ 
—III, xiii, 39. Hanmer’s punctuation seems to me exactly right: ‘ My sallad days! 
When I was green in judgment, cold in blood! To say, as I said then !’—Ep. 

90, 91. Ile vnpeople Egypt] JOHNSON: By sending out messengers. 


ACT IT, SC: i.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 81 


[4étus Secunda. Scene I. 


Enter Pompey, Menecrates, and Menas, in 
warlike manner. 


Pom. Wf the great Gods be iuft, they fhall affift 3 
Act II. Scene i. Rowe. The scene In Sicily. Rowe. Messina. A Room 
omitted, Gar. Kemble. in Pompey’s House. Cap. 


I, 2. in warlike manner. ] Om. Rowe. 


1. Menecrates, and Menas] JoHNnson: The persons are so named in the first 
edition. I know not why Menecrates appears ; Menas can do all without him. [In 
the following note, Capell endeavours to prove that a judicious discrimination will 
distinguish Menas from Menecrates; that ‘ Mene,’ in line 5, should be Afenas; and 
that, furthermore, Warburton’s emendation, de/ay’s for ‘decayes’ is just.] CAPELL 
(i, 31): All the speeches in this scene, except one by Varrius, are given by the Folios 
to Pompey and Menecrates only ; this was such a palpable error with respect to one 
of them [line 49] that it stands corrected in all the moderns, and of that speech 
Menas is made the speaker, and so he should be of [that in line 5]. A little reflec- 
tion upon the characters of the parties in question, will set the whole of this scene 
in the clearest light; and shew, withal, the propriety of both these corrections 
[mamely, Menas for Mene. in line 5, and Warburton’s de/ay’s]: The character of 
Pompey is mark’d by—a high sense of honour; and by a natural honesty, join’d 
with irresolution and a backwardness to engage in great actions: that of Menas has 
nothing particular, but that he is Pompey’s fast friend : Menecrates is also his friend ; 
but not in favour, like Menas, from being discontented, and disapproving his patron’s 
conduct: Thus stated, the characters themselves will point out who the speeches 
belong to: he who speaks in the second agrees with Pompey, in thinking—that the 
gods would befriend them at last ; but, delivering his opinion in the form of a maxim, 
‘what they do delay, they not deny,’ the other takes occasion from one of those 
words to tell him—that there was a delay which he should make his chief petition 
to heaven, meaning—a delay of the preparations against him: this is taken up by 
Menecrates, whose dissent is worded also in maxims, a respectful way of expressing 
dissent ; intimating by them,—that his opinion was rather, that Pompey himself 
should prepare, and attack the triumvirs before their whole strength was gather’d 
together: and this speech of Menecrates is a most unanswerable argument in favour 
of the latter amendment [de/ay’s], and no small one in that of the first [J/enas for 
Mene.]; for, unless de/ay’s be admitted, no reason can be assign’d for making the 
reflections contain’d in it; and, if he be the maker of them, he could not be so of 
that in the other speech, their tendencies being so contrary. MALONE: I have given 
the first two speeches to Menecrates, and the rest to Menas. It is a matter of little 
consequence. [For Johnson’s suggestion that this Scene might be included in the 
First Act, see the beginning of the next Scene. ] 

3. they shall assist] Staunton: The precision now observable in the employ- 
ment of sha// and w7// in the best writers was not regarded in Shakespeare’s day. 
He commonly follows the old custom of using the former for the latter to denote futur- 


6 


82 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Il; SC.i- 


The deeds of iufteft men. 

Mene. Know worthy Pompey, that what they do de- 5 
lay, they not deny. 

Pom. Whiles we are futors to their Throne, decayes 
the thing we fue for. 

Mene. We ignorant of our felues, 


Begge often our owne harmes, which the wife Powres 10 
Deny vs for our good : fo finde we profit 
By loofing of our Prayers. 12 
5. Mene. ] Menas. Cap. conj. 7, 8. decayes...for| One line, Rowe. 
5, 6. that...deny] One line, Rowe et 7. decayes| delays Warb. Cap. 
seq. 8. the] The Pope et seq. 
5. what] which Ff, Rowe. 9. We] We, Rowe. 
7. Whiles| While FF ,, Rowe,+. 12. loofing | lofing ¥¥,. 


ity, whether in the second and third persons or in the first. [There is more than sim- 
ple futurity in the present ‘ shall ;’ there isa futurity so inevitable that it is equivalent 
to must. ABBOTT (§ 315) has gathered several similar uses of sia//.—ED. ] 

7. decayes] WARBURTON: This nonsense should read thus: de/ay’s. Menecrates 
had said, ‘The Gods do not deny that which they delay.’ The other turns his words 
to a different meaning, and replies, ‘ Delay is the very thing we beg of them,’ z. e. the 
delay of our enemies in making preparations against us; which he explains after- 
wards, by saying Mark Antony was tied up by lust in Egypt; Czesar by avarice 
at Rome; and Lepidus employed in keeping well with both. [This emendation of 
Warburton would have been relegated to the Zext. JVotes, had it not beguiled as 
sensible an editor as Capell.] HEATH: (p. 453): This emendation of Mr War- 
burton’s is certainly nonsense, whatever becomes of the common text which he is 
pleased to call so. Who ever prayed for success in any enterprize, and at the same 
time prayed that that success might be delayed as long as he should pray for it? 
Besides the reply of Menecrates plainly implies that delay was not the thing sued 
for; but something else which was for the present denied; which could not be 
delay, since Pompey was already in possession of that, but must be the attainment 
of the empire. The ancient reading is undoubtedly the true one. The sense is, 
While we are wearying the Gods with prayers, the very thing we are praying for, 
that is the empire, is falling into decay and ruin by the ill conduct of my competitors, 
by the luxurious indolence of Antony, the avaricious extortions of Czesar, and by the 
insincerity and private views of all the three triumvirs. JOHNSON: The meaning is, 
‘While we are praying, the thing for which we pray is Jostng tts value.’ 

g-12. We ignorant of our selues, ... By loosing of our Prayers] THEOBALD 
refers to the parallelism between these lines and the following from Juvenal’s Tenth 
Satire. ‘ Quid enim ratione timemus, Aut cupimus? quid tam dextro pede concipis, 
ut te Conatfis non pceniteat, votique peracti? Evertére domos totas, optantibus ipsis, 
Di faciles. [lines 4-8]... . Si consilium vis, Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid 
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris. Nam, pro jucundis, aptissima queeque 
dabunt Di. Carior est illis homo, quam sibi.’ [Lines 346-350.] WALKER ( C7iz. i, 
153) also calls attention to these lines of Juvenal; and J. CHuRTON COLLINS (Studies, 


ACT I; Sc. i.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA ° 83 


Pom. I fhall do well: 13 
The people loue me, and the Sea is mine; . 
My powers are Creffent, and my Auguring hope 15 


Sayes it will come to’th’full. Marke Anthony 
In Egypt fits at dinner, and will make 
No warres without doores. Ce/ar gets money where 
He loofes hearts : Lepidus flatters both, 
Of both is flatter’d : but he neither loues, 20 
Nor either cares for him. 
Mene. Cafar and Lepidus are in the field, 
A mighty ftrength they carry. 
Pom. Where haue you this? ’Tis falfe. 
Mene. From Szlucus, Sir. 25 
Pom.He dreames : I know they are in Rome together 


15. powers are| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Coll. 22, 23. are...carry| Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Dyce, Wh. Glo. Cam. Sta. Ktly. pow’r’s Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. Mal. Sta. 
@ Theob. et cet. Separate line, Han. et cet. 

Creffent | Crefcent FF. 25. Siluius] Silvia F,. 

16, 7/] they Gould. 26, 27. He... Looking | Separate line, 

to'th’| to th’ FF. to the Coll. Han. 

19. loofes] lofes F ,. 26. [know] Om. Han. 


etc., p. 29) says that we cannot ‘attribute to mere coincidence the terse translation’ 
given of the foregoing lines in the present passage. ‘Again’ observes Collins, p. 28, 
‘ Juvenal was not translated into English until after Shakespeare’s death, but that 
he had read him seems certain.’ 

12. By loosing of our Prayers] See ABBOTT (§ 178) for other examples of the 
use of of after verbal nouns, and especially where there is a preposition before the 
verbal noun rendering the substantive use of the latter evident. 

15, 16. My powers are Cressent, and my Auguring hope Sayes it will 
come to’th’full] THEOBALD: What does the relative ‘it’ refer to? It cannot in 
sense relate to ‘hope’, nor in concord to ‘ powers.’ It is evident beyond a doubt, that 
the poet’s allusion is to the moon; and that Pompey would say, He is yet but a half- 
moon, or crescent ; but his hopes tell him, that crescent will come to a fu// orb. DYCE: 
Theobald’s change though adopted by all his successors, except Mr Collier, appears 
to me a very hasty alteration :—our old writers frequently make ‘it’ refer to a pre- 
ceding plural substantive. [It is to be regretted that Dyce did not give some of 
these instances. It is probable that in all of them there would have been found 
some noun, in the singular, interposed between the plural antecedent and its singular 
relative, whereby the relative becomes singular by attraction. In the present case, 
‘it’ refers to ‘ powers,’ but ‘crescent,’ although an adjective, is, in the imagination 
of the speaker, a singular and, consequently, by its proximity, throws the relative ‘ itz 
into the singular also.—ED. ] 

20. he neither loues] That is, neither Czesar nor Anthony. 


84 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 17, 'SC.& 


Looking for Axthony : but all the charmes of Loue, 27 
Salt Cleopatra {often thy wand lip, 


27. the] Om. Steev. Varr. Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. wanton Ktly. wand 
28. Cleopatra] Cleopatra, Rowe. Steev. et cet. 
wand | Ff, Rowe, Coll.i. wan 28. “i~,| Ff, Rowe, Pope. “4p; Coll. 
Pope, +, Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. waned lip ! Theob. et cet. 


28. Salt] That is, most wanton. 

28. soften thy wand lip] THEOBALD (Nichols, ii, 501) ‘suspects’ that ‘ wand,’ 
or as he has it in his text, after Pope, wax, should be warm, but as he made no 
later allusion to this conjecture, it is to be inferred that he withdrew it. JOHNSON 
makes the same conjecture, as well as ‘perhaps, fond.’ STEEVENS: ‘ Wand,’ if it 
stand, is either a corruption of wam, the adjective, or a contraction of wanned, or 
made wan, a participle. So, in Hamlet: ‘That, from her working, all his visage 
wand. Again, in Beau. and Fl. Queen of Corinth: ‘Now you look wan and 
pale; Zs’ ghosts you are.’ [IV, i.] Or perhaps waned lip, 7. e. decreased, like the 
moon, in its beauty. Yet this expression of Pompey’s, perhaps, after all, implies a 
wish only, that every charm of love may confer additional softness on the lips 
of Cleopatra: z. ¢. that her beauty may improve to the ruin of her lover; or, as 
Ritson expresses the same idea, that ‘her Zp, which was become fade and dry with 
age, may recover the colour and softness of her salad days.’ The epithet wan might 
indeed have been added, only to show the speaker’s private contempt of it. PERCY: 
Shakspeare’s orthography often adds ad at the end of a word. Thus, ‘vile’ is (in 
the old editions) everywhere spelt vz/¢d. ‘Laund’ is given instead of /ewx~: why not 
therefore wand for wan here? If this however should not be accepted, suppose we 
read with the addition only of an apostrophe, wan’d , z.e. waned, declined, gone off 
from its perfection ; comparing Cleopatra’s beauty to the moon past the full. COLLIER 
(ed. i): It may be doubted whether ‘ wand’ and ‘lip’ ought not to be united by a 
hyphen; ‘ wand’ probably has reference to Cleopatra’s power of enchantment,—that 
her lip is as potent as a magician’s wand ; and this construction seems warranted by 
what immediately follows: ‘Let wztchcraft join with beauty.’ ‘Wand’ is the 
‘witchcraft’ and ‘lip’ the ‘beauty.’ Dyce (Remarks, p. 245): What Mr Collier 
says here about Cleopatra’s ‘ wand-lip,’ z. e. lip as potent as a magician’s wand, 
cannot be allowed the merit of originality ; at least, it had been previously said in that 
mass of folly, ignorance, and conceit, Jackson’s Shakespeare's Genius Justified ; and 
one can hardly suppose that such a wild fancy would spring up spontaneously in the 
brains of two commentators. Not even in Lycophron, the most enigmatical of poets, 
is there any expression half so far-fetched or so strangely compounded as wand-lip / 
Whether the word be written wand or wan’d, it is evidently the past participle of the 
verb wane ; Cleopatra herself has previously touched on the decrease of her beauty: 
‘with Phoebus’ amorous pinches black And wrinkled deep in time.’ COLLIER, in his 
Second Edition makes no allusion to his extravagant suggestion of a wizard’s wand, 
—it cannot be enlivening to be coupled with Zachary Jackson,—but restricts himself 
to recording that his MS has warm, and the safe remark that ‘ ‘¢ wan’d”’ ought prob- 
ably to be taken as waned, 7. e. a lip that is on the wane.’ KEIGHTLEY’S text reads 
wanton ‘in the sense of soft, yielding, like “the wanton rushes,”’—z Hen. JV III, i,’ 
and he ‘strongly suspects [ £xf. p. 313] that the poet’s word may have been /ann’d, 
spelt of course amd. She is more than once called gypsy; she has “a tawny front.”’’ 


. 


ACTH, SC. 1.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 85 


Let Witchcraft ioyne with Beauty, Luft with both, 
Tye vp the Libertine in a field of Featts, 30 


29. Witchcraft | withcraft ¥ ,. 29. both,| Ff, Rowe, Pope. oth. 
Beauty,| Beauty: FF y Rowe,+. Johns. doth: Coll. doth ! Theob. et cet. 


[Keightley’s ¢ann’d can be upheld only at the expense of physiology ; there are, I 
believe, no pigmentary cells in the lips which can be affected by the sun’s rays. I 
cannot accept Dyce’s assertion that ‘wand’ is ‘ evidently the past participle of the 
verb wane.’ I see no reason why it should not be the same ‘wand’ which the 
Quartos give us in Hamlet, ‘all his visage wand’ (II, ii, 527) where almost every 
modern editor to the complete satisfaction of himself and of his readers prints wann’d 
that is, made wan. And, moreover, this interpretation is not lacking in fitness. 
Cleopatra’s lips, at the age of thirty-eight, as has been suggested, could hardly be as 
‘ripe in show’ as the lips of Helena, ‘those kissing cherries’ as Demetrius calls 
them; and it is to be remembered that it is not an admirer of Cleopatra that terms 
her lips wan. To Anthony, one kiss from them, wan’d or not, ‘repaid all that he 
had lost.’—ED. ] 

30. Tye vp the Libertine in a field of Feasts] Co1iier (ed. ii): The MS 
thus alters this line :—‘ Zay up the libertine in a flood of feasts ;’ but we do not feel 
warranted in deserting the old editions, although it is true that in O¢hel/o, 1,1, we have 
seen ‘ Laying’ misprinted Zyzzg, as here Lay may have been misprinted ‘Tie.’ As 
to ‘field of feasts’ we hardly know what is to be understood by the expression, but 
‘flood of feasts’ seems almost equally objectionable, though intelligible ; however, 
if any part of this play, as published, were derived from shorthand notes, ‘field’ and 
food would be spelt with the same letters, and hence possibly the confusion. 
W. W[ILLIAMS] (Parthenon, 17 May, 1862): Assuredly, Shakespeare has no meta- 
phor similar [to ‘ field of feasts’ ] throughout his works. ‘ Field’ is defined by John- 
son as being strictly ‘ground not inclosed, the open country ;’ and to ‘tie,’ he tells 
us, is ‘to constrain or confine, zf being little more than an emphatical addition.’ 
Pompey, wishing to fasten Antony to a particular spot, would scarcely desire the 
security of an ofew space. But there is a word, for which, by a very probable mis- 
reading, ‘field’ may have been substituted. /o/d, says Johnson, is an ‘enclosure of 
any kind,’ and a fold would therefore exactly suit Pompey’s purpose. The most 
rigid foliantist cannot object to weigh for a moment whether the true meaning may 
not be,—‘ Tie up the libertine in a fo/d of feasts.’ We have then @ figure of which 
Shakespeare is particularly fond... . A reference to a Concordance will save me any 
parade of confirmatory passages. [The phrase is certainly obscure, and yet I venture 
to think that the Folio needs no alteration. Pompey’s train of thought is, let me 
imagine, somewhat as follows: At all hazards, Anthony must be kept in Egypt, a 
prisoner to his passions ; within this boundary the libertine must be tied up. But 
the very idea of a libertine involves a certain freedom of motion ; a libertine cannot 
be tied up to a single feast, else he would cease to be a libertine in feasts ; there must 
be many feasts ; in using the word ‘libertine’ there may have then crept into Shake- 
speare’s mind that charming simile which elsewhere he twice uses, whereby the air 
becomes a ‘ chartered libertine,’ blowing wheresoever it pleases, over hill and dale,. 
and a single feast hereby expands, in imagination, into a whole field of feasts. 
Some limitations there must be; what better than a field of vague extent, wherein 
a libertine could be confined and indulge in endless feasting, day and night. 


86 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT 11, SC. i 


Keepe his Braine fuming. Epicurean Cookes, 31 
Sharpen with cloyleffe fawce his Appetite, 
That fleepe and feeding may prorogue his Honour, 
Euen till a Lethied dulneffe——— 
Enter Varrius. 35 

How now Varrius? 

Var. This is moft certaine, that I fhall deliuer : 
Marke Anthony is euery houre in Rome 


Expected. Since he went from Egypt, ’tis 39 
33. Honour] hour Mal. conj. Varr. Knt, Coll. Sing. Wh. dudne/s— 
34. tll] tell Rowe,+. to Han. FF, Rowe et cet. 

Lethied | Lethe’d Pope et seq. 35. Enter...] After line 33, Cap. After 
dulneffe | F,. dulness / Han. line 36, Var. ’78. 


Dyce, Glo. Cam. dulness. Mal. Steev. 


Thus, for the preservation of the text of the Folio, fect guod potui, factant meliora 
potentes.—ED. ] ’ 

30. Libertine] There is one Article in Walker's Versification (XL, p. 201) which, 
for the sake of that fine scholar’s reputation, even his admirers would, I think, like to 
see expunged. Itstitle is: ‘ The z in -z¢y is almost uniformly dropt in pronunciation,’ 
and, in proof, he quotes upwards of twenty instances where he assumes that this 
barbarous pronunciation must be adopted. Apparently, warming with his subject, he 
goes from bad to worse until, toward the close, he recommends such words as hostz?ty, 
virgin’ ty, purty and ‘suspects that the Elizabethan poets extended this rule to all 
substantives ending in -ty, as honesty, liberty, poverty, etc. Hence it is that majesty 
is almost uniformly a disyllable in Shakespeare.’ His last quotation is this present 
line, wherein he asserts that ‘libertine’ is ‘used in the same way,’ and, therefore, 
to be pronounced 7/73’ tine. —ED. 

31. Epicurean] In Greek names, Shakespeare usually followed, not the Latin, but 
the Greek accent, which was the method of Reuchlin, the accepted authority of his 
day; thus, ’Ezcxofpetoc. Thus, too, BapaBBac in The Mer. of Ven. Walker overlooked 
this fact, which would have spared him trouble in compiling his Article XLII, Vers. 
p- 211. ‘Euphrates’ in I, ii, 113, is an exception.—ED. 

33. feeding may prorogue his Honour] STEEVENS: This undoubtedly means 
‘to delay his sense of honour from exerting itself till he become habitually sluggish.’ 
DEIGHTON: To ‘prorogue,’ from Lat. £70, publicly, and rogare, to ask (the tech- 
nical term for proposing a measure to a legislative body), properly means to propose 
a further extension of office, thence to carry forward from one meeting to another, and 
so to defer. STAUNTON : Shakespeare certainly uses ‘ prorogue’ here, as he employs 
it in Pericles, V,i, 24, ‘nor taken sustenance But to prorogue his grief,’—in the sense 
of deaden or benumb. 

34. Lethied dulnesse] The Cam. Epp. record an Anonymous conjecture of 
‘ Lethe dulness,’ which seems probable. It must have been difficult for the ear of 
the compositor to escape from hearing the d@ of ‘dulness’ transferred to Lethe. 
—ED. 

35- Varrius] See Dram. Pers. 


ACEAI, SC. i.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 87 


A fpace for farther Trauaile. 40 
Pom. I could haue giuen leffe matter 

A better eare. Menas, I did not thinke 

This amorous Surfetter would haue donn’d his Helme 

For fuch a petty Warre : His Souldierfhip 

Is twice the other twaine : But let vs reare 45 

The higher our Opinion, that our ftirring 

Can from the lap of Egypts Widdow, plucke 

The neere Luft-wearied Anthony. 


Mene. I cannot hope, 49 
40. /pace| race Gould. 45. twatne| twatin’s Words. 
Jfarther| further Steev. Varr. 47. Widdow,| Widdow FF. 
Sarthest Gould. 48. neere Luft-wearied| F,. near 
Trauaile| travel FF, et seq. Lufi-wearted ¥¥, Rowe, Popei. me’er 
41. leffe] less weighty Gould. lust-wearied Pope ii, Cap. Var. ’78, 85, 
42. eare] car ¥,?. Mal. Coll. Wh. xe’ er-lust-wearied 
43. amorous| am’ rous Pope,+. Theob. et cet. 


Surfetter] Surfeiter F ,. 


39, 40. ’tis A space for farther Trauaile] STEEVENS: That is, since he quitted 
Egypt, a space of time has elapsed in which a longer journey might have been per- 
formed than from Egypt to Rome. AsBBoTT (§ 405) suggests that there is merely a 
not unusual ellipsis after ‘is;’ in the present case szffictent is probably to be supplied 
after ‘ space.’ 

42. Menas] STEEVENS: I cannot help supposing, on account of the present 
irregularity of metre, that the name ‘ Menas’ is an interpolation, and that the passage 
originally stood :—‘I could have given Less matter better ear.—I did not think—.’ 

47. Egypts Widdow] STEEvENS: Julius Caesar had married her to young 
Ptolemy, who was afterwards drowned. 

48. The neere Lust-wearied Anthony] Rowe and Pope having followed the 
Third and Fourth Folios, THEOBALD (Sh. Restored, p. 184) proved that the /irst 
Folio is right by printing ‘e’er lust-wearied,’ and restored sense to the passage, 
which means, he says, ‘if Antony, though never tired of luxury, yet moved from 
that charm upon Pompey’s stirring, it was reason for Pompey to pride himself upon 
being of such consequence.’ 

49. I cannot hope, etc.] STEEVENS: Mr Tyrwhitt observes, that to ‘hope,’ on 
this occasion, means to expect. So, in The Reve’s Tale, v. 4027 : ‘Our mancyple, as 
I hope, he wil be deed.’—BosweEL.: Yet from the following passage in Puttenham, it 
would seem to have been considered as a blundering expression in the days of Queen 
Elizabeth: ‘Such manner of yncouth speech did the Tanner of Tamworth vse to 
king Zdward the fourth, which Tanner hauing a great while mistaken him, and vsed 
very broad talke with him, at length perceiuing by his traine that it was the king, 
was afraide he should be punished for it, said thus with a certaine rude repentance : 
‘I hope I shall be hanged to-morrow!” For [I feare me] I shall be hanged, 
whereat the king laughed a good, not only to see the Tanners vaine feare, but also to 
heare his ill shapen terme.’ [—Arber’s Reprint, p. 263.]—DANIEL (p. 80): It was not 


88 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT U1, Sc. i. 


Cefar and Anthony fhall well greet to gether ; 50 
His Wife that’s dead, did trefpaffes to Ce/ar, 
His Brother wan’d vpon him, although I thinke 
Not mou’d by Anthony. 
Pom. I know not Menas, 
How leffer Enmities may giue way to greater, 55 
Were’t not that we ftand vp againft them all: 
’Twer pregnant they fhould fquare between themfelues, 57 


51. that’s] who's Pope,+, Var. 73. F\. greater. ...all, Rowe et seq. 
52. wan’d | warrd Ff et seq. 57. ’ Twer] F,. 
55, 50. greater, ...all:| greater. ...all: them/elues,| themselves ; Rowe. 


Menas’ cue to ope that they would ; his hope, if he was true to Pompey, must have 
been the other way; read, therefore,—I cannot hold. 

50. Czsar and Anthony shall well greet together] If we accept ‘ greet’ in its 
prominent sense of to sa/zte, it becomes difficult to comprehend how two men can 
‘greet together.’ It would be still more difficult, I think, to find, throughout English 
literature, a second example of the phrase. The /V. #, D. knows none such,—as far 
as I can discover. May it not be, however, that ‘greet’ is an error of the compositor, 
who, deceived either by his mental ear or the voice of his reader, has added to the 
verb gree the ¢ of the next word, ‘ together’ ? and that the true reading is ‘ Caesar and 
Anthony shall well gree together’ ?—ScHMIDT (Zex.) gives many instances, and the 
NV. £. D. still more, of the use of gree in the sense of Zo agree, to be in accord, etc. 
The past participle, ‘greed’ occurs in II, vi, 47, ‘this greed vpon, To part with 
vnhackt edges,’ etc.—ED. 

52. wan’d vpon him] See ‘ He stayes vpon your will,’ I, ii, 131. 

54. I know not Menas, etc.] THISELTON (p. 11): Modern editors have taken 
great liberties with the Folio punctuation of this speech, in total disregard of the 
point on which Pompey is enlarging, viz., that Anthony’s accession to the side of 
Cesar and Lepidus will, if it prove to be a fact, indicate the strength of Pompey’s 
menace. As usually punctuated the speech is self-contradictory, for Pompey is thereby 
made to say first that he knows not how it is, then to explain how it is, and finally to 
reassert that he knows not how itis. On the other hand, according to the Folio 
punctuation, Pompey states the only possible ground that occurs to him for Anthony’s 
reported movements; he would rather expect Anthony to remain on quarrelsome 
terms with his colleagues of the Triumvirate ; he therefore awaits confirmation of the 
report, holding it, if true, as a proof of his power and, at the same time, of the 
necessity of using that power to the uttermost against such a combination. 

57. pregnant] Narers (G/oss. s. v.) discusses the various meanings of this word, 
and, under the fourth head, says that it signifies ‘full of force or conviction, or full 
of proof in itself’ This definition, Dycr (G/oss.) quotes as the interpretation of the 
word in the present passage. Nares, in conclusion, says that ‘this word was used 
with great laxity, and sometimes abused, as fashionable terms are ; but may be gener- 
ally referred to the ruling sense of being full, or productive of something.’ 

57. they should square] That is, quarrel. Cotgrave has: ‘Se guarrer. To 
strout, or square it, looke big on’t, carrie his armes a kemboll braggadochio-like.’ 


ACT II, SC, ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPA TRA 89 


For they haue entertained caufe enough 58 
To draw their fwords : but how the feare of vs 
May Ciment their diuifions, and binde vp 60 


The petty difference, we yet not know: 

Bee’t as our Gods will haue’t ; it onely ftands 

Our liues vpon, to vfe our ftrongeft hands 

Come Menas. Exeunt. 64 


[Scene LI. 


Enter Enobarbus and Lepidus. 

Lep. Good Enobarbus, ’tis a worthy deed, 
And fhall become you well, to intreat your Captaine 
To foft and gentle fpeech. 

£inob. JI hall intreat him 5 
To anfwer like himfelfe : if Ce/ar moue him, 
Let Anthony looke ouer Ce/ars head, 
And fpeake as lowd as Mars. By Iupiter, 


Were I the wearer of Axthonio’s Beard, 9 
60. Ciment] Cement ¥F,. House.Cap. Gaudy, superfluously gilded. 
62. Bee’t... hauet|] Ff, Rowe,+, Kemble. 

Dyce, Glo. Sta. Be’t...have it Var.’73, 3. to intreat] t’intreat Pope,+, Dyce 

Coll. i. Be it...have’t Sing. Coll. ii, Wh. ii, iii. 

Ktly. Be zt...have z¢ Cap. et cet. 6. moue| mov’d Ran. 

onely] only F. g. Anthonio’s] Ff. Azztonzo’s Rowe, 
[Scene II. Rowe et seq. +, Cap. Ktly. Antonius’ Var.’73 et 
[Rome. Rowe. A Room in Lepidus’ cet. 


See, if need be, ‘ But they do square, that all their Elues for feare,’ etc.—Jfd WV. 
Dream, V1, i, 29, of this edition. 

62, 63. it onely stands Our liues vpon] STAUNTON: Our existence solely 
depends, etc., or it is incumbent on us for our lives’ sake, etc. [For other examples 
of this idiom, see ABBOTT, § 204.] 

64. Exeunt] VISCHER (p. 91) : This scene could have been dispensed with. [It 
is omitted in the version which Capell made for Garrick. —ED.] 

Scene II.] JoHnson: I think the First Act may be commodiously continued to 
this place, and the Second Act opened with the interview of the chief persons, and a 
change of the state of action. Yet it must be confessed, that it is of small importance, 
where these unconnected and desultory scenes are interrupted. 

g. Were I the wearer, etc.] CAPELL (i, 32): ‘ Alluding,’ says [Warburton], 
‘to the phrase—I will beard him.’ But the speaker had no such thing in his head ; 
but either meant as he spake, or—that he would put on his gruffest look. There is 
something uncommonly noble in the management of this interview, and the dignity 
of these great personages is wonderfully sustain’d; their entry without accosting each 
other, the conversation apart that each has with his friends, are circumstances finely 


go THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT J, SC. ii. 
I would not fhaue’t to day. 10 
Lep. ’Tis not a time for priuate ftomacking. 


Eno. Euery time ferues for the matter that is then 
borne in’t. 
Lep. But {mall to greater matters muft giue way. 
Eno. Not if the fmall come firft. 15 
Lep. Your fpeech is paffion : but pray you ftirre 
No Embers vp. Heere comes the Noble Azthony. 


Enter Anthony and Ventdius. 


fino. And yonder Ce/ar. 


Enter Cefar, Mecenas, and Agrippa. 20 


Ant. 
Hearke Ventidius. 


Io. /haue’t] shave Var.’03, 13. 

11. ’ 7%s...d¢me| Separate line, Han, 
Cap. Steev. et seq. 

12. Euery time] Separate line, Pope 
et seq. 

13. borne] born ¥F,. 


If we compofe well heere, to Parthia : 


22 


20. Mecenas] Ff. Maecenas Glo. Cam. 
Rlfe. (throughout.) /ecenas Rowe et 
cet. 

21. Parthia :| Parthia. Ln Johns. 
Parthia— Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Parthia / Sta. 


in’ ¢] in zt Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. 22. Hearke| F,, Hark F,F,, Rowe, 
Knt. Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Hark thee 
16,17. Your...Anthony. ] Three lines, Han. Knt, Dyce i, Glo. Sta. Hark ye 


ending affons; ... comes ... Anthony. 
Pope et seq. : 


Hark you Cap. et cet. 


imagin’d.—JOHNSON: I believe he means, ‘I would meet him undressed, without 
show of respect.’ 

Il. priuate stomacking] Anger, resentment. See III, iv, 14. 

16, 17. pray you stirre No Embers vp] DEIGHTON: Do not rake up any old 
quarrels. 

20. Enter Cesar, etc.] KNIGHT (Sup. (Votice, p. 356) : The interview between 
Czesar and Antony is most masterly. The constrained courtesy on each side—the 
coldness of Czesar—the frank apologies of Antony—the suggestion of Agrippa, so 
opportune, and yet apparently so unpremeditated—the ready assent of Antony—all 
this—matter for rhetorical flourishes of at least five hundred lines in the hands of an 
ordinary dramatist—may be read without a start or an elevation of the voice. It is 
solid business throughout. Antony we might think wasa changed man. Enobarbus, 
who knows him, is of a different opinion.—LLoyD (p. 338): The fated superiority 
of the cool and steadfast gamester for power, over the ardent and dissipated, is set 
forth with admirable effect in the long scene with the Triumvirs, which never pauses, 
and flags not in a line, though the subject matter is no whit more vivacious in itself 
than the contents of interchanging protocols. 

21. If we compose well] STEEVENS: That is, if we come to a lucky composition, 
agreement. So afterwards is ‘composition’ used. See II, vi, 74. 

22. Hearke] Dyce (ed. ii) has, I think, rightly interpreted this as ‘ Heark ye,’— 
possibly, misheard by the compositor.—Ep. 


ACT Il, sc. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA gI 
Cefar. 1 do not know Mecenas, aske Agrippa. 23 
Lep. Noble Friends: 

That which combin’d vs was moft great, and let not 25 


A leaner action rend vs. What’s amiffe, 
May it be gently heard. When we debate 
Our triuiall difference loud, we do commit 
Murther in healing wounds. Then Noble Partners, 
The rather for I earneftly befeech, 30 
Touch you the fowreft points with fweeteft tearmes, 
Nor curftneffe grow to’th’matter. 
Ant. ’Tis fpoken well : 
Were we before our Armies, and to fight, 
I fhould do thus. 
Caf. Welcome to Rome. 


Flourtfh. 35 


Ant. Thanke you. 
Cay. Sit. 
Ant, Sreanr, 39 


23. l...know] Separate line, Cap. et 
seq. (subs. ) 
know Mecenas,| Ff. know ; Me- 
cenas, Rowe,+. know, Mecenas ; Han. 
et cet. 
26. leaner] meaner Quincy MS. lesser 


32. to’'th’] F,. to th FF. 

33. /poken well | well spoken Words. 

34. Armies] Armes F,. 

35. Flourith.] Ff, Rowe, +, Glo. Om. 
Han. et cet. 

36-40. Welcome...Nay] As one line, 


Gould. 
27. heard | mov’d or urg’d Gould, 
29. Murther| Murder Johns. 
30. rather] rather, Pope. 
31. you] thou Han. ii. 


Steev. Varr. Sing. Welcome...Sit jir. 
As one line, Ktly. 

37. Thanke| I thank Ktly. 

39. Sit fir.] Sit, sir! Ran. Steev. Var. 
Mal. Var. 


32. Nor curstnesse grow to’th’matter] JOHNSON: Let not ill-humour be added 
to the real subject of our difference. 

35. I should do thus] CAPELL (i, 32): Meaning,—as Lepidus had entreated ; 
talk the difference over gently, and not make it greater by reproaches and harsh 
language; for that is the import of the words which that entreaty is couch’d in.— 
[Cot.1ER’s MS interpreted these words differently ; he inserted a stage-direction, 
‘ They shake hands,’ which Collier adopted in his Second and Third Editions, fol- 
lowed by Singer and, in effect, Keightley. The ‘Flourish’ manifestly indicates 
some action ; the trumpets would hardly blare at the mere expression of a sentiment. 
—ED. ] 

38, 39. Ces. Sit. Ant, Sit sir.] Srezvens: Antony appears to be jealous of 
a circumstance which seemed to indicate a consciousness of superiority in his too 
successful partner in power; and accordingly resents the invitation of Cesar to be 
seated : Caesar answers, ‘ Nay, then ;’ z.¢. if you are so ready to resent what I meant 
as an act of civility, there can be no reason to suppose you have temper enough for 
the business on which at present we are met. The former editors leave a full point 


g2 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act HJ, SC. ii. 


C@f. Nay then. 40 
Ant. I learne, you take things ill, which are not fo: 
Or being, concerne you not. 
Cef. Imuft be laught at, if or for nothing, or a little, I 
Should fay my felfe offended, and with you 
Chiefely i’th’world. More laught at, that I fhould 45 
Once name you derogately : when to found your name 
It not concern’d me. 
Ant. My being in Egypt Ce/ar, what was’t to you ? 
Cef. No more then my reciding heere at Rome 
Might be to you in Egypt : yet if you there 50 
Did practife on my State,your being in Egypt 


40. then.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Dyce, 46. Once... found] Separate line, 
Glo. Cam. Sta. ¢ken— Theob. et cet. Pope,+. 
41. not] nor F,,. 48. my...Cefar] Separate line, Cap. 
42. you] yon F.. et seq. 
43. /...at | Separate line, Rowe et seq. 49. reciding| refiding Ff. 
little, I little, Ff. 50. yet ] Om. Pope, Han. 


at the end of this, as well as the preceding speech.JoHNSON: The following cir- 
cumstance may serve to strengthen Mr Steevens’s opinion: When the fictitious 
Sebastian made his appearance in Europe, he came to a conference with the Condé 
de Lemos ; to whom, after the first exchange of civilities, he said, ‘Condé de Lemos, 
be covered.’ And being asked, by that nobleman, by what pretences he laid claim 
to the superiority expressed by such permission, he replied, ‘I do it by right of my 
birth ; I am Sebastian..—MALoneE: I believe, the author meant no more than that 
Cesar should desire Antony to be seated: ‘Sit.’ To this Antony replies, Be you, 
sir, seated first: ‘Sit, sir.’ ‘Nay, then,’ rejoins Czesar, if you stand on ceremony, to 
put an end to farther talk on a matter of so little moment, I will take my seat. How- 
ever, I have too much respect for the two preceding editors, to set my judgment above 
their concurring opinions, and therefore have left the note of admiration placed by 
Mr Steevens at the end of Antony’s speech, undisturbed.—K NIGHT: We agree with 
Malone that they each desire the other to be seated; and that Czsar puts an end to 
the bandying of compliments by taking his seat.—[I think there can be little doubt 
that Malone is right. ] 

42. Or being] AssorT (§ 404): ‘Being’ is often used for 27 being, or being so, 
very much like $v and its compounds in Greek.—[See also III, vi, 32, which Abbott 
gives as a parallel example, but is capable of a different explanation. ] 

46. derogately] WALKER ( Vers. 274) gives this word in the present passage as 
an example in his ‘ Article lv:’ ‘We sometimes find two unaccented syllables 
inserted between what are ordinarily the fourth and fifth, or sixth and seventh, the 
whole form being included in one word.’ 

51. Did practise on my State] STEEVENS: To ‘practise’ means to employ 
unwarrantable arts or stratagems. So, in the Countess of Pembroke’s An/onie, 
‘nothing killes me so, As that I so my Cleopatra see Practize with Cesar.’ [Act III. 
For ‘ practise’ in this sense, see Shakespeare passim. | 


ACT II, SC, ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 93 


Might be my queftion. 52 
Ant. How intend you, praétis’d ? 
Cef. You may be pleas’d to catch at mine intent, 


By what did heere befall me. Your Wife and Brother 55 

Made warres vpon me, and their conteftation 

Was Theame for you, you were the word of warre. 57 
53. practis da] practise Anon. ap. 57. Was Theame for you,| was theam’d 

Cam. for you, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Was 
55. me.] Om. Pope,+. theme for them, Ktly. Was known for 
56, 57. thetr...you,| for contestation yours, Orson. Was you for theme Mil- 

Their theme was you, M. Mason, Ran. ford ap. Cam. 


Theame| Theme ¥,. Theam F.. 


56, 57. their contestation Was Theame for you, you were the word of 
warre] WARBURTON: The only meaning of this can be, that the war, which Antony’s 
wife and brother made upon Cesar, was theme for Antony too to make war; or was the 
occasion why he did make war. But this is directly contrary to the context, which 
shows, Antony did neither encourage them to it, nor second them init. We cannot 
doubt then, but the poet wrote: ‘—and their contestation Was ¢hem’d for you,’ 
z. e. The pretence of the war was on your account, they took up arms in your name, 
and you were made the theme and subject of their insurrection.—JoHNson: I am 
neither satisfied with the reading nor the emendation: ¢hem’d is, I think, a word 
unauthorised, and very harsh. Perhaps we may read: ‘—their contestation Had 
theme from you,’ The dispute derived its subject from you. It may be corrected 
by mere transposition: ‘—their contestation You were theme for, you were the 
word—.’—CAPELL (i, 32): Though there can be no doubt made that [Warburton’s] 
emendation is just [Capell adopted it.], and his interpretation also; yet is grammar 
made dreadfully free with, and the analogy of language: for, according to the latter, 
them’d can have no other sense but—propos’d as a theme, given out as such; and 
must, according to grammar, be govern’d of ‘ contestation ;’ but this sense and con- 
struction bring matters back nearly to the point they were in under the old reading 
—‘theame:”’ the fault is in the Poet himself, whose licence of expression is sometimes 
excessive.—STEEVENS : ‘ Was theme for you,’ I believe, means only, ‘ was proposed as 
an example for you to follow on a yet more extensive plan ;’ as themes are given fora 
writer to dilateupon. Shakspeare, however, may prove the best commentator on him- 
self. Thus, in Coriolanus,1,i: ‘ —throw forth greater ¢hemes For insurrection’s argu- 
ing.’ Sicinius calls Coriolanus, ‘ —the ¢heme of our assembly.’-—MALONE: That is, 
‘their contestation derzved its theme or subject from you ; you were their word of war ;’ 
this affords a clear and consistent sense. To obtain the sense desired from War- 
burton’s emendation, we should read—‘ Was ¢hem’d from you—.’ So, in T7ro. and 
Cress.: ‘She is a theme of honour and renown, A spur to valiant and magnanimous 
deeds.’ That he must have written fom, appears by Antony’s answer: ‘ You do 
mistake your business ; my brother never Did urge me in his act.’ 7. e. ‘never made 
me the theme for insurrection’s arguing.’—-M. Mason: I should suppose that some 
of the words have been misplaced, and that it ought to stand thus: ‘—and for con- 
testation Their theme was you; you were the word of war.’—CoLLirr (ed. ii) : 
Their contestation was not theme for Antony, but Antony was their theme for con- 


04 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT LL <SCuik: 


Ant. You do miftake your bufines, my Brother neuer 58 
Did vrge me in his Act : I did inquire it, 
And haue my Learning from fome true reports 60 


That drew their {words with you, did he not rather 
Difcredit my authority with yours, 


And make the warres alike againft my ftomacke, 63 
58. your] the Han. ¢heir Anon. ap. 59. inquire] require Theob. ii, Warb. 
Cam. enquire Var.’78. 
59. Azs] this Han. 60. reports] reporters Pope, Han. 


61. you, you. FF, et seq. 


testation, ‘Was’ and ‘for’ accidentally changed places; therefore we read, ‘and 
their contestation For theme was you.’ This is all that is necessary, and it is 
strange that the commentators, in their ‘contestation,’ should not have discovered 
what was required.—[Thus it stood in Collier’s Second Edition, but in his Third 
Edition, Collier himself failed to ‘discover what was required’ and his text follows 
the Folio, ‘Was theme for you,’ without comment. ]|—STAUNTON: The meaning is 
apparent, though the construction is obscure and perhaps corrupt. We ought possibly 
to read,—‘ Had you for theme,’ etc.—ScHMIDT (Zex.) defines ‘theme’ in the pres- 
ent passage as ‘a matter, an enterprise undertaken in your interest..—DEIGHTON: 
(Conject. Readings, p. 41): Schmidt’s explanation would be excellent, if only the 
words would bear that sense. Though ‘theme’ is spelt in the Folios ‘theame’ or 
‘theam’ [or ‘theme,’ F,], I am satisfied that it is nothing else than hen (thenne), 
perhaps sophisticated by a copyist who thought ‘the word of war’ was explanatory 
of it. [There is, possibly, one interpretation which may justify the text as it stands. 
Ceesar has just insinuated that Anthony while still in Egypt ‘ practised’ against him, 
and is attempting to prove this, by what befell in Italy. His case would have been 
weak indeed, if he could assert merely that Anthony’s wife and brother, in their war, 
had used Anthony’s name as a pretext; in such circumstances, Anthony himself 
might be as innocent as the babe unborn. To prove Anthony guilty, therefore, 
Ceesar must connect him, personally, with this ‘contestation.’ He asserts, therefore, 
that this very contestation was cause enough, in itself, for Anthony’s practises—the 
mere fact that it existed was sufficient matter for Anthony to work on, or as it stands, 
in the fewest possible words, in the text, ‘their contestation was theme for you.’ 
Then, in order to involve them all, Fulvia, Lucius, and Anthony, in one common 
‘practise,’ Czesar adds, ‘ you were the word of war.’ —ED.] 

57. you were the word of warre] JoHN HunTER: The signal word of battle. 
So in the Julius Cesar of North’s Plutarch, ‘ Brutus’ men ran to give charge upon 
their enemies, and tarried not the word of battle, nor commandment to give 
charge.’ [See, also, ‘death’s the word,’ I, ii, 158.] 

58, 59. neuer Did vrge me in his Act] WARBURTON: That is, never did make 
use of my name as a pretence for the war. 

60. reports] That is, reporters, the abstract for the concrete. See (in this ed. ) 
Love's Lab, L. V, ii, 88, ‘incounters’ for encounterers, together with the following 
additional instances :—‘ wrongs’ for wrongers.— Rich. JI; Il, iii, 128; ‘speculations’ 
for speculators.—Lear, III, i, 24; ‘chase’ for object of chase.—3 Hen. VI: Il, iv, 
11; possibly, there may be added, ‘slander’ for slanderer, Rich. JZ: 1, i, 113. 


ACTH, SC; ii. | ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 95 


Hauing alike your caufe. Of this, my Letters 
Before did fatisfie you. If you’l patch a quarrell, 65 
As matter whole you haue to make it with, 


64. caufe.] caufe: F,. caufe? 1D 66. you haue to make] Ran. Knt, Coll. 
et seq. (MS), Wh. i, C-Clarke. you haue to 
65. youl] you Ff, Rowe. you will take Ff. youve not to make Rowe,+, 
Cap. (Errata. ) Dyce ii, iii, Ktly, Dtn. you have not to 
66. As matter] No matter Coll. MS. make Cap. et cet. you've nought lo make 


and you halve to make Anon. ap. Cam. 


64. Hauing alike your cause] JoHNsoN: The meaning seems to be, ‘having 
the same cause as you to be offended with me.’ But why, because he was offended 
with Antony, should he make war upon Caesar? May it not read thus: ‘ Hating 
alike our cause?’ —STEEVENS : The old reading is immediately explained by Antony’s 
being the partner with Octavius in the cause against which his brother fought.— 
MALonE: That is, 7 having alike your cause. Did he not (says Antony) make wars 
against the inclination of me also, of me, who was engaged in the same cause with 
yourself? Dr Johnson supposed that Aaving meant, he having, and hence has sug- 
gested an unnecessary emendation. 

66. As] Here equivalent to zxasmuch as, since. See I, iv, 25. 

66. As matter whole you haue to make it with] JoHNson: The original read- 
ing is without doubt erroneous.—STEEVENS: The old reading may be right. It 
seems to allude to Antony’s acknowledged neglect in aiding Czsar; but yet Antony 
does not allow himself to be faulty upon the present cause alleged against him.— 
MALONE: I have not the smallest doubt that the correction made by Rowe is right. 
The structure of the sentence, ‘As matter,’ etc., proves decisively that sof was 
omitted. Of all the errors that happen at the press, omission is the most frequent. — 
KnicurT (following the text): That is, if you’ll fa¢ch a quarrel so as to seem the 
whole matter you have to make it with, you must not patch it with this complaint. 
Whole is opposed to patch.—COLuiER (also following the text): That is, do not find 
out a cause of quarrel where none exists; do not patch a quarrel when no patching is 
required, because the matter is whole.—SINGER: The negative is absolutely necessary 
to make sense of the passage.-—STAUNTON: The negative is clearly indispensable ; 
but to satisfy the metre, Shakespeare may have adopted the old form x’ have instead 
of have not.—NICHOLS (i, 9) : The original text is right, and means, as if you have 
a whole matter to make it of, and wish to preserve to it the appearance of integrity, 
—of its being made out of a whole piece,—‘ 2¢ mst not be with this’ —for this patch 
will show, will be seen. On the other hand, if [ Rowe’s zof] be correct—if Cesar 
did wish to ‘ patch a quarrel ’—not having matter whole to make it of, surely no better 

_matter could offer itself for the purpose than that which he is here expressly told he 
could not use. The wife and brother of Antony had made war upon Cesar. Czesar 
accuses Antony, although he was in Egypt, of having instigated them; of being, as 
he says, ‘the word of war.’ Antony denies it; and, most likely, truly; but had 
Czesar wanted to make use of the facts, as far as they went, for the purpose of patch- 
ing a quarrel with Antony, public opinion, notwithstanding Antony’s denial, would 
perhaps have gone with Cesar; and though in itself, it might not have been a suf- 
ficient cause of quarrel, yet with the addition of a few other grievances, it might have 
been made to constitute one. Still, it would have borne the appearance, as Antony 


96 THE TRAGEDIE OF (ACT.i1,;SC5 1; 


It muft not be with this. 67 
Cef. You praife your felfe, by laying defeéts of iudge- 
ment to me : but you patcht vp your excufes. 69 


68, 69. You...excufes| Ff, Rowe, Knt. 68, 69. defects...me]| to me defects of 
Lines end, sedfe, ...dut...excuses Pope et judgment Cap. Ran. 


cet. 69. patcht] patch FF, Rowe,+. 


says, of a patched quarrel, and not as made out of whole matter.—INGLEBY (Sz. the 
Man, etc., i, 145) accepts the reading of the Folio, and interprets ‘you haue’ in the 
sense of obligation, you must. ‘Antony,’ he says, ‘refers to former letters, and 
Czsar to former excuses; so that when Antony speaks of patching the quarrel, he 
means that the quarrel has been already worn out by discussion. Czsar ought (he 
says) to be able to adduce a new and entire ground of complaint; but that if he will 
patch up the old quarrel he must do it with something else than the pretence that 
Antony’s wife and brother have made wars upon him.’ Ingleby concludes somewhat 
in Warburtonian style: ‘This conclusive interpretation of the text was proposed to me 
by Prof. Sylvester, the world-renowned mathematician. After this, an editor who 
shall reprint the text with Rowe’s emendation will only have the excuse of ignorance.’ 
-—Hupson adopts in his text the emendation, ‘As matter whole you Zack to make it 
with,’ and remarks, ‘I had conjectured /acé but found afterwards that I had been 
anticipated by an anonymous writer.’ I do not know who this anonymous writer is ; 
he is also, apparently, unknown to the Cambridge Editors—THE COWDEN-CLARKES 
(following the text) : That is, if you wish to botch up a quarrel, as you have whole 
and sound matter to make it good with, you must not use such flimsy stuff as this. 
We think that the phraseology is purposely equivocal here: Antony allowing Czesar 
to understand either ‘If you desire to pick a quarrel with me, you could find stronger 
ground to base it upon than these frivolous causes of complaint,’ or ‘If you wish to 
make up the quarrel between us, you have better means of doing so than by ripping 
up these trivial grievances.’—IRVING EDITION finds Cowden-Clarke’s suggestion that 
the phraseology is equivocal, ‘a forced interpretation. The meaning appears rather 
to be the reverse: make trivial things—mere bits and patches, as it were—the ground 
of quarrel. These slight occasions for disagreement are opposed to matter whole, 
or some serious cause for dissension.’—ROLFE: A few editors follow the Folio, but 
their attempts to explain the passage are forced and unsatisfactory.—THISELTON : 
‘As’ is equivalent here to as though , compare I, ii, 110; IV, i, 1. The meaning is, 
‘in such a way that it will seem to be made all of a piece.’ [To me the meaning 
seems to be, If you’ll patch a quarrel, inasmuch as you must make the patch out of 
good whole material, you must not take this. I think Ingleby is entirely right in 
his interpretation.—ED. ] 

68, 69. laying defects of iudgement to me] CAPELL (i, 32): The import of 
which in short, is—you praise yourself at my expense: and this being so, the word 
‘me’ in the next line, must be spoke with an emphasis ; which can not be lay’d upon 
it, in the situation it occupies in all former copies [see 7ext. Motes for Capell’s text], 
and by this the transposition is justify’d: Mistakes of this sort are often made by the 
pen, and oftner [szc] still by the press ; such presses especially as this Poet had the 
fate to come out of. 

69. excuses] WALKER (Cy?t.i, 246): I think excase is more Elizabethan.—DycE 
(ed. ii) makes independently the same conjecture, which is adopted by Hupson. 


ACFTI, SC. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 97 


Anth. Not fo,not fo: 70 
I know you could not lacke, I am certaine on’t, 
Very neceffity of this thought, that I 
Your Partner in the caufe ’gainft which he fought, 
Could not with gracefull eyes attend thofe Warres 
Which fronted mine owne peace. As for my wife, 75 
I would you had her fpirit,in fuch another, 
The third oth’world is yours ,which with a Snaffle, 
You may pace eafie, but not fuch a wife. 
Enobar. Would we had all fuch wiues, that the men 
might go to Warres with the women. 80 
Anth. So much vncurbable, her Garboiles (C¢/ar) 


71. Lam] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. Varr. Ktly. 


72. Very] The very Ktly. 76. /uch] Om. Steev. conj. 

74. gracefull | graceful F,. grateful another,| Ff, Rowe. another / 
Pope,+, Cap. Var. 73. Ktly. another - Pope et cet. 

75. fronted| ‘fronted Cap. Steev. 81. vncurbable, | uncurbable Theob.+. 


71-75. I know you could not lacke, .. . mine owne peace] DEIGHTON: That 
is, I am certain that you could not help feeling how impossible it was for me, whose 
interests were the same as yours, to regard with favourable eyes those wars which 
were so opposed to my own peace. ‘Very’ is here an adjective, thorough. <‘ Attend,’ 
in this sense, is more commonly applied to the ears than to the eyes. 

74. gracefull eyes] STEEVENS: We still say, I could not look Aandsomely on 
such or such a proceeding. 

75. fronted] BRADLEY (J. £. D. s.v. Front, v.! 3) : To stand face to face with ; 
especially to face in defiance or hostility ; oppose. 

76. I would you had her spirit, in such another] MALONE: Antony means to 
say, I wish you’ had the spirit of Fulvia, embodied in such another woman as her ; 
I wish you were married to such another spirited woman. By the words, ‘you had 
her spirit,’ etc. Shakspeare, I apprehend, meant, ‘ you were zzted fo, or possessed 
of, a woman with her spirit.’ Having formerly misapprehended this passage, and 
supposed that Antony wished Augustus to de actuated by a spirit similar to Fulvia’s, 
I proposed to read—e’e such another, 27 being frequently printed for ¢’e# in these 
plays.——STEEVENS: The plain meaning of Antony is, I wish you had my wife’s spirit 
in another wife ; 2. ¢. 2z a wife of your own. [See Appendix, Plutarch.] 

76. spirit] For the pronunciation of spirit, see WALKER (C77. i, 193) or I, ii, 143. 

77, 78. with a Snaffle, You may pace easie] ScHMIDT (Lex. s.v. Pace. 2, 
transitive) : To teach (a horse) to move according to the will of the rider.—[ Quan- 
doque bonus dormitat, etc.—ED. ] 

79, 80. that the men might go to Warres with the women] Hupson: I am 
uncertain whether this means that the men might go to war 7” company with the 
women, or go to war against them.—[I think that the plural ‘warres’ decides in 
favour of Hudson’s first meaning ; the number of fighters on one side, at least, would 
be certainly doubled.—ED. ] 

81. So much vncurbable, her Garboiles] JoHN HUNTER observes that ‘ vncurb- 


Zi 


98 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. il. 


Made out of her impatience : which not wanted 82 

Shrodeneffe of policie to : I greeuing grant, 

Did you too much difquiet, for that you muft, 

But fay I could not helpe it. 85 
Ce/far. 1 wrote to you, when rioting in Alexandria you 

Did pocket vp my Letters : and with taunts 

Did gibe my Mifiue out of audience. 
Ant. Sir, he fell vpon me, ere admitted, then : 


Three Kings I had newly feafted, and did want go 
Of what I was i’th’morning - but next day 
I told him of my felfe, which was as much 92 
83. Shrodeneffe] Shrewdne/s ¥ ¥ ,. Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Alexandria, 
to:] too: F;F,. zoo, Rowe. you Var.’78 et seq. 
84. mzu/t,| must Theob, et seq. 88. gibe] beg F,, Rowe. 

85. z.] 2¢? Staunton’s Photolith. 89. Str] Separate line, Cap. et seq. 
86. when...you]| Separate line, Rowe upon] on Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. 
et seq. admitted, then :| admitted: then 

Alexandria you| Alexandria, you Rowe et seq. 


able’ is here an epithet to the pronoun ‘her;’ and DELtus believes that it refers to 
the she involved in ‘her garboils,’ which amounts to about the same, and is, with the 
present text, an unavoidable explanation, for the simple reason that ‘ vncurbable,’ 
which, as MADDEN (p. 313) says, ‘clearly has its origin in the stable,’ cannot rightfully 
be predicated of a ‘ garboil.” KEIGHTLEY ingeniously evades the difficulty by leaving 
Anthony’s previous speech unfinished and ending it, after Enobarbus’s interruption, 
with ‘uncurbable.’ Thus:—‘ with a snaffle You may pace easy, but not such a 
wife, [ JSo much uncurbable. Her garboils,’ etc. His intention would have 
been possibly a little clearer, had he marked Enobarbus’s speech as an Aside, which 
it probably is.—Eb. 

83. Shrodenesse] Spelled phonetically.—Ep. 

86-88. I wrote to you, ...out of audience] The feeble punctuation of the 
Folio will readily give way to almost any punctuation of these lines. Dyce’s, which 
has been followed by the Glode, the Cambridge, and the majority of subsequent edi- 
tors: ‘I wrote to you When rioting in Alexandria;’ is somewhat objectionable, 
inasmuch as it is grammatically ambiguous whether Czesar was rioting or Anthony. 
There should be at least a comma after ‘you’ (as in the Folio), but a semi-colon, 
as suggested by Lloyd (a. Cam. ), would be better. Capell’s punctuation is good; ‘I 
wrote to you, When, rioting in Alexandria, you,’ etc. All colons or semi-colons after 
‘ Alexandria’ seem to me misplaced. Czsar is enumerating Anthony’s offences; to 
pocket up his letters is the first distinct and separate offence ; to gibe his missive is 
the second ; and the two should be distinguished as they are in the Folio, so it seems 
to me.—Eb. 

88, Misiue] Macbeth in his letter to his wife says that there came ‘ missives 
from the king, who all-hailed me,’ etc. 

92. I told him of my selfe] WARBURTON: That is, told him the condition I was 


RACE I SC... | ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 99 


As to haue askt him pardon. Let this Fellow 93 
Be nothing of our ftrife : if we contend 
Out of our queftion wipe him. f. 95 


C@far. You haue broken the Article of your oath, 
which you {hall neuer haue tongue to charge me with. 


Lep. Soft Ce/far. : 

Ant. No Lepidus , \et him fpeake, 
The Honour is Sacred which he talks on now, 100 

96, 97. You...with] Lines end, broken Hal. Cam. Separate line, Han. Cap. 
... meuer...with Rowe et seq. Steev. Sing. Dyce, Glo. Wh. ii. 

98. Soft Czefar.] Soft, Cesar, Rowe. 100. Honour is| honours Pope,+, 
Soft, Cesar, soft. Ktly. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Coll. Sing. Wh. 


99. Vo] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Sta. Ktly. 
Warb. Johns. Varr. Knt, Coll. Wh. i, 


in, when he had his last audience.—DELIus questions Warburton’s interpretation and 
holds the true meaning to be, ‘I told him of my own accord.’ Whereupon, SCHMIDT 
(Wotes, p. 173) acutely remarks that had this been the meaning, the text should run 
*I told it him of myself.’ 

94. Be nothing of our strife] Compare ‘but nothing of his ill-ta’ne suspition.’ 
— Wint. Tale, I, ii, 530; ‘ nothing of that wonderfull promise,’ etc.— Twelfth Night, 
III, iv, 263. 

99. No] WALKER ( Vers, 289): Lines wanting the tenth or final syllable, are (as 
it appears to me) unknown to Shakespeare, as they are certainly at variance with his 
rhythm.—[ Accordingly, Walker approves of the arrangement which was adopted first 
by Hanmer, whereby ‘No’ was separated from ‘Lepidus’ and made to follow 
‘Cesar.’ It is to be observed that the division of 1]. 96, 97 into metrical lengths was 
made by Rowe, and it is quite possible so to change it as not to need ‘No’ fora 
tenth syllable,—an ineffable relief to the o’ erfraught heart——EDp. ] 

1co. The Honour is Sacred] WARBURTON: Sacred, for unbroken, unviolated. 
—JOHNSON: Warburton seems to understand this passage thus: ‘The honour which 
he zalks of me as lacking, is unviolated. I never lacked it.’ This, perhaps, may be 
the true meaning ; but, before I read the note, I understood it thus: Lepidus inter- 
rupts Czsar, on the supposition that what he is about to say will be too harsh to be 
endured by Antony; to which Antony replies—‘ No, Lepidus, let him speak ; the 
security of honour on which he now speaks, on which this conference is held now, 
is sacred, even supposing that I lacked honour before—MALONE: Antony, in my 
opinion, means to say—The theme of honour which he now speaks of, namely, the 
religion of an oath, for which he supposes me not to have a due regard, is sacred ; it 
is a tender point, and touches my character nearly. Let him therefore urge his 
charge, that I may vindicate myself.—M. Mason: I do not think that either John- 
son’s or Malone’s explanation of this passage is satisfactory. The true meaning of 
it appears to be this:—Czsar accuses Antony of a breach of honour in denying to 
send him aid when he required it, which was contrary to his oath. Antony says, in 
his defence, that he did not deny his aid, but, in the midst of dissipation, neglected to 
send it: that having now brought his forces to join him against Pompey, he had 
redeemed that error; and that therefore the honour which Cesar talked of, was now 


100 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, SC. ii. 


Suppofing that I lackt it : but on Ce/ar, IOI 
The Article of my oath. 
Cefar. To lend me Armes, and aide when I requir’d 
them, the which you both denied. 
Anth. Negle¢ted rather : 105 
And then when poyfoned houres had bound me vp 
From mine owne knowledge, as neerely as I may, 
Ile play the penitent to you. But mine honefty, 
Shall not make poore my greatneffe, nor my power 
Worke without it. Truth is, that Fuduza, 1IO 
To haue me out of Egypt,made Warres heere, 
For which my felfe, the ignorant motiue, do 
So farre aske pardon, as befits mine Honour 
To ftoope in fuch a cafe. 
Lep. *Tis Noble fpoken. 115 
Mece. If it might pleafe you,to enforce no further 


101. on Cefar] on, Czefar FF. 107. knowledge,] Ff. knowledge ; 

102. oath.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. nowledge. 
Coll. Wh. Glo. oath— Theob. et cet. Han. Johns. et seq. 

103, 104. Zo...chem] Separate line, 115. Vodle] F,, Mal. Var.’21, Knt, 
Rowe et seq. Coll. i, Dyce, Hal. Sta. Glo. Cam. Wodly 


106. poyfoned | potson’d Pope et seq. FF, et cet. 


sacred and inviolate, supposing that he had been somewhat deficient before, in the 
performance of that engagement.—The adverb ow refers to zs, not to ¢a/és on; and 
the line should be pointed thus: ‘ The honour’s sacred that he talks on, now, Sup- 
posing that I lack’d it.’—[I cannot see that anything is here implied more than that 
Anthony’s sacred honour having been impugned, there can be no remission of the 
explicit charge, made by him who had supposed that Anthony had violated it—Ep. ] 

102. The Article of my oath] A majority of editors have followed Theobald in 
placing a dash after ‘oath; ’ implying an unfinished sentence. Would not an interro- 
gation point be better? Anthony is repeating Czsar’s own words, and asking, I 
think, an explanation.—Ep. 

106, 107. had bound me vp From mine owne knowledge] DEIGHTON: That 
as, I had become a complete stranger to my nobler nature. 

109, I10. nor my power Worke without it] MALONE: Nor my greatness work 
without mine honesty.—DeELtus prefers to consider ‘it’ as referring not to ‘honesty’ 
but to ‘greatness,’ and thus paraphrases the sentence: the honesty with which I 
acknowledge my fault, cannot injure my greatness, cannot diminish the knowledge 
of my worth; nor can it cause my power to be proved worthless. 

115. ’Tis Noble spoken] For many examples of adjectives used as adverbs, see, 
if need be, ABBOTT, § 1. Compare ‘How honourable . . . wee Determine for her,’ 
Vii zit. 

116. If it might please you, etc.] CAPELL (i, 33): This imperfect and con- 
ditional mode of expressing a wish, may be intended as a mark of submissiveness: in 


ACT 1I, sc. 1i.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA IOI 


The griefes betweene ye: to forget them quite, 117 
Were to remember : that the prefent neede, 
Speakes to attone you. 
_Lep. Worthily fpoken Mecenas. 120 
Enobar. Or if you borrow one anothers Loue for the 
inftant, you may when you heare no more words of 
Pompey returne it againe: you fhall haue time to wrangle 
in, when you haue nothing elfe to do. 
Anth. Thou art a Souldier,onely fpeake no more. 125 
£nob, That trueth fhould be filent, I had almoft for- 
got. 
Anth. You wrong this prefence, therefore fpeake no 


more. 129 
117. qutte,| quite. Ff. 119. attone] atone ¥,. 
118. remember : that] remember, that 120. Worthily] Worthy F.,. 

Ff. remember that Cap. et seq. 125. Souldier,onely| Ff, Rowe, Pope, 


119. Speakes] Speak Cap. (corrected Warb. soldier only ; Theob. et cet. 
in Errata.) 


any other light, is improper ; and— Wou/d were greatly better than ‘ 7’ —THISELTON 
(p. 12): The punctuation of the Folio indicates a deferential hesitancy in venturing 
to offer advice.—[If this ‘punctuation’ refers to the comma after ‘you,’ it is not 
peculiar to the Folio. There is, I think, no edition without it—Eb.] 

117. griefes] That is, grievances. 

118, the present neede,] THISELTON (p. 12): The comma after ‘neede’ shows 
that that word is to be dwelt upon for emphasis.—[Independently of the fact that the 
punctuation of Shakespeare’s compositors cannot be implicitly followed, it may be 
doubted that in the passage before us, ‘ present’ be not the emphatic word. In the 
very next line above there is a comma after ‘ quite’ ; does this indicate that ‘ quite’ is 
more emphatic than ‘ to forget ?’ Ep. ] 

119. attone] Murray (WV. Z. D. s. v.): Atone is formed on the adverbial phrase 
at one in its combined form as representing a simple idea, and 16th century pro- 
nunciation. Short for the phrase ‘set or make at one.’ ... From the frequent 
phrases ‘set at one’ or ‘at onement,’ the combined atonement began to take the 
place of oxement early in the 16th century, and a/one to supplant ove, verb, about 
1550. Atone was not admitted into the Bible in 1611, though atonement had been 
in since Tindale. 

120. spoken] Dyce (ed. ii) conjectures that this should be spoke, overlooking 
the fact that it is so printed by STEEVENS in 1793, followed by the Variorums of 1803 
and 1813, and is suggested by WALKER ((C77#. i, 131). This oversight, unaccountable 
in so careful an editor, beguiled the CaM. Epp. who record it as Dyce’s conjecture 
in their footnotes. —Ep. 

126. That trueth should be silent] STEEVENS: We find a similar sentiment in 
King Lear: ‘Truth’s a dog must to kennel,’ etc., I, iv, 124.—WALKER (C7zz. ii, 
170) : The structure of the sentence looks as if Enobarbus were referring to a proverb. 
—[Steevens and Staunton in the next note make a similar suggestion. ] 


102 


_Enob. Go too then : your Confiderate ftone. 


130. Go too] Go to Ff. 
your Confiderate flone.] your con- 
siderate stone— Var.’73. your confed- 
erates love. Heath. your considerate tone 
Nichols (withdrawn). your considerate 


THE LRAGED IER OL 


[ACT II, SC. ii. 
130 


gone Leo (ed. p. 142 and WV. & Qu. IV, 
iii, 191). see me your considerate stone 
Words. you're considerate stone Elze. 
your confederates atone Lloyd ap. Cam, 
your confederate atone Browne ap. Cam. 


stone am I Ktly conj. your confederate's 


130. your Considerate stone] JoHNSoN: This line is passed by all the editors, 
as if they understood it, and believed it universally intelligible. 
any very obvious, and hardly any possible meaning. 
to then, you considerate ones.’ 


I cannot find in it 
I would therefore read: ‘Go 
You who dislike my frankness and temerity of 
speech, and are so considerate and discreet, go to, do your own business.—CAPELL 
(i, 33), in this instance keener than Dr Johnson, gives the meaning of Enobarbus as 
that ‘he would, from thenceforth, be a very stone for silence, but he would think 
a little’ —STEEVENS: That is, if I must be chidden, henceforward I will be as mute 
as a marble statue, which seems to think, though it can say nothing. ‘As silent as a 
stone,’ however, might have been once a common phrase.—[ Hereupon follow several 
examples which might be multiplied, drawn from old sources where a stone is used 
as a simile of silence or stillness. ]—BLACKSTONE : The metre of this line is deficient. 
It will be perfect, and the sense rather clearer, if we read (without altering a letter) : 
“your consideratest one.’ I doubt, indeed, whether this adjective is ever used 
in the superlative degree ; but in the mouth of Enobarbus it might be pardoned.— 
Ritson (Cursory Crit. 85): As Enobarbus, to whom this line belongs, generally 
speaks in plain prose, there is no occasion for any further attempt to harmonize it.— 
CoLLIkR (ed. i) : It may be’a question whether Enobarbus means to call Antony ‘a 
considerate stone,’ or to say merely that he will be silent as a stone. If the former, 
we must, with Johnson, change ‘your’ to you, but the latter affords a clear mean- 
ing without any alteration of the ancient text.—Dycr (Remarks, 246); Enobarbus 
call Antony a stoze/ he would as soon have ventured to throw one at him, John- 
son’s proposed alteration, bad as it certainly was, did not involve such an absurdity. 
—COLLIER (ed. ii) : That is, I will be as considerate as a stone. Johnson’s notion 
[where ?] that Enobarbus meant to call Antony a ‘considerate stone,’ does not seem 
to us, recollecting that the words were those of a rough free-spoken soldier, such an 
‘absurdity’ as it appeared to the Rev. Mr Dyce. In speaking of the note in our first 
edition, he ought to have remembered two things, which he has entirely overlooked, 
viz., that we gave the very text he supports, and that we ourselves said no change was 
needed. If Mr Dyce had been more of a ‘ considerate stone,’ he would have saved 
himself from the appearance of endeavouring to make a fault where he could not find 
one. We do not at all say that the suspicion would be just, but that he has laid 
himself open to it.—[ Whoever wishes to hear the last word in this deplorable quarrel 
between two men who had been for many years fast friends, will find it in Dyce’s 
Strictures, p. 203, where he exultantly proves that to Collier exclusively belongs the 
notion that Enobarbus called Antony a stoné! Time did not abate the flush of 
Dyce’s triumph. Seven years later he repeated these remarks in his Strictures at 
full length, in his Second Edition. Apparently, so far from being crushed under 
this appalling stigma of bad preéminence, Collier in his /onovolume placidly printed 
‘you considerate stone,’ and in his 7ird Edition, while returning to the old text, 
reprinted the substance of the note in his Aérs¢ Edition.|—STAuUNTON : As silent as 


ACT II, SC, ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 103 


Cefar. 1 do not much diflike the matter, but E34 
The manner of his fpeech : for’t cannot be, 
We fhall remaine in friendfhip, our conditions 
So diffring in their aéts. Yet if I knew, 
What Hoope fhould hold vs ftaunch from edge to edge 135 


131, 132. matter...manner] manner 134, 136. Anew, ... ftaunch ... world :} 
...matter Warb. Cap. knew, ...staunch, ...world, Rowe. knew 

132. for’t] for it Varr. Mal. Steev. ...staunch,...world, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Varr. Knt, Coll. Wh. Hal. knew...staunch, ...world Pope et cet. 


@ stone was an expression not unusual formerly, and the words in the text may here- 
after be found to be proverbial ; at present they are inexplicable—Hupson : Mean- 
ing, apparently, Z am your considerate stone; like a statue, which seems to speak, 
but does not.—E1LZE (p. 285) is, apparently, willing to be pilloried alongside of 
Collier, and suggests, although ‘ with hesitation,’ ‘ yow’re considerate stone,’ that is : 
‘You are indeed considerate ( =discreet, circumspect), but at the same time “ sense- 
less as a stone,’’ inaccessible to conciliatory and tender emotions.’—[Instead of say- 
ing as in modern parlance, ‘ All right. Your obedient servant,’ Enobarbus replies in 
effect, ‘I understand. Your intelligent and accommodating stone,’ with all that a 
‘stone’ implies of dumbness, deafness, and impassivity. At least such is the inter- 
pretation of Enobarbus’s words in the opinion of the present ED. | 

131, 132. I do not much dislike the matter, but The manner, etc.] War- 
BURTON: What, not dislike the matter of it? when he says presently after, that he 
would do everything to prevént the evil Enobarbus predicted. Besides are we to 
suppose that common civility would suffer him to take the same liberty with Antony’s 
lieutenant, that Antony himself did? Shakespeare wrote ‘I donot much dislike the 
manner, but The matter of his speech,’ etc., z. ¢. ’tis not his liberty of speech, but 
the mischiefs he speaks of, which I dislike. This agrees with what follows, and is 
said with much urbanity, and show of friendship.— HEATH (p. 454) : That is, As to the 
matter of what he hath said, there is probably too much truth in it, though the want 
of respect in his manner of saying it may deserve blame. That this is the sense 
is most clearly evident from the confession of Czesar which immediately follows.— 
CAPELL (i, 33) : Here is another transposition; the words ‘ manner’ and ‘ matter’ : 
the emendation was started by [Warburton], is confirm’d by what the speaker says 
afterwards, and recommended by much delicacy.—[The present play was the fifth 
that Capell printed (vol. i, p. 19, footnote). It is noteworthy how much in these 
early plays he was under the influence of Warburton. In the present instance, he 
preferred the speciousness of Warburton to the sound sense of Heath.—Ep.]— 
Jounson: ‘I do not (says Ceesar), think the man wrong, but too free of his inter- 
position ; for it cannot be, we shall remain in friendship ; yet if it were possible, I 
would endeavour it.’ 

133. conditions] That is, dispositions, natures, tempers. 

135. What Hoope should hold vs staunch] There is the same simile of a hoop 
about a cask in 2 Hen. JV: IV, iv, 43, ‘A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in, 
That the united vessel of their blood . . . shall never leak.’—Corson (p. 277): It 
must evidently be understood by this speech, that a ‘hoop,’ and a very politic one, 
has been already decided upon by Octavius and his crafty counsellor, Agrippa. What 


104 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT i1,SCii: 
Ath’world : I would perfue it. 136 
Agri. Giue me leaue Ce/ar. 
Cesar. Speake Agrippa. 
Agri. Thou hafta Sifter by the Mothers fide, admir’d 
OGtauia ? Great Mark Anthony is now a widdower. 140 
Cefar Say not, fay Agrippa ; if Cleopater heard you,your 
proofe were well deferued of rafhneffe . 142 


136. Ath’] O’th’ Rowe ii et seq. 
(subs. ) 

137. Ceefar.] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. ii, 
iii, Cam. Casar,— Cap. et cet. 

138. Agrippa] good Agrippa Words. 

139, 140, Thou... widdower| Lines 
end, side...Antony...widower Rowe et 
seq. 

139. dy the] by thy Ff, Rowe. 

140, Octauia ?] Octavia! Rowe,+, 
Octavia . Han. Cap. et seq. 


141, 142. Say...ra/hneffe] Lines end, 
Agrippa...were...rafnnefge Pope. Lines 
end, Agrippa...proofe...rafhneffe Theob. 
et seq. : 

141. not, fay] Ff. 
seq. 2 not Coll. MS. 

Cleopater] Cleopatra Ff et seq. 

142. proofe] Ff, Rowe, Pope. approof 
Theob. Warb. vefvoof Warb. conj. Han. 
Johns. et seq. 

of | for Han. Coll. MS. 


not so, Rowe et 


widdower, | widower : Cap. 


follows shows this; and affords a special illustration, too, of Antony’s genius rebuked 
by Octavius’s. 

137. Giue me leaue Czsar.] It can hardly be that the comma and dash after 
* Cesar,’ begun by Capell and continued by a large majority of modern editors, are 
right. Where all are so courtly in this conference, it cannot be likely that Cesar 
would break in upon Agrippa’s first words, especially if it were merely to tell him to 
continue speaking, a very needless permission; the end would have been gained 
by Cesar’s keeping silent. If we erase the period of the Folio, I think we should 
substitute an interrogation mark.—ED. 

139. a Sister by the Mothers side] Octavia was Czsar’s own sister, by the 
same mother, Atia; but Shakespeare here follows Plutarch who says that her mother 
was Ancharia, See Appendix, Plutarch. 

141. Say not, say Agrippa] Corrected by Rowe. This is one of the very numer- 
ous instances collected by WALKER (C77z. i, 314) in his fifty-eight pages of the ‘ Sub- 
stitution of Words,’ generally to be attributed, as here, to proximity. 

141, 142. your proofe] THEOBALD said that he made ‘no scruple to restore 
“‘your approof.”’ HANMER’S text reads, ‘ your vefroof,’ and a footnote has ‘Ward. 
emend. ‘NARBURTON’S own text, however, follows Theobald, and he has no 
note on the passage. HEATH (p. 451) gives a good interpretation of Theobald’s 
text, but there is little need to reprint it, inasmuch as Warburton’s emendation has 
been uniformly followed. M. Mason properly interpreted ‘your reproof’ as ‘the 
reproof you would undergo,’ and quoted as parallel a passage from Beaumont & 
Fletcher’s Custom of the Country, V, iv, where ‘ Your great opinion in the world’ is 
equivalent, so he said, to ‘the great opinion conceived of you;’ but he was herein 
possibly wrong as to the exact meaning. MALONE detected the source of the error 
in the Folio, which lay in making the 7 in ‘your’ do double duty, for itself and for 
‘reproof,’ and cited as a parallel case ‘Mine Nightingale,’ IV, viii, 24. This error 
was due, so Malone said, to the transcriber’s ear deceiving him.—ABBOTT (§ 423) : 


ACT II, SC. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 105 


Anth. 1am not marryed Ca/ar : let me heere Agrippa 143 
further fpeake. 

Agri. To hold you in perpetuall ami tie, 145 
To make you Brothers, and to knit your hearts 
With an vn-flipping knot, take Anthony, 
Oétauia to his wife : whofe beauty claimes 
No worfe a husband then the beft of men : whofe 
Vertue ,and whofe generall graces, fpeake 150 
That which none elfe can vtter. By this marriage, 
All little Ieloufies which now feeme great, 
And all great feares, which now import their dangers, 
Would then be nothing. Truth’s would be tales, 
Where now halfe tales be truth’s : her loue to both, 155 
Would each to other, and all loues to both 
Draw after her. Pardon what I haue fpoke 


For ’tis a ftudied not a prefent thought, 158 
143, 144. Agrippa.../peake] Separate 154,155. Zreth’s...truth’s| ¥. truths 
line, Rowe et seq. .. truths FF, et seq. 
144. further] farther Coll. Wh, i, 154. be tales] be but tales Pope,+, 
Hal. Steev. Var. 03, ’13, Sing. Dyce ii, iii. 
149, 150. who/e.../peake| One line, then be tales Cap. Coll. iii. be half tales 
Ff, Rowe et seq. Ran. Sta. conj. de as tales Steev. conj. 
153. zmport] impart Coll. MS ap. be tales only Ktly. be mere tales Id. conj. 
Cam. 155. halfe tales] half-tales Ktly. 


Instead of ‘your reproof of rashness’ we should now say, ‘the reproof of your rash- 
ness’ (unless ‘of’ here means adout, for).—CoRSON (p. 277): This speech seems 
to convey the impression that the proposal of marriage between Antony and Octavia, 
intimated in the last speech of Agrippa, was something new to Octavius. But he 
evidently knows just what’s coming from Agrippa. 

147. take Anthony] For other examples of the subjunctive used imperatively, 
see ABBOTT § 364. 

151. That which none else can vtter] WorDsworTH : That is, for themselves 
better than any one else can. 

154. would be tales] WALKER ( Vers. p. 165) approves of Hanmer’s ‘ would be 
but tales..—STAUNTON: The remedy [for the defective metre] most accordant with 
the poet’s manner is to read ‘would be 4a/f tales,’ etc.—[Herein Staunton was, 
unwittingly, anticipated by RANN, an editor far too often overlooked.—Ep.]—Hup- 
sON: The meaning here is somewhat dark, but may be explained thus: ‘ Even true 
reports of differences between you will then pass for idle tales, and will not catch 
public credit ; whereas now mere rumours of such differences easily gain belief, and 
so do all the mischief of truths.’ Here, as often, ‘ where’ is equivalent to whereas. 
—AxporrT (§ 508) gives this line as an instance of the omission of a foot [before 


‘Truth’s’]. 


106 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


By duty ruminated. 
Anth, Will Ce/ar {peake ? 160 
Cafar. Not till he heares how Axthony is toucht, 
With what is fpoke already. 
Anth. What power is in Agrippa, 
If I would fay Agrippa, be it fo, 
To make this good ? 165 
Cefar. The power of Cesar, 
And his power,vnto Odtauza. 
Anth, May I neuer 
(To this good purpofe,that fo fairely fhewes) 
Dreame of impediment : let me haue thy hand 170 
Further this act of Grace : and from this houre, 
The heart of Brothers gouerne in our Loues, 
And fway our great Defignes. 
Cefar. There’s my hand: 
A Sifter I bequeath you, whom no Brother 175 
Did euer loue fo deerely. Let her liue 
To ioyne our kingdomes, and our hearts , and neuer 
Flie off our Loues againe. 
Lepr. Happily, Amen. 
Ant.I did not think to draw my Sword ’gainft Pompey, 180 
For he hath laid ftrange courtefies, and great 


161. toucht] touch’d Rowe. 170, 171. hand Further] hand ; Fur- 
162. /poke] /poken FF, Rowe. ther Theob. et seq. (subs. ) 
already] Om. Han. 174. There's] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, . 
164. Agrippa... fo] As quotation, Sing. Zhere zs Theob. et cet. 
Theob. [Antony takes it. Coll. ii. 
166, 167. Zhe... And | Ff, Rowe, Pope, 180. ’gain/?] againft Ff. 
Knt, Sta. Separate line, Theob. et cet. 181. hath laid] hath FF. 


168, May] Mao F,,. 


162. is spoke] See line 115, above. 

164. If I would say] AsBoTr (§ 331): This means, ‘If I wished, were dis- 
posed, to say.’ 

170, let me haue thy hand] Note the instant change to the familiar ‘thy.’ 
Czesar is not so warm-hearted ; he retains the distant ‘you’ to the end.— Ep. 

175. I bequeath you] Murray (4. Z.D.s.v.): An ancient word, the retention 
of which is due to the traditional language of wills. II. To ‘say (a thing) away;’ 
to give or part with by formal declaration....b. To ‘leave’ by will. (The only 
surviving sense for which it is the proper term. > 

178. Flie off ] In the same construction with ‘ Let’ in line ve 


ACI 11, 5S. 11-7] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 107 


Of late vpon me. I muft thanke him onely, 182 
Leaft my remembrance, fuffer ill report : 
At heele of that, defie him. 

Lept. Time cals vpon’s, 185 
Of vs muft Pompey prefently be fought, 
Or elfe he feekes out vs. 

Anth. Where lies he? 


Cefar. About the Mount-Mefena. 
Anth. What is his ftrength by land? 190 
Cefar. Great,and encreafing : 


But by Sea he is an abfolute Mafter. 
Anth. So is the Fame, 
Would we had fpoke together. Haft we for it, 194 


182. him onely,] him, only Nicholson 
ap. Cam. 
183. Leaft] Left Ff et seq. 


190-192. What...Ma/fter| Ff, Rowe, 
+, Knt, Glo. Sta. Lines end, strength 
...5ea...master Han. Cam. et cet. 


185. ufon's] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Dyce, Wh. Glo. o’s Han. 
upon us Cap. et cet. 

188. Where] And where Han. Steev. 
Wars 035113. 

he ?] he, Cesar? Cap. he now ? 
Ktly, Words. 

189. Mefena] Misenum Rowe. Mise- 

nus Johns. 


190, 191. by land? Ceefar. Great ]} 
Ces. By land great Han. Ktly. 

190, What is] Ff, Rowe, +, Knt, Glo. 
Sta. What's Han. Cam. et cet. 

191, 192. Great...Sea] Separate line, 
Theob. et seq. 

193. So zs] So’s Han. 

Fame) Frame Bae Rowe. 
194. Haft] Hafte FF. 


183. Least my remembrance, suffer ill report] JoHNsON: Lest I be thought 
too willing to forget benefits, I must barely return him thanks, and then I will defy 
him. 

184. At heele] Assotr (§ 89) considers that the article is here omitted. It is 
also possible that it is absorbed_in the ¢ of ‘At.’ 

186. Of vs] ‘Of’ is here used of the agent where we should say dy. 

189. About] To complete the deficient line, ‘Or else he seekes out vs. Where 
lies he?’?. WALKER (§ (77z. iii, 298) would affix to it this ‘About’ and pronounce 
it ’ Bout. 

189. the Mount-Mesena] RoLFe: The promontory in the Bay of Naples, now 
known as the Punta di Miseno. 

194. Would we had spoke together] ScumipT (Zex.): Sometimes, in a kind 
of euphemism, ‘speak’ is equivalent to exchange blows, to fight; ‘they lie in view, 
but have not spoke as yet.’—Corvo/. I, iv, 4; ‘thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with 
thy sails; we’ll speak with thee at sea’—the present play, II, vi, 30.—[The third 
and last of Schmidt’s examples is the present line, which, in his translation of this 
play, he thus renders, ‘O waren wir schon an ihm!’ with the note (p. 173) that 
Tieck translates it: ‘ ‘¢ Hatt’ ich ihn doch gesprochen!’’ in which sense,’ Schmidt 
goes on to say, ‘all other editors, to judge from their eloquent silence, have also taken 


108 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT J, SC. ii. 


Yet ere we put our felues in Armes, difpatch we 195 
The bufineffe we haue talkt of. 

Cefar. With moft gladneffe, 
And do inuite you to my Sifters view, 
Whether ftraight Ile lead you. 

Anth. Let vs Lepidus not lacke your companie. 200 

Lep. Noble Anthony, not fickeneffe fhould detaine 
me. 

Flourifh. Exit omnes. 
Manet Enobarbus, Agrippa, Mecenas. 

Mec. Welcome from AXgypt Sir. 205 

Eno. Halfe the heart of Ce/ar, worthy Mecenas. My 
honourable Friend Agrippa. 

Agri. Good Enobarbus. 

Mece. We haue caufe to be glad, that matters are fo 


well difgefted : you ftaid well by’t in Egypt. 210 

199. Whether| Whither Ff. Han. 

Me) Ple FF, L will Varr. 203. Exit] Exeunt Ff. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. : 204-217. Om. Gar. 

200-202. Let...me] Lines end, Lepi- 204. Manet] Manent Ff. 
dus...Anthony...me Han. Cap. Var.’78 206. Mecenas.] JZecenas, Pope. Afe- 
et seq. ceanas ! Theob. +. 

[Scene III. Pope,+. 210. difgelted | digefted FE. 

201. Noble] Nobld F,. byt] Ff, Rowe, +, Sing. Dyce, 


203. Flourifh.] Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Wh. Glo. Ktly. dy zt Cap. et cet. 


it.’ He then quotes the same examples which he gives in his Lexicon, with the 
remark that they can bear no possible meaning other than that which he gives. —Ep. ] 

197. With most gladnesse] See AppoTT (§ 17) for other examples where 
‘most’ is used as the superlative of great. 

199. Whether] WALKER (Vers. 105): The verse indicates that this is a mono- 
syllable. 

206. Halfe the heart] DEIGHTON: A translation of Horace’s ‘animz dimidium 
mez. ’— Ode I, iii, 8. 

206. Eno. Halfe the heart, etc.] Drrius (5%. Jahrb. V, 267): Only once in 
the earnest political conference of the Triumvirs did Enobarbus venture, in prose, 
to interject a bold word, for which he was immediately checked ; but now, there- 
fore, after the departure of his rigorous masters, he enters with more freedom into 
a conversation in prose with Mecenas. But as soon as the talk rises from the 
domain of mere gossip to a description of Antony’s first meeting with Cleopatra, he 
resumes blank verse. The poet was well enough aware that only in blank verse 
could this majestic masterpiece be adequately portrayed, and, therefore, the humour- 
ous side of Enobarbus’s character is here abandoned. 

210. disgested] An old, not uncommon form; it occurs again in Corto/. I, i, 
154, in the Folio, 


ACT II, SC. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 109 


Enob. 1 Sir, we did fleepe day out of countenaunce : 211 
and made the night light with drinking. 

Mece. Eight Wilde-Boares rofted whole at a break- 
- faft : and but twelue perfons there. Is this true ? 

£no.This was but as a Flye by an Eagle.we had much 215 
more monftrous matter of Feaft, which worthily defer- 
ued noting. 

Mecenas. She’s a moft triumphant Lady, if report be 
fquare to her. 

Enob. When fhe firft met Marke Anthony, the purft 220 
vp his heart vpon the Riuer of Sidnis. 

Agri. There fhe appear’d indeed : or my reporter de- 
uis’d well for her. 


Eno. Iwill tell you, 224 
211. J Sir,] Ay Sir, Rowe. Ay, Sir, 220-271. Om. Kemble. 

Theob. Ay, str; Cap. Mal. et seq. 220. purft| purs’d Rowe. 
214. there.| Ff, Rowe, Pope. there / 221. Sidnis] Cydnus Ff. 

Sta. Ktly. there ;— Theob. et cet. (subs. ) 222, 223. deuis’d...her] Separate line, 
215. as] Om. Rowe ii, Pope. Cap. Varr. Ran. 
218-285. Transposed to follow I, i, 224. you,| you, Sir: Cap. 

71. Gar. 


213. Eight Wilde-Boares, etc.] See Appendix, Plutarch. 

215. This was but asa Flye by an Eagle] By the few editors who have taken 
note of this phrase, it has been interpreted as conveying merely a comparison; the 
eight boars were merely as a fly by the side of, and so in comparison with, an eagle. 
Is it not capable of a different interpretation? Mzecenas wonders that eight boars 
should have been a breakfast for only twelve persons, Enobarbus replies, in effect, 
that so far from eight boars having been considered an inordinate repast, it was no 
more than a fly would be considered a hearty breakfast by an eagle.—Ep. 

218, 219. if report be square to her] STEEVENS: That is, if report guadrates 
with her, or suits with her merits. 

221. vpon the Riuer of Sidnis] M. Mason: This passage is a strange instance 
of negligence and inattention in Shakspeare. Enobarbus is made to say that Cleo- 
patra gained Antony’s heart on the river Cydnus ; but it appears from the conclusion 
of his own description, that Antony had never seen her there ; that, whilst she was 
on the river, Antony was sitting alone, enthroned in the market-place, whistling to 
the air, all the people having left him to gaze upon her: and that, when she landed, 
he sent to her to invite her to supper.—COWDEN-CLARKE: The inattention is 
Mason’s, not Shakespeare’s ; the expression ‘ upon the river of Cydnus,’ is here used 
to signify ‘the district on the shores of the river of Cydnus,’ including the ‘city’ 
which ‘cast her people out upon her,’ and its ‘market-place’ wherein ‘ Antony’ sat 
‘enthroned.’ The idiom ‘upon the Seine,’ or ‘upon the Thames’ is employed to 
express the adjacent shores of those rivers, the country in their neighborhood.—RoLrz : 
Mason’s criticism reminds one of Yellowplush’s surprise at finding Boulogne-sur- 
Mer was on the shore and zo¢ ‘on the sea.’ 


110 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


The Barge fhe fat in, like a burnifht Throne 


[acri, sc. it, 


225 


Burnt on the water : the Poope was beaten Gold, 
Purple the Sailes :and fo perfumed that 


The Windes were Loue-ficke. 


With them the Owers were Siluer, 


Which to the tune of Flutes kept ftroke, and made 


230 


The water which they beate, to follow fafter; 

As amorous of their ftrokes. For her owne perfon, 

It beggerd all difcription, fhe did lye 

In her Pauillion, cloth of Gold, of Tiffue, 

O’re-picturing that Venns, where we fee 235 


225-249. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 

226. Burnt | Burn’d Mal. Steev.Varr. 
Coll. Dyce, Wh. Glo. Hal. 

228, 229. The... Siluer] One line, 


oars Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Dyce 
li, iii, the oars F, et cet. 


231. fafeer| after Gould. 
232. their ftrokes| her ftrokes ¥ F ,. 


Pope et seq. 
Loue-ficke. With them] Ff, 


234. cloth of Gold, of Tiffue] cloth-of- 
gold of tissue Sta. In parenthesis, Cap. 


Rowe. Jove-sick with ’em, Pope,+, et seq. 
Var.’73. love-sick: with them Knut. 1, of Tiffue| and tissue Coll. ii, 
li. love-sick with them: Cap. et cet. Ktly. 


229. the Owers] the Oares FF. th 235. Venns] Venus Ff. 


225. The Barge she sat in, etc.] HAazLitr (p. 97): The rich and poetical 
description of Cleopatra’s person seems to prepare the way for, and almost to justify 
the subsequent infatuation of Antony when in the sea-fight at Actium, he leaves the 
battle, and ‘like a doating mallard’ follows her flying sails —HARTLEY COLERIDGE 
(ii, 184) : Beautiful as this description is, one might almost desire that it had been 
uttered by a more interesting personage. Dryden has transferred it to Antony,—copied 
it pretty closely,—or perhaps kept closer to Plutarch’s prose. The poetry he almost 
suppresses ; but he certainly introduces the story more artfully. Narration for its 
own sake is not, however, a frequent fault of Shakespeare. 

228. were Loue-sicke.] KNIGHT (ed. i and ii) virtually adheres to the punc- 
tuation of the Folio, which he observes ‘is surely more poetical.’ Dyce quotes the 
observation, prints it in Italics, and affixes two exclamation marks; a cheap mode 
of expressing a patronizing superiority. In Knight’s Second Edition, Revised, the 
Folio is abandoned and Capell followed.—Ep. 

234. cloth of Gold, of Tissue] CoLLier (ed. ii): This is nonsense; it could 
not be ‘cloth of gold’ if it were ‘of tissue.’ What was meant must have been that 
the ‘cloth of gold’ of the pavilion was lined with ‘ tissue.” The contraction for ‘and’ 
was not unfrequently read of by old printers, and such, according to the MS, seems 
to have been the case here—STAUNTON: That is, cloth-of-gold o” a ground of tissue. 
The expression so repeatedly occurs in early English books that we cannot imagine 
how anyone familiar with such reading can have missed it.—[Staunton here quotes 
Collier’s note, which, he says, is made ‘ with incredible simplicity.’ Collier in his 
Third Edition abandoned and, the reading of his MS.] 

235. that Venns] THEOBALD suggests that there is here a reference to the cele- 


ACT II, SC. 1i.] 


The fancie out-worke Nature. 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA III 


On each fide her, 236 


Stood pretty Dimpled Boyes, like fmiling Cupids, 
With diuers coulour’d Fannes whofe winde did feeme, 
To gloue the delicate cheekes which they did coole, 


And what they vndid did. 


Agrip’ Obhrare for Anthony. 
Her Gentlewoman, like the Nereides, 


Eno. 


So many Mer-maides tended her i’th’eyes, 


And made their bends adornings. 


238. diners coulour'd] Ff.  divers- 
-colour d Rowe, + ,Varr. Ran. Knt, Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. diverse-colour’d Cap. et cet. 

239. gloue] glove Ff. glow Rowe et seq. 

240. undid did | undid, did Theob. et 
seq. (subs. ) 

242. Gentlewoman] Gentlewomen Ff. 

LVereides| Nereids Pope. Nereids, 
or Han. 


At the Helme. 244 


243. Mer-maides] ¥,, Rowe ii, Mere- 
maids ¥ .F., Rowe i. mermaids Pope. 
2’ th’ eyes| Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce ii, 
iii, Wh. 2’¢h’guise Mason, Sing. 
1’ th’ dais Gould. 2’ the eyes Cap. et cet. 
244. made...adornings.| made their 
Bends adornings. Theob. made...ador- 
imgs. Han. Warb, Johns. 
bends| bands, ribands Gould. 


brated Venus Anadyomene of Apelles which was painted from Campaspe asa model, 
whereof an account is given in Pliny’s Matural History, Book xxxv, chap. 10. If 
Shakespeare had any particular Venus in mind, Theobald is possibly right. WaAR- 
BURTON, for no reason, that I can see, other than jealousy of Theobald, asserts that it 
was the Venus of Protogenes and gives the reference to Pliny which Theobald did not 
give. Warburton’s assertion, but not Theobald’s suggestion, is repeated in the Vario- 
rum of 1821, and has been ever since, by those who have mentioned it at all, accepted 
as his own. Yet, had his reference been verified, it would have been found that 
while the Venus Anadyomene by Apelles is there twice described, there is not a word 
said of any Venus by Protogenes.—ED. 

240. what they vndid did] JonHNson: It might be read less harshly: ‘ what 
they did, undid. MALONE: The wind of the fans seemed to give a new colour to 
Cleopatra’s cheeks, which they were employed to cool; and ‘ what they undid,’ z. e. 
that warmth which they were intended to diminish or allay, ¢hey did, 2. e., they seemed 
to produce.—STAUNTON: We should prefer, ‘what they wxdy’d, dy’d,’ that is, while 
diminishing the colour of Cleopatra’s cheeks, by cooling them, they reflected a new 
glow from the warmth of their own tints. 

242. Nereides] Dyce (ed. ii): Here in my first edition I altered ‘ Nereides’ to 
Nereids,—wrongly ; for formerly the word used to be written (Vereddes ; see, for 
instance, the article ‘ Nereides’ in Heywood’s Various Historie concerninge Women, 
etc., p. 36, ed. 1624. 

243. Mer-maides] COLERIDGE (p. 317): I have the greatest difficulty in believ- 
ing that Shakespeare wrote the first ‘mermaids.’ He never, I think, would have so 
weakened by useless anticipation the fine image immediately following. The epithet 
‘seeming’ becomes so extremely improper after the whole number had been posi- 
tively called ‘so many mermaids.’ 

243, 244. So many Mer-maides tended her i’th’eyes, And made their bends 
adornings] WARBURTON: This is sense indeed, and may be understood thus, her 


Il2 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


[243, 244. tended her i’th’eyes, And made their bends adornings] 
maids bowed with so good an air, that it added new graces to them. But this is not 
what Shakespeare would say ; Cleopatra, in this famous scene, personated Venus just 
rising from the waves; at which time, the mythologists tell us, the Sea-deities sur- 
rounded the goddess to adore, and pay her homage. Agreeably to this fable Cleo- 
patra had dressed her maids, the poet tells us, like Nereids. To make the whole 
conformable to the story represented, we may be assured Shakspeare wrote: ‘ And 
made their bends adorings.’ They did her observance in the posture of adoration, 
as if she had been Venus.—HEATH (p. 455) : I very much doubt whether such an 
affected flat expression as adorimgs came from Shakespeare. The word, dend, is here 
used for an arch, and the dends of the eyes are the eye-brows. Thus the sense will 
be, That these seeming nereids were employed in adjusting Cleopatra’s eye-brows, 
as often as they happened to be discomposed by the fanning of the boys, or any other 
accident. This interpretation is confirmed by the preceding words, tended her in the 
eyes.—[The student is entreated not to condemn Heath utterly on account of this 
one aberration of mind ; he is usually eminently sane.—Ep. ]—CAPELL (i, 33): That 
is, watch’d her looks, to receive commandments from them: in the receiving of 
which, the submiss inclination of body was perform’d with so much elegance, that 
their other personal beauties were much set out by it. This is the obvious meaning 
of ‘made their bends adornings..— JOHNSON: Perhaps ‘tended her dy ¢h’ eyes,’ dis- 
covered her will by her eyes.—STEEVENS ( Var. 1773) : That Cleopatra personated 
Venus we know; but that Shakespeare was acquainted with the circumstance of 
homage being paid her by the Deities of the Sea [as stated by Warburton], is by no 
means as certain.—TOLLET: I think ‘bends’ or dands is the same word, and 
means, in this place, the several companies of Nereids, that waited on Cleopatra.— 
[Although I have no idea at what age Tollet died, it is to be regretted that he did 
not live long enough to withdraw this conjecture.—Ep. ]—MALONE in the Var. of 
1778 apprehended that ‘their bends’ refers to Cleopatra’s eyes, and that ‘her 
attendants watched the motion of her eyes, the dexds or movements of which added 
new lustre to her beauty.’ But he withdrew this interpretation in his edition of 
1790, and gave in his adhesion to Warburton’s adorings. And in the Var. of 1821, 
he conceded that ‘tended her i’the eyes’ ‘ay only mean they performed their 
duty in the sight of their mistress..—STEEVENS ( Var. 1793): Perhaps ‘tended 
her i’the eyes’ may signify that the attendants on Cleopatra looked observantly into 
her eyes, to catch her meaning, without giving her the trouble of verbal explana- 
tion. After all, I believe it only means waited before her, inher sight. So, in Ham- 
Zet, IV, iv, 5: ‘If that his majesty would aught of us, We shall express our duty 
in his eye,’ z. ¢. in our personal attendance on him, by giving him ocular proof of 
our respect. Henley explains it thus: ‘obeyed her looks without waiting for her 
words.’-MoncK Mason: The passage, as it stands, appears to me wholly unin- 
telligible ; but it may be amended by a very slight deviation from the text, by read- 
ing, the guise, instead of ‘ the eyes,’ and then it will run thus: ‘ Her gentlewomen, like 
the Nereides, So many mermaids, tended her i’ the gwzse, And made their bends, 
adornings.’ ‘In the guise,’ means in the form.of mermaids, who were supposed to 
have the head and body of a beautiful woman, concluding in a fish’s tail: and by 
the bends which they made adornings, Enobarbus means the flexure of the fictitious 
fishes’ tails, in which the limbs of the women were necessarily involved, in order to 
carry on the deception, and which it seems they adapted with so much art as to make 
them an ornament, instead of a deformity. This conjecture is supported by the very 


ACTH, SC. 11.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 113 


[243, 244. tended her i’th’eyes, And made their bends adornings | 
next sentence, where Enobarbus, proceeding in his description, says: ‘at the helm 
A seeming mermaid steers.’--[This note of Mason with its harmless allusion to the 
‘flexure of the fictitious tails,’ afforded STEEVENS too good an opportunity to be 
lost. Accordingly, after observing that Mason’s conjecture, guzse, could not be thus 
used absolutely, without a limiting noun, he turns to the mermaids, who, ‘ whatever 
grace the tails of legitimate mermaids might boast of in their native element, must 
have produced but awkward effects when taken out of it, and exhibited on the deck 
of a galley... . I will undertake, in short, the expense of providing characteristic 
tails for any set of mimick Nereids, if my opponent will engage to teach them the 
exercise of these adscititious terminations, so as “to render them a grace instead of a 
deformity.’’ . . . It may be added also, that the Sirens and descendants of Nereus, 
are understood to have been complete and beautiful women, whose breed was 
uncrossed by the salmon or dolphin tribe.’ Finally, with the malicious smile still 
on his face, Steevens proposed to amend the phrase ‘merely by the omission of a 
single letter, and read “ made their ends adornings.”.’ Mason replied very temper- 
ately, like the Right Honourable gentleman that he was, in an Appendix to his Com- 
ments on Beaumont and Fletcher, maintaining his ground and concluding with the 
assertion that he could ‘ find no sense in the passage as’ Steevens and Malone ‘ have 
printed it.’ The foregoing notes which I have condensed are ‘so very long, as 
originally written,’ that in the Variorum of 1821 Boswell transferred them ‘to the 
end of the play’; there the student may read them at length; but, as in all such 
controversies, he will find but a ha’porth of Shakespeare to an intolerable deal of 
the disputants—Ep.] Z. JACKSON, whose insufferable book was many years ago 
banned from these pages, must now be heard, inasmuch as his contribution to the 
discussion happens to be of value. He believes (p. 293) that ‘ bends’ is here used in 
a nautical sense (the ‘bends’ are, according to Admiral SMyTH’s Sazlor’s Word- 
Book, ‘the thickest and strongest planks on the outward part of the ship’s side, 
between the plank-streaks on which men set their feet in climbing up’) ; the‘eyes’ 
also is nautical and means the ‘dead eyes’ (a dead-eye, also according to Admiral 
SMYTH, is ‘a sort of round flattish wooden block, ... pierced with three holes 
through the flat part, in order to receive a rope called a laniard, which, correspond- 
ing with three holes in another dead-eye on the shroud end, creates a purchase 
to extend the shrouds, etc.’); ‘on the dends of Cleopatra’s barge, therefore, stood 
her gentlewomen, uncovered to the waist,’ with an artificial mermaid’s tail floating 
on the water. Thus Cleopatra’s attendants, ‘as so many mermaids, tended her 
i’the eyes (for there they held by the rigging, connected with the eyes), and made the 
bends (whereon they stood) adornings, 7. ¢. they adorned the dends, which other- 
wise would have remained devoid of ornaments.’ Accordingly, Jackson proposed 
to read: —‘ And made ¢#e bends adornings.’ [Jackson is undoubtedly the earliest to 
apply a nautical interpretation to ‘bends’ and ‘ eyes,’—an interpretation to which 
the most recent criticism seems to be drifting. Unfortunately Jackson restricted ‘ eyes’ 
to the ‘dead eyes.’]—KwnicHT: We hold to the ‘adornings’ of the original.— 
CoLLiER : ‘ Tended her i’the eyes’ seems to mean nothing else but tended zm her 
sight; Mr Barron Field truly remarks, that in A/d. WV. D., we have the expression 
‘ gambol in his eyes,’ for gambol in his sight; ‘ made their bends adornings’ is prob- 
ably to be understood, that they bowed with so much grace as to add to their beauty. 
—[Zachary Jackson believed, as we have seen, that ‘th’eyes’ refers to ‘dead eyes,’ 
for the nautical use of which term there is good authority; in the following note 


8 


114 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IT ySe:ni, 


[243, 244. tended her i’th’eyes, And made their bends adornings] 
‘th’eyes’ is supposed to refer to the hawse-holes,—a use for which, in Shakespeare’s 
time, authority is thus far lacking. ‘The note is much condensed and paraphrased, 
as indeed all the notes on this vexed question are, of necessity. ]—C. F. B. (Put- 
nam’s Maga., March, 1857) : In Webster’s Dzct. under the article ‘ Eye’ there will 
be found a phrase ‘the eyes of a ship,’ with the definition that they are ‘the parts 
which lie near the hawse-holes.’ [‘The foremost part of the bows of a ship, 
where formerly eyes were painted; also the hawse holes.’—Webster, Dict. 1891. ] 
It is a phrase in common use, at present, among mariners, when speaking of 
the interior bows of a vessel. Bearing in mind the foregoing definition, and also 
that ‘tended’ may be an abbreviation of attended, I think we shall find no 
difficulty in reading the passage as it now stands. If we follow Enobarbus’s 
sketch we shall find that the size and interior arrangements of the barge were such 
as to allow no other space for ‘her gentlewomen’ to occupy, and that they must 
be stationed in the bows. The pavilion was too small and the air too warm to 
admit any more than the ‘dimpled boys’ on each side of Cleopatra and they were 
endeavouring to keep its fair owner cool. There can be no space for the majority 
of the gentlewomen near the pavilion, while, stationed in the bows, or eyes of the 
barge, their various and ever-changing attitudes and movements (either while wait- 
ing on Cleopatra’s commands or when gazing on the crowd that lined the shore) 
added to and improved the general effect of the scene, or ‘ made their bends adorn- 
ings.’ WALKER (C7i?z. iii, 299): Undoubtedly, adorings is the true reading. In 
the play of Dr. Dodypol [I, i, p. 101, ed. Bullen] the same erratum occurs,—‘ And 
devout people would from farre repaire, Like Pilgrims, with their dutuous sacrifice, 
Adorning thee as Regent of their loves.’ Undoubtedly, adoring; and so correct in 
Spenser, Virgil’s Gzat,—‘ Wherefore ye Sisters which the glorie bee Of the Pierian 
streames, fayre Naiades, Go too, and dauncing all in companie, 4dorne that God.’ 
[ll. 25-28, ed. Grosart.] Original, v. 18,—‘ite, sorores, Naides, et celebrate deum 
plaudente chorea..—Dyce (ed. ii), who cites, but does not quote, this note of 
Walker, pronounces adoring ‘a more than plausible emendation.’—R. G. WHITE: 
‘In the eye’ was a universally recognized idiom for in the presence, before the 
face, and was particularly used to express service before a superior. Thus, Cym- 
beline, III, v, 142, ‘first kill him, and in her eyes; there shall she see my 
valour.’—-[White’s text reads ‘adornings,’ but his note implies that he had adopted 
adorings. He asks, ‘is it not clear that we have here an instance of the super- 
fluous s final, and that “adoring’’ is not a substantive, but a participle?’ In his 
Second Edition, 1883, he still follows the Folio, and pronounces the phrase, ‘incom- 
prehensible ;’ and adds, ‘no acceptable explanation or correction has been proposed.’ ] 
—STAUNTON: By adopting [Warburton’s] likely substitution, and supposing the not 
improbable transposition of ‘eyes’ and ‘bends,’ we may at least obtain a meaning: 
—‘ tended her in the demas, And made their eyes adorings.’ It may count for some-~ 
thing, though not much, in favour of the transposition we assume, that in Pericles, 
TI, iv, we find,—‘ That all chose eyes adored him.’,—JOHN HUNTER: That is, 
Attended on her with their eyes; and by their gaze directed towards her formed 
ornamental appendages to the main figure. Compare Psalms, cxxiii, 2: ‘As the 
eyes of a maiden look unto the hand of her mistress, so our eyes wait,’ etc. —SCHMIDT 
( Zrans., note, p. 174): In the only other passage in Shakespeare where ‘bend’ 
occurs as a substantive, it refers, not to a bending or bowing, but to the eyes, ‘ that 
same eye whose bend doth awe the world.’—/u/. Cas., I, ii, 123. .. . ‘ Their’ in 


ACT HJ, SC, il.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 115 
[243, 244. tended her i’th’eyes, And made their bends adornings ] 
the present passage refers to ‘ eyes’ in the preceding line, and the literal translation 
runs: ‘sie erwiesen ihr in (oder mit) den Augen Huldigung, und machten deren 
Blick (oder Ausdruck) zu einem Schmuck.’ In his Lexicon (s.v. Adornings) 
Schmidt paraphrases the sentence thus :—‘ regarded her with such veneration as to 
reflect beauty on her, to make her more beautiful, by their looks.’-—C. M. INGLEBY 
(Sh. Hermeneutics, etc. 1875, p. 119, footnote) : We read, after Zachary Jackson, 
‘the bends’ adornings.’ [Z. J. wrote dends without an apostrophe.] Both ‘ eyes’ 
and ‘bends’ were parts of Cleopatra’s barge. The eyes of a ship are the hawse- 
holes ; the Jends are the wales, or thickest planks in the ship’s sides. North has it ; 
‘others tending the tackle and ropes of the barge ;’ which settles the question as to 
the meaning of eyes, and that once fixed, the other part of the interpretation is 
inevitable. What could the hardy soldier, Enobarbus, care for the curves of the 
mermaid’s bodies? To us it is obvious that if the girls tended Cleopatra at the eyes, 
they would ¢here be the natural ornaments of the bends.—[Jackson held the ‘eyes’ 
of the barge to be the ‘ dead-eyes,’ for which he had authority in so far as ‘dead mens 
eyes’ is mentioned, together with ‘ pullies, blockes, shiuers, caskets and crowes feete,’ 
in Captain Smith’s Accidence for yong Seamen, 1626, p. 15; Ingleby changes these 
‘eyes’ to the ‘hawse holes’ for which to be sure he has modern authority in Admiral 
Smyth’s Sazlor’s Word-Book, 1867, s.v. Eyes of her, but it is open to doubt that this use 
was known in Shakespeare’s time. I can find no trace of it inthe V. #.D. Finally, 
how Ingleby’s quotation from North ‘se¢¢les the question as to the meaning of eyes’ 
is, I fear to me, incomprehensible.—Ep. ]—F. J. FURNIVALL (ZV. & Qu. 1875, V, iv, 
103) quotes North’s words, ‘ others tending the tackle and ropes of the barge,’ and 
then continues :—I think that Shakespeare’s repetition of North’s Zend strengthens 
the position of those who urge that the eyes were the eyes of the barge,—the bows ; 
near the hawseholes or eyes, through which the anchor chains passed,—and not 
Cleopatra’s eyes ; while on the other hand, North’s allusion to the Graces makes it 
certain that ‘their bends’ is the curves of the ladies’ bodies, and not the bends or 
prominent streaks,—gy. including the gunwale,—of the boat, as has been suggested 
with the reading ‘the bend’s.’... To the meaning generally given to ‘tended her 
i’ the eyes,’ ‘attended to the movements of her eyes, watched her eyes for orders,’ I 
do not take.—E. H. PicKERSGILL (VV. & Qu. 1875, V, iv, 365): Plutarch speaks 
of ‘tending the tackle,’ but, according to Shakespeare, the gentlewomen, who are 
first mentioned ‘tended er’ (Cleopatra) z. ¢. were in waiting upon her. . . . ‘ Tended 
her i’the eyes’ is equivalent (I take it) to tended her wth their eyes, gave her (ina 
sense different from that in which the term is usually employed) eye-service. Com- 
pare Hamlet, IV, iii, 4, ‘the distracted multitude, Who like not in their judgement, 
but their eyes,’—that is, like in their eyes. If one may be said to /#e in eyes, why 
not also ¢ewd in eyes? I presume that Mr Furnivall has found contemporary 
authority for the use of the word ‘eyes’ in the sense of the bows of a ship, although 
he has not produced any reference.—J. E. SMITH (4. & Qu. 1890, VII, x, 402) : 
The suggestion now made is that ‘tended her i’the eyes’ should be dended to the 
oars, This change would make clear the meaning, mend the measure [is it defec- 
tive ?—Ep.], and complete the description. We now see the Nereides rowing, 
steering, and sailing the barge, instead of ‘tending Cleopatra i’th’eyes,’ an inscrut- 
able function not to be found in Plutarch. ... Oars is spelt differently on each of 
the three occasions when it occurs in the Folio: ‘oares,’ in 7wo Gent. II, iii; 
‘ores, Much Ado, II, i; and ‘Owers’ in line 229 of the present speech. Now if 


116 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


[243, 244. tended her i’th’eyes, And made their bends adornings ] 
in the MS it were indistinct, or had been subjected to any other orthographical vari- 
ation, or spelt as in AZuch Ado, what more likely than that the printers, at their wits’ 
end, should set it up as ‘eyes’? Then ‘tended’ would be a very probable mistake 
for bended.—[This ingenious but extremely violent emendation deeply stirred the 
contributors to Motes and Queries. R. M. SPENCE (1890, VII, x, 483) termed the 
supposition that the female attendants rowed the heavy silver oars, ‘ preposterous.’ 
T. A. TROLLOPE (1891, VII, xi, 82) came to the rescue, declaring that he considered 
the emendation ‘peculiarly and strikingly happy,’ and furthermore ‘humbly sub- 
mitted’ that ‘tended her i’the eyes’ is ‘sheer nonsense.’ In the same volume (p. 
182) H. INGLEBY, BR. NICHOLSON, and R. M. SPENCE, all horrorstruck at the stigma 
of ‘sheer nonsense,’ pleaded for the original text, with here and there a withering 
sneer at the proposed emendation. On p. 363, TROLLOPE replied in a long com- 
munication (adhering inflexibly to his original opinion), written so brilliantly through- 
out and with such good-humoured benignity that his opponents must have been 
glad, I should think, that they had been the means of eliciting it. Of course their 
own opinions were not a whit changed by it. He who can acknowledge that he is 
convicted of an error is unfit to enter into a discussion; e’en though vanquished he 
must argue still. And so, in vol. xii (of the same Series), p. 62, H. INGLEBY rejoined ; 
J. E. Smitu, the fons e¢ origo of the discussion, unrepentant, reinforced his original 
position ; G. Jorcey asked whether the line would not have run either ‘tended zz 
her eyes,’ or ‘tended her z:’ their eyes,’ if Titania’s ‘gambol in his eyes’ is to be 
taken as a parallel phrase (as had been alleged by Spence and earlier by Barron 
Field); and C. C. B. suggested ‘ended on her eyes.’ On p. 202 (of the same 
volume), we have TROLLOPE again master of fence and, apparently, of the situ- 
ation; and Br. NICHOLSON and SPENCE, and W. F. PRIDEAUX joinsin. Finally, 
on p. 261, TROLLOPE ‘feels obliged to write yet a few words (my last on this sub- 
ject) ;’ G. Jorcey suggests ‘tend her in her eyes And make their bends adorn- 
ings;’ H. INGLEBY suggests that ‘bends’ ‘ may be the equivalent in nautical phrase- 
ology, to &nxots;’ C. E. SEAMAN asks whether there might not lie in this descrip- 
tion some allusion to the heightened effect of Cleopatra’s eyes by the use of stibium 
or antimony. ‘By this the eyes’ bends (z. ¢, either the curves of the eyelids, or 
every motion to which her eyes were “ bent’’) had been made adornings.’ The 
Epitor of Notes and Queries here threw down his warder with the remark that 
‘he ventured to think this passage has received a full share of attention,’ whereto I 
think every one will agree. The discussion had lasted from the 22nd of November, 
1890 to the 3rd of October, 1891 and I think every one of the disputants would have 
been supposed upon a book that he ended precisely where he began. During its 
course, however, but not in connection with it, W. W. Lioyp (/ézd. VII, xii, 4) pro- 
posed the emendation ‘’tended her i’the eyes, And marked their bends, adoring.’ 
The discussion had a brief recrudescence in 1902, when N. H. PRENTER (IX, ix, 
222) revived the idea that the ‘eyes’ were the hawseholes, the ‘bends’ were the 
sailors’ £vods, etc. On p. 342 of the same volume, J. MARSHALL argued that the 
‘eyes’ were sailors’ oops, etc. In the meantime, while this discussion was going on, 
DEIGHTON gave his paraphrase of the original text :—‘the mermaids waited upon 
her, ever observant of her wishes as shown by her looks, and lent fresh beauty to 
the picture by the grace with which they paid their homage.’ H.LITTLEDALE, in 
his admirable edition of Dyce’s Glossary, gives, as a definition of ‘bends’ in the 
present passage, ‘ glances ; their eyes turned towards her, and by their bright glances 


ACT Il, SC. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 117 


A feeming Mer-maide fteeres : The Silken Tackle, 245 
Swell with the touches of thofe Flower-foft hands, 
That yarely frame the office.From the Barge 


A ftrange inuifible perfume hits the fenfe 248 
245. Yackle] Tackles Ff, Rowe,+, 247. frame] serve Gould. 

Varr. Ran. the office| their office Ktly conj. 
246. Swell] Smell Coll. ii, iii. move 248. tnuifible| imvasible or invasive 

Gould. Sevv’d Kinnear. Gould. 


247. yarely] yearly FF, Rowe ii. 


adorned her.’ The latest voice to be heard on the question, and one worthy of all re- 
spect, is that of ROLFE, who says, ‘ The part of North’s account which corresponds to 
“made their bends adornings ” seems to be the statement that the gentlewomen were 
apparelled ‘‘like the Graces,’’ and this must suggest a reference to grace in their 
movements. I believe that in all that has been written on the passage, no one has 
called attention to the very close paraphrase of North which Shakespeare gives: 
“« Her ladies and gentlewomen ... were apparelled ike the nymphs Weredds (which 
are the mermaids of the waters) and’’—after getting so far we have only to seek 
a parallel for “like the Graces;’? and may we not find it in “ made their bends 
adornings ?’’ —made their very obeisance, as they tended her, like that of the Graces 
waiting on Venus.’ I doubt that there is any corruption in this passage. A para- 
phrase by RANN has been reserved as a final word. To me it adequately expresses 
the meaning of the whole phrase :—‘ Her gentlewomen took their orders from the 
motion of her eyes, which gave her the happy opportunity of adding, by her looks, 
new lustre to her beauty; and made their obeisance with the utmost imaginable 
grace.’—ED. | ; 

246. Swell with the touches, etc.] COLLIER (ed. ii) adopts the change, sme//, 
of his MS. Ina note he asks, ‘how was ‘‘the silken tackle” to ‘‘swe//’? 2? The 
“‘ flower-soft hands” imparted a perfume to “the silken tackle,” and we are told just 
afterwards that the ‘‘smell’’ reached even ‘‘ the adjacent wharfs.” ’—R. G. WHITE 
(Sk.’s Scholar, p. 450): If Mr Collier must be literal, does he not know that cordage 
will swell with handling ?—DvceE (S¢rictures, etc. p. 204) : Mr Collier ought certainly 
to have accounted for so remarkable a circumstance [as set forth in preceding note] 
on physical grounds, and also to have shown (what may be doubted) that, in Shake- 
speare’s days, the verb ‘smell’ was ever followed by the preposition w##.—THISEL- 
TON (p. t3): The yielding softness of their hands gives rise to the illusion that the 
silken tackle swells.—[There is to me something peculiarly disagreeable in the 
emendation of Collier’s MS; the idea that any sme// results from a human touch is 
offensive, and wain-ropes cannot hale me to the belief that sae// is Shakespeare’s 
word. I do not forget ‘Since when it grows and smells, I swear, Not of itself but 
thee,’ and I also do not forget that the rosy wreath was perfumed because ‘ Thou 
thereon didst only breathe,’—a very different thing from smelling because it had been 
handled. It is my firm belief that the silken tackle actually swelled with sheer delight 
at having been clasped by those flower-soft hands.—ED. ] 

246. Flower-soft] Compare ‘ marble-constant’ V, ii, 291 ; and for many another 
similar compound see ABBOTT, § 430. 

247. yarely frame the office] STEEVENS: That is, readily and dexterously per- 
form the task they undertake.—[See 7empest, I, i, 4, and elsewhere in that play. ] 


118 THE TRAGEDIE OF FACT Il, Sas 


Of the adiacent Wharfes. The Citty caft 

Her people out vpon her : and Axzthony 250 

Enthron’d i’th’ Market-place, did fit alone, 

Whifling to’th’ayre : which but for vacancie, 

Had gone to gaze on Cleopater too, 

And made a gap in Nature. 
Agri. Rare Egiptian. 255 
Eno. Vpon her landing, Anthony {ent to her, 

Inuited her to Supper : fhe replyed, 

It fhould be better, he became her gueft: 

Which fhe entreated, our Courteous Azthony, 259 


251. 2’th’}] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. 7 the cet. 


Steev. Varr. Sing. Ktly. z’¢he Cap. et 253. Cleopater] F,. 
cet. 259. entreated, | entreated. Rowe. 
252. to’th’] F,. to th’ FF, Rowe, our] Om. Pope, Han. 


+, Dyce ii, ili, Wh. fo the Cap. et 


249. Wharfes] SCHMIDT (Zex.) : The banks of a river; as in Hamlet, I, v, 33: 
‘the fat weed that rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf.’ -W. W. SKEAT (Academy, 6 
April, 1878) : The root of ‘ wharf’ is the same as that which appears in Anglo-Saxon 
hweorfan, to turn, so that wharf is rightly spelt with initial wh. But the word wharf, 
in the sense of bank or sea-shore, is misspelt. It should rather be warf, and even 
then it is a corruption—viz. of the Middle English warth. The derivation is from a 
Teutonic base wara, meaning ‘sea.’ Hence was formed Anglo-Saxon weroth or 
warth, meaning ‘sea-shore,’ or ‘shore,’ ‘ bank.’ 

254. And made a gap in Nature] WARBURTON: Alluding to an axiom in the 
peripatetic philosophy, then in vogue, that ‘ Nature abhors a vacuum.’—MALONE: 
‘But for vacancy’ means for fear of a vacuum.—Corson (/ntrod. etc. p. 265) : What 
is chiefly remarkable, are the additions which Shakespeare makes to his prose original ; 
his imagination projects itself into inanimate things and impassions them, For ex- 
ample, the winds are represented as /ove-stck with the perfumes from the sails ; the 
water beat by silver oars, follows faster, as if amorous of their strokes; the silken 
tackle szwell with the touches of the flower-soft hands that tend them, the very air of 
the city, whose inhabitants had all gone out to gaze on Cleopatra, is represented as 
eager to go and gaze upon her too, but that it feared to make a gap in nature! In 
such a highly-colored and richly-sensuous passage, the great artist creates the atmos- 
phere in which the passion-fated pair are exhibited. 

257. Supper] ‘ With vs the nobilitie, gentrie, and students, doo ordinarilie go to 
dinner at eleuen before noone, and to supper at fiue, or betueene fiue and six at 
afternoone. The merchants dine and sup seldome before twelue at noone, and 
six at night especialie in London.... As for the poorest sort they generallie 
dine and sup when they may.’—Harrison, Description of England, etc. 1587; 
prefixed to Holinshed’s Chronicles, Bk. II, cap. vi. p. 171 (p. 166, Mew Sh. Soc. 
Reprint). 

258. It should be better] For this use of ‘should,’ see ABBOTT, § 326. 


ACT II, Sc. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 11g 


Whom nere the word of no woman hard fpeake, 260 
Being barber’d ten times o’re, goes to the Featt ; 
And for his ordinary, paies his heart, 
For what his eyes eate onely. 
Agri. Royall Wench : 
She made great C@/ar lay his Sword to bed, 265 
He ploughed her, and fhe cropt. 
Eno. I faw her once 
Hop forty Paces through the publicke ftre ete, 
And hauing loft her breath, fhe fpoke, and panted, 
That fhe did make defeét, perfeCtion, 270 
And breathleffe powre breath forth. 


260. of no] of no, Rowe. of No Pope. Theob. et seq. 


of No Theob. et seq. (subs.) —wo Cap. 271. breathleffe powre| breathless, 
conj. power Han. Cap. et seq. 
hard \ heard Ff. breath] breathe ¥¥,, Pope et 


268. fereete,| street. Rowe. street; seq. 


260. woman hard speake] ‘ Hard’ is here probably a phonetic spelling of the 
compositors. Possibly this pronunciation of seard may still exist in New England. 
It was common enough fifty years ago.—Eb. 

262. ordinary] NARrs: A public dinner, where each person pays his share. The 
word, in this sense, is certainly not obsolete; but it is here [z. ¢. in Nares’s own 
Glossary] inserted for the sake of observing that ordinaries were long the universal 
resort of gentlemen, particularly in the reign of James I. They were, as a modern 
writer well observes, ‘ The lounging-places of the men of the town and the fantastic 
gallants who herded together. Ordinaries were the exchange for news, the echoing 
places for all sorts of town-talk; there they might hear of the last new play and 
poem ; these resorts were attended also to save charges of housekeeping.’ — Curiosities 
of Literature, iii, 82. In 1608, a common price for a genteel ordinary was two 
shillings. 

264. Wench] This is by no means always a derogatory term. In the most 
tragic moment of his life Othello calls his dead Desdemona ‘O ill-starr’d wench!’ 
—ED. 

271. And breathlesse powre breath forth] CAPELL (i, 33): ‘Power’ is— 
power of charming; this, says Enobarbus, Cleopatra breath’d forth even by being 
breathless ; making (as he express’d it before) defects perfections, by the grace that 
went along with her panting —DANIEL (p. 80): The 7hird and Fourth Folio, for 
‘breath’ have érveathe, and on their authority (?) the line has always, I believe, been 
given thus,—‘ And, breathless, power breathe forth.’ If we modernise the spelling, 
I think we should read, what I believe to be the sense of the /irst Fo/io,—‘ And, 
breathless, pour breath forth.’ ‘Powre,’ of the First Folio is the form in which the 
verb four is frequently there printed; as, indeed, to the present day it is still fre- 
quently pronounced.—STAUNTON (Asheneum, 12 April, 1873) : Long before I read 
Daniel’s happy conjecture, the true lection occurred to me on copying the passage 
from the history where this not very feminine exploit is narrated. There we are 


120 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT J, SC. ii. 


Mece. Now Anthony, mutt leaue her vtterly. 272 


Eno. Neuer he will not - 
Age cannot wither her, nor cuftome {tale 
Her infinite variety : other women cloy 275 
The appetites they feede, but fhe makes hungry, 
Where mott fhe fatisfies. For vildeft things 
Become themfelues in her, that the holy Priefts 
Bleffe her, when fhe is Riggifh. 


Mece If Beauty, Wifedome, Modefty, can fett le 280 
The heart of Anthony :O¢taua is 
A bleffed Lottery to him. 282 


272. muft ... utterly] Separate line, 
Han. Cap. 

273. Neuer] Never, lai Never ; 
Cap. et seq. 

274. fale) freale¥,. fical FF ,, Rowe. 

275. Her...women] One line, Steev. 
Var. ’03, 713. 


277. vildef?| vileft F,. wildest Blum- 
hof. 

278. her,] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Wh. i, 
Cam. Hal. Sta. Ktly. er; Cap. et 
cet. 

281. Anthony - Octauia] Antony, Oc- 
tavia Rowe et seq. 


276. The appetites| th’ appetites Steev. 
Var. ’03, 713. 
appetites| appities F ,. 


Odtauia zs] Octavia’s LD 
282. bleffed Lottery] blest allott’ry 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. 


told that the all-conquering, unconquerable Queen, after hopping till breath seemed 
gone, to show the contrary, degan to sing. It was evident to me at once that ‘ pour 
breath forth’ was only a poetical way of saying that she sang; dreath being some- 
times used of old to signify song. [Daniel’s felicitous interpretation, enforced by 
Staunton’s illustration, is, it seems to me, indisputable. —ED. ] 

273. Neuer he will not:] Dyce (ed. ii): The Fo/zo has no point after ‘ Never; ’ 
but this does not read like a passage where the author meant to use the double 
negative. 

274, 275. Age cannot wither her, nor custome stale Her infinite variety] 
STEEVENS: Such is the praise bestowed by Shakspeare on his heroine ; a praise that 
well deserves the consideration of our female readers. Cleopatra, as appears from 
the tetradrachms of Antony, was no Venus; and indeed the majority of ladies who 
most successfully enslaved the hearts of princes, are known to have been less remark- 
able for personal than mental attractions. The reign of insipid beauty is seldom 
lasting ; but permanent must be the rule of a woman who can diversify the sameness 
of life by an inexhausted variety of accomplishments. To ‘stale’ is a verb employed 
by Heywood, in Zhe Jron Age, 1632: ‘One that hath s¢a/’d his courtly tricks at 
home.’ 

279. Riggish] Narers: Having the inclinations of a bad woman. Hence, wan- 
ton, immodest. 

282. A blessed Lottery to him] WarBurron: Methinks, it is a very indifferent 
compliment in Meczenas to call Octavia a ‘lottery,’ as if she might turn up d/an&, as 
well as prove a prize to Antony. The poet wrote, as I have reformed the text, 
Allottery, there being as much difference between ‘lottery’ and ad/ottery, as between 


ACT It, Sc. iti.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 121 


Agrip. Let vs go. Good Enobarbus, make your felfe 283 
my gueft, whilft you abide heere. 
£no,. WHumbly Sir I thanke you. 


[Scene ITT. 
Enter Anthony, Cefar, Octauia betw eene them. 


Exeunt 285 


Anth. The world,and my great office, will 

Sometimes deuide me from your bofome. 
Oéta. All which time, before the Gods my knee fhall 

bowe my ptayers to them for you. 5 
Anth. Goodnight Sir. My Odauia 

Read not my blemifhes in the worlds report : 

I haue not kept my fquare, but that to come 

Shall all be done byth’Rule : good night deere Lady : 

Good night Sir. 10 


283, 284. Good...gueft] Separate line, 
Rowe et seq. 

Scene III. Cap. et seq. 

The Same. A Room in Cesar’s House. 


4, 5. Al...you] Lines end, “ime... 
prayers...you Rowe et seq. 

5. my players] F,. in prayers Rowe, 
+, Cap. Varr. Ran. 


Cap. 9. 4yth’] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh.i. 4y the 
1-48. Om. Gar. Kemble. Cap. et cet. 
1. Enter...] Enter...Attendants be- 10. Good night Sir] Ff, Mal. Var.’21, 


Coll. i, Dyce i, Wh. Glo. Cam. Hal. 
Ktly. Octa. Good night Str. F,. Octa. 


Good night, Sir BE ” Rowe et cet. 


hind, and Soothsayer. Cap. 
2, 3. The... Sometimes] One line, Rowe 
et seq. 


a present designation and a future chance.—[ Again, the influence of Warburton on 
Capell is noteworthy (see Zext. /Vofes). Fortunately this influence ceased with 
Capell. ] 

Scene III.] In all editions down to Capell’s, the Scene is continued. Capell first 
made Scene III. begin here ; he also added the ‘ Soothsayer’ to the list of those who 
enter, and there the ‘Soothsayer’ remained until Collier restored him to the time of 
entrance which he has in the Folio. 

4, 5. my knee shall bowe my ptayers] CoLLirR (ed. ii) : 
in the MS; but if any change were desirable, it would rather be, ‘ my prayers shall 
bow my knee.’—[Whereby I fear all expression of that love which prompts first 
the silent kneeling, and then the supplication of prayer, is lost.—ED.] 

8, 9. kept my square, .. . done byth’Rule] Is there no enthusiastic Free Mason 
at hand to claim Shakespeare as a member of that fraternity? Or is this lesser grade 
included in the higher Rosicrucian brotherhood, to which Gen. H1TcHCocK main- 
tains that the Sonnets prove Shakespeare to have belonged ?—Ep. 

10. Good night Sir] MALONE: These last words, which in the [77st Folio] are 
given to Antony, the modern editors [see Zext. Votes] have assigned to Octavia. I 
He addresses himself to Czsar, who immediately replies, 


‘Bow with prayers’ 


see no need of change. 


122 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Cefar. Goodnight. 


[AcT U1, SC. iii. 


EXT Eee 


Enter Soothfater. 
Anth. Now firrah : you do wifh your felfe in Egypt? 
Sooth. Would I had neuer come from thence, nor you 


thither. 15 
Ant. If you can, your reafon ? 
Sooth.I fee it in my motion :haue it not in my tongue, 17 


11. Goodnight] Good night F,. Good- 
-night Pope. 
Exit.] Exeunt Czesar and Octavia. 
Rowe. 
[Scene IV. Pope, +. 
12. Enter...] Om. Cap. Varr. Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt. 


Glo. Ktly. 

14. nor] or Han. 

15. thither] Come thither ! Ktly. 

17-19. J...me] Prose, Pope,+. Lines 
end, 77...yet...me Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Dyce i, Glo. 

17. [fee it] Lsee’t Steev. Var. 03,’ 13. 


13. you do] do you FF, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. 

14. Would...you] As verse, Cap. Varr. 
Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Dyce i, 


motion. ...tongue| Ff, Rowe. 
notion, ... tongue, Theob. Han. Ktly. 
motion, ... tongue; Pope et cet. 


‘Good night.’—RiTson ( Curs. Crit. 85) : The first of these ‘ modern editors’ hap- 
pens to be [Malone’s] old friend the editor of the Second Folio (which he pretends 
to have collated with so much care), who appears, from this and numberless other 
instances, to have had a copy of the First Folio corrected by the players who pub- 
lished it, or some other well-informed person. That Mr Malone sees ‘no need of 
change’ is the strongest possible reason for believing that a change is absolutely 
necessary. And so it certainly is: Antony has already said ‘ Good-night, sir’ to 
Cesar in the three first words of his speech: the repetition would be absurd.—[The 
reading of the Second Folio is probably right, and certainly plausible. Dyce (ed. i) 
pronounced ‘the repetition natural enough,’—an assertion which he did not repeat in 
his ed. ii, but quoted only Ritson.—Ep. ] ; 

12. Soothsaier] See the first note in this Scene.—KNIGHT (Sup. Notice, p. 
356) : Shakespeare has most skilfully introduced the Soothsayer, at the moment when 
Antony’s moral weakness appears to have put on some show of strength. He found 
the incident in Plutarch; but he has made his own application of it. 

14, 15. nor you thither] M. Mason: Both the sense and grammar require that 
we should read Azther, instead of ‘thither.’ The Soothsayer advises Antony to hie 
back to Egypt, and for the same reason wishes he had never come to Rome; because 
when they were together, Czsar’s genius had the ascendant over his.—[ Hupson 
adopted this change. The Soothsayer means, ‘would I had never left Egypt nor 
you gone thither.’ It is merely a confusion of two constructions. He says after- 
ward, ‘ But yet hie you again to Egypt,’ which seems to refer to this ‘thither.’Ep. ] 

17. I see it in my motion] THEOBALD: I can trace no sense in this word, 
‘motion,’ here, unless the author were alluding to that agitation of the Divinity, 
which diviners pretend to when the fit of foretelling is upon them; but then I think 
verily, he would have wrote emotion. Iam persuaded, Shakespeare meant that the 
Soothsayer should say, he saw a reason in his thought or opinion ; tho’ he gave that 
thought or opinion no utterance. And ofton is a word which our author frequently 


ACTH, Sc. iti.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 123 


But yet hie you to Egypt againe. 18 
Antho. Say to me, whofe Fortunes fhall rife higher 
C@/fars or mine? 20 


Soot. Cefars.Therefore(oh Anthony){tay not by his fide 
Thy Demon that thy fpirit which keepes thee, is 
Noble, Couragious, high vnmatchable, 


Where C@/ars is not. But neere him, thy Angell 24 
18, to Egypt againe] again to Egypt Johns. et seq. 
Cap. Varr. Steev. Varr. Dyce i. 21. fide| side. Rowe. stde- Cap. 
19. Say to me] Separate line, Dyce ii. 22. Demon] demon Dyce. 
Say to me, whofe| Separate line, that...thee,| Johns. Var. 73, Knt, 
Ktly. Coll. Wh. Cam. Hal. Sta. Ktly. (¢ha?’s 
Fortunes| Fortune F,, Rowe, ...thee) Ff. that shy...thee, Bulloch. 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. that’s...thee, Rowe, Glo. et cet. 
21. Cefars] Separate line, Han. 23. high] high, FF, et seq. 


chooses, to express the mental faculties. -WARBURTON condensed the first portion 
of the foregoing note into ‘the divinatory agitation,’ and as he made no acknowl- 
edgement to Theobald, has received whatever credit has accrued. Dyce (ed. ii) 
accepted the phrase and ascribed it to Warburton.—CAPELL (i, 34): There is no 
occasion for supposing—that ‘ motion’ implies here ‘ the divinatory agitation ;’ nor 
—that it is put by mistake for another word ‘notion.’ It means—a something mov- 
ing within me; that unknown something which others also feel at some junctures, 
who are not soothsayers: ‘in,’ or by, this inward ‘motion,’ the speaker saw the 
‘reason, that Antony call’d for, but could not give it expression.—ScHMIDT ( Lex.) 
defines the phrase as equivalent to ‘intuitively.’ [In his capacity as seer he ‘ sees’ 
(thus purposely used, I think), the reason in his mental perturbation, but cannot put 
it into words.—ED. ] 

22. Thy Demon, etc.] It verily looks as though the editor of the Second Folio 
had here consulted North, where the corresponding passage runs thus: ‘‘ For thy 
demon,” said he (that is to say the good angel and spirit that keepeth thee), ‘is 
afraid of his”’ etc. The Second Folio deserts the /zrst Folio to an unwonted degree, 
and adopts the parenthesis of North. This same predominance of Czesar’s demon 
over Anthony is spoken of by Macbeth :—‘ under [Banquo] My Genius is rebuk’d, 
as it is said, Mark Anthonies was by Czsar.’—III, i, 67 (of the Revised Edition 
of the present series), where the Editor has added a note by Prof. BAYNrs, who says, 
‘In Shakespeare, the terms angel and genius [and here, demon] are usually em- 
ployed to denote the higher nature of man, the rational guiding soul or spirit, which 
in connection with the mortal instruments determines his character and fate.’ Ep. 

22, 32. spirit] As to pronunciation, see I, ii, 143. 

23. high vnmatchable] Every edition, I think, since the 72rd Folio has placed 
acomma after ‘high.’ Should there be one? I think there should be a hyphen. 
‘High-unmatchable’ is a compound adjective, like ‘pardon me, I am too sudden- 
bold’ in Zove’s Lab. Lost, and ‘ Fools should be so deep-contemplative,’ in As You 
Like It, In the propriety of this hyphen I have the support of an Anonymous con- 
jecture recorded in the Cambridge Edition. —Ep. 


124 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


Becomes a feare : as being o’re-powr’d, therefore 25 
Make fpace enough betweene you. 

Anth. Speake this no more. 

Sooth. To none but thee no more but : when to thee, 
If thou doft play with him at any game, 


Thou art fure to loofe : And of that Naturall lucke, 30 
25. Becomes...o’re-powr'd | One line, 26. Make] Make thou Han. 

Han. 28. thee... more but: when to thee, | 
a feare:| F,. a fear: FF, Rowe, thee...more, but when to thee, Ff. thee, 

Pope,+. afeard, Upton, Sing. Coll. ii, ...more, but...thee, Rowe, Pope. thee ,... 

Ktly. a fear, Cap. et cet. more, but...thee. Theob. et seq. (subs.) 
ore-powr d, | 0’ re-powr d, and Ff, 30. Thou art| Thou’rt Pope,+, Wh. 

Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. overpower d; i, Dyce ii, iii. 

And Han. o'erpowered, Johns. o’er- loofe| lofe ¥ F . 

powerd;and Cap. oerpower'd,; Var. And | he’s Han. 

773 et Cet. 


24, 25. thy Angell Becomes a feare] For ‘a feare’ UPTON (p. 192) suggested 
afeard, and was severely criticised for it by SEWARD in his Preface to Beaumont and 
Fletcher’s Works (p. Ixiv), ‘A Fear becomes’ says Seward, ‘not only fearful but 
ev’n Fear itself. The image is extremely poetical . .. God himself personizes Fear ; 
in Ezekiel, xxx, 13, He says ‘‘I will put a Fear in the land of Egypt.’”’ . . . But the 
instance most apposite is in 7he Maids Tragedy, where the forlorn Aspatia sees her 
servant working the story of Theseus and Ariadne, and thus advises her to punish 
the perfidy of the former :—‘‘ In this place work a quick-sand . . . and then a Fear, 
Do that Fear bravely.’?’ THIRLBY, in a letter to Theobald dated May, 1729 
(Nichols Just. ii, 228), anticipated Upton, whose conjecture appeared first in 
print, I believe, and therefore has the prior claim. HEATH upholds Upton and in 
the Soothsayer’s next speech: ‘I say again, thy spirit Is all afraid to govern thee 
near him,’ he says, ‘the reader will be pleased to observe the words, Z say again.’ 
—CAPELL (i, 34) : ‘A fear’ has been chang’d into—afeard, a word that stands con- 
demn’d by the sound ; for whoso likes it, or can even endure it, so near in place to 
‘o’er-power’d,’ his ear is to be pity’d: But why is ‘fear’ to be parted with ; mean- 
ing only, in language of poetry,—a thing frighted or terrify’d.—WALKER (C77. iii, 
299): What does this mean? I suspect that Shakespeare wrote afear.... I should 
prefer afeard, the final d and e being often confounded with one another; but I can- 
not away with afeard—o’ erpower’d.—R. G. WHITE considers Upton’s conjecture 
‘plausible ;” and STAUNTON observes that ‘the personification of fear renders the 
passage more poetical ; but it may be questioned, considering the old text has ‘‘a 
feare’’ whether Upton’s emendation is not the true reading.’ [I prefer to retain 
the text of the Ff with Capell’s interpretation of it, in spite of Heath’s strong point 
in the ‘I say again’ in line 32.—Ep. ] 

25. therefore] WALKER (Vers. 112) gives this as an instance where the stronger 
accent is on the last syllable. 

30. And of that Naturall lucke] That is, in consequence of that natural luck. 
For other examples where ‘of’ is used with a causal signification, see FRANZ, § 365, 
Anmerkung 1; or ABBOTT, §168. The difference between of and from in Shake- 
speare’s time was so very slight that occasionally it is almost impossible to catch the 


ACT Il, SC. ili.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 125 


He beats thee ’ gainft the oddes. Thy Lufter thickens, 31 
When he fhines by : I fay againe, thy {pirit 
Is all affraid to gouerne thee neere him : 
But he alway ’tis Noble. 
Anth. Get thee gone : 35 
Say to Ventigius I would fpeake with him. Exit. 
He fhall to Parthia, be it Art or hap, 
He hath fpoken true. The very Dice obey him, 
And in our fports my better cunning faints, 


Vnder his chance, if we draw lots he f{peeds, 40 
His Cocks do winne the Battaile, {till of mine, 
31. Lufter] lustre Rowe. 38. /poken] /poke Pope, +. 
thickens | sickens Gould, 39, 40. faints, ... chance,| faints, ... 
34. alway ’tis|] alway is Ff, Rowe. chance; Rowe. faints...chance; Pope 
away, tis Pope et seq. et seq. 
36, 45. Ventigius] Ventidius Ff. 40. lots he /peeds,| lots, he /peeds, Ff, 


37. Parthia,| Parthia, Pope. Par- Rowe. ots, he speeds ; Pope et seq. 
thia. Han. Johns, et seq. 


subtle meaning that divides them; in the final resort this meaning must depend on 
the verb. In the present phrase, for instance, we could here substitute /rom for 
‘of’ without at all modifying the meaning, until we come to the verb, ‘ beats,’ and 
then we perceive that ‘he beats thee from that natural luck’ conveys a different mean- 
ing from ‘he beats thee of that natural luck ;’ as when Hermione says (Wint. Tale, 
I, ii, 42), ‘say this to him, He’s beat from his best ward.’ These prepositions are not, 
therefore, here at least, interchangeable, however much they may seem so at first 
sight. Nevertheless there are cases where it does seem perfectly immaterial which 
one is used. Take, ‘His cocks do win the battle still of mine (line 41, below). 
Would it not run equally well if the phrase were still from mine? Prospero uses 
‘from’ after the verb ‘to win,’ where he says ( Zemp. I, ii, 455), ‘hast put thyself 
Upon this island asa spy, to win it From me.’ This coalescence of these two prepo- 
sitions has incited the grammarians to find some rule which may be a guide to their 
use. ABBOTT (§ 166) says that ‘of’ is used for from with verbs that signify, either 
literally or metaphorically, depriving, delivering, etc.’ FRANZ (§ 356) is more 
specific, and enumerates a considerable number of verbs where one or the other may 
be used, such as, discharge, deliver, rid (to free and to release, on the other hand, 
are used in Shakespeare only with from), cleanse, clear, purge, wash, have, get, 
receive, take, borrow, win, wrest, be, descend, come, moreover, after the adjectives 
Sree, clear, secure. ‘Tf,’ continues Franz, ‘after these verbs, of and from occasion- 
ally occur when they do not seem to be absolutely the same, and it may be desirable 
to decide upon the difference between them, then there seems to be no principle to 
be discerned in their use.’ See, also, ‘he frets That Lepidus of the Triumpherate 
should be deposed,’ III, vi, 30, ‘ Get gole for gole of youth,’ IV, viii, 29.—Epb. 

41. Cocks] A good account of the training of cocks for fighting is given by Hart- 
ING (p. 172) who says the sport ‘ was much in vogue in Shakespeare’s day.’ A short 
historical account of the game is to be found in Kelly’s Notices of Leicester, p. 162. 

41. of mine] See note on ‘of’ in line 30 above. 


126 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT U, SC, iii. 


When it is all to naught : and his Quailes euer 42 
Beate mine(in hoopt ) at odd’s. I will to Egypte: 


42. naught] Ff, Rowe, Dyce, Wh. i. at odds Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. i#- 


nought Pope et cet. -coop’d at odds Han. in whoop’ d-at odds 
42, 43. Quatles...hoopt)]| gquatls in- Seward, Cap. inhoop’d, at odds Rowe 
hooped Ever beat mine Words. et cet. 


43. (7 hoopt) at odd’s| Ff. in-hoop'd 


43. Beate mine(in hoopt) at odd’s] SEWARD (p.lxv): Here is evidently a sad 
anti-climax. His cocks win the battle of mine when it is all to nought on my side, 
and his quails, fighting 7% @ hoop, beat mine when the odds are on my side, What 
a falling off is there! . . . To whoop or hollow, might have been spelt oof, without 
the w, I read therefore: ‘ Beat mine in whoof’d-at odds.’ 7. ¢. when the odds are so 
great, that the betters on my side shout and whoop for victory. All who have been 
in a Cock-pit will have a clear idea of this: Flatness and Anti-climax will be avoided, 
and the'soaring spirit of Shakespeare will recover its own vigour.—[Seward’s reason- 
ing proved too cogent for Capell, who adopted both it and his emendation. ]}—HEATH 
(p.- 457): I shall only observe, that the phrase, as I apprehend, is, to beat a¢ odds, not 
to beat 7% odds; and that the meaning of the common reading is, Beat mine even 
when put into the cage, unequally matched, with the odds very much in my favour. 
—Jounson: ‘Inhoop’d’ is inclosed, confined, that they may fight. The modern 
editions read, ‘ Beat mine 77 whoop’d at odds.’—[The CAMBRIDGE EDITORS quote 
this note of Johnson and remark : ‘ No edition we know of reads thus. In Steevens 
and all subsequent editions Johnson’s note is repeated, ‘‘whoop’d at’’ being . 
hyphened.’ ]|—FARMER: Shakespeare gives us the practice of his own time; and 
there is no occasion for 1% whoop’d-at, or any other alteration. John Davies begins 
one of his Epigrams Vpox English Prouerbes :—‘ He sets cocke om the hoope, zn, 
you would say ; For cocking in hoopes is now all the play.’[—No. 287, ed. Grosart, 
where it is not punctuated as intelligently as Farmer gives it.— Ep. ]—Douck (ii, 87) : 
It may be doubted whether quail-fighting was practised in Shakspeare’s time; but 
when our poet speaks of their being zhoop’d, he might suppose that Czesar’s or 
Antony’s quails, which he found in Plutarch, were trained to battle like game cocks 
in a ving or circle. Quail combats were well known among the ancients, and espe- 
cially at Athens. Julius Pollux relates that a circle was made in which the birds 
were placed, and he whose quail was driven out of this circle lost the stake, which 
was sometimes money, and occasionally the quails themselves. [Douce gives an 
engraving from a Chinese miniature which] represents some ladies engaged at this 
amusement, where the quails are actually zzhoopf’d.—NARES (s. v. Inhoop’d): The 
substance of this passage is from North’s Plutarch, but the ‘inhoop’d’ is the addition 
of our poet. No trace of such a mode of fighting has been found except in Davies’s 
LEpigram, quoted by Farmer. Yet R. Holmes, who gives a list of terms and customs 
used in cock-fighting, has no mention of oops. See his Acad. of Armory, B. ii, ch. 
11. Nor is any trace of the hoops to be found in any book on cock-fighting. If 
this custom of fighting cocks within hoops could be thoroughly proved, it would also 
afford the best explanation of the phrase cock-a-hoop ; the cock perching on the oof, 
in an exulting manner, either before or after the battle—[The MV. Z. D., ‘in expla- 
nation of cock-a-hoop, says that it is ‘a phrase of doubtful origin; the history of which 
has been further obscured by subsequent attempts, explicit or implicit, to analyse it.’] 


ACT II, SC. iv.] 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 127 


And though I make this marriage for my peace, 


I’th’Eaft my pleafure lies. 


Oh come Ventigius. 45 


Enter Ventigius. 
You muft to Parthia, your Commiffions ready : 


Follow me, and reciue’t. Exeunt 
[Scene LV] 
Enter Lepidus, Mecenas and Agrippa. 
Lepidus. Trouble your felues no further : pray you 
haften your Generals after. 
Agr. Sir,Marke Anthony,will e’ne but kiffe OGauia, 
and weele follow. 5 
Lepi. Till I fhall fee you in your Souldiers dreffe, 
Which will become you both : Farewell. 
Mece. We fhall:as I conceiue the iourney, be at 
Mount before you Lepidus. 
Lepi. Your way is fhorter,my purpofes do draw me 10 


much about, you’le win two dayes vpon me. 


44. And] For Cap. conj. 
47. Commiffions] Commiffion’s FF. 
48. reciue’ t] Ff, Rowe,+,Cap. Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. receive it Var, ’73 et cet. 
Scene IV. Cap. 
The Same. A Street. Cap. 
I-13. Om. Gar. 
1. Lepidus] Lepidus, attended. Cap. 
2,3. Trouble...haften]| One line, Rowe 
et seq. 
2. your felues| your felfe Ff, Rowe. 
Jurther| Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. Sta. Ktly. farther Ff 
et cet. 
4. Anthony,] Anthony Ff et seq. 
4, 5. will... follow] One line, Theob. 


et seq. 

7. both :| both, Rowe et seq. 

8, 9. We...Lepidus] Lines end, ée... 
Lepidus Rowe. shall...mount... Lepidus 
Pope et seq. 

8. frall -| shall, Rowe. 

at | at the Ff, Rowe, Cap. Var. 73, 
Ran. Knt, Dyce, Glo. Cam. at th’ 
Pope, +. 

9. Mount] Ff, Rowe, Var. ’21, Coll. 
Sing. Dyce, Wh. Glo. Cam. Hal. Sta. 
Mount Misenum Ktly. mount Pope et 
cet. 

10, 11. Your...me] Lines end, shorter 
.-.about...me Rowe et seq. 


44. And though ] WALKER (C7i#. ii, 156): Read, as the connection of the 


thoughts requires, ‘47 though.’ 


3. hasten your Generals after] For other instances of the transposition of 
prepositions, see, if need be, ABBOTT, § 203. 

8, 9. be at Mount] STEEVENS: That is, Mount Misenum.—MALoneE: Our author 
probably wrote ‘a’ he Mount.’—[Is it not more likely that there is an absorption of 


the in the final ¢ of ‘at’ ?—Ep.] 


II. you’le win two dayes vpon me] FRANz (§ 334) : The persistent advance 
of any action, which chiefly takes place either at the cost or to the advantage of 


128 LHE TRAGEDIE VOR [ACT IE, SCcive 


Both. Sir good fucceffe. 12 
Lept. Farewell. Exeunt. 


[Scene V.| 


Enter Cleopater , Charmian, Iras, and Alexas. 
Cleo. Giue me fome Muficke:Muficke, moody foode 
of vs that trade in Loue. 
Omnes. The Muficke, hoa. 
Enter Mardian the Eunuch. 5 
Yeo. Let it alone, let’s to Billards : come Charman. 


12. Both.] Ff. Mec. Agr. Cap. 4. Omnes. ] Att. Cap. 
Sir] Om. Han. 6. Let...come] One line, Han. Cap. 

13. Exeunt.] Exeunt severally. Cap. Varr. 

Scene III. Rowe. Scene V. Pope et Let... Billards| One line, Steev. 
seq. Varr. Knt, Sta. 

Alexandria. Rowe. The Palace in let’s| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Alexandria. Theob. Warb. Johns. Coll. Sing. Dyce, Wh. 

1. Cleopater] F,. Glo. Cam. Jet us Han. et cet. 

2,3. Gtue...Loue| Lines end, food... Billards| ¥,. 


Jove. Rowe et seq. 


another person, or which, through a gradual increase, impairs or in any way les- 
sens the stable condition of another, is indicated, after such verbs as ‘to gain,’ ‘to 
encroach,’ by o# or zpon. The preposition fulfills the same function after ‘to win,’ 
‘to grow ;’ but the expression is, however, occasionally in Shakespeare so pregnant 
as to be not always understood by a modern reader without further amplifications. 
[ Thus, the present phrase is equivalent to] ‘you will get the advantage of me by two 
days.’—[See also IV, xiv, 118, ‘My Queen and Eros Haue... got upon me A 
Noblenesse,’ etc.—ED. ] 

2. Musicke, moody foode, etc.] JOHNSON: The mood is the mind, or mental 
disposition, Perhaps here is a poor jest intended between mood the mind and moods 
of music.—STEEVENS: ‘ Moody,’ in this instance, means melancholy.—[ Thus in the 
first line of 7welfth Night, ‘If music be the food of love, play on.’ ] 

3. of vs that trade in Loue] There is no thought here of ¢raffic,—traffic is 
mercenary. No mercenary love demands music as its food. Cleopatra means that 
her sole dealing is in love; it is her very life.—Eb. 

6. let’s to Billards] MALONE: This game was not known in ancient times.— 
Hupson: ‘An anachronism,’ say the critics. But how do they know this? Late 
researches have shown that many things were in use in old Egypt, which, afterwards 
lost, have been reinvented in modern times. But Shakespeare did not know this? 
Doubtless, not ; but then he knew that by using a term familiar to his audience he 
would lead their thoughts to what has always followed in the train of luxury and 
refinement. Suppose he had been so learned, and withal such a slave to his learn- 
ing, as to use a term signifying some game which the English people had never heard 
of. Which were the greater anachronism ?—A. A. ADEE (Zzt. World, 21 April, 
1883, Boston) : For about one hundred and fifty years, the favourite anachronism in 


ACT 11, /SC. V.)| ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 129 


[6. let’s to Billards] 
Shakespeare’s plays, singled out by the hypercritics, has been [this passage]. Of 
late, however, certain investigators have turned the tables, and instead of leaving the 
unlucky anachronism to support the Farmerian theory of Shakespeare’s want of learn- 
ing, or the more kindly modern belief that he wrote too impetuously to be bound by 
mere chronology and scientific facts, they find in it an argument against the Shake- 
spearian authorship of the plays, since as one of them says: ‘The human encyclo- 
pedia who wrote that sentence appears to have known,—what very few people know 
nowadays,—that the game of billiards is older than Cleopatra.’ It may be, as asserted, 
that a rudimentary game, in which ivory balls were punched with a stick into holes 
in a table, after the fashion of our modern ‘tivoli’ or ‘bagatelle,’ was really in vogue 
more than two thousand years ago, but it is very certain that Shakespeare never 
bothered his head about it. He simply followed his habit, and cribbed the idea from 
somebody else. In Chapman’s Blind Beggar of Alexandria, Migiale says: ‘Go, 
Aspasia, Send for some ladies to go play with you At chess, at billiards, and at other 
game.’ As Chapman’s play was printed in 1598, ten years before Ant. & Cleo. 
was written, it is easy to see where Shakespeare got the idea that billiards was an 
Egyptian game, and a favourite pastime of women. Whether George Chapman, 
whose classical learning enabled him to translate Homer, wrote from actual knowl- 
edge, or committed an anachronism, may be disputed; but the probabilities lean to 
the latter conjecture, for, in this same play, the hero flourishes a pistol, smokes tobacco, 
swears by ‘God’s wounds,’ and talks fair modern Spanish, in the time of the 
Ptolomies.—Murray (4. £. D.): An adopted form of French d//ard, the game ; 
so named from dz//ard, ‘a cue,’ originally ‘a stick with curved end, a hockey-stick,’ 
diminutive of dzd/e, piece of wood, stick. In England introduced only as the name 
of the game, and made plural as in draughts, skittles, bowls, etc. 1591 Spenser, 
Mother Hubberd, 803, ‘ With all the thriftles games that may be found . . . With dice, 
with cards, with balliards. 1598 Florio, 7rzcco, a kinde of play with balles vpon 
a table, called billiards.’—[Then follows the present passage. In an Article in the 
Edinburgh Review (April, 1871, p. 377) on the ‘Chorizontes,’ the writer observes 
that ‘Shakespeare could not have made any of his characters speak of tobacco without 
being grossly anachronistic, the incidents in all his plays having occurred at remote 
periods, or, at any rate, much anterior to the introduction of tobacco into Europe, 
whereas Ben Jonson [who does mention tobacco] laid the plot of many a play in his 
own time when tobacco was familiar to all.’ This statement having been criticised 
by Dr Hayman, the editor of the Odyssey, the author of the Article replied ( 4then- 
aum, 6 Sept. 1873), and admirably defines the distinction between anachronisms, that 
might be termed permissible and those that are too ‘gross’ to be ever tolerated. 
After referring to the mention by Shakespeare of ‘cannon’ in Aing John, a ‘ clock 
striking’ in Julius Cesar, and ‘billiards’ in this present play, the writer continues, 
“but no dramatic author, to produce a scenic effect, would shrink from such anachro- 
nisms, because they are not “ gross,’’ not so “gross” as to be detected in an instant 
by a theatrical audience, which knows nothing whatever about the origin of can- 
non, clocks, and billiards. But all Shakespeare’s contemporaries, even the most 
ignorant, knowing that tobacco had been introduced into the old world during their 
lives, would have derided the great dramatist had he represented Sir John Falstaff 
consoling himself at Dame Quickly’s in the reign of Henry the Fourth, with a pipe 
of tobacco. .. . So a dramatist of our age could not speak of William the Conqueror 
travelling by an express train, or sending a message by the electric telegraph ; the 


9 


130 


Char. 
Cleopa. 
with a woman. 
Mardt. 
Cleo. 
Though’t come to fhort 
The Actor may pleade pardon. 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACTIT SER Ve 


My arme is fore, beft play with Mardian. 7 
As well a woman with an Eunuch plaide, as 
Come you’le play with me Sir? 
As well as I can Madam. 10 
And when good will is fhewed, 


Ile none now, 


Giue me mine Angle, weele to’th’Riuer there 


My Muficke playing farre off. 


I will betray 15 


Tawny fine fifhes, my bended hooke fhall pierce 
Their flimy iawes : and as I draw them vp, 
Ile thinke them euery one an Anthony, 18 


8,9. As well...Sir ?] Two lines, end- 
ing play’d. ...Sir ? Rowe et seq. 

11,12. And.../nort | One line, Rowe 
et seq. 

Il. frewed | Ff. 
Pope et seq. 

12. Thought] tho't Pope,+. though 
it Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 
to fhort | too fhort Ff et seq. 

14. Angle,| angle; Glo. Cam. angle. 
Ktly. 


shew'd or show’d 


14. 0’ th’ ] to the Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. 
Steev. Varr. Coll. 

Riuer| River, Ff, 
river» Cap. et cet. 

15. of.) F,F,. off, F, et seq. 

16. Zawny fine] Tawnyfine F.,. 
Tawney-jine FF. Tawny-fin Rowe, 
Pope, Han. 7awny-finn’d Theob/Warb. 
et seq. 

Jifhes| fish Pope,+, Var. 73. 
bended | bent Anon. ap, Cam. 


Rowe, +. 


anachronism would be “gross”; it would come immediately within the cognizance of 
the audience, who know what is going on in their own generation, with some know- 
ing what went on in the generation immediately preceding; and, thinking the mistake 
ridiculous, they would burst into an excessive merriment. ... But the anachronism 
would not be discovered by anybody in his audience, if a dramatic author were to 
represent the Egyptian Pharaoh Cheops going in a pair of boots to witness the prog- 
ress of the building of the Great Pyramid, or the Jews returning in hats and shoes 
from their Babylonish captivity. For where can the theatrical audience be found 
that knows anything about the history of boots, hats, and shoes, when it does not com- 
prise, peradventure, one man possessing sound learning and extensive information ?’ 
—Eb.] 

11. And when good will, etc.] STEEVENS: Compare, ‘ For never any thing can 
be amiss, When simpleness and duty tender it..—A#d NV. D. V, i, 82. 

16. Tawny fine fishes] THEOBALD’s emendation which seems obvious enough 
to us now, falls in with many another in Walker’s list (Criz. ii, 61) of instances 
where final @ and final ¢ are confounded. See I, iv, 10; I, v, 58; V,i, 49. Ido 
_ not know why Shakespeare should have here used ‘tawny,’ which is not, at least in 
my experience, a characteristic colour of Mediterranean fishes, some of which are 
extremely brilliant in hue; and he could hardly have had in mind English fish, inas- 
much as he had already in A/uch Ado spoken of seeing ‘the fish Cut with her golden 
oars the silver stream.’ Possibly, it was Cleopatra’s ‘moodiness’ which tinged 
everything with a sombre tint Ep. 


ACI GSEs Vial 


And fay,ah ha;y’are caught. 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 131 


Char. ’Twas merry when you wager’d on your Ang- 20 
ling,when your diuer did hang a falt fifh on his hooke 


which he with feruencie drew vp. 
That time? Oh times : 


Cleo. 


I laught him out of patience : and that night 

I laught him into patience,and next morne, 25 
Ere the ninth houre, I drunke him to his bed : 

Then put my Tires and Mantles on him, whilft 


I wore his Sword Phillippan. 


Oh from Italie, 


Enter a Meffenger. 20% 


19. y’ are] you're Rowe et seq. 

20-22. ’ Twas...up.] Lines end, when 
...diver...he...up. Pope et seq. 

20, 21. Angling,| angling ; Theob. 
Warb. et seq. 

23. time? Oh times :| time,—O times! 
— Coll. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Glo. t2#e—O 
times!—Del. Ktly, Cam. time /—Oh 
times /— Rowe et cet. 

24,25. patience....patience, | patience, 
--. patience, Rowe,+. patience, ... 


patience; Cam. patience; ... patience ; 
Cap. et cet. (subs. ) 

28. Phillippan] F,. Phillippan F,F,. 
Philippine Han. Philippin Johns. PAil- 
tppian Coll. Wh. i, Ktly. 

Oh from] Oh. From Johns. 
Italie, F,. Italie, F,. Italie, F,. 
Italy; Theob. /taly— Johns. 

29. Enter...] After Phil/ippan. Coll. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. Enter Seleucus. Kem- 
ble. 


21. hang a salt fish on his hooke] See Plutarch, dfpendix. GREY (ii, 198) 
quotes from Memozrs of the English Court, 1707, p. 489, a similar story of Nell 
Gwin and Charles the Second. Douck (ii, 88) gives a story from Nashe’s Lenten 
Stuffe, where a Cambridge scholar deceived a gaping crowd in a somewhat similar 
fashion. 

26. drunke] ABBoTT (§ 339): Past indicative forms in « are very common in 
Shakespeare. Thus sang does not occur, while ‘sung’ is common as a past indicative. 
Sprang is less common as a past tense than ‘sprung.’ ‘Begun’ is not uncommon 
for ‘ began,’ which is also used. 

27. Then put my Tires and Mantles on him] WarsurTon: This is finely 
imagined. The speaker is supposed to do this in imitation of Omphale, in her treat- 
ment of Hercules, the great ancestor of Antony. 

28. Sword Phillippan] THEOBALD: We are not to suppose. nor is there any 
warrant from history, that Antony had any particular sword so called. The dignify- 
ing weapons, in this sort, is a custom of much more recent date. We find Antony, 
afterwards, in this play, boasting of his own prowess at Philippi: see III, xi, 38. 
That was the greatest action of Antony’s life; and therefore this seems a fine piece 
of flattery, intimating, that this sword ought to be denominated from that illustrious 
battle, in the same manner as modern heroes in romance are made to give their 
swords pompous names. 

29. Enter a Messenger] Mrs JAMESON (ii, 133): As illustrative of Cleonatra’s 
disposition, perhaps the finest and most characteristic scene in the whole play is that 
in which the messenger arrives from Rome with the tidings of Antony’s marriage 


132 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, Sc. v. 


Ramme thou thy fruitefull tidings in mine eares, 30 

That long time haue bin barren. 
Mef. Madam, Madam. 32 
30. Ramme| Rain Han. Cap. Ran. 31. bin] been F. 

Sing. Ktly. 32. Madam.| Madam! Rowe. mad- 


fruitefull| faithful Theob. ii, am,— Cap. et seq. (subs. ) 
Warb. 


with Octavia. She perceives at once with quickness that all is not well, and she 
hastens to anticipate the worst, that she may have the pleasure of being disappointed. 
Her impatience to know what she fears to learn, the vivacity with which she gradu- 
ally works herself up into a state of excitement, and at length into fury, is wrought 
out with a force of truth which makes us recoil.—STapFER (p. 402) : In the scene 
between Cleopatra and the messenger who brings the tidings of Antony’s marriage 
with Octavia, her fury and unreasonableness know no bounds. Harpagon, thumping 
Maitre Jacques, who, in obedience to his master’s orders, tells him candidly what is 
said of him in the town ; the Viceroy of Peru, in the ‘ Périchole’ of Mérimée, banish- 
ing his secretary for a like service, are models of wisdom and coolness compared to 
Cleopatra. There is some shadow of excuse for their anger, as the account given 
them is not the mere simple announcement of a fact, but consists of a long preach- 
ment which the secretary and Maitre Jacques may have flavoured with a spice of 
malice of their own; but the unhappy messenger to Cleopatra is as guiltless of the 
message as if he had given it to her under cover, closed and sealed. To insult him, 
beat him, and threaten him with a dagger shows a capability of exercising the same 
frenzy upon inanimate objects, such as pieces of furniture, mirrors, and china. No 
man, however furious, vents his rage in so senseless a form as this, which would 
seem to belong peculiarly to the anger of women and children. But at the same 
time, we must notice how passion dignifies every movement and action; the impetu- 
ous torrent of her wrath makes what is immeasurably petty, mean, and ridiculous 
appear even grand. No one would ever feel inclined to laugh at this scene, in which 
what might have been the subject for a comedy is transformed by the violence and 
force of Cleopatra’s love into tragic cries and outbursts.—CoLLIER (ed. ii) : In the 
MS this Messenger is called Elis; but whether that were the name of the actor of 
the part, or of the character, as represented in some MS of the play, we cannot 
determine. We know no player of that day of the name of Elis or Ellis. 

30. Ramme] STEEVENS: Rain of Hanmer agrees better with the epithets /ruzt- 
ful and barren. So, in Timon ; ‘ Rain sacrificial whisp’rings in his ear.—MALONE: 
The term employed in the text is much in the style of the speaker; and is supported 
incontestably by a passage in /u/. Ces.: ‘I go to meet The noble Brutus, thrusting 
this report Into his ears.’ Again, in The Tempest: ‘You cram these words into my 
ears, against The stomach of my sense.’—RITSON: Ram is a vulgar word, never 
used in our author’s plays, but once by Falstaff, where he describes his situation in 
the buck-basket. It is here evidently a misprint for a7. The quotation from zd. 
Ces. does not support the old reading at all, the idea being perfectly distinct.— 
STEEVENS: ‘Ramm’d,’ however, occurs in King John; II, i, 272.STAUNTON: The 
expression in the text is quite characteristic of the speaker.—[Had Cleopatra said 
sweetly and poetically ‘aim thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,’ the succeeding 
scene would never have been enacted.—ED. ] 


ACD II SCVie ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 133 


Cleo. Anthonyo’s dead, a3 
If thou fay fo Villaine, thou kil’ft thy Miftris : 
But well and free, if thou fo yeild him. 35 


There is Gold, and heere 
My bleweft vaines to kiffe : a hand that Kings 
Haue lipt, and trembled kiffing. 
Mef. Firft Madam, he is well. 
Cleo. Why there’s moreGold. 40 
But firrah marke, we vfe 
To fay, the dead are well : bring it to that, 
The Gold I giue thee, will I melt and powr 
Downe thy ill vttering throate. 
Mef. Good Madam heare me. 45 


33-36. Anthonyo’s ... and heere] Ff, so, thou villain Huds. 


Rowe. Lines end, so, ...free, ...here Cap. 
villain, ...free, ...here Sing. Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. Sta. dead ?...mistress...free, ...here 
Pope et cet. 

33- Anthonyo’s] Antonius Del. Glo. 
Cam. Oh, Antony is Ktly. Anthony’s 
Ff et cet. 

dead, | dead; Rowe, Cap. dead? 
Pope. dead! Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
34. fo Villaine,| fo, Villain, FF. 


34. Ril’/e| Rillest Ktly. 

35, 36. yeild him. There] ¥,. yield 
him. There FF, Rowe, Pope i. yield 
him, there Pope ii et seq. 

38. Haue] Hive ¥,. 

40, 41. Why...ufe] One line, Rowe,+, 
Cap. Varr. Steey. Var. ’03,’13, Knt, Sta. 

42. bring it] bring me Ff, Rowe. 

43. thee] Om. F,. 

44. wl vitering | ill-uttering FY. 


33, 34. Anthonyo’s dead, If thou, etc.] It is all very well for sudden terror to 
clutch at Cleopatra’s heart and stop her pulses, but this is no excuse whatever for 
not speaking rhythmically. To what trouble her heedlessness gives rise! ABBOTT 
(§ 484) decides that Antony is ‘ de-ad,’ and that the villain will kill his ‘ Misteress.’ 
WALKER (Vers. 48) does not prolong the term of Antony’s demise, and twice slay 
the slain, but inserts a do after ‘thou,’ ‘If thou do say so;’ he cannot, however, abide 
plain ‘ Mistris,’ but must also pronounce it M/s¢eress. DELIUS believes that in her 
intense excitement Cleopatra uses Anthony’s full dignified Latin name ‘ Antonius,’ 
on the only occasion when it is used throughout the play. KEIGHTLEY emits an 
additional groan before ‘ Anthonyo.’ And thus all pare and protract the lines into 
nice, decorous lengths to please the eye, and rhythm is smug again.—ED. 

35. But well and free] RANN: But well; and free :—Say but he is well; and 
thou gain’st thy freedom.—[Rann seldom, if ever, gives any authority in his notes; 
conjectures are there found of Capell, of M. Mason, and others ; all mingled with 
those which I believe to be his own. I think that the foregoing note is one of the 
latter.—ED. | 

37. My blewest vaines to kisse, etc.] HAzLiTT (p. 99): How all the pride of 
beauty and high rank breaks out in her promised reward.—[Is there not in Beaumont 
& Fletcher’s False One, I, ii, a reminiscence of these lines:—‘and for thy news, 
Receive a favour kings have kneeled in vain for, And kiss my hand’ ?—Ep.] 


134 THE: TRAGEDIES OF FACT, SC. ¥. 
Cleo. Well, go too I will : 46 

But there’s no goodneffe in thy face if Anthony 

Be free and healthfull;fo tart a fauour 

To trumpet fuch good tidings. Ifnot well, 

Thou fhouldft come like a Furie crown’d with Snakes, 50 


Not like a formall man. 


Mef. Wilt pleafe you heare me? 


Cleo. 


I haue a mind to ftrike thee ere thou fpeak’ft: 


Yet if thou fay Axthony liues, ’tis well, 
Or friends with Ce/ar, or not Captiue to him, 55 
Ile fet thee in a fhower of Gold,and haile 


46. go too] goto ¥,F,. go to, F,. 

47. face tf] face, of Ff, Knt. face. 
Jf Rowe, +, Coll. Wh. Hal. Ktly. face - 
if Cap. et cet. 

48. healthfull;fo] Ff, Knt. healthful; 
Why so Rowe,+. healthful, why so Cap. 
healthful, needs so Mal. conj. healthful 
—so Var. ’73 et cet. (subs.) 


49. trumpet] usher M. Mason. 
tidings.| Ff. tidings / Knt, Coll. i, 

Sing. Dyce, Glo. Cam. Hal. Sta. tdings ? 
Rowe et cet. 

52. Wilt] Will’t Rowe ii et seq. 

54. ’ts] Ff, Rowe,+, Var. 73, Coll. 
Hal. Sta. zs Tyrwhitt, Cap. et cet. 

55. Captiue] Captaine or Captain Ff, 
Rowe. 


Jauour]| favour suits not Ktly. 56. fet] /ee FF ,, Rowe, Pope. 


47, 48. no goodnesse in thy face if Anthony Be free] I cannot but consider 
the punctuation of the Ff, which places a comma merely after ‘ face,’ to be far better 
than CAPELL’s colon. . Cleopatra means, I think, that no one with good tidings to 
impart could wear such a hang-dog look.— ED. 

48. so tart a fauour] KNnicHT: How full of characteristic spirit is this passage, 
in which we exactly follow the punctuation of the original. But the editors are not 
satisfied with it. So they read, ‘zy so tart a favour.’—Dyce (ed. ii) : The ‘ why’ 
added by Rowe (and by Collier’s MS) is absolutely necessary for the sense of this 
passage, to say nothing of the metre.—[Knight is exactly right, I think, when he says 
this speech is characteristic of Cleopatra, but he seems hardly to be aware how right 
he is. Twice before have we had exclamations from Cleopatra as full of scorn and 
contempt as this. She said to Charmian (I, iii, 14) ‘ Thou teachest like a fool. The 
way to lose him!’ and again (I, v, 86) ‘ When I was green in judgement, cold in 
blood. To say as I said then!’ The present speech seems to me to be parallel. It 
appears to be a fashion of speaking as peculiar to Cleopatra as little short repetitions 
are to Rosalind, such as ‘Me believe it!’ ‘Youa lover!’ etc. Rowe’s didactic 
‘why’ is to me offensive; and the pause after ‘healthful’ makes good the metre.—ED. ] 

50. a Furie crown’d with Snakes] DEIGHTON: The Erinyes are represented 
by Aéschylus as having bodies all black, snakes twined in their hair, and blood drip- 
ping from their eyes. 

51. formall] JoHNson: Decent, regular.—STEEVENS: A man in his senses.— 
BRADLEY (WV. £. D. s.v. ¢ 4. c.) : Normal in intellect. 

54. ’tis well] TyYRWHITT’s emendation, ‘7s well,’ is not absolutely necessary. 

56. set thee in a shower of Gold, etc.] WARBURTON: That is, I will give thee 


ACTH, Sc. v.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 135 


Rich Pearles vpon thee. 57 
Mef. Madam, he’s well. ) 
Cleo. Well faid. 
Mef. And Friends with Ce/far. 60 
Cleo, Th’art an honeft man. 
Mef. Cefar,and he, are greater Friends then euer. 
Cleo. Make thee a Fortune from me. 
Mef. But yet Madam. 
Cleo. I do not like but yet, it does alay 65 
The good precedence, fie vpon but yet, 
Bur yet is as a Iaylor to bring foorth 
Some monftrous Malefaétor. Prythee Friend, 
Powre out the packe of matter to mine eare , 
The good and bad together : he’s friends with Ce/ar, 70 
In ftate of heal th thou faift, and thou faift, free. 
Mef. Y¥ree Madam, no : I made no fuch report, 
He’s bound vnto Oézauza. 
Cleo. For what good turne? 


Mef. For the beft turne i’th’bed. 75 
57. thee.] the. F.. 65. alay] alloy Gould. 
61. Th art] Ff. Thou art Varr. Mal. 66. precedence] precedent Han. 
Ran. Thou’ rt Rowe et cet. 67. Bur] F,. 
63. Make] Marke F, Mark F,F,, 69. the packe] thy pack Han. Cap. 
Rowe, Cap. Ran. 
Fortune) Forune ¥.,. 71. faift, free] faicft or fayeft free FF. 
64. Madam.| Madam— Rowe et seq. say’st, free Rowe. 
(subs. ) 72. Madam,| Madam ! Ff. 
65, 66. dut yet] As a quotation, Pope made| have made Pope. 
et seq. report] fport FF, Rowe, Pope. 


a kingdom, it being the eastern ceremony, at the coronation of their kings, to powder 
them with gold-dust and seed-pearl: So Milton,—‘the gorgeous East with richest 
hand Showers on her kings barbaric pearl and gold’—Bk. ii, line 5. In the Zzfe 
of Timur-bec or Tamerlane, written by a Persian contemporary author, are the fol- 
lowing words, as translated by Mons. Petit de la Croix, in the account there given 
of his coronation, Bk. ii, chap. 1: ‘Les Princes du sang royal et les Emirs repondi- 
rent 4 pleines mains sur sa téte quantité d’or et de pierreries selon la covttume.’ 

65, 66. alay The good precedence] STEEVENS: That is, abate the good quality 
of what is already reported. 

66. fie vpon but yet] Compare, Sir Philip Sidney, Zhe Defence of Poesie, 1598, 
p. 518, ad fin., ‘Thus doing, you shall be placed with Dantes Beatrix, or Virguls 
Anchises. But if (fie of such a But) you be born so neare the dirt-making Cataract 
of Nilus,’ etc. —Eb. 


136 - THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1, Sc. v. 


Cleo. Iam pale Charmian. 76 
Mef. Madam, he’s married to Octauia. 
Cleo. The moft infe€tious Peftilence vpon thee. 
Strikes him downe. 
Mef. Good Madam patience. 80 
Cleo. What fay you? Strikes him. 
Hence horrible Villaine, or Ile fpurne thine eyes 
Like balls before me : Ile vnhaire thy head, 
She hales him vp and downe. 
Thou fhalt be whipt with Wyer, and ftew’d in brine, 85 
Smarting in lingring pickle. 
Mef. Gratious Madam, 
I that do bring the newes, made not the match. 
Cleo. Say ’tis not fo, a Prouince I will giue thee, 
And make thy Fortunes proud : the blow thou had’ft go 
Shall make thy peace, for mouing me to rage, 
And I will boot thee with what guift befide 
Thy modeftie can begge. 
Mef. He’s married Madam. 
Cleo. Rogue, thou haft liu’d too long. Draw a knife. 95 
Mef. Nay then Ile runne: 
What meane you Madam, I haue made no fault. viz. 
Char.Good Madam keepe your felfe within your felfe, 
The man is innocent. 


Cleo. Some Innocents fcape not the thunderbolt : 100 

76. pale| faint Gould. 92. guift] gift FF. 

80. patience] have but patience Han. 95. knife.] dagger. Rowe. 

82. horrible...eyes | Separate line, Cap. 97. Madam,| Madam? Rowe ii et 
Var. ’78 et seq. seq. 

85. frew’d | stood Gould. 100. Lnnocents| Lnnoceuts F.,. 


93. modestie] ScumipT (Zex.): That is, freedom from arrogance or obtrusive 
impudence.—[Whereof the present passage is given as an example. But is it not, 
more properly, equivalent to moderation ?—ED. ] 

95. Draw a knife] Note the mandatory tone, indicative of a play-house copy.— 
ED. 

too, Some Innocents scape not the thunderbolt] Doucs (ii, 89) takes this 
line as the subject of a note on the Roman belief in regard to those who were struck 
by lightning; it in nowise illustrates Cleopatra’s words, which mean simply that 
the innocent sometimes suffer with the guilty, and that therefore this man cannot 
complain.—WALKER (C7/?z. iii, 300) will have us arrange, ‘as my ear requires,’ he 
says, this and the preceding line thus: ‘The man is innocent. Some innocents | 


ACT II, sc. v.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 137 


Melt Egypt into Nyle : and kindly creatures IOI 
Turne all to Serpents. Call the flaue againe, 
Though I am mad, I will not byte him :Call? 
Char. He is afeard to come. 

Cleo. I will not hurt him, 105 
Thefe hands do lacke Nobility, that they ftrike 
A meaner then my felfe : fince I my felfe 
Haue giuen my felfe the caufe. Come hither Sir. 

Enter the Meffenger againe. 

Though it be honeft, it is neuer good 110 
To bring bad newes - giue to a gratious Meffage 
An hoft of tongues, but let ill tydings tell 


Themfelues, when they be felt. 113 
lol. kindly] kindled Ff, Rowe. 109. Enter... ] Re-enter the Mes- 
103. Cal/?] Call. FF, et seq. senger. Rowe. Re-enter Charmian and 
104. afeard| afraid Pope,+, Var. Messenger. Dyce. 

O73: 112, 113. 2M... Them/elues| it... T/tem- 
105. [Exit Charmian. Dyce. relves ¥ 


’Scape not the thunderbolt,’ whereby it is difficult to perceive the gain. The half- 
line 99 is filled up, to be sure; but why should ‘’Scape not the thunderbolt’ be 
mutilated ? 

Iol, 102. Melt Egypt... Turne all] Assotr (§ 364) observes in regard to 
these two verbs that it is ‘often impossible to tell whether we have an imperative 
with a vocative, or a subjunctive used optatively or conditionally.’ I hardly under- 
stand what is meant by an ‘imperative with a vocative’ in this passage. The voca- 
tives can hardly be ‘ Egypt,’ or ‘kindly creatures.’ But omitting the ‘ vocatives,’ 
both verbs seem to me imperatives, like ‘Let Rome in Tiber melt” TuisELTon 
(p. 13), in the present command of Cleopatra'and in that of Anthony last quoted, 
would find that ‘the affinity of nature between Anthony and Cleopatra is suggested 
by their similar imprecations when the continuance of their connection is threatened.’ 
—Ep. 

103. Call?] Is this interrogation mark absolutely wrong? It has been discarded 
by every editor since the 7izrd Folio. But may it not indicate Charmian’s hesi- 
tation, and Cleopatra’s imperious questioning of her delay? May it not be similar 
to Lear’s frenzied shout, ‘ Who stirs?’ when the circle of courtiers stand motion- 
less with horror at the banishment of Cordelia, and Lear has already cried, ‘ Call 
France !’ ?>—ED. 

106. These hands do lacke Nobility, etc.] MALONE: This play was probably 
. not produced until after Elizabeth’s death, when a stroke at her proud and passion- 
ate demeanour to her courtiers and maids of honour (for her majesty used to chastise 
them too) might be safely hazarded.—[What cared Shakespeare, at such a moment, 
for Elizabeth and all her court? He was Cleopatra.—ED. ] 

107, 108. since I my selfe ... the cause] DEIGHTON: Sc. by allowing myself 
to be such a slave to love for Antony.—[Or, possibly, in that she had ever allowed 
Anthony to leave her.—ED. ] 


138 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. v. 


Mef. I haue done my duty. : 
Cleo. Is he married ? 115 
I cannot hate thee worfer then I do, 
If thou againe fay yes. 
Mef. He’s married Madam. 
Cleo. The Gods confound thee, 
Doft thou hold there ftill ? 120 
Mef. Should I lye Madame? 
Cleo. Oh, I would thou didft: 
So halfe my Egypt were fubmerg’d and made 
A Cefterne for fcal’d Snakes. Go get thee hence, 
Had’ft thou Narciffus in thy face to me, 125 
Thou would’f{t appeere moft vgly : He is married ? 
Mef. Ycraue your Highneffe pardon. 
Cleo. He is married ? 
Mef. Take no offence, that I would not offend you, 
To punnifh me for what you make me do 130 
Seemes much vnequall, he’s married to Odctauza. 


Cleo. Oh that his fault fhould make a knaue of thee, 132 
114. Zhaue] I’ve Dyce ii, iii. 125. face to me,| face, to me Ff et 
done] but done Cap. seq. 

117. thou] you Rowe ii,+. 126, 128. married ?| married. Pope. 

118. He's] He is Varr. Mal. Ran. 129. offence, that] offence, for Pope, 
Steev. Varr. Knt. Han. offence, Gould. 

11g, 120. One line, Rowe et seq. 130. do] do, Rowe. 

122. I would] would FF, Rowe, ‘131. unequall,| unequal. Johns. Var. 
Pope. 73. wuneguall: Ff et cet. 


didft:| didst, Coll. Dyce, Wh. 
Glo. Cam. Hal. Sta. 
124. Ceferne] Ciftern FF. 
Go get] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
i, Han, Cam. ii. go, get Theob. ii et 
cet. 


he’s] he zs Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. 
Varr. Knt, Coll. Wh. Hal. 

he’s married to O&auia] Given 
to Cleopatra followed by the stage direc- 
tion: The messenger pauses and makes 
no answer. Orger. 


123. So halfe my Egypt] Apsorr (§ 133): ‘So,’ thus meaning on condition 
that, is sometimes used where the context implies the addition of eve. Thus here, 
*So (even if) half my Egypt,’ etc. 

126. appeere most vgly] STEEVENS: So in King John, III, i, 36, 37: ‘ Fel- 
low, be gone; I cannot brook thy sight; This news hath made thee a most ugly 
man.’ ; 

129. Take no offence, etc.] CAPELL (i, 35) : Meaning—no new offence ; and is 
spoke upon seeing her angry, that her question was not instantly answer’d; his 
delay, as the speaker would intimate, proceeding from no other cause, but—that he 
would not offend her. 


ACTHET, (SCs2V5)| ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 139 


That art not what th’art fure of. Get thee hence, 133 
133. That... fure of.| That art not —Sing. i. That art not! What thou'rt 

what thou art fure of. Ff, Rowe. That — sure oft? Sing. ii. That art not what 

say’st but what thou'rt sure of! Han. thou utter’st Kinnear. That artnot what 

Warb. Cap. That art not !—What! thou’ rt sure of ! Pope et cet. 

thou'rt sure of ’t ? Mason, Steev. Var. 133. art] wot Jervis. art’s Bul- 


’03, 713, Coll. ii, Hazlitt, Ktly, Dtn. loch. 
Thai art not !—What? thou'rt sure of 


133. That art not what th’art sure of] JoHNson: I fancy the line consists only 
of abrupt starts: ‘That art—not what ?—Thou’rt sure on’t.’ ‘ That his fault should 
make a knave of thee that art—dut what shall I say thou art not? Thou art then 
sure of this marriage.’ —STEEVENS : Jn Meas. for Meas., I, ii, is a passage so much 
‘resembling this, that I cannot help pointing it out for the use of some future com- 
mentator, though I am unable to apply it with success to the very difficult line before 
us: ‘ Drest in a little brief authority, Most ignorant of what he’s most assur d, His 
glassy essence.,—-TOLLET: That is, ‘Thou art not an honest man, of which thou art 
thyself assured, but thou art, in my opinion, a knave by thy master’s fault alone.’— 
[KNIGHT substantially adopts this paraphrase. |]—M. Mason: A proper punctuation, 
with the addition of a single letter, will make this passage clear; the reading save 
of’ t, instead of ‘sure of’: ‘That art not!—What? thou’rt sure of’¢?’ That is, 
‘What? are you sure of what you tell me, that he is married to Octavia ?’ —MALONE: 
Cleopatra begins now a little to recollect herself, and to be ashamed of having struck 
the servant for the fault of his master. She then very naturally exclaims: ‘O, that 
his fault should make a knave of thee, That art not what thou’rt sore of !’ for so I 
would read, with the change of only one letter. ‘ Alas, is it not strange, that the 
fault of Antony should make thee appear to me a knave, thee, that art innocent, and 
art not the cause of that ill news, in consequence of which thou art yet sore with my 
blows!’ If it be said, that it is very harsh to suppose that Cleopatra means to say 
to the Messenger, that 4e is not himself that 2formation which he brings, and which 
has now made him smart, let the following passage in Cortolanus answer the objec- 
tion: ‘Lest you should chance to whip your zzformation, And beat the messenger 
that bids beware Of what is to be dreaded.’—[IV, vi, 53.] The Egyptian queen 
has beaten her zxformation. If the old copy be right, the meaning is—‘Strange, 
that his fault should make thee appear a knave, who art not that information of which 
thou bringest such certain assurance.’—STAUNTON observes that the ‘simple change 
[sore] proposed by Malone is more Shakespearian’ than Mason’s. COLLIER (ed. i), 
who follows the punctuation of M. Mason without changing ‘of’ into of’¢, admits 
that the original text is ‘far from intelligible. By the words,’ he continues, 
‘«« What ! thou’rt sure of ?”’ Cleopatra intends to inquire of the messenger once more, 
whether he is certain of the tidings he has brought.’ In his Second Edition, how- 
ever, Collier adopted Mason’s of’¢, but in his 7hird Edition he returned to the 
punctuation and reading of his /%rst.—Dycr (Remarks, p. 247): M. Mason’s 
punctuation, with the change of ‘of’ to oft, afforded at least a sense ; but Collier, 
. .. has made the passage mere nonsense. I should strongly protest against any 
deviation from the old eds. here. ‘That art not what thou’rt sure of’? may mean, 
‘That art not the evil tidings of which thou givest me such assurance.’ —[COLLIER 
did not relish having his reading stigmatised as ‘ mere nonsense’ ; accordingly in his 


140 THE, TRAGE DIE GOP [ACT II, SC. v. 


[133. That art not what th’art sure of ] 

Second Edition he contrived in an adroit way to say that the Rev. Mr Dyce was in 
‘ somewhat of a dilemma,’ a hideous imputation which flesh and blood could not stand; 
and so in both of Dyce’s subsequent editions, Dyce denounced Collier’s ‘ discredit- 
able subterfuge,’ printing these two words in small capitals, which are always thus 
supposed to sting like adders fanged. If it were not ludicrous, would it not be humil- 
iating, to see, in the awful presence of Shakespeare, wee atomies taking themselves 
so seriously ?—Ep.]—R. G. WHITE (ed. i) reads ‘That art 4u¢ what thou’ rt sure of,’ 
and thus explains: That is, being merely a messenger you are to be regarded only 
according to the tenor of your message... The universal previous punctuation of 
the passage makes it not superfluous to say, that it is not an optative exclamation, 
but a declaration ; and that ‘ that’ in the previous line is not the conjunction, but the 
definitive adjective. Cleopatra, in reply to the messenger’s plea, that he only per- 
forms his office, says, ‘O that [z. e. Antony’s marriage], which is his fault, should 
make a knave of thee, that art but what thy tidings are.’—[ White retained this read- 
ing in his Second Edition, with substantially the same paraphrase. ]—The CowDEN- 
CLARKES: That is, who art not thyself that fault which thou art so sure has been 
committed. ‘The Messenger has before said, ‘I that do bring the news made not the 
match,’ and ‘I have made no fault.,-HUDSON (reading ‘ That art in what thou’rt 
sure of’): That is, ‘skarest in, or art mixed up with, or infected by, the message 
which thou art sure of.’ Soin I, ii, ‘The nature of bad news zz/fects the teller.’ 
Cleopatra’s idea seems to be, that the Messenger is made a knave by the knavish 
message which he brings, and with which he shows himself to be in sympathy by 
sticking to it so constantly.—C. M. INGLEBy (/V. & Qu. 1885, VI, xi, 362): The 
sense is: ‘that ought not to be confounded with thy foul message, yet seemest to be 
tarred with the same brush.’—G., Jorcry (4. & Qu. 1891, VII, xii, 342): Read: 
‘That art not—what thou art sure of!’ Is not Cleopatra about to say ‘ that art not 
married’? She cannot bring herself to utter the (to her) detestable word again and 
paraphrases itas above. The meaning would be, ‘O that Antony’s knavish fault of 
getting married should cause thee—thee that art not married—to be treated as a 
knave.’—Br. NICHOLSON (JV. & Qu. 1892, VIII, i, 182): I take it that the author 
meant that Cleopatra, —looking to what she had just done,—would assume that such 
a knave was sure to be whipped or carted. One must not look for speech other than 
impulsive from an infuriated woman, still less from a Cleopatra maddened by jealous 
rage; nor was Shakespeare so bad an imitator of nature as to make her talk at such 
a time as thoughtfully as when debating what would best set off her charms when 
robed as the Paphian queen.—DEIGHTON (Old Drama. ii, 41): Perhaps ‘That art 
no whit th’ author of ’t’. t. e., that you, who are in nowise answerable for his fault, 
should be made a knave by it. This seems a suitable sense, and author for ‘art 
sure’ is no very violent alteration considering the writing of the time and the various 
spellings of the word.—HERFoRD: (With irony) that art innocent, forsooth, of 
offence, yet sure to offend !—[This line has not proved very encouraging to those 
who have lightheartedly attempted to amend it. Its most popular emendation has 
but five adherents. The original text can be paraphrased hardly better, I think, 
than it is by Dyce (following Malone substantially), as quoted above in his Remarhs. 
What the messenger was sure of was the ill tidings. These he himself assuredly 
was not, and these it was that Cleopatra would like to tear in pieces ; but as she had 
maltreated him instead, all the pity she could give him was that Anthony’s fault had 
exposed him to the treatment of a knave.—Ep.] 


ACT II, SC. v.} 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA I4I 


The Marchandize which thou haft brought from Rome 


Are all too deere for me: 


135 


Lye they vpon thy hand, and be vndone by em. 


Char. Good your Highneffe patience. 

Cleo. In prayfing Axthony,1 haue difprais’d Ce/ar. 
Char. Many times Madam. 

Cleo. 


I faint, oh Ivas, Charmian 


I am paid for’t now: lead me from hence, 140 
: tis no matter. 


Go to the Fellow, good Alexas bid him 
Report the feature of Oétauia : her yeares, 143 


134. Marchandize which] Merchan- 
dize which ¥,,Cap. Merchandifes which 
F, Rowe. merchandises Pope,+. Mer- 
chandife which F, et cet. 


140. Lam] Lam F.. 
Sort] for it Pope,+, Varr. Mal. 
Ran. 
141. faint,] faint; Rowe et seq. 


135, 136. Ave...hand, | One line, Cap. (subs. ) 
et seq. Charmian .] Charmian !—Rowe 
136. em] em FF, et seq. et seq. 


[Exit Mes. Rowe et seq. 


138. pray/ing| praying F.. 
140. Two lines, Cap. Steev. et seq. 


142, Alexas did] Alexas, bid FF. 
Alexas » bid Cap. et seq. 


136. em] The only other instances, that I can recall ( Comcordances give no help) 
of the use in the “rst Folio of this abbreviation, are in Zhe Tempest, where Prospero, 
speaking of his government in Naples, says ‘ The creatures that were mine, I say, or 
chang’d ’em, Or els new form’d ’em;’ I, ii, 99, 100; and again, in Henry V- IV, 
iii, 124, where Henry dismisses the French Herald who had come to demand a 
ransom from him, Henry replies, ‘They shall have none, I swear, but these my 
joints; Which if they have as I will leave ’em them, Shall yield them little,’ etc., 
where the full form, tem, would be decidedly harsh; and the reason for the abbre- 
viation is plain. Again, in Cortolanus, II, ili, 220, the First Citizen boasts, ‘I 
[have] twice hundred [voices] and their friends to piece’em.’ Possibly this may 
indicate the low estate of the speaker. And, lastly, we find Macbeth demanding of 
the witches, ‘Call ’em; let me see ’em.’—IV, i, 72, which may indicate his frenzied 
impatience. But why this form should be used in the present line and in 7he Tem- 
pest, I do not know.—ED. 

140-143. Iam... her yeares] WALKER (C77z. iii, 300): Arrange and write, 
perhaps,—‘ 7’ paid for’t now.—Lead me from hence, I faint; | O, Iras—Charm- 
ian—’Tis no matter.—Go | To ¢h’ fellow, good Alexas; bid him report | The 
feature of Octavia, her years.’’ | 

143. Report the feature, etc.] Grey (ii, 201) : This is a manifest allusion to 
the questions put by Queen Elizabeth to Sir James Melvil concerning his mistress 
the Queen of Scots.—[The MS, containing Sir James Melvil’s account, was not dis- 
covered until 1660, and was not published until 1683. It would not have been 
worth while to repeat this note of Grey, had it not been reprinted in the Variorum 
of 1821.—ED. | 

143. feature] ScuMmipT (Zex.) furnishes many examples where ‘ feature’ means 
‘the shape, make, exterior, the whole turn or cast of the body,’ 


142 THE ‘TRAGEDIE -OP:. 


[ACTA SC eive 


Her inclination, let him not leaue out 


The colour of her haire. 


Bring me word quickly, 145 


Let him for euer go, let him not Charmian, 
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon, 


The other wayes a Mars. 


Bid you Alexas 


Bring me word, how tall fhe is : pitty me Charmian, 


But do not fpeake to me. 


146. go, let him not] F,. go, let him 
not, FF. go—tlet him not, Rowe,+. 
go.—Let him not— Cap. et cet. (subs.) 

not | go Gould. 

148. Zhe other] Th other Theob. ii, 
+, Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Knt. 

wayes a] FF, way’s a F,, 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, Johns. Cap. Dyce, 


Lead me to my Chamber. 150 


Fixeunt. 


Wh. Glo. Cam. Sta. Rife, Dtn. way he 
zs a Varr. way he’s Ran. way he’s a 
Theob. ii et cet. 

148. Alexas] Alexas [to Mardian. 
Cap. et seq. 

149. Bring me] Sring Pope,+, 
Words. 

150. do not /peake] speak not Pope,+. 


146, Let him for euer go] JOHNSON: She is now talking in broken sentences, 
not of the Messenger, but of Antony.—TyrwuiTT (p. 11): This, I think, would be 
more spirited thus :—‘ Let him for ever go—let him—#o,—Charmion.’—[ Adopted, 
substantially, by Rann and Wordsworth. ] 

146. let him not] THISELTON (p. 14): That is, hinder him not. Cleopatra 
noticing that Charmian has started to bid Alexas not to bring back the Messenger, 
corrects herself and tells Charmian not to interfere. The first ‘him’ in this line 
refers to the Messenger; the second to Alexas.—[Dr Johnson’s interpretation seems 
to me more just. Cleopatra’s thoughts are not here concerned with any ignoble 
messenger. It is Anthony from whom she wishes to part ‘for ever,’ who, though he 
be in one aspect like a monster, in another he is a god.—Ep. ] 

147, 148. painted one way ... other wayes a Mars] STAUNTON: An allusion 
to the ‘double’ pictures in vogue formerly, of which Burton says,—‘ they are like 
these double or turning pictures; stand before wch, you see a fair maid, on the one side 
an ape, on the other an owl.’—[ Democritus to the Reader, p. 73, ed. 1651.]—And 
Chapman, in 4// Fooles, I, i, ‘ But like a cousoning picture, which one way Shewes 
like a Crowe, another like a Swanne.’—[Burton had once before (p. 36) thus 
referred to these pictures: ‘—and he, and the rest are hypocrites, ambodexters, out 
sides, so many turning pictures, a lyon on the one side, a lamb onthe other.’—ED. ] 

148. wayes a Mars] Is not this clearly a sophistication due to the ear ?—Ep. 

151, Exeunt] Mrs. JAMESON (ii. 139) : The pride and arrogance of the Egyptian 
queen, the blandishment of the woman, the unexpected but natural transitions of 
temper and feeling, the contest of various passions, and at length—when the wild 
hurricane has spent its fury—the melting into tears, faintness, and languishment, are 
portrayed with the most astonishing power, and truth, and skill in feminine nature. 
More wonderful still is the splendour and force of colouring which is shed over this 
extraordinary scene. The mere idea of an angry woman beating her menial presents 
something ridiculous or disgusting to the mind ; in a queen or a tragedy heroine it is 
still more indecorous; yet this scene is as far as possible from the vulgar or the 
comic. Cleopatra seems privileged to ‘touch the brink of all we hate’ with impunity. 


ACT II, SC. vii] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 143 


[Scene VT] 


Hlourifh. Enter Pompey, at one doove with Drum and Trum- 
pet:at another Cefar, Lepidus, Anthony, Enobarbus, Me- 
cenas, Agrippa, Menas with Souldiers Marching. 
Pom. Your Hoftages I haue, fo haue you mine: 
And we fhall talke before we fight. 5 
Cefar. Moft meete that firft we come to words, 
And therefore haue we 
Our written purpofes before vs fent, 
Which if thou haft confidered, let vs know, 
If’twill tye vp thy difcontented Sword, 10 
And carry backe to Cicelie much tall youth, 
That elfe muft perifh heere. 
Pom. To you all three, 
The Senators alone of this great world, 
Chiefe Factors for the Gods. I do not know, 15 
Wherefore my Father fhould reuengers want, 
Hauing a Sonne and Friends, fince Iu/ius Ce/far, 


Who at Phillippi the good Brutizs ghofted, 18 

Scene IV. Rowe. Scene VI. Pope et 6, 7. that firft...haue we] One line, 
seq. Rowe et seq. 

The Coast of Italy near Misenum. 9. confidered | consider’d Pope et 
Rowe. seq. 

1-105. Om. Gar. Kemble. 10, ’¢will] it will F,. 

1, Flourifh.] Om. Ff. 12. muft] much F.. 

Pompey,] Pompy, F,. Pompey 15. Gods. I] gods,—J Theob, Warb. 

and Menas, Rowe et seq. et seq. (subs. ) 

3. Menas] Om. Rowe et seq. 17. Friends,| friends ; Rowe et seq. 


This imperial termagant, this ‘wrangling queen, whom every thing becomes,’ becomes 
her fury. We know not by what strange power it is, that in the midst of all these 

- unruly passions and childish caprices, the poetry of the character, and the fanciful 
and sparkling grace of the delineation are sustained and still rule in the imagination ; 
but we feel that it is so. 

3. Menas] CoLiier: In the Folios, Menas is inserted as if he were one of the 
friends and followers of Czesar.—[Rowe made the change. See Zext. Votes. ] 

“11. much tall youth] GirrorpD remarks: There is scarcely a writer of Jonson’s 
age who does not frequently use ‘tall’ in the sense of bold or courageous.—LZvery 
Man in his Humour, IV, v, p. 124.—[See ‘tall fellow of his hands.’— Wint. Tae, 
V, ii, 164 of the present edition. ] 

18. ghosted] BrapLey (4. £.D. 2. trans.) : To haunt as an apparition.—[The 
present is the earliest instance. The next is from Burton, ‘ Ask not with him in the 
Poet .. . What madness ghosts this old man, but what madness ghosts us all ?’— 
p- 19, ed. 1621; p. 22, ed. 1651.] 


144 IME. HIG ANE IIIQIOR. (ONE [ACT IJ, SC. vi. 


There faw you labouring for him. What was’t 
That mou’d pale Ca/ius to con{pire ? And what 20 
Made all-honor’d, honeft, Romaine Brutus, 
With the arm’d reft, Courtiers of beautious freedome, 
To drench the Capitoll, but that they would 
Haue one man but a man,and that his it 
Hath made me rigge my Nauie. At whofe burthen, 25 
The anger’d Ocean fomes, with which I meant 
To fcourge th’ingratitude , that defpightfull Rome 
Caft on my Noble Father. 
Cefar. Take your time. 
Ant. Thou can’ft not feare vs Pompey with thy failes. 30 


19. for him] for me ¥,F,, Rowe. for 


ale 22. Courtiers| courters Theob. conj. 
him Han. 


(Nichols, ///es¢. withdrawn.) Han. 


wast] Ff, Rowe, Cap. Sing. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. Sta. was zt Pope et cet. 
20. confpire ?| conspire ; Dyce, Glo. 
conspire, Cam. 
20, 21. what...Brutus] One line, Var. 
778, ’85, Mal. Ran. 
21. Made] Var.’78, ’85, Mal. Knt, 


Coll. i, Hal. Mad the F,. Made thee 
Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Made the 
FF, et cet. 


all-honor'd| all-honoured Coll. i, 


beautious| beauteous FF. 

24. one man but a man,| Ff. one 
man but aman; Rowe. but one man, 
aman; Pope. One man, but a man? 
Theob. i. one man, but a man ? Theob. 
ii, Warb. Johns. Var.’73. ome man but 
aman? Han. et cet. 

his] ts Ff et seq. 

27. defpightfull| despiteful Han. i, 
Steev. et seq. 

30. fatles.] sails, Rowe. 


Del. 


19. There saw you labouring for him] Hupson: That is, Julius Cesar, after 
his death, saw you his son and friends labouring for his revenge at Philippi; there- 
fore I know no reason why my father should want revengers, as he has also a son 
and friends surviving him. 

20. pale Cassius] ‘ Cesar also had Cassius in great gealousie, and suspected him 
much: whereuppon he sayed on a time to his friends, what will Casszws doe, thinke 
ye? I like not his pale looks.’—North’s Plutarch: Julius Cesar, p. 787, ed. 1595 
(Leo’s Photolithograph). 

23. Capitoll] Craik ( /w/. Cas. II, i, 77): As an historical fact, the meeting of 
the Senate at which Czesar was assassinated was held, not in the Capitol, but in the 
Curia in which the statue of Pompey stood, being, as Plutarch tells us, one of the 
edifices which Pompey had built, and had given, along with his famous Theatre, to 
the public. The mistake is found also in Hamlet, III, ii, and [here in Ant, & 
Cleop.). 

24, one man but a man] THEOBALD: That is, they would have no One aim at 
arbitrary power, and a degree of preheminence above the rest. What did they kill 
Cesar for, but to prevent his aspiring above his Fellow Countrymen? 

30. Thou can’st not feare vs] JOHNSON: Thou canst not affright us with thy 
numerous navy. 


ACT, sc. vi.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 145 


Weele fpeake with thee at Sea. At land thou know’ft at 
How much we do o’re-count thee. 
Pom. At Land indeed 
Thou doft orecount me of my Fatherrs houfe : 
But fince the Cuckoo buildes not for himfelfe, 35 


Remaine in’t as thou maift. 
Lepi. Be pleas’d to tell vs, 


(For this is from the prefent how you take) 


The offers we haue fent you. 


Cefar. There’s the point. 40 
Ant. Which do not be entreated too, 

But waigh what it is worth imbrac’d 
Cefar. And what may follow to try a larger Fortune. 43 


31. Weele [peake] We re weak Gould. 

34. Fatherrs] F,. 

38. (For... take)] (For... now you 
talke) Ff (subs.), Rowe, Pope. (For 
this is from the present) how you take 
Theob. et seq. (subs. ) 


present] purpose Daniel. 
39. offers] offer Han. Dyce ii, iii. 


41, 42. Which ... waigh] One line, 
Rowe et seq. 

41. f00] to Ff. 

42. tmbrac’d] embracing Wray ap. 
Cam. 

43. And... Fortune] Two lines, Rowe 
et seq. 

follow] follaw F,. 


you. | you— Rowe, Pope, Han. 


31. Weele speake with thee] See ‘ Would we had spoke together,’ II, ii, 194. 

34. Thou dost ore count me, etc.] CAPELL (i, 35) : ‘O’er-count’ in this speech 
is a perversion of that [in Anthony’s speech, line 32]; for where Antony meant,— 
over-number, this speaker means,—over-reach.—[See Plutarch, Appendix. ] 

35, 36. since the Cuckoo... . Remaine, etc.] CAPELL (i, 35) : Where is the 
propriety of bidding Antony stay in this house, ‘stnce the cuckoo builds not for him- 
self ?’ the only solution of it is,—that ’tis one of those half-worded speeches, that 
are purposely left incomplete, and to be made out by the understanding of the party 
address’d to: what is wanting to perfect this speech, is-contain’d in the following 
paraphrase ;—But, since providence suffers the cuckoo to use a nest that is not of 
his building, (I too must submit to a like dispensation ; and so) ‘ remain in’t, as thou 
may’ st,’ keep the house you have seiz’d upon how you can.—JOHNSON: Since like 
the cuckoo, that seizes the nests of other birds, you have invaded a house which you 
could not build, keep it while you can.—[Dr Johnson once said that if Capell had 
only come to him he would have ‘ endowed his purposes with words.’—ED. ] 

38. from the present] STEEVENS: That is, foreign to the object of our present 
discussion.—[ For many examples where ‘from’ means @fart from, away from, with- 
out a verb of motion, see ABBOTT, § 158.] 

42, it is worth imbrac’d] It is within the bounds of possibility that the omission 
of a full stop after ‘imbrac’d’ is intentional, and indicates that Czsar in his eager- 
ness interrupts Anthony. That Cesar begins his sentence with ‘and’ adds a faint 
tinge of probability to this doubtful surmise. Where we have an undoubted inter- 
ruption, as in line 87, the dash is portentous.—Ep. 


p <o} 


146 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. vi. 


Pom. You haue made me offer 
Of Cicelie, Sardinia : and I muft 2 45 
Rid all the Sea of Pirats. Then,to fend 
Meafures of Wheate to Rome : this greed vpon, 

To part with vnhackt edges,and beare backe 

Our Targes vndinted. 
Omnes. That’s our offer. 50 
Pom. Know then I came before you heere, 

A man prepar’d 

To take this offer. But Marke Anthony, 

Put me to fome impatience : though I loofe 

The praife of it by telling. You muft know 55 

When Ce/ar and your Brother were at blowes, 

Your Mother came to Cicelie, and did finde 

44. You hauc] You've Pope,+, Dyce seq. 


45. Cicelie] F,. 
Sardinia) Sardiniar ¥,. 
47. greed | F,, Hal. Dyce ii, iii. greed 
ELF, et cet. 
49. Targes] targets F,, Rowe. sarge 
Pope,+, Cap. Var.’73, Steev. Var. ’03, 
uray Collemiiie 


51-53. Anow...Anthony] Lines end, 
man...Antony Rowe. then...prepar'd 
.-. Antony Pope et seq. 

54. Put] Puts Han. 

55. telling. You] Ff, Rowe, Sing. 
telling ; you Pope, Han. ¢elling, you 
Theob. et seq. 

56. Brother] brothers Steev. Varr. 


50. Omnes. ] Czes. Ant. Lep. Cap. et 


47. greed] It is not necessary in a modernised text to print this "greed; itisa 
regular past participle of the verb, zo gree, which is, according to BRADLEY (J. £. D. 


5. u.), an aphetized form of the verb, agree, in use from the time of Wyclif. See II, 
i, 50; Mer. of Ven. II, ii, 97.—ED. 
49. Our Targes vndinted] WALKER (Vers. 253): Palpably ¢arge’. [Where 


the apostrophe marks an abbreviated plural, like dusiness’, mightiness’]; and so write 
in Cymbeline, V, v, 5,—‘Stept before targes of proof, cannot be found.’ TZarge in 
the singular would not be Elizabethan English. [Of this last remark of Walker, 
Dyce (ed. ii) says] I am not sure that I understand [it];—but compare the fol- 
lowing passages of Chapman’s Homer :—‘As from his chariot he leapt downe, 
beneath his zarge of brasse.’—//iad, B. xi, p. 150, ed. Folio; ‘ And (with his lance) 
strooke through the ¢arge of that braue Lycian king.’—B. xii, p. 167 ; ‘ With sword 
and fire they vext for them their serges hugely round,’—B. xii, p. 168. In a note on 
the line in Cymbeline Mr Singer (Shakespeare, ed. 1856) observes: ‘The plural 
targes seems to have been formerly a monosyllable [args], as in French, where its 
oldest form is ¢argues.’ That Chapman at least did not use it as a monosyllable is 
shown by the third of the passages just cited from his Homer.—[Hupson adopted 
targs.] 

55. by telling. You must know] THEOBALD’s excellent restoration of the punc- 
tuation reveals the meaning of ‘ You must know,’ which is J must tell you, and can- 
not be 2¢ must have been already known to you. 


act 1, sc. vi] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 147 


Her welcome Friendly. ' 
Ant. 


I haue heard it Pompey, 


And am well ftudied for a liberall thanks, 60 


Which I do owe you. 
Pom. 


Let me haue your hand : 


I did not thinke Sir, to haue met you heere, 
Ant. The beds i’th’Eaft are foft, and thanks to you, 
That cal’d me timelier then my purpofe hither : 65 


For I haue gained by’t. 


Ce@far. Since I faw you laft, ther’s a change vpon you. 


Pom. Well, I know not, 


What counts harfh Fotune caft’s vpon my face, 
But in my bofome fhall fhe neuer come, 70 


To make my heart her vaffaile. 
Lep. Well met heere. 
Pom. 


I hope fo Lepidus, thus we are agreed : 


I craue our compofion may be written 


And feal’d betweene vs, 
Cefar. 
Pom. 

Draw lots who fhall begin. 
Ant. That will I Pompey. 


That’s the next to do. 
Weele feaft each other, ere we part, and lett’s 


75 


Pompey. No Anthony take the lot : but firft or laft, 80 


63. [They take hands. Coll. ii. 

65. That] You've Words. 

66. J haue... byt] Ff, Rowe, Cap. 
Dyce, Wh. Glo. Cam. Sta. Z’ve...dy it 
Pope,+. .J have... by wt Var. ’73 et 
cet. 

67. Two lines, ending Jast... you 
Rowe et seq. 

TEIAS\| VS 
There is Rowe et cet. 
69. counts] change Gould. 


harfh] hard FF, Rowe, +, Var. 


there's FF 


3.4 


Sing. 


73- 
Fotune] F,. 
70. frail fhe) fhe fnall ¥ F,, Rowe,+, 
Ware] 3: 


71. her vaffaile| avaffaile F,. avaffal 
F,F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

74. compofion| compofition Ff. 

may| my F,. 

77. lett’s| let us Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. 
Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. Hal. 

78. lots] lots ? Pope i. 

79. will I| I will Theob. ii, Warb. 
Johns. Var. ’73. 

80-82, Wo... there] Ff, Sta. Lines 
end, Jot. ... cookery ... Casar ... there. 
Rowe,+, Cam. Ktly. jirst...cookery... 
Casar...there. Cap. Glo, et cet. 

80. Mo] No, noble Cap. 

Anthony] Axtony, no; Words. 
take] take we Steev. conj. 


60. a liberall thanks] We still say, 2 hundred thanks, or a thousand thanks. 

69. What counts harsh Fotune cast’s] WARBURTON: Metaphor from making 
marks or lines in casting accounts in arithmetic. 

76, That’s the next to do] See ABBoTT, § 405, for ellipses after w2// and is. 


148 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 18, SC. vir 


your fine Egyptian cookerie fhall haue the fame, I haue 81 
heard that Iu/ius Ce/far,grew fat with feafting there. 
Anth. You haue heard much. 
Pom. TJ haue faire meaning Sir. 
Ant. And faire words to them. 85 
Pom. Then fo much haue I heard, 
And I haue heard Appolodorus carried -— 
Eno. No more that : he did fo. 
Pom. What I pray you? 


Eno. A certaine Queene to Ce/ar in a Matris. go 
81. Lhaue] J’ve Pope, +, Dyce ii, iii. — 86. heard,| heard. or heard: Pope et 
84. meaning] meanings Heath, Var. seq. heard, Mark Antony. Elze. 
85 et seq. : 88. more that] F,. more of that FF, 
85. them] it Han. et seq. 
86,87. Then...haue heard | One line, 90. Matris| Materice Ff, Rowe. mat- 
Cap. ress Pope. 


84. meaning] HEATH: The reply makes it evident we should read, meanings. 

87. Appolodorus carried] Cesar... therupon secretly sent for Cleopatra which 
was in the country to come vnto him. She only taking Afo//odorus SICILIAN of all 
her friends, tooke a litle bote, & went away with him in it in the night, and came 
and landed hard by the foote of the castle. Then hauing no other mean to come 
into the court without being knowen, she laid herselfe down vpon a mattresse or 
flockbed, which Afollodorus her friend tied and bound vp together like a bundle 
with a great leather thong, & so tooke her vp on his backe, and brought her thus 
hamperd in this fardle vnto Cesar, in the castle gate.—North’s Plutarch: Julius 
Cesar, p. 781, ed. 1595 (Leo’s Photolithograph). 

88. Eno. No more that ;: he did so] OrRGER (p. 98): It is hard to under- 
stand what Enobarbus can mean by trying to suppress a topic by the words, ‘no 
more of that,’ and then continuing to narrate it. It seems as if there is a faulty dis- 
tribution of parts. In the next scene, line 9, the servant describes Lepidus, ‘He 
cries out, “no more,” reconciles them to his entreaty, and himself to the drink,’ 
which justifies us in supposing that it is he who endeavours to stifle the scandal, and 
we should divide as follows :—‘ Lepidus. No more of that. Eno. He did so. [aside 
to Pompey.|’—[I think it is not impossible to imagine the action here. Pompey’s 
allusion to ‘fine Egyptian cookery’ is unfortunate, especially when he speaks of it to 
Anthony who is just married to Octavia; but his next reference to Julius Cesar and 
his feasting is worse. Anthony tries to stop him by saying ‘ you’ve heard altogether 
too much.’ Thereupon Pompey blunders still further by asserting that he really did 
not mean anything bad, that he had fair meanings. ‘Then,’ retorts Anthony, ‘see 
that you put them in fair words.’ But Pompey’s ill-timed references are not yet 
ended, ‘bad is begun but worse remains behind,’—he refers to Cleopatra’s first love- 
affair. Hereupon Enobarbus takes in the situation, and, instantly silencing Pompey, 
says aside to him, ‘ Hush, no more of that!’ adding ‘you are quite right,—Apollo- 
dorus did so.’ ‘What?’ asks the bewildered Pompey, who then recognizes Eno- 
barbus. And thereafter the dialogue continues without obstruction. Anthony had 
evidently turned away abruptly ; he does not speak again during the scene.—Ep.] 


ACEI, Sc. vi.]} 


Pom. 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 149 


I know thee now, how far’ft thou Souldier ? gI 


£no. Well, and well am like to do, for I perceiue 


Foure Feafts are toward. 
Pom. 
I neuer hated thee : 


Let me fhake thy hand, 
I haue feene thee fight, 95 


When I haue enuied thy behauiour. 
£nob. Sir, I neuer lou’d you much, but I ha’prais’d ye, 
When you haue well deferu’d ten times as much, 


As I haue faid you did. 
Pom. Inioy thy plainneffe, 
It nothing ill becomes thee : 


100 


Aboord my Gally, I inuite you all. 


Will you leade Lords? 
All. Shew’s the way, fir. 


Manet Enob .& Menas 105 


You haue done well by water. 110 


Pom. Come. Exeunt. 

Men. Thy Father Pompey would ne’re haue made this 
Treaty. You,and I haue knowne fir. 

E00.” “At \Séa, Ithinke. 

Men. We haue Sir. 

£nob. 

Men. And you by Land. 

Enob, 


91. [To Anob. Han. 

92. and...perceiue| One line, Theob. 
et seq. 

97. I neuer...ye| One line, Pope et 
seq. 

ha’ prais d ye| Ff, Rowe, +, Dyce, 

Glo. Cam. ha’prais’d you Wh. i. have 
praisd ye Sta. Hal. have prais’d you 
Cap. et cet. 

100. /nioy] Enjoy Pope. 

1ol. thee .] thee. Cap. et seq. 

102. Aboord] A-board ¥ ,. 


I will praife any man that will praife me, thogh Ti2 


104. All.] Czes. Ant. Lep. Cap. 
Shew’s| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. shew us or show us Han. 
et cet. 
106. Men.] Men. [Aside] Johns. et 
seq. 
this] Om. FF ,, Rowe. 
107. You...fr.] Separate line, Pope, 
+, Varr. Ran. Ktly. 
[To Anob. Han. 
T10-125. Om. Gar. 
112. thogh] F,,. 


97. ha’prais’d ye] ABBortT (§ 236); Sometimes ye seems put for you when an 


unaccented syllable is wanted [as here]. 


107. You, and I haue knowne sir] STEEVENS: That is, been acquainted.— 
AspoTtT (§ 382): The Elizabethan authors objected to scarcely any ellipsis, provided 


the deficiency could be easily supplied from the context. 


have known (one another), sir.’ 


Thus here: ‘ You and I 


112. I will praise any man that will praise me] WARBURTON: The poet’s art 
in delivering this humorous sentiment (which gives so very true and natural a pic- 
ture of the commerce of the world) can never be sufficiently admired. The con- 
fession could come from none but a frank and rough character, like the speaker’s : 


150 THE TRAGEDIES OF [ACT II, SC. vi. 
it cannot be denied what I haue done by Land. 113 
_Men. Nor what I haue done by water. 


Enob. Yes fome-thing you can deny for your owne 115 
fafety : you haue bin a great Theefe by Sea. 


Men. And you by Land. 


Enob. There I deny my Land feruice : but giue mee 
your hand Menas, if our eyes had authority, heere they 


might take two Theeues kiffing. 120 
Men. All mens faces are true, whatfomere their hands 

are. 
Enob. But there is neuer a fayre Woman, ha’s a true 

Face. 
Men. No flander, they fteale hearts. 125 


Enob. We came hither to fight with you. 


Men. 


For my part, I am forry it is turn’d to a Drink- 


ing. Pompey doth this day laugh away his Fortune. 


Enob. 
Men. 


If he do, fure he cannot weep’t backe againe. 
Y’haue faid Sir, we look’d not for Marke An- 130 


thony heere, pray you, is he married to Cleopatra? 


Enob. 
Men. 


Ce/fars Sifter is call’d Otaua. 
True Sir, fhe was the wife of Cazus Marcellus. 


Enob. But fhe is now the wife of Marcus Anthontus. 


Men. Pray’ye fir. 

115. /ome-thing| fomething ¥ ,. 

116. din] been F . 

great | good Ff, Rowe. 

119. our] your F,, Rowe. 

120. take] have F,¥,, Rowe. 

121. whatfomere| whatfoereF,. what- 
some’er Glo. Rife, Dtn, Wh. ii. whadt/o- 
e’re FF, Cam. et cet. (subs.) 


34 
123. neuer] ne’re FF, Rowe,+. 
ha’s| Ff. has Rowe. 
125. flander,| slander,— Theob. 


Warb. slander; Cap. et seq. 

129. weep’ t] Ff, Rowe,+, Sing. Dyce, 
Wh. Glo. Cam. Sta. Ktly. weep zt Cap. 
et cet. 


135 


130. Y’haue] Y’have Ff. You've 
Rowe,+, Sing. Dyce, Glo. Cam. Sta. 
Ktly. Y’ave Wh. You have Cap. et cet. 

Sir,] Ff... sir; Rowe,+. str. 
Cap. et seq. 

131. heere,] here; Rowe et seq. 

133. Sir,] sir ; Cap. et seq. (subs. ) 

134. /he ts now | now /he is FF , Rowe, 
+, Cap. Varr. Ran. 

135. Pray’ ye fir.| Pray y'e Sir. F,,. 
Pray ye, Sir. F,F,, Rowe. Pray you, 
str,— Cap. Pray you, sir? Varr. Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Coll. Wh. Pray ye, 
Sir? Pope,+, Sing. Dyce, Glo. Cam. Sta. 
Hal. Ktly. 


and the moral lesson insinuated under it, that /a¢tery can make its way through the 
most stubborn manners, deserves our serious reflection. 
121, All mens faces are true] Compare, ‘ There’s no art To find the mind’s con- 


struction in the face.’—Macbeth, I, iv, 11. 


125. Noslander] CoLLiEr: That is, what you say is no slander; they steal hearts. 


ACTH, sc. vi.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA I5I 


Enob. Tis true. 136 
Men. Then is Ce/far and he, for euer knit together. 
Enob. If I were bound to Diuine of this vnity, I wold 
not Prophefie fo. 
Men. {I thinke the policy of that purpofe, made more 140 
in the Marriage, then the loue of the parties. 
Enob. I thinke fo too. But you fhall finde the band 
that feemes to tye their friendfhip together, will bee the 
very ftrangler of their Amity : Oétauia is of a holy, cold, 
and ftill conuerfation. 145 
Men. Who would not haue his wife fo? 
Eno. Not he that himfelfe is not fo : which is Marke 
Anthony : he will to his Egyptian difh againe : then fhall 
the fighes of Octauza blow the fire vp in Ce/ar, and (as I 
faid before) that which is the ftrength of their Amity, 150 
fhall proue the immediate Author of their variance. Ax- 
thony will vie his affection where it is. Hee married but 
his occafion heere. 
Men. And thus it may be. Come Sir, will you aboord? 


I haue a health for you. 155 
Enob. J fhall take it fir : we haue vs’d our Throats in 
Egypt. 
Men. Come, let’s away. Exeunt. 158 
137. together. | together ? Coll. ii. 154. aboord] a-boord¥,. a-board ¥,. 
140. policy] policy F.,. aboard Rowe. 
144. firangler| firanger Ff. estranger 155. /...health| We have healths Gar. 
Rowe. 156. 2¢] ’em Gar. 


150. Amity] unity Elze. 


137. Then is Cesar and he, for euer knit together.] CoL.ier (ed. ii): We 
point this line with a note of interrogation, because Menas must intend to ask the 
question, whether it be so; if not, he contradicts himself in his next speech, where 
he asserts that the union was one of more convenience than love. He asks Eno- 
barbus whether Czsar and Anthony are for ever united by the marriage, and Eno- 
barbus replies in the negative, which Menas immediately confirms by his opinion, 
‘I think, the policy of that purpose,’ etc.—[In his 7hzrd Edition, Collier aban- 
doned this note of interrogation. ] 

145. conuersation] Murray (4. £. D. 6): Manner of conducting oneself in 
the world or in society ; behaviour, mode of life. 1552 Bk. Com. Prayer, Ordin. 
Pref., ‘A man of vertuous conuersation, and wythoute cryme.’ 1611 Lib/e, Ps. 1, 
23: To him that ordereth his conuersation aright. 

153. occasion] SCHMIDT (Lex. s.v. 4) Need, want, necessity. 


152 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Il, SC. vii. 


[Scene VIL.| 


Muficke playes. 
Enter two or three Seruants with a Banket. 


1 Heere they’! be man : fome o’th’their Plants are ill 3 
Scene V. Rowe. Scene VII. Pope 3. they l be man] they come Gar. 
et seq. Om. Kemble. be man:] F,. be, man FF. be 
Pompey’s Galley. Rowe. Under a anon Lloyd (WV. & Qu. VII, xi, 82.) 
Pavilion on Deck, a Banquet set out. Cap. oth their) o their Ff. 
2. Banket.] Banquet. F,F,. 3, 4. wl rooted | ill-rooted Var.’73. 
3 etc. 1] I ser. Rowe. unrooted Gould. 


2. Enter, etc.] FREYTAG (p. 235): One of the most beautiful exsemdle scenes of 
Shakespeare is the [present] banquet scene. It contains no chief part of the action, 
and is essentially a situation scene, a thing not occurring frequently in the tragic part 
of the action in Shakespeare. But it receives a certain significance, because it is 
at the close of the Second Act, and also stands in a place demanding eminence, 
especially in this piece, in which the preceding political explanations make a varie- 
gated and animated picture very desirable. The abundance of little characterising 
traits which are united in this scene, their close condensation, above all, the technical 
arrangement, are admirable. The Scene is introduced by a short conversation among 
servants, as is frequently the case in Shakespeare, in order to provide for the setting 
of the tables and the arrangement of the furniture on the stage. The Scene itself is 
in three parts. The first part presents the haughty utterances of the reconciled Tri- 
umvirs and the pedantry of the drunken simpleton, Lepidus, to whom the servants 
have already referred ; the second, in terrible contrast, is the secret interview of 
Pompey and Menas; the third, introduced by the bearing out of the drunken Lepidus, 
is the climax of the wild Bacchanalia and rampant drunkenness. The connecting 
of the three parts, as Menas draws Pompey aside, as Pompey again in the company 
of Lepidus, resuming, continues the carouse, is quite worthy of notice. Not a word 
in the whole Scene is without its use and significance; the poet perceives every 
moment the condition of the individual figures, and of the accessory persons ; each 
takes hold of the action effectively; for the manager, as well as for the rdles, the 
whole is adapted in a masterly way. From the first news of Antony across the 
Nile,—through which the image of Cleopatra is introduced even into this scene,— 
and the simple remark of Lepidus, ‘ You have strange serpents there,’ through which 
an impression is made on the mind of the hearer that prepares for Cleopatra’s death 
by a serpent’s sting, to the last words of Antony, ‘Good; give me your hand, sir,’ in 
which the intoxicated man involuntarily recognizes the superiority of Augustus Cesar, 
and even to the following drunken speeches of Pompey and Enobarbus, everything 
is like fine chiseled work on a firmly articulated metal frame. A comparison of this 
scene with the close of the banquet act in Zhe Piccolomini is instructive.—CoORSON 
(p. 285) : Of Pompey’s entertainment, made by Shakespeare so dramatically impor- 
tant a scene in the Play, Plutarch simply says, ‘and there’ (meaning on his galley) 
‘he welcomed them and made them great cheer.’ But Shakespeare, knowing that 
wine reveals as well as disguises, that 2 uzno est veritas, made this banquet the 
means of characterising and contrasting the Triumvirs, and the poor relic of republi- 


ACT i, Sc. vil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 153 


rooted already, the leaft winde i’th’world wil blow them 


downe. 5 
2 Lepidus is high Conlord. 

1 They haue made him drinke Almes drinke. Ui 

6 etc. 2] 2 ser. Rowe. 7. Almes drinke| FF, Alms drink 

6-21. Om. Gar. F,, Rowe, Pope. almsdvink Sing. alms- 


6. high Conlord] high colourd F.,. -drink Theob. et cet. 
high-colour'd ¥ ¥ . 


can Rome, Sextus Pompeius. This scene exhibits that Shakespearian irony which 
plays so freely with all things, regardless of all conventional ideas of high and low, 
great and small. 

2. a Banket] MALONE: A banquet frequently signified what we now calla des- 
sert ; and from the following dialogue the word must here be understood in that 
sense. 

3. some o’th’their Plants] JoHNsoN: ‘Plants,’ besides its common meaning, is 
here used for the foot, from the Latin.—STEEVENS: So, in Lupton’s 4 thousand 
Notable things, etc.: ‘Grind Mustard with Vineger, and rub it well and hard on the 
plants or soles of the feete: [and it will helpe and quicken forgetfull persons.’ 
—1627, The Third Booke, No. 30. | 

6. high Comlord] This gross misprint which was corrected in the Second Folio, 
GOULD (p. 45) accepts as the genuine word, and asserts that ‘ high-coloured’ is ‘one 
of the most absurd alterations’ he ‘ever met with.’ He then goes on to explain 
that Lepidus ‘ was one of the triumviri or conlords, and this is the subject of con- 
versation.’ Many years ago I regretfully announced that my patience was exhausted 
by the ignorance and presumption of ZACHARY JACKSON, ANDREW BECKET, LORD 
CHEDWORTH, and E. H. Seymour, and that thereafter, save in exceptional cases, 
no space on these pages should be sacrificed to their notes. After the foregoing 
note on ‘conlord’ would a single voice be raised in censure if George Gould be 
added to the list >—Ep. 

7. Almes drinke] WARBURTON: A phrase, amongst good fellows, to signify that 
liquor of another’s share which his companion drinks to ease him. But it satirically 
alludes to Cesar and Antony’s admitting him into the Triumvirate, in order to take 
off from themselves the load of envy.—COLLIER (ed. ii): Meaning wine that did 
not properly belong to his share, but which each had contributed, in order to intoxi- 
cate Lepidus. —ScuMIpT (Zex.): It evidently means here the /eavings.—MURRAY 
(M. Z. D. 4. b.): The remains of liquor reserved for alms-people.—[Apparently, 
this is the only known instance of the use of this phrase in the language. It is the 
solitary example furnished by Murray. Everyone is entitled, therefore, to give it any 
meaning that in his opinion harmonises with the eternal fitness of things. To me, 
Collier’s definition seems the closest. Just as an a/ms-fenny means, as Murray 
says, ‘a penny given in charity or as a gratuity,’ so an ‘alms-drink’ may be a drink 
that is given as a charity or as a gratuity. Inasmuch as there is here no question 
of charity, we may take it as a gratuity, and a gratuity bestowed by more than one. 
Lepidus then drank not only his own share, but ‘they’ plied him with wine, which, 
like the contents of a poor-box, was the result of many gratuitous contributions.— 


Ep. ] 


154 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT U1, SC. vil. 
2 As they pinch one another by the difpofition, hee 8 


8. difpofition] doing reason Kinnear. 


8. As they pinch one another by the disposition] WARBURTON: A phrase 
equivalent to that now in use, of ‘ touching one in a sore place.’—CAPELL (i, 35) : 
This signifies, attack for their foibles, the foibles each is dispos’d to.—CoLiier (ed. 
ii) : This seems to refer to the sign they give each other regarding ‘the disposition’ 
of Lepidus to drink.—STAUNTON: ‘By the disposition’ is a very questionable 
expression. We ought perhaps to read, ‘by the disputation,’ that is, i” the contro- 
versy.—The COWDEN-CLARKES: That is, ‘as they try each other’s temper by banter,’ 
as they gall or plague each other’s sensitiveness by their mutual taunts.’ SCHMIDT 
(Zex.) here defines ‘ pinch’ as ‘to make ridiculous, to serve a trick.’ ‘ By the dis- 
position’ means, he also says, ‘by their foible,’ adding, ‘a servant’s speech.’ [I find 
it, however, a little difficult to combine the two definitions into a coherent and appli- 
cable paraphrase of the whole sentence. Is it: they serve one another a trick by 
their foibles?—Ep.]—J. Crossy (Shakespeariana, Feb. 1884, p. 122): The servant 
has said [in effect], they have made him drink not only his own wine, but a share 
of theirs also, And now as they dispose of and set before him, their full goblets to 
quaff, they pinch one another, or wink significantly, at the imposition they are prac- 
tising on the good-natured reveler. And this harmonises with the context, ‘he 
cries, ‘* No more ;’’ reconciles them to his entreaty, and himself to the drink.’ ‘ Not 
another drop, gentlemen, I beseech you; I am not so well as I should be, but I’ll 
ne’er out ;’ to all of which they assent ; and he forthwith proceeds to drain the cups, 
that raise ‘the greater war between him and his discretion.’ I formerly thought we 
should read ‘as they pinch one another at the imposition. But the explanation I 
have given seems sufficient.—THISELTON (p. 15): In order to ply Lepidus suf- 
ficiently with liquor and at the same time keep sober themselves, his companions 
give him ‘ Almes drinke,’ thereby stinting themselves (‘ pinch one another by the dis- 
position’). By this means, he has their shares as well as his own, and, being satisfied 
with such good measure, and, perhaps, feeling some awkwardness at drinking alone 
in company, he cries out ‘No more,’ 7. ¢. ‘enough.’ They, having so far gained 
their object, comply, while he proceeds to drink the wine that has been so served to 
him. .. . The passage has been confused by. . . the assumption that ‘reconciles’ 
necessarily imports the inferiority of the wine served to Lepidus, when it probably 
indicates a slight touch of conscience on his part at continuing to drink alone. 
‘One another’ is certainly used somewhat loosely for ¢hemse/ves, but it must be 
borne in mind that it is a servant who speaks.—DEIGHTON: This seems to mean, as 
they ply each other hard with the mischievous desire of seeing one another under the 
table, Lepidus, affecting to have had as much as he can carry, cries out ‘enough ;’ 
yet all the same, while getting them to accept his excuses, finds it possible to quiet 
his scruples against further indulgence ; though perhaps ‘’twere to consider too curi- 
ously to consider’ the servant’s speech as having any very exact sense.—[If ‘one 
another’ can be regarded as the same as themselves, Thiselton’s interpretation seems 
to be the most plausible. The excuse, first suggested by Schmidt, for any looseness of 
expression—that it is the servants who are speaking—is hardly applicable when we 
find them presently referring, as Rolfe and Deighton assume, to the ‘ Ptolomaic sys- 
tem of astronomy,’ and using a term of.astrology. But still, letting that excuse pass 
for what it is worth, the idea that by disposing of an extra allowance to Lepidus they 


ACT II, SC, vii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 155 


cries out, no more; reconciles them to his entreatie, and 

himfelfe to’th’drinke. 10° 
I But it raifes the greatet warre betweene him & his 

difcretion. 
2 Why this it is to haue a name in great mens Fel- 

lowfhip : I had as liue haue a Reede that will doe me no 

feruice, as a Partizan I could not heaue. 15 
1 To be call’d into a huge Sphere, and not to be feene 

to moue in’t, are the holes where eyes fhould bee, which 


pittifully difafter the cheekes. 18 
9. no more] As quotation, Theob. et 14. five] live F, lieve FF, lef 
seq. Cap. et seq. 
10. to’th’] to th’ FF. 18. pzttefully] pittifily F 


Il. greatet] F,. 


stinted one another, is at least a more dignified explanation than that of supposing 
that they pinched each other, or tipped one another the wink, over the success of 
their ‘little game.’ Schmidt’s paraphrase, ‘foibles,’ which he probably derived from 
Capell without exactly comprehending it, is to me, whether in Schmidt or Capell, 
unintelligible.—Eb. ] 

15. Partizan] Murray (JW. Z£. D. s. v. sb.2): Adopted from the 16th century 
French, partizane ; an adaptation of Italian, partesana. The origin of the Italian 
word is disputed... . A military weapon used (under this name) by footmen in the 
16th and 17th centuries, consisting of a long-handled spear, the blade having one or 
more lateral cutting projections, variously shaped, so as sometimes to, pass into the 
gisarme and the halberd. 

16-18. To be call’d into a huge Sphere, .. . pittifully disaster the cheekes] 
JoHNson: This speech seems to be mutilated ; to supply the deficiencies is impossi- 
ble, but perhaps the sense was originally approaching to this: ‘To be called into a 
huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in it,’ is a very ignominious state; ‘ great 
offices’ ‘are the holes where eyes should be, which (if eyes be wanting), pitifully 
disaster the cheeks.,-M. MAson: The thought, though miserably expressed, appears 
to be this: That a man called into a high sphere, without being seen to move in it, 
is a sight as unseemly as the holes where the eyes should be, without the eyes to fill 
them.—MALonE: I do not believe a single word has been omitted. The being 
called into a huge sphere, and not being seen to move in it, these two circumstances, 
says the speaker, resemble sockets in a face where eyes should be [but are not], 
which empty sockets, or holes without eyes, pitifully disfigure the countenance. ‘The 
sphere in which the eye moves’ is an expression which Shakespeare has often used. 
Thus, in his 119th Sosnet: ‘How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,’ 
etc. Again, in Hamlet; ‘Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres.’ — 
Rotre here finds in ‘ sphere’ an ‘allusion to the old Ptolomaic astronomy, accord- 
ing to which the heavenly bodies were set in hollow crystal spheres, by the revolu- 
tion of which they were carried round.’ And ‘disaster,’ he observes, ‘ was an astro- 
logical term and is probably suggested here by the figure that precedes.’ [Both of 
these suggestions are, to me, somewhat doubtful. ‘Sphere’ and ‘disaster’ had been 


I 56 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT UJ, SC, vil. 


A Sennet founded. 
Enter Cafar, Anthony, Pompey, Lepidus, Agrippa, Mecenas, 20 
Enobarbus, Menes , with other Captaines. 


Ant. Thus do they Sir : they take the flow o’th’Nyle 22 


19. A Sennet founded.] A Sonnet 22. Ant.] Ant. [to Czes.] Cap. Mal. 
founded. F,F,. Trumpets. Rowe. et seq. 
21. Menes,] F,. 


so long used, I think, in their figurative sense, as in the two quotations given by 
Malone, that all thought of their origin had been lost. Of course this does not apply 
to ‘music of the spheres’ or ‘discord in the spheres’ and the like. Moreover, it 
seems to me hardly Shakespearian to put such learned allusions into the mouths of 
servants. Deighton agrees, however, with Rolfe and quotes him with approval.— 
Ep. ] 

19. A Sennet] Nares: A word chiefly occurring in the stage-directions of the 
old plays, and seeming to indicate a particular set of notes on the trumpet or cornet, 
different from a flourish. ‘Trumpets sound a florish, and then a sennate.’— Decker’s 
Satiromastix [p. 222, ed. Pearson]. In Beaumont and Fletcher’s Knight of Malta, 
V, ii, it is written sye¢, and Mr Sympson has explained it, 2. ¢. ‘ flourish of trum- 
pets.’ But we see from Decker’s play that they were different. It appears to have 
been a technical term of the musicians who played those instruments. 

20. Enter Cesar, etc.] KNIGHT (Supp. (Votice, p. 357): This scene is one of 
those creations which render Shakspere so entirely above, and so utterly unlike, other 
poets. Every line is a trait of character. Here we see the solemn, ‘unmeritable’ 
Lepidus; the cautious Czesar; the dashing, clever, genial Antony. His eye dances; 
his whole visage ‘doth cream and mantle; ’ the corners of his mouth are drawn down, 
as he hoaxes Lepidus about the crocodile with the most admirable fooling. The 
revelry grows louder and louder, till ‘the Egyptian bacchanals’ close the scene. 
Who can doubt that Antony bears ‘the holding’ the loudest of all? These are not 
the lords of the world of French tragedy. Grimm, who, upon the whole, has a 
leaning to Shakspere, says:—‘II est assez ridicule sans doute de faire parler les 
valets comme les héros; mais il est beaucoup plus ridicule encore de faire parler aux 
héros le langage du peuple.’ To make them drunk is worse even than the worst of 
the ridiculous. It is impossible to define such a sin. We think, with Dogberry, it 
is ‘flat burglary as ever was committed.’ 

22. they take the flow o’th’Nyle] RrEp: Pliny, speaking of the Nile, says: 
‘How high it riseth, is known by markes and measures taken of certaine pits. The 
ordinary height of it is sixteen cubits. Vnder that gage the waters ouerflow not all. 
Aboue that stint there are a let and hinderance, by reason that the later it is ere they 
be fallen, and downe again. By these, the seed time is much of it spent, for that 
the earth is too wet. By the other there is none at all, by reason that the ground is 
dry and thirsty. The prouince taketh good keep and reckoning of both, the one as 
well as the other; For when it is no higher than 12 cubits, it findeth extream famine: 
yea, and at 13 it feeleth hunger still, 14 cubits comforts their hearts, 15 bids them take 
no care, but 16 affoordeth them plenty and delicious dainties. . . . And so soon as any 
part of the land is freed from the water, straight waies it is sowed.’ —Holland’s 
Trans. Bk. V., chap. ix, p. 98, ed. 1601.—MALONE: Shakspeare seems rather to 


ACT II, SC. vii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 157 


By certaine fcales i’th’Pyramid-: they know 23 
By’th’height, the lowneffe, or the meane : If dearth 
Or Foizon follow. The higher Nilus fwels, 25 


The more it promifes : as it ebbes, the Seedfman 
Vpon the flime and Ooze {catters his graine, 
And fhortly comes to Harueft. 

Lep. Y’haue ftrange Serpents there ? 


Anth. I Lepidus. 30 
23. fcales| fcale Ff, Rowe, +. zt ebbs, Ff. 
24 by? th. |e 29. Y’haue] Ff. you've Rowe,+, 
meane. If| mean, tf Rowe et Cap. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. you have 
seq. Var. ’73 et cet. 
26, promifes : as it ebbes,| promifes as there ?] Ff. there. Rowe et cet. 


have derived his knowledge of this fact from Leo’s History of Africa, translated by 
John Pory, folio, 1600: ‘ Upon another side of the island standeth an house alone by 
itselfe, in the midst whereof there is a foure-square cesterne or channel of eighteen 
cubits deep, whereinto the water of Nilus is conveyed by a certain sluice under 
ground. And in the midst of the cisterne there is erected a certaine fz//er, which 7s 
marked and divided into so many cubits as the cisterne containeth in depth. And 
upon the seventeenth of June, when Nilus beginning to overflow, the water thereof 
conveied by the said sluce into the channel, increaseth daily. If the water reacheth 
only to the fifteenth cubit of the said Az//er, they hope for a fruitful yeere following ; 
but if [it ?] stayeth between the twelfth cubit and the fifteenth, then the increase of the 
yeere will prove but mean: if it resteth between the tenth and twelfth cubits, then 
it is a sign that corne will be solde ten ducates the bushel.’ 

23. Pyramid] W. W. Lioyp (4. & Quw. 1897, VII, xi, 283) quotes ‘ Though 
palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations.’—AZacéd. IV, i, 56; 
the present passage, and ‘rather make My Countries high pyramides my Gibbet.’ — 
V, ii, 71, and then from them infers that by ‘ pyramid,’ Shakespeare ‘ understands not a 
proper pyramid, but an obelisk.’ It is certainly not impossible; both terms were used 
vaguely, in accordance with the conception in the popular mind of the objects them- 
selves. Thus, for instance, Cotgrave defines an ‘obelisque’: ‘a great, high, and 
square stone, broad at the bottome, and lessening towards the top like a Pyramides.’ 
—Ebp. 

24. or the meane] STEEVENS: That is, the middle. 

25. Foizon] Brapiry (WV. Z. D.): Adopted from Old French fozson, fuson = 
Provengal fozson, regular phonetic descendant from popular Latin faséonzem for 
Latin /ésién-em, a pouring, noun of action formed on fundére to pour. 1. Plenty, 
abundance, a plentiful supply. 

28. And shortly] The Cambridge Edition records an Anonymous conjecture : 
‘And ’¢ shortly,’ which is highly probable. 

28. Haruest] Corson (p. 287): There’s an air of solidity in this speech, which 
indicates a consciousness on the part of the speaker, that he has imbibed quite freely, 
and therefore assumes a solid tone of speech.—[Or it may be merely the assurance 
of one who speaks of that whereof he knows. Anthony befittingly assumes to be an 


authority on things Egyptian,—ED. ] 


158 ' THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT I, SC. vil. 


Lep. Your Serpent of Egypt, is bred now of your mud 31 
by the operation of your Sun : fo is your Crocodile. 


Ant. 
Pom. 
Lep. 
But Ile ne’re out. 
Enob. 
till then. . 


They are fo. 


Sit,and fome Wine : A health to Lepidus. 
I am not fo well as I fhould be : 35 


Not till you haue flept : I feare me you’l bee in 


Lep. Nay certainly, I haue heard the Prolomies Pyra- 
mifis are very goodly things : without contradiction I 40 


32. your Sun] the Sun Ff, Rowe i, 
Cap. 

34. Sit, and] Fy, Jobns.y.Vat. -73: 
Sir, and F Fy Strrah Rowe,+. Sit,— 
and Cap. et cet. 

Wine :] wine / Rowe. 


35. be: be, Cap. et seq. 

37, 38. [Aside. Cap. 

39. Ptolomies] Ptolomy’s Rowe,+. 
Ptolomies Cap. et seq. 

39, 40. Pyramifis] Ff, Rowe,+. Pyr- 
amides Rann conj. pyramises Cap. et 


35, 36. Prose, Han. Cap. Var.’78 et seq. 
seq. ‘ 40. 7] Om. F,. 
35. well] Om. Theob. ii, Warb. 


31, 32. Your Serpent... your mud... your Sun... your Crocodile] If 
any student desires other instances of this idiom, common at this day, he may find 
them in ABBOTT, § 221. 

35. Iam not so well, etc.] Lepidus takes the ‘ health’ literally and replies that 
he is not very well, but he will not on that account leave the circle, which is what he 
means, I suppose, by ‘I’ll ne’er out;’ Enobarbus, in an Aside, perverts it, however, 
into meaning that he will not be out of his debauch until he can sleep it off—Enp. 

39, 40. Pyramisis] MALONE: Pyramis for pyramid was in common use in our 
author’s time. So, in Bishop Corbet’s Poems, 1647 : ‘Nor need the chancellor boast, 
whose pyramis Above the host and altar reared is.’ From this word Shakspeare 
formed the English plural, Ayvamises, to mark the indistinct pronunciation of a man 
nearly intoxicated, whose tongue is now beginning to ‘split what it speaks.’ —[ This 
suggestion of Malone, that the pronunciation ‘ pyramises’ indicates the fumes of 
wine, has been silently adopted by several commentators since his day. There is not 
the smallest objection to allowing Lepidus to reach the utmost limits of intoxication, 
but I do not see that in the present speech he has advanced as far as Malone would 
have him. First, he does not say ‘pyramises;’ this plural form Capell unwarrantably 
puts in his mouth. He says ‘ pyramisis,’ which, if he shared Bishop Corbet’s appar- 
ent belief that pyrvamis is an English singular, is no bad attempt to form a regular 
English plural; certainly not so bad as to say that his tongue splits what it speaks. 
Secondly, Shakespeare does not depend on bad spelling to add comicality to language. 
All spelling in his day was too lawless. This does not apply, of course, to dialectic 
words like ‘chill’ for 7 wid/, and the like. If Lepidus’s tongue were too ‘thick,’ in 
modern, not Shakespearian, speech, to pronounce pyramides, how comes it that 
immediately afterward he pronounces without difficulty a word quite as hard: ‘contra- 
diction’? Lastly, in the very speech in which Czesar says his ‘own tongue splits,’ 


ACT U1, sc. vii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 159 


haue heard that. 41 
Menas. Pompey,a word. 
Pomp. Say in mine eare,what is’t. 
Men. Forfake thy feate I do befeech thee Captaine, 
And heare me fpeake a word. 45 
Pom. Forbeare me till anon. Whifpers in’s Eare. 
This Wine for Lepidus. 
Lep. Whar manner o’thing is your Crocodile? 
Ant. Itis fhap’d fir like it felfe, and it is as broad as it 
hath bredth ; It is iuft fo high as it is, and mooues with it 50 
owne organs. It liues by that which nourifheth it, and 
the Elements once out of it, it Tranfmigrates. 
Lep. What colour is it of ? 
Ant. Of it owne colour too. 


Lep ‘Tis a ftrange Serpent. 55 
42. [Aside. Rowe. 46. Whifpers] Whifper F,F,, Rowe. 

42-46. Pompey...azon.] Aside, Cap. 48. Whar] F,. 

43. t°t.] i°'¢? FF, et seq. 50, 51. zt owne] F,, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
44. [Aside. Johns. Ktly. it’s own FF. its own Rowe et 

Seate] feate F,. cet. 

45. a word | Om. Steev. conj. 54. zt] F,, Sta. Glo. Cam. Ktly. it’s 
46. Forbeare] For F,F,, Rowe. F,F,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. ss 


46, 47. One line, Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Han. et cet. 


there is no word misspelt, unless it be sf/ce¢s itself, which is probably merely phonetic, 
and not a misspelling. See the regular plural, ‘ pyramides,’ in V, ii, 71.—Eb. ] 

48. Whar] This word is clearly thus spelled in my copy of the /irst Folio, and 
also a little less clearly in Staunton’s photo-zincographic reproduction. But it is 
What in the Reprint of 1807 and in Booth’s most accurate Reprint, as it is also, 
presumably, in the copy which the CAMBRIDGE EpiTors collated; they make no 
note of any variation. This is trivial enough, and noteworthy merely as additional 
proof that copies of the First Folio vary.—ED. 

50, 51, 54. it owne] According to Zhe Bible Word-Book (Eastwood and Wright) 
yt or tf is used in the Folio fourteen times for zs; Murray (4. £. D. s. v. Its) says 
fifteen times; z/s occurs ten times, whereof five (spelled z?’s) arein The Winters Tale. 
The instances specified, in 7ke Bible Word-Book, are given in a note on Wint. Tale, 
I, ii, 183, of this ed. /¢s does not occur in the Authorised Version of the Bible, 
1611. J¢ in place of z¢s occurs in Levit. xxv, 5, where is the same phrase as in the 
present passage: ‘That which groweth of it owne accord ;’ this was changed to ‘its 
own’ in an edition of the Bible printed, according to Murray (J/oc. czt.), in 1660. 
Milton, who died in 1674, does not use i¢s. ABBOTT (§ 228) says that z¢ is ‘ occasion- 
ally’ found for #és, ‘when a child is mentioned, or when anyone is contemptuously 
spoken of asa child.’ If this be one of the ‘occasional’ instances, it is not without 
meaning that Anthony now uses it to Lepidus. 

52. the Elements] See note on III, ii, 47. 


160 


Ant. 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT II, SC. vii. 


’Tis fo, and the teares of it are wet. 56 


Cef. Will this defcription fatisfie him ? 


Ant. 
is a very Epicure. 


With the Health that Pompey giues him, elfe he 


Pomp. Go hang fir, hang : tell me of that ? Away: 60 


Do as I bid you. 


Where’s this Cup I call’d for? 


Men. If for the fake of Merit thou wilt heare mee, 
Rife from thy ftoole. 
Pom. I thinke th’art mad - the matter ? 
Men. J haue euer held my cap off to thy Fortunes. 65 
Pom. Thou haft feru’d me with much faith : what’s 


elfe to fay ? Be iolly Lords. 


Anth. Thefe Quicke-fands Lepidus, 


Keepe off, them for you finke. 


Men. 
Pom. What faift thou ? 
Men. 
That’s twice. 
Pom. How fhould that be ? 


57-59. Will... picure] Aside, Cap. 

58. Health] healths Han. 

60. Pomp.] Pomp. [To Menas aside] 

Johns. 
61. this] the Ff, Rowe, +, Varr. Ran. 
62-67. lf for... fay] Aside, Cap. 
Gar. 

63. thy] the F,, Rowe, Pope. 

64. th’art] Ff. thou rt Rowe et seq. 
[Rises and walks aside. Johns. 
mad: mad. Johns. et seq. (subs.) 

65. J hawe] L’ve Dyce ii, iii. 

66. [To Menas.] Johns. 


Wilt thou be Lord of all the world ? 70 


Wilt thou be Lord of the whole world ? 


74 


66, 67. Thou...fay ?] As one line, 
Han. Cap. et seq. 
69. off, them] off them, FF. 
for) ’fore Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Var. '73, Coll. iii. or Walker ( Crzz. ii, 
72-98. Wilt thou...it more| Aside, 
Cap. 
72, 73. Wilt...twice] As one line, 
Rowe et seq. (subs.) 
74. How] Prithee, how Words, 
frould| shall Rowe,+, 
Mal. Ran. 


Varr. 


57. Will this, etc.] The Zert. Votes show the Asides in these and the following 


lines. 


60. tell me of that ?] This is purposely vague, and refers to what Menas had 


whispered ‘in’s eare.’ 


65. held my cap off to thy Fortunes] Compare, ‘my demerites May speake 
(vnbonnetted) to as proud a Fortune,’ etc.— Orhello, I, ii, 25, of this edition. 

68. Quicke-sands] Voss: Antony refers to the cup of wine, which Pompey had 
ordered for Lepidus, and was now handed to him. 

69. for you sinke] If a choice must be made between THEOBALD’S ’fore and 


WALKER’S or, the latter seems preferable. 


But I doubt the necessity of any choice. 


STAUNTON prefers ’fore, and also at III, xiii, 78, where he refers to the present 


passage as parallel_—_Epb. 


ACT II, Sc. vii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 161 


Men. But entertaine it, and though thou thinke me 75 
poore, I am the man will giue thee all the world. 

Pom. Haft thou drunke well. 

Men. No Pompey, 1 haue kept me from the cup, 
Thou art if thou dar’ft be, the earthly Ioue : 
What ere the Ocean pales, or skie inclippes, 80 
Is thine, if thou wilt ha’t. 

Pom. Shew me which way ? 


Men. Thefe three World-fharers, thefe Competitors 
Are in thy veffell. Let me cut the Cable, 
And when we are put off, fall to their throates : 85 
All there is thine. 

Pom. Ah, this thou fhouldft haue done, 87 


75, 76. But...world]| Lines end, and 
...man...world. Han. Steev. Varr. Ktly. 
it...man...world Pope, Warb. et seq. 

75. entertaine it | enter into it Anon. 
ap. Cam. 

and though] and Although Han. 
Steev. Varr. Ktly. 


et seq. 

79. Thou art] That FF. 

dar’ ft\ daxf ¥ ,. 

81. fa’t] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. ave zt Varr. Mal. Ran. 
have't Steev. et cet. 

82. way ?] way. FF, et seq. 


thou] you Pope ii, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Varr. Ran. 
77. well.) F,, Cap. Ran. well? FAF,, 
Rowe et cet. 


78. cup,] Ff, Rowei. cup. Rowe ii 


86, there is] then ts Southern MS ap. 
Coll. Pope,+, Cap. Varr. Ran. Coll. ii, 
iii (MS), Dyce ii, iii, Ktly. sthetrs zs 
Steev. conj. ¢here zs, 7s Ed. conj. 


77. Hast thou drunke well] CAPELL (i, 36, reading ‘Thou hast’): A sar- 
castical affirmation of Pompey’s; and no interrogation, as the moderns have made it, 
by putting a mark after ‘we//’ which they did not find in the two elder Folio’s; whose 
only mistake, in this instance, was—a transposition of ‘hast’ and ‘ ¢hou.’—[It would 
not be difficult to express sarcasm by a question as well as by an affirmation, and the 
text of the Folio be still preserved.—ED. ] 

80. the Ocean pales] Should any poet nowadays venture on using this verb in 
connection with the ocean he would be, it is to be feared, severely criticised. But 
as in the beginning of this scene we had to pardon some expressions because 
uttered by servants, so here point device phrases are hardly to be expected from a 
pirate.—ED. 

83. Competitors] The same word is used in I, iv, 5; V, i, 52; see I, i, 21. 

84. Let me cut the Cable] See Plutarch, Appendix. 

86. All there is thine] STEEVENS: This may mean, a// i the vessel.—ROLFE: 
‘There’ may be accompanied with a gesture towards the company they have left.— 
[Pope’s specious ¢ken has beguiled excellent editors. Rolfe’s interpretation is, to 
me, just; ‘there’ is spoken decxttx¢. (This pedantic word will, I trust, be pardoned. 
I know no English word precisely equivalent ; demonstratively comes, perhaps, the 
nearest, but this could be applied to a clenched fist, to which the Greek word, with 
its implied wave of the hand, would be, I think, quite inapplicable. ) —Ep.] 


II 


162 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT 11, Sc. Vii. 
And not haue fpoke on’t. In me ’tis villanie, 88 
In thee,’t had bin good feruice : thou muft know, 
Tis not my profit that does lead mine Honour : go 
Mine Honour it, Repent that ere thy tongue, 
Hath fo betraide thine a¢te. Being done vnknowne, 
I fhould haue found it afterwards well done, 
But muft condemne it now : defift,and drinke. 

Men. For this, Ile neuer follow 95 
Thy paul’d Fortunes more, 
Who feekes and will not take, when once ’tis offer’d, 
Shall neuer finde it more. 

Pom. This health to Lepzdus. 

Ant. Beare him afhore, 100 
Ile pledge it for him Pompey. 

Eno. Heere’s to thee Menas. 102 


88. /poke] /poken FF ,, Rowe,+. . this, ...more ;...offer d, ...more. Pope et 


ont] of it / Cap. Varr. Ran. 
89. thee,’t] thee, it Varr. Mal. Ran. 
Steev. Varr. Ktly. 
JSeruice «| service. Johns. et seq. 
(subs. ) 
gl. it, Repent] 7s, Repent Ff, Rowe. 
95. [looking contemptibly after him. 
Cap. Gar. 


seq. 

96. paul’d) pall’d FF. 

98. [Joins the company. Cap. 

100. a/hore] a fhore¥,. a-f/hoar FF .. 
ashoar Rowe, Pope. 

[to an attendant. Cap. 

100, to1. Beare...Pompey] One line, 

Pope et seq. 


95-98. For this...t¢ more] Lines end, 


gt. Mine Honour it] Assorr (§ 385): That is, (But it is), Mine honour (that 
doth lead) it (2. ¢. profit). 

96. paul’d] Murray (4. £. D. s.v. Palled, past participle from Pall which is 
apparently aphetic from Affa/, to which the early senses are parallel): Enfeebled, 
weakened, impaired. 

97, 98. Who seekes . . . neuer finde it more] VISCHER (p. 103, footnote) recalls 
Schiller’s apothegm: Was du von der Minute ausgeschlagen, das bringt dir keine 
Ewigkeit zurriick. 

lor. Ie pledge it]: ‘The English,’ says Master Estienne Perlin (Description d’ 
Angleterre, 1558), ‘are great drunkards (‘fort grands yvrongnes”) ; for if an Eng- 
lishman would treat you, he will say in his language, wis dring a quarta rim oim 
[ ? oin] gasguim oim hespatgnol oim malvoyst, that is, will you drink a quart of Gas- 
coigne wine, another of Spanish, and another of Malmsy? In drinking or eating they 
will say to you above a hundred times, drind tou; which is, I drink to you; and you 
should answer them in their language, 7p/azgiou, which means, I pledge you. If you 
would thank them in their language, you must say, god fangue artelay. When they 
are drunk, they will swear by blood and death that you shall drink all that is in your 
cup, and will say to you thus: bigod sol drind iou agoud oin.’—Rye, England as seen 
by Foreigners, p. 190. Not very appropriate, but amusing.—ED. 


ACT II, sc. vil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 163 
Men. Enobarbus, welcome. 103 
Pom. Fill till the cup be hid. 

Eno. There’s a ftrong Fellow Menas. 105 
Men. Why? 
£no. A beares the third part of the world man : feeft 
not ? 
Men. The third part,then he is drunk : would it were 
all, that it might go on wheeles. 110 


Eno. 


104. [Lepidus born off. Cap. 
105. trong] jtrrang F,. firange ¥ F ,, 
Rowe. F 
[Pointing to Lep. Rowe. 
107-110. A4...all,] Prose, Ff, Rowe,+, 
Knt, Dyce, Glo. Cam. Lines end, man 


Drinke thou : encreafe the Reeles. 


Sta. Ktly. 
cet. 

107. world man:| world, man! 
Rowe. 

Secft\ seest thou Ktly. 

109. then he is] Ff, Hal, Ktly, Coll. 
ili. ‘then 7s Rowe et cet. 

110. that... wheeles] Separate line, 
Theob. et seq. 


A’ Glo. Cam. He Pope et 


...not ?,,.all, Johns. Var.’73. bears... 
not ?...all, Cap. et cet. 
107. A] Ff, Rowe, Knt. ’4 Dyce, 


107, 108. seest not?] WALKER ( Vers. 291): Qu. ‘seés¢ not?’ yet the uncon- 
tracted se@s¢ seems strange in Shakespeare.—[Singer silently adopted this sug- 
gestion. | 

1og. then he is drunk] There seems to be no necessity to adopt Rowe’s omis- 
sion of ‘he.’ Had there been an interrogation mark after ‘ The third part,’ or even 
a dash, would anyone have suggested a change ?—Ep. 

110. it might go on wheeles] MALONE: Zhe World runs on Wheels is the title 
of a pamphlet by Taylor, the Water- Poet. 

III, encrease the Reeles] STEEVENS: As the word—vee/ was not, in our 
author’s time, employed to signify a dance or revel, and is used in no other part of 
his works as a substantive, it is not impossible that the passage before us, which 
seems designed as a continuation of the imagery suggested by Menas, originally stood 
thus: ‘aud grease the wheels.’.—Douckr: Here is some corruption, and unless it 
was originally revels, the sense is irretrievable. In all events Steevens has erred in 
saying that ‘7ee/ was not in our author’s time, employed to signify adance.’ [ Here- 
upon Douce gives a quotation from Mewes from Scotland, 1591, wherein there is 
a reference to a ‘reill or short daunce.’ See note on Macbeth, I, iii, 11 (of this 
edition), where this quotation is given in full, not, however, by Douce, but strangely 
enough by Steevens himself, who had evidently forgotten it.—Ep.]—S1ncEr : Menas 
says ‘would it were all so (¢.¢. drunk), that it [the world] might go on wheels, 
z. e. turn round or change.’ To which Enobarbus replies, ‘Drink thou; increase 
the reels, 7. e. increase its giddy course.—ScHMIpDT (Lex.): That is, increase the 
motions like those of drunken men; used in this sense for the rhyme’s sake.—[A 
sporadic rhyming couplet ina scene like the present is to me un-Shakespearian ; it 
is probably accidental, not intentional. Moreover, the explanations of ‘ Reeles,’ 
whether referring to the giddy course of the world or to the drunken gait of 
Menas, are to me forced. I much prefer to regard the word as a contraction of 


164 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. vil. 
Men Come. 112 
Pom. This is not yet an Alexandrian Feaft. 

Ant. It ripen’s towards it : ftrike the Veffells hoa. 

Heere’s to Ce/ar. 115 

Cefar. J could well forbear’t, it’s monftrous labour 


when I wafh my braine, and it grow fouler. 


Ant. Bea Child o’th’time. 


113. not yet] not Theob. ii, Warb. 
Johns. 

114. Veffells| Kettles Crosby (Sana, 
ry Lieaga 

115. Heere's|F,. Here's FF, Rowe, 
Cam. Here zs Pope, Glo. et cet. 

116, 117. J...fouler] Lines end, for- 


118 


bear it,...brain,...fouler. Pope et seq. 
116. forbeart] forbear it Pope,+, 
Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Coll. Wh. 
tleSi\els te, 
117. and | An Sing. 
grow] Sing. Ktly. growes F,. 
grows FF, et cet. 


revels, the likelihood of this contraction is set forth in the note on I, iv, 7, above. 
—Epb.] 

114. strike the Vessells | JoHNSON: Try whether the casks sound as empty.— 
STEEVENS: This means no more than ‘chink the vessels one against the other, as a 
mark of our unanimity in drinking,’ as we now say chink glasses.—HOLT WHITE: 
Vessels probably mean 4ettle-drums, which were beaten when the health of a person 
of eminence was drank; immediately after we have, ‘make battery to our ears with 
the loud musick.’ They are called 4e¢¢les in Hamlet: ‘Give me the cups; And let 
the kettle to the trumpet speak.’,—-BoswELL: In Fletcher’s Monsteur Thomas, we 
meet with a passage which leaves no doubt, as Weber has observed, that to s¢rike 
the vessels means to fag them: ‘ Home, Launce, and strike a fresh piece of wine.’ — 
V, x.—Dyce (G/oss.) reiterates Boswell’s assertion that Weber had rightly explained 
the meaning of ‘strike’ in this line, and adds an example of its use ‘ with the same 
signification in a well-known modern poem: ‘‘ L’ Avare, not using half his store, 
Still grumbles that he has no more; Strikes not the present tun, for fear The vintage 
should be bad next year.””’—Prior’s A/ma, C. iii. The COWDEN-CLARKES while 
granting that ‘strike’ at times means to Zap, do not believe that it has this meaning 
here, because ¢ Antony would hardly bid them broach more wine where Pompey is 
the entertainer; and, moreover, at this stage of the entertainment there would be no 
question of any one giving such an order.’ They, therefore, adopt Steevens’s inter- 
pretation. [If Shakespeare had meant that the revellers should merely c/iné the 
glasses, as in Iago’s song: ‘ Let me the cannikin clink,’ I doubt that he would have 
used so strong a word as ‘strike.’ As regards courtesy, Anthony was almost invited 
by Pompey to call for more wine by his complaint that they had not yet reached 
the height of an Alexandrian feast.—Ep. ] 

117. and it grow fouler] SINGER reads ‘am it grow fouler,’ which, as Dyce (ed. 
ii) justly observes, is ‘not a probable reading.’ 

118. a Child o’th’time] That is, submit like a child to the humour of the hour. 
Compare Lady Macbeth’s words (for I believe them to be hers) to her husband: 
‘Away, and mock the time with fairest show, False face must hide what the false 
Heart doth know.’—I, vii, 94. Lady Macbeth and Anthony use ‘time’ in the same 
sense, that is, ‘the company about you.’—Eb. 


ACT H, sc. vii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 165 


Cesar. 


Poffeffe it, Ile make anfwer ; but I had rather 


faft from all, foure dayes, then drinke fo much in one. 120 
Enob. Ha my braue Emperour, fhall we daunce now 

the Egyptian Backenals, and celebrate our drinke ? 
Pom. Let’s ha’t good Souldier. 


Ant. 


Come, let’s all take hands, 


Till that the conquering Wine hath fteep’t our fenfe, 125 


In foft and delicate Lethe. 
FEno. All take hands: 


Make battery to our eares with the loud Muficke, 
The while, Ile place you, then the Boy fhall fing. 129 


119, 120. Poffeffe...one.] Lines end, 
rather...one Theob. ii, Warb. Cap. fast 
... ome, Han. Mal. Steev. Varr. Coll. 
Sing. Wh. 77, ...fas¢...ome. Johns. Varr. 
Ran. answer :...days...one. Knt, Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. 

119. Poffeffe 
Pledge it Kinnear. 
son ap. Cam. 

ile] I will Johns, Varr. Ran. 
make| Om. Han. 


it] Possess'¢ Wan. 
Proface it Nichol- 


now...drink? Cap. Mal. emperor, ... 
Bacchanals, ...drink ? Johns. Varr. Ran. 
et seq. (subs. ) 

121. Enob.] Enob. [to Ant.} Cap. 

122. Backenals] Bachanals¥,. Bac- 
chanals FF. 

123. [they rise. Cap. 

124. let’s| det us Steev. Varr. Knt, 
Coll. Hal. 

hands,| hands, and beat the 

ground, Steev. conj. 


121, 122. Ha... drinke ?| Lines end, 


119. Possesse it] COLLIER (ed. ii, reading Profess zt from his MS, thus ex- 
plains) : That is, Profess to be a child of the time, and I’ll do the same. Although 
the meaning of Profess here may not be very evident, ‘ Possess’ seems to offer no 
consistent sense. In Aizg Lear, I, i, we have seen the opposite error, for there 
‘possesses’ was misprinted Arofesses.—COLLIER in his Third Edition returned to the 
original text, ‘ Possess,’ with the brief note: ‘So the old copies, s. g. Pass it, viz., 
the cup.’—Anon. (Blackwood, Oct. 1853, p. 467) : Czesar’s meaning is quite obvious ; 
he means, Be master of it. ‘Bea child of the time,’ says Antony. ‘Rather be its 
master, say I,’ rejoins Czesar,—a sentiment much more likely to come from the lips 
of the great dictator than the paltry rejoinder which [Collier’s MS] puts into his 
mouth— Profess it,’ —that is, profess to be the child of the time.—SINGER (SA. Vind. 
291): Caesar may mean, ‘ Possess it’ rather than waste it, like a child o’the time in 
drunkenness. —STAUNTON: There is some ambiguity in the word ‘possess,’ which, 
if not a misprint, is employed here in a sense we are unaccustomed to ; but the mean- 
ing of the passage is plain enough. In former days it was the practice, when one 
good fellow drank to another, for the latter to ‘do him right’ by imbibing a quantity 
of wine equal to that quaffed by the health-giver. Antony proposes a health to 
Cesar, but Czesar endeavours to excuse himself, whereupon Antony urges him by 
saying, ‘Be a child o’the time,’ 7. ¢. do as others do; indulge for once. Czesar then 
consents to pledge the health, and says, ‘possess it,’ or propose it,—I’'ll do it justice. 
—THISELTON (p. 16): This simply means, ‘ Have your wish.’—[I prefer the inter- 
pretation of Anon. in Blackwood (who is said to have been Lettsom).—Ep. ] 


166 | THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, sc. vii. 


The holding euery man fhall beate as loud, 130 
As his ftrong fides can volly. 


Mufcke Playes. Enobarbus places them hand in hand. 
The Song. 
Come thou Monarch of the Vine, 
Plumpie Bacchus, with pinke eyne : 135 


130. deate] beat ¥,F,, Rowe, Pope, bleat Daniel. 
Warb. dcar Theob. Han. Johns. et seq. 131. can] the Rowe ii. 


130. The holding euery man shall beate] THEOBALD: The company were to 
join in the burden, which the poet styles the o/ding. But how were they to deat 
this with their sides? Iam persuaded the poet wrote: ‘The holding every man 
shall dear, as loud As his strong sides can volley.’ The breast and szdes are immedi- 
ately concerned in straining to sing’as loud and forcibly asa man can. So in the 
Huntsman’s Song in As You Like Jt, we find the marginal direction: ‘The rest 
shall bear this Burthen.,—STEEVENS: ‘ Beat’ might have been the poet’s word, 
however harsh it may appear at present. In Henry VI/J. we find a similar expres- 
sion : ‘— let the musick £ock it.,— JOHNSON: ‘ The holding every man shall beat.’ 
That is, Every man shall accompany the chorus by drumming on his sides, in token 
of concurrence and applause.—[Did Dr Johnson measure every one’s capacity to 
drum on his sides by his own >—Ep.]—M. Mason: To dear the burden, or, as it is 
here called, the o/ding of a song, is the phrase at this day. The passage, quoted by 
Steevens, from Henry VJ/Z. relates to instrumental musick, not to vocal.—MALONE: 
The meaning of the holding is ascertained by a passage in an old pamphlet called 
The Serving Man’s Comfort, 1598: ‘— where a song is to be sung the under-song 
or holding whereof is, It is merrie in haul where beards wag all.’ 

133. The Song] CAPELL (i, 36) : When this play was fitted up for the stage in 
the year fifty-eight by the present editor, a stanza was then added to this truly 
bacchanalian song, and the song printed as follows: 1. Come, thou monarch of the 
vine, Plumpy Bacchus, with pink eyne; Thine it is to cheer the soul, Made, by thy 
enlarging bowl, Free from wisdom’s fond controul, Bur. Free from &c. 2. Mon- 
arch, come ; and with thee bring Tipsy dance, and revelling: In thy vats our cares 
be drown’d ; With thy grapes our hairs be crown’d; Cup us, till the world go round, 
Bur. Cup us, &c.—[ When Capell warbles ‘ Tipsy dance, and revelling,’ I am afraid 
he had been lately reading Milton’s Comus.] 

135. Plumpie] GREEN (p. 246) believes ‘of a certainty’ that the epithet 
‘plumpy’ was suggested by the figures depicted in the Emblem Writers, Alciat, 
Whitney, and especially in Boissard’s 7heatrum Vite Humana, p. 213; the illus- 
tration in this last book Green reproduces, and Bacchus is therein depicted as unde- 
niably plump, but whether the obesity be due merely to well-nourished youth or to 
convivial living, it is not easy to decide. The force of Green’s argument in favour 
of the Emblem Writers (and it has undeniable force), lies in his accumulation of 
instances, and is not to be judged by a solitary example.—Ep. 

135. with pinke eyne] JOHNSON (Dict. s. v. Pink. 2): An eye; commonly a 
small one: as fivk-eyed [in the present passage].—STEEVENS: Thus in Holland’s 
Pliny, Eleventh Book, we find : ‘also them that were pinke-eied, and had very small 


ACT Il, SC. vil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 167 


Ln thy Fattes our Cares be drown’ d, 136 
With thy Grapes our haires be Crown’d. 

Cup vs till the world go round, 

Cup vs till the world go round. 139 


136. Fattes] Kats Rowe. vats Pope. 138, 139. Cup] All. Cz Sta. © 


eies, they termed Ocel/e’ [p. 335, ed. 1635].—NAaRES (s. v. Pink eyne) : Small 
eyes. This expression, in the quaint language and fantastic spelling of old Lane- 
ham, appears thus: ‘It was a sport very pleazaunt of theeze beastz; to see the Bear 
with his pink nyez leering after hiz enmiez approch’ [p. 25, ed. 1784].—Iip. 
(s. v. Pink-eyed) : Coles renders it by /ucizius and ocella ; later ed. also fetus ; and 
in the Latin part of his Dictionary he has ‘ Ocel/e,—arum. Maids with little eyes ; 
pink-ey’d girls.’ To wink and pink with the eyes, still means to contract them, and 
peep out of the lids. In Fleming’s Momenclator we have: ‘Ocella, lucinius... 
Ayant fort petits yeux. That hath little eyes: pink-eyed..—WHITNEY (Cent. Dict. 
s. v. pink-eye.? Derived from gizk* v., wink, blink, + eye,! after Middle Dutch 
* pinck-ooghe, pimp-ooghe, one who has small eyes. . . Pzvk in [the present line] is 
usually regarded as an adjective, with the assumed sense ‘ winking,’ or ‘ blinking ;’ 
but if an adjective it must belong to f2z&? [a pink colour].) : A small eye—ELTON 
(p. 284) : Holinshed, however, shows us that Bacchus was accused in the song of a 
tipsy blinking; for in his sketch of the pot-knights he makes them afraid to stir from 
the alehouse-bench, where they sit half-asleep, ‘still pinking with their narrow eies 
as halfe sleeping, till the fume of their aduersarie [be digested that he may go to it 
afresh. Vol. i, p. 170, ed. 1586]. 

138, 139. Cup vs... round] COLLIER (ed. ii) : These last two lines, or rather 
the last line and the repetition of it, are expressly called ‘the burden’ (7. ¢. dourdon) 
in the MS, and they are included in a bracket.—DowDEN (p. 374): If, during this 
tragic period, Shakspere retain any tendency to observe the comedy of incident in 
life, the incident will be of another sort from that which moves our laughter in Zhe 
Comedy of Errors. It will rather be a fragment of titanic burlesque, overhung by 
some impending horror, and inspired by a deep ‘idea of world-destruction.’ * Such 
a stupendous piece of burlesque, inspired by an idea of world-destruction, Shakspere 
found in Plutarch’s life of Antony. and having allowed it to dilate and take colour 
in his own imagination, he transferred it to his play. Aboard Pompey’s galley the 
masters of the earth hold hands and dance the Egyptian bacchanals, joining in the 
volleying chorus, ‘Cup us, till the world goes round!’; and Menas whispers his 
leader to bid him cut the cable, and fall to the throats of the Triumvirs. A great 
painting by Orcagna shows a terrible figure, Death, armed with the scythe, and sweep- 
ing down through bright air, upon the glad and careless garden-party of noble and 
beautiful persons,—men and women who lean to one another, and caress their dogs 
and hawks, while they listen to the music of stringed instruments. In Shakspere’s 
scene of revelry, death seems to be more secretly, more intimately present, seems more 
surely to dominate life; though it passes by, it passes, as it were, with an ironical 
smile at the security of the possessors of this world, and at the noisy insubstantial 
triumph of life, permitted for a while. 


* A word applied by Heine to Aristophanes— Weltvernichtungsidee. 


168 THE WRAGEDIE VOL, 


Cefar. 
Pompey goodnight. 


[ACT II, SC. vii. 


What would you more? 140 
Good Brother 


Let me requeft you of our grauer bufineffe 


Frownes at this leuitie. 


Gentle Lords let’s part, 
You fee we haue burnt our cheekes. 


Strong Exobarbe 


Is weaker then the Wine, and mine owne tongue 145 
Spleet’s what it fpeakes: the wilde difguife hath almoft 


Antickt vs all. 
Good Anthony your hand. 
Pom. 


140, 141. What... Brother] One line, 
Rowe et seq. 

142. you of our] Ff. you of; our 
Rowe i. you, off; our Han. Cap. of you 
—our Ktly. you off ; our Rowe ii et cet. 

cheekes| cheeke F,. cheek OA 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, Han. 

Enobarbe] £xobarbus Pope, +. 
Enobarb Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 

145. Wine] wind AD Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. 


What needs more words ? goodnight. 


Ile try you on the fhore. 
Anth. And fhall Sir, giues your hand. 


150 


146. Spleet’s| Spleets ¥F,. Splits F 
et seq. 

147. Antickt] Antick’d Var.’78 et 
seq. 

149. on the fhore] on the fhoar FF. 
o the shore Steev. Var. ’73, 778, Knt. 
ashore or on shore Walker (Crit. iii, 
300). 

150. Sir,] Ff, Rowe. Sir. Johns. Coll. 
Wh. Sir; Pope et cet. 

giues| F,. give us Mal. 

FF, et cet. 


give's 


140. What would you more?] Corson (p. 291): Every speech of Octavius in 


this scene shows that, though z# the revels, he is not of them. 
them as a necessary evil, for the time being. 


He simply endures 
‘What would you more?’ shows that 


he has been a reluctant but politic attendant, and is impatient to have them over. 
142, 143. Let me request .. . Frownes at this leuitie] THISELTON (p. 16) : 
That is, ‘let me request you for the sake of our graver business which frowns at this 


levity.’ 


It is better to regard this passage as supplying an instance of the suppressed 


relative, than to alter ‘of’ to off, and bisect the sentence.—[ Does not the critic over- 


look the fact that he leaves the sentence incomplete ? 


What is it that Czesar requests ? 


It would be difficult, moreover, to find another example, exactly parallel to this, of 


the ‘suppression’ of a relative. 


I can detect none in the examples quoted by Abbott 


in §§ 244, 245, 246, on the ‘ omission of the relative.’ Ep. ] 
146. Spleet’s] Corer (ed. i): We are not sure that this orthography ought 


not to be preserved. 
ation might be intentional. 


‘Spleets’ was not the old mode of spelling sf/¢s, and the vari- 


146. the wilde disguise] Murray (JV. Z. D. s. v. Disguise. sd. 7) : ‘ Disorder 


by drink’ (Johnson), 


[The present passage is here quoted, and also] Ben Jonson, 


Masque of Augurs, ‘ Groom. Disguise! what mean you by that? do you think that 
his majesty sits here to expect drunkards?’ [p. 429, ed. Gifford. ] 
149. Ile try you on the shore] DEIGHTON: I will make trial of your feasting 


on shore (as you have mine on board ship). 


150. And shall Sir] Asporr (§ 97): ‘And’ is frequently found in answers in 


ACT HI, sc. vil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 169 


Pom. 
But what, we are Friends ? 
Come downe into the Boate. 

Eno, 


151, 152. you haue... Friends ?| One 
line, Cap. et seq. (except Knt, Sta.) 

151. Father houfe| Fathers houfe ¥. 
JSather-house Knt. Fathers houfe a A 
et cet. 

houfe.| Ff, Rowe,+,Coll. house, 

Var. ’73,’78, 85. house,— Cap. Mal. 
et cet. 

152, 153. But... Boate] One line, 
Rowe,+. 

152. what,] Ff, Rowe, Pope. what / 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var.’73. what ? 
Han. Cap. et cet. 


Oh Anthony, you haue my Father houfe. 151 


Take heed you fall not Menas : Ile not on fhore, 154 


152. we are] we're Pope,+. 

153. Come downe] Ff, Rowe, +, Coll. 
Hal. Come, down Cap. et cet. 

154-156. Take heed...what| As prose, 
Johns. 

154, 155. not...Cabin] not. [Exeunt 
Pom. Ces. Ant. and Attendants] A/enas, 
L’Ul...shore. Men. No, to my Cabin. Cap. 
Var. ’85 et seq. 

154. #o¢ Menas « //e] F,. not, Menas: 
tle EF. not. Men. /’// Rowe, Johns. 
not, Menas. Men. /’é/ Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. 


the sense of ‘you are right and’ or ‘yes and,’ the ‘yes’ being implied. In the pres- 
ent passage, the phrase is equivalent to ‘ You say well, ad you shall,’ or ‘So you 
shall,’ ‘that you shall,’ emphatically. 

151. you haue] Pore unwarrantably changed this into ‘you faze.’ Whereupon 
THEOBALD administered to Pope a somewhat sarcastic rebuke, and then, in order to 
prove that the original text is correct, ‘insisted,’ —to quote his own words,—that there 
is here an allusion to a ‘noted witticism’ made by Pompey on the present occasion. 
This witticism was founded on the fact that the splendid residence in Rome of Pom- 
pey’s father, at that time in the possession of Anthony, was situated on the Via 
Carine (‘or Galley-street, as we might call it’) where even the houses themselves 
were built to resemble galleys; when, therefore, Pompey said that he would enter- 
tain Ceesar and Anthony on his galley, there was a witty double allusion to his galley 
and his house in ‘ Galley-street.’ As authorities, Theobald quoted Paterculus : * Qui 
[z. e. Pompeius] haud absurde, cum in navi Czsaremque et Antonium coena excipe- 
ret, dixit, in Carinis suis se coenam dare ; referens hoc dictum ad loci nomen, in quo 
paterna domus ab Antonio possidebatur.’—[lib. ii, cap. Ixxvii.] And also Aurelius Vic- 
tor: ‘ Pace facta, epulatus in navi cum Antonio et Cesare, non invenuste ait: Hae sunt 
meae carinae ; quia Romae in Carinis domum eius Antonius tenebat.’—[cap. lxxxiv. ] 
It is doubtful that even Theobald’s insistence can make us believe that Shakespeare 
had Pompey’s ‘ witticism’ here in mind ; had he ever heard it or known it, an allusion 
to it would have been more appropriate in II, vi, 102, where Pompey says ‘ Aboord 
my Galley, I inuite you all.’ Is it not enough that Shakespeare found in Plutarch 
that Antony kept possession of Pompey’s house? See Appendix.—ED. 

154. Take heed you fall not] CAPELL (i, 36): Speaking to some of them (Pom- 
pey, probably), whom he sees stagger: After which, the boat puts off with it’s com- 
pany ; and Enobarbus, who has not yet had his dose, turns to Menas, and says— 
‘ Menas, I’ ll not on shore,’ and is reply’d to by Menas,—‘ Vo, to my cabin.’ This 
is the arrangement of the passage before us; and so palpably right, that the reader 
shall not be insulted with any proofs of it: What he finds in the moderns,—or may 
find, if he is so dispos’d,—took its rise from the negligent folio’s.—[The 7ext. Notes 
show that this arrangement of Capell is now adopted by all editors. ] 


170 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT 1h, SC. vite 


No to my Cabin : thefe Drummes, 155 


Thefe Trumpets, Flutes : what 


Let Neptune heare, we bid aloud farewell 
To thefe great Fellowes.Sound and be hang’d, found out. 
Sound a Hlourifh with Drummes. 


Enor. 
Men. 


155-158. ¢he/e...out. | Lines end, hear 


.. fellows ;...out, Cap. 
155. Vo] Wo, Han. 
155,156. Wo...what] One line, Han. 
thefe Drummes, ... what| One 
line, Var. ’78 et seq. 

Drummes, Thefe Trumpets, 
Flutes :| Drums !— These Trumpets, 
Flutes! Rowe, Pope, Theob. drums / 
these trumpets / Han. drums, these trum- 
pets, flutes, Cap. 


Hoo faies a there’s my Cap. 160 
Hoa, Noble Captaine, come. 


Exeunt. 


what! Rowe et cet. 
157. aloud | a loud Rowe ii. 
160. Enor.] F,. 
ffo0| Ff. Hoo, Rowe,+. Hoo! 
Dyce, Wh. Cam. Ho, or Ho/ Cap. et 
cet. 
faies a there’s| faies a, there's 
FF. says a! There's Rowe et seq. 
(subs. ) 
161. Hoa,] Ff, Rowe,+, Hoo! Dyce, 
Wh. Cam. Ho! or Ho, Var.’73 et 


156. what] what, F,. what— Cap. cet. 


155. these Drummes] STAUNTON (A¢henzum, 26 Apr. 1873), who adopts, in 
common with all modern editions, the division of lines in the Var. of 1778 (see 
Text. Notes), observes: ‘There is an obvious deficiency in this line. As a stop-gap, 
we might read,—‘‘ Where now are these drums,’ etc.’ In attempting to scan these 
lines, we must remember that their rhythm was not composed by Shakespeare but by 
Steevens ; a fact which ABBOTT (§ 509) overlooked when he said that the present 
line ‘ occurs amid regular verse.’ 

161. Exeunt] CoRsoN (p. 292): There is no other scene in all the plays of 
Shakespeare, perhaps, which exhibits a more complete dramatic identification on 
the part of the poet, than this banquet scene. There must have been at the time 
of his writing it, the fullest sympathetic reproduction within himself, of the several 
characters.—STAPFER (p. 416): Voltaire’s indignation is well known at Shake- 
speare’s so-called tragedies which are only ‘farces in which the burlesque and the 
horrible are united,’ and in which we see ‘the lowest rabble appearing on the stage 
by the side of princes, and princes often using the same language as the mob.’ 
Judgements of this kind belong to a period in which the characters of a tragedy were 
merely regarded as so many lay figures, who were expected to act in a solemn and 
ceremonious manner, especial care being taken that they should speak in the most 
courtly style and be able to make court-curtseys; and they belong moreover to a 
country in which the spirit of society and of high-bred manners has always been 
peculiarly cultivated and prized, and this differs as widely from the humourous spirit 
as one of our garden plants does from a foreign wild flower. These adverse opinions, 
however, do not prevent the banquet on board Pompey’s vessel from being a most 
excellent scene, and one even more thoroughly Shakespearian perhaps than the 
passages most celebrated for beauty in his plays, since in this particular kind of 
humourous presentation he is not only unrivalled, but has neither follower nor fore- 
runner. ‘ Vanity of vanities, all is vanity;’ what more amazing or more grotesque 
commentary on this philosophical truth, which lies at the basis of the spirit of humour, 


ACT I, sc.i.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 171 


| Adtus Tertius. Scene I] 


Enter Ventidius as it were in trinmph, the dead body of Paco- 
rus borne before him. 
Ven. Now darting Parthya art thou ftroke,and now 
Pleas’d Fortune does of Marcus Craffus death 
Make me reuenger. Beare the Kings Sonnes body, 5 
Before our Army thy Pacorus Orades, 
Paies this for Marcus Craffus. 


Romaine. Noble Ventidius, 8 
Act III. Scene i. Rowe. 3. Parthya| Parthia Ff. 
A Camp. Rowe. A Camp ina part Jrroke] ftrook ¥,. jiruck ¥ ,. 
of Syria. Theob, — 6. Army thy| Army, thy Ff, Rowe i. 
1-43. Om. Gar. host; thy Pope,+. army. Thy Coll. 


1,2. Enter...him.] Enter Ventidius in Dyce, Glo. Cam. army, thy Rowe ii et 
Triumph...before him, Roman Soldiers cet. (subs. ) 


and Attendants. Rowe. Enter, as from Orades] Orodes Rowe. 

Conquest, Ventidius, with Silius, and 8. Romaine.] Romane F,. Roman. 
other Romans, Officers and Soldiers... F,F,. Rom. Rowe. Sil. Theob. et 
him. Cap. seq. 


could be found than this scene, in which the lives of the Triumvirs depend upon a 
rope that Pompey had only to say the word to have cut, and in which Lepidus, ‘ the 
triple pillar of the world,’ rolls dead drunk under the table, and is carried off on the 
back of a slave. : 

1. Ventidius] See Plutarch, Appendix. 

I. as it were in triumph] CoLLier (ed. ii) opines that it is all the more needful 
that the phrase, ‘as it were in triumph’ should be retained, because ‘ Plutarch tells us 
that Ventidius was the only Roman who, up to that day, ‘‘had triumphed of the 
Parthians.’’’ DELIus, however, interprets (S4. /Jhrb. viii, 200) the phrase some- 
what differently. He thinks that Shakespeare, in using this phrase, meant to indi- 
cate that the comrades and subordinates of the General appeared also in the pro- 
cession. In this connection Delius suggests with ingenuity that we may infer from 
the somewhat fuller stage-directions in the present play, that Shakespeare was not 
himself personally concerned in its performance ; and that, therefore, he wrote out 
the directions to the actors more explicitly.—Ep. : 

3. darting Parthya] WorDsworTH cites two classical passages wherein darts are 
representative of the Parthians. The first is ‘ Miles [timet] sagittas et celerem fugam 
Parthi.’—Horace, Odes, II, xiii. The second, ‘Addam.. . Fidentemque fuga Par- 
thum versisque sagittis.’ Virgil, Georgics, iii, 31.—DEIGHTON: A reference to the 
Parthian method of fighting, their horsemen pouring in a shower of darts as they 
swarmed round the enemy, and then, as they fled to avoid close combat, turning in 
their saddles and discharging flights of arrows. 

3. art thou stroke] JoHNSON: Alludes to ‘darting.’ Thou whose darts have so 
often struck others, art struck now thyself. 


172 THE TRAGEDIE OP 


[ACT III, SC. k 


Whil’ft yet with Parthian blood thy Sword is warme, 


The Fugitiue Parthians follow. 


Spurre through Media, 10 


Mefapotamia, and the fhelters, whether 


The routed flie. 


So thy grand Captaine Anthony 


Shall fet thee on triumphant Chariots, and 


Put Garlands on thy head. 
Ven. Oh Sillius , Sulius, 


15 


I haue done enough. Alower place note well 

May make too great an act. For learne this Sz/us, 

Better to leaue vndone, then by our deed 

Acquire too high a Fame, when him we ferues away. 19 


10. The...follow.| Follow the fugitive 
Parthians ; Words. 
Spurre) Spurne¥,. Spurn ¥,¥ ,, 
Rowe. 
11. Mefapotamia] Mesopotamia Pope. 
whether| whither Ff. 
13. Chariots] Charriots F,. 
15-19. O% Sillius...2zway.] Lines end, 
done... make ... better... acquire...away. 


16. I haue] J’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, 
iii. 
Alower] F,,. 
place note well] place, note well 
Ff. (palce F,). place, note well, Rowe 
et seq. : 
18, 19. Better... Acquire] One line, 
Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Coll. Wh. Hal. 
19. him] he Pope, +, Cap. Varr. Ran. 


Han. 
15. Oh Sillius, Sillius,] Sz/ixs, Han. serve, ’s away Theob. Warb. Johns. 
15, 17. Sillius] Sz/ius FF, Rowe. ferve’s away FF, et cet. 


ferues away| ferue sway F,. 


13. Chariots] WALKER (Cyi¢. i, 253) says: ‘ Chariot, surely.’ Dyce, inde- 
pendently, made the same conjecture, and Hupson adopted it in his text. But the 
CowbEN-CLaRKES remark that a plural used in this way [as also in ‘Garlands’] is 
not infrequent among poets and poetic writers or speakers, to give the effect of 
amplitude and generalisation. Compare [Paulina’s passionate speech to Leontes in] 
The Winters Tale, ‘What flaying? boiling? In leads or oils? ’—III, ii, 191. 

16. Alower place note well, etc. ] THEOBALD (ed. 1): Plutarch particularly takes 
notice, that Ventidius was careful to act only on Lieutenantry ; and cautious of aim- 
ing at any glory in his own name and person. But the sentiments he throws in here, 
seem directly copied from Quintus Curtius, in Antipater’s behaviour with regard to 
Alexander :—Et, quanquam fortuna rerum placebat, invidiam tamen, quia majores res 
erant, quam quas Praefecti modus caperet, metuebat. Quippe Alexander hostes vinci 
voluerat ; Antipatrum vicisse, ne tacitus quidem indignabatur ; sue demptum gloriac 
existimans, quicquid cessisset alienae. taque Antipater, qui probe nosset spiritum 
ejus, non est ausus ipse agere arbitria victorig.—[Bk. vi, cap. 1.]—J. CHURTON 
COLLINS (p. 310): Theobald most happily furnishes the best of illustrations by quot- 
ing Antipater’s behaviour with regard to Alexander the Great.—[Collins hereupon 
quotes the foregoing passage from Quintus Curtius, but by a slip of the pen reads 
adignabatur instead of ‘ indignabatur.’ —Ep. ] 

17-19. For learne .. . serues away] The scansion of these lines has much 
perturbed the critics. STEEVENS was the earliest to suggest an amendment, but he 
went no further than to omit ‘to’ in line 18: ‘ Better leave undone, than by our 
deed.’ WALKER (Crit. iii, 300) was more vigorous ; he re-arranged the lines thus: 


ACFIII, SC. i.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 173 


Cefar and Anthony, haue euer wonne 20 
More in their officer, then perfon. So/fius 

One of my place in Syria, his Lieutenant, 

For quicke accumulation of renowne, 

Which he atchiu’d by’th’minute, loft his fauour. 

Who does i’th’Warres more then his Captaine can, 25 
Becomes his Captaines Captaine : andA mbition 

(The Souldiers vertue )rather makes choife of loffe 

Then gaine, which darkens him. 

I could do more to do Anthonius good, 


But ’twould offend him. And in his offence, 30 
Should my performance perith. 
Rom. Thou haft Ventidius that, without the which a 32 
20, 21. Czefar...perfon] Given to Silius, Ventidius ... sword, ... Antony ? Steev. 
Ran. Var. ’03, 13. that,...sword,...Antony ? 
21. Soffius] Sostus Rowe, Pope. Cap. et cet. 
24. he] Om. F,F,. 32, 40. Rom.] Ff, Rowe, Pope. Sil. 
atchiw d | atchiev'd FF. Theob. et cet. 
by’ th’ | by th’ Ff. 32. Thou...that,| Thou’st that, Ven- 
28-31. Then ... perifh.| Lines end, tidius, Elze. 
more...him;...perish. Han. the] Om. Steev. Var. '03, ’43, 


32-34. Thou...Anthony.] Lines end, Words. 
which...distinction :...Antony. Rowe,+. 


‘For learn this, Silius: Better | To leave undone, than by our deed acquire,’ etc. 
He then suggests another arrangement: ‘ Better to leave undone, | Than by our 
deed acquire too high a fame, | When him we serves away.’ Whereby, disregarding 
the plight in which he leaves two trimeter couplets: ‘ May make too great an act,’ 
and ‘When him we serves away,’ he has in reality accomplished nothing. He 
has eliminated no discord; there is no discord to be eliminated,—the lines are 
rhythmical howsoever they are divided. Unless the lines are uttered in the veriest 
sing-song, no ear can detect how or where they are divided. I cannot doubt that 
had Walker lived to revise his work, he would have omitted much that was merely 
the passing fancy of the moment. Yet Dyce, who is extremely chary of notes, reprints 
in full these suggestions of Walker. ABBOTT (§ 498) observes: ‘We might arrange 
‘¢ Better léave | undone, | than by | our déed | acquire.’ Or [line 18] might be 
(but there is not pause enough to make it probable) a trimeter couplet.’ Lastly, 
WorpswortTH amends and divides: ‘For learn, ’tis better | To leave undone, than 
by our deed acquire | Too high a fame when him we serve’s away.’ —ED. 

19. when him we serues away] For other examples of ‘him’ used for Ae, by 
attraction to whom understood, see, if need be, ABBOTT, § 208. 

21. More in their officer, then person] It is possible that in the final ” of 
‘then’ there is an absorption of 2: ‘then’ person.’—ED. 

24. by’th’minute] DEIGHTON: That is, each minute. 

28. which darkens him] After ‘him,’ KEIGHTLEY marks an omission, as of an 
incomplete sentence. 

32, 33. Thou hast Ventidius that, . . . graunts scarce distinction] WARBUR- 


174 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


FACT IE) SC. 


Souldier and his Sword graunts fcarce diftinction : thou 33 


wilt write to Anthony. 


Ven. Ile humbly fignifie what in his name, 35 
That magicall word of Warre we haue effected, 
How with his Banners, and his well paid ranks, 
The nere-yet beaten Horfe of Parthia, 


We haue iaded out o’th’ Field. 
Rom. Where is he now? 


40 


Ven.He purpofeth to Athens, whither with what haft 
The waight we muft conuay with’s, will permit : 


We fhall appeare before him. 


33. and his Sword graunts] from his 
sword Gains Huds. conj. 
graunts| grant Han. Warb. Johns. 
gains Coll. ii, iii (MS), Ktly, Huds. 
grants Ff et cet. 
graunts /carce| 
Words. 

34. Anthony.] Ff, Rowe i, Han. 
Antony, Roweii, Pope. Antony ? Theob. 
et seq. 

36. Warre we] war, we Rowe. 


Scarce gains 


On there ,paffe along. 


Exeunt. 44 


38. nere-yet beaten] ne er-yet-beaten 
Theob. et seq. 
39. We haue| Weve Pope, +. 
41. Athens,| Athens; Rowe. Athens. 
Johns. 
whither| Om. Pope,+. 
Cap. Walker. 

42. waight] weight FF. 
conuay| convay F,, convey FF. 
with’s| with us Cap. Warr. Mal. 

Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. Hal. 


where 


permit :| permit, Rowe ii et seq. 


37. well paid | well pat’d FF. well- 
43. On there] Om. Pope, Han. 


-paid Pope et seq. 
38. The] That Rowe ii, Pope. 


TON: ‘Grant,’ for afford. The sense is this: ‘Thou hast that, Ventidius, which if 
thou didst want, there would be no distinction between thee and thy sword. You 
would be both equally cutting and senseless.’ This was wisdom or knowledge of 
the world. Ventidius had told him the reasons why he did not pursue his advan- 
tages ; and his friend, by this compliment, acknowledges them to be of weight.— 
CAPELL (i, 36) : Meaning—wisdom or knowledge of the world: ‘without which,’ 
the soldier affords scarcely anything to distinguish him from his sword; the sword, 
in that case, doing nearly as much service, and being of equal value with himself. 
This maxim, and others with which the scene is embellish’d, are form’d out of very 
slight hints the Poet found in his Plutarch; which, if they are turn’d to, will shew 
with how sharp a judgment he look’d into the authors he dealt with. [See 4p- 
pendix. | 

39. iaded] ScumrpT (ZLex.): That is, to treat like a jade, to spurn, to kick. 

41-43. He purposeth ... passe along] WALKER (C77. iii, 300): Arrange, 
perhaps :—‘ He purposeth | To Athens; whither with what haste the weight | We 
must convey with’s will permit, we shall | Appear before him,—On, there; pass 
along.’ 

42. with’s,] THISELTON (p. 17): The Folio punctuation is here quite in con- 
sonance with Elizabethan usage, the comma after ‘ with’s’ marking the end of the 
relative clause. 


ACTII, sc. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 175 


[Scene IT. 


Enter Agrippa at one doore, Enobarbus at another. 
Agri. What are the Brothers parted ? 
Eno. They haue difpatcht with Pompey ,he is gone, 
The other three are Sealing. Odauia weepes 
To part from Rome : C@/ar is fad, and Lepidus 5 
Since Pompey’s feaft, as Menas faies, is troubled 
With the Greene-Sickneffe. 


Agri. Tis a Noble Lepidus. 

fino. A very fine one: oh, how he loues Ce/ar. 

Agri. Nay but how deerely he adores Mark Anthony. 10 
fino. C@far ? why he’s the Iupiter of men. 

Ant. What’s Anthony,the God of Iupiter ? 

£no. Spake you of Ce/ar ? How, the non-pareill ? 

Agri. Oh Anthony, oh thou Arabian Bird! 14 


Scene II. Rowe et seq. 
Rome. Rowe. An Anti-room in 
Czsar’s House. Cap. 
1. Enter...] Enter Agrippa and Eno- 
barbus, meeting. Cap. 
1-79. Om. Gar. 
2. What | What, Rowe. What ! Coll. 
What ? Hal. 
7. Greene-Sickneffe| Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Sing. Ktly. green sickness Theob. et seq. 
12. Ant.] Agr. Rowe. 
Anthony, ] Azfony ? Johns. et seq. 


12. lupiter ?| Jupiter. Johns. et seq. 
13. Spake] Speak EL, Rowe,+. 
How,| Oh! ¥F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Of? FF. of Han. 
O, Cap. How! Coll. Dyce, Wh. Glo. 
Cam. Hal. Ktly. “o/ Sta. ow? Johns. 
et cet. 
14. O# Anthony, oh thou] Of Antony ? 
oh the Han. Of Antony? O thou M. 
Oh... oh] O...O, Cap. et seq. 
(subs. ) 


4. Sealing] That is, finishing, concluding their agreements. 

14. thou Arabian Bird] ‘ There is another sacred bird, called the phoenix, which 
I myself have seen only in a picture; for, as the citizens of Helios say, it visits them 
only periodically, every five hundred years; they state that it always comes on the 
death of its sire. 
feathers are golden-hued, and some are red; in shape and figure it most resembles 
the eagle and in size also. They say, but I cannot credit it, that this bird contrives 
to bring from Arabia to the temple of Helios the body of its father plastered up in 
myrrh, and there buries it. The mode of carrying it is as follows :—first, he plasters 
together an egg of myrrh as large as he is able to carry, after he has tested his 
strength by carrying it; this trial having been made, he hollows out the egg suf- 
ficiently to place his father within, then with fresh myrrh he fills up the space 
unoccupied by his father’s body; the egg thereby becomes of the same weight as 
before, and thus plastered up he transports it to Egypt to the temple of Helios. Such 
things, they say, this bird can accomplish.’ — Herodotus, Lib. ii, cap. 73. 


If it at all resembles its picture, it is thus and so: some of its 


176 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[AcT. III, SC. il. 


Eno. Would you praife Ce/ar, fay Ce/ar|go no further. 15 
Agr.Indeed he plied them both with excellent praifes. 


Eno. 


Scribes, Bards, Poets, cannot 


But he loues C@/ar beft, yet he loues Anthony : 
Hoo, Hearts, Tongues, Figure, 


Thinke fpeake, caft, write, fing, number : hoo, 20 
His loue to Anthony. But as for Ce/ar, 


15. fay Cefar] say ‘ Cesar, Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. (subs.) 
go] Om. Steev. conj. 
Surther| farther Cap. Coll. Wh. 
Hal. 
18, 19. Hoo,...cannot | One line, Rowe 
et seq. 
18. Ho0,|] F,F,. Ho, F,. Hoo! Han. 
Dyce, Ho/ Rowe et cet. 
Figure| figures Han, Cap. et seq. 
20-22. Thinke...wonder.| Lines end, 


Antony...wonder. Han. 
20, 21. Thinke...loue] One line, Cap. 
Varr. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt. 
20. Thinke] Ever think Ktly. 
number| Om. Han. thunder Bul- 
loch. 
hoo, | 3 as ho, F, Rowe, Pope, 
Cap. Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt. hoo/ 
Han. Dyce, Wh. 40/ Theob. et cet. 
21, 22. Cefar, Kneele] Caesar, kneel, 
Kneel Cap. Varr. Ran. 


18-20. Hearts, ... number] JoHNsoN: Not only the tautology of ‘bards’ and 
‘poets,’ but the want of a correspondent action for the ‘ poet,’ whose business in the 
next line is only to ‘number,’ makes me suspect some fault in this passage, which I 
know not how to mend.—STEEVENS: I suspect no fault. The ancient dard sung 
his compositions to the harp; the foet only commits them to paper. Verses are often 
called xumdbers, and to ‘number,’ a verb (in this sense) of Shakspeare’s coining, is 
This puerile arrangement of words was much studied in the age of 
Shakspeare, even by the first writers. So, in An Excellent Sonnet of a Nimph, by 
Sir P. Sidney ; printed in Exgland’s Helicon, 1600: 


to make verses. 


* Vertue, beautie, and speeche, did strike, wound, charme, 
My heart, eyes, eares, with wonder, loue, delight ; 
First, second, last did binde, enforce, and arme 
His works, showes, sutes, with wit, grace, and vowes’ might. 
Thus honour, liking, trust, much, farre, and deepe, 
Held, pearst, possesst, my iudgment, sence. and will ; 
Till wrongs, contempt, deceite, did grow, steale, creepe, 
Bands, fauour, faith to breake, defile, and kill ; 
Then griefe, ynkindnes, proofe, tooke, kindled, taught, 
Well-grounded, noble, due, spite, rage, disdaine. 
But ah, alas, in vaine, my minde, sight, thought, 
Doth him, his face, his words leaue, shunne, refraine : 
For nothing, time nor place, can loose, quench, ease 
Mine owne, embracéd, sought, knot, fire, disease.’—[ed. Grosart, i, 197.] 


20. Thinke ... hoo] Dyce: Something was dropped out from this line.— 
R. G. WHITE doubts Dyce's assertion, and adds: The monosyllabic construction 
and interrupted flow make the line seem rather superfluous than deficient. 

20. cast] This corresponds to ‘ Figure,’ and consequently means to compute. 


ACT Ill, sc. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 177 


Kneele downe, kneele downe, and wonder. Z2 
Agri. Both he loues. 
Eno. They are his Shards, and he their Beetle, fo: 

This is to horfe : Adieu, Noble Agrippa. 25 
Agri. Good Fortune worthy Souldier, and farewell. 


Enter Cafar, Anthony, Lepidus ,and O€tauia. 

Antho. No further Sir. 

Cefar. You take from me a great part of my felfe: 
Vie me well in’t. Sifter, proue fuch a wife 30 
As my thoughts make thee, and as my fartheft Band 
Shall paffe on thy approofe : moft Noble Anthony, 
Let not the peece of Vertue which is fet 
Betwixt vs, as the Cyment of our loue 


To keepe it builded, be the Ramme to batter 35 
22. Kneele downe, kneele| Kneel, kneel 28. further farther Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Theob. Warb. Cap. Coll. Wh. Hal. 
wonder. | wonder— Rowe, Pope, [To Cefar. Cap. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. 30. in’¢t] in it Var. 73, 78,85, Mal. 
24. Beetle, fo:| Ff. beetle, so— Rowe, Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Knt, Coll. i. 
Pope, Theob. Warb. Jdeetle ; [Trumpet 31. and as] and Pope, Theob. Han. 
within] so, Cap. Dyce, Glo. Cam. (subs. ) Warb. 
beetle. So— Han. Johns. et seq. (subs. ) fartheft| furthest Johns. Varr. 
25. (Trumpets. Rowe. Ran. Steev. Varr. Dyce. 
Noble| most noble Ktly. Band | bond Rowe, +, Cap. 
27. Octauia. ] Octavi. F.,,. 34. Cyment] Cement FF. 


24. Shards] STEEVENS: That is the wzmgs that raise this heavy lumpish insect 
from the ground.—[ The ‘shards’ are wot the wings, but the wing-cases, the Zlyira ; 
they do zor raise the insect from the ground, but merely open to allow the wings to 
unfold; and the ‘insects’ are rarely ‘heavy and lumpish,’—with these exceptions 
Steevens’s definition is excellent.—Ep. ] 

24. so] From the days of Rowe this ‘so’ has been generally supposed to refer to 
Trumpets summoning the soldiers to horse. DEIGHTON interprets it merely as ‘ very 
good.’ 

31, 32. my farthest Band Shall passe on thy approofe] JoHNnson: As I will 
venture the greatest pledge of security, on the trial of thy conduct.—MALONE: 
‘Band’ and ond, in our author’s time, were synonymous. 

33. peece of Vertue] This phrase bears a double meaning ; ‘ piece’ may mean a 
‘specimen, or example, and be applied to an abstract thing’ (see Murray, J. Z. D. 
s.v. piece, 8, b.) ; and it may also mean a woman (see of. cit. 9, b.) which is, I think, 
the better meaning here, as it is also in 7e Tempest, ‘Thy Mother was a peece of 
vertue.’—I, ii, 69. 

34. Cyment] For a list of many words wherein ‘the accent is nearer the begin- 
ning than with us,’ see ABBOTT, § 492. 

35. To keepe it builded] MALoNnE: Compare Sonnet, 119: ‘And ruin’d love, 
when it is built anew, Grows fairer than at first,’ etc. 


12 


178 THE .TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Ill, sc, ii. 


The Fortreffe of it:for better might we 36 | 


Haue lou’d without this meane, if onboth parts 

This be not cherifht. 
Ant. Make me not offended, in your diftruft. 
Cefar. 1 haue faid. 40 
Ant. You fhall not finde, 

Though you be therein curious, the left caufe 

For what you feeme to feare, fo the Gods keepe you, 

And make the hearts of Romaines ferue your ends : 


We will heere part. 45 
Cefar. Farewell my deereft Sifter, fare thee well, 
The Elements be kind to thee,and make 47 
36. Fortreffe| Fortune Ff, Rowe, 40. Lhaue| I’ve Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Pope. 42. therein] certain Rowe ii, Pope. 
at] i¢ down Ktly. left] leaft FF. 
better| much better Han. far better 43. feare, fo] fear ; so, Pope et seq. 
Cap. Walker, Dyce ii, iii. 44. Romaines| Romanes¥,. Romans 
39. Make...offended | One line, Rowe LA 
et seq. Serue| feure Sta. Photo-lith. 


42. curious] Dyce (G/oss.): That is scrupulous, over-punctilious. 

47. The Elements be kind to thee] JoHNson: This is obscure. Its seems to 
mean, ‘ May the different e/ements of the body, or principles of life, maintain such 
proportion and harmony as may keep you cheerful.—SrTrEvens: I believe this 
means only, ‘ May the four elements of which this world is composed, unite their 
influences to make thee cheerful.’ [Or it] may, indeed, mean no more than the 
common compliment which the occasion of her voyage very naturally required. He 
wishes ‘that serene weather and prosperous winds may keep her spirits free from 
every apprehension that might disturb or alarm them.’—M. MAson: Octavia was 
about to make a long journey both by /and and by water. Her brother wishes that 
both these elements may prove kind to her; and this is all.—STAuNTON: There is 
a passage, altogether forgotten by the commentators, in /w/. Ces. V, v, which is 
entirely confirmatory of Dr Johnson’s interpretation : ‘ His life was gentle; and che 
elements So mix’d in him, that Nature might stand up, And say to all the world, 7hzs 
was a man !’—[It seems useless to contend over the meaning of ‘ Elements’ in this 
sentence ; its meaning must be determined by the context. ‘The elements’ mean, 
in general, earth, water, air, and fire, and of these man is supposed to be composed ; 
‘the due proportion and commixture whereof in his composition,’ says NARES (s. v. 
Elements) ‘were what produced in him every kind of perfection, mental and bodily.’ 
Thus Cleopatra says, ‘I am Fire, and Ayre; my other Elements [7. e. earth and 
water] I give to baser life.’—V, ii, 341. Sir Toby Belch asks, ‘ Does not our liues 
consist of the foure elements ?’— 7wel/th Night, II, iii, 11. Oras Anthony in the 
present play says of the Crocodile, ‘the elements once out of it, it Transmigrates.’— 
II, vii, 52. The four elements may also exist external to man, and when used in the 
singular, ‘the element’ may mean the air or the sky, as in Twelfth Night, where 
Valentine says of Olivia, ‘The Element itselfe, till seuen yeares heate, Shall not 


arn + 


ACT Ill, sc. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 179 


Thy fpirits all of comfort : fare thee well. 48 


Octa. My Noble Brother. 


Anth. The Aprill’s in her eyes, it is Loues fpring, 50 
And thefe the fhowers to bring it on : be cheerfull. 


Ota. Sir,looke well to my Husbands houfe : and 

Cefar. What Odtauia? 

Oédta. Ile tell you in your eare. 

Ant. Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can 55 


Her heart informe her tougue. 
The Swannes downe feather 


48. fare thee] farethee Sta. Photo-lith. 
53- What] Closing line 52, Han. Cap. 
Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 

Cam. Ktly. 
What Octauia ?] What Octavia. 


57 


et seq. 

56. tougue.| F,. tongue, Rowe. tongue ; 
Pope. 

57-59. Mnemonic. Warb. 

57. Swannes| swan’d Warb. 


Ff. What, Octavia ? Pope ii. 
54. [taking him aside. Cap. 
56,57. Her...feather| One line, Rowe 


downe feather | doun feather Ee 
down-feather Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. Ktly. 


Again, where Viola says to Olivia, ‘O you should not 
Or ‘the element’ may mean 


behold her face.’ —I, i, 31. 
rest Betweene the elements of ayre, and earth,’ etc. 
water, as where the Queen in Hamlet says of Ophelia, when fallen in ‘the weeping 
brook,’ that she was ‘like a creature native and indued Unto that element.’—IV, 
vii, 180. It is, therefore, quite possible in the present passage that ‘the elements’ 
may mean either those which are external to man or those of which he is composed. 
If the former, then Czesar means no more than ‘may you have a comfortable journey’; 
an objection to this meaning is that a comfortable journey does not of necessity 
create cheerful spirits; there is the well-known line ‘Czlum non animum mutant,’ 
etc., which suggests a sorrow ever-present, however comfortable the voyage. If 
by ‘the elements’ Czesar means those of which Octavia’s nature is composed, then 
Johnson’s interpretation is just, and it would be presumptuous to attempt to better 
his paraphrase.—ED. ] 

48. spirits] WALKER’s rule for the pronunciation of sfzvi¢ as a monosyllable 
(Crit. i, 193) will not here apply. See I, ii, 143, and II, ii, 76. 

50, 51 and 57-59. Loues spring, .. . bring it on : and The Swannes downe 
feather ... inclines] Mrs GrirritH (p. 469): These are two passages, which for 
elegance of thought, or beauty of expression, it is not in the power of poetical imagery 
or language to exceed. 

54. Ile tell you in your eare] As far as I know, Voss is the sole commentator 
who overhears what Octavia whispers. He says that she begs her brother not to be 
too exacting when dealing with Anthony, or else to remain constant to her, should 
Anthony’s former fascination for Cleopatra re-awaken. But see line 72.—ED. 

55-59. Her tongue will not, etc.] I think Anthony here speaks aside, while 
Octavia is whispering her last fond words to her brother.—ED. 

57-59. The Swannes downe feather... neither way inclines] CAPELL (i, 
37) : This comparison of Antony’s rose indeed from the words he had just spoken ; 


180 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


That ftands vpon the Swell at the full of Tide : 58 
And neither way inclines. 
Eno. Will Ce/ar weepe ? 60 
Agr. He ha’s a cloud in’s face. 
Eno. Hewere the worfe for that were he a Horfe, fo is 62 
58. That] Thus Walker, Huds. 61. 22's] in his Var.’73,’78,’85, Mal. 
at the full of | Mal. Knut, Coll. Ran. Ktly. 
Sing. Dyce, Wh. Hal. Ktly. at the full 62. He... Horfe] One line, Pope et 
Coll. ii. at the of full Sta. Photo-lith. seq. 
at full of Ff et cet. that were he...Horfe,| that, were 
60-70. Will...too.] As Aside, Cap. he a Horse Sta. Photo-lith. 


but are not an illustration of them, but of a reflection that was then springing up upon 
the state of Octavia’s heart; divided between love to her brother and love to him, 
and unable to give the preference to either.—Hupson: Very delicate imagery, but 
not perfectly clear: the plain English of it is, that Octavia’s heart is equally divided 
between her brother and her husband, so that she cannot tell which she loves most. 
—STEEVENS refers to a similar image in 2 Henry JV. II, iii, 63: ‘ As with the tide 
swell’d up unto his height, That makes a still-stand, running neither way.’ And 
DEIGHTON refers to Zro. and Cress. where Shakespeare again speaks of the soft 
plumage of the swan: ‘her hand .. . to whose soft seizure The cygnet’s down is 
harsh,.’—I, i, 58. 

58. at the full] In the Ff this ‘the’ is absorbed in the ¢ of ‘at,’ but is still pres- 
ent to the ear.—ED. 

62. were he a Horse] STEEVENS: A horse is said to have ‘a cloud in his face,’ 
when he has a black or dark-coloured spot in his forehead between his eyes. This 
gives him a sour look, and being supposed to indicate an ill-temper, is of course 
regarded as a great blemish. The same phrase occurs in Burton’s Anatomy of 
Melancholy, ‘Every lover admires his mistress, though she be very deformed of her 
self. . . thin, lean, chitty face, have clouds in her face, be crooked,’ etc.—[p. 519, 
ed. 1651.]—R. G. WHITE: An allusion to the dislike horse-fanciers have to white 
marks or other discolorations in the face of that animal.—MADDEN (p. 255): Eno- 
barbus’ grim jest would have prospered better in the ear of a Smithfield horse-courser 
than it has fared with some of the critics. The horse-courser could have told [Mr 
Grant White] that the words meant the exact opposite [to what he has said they 
mean]. The horse with a cloud in his face was one with no white star. Fitz- 
herbert, in his Boke of Husbandrie, commends the white star. ‘It is an excel- 
lent good marke also for a horse to have a white star in his forehead. The horse 
that hath no white at all upon him is furious, dogged, full of mischiefe and mis- 
fortune.’ —Cavalarice, G. Markham... . In the common language of the stable such 
a horse was said to have a cloud in his face. guus nebula (ut vulgo dicitur) in 
facie, cujus vultus tristis est et melancholicus, jure vituperatur, says the learned 
Sadlerius in his work, De procreandis, etc., eguis, 1587. From Sadler’s words ut 
vulgo dicitur, the expression ‘cloud in the face’ seems to have been in general use. 
Those who had not Shakespeare’s intimate knowledge of the language of the stable 
probably used it without any clear idea of its meaning, as Burton may have done 
when he wrote [the passage quoted by Steevens]. 


ACT Ill, sc, ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 181 


he being ajman. 63 
Agri. Why Enobarbus : 
When Anthony found Lulius Cefar dead, 65 


He cried almoft to roa ring : And he wept, 
When at Phillippi he found Brutus flaine. 

Eno. That yearindeed, he was trobled with a rheume, 
What willingly he did confound, he wail’d, 


Beleeu’t till I weepe too. 70 
64. Enobarbus -] Ff. Zxodarbus,Coll. 68. rheume] rume Sta. Photo-lith. 
Dyce, Wh. Glo. Cam. Hal. Znobarbus ? 70. Beleewt| Believe it Varr. Mal. 

Rowe et cet. Ran. Steev. Varr. 
68. yearindeed | yeare indeed Sta. weepe| F,. wept Theob. Warb. 
Photo-lith. Johns. Sing. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Glo. Cam. 
trobled | troubled Ff. Sta. Photo- Hal. Hunter, Huds. Dtn, Rife. weep EP 
lth. et cet. 


\ 


68. he was] This is one of the examples furnished by WALKER ( C71¢. ii, 203), 
illustrating his observation that ‘ Thou wert, you were, I was, etc. occur frequently 
in places where it is clear that they must have been pronounced as one syllable, in 
whatever manner the contraction was effected.’ 

68. The Zext. Motes show a remarkable number of varie lectiones within twenty 
or thirty lines, in SrAUNTON’s Photoltthograph. There can be no question that this 
reproduction faithfully sets forth its original, which could be at once pronounced one 
of the very earliest, if not the earliest, copy to leave the press, were it not that Staun- 
ton had two copies to print from: the copy in Bridgewater House and that in the 
National Library, and we do not know to which copy this page belongs.—ED. 

69. confound] MALONE: To ‘confound’ is to destroy. 

70. till 1 weepe too] THEOBALD: I have ventur’d to alter the tense of the verb 
here, against the authority of all the copies. There was no sense in it, I think, as it 
stood before. Enobarbus would say, ‘Indeed, Antony seem’d very free of his tears 
that year; and, believe me, bewail’d all the mischief he did, till I myself wept too.’ 
This appears to me very sarcastical. Antony’s tears, he would infer, were dissembled ; 
but Enobarbus wept in real compassion of the havock and slaughter committed on 
his countrymen.—CAPELL (i, 37): Which he thought would be never: so that, tak- 
ing them thus, the words are only a fresh and more positive assertion of what he had 
been saying before. Wept (a word adopted by two modern editors) can not be 
allow’d of; the sense which that would convey, being a manifest violation of 
character. —STEEVENS : I am afraid there was better sense in this passage as it origi- 
nally stood, than Theobald’s alteration will afford us. ‘Believe it (says Enobar- 
bus), that Antony did so, 7. ¢. that he wept over such an event, till you see me weep- 
ing on the same occasion, when I shall be obliged to you for putting such a con- 
struction on my tears, which, in reality (like his), will be tears of joy. —M. Mason: 
I should certainly adopt Theobald’s amendment, the meaning of which is, that 
Antony wailed the death of Brutus so bitterly, that I [Enobarbus] was affected by 
it, and wept also. Steevens’s explanation of the present reading is so forced, that I 
cannot clearly comprehend it—Dyce: Steevens and Capell vainly endeavour to 


182 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


Cefar. No fweet Odtaua, 71 
You fhall heare from me ftill : the time fhall not 
Out-go my thinking on you. 

Ant. Come Sir,come, 
Ile wraftle with you in my ftrength of loue, 75 
Looke heere I haue you, thus I let you go, 
And giue you to the Gods. 

Cefar. Adieu, be happy. 

Lep. Let all the number of the Starres giue light 


To thy faire way. 80 
Cefar. Farewell, farewell. Kiffes Otauia. 
Ant. Farewell. Trumpets found. Exeunt. 82 
71. [coming forward. Cap. Lith. 
73. my| her Rowe ii. 76. you, | you; Rowe. you, [embrac- 
75. wrafile| wrefile FF. ing him.] Han. 


76. L let you| TL, let hou Sta. Photo- 78. Adieu,| Adieu Sta. Photo-lith. 


defend [the Folio]. According to Capell, Theobald’s correction introduces a vio- 
lation of character ; but Enobarbus is not altogether ‘ unused to the melting mood ;’ 
for afterwards (IV, ii, 47) we find him saying, ‘ Looke, they weep; And J/, az ass, 
am onion-ey da, etc.—R. G. WHITE: I have no hesitation in adopting Theobald’s 
reading.—_KEIGHTLEY (Zxfositor, p. 315): Theobald is followed, from not under- 
standing the passage, as it seems to me; what is meant is, accept this explanation 
till you see #e weep from pure feeling, which Antony was no more capable of doing 
than I am.—[If Theobald’s reading be correct, and Enobarbus did actually weep 
out of sympathy, I find it difficult to detect with what he sympathised. Certainly 
not with Anthony’s tears; he has just said that they were due to a rheum. If 
Anthony’s tears were genuine, his sarcastic allusion to a rheum is pointless. Asa 
proof that tears from Enobarbus were not out of character, Dyce refers to a scene 
between Anthony and his followers where Enobarbus confesses he was ‘ onion-ey’d.’ 
But there is no parallelism between that scene and the present. It was the sight of 
the unfeigned tears of devoted affection for Anthony which in that scene brought 
tears to the eyes of Enobarbus. In Anthony’s * wailings’ over the ‘slain Brutus’ 
whom he had himself ‘ willingly confounded,’ Enobarbus had no jot of faith, and he 
asks Agrippa to believe his words,—until Agrippa shall see him ‘ weep too,’ which, 
as Capell says, will be never. ‘Weepe’ of the Folio should not be, I think, dis- 
turbed.—Ep. : 

72, 73. You shall heare from me still, etc.] Is it not here revealed what 
Octavia told in Ceesar’s ear ?—Ep. 


ACT II, SC. iil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 183 


[Scene LIT] 


Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras,and Alexas. 


Cleo. Where is the Fellow ? 
Alex. WHalfe afeard to come. 
Cleo. Go too,go too - Come hither Sir. 
Enter the Meffenger as before. 5 
Alex. Good Maieftie : Herod of Iury dare not looke 


vpon you, but when you are well pleas’d. 
Cleo. That Herods head, Ile haue : but how? When 
Anthony is gone, through whom I might commaund it: 
Come thou neere. 10 
Mef. Moft gratious Maieftie. 


Scene III. Rowe. 
Alexandria. Rowe. Palace in Alex- 


6. fury] F,. Jewry ¥F,. 
7. pleas’ d | plaes’d Sta. Photo-lith. 


andria. Theob. 

3. afeard | afraid Pope,+. 

4. Go too, go too:| Goto, goto: Ff. 
Go to, go to. Johns. 

6-10. Good... neere| Lines. end, 
majesty, ... you, ... head ... gone, ... it ».. 
near. Pope. majesty! ... you, ... head, ... 
gone, ...ncar. Theob. et seq. 


8-10. That Herods ... meere] Lines 
end, head... gone, ... it: ... near. Pope. 
head...gone, ...near. Theob. et seq. 

8, 9. how?... 2] Ff. how? ... i. 
Johns. Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. 
Ktly. ow, ...2¢? Coll. Dyce, Wh. Sta. 
Glo. Cam. Hal. 

11. Mateftie.| Majefty. Ff. Majesty! 


6. Matefie:| Ff. Majesty, Rowe. Han. Majesty,— Theob. Warb. et seq. 


Majesty ! Theob. 


4. Go too, go too] WorpsworTH (p. 341) : I have ventured to alter the com- 
mon text into ‘ Go to him, go,’ because the former, which is ‘a phrase of exhortation 
or reproof’ (Schm. ‘Lex.’), does not appear to give the meaning here required ; 
unless indeed we can suppose it to signify,—‘ Don’t tell me of his being afeard. I 
insist upon seeing him ;’ which puts at least an awkward strain upon the words. 
—DEIGHTON excellently paraphrases it as ‘nonsense, nonsense.’ 

5. the Messenger] CoLLier (ed. ii): He is again called Elis in the MS. [See 
II, v, 29.]—Mrs JAMESON (p. 140): The man is afterwards brought back, almost 
by force, to satisfy Cleopatra’s jealous anxiety, by a description of Octavia:—but this 
time, made wise by experience, he takes care to adapt his information to the humours 
of his imperious mistress, and gives her a satirical picture of her rival. The scene 
which follows, in which Cleopatra—artful, acute, and penetrating as she is—becomes 
the dupe of her feminine spite and jealousy, nay, assists in duping herself; and after 
having cuffed the messenger for telling her truths which are offensive, rewards him 
for the falsehood which flatters her weakness—is not only an admirable exhibition 
of character, but a fine moral lesson. 

6. Herod of Iury] See I, ii, 31. Alexas refers to the ferocious tyrant of the old 
mystery plays; Cleopatra’s thoughts wander to the living Herod. 


184 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act 11, sc. iii. 
Cleo. Did’ft thou behold Odtauia? 12 
Mef. 1 dread Queene. 

Cleo. Where ? 
Mef. Madam in Rome, I lookt her in the face : and 15 


faw her led betweene her Brother, and Marke Anthony. 


Cleo. Is fhe as tall as me ? 
Mef. She is not Madam. 
Cleo. 


Didft heare her fpeake ? 


Is fhe fhrill tongu’d or low ? 20 
Mef. Madam,I heard her fpeake, fhe is low voic’d. 
Cleo. That’s not fo good : he cannot like her long. 22 


12. Did’? thou behold | Separate line, 
Theob. Warb. et seq. (except Sta. Glo.) 
15, 16. Madam ... Anthony.] Lines, 
end, face :...and... Antony. Rowe, Pope, 
Han. ln Rome Madam...led...Antony. 


19, 20. Did/t...low?] One line, Rowe 
et seq. 

20. farill tongu’d]| shrill-tongued 
Rowe ii et seq. 

21. /peake,... voiced | fpeake ... vote c 


Sta. Photo-lith. 
low voiced] low-votc’d Pope et 


Theob. Warb. et seq. (subs. ) 
15. Madam in Rome| In Rome, 
Madam. Theob. Warb. Johns. seq. 


12. Did’st thou behold Octauia?] Sarnt-Marc GIRARDIN (iv, 403): The 
scene which follows is comical, but of a vulgar comicality. Cleopatra exhibits the 
unrest and curiosity of a rival; she shows none of that confidence in herself which 
constituted an element of her power. 

17. as tall as me] ABBOTT (§ 210): Probably ‘as’ was used with a quasi-prepo- 
sitional force.—STEEVENS here refers to Melvil’s Memoirs (see II, v, 143) and Rit- 
SON shows, by the date of the publication of these Memoirs, how extremely improbable 
it is that there can be here any allusion to Queen Elizabeth’s interview with Melvil, 
and concludes his note with the remark that ‘such enquiries [as Elizabeth put to 
Melvil concerning the personal appearance of the Queen of Scots] are, no doubt, 
perfectly natural to rival females, whether queens or cinder-wenches.’ 

20. shrill tongu’d] THISELTON (p. 17) : Cleopatra is evidently wishing to com- 
pare Octavia with ‘ shrill-tongu’d Fulvia.’ See I, i, 45. 

22. That’s not so good: he cannot like her long] MALONE: Cleopatra per- 
haps does not mean— That is not so good a piece of intelligence as your last ;’ but, 
‘That, t.¢. a low voice, is not so good as a shrill tongue.’ That a low voice (on 
which our author never omits to introduce an eulogium when he has an opportunity) 
was not esteemed by Cleopatra as a merit appears from what she adds afterwards, 
—‘Duill of tongue, and dwarfish!’ Perhaps the author intended no connection 
between the two members of this line; and that Cleopatra, after a pause, should 
exclaim—‘ He cannot like her, whatever her merits may be, for any length of time.’ 
It has been justly observed that the poet had probably Queen Elizabeth here in his 
thoughts. The description given of her by a contemporary, about twelve years after 
her death, strongly confirms this supposition. ‘She was (says the Continuator of 
Stowe’s Chronicle) tall of stature, strong in every limb and joynt, her fingers small 
and long, her voyce loud and shrill.’ —STEEVENS : It may be remarked, however, that 


ACT II, SC. iii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 185, 


Char. Like her ? Oh //s : ’tis impoffible. 2 
Cleo. thinke fo Charmian: dull of tongue, & dwarfith 
What Maieftie is in her gate, remember 25 


If ere thou look’ft on Maieftie. A 
Me/. She creepes:her motion, & her ftation are as one: 
She fhewes a body, rather then a life, 
A Statue, then a Breather. 
Cleo. Is this certaine ? 30 
Mef. Or I haue no obferuance. 
Cha. Three in Egypt cannot make better note. 
Cleo. He’s very knowing, I do perceiu’t, 
There’s nothing in her yet. 
The Fellow ha’s good iudgement. 35 
Char. Excellent. 
Cleo. Gueffe at her yeares, I prythee. 
Meff. Madam, fhe was a widdow. 
Cleo. Widdow? Charman, hearke. 39 


24. dwarfifh| dwarfi/h. FF. dwarf- 
ish / Cap. et seq. 

25. gate,| Ff. 
Johns. 

26. look’ fz] Ff, Rowe, 
look’ dst Pope et cet. 

27. She creepes| Closing line 26, Rowe 
et seq. 

32. Three... cannot] Not three in 


gate? Rowe. gait? 


Ware 73. 


32-34. Three...yet. | Lines end, Egypt 
.. .knowing...yet. Theob. et seq. 

38. Madam] Closing line 37, Steev. 
Varr. Knt, Coll. Sing. Dyce, Wh. Sta. 
Glo. Cam. Hal. Her years, madam ? 
Cap. (separate line.) 

widdow.| Widow. F,. widow,— 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
39. Widdow ?] widow! Dyce, Sta. 


Aigypt can Pope. Glo, Cam. 

when Cleopatra applies the epithet ‘ shrill-tongued’ to Fulvia, it is not introduced by 
way of compliment.—IRviInG EDITION: Cleopatra means that a low voice is so good 
a thing in itself that it is‘ not so good’ for ery, as it denotes a charm in Octavia. The 
latter part of the line is not at all consequent on what has just been said, but expresses 
the secret anxiety of the woman by her emphasis in uttering it. It would be better, 
perhaps, to print it as a separate sentence.—[This last interpretation is, to me, the 
true one. Cleopatra was thinking of herself, not of any quality of voice, and was, 
moreover, determined, as with the ‘ venom clamours of a jealous woman,’ to regard 
every quality of Octavia in the worst possible light. As for ‘the poet’s’ having 
Queen Elizabeth in his thoughts,—we here need Mr Burchell, to ejaculate ‘ Fudge !’ 
It is quite as likely that he was thinking of Marian Hacket.—Ep. ] 

27. her motion, & her station are as one] STEEVENS: ‘Station’ means the act 
of standing, as in Hamlet, ‘ A station like the herald Mercury.’—III, iv, 58.—[An 
impossible lie ; the very depth of obsequiousness or terror.—ED. ] 

39. Widdow] STEEVENS: Cleopatra rejoices in this circumstance ; it sets Octavia 
on a level with herself, who was no virgin when she fell to the lot of Antony.— 
[Cleopatra ‘rejoices’ because a ‘widow’ is suggestive of age and waning charms, 


186 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iii. 


Mef. And I do thinke fhe’s thirtie. 40 
Cle. Bear’{t thou her face in mind ? is’t long or round? 
Meff. Round, euen to faultineffe. 
Cleo. For the moft part too, they are foolifh that are 
fo. Her haire what colour ? 
Mef. Browne Madam: and her forehead 45 
As low as fhe would with it. 


41. Bear f...face] Separate line, Cap. 44. Her...colour| Separate line, 5 
zs’¢ | 7s it Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Rowe, Cap. Var. ’21, Knt, Coll. Sing. 
Var. ’03, 713. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Glo. Cam. Hal. 
43, 44. Hor...colour ?] Lines end, ¢oo 45, 46. Browne...z¢.| Lines end, Jow 
... colour ? Pope,+, Warr. Mal. Ran, sete CCN. Wak. 03, 13: 
Steev. Var. ’03, °13. 46. As low] zs as low Steev. Var.’03, 


43. they are| They re Pope,+, Dyce Diey 


and therefore less likely to hold Anthony’s affection in thrall as long as woulda 
blushing young bride.—Eb. ] 

43. they are foolish] STEEVENS: This is from the old writers on physiognomy. 
So, in Hill’s Pleasant History, etc., 1613: ‘the head very round, to be forgetful and 
foolish.’ Again, ‘the head /oxg, to be prudent and wary.’—p. 218.—[The date, 
1613, diminishes the value of these quotations, as far as the present play is concerned. 
—EDp.] 

45. Madam] WALKER ( Vers. 174) : Ma’ am, I think, renders the line more har- 
monious. I think that these speeches ought to be arranged as by Nares, s. v. Forehead. 

45. forehead] NarREs (s. v. Forehead) : A high forehead was formerly accounted 
a great beauty, and a low one a proportionable deformity ; so completely has taste 
changed in this respect. ‘ Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine; Ay, but her 
forehead’s low and mine’s as high. — Two Gent. 1V, iv, 197. ‘ For this is handsome- 
ness, this that draws us Body and bones; Oh, what a mounted forehead, What eyes 
and lips, what every thing about her.’—Beaumont and Fletcher’s JZons. Thomas, I, i. 
‘Her iuorie forhead, full of bountie braue, Lzke a broad table did it selfe dispred, 
For Loue his loftie triumphes to engraue, And write the battels of his great godhed,’ 
—Spenser, Faerie Queene, II, iii, 213. This is part of the description of a perfect 
ideal beauty :—‘ Her forehead smooth, full, polish’ d, bright, and high, Bears in itself 
a graceful majesty.’— Witts Recreations, sign. V 2, b. Thus also Sir Philip Sidney 
describes the beautiful Parthenia :—‘ For her great gray eye, which might seeme full 
of her own beauty ; @ large, and exceedingly faire forehead, with all the rest of her 
face and body, cast in the mould of noblenesse, was yet attired,’ etc.—Book i, p. 59. 
A lady jocularly setting forth her own beauty, enumerates, ‘True complexion If it be 
red and white, a forehead high.’—Beaumont and Fletcher’s Woman Hater, III, i. 
Cleopatra, when full of jealousy, is delighted to find that her rival has a low forehead. 
[The phrase], as low ‘as she would wish it’ is said ironically, for much lower. The 
dialogue would be improved a little in spirit, if we might read it thus: ‘ JZess. Brown, 
Madam. C/eop. And her forehead ? | Mess. As low as she could wish it.’ A low fore- 
head is humorously mentioned as the most striking deformity of apes :—‘ And all be 
turn’d to barnacles, or to apes, With foreheads villainous low.’ — Tempest, IV, i. 


ACT III, SC. ili.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 187 


Cleo. There’s Gold for thee, 47 
Thou muft not take my former fharpeneffe ill, 
I will employ thee backe againe : I finde thee 
Moft fit for bufineffe. Go, make thee ready, 50 
Our Letters are prepar’d. 
Char. A proper man. 
Cleo. Indeed he is fo : I repent me much 
That fo I harried him. Why me think’s by him, 
This Creature’s no fuch thing. 55 
Char. Nothing Madam. 
Cleo. The man hath feene fome Maiefty, and fhould 
know. 
Char. Hath he feene Maieftie ? Z/s elfe defend : and 
feruing you fo long. 60 
Cleopa. I haue one thing more to aske him yet good 
Charmian : but ’tis no matter, thou fhalt bring him to me 
where I will write;all may be well enough. 


Char. I warrant you Madam. Exeunt. 64 
47. There’s| There ts Steev. Varr. 59, 60. Hath...long.| Lines end, de- 
thee, | thee. Rowe ii. - fend; ...dong. Rowe et seq. 
50. ready] ready, while Cap. defend. ... long.| Ff. defend! 
51. [Exit Mes. Han. ... dong. Pope, Han. defend! ... long ? 
54. Why] Om. Pope, Han. Theob. Warb. Johns. defend, ... long ! 
me think’s| F,. me thinks ¥,. Cap. et cet. 
methinks ¥ |. 61-63. 7 haue... enough] Lines end, 
56. Nothing] O nothing Pope,+, Cap. Charmian...me...enough Rowe et seq. 
Steev. Vo, nothing Ktly. 61. ZL haue] I’ve Pope, +, Dyce ii, iii. 


46. as she would wish it] CAPELL (i, 37): [Heath, p. 458] has propos’d, to 
read—you would ; but, in this, there is something indelicate: The sentence would be 
better amended (if amendment be necessary), by reading— Lower than she would, etc.; 
and this, perhaps, is intended in the words that the printers have given us.—[Collier’s 
MS gives the same reading that Heath conjectured ; Malone also conjectured it. 
Dyce asserts that none of them was ‘aware that the Messenger uses a cant phrase,’ 
inasmuch as Steevens writes that he ‘ once overheard a chambermaid say of her rival 
‘¢ that her legs were as thick as she could wish them.’ | 

54. I harried him] Murray (¥. £. D. s.v. Harry. 4.) : To worry, goad, tor- 
ment, harass; to maltreat, ill-use, persecute. 

57. The man hath seene some Maiesty] Mrs JAMESON (ii, 141) : Do we not 
fancy Cleopatra drawing herself up with all the vain consciousness of rank and 
beauty as she pronounces this last line? and is not this the very woman who cele- 
brated her own apotheosis,—who arrayed herself in the robe and diadem of the god- 
dess Isis, and could find no titles magnificent enough for her children but those of 
the Sun and the Moon ? 


188 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iv. 


| Scene LV.| 


Enter Anthony and O€tauia. 

Ant. Nay,nay Odfauia, not onely that, 
That were excufable, that and thoufands more 
Of femblable import, but he hath wag’d 
New Warres ’gainft Pompey. Made his will, and read it, 5 
To publicke eare, fpoke fcantly of me, 
When perforce he could not 
But pay me tearmes of Honour : cold and fickly 
He vented then moft narrow meafure:lent me, 
When the beft hint was giuen him : he not look’t, 10 
Or did it from his teeth. 


Scene IV. Rowe et seq. 6. of me,| of me ; Rowe et seq. (subs.) 
Athens. Rowe. A Room in An- 7. When perforce| And when at any 
tony’s House. Cap. time perforce Han. 
1-42. Om. Gar. 8. Honour :| honour, Rowe et seq. 
2, 3. that, That were] that,—that 9. then moft...meafure-lent me, \them, 
Were Mal. most narrow measure lent me; Rowe et 
5. Pompey.] Pompey, Ff. Pompey ; seq. 
Rowe et seq. 10. him.:]| Ff, Knt. 42, Rowe et cet. 
read it, | read it Rowe et seq. nol look’t | Ff, Knt, Coll. ii. had 


6, 7. /poke...not | Sep. line, Cap. et seq. lookt F,. had lookt ¥,F,. oer-look'd 
6. fcantly| scantily Theob.+, Varr. Rowe, Pope. mot ¢ook’t Thirlby, Theob. 
Ran. scant’ly Cap. et cet. (zot took zt Varr. Ran.) 


In Kemble’s Acting Copy this scene foliows and continues the next scene, Scene v, 
which is then transposed so as to follow Scene ii. Scene vii closes Act II. 

5. New Warres] DEIGHTON: That is, contrary to the agreement between us, 
and without asking my assent. 

5. Made his will, etc.] According to Plutarch (see 4ppendix), it was Antony’s 
Will which Czesar removed from the custody of the Vestal nuns ; after reading it him- 
self and noting ‘certain places worthy of reproach,’ Czesar ‘assembled all the Senate 
and read it before them all. Whereupon divers were marvellously offended.’ Of 
course there is some corruption in the text. Anthony could have no possible cause 
of complaint if Czsar chose to make his own Will and read it in public. The cor- 
ruption lies in the words ‘made his’ for which he who lists may easily substitute any 
words that will make the text conform to Plutarch.—Eb. 

5, 6. will, ...it,...of me,] THISELTON (p. 17) calls attention to these commas 
as indications of the ‘ impetuosity of Antony’s utterance.’ It is possible that Thisel- 
ton is right, but at the same time we must remember that no great dependence is 
to be placed on the punctuation of the Folio, which is somewhat remote from any 
authoritative contact with Shakespeare’s own hand.—ED. 

6. scantly] That is, slightingly. 

8-10. Honour: ...vented then. ..measure: .. . look’t] The changes intro- 
duced by Rowe in this impossible punctuation, and the change by him of ‘ vented 
then’ into ‘vented ¢zem,’ have been unanimously adopted by all succeeding editors. 


ACT II, Sc. iv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 189 


Ogtauz, Oh my good Lord, i2 
Beleeue not all, or if you muft beleeue, 
Stomacke not all. A more vnhappie Lady, 14 


13. all,] al/, Pope. 


Tolerable sense can be made even in the present text, with its present punctuation, 
until we come to the colon after ‘ measure,’ which leaves ‘lent me’ inexplicable, unless 
we suppose that it bears a meaning unknown elsewhere. KNIGHT alone, among edi- 
tors, retains the colon after ‘giuen him.’ In Booth’s Repriné there is a semi-colon 
after ‘measure,’ not a colon, as in my copy of F,.—Ep. 

Io, he not look’t] THIRLBy’s emendation, ‘ he not 4o0%’¢,’ which has been adopted 
by nearly all editors, is to be found, without comment, in Nichols (///s¢. ii, 228). It 
means, of course, that Anthony did not take the ‘best hint,’ and receives some con- 
firmation, albeit very slight, from the spelling in the Folio, where the apostrophe in 
*look’t,’ as an abbreviation of /ooked, is somewhat unusual. KNIGHT and COLLIER 
(ed. ii) are the only modern editors who adhere to the Folio. The former does not 
believe that the ‘ best hint’ is here referred to, but‘ on the contrary’ he says, ‘although 
it was hinted to Czesar when speaking that he should mention Antony with terms of 
honour, he lent him most narrow measure—cold and sickly. His demeanour is 
then more particularly described. He /ooked not upon the people as one who is 
addressing them with sincerity—he sfoke from his teeth, and not with the full utter- 
ance of the heart.’ COLLIER (ed. ii) retained /ook’¢ because, I suppose, it had not 
been changed by his MS corrector, who had, however, changed ‘not look’t’ to ‘ dzt 
look’t,’—an emendation which Collier did not adopt, because he doubted ‘if there 
were any confusion here, for what Antony means to say is apparent enough as the text 
stands : Czesar would not look to avoid taking the least hint, or if he did look, and took 
the hint, his praise was superficial and insincere.’ On this reading of Collier’s MS Cor- 
rector, DycE (Votes, p. 153) remarks that ‘it has not only great obscurity of expres- 
sion, but is also unsuited to what immediately follows: ‘ he but look’d, Or did it from 
his teeth’ I have little doubt,’ he adds, ‘that Thirlby’s much simpler emendation 
(which alters only a single letter) restores the genuine reading.’ Later, in his edition, 
Dyce is more emphatic and pronounces the emendation of Collier’s MS ‘little better 
than nonsense.’ Later still, in his Stvictures (p. 205) he criticises not the emendation 
of Collier’s MS, but Collier himself for following the Folio. ‘What,’ he asks, ‘could 
induce Mr Collier to adopt here, in his new edition, the ridiculous reading of the 
folio, which admits of nothing but a ridiculous explanation ?’—Anon. (Blackwood, 
Oct. 1853, p. 467; supposed to be Lerrsom): ‘We may be pretty sure that 
[Thirlby’s emendation] is the right reading, as it is assuredly the only one which 
makes sense.’—[Thirlby’s change is so trifling, while the gain is so marked, that I 
think it may be adopted without heinous disloyalty to the Folio.—ED. ] 

11. Or did it from his teeth] STEEVENS: Whether this means, as we now say, 
in spite of his teeth, or that he spoke through his teeth, so as to be purposely indis- 
tinct, 1 am unable to determine.—[Knight’s interpretation is to be found in the pre- 
ceding note ; Collier’s, which is virtually the same, is that ‘ what Cesar said in praise 
of Antony came from no nearer his heart than his teeth.’ Singer appositely quotes 
from the Adagia nonnulla in Withals’s Dictionarie... deutsed for the capacity of 
Children, 1616, p. 562: ‘Lingua amicus. A friend from the teeth outward.’ ] 

14. Stomacke] That is, resent; as in II, ii, 11. 


190 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT III, SC. iv. 


If this deuifion chance, ne’re ftood betweene 15 


Praying for both parts : 


The good Gods wil mocke me prefently, 
When I fhall pray:Oh bleffe my Lord,and Husband, 
Vndo that prayer, by crying out as loud, 


Oh bleffe my Brother. 


Husband winne, winne Brother, 20 


Prayes, and diftroyes the prayer, no midway 


’Twixt thefe extreames at all. 


16,17. Praying...me] One line, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 

Praying...prefently| One line, 

Var.’78, ’85, Mal. Var. ’21. 
17. The] And the Steev. Var.’03, ’13. 
prefently| Om. Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Var. ’73, Ran. 

18. pray] praying Rowe. 
Oh ... Husband] As quotation, 


Theob. et seq. (subs.) 

18. my Lord, and Husband,| my 
husband ! presently Cap. Var.’73. my 
husband ! and presently Ran. 

19. Vndo| And undo Ktly. And then 
undo Words. 

out | Om. Words. 

20. Oh... Brother| As quotation, 
Theob. 

21. midway] mid way Cap. ( Errata.) 


16,17. Praying ... presently] It is ‘infinitely distressing’ (as Sydney Smith 
would say) to note the attempts which have been here made to amend what is deemed 
the defective metre of these two fragmentary lines. That the emotion of the speaker 
should have here any influence is not to be for a moment considered; in all circum- 
stances Shakespeare should be made to know that lines must have five feet, and to 
attain this end his words are to be at will lengthened, or compressed, or even omitted 
altogether. Rowe and his followers read as one line, ‘ Praying for both parts: the 
good Gods will mock me,’ and omit ‘presently.’ STEEVENS, in 1778, runs the two 
lines into an interminable one of fourteen syllables, and is followed in the union 
of the lines by WALKER ( Crit. iii, 301), who, however, reduces the number of sylla- 
bles by omitting ‘good,’ and by reading (can it be conceived?) ‘praying’ as a 
monosyllable! (I had rather be a pagan, suckled in a prose outworn, than think 
heaven could be moved by fra’mg.) In 1793, Steevens reverts to the division of the 
Folio, but pieces out the second line with an and, ‘ And the good Gods,’ ete. Dycr 
follows Steevens, but rejects his zd, and substitutes instead, ‘ Swve the good Gods,’ 
etc. Finally, AspoTtr (§ 484), retaining the division of the Folio, refuses both 
Steevens’s aud and Dyce’s sure, and beautifully counteracts Walker’s irreverent 
pra’ng by a pious prolongation of ‘ good’: ‘ The gé | od géds | will méck | me prés | 
ently.’ The ‘vnhappie Lady’s’ broken heart and broken speech are all forgotten. 
—Ep. 

17. presently] This word, which means, of course, zzmediately, CAPELL transfers 
to the end of the next line, reading, ‘When I shall pray, O, d/ess my husband ! 
presently | Undo,’ etc. which is harmless enough, had he only explained the con- 
struction of ‘Undo,’—a difficulty which RANN, who followed him in transferring 
‘presently,’ observed and obviated. See Zext. Note 18.—ED. 

21, 22, no midway ..-. at all] STEEVENS: Compare King John, III, i, 331-6, 
where the situation and sentiments of Blanche resemble those of Octavia. —DEIGH- 
TON refers to the similar case of Volumnia in Corzolanus, V, iii, 106-9. 


ACT Ill, sc. iv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 191 


Ant. Gentle Odauia, 23 
Let your beft loue draw to that point which feeks 
Beft to preferue it : if I loofe mine Honour, 25 


I loofe my felfe : better I were not yours 

Then your fo branchleffe. But as you requefted, 
Your felfe fhall go between’s, the meane time Lady, 
Ile raife the preparation of a Warre 


Shall ftaine your Brother, make your fooneft haft, 30 
25, 26. loofe] lofe FF. 30. ftaine] strain Theob. Han. Cap. 
27. your| yours Ff et seq. stay Boswell, Coll. ii, iii (MS), Dyce ii, 


28. detween’s| Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, iil. stem Joicey (VV. & Qu. VII, xii, 
Wh. Sta. Glo. Cam. Jdetqveen us Cap. et 343, 1891). slack Anon. ap. Cam. 
cet. Brother| brother's Bailey. 


27. Then your so] MALONE: This is one of the many mistakes that have arisen 
from the transcriber’s ear deceiving him, your so and yours so being scarcely dis- 
tinguishable in pronunciation. See line 34, below. 

30. Shall staine your Brother] THEOBALD: But, sure, Antony, whose business 
here is to mollify Octavia, does it with a very ill grace: and ’tis a very odd way of 
satisfying her, to tell her the war, he raises, shall ‘stain,’ z. e. cast an odium upon her 
brother. I have no doubt, but we must read, with the addition only of a single letter 
—‘Shall s¢vaiz your brother ;’ z. ¢. shall lay him under constraints; shall put him 
to such shifts, that he shall neither be able to make a progress against, or to preju- 
dice me. Plutarch says, that Octavius, understanding the sudden and wonderful 
preparations of Antony, was astonished at it; for he himself was in many wants, and 
the people were sorely oppressed with grievous exactions.—JOHNSON : I do not see 
but ‘stain’ may be allowed to remain unaltered, meaning no more than shame or 
disgrace,—STEEVENS: So, in some anonymous stanzas among the poems of Surrey 
and Wyatt: ‘here at hand approacheth one Whose face will stazz you all.’ Again, 
in Shore's Wife, by Churchyard, 1593: ‘So Shore’s wife’s face made foule Browneta 
blush, As pearle s¢ayzes pitch, or gold surmounts a rush.’ Again, in Churchyard’s 
Charitie, 1595: ‘ Whose beautie s¢azwes the faire Helen of Greece..—MALONE: I 
believe a line betwixt these two has been lost, the purport of which probably was, 
‘unless I am compelled in my own defence, I will do no act that shal/ stain,’ etc. 
After Antony has told Octavia that she shall be a mediatrix between him and his 
adversary, it is surely strange to add that he will do an act that shall disgrace her 
brother.—RANN ingeniously reads ’stazz, and explains it as standing for szstazz, that 
is, ‘in defence of him.—BOswELL: Perhaps we should read: ‘Shall s¢ay your 
brother ;’ shall check and make him pause in his hostile designs.—SINGER: To 
‘stain’ is not here used for to shame, or disgrace, as Johnson supposed; but for to 
eclipse, extinguish, throw into the shade, to put out; from the Old French esteindre. 
In this sense it is used in all the examples quoted by Steevens.—STAUNTON agrees 
with Singer as to the meaning of ‘stain,’ but adds that ‘ stay, suggested by Boswell, 
is more accordant with the context, and may easily have been misprinted ‘‘ stain.” ’ 
—Dvyce (ed. i): If ‘stain’ be right, it is equivalent to—throw into the shade; in 
which sense the word was formerly very common; e. g. ‘She stains the ripest virgins 
of the age.’—Beaumont and Fletcher's Cupia’s Revenge, II, ii; ‘1 saw sixe gallant 


1g2 THE LTRAGEDIEVOr [ACT III, SC. iv. 


So your defires are yours. 31 
O&@. Thanks to my Lord, 
The Ioue of power make me moft weake, moft weake, 


You reconciler : Warres ’twixt you twaine would be, 34 
33. mofe ... weake,| although most 34. You] Your Ff. 

weak, Han. 

nymphes, I saw but one, One stain’d them all . . . They borrowed beames from her 


star-staining eyes.’—Lord Sterling’s Aurora, sig. C 4., ed. 1604.—WALKER ( Crit. 
iii, 301) quotes the Folio text, and asks, ‘What does this mean? Besides, would 
Antony speak thus to Octavia?’ Whereto, Lerrsom, Walker’s editor, replies in a 
footnote, ‘Two very natural questions! Is it too bold to read,—“ I'll raise 20 prepa- 
ration of war Z” assatl your brother’? The crept in from the line above, and 
expelled 20. ... Stain, strain, and stay are alike nonsense.’—INGLEBY (Sh. Her- 
meneutics, p. 96): Certainly had ‘strain’ been in the old text we should have been 
well satisfied with it. But while regarding that as facile princeps among the proposed 
substitutes, we hold it to be quite inferior to the word of the folio. Compromtse 
would bea dilution of ‘stain,’ in the sense we believe Shakespeare to have intended. 
—DEIGHTON quotes ‘ To dim his glory, and to stain the track Of his bright passage 
to the occident.’—ich. Z/: III, iii, 66; ‘Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and 
sun.’—Sonn, xxxv, 3.—Br. NICHOLSON (JV. & Qu. VIII, i, 182, 1892) : No change 
seems to me to be required. Antony proudly says that his preparation will so 
show beside Czesar’s that it will overpoweringly eclipse it or stain it, as also that it 
will stain the colour of Czsar’s wishes to Antony’s own. It will change or stain 
Czsar’s gules to the olive colour of peace. Antony’s greater preparation will so 
stain and colour Cesar and his purposes as to effect a total change in the latter; 
change them from thoughts of war to thoughts of the desirability and safety of peace. 
—[If we could but be perfectly sure that the effect on Czesar of Anthony’s staining 
would be to evoke thoughts of peace, and not of somewhat excusable anger, Dr 
Nicholson’s interpretation would be faultless and carry conviction. Unfortunately, 
however, prognostication is here doubtful, and ‘stain’ cannot but convey a meaning 
which is, to say the least, uncomfortable. Hence the struggles of the critics to soften 
it. But is there any need of softening it? Be it as offensive as it will, it still remains 
the word of the text. Anthony’s bearing towards Octavia is not deferential—hardly 
gentle. When he enters he is irritably dissenting from her, and we can see that he 
is providing for the speedy desertion of her, for which we were prepared, in the first 
hours after he was married, by his resolve to go to Egypt; where his pleasure lay.— 
II, iii, 43.—Eb.] 

31. So your desires are yours] That is, make the earliest haste, so that what 
you desire may become your own. 

34. You reconciler] WALKER (C77z. ii, 191) quotes this ‘ You’ in his list of 
instances where you and your have been confounded in the Folio, but MALONE had 
already pointed out that the error arose from a confusion by the ear, due to the prox- 
imity of the two r’s. See line 27, above. 

34. Warres ’twixt you twaine would be, etc.] HEATH (p. 458) : The sense 
seems to be, As you are joint masters of the world, which in your union is united, 
so wars between you give an image of the cleaving of that world, and you both 
endeavouring to solder that cleft with the carcases of those who will be slain in the 


ACT Ill, SC. v.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 193 


As if the world fhould cleaue,and that flaine men 35 
Should foader vp the Rift. 
Anth, When it appeeres to you where this begins, 
Turne your difpleafure that way, for our faults 
Can neuer be fo equall, that your loue 


Can equally moue with them. Prouide your going, 40 
Choofe your owne company, and command what coft 
Your heart he’s mind too. Exeunt. 42 


[Scene V7] 


Enter Enobarbus,and Eros. 
Eno. How now Friend Zyros? 
Eros. Ther’s ftrange Newes come Sir. 
Eno. What man ? 
Ero. Ca@far & Lepidus haue made warres vpon Pompey. 5 
Eno. This is old, what is the fucceffe ? 


36. foader] fodder FF ,, Rowe, Pope. war...success ?...wars...rtvalty. ...them; 


solder Theob. ...letters ... Pompey. ... him, ... inlarge... 
42. he’s] has Ff. confine. Han. Lines end, wfon...Cesar, 
Continue the scene. Rowe,+. Scene ...Pompey, ... him ...not...had...appeal, 
V. Cap. et seq. .--Death...confine. Ktly. 
The same. Another Room in the 5. warres| Warre ¥,. War EF, 
same. Cap. Rowe, +. 
1-25. Om. Gar. upon] on Han. 
1. Enter...] Enter...meeting. Cap. 6. old,] old; Pope. 
4. What] What, Rowe. what is| what’s Han, 


5-12. Ceefar ... Conjine.] Lines end, 


contest.—[Quoted with approval by Hupson.]—JOHNSON: The sense is, that war 
between Czsar and Antony would engage the world between them, and that the 
slaughter would be great in so extensive a commotion. 

6-12. This is old, .. . his Confine] CaPELL (i, 38): The mixture of prose and 
verse in this scene, is a blemish that cannot be remedy’d without the exercise of such 
liberties as are hardly justifiable in an editor: [Hanmer] has put the prose into 
measure ; but such measure as the ear will be startl’d with: it will run something 
better in the way that shall now be propos’d, first observing—that ‘ owe’ [in]. 11; 
see Johnson’s note] must go out, as being absolute nonsense: ‘Zo. Pho! this is 
old; What’s the success? | Zvo. Cesar, having made use of him in the wars | 
’Gainst Pompey, presently deny’d him rivalty; | Would not let him partake i’ the 
glory: And | Not resting here, accuses him of letters | He had formerly wrote [or, 
Wrote formerly] to Pompey : seizes him | On his appeal ; so the poor thirdis up, | ’Till 
death enlarge his confine. |’ If the publick can relish it thus, it is at their service : 
and, to speak the truth, they should relish it; for, independent of other consider- 
ations, the prose that is given them in the text is every whit as offensive to the ear 
as even this verse.—[As given in the 7ext. Motes, HANMER’S division of these lines 
is almost unintelligible, owing to his textual emendations, which must be followed up 


13 


194 DELLE AILCA GLAD) ENO LG [ACT MT SC. Ve 


Eros. Cefar hauing made vfe of him in the warres Y, 
’gainft Pompey: prefently denied him riuality, would not 
let him partake in the glory of the aétion, and not refting 


here, accufes him of Letters he had formerly wrote to 10 
Pompey. Vpon his owne appeale feizes him, fo the poore 
third is vp, till death enlarge his Confine. 12 
7. in the] z’th’ Han. Han. 
8. Pompey «] Pompey, Pope. 10. he] which he Han. 
riuality| rivalty Rowe ii, Pope, wrote| written Han. 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. 11. Pompey.] Pompey; Cap. et seq. 
g. in the] of the Rowe, Pope, Han. (subs. ) 
of the of F,. owne]| Om. Cap. 
the action, and not|\ them; Not Seizes] he seizes Han, 


in the Zext. Motes as they occur. The subject is not important enough to have the 
space allotted to it which a reprint of the whole passage would have required. ]— 
Deuius (Sh. Jhrbuch, V, 268) : In this Scene, the first speeches between Enobarbus 
and Eros, which are historical merely, to keep the audience abreast of the times, are in 
prose, and rise to blank verse only when Enobarbus, in words, which are humour- 
ous yet tinged with feeling, apostrophises the world which must now throw all its 
food to the two surviving triumvirs. 

6. successe ?] STAUNTON: That is, What follows? What is the upshot ? ~ 

8. presently] ScumipT (Zex.) includes this ‘ presently’ in his list of examples 
meaning not immediately, but shortly. Of course, the decision will largely depend 
on our estimate of Czesar’s character. I prefer to think that Czesar acted with his 
accustomed promptitude, and, as soon as Lepidus ceased to be of any use to him, 
instantly deposed him. In Rich. //7.: IV, ii, 26, there is a striking instance of 
the use of ‘ presently’ in the sense of zmmediately, where we should assuredly expect 
the meaning shortly : Richard demands an immediate consent of Buckingham to the 
murder of the two young princes; Buckingham pleads for delay, for ‘some breath, 
some little pause’ and concludes with the promise ‘I will resolve you herein pres- 
ently.’ Assuredly, this can mean nothing else but shortly, and yet the Qq, which a 
majority of the editors believe have preserved the purer text, read ‘immediately.’ 
—Ep. 

8. riuality] JoHNsoN: That is, equal rank.—STEEVENS: So, in Hamlet, Horatio 
and Marcellus are styled by Bernardo ‘the rivals’ of his watch. 

11. Vpon his owne appeale] JOHNSON: To ‘appeal,’ in Shakespeare, is to 
accuse; Czsar seized Lepidus without any other proof than Czesar’s accusation.— 
[When Capell omitted ‘own,’ it is to be feared that he failed to understand the con- 
text which Johnson has so justly interpreted. —ED. ] 

II, 12. the poore third is vp] ScumipT (Lex. s. v. 6) defines ‘up’ in this 
sentence as equivalent to ‘in confinement ;’ wherein he has been virtually followed 
by one or two editors who have defined it as equivalent to shut up. Schmidt him- 
self had followed Delius, as is so often his wont; Delius thus translates the phrase, 
‘der arme Triumvir ist lebenslanglich eingesteckt,’ whereto he was led, I think, as 
indeed were all the others, by the second clause, ‘till death enlarge his confine.’ 
But I doubt that this is the meaning here. To me it rather conveys the meaning of 
jinished, done, as in the current phrase, ‘the game is up.’ The phrases, ‘the 


ACT III, SC. v.] 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 195 


Eno. Then would thou hadft a paire of chapsn o more, 13 
and throw betweene them all the food thou haft, they’le 


grinde the other. 


13-15. Zhen...Anthony ?] Lines end, 
more... hast... Antony ? Han. Cap. et 
seq. 

13. Then...hadft| Then, World ! thou 
hast Han. Cap. Mal. et seq. 


Where’s Anthony? 15 


Warb. Var..’73 et seq. 

15. the other] each other Han. Ran. 
Coll. one th’ other Heath. the one the 
other Cap. Mal. et seq. 

Where’s| Where ts Han Coll. Wh. 


chapsn 0 more,| chaps, no more, Hal. Ktly. 


Theob. Johns. chaps, no more; Han. 


Parliament is up,’ ‘the Court is up,’ quoted by Zhe Century Dictionary, are hardly 
parallel, inasmuch as there may be the subaudition in them of rising up from their 
seats when the sesstow is over. ‘ Till death enlarge his confine’ may merely refer to 
no other confinement than the muddy vesture of decay which hems us all in.—Ep. 

13. Then would thou hadst a paire of chapsn o more] Since the days of 
MALONE’S edition in 1790, the list is unbroken of editors who have accepted HAN- 
MER’S emendation, ‘Then, wor/d.’ Hupson explains that ‘a pair of chaps’ is 
‘simply an upper and a lower jaw’; and MALONE that ‘no more’ means ‘and only 
a pair.’ JOHNSON paraphrases the whole sentence, ‘ Caesar and Antony will make 
war on each other, though they have the world to prey upon between them.’ 

14. throw betweene them all the food, etc.] Hratu (p. 458): I apprehend 
this reflection is intended as a satire on the insatiable and incompatible nature of 
ambition, which no acquisitions can content, nor any considerations can reconcile to 
endure a partner. 

14, 15. they’le grinde the other] In referring to the emendation, ‘they’ll grind 
the one the other,’ Lerrsom (Walker, Cv¢. ii, 259, footnote) observes that it ‘seems 
to be the joint property of Capell and Johnson.’ Johnson assuredly proposed it in 
his edition published in 1765. Capell’s edition (in which the emendation appears 
in the text printed in black letter as an indication that it is not in the original) 
is undated, but his Preface is dated 1767; and in a note on p. 18 of his Jztvo- 
duction, he gives the dates at which his volumes went irregularly to the press: ‘the 
first sheet of this work,’ he says, ‘(being the first of volume 2) went to the press in 
September, 1760: and this volume was follow’d by volume 8 [the volume contain- 
ing the present play], 4, 9,1, 6, and 7; the last of which was printed off in August, 
1765.’ Guided by this note, I have hitherto uniformly assumed that vol. 8 was 
printed in 1761, four years before Johnson’s edition. But Capell nowhere says that 
his volumes were issued in the years they were printed; hence, for aught we can 
tell, they may have all appeared on the same day in 1766 or 1767, a full year lag of 
Johnson’s. ‘The fact, therefore, appears to be that, as regards the present emen- 
dation, to Capell belongs the priority of devising and of printing, and to Johnson 
the priority of publication, and it is publication that confers the prize and decides the 
ownership. Unfortunately for both critics, however, it is to be feared that their claims 
may be somewhat shorn of their glory. Heath’s Revisal of Shakespeare's Text 
appeared in 1765, before either Johnson’s edition or Capell’s,—both refer to it. On 
p- 458, Heath remarks that there seemed to be an error in the present phrase which 
‘ may be thus corrected, “ They’ll grind ome th’ other,’”’’ which certainly contains the 
germ, afterwards expanded by both Capell and Johnson into ‘¢he ome the other;’ 


196 THE TRAGEDIE, OF [ACURIIIASCH Ve 


Eros. He’s walking in the garden thus, and fpurnes 16 
The rufh that lies before him. Cries Foole Lepidus, 
And threats the throate of that his Officer, 
That murdred Pompey. 
Eno. Our great Nauies rig’d. 20 
Eros. For Italy and Ce/ar,more Domitius, 
My Lord defires you prefently : my Newes 
I might haue told heareafter. 
Eno.’ Twillbe naught, but let it be : bring me to Azthony. 


Lyvos. Come Sir, Exeunt. 25 
16. garden thus,| garden thus; 18. threats] threat Han. ii (misprint.) 
Theob.+,Cap. garden—thus ; Var.’78 20. Mauies| Navie’s FF, Navy's ¥,. 
et seq. (subs, ) 21. Ceefar, more] Cesar ; more Rowe. 
17. Cries] Crys, Rowe. Cesar. More, Johns. et seq. 
Foole Lepidus] As quotation, 24. du¢... Anthony] Separate line, 
Theob. Han. Cap. et seq. 


their ‘joint property’ turns out, therefore, to be the priceless asset of the definite 
article. —Eb. 

16. in the garden thus] Wherever in Capell’s text there appears a dagger 
inserted between words or phrases, it is an indication of some action to be taken by 
the speaker. For instance, where Cleopatra says to the Messenger, ‘ there is gold, 
and here My bluest veins to kiss,’ the lines thus appear in Capell’s text: ‘there is 
gold and here + My bluest veins to kiss,’ indicating that Cleopatra extends one hand 
with gold and the other to be kissed; it would be truly deplorable were an actress to 
suppose that Egypt’s queen uses her feet on this occasion, and against this easy error 
Capell kindly does all he can to protect her. Inthe present line, after ‘garden’ 
Capell unsheaths a dagger, which means, I suppose, that Eros imitates Anthony’s 
impatient strides. Here the little dagger is not too intrusive, albeit the end would 
have been gained by a dash, which STEEVENS, possibly taking the hint from Capell, 
adopted, and has been followed herein by all editors ever since. —ED, 

21. more Domitius] JoHNnson: I have something more to tell you, which I 
might have told at first and delayed my news. Antony requires your presence.— 
[In a note on ‘Conlord,’ II, vii, 6, I stated that the ignorant haphazard guesses of 
George Gould would possibly cumber these pages no more. If anything be needed 
to justify this decision, a note on ‘Domitius’ by that critic will supply it. It is as 
follows: ‘ This is a curious misrendering of manuscript, as there are only Eros and 
Enobarbus, whom he is addressing, on the scene, and as there is no Domitius in the 
play. Eros simply tells Enobarbus that Antony is waiting for him,’ There is no 
need to moralise the spectacle of attempts to amend the language of Shakespeare by 
one who has not even read over the Dramatis Persone in any common edition. As 
far as George Gould is concerned, in these pages, the rest is silence.—ED. ] 

24. ’Twillbe naught] CAPELL (i, 38): This has no relation to Eros’ last words, 
but means,—the event will be naught ; and is spoke with a look of much thought- 
fulness, and after a silence of some length. 


ACT Il], sc. vi.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 197 


[Scene VT.] 


Enter Agrippa, Mecenas,and Cefar. 
Cef. Contemning Rome he ha’s done all this, & more 
In Alexandria : heere’s the manner of’t : 
V’th’Market-place on a Tribunall filuer’d, 


Cleopatra and himfelfe in Chaires of Gold 5 
Were publikely enthron’d : at the feet, fat 
Ce/arion whom they call my Fathers Sonne, 7 


Scene V. Rowe,+. 
et seq. 

Rome. Rowe. The Palace in Rome. 
Theob. A Room in Cesar’s house. 
Cap. 

1. Enter...] Enter Cesar, Agrippa, 
and Meczenas. Rowe. 
2. ha’s| has |e as 


Scene VI. Cap. 


3. manner matter FF , 
Han. 
of’t] Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. of z¢ 
Ff et cet. 
4. ona] onaaF,, 
7. Cefarion] Ce/ario Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Fathers| father F.,. 


Rowe, Pope, 


2, 3. Contemning Rome... of’t] CAPELL (i, 38) : The punctuation of former 
editions, old and new, sets this line and the next in a light that is not true, the truth 
of it being as follows. Czsar enters in converse with some to whom he has been 
giving various instances of Antony’s ill behaviour, and goes on to another and greater 
that happen’d at Alexandria; and, in ent’ring upon it, puts into their hands the dis- 
patch he receiv’d it by.—[Of Capell’s punctuation of this passage no note appears to 
have ever been taken ; possibly because, being a matter of Capell’s individual prefer- 
ence, it is impossible to gainsay it. It is like Henderson’s reading ‘many a time,— 
and oft on the Rialto.’ Capell thus reads: ‘Contemning Rome, he has done all this: 
And more ; | In Alexandria,—here’s the manner of it,— | I’the market-place,’ etc. 
(In Capell’s version, which he made for Garrick, the lines read : ‘ Contemning Rome, 
he did all this: And once, | In Alexandria,—here’s the manner of it,’ etc.) Surely 
this punctuation has much to commend it.—ED. ] 

3. In Alexandria, etc.] See Plutarch, Appendix. 

6. at the feet] This is ‘at ¢hecr feet’ in Collier’s Monovolume, 1853, which is 
supposed to contain all changes made by his MS. The change is trifling and pos- 
sible.—ED. 

7. my Fathers Sonne] Julius Cesar was the great uncle of Octavius. That he 
is here called his ‘father’ is, possibly, due to a passage in Plutarch’s Life of Brutus 
(p. 1063, ed. 1595; p. 123, ed. Skeat) where we find that Octavius Czesar ‘was the 
sonne of Iulius Caesars Nece, whom he had adopted for his sonne, and made his 
heire, by his last will and testament. But when Iulius Cesar his adopted father 
was slaine, he was,’ etc. At the first glance, it seems as though there were here two 
separate legal acts: an adoption as a son and the making of an heir ; in reality there 
was but one. It was only by Czsar’s Will that Octavius became an adopted son, 
and this was evidently so unusual and doubtful a process that Octavius afterward had 
the adoption confirmed by the curise. ‘The phrase of ‘‘ adoption by testament”’ 
(Cic. Brutus, 58) seems,’ says Prof. GEORGE Lone (Smith’s Dict. Greek and Roman 
Antiquities, s.v. Adoptio) ‘to be rather a misapplication of the term ; for though a 


198 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACP MIL, SCivie 


And all the vnlawfull iffue, that their Luft 8 
Since then hath made betweene them. Vnto her, 
He gaue the ftablifhment of Egypt, made her IO 


Of lower Syria, Cyprus,Lydia, abfolute Queene. 
Mece. ‘This in the publike eye? 
Cefar. Vth’common fhew place, where they exercife, 
His Sonnes hither proclaimed the King of Kings, 
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia 15 
He gaue to Alexander. To Ptolomy he affign’d, 
Syria, Silicia, and Pheenetia : fhe 


In th’abiliments of the Goddeffe Z/s 18 
11. Of...Lydia] One line, Rowe ii 14. proclaimed] proclaim’d FF. et 
et seq. seq. 
Lydia| Lybia Upton, Johns. the King] Ff. the kings Rowe 
12. zn] zs Ff. et seq. 
13. /hew place| shew-place Rowe. 16. Ptolomy] Ptolemy F,F,. 
exerctfe, | exercise. Theob. he] Om. Han. 
14. hither] Ff. were there Rowe, 17. Phenetia| Phenicia Ff. 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. ke there 18. th’abiliments| the habiliments 
Johns. et cet. Rowe ii et seq. 


man or woman might by testament name a heres, and impose the condition of the 
heres taking the name of the testator or testatrix, this so-called adoption could not 
produce the effects of a proper adoption. It could give to the person so said to be 
adopted, the name or property of the testator or testatrix, but nothing more. Niebuhr 
(Lectures, vol. ii, p. 100) speaks of the testamentary adoption of C. Octavius by 
C. Julius Cesar, as the first that he knew of; but the passage of Cicero in the Brutus 
and another passage (Ad Hirt. viii, 3) show that other instances had occurred before. 
A person on passing from one gens into another, and taking the name of his new 
familia, generally retained the name of his old gens also, with the addition to it 
of the termination -azs (Cic. ad Adz. ili, 20, and the note of Victorius). Thus, 
C. Octavius, afterwards the Emperor Augustus, upon being adopted by the testa- 
ment of his uncle, the dictator, assumed the name of Caius Julius Cesar Octavianus ; 
but he caused the adoption to be confirmed by the curiz. .As to the testamentary 
adoption of C. Octavius, see Drumann, Geschichte Roms. i, 337, and the references 
there given.’ Were there any proof that Shakespeare had ever read Dion Cassius, I 
should not have referred to Plutarch as the possible source of this use of ¢ father.’ 
Dion Cassius speaks over and over again of Julius Cesar as the father of Octavius. 
—ED. 

11. Lydia] Upton (p. 243) changed ‘Lydia’ to Zydza, on the authority of the 
original Greek of Plutarch. But Shakespeare merely followed North’s Zrans/ation. 
M. MASON calls attention to line 76 of this scene where ‘ Bochus’ is called ‘the 
King of Lybia,’ thereby proving that ‘the present reading [Lydia] is right.’ 

14. Sonnes hither proclaimed] In ‘hither’ there is another mishearing. 

18. In th’abiliments] Murray (WV. £. D.): Obsolete form of Habiliment, used 
in all the senses, but especially in those of warlike munitions and accoutrements, 


ACT Ill, Sc. vi] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 199 


That day appeer’d, and oft before gaue audience, 
As ’tis reported fo. 20 
Mece. Wet Rome be thus inform’d. 
Agri. Who queazie with his infolence already, 
Will their good thoughts call from him. 
Cefar. The people knowes it, 
And haue now receiu’d his accufations. 25 
Agri. Who does he accufe ? 
Cesar. Cefar,and that hauing in Cicilie 
Sextus Pompetus {poil’d, we had not rated him 
His part o’th’Ifle. Then does he fay, he lent me 
Some fhipping vnreftor’d. Laftly, he frets 30 
That Lepidus of the Triumpherate, fhould be depos’d, 
And being that, we detaine all his Reuenue. 


Agri. Sir,this fhould be anfwer’d. 33 
20. reported fo] reported, fo Ff et seq. 27. and that] for that Han. 
(except Var. ’21.) Cicilie] Szcily Rowe. 

21-23. Let...him.] Lines end, thus... 31, 32. That... Reuenue| Lines end, 
imsolence...him. Han. Cap. Var.’78 et Triumvirate ... detain ... revenue. Rowe 
seq. (except Knt.) et seq. 

22. Agri. | Om. Han. 31. Triumpherate,| Triumvirate, Ff. 

24,25. The...receiu’d | One line, Pope triumvirate Rowe ii et seq. 
et seq. 32. And being that,| F,, Rowei. And 

24. knowes| know FF, et seq. being that ¥F,. And being, that Rowe 

26. Who] Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Hal. ii, Pope, Han. and, being that, Var.’21. 
whom Ff et cet. and, being, that Theob. et cet. 

does] do's FF, Rowe i. 33. anfwerd | anfwerd¥ ,. anfwered 

27. Czefar,] Cesar ; Theob. Warb. et FF, Rowe i. 

seq. 


things which fitted out or made able for war.—Inin. (s. v. Habiliment, 4 plural) : 
The apparel, vestments or garments appropriate to any office or occasion. (In this 
sense initial 4 has always prevailed; the connection with ad/e, ability, being less 
obvious, and that with modern French adit, habcllement more so.) 

30, 31. he frets That Lepidus of the Triumpherate, should be depos’d] 
See II, iii, 30, where Abbott and Franz are quoted, who would explain this ‘of’ as 
grammatically following ‘should be deposed.’ This use of ‘of’ after ‘depose’ is 
the accepted idiom ; see the examples in the WV. Z. D. (s.v. depose, ¢ 4, fb). At the 
same time it may be observed from the punctuation of the Ff (nowhere followed since 
Rowe, ed. ii), that the compositor did not recognize this idiom, but supposed the 
sense to be, as it is quite possible it may be, ‘he frets that Lepidus, he of the Tri- 
umvirate, should be deposed.’ —Ep. 

32. And being that, we detaine] The 7Zext. Notes reveal the various punctu- 
ations to which these words have been subjected, without, it must be acknowledged, 
greatly affecting the sense. The most idiomatic appears to be that of THEOBALD, 
adopted by the majority of editors. ApBort’s remark (§ 404, quoted at IT, ii, 42) 
then applies, which explains ‘ being’ as equivalent to 7¢ being so. 


200 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. vi. 


Cefar. Tis done already ,and the Meffenger gone: 
I haue told him Lepidus was growne too cruell, 35 
That he his high Authority abus’d, 
And did deferue his change : for what I haue conquer’d, 
I grant him part : but then in his Armenia, 
And other of his conquer’d Kingdoms, I demand the like 

Mec. Hee’ neuer yeeld to that. 40 

Cef. Nor muft not then be yeelded to in this. 

Enter O€tauia with her Traine. 


Oda. Haile Ce/ar, and my L. haile moft deere Ce/ar. 

Cefar. That euer I fhould call thee Caft-away. 

Oégta. You haue not call’d me fo, nor haue you caufe. 45 
Ce/. Why haue you ftoln vpon vs thus?you come not 


Like Ce/ars Sifter, 
34. the] his Ff, Rowe,+. a Coll. ’53. 


The wife of Anthony 47 
39. the like] the like. F , et seq. 


35. 1 haue told] I told Rowe ii,+, 
Var.’73. ve told Dyce ii, iii 
36. he his] his Ff. 
37. change: for] 
chance. For Rowe. 
+, Var. 73. 
I haue| I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, 


chance for Ff. 
change. For Pope, 


iii. 

38. Ais] this Han. ii. 

39. And.../]| Separate line, Rowe et 
seq. 


40. neuer| ne’er Theob. ii, Warb. 
41. muft not] must he Pope, Theob. 
Han Warb. 
42. with her Traine.] with Attend- 
ants. Rowe. Om. Cap. 
43. my L.| my Lord FF. 
46. haue you| haft thou Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. 
upon us| upon me Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. 
come] came Ff, Rowe. 


34. Messenger] WALKER ( Vers. 200) scans this word as a ‘ quasi-disyllable.’ 
Does there not lie in this ‘quasi’ a confession of weakness, nay, timidity? What 
honest man who loves the music of his English tongue would openly assert that we 
must adopt, in poetry (of all loves!), such words as messgers, passgers ? ABBOTT 
(§ 468) follows Walker and observes that ‘any unaccented syllable of a poly- 
syllable may be sometimes softened and almost ignored,’ and would fain have us 
imagine that the tripping dactyl ‘messenger’ is softened when uttered as a grim 
spondee, messger.—ED. 

42. with her Traine] CAPELL omitted these words because, I presume, he noted 
that Czesar says to Octavia ‘you are come A market-maid to Rome ;’ in this omission he 
was followed by every editor down to Collier, who revives the present stage-direction 
and remarks, ‘there can be no possible reason for following the example of modern 
editors by omitting these words. It must have been a small train; she had not ‘an 
army for an usher,” as appears by what follows, but she was not wholly unattended, 
according to the practice of the stage when the Folio was printed.’ 

43. Haile Cesar, and my L.] DEIGHTON: Her salutation is to him not only as 
Cesar, ruler of Rome, but as one to whom as the head of her family she owes 
allegiance. 

47. The wife of Anthony, etc.] Corson (p. 296): The extravagance of Czesar’s 
language is evidently designed to exhibit his insincerity. 


ACT 111, sc. vi.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 201 


Should haue an Army for an Vfher, and 48 
The neighes of Horfe to tell of her approach, 
Long ere fhe did appeare. The trees by’th’way 50 


Should haue borne men, and expe¢tation fainted, 
Longing for what it had not. Nay, the duft 

Should haue afcended to the Roofe of Heauen, 
Rais’d by your populous Troopes: But you are come 


A Market-maid to Rome, and haue preuented 55 
The oftentation of our loue ; which left vnfhewne, 
Is often left vnlou’d : we fhould haue met you 57 


50. bth] F,. by th’ FF. by the Cap. Steev. Var. ’03, 713. 


Cap. et seq. 57. left] felt Sing. conj. Huds, 
51. borne] F,. born ¥F,, Rowe, Pope, vnlou'd | unprized or uncared for 
Han. Cap. or unknown Bailey. 


56. oftentation] ostent Theob. Han. 


56. The ostentation] THEOBALD: I dare say the poet wrote: ‘ The ostent,’ 7. ¢. 
the shewing, token, demonstration of our love; and he uses it both in these accept- 
ations, and likewise to signify osten¢ation. The Alexandrine therefore is wholly 
unnecessary. [Theobald here gives examples of ostent from the Mer. of Ven. and 
Hen. V. STEEVENS appropriated this emendation of Theobald, even to the illus- 
trations from the Mer. of Ven.and Hen. V., these, he calmly remarks, ‘ sufficiently 
authorize [osten?] the slight change I have made.’ Not unnaturally, WALKER was 
thus misled when (C7?z. iii, 302) he made the following note]: ‘Steevens, perceiv- 
ing the defect in the verse, reads,—ostent,; which word, however, is always pro- 
nounced by Shakespeare os¢ént ; neither am I sure that he would have used it in this 
sense. I suspect that the true reading is ostention (properly ostension). This is 
nearer to the common text. Shakespeare is continually coining words from the 
Latin,’ 

57. Is often left vnlou’d] Corier (ed. ii): ‘Is often eld unlov’d,’ says the 
MS ; but with doubtful fitness—SINGER (S%. Vind. p. 293): The word felt, by a 
common accident at press, may have been jumbled into ‘left,’ consisting of the same 
letters.—ANON, (Blackwood, Oct. 1853, p. 467): If either of these emendations were 
adopted, we should require to read, ‘is often felt 2/oving, and this the measure will 
not permit. We therefore stand by the old text, the meaning of which we conceive to 
be—love which is left unshown is often left wxreturned.cSTAUNTON: With more 
likelihood we should read, ‘Is often left wzpr7x’d.’ ‘Unlov’d’ isa very problemati- 
cal expression here, and appears to have been partly formed by the compositor from the 
word ‘love’ in the preceding line.—Hupson [adopting Singer’s fe/¢]: The passage 
is commonly so pointed as to make ‘ which,’ referring to ‘ love,’ the subject of zs felt; 
whereas it should be the clause itself,—‘ which Jdezzg left unshown,’ or ‘the leaving 
of which unshown.’—Corson (p. 297) : ‘ Is often left unloved’ means, deprived of its 
character as love.-—ScHMIDT (Lex. s. v. Unloved) : That is, not felt ; 20 dove a Jove being 
a similar phrase, as, for instance, fo think a thought ; compare ‘ what ruins are in me 
. .. byhim not ruined?’ Com. Err. II, i, 96. ‘the want that you have wanted.’ Lear, 
I, i, 282.—[The meaning of ‘left unloved’ may be, as Schmidt says, ‘ not felt,’ but the 


202 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act Ii, 'SG.vi 


By Sea, and Land, fupplying euery Stage 58 
With an augmented greeting. . 
Oda. Good my Lord, . 60 


To come thus was I not conftrain’d, but did it 
On my free-will. My Lord Marke Anthony, 
Hearing that you prepar’d for Warre, acquainted 
My greeued eare withall - whereon I begg’d 


His pardon for returne. 65 
Cef. Which foone he granted, 

Being an abftract ’tweene his Luft,and him. 67 
62. On] Of Coll. ’53. 67. abftrac?| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, 
64. greeued | grieving Ff, Rowe,+, Del. obstruction Ktly. obstacle Cart- 

Cap. Var. ’73. wright. obstruct Theob. et cet. 


learned German is, I think, far astray when he holds the present phrase to be an 
instance of the common construction of a verb with its cognate accusative; nor are 
either of the examples which he quotes parallels to the present phrase. He was 
misled, I think, by the jingle of the words. Adriana asks, ‘ what ruins are there in 
me which cannot be found to have been made ruins by him?’ So, too, Cordelia 
deserves to experience the want of that affection in which she had herself been 
wanting. In what respect are these two examples parallel in construction to ‘the 
ostentation of love which when left unshown is not felt’? Of course, in the three 
paraphrases just given, cognate accusatives cannot be found, and for the simple reason 
that they do not exist in the original sentences; herein lay Dr Schmidt’s error. In 
the interpretation of the present phrase it seems tome that there has been a mis- 
apprehension of the person by whom the love is felt. The generally accepted mean- 
ing seems to be that if there is no expression of love, love will soon cease to exist. 
This, however, implies the possibility that Czesar’s love for his ‘ dearest sister’ might 
grow cold, which is hardly an expression of deep fraternal feeling. It amounts 
almost to a threat. Whereas, Cesar is pleading tenderly for himself, with gentle 
reproaches because Octavia has given him no chance to show his love for her, and 
urges that if there is no demonstration of his love she will soon cease to care whether 
he loves her or not, his love will be no longer prized ; it becomes unvalued, ‘ unloved.’ 
—ED.] 

65. pardon] ScumipT (Zex.): Sometimes almost equivalent to leave, permission. 

67. an abstract] THEOBALD: If Mr Pope or any other of the editors understand 
this [‘abstract’], I’ll willingly submit to be taught the meaning; but till then, I 
must believe, the Poet wrote, ‘an odstruct,’ 7. e. his wife being an obstruction, a bar, 
to the prosecution of his pleasures with Cleopatra. And I am the rather convinced 
that this is the true reading, because Mr Warburton started the emendation too, 
unknowing that I had meddled with the passage.—[ Warburton in his edition made 
no allusion to Theobald, but set forth the emendation as wholly his own, while 
repeating Theobald’s very words in defining ods¢ruct. |—STEEVENS : I am by no means 
certain that this change [oéstrzct] was necessary. Henley pronounces it to be ‘ need- 
less, and that it ought to be rejected, as perverting the sense.’ One of the meanings 
of abstracted is—separated, disjoined ; and therefore our poet, with his usual licence, 


ACT Ill, SC. vi.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 203 


Oda. Do not fay fo, my Lord. 68 
Cef. I haue eyes vpon him, 
And his affaires come to me on the wind:wher is he now? 70 


Octa. My Lord,in Athens. 

Cefar. No my moft wronged Sifter , Cleopatra 
Hath nodded him to her. He hath giuen his Empire 
Vp to a Whore, who now are leuying 


The Kings o’th’earth for Warre. He hath affembled, 75 
70. And... wind | One line, Rowe et 74. who now are| and now they re 
seq. Words. 
wher ts he| Where, say you, he ts are] ts Cap. conj. Ran. 
Cap. 75-83. He...Scepters| Om. Gar. 
71. zn] he ts im Han. 75. He] She Cap. conj. Ran. 
74. who] they Coll. MS, Ktly. affembled | diffembled ¥ ¥ ,. 


might have used it for a disjunctive. 1 believe there is no such substantive as 
obstruct ; besides, we say, an obstruction Zo a thing, but not dJefwee one thing and 
another. As Mr Malone, however, is contented with Dr Warburton’s reading, I 
have left it in our text—KnicHT: Although ‘abstract’ may be used with sufficient 
licence, it gives us the meaning which the poet would express, that Octavia was 
something separating Anthony from the gratification of his desires. It is better 
to hold to the original, seeing that Shakespeare sometimes employs words with a 
meaning peculiar to himself. His boldness may not be justified by example, —but 
his meaning has always reference to the original sense of the word.—SINGER: An 
abstract between is surely nonsense.—COLLIER (ed. ii): ‘ Abstract’ —a mere mis- 
print, which is set right in the MS. [2.e. by odstruct.]|—DeE.ius: ‘Abstract’ is 
equivalent to abbreviation, abridgement, shortening, and refers to the ‘pardon for 
return.’ Anthony gladly granted Octavia’s return to Rome, because therein lay an 
abridgement or curtailing of the hindrances between his lust and him; that is, 
between the lovers now separated by Octavia’s presence. The majority of editors 
refer ‘abstract’ to Octavia, instead of properly to ‘ which.’—ScHMIDT (Lex. s. v. 
Abstract) : That is, the shortest way for him and his desires, the readiest opportunity 
to encompass his wishes.—[To me, Delius’s definition of ‘ abstract,’ with its reference 
to ‘ which,’ carries conviction ; it is justly drawn from the strict meaning of the word. 
Schmidt’s paraphrase is weak and inferior to that of Delius, from which it is, not 
improbably, derived. I cannot find ‘abstract,’ as here used, in the 4. Z. D., of 
obstruct, Dr Murray says, ‘not otherwise known’ than here in Theobald’s emendation. 
In a choice between a word coined by Shakespeare and one coined by Theobald, ! 
prefer the former, even were it as dark as ignorance.—ED. | 

70, 71. wher is he now? My Lord, in Athens] Inasmuch as this is printed as 
one line since the days of Rowe, albeit lacking a syllable, WALKER (C7. ii, 145) 
conjectured that at the end of the line Cxsar exclaims Wo (in addition to the ‘No’ 
beginning line 72). Walker adds, ‘ The omission of a word or words at the end of 
a line, not altogether unfrequent in the Folio, appears to have happened oftener than 
usual in the latter part of this play.’ 

74, 75. who now are leuying ... He hath] Cape ut (i, 38): The lines should 
be read thus, ‘who now zs levying... Ske hath.’—MALonE: That is, which two 


persons now are levying, etc. 


204 THE GRACE DIE VOL, 


[ACT IN, SC. vi. 


Bochus the King of Lybia, Archilaus 76 


Of Cappadocia, Philadelphos King 


Of Paphlagonia : the Thracian King Adudlas, 
King Mauchus of Arabia, King of Pont, 


Herod of Jewry, Mithridates King 80 
Of Comageat, Polemen and Amintas, 
The Kings of Mede, and Licoania, 
With a more larger Lift of Scepters. 
Oégta. Aye me moft wretched, 
That haue my heart parted betwixt two Friends, 85 
That does affli€t each other. (breaking forth 
Ce/-Welcom hither : your Letters did with-holde our 
Till we perceiu’d both how you were wrong led, 
And we in negligent danger : cheere your heart, 89 


76-82. Lybia... Licoania] Libya;... 
Cappadocia ,...Paphlagonia ;...Adallas ; 
.. Arabia ;...Medes ;... Jewry ;...Coma- 
gene, ... Lycaonia ; Cap. 

76. Bochus] Bocchus Theob. 

Archilaus] Archelaus Theob. 

78. Adullas] Ada//as Rowe. 

79. Mauchus] Malichus Rowe. Mail- 
chus Theob. 

King] the King Ktly. 

81. Comageat | Comagene Rowe. Com- 

agené Ktly. 
Polemen] Polemon Theob. 
Amintas] Amyntas Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. 
82, 83. The... With a] One line, Steev. 


82. The... Licoanta] Of Lycaonia ; 
and the King of Mede. Ran. 

‘ings| King Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. 
Licoania] Lycaonia Ff. 

83. more] Om. Han. Cap. 

84. Aye] Ff. 4h Han. Cap. Ran. 
Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. Ktly. Ay Rowe 
et cet. 

86. does] doe Ff. 

87. Welcom hither] Separate line, F, 
et seq. 

88. perceiw’ d | perceived Cap. Var. ’78, 
’85, Ran. Coll. ii, Sta. Ktly, Dyce ii, iii. 

wrong led | wrong’d Cap. Sta. 


Varr. Sing. Dyce. Coll. (MS), Ktly. de-wronged Dtn. 


76-82. In comparing this list with Plutarch (see Appendix) UPTON (p. 238) 
detected certain discrepancies which he obviated by omitting ‘ King of Pont,’ in line 
79 (Polemen, in line 81, is the King of Pont); and by reading lines 81, 82 ‘ Amintas 
of Lycaonia; and the king of Mede.’ Whereby the two lists harmonise. CAPELL 
attained the same result more simply, perhaps, by reading ‘ King of Medes’ (Mede, 
Heath conj.) in line 79, and in line 82, ‘ The Kings of Pont and Lycaonia,’—a con- 
jecture of Heath. JoHNSON remarked, however, that ‘it is probable that the author 
did not much wish to be accurate.’ Dyce justly observes that the old text is doubt- 
less what the author wrote. 

79. King of Pont] KrIGHTLEY reads ‘¢e King of Pont’ and suggests (Zxf. 
316) the probability that ‘a proper name has been lost.’ 

83. more larger] For double comparatives, see ABBOTT, § II. 

89. negligent danger] CAPELL (i, 39): That is, in danger from negligence.— 
De.ius: Shakespeare frequently uses adjectives combining both an active and a 


ACT III, SC. vi.] 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 205 


Be you not troubled with the time, which driues go 
O’re your content, thefe ftrong neceffities, 

But let determin’d things to deftinie 

Hold vnbewayl’d their way. Welcome to Rome, 

Nothing more deere to me: You are abus’d 

Beyond the marke of thought : and the high Gods 95 
To do you Iuftice, makes his Minifters 


Of vs, and thofe that loue you. 


QI. content, thefe| content these Pope. 
neceffities,| mecesstties; Theob. 
Warb. et seq. 
95. Gods] God Ktly. 
96. makes his| Ktly. make his Ff, 


Beft of comfort, 97 


Dyce i, Wh. Hal. 
cet. 

97. Beft] Be Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. 
Ran. 


make them Cap. et 


comfort,| Ff, Rowe,+, Rife. com- 


Rowe, Pope, Coll. i. make their Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Varr. Ran. Kut, Sing. 


fort ; Cap. et cet. 


passive sense ; compare ‘ignorant present.’—J/acé. I, v, 58, and ‘ignorant conceal- 
ment,’ Wint. Tale, I, ii, 397. 

92, 93. determin’d things to destinie Hold, etc.] DEIGHTON: Let things that 
are fated go on their way to destiny without your mourning them. It is possible, how- 
ever, that the construction may be ‘things determined to destiny,’ z. ¢., on which 
destiny has resolved.—[The latter construction is, I think, to be preferred.—Ep. ] 

95, 96. the high Gods ...makes his Ministers] THEOBALD: Why must 
Shakespeare be guilty of such an obvious false concord? He has not writ thus in a 
parallel passage,—‘ Macbeth Is ripe for shaking, and the Pow’rs above Put on their 
Instruments.’—IV, iii, 237.— KNIGHT : Here is a false concord ; and to correct it we 
ought to read make their. But the modern editors read make them, which is a devi- 
ation from the principle upon which a correction can be authorised.—[ Which I do not 
quite understand. Is the ‘ principle’ well founded which holds make their a legiti- 
mate correction, and make them an illegitimate ?—Ep. ]—COoLLIER (ed. i): ‘ His’ 
refers to ‘justice’ and not to the ‘gods.’ The sense, therefore, is, that the gods, in 
order to right Octavia, make ministers of justice of Czsar and of those that love 
Octavia.—SINGER : It is impossible to conceive with [Collier] that the reference is 
to justice, which is not here personified, and, had it been, 42s would have been 
inapplicable.—CoLLixEr (ed. ii): We were disposed formerly to retain 42s upon the 
supposition that it might agree with justice. We now think that Singer is warranted 
in the blame he imputes to us for so doing, and we amend the text, although not 
exactly in his way. It seems not impossible that originally ‘gods’ was in the sing- 
ular, and in that case makes and his would be correct.—[Capell’s emendation, them 
(an ethical dative), seems to me more Shakespearian than any other emendation 
that has been proposed. Possibly it is to this that Knight objected —ED.] 

97. Best of comfort,] MALONE: Thus the original copy. The connecting par- 
ticle, amd, seems to favour the old reading. According to the modern innovation, 
‘ Be of comfort,’ it stands very awkwardly. ‘Best of comfort’ may mean—‘ Thou 
best of comforters!’ Compare Zhe Tempest: ‘A solemn air, and the dest comforter 
To an unsettled fancy’s cure !’—V, i, 58. Caesar, however, may mean, that what he 
had just mentioned is the best kind of comfort that Octavia can receive.—STEEVENS: 


206 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. vi. 


And euer welcom to vs. Agrip. Welcome Lady. 98 
Mec. Welcome deere Madam, 
Each heart in Rome does loue and pitty you, 100 


Onely th’adulterous Anthony, moft large 

In his abhominations, turnes you off, 

And giues his potent Regiment to a Trull 

That noyfes it againft vs. 
Odta. Is it fo fir ? 105 
Cef. Moft certaine : Sifter welcome : pray you 


101. ¢h’] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. Dyce ii, Theob, Han. Warb. oz/es FF, et cet. 


iii. che Cap. et cet. 106. Moft] lt is most Pope,+. 
102. abhominations] FF, abomt- pray you) Pray you, now Cap. 
nations F . Words. 


4 
104. noy/es] F,. moses Rowe, Pope, 


This elliptical phrase, I believe, only signifies—‘ May the best of comfort be yours!’ 
—DEIGHTON: These words seem to me to go rather with the following words and 
to mean, ‘ My best comforter,’ ‘my greatest comfort.’—[If the punctuation of the 
Folio had only been followed, and the comma retained after ‘comfort,’ I think there 
would have been scarcely any interpretation of the phrase other than Deighton’s. 
Malone had an inkling of this when he said that ‘‘‘and’’ stands very awkwardly,’ 
and gave ‘ Thou best of comforters’ as a paraphrase. The fatal twist was given by 
Capell’s unfortunate semi-colon, which has been followed by every editor except 
Rolfe, who, however, adopts Steevens’s signification, made under the malign influ- 
ence of the semi-colon.—ED. | 

102, abhominations] ELLis (p. 220): This was a common orthography in the 
Xvith century, and the Z seems to have been occasionally pronounced or not pro- 
nounced. There was no % in the Latin, although in the Latin of that time % was 
used, as we see from the Promptorium, 1450, ‘ Abhominable, abhominabilis, abhomt- 
nacyon, abhominacio’ and Levins, 1570, ‘ abhominate, abhominari,’ as if the words 
referred to 2b-homine instead of ab-omine.—[See Love's Lab. Lost, V, i, 26, of this 
edition, where this note is also given. ] 

103. potent Regiment to a Trull] JoHNsON: ‘Regiment,’ is government, au- 
thority ; he puts his power and his empire into the hands of a false woman. It may 
be observed, that ‘trull’ was not, in our author’s time, a term of mere infamy, but 
a word of slight contempt, as wench is now.—MALONE: ‘ Trull’ is used in x Henry 
VI. II, ii, 28 as synonymous to Aarlot. There can therefore be no doubt of the 
sense in which it is used here. 

104. That noyses it] STEEVENs: Milton has adopted this uncommon verb in his 
Paradise Regained; ‘though noising loud And threat’ning nigh,’ iv, 488.—[It is 
not the verb itself which is so ‘uncommon’ (it occurs elsewhere in Shakespeare, 
and several times in the ew Testament), but it is its present sense which is so 
unusual, conveying, as it does, the idea of loud-voiced and turbulent opposition. I 
think that Steevens might have cast, not unprofitably, a side-glance on the verb, more 
than ‘uncommon,’ which Rowe, Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, and Warburton accepted 
as the true one in this passage (see 7ex¢. (Votes), imparting, as it does, a novel and 
coquettish charm to the infinite variety already ascribed to Cleopatra. —ED. ] 


ACT Ill, Sc. vil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 207 


Be euer knowne to patience. 


My deer’ft Sifter. Exeunt 107 


[Scene VII. 


Enter Cleopatra,and Enobarbus. 


Cleo. I will be euen with thee, doubt it not. 
fino. But why, why, why? 
Cleo. Thou haft forefpoke my being in thefe warres, 
And fay’ft it it not fit. 5 
Eno. Well : is it, is it. 
Cleo. If not, denounc’d againft vs, why fhould not Ui 


107. deer'fi|F,. dearfiF¥ F,, Rowe, 
+, Sing. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. dearest 
Var. ’73 et cet. 

Scene VI. Rowe,+. Scene VII. Cap. 
et seq. Act III. Sc. i. Kemble. 

Actium. Rowe. Near the Promon- 
tory of Actium. Theob. Antony’s Camp. 
Cap. 

5. 22 | FB. 

On 2s 22.) 25:20 ? FE. 

7-11. Lf not...his Horfe] Prose, Ff, 
Rowe,+. Lines end, we... reply; ... 


together, ... bear ... horse. Han. Cap. et 
seq. 

7. Lf not, ...vs,| Ff. Ist not de- 
nounced against us? Rowe,+, Cap. 
(gainst). Varr. Ran. Huds. Joicey, 
Rife. Js'¢ not? Denounce against us, 
Tyrwhitt, Steev. Var.’03, ’13. Jf ot, 
denounce ’t against us, Mal. Wh. i, Sta. 
conj. Jf theyre denounced against us 
Words. Jf not denounc’d against us, 
Var. ’21 et cet. (subs.) 


105-107. Is it so... deer’st Sister] WALKER (C77v. iii, 303) : Arrange, per- 
haps,—‘ Is it so, sir? Most certain. Sister, welcome! | Pray you, be ever known to 
patience :— | My dearest sister !’—[For another scansion of these lines (solely for 
the eye), see ABBOTT, § 510.] 

4. forespoke] JOHNSON: To /orsfeak is to contradict, to speak against, as for- 
bid is to order negatively —BRADLEY (JV. /. D. s. v. Forspeak, + 3): To speak 
against, speak evil of. [The present line quoted. ] 

7. Ifnot, denounc’d against vs] TyRWHITT’s emendation, adopted by Steevens, 
will be found in the 7ext. Motes. MALONE, in 1790, read, ‘If not, denounce ’¢ against 
us,’ but remarked, ‘I am not, however, sure that the old reading is not right, “If 
there be no particular denunciation against me, why should we not,’’ etc. There is, 
however, in the Folio, a comma after the word ‘‘not’’ and no point of interrogation 
at the end of the sentence; which favours the emendation now made.’ In the Vari- 
orum of 1821, Malone restored the text of the Folio, omitting the comma after ‘ not,’ 
adding an interrogation at the end, and giving the foregoing paraphrase. The 
earlier commentators and their modern followers accept ‘denounce’ in the sense of 
‘ publicly arraign,’ or ‘censure.’ MOoNcK MAson, alone among them, seems to have 
caught what is apparently its true meaning, namely, ‘ proclaim,’ and referred it not to 
Cleopatra but to the wars. ‘ Cleopatra means to say,’ he remarks, ‘‘‘Is not the war 
denounced against us? Why should we not then attend in person?” ’ DELIUS 
agrees as far as referring ‘denounce’ to the war, but gives a different paraphrase: 
‘If it is not-fit, yet inasmuch as the war has been proclaimed against me, why should 
I not be there in person?’ Naturally Scumipt (Zex.) adopts the view of Delius ; so 


208 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


we be there in perfon. 


[ACT III, SC. vil. 


Enob, Well, I could reply : if wee fhould ferue with 
Horfe and Mares together, the Horfe were meerly loft : 10 
the Mares would beare a Soldiour and his Horfe. 


Cleo. What is’t you fay ? 


£nob. Your prefence needs muft puzle Axthony, 
Take from his heart, take from his Braine, from’s time, 


What fhould not then be fpar’d. He is already 15 
Traduc’d for Leuity, and ’tis faid in Rome, 
That Photinus an Eunuch,and your Maides 17 


8. perfon.] F,, Mal. ferfon? FF, et 
cet. 

g. Enob.] Eno. [ Aszde.] Johns. et seq. 
(subs. ) 

10. loft] lust Rowe. 

13. presence] prefent F., 

14. from’s] take from’s FF, Rowe. 
Jrom his Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. 


Varr. Knt, Ktly. 

15. then] thence Walker, Huds. 

17. Photinus ax Zunuch,] Ff, Rowe. 
Photinus, an eunuch, Del. Cam. Pho- 
tinus a eunuch, Sing. Photinus an 
eunuch Dyce, Sta. Glo. Photinus a 
eunuch Ktly.  Pothinus, an eunuch, 
Blumhof. 


also does THISELTON, who says that ‘if not’ is equivalent to ‘ otherwise.” SINGER 
paraphrases: ‘If we are not interdicted by proclamation, why should we not be there 
in person?’; and adds, ‘To denounce is most frequently used for to pronounce or 
proclaim by the poet.’ Hupson observes that the text which he adopts (Capell’s) is 
‘approved by the corresponding passage in Plutarch: ‘‘ Now, after that Cesar had 
made sufficient preparation, he proclaimed open war against Cleopatra,’’ etc.’ (See 
Appendix.) DEIGHTON thus amends the text: ‘If ow denounced against us,’ etc. 
and has the following note, ‘if these wars are now declared against me, why, etc. 
With the Folio reading, the only sense possible would be, “if there is no special 
injunction against my taking part in these wars,’’ etc.; but, as Antony alone could 
object, and he shows no inclination to do so, such sense seems very unsatisfactory.’ 
[It seems to me safest to follow the Folio and to accept Delius’s interpretation. 
—Ep.] 

1o. meerly] Used in its derivative sense, wholly, utterly, purely. 

15. What should not then] Very plausible is Walker’s conjecture (Crz¢. iii, 
303) of thence for ‘then.’ But ‘then’ so clearly refers to ‘time,’ the last idea, that 
change seems uncalled for.—Ep. 

17. Photinus an Eunuch] The name of this eunuch in the original Greek is 
‘Pothinus,’ both here and in the Zzfe of Cesar. In the latter, North has correctly repro- 
duced it ; but here, in the Zzfe of Antonius, it is rendered Photinus. The error began, 
I think, with Amyot ; in an edition of his translation, printed in Paris as late as 1811, 
the name is Photinus. Of course, Shakespeare followed North, and what the true name 
might be, he cared, probably, very little, and we, assuredly, care still less. Whatever 
his name, Photinus or Pothinus, he ought to be dead ; Julius Czesar put him to death 
some years before the present events. WALKER ( Vers. 173) calls attention to the fact 
that in Beaumont and Fletcher’s False One ‘the name is everywhere pronounced as 
it is now,’ that is, Photinus, with the accent on the penult. The position of the 


ACT Ill, sc. vii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 209 


Mannage this warre. 18 
Cleo. Sinke Rome, and their tongues rot 
That fpeake again{ft vs. A Charge we beare i’th’Warre, 20 
And as the prefident of my Kingdome will 
Appeare there fora man. Speake not againtt it, 
I will not ftay behinde. 
Linter Anthony and Camidias. 
Eno. Nay I haue done, here comes the Emperor. 25 
Ant. Is it not ftrange Camidius, 
That from Tarrentum, and Brandufium, 
He could fo quickly cut the Ionian Sea, 
And take in Troine. You haue heard on’t (Sweet? ) 


Cleo. Celerity is neuer more admir’d, 30 
Then by the negligent. 
Ant. A good rebuke, 32 
19. their] there Warb. 26. Js 2¢] Js’¢ Han. Cap. Steev. Varr. 
21, will} will I Pope, Theob. Han. Coll. Sing. Wh. Hal. Ktly. 
Warb. Ktly. 26, 34, loo. Camidius] Ff. Canidius 
24. Enter...] After line 25, Cap. Var. Rowe. 
”78 et seq. 27. Tarrentum]| Tarentum Rowe. 
Camidias] Camidius Ff. Can- Brandufium] Brundusium Ff. 
idius Rowe. 28, the] th’ Rowe ii,+, Dyce ii, iii. 
25. here... Emperor| Separate line, 29. Troine.| Toryne. FF, Toryne ? 
Han. Cap. Var.’21, Knt, Coll. Dyce. E. 


comma after ‘eunuch’ has been deemed important; on it the number of persons 
referred to may be made to depend. WorDSwoRTH remarks, ‘Dyce and other 
editors, including even those of the Globe, and Hudson, all following the careless- 
ness of the First Folio, point this without a comma after Photinus, and so leave 
the reader to suppose that he is the eunuch; whereas there can be no doubt that 
Mardian is intended, as appears plain both in Plutarch’s Greek and in North’s trans- 
lation. The Leopold edition prints the line correctly.’ The Leopold edition followed 
Delius. In any circumstances, I think it is a question of small moment, and becomes 
even less when we remember (which apparently Dr Wordsworth did not), that Photinus 
as well as Mardian was a eunuch.—Ep. 

23. I will not stay behinde] GARNIER, whose 7. Antoine was printed in 1578, 
represents jealousy as the cause of Cleopatra’s decision to ‘be in these warres.’ 
Cleopatra thus speaks to Eras: ‘ Mais, las! ie n’en fis conte, ayant |’ame saisie, 
A mon tres-grand malheur d’ardente ialousie: Par-ce que ie craignois que mon 
Antoine absent Reprint son Octauie, & m’allast delaissant.’—p. 179, ed. 1616. 
It is thus translated by the Countess of Pembroke, 1592: ‘But I car’d not: so 
was my soule possest (To my great harme), with burning iealousie: Fearing least 
in my absence Axtony Should leauing me retake Octauta.’—line 463, ed. Luce. 

29. take in Troine] That is, subdue. See I, i, 35. 


14 


210 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. vii. 


Which might haue well becom’d the beft of men 33 
To taunt at flackneffe. Camidius, wee 
Will fight with him by Sea. 35 


Cleo. By Sea, what elfe ? 

Cam. Why will my Lord, do fo ? 

Ant. For that he dares vs too’t. 

Enob. So hath my Lord, dar’d him to fingle fight. 

Cam. I, and to wage this Battell at Pharfalia, 40 
Where Ca@/ar fought with Pompey. But thefe offers 
Which ferue not for his vantage, he fhakes off, 
And fo fhould you. 

Enob. Your Shippes are not well mann’d, 


Your Marriners are Militers, Reapers, people 45 
33. decom’ d | become Theob. ii, Warb. 38. toot] to’t Ff, Om. Han, 
Johns. Cap. Coll. Wh. Ktly. 40. this] his F,F,, Rowe. 
34. at flackneffe] a slackness Rowe ii. 42. ferue] Serves FF ,. 
at slacknesses Bulloch, 45. are Militers| are Muliters Ff, 
Camidius] Come, Canidius Han. Rowe, Knt, Coll. Wh. Hal. ave muli- 
My Canidius Cap. teers Pope, Theob. Warb. muleteers 
36. Sea,] Ff, Rowe,+. sea; Cam. and Han. are muleteers Johns. Ktly. 
sea ! Cap. et cet. are muleters Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 


33, 34. Which might . .. slacknesse] These words, which express Anthony’s 
hearty assent to Cleopatra’s rebuke by asserting that the best of men might have used 
them in upbraiding sloth, BLUMHOF takes as a peevish rejoinder to Cleopatra’s irri- 
tating remark, and regards as a separate sentence and as an exclamation of surprise, 
‘To taunt at slackness!’ ‘Slackness’ is lengthened into three syllables by both 
WALKER (Vers. 20) and ABBOTT (§ 477): ‘slackeness.? But would not the pro- 
nunciation be almost as rhythmical, and quite as slovenly, were it uttered ‘ selack- 
ness? The pause necessitated by the change of address supplies the rhythm. 
Walker finishes the line and begins the next thus ‘ Canidius, come We’ll fight,’ etc. 
See Zext. Notes for Hanmer’s emendation.—ED. 

37. Why will] The accent is designedly thrown on ‘ will.’ 

45. Militers] See Text. MVotes.—WALKER (Vers. 217): Pioneer, Engineer, 
Muleteer, and many other (perhaps most) words of the same class, ought to be writ- 
ten poner, enginer, etc. This is evident, were there no other indication of it, from 
the flow of the verses in which these words occur. [To the instance in the present 
line, which Dyce was the first to spell correctly, Walker adds, ‘ Seignior, hang !—base 
muleteers of France.’—z Hen. VJ; III, ii, and continues :] Even here an Elizabethan 
ear would, I imagine, have demanded muleters; and so Folio. So everywhere in 
the writers of that age, as far as I have observed. Beaumont & Fletcher, Mair Maid 
of the Inn, Il, iv, Folio of 1647, p. 36, col. 2,—‘ Thou might’st have given it toa 
Muliter,’ etc. IV, ii, init. ‘Enter Host, Taylor, Muliter,’ etc. Love's Pilgrimage, 
II, iv, near the beginning,—‘ No mangey Muleters, nor pinching Posts.’—[Dyce has 
a note to the same effect. Both Walker and Dyce seem to have overlooked a note 
of Malone, which calls attention to the spelling of this word in the corresponding 


ACT Ill, Sc. vil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 211 


Ingroft by fwift Impreffe. In Ce/ars Fleete, 46 

Are thofe, that often haue ’gainft Pompey fought, 

Their fhippes are yare, yours heauy : no difgrace 

Shall fall you for refufing him at Sea, 

Being prepar’d for Land. 50 
Ant. By Sea, by Sea. 
£no. Moft worthy Sir, you therein throw away 

The abfolute Soldierfhip you haue by Land, 

Diftraét your Armie, which doth moft confift 

Of Warre-markt-footmen, leaue vnexecuted 55 

Your owne renowned knowledge, quite forgoe 

The way which promifes affurance, and 

Giue vp your felfe meerly to chance and hazard, 

From firme Securitie. 
Ant. Ile fight at Sea. 60 
Cleo. I haue fixty Sailes, Cz/ar none better. 


47. ’gainfe| against Warb. 61. fixty Sailes| full sixty sail Sey- 
49. Shall] Can Cap. mour. full sixty satis Huds. 
fall | fail Han. Cap. (Errata.) none better.| none better hath. 


55. Warre-markt-footmen] Ff, Rowei. Ktly. 
war-mark’d footmen Rowe ii et seq. 


passage in North’s Plutarch: ‘for lacke of water-menne, his Captaines did prest by 
force all sortes of men .. . that they could take vp in the field, as trauellers, muliters, 
reapers, haruest men, and young boyes.’ In the ed. of 1595, the word is spelled 
‘ muletters.’—Ep. ] 

46. Impresse] See ‘prest’ in the extract from North in the preceding note.— 
SKEAT (Concise Etymol. Dict.) : ‘ Press’ is a corruption of the old word prest, ready ; 
whence prest-money, ready money advanced to a man hired for service, earnest money ; 
also zmprest, a verb (now zmpress), to give a man earnest money. When it became 
common to use compulsion to force men into service, it was confused with the verb 
to press. Prest money was money lent, derived from Old French prester (French 
preter) to lend, advance money. 

48. yare] STEEVENS: So in North’s Plutarch : ‘Cezsar’s ships were not built for 
pomp, high and great, ... but they were light of yarage.’ ‘Yare’ generally sig- 
nifies, dextrous, manageable. 

49. Shall fall you] That is, befall you. For other words where prefixes are 
dropped, see ABBOTT, § 460. 

54. Distract your Armie] In North’s Plutarch, Canidius tells Antony, among 
other things, that he ‘ would weaken his army by dividing them into ships.’ Possi- 
bly this explains the present phrase. 

61. I haue] HANMER reads, ‘ Why, I have,’—‘a very probable emendation,’ says 
Dyce (ed. ii). It is one of several designed to mend the metre, which is defective 
according to the right butter-woman’s rank to market. Any deviation from the 
orthodox jog-trot deeply offends the truly sensitive ear. Nay, in cases where a final 


212 


Ant. 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT III, SC. vii. 


Our ouer-plus of fhipping will we burne, 62 


And with the reft full mann’d, from th’head of Action 


Beate th’approaching C@/ar. 
We then can doo’t at Land. 
Thy Bufineffe ? 


But if we faile, 
Enter a Meffenger. 65 


Mef. The Newes is true, my Lord, he is defcried, 


Ce/far ha’s taken Toryne. 
Ant, 


Can he be there in perfon? ’Tis impoffible 
Strange, that his power fhould be. 


Camidius, 70 


Our nineteene Legions thou fhalt hold by Land, 


And our twelue thoufand Horfe. 


Away my Thetis. 


Wee’! to our Ship, 


Enter a Soldiour. 


How now worthy Souldier? 


: 75 


Soul. Oh Noble Emperor, do not fight by Sea, 
Truft not to rotten plankes : Do you mifdoubt 
This Sword, and thefe my Wounds ; let th’Egyptians 
And the Pheenicians go a ducking : wee 
Haue vs’d to conquer ftanding on the earth, 80 


And fighting foot to foot. 
Ant. Well, well, away. 


62. Our] Come. Our Cap. 
closes. line 61.) 
63. full mann’d | full-mann’d Rowe. 
th’ the Cap. et seq. 
head of Action] heart of Actium 
Ff, Rowe. head of Actium Pope et seq. 
64. th’] the Theob. et seq. 
But] Om. Han. 
65. doo’t] dot FF. 
67. defcried,] descried ; Theob. et seq. 
69, 70. zmpoffible Strange, | impossible. 
Strange Pope et seq. 
70. be.] be fo, Ff. be so. Rowe, Pope, 


(Come: 


exit Ant. Cleo.& Enob. 82 


Theob. Warb. Johns. 

71. nineteene| nineteenes F.,. 

74. Soldiour.] Messenger. Rowe i. 
Diomede. Gar. Titius and Soldiers. 
Kemble. 

78. Wounds ;| wounds ? Rowe ii et 
seq. 

th’| the Theob. et seq. 

79. a ducking | a-ducking Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. 

82. well,] well. Coll. well :-— Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. 

exit] Exeunt. Ff. 


-ey must represent a full foot (as here), ABBOTT (§ 478) opines that it may ‘have 
been sometimes pronounced with a kind of ‘burr,’’ which produced the effect of an 


additional syllable.’ 


Inasmuch as Cleopatra’s variety was infinite, it is possible that 
a ‘burr’ may have been one of her charms. 


73- my Thetis] STEEVENs: Antony may address Cleopatra by the name of this 
sea-nymph, because she had just promised him assistance in his naval expedition ; or 
perhaps in allusion to her voyage down the Cydnus, when she appeared like 7yetts 


surrounded by the Nereids. 
compared Cleopatra.—See II, ii, 235.] 
76, etc. See Plutarch, Appendix. 


[It was not Zhedis, but Venus, to whom Enobarbus then 


ACT III, Sc. vii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 213 


Soul. By Hercules I thinke I am ’th’right. 83 
Cam. Souldier thou art: but his whole action growes 
Not in the power on’t : fo our Leaders leade, 85 


And we are Womens men. 

Soul. You keepe by Land the Legions and the Horfe 
whole, do you not ? 

Ven. Marcus O¢tauius, Marcus lufieus, 


Publicola, and Celus, are for Sea : 90 
But we keepe whole by Land. This fpeede of Ce/ars 
Carries beyond beleefe. 92 
83. right] light F.,. 87. You...Land | Separate line, Rowe 
84. his] the Ff, Rowe. ¢h7s Cap. et seq. 
85. /o] so, or so,— Nicholson ap, Cam. 89. Ven.] Ff, Rowe. Can. Pope et seq. 
Leaders leade| F,. Leaders lead Iufteus] Juftius Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
F,F,, Rowe, Pope. deader’s led Theob. Justetus Theob. 
et seq. go. Celius] Cehus Theob. 


84, 85. his whole action growes Not in the power on’t] CAPELLI (i, 39) : 
‘Action’ is here eterprize, the enterprize then in hand; no part of which, says 
Canidius, ‘ grows in the power on’t,’ is conducted as it might be, or suitably to the 
means that we have in our power.—[Capell refers ‘on’t’ to ‘action.’ Dr JoHNson, 
on the other hand, refers it to ‘right’ in the Soldier’s speech. ‘That is,’ he says, 
‘his whole conduct becomes ungoverned by the right, or by reason.’ MALONE gives 
what is essentially Capell’s interpretation and points out Johnson’s oversight. ‘I 
think,’ he observes, ‘that Canidius means to say, His whole conduct in the war is 
not founded upon that which is his greatest strength (namely, his /and force), but on 
the caprice of a woman, who wishes that he should fight by sea. Dr Johnson refers. 
the word on’t to right in the preceding speech. I apprehend, it refers to action in 
the speech before us.’ HUDSON says that ‘This speech may refer, not merely to the 
present action, but Antony’s whole course of late, where his action grows, takes its: 
shape, not from the power that executes it, that is, himself, but from the will of 
another.’ The phrase is certainly obscure. Possibly, it may mean that Anthony’s. 
course of action does not grow through its own native force, there are other influences 
at work—his deeds are not self-evolved.—ED. ] 

85. so our Leaders leade] THEOBALD’s change, ‘our leader’s led,’ which has 
been adopted by every subsequent editor, is pronounced needless by THISELTON 
(p. 19), and, I cannot but think, justly. If Cleopatra is herself a Leader, her power 
is more direct, and the soldiers are more emphatically her men, than if this power 
were exercised only indirectly through Anthony. Moreover, by the plural, ‘women,’ 
there is an implication that even Anthony himself has lost his manliness and is become 
a woman, which is missed if ‘Leader’ be restricted to Anthony alone.—Ep. 

89. Ven.] CoL.ter (ed. ii) conjectured that this abbreviation stood ‘ perhaps for 
Vennard, an actor in the part of Canidius.? Dyce repeated this conjecture without 
comment.— WALKER (C7it. ii, 185) says that the speech ‘is given to Ventidius 
instead of to Canidius.’ 

gI, 92. This speede. . . Carries beyond beleefe] An uncommon use of the verb,. 


‘ 


214 LHE | TRAGER DIENO Lr [Act III, Sc. vii. 


Soul. While he was yet in Rome. 93 
His power went out in fuch diftractions, 
As beguilde all Spies. 95 


Cam. Who’s his Lieutenant, heare you? 
Soul, They fay, one Towrus. 
Cam. Well, I know the man. 

Enter a Meffenger. 


Mef. The Emperor cals Camidius. 100 
Cam. With Newes the times with Labour, 

And throwes forth each minute, fome. exeunt 102 
93. he was| Om. Han. Iol. with] in Rowe,+, Var. ’73, Cap. 
95. beguilde all Spies] Separate line, (in Votes), Gar. 

Pope et seq. (except Knt.) With ... times] Separate line, 
96. Lieutenant] Lieutenat F . Ktly. . 

97. Towrus] Zorus Rowe, Pope. 102. throwes] FF. throes Theob, 

Taurus Theob. Var. ’73, Steev. Knt, Sing. Dyce, Sta. 
98. Well,] Ff, Rowei, Knt. Well; Glo, Cam. ‘shrows F, et cet. 

Johns. Well Rowe ii et cet. each...fome] Separate line, Rowe 
100. cals] calls for Han. et seq. 


lol. cémes] cime’s FF. 


carry, of which I can find no notice inthe V. Z. D. STEEVENS suggested that ‘ per- 
haps’ it is derived ‘from archery,’ and quoted 2 Hen. JV. III, ii, 52, ‘a’ would 
have . . . carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen and a half.’ SINGER 
without even hinting at the singularity of the phrase, gives a paraphrase, obvious to 
the humblest capacity, ‘72. ¢, passes all belief’ and then remarks, ‘I should not have 
noticed this, but for Steevens’s odd notion of its being a phrase from archery.’ 
ScHMIDT (Lex. s.v. Carry, 4) quotes the present passage and Justice Shallow’s 
speech quoted above by Steevens, and defines both by ‘to bear, to push on to a cer- 
tain distance,’ which is somewhat difficult of comprehension. It is not easy to see 
how anything that carries can thereby ‘push.’ DEIGHTON and ROLFE, braving 
Singer’s scoff, return to Steevens’s suggestion and hold that the metaphor is probably 
taken from archery, which is also the opinion of the present ED. 

94. distractions] JoHNSON: Detachments, separate bodies. 

102, throwes forth] According to Theobald’s spelling, this verb occurs again in 
The Tempest, Il, i, 231. 


ACT III, sc. vili.] AMTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 215 


[Scene VIIT.| 


Enter Ceafar with his Army, marching. 


Caf. Towrus ? 

Tow. My Lord. 

Cef. Strike not by Land, 
Keepe whole, prouoke not Battaile 5 
Till we haue done at Sea. Do not exceede 
The Prefcript of this Scroule : Our fortune lyes 


Vpon this iumpe. exit. 8 


[Scene LX.] 


Enter Anthony, and Enobarbus. 
Ant. Set we our Squadrons on yond fide o’th’ Hill, 
In eye of Ce/ars battaile, from which place 3 


Scene VIII. Cap. et seq. 

The same. Plain between both 
Camps. Cap. 

1. Enter... ] Enter Cesar, Taurus, 
Officers, and others. Cap. 

2. Towrus?] Ff. Zorus? Rowe. 
Taurus? Theob. Taurus,— Cap. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Dyce. 

3. Lord.| lord ? Dyce, Glo. Cam. 

4-8. Strike...tumpe] Lines end, whole, 


Knt, Coll. Sta. Ktly. 

7. this Scroule| this scroll [Giving it. 
Coll. 753. 

Scene IX. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Huds. 
Rife, Dtn, Words. The rest continue 
the Scene. 

Another part of the plain. Dyce. 
2. Sguadrons| sgudrons Rowe i. 
yond| Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. yon’ Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. 


++ 50a. ... Scvoule : ...tumpe. Steev. Varr. Steev. yon Knt. yond’ Coll. Wh. i. 


1. BRADLEY (p. 71): To come then to real defects :—one may be found in places 
where Shakespeare strings together a number of scenes, some very short, in which 
the dramatis persone are frequently changed; as though a novelist were to tell his 
story in a succession of short chapters, in which he flitted from one group of his 
characters to another. This method shows itself here and there in the pure tragedies 
(e.g. in the last act of Macbeth), but it appears most decidedly where the historical 
material was undramatic, as in the middle part of Antony and Cleopatra. It was 
made possible by the absence of scenery, and doubtless Shakespeare used it because 
it was the easiest way out of a difficulty. But, considered abstractedly, it is a defec- 
tive method, and, even as used by Shakespeare, it sometimes reminds us of the 
merely narrative arrangement common in plays before his time. 

8. iumpe] Murray (4. Z. D. s.v. + 6): The decisive moment of plunging 
into action of doubtful issue ; dangerous critical moment, critical point, crisis. (Latin, 
discrimen.) The notion is evidently that of making a jump or taking a plunge into 
the unknown or untried. 3 

3. battaile] Murray (J. £. D. s.v. 8): A body or line of troops in battle array, 
whether composing an entire army, or one of its main divisions. ‘What may the 
kings whole Battaile reach vnto?’—z Hen. /V; IV, i, 129. 


216 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. x. 


We may the number of the Ships behold, 
And fo proceed accordingly. exit. 5 


[Scene X.| 


Camidius Marcheth with his Land Army one way ouer the 
fiage, and Towrus the Lieutenant of Ca/far the other way: 
After their going in, ts heard the notfe of a Sea fight. 
Alarum. Lnter Enobarbus and Scarus. 


Eno. Naught, naught, al naught, I can behold no longer: 5 
Thantoniad, the Egyptian Admirall, 
With all their fixty flye, and turne the Rudder : 


To fee’t, mine eyes are blafted. 8 
Scene X. Dyce, Sta. Glo.Cam. Scene 4. and Scarus] Om. Rowe ii et seq. 

VII. Pope,+. Cap. et cet. continue the Gp Gi) 18s 

Scene. naught,| Ff, Rowe,+. naught. 
1. Camidius, etc.] Canidius, etc. Johns. aught! Cap. et seq. 

Rowe. 6. Thantoniad] Ff, Rowe. 7h’ An- 

Marcheth] Marching Ff, Rowe et tonias Pope,t+. The Antoniad Cap. et 
seq. seq. 


Land Army] land-army Theob. 7. fiye,and turne | flies and turns Han. 


3. the noise of a Sea fight] Our ignorance of the kind of noise which accom- 
panied sea-fights, and enabled an audience to distinguish it, when heard behind the 
scene, from that of a land-fight, is to be regretted. It may be that there were vociferous 
commands to the rowers and the sound of crashing boards ; but see IV, xii, 1.—Eb. 

6. Thantoniad] ‘The Admiral galley of C/eopatra, was called Antoniade.’— 
North’s Plutarch (see Appendix). [‘Thantoniad’ betrays the ear of the com- 
positor. —Ep. ] 

7. flye, and turne the Rudder] STAPFER (p. 405): What had happened was 
very simple; it was only that Cleopatra had felt frightened: she was not a woman 
of heroic type, and her nerves were not strong enough to bear the excitement of a 
battle for any length of time,—that was the whole secret. Those who seek for any 
other explanation of the defeat at Actium, do so because they start with the notion 
that on great occasions Cleopatra could be truly brave, the splendid manner of her 
death having acquired for her a false reputation for courage; but her supposed hero- 
ism is only a brilliant theatrical cloak wrapped round the most feminine little person, 
presenting the most complete contrast to all manliness of character that ever wore a 
crown. We have only to study closely her ending, as it is given by Shakespeare, and 
the mask falls—the woman remains and the heroine vanishes. —ANATOLE FRANCE 
(iv, 130): This flight, Admiral Jurien de la Graviére holds to be a skilfull manceuvre 
and M. Victorien Sardou has given to it a highly dramatic effect by representing the 
enamoured queen as effecting thereby the defeat and disgrace of her lover, in order to 
keep him completely her own. 


ACT 111, sc. x.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA Baty, 


Enter Scarrus. 
Scar. Gods,|& Goddeffes, all the whol fynod of them! 10 


Eno. 
Scar. 


What’s thy paffion. 


The greater Cantle of the world, is loft 


With very ignorance, we haue kift away 


Kingdomes, and Prouinces. 
Eno. 
Scar. 

Where death is fure. 


9. Scarrus] Scarus Ff. Dzomede Gar. 
Scaurus Walker. 

10. Gods, & Goddeffes]| Separate line, 
Theob. Warb. et seq. 

II. paffion.] paffion ? FF. 

16-29. Mnemonic, Warb. 

17. Yon...agge| Dyce, Wh. i, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. Hal. Ktly, Del. iii, Hunter, 


How appeares the Fight ? 15 
On our fide, like the Token’d Peftilence, 
Yon ribaudred Nagge of Egypt, 17 


F,. Your ribauldred Nag ¥,. Your 
ribauld nag Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. 
Yond ribauld nag Han. Johns, Var. ’73 
(subs.) You ribald nag Cap. Var.’78, 
’85, Ran. Kemble, Huds. (subs.) Yow’ 
ribald-rid nag Steev. conj. Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Knt, Coll. i, Del. i (subs.) Yow 
ribald hag Tyrwhitt, Coll. ii, iii, Words. 


Yon ribaldred nag Wh. ii. Yon ribald 
rag Anon. ap. Cam. 


Marshall, Rife, Dtn (subs.) You ribau- 
dred Nagge¥,. Your ribaudred Nagge 


12. Cantle] Murray (4. Z. D. s.v. Medizval Latin, cantellus, diminutive of 
cant, canto, cantus, corner. 3} ¢.): A segment of a circle or sphere. [Present line 
quoted. | 

16, the Token’d Pestilence] STEEVENS: The death of those visited by the 
plague was certain, when particular eruptions appeared on the skin; and these were 
called God’s tokens.—HALLIWELL (Love's Lab. Lost, V, ii, 470): ‘The spots 
[indicative of the plague], otherwise called God’s tokens, are commonly of the big- 
nesse of a flea-bitten spot, sometimes much bigger. ... But they have ever a circle 
about them, the red ones a purplish circle, and the others a redish circle.’—Brad- 
well’s Physick for... the Plague, 1636.—ELTON (p. 468, footnote): Allusions to 
the ‘tokens’ of pestilence in Shakespeare are not uncommon after the great outbreak 
of plague in the winter of 1602, which, between Christmas and Christmas, killed 
in London and its liberties more than 30,000 people. The tokens were redder than 
in former pestilences; hard spots of a bright flaming red were accounted a fatal 
symptom. 

17. Yon ribaudred Nagge] CAPELL (i, 39): Meaning, indeed,—brazen hack- 
ney: and calling her so in his anger, by reason of her forwardness and her prosti- 
tutions: and from hence, the propriety of the imprecation he immediately makes on 
her,—‘ Whom leprosy o’er-take !’—STEEVENS: ‘ Ribaudred’ is, I believe, no more 
than a corruption. Shakespeare, who is not always very nice about his versification, 
might have written, ‘Yon vibald-rid nag,’ z. e. Yon strumpet, who is common to 
every wanton fellow.—MAaLonE: I have adopted the happy emendation proposed by 
Mr Steevens. Rzbaud was only the old spelling of riéa/d; and the misprint of 
‘red’ for vid is easily accounted for. By rida/d, Scarus, I think, means the lewd 
Antony in particular, not ‘every lewd fellow,’ as Mr Steevens has explained it.— 
TyrwuitT (p. 9): I believe we should read, ‘yon ribauld Hag.’ What follows 
seems to prove it :—‘ The noble ruin of her magick, Antony,’ etc.—[This emendation 


218 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. x. 


[17. Yon ribaudred Nagge of Egypt] 
is repeated in Collier’s ed. ii, not, however, as Tyrwhitt’s, but as that of Collier’s 
corrected Folio, which, as Collier observes, has ‘ ribaudred’ altered to rzba/d, and 
‘nag’ to hag. Ribald, he continues, ‘requires no explanation, whereas no instance 
of the use elsewhere either of ‘‘ribaudred’”’ or ‘‘ribauldred’’ can be produced. 
There are, no doubt, such words as ribaldry and ribaldrous, but the employment of 
them by old authors proves nothing, since they are not the word wanted. ‘‘Nag”’ 
for hag was clearly a misprint, and it will be observed that, even amending the word 
‘¢ribaudred’’ to rzbaldrid, as was done by Steevens, gives the line a syllable too 
much.’ Tyrwhitt’s change of ‘nag’ into ag was followed a second time, this time 
by SINGER, who exclaims that ‘the poet would surely not have called Cleopatra a 
nag/? Any change in ‘ ribaudred,’ Singer deems quite unnecessary, ‘“ Ribaudred”’ 
is,’ he says, ‘ obscene, indecent in words or acts. Thus Barett [A/vearte, 1580] :— 
‘¢a Ribaudrous and filthie tongue. Os tncestum, obscenum, impurum, & impudicum. 
Vide Filthie.” —[where we find] “ Villanie in actes, or words ; ribauldrie, filthinesse, 
vncleannesse. Obdscenitas,’’ etc.’ To Singer’s exclamation that ‘the poet’ would 
not have called Cleopatra a zag, DYcCE replies, that ‘since she has been previously 
called ‘a trull,’? I see no reason for wondering that she should now be called 
‘‘mag,” t.¢, jade, hackney. (“Know we not Galloway zags ?’’ exclaims Pistol, 
alluding to Doll Tearsheet—z Hen. JV; II, iv.)’ Furthermore, in reference to 
this use of ‘nag,’ R. G. WHITE (ed. i) quotes Leontes, who, ‘ in his jealous fit, exclaims, 
“Then say my wife’s a hobby-horse !’’’? |—STAUNTON: ‘ Ribaudred nag’ means filthy 
strumpet.—KEIGHTLEY (£ xf. 317): There is no need of change. —Hupson : ‘ Ribau- 
dred’ damages the metre ; and I cannot perceive the sense of xed thus tagged on to 
ribaud ... Bishop Hall has vzbaldish, and so, I suspect, the Poet wrote here. [P. 90], 
Of course the epithet 7za/d is applied to Cleopatra to express her notorious profligacy. 
It seems to me, also, that the Poet meant ‘nag’ in reference to her speedy flight 
from the battle, carrying Antony off, as it were, on her back. And the words, ‘the 
breese upon her,’ and ‘like a cow in June’ naturally infer that such was the image 
intended.—THISELTON (p. 19): Read 7zband-red for ‘ribaudred’ on the following 
grounds. (1) No such word as ‘ribaudred’ is known. (2) In the preceding line 
‘the Fight’ is likened to ‘the Token’d Pestilence,’ the reference being to the Plague, 
of which there were three varieties ; the red, the yellow, and the black. It is Cleo- 
patra’s red ribands that suggest the figure of the red plague to Scarrus. (3) Red 
ribands would match a dark complexion and the actor who played the part of Cleo- 
patra may be presumed to have worn them. (4) Cleopatra will then be likened to 
a nag decked with red ribands as for a fair, anything but an ‘ Arme-gaunt steede.’ 
(5) ‘Riband-red’ enhances the force and appropriateness of the imprecation in the 
next line, ‘Whom Leprosie o’er-take,’ that disease being characterised by whiteness 
of the skin. (6) In the Folio the « in the word usually given as ‘ribaudred’ is 
raised above the level of the preceding and succeeding letters, and would therefore 
seem to be in reality an inverted #.—[Suggestions from this critic are worthy of 
respectful consideration. But is it any more easy to apprehend the meaning of ‘a 
riband-red nag’ than it is of ‘a waistcoat-white gentleman’? In Aer. of Ven. III, 
ii, 103, we find the phrase, ‘the guiled shore’; in Jeas. for Meas. III, i, 121: 
‘the delighted spirit’; in Othed/o, I, iii, 320: ‘delighted beauty’; in x Hen. JV: 
I, iii, 183 : ‘disdain’d contempt.’ In all these cases, and many more could be added, 
the past participles convey the meaning that the nouns which they qualify are abun- 
dantly supplied with that which the participles represent. Thus, ‘the guiled shore’ 


ACT III, sc. x.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 219 


(Whom Leprofie ° re-take ) i’th’midft o’th’fight, 18 
When vantage like a payre of Twinnes appear’d 
Both as the fame, or rather ours the elder ; 20 


(The Breeze vpon her ) like a Cow in Inne, 

Hoifts Sailes, and flyes. 
£no. That I beheld : 

Mine eyes did ficken at the fight, and could not 

Indure a further view. ; 25 
Scar. ‘She once being looft, 


18. o’re-take] o’ re Ff, Rowe. 21. June] Lune Ff. 
2’th’| Ff, Rowe,+. 2’the Cap. 22. Sales] sail Cap. conj. 
et seq. Jiyes. | flies, En’ barbus, Elze. flies 
midfe| very midst Rowe. amain. Words. 
o’th’| Ff, Rowe,+. othe Cap. et 23, 24. That... eyes| Separate line, 
seq. Cap. Steev. Var. 73, ’78. 
19. vantage] vantages Ktly. 23. beheld | beheld myself Ktly. 
20. as the of the Ff, Rowe. 24. fight, | sight of wt, Cap. sight on’t 
21. Breeze] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Steev. Var. 73, ’78. 
Warb. Cap. érieze Johns. Var. ’73. 26. looft] loof’d Mal. Steev. et seq. 


breese Dyce, Glo. Cam. drize Han. et cet. aloof’ d Coll. conj. 


means the shore fz// of gudles ; ‘the delighted spirit’ means the spirit endowed with 
delights ; ‘disdain’d contempt’ means contempt /i// of disdain.’ In Bishop Cooper’s 
Thesaurus Lingue Romane, 1573, we find, among the definitions of Odscenitas, 
‘ribauldrie.’ If this noun be turned into a participle we have 7zbauldried, which, I 
venture to suggest, is the very word, phonetically spelled, in our present ‘ ribaudred.’ 
(In the next scene, forty-seventh line, we have ‘vnqualited’ for ‘ vnqualitzed.’) 
Hence, ‘ Yon ribaudred Nagge’ means, I think, ‘ Yon nag made up of, or composed 
of ribaldry.’—ED.] 

18. Leprosie] JOHNSON: An epidemical distemper of the Egyptians; to which 
Horace probably alludes in the controverted line: ‘ Contaminato cum grege turpium 
Morbo virorum.’—[ Ode, I, xxxvii, 9. ] 

20. Both as the same] STAUNTON: This is oddly expressed. Can ‘as’ bea 
transcriber’s slip for ag’¢? The context,—‘ or rather ours che elder,’ —favours the 
supposition. 

21. Breeze] Murray (/. £. D. s. v. Breeze. sb1): A gadfly: a name given to 
various dipterous insects, especially of the genera @strus (BOT-FLY) and Zabanus, 
which annoy horses and cattle. 

‘22, Hoists Sailes, and flyes] STAUNTON (Athen. 26 Apr. 1873) : To say nothing 
of the redundant sibilants in this line, would Shakespeare have described a nag, as 
like a cow stung by the gad-fly, hoisting saz/s ? I think, to sustain the similitude and 
the characteristic roughness of the speaker, he is more likely to have written,‘ Hoists 
tail and flies.’ Those familiar with old typography know well how readily ‘sails’ 
and ¢az/e would be confounded. If my conjecture has any weight, it shows the error 
committed by several modern editors in reading Aag for ‘ nag.’ 

26. looft] BrapLry (M. £. D. s, v. Luff. 2. trans.) : To bring the head of a 


220 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IIT, SC> x: 


The Noble ruine of her Magicke, Anthony, 27 
Claps on his Sea-wing, and (like a doting Mallard ) 
Leauing the Fight in heighth, flyes after her : 
I neuer faw an Aétion of fuch fhame ; 30 
Experience, Man-hood, Honor, ne’re before,| 
Did violate fo it felfe. 

Exod. Alacke, alacke. 

Exter Camidius. 

Cam. Our Fortune on the Sea is out of breath, 35 
And finkes moft lamentably. Had our Generall 
Bin what he knew himfelfe, it had gone well : 
Oh his ha’s giuen example for our flight, 
Moft groffely by his owne. 

Exod. I, are you thereabouts? Why then goodnight 40 
indeede. 


Cam. Toward Peloponnefus are they fled. 42 

28. and | Om. Pope,+. Dyce, Sta. 

29. heighth] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Cap. 41. indeede| Indeed (as separate line 

37. Bin] Been F of verse) Han. Cap. et seq. (except Knt, 

38. Aisha’s) heeha’s¥,, he has ¥F,. Dyce, Sta.) indeed, Canidius Elze. 

40, 41. J,... indeede.| [Aside. Cap. 42. Toward | Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Knt, Ktly. Han. Warb. Dyce, Glo. Cam. Towards 


40. J, ... thereabouts ?| Separate line, Johns, et cet. 


vessel nearer to the wind. [The present line quoted. The word occurs more than 
once in the Lzfe of Anthony in North’s Plutarch. ] 

28. Sea-wing] No mention of this, as a nautical term, is made in Smith’s Acc?- 
dence... Necessary for all Young Sea-men, etc. 1626, nor in Smyth’s Sazlor’s Word- 
Book, 1867. The Century Dictionary quotes the present line, and gives the obvious 
meaning ‘a sail,’ and adds that it is ‘Rare.’ It would never have occurred to me as 
needing comment were it not that in an extremely rare little volume, I find the fol- 
lowing, which I quote for what it is worth: ‘[Sea-wings] are two rows of long flat 
pieces of wood, which are suspended in the air when the vessel sails, and which are 
let down in concert when they are becalmed or have the wind against them.— Vide 
Spectacle de la Nature, vol. 4.’—JOHN CROFT, Annotations on Plays of Shakespear, 
York, 1810. This particular Spectacle de la Nature 1 have never seen.—ED. 

38. Oh his ha’s giuen example, etc.] THISELTON (p. 20): ‘ His’ is undoubt- 
edly the correct reading, the sense being ‘his general (Cleopatra) by leading him off 
into flight has set us the example for flight.” [Does this accord with ‘his owne’ in 
the next line ?—Ep. ] 

40, 41. I, are you thereabouts ?. . . indeede] Hupson: ‘If that is what you 
are thinking about, then our cause is lost, or our game is up, sure enough.’ Enobar- 
bus rightly construes what Canidius has just said as an intimation that he is meditat- 
ing desertion from Antony, since Antony has deserted himself. 


_ ACT IIL, SC. xl.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 221 


Scar. ’Tis eafie toot, 43 
And there I will attend what further comes. 
Camid. To CefarwillI render . 45 


My Legions and my Horfe, fixe Kings alreadie 
Shew me the way of yeelding. 
Exo. Ile yet follow 
The wounded chance of Anthony, though my reafon 
Sits in the winde againft me. 50 


[Scene XT] 


Exter Anthony with Attendants. 
Ant. Hearke, the Land bids me tread no more vpon’t, 
It is afham’d to beare me. Friends, come hither, 
I am fo lated in the world, that I 


Haue loft my way for euer. I haue a fhippe, 5 

Laden with Gold, take that, diuide it : flye, 
43. toot] tt FF. way Ktly conj. tinued, Rowe, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
44. what further comes] Separate line, Scene IX. Cap. et cet. 

Han. Var. ’78 et seq. Alexandria. A Room inthe Palace. 

Surther| farther Coll. Cap. ...in Cleopatra’s Palace. Dyce. 

47. [Exit. Cap. 1, Enter...] Enter Antony, with Eros 
50. [Exeunt, severally. Theob. Exit. seer Ope: 

Cap. 4. lated] ’lated Cap. ( Errata.) 
Scene XI. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 5» 9, 25. L haue] J’ ve Pope,t+, Dyce 

Scene VIII. Pope, Han. Scene con- ii. iii. 


49. The wounded chance of Anthony] JoHNson: I know not whether the 
author, who loves to draw his images from the sports of the field, might not have 
written: ‘The wounded chase of Antony.’ The allusion is to a deer wounded and 
chased, whom all other deer avoid. J wi//, says Enobarbus, follow Antony, though 
chased and wounded. ‘The common reading, however, may very well stand.— 
MALONE: The wounded chance of Antony, is a phrase nearly of the same import as 
‘the broken fortunes of Antony.’ The old reading is indisputably the true one. So, 
‘Or shall I show the cinders of my spirits, Through th’ ashes of my chance.’ [V, 
ii, 204.]|—STEEVENS: Mr Malone has judiciously defended the old reading. In 
Othello we have a phrase somewhat similar to ‘wounded chance’; viz. ‘mangled 
matter.’ [I, iii, 196. ] 

50. Sits in the winde] CapELL (i, 39): The word ‘sits’ shews the phrase to 
be taken from field-sports ; the pursuers of which know,—that scents coming down 
the wind, or from game that sits or lyes in the wind, are always the strongest. 

2. Hearke, etc. ] What phenomenon in nature was it to which Antony here refers, 
and interprets according to his own despairing mood? Can it have been the wild 
tumult on land caused by ‘the great boisterous wind,’ which, according to Plutarch, 
troubled Anthony’s ships more than aught else after he had deserted them ?—Ep. 

4. lated] JouNnson: Alluding to a benighted traveller—STEEVENS: Thus, in 
Macbeth, III, iii, 10: *‘ Now spurres the lated traueller apace.’ 


222 THE TRAGEDIE OF PAG? TSC yoas 


And make your peace with C@/ar. 7 
Omnes. Fly ? Not wee. 
Ant. Uhaue fled my felfe, and haue inftru¢ted cowards 

To runne, and fhew their fhoulders. Friends be gone, 10 

I haue my felfe refolu’d vpon a courfe, 

Which has no neede of you. Be gone, 

My Treafure’s in the Harbour. Take it : Oh, 

I follow’d that I blufh to looke vpon, 

My very haires do mutiny : for the white 15 

Reproue the browne for rafhneffe, and they them 

For feare, and doting. Friends be gone, you fhall 

Haue Letters from me to fome Friends, that will 

Sweepe your way for you. Pray you looke not fad, 


Nor make replyes of loathneffe, take the hint 20 
Which my difpaire proclaimes. Let them be left 
Which leaues it felfe, to the Sea-fide ftraight way; 22 
8. Omnes.] Att. Cap. Mal. et seq. wself : Cap. et seq. 
(subs. ) 22. to the] to Ff. 
Filly ?| Fly ! Rowe et seq. Sea-fide firaight way ;|F,.  sea- 


13. 2¢.: Oh,| Ff. 2z-—Oh, Rowe, Pope, -side straight-way. Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Theob. Han. Warb. zt. Of, Johns. et Han. Warb. sea-stde. Straightway Johns. 
cet. (subs. ) Var. ’73. sea-side straight away ; Cap. 

21, 22. them...it felfe,| Ff, Rowe i. Sfeafide firaightway : FF, Var. ’78 et 
them be left Which leave themselves. seq. 

Rowe ii,+. that be left Which leaves 


g. I haue fled my selfe] Does this mean, ‘I myself have fled,’ or ‘I have fled 
from myself’? Romeo says (I, i, 190): ‘I have lost myself. I am not here.’ 
Further on, Anthony says, ‘ Let [that] be left which leaves itself.’—Ep. 

12, Which has no neede of you. Be gone] This line lacks two syllables. 
Several ingenious expedients have been proposed to correct this serious error. 
CAPELL reiterates ‘ Be gone’; STEEVENS suggested, ‘ Be gone, J say’ ; KEIGHTLEY, 
‘Be gone, J pray’ or ‘J pray you.? And ABBOTT (§ 507) asserts that ‘the best way 
of arranging’ it is to print ‘Begone’ in a separate line. Is it to be supposed that 
Shakespeare was unable to detect the loss of two syllables, and that his resources 
were insufficient to supply what any child could suggest? Or is it to be supposed 
that, after Shakespeare’s audience had shuddered on hearing the maimed utterance 
on the stage, their lacerated feelings were soothed by seeing ‘ Begone’ printed as a 
separate line >—Ep. 

17, 18. Friends be gone, . . . some Friends] On the supposition that there is 
some corruption in the repetition of ‘ Friends,’ WALKER (Cyzz. i, 288) proposed, ‘ per- 
haps, “ /ed/ows, begone’’ (socit).’? Whereupon, Dyce (ed. ii) comments: ‘ Here 
Walker would alter what an earlier line (the second) of this speech proves to be quite 
right. Whether or not there be any error in “some friends” I cannot determine.’ 

20. replyes of loathnesse] WorDswortu: As if you were loath to do what I say. 

21, 22. Let them be left Which leaues it selfe] Of his own emendation (see 


ACT III, SC. xi.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 223 


I will poffeffe you of that fhip and Treafure. 23 
Leaue me, I pray a little: pray you now, 
Nay do fo : for indeede I haue loft command, 25 


Therefore I pray you, Ile fee you by and by. Sets downe 
Enter Cleopatra led by Charmian and Eros. 
Eros. Nay gentle Madam, to him, comfort him. 
Iras. Do moft deere Queene. 


Char. Do, why, what elfe ? 30 
Cleo. Let me fit downe : Oh Juno. 
Ant. No, no, no, no, no. 


Eos. See you heere, Sir ? 

Ant. Oh fie, fie, fie. 

Char. Madam. 35 
lras. Madam, oh good Emprefte. 

Eros. Sir, fir. 

Ant. Yes my Lord, yes; he at Philippi kept 38 


24. now,| now— Rowe,+. mow- 30, 31. Do...me] Separate line, Han. 


Cap. et seq. 31. fit...luno.] Separate line, Ktly. 
26. you, | you— Rowe,+. you: Cap. downe «| down, Var.’78 et seq. 
et seq. [sitting down. Coll. ii. 


Sits downe] Exeunt Att. Throws 
himself on a Couch. Cap. Om. Varr. Mal. 


35, 30. Char. Madam. Iras. Madam, 
...Lmpreffe.| Om. Words. 


Ran. 35. Madam. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
27. Enter...] Enter Eros, with Cleo- Madam ! Glo, Cam. Madam— Theob. 
patra... Cap. et cet. (subs. ) 
28. him,| him. Johns. him. Varr. 36. oh good | good Cap. 
Mal. LEmpreffe.| empress,— Cap. Dyce. 


30. Do,| Do? Rowe ii,+. Do/ Cap. 
et seq. 
Char. Do...e//e?] Om. Words. 
30, 31. Char. Do...elfe? Cleo. Let] 
Cleo. Do ?...clse ? de¢ Han. 


empress ! Glo. Cam. 
37. fir.] sir, my Lord! Han. sir! 
Glo. Cam. siv,— Cap. et seq. (subs.) 
38-41. Mnemonic, Warb. 
38. my Lord,| Om, Han. 


Text. Notes) Capell complacently remarks that it is one ‘which the moderns had 
done well to have made ; instead of altering, as they have done, “itself” into ¢hem- 
selves.’ Collier’s MS also made the same emendation. 

25. I haue lost command] JoHNson: I am not master of my own emotions, — 
STEEVENS: Surely, he rather means,—I extrea¢ you to leave me, because I have lost 
all power to command your absence. [Unquestionably.] 

38. Yes my Lord, yes] CaPELL (i, 39): These words puzzl’d the Oxford editor 
[Hanmer], and some others besides him; and that for want of duly reflecting upon 
the situation of the person who speaks them: Bury’d in thought and sightless, with- 
out knowledge of what is said to him or where he is, he just hears a voice; replies to 
it, as it had come from some courtier or other great person, and relapses immediately 
into the same train of thinking that engag’d him before; nor is he wak’d out of it, 
’till Eros (either raising his voice, or shaking him) says—‘ Sir, the queen.’ —[line 54. 


224 DHE TRAGEDIEAOLR [ACT Ill, SC. xi. 


His fword e’ne like a dancer, while I ftrooke 39 
39. e’ne] Ff, Rowe, +, Var. ’21, Coll. 39. frrooke] firook ¥ .F,, Rowe, +, Cap. 

Sing. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Glo. Cam. even struck Var.’73. 

Cap. et cet. 


Capell is right, I think, in his interpretation of these words. Anthony is utterly 
unconscious of the world about him; but roused, for a second, by the voice, or, 
possibly, the respectful hand of Eros, he answers at random with instinctive courtesy, 
which, indeed, is pathetic in the circumstances, ‘ Yes, my lord, yes.? STAUNTON, 
aowever, apparently hears in the expression a somewhat petulant tone. ‘This kind 
of rejoinder,’ he remarks, ‘sometimes in play, sometimes in petulance, is not unfre- 
quent in our old dramas. See Mer. of Ven. II, ix, 89, 90,’—where a Messenger 
enters and asks, ‘ Where is my Lady?’ and Portia gaily replies, ‘ Here, what would 
my Lord?’ As instances similar to this reply of Portia, Dyce (Remarks, p. 55) 
quotes ad loc. from 4 Hen. JV; II, iv: ‘ Hostess. O Jesu! my lord the prince. 
P. Henry. How now, my /ady, the hostess.” From Rich. /7> V,v: ‘ Groom. 
Hail, royal prince! King Richard. Thanks, noble peer.’ And from Zhe Hogge 
hath Lost his Pearle, 1614, sig. H: ‘ Enter Peter with a candle. Peter. Where are 
you, my Lord? Hog. Here, my Lady.’ Of these three instances, that from Rich. 
77. should be eliminated, I think. There is neither gaiety nor petulance in Richard’s 
reply to the Groom, but sarcasm, as the context shows. In his note on this same 
reply of Portia, Staunton says: ‘a dozen instances may be cited, where a similar 
expression is used by an individual of station to one of very inferior rank’; but 
he merely repeats those already given by Dyce, without any addition. In default, 
therefore, of more examples, we can hardly accept these three, Portia’s, Prince 
Hal’s, and Hog’s, as sufficient to warrant the belief that this mode of expression 
was common; and the fact that in all of them there lies banter or sarcasm, is 
quite enough to deprive them of any similarity to Anthony’s present words, which, I 
think, stand quite alone, and have been rightly interpreted by Capell. Hupbson, 
however, gives a different meaning to them. ‘Antony,’ he says, ‘is muttering to 
himself under an overpowering sense of shame. In ‘‘ Yes, my lord, yes,” he is 
referring to Cesar: ‘ Yes, Czesar, you have done me now, and can have things all 
your own way.” ’—ED. ] 

38, 39. he at Philippi kept His sword e’ne like a dancer] JoHNsON: In the 
Morisco, and perhaps anciently in the Pyrrhick dance, the dancers held swords in 
their hands with the points upward.—STEEVENS: I believe it means that Cesar 
never offered to draw his sword, but kept it in the scabbard, like one who dances 
with a sword on, which was formerly the custom in England.—MALONE: That Mr 
Steevens’s explanation is just, appears from a passage in A//’s Well; Bertram, 
lamenting that he is kept from the wazs, says—‘ Creaking my shoes . . . Till honour 
be bought up, and no sword worn, But one to dance with.’ [II, i, 31.] The word 
worn shows that in both passages our author was thinking of the English, and not 
of the Pyrrhick, or the Morisco, dance (as Dr Johnson supposed), in which the 
sword was ot worn at the side, but held in the hand with the point upward.— 
STAUNTON (Note on 4//’s Well, II, i, 31): As it was the fashion in Shakespeare’s 
time for gentlemen to dance with swords on, and the ordinary weapon was liable to 
impede their motions, rapiers, light and short, were made for the purpose :—‘ when 
our Gentlemen went simply . . . without Cuts or gards, bearing their heauy Swordes 


ACT ill, SC. xi.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA. 225 


The leane and wrinkled Ca/fius, and ’twas I 40 
That the mad Lrutus ended : he alone 
Dealt on Lieutenantry, and no practife had 


In the braue fquares of Warre : yet now : no matter. 43 
41. mad | sad Han. Jad or mild Theob. 43. now; no matter| now—no matter 
conj. (Nichols 7/7. ii, 503) withdrawn. — Rowe, +, Var. ’73. ow—wVo matter. 


man Cap. conj. (Votes, i, 40; also Gar. Cap. et cet. (subs.) 
p- 100) withdrawn. 


and Buckelers on their thighes, in sted of cuts and Gardes and “ght daunsing Swordes.’ 
—Stafford’s Briefe Conceipt of English Pollicy, 1581. 

38-43. HAz.iTT (p. 100) : The passage after Antony’s defeat by Augustus where 
he is made to [utter these words] is one of those fine retrospections which shew us 
the winding and eventful march of human life. The jealous attention which has 
been paid to the unities both of time and place has taken away the principle of per- 
spective in the drama, and all the interest which objects derive from distance, from 
contrast, from privation, from change of fortune, from long-cherished passion ; and 
contracts our view of life from a strange and romantic dream, long, obscure, and 
infinite, into a smartly contested, three hours’ inaugural disputation on its merits by 
the different candidates for theatrical applause. 

41. the mad Brutus] UPTON (p. 296): Why does Antony call Brutus ‘mad’? 
Plato seeing how extravagantly Diogenes acted the philosopher, said of him Zhat 
he was Socrates run mad. ‘There is also a maxim drawn from the depth of philoso- 
phy by Horace, Zpzst. I, vi, 15: ‘/nsant sapiens nomen ferat, eequus iniqui, Ultra 
quam satis est virtutem si petat ipsam.’ Now if this be the opinion of philosophers 
themselves concerning philosophy, that it may be pursued with so much ardor and 
enthusiasm, that even the over-strained pursuit may border on madness ; how agree- 
able it is to the character of the wild, undisciplin’d Antony, to call even Brutus Aad, 
the sober Brutus, the philosopher and patriot? Such as Antony look on all virtue 
and patriotism as enthusiasm and madness. 

42. Dealt on Lieutenantry] JoHNSON: I know not whether the meaning is, 
that Ceesar acted only as lieutenant at Philippi, or that he made his attempts only on 
lieutenants, and left the generals to Antony.—STEEVENS: I believe it means only,— 
‘fought by proxy,’ made war by his lieutenants, or oz the strength of his lieutenants. 
So, in a former scene, Ventidius observes—‘ Cesar and Antony have ever won More in 
their officer, than person.’—[III, i, 20. ]—Matone: Inthe Life of Antony, Shakspeare 
found the following: ‘—they were always more fortunate when they made warre by 
their lieutenants, than by themselves’ ;—[see III, i, 16] which fully explains the 
present passage. The subsequent words also—‘ and no practice had,’ etc. show that 
Mr Steevens has rightly interpreted this passage. —M. MASON: Steevens’s explanation 
of this passage is just, and agreeable to the character here given of Augustus. Shak- 
speare represents him, in the next Act, as giving his orders to Agrippa, and remain- 
ing unengaged himself: ‘Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight. ...’? Again: ‘Go, 
charge, Agrippa.’—STAUNTON: Or it may mean ¢vaded in war's theory :—‘I met 
just now a usurer, that only deals upon ounces.’ — The Witty Fair One, V, i.— 
ScumipT (Zex. s.v. Deal) : Acted by substitutes. 

43. squares of Warre] CenTuRY DicTIonary (s.v. Square, 9): A body of 
troops drawn up in quadrilateral form. The formation used in the sixteenth century 


15 


226 THE TRAGEDIE OF (ACT ATI, SC: x1 


Cleo. Ah ftand by. 
Eyvos. The Queene my Lord, the Queene. 45 
lvas. Go to him, Madam, fpeake to him, 
Hee’s vnqualited with very fhame. 
Cleo. Well then, fuftaine me : Oh. 
vos. Moft Noble Sir arife, the Queene approaches, 


Her head’s declin’d, and death will ceafe her, but 50 
44. Ah] Ah me !/ Cap. 47. Hee’s|] Walker. He zs Ff et seq. 
fiand by.) stand you by [To Eros. ungualited | ungualitied Theob. 
Words. et seq. 
[rising. Cap. 48. then, | then,— Cap. et seq. 
45. Queene.| gueen— Rowe,+. Oh.| Oh !— Rowe. oh! Theob. 
46, 47. Go... unqualited | One line, O/ Cap. 
Cap. Walker, Words. [Rising. Coll. ii. 
46. /peake to him,| speak ; Words. 50. cea/e] /eize Ff et seq. 


and afterward was a nearly solid body of pikemen, to which the harquebusiers, cross- 
bowmen, etc. formed an accessory, as by being posted on the flanks, etc. In Shake- 
speare’s time troops drawn up in battle array were primarily in squares. 

47. Hee’s vnqualited] MALonE: I suppose she means, he is wmsoldier’d. 
Quality, in Shakspeare’s age, was often used for professtcon.—STEEVENS: Perhaps, 
ungualitied, only signifies uxmanned in general, ‘disarmed of his usual faculties,’ 
without any particular reference to soldiership. 

50. cease] HuDSON ‘strongly suspects that “‘cease’’ should be retained,’ because 
Shakespeare ‘ repeatedly uses cease as a causative verb.’ [See Zext. Votes for the 
accepted reading. ] 

50. but] JoHNsoN: ‘But’ has here, as once before in this play, the force of except 
or unless. [Johnson refers, probably, to I, i, 57, where the meaning which he claims 
for the word is somewhat doubtful. See also IV, xi, 2; V, i, 34.]—-MALONE: I 
rather incline to think that ‘ but’ has here its ordinary signification. If it had been 
used for zwmless, Shakespeare would, I conceive, have written, according to his 
usual practices, make.—[Possibly, accepting this hint, Dyce conjectured make ; 
and his conjecture was adopted in the text by HUDSON and WoRDsworTH. John- 
son is so far right, I think, in his interpretation that ws/ess seems a better para- 
phrase than omly, which is what ABBOTT (§ 124) gives, with the remark that ‘this 
[present] passage illustrates the connection between ‘‘ but’’ meaning ov/y and “ but’”’ 
used adversatively.? See notes, especially Walker’s, on ‘But being charg’d,’ IV, 
xi, 2, where ‘But’ can hardly mean only, and is almost uniformly said to mean 
unless. In the present passage FRANZ (§ 414, b. a.) observes that ‘ but’ is equiva- 
lent to 7f... mot; that is, ‘death will seize her, zf your comfort does zo¢ make the 
rescue’; and quotes a parallel passage in Twelfth Night (III, i, 40) where Feste 
says, ‘I would be sorry, sir, but the Foole should be as oft with your master, as with 
my Mistress ;’ again, in Love’s Lab. Lost (IV, i, 106) where Boyet says, ‘I am 
much deceived, but I remember the style.’ Where shades of meaning are in question, 
it is folly to be dogmatic. Yet if choice must be here made between the three mean- 
ings : ‘but’ adversative, and ‘ but’ as equivalent to w/ess, only, and ‘but’ as equiv- 
alent to if... mot, the last seems, I think, the best. The use of the indicative 


ACT Ill, SC. xi.] AMTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 227, 


Your comfort makes the refcue. 51 
Ant. I haue offended Reputation, 
A moft vnnoble fweruing. 
fyos. Sir, the Queene. 
Ant. Oh whether haft thou lead me Egypt, fee 55 
How I conuey my fhame, out of thine eyes, 
By looking backe what I haue left behinde 


Stroy’d in difhonor. 58 

51. makes| make Dyce conj. Huds. 55. Oh whether| O whither Ff et seq. 

Words. Egypt,| Egypt? Rowe et seq. 
refcue]| rescue presently Words. (subs. ) 

52, 53. Reputation.../weruing | Sepa- [starting up. Cap. 
rate line, Ktly. 56. [Rising. Coll. ii. 

52. Reputation,| Ff. reputation,— 57. what] Ff, Coll. Sing. Dyce, Wh. 
Dyce, Sta. Glo,Cam. refutation ; Rowe Sta. Glo. Cam. on what Rowe et cet. 
et cet. I haue| I’ve Pope,+. 

53. /weruing.| Ff. swerving— Rowe, 58. Stroyd] ’Stroy’d Pope,+, Cap. 
+, Var.’73. swerving: Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Coll. Wh. 


‘makes’ after the conditional ‘but,’ FRANz (§ 487, b. Zudikativ) ascribes to the 
sureness, the reality of the conclusion.—Ep. ] 

52. Reputation] That is, ‘reputation’ in the abstract. Compare Othello (II, ii, 
291, of this ed.) where Cassio exclaims: ‘Reputation, Reputation, Reputation: Oh 
I haue lost my Reputation. I haue lost the immortall part of myselfe, and what 
remaines is bestiall.’ 

53. A most vnnoble] CoLLier (ed. ii): The MS here has, ‘ By most unnoble,’ 
but it can hardly be called a necessary emendation, although it is very likely what 
the actor spoke. ; 

55 and 62, Egypt] CoLErIDGcE (p. 236) says that ‘the stage in Shakespeare’s 
time was a naked room with a blanket for a curtain; but he made it a field for 
monarchs.’ And moreover taught those monarchs the right royal mode of addressing 
each other. ‘Who is it thou dost call usurper, France ?’—King John, Il, i, 120; 
‘England, thou hast not saved one drop of blood.’ — /ézd. II, i, 342 (there is many and 
many an instance in this same play of Azzg_ John, where monarchs are the chief actors). 
‘Myself am Naples’ Ferdinand says in 7he Tempest. There have been already two 
or three instances in this present play where Anthony addresses Cleopatra as ‘Egypt,’ 
and there are others in the scenes to come; notably where Anthony is dying.—ED. 

56. How I conuey my shame, etc.] JOHNSON: How, by looking another way, 
I withdraw my ignominy from your sight.—STAUNTON imparts, better, perhaps, than 
Johnson, the subtle meaning of ‘convey’ by paraphrasing the sentence thus: ‘ How 
I pass by sleight my shame out of thy sight, in looking another way.’ 

57. By looking backe what I haue left behinde] ABsorT (§ 200) quotes this 
passage, among others, as an instance of the omission of the preposition ‘after some 
verbs which can easily be regarded as transitive,’ and thus explains it: ‘ While turn- 
ing away from Cleopatra, Antony appears to say, that he is Jooking back (for) the 
fleet that he has left dishonoured and destroyed.’ Again, in § 220, he interprets the 
present ‘looking’ as equivalent to looking .. . for. 

58. Stroy’d] CAPELL (i, 40) : [This word] the present editor was greatly tempted 


228 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. xi. 


Cleo. Oh my Lord, my Lord, 
Forgiue my fearfull fayles, I little thought 60 
You would haue followed. 
Ant. Egypt, thou knew’ft too well, 
My heart was to thy Rudder tyed by’th’ftrings, 
And thou fhould’ft ftowe me after. O’re my fpirit 
The full fupremacie thou knew’ft, and that 65 
Thy becke, might from the bidding of the Gods 
Command mee. 
Cleo. Oh my pardon. 
Ant. Now I muft 
To the young man fend humble Treaties, dodge 70 
And palter in the fhifts of lownes, who 
With halfe the bulke o’th’world plaid as I pleas’d, 


Making, and marring Fortunes. You did know 73 
61. followed | follow’d Pope et seq. i, Coll. Wh. i. Zhy full Theob. ii et 
63. by’ th’] by th’ F,F,, Rowe,+. by cet. 

the Var. 73 et seq. 68. Oh] Oh, Rowe. O, Cap. 

Strings] string Rowe ii,+. 70. Treaties] ’treaties Cap. Ktly. 
64. ftowe] towe Rowe et seq. (subs.) 71. /hifts| shift Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. 


65. The full] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 


to alter ; not meerly upon account of it’s harshness or it’s uncommon apheeresis, (for 
that, perhaps, might be justify’d by parallel instances) but because a better image 
presents itself,—and such a one as the passage seems to point out to,—by the 
admission of a word very near it in character,—s¢vew’d or strow’d. The following 
comment will shew what the editor thinks, is the image intended; and which is 
indeed seen in the words as they stand, but more plainly if strow’d be admitted: ... 
‘ By looking back on what I have left behind, S¢vow’d in dishonour,’ or in the paths 
of dishonour; meaning—his ruin’d fortunes; which, as they had been riches, or 
other realities, s¢row’d the way which he took in his flight. 

63. tyed by’th’strings] JoHNSoN: That is, by the Aeart-strings. 

64. thou should’st] See ABBort, § 326, for examples of this Elizabethan use of 
should, where we now use might or would. 

64. should’st stowe] MALONE: This is one of the many corruptions occasioned 
‘by the transcriber’s ear deceiving him.—[ Was it the ‘ transcriber’ or the compositor’ s 
reader ?—ED. ] 

64. spirit] WALKER’s pronunciation of ¢ spirit’ asa monosyllable would be intoler- 
able here to our modern ears. See I, ii, 143.—Eb. 

65. The full supremacie] Dyce (Remarks, p. 247): Read, with the other 
modern editors, 7Zy. In such a case as this the authority of the old eds. is nothing. 
—[I protest. Not for the sake of upholding the old editions, but because I believe 
‘ The full supremacy’ to be the better reading,—by far the better reading. The 
emphasis lies on ‘full.’ ‘The full’ should be pronounced as the perfect iambus 
which it is, with the lightest possible utterance of ‘The’: ‘77 full.” To change it 
to ‘7hy full’ converts it to a spondee, takes the emphasis from ‘full,’ and (which is 


ACT II, Sc. xil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 229 


How much you were my Conqueror, and that 
My Sword, made weake by my affe€tion, would 75 
Obey it on all caufe. 
Cleo. Pardon, pardon. 
Ant. Fall not a teare I fay, one of them rates 
All that is wonne and loft : Giue me a kiffe, 
Euen this repayes me. 80 
We fent our Schoolemafter, is a come backe ? 
Loue I am full of Lead : fome Wine 
Within there, and our Viands : Fortune knowes, 
We fcorne her moft, when moft fhe offers blowes. Exeunt 84 


[Scene XI] 
Enter Cafar, Agrippa, and Dollabello, with others. 
Ce/. Let him appeare that’s come from Anthony. 


Know you him. 
Dolla. Cefar,’tis his Schoolemafter, 4 


76. on] 7m Walker (Crit. iii, 303). ’85, Ran. 


caufe| causes Cap. Walker. 
77. Pardon] O, pardon Theob,+, 
Ktly. 
78. /ay,| say ; Pope et seq. (subs.) 
80-83. Luen... knowes| Lines end, 
schoolmaster, ... lead; ... knowes, Han. 
Cap. et seq. 


Scene XII. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
Scene VII. Rowe. Scene VIII. (mis- 


print) Pope, Warb. Johns. Scene IX. 
Han. Scene X. Cap. et cet. 
Ceesar’s Camp. Rowe. A Camp in 


Egypt. Czsar’s Tent. Cap. 
1. Dollabello] F,. 


80. me] Om. Ff, Rowe. ... with others.] Thidias, with 
81. @ come] FF, he come F, et others. Rowe. Thyreus, with others. 
seq. Theob. 
82. Lead: lead. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 2. from] for Ff. 
Cam. 3. Know] Kuow F.,. 
83. Within] Om. Han. Cap. Var.’78, 4. Schoolemafter| soothsayer Gar. 


of importance), weakens, when repeated, the emphatic force of ‘Thy’ in the next 
line.—ED. ] 

76. cause] ABBOTT (§ 453): If the diphthong ‘cause’ be pronounced as a dis- 
syllable, the difficulty [in the scansion of the line] will be avoided. ‘ Pardon, par- 
don’ is, perhaps, an instance of two consecutive trochees. (There seems no ground 
for supposing that ‘ pardon’ is to be pronounced as in French.) [Is not Capell’s 
emendation, causes, upheld by Walker (C7rz¢. iii, 303) ‘for grammar’s sake,’ far pref- 
erable to the pronunciation ca-use ?—ED. ] 

78. Fall not a teare] AsgBort (§ 291) includes ‘ fall’ ina list of intransitive verbs 
which are sometimes converted into transitive. FRANZ (§ 476, c.) explains this con- 
version by detecting in the verb a causative force, as in the present passage; and 
again in the verb ‘ quail,’ V, ii, 104. 

78. rates] STAUNTON: That is, counts for, is equivalent to. 

1. Agrippa] CoLLIER: Agrippa does not appear to have been on the stage. 


230 * THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. xii. 


An argument that he is pluckt, when hither 5 
He fends fo poore-a Pinnion of his Wing, 
Which had fuperfluous Kings for Meffengers, 
Not many Moones gone by. 
Enter Ambaffador from Anthony. 

Cefar. Approach, and fpeake. 10 
-: Amb. Such as I am, I come from Anthony : 
I was of late as petty to his ends, 
As is the Morne-dew on the Mertle leafe 


To his grand Sea. 14 
9. Ambaffador] Euphronius. Cap. et -dew Ktly conj. 

seq. Soothsayer. Gar. Freedman, Eros. 13. Mertleleafe| Myrtle leaf¥ ,. Myr- 

Kemble. tle Leaf ¥,. myrtle-leaf Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
11. Amb.] Eup. Cap. Cam. Ktly. 
13. Morne-dew] ¥¥,. Morn dew ¥ , 14. zs] the Han. Johns. Wh. i, Huds. 


Cap. morn-dew Rowe et cet. morning- this Tyrwhitt, Ktly. 


9g. Ambassador] CAPELL (i, 40): Finding a name [Euphronius] in Plutarch for 
[this Ambassador] that is more determinate, it seem’d not amiss to give it him here. 
{See Plutarch, Appendix. ] 
14. To his grand Sea] TyRWHITT: To whose grand sea? I know not. Per- 
haps we should read: ‘To ¢hzs grand sea.’ We may suppose that the sea was within 
view of Czesar’s camp, and at no great distance.—CaPELL (i, 40) : Meaning—the 
sea that he (the dew-drop) arose from. [Steevens, also, gives this meaning, and 
adds, ‘“his” is used for 7z¢s,’]|—STEEVENS: ‘His grand sea’ may mean his ‘full 
tide of prosperity.’ So, in 7 Hen. VI: IV, viii, 54: ‘ You are the fount that makes 
small brooks to flow ; Now stops thy spring ; my sea shall suck them dry, And swell 
so much the higher by their ebb.’ Again, in Zhe Zwo Noble Kinsmen, I, iii, 6 :— 
‘though I know His ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they Must yield their tribute 
there.’ Tollet offers a further explanation of the change proposed by Tyrwhitt : 
‘ Alexandria, towards which Cesar was marching, is situated on the coast of the 
Mediterranean sea, which is sometimes called mare magnum, Sir John Maundeville 
[Cap. xlvii.] calls that part of the Mediterranean which washes the coast of Palestine, 
‘the grete see.’—RiTson: If ‘his’ be not used for z/s, Shakespeare has made a per- 
son of ‘morn-drop.’—R. G. WHITE (ed. i): ‘ His,’ in my judgement is a manifest 
typographical error. Hanmer corrected it. But of late years ‘his’ has been retained 
on the supposition that it alludes to the sea as the origin of the dew-drop! [In his 
ed. ii, White retains ‘his,’ without comment.]—WALKER, both in his Cr7z, i, 314 
and in his Crt. iii, 303, approves of ¢he instead of ‘his’; at the latter place, 
he quotes, in support of his approval, the same passage that Steevens quoted from 
The Two Noble Kinsmen ; and in a footnote LETTSOM, Walker’s editor, strenuously 
upholds ¢he. ‘It is astonishing,’ he says, ‘that, though this obvious blunder was 
corrected by Hanmer, more than a century.ago, it has maintained itself in all the 
editions, except Johnson’s, that I have consulted. Steevens, even, has defended 
his by quoting the very passage which Walker here compares on account of the 
similarity in the sense. But in Zhe Two Noble Kinsmen we have a metaphor; in 


ACT III, SC. xil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 231 


Cef. Bee’t fo, declare thine office. ame 
Amb. Lord of his Fortunes he falutes thee, and 
Requires to liue in Egypt, which not granted 
He Leffons his Requefts, and to thee fues 
To let him breath betweene the Heauens and Earth 
A priuate man in Athens : this for him. 20 
Next, Cleopatra does confeffe thy Greatneffe , 
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craues 
The Circle of the Ptolomies for her heyres, 
Now hazarded to thy Grace. 
Cef. For Anthony, 25 
I haue no eares to his requeft. The Queene, 


15. Beet] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. Gar. 


Glo. Cam. Je zt Cap. et cet. 19. breath] F,, Rowe, Cap. breathe 
17. Lgypt,| Lgypt; Rowe et seq. FF, et cet. 

(subs. ) 23. heyres| heirs FF. 
18. Leffons] Leffens Ff. 24. Grace] Gace F,. 


Reque/ts...to thee| request...of thee 


Ant. & Cleop.,a simile. Had the case been reversed, the writer of the passage in 
the former play would necessarily have said, “ He no more needs me than ¢he ocean 
needs a few drops’’; while Shakespeare would have said, just as necessarily, “I am 
a dew-drop to 47s grand sea.’’’—[ There can be no doubt that the sentence is intelli- 
gible. Hanmer’s emendation is, I think, logically just. It is extremely probable 
that the error is Shakespeare’s. But it is one which demands some little mental 
analysis to detect and correct, in which, if we indulge, while sitting at the play, 
Euphronius will have delivered his message and departed before we have settled 
the propriety of his opening speech. And there are minds of a cast so ignoble as to 
prefer, where the sense is perfectly obvious, an incorrect word of Shakespeare to a 
correct one of Hanmer.—ED. ] 

17. Requires] DEIGHTON: This verb is seldom used in Shakespeare in the 
peremptory sense the word would now have in such a context ; compare Hen. VIII: 
II, iv, 144, ‘Most gracious sir, In humblest manner I require your highness, That 
it shall please you to declare,’ etc., said by Wolsey to the king. 

17. which not granted] See ApgorT (§ 377) for other instances of the use of the 
participle ‘to express a condition, where, for perspicuity we should now mostly insert 
“if”? See ‘not petty things admitted,’ V, ii, 169. 

18. He Lessons] THISELTON (p. 20): ‘ Lessons’ is undoubtedly Shakespeare’s 
word here in the sense of schools or disciplines. The initial capital indicates an 
emphasis which the feeble /essens would hardly carry, but which the metaphorical 
‘Lessons’ carries easily. The fact that the ambassador is on this occasion a school- 
master should have been sufficient to have warded off the sacrilegious hand of the 
emendator. 

23. The Circle of the Ptolomies] JoHNson: The diadem; the ensign of 
royalty. 

24. hazarded] ScumipT (Zex.): That is, staked and lost to thee, as at gaming. 


232 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT III, SC. xii. 


Of Audience, nor Defire fhall faile, fo fhee 25 
From Egypt driue her all-difgraced Friend, 


Or take his life there. 


This if fhee performe, 


She fhall not fue vnheard. So to them both. 30 


Amb, Fortune purfue thee. 


Cef. Bring him through the Bands : 
To try thy Eloquence, now ’tis time, difpatch, 
From Axthony winne Cleopatra, promife 
And in our Name, what fhe requires, adde more 35 


From thine inuention, offers. 


Women are not 


In their beft Fortunes ftrong ; but want will periure 


The ne’re touch’d Veftall. 


Try thy cunning T/idzas,| 


Make thine owne Ediét for thy paines, which we 


Will anfwer as a Law. 


29. This] This, Rowe, Pope. 
31. thee.| thee! Theob. et seq. thee— 
Anon, ap. Cam. 
32. Bands :] bands. Han. Cap. et seq. 
[Exit Ambassador. Rowe. Exit 
Euphronius, attended. Cap. 
33. [To Thidias. Rowe, Pope. To 
Thyreus. Theob. et seq. 
now’ tis time] now's the time Cap. 
conj. 
time, | time ; Theob. Warb. et seq. 
aifpatch,| dispatch : Cap. Var. ’78 
et seq. (subs. ) 


34. Cleopatra, promife] Cleopatra 


40 


Roweii. Cleopatra, promise, Pope, Han. 
Cleopatra, promise ; Theob. Warb. CZeo- 
patra ; promise, Johns. Cap. et seq. 

35. Wame,| name ; Han. 

what | when Ff, Rowe,+. 

35, 36. more From] more; Frame 
Kinnear. 

36. From thine inuention, offers.| As 
thine invention offers. Han. (from thine 
invention) offers. Warb. Offers from 
thine invention. Ktly, Huds. 

38. ne’re touch’ d | ne’ er-touch’d Pope 
et seq. 

Thidias] 7hyreus Theob. et seq. 


27. nor Desire] See ABBOTT (§ 396) for other examples of the ‘ ellipsis of Mecther 
before Vor.’ 

35, 30. adde more From thine inuention, offers] WALKER ((C7?t. i, 253): 
Read : ‘aud more, From thine invention, offer. —R. G. WHITE (ed. i): The inver- 
sion in this sentence is so distracting and so needless, that it seems to me quite prob- 
able, at least, that there has been accidental transposition, and that Shakespeare may 
have written :—‘ promise What she requires ; and in our name add more Offers from 
thine invention.’—[See 7ext. Motes, for the text of KEIGHTLEY and Hupson, 
WHITE (ed. ii) retained the text of the Folio, with the remark that it is ‘a fine 
example of Shakespeare’s utter recklessness in the use of language.’ ]—DEIGHTON : 
The position of ‘offers’ seems to be intentionally emphatic. 

38. Thidias] THEOBALD, here and throughout, changed this name to 7hyreus, 
on no other authority than because the name of the ambassador is so given in North’s 
Plutarch ; and he has been herein followed by every editor.—ED. 

39, 40. Make thine owne Edict .. . answer as a Law] DEIGHTON: That is, 
fix your own reward, if you succeed, and I will consider its payment as binding upon 
me as a law. 


ACT Ill, Sc. xiii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 233 


Thid. Ce/far,\ go. 


4I 


Cefar. Obferue how Anthony becomes his flaw, 
And what thou think’{t his very ation fpeakes 


In euery power that mooues. 


Thid. Cafar, 1 thall. 


exeunt. 45 


[Scene XTIT.] 


Enter Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, & Iras. 


Cleo. 


fino. Thinke, and dye. 


41, 45. Thid.] Thyr. Theob. et seq. 


42. flaw,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Coll. 
Dyce, Sta. Glo, Cam. Hal. flaw; Theob. 


What fhall we do, Exobarbus ? 


3 


Scene VIII. Rowe. Scene IX. Pope, 
Warb. Johns. Scene X. Han. Act IV. 
Sc. i. Coll. (MS). Scene XI. Cap. et cet. 


Alexandria. Rowe. A Room.in the 
Palace. Cap. 
2. do] Om. Steev. conj. 


et cet. 
43. think’/2] thinkeft Ff, Rowe. 
45. exeunt.] Exent. F.. 
Scene XIII. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 


42. how Anthony becomes his flaw] JOHNSON: That is, how Antony conforms 
himself to this breach of his fortune.—STAUNTON: This is not very clear.— 
DEIGHTON : In ‘flaw’ there is, perhaps, an allusion to another meaning of the word, 
common in Shakespeare, viz. sudden bursts of wind. 

43, 44. his very action speakes In euery power that mooues] STEEVENS: 
So, in Trozl. & Cress. IV, v, §7: ‘her foot speaks ; her wanton spirits look out At 
every joint and motive of her body.’ 

2. Enobarbus] WALKER (Vers. 186) : This name in this play is frequently used 
as if it were a trisyllable, in whatever way the anomaly is tobe explained. [See IV, 
V,123 5 LV, v1, 20;)) 1V, ix, 12, 14.-} 

3. Thinke, and dye] In North’s Plutarch mention is made of a convivial club, 
presumably founded by Anthony after the battle of Actium, the members whereof 
agreed that they would die together. (See Appendix.) Supposing that an allusion 
is here made to this club, HANMER changed ‘Thinke’ to Driz%, an emendation 
which has had but two admirers: Warburton and Capell. Both adopted it in their 
text, and the latter pronounced it “most true and ingenious.’ JOHNSON did ‘ not 
advance it into the page, not being convinced that it is necessary. ‘* Think and 
die’’; that is, Reflect on your folly, and leave the world, is a natural answer..—TYR- 
WHITT (p. 9): I grant it would be, according to [Johnson’s] explanation, a very 
proper answer from a moralist or a divine ; but Enobarbus, I doubt, was neither the 
one nor the other. Heis drawn asa Plain, blunt soldier; not likely, however, to 
offend so grossly in point of delicacy as Hanmer’s alteration would make him. I 
believe the true reading is: ‘Win, and die.’ When the ship is going to be cast 
away, in Zhe Sea Voyage of Beaumont and Fletcher (I, i), and Aminta is lamenting, 
Tibalt says to her: ‘—Go, take your gilt prayer-book, and to your business; 
Wink, and die :’ insinuating plainly, that she was afraid to meet death with her eyes 
open. And the same insinuation, I think, Enobarbus might very naturally convey 
in his return to Cleopatra’s desponding question.—STEEVENS: The old reading may 


234 THE TRAGE DIE OF [ACT 111, SC. xiii, 


Cleo. 1s Anthony, or we in fault for this ? 
Eno. Anthony onely, that would make his will 5 
Lord of his Reafon. What though you fled, 
From that great face of Warre, whofe feuerall ranges 
Frighted each other? Why fhould he follow ? 
The itch of his Affection fhould not then 


Haue nickt his Captain-fhip, at fuch a point, 10 
6. though] although Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Ktly. a’ follow’d 
Han. Warb. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Ktly. Anon. ap, Cam. 
8. other ?] other, Coll. Wh. Cam. Hal. 10. Captain-/hip,| captainship, Rowe. 
Ktly. captainshif Pope, Han. captainship ; 


follow ?| follow you Pope, Theob. Theob. Warb. et seq. 


be supported by the following passage in /wlius Cesar: ‘all that he can do Is to 
himself, take thought, and die for Cesar.’ [II, i, 187.] Tollet observes, that the 
expression of éaking thought, in our old English writers, is equivalent to the being 
anxious or solicitous, or laying a thing much to heart. Tyrwhitt, however, might 
have given additional support to his reading from a passage in 2 Hen. 7V = I, iii, 
33: ‘led his powers to death And wixkimg leap’d into destruction.’—TYRWHITT : 
After all that has been written upon this passage, I believe the old reading is right ; 
but then we must understand think and die to mean the same as aie of thought, or 
melancholy. In this sense is thought used below, IV, vi, 43, and by Holinshed, 
Chronicles of Ireland, p. 97: ‘his father liued in the tower—where for shought of 
the young man his follie Ze ded.’ There is a passage almost exactly similar in The 
Beggars Bush of Beaumont and Fletcher : ‘Can I not ¢hink away myself and die?’ 
[V, i.J—HeEniey: ‘Think and die.’ Consider what mode of ending your life 
is most preferable, and immediately adopt it—KNiIGHT: Here is a noble answer 
from the rough soldier to the voluptuous queen... . We may here very safely trust 
to the original—CraIk (p. 145): Zo think or to take thought, seems to have been 
formerly used in the sense of to give way to sorrow and despondency.—[ Possibly, 
our most familiar quotation is, ‘Take no thought for the morrow.’—Matthew, vi, 
34. ]—STAUNTON: Despair and die.—Hupson: This is equivalent to grieve our- 
selves to death. 

6. What though] WALKER (C77. ii, 156) Read metri gratia, ‘What an though’ ; 
unless ‘ what although’ be allowable, which I doubt.—STAUNTON (A¢heneum, 26 
April, 1873) : Something is missing from the line. Perhaps—‘ What though you, 
timorous, fled.’ 

7. whose seuerall ranges] STAUNTON: The commentators, perhaps, have a per- 
ception of what this means, since they pass it silently ; to us it is inexplicable, and 
we cannot choose but look on ‘ranges’ as a misprint for the vages of grim-visag’d 
war.—SCHMIDT (Zex.): ‘Ranges,’ that is, avs. [Compare, ‘the wide Arch Of 
the raing’d Empire,’ I, i, 46.] 

10. Haue nickt] STEEVENS: That is, set the mark of folly on it. So, in Zhe 
Com. of Errors, ‘and the while His man with scissors nicks him like a fool.’ [V, i, 
175.—This passage of itself does not, I think, prove that the hair of fools was inten- 
tionally cut in nicks; DEIGHTON remarks, ‘it is only because Pinch’s hair was 
cut in this disfiguring way that he is made to look like a fool.’ At this same passage 


ACT Il, Sc. xill.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 235 


_ When halfe to halfe the world oppos’d, he being II 
The meered queftion? ’Twas a fhame no leffe 


11,12. he being The meered| begins Cam. empery Bulloch. merest Kinnear. 
The mortal Orger. and he Was the mere mered Mal. et cet. 


Words. 12. guefiton ?| question. Rowe et seq. 
12. meered | Ff, Pope,+, Cap. Varr. (subs. ) 
Glo. meer Rowe. admired Mitford ap. ’ Twas] Tis ¥,. ’ Tis ¥,¥,, Rowe. 


in Com. of Errors, MALONE gives a quotation which he deems conclusive ; it is from 
The Choice of Change... by S. R. Gent, 1598, as follows: ‘Three things used by 
monks, which provoke other men to laugh at their follies, 1. They are shaven and 
notched on the head, like fooles.’ It is probable that here ‘ fooles’ refers, not to the 
domestic or ‘allowed fools,’ but to idiots.. Douce (ii, 323), in his exhaustive essay 
On the Clowns and Fools of Shakespeare, says that, ‘The head was frequently shaved 
in imitation or perhaps ridicule of a monk’s crown. This practice is very ancient, and 
can be traced to the twelfth century. In one instance, the hair exhibits a sort of triple 
or Papal crown.’ The reference, in the present line, is a coarse one, but then Enobarbus 
was of coarse fibre. From what we know of the neglected personal habits of Fools, 
the inference is not strained that they were liable to cutaneous ailments, and of such 
ailments the only one that could ‘ nick’ anything was the ‘itch,’ and the only thing it 
could nick was the hair. Posszbly, this nicking was so common among Fools as to 
make the term almost synonymous with folly. In the Pathology of those days all irri- 
tating cutaneous diseases were called the ‘itch,’ but this term is not now applied to 
affections of the scalp. In answer to my question on the subject, I received from my 
friend, Dr L. A. DUHRING, an acknowledged authority on Cutaneous Diseases, the fol- 
lowing reply :—‘ The affection referred to, in the passage you quote from Antony and 
Cleopatra, is not the itch, or scabies, but, without question, the common “ ringworm of 
the scalp,’’ a frequent and well-defined affection, which causes the destruction of the 
hair, giving to the area invaded a nicked or cropped appearance, and in my works I 
describe the hair (as do many other writers) as seeming to have been “ nibbled off.’’ 
It is due to a fungus, and the sensation of itching accompanies it.’—ED. ] 

II, 12. he being The meered question] JoHNSoN: ‘The mered question’ is a 
term I do not understand. I know not what to offer, except ‘ The mooted question.’ 
That is, the dzsputed point, the subject of debate. ere is indeed a Joundary ; and 
the meered question, if it can mean anything, may, with some violence of language, 
mean, the disputed boundary.—STEEVENS : So, in Stanyhurst’s translation of Virgil, 
b. iii. 1582: ‘ Wheare too ioynctlye mearing a cantel of Italye neereth.’ Barrett, in his 
Alvearie, 1580, interprets a meere-stone by Terminalis lapis. ‘Question’ is certainly 
the true reading. So, in Hamlet, I, i: ‘— the king That was and is the guestion 
of these wars.—M. Mason: Possibly Shakspeare might have coined the word 
meered, and derived it from the adjective mere or meer. In that case, the mcered 
question might mean, the only cause of the dispute—the only subject of the quarrel. 
—KnicHT: Mere is a boundary; and ¢o mere is to mark, to limit—CoLier (ed. 
ii): It is altered to mooted in the MS; but as ‘mered’ may be taken in the sense 
of sole, or mere question, we make no change.—R. G. WHITE (ed. i): It is quite 
possibly a misprint for 7zooted.—Ipip. (ed. ii): An amazing participial adjective, 
formed from mere.—[Surely, in this note we hear the voice of White’s ‘ washer- 
woman’ whose advice he said he took (see his Preface, p. xii) in the selection of his 


236 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. xili, 
Then was his loffe, to courfe your flying Flagges, 13 
And leaue his Nauy gazing. 

Cleo. Prythee peace. 15 


Enter the Ambaffador ,with Anthony. 
Ant. Is that his anfwer? Amb. I my Lord. 
Ant. The Queene fhall then haue courtefie, 
So fhe will yeeld vs vp. 
Am. He fayes fo. 20 
Antho. Let her know’t. To the Boy Ce/ar fend this 
grizled head, and he will fill thy wifhes to the brimme, 
With Principalities. 
Cleo. That head my Lord ? 
Ant. To him againe, tell him he weares the Rofe 25 
Of youth vpon him : from which, the world fhould note 


16. Enter...] Enter Antony with Amb. 
Rowe. Enter Antony with Euphronius. 
Cap. 

17. that] this Ff, Rowe. 

17, etc. Amb.] Eup. Cap. 

18-20. The Queene...fo.| Lines end, 
Queen...yield...so, Han. Cap. Steev. Var. 
73,778. 

18, 19. The Queene...So fhe] One line, 
Mal. Ran. Var. ’21, Coll. Sing. Dyce, 


Knt. 

18, 19. The Queene...vs up| One line, 
Sta. 

20. He] My Lord, he Han. Cap. 

21, 22. Let her...brimme] Lines end, 
know’ t. ...head, ...brim, Rowe et seq. 

21. know’t] Ff, Rowe, +, Cap. Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. mow zt then Steev. conj. 
know it Var.’ 73 et cet. 

25. againe,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 


Wh. i, Glo. Cam. Hal. Ktly. 
The Queene... yeeld| One line, 


again. Johns. again; Theob. et cet. 


4 


comments. He himself was too experienced an editor to be ‘amazed’ at Shake- 
speare’s freedom in forming participles—EpD.]—STAUNTON: Possibly, the entire, 
or sole question; but the word reads suspiciously.—ABBOTT (§ 294): The word 
‘meered’ is marked as corrupt by the Globe; but perhaps it is the verb from the 
adjective mcere or mere, which in Elizabethan English means entire. Hence, ‘he 
being the entire question,’ z.e. Antony, being the sole cause of the battle, ought not 
to have fled.—ELTON (p. 141): The tillage-lands and cow-pastures were protected 
by banks and fences called meers; and the name in time came to mean a ‘ marking 
off’? for any special purpose. Enobarbus applied it to Antony :—‘The meered 
question.’—[If ‘meered’ means marked off, as Elton would have it, it seems to 
yield a meaning, if intelligible, at variance with the drift of Enobarbus’s speech. So 
far from Anthony’s being marked off or excluded from the question, he was the very 
soul of it. I prefer the interpretation of Mason and Abbott.—Ep. ] 

19. So she will yeeld vs vp] For an exposition of the process whereby so 
assumes the function of a conditional conjunction, see FRANZ, § 413. 

21. the Boy Cesar] The battle of Actium was fought almost on Cesar’s birth- 
day. He was born on the 23rd of September, B.c. 63, and the battle took place on 
the 31st of September, B.c. 31; eight days after he had entered his thirty-second 
year. Anthony was just twenty years older,—in his fifty-second year.—Ep. 


ACT Ill, Sc. xili.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 237 


Something particular : His Coine, Ships, Legions, 27 
May be a Cowards, whofe Minifters would preuaile 
Vnder the feruice of a Childe, as foone 


As i’th’Command of Ce/ar. I dare him therefore 30 
To lay his gay Comparifons a-part, 
And anfwer me declin’d, Sword againft Sword, 22 
28. Minifters| ministries Cap. Ran. 31. a-fart] apart FF. 
30. 2’th’] 2’ the Cap. et seq. 32. dechin’d,| declin’d; Coll. Hal. 


31. Comparifons] caparisons Pope, dechin’d Sing. 
Han. Wh. i, Sing. Ktly, Huds. 


27. particular] WALKER (C7?z. iii, 304) : That is, personal, individual. Ford, 
Love's Sacrifice, 1, i: ‘If singular beauty, unimitable virtues, honour, youth, and 
absolute goodness be a fortune, all those are at once offered to your particular 
choice. ... The great and gracious Lady Fiormonda loves you, infinitely loves you.’ 
[p. 16, ed. Dyce. ] 

28. whose Ministers] CAPELL (i, 41, see Zext. Motes) : That is, ministrations, 
services administer’d ; but what the ‘ szzdsters of coins, ships, and legions,’ may be, 
those gentlemen should (methinks) have inform’d us, who have let the word stand 
in their several editions.—[The volume containing this play, although bearing the 
number 8, was only the second that Capell sent to press. It bears the mark of his 
’prentice hand. After more experience, he would not have emended the text, and 
we should not have had the foregoing note. It would have occurred to him that 
‘ministers’ here means the agents who execute the purposes of coins, ships, and 
legions.—Ep. ] 

31, 32. gay Comparisons a-part, And answer me declin’d] HEATH (p. 460): 
That is, those pleasing comparisons which Czsar would naturally make between his 
own circumstances and those of Antony, resulting from the advantage he had so lately 
obtained. ‘And answer me declin’d’ as I am, in power and reputation. —CAPELL 
(i, 41) : By ‘comparisons, are meant—those advantages which put the world upon 
making comparisons between Cesar and himself: these advantages, he dares Cesar 
to lay aside or deciine, and then to answer him, ‘ sword against sword.’—JOHNSON : 
I require of Czesar not to depend on that superiority which the ‘ comparison’ of our 
different fortunes may exhibit to him, but to answer me man to man, in this ‘ decline’ 
of my age or power.—[Warburton has a note to the same effect, but its display of 
his knowledge of Italian, as fanciful as it is vainglorious, excluded it, I suppose, 
from the pages of the early Variorums. MALONE remarks, ‘I have sometimes thought 
that Shakespeare wrote,—“ gay caparisons.’”’’ It is truly surprising that Malone 
should not have been aware that caparisons is the text of both Pope and Hanmer. ] 
—SINGER (reading caparisons): To ‘gay caparisons’ the next speech gives as 
an equivalent, ‘unstate his happiness,’—let him take off his imperial trappings. 
‘Declin’d’ must mean zzclined, sloped, as swords are sloped one against another at 
the commencement of a combat. The word is technical and we have elsewhere :— 
Troil, & Cress. IV, v, 189, ‘hung thy advanc’d sword i’the air, Not letting it decline 
on the declined.’—R. G. WHITE (ed. i) : Ceesar had made no comparisons of any 
kind, as may be seen by reference to the single speech which he addresses to 
Euphronius in the previous Scene. Antony, however, has more than once, and 


238 THE TRAGEDIE OF PACT II, (SC. xili: 


Our felues alone : Ie write it : Follow me. 33 
Eno. Yes like enough : hye battel’d C@/ar will 
Vnftate his happineffe, and be Stag’d to’th’fhew 35 


Againft a Sworder. I fee mens ludgements are 
A parcell of their Fortunes, and things outward 


Do draw the inward quality after them 38 
33. [Exit Ant. Rowe. Exeunt Ant. Coll. iil. enough, ... sworder. Var. ’73 
and Euph. Cap. et cet. 
34-42. Yes...too] Aside, Cap. Dyce, 34. hye battel’d | hye-battel’d Ff. 
Glo. Cam. Ktly. 35. toth’| F,, to th’ FF ,, Rowe,+. 
34-36. enough :...Sworder.| Ff, Rowe, 2’the Hal. fo the Cap. et cet. 
+,Cap. enough, ...sworder ! Dyce, Sta. 36-39. Mnemonic, Warb. 
Glo. Cam. Ktly. enough! ... sworder / 38. guality| qualities Coll. MS. 


just before, alluded to the youth and gayety of Octavius, and he now summons him 
to lay aside everything but armor and a sword, and meet him face to face in single 
combat. [In the next clause] it seems to me that there has been an accidental trans- 
position, and that we should read ‘sword against sword declin’d.’—[ DEIGHTON, 
ROLFE (who ‘ suspects that caparisons’ is the true reading), WORDSWORTH, HER- 
FORD all give good paraphrases, but none is, I think, better or more concise than 
COLLIER (ed. ii), as thus: ‘That is, his gay, youthful, and triumphant condition, 
as compared with me, in my declined or fallen state.’ Deighton justly says, ‘there 
is probably a special allusion to Antony’s declining years as compared with Czsar’s 
youth.’ That Anthony refers, not to Ceesar’s outward trappings, his caparisons, but 
to immaterial conditions, receives confirmation, I think, from the words of Enobarbus 
when he derides the thought that ‘the full Czesar will answer Anthony’s emptiness.’ 
That ‘ declin’d’ has nothing whatsoever to do with swords, is clear, I think, from its 
use in the very same sense, as I believe, in Czesar’s lament over Anthony’s death, 
where he says, ‘I must perforce Haue shewne to thee such a declining day, Or looke 
on thine,’ V, i, 47.—ED. ] 

35. Stag’d to’th’shew] HENLEY: That is, exhibited, like conflicting gladiators, 
to the public gaze. 

36, etc. I see mens Iudgements, etc.] THISELTON (p. 20): This speech is 
excellently punctuated in the Folio. Modern editors not seeing that ‘ that’ in line 
39 introduces the ground of Enobarbus’ inference (see Abbott, § 284), and in their 
abhorrence of anything like a long sentence, place a full stop after ‘alike,’ and a note 
of exclamation after ‘emptinesse,’ and so weaken the tension of the style. It may 
be safely asserted that no one can derive an adequate conception of the energy of 
Shakespeare’s style from the study of a modern text.—[To follow here the punctu- 
ation of Shakespeare’s printers is, I think, to rob the speech of its vigour, and convert 
into a philosophic, didactic observation what was intended to be indignant astonish- 
ment. Rowe’s dramatic instinct revealed to him the derision, nay, almost the con- 
tempt, which lay in the words, ‘That he should dreame,’ etc. We hear the same 
indignant, derisive tones in Cleopatra’s ‘To say as I said then!’ (I, v, 88); or in 
‘The way to lose him!’ (I, iii, 14); or ‘so tart a fauour To trumpet such good 
tidings !’ (II, v, 48.)—Ep.] 

37. A parcell of their Fortunes] STEEVENS: That is, as we should say at pres- 
ent, are of a piece with them. 


ACT III, sc. xili.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 239 


To fuffer all alike, that he fhould dreame, 
Knowing all meafures, the full Cefar will 40 
Anfwer his emptineffe ; Ce/ar thou haft fubdu’de 
His iudgement too. 
Enter a Seruant. 

Ser. A Meffenger from Ce/ar. 

Cleo. What no more Ceremony ? See my Women, 45 
Againft the blowne Rofe may they {top their nofe, 
That kneel’d vnto the Buds. Admit him fir. 


£no. Mine honefty, and I, beginne to fquare, 48 

39. alike, that] alike. That Rowe et 46. nofe] noses Walker, Huds. Words. 
seq. 47. [Exit Attendant. Cap. 

41. emptineffe ;| emptiness ! Theob. et 48. Eno.] Eno. [Aside.] Han. Cap. 
seq. et seq. 

42. zudgement | judegement F.. Square, | square; Rowe,+. square. 

46. their] the Kinnear. Cap. et seq. 


39. To suffer] STAUNTON: The verb is apparently used here in an active sense, 
meaning to punish or afflict. 

40. Knowing all measures] COLLIER (JVo/es, etc. p. 497, ed. ii) records miseries 
as the correction of his MS and explains that thereby ‘ Enobarbus refers to the woe- 
ful plight and prospects of Antony at the time he dared Cesar to “lay his gay com- 
parisons apart,” and meet him ‘sword against sword.” ’—ANoN. (Blackwood, Oct. 
_ p. 467, 1853): That is, it is surprising that Antony, who has experienced every 
measure of fortune, has drunk of her fullest.as well as of her emptiest cup, should 
dream that the /w// Cesar will answer his emptiness. Here the words ful/ and 
emptiness prove to a demonstration that ‘measure’ is the right word; yet Collier’s 
MS alters it to mdseries / 

40. full] Thidias, line 107, calls Ceesar ‘the fullest man,’ z. ¢. the most perfect. 

46. blowne Rose... their nose] WALKER (C77z. iii, 305): Shakespeare would 
not have tolerated this cacophony ; besides, the old grammar requires ”oses.—LETTSOM 
(Footnote to preceding) : Walker is, I think, mistaken [Unquestionably.—ED. ] in this 
latter observation, though I agree with the preceding part of the note.—STAUNTON 
(Atheneum, 26 Apr. 1873): Walker has noticed the insufferable cacophony of ‘rose’ 
and ‘nose,’ which assuredly Shakespeare would never have endured. But his pro- 
posal to read zoses is not a convincing remedy. My belief is that the line originally 
stood ‘— may stop their sezse,’ That is, their sense of smelling ; which, not being 
understood, was changed into ‘ nose.’_[Hereupon Staunton gives several quotations 
where sense is applied to seeing, to hearing, to smelling; the most apposite is, ‘ You 
smell this business with a sense as. cold,’ ete.— Wint. Tale, I1,i. But it is to be doubted 
that any number of quotations would justify a change of the text. The cacophony 
may be possibly softened, if, in reading the line, the emphasis be strongly laid on 
‘blown’ :—‘ Against the 4/owm rose may they stop their nose.’ Was it not for this 
purpose that Shakespeare threw the ictus on ‘ blown’ ?—Ep. ] 

47. Admit him sir] An instance of the use of ‘sir’ in addressing persons of 
humble rank.—ED. 

48. beginne to square] Peck (p. 224) is reluctant to accept for ‘square’ the 


240 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. xiii, 


The Loyalty well held to Fooles, does make 
Our Faith meere folly : yet he that can endure 50 
To follow with Allegeance a falne Lord, 
Does conquer him that did his Mafter conquer, 
And earnes a place i’th’Story. 
Enter Thidias. 
Cleo. Cefars will. 55 
Thid. Heare it apart. 
Cleo. None but Friends : fay boldly. 
Thid. ‘So haply are they Friends to Axthony. 


Enob. He needs as many (Sir) as Ce/ar ha’s, 59 
49. Zhe] Tho’ Theob. Han. 57. Lone] None here Han. Here's 
53. 2’th’ | z’the Cap. et seq. none Ktly. Mo one Walker. 

55. well.| will? Theob. et seq. Say] say on Cap. 


definition guarre/, and, after quoting passages from Mid. NV. Dream, Wint. Tale, 
and 77, And. wherein the word occurs in that sense, and in each instance pro- 
posing jar, or sguall as a substitute, quotes the present passage, and observes, 
‘Yet, upon the whole, perhaps Shakespeare never wrote ‘‘square’”’ to express a 
quarrel, For I am sometimes inclined to think he wrote, in most of these places, 
sparre.’ Be it remembered that Peck wrote in 1740.—ED. 

49. The Loyalty well held to Fooles, etc.] THEOBALD: After Enobarbus has 
said, that his honesty and he begin to quarrel, (z.¢. that his reason shews him to be 
mistaken in his firm adherence to Antony) he immediately falls into this generous 
reflection ; ‘Tho’ loyalty, stubbornly preserved to a master in his declin’d fortunes, 
seems folly in the eyes of fools; (z.e. men, who have not honour enough to think 
more wisely), yet he, who can be so obstinately loyal, will make as great a figure on 
record, as the conqueror.’ I therefore read: ‘ 7ho’ loyalty, well held, to fools does 
make Our faith mere folly,’ etc.—JoHNsoN: I have preserved the old reading: 
Enobarbus is deliberating upon desertion, and finding it is more prudent to forsake a 
fool and more reputable to be faithful to him, makes no positive conclusion. —CAPELL 
(i, 41) : The change of ‘ The’ into— 7%o’, robs this speech of it’s greatest beauty ; 
by destroying, or less’ning at least, that air of unsettledness that is much more visible 
in it when the propositions are not connected: a good speaker would shew this, 
sooner than words ; by making a pause after ‘ folly,’ and pronouncing ‘yet’ with an 
zctus, with the force of—and yet. 

53. a place] Sraunron: That is, a seat of dignity. 

59. Enob. He needs as many, etc.] MALONE: I suspect that this speech belongs 
to Cleopatra, not to Enobarbus. Printers usually keep the names of the persons, who 
appear in each scene, ready composed ; in consequence of which, speeches are often 
attributed to those to whom they do not belong. Is it probable that Enobarbus 
should presume to interfere here? The whole dialogue naturally proceeds between 
Cleopatra and Thyreus, till Enobarbus thinks it necessary to attend to his own 
interest, and says what he speaks when he goes out. The plural number (zs), 
which suits Cleopatra, who throughout the play assumes that royal style, strengthens 


ACT IH, Sc. xili.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 241 


Or needs not vs. If Ce/ar pleafe, our Mafter 60 
Will leape to be his Friend : For vs you know, 
Whofe he is, we are, and that is Ce/ars. 
Thid.So. Thus then thou moft renown’d, C¢/ar intreats, 
Not to confider in what cafe thou ftand’ft 


Further then he is Ce/ars. 65 
61. For vs you] For as you Ff, Rowe, et seq. (subs.) 

Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 63. zntreats] entreats Cap. Mal. Steev. 
62. that is] that’s Pope,+, Steev. et seq. entreats thee Ktly. 

Varr. Coll Sing. Wh. i. 65. Ceefars.] Cesar’s. Mal. Ran. Var. 
63. So.] Separate line, Pope et seq. ’21, Coll. i. Ca/ar. Ff et cet. 


renown d,| renown’ d ; Han. Cap. 


my conjecture. The words, ‘ our master,’ it may be said, are inconsistent with this 
supposition ; but I apprehend, Cleopatra might have thus described Antony, with 
sufficient propriety. They are afterwards explained: ‘Whose he is, we are.’ 
Antony was the master of her fate.—SrrEEVENS : Enobarbus, who is the buffoon of 
the play, has already presumed to interfere between the jarring Triumvirs, and might 
therefore have been equally flippant on the occasion before us. For this reason, as 
well as others, I conceive the speech in question to have been rightly appropriated 
in the old copy. What a diminution of Shakspeare’s praise would it be, if four lines 
that exactly suit the mouth of Enobarbus, could come with equal propriety from the 
lips of Cleopatra ! 

60. Or needs not vs] HEATH (p. 461): The poet’s meaning is this: In his 
present fortune Antony needs as many friends as Cesar hath, or else he needs not 
even us, whose small number and want of power render us incapable, without other 
assistance, of being of any service to him. If Czesar so pleases, our master will leap 
to be his friend; for, as you know very well, though we are indeed our master’s 
friends, yet both he and we are at present pretty much at Czsar’s discretion. 

60. Or needs not vs. If Czsar please,] WARBURTON: All sense is lost in this 
false pointing, which should be reformed thus: ‘Or needs not us if Czesar please.’ 
That is, while he is at enmity with Cesar he needs a power equal to Cxsar’s; but 
if he pleases to receive Antony into his friendship he will then want no other sup- 
port. This is sensible and polite.—[For all its sense and politeness, no editor or 
commentator has paid any attention to it.] 

61. For vs you know] CAPELL (i, 41. See Zext. Motes.) : Upon reading this 
speech in former editions, the annotator was struck with seeing, in the last line but 
one, a consequence drawn from premises that can never fairly be made to yield it: 
he observ’d too, that the causal particle ‘ For’ was printed with a great letter ; and— 
concluding from both these circumstances, that no consequence was intended,— 
thought rashly that ‘ For’ was a mistake, and to be amended by— Or. But, looking 
into the folio’s again, while this note was in penning, he found a word in the first 
of them (overslipt in collation) that makes amendment unnecessary, and even injuri- 
ous; for by reading, as that does,—‘ For us,’ (z. ¢. As for us,) this member of the 
speech has another aspect, and is so clear as to need no explaining.—[ Which, being 
interpreted, means that he withdraws the emendation in his text: Or, as.] 

65. Further then he is Czsars] ‘Czsars’ is as clearly a misprint here as it is 
in ‘shee, Eros, has Packt Cards with Czsars.’—IV, xiv, 24. It is correctly printed 


16 


242 LIED SOCMCIRIOVES OVE [ACT Il, SC. xili. 


Cleo. Go on,right Royall. 66 
Thid. We knowes that you embrace not Axthony 

As you did loue, but as you feared him. 
Cleo. Oh. 69 


66. on, right | Ff, Rowe, Pope. on.— Huds. 
Right Johns. on ;—right Theob. et cet. 68. feared | fear'd Theob. et seq. 
(subs. ) 69. Oh. | Ok / [Aside.] Rowe,+. Var. 


67. embrace] embrac d Cap. conj. Ran. OG ie 


‘Cesar’ in F, which has been followed by every editor except three, and of these Col- 
lier (ed. i) is silent, and Rann is an echo of MALONE, whose note is as follows: ¢ It 
has just been said, that whatever Azfony is, all his followers are; “that is, Cesar’s.” 
Thyreus now informs Cleopatra that Czesar entreats her not to consider herse/f in a 
state of subjection, further than as she is connected with Antony, who is Cesa7’s - 
intimating to her (according to the instructions he had received from Czsar, to detach 
Cleopatra from Antony), that she might make separate and advantageous terms for 
herself.’ RANN’S note is as follows: ‘ Than as thou art connected with Antony who 
is now at Ceesar’s discretion.” WARBURTON, adopting ‘Czsar’ of F., thus para- 
phrases: ‘That is, Czesar intreats, that at the same time you consider your desperate 
fortunes, you would consider he is Cesar: That is, generous and forgiving, able and 
willing to restore them.’ CAPELL (i, 41) follows thus: ‘Nor will Thyreus’ address 
to Cleopatra be conceiv’d very readily; for, being a tender matter, it is worded with 
great caution, and from thence it’s obscurity: the purport of it is,—that Ceesar would 
have her think, that she is in the hands of a conqueror ; but think at the same time, 
that that conqueror is Czsar, one unable to use his power to her prejudice.’ 

66. Go on, right Royall] DANIEL (p. 82) suggests, with probability, that ‘ right 
Royall’ belongs to Thidias. If, however, it is spoken by Cleopatra, as it now 
stands, the purpose of such flattery so early in the interview is somewhat obscure, 
and the absolute use of an adjective, ‘ Royall’ does not help to make the phrase any 
clearer. In the last scene of the play, Cesar, looking on Cleopatra’s fair corpse, says, 
‘She levell’d at our purposes, and, being royall, Took her own way.’ This latter 
clause has been interpreted as a reference to ‘Harts Royal,’ which, by the Forest 
Laws, were suffered to roam where they pleased, protected from all molestation. 
To the majority of Shakespeare’s audience, every term in Venery was as familiar, I 
suppose, as the names of vegetables. Can it be that here, in ‘right Royal’ there is 
an allusion, readily caught by the audience, to ‘ harts royall,’ the undisputed lords of 
the forest >—Ep. 

67. that you embrace not] CAPELL (i, 42): It does not seem to be Thyreus’ 
business, to insinuate—that Antony is still low’d by Cleopatra: therefore ‘ embrace,’ 
in this line, should be—emérvac’d,; and the words ‘fear’d’ and ‘did love,’ in the 
next line absolutely require it. 

69. Oh] What does this mean? What emotion does it express? It is the key- 
note to our interpretation of Cleopatra’s bearing during this interview. And how is 
that bearing to be interpreted? If we believe that she is here playing false to 
Anthony, this ‘Ok’ must be a shudder. If she is true to Anthony,—and_ nothing in 
this play can make me believe otherwise,—and is merely, with consummate skill, 
drawing on the Ambassador in order to probe to the bottom Czsar’s plans so that 


ACT ill, sc. xi.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA (243 


Tiid. The fcarre’s vpon your Honor,therefore he 70 
Does pitty, as conftrained blemifhes, é 
Not as deferued. 

Cleo. He is a God, 

And knowes what is moft right. Mine Honour 

Was not yeelded, but conquer’d meerely. 75 
Eno. To be fure of that, I will aske Anthony. 

Sir, fir, thou art fo leakie 

That we muft leaue thee to thy finking, for 

Thy deereft quit thee. Exit Enob. 

Thid. Shall I fay to Ce/ar, ; 80 
What you require of him : for he partly begges 
To be defir’d to giue. It much would pleafe him, 
That of his Fortunes you fhould make a ftaffe 
To leane vpon. But it would warme his fpirits 84 


70. fearre’s| fcarres ¥¥,. fears F,. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Str, sv, thow rt 
73. He is| He's Walker, Dyce ii, iii. Steev. Varr. Coll. Sing. Wh. i, Hal. 


73-75. He is... meerely| Lines end, 78. to] Om. Ff. 
right. ...meerly Rowe. Lines end, knows 81. him] him? Pope et seq. 
.. yielded, ...meerly Pope et seq. Sor Om. Pope, Theob. Han, Warb. 
76. Eno.] Eno, [Aside.] Han. Cap. 83. fhould | would Rowe ii,+, Varr. 
et seq. Ran. 
76,77. To be...deakie| Lines end, that, 84-86. Zo leane ... Land-lord | Lines 
...deaky Pope et seq. end, upon. ... me... yourself ... landlord 


Tithe Sir, fir, thou art| Sir, thou rt Johns. Var. ’73. 


she can protect Anthony and herself, then this ‘Oh’ is shocked surprise, inadvertently 
escaping from her at the bare suggestion that she feared Anthony more than she loved 
him,—Anthony! for whom her love was without a bourn! With whatever tone it 
was uttered, the Ambassador was quick to interpret it not otherwise than as a con- 
firmation of his insinuation.—ED. 

72, 73. Not as deserued. He is a God] WALKER (C77. iii, 305) suggests 
that the ‘deservéd’ of the Folio be retained and that /e’s be read for ‘ He is.’— 
[Attempts to force broken lines into regular rhythm deserve, I think, but little heed; 
for actors they are valueless. In the present case, which is the better emphasis: 
‘He’s a God) implying astonishment, and that the knowledge of Czsar’s divinity 
has just dawned on the speaker ; or ‘ He zs a God,’ implying that Czesar’s divinity is 
well-known, and that in this reluctant assent lies a fresh and convincing proof of it? 
—ED.] 

78, 79. for Thy deerest quit thee] STAUNTON, by referring to his note on ‘ For 
you sink’ (II, vii, 69), intimates that the present ‘for’ is the same as the ‘for’ in 
that passage and that both should be printed ’fore. I doubt it in both cases, —in the 
present case, emphatically. By the manner in which Cleopatra was at that very 
minute receiving Thidias, Enobarbus imagined that he saw proof that she had 
already ‘ quit’ Anthony.—ED. ] 

84. spirits] Possibly, Walker’s rule as to the monosyllabic pronunciation of 


244 THE: TRAGELDIE (OF 


[ACT III, SC. xiii. 


To heare from me you had left Azthony, 85 
And put your felfe vnder his fhrowd, the vniuerfal Land- 


Cleo, What’s your name? (lord. 
Thid. My name is Thidias. 
Cleo. Moft kinde Meffenger, 
Say to great C@/ar this in difputation, go 


I kiffe his conqu’ring hand : Tell him, I am prompt 


86. /hrowd | shroud Theob. ii, Warb. 
Johns. Var.’73. shrowd, the great Han. 
Cap. shrowd, who zs Coll. ii, iii (MS), 
Ktly, Huds. stewardship Bulloch. 

86, 87. the vniuerfal Land-(lord.] 
Separate line, Han. Cap. Var. ’78 et 
seq. 


88. Thidias] 7iyreus Theob. et seq. 
90. this in difputation,| Ff, Rowe, 
Pope. ¢his ; tn deputation Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns, Cap. Ran. Sing. Dyce, Wh. 
Glo. Cam. Ktly, Coll. ili. ¢hzs » i” dis- 
putation Var.’78,’85, Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Knt, Coll. i, Sta. Hal. that in disputation 


Land-(lord]| Landlord (oppo- 
site line 89), F.. 


2 


Coll. ii (MS). 


‘spirit’ does not here apply ; and yet the verse seems to require it. 
—Eb. 

86. And put your selfe vnder his shrowd] ABBotTT (§ 505): Lines with four 
accents are, unless there is a pause in the middle of the line, very rare. The fol- 
lowing, however, seem to have no more than four accents.—[Among the examples 
then given by Abbott is found the present line (it has been printed as a separate line 
in every edition since 1778), and it has seemed, apparently, in Abbott’s eyes so 
unmistakeably of four accents and pauseless withal, that he has queried if it be not 
corrupt. But is it pauseless? Is Thidias so little of a diplomatist that he fails to feel 
his way? His keen eyes are reading every emotion that flits over Cleopatra’s face. 
He has won her ear. He has represented Czesar as almost cringing before her. He 
has ventured perilously near to the assertion that she bears no love to Anthony, and 
he has met no scornful denial ; and now approaches the supreme moment, the sole 
object of his mission, when, with her own consent, he is to get her into Czsar’s power. 
‘And put yourself,’ he slowly says, and pauses, watching, and would have said 
‘beyond temptation,’ or ‘ far from Anthony’s power,’ or anything else to that effect, 
had he read a trace of cold suspicion in the eyes before him. But what he read so 
far emboldened him that he then, and not till then, dared complete the sentence,— 
‘under his shrowd.’ I venture to hope that a dramatic necessity is here shown for a 
pause long enough to remove the line from Abbott’s list of anomalies and to purge 
it from corruption.—ED.] 

86. shrowd] Derived from Anglo-Saxon scra#d, a garment, clothing. Secondly, 
a winding sheet, etc. In the present line it means protection.— Century Dictionary. 
{The only instance given by Scumipt (Zex.) of this noun thus used. Compare 
Milton, Comzs, 147, where Comus bids his troop, ‘ Run to your shrouds within these 
brakes and trees.’ —Ep. ] 

90, 91. Say to great Cesar this in disputation, I kisse his conqu’ring hand] 
THEOBALD: The poet certainly wrote: ‘Say to great Caesar this; in deputation I kiss 
his conqu’ring hand :’ 7. e. by proxy ; I depute you to pay him that duty in my name. 
—[Warburton reprinted this note in his edition, word for word, without acknowledge- 


See I, ii, 143. 


ACT Ul, Sc. xii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 245 


To lay my Crowne at’s feete, and there to kneele. 92 


92. at’s| Ff, Rowe,+, Knt, Coll. at his Cap. et cet. 
Sing. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Hal. Glo. Cam. 


ment ; as his, it was repeated in subsequent editions, and to him, as the author, it is 
always ascribed. The Cam. Ld., while according the first appearance of deputation 
in print to Theobald, attributes its suggestion to Warburton by printing his name in 
parenthesis after Theobald’s. I suppose that for this the editors of that edition find their 
authority in what Theobald says in his note, which reads thus: ‘ The Poet certainly 
wrote (as Mr Warburton likewise saw, we must restore),’ etc. I cannot but believe 
that Theobald here means merely that he had submitted the emendation to Warbur- 
ton and that the latter had approved of it. Never would Theobald have hesitated to 
announce the real authorship, had it not been his. It is true, I have searched through 
the voluminous correspondence of the two men and have found no mention of this 
passage; but all the correspondence has not been preserved.—ED.]—STEEVENS : 
Iam not certain that this change is necessary. ‘I kiss his hand in disputation’— 
may mean, I own he has the better in the controversy. I confess my inability to 
dispute or contend with him. To dispute may have no immediate reference to words 
or language by which controversies are agitated. So, in Macbeth. ‘ Dispute it like 
aman;’ and Macduff, to whom this short speech is addressed, is disputing or con- 
tending with himself only. Again, in Twelfth Might: ‘For though my soul dispuces 
well with my sense.’ If Warburton’s change be adopted, we should read—‘ dy 
deputation.—M. Mason: I have no doubt but deputation is the right reading. 
Steevens having proved, with much labour and ingenuity, that it is but by a forced and 
unnatural construction that any sense can be extorted from the words as they stand. 
—MaAtone: I think Warburton’s conjecture extremely probable. The objection 
founded on the particle 2 being used, is, in my apprehension, of little weight. Though 
by deputation is the phraseology of the present day, the other might have been com- 
mon in the time of Shakspeare. I have found no example of 7 deputation being 
used in the sense required here.—CoLLikrR (ed. i) : As a clear meaning is afforded 
by ‘disputation,’ in the sense of controversy, or contest, we adhere to the text of all 
the old editions. At the same time the plausibility of Warburton’s change is not to 
be disputed.—Isip. (ed. ii) : Warburton’s suggestion is fully confirmed by the MS 
which adds that we must also read ‘hat for ‘this’ of the old copies.—STAUNTON : 
We are of opinion that, as in II, vii, 8, dzsposztion was misprinted ‘ disputation,’ the 
reciprocal error has been perpetrated here, and that the poet wrote ‘in dzsposition,’ 
that \is, 7% inclination, willingly. [Staunton has misquoted his own note at II, vii, 
8, where the text is ‘ disposition,’ which he conjectured should be disputation. |— 
R. G. WHITE (ed. i): For obvious reasons I have no hesitation in adopting Warbur- 
ton’s reading. SCHMIDT (ZLex.): ‘ Disputation’ is perhaps equivalent to ‘say to 
Czesar this, as the plea which I put in.’—[TIt is not easy to see what valid objection 
there can be to ‘disputation.’ To be sure, it is a large word for a fair woman’s 
mouth, but it was not too large for poor Lucretia’s. Possibly, Cleopatra wished to 
minimise as much as possible the uncomfortable fact that she had been actually at 
war with Czsar, so she called her warfare a ‘ disputation,’ which it certainly was, and 
a good deal more ; but this she keeps in the background. Moreover, ‘7 deputation’ 
is undeniably awkward ; and besides, can a kiss be sent by proxy without giving it 
to the bearer? I ask in ignorance. These objections are, it seems to me, sufficient 
to awaken suspicion of any emendation, and to counsel loyalty to the Folio.—Ep.] 


246 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. xiii. 
Tell him, from his all-obeying breath, I heare 93 
The doome of Egypt. 

Thid. ’Tis your Nobleft courfe : 95 


Wifedome and Fortune combatting together, 
If that the former dare but what it can, 
No chance may fhake it. Giue me grace to lay 
My dutie on your hand. 
Cleo. Your Ce/ars Father oft, 100 
( When he hath mus’d of taking kingdomes in) 
Beftow’d his lips on that vnworthy place, 


As it rain’d kiffes. 103 
93. Tell... breath] One line, Rowe, 96-98. Mnemonic, Warb. 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 100. oft,| Om. Han. [giving her hand. 
from] that from Rowe,+. Cap. 
all-obeying | all-swaying Anon. 100, 101. oft...7] One line, Steev. 
ap. Cam. Var. ’03, ’13, Knt, Sing. Ktly. 


95. ’T%s] Zt 7s Han. 


93. from his all-obeying breath] JOHNSON: ‘Doom’ is declared rather by an 
all-commanding, than an ‘all-obeying breath.’ I suppose we ought to read—<all- 
obeyed breath.’—CrAIK (Vote on ‘a labouring day,’ /z/. Ces. I, i, 4): An expression 
used by Cowper (in his verses composed in the name of Alexander Selkirk), ‘the 
sound of the church-going bell’ has been passionately reprobated by Wordsworth. 
‘The epithet church-going applied to a bell,’ observes the critic (in an Appendix 
upon the subject of Poetic Diction), ‘and that by so chaste a writer as Cowper, is an 
instance of the strange abuses which poets have introduced into their language, till 
they and their readers take them as matters of course, if they do not single them out 
expressly as matters of admiration.’ <A church-going bell is merely a bell for church- 
going; and the expression is constructed on the same principle with a thousand 
others that are and always have been in familiar use ;—such as a marauding or a 
sight-seeing expedition, a banking or a house-building speculation, a fox-hunting 
country, a lending library, a fishing village, etc. What would Wordsworth have 
said to such a daring and extreme employment of the same form as we have in Shake- 
speare, where he makes Cleopatra say, speaking of the victorious Czesar,—‘ From his 
all-obeying breath I hear The doom of Egypt?’ But these audacities of language 
are of the very soul of poetry. 

96, 98. Wisedome and Fortune . .. may shake it] That is, if, when wisdom 
and chance are opposed, the former ventures to exercise all its power, no mischance 
can thwart it. 

98. Giue me grace] JoHNSON: Grant me the favour. 

1oo, Your Czsars Father] Julius Cesar was the grand-uncle of Octavius. See 
note on the relationship, ITI, vi, 7. 

lor. taking kingdomes in] Compare, ‘ Take in that Kingdome, and Infranchise 
that,’ —I, i, 35, or ‘ He could so quickly cut the Ionian Sea And take in Troine.’— 
III, vii, 28. 


ACT I, SC. xill.] AVTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 247 


Lnter Anthony and Enobarbus. 
Ant. Fauours? By Ioue that thunders. What art thou 105 


Thid. One that but performes 


(Fellow? 


The bidding of the fulleft man, and worthieft 


To haue command obey’d. 
Eno. You will be whipt. 


Ant.Approch there : ah you Kite.Now Gods & diuels 110 


Authority melts from me of late. 


When I cried hoa, 


Like Boyes vnto a muffe, Kings would ftart forth, 


And cry, your will. 


Haue you no eares ? 


Iam Anthony yet. Take hence this Iack, and whip him. 
Enter a Seruant. 115 


Eno. 


Scene X. Pope, Warb. Johns. Scene 
XI. Han. Scene continued, Theob. Cap. 
et seq. 

105. [Seeing Thidias kiss her hand. 
Rowe. 

105. Fauours?] Ff. Favours! Rowe, 
+. Favours, Cap. et seq. 

105, 106. Fauours?...( Fellow?] Lines 
end, thunders. ... Fellow? ¥ , Rowe et 
seq. 

109. whip~t] Ff. whifp'd Rowe. 
[Aside. Cap. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 

110. there: | there— Rowe,+. there! 
Var. 73. 

ah] ay, Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. 
Dyce, Wh. i, Hal. 
Kite.| Kite! Rowe et seq. 
Now...diuels| Separate line, F,. 


’Tis better playing with a Lions whelpe, 


I11-114. Azthority ... him.| Lines 
end, /...would...ears ?...him. Han. 

111. me of late. When] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. me of late - 
when Cap. me. Of late, when Johns. et 
cet. 

hoa,| ho! Cap. 

113, 114. And cry...[ am] Ff, Rowe, 
+, Knt, Sta. Cam. Separate line, Cap. 
et cet. 

113. your will.| your will? Pope et 
seq. As a quotation, Han. Johns. et 
seq. 

114. Jam] I’m Pope,+. 

115. Enter... ] Enter Attendants. Cap. 
(after line 113). 

116, 117. ’ Zs... dying] Aside. Cap. 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 


105. Fauours ?] Can any sufficing reason be given why the astonished interro- 
gation of the Folio should be deserted, as it is, by all editors since Capell 2—Ep. 

107. the fullest man] Enobarbus also has already (line 40) spoken of ‘the full 
Ceesar,’ z. e. the complete, in every way endowed. 

110. ah you Kite] ‘What beast was ’t that made’ STEEVENS substitute ay for 
this threatening ‘ah’ ?—Ep. 

112. a musse] ‘ Fére alla gréppa pit, to play at musse, to shuffle and scramble 
for.’—Florio; Mew World of Words.—‘ Groée: f. A great quantitie, or number of 
stirring, or stirred things ; whence; A la gvroée.. The boyish scrambling for nuts, etc. ; 
cast on the ground ; a Musse.’—Cotgrave. 

114. this lack] ScHmipT (Zex.) supplies many examples of the use of ‘ Jack’ 
as ‘a term of contempt for saucy and paltry, or silly fellows.’ 

114. and whip him] KnicuT (Supp. Notice, p. 358): This is partly jealousy ; 
partly the last assertion of small power by one accustomed to unlimited command. 


248 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. xill. 


Then with an old one dying. 117 
Ant. Moone and Starres, 

Whip him : wer’t twenty of the greateft Tributaries 

That do acknowledge C@/ar, fhould I finde them 120 

So fawcy with the hand cf fhe heere, what’s her name 

Since fhe was Cleopatra? Whip him Fellowes, 

Till like a Boy you fee him crindge his face, 

And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence. 
Thid. Marke Anthony. 125 
Ant. Tugge him away : being whipt 

Bring him againe, the Iacke of C@/ars thall 


Beare vs an arrant to him. Exeunt with Thidius. 128 
118. Starres,| stars / Rowe. 122. Cleopatra ?] Cleopatra— Rowe. 
119. wert] wert F, were FF,, 125. Anthony.] Ff. Antony! Glo. 

Rowe, Pope. Antony— Rowe et cet. 

121. of fhe] of her Han. of—she 127. againe,| again, Theob. et seq. 

Coll. Wh. i. (subs. ) 

121, 122. what’s... Cleopatra ?] In the] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Coll. Wh. 
parenthesis, Pope, +, Cap. i, Hal. Z¢hzs Pope et cet. 
121. name] name, Johns. et seq. 128. arrant] errand F,. 


119. Whip him] AxBBoTr (§ 499) finds that this line belongs to a class of ‘ appar- 
ent Alexandrines, which are sometimes regular verses of five accents preceded or 
followed by a foot, more or less isolated, containing one accent.’ ‘Whip him’ is 
the isolated foot here, as, I suppose, ‘ what’s her name’ is the isolated one in line 
121. It is the same old story; Anthony, even in the whiff and wind of foaming rage, 
will pay no attention to his rhythm. . . . I now find that ABBorrT (§ 497) has a differ- 
ent scansion for the ‘apparent Alexandrine’ of line 121. It is to be effected by ‘ the 
omission of unemphatic syllables,’ thus :—‘ So saucy | with ¢4e hand | of shé | here 
—what’s | her name?’—Ep. 

121. hand of she heere] ‘She’ instead of Aer is used in supreme contempt. 
Collier’s dash before it is, I think, well devised. Hanmer’s ‘her here’ is to me 
intolerable. -—Ep. 

122, Since she was Cleopatra] AsBoTr (§ 132): Perhaps the meaning is 
‘Whip him for being saucy with this woman, szzce (though she is not now worthy 
of the name) she once was (emphatical) Cleopatra.’ Else ‘ What is her new name 
since she ceased to be Cleopatra?’ If ‘since,’ in the sense of ago, could be used 
absolutely for ovce, a third interpretation would be possible: ‘ What’s her name? 
Once she was Cleopatra.’ / 

127. the Iacke] Popr changed ‘the’ to ¢4zs, and has been followed by a majority 
of editors. We have already had ‘this Jack’ where Thidias is regarded as simply 
an offensive menial without any qualification other than the contemptuous ‘this.’ 
But here he is ‘the Jack of Czesar,’ and it is because he is Czsar’s Jack that he is to 
be made a servile messenger. There is enough contempt in the fact that he came as 
Czesar’s ambassador and returns as an errand-bearer. It seems to me that ‘the’ 
should be retained. The ictus falls on ‘ Jack.’—Ep., 


ACT Il, SC. xlil.] AWZTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 249 


You were halfe blafted ere I knew you : Ha? 
Haue I my pillow left vnpreft in Rome, 130 
Forborne the getting of a lawfull Race, 
And by a Iem of women, to be abus’d 
By one that lookes on Feeders? 
Cleo. Good my Lord. 


Ant. You haue beene a boggeler euer, 135 
But when we in our vicioufneffe grow hard 
(Oh mifery on’t) the wife Gods feele our eyes 137 
129. Ha?]| Ha! Rowe. 137. feele] F,. feale F, feal ¥F, 


132. lem] F,. Jemme F,. Jem ¥, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb.  see/ 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. em Han. Johns. et seq. 


134. Lord.| Lord— Rowe et seq. 137, 138. eyes...filth,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
(subs. ) Theob. Han. Johns. eyes...filth ; Cap. 
135. boggeler] boggler Rowe. Knt. eyes. ...filth Warb. et cet. (subs. ) 


136. grow] grew Ff, Rowe. 


133. By one that lookes on Feeders ?] JoHNsoN, by an obliquity that will some- 
times befall the keenest, supposed that this refers to Thidias, and that Anthony was 
abused by a man who looked on while others were feeding ; consequently he para- 
phrased the words by : ‘one that waits at the table while others are eating,’ which is 
true enough if the words are taken literally, but the ‘one that looks on’ (that is, looks 
on with favour) is Cleopatra, and ‘feeders’ are servants. When Corin offers to 
establish Rosalind and Celia in their cottage he says, ‘I will your very faithfull 
Feeder be.’—As You Like It, Il, iv, 105.—ED. 

135. boggeler] Murray (WV. £. D.): The verb Zo doggle is apparently formed 
on doggle, a variant of Bogle, a spectre (such as horses are reputed to see). In later 
times there has been a tendency to associate the word with dumg/e, which appears in 
sense 4, and in the derivatives. 1. zz¢r. To start with fright, to shy as a startled 
horse, to take alarm, etc. 2. To raise scruples, hesitate, demur, stickle (a/, etc.). 
3. ‘To play fast or loose,’—Johnson ; to palter, quibble, equivocate. 4. To fumble, 
bungle, make a clumsy attempt. [Hence] Bogg/er is one who boggles, or hesitates ; 
a stickler [whereof the present line is quoted as an example]. 

136-139. when... errors] That is, when we become hardened in our vicious 
courses the wise gods so blind us that we lose the power of judging clearly concern- 
ing our own moral defilement, and end with adoring our very errors. I am haunted 
with the memory of a sentiment similar to this in the Old Testament, and mention it 
in the trust that some one may be more fortunate than I in recalling it. We must - 
remember that //th, filthy, etc. are much stronger terms now than in the time of 
Shakespeare.—ED. 

137. seele our eyes] HARTING (p. 69): Turbervile, in his Book of Falconrie, 
1575, gives the following directions ‘how to seele a hawke’ :—‘ Take a needle 
threeded with untwisted thread, and (casting your Hawke) take her by the beake, 
and put the needle through her eye-lidde, not right against the sight of the eye, but 
somewhat nearer to the beake, because she may see backwards. And you must take 
good heede that you hurt not the webbe, which is under the eye-lidde, or on the 
inside thereof. Then put your needle also through that other eye-lidde, drawing 


~ 


250 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 111,.SCs xa, 
In our owne filth, drop our cleare iudgements, make vs 138 
Adore our errors, laugh at’s while we ftrut 

To our confufion. 140 


Cleo. Oh,is’t come to this ? 
Ant. I found you as a Morfell, cold vpon 
Dead Ce/ars Trencher : Nay, you were a Fragment 
Of Gueius Pompeyes, befides what hotter houres 
Vnregiftred in vulgar Fame, you haue 145 
Luxurioufly pickt out. For I am fure, 
Though you can gueffe what Temperance fhould be, 
You know not what it is. 
Cleo. Wherefore is this ? 
Ant. To let a Fellow that will take rewards, 150 
And fay, God quit you, be familiar with 


138. drop| dark Lettsom, Huds. Sta. Glo. Cam. zs z¢ Var. 73 et cet. 


drown Words. 144. Gneius] Cneius Ff. 

139. at’s] F,F,, Rowe, +, Sing. Dyce, Pompeyes] Pompey’s F,. Pom- 
Sta. Glo, Cam. ats F,. at us Cap. et pey Han. 
cet. 151. God guit you] As a quotation, 


141. 29°¢] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Dyce, Han. 


the endes of the thread together, tye them over the beake, not with a straight knotte, 
but cut off the threedes endes neare to the knotte, and twist them together in such 
sorte, that the eye-liddes may be raysed so upwards, that the Hawke may not see 
at all, and when the threed shall ware loose or untyed, then the Hawke may see 
somewhat backwardes, which is the cause that the threed is put nearer to the 
beake.’ 

137. our eyes] Surely a debt of gratitude is due to Warburton for his punctuation 
here, when we find a critic as keen as WALKER (C777. iii, 305) ‘imagining,’ that 
Knight was ‘right’ in substantially following the Folio. In the circumstances, 
Walker naturally found a difficulty in forcing ‘drop’ to assume the sense of make 
drop. Whereas, under Warburton’s corrected punctuation, the subject of ‘drop’ is 
‘the wise Gods,’ just as it is of ‘make’ and ‘laugh,.’—Ep. 

142, 143. a Morsell, cold vpon...a Fragment] WHITER (p. 136): The 
rapid imagination of the unwary Poet, even when it is employed on sentiments the 
most tender and pathetic, is sometimes imperceptibly entangled in a chain of imagery, 
which is derived from the meanest subjects and the lowest occupations. [Hereupon 
follow several illustrations of the way in which an image, drawn from the culinary 
art, influences the train of thought; as here the word ‘ morsel’ leads to ‘ fragment.’ ] 
‘In old English,’ continues Whiter, ‘ “ fragments’’ and dvoken meat were synonymous. 
In the vulgar translation of the Bible we have, ‘‘and they took up of the dro4en meat 
that was left seven baskets.”—Maré viii, 8. In other places we find fragments used 
for these broken relicts.’ 

146. Luxuriously] In Roman Catholic Moral Theology there is no other definition 
of /«xury than ‘inordinatus appetitus rei venerez.’ 

147. Though] STaunToN: ‘Though’ carries here the sense of 2/, or even if. 


ACT Ill, SC. xili.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 2EY 


My play-fellow, your hand ; this Kingly Seale, 152 
And plighter of high hearts. O that I were 
Vpon the hill of Bafan, to out-roare 
The horned Heard, for I haue fauage caufe, 155 
And to proclaime it ciuilly, were like 
A halter’d necke, which do’s the Hangman thanke, 
For being yare about him. Is he whipt ? 
Enter a Seruant with Thidias. 

Ser. Soundly, my Lord. 160 

Ant. Cried he? and begg’d a Pardon ? 

Ser. He did aske fauour. 

Ant. If that thy Father liue, let him repent 
Thou was’t not made his daughter, and be thou forrie 
To follow C@/ar in his Triumph, fince 165 
Thou haft bin whipt. For following him, henceforth 
The white hand of a Lady Feauer thee, 
Shake thou to looke on’t. Get thee backe to Ce/ar, 
Tell him thy entertainment : looke thou fay 
He makes me angry with him. For he feemes 170 

153-158. O...42m] Om. Gar. 168. Shake thou] Shake Ff, Rowe, 


161. degg’d a] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Shake thee 
begg’d a’ Theob. Warb. Johns. Glo. Mal. Shake but Coll. MS. 


begg’d he Cap. et cet. Get] Go get Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
166. d27] deen Ff. Han. Warb. 
whipt. Kor...him,| whipp’d, for 170. makes| make Rowe ii. 


...2tm. Rowe et seq. (subs. ) 


152. this Kingly Seale] CoLLier (ed. ii) : The MS converts ‘this’ into ¢hat ; 
the use of ‘ this’ would almost imply that Antony had seized Cleopatra’s hand. 

154, 155. the hill of Basan, to out-roare The horned Heard] Cruden’s Con- 
cordance gives the following references, where mention is made of the high hill of 
Bashan and of its bulls:—Psalms, xxii, 12; Ixvili, 15 ; Azekie/, xxxix, 18; Amos, 
iv, 1. By way of excuse for these quotations from the O/d Testament in the mouth 
of Anthony, SINGER suggests that ‘probably Antony caught them from his friend 
Herod, or picked them up when he was at Jerusalem with Cleopatra, as he once was.’ 

158. yare] That is, adroit, quick. See Shakespeare, passzm. 

167. The white hand] Can it be that it is an unsavory commentary on the personal 
cleanliness of the ladies of his time that Shakespeare lays so much stress, as some- 
thing distinctive, on the ‘ white hands’ of his heroines? Rosaline has a ‘ white hand;’ 
so has Rosalind, also Olivia; the Duke of Orleans in Henry the Fifth swears by his 
‘lady’s white hand.’ Hermione’s hand was white, so also Helen of Troy’s, hers 
was ‘marvelous white’; the hand of Lucrece was a ‘perfect white,’ and here in 
the present line, by implication, Cleopatra has a ‘white hand.’ The respective 
references may be found in Bartlett’s Concordance.—ED. 

167. Feauer] Used causatively. 


252 THE. TRAGEDIEWOLR [ACT III, SC. xill. 


Proud and difdainfull, harping on what I am, 171 
Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry, 

And at this time moft eafie ’tis to doo’t : 

When my good Starres, that were my former guides 

Haue empty left their Orbes, and fhot their Fires 175 
Into th’Abifme of hell. If he miflike, 

My fpeech, and what is done, tell him he has 

Ffiparchus, my enfranched Bondman, whom 

He may at pleafure whip, or hang, or torture, 


As he fhall like to quit me. Vrge it thou : 180 
Hence with thy ftripes, be gone. Exit Thid. 

Cleo. aue you done yet? 

Ant. Alacke our Terrene Moone is now Eclipft, 183 


173. doo’'t:] doot: F, dot: FF, Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. 


Rowe,+. do’, Johns. Coll. Dyce, Glo. 178. enfranched|. Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Cam. Sta. Glo. Cam. Hal. exfranchéd Dyce. 
175. /hot| /hut FF ,. enfranchis'd Theob. et cet. 
176. th’ Abif/me] the Abifme Ff et 183-185. Alacke...time ?| Lines end, 
seq. moon...alone...time? Cap. Var. ’78 et 


177. done,| done; Cap. Varr. Mal. seq. 


175. Orbes] This is not used for ovdzt, as has been stated, but refers to the nine 
concentric crystalline spheres, in which, according to the Ptolomaic system, the seven 
planets (of which the sun is one), the fixed stars, and the Primum Mobile moved 
about the earth. What the Primum Mobile is, is a little vague, beyond the belief 
that it moved and controlled the rest. Anthony’s ‘good stars’ were probably in the 
eighth Orb of fixed stars ; they were hardly likely to be in any of the planetary Orbs. 
It is to this Ptolomaic theory that Cleopatra refers when she says ‘Oh Sunne Burne 
the great Sphere thou mou’st in,’—IV, xv, 16, and again ‘ His voyce was propertied 
As all the tuned Spheres,’—V, ii, 102, in the next line Shakespeare used ‘Orbe’ 
for the whole world, as he does in Twelfth Night (and probably elsewhere) where 
Feste says to Viola: ‘ Foolery sir, does walke about the Orbe like the Sun,’ —III, i, 
39. Anthony says ‘shot their Fires,’ to which there is a similar expression in A/zd. 
NV. Dream, where Oberon says, ‘ And certaine starres shot madly from their Spheares.’ 
—II, i, 158.—Ep. 

180. to quit me] JoHNsoN: To repay me this insult; to requite me. 

183. our Terrene Moone] CAPELL (i, 42): This will be understood by most 
readers, of the moon in the heavens; which, they will think, might be call’d— 
‘terrene,’ as being the earth’s attendant, or satellite: But the speaker means it of 
Cleopatra, who was call’d—the new Isis, and wore often the attires of that goddess ; 
[II1, vi, 18] and she, in the Egyptian theology, was the same as the moon. It is to 
this circumstance, in part, that Cleopatra herself alludes, in these words of hers, 
‘Now the fleeting moon No planet is of mine.’—[V, ii, 291.—It is Warburton who 
says that Cleopatra in the last Act refers to Isis when she speaks of the ‘fleeting 
moon,’—a thoroughly Warburtonian suggestion; and evidently the source whence 


ACT II, sc. xiii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 253 


And it portends alone the fall of Anthony. 
Cleo. I muft ftay his time? 185 
Ant. To flatter Ce/ar, would you mingle eyes 
With one that tyes his points 
Cleo. Not know me yet? 
Ant. Cold-hearted toward me? 
Cleo. Ah ( Deere ) if I be fo, 190 
From my cold heart let Heauen ingender haile, 
And poyfon it in the fourfe, and the firft ftone 
Drop in my necke : as it determines fo 
Diffolue my life, the next Czefarian fmile, 


Till by degrees the memory of my wombe, 195 
Together with my braue Egyptians all, 
By the difcandering of this pelleted ftorme, 197 
185. [to her Women. Cap. 194. life,] life; Rowe, Pope, Han. 
time?|¥,. time. FF, et seq. life! Theob, et seq. 
187. points.| points ? Rowe et seq. Cefarian f/mile| Ff.  Cesario 
189. me?] me! Theob.+, Var. ’73. smite Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
me— Ktly. Cesarion smite Han. et cet. 
190. Ah (Deere)| Om. Han. 197. difcandering] Ff, Knt.  déscat- 
192. poyfon it | potson’t Pope,+. tering Rowe, Pope. discandying Thirlby, 
193. determines fo| determines, so Theob. et cet. 


Rowe et seq. 


Capell received the idea, which would never else have occurred to his sensible mind. 
As it is, he yielded, as he says, only ‘in part.’—Ep. ] 

187. With one that tyes his points] MALONE: That is, with a menial atten- 
dant. ‘Points’ were laces with metal tags, with which the old trunkhose were 
fastened.—DavIEs (ii, 354) : When Mr Hyde, afterwards Earl of Clarendon, some 
time before the beginning of the civil wars, waited upon Charles I. at Hampton 
Court, the king said to him, ‘So, Ned Hyde, they say you tie my points !’ 

193. as it determines] M. Mason: That is, as the hailstone dissolves. 

194. Dissolue my life] Collier: But for the verse, we might, perhaps, more 
properly and intelligibly read, ‘as it dissolves, so determine (or end) my life.’ 
‘Determine’ and ‘dissolve’ may, however, be taken as convertible terms. 

194. next] In deciding the question of Cleopatra’s sincerity or insincerity in this 
scene, has full weight been given to the pathetic tenderness of this word ?— Ep. 

194. the next Czesarian] STEEVENS: Czsarion was Cleopatra’s son by Julius 
Ceesar.—IRVING EDITION: Cleopatra appears to apply the name to Antony’s off- 
spring as an indirect compliment; as if she had said, this second Czsar’s son.—[Or, 
rather, is it not a wilful and artful oblivion that she had eyer had any children of 
whom Anthony was not the father ?>—Ep. ] 

195. memory of my wombe] CAPELLI (i, 42): That is, the memorials of my 
womb, the things by which it will be remember’d, and means—her children. 

197. discandering] THIRLBY (Letter to Theobald, 1729,—Nichols, ///ust. ii, 
228): Possibly, Shakespeare wrote ‘discandying.’ Sed nihil statuo. If you please, 


254 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. xii. 


Lye graueleffe, till the Flies and Gnats of Nyle 198 
Haue buried them for prey. 
Ant. Iam fatisfied - 200 


Ce/far {ets downe in Alexandria, where 
I will oppofe his Fate. Our force by Land, 
Hath Nobly held, our feuer’d Nauie too 


Haue knit againe, and Fleete, threatning moft Sea-like. 204 
198. graueleffe,| Ff, Rowe, Var.’73, 201. in] ’fore Han. 
Coll. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Glo. Cam. Hal. 203. held,| held ; Pope et seq. 
graveless ; Pope et cet. our| and Ff, Rowe. 
200. Lam] I’m Pope, +, Dyce ii, iii. 204. Fleete] float Rowe, +, Var. ’73. 


201. fets] sits Johns. Var. ’73 et seq. a fleet Coll. MS. 


and it be worth while, consider a little of it; for I have objections against it, and let 
me know your opinion of it; and whether Shakespeare ever uses the word dscatter. 
—THEOBALD: From the corruption [of the Folios] both Dr Thirlby and I saw, we 
must retrieve the word with which I have reform’d the text. . . . The congealing of 
the water into hail he metaphorically calls candying ; and it is an image he is fond 
of. So in the next Act of this very play :—‘ The hearts, ... do discandy, melt 
their sweets,’ etc.—K NIGHT: But how is ‘discandy’ used in the next Act? ‘The 
hearts. . . to whom I gave Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets, On blos- 
soming Ceesar,’ The expletive melt their sweets gives us the peculiar and most forci- 
ble meaning in which the word is here used. But the pelleted storm, which makes 
Cleopatra’s brave Egyptians lie graveless, is utterly opposed to the melting into 
sweetness of the word discandying. See note in The Mer. of Ven. I, iii, upon the 
passage: ‘other ventures he hath sguwandered abroad.’ To sguander is to scatter ; 
and so Dryden uses the word :—‘ They drive, they sguander the huge Belgian fleet.’ 
To dis-scander, we believe then, is to ds-sguander. . . . We, therefore, without hesi- 
tation, restore the original ‘ discandering,’ in the sense of dis-sguandering.—[DYCE 
gives the reading of the Folios, and then, without quoting Knight’s note, adds: ‘ which 
Mr Knight ‘‘ without hesitation restores.” ’ After ‘restores,’ Dyce indulges in a 
good heartsome exclamation mark, which saves thought and does not spare feelings, 
—Knight, gentlest of men, whose epitaph Douglas Jerrold said should be ‘Good 
Night,’ must, sooner or later, have known of this contemptuous treatment of his well- 
considered opinion; he outlived Dyce. —ED.] 

197. this pelleted storme] STAUNTON (Atheneum, 26 April, 1873): I have a 
suspicion that ‘pelleted’ is wrong, and that Shakespeare wrote,—‘ ol/uted storm.’ 
The hail was to be /otsoned, and kill in melting, not in falling. This, however, 
may be thought by many to be gilding refined gold. ‘ Pelleted’ affords a good 
sense, and in any other writer would be received without question. 

199. Haue buried them for prey] DEIGHTON: That is, till they have found a 
grave in the stomachs of the flies and gnats of the Nile. Compare Macbeth, III, 
iv, 72, ‘If charnel-houses and our graves must send Those that we bury back, our 
monuments (2. e. tombs) Shall be the maws of kites.’ 

202. I will oppose his Fate] A revelation of the conviction forced on Anthony 
both by the Soothsayer (II, iii), and by his own experience, that it was Czesar’s ‘fate’ 
to be Anthony’s superior.—ED. 

204. and Fleete] CAPELL (i, 42): This implies, a moving with nimbleness, a 


ACY 111, sc. xii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 255 


Where haft thou bin my heart ? Doft thou heare Lady ? 205 

If from the Field I fhall returne once more 

To kiffe thefe Lips, I will appeare in Blood, 

I,and my Sword, will earne our Chronicle, 

There’s hope in’t yet. 
Cleo. That’s my braue Lord. 210 
Ant. I will be trebble-finewed, hearted, breath’d, 

And fight malicioufly : for when mine houres 


Were nice and lucky, men did ranfome liues 213 
205. bin] been Ff. Steev. Varr. 
206. /hall| should Pope ii, Theob. 209. yet] Om. Sta. 

Warb. Johns. Varr. Ran. 211. trebble-finewed| FF. treble- 
208. our] my Ff, Rowe,+, Varr. Sinewed ¥,, Rowe. treble-sinew’d Pope 


209. There’s...in’t| There is...in it et seq. 
Han. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. 


skimming lightly on water; as in this line of Lodge’s,—-‘ As many frie [7.¢. small 
pike] as .ficete on Ocean’s face.’—Luphues’ Golden Legacy, E, 2b,) and is therefore 
fitter than—/jloaz, a word the moderns have chang’d it to, which carries with it an 
idea of inaction and stillness, BRADLEY (/V. Z. D. s.v. Fleet): 1. To float. ¢c. Of 
a vessel: To be or get afloat ; to sail. 

204. threatning most Sea-like] THISELTON (p. 21): The Navy is here regarded 
as partaking of the nature of the Sea, so at home does it appear to be in that 
element. 

205. Where hast thou bin my heart ? Dost thou heare Lady ?] To Anthony’s 
first question, which is that of a lover, jealous of every minute passed by his mistress 
while out of sight, Cleopatra returns no answer. Whereupon follows the second 
question, which would not have been asked had she not evidently been lost in thought. 
During her interview with Thidias she had been true to Anthony and had encouraged 
Czesar’s ambassador only that she might discover the full extent of his master’s plans. 
But now this outburst of Anthony’s Berserker wrath could not but have its effect on 
her, and give her food for reflection. When the play opens, the question with her 
was how she should keep Anthony by her side ; now the question looms up whether 
or not she should keep by the side of Anthony. Czesar’s offer was perilously attrac- 
tive. Small wonder that she was so abstracted that Anthony had to say, ‘ Dost thou 
hear, Lady?’ She emerges from this reverie, true to her love, and from this hour 
her fate and Anthony’s were to be the same.— ED. 

207. in Blood] That is, in full vigour, in perfect condition, a phrase derived from 
the chase. See, if need be, the note (in this edition) on ‘The Deare was (as you 
know) sanguis in blood,’—Zove’s Lad. Lost, IV, ii, 4.—ED. 

209. There’s hope in’t yet] For the sake of the metre, HANMER, with a fol- 
lowing that is certainly respectable, changed this into the demure and deliberate 
‘There is hope in it yet.’ Happily, no editor since Knight’s day has thus trans- 
gressed.— ED. 

211, trebble-sinewed, hearted, breath’d] MALONE points out that ‘ trebble’ 
qualifies both ‘hearted’ and ‘breath’d.’ 

213. Were nice and lucky] WARBURTON: ‘Nice,’ for delicate, courtly, flowing 


256 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT III, SC. xili. 


Of me for iefts : But now, Ile fet my teeth, 


And fend to darkeneffe all that ftop me. 


Come, 215 


Let’s haue one other gawdy night : Call to me 
All my fad Captaines, fill our Bowles once more : 


Let’s mocke the midnight Bell. 


Cleo. It is my Birth-day, 


I had thought t’haue held it poore. 


But fince my Lord 220 


Is Anthony againe,I will be Cleopatra. 


Ant. 
Cleo. 
Ant. 
And to night Ie force 


We will yet do well. 


217, 218. Bowles once more: Let's} 
Ff, Knt, Sing. Glo. Cam. Ktly. dowls ; 
once more Let’s Rowe et cet. 

220, 221. Z had... Cleopatra] Lines 
end, zs... Cleopatra Han. 

220. ¢’haue] Ff, Rowe,+, Sing. Dyce 
ii, iii to have Cap. et cet. 

221. againe| Om. Steev. conj. 


Call all his Noble Captaines to my Lord. 
Do fo, wee’l fpeake to them, 


225 


222. Wewill] Ff, Rowe, +, Var.’73, 
Knt, Coll. Sing. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Glo. 
Cam. Hal. We'// Cap. et cet. 

223. Call... Lord.] Call my lord’s 
noble captains. Words. 

224-227. Do fo... Queene] Lines end, 
force... Queen. Rowe et seq. 

224. to them] to’em Han. 


im peace.—JOHNSON : ‘ Nice’ rather seems to be, just fit for my purpose, agreeable to 
my wish. So we vulgarly say of any thing that is done better than was expected, it 
is wice.—STEEVENS: ‘ Nice’ is trifling. So, in Rom. and Jul. V,ii: ‘The letter 
was not wzce, but full of charge.’ MALONE: Again, in Richard JI/,: ‘My lord, 
this argues conscience in your grace, But the respects thereof are ice and ¢rivial.’— 
Douce (ii, 94) asserts that it is here used ‘in a sense bordering on that of amorous 
or wanton.’ —[ Unquestionably, ‘ nice’ is used in all these senses and in several others, 
—the context must decide. It is used here, I think, in any sense other than in 
Douce’s.—ED. ] 

216. gawdy night] Brapiey (Vv. &. D.) defines a ‘Gaudy-day’ as a ‘day of 
rejoicing, a festival or gala day ; especially the day on which a college gaudy is held’ ; 
and refers to ‘ Gaudy,’ a substantive, which is ‘an adaptation from the Latin saudium, 
joy.’ Hence ‘ gaudy-night.,—WRrIGHT (s. v. Gaudy, substantive, 2.) gives an 
instance of ‘gaudy-night’ in use at Oxford as late as 1861. 

219. It is my Birth-day] See Plutarch, 4ppendix. 

220, 221. I had... Cleopatra] WALKER (Cyr?v. iii, 306): Arrange,—‘ I’had 
thought t’ have held it poor; | But, since my lord is Antony again, | I will be Cleo- 
patra.’—Corson (p. 308): There’s an unconscious and pathetic if not ludicrous 
irony in this speech: ‘since my lord is Antony again,’ really means, he has returned 
to his weak and sensual self; ‘I will be Cleopatra,’ that is, she will be again the 
fascinating serpent of old Nile.—[Does it not rather refer to the towering passion into 
which Anthony had Jashed himself, and during which he had assailed Cleopatra 
with a torrent of vile abuse ?—Ep.] 

222. We will yet do well] For an analysis of the conditions under which ¢ will,’ 
instead of sha//, is used to express simple futurity, see FRANZ, § 462. 


ACY Ill, Sc, xill.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 257 


The Wine peepe through their fcarres. 226 

Come on (my Queene ) 

There’s fap in’t yet. The next time I do fight 

Ile make death loue me : for I will contend 

Euen with his peftilent Sythe. Exeunt. 230 
£no. Now hee’l out-ftare the Lightning, to be furious 

Is to be frighted out of feare, and in that moode 


The Doue will pecke the Eftridge ; and I fee ftill 233 
226. fcarres] fkarres F. ning ; Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
230. Sythe) scythe ¥F. lightning. Johns. et cet. 

Exeunt.] Exeunt Ant. Cle. Cha. 232. Js to be] Ls to Cap. (Corrected 

Ira. and Att. Cap. in Errata.) 

231-235. Mnemonic, Warb. and] Om. Cap. Walker. 
231. out/tare| outflare Daniel. 233. and | Om. Han. 


Lightning,| Ff, Rowei. “ght- 


230. his pestilent Sythe] ScHmIpT (Zex.) : ‘ Pestilent sythe’ is here equivalent 
to the scythe of pestilence, the deaths occasioned by pestilence. —[That is, I will rival 
the scythe that mows down victims in a pestilence. —ED. } 

230. Exeunt] VISCHER (p. 125): And thus Antony commits the extraordinary 
blunder of allowing himself to be won over. But how? It is hardly conceivable 
that he should have done so, after Cleopatra’s baseness in yielding herself to Czesar 
and in giving his messenger her hand to be kissed. The question arises whether or 
not an intermediate scene be lost. The conclusion, that this is the case, is almost 
inevitable. And why does Cleopatra here display so little charm? Did the Poet 
intend that she should here appear insipid >—[ Never insipid, but dazed, and think- 
ing very fast. She is at the parting of the ways.—Ep. ] 

231, 232. Now hee’l...moode] WALKER ((C77v. iii, 306): Arrange, ‘ Now 
he’ll outstare | The lightning. To be furious, is to be | Afrighted out of fear; and, 
in that mood,’ etc. 

233. Estridge] Douce (i, 435, note on ‘estridges,’ 2 Hen. IV: IV, i, 97): 
Although it is admitted that the ostrich was occasionally denominated estride by our 
old writers, it is by no means certain that this bird is here meant. Throughout the 
many observations on these difficult lines, it has been quite overlooked that estridge 
signifies a goshawk. In this sense the word is used in [the present passage in Azz. 
& Cleop.]. It would be absurd to talk of a dove pecking an ostrich ; the allusion is 
to the practice of flying falcons at pigeons. Falconers are often called ostregers and 
ostringers in the old books of falconry, and elsewhere. Zs¢ridge for ostrich or ostridge 
is a corrupt spelling that crept into our language at the commencement of Queen 
Elizabeth’s reign, and it appears that after that period the two words were very often 
confounded together, and used one for the other.—MADDEN (p. 155, footnote) : 
Douce was the first to point out that Shakespeare wrote of the estridge or goshawk, 
not of the ostrich [in the present passage]. The same idea was present to the mind 
of Clifford when he thus taunted Richard, Duke of York: ‘So cowards fight when 
they can fly no further ; So doves do peck the falcon’s piercing talons.’ —7 Hen. VI- 
I, iv, 40. A dove pecking an ostrich is not a lively image, and I doubt that the idea 
would have occurred to a commentator, had he been aware that a kind of hawk in 


17 


258 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. i. 
A diminution in our Captaines braine, 

Reftores his heart ; when valour prayes in reafon, 235 
It eates the Sword it fights with : I will feeke 

Some way to leaue him. Exeunt., 237 


|4cétus Quartus. Scene I] 


Enter Cefar , Agrippa, & Mecenas with his Army, 
Cafar reading a Letter. 


C@ef. He calles me Boy, and chides as he had power 3 
235. prayesin] praysin F,. preys on Alexandria. Cap. 
Rowe et seq. 1-20. Om. Gar. 
237. Exeunt.] Exit. Rowe. 1. Mecenas] Meceenas F,. 
Act IV, Scenei. Rowe. Scene i. Om. with his Army ] Officers, and others, 
Kemble. attending. Cap. et seq. (subs.) 


Ceesar’s Camp. Rowe. Camp before 


common use was known as an estridge.—[On the other hand, BRADLEY (ZV. £. D.) 
says that £strich or estridge, is a variant of ostrich, and gives to it no other meaning 
than the latter word ; the present passage is given as a reference. No such meaning 
as goshawk is mentioned by him. Every reference that he gives clearly refers to 
the ostrich, except the present, and two others, of which one is dated 1450, and the 
second, dated 1649, is doubtful. The derivation which Murray (iV. £. D.) gives 
of Ostreger, Ostringer, has no reference to Estridges, but the word comes, con- 
clusively, from Asturia, in Spain. The image of a dove in its fright pecking at an 
African ostrich is to me so infinitely absurd that I would welcome any bird or beast 
that can prove a more rational substitute. The case of the ostrich is by no means 
improved when the quality is noted for which it is chiefly distinguished in the days 
of Shakespeare. Some of the examples in the V. £. D. of the use of estvidge refer 
to its plumes, but the majority to a comfortable and enviable digestion, which success- 
fully copes with nails and horse-shoes. It is hardly too much to say that in any 
allusion by Shakespeare to an ostrich, an audience of his day would be at once 
reminded of the bird’s voracity, and, consequently, should a dove peck at an ostrich, 
the allusion would be at once interpreted as referring to a defence, not of eggs or 
young, but of nails or horse-shoes. After all, the question is of small moment. It is 
enough that Enobarbus, after his profoundly true saying that ‘to be furious Is to be 
frighted out of fear,’—one of those ‘jewels, five words long,’ which sparkle for ever, 
—draws his illustration from the image of a dove, the type of timidity, which attacks, 
under the influence of fear, that from which it would otherwise fly in terror, this, 
I prefer to believe, is a hawk, the dove’s most terrible foe.—ED. ] 

235. in reason] R. G. WuirTE (ed. i) : I am not quite sure that the Folio should 
not hére be followed ;—‘ in’ having the sense of won. 

235, 236. when valour... fights with] HALLIweELt (Select. Notes, p. 29): 
This passage is thus given in Cotgrave’s English Treasury, 1655 :—‘ When valour 
preys on reason, it does eat | The sword it shovld fight with.’ 

3. as he had] Equivalent to as though ; see Shakespeare, passim. 


ACT IV;SC. 1.\] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 259 


To beate me out of Egypt. My Meffenger 


He hath whipt with Rods, dares me to perfonal Combat. 5 
Cefar to Anthony : \et the old Ruffian know, 
I haue many other wayes to dye : meane time v4 
5. Combat.| combat, Rowe et seq. Johns. Cap. Ran. 
6. know,| know Dyce, Glo. Cam. 7. aye.) adie, Coll Hal. Cam. 


7. I haue| He hath Wan. Upton, 


7. I haue many other wayes to dye] UPTON (p. 240) : What a reply is this to 
Antony’s challenge? ’tis acknowledging he should die under the unequal combat. 
But if we read, ‘ He hath many other ways to die; mean time / laugh at his chal- 
lenge.’ By this reading we have poignancy, and the very repartee of Czesar.—CAPELL 
(i, 42): The Plutarch that Shakespeare dealt with, speaking of Antony’s challenge, 
says,—‘ Cesay aunswered him, that he had many other wayes to dye then so,’ which 
words are ambiguous, and might be taken wrong by the Poet, and occasion that reply 
which is in all the editions except the Oxford one [z.¢. Hanmer’s]: But this is so 
unfit a reply to be made by Cesar, that the editor could not but acquiesce in the 
Oxford correction; which, besides that it is not violent, gives us the true reply as 
found in the original. ‘I’ in the next line [see Zext. Votes], is taken from the 
same edition: but the line should be further amended by the insertion of another 
word,—/fond, between ‘his’ and ‘challenge’ ; otherwise the metre will not proceed 
right.—JoHNsoN: I think this emendation [He ath] deserves to be received.— 
FARMER: Most indisputably this is the sense of Plutarch, and given so in the modern 
translations, but Shakespeare was misled by the ambiguity of the old one: ‘ Czsar 
answered him, that he had many other ways to die, than so.’—-[DycE quotes with 
approval this note of Farmer.]—MAGINN (Fraser's Maga. Sept. 1839, p. 264): I 
am not quite so sure that Shakespeare wrote [this passage] as we have it. [Maginn 
here quotes it, but reads line 9 as ‘Cesar must £now.’] Taking the repartee Uiter- 
ally as it appears in North, Shakespeare’s ordinary practice may afford a better read- 
ing: ‘Let the old ruffian know | He hath many other ways to die than so. | Mean- 
time, I laugh at’s challenge. ec. Cesar must know,’ | .. . Is it any very violent 
conjecture to imagine that Shakespeare had seized the spirit of Plutarch and had 
written the exact words of North, without alteration of a letter, except the necessary 
change of haz for had, and that some printing or editorial blundering has jumbled 
the pronouns. The supposition is in complete conformity with Shakespeare’s prac- 
tice, and it removes the metrical difficulty—[It is patent that North’s translation is 
ambiguous. It makes little difference whether the ambiguity is due to North or to 
Amyot; there it is in North’s text, and Shakespeare accepted the interpretation 
which he preferred as most in harmony with his idea of his characters ; I do not 
see what right we have to change his words because we happen to think that Czsar 
is thereby rendered pusilanimous. If Shakespeare represents Czesar as conscious of 
his inferiority in single combat with Anthony (and he might very well be so, he was 
much younger and in delicate health), and, therefore, assured that he would fall, was 
afraid to meet Anthony, have we any right to change Shakespeare’s words and remodel 
his characters? In the original Greek there is no ambiguity:—LXXV. Ida 
& ’Avrdvioc Ereume, Kaloapa povoyaxgjoar mpoxadobuevoc. ’Arokpivapévov & éxeivov, 
moAAdc ddove ’AvTwriw mapétvat Oavdtov, ovudpovicac, etc. Nor is there any ambigu- 
ity in the Latin version, which, it is said, Amyot followed at times :—‘ Porro prouo- 


260 THE TRAGEDIE: OF [Act Iv, Sc. i. 


Laugh at his Challenge. 8 
Mece. Ce/far muft thinke, 
When one fo great begins to rage, hee’s hunted fe) 


Euen to falling. Giue him no breath, but now 
Make boote of his diftraétion : Neuer anger 
Made good guard for it felfe. 
Cef. Let our beft heads know, 
That to morrow, the laft of many Battailes 15 
We meane to fight. Within our Files there are, 
Of thofe that feru’d Marke Anthony but late, 
Enough to fetch him in. See it done, 
And Feaft the Army, we haue ftore to doo’t, 


And they haue earn’d the wafte.Poore Anthony. Exeunt 20 
8. Laugh...Challenge| I at this chal- (Athen. 26 Apr. 1873.) 
lenge laugh Han. TJ laugh at his chal- 14. Let...heads] Separate line, Theob. 
lenge Upton, Cap. Ran. et seq. 
his] this Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 15. many] Om. Rowe ii, Pope. 
9. muft| needs must Ritson. we must 18. done] be done Pope, + , Cap. Steev. 


Walker, Huds. must needs Sta. conj. Var. ’03, ’13, Ktly. 


cauit denuo per nuntios Antonius Czsarem, vt solus secum certaret. qui respodit, Vias 
Antonio multas patére interritum.’ It is in Amyot that the ambiguity is to be found, 
and North is exonerated :—‘ Et Antonius envoya une austrefois deffier Czesar, et luy 
presenter le combat d’homme 4 homme. Cesar luy feit response, gu’2/ avoit beaucoup 
d’ austres moyens de mourir que celuy-la.’—p. 237, ed. 1784. Dryden follows Shake- 
speare: Anthony tells Ventidius that Czesar’s answer was, ‘ He had more ways than 
one todie.’ I think there should be, in the present line, a period after ‘dye’ ; it con- 
cludes the message. ‘Laugh’ is, it seems to me, in the imperative, and the sentence 
is, in effect, ‘In the meantime Let’s laugh at his challenge.’—-Ep. 

12. Make boote of] JoHNson: That is, take advantage. 

14. Let our best heads know, etc.] THEOBALD: I might very reasonably return 
Mr Pope one of his own Civilities here, and say, the intermediate Line [namely, 
‘That to-morrow the last of battels,’ as Pope has it, omitting the word ‘many’ ] zs zx 
his Ear a Verse. But I have a better Opinion of his Hay than I have of his 
Industry, one of the Qualifications necessary toa good Editor. A small Observation 
of the Measure, mix’d with a little Diligence in col/ating, might have taught him to 
regulate the Lines, and to have avoided this hobbling, inharmonious, Monster of a 
Verse. 

18. See it done] Dyce (ed. ii) : In all probability, ‘See it de done. [See 7ex¢. 
Notes. |—ABsBotT (§ 484) quotes this line as an illustration of his rule that mono- 
syllables containing diphthongs and long vowels are often so emphasised as to dis- 
pense with an unaccented syllable. Accordingly he scans the line thus: Enough | 
to fétch | him in. | Sée | it done.’—[It is, I think, the necessary pause after a full 
stop that supplies the lacking syllable. And, furthermore, there should be no 
emphasis on ‘See’; if there be any emphasis in so trivial a command, it lies on 
‘done.’ —ED. ] 


ACTIV, sc.i.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 261 


[Scene 11. 


Enter Anthony, Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, 
lras, Alexas with others. 


Ant. He will not fight with me, Domitian? 

Eno. No? 

Ant. Why fhould he not? 5 

£no.He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune, 
He is twenty men to one. 

Ant. To morrow Soldier, 
By Sea and Land lle fight : or I will liue, 
Or bathe my dying Honor in the blood 10 
Shall make it liue againe. Woo’t thou fight well. 

Fino. Ile ftrike, and cry, Take all. 

Ant. Well faid, come on: 
Call forth my Houfhold Seruants, lets to night 

Enter 3 or 4 Seruitors. 15 

Be bounteous at our Meale. Giue me thy hand, 


Scene II. Rowe et seq. 7. He is| He's Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 
Alexandria, Rowe. Palace in Alex- 11. Woot] Wow't Cap. 
andria. Theob. well.| well ? Rowe ii et seq. 

1-58. Om. Gar. 12. Take all As quotation, Theob. 

2. Alexas,] Om. Cap. 14. lets] let’s FF, 

3. Domitian 7] F,, Domitian. F,F,. 15. Enter...] Glo. Cam. Enter Serv- 
Domitius ? Han. Knt, Ktly. Dometius. ants. Rowe. Enter some Domesticks. 
Rowe et cet. E Cap. After meale, line 16, Dyce, Sta. 

4. Wo ?] Ff, Rowe, Pope. Vo. Theob. Glo. Cam. 
et seq. 16. dounteous] bountious ¥F 


4. No?] CAPELL (i, 42): ‘No.’ So is this monosyllable pointed in the three 
latter moderns [Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton], and rightly ; for this sullen affirm- 
ative negation expresses admirably the state of the speaker’s mind at this time. 

6. twenty times of better fortune] For other instances of the ‘ transposition of 
adverbs,’ such as ‘of twenty times better,’ see ABBOTT, § 420, and Shakespeare, 
passim. 

11. Woo’t thou] ABsorr (§ 241): Zhow is often omitted after would’st, or per- 
haps merged, in the form ‘ woo’t,’ as ‘ wilt thou’ becomes w7/¢a. Sometimes ¢how is 
inserted [as here]. See IV, xv, 76.—FRANZ (§ 20a): The sporadic forms wo/, 
wo’t, woot for wilt, and wooll for will, correspond to the Middle English wo/t and 
wol,; in the following list [containing the present passage] the 7 is suppressed, as in 
the present English wozdd. 

12. Take all] JoHNson: Let the survivor take all. No composition ; victory or 


death. 


262 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACE Iv; "sce ui: 


Thou haft bin rightly honeft, fo haft thou, 17 
Thou, and thou, and thou : you haue feru’d me well, 
And Kings haue beene your fellowes. 
Cleo. What meanes this ? 20 
Eno’ Tis one of thofe odde tricks which forow fhoots 
Out of the minde. 
Ant. And thou art honeft too: 
I wifh I could be made fo many men, 
And all of you clapt vp together, in 25 
An Anthony : that I might do you feruice, 
So good as you haue done. 
Omnes. The Gods forbid. 
‘Ant. Well, my good Fellowes, wait on me to night : 
Scant not my Cups, and make as much of me| 30 
As when mine Empire was your Fellow too, 
And fuffer’d my command. 
Cleo. What does he meane? 


‘Eno. To make his Followers weepe. 34 

17. bin] beene Ff. Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 

18. Thou] And thou Rowe,+, Cap. 21. tricks] freaks Han. traits Warb. 
Varr. Ran. Steev. Varr. Dyce ii, iii. 27. you haue done] you've done me 
Thou too Anon. ap. Cam. Walker, Huds. 

you haue| you've Pope,+, Dyce 28. Omnes.] Ff, Rowe,+. Dom. Cap. 
ii, iii. you have all Ktly. All. Glo. Serv. Mal. et cet. 

20-22. [Aside. Cap. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 32. fufferd | fuffered Ff, Rowe. 

Cam. 33, 34. Aside, Cap. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 


21. [Aside. Johns. Varr. Mal. Ran. Cam. Ktly. 


18. Thou] Of Rowe, who reads ‘Azd thou,’ and of those editors who follow him, 
KNIGHT justly says: ‘They cannot understand how the pause, which is necessary in 
addressing various persons, stands in the place of a syllable.’ On the other hand, 
Dyce (ed. ii) dogmatically asserts that Rowe’s addition, Amd is ‘ positively required.’ 
By whom? Apparently not by Shakespeare.—ED. 

21. odde tricks] WARBURTON, to make the metaphor suggested by ‘ shooting’ 
consistent, changed ‘tricks’ to ¢vaz¢s, the French for ‘ arrows, shafts.,—JoHNsoN : I 
know not what obscurity the editors find in this passage. ‘Trick’ is here used in 
the sense in which it is uttered every day by every mouth, elegant and vulgar; yet 
Warburton, in his rage of Gallicism, changes it to ¢vazés. 

27. you haue done] WALKER (C77¢. ii, 254): Does not the sense imperatively 
require,—‘ So good as y’ have done me’? (This instance, indeed, might perhaps be 
otherwise accounted for ; omissions, at least at the end of the line, are not unfrequent 
in the latter part of this play. )—-Dyce (ed. ii) quotes the foregoing and asks, ‘ But 
is not “me’’ implied in the old text ?’—R. G. WHITE (Studies, p. 371) also quotes 
Walker’s question, and replies, ‘Not at all. The’sense is perfect, like the rhythm, 
as anyone may see.’ 


ACT lV, SC. il.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 263 


Ant. Tend me to night ; 35 
May be, it is the period of your duty, 
Haply you fhall not fee me more, or if, 
A mangled fhadow. Perchance to morrow, 
You’l ferue another Mafter. I looke on you, 
As one that takes his leaue. Mine honeft Friends, 40 
I turne you not away, but like a Mafter 
Married to your good feruice, ftay till death : 
Tend me to night two houres, I aske no more, 
And the Gods yeeld you for’t. 
Eno. What meane you(Sir) 45 
To giue them this difcomfort ? Looke they weepe, 
And I an Affe, am Onyon-ey’d; for fhame, 
Transforme vs not to women. 


Ant. Ho,ho,ho: 49 
36. May] ’ May Theob. 38, 55. to morrow] to-morrow Pope. 
37, 38. or tf, A] Ff. or if—A Theob. 43. to night | to-night Pope. 

Warb. or if You do, a Ktly. 44. yeeld | shield Johns. 
38. Perchance| lt may chance Pope,+. 46. they] you Ff, Rowe. 

Nay, perchance Steev. conj. 47. Onyon-ey’ d;| onion ey’ d. Johns. 


37. or if] JoHNsON: ‘Or if’ you see me more, you will see me ‘a mangled 
shadow,’ only the external form of what I was.—[For instances of the omission of 
so after ‘if,’ see ABBOTT, § 64; or FRANZ, § 297. ] 

38. Perchance] CAPELL (i, 43): This line is not one bit the better, for perfect- 
ing it by reading—‘ It may chance,’ instead of ‘ Perchance’ : verses wanting measure, 
—that is, their full measure,—have, upon some occasions, a singular beauty; that in 
question is one of them, as being a kind of painting of the disturb’d mind of the per- 
son it comes from.—[It is well worth while to refer here to North, merely to see how 
very closely Shakespeare has followed him throughout this scene. ] 

44. yeeld you] That is, reward you. See, if needful, ‘God-eyld vs,’ Macbeth 
(Revised ed.), I, vi, 19 in this edition. 

47. Onyon-ey’d] JoHNson: I have my eyes as full of tears as if they had been 
fretted by onions.—[ This is the second time that Enobarbus has referred to this effect 
of onions. See I, ii, 192.] 

49. Ho, ho, ho] Murray (WV. £. D. s. v. Ho, sb1,): An exclamation express- 
ing, according to the intonation, surprise, admiration, exultation (often ironical), tri- 
umph, taunting. 4. Repeated ho/ ho! or ho! ho! ho! it expresses derision or 
derisive laughter. As in Puck’s call to Demetrius: ‘Ho, ho, ho; Coward, why 
com’st thou not?’—dé@d. NV. D. III, ii, 421.—[BosweE. says that this laughter of 
Anthony, like Cleopatra’s ‘ Ha, ha, give me to drink mandagora,’—I, v, 4, is hysterical, 
which, if true (and I doubt hysterics in both cases), gives us no clue as to the tone in 
which it was uttered. To me, it sounds like an honest laugh, merely somewhat 
forced, with no tinge of derision in it,—how could there be any derision or con- 
tempt, when it is followed by, ‘Grace grow where these drops fall!’ Under ‘ Ho, 


264 THE TRAGEDIE) OF 


[ACT IV, SC. ili. 


Now the Witch take me, if I meant it thus. 50 
Grace grow where thofe drops fall(my hearty Friends ) 

You take me in too dolorous a fenfe, 

For I fpake to you for your comfort, did defire you 

To burne this night with Torches : Know (my hearts) 

I hope well of to morrow, and will leade you, 55 
Where rather Ile expect victorious life, 


Then death,and Honor. 
And drowne confideration. 


Let’s to Supper, come, 


Exeunt. 58 


[Scene LIT.| 


Enter a Company of Soldiours. 


1. Sol. 
2. Sol. 


Brother, goodnight : to morrow is the day. 
It will determine one way : Fare you well. 


Heard you of nothing ftrange about the ftreets. 


1 Nothing : what newes ? 


2 Belike ’tis but a Rumour, good night to you. 


1 Well fir, good night. 


51. fall (my...Friends)| Ff. fall; my 
.. friends, Rowe ii, Pope. fall! my... 
Jriends, Theob. et cet. 
52. 2” too] a too Ff. 
53. For...you] I speake t’ you Pope i. 
I speak t’you Pope ii. J spake t’ you 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. J spake ¢o 
you Cap. Var.’73, Steev. Var. ’03, 713. 
58. End of Act III. Kemble. 
Scene continued, Rowe, Pope. Scene 
III. Han. Johns. et seq. Om. Kemble. 
A Court of Guard before the Palace. 


Theob. 

1-35. Om. Gar. 

1. Enter...] Enter two Soldiers, to 
their Guard. Cap. Steev. et seq. 

2. goodnight] good night Ff, Rowe. 
good-night Pope. 

to morrow] to-morrow Pope. 

4. fereets.] streets ? Rowe ii et seq. 

5-lo. Nothing...goodnight | Lines end, 
rumour, ... Soldiers, ...good night. Steev. 
Var.’03, 13, Knt, Sing. Ktly. 

6. to] Om. Rowe ii. 


5b,’ Murray gives the definition ‘a call to stop, to cease,’ etc. (whence our teamster’s 


whoa). 


Having found certain passages where 4o is thus used, HOLT WHITE, in the 


Var. of 1821, gives a long note to prove that this meaning obtains here.—Ep. ] 

50. the Witch take me] I suppose this means, may the very spirit of sorcery, 
which alone could so pervert my words, blast me if, etc.—Eb. 

51. Grace grow] STEEVENS: Soin Rich. J]: ‘Here did she fall a tear ; here 
in this place I’ll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace.’ [III, iv, 105.] 

53. For I spake to you for, etc.] WALKER (Crit. iii, 306): Rather, ‘I spake 
t’you for,’ etc.—[Theobald’s reading, see Text. Notes.] 

57. Then death, and Honor] Upton: That is, an honourable death.—[It may 
be so; but it is, also, possible to understand the sentence as meaning ‘I’ll expect a 
victorious life rather than death, and I’ll expect honour.’—Ep.] 


ACT iv, sc. iil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 265 


They meete other Soldiers. 8 
2 Souldiers,haue carefull Watch. 
1 And you : Goodnight,goodnight. 10 


They place them/elues in euery corner of the Stage. 


2 Heere we : and if to morrow 


Our Nauie thriue, I haue an abfolute hope 


Our Landmen will ftand vp. 


1 ’Tis a braue Army, and full of purpofe. 15 
Mujficke of the Hoboyes is under the Stage. 


2 Peace, what noife ? 

1 Lift lift. 

2 Hearke. 

1 Muficke i’th’Ayre. 

3 Vnder the earth. 

4 It fignes well, do’s it not? 


8. They ...] They meet with... Ff, 
Rowe. Enter two other Soldiers. Cap. 
Mal. et seq. 

9. Souldiers] Ff. Soldiers Rowe. 

10. 1 And] 3. S. And Cap. Mal. et 
seq. (subs. ) 

you ;] you, Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. 
you. Johns. Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 

11. They...] The two first go to their 
Posts. Cap. Mal. et seq. (subs. ) 

in] on Johns. Var. ’73. 

12. 2 Heere] 4. S. Here Cap. Mal. et 

seq. (subs.) 

we. | we. [going to theirs] Cap. 
Mal. et seq. (subs.) 

and if] an if Walker (Crit. ii, 
155). 

14-18. Our Landmen ... lift.| Lines 
end, army, ... fist/ Steev. Varr. Knut, 


20 


22 


Sing. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
15. 1’ Zis] 3.S.’ Zzs Cap. Mal. et seq. 
(subs. ) 
 Tis...purpofe| Lines end, army, 
.. purpose Cap. Hal. 
16. Hoboyes] hautboys Pope. 
17. 2 Peace] 4.S. Peace Cap. Mal. et 
seq. (subs. ) 
19-24. Hearke... I fay] Lines end, 
carth...I say ! Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
19. [advancing from their Posts. Cap. 
20. 2’th’] wth’ FF ,. 2’ the Cap. et seq. 
20-24. Mujficke...meane ?] Lines end, 
well, ...mean ? Steev. Var. ’03,’13, Knt, 
Sing. Sta. 
22. 4 /t] Jt Ff, Rowe,+. 
ignes| F,, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
JSinges F,. Jings F,, Rowe, Pope. signs 
Han. Cap. et seq. 


16. Musicke . . . is vnder the Stage] StrEvrENns: Holinshed, describing a very 
curious device or spectacle presented before Queen Elizabeth, insists particularly on 
the secret or mysterious music of some felicitous nymphs, ‘ which,’ he adds, ‘sure 
had beene a noble hearing, and the more melodious for the varietie thereof, and 
bicause it should come secretlie and strangelie out of the earth.’ —vol. iii, p. 1297.— 
[It is hardly correct to say that the spectacle was presented before Queen Elizabeth ; 
in fact the show did not come off at all. Just as the queen was about ‘to come unto 
 hircoch,... there fell such a showre of raine (& in the necke thereof came such a ter- 
rible thunder) that euerie one of vs were driuen to seeke for couert, insomuch .. . that 
it was a greater pastime to see vs looke like drowned rats, than to haue beheld the 
vttermost of the shewes rehearsed.’—ED. ] 

22, It signes well] THEOBALD: That is, is it a good omen? Does it portend 


266 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT IV, SC. iv. 


3 No. 23 
1 Peace I fay : What fhould this meane ? 
2 ’Tis the God Hercules, whom Anthony loued, 25 
Now leaues him. 
1 Walke, let’s fee if other Watchmen 
Do heare what we do? 
2 How now Maifters ? Speak together. 
Omnes. How now? how now? do you heare this ? 30 
1 I, is’t not ftrange ? 
3 Do you heare Mafters ? Do you heare? 
1 Follow the noyfe fo farre as we haue quarter. 
Let’s fee how it will giue off. 
Omnes. Content : ’Tis ftrange. Exeunt. 35 
[Scene LV] ogi 
Enter Anthony and Cleopatra, with others. 
Ant. Eros, mine Armour £ros. 2 


23. 3 WVo.] 2 Sold. Wo. Rowe,+. 

24. What... meane?]| Separate line, 
Dyce. 

25. whom Anthony loued | Who loved 
Anthony Rowe, +, Coll. MS, Huds. 

27. Walke,| Walk ; Cap. et seq. (subs.) 

28-31. Do... ftrange?] Lines end, 
How now ? ... strange ? Steev. Var. ’03, 
?13, Knt. 

28. [going. Cap. 

do ?| do. Theob. et seq. 

[Enter other Soldiers, meeting 
them. Cap. They advance to another 
Post. Mal. et seq. (subs.) 

29. 2 How] 1. 2. 3. 4. How Cap. 

Speak together.] Om. Mal. 

30. Omnes.] Sold. Cap. All. Glo. 


30. how now ?...this ?] Separate line, 

Cap. Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. Dyce. 
[several speaking together. Mal. 
et seq. (subs.) 

31. 4) F, Om. FF 
Cap. et seq. 

34. 2¢ well | twzll Pope, +, Cap. Steev. 
Varr. Knt, Sing. 

giue| go Cap. conj. 

35. Omnes.] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Wh. 
All. Glo, Cam. Sold. [several speak- 
ing] Mal. et cet. (subs.) 

Scene III. Pope, Warb. Scene IV. 
Han. Johns. et seq) Om. Kemble. 

Cleopatra’s Palace. Pope. 

1. Enter...] Enter...Charmian, Iras, 

and others, Att. Cap. 


Rowe,+. Ay: 


4 


well to our General ?—WALKER (C7it. iii, 306) unaccountably prefers szmgs (see 
Text. Notes). 

25. whom Anthony loued] Cape t (i, 43): The words are right, and should 
not have been chang’d by the moderns into—who lov’d Antony , for thus the author 
who furnish’d them,—‘ they thought that it was the god unto whom Antonius bare 
singular devotion:’ But the Poet has put a wrong god, and perhaps by design ; for 
Bacchus, the god his author intended, could not stand in his verse along with these 
words: Hercules, he knew, was honour’d by Antony, as well as Bacchus; and he 
might think it a matter indifferent, which god these same signs were ascrib’d to: ’tis 
observable, he speaks only of ‘musick’; and has omitted the other signs mention’d, 
which determine them to have proceeded from Bacchus. 


ACT IV, SC. iv.] 


Cleo. 
Ant. 


Sleepe a little. 
No my Chucke. 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 267 


£ros,come mine Armor Eros. 
Enter Eros. 


Come good Fellow,put thine Iron on, 
If Fortune be not ours to day, it is 


Becaufe we braue her. 


Come. 


Cleo. Nay, Ile helpe too, Anthony. 
What’s this for ? Ah let be, let be, thou art 10 
The Armourer of my heart : Falfe, falfe : This, this, 
Sooth-law Ile helpe : Thus it muft bee. 2 


5. Enter Eros] ...with Armour. Cap. 
6. good | my good Rowe,+ , Cap. Ktly. 
thine| mine Han. Sing. Dyce, Coll. 


8. [Eros arms him. Cap. 

g. Anthony.] Om. Han. Johns. et 
seq. 

10. What's this for ?| Continued to 


10, 11. Ah ket be, ... this,| Ant. Ah, 
let be, ... this. Mal. et seq. 

12. Sooth-law] Ff, Rowe, Pope. Sooth- 
-la, Theob. Warb. Johns. Sooth, la! 
Coll. Sooth, la, Cap. et cet. 

Sooth-law ... bee.| Cleo. Sooth-la, 
...6e. Han. Johns. et seq. 
[Cleopatra puts the armour on 


Antony. Johns. 


Cleop. Mal. et seq. 
Thus it muft bee.| Given to An- 


10, 11. What’s...this,| Ant. What’s 
...¢his. Han. Johns. Cap. Varr. 


6. Come good Fellow] Dycz (ed. ii): That the word which has dropt out of 
the folio in this line was my (Rowe’s addition) is proved by Antony’s next speech 
but one, ‘Seest thou, my good fellow ?’ 

6. put thine Iron on] MALONE: ‘Thine iron’ is the iron which thou hast in 
thy hand, that is, Antony’s armour.—COLLIER (Votes, etc. p. 498): Surely ‘thine’ 
ought to be as the MS renders it, ‘ Put mde iron on’—ANoN. (Blackwood, Oct. 
1853, p. 468, thus answers Collier) : Not at all; either word will do; but ‘thine’ is 
more consonant with ordinary usage. A gentleman asks his butler, not ‘have you 
cleaned my plate?’ but ‘ have you cleaned your plate?’ meaning my plate of which 
you have the charge. Eros had the charge of Antony’s armour.—Dyce (ed. ii) : 
[‘ Thine’ of the Folio, with Malone’s note,] is an utterly improbable reading and 
explanation, since just before Antony has twice said ‘sme armour.’ Nor, as the 
context shows, is Antony here speaking of Zros’s armour,—he afterwards bids Eros 
‘put on his defences.’—[The reason given by Dyce which renders ‘thine’ ‘utterly 
improbable’ is to me precisely the reason which renders it extremely probable. It 
would be ‘ damnable iteration’ indeed, to have called out ‘ mine armour’ three times. 
Is it not universal that an exclamation or a question is varied at the second or third 
repetition of its substance? It is, to me, eminently natural that Anthony should have 
changed his twice-uttered impatient summons, ‘ mine armour,’ into ‘thine iron.’ If 
‘thine’ is to be changed to mine why should not, by Dyce’s rule, ‘iron’ be changed 
to armour ? An adequate reason why ‘thine’ refers to Anthony’s armour, and not 
Eros’s, is given, I think, by ‘ Anon.’ who, it has been said, was Lettsom.—ED. | 

9-12. Nay, Ile helpe too, .. . it must bee] HANMER was the first to attempt 
to disentangle these lines ; this he did so far as to remove ‘Anthony’ from the end of 
Cleopatra’s speech, and give it to ‘ Anz.’ by placing it before the next line, where it 


268 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. iv. 
Ant. Well, well, we fhall thriue now. 13 
Seeft thou my good Fellow. Go,put on thy defences. 
Lyos. Briefely Sir. 15 


Cleo. Is not this buckled well ? 
Ant. Rarely,rarely : 
He that vnbuckles this, till we do pleafe 


To daft for our Repofe, fhall heare a ftorme. 19 
13. Well, well,| Separate line, Han. 17. Rarely,| Oh! rarely, Uan. Cap. 
Cap. Var. 78 et seq. Ktly. 
13, 14. we /hall... Fellow] One line, 19. daft] doft Ff. dof’t Rowe, Pope. 
Han. Cap. Var. ’78 et seq. doff it Varr. Mal. Ran. daff’t Dyce, 
14. Fellow.) fellow ? Theob. et seq. Glo. Cam. doff’t Theob. et cet. 
15. Eros.] Eno. F,, Rowe, Pope, heare| bear Coll. ii, iii (MS), 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Sing. 


was almost as ill placed as it was before. Then he gave line 12: ‘ Sooth-law Ie 
helpe: Thus it must bee’ to Cleopatra, whose it has remained ever since. CAPELL, 
in his text, followed Hanmer, but in his /Votes (i, 43) he says that he ‘now thinks’ 
‘Antony’ is ‘better placed before “ Ah,’’ and the words ‘‘ What’s this for?’’ given 
to Cleopatra, who, in speaking them, takes up some of the armour.’ MALONE 
(1790) adopted this suggestion of Capell (without acknowledgement) and his text 
has been followed ever since. All this is set forth piecemeal in the 7ext. Notes ; but 
it is satisfactory to have before the eyes the undissected modern text, as follows: 


‘ Cleop. Nay, I’ll help too. 
What’s this for? 
Ani. Ah, let be, let be! thou art 
The armourer of my heart :—false, false; this, this. 
Cleop. Sooth, la, I’ll help: Thus it must be.’—Ep. 


12. Sooth-law] EARLE (§ 197): ‘La’ is that interjection which in modern 
English is spelt Zo. It was used, in Saxon times, both as an emotional cry and as 
a sign of the respectful vocative... The ‘la’ of Saxon times has none of the 
indicating or pointing force which /o now has, and which fits it to go so naturally 
with an adverb of locality, as ‘ Lo here,’ or ‘Lo there.’ While Zo became the liter- 
ary form of the word, ‘la’ has still continued to exist more obscurely, at least down 
to a recent date, even if it be not still in use. ‘La’ may be regarded as a sort of 
feminine to 4o.—[Also see Twelfth Night, III, iv, 104; Love's Lab. Lost, V, ii, 
460; Wint. Tale, II, iii, 64, where the foregoing note substantially appears. ] 

12, Thus it must bee] CoLiier (ed. ii): These words have usually been 
assigned to Cleopatra, but it appears by the MS that they belong to Antony, who is 
instructing Cleopatra, and who adds ‘well, well,’ when what he wished has been 
accomplished by her.—[Cleopatra has made one blunder, and then having adjusted 
a piece of armour correctly, exclaims exultingly: ‘Thus it zzst be !’—Ep.] 

15. Briefely Sir] JOHNSON: That is, guic&ly, sir.—[Or does it not mean, ‘in a 
minute’? or ‘presently,’ as we now use the word ?—Ep. ] 

19. daft] See Zext. Notes. 

19. heare a storme] COLLIER (ed. ii): The MS instructs us to read ‘dear a 


ACT Iv, SC.iv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 269 


Thou fumbleft Zvos, and my Queenes a Squire 20 
More tight at this, then thou : Difpatch. O Loue, 
That thou couldft fee my Warres to day, and knew’ ft 
The Royall Occupation, thou fhould’ft fee 
A Workeman in’t. 
Enter an Armed Soldier. 25 
Good morrow to thee, welcome, 
Thou look’ft like him that knowes a warlike Charge : 
To bufineffe that we loue, we rife betime, 
And go too’t with delight. 
Soul. A thoufand Sir, early though’t be, haue on their 30 
Riueted trim, and at the Port expect you. Showt. 
Trumpets Flourtfn. 
Enter Captaines, and Souldiers. 
Alex. The Morne is faire : Good morrow Generall. 34. 


21. then thou| Om. Ff, Rowe. 785. Capt. A Dyce. 


24. int] tm zt Var. 73. 

25. Enter... ] Enter an Officer, arm’d. 
Cap. (after line 23.) Enter a Captain 
armed. Dyce. 

29. toot] F,. tot FF, ¢o ct Varr. 
Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 

30. Soul. 4] 1. O. 4 Cap. Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Knt, Sta. (subs.) Off. 4 Var.’78, 


30, 31. A thoufand...you.] Lines end, 
Sir, ... trim, ... you. Rowe et seq. 

30. though’t| though it Varr. Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Sing. Ktly. 

31. Showt] Shout within. Cap. 

34. Alex. Zhe] Capt. Zhe Rowe,+, 
Varr. Ran. Coll. Sing. Wh. Glo. Cam. 
2. O. The Cap. et cet. (subs.) 


storm,’ in reference to the blows the man must receive who unbuckled the armour 
until the wearer pleased.—[If the reference be to the blows the foe must receive, 
which is doubtful, he could quite as well ‘hear’ them pelting on his armour as dear 
them.—ED.] < 

21. More tight at this] STEEVENS: ‘Tight’ is handy, adroit. 

25. an Armed Soldier] Dycr: What is said to him by Antony shows that he is 
not one of the common file. [See Zext. Motes.] 

28. betime] For the varying use of such adverbs as afterward(s), downward(s), 
forward(s), betime(s), etc., see FRANZ (§ 91) where the conclusion is reached that, 
in colloquial language, the modern tendency is to retain the s, albeit the dropping of 
the s still continues, especially in the written language. See also § 262.—[ With 
Shakespeare’s printers the two forms seem to be used indifferently ; see ‘betimes’ in 
line 38. ABBOTT (§ 25) does not, as far as I can find, include detime(s) in his list. 
—ED. ] 

31. Riueted trim] That is, their equipment or armour which is all riveted. 

31. Port] That is, the gate. 

34. The Morne is faire, etc.] CAPELL (i, 44): This speech, in the folio’s, is pre- 
ceded by the letters—A/ex. meaning—Alexas; in the moderns, by—Cap. mean- 
ing—captains: The first was set aside by them, and rightly ; for Alexas was other- 
wise dispos’d of, as we find in [IV, vi, 16] ; but the actor of that part having nothing 


270 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. iv. 


All, Good morrow Generall. 35 
Ant. ’Tis well blowne Lads. 

This Morning, like the fpirit of a youth 

That meanes to be of note, begins betimes. 

So, fo : Come giue me that, this way, well-fed. 

Fare thee well Dame, what ere becomes of me, 40 

This is a Soldiers kiffe : rebukeable, 

And worthy fhamefull checke it were, to ftand 

On more Mechanicke Complement, Ile leaue thee. 

Now like a man of Steele, you that will fight, 

Follow me clofe, Ile bring you too’t: Adieu. xeunt. 45 
Char. Pleafe you retyre to your Chamber ? 


36. Lads] Lad Ff, Rowe, Pope. 43. Complement, | compliment ; Theob. 
39. that,| Ff, Rowe. shat,— Pope, et seq. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. /at.— Han. 43, 44. thee. Now... Steele,| Ff. thee, 
that : Cap. et cet. Low, ... steel. Rowe, Pope. thee ow, 
this way, well-fed.| what ere be- ...steel. Theob. et seq. 
comes of me, Ff, Rowe. this way—well 45. Exeunt.] Exeunt Eros, Antony, 
Said. Pope et seq. (subs. ) Officers, and Att. Cap. 
40. becomes] become F,,. 46. you] you, Cap. Var. ’78 et seq. 
41. [Kisses her. Johns, retyre| to retire Rowe ii, Theob. 
42. checke| cheek Theob. ii, Warb. Warb. Var. ’73. 
(Corrected in MS, V. & Qu. 8 Apr. Chamber ?| chamber, Cap. Coll. 
108). Dyce, Wh. Glo. Cam. Hal. 


more to do, this character was also perform’d by him; and the speech that is given 
to’t, intitl’?d by the name of that character which he had appear’d in before.— 
G. WILKEs (p. 366): The morn is always fairin Egypt. I have been assured by 
Egyptians that it never rains above Cairo, on the Nile, and so seldom at Alexandria 
(say six or seven times a year) that a fair sky is not a matter for remark. Bacon 
would not have fallen into this mistake. 

36. ’Tis well blowne Lads] De ius: This refers to the Flourish of trumpets, 
which make themselves heard.—[This reference to the Trumpets is followed by 
ScumipT (Zex. s.v. Blow, vb. 4), by RoLre, and by WorpDswortH; I think 
rightly. On the other hand Hupson says it refers ‘to the morning or the day; the 
metaphor being implied of night blossoming into day.’ Thus also DEIGHTON: 
‘That is, in full blossom, 2. e. the sun is shining brightly in the sky.’—ED.] 

37. spirit] In the present line, at least, WALKER’S rule for the monosyllabic 
pronunciation of ‘spirit’ does not hold good. See I, ii, 143.—Eb. 

39. Come giue me that] WorDsworTH : This is addressed to Cleopatra. ‘That’ 
is another piece of his armour. 

39. well-sed] See ScumipT (Lex. s.v. Say, 4, 2) for many instances where this 
phrase is equivalent to ‘ well done!’ 

43. On more Mechanicke Complement] Dertius: A ‘mechanic compliment’ 
is a style of leave-taking which befits the common people, mechanics, but not a man 
of steel, a warrior, who parts from his mistress only with a soldier’s kiss. 


ACT IV, SC. v.] 


Cleo. Lead me: 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 27% 


47 


He goes forth gallantly : That he and Ce/ar might 
Determine this great Warre in fingle fight ; 


Then Anthony; but now. Well on. 


Exeunt 50 


[Scene V7] 


Trumpets found. 


Eyos. 


48,49. might Determine] Might finish 
Words. 

49. fight ;| Ff, Rowe, Sing. fight! 
Pope et cet. 

50. Zhen Anthony; but now.| Then 
Antony—but now— Rowe et seq. (subs. ) 


Enter Anthony,and Evos . 


The Gods make this a happy day to Axthony. 2 


Scene IV. Pope, Warb. Kemble. Scene 
V. Han. Johns. et seq. 

Scene changes to a Camp. Theob. 
Under the Walls of Alexandria. An- 
tony’s Camp. Cap. 

1. Eros.] Eros; a soldier meeting 


them. Theob. 
2. Eros. Zhe] Ff, Rowe, Pope. Off. 
The Sta. Sold. Zhe Theob, et cet. 


Well on, | Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
it, Warb. Well !—On. Johns. Var.’ 73. 
well, on. Theob. i et cet. (subs.) 


49. Determine] CHARLES ALLEN gives a valuable chapter wherein many instances 
are gathered of Shakespeare’s legal knowledge whereto parallel instances are to be 
found in contemporary writers ; from which the conclusion fairly follows that Shake- 
speare’s legal knowledge, on which much stress has been laid, is not more extraordi- 
nary than that of his eminent contemporaries. On p. 55 Allen notes that ‘ “Deter- 
mine’’ is twice used by Shakespeare in its legal sense as signifying the end, namely, 
in Cortolanus (V, iii, 119) : “I purpose not to wait on fortune till These wars deter- 
mine.’’ [and in the present passage.] A similar use is found in Jonson’s Alchemist : 
‘‘For here Determines the indenture tripartite.’’ (V, ii.) Donne also, in Anatomy 
of the World, says: *‘ Measures of times are all determined.”’ (I, § 40.)’ 

50. Then Anthony; but now] Kreyssic (ii, 73): To this woman Anthony 
gave more than any man should dare to give: his honour. He cannot complain if 
he is taken at his own valuation. The recollection of the flight of the ‘doting mal- 
lard’ from the sea-fight, although it cannot morally justify Cleopatra’s faithlessness, 
makes it zesthetically endurable. When she is arming him for his last battle, her 
determination is already taken. She knows well enough that what must here decide 
is not the heroic courage of a warrior, but wary judgement and essential superiority. 
But, at that very moment, her fine, zesthetic temperament pays homage to the man who 
is even in that instant betrayed.—[The Epiror begs leave to remark that he is not 
responsible for the opinions of commentators. ] 

2. Eros] THEOBALD: ’Tis evident, as Dr Thirlby likewise conjectured, by what 
Antony immediately replies, that this line should not be placed to ‘Eros,’ but to the 
Soldier, who, before the battle of Actium, advised Antony to try his Fate at land.— 
CAPELL (i, 44) : [Theobald] should have gone a step further, and have given [to the 
Soldier the speeches (lines 5 and 10)] which are no less certainly his than that [he 
has] given: the matter of them shews—that they come from the first speaker, and 


272 THE  TRAGE DIE VOL, 


<= 


[ACT Iv, ‘SC: v. 


Ant. Would thou, & thofe thy fears had once preuaild 3 


To make me fight at Land. 
Eros. 


Had” ft thou done fo, 


The Kings that haue reuolted, and the Soldier 
That has this morning left thee, would haue ftill 


Followed thy heeles. 
Ant. 
Eros. 


Whofe gone this morning ? 
Who? one euer neere thee, call for Exobarbus, 10 


He fhall not heare thee, or from Ce/ars Campe, 


Say I am none of thine. 
Ant. What fayeft thou ? 
Sold. Sir he is with Ce/ar. 


Eros. Sir, his Chefts and Treafure he has not with him. 15 


Ant. Is he gone ? 
Sol. Moft certaine. 
Ant. 


Go &ros, fend his Treafure after, do it, 


Detaine no iot I charge thee : write to him, 
(I will fubfcribe) gentle adieu’s, and greetings ; 20 
Say, that I wifh he neuer finde more caufe 


To change a Mafter. 
Corrupted honeft men. 


5. Eros. Had’’/?] Ff, Rowe,+, Varr. 
Ran. Off. Had’st Sta. Sol. Had’ st 
Cap. et cet. 

8. Followed] Follow’ d Pope et seq. 

9. Whofe| Who's Ff et seq. 

10. Eros. Who ?] Ff, Rowe,+, Varr. 
Ran. Off. Who?Sta. Sol. Who? Cap. 
et cet. 

one... Enobarbus] Separate line, 
Pope et seq. 

thee, call] thee. Call Rowe ii et 
seq. (subs. ) 

12. J...thine] As quotation, Theob. et 
seq. 

13. fayeft| Ff. say’ st Rowe et seq. 

14, 15. he zs... Trea/ure] As one line, 


Oh my Fortunes haue 
Difpatch Exobarbus. 


Exit 23 


Theob. et seq. 

17. Sol. AZof7] Eros. Most Elze. 

18. after, | after; Johns. 

20. /ub/cribe) gentle] subscribe, gentle 
Rowe, Johns. szdscribe gentle Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. 

23. Di/patch Enobarbus.] Dz/patch 
Eros. F,. Dz/patch, Eros. F,F,, Rowe, 
Wh. i. dispatch my Eros Pope. dis- 
patch, my Eros. Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. Despatch ! To Enobarbus / Johns. 
conj. Dzspatch.— O Enobarbus ! Cap. 
Eros! dispatch. Ran. Ritson, Steev. 
Var. ’03, 713 (subs.) Dispatch. Eno- 
barbus / Var.’ 73 et cet. (subs.) Domitius 
Lnobarbus ! Anon. ap. Cam. 


their style is not unfitting for him; but most unsuitable to the dependent condition 
of Eros, the gentleness of his manners, and his extreme love of his master.—[This 
distribution of speeches by Capell, in lines § and 10, was adopted by Malone (1790), 


and followed by all subsequent editors. ] 


23. Dispatch Enobarbus] CaprLi (i, 44): The pathetick exclamation of 
Antony, which is fetch’d from the First Folio, is such an improvement of the scene, 


, ACTIV, sc. vii] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 273 


[Scene VT. 


Flourifh. Lnter Agrippa, Cefar with Enobarbus, 
and Dollabella. 


Cef. Go forth Agrippa, and begin the fight: 

Our will is Axthony be tooke aliue : 

Make it fo knowne. 5 
Agrip. Cefar, I fhall. 


Flourifh.] Om. Ff, Rowe. 

and Dollabella.] and others. Cap. 
knowne| known, Agrippa Elze. 
[Exit Agrippa. Cap. 


Scene III. Rowe. Scene V. Pope, 
Warb. Scene II. Kemble. Scene VI. 
Han. Johns. et seq. 

Czefar’s Camp. Rowe. Before Alex- 
andria. Czesar’s Camp. Cap. 


Soa ss 


that the moderns are hardly pardonable for their ‘dispatch, my Eros,’ cobbl’d up 
from the second.—STEEVENS: Holt White supposes, that ‘ Antony, being astonished 
at the news of the desertion of Enobarbus, merely repeats his name in a tone of 
surprise.” In my opinion, Antony was designed only to enforce the order he had 
already given to Eros. I have therefore followed the Second Folio.—RiTson: It 
will be evident to any person, who consults the Second Folio with attention and can- 
dour, that many of the alterations must have been furnished by some corrected copy 
of the First Folio, or an authority of equal weight, being such as no person, much 
less one so ignorant and capricious as the Editor has been represented, could have 
possibly hit upon, without that sort of information. Among these valuable emendations 
is the present, which affords a striking improvement both of the sense and of the 
metre, and should of course be inserted in the text, thus ‘ Eros, dispatch.’ KNIGHT : 
We follow the words of the original, but not the punctuation. [The original] may 
mean dispatch the business of Enobarbus; but it is more probable that Antony, 
addressing Eros, says ‘dispatch’; and then, thinking of his revolted friend, pro- 
nounces his name.—R. G. WHITE: Considering the rhythm of the line, the appro- 
priateness of the command, and the great probability that in the manuscript there stood 
only E., I have no hesitation in adopting [the reading of F,. ]—[Knight’s note, is to 
me, the most satisfactory ; in substance it is followed by CoLLIER, SINGER, HUDSON, 
and DEIGHTON. We can hear the deep sigh with which the name ‘ Enobarbus’ is 
breathed forth. It is like Octavius’s ‘ Poor Anthony !’ at the close of the first Scene 
of this Act.—ED.] 

4. Our will is Anthony be tooke aliue] WARbuRTON: It is observable with 
what judgment Shakspeare draws the character of Octavius. Antony was his hero ; 
so the other was not to shine: yet being an historical character, there was a necessity 
to draw him Z&e. But the ancient historians, his flatterers, had delivered him down 
so fair, that he seems ready cut and dried fora hero. Amidst these difficulties Shak- 
speare has extricated himself with great address. He has admitted all those great 
strokes of his character as he found them, and yet has made him a very unamiable 
character, deceitful, mean-spirited, narrow-minded, proud, and revengeful. 

6. I shall] See ABBorT (§ 315) for instances of ‘shall’ used for z2//. 


18 


274 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, Sc. vi. 


Cefar. The time of vniuerfall peace is neere: 7 
Proue this a profp’rous day, the three nook’d world 


8. profp’ rous| Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. 
three nook’ d | three-nook'd F mG , et seq. 


7. The time of vniuersall peace is neere] CAPELL (i, 44): The Poet had not 
this from his Plutarch, but from ecclesiastical histories (probably) or some bible com- 
mentator: The return of Augustus to Rome was signaliz’d by three triumphs in the 
course of one month, for victories obtain’d in Dalmatia, at Actium, and this at Alex- 
andria: after which, he shut up the temple of Janus, in token that all wars were 
over; an event which those histories dwell upon, as the precursor of Christ’s birth, 
according to prophesy. 

8. Proue this] For instances where the inversion of the subject indicates a con- 
ditional sentence, see FRANZ, ¢ 487, Anmerkung, 4. c. 

8. the three nook’d world] On this puzzling phrase we get but small light from 
the commentators. It is not difficult to draw an explanation from the ‘ depths of one’s 
consciousness,’ as Theobald and Capell seem to have drawn from theirs, and say, with 
them, that according to primitive geography there were but three countries in the world: 
Europe, Asia, and Africa, and that these made the ‘three angles.’ But three angles 
do not make three nooks; they may make only two. From Malone to the present day 
there has been quoted, as parallel to the present passage, the closing lines in Azxg John, 
where the Bastard says, ‘Come the three corners of the world in arms, And we shall 
shock them.’ But, even in this passage, what the ‘ three corners’ are, is very doubtful ; 
it has been even suggested that they may have been the Pope, France, and Spain. 
Whatever they were, England is supposed to be the fourth corner, which alone, I think, 
removes the parallelism with ‘three nook’d.’ Again it has been surmised that the 
present allusion is to the fact that the world had been divided among Czsar, Anthony, 
and Lepidus. If this be so, it is extremely difficult, to me at least, to imagine why 
Cesar, Anthony, and Lepidus should be termed ‘nooks.’ There is, however, one pos- 
sible source of information, namely, in Shakespeare’s supposed familiarity with the 
Emblem writers. The proofs of this familiarity which GREEN has gathered on this sub- 
ject are, when taken singly, of doubtful value, but become respectable by accumulation. 
On p. 350 of his Shakespeare and the Emblem Writers, we find the following : ‘Curious 
it is to note how slowly the continent which Columbus discovered became fully recog- 
nised as an integral portion of “the inhabited world.”’. . . Brucioli’s Tvattato della 
Sphera, Venice, 1543, . . . in dividing the globe into climates, does not take a single 
instance except from what is named the Old World; in fact the New World of America 
is never mentioned. Somewhat later, in 1564, when Sambucus published his Zmdlems, 
and presented Symbols of the parts of the Inhabited Earth, he gave only three [parts: 
Europe, Asia, and Africa, as comprising the whole world.] ... Shakespeare’s geog- 
raphy, however, though at times defective, extended further than its ‘‘symbols’’ by 
Sambucus. He refers to America and the Indies in Com. of Err. III, ii, 131, and 
to the East and West Indies in The Merry Wives, I, iii, 64. Yet in agreement with 
the map of Sambucus, [where] the three Capes prominent upon it, are the Gibraltar 
Rock, the Cape of Good Hope, and that of Malacca, Shakespeare, on other occasions, 
ignores America and all its western neighbours. At the consultation by Octavius, 
Antony, and Lepidus about the division of the Roman Empire, Antony, on the 
exit of Lepidus, asks, “is it fit, The three-fold world divided, he should stand One 


ACT Iv, SC. vi.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 275 


Shall beare the Oliue freely. 


Enter a Meffenger. 10 
Mef. Anthony is come into the Field. 


Cef. Go charge Agrippa, 


Plant thofe that haue reuolted in the Vant, 
That Azthony may feeme to fpend his Fury 


Vpon himfelfe. 


Exeunt. 15 


Enob. Alexas did reuolt, and went to Jewry on 


11. Anthony] Mark Antony Pope,+. 
zs come... Field | Separate line, 
Cap. Mal. et seq. 

12, 13. Go charge Agrippa, Plant] 
Ff, Rowe, Pope. Go, charge, Agrippa ; 
Plant Theob. Han. Warb. Go, charge 
Agrippa, Plant Johns. Sing. Go, charge 
Agrippa; Plant Var. ’73, Knut (subs. ) 
Go, charge Agrippa. Plant Coll. i, Wh. 
i, Hal. Go charge Agrippa Plant Dyce, 


13. Vant] Var.’78, 85. 
cet. 

15. Exeunt.] Exeunt Cesar and Train. 
Cap. 

16. Alexas ... lewry] Separate line, 
Steev. Var. ’03, 13, Knt, Sing. Coll. ii, 
Cam. Ktly. 

did | doth Rowe ii, Pope. 
reuolt, and went | revolt ; he went 
Cap. Ktly (subs.) revolt ; and went Var. 


Van Ff et 


Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. Go, charge Agrippa 73 et seq. 


Plant Cap. et cet. 


nook’d world”’’ [in the present passage. The wood-cut which Green gives of the 
map of Sambucus presents only three great nooks in the world, one is formed by the 
Mediterranean, a second by the Red Sea, and a third is hard to identify, but is possi- 
bly the Bay of Bengal. According to this small map or Emblem (for the three 
divisions of the earth are dominated by animals), the world can assuredly be styled 
‘three nooked.’ Whether or not Shakespeare ever saw it is a question which is open 
to all the doubt that anyone may choose to apply to it. That Shakespeare was, at 
least, familiar with Emblems has very lately received a conspicuous proof by the dis- 
covery of a payment to him and to Burbadge for designing an impresa for the sixth 
Earl of Rutland.—Ep. ] 

g. Shall beare the Oliue freely] WARBURTON: That is, shall spring up every- 
where spontaneously and without culture.—M. MAson: To ‘bear’ does not mean 
to produce, but to carry; and the meaning is, that the world shall then enjoy the 
blessings of peace, of which olive-branches were the emblem. The success of 
Augustus could not so change the nature of things as to make the olive-tree grow 
without culture in all climates, but it shut the gates of the temple of Janus. This 
explanation is supported by the following lines from 2 Hen. JV: IV, iv, 87, where 
Westmoreland says, ‘ There is not now a rebel’s sword unsheath’d, But peace puts 
forth her olive every where.’ 

12, 13. charge Agrippa, Plant] Dyce: The meaning of the passage is obviously 
‘Go and enjoin Agrippa to plant those that,’ etc. 

13. Want] THISELTON (p. 22): As van is derived from the French avant it is 
unnecessary to expunge the terminal ¢here. In the Prologue to Zo. & Cvess., line 
27, the same word is spelt ‘ vaunt.’ 

16. Alexas did reuolt, etc.] CAPELL (i, 44) : The revolt of Alexas was not nor 
could not be prior to his going to Herod,—as the reading of all former copies would 


276 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT Iv, SC. vi. 


Affaires of Anthony, there did diffwade 17 

Great Herod to incline himfelfe to Ce/ar, 

And leaue his Mafter Anthony. For this paines, 

Ce/ar hath hang’d him : Camzndius and the reft 20 

That fell away, haue entertainment, but 

No honourable truft: I haue done ill, 

Of which I do accufe my felfe fo forely, 

That I will ioy no mote. 

Enter a Soldier of Cefars. 25 

Sol. Enobarbus, Anthony 

Hath after thee fent all thy Treafure, with 

His Bounty ouer-plus. The Meffenger 

Came on my guard, and at thy Tent is now 

Vnloading of his Mules. 30 
£no. I giue it you. 


17. Anthony,] Aztony ; Rowe et seq. 20. Camindius] Canidius Ff et seq. 
Antony’s ; Ktly. 24. mote] more Ff. 
adiufwade} Ff, Coll.i, Wh. i. per- 25. of Cefars] Om. Cap. 
swade Rowe et cet. (subs.) 28. oucr-plus]| overplus Steev. et seq. 


19. ¢his] his Han. 


make it,—for he went to him ‘on affairs of Antony,’ that is—in Antony’s behalf: 
The passage therefore is wrong, both in one of it’s words and the punctuation : it is 
set to rights by the change that is now made in them, which is small, and in rule. 
[See Zext. Notes.] 

16. went to Iewry on] ABBOTT (§ 503, ‘ Apparent Trimeter Couplets’) : ‘On’ 
may be transposed to the next line ; or, considering the licence attending the use of 
names and the constant dropping of prefixes, we might perhaps read ‘ Aléxas | did 
{re)vdlt | .’ 

16, 17. went to Iewry on Affaires] FRANZ (§ 342): ‘On’ ‘upon,’ after verbs 
of motion or direction, have a causal signification, inasmuch as they introduce the cir- 
cumstance which is the end and aim of an action.—[Hereupon follow many examples; 
among them, however, I can find none which is parallel to ‘came on my guard,’ 
in line 29, below, where there is a verb of motion, but no causal signification in ‘on.’ 
—Ep.] 

17. there did disswade] JoHNson: The old copy has ‘ dissuade,’ perhaps rightly. 
—MALONE: It is undoubtedly corrupt. The words in the old translation of Plutarch 
are: ‘for where he should have kept Herodes from revolting from him, he persuaded 
him to turne to Cesar,’ ete.—Dyce (ed. ii): [This quotation from North’s trans- 
lation] distinctly proves ‘ disswade’ to be wrong. 

21. haue entertainment] That is, they are accepted as soldiers, and have mili- 
tary pay. See Orhello, III, iii, 294, ‘ Note if your Lady straine his Entertainment,’ 
that is, ‘see if Desdemona urges the acceptance of Cassio as a soldier.’ 

29. Came on my guard] See note on ‘ went to Iewry on Affaires,’ lines 16, 17, 
above. 


ACT IV,-SC. vi.] 


Sol. Mocke not Exodarbus, 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 


I tell you true : Beft you faf’t the bringer 
Out of the hoaft, I muft attend mine Office, 


Or would haue done’t my felfe. 


Continues ftill a Ioue. 
Lnob. 


I am alone the Villaine of the earth, 


And feele I am fo moft. Oh Anthony, 
Thou Mine of Bounty, how would’ft thou haue payed 


My better feruice, when my turpitude 


Thou doit fo Crowne with Gold. This blowes my hart, 


32. Mocke| Mock me Theob, Han. 
Warb. Steev. Var.’03, ’13, Words. JZ 
mock Cap. 

Enobarbus] Lxobarbus, for in 
this Words. 

33. you faf't] FF. you faft F,. 
you safe’t Rowei. you see safe Rowe 
ii, Pope, Cap. you see safe ’t Theob. 
Han. Warb. that you saf’d Steev. Var. 
03, 713. you safed or saf’d Johns. et 


277 
32 
Your Emperor 35 
Exit 
40 
cet. you saw safe Cap. conj. 
34. hoaft,|) FF, Rowe. haoft, F,. 


_ host, Johns. hoast ; Rowe ii et cet. (subs.) 
38. And feele I am fo moft] Om. 
Words. 
39. payed | Ff. paid Rowe. 
41. blowes| bows Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Cap. 
hart,| heart Ff. heart ; Rowe et 
seq. 


33. Best you] Dyce pronounces STEEVENS’s emendation, ‘ Best that you,’ ‘ most 
probable.’ 

37. I am alone the Villaine] For ‘alone’ when equivalent to deyond all others, 
see ABBOTT, § 18. For ‘the’ betokening preéminence, see FRANZ, § 113, or 
ABBOTT, § 92. 

38. And feele I am so most] M. MAson: That is, and feel I am so, more than 
any one else thinks it.— REED: Surely, this explanation cannot be right. ‘ And feel 
I am so most,’ must signify, ‘I feel or know it myself, more than any other person 
can or does feel it.—DEIGHTON paraphrases it concisely: ‘ And no one could feel 
it as bitterly as I do.’ 

41. This blowes my hart] JoHNsoN: This generosity (says Enobarbus) swe//s 
my heart, so that it will quickly break, ‘if thought break it not, a swifter mean.’ — 
STEEVENS: That to ‘blow’ means to guff or swell, the following instance, in V, ii, 
419, of this play, will sufficiently prove: ‘on her breast There is a vent of Bloud, 
and something d/owne.’ —[This interpretation of ‘ blowe’ seems to me weak, and far 
from adequate to Enobarbus’s deep emotion, And yet I have none better to offer, 
except by hermeneutical torture. To give it force, Dr Johnson has to add, ‘so that 
it will quickly break,’ but this is wholly his addition, and is not, of necessity, inherent 
in the simple word ‘blows.’ Unquestionably, Shakespeare frequently uses ‘blow’ 
in the sense of swell, puff up, etc.; and there is a passage in Zear which seems 
strongly to strengthen this sense in the present sentence. It is where Lear says, ‘O, 
how this mother swells up toward my heart !’—(II, iv, 54.) And yet I am not 
satisfied. The hermeneutical torture, as pedantic schoolmen would say, to which I 
referred, is based on the right to use any extreme, legitimate interpretation. Now 
Shakespeare does, once or twice, use ‘blow’ in the sense of break, shatter, as the 


result of an explosion. Hamlet says, ‘’tis the sport to have the enginer Hoist with 


278 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. vil. 


If fwift thought breake it not: a fwifter meane 42 
Shall out-ftrike thought, but thought will doo’t. I feele 

I fight againft thee : No I will go feeke 

Some Ditch, wherein to dye : the foul’ft beft fits 45 
My latter part of life. Exit. 


[Scene VII. 


Alarum, Drummes and Trumpets. 


Enter Agrippa. 
Agrip Retire, we haue engag’d our felues too farre : 
Ce/ar himfelfe ha’s worke, and our oppreffion 4 


42. not ;] not, Rowe et seq. 
Swifter) fwifted Ff, Rowe. 


I may Rowe,+, Var. ’73. 
Scene IV. Rowe. Scene VI. Pope, 


43. out-ftrike] outstrike Steev. et seq. 
thought,| thought : Rowe et seq. 
doo’t. I feele] F,, do't. I feele F,. 
do't. I feel F,. do't, I feel. Rowe et seq. 
44. thee] thee! Rowe et seq. 
Vo] No, F,F,, Rowe,+. 10; 
Cap. et seq. : 


45. wherein to| where to Ff. where 


Warb. Scene VII. Han. Johns. et seq. 
Before the Walls of Alexandria. 
Rowe. Between the Camps. Field of 
Battle. Cap. 
2. Agrippa] Agrippa, and his Forces, 
Cap. 
4. and our oppreffiion| our opposition 
Han. 


his own petar; and ’t shall go hard But I will delve one yard below their mines, 
And blow them at the moon.’ I know the phrase here is ‘ blow az¢,’ which differ- 
entiates it from ‘blow,’ used absolutely. Yet the drift of the sentence is that ‘ blow’ 
is here used as a result of a sudden and violent force, and we may well imagine that 
its effect was shattering. Again, to return to the interpretative torture, at the close 
of Henry the Eighth, the Porter’s Man, speaking of a fellow in the crowd with a 
fiery nose, says ‘he stands there, like a mortar piece, to blow us.’—V, iv, 48. 
Wherefore, I should like, on this faint possibility, to found a belief that in ‘ This 
blows my heart’ there lies in ‘blows’ a meaning stronger than szwe//s,—one that 
involves the idea of breaking. It is possibly noteworthy that the punctuation of the 
Folio after ‘heart’ and ‘not’ has been uniformly, and perhaps justly, discarded for 
that of Rowe. Although the punctuation of Shakespeare’s compositors is not, in 
general, of an all-commanding value, yet, in the present instance, it seems to imply 
that the thought of his turpitude will break his heart, if it be not already broken by 
swift remorse.—Ep. ] 

43. thought] MALone: ‘Thought,’ in this passage, as in many others, signifies 
welancholy.—[ Why not say pensiveness at once? The damning ‘thought’ that he, 
above all others, is the greatest villain on earth, and that no foul ditch is foul enough 
for him to die in, is, possibly, sufficient, it must be acknowledged, to make a man 
-occasionally, now and then, once in a while, a trifle depressed. The melancholy, as 
Malone would have it, which Enobarbus feels is the very blackest despair.—Ep. ] 

4. Cesar himselfe ha’s worke] ScHMIDT (Zex. s. v. 2): That is, Cesar is in 
‘great straits. 


ACT Iv, Sc. viil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 279 
Exceeds what weexpetted. Jae ois 5 


Alarums . 
Enter Anthony, and Scarrus wounded. 


Scar. O my braue Emperor, this is fought indeed, 

Had we done fo at firft, we had drouen them home 

With clowtsabout their heads. Far off. 10 
Ant. Thou bleed’ft apace. 
Scar. I had a wound heere that was like a T, 

But now ’tis made an H. 


Ant. They do retyre. 14 
5. Exit.] Om. Roweii. Retreat. Ex- Io. Far off.] F,, Rowei. Farre off. 
eunt. Cap. FF. Retreat afar off. Cap.Cam. Om. 
9. drouen| Ff, Rowe,+, Glo. Cam. Rowe ii et cet. 
Ktly. driven Cap. et cet. t1-15. Ant. Zhou... Bench-holes,| Om. 
10. heads] head Ff, Rowe. Words. 


4. our oppression] STEEVENS: That is, the force by which we are oppressed or 
overpowered. 

7. Scarrus] CAPELL (i, 45): It is worth remarking, concerning this Scarus,— 
that his name is of the Poet’s invention, and himself a person of his creating: One 
(he saw) must be had, to be about Antony when deserted by Enobarbus and the 
rest, and no fit one was presented by story: he therefore had recourse to invention ; 
and by bringing in his foundling before among Antony’s other followers at the battle 
of Actium, gives his introduction in this scene an easy appearance, and hides it’s 
necessity. [Sce Dram. Pers.] 

g. drouen] This form is found in Shakespeare only here. 

10. With clowts about their heads] ScHmipT (Zex.) asks whether or not 
*clouts’ be here ‘equivalent to cuffs,’—a question which surely requires no answer 
from any English reader. ‘Clouts’ here are bandages for wounds. 

12. that was like a T] DeELius: We must suppose that the T was lying on its 
side, 4, and by one or two more slashes was changed to an H.—[This is certainly 
ingenious, and the only attempt I have found to explain the conversion of the letter 
T into a letter H. STAUNTON (Atheneum, 26 Apr. 1873), however, gives the true 
interpretation, namely, that there was no actual conversion of one letter into another; 
the pun consists in that Scarus had received a T-shaped wound which, ‘by being 
undressed and exposed to the air, had begun to pain him.’ The noun ache and the 
letter H were pronounced alike; see the next note.—ED. ] 

13. now ’tis made an H] STEEVENS (Note on Mauch Ado, III, iv, 52): Hey- 
wood in his Zfigrams, 1566, has one ‘ Of the letter H’ (p. 111, Spenser Soc. Reprint), 
‘H is worst among letters in the crosse row, For if thou finde him either in thine 
elbow, In thine arme, or leg, in any degree, In thine head, or teeth, in thy toe or 
knee, Into what place soever H may pike him, Where euer thou finde ache, thou 
shalt not like him.’—[The verb was pronounced ae ; the noun aztch, like the letter, 
or, possibly, a¢ch. For a fuller discussion of this pronunciation, see, if need be, Zhe 
Tempest, I, ii, 433; Much Ado, III, iv, 52, of this edition.—Ep. ] 


280 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. viii. 


Scar. Wee’l beat ’em into Bench-holes, I haue yet 15 

Roome for fix {cotches more. 
Enter Eros. 

Eros. They are beaten Sir, and our aduantage ferues 
For a faire victory. 

Scar. Let vs fcore their backes, 20 
And {natch ’em vp, as we take Hares behinde, 
’Tis fport to maul a Runner. 

Ant. I will reward thee 
Once for thy fprightly comfort, and ten-fold 
For thy good valour. Come thee on. 25 

Scar. Ile halt after. Exeunt 


[Scene VIII. 


Alarum. Enter Anthony againe in a March. 
Scarrus, with others. 


Ant. We haue beate him to his Campe : Runne one 
Before, & let the Queen know of our guefts : to morrow 4 


15. ’em] them Ran, 
Bench-holes| Id est, sellz famil- 


the walls of Alexandria. Var.’78. 
1. Alarum.] Om. Cap. 


iaricee. —ED. 

18. They are| They re Pope,+, Dyce 

21. Hares behinde,| hares, behind ; 
Theob. et seq. 

22. fport) a fport FF. 

23. thee] thee, Han. 

24. [prightly| spritely Steev. Varr. 
Knt, Sing. Dyce, Sta. Glo, Cam. 

25. thee] Om. Han. 

Scene continued, Rowe,+. 
VIII. Cap. et seq. 

Gates of Alexandria. Cap. Under 


Scene 


againe ina March. ] marching; Cap. 
2. Scarrus] Scarus Ff, 
with others. ] with other. F,. and 
Forces. Cap. 
3. We haue| Weve Pope,+, Dyce ii, 
iii. 
3,4. We... Before] One line, Rowe et 
seq. 
4. guefis| gests Theob. Han. Warb. 


Sta. Glo. Cam. Ktly, Hal. 
Theob. conj. ( withdrawn.) 


her guests 


18. our aduantage serues] CAPELL (i, 45): Meaning—that circumstances 
favour’d them, and they had now an opportunity of obtaining ‘a fair victory’ ; an 
opinion that Scarus assents to, and afterwards—Antony, and occasions their exit: As 
they are again the next enterers, and that in another place, some interval must be 
suppos’d between the two scenes, that should be fill’d up with skirmishings and dis- 
tant alarums. 

25. Come thee on] For many examples of the Elizabethan use of ‘thee’ for 
thou, see ABBOTT, § 212. : 

4. guests] THEOBALD: What ‘guests’ was the Queen to know of? 
was to fight again on the morrow ; and he had not yet said a word of marching to 


Antony 


ACT IV, Sc. viii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 281 


Before the Sun fhall fee’s, wee’l {pill the blood 5 
That ha’s to day efcap’d. I thanke you all, 
For doughty handed are you, and haue fought 
Not as you feru’d the Caufe, but as’t had beene 
Each mans like mine : you haue fhewne all Heors. 
Enter the Citty, clip your Wiues, your Friends, fe) 
Tell them your feats, whil’{t they with ioyfull teares 
Wath the congealement from your wounds, and kiffe 
The Honour’d-gafhes whole. 
Enter Cleopatra. 
Giue me thy hand, ; 15 
To this great Faiery, Ile commend thy aéts, 


5. fee’s] FjF,, Rowe, +, Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. /ees F,. see ws Cap. et cet. 


g. Hectors.] Hectors. Go, Walker, 
Huds. as Hectors. Anon. ap. Cam. 


7. doughty handed | doughty-handed 
Pope et seq. 

8. the] my Han. 

as’t| as it Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. 
Varr. Coll. 

9. you...all | you've shewn yourselves 
all Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Ktly. you 
have all shewn you Cap. you all have 
shown all Hectors Nicholson ap. Cam. 


13-15. The...hand,| One line, Rowe 
et seq. 

13. Honour d-ga/hes| honour'd gafhes 
F’, et seq. 

14. Cleopatra.] Cleopatra, attended. 
Cap. 

15. [To Scarus. Rowe et seq. 

16-23. Mnemonic, Warb. 

16. Fatery]| Fairy Johns. et seq. 


Alexandria, and treating his officers in the palace. We must restore, as Mr War- 
burton likewise prescribes, ‘our gests,’ 2. e. res geste ; our feats, our glorious actions. 
It is a term that frequently occurs in Chaucer; and, after him, in Spenser ; nor did 
it cease to be current for some time after our Author’s days.—JoHNson: Antony, 
after his success, intends to bring his officers to sup with Cleopatra, and orders notice 
to be given of their guests.—[COLLIER’s MS also gives gests, and for a time received 
the credit therefor. Whether or not the MS Corrector anticipated Theobald is not 
here open to question. The credit is to be given to him by whom the emendation 
was first published. The 7ext. Notes show how emphatic is the preference of the 
best editors for Theobald’s happy change.—Ep. ] 

g. you haue shewne all Hectors] WALKER (Crit. iii, 307): I think,—‘ you 
have shown all Hectors. Go.’ At any rate, something has dropped out at the end 
of the line; as after ‘haven,’ in x, 9; after ‘I dare not,’ in xv, 32; and after ‘the 
round world,’ in V, i, 20.—[AsxotrT (§ 484) thus scans the line, ‘Each man’s | like 
mt | me. you | have shéwn | all Héctors.’ This is solely for the eye.—ED. ] 

1o. clip your Wiues, your Friends] To ‘clip’ is embrace. 

11. Tell them your feats] The use of ‘feats’ here adds strength to Theobald’s 
conjecture of ges/s in line 4 above; especially if ‘them’ be emphasised in accordance 
with the rhythm. There is a repetition with a variation ; ‘let the Queen know of 
our gests and tell your friends, too, of your feats.—Eb. 

16. Faiery] WARBURTON: For zxzchantress, in which sense it is often used in the 


282 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. viii. 


Make her thankes bleffe thee. Oh thou day o’th’world, 17 
Chaine mine arm’d necke, leape thou, Attyre and all 
Through proofe of Harneffe to my heart,and there 
Ride on the pants triumphing. 20 
Cleo. Lord of Lords, 
Oh infinite Vertue, comm’ft thou fmiling from | 
The worlds great {nare vncaught. 
Ant. Mine Nightingale, 
We haue beate them to their Beds. 25 
What Gyrle, though gray 


17. [To Cleo. Glo. Dyce ii. 24. Mine] My Ff et seq. 
18. necke,]| neck ; Pope et seq. 25. We haue| We've Pope,+, Dyce 
19. heart] part Ff. ii, iii. 
20. pants] paints FF. 25, 26. We... gray] One line, Rowe 
23. uncaught.| uncaught ? Rowe ii et et seq. 

seq. 


old romances.—[ HANMER, STAUNTON, and several recent editors adopt this mean- 
ing. ]}—CAPELL (i, 45) : Giving her this name as being something more than humanity, 
and of a middle nature between that and the gods.—JoHNsON: Mr Upton has well 
observed that ‘fairy’ comprises the idea of power and beauty.—DeE ius: Cleopatra 
is a fairy inasmuch as she is the bountiful dispenser of that good fortune which is 
Scarus’s due. [Which seems to be the true interpretation. —ED. ] 

18. Chaine mine arm’d necke] WARBURTON: Alluding to the Gothic custom 
of men of worship wearing gold chains about the neck.—EDWARDS (p. 201, after 
quoting the foregoing note): Your humble servant, Mr Alderman Antony—Your 
worship is so fine to day; that I vow I scarce know you. But you will hardly 
thank Mr Warburton, for the honor he does you. ‘Chain my arm’d neck’ means, 
entwine me, armed as I am, in thy embraces. A chain, which a gallant man would 
prefer before any gold one. 

19. proofe of Harnesse] STEEVENS: That is, armour of proof. 

20. Ride on the pants triumphing] WARBURTON: Alluding to an Admiral 
ship on the billows after a storm. The metaphor is extremely fine.—EDWARDs (p. 
202, after quoting the foregoing note) : There are some points which our Professed 
Critic should never touch; for, whenever he does, he only shews his ignorance about 
them. He quite mistakes the nature of the ‘pants’ here, as well as the ‘chain’ 
above. But why ¢rzumphing like an admiral ship after a storm? I thought victories 
gained, not storms escaped, had been the matter of triumphs; and, I suppose, other 
ships dance on the billows, just after the same manner as an Admiral’s does. 

24. Mine Nightingale] This is an example, even more striking than ‘your 
reproof’(II, ii, 141), of confusion of sound in the ear of the compositor, who failed 
to detect, in the pronunciation of his reader, the difference between ‘ my nightingale’ 
and ‘mine nightingale.’ See also ‘ Unarme Eros,’ IV, xiv, 45 ; and ‘mine Nailes,’ 
V, ii, 268; ‘hither,’ III, vi, 14; ‘your so,’ III, iv, 27, etc.—ED. 

24. Nightingale] DreIcHTon: A compliment to the fascination of her voice. 


ACT IV, Sc. viii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 283 


Do fomthing mingle with our yonger brown, yet ha we 27 
A Braine that nourifhes our Nerues,and can 
Get gole for gole of youth. Behold this man, 
Commend vnto his Lippes thy fauouring hand, 30 
Kiffe it my Warriour : He hath fought to day, 
As if a God in hate of Mankinde, had 
Deftroyed in fuch a fhape. 
Cleo. Ile giue thee Friend 
An Armour all of Gold : it was a Kings. 35 
Ant. He has deferu’d it, were it Carbunkled 


27-29. Do...man,] Lines end, brown, 29. gole| goal Pope. 
...2erves, ...man, Johns. Var.’73, Knt, {Pointing to Scarus. Coll. 53. 
Sing. Ktly. 30. /auouring| favouring Theob. et 
27. yonger| younger FF. Om. Han. seq. 
‘Cap. Steev. Var. ’03,’13, Words. 32, 33. Mnemonic, Warb. 
ha] FF, ha’ F,, Rowe, Pope, 33. Deftroyed | Destroy'd Han. Cap. 


Theob. Warb. Johns. Knt, Dyce, Wh. et seq. 
Sta. Glo. Cam. ave Han. et cet. 


27. Do...ha we] This apparent Alexandrine is put by ABBOTT (§ 499) in a 
class where ‘ sometimes regular verses of five accents are preceded or followed by a 
foot [here ‘ yet ha’ we’], more or less isolated, containing one accent.’ 

27. with our yonger brown] STEEVENS: As this epithet ‘younger,’ without 
improving the idea, spoils the measure, I have not scrupled... to omit it as an 
interpolation.—[In general, I, too, have not scrupled to omit all Steevens’s notes 
explanatory of his arbitrary metrical changes ; but the reckless arrogance of the fore- 
going deserves to be pilloried. And yet, in this instance, Steevens was not the orig- 
inal offender.—ED. | 

28. A Braine that nourishes our Nerues] ANON. (Zhe Transatlantic, Nov. 
1871. From St. Paul’s Maga.): These words may be considered somewhat obscure, 
but underneath them lies a vast substratum of meaning. An intellect that never lies 
fallow, a heart that is never cold, a nervous system that, though never quiet, is never 
unstrung. 

29. Get gole for gole of youth] JoHNsoNn: At all plays of barriers, the bound- 
ary is called a goal; to win a goal, is to be a superior in a contest of activity.— 
DEIGHTON: That is, win as many goals as younger men; for every goal they get 
of us, can get one of them; not get the better of youth, but prove their equals. — 
[For the use of ‘of,’ see, if necessary, II, iii, 30.] 

30. sauouring] It is to THEOBALD’s acuteness that we owe the detection of the 
substitution of a long / for f 

32. Mankinde] RoLrE quotes from Schmidt (Zex.) that this word is ‘accented 
mostly on the last syllable in Zion of Athens, on the first in the other plays.’ 

36. Carbunkled] Again, in Cymbeline, there is a reference to the carbuncles 
in Phcebus’s chariot, where Iachimo is making his confession and says that Posthu- 
mus ‘ stakes this ring ; And would do so, had it been a carbuncle of Phoebus’ wheel.’ 
I had hoped that by the reference to this gem, which Golding does not mention 


284 THE TRAGE DIE. OF [ACT Iv, ae ix 


Like holy Phoebus Carre. Giue me thy hand, 37 
Through Alexandria make a iolly March, 

Beare our hackt Targets, like the men that owe them. 

Had our great Pallace the capacity 40 
To Campe this hoaft, we all would fup together, 

And drinke Carowfes to the next dayes Fate 

Which promifes Royall perill, Trumpetters 

With brazen dinne blaft you the Citties eare, 


Make mingle with our ratling Tabourines, 45 
That heauen and earth may ftrike their founds together, 
Applauding our approach. Exeunt. 47 


[Scene LX.] 


Euter a Centerie, and lis Company , Enobarbus followes. 


Cent. If we be not releeu’d within this houre, 
We muft returne to’th’Court of Guard : the night 
Is fhiny, and they fay, we fhall embattaile 


By’th’fecond houre ?’th’Morne. 5 
37. holy] glowing Coll. MS. 1. Centerie,] Century, F,F,. 
41. this] his Han. ii. 2-Gent/f | Pi, Rowe. 3s j1cap. 
all would) would all Theob. ii, 3. te’th’] F, to th’ FF, Rowe,+, 
Warb. Johns. Varr. Ran. Sing. Wh. @o the Cap. et cet. 
45. with] with it Ktly. 3, 40. Court of Guard | court-of-guard 
47. approach] reproach FF. Dyce ii, iii. 
Scene V. Rowe. Scene VII. Pope, 4. embattaile| F,. embattel Rowe, 
Warb. Scene VIII. Han. Johns. Scene Pope, Han. embattle FF, et cet. 
IX. Cap. et seq. 5. Byth’| F, By th’ FF, Rowe, 
Cesar’s Camp. Rowe. Out-skirts +, Wh. Sy ¢he Cap. et cet. 
of Czsar’s Camp. Sentinels upon their z’th’ | Ff, Rowe,+. z’the Cap. et 
Posts. Enter Enobarbus. Cap. seq. 


in his translation of Ovid, it could be shown that Shakespeare had quoted from 
the original. But chrysolites are alone specified by Ovid, MMJetam. ii, 106-110. 
—Ep. 

39. Beare our hackt Targets, like the men that owe them] WARBURTON: 
That is, hack’d as much as the men to whom they belong.—JOHNSON: Why not 
rather, ‘Bear our hack’d targets,’ with spirit and exultation, such as becomes the 
brave warriors that oz them.—[ Warburton’s explanation is, I think, more thoroughly 
in accordance with Shakespearian construction.—ED. ] 

45. Make mingle] Dantet (p. 82): Read Make ’t tingle,—i. e. Make the city’s 
ear tingle with our rattling tambourines. 

3. Court of Guard] STEEVENS: That is, the guard-room, the place where the 
guard musters. 


ACT Iv, sc. ix.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 285 


1.Watch. This laft day was a fhrew’d one too’s. 6 
£nob. Oh beare me witneffe vet 
2 What man is this ? , 8 
6. 1. Watch. Zhis] Ff, Rowe. 1. S. 7. night.| Ff, Rowe. night! Pope, 
This Cap. 1 Sold. Zhis Var. ’78. Theob. Ward. Johns. ight? Han. 
This laft...too’s| Dividing and end- night,— Cap. Mal. et seq. 
ing the line at was, Han. Cap. et seq. 8. 2 What] 2. What ¥ F . 2 Watch. 
Jrrew'd\ ¥,. fhrewde ¥,. fhrewd What Rowe. 2.8. What Cap. 2 Sold. 
i: What Var.’85. Third Sold. How now ? 
too’s] to’s Ff, Rowe, +, Dyce, Wh. What Words. 
Sta. Glo. Cam. 0 us Cap. et cet. 8, 9. What...him.] Aside, Cap. 


6. a shrew’d one] CRAIK (p. 141): Both 4o shrew and fo beshrew are used by 
our old writers in the sense of to curse, which latter verb, again, also primarily and 
properly (from the A.S. cuvsan or curstan) signifies to vex or torment. Now, it is 
a strong confirmation of the derivation of shrewd from the verb ¢o shrew that we find 
shrewd and curst applied to the disposition and temper by our old writers in almost, 
or rather in precisely, the same sense. Shakespeare himself affords us several 
instances. Thus, in Much Ado About Nothing (II, i), Leonato having remarked to 
Beatrice, ‘By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get a husband if thou be so shrewd of 
thy tongue,’ his brother Antonio adds, assentingly, ‘In faith, she’s too crst.’ So, in 
A Midsummer Night’s Dream (III, ii), Helena, declining to reply toa torrent of abuse 
from Hermia, says, ‘I was never curst,; I have no gift at all in shrewishness.’ And 
in Zhe Taming of the Shrew (I, ii), first we have Hortensio describing Katharine 
to his friend Petruchio as ‘intolerable czrs¢, and shrewd, and froward,’ and then we 
have Katharine, the shrew, repeatedly designated ‘ Katharine the curs¢.’ At the end 
of the Play she is called ‘a curst shrew,’ that is, as we might otherwise express it, an 
ill-tempered shrew. . . . As it is in words that ill-temper finds the readiest -nd most 
frequent vent, the terms curst, and shrew, and shrewd, and shrewish are often used 
with a special reference to the tongue. But sharpness of tongue, again, always 
implies some sharpness of understanding as well as of temper. The terms shrewd 
and shrewdly, accordingly, have come to convey usually something of both of these 
qualities, —at one time, perhaps, most of the one, at another of the other. The sort 
of ability that we call skrewdmess never suggests the notion of anything very high: 
the word has always a touch in it of the sarcastic or disparaging. But, on the other 
hand, the disparagement which it expresses is never without an admission of some- 
thing also that is creditable or flattering. Hence it has come to pass that a person 
does not hesitate to use the terms in question even of himself and his own judg- 
ments or conjectures. We say, ‘I shrewdly suspect or guess,’ or ‘I have a shrewd 
guess, or suspicion,’ taking the liberty of thus asserting or assuming our own intel- 
lectual acumen under cover of the modest confession at the same time of some little 
ill-nature in the exercise of it. Even when shrewd is used without any personal 
reference, the sharpness which it implies is generally, if not always, a more or less 
unpleasant sharpness. ‘This last day was a shrewd one to us,’ says one of the 
Soldiers of Octavius to his comrade, in [the present passage], after the encounter in 
which they had been driven back by Antony near Alexandria. 

7-9. Oh beare me... list him] WALKER ((7/z. iii, 307) proposes to arrange 
these two lines as one, wherein I can discover no possible gain, either to eye or ear. 


286 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. ix. 


1 Stand clofe,and lift him. 
Enob. Be witneffe to me(O thou bleffed Moone ) 10 
When men reuolted fhall vpon Record 
Beare hatefull memory : poore Exobarbus did 
Before thy face repent. 
Cent. Enobarbus? 
2 Peace : Hearke further. 15 
Enob. Oh Soueraigne Miftris of true Melancholly, 
The poyfonous dampe of night difpunge vpon me, 
That Life, a very Rebell to my will, 
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart 
Againft the flint and hardneffe of my fault, 20 
Which being dried with greefe, will breake to powder, 
And finifh all foule thoughts. Oh Axzthony, 
Nobler then my reuolt is Infamous, 
Forgiue me in thine owne particular, 


But let the world ranke me in Regifter 25 
g. 1 Stand] 1. Stand FF. 1 Watch. 14. Cent.] 3. S. Cap. 
Stand Rowe. 1.S. Stand Cap. 1 Sold. 15. 2 Peace] 3 Watch. Peace Rowe. 
Stand Var.’85. 2.8. Peace Cap. 3 Sold. Peace Var.’78. 
Lift] listen to Han. “ist to Steev. Peace : | Separate line, Han. Steev. 
Var. ’03, 713, Ktly. et seq. 
12. memory ‘| memory, Cap. Var.’78 16-19. Mnemonic, Warb. 
' et seq. 17. ai/punge| disperge Han. 
14, 15. Enobarbus ... further] Aside, 20. fault,| fault ; Cap. et seq. 
Cap. 22. [Lying down. Coll. ii. 


It seems, on the contrary, objectionable, inasmuch as it leaves ‘a shrewd one to us,’ 
an isolated line, which certainly requires no such emphasis.—ED. 

16. Oh Soueraigne Mistris, etc.] CAPELL (i, 45): To which of the fabulous 
deities is this prayer of Enobarbus address’d? It cannot be Night ; for she is desir’d 
to ‘despunge,’ or pour down upon him, ‘the poisonous damp of night:’ it must 
therefore be Hecate, the Night’s companion in classicks, and in Shakespeare him- 
self.—[It is strange that Capell did not see that Enobarbus was continuing his 
address to the moon.—ED. ] 

17. dispunge] STrEEVENS: That is, discharge, as a sponge, when squeezed, dis- 
charges the moisture it had imbibed. So in Hamlet, ‘it is but squeezing you, and, 
sponge, you shall be dry again.’ [This is the earliest reference given inthe V. £. D.] 

19, etc. Throw my heart, etc.] JOHNSON: The pathetick of Shakspeare too often 
ends in the ridiculous. It is painful to find the gloomy dignity of this noble scene 
destroyed by the intrusion of a conceit so far-fetched and unaffecting. 

24. in thine owne particular] That is, in your own separate personal capacity, 
or, as DEIGHTON says, as far as you, individually, are concerned. See ‘my more par- 
ticular,’ I, iii, 69. 

25. Register] That is, in its record, list, catalogue. But BLADES, who endeay- 


ACT IV, SC. ix.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 287 


A Mafter leauer, and a fugitiue : 


Oh Anthony! Oh Anthony! 
1 Let’s fpeake to him. 
Cent. 

May concerne C@/ar. 


2  Let’s do fo, but he fleepes. 
Swoonds rather, for fo bad a Prayer as his 


Cent. 
Was neuer yet for fleepe. 
I Go we to him. 


26. Mafter leauer| Mafter-leaver ¥ , 
et seq. 
27. [Dies. Rowe et seq. 

28. 1 Le¢’s] 1 Watch. Let’s Rowe. 
1.8. Let’s Cap. 1 Sold. Let’s Var.’78. 
28-33. Let’s...fleepe| Aside, Cap. 

28. to him] Separate line, Steev. et 


26 


Let’s heare him, for the things he fpeakes 


30 


34 


29. him] him further Cap. 

31. 2 Let’s] 2 Watch. Let’s Rowe. 
2.8. Let’s Cap. 2 Sold. Let’s Var.’78. 

32. Cent.] 3..S. Cap. 

32. Swoonds| Swoons Rowe et seq. 

32, 33. Swoonds...fleepe.| Prose, Knt, 
Sta. 


seq. (except Cam.) 

29. Cent.] 3.5. Cap. 

29. Let’s heare| Nay, let us hear 
Elze. 

29, 30. Let’s...Czefar] Prose, Knt, Sta. 


Sing. Ktly. 
Jfleepe] sleeping Steev. Var. 03,’ 13. 
34. I Go] 1 Watch. Go Rowe. 1.5. 
Go Cap. 1 Sold. Go Var.’78. 


ours to prove that Shakespeare had an intimate and special knowledge of Typography, 
observes (p. 53) that ‘the forme then went to the Press-room, where considerable 
ingenuity was required to make “ register”’ ; that is, to print one side so exactly upon 
the other, that when the sheet was held up to the light the lines on each side would 
exactly back one another. The accuracy of judgement required for this is thus 
glanced at [in the present passage].’ 

27. Oh Anthony!] Haz.irr (p. 102): The repentance of Enobarbus after his 
treachery to his master is the most affecting part of the play. 

32. Swoonds] For the pronunciation, see 4s You Like Jt, III, v, 19; and for 
the spelling, see Wixt. Tale, IV, iv, 17 of this edition. 

33. Was neuer yet for sleepe] COLLIER (JVotes, etc., p. 500): Instead of ‘ for 
sleep’ we ought to read ‘’fore sleep,’ or before sleep, and the word is altered in the 
MS accordingly: the sense is, that so bad a prayer, as Enobarbus had ended with, 
was never uttered before sleep.—[SINGER adopted this emendation without acknowl- 
edgement, as was his wont in the majority of his notes. CoLLiER (ed. ii) severely 
taxed him with it. Thereupon, in his Shakespeare Vindicated (p. 295), without 
mentioning that he had adopted ’ fore in his text, Singer remarks that the emendation 
“seems unnecessary.’ ANON. (Blackwood, Oct. 1853, p. 468) had, however, a differ- 
ent opinion; he observes that ’fove is ‘entitled to very favourable consideration.’ ]— 
STAUNTON: Another instance, we apprehend, where ‘ for’ is either intended to repre- 
sent fore, or has been misprinted instead of that word.—[It seems to me that the 
Soldier would protest too much if he were to say that such a bad prayer had never 
yet been uttered before going to sleep. Such an assertion was hardly within his 
knowledge. But he was probably right in saying that so bad a prayer had never yet 
been said for the purpose of seeking repose in sleep. —ED. ] 


288 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IVSe iat 


2 Awake fir,awake, fpeake to vs. 35 
1 Heare you fir? 
Cent. The hand of death hath raught him. 

Drummes afarre off. 


Hearke the Drummes demurely wake the fleepers : 39 

35. 2 Awake] 2 Watch. Awake Rowe. 37-41. The...out.] Lines end, drums 
2.8. Awake Cap. 2Sold. Awake Var.’78. ... Aim...hour...out. Mal. et seq. 

Awake fir, awake,| Awake, awake, 37. raught] caught F ,, Rowe, Pope, 

str, Steev. Varr. y Han. 

35-37. awake, fpeake... The hand | 39. Hearke the| Hearke how the Ff, 
As one line, Cap. Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. Ran. 

35. [to Eno. Cap. demurely| Din early Han. Do 


36. 1 Heare| 1 Watch. Hear Rowe. early Coll. ii, iti (MS). Do merrily 
1.8. Hear Cap. 1 Sold. Hear Var.’78. Dyce conj. Ktly. Clam’ rously Sing. con}, 
Heare you| ¥,. Hear, you Han. Do mournfully Cartwright. Do rudely 
flear you, FF’, et cet. Kinnear. Do matinly B. Nicholson 
[shaking him. Cap. (withdrawn.) Do yarely Elze ap. Cam. 

37. Cent.] 3.9. Cap. 


37. raught] The past participle of to reach. See NV. E. D. or FRANZ, § 7. 

39. Drummes demurely wake] WARBURTON: That is, ‘demurely,’ for soé- 
emnly.—[In the propriety of this definition the Shakespearian world seems to be 
gradually acquiescing, after a temporary flurry started in 1853 by the publication of 
the MS emendations in CoLLIER’s Second Folio. The change, therein prescribed, 
from ‘demurely’ to do early, coupled with Collier’s assertion that the adverb 
‘demurely’ ‘is surely ill suited to the sound of drums,’ seems to have demurely 
wakened the sleeping critics, always so zealously at hand to help Shakespeare express 
his thoughts and endow his purposes with words. The 7Zesx¢. (Votes show the result. 
As none of these emendations has been approved by anybody but the emenders them- 
selves, it seems needless to rehearse the arguments by which they are maintained. 
The latest interpretation, fully in accord with Warburton’s, is authoritative, and with 
many critics will close all discussion once and forever. Dr Murray (WV. £. D. s.v. 
+ b.) thus defines ‘demurely ’ in the present passage: ‘In a subdued manner.’ Why 
‘demurely’ is thus appropriate is set forth by Dr B. NIcHOLSON (Votes & Qu. IV, 
viii, 41) : Coesar, like Antony, would renew the combat, and taking advantage of 
‘the shining’ of the cloudless night, and a precaution from it, ordered the embattl- 
ing of his forces to begin as early as 2 A.M. It would, therefore, only be in accord 
with his careful and exact discipline that any notes of preparation should, in pres- 
ence of a hostile and almost victorious force, be made in a subdued tone. Other- 
wise the enemy might have unnecessary information and forewarning, or even make 
such notes of preparation their signal of attack, and come upon him while defiling 
out of camp and before his line of battle had been taken up. But there is yet 
another and second meaning which may be given to the word demure. If not now, 
yet at all events in 1814 the drum-reveillé of the non-Latin races was not a lively, 
merry, or clamorous din, but a measured and somewhat solemn beat; and, judging 
from this and from the discipline of Gustavus Adolphus and other considerations, it 
seems not unlikely that the drum-reveillé of the Low Country, or German Protestant 
armies of Elizabeth’s time, was of the same character, even if it were not founded on 


ACT Iv, 'SC.x.] 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 289 


Let vs beare him to’th’Court of Guard : he is of note: 40 


Our houre is fully out. 


2 Come on then, he may recouer yet. 


exeunt 42 


[Scene X.] 


Enter Anthony and Scarrus with their Army. 


Ant. 
We pleafe them not by Land. 
Scar. For both,my Lord. 
Ant. 


40. Let vs] Let’s Theob,+, Cap. Varr. 
Sing. 
Let...he is] One line, Han. Cap. 
Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 
42. then] Om. Han. 
he] perchance he Words. 
he...yet | Separate line, Han. Cap. 
et seq. (except Cam. Ktly.) 
exeunt] Exeunt with the Body. 


Their preparation is to day by Sea, 


I would they’ld fight i’th’Fire, or i’th’Ayre, 5 


et seq. 
Between the two Camps. Rowe. 
Hills without the City. Cap. 
1. Scarrus] Scarus Ff. 

2. by Sea,| Ff, Rowe,+. for sea Cap. 
Ran. éy sea; Var.’73 et cet. 
5. 2th’ Fire] ith’ Fire Ff. 

Cap. et seq. 
t’th’ Ayre| ith’ Ayre F,. ith’ Aire 


2’ the Fire 


Cap. F,. wh Air F,. in the air Rowe,+, 
Scene VI. Rowe. Scene VIII. Pope. Var. 78, ’85, Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 
Scene IX. Han. Johns. Scene X. Cap. Knt. 2z’¢he air Cap. et cet. 


a psalm tune. In one of those inartificial touches of reality and circumstance which 
give such a charm to the tales of Erckmann and Chatrian, the soldier-conscript of 
the first Napoleon ( Waterloo, ch. xviii) incidentally tells us—‘ Notre diane com- 
mence toujours avant celle des Prussiens, des Russes, des Autrichiens, et de tous nos 
ennemis; c’est comme le chant de |’alouette au tout petit jour. Les autres, avec leurs 
larges tambours, commencent aprés leurs roulements sourds, qui vous donnent des 
idées d’enterrement.’ (‘The others, with their big drums, begin later, and their 
dull-sounding rolls awake in one the remembrance of a burial.’) Now this I take to 
be a perfect gloss on demurely in the sense of solemnly, as explained by Warburton. 
But the one meaning does not exclude the other, and both would be easily under- 
stood by an audience, since they were interpreted by actual beat of drum within. 
This piece of stage arrangement furnishes, moreover, another important argument in 
their favour. Even an inferior artist would not foolishly mar with the ill accord of 
a lively rataplan the close of so touching and effective a scene. Nor could Shake- 
speare do so; but he would make use of that which he knew would harmonise with 
and heighten the feelings he had produced, and the measured, low-toned and far-off 
beats that demurely woke the sleepers were heard as the knell of one whom the hand 
of death had already raught, the funeral march for the erring but repentant soldier. 

2. to day by Sea] CAPELL (i, 45): Instead of for, the moderns have—‘ by’ ; 
taking it from the folio’s, whose printers let their eye slip upon ‘ by’ in the next line, 
and inserted it here: but that for is the true word, is evinc’d (and past doubting of ) 
by Scarus’ reply.—[This plausible emendation has not received the attention it 
deserves. Even Dyce pays no heed to it, and he is the only editor, except MALONE 
and RANN, who appears to have given any attention to Capell’s uncouth, yet sen- 
sible notes.—ED. ] 


19 


290 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Ly, /SC.ox; 


Wee'ld fight there too. But this it is, our Foote 6 
Vpon the hilles adioyning to the Citty 2 
Shall ftay with vs. Order for Sea is giuen, 

They haue put forth the Hauen : 


Where their appointment we may beft difcouer, IO 
6. thts] thus Coll. ii conj. Let’s seek a spot, Mal. Var.’21. haven) 
7. hilles| hills FF ,. Coll. Sing. haven. haste we then Hun- 
9. They] And they Ktly. ter conj. aven... Glo. Cam, haven. 

Hauen:| Ff, Knt, Sta. haven. We'll take our stand Ktly.. haven: 

Johns. Var.’73. Haven: Further on mount we then Huds. haven. let us on 


Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Ran. Nicholson (ap. Cam.) Irving. aven. 
Steev. Var. ’03, 13, Hal. Haven: Hie To the hills! Anon. ap. Cam. 
weon Cap. Haven, Var.’78,’85. haven: 


g. forth the Hauen] See note on ‘ fly forth of Egypt,’ I, v, 16. 

9, 1o. They haue put forth the Hauen: Where their, etc.] M. Mason: I 
think the words [‘ Further on’ (see Zex¢. Votes)] are absolutely necessary for the 
sense. As the passage stands, Antony appears to say, ‘ that they could best discover 
the appointment of the enemy at the haven after they had left it.’ But if we add 
the words Further on, his speech will be consistent: ‘As they have put out of the 
haven, let us go further on where we may see them better.’ And accordingly in the 
next page but one he says—‘ Where yonder pine does stand, I shall discover all.’— 
MALONE [reading, Zet’s seek a spot after ‘ Hauen:’]: The defect of the metre in 
the old copy shows that some words were accidentally omitted. In that copy there 
is a colon at ‘haven’—an additional proof that something must have been said by 
Antony, connected with the next line, and relative to the place where the enemy 
might be reconnoitred. The haven ztse/f was not such a place ; but rather some hill 
from which the haven and the ships newly put forth could be viewed. What Antony 
says upon his re-entry, proves decisively that he had not gone to the haven, nor had 
any thoughts of going thither. ‘I see (says he), they have not yet joined; but I'll 
now choose a more convenient station near yonder pine, and I shall discover all.’ — 
KNIGHT: The sentence,—‘ Order for sea is given They have put forth the haven,’ — 
is parenthetical. Omit it, and Antony says, that the foot soldiers shall stay with 
him, upon the hills adjoining the city, ‘Where their appointment we may best dis- 
cover.’ The editors allow nothing for the rapidity of utterance, and the modulation 
with which such parenthetical passages are given upon the stage ; and they, therefore, 
corrupt the text by the feeble addition of Let’s seek a spot, etc. This is Malone’s 
cobbling.—[CoLL1ER, STAUNTON, and SINGER approve and adopt this interpretation, 
the first two with acknowledgement, the last, more suo, without.]—Dyce: I think 
[Knight’s interpretation] utterly ridiculous. I cannot for a moment doubt that after 
the word ‘haven’ something has been accidentally omitted either by the transcriber 
or the printer. . . . Tyrwhitt (in his copy of F, in the British Museum) inserted Le¢ 
us go. [Dyce’s own insertion is —/forward, now, and is adopted by ROLFE.]— 
R. G. WuiTE (ed. i): This speech is very closely formed upon the corresponding 
passage in North’s Plutarch, and by that I have been guided in my attempt [Ascend 
we then] to supply the hiatus :—‘ The next morning by breake of day he went to set 
those few footemen he had in order zpon the hills adjoining vnto the citie ; and ¢here 
he stoode to behold his gallies which departed from the haven.’ It is evident from 


ACT Iv, sc. xi.}] AMTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 291 
And looke on their endeuour. exeunt II 
| Scene XT. 
Enter Cefor,and his Army. 
Ce/. But being charg’d, we will be ftill by Land, 
Which as I tak’t we fhall, for his beft force 
Is forth to Man his Gallies. To the Vales, 
And hold our beft aduantage. exeunt. 5 
Scene XI. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Scene 3. Which ... fnall,| Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
continued, Rowe et cet. Which...shall not Han. Which, as I 
Another part of the same. Dyce. take’ t, we shall; Theob, et cet. 
2. But] Not Han. 5. aduantage] advantage F.. 


the first part of Antony’s speech that he has not yet gone up the heights. [In his 
ed, li, White has Go we up.| STAUNTON: We have adopted Knight’s suggestion in 
printing the sentence parenthetically, though there can be little doubt some words 
after ‘haven’ have been accidentally omitted. Dyce’s addition, slightly altered to 
‘forward zhen,’ strikes us as preferable to any of the others. [It is adopted by 
DEIGHTON. It is such a passage as this that awakens an unavailing regret that 
there is no Quarto of this play which haply might fill this Azatus, valdissime deflendus. 
But since there is not, I prefer to have the missing words ‘glare by their absence,’ 
rather than fill the vacancy with any phrase from hands less august than Shake- 
speare’s. This is one of the imperfect lines noted by Walker at IV, viii, 9.—Ep.] 

io, 11. Where their appointment ... And looke on their endeuour] War- 
BURTON: That is, where we may best discover their zumbers, and see their motions. 

2. But being charg’d, we will be still by Land] WarsurtTon: That is, unless 
we be charged we will remain quiet at land, which quiet I suppose we shall keep.— 
COLLIER: ‘ But’ is still frequently employed in the north of England as a prepo- 
sition, equivalent to wzthout. Several ancient instances may be found in the Coventry 
Mysteries, printed by the Shakespeare Society and edited by Halliwell.—WALKER 
(Crit. iii, 307): That is, Undess we are attacked, we will remain quiet, as far as our land 
forces are concerned. So construe, in the lines subjoined to Chester’s Love's Martyr, 
—‘ Hearts remote, yet not asunder: Distance, and no space was seen ’Twixt the 
turtle and his queen: But in them it were a wonder.’ /¢ were a wonder in any but 
them. Sidney, Arcadia, B. iii, p. 360, 1. 8,‘ — they rang a bell, which served to 
call certain poor women, which ever lay in cabins not far off, to do the household 
services of both lodges, and never came to either dt being called for.’ Two Noble 
Kinsmen, I, i,—‘ Lend us a knee; uz touch the ground for us no longer time,’ etc. 
t.¢., ‘do but touch,’ ‘ only touch.’ I notice this, simple as it may appear, because I 
myself mistook it for a long time.—ABBOTT (§ 124): That is, excepting the sup- 
position of our being charged. [See notes on III, xi, 50.] 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT Iv, SC. xii. 


202 
[Scene XII. 
Alarum afarre off, as at a Sea-fight. 
Enter Anthony, and Scarrus. 
Ant. Yet they are not ioyn’d: 


Where yon’d Pine does ftand, I fhall difcouer all. 


Ile bring thee word ftraight, how’ris like to go. 


Scar. Swallowes haue built 
In Cleopatra’s Sailes their nefts. 


exit. 5 


The Auguries 


Say ,they know not, they cannot tell, looke grimly, 


And dare not fpeake their knowledge. 


Anthony, 


Is valiant, and deie¢ted, and by ftarts 10 
His fretted Fortunes giue him hope and feare 


Of what he has, and has not. 


Enter Anthony. 


Ant. Allis loft: 


This fowle Egyptian hath betrayed me : 15 


Scene XII. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
Scene continued, Rowe et cet. 

Another part of the same. Dyce. Hills 
adjoining Alexandria. Cam. 

1. Alarum...fight.] Transposed to line 
12, Var. ’78 et seq. 

2. Scarrus.] Scarus. Ff. 

3-5. Yet...go.] Lines end, stand, ... 
word...go. Cap. et seq. 

3. they are] they've Han. Cap.Var.’78, 
85, Ran. Steev. Varr. 

4. yon’d| yonder Cap. Warr. Ran. 
Steev. Varr. yond’ Mal. Coll. Sing. Wh. 
Ktly. yond Ff et cet. 

does ftand | stands Rowe,+. 
Bo eee] De. 
7. Cleopatra’s] Cleopatraes F,. 
Auguries| Ff, Rowe, Coll. i, Ktly. 
Augurs Pope,+, Var.’73. Augurers 


Cap. et cet. 

8. not, ...tell,| not—...tell— Rowe,+. 

tell,| tell ; Cap. et seq. 

12, [Shouts afar off. Cap. 

Scene VII. Rowe. Scene IX. Pope, 
Warb. Scene X. Han. Johns. Scene 
continued, Cap. et cet. 

13. Enter...] Re-enter...hastily. Cap. 

14. Allis] All’s Theob. Warb. Johns. 


- Varr. 


14, 15. A//...me «| As one line, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Var.’73, Walker. 
14. loft :] lost! Rowe. 
15. fowle] foule ¥,. foul F,. 
hath] hath again Kemble. 
betrayed | betray’d Rowe ii, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73, Walker, 
Hal. 
me.:| me! Rowe. 


x. Alarum afarre off, as at a Sea-fight] Since printing the note on III, x, 3, I 
have found that GirrorD (Szlent Woman, IV, ii) asserts that fights at sea ‘ were 
merely made known to the audience by letting off a cracker behind the scenes.’ It 
would be satisfactory to know his authority.—Eb. 

3. Yet] AspoTtr (§ 76): That is, up to this time. 


7. Sailes] That is, ships. 


See Appendix, Plutarch. 


7. Auguries] If it were not for the grim looks, and reluctant speech, it would 
hardly be worth while to change this to augurers.—ED. 


ACT Iv, sc. xii.}} ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 293 


My Fleete hath yeelded to the Foe, and yonder 16 
They caft their Caps vp, and Carowfe together 

Like Friends long loft. Triple-turn’d Whore, ’tis thou 

Haft fold me to this Nouice, and my heart 

Makes onely Warres on thee. Bid them all flye: 20 
For when I am reueng’d vpon my Charme, 

I haue done all. Bid them all flye, be gone. 

Oh Sunne, thy vprife fhall I fee no more, 

Fortune, and Axzthony part heere, euen heere 

Do we fhake hands? All come to this? The hearts 25 
That pannelled me at heeles, to whom I gaue 


22. [Exit Scarus. Cap. Mal. et seq. 25. this ?| this! Rowe, +. 

23-28. Mnemonic, Warb. 26. pannelled | Ff, Rowe. pannell’d 

24. part heere,| part here; Cap. et Pope, Var.’73. jpantler'd Theob. Warb. 
seq. (except Cam. ) spaniel’d Han. et cet. 

25. hands?| Ff. hands— Rowe,+. heeles| Heals Rowe i. 


hands. Cap. Mal. et seq. 


18. Triple-turn’d] JoHNsoN: She was first for Antony, then was supposed by 
him to have ¢urned to Cesar, when he found his messenger kissing her hand ; then 
she turned again to Antony ; and now has ¢urned to Cesar. Shall I mention what 
has dropped into my imagination, that our author perhaps might have written ¢77p/e- 
tongued ? Double-tongued is a common term of reproach, which rage might improve to 
triple-tongued. But the present reading may stand.—MALone: Cleopatra was first 
the mistress of Julius Czesar, then of Cneius Pompey, and afterwards of Antony.— 
M. MAson: She first belonged to Julius Czsar, then to Antony, and now, as he 
supposes, to Augustus. —STEEVENS: The sober recollection of a critic should not be 
expected from a hero who has this moment lost the one half of the world. 

21. Charme] WALKER (Cvié. i, 292, On the substitution of Words): Nine 
lines below, without any apparent reason for the repetition of the word,— this grave 
charm’; wrong, surely ; perhaps it is the latter ‘ charm’ that is corrupt. ‘Grave’ 
too looks suspicious.—[Is it worth while to protest against this far-reaching influence 
of one word on another, at a distance of nine lines? What limit is to be put to this 
influence? ‘ Grave’ may be possibly open to suspicion, although I believe it to be the 
true word (see note on line 30, below), but I think it was the witchcraft, pure witch- 
craft of Cleopatra, that dominated Anthony’s thoughts.—ED. ] 

23. Oh Sunne, thy vprise, etc.] THEOBALD: Ajax in Sophocles, when he is on 
the point of killing himself, addresses the sun in a manner not much unlike this. 
[lines 814-816. ] 

26. That pannelled me at heeles] Jounson: Hanmer substituted spanzel’d 
by an emendation, with which it was reasonable to expect that even rival com- 
mentators would be satisfied ; yet Warburton proposes faz/ler’d, in a note, of which 
he is not injured by the suppression ; and Upton having in his first edition proposed 
plausibly enough—‘ That paged me at heels,’ in the second edition retracts his alter- 
ation, and maintains fanell’d to be the right reading, being a metaphor taken, he 
says, from a pannel of wainscot.—TOLLET: Spaniel’d is so happy a conjecture, that 


294 LHE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, se. sat 


Their wifhes, do dif-Candie, melt their fweet$ 27 


27. adif-Candie| dif’Candy ¥,.  dis- Theob. i. déscandy Theob. ii et seq. 
-Candy FF. dis-candy Rowe, Pope, 


I think we ought to acquiesce in it. It is of some weight with me that spanzel was 
often formerly written spanne/. Hence there is only the omission of the first letter. 
—MALONE: Spannel for spaniel is yet the inaccurate pronunciation of some persons, 
above the vulgar in rank, though not in literature—CoLLIER (ed. ii): It is rather 
singular that the MS makes no change. 

26, 27. That pannelled me at heeles, to whom I gaue Their wishes, do 
dis-Candie, melt their sweets, etc.] WHITER (p. 138): This passage and the 
succeeding quotations are well worthy of the readers attention :—‘ No, let the 
candied tongue Zick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where 
thrift may follow fawning.’ —Hamlet, III, ii, 55; ‘ Will these moss’d trees, That 
have outlived the eagle, page thy Aee/s, And skip where thou point’st out? will the 
cold brook, Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste,’ etc.— Zimon, IV, iii, 223 ; 
‘Why, what a candy deal of courtesy This fawning greyhound then did proffer 
me!’—z fen. LV. I, ili, 251. These passages are very singular. The curious 
reader will observe that the fawning obsequiousmess of an animal, or an attendant, is 
connected with the word candy. The cause of this strange association I am unable 
to discover ; though the reader must know but little of the human mind—of Shak- 
speare—or even of the ordinary doctrine of chances, if he imagines that these matters 
were in four passages connected by accident. When the reader shall be convinced 
respecting the truth of this observation ; his curiosity will be much gratified by the 
following lines from the Zevzfest; in which he will perceive that the same associ- 
ation still occupied the mind of the Poet, though a single word only is apparent, which 
relates to one portion of the preceding metaphor. ‘Sed. But, for your conscience ? 
Ant. Ay, sir; where lies that? if ’twere a £7de, ’T'would put me to my slipper: but 
I feel not This deity in my bosom: twenty consciences, That stand ’twixt me and 
Milan, candied be they And me/t ere they molest !’— 7empest, II, i, 275. Surely 
the reader cannot doubt but that the introduction of the word £yée is to be referred to 
the former expressions, ‘ page thy /eeds,’—‘ spaniel’d me at 4ee/s,’ though it is applied 
to a very different metaphor. Let me add, that the quaintness of the imagery is an 
argument for the remoteness of the original. Though I cannot explain to the reader 
the cause of this association between the term candy and the fawning of a dog; I 
can diminish his surprise respecting its existence, by producing another case, which 
contains a direct union between this animal and an idea equally remote ; and which 
certainly would have appeared altogether as extraordinary, unless we had possessed 
a clue to unravel the mystery. What should we say, were we to find in an ancient 
Greek writer a combination between the fawning of a dog and the cleansing of hands. 
The union, however, is so intimate, that among the Lacedemonians the name for the 
substance, which they sometimes used for cleansing of the hands, is derived from 
the animal.—[Hereupon follows an explanation of this strange association. The 
subject is not, however, germane to Amt. & Cleop.|—NARES (s. v. Discandy) : It is 
to be wished that something could be suggested in the place of ‘spaniel’d me at 
heels,’ which might appear to lead to the subsequent idea of discandying. Hearts 
that spaniel’d Antony at the heels, melting their sweets upon Ceesar, forms a master- 
piece of incongruity, which, amidst the natural, though rapid transitions of Antony’s 


ACT IV, Sc. xil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 295 


On bloffoming Ce/ar : And this Pine is barkt, 28 

That ouer-top’d them all. Betray’d I am. 

Oh this falfe Soule of Egypt! this graue Charme, 30 
29, 30. am. Oh] FF, Rowe, +, Coll. 30. graue] gay Pope, Theob. Han. 


am On F,. am, O Cap. et cet. (subs.) Warb. great Coll. ii, iii( MS). grand 
30. Oh... Charme] O this false fowl Sing. drave Dtn conj. 
of Egypt! haggard charmer, Bulloch. 30, 32. Charme, ...end,| charm,—... 
Soule] spell Coll. ii, iii (MS), Sing. end,— Var.’78, °85, Mal. Ran. 
snake Walker. 


passionate state, we should not expect to find.—[Be it borne in mind that Whiter 
attempts merely to show that in Shakespeare’s mind there was, possibly unconsciously, 
an association of ideas which harmonised what to us seems discordant. Whiter’s 
Commentary had been published nigh thirty years before Nares wrote.—ED. | 

30. Oh this false Soule of Egypt! this graue Charme] JoHNnson: By ‘this 
grave charm,’ is meant, ‘ this sublime, this majestick beauty.’—-CAPELL (i, 45; whose 
text reads soz for ‘Soule’) : The former reading was—‘ Soule’ ; and the sentence, 
with that word in it, can be understood only of Cleopatra: but they who can but 
barely imagine—she could be spoke of in so vulgar a phrase, and that by Antony, 
have not pierc’d very deeply either into him or the poet. The moderns retain the 
old reading: and, that the finishing part of the line might have no cause to triumph 
over that it began with, the four last of them alter ‘grave’ into—gay, that is, the 
most noble and masculine epithet in all Shakespeare, into one the poorest and most 
unworthy, of him, the speaker, and the occasion, that even study could help them to. 
‘Grave charm’ is—a charm or enchantment that leads to death or the grave, too 
truly applicable to the person intended ; and they are the only words in the line that 
are aim’d directly at her: The other member of it, is, as the reader sees, an exclam- 
atory reflection,—growing out of the words that precede it,—on the perfidies of 
Egyptians in general; so numerous, and almost continual, that he thinks their soz/ 
itself is in fault; and that they are made the people they are, by some contagion that 
springs out of that.—STEEVENS: I believe ‘grave charm’ means only deadly, or 
destructive piece of witchcraft. In this sense the epithet ‘grave’ is often used by 
Chapman, in his translation of Homer. So, in the 19th book: ‘but not far hence the 
fatal minutes are Of thy grave ruin.’ [lines 394, 395.] Again, in the 22d Odyssey: 
‘and then flew Minerva, after every dart, and made Some strike the threshold, some 
the walls invade; Some beate the doores, and all acts rendred vaine Their grave 
steel offer’d.’ [lines 322-326.] It seems to be employed’in the sense of the Latin 
word gravis.—[ COLLIER (ed. ii) pronounces the reading of his MS: ‘this false spe/7 
. .. this great charm’ an ‘irresistible emendation.’] STAUNTON: ‘O this false sfel/,’ 
of Collier’s MS is very plausible ; but ‘ gvea¢ charm,’ from the same source, is infinitely 
less expressive and appropriate than ‘grave charm,’ 7. ¢. pernicious, deadly, fatal 
sorceress.—KEIGHTLEY (p. 319) : In my edition, yielding to an impulse I could not 
resist, I have added a final 7 to ‘charme’ both here and a few lines before; thus 
making it accord with ‘ witch’ and ‘gypsy,’ as he also calls her. But he likewise 
terms her ‘spell,’ and Perdita, Wint. Tale, IV, iii, is called ‘ enchantment,’ both, 
however, in the vocative.—A. C. BRADLEY ( Quart. Rev., April, 1906, p. 349) : Why 
should not ‘grave’ have its usual meaning? Cleopatra, we know, was a being of 
‘infinite variety,’ and her eyes may sometimes have had, like those of some gipsies, 
a mysterious gravity or solemnity which would exert a spell more potent than her 


296 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. xii. 


Whofe eye beck’d forth my Wars, & cal’d them home : 31 
Whofe Bofome was my Crownet, my chiefe end, 
Like a right Gypfie, hath at faft and loofe 
Beguil’d me, to the very heart of loffe. 
What £vos, Eros ? 35 
Enter Cleopatra. 
Ah, thou Spell! Auaunt. 
Cleo. Why is my Lord enrag’d againft his Loue? 


Ant. Vanith, or I fhall giue thee thy deferuing, 39 
35. Eros ?] Eros / Rowe. 39. Vani/h,| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce, 
37. Auaunt] Avant FF, Rowe,+. Wh. Glo. Cam. Vanish / Sta. Vanish ; 
38. Loue ?] Love; F,. Cap. et cet. 


gaiety. Their colour, presumably, was what is called ‘black’; but surely they were 
not, as Tennyson imagined, ‘ do/d black eyes.’ 

32. was my Crownet, my chiefe end] Srervens: Dr Johnson supposes that 
‘crownet’ means Jast purpose, probably from finzs coronat opus. Chapman, Homer, 
bk, ii, uses crown in the sense which my learned coadjutor would recommend : ‘all 
things have their crowne.’ Again, in our author’s Cymébeline: ‘ My supreme crown 
of grief.’—[Is the foregoing rather superfluous note open to the suspicion of having 
been written solely for the sake of a reference to ‘my learned coadjutor’? Steevens 
was extremely proud (can he be censured?) of being the only man whose name 
appears, as an author, on the same title-page with Dr Johnson’s.—ED. | 

33. at fast and loose] Sir J. Hawkins: This is a term to signify a cheating 
game, of which the following is a description. A leathern belt is made up into a 
number of intricate folds, and placed edgewise upon a table. One of the folds is 
made to resemble the middle of the girdle, so that whoever should thrust a skewer 
into it would think he held it fast to the table; whereas, when he has so done, the 
person with whom he plays may take hold of both ends, and draw itaway. This trick 
is now known to the common people, by the name of pricking at the belt or girdle, 
[or garter, according to Gifford] and perhaps was practised by the Gypsies in the time 
of Shakespeare.—STEEVENS: This supposition is confirmed by the following Epigram 
in an ancient collection called Rum and a great Cast, by Thomas Freeman, 1614: 
‘Epig.95. ‘Charles the 4 eyptian, who by jugling could Make fast or Zoose, or what- 
soere he would,’ etc.—REED: That the A‘gyptians were great adepts in this art before 
Shakspeare’s time, may be seen.in Scot’s Dzscoverie of Witchcraft, 1584, p. 336, 
[ Of fast or loose, how to knit a hard knot upon a handkercher, and to undoo the same 
with words. —Bk. 13, Chap. xxix.] where these practices are fully explained.—[It is 
mentioned twice in Love’s Lad. Lost, I, ii, 150, and III, i, 108.] 

34. very heart of losse] JoHNnsoN: To the utmost loss possible.—CAPELL (i, 
46): This is a phrase importing—the most perfect and absolute loss, z. e. ruin; and 
is taken from trees, whose heart and centre is commonly perfecter than their extreams. 
—[This Capellesque gem ought not glow unseen. ] 

39. Vanish] Shakespeare applies this verb to many objects, but especially, I think, 
to witches, dreams, ghosts, exhalations, etc. Cleopatra in the last scene applies it 
to Iras’s departing life. Here Anthony, in thus using it, continues the image, ‘ Thou 
Spell! Avaunt !’—Ep. 


ACT IV, SC. xil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 297 


And blemifh C@/ars Triumph. Let him take thee, 40 
And hoift thee vp to the fhouting Plebeians, 

Follow his Chariot, like the greateft {pot 

Of all thy Sex. Moft Monfter-like be fhewne 


For poor’ft Diminitiues, for Dolts, and let 44 
41. to the] to th’ Ff, Rowe, Sing. 43. /hewne] the shew Han. 
Walker. «unto the Ktly. 44. Diminitiues| Diminutiues Ff. 
Plebeians,| Plebetans; Rowe et Jor Dolts,| Ff. for dolts ; Rowe, 
seq. (subs. ) Pope, Theob. Han. Johns. 0 dolis ; 
43. Moff] Om. Han. Tyrwhitt, Var. ’78, ’85, Steev. Var. ’03, 


Monfter-like| Monfter like F. 


” 13. for doits Thirlby, Warb. et cet. 
Rowe. 


41. Plebeians] WALKER (Vers. 161): ‘Plebeian’—with the exception of a 
single passage [Henry V: V,i, Chorus, 27], is pronounced Z/édzan , as it still is by 
the common people. 

44. For poor’st Diminitiues, for Dolts] In a letter to Theobald, in May, 1729 
(Nichols, ///us¢. ii, 228) the Rev. SryAN THIRLBY proposed the change of ‘ dolts’ 
to doits. Theobald, in his edition refers to Warburton’s knowledge of this emen- 
dation; when Warburton’s edition appeared, in 1747, he made no reference to 
Thirlby, but put forth the emendation as his own, and to him it has been wrongly 
accredited ever since, until the appearance of the Zex¢. Votes in the Cam. Ed. 
Theobald’s own note on the word thus concludes, after giving his reasons for reject- 
ing dozts ‘Perhaps the Poet’s meaning may be, that Cleopatra should become a 
show, a spectacle to the scum and rabble of Rome; to blockheads, and people of the 
lowest rank. Cleopatra speaks twice afterwards to the same effect [see V, ii, 65, 
and 252].’,—WARBURTON: As the allusion here is to monsters carried about in 
shows, it is plain, that the words, ‘for poorest diminutives,’ must mean for the least 
piece of money. We must therefore read: ‘for dozés,’ 2. e. farthings, which shows 
what he means by ‘poorest diminutives.’—CAPELL (i, 46, reading dots): Had 
‘dolts’ been the word, the Poet would have said, Zo dolts, 4o poor’st diminutives ; as 
he has, two lines higher, ‘Zo the shouting plebeians’ ; which very words led him to 
‘for’ and to dozts, to avoid a co-incidence of thoughts and expression in lines so 
near one another.—TYRWHITT (in answer to Warburton’s note): There was surely 
no occasion for the poet /o show what he meant by purest diminutives. The expres- 
sion is clear enough, and certainly acquires no additional force from the explana- 
tion. I rather believe we should read: ‘For poor’st diminutives, fo dolts,;’ This 
aggravates the contempt of her supposed situation ; to be shown, as monsters are, not 
only for the smallest piece of money, but to the most stupid and vulgar spectators. — 
MALONE: I have received the emendation made by Warburton, because the letter z, 
in consequence of the dot over it, is sometimes confounded with 7 at the press. It 
appears to me much more probable that ‘dolts’ should have been printed for dozts, 
than that ‘for’ should have been substituted for zo. Whichsoever of these emen- 
dations be admitted, there is still a difficulty. Though monsters are shown to the 
stupid and the vulgar for ‘ poor’st diminutives,’ yet Cleopatra, according to Antony’s 
supposition, would certainly be exhibited to the Roman populace for nothing. Nor 
can it be said that he means that se would be exhibited gratis, as monsters are 


298 DHEDD RAGE DIEM OLR [ACT Iv, SC, xii. 


Patient Oc?auia, plough thy vifage vp 45 
With her prepared nailes. exit Cleopatra. 

’Tis well th’art gone, 

If it be well to liue. But better ’twere — 

Thou fell’{t into my furie, for one death 


Might haue preuented many. vos, hoa ? 50 
45. Patient | Passioned Theob. con). 47. th art] thowrt Rowe et seq. 

( withdrawn.) 49. tnto] under Coll. ii, iii (MS). 
46, 47. With...gone| One line, Rowe 50. hoa?] hoa! Rowe. 

et seq. 


shown for smail pieces of money; because his words are ‘monster-like, be [thou] 
shown for poor’st diminutives.’ I have sometimes therefore thought that Shakspeare 
might have written: ‘ Hore poor diminutives, fore dolts.’ The following passage in 
Tro. and Cress. adds some support to my conjecture: ‘How the poor world is 
pestered with such waterflies, diminutives of nature!’ [V, i, 38. ]|—KnicHT: We 
believe that the ‘ poor’st diminutives’ are the lowest of the populace, as the ‘ dolts’ are 
the most stupid. We must therefore understand ‘for’ to mean, for the gratification 
of; or adopt Malone’s suggestion of ‘be shown fore,’ etc.—DyYcE pronounces this 
explanation of Knight ‘very curious,’ quotes Knight’s understanding of ‘for,’ and 
subjoins his favourite exclamation mark.—DEIGHTON (reading dozts): With the 
reading [of the Folio] ‘for’ could only have the sense of ‘for the gratification of,’ 
a very forced one; while Malone’s objection that Cleopatra would be shown for 
nothing is of little value, since Shakespeare was evidently thinking of the exhibition 
of monsters, strange fishes, etc., at fairs, etc., in his own country. Compare Zemfest, 
II, ii, 28-34. ROLFE (reading ‘ dolts’) : But the reference is to Cleopatra’s being led 
in triumph through the streets of Rome, a ‘ free show’ for the rabble, not to her being 
exhibited for a fee. Besides it seems more natural for Antony to emphasize the low 
character of the spectators than the pettiness of the price charged, if there were any. 
The only other instance of ‘diminutives’ is in Z7vo. & Cvess. V, i, 38, where it 
means insignificant persons. ‘ Monster-like’ is equivalent to as a monstrosity ; but 
it is not necessary to see any reference to the fact that monsters were exhibited for 
money.—[The defence of the Folio may well be left in the hands of Theobald and 
of Rolfe. The degradation lay in being exhibited at all, not in any sum charged 
for ‘admission.’ And it is noteworthy how deeply the taunt sank into Cleopatra’s 
mind by her double reference to it afterward, and how her fateful imagination mag- 
nified it by her description of the atmosphere arising from the greasy mechanics, the 
dolts, and poorest diminutives. Dyce calls Knight’s interpretation of ‘for’ ‘very 
curious,’ and Deighton pronounces it ‘very forced.’ Compare, ‘ For Banquo’s issue 
have I filed my mind.’ Wherein does Anthony’s ‘for’ differ from Macbeth’s >—Ep. ] 

46. her prepared nailes] WARBURTON: That is, with nails that she suffered to 
grow for this purpose. [This interpretation strikes me as puerile. ‘ Prepared’ here 
means, I think, a// ready, at any time.—ED. | 

48-50. better ’twere Thou fell’st .. . haue preuented many] DEIGHTON: In 
truth it would have been better for you to die by my fury than to suffer death many 
times, as you will in the terrors to which your cowardice will be exposed. Compare 
Jul. Ces. II, ii, 32, ‘ Cowards die many times before their deaths; The valiant never 


ACT IV, Sc. xil.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 299 


The fhirt of Ve//fus is vpon me, teach me 51 
Alcides, thou mine Anceftor, thy rage. 
Let me lodge Licas on the hornes o’th’Moone, 53 


51. upon me,| upon me, Rowe et seq. rage; EHelp’d thee Theob. conj. rage- 
52,53. vage. Let me| Ff, Theob. Johns. Let me Rowe et cet. 
rage, Led thee Han. rage Led thee Warb. 53. Licas] Zichas Theob. 


taste of death but once.’—[I find it impossible to accept Deighton’s paraphrase of 
this difficult passage, and it is the only paraphrase that any editor or critic, as far as 
I know, has vouchsafed us. The ‘many’ deaths cannot refer to imaginary deaths, 
as Deighton supposes ; if he is correct, the inference is clear that it would be a pres- 
ent mercy to kill every coward who fears to die, which would go near to depopulate 
the world. Anthony does not say that Cleopatra’s present death would prevent many 
future deaths, real or imaginary, but his words are that her death (in time past) 
‘might have prevented many’ (others, of soldiers slain in battle). In this case, ¢ bet- 
ter ’twere thou fell’st’ is equivalent to ‘better ’twere thou shouldst have fallen,’— 
the sequence of tenses will hardly permit ‘fell’st’ to be the perfect indicative. Can 
it be that in Anthony’s present conviction of Cleopatra’s treachery there rise in his 
memory past occasions when he mistrusted her, notably her reception of Czesar’s 
messenger ? and he now sees that it would have been better had she fallen under his 
fury then? and by one death ‘might have prevented many’ ?—ED. | 

51, etc. The shirt of Nessus, etc.] HEATH (p. 463) : While Antony is contem- 
plating his present inevitable ruin, brought upon him, as he thought, by the treachery 
of the woman who was dearest to him, his imagination presents to him his supposed 
ancestor Hercules in circumstances exactly parallel, wrapped up, by the instrumen- 
tality of Deianira’s deceived jealousy, in the poisoned shirt of Nessus, from which it 
was impossible he could ever extricate himself alive. Upon this point, his imagi- 
nation taking fire transports him almost to a delirium. He fancies himself to be a 
real Hercules, and the shirt of Nessus to be actually upon him; and, after invoking 
his ancestor to inspire him with the same rage, with which he was actuated on the 
like occasion, he is instantly on the wing to exert it in the very same effects, in the 
lodging Lichas on the horns of the moon, and in subduing his worthiest self, with 
those very Herculean hands that grasped the heaviest club. All which, when 
stripped of those violent figures in which his heated imagination had cloathed it, 
terminates in no more than this, the taking the severest vengeance on the instrument 
of his ruin, and putting an end to his life by his own hands. The most exception- 
able expression perhaps is, the bestowing the epithet, worthzes¢, on himself; but even 
this exaggeration will appear excusable at least, if not justifiable, when it is con- 
sidered, that it is not seriously intended as a vain-glorious vaunt, but proceeds wholly 
from a transport of the fancy, which represents him to himself for that moment as 
the very Hercules in person.—CaPELt (i, 46): Lichas was not lodg’d by Hercules 
quite upon ‘the horns of the moon,’ but was thrown from the top of Mount Oeta 
into the sea: Antony’s exaggeration in this place, and the puffiness of what he speaks 
next, should be consider’d as specimens of that Asiatick tumour of diction, which 
the Poet (using Plutarch’s authority) has made a part of his character ; throwing it 
into some of his speeches as occasion presented, and most properly into this. 

53. Let me lodge Licas] WarBurTon: This image our poet seems to have 
taken from Seneca’s Hercules, who says Lichas being launched into the air, sprinkled 


300 LIEU VO MEIEIONCE (he [ACT Iv, SC. xiii. 


And with thofe hands that grafpt the heauieft Club, 


Subdue my worthieft felfe : The Witch fhall die, 55 
To the young Roman Boy fhe hath fold me, and I fall 
Vnder this plot : She dyes for’t. vos hoa? exit. 57 


[Scene XIII 


Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Tras, Mardian. 


Cleo. Helpe me my women : Oh hee’s more mad 
Then Te/amon for his Shield, the Boare of Theffaly 
Was neuer fo imboft. 4 


55. my] thy Theob. conj. Han. Warb. XI. Cap. et cet. 


die,| die: FF, et seq. Alexandria. A Room in the Palace. 
56. young] Om. Han. Cap. Steev. Cap. A street in Alexandria. Kemble. 
Var. ’03, ’13, Huds. 1. Enter...] Re-enter... Pope. 
57. this] his FF, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 2. women] woman Ff. 
Warb. Johns. er Han. hee’s| he ts Ff et seq. 
Scene XIII. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 4. imboft| emboss d Var.’ 73 et seq. 


The Scene continued, Rowe,+. Scene 


the clouds with his blood. [‘In astra missus fertur, et nubes vago Spargit cruore.’— 
Flercules Eteus, U1, 817. ]|—JOHNSON : The meaning is, ‘ Let me do something in 
my rage, becoming the successor of Hercules.’ 

55. my worthiest selfe] STAUNTON: Would Antony, in this hour of bitter 
remorse, speak of his ‘ worthzest self’? He might have said ‘my worthless self’ ; 
yet the context, ‘the witch shall die,’ makes it more probable he is thinking of Cleo- 
patra, and that what the author wrote was, ‘Subdue my worthless elf.’ Elf being 
synonymous with witch or fairy.—[Alas! alas! See Heath’s note on line 51, with 
which, however, I am not fully in accord. By ‘ worthiest self,’ I think Anthony 
means that part of his nature which is noblest and best,—this had been in subjection 
to Cleopatra ; he now prays for strength to control it, ‘subdue’ it, and make it again 
subservient to his will.—Ep. ] 

56. young] Dyce (ed. ii) : This word has been rejected by several editors; and 
assuredly, while it injures the metre, it adds nothing to the sense.—Hupson: Prob- 
ably the Poet wrote doy as a substitute for young, and then both words got printed 
together. ‘Roman Joy’ conveys a sneer, which ‘ vowg Roman’ does not.—ABBOTT 
(§ 498) : If the text be correct, this line seems a pure Alexandrine. 

3. Telamon for his Shield, the Boare of Thessaly] STEEVENS: That is, than 
Ajax Telamon for the armour of Achilles, the most valuable part of which was the 
shield. ‘The boar of Thessaly’ was the boar killed by Meleager. 

4. Was neuer so imbost] BrapLey (WV. £. D. s. v. Emboss): Middle English 
embose, perhaps formed on En-+old French os, 407s, wood ; the equivalent Old French 
embuiser occurs with sense of Ambush. If so, the word is ultimately identical with 
Imbosk verb. The development of senses as suggested below is strange, but appears 
to be in accordance with the existing evidence. f 1. eztv. Of a hunted animal: To 
take shelter in, plunge into, a wood or thicket. + b. The past participle is used by 


ACT IV, Sc. xiv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 301 


Char. To’th’Monument, there locke your felfe, 5 
And fend him word you are dead: 
The Soule and Body riue not more in parting, 
Then greatneffe going off. 
Cleo. To’th’Monument : 
Mardian, go tell him I haue flaine my felfe : 10 
Say, that the laft I fpoke was Anthony, 
And word it(prythee) pitteoufly. Hence Mardian, 
And bring me how he takes my death to’th’ Monument. 


Exeunt. 14 
[Scene XIV] 
Enter Anthony, and Eros. 
Ant. ros, thou yet behold’ft me? 
Lros. I Noble Lord. 
Ant. Sometime we fee a clowd that’s Dragonith, 4 


5, 6. there locke,..dead | One line, Pope oufly F,, Rowe. 


et seq. 13. death] Ff, Rowe. death, Han. 
6. you are] youre Pope,+, Dyce ii, death. Pope et cet. 
ili. to’ th’ Monument.| Separate line, 


7, 8. Mnemonic, Warb. 

9,13. Zo’th’ | F,. To th’ FF, Wh.i. 
To the Steev. et seq. 

12,13. And...Monument | Lines end, 
flence, ... death. ... Monument. Steev. et 
seq. (except Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam.) 

12. prythee| prethee Ff, Rowe i. prt- 
thee Rowe ii, Dyce, Glo, Cam. gr ythee 
Pope et cet. 

pitteoufly| F,. pittioufly ¥,. piti- 


Sta. 

Scene XIV. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
Scene VIII. Rowe. Scene X. Pope, 
Warb. Scene XI. Han. Johns. Scene 
XII. Cap. et cet. 

Cleopatra’s Palace. Rowe. The 
same. Another Room. Cap. 

1. Enter...] Re-enter... Theob. 

2. me?| me. Theob.+. 

4-15. Mnemonic, Pope, Warb. 


Milton for zwzbosked. 


+ 2. To drive (a hunted animal) to extremity. 


T 3- In Zas- 


sive of a hunted animal: To be exhausted by running ; hezce, to foam at the mouth 
(as a result of exhaustion in running). Also, ¢ransferred sense, of persons: (a) To 
be exhausted, at the last extremity of fatigue; (4) to foam at the mouth (from rage, 
etc.). 4. ¢vansitive. To cover with foam (the mouth, the body of an animal). 

5. To’th’Monument] See Plutarch, Appendix. 

4. Sometime we see a clowd, etc.] Hazuirt (p. 101): This is, without doubt, 
one of the finest pieces of poetry in Shakespeare. The splendour of the imagery, the 
semblance of reality, the lofty range of picturesque objects hanging over the world, 
their evanescent nature, the total uncertainty of what is left behind, are just like the 
mouldering schemes of human greatness. Itis finer than Cleopatra’s passionate lamen- 
tation over his fallen grandeur, because it is more dim, unstable, unsubstantial.— 
[In the Variorum of 1821 those who list may find four or five tepid quotations from 
sundry authors, which, according to Steevens and Malone, probably furnished Shake- 


302 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. xiv. 


A vapour fometime, like a Beare, or Lyon, 5 
A toward Cittadell, a pendant Rocke, 

A forked Mountaine, or blew Promontorie 

With Trees vpon’t, that nodde vnto the world, 

And mocke our eyes with Ayre. 

Thou haft feene thefe Signes, fe) 
They are blacke Vefpers Pageants. 


5. vapour] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 8. world] wind Cap. conj. (with- 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. vapour, Theob. et drawn. /Vofes, i, 47.) 
cet. 9, 10. And... Signes}] One line, Rowe 
6. toward] Ff. stower'd Rowe et seq. et seq. 
7. blew) blue Rowe. 10, Thou haft| Thow st Pope,+. 


speare with the imagery of these lines. It is a waste of time to read them, an 
unpardonable waste of paper and ink to reprint them.—ED. ] 

11. Pageants] Murray (JM. £. D. s.v.): Origin and history obscure. 1. A 
scene acted on the stage; specially, one scene or act of a medizval mystery play. 
} 2. A stage or platform on which scenes were acted or tableaux represented ; espe- 
cially in early use, the movable structure or ‘ carriage,’ consisting of stage and stage 
machinery, used in open air performances of the mystery plays. 3. A tableau, repre- 
sentation, allegorical device, or the like, erected on a fixed stage or carried on a 
moving car, as a public show; any kind of show, device, or temporary structure, 
exhibited as a feature of a public triumph or celebration. (This sense, in which 
‘scene’ and ‘stage’ are combined, may have been the intermediate link between I 
and 2.)—[In conclusion Dr Murray gives an extremely valuable (Vote, wherein is 
discussed the two main early senses of the word, which were ‘a scene displayed on 
a stage’ and ‘a stage on which a scene is exhibited or acted.’ Unfortunately this 
purely philological question is not germane to these pages. It is not to be sup- 
posed that in using the word ‘ Pageants’ Shakespeare had in mind the uncouth 
clumsy structures or the barbarous acting of the early Moralities or Mysteries. The 
pageants of his day were elaborate, allegorical, and superbly furnished. WARTON 
(ii, 365) says ‘the frequent and public exhibition of personifications in the Pageaunts, 
which anciently accompanied every high festivity, greatly contributed to cherish the 
spirit of allegorical poetry, and even to enrich the imagination of Spenser. [ Foot- 
note.| And of Shakespeare. There is a passage [the present, ] in Antony and Cleo- 
patra, where the metaphor is exceedingly beautiful ; but where the beauty both of the 
expression and the allusion is lost, unless we recollect the frequency and the nature 
of these shews in Shakespeare’s age.’ On p. 202, ef seg. of the same volume, War- 
ton gives, from contemporary sources, an account of the magnificence of Pageants 
in which even royal personages took part. WHITER, also, writes to the same effect. 
‘It is impossible,’ he says (p. 199), speaking of Pageants presented at Court, ‘for 
the reader to form an adequate notion of these performances, or to conceive their 
impression on the minds of those to whom they were familiar, unless he will himself 
consult the original narratives, which describe their exhibition. When he reflects on 
the immense sums which were lavished on these occasions; and considers that the 
most celebrated artists and poets of the age were employed in displaying before a 
voluptuous Court the most consummate specimens of their skill, he will readily 


ACT IV, Sc. xiv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 303 


Eyos. I my Lord. 


Ant. That which is now a Horfe, euen with a thoght 
the Racke diflimes, and makes it indiftinet 


As water is in water. 
Eros. It does my Lord. 


15 


Ant. My good Knaue Zyos, now thy Captaine is 
Euen fuch a body : Heere I am Anthony, 
Yet cannot hold this vifible fhape (my Knaue ) 
I made thefe warres for Egypt, and the Queene, 20 
Whofe heart I thought I had, for fhe had mine: 
Which whil’ft it was mine, had annext vntoo’t 
A Million moe, (now loft:) fhee Zvos has 
Packt Cards with Ce/ars, and falfe plaid my Glory 24 


13. exen] ev’n Johns. 
14. the] F,. The Ff. 
diflimes| Ff. dislimn’s Rowe, 
Pope. dzslimns Theob. et seq. dislimbs 
Ktly conj. 


Ktly, Hal. gueen,— Cap. et cet. 

21. mine.:] mine) Pope. mine, Han. 
Coll. Wh. i, Cam. Ktly, Hal. 

23. moe] Ff, Ktly, Cam. more Rowe 
et cet. 
now lost ; Rowe, 


16. does] do's FF, 
Theob. Han. Warb. 
18. Zuen] Ev’n Johns. 
Lam] I’m Pope,+. 
19. Knaue)| knave. Rowe ii et seq. 
20. Lgypt,| Ff, Rowe, Coll. Wh. i, 
Hal. Zeyft. Pope et cet. 
Queene. Ff, Rowe, +, Coll. Wh. i, 


Rowe, Pope, now loft :| Ff. 
Coll. Wh. i, Hal. sow Jost! Pope,+, 
Var. ’73. mow lost,— Cap. et cet. 
24. Ceefars,] Ff, Coll. i. Cesar, Rowe 
et seq. 
Salle plaid | false-play’ d Cap. Knt, 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. , 


acknowledge the superior grandeur of these romantic spectacles.’ See also Whiter’s 
note on V, ii, 97.—ED. ] 

14. the Racke dislimes] WHITER (p. 195): This is a continuation of the 
same allusion to a pageant... . Mark the following quotation from Jonson’s 
Masque of Hymen : ‘ Here the upper part of the scene, which was all of clouds, and 
made artificially to swell, and ride like the rack, began to open,’ etc. [p. 59, ed. 
Gifford. It is more than probable that Whiter is here right in saying that this isa 
continuation of the allusion, although Anthony’s speech throughout deals with actual 
clouds. Seea long discussion on ‘rack’ or wreck in The Tempest, IV, i, 178 (of 
this ed.), where STAUNTON excellently remarks, of the phrase ‘Leaue not a rack 
behinde’: ‘ While it is evident that by “rack’’ was understood the drifting vapour, 
or scud, as it is now termed, it would appear that Shakespeare, in the present 
instance, as in another occurring in Ax¢. & CZeop., was thinking not more of the 
actual clouds than of those gauzy semblances, which, in the pageants of his day, as 
in the stage-spectacles of ours, were often used partly or totally to obscure the scene 
behind.’—ED. ] 

19, 20. (my Knaue) .. . the Queene] THISELTON (p. 24): Possibly these sug- 
gested the metaphor from cards, which is perhaps continued by the word ‘triumph.’ 

24, 25. Packt Cards with Czsars, and false plaid my Glory Vnto an 


304 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. xiv. 


Vnto an Enemies triumph. 25 
Nay, weepe not gentle Evos, there is left vs 
Our felues to end our felues. 


Enter Mardian. 
Oh thy vilde Lady, fhe has rob’d me of my Sword. 
Mar. No Anthony, 30 
25. Lnemies| Enemy's ¥,¥,. 29. vilde] vile ¥ . 
triumph. | triumph— Pope, Theob. Jie has] sh’ has Pope, +. 
Han. Warb. JSre...Sword | Separate line, Rowe 
29. thy] the F,, Rowe, Pope. et seq. 


Enemies triumph] WARBURTON: Shakspeare has here, as usual, taken his meta- 
phor from a low trivial subject; but has enobled it with much art, by so contriving 
that the principal term in the subject from whence the metaphor was ¢aéen, should 
belong to, and suit the dignity of the subject to which the metaphor is ¢/vansferred - 
thereby providing at once for the integrity of the figure, and the nobleness of the 
thought. And this by the word ¢rzumph, which either signifies Octavius’s conquest, 
or what we now call, contractedly, the ¢~ump at cards, then called the ¢r7umph or the 
triumphing sort.—JOHNSON: This explanation is very just; the thought did not 
deserve so good an annotation.—MALONE: I believe Warburton here, as in many 
other places, saw more than his author meant. Shakspeare, I think, only intended 
to say, that Cleopatra, by collusion, played the great game they were engaged in 
falsely, so as ¢o sacrifice Antony's fame to that of his enemy. ‘The playing false to 
the adversary’s trump card (as Warburton explains the words) conveys no distinct 
idea. The plain sense of the passage will appear from the following dialogue in 
Florio’s Second Frvtes, 1591: ‘S. What a shooffling doo you keepe with those 
cardes? <A. J plate faire plaie, and shooffell them as I ought. S. Me thinkes 
you pack and set them.’ [p. 69. Assuredly, Malone is right. To play false to your 
opponents trump can do no harm to anybody but the player and his partner. Possi- 
bly, the sentence may be thus paraphrased :—She ‘stacked’ the cards in Czesar’s 
favour, and then, by her cheating, converted my glory into an enemy’s triumph. 
Warburton’s note renders needless the many comments on the conversion of ‘the 
triumph card’ into ‘the trump card.’—ED. | 

24. Czesars] For the superfluous s see I, iv, II. 

29. she has rob’d me of my Sword] CAPELLI (i, 47): Words that should not 
be taken metaphorically, as some have suppos’d, but literally ; for that he had no 
sword of his own, appears by what he says to Eros [line 94], and he afterwards dies 
by his sword: nor is it any objection, that this sword is call’d by Dercetas Antony’s 
sword [V, i, 30]; who only gives it that name as knowing ’twas the sword that he 
dy’d by, and look’d no farther. Cleopatra’s action proceeded from tenderness: she 
saw the rage he was in; and, fearing the effects of it, withdrew (or caus’d to be 
withdrawn), the instrument of his harm.—[If there were any special meaning in ask- 
ing Eros to use his own sword, it may have been that there was therein less thought 
of suicide. Later on Anthony asks Diomed also to draw his sword and give suf- 
ficing strokes for death ; possibly, in this case, because the sword of Eros was still in 
the wound. Cleopatra had robbed Anthony of his sword just as the belief in Des- 
demona’s infidelity had robbed Othello of his occupation.—ED. ] 


ACT Iv, sc. xiv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 305 


My Miftris lou’d thee, and her Fortunes mingled au 
With thine intirely. 
Ant.Hence fawcy Eunuch peace, fhe hath betraid me, 
And fhall dye the death. 
Mar. Death of one perfon, can be paide but once, 35 
And that fhe ha’s difcharg’d. What thou would’f{t do 
Is done vnto thy hand : the laft fhe fpake 
Was Anthony, moft Noble Anthony : 
Then in the midd’ft a tearing grone did breake 
The name of Axthony : it was diuided 40 
Betweene her heart, and lips : fhe rendred life 
Thy name fo buried in her. 


Ant. Dead then ? 
Mar. Dead. 
Ant. Wnarme £ros, the long dayes taske is done, 45 


And we mutt fleepe : That thou depart’{t hence fafe 

Does pay thy labour richly : Go. exit Mardian. 

Off, plucke off, 

The feuen-fold fhield of Azax cannot keepe 49 


Ritson (ap. Cam. ), Steev. Var. ’03, ’13. 


32. intirely] entirely Warb. 
Unarm, Eros Var.’73 et cet. 


33, 34-/he...death] Separate line, Han. 


Cap. et seq. 

34. frall| she shall Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. 

35-42. Mnemonic, Pope, Warb. 

36. ha’s| has Ff. hath Cap. 

41. rendred | tendered Ff. render’d 
Warb. Cap. et seq. 

45. Vnarme Eros,] F,. Unarme, Eros, 


46. fleepe | sleep. Johns. Coll. Dyce, 

Wh. Ktly, Glo. Cam. Hal. s/eep / Sta. 

[To Mardian. Han. Warb. Johns. 

ii, iii Om. Cap. et cet. 

47, 48. Does...off.| As one line, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Cap. Var. ’78 et seq. 

48. Off,] Oh, Ff, Rowe, Pope. Om. 

Han. Cap. 


FF, Unarm me, Eros, Rowe,+, Cap. 49. The] Then Johns. (misprint ?) 


Lros, unarm ; 


45. Wnarme Eros] COLLIER (ed. ii) : The MS puts it ‘Unarm me, Eros’ [see 
Text. Notes|, which we cannot believe to be right, because the metre is thus unneces- 
sarily disturbed. Steevens, almost wantonly, read ‘Eros, unarm,’—-Dyck, after 
quoting the foregoing, adds: ‘A note which shows that Mr Collier has rather 
odd ideas on the subject of metre.,— WALKER (C771. ii, 262): Shakespeare wrote 
‘Unarm me, Eros.’—LrETTsom ( footnote to foregoing) : Collier has rejected, on met- 
rical grounds, this elegant and certain emendation, but he is quite mistaken. See 
Walker’s Vers. Art. ix. There are more than fifty similar verses [7. ¢. where there 
is an extra syllable after a pause] in Collier’s text of this very play—[Oxen and 
wainropes cannot draw me from the conviction that ‘ Unarm me, Eros,’ is what Shake- 


It was through the careless pronunciation of the compositor’s reader 


speare wrote. 
See II, ii, 


that the 2e was lost in the final # of ‘Unarm’ and in the Z of ‘ Eros.’ 
141; IV, viii, 24; V, ii, 268.—ED.] 
20 


\ 


306 THE: TRAGEDIE \OF [act IV, SC. xiv. 
The battery from my heart. Oh cleaue my fides. 50 
Heart, once be ftronger then thy Continent, 

Cracke thy fraile Cafe. Apace Eros, apace ; 


No more a Soldier : bruifed peeces go, 
You haue bin Nobly borne. From me awhile. exit Evos 


I will o’re-take thee Cleopatra, and 55 
Weepe for my pardon. So it muft be, for now 
All length is Torture : fince the Torch is out, 57 
50. Zhe] This Johns. conj. 53. [Unarming himself. Pope. 
Oh..fides.| Oh, cleave my sides ! 54. awhile] F,F,, Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
Han. Var.’73. O cleave, my sides! a while ¥, et cet. 
Theob. et seq. (subs.) 56. So zt] So’t Pope, +. 
51. [Unarming himself. Rowe. 57. length] life Steev. conj. 
53. Soldier | soldier— Rowe,+. sol- the] thy Han. 
dier. Ktly. 


50. The battery from my heart] BoswELL: This means, I apprehend, ‘the 
battery proceeding from my heart, which is strong enough to break through the seven- 
fold shield of Ajax; I wish it were strong enough to cleave my sides and destroy 
me.’—[ Anthony is unarming, and, as Eros ‘plucks off’ his breastplate, is reminded 
- of the folly of supposing that such a mere sheet of metal could protect his heart from 
a battery against which Ajax’s seven-fold shield would have proved vain. Then, 
as he breathes freer, and his chest expands, he prays his heart to cleave his sides, 
that for once it may find relief in breaking. Boswell’s note is to me incompre- 
hensible, and what is still more incomprehensible is that five, at least, of recent edi- 
tors should have adopted it in whole or in part. A shield is for the protection of 
the bearer. Who, one may ask, was the bearer of Ajax’s shield, who was to be pro- 
tected from the battery ‘proceeding from’ Anthony’s heart? Against whom was 
Anthony about to open a battery from his heart? and with what object? His own 
heart was the citadel from which the battery could not be kept.—Ep. ] 

50, 51. cleaue my sides. Heart] I utterly mistrust the period in the Folio after 
“sides,” which has been practically retained by every editor. It makes Anthony 
adjure his sides to cleave, sci/. themselves. This intransitive or reflexive use of 
‘cleave’ is rare; see Murray (V. Z. D.) where comparatively few examples of it 
are given. Replace the period with a comma, and ‘cleave’ then becomes the 
imperative of a transitive verb with ‘sides’ as an object, and ‘ Heart’ as the subject : 
“Oh, Heart, cleave my sides!’ Then, in a manner thoroughly Shakespearian, the 
idea is repeated, but in a different form: ‘for once be stronger than thy, continent, 
crack thy frail case.’Ep. 

51. Continent] STEEVENS: That is, the thing that contains thee. [Of which 
Schmidt’s Zex. will furnish many examples. ] 

57. length] HALLIWELL (Select. Notes, p. 35): This word may stand for Zength 
of life.—[Assuredly. And for length of time, of breathing, of heart-beats, of every- 
thing. It is what it is: length in the abstract.—Ep. ] 

57. Torture... Torch] Although it is dimly possible that the latter word was 
unconsciously suggested by the sound of the former, yet the similarity in sound was 


ACT Iv, SC. xiv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 307 


Lye downe and ftray no farther. Now all labour 58 
Marres what it does : yea, very force entangles 
It felfe with {trength : Seale then, and all is done. 60 


vos? 1 come my Queene. Zyros? Stay for me, 

Where Soules do couch on Flowers, wee’! hand in hand, 
And with our fprightly Port make the Ghoftes gaze : 
Dido, and her 4neas fhall want Troopes, 


And all the haunt be ours. Come &ros, Evos. 65 
Liter Eros. 
Evos. What would my Lord? 67 
58. feray] stay Rowe ii (misprint ?) 61. me,| me, Cap. et seq. 
farther | further Rowe ii, +, Varr. 64. Aineas] Sicheus Warb. Han. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Dyce. 67,68. What...Since]| I come my Lord: 
60. Seale] Seal F,. sleep Han. —FHlere’s one brings word of Enobarbus’ 
61. Eros ?] Zvos /— Rowe et seq. death. Ant. I have forgiven him. Since 
Stay] Say Ff. Kemble. 


less in Shakespeare’s day than at present. It was probably pronounced, somewhat 
as in French, zort-yeure.—ED. 

58-60. Now all labour Marres what it does : yea, very force entangles It 
selfe with strength] WALKER (C777. iii, 309) appositely compares these lines with 
Sonnet xxiii: ‘Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage, Whose strength’s 
abundance weakens his own heart, .. . And in mine own love’s strength seem to 
decay, O’ercharg’d with burthen of mine own love’s might.’ DEIGHTON thus para- 
phrases the latter clause: ‘ Yea, all strong efforts only confound themselves by their 
strength ; what should be the source of success only ensures failure. 

60. Seale then] THEOBALD: Antony had offended Cleopatra with his suspicions ; 
he is about doing something to deserve her pardon: and he thinks stabbing himself 
will sea/ that pardon.— WARBURTON: Metaphor taken from civil contracts, where, 
when all is agreed on, the sealing compleats the contract ; so he hath determined to 
die, and nothing remained but to give the stroke.—JoHNsoNn : I believe the reading 
is: ‘sce/ then, and all is done.’ To seel hawks, is to close their eyes. The mean- 
ing will be: ‘Close thine eyes for ever, and be quiet. —STEEVENS: The old read- 
ing is the true one. Thus, in Henry V: ‘ And so espous’d to death, with blood he 
seal’d@ A testament of noble-ending love.’ [IV, vi, 26.] 

64. Dido, and her ZEneas] WarsurTon: But Dido’s fondness did not reach to 
the other world; she then despised A®neas, and returned to her old affection for 
Sichzus. I should think, therefore, that the Poet wrote, ‘Dido and her Sicheus.’ 
And the rather, because the comparison of Antony to Sichzeus is remarkably apposite. 
Sichzeus was murdered by his brother Pygmalion for his wealth, on which his wife, 
Dido, fled into Africa: So Antony was fought with and defeated at Actium by his 
brother Octavius, for his share of the dominion of the world, whereon Cleopatra fled 
from the victor’s rage into Egypt. [and there is salmons in both.’ Ep. ]—CAPELL 
(i, 47) : The Poet did not stay to consider, whether Dido’s love for Aneas did or 
did not follow her into the other world ; it was very sufficient for his purpose—that 
the loves of her and Aineas were of great fame, which made them a fit couple to 
be rank’d with those he is talking of. 


308 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. xiv. 


Ant. Since Cleopatra dyed, 68 
I haue liu’d in fuch difhonour, that the Gods 
Deteft my bafeneffe. I, that with my Sword, 770, 


Quarter’d the World, and o’re greene Neptunes backe 
With Ships, made Cities; condemne my felfe, to lacke 


The Courage of a Woman, leffe Noble minde 78 
69. J haue lind | I’ve liv’'d Pope,+, 73. Noble minde| FF. noble minded 
Dyce ii, iii. J “ve Han. Rowe, Warb. Var. ’73. oble-minded 
71. o’ve greene o're-greene F,. Pope, Theob. Han. Johns. Cap. Dyce 
72. Cities ;]| cities, Rowe, Johns. et li, ili, Ktly, Coll. iii. s20bly mind Steev. 
seq. conj. Voble mind F, et cet. 


73. Woman,| woman, Rowe et seq. 


69, 70. the Gods Detest my basenesse] WALKER (C77z. ii, 311): In the 
writers of that age de¢es¢ is used in the sense which as then it still retained from its 
original, detestarz, being indicative of something spoken, not of an affection of the 
mind.—[Among other examples of this use Walker quotes the present passage, and 
here defines ‘detest’ as cry out against, which is, possibly, correct; at the same 
time, there are many passages in Shakespeare where the idea of simple abhorrence 
obtains, as in Lear’s ‘ Detested kite! thou liest.’ The range of readings which 
the 4. Z. D. affords would have shown Walker that his interpretation was too 
restricted. Dr Murray distinguishes three meanings in the use of ‘detest.’ The 
third : ‘To renounce solemnly or under oath’ is odso/efe and rare, and does not concern 
us here. The two other meanings, under which there are venerable and abundant 
examples in proof, are: ‘1. transitive. To curse, calling God to witness ; to express 
abhorrence of, to denounce, execrate [Walker's meaning]. 2. To feel abhorrence 
of; to hate or dislike intensely ; to abhor, to abominate.’ The latter meaning is 
certainly applicable to the present passage.—Ep.] _ 

72. With Ships, made Cities] Compare, Henxry V; III, Chorus, line 14 : ‘behold 
A city on the inconstant billows dancing; For so appears this fleet majestical, Hold- 
ing due course to Harfleur.’ DEIGHTON, however, understands it differently, and 
paraphrases, ‘his vessels being so capacious as to carry in each of them the popu- 
lation of a city.—ED. 

72, 73. condemne my selfe, to lacke The Courage . . . lesse Noble minde] 
MALONE conceived that ‘less noble mind’ as well as ‘courage’ was the object of 
‘lack’ and that, consequently, Antony said what he did not mean. But he took 
heart of grace in the supposition that the construction was one of Shakespeare’s 
peculiar inaccuracies’ on which we must look leniently and in which ‘the poet’ 
must be humoured. Finally, he received great contentment from finding that ‘ how- 
ever inaccurate, the text is not corrupt,’—in North’s Plutarch occur the very same 
words! Thus Antony there says, ‘I am sorrie that having been so great a captaine 
and emperour, I am indeede condemned to be judged of lesse corage and noble minde 
than a woman.’ STEEVENS then remarks that ‘ “ Condemn myself Zo Zack,’ however 
licentiously, may have been employed to signify, “condemn myself for /acking even 
the courage of a woman.’”’’ AsBgBotT (§ 356) supplies many and many an instance 
of the infinitive thus indefinitely used. That ‘less noble mind’ (or minded,—it makes 
little difference) is still governed by ‘I,’ in line 70 (‘I, that with my sword,’ etc.), 


ACT IV, Sc. xiv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 309 


Then fhe which by her death, our C@/ar telles 


I am Conqueror of my felfe. 


Thou art fworne Zros, 75 


That when the exigent fhould come, which now 

Is come indeed : When I fhould fee behinde me 

Th’ineuitable profecution of difgrace and horror, 

That on my command, thou then would’ft kill me. 

Doo’t, the time is come : Thou ftrik’{t not me, 80 
Tis Ce/ar thou defeat’{t. Put colour in thy Cheeke. 


Eyos. 


The Gods with-hold me, 


Shall I do that which all the Parthian Darts, 83 


oe see 


I...felfe| As quotation, Theob. et 
seq. (subs. ) 

77. indeed :| indeed, Rowe et seq. 
(subs.) 

78-81. Th’ ineuitable...Cheeke.] Lines 
end, disgrace...then...come. ...defeat’ st. 
... cheek. Rowe,+, Knt. Lines end, 
prosecution ... command ... come.— ... de= 


featest...cheek. Ktly. Lines end, of... 
command, ... come. ...defeat’ st. ... cheek, 
Cap. et seq. 

80. Doo’t, the} F,. Do it, for the 
Pope,+. Dot, the F,F, et cet. (subs.) 

81. ’ Zits] Til ¥,. "tll Rowe. 

thy] my Ff, Rowe, Pope. 

82. me,] Ff, Rowe. me: Pope. me! 

Theob. et seq. 


might have been made a little clearer had the punctuation of the Folio been followed. 
But every editor since Rowe has placed a semi-colon or a colon after ‘ Woman,’ and so 
disjointed the sentence. WALKER (C7?z. iii, 310) says ‘ Read “less oble-minded.”’’ 
His editor, LETTrsom, in a footnote, observes, ‘So Rowe and all the earlier editors. 
Malone and Steevens have done their best to darken noon. Compare for the mean- 
ing of minded, Tam. of the Shrew, 1i, i, “« 1 am as peremptory as she proud-minded.”’’ 
Possibly, it would be better to accept ‘less noble-minded,’ but it is not necessary; ‘I, 
less noble mind’ is, to me, fully as intelligible, and rather more dignified in its 
humiliation. —Ep. 

78. Th’ineuitable prosecution of disgrace and horror] This line, with its 
eight feet catalectic, has given much metrical trouble. Its predecessor and suc- 
cessor are adequately correct, but this line is certainly a notable violation of the laws 
of blank verse. To utter these words, proclaiming his open shame, must have cost 
Anthony’s proud spirit a fierce struggle ; every word is a torture, and his emotion 
must have been almost uncontrollable before he could bring himself to utter ‘ disgrace’ 
and ‘horror.’ Wherefore, disregarding all metrical laws whatsoever, I would, with 
a long pause after ‘of,’ put ‘disgrace and horror’ in a separate line, and allow the 
other lines to remain undisturbed. Although this arrangement is, in effect, for the 
benefit of the eye, yet through the eye it conveys an intimation of the way in which, 
as I think, it should be spoken.—Ep. 

81. Put colour in thy Cheeke] Elsewhere Shakespeare makes us see how terror 
blanches the cheek. ‘ Out, you tallow-face,’ says old Capulet to Juliet when he tells 
her she must marry Paris. ‘What soldiers, whey-face?’ asks Macbeth of the Ser- 
vant who brings the news of the approach of ten thousand English. JouN HUNTER 
paraphrases it, however, ‘ Rouse the blood into thy face through eagerness to defeat 
Czesar.’— ED. 


310 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. xiv. 


(Though Enemy) loft ayme, and could not. 
Ant. Eros, 85 
Would’ft thou be window’d in great Rome, and fee 
Thy Mafter thus with pleacht Armes, bending downe 
His corrigible necke, his face fubdu’de 
To penetratiue fhame ; whil’{t the wheel’d feate 
Of Fortunate Cz/ar drawne before him, branded go 
His Bafeneffe that enfued. 
Eros. I would not fee’t. 
Ant. Come then : for with a wound I muft be cur’d. 
Draw that thy honeft Sword, which thou haft worne 
Mott vfefull for thy Country. 95 
Eros. Oh fir, pardon me. 
Ant. When I did make thee free, fwor’ft y not then 
To do this when I bad thee ? Do it at once, 
Or thy precedent Seruices are all 
But accidents vnpurpos’d. Draw,and come. 100 
fyros. Turne from me then that Noble countenance, 
Wherein the worfhip of the whole world lyes. 
Anti, Acsoe thee: 
ros. My {word is drawne. 
Ant. Then let it do at once 105 
The thing why thou haft drawne it. 
Eros. My deere Matter, 


My Captaine, and my Emperor. Let me fay 108 

84. Enemy] enemies Ktly. 98. dad] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, 
not.| not ? Rowe et seq. Han. Cap. éade Theob. ii et cet. 

87. Thy] The F,. 103. thee] there Wh. i conj. 
pleacht | pleach’d Cap. et seq. [Turning from him. Rowe. 

89. wheel’d] wheel Johns. ap. Cam. 105. Ze¢ 7] Om. Words. 

Ql. enfued.| ensued ? Rowe ii et seq. at once| Om. Han. 

97. ¥] thou Ff. 108. Emperor] emp’ror Pope,+. 


87. pleacht Armes] JOHNSON: Arms folded in each other.—[In the frontispiece 
of Burton’s Avxatomy of Melancholy the woe-begone ‘ Inamorato’ is represented with 
‘pleacht arms,’ as a sign of sadness.—ED. | 

88, 89. His corrigible necke,... penetratiue] STEEVENS: ‘Corrigible’ for 
corrected, and ‘penetrative’ for penetrating. So Virgil has ‘ penetrabile frigus’ for 
‘ penetrans frigus,’ in his Georgics. [i, 93.] 

91. His Basenesse that ensued] JoHNson: The poor conquered wretch that 
followed.—SINGER: This is a little inaccurate ; the captives came before the victor 
in the order of a Roman triumph. 

102. the worship] JoHNsoN: That is, the dignity, the authority. 


CT Iv, sc. xiv.]| ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 311 


Before I ftrike this bloody ftroke, Farwell. 


Ant. 

Lyos. Farewell great Chiefe. 
Ant. Now £&ros. | 
Eros. Why there then : 


’Tis faid man, and farewell. 110 
Shall I ftrike now ? 


Killes him/felfe. 


Thus I do efcape the forrow of Anthonies death. 


Ant. 


Thrice-Nobler then my felfe, II5 


Thou teacheft me : Oh valiant Zvos, what 

I fhould, and thou could’ft not, my Queene and Eros 

Haue by their braue inftru€tion got vpon me 

A Nobleneffe in Record. But I will bee 

A Bride-groome in my death, and run intoo’t 120 
As to a Louers bed. Come then, and &7os, 

Thy Mafter dies thy Scholler ; to do thus 


I learnt of thee. 


How, not dead? Not dead ? 


The Guard, how ? Oh difpatch me. 124 


109. Farwell] farewell Ff. 
112. Killes...] After line 113, Rowe,+. 
113, 114. Why... forrow] One line, 
Han. Cap. Var.’78,’85, Mal. Ran. Steev. 
Coll. Dyce, Cam. Two lines, ending 
then— ...sorrow. Pope, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. 
113. then.] then— Rowe,+. 
114. [do] do I Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 
Varr. Ran. Varr. Coll. Wh. i, Hal. 
of Anthonies death] Separate line, 
Pope et seq. 
[Dyes. Theob. Warb. Johns. 
115. Thrice-Nobler| ¥ F,, Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. Thrice Nobler ¥, et cet. 
Sebfe,| self! Pope et seq. 
116. me.] me, Pope et seq. 
117. thou] Om. F,F,. 
not,| not; Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


Warb. ot. Johns. et seq. (subs.) 


121. Come then,| Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Come then ; Theob. Warb. et seq. 
then, | then ; [taking Eros’ sword. 
Cap. 

122. [Falling on his Sword. Rowe. 

123. learnt] learn’t Han. learn’d 
Var. ’73 et seq. 

flow, not] Ff, Rowe. How, not 
yet Pope,+. How! not yetCap. How! 
not Var.’73 et seq. 

124. Guard, how ?]| Ff. Guard—how / 
— Rowe, Pope, Han. Knt. Guard 
—ho!— Theob. Warb. Johns. Sta. 
Guard ? how /— Cap. Var.’78. Guard ? 
—ho !—Var.’73. Guard, ho!— Var. 
85, Ran. Dyce, Wh. Glo. Cam. Guard / 
—how /— Mal. Guard !—ho !— Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Ktly, Hal. Coll. iii. Guard / 
—how ?—Coll. i, ii. Guard now / Barry 
ap. Coll. 


113. Why there then] After these words THEOBALD inserted the stage direc- 
tion, Eros kills himself; and then, to make assurance double sure, adds at the close 


of the next line, Dyes. 


This slaying of the slain was faithfully copied by WARBUR- 


TON and JOHNSON, who, while sneering at Theobald at every turn, printed, almost 


slavishly, from his edition.—Eb. 


117-119. my Queene and Eros Haue .. . got vpon me A Noblenesse, etc.] 
That is, my Queen and Eros have gained the advantage of me in the history of noble 


deeds. 


See Franz’s note on II, iv, 11, ‘ you’le win two dayes vpon me.’—ED. 


120. A Bride-groome in my death] STEEVENS : Compare ‘If I must die, I will 
encounter darkness as a bride, And hug it in mine arms.’—JZeas. for Meas. IU, i, 83. 


212 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. xiv. 


Enter a Guard. 125 
1.Guard. What’s the noife? 
Ant. I haue done my worke ill Friends : 
Oh make an end of what I haue begun. 
2 The Starre is falne. 
1 And time is at his Period. 130 
All, Alas,and woe. 


Ant. Let him that loues me, ftrike me dead. 
Ie Not I. 
2 Nori, 


3. Nor any one. exeunt 135 
Dercetus. Thy death and fortunes bid thy folowers fly 
This fword but fhewne to C@/ar with this tydings, 
Shall enter me with him. 
Linter Diomedes. 


Dio. Where’s Anthony? 140 
Decre. There Diomed there. 
Diom. Liues he : wilt thou not anfwer man ? 142 


125. Scene XI. Pope, Warb. Scene 
XII. Han. Johns. 
Enter...] Enter Decretas and 


129. falne] F,. faln F,F,, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Warb. fa//’x Han. Johns. 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. fallen Cap. et cet. 


Guard. Rowe (Dercetas, Pope). After 134. Nor] Not F,. 

line 123, Cap. 136. Dercetus.] Decre. Ff. Dec. 
127. [ haue| I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, Rowe. Der. Pope. 

iii. 137. this] these Han. 
127, 128. / haue...end | One line, 142. he-] he? F. 


Han. Cap, et seq. 

127. worke wl] F,. work, wl FF, 
Rowe i. work il, Rowe ii et seq. 

129. 2 The] 2 Guard. The Rowe. 


welt ... man ?] Separate line, 
Steev. et seq. 

man ?| Om. Han. 

[Exit Dercetas. Var.’78. 


124. The Guard, how] MALONE lays stress on his having early ‘ suspected’ that 
‘how’ should here be printed Zo, unmindful or ignorant of the fact that, long before, 
Theobald had so printed it in his text, and had been faithfully followed therein by 
his two beneficiaries, Warburton and Johnson. Dyck, also, not a little emphasises 
his own discrimination in acutely distinguishing 4o from ‘how.’ Through two 
editions COLLIER bravely clung to ‘how,’ but, in his 7Azrd Ed. yielded to ho, possi- 
bly in consequence of Dyce’s home-question (S¢vict. p. 207): ‘If Mr Collier did 
not intend to make Antony “ ca// the guard,’’ I should like to know what meaning he 
would have us attach to “The Guard!” The modern editors who printed o for 
“how’’ were evidently right.’ Ep. 

137, 138. This sword ... Shall enter me with him] Surely these two lines 
are spoken aside. I cannot, however, find that any editor has so printed them. 
—Ep. For ‘enter,’ meaning ‘to admit into a society, etc.; or into a condition or 
state,’ see VV. £. D. II. 17. transitive. b. [The present line quoted. ] 

137. this tydings] Again used as a singular noun in ‘it is Tydings,’ V, i, 34. 


ACT IV, sc. xiv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPA TRA 313 


Ant. 


Suffifing ftrokes for death. 
Diom. 


Art thou there Diomed? 
Draw thy {word, and giue mee, 


Moft abfolute Lord : 


143 


145 


My Miftris Cleopatra fent me to thee. 


Ant. 
Diom. Now my Lord. 
Anth' Where is fhe? 


When did fhee fend thee ? 


(feare 150 


Diom. Lockt in her Monument : fhe had a Prophefying 
Of what hath come to paffe : for when fhe faw 
(Which neuer fhall be found) you did fufpe& 
She had difpos’d with Ce@/ar, and that your rage 
Would not be purg’d, fhe fent you word fhe was dead : 155 
But fearing fince how it might worke, hath fent 
Me to proclaime the truth, and I am come 


I dread, too late. 


Ant. Too late good Diomed: call my Guard I prythee. 


Dio. 


What hoa : the Emperors Guard, 160 


The Guard, what hoa ? Come, your Lord calles. 
Enter 4. or 5. of the Guard of Anthony. 


Ant. 


143, 144. Avrt...mee] One line, Rowe 
et seq. 

151, 150. /he...( feare] Separate line, 
Han. 

151. had | had, alas ! Han. 

Prophefying| Om. Cap. conj. 
Gar. prophet’s Steev. con}. prophetic 
Words. 

153. (Which.../u/pect | You did sus- 
pect,— which never shall be found— 
Words. 

154. difpos’d] compos d Coll. MS. 


Beare me good Friends where C/eopatra bides, 163 


155. you] Om. Pope, +, Var. ’73. 

159. prythee| prethee Ff, Rowe. pri- 
thee Knt, Dyce, Glo. Cam. pr’ ythee Pope 
et cet. 

160, 161. What hoa: ... what hoa?) 
One line, Pope et seq. 

162. Enter...] Ff, Glo. Cam. Enter 
the Guard. Rowe. Enter a Guard. Johns. 
Enter some of the Guard. Cap. 

163. where] were F.,. 

bides] ’bides Johns. Var.’73. 


151. Lockt... (feare] ApBoTr (§§ 505, 470): It is difficult to scan this line 


without making the latter portion a verse of four accents. 
Shé’d | a préphe | sying féar,’ making ‘ sying’ a monosyllable like 


m6n(u) | ment. 


(Perhaps ‘ Léck’d in | her 


‘being,’ ‘doing.’)—[Is this really scanning? where vowels are dropped, and the 
final ¢’s of participles disregarded in a scamper to utter the line in five feet ?—ED. ] 
154. She had dispos’d with Caesar] Murray (J. £. D. s. v. II. Intransitive 


senses. 7 ¢ b.): To settle matters, make terms. 


[The present line quoted. ] 


162, Enter 4. or 5. of the Guard] Co.iier (ed. i): The old stage-direction 
shows how many the theatre (supposing the tragedy to have been acted, of which, 
though we can have no proof, there can be little doubt) afforded for this duty. 


314 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT Iv, SC. Xv. 


’Tis the laft feruice that I fhall command -you. 
1 Woe,woe are we fir, you may not liue to weare 165 


All your true Followers out. 
All. Moft heauy day. 


Ant. Nay good my Fellowes, do not pleafe fharp fate 


To grace it with your forrowes. 


Bid that weleome 


Which comes to punifh vs,and we punifh it 170 
Seeming to beare it lightly. Take me vp, 
I haue led you oft, carry me now good Friends, 


And haue my thankes for all. 


Exit bearing Anthony 173 


[Scene XV] 


Enter Cleopatra, and her Maides aloft, with 
Charmian & Iras. 


Cleo. 
Char. 


Cleo. No, I will not: 


Oh Charmian, I will neuer go from hence. 
Be comforted deere Madam. 


All ftrange and terrible euents are welcome, 
But comforts we difpife ; our fize of forrow 
Proportion’d to our caufe, muft be as great 


As that which makes it. 


Enter Diomed. 10 


164. f/eruice] feevice F. 
165. 1 Woe] Guard. Woe Rowe. 
Woe, woe are| Woe! woe are 

Rowe. Woe are Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Cap. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Words. 

166. Followers] follow’rs Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. 

172. oft,] oft; Theob. Warb. Cap. et 
seq. 

173. Exit...] Exeunt... Ff. 

Scene XV. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
Act V. Scenei. Rowe. Scene XII. Pope, 


Warb. Scene XIII. Han. et cet. 

A magnificent Monument. Rowe. 
The Battlements of the Monument. 
Kemble. 

1. Enter...] Enter Cleopatra, Char- 
mian, and Iras, above. Rowe. Enter at 
a Window, above, Cleopatra, Charmian, 
and Iras. Cap. Enter above, on a gal- 
lery... Wh. 

Io. Enter...] Enter, below... Coll. 

Diomed.] Diomedes, Rowe. 


173. Here follows Scene viii, in Kemble’s version, consisting solely of ‘ Mournful 


Music. Titius and Guards pass towards the monument, bearing Anthony on his 
Litter.’—Eb. 
7-9. our size of sorrow . .. which makes it] As DEIGHTON justly remarks, this 


sentence is somewhat tautological: ‘the size of our sorrow, when it is of the same 
size as the cause, must be as great as the cause.’ Deighton’s paraphrase adroitly helps 
to veil the tautology: ‘the sorrow I feel, commensurate to the reason I have for it, 
cannot help showing itself, with equal amplitude.’ —Ep. 


ACT Iv, sc. xv.]~- ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 315 


How now? is he dead ? 
Diom. 


II 


His death’s vpon him, but not dead. 


Looke out o’th other fide your Monument, 
His Guard haue brought him thither. 
Enter Anthony, and the Guard. 15 


Cleo. Oh Sunne, 


Burne the great Sphere thou mou’ft in, darkling ftand 
The varrying fhore o’th’world.O Antony, Antony,Antony 18 


12, 13. His...out ] One line, Cap. 
12-14. His...thither.| Lines end, ozt 
...Aither, Han. 
12, death's deaths ¥ ¥.. 
but not | but he ts not Ktly. 
13. oth] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. Dyce ii, 
iii. o’the Cap. et cet. 
other fide] other-side Rowe i. 
your Monument |Om. Han. your 
monument,—But see, Cap. 
14. thither] hither Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Cap. 
5 15. Enter...] Enter Antony, born by 
the Guard. Rowe. Enter, below, ... 
Coll. 
16. Sunne,| thou sun, Pope,+, Steev. 


17. Burne the great | Turn from the 

Han. Zurn from th’ great Waxb. 
Srand | stand on Ktly. 

18. Zhe...O Antony, | One line, Johns. 
Cap. Varr. Mal. Steev. 

18-20. The... hither.| Lines end, O 
Antony, ... [ras ; ... hither. Cap. Lines 
end, O Antony! ...Iras, help ; ...hither. 
Mal, Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Sing. Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. Ktly, Hal. 

18. varrying] varying FF. 

oth’ Ff, Rowe. othe Cap. 

Antony, Antony, Antony] 4Ax- 
tony ! Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 

Antony, Antony] Separate line, 
Johns, Varr. Ran. 


Var. ’03, 713. sun, sun, Cap. Words. 


12. His death’s...dead] Srreevens: The defective measure, and want of 
respect in the speaker, induce me to suppose that the line originally stood, ‘ His 
death’s upon him, madam, but not dead.’ 

14. thither] Dyce (ed. ii) : The Second Folio has Az¢fer ; but the original word 
agrees well enough with what precedes.—[Is ‘thither’ merely ‘ well enough’ when 
it refers to ‘hat place, away from the speaker, on the other side of the monument? 
Is it possible, in such circumstances, that 4z¢her can be right >—Ep. ] 

17. Burne the great Sphere thou mou’st in] HEATH (p. 464): According to 
the philosophy which prevailed from the age of Aristotle to that of Shakspeare, and 
long since, the sun was a planet, and was whirled round the earth by the motion of 
a solid sphere in which it was fixed. If the sun therefore was to set fire to the sphere, 
so as to consume it, the consequence would be, that itself, for want of support, must 
drop through, and wander in endless space; and in that case, the earth would be 
involved in endless night. [See note on III, xiii, 175.] 

18, The varrying shore o’th’world] WArBuRTON: That is, of the earth, where 
light and darkness make an incessant variation.—STAUNTON (Atheneum, 26 Apr. 
1873): We have here a painful proof of the injury which the change of a word can 
do to the finest passage. Cleopatra’s magnificent invocation is turned into sheer non- 
sense by that miserable misprint ‘shore.’ What is the varying shore?... Read 
‘The varying star o’th’world.” The varying star of the world, spelt of old starre, 
is, of course, ‘the inconstant moon.’ Compare, in this tragedy, ‘—Alack, our ¢errene 
moon Is now eclips’d.’—III, xiii, 183; ‘now the fleeting moon No planet is of mine.’ 


316 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. xv. 

Helpe Charmian, helpe Jras helpe : helpe Friends 

Below, let’s draw him hither. 20 
Ant, \Peace, 


Not Ce/ars Valour hath o’rethrowne Anthony, 
But Axthonie’s hath Triumpht on it felfe. 
Cleo. So it fhould be, 
That none but Axthony fhould conquer Anthony, 25 
But woe ’tis fo. 
Ant. Iam dying Egypt, dying ; onely 
I heere importune death a-while, vntill 
Of many thoufand kiffes, the poore laft 
I lay vpon thy lippes. 30 
Cleo. I dare not Deere, 


19. HHelpe Charmian, he/pe Iras helpe -} 
Charmian, help ; help, [ras ; Cap. Steev. 
Var. 03, °13. Help, Charmian, help; 
Iras help ; Varr. Mal. Ran. 

19-25. helpe Friends ... conquer An- 
thony] Lines end, below /... valour... 
Antony’s ... itself. ... Antony ... conquer 
Antony. Walker (Crit. iii, 310). 

20. Below, let’s| Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Var. ’21. Below there, let us Han. Be- 
low ; let’s Theob. et cet. (subs.) 

23. Anthonie’s] Anthonie F,. Anthony 
FF, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 

it felfe| himself Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. 


Bere So...fo.] Lines end, but Antony 

..50. Rowe et seq. 

27. Egypt, dying] E, 
Steev. conj. 

onely | 

Words. 

28. a-while] F,. 
Glo. Cam. 

30. lippes.| lips.— 
Han. Warb. Cap. 

31, 32. Z dare.. 
Ktly. 


Supt, dying, dying 
only yet Pope,+, Cap. 


awhile Pe rc 


a while Rowe et cet. 
Come down. Theob. 


Dyce, 


.dare not| One line, 


Deere, Deere...not| One line, 
in parenthesis, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. 
(subs. ) 


—V, ii, 291.... 


But it is needless, I believe, to multiply quotations to demonstrate 


that ‘shore’ is an erratum for star, or to make clear that Egypt’s queen, in her 


wretchedness, calls, like Othello, for ‘a huge eclipse of sun and moon.’ 


The sense 


and context both justify the emendation.—[ HUDSON adopted Staunton’s emendation 


in his text. 
to be parallel, is forceful. 


unless the original is, in reality, ‘ sheer nonsense.’ 


ton’s explanation is puerile. 


It is, indeed, a specious one, and the passage from Othello, which seems 
But we are not justified in making so great a change, 


I think all will agree that Warbur- 


It is not alone the shores of the world that are subjected 
to the ‘incessant variation of light and darkness.’ 
cerned, Cleopatra might as well have said ‘ the varying ‘ozuzs of the world.’ 


As far as this variation is con- 
It was 


more than the mere shores that Cleopatra wished might stand darkling; it was the 
whole world, of which the shores were the limit. And the image of the whole world, 
the orbis terrarum, which, possibly, Shakespeare had here in mind, was the same as 
that, which, with its irregular outline, its deeply indented, its ‘ varying’ shore, he had 
already called the ‘ ¢hree-nook'd world.’ 
for.—ED. } 

28. I heere importune death] Jounson: I solicit ess to delay ; or, I troudle 
death by keeping him in waiting. 


Emendation is, I think, entirely uncalled 


ACT Iv, SC. xv.} ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 217 


Deere my Lord pardon : I dare not, a2 
Leaft I be taken : not th’Imperious fhew 

Of the full-Fortun’d Ce/ar, euer fhall 

Be brooch’d with me, if Knife, Drugges, Serpents haue 35 
Edge, fting, or operation. I am fafe: 

Your Wife Odzauza, with her modeft eyes, 


And ftill Conclufion, fhall acquire no Honour 38 
32. Deere... pardon] In parenthesis, 34. full-Fortun’d | dull-fortun'd F ,. 

Mal. Steev. et seq. (subs. ) 35- brooch’d | broach’d FF. 
pardon) Your pardon that Theob. me, | me; Rowe et seq. 

Han. Warb. Cap. pardon, pardon me Knife] Knives Cap. 

Huds. 36. fting, or operation operation or 
dare not, | dare not; Theob.Warb. sting Han. 

dare not descend Mal. conj. Ran. dare operation. | operation, Ff. 

not come down Ritson, Words. dare not 38. Conclufion| condition Coll. ii 

come Elze. dare not ope the door Nich- (MS). complexion Kinnear. 

olson ap. Cam. no] Om. F,F,. 


32. I dare not] This is one of the lines, enumerated at LV, viii, 9, which WALKER 
(Crit. iii, 307) says has lost something at the end. The 7Zext. Notes bear witness 
that something has happened. After devising 2. addition (to supply what is sup- 
posed to be lost), which will never be generally accepted, and after the counting of 
syllables in order to convert these impassioned lines into smug pentameters, the zeal- 
ous critics must have retired with ‘fingers weary and worn,’—and without adding 
anything toward the better comprehension of a line already adequately clear.—Eb. 

35. Be brooch’d with me] Murray (WV. £.D.) gives the present passage as 
the only example of the use of this verb, except one other reference of a date as late 
as 1865. Its meaning is ‘to adorn as with a brooch.’ The substantive ‘ brooch’ is 
‘the same as broach, the difference of spelling being only recent, and hardly yet 
established.’ Its meanings are ‘1. An ornamental fastening, consisting of a safety 
pin, with the clasping part fashioned into a ring, boss, or shield, or other device of 
precious metal or other material, artistically wrought, set with jewels, etc. Now used 
mainly as a (female) ornament; but always for the ostensible purpose of fastening 
some part of the dress. f 2. Formerly also in a more general sense ; according to 
Johnson “a jewel, an ornament of jewels.” In earlier times applied to a necklace, 
a bracelet, and other trinkets.’ 

35, 30. Knife, Drugges, Serpents haue Edge, sting, or operation] To make 
this ‘respective construction’ exact, the order of the second line should run: ‘ Edge, 
operation, or sting,’ as Hanmer has it, but it does not run smoothly. In the reference 
to ‘serpents,’ have we an anticipation ?—ED. $ 

38. still Conclusion] JoHNsoNn: That is, sedate determination ; silent coolness 
of resolution. —NARES: From the character and state of mind of Cleopatra, I should 
think she meant ‘deep but secret censure, looking demure all the while.’ [The 
qualities set forth by Johnson] would not be called for by the occasion, nor would 
they be particularly galling to Cleopatra.—CoLLiER (ed. ii): Condition is a very 
valuable emendation in the MS for ‘conclusion.’ How easy it was to misprint, or 
misread condition, ‘conclusion,’ requires no explanation. The reference is to the 


318 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. xv. 


Demuring vpon me : but come, come Anthony, 
Helpe me my women, we muft draw thee vp : 40 
Affift good Friends. 

Ant. Oh quicke, or I am gone. 


Cleo. Heere’s fport indeede: 43 
40. up:] up— Rowe,+. wp; Cap. et 43. Heere’s [port | Here’ s port Coll. ii, 
seq. iii (MS). He's spent Bailey. Here’s 
41. [Cleopatra, and her Women, throw support Sing. con). 
out certain Tackle, into which the People 43, 44. HHeere’s... Lord? One line, 
below put Antony, and he is drawn up. Rowe et seq. 
Cap. 


modest eyes and tranquil temperament of Octavia ; ‘conclusion’ is not far from non- 
sense. [Yet Collier returned to it in his Third Edition.]—Anon. (Blackwood, Oct. 
1853, p. 468) : How good is that expression ‘still conclusion’! That lady of yours, 
looking demurely upon me with her modest eyes, and drawing her quiet inferences, 
shall acquire no honour from the contrast between my fate with herown. And yet 
we are called on by [Collier’s MS] to give up these pregnant words for the vapid 
substitution of ¢ still condition /’ This, we say, is no fair exchange, but downright 
robbery. 

39. Demuring vpon me] This is the only example given by Murray (WV. Z. D.) 
of this verb. He queries if it be intransitive, and after defining it as ‘To look 
demurely,’ gives Johnson’s definition: ‘to look with an affected modesty.’ Finally, 
he makes a valuable suggestion in referring to a certain use (3 b.) of the verb 
‘demur,’ where it means ‘to be of doubtful mind ; to remain doubtful.’ This is cer- 
tainly worthy of consideration. I think no one can be fully satisfied with Johnson’s 
definition ; it negatives the ‘ modest eyes’ which Cleopatra has just scornfully granted 
to Octavia. I think it would be more appropriate if we could understand ‘ demur- 
ing’ as demurring, that is, slightly amplifying the meaning suggested by Murray, 
‘looking doubtfully askance upon me.’—ED. 

43. Heere’s sport indeede] JOHNSON: I suppose the meaning of these strange 
words is, here's trifling, you do not work 7% earnest—MALONE: Perhaps rather, 
here’s a curious game, the last we shall ever play with Anthony! Or perhaps she 
is thinking of fishing with a line, a diversion, of which, we have been already told, 
she was fond. Shakespeare has introduced ludicrous ideas with as much incongruity 
in other places.—[This note of Malone appeared in 1790, and again in each suc- 
ceeding Variorum down to 1821, when Boswell omitted it and substituted the follow- 
ing, of his own: ‘She is contrasting the melancholy task in which they are now 
engaged with their former sports.’ Malone’s note obtained one advocate at least,— 
see Leo’s note, below. ]|—STEEVENS: Cleopatra, perhaps, by this affected levity, this 
phrase which has no determined signification, only wishes to inspire Antony with 
cheerfulness, and encourage those who are engaged in the melancholy task of draw- 
ing him up into the monument.—CoLLiEr (ed. ii) [The MS by striking out the s 
changed ‘sport’ into port]: The fact seems to be that Shakespeare used the word 
port for weight, as the French call a large, heavy ship une navire de grand port. 
Cleopatra, of course, alludes to the burden of Antony, and to the difficulty of draw- 
ing him up.—SINGER ($4. Vind. p. 297), in his criticism of Collier's MS emen- 
dations,—a criticism so bitter and personal that it defeated its purpose by its intem- 


ACT IV, Sc. xv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 319 


How heauy weighes my Lord ? 

Our ftrength is all gone into heauineffe, 45 
That makes the waight. Had I great Juno’s power, 

The ftrong wing’d Mercury fhould fetch thee vp, 

And fet thee by Ioues fide. Yet come a little, 


Wifhers were euer Fooles. Oh come, come, come, 49 
45. heauineff[e,| heaviness ; Knt, Sta. 49. Fooles.] fools,— Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. Cam. 
47. firong wing’d| strong-wing’d come, come, come,| come, come, 
Pope et seq. strong’d-wing’d Johns, come— Rowe,+. 


(misprint. ) 


perance,—says : ‘It would astonish me, and many more, if Mr Collier should succeed 
in finding fort used for “a load or wezght” in the whole range of English literature.’ 
—COLLIER (Votes, etc. p. 501—a volume into which ‘Collier collected all, or the 
chiefest, of the MS emendations) acknowledges the weakness of fort by the addi- 
tional remark that ‘we may not be able to point out any other instance where port 
signifies in English a load or weight.’—Awnon. (Blackwood, Oct. 1853, p. 468) : 
Johnson’s note on this place is remarkable as an instance of want of judgement in 
a man whose sagacity was very rarely at fault. [Johnson is then quoted.] No inter- 
pretation could well go wider of the mark than this. Steevens says that she speaks 
with an ‘affected levity.’ It would be truer to say that she speaks from that bitter- 
ness of heart which frequently finds a vent for itself in irony.... Even although 
authority could be found for [fort used for a load or weight, Collier’s] proposed 
reading would still be utterly indefensible,—‘ Here’s fort (i. e. weight) indeed! how 
heavy weighs my lord!’ ‘This is as bad as ‘ o/d Goody Blake was o/d and poor.’ 
Singer proposes support, which we can by no means approve of, as it seems to have 
no sense. —STAUNTON: The pathos of this exclamation, so piteous in the contrast 
it implies between the fallen queen’s present occupation and the diversions of her 
happier times, is quite lost on Collier’s unsusceptible commentator, who coolly reads, 
‘Here’s fort indeed’ !—Hupson: Some editors have stumbled rather strangely at 
this use of ‘sport’; just as if it were not a common and a natural thing for people 
to express the intensest feeling by words of a contrary meaning. —LEo (p. 143) com- 
pares these words with Cleopatra’s dreamings in the old days when her bended hook 
pierced the fishes’ slimy jaws, and, as she drew them up, she would ‘think them 
every one an Anthony, and say ah, ha! you’re caught.’—II, v, 19. ‘And now’ says 
Leo, ‘in this cruel hour, those fair, bright days recur to her memory, and it flashes on 
her that she is now, indeed, drawing up Anthony’s very self, and in bitter, woeful 
jest, she says to Charmian, ‘ Here’s sport indeed!’ Leo, with his unflinching honesty, 
acknowledges that he derived the first hint of this from Malone, but we know that it 
was onlya hint. In conformity with his interpretation, Leo translates ‘ Here’s sport 
indeed!’ by ‘Nun angl’ ich wieder!’—[It would be temerarious, indeed, to assert 
that Leo is wrong. We all know how frequent in Shakespeare are these subtle, 
fleeting allusions ; but for myself I doubt that Cleopatra is thinking of any particular 
occasion, and agree with Staunton that in this piteous cry of irony and of agony, we 
hear that all her laughter-loving life is come but to this.—ED. ] 

45. heauinesse] MALonE: This is here used equivocally for sorrow and weight. 


320 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. xv. 


They heaue Anthony aloft to Cleopatra. 50 

And welcome, welcome. Dye when thou haft liu’d, 
Quicken with kiffing : had my lippes that power, 
Thus would I weare them out. 

All, A heauy fight. 

Ant. Iam dying Egypt, dying. 55 
Giue me fome Wine, and let me fpeake a little. 

Cleo. No, let me fpeake, and let me rayle fo hye, 
That the falfe Hufwife Fortune, breake her Wheele, 
Prouok’d by my offence. 

Ant. One word (fweet Queene) 60 
Of Ce/ar feeke your Honour, with your fafety. Oh. 

Cleo. They do not go together. 


Ant. Gentle heare me, 63 
50. They...] They draw Ant. up to 58. Hufwife] housewife Mal. Steev. 
Cleop. Cap. et seq. 
51. when] Ff, Rowe, Coll. i. where 61. /afety.| safety— Rowe,+. 
Pope et cet. Oh.] Om. Han. you— Ward. 
54. 4] Oh Rowe,+. Oh ! Rowe. 


51. Dye when thou hast liu’d] CoLLrer (ed. i) is the only editor, since Pope, 
who ventured to retain ‘ when’ of the Folio, and even his courage deserted him before 
his Second Edition, We interpreted ‘ Die, when thou hast liv’d’ as meaning ‘in 
consequence of being quickened, or restored, by my kissing thee.’ 

52. Quicken with kissing] JoHNsoN: That is, revive by my kiss. 

58. That the false... breake her Wheele] JoHNSON: This despicable line 
has occurred before. [Where? The nearest approach to it that I can find is the 
one suggested by Malone, and it isin prose. ‘Let us sit and mock the good hous- 
wife, Fortune, from her wheel,’ as Celia says to Rosalind. KNIGHT quotes Johnson 
and then drily remarks, ‘There are not many such “ despicable”’ lines in Zreme.’|— 
STAUNTON: ‘ Huswife’ is here used in the loose sense, which it often bore, of Assy, 
or harlot. Soin Hen. V; V, i, Pistol asks,—‘* Doth Fortune play the huswife with 
me now ?’—[I doubt that ‘ Huswife,’ in Shakespeare’s days, retained, to any large 
extent, the idea of a house-wife, that is, one who devoted herself to household cares. 
It was an opprobrious epithet, rather than a literal one. Otherwise, we might infer 
that Shakespeare, at least here and in As You Like Jt, supposed that Fortune’s wheel 
was a spinning-wheel. Possibly, in popular belief it was so, owing to some con- 
fusion with Clotho’s distaff. Fluellen, however, had a perfectly correct idea of it. 
‘Fortune,’ he says, ‘is painted also with a wheel to signify to you . . . that she is turn- 
ing, and inconstant, and mutability, and variation; and her foot, look you, is fixed 
upon a spherical stone, which rolls, and rolls, and rolls.’.— Hen. V; Ill, vi, 34. 
Why Fortune should have two similar symbols of revolution, it is hard to say. Both 
are found in early Etruscan times. Possibly, the wheel was merely an added 
emblem or badge of the tribe of Leucomones. See Creuzer, Symbolik, iii, 664, 
footnote.—ED. ] 


ACT Iv, sc. xv.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA Ben 


None about C@/ar truft, but Proculecus. 
Cleo. My Refolution, and my hands, Ile truft, 65 
None about Ce/ar. 
Ant. The miferable change now at my end, 
Lament nor forrow at : but pleafe your thoughts 
In feeding them with thofe my former Fortunes 
Wherein I liued. The greateft Prince o’th’world, 70 
The Nobleft : and do now not bafely dye, 
Not Cowardly put off my Helmet to 
My Countreyman. A Roman, by a Roman 
Valiantly vanquifh’d. Now my Spirit is going, 
I can no more. 75 
Cleo. Nobleft of men, woo’t dye ? 


F,. Wor cowardly, Rowe. Nor cowardly 


64. tuft, | trust: Pope ii. 

65. ¢trujf?,| trust ; Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Mal. Steev. et seq. 

70. liued. The) lived. The¥ F,. liv’d. 
The 1a Rowe, Pope. “v’d; the Han. 
Cap. Var.’21. liv’d the Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Sing. Ktly. “vd, the Var.’78 et 
cet. 

71. Nobleft : and do now not] noblest 
once; and do now not Rowei. noblest 
once ; and now not Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 
noblest once, and do not now Theob. 
Warb. 

now] Om. F,F,. 


Pope, +, Knt, Coll. ae Dyce ii, iii. Vor 


cowardly ; Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. 
72. pul of] put of F,. but doff Sta. 


conj. 
fHelmet to| helmet ; to Cap. 

73. Countreyman.] ¥f, Rowe, Pope. 
countryman» Theob. Han. Warb. Mal. 
Coll. ii. countryman, Johns. et cet. 

75. more.) more— Rowe,+. 

[Antony dies. Rowe. sinks. Cap. 

76. men, | men— Rowe. 

woo't| wou't Cap. 


72. Not Cowardly] Not Cowardly, dye?) adie, F 


67, etc. The miserable change, etc.] CORSON (p. 313): Antony, in regard to 
himself, reposes overmuch, for our full sympathy, upon his past.—[If a man is ever 
to be pardoned for being self-centred, surely it is when he is dying; and Anthony 
needed the memory of every shred of his former greatness wherewith to obscure the 
ignominy of his present death.—Ep. ] 

74. Spirit] To modern ears, WALKER’S monosyllabic pronunciation of ¢ Spirit,’ 
would be here intolerable. See I, ii, 143; and also line 109 of the present scene. 
—Ebp. 

76, etc. Noblest of men, etc.] Mrs JAMESON (ii, 150): Cleopatra’s speech, after 
Antony has expired in her arms, I have always regarded as one of the most wonder- 
ful in Shakspeare. Cleopatra is not a woman to grieve silently. The contrast 
between the violence of her passions and the weakness of her sex, between her 
regal grandeur and her excess of misery, her impetuous, unavailing struggles with 
the fearful destiny which has compassed her, and the mixture of wild impatience 
and pathos in her agony, are really magnificent. She faints on the body of Antony, 
and is recalled to life by the cries of her women. 

76. woo’t dye] For ‘woo’t,’ see IV, ii, It. 


21 


322 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. xv. 


Haft thou no care of me, fhall I abide a7, 
In this dull world, which in thy abfence is 

No better then a Stye ? Oh fee my women : 

The Crowne o’th’earth doth melt. My Lord? 80 
Oh wither’d is the Garland of the Warre, 

The Souldiers pole is falne : young Boyes and Gunes 

Are leuell now with men : The oddes is gone, 


And there is nothing left remarkeable 


Beneath the vifiting Moone. 
Char. 
lyas. 
Char. 
Tras. 
Char. 
tras. 


Lady. 
Madam. 


77. me,| me? Rowe et seq. 

79. [Ant. dies. Cap. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. 

80. My Lord ?] My lord !— Rowe. 
My lord! my lord ! Walker, Dyce ii, iii, 
Huds. 

82. Souldiers] soldier's Pope. 

VELEN VHD 18 Rowe. 
fall’n Pope,+, Cap. Varr. Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. fallen Mal. et cet. 

85. [She faints. Rowe. 


Oh quietneffe, Lady. 
She’s dead too, our Soueraigne. 


85 


Oh Madam, Madam, Madam. 90 
Royall Egypt : Empreffe. 


87. She's] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Cam. She zs Han. Cap. 
et cet: 

90. Madam, Madam, Madam.| Mad- 
am, Madam! Wan, Madam, Madam,— 
Coe 

. Egypt -| Lgypt ! Rowe. 

Empreffe.| In separate line, Zm- 
peress! Cap. Ktly. In separate line, 
Empress ! Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. Sing. 
Dyce, Wh. Sta. Glo. Hal. 


86. guietneffe| quitneffe ¥ . 


80. My Lord] WALKER (C7iz. ii, 144) : Read, ‘My lord! my lord!’ 
the repetition is required. 

82. Souldiers pole] JoHNsSoN: He at whom the soldiers pointed, as at a pageant 
held high for observation.—BoswELL: The pole, I apprehend, is the standard. — 
DEIGHTON: The word ‘garland’ in the previous line evidently suggested the word 
‘pole,’ Shakespeare was thinking of the village festivities in which a pole, the central 
point of the sports, is decked with garlands of flowers. There may be also the idea 
of a conspicuous mark round which the soldiers might rally, as in Coriolanus, V, iii, 
72, ‘that thou mayst... stick i? the wars Like a great sea-mark, standing every 
flaw, And saving those that eye thee !’—[ Deighton might also have said that the 
garlanded village pole suggested, possibly, the ‘boys and girls.’—Ep. ] 

83. The oddes is gone] That is, there is now no longer any difference between 
youth and age, high and low, rich and poor.—Ep. 

84. remarkeable] WALKER (Cyt. iii. 310) : The word still retained its etymo- 
logical force. Voticeable ; worthy of mark.—STAUNTON: In Shakespeare’s time, 
the word ‘remarkable’ bore a far more impressive and appropriate meaning than 
with us. It then expressed not merely odservadle or noteworthy, but something pro- 
foundly striking and uncommon. 


Surely 


ACT Iv, sc. xv.] “ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA B25 


Char, Peace, peace, Iras: 92 
Cleo, No more but in a Woman, and commanded 
By fuch poore paffion, as the Maid that Milkes, 


And doe’s the meaneft chares. It were for me, 95 
92. Char. Peace...Iras.] Char. Peace 93. more but in a] Ff, Johns. more 
... sts. Warb. Om. Words. but a mere Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 
92, 93. Char. Peace...Cleo. Vo] Cleo. Warb. more—but e’en a Johns. conj- 
Peace...Vo Han. Cap. et cet. (subs. ) 
92. [seeing her recover. Cap. 94. paffion] passions Cap. conj. Var.. 
93, 94. Mnemonic, Pope. 736 


93-108. Mnemonic, Warb. 


92. Peace, peace, Iras] WARBURTON: Cleopatra is fallen into a swoon; her 
maids endeavour to recover her by invoking her by her several titles. At length, 
Charmian says to the other, ‘ Peace, peace, Iras’; on which Cleopatra comes to her- 
self, and replies to these last words, ‘ No, you are mistaken, I am a mere woman like 
yourself.’ Thus stands this senseless dialogue. But Shakespeare never wrote it so. 
We must observe then, that the two women call her by her several titles, to see 
which best pleased her; and this was highly in character; the Ancients thought, 
that not only men, but Gods too, had some names which, above others, they much 
delighted in, and would soonest answer to; as we may see by the hymns of Orpheus, 
Homer, and Callimachus. The Poet, conforming to this notion, makes the maids 
say, Sovereign Lady, Madam, Royal Egypt, Empress. And now we come to the 
place in question: Charmian, when she saw that none of these titles had their effect, 
invokes her by a still more flattering one: ‘ Peace, peace, Isis!’ for so it should be 
read and pointed: z. e. peace, we can never move her by these titles: Let us give 
her her favourite name of the Goddess Isis. And now Cleopatra’s answer becomes 
pertinent and fine: ‘No more but a mere woman,’ etc. 2. ¢. I now see the folly of 
assuming to myself those flattering titles of divinity. My misfortunes, and my impo- 
tence in bearing them, convince me I am a mere woman and subject to all the passions 
of the meanest of my species. Here the Poet has followed history exactly, and what 
is more, his author Plutarch, who says, that Cleopatra assumed the habit and attributes. 
of that Goddess, and gave judgements, or rather oracles to her people under the quality 
of the New Isis.—JoHNson: Of this [foregoing note] it may be truly said, that it 
at least deserves to be right, nor can he, that shall question the justness of the emen- 
dation, refuse his esteem to the ingenuity and learning with which it is proposed. I 
suppose, however, that we may justly change the ancient copy thus, ‘No more, but 
Zena woman.’ I am inclined to think that she speaks abruptly, not answering her 
woman, but discoursing with her own thoughts: ‘ No more—but ¢’ez a woman. I 
have no more of my wonted greatness, but am even a woman, on the level with other 
women; were I what I once was, it were for me to throw my scepter,’ etc. ‘ Peace, 
peace, Iras,’ is said by Charmian, when she sees the Queen recovering, and thinks 
speech troublesome. 

95. meanest chares] Murray (WV. Z. D. s. v. Chare, sd.1) : II. Extant sense. 
5. especially : An occasional turn of work, an odd job, especially of household work ; 
hence in plural the household work of a domestic servant. (The regular phrase in 
the U. S. where the word has the form Chore.) [The present passage is given as 


an example. ] 


324 THE LTRAGEDIE VOR 


[ACT IV, SC. xv. 


To throw my Scepter at the iniurious Gods, 96 
To tell them that this World did equall theyrs, 


Till they had ftolne our Iewell. 


All’s but naught : 


Patience is fottifh, and impatience does 
Become a Dogge that’s mad : Then is it finne, 100 
To rufh into the fecret houfe of death, 


Ere death dare come to vs. 


How do you Women ? 


What, what good cheere? Why how now Charmian? 
My Noble Gyrles ? Ah Women, women ! Looke 


Our Lampe is fpent, it’s out. 


96. Scepter] sceptre Knt et seq. 
the iniurious| th’injurious Pope, 
+. 
98. frolne] F,. ftoln ¥F,, Rowe. 
stoll’n Pope,+, Cap. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. (subs.)  s¢olen Var. ’73 et cet. 
naught | nought ¥., Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Ran. Sta. 


Good firs, take heart, 105 


Rowe, Pope. What, what, good cheer ! 
Theob.Warb. What ? what ? good cheer ! 
Han. What, what. Good cheer ! Johns. 
What, what? Good cheer ! Cap. et cet. 
(subs. ) 

104. Gyrles ?] girls | Cap. et seq. 

105. Good firs, ...heart,| Good stirs, ... 
heart :— [to the Guard below. Mal. 


102. vs.] us? Ff. 
103. What, what good cheere?| Ff, 


Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. Sing. 


95, 96, etc. It were for me, To throw, etc.] Hupson: Cleopatra has been used to 
think herself and Antony so nearly equal with the gods, that the latter have no right 
to shut down so sternly upon them.—[I do not understand the passage in exactly this 
sense. I think that, possibly, Cleopatra’s meaning is, that before the unjust gods had 
stolen her jewel, this world equaled theirs, and her own emblem of sovereignty was as 
potent a symbol as any they wielded, but now that her jewel is gone, it is befitting 
in her to fling her sceptre at them to let them know how little she now esteems it, 
and how much she despises them.—ED. ] 

99, loo. impatience does Become a Dogge, etc.] It is, perhaps, superfluous 
to remark that this does not mean that impatience turns into a dog, but that impatience ~ 
is befitting only in a dog that’s mad.—Eb. 

103, 104. What, what good cheere?... My Noble Gyrles] This attempt at 
cheerfulness, the very last flickering of her sunny nature before it dies down for ever 
is, it seems to me, exquisitely pathetic. Under its influence she calls Iras and 
Charmian ‘girls,’ as her joyous companions of aforetime. But her woe and deso- 
lation overmaster her, and she again calls them ‘ Women, women.’—ED. 

105. Good sirs, take heart] Dyce: Here to these words is usually added a 
stage-direction [first added by Malone] ‘ 70 the Guard below’, but by ‘sirs’ Cleo- 
patra means Charmian and Iras :—in V, ii, she says, ‘ Stvrah Iras, go.’ That in 
former days women were frequently so addressed, is proved by numerous passages 
of our old writers: ¢.g. in Beaumont and Fletcher’s Coxcomé, IV, iii, the Mother 
says to Viola, Nan, and Madge, ‘ Sz7s, to your tasks, and show this little novice 
How to bestir herself,’ etc. ; and presently after, Nan and Madge call each other 
‘ Sirrah.’ Again, in A King and no King, by the same dramatists, II, i, we find, 
‘ Spaconia. I do beseech you, madam, send away Your other women, and receive 


KOT, SC i.) ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 325 


Wee’l bury him : And then, what’s braue, what’s Noble, 106 
Let’s doo’t after the high Roman fa fhion, 

And make death proud to take vs. Come,away, 

This cafe of that huge Spirit now is cold. 

Ah Women, Women! Come, we haue no Friend 110 
But Refolution, and the breefeft end. 


Exeunt , bearing of Anthonies body. 112 


[4ctus Quintus. Scene 1] 


Enter Cefar, Agrippa, Dollabella, Menas , with 
his Counfell of Warre. 


Cefar. Goto him Dollabella, bid him yeeld. 
Being fo fruftrate, tell him, 
He mockes the pawfes that he makes. 5 


106. what’s Noble,| what Noble, ad 

107. doo’'t] F,. dot ¥jF,, Rowe. do 
it Pope et seq. 

112. Exeunt...] Exeunt ; those above 
bearing off the Body. Cap. 

Scene VII. Rowe. Act V, Scene i. 
Pope et seq. 

Ceesar’s Camp. Rowe. 

1. Menas] Meczenas, Gallus, Theob. 
Meczenas, Proculeius, Gallus, Han. 

1, 2. with...Warre.] Om. Rowe. and 


4,5. Being...makes.] Lines end, mocks 
... makes. Han. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Dyce, 
Wh. Sta. Glo. Cam. Hal. Lines end, 
by...makes. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt, 
Sing. Ktly. s...makes Coll. ii, iii. 

4. frufirate| fruflate ¥,. frustrated 
Cap. Var. ’78, 85. 

5. He mockes| he but mocks Han. he 
mocks us by Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt, ° 
Coll. i, iii, Sing. Ktly. chat he mocks 
us By Coll. ii. 


Train. Theob. 


from me A few sad words, which, set against your joys, May make ’em shine the 
more. Panthea. Sirs, leave me all. [Exeunt Waiting-women.’ 

I. Menas] THEOBALD (ed. ii): Menas and Menecrates, we may remember, were 
two famous pirates, linked with Sextus Pompeius, and who assisted him to infest the 
Italian coast. We nowhere learn expressly, in the play, that Menas ever attached 
himself to Octavius’s party. Notwithstanding, the Ff concur in marking the entrance 
thus, yet, in the two places in the scene, where this character speaks, they have 
marked in the margin, A/c., so that, as Dr Thirlby [ Mchols, Z//ust. ii, 228] sagaciously 
conjectured, we must cashier ‘ Menas’ and substitute M/ecenas in his room. [This 
change has been since then uniformly adopted. ] 

4, 5. Being so frustrate, tell him, He mockes the pawses, etc.] STEEVENS 
( Variorum of 1778): ‘He mocks the pauses that he makes’ means that he plays 
wantonly with the intervals of time which he should improve to his own preservation. 
Or the meaning may be,—being thus defeated in all his efforts, and left without 
resource, tell him that these affected pauses and delays of his in yielding himself up 
to me, are mere idle mockery. ‘He mocks the pauses’ may be a licentious mode 


326 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act v, sc. i 


[4, 5. Being so frustrate, tell him, etc. ] 

of expression for,—he makes a mockery of us by these pauses; 2. e. he trifles with us. 
—In the Variorum of 1785, MALONE expressed the belief that the defect in metre 
proved that some words had been omitted which would have rendered the line 
intelligible. ‘When Antony himself made these pauses, would he mock,’ Malone 
asks, ‘or laugh at them? and what is the meaning of mocking a pause?’ He there- 
fore conjectured that ws dy were the omitted words, and in his own later edition, in 
1790, thus prints the line: ‘ Being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks us 6y The pauses,’ 
etc. In this same edition of 1790 Malone rather disingenuously conveys the 
impression that the note by Steevens (quoted above), had been written after the line 
had been rendered intelligible by the emendation us dy. I have, therefore, dated 
Steevens’s note to show that it was written before Malone had, in his own estimation, 
amended the line. In Steevens’s edition of 1793 appeared the following additional 
note by him:—I have left Malone’s emendation in the text ; though, to complete 
the measure, we might read,— frustrated,’ or ‘ Being so frustrate, tell him ¢#a¢ he 
mocks,’ etc.; as I am well convinced we are not yet acquainted with the full and 
exact meaning of the verb mock, as sometimes employed by Shakespeare. [From 
COLLIER (ed. ii) we learn that this change, suggested by Steevens, ‘tell him ¢az,’ is 
also given by the MS. Collier thereupon remarks]: The expression Zo mock pauses 
is far from intelligible ; and it seems pretty certain that the old printer made some con- 
fusion between ‘mocks’ and makes, words so much alike inold MSS. Malone added 
us by, and they appear necessary in order to render the sense clear; at all events 
that object has been obtained, and the regularity of the verse preserved.—RITSON 
(Cursory Crit. p. 88): The two last words [‘ zs dy’] of this line are added by the 
present Irish editor, who observes that ‘the defect of the metre,’ of which he knows 
as much as a superannuated jack-ass, ‘shows that something was omitted.’ Former 
editors [see Zext. Votes] supplied the measure by reading, ‘ Being so frustrated, tell 
him he mocks’; which, it must be confessed, does not afford an easy sense. Shake- 
speare, however, would never have written the above hobbling line [Malone’s] 
which has no sort of pretensions to metre. We may read, ‘ Being so frustrated, he 
mocks us by.’—[KNIGHT reluctantly approves of Malone’s emendation, and prints 
it in brackets in his text. R.G. WHITE (ed. i) approves but does not adopt. Hup- 
SON approves heartily and adopts, and does ‘not see how it is possible to strain any 
sense at all out of the original reading.’ For my part, I think Steevens supplies us 
with a sense when he says, in effect, that Anthony’s pauses, now that he is utterly 
vanquished, are a mockery.—ED. 

4. frustrate] ABBorT (§ 342) gives a list of verbs, ending in -fe, -¢, and -d, 
which ‘on account of their already resembling participles in their terminations, do not 
add -ed in the participle. . . . Words like “miscreate,’”’ “create,’’ ‘“consecrate’’ 
[‘ frustrate’] being directly derived from Latin participles, stand on a different foot- 
ing, and may themselves be regarded as participial adjectives, with the addition of -d’ 
WALKER ( Vers. 8) includes the present ‘frustrate’ in his list of words illustrating the 
tule that, ‘Words such as Juggler, tickling, kindling, England, angry, children, and 
the like are,—as is well known,—frequently pronounced by the Elizabethan poets as 
though a vowel were interposed between the liquid and the preceding mute.’ Of the 
present line, he asks, ‘Can a good sense be made out of the original reading? the 
play of words seems a very strong argument in its favour; indeed, it seems impossible 
that this should be accidental. So—though it seems hardly worth while to accumu- 
late instances of the same word used in the same manner,—Massinger, Middleton, 


ACTIV; SC. 11: | 


Dol. Ca@far, TI thall. 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 327 


Enter Decretas with the fword of Anthony. 
Cef. Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar’ft 


Appeare thus to vs? 
Dec. Tam call’d Decretas, 


ie) 


Marke Anthony I feru’d, who beft was worthie 
Beft to be feru’d : whil’ft he ftood vp, and fpoke 
He was my Matter, and I wore my life 


To {pend vpon his haters. 


If thou pleafe 


To take me to thee, as I was to him, 15 
Ile be to Ce/ar : if y pleafeft not, I yeild thee vp my life. 


Cesar. 
Dec. 


What is’t thou fay’ft ? 
I fay (Oh Ca/ar) Anthony is dead. 


Cefar. The breaking of fo great a thing, fhould make 


A greater cracke. 


6. [Exit Dolabella. Theob. et seq. 
7, 10 etc. Decretas] Ff, Rowe. Der- 
cetas Pope et seq. 
15. thee, thee; Rowe. 
as [| as Las F,,. 

16. ] chou Ff. 
1...life.| Separate line, F, et seq. 
yeud | yield FF. 

17. fay ft| fayefi F ,, Rowe. 

20-22. A...Anthony ] Lines end, shook 
... Citizens... Antony Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Ran. Ktly, Coll. iii. Lines end, shook 
... streets, ... Antony Mal. Steev. Varr. 


The round World 20 


Coll. i, Wh. Hal. 

20. cracke.| crack in nature. Han. 
Cap. 

cracke. The round World | crack ; 

The round world convulsive Sing, conj. 
crack in the round world Daniel. crack: 
and the rebounding world Bulloch. 
crack: the drown’d world Sprenger. 
crack : the round world so bereft Words. 
crack : the round uproared world Huds. 
crack : the round world in rending Nich- 
olson ap. Cam. crack. the ruinated 
world L, Campbell ap. Cam. 


and Rowleys Old Law. ‘The law that should take away your old wife from you, 


. .. Is void and frustrate ; so for the rest :’ etc. 
‘What we confirm the king will frustrate.’ 


ed. Gifford, 1805. ] 
IT.,— Works, p. 178, ed. Dyce, 1858. 


[Massinger’s Works, vol. iv, p. 568, 
Marlowe’s Ldward 


6. I shall] THEOBALD: I make no doubt but it should be marked here that Dolla- 


bella goes out. 


Tis reasonable to imagine he should presently depart upon Czesar’s 


command; so that the speeches placed to him in the sequel of this scene, must be 


transferred to Agrippa, or he is introduced as a mute. 


Besides, that Dollabella 


should be gone out, appears from this, that when Czesar asks for him, he recollects 


that he had sent him on business. 


[For this use of ‘shall’ for zw2//, both here and 


in line 82, below, see, if need be, ABBOTT, § 315. ] 
g. Appeare thus to vs] STEEVENS: That is, with a drawn and bloody sword in 


thy hand. 


13. I wore my life] DricHTon: The figure is that of a dress worn for some 
special purpose, and also conveys the idea that to him life was as something external 
which could be put off at will, not an essential part of his being. 

20, 21. A greater cracke. The round World Should haue shooke Lyons 


328 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT v, Sc. i, 


Should haue fhooke Lyons into ciuill ftreets, 21 
And Cittizens to their dennes. The death of Anthony 
Is not a fingle doome, in the name lay 
A moity of the world. 
Dec. He is dead Ce/ar, 25 
Not by a publike minifter of Iuftice, 
Nor by a hyred Knife, but that felfe-hand 
Which writ his Honor in the Aé¢ts it did, 
Hath with the Courage which the heart did lend it, 


Splitted the heart. This is his Sword, 30 
22. to] ¢nto Theob. Warb. Johns. Ran. 30. Splitted the heart.| Splitted the 
Ktly. heart ttself Han. Cap. Split that self 
23. the] that Pope,+, Cap. Var. ’73. noble heart Coll. ii (MS). Splitted the 
27. Knife,| knife: Rowe et seq. heart. Cesar, or Splitted that very heart. 
Selfe-hand | self hand Cap. Var. Elze. 
78 et seq. 


into ciuill streets] JoHNsoON: I think here is a line lost, after which it is in vain to 
go in quest. The sense seems to have been this: ‘The round world should have 
shook,’ and this great alteration of the system of things should send ‘lions into 
streets, and citizens into dens.’ There is sense still, but it is harsh and violent.— 
STEEVENS: I believe we should read, ‘A greater crack than this: The ruin’d 
world,’ z. e. the general disruption of elements should have shook, etc. Shakespeare 
seems to mean that the death of so great a man ought to have produced effects 
similar to those which might have been expected from the dissolution of the universe, 
when all distinctions shall be lost. Perhaps, however, Shakespeare might mean 
nothing more here than merely an earthquake, in which the shaking of the round 
world was to be so violent as to toss the inhabitants of woods into cities and the 
inhabitants of cities into woods.—MALONE: The defect of the metre strongly sup- 
ports Dr Johnson’s conjecture, that something is lost. Perhaps the passage origin- 
ally stood thus: ‘The round world should have shook; Zhrown hungry lions into 
civil streets, etc. ... The words omitted were perhaps in the middle of the line, 
which originally might have stood thus in the MS: ‘Lions deen hurtled into civil 
streets,’ etc.—TYRWHITT: The sense, I think, is complete and plain, if we consider 
‘shook’ (more properly shake) as the participle past of a verb active.—[That there 
is here an omission is also the opinion of CoLLier, Dycr, R.G. WHITE, STAUNTON, 
DEIGHTON, ROLFE, and of WALKER (see IV, viii, 9). But as the meaning is per- 
fectly clear, and forcibly expressed, for my part, the tears live in an onion that shall 
water the sorrow for any loss.—ED. ] 

27. selfe-hand] See ABBort, § 20. 

30. Splitted the heart] CoLiinr (ed. ii): This line cannot be right, for although 
‘splitted’ might be allowed on the score of ‘splitted in the midst,’ and ‘ splitted my 
poor tongue’ in the Comedy of Errors, yet the line is otherwise defective, and the 
MS gives it ‘ Spt that self noble heart. This is his sword,’ which we cannot but 
persuade ourselves is right, seeing that just above we have ‘that self-hand’ in the 
same way that we have ‘self noble heart’ in the line in question as amended. The 


AEE; SC. 1] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 329 


I robb’d his wound of it : behold it ftain’d an 

With his moft Noble blood. 
C@ef. Looke you fad Friends, 

The Gods rebuke me, but it is Tydings 

To wath the eyes of Kings. 35 
Dol. And ftrange it is, 

That Nature muft compell vs to lament 

Our moft perfifted deeds. 


Mec. His taints and Honours, wag’d equal with him. 39 

31. wound | mortal wound Words. con}. (Athen. 26 Apr. 1873.) 

33. you fad Friends,| F,. you, fad 39,43. Mec.] Men. FF, Rowe, Pope. 
Jriends, F,F,, Rowe, Pope. you sad, 39. wag'd] Knt, Dyce, Sta. way 
Sriends, Theob. et cet. F.. may FF, weigh’d Rowe, Pope, 


34. wis Tydings| it tidings is Ktly. Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Coll. ii, iii (MS). 
Tydings| a Tydings F,. a Tia- wagged Anon. (Gent. Mag. 1790, |x, p. 


ings FF, Cap. Var.’78, ’85, Ran. Steev. 126.) waged Johns. et cet. 
Var. ’03, ’13, Dyce ii, iii, Coll. iii. @ wag’ d...him | Separate line, Pope 
tiding Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. et seq. 

36, 40. Dol.] Agr. Theob. et seq. with him.| in him. Rowe,+. 


37. mufe conpell| most compels Sta. 


change adds much force and grace to the tribute Dercetas is paying to his dead 
master. 

33. Looke you sad Friends] THEOBALD : It is requisite to transpose the comma 
[after ‘ you’ in Pope’s edition, and place it after ‘sad’; because] Octavius’s friends 
would probably avoid showing any concern on the news of Antony’s death, lest it 
should give displeasure to Ceesar; which Czesar observing, it shows a noble humanity 
in him to bid them share in such a sorrow, and to tell them it is a calamity that ought 
to draw tears even from the eyes of Princes. Young Prince Henry, upon his father’s 
death, speaks just in the same manner to his brothers ; and tho’ he would not have 
them mix fear with their affliction, he encourages them in their sorrow—‘ Yet be sad, 
good brothers, For, by my faith, it very well becomes you.’—2 Hen. JV. V, ii, 49. 

34. but it is Tydings] JoHNsoN: That is, may the gods rebuke me, 2 ¢hzs be 
not tidings to make kings weep. ‘But’ again, for zf wot. [Johnson probably here 
refers to III, xi, 50, which see, and also IV, xi, 2, ‘Tidings’ has already been used 
as a singular noun in ‘this tidings’ IV, xiv, 137; which justifies those editors who 
prefer the reading of F,, if they need any justification. —Ep. ] 

35. To wash the eyes of Kings] Craik (p. 194): ‘ Wash,’ an Anglo-Saxon 
word (preserved also in the German waschen), is used in what is probably its primi- 
tive sense of immersing in or covering with liquid. Thus we say to wash with gold 
or silver. 

36. Dol. And, etc.] DANIEL (p. 83) : I would continue this speech to Cesar, 
and, in line 38, for ‘pex/i/ted’ would read, perfited.—HuDSON accepted this dis- 
tribution of speeches; * surely,’ he says, ‘this speech comes more fitly from Czesar’ 
[than from Agrippa, to whom it had been assigned by Theobald]. 

39. wag’d equal with him] STEEVENs: It is not easy to determine the precise 
meaning of the word wage. In Othello, it occurs again: ‘To wake, and wage a 


330 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACTIV SC UE, 


Dola.. A Rarer fpirit neuer 40 
Did fteere humanity : but you Gods will giue vs 
Some faults to make vs men. C@/ar is touch’d. 
Mec. When fuch a fpacious Mirror’s fet before him, 
He needes muft fee him felfe. 
Cefar. Oh Anthony, 45 
I haue followed thee to this, but we do launch 
Difeafes in our Bodies. I muft perforce 
Haue fhewne to thee fuch a declining day, 
Or looke on thine: we could not ftall together, 


In the whole world. But yet let me lament 50 
42. make| mark Cap. 46. this, but | this—dut Pope, +. this; 
43, 44. When...felfe.| Aside. Ktly. Cap. et seq. 

43. Ahirror’s| Mirrors ¥,,. launch] ¥f, Rowe, Cap. daunce 
46. L haue] I’ve Pope, +, Dyce ii, iii. Pope, Han. J/ance Theob. et cet. 
flave I Coll. ’53. 49. looke] look’d Han. Wh. i, Walker, 


followed | ¥f, Rowe,Var.’73. fol- Dyce ii, iii, Huds. 
low’ d Pope et cet. 


danger profitless.’ [I, iii, 38, of this ed., with note]. It may signify to oppose. 
The sense will then be, ‘his taints and honours were an equal match,’ 7. ¢. were 
opposed to each other in just proportions, like the counterparts of a wager.—RITSON: 
Read, weigh, with F,, where it is only mis-spelled ‘way.’ So in Shore's Wife, by 
A. Chute, 1593: ‘notes her myndes disquyet To be so great she seemes downe 
wayed by it.’—[As concerns the meaning, there is little to choose between wage and 
weigh, if we accept wage in the sense of opposing, contending, as we find it in Lear, 
‘To wage against the enmity of the air’ (II, iv, 206). It is to such cases that the 
scholastic law applies, durior lectio preferenda est, and this, I think, points to 
‘“wag’d.’—Ep. ] 

39. with] For this use of ‘with,’ which ABBoTT (§ 193) says is here equivalent 
to zz, see I, i, 72. 

40. spirit] For the pronunciation, here a disyllable, see I, ii, 143. 

46, etc. I haue followed ...wedo launch, etc.] STEEVENS: ‘Launch’ was 
the ancient, and is still, the vulgar pronunciation, of /amce. Nurses always talk of 
launching the gums of children, when they have difficulty in cutting teeth. ‘I have 
followed thee,’ says Ceesar, ‘to this’; z. e. I have pursued thee, till I compelled thee 
to self-destruction. But, adds the speaker (at once extenuating his own conduct, and 
considering the deceased as one with whom he had been united by the ties of relation- 
ship as well as policy, as one who had been a part of himself), the violence, with 
which I proceeded, was not my choice; I have done but by him as we do by our 
own natural bodies. I have employed force, where force only could be effectual. I 
have shed the blood of the irreclaimable Antony, on the same principle that we /azce 
a disease incurable by gentler means. 

48. declining day; See III, xiii, 32. 

49. Or looke on thine] The change to /ook’d seems to me not only superfluous, 
but injurious. —Ep. 


ACP) SCL] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 331 


With teares as Soueraigne as the blood of hearts, 51 
That thou my Brother, my Competitor, 
In top of all defigne ; my Mate in Empire, 
Friend and Companion in the front of Warre, 
The Arme of mine owne Body, and the Heart 55 
Where mine his thoughts did kindle; that our Starres 
Vnreconciliable, fhould diuide our equalneffe to this. 
Heare me good Friends, 
But I will tell you at fome meeter Seafon, 
The bufineffe of this man lookes out of him, 60 
Wee’l heare him what he fayes. _ 
Enter an Aigyptian. 

Whence are you ? 

“lgyp. A poore Egyptian yet, the Queen my miftris 64 


51. Soueraigne| Soveragin F ,. 
53- defigne ;| design, Rowe et seq. 
56. zs] zts Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
kindle ;| kindle,— Cap. Var.’78 
et seq. 
57- Vunreconciliable| unreconcilable 
F.. wunreconcileable ¥ . 
diuide| have divided Pope, Theob. 
Warb., Johns. 
57, 58. our...Lriends, | One line, Pope 
et seq. 
58. Lriends,| friends— Han. Johns. 
et seq. (subs. ) 
59. Seafon,| Ff, Johns. season— 
Rowe, Pope. season. Theob. et cet. 
61-63. Wee'l...you ?| One line, Rowe 


et seq. 

62. Enter...] Ff. After you ? line 63, 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. After 
friends, line 58, Wh. Sta. Cam. After 
Seafon, line 59, Jchns. et cet. 

Egyptian. ] Messenger. Cap. Mal. 
Var. ’21, Knt. 


63. Whence] Now whence Han. 
Whence, and who Steev. conj. 
you?| you, sir? Cap. you ? 


What ? Walker. 
64. yet] Om. Cap. 
yet, the] Ff, Rowe i. yet, the 
Rowe ii, +, Warr. Ran. yer. The Theob. 
Mal. et seq. 


52. Competitor] That is, colleague. 


Seemsa, eke Lives. 


53. In top of all designe] That is, in all our highest ambitions. 


56. his thoughts] The use of zfs had not yet become universal; else it would 
have been used here. In introducing it Pope ran a little before the years. 

57. should diuide our equalnesse to this ] JoHNsoN: That is, should have made 
us, in our equality of fortune, disagree to a pitch like this, that one of us must die. 

61. heare him what he sayes] For other examples of a redundant object, see 
ABBOTT, § 414. 

64. Egyptian yet,] JouHnson: If this punctuation be right [Theobald’s], the 
man means to say that he is yet an A¥gyptian, that is, ‘yet a servant of the Queen 
of Egypt,’ though soon to become a subject of Rome.—STAUNTON: ‘ Yet,’ that is, 
now.—DEIGHTON: Perhaps the meaning is ‘one who, though conquered, still boasts 
himself an Egyptian.’.—JoHN Hunter: I apprehend Cleopatra to be the ‘poor 
Egyptian,’ and that the line should be written thus: ‘A poor Egyptian, yet the queen 
my mistress’ ; where ‘yet’ means dz not /ess—[I think that there is much more to 


332 THE TRAGEDIE (Of 


[ACT v, sc. i. 


Confin’d in all, fhe has her Monument 65 


Of thy intents, defires, inftru¢tion, 


That fhe preparedly may frame her felfe 


To’th’way fhee’s force’d too. 
Cesar. 


Bid her haue good heart, 


She foone fhall know of vs, by fome of ours, 70 
How honourable, and how kindely Wee 
Determine for her.For C@/ar cannot leaue to be vngentle 


gy pt. 


So the Gods preferue thee. 
Caf. Come hither Proculeius. 


Ex. 
Go and fay 


We purpofe her no fhame : giue her what comforts 75 
The quality of her paffion fhall require ; 
Leaft in her greatneffe, by fome mortall ftroke 


She do defeate vs. 


For her life in Rome, 


Would be eternall in our Triumph : Go, 
And with your fpeedieft bring vs what fhe fayes, 80 


65. all, ...Monument | all she has, her 
Monument, Rowe et seq. 

66. intents, defires,| Ff, Rowei. in- 
tents, desires Rowe ii. intents destres 
Pope et seq. 

68. too.] F,. 

71. honourable] honourably Pope,+, 
Cap. Varr. Ran. Wh. ii. 

kindely| kindly Ff. 

72. Determine| Determiw d have Cap, 
for| Om. Words. 
leaue...ungentle] Ff, Rowe i. leave 


zo be gentle. (as one line) Cap. earn to 
be ungentle. Tyrwhitt, Dyce, Words. Live 
to be ungentle. Rowe ii et cet. 

72. tobe vngentie] Separate line, Pope 
et seq. 

ungentle| Ff. ungentle. Rowe et 

seq. 

73. So] Om. Rowe ii. 
Theob. Han. Warb. 

77. Leaft\ F, LAFF, 

79. eternall in] eternalling Thirlby, 
Han. Cap. 


May Pope, 


be said in favour of this interpretation than against it. 


It sounds very like a propitia- 


tory message such as Cleopatra, on this occasion, would send ; and accords with the 
assertion that the Monument is now all that she possesses. Moreover, Czesar’s ques- 
tion is ‘Whence are you?’ not ‘Who are you?’—this almost necessitates Hunter’s 
interpretation.—Ep. ] 

71. How honourable] See ‘’Tis noble spoken,’ II, ii, 115. It may be, how- 
ever, that the termination -/y, attached to ‘kindly,’ is supposed to be effective for 
‘honourable’ also. See WALKER (Crit. i, 218), or ABBoTT (§ 397), or SCHMIDT 
(Lex. p. 1419, 6). 

72. Czsar cannot leaue] COLLIER (ed. i): This was altered to ve by Southern, 
in his copy of F,. He anticipated Pope [Rowe, ed. ii] in a change, which, if not 
made, would directly contradict the poet’s meaning.—Dyce: I adopt the correction 
made by Tyrwhitt in his copy of F, in the British Museum. 

78, 79. her life in Rome, Would be eternall, etc.] JoHNSON: The sense is, 
‘If she dies here, she will be forgotten, but if I send her in triumph to Rome, her 
memory and my glory will be eternal.’ 


ACT V, SC. il. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 333 


And how you finde of her. 81 
Pro. Ca@far \ hall. Exit Proculewus. 
Caf. Gallus, go you along : where’s Doladella, to fe- 

cond Proculeius ? 
All, Dolabella. 85 
Cef. Let him alone : for I remember now 

How hee’s imployd : he fhall in time be ready. 

Go with me to my Tent, where you fhall fee 

How hardly I was drawne into this Warre, 


How calme and gentle I proceeded ftill go 
In all my Writings. Go with me, and fee 
What I can fhew in this. Exeunt. 92 


[Scene IT. 


Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Mardian. 


Cleo. My defolation does begin to make 
A better life : Tis paltry to be Ce/ar : 
Not being Fortune, hee’s but Fortunes knaue, 
A minifter of her will : and it is great 5 
To do that thing that ends all other deeds, 


81. you] yon F.,,. 88. Tent,] tent ; Cap. et seq. 

83. along :] along, [Exit Gallus. Scene VIII. Rowe. Scene II. Pope 
Han. et seq. et seq. 

83, 84. 40 fecond Proculeius] Separate The Monument. Rowe. 
line, Pope et seq. I. and Mardian.] Mardian, and Se- 

85. All.] Agr. Mec. Mal. et seq. leucus. Rowe. Om. Cap. et seq. 
(except Coll.) 6. deeds,| deeds ; Theob. et seq. 


81. you finde of her] For other examples, where ‘of’ means concerning, about, 
see ABBOTT, § 174, or FRANZ, § 364, or I, iv, 81. 

1, Enter Cleopatra, etc.] Dyce (ed. ii) : When the play was originally acted, 
they all entered here (as in scene xv. of the preceding act) on what was called the 
upper-stage ; but how the business of the present scene was managed after the seizure 
of Cleopatra, I cannot pretend to determine. 

2, 3. My desolation .. . better life] Words, as significant as they are pathetic. 
—ED. 

4. Fortunes knaue] JOHNSON: That is, the servant of fortune. 

6-9. To do that thing... and Czsars] WarsuRTON: The action of suicide 
is here said to shackle accidents; to bolt up change; to be the beggar’s nurse and 
Ceesar’s. So far the description is intelligible. But when it is said that it sleeps and 
never palates more the dung, we find neither sense nor propriety : which is occasioned 
by the loss of a whole line between the third and fourth, and the corrupt reading of 


334 LAE VL RA GEILE MOL 


[ACTSY SC.0ml. 


Which fhackles accedents, and bolts vp change; ip 
Which fleepes, and neuer pallates more the dung, 


The beggers Nurfe, and Ce¢/ars. 


7. accedents| accidents Ff. accident 
Anon. ap. Cam. 
change ; | change, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
8. Which ... dung | (Which ... dugg *) 
Warb. 
8, 9. Which... The] Which makes us 
sleep, nor palate more the dug O th’ Han. 
8. pallates| pallats Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
palates Theob. 
dung] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. ii, 


9 


Knt, Coll. Del. Sing. Wh. i, Ktly, 
Cowden-Clarke, Huds. Rlfe, Irving. 
dugg Warb. Theob. i. dug Han. Dyce, 


Dtn, Wh. ii. wrong Cartwright. fongue 
B. Nicholson (4. & Qu. III, vii, 395, 
1865). 

8, 9. dung ... Nurse] doom ... curse 
Bailey. 

9. The] Of the Ktly con}. 


Johns. Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 9, 20, 57. beggers| beggars FI", 


the last word in the fourth. We should read the passage thus: ‘ And it is great To 
do the thing that ends all other deeds; Which shackles accidents, and bolts up 
change ; [Ludlls wearied nature to a sound repose ;| Which sleeps, and never palates 
That this line in hooks was the 
substance of that lost, is evident from its making sense of all the rest: which are to 
this effect. 
lulls our over-wearied nature to repose (which now sleeps and has no more appetite 


more the dugg. The beggar’s nurse and Czsar’s,’ 
‘It is great to do that which frees us from all the accidents of humanity, 


for worldly enjoyments), and is equally the nurse of Czsar and the beggar.’-SEWARD 
(Note on The False One, IV, ii, p. 139): When we speak in contempt of anything, 
we generally resolve it into its first principles: Thus, man is dust and ashes, and 
the food we eat, the dung, by which first our vegetable, and from thence our animal, 
food is nourished. Thus Cleopatra finding she can no longer riot in the pleasures 
of life, with the usual workings of a disappointed pride, pretends a disgust to them, 
and speaks in praise of suicide [as in the present lines]. From the observations 
above, nothing can be clearer than this passage: ‘both the beggar and Cesar are 
fed and nursed by the dung of the earth.’ Of this sense there is a demonstration in 
[1, i, 48].—HeEarTH (p. 466): That is, which sleeps, and hath no further relish for 
the trash and dung of this earth, which dung is equally necessary to the support of 
Cesar, as of the meanest beggar. In what sense Warburton could understand death 
to be equally the nurse of Czesar and the beggar, or indeed to be the nurse of either, 
is inconceivable.—CAPELL (i, 49): The sentiment in line 8 is not unlike one in I, 
i, 48, and the expressions which that is couch’d in, shew plainly what ‘dung’ means 
in this line, viz.—the earth, and it’s duxgy productions; and to mark her contempt 
of them, and of Czesar too at the same time, she calls them—the nourses or nourishers 
both of him and the beggar.—JoHNsON: The difficulty of the passage, if any difficulty 
there be, arises only from this, that the act of suicide, and the state which is the effect 
of suicide, are confounded. Voluntary death, says she, is an act which bolts up 
change ; it produces a state, ‘ Which sleeps, and never palates more the dung, The 
beggar’s nurse and Czsar’s.’ Which has no longer need of the gross and terrene 
sustenance, in the use of which Cesar and the beggar are on a level. The speech 
is abrupt, but perturbation in such a state is surely natural.—BosweELL: ‘The beg- 
gar’s nurse and Czsar’s’ means, I apprehend, ‘death’ (as Warburton has observed), 
and not, as Johnson supposed, the gross substance on which Cesar and the beggar 
were fed.—[K NIGHT agrees with Boswell that the ‘ beggar’s nurse is, unquestionably, 


AETV SES Ti] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 335 


Liter Proculeius . if) 
Pro. C@far fends greeting to the Queene of Egypt, 
Io, Enter...] Enter...and Gallus be- Soldiers, at the Door of the Monument, 


low. Han, Enter...and Gallus, with without. Cap. 


death.’ ]—CoL.ier (ed. ii): This [dug] is an admirable, though merely literal 
emendation in the MS. What Cleopatra says is, that self-destruction prevents all 
change, and no longer requires, or ‘palates’ the dug, which affords nutriment to all 
mankind, whether high or low.—Dycr (ed. ii): To me the word ‘nurse’ is almost 
alone sufficient evidence that ‘ dung’ is a transcriber’s or printer’s mistake for dug,— 
which was the more liable to be corrupted, as it was formerly often spelt dugge (so the 
folio has, in Rom. & Jul. I, iii, «on the nipple of my Dugge’). The sense I conceive 
to be, ‘and never more palates that dug which affords nourishment as well to the beg- 
gar as to Cesar.’—ANoNn. (Blackwood, Oct. 1853, p. 469): The sense probably is, 
—‘It is great to do the thing (suicide) which causes us to sleep, and never more to 
taste the produce of the earth, which nourishes alike Cesar and the beggar. The 
MS correction [Warburton’s] certainly does not mend matters. This reading affords 
no extrication of the construction, ‘ which sleeps,’ which we have ventured to explain 
as ‘which days us asleep, and cazses us never more to palate or taste,’ etc.—R. G. 
WHITE (ed. i): As Iam unable to discern what is the dug which is ‘the beggar’s 
nurse and Czsar’s,’ and as the word in the text is expressive of the speaker’s bitter 
disgust of life, I make no change.—STAUNTON: ‘ Dung’ for dug is an obvious mis- 
print, though not wanting defenders.—Hupson: ‘ Nurse’ appears to be used here 
for zourishment. Cleopatra is speaking contemptuously of this life, as if anything 
that depends upon such coarse, vulgar feeding were not worth keeping. But Cleopatra 
has never palated the dug since she was a baby ; and the sense of the passage clearly 
requires some contemptuous word for the common supports of human life, as such,— 
the food she has to palate every day.— DEIGHTON: That is, which produces a state 
in which one sleeps a lasting sleep and has no need to taste the dug by which poor 
and rich, great and small, are nourished, z. e. no need of the sustenance of life. . 

There seems a considerable difference between speaking of the earth as fertilized by 
manure into furnishing food, and a human being feeding on dung.— IRVING EDITION: 
It seems more natural to suppose that the word ‘ dung’ is simply a periphrasis for the 
fruits of the fertilizing earth, used, certainly in a spirit of bitter mockery and supreme 
contempt.—THISELTON (p. 25): A reminiscence of Anthony’s words in I, i, 48. 
Nowhere are such reminiscences used with more effect than in the close of this trag- 
edy where they suggest the integrity of Cleopatra’s attachment to Anthony. Shake- 
speare meant us to leave Cleopatra, notwithstanding her failings, with feelings of 
sympathy and admiration, and that our last thoughts should be of ‘the glory of her 
womanhood.’—[There is a strength in the very coarseness of the word ‘dung’ 
which, to me, strongly commends it. Only a poet, strong in his own strength, and 
conscious of his own supremacy, and ‘neamess to the eternal verities,’ would have 
dared to use it. This elemental vigour is, to me, wholly lacking in Warburton’s 
substitution. Surely it does not need either natural death or suicide to cause us to 
cease from palating the dug. The palating of it ceases with weaning. It is while 
we palate it, before we are weaned, that an aversion to it can be created. When we 
cease to have any love for it, death can then produce no aversion. In order, there- 
fore, to change love for the dug into indifference to it, should not suicide be restricted 


to babes at the breast —Eb. ] 


336 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Vv, Sc. ii. 


And bids thee ftudy on what faire demands 12 

Thou mean’ft to haue him grant thee. 
Cleo. What’s thy name ? 
Pro. My name is Proculetus. 15 
Cleo. Anthony 

Did tell me of you, bad me truft you, but 

I do not greatly care to be deceiu’d 

That haue no vfe for trufting. If your|Mafter 

Would haue a Queece his begger, you mutt tell him, 20 

That Maiefty to keepe decorum, mutt | 

No leffe begge then a Kingdome : If he pleafe 

To giue me conquer’d Egypt for my Sonne, 

He giues me fo much of mine owne, as I 

Will kneele to him with thankes. 25 
Pro. Be of good cheere : 

Y’are falne into a Princely hand, feare nothing, 

Make your full reference freely to my Lord, 

Who is fo full of Grace, that it flowes ouer 


On all that neede. Let me report to him 30 

Your fweet dependacie, and you fhall finde 

A Conqueror that will pray in ayde for kindneffe, 22 
14, 16, 34. Cleo.] Cleo. [within.] Ktly. 

Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 27. Y’ are] Ff, Sing.Wh. Ktly. You're 
14. thy] the 1 Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. You are 
15. My] May F,,. Cap. et cet. 

17. bad | bade Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. falne| F,. fain Pe Rowe, 

Var. ’73 et seq. Pope. /a/’n Theob.+, Cap. Dyce, Sta. 
20. Queece] F,. Glo. Cam. fallen Var.’73 et cet. 

21. decorum] Ff, Rowe,+. decorum 28. reference] reverence Words. 
Cap. 29. fo] Om. F,F,. 
24. as [| and I M. Mason. 31. dependacte] F,. 
25. Aneele| kneel for Han. 32. pray in] pray, in Pope, Theol. 


thankes| thanks for Cap. conj. rh 


17-19. but I do not greatly .. . for trusting] Hupson: Cleopatra is exceed- 
ingly shrewd and artful in this: To throw Proculeius off his guard, she gives him 
to understand that she is pretty much indifferent whether he be true or not. That is 
just the thing to make Czesar feel sure of having her at his command, and so he will 
be less secret as to his purpose, or what he means to do with her; which is what she 
most of all desires to learn. 

32. that will pray in ayde for kindnesse] HANMER: ‘ Praying in aid’ is a term 
used for a petition made in a court of justice for the calling in of help from another 
that hath an interest in. the cause in question.—CAPELL (i, 49): This means,—who 
is even ready to pray those to accept of his kindness and grace, who ask it sub- 


ACT Vi; SCap li.) 


Where he for grace is kneel’d too. 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 337 


Cleo. Pray you tell him, i 
I am his Fortunes Vaffall, and I fend him 35 
The Greatneffe he has got. I hourely learne 
A Doétrine of Obedience, and would gladly 
Looke him i’th’Face. 

Pro. This Ile report (deere Lady ) 
Haue comfort, for I know your plight is pittied 40 
Of him that caus’d it. 

Pro. You fee how eafily fhe may be furpriz’d : 42 


33- 400) F,. to F,F,. 

35. fend him] bend to Han. 

38. 2’ th’) 2’ the Cap. et seq. 

41, 42. caus’d tt. Pro. You] caus’ d tt. 
Fare you well,— [Aside.] Hark Gallus ! 
You Cap. caus’d it. [Aside.] You 
Johns. Varr. 

42. [Here Gallus, and Guard, ascend 
the Monument by a Ladder, and enter 
at a back-window. Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Here Proculeius, and two of the guard, 
ascend the Monument bya Ladder placed 


guard unbar and open the gates. Mal. 
et seq. (subs.) ...the gates, discovering 
the lower room of the Monument. 
Cowden-Clarke. 

42. Pro. You] Gal. [Aside to Pro.] 
You Cowden-Clarke. 

42, 43. Pro. You... furprizd: Guard 
...come,| Char. You...furpriz’d: Guard 
... come. Ff, Rowe. Char. Vou ... sur- 
prisd. Pro. Guard...come. Pope. Gall. 
You ...surprisd. Pro. Guard... come. 
Theob. Han. Warb. [Aside.] Cap. Var. 


78, 85. Gall. You...surpriz d. Guard 
...Come. Mal. et cet. 


against a window, and having descended, 
come behind Cleopatra. Some of the 


missively.—HupDsoN: The meaning is, when you sue to him for mercy, as to a 
superior, he will sue for your kindness as an ally, and as having an interest in com- 
mon with him. 

35, 36. I send him The Greatnesse he has got] CAPELL (i, 49) : Homage 
of great people to persons greater than them, was (and still is), in many countries, 
accompany’d with presents: Cleopatra, in her reply, acknowledges herself Czesar’s 
vassal, and that she ow’d him homage as such; but that, having nothing in way of 
present to send him, she sent him ‘zs ow greatness ; intimating—that he was master 
of hers, and of the fortunes of all the world, and could not be disturb’d in them.— 
Jounson: I allow him to be my conqueror; I own his superiority with complete 
submission. —M. Mason: Johnson has mistaken the meaning of this passage, nor will 
the words bear the construction he gives them. It appears to me, that by ¢he great- 
ness he has got, she means her crown which he has won; and I suppose that when 
she pronounces these words, she delivers to Proculeius either her own crown, or some 
other ensign or royalty.—[I prefer Johnson’s interpretation, which is, substantially, 
that of Capell.—Eb. ] 

42. MALONE: In the old copy there is no stage-direction. That which is now 
inserted [see Zext. Votes] is formed on the old translation of Plutarch: ‘ Proculeius 
came to the gates that were very thicke & strong, and surely barred, but yet there 
were some cranewes through the which her voyce might be heard, and so they without 
vnderstood, that C/eopatra demaunded the kingdome of Egypt for her sonnes: and 
that Proculeius aunswered her, that she should be of good cheare, and not be affrayed 


22 


338 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Guard her till Cefar come. 


43. Guard] [Aloud to Pro.] Guard 
Cowden-Clarke. 

come. [come. Exit Proculeius. Gal- 

lus maintains converse with Cleopatra. 


[ACT V, SC. il. 
43 


hind, Proculeius, and Soldiers, hastily. 
Cap. come. Exit. Var.’78, ’85. come. 
To Proculeius and the guard. Exit Gal- 
lus. Mal. 


Re-enter, into the Monument, from be- 


to referre all vnto Cesar. After he had viewed the place very well, he came and 
reported her answere vnto Cxsar. Who immediatly sent Gad/us to speake once 
againe with her, and bad him purposely hold her with talke, whz/est Proculeius did 
set up a ladder against that high window, by the which Antonius was trised up, and 
came downe into the monument with two of his men hard by the gate, where Cleopatra 
stood to heare what Gallus sayd vnto her. One of her women which was shut 
in her monuméts with her, saw Proculeius by chance as he came downe, and 
shreeked out, O poore Cleopatra, thou art taken. Then when she saw Proculeius 
behind her as she came from the gate, she thought to haue stabbed her selfe in 
with a short dagger she wore of purpose by her side. But Procwlevus came sodainly 
vpon her, and taking her by both the hands, sayd vnto her. Cleopatra, first thou 
shalt do thy selfe great wrong, and secondly vnto Cesar. to depriue him of the 
occasion and oportunitie, openly to shew his bountie and mercie, and to giue his 
enemies cause to accuse the most curteous and noble Prince that euer was, and to 
appeache him, as though he were a cruell and mercilesse man, that were not to be 
trusted. So euen as he spake the word, he tooke her dagger from her, and shooke 
her clothes for feare of any poyson hidden about her.’—[See Appendix, Plutarch. 
I have not recorded in the 7ext. Votes all the stage-directions given by the early 
editors in their vain reachings after those which would satisfy all requirements ; nor 
have I recorded all the minor variations of the modern editors. For my own part, I 
see no need of any stage-direction at all. It is, at least for me, quite sufficient to see 
that the Romans rush in and seize the Queen. In these thrilling moments, how they 
Nor does any one in the audience ever know how 
they entered, and would not know, unless the stage-manager came forward and 
read aloud Plutarch, or Malone’s directions.—ED. ] 

42, 43. Pro. You see how easily...Czsar come] The Ff, followed by 
Rowe and Pops, give this speech to Charmian. THEOBALD, however, attributed 
this distribution to the two latter editors, and remarks: This blunder was for want 
of knowing, or observing, the historical fact. When Cesar sent Proculeius to the 
queen, he sent Gallus after him with new instructions ; and while one amused Cleo- 
patra with propositions from Czesar, through the crannies of the monument, the other 
scaled it by a ladder, entered it at a window backward, and made Cleopatra, and 
those with her, prisoners. I have reformed the passage, therefore (as, I am per- 
suaded, the author designed it), from the authority of Plutarch.—JoHNson: This 
line, in the first edition, is given to Proculeius ; and to him it certainly belongs, though 
perhaps misplaced. I would put it at the end of his foregoing speech: ‘ Where he 
for grace is kneel’d to. Aside to Gallus. You see how easily she may be surpriz’d’ ; 
Then, while Cleopatra makes a formal answer, Gallus, upon the hint given, seizes 
her, and Proculeius, interrupting the civility of his answer: ‘—your plight is pitied 
Of him that caus’d it,’ cries out: ‘Guard her till Caesar come.’—MALONE: It is 
clear, from the passage quoted from Plutarch in the preceding note, that this [‘Pro.’] 
was an error of the compositor’s at the press, and that it belongs to Gallus; who, 


got in, I neither know nor care. 


ACT. V,5SC. 11.) ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 339 


Tras. Royall Queene. 
Char. Oh Cleopatra, thou art taken Queene. 45 
Cleo. Quicke, quicke, good hands. 
Pro. Hold worthy Lady, hold : 
Doe not your felfe fuch wrong, who are in this 


Releeu’d, but not betraid. 49 
44. Royall] O royal Theob.+, Cap. ger. The Monument is open’d; Pro. 
Ktly. rushes in and disarms the Queen. Theob. 
Queene.| Queen— Han. 47. [staying her. Cap. Seizes and 

45. taken] taken, Rowe ii. disarms her. Mal. 


46. hands.| hands. [ Drawing a Dag- 


after Proculeius hath, according to his suggestion, ascended the monument, goes out 
to inform Czesar that Cleopatra is taken, That Caesar was informed immediately of 
Cleopatra’s being taken, appears from Dolabella’s first speech to Proculeius on his 
entry: ‘ Proculeius, What thou hast done, thy master Czsar knows,’ etc. [See lines 
77, 78.| This information, it is to be presumed, Czesar obtained from Gallus. The 
stage-directions being very imperfect in this scene in the old copy, no exit is here 
marked ; but as Gallus afterwards enters along with Czesar, it was undoubtedly the 
author’s intention that he should here go out.— WALKER (Crit. ii, 177) has an Article 
on ‘Instances in which Speeches are assigned in the Folio to Wrong Characters,’ in 
the course of which he remarks (p. 185) that, ‘ Errors in the assignment of speeches, 
—including cases in which two speeches have been confused into one, or the like,— 
are remarkably frequent in the Folio. I have just cited sixty or more instances [sixty- 
six, by my counting.—ED. ] in which this has taken place, even according to the uni- 
versally received text. This being the case, there is no reason why we should be 
scrupulous in asserting the same of other passages, where the context clearly 
indicates it. [The present line is among the sixty-six. ]—THISELTON (p. 26): If it 
were desired to follow Plutarch, the simplest way would be, perhaps, to regard this 
line as the commencement of a new scene the interval being taken up with the move- 
ments of Proculeius, but the fact that Gallus, whose presence talking with Cleopatra 
is essential to Plutarch’s account, does not enter till later shows that Shakespeare did 
not intend to follow his authority slavishly. It therefore seems preferable to suppose 
that the ladder was fixed by the soldiers during Proculeius’ previous conversation 
with Cleopatra, and that he, instead of going to Cesar as he pretended, climbed up 
the ladder with the soldiers and almost immediately appeared behind Cleopatra and 
her companions who were still standing at the gate. This view will account for the 
two speeches in succession being attributed to Proculeius by the Folio. 

49. Releeu’d, but not betraid] Peck (p. 254): Instead of ‘betray’d,’ I think, 
we should read deveav’d. This reading, I am sure, agrees better with Cleopatra’s 
next words, . . . where detvay’d of death is a forced expression, but dereav’d is very 
natural. Besides in her present condition she finds herself already dereav’d of her 
crown, and, therefore, thinks it harder to be deveav’d of death, or the liberty to kill 
herself.—[Seven years after the publication of the foregoing note by Peck, WAR- 
BURTON proposed the same emendation, except that he transferred the change to 
‘Releeu’d’; his text reads ‘ Berveav’d, but not betray’d.’ His note thereon is of 


small consequence. } 


340 THE TRAGE DIE, OF [ACE VW SCa mt, 


Cleo. What of death too that rids our dogs of langui fh 50 
Pro. Cleopatra, do not abufe my Mafters bounty, by 
Th’vndoing of your felfe : Let the World fee 
His Nobleneffe well aéted, which your death 
Will neuer let come forth. 
Cleo. Where art thou Death ? 55 
Come hither come ; Come, come, and take a Queene 
Worth many Babes and Beggers. 
Pro. Oh temperance Lady. 
Cleo. Sir, I will eate no meate, Ile not drinke fir, 
If idle talke will once be neceffary 60 
Ile not fleepe neither. This mortall houfe Ile ruine, 


50, 51. that...langui/h Cleopatra,] As 56. a Queene] the Queen Rowe. 
one line, Cap. et seq. 59, 60. Str, ...zeceffary] Lines trans- 
50. languifh| languish ? Rowe. an- posed, Mitford ap. Cam. 
guish Johns, conj. 59. Me] F, PeF, Wek, LU 
51. Cleopatra,] Om. Pope,+. Sepa- Rowe. 
rate line, Var. ’73, 778, 785. 60. Jf... meceffary| In parenthesis, 
52. Th’ undoing| Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Sing. Given to Proculeius. Joicey (1. 
Wh. Hal. Zhe undoing Cap. et cet. & Qu. VII, xii, 343). 
56. come; Come, come,| F,. come; neceffary]| accessary Han. Coll. ii, 
Come, FF ,. come: Oh! come, Rowe, +. iii (MS), Sta. 


come! come, come, Cap. et seq. 


50. What of death too] CAPELL (i, 49): These words import—What, am I 
rob’d of death too, as well as of my kingdom? and have no relation to those that 
Proculeius had just spoke, which perhaps were not heard by her. 

57. Worth many Babes and Beggers] JoHNSON: Why, death, wilt thou not 
rather seize a queen, than employ thy force upon dades and beggars ? 

60. talke] WARBURTON: This nonsense should be reformed thus: ‘If idle ¢7e,’ 
etc., z. ¢. if repose be necessary to cherish life, I will not sleep.—JoHNsON : I do not 
see that the nonsense is made sense by the change. 

60, 61. If idle talke will once be necessary, Ile not sleepe neither] Hratu 
(p. 466) : I conceive the poet’s meaning is, I will not sleep neither, and, to prevent 
it, I will keep myself awake with any idle talk that happens to come uppermost.— 
JouNSON : ‘ J will xot eat, and 2f zt will be necessary now for once to waste a moment 
in zdle talk of my purpose, J will not sleep neither.’ In common conversation we 
often use w// de, with as little relation to futurity. As, ‘ Now I am going, it w#J/ be 
fit for me to dine first.,—-CAPELL (i, 50): ‘Necessary’ in this line, means—neces- 
sary to life; and ‘idle talk,’—conversation and talk among friends: and this being 
so, ‘ sleep,’ —which is the reading of all former copies,—must be a mistake, and that 
for—‘ speak :’ [thus in Capell’s text]. After declaring first against ‘ meat,’ and then 
against ‘drink,’ she crowns the whole by threat’ning him with,—the greatest possi- 
ble female achievement,—a renouncing of sfeech. But this is being too pleasant: 
especially, at this time; and with a speech, that, in all the parts of it, is as worthy 
the magnificent Cleopatra as any one that the Poet has given her.—STEEVENS: Once 


ACT V, SC. iL] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 341 


Do C@/ar what he can. Know fir, that I 62 
Will not waite pinnion’d at your Mafters Court, 

Nor once be chaftic’d with the fober eye 

Of dull Octawa, Shall they hoyft me vp, 65 
And fhew me to the fhowting Varlotarie 

Of cenfuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt. 

Be gentle graue vnto me, rather on Nylus mudde 

Lay me ftarke-nak’d, and let the water-Flies 

Blow me into abhorring ; rather make 70 
My Countries high pyramides my Gibbet, 


64. Mor once be| Not once to be LAD 69. frarke-nak’d]| F,, Rowe, Pope. 
Rowe, Pope. JSiark nak’d FF, Theob. Warb. Coll. 

66. Varlotariec] Varlotry Ff, Rowe, Dyce, Wh. Sta. Hal. stark naked Han. 
Pope, Theob. Warb. vardetry Han. et cet. 

67. Egypt.| Egypt, ¥,. degypt Theob. the] Om. Huds. 

68. Be gentle graue| Be gentle, crave, 71. high pyramides| hygh pyramides 
F ADE But gentle, grave, Rowe. FE. high Pyramids BUF ,, Var. ’73. 

unto| to Han. highest Pyramid Han, 


may mean sometimes. ‘The meaning of Cleopatra seems to be this: If zd/e talking be 
sometimes necessary to the prolongation of life, why I will not sécep for fear of ¢alk- 
ing wdly in my sleep. The sense, designed, however, may be—If it be necessary, for 
once, to talk of performing impossibilities, why, I’ll not sleep neither. I have little 
confidence, however, in these attempts, to produce a meaning from the words under 
consideration.—MALONE: The explications above given appear to me so unsatisfac- 
tory, that I have no doubt that a line has been lost after the word mecessary, in which 
Cleopatra threatened to observe an obstinate silence. The line probably began 
with the word /’//, and the compositor’s eye glancing on the same words in the line 
beneath, all that intervened was lost. The omitted line might have been of this. 
import: ‘If idle talk will once be necessary, /’4/ not so much as syllable a word; YM 
not sleep neither,’ etc. The words, ‘I’Jl not sleep neither,’ contain a new and dis- 
tinct menace.—RiTson: I agree that a line is lost, which I shall attempt to supply : 
“Tf idle talk will once be necessary [Z well not speak; If sleep be necessary], VM 
not sleep neither.’ The repetition of the word secessary may have occasioned the 
omission.—COoLLIER (ed. ii) says, in effect, that, according to the MS, Cleopatra 
adds ‘that she will hasten her death by perpetual watchfulness, if ‘idle talk’ will 
contribute to it, or be accessary to it.—STAUNTON: We adopt Hanmer’s accessary.. 
The sense is plainly,‘ I’ll neither eat nor drink, and, if idle talk will, for the nonce, 
be assistant, I’ll not sleep.’—[The obscurity in these lines is removed, I think, by 
the paraphrases of Heath and of Johnson.—ED. ] 

69. starke-nak’d] WALKER (Vers. 192) has gathered many examples from the 
old poets where zaked is thus contracted. We find in Middleton, ‘ To cover others, 
and go nak’d thyself.’—Spanish Gipsy, p. 135, ed. Dyce. Again, Sidney: ‘ His 
who till death lookt in a watrie glasse, Or hers whom nakd the Troian boy did see.’ 
—Astrophel and Stella, Sonn. \xxxii.—DYCceE (ed. ii) quotes, ‘ Accomplish’d Thoas, in 
whose breast, (being nak’d) his lance he threw,’ etc.—Chapman’s //ad, xvi, 296 ;. 
‘ Strip’d nak’d her bosome, show’d her breasts,’ etc.—Jd7d. xxii, 69. 


342 THEO TRAGE DIEGO, [ACT V, SC. il. 


And hang me vp in Chaines. 72 
Pro. You do extend 

Thefe thoughts of horror further then you {hall 

Finde caufe in Ce/ar. 75 

Enter Dolabella. 

Dol. Proculewus, 

What thou haft done, thy Mafter Ce/ar knowes, 

And he hath fent for thee : for the Queene, 

Ile take her to my Guard. 80 
Pro. So Dolabella, 

It fhall content me beft: Be gentle to her, 

To Ce/ar I will fpeake, what you fhall pleafe, 

If you’l imploy me to him. Exit Proculetus 
Cleo. Say, I would dye. 85 
Dol. Moft Noble Empreffe, you haue heard of me. 
Cleo. JI cannot tell. 
Dol. Affuredly you know me. 
Cleo. No matter fir, what I haue heard or knowne: 

You laugh when Boyes or Women tell their Dreames, 90 


74. further| farther Cap. Coll. Wh. Han. Johns. Var. ’73 et seq. 


75. caufe| cause for it Cap. 84. Exit...] Exeunt Proc. and Gallus. 
Scene III. Warb. Johns. Han. Exeunt Proc. and Soldiers. Cap. 
78. thy] my ¥,, Rowe, Pope, Han. After line 85, Pope et seq. 
79. fent | sent me Dyce i. con}. Walker, 86. me.| Ff, Rowe,+, Ktly. me? 
Dyce ii, iii, Ktly. Cap. et cet. 
for| as for Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 88. you know me] you have Gar. 
Varr. Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Huds. 90. Dreames,| dreams; Theob. et 


83, 84. Zo... him.] [To Cleopatra. seq. 


71. pyramides] Dycr (Note in Zhe False One, II, i): The passages of our 
early writers in which ‘pyramides’ (the regular plural of pyvamis) occurs are very 
numerous. In the line in this speech [in Zhe False One]: ‘No pyramids set off 
his memories,’ though both the folios have pyramdes, there can be no doubt that the 
poet intended the word to consist of only three syllables. —[See II, vii, 39.] 

82. It shall content me best] Here the CowDEN-CLARKES have the following 
stage-direction and note: ‘ Brings Cleopatra down into the lower room of the Monu- 
ment, and delivers her to Dollabella.? This stage-direction has been added by the 
editors, as affording an idea of the situation in the present scene. There would be 
no means of accounting for what subsequently takes place, were we not to imagine 
Cleopatra as being still withinside her monument. 

84. If you’l imploy me to him] Brapiry (XM. £. D. s. v. Employ, 3. ¢ b.) : 
To send (a person) with a commission 4o, éowards (a person), fo, into (a place). 
‘ We shall haue neede T’imploy you towards this Romane.’—Cym. II, iii, 68. [The 
present passage quoted. See, also, if needful, FRANZ, § 379, b.] 


ACT V, SC. il. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 343 


Is’t not your tricke ? gli 
Dol. I vnderftand not, Madam. 
Cleo. I dreampt there was an Emperor Anthony. 

Oh fuch another fleepe, that I might fee 

But fuch another man. 95 
Dol. If it might pleafe ye. 

Cleo. His face was as the Heau’ns, and therein ftucke 

A Sunne and Moone, which kept their courfe, & lighted 

The little o’th’earth. 
Dol. Moft Soueraigne Creature. 100 
Cleo. His legges beftrid the Ocean, his rear’d arme 

Crefted the world : His voyce was propertied 

As all the tuned Spheres, and that to Friends : 103 


93, 114. dreampt] F, dreamt FF, O oth’ Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Var. 
Rowe,+, Cap. Var. ’73, Knt, Sing. "73. orbo th’ Han. O, the Var.’78 et 


dream’ d Var.’78 et cet. seq. 
96. ye.] Ff. ye— Rowe,+, Dyce, 100. Creature.| creature— Rowe et 
Wh. Sta. Glo. Cam. (subs.) yow,— Cap. seq. (subs.) 
et cet. 103. and that] when that Theob. 
97. Heau’ns| Rowe,+. heaven’ s De- Warb. Johns. Cap. addrest Anon. ap. 
lius conj. heavens Ff et cet. Cam. 


99. o’th’] F,, Rowe, Pope. off’ FF). 


97, etc. His face was as the Heau’ns, etc.] In all the similes throughout this 
‘dream,’ WHITER discerns allusions to pageants and processions. ‘Let it be 
remembered,’ he says (p. 190), ‘that an imitation of the sphere of the Heavens, 
with the attributes and ornaments belonging to it, the sweetness of its music, and 
the noise of its thunder, the Sun, the Moon, and the Earth, colossal figures, — 
armorial bearings,—a magnificent procession of monarchs and their attendants, — 
floating islands, —and a prodigal distribution of wealth and honors, are the known 
and familiar materials which formed the motley compound of the Masque, the 
Pageant, or the Procession.” See IV, xiv, 11. 

99, 100. The little ... Creature] THEOBALD: What a blessed limping verse 
these two hemistichs give us! Had none of the Editors an ear to find the hitch in 
its pace? ’Tis true, there is but a syllable wanting, and that, I believe verily, was 
but of a single letter; which the first Editors not understanding, learnedly threw it 
out asaredundance. I restore, Zhe little O oth’ Earth, 7. e. the little orb or circle. 
And, ’tis plain, our Poet in other passages chuses to express himself thus, ‘ Ros. O, 
that your face were not so full of O’es.’—Love’s Labour's Lost, V, ii, 46, 7. e. of 
round dimples, pitts with the smallpox. ‘Can we cram, Within this wooden O, 
the very casques,’ etc.—Prol. to Henry V. 12. ‘Fair Helena, who more engilds the 
night Than all yon fiery O’s and Eyes of light.’—Jdfd. WV. D., III, ii, 195, 2. e. 
the circles, orbs of the stars COLLIER: [Notwithstanding Theobald’s amendment, 
the text of the folio] may, after all, be the true reading. 

IoI, 102. his rear’d arme Crested the world] Percy: Alluding to some of the 
old crests in heraldry, where a raised arm on a wreath was mounted on the helmet. 


344 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT v, SC. il. 


But when he meant to quaile, and fhake the Orbe, 


He was as ratling Thunder. For his Bounty, 105 
There was no winter in’t. An Azthony it was, 
That grew the more by reaping : His delights 107 


106. An Anthony z¢ was] Ff, Rowe, Autumn’ twas Theob. et seq. 
Pope. ax entity it was Bulloch. An 


103. the tuned Spheres] See III, xiii, 175. Also, if need be, ‘ There’s not the 
smallest orbe which thou beholdst But in his motion like an angell sings, —er. of 
Ven. V, i, 69, and the notes that follow, in this edition. 

103. and that to Friends] STAUNTON (Atheneum, 26 Apr. 1873): Surely,— 
‘and sweet to friends’; ‘that’ has no business in this place, and only serves to mar 
the glory of the speech.—[ELZE (p. 293) proposed, independently, the same emen- 
dation, and also ‘and soft to Friends.’ But, assuredly, though a little awkward, 
‘that’ is perfectly correct. Its antecedent is ‘voice.’ ‘That’ (or such) was his 
voice when addressing his friends. —ED. ] 

104. quaile] See ‘ Fall not a tear,’ ITI, xi, 78. 

105. ratling Thunder] Compare: ‘Thy eye /oues lightning beares, thy voyce 
his dreadfull thunder. Which not to anger bent, is musique and sweet fire.’ —Love’s 
Lab. Lost, IV, ii, 130.—Ep. 

105-107. For his Bounty, There was no winter in’t. An Anthony it was, 
That grew the more by reaping] THEOBALD: There was certainly a contrast 
both in the thought and terms, designed here, which is lost in an accidental cor- 
ruption. How could an Antony grow the more by reaping? I'll venture, by a very 
easy change, to restore an exquisite fine allusion ; which carries its reason with it too, 
why there was no wiwéer in his bounty: ‘For his bounty, There was no winter 
in’t; an autumn twas, That grew the more by reaping.’ I ought to take notice, 
that the ingenious Dr Thirlby likewise started this very emendation, and had marked 
it in the margin of his book. The reason of the depravation might easily arise from 
the great similitude of the two words in the old spelling, Antonze and Automne. [The 
name is spelt Azthony in this play in the Folio without an exception, I think; 
which injures the literal ‘similitude’ not a little.—Ep.] Our author has employed 
this thought again in [his 53rd Sonnet]: ‘Speak of the spring and foison of the 
year; The one doth shadow of your beauty show, The other as your bounty doth 
appear ; And you in every blessed shape we know.’ ’Tis plain that ‘foison’ means 
Autumn here, which pours out its profusion of fruits bountifully ; in opposition to 
Spring, which only shews the youthful beauty, and promise of that future bounty. — 
Corson ( The Nation, 28 Aug., 1873): If ‘An Anthony it was’ is not right, ‘an 
autumn ’twas’ is certainly wrong. It is too tame for the intensely impassioned 
speech in which it occurs, or, rather, into which it has been introduced by the editors. 
Again, if ‘autumn’ could, by metonymy, be wrenched to mean the crops of autumn, 
it could hardly be said that an autumn grows the more by reaping. But this reading 
of Theobald has been silently adopted by all subsequent editors, without any con- 
sideration of its tameness or of the resultant incongruity. In ‘An Anthony it was,’ 
‘it’ stands, of course, for ‘Bounty.’ His Bounty was an Anthony, ‘that grew the 
more by reaping.” Now, could the ‘less Greek’ which, Ben Jonson tells us, Shake- 
speare possessed, have enabled him to see in ‘Anthony’ the word dv3oc? His 
Bounty had no winter in it; it was a mead of perennial luxuriance, affording a 


ACT V, SC. il. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 345 


Were Dolphin-like, they fhew’d his backe aboue 108 
108. his backe] their back Han. the back Ktly. their backs Bailey (ii, 125). 


flowering pasturage (’Aviévoyoc), and ‘that grew the more by reaping.’ —J AMES 
SPEDDING (V. & Quw., 1874, V, i, 303) : I cannot understand Prof. Corson’s objec- 
tion to ‘autumn.’ In the cursive black-letter hand of the time Autumn might easily 
be written so as to be hardly distinguishable from Azonic, and surely it makes better 
sense and better poetry. So far from calling it ‘tame,’ I should instance it as one of 
the noblest, boldest, and liveliest images in poetry, Keats said that poetry ‘ought 
to surprise, by a fine excess.’ This is exactly a case of such ‘fine excess.’ ‘An 
autumn that grew the more by reaping’—that, the more you took of its harvests, 
the more there remained to take—is surely as great an image of ‘bounty’ as the 
mind in its most impassioned state ever created; quite as much so, and yet evidently 
from the same mint, as Juliet’s—‘ My bounty is as boundless as the sea, My love as 
deep ; the more I give to thee, The more I have; for both are infinite.’ As for the 
difficulty of understanding by autumn the crops of autumn, how is it more difficult 
than to understand by ‘winter’ the absence of crops? And what are we to come 
to? Instead of allowing Tennyson to say—‘ To strip a hundred hollows bare of 
spring,’ we shall have to ask him to print ‘sprigs’ for ‘spring’ As for the amount 
of Shakespeare’s Greek, of which he has left us no means of judging, the difficulty 
is to understand how he could have had Greek enough to know that avfoc meant a 
flower, without knowing also that Anthony could of mean a pasture of flowers ; and 
not only could not really mean it, but could not, by any process of association, legiti- 
mate or illegitimate, suggest the image to an Englishman.—[Theobald asks, ‘how 
an Antony could grow the more by reaping?’ Would it not be equally perti- 
nent to ask how an autumn could grow the more by reaping? Reaping in the 
autumn is done when the grain is ripe, and grain thus reaped never grows again. 
The farmer is not yet born who, in the temperate zone, reaps the ripe grain in the 
autumn and finds it growing more vigorously for the process. To be sure, a farmer 
who could keep on reaping stubble fields and find at each reaping a heavier harvest 
would be, as Spedding observes, ‘as great an image of “bounty” as the mind in its 
most impassioned state ever created,’ and, possibly, can be paralleled only in the 
Arabian Nights. Not thus essentially at fault are, I think, Shakespeare’s similes, 
which may be sometimes flagrantly open to criticism, but never to downright folly— 
thus, in all humility, it seems to me. When Spedding becomes eloquent over the 
beauty of ‘autumn,’ he seems to forget that he is exalting not Shakespeare, but Theo- 
bald. There is about Corson’s suggestion so much refinement, elegance, and charm 
that it is hard to reject it. But, unfortunately, there is nothing in common between 
Anthony and Anthos but the first syllable, and there is no Greek word which will 
furnish any more. Moreover, we do not reap flowers, even to make them grow. 
Until an emendation is suggested, therefore, happier, as I think, than autumn, I 
shall endeavour, for my own feeble self, to extract from ‘ Anthony’ what meaning I 
may of inexhaustible perfection in face, in form, in voice, in bounty, which for Cleo- 
patra so far lay in that single name that once, in order to express the height and 
depth and boundlessness of her self-absorption she exclaimed, ‘Oh, my oblivion isa 
very Anthony !’—ED.] 

108. Dolphin-like, they shew’d his backe, etc.] WHITER (p. 189): The ack 
of the dolphin is deeply associated in the mind of Shakespeare with the splendid 
scenery of the pageant or the procession. Would the reader believe that [the pres- 


346 THE TRAGLDIE VOL [ACT V, SC. ii. 


The Element they liu’d in : In his Liuery 
Walk’d Crownes and Crownets:Realms & Iflands were 110 
As plates dropt from his pocket. 
Dol. Cleopatra. 
Cleo. Thinke you there was, or might be fuch a man 
As this I dreampt of ? 
Dol. Gentle Madam, no. 115 
Cleo. You Lye vp to the hearing of the Gods : 
But if there be, nor euer were one fuch 
It’s paft the fize of dreaming : Nature wants ftuffe 


To vie ftrange formes with fancie, yet t’imagine 1 fe) 
110. Crownets] coronets Pope,+ . 119. fancie,| fancy; Han. Cap. et 
were| Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope. ° seq. 
112. Cleopatra.] Ff. Cleopatra / Glo. imagine] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Cleopatra— Rowe et cet. (subs.) Theob. Warb. Johns. Sing. Wh. Dyce 
117. nor] F,, or F,F, et seq. li, iii, Ktly. 40 form Han. 0 imagine 
EIS: 22's) 175 Fk Cap. et cet. 


ent passage] is to be referred to this source? There is nothing, however, more cer- 
tain and indubitable. 

111. As plates] STEEVENS: ‘ Plates’ mean, I believe, s¢/ver money. So, in Mar- 
lowe’s Jew of Malta, 1633: ‘ What’s the price of this slave? two hundred crowns! 
... And if he has, he is worth three hundred A/afes.’—[II1, p. 272, ed. Dyce.] 
Again: ‘Rat’st thou this Moor but at two hundred Jlates ?’—[ bid. p. 273. |— 
WHALLEY: Steevens justly interprets ‘plates’ to mean silver money. It is a term 
in heraldry. The balls or roundels in an escutcheon of arms, according to their 
different colours, have different names. If gz/es, or red, they are called ¢orteauxes ; 
if or, or yellow, dezants ; if argent, or white, plates, which are buttons of silver with- 
out any impression, but only prepared for the stamp. 

117. nor euer were] THISELTON (p. 27): ‘ Nor’ has been unwarrantably changed 
to or, owing to its being overlooked that this line is in direct contrast with the preced- 
ing, and that ‘nor’ implies an ellipsis of #ezther or not. Cleopatra would ask, ‘ But 
assuming for the moment you are right, how came I to dream of such a one?’ And 
this question she answers by saying that though Fancy could outstrip Nature, yet the 
mere picture of Anthony as he actually was in Nature exceeded anything Fancy 
could create. The description Cleopatra has just given was the work of fancy but in 
so far as it did not tally with Anthony as he was, it was because it fell short of, not 
because it exaggerated, his greatness. 

119. To vie] STAUNTON: This was a term at cards, and meant, particularly, to 
increase the stakes, and, generally, to challenge any one to a contention, bet, wager, 
etc.—[Undoubtedly, it was, and, perhaps, originally, a term at cards, although its 
meaning is obscure. It is used in Florio’s Second Frutes (pp. 69, 71) in a way 
which is difficult to explain. But I doubt that, in the present passage, it has any 
reference to cards. It is used, I think, as it is defined in the Century Dictionary 
(s.v. vie, II. zvans. 2.): ‘To put or bring into competition; try to outdo in; contend 
with respect to.’ Whereupon the present passage is quoted as an example.—ED. ] 


AETV, SCr 11.) ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 347 


An Anthony were Natures peece, ’gainft Fancie, 120 
Condemning fhadowes quite. 

Dol. Heare me, good Madam : 
Your loffe is as your felfe, great ; and you beare it 
As anfwering to the waight, would I might neuer 
Ore-take purfu’de fucceffe : But I do feele 125 
By the rebound of yours, a greefe that fuites 


120. were] with B,. was Cap. conj. Rowe et seq. 
Gar. 125. pur/u'de) purfwd FF. 
(PCece| aL emepzeres FF, Rowe, Jucceffe : But | success, but Rowe 
Pope. frize Theob. Han. Warb. piece et seq. 
Johns. et seq. 126. /uites] F,. /uits ¥,F,, Rowe. 
Francie] Fancy’s Ktly. smites Cap. Coll. Sing. Dyce, Wh: i, Sta. 


124. waight,| weight, FF. weight: Glo. Cam. Hal. shoots Pope et cet. 


IIg-I2I. yet "imagine ... shadowes quite] WHITER (p. 194): Is it possible 
to employ terms more pointed and_ significant than those which might be selected 
from the concluding sentence to describe the nature and properties of such romantic 
exhibitions ?- For what are the devices of the Pageant, but the creatures of a dream, 
—the strange forms of an illusive fancy, and the empty shadows of a sportive 
imagination ?—STAUNTON: We are not sure of having mastered the sense of this, or 
indeed. that the text exhibits precisely what Shakespeare wrote, but the meaning 
apparently is,—‘ Nature lacks material to compete with fancy in unwonted shapes, 
yet the conception of an Antony was a masterpiece of Nature over fancy, abasing 
phantoms quite.’—Hupson: Shakespeare sometimes uses fancy and imagination as 
equivalent terms, and here he uses both for the dreaming-power. Nature lacks 
material to keep up with fancy in the creation of strange forms ; yet to fancy such an 
actual being as Antony, a man of Nature’s making, were to make Nature an over- 
match for fancy, dwarfing its shadowy creatures into insignificance. The passage 
is exceedingly strong and subtle, and comes appropriately from this matchless roll of 
unwomanly womanhood. 

120, 121. were Natures peece, ’gainst Fancie, Condemning shadowes quite] 
WARBURTON: The word fvize, which I have restored, is very pretty, as figuring a 
contention between ature and imagination about the larger extent of their powers ; 
and mature gaining the prize by producing Antony.—JOHNSON : The word ‘piece,’ 
is a term appropriated to works of art. Here Nature and Fancy produce each their 
piece, and the piece done by Nature had the preference. Antony was in reality past 
the size of dreaming ; he was more by Nature than Fancy could present in sleep. 

124, 125. wouldI... But I do] THISELTON (p. 27): ‘ But,’ Dollabella means, 
‘If success in a cherished object carries with it the being infected by the grief of my 
victim, as I am now by your grief, I would rather forego it.’—[Is not the ‘ But,’ in 
this passage, that which follows strong asseverations, as in Othello’s exclamation : 
‘ Perdition catch my soul But I do love thee’? Thus here Dollabella says, in effect, 
‘Would I might never gain success, if I do not sympathise with you !’—Ep. ] 

126. a greefe that suites] COLLIER (ed. i): Surely, as Mr Barron Field observes, 
[suites] is much more likely to have been a misprint for saz¢es [than shoots] which 
only varies in a single letter. The expression is then more natural, and it avoids the 


348 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. ii. 
My very heart at roote. 127 
Cleo. J thanke you fir : 


Know you what Ce/ar meanes to do with me ? 
Dol. Jam loath to tell you what, I would you knew. 130 
Cleo. Nay pray you fir. 
Dol. Though he be Honourable. 


Cleo. Hee’l leade me then in Triumph. 
Dol. Madam he will, I know’t. Flourt/h. 
Enter Proculeius, Cefar, Gallus, Mecenas, 135 
and others of his Traine. 
All, Make way there C@/ar. 137 


Varr. Steev. Varr. Knt. Flourish with- 
in. Dyce. Flourish without. Sta. Flour- 
ish and shout within : ‘ W/ake way there - 
Cesar!’ Glo, Cam. 


127. at roote] at’ root Ed. con). 
what, [| what I Rowe ii et seq. 

131. fr.] sir: Cap. stv,— Var.’73 

Scene 


et seq. 
132. Honourable. | honourable— Pope 
et seq. (subs. ) 
133. then] Om. Theob. ii, Warb. 
Johns. Cap. 
Triumph.] Ff, Rowe. triumph: 
Cap. triumph ? Pope et cet. 
134. Z know’t] Separate line, Han. 
Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Knt, Sing. 
know t] F,F,, Var. ’21, Coll. 
Dyce, Wh. Sta. Glo. Cam. Hal. now/ 


134. Scene III. Pope, Han. 
IV. Warb. Johns. 

135, 136. Enter...] Enter Caesar and 
Train of Romans, and Seleucus. Cap. 
After line 137, Pope et seq. 

136. others of his Traine. ] Attendants. 
Rowe. 

137. All. Make ... Ceefar.] within. 
Make... Cesar. Cap. [Without] Jake 
>= Cesar! Sta. 

there Ceefar | there—Casar. Rowe 


F,. now zt Cap. et cet. 
Flourifh.] Om. Rowe,+, Cap. 


et seq. 


clash of shoots and ‘root.’—[Collier repeats this note in his ed. ii, and adds that 
‘suites’ is corrected to sates in the MS.]—WALKER (C7iz. iii, 311): ‘A grief that 
shoots, —that is neither old nor modern English. Note, too, ‘ shoots a¢ root.’ Folio, 
suites; hence one of the commentators (I know not who), recollecting the puns on 
suitor and shooter in the old dramatists, concluded it was a mistake of the printer’s 
ear for shoots. (Apropos of which, by the way, in a letter of John Alleyn, the player, 
aman ignorant of spelling, ap. Collier’s 4//eyn Papers, shaute is written for suzte, 
courtship, offer of marriage.) Shakespeare wrote smites. Smite occurs in the very 
next column; so that the word seems to have been running in his head.—Dycr: 
Smites,—thus Tyrwhitt in his copy of F, in the British Museum.—Awnon. (Black- 
wood, Oct. 1853): ‘Suites’ is perhaps judiciously altered into s#ztes.—[Inasmuch 
as there is proof, adequately conclusive (see a long discussion in Love’s Lab. Lost, 
IV, i, 122), that swte and szztor were, in Shakespeare’s day, pronounced, on occasion, 
shoot and shooter ; and, inasmuch as ‘suites,’ thus pronounced in the present pas- 
sage makes good sense, I do not think we are justified in substituting, for one of 
Shakespeare’s own words, any other word, however great may be the improvement. 
Is it not common enough, at the present day, to speak of physical pain as ‘ shooting’ ? 
Cannot poetic license apply the same verb to mental pain ?—Ep. ] 


ACT V, Sc. ii] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 349 


Cef. Which is the Queene of Egypt. 138 
Dol. It is the Emperor Madam. Cleo. kneeles. 
Cefar. Arife, you fhall not kneele : 140 


I pray you rife, rife Egypt. 
Cleo, Sir, the Gods will haue it thus, 
My Mafter and my Lord I muft obey, 
Cefar. Take to you no hard thoughts, 
The Record of what iniuries you did vs, 145 
Though written in our flefh, we fhall remember 
As things but done by chance. 
Cleo. Sole Sir o’th’ World, 
I cannot proieét mine owne caufe fo well 
To make it cleare, but do confeffe I haue 150 
Bene laden with like frailties, which before 
Haue often fham’d our Sex. 
Cefar. Cleopatra know, 


We will extenuate rather then inforce : 154 
138-140. Which...kneele-| Lines end, 142, 143. will...Lord ] Separate line, 

queen... Arise, ...kneel: Steev. Var.’03, Pope et seq. 

Age 142. thus,] thus ; Theob. et seq. 

138. Lgypt.| egypt ? Rowe et seq. 143. miuf?| much Ff. 
139. J¢zs]’ Zs Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. obey, obey. F, et seq. 

Ktly. 144. thoughts, | thoughts ; Pope et seq. 
140. [to Cleop. raising her. Cap. 149. protec?] parget Han. procter 
141. rife, ] rise. Johns. Var.’73. rise; Warb. ferfect Orger. 

Cap. Var.’78 et seq. 150. cleare,| clear ; Cap. et seq. 


149. I cannot proiect mine owne cause] WARBURTON: § Project’ signifies to 
invent a cause, not to plead it ; which is the sense here required. It is plain that we 
should read, proctor. The technical term, to plead by an advocate.—JOHNSON: 
Hanmer reads: ‘I cannot parget my own cause—.’ Meaning, I cannot whitewash, 
varnish, or gloss my cause. I believe the present reading to be right. To project a 
cause is to represent a cause; to project it well, is to plan or contrive a scheme of 
defence. —HEATH (p. 466): To Project is properly a term of perspective, signifying 
to represent an object truly, according to the rules of that art. Hence it is applied 
metaphorically to denote a representation of any kind whatever. So that the sense 
is, I am not capable of stating my own cause in so favourable a light, as to free 
myself from all blame.—STEEVENS: ‘Project’ may certainly be right. Sir John 
Harrington, in his Metamorphosis of Ajax, 1596, says—‘I am not only groundedly 
studied in the reformation of Ajax, which I have chosen for the froject of this dis- 
course.’—[p. 95, ed. Singer.]—MALONE: In Mfuch Ado, we find these lines: ‘She 
cannot love, Nor take no shape nor /roject of affection, She is so self-endear’d.’ —[ III, 
i, 59.] I cannot project, etc. means, therefore, I cannot shape or form my cause, 
etc.—[ Heath’s interpretation, which is also, in fact, Johnson’s, seems to be the best. 


—ED. ] 


350 LAE RAGED IENMOL: [ACT Vv, SC. ii. 


If you apply your felfe to our intents, 155 
Which towards you are moft gentle, you fhall finde 
A benefit in this change : but if you feeke 
To lay on me a Cruelty, by taking 
Anthonies courfe, you fhall bereaue your felfe 
Of my good purpofes, and put your children 160 
To that deftruction which Ie guard them from, 
If thereon you relye. Ile take my leaue. 
Cleo.And may through all the world : tis yours, & we 
your Scutcheons, and your fignes of Conqueft fhall 
Hang in what place you pleafe. Here my good Lord. 165 
Cefar. You fhall aduife me in all for Cleopatra. 
Cleo. This is the breefe : of Money, Plate, & Iewels 


I am poffeft of, ’tis exactly valewed, 168 
158. Cruelty, by] cruelty by Pope, 165. Lord.] lord,— Ktly. 

Han. Cam. 166. 2% all for] of all Rowe ii, Pope. 
159. vour felfe| you felfe F,. 167. brecfe: of | briefe: of F,. brief: 
162. leaue.| leave— Var.’73. of F,F,, Rowe. brief of Pope et seq, 
163. yours, ] yours ; Theob. et seq. 168. of,] of— Pope,+. of, Cap. et 
164. your Scutcheons | Your Scutcheons seq. 

Ine valewed | valued FF. 


165. Here] Hear, Coll. iii. 


166. You shall aduise me in all for Cleopatra] MALONE: You shall yourself 
be my counsellor, and suggest whatever you wish to be done for your relief. So, 
afterwards: ‘For we intend so to dispose you, as Yourself shall give us counsel.’ 
[lines 219, 220. ] ; 

167. This is the breefe, etc.] VON FRIESEN (iii, 256) : Cleopatra’s determination 
to shut herself up in her Monument, and have her death announced to Anthony is a 
step concerning which it is difficult to decide whether it was prompted by a sudden 
prudence in retiring before the bitter reproaches of Antony, or an artistic stroke of 
fresh coguciterie. But when there followed upon it an unexpected issue and Antony 
had committed suicide, I am convinced that Cleopatra was smitten with a love for 
the dying and for the dead hero, deeper and, possibly, more overwhelming than ever 
she had felt for him when alive. Hereupon, she reveals in her opposition to Octavius 
all the versatility of her shrewdness and dissimulation. Plutarch, justly enough, 
does not record that she contemplated enmeshing Octavius in her charms. This 
repulsive legend, started by the historians after Plutarch’s time, Shakespeare could 
not, therefore, have intended, even in the remotest degree, to have recalled. On the 
contrary her deportment toward the Emperor from the moment of his sending Thyreus 
to her displays the keenest shrewdness. In this respect, her interview with him is a 
model. . . . From the very instant that she learned the Emperor’s decision to carry 
her as a prisoner to Rome to grace his triumph, her resolve to take her own life was 
fixed and immovable. For what other purpose, forsooth, was the presentation to 
Octavius of the brief of her treasures and the summons to Seleucus to testify to her 
conscientious statement ? 


ACT SV, SEL.) ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 351 


Not petty things admitted. Where’s Seleucus? 
Seleu. Heere Madam. 170 
Cleo, This is my Treafurer, let him fpeake (my Lord) 

Vpon his perill, that I haue referu’d 

To my felfe nothing. Speake the truth Seleucus. 
Seleu. Madam,I had rather feele my lippes, 

Then to my perill fpeake that which is not. r75 
Cleo. What haue I kept backe. 
Sel. Enough to purchafe what you haue made known 
Cefar. Nay bluth not Cleopatra, I approue 

Your Wifedome in the deede. 


Cleo. See Cefar : Oh behold, 180 
169. admitted.| admitted — Pope. Han. Cap. et seq. 

omitted— Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. 174. feele] F,. seed Johns. Varr. Mal. 

Where’s| Whereas FF. Ran. Steev. Warr. Sing. Ktly. /eale F,. 

169-211. Where's ... pittied| Om. Seal ¥ , et cet. 

Kemble. 176. backe.| back ? FF, et seq. 
174. Madam] Om. Han. 180. See...behold | Cesar ! behold Han. 
174,175. LZhad...perill | Separate line, Ceefar :] Cesar / Rowe et seq. 


168, 169. ’tis exactly valewed, Not petty things admitted] THEOBALD: 
Sagacious editors! Cleopatra gives in a list of her wealth, says, ’tis exactly valued ; 
but that petty things are not admitted in this list: and then she appeals to her treas- 
urer, that she has reserved nothing to herself. And when he betrays her, she is 
reduced to the shift of exclaiming against the ingratitude of servants, and of making 
apologies for having secreted certain trifles. Who does not see, that we ought to 
read: ‘ Not petty things omztted ?’ For this declaration lays open her falsehood ; 
and makes her angry, when her treasurer detects her in a direct lie—JOHNSON: Not- 
withstanding the wrath of Theobald, I have restored the old reading. She is angry 
afterwards, that she is accused of having reserved more than petty things.—[In the 
corresponding passage in Plutarch, Cleopatra says, ‘ though it may be I have reserved 
some jewels and trifles meet for women,’ etc.—Ep. ]—ABBoTrT (@ 377) : The parti- 
ciple is often used. to express a condition, where, for perspicuity we should now mostly 
insert 7 Thus here the meaning is, ‘exactly, if petty things be excepted.’—[See 
IGM Is beth 176) 

174. I had rather seele my lippes] JoHNSON: Sew up my mouth.—STEEVENS : 
It means close up my lips as effectually as the eyes of a hawk are closed. To see/ 
hawks was the technical term.—COLLIER (ed. i): The commentators have under- 
stood an allusion to seedizg the eyes of a hawk ; but the common expression of sealing 
the lips requires no such explanation.—SINGER : But the poet is very fond of such 
allusions [to hawking], and there is surely no reason for printing sea/, and thus sub- 
stituting a word not authorised by the old copy which always prints the latter word 
seal or seale.—DYCE (ed. ii) : In II, xiii, 137, we have ‘the wise gods see/e our 
eyes,’ etc. But here the spelling of the Folio goes for little; in Lear, IV, vi, 168, 
the Folio has ‘the power to sea/e th’ accusers lips’ ; and in 2 Hen. VJ. I, ii, $9, 
‘ Seale vp your Lips.’ STAUNTON : To sea/ one’s lips was a familiar expression ages 
before Shakespeare lived. 


352 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V,/SCyatts 


How pompe is followed : Mine will now be yours, 181 
And fhould we fhift eftates, yours would be mine. 
The ingratitude of this Se/eucus, does 
Euen make me wilde. Oh Slaue, of no more truft 
Then loue that’s hyr’d? What goeft thou backe, y fhalt 185 
Go backe I warrant thee : but Ile catch thine eyes 
Though they had wings. Slaue, Soule-leffe, Villain, Dog. 
O rarely bafe ! 
Ce/ar. Good Queene, let vs intreat you. 
Cleo. O Ce/far, what a wounding fhame is this, 190 
That thou vouchfafing heere to vifit me, 
Doing the Honour of thy Lordlineffe 


To one fo meeke, that mine owne Seruant fhould 193 
181. followed | follow'’d Pope et seq. 187. Soule-leffe, Villain, soul-less vil- 
184. Luen]| Ev'n Pope,+. lain, Pope et seq. 

185. hyr’ d?] hir' d. Rowe, Pope, Han. Villain] Villian Rowe i. 
hiv d— Theob. Warb. Johns, fzr’d/ 188. [Striking him. Johns. flying at 
Cap. et seq. him. Cap. 
What] What! Coll. Wh. Ktly, 189. [interposing. Cap. 

Hal. 193. meeke] weak Theob. Han. Warb. 

backe,| back ? Rowe ii et seq. mean Cap. Ran. 


9] thou Ff. 


184. Oh Slaue, of no more trust, etc. ] STAHR (p. 270): This little comedy, 
pre-arranged and agreed upon, between her and her faithful treasurer is a master- 
stroke of the bold lady, which completely attains the purpose for which it was 
designed.—[It is hardly too much to say, I think, that the historian of Cleopatra has 
made us all his debtors by this keen-sighted.interpretation of the Queen’s outrageous 
treatment of Seleucus. It is a relief to be freed from the necessity of finding excuses 
for what we now see to be simulated rage.—ED. ] 

185, 186. What goest thou backe, ... thee] DEIGHTON: What (said as she 
advances to strike him), do you retreat before me ? you’ll be ready enough, I warrant, 
to desert me ; ‘Go back’ being used in the literal and the figurative sense. In the 
latter sense Schmidt takes the phrase here as equivalent to ‘be worsted.’—[ Very few 
readers, I think, will detect any ‘figurative sense’ here, or any equivalent to being 
‘worsted.’ —Ep. ] 

188. O rarely base] STEEVENS: That is, base to an uncommon degree. 

193. To one so meeke] THEOBALD: Surely Cleopatra must be bantering Cesar, 
to call herself ‘meek,’ when he had the moment before seen her fly at her Treasurer, 
and wishing to tear out his eyes. I correct, wea, that is, so shrunk in fortune and 
vower. Besides, she might allude to her bodily decay. See Plucarch.—[The fore- 
going note with its emendation is not repeated in any of the Variorums, and was, 
therefore, unknown to WALKER, when (Cv?z. ii, 300) among a number of instances 
where m and w are confounded, he also suggested weak, in the present line. J— 
CAPELL (i, 50): That ‘meek’ is corrupt, is assented to readily; but not the word 
"tis amended by [by Theobald], weaé is ambiguous, and therefore improper; and 


_AE€T V, SC. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 353 


Parcell the fumme of my difgraces, by 

Addition of his Enuy. Say (good Ce/ar) 195 
That I fome Lady trifles haue referu’d, 

Immoment toyes, things of fuch Dignitie 

As we greet moderne Friends withall, and fay 

Some Nobler token I haue kept apart 

For Lima and Odauia, to induce 200 
Their mediation, muft I be vnfolded 

With one that I haue bred : The Gods! it {mites me 

Beneath the fall I haue. Prythee go hence, 

Or I fhall fhew the Cynders of my fpirits 


Through th’Afhes of my chance : Wer’t thou a man, 205 

195. Enuy.] Envy! FF, et seq. 203. [To Seleucus. Johns. 

196. Lady trifles] Lady-trifies Ft, Prythee| Prethee Ff. 

Rowe, +, Coll. 204. /pirits| spirit Walker, Coll. MS, 

198. wethall,| withal; Theob. et seq. Ktly, Huds. 

201. mediation,| F,, Coll. Wh. Hal. 205. th’ A/fhes| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 
meditation, FF. mediation ? Var.’ 21. Sing. Wh. Dyce ii, iii, Ktly, Hal. she 
medtation ; Cap. et cet. ashes Cap. et cet. 

202. With] By Rowe ii,+, Var.’73. my chance | mischance Han. Coll. 
of Cap. ii, iii (MS). my change Walker. my 

bred :| bred ? Rowe et seq. glance Ingleby, Huds. 
The Gods] Ye gods Coll. ii, iii Wert] Wert Rowe. 


(MS), Sing. Ktly. 


mean, a word as near it in characters, bids fairer to be the true one, from its oppo- 
sition to ‘lordliness’ in the same sentence.—MALONE: ‘ Meek,’ I suppose, means 
here /ame.—[I suppose that ‘meek’ here means meek,—the very quality that Cleo- 
patra would claim for herself, especially when she least deserved it—ED. ] 

194. Parcell the summe of my disgraces] JOHNSON: 7o parcel her disgraces, 
might be expressed in vulgar language, ¢o bundle up her calamities —MALONE: The 
meaning, I think, either is, ‘that this fellow should add one more parcel or z#em to 
the sum of my disgraces, namely, his own malice’ ; or ‘that this fellow should Jot up 
the sum of my disgraces, and add his own malice to the account.’—[ Dyce adopts, 
in his Glossary, this note of Malone. ] 

195. Enuy] That is, malice; see Shakespeare, passim. 

198. moderne] That is, common, every day ; see Shakespeare, passim. 

201, 202. vnfolded With one ] For other instances where ‘ with’ is equivalent 
to by, see ABBOTT, § 193; or FRANZ, § 383. 

202. The Gods] CoL.ier (ed. ii) : Another instance of old misprinting, ‘ The’ 
for Ye, owing to the mistake of the abbreviation ye: we derive the change from the 
MS.—Dvyce (ed. ii): But compare, ‘O me, the gods,’ Coriolanus, Il, iii; O the 
gods!’ Tro. & Cress. IV, ii; Cortolanus, IV,i; Cymb., 1, i; ‘O the blest gods!” 
Lear, Il, iv; and ‘O ¢he good gods /’ in this present scene, line 266. 

204, 205. Cynders of my spirits Through th’Ashes of my chance, etc. ] 
THEOBALD: She considers herself, in her downfall, as a fabric destroyed by fire; 


23 


354 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act v, sc. ii. 
Thou would’ft haue mercy on me. 206 
Cefar. Forbeare Seleucus. 


Cleo. Be it known, that we the greateft are mif-thoght 
For things that others do : and when we fall, 
We anfwer others merits, in our name 210 


Are therefore to be pittied. 


207. [Exit Seleucus. Cap. et seq. 

210, 211. anfwer...Are] Ff. answer 
others merits, in our names Are Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. i. answer others’ merits, 
in our names Ave Theob. ii. pander 
others merits with our names, And Han. 
answer others’ merits in our names ; Are 


Johns. Var. ’73. answer others? merits ; 
in our name Are Cap. answer others’ 
merits in our names, Are Var.’78, ’85, 
Ran. answer others’ merits in our name, 
And Coll. iii. answering others’ merits 
in our name, Are Bulloch. answer 
others’ merits in our name, Are Mal. et 
cet. 


and then would intimate that the same fire has reduced her spirits too to cinders ; 
z. e. consumed the strength and dignity of her soul and mind. Warburton thinks, 
the poet wrote, ‘Through the ashes of my cheeks.’—[This emendation Warburton 
did not suggest in his subsequent edition. It is, therefore, open to hope, that he 
withdrew it. ]—Murray (/. £. D. s. v. Chance, 3.) : That which befalls a person ; 
(one’s) hap, fortune, luck, lot.—[We have already had in ‘the wounded chance of 
Anthony’ (III, x, 49), a use of ‘chance’ exactly parallel to the present. ‘Chance’ 
there meant fortune, Jot, and here it means the same. ‘ Though the ashes of her 
fortune, the embers of her spirit are still glowing.’ In this same line, where Cleopatra 
says ‘,Wer't thou a man,’ she implies the knowledge that Seleucus was a eunuch. 
—ED. ] 

204. spirits] See I, ii, 143, with its protest against Walker’s monosyllabic pro- 
nunciation of ‘spirit.’ 

209-211. when we fall, We answer others merits, in our name Are there- 
fore to be pittied] WARBURTON: The lines should be pointed thus :—‘ And when 
we fall We answer. Others’ merits, in our names Are therefore to be pitied.’ That 
is, ‘when any misfortune hath subjected us to the power of our enemies, we are sure 
to be punished for those faults. As this is the case, it is but reasonable that we 
should have the merit of our ministers’ good actions, as well as bear the blame of 
their bad.’ But she softens the word meri¢ into pity. The reason of her making 
the reflexion was this: Her former conduct was liable to much censure from 
Octavius, which she would hereby artfully insinuate was owing to her evil ministers. 
And as her present conduct, in concealing her treasures, appeared to be her own act, 
she being detected by her minister, she begs, that as she now answers for her 
former minister’s miscarriages, so her present minister’s merit in this discovery, might 
likewise be placed to her account: Which she thinks but reasonable-—HEATH 
(p. 467) : That is, We, who are in possession of the supreme power, are ill thought 
of for faults committed by others, without our direction or knowledge; and, when we 
are stripped of this power, are obliged to answer in our own names for what those 
others ought in justice to answer for themselves. Therefore we are to be pitied. I 
conceive that this reflection of Cleopatra is intended to insinuate, that the deficiency 
in the inventory ought to be imputed to Seleucus her accuser, and not to herself; 


_ACT V, SC. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 355 


Cafar. Cleopatra, 212 
Not what you haue referu’d, nor what acknowledg’d 
Put we i’th’Roll of Conquett : {till bee’t yours, 


Beftow it at your pleafure, and beleeue 285 
C@/ars no Merchant, to make prize with you 
Of things that Merchants fold. Therefore be cheer’d, 217 
214. Put we] Put me Rowe, Pope. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Ktly. de i Cap. 
2’th’| Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. z’the eticet: 
Cap. et cet. 216. prize] price Anon. ap. Cam. 
beet] Ff. bet Rowe,+, Sing. 217. fold | hold Anon. ap. Cam. 


and that he therefore was properly answerable for it. I would beg leave to add, 
that I am inclined to believe that Shakespear gave us the third line thus, And answer 
others merits in our names; which renders the construction more explicit and per- 
spicuous.—[COLLIER’s MS marked the same change from ‘Are’ to dnd. ‘Very 
unnecessarily,’ says Dyce (ed. ii): ‘In the last clause of a sentence Shakespeare 
(like other old writers) sometimes omits ‘‘and.”’]—CAPELL (i, 51): The reflec- 
tions contain’d in this speech are perfectly just, and their wording as clear as their 
intention; which is—to exculpate the speaker, not in what has recently happen’d, 
but her political behaviour in general: Nothing then is hard to conceive, but the 
consequence drawn from these premises,—‘in our name Are therefore to be pity’d’; 
and the single difficulty there, lyes in—‘ zeme’: But how often is zame put for— 
title? and here with great energy: as importing—that greatness and dignities, high 
and swelling titles, were mere vanities and a zame only; rather worthy of pity than 
envy, by reason of it’s servants’ abuses, and the ruin it often suffers through them.— 
JouHNson: ‘ We suffer at our highest state of elevation in the thoughts of mankind 
for that which others do; and when we fall, those that contented themselves only 
to think ill before, call us to answer in our own names for the merits of others. We 
are therefore to be pitied.’ ¥ert¢s is in this place taken in an ill sense, for actions 
meriting censure.—M. Mason: The plain meaning is this: ‘ The greatest of us are 
aspersed for things which others do; and when, by the decline of our power, we 
become in a condition to be questioned, we are called to answer in our own names 
for the actions of other people.’ JA/er7t is here used, as the word desert frequently 
is, to express a certain degree of merit or demerit. A man may merit punishment 
as well as reward.—MALONE: As demerits was often used, in Shakspeare’s time, as 
synonymous to merit, so merit might have been used in the sense which we now 
affix to demerit; or the meaning may be only, we are called to account, and to answer 
in our own names for acts, with which others, rather than we, deserve to be charged. 
—[From Capell’s crabbed English (Dr Johnson, using Prospero’s language in 
reference to Caliban, said that if Capell had only come to him, he would ‘have 
endowed his purposes with words’) I can extract more light than from any of the 
other interpretations, and, in addition, his version conforms closely to the Folio. 
The real difficulty lies, as he says, in the word ‘name,’ which here, I think, means 
eminence, greatness (as in other instances which Schmidt’s Zexicon will supply). 
The passage, then, may be paraphrased: ‘When we, the great ones of earth, fail, 
it is not through our own fault, but through that of others, our subordinates; for the 
very eminence of our position, therefore, we are to be pitied.’—Eb. ] 


356 DHE STARA GLAD TEMOLE FACT V, SC. ii. 
Make not your thoughts your prifons : No deere Queen, 218 
For we intend fo to difpofe you, as 

Your felfe fhall giue vs counfell : Feede,and fleepe : 220 


Our care and pitty is fo much vpon you, 
That we remaine your Friend, and fo adieu. 


Cleo. My Mafter,and my Lord. 
Caefar. Not fo : Adieu. Flourt/h. 

Exeunt Cefar , and his Traine. 225 
Cleo. He words me Gyrles, he words me, 


That I fhould not be Noble to my felfe. 

But hearke thee Charmzan. 
Iras. Finith good Lady, the bright day is done, 

And we are for the darke. 230 
Cleo. Hye thee againe, 

I haue fpoke already, and it is prouided, 

Go put it to the hafte. 233 


218. prifons] poison Han. i, Johns. 
conj. prison Han. ii, Dyce conj. 
Ktly. 

223. Lord.] lord,— Cap. Jord! Var. 
73 et Seq. 

224. Flourifh.] Om. Ff. 

225. Scene V. (misprint for IV.) Pope, 
Warb. Johns. Scene IV. Han. 

226-228. /7e...Charmian] Two lines, 
dividing at of, Han. Cap. et seq. 

228. Charmian] Charmion Johns. 


228. [Whispers Char. Theob. et seq. 
To this whisper, Char. replies, ‘The 
aspics, Madam?’ Kemble. 

229. Lady,] lady. Johns. /ady, Cap. 
et seq. 

231. againe] amain Theob. conj. 
( withdrawn.) 

232. [ haue] I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, 
iii. 

233. Go put] Go, put Cap. Steev. 
Varr. Knt, Coll. Sing. Wh. Sta. Ktly. 


218, Make not your thoughts your prisons] JOHNSON: I once wished to 
read—‘ Make not your thoughts your fozson—’ : Do not destroy yourself by musing 
on your misfortune. Yet I would change nothing, as the old reading presents a very 
proper sense. ‘Be not a prisoner in imagination, when in reality you are free.— 
[JOHNSON suggested Aozson, wherein he was anticipated by Hanmer ed. i. Dyce 
suggested frison, wherein he was anticipated by Hanmer, ed. ii.—ED.] 

232. and it is prouided] THEOBALD: Freinshemius has observed, upon a pas- 
sage in Quintus Curtius, that your best writers very often leave some things to be 
understood from the consequence and implication of words, which the words them- 
selves do not express. Our author observes this conduct here. Cleopatra must be 
supposed to mean, she has spoke for the asp, and it is provided, tho’ she says not a 
word of it in direct terms.—CAPELL (i, 51): The Poet’s art in this place is worth 
noting: ‘it’ relates covertly to the asp which she afterwards dies by; but her 
further directions about it, are convey’d in a whisper,—‘ But hark thee, Charmian’; 
which had they been openly given, a main grace of the incident that presently fol- 
lows had been taken away from it, that is—it’s novelty, 


ACT V, SC. ii. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 357 


Char. Madam, I will. 
Enter Dolabella. 235 
Dol, Where’s the Queene ? 
Char. Behold fir. 
Cleo. Dolabella. 
Dol. Madam, as thereto fworne, by your command 
(Which my loue makes Religion to obey ) 240 
I tell you this : Ce/ar through Syria 
Intends his iourney, and within three dayes, 
You with your Children will he fend before, 
Make your beft vfe of this. I haue perform’d 
Your pleafure, and my promife. 245 
Cleo. Doltabella, I fhall remaine your debter. 
Dol. your Seruant : 


Adieu good Queene, I muft attend on Ce/ar. Exit 
Cleo. Farewell, and thankes. 
Now Jras, what think’ft thou ? 250 
Thou, an Egyptian Puppet fhall be fhewne 
234. [Exit Charmian. Theob.+. go- 243. before,| before; Rowe ii et seq. 
ing. Cap. (subs. ) 
236. Where's] Where ts Pope et seq. 246. Dolabella,] Separate line, Pope 
237. Char.] Iras. Han. et seq. 
[Exit Char. Cap. et seq. 249, 250. Farewell...thou ?| Ff, Cap. 
238. Dolabella.] Ff, Rowe, Pope. One line, Rowe et seq. 
Dolabella ! Theob. Han. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 251. fhall | fhailt Ff. 


Cam. Dolabella ? Cap. et cet. 


250, etc. Now Iras, etc.] Mrs JAMESON (ii, 152): But though Cleopatra talks 
of dying ‘ after the high Roman fashion,’ she fears what she most desires, and cannot 
perform with simplicity what costs her such an effort. That extreme physical coward- 
ice, which was so strong a trait in her historical character, which led to the defeat 
of Actium, which made her delay the execution of a fatal resolve till she had ‘tried 
conclusions infinite of easy ways to die,’ Shakespeare has rendered with the finest 
possible effect, and in a manner which heightens instead of diminishing our respect 
and interest. Timid by nature, she is courageous by the mere force of will, and she 
lashes herself up with high-sounding words into a kind of false daring. Her lively 
imagination suggests every incentive which can spur her on to the deed she has 
resolved, yet trembles to contemplate. She pictures to herself all the degradations 
which must attend her captivity ; and let it be observed, that those which she antici- 
pates are precisely such as a vain, luxurious, and haughty woman would especially 
dread, and which only true virtue and magnanimity could despise. Cleopatra could 
have endured the loss of freedom; but to be led in triumph through the streets of 
Rome is insufferable. She could stoop to Cesar with dissembling courtesy, and meet 
duplicity with superior art; but ‘to be chastised’ by the scornful or upbraiding 
glance of the injured Octavia—‘rather a ditch in Egypt!’ 


358 DR LWEDE SLIM EIS IIONME. (OV [ACT 'V,"SGp It 


In Rome afwell as I : Mechanicke Slaues 252 
With greazie Aprons, Rules,and Hammers fhall 
Vplift vs to the view. In their thicke breathes, 
Ranke of groffe dyet, fhall we be enclowded, 255 
And fore’d to drinke their vapour. 
fras. The Gods forbid. 
Cleo. Nay, ’tis moft certaine /ras.: fawcie Lictors 
Will catch at vs like Strumpets, and fcald Rimers 
Ballads vs outa Tune. The quicke Comedians 260 
Extemporally will ftage vs, and prefent 
Our Alexandrian Reuels : Anthony 
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I fhall fee 


Some fqueaking Cleopatra Boy my greatneffe 264 
259. catch at] chastise Orger. Johns. zt 0’ -tune Var.’73. out of tune 
Scala) feall’d Lae pe Rowe, Pope, Ktly. out o’ tune Han. et cet. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. sta//’d Han. 262. Alexandrian] Alexandria Fi. 
260. Ballads| Ballad Ff et seq. 264. /qgueaking... Boy| /peaking-Cleo- 
out a Tune| Ff, Rowe. out-a- patra-Boy FF, /peaking Cleopatra- 
-tune Pope. out-o'-tune Theob. Warb. -Boy ¥ ,. speaking Cleopatra Boy Rowe. 


256. drinke their vapour] Murray (J. £. D. s.v. Drink, I. Transitive senses. 
5.): To draw in or inhale. [The current phrase, in Shakespeare’s time, for ‘to 
smoke tobacco’ was ¢o drink tobacco. | 

258, 259. sawcie Lictors Will catch at vs] Murray (J. Z. D. s. v. Catch, 
23. Yo catch at): To snatch at; to make a quick or eager attempt to lay hold of. 
[The present line is quoted. Dr Murray’s adjective, ‘ eager,’ is well chosen. It is 
the ‘ eagerness’ which is naturally so abhorrent and degrading to the Queen. Lear 
(IV, vi, 166) attributes to the ‘beadle’ that which, I think, Cleopatra attributes, in 
imagination, to the saucy lictors.—ED.] 

259. scald] JoHNson: A word of contempt, implying poverty, disease, and 
filth. 

260. Ballads] For this superfluous s, see ‘abstracts,’ I, iv, 11; ABBOTT, 
§ 338. 

260. The quicke Comedians ] JoHNsoN: The gay inventive players.—M. MAson:. 
‘Quick’ here means, veady, rather than gay—MALonE : The lively, inventive, guick- 
witted comedians. 

262. Our Alexandrian Reuels] See note on ‘reuell,’ I, iv, 7, and also II, vii, 
III. 

264. Some squeaking Cleopatra Boy my greatnesse] HANMER: The parts 
of women were acted on the stage by boys.—ScuMIDT, in the JVozes to his version 
of Tieck’s Translation, denies (p. 176) that ‘boy’ is here a verb, because the next 
clause, ‘i’th’ posture,’ etc., does not harmonise with it; such a posture can hardly be 
deemed characteristic of a boy. He, therefore, holds ‘Cleopatra-boy’ as a com- 
pound; and the meaning is that she will see some Cleopatra-boy acting her own 
greatness in the posture, etc. In his subsequent Zexzcon he adhered to this interpreta- 


ACT V, SC. ii!] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 359 


I’th’pofture of a Whore. 265 
lvas. O the good Gods ! 
Cleo. Nay that’s certaine. 
fras. IWle neuer fee’t ? for I am fure mine Nailes 
Are ftronger then mine eyes. 
Cleo, Why that’s the way to foole their preparation, 270 
And to conquer their moft abfurd intents. 


265. £’th’] I’ the Cap. et seq. 270-273. fo foole...Charmian. ] As three 
266. Gods !] gods forbid ! Words. lines, ending way...conquer... Charmian. 
267. that’s| that ts Steev. Varr. Knt, Rowe et seq. 
Coll. Wh. Ktly, Hal. dt that’s Words. 270. foole| foil Coll. MS. 
268. /ee’t | Ff, Rowe, Cap. Dyce, Sta. 271. ¢o conguer| conquer Ff. 
Glo. Cam. see 2¢ Pope et cet. abfurd | assurd Theob. Han. 
Lam] am Rowe ii. J’ m Pope,+, Cap. Coll. (MS), Huds. abhorr'd 
Dyce ii, iii. Kinnear. 


maine| my Ff et seq. 


tion and defined the phrase: ‘I shall see some boy, performing the part of Cleopatra, 
as my highness.’ SPRENGER suggested dow instead of ‘boy.’ LEO ina Review of 
Sprenger’s Lmendations (Sh. Jhrbuch, xxvii, 1892, p. 223) suggests that punctuation 
alone is needed to reveal the sense, thus : ‘Some squeaking Cleopatra boy—my great- 
ness I’the posture,’ etc. He adds, however, a possible emendation of ‘boy,’ which 
it will do his fine reputation no harm to suppress, especially since he himself set no 
value on it, and professed his adherence to the Folio.—ED. 

264. squeaking] DEIGHTON appositely quotes Hamlet’s greeting to the young 
boy actor: ‘Pray God, your voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked 
within the ring.’—II, ii, 407. 

264. Boy] W. PoEL (New Sh. Soc. Trans., 8 Nov, 1889) : Stephen Gosson thus 
condemns the realistic acting of the boys who assumed women’s parts: * Which way, 
I beseech you, shall they be excused that put on, not the apparel only, but the gait, 
the gestures, the voice, the passions of a woman ?’ 

265. posture] That is, dehaviour, deportment.—ED. 

267. Nay that’s certaine] CAPELL (i, 53): Though this speech is still left in 
possession of the place it has always occupy’d, yet it’s title is very suspicious: it 
seems to have nothing to do here; and more than so,—to have been an accidental 
corruption, crept in by the compositor’s heedlessness, who was beginning to print 
again in this place a speech that he had printed before [line 258, supra]; and 
besides,—the spirit of the maid’s declaration concerning her eyes, is weaken’d by 
the intervention of any thing between that and her exclamation: if the speech must 
needs stand, for reasons that are not discoverable by the editor, it should at least be 
made metre of, by reading—/Vay, ¢hzs zs certain ; meaning—this which I tell you.— 
[Capell adopted this change in his Version for Garrick. ] 

268. mine Nailes] See ‘your proofe,’—II, ii, 141 ; ‘ Mine Nightingale,’—IV, 
viii, 24; ‘ Vnarme Eros,’—IV, xiv, 45; all examples of errors in hearing. Also, if 
need be, Walker (C72¢. i, 318). 

271. their most absurd intents] THEOBALD : Why should Cleopatra call Czsar’s 
designs ‘absurd’? She could not think his intent of carrying her in triumph, such, 


360 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. ii. 


Enter Charmian. 272 
NowCharmian. 
Shew me my Women like a Queene : Go fetch 
My beft Attyres. I am againe for Cidrus, 275 


To meete Marke Anthony. Sirra ras, go 


273. Charmian.] Ff, Rowe,+. Char FF, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han, Warb. 
mian ! Dyce, Sta. Glo, Cam. Ktly. Char- Dyce, Glo. Cam, Swift, Jras, Orger. 


mian ? Cap. et cet. Sirrah, [ras, Johns. et cet. 
275. Cidrus] Czdnus Rowe, Pope. 276. go] go, Rowe. go— Pope,+. 
Cydnus Theob. go. Cap. et seq. 


276, Sirra Iras,] F, Sirrah Iras, 


with regard to his own glory ; and her finding an expedient to disappoint him, could 
not bring it under that predicament. I much rather think the poet wrote: ‘ Their 
most assur’d intents,’ 7. ¢. the purposes which they make themselves most sure of 
accomplishing. JOHNSON: I have preserved the old reading. The design certainly 
appeared absurd enough to Cleopatra, both as she thought it unreasonable in itself, 
and as she knew it would fail—UPpron (p. 295): That is, harsh, grating. Latin, 
absurdus, ex ab e¢ surdus, @ quo aures et animum avertas. Cicero, Pro Roséto. 
Sect. 7: ‘Fraudavit Roscius. Est hoc quidem auribus animisque [hominum] absur- 
dum.’ Adbsurdum est, 1. e. sounds harsh, grating, unpleasant.—HUupDSsoN : ‘ Absurd’ 
seems to me an absurd reading.—ROLFE: Surely if Ceesar’s intents are assur’d from 
his point of view, they are ‘ absurd’ from Cleopatra’ s, for she is going to fool them. 
In the same vein, after she has done this, she calls Caesar an ‘ass unpolicied.’— 
Murray (XV. £. D. s. v.): Adopted from French aésurde, an adaptation of Latin 
absurd-us, inharmonious, tasteless, foolish; formed on aé off, here intensive + surdus 
deaf, inaudible, insufferable to the ear. 2. Out of harmony with reason or propriety ; 
incongruous, unreasonable, illogical. In modern sense, especially, plainly opposed to 
reason and hence ridiculous, silly—[I think Shakespeare has a right to the privi- 
lege of using ‘absurd’ in its derivative sense.—ED. ] 

274, 275, etc. Go fetch My best Attyres, etc.] Mrs JAMESON (ii, 154) : She then 
calls for her diadem, her robes of state, and attires herself as if ‘again for Cydnus, to 
meet Mark Antony.’ Coquette to the last, she must make Death proud to take her, 
and die ‘ pheenix like,’ as she had lived, with all the pomp of preparation—luxurious 
in her despair. The death of Lucretia, of Portia, of Arria, and others who died 
‘after the high Roman fashion,’ is sublime according to the Pagan ideas of virtue, 
and yet none of them so powerfully affect the imagination as the catastrophe of Cleo- 
patra. The idea of this frail, timid, wayward woman, dying with heroism from the 
mere force of passion and will, takes us by surprise. The attic elegance of her mind, 
her poetical imagination, the pride of beauty and royalty predominating to the last, 
and the sumptuous and picturesque accompaniments with which she surrounds her- 
self in death, carry to its extreme height that effect of contrast which prevails through 
her life and character. No arts, no invention could add to the real circumstances of 
Cleopatra’s closing scene. Shakespeare has shown profound judgment and feeling in 
adhering closely to the classical authorities; and to say that the language and senti- 
ments worthily fill up the outline, is the most magnificent praise that can be given. 

276. Sirra Iras] See IV, xv, 105.—Dyce (ed. ii) : Nearly all the modern editors 
wrongly put a comma between these words. 


ACTYV, SC. il] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 361 


( Now Noble Charmian, wee’| difpatch indeede,) 277 
And when thou haft done this chare, Ile giue thee leaue 
To play till Doomefday : bring our Crowne, and all. 
. A notfe within. 280 
Wherefore’s this noife ? 
Enter a Guard/man. 
Gardf. Heere is a rurall Fellow, 283 


277. No parentheses, Rowe et seq. 280. [Exit Iras, Charmian falls to ad- 
278. thou haft| thowast Pope, Han. justing Cleopatra’s dress. Noise with- 
thow st Theob. Warb. Johns. Dyce ii, iii. in. Cap. 


279. Doomefday -| dooms-day— Pope, 280-331. Om. Kemble. 
Theob. Han. Warb. dooms-day. Johns. 281. Wherefore’s] Wherefore ¥F,, 
et seq. Rowe,+, Var.’73. 


283. arurall Fellow] A. C. BRADLEY (p. 395): The Porter [in Macbeth] does 
not make me smile: the moment is too terrific. He is grotesaue; no doubt the 
contrast he affords is humorous as well as ghastly ; I dare say the groundlings roared 
with laughter at his coarsest remarks, But they are not comic enough to allow one 
to forget for a moment what has preceded and what must follow. And I am far 
from complaining of this. I believe that it is what Shakespeare intended, and that 
he despised the groundlings if they laughed. Of course he could have written with- 
out the least difficulty speeches five times as humorous; but he knew better. The 
Grave-diggers make us laugh: the old Countryman who brings the asps to Cleopatra 
makes us smile at least. But the Grave-digger scene does not come at a moment of 
extreme tension; and itis long. Our distress for Ophelia is not so absorbing that 
we refuse to be interested in the man who digs her grave, or even continue through- 
out the long conversation to remember always with pain that the grave is hers. It 
is fitting, therefore, that he should be made decidedly humorous. The passage in 
Antony and Cleopatra is much nearer to the passage in Afacbeth, and seems to have 
been forgotten by those who say that there is nothing in Shakespeare resembling that 
passage.* The old Countryman comes at a moment of tragic exaltation, and the 
dialogue is appropriately brief. But the moment, though tragic, is emphatically one 
of exaltation. We have not been feeling horror, nor are we feeling a dreadful 
suspense. We are going to see Cleopatra die, but she is to die gloriously and to 
triumph over Octavius. And therefore our amusement at the old Countryman and 
the contrast he affords to these high passions, is untroubled, and it was right to make 
him really comic. But the Porter’s case is quite different. We cannot forget how 
the knocking that makes him grumble sounded to Macbeth, or that within a few 
minutes of his opening the gate Duncan will be discovered in his blood ; nor can we 
help feeling that in pretending to be porter of hell-gate he is terribly near the truth. 
To give him language so humorous that it would ask us almost to lose the sense of 
these things would have been a fatal mistake,—the kind of mistake that means want 
of dramatic imagination. And that was not the sort of error into which Shakespeare 


fell. 


* Even if this were true, the retort is obvious that neither is there anything resem- 
bling the murder-scene in AZacbeth. 


362 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. ii. 


That will not be deny’de your Highneffe prefence, 
He brings you Figges. 285 
Cleo. Let him come in. Exit Guard/man. 
What poore an Inftrument 
May do a Noble deede : he brings me liberty : 
My Refolution’s plac’d, and I haue nothing 
Of woman in me : Now from head to foote 290 
I am Marble conftant : now the fleeting Moone 
No Planet is of mine. 
Enter Guard/man,and Clowne. 
Guard/f. This is the man. 
Cleo. Auoid,and leaue him. Exit Guard/man. 295 
Haft thou the pretty worme of Nylus there, 


286, 287. Let.../nfirument | One line, Theob. et seq. 


Rowe et seq. 291. Lam] Z’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 
287. What poore an| How poor an Ff, Marble conftant | marble-constant 

Rowe,+, Cap. Var. ’73, Steev. Var. 703, Cap. et seq. 

?13, Sing. What a poor Var.’78, 85, 293. Clowne.] Clown, with a Basket. 

Ran. Ktly. Rowe. 


288. deede:| deed? Pope. deed! 


287. What poore an Instrument] ApsoTT (§ 85): ‘What’ is here used for 
how.—IBID (§ 422): Wecan say ‘how poor az instrument,’ regarding ‘how’ as 
an adverb, and ‘how poor’ as an adverbialized expression, but not, ‘ What poor an 
instrument,’ because ‘ what’ has almost lost with us its adverbial force.—[In this 
section Abbott gives many examples of the transposition of the Article. ] 

291. the fleeting Moone] WaARsuRTON: Alluding to the Egyptian devotion 
paid to the moon under the name of Isis.—[See III, xiii, 183.]—STrevens: I 
really believe that the poet was not at all acquainted with the devotion that the 
Egyptians paid to this planet under the name of Isis. ‘ Fleeting’ is inconstant.— 
[Juliet’s words are a sufficing commentary: ‘O, swear not by the moon, th’ incon- 
stant moon, That monthly changes in her circled orb.’—II, ii, 109.—Ep.] 

293. Enter ...Clowne] VISCHER (vi, p. 175): The Clown enters with the 
asp, which Cleopatra had ordered. In him, Shakespeare introduces a dunderhead, 
who, unwitting of the great act to which he had been summoned, cracks jokes about 
the bite of the worm of Nilus, and, like the Musicians in Romeo and Juliet, the 
Porter in Macbeth, and the Grave-diggers in Hamlet, supplies the contrast between 
the exalted image of death and low ordinary life. It is not too distracting. Genuine 
tragic emotion is often stimulated thereby, so fearfully does life love to mingle the 
serious and the comic.—DeE tus (Sh. Jahrbuch, V, p. 268): This ‘rural Fellow’ 
is the Clown of the drama, and consequently uses Clown’s language, which is prose 
embellished with perverted words. 

296. the pretty worme of Nylus] JoHNson: Worm is the Teutonick word for 
serpent ; we have the blind-worm and slow-worm still in our language, and the Nor- 
wegians call an enormous monster, seen sometimes in the Northern ocean, the sea- 
worm.—PERCY: In the Northern counties, the word worm is still given to the ser- 


ACT V, SC. ii. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 363 


That killes and paines not? 297 
Clow. Truly I haue him : but I would not be the par- 
tie that fhould defire you to touch him, for his byting is 
immortall : thofe that doe dye of it, doe feldome or ne— 300 
uer recouer. 
Cleo. Remember’ft thou any that haue dyed on’t ? 
Clow. Very many, men and women too. I heard of 
one of them no longer then yefterday, a very honeft wo- 
man, but fomething giuen to lye, as a woman fhould not 305 
do, but in the way of honefty, how fhe dyed of the by- 
ting of it, what paine fhe felt: Truely, fhe makes a verie 
good report o’th’worme : but he that wil beleeue all that 
they fay, fhall neuer be faued by halfe that they do: but 


this is moft falliable, the Worme’s an odde Worme. 310 

Cleo. Get thee hence, farewell. 

Clow. I with you all ioy of the Worme. 252 
298-321. Mnemonic, Pope, Warb. Pope,+. et. Coll. Sing. Wh. /e/4,— 
302. Remember’ ft | Rememberest Dyce, Cap. et cet. 

Glo. Cam. 308, 309. all...halfe| half...all Theob. 
on’ t| on it Ktly. i, Han. Warb. 
303. many, | many Rowe. 310. falliable] fallible Ff et seq. 
306. hone/ty,| Ff, Coll. honesty. Rowe, odde| adder Coll. MS. 
+. honesty: Cap. et seq. 312. [setting down his basket. Cap. 


307. felt. | Ff, Rowe, Glo. Cam. felt / 


— 


pent species in general. I have seen a Northumberland ballad, entituled, The /aidly 
Worm of Spindleston Heughes, t. e. The loathsome or foul serpent of Spindleston 
Craggs.—[Aspis is an Adder worst and most wicked in venime & in biting, & hath 
that name Aspis, of Aspergendo, springing: for he casteth out slaieng venime, and 
spitteth and springeth out venime by bitings . . . And it followeth there [in Isidore] : 
Of adders that be called Aspzs bee diuers manner kind, and haue diuerse effects and 
dooings, to noy and to grieue, that is to wit, Dipsas that is called Scy¢z/a in Latine. 
For when he biteth, he slayeth with thirst. pa/¢s is a manner adder, that slayeth 
with sleepe. These manner adders Cleopatra layde by her, and passed out of the 
lyfe by death, as it were a sleepe.—Batman vppon Bartholome, 1582, Liber XVIII. 
Of Aspide. cap. 10, p. 345.—Ep.] 

308, 309. but he that wil beleeue all that they say, shall neuer be saued 
by halfe that they do] Warsurton: Shakspeare’s clowns are always jokers, and 
deal in sly satire. It is plain this must be read the contrary way, and a// and half 
change places.—[Any comment on the foregoing is impertinent. Warburton’s dog- 
matism overawed Theobald in his first edition, but his common sense asserted itself 
in his second.— ED. ] 

310. most falliable] WALKER ((C77v. iii, 312) : Does this < falliable’ belong to 
the Clown or to the old printer ?—[I think to the old printer. What is comic in 
Shakespeare’s Clowns generally lies in the perversion of words and phrases. —ED. | 


364 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT v, sc. ii. 


Cleo. Farewell. 

Clow. You mutt thinke this (looke you,) that the 
Worme will do his kinde. 

Cleo. I, I, farewell. 

Clow. Looke you, the Worme is not to bee trufted, 
but in the keeping of wife people : for indeede, there is 
no goodneffe in the Worme. 

Cleo. Take thou no care, it fhall be heeded. 

Clow. Very good : giue it nothing I pray you, for it 
is not worth the feeding. 

Cleo. Will it eate me ? 

Clow. You muft not think Iam fo fimple, but I know 
the diuell himfelfe will not eate a woman :I know, that 
a woman is a difh for the Gods, if the diuell dreffe her 
not. But truly, thefe fame whorfon diuels doe the Gods 
great harme in their women : for in euery tenne that they 
make, the diuels marre fiue. 

Cleo. Well, get thee gone, farewell. 

Clow. Yes forfooth :I with you ioy o’th’worm. xt 

Cleo. Giue me my Robe, put on my Crowne, I haue 
Immortall longings in me. Now no more 
The iuyce of Egypts Grape fhall moyft this lip. 

Yare, yare, good /ras ; quicke : Me thinkes I heare 
Anthony call : I fee him rowfe himfelfe 

To praife my Noble Aét. I heare him mock 

The lucke of Cz/ar, which the Gods giue men 


316. J, 7,] Ay, ay, Rowe,+. Ay, V. Han. 


ay ; Cap. et seq. 332-350. Mnemonic, Warb. 


313 


315 


320 


325 


330 


335 


338 


320. thou] Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 332. Crowne] crown, Pope et seq. 


324. Clow.] Cleo. F.. 334. this] Ais FF, Rowe. 


3 4 


329. fiue] nine Coll. MS. 335. Iras ; guscke | Iras, guick « FF. 
330. thee] the FF,. Lras, quick— Rowe, Pope. Jras ; quick 
331. oth] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. o’the — Theob. Han. Warb. Jras; quick. 


Varr. Ran. Dyce, Sta. Glo, Cam. of the Johns, et seq. 
Cap. et cet. 336. call-] call, Rowe. 
Scene VI. Pope, Warb. Johns. Scene 


315. will do his kinde] JoHNson: The serpent will act according to his 


nature. 


328. in their women] ‘Their’ is here used ethically. Drttus takes it as a 


possessive, meaning the women that belong to the gods. 
335. Yare, yare] That is, make haste, hurry. 


ACT V, SC. ii. ] 


ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 365 


To excufe their after wrath. Husband, I come : 
Now to that name, my Courage proue my Title. 340 
I am Fire, and Ayre ; my other Elements 


I giue to bafer life. 


So, haue you done? 


Come then, and take the laft warmth of my Lippes. 
Farewell kinde Charmian, Jras, long farewell. 
Haue I the Afpicke in my lippes ? Doft fall ? 345 


339. To excufe| T’ excuse Pope,+, 
after wrath) after-wrath Rowe 
ii,+. 

[Goes to a Bed, or Sopha, which 
she ascends ; her Women compose her 
on it; Iras sets the basket, which she 
has been holding upon her own arm, by 
her. Cap. 


So— Rowe et seq. (subs.) 
344. Charmian,] Charmion. Johns. 
Charmian ; Theob. Cap. et seq. 
[Kissing them. Han. 
falls. Cap. 
[Applying the Asp. Rowe. 
345. [To Iras. Pope. ... who falls 
down. Han. 
[Iras, who has had the aspics 
in the basket on her arm, sinks down 
and dies. Kemble. 


see ras 


342. to] no FF. 
So,|] Ff, Cap. So; Glo. Cam. 


338, 339. which the Gods giue... after wrath] Rev. JoHN HunTER: The 
notion of good fortune in this world justifying the gods in reversing it in the next 
world, was founded on the parable of Dives and Lazarus, Zhe, xvi, 25.—WoRDs- 
WORTH: A genuine heathen sentiment: see Herod. III, 40.—[Dr Wordsworth also 
refers to his own Book, Shakespeare's Knowledge and Use of the Bible, where (p. 114, 
et seg.) the attempt is made to show that Shakespeare is wont to make religious senti- 
ments conform to the religion of the speaker, whether Heathen or Christian. ] 

339. Husband] This sanctifies her love for Anthony; in this one sacred word 
we hear Shakespeare’s last appeal to us for her pardon,—like ‘the heavenly voice’ 
breathing forth, in Gretchen’s dungeon, ‘sie ist gerettet !’—Ep. 

341. Fire, and Ayre ; my other Elements] MALONE: So in Henry the Fifth, 
the is pure air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and water never appear in 
him.’ —[III, vii, 22, This is in the Dauphin’s description of his horse, and MADDEN 
(p. 261) shows that this reference to the elements, in this connection, has, in old 
writers on farriery, more significance than is at once apparent. Cleopatra here uses 
‘elements’ as referring to the materials of which man is composed. See note on 
III, ii, 47.—Eb. ] . 

342. I giue to baser life] THEOBALD (Nichols, ///wst. ii, 511): I have imagined 
we should read, ‘to baser earth,’ 7. ¢. aS we say in the Service for the dead, ‘ Dust to 
dust, ashes to ashes’; or as in Wills, ‘I give my Jody to the earth,’ etc.—[This con- 
jecture was not repeated in Theobald’s edition. ]|—DrIGHTON: I leave to be eaten 


by worms. 
345. Dost fall?] CAPELL (i, 53): The Poet’s great attention to nature in the 


death of these three persons, is extremely remarkable. It does not appear in any 
preceding edition, which way Iras comes by her death; the direction [given in Zex?. 
Note, 339] was intended to shew it: Iras, either in setting down the basket, or in 
leaning over it to take her farewell, gets a bite from an asp; and being it’s first bite, 
when it’s poison was most vigorous, she dies almost instantly : The exulting and 


306 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V,-SC.7aL. 


If thou, and Nature can fo gently part, 346 

The ftroke of death is as a Louers pinch, 

Which hurts, and is defir’d. Doft thou lye ftill ? 

If thus thou vanifheft, thou tell’ft the world, 

It is not worth leaue-taking. 350 
Char. Diffolue thicke clowd, & Raine, that I may fay 

The Gods themfelues do weepe. 
Cleo. This proues me bafe : 

If fhe firft meete the Curled Axthony, 


Hee’l make demand of her, and fpend that kiffe 355 
349. vani/hef | vanguishest Rowe ii. Ktly. 
350. deaue-taking| leave taking Ff, 354. firxft mecte] proves Ff. approves 
Rowe, Warb. Rowe. first should meet (then should 
[Iras dies. Pope. erased) Coll. MS. 
353. bafe-] base— Rowe,+. dbase. Curled | curfed F. 


triumphing manner that Cleopatra goes off in, shews the flow of her spirits, and her 
death is partly lengthen’d by that; partly, as we may conjecture, by her taking the 
weaken’d asp first to apply to her breast ; when the fresh one is apply’d to her arm, 
she vanishes as her woman had done: The poison of both being weaken’d, Charm- 
ian’s death is protracted of course: and if we further suppose her to have taken by 
accident the aspick that her partner had dy’d by, this will account for her words— 
‘TI partly feel thee’; and her exclamation in dying, which seems to indicate some- 
thing of pain.—STEEVENS: Iras must be supposed to have applied an asp to her arm 
while her mistress was settling her dress, or I know not why she should fall so soon. 
—[This note of Steevens is quoted in substance or verbally, without dissent, by DycE, 
STAUNTON, The COWDEN-CLARKES, Hupson, ROLFE, DEIGHTON. ]—HALLIWELL 
quotes the following remarks by ‘ ANON.’ (which appear in The Gentleman’s Maga., 
1790, lx, p. 127) : ‘I apprehend a mistake in the stage-direction,—that it should be, 
Applying the asp to Tras, in order to see the effect of the poison, and the pain she 
had to encounter in death. The asp might be applied to Iras, either with or without 
her consent. This opinion is strengthened by Cleopatra saying, “This calls me 
base,’’ as it could not be base in Cleopatra, that Iras did it without her consent ; but 
the baseness must be in her own want of resohition, and in the murder of Iras. When 
Cleopatra says, “Come thou mortal wretch,’”’ I should suppose that Cleopatra then 
applied the first asp to her own breast.,—The CowpDEN-CLARKES: Throughout this 
scene, Iras has shown eagerness for death ; witness her words,—‘ Finish, good lady ; 
the bright day is done, and we are for the dark’; and ‘I’ll never see it; I am sure my 
nails are stronger than mine eyes.’—DELIuS: Steevens’s assumption finds no support 
whatever in the text. Shakespeare wished to make it clear that Iras died of the 
grief which taking leave of her mistress caused her.—[Thus, also, the CAMBRIDGE 
Epitors, who remark (/Vo¢e vill.) : ‘The context implies that the cause of [Iras’s] 
death was grief at the leave-taking,’ which is also the opinion of the present Editor. 
We have already had an instance in this play where a broken heart has caused death, 
and, moreover, where the victim was a strong, vigorous man.—ED. ] 

355. Hee’l make demand of her] JoHnson: He will enquire of her concerning 
me, and kiss her for giving him intelligence. 


ACT V,| SC. 11.) ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 307 


Which is my heauen to haue.Come thou mortal wretch, 356 

With thy fharpe teeth this knot intrinficate, 

Of life at once vntye : Poore venomous Foole, 

Be angry, and difpatch. Oh could’ft thou fpeake, 

That I might heare thee call great Ce/ar Affe, vnpolicied. 360 
Char. Oh Eafterne Starre. 


Cleo. Peace, peace : 362 
356-359. Mnemonic, Warb. 357. [Totheserpent. Pope. ...apply- 
356. thou] Om. Pope, +, Cap. Steev. ing it to her breast. Han. 

Var. ’03, ’13, Words. 358. [stirring it. Cap. 
[to the Asp; applying it to her 360. Afe,] ass Var. 78 et seq. 
Breast. Cap. unpolicted. | Separate line, Pope 
357, 358. zntrinficate, Of life] intrin- et seq. 
sicate Of life, Pope. intrinsicate Of life 362-364. Mnemonic, Pope, Warb. 


Theob. et seq. (2#tvinsecate Cap. Errata.) 


355. and spend that kisse] A. S. G. CANNING (Sh. Studied in Eight Plays, 
p- 161): There is really nothing truly pathetic in these tragic events, if calmly con- 
sidered. Cleopatra’s jealous dread of Iras dying first, lest Antony should take a 
fancy to her, is almost ludicrous, according to modern ideas.—[Ah, for one hour of 
Dyce,—with his exclamation marks.—ED. ] 

357. this knot intrinsicate] WARBURTON: The expression is fine ; it signifies 
a hidden, secret (¢#trimsecus) knot, as that which ties soul and body together.— 
EpWARDs (p. 184): How, secret as that which ties soul and body together? Why, 
it is that very knot she speaks of. But, what a lingua franca is here! a secret 
intrinsecus knot! How long has z#¢trimsecus been an adjective? and, if it be not, 
how will he construe the sentence? Had our critic read Shakspeare with any atten- 
tion, he might have known, that he uses z#¢rinsecate for intricate, entangled, or tied 
in hard knots, ‘Like rats, oft bite the holy cords in twain, Too intrinsecate to 
unloose.’ Had it signified Z2dden, secret, it could no more have been dz¢/en in twain, 
than untied, before it was found out.—MuRRAY (WV. £. D.): Apparently formed on 
Italian zx¢vinsecato, familiar, confused in sense with zz¢ricato, intricate. Equivalent 
to intricaée, involved, entangled. [Four references follow: 1560, Whitehorne, Arte 
Warre; 1599, Jonson, Cynthia’s Revels, V, ii; Marston, Scourge of Villante; and 
the present passage in Ant. & Cleop.] 

360. Asse, vnpolicied] STEEVENS: That is, an ass without more policy than to 
leave the means of death within my reach, and thereby deprive his triumph of its 
noblest decoration.—[Steevens did not improve the text, I think, when, in the Vari- 
orum of 1778, he expunged the comma after ‘ Asse.’ A pause after the word, enforced 
by this comma, seems, to me at least, to impart an emphasis, with concentrated bitter- 
ness, to ‘unpolicied.’—ED. ] 

362. Peace, peace] MRs JAMESON (ii, 155): The magical play of fancy and the 
overpowering fascination of the character are kept up to the last: and when Cleo- 
patra, on applying the asp, silences the lamentations of her women—‘ Peace! peace! 
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast, That sucks the nurse to sleep?’ These 
few words—the contrast between the tender beauty of the image and the horror of 
the situation—produce an affect more intensely mournful than all the ranting in the 


368 THE. TRAGEDIE OF [AcT V, SC. il. 


Doft thou not fee my Baby at my breaft, 363 
That fuckes the Nurfe afleepe. 
Char. O breake ! O breake! 365 
Cleo. As fweet as Balme, as foft as Ayre, as gentle. 
O Anthony | Nay I will take thee too. 367 
364. afleepe.| asleep ? Rowe ii. (subs. ) 
366. gentle.| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 367. [Applying another Asp to her 
Coll. Wh. Ktly, Hal. gentle, Theob. arm. Theob. 


Warb. Johns. gentle— Cap. et cet. 367, 368. Vay...ffay] Om. Kemble. 


world. The generous devotion of her women adds to the moral charm which alone 
was wanting: and when Octavius hurries in too late to save his victim, and exclaims 
when gazing on her— She looks like sleep—As she would catch another Antony In 
her strong toil of grace,’ the image of her beauty and her irresistible arts, triumphant 
even in death, is at once brought before us, and one masterly and comprehensive 
stroke consummates this most wonderful, most dazzling delineation. 

363. at my breast] BUCKNILL (p. 221): It is curious that Shakespeare makes 
Cleopatra apply the aspic both to the breast and to the arm, since we find a discussion 
in old Primrose’s Popular Errors, on this point. Primrose does not appear to have 
read Shakespeare, or with his love of reference he would certainly have shewn it. 
In his chapter on the mountebank’s antidote, he says :—‘ And now the story of C/eo- 
patra comes to my minde. Petrus Victorius blames the painters, that paint C/eo- 
patra applying the aspe to her paps, seeing it is manifest out of P/starch, in the 
Life of Antonius, and out of Piinze likewise, that she applyed it to her arme. Zon- 
aras relates that there appeared no signe of death upon her save two blew spots on 
her arme. Cesar also in her statute which he carryed in triumph, applyed the aspe 
to her arme: For in the armes there are great veines and arteries, which doe quickly 
and in a straight way convey the venome to the heart, whereas in the paps the vessels 
are slender, which, by sundry circumvolutions onely, do lead to the heart.’ 

364. That suckes the Nurse asleepe] STEEVENS: Before the publication of 
this piece, The Tragedy of Cleopatra, by Daniel, 1594, had made its appearance ; 
but Dryden is more indebted to it than Shakspeare. Daniel has the following address 
to the asp: ‘Better than death death’s office thou dischargest, That with one gentle 
touch can free our breath; And ina pleasing sleep our soul enlargest, Making our- 
selves not privy to our death. Therefore come thou, of wonders wonder chief, That 
open canst with such an easy key The door of life ; come gentle, cunning thief, That 
from ourselves so steal’st ourselves away.’ [See Dryden’s Ad/ for Love in Appendix. ] 

364. asleepe] THEOBALD proves by quotations from Lucius Florus, Solinus, 
Propertius, Lucan, and Ovid, that Shakespeare was justified in thus attributing a 
somnolent effect to the venom of the asp. The proof is not now needed. Batman 
uppon Bartholome is authority sufficient for the popular belief in Shakespeare’s day. 
Probably, no one, however, among the early editors was as competent as Theobald 
to furnish, off-hand, such an array of learning.—ED. 

367. I will take thee too] THEOBALD: ’Tis certain, Cleopatra is here design’d 
to apply one aspick to her arm, as she had before clap’d one to her breast. Dion 
Cassius, in the §1st Book of his Roman History is express as to small punctures of 
the asp being discover’d only on her arm. And Plutarch [verifies it.] Strabo, Vel- 


ACTAV SCL ies} ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 369 


What fhould I ftay 
Char. In this wilde World ? So fare thee well : 


Dyes. 368 


368. What] Why Coll. MS. Cleop. Elze. 
Dyes. ] falls on a bed, and dies. 369. wilde] F,. vile Cap. Sing. Dyce, 
Mal. Sta. Glo. Cam. Ktly, Hal. Wh. ii. wld 


369. In ... World?] Continued to FF, et cet. 


leius Paterculus, Eutropius, and Lucius Florus leave this matter as much at large. 
Leonardo Augustini, among his antique gems, exhibits one of Cleopatra upon an 
agot, with an aspick biting her right breast. And Strada, the Mantuan Antiquary, 
who gives us a medal of this princess, says, that she died by serpents applied to her 
breasts. And Domitius Calderinus, upon the 59th Zpigram of the 1vth Book of 
Martial, says precisely, that she procured her own death by applying Asps to her 
breast and arm. 

368. Dyes] Sir THomas Browne ( Vulgar Errors, Book V, Chap. xii, p. 291, 
ed. 1672): The picture concerning the death of Cleopatra with two Asps or venem- 
ous Serpents unto her arms, or breasts, or both, requires consideration: for therein 
(beside that this variety is not excusable) the thing it self is questionable ; nor is it 
indisputably certain what manner of death she died. Plutarch in the life of Antony 
plainly delivereth, that no man knew the manner of her death; for some affirmed 
she perished by poison, which she always carried in a little hollow comb, and wore 
it in her hair. Beside, there were never any Asps discovered in the place of her 
death, although two of her Maids perished also with her; only it was said, two small 
and almost insensible pricks were found upon her arm; which was all the ground 
that Cesar had to presume the manner of her death. Galen who was contemporary 
unto Plutarch, delivereth two wayes of her death: that she killed her self by the 
bite of an Asp, or bit an hole in her arm, and poured poison therein. S¢rvaéo that 
lived before them both hath also two opinions ; that she died by the bite of an Asp, 
or else a poisonous ointment. We might question the length of the Asps, which are 
sometimes described exceeding short ; whereas the Cherszea or land-Asp which most 
conceive she used, is above four cubits long. Their number is not unquestionable ; 
for whereas there are generally two described, Augustus (as Plutarch relateth) did 
carry in his triumph the Image of C/ofatra but with one Asp unto her arm. As for 
the two pricks, or little spots in her arm, they infer not their plurality: for like the 
Viper, the Asp hath two teeth; whereby it left this impression, or double puncture 
behind it. And lastly, We might question the place ; for some apply them unto her 
breast, which notwithstanding will not consist with the History; and Petrus Vic- 
torius hath well observed the same. But herein the mistake was easie ; it being the 
custom in capital malefactors to apply them unto the breast, as the Author De 7he- 
viaca ad Pisonem, an eye witness hereof in Alexandria, where Cleopatra died, 
determineth: I beheld, saith he, in A/exandria, how suddenly these Serpents bereave 
a man of life; for when any one is condemned to this kind of death, if they intend to 
use him favourably, that is, to dispatch him suddenly, they fasten an Asp unto his 
breast; and bidding him walk about, he presently perisheth thereby. 

369. In this wilde World] CAPELL (i, 53; reading v7/e) : Speaking them after a 
pause; with eyes fix’d upon her dead mistress, and a look of the tenderest affection. 
Vile was spelt—vi/de, when this play was in penning, which occasion’d the present 
corruption ; for so ‘ w/de’ will be thought by most readers, who bestow a little reflec- 


24 


370 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. ii. 


Now boaft thee Death, in thy poffeffion lyes 370 
A Laffe vnparalell’d. Downie Windowes cloze, 
And golden Pheebus, neuer be beheld 


Of eyes againe fo Royall : your Crownes away, 273 
371. Laffe] loss Sprenger. away. FF, Rowe i. Crowns awry 
373. Crownes away] F,. Crowns Rowe ii. cvown’s awry Pope et cet. 


tion upon the difference between the two words in point of propriety. —STEEVENS : 
I suppose she means by this zwz/d world, this world which by the death of Antony is 
become a desert to her. A wild is a desert. Our author, however, might have writ- 
ten wild (i.e. vile according to ancient spelling), for worthless. COLLIER (ed. ii) : 
There is not the slightest pretext for altering ‘ wild’ to the commonplace vz/e, as has 
been done under the supposition that vz/e having been of old often misprinted vz/de 
(a form to which the Rev. Mr Dyce strangely adheres), it was in this place mistaken 
for ‘wild.’ Charmian might well call the world ‘ wild,’ desert, and savage, after the 
deaths of Antony, Cleopatra, and others whom she loved. This passage is another 
proof how the corruption of wz/d¢, where w/e was intended, makes confusion in the 
heads of editors, as well as in the texts of dramatists ; if wzZe had not sometimes been 
misprinted zw/d, nobody would have thought of amending ‘wild world’ to ‘wile 
world.’ If any change were made, we should prefer here wide to vile; but in truth it 
is an offence against all just rules of criticism to attempt an emendation where none 
is required.—R. G. WuiTx (ed. i): There is not sufficient justification for the change 
[to vz/e]. At that time the world seemed wild enough to poor Charmian.—DycE 
(ed. i): Capell saw (what is plain enough) that vz/de had been by mistake transformed 
into ‘wilde.’ (The folio, with its usual inconsistency of spelling, has in some places 
‘vild’ and ‘vilde,’—in others ‘ vile.’)—Isip. (ed. ii) : On the above remark [of 
Collier] I have to remark :—First, That I no longer ‘adhere’ to the old spelling 
vild.. . . Secondly, That the passages in early books where vi/d (7. e. vile) is mis- 
printed wez/d are so very numerous, that there can be no doubt of the same error havy- 
ing been committed in the passage now under consideration. We meet with the fol- 
lowing examples in the plays of Beaumont & Fletcher :—‘I will not lose a word To 
this wld [read vild= vile] woman,’ etc.— Zhe Mazd’s Tragedy, I11,i; ‘That now 
dares say I am a stranger, not the same, more wz/d [read vi/ld=vile],’ etc.— The 
faithful Shepherdess, IV, iv; ‘To do these wz/d [so the first 4to, the later 4tos 
vild, folio 1679 vile] unmanly things.’— 7he Scornful Lady, II, i; ‘Or am I of so 
wild [read vild=vile] and low a blood,’ ete.— Zhe Little French Lawyer, III, v. 
Thirdly, That ‘ v2Ze world,’ which Collier terms a ‘commonplace phrase,’ occurs in a 
passage of 2 Henry VI. V, ii, a passage which (as it is not found in Zhe First Part 
of the Contention, etc.) we may confidently ascribe to Shakespeare :—‘O, let the 
VILE WORLD end, And the promiséd flames of the last day, Knit earth and heaven 
together!’ Fourthly, That ‘wide,’ [Collier’s suggestion,] has no propriety here, 
not being (what is obviously required) a vituperative epithet.—[‘ Wild’ seems, I 
think, too weak in Charmian’s mouth, in comparison with w/e.—Ep.] 

371. Downie Windowes] MALONE: So, in Venus and Adonis ; ‘ Her two blue 
windows faintly she upheaveth.’ 

373. your Crownes away] JOHNSON: This is well amended [awry] by the 
editors.—JAMES NICHOLS (ii, 3) : Thus arrayed [in her robe and crown] Cleopatra 
applies the aspick,—its poison acts quickly and painlessly; life soon succumbs to its 


ACT V, SC. 11.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 278 


Ile mend it,and then play——— 


Enter the Guard rufiling in, and Dolabella. 375 
374. play ] Ff, Rowe+, Var. seq. f 
73, Coll. Wh.i, Ktly. play. Cap. et cet. 375. and Dolabella.] Om. Rowe et 
375. ruftling in,] rushing in, Rowe et seq. 


influence, and as she dies, her head naturally falls backward on the couch, and the 
crown, compressed between the back of the head and the couch, necessarily springs 
‘away’ from the forehead. This Charmian perceives, and says, ‘your crown’s 
away; Ill mend it,’ which she does by drawing it gently down again.—Dvcez, in 
his first edition, quoted Steevens’s note on line 374. In his second edition he added 
an extract from North’s Plutarch wherein Charmian is described as trimming the 
diadem which Cleopatra wore upon her head ; he then concluded as follows: ‘The 
addition I have now made to my original note on this passage has been called forth 
by the thrice-foolish attempt to defend the blunder of the Folio, ‘away,’ [in the 
foregoing note by James Nichols].’—[Surely, no one, after reading Nichols’s note, 
will approve of Dyce’s intemperate words. For myself, I think the note, in its praise- 
worthy attempt to vindicate the Folio, is eminently just, and am ready to share any 
condemnation which may properly fall on its writer. In itself, the phrase ‘your 
crown’s away’ is more smooth and liquid than the crooked, harsh ‘ your crown’s 
awry.’ The sole objection to ‘away’ that I can perceive (and it is trivial) is the 
rhyme with ‘ play,’ in the next line; but the words can be so spoken that the rhyme 
will be unnoticeable. Dyce’s baptismal name was well bestowed ; he considered 
Shakespeare as his exclusive realm, and in this realm, ‘ Like Alexander he would 
reign, And he would reign alone,’—woe to any one who ventured a foothold there! 
Collier always believed that Dyce’s bitter and inappeasible hostility dated from the 
discovery that he was preparing an edition of Shakespeare. A. E. Brae, an unusually 
keen critic, was another of Dyce’s aversions. Brae was, by profession, a dentist ; there- 
fore, presumably, Dyce felt less compunction in attacking him, certainly tooth, and pos- 
sibly nail. Ingleby, too, received one of Dyce’s bitterest strokes. Lettsom appears 
to have been the only exception in Dyce’s horizon, and to him Dyce paid homage 
throughout his second edition. The emendation ‘awry,’ be it observed, is Rowe's, 
not Pope’s, to whom it is almost universally attributed. STEEVENS quotes the corre- 
sponding passage in Daniels’ 7ragedie of Cleopatra, 1594 :—‘ And sencelesse, in her 
sinking downe she wryes The Diademe wvhich on her head she vvore : Which Char- 
mion (poore weake feeble maid) espies, And hastes to right it as it vvas before. For 
Eras now was dead.’—line 1651, ed. Grosart.—ED. ] 

374. and then play | STEEVENS: That is, play her part in this tragic scene 
by destroying herself; or she may mean, that having performed her last office for 
her mistress, she will accept the permission given her (in lines 278, 279) to ‘ play 
till doomsday.’—[1I know of no explanation of these words other than Steevens’s, 
which seems to have been universally adopted; but the fact that the sentence is 
broken off renders possible a different conclusion. I cannot believe that the dis- 
regard of this long dash after ‘play,’ in the Folio, is judicious. It is of rare occur- 
rence, at least in this play, and should be, therefore, all the more observed. In 
proof of its rarity, see line 378, where it should be, but is not. After line 368, above, 
it has been by all editors punctiliously retained ; I think that so it should have been 


here.—ED. ] 


372 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act v, SC. i. 
1 Guard. Where’s the Queene? 376 
Char. Speake foftly, wake her not. 

1 Ce/far hath fent 
Char. Too flow a Meffenger. 


Oh come apace, difpatch, I partly feele thee. 380 


1 Approach hoa, 


All’s not well : Ce/ar’s beguild. 


2 There’s Dolabella fent from C@e/ar : call him. 
1 What worke is heere Charmian ? 


Is this well done ? 
Char. 


385 


It is well done,and fitting for a Princeffe 


Defcended of fo many Royall Kings. 


Ah Souldier. 


Charmian dyes. 


Einter Dolabella. 


Dol. How goes it heere ? 
2.Guard. All dead. 


Dol. Cefar,thy thoughts 


399 


Touch their effects in this : Thy felfe art comming 
To fee perform’d the dreaded A&t which thou 


So fought’ft to hinder. 


395 


Enter Cefar and all his Traine, marching. 


376. Where's] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Where is Han. Johns. et seq. 

378. fent] fent. Ff, Theob.i. sent— 
Rowe et cet. 

{[Charmian and Iras apply the 
Asp. Rowe. Charmian applies the Asp. 
Pope. 

380. come apace, difpatch,| Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. come, apace, dispatch; Cap. come; 
apace ; dispatch ; Coll. Wh. Hal. come. 
Apace, dispatch. Johns. et cet. (subs.) 


380. J partly] now, now J Kemble. 

381, 382. Approach ... beguild | One 
line, Theob. et seq. 

384, 385. What ... done ?] One line, 
Rowe et seq. 

386. ft 7s] 7t’s F,F,, Rowe. 

388. Souldier.] FF. soldiers ! Rowe, 
+. Souldier ! ¥, Cap. et seq. 

Charmian dyes.] Char. and Iras 

die. Rowe. 

396. Enter...] Enter Caesar and At- 
tendants. Rowe. 


385. Is this well done?] SINGER: This refers toa deception. Charmian, whispered 
by Cleopatra, went out to manage the introduction of the Clown with the asps. — 
R. G. WHITE gives a similar explanation, which might be accepted were it not that 
the question is exactly copied from North’s Plutarch, where the Guard could not 


have known of Charmian’s agency in the matter. 


that it refers to the dead queen.—ED. ] 


Charmian’s reply, moreover, shows 


392, 393. thy thoughts Touch their effects in this] That is, thy forebodings 


are realised here. 


ACT V, SC. ii.] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 373 


All, A way there, a way for Ce/ar. 397 
Dol. Oh fir, you are too fure an Augurer: 
That you did feare, is done. 


Cefar. Brauett at the laft, 400 
She leuell’d at our purpofes, and being Royall 
Tooke her owne way : the manner of their deaths, 402 

397. All.] Within. Cap. Without. Sta. line as quotation. Glo. Cam. 

A way...way| Make way there, 400. Braucft| Brav’st Dyce ii, iii. 

make way FF, Rowe, Pope, Theob. the laft\ last Pope,+. 
Warb. Johns. Make way there, way Han. 401. purpofes| purpose Pope,+. 
A way there, way Cap. Steev. Var.’03, 402. way .| way. Pope et seq. 
"13. A way there, make way Var.’73. their deaths,\ FF. her Deaths ? 


Way there, way Walker. The whole I. their deaths ? Rowe et seq. 


4 


401. purposes] For the concluding s see I, iv, 11. Dyce conjectured purpose, 
not knowing that he had been virtually anticipated by WALKER, and that Walker had 
been anticipated by Pope. 

401. and being Royall] HunrTer (ii, 290) : This passage is left without any 
annotation, and yet there is meaning in it which many readers might not discover. 
Dollabella had alluded to theaugurs. This introduces the idea of the flight of birds ; 
this the idea of hawking ; and Cleopatra, brave in her death, is represented under 
the image of a hawk levelling at the purposes of her conqueror, and rendering them 
dead or ineffectual. The idea of hawking introduced the idea of other field-sports, 
and to the hawk Shakespeare transfers the attribute of a art-royal, which had the 
privilege of roaming at large unmolested, and taking its own way to its lair. Thus 
Cleopatra being ‘royal’ had ‘taken her own way’ in self-destruction. In Zhe 
Gentleman's Recreation, p. 6, the liberty of the hart-royal is thus described :—‘ If 
the King or Queen shall happen to hunt or chase a hart, and he escape with life, he 
shall ever after be called a hart-roya/, but if he fly so far from the forest or chase 
that it is unlikely he will ever return of his own accord to the place aforesaid, and 
that proclamation be made in all towns and villages thereabout, that none shall kill 
or offend him, but that he may safely return, if he list, he is then called a hart royal 
proclaimed.’ —MADDEN (p. 19): The male red deer is now ordinarily called a stag, 
the female a hind, and the young a calf. ... But if you would speak in the strict 
language of woodcraft, you would call him in the first year ‘a Hind calfe, or a calfe, 
the second yeere you shall call him a Broket; . . . the sixt yeere you shall call him a 
Hart. . . . But if the king or queene doe hunt or chace him, and he escape away 
aliue, then after such a hunting or chacing he is called Hart Royall.’—Manwood, 
The Forest Lawes, 1598. henceforth, after proclamation, he was free to return to 
the forest from whence he came, and no man might meddle with a hart royal pro- 
claimed. Hunter suggests [as above] that when Cesar said of Cleopatra that she 
‘being royal, Took her own way,’ the licence accorded to the hart royal to go his 
own way was present to his mind; and certainly instances may be found in Shake- 
speare of similar conceits. The stag, or hart, at six years of age should have acquired 
‘his rights,’—that is to say, the brow, bay, and trey antlers—and two points on top 
of each horn. The modern use of the term ‘royal’ to denote a stag with all his 
rights and three on top, is altogether inaccurate, and without warranty of any writer 


of authority on woodcraft. 


374 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act Vv, SC. il. 


I do not fee them bleede. 403 
Dol. Who was laft with them ? 
1 Guard.A fimple Countryman, that broght hir Figs: 405 


This was his Basket. 
Caefar. Poyfon’d then. 
1.Guard. Oh Cesar: 


This Charmian liu’d but now, fhe ftood and fpake : 


I found her trimming vp the Diadem ; 


410 


On her dead Miftris tremblingly fhe ftood, 


And on the fodaine dropt. 
Cesar. 


Oh Noble weakeneffe : 


If they had fwallow’d poyfon, ’twould appeare 
By externall fwelling : but fhe lookes like fleepe, 415 
As fhe would catch another Anthony 


In her ftrong toyle of Grace. 
Dol. Weere on her breft, 


There is a vent of Bloud, and fomething blowne, 


The like is on her Arme. 420 
1.Guard. This is an Afpickes traile, 

And thefe Figge-leaues haue flime vpon them, fuch 

As th’Afpicke leaues vpon the Caues of Nyle. 423 


405. broght hir] ¥,. 

408. 1.Guard.] 1 Gent. Rowe ii, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. 

Ceefar:] Cesar! Rowe,+. Cesar, 
Cap. et seq. 

410, 411. Diadem; ... Miftris| Dia- 
dem; ...Miftris, ¥,. Diadem, ...Mifiris, 
F,, Rowe. Diadem,; ...Miftri/s¥ ,. dia- 
dem...mistress, Pope, Han. diadem... 
mistress ; Theob. et cet. 

413. weakeneffe :]| weakness ! Rowe ii 
et seq. 

414. fwallowd| S/wallowed FF, 
Rowe i. 

appeare| appear. Ff, Rowe i. 


415. By] By some Cap. conj. 
externall | extern Walker. 
415, 416. dzke ... Anthony] One line, 
Cap. conj. 
419. dlowne,] blown ; Theob. et seq. 
421-423. Zhis...Vyle] Lines ending, 
leaues...leaues...Nyle Johns. Var.’73 et 
seq. 
421. zs] Om. Ff. 
Afpickes| Afpects FE. 
[pointing to the Floor. Cap. 
423. th’ A/picke] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce 
li, iii. che aspick Cap. et cet. 
leaues| voids Bailey. 
Caues| course Perring. 


414, 415. ’twould appeare By externall swelling] BucKNILL (p. 221) quotes 
from Ward’s Diary :—‘ When one was poisoned at Coventrie, hee was taken upp out 
of his grave; but as the apothecarie said the earth would keep him from swelling, so 
that no judgement could be made thereby ; but being opened, they found the poison 
in his stomach.’—MoyeEs (p. 58): [This speech of Cesar] evidently embodies a 
popular belief, though what has given rise to it is not clear. 

419. something blowne] JoHNsoN: The flesh is somewhat puffed or swoln. 

423. vpon the Caues of Nyle] Hunter (ii, 291) : Mr Barry has suggested to 


ACL-YV, SC. ii. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 375 


Cesar. Moft probable 
That fo fhe dyed : for her Phyfitian tels mee 425 
She hath purfu’de Conclufions infinite 
Of eafie wayes to dye. Take vp her bed, 
And beare her Women from the Monument, 
She fhall be buried by her Azthony. 
No Graue vpon the earth fhall clip in it 430 
A payre fo famous : high euents as thefe 
Strike thofe that make them : and their Story is 
No leffe in pitty,then his Glory which 
Brought them to be lamented. Our Army fhall 
In folemne fhew, attend this Funerall, 435 
And then to Rome. Come Dolabella, fee 
High Order, in this great Solmemnity. Exeunt omnes 437 


EGPCS: 


431. famous :| famous. Rowe et seq. 437. Solmemnity] F,. 


me that for ‘caves’ we should read canes, the reeds of Nile. This reading may be 
supported by the following passage in the writings of Bishop Taylor :—‘ The canes 
of Egypt, when they newly arise from their bed of mud and slime of Nilus, start into 
equal and continual length, and are interrupted with hard knots,’ etc.—CoLLIER 
(ed. i) : It is very obvious that the aspick might leave its slime upon the ‘caves’ of 
Nile as well as upon the canes of Nile-—Hupson: Alexandria was supplied with 
water brought from the Nile in underground canals; which may be the caves meant. 

426. She hath pursu’de Conclusions infinite] STEEVENS: To ‘pursue con- 
clusions,’ is to ¢ry experiments. So, in Hamlet: ‘like the famous ape, To ¢ry con- 
clusions,’ etc. [III, iv, 194.] Again, in Cymdeline - <I did amplify my judgment in 
Other conclusions.’ [I, v, 17-] 

427. Of easie wayes to dye] STEEVENS: Such was the death brought on by the 
aspick’s venom. Thus Lucan, lib. ix, 815: ‘At tibi, Leve miser, fixus praecordia 
pressit Niliacé serpente cruor; nulloque dolore Testatus morsus, subita caligine 
mortem Accipis, et Stygias somno descendis ad umbras.’—[SINGER takes, without 
acknowledgement, this quotation from Steevens, as is evident from his copying an 
error in the numbering of the lines, and Steevens took it, without acknowledgement, 
from Theobald, who, as we have seen, gives a wealth of classical references to this 
subject. —ED. ] 

430. shall clip] STrEveNs: That is, enfold. See II, vii, 80 ; and IV, viii, 10. 

431-434. high euents as these ... lamented] CapPELL (i, 54): The concise- 
ness of this reflection, and of that it is follow’d by, is attended with some obscurity ; 
but the meaning of them seems to be this :—The very causers of events like the pres- 
ent, cannot help being touch’d by them: and the pitifulness of them will set them as 
high in fame, as conquest will the person that wrought them. 

437. It cannot but prove interesting, I think, to read the account of the closing 


376 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACY ¥,, Se, til; 


events of this historical Tragedy as given by Dion Cassius (after Plutarch one of our 
best historians of these days), especially since in several Dramatic Versions the two 
accounts, Plutarch’s and Dion Cassius’s, have been interwoven. For Plutarch’s 
account, see, of course, the Appendix.—DIon Cassius (vol. iii, p. 323, trans. by Pro- 
fessor H. B. Foster, 1906, Troy, N. Y.): Antony after his unexpected setback took 
refuge in his fleet and prepared to have a combat on the water, or in any case to sail 
to Spain. Cleopatra seeing this caused the ships to desert and she herself rushed 
suddenly into the mausoleum pretending that she feared Czesar and desired by some 
means to destroy herself before capture, but really as an invitation to Antony to enter 
there also. He had an inkling that he was being betrayed, but his infatuation would 
not allow him to believe it, and, as one might say, he pitied her more than himself. 
Cleopatra was fully aware of this and hoped that if he should be informed that she 
was dead, he would not prolong his life, but meet death at once. Accordingly, she 
hastened into the monument with one eunuch and two female attendants and from 
there sent a message to him to the effect that she had passed away. When he heard it, 
he did not delay, but was seized with a desire to follow her in death. Then first he 
asked one of the bystanders to slay him, but the man drew a sword and dispatched 
himself. Wishing to imitate his courage Antony gave himself a wound and fell upon 
his face, causing the bystanders to think that he was dead. An outcry was raised at 
his deed, and Cleopatra hearing it leaned out over the top of the monument. Bya 
certain contrivance its doors once closed could not be opened again, but above, near 
the ceiling, it had not yet been completed. That was where they saw her leaning 
out and some began to utter shouts that reached the ears of Antony. He, learning 
that she survived, stood up as if he had still the power to live; but a great gush of 
blood from his wound made him despair of rescue and he besought those present to 
carry him to the monument and to hoist him by the ropes that were hanging there to 
elevate stone blocks. This was done and he died there on Cleopatra’s bosom. 

She now began to feel confidence in Cesar and immediately made him aware of 
what had taken place, but did not feel altogether confident that she would experience 
no harm. Hence she kept herself within the structure, in order that if there should 
be no other motive for her preservation, she might at least purchase pardon and her 
sovereignty through fear about her money. Even then in such depths of calamity 
she remembered that she was queen, and chose rather to die with the name and 
dignities of a sovereign than to live as an ordinary person. It should be stated that 
she kept fire on hand to use upon her money and asps and other reptiles to use upon 
herself, and that she had tried the latter on human beings to see in what way they 
killed in each case. Czesar was anxious to make himself master of her treasures, to 
seize her alive, and to take her back for his triumph. However, as he had given 
her a kind of pledge, he did not wish to appear to have acted personally as an 
impostor, since this would prevent him from treating her asa captive and to a certain 
extent subdued against her will. He therefore sent to her Gaius Proculeius, a knight, 
and Epaphroditus, a freedman, giving them directions what they must say and do. 
So they obtained an audience with Cleopatra and after some accusations of a mild 
type suddenly laid hold of her before any decision was reached. Then they put out 
of her way everything by which she could bring death upon herself and allowed her 
to spend some days where she was, since the embalming of Antony’s body claimed 
her attention. After that they took her to the palace, but did not remove any of her 
accustomed retinue or attendants, to the end that she should still more hope to 
accomplish her wishes and do no harm to herself. When she expressed a desire to 


ACT V, SC. ii. ] ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA 2777, 


appear before Czesar and converse with him, it was granted; and to beguile her still 
more, he promised that he would come to her himself. 

She accordingly prepared a luxurious apartment and costly couch, and adorned 
herself further in a kind of careless fashion,—for her mourning garb mightily became 
her,—and seated herself upon the couch; beside her she had placed many images 
of his father, of all sorts, and in her bosom she had put all the letters that his father 
had sent her. When, after this, Cesar entered, she hastily arose, blushing, and said: 
‘ Hail, master, Heaven has given joy to you and taken it from me. But you see with 
your own eyes your father in the guise in which he often visited me, and you may 
hear how he honored me in various ways and made me queen of the Egyptians. That 
you may learn what were his own words about me, take and read the missives which 
he sent me with his own hand.’ 

As she spoke thus, she read aloud many endearing expressions of his. And now 
she would lament and caress the letters and again fall before his images and do them 
reverence. She kept turning her eyes toward Cesar, and melodiously continued to 
bewail her fate. She spoke in melting tones, saying at one time, ‘Of what avail 
Ceesar, are these your letters?’ and at another, ‘ But in the man before me you also 
are alive for me.’ Then again, ‘ Would that I had died before you!’ and still again, 
‘But if I have him, I have you!’ Some such diversity both of words and of gestures 
did she employ, at the same time gazing at and murmuring to him sweetly. Czesar 
comprehended her outbreak of passion and appeal for sympathy. Yet he did not pre- 
tend to do so, but letting his'eyes rest upon the ground, he said only this: ‘ Be of 
cheer, woman, and keep a good heart, for no harm shall befall you.’ She was dis- 
tressed that he would neither look at her nor breathe a word about the kingdom or 
any sigh of love, and fell at his knees wailing: ‘ Life for me, Czesar, is neither desir- 
able nor possible. This favor I beseech of you in memory of your father, —that since 
Heaven gave me to Antony after him, I may also die with my lord. Would that I 
had perished on the very instant after Czesar’s death! But since this present fate 
was my destiny, send me to Antony: grudge me not burial with him, that as I die 
because of him, so in Hades also I may dwell with him.’ 

Such words she uttered expecting to obtain commiseration : Caesar, however, made 
no answer toit. Fearing, however, that she might make away with herself he exhorted 
her again to be of good cheer, did not remove any of her attendants, and kept a care- 
ful watch upon her, that she might add brilliance to his triumph. Suspecting this, 
and regarding it as worse than innumerable deaths, she began to desire really to die 
and begged Czesar frequently that she might be allowed to perish in some way, 
and devised many plans by herself. When she could accomplish nothing, she feigned 
to change her mind and to repose great hope in him, as well as great hope in Livia. 
She said she would sail voluntarily and made ready many treasured adornments as 
gifts. In this way she hoped to inspire confidence that she had no designs upon her- 
self, and so be more free from scrutiny and bring about her destruction. This also 
took place. The other officials and Epaphroditus, to whom she had been committed, 
believed that her state of mind was really as it seemed, and neglected to keep a care- 
ful watch. She, meanwhile, was making preparations to die as painlessly as possi- 
ble. First she gave a sealed paper, in which she begged Cesar to order that she be 
buried beside Antony, to Epaphroditus himself to deliver, pretending that it con- 
tained some other matter. Having by this excuse freed herself of his presence, she 
set to her task. She put on her most beauteous apparel and after choosing a most 
becoming pose, assumed all the royal robes and appurtenances, and so died. No one 


378 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT.V, SCo il. 


knows clearly in what manner she perished, for there were found merely slight 
indentations on her arm. Some say'that she applied an asp which had been brought 
in to her in a water-jar or among some flowers. Others declare that she had smeared 
a needle, with which she was wont to braid her hair, with some poison possessed of 
such properties that it would not injure the surface of the body at all, but if it touched 
the least drop of blood it caused death very quickly and painlessly. The supposition 
is, then, that previously it had been her custom to wear it in her hair, and on this 
occasion after first making a small scratch on her arm with some instrument, she 
dipped the needle in the blood. In this or some very similar way she perished with 
her two handmaidens. The eunuch, at the moment her body was taken up, pre- 
sented himself voluntarily to the serpents, and after being bitten by them leaped into 
a coffin which had been prepared by him. Czesar on hearing of her demise was 
shocked, and both viewed her body and applied drugs to it and sent for Psylli,* in 
the hope that she might possibly revive. These Psylli, who are male, for there is no 
woman born in their tribe, have the power of sucking out before a person dies all the 
poison of every reptile and are not harmed themselves when bitten by any such crea- 
ture. They are propagated from one another and they test their offspring, the latter 
being thrown among serpents at once or having serpents laid upon their swaddling- 
clothes. In such cases the poisonous creatures do not harm the child and are 
benumbed by its clothing. This is the nature of their function. But Czsar, when 
he could not in any way resuscitate Cleopatra, felt admiration and pity for her and 
was himself excessively grieved, as much as if he had been deprived of all the glory 
of the victory. 


* Compare Pliny, Vatural History, xxi, 78. [Book VII, chap. ii, p. 154, Holland’s 
Trans. ed, 1635. ] 


/ 


IPP EENeDEIeX 


oe 
+ AG eh 
aes 


pares 
f 


a ‘ 
rn 


AP PEIN DIX 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 


STEEVENS is, I believe, the earliest among editors to attempt to fix the Date of 
publication of this play. In the Variorum of 1785 (p. 131) he calls attention to 
the following entry in the Stationers’ Registers : 


xix° die Ortobris. [1593] 


Symond water- Entred for his Copie vnder th andes of bothe the wardens a booke 
son. intituled The Tragedye of Cleopatra me ome vjd * 


This Symon Waterson, Steevens goes on to say, was the printer of some of Daniel’s 
works; the foregoing entry probably refers, therefore, ‘to Daniel’s C/eopatra, of 
which there are several editions.” Steevens found a second entry, of which he 
remarks that ‘it is the first notice I have met with concerning any edition of this 
play, more ancient than the folio of 1623.’ It is as follows: 


20 maiz [1608] 
Edward Blount. Entred for his copie vnder th andes of Sir George Buck knight 
and Master Warden Seton A booke called. The booke of Pericles 
prynce of Tyre te ie one oe a6 6 Aa! 


Edward Blunt. Entred also for his copie by the lyke Aucthoritie. A booke 
Called. Anthony. and Cleopatra oe ie co ley 


MALONE, in his edition of 1790, says, in his notice of /Judius Cesar (vol. i, p. 369), 
that ‘ we have certain proof that Antony and Cleopatra was composed before the mid- 
dle of the year 1608.’ This certain proof is the entry in the Statéoners Registers of 
that year, but Malone gives a slightly wrong impression in saying that the 20th of May 
is ‘before the middle of the year’; the year then began in March and the middle of 
the year fell in September. Asa further corroboration of this date, 1608, he observes 
(p. 372) that ‘in Ben Jonson’s Silent Woman, IV, iv [IV, ii, ed. Gifford], 1609, this 
play seems to be alluded to: “A/ovose. Nay, I would sit out a play, that were nothing 
but fights at sea, drum, trumpet, and target.” ’ If the reference be here to Antony & 
Cleopatra, the play which is ‘ xothing but fights at sea’ dwindles to a single stage- 
direction ‘ Alarum as at a sea fight.’—IV, xii, 1. The flimsiness of the pretence of 
adducing this quotation from Jonson as an indication of the date of Anthony & Cleo- 
patra is thus exposed by GirrorD: ‘ Long before 7he Silent Woman was written, 
nay, before Shakespeare was known to the stage, the theatres were in possession of 
many rude pieces founded on the remarkable events of our history, of which battles, 
etc., always formed a prominent feature. The miserable attempts to represent these 
favourite scenes, were often made a subject of mirth by succeeding writers.’ Never- 


* Arber’s Transcript, 11, 638. + Arber’s Zranscript, UI, 378. 
381 


382 APPENDIX 


theless, GEORGE CHALMERS, the next critic who deals with the Chronology of the 
Plays, repeats Malone’s quotation from Zhe Silent Woman without dissent ; he also 
accepts the proof to be drawn from the entry in the Stationers’ Registers as conclusive, 
and observes that if this tragedy were written as a sequel to Julius Cesar, ‘it may, 
perhaps, have been written in the beginning of the year 1608.’ He also opines 
( Supplemental Apology, 1799, Pp. 432) that ‘like other preceding dramas, this tragedy 
had been suggested to the observant mind of Shakespeare, by prior intimations. . . 
The argument of Daniel’s C/eopatra may have furnished the more dramatic genius of 
Shakespeare with several hints, which he well knew how to work into a better form. 
He had seen in 7h%e Devils Incarnate, in 1596, which he had attentively read, 
what Lodge had remarked, how ‘‘ Anthony, dallying in delights with Cleopatra, 
gave Czesar opportunitie of many victories.’’’ 


KNIGHT is the next editor to discuss the Date. In the /xtroduction to Coriolanus 
(p. 148) he remarks: ‘In 1623 Blount and Jaggard, the publishers of the folio, enter 
“‘ Mr. William Shakspere’s Comedies, Histories, and Tragedies, so many of the said 
copies as are not formerly entered to other men.’ Amongst these is du/ony and 
Cleopatra. All the plays thus entered in 1623 were unpublished; and not one of them, 
with the exception of Antony and Cleopatra, had been “formerly entered” by name. 
It is therefore more than probable that the Anthony and Cleopatra entered in 1608 was 
not Shakspere’s tragedy ; and we therefore reject this entry as any evidence that Shak- 
spere’s Antony and Cleopatra was written as early as 1608. Upon the date of this 
play depends, according to Malone, the date of /u/ius Cesar. We state, unhesitat- 
ingly, that there is no zzfernal evidence whatever for the dates of any of the three 
Roman plays. We believe that they belong to the same cycle; but we would place 
that later in Shakspere’s life than is ordinarily done. Malone places them together, 
properly enough ; but in assuming that they were written in 1607, 1608, and 1610, 
his theory makes Shakspere almost absolutely unemployed for the last seven years 
of his life. We hold that his last years were devoted to these plays.’—[Knight’s 
assertion that ‘all the plays’ entered in the First Folio list ‘ were unpublished,’ is, 
possibly, a little rash, and yet it is difficult to disprove it. He is on firmer ground 
when he says that it is ‘more than probable’ that the Anthony and Cleopatra of 1608 
is not Shakespeare’s tragedy,—ground which, I think, has been examined by editors 
and critics with hardly sufficient care. It raises another mystery ; the ever-recurring 
mysteries connected with the Quartos has a tendency to become monotonous. The 
Edward Blount who entered the copy of Anthony and Cleopatra in 1608 is the same 
Edward Blount who with William Jaggard entered the copy of the First Folio on 
the eighth of November, 1623, and the terms of the latter entry expressly exclude 
“soe manie’ of the ‘Comedyes, Histories, and Tragedyes’ ‘as are not formerly 
entred to other men.’ In the list which follows there stands our present Anthonie 
and Cleopatra. Why, it may be asked, should Edward Blount include this play in 
1623, seeing that he had already received the license to print it in 1608? To be 
sure, it had not been entered to an ‘other man,’ but it had been entered to himself, 
and, if, in 1608, 7¢ was Shakespeare's play, why should he desire to take out a double 
license? Why should it be mentioned at all, seeing that, if the 1608 entry was the 
present play it was already his property? The list, as it stands in the Stationers’ 
Registers, of unlicensed plays by Shakespeare which Blount and Jaggard were 
licensed to print in 1623 is as follows: * 


* Arber’s Transcript, iv, 107. 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 383 


The Tempest 

The Two gentlemen of Verona 
Measure for Measure 

The Comedy of Errors 

As you like it 

All’s well that ends well 
Twelfe night 


| 
COMEDYES J 
[ The winters tale 


The thirde parte of HENRY ye Sixt 


HIsToRiIEs 
Henry the EIGHT 


CoRIOLANUS 

TIMON of Athens 

JULIUS C#SAR 

MACKBETH 

ANTHONIE and CLEOPATRA 


TRAGEDIES 
L CYMBELINE 


As Knight says, ‘not one of these, with the exception of Anthonie and Cleopatra, 
had been ‘formerly entred’’ by name.’ And, to repeat what I have just said, if the 
1608 Anthony and Cleopatra were Shakespeare’ s, and already the property of Edward 
Blount, it is not clear why it should have been entered again. When, therefore, 
Knight rejects the date of 1608 as a proof that Shakespeare wrote the present play in 
that year, even-handed justice must acknowledge that there is colour for his rejection, 
and, furthermore, all who, confiding on this date, erect their scheme of the chro- 
nology of these plays, do so on a foundation which, in respect to the present play, is 
not flawless. 


G. C. VERPLANCK gives a late date to the three plays Coriolanus, Julius Cesar, 
and the present play, because Shakespeare, in these tragedies, preserves throughout 
‘an artist-like keeping, which, combined with their dramatic skill, the constant pro- 
pensity of the author to moral or political argument or reasoning, and the more 
habitual and mature tone of his philosophy, as well as with the evidence of diction 
and versification, gives strong attestation that they belong to that later epoch of 
Shakespeare’s authorship, when (to use Coleridge’s discriminating criticism) ‘‘ the 
energies of intellect in the cycle of genius become predominant over passion and 
creative self-manifestation.’’? This period I should place as beginning after the pro- 
duction of Zear and Macbeth, in 1608 or 1609, or about the Poet’s forty-fifth year. 
Besides those reasons for ascribing the Roman dramas to this date, which appeal 
only to the reader’s taste and feeling, the following considerations seem also of some 
weight. Coriolanus and its Plutarchian companions appeared first in print in the 
posthumous folio of 1623, and they were then entered in the Stationers’ Register as 
among the plays in that volume “ not formerly entered to other men.” This was the 
case with all Shakespeare’s later works, either produced or remodelled after Lear ; 
for it appears that after Othello, Hamlet, and Lear had placed him far above his con- 
temporaries, his plays became of too much value to the theatrical company which held 
the copies to be suffered to go into the market as mere literary property. Again: 
there is no period of Shakespeare’s life, except the last seven or eight years, where 
we can well find room for the production of these dramas. We well know from 


384 APPENDIX 


various sources what were the luxuriant products of his youthful genius until 1598. 
During the succeeding ten years we find him with his full share of interest and 
occupation in the management and pecuniary concerns of his theatre, yet employed 
in the enlargement of his Ham/et ‘to as much again as it was,’ the improvement and 
revision of some of his comedies, and the composition of As You Like /t, Much Ado 
About Nothing, Twelfth Night, very probably of several of his English historical 
plays, and of Zimon, and certainly of Othello, Measure for Measure, Troilus and 
Cressida, Lear, and Macbeth. It can scarcely be thought that he had then leisure 
to add the Roman tragedies to all these. On the other hand, if there had been no 
trace of any additional authorship after 1609, we might infer that he had been inca- 
pacitated by disease, or drawn away by some other cause from composition; but as 
we know that after that date he revised or greatly enlarged some dramas, and wrote 
two or three new ones, we have far more reason to presume that some portion of his 
leisure, after he had returned to his native village, during which he wrote the Zem- 
pest, was also employed in the composition of these tragedies, filled like that, his 
last poetic comedy, with grave and deep reflections, wide moral speculation, and the 
sobered energy of mature but calm power, than to believe that they were poured 
forth in the same rapid torrent of invention and passionate thought which, during the 
ten preceding years of the Poet's life, had enriched English literature with more of 
original dramatic character, and poetic sentiment and expression, than it owes to the 
life of any other author. 


CHARLES BATHURST (p. 130): Entered on the Stationers’ books, May 2, 1608. 
This is a valuable date, for the verse is still more checked and cut up (as in his 
fourth style) than in Coriolanus. Put off my helmet to My countryman, a Roman. 
Remarkably so, in the change of person in dialogue; but it is far from having the 
same load of ideas, nor stiffness. The mind of the reader would flow on more freely, 
than in Cortolanus, if the ear were allowed to do so. It is a far more irregular, 
varied, play,—more, perhaps, than any he has written. There is, however, still much 
of the crampness of a lesson out of a book, in the political parts. With this cramp- 
ness goes correctness of taste. There are not the faults of carelessness or of 
unchecked want of taste, which are common in the earlier plays. Mere conceits, 
puns, indelicacy, we do not see much of. There are many double endings in this 
play. 


G. G. GERVINUS (ii, 312, 1872. 4te Auflage): It may well be that by the ‘ booke,’ 
entered by Blount, the present play is meant, and that its date of composition may be 
set down as in 1607-8. Indications of a common treatment of material, certain 
peculiarities of style, possibly even more than these, the poet’s frame of mind at the 
time, place this play near to 770. &° Cress., which may also tend to confirm this date. 


The late date of the present play is corroborated by the Metrical Tests. From 
the careful Table, prepared by Prof. IncRam (Mew Sh. Soc. Trans. 1874, p. 450), 
of Shakespeare’s use of light and weak endings, Prof. Ingram deduces the following 
results : 

‘1. During the first three-fourths (or thereabouts) of Shakspere’s poetic life, he 
used the light endings [such as am, are, art, be, been, can, etc.] very sparingly, and 
the weak endings [such as and, as, at, by, for, from, etc.] scarcely at all. 

‘2, The last fourth (or thereabouts) is obviously and unmistakeably distinguished 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 385 


from the earlier stages by the very great increase of the number of light endings, 
and, still more, by the first appearance in any appreciable number, and afterwards 
the steady growth, of the weak endings. 

3. Hence, in any discrimination of periods which is founded on metrical con- 
siderations, this last may be called the ‘‘ weak-ending Period.” .. 

‘7. The weak endings do not come in by slow degrees, but the poet seems to 
have thrown himself at once into this new structure of verse; 28 examples occurring 
in Ant. and Cleop., whilst there are not more than two in any earlier play.’ 

Accordingly, in Prof. Ingram’s Table, Amt. & Cleop. is the twenty-sixth in order, 
and is followed only by ‘ Coriolanus, Pericles (Shakspere’s part), Tempest, Cymbeline, 
Winter's Tale, Henry VIII (Shakspere’s part).’ 


J. O. HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPs (Outlines, 5th ed. p. 187): About the time that 
Pericles was so well received at the Globe, the tragedy of Antony and Cleopatra was 
in course of performance at the same theatre, but, although successful, it did not 
equal the former in popularity. It was, however, sufficiently attractive for Blount to 
secure the consent of the Master of the Revels to its publication and also for the 
company to frustrate his immediate design.—[In his ///ustrative Notes, Halliwell 
attempts to substantiate the foregoing positive assertions by adducing two inferences. 
On the words ‘although successful’ there is the following note (p. 524): ‘This 
‘fact may be inferred from the entry in the Stationers’ Registers of 1608, to Edward 
‘Blount of ‘‘his copie by the lyke aucthoritie, a booke called Anthony and Cleo- 
“«patra.”’? The “like authority ’’ refers to the sanction of Sir George Buck and the 
‘company, as appears from the previous entry in the register, so that Blount was no 
‘doubt in possession of the copyright of the authentic play. If he printed it in 1608, 
‘no copy of the impression is now known to exist, the earliest edition which has been 
‘preserved being that in the collective work of 1623, of which Blount was one of 
‘the publishers ; and although it is included in the list of tragedies ‘‘as are not 
‘«¢formerly entred to other men”’ in the notice of the copyright of the folio, it is 
‘still not impossible that an earlier separate edition was issued by him. There are 
‘indications that the list of non-entered plays was carelessly drawn up.’ It is 
impossible to deny Halliwell’s assertion that there are indications that this list is 
carelessly drawn up; but he does not state what the indications are; this at least is 
certain that it isso far careful that with but two exceptions, not a single play is given 
in it which has been before even referred to in the Stationers’ Registers; in regard to 
the other plays which it specifies the list is strictly accurate. The two exceptions are 
As You Like It, which is not entered, but mentioned only ‘to be staied’ and the pres- 
ent play of Anthony and Cleopatra, if the entry of 20th of May, 1608 really refers to 
it. When, then, we find this list so accurate in regard to all the other plays, I do 
not believe we are justified in asserting that it is inaccurate in this one solitary instance, 
unless we are positively certain that the entry of 20th of May, 1608 refers to Shake- 
speare’s Anthony and Cleopatra. Knight and Verplanck believe that it does not. 
And it is impossible to contradict them. There is no proof whatever that it is Shake- 
speare’s play. We do not even know that it was a play at all,—it may have been a 
prose history. There is nothing here but inferences, as is, unfortunately, so much of 
what Halliwell asserts in his Ow¢/izes. For instance, in the note (p. 525) on his state- 
ment that Anthony and Cleopatra did not equal Pericles in popularity: ‘this,’ he 
remarks, ‘may be gathered from the rarity of contemporary allusions to it. The only 
‘extrinsic notice of the tragedy during the author’s life-time appears to be a curious one 


25 


386 APPENDIX 


‘in Anton’s Philosophers Satyrs, 1616, where the latter poet blames ladies for encour- 
“aging the performance of so vicious a drama by their presence.’ Here, in this note, 
there are two inferences which are supposed to substantiate the truth of an assertion. 
In its first line, the inference is open and confessed where it is said that 7 may be 
gathered. The second inference lies in assuming that Anton, when he speaks of 
‘Orestes incest, Cleopatres crimes’ refers to Shakespeare’s play of Anthony and 
Cleopatra. That he does so, is purely a surmise on Halliwell’s part. If surmises 
be once allowed, why may we not surmise that the unknown date of Beaumont and 
Fletcher’s Zhe False One, wherein Cleopatra is the heroine, be before 1616? Weber 
places it before 1618. Only a little stretching will bring it into 1616, and then to it, 
and not to Shakespeare, Anton’s reference may apply. Moreover, Shakespeare died 
in 1616. Cana work, which, like Anton’s Sa¢yvs is dated 1616, be stated without 
qualification to contain a ‘notice of the tragedy during the poet’s lifetime’ ? 


RECAPITULATION : 


1790 MALONE . ‘ ; 3 é : ; ; ; : : 1608 
1793 STEEVENS . ’ : ; ‘ ; : 3 ; : : 1608 
1799 GEO. CHALMERS ; : : : 1608 
1841 KNIGHT . : : au auaiae ee seven years of Shakespeare’s life.’ 

1643 ‘COLLIERS. ‘ . written late in 1607, and acted’ in 1608 
1847 VERPLANCK : ofr 1608 or 1609, or about Shakespeare’s forty-fifth year.’ 

1857 STAUNTON : : 3 : : ; : written at end of 1607 
1857 BATHURST 5 : : 3 : : : : : ? 1608 
1860 R.G. WHITE . : : : 2 Sir PNG : : about 1608 
1865 HALLIWELL : : , : : : - é . 1607 or 1608 
1866 Dyce (ed.ii)  . ‘ : : i : . a Short time before 1608 
1872 GERVINUS . : ; : ‘ 4 2 : 1607-1608 
1872 Detius (ed. ili) . é =. ‘ina SoREAGvENy ate: year in the Poet’s life. 


1874 J. K. INGRAM twenty-sixth in order, and followed only by Cortolanus, Peri- 
cles (Shakspere’s part), Tempest, Cymbeline, Winter's Tale, Henry VIII 
(Shakspere’s part). 


1874 F. J. FURNIVALL : : : 5 : 5 : E ? 1606-7 
1875 A.W. WARD. : : : : : : before 1608 
197 Ope on Cree KEP AS ees : ; - At Geied shanimoudly early in 1608’ 
1881 H.N. Hupson . : : : : - in 1607 or very early in 1608 
1893 CHARLES WORDSWORTH . : : . probably written in 1606-1607 
1g01 K. DEIGHTON . . : : : . : : - 1607 or 1608 
1903 C. H. HERFOoRD ; : - e . é : ? 1608 
1904 W. J. ROLFE. ; . . : oh Nt 1607, or very early in 1608 
n.d. The COWDEN-CLARKES : : . Close of 1607, or beginning of 1608 


DURATION OF ACTION 


It is hardly likely that Shakespeare, in his Historical Dramas, paid much attention 
to the passage of time, either historical or dramatic. It was enough that in the flight 
of ten years a general sequence of events was preserved, In these circumstances, 
where there inevitably exists much shuffling of times, it is a task of extreme difficulty 
to unravel the tangled skein and to determine the division into days of dramatic time. 


SOURCE. OF THE PLOT 387 


This knot, which seems almost too intrinse to unloose, Mr P. A. DANIEL has untied 
in a quite triumphant manner, as follows (His scheme had better be accepted; it is 
not likely that, in the future, anyone with adequate skill and patience will be found 
who can modify it.) : 


“Time of the Play, twelve days represented on the stage ; with intervals. 
Day 1.—Act I, sc. i-iv. 
Intevval—4o days? 
c2:—Act I, sc. vis Act Ll, scat—ilie 
“« 3.—Act II, sc. iv. 
Lnterval. 
“ 4—Act II, se. v-vii. [Act III, sc. iii.] 
Interval ? 
« 5§.—Act III, sc. i and ii. 
[Act III, sc. iii. See Day 4.] 


Interval. 
“ 6.—Act III, sc. iv and v. 
Lnterval, 
« = 7.—Act III, sc. vi. 
Lnterval. 


« $8.—Act III, sc. vii. 
* 9.—Act III, sc. viii—x. 
Lnterval. 
« yo.—Act III, sc. xi-xiii; Act IV, sc. i-iii. 
*« yr.—Act IV, sc. iv—ix. 
* y2.—Act IV, sc. x-xv; Act V, sc. i and ii. 


Historic time, about ten years: B.C. 40 to B.C. 30..—Vew Shakspere Soc. Trans. 
1877-9, Pp. 239. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT 


After the painful student has waded through the preceding pages of this volume, it 
seems impertinently superfluous to state that Shakespeare drew the Source of his Plot 
from North’s 7ranslation of Plutarch. The continual references in the Commentary ~ 
to this portion of the Appendix are wearisome in their iteration. Yet, surely, that 
mind must be inert, indeed, that finds no pleasure in observing the magic whereby 
Shakespeare, gilding the pale stream with heavenly alchemy, transfigures the quiet 
prose, at times almost word for word, into exalted poetry. In the following pages 
only those passages are reprinted from the Life of Antonius which, in the Editor's 
judgement, have any relation to the present play. In the original there are marginal 
notes, in Italics, setting forth the substance of the adjoining text; in order to save 
space these have been omitted, and their places supplied by references, in broad- 
faced type, to Acts, Scenes, and Lines in the play. 


The following 7ranscript is taken from the Photolithograph of Four Chapters of 
North’s Plutarch, of the edition of 1595, published in 1878, by Dr F. A. LEo, of 
Berlin. 


388 APPENDIX 


PLUTARCH 


THE Lives | OF THE NOBLE GRE- | CIANS AND ROMANES, COMPARED | TOGETHER 
BY THAT GRAVE LEARNED | PHILOSOPHER AND HISTORIOGRAPHER, | Plutarke of 
Cheronea: | Tranflated out of Greeke into French by IAmrs AmIOT, Abbot of 
Bello- | zane, Bifhop of Auxerre, one of the Kings priuie counfell, and great | Amner 
of France, and out of French into Englifh, by | 7Zomas North. [Vignette] Imprinted 
at London by Richard Field for | Bonham Norton. | 1595. 


Thereupon he left IraLy, & went into GRECE, & there bestowed the most part 
of his time, sometime in warres, and otherwhile in the studie of 
eloquence. He vsed a manner of phrase in his speech, called Asiat- 
ike, which caried the best grace and estimation at that time, and was 
much like to his manners and life: for it was full of ostentation, fool- 
ish brauerie, and vaine ambition. .. . 

But besides all this, he had a noble presence, and shewed a countenance of one 
of a noble house: he had a goodly thicke beard, a broad forehead, crooke nosed, 
and there appeared such a manly looke in his countenance, as is commonly seene in 
Flercules pictures, stamped or grauen in mettall. Now it had bene a speech of old 

time, that the familie of the Axzonj were discended from one Axion, 


I, iii, 67. 
IV, xii, 51. 


i the sonne of Hercules, whereof the family tooke name. This opinion 
1, iil, 105. gid Antonius seeke to confirme in all his doings: not onely resem- 
bling him in the likenesse of his bodie, as we haue saide before, but 
also in the wearing of his garments. For when he would openly shewe himselfe 
abroad before many people, he would alwaies weare his cassocke girt downe low 
vppon his hippes, with a great sword hanging by his side, and vpon that, some ill 
fauoured cloke. Furthermore, things that seeme intollerable in other 
: men, as to boast commonly, to ieast with one or other, to drinke like 
rau ty Chea good fellow with euery bodie, to sit with the souldiers when they 
dine, and to eate and drinke with them souldierlike: it is incredible 
what wonderfull loue it wanne him amongst them. And furthermore, being given 
to loue: that made him the more desired, and by that meanes he brought many to 
loue him. For he would further euery mans loue, and also would not be angry that 
men should merily tell him of those he loued. But besides all this, that which most 
procured his rising and aduancement, was his liberalitie, who gaue all to the souldiers, 
and kept nothing for himselfe: and when he was growen to great credite, then was 
his authoritie and power also very great, the which notwithstanding himselfe did 
ouerthrowe, by a thousand other faults he had... . 
Then was Antonzus straight maruellously commended and beloued 
: of the souldiers, because he commonly exercised himselfe among 
I, iv, 22. them, and would oftentimes eate and drinke with them, and also be 
liberall vnto them, according to his abilitie.. . . 
Afterwardes when Pompeys house was put to open sale, Antonius 


HL, Vib TSX» bought it: but when they asked him money for it, he made it very 


EP EG strange, and was offended with them. . . . 
I, ii, 137 And therefore he left his dissolute manner of life, and maried 
II, ii, 76. Fuluia that was Clodius widdow, a woman not so basely minded to 


} spend her time in spinning and housewiuery, and was not contented 
to master her husband at home, but would also rule him in his office abroade, and 


PLUTARCH 389 


commaund him, that commaunded legions and great armies: so that Cleopatra was 
to giue “w/uia thankes for that shee had taught Axtonius this obedience to women, 
that learned so well to be at their commandement. .. . 

Now things remayning in this state at ROME, Octaucus Cesar 
the yonger came to ROME, who was the sonne of Julius Caesars 
Neece, as you haue heard before, and was left his lawfull heire by 
will, remayning at the time of the death of his great Vncle that was 
slaine, in the City of APOLLONIA.... 

Cicero on the other side being at that time the chiefest man of authority and esti- 
mation in the city, he stirred vp all men against A/onzus - so that in the end he made 
the Senate pronounce him an enemy to his country, and appointed yong Cesar Ser- 
geants to cary axes before him, and such other signes as were inci- 
dent to the dignity of a Consull or Pretor: and moreouer sent Hir- 
ctus and Pansa, then Consuls, to driue Axtonius out of ITALY. 
These two Consuls together with Cesar, who also had an army, 
went against Azfonzus that besieged the city of MopENA, and there ouerthrew him in 
battel; but both the Consuls were slaine there. Axtonius flying vpon this ouerthrow, 
fell into great misery all at once: but the chiefest want of all other, and that pinched 
him most, was famine. Howbeit he was of such a strong nature, that by patience he 
would ouercome any aduersitie, and the heauier fortune lay vpon him, the more con- 
stant shewed he himselfe. Euery man that feeleth want or aduersity, knoweth by 
vertue and discretion what he should doe: but when indeede they are ouerlayed with 
extremity, and be sore oppressed, few haue the hearts to follow that which they praise 
and commend, and much lesse to auoide that they reproue and mislike. But rather 
to the contrary, they yeeld to their accustomed easie life: and through faint heart, & 
lacke of corage, doe chaunge their first mind and purpose. And therefore it was a 
wonderfull example to the souldiers, to see An¢onius that was brought 
vp in al] finenesse and superfluity, so easily to drinke puddle water, 
and to eate wild frutes and rootes; and moreouer it is reported, that 
euen as they passed the Alpes, they did eate the barkes of trees, and 
such beasts, as neuer man tasted of their flesh before. . . 

Thus Axtonius being a foote againe, and growen of great power, repassed ouer 
the Alpes, leading into ITALY with him seuenteene legions, and tenne thousand horse- 
men, besides sixe legions he left in garrison among the GAVLEs, vwnder the charge of 
one Varius, a companion of his that woulde drinke lustely with him, and therefore 
in mockery was surnamed Coty/on ; to wit, a bibber. 

But setting aside the ill name he had for his insolency, he was yet much more 
hated in respect of the house he dwelt in, the which was the house of Pompey the 
great: a man as famous for his temperance, modesty, and ciuil life, 
as for his three triumphes. For it grieued them to see the gates 
commonly shut against the Captaines, Magistrates of the city, and 
also Ambassadors of straunge nations, which were sometimes thrust 
from the gate with violence... . 

When they had passed ouer the seas, and that they beganne to make warre, they 
being both camped by their enemies, to wit, Azfonius against Cassius, and Cesar 
against Brutus: Cesar did no great matter, but Adonis had alway the vpper hand, 
and did all. For at the first battell Cesar was ouerthrowen by Brutus, and lost his 
campe, and very hardly saued him selfe by flying from them that followed him. 
Howbeit he writeth himselfe in his Commentaries, that he fled before the charge was 


III, vi, 7. 


I, iv; 67: 


I, iv, 70. 


II, vii, 151. 


390 APPENDIX 


giuen, because of a dreame one of his friends had. Améonius on the other side ouer- 
threw Cassius in battell, though some write that he was not there himselfe at the bat- 
tel, but that he came after the ouerthrow, whilest his men had the enemies in chase. 
So Cassius at his earnest request was slaine by a faithfull seruant of his own called 
Pindarus, whom he had infranchised: because he knew not in time that Brefus 
had ouercome Cesar. Shortly after they fought an other battell 
againe, in the which Brztus was ouerthrowen, who afterwardes also 
slue himself. Thus Az‘onius had the chiefest glory of all this vic- 
tory, specially because Cesar was sicke at that time... . 


III, xi, 41. 


Antonius being thus inclined, the last and extreamest mischiefe of all other (to 
wit, the loue of Cleopatra) lighted on him, who did waken and stirre vp many vices 
yet hidden in him, and were neuer seene to any: and if any sparke of goodnesse or 
hope of rising were left him, CZeopatra quenched it straight, and made it worse then 
before. The manner how he fell in loue with her was this. Azfonius going to make 
warre with the PARTHIANS, sent to command C/eofa¢ra to appeare personally before 
him, when he came into CILICIA, to aunswere vnto such accusations as were laide 
against her, being this: that she had aided Cassius and Brutus in their warre against 
him. The messenger sent vnto C/eopatra to make his summons vnto her, was called 
Dellius : who when he had thoroughly considered her beautie, the excellent grace 
and sweetenesse of her tongue, he nothing mistrusted that Azfonius would doe any 
hurt to so noble a Ladie, but rather assured himselfe, that within few dayes she should 
be in great fauor with him. Thereupon he did her great honour, and perswaded 
her to come into CILIcIA, as honourably furnished as she could possible, and bad her 
* not to be affraide at all of Amozzus, for he was a more courteous Lord, then any that 
she had euer seene. Cleopatra on the other side beleeuing De//ius words, & gessing 
by the former accesse and credit she had with /u/ius Cesar, and Cneus Pompey (the 
sonne of Pompey the great) onely for her beautie: she began to haue good hope that 
she might more easily win Azéonius. For Cesar and Pompey knew her when she 
was but a young thing, & knew not then what the worlde ment: but 
now she went to Azdonzus at the age when a womans beautie is at 
the prime, and she also of best iudgement. So, she furnished her- 
selfe with a world of gifts, store of gold and siluer, and of riches and 
other sumptuous ornaments, as is credible enough she might bring from so great a 
house, and from so wealthie and rich a realme as Ai'cypT was. But yet she caried 
nothing with her wherein she trusted more then in her selfe, and in the charmes and 
inchauntment of her passing beautie and grace. Therefore when she was sent vnto 
by diuers letters, both from Az¢onzus himselfe, and also from his friendes, she made 

so light of it and mocked Azztomzzs so much, that she disdained to set 

II, ii, 225. forward otherwise, but to take her barge in the riuer of Cydnus, the 
II, ii, 243. Ppoope whereof was of gold, the sailes of purple, and the owers of 
siluer, which kept stroke in rowing after the sound of the musicke 

of flutes, howboyes, cytherns, vyolls, and such other instruments as they played vpon 
in the barge. And now for the person of her selfe: she was laide vnder a pauillion 
of cloth of golde of tissue, apparelled and attired like the goddesse Venus, commonly 
drawen in picture: and hard by her, on either hand of her, pretie faire boyes appa- 
relled as painters doe set foorth god Cupide, with litle fans in their hands, with the 
which they fanned winde vpon her. Her Ladies and gentlewomen also, the fairest 
of them were apparelled like the nymphes (Vereides (which are the myrmaides of the 
waters) and like the Graces, some stearing the helme, others tending the tackle and 


I, v, 86. 


PLUTARCH 301 


ropes of the barge, out of the which there came a wonderfull passing sweete sauor 
of perfumes, that perfumed the wharfes side, pestered with innumerable multitudes 
of people. Some of them followed the barge all alongst the riuers side : others also 
ranne out of the citie to see her comming in. So that in the end, there ranne such 
multitudes of people one after an other to see her, that Antonius was left post alone 
in the market place, in his Imperiall seate to giue audience: and there went a rumor 
in the peoples mouthes, that the goddesse Venus was come to play with the god Bac- 
chus, for the generall good of all Asta. When Cleopatra landed, Antonius sent to 
inuite her to supper to him. But she sent him worde againe, he should doe better 
rather to come and suppe with her. Antonius therefore to shew himselfe curteous 
vnto her at her arriuall, was contented to obey her, and went to supper to her: where 
he found such passing sumptuous fare, that no tongue can expresse it. But amongst 
all other things, he most wondered at the infinite number of lightes and torches 
hanged on the toppe of the house, giuing light in euery place, so artificially set and 
ordered by deuises, some round, some square: that it was the rarest thing to behold 
that eye could discerne, or that euer bookes could mention. The next night, Aztonius 
feasting her, contended to passe her in magnificence and finenes: but she ouercame 
him in both. So that he himselfe began to scorne the grosse seruice of his house, in 
respect of Cleopatraes sumptuousnes and finenesse. And when Cleopatra found 
Antonius ieasts and flents to be but grosse, and souldier like, in plaine manner: she 
gaue it him finely, and without feare taunted him throughly. Now her beautie (as 
it is reported) was not so passing, as vnmatchable of other women, nor yet such, as 
vpon present viewe did enamor men with her: but so sweete was her companie and 
conuersation, that a man could not possiblie but be taken. And besides her beautie, 
the good grace she had to talke and discourse, her curteous nature that tempered her 
words & deedes, was a spurre that pricked to the quick. Furthermore, besides all 
these, her voice and words were maruellous pleasant: for her tongue was an instru- 
ment of musicke to diuers sportes and pastimes, the which she easily turned to any 
language that pleased her. She spake vnto few barbarous people by interpreter, but 
made them answere her selfe, or at the least the most part of them: as the A‘'THIOP- 
IANS, the ARABIANS, the TROGLODYTES, the HEBRVES, the SYRIANS, the MEDEs, 
and the PARTHIANS, and to many others also, whose languages she had learned. 
Whereas diuers of her progenitors, the kings of AScypr, could scarce learne the 
EGYPTIAN tongue only & many of them forgot to speake the MACEDONIAN. Now, 
Antonius was so rauished with the loue of Cleopatra, that though his wife Fu/uia 
had great warres, and much a doe with Cesar for his affaires, and that the armie of 
the PARTHIANS (the which the kings Lieutenantes had giuen to the only leading of 
Labienus) was now assembled in MrsopoTaMIA readie to inuade SyRIA: yet, as 
though all this had nothing touched him, he yeelded himselfe to goe with Cleopatra 
into ALEXANDRIA, where he spent and lost in childish sports (as a man might say) 
and idle pastimes, the most pretious thing a man can spend, as Anéiphon saith: and 
that is, time. For they made an order betwene them, which they called Amimetobion 
(as much to say, no life comparable and matchable with it) one feasting each other 
by turnes, and in cost, exceeding all measure and reason. And for proofe hereof, I 
haue heard my grandfather Lampryas report, that one PAzlo¢as a Phisitian, borne in 
the city of Ampuissa, told him that he was at that present time in ALEXANDRIA, 
and studied Phisicke: and that hauing acquaintance with one of Antonius cookes, 
he tooke him with him to Axéonius house, (being a young man desirous to see 
things) to shew him the wonderfull sumptuous charge and preparation of one only 


392 APPENDIX 


supper. When he was in the kitchin, and saw a world of diuersities of meates, and 
amongst others, eight wild boares rosted whole : he began to wonder 
at it, and saide, sure you haue a great number of guestes to supper. 
The cooke fell a laughing, and answered him, no (quoth he) not many 
guestes, nor aboue twelue in all : but yet all that is boyled or roasted 
must be serued in whole, or else it would be marred straight. For Antonius per- 
aduenture will suppe presently, or it may be a pretie while hence, or likely enough he 
will deferre it longer, for that he hath drunke well to day, or else hath had some 
other great matters in hand: and therefore we doe not dresse one supper onely, but 
many suppers, because we are uncertaine of the houre he will suppe in. P/z/ofas the 
Phisitian tolde my grandfather this tale... . 

But now againe to Cleopatra. Plato writeth that there are foure kinds of flatterie : 
but Cleopatra deuided it into many kinds. For she, were it in sport, or in matters of 
earnest, still deuised sundrie newe delights to haue Antonius at commaundement, 


Th nio13: 


neuer leauing him night nor day, nor once letting him go out of her sight. For 
she would play at dice with him, drinke with him, & hunt commonly with him, 
and also be with him when he went to any exercise or actiuitie of 
body. And sometime also, when he would go vp and downe the 
citie disguised as a slaue in the night, & would peere into poore 
mens windowes & their shops, and scold and braule with them 


I, i, 68. 


within the house: Cleopatra would be also in a chamber maides array, and amble 
vp and downe the streetes with him, so that oftentimes Azfonius bare away both 
mockes and blowes. Now, though most men misliked this manner, yet the ALEX- 
ANDRIANS were commonly glad of this iolity, and liked it well, saying very gallantly, 
and wisely: that Antonius shewed them a comicall face, to wit, a merie countenance: 
and the ROMAINES a tragicall face, to say, a grimme looke. But to reckon vp all 
the foolish sportes they made, reuelling in this sort: it were too fonde a part of me, 
and therefore I will only tell you one among the rest. Ona time he went to angle 
for fish, and when he could take none, he was as angrie as could be, because 
Cleopatra stood by. Wherefore he secretly commaunded the fisher men, that when 
he cast in his line, they should straight diue vnder the water, and put a fish on his 
hooke which they had taken before: and so snatched vp his angling rodde, and 
brought vp fish twise or thrise. C/eofatra found it straight, yet she seemed not to 
see it, but wondred at his excellent fishing: but when she was alone by her selfe 
among her owne people, she tolde them how it was, and bad them the next morning 
to be on the water to see the fishing. A number of people came to the hauen, and 
got into the fisher boates to see this fishing. Avztonzus then threw in his line and 
Cleopatra straight commanded one of her men to diue vnder water 
before Antonius men, and to put some old salt fish vpon his baite, 
like vnto those that are brought out of the country of Pont. When 
he had hong the fish on his hook, Antonius thinking he had taken 
a fish in deede, snatched vp his line presently. Then they all fell a laughing. 
Cleopatra laughing also, said vnto him: leaue vs (my Lord) AScypTiaNs (which 
dwell in the country of PHarvs & CANosus) your angling rod: this is not thy pro- 
fession: thou must hunt after conquering of realmes and countries. 
Now Anéonius delighting in these fond and childish pastimes, very 
ill newes were brought him from two places. The first from Ror, 
that his brother Zeciws and /uluia his wife, fell out first betwene 
themselues, and afterwards fell to open warre with Cesar, & had brought all to 


Liiv2hs 


I, ii, 102. 


LAS OPATR. CH: 303 


nought, that they were both driuen to flie out of IrALy. The second newes, as 
bad as the first: that ZLadienus conquered all AsIA with the armie of the Par- 
THIANS, from the riuer of Euphrates, and from SyrIA, vnto the 
countries of LypIA and IontA. Then beganne Antonius with 
much a do, a litle to rouse him selfe as if he had bene wakened 
out of a deepe sleepe, and as a man may say, comming out of a 
great drunkennesse. So, first of all he bent himselfe against the PARTHIANS, and 
went as farre as the country of PHaNicIA: but there he receiued lamentable letters 
from his wife /uca. Whereupon he straight returned towardes ITALY, with two 
hundred saile: and as he went, took vp his friends by the way that fled out of 
ITALIE, to come to him, By them he was informed, that his wife Huduia was the 
only cause of this warre: who being of a peeuish, crooked, and troublesome nature, 
had purposely raised this vprore in ITALy, in hope thereby to with- 

draw him from Cleopatra. But by good fortune, his wife Fuluia is 

going to meete with Antonius sickned by the way, and died in the I, ii, 139. 
citie of SICYONE: and therefore Octavius Cazsar, and he were the 

easilier made friends together. For when Ax/onius landed in ITAL, and that men 
saw Cesar asked nothing of him, and that Ax¢onius on the other side laide all the 
fault & burden on his wife //uéa: the friendes of both parties would not suffer them 
to vnrippe any old matters, and to proue or defend who had the wrong or right, and 
who was the first procurer of this warre, fearing to make matters worse betwene them: 
but they made them friendes together, and deuided the Empire of Rome betwene 
them, making the sea Ionium the bounds of their diuision. For they gaue all the 
prouinces Eastward vnto Antonius: and the countries Westward, vnto Cesar. and 
left AFRICKE vnto Lepidus: and made a law, that they three one after an other 
should make their friends Consuls, when they would not be themselues. This 
seemed to be a good councell, but yet it was to be confirmed with a straighter bond, 
which fortune offered thus. There was Octauia the eldest sister of 
Cesar, not by one mother, for she came of Ancharta, & Cesar him- 
selfe afterwards of Accia. It is reported, that he dearly loued his 
sister Octauza, for in deede she was a noble Ladie, and left the : 
widow of her first husband Cazus Marcellus, who died not long before: and it 
seemed also that Antonius had bene widower euer since the death of his wife Puia, 
For he denied not that he kept Cleopatra, but so did he not confesse that he had her 
as his wife: & so with reason he did defend the loue he bare ynto this ASGPYTIAN 
Cleopatra. Thereupon euery man did set forward this mariage, hoping thereby that 
this Ladie Octauza, hauing an excellent grace, wisedom, & honestie, ioyned vnto so 
rare a beautie, that when she were with Aztonzus (he louing her as so worthy a Ladie 
deserueth) she should be a good meane to keepe good loue & amitie betwixt her 
brother and him. So when Cesar & he had made the match betwene them, they 
both went to Rome about this mariage, although it was against the law, that a widow 
should be maried within tenne monthes after her husbandes death. Howbeit the 
Senate dispensed with the law, and so the mariage proceeded accordingly. Sextus 
Pompeius at that time kept in SIcIL1A, and so made many an inrode 
into ITALIE with a great number of pynnasies and other pirates 
shippes, of the which were Captaines two notable pirats, J/enas and 
Menecrates, who so scoured all the sea thereabouts, that none durst 
peepe out with a saile. Furthermore, Sextus Pompeius had dealt very friendly with 
Antonius, for he had courteously receiued his mother, when she fled out of ITALIE 


Mot sie 


LOG Sb, hte vey, 


I, iv, 56. 


, 
394 APPENDIX 


with Fulwia- and therefore they thought good to make peace with him. So they 
met all three together by the mount of Misena, vpon a hill that runneth farre into the 
sea: Pompey hauing his shyppes ryding hard by at anker, and Antonius and Cesar their 
armies vpon the shore side, directly ouer against him. Now, after they had agreed 
that Sextus Pompeius should haue SIcILE and SARDINIA, with this condition, that he 
should ridde the sea of all theeues and pirats, and make it safe for passengers, and 
withall that he should send a certaine of wheate to ROME: one of 
them did feast an other, and drew cuts who should beginne. It was 
Pompeius chaunce to inuite them first. Whereupon Amtonius asked 
him: and where shall we sup? There, said Pompey, and shewed 
him his admirall galley which had sixe banks of owers: that (said he) is my fathers 
house they haue left me. He spake it to taunt Astonzus, because 

II, vi, 34- he had his fathers house, that was Pompey the great. So he cast 
Il, vii, 151. anckers enow into the sea, to make his galley fast, and then built a 
bridge of wood to conuey them to his galley, from the head of mount 

Misena: and there he welcomed them, and made them great cheere. Now in the 
middest of the feast, when they fell to be merie with Aztonzus loue vnto Cleopatra - 
Menas the pirate came to Pompey, & whispering in his eare, said 
vnto him: shall I cut the gables of the ankers, and make thee Lord 
not only of SiciLE and SARDINIA, but of the whole Empire of 
RoE besides? Pompey hauing paused a while vpon it, at length 
answered him: thou shouldest haue done it, and neuer haue told it me, but now we 


II, vi, 102. 


II, vii, 84. 


must content vs with that we haue. As for my selfe, I was neuer taught to breake 
my faith, nor to be counted a traitor. The other two also did like- 

ae wise feast him in their campe, and then he returned into SICILE. 

I, vil, 149. Antonius after this agreement made, sent Ventidius before into ASIA 
to stay the PARTHIANS, and to keepe them they should come no 
further: and he himselfe in the meane time, to gratifie Cesar, was contented to be 
chosen /u/ius Cesars priest and sacrificer, & so they ioyntly together dispatched all 
great matters, concerning the state of the Empire. But in all other maner of sports 
and exercises, wherein they passed the time away the one with the other: 
Antonius was euer inferior vnto Cesar, & alway lost, which grieued him much. 
With Axtonius there was a soothsayer or astronomer of Aicyrt, that could cast a 
figure, and iudge of mens natiuities, to tell them what should happen to them. He, 
either to please Cleopatra, or else for that he found it so by his art, tolde Azztonius 
plainely, that his fortune (which of it selfe was excellent good, and very great) was 
altogether bleamished and obscured by Cesars fortune: and there- 
fore he counselled him vtterly to leaue his company, and to get him 
as farre from him as he could. For thy Demon, said he, (that is to 
say, the good angell and spirit that keepeth thee) is affraide of his: 
and being coragious & high when he is alone, becometh fearfull and timerous when 
he commeth neere vnto the other. Howsoeuer it was, the euents ensuing proued the 
AEGYPTIANS words true. For, it is said, that as often as they two drew cuts for pas- 
time, who should haue anything, or whether they plaied at dice, Axtonius alway lost. 
Oftentimes when they were disposed to see cockfight, or quailes that 
were taught to fight one with an other: Cesars cockes or quailes did 
euer ouercome, The which spighted Amtonius in his mind, although 
he made no outward shew of it: and therefore he beleeued the Aicyp- 
TIAN the better. In fine, he recommended the affaires of his house vnto Cesar, & went 


II, ili, 22. 


II, iii, 43. 


é 


PLUTARCH 395 


out of ITALY with Octauia his wife, whom he caried into GRECE, after he had had a 
daughter by her. So Avtonius lying al the winter at ATHENS, news came vnto him 
of the victories of Ventidius, who had ouercome the PARTHIANS in battell, in the 
which also were slaine, Ladéenus and Pharnabates, the chiefest Captaine king Orodes 
had. For these good newes he feasted all ATHENS, and kept open house for all the 
GRECIANS, and many games of price were plaid at ATHENS, of the which he himselfe 
would be iudge. Wherefore leauing his gard, his axes, and tokens of his Empire at 
his house, he came into the shew place (or listes) where these games were plaide in 
a long gowne and slippers after the GRECIAN fashion, and they caried tippestaues 
before him, as martials men do carie before the Iudges to make place: and he him- 
selfe in person was a stickler to part the young men, when they had fought enough. 
After that, preparing to go to the warres, he made him a garland of the holy Oliue, 
and caried a vessell with him of the water of the fountaine Clepsydra, because of an 
Oracle he had receiued that socommaunded him. In the meane 
time, Ventidius once againe ouercame Pacorus, ( Orodes sonne king 
of PARTHIA) in a battel fought in the country of CyrrRxEsTICA, he 
being come againe with a great armie to inuade SyrIA: at which 
battell was slaine a great number of the PARTHIANS, & among them Pacorus, the 
kings owne sonne slaine. This noble exploit as famous as euer any was, was a full 
reuenge to the RoMAINES, of the shame and losse they had receiued before by the 
death of Marcus Crassus : and he made the PARTHIANS flie, and glad to keepe them- 
selues within the confines and territories of MEsopoTaAMriA, & MEDIA, 

after they had thrise together bene ouercome in seueral battels. How- III, i, 16. 
beit Ventidins durst not vndertake to follow them any farther, fearing JJ, j, 32. 
least he should haue gotten Azfonius displeasure by it. Notwith- 

standing, he led his armie against them that had rebelled, and conquered them 
againe: amongst whom he besieged Antiochus, king of COMMAGENA, who offered 
to giue him a thousand talents to be pardoned his rebellion, and promised euer after 
to be at Antonius commaundement. But Ventidius made him answere, that he should 
send vnto Antonius, who was not farre off, & would not suffer Ventidius to make any 
peace with Antiochus, to the end that yet this litle exploit should passe in his name, 
and that they should not thinke he did anything but by his Lieutenant Ventzdius. The 
siege grew very long, because they that were in the towne, seeing they could not be 
receiued vppon no reasonable composition: determined valiantly to defend themselues 
to the last man. Thus Axzonius did nothing, and yet receiued great shame, repent- 
ing him much that he tooke not their first offer. And yet at last he was glad to 
make truce with Aztiochus, and to take three hundred talents for composition. Thus 
after he had set order for the state & affaires of SyRIA, he returned againe to ATHENS: 
and hauing giuen Ventidius such honours as he deserued, he sent him to RoME, to 
triumph for the PARTHIANS. Ve/¢idius was the onely man that euer triumphed of 
the PARTHIANS vntill this present day, a meane man borne, and of no noble house 
nor family : who only came to that he attained vnto, through Am/onzus friendshippe, 
the which deliuered him happie occasion to atchieue to great matters. And yet to 
say truely, he did so well quit himselfe in all his enterprises, that he 

confirmed that which was spoken of Antonius and Cesar; to wit, III, i, 20. 
that they were alway more fortunate when they made warre by their fy I, xi, 42. 
Lieutenants, then by themselues. For Soss¢us, one of Anfonius Lieu- 

tenants in Syria, did notable good seruice: and Canidius whom he had also left his 
Lieutenant in the borders of ARMENIA, did conquer it all. So did he also ouercome 


LiTS i; ue 


306 APPENDIX 


the kings of the IpERIANS and ALBANIANS, and went on with his conquests vnto 
mount Caucasus. By these conquests, the fame of Amtondus power increased more 
and more, and grew dreadfull vnto all the barbarous nations. But Amtonzus notwith- 
standing, grew to be maruellously offended with Cesar, vpon certaine reportes that 
had beene brought vnto him: and so tooke sea to go towards ITALY with three hun- 
dred saile. And because those of BRVNDVSIVM would not receiue his armie into 
their hauen, he went farther vnto TARENTVM. There his wife Octauéa that came 

out of GRECE with him, besought him to send her vnto her brother : 

III, iv, 27. the which he did. Octawea at that time was great with child, and 

moreouer had a second daughter by him, and yet she put her selfe 

III, vi, 43. in iorney,and met with her brother Octauzus Cesar by the way, who 

brought his two chiefe friends, AZecenas and Agrippa with him. She 
tooke them aside, and with all the instance she could possible, intreated them they 
would not suffer her that was the happiest woman of the worlde, to become now the 
most wretched and vnfortunatest creature of all other. For now, said she, euery 
mans eyes doe gaze on me, that am the sister of one of the Emperors and wife of the 
other. And if the worst counsell take place, (which the goddes forbid) and that 
they growe to warres: for your selues, it is vncertaine to which of them two the 
goddes haue assigned the victorie, or ouerthrowe. But for me, on which side soeuer 
victorie fall, my state can be but most miserable still. These wordes of Octauda so 
softned Cesars heart, that he went quickly vnto TARENTYM. . . 

Antonius also leauing his wife Octauza and litle children begotten of her with 
Cesar, and his other children which he had by F/sza. he went directly into ASIA. 
Then beganne this pestilent plague and mischiefe of Cleopatraes loue (which had 
slept a long time, and seemed to haue beene vtterly forgotten, and that Antonius 
had giuen place to better counsell) againe to kindle, and to be in force, so soone as 
Antonius came neare vnto SyRIA. And in the end, the horse of the minde as Plato 
termeth it, that is so hard of raine (I meane the vnreyned lust of concupiscence) did 
put out of An‘fonzus head, all honest and commendable thoughtes: for he sent /on- 
teius Capito to bring Cleopatra into SYRIA. nto whom, to welcome her, he gaue 
no trifling things: but vnto that she had already, he added the prouinces of Pua- 
NICIA, those of the nethermost SyRIA, the Ile of Cyprvs, and a great part of CILIctIA, 
and that countrey of Ivry, where the true balme is, and that part of ARABIA where 
the NABATHEIANS doe dwell, which stretcheth out towardes the Ocean. These great 
giftes much misliked the RoMaINnEs. But now, though Avzfonius did easily giue 
away great seigniories, realmes, and mighty nations vnto some priuate men, and that 
also he tooke from other kings their lawfull realms (as from Az¢igonus king of the 
IevvEs, whom he openly beheaded, where neuer king before had suffered like 
death) yet all this did not so much offend the RoMAINES, as the vnmeasurable 
honors which he did vnto Cleopatra. But yet he did much more aggrauat their 
malice and ill will towards him, because that Cleopatra hauing brought him two 
twins, a sonne and a daughter, he named his son Alexander, and his daughter 
Cleopatra, and gaue them to their surnames, the Sun to the one, and the moone to 
the other. ... 

This so great and puisant army which made the INDIANS quake for fear, dwelling 
about the country of the BAcrrrans, & all AsIA also to tremble: serued him to no 
purpose, & all for the loue he bare to Cleopatra. For the earnest great desire he had 
to lie all winter with her, made him begin his warre out of due time, and for hast, 
to put all in hazard, being so rauished and enchaunted with the sweete poison of her 


PLUTARCH 397 


loue, that he had no other thought but of her, and how he might quickly returne 
againe ; more then how he might ouercome his enemies. . . 

Then seeing him selfe enuironned of all sides, he sent vnto the army, that they 
should come and aide him: but there the Captaines that led the legions (among the 
which Canzdius, a man of great estimation about Antonius made one) committed 
many faults. 

Now whilest Azfonius was busie in this preparation, Octauia his wife, whom he 
had left at RomrE, would needes take sea to come vnto him. Her brother Octaucus 
Cesar was willing vnto it, not for his respect at all (as most authors doe report) as 
for that he might haue an honest colour to make warre with Antonius if he did mis- 
use her, and not esteeme of her as she ought to be. But when she was come to 
ATHENS, she receiued letters from Antonius, willing her to stay there vntill his com- 
ming, & did aduertise her of his iorney and determination. The which though it 
grieued her much, and that she knew it was but an excuse: yet by her letters to him 
of aunswere, she asked him whether he would haue those things sent vnto him which 
she had brought him, being great store of apparell for souldiers, a great number of 
horse, summe of money and gifts, to bestow on his friends and Captaines he had 
about him: and besides all those, she had two thousande souldiers chosen men, all 
well armed like vnto the Prators bands. When Mier, one of Antonius friendes 
whom he had sent vnto ATHENS, had brought these newes from his wife Octauia, 
and withall did greatly praise her, as she was worthy, and well deserued: Cleopatra 
knowing that Octauia would haue Ax‘éonzus from her, and fearing also that if with 
her vertue and honest behauior, (besides the great power of her brother Cesar) she 
did adde thereunto her modest kind ]oue to please her husband that she would then 
be too strong for her, and in the end winne him away: she subtilly seemed to lan- 
guish for the loue of Anzonius, pining her body for lacke of meate. Furthermore, 
she euery way so framed her countenance, that when Ax‘onius came to see her, she 
cast her eyes vpon him, like a woman rauished for ioy. Straight againe when he 
went from her, she fell a weeping and blubbering, looked ruefully of the matter, and 
still found she meanes that Antonius should oftentimes finde her weeping: and then 
when he came sodainely vppon her, she made as though she dried her eyes, and 
turned her face away, as if she were vnwilling that he should see her weepe. . . 

When Octauia was returned to ROME from ATHENS, Cesar commanded her to 
goe out of Anéonius house, and to dwell by herselfe, because he had abused her. 
Octauia answered him againe, that she would not forsake her husbands house, and 
that if he had no other occasion to make warre with him, she prayed him then to 
take no thought for her: for sayed she, it were too shamefull a thing, that two 
famous Captaines should bring in ciuill warres among the RoMAIns, the one for the 
loue of a woman, and the other for the iealousie betwixt one another. Now as she 
spake the word, so did she also performe the deede. For she kept still in Avtonius 
house, as if he had bene there, and very honestly, and honorably kept his children. 
not those onely she had by him, but the other which her husband had by Fad/uia. 
Furthermore, when Anéonius sent any of his men to Rom, to sue for any office in 
the common wealth: she receiued him very curteously, and so vsed her selfe vnto 
her brother, that she obtained the thing she requested. Howbeit thereby, thinking 
no hurt, she did Améonius great hurt. For her honest loue and regard to her hus- 
band, made euery man hate him, when they sawe he did so vnkindly vse so noble 
a Ladie: but yet the greatest cause of their malice vnto him, was for the diuision of 
lands he made amongst his children in the citie of ALEXANDRIA. And to confesse 


398 APPENDIX 


a troth, it was too arrogant and insolent a part, and done (as a man would say) in 
derision and contempt of the Romans. For he assembled all the people in the 
shew place, where young men doe exercise themselues, and there vppon a high 
tribunall siluered, he set two chaires of gold, the one for himselfe, 
and the other for Cleopatra, and lower chaires for his children : then 
i he openly published before the assembly, that first of all he did 
HII, vi, 11. establish Cleopatra Queene of AScypT, of Cyprys, of LypiA, and 
III, vi, 7. of the lower SyRIA, and at that time also, Cesavzon king of the same 
realmes. This Cesarion was supposed to be the sonne of /zdlius 

Cesar, who had left Cleopatra great with child. Secondly he called the sonnes he 
had by her, the kings of kings, & gaue A/exander for his portion, ARMENIA, MEDIA, 
and PARTHIA, when he had conquered the countrie: and vnto Péolomy 

III, vi, 16. for his portion, PHENICIA, SyRIA, and Cixicia. And therwithall 
he brought out A/exander in a long gowne after the fashion of the 

MEDES with a high copped tanke hat on his head, narrow in the toppe, as the kings 
of the MepEs and ARMENIANS doe vse to weare them: and P/olomy apparelled in a 
cloke after the MACEDONIAN maner, with slippers on his feete, and a broad hat, with 
a royal band or diademe. Such was the apparell and old attire of the auncient 


III, vi, 3. 


kings and successours of Alexander the great. So after his sonnes had done their 
humble duties, and kissed their father and mother: presently a company of ARME- 
NIAN souldiers set there of purpose, compassed the one about, and a like company 
- of the MACEDONIANS the other. Now for Cleopatra, she did not only weare at that 
time, (but at all other times els when she came abroad) the apparell of the goddesse 
Tsis, and so gaue audience vnto all her subiects, as a new sts. Octautus Cesar 
reporting all these things vnto the Senate, and oftentimes accusing him to the whole 
people and assembly in Rome: he thereby stirred vp all the ROMAINS against him. 
Antonius on the other side sent to ROME likewise to accuse him, and the chiefest 
: pointes of his accusations he charged him with, were these. First, 

III, vi, 18. that hauing spoiled Sextus Pompeius in SICILE, he did not giue him 
III, vi, 27. his part of the Ile. Secondly, that he did detayne in his hands the 
shippes he lent him to make that warre. Thirdly, that hauing put 

Lepidus their companion and triumuirate out of his part of the Empire, and hauing 
depriued him of all honors: he retayned for him selfe the lands and reuenues thereof, 
which had bene assigned vnto him for his part. And last of all, that he had in 
manner deuided all IrALy amongest his owne souldiers, and had left no part of it 
for his souldiers. Octauius Cesar aunswered him againe: that for Lepzdus, he had 
in deede deposed him, and taken his part of the Empire from him, because he did 
ouercruelly vse his authoritie. And secondly, for the conquests he had made by 
force of armes, he was contented Antonius should haue his part of them, so that he 
would likewise let him haue his part of ARMENIA. And thirdly, that for his soul- 
diers, they should seeke for nothing in ITALY, because they possessed MEDIA and 
ParTHiA, the which prouinces they had added to the Empire of Rom, valiantly 
fighting with their Emperor and Captaine. Amtonius hearing these newes, being 
yet in ARMENIA, commaunded Canidius to goe presently to the sea side with his six- 
teene legions he had: and he himselfe with Cleopatra, went vnto the citie of Epx- 
ESvs, and there gathered together his gallies and shippes out of all partes, which 
came to the number of eight hundreth, reckoning the great shippes of burden: and 
of those Cleopatra furnished him with two hundreth, and twenty thousand talents 
besides, & prouision of victuals also to mainteine all the whole armie in this warre. 


PLUTARCH 399 


So Antonius, through the perswasions of Domitius, commaunded Cleopatra, to returne 
againe into Ecypt, and there to vnderstand the successe of this warre, But Cleo- 
patra, fearing least Antonius should againe be made friends with Octautus Cesar, 
by the meanes of his wife Octauia: she so plyed Canidius with money, and filled 
his purse, that he became her spokesman vnto Antonius, and told him there was no 
reason to send her from this war, who defraied so great a charge : neither that it was 
for his profit, because that thereby the AZGyPTIANs would then be vtterly discoraged, 
which were the chiefest strength of the armie by sea: considering that he could see 
no king of all the kings their confederates, that Cleopatra was inferior vnto, either 
for wisedom or iudgement, seeing that long before she had wisely gouerned so great 
a realme as Aicypt, & besides that she had bene so long acquainted with him, by 
whom she had learned to manedge great affaires, These faire perswasions wanne 
him: for it was predestined that the gouernment of all the world should fall into 
Octauius Cesarshandes. Octauius Cesar vnderstanding the sodaine 

& wonderfull great preparation of Axdonius, he was not a litle III, iv, 30. 
astonied at it, (fearing he should be driuen to fight that sommer) 

because he wanted many things, & the great and grieuous exactions of money did 
sorely oppresse the people... . 

Furthermore, 7itius and Plancus (two of Antonius chiefest friendes and that had 
bene both of them Consuls) for the great iniuries C/eofatra did them, because they 
hindred all they could, that she should not come to this warre: they went and yeelded 
themselues vnto Cesar, and tolde him where the testament was that 
Antonius had made, knowing perfitly what was in it. The will was 
in the custody of the Vestall Nunnes: of whom Cesar demanded for 
it. They answered him, that they would not giue it him: but if he 
would goe and take it, they would not hinder him. Thereupon Cesar went thither, 
& hauing read it first to himselfe, he noted certen places worthy of 
reproch : so assembling all the Senate, he read it before themall.... III, iv, 5. 

Now after that Cesar had made sufficient preparation, he pro- 
claimed open warre against C/eopatra, and made the people to III, vii, 7. 
abolish the power and Empire of Anzonzus, because he had before 
giuen it vp vnto a woman. And Cesar sayed furthermore, that Axfonius was not 
Maister of himselfe, but that C/eopatra had brought him beside himselfe, by her 
charmes and amarous poysons: and that they that shoulde make 
warre with them, should be Mardian the Eunuch, Photinus, and 
Tras, a woman of Cleopatraes bedchamber, that frizeled her haire, 
and dressed her head, and Charmion, the which were those that 
ruled all the affaires of Anfonius Empire. Before this warre as it is reported, 
many signes and wonders fell out... . The Admiral galley of 
Cleopatra, was called Antoniade, in the which there chanced a III, x, 6. 
maruellous ill signe. Swallowes had bred vnder the poop of her IV, xii, 7. 
ship, and there came others after them that draue away the first, and 
plucked down their neasts. Now when all things were readie, & that they drew neare 
to fight : it was found that Antonius had no lesse then fiue hundreth good ships of war, 
among which there were many gallies that had eight & ten bancks of owers, the which 
were sumptuously furnished, not so meete for fight, as for triumph : a 
hundred thousand footmen, and twelue thousand horsemen, and had _III, vi, 76. 
with him to aide him these kings and subiectes following. Bocchus 
king of Lipya, Zarcodemus king of high Siticta, Archelaus king of CAPPADOCIA, 


III, iv, 5. 


III, vii, 17. 


400 APPENDIX 


Philadelphus king of PAPHLAGONIA, Mithridates king of COMAGENA, and Adallas king 
of THRAcIA. All which were there euery man in person. The residue that were 
absent sent their armies, as Polemon king of Pont, Manchus king of ARABIA, Herodes 
king of Ivry: and furthermore, Amyntas king of Lycaonta, & of the GALATIANS: 
and besides all these, he had all the aide the king of MEDEs sent vnto him. Now 
for Cesar, he had two hundreth and fiftie ships of warre, fourescore thousand foot- 
men, and well neare as many horsmen as his enemie Antonius. Antonius for his 
part, had all vnder his dominion from ARMENIA, & the riuer of Euphrates, vnto the 
sea lonivm & ILLYRICVM. Octauius Cesar had also for his part, all that which was 
in our HEMISPHERE, or halfe part of the world, from ILLyRIA, unto the Ocean sea 
vpon the west: then all from the Ocean, vnto mare Siculum: & from AFRICK, all 
that which is against ITALy, as GAVLE, & Span, Furthermore, all from the prouince 
of CyRENIA, to AETHIOPIA, was subiect vnto Antonius. Now Antonius was made 
so subiect to a womans will, that though he was a great deale the stronger by land, 
yet for Cleopatraes sake he would needes haue this battell tryed by sea: though he 
sawe before his eyes, that for lacke of water-menne, his Captaines did prest by force 

all sortes of men out of GRECE that they could take vp in the field, 

Ill; vii, 45: °° trauellers, muletters, reapers, haruest men, and young boyes, and 
yet could they not sufficiently furnish his gallies: so that the most 
parte of them were emptie, and could scant row, because they 
lacked water-men enowe. But on the contrarie side Cesars shippes were not built 

for pompe, high and great, onely for a fight and brauery, but they 

{it, viitaae light of yarage: armed and furnished with water-men as many 

as they needed, and had them al in readines, in the hauens of 
TARENTVM, & BRVNDVSIVM. So Octautus Cesar sent vnto Antonzus, 
to will him to delay no more time, but to come on with his army into ITALY: and 
that for his owne part he would giue him safe harbor, to land without any trouble, 
and that he would withdraw his armie from the sea, as farre as one horse could 
runne, vntil he had put his army a shore, & had lodged his men. Azdéonius on the 
other side brauely sent him word againe, and chalenged the combat of him man to 
man, though he were the elder: and that if he refused him so, he would then fight 
a battell with him in the fields of PHARSALIA, as Julius Cesar, & Pompey had done 
before. Now whilst Aztonzus rode at anker, lying idlely in harbor at the head of 
ACTIUM, in the place where the citie of NrcopoLis standeth at this present: Cesar 
had quickly passed the sea Ionium, and taken a place called ToORYNE, before Anéonzus 
vnderstoode that he had taken ship... . 
Furthermore, he delt very friendly and courteously with Domitius, and against 
Cleopatraes minde. For, he being sicke of an agew when he went 
IV, v, 18. and tooke a litle boate to go vnto Cesars campe, Antonius was very 
sorie for it, but yet he sent after him all his cariage, traine, and men: 
and the same Domitius, as though he gaue him to vnderstand that 
he repented his open treason, he died immediately after. . . . 

And Canidius also, who had charge of his armie by land, when time came to follow 
Antonius determination : he turned him cleane contrarie, and counselled him to send 
Cleopatra backe againe, and himselfe to retire into MACEDON, to fight there on the 
maine land. And furthermore told him, that Dicomes king of the GETES, promised 
him to aid him with a great power: and that it should be no shame nor dishonor to 
him to let Cesar haue the sea, (because himselfe and his men both had bene well 
practised and exercised in battels by sea, in the warre of SILICIA against Sextus Pom- 


IWeiix 27° 


PLUTARCH 401 


peius) but rather that he should doe against all reason, he hauing so great skill and 
experience of battelles by land as he had, if he should not imploy the force and 
valiantnes of so many lusty armed footemen as he had readie, but 

would weaken his armie by deuiding them into shippes. But now III, vii, 52. 
notwithstanding all these good perswasions, Cleopatra forced him to III, vii, 54. 
put all to the hazard of battell by sea: considering with her selfe 

how she might flie and prouide for her safetie, not to helpe him to win the victorie : 
but to flie more easily after the battell lost... . 

So when Antonius had determined to fight by sea, he set all the other shippes on 
fire, but threescore ships of Ecyrt, and reserued onely but the best and greatest 
gallies, from three bancks, vnto tenne bancks of owers. Into them he put two & 
twenty thousand fighting men, with two thousand darters & slingers. Now as he 
was setting his men in order of battel, there was a Captaine, and a valiant man, that 
had serued Axfonius in many battels & conflicts, & had all his body hacked and cut: 
who as Antonius passed by him, cryed out vnto him & said; O 
noble Emperor, how commeth it to passe that you trust to these vile Ill, vii, 76 
brittle shippes? what doe you mistrust these wounds of mine and ena S %, 
this sword? let the EGypTIANs and PHENICIANS fight by sea, and 
set vs on the maine land, where we vse to conquer, or to be slaine on our feete. 
Antonius passed by him and said neuer a word, but onely beckned to him with his 
hand & head, as though he willed him to be of good courage, although indeed he 
had no great courage himselfe. . . . 

All that day and the three dayes following, the sea rose so high & was so boister- 
ous, that the battell was put off. The fift day the storme ceased, and the sea calmed 
againe and then they rowed with force of owers in battell one against the other... . 

Now Pudlicola seing Agrippa put forth his left wing of Cesars armie, to compasse 
in Antonius shippes that fought: he was driuen also to loofe off to haue more roome, 
& going a litle at one side, to put those farther off that were affraid, and in the mid- 
dest of the battell. For they were sore distressed by Arwzetius. 
Howbeit the battell was yet of euen hand, and the victorie doubtful, 
being indifferent to both: when sodainely they sawe the threescore 
shippes of Cleopatra busie about their yard masts, and hoysing saile 
to flie. So they fled through the middest of them that were in fight, for they had 
bene placed behind the great shippes, & did maruellously disorder the other shippes. 
For the enemies them selues wondred much to see them saile in that sort, with ful 
saile towards PELOPONNESVS. There Anéonius shewed plainly, that he had not 
onely lost the courage and hart of an Emperor, but also of a valiant man, & that he 
was not his owne man: (prouing that true which an old man spake in myrth, that 
the soule of a louer liued in another body, and not in his owne) he was so caried 
away with the vaine loue of this woman, as if he had bene glued vnto her, & that 
she could not haue remoued without mouing of him also. For when he saw C/eo- 
patraes shippe vnder saile, he forgot, forsook, & betrayed them that fought for him, 
& imbarked vpon a galley with fiue bankes of owers, to follow her 
that was already begun to ouerthrow him, & would in the end be 
his vtter destruction. When she knew his galley a farre off, she lift 
vp a signe in the poope of her shippe, and so Azfonius coming to it, 
was pluckt vp where C/eopatra was, howbeit he saw her not at his first comming, 
nor she him, but went and sate downe alone in the prow of his shippe, and saied 
neuer a word, clapping his head betweene both his hands. . . . 


26 


TTT) x; urs; 


III, x, 29. 


402 APPENDIX 


After Zurycles had left Antonius, he returned againe to his place, and sate downe, 
speaking neuer a word as he did before: and so liued three dayes alone, without 
speaking to any man. But when he arriued at the head of Tzenarus, 
there Cleopatraes women first brought Antonius and Cleopatra to 
speake together, and afterwards, to suppe and lye together. Then 
béganne there againe a great number of Marchaunts shippes to gather 
about them, and some of their friends that had escaped from this ouerthrow: who 
brought newes, that his army by sea was ouerthrown, but that they thought the army 
by land was yet whole. Then Antonius sent vnto Canidius, to return with his army 
into Asta, by MAcEDON. Now for himself, he determined to crosse 
ouer into AFRICK, & took one of his carects or hulks loden with 
gold, siluer, and other rich cariage, & gaue it vnto his friends : com- 
manding them to depart, and to seeke to saue themselues. They 
answered him weeping, that they would neither doe it, nor yet forsake him. Then 
Antonius verie courteously and louingly did comfort them, and prayed them to depart: 
and wrote vnto Theophilus gouernor of CORINTHE, that he would see them safe, and 
helpe to hide them in some secret place, vntill they had made their way & peace 


III, xi, 28. 


IIT, xi, 23. 


with Cesar. . 

And thus it stood with Antonius. Now for his armie by sea, that fought before 
the head or foreland of AcTivm: they helde out a long time, and 
nothing troubled them more then a great boysterous winde that rose 
full in the prooes of their shippes and yet with much a doe, his nauie 
was at length ouerthrowen, fiue houres within night.... 


III, xi, 2. 


But now to returne to Anxtonius againe. Canidius himselfe came to bring him 
newes, that he had lost all his armie by land at AcTIVN: on the other side he was 
aduertised also, that Herodes king of IvRIE, who had also certen legions and bandes 
with him, was reuolted vnto Cesar, and all the other kings in like manner: so that, 
sauing those that were about him, he had none left him. All this notwithstanding 
did nothing trouble him, and it seemed that he was contented to forgoe all his hope, 
and so to be ridde of all his care and troubles. Thereupon he left his solitarie house 
he had built by the sea which he called Timoneon, and C/eopatra receiued him into 
her royall pallace. He was no sooner com thither, but he straight set all the citie on 
rioting and banquetting againe, and himselfe to liberalitie and giftes. He caused the 
sonne of Julius Cesar & Cleopatra, to be enrolled (according to the manner of the 
ROMAINS) amongst the number of young men: and gaue Antyllus, his eldest son he 
had by /#/uca, the mans gown, the which was a plaine gowne, without gard or 

embroderie of purple. For these things, there was kept great feast- 

III, xiii, 3. ing, banquetting and dancing in ALEXANDRIA many dayes together. 
In deede they did breake their first order they had set downe, which 

they called Amimetobion, (as much to say, no life comparable) & did set vp another, 
which they called Synapothanumenon (signifying the order and agreement of those that 
will dye together) the which in exceeding sumptuousnes, and cost was not.inferior to 
the first. For their friendes made themselues to be inrolled in this order of those that 
would die together, and so made great feastes one to another; for euerie man when it 
came to his turne, feasted their whole companie and fraternitie. CJeopatra in the meane 
time was verie carefull in gathering all sorts of poysons together, to destroy men. 
Now to make proofe of those poysons which made men die with least paine, she tryed 
it vpon condemned men in prison. For when she saw the poysons that were sodaine 
and vehement, and brought speedy death with grieuous torments: & in contrary 


PLUTARCH 403 


manner, that such as were more milde and gentle, had not that quicke speede and 
force to make one dye sodainely : she afterwardes went about to proue the stinging 
of snakes and adders, and made some to be applyed vnto men in her sight, some in 
one sorte and some in another. So when she had daily made diuers and sundrie 
proofes, she found none of them all she had proued so fit, as the biting of an Aspick, 
the which causeth onely a heauines of the head, without swounding or complaining, 
and bringeth a great desire also to sleepe, with a litle swet in the face, and so by litle 
and litle taketh away the senses & vitall powers, no liuing creature perceiuing that 
the patients feele any paine. For they are so sorie when any bodie awaketh them, 
and taketh them vp: as those that being taken out of a sound sleep, are very heauie 
and desirous to sleepe. This notwithstanding, they sent Ambassadors vnto Octauius 
Cesar in Asta, Cleopatra requesting the realme of AEcypr for their children, and 
Antonius praying that he might be suffered to liue at ATHENS like a priuate ma, if 
Cesar would not let him remaine in Hcypr. And because they had no other men 
of estimation about them, for that some were fled, and those that 
remained, they did not greatly trust them: they were inforced to 
send Luphrontus the schoolemaister of their children. For Alexas 
LAODICIAN, who was brought into Axfonius house & fauour by 
meanes of 7¢magemes, and afterwards was in greater credit with him, then any other 


III, xii, 9. 


GRECIAN: (for that he had alway bene one of Cleopatraes ministers to win Antonius, 
& to ouerthrow all his good determinations to vse his wife Octawia well) him Antonius 
had sent vnto Herodes king of Ivrir, hoping still to keepe him his friend, that he 
should not reuolt from him. But he remained there, and betrayed Avéondus. For 
where he should haue kept Hevodes fro reuolting from him, he 
perswaded him to turne to Cesar: & trusting king Herodes, he pre- 
sumed to come in Cesars presence. Howbeit Herodes did him no 
pleasure: for he was presently taken prisoner, and sent in chaines to 
his own country, & there by Cesavs commaundement put to death. Thus was Alexas 
in Antonzus life time put to death, for betraying of him. Furthermore, Cesar would 
not graunt vnto Amtonzus requestes: but for Cleopatra, he made her aunswere, that 
he would deny her nothing reasonable, so that she would either put Antonius to 
death, or driue him out of her country. There withall he sent 
Thyreus one of his men vnto her, a very wise and discreet man, 
who bringing letters of credit from a young Lord vnto a noble Lady, 
and that besides greatly liked her beautie, might easily by his elo- 
quence haue perswaded her. He was longer in talke with her then any man else 
was, and the Queene her selfe also did him great honour: in somuch as he made 
Antonius ielous of him. Whereupon Axzonius caused him to be ; 
taken and well fauoredly whipped, and so sent him vnto Cesar: 
and bad him tell him that he made him angry with him, because 
he shewed himselfe proude and disdainfull towardes him, and now 
specially when he was easie to be angred, by reason of his present miserie. To be 
short, if this mislike thee sayd he, thou hast A%pparchus one of my infranchised 
bondmen with thee: hang him if thou wilt, or whippe him at thy pleasure, that we 
may crie quittaunce. From thenceforth, C/eopaira to cleare her selfe of the suspition 
he had of her, she made more of him then euer she did. For first 

of all, where she did solemnise the day of her birth very meanely III, xiii, 219. 
and sparingly, fit for her present misfortune: she now in contrary 

maner did keepe it with such solemnitie, that she exceeded all measure of sump- 


IV, vi, 17. 


III, xii, 38. 


III, xiii, 122. 


404 APPENDIX 


tuousnesse and magnificence: so that the guestes that were bidden to the 
feasts, and came poore, went away rich. Now things passing thus, Agrippa by 
diuers letters sent one after an other vnto Cesar, prayed him to returne to ROME, 
because the affaires there did of necessitie require his person and presence. There- 
upon he did deferre the warre till the next yeare following: but when winter was 
done, he returned againe through SyRIA by the coast of AFRICKE, to make warres 
against Axéonius, and his other Captaines. When the citie of PELVsIvM was taken, 
there ran a rumor in the citie, that Se/eucus, by Cleopatraes consent, had surrendered 
the same. But to cleare her selfe that she did not, Cleopatra brought Selewcus wife 
and children vnto Axzonius, to be reuenged of them at his pleasure. _ Furthermore, 
Cleopatra had long before made many sumptuous tombes and monuments, as well 
for excellencie of workemanship, as for hight and greatnesse of building, ioyning 
hard to the temple of /sis. Thither she caused to be brought all the treasure and 
pretious things she had of the auncient kings her predecessours: as gold, siluer, 
emerods, pearles, ebbonie, iuorie, and sinamon, and besides all that, a maruellous 
number of torches, faggots, and flaxe. So Octauius Cesar being affrayed to loose 
such a treasure and masse of richesse, and that this woman for spight would set it a 
fire, and burne it euery whit: he alwayes sent some one or other vnto her from him, 
to put her in good comfort, whilest he in the meane time drew neare the citie with 
his armie. So Cesar came, and pitched his campe hard by the citie, in the place 
where they runne and manage their horses. Amtonzus made a saly vpon him, and 
fought very valiantly, so that he draue Cesars horsemen backe, fighting with his 
men even into their campe. Then he came againe to the pallace, greatly boasting 
of this victorie, and sweetely kissed Cleopatra, armed as he was, when he came from 
the fight, recommending one of his men of armes vnto her, that had 
valiantly fought in this skirmish. CVeofatra to reward his manli- 
nesse, gaue him an armour & head peece of cleane gold: howbeit 
the man at armes when he had receiued this rich gift, stale away by 
night, and went to Cesar? Antonius sent againe to chalenge Cesar, to fight with 
him hand to hand. Cesar aunswered him, that he had many other 

IvV°L 7 wayes to dye then so. Then Antonius seeing there was no way 
more honourable for him to dye, then fighting valiantly: he deter- 

IV, ii, 38. mined to set vp his rest, both by sea and land. So being at supper, 
(as it is reported) he commaunded his officers and household ser- 

uaunts that waited on him at his bord, that they should fill his cuppes full, and 
make as much of him as they could: for sayd he, you know not whether you shall 
do so much for me to morrow or not, or whether you shall serue an other maister : 
and it may be you shall see me no more, but a dead body. This notwithstanding, 
perceiuing that his friends and men fell a weeping to heare him say so: to salue 
that he had spoken, he added this more vnto it, that he would not lead them to bat- 
tell, where he thought not rather safely to returne with victorie, then valiantly to dye 
with honour. Furthermore, the selfe same night within litle of midnight, when all 
the citie was quiet, full of feare, and sorrow, thinking what would be the issue and 
end of this warre: it is sayd that sodainly they heard a maruellous 

Tvonutie: sweete harmonie of sundry sortes of instrumentes of musicke, with 
the crie of a multitude of people, as they had bene dauncing, and 

had song as they vse in Bacchus feasts, with mouings and turnings 

after the manner of the Satyres: and it seemed that this daunce went through the 
city vnto the gate that opened to the enemies, and that all the troupe that made this 


IV, viii, 34. 


noyse they heard, went out of the citie at that gate. Now, such as in reason sought 
the depth of the interpretation of this wonder, thought that it was the god vnto whom 
Antonius bare singular deuotion to counterfeit and resemble him, that did forsake 
them. The next morning by breake of day, he went to set those few footemen he 
had in order vpon the hils adioyning vnto the citie: and there he 
stood to behold his gallies which departed from the hauen, and 
rowed against the gallies of his enemies, and so stood still, looking 
what exploit his souldiers in them would do. But when by force 
of rowing they were come neare vnto them, they first saluted Cesars men: and then 
Cesars men resaluted them also, and of two armies made but one, and then did all 
together row toward the citie. When Ax‘onius saw that his men did forsake him, 
and yeelded ynto Cgsav, and that his footemen were broken and ouerthrowen: he 
then fled into the citie, crying out that Cleopatra had betrayed him vnto them, with 
whom he had made warre for her sake. The she being affrayed of his fury, fled 
into the tombe which she had caused to be made, and there locked 

the doores vnto her, and shut all the springs of the lockes with great 


IV, x, 9. 


boltes, and in the meane time sent vnto Anéonzus to tell him that Ae StS 
she was dead. An/onius beleeuing it, sayd vnto himselfe: what 

doest thou looke for further, Axfonius, sith spightfull fortune hath taken from thee 
the onely ioy thou haddest, for whom thou yet reseruedst thy life? when he had 
sayd these words, he went into a chamber & vnarmed himselfe, and being naked said 
thus: O Cleopatra, it grieueth me not that I haue lost thy companie, for I will not 
be long from thee: but I am sory, that hauing bene so great a Captaine and Emper- 
our, I am indeede condemned to be iudged of lesse courage & noble 
minde, then a woman. Now he had a man of his called £7os, 
whom he loued and trusted much, and whom he had long before 
caused to sweare vnto him, that he should kill him when he did 1V; xiv, 97. 
commaunde him: and then he willed him to keepe his promise. 

His man drawing his sword, lift it vp as though he meant to haue striken his mais- 
ter: but turning his head at one side, he thrust his sword into himselfe, and fell 
downe dead at his maisters foote. Then sayd <Azzonzus,O noble Lros, I thanke 
thee for this, and it is valiantly done of thee, to shew me what I should do to my 
selfe, which thou couldest not do for me. Therewithall he tooke his sword, and 
thrust it into his bellie, and so fell downe vpon a litle bed. The wounde he had 
killed him not presently, for the bloud stinted a litle when he was layed: and when 
he came somewhat to himselfe againe, he prayed them that were about him to dis- 
patch him. But they all fled out of the chamber, and left him crying out & torment- 
ing himselfe: vntill at last there came a Secretarie vnto him called Dzomedes, who 
was commaunded to bring him into the tombe or monument where Cleopatra was. 
Whe he heard that she was aliue, he very earnestly prayed his men to carie his body 
thither, and so he was caried in his mens armes into the entry of the monument. 
Notwithstanding, C/eopatra would not open the gates, but came to the high win- 
dowes, and cast out certaine chaines and ropes, in the which Av/ontus was trussed : 
and Cleopatra her owne selfe, with two women onely, which she had suffered to 
come with her into these monuments, trised Aztonius vp. They that were present 
to behold it, sayd they neuer saw so pitifull a sight. For, they plucked vp poore: 
Antonius all bloudy as he was, and drawing on with pangs of death, who holding: 
vp his hands to Cleopatra, raised vp himselfe as well as he could. It was e hard 
thing for these women to do, to lift him vp: but Cleopatra stouping downe with her 


IV, xiv, 72. 


406 APPENDIX 


head, putting all her strength to her vttermost power, did lift him vp with much 
a do, and neuer let go her hold, with the helpe of the women beneath that bad her 
be of good courage, and were as sory to see her labour so, as she her selfe. So 
when she had gotten him in after that sort, and layed him on a bed: she rent her 
garments vpon him, clapping her brest, and scratching her face and stomacke. 
Then she dried vp his bloud that had berayed his face, and called him her Lord, her 
husband, and Emperour, forgetting her owne miserie and calamity, for the pitie and 
compasion she tooke of him. Azfonzazs made her ceasse her lament- 
ing, and called for wine, either because he was a thirst, or else for 
that he thought thereby to hasten his death. When he had dronke, 
he earnestly prayed her, and perswaded her, that she would seeke 
to saue her life, if she could possible, without reproche and dishonour: and that 
cheifly she should trust Proculecus aboue any man else about Cesar. And as for 
himselfe, that she should not lament nor sorow for the miserable chaunge of his for- 
tune at the end of his dayes: but rather that she should thinke him the more fortu- 
nate, for the former triumphes & honours he had receiued, considering that while he 
liued he was the noblest and greatest Prince of the world, & that now he was ouer- 
come, not cowardly, but valiantly, a ROMAINE by an other ROMAINE. As Antonius 
gaue the laste gaspe, Procudeius came that was sent fro Cesar. For after Antonius 
had thrust his sword in himselfe, as they caried him into the tombes 

; and monuments of CYeopatra, one of his gard called Derceteus, 

AV OUR tooke his sword with the which he had striken himselfe, and hid it: 

5 then he secretly stale away, and brought Octauzus Cesar the first 
newes of his death, & shewed him his sword that was bloudied. Cesar hearing these 
newes, straight withdrew himselfe into a secret place of his tent, and there burst out 
with teares, lamenting his hard and miserable fortune, that had bene his friend and 
brother in law, his equall in the Empire, and companion with him in sundry great 
exploits and battels. Then he called for all his friendes, and shewed them the letters 
Antonius had written to him, and his aunsweres also sent him againe, during their 


IV, xv, 56. 


quarrell and strife: and how fiercely and proudly the other aunswered him, to all 
iust and reasonable matters he wrote vnto him. After this, he sent Proculeius, and 
commaunded him to do what he could possible to get Cleopatra aliue, fearing least 
otherwise all the treasure would be lost: & furthermore, he thought that if he could . 
take Cleopatra, and bring her aliue to RoME, she would maruellously beautifie and 
set out histriumphe. But Cleopatra would neuer put her selfe into Procz/ezus handes, 
although they spake together. For Procu/etus came to the gates that were very thicke 
& strong, and surely barred, but yet there were some cranewes through the which 
her voyce might be heard, and so they without vnderstood, that Cleopatra demaunded 
the kingdome of AtcyrrT for her sonnes: and that Procudetus aunswered her, that she 
should be of good cheare, and not be affrayed. to referre all vnto Cesar. After he 
had viewed the place very well, he came and reported her answere vnto Cesar. 
Who immediately sent Ga//us to speake once againe with her, and bad him pur- 
posely hold her with talke, whilest Proculecus did set vp a ladder against that high 
window, by the which Az¢onius was trised vp, and came downe into the monument 
with two of his men hard by the gate, where C/eofatra stood to heare what Gallus 
sayd vnto her. One of her women which was shut in her monuméts with her, saw 
Proculeius by chance as he came downe, and shreeked out : O poore Cleopatra, thou 
art taken. Then when she saw Proculeius behind her as she came from the gate, 
she thought to haue stabbed her selfe in with a short dagger she wore of purpose by 


PLUTARCH 407 


her side. But Proculeius came sodainly vpon her, and taking her by both the hands, 
sayd vntoher. Cleopatra, first thou shalt do thy selfe great wrong, and secondly vnto 
Cesar: to depriue him of the occasion and oportunitie, openly to shew his bountie 
and mercie, and to giue his enemies cause to accuse the most curteous and noble Prince 
that euer was, and to appeache him, as though he were a cruell and mercilesse man, 
that were not to be trusted. So euen as he spake the word, he tooke her dagger 
from her, and shooke her clothes for feare of any poyson hidden about her. After- 
wardes Cesar sent one of his infranchised men called Lpaphroditus, whom he 
straightly charged to looke well vnto her, and to beware in any case that she made 
not her selfeaway : and for the rest, to vse her with all the curtesie possible. . . . 
Therefore Cesar did put Cesarion to death, after the death of his mother C/eo- 
patra. Many Princes, great kings & Captaines did craue Antonius body of Octauius 
Cesar, to giue him honourable buriall: but Cesar would neuer take it from Cleopatra, 
who did sumptuously & royally bury him with her own hands, whom Cesar suffred 
to take as much as she would to bestow vpon his funerals. Now was she altogether 
ouercome with sorow & passion of minde, for she had knocked her brest so pitifully, 
that she had martyred it, and in diuers places had raysed vlcers & inflammations, so 
that she fell into a feuer withall: whereof she was very glad, hoping 
thereby to haue good colour to absteine from meate, and that so she V+ ii, 59. 
might haue dyed easily without any trouble. She hada Phisition V, ii, 193. 
called Olympus, whom she made priuie of her intent, to the end he 
should helpe her to rid her out of her life: as Olympus writeth himselfe, who wrote 
a booke of all these things. But Cesar mistrusted the matter, by many coniectures 
he had, and therefore did put her in feare, and threatned her to put her children to 
shamefull death. With these threates, Cleopatra for feare yeelded straight, as she 
would haue yeelded vnto strokes: & afterwards suffred her selfe to be cured and 
dieted as they listed. Shortly after, Cesar came himself in person to see her, & to 
cofort her. Cveofatra being layed vpon a litle low bed in poore estate, when she 
saw C@sar come into her chamber, she sodainly rose vp, naked in her smocke, and 
fell downe at his feete maruellously disfigured : both for that she had plucked her haire 
from her head, as also for that she had martired all her face with her nayles, and 
besides, her voyce was small and trembling, her eyes sunke into her head with con- 
tinuall blubbering and moreouer, they might see the most part of her stomake torne 
in sunder. To be short, her body was not much better then her minde: yet her 
good grace and comelynesse, and the force of her beautie was not altogether defaced. 
But notwithstanding this ougly and pitifull state of hers, yet she shewed herselfe 
within, by her outward lookes and countenance. When Cesar had made her lye 
downe againe, and sate by her beds side: C/eopatra began to cleare and excuse her 
selfe for that she had done, laying all to the feare she had of Antonius: Cesar, in 
contrary manner, reproued her in euery point. Then she sodainly altered her 
speach, and prayed him to pardon her, as though she were affrayed to dye, and 
desirous to liue. At length, she gaue him a briefe and memoriall of all the ready 
money and treasure she had. But by chaunce there stood Se/ewcus by, one of her 
Treasurers, who to seeme a good seruant, came straight to Cesar to disproue C/eo- 
patra, that she had not set in all, but kept many things backe of purpose. Cleopatra 
was in such a rage with him, that she flew vpon him, & tooke him by the haire of 
the head, and boxed him welfauouredly. Cesar fell a laughing, and parted the 
fray. Alas, sayd she, O Cesar: is not this a great shame and reproche, that thou 
hauing vouchsaued to take the paines to come vnto me, and hast done me this hon- 


408 APPENDIX : 


our, poore wretch, and caitife creature, brought into this pitifull and miserable estate : 
and that mine owne seruants should come now to accuse me, though 

V, ii, 168. it may be I haue reserued some iewels and trifles meete for women, 
but not for me (poore soule) to set out my selfe withall, but mean- 

V, ii, 200. ing to giue some pretie presents and giftes vnto Octauia and Liuza, 
that they making meanes & intercession for me to thee, thou mightest 

yet extend thy fauour and mercy vpon me? Cesar was glad to heare her say so, per- 
swading him selfe thereby that she had yet a desire to saue her life. So he made 
her aunswere, that he did not onely giue her that to dispose of at her pleasure, which 
she had kept backe, but further promised to vse her more honorably and bountifully 
than she would thinke for: and so he tooke his leaue of her, supposing he had 
deceiued her, but indeede he was deceiued himselfe. There was 
a young gentleman Cornelius Doladella, that was one of C@sars very 
great familiars, & besides did beare no euill wil vnto Cleopatra. He 
sent her word secretly as she had requested him, that Cesar determined 
to take his iorney through Svria, & that within three daies he would send her away 
before with her children. When this was told Cleopatra, she requested Cesar that 
it would please him to suffer her to offer the last oblations of the dead, vnto the soule 
of Antonius. This being graunted her, she was caried to the place where his tombe 
was, and there falling downe on her knees, imbracing the tombe with her women, 
‘the teares running down her cheekes, she began to speake in this sort: O my deare 
‘Lord Antonius, not long sithence I buried thee here, being a free woman : and now 
‘I offer vnto thee the funerall sprinklings and oblations, being a captiue and prisoner, 
‘and yet I am forbidden and kept from tearing & murthering this captiue body of mine 
‘with blowes, which they carefully gard and keepe, only to triumphe of thee: look 
‘therefore henceforth for no other honours, offerings, nor sacrifices from me, for these 
‘are the last which C/eopatra can giue thee, sith now they carie her away. Whilest 
‘we lined together, nothing could seuer our companies: but now at our death, I feare 
‘me they will make vs chaunge our countryes. For as thou being a ROMAINE, hast 
‘bene buried in Ai?cypr: euen so wretched creature I, an ASGYPTIAN, shall be buried 
‘in ITALIE, which shall be all the good that I haue receiued by thy country. If there- 
‘fore the gods where thou art now haue any power & authoritie, sith our gods here 
‘haue forsake vs: suffer not thy true friend and louer to be caried away aliue, that in 
‘me, they triumphe of thee: but receiue me with thee, and let me be buried in one 
‘selfe tombe with thee. For though my griefes and miseries be infinite, yet none hath 
‘grieued me more, nor that I could lesse beare withall: then this small time, which 
‘T haue bene driué to liue alone without thee. Then hauing ended these dolefull 
plaints, and crowned the tombe with garlands and sundry nosegayes, and maruellous 
louingly imbraced the same: she commaunded they should prepare her bath, and 
when she had bathed and washed her selfe, she fell to her meate, and was sumptu- 
ously serued. Now whilest she was at dinner, there came a countryman, and brought 
her a basket. The souldiers that warded at the gates, asked straight what he had in 
his basket. He opened the basket, and tooke out the leaues that couered the figges, 
and shewed them that they were figges he brought. They all of them maruelled to 
see so goodly figges. The countryman laughed to heare them, and bad them take 
some if they would. They beleeued he told them truely, and so bad him carie them 
in. After Cleopatra had dined, she sent a certaine table written and sealed ynto 
Cesar, and commaunded them all to go out of the tombes where she was, but the 
two women, then she shut the doores to her. Cesar when he receiued this table, 


V, ii, 235. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE 409 
and began to read her lamétation and petition, requesting him that he would let her 
be buried with Antonius, found straight what she meant, and thought to haue gone 
thither himselfe: howbeit he sent one before in all hast that might be, to see what it 
was. Her death was very sodaine. For those whom Cesar sent vnto her ran thither 
in all hast possible, & found the souldiers standing at the gate, mistrusting noth- 
ing, nor vnderstanding of her death. But when they had opened the doores, they 
found Cleopatra starke dead, layed vpon a bed of gold, attired & arayed in her roy- 
all robes, and one of her two women, which was called /ras, dead at her feete: and 
her other woman called Charmion halfe dead, and trembling, trim- 
ming the Diademe which C/eopatra ware vpon her head. One of = 
the souldiers seeing her, angrily sayd vnto her: is that well done V, ii, 373. 
Charmion? Very well sayd she againe, and meete for a Princesse 
discended from the race of so many noble kings. She sayd no more, but fell downe 
dead hard by the bed. Some report that this Aspicke was brought ynto her in the 
basket with figs, & that she had commaunded them to hide it vnder the figge leaues, 
that when she should thinke to take out the figges, the Aspicke should bite her before 
she should see her: howbeit, that when she would haue taken away the leaues for 
the figges, she perceiued it, and sayd, art thou here then? And so, her arme being 
naked, she put it to the Aspicke to be bitten. Other say againe, she kept it ina 
boxe, and that she did pricke and thrust it with a spindle of gold, so that the Aspicke 
being angerd withall, lept out with great furie, and bit her in the arme. Howbeit 
few can tell the troth. For they report also, that she had hidden poyson ina hollow 
raser which she caried in the haire of her head: and yet was there no marke seene 
of her body, or any signe discerned that she was poysoned, neither also did they finde 
this serpent in her tombe. But it was reported onely, that there were seene certaine 
fresh steppes or trackes where it had gone, on the tombe side toward the sea, and 
specially by the doore side. Some say also, that they found two litle pretie bytings 
in her arme, scant to be discerned: the which it seemeth Cesar him- 
selfe gaue credit vnto, because in his triumphe he caried Cleopatraes ot 
image, with an Aspicke byting of her arme. And thus goeth the ; 
report of her death. Now Cesar, though he was maruellous sory V, ii, 429. 
for the death of Cleopatra, yet he wondred at her noble minde and 
courage, and ‘therefore commaunded she should be nobly buried, and layed by 
Antonius: and willed also that her two women should haue honorable buriall. 
Cleopatra dyed being eight and thirtie yeare old, after she had raigned two and 
twenty yeares, and gouerned aboue foureteen of them with Axsonius. And for 
Antonius, some say that he liued three and fiftie yeares: and others say, six and 
fiftie. 


422. 


DRYDEN 
ALL For LOVE: | or, THE } World well Lost. | A | TRAGEDY, | As it is Acted 
at the | 7xzarre-Royaz; | And Written in Imitation of Shakespeare’s Stile. | 
By John Dryden, Servant to His Majesty. 


Facile est verbum aliquod ardens (ut ita dicam) notare. tdque restinctis 
animorum incendiis trridere, Cicero. 


In the SAVoY: | Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for Henry Herringman, at the Blew 
An- | chor in the Lower Walk of the Mew-Exchange. 1678. 


410 APPENDIX 


PREFACE. 


The death of Anthony and Cleopatra, is a Subject which has been treated by the 
greatest Wits of our Nation, after Shakespeare; and by all so variously, that their 
example has given me the confidence to try my self in this Bowe of Ulysses amongst 
the Crowd of Sutors; and, withal, to take my own measures, in aiming at the Mark. 
I doubt not but the same Motive has prevailed with all of us in this attempt; I mean 
the excellency of the Moral: for the chief persons represented, were famous patterns 
of unlawful love; and their end accordingly was unfortunate. All reasonable men 
have long since concluded, That the Heroe of the Poem, ought not to be a character 
of perfect Virtue, for, then, he could not, without injustice, be made unhappy ; nor 
yet altogether wicked, because he could not then be pitied: I have therefore steer’d 
the middle course; and have drawn the character of Anthony as favourably as Plx- 
tarch, Appian, and Dion Cassius wou'd give me leave: the like I have observ’d in 
Cleopatra. That which is wanting to work up the pity to a greater heighth, was not 
afforded me by the story: for the crimes of love which they both committed, were not 
occasion’d by any necessity, or fatal ignorance, but were wholly voluntary; since our 
passions are, or ought to be, within our power. The Fabrick of the Play is regular 
enough, as to the inferior parts of it; and the Unities of Time, Place and Action, 
more exactly observed, than, perhaps, the English Theater requires. Particularly, 
the Action is so much one, that it is the only of the kind without Episode, or Under- 
plot; every Scene in the Tragedy conducing to the main design, and every Act con- 
cluding with a turn of it. The greatest errour in the contrivance seems to be in the 
person of Octavia: For, though I might use the priviledge of a Poet, to introduce 
her into Alexandria, yet I had not enough consider’d, that the compassion she mov’d 
to her self and children, was destructive to that which I reserw’d for Anthony and 
Cleopatra ; whose mutual love being founded upon vice, must lessen the favour of 
the Audience to them, when Virtue and Innocence were oppress’d by it. And, 
though I justified Azthony in some measure, by making Octavia’s departure, to pro- 
ceed wholly from her self; yet the force of the first Machine still remain’d; and the 
dividing of pity, like the cutting of a River into many Channels, abated the strength 
of the natural stream. But this is an Objection which none of my Critiques have 
urg’d against me; and therefore I might have let it pass, if I could have resolv’d to 
have been partial to my self. The faults my Enemies have found, are rather cavils 
concerning little, and not essential Decencies; which a Master of the Ceremonies 
may decide betwixt us. The /rench Poets, I confess, are strict Observers of these 
Punctilio’s: They would not, for example, have suffer’d Cleopatra and Octavia to 
have met; or if they had met, there must only have pass’d betwixt them some cold 
civilities, but no eagerness of repartée, for fear of offending against the greatness of 
their Characters, and the modesty of their Sex. This Objection I foresaw, and at the 
same time contemn’d : for I judg’d it both natural and probable, that Octavia, proud 
of her new-gain’d Conquest, would search out Cleopatra to triumph over her; and 
that Cleopatra, thus attacqu’d, was not of a spirit to shun the encounter: and ’tis 
not unlikely, that two exasperated Rivals should use such Satyre as I have put into 
their mouths ; for after all, though the one were a Roman, and the other a Queen, 
they were both Women. . 

In my Stile I have profess’d to imitate the Divine Shakespeare ; which that I 
might perform more freely, I have disincumber’d my self from Rhyme. Not that I 
condemn my former way, but that this is more proper to my present purpose. I hope 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE 4II 


I need not to explain myself, that I have not Copy’d my Author servilely : Words 
and Phrases must of necessity receive a change in succeeding Ages: but ’tis almost 
a Miracle that much of his Language remains so pure ; and that he who began Dra- 
matique Poetry amongst us, untaught by any, and, as Ben Johnson tells us, without 
Learning, should by the force of his own Genius perform so much, that in a manner 
he has left no praise for any who come after him. The occasion is fair, and the sub- 
ject would be pleasant to handle the difference of Stiles betwixt him and Fletcher, 
and wherein, and how far they are both to be imitated. But since I must not be 
over-confident of my own performance after him, it will be prudence in me to be 
silent. Yet I hope I may affirm, and without vanity, that by imitating him, I have 
excell’d my self throughout the Play; and particularly, that I prefer the Scene 
betwixt Anthony and Ventidius in the first Act, to any thing which I have written 
in this kind. 


PROLOGUE. 


As Vultures wait on Armies for their Prey, 

All gaping for the Carcass of a Play ! 

With Croaking Notes they bode some dire event ; 

And follow dying Poets by the scent. 

Ours gives himself for gone; y’have watch’d your time! 
He fights this day unarm’d; without his Rhyme. 

And brings a Tale which often has been told ; 

As sad as Dido’s; and almost as old. 

His Heroe, whom you Wits his Bully call, 

Bates of his mettle; and scarce rants at all ; 

He’s somewhat lewd; but a well-meaning mind ; 
Weeps much; fights little ; but is wond’rous kind. 

In short, a Pattern, and Companion fit, 

For all the keeping Tonyes of the Pit. 

I cou’d name more ; a Wife and Mistress too ; 


What Flocks of Critiques hover here to day, 


Both (to be plain) too good for most of you : 
The Wife well-natur’d, and the Mistress true. 

Now, Poets, if your fame has been his care ; 
Allow him all the candour-you can spare. 
A brave Man scorns to quarrelonce a day; 
Like Hectors, in at every petty fray. 
Let those find fault whose Wit’s so very small, 
They’ ve need to show that they can think at all: 
Errours like Straws upon the surface flow ; 
He who would search for Pearls must dive below. 
Fops may have leave to level all they can; 
As Pigmies wou’d be glad to lopp a Man. 
Half-Wits are Fleas; so little and so light ; 
We scarce cou’d know they live, but that they bite. 
But, as the Rich, when tir’d with daily Feasts, 
For change, become their next poor Tenants Ghests ; 
Drink hearty Draughts of Ale, from plain brown Bowls, 
And snatch the homely Rasher from the Coals : 


412 APPENDIX 


So you, retiring from much better Cheer, 

For once, may venture to do penance here. 

And since that plenteous Autumn now is past, 

Whose Grapes and Peaches have Indulged your taste, 
Take in good part from our poor Poets boord, 

Such rivell’d Fruits as Winter can afford. 


Persons Represented. 


By 

Marc Anthony, Mr. Hart. 
Ventidius, his General, Mr. Mohun. 
Dollabella, his Friend, Mr. Clarke. 
Alexas, the Queen’s Eunuch, Mr. Goodman. 
Serapion, Priest of Zszs, Mr. Griffin. 
Another Priest, Mr. Coysh. 

Servants to Anthony. 
Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, Mrs. Bowtell. 
Octavia, Anthony's Wife, Mrs. Corey. 
Charmion, 


; ‘ 
ee \ Cleopatra’s Maids. 


Anthony’ s two little Daughters. 


ScENE ALEXANDRIA. 
Act. I. ScENE, Zhe Temple of Isis. 


Enter Serapion, Myris, Priests of Isis. 
Serap. Portents, and Prodigies, are grown so frequent, 

That they have lost their Name. Our fruitful 2Vz/e 
Flow’d ere the wonted Season, with a Torrent 
So unexpected, and so wondrous fierce, 
That the wild Deluge overtook the haste 
Ev’n of the Hinds that watch’d it: Men and Beasts 
Were born above the tops of Trees, that grew 
On th’ utmost Margin of the Water-mark. 
Then, with so swift an Ebb, the Floud drove backward 
It slipt from underneath the Scaly Herd: 
Here monstrous Phoce panted on the Shore ; 
Forsaken Dolphins there, with their broad tails, 
Lay lashing the departing Waves: Hard by ’em, 
Sea-Horses floundring in the slimy mud, 
Toss’d up their heads, and dash’d the ooze about ’em. 


Lnter Alexas behind them. 

Myr. Avert these Omens, Heav’n. 

Serap. Last night, between the hours of Twelve and One, 
In a lone Isle o’th’ Temple while I walk’d, 
A Whirl-wind rose, that, with a violent blast, 
Shook all the Dome. the Doors around me clapt, 
The Iron Wicket, that defends the Vault, 
Where the long Race of Prolomies is lay’ d, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT I 413 


Burst open, and disclosed the mighty dead. 
From out each Monument, in order plac’d, 
An Armed Ghost start up: the Boy-King last 
Rear’d his inglorious head. A peal of groans 
Then follow’d, and a lamentable voice 
Cry’d 4/gyft is no more. My blood ran back, 
My shaking knees against each other knock’d; 
On the cold pavement down I fell intrane’d; 
And so unfinish’d left the horrid Scene. 
Alexas (showing himself.) And, Dream’d you this? or, Did invent the Story ? 
To frighten our “gyptian Boys withal, 
And train ’em up betimes in fear of Priesthood ? 
Serap. My Lord, I saw you not, 
Nor meant my words should reach your ears; but what 
I uttered was most true. 
Alex. A foolish Dream, 
Bred from the fumes of indigested Feasts, 
And holy Luxury. 
Serap. I know my duty: 
This goes no farther. 
Alex. ’Tis not fit it should. 
Nor would the times now bear it, were it true. 
All Southern, from yon hills, the Roman Camp 
Hangs o’er us black and threatning, like a Storm 
Just breaking on our heads. 
Serap. Our faint Lgyftians pray for Antony ; 
But in their Servile hearts they own Octavius. 
Myr. Why then does Axéony dream out his hours, 
And tempts not Fortune for a noble Day, 
Which might redeem, what Acizum lost ? 
Alex, We thinks ’tis past recovery. 
Serap. Yet the Foe 
Seems not to press the Siege. 
Alex. O, there’s the wonder. 
Mecenas and Agrippa, who can most 
With Cesar, are his Foes. His Wife Octavia, 
Driv’n from his House, solicits her revenge ; 
And Dolabella, who was once his Friend, 
Upon some private grudge, now seeks his ruine: 
Yet still War seems on either side to sleep. 
Serap. ’Tis strange that Antony, for some days past, 
Has not beheld the face of Cleopatra ; 
But here, in /szs Temple, lives retir’d, 
And makes his heart a prey to black despair. 
Alex. Tis true; and we much fear he hopes by absence 
To cure his mind of Love. 
Serap. Tf he be vanquish’d, 
Or make his peace, 42gypt is doom’d to be 
A Roman Province; and our plenteous Harvests 


414 APPENDIX 


Must then redeem the scarceness of their Soil. 
While Antony stood firm, our Alexandria 
Rival’d proud Rome (Dominions other Seat) 
And Fortune striding, like a vast Colossus, 
Cou’d fix an equal foot of Empire here. 

Alex. Had 1 my wish, these Tyrants of all Nature 
Who Lord it o’er Mankind, should perish, perish, 
Each by the others Sword ; but, since our will 
Is lamely follow’d by our pow’r, we must 
Depend on one; with him to rise or fall. 

Serap. How stands the Queen affected ? 

Alex. O, she dotes, 

She dotes, Serafizon, on this vanquish’d Man, 

And winds her self about his mighty ruins, 

Whom would she yet forsake, yet yield him up, 

This hunted prey, to his pursuers hands, 
She might preserve us all; but ’tis in vain 
This changes my designs, this blasts my Counsels, 
And makes me use all means to keep him here, 
Whom I could wish divided from her Arms 

Far as the Earth’s deep Center. Well, you know 
The state of things; no more of your ill Omens, 
And black Prognosticks ; labour to confirm 

The peoples hearts. 


Enter Ventidius, talking aside with a Gentleman of Antony’s 
a 


Serap. These Romans will o’rehear us. 
But, Who’s that Stranger? By his Warlike port, 
His fierce demeanor, and erected look, 
He’s of no vulgar note. 
Alex. O,’tis Ventidius, 
Our Emp’rors great Lieutenant in the East, 
Who first show’d Rome that Parthia could be conquer’d. 
When Anfony return’d from Syria last, 
He left this Man to guard the Roman Frontiers. 
Serap. You seem to know him well. 
Alex. Too well. I saw him in Ci/icia first, 
When Cleopatra there met Antony - 
A mortal he was to us, and gyft. 
But, let me witness to the worth I hate, 
A braver Roman never drew a Sword. 
Firm to his Prince; but, as a friend, not slave. 
He ne’r was of his pleasures ; but presides 
O’re all his cooler hours and morning counsels : 
In short, the plainness, fierceness, rugged virtue 
Of an old true-stampt Roman lives in him. 
His coming bodes I know not what of ill 
To our affairs. Withdraw, to mark him better ; 
And I'll acquaint you why I sought you here, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT I 41s 


And what’s our present work. They withdraw to a corner, 
Ventidius. Not see him, say you? | of the Stage; and Ventidius, 

I say, I must, and will. with the other, comes for- 
Gent. He has commanded, wards to the front. 


On pain of death, none should approach his presence. 
Ven. I bring him news will raise his drooping Spirits, 
Give him new life. 
Gent. He sees not Cleopatra. 
Ven. Would he had never seen her. 
Gent. He eats not, drinks not, sleeps not, has no use 
Of any thing, but thought ; or, if he talks, 
’Tis to himself, and then ’tis perfect raving : 
Then he defies the World, and bids it pass ; 
Sometimes he gnawes his Lip, and Curses loud 
The Boy Octavius: then he draws his mouth 
Into a scornful smile, and cries, Take all, 
The World’s not worth my care. 
Ven. Just, just his nature. 
Virtues his path; but sometimes ’tis too narrow 
For his vast Soul; and then he starts out wide, 
And bounds into a Vice that bears him far 
From his first course, and plunges him in ills : 
But, when his danger makes him find his fault, 
Quick to observe, and full of sharp remorse, 
He censures eagerly his own misdeeds, 
Judging himself with malice to himself, 
And not forgiving what as Man he did, 
Because his other parts are more than Man. 
He must not thus be lost. [Alexas and the Priests come forward. 
Alex. You have your full Instructions, now advance ; 
Proclaim your Orders loudly. 
Serap. Romans, A2gyptians, hear the Queen’s Command. 
Thus Cleopatra bids, Let Labor cease, 
To Pomp and Triumphs give this happy day, 
That gave the World a Lord: ‘tis Azfony’s. 
Live, Antony; and Cleopatra live. 
Be this the general voice sent up to Heav’n. 
And every publick place repeat this eccho. 
Ven. aside. Fine Pageantry ! 
Serap. Set out before your doors 
The Images of all your sleeping Fathers, 
With Laurels crown’d; with Laurels wreath your posts, 
And strow with Flow’rs the Pavement; Let the Priests 
Do present Sacrifice ; pour out the Wine, 
And call the Gods to joyn with you in gladness. 
Ven. Curse on the tongue that bids this general joy. 
Can they be friends of Antony, who Revel 
When Axzony’s in danger? Hide, for shame, 
You Romans, your Great grandsires Images, 


416 


APPENDIX 


For fear their Souls should animate their Marbles, 
To blush at their degenerate Progeny. 

Alex. A love which knows no bounds to Antony, 
Would mark the Day with honors ; when all Heaven 
Labored for him, when each propitious Star 
Stood wakeful in his Orb, to watch that hour, 

And shed his better influence. Her own Birth-day 
Our Queen neglected, like a vulgar Fate,* 
That pass’d obscurely by. 
Ven. Would it had slept, 
Divided far from his; till some remote 
And future Age had call’d it out, to ruin 
Some other Prince, not him. 

Alex. Your Emperor, 

Tho grown unkind, would be more gentle, than 
T’upbraid my Queen, for loving him too well. 

Ven. Does the mute Sacrifice upbraid the Priest ? 

He knows him not his Executioner. 

O, she has deck’d his ruin with her love, 

Led him in golden bands to gaudy slaughter, 

And made perdition pleasing: She has left him 
The blank of what he was; 

I tell thee, Eunuch, she has quite unmann’d him: 
Can any Roman see, and know him now, 

Thus alter’d from the Lord of half Mankind, 
Unbent, unsinew’d, made a Womans Toy, 
Shrunk from the vast extent of all his honors, 
And crampt within a corner of the World? 

O, Antony | 

Thou bravest Soldier, and thou best of Friends! 
Bounteous as Nature; next to Nature’s God! 
Could’ st thou but make new Worlds, so wouldst thou give ’em, 
As bounty were thy being. Rough in Battel, 

As the first Romans, when they went to War ; 
Yet, after Victory, more pitiful, 

Than all their Praying Virgins left at home! 

Alex. Would you could add to those more shining Virtues, 
His truth to her who loves him. 

Ven. Would I could not. 

But, Wherefore waste I precious hours with thee ? 

Thou art her darling mischief, her chief Engin, 

Antony’s other Fate. Go, tell thy Queen, 

Ventidius is arriv’d, to end her Charms. 

Let your “gyptian Timbrels play alone ; 

Nor mix Effeminate Sounds with Roman Trumpets. 

You dare not fight for Aztony ; go Pray, 

And keep your Cowards-Holy-day in Temples. [ Zxeunt Alex, Serap. 


* If this be the phonetic spelling of Féze, it is a far earlier example th 
given in the V. £. D.—Ep. ; p an any 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT I 417 


Re-enter the Gentleman of M. Antony. 
2. Gent. The Emperor approaches, and commands, 
On pain of Death, that none presume to stay. 
1. Gent. I dare not disobey him. [ Going out with the other. 
Vent. Well, I dare. 
But, I'll observe him first unseen, and find 
Which way his humour drives: The rest I’ll venture. | Withdraws. 


Lnter Antony, walking with a disturl’d Motion, 
before he speaks. 
Antony. They tell me, ’tis my Birth-day, and I’ll keep it 
With double pomp of sadness. 
*Tis what the day deserves, which gave me breath. 
Why was I rais’d the Meteor of the World, 
Hung in the Skies, and blazing as I travel’d, 
Till all my fires were spent; and then cast downward 
To be trod out by Cesar ? 
Ven. aside. On my Soul, 
> Tis mournful, wondrous mournful ! 
Anto. Count thy gains. 
‘Now, Aztony, Would’st thou be born for this ? 
Glutton of Fortune, thy devouring youth 
Has starved thy wanting Age. 
Ven. How sorrow shakes him! [ Aside. 
So, now the Tempest tears him up by th’ Roots, 
And on the ground extends the noble ruin. 
Ant. having thrown himself down. 
* Lye there, thou shadow of an Emperor ; 
The place thou pressest on thy Mother Earth 
Is all thy Empire now : now it contains thee; 
Some few days hence, and then twill be too large, 
When thou’rt contracted in thy narrow Um, 
Shrunk to a few cold Ashes; then Océavia, 
(For Cleopatra will not live to see it) 
Octavia then will have thee all her own, 
And bear thee in her Widow’d hand to Cesar ; 
Cesar will weep; the Crocodile will weep, 
To see his Rival of the Universe 
Lye still and peaceful there. I'll think no more on’t. 
Give me some Musick ; look that it be sad : 
V’ll sooth my Melancholy, till I swell, 
And burst my self with sighing: 
’Tis somewhat to my humour. Stay, I fancy 
I’m now turn’d wild, a Commoner of Nature ; 
Of all forsaken, and forsaking all; 
Live in a shady Forrest’s Sy/van Scene, 
Stretch’d at my length beneath some blasted Oke; 


[Soft Musick. 


* The following twelve lines are spoken, I think, by Antony, not Ventidius.— 
ED. 


27 


418 


APPENDIX 


I lean my head upon the Mossy Bark, 

And look just of a piece, as I grew from it: 

My uncomb’d Locks, matted like Ms/eto, 

Hang o’re my hoary Face; a murm’ring Brook 

Runs at my foot. 

Ven. Methinks I fancy 

My self there too. 

Ant. The Herd come jumping by me, 

And fearless, quench their thirst, while I look on, 

And take me for their fellow-Citizen. * 

More of this Image, more; it lulls my thoughts. [Soft Musick again. 
Ven. I must disturb him; I can hold no longer [Stands before him. 
Ant. starting up. Axt thou Ventidius ? 

Ven. Are you Antony ? 
I’m liker what I was, than you to him 
I left you last. 
Ant. Vm angry. 
Vent. Soam I. 
Ant. I would be private: Leave me. 
Ven. Sir, I love you, 
And therefore will not leave you. 
Ant. Will not leave me? 

Where have you learnt that Answer? Who amI? 

Ven. My Emperor; the Man I love next Heaven: 

If I said more, I think ’twere scarce a Sin; 

Y’are all that’s good, and good-like. 

Ant. All that’s wretched. 

You will not leave me then? 
Ven. ’ Twas too presuming 

To say I would not; but I dare not leave you: 

And, ’tis unkind in you to chide me hence 

So soon, when I so far have come to see you. 

Ant. Now thou hast seen me, art thou satisfy’d ? 

For, if a Friend, thou hast beheld enough ; 

And, if a Foe, too much. 

Ven. [weeping.| Look, Emperor, this is no common Deaw, 

I have not wept this Forty year; but now 

My Mother comes afresh into my eyes ; 

I cannot help her softness, 

Ant. By Heav’n, he weeps, poor good old Man, he weeps! 

The big round drops course one another down 

The furrows of his cheeks. Stop ’em, Ventidius, 

Or I shall blush to death: they set my shame, 

That caus’d ’em, full before me. 

Ven. Ill do my best. 
Ant. Sure there’s contagion in the tears of Friends: 

See, I have caught it too. Believe me, ’tis not 

For my own griefs, but thine Nay, Father. 


* See As You Like Ut, II, i, 34, et seq.—En. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT J 


Ven. Emperor. 

Ant. Emperor! Why, that’s the stile of Victory, 
The Conquw’ ring Soldier, red with unfelt wounds, 
Salutes his General so: but never more 
Shall that sound reach my ears. 

Ven. I warrant you. 

Ant. Actium, Actium! Oh— 

Ven. It sits too near you. 

Ant. Here, here it lies; a lump of Lead by day, 
And, in my short distracted nightly slumbers, 

The Hag that rides my Dreams 
Ven. Out with it; give it vent. 
Ant. Urge not my shame. 

I lost a Battel. 

Ven. Sohas Julius done. 


Ant. Thou favour’st me, and speak’st not half thou think’st ; 


For Julius fought it out, and lost it fairly : 
But Antony 
Ven. Nay, stop not. 
Ant. Antony. 
(Well, thou wilt have it) like a coward, fled, 
Fled while his Soldiers fought ; fled first, Ventidius. 
Thou long’st to curse me, and I give thee leave. 
I know thou cam’st prepar’d to rail. 
Ven. I did. 
Ant, Yl help thee—I have been a Man, Ventidius, 
Ven. Yes, and a brave one; but 
Ant. I know thy meaning. 
But, I have lost my Reason, have disgrac’d 
The name of Soldier, with inglorious ease. 
In the full Vintage of my flowing honors, 
Sate still, and saw it prest by other hands. 
Fortune came smiling to my youth, and woo’d it, 
And purple greatness met my ripen’d years. 
When first I came to Empire, I was born 
On Tides of People, crouding to my Triumphs; 
The wish of Nations; and the willing World 
Receiv’d me as its pledge of future peace; 
I was so great, so happy, so belov’d, 
Fate could not ruine me ; till I took pains 
And work’d against my Fortune, chid her from me, 
And turn’d her loose ; yet still she came again. 
My careless dayes, and my luxurious nights, 
At length have weary’d her, and now she’s gone, 
Gone, gone, divorc’d for ever. Help me, Soldier, 
To curse this Mad-man, this industrious Fool, 
Who labour’d to be wretched: Pr’ythee curse me. 
Ven. No. 
Ant. Why? 


419 


420 


APPENDIX 


Ven. You are too sensible already 
Of what y’have done, too conscious of your failings, 
And like a Scorpion, whipt by others first 
To fury, sting your self in mad revenge. 
I would bring Balm, and pour it in your wounds, 
Cure your distemper’d mind, and heal your fortunes. 
Ant. I know thou would’st. 
Ven. I will. 

Ant. Wa, ha, ha, ha. 

Ven, You laugh. 

Ant. I do, to see officious love 
Give Cordials to the dead. 

Ven. You would be lost then? 

Ant. Lam. 

Ven. say, youare not. Try your fortune. 

Ant. Thave, to th’utmost. Dost thou think me desperate, 
Without just cause? No, when I found all lost 
Beyond repair, I hid me from the World, 

And learnt to scorn it here; which now I do 
So heartily, I think it is not worth 
The cost of keeping. 

Ven. Caesar thinks not so: 

He’l thank you for the gift he could not take. 
You would be kill’d, like 7z//y, would you? do, 
Hold out your Throat to Cesar, and dye tamely. 

Ant, No, I can kill my self; and so resolve. 

Ven. I can dy with you too, when time shall serve; 
But Fortune calls upon us now to live, 

To fight, to Conquer. 

Ant. Sure thou Dream’st, Ventidius. 

Ven. No; ’tis you Dream; you sleep away your hours 
In desperate sloth, miscall’d Phylosophy. 

Up, up, for Honor’s sake; twelve Legions wait you, 
And long to call you Chief: by painful journeys, 
I led ’em, patient, both of heat and hunger, 
Down from the Parthian Marches, to the Wile. 
’T will do you good to see their Sun-burnt faces, 
Their skar’d cheeks, and chopt hands ; there’s virtue in ’em, 
They’! sell those mangled limbs at dearer rates 
Than yon trim Bands can buy. 

Ant. Where left you them? 

Ven. I said, in lower Syria. 

Ant. Bring ’em hither; 
There may be life in these. 

Ven. They will not come. 

Ant, Why did’st thou mock my hopes with promis’d aids 
To double my despair? They’r mutinous, 

Ven. Most firm and loyal. 
Ant. Yet they will not march 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT I 421 


To succor me. Oh trifler! 

Ven. They petition 
You would make hast to head ’em. 

Ant. I'm besieg’d. 

Ven. ‘There’s but one way shut up: How came I hither? 

Ant. I will not stir. 

Ven. They would perhaps desire 
A better reason. 

Ant. I have never us’d 
My Soldiers to demand a reason of 
My actions. Why did they refuse to March? 

Ven. ‘They said they would not fight for Cleopatra. 

Ant. What was’t they said? 

Ven. They said, they would not fight for C/eopatra, 
Why should they fight indeed, to make her Conquer, 
And make you more a Slave? to gain you Kingdoms, 
Which, for a kiss, at your next midnight Feast, 

You’! sell to her? then she new names her Jewels, 
And calls this Diamond such or such a Tax, 
Each Pendant in her ear shall be a Province. 
Ant. Ventidius, 1 allow your Tongue free licence 
On all my other faults; but, on your life, 
No word of Cleopatra: She deserves 
More World’s than I can lose. 
Ven. Behold, you Pow’rs, 
To whom you have intrusted Humankind ; 
See Europe, Africk, Asia put in ballance, 
And all weigh’d down by one light worthless Woman ! 
I think the gods are Azzony’s, and give 
‘Like Prodigals, this neather World away, 
To none but wastful hands. 

Ant. You grow presumptuous. 

Ven, I take the priviledge of plain love to speak. 

Ant. Plain love! plain arrogance, plain insolence : 
Thy Men are Cowards ; thou, an envious Traitor ; 
Who, under seeming honesty, hast vented 
The burden of thy rank o’reflowing Gall. 

O that thou wert my equal; great in Arms 
As the first Cesar was, that I might kill thee 
Without a Stain to Honor! 

Ven. You may kill me; 

You have done more already, call’d me Traitor. 

Ant, Art thou not one? 

Ven. For showing you your self, 

Which none else durst have done; but had I been 
That name, which I disdain to speak again, 

I needed not have sought your abject fortunes, 
Come to partake your fate, to dye with you, 

What hindred me t’have led my Conqu’ring Eagles 


422 


APPENDIX 


To fill Octavius’s Bands? I could have been 
A Traitor then, a glorious happy Traitor, 
And not have been so call’d. 
Ant. Forgive me, Soldier: 
I’ve been too passionate. 
Ven. You thought me false ; ; 
Thought my old age betray’d you: kill me, Sir; 
Pray kill me; yet you need not, your unkindness 
Has left your Sword no work. 
Ant. I did not think so; 
I said it in my rage: prythee forgive me : 
Why did’st thou tempt my anger, by discovery 
Of what I would not hear? 
Ven. No Prince but you 
Could merit that sincerity I us’d, 
Nor durst another Man have ventur’d it; 
But you, ere Love misled your wandring eyes, 
Were sure the chief and best of Human Race, 
Fram’d in the very pride and boast of Nature, 
So perfect, that the gods who form’d you wonder’d 
At their own skill, and cry’d, A lucky hit 
Has mended our design. Their envy hindred, 
Else you had been immortal, and a pattern, 
When Heav’n would work for ostentation sake, 
To copy out again. 
Ant. But Cleopatra 
Go on; for I can bear it now. 
Ven. No more. 
Ant, Thou dar’st not trust my Passion ; but thou may’st: 
Thou only lov’st ; the rest have flatter’d me, 
Ven. WUeav’n’s blessing on your heart, for that kind word. 
May I believe you love me? speak again. 
Ant, Indeed I do. Speak this, and this, and this. [ Hugging him. 
Thy praises were unjust; but, I’ll deserve ’em, 
And yet mend all. Do with me what thou wilt ; 
Lead me to victory, thou know’st the way. 
Ven. And, Will you leave this 
Ant. Pr'ythee do not curse her, 
And I will leave her; though, Heav’n knows, I love 
Beyond Life, Conquest, Empire ; all, but Honor: 
But I will leave her. 
Ven. That’s my Royal Master. 
And, Shall we fight ? 
Ant. J warrant thee, old Soldier, 
Thou shalt behold me once again in Iron, 
And at the head of our old Troops, that beat 
The Parthians, cry aloud, Come follow me. 
Ven. O now I hear my Emperor! in that word 
Octavius fell. Gods, let me see that day, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT IJ 423 


And, if I have ten years behind, take all; 
Pll thank you for th’exchange. 
' Ant. Oh Cleopatra ! 

Ven. Again? 

Ant. I’ve done: in that last sigh, she went. 
Cesar shall know what ’tis to force a Lover 
From all he holds most dear. 

Ven. Methinks you breath 
Another Soul: Your looks are more Divine ; 
You speak a Heroe, and you move a God. 

Ant. O, thou hast fir’d me; my Soul’s up in Arms, 
And Mans each part about me: once again, 
That noble eagerness of fight has seized me ; 
That eagerness, with which I darted upward 
To Cassius’s Camp: In vain the steepy Hill, 
Oppos’d my way; in vain a War of Speares 
Sung round my head; and planted all my shield: 
I won the Trenches, while my formost Men 
Lag’d on the Plain below. 

Ven. Ye Gods, ye Gods, 
For such another hour. 

Ant. Come on, My Soldier! 
Our hearts and arms are still the same: I long 
Once more to meet our foes; that Thou and I, 
Like Time and Death, marching before our Troops, 
May taste fate to’em; Mowe ’em out a passage, 
And, entring where the foremost Squadrons yield, 
Begin the noble Harvest of the Field. [ Lxeunt. 


Act ali: 
Cleopatra, Tras, and Alexas. 

Cleo. What shall I do, or whither shall I turn? 
Ventidius has o’rcome, and he will go. 

Alex. We goes to fight for you. 

Cleo. Then he wou’d see me, ere he went to fight : 
Flatter me not: if once he goes, he’s lost: 
And all my hopes destroy’ d. 

Alex. Does this weak passion 
Become a Mighty Queen ? 

Cleo. JI am no Queen ; 
Is this to be a Queen, to be besieg’d 
By yon insulting Roman ; and to wait 
Each hour the Victor’s Chain? These ills are small; 
For Antony is lost, and I can mourn 
For nothing else but him. Now come, Octavius, 
I have no more to lose; prepare thy Bands ; 
I’m fit to be a Captive: Aztony 
Has taught my mind the fortune of a Slave. 

Jras. Call Reason to assist you. 


424 


APPENDIX 


Cleo. J have none. 
And none would have: my Love’s a noble madness, 
Which shows the cause deserv’d it. Moderate sorrow 
Fits vulgar Love; and for a vulgar Man: 
But I have lov’d with such transcendent passion, 
I soard, at first, quite out of Reasons view, 
No, I’m proud 
?Tis thus: would Azfony could see me now ; 
Think you he would not sigh? though he must leave me, 
Sure he would sigh; for he is noble-natur’d, 
And bears a tender heart: I know him well. 
Ah, no, I know him not; I knew him once, 
But now ’tis past. 
Jras. Let it be past with you: 
Forget him, Madam, 
Cleo. Never, never, /ras. 
He once was mine; and once, though now ’tis gone, 
Leaves a faint Image of possession still. 
Alex. Think him unconstant, cruel, and ungrateful. 
Cleo. cannot: if I could, those thoughts were vain ; 
Faithless, ungrateful, cruel, though he be, 
T still must love him. 
Now, What news my Charmion? 
Will he be kind? and, Will he not forsake me? 
Am I to live, or dye? nay, Do I live? 
Or am I dead? for, when he gave his answer, 
Fate took the word, and then I liv’d, or dy’d. 
Char. J found him, Madam 
Cleo. A long Speech preparing ? 
If thou bring’st comfort, hast[e], and give it me; 
For never was more need. 


And now am lost above it 


Iras. 1 know he loves you. 

Cleo. Wad he been kind, her eyes had told me so, 
Before her tongue could speak it: now she studies, 
To soften what he said; but give me death, 

Just as he sent it, Charmion, undisguis’d, 
And in the words he spoke. 

Char. 1 found him then 

Incompass’d round, I think, with Iron Statues, 

So mute, so motionless his Soldiers stood, 

While awfully he cast his eyes about, 

And ev’ry Leaders hopes or fears survey’d : 
Methought he look’d resolv’d, and yet not pleas’ d. 
When he beheld me strugling in the croud, 

He blush’d, and bade, make way. 

Alex. There’s comfort yet. 

Char. Ventidius fixt his eyes upon my passage, 
Severely, as he meant to frown me back, 

And sullenly gave place: I told my message, 


Enter Charmion. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT I 


Just as you gave it, broken and disorder’ d ; 

I numbred in it all your sighs and tears, 

And while I mov’d your pitiful request, 

That you but only beg’d a last farewel, 

He fetch’d an inward groan, and ev’ry time 

I nam’d you, sigh’d, as if his heart were breaking, 

But shun’d my eyes, and guiltily look’d down ; 

He seem’d not now that awful Ansony 

Who shook an Arm’d Assembly with his Nod, 

But making show as he would rub his eyes, 

Disguis’d and blotted out a falling tear. 

Cleop. Did he then weep? and, Was I worth a tear? 

If what thou hast to say be not as pleasing, 

Tell me no more, but let me dye contented. 

Char. He bid me say, He knew himself so well, 

He could deny you nothing, if he saw you; 

And therefore 
Cleop. Thou would’st say, he wou’d not see me? 
Charm. And therefore beg’d you not to use a power, 

Which he could ill resist ; yet he should ever 

Respect you as he ought. 

Cleo. Is that a word 

For Antony to use to Cleopatra ? 

Oh that faint word, Respect ! how I disdain it! 

Disdain my self, for loving after it ! 

He should have kept that word for cold Octavia. 

Respect is for a Wife: Am I that thing, 

That dull insipid lump, without desires, 

And without pow’r to give ’em ? 

Alex, You misjudge; 

You see through Love, and that deludes your sight: 

As, what is strait, seems crooked through the Water; 

But I, who bear my reason undisturb’d, 

Can see this Axzony, this dreaded Man, 

A fearful slave, who fain would run away, 

And shuns his Master’s eyes: if you pursue him, 

My life on’t, he still drags a chain along, 

That needs must clog his flight. 

Cleo. Could I believe thee ! 
Alex, By ev’ry circumstance I know he Loves. 

True, he’s hard prest, by Intrest and by Honor ; 

Yet he but doubts, and parlyes, and casts out 

Many a long look for succor. 

Cleo. He sends word 

He fears to see my face. 

Alex, And would you more? 

He shows his weakness who declines the Combat ; 

And you must urge your fortune. Could he speak 

More plainly? To my ears, the Message sounds 


425 


426 


APPENDIX 


Come to my rescue, Cleopatra, come ; 

Come, free me from Ventidius ; from my Tyrant : 

See me, and give me a pretence to leave him. 

I hear his Trumpets. This way he must pass. 

Please you, retire a while; I’1l work him first, 

That he may bend more easie. 
Cleo. You shall rule me; 

But all, I fear, in vain. [ Zeit with Char. and Iras. 
Alex. I fear so too; 

Though I conceal’d my thoughts, to make her bold : 

But, ’tis our utmost means, and Fate befriend it. [ Withdraws. 


Enter Lictors with Fasces: one bearing the Eagle: then Enter 
Antony wth Ventidius, follow’d by other Commanders. 
Ant. Octavius is the Minion of blind Chance, 
But holds from Virtue nothing. 
Ven. Has he courage? 
Ant. But just enough to season him from Coward. 
O, ’tis the coldest youth upon a Charge, 
The most deliberate fighter! if he ventures 
(As in //lyria once they say he did 
To storm a Town) ’tis when he cannot chuse, 
When all the World have fixt their eyes upon him; 
And then he lives on that for seven years after, 
But, at a close revenge he never fails. 
Ven. J heard, you challang’d him. 
Ant. I did, Ventidius. 
What think’st thou was his answer? ’twas so tame, 
He said he had more wayes than one to dye; * 
T had not. 
Ven. Poor! 
Ant. He has more wayes than one ; 
But he would chuse ’em all before that one. 
Ven. He first would chuse an Ague, or a Fever : 
Ant. No: it must be an Ague, not a Fever; 
He has not warmth enough to dye by that. 
Ven. Or old Age, and a Bed. 
Ant. TI, there’s his choice. 
He would live, like a Lamp, to the last wink, 
And crawl upon the utmost verge of life: 
O Hercules! Why should a Man like this, 
Who dares not trust his fate for one great action, 
Be all the care of Heav’n? Why should he Lord it 
O’re Fourscore thousand Men, of whom, each one 
Is braver than himself ? 
Ven. You conquer’d for him: 
Philippi knows it; there you shar’d with him 
That Empire, which your Sword made all your own. 


# See Anthony and Cleopatra, IV, i, 7. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT II 427 


Ant. Fool that I was, upon my Eagles Wings 
I bore this Wren, till I was tir’d with soaring, 
And now he mounts above me. 
Good Heav'ns, Is this, is this the Man who braves me? 
Who bids my age make way: drives me before him, 
To the World’s ridge, and sweeps me off like rubbish ? 
_ Ven. Sir, we lose time ; the Troops are mounted all. 
Ani. Then give the word to March: 
I long to leave this Prison of a Town, 
To joyn thy Legions ; and, in open Field, 
Once more to show my face. Lead, my Deliverer. [Zxter Alex. 
Alex. Great Emperor, 
In mighty Arms renown’d above Mankind, 
But, in soft pity to th’ opprest, a God : 
This message sends the mournful Cleopatra 
To her departing Lord. 
Ven. Smooth Sycophant ! 
Alex, A thousand wishes, and ten thousand Prayers, 
Millions of blessings wait you to the Wars, 
Millions of sighs and tears she sends you too, 
And would have sent 
As many dear embraces to your Arms, 
As many parting kisses to your Lips ; 
But those, she fears, have weary’d you already. 
Ven. aside. False Crocodyle! 
Alex, And yet she begs not now, you would not leave her, 
That were a wish too mighty for her hopes, 
Too presuming for her low Fortune, and your ebbing love, 
That were a wish for her more prosp’rous dayes, 
Her blooming beauty, and your growing kindness. 
Ant. aside. Well, I must Man it out; What would the Queen? 
Alex, First, to these noble Warriors, who attend, 
Your daring courage in the Chase of Fame, 
(Too daring, and too dang’rous for her quiet) 
She humbly recommends all she holds dear, 
All her own cares and fears, the care of you. 
Ven. Yes, witness Actium. 
Ant. Let him speak, Vendidius. 
Alex. You, when his matchless valor bears him forward, 
With ardor too Heroick, on his foes 
Fall down, as she would do, before his feet ; 
Lye in his way, and stop the paths of Death ; 
Tell him, this God is not invulnerable, 
That absent C/eopatra bleeds in him ; 
And, that you may remember her Petition, 
She begs you wear these Trifles, as a pawn, 
Which, at your wisht return, she will redeem [Gives Jewels to the 
Commanders. 


With all the Wealth of 4gyft- 


428 


APPENDIX 


This, to the great Ventidius, she presents, 
Whom she can never count her Enemy, 
Because he loves her Lord. 

Ven, ‘Tell her I’ll none on’t; 

I’m not asham’d of honest Poverty : 

Not all the Diamonds of the East can bribe 

Ventidius from his faith. I hope to see 

These, and the rest of all her sparkling store, 

Where they shall more deservingly be plac’d. 
Ant. And who must wear ’em then? 

Ven. The wrong’d Octavia. 

Ant. You might have spar’d that word. 
Ven. And he that Bribe. 

Ant. But have I no remembrance ? 
Alex. Yes, a dear one: 

Your slave, the Queen 
Ant. My Mistress. 
Alex. Then your Mistress, 

Your Mistress would, she sayes, have sent her Soul, 

But that you had long since; she humbly begs 

This Ruby bracelet, set with bleeding hearts, 

(The emblems of her own) may bind your Arme. [Presenting a Bracelet. 
Ven. Now, my best Lord, in Honor’s name, I ask you, 

For Manhood’s sake, and for your own dear safety, 

Touch not these poyson’d gifts, 

Infected by the sender, touch ’em not, 

Miriads of blewest Plagues lye underneath ’em, 

And more than Aconite has dipt the Silk. 

Ant. Nay, now you grow too Cynical, Ventidius. 

A Lady’s favors may be worn with honor. 

What, to refuse her Bracelet! On my Soul, 

When I lye pensive in my Tent alone, 

Twill pass the wakeful hours of Winter nights, 

To tell these pretty Beads upon my arm, 

To count for every one a soft embrace, 

A melting kiss at such and such a time; 

And now and then the fury of her love. 

When—And what harm’s in this? 

Alex. None, none my Lord, 
But what’s to her, that now ’tis past for ever. 
Ant. going to tye it. We Soldiers are so aukward 
Alex. In faith, my Lord, we Courtiers too are aukward 
In these affairs: so are all Men indeed; 
Ev’n I, who am not one. But shall I speak ? 
Ant. Yes, freely. 
Alex, Then, my Lord, fair hands alone 
Are fit to tye it; she, who sent it, can. 
Ven. Hell, Death; this Eunuch Pandar ruins you. 
You will not see her? [Alexas whispers an Attendant, who goes out. 


help me tye it. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT II 


Ant. But to take my leave. 

Ven, Then I have wash’d an 4 thiopfe. Y’are undone; 
Y’are in the Toils ; y’are taken; y’are destroy’d: 
Her eyes do Cesar’s work. 

Ant. You fear too soon. 

I’m constant to myself: I know my strength; 
And yet she shall not think me Barbarous, neither. 
Born in the depths of Africk; I’m a Roman, 
Bred to the Rules of soft humanity. 

A guest, and kindly us’d, should bid farewel. 

Ven. You do not know 
How weak you are to her, how much an Infant ; 
You are not proof against a smile, or glance ; 

A sigh will quite disarm you. 

Ant. See, she comes! 
Now you shall find your error. Gods, I thank you : 
I form’d the danger greater than it was, 
And, now ’tis near, ’tis lessen’d. 

Ven. Mark the end yet. 


Lnter Cleopatra, Charmion and Iras. 


Ant, Well, Madam, we are met. 
Cleo. Is this a Meeting ? 
Then, we must part ? 
Ant. We must. 
Cleo, Who sayes we must ? 
Ant. Our own hard fates. 
Cleo. We make those Fates our selves. 
Ant. Yes, we have made’em; we have lov’d each other 
Into our mutual ruin. 
Cleo. The Gods have seen my Joys with envious eyes ; 
I have no friends in Heav’n; and all the World, 
(As ’twere the bus’ness of Mankind to part us) 
Is arm’d against my Love: ev’n you your self 
Joyn with the rest; you, you are arm’d against me. 
Ant. I will be justify’d in all I do 
To late Posterity, and therefore hear me. 
If I mix a lye 
With any truth, reproach me freely with it; 
Else, favor me with silence, 
Cleo; You command me, 
And I am dumb: © 
Ven, I like this well: he shows Authority. 
Ant, That I derive my ruin 
From you alone 
Cleo. O Heav’ns! I ruin you! 
Ant. You promis’d me your silence, and you break it 
Ere I have scarce begun. 
Cleo, Well, I obey you. 


429 


430 


APPENDIX 


Ant. When I beheld you first, it was in Zgyf¢, 
Ere Cesar saw your Eyes; you gave me love, 
And were too young to know it; that I setled 
Your Father in his Throne, was for your sake, 

I left th’ acknowledgment for time to ripen. 
Cesar stept in, and with a greedy hand 

Pluck’d the green fruit, ere the first blush of red, 
Yet cleaving to the bough. He was my Lord, 
And was, beside, too great for me to rival, 

But, I deserv’d you first, though he enjoy’d you 
When, after, I beheld you in CeZcza, 

An Enemy to Rome, I pardon’d you. 

Cleo. I clear’d my self. 

Ant. Again you break your Promise. 

I lov’d you still, and took your weak excuses, 
Took you into my bosome, stain’d by Cesar, 
And not half mine: I went to 4gyft with you 
And hid me from the bus’ness of the World, 
Shut out enquiring Nations from my sight, 

To give whole years to you. 

Ven. aside. Yes, to your shame be’t spoken. 

Ant. How I lov’d 
Witness ye Dayes and Nights, and all your hours 
That Danc’d away with Down upon your Feet, 
As all your bus’ness were to count my passion. 
One day past by, and nothing saw but Love; 
Another came, and still ’twas only Love: 
The Suns were weary’d out with looking on, 
And I untyr’d with loving. 
I saw you ev’ry day, and all the day; 
And ev’ry day was still but as the first : 
So eager was [I still to see you more. 

Ven. ’Tis all too true. 

Ant. Fulvia, my Wife, grew jealous, 
As she indeed had reason; rais’d a War 
In /taly, to call me back. 

Ven. But yet 
You went not. | 

Ant. While within your arms I lay, 

The World fell mouldring from my hands each hour, 
And left me scarce a grasp (I thank your love for’t.) 

Ven. Well push’d: that last was home. 

Cleop. Yet may I speak ? 

Ant. If I have urg’d a falshood, yes; else, not. 
Your silence says I have not. Fzlvia dy’d; 
(Pardon, you gods, with my unkindness dy’d) 

To set the World at peace, I took Octavia, 
This Cesar’s Sister; in her pride of youth 
And fiow’r of Beauty did I wed that Lady, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT IJ 431 


Whom blushing I must praise, because I left her. 
You call’d ; my Love obey’d the fatal summons: 
This rais’d the Roman Arms; the Cause was yours. 
I would have fought by Land, where I was stronger ; 
You hindred it: yet, when I fought at Sea, 
Forsook me fighting ; and (Oh stain to Honor! 
Oh lasting shame!) I knew not that I fled; 
But fled to follow you. 

Ven. What haste she made to hoist her purple Sails ! 
And, to appear magnificent in flight, 
Drew half our strength away. 

Ant. All this you caus’d. 
And, Would you multiply more ruins on me? 
This honest Man, my best, my only friend, 
Has gather’d up the Shipwrack of my Fortunes ; 
Twelve Legions I have left, my last recruits, 
And you have watch’d the news, and bring your eyes 
To seize them too. If you have ought to answer, 
Now speak, you have free leave. 

Alex. aside. She stands confounded : 
Despair is in her eyes. 

Ven, Now lay a Sigh i’th way, to stop his passage: 
Prepare a Tear, and bid it for his Legions ; 
’Tis like they shall be sold. 

Cleo. How shall I plead my cause, when you, my Judge 
Already have condemn’d me? Shall I bring 
The Love you bore me for my Advocate? 
That now is turn’d against me, that destroys me ; 
For, love once past, is, at the best, forgotten ; 
But oftner sours to hate: ’twill please my Lord 
To ruine me, and therefore I’ll be guilty. 
But, could I once have thought it would have pleas’d you, 
That you would pry, with narrow searching eyes 
Into my faults, severe to my destruction. 
And watching all advantages with care, 
That serve to make me wretched? Speak, my Lord, 
For I end here. Though I deserve this usage, 
Was it like you to give it? 

Ant. O you wrong me, 
To think I sought this parting, or desir’d 
To accuse you more than what will clear my self, 
And justifie this breach. 

Cleo. Thus low I thank you. 
And, since my innocence will not offend, 
I shall not blush to own it. 

Ven. After this 
I think she’ll blush at nothing. 

Cleo. You seem griev’d, 
(And therein you are kind) that Cesar first 


432 APPENDIX 


Enjoy’d my love, though you deserv’d it better: 
I grieve for that, my Lord, much more than you; 
For, had I first been yours, it would have sav’d 
My second choice: I never had been his, 
And ne’r had been but yours. But Cesar first, 
You say, possess’d my love. Not so, my Lord: 
He first possess’d my Person; you my Love: 
Cesar lov’d me; but I lov’d Antony. 
If I endur’d him after, ’twas because 
I judg’d it due to the first name of Men; 
And, half constrain’d, I gave, as to a Tyrant, 
What he would take by force. 
Ven. O Syren! Syren! 
Yet grant that all the love she boasts were true, 
Has she not ruin’d you? I still urge that, 
The fatal consequence. 
Cleo. The consequence indeed, 
For I dare challenge him, my greatest foe, 
To say it was design’d: ’tis true, I lov’d you, 
And kept you far from an uneasie Wife, 
(Such Fulvia was) 
Yes, but he’ll say, you left Octavia for me ; 
And, Can you blame me to receive that love, 
Which quitted such desert, for worthless me? 
How often have I wish’d some other Cesar, 
Great as the first, and as the second young, 
Would court my Love to be refus’d for you ! 
Ven. Words, words; but Actium, Sir, remember Actium. 
Cleo. Ev’n there, I dare his malice. True, I Counsel’d 
To fight at Sea; but, I betray’d you not. 
I fled; but not to the Enemy. ’Twas fear; 
Would I had been a Man, not to have fear’d, 
For none would then have envy’d me your friendship, 
Who envy me your Love. 
Ant. We're both unhappy: 
If nothing else, yet our ill fortune parts us. 
Speak ; Would you have me perish, by my stay ? 
Cleo. If asa friend you ask my Judgment, go; 
If as a Lover, stay. If you must perish: 
’Tis a hard word; but stay. 
Ven. See now th’ effects of her so boasted love! 
She strives to drag you down to ruine with her : 
But, could she scape without you, oh how soon 
Would she let go her hold, and haste to shore, 
And never look behind! 
Cleo. Then judge my love by this. [Giving Antony a Writing. 
Could I have born 
A life or death, a happiness or woe 
From yours divided, this had giv’n me means. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT Il 433 


Ant. By Hercules, the Writing of Octavius ! 
I know it well ; ’tis that Proscribing hand, 
Young as it was, that led the way to mine, 
And left me but the second place in Murder. 
See, see, Ventidius! here he offers Egypt, 
And joyns all Syvza to it, as a present, 
So, in requital, she forsake my fortunes, 
And joyn her Arms with his. 
Cleo. And yet you leave me ! 
You leave me, Anthony ; and, yet I love you. 
Indeed I do: I have refus’d a Kingdom, 
That’s a Trifle: 
For I could part with life; with any thing, 
But onely you. O let me dye but with you! 
Is that a hard request ? 
Ant. Next living with you, 
*Tis all that Heav’n can give. 
Alex. aside. He melts; We conquer. 
Cleo. No: you shall go: your Int’rest calls you hence ; 
Yes; your dear interest pulls too strong, for these 
Weak Armes to hold you here. 
Go; leave me, Soldier; 
(For you’re no more a Lover :) leave me dying : 
Push me all pale and panting from your bosome, 
And, when your March begins, let one run after 
Breathless almost for Joy ; and cry, she’s dead: 
The Souldiers shout ; you then perhaps may sigh, 
And muster all your Roman Gravity ; 
Ventidius chides ; and strait your Brow cleares up. 
As I had never been. 
Ant. Gods, ’tis too much ; too much for Man to bear! 
Cleo. What is’t for me then, 
A weak forsaken Woman? and a Lover ?— 
Here Jet me breathe my last: envy me not 
This minute in your Armes: I’ll dye apace : 
As fast as ere I can; and end your trouble. 
Ant. Dye! Rather let me perish: loos’nd Nature 
Leap from its hinges. Sink the props of Heav’n, 
And fall the Skyes to crush the neather World. 
My Eyes, my Soul; my all! 
Ven. And what’s this Toy 
In ballance with your fortune, Honor, Fame? 
Ant. What is’t, Ventidius? it out-weighs ’em all; 
Why, we have more than conquer’d Cesar now : 
My Queen’s not only Innocent, but Loves me. 
This, this is she who drags me down to ruin! 
But, could she scape without me, with what haste 
Would she let slip her hold, and make to shore, 
And never look behind ! 


28 


[ Takes his hand. 


[Zmbraces her. 


434 


APPENDIX 


Down on thy knees, Blasphemer as thou art, 
And ask forgiveness of wrong’d Innocence. 
Ven. Yl rather dye, than take it. Will you go? 
Ant. Go! Whither? go from all that’s excellent ! 
Faith, Honor, Virtue, all good things forbid, 
That I should go from her, who sets my love 
Above the price of Kingdoms. Give, you Gods, 
Give to your Boy, your Cesar, 
This Rattle of a Globe to play withal, 
This Gu-gau World, and put him cheaply off: 
Y’'ll not be pleas’d with less than C/eopatra. 
Cleo. She wholly yours. My heart’s so full of joy, 
That I shall do some wild extravagance 
Of Love, in publick ; and the foolish World, 
Which knows not tenderness, will think me Mad. 
Ven. O Women! Women! Women! all the gods 
Have not such pow’r of doing good to Man, 
As you of doing harm. [ 2xct. 
Ant. Our Men are Arm’d. 
Unbar the Gate that looks to Cesar’s Camp ; 
I would revenge the Treachery he meant me: 
And long security makes Conquest easie. 
I’m eager to return before I go; 
For, all the pleasures I have known, beat thick 
On my remembrance: how I long for night! 
That both the sweets of mutual love may try, 
And once Triumph o’re Cesar [eer ?] we dye. [Zxcecunt. 


ACT aU 


At one door, Enter Cleopatra, Charmion, Iras, azd Alexas, a Train of Egyptians : 


at the other, Antony and Romans. The entrance on both sides is prepar'd by 
Musick ; the Trumpets first sounding on Antony’s part: then answerd by Tim- 
brels, &c. on Cleopatra’s. Charmion and Iras hold a Laurel Wreath betwixt 
them. A Dance of Atgyptians. After the Ceremony, Cleopatra Crowns Antony. 


Ant. I Thought how those white arms would fold me in, 
And strain me close, and melt me into love ; 
So pleas’d with that sweet Image, I sprung forwards, 
And added all my strength to every blow ; 

Cleo. Come to me, come my Soldier, to my Arms, 
You’ve been too long away from my embraces ; 
But, when I have you fast, and all my own, 
With broken murmurs, and with amorous sighs, 
Vl say, you were unkind, and punish you, 
And mark you red with many an eager kiss. 

Ant. My Brighter Venus / 

Cleo. O my greater Mars / 

Ant. ‘Thou joinst us well, my Love! 
Suppose me come from the Phlegrean Plains, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT II 435 


Where gasping Gyants lay, cleft by my Sword: 
And Mountain tops par’d off each other blow, 
To bury those I slew: receive me, goddess : 
Let Cesar spread his subtile Nets, like Vulcan, 
In thy embraces I would be beheld 

By Heav’n and Earth at once: 

And make their envy what they meant their sport. 
Let those who took us blush; I would love on 
With awful State, regardless of their frowns, 
As their superior god. 

There’s no satiety of Love, in thee ; 

Enjoy’d, thou still art new ; perpetual Spring 
Is in thy armes ; the ripen’d fruit but falls, 
And blossoms rise to fill its empty place; 

And I grow rich by giving. 


Enter Ventidius, and stands apart. 

Alex. O, now the danger’s past, your General comes. 
He joyns not in your joys, nor minds your Triumphs ; 
But, with contracted brows, looks frowning on, 
As envying your Success. 

Ant. Now, on my Soul, he loves me; truly loves me ; 
He never flatter’d me in any vice, 
But awes me with his virtue: ev’n this minute 
Methinks he has a right of chiding me. 
Lead to the Temple: J’ll avoid his presence ; 
It checks too strong upon me. [Zxeunt the rest. 


As Antony zs going, Ventidius pulls him by the Robe. 
Ven. Emperor. 
Ant. looking back. ’Tis the old argument; I pr’ythee spare me. 
Ven. But this one hearing, Emperor. 
Ant. Let go 
My Robe; or, by my Father Herczles 
Ven. By Hercules his Father, that’s yet greater, 
I bring you somewhat you would wish to know. 
Ant. Thou see’st we are observ’d ; attend me here, 
And I'll return. { Exit. 
Ven. Vm waning in his favor, yet I love him; 
I love this Man, who runs to meet his ruine; 
And, sure the gods, like me, are fond of him: 
His Virtues lye so mingled with his Crimes, 
As would confound their choice to punish one, 
And not reward the other. 


Enter Antony. 
Ant. We can conquer. 
You see, without your aid. 
We have dislodg’d their Troops, 
They look on us at distance, and, like Curs 
Scap’d from the Lions paws, they bay far off, 


436 


APPENDIX 


And lick their wounds, and faintly threaten War. 
Five thousand Romans with their faces upward, 
Lye breathless on the Plain. 
Ven. Tis well: and he 
Who lost ’em, could have spar’d Ten thousand more. 
Yet if, by this advantage, you could gain 
An easier Peace, while Cesar doubts the Chance 
Of Arms! 
Ant. O think not on’t, Ventidius ; 
The Boy pursues my ruin, he’ll no peace: 
His malice is considerate in advantage ; 
O, he’s the coolest Murderer, so stanch, 
He kills, and keeps his temper. 
Ven, Wave you no friend 
In all his Army, who has power to move him, 
Mecenas, or Agrippa might do much. 
Ant. They’re both too deep in Cesar’s interests. 
We'll work it out by dint of Sword, or perish. 
Ven. Fain I would find some other. 
Ant. Thank thy love. 
Some four or five such Victories as this, 
Will save thy farther pains. 
Ven. Expect no more; Csar is on his Guard : 
I know, Sir, you have conquer’d against ods ; 
But still you draw Supplies from one poor Town, 
And of 4gyftians: he has all the World, 
And, at his back, Nations come pouring in, 
To fill the gaps you make. Pray think again. 
Ant. Why dost thou drive me from my self, to search 
For Forreign aids? to hunt my memory, 


And range all o’re a waste and barren place 
To find a Friend? The wretched have no Friends 
Yet I had one, the bravest youth of Rome, 
Whom Cesar loves beyond the love of Women ; 
He could resolve his mind, as Fire does Wax, 
From that hard rugged Image, melt him down, 
And mould him in what softer form he pleas’d. 
Ven. Him would I see; that man of all the world: 
Just such a one we want. 
Ant. He lov’d me too, 
I was his Soul ; he liv’d not but in me: 
We were so clos’d within each others brests, 
The rivets were not found that join’d us first 
That does not reach us yet: we were so mixt, 
As meeting streams, both to our selves were lost ; 
We were one mass; we could not give or take, 
But from the same ; for he was I, I he. 
Ven. aside. He moves as I would wish him. 
Ant. After this, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT III 437 


I need not tell his name: ’twas Dol/adella. 
Ven. He’s now in Cesar’s Camp. 
Ant. No matter where, 
Since he’s no longer mine. He took unkindly 
That I forbade him Cleopatra’s sight ; 
Because I fear’d he lov’d her: he confest 
He had a warmth, which, for my sake, he stifled; 
For ’twere impossible that two, so one, 
Should not have lov’d the same. When he departed, 
He took no leave; and that confirm’d my thoughts. 
Ven, It argues that he lov’d you more than her, 
Else he had staid; but he perceiv’d you jealous, 
And would not grieve his friend: I know he loves you. 
Ant. I should have seen him then ere now. 
Ven. Perhaps 
He has thus long been lab’ring for your peace. 
Ant. Would he were here. 
Ven. Would you believe he lov’d you? 
I read your answer in your eyes; you would, 
Not to conceal it longer, he has sent 
A Messenger from Cesar’s Camp, with Letters. 


Ant. Let him appear. [£xzt Ventidius, and Re-enters 
Ven. Tl bring him instantly. immediately with Dollabella. 
Ant. ’Tis he himself, himself, by holy Friendship ! [uns to em- 
Art thou return’d at last, my better half ? brace him. 


Come, give me all my self. 

Let me not live, 

If the young Bridegroom, longing for his night, 
Was ever half so fond. 

Dolla. must be silent; for my Soul is busie 
About a nobler work: she’s new come home, 
Like a long-absent man, and wanders o’er 
Each room, a stranger to her own, to look 
If all be safe. 

Ant. Thou hast what’s left of me. 

For I am now so sunk from what I was, 

Thou find’st me at my lowest water-mark. 
The Rivers that ran in, and rais’d my fortunes, 
Are all dry’d up, or take another course : 
What I have left is from my native Spring ; 
T’ve still a heart that swells, in scorn of fate, 
And lifts me to my banks. 

Dolla. Still you are Lord of all the World to me. 

Ant. Why, then I yet am so ; for thou art all. 
If I had any joy when thou wert absent, 

I grudg’d it to my self; methought I robb’d 
Thee of thy part. But, Oh my Dodladella ! 
Thou hast beheld me other than I am. 

Hast thou not seen my morning Chambers fill’d 


438 


APPENDIX 


With Scepter’d Slaves, who waited to salute me: 
With Eastern Monarchs, who forgot the Sun, 
To worship my uprising? Menial Kings 
Ran coursing up and down my Palace-yard, 
Stood silent in my presence, watch’d my eyes, 
And, at my least command, all started out 
Like Racers to the Goal. 
Dolla. Slaves to your fortune. 
Ant. Fortune is Cesarv’s now; and what am I? 
Ven. What you have made your self ; I will not flatter. 
Ant. Is this friendly done? 
Dolla. Yes, when his end is so, I must join with him ; 
Indeed I must, and yet you must not chide : 
Why am I else your friend ? 
Ant, Take heed, young man, 
How thou upbraid’st my love: the Queen has eyes, 
And thou too hast a Soul. Canst thou remember 
When, swell’d with hatred, thou beheld’st her first 
As accessary to thy Brothers death ? 
Dolla. Spare my remembrance ; ’twas a guilty day, 
And still the blush hangs here. 
Ant. To clear her self, 
For sending him no aid, she came from Zgyf¢. 
Her Gally down the Silver Cydnos row’ d, 
The Tackling Silk, the Streamers wav’d with Gold, 
The Gentle Winds were lodg’d in Purple sails : 
Her Nymphs, like Verezds, round her Couch, were plac’d; 
Where she, another Sea-born Venus, lay. 
Dolla. No more: I would not hear it. 
Ant. O, you must! 
She lay, and leant her cheek upon her hand, 
And cast a look so languishingly sweet, 
As if, secure of all beholders hearts, 
Neglecting she could take ’em: Boys, like Cufids, 
Stood fanning, with their painted wings, the winds 
That plaid about her face: but if she smil’d, 
A darting glory seem’d to blaze abroad : 
That mens desiring eyes were never weary’d; 
But hung upon the object: to soft Flutes 
The Silver Oars kept time ; and while they plaid, 
The hearing gave new pleasure to the sight ; 
And both to thought : ’twas Heav’n, or somewhat more; 
For she so charm’d all hearts, that gazing crowds 
Stood panting on the shore, and wanted breath 
To give their welcome voice. 


‘Then, Dotlabella, where was then thy Soul ? 


Was not thy fury quite disarm’d with wonder? 
Didst thou not shrink behind me from those eyes, 
And whisper in my ear, Oh tell her not 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT III 


That I accus’d her of my Brothers death ? 

Dolla, And should my weakness be a plea for yours ? 
Mine was an age when love might be excus’d, 

When kindly warmth, and when my springing youth 
Made it a debt to Nature. Yours 

Ven. Speak boldly. 
Yours, he would say, in your declining age, 

When no more heat was left but what you fore’d, 
When all the sap was needful for the Trunk, 
When it went down, then you constrain’d the course, 
And robb’d from Nature, to supply desire; 
In you (I would not use so harsh a word) 
But ’tis plain dotage. 

Ant. Ha! 

Dolla. ’Twas urg’d too home. 
But yet the loss was private that I made; 
”Twas but my self I lost: I lost no Legions ; 
I had no World to lose, no peoples love. 

Ant. This from a friend ? 

Dolla, Yes, Anthony, a true one ; 
A friend so tender, that each word I speak 
Stabs my own heart, before it reach your ear. 
O, judge me not less kind because I chide : 
To Cesar I excuse you. 

Ant. Oye Gods! 
Have I then liv’d to be excus’d to Cesar ? 

Dolla. As to your equal. 

Ant. Well, he’s but my equal: 
While I wear this, he never shall be more. 

Dolla. bring Conditions from him. 

Ant. Are they Noble? 

Methinks thou shouldst not bring ’em else ; yet he 
Is full of deep dissembling; knows no Honour, 
Divided from his Int’rest. Fate mistook him ; 

For Nature meant him for an Usurer, 

He’s fit indeed to buy, not conquer Kingdoms. 

Ven. Then, granting this, : 
What pow’r was theirs who wrought so hard a temper 
To honourable Terms ! 

Ant. It was my Dollabella, or some God. 

Dolla. Nor; nor yet Mecenas, nor Agrippa - 
They were your Enemies; and I a Friend 
Too weak alone; yet ’twas a Koman’s deed. 

Ant. ?Twas like a Roman done: show me that man 
Who has preserv’d my life, my love, my honour ; 
Let me but see his face. 

Ven. That task is mine, 

And, Heavy’n thou know’ st how pleasing. 

Dolla. You'll remember 


439 


[Zxtt Vent. 


440 


APPENDIX 


To whom you stand oblig’d? 
Ant. When I forget it, 
Be thou unkind, and that’s my greatest curse. 
My Queen shall thank him too. 
Dolla. J fear she will not. 
Ant. But she shall do’t: the Queen, my DoW/abella / 
Hast thou not still some grudgings of thy Fever? 
Dolla. J would not see her lost. 
Ant. When I forsake her, 
Leave me, my better Stars ; for she has truth 
Beyond her beauty. Cesar tempted her, 
At no less price than Kingdoms, to betray me; 
But she resisted all: aad yet thou chid’st me 
For loving her too well. Could I do so? 
Dolla, Yes, there’s my reason. 


Re-enter Ventidius, w7tk Octavia, eading Antony’s 
two little Daughters. 


Ant. Where? Octavia there ! [Starting back. 
Ven. What, is she poyson to you? a Disease ? 
Look on her, view her well; and those she brings : 
Are they all strangers to your eyes? has Nature 
No secret call, no whisper they are yours? 
Dolla. For shame, my Lord, if not for love, receive ’em 
With kinder eyes. If you confess a man, 
Meet ’em, embrace ’em, bid ’em welcome to you. 
Your arms should open, ev’n without your knowledge, 
To clasp ’em in; your feet should turn to wings, 
To bear you to ’em; and your eyes dart out, 
And aim a kiss ere you could reach the lips. 
Ant, I stood amaz’d to think how they came hither 
Vent. I sent for’em; I brought ’em in, unknown 
To Cleopatra’s Guards. 
Dolla. Yet are you cold? 
Octav. Thus long I have attended for my welcome; 
Which, as a stranger, sure I might expect. 
Who am I? 
Ant. Casar’s Sister. 
Octav. That’s unkind! 
Had I been nothing more than Cesav’s Sister, 
Know, I had still remain’d in Cesar’s Camp ; 
But your Octavia, your much injur’d Wife, 
Tho’ banish’d from your Bed, driv’n from your House, 
In spight of Cesar’s Sister, still is yours. 
’Tis true, I have a heart disdains your coldness, 
And prompts me not to seek what you should offer; 
But a Wife’s Virtue still surmounts that pride : 
I come to claim you as my own; to show 
My duty first, to ask, nay beg, your kindness : 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT Ill 44t 


Your hand, my Lord; ’tis mine, and I will have it. [ Taking his hand. 

Ven. Do, take it, thou deserv’st it. 

Dolla. On my Soul, 

And so she does: she’s neither too submissive, 
Nor yet too haughty ; but so just a mean, 
Shows, as it ought, a Wife and Roman too. 

Ant. I fear, Octavia, you have begg’d my life. 

Octav. Begg’d it, my Lord? 

Ant. Yes, begg’d it, my Ambassadress, 

Poorly and basely begg’d it of your Brother, 

Octav. Poorly and basely I could never beg ; 
Nor could my Brother grant. 

Ant, Shall I, who, to my kneeling Slave, could say, 
Rise up, and be a King; shall I fall down 
And cry, Forgive me, Cesar ? shall I set 
A Man, my Equal, in the place of Jove, 

As he could give me being? No; that word, 
Forgive, would choke me up, 
And die upon my tongue. 

Dolla. You shall not need it. 

Ant. Iwill not need it. Come, you’ve all betray’d me: 
My Friend too! To receive some vile conditions. 
My Wife has bought me, with her prayers and tears ; 
And now I must become her branded Slave: 

In every peevish mood she will upbraid 
The life she gave: if I but look awry, 
She cries, I’ll tell my Brother. 

Octav. My hard fortune 

Subjects me still to your unkind mistakes. 

But the Conditions I have brought are such 

You need not blush to take: I love your Honour, 
Because ’tis mine; it never shall be said 
Octavia’s Husband was her Brothers Slave. 

Sir, you are free; free, ev’n from her you loath; 
For, tho’ my Brother bargains for your love, 
Makes me the price and cement of your peace, 

I have a Soul like yours; I cannot take 

Your love as alms, nor beg what I deserve. 

V’ll tell my Brother we are reconcil’d ; 

He shall draw back his Troops, and you shall march 
To rule the East: I may be dropt at Athens ; 
No matter where, I never will complain, 

But only keep the barren Name of Wife, 

And rid you of the trouble. 

Ven. Was ever such a strife of sullen Honour! 
Both scorn to be oblig’d. 

Dolla. O, she has toucht him in the tender’st part ; 
See how he reddens with despight and shame 
To be out-done in Generosity ! 


442 


APPENDIX 


Ven. See how he winks! how he dries up a tear, 
That fain would fall ! 
Ant. Octavia, I have heard you, and must praise 
The greatness of your Soul ; 
But cannot yield to what you have propos’d: 
For I can ne’er be conquer’d but by love ; 
And you do all for duty. You would free me, 
And would be dropt at Athens ; was’t not so? 
Octav. It was, my Lord. 
Ant. Then I must be oblig’d 
To one who loves me not, who, to her self, 
May call me thankless and ungrateful Man: 
T’ll not endure it, no. 
Ven. I’m glad it pinches there. 
Octav. Would you triumph o’er poor Octavia’s Virtue ? 
That pride was all I had to bear me up; 
That you might think you ow’d me for your life, 
And ow’d it to my duty, not my love. 
I have been injur’d, and my haughty Soul 
Could brook but ill the Man who slights my Bed. 
Ant. Therefore you love me not. 
Octav. Therefore, my Lord, 
I should not love you. 
Ant. Therefore you wou’d leave me? 
Octav. And therefore I should leave you 
Dolla. Wer Souls too great, after such injuries, 
To say she loves; and yet she lets you see it. 
Her modesty and silence plead her cause. 
Ant. O, Dollabella, which way shall I turn ? 
I find a secret yielding in my Soul; 
But Cleopatra, who would die with me, 
Must she be left? Pity pleads for Octavia ; 
But does it not plead more for Cleopatra ? 
Ven. Justice and Pity both plead for Octavia ; 
For Cleopatra, neither. 
One would be ruin’d with you; but she first 
Had ruin’d you: the other, you have ruin’d, 
And yet she would preserve you. 
In every thing their merits are unequal. 
Ant. O, my distracted Soul! 
Octav. Sweet Heav’n compose it. 
Come, come, my Lord, if I can pardon you, 
Methinks you should accept it. Look on these ; 
Are they not yours? Or stand they thus neglected 
As they are mine? Go to him, Children, go; 
Kneel to him, take him by the hand, speak to him; 
For you may speak, and he may own you too, 
Without a blush; and so he cannot all 
His Children: go, I say, and pull him to me, 


if I could. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT III 443 


And pull him to your selves, from that bad Woman. 
You, Agrippina, hang upon his arms; 
And you, Antonia, clasp about his waste : 
If he will shake you off, if he will dash you 
Against the Pavement, you must bear it, Children; 
For you are mine, and I was born to suffer. [Here the Children £0 to him, etc. 
Ven. Was ever sight so moving! Emperor! 
Dolla. Friend! 
Octav. TWusband! 
Both Childr. Father! 
Ant, Jam vanquish’d: take me, 
Octavia ; take me, Children; share me all. [Zmbracing them. 
Pve been a thriftless Debtor to your loves, 
And run out much, in riot, from your stock ; 
But all shall be amended. 
Octav. O blest hour! 
Dolla. O happy change! 
Ven. My joy stops at my tongue; 
But it has found two chanels here for one, 
And bubbles out above. 
Ant. to Octav. This is thy Triumph; lead me where thou wilt; 
Ev’n to thy Brothers Camp. 
Octav. All there are yours. 
Luter Alexas hastily. 
Alex. The Queen, my Mistress, Sir, and yours 
Ant. *Tis past. Octavia, you shall stay this night; To morrow, 
Cesar and we are one. [Zx. leading Octavia. Dol. 
Ven, There’s news for you; run, and the Children follow. 
My officious Eunuch, 
Be sure to be the first ; haste forward : 
Haste, my dear Eunuch, haste. [Z£xi¢. 
Alex. This downright fighting Fool, this thick-scull’d Hero, 
This blunt unthinking Instrument of death, 
With plain dull Virtue, has out-gone my Wit : 
Pleasure forsook my early’st Infancy, 
The luxury of others robb’d my Cradle, 
And ravish’d thence the promise of a Man: 
Cast out from Nature, disinherited 
Of what her meanest Children claim by kind ; 
Yet, greatness kept me from contempt: that’s gone. 
Had Cleopatra follow’d my advice, 
Then he had been betray’d, who now forsakes. 
She dies for love ; but she has known its joys: 
Gods, is this just, that I, who knows no joys, 
Must die, because she loves ? 


Enter Cleopatra, Charmion, Iras, Tran. 


Oh, Madam, I have seen what blasts my eyes! 
Octavia’s here! 


44 


APPENDIX 


Cleop. Peace with that Raven’s note. 
I know it too; and now am in 
The pangs of death. 
Alex. You are no more a Queen; 
Lgypt is lost. 
Cleop. What tell’st thou me of ZLgyfd ? 
My Life, my Soul is lost! Octavia has him! 
O fatal name to C/eopatra’s love! 
My kisses, my embraces now are hers ; 
While I But thou hast seen my Rival ; speak, 
Does she deserve this blessing? Is she fair, 
Bright as a Goddess? and is all perfection 
Confin’d to her? Itis. Poor I was made 
Of that course matter which, when she was finish’d, 
The Gods threw by, for rubbish. 
Alex. She’s indeed a very Miracle. 
Cleop. Death to my hopes, a Miracle! 
Alex, bowing. A Miracle; 
I mean of Goodness; for in beauty, Madam, 
You make ail wonders cease. 
Cleop. I was too rash : 
Take this in part of recompence. But, Oh, [ Giving a Ring. 
I fear thou flatter’st me. 
Char. She comes! she’s here! 
Tras. Flie, Madam, Cesar’s Sister! 
Cleop. Were she the Sister of the Thund’rer Jove, 
And bore her Brothers Lightning in her eyes, 
Thus would I face my Rival. [ Meets Octav. with Ventid. Octav. 
Octav. need not ask if you are Cleopatra, bearsuptoher. Their Trains 
Your haughty carriage come up on either side. 
Cleop. Shows I am a Queen: 
Nor need I ask you who you are. 
Octav. A Roman: 
A name that makes, and can unmake a Queen. 
Cleop. Your Lord, the Man who serves me, is a Roman. 
Octav. He was a Roman, till he lost that name 
To be a Slave in Lgyft,; but I come 
To free him thence. 
Cleop. Peace, peace, my Lover’s Juno. 
When he grew weary of that Houshold-Clog, 
He chose my easier bonds. 
Octav. I wonder not 
Your bonds are easie ; you have long been practis’d 
In that lascivious art: he’s not the first 
For whom you spread your snares ; let Cesar witness. 
Cleop. I lov’d not Cesar, ’twas but gratitude 
I paid his love: the worst your malice can, 
Is but to say the greatest of Mankind 
Has been my Slave. The next, but far above him, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT Ill 


In my esteem, is he whom Law calls yours, 
But whom his love made mine. 
Oct. coming up close to her. Y would view nearer 
That face, which has so long usurp’d my right, 
To find th’ inevitable charms, that catch 
Mankind so sure, that ruin’d my dear Lord. 
Cleop. O, you do well to search ; for had you known 
But half these charms, you had not lost his heart. 
Octav. Far be their knowledge from a Roman Lady, 
Far from a modest Wife. Shame of our Sex, 
Dost thou not blush, to own those black endearments 
That make sin pleasing ? 
Cleop. You may blush, who want ’em. 
If bounteous Nature, if indulgent Heay’n 
Have giv’n me charms to please the bravest Man; 
Should I not thank ’em? should I be asham’d, 
And not be proud? I am, that he has lov’d me; 
And, when I love not him, Heav’n change this Face 
For one like that. 
Octav. Thou lovy’st him not so well. 
Cleop. I love him better, and deserve him more. 


Octav. You do not; cannot: you have been his ruine. 


Who made him cheap at Rome, but Cleopatra? 
Who made him scorn’d abroad, but C/eopatra ? 
At Acttum, who betray’d him? Cleopatra. 
Who made his Children Orphans? and poor me 
A wretched Widow ? only Cleopatra. 

Cleop. Yet she who loves him best is Cleopatra. 
If you have suffer’d, I have suffer’d more. 
You bear the specious Title of a Wife, 
To guild your Cause, and draw the pitying World 
To favour it: the World contemns poor me; 
For I have lost my Honour, lost my Fame, 
And stain’d the glory of my Royal House, 
And all to bear the branded Name of Mistress. 
There wants but life, and that too I would lose 
For him I love. 

Octav. Be’t so then; take thy wish. 

Cleop. And ’tis my wish, 
Now he is lost for whom alone I liv’d. 
My sight grows dim, and every object dances, 
And swims before me, in the maze of death. 
My spirits, while they were oppos’d, kept up; 
They could not sink beneath a Rivals scorn : 
But now she’s gone they faint. 

Alex. Mine have had leisure 
To recollect their strength, and furnish counsel, 
To ruine her; who else must ruine you. 

Cleop. Vain Promiser! 


445 


[Zxctt cum suts. 


446 


APPENDIX 


Lead me, my Charmion ; nay, your hand too, /ras: 

My grief has weight enough to sink you both. 

Conduct me to some solitary Chamber, 

And draw the Curtains round ; 

Then leave me to my self, to take alone 

My fill of grief: 

There I till death will his unkindness weep: 

As harmless Infants moan themselves asleep. [ Lxeunt. 


ACT GLY, 
Antony, Dollabella. 


Dolla. Why would you shift it from your self, on me? 
Can you not tell her you must part ? 
Ant, I cannot. 
I could pull out an eye, and bid it go, 
And t’other should not weep, Oh, Dodlabedia, 
How many deaths are in this word Depart! 
I dare not trust my tongue to tell her so: 
One look of hers, would thaw me into tears 
And I should melt till I were lost agen. 
Dolla. Then let Ventidius; 
He’s rough by nature. 
Ant. Oh, he’ll speak too harshly ; 
He’ll kill her with the news: Thou, only thou. 
Dolla, Nature has cast me in so soft a mould, 
That but to hear a story feign’d for pleasure 
Of some sad Lovers death, moistens my eyes, 
And robs me of my Manhood.—I should speak 
So faintly ; with such fear to grieve her heart, 
She’d not believe it earnest. 
Ant. Therefore; therefore 
Thou only, thou art fit: think thy self me, 
And when thou speak’st (but let it first be long) 
Take off the edge from every sharper sound, 
And let our parting be as gently made 
As other Loves begin: wilt thou do this? 
Dolla. What you have said, so sinks into my Soul, 
That, if I must speak, I shall speak just so. 
Ant. J leave you then to your sad task: Farewel. 
I sent her word to meet you. [ Goes to the door, and comes back. 
I forgot ; 
Let her be told, I’ll make her peace with mine : 
Her Crown and Dignity shall be preserv’d, 


If I have pow’r with Cesar. O, be sure 
To think on that, [Antony goes again to the 
Dolla. Fear not, I will remember. door, and comes back. 


Ant. And tell her, too, how much I was constrain’d; 
I did not this, but with extreamest force : 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT IV 447 


Desire her not to hate my memory, 
For I still cherish hers; insist on that. 
Dolla. Trust me, I'll not forget it. 
Ant. Then that’s all. [ Goes out, and returns again. 
Wilt thou forgive my fondness this once more ? 
Tell her, tho’ we shall never meet again, 
If I should hear she took another Love, 
The news would break my heart.—Now I must go; 
For every time I have return’d, I feel 
My Soul more tender ; and my next command 
Would be to bid her stay, and ruine both. [ Zit. 
Dolla. Men are but Children of a larger growth, 
Our appetites as apt to change as theirs, 
And full as craving too, and full as vain ; 
And yet the Soul, shut up in her dark room, 
Viewing so clear abroad, at home sees nothing ; 
But, like a Mole in Earth, busie and blind, 
Works all her folly up, and casts it outward 
* To the Worlds open view: thus I discover’d, 
And blam’d the love of ruin’d Anzony; 
Yet wish that I were he, to be so ruin’d. 


Luter Ventidius above. 

Ven, Alone? and talking to himself? concern’d too? 
Perhaps my ghess is right: he lov’d her once, 
And may pursue it still. 

Dolia. O Friendship! Friendship! 
Til canst thou answer this; and Reason, worse: 
Unfaithful in th’ attempt; hopeless to win; 
And, if I win, undone: meer madness all. 
And yet th’ occasion’s fair. What injury 
To him, to wear the Robe which he throws by ? 

Ven. None, none at all. This happens as I wish, 
To ruine her yet more with Anéony. 


Enter Cleopatra, talking with Alexas, Charmion, 
Iras on the other side. 

Dolla. She comes! What charms have sorrow on that face! 
Sorrow seems pleas’d to dwell with so much sweetness ; 
Yet, now and then, a melancholy smile 
Breaks loose, like Lightning, in a Winter’s night, 
And shows a moments day. 

Ven. If she should love him too! Her Eunuch there ! 
That Porcpisce bodes ill weather. Draw, draw nearer, 
Sweet Devil, that I may hear. [Dollabella goes over to Charmion and 

Alex. Believe me ; try E Iras; seems to talk with them. 
To make him jealous ; jealousie is like 
A polisht Glass held to the lips when life’s in doubt: 
If there be breath, ’twill catch the damp and show it. 

Cleop. I grant you jealousie’s a proof of love, 


448 


APPENDIX 


But ’tis a weak and unavailing Med’cine ; 

It puts out the disease, and makes it show, 

But has no pow’r to cure. 

Alex, ’Tis your last remedy, and strongest too : 

And then this Dol/abella, who so fit 

To practice on? He’s handsom, valiant, young, 

And looks as he were laid for Nature’s bait 

To catch weak Womens eyes. 

He stands already more than half suspected 

Of loving you: the least kind word, or glance, 

You give this Youth, will kindle him with love: 

Then, like a burning Vessel set adrift, 

You'll send him down amain before the wind, 

To fire the heart of jealous Azzony. 

Cleop. CanIdo this? Ah no; my love’s so true, 

That I can neither hide it where it is, 

Nor show it where it is not. Nature meant me 

A Wife, a silly harmless household Dove, 

Fond without art; and kind without deceit ; 

But Fortune, that has made a Mistress of me, 

Hast thrust me out to the wide World, unfurnish’d 

Of falshood to be happy. 

Alex. Force your self. 

Th’ event will be, your Lover will return 

Doubly desirous to possess the good 

Which once he fear’d to lose. 

Cleop. 1 must attempt it; 

But Oh with what regret! Zxz¢ Alex. [She comes up to Dollabella. 
Ven. So, now the Scene draws near; they’re in my reach. 
Cleop. to Dol. Discoursing with my Women! Might not I 

Share in your entertainment ? 

Char. You have been 
The Subject of it, Madam. 
Cleop. How; and how? 
fras. Such praises of your beauty ! 
Cleop. Meer Poetry. 

Your Roman Wits, your Gallus and Tibullus, 

Have taught you this from Crtheris and Delia. 

Dolla, Those Roman Wits have never been in Egyft, 

Citheris and Delia else had been unsung : 

I, who have seen had I been born a Poet, 

Should chuse a nobler name. 

Cleop. You flatter me. 

But, ’tis your Nation’s vice: all of your Country 

Are flatterers, and all false. Your Friend’s like you. 

I’m sure he sent you not to speak these words. 

Dolla. No, Madam; yet he sent me 
Cleop., Well, he sent you 
Dolla, Of a less pleasing errand. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT IV 449 


Cleop. How less pleasing ? 
Less to your self, or me? 
Dolla. Madam, to both; 
For you must mourn, and I must grieve to cause it. 
Cleop. You, Charmion, and your Fellow, stand at distance. 
(Aside.) Hold up, my Spirits. Well, now your mournful matter ; 
For I’m prepar’d, perhaps can ghess it too. 
Dolla. I wish you would ; for ’tis a thankless office 
To tell ill news: and I, of all your Sex, 
Most fear displeasing you. 
Cleop. Of all your Sex, 
I soonest could forgive you, if you should. 
Ven. Most delicate advances! Woman! Woman! 
Dear damn’d, inconstant Sex! 
Cleop. In the first place, 
I am to be forsaken; is’t not so? 
Dolla, 1 wish I could not answer to that question. 
Cleop. Then pass it o’er, because it troubles you : 
I should have been more griev’d another time. 
Next, I’m to lose my Kingdom. Farewel, Zgyft. 
Yet, is there any more? 
Dolla. Madam, I fear 
Your too deep sense of grief has turn’d your reason. 
Cleop. No, no, I’m not run mad; I can bear Fortune : 
And Love may be expell’d by other Love, 
As Poysons are by Poysons. 
Dolla. You o’erjoy me, Madam, 
To find your griefs so moderately born. 
You’ve heard the worst; all are not false, like him. 
Cleop. No; Heav’n forbid they should. 
Dolla. Some men are constant. 
Cleop. And constancy deserves reward, that’s certain. 
Dolla. Deserves it not; but give it leave to hope. 
Ven. Jl swear thou hast my leave. I have enough: 
But how to manage this! Well, I’ll consider. [ Zxccz. 
Dolla. {came prepar’d, 
To tell you heavy news; news, which I thought, 
Would fright the blood from your pale cheeks to hear : 
But you have met it with a cheerfulness 
That makes my task more easie; and my tongue, 
Which on another’s message was employ’d, 
Would gladly speak its own. 
Cleop. Hold, Dollabella. 
First tell me, were you chosen by my Lord? 
Or sought you this employment? 
Dolla. He pick’d me out ; and, as his bosom-friend, 
He charg’d me with his words. 
Cleop. The message then 
I know was tender, and each accent smooth, 


29 


450 APPENDIX 


To mollifie that rugged word Depart. 
Dolla. Oh, you mistake: he chose the harshest words, 
With fiery eyes, and with contracted brows, 
He coyn’d his face in the severest stamp: 
And fury shook his Fabrick like an Earthquake ; 
He heav’d for vent, and burst like bellowing Z7ua, 
In sounds scarce humane, ‘ Hence, away for ever: 
‘Let her begone, the blot of my renown, [AW the time of this speech, Cleop. 
« And bane of all my hopes: seems more and more concern dad, 
‘Let her be driv’n as far as men can think will she sinks quite down. 
‘From Mans commerce: She’ll poyson to the Center.’ 
Cleop. Oh, I can bear no more! 
Dolla. Help, help: Oh Wretch! Oh cursed, cursed Wretch ! 
What have I done? 
Char. Welp, chafe her Temples, /vas. 
Tras. Bend, bend her forward quickly. 
Char. Heav’n be prais’d, 
She comes again. 
Cleop. Oh, let him not approach me. 
Why have you brought me back to this loath’d Being, 
Th’ abode of Falshood, violated Vows, 
And injur’d Love? For pity, let me go; 
For, if there be a place of long repose, 
I’m sure I want it. My disdainful Lord 
Can never break that quiet ; nor awake 
The sleeping Soul, with hollowing in my Tomb 
Such words as fright her hence. Unkind, unkind. 
Dolla. kneeling. Believe me, ’tis against my self I speak, 
That sure deserves belief; I injur’d him: 
My Friend ne’er spoke those words. Oh, had you seen 
How often he came back, and every time 
With something more obliging and more kind, 
To add to what he said; what dear Farewels; 
How almost vanquisht by his love he parted, 
And lean’d to what unwillingly he left : 
{, Traitor as I was, for love of you, 
(But what can you not do, who made me false !) 
I forg’d that lye; for whose forgiveness kneels 
This self-accused, self-punished Criminal. 
Cleop. With how much ease believe we what we wish! 
Rise, Dolladella ; if you have been guilty, 
I have contributed, and too much love 
Has made me guilty too. 
Th’ advance of kindness which I made, was feigned, 
To call back fleeting love by jealousie ; 
But ’twould not last. Oh, rather let me lose 
Than so ignobly trifle with his heart. 
Dolla. J find your breast fenc’d round from humane reach, 
Transparent as a Rock of solid Crystal ; 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT IV 451 


Seen through, but never pierc’d. My Friend, my Friend! 
What endless treasure hast thou thrown away, 
And scatter’d, like an Infant, in the Ocean, 
Vain sums of Wealth which none can gather thence. 
Cleop. Could you not beg 
An hours admittance to his private ear ? 
Like one who wanders through long barren Wilds, 
And yet foreknows no hospitable Inn 
Is near to succour hunger, 
Eats his fill, before his painful march: 
So would I feed a while my famish’d eyes 
Before we part ; for I have far to go, 
If death be far, and never must return. 
Ventidius, wth Octavia, behind. 
Ven. From hence you may discover. Oh, sweet, sweet! 
Would you indeed? the pretty hand in earnest ? 
Dolla. takes her hand, J will, for this reward. 
*Tis all I e’er will beg. 
Ven. They turn upon us. 
Octav. What quick eyes has guilt! 
Ven. Seem not to have observ’d ’em, and go on. 
They enter. 
Dolla. Saw you the Emperor, Ventidius ? Ven. No. 
I sought him; but I heard that he was private, 
None with him, but A/7Zparchus his Freedman. 
Dolla. Know you his bus’ ness ? 
Ven. Giving him Instructions, 
And Letters, to his Brother Cesar. 
Dolla. Well, 
He must be found. [Zxeunt Dol. and Cleop. 
Octav. Most glorious impudence ! 
Ven. She look’d methought 
As she would say, Take your old man, QOcdavia ; 
Thank you, I’m better here. 
Well, but what use 
Make we of this discovery ? 
Octav. Let it die. 
Ven. pity Dollabella ; but she’s dangerous : 
Her eyes have pow’r beyond 7hessalian Charms 
To draw the Moon from Heav’n; for Eloquence, 
The Sea-green Syrens taught her voice their flatt’ry ; 
And, while she speaks, Night steals upon the Day, 
Unmark’d of those that hear: Then she’s so charming, 
Age buds at sight of her, and swells to youth: 
The holy Priests gaze on her when she smiles ; 
And with heav’d hands forgetting gravity, 
They bless her wanton eyes: Even I who hate her, 
With a malignant joy behold such beauty ; 
And, while I curse, desire it. Anthony 


Draw it not back, 


452 


APPENDIX 


Must needs have some remains of passion still, 
Which may ferment into a worse relapse, 
If now not fully cur’d. I know, this minute, 


_ With César he’s endeavouring her peace. 


Octav. You have prevail’d :—but for a farther purpose [ Walks off 
T’ll prove how he will relish this discovery. 
What, make a Strumpet’s peace! it swells my heart: 
It must not, sha’ not be. 
Ven, Wis Guards appear. 
Let me begin, and you shall second me. 
Linter Antony. 
Ant. Octavia, I was looking you, my love: 
What, are your Letters ready? I have giv’n 
My last Instructions. : 
Octav. Mine, my Lord, are written. 
Ant, Ventidius / [Drawing him aside. 
Ven. My Lord? 
Ant. A word in private. 
When saw you Dollabella ? 
Ven. Now, my Lord, 
He parted hence; and Cleopatra with him. 
Ant. Speak softly. ’Twas by my command he went, 
To bear my last farewel. 
Ven. aloud. It look’d indeed 
Like your farewel. 
Ant, More softly. My farewel ? 
What secret meaning have you in those words 
Of my Farewel? He did it by my Order. 
Ven. aloud. Then he obey’d your Order. I suppose 
You bid him do it with all gentleness, 
All kindness, and all 
Ant. How she mourn’d, 
The poor forsaken Creature ! 
Ven. She took it as she ought ; she bore your parting 
As she did Ce@sar’s, as she would anothers, 
Were a new Love to come. 
Ant. aloud. Thou dost belye her; 
Most basely, and maliciously belye her. 
Ven. I thought not to displease you; I have done. 
Octav. coming up. You seem disturb’d, my Lord. 
Ant, A very trifle. 
Retire, my Love. 
Ven, It was indeed a trifle. 
He sent 
Ant. angrily. Nomore. Look how thou disobey’st me; 
Thy life shall answer it. 
Octav. Then ’tis no trifle. 
Ven. to Octav. ’Tis less; a very nothing: you too saw it, 
As well as I, and therefore ’tis no secret. 


love. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT IV 453 


Ant. She saw it! 
Ven. Yes: she saw young Dollabella 
Ant. Young Dollabella ! 
Ven. Young, I think him young, 
And handsom too; and so do others think him. 
But what of that? He went by your command, 
Indeed ’tis probable, with some kind message ; 
For she receiv’d it graciously; she smil’d: 
And then he grew familiar with her hand, 
Squeez’d it, and worry’d it with ravenous kisses; 
She blush’d, and sigh’d, and smil’d, and blush’d again ; 
At last she took occasion to talk softly, 
And brought her cheek up close, and lean’d on his: 
At which, he whisper’d kisses back on hers ; 
And then she cry’d aloud, That constancy 
Should be rewarded. 
Octav. This I saw and heard. 
Ant. What Woman was it, whom you heard and saw 
So playful with my Friend! 
Not Cleopatra? 
Ven. Ev’n she, my Lord! 
Ant. My Cleopatra? 
Ven. Your Cleopatra ; 
Dollabella’s Cleopatra : 
Every Man’s Cleopatra.* 
Ant. Thou ly’st. 
Ven. I do not lye, my Lord. 
Is this so strange? Should Mistresses be left, 
And not provide against a time of change? 
You know she’s not much us’d to lonely nights, 
Ant. Vl think no more on’t. 
I know ’tis false, and see the plot betwixt you. 
You needed not have gone this way, Octavia. 
What harms it you that C/eopatra’s just ? 
She’s mine no more. I see; and I forgive: 
Urge it no farther, Love. 
Octav. Are you concern’d 
That she’s found false ? 
Ant. I should be, were it so; 
For, tho ’tis past, I would not that the World 
Should tax my former choice: That I lov’d one 
Of so light note; but I forgive you both. 
Ven. What has my age deserv’d, that you should think 
I would abuse your ears with perjury ? 
If Heav’n be true, she’s false. 
Ant. Tho Heav’n and Earth 
Should witness it, I’l] not believe her tainted. 


* ¢Leonato’s Hero, your Hero, every man’s Hero.’—Much Ado, III, ii, 108.—ED. 


454 APPENDIX 


Ven. Vl bring you then a Witness 
From Hell to prove her so. Nay, go not back ; [Seeing Alexas just 
For stay you must and shall. entring, and starting back. 
Alex. What means my Lord ? 
Ven. To make you do what most you hate; speak truth. 
You are of Cleopatra’s private Counsel, 
Of her Bed-Counsel, her lascivious hours ; 
Are conscious of each nightly change she makes, 
And watch her, as Cha/deans do the Moon, 
Can tell what Signs she passes through, what day. 
Alex. My noble Lord. 
Ven. My most illustrious Pandar, 
No fine set Speech, no Cadence, no turn’d Periods, 
But a plain home-spun Truth, is what I ask : 
I did, my self, o’erhear your Queen make love 
To Dollabella. Speak; for I will know, 
By your confession, what more past betwixt ’em ; 
How near the bus’ness draws to your employment ; 
And when the happy hour. 
Ant. Speak truth, A/exas, whether it offend 
Or please Ventidius, care not: justifie 
Thy injur’d Queen from malice: dare his worst. 
Octav. aside. See, how he gives him courage! how he fears 
To find her false! and shuts his eyes to truth, 
Willing to be misled! 
Alex. As far as love may plead for Woman’s frailty, 
Urg’d by desert and greatness of the Lover ; 
So far (Divine Octavia!) may my Queen 
Stand ev’n excus’d to you, for loving him, 
Who is your Lord: so far, from brave Ventidius, 
May her past actions hope a fair report. 
Ant. ’Tis well, and truly spoken: mark, Veztidius. 
Alex. To you, most Noble Emperor, her strong passion 
Stands not excus’d, but wholly justifi’d. 
Her Beauty’s charms alone, without her Crown, 
From /nd and Meroe drew the distant Vows 
Of sighing Kings; and at her feet were laid 
The Scepters of the Earth, expos’d on heaps, 
To choose where she would Reign : 
She thought a Roman only could deserve her; 
And, of all Romans, only Antony. 
And, to be less than Wife to you, disdain’d 
Their lawful passion. 
Ant. ’Tis but truth. 
Alex. And yet, tho love, and your unmatch’d desert, 
Have drawn her from the due regard of Honor, 
At last, Heav’n open’d her unwilling eyes 
To see the wrongs she offer’d fair Octavia, 
Whose holy Bed she lawlessly usurpt, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT IV 


The sad effects of this improsperous War, 
Confirm’d those pious thoughts. 

Ven. aside. O, wheel you there ? 
Observe him now; the Man begins to mend, 
And talk substantial reason, Fear not, Eunuch, 
The Emperor has giv’n thee leave to speak. 

Alex. Else had I never dar’d t’ offend his ears 
With what the last necessity has urg’d 
On my forsaken Mistress; yet I must not 
Presume to say her heart is wholly alter’d. 

Ant. No, dare not for thy life, I charge thee dare not, 
Pronounce that fatal word. 


Octav. aside, Must I bear this? good Heav’n afford me patience. 
Ven. On, sweet Eunuch ; my dear half man, proceed. 


Alex. Yet Dollabella 
Has lov’d her long, he, next my God-like Lord, 
Deserves her best; and should she meet his passion, 
Rejected, as she is, by him she lov’d 
Ant. Hence, from my sight; for I can bear no more: 
Let Furies drag thee quick to Hell; let all 
The longer damn’d have rest; each torturing hand 
Do thou employ, till Cleopatra comes, 


455 


Then joyn thou too, and help to torture her. [ Zx7t Alexas, thrust out by Antony. 


Octav. ’Tis not well, 
Indeed, my Lord, ’tis much unkind to me, 
To show this passion, this extream concernment 
For an abandon’d, faithless Prostitute. 

Ant. Octavia, leave me: I am much disorder’d. 
Leave me, I say. 

Octav. My Lord? 

Ant. I bid you leave me. 

Ven. Obey him, Madam: best withdraw a while, 
And see how this will work. 

Octav. Wherein have I offended you, my Lord, 
That I am bid to leave you? Am I false, 
Or infamous? Am I a Cleopatra? 
Were I she, 
Base as she is, you would not bid me leave you ; 
But hang upon my neck, take slight excuses, 
And fawn upon my falshood. 

Ant. ’Tis too much, 
Too much, Octavia; I am prest with sorrows 
Too heavy to be born; and you add more : 
I would retire, and recollect what’s left 
Of Man within, to aid me. 

Octav. You would mourn 
In private, for your Love, who has betray’d you ; 
You did but half return to me: your kindness 
Linger’d behind with her. I hear, my Lord, 


456 


APPENDIX 


You make Conditions for her, 
And would include her Treaty. Wondrous proofs 
Of love to me! 
Ant. Are you my Friend, Ventidius ? 
Or are you turn’d a Dollabella too, 
And let this Fury loose ? 
Ven. Oh, be advis’d, 
Sweet Madam, and retire. 
Octav. Yes, I will go; but never to return. 
You shall no more be haunted with this Fury. 
My Lord, my Lord, love will not always last, 
When urg’d with long unkindness, and disdain ; 
Take her again whom you prefer to me; 
She stays but to be call’d. Poor cozen’d Man! 
Let a feign’d parting give her back your heart, 
Which a feign’d love first got; for injur’d me, 
Tho’ my just sense of wrongs forbid my stay, 
My duty shall be yours. 
To the dear pledges of our former love, 
My tenderness and care shall be transferr'd, 
And they shall cheer, by turns, my Widow’d Nights : 
So, take my last farewel; for I despair 
To have you whole, and scorn to take you half. [2xiz. 
Ven. {combat Heav’n, which blasts my best designs: 
My last attempt must be to win her back; 
But Oh, I fear in vain. [ Zxit. 
Ant. Why was I fram’d with this plain honest heart, 
Which knows not to disguise its griefs and weakness, 
But bears its workings outward to the World ? 
I should have kept the mighty anguish in, 
And fore’d a smile at Cleopatra’s falshood : 
Octavia had believ’d it, and had staid; 
But I am made a shallow-forded Stream, 
Seen to the bottom: all my clearness scorn’d, 
And all my faults expos’d! See, where he comes 
Enter Dollabella. 
Who has prophan’d the Sacred Name of Friend, 
And worn it into vileness! 
With how secure a brow, and specious form 
He guilds the secret Villain! Sure that face 
Was meant for honesty ; but Heav’n mis-match’d it, 
And furnish’d Treason out with Natures pomp, 


To make its work more easie. 
Dolla. O, my Friend! 
Ant. Well, Dollabella, you perform’d my message ? 
Dolla. 1 did, unwillingly. 
Ant. Unwillingly ? 
Was it so hard for you to bear our parting ? 
You should have wisht it. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT IV 457 


Dolla. Why? 
Ant. Because you love me. 
And she received my message, with as true, 
With as unfeign’d a sorrow, as you brought it ? 
Dolla. She loves you, ev’n to madness. 
Ant. Oh, I know it. 
You, Dollabella, do not better know 
How much she loves me. And should I 
Forsake this Beauty? This all-perfect Creature ? 
Dolla. I could not, were she mine. 
Ant. And yet you first 
Perswaded me: how come you alter’d since ? 
Dolla. I said at first I was not fit to go; 
I could not hear her sighs, and see her tears, 
But pity must prevail : and so, perhaps, 
It may again with you ; for I have promis’d 
That she should take her last farewel : and, see, 
She comes to claim my word. 
Enter Cleopatra. 
Ant. False Dollabella! 
Dolla. What's false, my Lord ? 
Ant. Why, Dollabella’s false, 
And Cleopatra’s false; both false and faithless. 
Draw near, you well-join’d wickedness, you Serpents, 
Whom I have, in my kindly bosom, warm’d 
Till I am stung to death. 
Dolla. My Lord, have I 
Deserv’d to be thus us’d? 
Cleop. Can Heav’n prepare 
A newer Torment? Can it find a Curse 
Beyond our separation ? 
Ant. Yes, if Fate 
Be just, much greater ; Heav’n should be ingenious 
In punishing such crimes. The rowling Stone, 
And gnawing Vulture, were slight pains, invented 
When Jove was young, and no examples known 
Of mighty ills ; but you have ripen’d sin 
To such a monstrous growth, ’twill pose the Gods 
To find an equal Torture. Two, two such, 
Oh there’s no farther name, two such to me, 
To me, who lock’d my Soul within your breasts, 
Had no desires, no joys, no life, but you; 
When half the Globe was mine, I gave it you 
In Dowry with my heart; I had no use, 
No fruit of all, but you: a Friend and Mistress 
Was what the World could give. Oh, Cleopatra! 
Oh, Dollabella! how could you betray 
This tender heart, which with an Infant-fondness 
Lay lull’d betwixt your bosoms, and there slept 


458 


APPENDIX 


Secure of injur’d Faith ? 
Dolla. Vf she has wrong’d you, 
Heav’n, Hell, and You revenge it. 
Ant. If she wrong’d me, 
Thou wouldst evade thy part of guilt; but swear 
Thou lov’st not her. 
Dolla, Not so as I love you. 
Ant. Not so! Swear, swear, I say, thou dost not love her. 
Dolla. No more than Friendship will allow. 
Ant. No more? 
Friendship allows thee nothing: thou art perjur’d. 
And yet thou didst not swear thou lov’dst her not; 
But not so much, no more. Oh trifling Hypocrite, 
Who dar’st not own to her thou dost not love, 
Nor own to me thou dost!  Véevtidius heard it; 
Octavia saw it. 
Cleop. They are enemies. 
Ant. Alexas is not so: he, he confest it ; 
He, who, next Hell, best knew it, he avow’d it. 
( To Dol.) Why do I seek a proof beyond your self ? 
You whom I sent to bear my last Farewel, 
Return’d to plead her stay. 
Dolla. What shall I answer ? 
If to have lov’d be guilt, then I have sinn’d; 
But if to have repented of that love 
Can wash away my crime, I have repented. 
Yet, if I have offended past forgiveness, 
Let not her suffer: she is innocent. 
Cleop. Ah, what will not a Woman do who loves ! 
What means will she refuse, to keep that heart 
Where all her joys are plac’d! ’Twas I encourag’d, 
’Twas I blew up the fire that scorch’d his Soul, 
To make you jealous; and by that regain you. 
But all in vain; I could not counterfeit : 
In spight of all the damms, my love broke o’er, 
And drown’d my heart again: Fate took th’ occasion ; 
And thus one minutes feigning has destroy’d 
My whole life’s truth. 
Ant. Thin Cobweb Arts of Falshood ; 
Seen, and broke through at first. 
Dolla. Forgive your Mistress. 
Cleop. Forgive your Friend. 
Ant. You have convinc’d your selves, 
You plead each others Cause: What Witness have you, 
That you but meant to raise my jealousie ? 
Cleop. Our selves, and Heav’n. 
Ant. Guilt witnesses for guilt. Hence, Love and Friendship ; 
You have no longer place in humane breasts, 
These two have driv’n you out: avoid my sight ; 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT IV 459 


I would not kill the Man whom I lov’d; 
And cannot hurt the Woman; but avoid me, 
I do not know how long I can be tame ; 
For, if I stay one minute more to think 
How I am wrong’d, my Justice and Revenge 
Will cry so loud within me, that my pity 
Will not be heard for either. 
Dolla, Heav’n has but 
Our sorrow for our sins; and then delights 
To pardon erring Man: sweet Mercy seems 
Its darling Attribute, which limits Justice ; 
As if there were degrees in Infinite; 
And Infinite would rather want perfection 
Than punish to extent. 
Ant. I can forgive 
A Foe; but not a Mistress, and a Friend: 
Treason is there in its most horrid shape, 
Where truth is greatest: and the Soul resign’d 
Is stabb’d by its own Guards: I’ll hear no more; 
Hence from my sight, for ever. 
Cleop. Wow? for ever! 
I cannot go one moment from your sight, 
And must I go for ever ? 
My joys, my only joys are center’d here: 
What place have I to go to? my own Kingdom ? 
That I have lost for you: or to the Romans ? 
They hate me for your sake: or must I wander 
The wide World o’er, a helpless, banish’d Woman, 
Banish’d for love of you; banish’d from you; 
I, there’s the Banishment! Oh hear me; hear me, 
With strictest Justice: for I beg no favour : 
And if I have offended you, then kill me, 
But do not banish me. 
Ant. J must not hear you. 
I have a Fool within me takes your part; 
But Honour stops my ears. 
Cleop. For pity hear me! 
Wou’d you cast off a Slave who follow’d you, 
Who crouch’d beneath your Spurn ? He has no pity! 
See, if he gives one tear to my departure ; 
One look, one kind farewel :. Oh Iron heart! 
Let all the Gods look down, and judge betwixt us, 
If he did ever love! 
Anth. Nomore: Alexas! 
Dolla, A perjur’d Villain ! 
Anth. to Cleop. Your Alexas; yours. 
Cleop. O twas his plot: his ruinous design 
T’ ingage you in my love by jealousie. 
Hear him; confront him with me; let him speak. 


460 


a 


APPENDIX 


Anth. Thave; I have. 
Cleop. And if he clear me not 
Ant. Your Creature! one who hangs upon your smiles! ' 
Watches your eye to say or to unsay 
Whate’er you please! I am not to be mov’d. 
Cleop. Then must we part? Farewel, my cruel Lord, 
Th’ appearance is against me; and I go 
Unjustifi’d, for ever from your sight. 
How I have lov’d, you know; how yet I love, 
My only comfort is, I know my self: 
I love you more, ev’n now you are unkind, 


Than when you lov’d me most; so well, so truly, 
I’ll never strive against it; but die pleas’d 
To think you once were mine. 
Ant. Good Heav’n, they weep at parting. 
Must I weep too? that calls ?em innocent. 
I must not weep; and yet I must, to think 
That I must not forgive. 
Live ; but live wretched, ’tis but just you shou’d, 
Who made me so: Live from each others sight : 
Let me not hear you meet: Set all the Earth, 
And all the Seas, betwixt your sunder’d Loves: 
View nothing common but the Sun and Skys: 
Now, all take several ways; 
And each your own sad fate with mine deplore ; 
That you were false, and I could trust no more. [2xecunt severally. 


Act. V. 


Cleopatra, Charmion, Tras. 

Char. Be juster, Heav’n: such virtue punish’d thus, 
Will make us think that Chance rules all above, 
And shuffles, with a random hand, the Lots 
Which Man is fore’d to draw. 

Cleop. I cou’d tear out these eyes, that gain’d his heart, 
And had not pow’r to keep it. O the curse 
Of doting on, ev’n when I find it Dotage! 
Bear witness, Gods, you heard him bid me go; 
You whom he mock’d with imprecating Vows 
Of promis’d Faith. I'll die, I will not bear it. 
You may hold me. [She pulls out her Dagger, and they hold her. 
But I can keep my breath ; I can die inward, 
And choak this Love. 


Enter Alexas. 
Tras. Help, O Alexas, help ! 
The Queen grows desperate, her Soul struggles in her, 
With all the Agonies of Love and Rage, 
And strives to force its passage. 
Cleop. Let me go. 


Art thou there, Traitor! O, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT V 


O, for a little breath, to vent my rage! 
Give, give me way, and let me loose upon him. 
Alex. Yes, I deserve it, for my ill-tim’d truth. 
Was it for me to prop 
The Ruins of a falling Majesty ? 
To place my self beneath the mighty flaw, 
Thus to be crush’d, and pounded into Atomes, 
By its o’erwhelming weight? ’Tis too presuming 
For Subjects, to preserve that wilful pow’r 
Which courts its own destruction. 
Cleop. I wou’d reason 
More calmly with you. Did not you o’er-rule, 
And force my plain, direct, and open love 
Into these crooked paths of jealousie ? 
Now, what’s th’ event? Octavia is remov’d; 
But C/eopatra’s banish’d. Thou, thou, Villain, 
Has push’d my Boat, to open Sea; to prove, 
At my sad cost, if thou canst steer it back. 
It cannot be; I’m lost too far; I’m ruin’d: 
Hence, thou Impostor, Traitor, Monster, Devil. 
I can no more; thou, and my griefs, have sunk 
Me down so low, that I want voice to curse thee. 
Alex, Suppose some shipwrack’d Seaman near the shore, 
Dropping and faint, with climbing up the Cliff, 
If, from above, some charitable hand 
Pull him to safety, hazarding himself 
To draw the others weight; wou’d he look back 
And curse him for his pains? The case is yours ; 
But one step more, and you have gain’d the heighth. 
Cleop. Sunk, never more to rise. 
Alex, Octavia’s gone, and Dollabella banish’ d. 
Believe me, Madam, 4z/ony is yours. 
His heart was never lost ; but started off 
To Jealousie, Love’s last retreat and covert : 
Where it lies hid in Shades, watchful in silence, 
And list’ning for the sound that calls it back, 
Some other, any man, (’tis so advanc’d) 
May perfect this unfinish’d work, which I 
(Unhappy only to my self) have left 
So easie to his hand. 
Cleop. Look well thou do’t; else 
Alex. Else, what your silence threatens. 
Is mounted up the Pharos; from whose Turret, 
He stands surveying our Lgyptzan Gallies, 
Engag’d with Cesar's Fleet: now Death, or Conquest. 
If the first happen, Fate acquits my promise : 
If we o’ercome, the Conqueror is yours. 
A distant Shout within. 
Char. "ave comfort, Madam: did you mark that Shout? 


Antony 


462 


APPENDIX 


Second Shout nearer. 
Tras. ark; they redouble it. 
Alex. ’Tis from the Port. 
The loudness shows it near: good news, kind Heavens. 
Cleop. Osiris make it so. 
Enter Serapion. 
Serap. Where, where’s the Queen? 
Alex. How frightfully the holy Coward stares ! 
As if not yet recover’d of th’ assault, 
When all his Gods, and what’s more dear to him, 
His Offerings were at stake. 
Sevap. O horror, horror! 
Egypt has been; our latest hour is come: 
The Queen of Nations from her ancient seat, 
Is sunk for ever in the dark Abyss: 
Time has unrowl’d her Glories to the last, 
And now clos’d up the Volume. 
Cleop. Be more plain: 
Say, whence thou com’st, (though Fate is in thy face, 
Which from thy haggard eyes looks wildly out, 
And threatens ere thou speak’ st. ) 
Serap. came from Pharos; 
From viewing (spare me and imagine it) 
Our Lands last hope, your Navy. 
Cleop. Nanquish’d ? 
Serap. No. 
They fought not. 
Cleop. Then they fled. 
Serap. Nor that. I saw, 
With Antony, your well-appointed Fleet 
Row out ; and thrice he wav’d his hand on high, 
And thrice with cheerful cries they shouted back : 
’T was then, false Fortune, like a fawning Strumpet, 
About to leave the Bankrupt Prodigal, 
With a dissembled smile wou’d kiss at parting, 
And flatter to the last; the well-tim’d Oars 
Now dipt from every bank, now smoothly run 
To meet the Foe; and soon indeed they met, 
But not as Foes. In few, we saw their Caps 
On either side thrown up; th’ Agyptian Gallies 
(Receiv’d like Friends) past through, and fell behind 
The Roman rear: and now, they all come forward, 
And ride within the Port. 
Cleop. Enough, Serapion : 
I’ve heard my doom. This needed not, you Gods : 
When I lost Antony, your work was done ; 
*Tis but superfluous malice. Where’s my Lord? 
How bears he this last blow? 
Serap. His fury cannot be express’d by words: 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT V 463 


Thrice he attempted headlong to have faln 
Full on his foes, and aim’d at Czsar’s Galley: 
With-held, he raves on you; cries, He’s betray’d. 
Should he now find you. 
Alex. Shun him, seek your safety, 
Till you can clear your innocence. 
Cleop. Tl stay. 
Alex. You must not, haste you to your Monument, 
While I make speed to Cesar. 
Cleop. Casar'! No, 
I have no business with him. 
Alex. I can work him 
To spare your life, and let this madman perish. 
Cleop. Base fawning Wretch ! wouldst thou betray him too ? 
Hence from my sight, I will not hear a Traytor ; 
”Twas thy design brought all this ruine on us ; 
Serapion, thou art honest ; counsel me: 
But haste, each moment’s precious. 
Serap. Retire; you must not yet see Antony. 
He who began this mischief, 
*Tis just he tempt the danger: let him clear you ; 
And, since he offer’d you his servile tongue, 
To gain a poor precarious life from Cesar, 
Let him expose that fawning eloquence, 
And speak to Antony. 
Alex. O Heavens! I dare not, 
I meet my certain death. — 
Cleop. Slave, thou deserv’st it. 
Not that I fear my Lord, will I avoid him ; 
I know him noble: when he banish’d me, 
And thought me false, he scorn’d to take my life; 
But [’ll be justifi’d, and then die with him. 
Alex. O pity me, and let me follow you. 
Cleop. To death, if thou stir hence. Speak, if thou canst, 
Now for thy life, which basely thou wou’ dst save ;_ 
While mine I prize at this. Come, good Serafzon. 
[ Zxeunt Cleop. Serap. Char. Iras. 
Alex. O that I less cou’d fear to lose this being, 
Which, like a Snow-ball, in my coward hand, 
The more ’tis grasp’d, the faster melts away. 
Poor Reason! what a wretched aid art thou! 
For still, in spight of thee, 
These two long Lovers, Soul and Body, dread 
Their final separation. Let me think: 
What can I say, to save my self from death ? 
No matter what becomes of Cleopatra. 
Ant. within. Which way? where? 
Ven. within. This leads to th’ Monument. 
Alex. Ahme! I hear him; yet I’m unprepar’d: 


464 


APPENDIX 


My gift of lying’s gone; 
And this Court-Devil, which I so oft have rais’d, 
Forsakes me at my need. I dare not stay ; 
Yet cannot far go hence. [ xit. 
Enter Antony and Ventidius. 
Ant. O happy Cesar! Thou hast men to lead; 
Think not ’tis thou hast conquer’d Anzony ; 
But Rome has conquer’d Egypt. I’m betray’d. 
Ven, Curse on this treach’rous Train ! 
Their Soil and Heav’n infect ’em all with baseness ; 
And their young Souls come tainted to the World 
With the first breath they draw. 3 
Ant. Th’ original Villain sure no God created ; 
He was a Bastard of the Sun, by /Vi/e, 
Ap’d into Man; with all his Mother’s Mud 
Crusted about his Soul. 
Ven. The Nation is 
One Universal Traitor; and their Queen 
The very Spirit and Extract of ’em all. 
Ant. Is there yet left 
A possibility of aid from Valor? 
Is there one God unsworn to my Destruction ? 
The least unmortgag’d hope? for, if there be, 
Methinks I cannot fall beneath the Fate 
Of such a Boy as Cesar. 
The World’s one half is yet in Antony ; 
And, from each limb of it that’s hew’d away, 
The Soul comes back to me. 
Ven. There yet remain 
Three Legions in the Town. The last assault 
Lopt off the rest: if death be your design, 
(As I must wish it now) these are sufficient 
To make a heap about us of dead Foes, 
An honest Pile for burial. 
Ant. They’re enough. 
We'll not divide our Stars; but side by side 
Fight emulous: and with malicious eyes 
Survey each other’s acts: so every death 
Thou giv’st, I’ll take on me, as a just debt, 
And pay thee back a Soul. 
Ven. Now you shall see I love you. Not a word 
Of chiding more. By my few hours of life, 
I am so pleas’d with this brave Roman Fate, 
That I wou’d not be Cesar, to out-live you. 
When we put off this flesh, and mount together, 
IT shall be shown to all th’ Etherial crowd; 
Lo, this is he who dy’d with Ansony. 
Ant. Who knows but we may pierce through all their Troops, 
And reach my Veterans yet? ’Tis worth the tempting, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT V 465 


T’ o’er-leap this Gulph of Fate, 
And leave our wond’ring Destinies behind. 
Lnter Alexas, trembling. 

Ven, See, see, that Villain; 
See Cleopatra stampt upon that face, 
With all her cunning, all her arts of falshood ! 
How she looks out through those dissembling eyes ! 
How he has set his count’nance for deceit - 
And promises a lye, before he speaks ! 
Let me dispatch him first. [ Drawing. 

Alex. O, spare me, spare me. 

Ant. Hold; he’s not worth your killing. On thy life, 
(Which thou may’st keep, because I scorn to take it) 
No syllable to justifie thy Queen; 

Save thy base tongue its office. 

Alex. Sir, she’s gone, 

Where she shall never be molested more 
By Love, or you. 

Ant. Fled to her Dollabella! 

Die, Traitor, I revoke my promise, die. [ Going to kill him. 
Alex. O hold, she is not fled. 
Ant. Sheis: my eyes 
Are open to her falshood; my whole life 
Has been a golden dream, of Love and Friendship. 
But, now I wake, I’m like a Merchant, rows’d 
From soft repose, to see his Vessel sinking, 
And all his Wealth cast o’er. Ingrateful Woman! 
Who follow’d me, but as the Swallow Summer, 
Hatching her young ones in my kindly Beams, 
Singing her flatt’ries to my morning wake; 
But, now my Winter comes, she spreads her wings, 
And seeks the Spring of Cesar. 
Alex. Think not so: 
For Fortunes have, in all things, mixt with yours. 
Had she betray’d her Naval force to Rome, 
How easily might she have gone to Cesar, 
Secure by such a bribe! 

Ven. She sent it first, 
To be more welcome after. 

Ant. ’Tis too plain; 

Else wou’d she have appear’ d, to clear her self. 

Alex. Too fatally she has; she could not bear 
To be accus’d by you; but shut her self 
Within her Monument: look’d down, and sigh’d ; 
While, from her unchang’d face, the silent tears 
Dropt, as they had not leave, but stole their parting. 
Some undistinguish’d words she inly murmur’d; 

At last, she rais’d her eyes; and, with such looks 
As dying Lucrece cast, 


3° 


466 


APPENDIX 


Ant. My heart forebodes. 
Ven. All for the best: go on. 
Alex. She snatch’d her Ponyard, 
And, ere we cou’d prevent the fatal blow, 
Plung’d it within her breast ; then turn’d to me, 
Go, bear my Lord (said she) my last Farewel ; 
And ask him if he yet suspect my Faith. 
More she was saying, but death rush’d betwixt. 
She half pronounc’d your Name with her last breath, 
And bury’d half within her. 
Ven. Weav’n be prais’d. 
Ant. Then art thou innocent, my poor dear Love ? 
And art thou dead ? 
O those two words ! their sound shou’d be divided : 
Hadst thou been false, and dy’d; or hadst thou liv’d, 
And hadst been true But Innocence and Death! 
This shows not well above. Then what am I, 
The Murderer of this Truth, this Innocence ! 
Thoughts cannot form themselves in words so horrid 


As can express my guilt ! 
Ven. Is’t come to this? The Gods have been too gracious ; 
And thus you thank ’em for’t. 
Ant. to Alex. Why stay’st thou here ? 
Ts it for thee to spy upon my Soul, 
And see its inward mourning ? Get thee hence; 
Thou art not worthy to behold, what now 
Becomes a Roman Emperor to perform. 
Alex. aside. He loves her still: 
His grief betrays it. Good! The joy to find 
She’s yet alive, compleats the reconcilement. 
I’ve sav’d my self, and her. But, Oh! the Romans! 
Fate comes too fast upon my Wit, 
Hunts me too hard, and meets me at each double. [2xiz. 
Ven. Wou’d she had dy’d a little sooner tho, 
Before Octavia went; you might have treated: 
Now ’twill look tame, and wou’d not be receiv’ d. 
Come, rouze your self, and lets die warm together. 
Ant. I will not fight; there’s no more work for War. 
The bus’ness of my angry hours is done. 
Ven. Cesar is at your Gates. 
Ant. Why, let him enter; 
He’s welcom now. 
Ven. What Lethargy has crept into your Soul ? 
Ant. ’Tis but a scorn of life, and just desire 
To free my self from bondage. 
Ven. Do it bravely. 
Ant. Iwill; but not by fighting. O, Ventidius! 
What shou’d I fight for now? My Queen is dead. 
I was but great for her; my Pow’r, my Empire, 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT V 


Were but my Merchandise to buy her love; 
And conquer’d Kings, my Factors. Now she’s dead, 
Let Cesar take the World, 
An Empty Circle, since the Jewel’s gone 
Which made it worth my strife ; my being’s nauseous; 
For all the bribes of life are gone away. 
Ven. Wou’d you be taken? 
Ant. Yes, I wou’d be taken; 
But, as a Roman ought, dead, my Ventidius : 
For I’ll convey my Soul! from Cesar’s reach, 
And lay down life my self. ’Tis time the World 
Shou’d have a Lord, and know whom to obey. 
We two have kept its homage in suspense, 
And bent the Globe on whose each side we trod, 
Till it was dinted inwards: Let him walk 
Alone upon ’t; I’m weary of my part. 
My Torch is out; and the World stands before me 
Like a black Desart, at th’ approach of night; 
T’]] lay me down, and stray no farther on. 
Ven. I cou’d be griev’d, 
But that Ill not out-live you: choose your death ; 
For, I have seen him in such various shapes, 
I care not which I take; I’m only troubled 
The life I bear, is worn to such a rag, 
’Tis scarce worth giving. I cou’d wish indeed 
We threw it from us with a better grace ; 
That, like two Lyons taken in the Toils, 
We might at least thrust out our paws, and wound 
The Hunters that inclose us. 
Ant. I have thought on’t. 
Ventidius, you must live. 

Ven. I must not, Sir. 

Ant, Wilt thou not live, to speak some good of me? 
To stand by my fair Fame, and guard th’ approaches 
From the ill Tongues of Men? 

Ven. Who shall guard mine, 

For living after you? 

Ant. Say, I command it. 

Ven. Tf we die well, our deaths will speak themselves, 
And need no living witness. 

Ant, Thou hast lov’d me, 

And fain I wou’d reward thee; I must die; 
Kill me, and take the merit of my death 
To make thee Friends with Cesar. 
Ven. Thank your kindness. 
You said I lov’d you; and, in recompence, 
You bid me turn a Traitor: did I think 
You wou’d have us’d me thus? that I shou’d die 
With a hard thought of you? 


467 


468 


APPENDIX a 


Ant. Forgive me, Roman. 
Since I have heard of C/eofatra’s death, 
My reason bears no rule upon my tongue, 
But lets my thoughts break all at random out: 
I’ve thought better; do not deny me twice. 
Ven. By Heav’n, I will not. 
Let it not be t’ out-live you. 
Ant. Kill me first, 
And then die thou: for ’tis but just thou serve 
Thy Friend, before thy self. 
Ven. Give me your hand. 
We soon shall meet again. Now, Farewel, Emperor. [ Lmbrace. 
Methinks that word’s too cold to be my last: 
Since Death sweeps all distinctions, Farewel, Friend. 
That’s all. 
T will not make a bus’ness of a trifle : 
And yet I cannot look on you, and kill you ; 
Pray turn your face. 
Ant. Ido; strike home be sure. 
Ven. Home, as my Sword will reach. [ Atlls himself. 
Ant. O, thou mistak’st ; 
That wound was none of thine; give it me back: 
Thou robb’st me of my death. 
Ven. I do indeed ; 
But, think ’tis the first time I e’er deceiv’d you; 
If that may plead my pardon. And you, Gods, 
Forgive me, if you will; for I die perjur’d, 
Rather than kill my Friend. [ Dies. 
Ant. Farewel. Ever my Leader, ev’n in death! 
My Queen and thou have got the start of me, 
And I’m the lag of Honour. Gone so soon? 
Is death no more? He us’d him carelessly, 
With a familiar kindness: ere he knock’d, 
Ran to the door, and took him in his arms, 
As who shou’d say, Y’are welcome at all hours, 
A Friend need give no warning. Books had spoil’d him; 
For all the Learn’d are Cowards by profession. 
Tis not worth 
My farther thought; for death, for ought I know, 
Is but to think no more. Here’s to be satisfi’d. [Falls on his Sword. 
T’ve mist my heart. O unperforming hand! 
Thou never cou’ dst have err’d in a worse time. 


“My Fortune jades me to the last ; and death, 


Like a great Man, takes state, and makes me wait 
For my admittance. 


[ Trampling within. 
Some perhaps from Cesar: 

If he shou’d find me living,and suspect 

That I plaid booty with my life! I'll mend 

My work, ere they can reach me. [Rises upon his knees. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT V 469 


inter Cleopatra, Charmion, Iras. 
Cleop. Where is my Lord? where is he? 
Char. There he lies, 
And dead Ventidius by him. 
Cleop. My fears were Prophets; I am come too Iate. 
O that accurs’d Alexas! [ Runs to him. 
Ant. Art thou living ? 
Or am I dead before I knew? and thou 
The first kind Ghost that meets me? 
Cleop. Help me seat him. 
Send quickly, send for help. [ They place him in a Chatr. 
Ant. Tam answerd. 
We live both. Sit thee down, my Cleopatra: 
Pll make the most I can of life, to stay 
A moment more with thee. 
Cleop. How is it with you? 
Ant. ’Tis as with a man 
Removing in a hurry ; all pack’d up, 
But one dear Jewel that his haste forgot ; 
And he, for that, returns upon the spur : 
So I come back, for thee. 
Cleop. Too long, you Heav’ns, you have been cruel to me ; 
Now show your mended Faith, and give me back 
His fleeting life. 
Ant. It will not be, my Love. 
I keep my Soul by force. 
Say but thou art not false. 
Cleop. Tis now too late 
To say I’m true: I'll prove it, and die with you. 
Unknown to me, A/exas feign’d my death: 
Which, when I knew, I hasted, to prevent 
This fatal consequence. My Fleet betray’d 
Both you and me. 
Ant. And Dollabella. 
Cleop. Scarce esteem’d before he lov’d; but hated now. 
Ant. Enough: my life’s not long enough for more. 
Thou sayst thou wilt come after: I believe thee; 
For I can now believe whate’er thou sayst, 
That we may part more kindly. 
Cleop. Iwill come: 
Doubt not, my life, I’ll come, and quickly too : 
Cesar shall triumph o’er no part of thee. 
Ant. _ But grieve not, while thou stay’st 
My last disastrous times : 
Think we have had a clear and glorious day ; 
And Heav’n did kindly to delay the storm 
Just till our close of ew’ning. Ten years love, 
And not a moment lost, but all improy’d 
To th’ utmost joys: What Ages have we liv’d? 


470 


APPENDIX 


And now to die each others; and, so dying, 
While hand in hand we walk in Groves below, 
Whole Troops of Lovers Ghosts shall flock about us, 
And all the Train be ours. 
Cleop. Your words are like the Notes of dying Swans, 
Too sweet to last. Were there so many hours 
For your unkindness, and not one for love ? 


Ant. No, not a minute. This one kiss more worth 


Than all I leave to Cesar. [ Dies. 


Cleop. OO, tell me so again, 
And take ten thousand kisses, for that word. 
My Lord, my Lord: speak, if you yet have being; 
Sigh to me, if you cannot speak; or cast 
One look: Do any thing that shows you live. 
Tras. He’s gone too far, to hear you; 
And this you see, a lump of sensless Clay, 
The leavings of a Soul. 
Char. Remember, Madam, 
He charg’d you not to grieve. 
Cleop. And I'll obey him. 
I have not lov’d a Roman not to know 
What should become his Wife; his Wife, my Charmion ; 
For ’tis to that high Title I aspire, 
And now I’ll not die less. Let dull Octavia 
Survive, to mourn him dead: my Nobler Fate 
Shall knit our Spousals with a tie too strong 
For Roman Laws to break. 
Zras. Will you then die? 
Cleop. Why shou’dst thou make that question ? 
Lras. Cesar is merciful. 
Cleop. Let him be so 
To those that want his mercy: my poor Lord 
Made no such Cov’nant with him, to spare me 
When he was dead. Yield me to Cesar’s pride? 
What, to be led in triumph through the Streets, 
A spectacle to base Plebeian eyes ; 
While some dejected Friend of Axéony’s, 
Close in a corner, shakes his head, and mutters 
A secret curse on her who ruin’d him ? 
Pll none of that. 
Char. Whatever you resolve, 
T’ll follow ev’n to death. 
tras. J only fear’d 
For you; but more shou’d fear to live without you. 
Cleop. Why, now ’tis as it shou’d be. Quick, my Friends, 
Dispatch ; ere this, the Town’s in Cesar’s hands : 
My Lord looks down concern’d, and fears my stay, 
Lest I shou’d be surpriz’d ; 
Keep him not waiting for his love too long. 


DRYDEN—ALL FOR LOVE, ACT V 471 


You, Charmion, bring my Crown and richest Jewels, 
With ’em, the Wreath of Victory I made 
(Vain Augury !) for him who now lies dead; 
You, /ras, bring the cure of all our ills. 
tras. The Aspicks, Madam ? 
Cleop. Must I bid you twice ? [Zxeunt Char. and Iras. 
Tis sweet to die, when they wou’d force life on me, 
To rush into the dark aboad of death, 
And seize him first; if he be like my Love, 
He is not frightful sure. 
We’re now alone, in secresie and silence ; 
And is not this like Lovers? I may kiss 
These pale, cold lips; Oc¢avia does not see me; 
And, Oh! ’tis better far to have him thus, 
Than see him in her arms. 


O welcome, welcome. 
Linter Charmion, Iras. 
Char. What must be done ? 
Cleop. Short Ceremony, Friends ; 
But yet it must be decent. First, this Laurel 
Shall crown my Hero’s head: he fell not basely, 
Nor left his Shield behind him. Only thou 
Cou’dst triumph o’er thy self; and thou alone 
Wert worthy so to triumph. 
Char. To what end 
These Ensigns of your Pomp and Royalty ? 
Cleop. Dull, that thou art! why, ’tis to meet my Love; 
As when I saw him first, on Cydnos bank, 
All sparkling, like a Goddess; so adorn’d, 
Vl find him once again: my second Spousals 
Shall match my first, in Glory. Haste, haste, both, 
And dress the Bride of Azéozy. 
Char. ’Tis done. 
Cleop. Now seat me by my Lord. I claim this place; 
For I must conquer Cesar too, like him, 
And win my share o’th’ World. Hail, you dear Relicks 
Of my Immortal Love ! 
O let no Impious hand remove you hence; 
But rest for ever here: let Zgyft give 
His death that peace, which it deny’d his life. 
Reach me the Casket. 
Tras. Underneath the fruit the Aspick lies. 
Cleop. putting aside the leaves. Welcom, thou kind Deceiver ! 
Thou best of Thieves; who, with an easie key, 
Dost open life, and, unperceiv’d by us, 
Ev’n steal us from our selves: discharging so 
Death’s dreadful office, better than himself, 
Touching our limbs so gently into slumber, 
That Death stands by, deceiv’d by his own Image, 
And thinks himself but Sleep. 


472 


APPENDIX 


Serap. within, The Queen, where is she? 
The Town is yielded, Cesar’s at the Gates. 
Cleop. He comes too late t’ invade the Rights of Death. 
Haste, bare my Arm, and rouze the Serpent’s fury. [ Holds out her Arm, and 
Coward Flesh draws it back. 
Wou’ dst thou conspire with Cesar, to betray me, 
As thou wert none of mine? I'll force thee to’t, 
And not be sent by him, 
But bring my self my Soul to Antony. [ Turns aside, and then shows 
Take hence; the work is done. her Arm bloody. 
Sevrap. within. Break ope the door, 
And guard the Traitor well. 
Char. The next is ours. 
Tras. Now, Charmion, to be worthy 
Of our great Queen and Mistress. [ They apply the Aspicks. 
Cleop. Already, Death, I feel thee in my Veins ; 
I go with such a will to find my Lord, 
That we shall quickly meet. 


A heavy numiness creeps through every limb, 

And now ’tis at my head: my eye-lids fall, 

And my dear Love is vanish’d in a mist. 

Where shall I find him, where? O turn me to him, 
And lay me on his breast. 


Cesar, thy worst ; 
Now part us, if thou canst. (Dvzes.) Iras sinks down at her feet, and dies ; 
Charmion stands behind her Chatr, as dressing her head. 
Enter Serapion, two Priests, Alexas bound, Egyptians. 
2 Priests. Behold, Serapion, what havock Death has made! 
Serap. ’ Twas what I fear d. 
Charmion, is this well done ? 
Char. Yes, ’tis well done, and like a Queen, the last 
Of her great Race: I follow her. [Sinks down ; Dies. 
Alexas. ’Tis true, 
She has done well: much better thus to die, 
Than live to make a Holy-day in Rome. 
Serap. See, see how the Lovers sit in State together, 
As they were giving Laws to half Mankind. 
Th’ impression of a smile left in her face, 
Shows she dy’d pleas’d with him for whom she liv’d, 
And went to charm him in another World. 
Cesar’s just entring ; grief has now no leisure. 
Secure that Villain, as our pledge of safety 
To grace th’ Imperial Triumph. Sleep, blest Pair, 
Secure from humane chance, long Ages out, 
While all the Storms of Fate fly o’er your Tomb; 
And Fame, to late Posterity, shall tell, 
No Lovers liv’d so great, or dy’d so well. 


[Hereupon follows an Zpz/ogue, in about thirty lines, of purely local and tempo- 
rary interest. ] 


REMARKS ON ALL FOR LOVE 


SCOR 473 


REMARKS on ALL FOR LOVE 


Sir WALTER Scorr (/ntroduction to * All for Love,’ Dryden’s Works, V, 287, 
London, 1808) : The first point of comparison [between Shakespeare’s Play and 
Dryden’s] is the general conduct, or plot, of the tragedy. . . . Shakespeare, with the 
license peculiar to his age and character, had diffused the action of his play over 
Italy, Greece, and Egypt; but Dryden, who was well aware of the advantage to be 
derived from a simplicity and concentration of plot, has laid every scene in the city 
of Alexandria. By this he guarded the audience from that vague and puzzling dis- 
traction which must necessarily attend a violent change of place. It is a mistake to 
suppose that the argument in favour of the unities depends upon preserving the 
deception of the scene; they are necessarily connected with the intelligibility of the 
piece. It may be true, that no spectator supposes that the stage before him is actu- 
ally the court of Alexandria; yet, when he has once made up his mind to let it pass 
as such during the representation, it is a cruel tax, not merely on his imagination, 
but on his powers of comprehension, if the scene be suddenly transferred to a dis- 
tant country. Time is lost before he can form new associations, and reconcile their 
bearings with those originally presented to him, and if he be a person of slow com- 
prehension, or happens to lose any part of the dialogue, announcing the changes, the 
whole becomes unintelligible confusion. In this respect, and in discarding a num- 
ber of uninteresting characters, the plan of Dryden’s play must be unequivocally 
preferred to that of Shakespeare in point of coherence, unity, and simplicity. It is 
a natural consequence of this more artful arrangement of the story, that Dryden con- 
tents himself with the concluding scene of Antony’s history, instead of introducing 
the incidents of the war with Cneius Pompey, the negotiation with Lepidus, death 
of his first wife, and other circumstances, which, in Shakespeare, only tend to dis- 
tract our attention from the main interest of the drama. The unity of time, as 
necessary as that of place to the intelligibility of the drama, has, in like manner, 
been happily attained; and an interesting event is placed before the audience with 
no other change of place, and no greater lapse of time, than can be readily adapted 
to an ordinary imagination. But, having given Dryden the praise of superior address 
in managing the story, I fear he must be pronounced in most other respects inferior 
to his grand prototype. Antony, the principal character in both plays, is incompar- 
ably grander in that of Shakespeare. The majesty and generosity of the military 
hero is happily expressed by both poets ; but the awful ruin of grandeur, undermined 
by passion, and tottering to its fall, is far more striking in the Antony of Shake- 
speare. Love, it is true, is the predominant, but it is not the sole ingredient in his 
character. It has usurped possession of his mind, but is assailed by his original pas- 
sions, ambition of power, and thirst for military fame. He is, therefore, often, and 
it should seem naturally represented, as feeling for the downfall of his glory and 
power, even so intensely as to withdraw his thoughts from Cleopatra, unless con- 
sidered as the cause of his ruin. Thus, in the scene in which he compares himself 
to ‘black Vesper’s pageants,’ he runs on in a train of fantastic and melancholy 
similes, having relation only to his fallen state, till the mention of Egypt suddenly 
recalls the idea of Cleopatra. But Dryden has taken a different view of Antony’s 
character, and more closely approaching to his title of 4// for Love. ‘He seems not 
now that awful Antony.’ His whole thoughts and being are dedicated to his fatal 
passion; and though a spark of resentment is occasionally struck out by the 
reproaches of Ventidius, he instantly relapses into love-sick melancholy. The fol- 


474 APPENDIX 


lowing beautiful speech exhibits the romance of despairing love, without the deep 
and mingled passion of a dishonoured soldier, and dethroned emperor : [A for 
Love + ‘Ant. Lie there, thou shadow of an Emperor. ... And take me for their 
‘ fellow-citizen,’ p. 417.] Even when Antony is finally ruined, the power of jealousy 
is called upon to complete his despair, and he is less sensible to the idea of Czesar’s 
successful arms than to the risque of Dolabella’s rivalling him in the affections of 
Cleopatra. It is true, the Antony of Shakespeare also starts into fury, upon Cleo- 
patra permitting Thyreus to kiss her hand; but this is not jealousy; it is pride 
offended, that she, for whom he had sacrificed his glory and empire, should already 
begin to court the favour of the conqueror, and vouchsafe her hand to be saluted by 
a ‘jack of Czsar’s.’ Hence Enobarbus, the witness of the scene, alludes imme- 
diately to the fury of mortified ambition and falling power: ‘’Tis better playing with 
‘a lion’s whelp, Than with an old one dying.’ . . . Having, however, adopted an idea 
of Antony’s character, rather suitable to romance than to nature, or history, we must 
not deny Dryden the praise of having exquisitely brought out the picture he intended 
to draw. He has informed us, that this was the only play written to please himself; 
and he has certainly exerted in it the full force of his incomparable genius. Antony 
is throughout the piece what the author meant him to be: a victim to the omnipotence 
of love, or rather to the infatuation of one engrossing passion. 

In the Cleopatra of Dryden, there is greatly less spirit and originality than in 
Shakespeare’s. The preparation of the latter for death has a grandeur which puts to 
shame the same scene in Dryden, and serves to support the interest during the whole 
fifth act, although Antony has died in the conclusion of the fourth. No circumstance 
can more highly evince the power of Shakespeare’s genius, in spite of his irregular- 
ities ; since the conclusion in Dryden, where both lovers die in the same scene, and 
after a reconciliation, is infinitely more artful and better adapted to theatrical effect. 
In the character of Ventidius, Dryden has filled up, with ability, the rude sketches, 
which Shakespeare has thrown off in those of Sczeva [sec] and Eros. The rough 
old Roman soldier is painted with great truth; and the quarrel betwixt him and 
Antony, in the first act, is equal to any single scene that our author ever wrote, 
excepting, perhaps, that betwixt Sebastian and Dorax; an opinion in which the 
judgment of the critic coincides with that of the poet. It is a pity, as has often been 
remarked, that this dialogue occurs so early in the play, since what follows is neces- 
sarily inferior in force. Dryden, while writing this scene, had unquestionably in 
his recollection the quarrel betwixt Brutus and Cassius, which was justly so great a 
favourite in his time, and to which he had referred as inimitable in his prologue to 
Aureng-Zebe. The inferior characters are better supported in Dryden than in 
Shakespeare. We have no low buffoonery in the former, such as disgraces Eno- 
barbus, and is hardly redeemed by his affecting catastrophe. Even the Egyptian 
Alexas acquires some respectability, from his patriotic attachment to the interests of 
his country, and from his skill as a wily courtier... . The Octavia of Dryden is a 
much more important personage than in the Axfony and Cleopatra of Shakespeare. 
She is, however, more cold and unamiable; for, in the very short scenes in which 
the Octavia of Shakespeare appears, she is placed in rather an interesting point of 
view. But Dryden has himself informed us, that he was apprehensive the justice of 
a wife’s claim upon her husband would draw the audience to her side, and lessen 
their interest in the lover and the mistress. He seems accordingly to have studiedly 
lowered the character of the injured Octavia, who, in her conduct towards her hus- 
band, shews much duty and little love; and plainly intimates, that her rectitude of 


REMARKS ON ALL FOR LOVE—CAMPBELL 475 


conduct flows from a due regard to her own reputation, rather than from attachment 
to Antony’s person, or sympathy with him in his misfortunes. It happens, there- 
fore, with Octavia, as with all other very good selfish kind of people; we think it 
unnecessary to feel any thing for her, as she is obviously capable of taking very good 
care of herself. I must not omit, that her scolding scene with Cleopatra, although 
anxiously justified by the author in the preface, seems too coarse to be in character, 
and is a glaring exception to the general good taste evinced throughout the rest of 
the piece... . In judging betwixt these celebrated passages, [the descriptions by 
Shakespeare and by Dryden of Cleopatra on the Cydnus] we feel almost afraid to 
avow a preference of Dryden, founded partly upon the easy flow of the verse, which 
seems to soften with the subject, but chiefly upon the beauty of the language and 
imagery, which is flowery without diffusiveness, and rapturous without hyperbole. I 
fear Shakespeare cannot be exculpated from the latter fault ; yet I am sensible, it is 
by sifting his beauties from his conceits that his imitator has been enabled to excel 
him. It is impossible to bestow too much praise on the beautiful passages which 
occur so frequently in AZ for Love. Icontent myself with extracting the sublime 
and terrific description of an omen presaging the downfall of Egypt. [‘Serap. Last 
night, between the Hours of Twelve and One. . . . And so unfinish’d left the horrid 
Scene.’ p. 412.] 


T. CAMPBELL (p. Ixi): Dryden’s AM for Love was regarded by himself as his 
masterpiece, and is by no means devoid of merit; but so inferior is it to the prior 
drama, as to make it disgraceful to British taste for one hundred years that the former 
absolutely banished the latter from the stage. A French critic calls Great Britain 
the island of Shakspeare’s idolaters; yet so it happens, in this same island, that Dry- 
den’s AZ for Love has been acted ten times oftener than Shakspeare’s Antony and 
Cleopatra.* Dryden’s Mark Antony is a weak voluptuary from first to last. Nota 
sentence of manly virtue is ever uttered by him that seems to come from himself; and 
whenever he expresses a moral feeling, it appears not to have grown up in his own 
nature, but to have been planted there by the influence of his friend Ventidius, like a 
flower in a child’s garden, only to wither and take no root. Shakspeare’s Antony 
is a very different being. When he hears of the death of his first wife, Fulvia, his 
exclamation ‘ There’s a great spirit gone!’ and his reflections on his own enthral- 
ment by Cleopatra, mark the residue of a noble mind. A queen, a siren, a Shak- 
speare’s Cleopatra alone could have entangled Mark Antony, whilst an ordinary 
wanton could have enslaved Dryden’s hero. 


Mrs JAMESON (ii, 170): Dryden has committed a great mistake in bringing 
Octavia and her children on the scene, and in immediate contact with Cleopatra. To 
have thus violated the truth of history } might have been excusable, but to sacrifice 
the truth of nature and dramatic propriety, to produce a mere stage effect, was unpar- 
donable. In order to preserve the unity of interest, he has falsified the character of 


* It ought to be kept in remembrance, nevertheless, that the inconstant represen- 
tations of a popular dramatic poet’s pieces on the stage is not a proof of his popularity 
having expired, or being even on the decline. The frequenters of the theatre demand 
variety. Moliére is as much as ever a favourite of France, yet the pieces of other 
comic writers are oftener represented. 

+ Octavia was never in Egypt. 


476 APPENDIX 


Octavia as well as that of Cleopatra: he has presented us with a regular scolding match 
between the rivals, in which they come sweeping up to each other from opposite sides 
of the stage, with their respective trains, like two pea-hens in a passion. Shakspeare 
would no more have brought his captivating, brilliant, but meretricious Cleopatra into 
immediate comparison with the noble and chaste simplicity of Octavia, than a con- 
noisseur in art would have placed Canova’s Dansatrice, beautiful as it is, beside the 
Athenian Melpomene, or the Vestal of the Capitol. 


James RussELL LowEL. (Among my Books, p. 57, Boston, 1870): All for Love 
is, in many respects, a noble play, and there are few finer scenes, whether in the 
conception or the carrying out, than that between Antony and Ventidius in the 
first act. 


Joun CHuRTON COoLLins (Zssays and Studies, p. 36, London, 1895): To com- 
pare AW for Love with Antony and Cleopatra would be to compare works which, in 
all that pertains to the essence of poetry and tragedy, differ not in degree merely but 
in kind. And yet Dryden’s tragedy, even from a dramatic point of view, is, with 
three or four exceptions, superior to anything produced by his contemporaries. If his 
Cleopatra is wretched, his Antony is powerfully sketched. The altercation between 
Antony and Ventidius, though modelled too closely on that between Brutus and 
Cassius in Julius Cesar, is a noble piece of dialectical rhetoric, while the scene 
between Cleopatra and Octavia is perhaps finer than anything which the stage had 
seen since Massinger. 


Tuomas R. Lounssury ( Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist, p. 97. New York, 
1901): Dryden’s whole play is made to turn upon the infatuation for Cleopatra 
which has taken possession of the Roman commander, and against the force of which 
the loyalty of Ventidius struggles to no purpose. There are few things said and 
fewer things done by Antony which remind us of the great general, of the dishonored 
soldier, of the fallen master of half the world. He is little more than a sentimental 
love-sick swain, while the Egyptian queen has lost nearly every one of the character- 
istics with which she has impressed the ages, and is exhibited to us as displaying the 
behavior of a tender-hearted, affectionate, and wholly romantic school-girl. Scott, 
who is at his worst in his comparison of this play with Shakespeare’s, assures us 
that its plan must be preferred to that of the latter’s on the score of coherence, unity, 
and simplicity; and, further, that as a consequence of the more artful arrangement 
of the story, the unity of time, like that of place, so necessary to the intelligibility 
of the drama, has been happily attained. It is the last assertion alone which con- 
cerns us here. How has this unity of time been attained? It has been preserved 
by the studious suppression of all reference whatever to its passage. Events are 
crowded into it which history is not alone in assuring the scholar did not happen in 
the space assigned : common sense further assures everybody they could not possibly 
so have happened. Numerous minor incidents, however important, are not neces- 
sary to be considered in the examination of the play. But in this one day Antony 
goes out to fight a great battle. We only hear of it; there is no representation of it. 
On his return he reports that five thousand of his foes have been slain. As battles 
go in this world, the mere despatching of so large a number of men would encroach 
heavily upon the time allotted. Further, at a later period in this one day, the Egyp- 
tian fleet sets out to attack the enemy. Instead of fighting the Romans it goes over 


ENGLISH CRITICISM—JOHNSON 477 


to them. Then follow the consequences of defeat and despair. This is the happy 
attainment of the same old spurious unity of time, which cheats our understanding 
at the cost of our attention. Yet, though marked by these and other defects, Dry- 
den’s play is, after its kind, an excellent one. There are in it passages of great 
power, which will explain the favor with which it has been held by many. Had its 
author been gifted with dramatic genius, as he was not, he would doubtless have 
made it far more effective. But under the limitations imposed by the critical canons 
he accepted, neither he nor any one else could have drawn the picture of life which 
we find in the wonderful corresponding creation of the great poet of human nature. 


ENGLISH CRITICISM 


Dr Jounson : This play keeps curiosity always busy, and the passions always inter- 
ested. The continual hurry of the action, the variety of incidents, and the quick suc- 
cession of one personage to another, call the mind forward without intermission from 
the first Act to the last. But the power of delighting is derived principally from the 
frequent changes of the scene; for, except the feminine arts, some of which are too 
low, which distinguish Cleopatra, no character is very strongly discriminated. Upton, 
who did not easily miss what he desired to find, has discovered that the language of 
Antony is, with great skill and learning, made pompous and superb, according to his 
real practice. But I think his diction not distinguishable from that of others: the 
most tumid speech in the play is,that which Czesar makes to Octavia. The events, 
of which the principal are described according to history, are produced without any 
art of connection or care of disposition. 


W. HazuitT (p. 95): This is a very noble play. Though not in the first class of 
Shakespear’s productions, it stands next to them, and is, we think, the finest of his 
Historical Plays, that is, of those in which he made poetry the organ of history, and 
assumed a certain tone of character and sentiment, in conformity to known facts, 
instead of trusting to his observations of general nature or to the unlimited indulgence 
of his own fancy. What he has added to the history, is upon a par with it. His 
genius was, as it were, a match for history as well as nature, and could grapple at 
will with either. This play is full of that pervading comprehensive power by which 
the poet could always make himself master of time and circumstances. It presents 
a fine picture of Roman pride and Eastern magnificence: and in the struggle between 
the two, the empire of the world seems suspended, ‘like the swan’s down-feather, 
‘That stands upon the swell at full of tide, And neither way inclines.’ The char- 
acters breathe, move, and live. Shakespear does not stand reasoning on what his 
characters would do or say, but at once éecomes them, and speaks and acts for them. 
He does not present us with groups of stage-puppets or poetical machines making set 
speeches on human life, and acting from a calculation of ostensible motives, but he 
brings living men and women on the scene, who speak and act from real feelings, 
according to the ebbs and flows of passion, without the least tincture of the pedantry 
of logic or rhetoric. Nothing is made out by inference and analogy, by climax and 
antithesis, but every thing takes place just as it would have done in reality, according 
to the occasion. 

(Page 102): Shakespear’s genius has spread over the whole play a richness like 


the overflowing of the Nile. 


478 APPENDIX 


T. CAMPBELL (p. Ixi): If I were to select any historical play of Shakspeare, in 
which he has combined an almost literal fidelity to history with an equally faithful 
adherence to the truth of nature, and in which he superinduces the merit of skilful 
dramatic management, it would be Anthony and Cleopatra. In his portraiture of 
Antony there is, perhaps, a flattered likeness of the original by Plutarch; but the 
similitude loses little of its strength by Shakspeare’s softening and keeping in the 
shade his traits of cruelty. In Cleopatra, we can discern nothing materially different 
from the vouched historical sorceress; she nevertheless has a more vivid meteoric 
and versatile play of enchantment in Shakspeare’s likeness of her, than in a dozen 
of other poetical copies in which the artists took much greater liberties with historical 
truth :—he paints her as if the gypsy herself had cast her spell over him, and given 
her own witchcraft to his pencil. At the same time, playfully interesting to our fancy 
as he makes this enchantress, he keeps us far from a vicious sympathy. The asp at 
her bosom, that lulls its nurse asleep, has no poison for our morality. A single 
glance at the devoted and dignified Octavia recalls our homage to virtue ; but with 
delicate skill he withholds the purer woman from prominent contact with the wanton 
Queen, and does not, like Dryden, bring the two to a scolding match. 


A. SKOTTOWE (ii, 238) : The passage most strongly expressive of the entire sub- 
jection of Antony’s reason to his passions, is his reply to Cleopatra’s petition for 
pardon, when her indiscretion had effected his utter ruin: ‘ Fall not a tear, I say,’ 
etc. III, xi, 78. The opinion entertained by the dramatic Antony of the worthless- 
ness of Cleopatra, is a circumstance entirely of the poet’s own creation, Antony 
describes her as ‘cunning past man’s thought,’ and designates her in terms which, 
to the mind of a lover, would naturally communicate feelings of unmingled disgust. 
‘I found you as a morsel,’ etc. III, xiii, 142. He is fully alive to, and bitterly 
laments the folly and degradation of his conduct; but his firmest resolves are feebly 
opposed against the potent spell of his ‘ grave charm,—Whose eye beck’d forth his 
‘wars, and call’d them home ; Whose bosom was his crownet, his chief end.’ The opin- 
ions and actions of Shakespeare’s Antony, therefore, are diametrically opposed to each 
other; but there is no inconsistency in his conduct. The licentiousness of Cleopatra 
is the link which binds her to the heart of Antony ; dissolute and voluptuous himself, 
her depravity is congenial to his nature ; that which others would have revolted from, 
is to him a spell. . . . But, what was grateful to his appetite did not command the 
approbation of his judgement. History has alike recorded Antony’s intellectual 
ability and his corporeal frailty : a victim to the latter, enough of the former doubtless 
survived to impress on his memory the deepest sense of his folly, the weakness and 
the unworthiness of his infatuation. Shakespeare read the inmost thoughts of Antony; 
he has given them an everlasting record. 


H. HALvam (iii, 571): Antony and Cleopatra does not furnish, perhaps, so many 
striking beauties as [ _Judius Cesar], but is at least equally redolent of the genius of 
Shakspeare. Antony indeed was given him by history, and he has but embodied in 
his own vivid colours the irregular mind of the Triumvir, ambitious and daring against 
all enemies but himself. In Cleopatra he had less to guide him; she is another 
incarnation of the same passions, more lawless and insensible to reason and honour, 
as they are found in women. This character being not one that can please, its strong 
and spirited delineation has not been sufficiently observed. It has indeed only a 
poetical originality; the type was in the courtezan of common life, but the resem- 
blance is that of Michael Angelo’s Sybils to a muscular woman. 


ENGLISH CRITICISM—BATHURST 479 


In these three tragedies [ Cordolanus, Julius Cesar, Anthony and Cleopatra] it is 
manifest that Roman character, and still more Roman manners, are not exhibited 
with the precision of a scholar; yet there is something that distinguishes them from 
the rest, something of a grandiosity in the sentiments and language, which shows us 
that Shakespeare had not read that history without entering into its spirit. 


CHARLES BATHURST (p. 130): Anthony and Cleopatra is carelessly written, with 
no attempt at dignity, considering what great personages are introduced; but with a 
great deal of nature, spirit, and knowledge of character, in very many parts, and with 
several most beautiful passages of poetry and imagination; as, for instance, the dream 
of Cleopatra. It has passages, where he lets his mind loose, and follows his fancy 
and feeling freely; particularly, perhaps, in the end; and even the verse breaks 
delightfully out of its trammels, as in the speech about the cloud. The subject ofthe 
play, in fact, was likely often to lead to this looser and softer character ; tenderness, 
even weakness, is its business. It is historical; but it is chiefly the anecdote of his- 
tory, not the dignity of it. Plutarch’s Lives, his only authority, is in fact but, in great 
degree, a collection of anecdotes. But there was no occasion to read Plutarch, to 
understand the part of Cleopatra. The tenderness of feeling, however, extends 
itself to other parts than those of the lovers; at least it is most remarkable in the 
death of Enobarbus—a part which, after the manner of Shakespeare, is made to throw 
great light on the character of Antony himself, which he meant to elevate as much 
as possible ; notwithstanding his great weakness in all that concerns Cleopatra, and 
unmistakable misconduct with regard to his wife. He represents him as, what he 
certainly was not, a man of the most noble and high spirit, capable at times, notwith- 
standing the luxury he afterwards fell into, of a thoroughly soldier-like life, and full 
of kind and generous feelings. He seems to delight in supposing the melancholy 
meditations of a great and active character, when losing his power, and drawing to 
his end. 


HARTLEY COLERIDGE (ii, 183): The general neglect of Axtony and Cleopatra 
by all but students of Shakspeare, and the preference long given to Dryden’s play on 
the same subject, prove the danger of protracting the interest of a plot, in order to 
introduce a greater variety of incidents. The scenes, for example, wherein Pompey 
figures, though well-written, are wholly inconclusive ; they form a part of the biogra- 
phy of Antony, not of his tragedy. Nor is it easy to conjecture Shakspeare’s reason 
for introducing so many short scenes, which serve no purpose but to let the auditor 
know the news. They form a sort of back-ground to the picture, but they detain the 
action. For poetry and character, there are few dramas superior; nor is there any 
want of deep and grand pathos; but perhaps both Antony and Cleopatra are too 
heroic to be pitied for weakness, and too viciously foolish to be admired for their 
heroism. Seldom has unlawful love been rendered so interesting; but the interest, 
though not dangerous, is not perfectly agreeable. 


W. W. Luoyp (Critical Essay, ed. Singer, p. 332): The passion of Antony for 
Cleopatra is too obviously spurious to command our sympathy, but at least it is pas- 
sion; it is in its way sympathetic, and so far unselfish ; and the course of the action 
makes us feel the value of this quality, however debased, when set against the cold 
negation of all sympathetic feeling, the barren materialism of unsocial ambition that 
covets possession of the instruments of gratification at the cost of the very sense that 


480 APPENDIX 


gives the faculty of being gratified. Notwithstanding therefore that the folly of 
Antony and the falsehood of the Egyptian Queen are made most manifest, the modi- 
fied triumph of the piece is theirs, and Czsar and his soldiers are left duped and 
defied and disappointed. . . . The play throughout evinces the master hand of Shake- 
speare—it reads with unchecked freshness, as though it flowed with quickest facility 
from his pen, at the same time that every line is charged with the maturest autumn 
of his ripened mind. Luxuriant as the execution is, it is so governed by appropriate- 
ness, that I doubt whether any of Shakespeare’s plays can be more justly entitled 
correct, in the technical sense, than Antony and Cleopatra,—whether from any other 
a single line could less easily be struck out without apparent injury and loss. 


ANON. (R. CARTWRIGHT ?, Sonnets of W. Sh., pp. 19, 22, 31) : Lepidus is evidently 
Marlowe ; and, strangest of all, Sextus Pompeius is William Herbert ; and Menas, 
Thomas Thorpe. It is not probable, that Miss Anne Hathaway ever dreamt of being 
the sister of Caesar and the wife of a greater than Caesar; but was Shakspere himself 
conscious of his own position in the world of poetry and thought? Certainly, this 
play proves it; but this self-consciousness is not in the least degree necessarily con- 
nected with pride or vanity; it is the repose, the calm majesty of the Olympian Jove; 
and when Antony acknowledges himself a Roman by a Roman valiantly vanquished, 
it is the Shakspere of 1593 acknowledging the moral supremacy and greatness of him 
of 1613. It may perhaps be advisable, and more satisfactory to the reader to point 
out, how far the characters in the Sonnets and in the Play agree or tally one with 
another. The two ladies readily answer for themselves—Cleopatra being, of course, 
the lady with the raven black eyes; and Octavia, Mrs. W. Shakspere. Enobarbus 
also, the personal friend and favourite officer of Antony, treacherous, repentant, and 
forgiven, is easily recognized as Lord Southampton, who was in after-life ‘a great 
‘captain in the Spanish wars, and in the Low Countries.’ To conclude, Antony is 
evidently not the Mark Antony of history, but the fully developed Shakspere of 1593 
—an archangel ruined; Lord Southampton is clearly pointed at in Enobarbus ; the 
character of Marlowe is drawn with extraordinary accuracy; the Earl of Pembroke 
is very distinctly marked; and the allusion to Thomas Thorpe a home-thrust. It is 
impossible that Shakspere, in his fiftieth year, could, even offhand as a sketch, have 
written these passages without a clear and definite object ; and yet the two apparently 
trifling and unmeaning conversations, the one with Menas, and the other about 
Lepidus, might have been omitted, and the parts of Pompey and Lepidus might have 
been dismissed in a few words, just like Fulvia, without injury to the body of the 
work ; and perhaps the play would then have been cast in a more classical mould, 
less distasteful to French critics, and more worthy of a Daniel or a Pembroke’s 
Mother ; but it would not have been a Reply to the tale in the Sonnets. 


J. A. Heraup (p. 374): In closing his cycle of Roman plays, Shakspere’s ambition 
manifested itself in the highest form. His intellectual energies had already blended 
with and modified his imaginative, his passionate, and his creative power and impulses; 
but they were now to be identified at the acme of their manifestations, in his sublime 
and wonderful tragedy of Antony and Cleopatra. We have already witnessed the 
poet looking down, as a superior intelligence, on the loves of Troilus and Cressida, 
and sporting as an equal with those of Vess and Adonis. We have now to see him 
identify himself with two mortals at the height of fortune, who, in a species of heroic 
madness, had conceived themselves to be in the position of Divine Powers, exempt 


ENGLISH CRITICISM—DOWDEN 481 


from all laws except that of their own wills. This is the elevation at which Shak- 
spere sustains his argument, and thus prevents it from becoming immoral, as it does 
in the hands of Dryden, who paints his heroine and hero as mere human persons, of 
great rank indeed, indulging in voluptuous and licentious habits. No notion of guilt 
attaches to the conduct of Shakspere’s Antony and Cleopatra either in the poet’s 
opinion or theirown. They absolutely transcend all relative conventions, all possible 
forms of manners. They consciously acknowledge, and therefore transgress, no law. 
They live in an ideal region, far above the reach of a moral code, and justify their 
acts on the warranty of their own nature. They swear by and recognise no higher 
power than themselves. That this is a false position there is no doubt; and the 
poet, by the catastrophe of his tragedy shows it to have been such. But while the 
divine revels last, the actors in them fully believe that they are the divinities whom 
they would represent. Antony and Cleopatra surrender themselves without reserve 
to the inspirations with which they are filled, and are no less in their own estimation 
than the very deities of love. They suffer no vulgar criticism, no every-day cares, to 
come near them, and hold themselves aloof from the customary and the common. 
They sit on thrones outside the circle of the round globe, and repose on couches 
which float in air-like clouds, and never touch the surface of the planet. . . . There 
is a poetic valour as well as a personal one, and it required a brave poet to conceive 
and execute such a design. With a happy audacity, Shakspere rises from the begin- 
ning to the height of his theme. The love of his heroic pair, they assume to be 
boundless. To set a bourne to it, would require the discovery of a new heaven, new 
earth. The manner in which Antony suffers the imperial Egyptian to overbear his 
very manhood shows at any rate that his is without limits. No consideration or 
interest, however solemn or serious, can prevent its extension. 


EDWARD DowDEN (p. 308) : The spirit of the play, though superficially it appear 
voluptuous, is essentially severe. That is to say, Shakspere is faithful to the fact. 
The fascination exercised by Cleopatra over Antony, and hardly less by Antony over 
Cleopatra, is not so much that of the senses as of the sensuous imagination. A third 
of the world is theirs. They have left youth behind with its slight, melodious rap- 
tures and despairs. Theirs is the deeper intoxication of middle age, when death has 
become a reality, when the world is limited and positive, when life is urged to yield 
up quickly its utmost treasures of delight. What may they not achieve of joy who 
have power, and beauty, and pomp, and pleasure all their own? How shall they 
fill every minute of their time with the quintessence of enjoyment and of glory? 
‘Let Rome in Tiber melt ! and the wide arch Of the rang’d empire fall! here is my 
‘space.’ Only ome thing they had not allowed for,—that over and above power, and 
beauty, and pleasure, and pomp, there is a certain inevitable fact, a law which can- 
not be evaded. Pleasure sits enthroned as queen; there is a revel, and the lords of 
the earth, crowned with roses, dance before her to the sound of lascivious flutes. 
But presently the scene changes; the hall of revel is transformed to an arena ; the 
dancers are armed gladiators; and as they advance to combat they pay the last hom- 
age to their Queen with the words, Mortturt ¢e salutant. 


F. J. FuRNIVALL (Leopold Shakspere, Introd. p. \xxxii): That in [Cleopatra], 
the dark woman of Shakspere’s Sonnets, his own fickle, serpent-like, attractive mis- 
tress, is to some extent embodied, I do not doubt. What a superbly sumptuous 
picture, as if painted by Veronese or Titian, is that where Cleopatra first met Antony 


31 


482 APPENDIX 


upon the river of Cydnus! How admirably transferred from Plutarch’s prose! And 
how that fatal inability to say ‘ No’ to woman shows us Antony’s weakness and the 
cause of his final fall. The play is like Zvodlus and Cressida, not only in lust and 
false women (Cressida and Cleopatra) playing such a prominent part in it, but in 
Antony’s renown and power, and selfish preference of his own whims to honour’s 
call, to his country’s good, being the counterpart of Achilles’s. All the characters 
are selfish except Octavia and Eros. ... In [Antony’s] developement, lust and self- 
indulgence prevail, and under their influence he loses judgment, soldiership, even 
the qualities of a man. His seeming impulse towards good in the marriage of 
Octavia lasts but for a time ; all her nobleness and virtue cannot save him. He turns 
from the gem of woman to his Egyptian dish again, and abides by his infatuation 
even when he knows he’s deceived. 


A. C. SWINBURNE (p. 188) : A loftier or a more perfect piece of man’s work was 
never done in all the world than this tragedy of Coriolanus ; the one fit and crown- 
ing epithet for its companion or successor is that bestowed by Coleridge—‘ the most 
‘wonderful.’ It would seem a sign or birthmark of only the greatest among poets 
that they should be sure to rise instantly for awhile above the very highest of their 
native height at the touch of a thought of Cleopatra. So was it, as we all know, 
with William Shakespeare : so is it, as we all see, with Victor Hugo. As we feel in 
the marvellous and matchless verses of Zim-Zisimi all the splendour and fragrance 
and miracle of her mere bodily presence, so from her first imperial dawn on the stage 
of Shakespeare to the setting of that eastern star behind a pall of undissolving cloud 
we feel the charm and the terror and the mystery of her absolute and royal soul. 

Never has he given such proof of his incomparable instinct for abstinence from the 
wrong thing as well as achievement of the right. He has utterly rejected and dis- 
dained all occasion of setting her off by means of any lesser foil than all the glory 
of the world with all its empires. And we need not Antony’s example to show us 
that these are less than straws in the balance. ‘Entre elle et l’univers qui s’offraient 
‘a la fois I] hésita, lachant le monde dans son choix.’ Even as that Roman grasp 
relaxed and let fall the world, so has Shakespeare’s self let go for awhile his greater 
world of imagination, with all its all but infinite variety of life and thought and 
action, for love of that more infinite variety which custom could not stale. Himself 
a second and a yet more fortunate Antony, he has once more laid a world, and a 
world more wonderful than ever, at her feet. He has put aside for her sake all 
other forms and figures of womanhood ; he, father or creator of Rosalind, of Cor- 
delia, of Desdemona, and of Imogen, he too, like the sun-god and sender of all 
song, has anchored his eyes on her whom ‘ Phcebus’ amorous pinches’ could not 
leave ‘black, nor ‘ wrinkled deep in time’ ; on that incarnate and imperishable 
‘spirit of sense,’ to whom at the very last ‘ The stroke of death is as a lover’s pinch, 
‘That hurts, and is desired.’ To him, as to the dying husband of Octavia, this crea- 
ture of his own hand might have boasted herself that the loveliest and purest among 
all her sisters of his begetting, ‘with her modest eyes And still conclusion, shall 
‘acquire no honour, Demurring upon me.’ To sum up, Shakespeare has elsewhere 
given us in ideal incarnation the perfect mother, the perfect wife, the perfect daughter, 
the perfect mistress, or the perfect maiden; here only once for all he has given us 
the perfect and the everlasting woman. 

And what a world of great men and great things, ‘high actions and high pas- 
‘sions,’ is this that he has spread under her for a foot-cloth or hung behind her for a 


ENGLISH CRITICISM—HUDSON ’ 483 
curtain! The descendant of that other, his ancestral Alcides, late offshoot of the god 
whom he loved and who so long was loth to leave him, is here, as in history, the 
visible one man revealed who could grapple for a second with very Rome and seem 
to throw it, more lightly than he could cope with Cleopatra. And not the Roman 
Landor himself could see or make us see more clearly than has his fellow provincial 
of Warwickshire that first imperial nephew of her great first paramour, who was to 
his actual uncle even such a foil and counterfeit and perverse and prosperous parody 
as the son of Hortense Beauharnais of Saint-Leu to the son of Letizia Buonaparte 
of Ajaccio. For Shakespeare too, like Landor, had watched his ‘sweet Octavius’ 
smilingly and frowningly ‘draw under nose the knuckle of forefinger’ as he looked 
out upon the trail of innocent blood after the bright receding figure of his brave 
young kinsman. The fair-faced false ‘present God’ of his poetic parasites, the 
smooth triumphant patron and preserver with the heart of ice and iron, smiles before 
us to the very life. It is of no account now to remember that ‘he at Philippi kept 
‘ His sword even like a dancer :’ for the sword of Antony that struck for him is in 
the renegade hand of Dercetas. 

I have said nothing of Enobarbus or of Eros, the fugitive once ruined by his flight 
and again redeemed by the death-agony of his dark and doomed repentance, or the 
freedman transfigured by a death more fair than freedom through the glory of the 
greatness of his faith ; for who can speak of all things or of half that are in Shake- 
speare? And who can speak worthily of any? 


H. N. Hupson (Harv. Ed., p. 6): Judging from my own experience, Antony 
and Cleopatra is the last of Shakespeare’s plays that one grows to appreciate. This 
seems partly owing to the excellences of the work, and partly not. For it is marked 
beyond any other by a superabundance of external animation, as well as by a sur- 
passing fineness of workmanship, such as needs oft-repeated. and most careful perusal 
to bring out full upon the mind’s eye. The great number and variety of events 
crowded together in it, the rapidity with which they pass before us, and, consequently, 
the frequent changes of scene, hold curiosity on the stretch, and somewhat overfill 
the mind with sensuous effect, so as for a long time to distract and divert the thoughts 
from those subtilties of characterization and delicacies of poetry which everywhere | 
accompany them. I am by no means sure but the two things naturally go together, 
yet I have to confess it has long seemed to me that, by selecting fewer mncidents, or 
by condensing the import and spirit of them into larger masses, what is now a serious 
fault in the drama might have been avoided. 


H. Corson (Zutroduction to the Study of Shakespeare, 1889, p. 260, e¢ Seg.) 
This then is the dramatic situation: a man of extraordinary possibilities, altogether 
of colossal but unsymmetrical proportions, brought under the sway of a fascinating 
woman—fascinating in a sensuous direction—with all possible adventitious aids to 
her intrinsic fascination ; but to induce a vigorous resistance to this sway under which ; 
he is brought, and to save him from becoming a helpless victim of her magic, the 
greatest possible demands are made upon his asserting his nobler self—demands 
which, if met, would enable him to ‘ walk the earth with dominion,’ though wanting 
in the civic genius of his colleague in the triumvirate, Octavius. He is an unparal- 
leled illustration of what Hamlet is made to give expression to: ‘So oft it chances 
‘in particular men,’ etc., I, iv, 23-28. This passage expresses the very theme of 
Antony and Cleopatra asa tragedy ; and when Shakespeare wrote it, he had already, 


484 APPENDIX 


there can be little or no doubt, produced the play of Judius Cesar, and had seen in 
the character of Antony, notwithstanding all its great elements, the fatal consequences 
of a ‘vicious mole of nature.’ Antony may have been in his mind when he wrote 
this passage. Thomas De Quincey, in his volume on Zhe Cesars, credits Shake- 
speare with an insight into the grand possibilities of Antony’s nature, which the 
Romans themselves could not have had: ‘Shakespeare,’ he says, ‘had a just con- 
‘ception of the original grandeur which lay beneath that wild tempestuous nature 
‘presented by Antony to the eye of the undiscriminating world. It is to the honor 
‘of Shakespeare that he should have been able to discern the true coloring of this 
‘most original character under the smoke and tarnish of antiquity. It is no less to 
‘the honor of the great triumvir, that a strength of coloring should survive in his 
‘character, capable of baffling the wrongs and ravages of time. Neither is it to be 
‘ thought strange that a character should have been misunderstood and falsely appreci- 
‘ated for nearly two thousand years. It happens not uncommonly, especially 
‘amongst an unimaginative people, like the Romans, that the characters of men are 
‘ciphers and enigmas to their own age, and are first read and interpreted by a far 
‘ distant posterity. . . . Men like Mark Antony, with minds of chaotic composition— 
‘light conflicting with darkness, proportions of colossal grandeur disfigured by 
‘unsymmetrical arrangement, the angelic in close neighborhood with the brutal—are 
‘first read in their true meaning by an age learned in the philosophy of the human 
‘heart. Of this philosophy the Romans had, by the necessities of education and 
‘domestic discipline, not less than by original constitution of mind, the very narrow- 
‘est visual range. . . . Not man in his own peculiar nature, but man in his relations 
‘to other men, was the station from which the Roman speculators took up their 
‘philosophy of human nature. Tried by such standard, Mark Antony would be 
‘found wanting. Asa citizen, he was irretrievably licentious, and therefore there 
‘needed not the bitter personal feud, which circumstances had generated between 
‘them, to account for the acharnement with which Cicero pursued him. Had Antony 
‘been his friend even, or his near kinsman, Cicero must still have been his public 
‘enemy. And not merely for his vices; for even the grander features of his char- 
‘acter, his towering ambition, his magnanimity, and the fascinations of his popular 
‘qualities,—were all, in the circumstances of those times, and in zs disposition, of a 
‘tendency dangerously uncivic.’ 

(Page 265): In such a highly-coloured and richly-sensuous passage [as the 
description of Cleopatra’s appearance on the river Cydnus], the great artist creates 
the atmosphere in which the passion-fated pair are exhibited. Now what moral 
problem was involved in the dramatic treatment of such a theme? It could be said, 
@ priori, that the problem consisted in shutting off sympathy with moral obliquity, 
and inviting sympathy with moral freedom so far as the latter is asserted, on the part 
of the principal actors. And just this, it will be seen, Shakespeare has done. We 
are nowhere brought into a sympathetic relationship with the moral obliquity of either 
Antony or Cleopatra. We are protected by the moral spirit with which the dramatist 
works, from any perversion of the moral judgment. And this protection is positive 
rather than negative; for the moral judgment is stimulated to its best activity, 
throughout the play. 

An interesting feature of the play, bearing on its moral spirit, is that part of its 
narrated element which pertains to the hero and heroine—what is ¢o/d of Antony and 
of Cleopatra, instead of being brought dramatically forward. Professor Delius, in his 
valuable papers On Shakespeare's Use of Narration in his Dramas, attributes too 


ENGLISH CRITICISM—WINTER 485 


much, perhaps, of the narrated element, to the deficiencies of the stage in Shake- 
speare’s time, and not enough to the perspective the artist aimed after, by his use of 
narration, and to the moral proportion of a play. What is thrown into the back- 
ground by narration often serves moral proportion by its being thus kept apart from 
our sympathies. ‘This is especially the case with the tragedy of Antony and Cleo- 
patra. [See I, i, 46-53; I, i, 63-67; II, ii, 267-279; III, x, 26-29; III, xi, 55-80; 
IV, xiv, 55-65; IV, xv, 27-30.] Now the point to be especially noted is, that 
Cleopatra’s fascination is, in the passages quoted, described and spoken of, rather than 
brought dramatically to our feelings through what she herself says and does. These 
descriptions of her charms do not bring us into any sympathetic relationship with her 
personality. We simply now of her charms. The dramatist does but little more 
than the historian. Plutarch ze//s us of her fascination, and so does Dion Cassius. 
Both these writers emphasize it even more than Shakespeare does. But they narrate 
it as historians, They address the fact to our minds. But the drama, if it be within 
its purpose, should bring it, as far as possible, to our zsthetic appreciation, rather 
than simply acquaint us with the fact. But it does not do so. In some, indeed in 
all the scenes in which Cleopatra appears, she is not a very fascinating creature. Her 
treatment of the messenger who brings her the news of Antony’s marriage to Octavia 
does not present her in a very attractive light; rather, in a very repulsive one (A. II. 
Sc. V.). In her rage she is simply irrational, She beats the innocent messenger, 
hales him up and down, and even prepares to kill him. She is almost divorced from 
the moral constitution of things. Her will is the wind’s will. Her fascination, as 
represented by Shakespeare, is almost wholly a sexual one, exerted upon those who 
are in her bodily presence. 


W. WINTER (Old Shrines and Ivy, p. 219): Whatever else may be said as to 
the drift of the tragedy of Antony and Cleopatra this certainly may with truth be 
said, that to strong natures that sicken under the weight of convention and are weary 
with looking upon the littleness of human nature in its ordinary forms, it affords a 
great and splendid, howsoever temporary, relief and refreshment. The winds of 
power blow through it; the strong meridian sunshine blazes over it; the colours of 
morning burn around it; the trumpet blares in its music; and its fragrance is the 
scent of a wilderness of roses. Shakespeare’s vast imagination was here loosed 
upon colossal images and imperial splendours. The passions that clash or mingle 
in this piece are like the ocean surges—fierce, glittering, terrible, glorious. The 
theme is the ruin of a demigod. The adjuncts are empires. Wealth of every sort 
is poured forth with regal and limitless profusion. The language glows with a prod- 
igal emotion and towers to a superb height of eloquence. It does not signify, as 
modifying the effect of all this tumult and glory, that the stern truth of mortal evan- 
escence is suggested all the way and simply disclosed at last in a tragical wreck of 
honour, love, and life. While the pageant endures it endures in diamond light, and 
when it fades and crumbles the change is instantaneous to darkness and death. 
‘ The odds is gone, And there is nothing left remarkable Beneath the visiting moon.’ 
There is no need to inquire whether Shakespeare—who closely followed Plutarch, 
in telling the Roman and Egyptian story—has been true to the historical fact. His 
characters declare themselves with absolute precision and they are not to be mis- 
taken. Antony and Cleopatra are in middle life, and the only possible or admissible 
ideal of them is that which separates them at once and forever from the gentle, puny, 
experimental emotions of youth, and invests them with the developed powers and 


486 APPENDIX 


fearless and exultant passions of men and women to whom the world and life are a 
fact and not a dream. They do not palter. For them there is but one hour, which 
is the present, and one life, which they will entirely and absolutely fulfil. They 
have passed out of the mere instinctive life of the senses, into that more intense and 
thrilling life wherein the senses are fed and governed by the imagination. Shake- 
speare has filled this wonderful play with lines that tell unerringly his grand mean- 
ing in this respect—lines that, to Shakespearean scholars, are in the alphabet of 
memory: ‘There’s beggary in the love that can be reckoned.’ .. . ‘ There’s not a 
‘minute of our lives should stretch Without some pleasure now.’ .. . ‘ Let Rome in 
‘Tiber melt and the wide arch Of the ranged empire fall! Here is my space!’ . 
‘O, thou day of the world, Chain mine armed neck! Leap thou, attire and all, 
‘ Through proof of harness, to my heart and there Ride on the pants triumphing.’ . . . 
‘Fall not a tear, I say! one of them rates All that is won and lost. Give me a kiss ; 
‘Even this repays me.’ Here is no Orsino, sighing for the music that is the food of 
love; no Romeo, taking the measure of an unmade grave ; no Hamlet lover, bidding 
his mistress go to a nunnery. You may indeed, if you possess the subtle, poetic 
sense, hear, through this voluptuous story, the faint, far-off rustle of the garments ~ 
of the coming Nemesis; the low moan of the funeral music that will sing those 
imperial lovers to their rest—for nothing is more inevitably doomed than mortal 
delight in mortal love, and no moralist ever taught his lesson of truth with more 
inexorable purpose than Shakespeare uses here. But in the meantime it is the 
present vitality and not the moral implication of the subject that actors must be con- 
cerned to show, and observers to recognise and comprehend, upon the stage, if this 
tragedy is to be rightly acted and rightly seen. Antony and Cleopatra are lovers, 
but not lovers only. It is the splendid stature and infinite variety of character in 
them that render them puissant in fascination. Each of them speaks great thoughts 
in great language. Each displays noble imagination. Each becomes majestic in 
the hour of danger and pathetically heroic in the hour of death. The dying speeches 
of Antony are in the highest vein that Shakespeare ever reached; and, when you 
consider what is implied as well as what is said, there-is nowhere in him a more 
lofty line than Cleopatra’s ‘Give me my robe, put on my crown; I have immortal 
‘longings in me!’ Antony at the last is a ruin, and like a ruin—dark, weird, grim, 
lonely, haggard—he seems to stand beneath a cold and lurid sunset sky, wherein the 
black clouds gather, while the rising wind blows merciless and terrible over an inter- 
vening waste of rock and desert. Those images indicate the spirit and atmosphere 
of Shakespeare’s conception. 


GEORGE WYNDHAM (WVorth’s Plutarch, etc. Reprint, London, 1895. Zntrod. p. 
xcili) : What, it may be asked, led Shakespeare, amid all the power and magnificence 
of North’s Ptutarch, to select his Coriolanus, his Julius Cesar, and his Antonius ? 
The answer, I think, must be that in Volumnia, Calpurnia and Portia, and Cleopatra, 
he found woman in her three-fold relation to man, of mother, wife, and mistress. I 
have passed over Shakespeare’s Julius Cesar; but I may end by tracing in his 
Antony the golden tradition he accepted from Amyot and North. It is impossible 
to do this in detail, for throughout the first three Acts all the colour and the incident, 
throughout the last two all the incident and the passion, are taken by Shakespeare 
from North, and by North from Amyot. Shakespeare, indeed, is saturated with 
North’s language and possessed by his passion. He is haunted by the story as North 
has told it, so that he even fails to eliminate matters which either are nothing to his 


: ENGLISH CRITICISM—BOAS 487 


purpose or are not susceptible of dramatic presentment: as in I, ii of the Folios, 
where you find Lamprias, Plutarch’s grandfather, and his authority for many details 
of Antony’s career, making an otiose entry as Lamprius, among the characters who 
have something to say. Everywhere are touches whose colour must remain com- 
paratively pale unless they glow again for us as, doubtless, they glowed for Shake- 
speare, with hues reflected from the passages in North that shone in his memory. 
During his first three Acts Shakespeare merely paints the man and the woman who 
are to suffer and die in his two others; and for these portraits he has scraped together 
all his colour from the many such passages as are scattered through the earlier and 
longer portion of North’s Avéonius. But in the Fourth Act Shakespeare changes his 
method : he has no more need to gather and arrange. Rather the concentrated 
passion, born of, and contained in, North’s serried narrative, expands in his verse— 
nay, explodes from it—into those flashes of immortal speech which have given the 
Fourth Act of Antony and Cleopatra its place apart even in Shakespeare. Of all 
that may be said of North’s Plutarch, this perhaps is of deepest significance: that 
every dramatic incident in Shakespeare’s Fourth Act is contained in two, and in his 
Fifth Act, in one and a half folio pages of the Antonius. 


F. S. Boas (p. 473): Certainly in consummate delineation of character, and in 
the superb rhythmical swell of many passages, the work is unsurpassed. But it has 
a grave share of the defects to which Romantic Drama had been liable from the first, 
especially when it was drawing upon historical materials... . Shakspere seems to 
have felt a conscientious obligation to introduce every incident, political or private, 
mentioned by Plutarch, and the result is a loss of dramatic unity and perspective. 
The multiplicity of details is bewildering, and no single event stands out boldly as 
the pivot on which the catastrophe turns, But this artistic defect is here in part the 
outcome of a significant peculiarity in Shakspere’s treatment of love as a dramatic 
theme. Sexual passion is the immediate subject of only three plays, Romeo and 
Juliet, Troilus and Cressida, and Antony and Cleopatra. In each case the emotional 
interest is interwoven with elements of a political nature—the civil strife of Mon- 
tagues and Capulets, the war between the Greeks and the Trojans, the struggle for 
the lordship of the Roman world. Thus Shakspere, even when making an elaborate 
study of amorous passion, does not isolate it from the wider, more material, issues of 
surrounding civic or national life. He thus avoids the disastrous pitfall of treating 
love as the exclusive factor in existence—a method which, according to the nature of 
the love chosen for analysis, tends to produce an unwholesome sentimentality or a 
still more unwholesome prurience. Shakspere opens to our view hearts aflame with 
chaste affection or with sensuous desire, but he never cheats himself or others into 
the belief that sexual relationship is the solitary, imperious concern of all mankind. 
From the kaleidoscopic changes of Cleopatra’s moods he turns our gaze to the legions 
tramping in solid array through the uttermost parts of the earth, or to the council- 
chambers where the destinies of kingdoms are being decided by the stroke of a pen. 
We are shown in turn every aspect of the most materialistic age in the world’s his- 
tory, the age when Roman civic virtue was, in its death-throes, suffocated by the 
plethora of its golden spoils from the South and the East. 


Tuomas R. Lounspury (p. 96): In certain ways the Antony and Cleopatra of 
Shakespeare is one of the most astonishing exhibitions of the many astonishing 
exhibitions the poet has afforded of that almost divine insight and intuition which 


488 APPENDIX 


enabled him to comprehend at a glance that complete whole of which other men, 
after painful toil, learn but a beggarly part. The student of ancient history can find 
in the play occasional disregard of precise dates. He can discover, in some cases, a 
sequence of events which is not in absolutely strict accord with the account of them 
that has been handed down. But from no investigation of records, from no inter- 
pretation of texts, will he ever arrive at so clear and vivid a conception of the char- 
acters of the actors who then took part in the struggle for the supremacy of the world. 
Nowhere in ancient story or song will he find, as here, the light which enables him 
to see the men as they are. It is a gorgeous gallery in which each personage stands 
out so distinct that there is no danger of misapprehension or confusion as to the parts 
they fill, Antony appears the soldier and voluptuary he was, swayed alternately by 
love, by regret, by ambition, at one moment the great ruler of the divided world, at 
the next recklessly flinging his future away at the dictation of a passionate caprice; 
Cleopatra, true to no interest, fascinating, treacherous, charming with her grace those 
whom she revolts by her conduct, luring the man she half loves to a ruin which 
involves herself in his fate; Octavius, cool, calculating, never allowing his heart to 
gain, either for good or evil, the better of his head, showing in early youth the self- 
restraint, the caution, the knowledge of the world which belong to advancing years; 
the feeble Lepidus, striving to act the part of a reconciler to the two mighty oppo- 
sites, with whom the irony of fate has thrown him into conjunction: these and half- 
a-dozen minor characters appear painted in clear and sharp outline on the crowded 
canvas of Shakespeare; while in attendance, like the chorus of a Greek tragedy, 
stands Enobarbus, commenting on every incident of the great world-drama which is 
acted before his eyes, ominously foreboding the declining fortunes of his chief in 
the moral ruin which carries with it prostration of the intellect, and pointing to the 
inevitable catastrophe of shame and dishonor to which events are hurrying. 


RICHARD GARNETT (Lxglish Literature, etc., ii, 243): The close relationship 
between Antony and Cleopatra and Pericles, Prince of Tyre, is shown by the cir- 
cumstance that, though only Pericles was printed, both were entered for publication 
on the same day, May 20, 1608. Which was first written cannot be known; the 
probability is that some play entirely from Shakespeare’s hand would intervene 
between two, like Zion and Pericles, produced with the help of collaborators. The 
question, however, is not material, for both show Shakespeare’s restoration to a sane 
and cheerful view of life. Antony and Cleopatra is pre-eminently thé work of one 
interested in the ‘ world’s great business.’ Hardly anywhere else is there such bustle, 
such variety, such zest for political and military affairs. Shakespeare is thoroughly 
in charity with his principal characters. His treatment of Cleopatra is purely objec- 
tive, there is no trace of personal resentment, as in his portrait of Cressida. In 
Antony he has marvellously depicted ‘the average sensual man,’ on a far lower 
plane than a noble idealist like Brutus, but still capable of deep human feeling. This 
was shown in /ulius Cesar, by the great speeches beginning ‘O pardon me, thou 
‘bleeding piece of earth,’ and ‘ This was the noblest Roman of them all.’. In Axéony 
and Cleopatra this depth of feeling is entirely devoted to a woman; and so intense, 
especially under the influence of jealousy, so sincere, so single-minded, save for one 
vacillation under stress of politics, is it that we overlook the fact that we have before 
us an Antony in decay, no longer able to sway the Roman multitude or school Octavius. 
Wisdom and policy are gone forever, even martial honour is dimmed, but love makes 
amends for all. Such a picture necessarily implies a corresponding brilliancy in the 


ENGLISH CRITICISM—COURTHOPE 489 


portrait of Cleopatra, and it is needless to remark that she is perhaps the most wonder- 
ful of all Shakespeare’s studies of female character. He follows Plutarch’s deline- 
ation closely, but performs the same miracle upon it as Venus wrought upon the 
efigy of Galatea: a beautiful image becomes a living being. Perhaps the keynote 
of the personality is what Shakespeare terms ‘her infinite variety’; there is room in 
her for every phase of female character. The same amplitude characterises the play 
itself, with its great sweep in time and place, its continual changes of scene, its crowd 
of personages, its multitude of speeches and profusion of poetical imagery. The con- 
trast with /w/ius Cesar is instructive. There the interest is more concentrated, the 
characterisation more minute, and the execution more laborious. The ease with 
which Shakespeare handles his theme in the later play, and the plasticity of the 
entire subject in his hands, manifest the perfection of his art by dint of practice, but 
impair the effectiveness of his piece on the stage. The actor has fewer grand oppor- 
tunities than of yore, and although the drama is resplendent with poetical phrases, 
there are few sustained outbursts of passion or eloquence. The impersonation of 
Cleopatra, moreover, demands an actress of mature years. In Shakespeare’s time 
there was no difficulty, for there were no actresses. The representation of his Cleo- 
patra by a Joy strikes us now as indescribably farcical. 


W. J. CouRTHOPE (IV, 178): Antony’s character in its extraordinary versatility— 
orator, soldier and debauchee ; a Henry V. without his power of self-control—fur- 
nished one of those contradictory problems of human nature which Shakespeare was 
accustomed to study with the most sympathetic insight; and the meretricious fasci- 
nation of Cleopatra, as recorded by Plutarch, joined (for she is no Cressida) to a 
certain greatness of soul and fidelity of passion, must have struck the poet’s imagi- 
nation by its likeness, as well as its contrast, to some woman whose character he 
painted in his Sozmets. The use of the word ‘will’ in this remarkable play is 
noticeable. When Antony has left the battle of Actium, to his own dishonour, in 
pursuit of the flying Cleopatra, the queen asks the shrewd, worldly, and calculat- 
ing Enobarbus, who is introduced into the play as a kind of chorus to comment on 
Antony and his fortunes: ‘Is Antony or we in fault for this?’ Enobarbus replies: 
« Antony only, that would make his will Lord of his reason.’ (III, xii.) Yet Antony 
throughout the play recognises that he is acting against his deliberate resolution, 
under the irresistible influence of passion: ‘I followed that I blush to look upon: 
* My very hairs do mutiny ; for the white Reprove the brown for rashness, and they 
‘them For fear and doting.’ (III, xi.) So that his conduct is what Iago calls ‘ merely 
“a lust of the blood and permission of the will.’ (I, iii.) This is the very helpless- 
ness of passion spoken of in Sonnet cl.: ‘O, from what power hast thou this pow- 
‘erful might With insufficiency my heart to sway? To make me give the lie to my 
‘true sight And swear that brightness doth not grace the day? Whence hast thou 
‘this becoming of things ill, That in the very refuse of thy deeds There is such 
‘strength and warrantise of skill That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?’ 


H. W. Masie (p. 271): Antony and Cleopatra is the drama of the East and 
West in mortal collision of ideals and motives, and the East succumbs to the superior 
fibre and more highly organized character of the West. Cleopatra is the greatest of 
the enchantresses. She has wit, grace, humour; the intoxication of sex breathes 
from her ; she unites the passion of a great temperament with the fathomless coquetry 
of a courtesan of genius. She is passionately alive, avid of sensation, consumed with 


490 APPENDIX 


love of pleasure, imperious in her demands for that absolute homage which slays 
honour and saps manhood at the very springs of its power. This superb embodiment 
of femininity, untouched by pity and untroubled by conscience, has a compelling 
charm, born in the mystery of passion and taking on the radiance of a thousand 
moods which melt into one another in endless succession, as if there were no limit to 
the resources of her temperament and the sorceries of her beauty. Of her alone has 
the greatest of poets dared to declare that ‘age cannot wither her, nor custom stale 
‘her infinite variety.’ It is this magnificence which invests Cleopatra’s criminality 
with a kind of sublimity, so vast is the scale of her being and so tremendous the force 
of her passions. The depth of Shakespeare’s poetic art and the power of his imagi- 
nation are displayed in their full compass in Antony and Cleopatra. 


A. C. BRADLEY (Quarterly Review, April, 1906, p. 350) : Why is it that, although 
we close the book in a triumph which is more than reconciliation, this is mingled, as 
we look back on the story, with a sadness so peculiar, almost the sadness of disen- 
chantment? Is it that, when the glow has faded, Cleopatra’s ecstasy comes to appear, 
I would not say factitious, but an effort strained and prodigious as well as glorious, 
not, like Othello’s last speech, the final expression of character, of thoughts and 
emotions which have dominated a whole life? Perhaps this is so, but there is some- 
thing more, something that sounds paradoxical: we are saddened by the very fact 
that the catastrophe saddens us so little; it pains us that we should feel so much tri- 
umph and pleasure. In ‘ Romeo and Juliet,’ ‘ Hamlet,’ ‘ Othello,’ though in a sense 
we accept the deaths of hero and heroine, we feel a keen sorrow. We look back, 
think how noble or beautiful they were, wish that fate had opposed to them a weaker 
enemy, dream possibly of the life they might then have led. Here we can hardly 
do this. With all our admiration and sympathy for the lovers we do not wish them 
to gain the world. It is better for the world’s sake, and not less for their own, that 
they should fail and die. At the very first they came before us, unlike those others, 
unlike Coriolanus and even Macbeth, in a glory already tarnished, half-ruined by 
their past. Indeed one source of strange and most unusual effect in their story is 
that this marvellous passion comes to adepts in the experience and art of passion, 
who might be expected to have worn its charm away. Its splendour dazzles us; 
but, when the splendour vanishes, we do not mourn, as we mourn for the love of 
Romeo or Othello, that a thing so bright and good should die. And the fact that 
we mourn so little saddens us. 

A comparison of Shakespearean tragedies seems to prove that the tragic emotions 
are stirred in the fullest possible measure only when such beauty or nobility of char- 
acter is displayed as commands unreserved admiration or love; or when, in default 
of this, the forces which move the agents, and the conflict which results from these 
forces, attain a terrifying and overwhelming power. The four most famous tragedies 
satisfy one or both of these conditions; ‘Antony and Cleopatra,’ though a great 
tragedy, satisfies neither of them completely. But to say this is not to criticise it. It 
does not attempt to satisfy these conditions, and then fail in the attempt. It attempts 
something different, and succeeds as triumphantly as ‘Othello’ itself. In doing so 
it gives us what no other tragedy can give, and it leaves us, no less than any other, 
lost in astonishment at the powers which created it. 


GERMAN CRITICISM—GOETHE 491 


GERMAN CRITICISM 


GOETHE (Shakespeare und hein Ende, 1813, § 1): Be another remark here 
made: it will be difficult to find a second poet in whose separate works there is 
always a different conception operative and throughout effective, as can be demon- 
strated in Shakespeare’s various plays. Thus throughout Coriolanus there runs the 
vexation that the common people will not recognise the pre-eminence of their superiors. 
In Julius Cesar everything revolves about the idea that the upper classes are unwill- 
ing to see the highest position occupied, because they vainly imagine that they can 
be effective as a body corporate. In Antony and Cleopatra, it is proclaimed with a 
thousand tongues that self-indulgence and achievement are incompatible. 


G. G, GERVINUS (ii, 315) : There arises, moreover, an ethical objection [to this 
play] which will prejudice the majority of readers against it, and against Coleridge’s 
opinion of it. Among the Dramat’s Persone there is no great and noble character, 
and in the actions of the drama, no really elevating feature, either in its politics or 
in its love-affairs. This play seems to make us intuitively aware how much we 
should lose in Shakespeare, if, with his confessedly great knowledge of men and 
nature, there did not go, hand in hand, esthetic excellence (the ideal concentration 
of actors and actions), and ethical excellence (the ideal height of what is represented 
as human nature). The poet had to set forth a debased period in his Antony and 
Cleopatra; for the truth of history, he did so adequately; but this did not exclude 
him from giving.a glance at a better state of human nature, which, amid so much 
degradation, might comfort and elevate us. If we recall the Azstorical Plays, where 
Shakespeare had to depict generations, for the most part degenerate and ruined, we 
shall find that in Richard J/, there was, as a compensation, a Gaunt and a Carlisle ; 
and even in &ichard J//., the few strokes that depicted the sons of Edward, are a 
beneficent counterpoise to the wide-spread wickedness. Here, however, there is 
nothing of the kind, and we may even affirm that the opportunity for such a counter- 
balance has been conspicuously evaded : it would surely have been easy, in the char- 
acter of Octavia at least, to keep before us some views of what is more noble in 
human nature; even if it were by only a few traits, which would have exhibited her 
to us in action, where now she is merely described to us in words. Let me introduce 
an observation here, which will set this singular defect in Antony and Cleopatra in 
a still stronger light. It seems to us, in truth, as though Shakespeare, about 1607— 
10, had, we will not say a period but, seasons when he composed his poetry, in gen-, 
eral, somewhat more carelessly, be it regarded either zesthetically or ethically. What 
may have been the cause of that which is here conjectured, we can hardly fathom. 
It is, indeed, possible, that at about this time his aversion to everything pertaining 
to the theatre, might have seized him more strongly; it may be also possible, that 
some indications of physical exhaustion had already set in, and that these may have 
been the cause of his retirement, and the first intimation of his early death.* Be the 
cause what it may, of the more negligent treatment of some works of this period, the 


fact itself seems incontestible. 


* Shakespeare died at the age of fifty-two years. This is early, but not quite as 
early as is often supposed. An average of the ages of Jonson, BEAUMONT, FLETCHER, 
Marston, MIDDLETON, GREENE, BURBADGE, ROWLEY, PEELE, and MASSINGER 


is forty-nine years and three-tenths.— ED. 


492 APPENDIX. 

(Page 318) : We might imagine that he has placed the characters of Antony and 
Cleopatra in a more advantageous light than was befitting, and clothed the volup- 
tuaries with a certain exalted splendour, that betrays a decided partiality for them. 
But whatever he did in this respect, was undoubtedly done, not from moral levity, 
but for zesthetic purposes. Had Shakespeare taken Antony exactly as he found him 
in Plutarch, never would he have been able to represent him as a tragic character, 
or have excited an interest in him in his relations with Cleopatra... . It is wonder- 
ful, how Shakespeare so preserved the historical features of Antony’s character, as, 
on the one hand, not to make him unrecognizable, and yet, on the other, to make of 


him an attractive personage. 


Pau Hevss (lntrod. to Trans. ed. Bodenstedt, p. v, 1867) : Two natures are 
here brought in contact, which, in good qualities as well as bad, are as completely 
complemental to each other, as their elevation is high above the average of mankind. 
A ruler of the universe, who has tasted to the last drop all that the world offers both 
of toil and of self-indulgence, meets a queen who can also say that nothing human is 
alien to her. Both stand at the very highest hey-day of life, and are in complete 
fullness of their powers. Long before reaching this point, both would have been, in 
modern phrase, dasés, had not the inexhaustible, classic life of the senses endowed 
each of them with eternal youth. Thus nature, by a species of necessity, binds them 
to each other; each beholds a recognised counterpart in the opposite sex. It is in 
both a final passion, which, because it is the last, blazes up with all the intensity of 
a first love; in a moment, it makes these two mature, world-worn beings, children 
again, and, with the same lightheartedness, as ever a Romeo or a Juliet, wafts them 
above all dangers of their time, and all duties of their station. The only difference 
between them and those two young lovers is that they were cozsczous of their state 
and had reduced their intoxicating revel to a system, and diversified their enjoyments 
with all the refinement of an exquisite art of living. 

(Page vi): Up to this point [where Anthony leaves Octavia and returns to Cleo- 
patra]the general public will understand the hero, and follow his conduct with sym- 
pathy. Thus far he differs in no respect from other enamoured heroes, who ‘sich 
‘mit Mannern schlagen, mit Weibern sich vertragen,’* and to whom a pardon for 
even some suspicious weaknesses will be extended for the sake of a certain romantic 
chivalry. But when, at the very crisis of his fate, he leaves the naval battle because 
his mistress from womanish timidity sets sail and flies,—from that moment he forfeits, 
in the opinion of the majority, all claim to any tragic sympathy, and it is doubtful 
if, throughout the rest of the play, he ever quite regains it. Here is a point, where, 
in my opinion, the psychological problem becomes too fine, too exceptional, too deep 
for a dramatic performance. The conception of a woman, with a power so demon- 
iacal that it mystifies both sense and reason, as here floated before the imagination 
of the poet, perhaps before his memory,—for we must seek in the confessions of the 
Sonnets for the earliest studies of this Cleopatra,—will rarely find on the stage an 
incarnation, which, even to a certain extent, will justify the hero, in holding indiffer- 
ent the gain or loss of a hemisphere in comparison with separation from his enchant- 
ress. When we can be brought to believe in such an elemental power of this passion, 
then and then only can we face the shame of this hero, not with a disapproving shrug, 
but with that tragic shock, which the horror of every inexorable fate alwavs awakens 


* That is, ‘who fight with men, and flirt with women,’ from a Student-song by 
Goethe.—Ep. 


GERMAN CRITICISM—TEN BRINK 493 
in us. I must deny myself the illustration by separate examples of that lavish exuber- 
ance of characteristics wherewith the hand of genius has set forth the figure of the 
Egyptian Queen. I honestly believe it to be the very greatest masterpiece of female 
characterisation ; alongside of which there can be placed no more richly devised figure 
in the whole literature of modern romance, whereof the strength lies in psychologic 
analysis and vivid contrasts. With equal poetic power and depth is the character of 
Anthony depicted to the very last; both are to be measured separately, just as both 
Separately are overtaken by a fate so completely interwoven that the flame of passion, 
which transfigures them at the close with a wondrous glory, reflects its glow back to 
the beginning of the play and illumines many a shadow. The scholastic view, which 
turns Shakespeare into a conscientious moralist, above all things anxious to display, 
in the fate of mortals, the equipoise of guilt and expiation, appears, as it seems to me, 
in no single play in such embarrassing perplexity as in the presence of this tragedy ; 
which undoubtedly preaches with a hundred tongues the lesson, in Goethe’s striking 
words, that ‘self-indulgence and achievement are incompatible.’ But a single prin- 
ciple, founded on experience, and, among others, objectively contained in a poem, 
cannot on that account claim to be considered the soul of the whole work. If the 
poet had chosen this material in order to warn the world against being fooled by 
self-indulgence, because it disables the power of achievement, he would have devised 
the development very differently. In spite of the gross stain wherewith this hero 
of self-indulgence, this heroic rowé, has defiled himself, his character decidedly over- 
shadows the discreet, cool, efficient, and, in fact, victorious rival. Extremely few 
readers will waver in their choice as to which they would give the preference, to the 
cold-blooded Czesar or to the warm-blooded Marc Anthony. And even an audience 
of women would not remain insensible to Cleopatra’s charm. But if a majority could 
be really found, who, in spite of the tragic downfall, did not cease to deem the aristo- 
cratic autocracy of these natures as criminal, the minority could console themselves 
that they had on their own side the poet himself. There arose before him the dazzl- 
ing apparition of such a pair, that ‘stood up peerless,’ and it stimulated his creative 
power. Whatsoever was holy and unholy in such a tie, everything that an average 
morality could plead against it, was undoubtedly as ever present to him as to his 
critics of today. And although it may not have stood written in history, his higher 
comprehension and knowledge of the world taught him the inflexible law that even 
the most highly endowed man must succumb as soon as he ‘ would make his will 
‘Lord of his reason.’ Shakespeare, with his incorruptible honesty, neither concealed 
all this, nor adorned it. Nay, there are traces of even a certain defiance in the sharp 
prominence given to what is hateful and mean. He allows it freely to unfold itself 
in sharp realistic features of every-day life. In his heart, however, he is aware that 
he has but to await the propitious moment to melt all this dross into an irresistible 
glow and refine it. He could not have been the poet that he is, the richly endowed 
son of Mother Nature, had he not known himself to be a blood relation to whatso- 
ever of nobility she had brought forth. When he saw, in this pair, the powers of a 
luxurious life bloom forth and wither in obedience to the law of all earthly things, a 
tragic pain broke from his heart, which had no rest until he had adorned their grave 
with all the treasures of poesy, and, by the most affecting funeral ceremony, rendered 


their death immortal. 


B. TEN BRINK (p. 90): In Antony and Cleopatra, the third in the series of Roman 
dramas, we see, for the first time since Romeo and Juliet, a woman share on an equal 


494 APPENDIX 


footing with the principal character in the action of a Shakespearean tragedy. But 
what a contrast between Juliet and Cleopatra: one, a young girl, hardly more than 
a child, whom the might of a pure and unselfish passion transforms into a woman, 
whose whole being is absorbed by this love which consummates her character and 
her life; the other, a courtesan of genius, if I may say so, with experience of life 
and the world, devoted to pleasure, practiced in all the arts of seduction, endowed 
by nature with an alluring witchery, to whom the fire of her love for Antony alone 
lends a glimmer of womanly dignity. Artistically considered, Cleopatra is, perhaps, 
the masterpiece among Shakespeare’s female characters; given the problem, Shake- 
speare has solved it as no one else could have done. But what conflicts must his 
soul have endured, what bitter experiences must he have passed through, to have set 
himself such a problem, to have created a woman so widely different from all those 
he had pictured before—a woman so devoid of the ideal womanly graces, yet so 
irresistible, for whose sake Antony sacrifices the dominion of the world. 


CarL Puruips (Lokalfarbung in Shakespeares Dramen, p. 32, Kéln, 1887) : 
When we consider all these various points in retrospect, the conclusion is inevitable 
that Shakespeare, in his climatic and geographical references to the native land of 
Cleopatra, remains first of all a poet unsurpassed in truth to nature. Every student 
of geography, even without any thought of Egypt in his mind, would at once assign 
the land represented in this play to a chartographic zone wherein the climate, the 
flora, the fauna, and the human race were all thoroughly consistent. And at the 
same time the poet has striven to reflect symbolically, in the character of the land 
itself and especially in its animal life, the fatal nature of the passion of the hero and 
heroine—an aim which he has attained with his usual supremacy. Finally, the poet 
has given, as an illustration, an historical law, founded in the nature of all races. 
Wheresoever the inhabitants of any country in which nature yields her gifts in lavish, 
prodigal profusion, suffer themselves, by this profusion to be seduced to a love of 
pleasure, from that hour they are doomed to decay, and must become subject to an 
alien race from rougher climates. Without assuming that it was the poet’s first or 
chief intention to give a proof of this, we can at least assert that, with a small expen- 
diture of means, he has supplied it. At all events, in the drama before us, Shake- 
speare has penetrated to the creative power of Nature and has overheard her secrets ; 
with greater truth can he say of himself, what the Soothsayer claims with self- 
conscious modesty, that ‘in Nature’s infinite book of secrecy a little I can read.’ 
However widely critics may differ in their views of our poet’s artistic power and per- 
fection they are of one mind in a recognition of the uniformity of his local colouring. 
In conclusion let me quote the remarks of RUMELIN at the close of his criticism of the 
Roman plays: ‘ Although Shakespeare makes his Roman heroes think and speak 
‘like English lords and barons,’ says Riimelin,* ‘he knew how to impart to his plays 
‘and to his characters a very effective geographic zwance; if he imagined himself in 
‘any particular country, his phantasy assumed a certain tinct which diffused itself 
‘over every object. Throughout Macbeth, Hamlet, Lear there blows a keen north- 
‘ern wind, but in Romeo, in The Merchant of Venice from the very first we feel the 
‘southern warmth. In like manner, these Roman plays seem to have a similar 
‘local colour, a warmer tone, as far as they may be said to have any specific tone 
‘at all.’ 


* Shakespearestudien, p. 108, 1866. 


FRENCH CRITICISM—PASCAL 405 


KARL FRENZEL (Berliner Dramaturgie, 25 May, 1871, i, 258): Cleopatra is 
of the race of Semiramis and of Zenobia, between her and Antony there is enacted 
not merely a love-story but a great political undertaking. Along side of the riotous 
festivities of Alexandria there was advancing a powerful political and social move- 
ment which was to shake the world. On this rock, of which he was only dimly con- 
scious, rather than clearly perceiving it, Shakespeare’s poetry was wrecked. It is 
not the continuous shifting of the scene, whereby we are chased as though by a 
storm from Alexandria to Rome on board of Pompey’s galley, from Rome to Actium, 
and back to Alexandria; it is not the messengers, the servants, the guards, who 
necessarily, by their news, spin out the thread of the action, that break up and shat- 
ter the dramatic unity; it is the material itself, as Shakespeare has comprehended 
it, which has remained in the epic form of a chronicle. The poet has neither 
known how, out of the numberless persons, to select the most important, nor, out of 
the superabundance of circumstances, to eliminate the weightiest; consequently the 
drama lacks genuine core and deliquesces like pap [drezartig]. In notasingle instance 
is the contrast between Antony and Octavius sharply defined, and the perpetual love- 
making of the hero and heroine, which rises and falls in a monotonous alternation 
from tender cooing to furious execrations, is at first comic, but at last tedious. Very 
possibly, admirers of Shakespeare may accept it differently, but to my taste, a good 
third of the speeches of Antony and of Cleopatra trenches close on the bombast of the 
weaker tragedy of Corneille. There is no attempt at a development of character in 
the grand style; from the beginning to the end, Cleopatra is a quarrelsome woman, 
who, in the scenes with the messenger and with Seleucus, strikingly proves that, on 
the old English stage such vé/es of Furies and fish-wives could have been played only 
by young men, for whom they were written. ; 


FRENCH CRITICISM 


PASCAL (Pensées, Premtére Partie. Article IX, No. x\vi): Si le nez de Cléopatre 
eft été plus court, toute la face de la terre aurait changé. 


M. Guizor (WVotice. Translation): There is in Antony a combination of strength 
and of weakness; inconstancy and fickleness are his attributes; generous, sensible, 
impassioned, but volatile he affords a proof that, with an extreme love of pleasure, a 
man of his temperament can, when circumstances require it, combine a lofty soul, 
capable of the noblest resolves, but who will for ever yield to the seductions of a 
woman. Cleopatra is the voluptuous and designing courtesan that history depicts ; 
like Antony she is full of contrasts; she is, by turn, vain as a coquette and majestic as 
a queen; fickle in her thirst for pleasures, and sincere in her love for Antony; she 
seems created for him, and he for her. If her passion lacks the dignity of tragedy,— 
how misfortune ennobles it! How she rises to the grandeur of her rank by the hero- 
ism of her last moments! Worthy indeed, does she show herself to share Antony’s 


tomb! 


H. A. Tatnz (i, 328): How much more visible is this impassioned and unfettered 
genius of Shakespeare in the great characters which sustain the whole weight of the 
drama! The startling imagination, the furious velocity of the manifold and exuberant 
ideas, the unruly passion, rushing upon death and crime, hallucinations, madness, 
all the ravages of delirium bursting through will and reason: such are the forces and 


496 APPENDIX 


ravings which engender them. Shall I speak of dazzling Cleopatra, who holds 
Antony in the whirlwind of her devices and caprices, who fascinates and kills, who 
scatters to the winds the lives of men as a handful of desert-dust, the fatal Eastern 
sorceress who sports with life and death, headstrong, irresistible, child of air and 
fire, whose life is but a tempest, whose thought, ever re-pointed and broken, is like the 
crackling of lightning ? 


PauL STAPFER (p. 398, é seg.): The subject of Shakespeare’s tragedy is the 
guilty love of Antony and Cleopatra, a subject that would have presented an almost 
insuperable difficulty to a poor little poet of a narrow and mediocre type; quite at a 
loss, and biting his pen the while, he would have said to himself, ‘ What is to be 
‘done? Cleopatra is a very wicked woman, a monster, as Horace calls her,—a 
‘mixture of all we most hate and despise, she is a coquette, timid, cowardly, cring- 
‘ing, perfidious, tyrannical, cruel and wanton. To interest decent people in such a 
‘creature is clearly impossible, except by making a selection from among the contra- 
‘dictory features of her character, and since Plutarch speaks of her as being occasion- 
‘ally generous, tender and devoted, heroic and sublime, I must convert the conception 
‘into the rule, and put an expurgated Cleopatra on the stage.’ But Shakespeare 
reasoned in a very different manner. He started with the notion of Cleopatra as an 
enchantress, and he trusted with quiet confidence to the power of his poetry, and to 
his sure knowledge of the human heart, to make the same fascination that she exer- 
cised over her lovers be felt by us: her faults, her vices, her crimes—what do they 
matter? Besides which, it betrays a good deal of simplicity to suppose that certain 
sins which are repulsive in a man are equally odious when met with ina woman. A 
man is ugly, and has hard work to atone for his natural ugliness, but, as a poet has 
said,—and it is no empty compliment, but an astute psychological truth,—women, do 
what they will, are always charming: ‘On en peut, par hasard, trouver qui sont 
‘méchantes ; Mais qu’y voulez vous faire? Elles ont la beauté.’ * 

Shakespeare ‘has not deemed it necessary to leave out any of the stains, big or 
little, in Cleopatra’s character, as he was obliged to do in Antony’s ; and this, instead 
of depriving the lovely little monster of a single charm, only makes her the more 
irresistible. 


FRANGOIS- VICTOR HuGo (vol. vii, Zztrod. p. 9, e¢ seg.) : That which strikes us 
in Pascal’s memorable apothegm on the destiny of man, is the prodigious dispro- 
portion between the fact and its consequences, between the means and its results, 
between the premises and the conclusion. ‘The cause is a je me sats guoi and its 
‘effects are terrifying.’ Thoroughly to comprehend this disproportion, let us reduce 
to its lowest terms the action wherein it occurs: a spendthrift, smitten with a cour- 
tesan whom he lavishly supports, decides, in order to repair his fortune, to marry a 
woman whom he does not love; hardly has the ceremony been concluded before he 
returns to his mistress, to consume with her the dower of his wife. The deserted 
wife seeks the protection of her brother, who, in a rage, challenges the husband. A 
duel follows; the spendthrift falls, and the courtesan in despair commits suicide.— 
Suppose that the events, which I have just described, took place in the narrow circle 
of bourgeoise life,—what will be the result? A mere domestic tragedy, whereof the 
catastrophe will affect only some few lives immediately concerned. On the other 


* Alfred de Musset. 


FRENCH CRITICISM—F.-VICTOR HUGO 497 
hand, let these same events occur in the very highest circle of public life; let the 
courtesan be called Cleopatra, and let her wear a crown; let the spendthrift husband 
be called Antony and reign over the East; and let the brother who avenges the 
insulted wife be called Octavius and be master of the Occident; then the whole 
known world will find itself involved in a household quarrel ; the mourning of one 
family will bring about the mourning of the human race. The earth will tremble 
beneath the tramp of armies, the sea under the weight of fleets; nation will chal- 
lenge nation and both rush at each other; Alexandria will hurl defiance at Carthage; 
Rome and Athens will fly at each other’s throats. A hundred thousand men, twelve 
thousand horses, three hundred ships will hardly suffice to uphold the cause of the 
courtesan ; to the rescue will throng Bocchus, the king of Libya, Tarcodemus, the 
king of Cilicia, Archelaus, the king of Cappadocia, Philadelphus, the king of Paph- 
lagonia, Mithridates, the king of Commagena, Adallas, the king of Thrace, Pole- 
mon, the king of Pontus, Manchus, the king of Arabia, Amynthas, the king of the 
Lycaonians and Galatheans, Herod, the king of the Jews, and the king of the 
Medes. Eighty thousand veterans, twelve thousand horsemen, and two hundred 
and fifty ships will not be too many to uphold the rights of the lawful wife ; Italy, 
Spain, Gaul will send their legions, and Europe, from Slavonia to the Atlantic, will 
be in motion. O amazing logic of facts! Can a cause so puny have such vast 
results! Can a lever sufficient to lift the globe be found in the smile of a mad-cap 
girl? Marry! Because a man is enamoured of a girl, because he dotes on a profil 
éguivogue, forsooth, a universal war must be kindled! Everywhere mothers must 
weep for their children, everywhere lovers must be torn from their sweethearts, 
everywhere hearts must be lacerated. Conscription takes the farmer from his fur- 
row, the peasant from his cabin, the shepherd from his flock. The press-gang emp- 
ties houses to fill the galleys ; muleteers, harvesters, travellers on the road are seized 
by force,—it is Plutarch who tells it; the desert invades the cities; War and Chaos, 
torch in hand, rush over the earth; the heavens are reddened with a fateful glow, it 
is blazing villages, lit by squadrons,—the Orient and the Occident, for long ages 
defiant, have met at last. The shock befell before the promontory of Actium. The 
Orient recoils before the Occident. 

(Page 16): Shakespeare for ever brings back the interest to this sovereign figure 
which gives to the work its unity. Present or absent, Cleopatra pervades the entire 
drama. Even at the feast which the young Pompey spreads for the Triumvirs aboard 
his galley, even at that monstrous orgy where wine turns the head of the noblest, 
where Lepidus rolls under the table, where Antony staggers and where Czsar stam- 
mers, it is Cleopatra who, unperceived, presides. Cleopatra is the fatal enchantress 
who initiated Rome into the startling mysteries of oriental voluptuousness. She is 
the invisible sorceress who sweeps the masters of the globe into the dizzy whirl of 
an Egyptian bacchanal. .. . Cleopatra is the supreme type of seduction. The spell 
which she weaves is the greatest triumph of feminine magic. Her sisters, the other 
heroines of Shakespeare, attract us only by their virtues and by their qualities ; she, 
she enchants us by her very faults, her very weaknesses. . . : Fully assured of the 
irresistible charm of his heroine, the poet does not, for a single instant, suffer us to 
be under any illusion. From the very beginning of the drama, at the moment when 
she enters on the arm of her lover, he tells us what she is with the utmost frankness. 
‘Look,’ he cries, ‘and you shall see in him The triple pillar of the world transform’d 
‘Into a strumpet’s fool.’ Away with reticence, away with ambiguity! Shakespeare 
has neither the timidity of Corneille nor that of Dryden; he does not evade the sub- 


498 APPENDIX 


ject, he faces it full front. He does not deny his heroine, he proclaims her. It is 
a ‘strumpet’ that he installs on the scene ; it is to a ‘strumpet’ that he attracts our 
interest; it is for a ‘strumpet’ that he demands our pity; it is for the death of a 
‘ strumpet ’ and her lover that he exacts our tears. Omnipotence of genius! In this 
drama, where an outraged wife reclaims her rights from a courtesan, it is not the 
wife who enlists our sympathy, it is the courtesan! She whom we compassionate, is 
not Octavia, the austere, the chaste; it is this light o’ love whom Antony had found 
as a ‘morsel cold upon dead Czesar’s trencher.’ But by what means has the poet 
been enabled to produce such a change in the consciences of the spectators, and to 
concentrate on Cleopatra all the sympathy that should be due to Octavia? To work 
this miracle Shakespeare needed to tell nothing but the truth; he had merely to 
reveal to us the profound sentiment which inspired his heroine. Cleopatra had in 
her heart the flame that purifies everything: she loves. It is by love that the royal 
courtesan stands revealed; it is by love that she is rehabilitated. Ay, this Antony 
whom she teases, whom she torments, whom she maddens, this Antony whom at one 
moment she abjures and unscrupulously deceives with Thyreus, she loves him, she 
loves him to distraction. Do you doubt? Listen. The minute that Antony is 
absent, Cleopatra is utterly desolate. She thinks only of him, she speaks only of 
him; she intoxicates herself with mandragora to sleep out the great gap of his 
absence. 

(Page 20): In Plutarch Antony lives long with Octavia, in Shakespeare the mar- 
riage was a mere formality. Who does not see in this perversion of history, by the 
hand of genius, a feature of exquisite delicacy? ‘The poet would not suffer his hero 
to be for a single instant unfaithful to his heroine; he has not permitted a single 
treason, even if legalised, to profane this sanctified adultery. To Shakespeare, the 
union of Antony and Octavia was never aught else than an ephemeral bargain arranged 
by policy; but his union with Cleopatra is an everlasting compact, sealed by devotion. 
Thus the poet does not hesitate to sacrifice the first to the second. In his eyes, that 
which sanctifies the relations between man and woman is less social convention than 
the natural law. Let two beings love each other, let them live the one for the 
other, that is sufficient ; they are affianced for ever, all other engagements to the 
contrary notwithstanding. In the eyes of posterity, as in Shakespeare’s, the spouse 
of Antony is no longer Octavia, it is Cleopatra. The intensity of the passion is its 
legitimacy. 

What a contrast between Antony and Cleopatra, Romeo and Juliet. The latter 
are young, loyal, and candid; there is never a wrinkle on their brow nor remorse in 
their heart ; their characters are pure like their affection ; their souls are as virgin as 
their bodies, Their accord is a continuous effusion of tenderness; it is an harmonious 
duet with not a murmur of discord. What he dreams, she sees; what she perceives 
he accepts. Sighs answer to sighs, tears to tears, kisses to kisses. The innocence 
of the Christian lovers is equaled only by the corruption of the pagan lovers. Antony 
is as vicious as Romeo is honest; Cleopatra is as dissolute as Juliet is chaste. . The 
union of the Roman and the Egyptian is the evil conjunction of two great souls which 
absolute power has made monstrous; this union is sombre like the storm, raucous 
like a debauch, dishevelled like an orgy. The nations crushed by despotism con- 
template with terror this Titanic passion which roars above their heads and bursts forth 
in bolts of lightning. Between the Triumvir and the Queen of Egypt there are only 
quarrels, recriminations, sarcasms, invectives! But what does it matter! They love 
each other; and such is the grandeur of their love that we forget their crimes. ... 


CRITICISM—ANTHONYV—TRENCH 499 


Our compassion rebels against our equity, and the death of Antony and Cleopatra 
wounds us as sorely as the death of Romeo and Juliet. In sooth, the same 
fatality which hurries on the latter, drives on the former. For the one as for the 
other, suicide is a necessity. The likeness between the two catastrophes is such that 
it seems as though in preparing them, destiny had plagiarised itself. This sur- 
prising analogy has not been adequately considered, which, even in the details, pro- 
vokes comparison. The two dénovments take place amid the same funereal scenes ; 
on the one hand it is the tomb of the Ptolemies, on the other the tomb of the Capu- 
lets. Run down by adversity the pagan lovers, like the Christian lovers, are driven 
to bay at the sepulchre; it is to the sepulchre that they betake themselves; at the 
sepulchre is their last tryst. In the two dramas, the same error is followed by the 
same consequences: Antony believes Cleopatra dead and kills himself; Romeo 
believes Juliet dead and kills himself. The attachment of the women keeps pace 
with the devotion of the men; both refuse to save themselves. The one resists the 
solicitations of Czesar, the other the prayer of Friar Laurence. ‘I trust only my 
‘resolution,’ says one, as she applies the aspic. ‘I will not away !’ cries the other, 
and she seizes the poniard. Conclusion sublime! Between these two couples who 
have lived so differently, infinite love has suppressed all differences ; it effaces all dis- 
tinction between the innocent and the guilty; it makes the dying Egyptian the equal 
in agony of the Veronese, it gives to adultery the august majesty of marriage. ‘Hus- 
‘band, I come.’ Yes, the same name that Juliet gives to Romeo, Cleopatra at last 
conquers the right to give to Antony ; at the moment when she kills herself for him, 
she may well be permitted to call him her husband. The two lovers in dying have 
exchanged the kiss of an eternal betrothal. Between her and him, there is no more 
separation to be feared, no divorce possible. . . . Entombed by their conqueror, Antony 
and Cleopatra repose side by side in the nuptial grave. Death has been their mar- 
riage. 


ANTHONY 


Rev. Dr R. C. TRENCH ( Plutarch, etc., London, 1873, p. 56): The Antony of’ 
history, of Plutarch himself, would have been no subject for poetry. Splendidly 
endowed by nature as he was, it would yet have been impossible to claim or create 
a sympathy for one so cruel, dyed so deeply in the noblest blood of Rome, the whole- 
sale plunderer of peaceful cities and provinces that he might squander their spoils on 
the vilest ministers of his pleasures; himself of orgies so shameless, sunken in such 
a mire of sin; in whom met the ugliest features, and what one would have counted 
beforehand as the irreconcilable contradictions, of an Oriental despot and a Roman 
gladiator. And yet, transformed, we may say transfigured by the marvellous touch, 
the Antony of Shakespeare, if not the veritable Antony of history, has not so broken 
with him as not to be recognizable still. For the rest, what was coarse is refined, 
what would take no colour of goodness is ignored, what had any fair side on which 
it could be shown is shown on that side alone. He appears from the first as not 
himself, but as under the spells of that potent Eastern enchantress who had once held 
by these spells a Caesar himself. There are followers who cleave to him in his lowest 
estate, even as there are fitful gleams and glimpses of generosity about him which 
explain this fidelity of theirs; and when at the last we behold him standing amid the 
wreck of fortunes and the waste of gifts, all wrecked and wasted by himself, pene- 
trated through and through with the infinite shame and sadness of such a close to such 
a life, the whole range of poetry offers no more tragical figure than he is, few that 


500 APPENDIX 


arouse a deeper pity ; while yet, ideal as this Antony of Shakespeare is, he is con- 
nected by innumerable subtle bands and finest touches with the real historical Antony, 
at once another and the same. 


CLEOPATRA 


A. SKOTTOWE (ii, 240) : Shakespeare has not been successful in conveying an 
idea of the elegance of Cleopatra’s mind. Neither her manners, thoughts, nor lan- 
guage, impress us with a conviction of her possessing those accomplishments which 
[Plutarch] ascribes to her. 


Mrs JAMESON (ii, p. 120, e¢ seg.) : Of all Shakespeare’s female characters, Mir- 
anda and Cleopatra appear to me the most wonderful. The first, unequalled as a 
poetical conception ; the latter, miraculous as a work of art. If we could make a 
regular classification of his characters, these would form the two extremes of simplicity 
and complexity ; and all his other characters would be found to fill up some shade or 
gradation between these two. Great crimes, springing from high passions, grafted 
on high qualities, are the legitimate source of tragic poetry. But to make the extreme 
of littleness produce an effect like grandeur—to make the excess of frailty produce 
an effect like power—to heap up together all that is most unsubstantial, frivolous, vain, 
contemptible, and variable, till the worthlessness be lost in the magnitude, and a 
sense of the sublime spring from the very elements of littleness,—to do this, belonged 
only to Shakespeare, that worker of miracles. Cleopatra is a brilliant antithesis, a 
compound of contradictions, of all that we most hate, with what we most admire. 
The whole character is the triumph of the external over the innate; and yet like one 
of her country’s hieroglyphics, though she present at first view a splendid and per- 
plexing anomaly, there is deep meaning and wondrous skill in the apparent enigma, 
when we come to analyze and decipher it. But how are we to arrive at the solution 
of this glorious riddle, whose dazzling complexity continually mocks and eludes us? 
What is most astonishing in the character of Cleopatra is its antithetical construction 
—its consistent inconsistency, if I may use such an expression—which renders it quite 
impossible to reduce it to any elementary principles. It will, perhaps, be found on 
the whole, that vanity and the love of power predominate ; but I do not say it zs so, 
for these qualities and a hundred others mingle into each other, and shift, and change, 
and glance away, like the colours in a peacock’s train. In some others of Shakespeare’s 
female characters, also remarkable for their complexity (Portia and Juliet, for instance), 
we are struck with the delightful sense of harmony in the midst of contrast, so that 
the idea of unity and simplicity of effect is produced in the midst of variety; but in 
Cleopatra, it is the absence of unity and simplicity which strikes us; the impression 
is that of perpetual and irreconcileable contrast. The continual approximation of 
whatever is most opposite in character, in situation, in sentiment, would be fatiguing, 
were it not so perfectly natural: the woman herself would be distracting, if she were 
not so enchanting. I have not the slightest doubt that Shakespeare’s Cleopatra is the 
real historical Cleopatra—the ‘ Rare Egyptian ’—individualised and placed before us. 
Her mental accomplishments, her unequalled grace, her woman’s wit and woman’s 
wiles, her irresistible allurements, her starts of irregular grandeur, her bursts of 
ungovernable temper, her vivacity of imagination, her petulant caprice, her fickleness 
and her falsehood, her tenderness and her truth, her childish susceptibility to flattery, 
her magnificent spirit, her royal pride, the gorgeous eastern colouring of the char- 


CRITICISM—CLEOPA TRA—HEINE 501 


acter ; all these contradictory elements has Shakespeare seized, mingled them in their 
extremes, and fused them into one brilliant impersonation of classical elegance, Ori- 
ental voluptuousness, and gipsy sorcery. What better proof can we have of the 
individual truth of the character than the admission that Shakespeare’s Cleopatra pro- 
duces exactly the same effect on us that is recorded of the real Cleopatra? She 
dazzles our faculties, perplexes our judgement, bewilders and bewitches our fancy 
from the beginning to the end of the drama, we are conscious of a kind of fascination 
against which our moral sense rebels, but from which there is no escape. The epi- 
thets applied to her perpetually by Antony and others confirm this impression : 
‘enchanting queen !’—‘ witch ’—‘ spell ’—* great fairy ’"—‘ cockatrice’ —‘ serpent of 
‘old Nile’—‘ thou grave charm ’—are only a few of them... . In representing the 
mutual passion of Antony and Cleopatra as real and fervent, Shakespeare has adhered 
to the truth of history as well as to general nature. On Antony’s side it is a species 
of infatuation, a single and engrossing feeling: it is, in short, the love of a man 
declined in years for a woman very much younger than himself, and who has sub- 
jected him by every species of female enchantment. In Cleopatra the passion is of a 
mixt nature, made up of real attachment, combined with the love of pleasure, the love 
of power, and the love of self. Not only is the character most complicated, but no: 
one sentiment could have existed pure and unvarying in such a mind as hers; her 
passion in itself is true, fixed to one centre ; but like the pennon streaming from the 
mast, it flutters and veers with every breath of her variable temper: yet in the midst 
of all her caprices, follies, and even vices, womanly feeling is still predominant in 
Cleopatra; and the change which takes place in her deportment towards Antony, 
when their evil fortune darkens round them, is as beautiful and interesting in itself 
as it is striking and natural. Instead of the airy caprice and provoking petulance 
she displays in the first scenes, we have a mixture of tenderness, and artifice, and 
fear, and submissive blandishment. Her behaviour, for instance, after the battle of 
Actium, when she quails before the noble and tender rebuke of her lover, is partly 
female subtlety and partly natural feeling. 

The Cleopatra of Fletcher reminds us of the antique colossal statue of her in the 
Vatican, all grandeur and grace. Cleopatra in Dryden’s tragedy is like Guido’s 
dying Cleopatra in the Pitti Palace, tenderly beautiful. Shakespeare’s Cleopatra is 
like one of those graceful and fantastic pieces of antique Arabesque, in which alk 
anomalous shapes and impossible and wild combinations of form are woven together 
in regular confusion and most harmonious discord; and such, we have reason to 
believe, was the living woman herself, when she existed upon this earth. 


H. HeEIneE (v, 288): For Cleopatra isa woman. She loves and betrays at the 
same time. It is a mistake to believe that women when they betray us have ceased 
to love. They follow only their inborn nature; and if they do not wish to empty the 
forbidden cup, they like at least to sip from it, or lick the brim, just to see what poison 
tastes like. . . . Yes, this Cleopatra is a woman in the blessedest and cursedest sense _ 
of the word! She reminds me of that saying of Lessing, ‘ When God made woman 
‘He took too finea clay!’ The extreme delicacy of His material seldom agrees 
with the requirements of life. This creature is at once too good and too bad for this 
world. Most charming attractions are here the cause of most repulsive frailties. With 
enchanting truth Shakespeare depicts, even at the first appearance of Cleopatra, the 
variegated fluttering spirit of caprice which is always rampant in the brain of the 
' beautiful queen, not seldom bubbling over in the most notable questions and desires,, 


502 APPENDIX 


and is perhaps really to be regarded as the final cause of all her actions and behaviour. 
... From the excited, unbalanced mind of Cleopatra, made up of extremes shuffled 
together, a mind oppressively sultry, there flashes, like heat-lightning, a sensuous, 
wild, and brimstone-yellow wit, which frightens rather than pleases. Plutarch gives 
us an idea of this wit, which shows itself more in deeds than words... 

The surroundings of Cleopatra are as intensely witty as her character. This 
capricious, pleasure-seeking, ever-veering, feverishly coquettish woman, this antique 
Parisienne, this goddess of life, scintillated and ruled over Egypt, the stark, silent 
land of the dead. You know it well, that Egypt, that Mizraim full of mystery, that 
Nile with its narrow valley, looking like a coffin. In the high reeds grins the croc- 
odile, or the exposed babe of Revelation whimpers. Rock temples with colossal 
pillars, whereon appear caricatures of sacred animals of horribly varied hues. At the 
portal nods a monk of Isis, with hieroglyphic head-gear. In luxurious villas, mum- 
mies take their siestas, and the gilded masks protect them from the swarms of carrion 
flies. There stand slender obelisks and squat pyramids, like dumb thoughts. In 
the background we are greeted by the Ethiopian mountains of the Moon, hiding 
the sources of the Nile. Everywhere Death, Stone, and Mystery. And over this: 
land, there ruled as queen the beautiful Cleopatra. How witty God is! 


CHARLEs BATHURST (p. 131): The character of Cleopatra is fully like that of a 
queen, in boldness, pride and command. But not at all otherwise. Her passions are 
those of a mere ordinary woman, who has no respect for herself. This may have 
been the case in fact with many queens, in private, because they have less to control 
them than other people; but it certainly ought not to be so represented. Her love 
for Antony is much inferior in depth, steadiness, and sincerity to his for her: but 
this was required by the events of the history. However, Shakespeare has put some 
very fine things here and there in her speeches, has made her interesting throughout, 
and winds her up at the last, partly by showing the attachment of her attendants to 
her, most magnificently. 


HENRY GILES (p. 143) : With more commanding sweep of character and intel- 
lect, we have impassioned womanhood in Cleopatra. Wonderful she is in her grand 
and dazzling loveliness. Full of soul, full of power, and full of poetry, she is the 
very majesty of voluptuousness ; she could beat Antony himself in the strength and 
endurance of carousal. ‘QO, times,’ she says, ‘I laughed him out of patience, and 
‘that night I laughed him into patience, and next morning, ere the ninth hour, I 
‘drunk him to his bed.’ Ambitious, yet sensuous; cunning, yet intellectual ; insid- 
ious, yet bold; high and daring in her aims, she contrives to combine politics with 
pleasure. Keen in her understanding, yet gorgeous in her imagination, she knew 
how to conceal a plan within a pageant, and her pageantry was the pageantry of a 
goddess. Vehement as she was subtle, her pleasures were as ocean-tides; they 
surged up from the dark depths of her impassioned soul. Daughter of the Ptolemies, 
queen of olden and mystic Egypt, with the rich genius of Greece and the hot blood 
of Africa, she was at once poetess, sovereign, and enchantress ; grace, mingled with 
force, concealed the grossness of her excess; something of the artistic entered into 
the wildest extravagance of her luxuries: even in her vices she was brilliant and 
imperial. It was meet that her lovers should be masters of the world; with no lower 
suitors would imagination be content to mate her. If se must bend her sceptre to 
the sword of Cesar, it was still right that Ze should bow his head to the royalty of 


~ 


CRITICISM—CLEOPA TRA —MASSEYV 503 


hher beauty: 42s was the victory of force, hers of fascination; Ae was strong in his 
legions, se was strong in herself; he conquered the world, and se conquered hm. 
The august and godlike Julius humbled himself before her. The impetuous and 
magnificent Antony became a mere child to her command. What measure shall we 
find for that combination of womanly witchery and womanly genius, the result of 
which we observe in the subjugation of two such men as haughty Julius and incon- 
stant Antony? It required the mind of Shakespeare properly to conceive it, and by 
Shakespeare only it has sufficiency of expression. 


GERALD MAssEy (Secret Drama, etc., 1872, p. 482): There was a woman in 
the North, whom Shakespeare had known, quite ready to become his life-figure for 
this siren of the east [Cleopatra]; her name was Lady Rich. A few touches to 
make the hair dark, and give the cheek a browner tint, and the change was wrought. 
The soul was already there, apparelled in befitting bodily splendour. She had the 
tropical exuberance, the rich passionate life, and reckless impetuous spirit ; the tower- 
ing audacity of will, and breakings-out of wilfulness; the sudden change from still- 
ness to storm, from storm to calm, which kept her life in billowy motion, on which her 
spirit loved to ride triumphing, although others went to wreck; the cunning—past 
man’s thought—to play as she pleased upon man’s pulses; the infinite variety that 
custom could not stale ; the freshness of feeling that age could not wither ; the magic 
to turn the heads of young and old, the wanton and the wise! Her < flashes of nature’ 
were lightning-flashes! A fitting type for the witch-woman, who kissed away king- 
doms, and melted down those immortal pearls of price—the souls of men—to enrich 
the wine of her luxurious life! The very ‘model for the devil to build mischief on,’ 
or for Shakspeare to work by, when setting that ‘historic abstraction’ all aglow with 
a conflagration of passionate life, and making old Nile’s swart image of beauty in 
bronze breathe in flesh and blood and sensuous shape once more to personify eternal 
torment in the most pleasurable guise. The hand of the Englishwoman flashes its 
whiteness too, in witness, when she offers to give her ‘bluest veins to kiss,’ forgetful 
that it was black with ‘Phoebus’ amorous pinches.’ The ‘lascivious Grace, zz 
‘whom all ill well shows.’ (—Sonnet 40) is that ‘serpent of old Nile,’ who was cun- 
‘ning, past man’s thought ;’ she who is asked, in Sonmet 150,—‘ Whence hast thou 
‘this becoming of things ill That in the very refuse of thy deeds, There is such 
‘strength and warrantise of skill That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds?’ 
is the same person, of whom it is said in the tragedy, ‘the wdlest things become 
‘themselves in her;’ the lady addressed in Sonnet 96—‘ Thou mak’st faults graces 
‘that to thee resort, As on the finger of a thronéd Queen, The basest jewel will 
“be well esteemed; So are those errors that in thee,are seen To truths trans- 
‘lated, and for true things deemed—’ is one with the ‘Wrangling Queen, Whom 
‘everything becomes, to chide, to laugh, To weep: whose every passion fully strives — 
‘To make itself, in thee, fair and admired!’ This verisimilitude is not casual, it 
comes from no inadvertence of expression, but goes to the life-roots of a personal 


character, so unique, that the Poet on various occasions drew from one original— - 


the Lady Rich. 


EDWARD DowDEN (p. 312) : We do not mistake this feeling of Cleopatra towards 
Antony for love; but he has been for her (who had known Czsar and Pompey), the 
supreme sensation. She is neither faithful to him nor faithless; in her complex 
nature, beneath each fold or layer of sincerity lies one of insincerity, and we cannot 


504 APPENDIX 


tell which is the last and innermost. Her imagination is stimulated, and nourished 
by Antony’s presence. And he in his turn finds in the beauty and witchcraft of the 
Egyptian, something no less incommensurable and incomprehensible. Yet no one 
felt more profoundly than Shakspere,—as his Sonnets abundantly testify,—that the 
glory of strength and of beauty is subject to limit and to time. What he would seem 
to say to us in this play, not in the manner of a doctrinaire or a moralist, but wholly 
as an artist, is that this sensuous infinite is but a dream, a deceit, a snare. At every 
moment in this play we assist at a catastrophe—the decline of a lordly nature. At 
every moment we are necessarily aware of the gross, the mean, the disorderly woman- 
hood in Cleopatra, no less than of the witchery and wonder which excite, and charm, 
and subdue. We see her a dissembler, a termagant, a coward; and yet ‘vilest 
‘things become her.’ The presence of a spirit of /zfe in Cleopatra, quick, shifting, 
multitudinous, incalculable, fascinates the eye, and would, if it could, lull the moral 
sense to sleep, as the sea does with its endless snakelike motions in the sun and 
shade. She is a wonder of the world, which we would travel far to look upon. 


F. S. Boas (p. 475, e¢ seg.) : Cleopatra is among Shakspere’s women what Fal- 
staff is amongst his men. Both have the same infinite complexity of nature in which 
seemingly contradictory qualities are ‘reconciled, and both the same paradoxical 
grandeur compounded out of all that is most morally worthless. Fascination radi- 
ates equally from either personality, and as Falstaff, when completely bankrupt in 
honour and fortune, is still the knight and the gentleman, so Cleopatra, guilty of the 
most detestable and squalid forms of misconduct, remains every inch a queen. In 
the Boar’s Head Tavern and in the Palace at Alexandria a similar struggle is being 
waged : the venue is changed, and the weapons, but an identical principle is at stake. 
Falstaff had sought to defeat moral facts by the dazzling play of an inexhaustible 
humour; Cleopatra substitutes the no less dazzling play of an inexhaustible personal 
charm, wherein beauty, as Plutarch expressly states, was only a minor element. Per- 
fect beauty could indeed scarcely be the portion of this ‘ gipsy,’ with ‘ Phoebus’ amor- 
‘ous pinches black,’ but she has the more talismanic gifts of perennial youth and 
endless versatility of attraction. . . . Antony’s names for her, ‘ serpent of old Nile,’ 
and ‘great fairy,’ testify to a spell that seems wellnigh more than human. Yet its 
potency really springs from her unabashed revelation of a womanhood dowered with 
every captivating attribute save those which have a moral source. The Cleopatra 
of Shakspere, and indeed of Plutarch, anticipates a type of which the modern stage 
is often supposed to be the originator. This demi-mondaine born in the purple, with 
her hot and cold fits, her mingled restlessness and languor, her passion at once false 
and true, her lavishness and her avarice, her seductive wiles varied by outbursts of 
ferocity or coarseness—what essential aspect of courtesan-nature has the realism of 
today discovered which is not to be found in this wonderful picture? Fate provides 
for a unique manifestation of the myriad possibilities of Cleopatra’s character when 
it throws Antony into her toils. In her youth she had been Czsar’s paramour, but 
to the conqueror and statesman this dalliance had been only an interlude amidst the 
serious work of war and government. Antony is of other mould, and is, in fact, as 
completely the masculine counterpart of Cleopatra as Benedick was of Beatrice. The 
emotional homage which in earlier days he had lavished on Cxsar is now poured 
forth yet more unreservedly at the feet of the Egyptian Queen. In her, Antony finds 
a being who satisfies the boundless craving of his richly endowed sensuous nature. 
Yet this passion, so mutually enthralling, so opulent of delight, is not, in any true 


CRITICISM—CLEOPA TRA—BRADFORD 505 


sense, love. The souls of Antony and Cleopatra have never for one moment mingled. 
The gorgeous fabric of their bliss totters from hour to hour on an unstable foundation. 
Antony is always on the watch for treachery on the part of the « gipsy,’ and Cleopatra 
is ever fearful that her paramour will be drawn from her side by his bond as a hus- 
band, or his ambition as a ruler. 


G, BRADFoRD, Jr. ( Poet Lore, Vol. x, No. 4, 1898, p. 529) : The exact proportion 
of madness and sanity in Hamlet must always remain a question, and so with Cleo- 
patra. I, at least, do not feel clear as to her good faith to Antony. That she loves 
him there is no doubt at all, loves him as she is capable of loving. But it is more 
than doubtful whether she kills herself for love of him or in sheer desperation to 
avoid the scorn and vengeance of Czesar. I greatly fear that if she had been confident 
of Czsar’s favour, confident of reigning in Rome as she had reigned in Alexandria, 
Antony’s poor dust might have tossed forgotten in the burning winds of Egypt. And 
yet, I do not know,—who can know? That is precisely what gives the character its 
charm. History leaves us in the same doubt. Shakespeare may have had no definite 
opinion on the point. Cleopatra may not have considered it herself. She adored 
Antony. She had the pride of her race. She would not see, ‘Some squeaking Cleo- 
‘patra boy her greatness,’ and she dies as she lived, a supreme mystery. 


OCTAVIA 


Mrs JAMESON (ii, pp. 169-174): I do not understand the observation of a late 
critic, that in this play ‘ Octavia is only a dull foil to Cleopatra.’ Cleopatra requires 
no foil, and Octavia is not dull, though in a moment of jealous spleen, her accom- 
plished rival gives her that epithet. ‘The sober eye of dull Octavia.’—V, ii. It is 
possible that her beautiful character, if brought more forward and coloured up to the 
historic portrait, would still be eclipsed by the dazzling splendour of Cleopatra’s: for 
so I have seen a flight of fireworks blot out for a while the silver moon and ever 
burning stars. But here the subject of the drama being the love of Antony and Cleo- 
patra, Octavia is very properly kept in the background, and far from any compe- 
tition with her rival: the interest would otherwise have been unpleasantly divided, 
or rather Cleopatra herself must have served but asa foil to the tender, virtuous, 
dignified, and generous Octavia, the very Jeau-2deal of a noble Roman lady— 
¢ Admired Octavia, whose beauty claims No worse a husband than the best of men; 
‘ Whose virtue and whose general graces speak That which none else can utter.’ . . . 
The character of Octavia is merely indicated in a few touches, but every stroke tells. 
We see her with ‘downcast eyes sedate and sweet, and looks demure,’—with her 
modest tenderness and dignified submission—the very antipodes of her rival! Nor 
should we forget that she has furnished one of the most graceful similes in the whole 
compass of poetry, where her soft equanimity in the midst of grief is compared to 
‘The swan’s down feather That stands upon the swell at flood of tide, And neither 
‘way inclines.’ The fear which seems to haunt the mind of Cleopatra, lest she 
should be ‘chastised by the sober eye’ of Octavia, is exceedingly characteristic of 
the two women: it betrays the jealous pride of her, who was conscious that she had 
forfeited all real claim to respect; and it places Octavia before us in all the majesty 
of that virtue which could strike a kind of envying and remorseful awe even into the 
bosom of Cleopatra. What would she have thought and felt, had some soothsayer 
foretold to her the fate of her own children, whom she so tenderly loved? Captives, 
and exposed to the rage of the Roman populace, they owed their existence to the 


506 APPENDIX 


generous, admirable Octavia, in whose mind there entered no particle of littleness. 
She received into her house the children of Antony and Cleopatra, educated them 
with her own, treated them with truly maternal tenderness, and married them nobly. 


OCTAVIUS 


PauL STAPFER (p. 409): In the whole range of historical figures it would be 
difficult to find one more disagreeable, more ugly, and more repulsive than Czesar’s 
nephew, Octavius, who afterwards became the renowned Augustus, so chanted and 
glorified by the poets. Not that he was a monster of wickedness ; comparatively 
speaking at least and placed by the side of the more thorough-going ruffians who 
were members of his august family, he could hardly be called so. But from a poet- 
ical point of view this is just where his fault lies; had he been more frankly and 
boldly wicked he would have been less detestable. Schiller has very truly remarked 
that a robber gains, poetically speaking, by being also a murderer, and that a man 
who lowers himself in our esthetic esteem by some paltry rascality, may raise himself 
by the commission of a great crime. But in a mean shivering creature, who used to 
regale himself upon an ounce of bread and a few dried raisins, and in winter wore 

"four tunics under his toga, it is impossible to feel any vivid interest. Military cour- 
age, we know, was not one of his virtues. His favourite maxims, ‘ Precaution is bet- 
‘ter than boldness,’ ‘ Make haste slowly,’ etc. were of much the same unheroic char- 
acter as the saying that Louis XI. was so fond of repeating: ‘In war the honour is 
‘his who gains the most by it.’ . .. He has often, like many other persons whose 
whole wit consists in preserving a judicious silence, been taken for a deep thinker, 
but his solemn and mysterious manner only hides the emptiness beneath. Nothing 
is more irritating for purposes of analysis than this kind of colourless character, which 
has nothing original or worth studying about it, and which defies all definition, because 
its indefinite and varying features cannot possibly be brought into any sort of unity. 
For instance, Octavius was cruel from inclination as well as from policy, and several 
instances of his cruelty are related by Suetonius which Caligula himself might have 
envied: but he had his moments of moderation and clemency notwithstanding, and 
it is to one of these slight attacks of generosity that he owes the reputation of magnan- 
imity which he has obtained through the too great benevolence of Corneille, who 
was ever on the watch for what was grand and noble. The death of his enemy 
Antony inspired him, according to Suetonius, with feelings of delight, but according 
to Plutarch, he withdrew into his tent and wept and lamented. Shakespeare here, 
as always, follows Plutarch ; but his conduct is not of the slightest importance, nor 
is it even necessary to suppose that his tears were hypocritical : with this thin coating 
of sensitiveness he might easily be affected for an instant by the ‘ breaking of so great 
‘a thing.’ A passive instrument in the hands of fortune, tame and colourless, with- 
out one ray of poetry in his nature, Octavius both in history and in Shakespeare is an 
absolutely vapid and insipid personage. To take him as the representative of an 
iron will, cold, patient, and certain of his aim, as some commentators have done, 
and to contrast him with the lavish splendour of a brilliantly gifted nature, whirled 
away by a fatal passion, like that of Antony, is assuredly to do him too much honour. 
We meet with many practical men of action in Shakespeare’s plays who are tolerably 
worthy of forming a contrast to the more poetical but less sensible hero, such as 
Fortinbras in Hamlet, Alcibiades in Timon of Athens, and Cassius in Julius Cesar ; 
but we may be allowed to doubt whether Octavius had any very real practical merit, 
and whether the appearance he had of it was not entirely due to the egregious folly 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—JODELLE 507 


and infatuation of his opponent, by force of contrast with which, the faintest signs 
of ability or wisdom would become magnified. When Antony, after his defeat 
challenged Octavius to single combat, it was not necessary for him to be a wise <n 
to shrug his shoulders at a challenge so obviously absurd,—not to be a hero as 
quite sufficient. It was not Octavius, but the star of his destiny that won the battle 
of Actium: Cleopatra took flight, her lover followed her, and Octavius, as usual 
had only to let the gods act for him. At most, he only fills in the tragedy the ee 
of the principal agent in Antony’s predestined downfall. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS 


IN 1552 there was published in France a drama called Cleopatre Captive, which 
was the first tragedy to appear in the French language. It was written by EsTIENNE 
JODELLE, ‘fieur du Lymodin,’ who was born in Paris in 1532, and died at the age 
of forty-one in 1573, when Shakespeare was nine years old. In construction this 
tragedy was modelled on the Drama of Seneca; in some respects it shows the influ- 
ence of the Greek tragedians also,—the Chorus shares in the dialogue, which is rare, 
I think, in Seneca, and, in the Second Act, it is divided into Strophes and Anti- 
strophes. Its Dramatis Persone are as follows: The Shade of Antony, Cleopatra, 
Eras, Charmium, Octavian Cesar, Agrippa, Proculeius, Chorus of Alexandrian 
Women, Seleucus. The First Scene is laid in Purgatory, and consists of a sol- 
iloquy by the Shade of Antony who laments the sad fate brought on him by the 
gods, through their jealousy of his greatness ; he reviews his past life, and his fatal 
infatuation for Cleopatra, whom he bitterly denounces. Purgatorial fires having 
already had some effect, the Ghost laments his cruel treatment of his wife, Octavia, 
and furthermore, 

‘I chased my tender children from my side 
And warmed that murderous serpent in my bosom 
Which coiled about me, and deceived my soul, 
While pouring deadly venom o’er my life.’ *—p. 110, recto. 
But he is resolved that he will not remain all alone in torment; before the sun, 
now rising, sets, Cleopatra must die. He has appeared to her in a dream, and com- 
_ manded her, after having given his corpse an honourable burial, to kill herself, 
‘Or’ se faisant compagne en ma peine et tristesse 
Qui s’est faite long temps compagne en ma liesse ;’—p. 110, verso. 
which has really a show of justice and fair play. In the next Scene Cleopatra 
rehearses to Eras and Charmium, the events of her life, much in the same style as 
Antony had narrated his past story, but, not having had as yet the advantage of 
Purgatorial flames, her remorse is not so deep. She refers with terror to her dream, 
and decides that Antony’s commands must be obeyed; moreover, every horror is to 
be endured rather than be taken to Rome for Czsar’s triumph. The Chorus, at the 
close of the Act, shows a close imitation of Seneca by beginning with a description, 
by no means without charm, of a sunrise and an opening day. It inevitably chal- 
lenges comparison with the fine description by the Chorus at the end of the First 
Act in the Hercules Furens, beginning, ‘Jam rara micant sidera prono Languida 


* A recent writer (Athencum, 11 August, 1906), in speaking of blank verse, 
says with truth, ‘it is criminally easy to write it execrably, and almost impossible to 
‘write it well.’ Here, and in the translations, in blank verse, from the French, Ger- 
man, and Italian of the following Verszons, I enact the criminal. 


508 APPENDIX 


‘mundo,’ etc. In the next Act Octavius boasts to Agrippa and Proculeius of his 
grandeur and of his mighty exploits, beginning with the self-complacent assertion 
that no one under heaven’s cope has been so favoured by the gods as he himself. 
But his career will be incomplete if he cannot take Cleopatra in triumph to Rome. 
Proculeius describes the manner in which he captured the queen, wherein Jodelle 
closely follows Plutarch. Octavius bids him dispossess Cleopatra of all thoughts of 
suicide. Inthe 7%ird Act there is a conference between Octavius and the Queen. 
The latter displays the letters of Julius Caesar, wherefrom it appears that Jodelle con- 
sulted Dion Cassius as well as Plutarch. In Cleopatra’s appeals, as a queen, for 
compassion, in her lamentations for Antony, and in her despairing commiseration of 
her own bitter lot, the drama rises, I think, to its highest point of tragedy. ‘ Unless,’ 
Cleopatra, addressing Octavius, plaintively begins: 
‘Unless the grief, imprisoned in my breast, 
Far, far surpassed this final plaint of mine 
Thou wouldst not see thy poor slave at thy feet. 
No words of mine are equal to the grief, 
Which, throbbing, has consumed me all within,— 
My tears, my moans, and all my heavy sighs. 
Art thou surprised that this word “separation” 
Has power to put my steadfastness to flight ? 
To separate! ye gods! I know its meaning! 
If this sad war had only been foreseen, 
It had been better for me, luckless queen, 
To have separated from him during life. 
His bitter grief could then have been prevented! 
I could have warded off all cruel blows, 
Because I had the means and chance, with hope 
Of seeing in full secresy his face. 
But now a hundred,—hundred-hundredfold 
Tve suffered from this bitter war; by it 
I’ve lost my lands, my kingdom,—and my all! 
And I have seen my life, and my support, 
My joy, my universe, take his own life! 
And, bleeding as he was, all cold and wan, 
I strove to warm him with my own hot tears, 
And almost separated myself from him 
While death was separating him from me. 
Ha Dieux, grands Dieux! Ha grands Dieux! 
* * * * * 
I needs must live; fear not I’ll take my life. 
I have not laid a scheme to kill myself. 
But since ’tis right that I prolong my life 
And that in me the love of life revive, 
Vouchsafe to look upon this weakling, Czesar, 
Who casts herself once more before thy feet. 
At least, O Czesar, let my streaming tears 
Induce a softness whence will spring my pardon. 
Fast flowing drops will outwear e’en the flint, 
Then on thy heart shall tears have no effect ?’—p. 223, recto. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—JODELLE 509 


In this one Scene there is, I think, a tragic human cry, deeper and more sincere 
than is to be found in the Cleopatras of many of Jodelle’s successors who have 
achieved more fame. Octavius remains, however, unmoved, and recounts all the 
misdeeds in Cleopatra’s career, but finally assures her that her life and the lives of 
her children shall be spared. Out of gratitude the queen says that she will disclose 
to Octavius all the gold and jewels in her treasury. Hereupon Seleucus comes for- 
ward officiously, as he does in Plutarch (in Shakespeare Cleopatra appeals to him), 
and asserts that Cleopatra has concealed wealth incalculable. The Scene that fol- 
lows in Plutarch, where Cleopatra falls into a rage with Seleucus, proved to Jodelle 
too attractive to be omitted ; consequently he inserted it at length, although so much 
action is in general alien to the Senecan tragedy. By this one venturesome stroke 
Jodelle has shown his appreciation of Cleopatra’s nature, and has imparted action, 
life, and character to his drama which give it a high place, earliest though it be of 
French tragedies, when compared with those subsequently written under Senecan 
influence, with Cleopatra for a theme. As Jodelle’s Works are very scarce (the first 
edition appeared in 1552,—my copy is dated 1583), it may not be displeasing to 
reprint this fragment of the Scene. Jodelle’s close adherence to Plutarch can be 
observed only in the original French ; it would be lost in a translation. Seleucus has 
finished his accusation and at once Cleopatra’s anger breaks forth : 


‘ Cleopatra. A faux meurdrier! a faux traistre, arraché 

‘ Sera le poil de ta teste cruelle. 

‘Que pleust aux Dieux que ce fust ta ceruelle! 

‘ Tié traistre, tié. Se/. O Dieux! C?/. O chose detestable! 
‘Vn serf vn serf! Oct. Mais chose esmerueillable 

‘D’vn coeur terrible. C/. Et quoy, m’accuses tu? 

‘Me pensois tu veufue de ma vertu 

‘Comme d’Antoine? aatraistre! Se/. Retiens la, 

‘ Puissant Cesar, retiens la doncq. C/. Voila 

‘ Tous mes bienfaits. hou! le dueil qui m’efforce, 

‘Donne a mon cceur langoureux telle force, 

‘ Que ie pourrois, ce me semble, froisser 

‘Du poing tes os, & tes flancs creuasser 

«A coups de pied. Oct. O quel grinsant courage! 

‘ Mais rien n’est plus furieux que la rage 

‘D’vn cceur de femme. Et bien, quoy, Cleopatre ? 

‘Estes vous point ia saoule de le battre! 

‘Fuy t’en, ami, fuy t?en. C7 Mais quoy, mais quoy? 
‘Mon Empereur, est-il vn tel esmoy 

« Au monde encor que ce paillard me donne? 4 
‘Sa lacheté ton esprit mesme estonne, 

‘Comme ie croy, quand moy Roine d’ici, 

‘De mon vassal suis accusee ainsi, 

«Que toy, Cesar, as daigné visiter.’—p. 225, verso, ed. 1583. 


Seleucus repents, and in a dialogue with the Chorus confesses that death would 
be preferable to the memory which must be always his that he has so deeply wounded 


and offended his queen and mistress. ? 
The Fourth Act is almost wholly given up to the bitter lamentations of Cleopatra. 


At the close there are four lines which I think are touching : 


510 APPENDIX 


‘Car entre tout le mal, peine, douleur, encombre, 
Souspirs, regrets, soucis, que i’ ay souffert sans nombre, 
TY estime le plus grief ce bien petit de temps 
Que de toy, 6 Antoine, esloigner ie me sens.’ 

The Fifth Act is divided between Proculeius and the Chorus. The former, over- 
whelmed with grief, describes how he broke into the Monument and found Cleo- 
patra and Eras dead and Charmium dying, without a trace of the cause of their death. 
Later on, in wondering how he shall break the news to Czesar, he asks if it be pos- 
sible that she could have died by an aspic’s bite or by some secret poison. The 
Chorus promises to the dead Cleopatra an eternity of fame in every land which the 
sun beholds from his rosy dawn to his darkened rest. 

Comparisons between national literatures are idle; therefore, after recalling the 
fact that Gorboduc, our earliest tragedy, was written in 1562, just ten years after 
Jodelle’s Cleopatre, it seems to me a sufficient conclusion that the latter as a first essay 
in dramatic tragedy is an origin of which any literature might be more than contented. 


THE NEXT Tragedy, chronologically, wherein Cleopatra appears, is that by ROBERT 
GARNIER, conseiller dv Roy lieutenant general criminel au siege presidial & sene- 
chaussee du Maine. Itis called 1. Antoine, and was published in 1578. It shared the 
popularity of Garnier’s other plays, which during the following century were reprinted 
at the remarkable rate of an edition every two years.* JZ, Antoine had the honour 
of being translated by the Countess of Pembroke, Sir Philip Sidney’s sister, in 1592. 
To us, Shakespeare students, this translation is of importance. Its date renders it 
possible that it may have been read by Shakespeare. But if Shakespeare ever 
looked into it, I think he read no further than to the end of the 4~gument, where he 
found the statement that Garnier had drawn his material from Plutarch,—an ample 
notice that, in material for his play, the English dramatist could gain nothing from 
the French. 

Of course, Garnier took Seneca as his model, except that he apparently thought 
that if one Chorus was good two would be better,—a luxury in which, I believe, 
Seneca never indulged. Garnier has a Chorus of Egyptians and another of Czesar’s 
soldiers. Inasmuch as the title of the play is JZ Av‘éoine, it will hardly suffice that 
Antony should be, as in Jodelle’s tragedy, a Shade, which after all may be a source of 
regret. The living man appears only twice during the play. The First Act, of over 
two hundred and thirty lines, is one long lugubrious monologue by him, wherein 
he exalts his own fame and prowess, bewails his unjust downfall, and denounces 
Cleopatra’s deceitful love and treachery. His second appearance is in the Zhird 
Act wherein, with Lucilius as an occasional interlocutor, he continues, in about the 
same number of lines, the same mournful strain, but with an open confession that he 
cannot emancipate himself from Cleopatra’s thralldom. It is in the course of this 
Act that he betrays the recent reading of his Dante when he says: 

‘Car rien tant ne tourmente vn home en sa misere 
Que se representer sa fortune prospere.’—p. 194, ed. 1616. 
With an honesty beyond praise he puts these lines in quotation marks. The same 


honesty, I regret to say, is not shown by the First Chorus, in thus distinguishing the 
following lines: 


* See the admirable Reprint of the Countess of Pembroke’s Azsonie, edited, with 
an Introduction, by ALICE Lucr (of Boston, Massachusetts), Weimar, 1897, p. 32. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—GARNIER SIt 


‘ Heureux qui iamais n’eut de vie 
Ou que Ja mort dés le berceau 
Luy a, pitoyable, rauie, 
L’emmaillottant dans le tombeau.’—p, 171. 
which recall the words of the Chorus: 7 divar Tov dravra wiKG Aébyov, etc. in the 
dipus Coloneus of Sophocles, line 1225, et seg. 

From the very structure of the dramas formed on the Seneca model, it is vain to 
expect any development of character beyond that which twenty-four hours may 
effect. Cleopatra appears in two Scenes, and what she is in the former she is in the 
Jatter,—a woman deeply in love with Antony, freely acknowledging that she entan- 
gled him in her snares (and a little proud of it), and completely heart-broken that 
Antony should think she had been treacherous to him. In describing her flight at 
Actium she utters two lines which remind us and merely remind us, of Shakespeare ; 
in referring to Antony’s pursuit, she says that he was 

‘ Oublieux de sa charge, & comme si son ame 
Eust esté attachée a celle de sa Dame.’—p. 178. 

The reason she gives for her flight and for her decision to be in these wars, was 
her extreme jealousy, lest Antony should return to Octavia.. See III, vii, 23, supra. 

In the Fourth Act Antony’s death (described as in Plutarch), is narrated to Cesar 
by Dercetas. The #2/’h Act is devoted to Cleopatra, who takes leave of her children, 
and although continually asserting her intention to kill herself, we have no infor- 
mation as to when, or where, or how she at last fulfills it. The Act begins as follows: 

* Cleopatra. O cruel Fortune! O accurs’d disaster ! 
O noxious love! O torch abominable ! 
O ill-starred pleasures! O caitiff beauty ! 
O deadly grandeur, deadly majesty ! 
O hapless life! O pitiable queen ! 
O Antony, through my fault, to be buried ! 
O heavens too malign! alas! all blows 
And rancour of the gods are come upon us! 
Ill-omened queen! O would that I had ne’er 
Beheld, alas! the wandering light of day! 
I am a plague and poison to my dear ones! 
I’ve lost the ancient sceptre of my fathers ! 
This kingdom I’ve enslaved to foreign laws, 
And of their heritage deprived my children. 

Yet this is nought, alas! all nought, compared 
With loss of you, dear spouse [ Zspoux], by me ensnared, 
Of you, whom I misled, and then constrained 
By bloody hand, to lie in mouldring tomb. 

Of you whom I destroyed, of you, my dearest lord, 
From whom I took all honour, empire, life ! 

- O harmful woman! Hé! can I live on, 
Locked up within this grisly, haunted tomb? 
Can I breathe on? and can, oh, can my soul 
Continue, in such grief, within my body ? 
O Atropos, O Clotho, fatal spinners ! 
O Styx, O Phlegethon, infernal rivers ! 
O Daughters of the Night !’—p. 220. 


512 APPENDIX 


Cleopatra confides her children to Euphronius, with the prayer that he will wander 
with them over the face of the earth rather than suffer them to fall into Czesar’s power. 


She then takes leave of them, as follows: 
‘Who knows but that your hands, to which false Fate 
Once gave the promise of the Latin sceptre, 
Shall bear, instead of it, a crooked sheep-hook, 
A mattock, or a goad, or guide the plough? 
Then learn to suffer, children, and forget 
The glory of your birth, and bend to fate. 
Adieu, my babes [enfangons] adieu, my heart’s oppressed 
With pity, grief; already death has pierced me! 
I cannot breathe! Adieu for evermore! 
Your sire or me you’ll never more behold. 
Adieu, sweet care, adieu! 
Children. Madame, adieu ! 


Cleopatra. ah! that voice kills me. Bons Dieux, I faint! 


I can no more. I die. 
Eras. Madame, would you 
Succumb to sorrow ? alas, pray speak to us! 
Euphronius. Come children. 
Children. We come.’—p. 222. 


Charmion and Eras at last succeed in reviving the Queen. Thereupon all three 
begin to bewail Antony, and continue so doing for seventy lines, during which Char- 
mion is fearful lest their tears should give out, and suggests that they keep on crying 
‘tant qu’aurons quelque humeur.’ At the end of the seventieth line occurs the fol- 
lowing passage which I think noteworthy. It is Cleopatra who is speaking : 


‘ By our true loves, I pray thee, Antony, 
By our two hearts, once kindled with sweet flames, 


Our holy marriage [ Par nostre saint Hymen] and the tender pity 


For our small children, pledges of our love, 

That to thine ears my mournful voice may fly 

And that on Pluto’s shore thou wilt escort me, 

Thy wife, thy friend; hear thou, O Antony, 

Where’ er thou art these sobbing sighs of mine.’—p. 224. 


It is not a little remarkable, I think, that in more than one of these early versions 
Cleopatra refers to Antony as her husband. Here we find an open reference to 
their ‘holy marriage.’ No other version that I can recall has spoken thus explicitly. 


Cleopatra continues: 

‘ Till now, I’ve lived as was decreed by Fate, 
I now have run my wingéd course of years ; 
I’ve flourish’d; and I’ve reign’d; I’ve taken vengeance 
On that proud foe, who holds me still in scorn. 
Happy, thrice-happy had it been for me 
If never fleet of Rome had touch’d these shores ! 
And now of me a phantom great shall go 
Beneath the world, to bury all my woe!’—p. 225. 


Cleopatra here anticipates the line which Virgil, in the Fourth Book of the Zneid, 


will put into Dido’s mouth, ‘ Et nunc magna mei sub terras ibit imago.’ 


The queen 


continues in this strain for about twenty lines; among them are the following: 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—COUNTESS OF PEMBROKE 513 


‘ Le plus aigre tourment qu’en mon ame ie sente, 

Est ce peu que ie suis de toy, mon cceur, absente.’ 

which show that she had been lately reading her Jodelle. She then concludes: 

‘Since I no more can sprinkle him with tears,— 

Ah woe, those founts in me are all drawn dry,— 

What is there left, alas! but lavish kisses? 

O fairest eyes, my light, then let me kiss you! 

O brow, proud honour’s seat! fair, warlike face! 

O neck! O arms! O breast where death 

Just now, black deed, has struck the murderous blow ! 

A thousand kisses, and yet thousands more, 

Accept as my last duty to your fame. 

And in such office let my. nerveless frame 

Breathe forth my soul and wither on thy breast.’ 

And this is all. With this line the Tragedy ends. 

Cleopatra’s character is not altogether colourless, but is as far removed as possible 
from any Shakespearian glow. Her love is boundless, her self-reproach endless, 
her self-abasement abysmal, her knowledge of mythology extensive, and, had we 
not had some experience with Jodelle, we should consider her achievement in sol- 
iloquy phenomenal. After your spirit is once fairly broken, you can read on and 
on with a tepid gentle excitement that is not unpleasing. The Choruses are always 
lyric, with occasional passages of genuine poetry. In all the incidents of the play 
Plutarch is closely followed, and at all times there is a subtle consciousness that you 
are in the hands of a scholar. 


The familiar fact has been already mentioned that this tragedy of Garnier was 
‘done into English’ by MAry SIDNEY, Countess of Pembroke. It was published in 
1592. That it is ‘done into English’ is true, but it is done into awkward English, 
which well might merit a stronger adjective when we recall some of the finished 
poetry of her brother, Philip. She sedulously maintains the ten syllables of an 
iambic pentameter ; but to do this, all customary order of words is at times violated. 
In the following selection I think and I hope I have given the translation at its 
best. Passages written in stichomythia are unusually difficult to translate. The orig- 
inal French is throughout (except in the Choruses) in rhymed Alexandrines. With 
a few exceptions, her Ladyship uses rhyme only in the stichomythic passages. Char- 
mian and Eras are dissuading Cleopatra from suicide : 

‘Char. Que sert & son malheur [7. ¢. Antony’s] cette amour eternelle? 
Cleo. Qu’elle serue, ou soit vaine, elle doit estre telle. 
Er. C’est mal fait de se perdre en ne profitat point. 
Cleo. Ce n’est mal fait de suyure vn amy si conioint. 
Er. Mais telle affection n’ amoindrist pas sa peine. 
Cl. Sans telle affection ie serois inhumaine. 
Ch. Inhumain est celuy qui se brasse la mort. 
Cl. Inhumain n’est celuy qui de. miseres sort. 
Ch. Viuez pour vos enfans. C/. Ie mourray pour leur pere. 
Ch. O mere rigoureuse! C/. Espouse debonnaire! 
Er. Les voulez-vous priuer du bien de leurs ayeux ? 
Cl. Les en priué-ie? non, c’est la rigueur des dieux.’—p. 182, 1616, 
The translation of the Countess of Pembroke is as follows : 


33 


514 APPENDIX 


‘Char. What helps his wrack this euer-lasting loue? 
Ci. Help, or help not, such must, such ought I proue. 
Char. Jl) done to loose your selfe, and to no ende. 
Cl. How ill thinke you to follow such a frende ? 
Char. But this your loue nought mitigates his paine. 
Cl. Without this loue I should be inhumaine. 
Char. Inhumaine he, who his owne death pursues. 
Cl. Not inhumaine who miseries eschues. 
Ch. Liue for your sonnes. CZ. Nay, for their father die. 
Cha. Ward hearted mother! CV’. Wife kind-hearted I. 
Ch. Then will you them depriue of royall right ? 
Cl. Do I depriue them? no, it’s dest’nies might.’—p. 75, ed. Luce. 


GIRALDI CINTHIO, in 1583, follows Garnier, chronologically. His Cveopatra, 
published in that year, I have not succeeded in obtaining. KLEIN (/falientsche 
Dramen, V, 352), gives a short account of it. ‘It is conceivable,’ he says, ‘nay, 
‘possible, perhaps even not improbable, that Shakespeare was acquainted with it.’ 
But the instances that Klein cites in confirmation are among those which Shake- 
speare derived from Plutarch, and are therefore necessarily common to both dramas. 
MOELLER (p. 12) gives a fuller account of Cinthio’s Zragedy, and proves Klein’s 
account to be erroneous in several particulars. But whether we accept Moeller’s 
abstract or Klein’s, the latter’s general conclusion bears truth on the face of it: 
‘ Shakespeare’s Anthony and Cleopatra in comparison with Cinthio’s Cleopatra is like 
‘the barge of purple and gold on the river Cydnus, and a little paper boat which a 
‘boy sails in a gutter.’ 


In 1594 the excellent poet, SAMUEL DANIEL, put forth a third edition of his 
Sonnets, addressed to the imaginary, or at least unknown, fair ‘ Dea,’ and in the 
same volume appeared, for the first time, Zhe Tragedie of Cleopatra. TDaniel’s 
poems were deservedly popular, and this 7ragedy appeared in the successive editions 
of them, in 1599, 1601, 1605, 1607, and 1609; in 1611 the 7vagedy was issued in a 
separate impression.* So many successive editions imply a wide circle of readers, 
and the supposition is not violent that in this circle Shakespeare was included. Were 
it so, he would have found one of the very few dramas in the English language, 
modeled throughout on the drama of Seneca, which, even in its severest form, still 
has a power to charm. 

As far as any dramatic aid is concerned, Shakespeare could have found none what- 
ever in Daniel’s 7ragedy. There is no action init. The whole of the First Act is 
a soliloquy by Cleopatra. The Second is a dialogue between Cesar and Proculeius. 
The 7hzrd is another between Philostratus and Arius, and so on. Not even does 
Cleopatra’s death take place on the stage; it is described by a trusted servant, the 
same who had brought her the basket of figs wherein the aspics were concealed. 
Whatever influence Daniel had on Shakespeare must be detected not in any action 
but in similarity of thought or expression; of this, with two or three possible Breen 
tions, I can find no traces that are indubitable, or even worthy of serious consider- 
ation. Naturally there are passages from Plutarch, even following the very words 
which are common to both poets, but therein it is Plutarch, not Daniel, whom Shake. 


* Daniel, Works, iii, 3, ed. Grosart. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—DANIEL 515 


speare has followed. One of the exceptions to which I have alluded is where the 
messenger, ‘ Nuntius,’ describes his interview with his mistress when he brought her 
the basket of figs: 
‘Well, in I went, where brighter than the Sunne, 

Glittering in all her pompeous rich aray, 

Great Cleopatra sate, as if sh’ had wonne 

Cesar, and all the world beside, this day: 

Euen as she was when on thy cristall streames, 

Cleare Cydnos, she did shew what earth could shew;... 

Euen as she went at first to meete her loue, 

So goes she now againe to finde him. 

But that first, did her greatnes onely proue, 

This last her loue, that could not liue behind him.’—p. 84. 

Thus Shakespeare’s Cleopatra says, 


«Shew me, my women, like a queen ; go fetch 
My best attires. I am again for Cydnus 
To meet Mark Anthony.’—V, ii, 274. 

Again Daniel’s Cleopatra speaks of herself as Anthony’s wife. She is address- 
ing the spirit of the dead Anthony to intercede for her with the gods, and thus 
adjures him, 

‘O worke they may their gracious helpe impart, 
To saue thy wofull wife from such disgrace.’—p. 73. 

Again there is a faint fleeting similarity in the two following passages. Thus 
Daniel’s Cleopatra : 

*.,.. now am I taught 
‘In death to loue, in life that knew not how.’—p. 38. 
Thus Shakespeare’s : 
‘ My desolation does begin to make 
‘A better life.’—V, ii, 2. 

Daniel’s Cleopatra calls Anthony ‘ My Atlas.’—p. 32; Shakespeare’s calls him 
‘The demi-Atlas of this earth.’—I, v, 28. 

There is a certain passage in Shakespeare’s play which has given rise to some 
discussion on the score of its meaning. It is where Anthony moralises on the death 
of Fulvia and says: ‘The present pleasure, By revolution lowering, does become 
‘The opposite of itself.’—I, ii, 145. Can it be that this is a condensation of the 
following lines in Daniel which were hovering in Shakespeare’s memory ? 

‘Thus doth the euer-changing course of things 
Runne a perpetuall circle, euer turning: 
And that same day that hiest glory brings, 
Brings vs vnto the point of backe-returning.’—p. 52. 

And I think these are all. That Shakespeare had read Daniel’s Cleopatra is of 
course possible ; that it is even probable, is not impossible ; but that he was indebted 
to it, or was influenced by it, in the faintest degree, in the delineation of any of his 
characters, is, I think, chimerical. 

Daniel published in 1599, among his Poems, A Letter from Octauia to Marcus 
Antonius, which is, to me, unattractive and lacking in earnestness, and with no trace 
whatsoever of any influence on Shakespeare. 


516 APPENDIX 


I have deemed it beyond the scope of a study of the present play to set forth any 
dramatisation of Cleopatra’s story, wherein the scene is laid before the period when 
Antony fell in love with her. Accordingly, no notice is here taken of the Mort de 
Pompée, 1638, by CHAULMER ; * nor of CORNEILLE’S Pompée (written in 1643 t) nor 
of its translation by the ‘ Matchless Orinda,’ in 1678 ; nor of COLLEY CIBBER’S Cesar 
in Egypt, 1725, a composite of Corneille’s Pompée and Beaumont and Fletcher’s 7%e 
False One; nor, in our own day, of Cesar and Cleopatra by Mr BERNARD SHAW. 

An exception is to be made, however, in favour of Zhe False One. Scarcely has 
there appeared in recent years an annotated edition of Shakespeare that does not 
contain a reference to it in connection with Anthony and Cleopatra. It was written 
about 1620; it seems to be pretty generally conceded that Massinger wrote the 
First and Fifth Acts and Fletcher the rest. Why it should take its title from a 
thoroughly repulsive character, a man utterly false and devoid of any moral prin- 
ciple, who killed his benefactor, Pompey, and is not the hero of the piece, it is not 
easy to imagine. The play deals with Julius Cesar and his subjection to the 
charms of Cleopatra. The story, briefly told and omitting all reference to ‘the 
false one,’ is that Cesar, in pursuit of Pompey after the battle of Pharsalia, 
reaches Egypt, and there finds that Ptolemy, to make himself more secure as mon- 
arch on the throne, has ‘committed to safe custody’ his sister, Cleopatra, who 
by law was his equal in the government. When Cleopatra learns that Cesar is at 
hand, she resolves to win him to espouse her cause against her brother. How she 
was by stealth conveyed to his tent, concealed in a mattress, is a well-worn story, 
together with the consequent subjection of Cesar to her fascinations. In order to 
impress Czsar with a knowledge of Egypt’s boundless resources, Ptolemy foolishly 
attempts to dazzle his Roman guest by a display of wealth. This occurs in Act 7//, 
Scene iv, as follows : Cesar, Antony, and others enter on the upper stage, Cleopatra 
appears, and Antony cries, ‘ The young queen comes: give room!’ Cesar responds, 
‘Welcome, my dearest; Come, bless my side.’ Then Ptolemy and his courtiers 
enter, also on the upper stage. 

‘ Ptolemy. Wail to great Cesar! 
My royal guest, first I will feast thine eyes 
With wealthy Egypt’s store, and then thy palate, 
And wait myself upon thee. [Attendants bring in treasure below. 
Cesar. What rich service ! 
What mines of treasure! richer still ! 
Cleopatra. My Cesar, 
What do you admire? pray you, turn, and let me talk to you: 
Have you forgot me, sir? how, a new object! 
Am I grown old o’ the sudden? Cesar! 
Cesar. Tell me 
From whence comes all this wealth ? 
Cleopatra, Is your eye that way, 
And all my beauties banish’d ? 
Ptolemy. Y'll tell thee, Czsar ; 
We owe for all this wealth to the old Nilus.... 
Cesar. The matchless wealth of this land! 


* Pompte par P. Corneille, edited by Professeur FELIX Himon, 3ieme ed. 
Paris, 1897. Introduction, p. 16. Oper, p20. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—THE FALSE ONE 517 


Cleopatra. Come, you shall hear me. 
Cesar. Away! let me imagine. 
Cleopatra. How! frown on me! 
The eyes of Czsar wrapt in storms ! 
Cesar. Iam sorry: 
But, let me think. ... 
Cleopatra [ Aside.| A little dross betray me!... 
Cesar. The wonder of this wealth so troubles me, 
Iam not well. Good night... . 
Cleopatra [Aside.| Well, 
I shall yet find a time to tell thee, Czesar, 
Thou hast wrong’d her love.’ 
This fragment is given that it may fitly introduce the following Scene which is, I 
think, the finest in the play: 
‘Act IV, Scene ii. Zhe Apartments of Cleopatra in the Palace. 
L£nier Cleopatra, Arsinoe [her sister], and Eros [her maid}. 
Ars. You are so impatient ! 
Cleo. Have I not cause? 
Women of common beauties and low births, 
When they are slighted, are allow’d their angers : 
Why should not I, a princess, make him know 
The baseness of his usage? 
Ars. Yes, ’tis fit: 
But then again you know what man— 
Cleo. He is no man; 
The shadow of a greatness hangs upon him, 
And not the virtue : he is no conqueror ; 
H’as suffer’d under the base dross of nature ; 
Poorly deliver’d up his power to wealth, 
The god of bed-rid men, taught his eyes treason; 
Against the truth of love he has rais’d rebellion, 
Defied his holy flames. 
Eros. He will fall back again, 
And satisfy your grace. 
Cleo. ad I been old, 
Or blasted in my bud, he might have shew’d 
Some shadow of dislike: but to prefer 
The lustre of a little earth, Arsinoe, 
And the poor glow-worm light of some faint jewels, 
Before the life of love and soul of beauty, 
Oh, how it vexes me! He is no soldier; 
All honourable soldiers are Love’s servants : 
He is a merchant, a mere wandering merchant, 
Servile to gain; he trades for poor commodities, 
And makes his conquests thefts. Some fortunate captains 
That quarter with him, and are truly valiant, 
Have flung the name of Happy Czesar on him ; 
Himself ne’er won it: he is so base and covetous, 
He'll sell his sword for gold. 


APPENDIX 


Ars. This is too bitter. 
Cleo. Oh, I could curse myself, that was so foolish, 
So fondly childish, to believe his tongue, 
His promising tongue, ere I could catch his temper ! 
I had trash enough to have cloy’d his eyes withal, 
(His covetous eyes,) such as I scorn to tread on, 
Richer than e’er he saw yet, and more tempting ; 
Had I known he had stoop’d at that, I had sav’d mine honour, 
I had been happy still: but let him take it, 
And let him brag how poorly I am rewarded ; 
Let him go conquer still weak wretched ladies : 
Love has his angry quiver too, his deadly, 
And, when he finds scorn, arméd at the strongest. 
I am a fool to fret thus for a fool, 
An old blind fool too; I lose my health: I will not, 
I will not cry ; I will not honour him 
With tears diviner than the gods he worships ; 
I will not take the pains to curse a poor thing. 
Eros. Do not; you shall not need. 
Cleo. Would I were prisoner 
To one I hate, that I might anger him! 
I will love any man, to break the heart of him, 
Any that has the heart and will to kill him. 
Ars. Take some fair truce. 
Cleo. I will go study mischief, 
And put a look on, arm’d with all my cunnings, 
Shall meet him like a basilisk, and strike him. 
Love, put destroying flames into mine eyes, 
Into my smiles deceits, that I may torture him, 
That I may make him love to death, and laugh at him! 
L£nter Apollodorus. 
Apol. Czsar commends his service to your grace. 
Cleo, His service! what’s his service ? 
Lyos. Pray you, be patient; 
The noble Cesar loves still. 
Cleo. What’s his will ? ; 
Apol. He craves access unto your highness. 
Cleo. No; 
Say, no; I will have none to trouble me. 
Ars. Good sister— 
Cleo, None, I say ; I will be private. 
Would thou hadst flung me into Nilus, keeper, 
When first thou gav’st consent to bring my body 
To this unthankful Cesar ! 
Apol. ’Twas your will, madam, 
Nay more, your charge upon me, as I honour’d you. 
You know what danger I endur’d. 
Cleo. Take this, [ Giving a jewel. 
And carry it to that lordly Czesar sent thee ; 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—THE FALSE ONE 519 


There’s a new love, a handsome one, a rich one, 
One that will hug his mind: bid him make love to it ; 
Tell the ambitious broker, this will suffer— 

Apol. He enters. 

Enter Cesar. 

Cleo. How! 

Cesar. I do not use to wait, lady ; 
Where I am, all the doors are free and open. 

Cleo. I guess so by your rudeness. 

Cesar. You are not angry ? 
Things of your tender mould should be most gentle. 
Why do you frown? good gods, what a set anger 
Have you forc’d into your face ! come, I must temper you: 
What a coy smile was there, and a disdainful ! 
How like an ominous flash it broke out from you! 
Defend me Love! sweet, who has anger’d you? 

Cleo. Shew him a glass: that false face has betray’d me, 
That base heart wrong’d me. 

Cesar. Be more sweetly angry. 
I wrong’d you, fair ? 

Cleo. Away with your foul flatteries ! 
They are too gross. But that I dare be angry, 
And with as great a god as Cesar is, 
To shew how poorly I respect his memory, 
I would not speak to you. ; 

Cesar. Pray you, undo this riddle, 
And tell me how I have vex’d you? 

Cleo. et me think first, 
Whether I may put on a patience 
That will with honour suffer me. Know, I hate you ; 
Let that begin the story: now, I'll tell you. 

Cesar, But do it milder: in a noble Lady, 
Softness of spirit, and a sober nature, 
That moves like summer winds, cool, and blows sweetness, 
Shews blesséd, like herself. 

Cleo. And that great blessedness 
You first reap’d of me: till you taught my nature, 
Like a rude storm, to talk aloud and thunder, 
Sleep was not gentler than my soul, and stiller. 
You had the spring of my affections, 
And my fair fruits I gave you leave to taste of ; 
You must expect the winter of mine anger. 
You flung-me off, before the court disgrac’d me, 
When in the pride I appear’d of all my beauty, 
Appear’d your mistress ; took into your eyes 
The common strumpet, love of hated lucre, 
Courted with covetous heart the slave of nature, 
Gave all your thoughts to gold, that men of glory, 
And minds adorn’d with noble love, would kick at : 


520 


APPENDIX 


Soldiers of royal mark scorn such base purchase ; 
Beauty and honour are the marks they shoot at: 
I spake to you then, I courted you, and woo’d you, 
Call’d you “ dear Cesar,” hung about you tenderly, 
Was proud to appear your friend— 
Cesar. You have mistaken me. 
Cleo. But neither eye, nor favour, not a smile, 
Was I bless’d back with, but shook off rudely ; 
And, as you had been sold to sordid infamy, 
You fell before the images of treasure, 
And in your soul you worshipp’d: I stood slighted, 
Forgotten, and contemn’d; my soft embraces, 
And those sweet kisses you call’d Elysium, 
As letters writ in sand, no more remember’d ; 
The name and glory of your Cleopatra 
Laugh’d at, and made a story to your captains: 
Shall I endure ? 
Cesar. You are deceiv’d in all this; 
Upon my life, you are; ’tis your much tenderness. 
Cleo. No, no; I love not that way; you are cozen’d: 
I love with as much ambition as a conqueror, 
And, where I love, will triumph. 
Cesar. So you shall; 
My heart shall be the chariot that shall bear you ; 
All I have won shall wait upon you.—By the gods, [Aside. 
The bravery of this woman’s mind has fir’d me !— 
Dear mistress, shall I but this night 
Cleo. How, Cesar! 
Have I let slip a second vanity 
That gives thee hope ? 
Cesar. You shall be absolute, 
And reign alone as queen ; you shall be any thing. 
Cleo, Farewell, unthankful ! 
Cesar, Stay. 
Cleo. I will not. 
Cesar, I command. 
Cleo. Command, and go without, sir. 
I do command ¢hee be my slave for ever, 
And vex while I laugh at thee. 


Cesar. Thus low, beauty [ Kneels. 
Cleo. It is too late: when I have found thee absolute, 

The man that fame reports thee, and to me, 

May be I shall think better. Farewell, conqueror !’ [2xiz. 


From now till the end of the play Czsar’s thoughts and acts are devoted to 
extricating himself from the dangers of an insurrection of the Alexandrians, who 
have besieged the Palace and threatened death to all its inmates. Cesar and a few 
of his friends succeed in cutting their way to his ships. Ptolemy attempts to follow, 
fails, and is cut down and trampled to death. Czesar returns with his legions, puts 
down the insurrection, and, in the last Scene, enters the presence of Cleopatra with 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—MAY 521 


the heads of her two greatest enemies. His last words recur to the close of the 
Scene, given above. ‘And now, my dearest,’ he says as he turns to Cleopatra, 
‘Look upon Cesar, as he still appear’d [qu. appears ?] 

A conqueror ; and, this unfortunate king 

Entomb’d with honour, we’ll to Rome, where Czsar 

Will show he can give kingdoms ; for the Senate, 

Thy brother dead, shall willingly decree 

The crown of Egypt, that was his, to thee. [Zxeunt.’ 

It remains only to add that here and there, throughout the play, we hear Shake- 

spearian echoes, such as where Cleopatra says, ‘and for thy news Receive a favour 
‘kings have kneeled in vain for, And kiss my hand.’—I, ii; again Sceva thus 
describes Cleopatra, ‘ She will be sick, well, sullen Merry, coy, over-joy’d, and seem 
‘to die, All in one half-an-hour.’ Again, in the foregoing extract, where Cleopatra 
says, ‘Had I been old, Or blasted in my bud,’ there is an echo of Constance’s lament 
for Arthur in King John. 


Of all the Versions with which I am acquainted, The Tragedie of Cleopatra Queen 
of Egypt, Written by THOMAS May, Esq., London, 1654, * is the weakest and least 
imaginative. I know of no source wherefrom gratitude for it can spring, except from 
Citoyen MorcuEs, who is saved by it from being at the very bottom of the list. In 
the First Act we learn of the dissatisfaction among Antony’s generals in Alex- 
andria, caused by the lavish way in which Antony bestows provinces on Cleopatra. 
There is also a feast given by Cleopatra, who entreats her guests to be ‘ freely merry,’ 
which must have been ‘a sweating labour,’ if the following ‘Song,’ introduced with- 
out prelude in the midst of the feast, indicates the height of revelry : 

‘Not hee, that knows how to acquire 
But to enjoy, is blest. 
Nor does our happinesse consist 
In motion, but in rest. 


‘ The Gods passe man in blisse, because 
They toile not for more height ; 
But can enjoy, and in their own 
Eternal] rest delight. 


‘Then, Princes, do not toile, nor care ; 
Enjoy what you possesse. 
Which whilest you do, you equalize 
The Gods in happinesse.’ 
Antony thus describes Cleopatra’s appearance on the Cydnus: 
«And down the silver stream of Cydnzus, thou 
In Venus shape cam’st sayling, while the aire 
Was ravish’d with thy Musick, and the windes 
In amorous gales did kisse thy silken sayls. 
Thy maids in Graces habits did attend, 
And boys, like Czpzds, painted quivers bore, 
While thousand Czfzds in those starry eyes 
Stood ready drawn to wound the stoutest hearts.’ 


* For a copy of this Tragedy I am indebted to the courtesy of the Library of The 
University of Pennsylvania.—Ep. 


522 APPENDIX 


In the Second Act Antony and his generals decide upon a-war with Cesar, and,. 
after a prolonged discussion, it is also decided that Cleopatra shall personally share 
the fight. The 7#ird Act isin Czsar’scamp. Antony’s defeat at Actium is described, 
and his seclusion in the island of Pharos is reported. Ccesar receives a letter of sub- 
mission from Cleopatra, laying her crown and kingdom at his feet. He decides to 
send Thyreus to woo her in his name. ‘Tell her’ he instructs Thyreus, ‘that I love 
‘her, and extremely dote On her admired beauty, and win her to betray Antonius to 
‘my hand.’ The scene shifts to the island of Pharos, and Antony appears ‘ disguised 
‘like Timon,’ and in this character holds a long and weak conversation with one of 
his friends. A message from Cleopatra is delivered to him, begging him to return 
to Alexandria and to her. Another friend announces to him that all the remnant of 
his army is gone over to Cesar. Whereupon there ensues the following conver- 
sation, and the Act ends: 

‘Antony. Ha! 

Lucilius. This sinks into him. 
Canidius. It makes a deep impression in his passion. 
Aristocrates. And may perchance expell his other fit. 
Antony. All you here yet! then I have friends I see. 

But tell me, can you be so mercifull. 

As to forgive that most unmanly fit 

That I have been in? oh, I am all in blushes. 
Canidius. My Lord, take better comfort. 
Antony. Dearest friends, 

I will be proof ’gainst any fortune now. 

Come let’s together to the Court, and there 

Drown sadness in rich cups of Meroé wine, 

And laugh at Fortune’s malice, for your sight 

More cheers my spirits, than her frowns can dull them.’ 

The Fourth Act opens with Cleopatra’s experiment as to the efficacy of an aspic’s 
bite. A prisoner already condemned to death is subjected to the trial and dies 
instantly and painlessly. Whereupon the queen exclaims: ‘I am resolv’d; nought 
but the Libyan aspe Shall be renown’d for Cleopatraes death.’ Thyreus enters and 
in Czsar’s name makes ardent love to Cleopatra and finally presents to her ‘ His 
true, and most unflatter’d portraiture.’ Cleopatra waxes ecstatic over the portrait. 
‘The fairest form,’ she cries, ‘ that ere these eyes beheld. 

Where all the best of each best modell meets, 
Cupid’s sweet smiles, lodg’d in the eye of Jars, 
Ganymed’s cheek, th’ Imperiall brow of Jove 
Where love and majesty are proud to dwell.’ 

She tells Thyreus that she will give him an answer shortly, and requests him in 
the meantime to remain near her. He departs and Antony enters, who exclaims, 
‘Ah sweetest Cleopatra, In this Ambrosiake kisse I am again possest of all my - 
‘wealth.’ Cleopatra responds to his warmth and says, ‘ Let’s in and feast,’ and they 
depart to that end. The feast is supposed to have taken place; the Queen resumes 
her interview with Thyreus, and promises to surrender Pelusium to him. As for 
Antony, he ‘is already,’ she says, ‘ fallen So low, that nothing can redeem him now’ 
... ‘he has lost the strength of his own soul, and is not That Antony he was when 
‘first I knew him.’ Antony himself interrupts the conference, and in a mild explo- 
sion of jealousy orders Thyreus to prison. Cleopatra intercedes, amid protestations 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—MA Y 523 


of unalterable love, and at last threatens to resort to ‘the lovely aspe’ which she has 
kept to save her from Czsar, but will now apply against a ‘worst fo,’—Antonius’s 
baseness, Antony relents, apologises, and orders Thyreus to be released. In the 
Lith Act Cesar and Cleopatra have an interview; the latter throws upon Fate the 
guilt of her past actions, and Cesar bids her still live in all her regal state, and whis- 
pers directions to Epaphroditus in reference to it. Whereat Cleopatra, aside : 
‘Yes, whisper on; you cannot over-reach 

My jealousies : no signes of love at all, 

No smile, nor amorous glance ; I was deceiv’d, 

And meerly coosen’d by base Thyreus.’ 

As a result of the interview, Cesar, extremely forehanded, provides two ‘ Psyls,’ 
as May calls them, to ‘suck the mortall venome’ from Cleopatra in case she should 
die by anasp. Cleopatra writes to Czesar informing him that by the time he receives 
the note she will be no more, and then speaks, as follows: 

‘So now my trouble is remov’d, I come, 
I come my dearest Lord Antonius, 
Never till now thy true and faithfull love. 
My much abused Lord, do not disdain 
Or blush t’acknowledge C/eopatra’s name 
When tears and bloud have wash’d her spotted soul. 
Wert thou alive again, not all the world 
Should shake my constancie, or make divorce 
Twixt thee and mee; but since too late, alas, 
My tears of sorrow come, I’ll follow thee, 
And beg thy pardon in the other world... . 
Though false to thee alive, I now am come 
A faithfull lover of thy dust and tombe.’ 

When we next see her, she is crowned and ‘takes her state’ ; Antony’s hearse is 
brought in. 

‘ This,’ she says, ‘is my second Coronation day ; 
But nobler then the first, and fuller farre 
Of reall honour, and magnificence. 
Nor till this pompous houre was Cleopatra 
A perfect Queen.’ 

When Charmion reminds her that Antony is dead, Cleopatra denies it, and says 
that he still lives in the other world and is awaiting her, and from that seat of state + 
she will look down on Rome and Czsar’s threats. Then addressing Antony’s hearse, 
her last words are, 

‘ Farewell thou fading remnant of my Love. 
When I am gone, I’ll leave these earthly parts 
To keep thee company : never to part, 

But dwell together, and dissolve together. 

Come Aspe, possesse thy mansion; freely feed 

On these two hills, upon whose snowy tops 

The winged Cupzd oft has taken stand, 

And shot from thence the proudest hearts on earth. 
Corruption now, and rottennesse must seize 

This once admired fabrick, and dissolve 

This flesh to common elements again. 


524 APPENDIX 


When skilfull nature, were she strictly bound 
To search through all her store-house would be pos’d 
To tell which piece was C/eopatra once. 
Sweet Aspe, I feel thy touch, and life begins 
From these cold limbs to take her gentle fight. 
A slumber seizes me ; farewell my girles. 
Thus let the Romans find me dead, and know 
Maugre the power of Rome, and Czsar’s spleen 
That Cleopatra liv’d, and di’d a Queen.’ 
‘She’s dead, and Ziva too,’ says Charmion, who thereupon stabs herself. Czesar 
enters. The ‘skilfull Psyls’ exert their art in vain. 


GIOVANNI DELFINO was born in Venice in 1617, was made a Cardinal in 1667, 
and died in 1699. In his youth he wrote beside philosophical essays, several trag- 
edies which were collected by his nephew and sumptuously printed in Padua in 
1733. Among these tragedies the most celebrated was, and is, Cleopatra, written 
in 1660. In its first Scene the Shade of Antony, in Avernus, implores the aid of 
Megaera, one of the Eumenides. He asserts that his love for Cleopatra is still as 
deep as ever and his only dread is that Augustus Czesar will woo and win her; this, 
he begs Megaera to prevent, and the Fury promises that she will thwart all the joys 
of Augustus in that direction. In the next Scene Augustus (somewhat prematurely 
so called), in an interview with Cleopatra, endeavours to calm the queen’s mind by 
expatiating on the instability of human affairs, and bids her not despair, 

‘ The heavens do not always keep one face ; 
The stars wherefrom proceed all joy and woe, 
Are wheels and are for ever turning. 
Cleopatra. Fortune, in sooth, has fought with me and won, 
The stars indeed have had their fullest triumph. 
One comfort now alone remains to me,— 
O’er which nor fate nor stars have any power,— 
A heart it is, that welcomes speedy death, 
And, conquering fortune, triumphs over fate.’ 

Augustus, who is as faultless in gentleness and devotion to Cleopatra as the most 
enamoured of lovers, tries in every way to dissuade her from her fell purpose, even 
promising that she shall not be led in triumph at Rome, and at last so far prevails 
that she promises that she will not carry out her design without listening once more 
to his counsels,—but she exacts the condition that he will not prevent her from 
taking her own life when she has finally resolved to do so. Cleopatra afterwards 
confides to her maid, Ergonda, that she mistrusts Augustus and believes that all his 
promises are merely wiles to entrap her. Ergonda, who supplies the place of Charm- 
ian and Iras in other versions, and is at times tediously didactic and philosophical, 
maintains that Augustus is genuinely in love with her mistress, and tries to dispel 
Cleopatra’s devotion to the memory of Antony by saying that earthly affairs no 
longer interest the dead, and quotes her father, a most learned man, as saying that 
our souls when freed from the body become a part of that great soul whose eternal 
source is the wandering sun, and that when emancipated from the body, our souls 
have no human thoughts, but are interested solely in the other world. She exhorts 
Cleopatra, therefore, to sustain life and throne at all hazards. Cleopatra is unmoved 
and replies sadly, 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—DELFINO 525 


‘ For life and throne I have no further care ; 
From every human wish my heart is free. 
I have lived and I have reigned.’ 

With the exception of a short Scene, in which an astrologer, Sesastre by name, is 
puzzled in reading Cleopatra’s stars which foretell a marriage and a death within an 
hour, the rest of the Act is taken up by Agrippa with the description of a storm at 
sea, and by Augustus with a full account of Antony’s death and of the seizure, as 
prisoner, of Cleopatra, wherein throughout DELFINO follows Plutarch. The Chorus 
which closes each Act here denounces navigation, which offers facilities for rich and 
powerful nations to approach and conquer other countries as the Romans have con- 
quered Egypt. We next learn from Ergonda that Cleopatra, overborne by the repre- 
sentations of the astrologer and the arguments of Ergonda herself, has consented to 
look with favour on Augustus’s love if it be offered voluntarily, and has instructed 
Ergonda to sound the Emperor on the subject. But the maid is timid and decides 
that it is better to entrust the delicate matter to an erudite priest, Acoreo. In the 
next Scene Augustus describes to Agrippa how his pity for Cleopatra has developed 
into love; to console her in her bitter lot he visited her more than once and became 
dazzled by her beauty; the sovereignty which had fallen from her hand she still bore 
on her brow; when she spoke every word was a fetter and every glance of her 
eye a snare. Thus he became the prisoner of his prisoner. Agrippa sympathises 
with his royal master and advises him secretly to marry the queen, who would then 
be willing to go to Rome, under the temporary guise of a prisoner; she would be 
not the conquered, but, in reality, the conqueror. This, however, is too great a gift 
to be proffered. Cleopatra must be induced to ask for it. This delicate service 
Agrippa undertakes, but in the course of prolonged self-communings he decides 
that he had better entrust the extremely delicate affair to the more skilful hands of 
the learned priest, Acoreo. In the meantime Ergonda had sought out this same 
Acoreo and begged him to elicit with all possible caution the nature of the senti- 
ments of Czesar toward Cleopatra. This Acoreo consents to do to the extent of his 
ability. An interview between Agrippa and Acoreo follows wherein after a vast 
deal of circumlocution, the project of a marriage between Augustus and Cleopatra is 
broached and Acoreo is made a plenipotentiary in the premises. The Chorus sings 
its little song over the power of Fortune and the Second Act closes. In the next Act 
we listen to the ecstatic rhapsodies of Augustus over the loveliness of Cleopatra ; 
we hear of a fearful dream of his, wherein he sees Death break Cupid’s bow, while 
exclaiming ‘Cleopatra is mine.’ Acoreo tries, in vain, to persuade the queen that 
Czesar’s love for her is true; she refuses to believe it and sends word that she is 
determined to die that very day. In his profound despair at bearing: this, Augustus 
empowers Agrippa to offer immediate marriage to the queen, but that it must be kept 
secret until their arrival in Rome. In the next Act Cleopatra’s scruples yield to the 
persuasion of Acoreo, and when Agrippa enters and aehvers the message from 
Augustus he finds her acquiescent. As her last words to him, she declares, 

‘When in Augustus I behold such power 
United with such goodness, I am forced 
To question if there be not hither come 
Some god to dwell with us awhile on earth. 
Already with his host he’s conquered Egypt, 
But by this noble offer he has made 
He has conquered even Cleopatra. 


526 APPENDIX 


I can deny him nothing more. For me 
His slightest wish shall be my highest law.’—p. 114. 

When alone, Cleopatra indulges in delicious day-dreams of her power in Rome, 
and of her exultation at the sight of proud Roman matrons kissing the ground before 
her. Her thoughts, however, revert to Antony, and she exclaims, 

‘ Believe me, ah believe, thou Shade adored ! 
Could tears recall thee to the vital air 
Into twin founts my eyes at once should turn.’ 
Then she reflects that if tears and grief could recall the dead to life, death would 
not be death ; she must submit to nature, and time must bring her consolation, but 
«O Shade revered and loved, here now I swear 
Thine image never shall depart this heart ! 
Whate’ er my lot, or neath whatever clime 
Thy memory shall be noblest and most dear!’ 

Augustus also has his hour of exultation and exaltation, and needs over a hundred 
lines wherein to express his enraptured emotions. Agrippa enters, and, recognising 
the embarrassment that would arise should it become known in Rome that Augustus 
was about to marry Rome’s bitter foe before Augustus himself could reach that city 
and control the situation, advises his royal master to dispatch a letter to the Senate 
warning the Senators to disbelieve any such report, and that in a few days he would 
bring Cleopatra as a captive in chains to Rome, etc. Augustus approves of the plan. 
The letter is written, but in quelling a disturbance at the harbour, Agrippa loses it. 
It was found and brought to Cleopatra, who opened it and there read, as she natu- 
rally believed, an incontrovertible proof of Augustus’s treachery. Her grief, horror, 
and misery are extreme, but her duty is now clear before her,—she must at once 
rejoin Antony and prepare for the fatal voyage in Charon’s boat. She writes a note: 
‘From Cleopatra already enrolled in the Book of the Dead, to the inhuman Augustus. 
‘If thy wrath at my death be over, be silent concerning the base secret [that she had 
‘been faithless for a while to Antony’s memory] which I carry to the tomb and to 
‘the Tartarean strand,’ etc. This note she entrusts to Ergonda, who delivers it to 
Augustus with bitter reproaches, Augustus is plunged into the deepest despair, and 
to his lamentations Ergonda responds, ‘ Thus,’ she says, ‘a coccodrill [séc] weeps 
‘when he has killed a man.’ She tells how Cleopatra, with Augustus’s letter to the 
Senate in her hand, had gone into her garden, and, seeking some means whereby to 
end life quickly, her eyes lit on a vase of flowers wherein she caught sight of two 
aspics, which, in spite of Ergonda’s struggles with her, she had succeeded in apply- 
ing to her breast; the deadly poison conquered the fortress of her heart, and she 
fell to the ground like a lovely purple flower cut down by the ploughshare. Augustus 
lifts up his voice in bitter, heart-rending lamentations. The Chorus announces, how- 
ever, that Cleopatra is not yet dead, that Acoreo had found her, explained everything, 
and that now she wishes to see Augustus before the last sigh escapes from her dying 
breast. Augustus hastens to her side. She tells him that her feet already stand on 
board the fatal skiff. Awful as is the approach of death, more awful still is the 
thought of her great unfaithfulness to Antony’s memory. ‘It is not right,’ she says 
to Augustus, 

‘ That it should grieve you thus, 
Because the Fates have taken from my heart 
The noble gift which you so lately made. 
She is not worthy of your priceless love, 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—CASPER 527 


Who, tempted by desire or empty pride, 

Could prove a traitress to that noble Shade! 

Bestow no grief, I pray, where none is due. 

A faithless heart deserves not Czesar’s tears. 

Ah woe! ah woe! I feel the fatal shears 

Which slit the thin-spun thread of waning life. 

Adoréd Shade, if thou still hover near, 

Do not disdain to list the earnest prayer 

Of penitence sincere, and tend on me, 

While forth I fare toward that nighted shore ; 

And on that horrid path, shield thou thy Cleopatra... . 
My life, Augustus, lingers only now 

Upon the cool edge of my dying lips, 

A sigh, and it is gone for ever. 

Lo, Destiny, thou hast conquered ! 

Farewell, my country,—friends, farewell ! [ Dies.’ 


GERMANY was the last among European nations to awaken to the charm of dra- 
matic tragedy. There are rival claimants to the honour of being the first to set forth 
this charm, but it is, I believe, now generally conceded that this honour belongs to 
DANIEL CASPER VON LOHENSTEIN, who, in 1660, produced Cleopatra, ‘the first 
‘technically correct German tragedy.’ * Few dramatists have experienced more 
deeply than CASPER the alternations of popularity and neglect ; extolled in his own 
day, and for long years afterward, as the greatest of dramatic poets, surpassing 
Greeks, Romans, and French (I believe the comparison never extended to Shake- 
speare), his fame dwindled, until in recent times ‘ Lohensteinian bombast’ became 
a term of reproach. ‘The estimation in which he is held at the present day seems to 
be more moderate and more just,—whatever excellences he shows are his own, and 
his defects, which are many, are the limitations of a pioneer in a new field. His 
tragedy of Cleopatra extends to four thousand two hundred and thirty-five lines 
(the lines are numbered,—I should never have had the patience to count them) of 
rhymed Alexandrines. GENEE suggests (p. 49) that Casper did not consider the 
Drama in connection with the stage, but as a department of literature. This sug- 
gestion is, I think, to be charitably accepted. 

The drama begins after the battle of Actium. Antony has repulsed an attack of 
Roman cavalry, but is deserted by his soldiers, contemplates suicide, thinks better 
of it, calls a council of war, in course of which he explains that the defeat at Actium 
was due to Fate, who attacked him ‘tooth and nail,’ and discharged from heaven on 
him lightning, hail, rain, thunderbolts, turning sails inside out, entangling the ropes, 
unshipping masts and rudders. Wherefore, no one could blame Cleopatra for lead- 
ing the way to safety out of this sulphurous hell (line 105)—an apology for Cleo- 
patra’s flight which is, I think, unusual. The result of the council is that no agree- 
ment is to be made with Czesar, and that Antony must not expose himself in battle 
(line 434). In the next Scene Cleopatra tearfully narrates to Antony the fearful 
omens which had attended her devotions in the temple, Apis had with his breath 
extinguished the incense, which betokened that Egypt should be reduced to ashes ; 


* Daniel Casper von Lohenstein’s Trauerspiele, etc., von Dr AUG. KERCKHOFFS, 
Paderborn, 1877, p. 7. 


528 APPENDIX 


the nine and twenty signs wherein this sacred animal resembles the moon, all dis- 
appeared, where his colour was usually white it turned black, and where black it was 
like snow, etc. Antony comforts her by interpreting all these signs as favourable. 
Proculeius, the ambassador of Czesar, is announced, and Antony gives him audience. 
Proculeius declares that his mission is in the interest of peace ; consequently he and 
Antony begin mutual recriminations which continue, in stichomythia, in almost 
unbroken sequence for one hundred and four lines; but at last Proculeius unfolds the 
agreement, namely, that Antony shall leave Egypt, break away from Cleopatra, live 
with Octavia, and set free Artabazes. Antony promises that he will set free Arta- 
bazes and will give an answer to the other demands before the day is over. In 
the Second Act Thyreus tells Cleopatra that Caesar is very much in love with her, 
that ‘the flames of love have melted into one his soul and hers.’ But Cleopatra is 
cautious and suspects that Thyreus is dissembling, because, as she says, the cause of 
Rome’s enmity to Antony is that it imagines that he drew gall and poison from her 
breast ; it had washed the blood from the hands of the murderers of the great Julius, 
on the pretext that he had been defiled by her bed, as though it had been a nest of 
vipers, and, furthermore, Augustus was no boy that he should love her now, when 
all her beauty was gone. When Thyreus replies that Augustus is sincere in his love, 
Cleopatra asks why then, when Antony offered to kill himself, if thereby the possession 
of Egypt could be secured to her, he did not accept Antony’s offer? KERCKHOFFS 
is aware that CASPER found this offer of Antony in Dion Cassius and yet he says that 
nothing more dramatic can be imagined than this unconscious admission by Cleo- 
patra of Antony’s magnanimity of soul. Thyreus persists and begs the Queen to per- 
mit Augustus to ‘taste the spice of love on her sugar lips, where kisses will draw out 
‘each other’s soul.’ He confirms his commission by producing Czesar’s bond and seal. 
Cleopatra accepts all ecstatically, sends a ring to Cesar as a pledge that she sur- 
renders herself wholly to him, and that 
‘ Before Osiris grants another dawn and light, 
Antonius to the world shall bid a long good night.’ 

In order to fulfill this promise, Cleopatra, in the next Scene, induces her son, 
Czsarion, and her privy counselor, Archibius, to join her in vengeance on Antony, 
who, she falsely tells them, has approved of a plan, broached in the foregoing con- 
ference with Proculeius, for destroying her by poison smeared over her body. 
Archibius decides that Antony must die, and Czsarion silently acquiesces. They 
are interrupted by the announcement that Antony seeks an interview with Cleopatra, 
who, after the departure of Archibius and Czesarion, order the three children to be 
brought in, Antony enters much dejected, but declares that a kiss will prove a 
refreshing western wind to his languishing heart. Cleopatra immediately begins, 
however, with bitter reproaches for not having been admitted to the conference with 
Proculeius, which she chooses to interpret as a proof that Antony intends to desert 
her. She bids the children embrace the knees of their father and beg for mercy for 
her and for themselves. They obey, and with such effect that Antony’s heart is 
deeply moved, and he swears by Osiris and by Jupiter that, until Clotho shall sever 
his thread of life, he will love and honour Cleopatra, and will instantly send back 
Proculeius, unanswered, to Czesar, and thereby break off all negotiations. Hereby 
Cleopatra’s treachery gains much, but to make the breach between Antony and 
Cesar complete, she begs Antony to send to Cesar the head of Artabazes. To this 
Antony consents, and gives orders for the immediate execution of the man whose 
life was one of Czesar’s special stipulations. This Scene is, I think, the best in the 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—CASPER 529 


play. The phraseology is less stilted and the style less turgid, and there are one or 
two touches of nature, as where one of the children says ‘just let him have a helmet 
‘and armour and he’ll show them how to fight’ ; and another says that ‘he would 
‘like to go at Ceesar with steel and dagger.’ When Cleopatra is left alone she exults 
in the success of her plans thus far, but must proceed with caution; she has a 
secret treaty with Caesar, whereof the condition is Antony’s death; she rehearses the 
different modes of killing him and finally she adopts the plan (herein Casper follows 
Dion Cassius), of sending word of her death to Antony, so that he may commit sui- 
cide, as she is sure he will. In the Zhird Act Cleopatra takes Charmium into her 
confidence and instructs her that as soon as she sees her mistress’s body lying asleep 
as though dead, she must instantly run to Antony and make him believe that the 
apparent death is real. In the next Scene Cleopatra summons to her side all her 
attendants and makes due preparations for her fictitious death. Before beginning 
she bids them all, her ‘dearest sisters’ as she calls them, learn from her example 
that high station is a toil and a burden; ‘no thistle pricks as severely as silk and 
‘purple ; a sceptre breaks easier than glass; hardly had I seen the light of day 
‘before misery hung about my neck; I had more wormwood than mother’s milk. 
‘ Before my tongue could lisp I suffered by my parent’s death, and my brother’s hate.’ 
She begs her attendants not to dissuade her, but rather to help her onward in that 
garden path where she can engraft her life on posterity. ‘Bind diamonds in my 
‘ringlets, and crown my heavenly head with roses and narcissus; let pearls kiss my 
‘bare neck ; place emeralds on my arms and purple on my shoulders, so that I can- 
‘not fail to please the bridegroom.’ ‘Whom will Cleopatra wed?’ asks Belisama. 
‘Death,’ is the reply, ‘whom I welcome more joyfully than when I entrusted myself 
‘to Cesar or to Antony.’ Her directions, strictly, I suppose, in accordance with 
Egyptian rites, are as minute as they are tedious, but they are at last complete and 
Cleopatra takes the cup, exclaiming as she does so, ‘O nectar of our life ! Cordial of 
‘our soul! O sugar-sweet poison! Happy he, who through thee evades all misery ! 
‘Who, under this image of death, masks his highest weal! Charmium. She grows 
‘pale! JZras. Serene Highness! Charm. She is speechless! Szda. She has the death 
‘rattle! Charm. She isdying! ada. Tear off herclothes! Selsama, Alas her 
‘pulse is stopped!’ etc. They decide to send word, by Eteocles, at once to Antony, 
who in the meantime is passing through an uncomfortable ordeal. After he had fallen 
asleep the ghosts of Antigonus, Artabazes, and Jamblichus, three kings whom he had 
caused to be executed, appear and curse him. He awakes in affright and in a frame 
of mind sufficiently terror-stricken to receive the added horror of Cleopatra’s death, 
which Eteocles announces. Antony bewails his unhappy lot, and, after describing 
in glowing language Cleopatra’s charms, commands Eros to kill him. Here CASPER 
follows Plutarch’s account of Eros’s noble self-sacrifice and Antony’s unsuccessful 
attempt to kill himself. Diomedes enters and tells Antony that Cleopatra’s life 
has been saved by the administration of antidotes. Antony begs to be taken to 
her. On his arrival Cleopatra breaks forth in lamentations over him, over her lot, 
and in railings against Fate. Antony expresses his joy in having her lap as his 
death-bed, bids her bury him like a Ptolemy, cease her lamentations, which will dis- 
turb his rest in the grave, and force him to wander as a doleful ghost at midnight, 
about the palace, to see how she and the children are faring. He dies finally and 
Cleopatra falls fainting on his body. The Fourth Act is mainly taken up with dis- 
cussions by Cesar and his friends over the government of Alexandria and the dis- 
posal of Cleopatra. Toward the close Caesar and the Queen have an interview, 
34 


530 APPENDIX 


wherein CAspER follows Dion Cassius as far as concerns the display by Cleopatra 
of Julius Czsar’s images and his letters to her, but, unlike Dion Cassius, Augustus 
excels the queen in hypocrisy and affects to be desperately enamoured of her, calls 
her ‘ fairest queen’ and promises to give her not only her kingdom, her sceptre, her 
freedom, but even more. In return, Cleopatra offers her heart to him and will swear 
to be true and faithful, and will resign the key to her treasure ; she declares that her 
heart is without guile and her body without a blemish. Whereat Augustus asks what 
stone would not then become wax, what ice not become sulphur, and adds that it is the 
powerful magnet of Cleopatra’s beauty that draws him. This emboldens Cleopatra ; 
and she advises him to ‘enjoy the pleasure of his youthful prime; time flies like an 
‘arrow; desire is butashadow. A heart that will not yield to love is a star shrouded 
‘in clouds, a jewel under water; of what use is the coral that is ungathered in the 
‘sea? On the other hand, what delight it must be, to one who is a great lord and 
‘has harvested both victory and the fruits of love, to rest his half-exhausted frame on 
“some tender breast, and to be quickened by the sweet dew of the kisses of his beloved 
‘one.’ Augustus responds: ‘Thou Venus of our time, thou sun of the world, whom 
‘my enamoured soul accepts as an idol, Augustus surrenders to thee, he exchanges 
‘his laurel wreath for thy myrtle chaplet. As far as earth’s remotest bound thou 
‘shalt be adored. But,’ he continues, ‘the errors of others should teach us caution. 
‘Julius Cesar gained hatred, and Antony enemies and war, because they showed in 
‘Rome the wounds received from Cleopatra’s love before they showed the Romans 
‘Cleopatra herself, whose beauty would have converted hate into idolatry.’ Hence 
it follows with the certainty of a Q, £. D. that Cleopatra must go to Rome, and then 
the way will be smooth for her to marry the Emperor of the World. But Cleopatra 
sees the snare, and evades a downright refusal to go to Rome by begging from 
Augustus the privilege, before she leaves for that city, of burying Antony according 
to Egyptian rites. Czesar accedes, and the Act closes. The Fifth Act opens with 
Cleopatra’s busy preparations for embalming Antony. ‘Come, dearest sisters,’ she 
says to her attendants, ‘come, bring to him a true offering of fidelity and the last 
‘pledge of love. Defile your bodies, uncover and beat your breasts. For seven days 
‘do not wash yourselves. Wreathe the sarcophagus with ivy. Put on sackcloth 
‘instead of silk. Drink no wine, only water, so that you can weep abundantly. Wet 
‘your bread and scanty food with tears. Take this crooked iron, Iras, and drag out 
‘ Antony’s brains through his nose, and pour in balsam.’ _Iras observes that Eteocles 
has already opened the body, and gives in detail the disposition of the organs; it is 
hardly worth while to follow the steps of the process, which are probably as accurate 
as they are certainly repulsive ; they are not to be found in the edition of 1661, but 
are a cheerful addition to that of 1680. Cleopatra’s attendants try to comfort her by 
dwelling on Czesar’s love, but she hands to them a paper that she had found among 
Antony’s effects, in Czesar’s handwriting, wherein Antony is instigated to murder 
her; and also shows a letter from Dolabella setting forth Czesar’s intention of send- 
ing her at once a prisoner to Rome. There is now for her no alternative ; she must 
take her fate into her own hands. Antyllus, the oldest son of Antony and Fulvia, 
enters and denounces Cleopatra as an ‘accursed sorceress! a bloodthirsty Medea’ 
whom he would incontinently kill, were it not that she had determined to kill her- 
self. Cleopatra offers him a sword and her breast, and bids him ‘Strike! AntylJus. 
‘Absurd folly! Cleopatra. Strike! Aztyl/us. I would, but I cannot. Cleop. I 
‘will accept the stroke and death asa kindness. Anty//. Blood so black shall never 
‘stain my hands. CVeop. Then let me uncursed die, Antyllus. Amtyll, Deserved 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—SEDLEYV 531 


‘or undeserved, I’ll cast no stone upon thy grave. Cleop. Then joyfully I die.’ 
Cleopatra writes a letter to Caesar begging him to let her lie by Antony’s side. Iras 
and Charmium avow their determination to share their mistress’s fate, but she endeav- 
ours to dissuade them,—wherefore should Czesar treat them harshly ? who else would 
see that she was befittingly buried? ‘ Believe me,’ she says, ‘if you die for fear, 
‘you do not show your love for me as much as you would if you waited in order to 
‘perform the last sad rites for me.’ Cleopatra removes the leaves in the basket of 
figs-and shows the aspics. ‘ Charmium. Ye gods! and is that horrid thing to strike 
‘poison into your lily-white arm? Cleo. Yes, to lift the gates of the body to our 
‘lofty soul.” Diomedes, to hearten them all, applies an aspic to his own arm and 
falls dead. 

‘ Cleop. The faithful knave wins fame and teaches us how easy ’tis to die. 

Belsamina, The asp that killed the knave so swiftly will not sting Cleopatra ; 
Fate, perchance, witholds its fang. 

Cleop. Suggest not such a thing for me. It will not touch my arm! ’Tis thirsty 
for my breast. Here! because, for all my sins, I merit death, now stirig ! suck poison 
there where many a rosy mouth sucked milk and honey. It stings! I’m wounded! 
Already am I faint and drowsy. Come, dearest, and take from me the last fond 
kiss. [ Dies. 

Salambo. She shivers! she sleeps! she’s dead !’ 

Tras also applies the asp and dies, as does also Charmium after she has filled with 
flowers the hands of her dead mistress. 

The tragedy continues for nearly five hundred lines more. To the five corpses 
on thé stage: Antony, Cleopatra, Iras, Charmium, Diomedes,—Antyllus is added. 
As in Dion Cassius, the Psylli are summoned in vain. 

CASPER’S /Votes, wherein he gives his authority for his Egyptian references, are 
almost as voluminous as his text. 


In 1677 a rhymed dramatic version of the story appeared with the following title: 
‘Antony | and | Cleopatra: |. A | Tragedy. | As it is acted at the DuKEs | Theatre, 
‘| Written by the Honourable | Sir CHARLES SEDLEY, Baronet. | Licensed Apr. 24. 
‘1677. Roger L’ Estrange. | London, | Printed for Richard Tonson at his Shop 
‘under | Grayes-Inne-gate next Grayes-Inne-lane, | MDCLXXVII.’ (I have another 
copy dated 1696, but it is merely a reprint.) Among the ‘Persons represented’ 
Antony was Mr Betterton; Cesar, Mr Smith; Cleopatra, Mrs Mary Lee; Octavia, 
Mrs Betterton ; /ras, Mrs Gibbs; Charmion, Mrs Hughes. In the Reprint of 1696 
the same parts are assumed by the same actors. Of this play Sir Walter Scott said 
that he had read it once and would ‘assuredly not read it a second time,’—a resolve 
which, I think, all will share, and include in it even the following brief synopsis : 

When the first Scene opens, the battle of Actium has taken place and Mecenas 
urges Octavius to prosecute the war vigorously against Antony; Octavius acquiesces for 
policy’s sake and for Octavia’s. In the next Scene two Egyptian lords determine to 
plot against Antony in order to free Cleopatra and their country. Antony enters 
and decidedly shows the white feather. He tells Canidius to go out and fight the 
Romans, while he remains within the walls and takes care of Cleopatra; but when 
Cleopatra enters, her warlike spirit inspires him and the Act closes with Cleopatra’s 
declaration that her ‘heart can danger though not absence bear, To Love, ’tis Wax, 
‘but Adamant to Fear.’ Antony chivalrously responds, ‘Mine has such Courage 
‘from your Firmness took, That I can almost bear a parting look.’ In Act //. it 


532 APPENDIX 


appears that Photinus is a traitor to Antony and in love with Iras. He determines 
to make his peace with Czsar by dispatching Antony, then seize the crown and 
make Iras his queen. In the next Scene Octavia appears in Czesar’s tents and inter- 
cedes for Antony ; when her brother says that he must for her sake punish Antony, 
she attempts to stab herself, in order thus to remove the cause of the quarrel. 
Mecenas prevents her. Czesar remarks that he will forgive her for her rashness 
if she will promise not to do it again, and immediately departs after requesting 
Meecenas to look after her and ‘see remov’d all means of Death, Let Nature and 
‘not rage conclude her breath.” Maecenas at once proceeds to make vehement love 
to Octavia and says ‘he’ll the reversion wait And live like Heirs in hope of an 
‘estate.’ Octavia repels him and says she will not survive Antonius an hour, and, 
rather enigmatically, tells him that ‘My dear Antonius, him you must preserve, If 
“aught you from Octavia would deserve,’ and at once departs. Mzcenas thereupon 
concisely states the situation, as he looks after her, ‘Whom whilst he lives I never 
‘can enjoy, And if he dies she will herself destroy.’ 

The first Scene of Act Z//. is taken up with a conversation between Czesar, Mzece- 
nas, and Agrippa wherein the riotous living of Antony is discussed and denounced, 
‘especially,’ says Agrippa, ‘his dotage on the Queen Employs my wonder; was it 
“ever seen A woman rul’d an Emperor till now? What horse the mare, what bull 
‘obeys the cow?’ This vigorous and bucolic argument proves conclusive; they 
decide that Czsar must conquer Antony and govern Rome. Cesar departs, after 
uttering a remark more noteworthy for its undeniable truth than for its rhythm : ‘Men 
“die of agues, too much heat or cold, And others grow ridiculous old.’ In the next 
Scene Antony, Canidius, and Cleopatra discuss the terms of peace offered by Ceesar, 
which they all decide are impossible. Thyreus enters and Antony leaves. As an 
ambassador from Cesar, Cleopatra will have nothing to say to Thyreus, but when he 
pleads as a lover, she exacts from him a promise to tell her, as soon as he can 
find out, what disposition Czesar will make of her should he prove the conqueror. 
Anthony returns in time to see Thyreus on his knees, kissing Cleopatra’s hand, and 
orders him, in spite of Cleopatra’s remonstrances, to be taken out and whipped. This 
whipping of a Roman is more than the Roman soldiers in the city can tolerate ; they 
mutiny and liberate Thyreus, but are restored by Lucilius to allegiance to Anthony. 
In the Fourth Act Octavia again pleads with Cesar for the life of Antonius, but find- 
ing him obdurate, announces that she will go to Rome and stir up the city against 
him; a Messenger enters with the news that a battle is now raging. In this battle 
Antony encounters Thyreus and vanquishes him. Thyreus with his dying breath 
bids his victor tell Cleopatra that Caesar intends to take her in triumph to Rome. 
Antony then meets Cesar and, in single combat, Czsar is beaten back, but before 
Antony can pursue his advantage, word is brought that Cleopatra has been taken 
prisoner. Antony flies to her assistance and rescues her. While these events are in 
progress outside the town, Photinus, still in love with Iras, heads a rebellion within 
the town, against both Antony and Cleopatra. Lucilius, however, within the city 
overcomes him and brings him as a prisoner to Antony, to whom he lies, as to his 
loyalty, so ingeniously that Antony forgives him. In the //th Act, while Antony is 
boasting to Cleopatra of his successes, word is brought that Octavius with his whole 
force is advancing to battle; Antony rushes forth to meet him, leaving Cleopatra to 
indulge in gloomy forebodings. Antony is utterly defeated, and re-enters, exclaiming: 

‘Gape Hell, and to thy dismal bottom take 
The lost Antonius ; this was our last stake.’ 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—SEDLE Y 533 


Photinus enters, crying, 

‘ Horror on horror! Sir, th’ unhappy Queen 
Betray’d by a report that you were slain ! 

Ant. J understand you, she herself has kill’d 
And better knew to die, than how to yield. 

Phot, Alas! she has, I pull’d the reeking steel 
From her warm wound, and with it rusht her life— 
Her latest breath was busie with your name, 

And the sweet pledges of your mutual flame : 
Your children she embrac’t, and then she died. 

Ant. How well had I been with great Julius slain, 
Or by some flying Parthian’s darted cane.’ 

Antony then resolves to kill himself, so as to ‘let Romans now each other love, 
‘Their tedious quarrel I will soon remove.’ He requests Lucilius to kill him, but 
Lucilius passes the weapon through his own body. Antony remarks, 

‘The noblest way: thou show’st me what to do. 
Thou giv’st th’ example, and I’le give the blow.’ 
He thereupon ineffectually stabs himself, and observes to Photinus, 
‘Thou can’st not now my fatal journey stay. 

Phot. Nor would I, Sir, you’r fairly on your way. 

Ant. Death soon will place me out of fortunes reach ; 
Why stays my soul to sally at this breach ? 

Phot. It is not big enough. 

Ant. Do’st mock me now? 

Can my few minutes a new torture know— 

Phot. They may, and to provoke thy parting soul, 

Know that the Queen yet lives, thou loving fool, 
And I the story of her death contriv’d, 

To make thee kill thyself, which has arriv’d 
Just as I wish’t; by thy own hand thou dy’st, 
And art at once the victim and the priest. 

Ant. Furies and Hell 

Phot. Curse on; but Cesar shall 
With Egypt’s sceptre thank me for thy fall.’.. . 

(This is really the best Scene, I think, in the play.) Charmion and Iras enter 
and reveal to Antony that Cleopatra is alive in her Monument, where 

‘ All she holds dear she has throng’d there, but you, 
And now intreats that you will enter too.’ 

Antony is not so far dead but that he manages to walk off to the Monument. 
Cesar and his friends enter, as does also Photinus with Antony’s sword, but he is 
received with suspicion. A servant enters and announces that Octavia is ‘past all 


“human grief and care.’ 
“Ces. She is not dead. 
Serv. Yes, in her way to Rome, 
Of grief and discontent, as we presume. [Italics mine.—Ep.] 
Ces. Ye joyes of victory, a while forbear, 
I must on my Octavia drop a tear.’ ... 
The Scene changes to the Monument and £ter Antonius, Cleopatra, Charmion, 


and Iras, 


£34 APPENDIX 


‘Ant. ’Twas I that pull’d on you the hate of Rome, 
And all your ills past, present and to come. 
It is not fit nor possible I live, 
And my dear Queen, it growes unkind to grieve.’ 
Antony advises Cleopatra to submit to Cesar, who will pity her and recognise 
that her beauty and his love were all her crime. 
‘Ant. But you may live a Queen; say you obey’d 
Through fear: and were compell’d to give me aid... . 
Say, that at last you did my death procure ; 
Say anything that may your life and crown secure.’ 
Antony dies exclaiming, 
“O Rome! thy freedom does with me expire, 
And thou art lost, obtaining thy desire. 
Cleop. He’s gone! he’s gone! and I for ever lost 
The great Antonius now is but a ghost: 
A wand’ring shadow on the Stygian Coast.’ .. . 
Cleopatra masters her overwhelming grief long enough to apostrophise in thirteen 
lines the fleeting frailty of beauty, and its unreality; and finally tells Charmion that 
‘In yonder golden box three asps there lie, . 
Take one and to my naked breast apply 


Its poisonous mouth : 


Charmion obeys; the asp ‘stings her’; she says her ‘eyes grow dim’; then, 
kneeling by Antony’s corpse, exclaims, 
* Good asp bite deep and deadly in my breast, 

And give me sudden and eternal rest. [She dies. Iras runs away. 
Charm. Fool, from thy hasty Fate thou can’st not run. 
Iras. Let it bite you, le stay till you have done. 

Alas! my life but newly is begun 
Charm. No ; thou would’st live to shame thy family ; 

But Ple take care that thou shalt nobly die. 
Zras. Good Charmion !} 


Charm. Ve hear no more: faint hearts that seek delay 
Will never want some foolish thing to say. [Charm. stings her, then 
At our Queen’s feet let’s decently be found, puts it to her own breast. 
And loyal grief be thought our only wound. [ Dies.’ 
Cesar and his train enter, after having battered down the doors, and all duly 
express horror at the sight of the corpses. Photinus runs to Iras, who with her 
dying breath reproaches him for not having made her queen of Egypt; lest she 
should further reveal his treachery, he stabs her, and is at once killed by a soldier 
who says he is Iras’s brother. Czesar wonders what Antony could have feared from 
a brother who owed to him all his honours, and asserts that it would have been a 
godlike pleasure to have shared the empire again with him. To make a clean sweep 
of everything, Agrippa announces that Cleopatra had burned all ‘her vast treasure 
“to vile ashes,’ and had turned ‘her fair person to a carcase.? The curtain falls, 
after Caesar has uttered the solemn warning to us all, that 
‘ Great minds the Gods alone can overcome 
Let no man with his present Fortune swell. 
The fate of growing empire who can tell ? 
We stand but on the greatness whence these fell.’ 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—DE LA CHAPELLE 535 


GENEsT (i, 208) remarks that Sedley (‘for so he then wrote his name’) seems 
to have written the ‘ part of Photinus, an intriguing statesman and great villain, pur- 
‘ posely for Sandford.’ 


In 1682 there was published in Paris, Cezorarre par Mr DELA CHAPELLE. The 
character of Cleopatra is here drawn with bolder strokes than in either JODELLE (if 
we omit the Scene with Seleucus) or GARNIER. On one occasion, when Antony con- 
fesses that he is about to desert her, there is an outburst of hot indignation in which 
she calls him ‘ barbare,’ and threatens him with an undivulged cruel retaliation, before 
which the Roman quails. Unfortunately, I cannot say that this character is fully 
sustained. Possibly, it was the author’s intention, but certain it is that before the 
drama closes Cleopatra is subdued to a dove-like meekness in her utter subjection 
to love for Antony. Octavia takes a prominent part in the drama; her devotion to 
Antony is so unbounded that it includes even Cleopatra, and she vainly struggles to 
save them both, 

The Scene opens after the battle of Actium; throughout the First Act Cleopatra 
does not, and will not appear. She is so overwhelmed with grief at the ruin and 
disgrace she has brought on Antony that she refuses to see him. This seclusion is 
Octavia’s opportunity, and while Antony is chafing under the absence of his queen, 
his wife presents herself to him and adjures him for his own sake and for their chil- 
dren’s to return to Rome and placate the Senate. Her success is such that Antony 
demands time to think it over. The Second Act shows us Cleopatra brooding over 
the fear that Antony is about to desert her, and over his changed demeanour, which 
is very different from his tender forgiveness after her flight at Actium, where 

‘Tl vit que je fuyois, son ame en fifit atteinte, 
Et l amour fit en luy ce qu’en moy fit la crainte,’ 
and when he swore endless vows of eternal fidelity. And here occurs a touch of 
nature, trifling to be sure, but refreshing amid so much moralising: Cleopatra had 
sent Iras to the harbour to learn what she could of Antony’s movements, and had 
not yet returned; hereupon, Cleopatra declares that Iras knows how impatient she 
is for news and yet takes not the smallest pains to hurry; it is only too clear that 
nobody cares for her or her misfortunes, and that she must weep all alone; everybody 
had abandoned her. At that very instant Iras enters. She reports that Antony is 
about to leave Alexandria and Cleopatra for ever, and that on this condition peace had 
been made with Rome. She also reports that Octavia is in the palace and waiting to 
see Cleopatra. Octavia enters and implores Cleopatra, by her very love for Antony, 
to force him to return to Rome, to his honour, and to his power, and that by so doing 
she will convert the hatred of the Romans into admiration, and secure her own throne. 
Cleopatra replies that her advice to Antony would be to die rather than return to 
Rome, only to be shorn of his power like poor Lepidus. Octavia asks how Cleo- 
patra, in case there should be more fighting, would bear the news of Antony’s death. 
‘Like a Queen,’ Cleopatra replies, ‘A thousand famous examples, of which your 
‘Roman history, Madame, is full, will give me the aid of a noble despair in ending 
‘my sad days. You will never see me, like a dastard, disgrace the hundred kings 
‘from whom I am descended. Maugre Rome and maugre the angry Fates I shall 
‘know how to rejoin the anes of a husband. Octavia ends the interview by say- 
‘ing that she will depart, ‘but, Madame, in spite of you, in spite of him, I will today 


‘save you both.’ 
Antony enters and pleads with Cleopatra that it is necessary that he should sub- 


536 APPENDIX 


mit to Octavius and depart for Rome in order to save her from further indignities and 
from being paraded in Czsar’s triumphal procession. Cleopatra sees through this 
specious reasoning, and rises to tragic grandeur as she denounces his perfidy, and 
relates how for his sake she had ruined her kingdom, and had been dishonoured 
throughout the world by his fatal love, but she no longer retains him, and bids him 
go to Octavius, become his slave; ‘ Go, brighten his court! I too will be present! 
‘Perhaps you will find me more cruel than pleasant !’ 

These parting words alarm Antony with their veiled threat, and he resolves that 
he will try to thwart her insidious plans. In a Scene with Agrippa, Czesar’s ambassa- 
dor, Octavia renews her vow that she will remain near Antony in war or in peace ; 
and reasserts her determination to share Cleopatra’s fate and to save both her and 
Antony. Octavia retires; Cleopatra enters and makes full submission to Cesar 
and to Rome. Antony enters unexpectedly and tells Agrippa that his treaty of peace 
with Czesar is broken off, that there must now be war, and that he casts in his lot 
with Cleopatra. Agrippa, astounded, retires; Cleopatra’s anger, mingled with jeal- 
ousy, has no whit cooled; she treats Antony at first with the utmost disdain. He 
accuses her of ingratitude. She asks if she is to remain for ever trembling, and for 
ever accused, exposed to the violence and jealous transports of an enraged barbarian ; 
she sees his design to drive her away and she will at once gratify him. He implores 
her to remain and swears that his only thought has been to protect her and her chil- 
dren in case of his death. This touches Cleopatra and she yields. Without him, 
she confesses, she would not care to live, and at this very moment her dearest wish 
is to see him happy and to die for him. Antony then renews his vows of love, and 
describes the great deeds he is about to perform in the war. At this moment word 
is brought to him that the Romans are everywhere victorious and that his presence 
is needed in the camp. Antony takes a touching farewell of Cleopatra, and adjures 
her to preserve the memory of his faithful love. But 


‘ Before my brave army I must be calm 3 
And hide all my trouble.—So adieu, Madame. [Zeit 
Cleopatra. Dieux! if today, Death should humble his pride ! 
Tl follow him swiftly, and die by his side !’ 


In the next Scene Cleopatra is alone, and horror-struck at the thought that even at 
that very moment Antony’s head may have been brought to Ceesar. 


‘ My glorious spouse [Zfouwx]!’ she cries, ‘’twas my fatal love,— 
That sent thee too soon to mansions above. 
*Twas I who deprived thee of crown and of light! 
I will follow thee, dearest, in fortune’s despite !’ 


While the battle is going on and Cleopatra is in the extremity of fear and alarm, 
Octavia appears and asserts that she is come to share Cleopatra’s fate. Cleopatra is 
not cordial, and remarks that the combat is not yet decided. But at that instant 
Charmion hurries in and announces that all is lost, Czesar’s victorious troops are 
already in the city. Thereupon Cleopatra hastens to her Monument. Antony 
returns defeated, disgraced, and in despair, seeking Cleopatra, whom alone he 
wishes to see. 

Octavia is warned that her husband is bent on suicide, and is seeking Cleopatra to 
bid her farewell. Octavia’s excellent character rises to the occasion. After all the 
misfortunes which the queen has caused her, she says that were she herself not a 
Roman she could hate her, but, 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—DE LA CHAPELLE 537 


‘ These jealous stirrings and these mortal quarrels, 
Which lacerate the heart of vulgar lovers, 
Awake in mine no thought to stain my glory. 
What if, for her, my love has been disdained, 
Unhappy is she, and, like me, a woman. 
Pll seek my brother, and assure my spouse 
That Roman hearts cannot withstand my tears.’—p. 48. 

Word is brought to Antony that Cleopatra had taken refuge in her Monument, 
which had been attacked by Roman soldiers to whom Charmion had thrown out some 
treasures and with tears had announced Cleopatra’s death, whereat even the rough 
soldiers were touched and retired. Antony’s attempted suicide follows, as in Plu- 
tarch ; he learns from Iras that the queen still lives. The way in which Antony was 
carried to the Monument, and, by the scarves and veils which Charmion had twisted 
into ropes, was pulled up by Cleopatra and her women, is described to Octavia. In 
the last Sceze Cleopatra tells Czesar’s ambassador that she now surrenders herself; 
she has left the Monument where the inhuman Gods had just snatched from her the 
greatest of all the Romans; she had closed the lids over his eyes, all stained with 
blood and dust. ‘It is I,’ she cries, ‘ who killed him. Too great a solicitude for my 
‘life has cost me my life. The deplorable state in which his loss has left me,—these 
‘veils stained with blood, his last sighs breathed out in my arms, and my own sorrows, 
‘all demand my death. If I defer it for a few minutes, ’tis to ask of Cesar only one 
‘favour, and Czesar must remember that to me is really due his glory, which he would 
‘never have attained had not Antony been blinded by his fatal love for me. This 
‘fatal love the gods sent to his breast, The Senate exiled him,—and I did all the rest.’ 

The favour which she asks is that such funeral honours as are beyond her power 
may be given to Antony. She does not desire any proud mortuary pomp, which 
may attempt to repair the ignominy of his ending ; 

*’Tis ample that his Shade obtains repose, 
And that a little mound of heaped-up earth, 
May prove an all-sufficing monument, 

In honour of his sacred memory.’ 

Agrippa begs her to relinquish all thoughts of dying, assures her that Cesar recog- 
nises her virtues, and laments her misfortune ; but she replies, 

‘ From cares like these, has Fate deliver’d me, 
Some minutes now are all I have to live. 

Agrippa. What say you, Madame? 
Cleopatra. Tis already done, Agrippa, 
The poison I have taken ends its work. 
If any pity for me stirs you now, 
Permit no severance twixt my spouse and me, 
But in one tomb, pray, let us both be laid. 
Tis there—’tis there, the summit of my wishes! 
Dear spouse! receive me in the gloomy realm, 
Where love, I pray, may reunite our Shades. 
There’s nought that now appears so sad to me’ 
As moments when I was not by your side.* 
Sustain me, Charmion, my strength is going. 

* This awakens an uncomfortable suspicion that the Egyptian queen had been 

lately reading her Jodelle, or her Garnier. 


538 APPENDIX 


Agrippa. I grieve; admire; her virtue astounds me. 
Charmion. Madame 


Cleopatra. The poison puts forth double strength. 
A deathlike chill is creeping through my frame. 
I die! 


Tras. O cruel fortune! She is dead! 
Agrippa. O heavens! TI’ll bear at once the news to Cesar.’ 
Here ends the Tragedy. 


‘ANTOINE e¢ CLEOPATRE, Tragédie. Represéniée pour la premiere fors sur le 
Théatre de la Comédie Francoise, le 6. Novembre 1741. Paris, M. DCC. XLII.’ 
So runs the title of a play which the Dedicatory Epistle informs us was written by 
‘BolstTEL.’ (From his collected Works we learn that his full name is J. B. ROBERT 
BolstEL D’WELLEs.) This version is, it appears to me, of more than common 
interest. The author’s conception of both Antony and Cleopatra is wholly original. 
Antony’s love for Cleopatra suffers only one momentary eclipse, and then he at once 
recovers himself, and, with a strength unknown among other Antonies, shuts off 
all possibility of a relapse by proclaiming to his army that Cleopatra is his wife. 
Cleopatra is a truly pathetic figure. She makes a firm stand against Fate, even 
counselling Antony to attack and conquer Rome. But when she finds that Fate is 
too strong for her, she adjures Antony to desert her, the cause of all his misfortunes ; 
when he refuses, she retires to the Pyramids and there dies; how she finds death we 
are not told. This version comes nearer than any other to canonizing Cleopatra. 
Octavia does not appear in the play. Her place, as a representative of Antony’s 
home-ties, is taken by Julius, a son of Antony and herself. From what we are told 
during the first few Scenes, we learn that after the battle of Actium, Antony sepa- 
rated himself from Cleopatra and, in a decisive battle, vanquished Czesar, but on his 
victorious march to Rome was recalled to Egypt by a revolt in his army. Czesar 
has followed him, and here in Alexandria appointed an interview for a discussion 
of the peace demanded by the soldiers, and has designated, as the spot where it is 
to take place, the royal tombs of the kings of Egypt, where Cleopatra has kept her- 
self secluded ever since her disgraceful flight at Actium. It is intimated that the 
wily Czesar has selected this spot in the hope that Antony, who is ignorant of Cleo- 
patra’s presence there, may again meet the Egyptian Queen, and again become her 
thrall. The plot succeeds, Antony again meets Cleopatra, and they renew their 
vows of eternal love. When Cleopatra learns, however, that Czesar is coming hither 
for a conference, she is terrified lest, as she tells Antony, her eyes should behold 

‘A second Actium on this fatal spot. 
Your foe hates you, and me all Rome abhors. 
While you love me what is there I need fear? 
I hear a noise. I yield to duty’s call. 
*Tis doubtless Czesar ; go, my lord, and meet him, 
And trust that I, most faithful to your love, 
Will cherish thoughts of you to my life’s end. 
If ever I was worthy of your love 
Do you here show that you are worthy mine 
By flying hence, and making peace with Czesar.’—p. 15. 

Thus closes the “vst Act. In the next the Triumvirs meet for discussion. 

Antony is the magnanimous, open-hearted patriot, who would give liberty to all, and 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—BOISTEL 539 


to each a chance to live. Czesar is the wily, selfish politician, They agree to divide 
the world between them, but Czxsar requires some assurance that the glory of Rome 
will not be tarnished, nor his sister live in contempt, through Antony’s connection 
with Cleopatra. Accordingly, he demands that the Egyptian queen shall either take 
a husband of his choosing, or be delivered as a hostage to Rome. Antony blazes 
into fury at the thought of either alternative. The conference ends with his defiance 
of Cesar. In the next Scene, Cleopatra counsels Antony to send her to Rome and 
then win her back by conquering the city,—a plan which he scouts, but waxes 
enthusiastic over the wonderful military genius it displays. In the next Act, Julius, 
Antony’s son, unrecognized by his father, is presented to Antony by Eros as the 
son of Ventidius. Julius describes the bitter grief with which Octavia mourns 
Antony’s desertion; Antony listens at first with coldness, but is finally touched ; 
when Julius informs him that Octavia is close at hand, and, throwing himself at 
his father’s feet, reveals his identity, Antony breaks down and bids him bring his 
mother and he will be reconciled to her. But as soon as he is alone and calm, he 
sees to what a frightful pass his promise to Julius has brought him,—nothing less than 
a reconciliation with Rome and an abandonment of Cleopatra. He resolves that he 
will seek out Octavius, and by a sudden oath extricate himself from the horror of his 
situation. Cleopatra enters. To her, he recounts his misery and his remorse, and 
says that he will fly to where she is not, or whithersoever death will guide his steps. 
Cleopatra counsels him to obey necessity, and shows that even greater trouble is at 
hand ; Cesar is inciting Antony’s soldiers to revolt by disseminating among them let- 
ters wherein they are exhorted either to surrender Cleopatra to him or to destroy the 
beauty which Antony still adores. Cleopatra asserts that, as she is the only cause 
of discord, it behooves her to fly to some distant land, abandoning her country and 
resigning her diadem, convinced that— 
‘If thou wert happy, I should soon forget them. 
In every danger, will sweet thoughts of thee 
Make good the loss of honour, throne, and home.’—p. 39. 

Antony seeks out Octavius to give him his final answer; he will not confide Cleo- 
patra to him; she shall remain his until death; he repudiates Octavia, she is of 
Ceesar’s blood. He turns to the assembled Egyptians and Romans and exclaims: 

‘ Cleopatra, it is true, was born a queen, 
But ’tis in her the only fault I’ve found. 
And if you think it does impute disgrace, 
Remember it was Fate. I can repair it: 
No more, Egyptians, do you have a queen! 
Here, Romans, stands my wife, your sovereign lady !’—p. 41. 

He defies Czesar, and Rome, which he will one day force to bend the knee before 
a woman. Cleopatra meets Julius, not knowing at first that he is Antony’s son, and 
begs him, as a friend to Antony, to persuade the latter to return to his duty. Julius 
mistrusts her and reveals himself. Antony enters. Cleopatra begs him to withdraw 
the empty title of wife which he had given her before his army, 

‘ Thou hast deceived me, Antony; my just alarm 
Demands the motive for this empty title. 
But time is short, I’ll spare thee all complaint. 
Today, thy duty summons thee to say— 
Which of the two shall now prevail with thee, 
The tie of blood—or love, thy son—or I? 


540 APPENDIX 


‘ But, be it either son, or be it loved one, 

Go with me to thy army, and my wish fulfill. 

Come! I must there resign into thy hands 

This honour which excites thy Romans’ ire. 

Thou know’ st how deadly, ire like this may grow. 

Imagine this to be thy sole resource. 

Art silent? What! must thy son blush for thee ? 

Or in thy heart can love do nothing more 

Than here refuse me what my lips implore, 

And load me down with gifts that I abhor? 

Judge of thy plight, when here thou seest at one, 

In the same hope, Cleopatra and thy son!’—p. 45. 

But Antony is obdurate, he has done what he believed to be his duty and is satis- 

fied. Then Cleopatra becomes desperate and declares that Antony will call to her 
in vain at the gates of the tomb where she is dying. 


‘ But if, at this cost, thou wilt not heed my voice 
No more my presence shall thine eyes rejoice. Adieu!’ 


Julius recognizes her nobleness, and, as she is leaving, breaks forth in exclamations 
of sincere admiration. 

The ifth Act opens with a soliloquy by Cleopatra in which she apostrophises her 
Antony, her ‘dear lover,’ and begs him to believe that if she has ever made him 
despair, if she has ever seemed to avoid him, or seemed afraid to see him, or, in the 
happy hours gone by, has not yielded to the intoxication of joy which her love 
prompted, she implores his pardon, and assures him that he was never more loved 
than at this moment. She then turns to the Monuments of the dead kings of her 
race, and to them declares that 

‘If loving thus a Roman hurts your pride, 
And all my glory has seemed stained thereby, 
My death shall here efface my life’s misdeeds.’—p. 55. 

Eros brings her word of Antony’s utter defeat, of the death of Julius by his father’s 
side, and of Antony’s entreaty, before he retired from the battle, that Cleopatra should 
be saved by Eros from the Romans. Cleopatra replies, 


‘Fear nothing! I’m his wife and eke a queen! 
None ever shall see Rome insult my woe. 
Do what I could, I’ve caused all his misfortunes. 
Perchance my death will more avail than tears. 
If I, by fate, have tasted life’s sweet joys, 
I’ve learned, thank Heaven, to bow to fate’s caprices. 
Follow me both. The dreadful moment comes! 
I pardon all! Blest gods! preserve my lover ! 

These are the last words we hear from Cleopatra. Eros brings word to Antony 
that she is dead. Antony in his distraction goes to the Monument and calls again 
and again and again on Cleopatra, but in vain. He then commands Eros to kill him, 
and the result is repeated from Plutarch, except that the stab which Antony gives 
himself is entirely successful. 


MARMONTEL’S Tragedy of Czforarre need not detain us long. It was, as is 
announced on the title-page, ‘ Représentée pour la premiére fois par les Comédiens 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—MARMONTEL 541 


‘ordinaires du Roi le 20. Mai, 1750.’ The author was but twenty-seven years old, 
and his tragedy bears the marks of youth in everything but in its lack of fire. It 
is cold, spiritless, timid, and insincere, with little discrimination of character. His- 
tory, except in extremely meagre outlines, is disregarded. Indeed, it is difficult to 
believe that the dramatist had ever read Plutarch or Dion Cassius, but, as far as 
Ventidius is concerned, it seems as though he must have read Dryden. Octavia does 
not appear among the Dramatis Persone; and, apart from Cleopatra, the chief 
interest is divided between Antony and Czsarion, a malapert boy, who thinks that 
Rome and all Romans should bow the knee to him because in his veins runs the 
blood of Julius Czesar. Cleopatra’s love seems to be equally shared by Antony and 
Czsarion. The play opens after the battle of Actium, and the First Act closes with 
Cleopatra’s attempts to cheer and encourage Antony. In the Second Act Ventidius 
awakens Antony’s sense of honour and persuades him to desert Cleopatra, who is 
plunged into despair when she learns of this resolution from Antony’s own lips. She 
thereupon determines that she will make her lover jealous, and so win him again, 
by making love to Octavius. She is aware, she says, that she no longer possesses 
the beauty of her first youth, but then age replaces youth, by the knowledge of more 
seductive wiles. Whoso knows how to attack is already half a master. What a 
triumph to vanquish the pride and the power of Octavius by the glances of her eyes ! 
Let the world call her perfidious and false! ‘In my own eyes upright, content with- 
‘out flaw, I need but my heart, both for judge and for law.’ 

Cleopatra meets Octavius and flatters him to the skies. He afterwards acknowl- 
edges to Proculeius that he had never before so thoroughly appreciated her fasci- 
nations, but they had not touched his heart. Antony and Octavius meet, and although 
there are outbursts of indignation from the former, yet Octavius ‘calms them and they 
become friends. Cleopatra enters and places her crown in the hands of Octavius, 
useless burden as it is on the brow of a captive. To Antony she says, ‘ You have 
‘given me a master, let me bow down to him. From you or from him, my fate I must 
‘crave I am either your spouse, or else I’m his slave. Choose ye.’ 

Antony at once breaks off with Octavius and follows Cleopatra. In the battle 
which follows Antony is defeated and Czesarion taken prisoner. Ventidius brings 
word from Octavius that if Cleopatra wishes to save Czesarion’s life she must herself 
come and ask for it. She bids Ventidius take a poniard to Cesar wherewith he may 
stab Czesarion, who will then die undisgraced. This Ventidius refuses to do and 
holds out the hope that they may still conquer Octavius with the troops that survive, 
but these troops will not fight unless Antony leaves Cleopatra, The queen then bids 
Ventidius announce to the soldiers that the chain which bound her to Antony is 
broken, and that she consents even to be fastened behind a chariot in Rome. In 
the last Act, Cleopatra instigates Eros to assassinate Octavius. Antony and Octavius 
meet, the latter is cruel and haughty, and bids Antony choose his place of exile, but 
he will retain Cleopatra and Czsarion as hostages ; at that instant Eros aims a blow 
with a poniard at Octavius’s heart. Antony catches his arm and saves the life 
of Octavius. Out of gratitude Octavius shows Antony the letter which Cleopatra 
had written to him offering to surrender everything—even Antony himself. The 
latter is thunderstruck and breaks out into wild despair. ‘ After such treason,’ Caesar 
asks, ‘can you love her?’ Antony replies ‘I adore her! Leave me. Your pity 
‘augments my frenzy. Leave me!’ ‘What recourse, have you?’ asks Ventidius. 
‘Death!’ answers Antony ashe stabs himself. Cleopatra rushes in, falls on Antony’s 
body, sees the fatal letter which she had written as a decoy to Octavius, and under- 


542 APPENDIX 
stands it all. She implores Antony to speak to her ; ‘he extends his arms, his eyes 
beam love, 

Adoring at thy feet, behold thy queen ! 

Excess of love and sorrow brings me death ! 

Hah! would’st thou speak ?—thou sighest,—thou diest !’ 

Cleopatra faints, but revives and begs from Czesar, as a last favour, that she may 
place a crown of laurel on Antony’s brow. Charmion brings a basket of laurel 
leaves under which an aspic is concealed. Cleopatra seizes the aspic and applies 
it to her breast. ‘O ye gods!’ cries Octavius. Cleopatra, with the aspic still on 
her bosom, exclaims, ‘At last I’m free. My heart mounts up above Octavius and all 
‘misfortunes! My son is alive and free. Adieu. Upon this funeral-pile I die a 
«queen.’ Her last words are, » 

‘ My senses, Charmion, gently fade to rest 
I die, with kisses, on my hero’s breast.’ 

An anecdote connected with this Version by MARMONTEL is told (on the authority 

of the Mouvelle Biographie Générale, 1863) in the Preface to the present volume. 


The earliest drama of VITTORIO ALFIERI, written at the age of twenty-five, is 
ANTONIO E CLEOPATRA, acted for the first time in Turin, in June, 1775. The play was 
several times re-written, and spoken of by the author in such contemptuous terms as 
‘abortion,’ ‘ refuse,’ ‘ the first tragic and lyric attempt of a sucking poet,’ etc. Of the 
origin of the version ALFIERI gives a description in his Zzfe. ‘Sitting unoccupied in 
‘the saloon of his lady-love, whose health required long periods of retirement and 
‘ silence, he took up half-a-dozen leaves of paper that lay at hand, and sketched upon 
‘them two or three scenes of dialogue, naming the principal speaker Cleopatra. 
«This name was suggested by the story woven on the tapestries of the apartment, 
‘otherwise, he says, he might just as well have called his heroine Berenice or Zenobia. 
‘When his paper was exhausted, he thrust the leaves under the cushion of a sofa, 
“and there they remained for over a year, during which he visited Rome, and went 
‘through other experiences wholly alien to composition. Finding his passion exer- 
‘cising a baleful influence on his life, he determined to break it off, and in one of his 
‘last visits to the lady’s house, he withdrew from under the cushion his attempt at a 
«drama, and proceeded to recast it, still with no very definite plan.’ * Of this inci- 
dent of the cushion ALFIERI furthermore says, ‘ my earliest attempts at tragedy were 
‘brooded over, as it were, by the lady herself, who sat in the chair habitually, and 
‘by any person who happened to sit down upon it.’ + 

As far as the historical Cleopatra is concerned, ALFIERI was eminently correct when 
he said that he might just as well have called his heroine Berenice or Zenobia, with 
this qualification, however, that no Berenice or Zenobia was ever so utterly deceitful 
or cruel as is his Cleopatra. With the exception of KoTzEBUE, I can recall no dram- 
atist who has given to Cleopatra so black a character as ALFIERI. The Egyptian queen 
drawn by the Italian is as much blacker than the melodramatic Egyptian queen of the 
German as, in genius, ALFIERI towered above KorzEBur. In reading ALFIERI’S 


* Six, Cleopatras, by WILLIAM EveRETT, Atlantic Monthly, February, 1905, 
p- 261. A delightful Essay which no one interested in the subject can afford to 
overlook. 

} The Tragedies of Vittorio Alfieri, From the Italian, Edited by E. A. Bowrinc 
Bohn’s ed., 1876, p. 422. ; 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—ALFIERI 543 


tragedy let us forget history, forget that Cleopatra was a Greek, and an Egyptian 
only so far as she had been thus made by Phoebus’ amorous pinches, and passively 
resign ourselves to the terror inspired by his heroine, whose character reflects the 
lawless strength and medizeval warmth of the Italy of the Borgias. 

The play opens in Alexandria, immediately after Cleopatra’s arrival in Egypt after 
her disgraceful flight from Actium. She knows nothing of Antony’s fate, nor of the 
result of the battle. She avows to her attendant, Ismene, her inextinguishable 
remorse for having fled, and possibly causing thereby the defeat of Antony, of whom, 
up to this moment, she has no news. In the course of her denunciation of herself, 
she declares, 

“It is not love that poisons now my days; 
Ambition to command has ever moved me. 
Each path, and none in vain, have I essay’d, 
Which could conduct me to that lofty end ; 
My other passions all succumb’d to this, 
And others’ passions minister’d to mine.’ *—p. 424. 

She learns that Antony has been utterly defeated. In the following soliloquy, 

when alone, she throws off all disguise and we here learn her true character : 
* Cleo. And now at last 
I may pluck off the veil which hides the truth 
In a dissembling heart’s profound abysses. 
Vanquish’d is Antony: this shame and treason 
Perchance survives he not; the base design 
I dared to form has been fulfill’d: so much 
I could not hope for from my wicked flight. 
But half the work remains for me to do, 
And the most doubtful: vain are my misdeeds, 
If to my fate I cannot link Augustus. 
And from his heart what answer seek I? Love:... 
Love, whom I oft inspired but never knew, 
And from whose pow’r, when vanquish’d and disarm’d, 
I glory drew, the very victor taming. 
Sole barrier to my scheme was Antony : 
If he’s no more, my conquest will be easy.’—I, iv, p. 429. 

We next see her in an interview with the disgraced Antony, whose bitter upbraid- 
ings for her treachery she in vain tries to stem by protestations of her love. When 
at last he says that he abhors life because he is endlessly disgraced, and abhors death 
because she might find him out among the Shades and even there destroy his peace, 
she breaks forth, 

‘ Dost seek, barbarian, solace for thy fury ? 
It is not love thou feelest in thy breast, 
I know it but too well: here, take this steel ! 
My bosom I unveil, where once thou restedst ; 
Thou know’st it not again, or hast forgotten ; 
Raise thy intrepid hand, and brandish it 
Then will the blood, which thou didst think unfaithful, 


* This extract, and the following metrical extracts, are from the Translation of 


Alfieri’s Tragedies just mentioned. 


544 APPENDIX 


‘Rush gushing forth, and straightway dye my garments, 
And fall upon my feet, and both my hands 
Will reek with it; and whatsoever breath 
Remains to Cleopatra, tow’rds thee turning 
Eyes full of love, and death, will she collect, 
To say: Farewell, I loved thee, die for thee! 
And then, when thou hast fed thy angry looks 
On thy dead enemy, by slow degrees 
Thy fury will abate, and constancy 
Revive in thee again, and thy old virtue. 

Ant. How, Cleopatra, hast thou gain’d such power 
Thus to delude me ever? yet I love 
Thy treacheries, and those deceitful accents 
Have from my ear reach’d even to my heart.’ —II, iii, p. 436. 

She then gives a fictitious and flimsy excuse for her flight from Actium: that 
she learned, only on the day she sailed, of a powerful rebellion among her subjects, 
designed to deliver Egypt to Caesar, and she returned to quell it, not for the sake of 
her own throne, but solely out of love for Antony. Antony is appeased, but not con- 
vinced. His supreme love for her forbids him to reason. But whether she be true 
or false, he must leave her, encounter Cesar, and die in battle. 

Having failed in her attempt to destroy Antony at Actium, Cleopatra now devises 
a second and more fatal act of treachery which can hardly fail of a successful issue, 
either in causing Antony to lose his life in battle or to commit suicide. She thus 
discloses it to Ismene : 


‘a second plot 
Is in the field prepared, t’assure the first. 
The warlike trumpets scarcely will be heard 
To sound the haughty signal for the fight, 
When on the sea the ships, on land the cohorts, 
Abandoning the leader they once own’d, 
Will range themselves beneath Augustus’ ensigns. 
Left by their flight defenceless, Antony 
Will turn against himself his bitter fury.’—III, i, p. 440. 

The plot succeeds and Antony returns, having touched a lower deep than he had 
ever before conceived of, and with proof too clear of Cleopatra’s treachery. There 
is nothing before him now but infamy or death. The same will be Cleopatra’s fate. 
Since they are herein equal, he bids her take his sword, transfix with it her heart, 
return it to him, and he will then transfix his own. She turns pale, but, still certain 
of her supreme power over him, artfully evades the fatal stroke by saying that she 
will teach him how to die, and in such an honourable death nothing is wanting 

‘save that thy dearer hand 
Should guide the friendly steel ; mine maybe, trembling, 
Or, little wont to strike, might give the lie 
Both to my valor, and thy cruel thoughts. 
Into this heart, by not an unknown path, 
Th’ avenging blade may plunge: deep sculptured there, 
Thy fatal image will be found by thee; 
Thou didst impress it, thou shalt cancel it ; 
The dagger take, and strike . . . thou turn’st away ?’—III, ii, P- 444. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—ALFIERI 545 


As Cleopatra had foreseen, Antony refused to strike and was in the very act of 
turning the sword against himself, when his hand was stayed by the announcement 
that Caesar was about to enter. Cleopatra retires. Czesar addresses Antony in 
friendly and encouraging terms, promising to bury all hostility in oblivion, and finally 
invites him to return to Rome, but will not promise that Cleopatra shall not grace his 
triumph. Antony breaks off the interview by saying that ‘never shall that woman 
‘be in Rome By mortal seen as subject to Augustus, Who once deserved the love of 
‘Antony.’ Ina conversation with his friend, Septimius, Cesar declares that he intends 
to procure Antony’s death at the hands of Cleopatra, and then, after having been kept 
for the disgrace of being led in his triumph, Cleopatra herself shall be put toa 
wretched death. 

In the /ourth Act there is an interview between Augustus and Cleopatra, who 
puts forth all her arts to win the Roman conqueror; she claims his gratitude for 
having wilfully betrayed Antony at Actium, and again for having caused all her 
army to desert him. Augustus intimates his hopes that Cleopatra will some day be 
his queen, and that she will not disdain to divide his sceptre with him; in those 
happy days, perchance, Cleopatra will weep at having loved Antony so much. To 
this artful suggestion Cleopatra replies, 

“Too much I loved ungrateful Antony ; 
No more I love him ; to amend my fault 
I’m now prepared : it is not hate or vengeance 
Which urges me to-day my fault to cancel, 
But reason, the cool reason of a monarch. 
For a long time his death has seem’d to be 
Not only useful for this kingdom, long 
By him despoil’d, but indispensable ; 
And now that his existence might once more 
Re-open all the ancient wounds of Rome, 
Destroy the peace of the whole world, and partly 
Rob thee of thy supreme felicity, 
’Twould be a crime to have compassion on him.’—IV, ii, p. 454. 

Hereupon, Cleopatra, in unmeasured terms, confesses her admiration of Augustus, 
who responds in protestations, equally sincere, of his love for her. At last Augustus 
says, ‘But Antony draws nigh; we must dissemble.’ When Antony enters he is 
furious at the sight of Augustus alone with Cleopatra. Both endeavour to appease 
him,—Anugustus by indignation at Antony’s mistrust, Cleopatra by asseverations of 
her undying, faithful love,—for Antony’s sake there is no sacrifice she will not make, 
to fulfill his wishes; if he desires her to be led in triumph in Rome she will fly to 
the chariot; without Antony she is a living corpse. At last Augustus bids Cleopatra 
live as queen, and with her lover if she wishes it; in the temple let them all swear 
lasting oblivion to their former hatred. After Augustus has left, the poor disgraced, 
bewildered, heart-broken Antony tells Cleopatra that he will seek the temple to ask 
the gods for guidance. As soon as he is gone, Cleopatra looks after him, saying, 

‘Credulous lover, go not to the temple ; 
Go rather to an unexpected death 
Yes, find thou death, and heinous treachery, 
There, where thou look’st for life, for love and peace.’—p. 459. 

Cleopatra thereupon commands Diomedes to follow Antony, and, in a dark pas- 
sage leading to the temple, stab him, and let the victim also know at whose command 


35 


546 APPENDIX 


the blow is struck. Diomedes shortly returns, and reports that he has done the deed ; 
Cleopatra rejoices that ‘the odious rugged chains of Antony at length are broken.’ 
But Augustus receives the news of Antony’s death by no means with the pleasure 
that Cleopatra had anticipated. He is, on the contrary, sternly indignant, and speaks 
of Antony as ‘a great hero,’ ‘a mighty warrior,’ who was worthy of a far more noble 
end, and declares that ‘To rid him of his enemies, Augustus Has never sought a 
‘ woman’s coward hand.’ He commands Cleopatra to prepare to follow him to Rome, 
there to render an account of her atrocious guilt. After he is gone Cleopatra’s expres- 
sions of grief over the complete failure of her plan are bitter and her vows of venge- 
ance on Augustus are deep. In the midst of them Antony enters. The courage of 
Diomedes had failed him, or rather his compassion and love for Antony had proved 
too great. In Antony’s living presence no subterfuge will avail the wretched queen, 
and she openly confesses that she feels neither pity nor remorse. In the last Scene 
all the characters are present, Antony addresses Augustus in noble words of mingled 
pride, resignation, and defiance; then, turning to Cleopatra, exclaims, 
‘Fly, fly, O queen, the horrors of a triumph, 

Horrors far worse than those of any death. 

Wherefore alone to die is granted to us? 

I could have given thee yet more of life 

Augustus, now will the whole world be thine: 

Since I have taught thee how thou should’st not reign ; 

If thou, like me, should’st be unfortunate, 


Learn to die bravely, as does Antony. [ Kills himself. 
Diomedes. Brave warrior! Heav’n was jealous of thy presence 
On this ungrateful earth. [Antony zs borne off. 

Augustus. Now let the queen ~ 


Be dragg’d away from hence by force, if prayers 

Are not sufficient 
Cleopatra. Stop, thou barb’ rous one ! 

Thou fain wouldst tie me to thy car in Rome? 

At least permit me to delight my eyes 

In horrors and in blood, yes, e’en in death; 

That I may lose my senses, and extract 

Fresh fury from them—But since heav’n is slow 

The wicked to chastise, and I’m unable ’ 

To pierce thy breast, I pierce my own instead. [Stabs herself. 


Aug. Heav’ns, Cleopatra ! 
Cleo. I unworthy was 


Of life but, if to thee the curses now 
By wicked rage invoked can fatal be, 
Then horror, and deceit, and treachery 
Will close pursue thee, and at last thou’ lt find 
The horrid death which is a tyrant’s due 
Furies—infernal Furies—come ye now? 
I follow you—ah !—with thy viper’s torch, 

Thou discord black, thou fain wouldst light my way. 
Give it to me—in dying I perchance 

Might set the world on fire, and so dissolve it 
Dost cry for vengeance, Antony ?—’tis blood 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—A VRENHOFF 547 


‘ But faithless blood—O horror—ruin—death. 
Augustus. O Romans, let us go; in this vile land 
All breathes of terror, making heav’n impure ; 
The very air with ev’ry vice is tainted.’ 


[ Dies. 


GENEST (vi, 63) gives the following abstract of a Tragedy, called Antony and 
Cleopatra, by HENRY BROOKE (author of Zhe Fool of Quality), published in 1778, 
but omitted in an edition, edited by Brooke’s daughter, in 1792. (I have been unable 
to obtain a copy.) 

‘Antony and Cleopatra—one-third, or perhaps one-half of this play is taken 
‘from Shakspeare—the other part is Brooke’s—he has added 3 new characters—the 
‘2 children of Antony and Cleopatra; and Ptolemy her brother—these characters 
‘are not happy additions to the Dramatis Persone. In the 2d act Antony seeing 
‘Cleopatra embrace Ptolemy, and not knowing who he is, leaves Alexandria in a 
‘violent fit of jealousy—on being undeceived he returns, Shakspeare’s play, with 
‘all its faults, is infinitely superior to Brooke’s—yet it must be allowed that a consid- 
‘erable part of Brooke’s additions is well written—the scene lies entirely at Alexan- 
“dria—the characters of Czsar and Octavia with many others are omitted.’ 


In 1783, at a period when there was in Germany a temporary reaction against 
Shakespeare, there appeared, Kzz0P4rR4 uND AnTontus, A Tragedy in Four Acts, 
by CORNELIUS VON AYRENHOFF, Austrian Lieutenant-Field-Marshall. In a long 
and polemical Preface, addressed to Wieland, the writer denounces the dramatic 
critics of the day. ‘How can we expect,’ he exclaims in his indignation, ‘ that such 
‘instructors in art, who have learned in public taverns all their knowledge of 
‘refined society and there educated their taste, will defend the laws which govern the 
‘Three Unities, elegant manners, and versification? What is more natural than that 
‘they should keep on praising incessantly the monster [ Ungeheuwer] Shakespeare as 
‘the highest product of all nations, not because he often shows traces of great 
‘genius, but because through him we become accustomed to all kinds of possible law- 
‘lessness, and that they should on every occasion dismiss with contempt the master- 
‘pieces of Corneille, Racine, and Voltaire?’—p. 11. Ayrenhoff states how deeply he 
had been stirred by the story of Cleopatra as told by Plutarch, and how inadequately 
it had been presented by the dramatists. He had read the tragic story in Shake- 
speare, in la Chapelle, in Lohenstein, in Dryden, and exclaims, ‘ Poor Cleopatra ! 
‘thou fairest, loveliest, most unfortunate woman of antiquity ! how brutally hast thou 
‘been treated! It was not enough that thou wert robbed of thy throne and of thy 
‘life by thy hateful contemporary, the cunning and cowardly Octavius, but the poets 
‘of later days are still presenting thee on the public stage as a disgrace to thy sex!’ 
After this open avowal of compassionate love and admiration, we find in Ayrenhoff’s 
tragedy what is to be expected, a Cleopatra who, while conformed to the records of 
Plutarch, is idealised into a lofty character, quite too good for human nature’s daily , 
food. I know of no other Cleopatra exactly like her. The tragedy is skilfully 
written and has in it some good Scenes, especially the last, which, in Cleopatra’s 
treatment of Octavius, is really admirable. It is written in Alexandrine rhyming 
couplets. 

The opening Scenes somewhat remind us of Dryden. Lucilius, Antony’s dear 
friend and trusted General, corresponds to the Ventidius of the English poet; he cheers 
Antony in his despair after Actium, warning him at the same time of the influence 


548 APPENDIX 


of Cleopatra; at last he tells him plainly that defeat is certain unless he abandons 
the queen, With the warning words ‘ Remember Actium !’ he departs, and Cleopatra 
enters. She will not listen to Antony’s gloomy forebodings. Nothing can trouble 
her so long as Antony loves. 
« As we began, so, too, the end must be ; 

The greatest man the world can prize, art thou ; 

Sole woman worthy of such greatness, I. 

Let throne and world be shattered by Octavius ; 

For Antony alone, does Cleopatra tremble.’ 


Antony tells the queen that even now a decisive battle is imminent. Cleopatra 
replies that she is ready, ‘to the determined soul, uncertainty alone is pain ;’ and 
points to the mausoleum which she has built, ‘ That, for Cleopatra will the refuge be. 
‘Would, O beloved one! it might be with thee !’ 

Antony reminds her of his vow not to survive her, but will not believe that such 
a desperate remedy is near. Indeed, he is heartened for the battle to which he will 
now go with joy, and return a victor, or word shall be brought to her of hisdeath. He 
departs and Cleopatra, thus early in the play, bids Charmion procure some asps and 
tell the priests to make ready the mausoleum, 

When the next Act opens the battle has been fought, Antony has been victorious ; 
Cleopatra awaits his approach, with a laurel wreath wherewith to crown him. 
Antony enters and is crowned by Cleopatra with extravagant expressions of love and 
admiration. Word is brought that a veiled Roman lady desires an audience with 
Antony alone. Antony refuses to see her, but Cleopatra intercedes. ‘It may be,’ 
she says, ‘ some wife or mother come to beg the life of her dear one ; and, if so, send 
‘the unhappy one to me, and I will try to comfort her.’ She leaves and the veiled 
lady enters ; at Antony’s bidding she draws aside her veil and reveals Octavia. She 
prostrates herself before him, but he bids her rise; she recalls to him their happy, 
cloudless years in Athens, but not to win him back is she come, but to bring peace 
between her husband and her brother, who, she declares, still holds Antony in fond 
affection and is anxious to become reconciled. To none of her arguments will 
Antony accede, but ends with saying that there are other obstacles, known only to 
himself. Octavia understands this reference to Cleopatra and replies, 


‘ Full well I know that you will never take 
A step that leads to Cleopatra’s harm. 
And this I honour; you can lightly judge 
That I do not forget the cause of it. [Antony expresses astonishment. 
Ignoble hate has ne’er disgraced my heart. 
Thou lov’st her—this shows she’s worthy of thy love. 
Although I ne’er can rival her in charms, 
In greatness of the soul, she’!] not excel me, 
And more I ask not. Ah, not from envy 
Would I disturb these bonds which make you blest 
Far less to me, I own, is my own weal 
Than thine,—dear father of my children !’ 


Antony replies that all isin vain; he honours her and will always honour her, 
but, ascribe it to Fate if need be, he cannot comply with her wishes. The children 
are then brought in, and they, with their mother, fall at the feet of Antony, who is 
deeply moved. Cleopatra enters, and in the veiled Roman lady discovers Octavia, 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—A YVRENHOFF 549 


who explains to her that she is come to try to extricate Antony from his perilous 
position and begs for protection, Cleopatra replies, 
‘I wonder greatly at thy deed, Octavia ! 
How I regard it, I'l] not now explain. 
Yet know, whoe’er as friend,—for such thou claim’st to be, 
Seeks my protection, it shall be bestowed. 
[ 70 Charmion] Be it your care to see throughout my court 
That, like myself, she’s treated as a queen. 
[ Zo Octavia] Free, as thou may’st, from the engulfing flood 
Thy husband, sinking neath the raging storm ; 
May heaven aid thee,—and reward thy pains! 
In nought will I deprive thee of the merit. 
Complete your plans untrammelled. But know this, 
From them I must be utterly excluded. 
As soon as he has made his firm resolve, 
Then, and not till then, I’ll decide my lot. 
And also until then, I ask you, Sir, 
To suffer me to stay in my seclusion. 
Ant. What! Cleopatra asks 
Cleop. Nothing; she commands; 
And counts,—if she is dear,—on thy obedience. [ Lxct with her train. 
As soon as she is gone Octavia breaks forth into admiration of the nobility of her 
character. But none the less does she urge her vacillating husband to return with her 
and their children to Rome and to the paths of virtue. Antony at last decides that 
he will lay down his power and become a private citizen if Czesar will do the same. 
Should Czesar consent to do this, and the Senate confirm her throne to Cleopatra, he 
will live in Athens with Octavia, from whom no power on earth can then separate 
him. Octavia is certain that she can persuade her brother to this course and the 
Scene ends with profuse tears of joy all round, to which effusion Lucilius contributes. 
Charmion, who had come to tell Octavia that her apartments were ready, is a witness 
to this reconciliation and reports it to her anxious mistress, offering, at the same 
time, to kill Octavia during the night. This horrifies Cleopatra, who sternly reproves 
her. At last she decides to send a secret messenger to Czesar’s camp, and the 
Act ends. Inthe next Act, while waiting for the result of Octavia’s intercession with 
Octavius, Antony and Cleopatra havea stormy scene. Cleopatra asserts that Antony 
had committed her fate to Casar. This Antony denies, and says that Rome, through 
the Senate on its oath, had for ever renounced all claim to Cleopatra’s throne. 
“ Cleop. Much longed for chance ! forsooth my bliss is boundless ! 
Yet, Sir, to whom must I ascribe this bliss ? 
To Rome? Octavia? To Cesar? or to thee? 
Ant. Thou triflest, Queen ! 
Cleop. [with angry earnestness.| Resolve me then my doubts! 
Whose is the saving arm that, out of pity, 
Maintains me on my throne ancestral ? 
To whom do I owe thanks for this, my crown! 
Js’t not Octavia? is it not her charms, 
Whose power,—to win thee from me,—won Rome’s grace? 
Did not a single tear, shed at thy feet, 
Nay but a single sigh, dissolve the bond 


550 APPENDIX 


‘ That knit us firm together, up till now, 
And place within the power of my foe 
My fate, my fame, and all my happiness ? 
This, ¢4zs, ingrate, shalt thou explain to me.’ 

Antony complains that Octavia would not have persuaded him, had Cleopatra said 
but a word or given a hint. She again breaks forth, 

«A word, a hint from me !—to rouse thy duty ? 
Traitor! shewed she not to thee thine inmost heart ? 
Could I believe thy faith so weakly grounded ? 
And to Octavia’s tongue must I submit, 

And blush at every word, confess my fear, 

And by my lowness make her triumph greater ? 

So low no power shall ever make me bow ! 

Let them, thou brute, deprive me of my throne. 
One thing remains, my honour is my own 

And should this pride, this day involve my death 
The thought of but one weakness makes me rue :— 
That, O barbarian, I have lived for you!’ 

Antony exclaims that this is beyond endurance and that Octavia shall at once 
return, alone, to Rome, all thought of peace shall be relinquished, and demands that 
Cleopatra shall tell him what course to take. She replies, 

‘ The work thou hast begun, complete. This, Sir, 

Is all that thou canst do. Farewell. 
Ant. No, cruel one, before thou goest 
Say what for me and thee thou hast resolved. 
Cleop. Thereto must Ceesar first bestow the power. 
The one on trial cannot be the judge. 
Farewell. [2a 

Antony for a while rages against Cleopatra, but at last recognises that it is really 
love for him that makes her jeopardise her throne and her very life. Then he decides 
that Octavia is the real cause of all this misery, and resolves never to see her again, 
but remain for ever by Cleopatra’s side. Lucilius enters, but is so shocked at Antony’s 
change of heart that he departs in anger. Antony sends after him; when he returns 
he so convicts Antony of folly in clinging to Cleopatra that Antony swears never - 
to see her again until he parts from her for ever. Octavia enters with Czsar’s 
letter of assent to Antony’s proposition : Cesar will lay down his power and live as 
a private citizen in Epirus; Cleopatra’s throne shall be unmolested. The joy of 
Antony, Octavia, and the children is unbounded. Cleopatra enters and Antony 
endeavours to explain to her the situation and its advantages for all concerned. Cleo- ’ 
patra declares that she too has been in correspondence with Cesar, and hands to 
Antony a letter from Czsar wherein she is told to place no reliance on his agree- 
ment with Octavia, and that he pledges himself to secure her safety and her throne 
if she will send him Antony’s head. Octavia, heartbroken over the duplicity of her 
treacherous brother, departs with her children and is seen no more. Antony throws 
himself at the feet of Cleopatra and with tears acknowledges her magnanimity. He 
takes a tender leave of her and departs to plunge into battle with Cesar. Cleo- 
patra, from a tower of her palace, watches the fight and sees Antony’s defeat. 
Demetrius, whom she had sent for news of Antony’s welfare, enters and relates how 
Antony, on a false report of Cleopatra’s death, had attempted to kill himself, and, 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—A YRENHOFF 551 


when told by Demetrius that she was alive, had sent her tender messages imploring 
her forgiveness. Cleopatra commands Demetrius to bring Antony to her at once, 
and bids Charmion fetch the asp. Antony is brought in, borne by soldiers. Both 
Cleopatra and Antony implore forgiveness of each other. He begs her to fly, she 
protests that life has no more charm for her, but to die with him will be her highest 
bliss. Antony dies, and after her first outburst of sorrow Cleopatra exclaims, ‘I 
‘who deeply swore not after thee to live, A proof of my true faith I hasten now 
‘to give.’ 

Dolabella enters, and, under a feigned weakness and timidity, she extracts from 
him the secret that within three days she is to be sent to Rome. Cleopatra gives him 
a letter to be delivered to Caesar. When alone with Charmion, Cleopatra bids her 
place a throne near Antony’s corpse; she then takes the vase containing the aspic, 
lifts the cover, and looking in, says, 

‘Well, little thing! how fixedly thou starest ! 
Dost think thy hissing can awaken fright ? [sorrow ! 
Here! [thrusting her arm into the vase.] Cool thy anger and abate my 
It hurts not, Charmion ! [She returns to the corpse. ] 
Now, my departed friend ! for ever we’re united. 
Now I dare call thee husband,—myself thy wife. 
Nought severs us again; one tomb for both! 
This thought alone, for me, can sweeten death.’ 

She bids Charmion bring her crown and summon all her attendants, who enter 
and group themselves about her with the emblems of royalty—the diadem and 
sceptre. She says, aside ‘ What coolness steals so softly through my veins! Is it 
‘the poison ? ah, how gentle!’ 

She tells her attendants that she has remembered them all and that Demetrius 
has the gold; even if they are subject to Caesar they must always retain the free- 
dom in their hearts to love and remember her. Dolabella enters and announces the 
approach of Czesar, who, shortly after, enters. Dolabella, in an aside, says to the 
queen that she must rise, and not remain seated in Czsar’s presence. She keeps her 
seat, 

‘ Cesar. O woeful sight! Unhappy Antony ! 
Why could I never win thy confidence? 
Thy hatred was my grief,—at last thy ruin! 
Unhappy queen ! I feel for thy misfortune ! 
Cleop. Had our mischance not been thy fortune’s germ 
I doubt not thou hadst pitied us, Coe NS: 
But, Sir, unpitied I can bear my sorrow.’ 
Czesar assures her that he is her friend, and she obtains from him the promise that 
she shall be buried in the same tomb with her Antony; Cesar considers it a trifling 
request, he was ready to grant much greater. 
‘ Cleop. To thee it may be small, to me ’tis great. 
Is it no.salve in death to be united 
To him who was the dearest upon earth ? 
Ay,—to that great man, the very last great man 
This servile world can ever name with pride? 
Dolabella. [aside.| Ah, Cleopatra ! 
Cleop. What! shall I refrain from praising him ? 
Cesar himself can witness to his greatness ; 


552 APPENDIX 


‘To it, forsooth, he owes his happy fortune, 
The laurel, which adorns him now, was gathered 
For him at Philippi by Antony. 
That weighty fight saw Cesar but preparing,— 
He had a fever then, and could not fight. 

Cesar. What insolent derision, thou audacity ! 

Dolabella. [aside to Cesar.| Pardon her, Sire! 
Her sorrows tempt her to forget herself. 

Cleop. Friend, let him rage! he’ll learn to honour truth ! 
He rules now uncontrolled—he’Il never hear it more ! 

Cesar. Insulting Pride! Know’st thou not who I am, 
And who thyself art now? 

Cleop. For aye, a queen ! 

Whose fearless daring no soldier can dismay ! 
Who e’en in death can still avenge an insult. 

Cesar. An insult? Thou? From me? 

Cleop. From thee, thou tyrant ! [ She throws Cesar’s letter 
Who dared to ask from me assassination ; to her at his feet. 
Who held me as a traitor to my loved one; 

Offered my realm as the reward of crime. 

How mean the conqueror shows beside the conquered ! 
How dastardly stands forth assassination 

Beside the honourable duello,— 


Fraud and deceit by honesty and courage ! [ She sinks down. Char- 
Dolabella, What does this mean? Her eyes grow dim! mion brings her 
Charmion. She is dying. to the throne. 


Cesar. Wa! who loves his life speak out, and say 
What means this— 

Cleop. Spare thy anger! Egypt’s queen has finished 
Her last duty—she dies and will not basely 
—Out-live her glory—Lay me by Antony— 
Thou hast pledged thy word—Oh, Charmion— 
Tis ice—death’s freezing hand—my heart— 
My Antony ! [ She dies.]’ 


In 1793 JULIUS, REICHSGRAF VON SODEN, published a Tragedy in prose, called 
KLeoraTrA, Whether or not it was ever acted I do not know. Ina short Preface 
the author remarks that the subject has been already used by the dramatists of many 
nations, and, among them, Shakespeare stands at the head. From his own study 
of history the author has been led to believe that full justice has not been done to 
the character of Cleopatra, in whom he believed that he discerned ‘a mingling of 
‘coquetry and nobility, of voluptuousness and strength, of weakness, of womanliness, 
‘and of regal freedom, which explained all the apparent contradictions of her acts.’ 
In carrying out this conception I cannot say that I think the author is altogether 
successful. The voluptuous tendency in Cleopatra’s nature is emphasized, —indeed, 
it is more conspicuous than in any other version with which I am acquainted. I can 
perceive no traces in Cleopatra of unusual strength of character, unless it be the 
unabashed way in which she unfolds to her maid, Miris, her excellent reasons for 
changing from the unsuccessful Antony to the successful Czesar. Unlike other Ver- 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—VON SODEN 533 


stons there is no parting Scene between Antony and Cleopatra. Antony’s attempt at 
suicide is entirely successful ; Cleopatra merely hears of his death and applies the 
asp only when Cesar’s steps are on the threshold of the pyramid in which she had 
taken refuge from Antony, who was seeking to kill her after the desertion to Cesar 
of the Egyptian army. 

The foregoing abstract is all that I had intended to give of this version, which, 
written in prose, seemed to me to be, in general, of inferior merit. I found, however, 
to my amazement, that MOELLER pronounces it ‘ the most noteworthy version in Ger- 
‘man literature? In MOELLER’s concluding remarks he acknowledges that von 
SODEN has not succeeded in making Cleopatra a perfectly consistent character, but 
in spite of this he does not hesitate to affirm that ‘this drama, together with the lyric 
‘effusion of Prince George of Prussia, furnishes the German version of Cleopatra’s 
‘tragedy which we can, at this day, read with pleasure.’ In deference to this opinion 
I now give an ampler abstract. The opening locality is Tarentum, where Octavius 
and Antony are feasting each other before Octavius starts on his expedition against 
Sextus Pompeius and Antony sets out on the war against the Parthians. The first 
Scene lies in Antony’s house. Cleopatra enters, accompanied by Miris, her maid, 
and is thrilled by the thought that she is really in Antony’s home, against the 
majestic pillars whereof he may have once leaned, ‘this floor, lifeless though it be, 
‘has borne the footsteps of the lord of the world, and is proud of it’ (There is a 
faint reminiscence of Shakespeare here.) ‘It does not compare with your palace at 
‘ Alexandria,’ says Miris. ‘ Palace!’ exclaims Cleopatra, ‘It was a palace when it 
‘enclosed Antony within its walls. Palace, doI call it? It was a temple, conse- 
“crated to love and adorned with all its magic. Ah! when he hung upon my neck, 
‘our souls lost themselves on our lips! Then !—Isis drew about us a magic circle, 
‘and, sundered from all mortal thoughts, Elysium was in us and about us. Prythee, 
‘Miris, how did I look when Cesar lay at my feet ? 

Miris. Like the goddess, to whom we bring our offerings. 

Cleopatra. And I am still Cleopatra ? 

Miris, Assuredly. 

Cleopatra. Seest thou wrinkles on this brow? Has time dimmed the glance 
which prostrated at my feet the conqueror of the world ? ; 

Miris. By no means. : 

Cleopatra. Then have no fear, Miris. Antony ismine! And even if Elysium 
has thrown wide its gates, or Orcus opened its abyss for him, with a single smile I 
‘can call him back, and repel the Fates. The powers of Heaven and of Hell cannot 
restrain him from me.’ 2 

Miris refers to Octavia. ‘Silence!’ Cleopatra cries, ‘By heaven! If you value 
‘your life, mention her not again! That humdrum, lackadaisical creature! that 
‘alabaster image of simplicity will be frightened off by a single puff of breath from 
‘my lips. Aha! that breath has wrought mightier wonders. It has dissolved every 
‘nerve of the untamed Antony in love and voluptuousness, and subdued the very 
‘tigers. Antony, he knows what it is! .. . Know then, Miris, a man is only what the 
“woman makes him. It is woman alone who can evoke this headlong rush of=the 
‘blood, this all-embracing flight of the imagination,—the sole source of great and 
‘exalted deeds. This Antony, Miris, this fearful Colossus, Antony, who covers half 
‘the world with his shadow,—by all the gods, dear Miris, when, asleep in my arms, 
‘I bind him to the bedposts [a feeble attempt to imitate the teasings of Shakespeare’s 
Cleopatra], ‘and then when he awakes, slip away from the sulky hero, with a laugh, 


554 APPENDIX 


‘if this poor world, whose lord he is, could see him then, what do you suppose it 
‘would think of its fettered demi-god ? 

MMiris. Poor, poor Antony ! 

Cleopatra. Hush! not even the gods themselves dare hear the secrets of womer. 

Miris, You are then resolved 

Cleopatra. To take him back to Alexandria with me. 

Miris. Why then do you not appear as Cleopatra ? - 

Cleopatra. No, Miris, no. The sheen of purple dries up the tears of pity, and 
freezes compassion. All alone, unadorned, with dishevelled hair, like a bride whose 
wild war has engulfed the bridegroom, I will appear before him,—like an orphaned 
one will I embrace his feet,—with hot tears bedew his warlike thoughts and melt 
his wildness into voluptuousness.’ 

They hear Antony coming and Lxeunt. 

In the next five Scenes Antony learns that Sextus Pompeius is dead and that 
Lepidus is arrested ; he thereupon vents his rage on Octavius, whom he now hates. 
‘I hate his eye,’ he exclaims (and it is one of the best sayings in the play), ‘ I hate 
‘his eye; in it I see myself,—and I’ll not be doubled! A second self is too much 
‘forme!’ Octavia labours hard to effect a reconciliation between her brother and 
her husband and is at last successful. [hese are among the best Scenes of the play, 
if not the very best. The contrast between Octavius’s sedate temperament and 
Antony’s headlong, blustering violence, yet honest withal, is well kept up. Indeed, 
in my opinion Antony is the best character in the play, which, with advantage, might 
have been called Azzonius, instead of ‘ Cleopatra.’ 

With the kisses of his wife and the words, ‘ Farewell, my sweet Octavia!’ still 
on his lips, Antony meets Cleopatra. He is astounded at seeing her in Tarentum; 
she at once taxes him with treachery and desertion. ‘ Who was it,’ she bursts 
forth, ‘ that in the delicious intoxication of love swore never, never to desert me? 


‘Who? Hast thou forgotten, thou faithless man! the moments when our souls ling- 
‘ered on our wounded lips, when heavenly fire shot through every fibre, and glorified 
‘our beings, and, bathed in this sea of beneficent flames—hah, Elysium itself cannot 
‘outweigh a single moment of such existence ! 

Antony. Refrain, Cleopatra! refrain! the memory makes me quiver ! 

Cleopatra. To think that inexorable time has power over such delights ! that the 
impression of such feelings can vanish like a dream ! 

Antony. Do me not wrong, Cleopatra. 

Cleopatra. No Antony! Thou art more or less than mortal, in that thou canst 
forget such feelings. Were I immortal and should lose myself in eternity, they would 
be my sole thought. Antony has treated me cruelly. Thou divine Isis, and all ye 
heavenly hosts, bear me witness how wholly I gave myself to this man ; throughout 
the whole broad world I felt, saw, heard nothing but him! Every breath I drew, I 
counted lost that did not expire on his lips. 

Antony. Thou dear, dear, beloved one!’ 

Antony is on the point of yielding when Ventidius enters and summons him to 
the camp ; he is about to obey when Cleopatra makes one last and desperate appeal 
to him. 

‘ Antony. Cleopatra, what dost thou demand ? 

Cleopatra. Dear, beloved idol of my soul, what in this wide world can I wish 
for, demand, long for but thee ? but thyself? 

Antony. Sorceress! omnipotent Sorceress! whither would’st thou lead me ? 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—VON SODEN 555 


Cleopatra. To these arms, open to thee alone, to this bosom, to be pressed alone 
to thine, to these lips that glow alone for thee ! 

Antony. So be it!’ 

Antony breaks off all negotiations with oe and follows Cleopatra to Alexan- 
dria. Ceesar stirs up the Senate to declare war on Antony by setting forth Antony’s 
prodigality in giving away provinces and cities, and by his treatment of Octavia. 
We have then a wild scene of revelry in the Palace of Cleopatra. Before Antony 
has slept off his drunken debauch, Ventidius comes to announce that Czsar with his 
army is athand. He finally arouses Antony and inspires him with wonted warlike 
fury. Actium is fought and the battle lost. Antony’s despair and humiliation are, 
as in all other versions, profound. Again, as in former Scenes, his character is well 
sustained. Cleopatra attempts to console him and so far succeeds that she gains his 
consent to send a message to Octavius. 

‘ Cleopatra. A wise man bends before the storm and, safe in a awaits a more 
favourable hour. Thy name is still formidable enough— 

Antony. to frighten children to hide behind their mother’s apron ? 

Cleopatra.—to obtain from Czesar an advantageous arrangement. Perhaps he will 
let me remain in Egypt, and permit you to retire to private life. 

Antony. ‘Permit?’ This word forces blood out at my eyes! 

Cleopatra. Only this once! Oh, only this once! Listen to thy loved one !— 
Like the soft whispers of zephyrs the rest of thy life will glide away! My devotion 
shall infuse new strength and life into thy veins. Far from the dangers of a hero’s 
path thou shalt repose on my breast, and from my lips thou shalt drink oblivion; I 
will only live, only breathe for thee. 

Antony. Invain do I close my ears, The magic of thy voice dissolves my whole 
being in love.’ 

Of course Antony is won; as soon as Cleopatra is alone she murmurs: ‘ What a 
‘pitiful creature a conquered man is! Cleopatra! Cleopatra! Dost thou still really 
‘love this shadow of an Antony? Ah, how high above him towers the young, pow- 
‘erful Cesar! No, no, it was Antony that I loved, and Antony is now no more!’ 

Antony meets Ventidius and by him is again inspired with martial ardour, and 
with the hope that by attacking Czesar he can regain his lost honour. A battle is 
fought ; at the end of the day Antony is victorious and returns triumphant to Cleo- 
patra, who has a laurel wreath ready for him. In the midst of their rejoicing word 
is brought that Czesar is advancing toa fresh attack. In the meantime Cleopatra has 
received a secret messenger from Cesar, and while Antony is absent, renewing his 
fight with Czesar, she thus reveals her treachery to Miris : 

‘ Miris. Czesar sent that offer to you? 

Cleop. Ay, indeed, and more too, if I would only deliver Antony up to him. 

Miris. Did you promise it? 

Cleop. We're not yet fully agreed. But just one glance of mine, a single smile 
of mock-modesty cast backward over the shoulder will bring this conqueror of the 
world prostrate at my feet. 

Miris. And Antony? 

Cleop. Antony ?—Alas! Antony is no longer Antony. 

Miris. No longer? To whom thou sworest eternal fidelity? Thy terrestrial 
god ? 

Cleop. That was Antony, the fortunate Antony; the conqueror of half the world, 
feared from sunrise to sunset, in all the splendour of the highest earthly height ! 


5 56 APPENDIX 


‘ Miris. Alas! it is the same Antony whom thou lovedst ! 

Cleop. Miris, Miris, love is the favourite of Fortune. Suppose she deserts him ? 
Fortune, with her all-powerful wheel, rolls everything up and down, excepting only 
me. 

Miris. Pardon me, queen, love accepts the man, without any accidental splen- 
dour. Thou hast never loved him. 

Cleop. By the immortals! I have; but love, like Fortune, has its caprices. 

Miris. Poor Antony! 

Cleop. That is just it! No, no, Cleopatra was not made to be the zzamorata of 
a common mortal. 

Miris. Thou wilt leave him then? 

Cleop. Is it my fault, if Fortune has left him? . . . Dost thou not understand my 
plans ? 

Miris. What wilt thou do with Czesar? 

Cleop. The fate of his father and of Antony awaits him. When the world 
becomes too small for these rapacious Romans ; when, in the course of their restless 
ambition, they crush nations, and the immeasurable universe offers no limit to their 
rapacity,—then it is Cleopatra who sets a limit to them. Here the wild conqueror 
lays down his arms; his haughty soul becomes entangled in the shifting web of love 
and luxury, with all its secret, and infinitely varying delights, which I weave about 
him, sometimes with a sparing, sometimes with a lavish hand ; his greatness vanishes, 
his energy slumbers, he sinks to the level of the common herd. And such a triumph! 
by the immortal Isis, I would not exchange it for one of Czesar’s fairest victories!’ 

Euphronius enters and adjures Cleopatra to fly. Antony has been defeated and 
is on his way hither, more raging than the ‘ Hyrcanian tiger’ in his threats of venge- 
ance against the queen, who at once takes to flight and escapes. When Ventidius 
has succeeded somewhat in calming Antony, he brings forward Octavia and Antony’s 
children. Reconciliation and forgiveness rule the hour. Cleopatra, with Miris, has 
betaken herself to her Monument, and, knowing that she cannot appease Antony in 
his present mood, confides to Miris that she will send him word that she is dead, 
whereupon he will come to the Monument in deepest grief, and she, ‘ blooming, even 
‘in the grave, with all those charms which were so dangerous to him, will sink into 
‘his arms, and, with glowing kisses, steal forgiveness from his lips.’ Euphronius 
brings word that Octavia is in Alexandria and is reconciled to Antony. A Scene 
here follows which is a weak, very weak, imitation of Shakespeare’s Scene of Cleo- 
patra and the slave who brings word that Antony is married to Octavia. When the 
tempest, such as it is, subsides, Euphronius is sent to announce Cleopatra’s death to 
Antony, who is just finishing a highly moral discourse to his children on the wicked- 
ness of women, as Euphronius enters. After Euphronius retires, the manner of 
Antony’s death is the same as in Plutarch. Euphronius returns to Cleopatra and 
reports Antony’s despair when he announced her death to him. Cleopatra’s exul- 

-tation at this proof that Antony still loves her is boundless ; all her love for Antony 
revives in tenfold force, and she revels in the thought of meeting him again. This 
‘lightning before death,’ as it were, is well conceived. 

As soon as Euphronius is gone, Cleopatra breaks forth to Miris: 

‘He loves me! Antonius still loves me! Did he not say ‘ despair”? ? 

Miris. So I heard it. 


Cleop. Ay, ‘‘despair’’?! A frightful word, but to me so sweet! Did he not 
speak of dejection ? 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—KOTZEBUE 557 


Mir. | Yes, indeed. 

Cleop. ejection is the twin-sister of love! Love feeds dejection, and dejection 
feeds love. 

Mir, heard of frenzy also. 

Cleop. Didst hear it! Frenzy! O this boundary line of passion is merely the 
highest step of love, the very summit of earthly joy. 

Mir. And all this, Queen ?— 

Cleop. Whither leads it? O short-sighted girl !—Do you not know that Antonius 
will hasten hither? Hither! to gaze for the last time on the remains of his Cleo- 
patra ? 

Mir, And then? 

Cleop. Then? Then? O Miris, the gods themselves cannot appreciate the bliss 
of such a meeting !’ 

Word is brought that Antony has killed himself; Cleopatra drives from her pres- 
ence the luckless messenger, of whom she demands to know if ‘he has not sucked 
‘up every misfortune in nature, like a poisonous sponge, only to squeeze it out over 
‘her.’ Miris brings the asp in a basket of flowers; Cleopatra apostrophises the 
spirit of Antony ; she will ‘cross the floods of eternity, as a queen, to him, and by 
‘her noble death appease him. But how,’ she exclaims, ‘if I should not find him ? 
‘What if this presentiment of another meeting,—this powerful yearning for a re- 
‘union,—were a mere phantom ? a fancy of the heated imagination ? an intoxication 
‘of the soul, such as follows a goblet of Falernian?’ When Czsar’s feet are almost 
on the threshold of the monument Cleopatra applies the asp to her breast : 

‘Cleop. Itisdone! Drain, thou most faithful of my subjects, drain every drop 
of blood which still clogs the free soul. 

Miris. Woe’sme! Woe’s me! 

Cleop. [sinking into her arms.| Peace! peace! 

Miris. Canst thou leave me thus ? 

Cleop. Follow ! 

Miris. Woe’s me! 

Cleop. My fetters—Czesar’s fetters! Antony! Farewell, Miris !— Farewell ! 
[aes.]’ 


In 1801 there appeared a tragedy, called Ocravia, by AUGUST VON KOTZEBUE. 
In a Preface the auther says that for a long time it seemed to him impossible to 
harmonise the many contradictions in the character of Cleopatra. At last he came 
to the conclusion that the cause of the evil, from which her actions sprang, lay in the 
extremest sensual egozsmus. It was fear which led to her first meeting with Antony. 
She had been sternly commanded to give an account of the help she had bestowed 
on Cassius. Her sole safety lay in her charms; she availed herself of them; her 
austere judge became her wooer. Antony at this time was at the pinnacle of his 
power, without his support her throne would topple; it seemed, therefore, of impor- 
tance that such a conquest should be retained. Added to this, there was an incli- 
nation to voluptuousness and debauchery. ear, Power, and Licentiousness were, 
therefore, the only ties which bound this impure soul to the hero. Naturally, as soon 
as these sources of control weakened, or even threatened to weaken, she must be 
ready on the instant to sacrifice her lover. Thus she showed it in her flight at Actium; 
thus, also, in her treacherous dealings with Cesar ; thus finally in the devilish fiction 
concerning her death, in order to lead Antony to suicide. As an offset to the black- 


558 APPENDIX 


ness of her soul, should her heroic death be urged, and the tears shed on Antony’s 
corpse, it must be borne in mind that those tears and that death were only the 
necessary consequence of Czesar’s inexorable will and invincible indifference to her 
charms. 

From clay thus sordid and foul it is hardly to be expected that the dramatist 
should mould a gracious figure. And, indeed, in the motley group of the Cleopatras 
who live their little day in the dramatic world, KorzEBur’s Egyptian Queen is emi- 
nent as the most deceitful, the most selfish, and the least attractive of them all. 

Octavia, with her two children, braves the journey to Alexandria, pleads with her 
brother for peace with Antony, and, after a promise from him of reconciliation, ven- 
tures into Cleopatra’s very palace and there pleads with Antony; just as she has 
won him, and she and Antony with their two children are all mingling tears of joy, 
Cleopatra enters, gazes for a while, unseen, on the group, comprehends it all, and 
rushes with a dagger at Octavia. Antony seizes her arm in time, and the curtain 
falls, with Cleopatra casting furious glances at Octavia and struggling in Antony’s 
grasp while Octavia gazes at her with pride, compassion, and scorn. The curtain 
rises again on the same Scene. Of course Cleopatra has fainted, and of course 
Antony thinks she is dead. But she revives, recalls the past scene, thanks Antony 
for having prevented her from hurting that noblest of Roman women, whom she 
now recognises and of whom she implores forgiveness. Antony pronounces them 
both to be the noblest of women, whose kindred souls nature intended to be united 
in sisterly love. ‘Embrace,’ he cries, ‘hand in hand and breast to breast! let me 
‘feast my eyes on the divine sight.’ ‘Dare I venture?’ asks Cleopatra, timidly. 
Octavia says, aside, ‘ Be still my heart, ’tis for the sake of peace,’ and then aloud, 
“Come hither; be thy friendly embrace a pledge for the future!’ They embrace, 
and Antony folds them both in his arms! There they both coo for some time while 
he beams down on them, enraptured. At last Cleopatra begs to be excused in order 
to provide some refreshment for Octavia. At this repast she offers to Octavia a 
friendly cup, which is dashed from her hand by Ventidius who has, shortly before, 
intimidated the purveyor of the poison into a confession of the plot. Antony drags 
Cleopatra aside, and to him she confesses that it was love for him that prompted her 
to the act, and so cajoles him that he dashes from her presence to go and fight a 
duel with Cesar. He leaves the unfortunate Octavia and his children in the power 
of Cleopatra, after having asseverated to the Egyptian queen, with a most solemn 
oath, that her life would answer for theirs. After his departure Cleopatra drives 
Octavia from the palace with the grossest insults, but retains the children, who are, 
however, shortly rescued by Eros and restored to their mother. To get rid of 
Antony, whom she now hates, and to prepare the way to subjugate Cesar with her 
charms, Cleopatra decides on making Antony commit suicide, which she is sure he 
will do, should he hear that she was dead. Under instructions from her, Charmion 
tells Antony with befitting outcries and lamentations that Cleopatra has drowned 
herself in the Nile. Antony obligingly fulfills Cleopatra’s anticipations, and, after 
stabbing himself, expires in the arms of Octavia and of his weeping children. Of 
Cleopatra’s ultimate fate we have no knowledge. 


‘ ANTOINE ET CLEOPATRE, Tragedie, Par le Citoyen S.D. M., Habitant de Mont- 
‘pellier. L’ennui naquit un jour de l’uniformité.—Vo.LTaire. A Paris. An XI,.— 
« 1803.’ Dr MOELLER was the first, I believe, to unwrap the anonimity of the author 
of this version (that it was a kindness may be doubted), by finding, in the copy 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—MORGUES 559 


belonging to the Bibliothégue Nationale, a letter, addressed to the printer of the 
play, signed ‘S. D. Morgues.’ In his Preface the author tells us that he has long 
observed that the dramas presented on the stage are not lively enough with song and 
dance, and that the audience yawns over them. The following tragedy is supposed 
to correct this defect. To show us how ebullient is his Muse, and how he lisps in 
numbers and the numbers come, and how competent he is to enliven a tragedy, 
throughout five of the thirteen pages of his Preface, he caracoles in verse. The 
setting of the stage for the First Act and Scene will give some idea of the capacity 
of Citoyen MorGuEs to carry out his plan: ‘The Theatre represents a gallery or hall 
‘of the palace, decorated with everything magnificent or voluptuous that the imagi- 
‘nation can conceive. On the side scenes are pictures of the loves of Mars and Venus 
‘and many mirrors. At the back is a superb throne, enriched with precious stones, 
“where Cleopatra, as Venus, is seated, with Love as a young child at her side. The 
‘ Ambassadors of neighboring kings, each in his national costume, grandees, officers 
‘of State, stand, according to their rank, on the steps of the throne. The rest of the 
‘scene is filled with Loves, Graces, the Pleasures, etc.’ 

Cleopatra is awaiting the arrival of Antony, and this gay scene has been devised 
to raise his spirits, sadly depressed since the battle of Actium. Nymphs sing of his 
warlike prowess, he enters, is overwhelmed with the brilliancy of the scene and the 
ravishing beauty of Cleopatra, and is about to refer to the disgrace of Actium when 
the queen interrupts, announcing that the whole day is to be given up to delight, and 
commands the Nymphs, Pleasures, Graces, Loves to bind the hero captive with the 
chains of Cytherea. NHereupon follow several pages of a ‘Song,’ composed of such 
stanzas as the following: 


‘ Our springtime resembles these roses, 
Which have but a day of delight, 
The sun all their beauty discloses, 
But they die with the advent of night. 


So then, while old Time is still flying, 
Let us seize all his joys as they pass, 
And with raptures, each other outvying, 
Find delight in each grain in his glass.’—p, 21. 


Under the influence of such sparkling and novel strains, what eye can droop, 
or head incline to yawn! But quips and cranks and wanton wiles cannot last for 
ever. Lucilius breaks in and the charm is snapt. From here to the end of the 
play Plutarch’s fine direct prose is converted, or perverted, into dull rhyming 
couplets. There are, however, some episodes. After hearing the false report of 
Cleopatra’s death Antony becomes frantic. The Shades of the victims of his past 
cruelty appear, especially Cicero, and he apostrophises them with horror. Another 
notable divergence from Plutarch, for which we must give Citoyen MorcuEs all 
credit, is the ingenious excuse whereby Cleopatra eludes the vigilance of Octavius 
himself, and escapes from his very presence in order to compass her own death and 
thereby thwart his plans. Her device, which cannot fail to appeal to the female 
heart, is thus contrived: the incident of Seleucus and the false brief has just closed 
(but very tamely, in comparison with JODELLE) when Cleopatra exclaims : 

‘Ye gods! and have I lost all sense of shame? 
Thus dressed, to venture in the gaze of men? 


560 APPENDIX 


Woe’s me! my fatal sorrows are the cause. 
Disgrace has plunged me to the lowest depths. 
All things, e’en shame, are dead within my soul ! 
’Tis too degrading thus to blush ’fore Czsar ! 

I can no longer bear his steady gaze. 

Permit me, Sir, to leave you for a minute, 

My garments’ plight enforces my retirement. 
Allow me hence to go to re-arrange them. 

T’'ll presently return, and show myself 

More nobly vestured, and, perhaps, more worthy 
A queen disgraced, who blushes at her state.’ —p. 99. 

These are the last words we hear from her. When next we behold her she is a 
corpse, magnificently attired, with Iras dead by her side. Charmian is dying, but, 
evidently with a soul prophetic of the future dispute over the mode of Cleopatra’s death, 
refuses to commit herself by telling Octavius how or from what cause her mistress died. 


CLEOPATRE, Tragédie en cing Actes et en Vers, Par M. ALEXANDRE SOUMET, 
del’ Academie Frangaise. Représentée, pour la premiétre fots, sur le Théatre Royal 
de I’ Odéton, le 2 Juillet 182g. There is a marked contrast between the present trag- 
edy and its predecessor by Citoyen MorGuES ; it could hardly be otherwise, consider- 
ing that one is by a member of the French Academy and the other by a ‘ habitant de 
‘Montpellier.’ Its Dramatis Persone are: CLEOPATRE, reine a’ Egypte. ANTOINE. 
OcTAVIE.. MARCELLUS, fils a’ Antoine et d’ Octavie. OCTAVE CESAR. PROCULEIUS, 
ambassadeur de Rome. ERos, esclave d’ Antoine. PHORBAS, ministre de Cléopatre. 
THEONE, femme de Cléopatre. We learn from MOELLER (p. 83) that other plays by 
SouMET were highly popular, but that the present one was a decided failure, which 
is conceivable if the standard be the attractiveness of the characters. Cleopatra is 
selfish and treacherous. Octavius, also, is treachery itself; after professions of fraternal 
love to Antony and of fidelity to Cleopatra, he confides to Proculeius that both are 
destined for the Tarpeian Rock. Antony is the least repellent of the three, but even 
he, as in a majority of these Verszons, is as weak as he is foolish. It cannot be sur- 
prising, therefore, that in spite of the dignity of the style and the goodness of the 
construction, the play was a failure. 

Cleopatra appears in the First Scene and strikes the chord which is to vibrate in 
the last. In obedience to her commands sundry deadly poisons, an envenomed dag- 
ger, and the asps stand ready for use on a funeral altar in the interior of a pyramid 
whither she has betaken herself after the battle of Actium. In a conversation with 
her attendant, Théone, Cleopatra reveals her treachery and tells of a secret treaty 
which she has made with Octavius, whom she hopes soon to see at her feet. Pro- 
culeius, the envoy of Octavius, enters and announces to Cleopatra that his master 
will make her queen of all the East if she will surrender Antony to him. She refuses 
with scorn to be an assassin and, having always at hand the means of killing herself, 
bids Proculeius tell Ceesar that she awaits his arrival at this sepulchre with a dagger 
in her hand. Proculeius departs. Antony enters, having, to the astonishment of 
Cleopatra, recovered from the delirium of shame into which the loss of Actium had 
plunged him. His self-accusations in having been, instead of a victorious emperor, 
merely Cleopatra’s lover, and the laughing stock of the universe, sting Cleopatra into 
indignant rage and she scornfully asks him why he does not at once go over to 
the Roman camp: 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—SOUMET 561 


‘Tis not the hour thus to speak to me. 
If after all, so dearly you love Rome, 
Why do you not, forsooth, at once betake 
Yourself to Caesar? his camp is close at hand. 
You'll thus escape the weary bonds which bind you. 
Perhaps the Romans are awaiting you ? 
Nay and perchance your trembling wife, Octavia, 
Will there, among them all, protect you, Sir ; 
And lictors improvise a noble escort ; 
Desert! desert! these fatal halls of death! 
My guards stand ready to conduct your steps.’—p. 13. 

Antony declines and asserts that even now he intends to conquer Czesar; he has 
friends and soldiers enough to protect Alexandria and Cleopatra. This intention of 
" fighting for her softens Cleopatra's heart, and the Acf closes with a reconciliation. 

The Second Act opens with a conversation between Antony and Eros in which, 
as in Cleopatra’s case, we have an anticipation of tragedy,—Antony reminds Eros of 
his promise to kill him, should he demand it. A conference between Antony and 
Octavius follows in which there are mutual recriminations and a general airing of all 
complaints. Czesar represents the cause of absolute monarchy, while Antony is the 
advocate of freedom against tyranny, and each harangues his warriors from his own 
point of view. Czsar denounces Antony as a rebel and Antony denounces Cesar 
asatyrant. The conference is broken up by the entrance of Octavia, who utters her 
sad complaints and adjures Antony to return to the path of virtue and to Rome. 
But her husband listens coldly, until at last Octavius plays a well-devised stroke by 
producing the secret treaty made with Octavius by Cleopatra. Hardly has Antony 
finished reading it, when Cleopatra herself is announced. Antony taxes her with 
her treachery, but she defends herself as having done everything solely with a view to 
his protection. She confessed to having made a treaty with Rome, but had broken it 
when she found it was to be sealed with his blood. Goaded to madness she turns on 
Octavia with the declaration that for herself she had sacrificed to Antony all her 
fleet, her treasure, her armies, her estates, and all her subjects, merely to uphold his 
rights ; while in return, he it was who now devised her impending ruin, and at the 
words ‘ your plottings ’ Antony interrupts and tells her to respect Octavia’s 
mourning weeds[!], and, proclaiming Octavia to be a model of virtue, asserts that no 
one shall insult her in his presence ; then commanding his wife to follow him, he goes 
out with the words, ‘I blush for myself, but I am proud of Octavia.’ Cleopatra, left 
alone, bewails her fate, but finds comfort, not only in having defeated all hopes of a 
treaty between Antony and Czsar, but also in the command which she is about to 
issue to her army to renew the battle. She gives one dark hint: ‘If some day this 
“steel in the blood of Octavia—Therefor I am hoping—.’ 

The Zhird Act opens while the battle is raging, and Cleopatra, with Théone, is 
awaiting news of the issue. Brooding over the way in which Antony has left her, 


she says, 
‘ Perhaps this triumph, which I so desire, 
Will prove the worst misfortune of my life. 
And Cleopatra, at this fatal moment, 
Can breathe no prayer,—not even for her lover.’—p. 35. 
Phorbas enters, describes Antony’s victory, and how he had obtained from the 
priests a precious frontlet which only the queens of Egypt were allowed to wear; 


36 


562 APPENDIX 


Phorbas adds, that, according to rumour, this frontlet was destined for Octavia. 
Amid the transports of rage into which Cleopatra falls on hearing this, she throws 
out another dark hint that if she must descend from her throne she will first bathe it 
in blood. In the next Scene Antony confides to Eros that the frontlet is destined for 
the Egyptian queen; he will repudiate Octavia and marry Cleopatra, amid general 
rejoicings and festivities ; he is proud, he says, to bear her yoke, and his only wish is 
to bring the haughty Romans to her feet. Cleopatra enters and greets Antony with 
ironical congratulations on his approaching festivity, to which she says she has 
invited a few other guests,—certain witnesses whom he does not expect. 


‘In crowning her,’ she asks, ‘ whom you so deeply love 
Will no remorse arise to vex your soul ? 
Antony. I know how much this day will bring of sorrow ; 
But 
Cleopatra. ’Twill see the flow of far more blood than tears. 
This festal day is not yet finished, monster ! 
Didst thou suppose that my quiescent hatred 


Would suffer thee to compass my dishonour ? 
Thouw’lt see that I can yet avenge my crown. 
My throne in falling will o’erwhelm thee too.’ 


Antony is thunderstruck and asks what means this frightful misunderstanding, 
and asserts that he is for ever separated from Octavia, and hopes at the altar of the 
immortal gods to marry Cleopatra, the sole object of his idolatry. On hearing these 
words, a pallor overspreads Cleopatra’s features. At that instant Eros rushes in with 
the news that treachery has opened the gates of Alexandria and that the Romans are 
even now at the very doors of the palace. Cleopatra confesses that, prompted by 
black jealousy, the treachery is hers, and implores Antony to kill her as a punish- 
ment, and also to save her from Cesar, from Rome, and from herself. Antony leaves 
her with the bitter hope that her treachery will be successful, and her path to power 
re-opened when the conqueror greets her, bearing in his hand Antony’s head. When 
alone, Cleopatra bewails, not so much the loss of her crown, as of Antony, and resolves 
that she will seek the camp of Ceesar ; if she once find lodgement there, it will prove 
fatal to him; then, by his death, Antony may regain power. 

In the Fourth Act Antony has in vain sought death in battle, and, when Eros 
enters and announces that Octavia is approaching, he commands Eros to kill him, 
and just as he is about to obey, Octavia enters; she pleads with him and finally 
brings forward his son, Marcellus, who does not know that Antony is his father, but 
tells how proud he is of him and of his valour, until at last Antony breaks down, 
reveals himself to his son, and expresses astonishment at finding the voice of nature 
awaken in his heart ; he obeys the voice, and folds Octavia and Marcellus in his arms. 
Cleopatra has an interview with Octavius in which she temptingly sets before him 
the grandeur of a vast empire which he could found, with Alexandria as a Capital. 
Octavius asks if he could possibly ‘abandon Rome and its glorious walls?’ Cleo- 
patra replies that ‘Rome makes heroes, but Egypt makes gods.’ Octavius in turn 
invites Cleopatra to go to Rome with him and there unfold the grandeur of her vast 
projects. She assents, after saying in an aside, ‘ Tremble, imprudent young man!’ 
The Act closes with Octavius’s words to Proculeius, in reference to Cleopatra and 
Antony, that the Tarpeian Rock awaits its two victims. 

In the 47th Act (which takes place within a Pyramid) Cleopatra has discovered 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—SOUMET 563 


Octavius’s treachery, and that he intends to take her as a captive to Rome, where, 
as she tells Théone, she will be 
. ‘Exposed to all the insults of the mob 
And lictors will exhibit for a penny, 
The queen of Egypt, as a show, in chains !’ 
(Wherein we have a possible reminiscence of Shakespeare.) She expresses her 
hatred of Octavia, and decides that Phorbas shall lure her hither and contrive her 
death. Octavia, with Marcellus, enters the Pyramid in search of Antony; she bids 
the young boy await her while she explores the passage down which Cleopatra has 
just disappeared. The lad hears piercing screams; Cleopatra immediately enters 
with the reeking steel yet in her hand and bids him fly, which he does, shrieking for 
his father to avenge his mother’s murder. A sudden, unexpected, and inexpressible 
horror seizes Cleopatra, she feels that her hour is come, and thrusts her arm into a 
vase where lie the asps. 
‘Tis done! and now can Fate no further harm me! 
To mock Octavius and all his cruelty, 
T’ve sent this poison speeding through my veins 
Come hither, tyrant ! here thou shalt find proof 
That I need none to teach me how to die.’—p. 72. 

Phorbas enters and tells how Antony has stabbed himself and is even now 
approaching to behold Cleopatra once more before he breathes his last. Antony 
enters, Cleopatra tells him that poison already invades her heart. Antony doubts. 
She appeals to her pallor. 

‘Antony. ’Tis death,—I see ’tis done,— ’tis death, indeed. 
Thou never yet hast looked so fair to me. 
Once more I taste of that delirious joy 
In gazing on those eyes, whose brightness fails ! 
Let me behold thee, and close pressed in mine 
Lay thou thy flower-soft hand.—’ Tis icy cold! 
The tomb unites us, and we are both alike. 
Tis well with me, since we are one in death. 
Cleopatra. ast pardoned me! And dost thou know my crime ? | 
Antony. What sayest thou ? 
Cleopatra. Know’ st thou my victim’s name ? 
Know’st thou the vengeful stroke? My frightful rage 
Antony. Octavia 


Cleopatra. Precedes us both in death. 
Canst thou forgive me? 
Antony. Forgive thee ? monster ! 


Though death unite us, crime divides us now. 

Spare me the sight of thee, as death draws nigh, 

Tis shuddering horror to die in thine embrace ! [ Dies. 

SCENE THE LAST. 
Enter Octavius, 4o Cleopatra avd Phorbas. Attendants bearing torches. 

Octavius. Egyptians, give your Queen up to my power. 

My car of triumph she must follow soon. 

Make search for him, my second captive. 
Cleopatra [ pointing to Antony’ s corpse.| Look there ! 

You ne’er before beheld him without fear ! 


564 APPENDIX 


Octavius. "He's dead! 
Cleopatra. Give way to joy without constraint. 
Octavius. What terror could be stirred in me by him? 
Does not the universe belong to me ? 
He has robb’d me of the glory of his pardon; 
He was my captive. 
Cleopatra. Thou dar’st not believe it. 
Thou tremblest yet, e’en after conquering him. 
A hero’s fall has stricken thee with terror. 
Octavius. This is too much; ’tis time that crime be punished. 
Octavia’s tears and blood you’ll dearly pay for. 
Lay hold on her! and load her arms with fetters ! 
Your punishment’s a sight I owe to Rome. 
Cleopatra. Thou hast cajoled them with it ? 
Phorbas. Sir, she dies! 
The poison 
Cleopatra. Yes, thou tyrant, I elude thee! 
Without thine aid I have controlled my fate. 
Come, snatch this death from out my painful breast, 
Or crown thy memory with a novel crime 
And bind to thy triumphal chariot Cleopatra. [ Dies.’ 


CL£opATRE was written for Mademoiselle RACHEL by Madame EmIte DE 
GIRARDIN (DELPHINE Gay), and acted for the first time in 1847. 

The play opens before the battle of Actium (which is unusual in these Verszons) ; 
Ventidius, Antony’s closest friend, is sent to Cleopatra to call her to account for 
having given aid and comfort to Brutus. In Cleopatra’s palace Ventidius meets Dio- 
medes, Cleopatra’s secretary, and the two have a long and friendly conference, which 
reveals to each that they have in view the same end, namely, to keep Antony from 
falling into the toils of the Egyptian queen, on the one hand, and Egypt from falling 
under the dominion of Cleopatra’s lover, on the other. It is, dramatically, a skilful 
opening ; opportunity is afforded to Diomedes to unfold Cleopatra’s character, and to 
Ventidius to unfold Antony’s. Diomedes describes his queen’s invincible charm of 
manner, which disarms all hate and impels instant forgiveness for all misdeeds ; she 
is always a queen, and always a woman ; in her frail frame is discerned a great soul, 
and royalty amidst her weakness. Thus she goes from crime to crime, 

‘ Bravant impunément et le peuple et la cour, 
Ne méritant que haine et n’inspirant qu’amour.’ 

In the description of her love of luxury and pleasure we find what is perhaps the 
nearest approach to ‘custom cannot stale her infinite variety’ where Diomedes says, 

‘Ce bruit, ce mouvement d’une éternelle féte, ; 
Tourbillon de plaisir qui jamais ne s’arréte.’ 

To this ambitious, unprincipled, luxurious character, Ventidius describes Antony’s 
as an exact counterpart. Some plan must be devised, therefore, of controlling Antony 
and of converting his love for Cleopatra into jealousy and hate, should it threaten to 
overmaster him, An instrument to carry out this plan is found in an Egyptian Slave. 
This young Slave, as handsome as an Apollo, had fallen wildly in love with Cleo- 
patra, who, in an hour of ezau?z, had deigned to look on him, and listen to the 
delirious protestations of his adoration ; when at last he exclaimed, ‘Give me death, 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—DE GIRARDIN 565 


‘if you will, for one moment of love!’ she had bestowed on him a smile of assent. 
‘ Poison and the Nile,’ concludes Diomedes, ‘ will this day end the disgraceful amour.’ 
Just as Ventidius discerns the drift of Diomedes and exclaims, ‘Marc Antony is 
‘jealous .. . If, rescuing this slave . . .’ the interview is broken off by the approach 
of some one, and the Scene ends. 

In the next Scene Charmion appears, bearing a goblet of foaming liquor, a new 
and deadly poison just received from Thrace, as she explains to Iras, which, as it is 
now dawn, the young Slave must quaff and < pay with his life for a moment of bliss.’ 
The young Slave enters and joyously demands the goblet which Charmion hands 
to him; whereupon, in some impassioned verses, he apostrophises Night, which is 
about to envelop him, and Death, which he welcomes : 

‘ Je suis prét a partir pour les rivages sombres ; 
Prends mon sang et ma vie et mon jeune avenir. 
Mais permets qu’avec moi j’emporte chez les ombres 

Le souvenir . . . le souvenir !? 

He lifts the cup, drinks, and falls. On the instant Diomedes rushes in, saying 
to Charmion and Iras that the queen is asking for them, and they depart forthwith. 
Diomedes is followed by Ventidius and a Leech, who at once takes the young Slave 
in hand and by the administration of antidotes recalls him to life, 

Thus ends the First Act. Although neither Antony nor Cleopatra appear in it, 
their presence pervades it throughout. 

The opening of the Second Act introduces us to Cleopatra, reclining on a couch ; 
before her a High Priest, a Philosopher, a Savant, and an Architect. This reve- 
lation of the intellectual side of Cleopatra’s character is to be found in no other 
presentation of her with which I am acquainted. She listens to the High Priest 
as he expounds the Egyptian religion, and she promises to take part in certain cere- 
monies; she bids the Philosopher admit to the School, Egiras of Samos, a young 
student of ability; she exhorts the Architect to hasten the building of the temple 
of Hermonthis ; and asks the Savant how many new volumes have been added to 
the Library to replace those that were burnt, etc. After the departure of this group, 
and she is left alone with Iras and Charmion, she tells them how weary she is, wait- 
ing for Antony, whom the oracles have promised she should see to-day. By a subtle 
and Shakespearian touch, which I am afraid was suggested by THEOPHILE GAUTIER’S 
Une Nuit de Cléopatre, this weariness is attributed to everything about her, the earth 
and sky, the people and the climate. ‘Oh!’ she exclaims, ‘how slowly pass the 
weary hours! And how depressing is this breezeless heat ! 

With no cool cloud in skies for ever clear, 

No tear of moisture in the unpitying blue! 

The skies have never winter, spring, nor fall ; 
There’s nought to change their dazzling monotone. 
And on the desert’s verge there hangs the sun, 
A huge and blood-red eye for ever open. 

This constant brilliance tires my dreaming soul. 
Could I but see a single drop of rain 

I’d give these pearls, this carcanet, my Iras. 
Ah! life in Egypt is a heavy burthen ! 

No, this rich land, so justly celebrated, 

For me, young queen, is but a realm of death. 
They vaunt its palaces, its monuments, 


566 APPENDIX 


‘ But what excite most wonder are but tombs. 
Where’ er one treads, one knows there sleep beneath 
The rigid mummies of long ages past. 

Call it a land of murder and remorse. 

The living toil but to embalm the dead... . 

Here’s nought but what to me is odious ; 

All, e’en its beauties, fill me with affright, 

Ay, e’en its famous stream, with course unknown, 
Whose head is sought in vain, three thousand years. 
Its very blessing seems like a misfortune, 

Because the sombre secret of its richness 

Lies not within the sun’s gift, nor a star’s. 

This fruitfulness is born of a disaster..—p. 152. 

To raise Cleopatra’s spirits Charmion and Iras recall the splendour of the voyage 
on the Cydnus, and rehearse the description, as given in Plutarch. Anthony enters 
in disguise, accompanied by Ventidius and Diomedes, and listens with delight to 
Cleopatra’s expressions of disappointment at his failure toappear. At last he reveals 
himself and explains his disguise as due to the secrecy which attends a meeting at 
the harbour for the purpose of concluding a treaty. Cleopatra implores him to remain; 
he is about to yield, when Ventidius whispers to him, ‘The Slave is there; are you 
‘no longer jealous?’ ‘The Slave!’ gasps Antony, aside, ‘that one word re-awakes 
‘my rage.’ And he hurries precipitately away. 

Cleopatra mistrusts Antony’s ‘ treaty’ and believes that he is deceiving her. While 
she is in a balcony, watching the departing ships, the Slave, from below, shoots up 
to her an arrow bearing the message that Antony is treacherous, is become friends 
with Czesar, and has left for Rome, to marry Octavia. This resuscitated Slave, 
through whom Diomedes and Ventidius believed that they could always awaken 
Antony’s jealousy (and as we have just seen, successfully), and who, they hoped, would 
prove an implacable foe to Cleopatra, remains, in reality, the queen’s idolater, and 
becomes her devoted guardian ; in the very last Scene of all it is he who, in mercy, 
brings the asp in the basket of figs. Cleopatra learns from Diomedes that Octavia 
is beautiful and charming ; she thereupon decides that, disguised as a Greek slave, 
with Diomedes and Iras as her sole companions, she will go to Tarentum and 
see for herself. She arrives there and is enabled to overhear an interview between 
Ceesar and his sister, Octavia, when the latter will not allow Cesar to utter one word 
in derogation of Antony’s love for her. ‘ But,’ says Czesar, ‘he insults both you 
‘and me ? TJ feel no insult,’ cries Octavia, 

‘’Tis in his courage that his virtue lies ! 

A hero’s love, so properly applauded, 

Is cheaply bought by some few bitter tears. 
What matters Cleopatra,—nay, any mistress ? 
He loves them but in moments of delirium. 
When reason rallies, I am his delight, 

’Tis I whom he then seeks in his chaste home, 
To me is all his future dedicated. 

*Tis I whom he respects,—and women envy. 
Tis mine alone to follow, and wait on him 
Without a blush and fearless of a witness .... 
Thou seest, brother, that my lot is fairest !’—p. 173. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—DE GIRARDIN 567 


When the conference is at an end, Czsar retires by one door and Octavia is about 
to retire by another, when Cleopatra rushes forth with the cry that ¢ her punishment 
‘has been too long and that she is dying.’ Iras flies to her assistance; Octavia, 
who does not, of course, know who she is, pauses with kindly interest and recom- 
mends her own Greek physician. Cleopatra gives orders to Diomedes for her im- 
mediate return to Alexandria, and in a long soliloquy confesses the power which 
Octavia ‘ possesses in her conscious chastity,’ ‘that grand word which for the first 
‘time she comprehends,—that grand word, virtue, which rings so loud. 

‘This noble dame, oblivious of vengeance, 
Appeared to me to be indeed sublime. 
My better nature could esteem her greatness ; 
I loved her bearing of high purity. 
I envied her calm front and stern regard... . 
O Brutus! virtue’s not an empty name! 
’Tis not a lie, a false illusion,—No ! 
’Tis an authority, a boundless force,— 
’Tis the first step where royalty begins ! 
It is a precious gift, a treasure all divine !’—p. 177. 

All the blame of her past follies she lays on the African sun that sent its own 
hot fire through her youthful veins. But for this fiery god she would have known 
love in its purity, and beneath her crown she would have had a loyal and stainless 
brow, and given to Octavia gaze for gaze, 

In the meantime Antony, his love for Cleopatra having revived with full force, 
breaks loose from Ventidius and discovers Cleopatra, just as she is about to leave 
Tarentum. Vows of mutual love are renewed and they agree to meet again at 
Actium. 

When the fourth Act opens, the battle of Actium has been fought, and Antony is 
the victim of abysmal despair, from which he is, however, aroused by the devotion of 
his soldiers, led on by an old, scarred veteran named Faustus. Cleopatra approaches, 
and is at first repelled, but she throws herself on her knees at Antony’s feet and, 
taking upon herself all the blame of the defeat, begs to be forgiven. She then goes 
on to describe the delirium of excitement in which she entered on the battle. She 
saw Antony in his dazzling gold armour and heard his voice; he seemed a being 
from another sphere, so terrible, so grand was he. She had no thought of fear; she 
stood on her vessel’s prow with flowing hair, her limbs of brass and her soul of fire ; 
she quaffed healths to Neptune, to Jupiter, to Mars, and flung the golden goblets in 
the deep. “She heard. the shrieks, the whistling of the javelins, and saw the blue 
waves with blood incarnadined. The scene was too horrible’ for one of even her 
regal race,—her reason tottered ; when, of a sudden, a soldier fell wounded on the 
deck and his blood rushed forth in great gushes. She drew near,—O Gods! he 
resembled Antony! In an instant all was forgotten, pride, glory, history, fame ; 
one thought dominated all others: to save Antony’s life, She gave the signal to 
retreat and knew that Antony would obey it : 

«Et quand je t’ai revu, quand je t’ai retrouvé, 
Je n’ai pas dit: J’ai fui. ... j’ai dit: Je tai sauvé!’ 

Of course Antony forgives her and folds her in his arms, with a reminiscence of 
Shakespeare, as he says‘ L’Empire ne vaut pas une larme de toi.’ A new life is 
breathed into him and he calls for his armour, but even in that moment he confesses 
to Cleopatra that his sole enemy is mistrust, yes, mistrust. The faintest suspicion of 


568 APPENDIX 


a mistrust of her, and the world with all its ambitions fades from him. At this instant 
Ventidius appears and announces that all Cleopatra’s army has deserted to Cesar; 
and that there is a secret treaty whereby Antony, also, is to be delivered to the con- 
queror. Instantly Antony’s mistrust flares up into certainty; he tears himself away 
from Cleopatra, bidding her ‘ Weep! groan !—I know now the value of thy tears.’ 
Hardly had he left her, and given directions to his soldiers, when the Slave enters 
and tells him that Cleopatra is dead. His response is ‘Run to those soldiers, tell 
‘them—Antony is about to die! Dead! she loved me then, and I maligned 
‘her!’ He commands Faustus to kill him; the story of Eros is repeated from 
Plutarch. 

The Fifth Act discovers Antony dying ona couch in the Hall of the Tombs of the 
Ptolemies. His prayer that he may die in Cleopatra’s arms is granted. Cleopatra 
bewails her loss, reiterating her boundless love for him and beseeching Isis to lead 
her to him, Charmion says, ‘ Death’s pallor now is creeping o’er his face. Let us 
‘invoke him thrice as it is done in Rome.’ 

She calls, ‘ Antony!’ Cleopatra calls,‘ Antony!’ But the third call is uttered 
by Octavia, who enters unexpectedly. She is no longer the calm woman of afore- 
time, but she rails at Cleopatra ; acknowledges her hate, and hopes to live to see the 
Egyptian queen her slave and bound to the triumphal chariot of Octavius. 

The drama now comes swiftly to a close. While Cleopatra is rehearsing the bit- 
ter fate which will compel her to enter Rome in Cesar’s triumph, the Slave enters 
bearing a basket of fruit, and, prostrating himself before the queen, says to her, aside, 
‘Rome awaits thee, thou wilt leave this evening, unless, preferring a quick and noble 
‘ death—Hast fear of death ? 

Cleop. 1?—I fear the shame, A poniard? 

Slave. A poniard! These surly guards at sight of any blow thou’dst give thy- 
self, would force on thee their aid. 

Cleop. Poison? 

Slave. The soul does not yield readily to poison,—no, thou wouldst suffer too 
much pain and be less beautiful in dying. Amid these ruddy fruits some serpents 
are concealed ; their venom lulls you to the last long sleep, sans horror, suffering, or 
a change of features. ; 

Cleop. [making a sign to the Slave to bring the basket near the throne.| There! 
Let me give to death an air of triumph! My crown, O Charmion, and my royal 
robe! [Cleopatra ascends the throne, Iras and Charmion place the royal mantle on 

her shoulders ; she puts the crown on her head. 

Officer. Czsar! 

Slave. Czsar comes! 

Cleop. Oh! would that he would come! 

My noble Charmion, my death will be thine. 
[ Zo Zras.] Adieu, weep not.—And thou, serpent of Nile, 
Freeme! [She thrusts her hand into the basket and is stung by an aspic.] 
Already !—the poison ’s quick! 
I shall again see Antony ! 
With joy I die—Come, Czsar, and here seek thy prey ! 
’Tis ready—thou canst bind it to thy car! 
Now I rejoin thee, Antony [ Zo Cesar who enters.| And I await thee, Cesar! 
[At the approach of Cesar the dying Cleopatra raises herself with an effort, 
extends to him her hand, smiles, and falls back dead. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—LANDOR 569 


Cesar. Elle m’a trompé !—morte !—Elle et lui !—je respire ! 
A ces deux orgueilleux la tombe—a moi l’ Empire!’ [ Zxeunt omnes. 


THEOPHILE GAUTIER, in an Jntvoduction to the collected Works of Mad. DE 
GIRARDI, referring to the foregoing Version, declares that ‘ it is the most masculine 
‘work that ever a woman’s hand created;’ and exclaims, ‘ How magnificent was 
“Mademoiselle Rachel in the réle of Cleopatra! What dangerous fascination! 
‘What viperine grace! what mortal beauty! what unshunnable ascendancy!... It 
‘is indeed to be deeply regretted that the tragedy had to be dropped from the Reper- 
‘toire after the premature death of the great ¢vagedienne, who alone could personate 
‘the Egyptian Queen as she had personated Marie Stuart, that other seductress whom 
‘history condemns and whom poesie pardons.’ 

Dr WiLi1AM Everett (Zhe Atlantic Monthly, February, 1905), thus praises 
Mad. DE GIRARDIN’S tragedy: 

‘The play is written with great force and beauty of expression, and deserves no 
‘inferior place among those we are discussing. It could hardly help being superior 
‘to Alfieri’s boyish effort,—but it has more dignity than Zhe False One, with less 
‘appearance of being hurried for the stage; the scope and field is wider than AZ for 
‘Love, and le grand Corneille must confess his brilliant countrywoman excels him in 
‘manliness. .. . The radical defect, to Saxon taste, is the spirit of declamation that 
‘dominates situation and poetry. Ventidius, Diomedes, the Slave, Antony, Cesar, 
‘Octavius, Cleopatra, all have to develop their feelings in long tirades—/e recit de 
‘ Théramene. One does not question that Rachel and her coadjutors could have given 
‘them with immense spirit and feeling; one feels that the point and wit of the French 
‘language is here elevated to a dignity worthy of Bossuet and Vergniaud. But in 
‘ Antony and Cleopatra there is not a single speech twenty lines long; the rhetoric 
‘which, in Cortolanus, in Julius Cesar, in Henry V., in Henry VITZ., unless that is 
‘ Fletcher’s, throws all Corneille and Racine into the shade, is laid aside for fear it 
* should mar the dramatic perfection of the character and incidents.’ 


WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR has entitled one of his inimitable ‘ Dialogues in Verse,’ 
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA, it consistsof Twelve Scenes wherein appear about the same 
number of Shakespeare’s chief characters; but they are Shakespeare’s characters only 
in name, nor are they the characters of Plutarch. The fire of Shakespeare’s Cleo- 
patra is subdued to a pure, unwavering glow, exquisitely radiant with love for Antony 
and for her children. Antony’s turbulence has vanished; he is the calm, high- 
souled, broken-hearted, classic hero. The story of the asps is treated as mere 
gossip. Cleopatra dies of the poison contained in a ruby ring which Antony gives 
her (in the Scene here reprinted). Her death is not described ; she sends the empty 
ring to Antony; he understands that she has taken the poison and is dead; he 
thereupon kills himself. Czesarion is endowed with every charm of a young boy 
just verging on manhood, and his cruel death, commanded by Octavius, under the 
stabs of Scopas’s dagger, is harrowing ; without being similar, there is about the Scene 
_ of his death, an indefinable reminiscence of the Scene between Arthur and Hubert. 
Only those Scenes wherein Cleopatra appears are here reprinted. 


‘SCENE THE SECOND. 
SOOTHSAYER aud CLEOPATRA. 
Soothsayer. Our lord Antonius wafts away all doubt 
Of his success. 


570 APPENDIX 


Cleopatra. What! against signs and tokens ? 
Soothsayer. Even so! 
Cleopatra. Perhaps he trusts himself to Hercules, 
Become of late progenitor to him. 
Soothsayer. Ah! that sweet smile might bring him back ; he once 
Was flexible to the bland warmth of smiles, 
Cleopatra. Vf Hercules is hail’d by men below 
For strength and goodness, why not Antony ? 
Why not succeed as lawful heir? why not 
Exchange the myrtle for the poplar crown? [Antony enters. Sooth- 
Cleopatra. Antony! is not Cesar now a god ? sayer goes. 
Antony. We hear so. 
Cleopatra. Nay, we know it. Why not thou ? 
Men would not venture then to strike a blow 
At thee: the laws declare it sacrilege. 
Antony. Julius, if I knew Julius, had been rather 
First among men than last among the Gods. 
Cleopatra, At least put on thy head a kingly crown. 
Antony. J have put on a laurel one already ; 
As many kingly crowns as should half-cover 
The Lybian desert are not worth this one. 
Cleopatra. But all would bend before thee. 
Antony. ’T was the fault 
Of Czesar to adopt it; ’twas his death. 
Cleopatra. Be then what Cesar is. 
To laugh so loud becomes not state so high. 
Antony, He isa star, we see; so is the hair 
Of Berenice: stars and Gods are rife. 
What worth, my love, are crowns? Thou givest pearls, 
I give the circlet that encloses them. 
Handmaidens don such gear, and valets snatch it 
Sportively off, and toss it back again. 
Cleopatra. But graver men gaze up with awful eyes... 
Antony. And never gaze at that artificer 
Who turns his wheel and fashions out his vase 
From the Nile clay! ’Tis easy work for him; 
Easy was mine to turn forth kings from stuff 
As vile and ductile: he still plies his trade, 
But mine, with all my customers, is gone. 


O Antony! 


Ever by me let enemies be awed, 
None else: bring round me many, near me few, 
Keeping afar those shaven knaves obscene 
Who Jord it with humility, who press 
Men’s shoulders down, glue their two hands together, 
And cut a cubit off, and tuck their heels 
Against the cushion mother Nature gave. 
Cleopatra. Incomprehensible! incorrigible ! 
O wretch! if queens were ever taught to blush, 
I should at such unseemly phrase as thine. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—LANDOR 571 


I think I must forgive it. What! and take 
Before I grant? Again! You violent man! 
Will you for ever drive me thus away ? 
SCENE THE THIRD. 
ANTONY and CLEOPATRA. 
Antony. What demon urged thy flight ? 
Cleopatra. The demon Love. 
I am a woman, with a woman’s fears, 
A mother’s, and, alas O Antony! 
More fears than these. 
Antony. Of whom ? 
Cleopatra. Ask not of whom 
But ask for whom, if thou must ask at all, 
Nor knowest nor hast known. Yes, I did fear. 
For my own life... ah! lies it not in thine? 
How many perils compast thee around ! 
Antony. What are the perils that are strange to me? 
Cleopatra. Mine thou couldst not have seen when swiftest oars, 
Attracted by the throne and canopy, 
Pounced at me only, numerous as the waves ; 
Couldst not have seen my maidens throwing down 
Their fans and posies (piteous to behold !) 
That they might wring their hands more readily. 
I was too faint myself to still their cries. 
Antony [aside.| I almost thought her blameable 


[ Zo Cleopatra.] The Gods 
So will’d it. Thou despondest . . . too aware 


The day is lost. 
Cleopatra. The day may have been lost, 
But other days, and happier ones, will come. 
Antony. Never: when those so high once fall, their weight 
Keeps them for ever down. 
Cleopatra. Talk reasonably, 
And love me as... til now... it should be more, 
For love and sorrow mingle where they meet. 
Antony. Itshall be more. Are these last kisses cold ? 
Cleopatra. Nor cold are they nor shall they be the last. 
Antony. Promise me, Cleopatra, one thing more. 
Cleopatra. Tis promist, and now tell me what it is. 
Antony. Rememberest thou this ring? 
Cleopatra. Dost thou remember 
The day, my Antony, when it was given? 
Antony. Day happiest in a life of many happy, 
And all thy gift. 
Cleopatra. Tis call’d the richest ruby, 
The heaviest, and the deepest, in the world. 
Antony. The richest certainly. 
Cleopatra. And not the deepest 
And broadest? Look! it hides all this large nail, 


572 


APPENDIX 


And mine are long ones if not very wide; 
Now let me see if it don’t cover yours 
As wide again! there! it would cover two. 
Why smile you so? 
Antony. Because I know its story. 
Cleopatra. Ha! then you have not lost all memory quite. 
I told it you. The king of Pontus sent it 
When dying to my father, warning him 
By letter that there was a charm in it 
Not to be trifled with. 
Antony. It shall not be. 
Cleopatra. But tell me now the promise I must make ; 
What has the ring to do with it ? 
Antony. All, all. 
Know, Cleopatra, this is not one ruby. 
Cleopatra. The value then is smaller. 
Antony. Say not so, 
Remark the rim. 
Cleopatra. The gold is thin, I see. 
Antony. And seest thou it will open? It contains 
Another jewel richer than itself. 
Cleopatra. Impossible! my Antony! for rubies 
Are richer than all other gems on earth. 
Antony. Now, my sweet trifler, for thy promise. 
Cleopatra. Speak. 
By all the Powers above and all below, 
I will perform thy bidding, even to death. 
Antony. To death it goes; not until after mine. 
Cleopatra. I kiss the precious charm. Methinks an odor 
Of almond comes from it. How sweet the flower 
Of death ! 
Antony. ’Tis painless death, ’tis sudden too. 
Cleopatra. Who could wish more, even were there more to wish ? 
With us there is not. 
Antony. Generous, pious girl ! 
Daughter of Ptolemies! thou hast not won 
A lower man than they. Thy name shall rise 
Above the pyramids, above the stars, 
Nations yet wild shall that name civilize, 
And glorious poets shake their theaters, 
And stagger kings and emperors with applause. 
Cleopatra. I was not born to die; but I was born 
To leave the world with Antony, and will. 
Antony. The greatest of all eastern kings died thus, 
The greater than all eastern kings thus died. 
O glorious forgeman who couldst rivet down 
Refractory crowds by thousands, and make quake 
Scepters like reeds! we want not here thy voice 
Or thy example. Antony alone 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—LANDOR 573 


And queenly pride, tho’ Love were dumb, would do. 
SCENE THE Fourtu. 
CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN. IRAs. 
Cleopatra. At the first entrance of your lord, before 
He ordered you, before he spake a word, 
Why did ye run away ? 
Charmian. I was afraid, 
Never so in my life ; he lookt so fierce 
He fear’d his own wild eyes, he placed one hand 
(His right) across them on lowered brow, his left 
Waved us away as would a hurricane 
A palm-tree on the desert. 


Cleopatra. [to Lras. | And wert thou, 
Tras, so terrified ? 
Tras. Not I indeed ; 


My lady, never man shall frighten me. 

Cleopatra. Thou silly creature! I have seen a mouse 
Do it. 

tras. A mouse is quite another thing. 

Charmian. [hesttating.] Our lord and master .. . 


Cleopatra. What of Antony ? 
Charmian. Octavius. . 
Cleopatra. Who? Our lord and master he? 


He never shall be mine. . that is to say. . 
Charmian. What! lady? 
Cleopatra. I forget . . ’twas not worth saying. 
Charmian! where hast thou been this last half-hour ? 
Charmian. In my own room. 


Cleopatra. So fearful ? 
Charmian. Far more sad. 
Cleopatra. Where, Iras, thou ? 

Tras. I wanted to report 


To my sweet lady what I might espy. 
Cleopatra. And what have those long narrow eyes espied ? 
Tras. All. 
Cleopatra. Twas done speedily; but what is all ? 
Army and fleet from any terrace-roof 
Are quite discernible, the separate men 
Nowhere. 
Tras. My heart has told me what delight 
Its queen would feel to hear exactly how 
The leaders look. 
Cleopatra. And how then did they look ? 
Tell me; some might have ridden near enough. 
The town to judge by, where the sight is sharp. 
Tras, Merciful Isis! ridden! and so close! 
Horses are frightful, horses kick and rear 
And whinny, full of wickedness; ’twere rash 
To venture nigh them. 


574 


APPENDIX 


Cleopatra. There are things more rash. 
Tras. Quieter creatures than those generals are 
Never were seen. 
Cleopatra. Barbarians! not a word 
About them, Iras, if thou lovest me; 
They would destroy my city, seize my realm, 
And ruin him we live for. 
Tras. Surely no ; 
It were a pity; none are so unkind ; 
Ceesar the least of all. 


Cleopatra. Ah simple child! 
Thou knowest not his heart. 
Tras. I do indeed. 
Cleopatra. No, nor thy own. 
Tras. His better ; for of mine 


I never askt a question. He himself 
Told me how good he would be. 


Cleopatra. He told thee ? 
What! hast thou seen him? 

Lras. Aye, and face to face, 
Close as our lord’s to yours. 

Cleopatra. O impudence! 


Tras. But he would have it so; just like our lord. 
Cleopatra. Impudent girl! thou shalt be whipt for this. 
Tras. 1am too old; but lotuses don’t hurt 
Like other things ; they cool the strokes they give. 
Cleopatra. I have no patience with thee. How I hate 
That boy Octavius! Dared he touch thy cheek ? 
Iras. He could; he only whispered in my ear, 
Holding it by the ring. 


Cleopatra. Whispered ? what words ? 
Zras. The kindest. 
Cleopatra. Ah! no doubt! but what were they ? 


Iras. He said, The loveliest creature in the world... 
Cleopatra, The vulgar brute! Our ferrymen talk so: 
And couldst thou listen, Iras, to such speech ? 
fras. Only when people praise our gracious queen. 
Cleopatra. Me? this of me? Thou didst thy duty, child: 
He might have fail’d in what he would express. 
The birds have different voices, yet we bear — 
To hear those sing which do not sing the best. 
Iras! I never thought thee half so wise. 
And so, he said those gentle words of me ? 
Tras. Al, and forgot to kiss me when I vow'd 
I would report them faithfully. 
Cleopatra. Is there 
Resemblance in him to that marble image 
I would have broken, but my Antony 
Seiz’d both my hands? 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—LANDOR 575 


Tras. Alas! that image wants 
The radiant eyes, and hair more radiant still, 
' Such as Apollo’s may have been if myrrh 
Were sprinkled into its redundant waves. 

Cleopatra. Ue must be tenderer than I fancied him 
If this be true. 

Lras. He spoke those very words. 

Cleopatra. Iras! ’tis vain to mind the words of men; 
But if he lookt as thou hast said he lookt, 
I think I may put trust in him. 


Tras. And see him ? 

Cleopatra. J am not hasty. 

tras. If you could but see him! 

Cleopatra. Call Charmian : I am weary: I must rest 
Awhile. 


Iras. My sweetest lady! could not I, 

Who have been used to it almost a year, 

Help you as well as Charmian ? While you sleep 

Could I not go again and.bid him haste 

To comfort you ? 

Cleopatra. Is the girl mad? Call Charmian. 

[ Zo Charmian.] Charmian! hath Iras tickled thee away 

From moping in thy chamber? thou hast sped. 
Charmtian. Iras is growing bold. 

Cleopatra. I was bold too 
While I was innocent as Iras is. 

Charmian. Our lady looks more flurried than deprest. 

Cleopatra. Jam not flurried, I am not deprest. 
[After a pause.] Believest thou in Czesar’s generosity ? 

Charmian. I know it. 

Cleopatra. In what matter ? 

Charmian. Half the guards 
And half the ministers of state have shown 
Signs of his bounty to the other half. 

Cleopatra. Gifts are poor signs of bounty. Do not slaves 
Slip off the gold-black pouches from their necks 
Untied but to buy other slaves therewith ? 

Do not tame creatures lure into the trap 

Their wilder brethren with some filthy bait ? 

All want companions, and the worst the most. 

I am much troubled : even hope troubles me. 
Charmian. 1 dare not ask our lady why she weeps. 
Cleopatra. Czesarion, my first-born, my dearest one, 

Is safely shielded by his father’s name : 

He loves his brothers, he may save them both, 

He only can: I would fain take the advice 

Of Dolabella, fain would venture him 

In Ceesar’s camp: the father’s voice and look 

Must melt him, for his heart is not so hard 


6 


APPENDIX 


‘ That he could hurt so beautiful a child; 
Nay, what man’s is? 
Charmian. But trust not the two younger ; 
Their father will not help them in their need. 
Cleopatra. Czesarion in fit hour will plead for them. 
Charmian, what ponderest thou? what doubtest thou? 
Charmian. Cesar I doubt, and Dolabella more ; 
And what I pondered were your words: /¢ may be 
That givers are not always benefactors. 
Cleopatra. J have one secret, but keep none from thee : 
He loves me! 
Charmian. All do. 


Cleopatra. Yes, but some have power. 
Charmian. Power, as most power is, gain’d by treachery. 
Cleopatra. Whom, 


In Egypt, Europe, Asia, can I trust ? 
Charmian. Few, nor those few too far, nor without watch. 
Cleopatra. Not Charmian ? 
Charmian. Bid her die; here; now; and judge. 
SCENE THE TENTH. 
Eros and ANTONY. 
Antony. Eros! I speak thee welcome. 
Eros, Hail, our lord! 
Antony. Thou hast been ever faithful to thy trust, 
And spoken freely, but decorously, 
On what concern’d the household and the state. 
My glory is gone down, and life is cold 
Without it. I have known two honest men 
Among the senators and consulars. . . 
Lros. None among humbler? 
Antony. By the Powers above! 
I thought but of the powerful, men of birth. 
Lros. All men are that. Some sink below their cradle, 
Others rise higher than parental roof, 
And want no scepter to support their steps. 
Antony. Such there may be whom we have all past by. 
L£yros. Men cast long shadows when their life declines, 
Which we cross over without noticing; 
We met them in the street and gave not way, 
When they were gone we lifted up both hands, 
And said to neighbors These were men indeed ! 
Antony. Reflections such as thine had wearied me 
Erewhile, and from another even now; 
But what is that thou bringest me wrapt up, 
Tardy in offering it as worth too little? 
Eros. J bring a ruby and a hollow ring 
Whereon it fitted. 
Antony. Gods of Rome! at last 
Ye make me grateful. Thanks, and thanks alone, 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—LANDOR 


‘ Have I to give, and one small sacrifice; 
I vow it you before this hour is past. 
My heart may beat against its bars awhile 
But shall not leave me yet. Go, Eros, go, 
I must lie down and rest, feeble and faint. 
But come back presently. 
Eros. [after some absence.| How fares our lord? 


Antony, Recovered, sound again, more sound than ever. 


Zyros. And yet our lord looks more like other men. 


Antony. [smiling.| We can not always swagger, always act 


A character the wise will never learn: 

When Night goes down, and the young Day resumes 
His pointed shafts, and chill air breathes around, 
Then we put on our own habiliments 

And leave the dusty stage we proudly trod. 

I have been sitting longer at life’s feast 

Than does me good; I will arise and go. 
Philosophy would flatten her thin palm 

Outspred upon my sleeve; away with her! 

Cuff off, cuff out, that chattering toothless jade ! 
The brain she puzzles, and she blunts the sword: 
Even she knows better words than that word “ve. 
Cold Cato, colder Brutus, guide not me; 

No, nor brave Cassius. 


Which will console her. 

Antony. She expected none; 
I did; and it is come. Say, lookt she pale ? 
Spake she no word ? 

Eros. Alas, most noble sir, 
She would not see me. Charmian said her face 
Was indeed pale, yet grew less pale than usual 
After she gave the ring, and then she spake 
Amid some sighs (some spasms too interposed) 
More cheerfully, and said she fain would sleep. 


Antony. The fondest heart, the truest, beats no more. 


She listened to me, she hath answered me, 
She wanted no entreaty, she obeyed, 

She now commands: but no command want I. 
Queen of my soul! I follow in thy train, 
Thine is the triumph. Eros, up! rejoice! 
Tears, man! do tears become us at this hour ? 
I never had too many; thou hast seen 

(If thou didst see) the last of them. 
I will march out becomingly. 

Eros, O sir! 
Enemies watch all round, and famine waits 
Within. 

Antony. Thou knowest not the prudent sons 


37 


My sword! 


Thou hast brought me balm. 
Lyros. Our lord may have some message for the giver, 


577 


578 ‘APPENDIX 


“Of Egypt; corn and wine have been supplied 
Enough for many years, piled underground. h 
Tho’ stiffened by the sludge of barbarism, 
Or indolent and overgorged at home, 
Briton or German would take heed that none 
Who fought for him should perish for the lack 
Of sustenance : the timid bird herself 
Will hover round and round until she bring 
The grain cried out for in the helpless nest. 
Give me my sword! Is the point sharp ? 
LEyros. In vain 
To trust it now! 
Antony. Come, bring it; let me try it. 
Eros. O heavens and earth! Help! help! no help is nigh, 
No duty left but one: less worthily 
Than willingly this duty I perform. [Stabs himself. 
It pains not: for that blood I see no more.’ 


CLeopaTrA, A Tragedy in one Act, by G. CONRAD (a name assumed, according to 
MOELLER, by Prince GeorcE of Prussia, of whom I know nothing further), appeared 
in 1868. It is in three Scenes; the first two are skilfully devised to introduce the 
third and most important. In the first a dialogue between Iras and Charmion, who 
bears a covered basket of flowers wherein lie the asps, sets forth the resolution of 
the queen to die, and gives occasion to describe the past glories of the voyage on 
the Cydnus, their brilliant feasts, Antony’s death, and Cleopatra’s bearing toward 
Augustus. In the second we have an ardent love-scene beween the queen and Dola- 
bella, wherein the latter is the impassioned lover. Asa proof of his devotion, he 
divulges the secret that Augustus is resolved to lead the queen in triumph in Rome, 
for which Dolabella hates him and implores Cleopatra to fly with himself to some 
paradise, where, amid perfume and flowers, raptures and delight, intoxicated with 
transports, they can lose and forget the world. The queen promises to give him an 
answer before the night is over, and calls him her ‘beloved one’ as, at the approach 
of Augustus, she bids him a hurried farewell. In the third Scene Augustus enters, 
cold, distant, and haughty. In the dialogue which follows we find that Augustus 
represents patriotism, the prosaic, sterner virtues, and simplicity, not unalloyed with 
severity and over-weening ambition ; Cleopatra represents the poesy of life, the joy- 
ousness of art, of love, of sensuous delights, the artist’s vision and the poet’s dream. 
The Egyptian queen invites her Roman conqueror to enter this world of happiness 
which all are struggling to attain. The Spartan virtues are no longer practised ; 
renunciation and submission are a weariness. But Augustus turns a deaf ear to all 
her allurements and asserts that ‘undeterred he will pursue his aims.’ Thereupon 
Cleopatra replies : 

‘ But trust in me, and thou shalt still be happy. 
Before thee shall unfold an unknown life, 
So full, so fair, like nothing else on earth, 
Where every pain, and every care is hushed ; 
The might of beauty, and the glow of passion, 
The fairest bloom of shape, and all the joy, 
To thee unknown, of sweet and magic hours, 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—CONRAD 579 


‘ All these await thee; and ecstatic joy 

Will waft its glowing flames about thy heart. 

O haughty victor! thou art mine! Thou canst 

Not now withstand me! [She turns toward him, as with the 
Augustus. Dare I, Cledpatra, put trust in thee ? keenest rapture. 
Cleopatra. And dost thou doubt me still? What shall I do 

To put far from thee all suspicion ? 

Dost thou desire my crown? I will exchange it 

For my victor’s love. Speak! Dost trust me now ? 

Must I e’en follow thee to Rome? I’m ready. 

Thou dost not shake thy head. Dare I then hope? . 

That I did hate thee once, I’ll not deny. 

Nay, I have even wished thy death. But now 

’Tis far, far different ; it is thy mien 

That now has vanquished me. 
Augustus. Art thou so fickle, queen? How else can I 

Explain this wondrous transformation ? 
Cleopatra. Oh, take me with thee! I am wholly thine! 

I know,—I feel that numbered are my hours; 

Too keen have been my sufferings of late! 

My life has been a never-ending fray. 

Oh, take me with thee, that my dying eyes 

May rest on thine; in gold and purple sheen 

My sun will set, if I’m beloved by thee! ... [She turns to him, as though 

[ Aszde.] He stands unmoved! Disgrace ineffable! inspired. 
Augustus. Let’s change the subject. The royal treasure 

- Appears, together with the Real Estate, 

To be important.—How large the revenue ? 
Cleopatra. [with scorn.] Take what thou wilt.—My sorcery is o’er. 

This grovelling nature is to me abhorrent. 

What knows the blind man of the light of heaven? ... 

Thou praisest virtue but thou show’st it never, 

Thou speak’st of Rome, but seekest thine own glory. 

From thee will spring the abhorrent rule of lies! 


The triumph of vainglorious deceit! [She turns angrily away. 
* * * * 


Dost thou believe the thought can e’er affright me 

Of following thee to Rome? Does there not glow, 

E’en now in Roman breasts, the hope 

Of seeing me, their foe, in thy triumphal train ? 

_ Then take me with thee! Do but make the trial! 

I will outshine the conqueror himself, 

And every Roman cheer will be for me. 
Augustus. 1am thy lord. To me is Rome devoted. 
Cleopatra. Destruction on thee and on all like thee! 

Destruction light on all such grovelling souls! 

To rulers, such as thou, the god who guides 

The destinies of man can ne’er prove gracious. 

?Tis falseness that is gnawing at thy greatness, 


580 APPENDIX 


¢ E’en like a canker at the core of fruits, 

Which outwardly are sound and fair to view, 

But inwardly we find them half decayed. 

Thy laurel crown cannot for long be green! 

Naught that is noble canst thou e’er evoke. 

To end like Antony is far more grand 

Than like Augustus to be living on! [Zxct in haste.’ 

Augustus was stirred more deeply than Cleopatra imagined. He confesses that 
for the first time he now understands her and perceives her hatred of all hypocritcial 
pretence. Her charms of mind and person have subdued him. He will seek her 
and be to her as a divinity bringing consolation and blessing. He draws the cur- 
tain before an inner room and discovers Cleopatra lying lifeless on her couch with 
Tras and Charmian dead beside her. Dolabella rushes in, and, uttering frantic cries 
of grief and horror, falls prostrate before the queen’s couch. Augustus tries to calm 
him, and, to soothe him, promises a future of unequaled glory in Rome. Dolabella 
leaps to his feet and curses Augustus and Rome, who crush all happiness into the 
dust ; then turning to Cleopatra’s corpse with the words, 
‘Only by thee were happiness and life! 

Thou diest, and a world is lost in thee !’ 

stabs himself. ‘A world!’ Augustus utters with pain, and the Curtain falls. 


As this is one of the latest, it is also one of the best of these Versions. The 
inevitable fate of Poesy, to be crushed in any collision with the prosaic world of Fact, 
that awakes too late to find what it has lost, is finely conceived, while the despair of 
Youth at the deathbed of Poetry completes the brilliant picture. 


In 1878 the first performance was given of a version, by FRANZ DINGELSTEDT, of 
Shakespeare’s Antony and Cleopatra; it bore the announcement that it was ‘ freely 
‘translated and re-arranged.’ There are sundry omissions, combinations, re-arrange- 
ments, and trifling additions to smoothe away gaps as far as what, in the version, is 
Act IV, Scene ii, whereof the Scene is laid in ‘Antony’s Palace in Athens;’ it 
is after the battle of Actium; Antony enters, uttering the soliloquy, ‘ Hearke, the 
‘Land bids me tread no more upon’t,’ and shortly after, Cleopatra approaches timidly, 
in an attempt at reconciliation. Thus far DINGELSTEDT’s drama might be leniently 
termed a version. From this point onward, I fear, it can be termed with truth only 
a perversion. Antony is no longer the same character whom we have learned to 
admire and pity, and although he says that Cleopatra’s beck might from the bidding 
of the gods command him, the words have really no meaning; he shows forthwith 
that her full supremacy is gone, and that he loves himself far more than he loves her. 
The same change is apparent in Cleopatra. Two brief sentences of impatient rage 
suffice with her to dethrone the demi-Atlas of the earth and make her resolve to 
throw herself on the protection of Octavius and abandon Antony to his fate. The 
transformation Scene is as follows: When Cleopatra says, ‘Oh, my lord! my lord! 
‘Forgive my fearful sails, I little thought you would have followed them,’ Antony 
springs up, and raging above the kneeling Cleopatra, utters, ‘Thou knew’st too well, 
‘vicious [zsselig] woman, That my heart was to thy rudder tied by the strings, And 
‘thou should’st tow me after,’ etc. Cleopatra throws her arms about him, pleading 
‘Forgive, forgive ;’ and sobs aloud on his breast, whereupon Antony bursts forth, 

‘What? Tears? Treacherous tears! 
Like those shed by the crocodile of thy Nile! 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—DINGELSTEDT 581 


‘ Away, thou venom’d boa-constrictor ! [ Kénigsschlange] 
T’ll tear me free from thine embracing coils 
Before thou sting’st me! Away! Away, I say! [“e dashes out. Eros fol- 
lows, Cleopatra collapses. But after a pause, she arises, and with a 
demoniac expression of face, gazes scornfully after Antony, thereby dis- 
closing the growth in her mind of her resolve to desert him. 

When, in the next Scene, Antony orders Thyreus to be taken away and whipped, 
‘Cleopatra wrings her hands,’ and when Antony continues to storm against her, she 
interrupts with, ‘This, to me! darest thou ” Forsooth, this is enough!’ as 
she utters this latter exclamation she advances passionately toward Antony.’ Alexas, 
Charmian, and Iras interpose with ‘O Queen!’ 

‘ Cleop. Back! and dare not to interpose yourselves 
Betwixt that man and me! [ Zhen i crushing 
zones to Ant.| And who, pray, then art thou? 
That art so high and mighty, —and to me !— 
That dar’st reproach me with disgrace and shame !— 
Thou, sunk and lost in deep dishonour ! [Anz. collapses on a couch. 
Tama queen! But thou art less than nothing! 
Where now, Triumvir, bides thy host, thy fleet ? 
Where, pattern of a husband, is thy wife ? 
Speak ! 
Did’st thou not break thy vows, deep-sworn to me, 
And, with dishonour, bind thyself afresh 
Before from old bonds thou had’st yet been freed ? 
And now,—or do I dream it ?—thou would’st leave 
Me here deserted, for another’s arms, 
Betrayed, behind my back, for vile advantage ? 
What! Thou a man, and let’st the stripling Czesar 
With help of that gross hypocrite, his sister, 
Enmesh thee with his stupid clumsy snares, 
Which artfully he throws about thy horns. 
What! Thou a hero, and, at battle’s height, 
With victory at hand, thou runn’st away, 
Deserting armies, fortune, and thyself, 
Because a woman left thee! A Ruler! 
Thou! thou, who canst not even rule thy heart! 
Thou wretched Roman, learn thou here from me, 
A queen from out the thousand-year-old race 
Of Ptolemies,—of Egypt’s sacred soil 
A worthy daughter,—learn how death is wooed 
When one can live no longer without honour! [Zxtt grandly and with a 
Ant, [beside himself.| Cleopatra !—After her!—But no,— commanding air. 
Too late! We'll ne’er again be as we were. 
And she is right: there’s nought remains but—death.’—p. 107. 

Eros here enters with Thyreus. Antony sends by the latter his personal chal- 
lenge to Cesar. 

It is not worth while to follow the rest of the version, step by step or Scene by 
Scene. Czesar in his camp before Alexandria tells Mzecenas that on the morrow the 
city shall be stormed, if need be; then smilingly adds, ‘ And yet I hardly think it. 


582 APPENDIX 


‘It is not battering rams, but tender fingers 
That will throw open wide the gates forus. [Ad regard him enqutringly. 
My messenger, whom Antony had whipped, 
Has cruelly revenged himself. He stole 
The sole thing Antony had left—Cledpatra. 
She sent us, by Thyreus, full submission 
And made an offer of a firm alliance, 
For which she asks no further for herself, 5; 
Or even for her sons, but Egypt’s crown. [AY are astonished. 
Well, well, that will come round, of course. Meanwhile 
No aid to Antony will she supply ; 
Nay and perchance she’ll give him up to us. 
Although we arm, there will not be a battle. 
I hope Antonius will be taken prisoner. 
He’ll prove attractive in our Roman triumph. 
His exhibition do I owe my city.’—p. 116. 

The Scene changes to Cleopatra’s palace. Alexas tells Cleopatra that Antony is 
furious against her, and for safety conveys her to the royal Pyramids. Antony enters; 
he has been ransacking the palace to find Cleopatra and wreak his vengeance on her, 
—‘he is in full armour and beside himself,’ and calls: 

‘ Where art thou now, Cledpatra? Thou Fury 
Of Hades, where dost keep thyself bestowed ? 
Triple-turned wanton, I am seeking thee, 
To be revenged on thee,—to punish thee! 
On thee alone I now am waging war,— 
A war for life or death! Thy blood, thy warm, 
Sweet, treacherous blood, this do I long to quaff!’—p. 129. 

There is not an alarming amount of perversion in Eros’s suicide, nor in Antony’s 
attempt to imitate him. As Antony lies in a swoon, Cleopatra rushes in, and with 
‘a piercing shriek,’ exclaims, ‘ Antonius—dead?’ Her outcry arouses Antony, who 
raises himself, and addresses her, 

“Is ’t thou, Cledpatra? Hast thou from Orcus, 
Returned to fetch thy dilatory friend ? 
Cleop. No. I’m not dead, and neither shalt thou die! 
T’ll wake thee back to life, e’en with my kissing. 
Ant. [looking vaguely about, notices Alexas.| ’ Twas he who said just now, 
thow’ dst killed thyself ? 
Cleop. He lied. 
Ant, Even here in death, more lies,—lies,—lies! [He curns himself from 
Cleop., Oh, would that I had follow’d him! I thought her dz disgust. 
That I could thus best win my friend again! 
Ant. And therefore die! Behold—I do not lie, 
My death is real. My sight begins to swim, 
Where art thou, Cleopatra ? 


Cleop. Here to beg 
Forgiveness on my knees. 
Ant. Thou art forgiven... 


Already much in life I have forgiven thee, 
And now ...in death... everything!’ 


ACTORS—KNIGHT. DAVIES 583 


Hereupon follows a weak version of Antony’s last speech, with omissions and 
insignificant additions. The Scene of the Fifth Act lies inside a pyramid, with 
mummies in niches in the walls. Antony’s body lies on a catafalque in the middle. 
Mecenas falls desperately in love with Cleopatra ; she repels him, but appeals to 
him to discover Czesar’s intentions with regard to her future. She learns that she is 
to be led in triumph at Rome. All the chief features of her death Scene are pre- 
served, as in Shakespeare. ; 


ACTORS 


The present play of Anthony and Cleopatra is barren, indeed, of adequate records 
of the few actors and actresses who have performed it. The dates of the revivals 
may be found in GENEsT. Comments on the revivals themselves are, in the Zy¢ro- 
duction to the play in Jrving’s Edition, set forth as follows : 

JosrePpH KnicuT (ed. Irving, Zvtroduction, p. 115): Between 1704 and 1706, 
according to Downes, four plays, to be acted by the players of both companies— 
Drury Lane and Lincoln’s Inn Fields—were commanded at Court. First among 
these was A// for Love, in which Betterton appeared as Antony, Verbruggen as Ven- 
tidius, Wilks as Dolabella, Booth as Alexas, Mrs Barry as Cleopatra, and Mrs Brace- 
girdle as Octavia. Concerning these representations Downes says, with every prob- 
ability of truth in his favour, ‘These four plays were well acted and gave great satis- 
‘faction.’ On 3rd December, 1718, at Drury Lane, when the management of Cib- 
ber, Wilks, and Booth was at the height of its good fortune, an important revival 
took place. In this Barton Booth was Antony ; Mills, Ventidius; Wilks, Dolabella ; 
Cibber, Alexas; Mrs Oldfield, Cleopatra; and Mrs Porter, Octavia. Concerning this 
revival Colley Cibber says, ‘The habits of that tragedy amounted to an expense of 
‘near six hundred pounds; a sum unheard of for many years before, on the like 
*occasion’ (AZology, li, 175, 176, ed. 1889). 

[Of this same revival we also find the following : 

Tuomas Davis (ii, 370): In Dryden’s Ad for Love, Booth’s dignified action 
and forcible elocution, in’the part of Antony, attracted the public to that heavy, 
though, in many parts, well written play, six nights successively, without the assist- 
ance of pantomime, or farce, which, at that time, was esteemed something extraor- 
- dinary. But, indeed, he was well supported by an Oldfield, in his Cleopatra, who, 
to a most harmonious, powerful voice and fine person, added grace and elegance of 
gesture. When Booth and Oldfield met in the Second Act, their dignity of deport- 
ment commanded the applause and approbation of the most judicious critics. When 
Antony said to Cleopatra, ‘You promised me your silence, and you break it Ere I 
‘have scarce begun’—this check was so well understood by Oldfield, and answered 
with such propriety of behaviour, that, in Shakespeare’s phrase, her ‘bendings were 
‘adornings.’ The elder Mills acted Ventidius with the true spirit of a rough and 
generous old soldier. To render the play as acceptable to the public as possible, 
Wilkes took the trifling part of Dolabella, nor did Colley Cibber disdain to appear in 
Alexas; these parts would scarcely be accepted now by third-rate actors. Still to 
add more weight to the performance, Octavia was a short character of a Scene or 
two, in which Mrs Porter drew not only respect, but the more affecting approbation 
of tears, from the audience. Since that time, 4/7 for Love has gradually sunk into 
forgetfulness. ] KNIGHT continues : 

While Antony and Cleopatra slept for another seventy years Dryden’s play was 


584 APPENDIX 


revived at Drury Lane, 22nd Mar., 1766, with Powell as Antony and Mrs Yates 
again as Cleopatra; and once more at the same house, still under Garrick’s manage- 
ment, 17th Dec., 1772, with Spranger Barry as Antony, Mrs Barry as Octavia, and 
Miss Younge, for the first time, as Cleopatra. On the 28th of the following March, 
at Covent Garden, Mrs Hartley, whose first season it was, made her first appearance 
as Cleopatra to the Antony of Smith and the Dolabella of Wroughton, With Miss 
Younge and Smith in the principal parts A// for Love was played at Drury Lane on 
12th May, 1775, and 13th March, 1776. With Smith as Antony, and Miss Yates from 
Drury Lane as Cleopatra, with West Digges as Ventidius, and Farren as Dolabella, 
it was given at Covent Garden 8th Jan., and 5th Feb., 1779. 

In Dryden’s AZ for Love, and not in Shakespeare’s Antony and Cleopatra, Mrs 
Siddons essayed, at Drury Lane, 5th May, 1788, the character of Cleopatra, Kemble 
being the Antony; Palmer, Ventidius; Barrymore, Dolabella; and Mrs Ward, 
Octavia. That the performance by Mrs Siddons of a character so suited to her 
powers was fine may be assumed. Not being in Shakespeare, however, it calls for 
no further comment than the statement that Boaden (Lzfe of Siddons, ii, 243) says 
that she showed ‘the daring atrocity of crime,’ and adds, with sub-acid banter, that 
‘the notion of frailty was visually banished.’ Campbell (Zzfe of Siddons, ii, 127) 
suggests that Octavia would under certain conditions have been a better part for the 
actress than Cleopatra; and says that ‘ she never established “ the Siren of the Nile”’ 
‘among her popular characters.’ On 24th May, 1790, at Covent Garden, Miss Brun- 
ton played Cleopatra to the Antony of Holman; and on 12th Jan., 1818, at Bath, 
Conway, the unfortunate actor, treated with so much perverse cruelty by Hazlitt and 
Theodore Hook, was the Antony to the Cleopatra of Miss Somerville, afterwards 
Mrs Bunn... . 

In November, 1833, Macready produced at Covent Garden an acting version of 
Antony and Cleopatra. The great feature of the revival was the scenery by Clark- 
son Stanfield. [According to Macready’s own diary the revival was not eminently 
successful.] ... 

Antony and Cleopatra was naturally included in the series of revivals of Shake- 
speare undertaken by the Phelps and Greenwood management at Sadler’s Wells. It 
was first played 22nd October, 1850, with Phelps as Antony, G. K. Dickinson as 
Octavius, Henry Marston as Sextus Pompeius, George Kenrick as Enobarbus, and 
Miss Glyn as Cleopatra. This was one of the most successful of the Sadler’s Wells 
revivals, and elicited much approval. Miss Glyn’s performance of Cleopatra was 
the crowning triumph of her career. In personal appearance she conformed to the 
requirements of Talfourd, namely, ‘a figure of voluptuous majesty, a mingling of 
‘dazzling beauty and intellectual command.’ In her death scene she was pro- 
nounced equal to Pasta. 


C. E. Pascor (Dramatic List, London, 1880, p. 158): In portraying the 
enchantress, Cleopatra, Miss Glyn had occasion to draw upon the entire resources 
of her art. The variety and fascination of the character she touched to admiration. 
The caprice, the grace, the pride of the character were exhibited with a power which 
exceeded expectation. It was evident that she had made a profound and industrious 
study of the part. The whole portrait was thrown out with decision and force, and 
richly coloured. Those parts in which dignity and anger were expressed—such as 
the interview with the messenger after Antony’s second marriage—were given with 
a vehemence and power corresponding to the language she had to deliver. But it 


CAPELL’S VERSION 585 


was in the Fifth Act, when preparing for her death, that the better phases of the 
character and the more refined parts of the action tested the fitness of the actress for 
this assumption. Indignant majesty, compulsory resignation, heroic resolve, and 
tender memory, were all adequately pronounced. The death itself was a triumph. 
—Atheneum, 27 October, 1849. 

Is1p. (p. 160) : After some years’ absence from the stage, in May, 1867 [Miss 
GLYN] reappeared at the Princess’s Theatre, as Cleopatra, and according to The 
Atheneum (May 18, 1867), ‘the triumph of the evening was the assumption by Miss 
‘Glyn of Cleopatra. ‘The witchery of the blandishments, the Asiatic undulations of 
‘the form, the variety of the enchantments, the changes of mood, the impetuous pas- 
‘sion, and in the end the noble resignation—all these points were brought out with 
‘an accuracy of elocution and with a force of genius which left no doubt on the mind 
‘that Miss Glyn is as great an actress as ever adorned the English stage.’ 

ANON. (Atheneum, 27 Sept., 1873): A man need scarcely be a veteran stage- 
goer to recollect when Miss Glyn, at Sadler’s Wells, gave an embodiment of Cleo- 
patra, which came as near a realisation of the ‘serpent of old Nile’ as anything 
modern art can afford. This impersonation was repeated at the Standard first, and 
subsequently at the Princess’s, with no alteration of Shakespeare’s text. [On the 
revival referred to in this notice, JosepH KnicuT (Zztrod. of. cit., p. 119) has the 
following remarks]: Mr James Anderson appeared as Antony, and Miss Wallis, then 
almost a debutante, as Cleopatra. The piece had been arranged with a view to 
spectacular effect, and with no very reverend hand, by Andrew Halliday, and the 
general cast was far from strong. Mr Anderson’s performance of Antony was pic- 
turesque and vigorous, but old-fashioned ; Miss Wallis’s qualifications for Cleopatra 
did not extend beyond good looks and some elocutionary ability, and the production 
was one of those experiments on the strength of which Chatterton, by whom it was 
tried, put forward the famous managerial dictum that ‘Shakespeare spelt ruin.’ 

[For the latest revival, by Mr Tree, see p. 591.] 


CAPELL’S VERSION 


The Version which EDWARD CAPELL made for GARRICK has the following title: 
‘ANTONY and CLEOPATRA | an historical Play, | written by | WILLIAM SHAKE- 
“SPEARE: | fitted for the Stage by abridging only ; | and now acted, at the | Theatre- 
‘ Royal in Drury-Lane, | by his Majesty’s Servants. | No grave upon the earth shall 
‘clip in it A pair so famous. p. 99. | Lonpon: | Printed for J. and R. TONSON 7 
‘the Strand.| MDCCLVIII.’ On the next page is the following : 

To the right honourable, and worthy of 
all Titles, the Countess of * "3 
Why, from the throne where BEAUTY sits SUPREME 
and countless emanations deals below, 
infus’d and fix’d in Woman’s shining frame, 
doth so large portion of his wonder flow ? 
why, but to rule the tread of human woe, 
and point our erring feet where joys abide: 
But (ah, the pity!) to a traitor flame, 
weak, wavering, wild, the heav’n-born ray is ty’d, 
and man, confiding man, from bliss estranged wide. 


586 APPENDIX 


Daughters of Zritain, scorn the garish fire, 
exile the meteor to it’s Pharzan grave ; 

sincerer flames from Virtue’s heights aspire, 
that brighten beauty, and from sorrow save : 
High o’er the rest, see, what fair hand doth wave 

a deathless torch; and calls you to the shrine, 

where only beauty only bliss entire! 

follow the branch of much-lov’d * *’s line, 

and from those altars mend, with her, the ray divine. 
Lenoto. 
Oct3di757. 


In the Zextwal Notes on the preceding pages, the various readings of this Version, 
where they decidedly differ from CAPELL’s own text, are duly recorded. To avoid 
confusion I have designated this Version as GARRICK’S, abbreviated ‘Gar.’ It has 
received the following notices: 

T. Davies (ii, 369): Antony and Cleopatra had long lain dormant, I believe ever 
since it was first exhibited, when, about the year 1760, Mr Garrick, from his passion- 
ate desire to give the public as much of their admired poet as possible, revived it, as 
altered by Mr Capell, with all the advantages of new scenes, habits, and other deco- 
rations proper to the play. However, it did not answer his own and the public 
expectation. It must be confessed, that, in Antony, he wanted one necessary accom- 
plishment: his person was not sufficiently important and commanding to represent 
the part. There is more dignity of action than variety of passion in the character, 
though it is not deficient in the latter. The actor, who is obliged continually to 
traverse the stage, should from person attract respect, as well as from the power of 
speech. Mrs Yates was then a young actress, and had not manifested such proofs 
of genius, and such admirable elocution, as she has since displayed: but her fine 
figure and pleasing manner of speaking were well adapted to the enchanting Cleo- 
patra. Mossop wanted the essential part of Enobarbus, humour. 

J. GenesT (Vol. iv, p. 544, D.L., 1758-1759): Shakspeare’s play, acted six 
times, was adapted to the stage by abridging and transposing only,—Capell’s alter- 
ation is judicious on the whole, but might have been better,—for the convenience of 
representation it was right to reduce the number of characters, but this is done with- 
out any regard to propriety—the speech with which Philo opens the play, and the 
famous description of Cleopatra on the Cydnus (taken from Enobarbus) are given to 
Thyreiis—if a change were to be made it should certainly have been made in favour 
of some Roman of consequence on Antony’s side, not in favour of Thyretis, who was 
Cesar’s freedman, and who had never seen Cleopatra till he was sent with a message 
to her, as in the 7Aird Act of the play,—what the Soldier and Scarus say in the 
Third and Fourth Acts is absurdly given to Diomedes, who was only Secretary to 
Cleopatra and could have nothing to do with military concerns—in the Second Act 
Antony says—‘ If we compose well here, to Parthia: “‘ Hark you Ventidius.”’ Capell 
has changed the name to Canidius, which was wrong, as Ventidius was the person 
really sent to oppose the Parthians. Garrick revived this play with all the advantages 
of new scenes, habits, and decorations, but it did not answer his expectation—his own 
person was not sufficiently important for Antony ; and Mrs Yates had not perhaps at 
this time displayed abilities equal to the representation of Shakspeare’s best female 
character, Lady Macbeth excepted. 


VERSION ATTRIBUTED TO KEMBLE 587 


J. Knicut (Zrving Ed. Introd., p. 117): It is melancholy to find, though the 
fault appears to have been principally attributable to the actors, that this long-deferred 
production of [Capell’s Version] was not a success. After half a dozen repetitions 
the piece was withdrawn. Why Garrick should not have been a good Antony is not 
easily seen. He was not, however. Mrs Yates, meanwhile, though popular as 
Lady Macbeth, won little recognition in other important female characters of Shake- 
speare, and made no impression as Cleopatra. Few of Garrick’s revivals attracted 
less attention. Davies and Murphy in their biographies leave it unmentioned. Dr 
Doran, without advancing any authority, speaks of it as the great event of its season, 
and says, with what almost sounds like disingenuousness, but is only carelessness, that 
Garrick and Mrs Yates gained ‘even more laurels as Zamti and Mandane in the 
‘Orphan of China’ than in Antony and Cleopatra, in which they gained none at all. 
Mr Percy Fitzgerald confesses it a failure. 


VERSION ATTRIBUTED TO KEMBLE 


In 1813 there appeared SHAKSPEARE’S Tragedy of ANTONY and CLEOPATRA; 
with alterations, and with additions from DRYDEN ; as now perform’d at the THEATRE- 
ROYAL, CovENT-GARDEN. Mr Abbot appeared as Octavius; Mr Young as Antony ; 
Mr Barrymore as Lepidus; Mr Egerton as Enobarbus; Mrs Faucit as Cleopatra ; 
Miss Cooke and Mrs Watts as Charmion and Iras; Mrs M’Gibbon as Octavia. The 
object of the Compiler of this Verston (who is said to have been KEMBLE, but with- 
out sufficient foundation) is set forth in an ‘Advertisement,’ prefixed to the Text; 
very briefly stated, this object appears to have been to weld into one play the beauties 
of Shakespeare’s Anthony and Cleopatra and of Dryden’s Al for Love, after having 
eliminated from the former the features which tend to render it unacceptable to the 
public, and from the latter those weaknesses that have caused it to decline in popu- 
larity, or, in short, as the author expresses it, ‘an amalgamation of wonderful poetical 
‘powers.’ The various readings, transpositions, and additions have not been recorded 
in the Zextual Notes on the preceding pages of this volume; within a space so 
restricted it would have been impossible to render them intelligible. In place 
thereof a description of this ‘amalgamation’ is here given which will convey an 
idea of the Version, as a whole, far more clearly than can be conveyed by any 7ex¢ual 
Notes. This description is by GENEST. (I happen to have Genest’s own copy and 
almost every page bears witness to the fidelity with which he performed his task. ) 
It is found in his vol. viii, p. 417, ef seg. as follows: 

‘ First Act does not differ materially from the original [z. e. Shakespeare’s ]— 
Modena and Charmian are properly changed to Mutina and Charmion—but Maré 
Antony should have been altered to Mare Antony, as in the bill—the letter 4 ina 
Roman name is an unpardonable solecism. Second Act, begins with Shakespeare’s 
Second Scene, but the conclusion of it, in which Enobarbus describes Cleopatra on 
the Cydnus, is most injudiciously omitted—Capell has transposed it—then follows 
Shakespeare’s Fifth Scene with Cleopatra and her attendants—next comes an unim- 
portant Scene between Antony and Octavia at Athens—this is from Shakespeare’s 
Third Act—Cleopatra, etc., are discovered at Alexandria—the first part of this Scene 
is chiefly from Shakespeare, but when Antony enters, the remainder of the 4c¢ is from 
Dryden—Dryden’s Scene is a very good one, but it is not introduced in this place 
with propriety—in Dryden’s play, Ventidius in the “77st Act estranges Antony from 
Cleopatra, after which, naturally follows the Scene in which Antony reproaches her— 
but the Editor of the present play reverses the order of things, and makes Dryden’s 


588 APPENDIX 


Second Scene precede his First—in Dryden’s play the Scene lies the whole time at 
Alexandria, but in this alteration Antony is represented as coming back to Egypt 
merely to tell Cleopatra that they must part—which is not only contrary to the fact, 
but absurd in itself—there was nothing like a quarrel between Antony and Cleopatra 
until after the battle of Actium. Zhérd Act begins with the Sixth Scene of Shake- 
speare’s Third Act—then follows the Seventh Scene—the battle of Actium takes 
place in the sight of the audience—and the Act is concluded from Shakespeare with 
slight alterations. Fourth Act is nearly the whole of it from Dryden—the celebrated 
Scene between Antony and Ventidius is introduced with propriety—that in which 
Ventidius leads on Octavia, might have been spared—and the one from Dryden, 
which is improperly inserted in the Second Act, might have been substituted for it— 
Octavia’s coming to Antony in Egypt is a poetical fiction on the part of Dryden, and 
the Scene itself is not equal in merit to the Scenes of Shakespeare, which are left out 
to make room for it—Dryden’s description of Cleopatra on the Cydnus is omitted. 
Fifth Act is made up from Shakespeare and Dryden—Ventidius kills himself as in 
Dryden—when Antony has fallen on his sword, the play is concluded from Shake- 
speare—Ceesar and his party enter—after which, the Scene changes to the interior of 
the monument—Antony, Cleopatra, etc. are discovered—Antony dies—and the Act 
proceeds as in Shakespeare, but with great omissions—Cleopatra’s speeches are sadly 
mutilated—the play concludes with two short Scenes, partly from Shakespeare—and 
a grand funeral procession. 

‘This alteration is attributed to Kemble—but his name does not appear in the title- 
page—Capell’s alteration is the better of the two—the modern editor omits too much 
of Shakespeare—yet it must be allowed, that no person has altered one of Shake- 
speare’s plays materially, and has yet succeeded so well—the reason is obvious—he 
has selected the best parts of Dryden’s best Tragedy, instead of patching up a play, 
with stuff of his own invention, as Davenant, Tate, Cibber, etc., have done. 

‘This revival of Antony and Cleopatra did not meet with the success it deserved— 
it ought not however to have been brought forward without a first rate actress in 
Cleopatra—Mrs Siddons would have made a glorious part of Cleopatra (supposing 
the part not to have been mutilated) and perhaps have fixed the play in the favour 
of the public—she had been more than once or twice solicited by Kemble to act 
Shakespeare’s Cleopatra, but she continually declined for a very foolish reason—she 
said she should hate herself, if she should play the part as it ought to be played.’ 

Genest mentions ‘a grand funeral procession’ with which the play ended, but he 
does not refer to an ‘ Epicedium’ which was sung at the same time. It begins with 
a Chorus which will, I think, amply serve as a specimen: 

‘Cold in death the Hero lies ; 
Nerveless, now, the Victor’s arm; 
Quench’d the light’ ning of his eyes, 
The Foe to daunt, the Fair to charm, 
Mourn, soldiers, mourn! your day is done; 
Valour has lost its cheering sun ; 
The Roman Glory sets on Egypt’s shore, 
And great Mark Antony will rise no more.’—etc. 


KEMBLE’S VERSION 


In the Zextual Notes on the preceding pages of this present volume there occurs, 
not infrequently, the name ‘Kemble.’ Let it not be supposed that reference is 


KEMBLE’S VERSION 589 


hereby made to this Verston of 1813, just described by Genest. It refers toa AZS 
Stage-copy of this play, with Stage-directions in the handwriting of J. P. KEMBLE. 
This copy has been kindly lent to me by my highly valued friend, H. C. Foierr, jr., 
of Brooklyn, New York, who bought it at the sale of the library of Lawrence Doyle, 
of Dublin, at Sotheby’s, December, 1898, in whose catalogue it was described as 
‘J. P. Kemble’s copy with MS notes, stage-directions, etc., in his autograph. Note 
‘on fly-leaf, «G. Lamb, bought at Kemble’s sale, 1821.’?’ The notes, stage-direc- 
tions, etc., are unquestionably in Kemble’s autograph, which is familiar to me. 

The principle which seems to have rigidly guided Kemble in constructing this 
Version is omission ; there are not many transpositions, and no additions of moment. 
How extensive is this omission may be seen at once from the Dramatis Persone, 
from whom, as given in Steevens’s edition of 1793 (the edition which Kemble would 
have probably used), Kemble has omitted Pompey, Ventidius, Scarus, Dercetas, 
Demetrius, Philo, Dolabella, Proculeius, Menas, Menecrates, Taurus, Canidius, 
Euphronius, Mardian, and Diomedes ; in all fifteen characters; in reality fourteen. 
Kemble has a new character, Titius by name, a friend of Antony, and highly accom- 
modating in filling odd gaps. Hereby the thirty-four characters in Steevens’s edition 
are reduced to twenty in Kemble’s Version. It is evident, at once, that, by this reduc- 
tion in the characters, the play is shortened by many hundred lines. In the following 
description no reference is made to the Scenes where those characters appear that 
Kemble has omitted ; in speaking of Scenes ‘in the original,’ the Scenes in the Glove 
L£dition are referred to. 

The directions for the setting of the stage at the opening of the Play are as fol- 
lows: ‘The Palace in Alexandria should be of the most magnificent orders of the 
‘purest Grecian architecture; yet the decorations and furniture of every apartment 
‘should remind one that the scene lies in Egypt. Portico of the Palace: Stage open 
‘as far back as possible. View of the sea, ships, etc., The Pharos, Pompey’s Pillar, 
‘Cleopatra’s Obelisk, Statues of Hercules, Alexander, Anubis.’ At the foot of the 
page, Kemble, in the spirit of a true scholar, notes his authorities : ‘ Norden’s Antiq- 
‘uities of Egypt. Montfaucon. Mr Knight’s Antiques.’ 

The /irst Scene opens with a conversation between Thyreus and Enobarbus ; after 
the first ten lines, which in the original are spoken by Philo, but here by Enobarbus, 
the latter gives the description of Cleopatra and her barge on the Cydnus. When 
Antony and Cleopatra enter, the Sceze continues to the end unchanged as in the 
original. The first eighty lines of the Second Scene are omitted, and then Shake- 
speare’s Scene continues with some minor omissions to the end. The 7hird Scene 
remains unchanged, as do also the Fourth and fifth, with trifling omissions, and the 
First Actends. The Second Scene of the Second Act follows the original, with the 
exception of twenty or thirty lines omitted here and there together with the description 
of Cleopatra on the Cydnus which has been transferred to the Azrst Scene in the play. 
The Zhird Scene of the original is omitted, and instead the Fourth is retained, and 
to it is added an abridgement of the first twenty lines of Act /7/, Scene ii. The 
Fifth Scene of the original (Kemble’s 7/zrd Scene) is retained with trifling omissions, 
The Messenger, Kemble calls Seleucus. Kemble’s Fourth Scene of Act LI. is com- 
posed of the Fourth and Fifth Scenes of Act I//. of the original, and after Octavia 
leaves (III, iv, 31) the Soothsayer enters, exclaiming, ‘Antony! Antony! Antony ! 
‘You, that wish yourself in Egypt.’ Antony demands, ‘ What would you?’ and then 
follows Act ZZ, iii, from line 10 to ‘I’the east my pleasure lies,’ with the omission of 
a line or two. Kemble’s II, v. is III, iii. of the original. Kemble’s II, vi. is III, vi. 


590 APPENDIX 


of the original, but very slightly ‘cut.’ With this Scere Kemble’s Act //. ends, his 
Act ITT. begins with III, vii. of the original. This ending and this beginning are the 
same as in Capell’s Version, and much can be said in favour of the division at this 
point. The few words Canidius speaks in this Scene are, in Kemble’s, spoken by 
Enobarbus. Scene ii.in Kemble is Scene viii. of the original, whereof Scene ix. Kem- 
ble omits, and begins his Scene iii. with Scene x. of the original. At its close Eno- 
barbus (Canidius in the original) after line 27 adds the lines which he says aside in 
III, xiii. ‘ Mine honesty and I begin to square,’ etc. Kemble’s Scene iv, with little 
variation, is Scene xi. of the original. Kemble’s Scene v. is the same as Scene xii. 
except that Euphronius is Kemble’s Eros; his Scene vi. is Scene xiii, to the end of 
Act IIT, in the original, but Kemble continues the Sceze by keeping Enobarbus on 
the stage, and, omitting Act [V, Scene i. of the original, has ‘ Re-enter Antony and 
‘Eros’; Antony at once begins ‘ He will not fight with me Domitius,’ etc., and so 
on to the end of the Scewe as in the original, except that Cleopatra is omitted; it is 
Eros, and not Cleopatra therefore who asks Enobarbus aside, ‘ What does he mean ?’” 
This Scene concludes Kemble’s Act Z//.; his Act JV. begins at IV, iv, 18, and, 
omitting Cleopatra and Charmian, continues through Scene v. of the original. Kem- 
ble’s Scewe ii. comprises the first ten lines of IV, vi. of the original. His Scene iii. 
begins with IV, viii, 1, and, after inserting eight or ten lines from the preceding Scene 
(IV, vii, 4-17), continues the Sceze as in the original. Kemble’s Scene iv. is com- 
posite ; it begins with the Sentinels on their post (‘Silius and Varius’ in Kemble) 
asin IV, ix. Enobarbus enters; his address to the moon is followed by his reflec- 
tions in IV, vi, 16 ‘ Alexas did revolt,’ etc., through the rest of that Scene where his 
treasure is returned to him by Antony (IV, vi, 20-39). Act 7V, Scene ix. is then 
resumed and the last five lines of his dying speech closes the Sceze. Kemble’s 
Scene v. begins with Scene x, and, omitting Scewe xi. Cleopatra’s entrance and the 
lines addressed to her, as well as sundry others, ends with ‘she dies for’t. Eros ho!’ 
IV, xii, 57. Kemble’s Scene vi. is the same as Scene xiii; his Sceze vii. is the same 
as Scene xiv, with few omissions, the longest is from line 104-113. Kemble’s Scene 
viii. is as follows: ‘ Alexandria, A Street. Mournful Music. Titius and Guards pass 
‘towards the Monument, bearing Antony on his Litter.’ Kemble’s Scere ix. follows 
very closely Scene xv, and with dct JV. ends. Kemble’s /7/th Act adheres closely 
throughout to the original. The longest omissions are the episode of Seleucus and 
the Clown with the asps; and the most notable transpositions are the lines (62-72) 
‘T’ll not wait pinion’d at great Czesar’s court’ down to ‘And hang me up in chains’ 
—which are transposed to follow Cleopatra’s directions to Charmian about the asps, 
line 228. In Kemble, Cleopatra says ‘Come hither Charmian [ Whispers Charmian.] 
‘Char. The aspics, Madam! CYeop. I’ve spoke already and it is provided.’ Lines 
208-226 are omitted. 


This Version was made by a man of rare intelligence, an excellent judge of stage- 
effect, a scholar, and reverential admirer of Shakespeare. If the play must be 
abbreviated to meet the requirements of the modern stage, it is not easy to see how 
it can be done more judiciously. J have deemed it befitting to give a description of 
it, thus minute, because, as far as I know, it exists only in manuscript. 


ACTORS—BEERBOHM TREE sl 


- WHILE these pages are going through the press, word comes from London of a 
Revival there, unprecedented for splendour and sumptuousness, by Mr BEERBOHM 
TREE. The performance is thus spoken of by the London Times, January 4, 1907: 

‘[ Antony and Cleopatra] is one of the classics of what M. Porto-Riche would 
call the Théatre de ? Amour. Mr Bernard Shaw would give its theme a less elegant 
name, “sexual infatuation.” Cleopatra is the irresistible enchantress, Antony the 
colossal lover, and the whole play must burn to a white heat with their fire. . 
Nevertheless, if you present Antony and Cleopatra at all, you must present it, above 
everything, as a treatment of “sexual infatuation”? in the grand style. And that is 
just what Mr Tree has perceived and has done.... [Mr Tree] has the supreme 
quality of thinking out the master-idea of a play, of disengaging its essential essence, 
and of comprehending the play “in its quiddity.” To get at the heart of the play, 
and to exhibit that heart to you, he will boldly lop here and still more boldly add 
there—and who shall blame him? The pedants, no doubt; but certainly not the 
great body of playgoers who come to Shakespeare, as they come to any other dram- 
atist, simply and solely to get what pleasure they can out of him,—and whose pleasure 
is dependent upon the clearness, the unity, of what is put before them. . . . Where is 
that unity in Axtony and Cleopatra ? Is it in the Imperial Roman motif? No; 
that is merely North’s Plutarch cut up into blank verse, and taken by itself would 
be as dull as ditch water. Is it in the Octavia mo¢df, the contrast of the ultra-respect- 
able matron, the pattern of domesticity, with the voluptuous orchidaceous Cleopatra ? 
No; that is a mere additional touch of art. It is in the passion-szo/7f of Cleopatra 
and Antony, there and not elsewhere; and it is upon that motif that Mr Tree con- 
centrates the whole force of his stage. Hence the scenes in ‘‘ Czsar’s House’’ are 
cut very short indeed. Hence the “camp”’ scenes become mere kinematographs. 
Hence the passionate duologue between Antony and Cleopatra is given all the advan- 
tage of scenic magnificence and orchestral illustration. Egypt, not Rome nor Athens 
nor Misenum, becomes the “hub” of the play. ... A dissolving vision of the Sphinx 
opens and closes the play. Weird nerve-thrilling Oriental strains are in the air. 
You hear those same strains even in Rome or Athens—on the Wagnerian plan— 
whenever Antony’s thoughts turn to the far-away Cleopatra. For example, Antony 
has just parted, not without conjugal tenderness, from Octavia. He seems, for once, 
to have in him the makings of a model home-loving husband. But there swiftly 
enters a messenger—Cleopatra’s trusty messenger—with a scroll. Antony falls on 
his couch, murmuring “ Cleopatra,’’ and covering his eyes that he may shut out the 
present scene and dream of her, again to the faint sound of the Oriental music. You 
will search in vain for any indication of this “business” in Shakespeare ; but it is 
ingeniously, and quite legitimately, invented; it helps the unity of impression. 
Another example: in the text Czesar describes Antony’s return to Alexandria, how 
“T’ th’ market place on a Tribunal silver’d” [etc. III, vi, 4-9; 17-19]. All this 
Mr Tree actually shows you in a silent and yet extraordinarily eloquent tableau, which 
will, perhaps, vex text-worshippers, but certainly will delight everybody else... . 
One hardly knows which to admire most, the gorgeous interior of the palace in 
which Cleopatra loves and languishes, or the mysterious cavern-like vastness of the 
“ Monument,” wherein she so nobly dies. Another masterpiece both of stage-car- 
pentry and of stage management is the deck of Pompey’s galley, where the Trum- 
virs and their officers get so imperially drunk. . . . It would be unjust not to mention 
the name of the designer of the costumes, Mr Percy Macquoid. .. . Mr Tree him- 
self makes a fine figure of Antony. He does not fall into the error of showing him 


592 APPENDIX 


as a mere sensual weakling, “ passion’s slave.’’ Indeed his voluptuous thrills, even 
when he is encircled by Cleopatra’s arms, seem to lack something of responsive 
warmth. No doubt Mr Tree will become more demonstratively amorous by and by. 
Meanwhile you cannot help liking his Antony—which, of course, is quite the right 
frame of mind. The Octavius of Mr Basil Gill and the Pompey of Mr Julian 
L’Estrange are both excellent performances—they are proper “ Plutarch’s men”’ and 
speak their lines roundly. Excellent, too, the Enobarbus of Mr Lyn Harding, good 
to look at and atreat to hear. His “ purple patch” describing Cleopatra’s galley 
could not be better delivered. The helpless intoxication of Lepidus on board Pom- 
pey’s ship loses nothing of its grotesque repulsiveness in the hands of Mr Norman 
Forbes; Mr Fisher White makes a quite remarkable thing of the Soothsayer; and 
the unhappy messenger who is so bullied and terrified by the jealous Cleopatra is 
very cleverly played by Mr Charles Quartermaine. 

But Cleopatra herself? Everything in this play depends upon her. It is a terri- 
bly exacting part for any actress. She must have beauty, of course, and, what is 
even more important, she must have glamour. She must be able to run at a rapid 
sweep through the whole gamut of emotion—from dove-like cooings to the rage of a 
tigress, from voluptuous languor to passion all aflame, from the frenzy of a virago to 
the calm and statuesque majesty of one of the noblest death-scenes in all Shake- 
speare. It is a great ordeal for Miss Constance Collier. One trembled for her 
beforehand, but quite needlessly as it turns out, for she not only looks but plays the 
part splendidly. An occasional touch of our modern ‘fine spoken’”’ accent, which 
jars against the music of Shakespearian verse is the only blemish in what is on the 
whole, as Enobarbus says of the Queen, ‘‘ a wonderful piece of work.’’ ’ 


? 


THE DAILY TELEGRAPH (28 December, 1906) : Never, probably, in his career 
has Mr Tree given us a more perfect stage adornment than that which he displays in 
Antony & Cleopatra. The gradation of colours, the delicate shades of violet, and 
puce, and purple, the glittering robes of the Queen, the pomp and ceremony of her 
court,—all these things, controlled by the practised artistry of Mr Percy Macquoid, 
add to the pleasure of the eye, and give bodily semblance to the inner meaning of 
the play. If for nothing else, the production would be extraordinary because of its 
stage pictures. The first glimpse of the landing-stage of Cleopatra’s palace, with 
the barge that draws up to the steps, from which issue the regal pair of lovers; the 
beautiful gold-bedizened scene, when Cleopatra wreaks her vengeance on the 
messenger telling of Antony’s betrothal; the magnificent tableau of the return of 
Antony to Alexandria; above all, perhaps, the scene on Pompey’s galley, where, in 
the mysterious dark, lit by the fantastically-coloured lamps at the poop, the triumvirs 
watch the dancing-girls, and themselves join in a mad debauch—these and other 
pictures prove once more that whatever else we may have succeeded or failed in 
doing on the modern stage, we have advanced the ordinary scenic artifices to a pitch 
of success which was not dreamed of by our forefathers. In this, above all, lies the 
triumph of last night’s play, on which Mr Tree is warmly to be congratulated. . . . 

Certainly the piece is very well played. Miss Constance Collier, handsome, 
dark-skinned, barbaric, dominates the scene wherever she appears. Nor has she 
ever had a better chance, or more fully availed herself of it, than when in the second 
act she has to prove how close the tiger’s cruelty lies under the sleek skin of the 
cultivated woman. Mr Tree’s Mark Antony was a fine, masculine, resolute rendering 
of a hero ruined by love. There is not much subtlety or complexity in the part. 


ACTORS—BEERBOHM TREE 593 


Antony is the Samson caught by Delilah; a sort of primitive, elemental hero, whose 
degradation is all the more sure because his intellect is so inferior to his heart. And 
this is precisely the hero whom Mr Tree so skilfully rendered. Apart from these two 
principal personages, there were many others who gained a significant success on the 
boards. Mr Basil Gill was very alert and vivid in the part of Octavius Czsar, saying 
his lines with that prompt energy which belongs to the nature of the Shakespearian 
conqueror, Mr Norman Forbes gave adequate presentment of the weakness of 
Lepidus, an invaluable help in the evolution of the play, keeping the figure within 
its proper limits, as wholly subordinate, yet illustrative of the increasing degeneracy 
of the Roman. Mr Lyn Harding’s Enobarbus was also a fine performance, pictur- 
esque, and varied, done with admirable lightness and no little artistic skill; while 
Mr Julian L’Estrange, in such brief opportunities as he possessed, gave a firm sketch 
of Sextus Pompeius. Cleopatra’s two attendants, Iras and Charmian, were both 
excellent—especially, perhaps, Charmian, as played by Miss Alice Crawford, who 
revealed real dramatic power in the last act, and throughout presented a beautiful 
picture of Eastern womanhood. Nor ought we to forget the dignified Sooth-sayer of 
Mr J. Fisher White—a characteristic personage, who at various crises in the story 
illustrated before our eyes the noiseless steps of on-coming Destiny. 

It would be interesting, also, if it were possible, to recount all those clever 
adaptations and contrivances by means of which so diffuse a play was brought within 
manageable compass on the stage. We must limit ourselves, however, to one 
example, where Shakespeare has given a real difficulty to the stage manager. Antony 
who has tried, very imperfectly, to commit suicide, is lying outside the walls of Alex- 
andria. Cleopatra and her maids have taken refuge inthe monument. The problem 
is how to get the wounded man into the monument, in order that the final scene of 
death may be enacted before us. Mr Tree solves it as follows. In the gloom of 
on-coming night the fallen hero, Mark Antony, is carried to the bottom of the walls, 
and above, at a window, Cleopatra is looking out, to answer the cry of her defeated 
lover. As the lights go out we see the body being hoisted upwards to the window ; 
then, by a quick change, we are transported to the interior of the monument, and 
once more see Antony being lifted inwards through the open window, and brought 
to the couch to receive Cleopatra’s farewell. It was a clever bit of stage work, 
which gave a complete and satisfactory impression without any lack of verisimilitude. 


THe ATHENZUM (5 January, 1907): For the first time, so far as records extend, 
Antony and Cleopatra has been set upon the stage in a manner worthy of the place 
it occupies in the Shakespearian drama, and its reception,—not that accorded it by 
the first night’s public at His Majesty’s, but the lasting empire it exercises over the 
play-going world,—should settle definitely its claims to rank among the great acting 
plays.... As re-arranged by Andrew Halliday, the piece was produced at Drury 
Lane in 1873. At the Standard it was also given; and in Manchester there was a 
noteworthy revival. The experiment of Mrs Langtry; that of Madame Bernhardt, 
which, however, was in Sardou, not Shakespeare; and that, sadly misjudged, of 
Signora Duse, belong to days comparatively modern. Irving, urged to present the 
play at the Lyceum, was discouraged by its record of indifferent success. Among 
these efforts, that of Mr Tree is the most serious,—it might almost be said the sole 
serious attempt. That in 1873 at Drury Lane came nearest to it in splendour and 
had acertain amount of imaginative grace.... In the case of Antony and Cleopatra 
it is impossible to regard with favour the restrictions upon scenic display which some 


38 


504 APPENDIX 


sticklers for the text, and nothing but the text, would have us observe. Here, if any- 
where, is to be shown the full splendour of a court in which Egypt strove, if not with 
Assyria, with Rome in wealth and luxury, when Cleopatra wore, as now she wears 
the garb of Isis and accepted her worship, and her regal lover took on him the state 
and splendour of his ancestor, Hercules. Nowise burdensome is the environment 
Mr Tree provides. It is on the contrary splendidly helpful and serviceable, as well 
as pleasurable to the spectator. As regards the mounting, it is not only the best that 
has been given to this play—it may be regarded as the best that has been bestowed 
upon any work of the author.... A splendid effect is realized in the scene at the 
portals of Cleopatra’s Palace where the royal lovers arrive at the river front and 
disembark. Still more superb is that in which, apparelled like Isis, the queen greets 
her returning warrior. As an example of scenic decoration and pageantry this is 
unequalled. More sedate in beauty, but still unsurpassable, is that in the Palace in 
which Cleopatra receives the unfortunate messenger who brings her intelligence of 
the marriage of Antony and Octavia. Very fine, too, is the picture of debauch on 
the galley of Pompey. A word of special praise is deserved by the costumes of the 
Roman warriors, which are perfect. Those of Cleopatra and her hand-maidens 
‘beggared all description.’ 

The general interpretation is admirable. Looking Antony to the life, Mr Tree 
shows something more than the inspired sensualist who for Cleopatra’s sake counted 
the world well lost. With him are well éontrasted the forceful, passionate, resolute 
Cesar of Mr Basil Gill, and the weak, bibulous Lepidus of Mr Norman Forbes. 
Enobarbus, Sextus Pompeius, Eros, the Soothsayer, and other prominent characters 
find effective exponents. Miss Constance Collier is a splendid Cleopatra, and shows 
well the forcible passions that underlie the sensual charm and allurement of the 
queen. The most dramatic scene in the play—her onslaught on the messenger 
bringing her the unwelcome news of Antony’s marriage—is thrilling in savage, pas- 
sionate intensity and energy, and was greeted with rapture by the audience. Iras 
and Charmian have delightful exponents, the latter, in the person of Miss Alice 
Crawford, displaying dramatic power as wellas charm. For the first time the play 
has been adequately set before the public, by which it was received with ecstasy. 
Whether the magnificence of the production will break the spell under which Axzdony 
and Cleopatra supposedly labours remains to be seen. It can hardly, however, be 
otherwise, since as spectacle and as intellectual entertainment the whole is equally 
noteworthy. 


In 1878 there was a Revival by Miss RosE EyTINGE, which had, as it was 
reported, a successful ‘run’ of many weeks in New York, and throughout the 
country. Mr G. C. BonIrace was Marc Antony; Mr C. RocKWELL, Octavius. 


There was another Revival in New York in 1889, with a version ‘ arranged for 
‘acting’ by Mr KyrLe BELLEw, who took the part of Anthony; Mrs PoTTEerR was 
Cleopatra ; Mr IAN ROBERTSON, Octavius, and Mr HeENry Epwarps, Enobarbus. 


A Version by M. SARDOU (never published, I believe) was produced by Miss 
FANNY DAVENPORT, and by Mad. SARA BERNHARDT. 


COSTUME—GODWIN 595 


COSTUME 


In Cumberland’s British Theatre, edited by D. 
following directions are given for the Costumes : 

Marc Antony.—Splendid buff shirt and robe—fleshings—sandals—bracelets— 
white riband tied round his brows. Second dress: Roman shirt—breastplate and 
lambeskean shield—sword and helmet. 

Octavius Casar.—Roman toga—fleshings—sandals, &c. Second dress « Breast- 
plate, helmet, lambeskean—red robe—sword, chain, &c. 

ENOBARBUS.—White shirt and red robe—fleshings—sandals, &c. Second dress : 
Breastplate—lambeskean—sword, helmet, &c. 

Lrpibus.—Roman toga—fleshings—sandals, &c. 

SExTus Pompetus.—Ibid. 

Eros.—Roman shirt—breastplate—lambeskean—helmet—sword—robe—arm and 
leg fleshings. 

PuILo and Mecanus.—Ibid. 

AGRIPPA.—Roman toga. Second dress : Armour ibid. 

THYREUS.—Roman shirt—robe—fleshings, arms and legs. Second dress : Armour 
ibid. 

DOLABELLA.—White shirt and robe. Second dress: Armour ibid. 

GALLUS and Mrnas.—Ibid. . 

ALEXAS.—Blue shirt, with gold binding—blue robe—fleshings, &c. 

DIOMEDE.—Roman shirt and robe. Second dress: Armour ibid. 

CANIDIUS.—Roman toga—fleshings—sandals, &c. 

EupHronius. —Blue robe—white beard—sandals and fleshings. 

PROCULEIUS.—Shirt—breastplate—fleshings—helmet, &c. 

CLEOPATRA.—Egyptian merino white dress—tiara of jewels in hair—dress richly 
ornamented with pearls and jewels—robe of tissue, richly studded with stars, &c.— 
sandals—robes and crown for last scene. 

OcTAviA.—White Roman dress—sandals, &c —riband in hair. 

CHARMIAN.—Egyptian blue merino, and robe—fleshings, sandals. 

Iras.—Buff ibid—ornaments in hair. 

[Unless the foregoing ‘lambeskean’ stands for /amdskin, it is unintelligible to 
me; it is faithfully reprinted. ] 

E. W. Gopwin (The Architect, 26th June, 1875): Zhe Costume of this play may 
be taken to be somewhat mixed. That the Roman fashions were for the most part 
accepted wherever the power of Rome had made itself a reality may be safely assumed, 
but then these fashions were themselves moulded on those of other nations. . . . But 
fashion, in old as in modern times, belongs to the upper classes, so that while I have 
little hesitation in clothing Kleopatra and her court in the habit, or some slight modi- 
fication of the habit, prevalent among Greeks—more or less adopted also by the 
Roman aristocracy—the poor people, the Clown especially, and perhaps the Sooth- 
sayer, might very well exhibit in their dress some tradition of the old nation to which 
they belonged.* The Ionic chiton, the chlamys, the peplos, the transparent fine 
linen vest, chemise, or under tunic were dresses which obtained throughout the shores 


G. [GEorGE DanIEL] the 


* The Queen, according to the Text, which follows history in this particular, 
appeared often ‘in the habiliments of the goddess, Isis,’—the goddess of the Moon ; 
in other words, in a long, transparent, fine linen tunic, and a pallium fastened by a 
knot in front, a crown of lotus flowers on her head, and a sistrum in her hand. 


596 APPENDIX 


of the Mediterranean with but little variation beyond that resulting from increase or 
decrease in length or breadth of material. No doubt, too, the fashionable ladies of 
Alexandria had their parasols, or umbracula, just the same as the ladies of Athens, 
Rome, or Pompeii. Broad-brimmed straw hats, with low, saucer-shaped crowns, were 
also probably worn. Octavia, after her marriage, might appear in the stola and the 
square-cut white pallium, fastened with a fibula, or brooch, on the right shoulder, 
leaving the right arm free. 


In reference to the STAGE SETTING, Gopwin has the following (of. cit. 26th 
June, 1875): In the tragedy before us we have no less than thirty-six scenes. Of » 
these, twenty-five are architectural, including the one on board Pompey’s galley, 
which belongs to naval architecture. The other twenty-four are divided between 
Alexandria, Rome, Messina, and Athens, or the respective residences of AZeopfatra, 
Ceasar, Pompeius, and Antonius, but by far the most important of these are those 
which belong to the City of the P/olemzes. It is next to impossible to reduce this 
play to set scenes, for the unities of time and place are quite disregarded by the 
author. In the first and last Acts a very slight change would enable us to bring 
these into two scenes, if the fourth Scene of the first Act were carried on to the second 
Act and the first Scene of the fifth Act omitted, but the second Act carries us in seven 
Scenes from Pompey’s house at Messina to the house of Lepidus at Rome, thence into 
Casar’s palace, thence into the streets of Rome, thence to the palace at Alexandria, 
thence to Misenum, and finally leaves us floating on the sea. In the third Act 
(eleven Scenes) we are in Alexandria, Rome, and Athens ; now on the plains of Syria, 
and now on the promontory of Actium. In the fourth Act of thirteen Scenes we are 
certainly confined to Alexandria and its neighbourhood, but we are perpetually moved 
about from the inside of the palace to the outside, from within to without the walls, 
from one camp to the other, until we are brought to rest in that remarkable Scene— 
‘the Monument.’ I see no reason why the Scene in the house of Lepidus ( Act ii., 
Scene 2) should not be laid in a lesche or under a colonnade before Cesar’s house, 
and thus serve also for the two Scenes which follow it. Indeed, by the exercise of 
some little thought and care, the whole number of the architectural Scenes may be 
fairly reduced, and it is possible without serious mutilation to prevent some of the 
abrupt changes, as for example that brought about by the introduction of Alexandria 
in the fifth Scene of the second Act; for there does not exist, as it seems to me, any 
great obstacle to this Scene forming part of the third in the third Act. I cannot at 
present see that we can do with less architectural scenery than that set down in the 
following list, unless the Scenes at Athens and Messina are omitted altogether : 


The palace at Alexandria—interior. 

A Monument at Alexandria. 

Cesar’s house at Rome—a lesche or colonnade. 
Antony’s house at Athens—interior. 

Pompey’s house at Messina—interior. 


Pw dm 


Of the interior of A7Zeopatra’s palace the play presents us with no less than twelve 
Scenes, and with one laid outside or before the palace (Act IV, Sc. iii), but all thir- 
teen could reasonably pass in one hall if attention were given to the planning of it. 
The remains of the temples at Phils, Dendera, and Kalabsche, the relic of the palace 
at Medinet Habou, and the representations of domestic architecture in the fragments 
of wall paintings in our museums, are the only authorities available for this important 


LIST OF EMENDATIONS IN CAMBRIDGE EDITION 597 


Scene. The temples and palace, however, that I have just mentioned must be held 
to be far inferior to the temples and palaces of the royal city. . 

The evidence of material wealth—a splendour lavish as daylight—would be there 
[Alexandria]. Whatever marble and basalt, porphyry and serpentine, bronze or 
silver, or gold or any other precious material could do, we may be quite sure was not 
lacking. Mechanics would shine like the sun, in construction ; multitudes of pillars, 
and miles of avenue, and corridor, and labyrinth would speak of the mighty mass of 
labour in the service of Egypt. . 

The ‘Monument’ of the ae is Oe denis nothing more than the raised stage at 
the back of the main stage, so common in the theatres of Shakespeare’s time. An 
Egyptian monument or tomb was constructed on principles which could not possibly 
admit the poet’s idea. But the Greek monument was altogether different. In the 
one case we find a tomb, an architectural grave, a sepulchre ; in the other we have a 
house, a shrine, a temple. The little memorial of Zysicrates at Athens, and the 
temple-like Lycian monument discovered at Xanthus, and now in our National 
Museum, are extreme illustrations of one principle of design. In both the structure 
consists of two storeys: the ground storey solid and comparatively plain, the upper 
storey open and enriched with columns, figure sculpture, and other ornamental acces- 
sories. Now, although acting on a higher platform than the stage is always made to 
look more or less ridiculous by modern scenic arrangements, in proof of which asser- 
tion I may cite /w/iet’s balcony as a flagrant example, and although I know of no 
instance where this division of stage level has been well carried out, yet even in the 
Veronese and Venetian plays there is no room for reasonable excuse if the Scene 
results in failure; still less in the play under consideration should the acting suffer, 
inasmuch as the area of the Monument of Egypt’s Queen may be of almost any 
size. 

Antony’s house at Athens might be one of the old Greek houses or palaces, with 
its double arrangement of Andronitis and Gynzconitis, or the men’s and women’s 
quarters. The fourth and fifth Scenes of the third Act introduce us to two rooms 
in this house, but there is no reason why one interior should not suffice for both 
Scenes, if the proper room be selected, which I take it should be the pillared hall 
(avA7) of the Andronitis, which in a Greek house occupies the place of the Roman 
Atrium. The floor might be of mosaic, whilst both the ceiling and walls might be 
painted. Pompey's house at Messina might be either Roman or Greek, or half and 
half... . In Antony and Cleopatra there is not one word about architecture or build- 
ing, but then we have a description of the Queen’s barge. 


LIST OF EMENDATIONS ADOPTED IN THE TEXT 
OF THE CAMBRIDGE EDITION 


This List does not include Stage Directions ; divisions into metrical lines; mere 
punctuation, such as changing an / into an ?; nor changes of spelling, such as poz- i 
son’d for ‘poisoned,’ zhere’s for ‘there is,’ etc. Nor is there included two or three 
changes in the distribution of speeches, which were self-evident; nor such changes 
as MALONE’S Servants for the Folio’s ‘Omnes.’ These hardly rise to the dignity 
of emendations. The Four Folios are considered as one text. The lines are num- 
bered according to the Folio Text, as given on the preceding pages of the present 


volume. 


598 


APPENDIX 


In the First Scene of the First Act, no emendation has been admitted. In the 


following passages— 
amends 


Theobald 

“cc 
Warburton 
Dyce 
Rowe 
Pope 
Rowe 
Heath 
Johnson 
Malone 
Theobald 

“ 
Pope 
Steevens 
Theobald 
Pope (Ed. ii) 
Rowe 
Warburton 
Rowe 
Pope 
Theobald 
Tyrwhitt 
Heath 
Capell 
Rowe 
Theobald 
Hanmer 
Theobald 
Thirlby 
Capell 
Johnson 
Theobald 
Capell 
Theobald 
Pope 
Capell 

“ec 

Rowe 
Theobald 

“ 
Pope 
Hanmer 
Thirlby 
Rowe 
Hanmer 


Theobald 


66 


‘ change’ 

‘ foretell’ 

‘ windes’ 
‘how’ 
‘compelling an’ 
*loue’ 
‘heire’ 
‘one’ 

“ vouchsafe 
‘ foyles’ 
‘fear’d’ 
‘lacking ’ 
‘ vassailes’ 
‘Was’ 
“dumbe’ 
*neere’ 
‘not, say’ 
‘ proofe’ 
‘gloue’ 
‘alway ’tis’ 
‘Tawny fine’ 
etise 

‘meaning ’” 
‘liue’ 

‘then he is’ 
“beate ’” 

‘figure’ 
‘weepe’ 
“look’t’ 

‘the other’ 
‘hither’ 
‘abstract’ 
‘makes his’ 

* Leaders leade’ 
© Ven.’ 

‘ Thantoniad ’” 
‘them’ 

“stowe’ 

‘The’ 

‘ Thidias ’ 

‘the’ 

‘ Ceesarian smile’ 
‘ discandering ’ 
Sie 

‘thine’ 

* guests ’- 

‘ savouring ” 


? 


to 


charge 
fertile 
minds 
ho 
a compelling 
leave 
hair 
our 
vouchsaf’a 
souls 
dear ad 
lackeying 
wassatls 
Wast 
dumb’ d 
ne’ er 
not so, 
reproof 
glow 
away, "tis 
Tawneyfinn ad 
zs 
meanings 
lef 
then ts 
bear 
Jjigures 
wept 
took’ t 
the one the other 
he there 
obstruct 
make then 
leader’ s led 
Can. 
The Antoniad 
that 
tow 
Thy 
Thyreus 
this 
Cesarion smite 
adiscandying 
on 
mine 
gests 
favouring 


109 
130 


PLAN OF THE WORK 


599 

Capell amends ‘auguries’ to augerers IV, xii, 7 
Hanmer cs ‘pannelled’ “ spaniel d GES G61 
Thirlby oe ‘dolts’ “  doits cae OAA 
Rowe & ‘toward’ “ towerd “ xiv, 6 
Theobald ss ‘ dislimes’ “  dislimns GE al 14 
Pope se ‘when’ “where PA, Sony! 
Johnson 6c ‘in’ “ on “c “ 93 
Rowe Ss ‘leave’ “ live Mes aly 72 
Warburton xe ‘dung’ “ dug Searels 8 
Theobald ce ‘Anthony’ “ autumn Se ieee aL OO 
Capell << ‘ suites’ “  smites Seep GA oi OF8) 
«s ge ‘wilde’ se atlé Scans 00 
Pope 6“ ‘ away > 66 awry “ “ 373 


PLAN OF THE WORK, etc. 


In this Edition the attempt is made to give, in the shape of TexTuAL Norss, 
on the same page with the Text, all the VARIous READINGS of The Tragedie of 
Anthony and Cleopatra, from the Second Folio down to the latest critical Edition of 
the play; then, as COMMENTARY, follow the Notes which the Editor has thought 
worthy of insertion, not only for the purpose of elucidating the text, but at times as 
illustrations of the History of Shakespearian criticism. In the APPENDIX will be 
found criticisms and discussions which, on the score of length, could not be con- 
veniently included in the Commentary. 


LIST OF EDITIONS COLLATED IN THE TEXTUAL NOTES 


THE Seconp Forio Paalle 1632 
THE Trirp Fotio (Re). 1664 
THE Fourtx Foro BE lec 1685 
N. Rowe (First Edition) [Rowe] 1709 
N. Rowe (Second Edition) .. [Rowe ii] .. 1714 
A. Pope (First Edition) : [Pope] 1723 
A. Porr (Second Edition) [ Pope ii] 1728 
L. THEOBALD (First Edition) [Theob. ] 1733 
L. THEOBALD (Second Edition) [Theob. ii]. . 1740 
Sir T. HANMER (First Edition) [Han.] 1744 
Sir T. HANMER (Second Edition) { Han. ii] 1745 
W. WARBURTON AG [ Warb. } 5 eel AT, 
E. CAPELL [Cap:] 36 (?) 1761 
DR JOHNSON .. Bre [Johns. } Sa Gh 
JOHNSON and STEEVEN [War73)) 2 1773 
JOHNSON and STEEVENS [Vare.73]e~ 1778 
JoHNSON and STEEVENS [ate7S5 on 1785 
J. RANN [ Ran. ] 1787 
E. MALONE [Mal. ] 1790 
Gro, STEEVENS.. [isteey.i]) a= 1793 
REED’S STEEVENS [Var9203)) 1. 1803 
REED’S STEEVENS {ivatuts)| eer. 1813 


600 APPENDIX 


BoswELL’s MALONE .. a4 ar A mare) 5c sein EO2E 
CHIGNIGH TE ey. oe and eect) BS (?) 1840 
J. P. COLLIER (First Edition) .. 58 5 A % [Coll. “ie aipenlS42 
S. W. SINGER (Second Edition) ae aie a 5) llissieeentl) as .. 1856 
A. Dyce (First Edition) es ots 3'e a) ai [LDycell Or she LOST 
H. STAUNTON .. shee 5 «hea otac] ie SU eLOSy7, 
J. P. CoLLiER (Second Edition) a6 ae ao (Re@IL sy) se Pe LO5S 
R. G. WuITE (First Edition) . [ Wh. ] ae «+ 1860 
CAMBRIDGE ae Edition, W. G. Suen ee W. AS 

WRIGHT) . be 30 ome a ve Canncsereraw. fen LSOR 
T. KEIGHTLEY.. é awe seh i ctlyal a so PISO) 
GLOBE EDITION (Clark and Waicen) ie ei Glos} ot *. 1864 
J. O. HALLIWELL (Folio Edition) .. a 50 Peete pve 5 LOOS 
A. Dyce (Second Edition) .. S70 oo - « — PDyce ii] eae .. 1866 
A. Dyce (Third Edition) a So ome oe eo an aI STS 
J. P. Cotiier (Third Edition) is oe oe Colle i 55 eee LOT Hy, 
R. G. WuiTeE (Second Edition) be : Son EATS I Nor .. 1883 
CAMBRIDGE (Second Edition, W. A. Seer top Carnelian eet oo2 
Rev. JOHN HuNTER (Longmans’ Series) . . ea ieunter| London, 1870 
N. DELtIus 30 15 at ahs cae ae eOels Elberfeld, 1872 
Wicw) ami OID Euaten ee 65 ae bAc ee Ret New York, 1904 
H. N. Hupson 5 : Oa rdarcstat Boston, 1881 
F, A. MARSHALL (any vine Raison) = Sic a London, 1889 
K. ea one oc > 6 ei 36 OER] cs 1901 
C. H. HERFORD 5 B65 ae ae S00 ae New York, 1903 
G: =H 5.0 — ae +6 .. [Words.] London, 1893 


These last eight editions I have not collated beyond referring to them in disputed 
passages. 

Within the last twenty-five years,—indeed, since the appearance, in 1864, of 
The Globe Edition,—the text of SHAKESPEARE is become so settled that to collate, 
word for word, the text of editions which have appeared within this term, would 
be a needless task. When, however, an Editor revises his text in a Second or a 
Third Edition, the case is different ; it then becomes interesting to mark the effect 
of maturer judgement. 

The present TEXT is that of the First Fouio of 1623. Every word, I might 
say almost every letter, has been collated with the original ; yet I am not so inexpe- 
rienced as to believe that it is absolutely perfect. 

In the TexTuAL Notes the symbol Ff indicates the agreement of the Second, 
Third, and Fourth Folios. 

I have not called attention to every little misprint in the Folio. The Zextual 
Notes will show, if need be, that they are misprints by the agreement of all the 
Editors in their corrections. 

Nor is notice taken of the first Editor who adopted the modern spelling, or sub- 
stituted commas for a parenthesis, or changed ? to !. 

The sign + indicates the agreement of Rowr, PopE, THEOBALD, HANMER, 
WARBURTON, and JOHNSON. 


LIST OF BOOKS 601 


When WARBURTON precedes HANMER in the Textual WVotes, it indicates that 
HANMER has followed a suggestion of WARBURTON’S. 

The words e¢ ce¢, after any reading indicate that it is the reading of ad/ other 
editions. 

The words e¢ seg. indicate the agreement of all subsequent editions. 

The abbreviation (szés.) indicates that the reading is substantially given, and that 
immaterial variations in spelling, punctuation, or stage-directions are disregarded. 

When Varr. precedes Steev. or Mad. it includes the Variorums of 1773, 1778, and 
1785; when it follows Steev. or Mal. it includes the Variorums of 1803, 1813, and 
1821, 

An Emendation or Correction given in the Commentary is not repeated in the 
Textual Notes, unless it has been adopted by an Editor in his Text; nor is con. 
added in the 7extual Notes to the name of him who has proposed the conjecture, 
unless the conjecture happens to be that of an Editor, in which case omission of 
conj, would lead to the inference that such was the reading of his text. 

CoLL. MS refers to CoLLiER’s copy of the Second Folio bearing in its margin 
manuscript annotations. When Collier adopted its readings in his Text, it is placed 
in parenthesis (MS). CoLL. ’53 stands for a monovolume which COLLIER issued in 
1853, wherein these MS readings are incorporated in the Text. 


LIST OF BOOKS 


To economise space in the foregoing pages, as a general rule merely the name 
of an author has been given, followed, in parenthesis, by the number of volume 
and page. 

In the following List, arranged alphabetically, enough of the full titles is set 
forth to serve the purposes of either identification or reference. 

Be it understood that this LisT contains only those books wherefrom quotations 
have been taken at first hand. It does not include those which have been consulted 
or used in verifying references; were these included the list would be very many 


times longer. 


E, A. Appott: Shakespearian Grammar -.. +o ae London, 1870 
A. A. ADEE: Literary World, 21 April 56 ae irs Boston, 1883 
V. ALFIERI: Antonio e Cleopatra (Bohn’s Edition) . . 5:6 London, 1876 
C. ALLEN: Wotes on the Bacon-Shakespeare Question . . Ants Boston, 1900 
ANON. [R. CARTWRIGHT] Sonnets of Shakespeare, etc. Are London, 1859 
E. ARBER: TZyranscript of the Stationers Registers. . 5 es 1877 
W. R. ARRowsMITH: Shakespeare's Editors and Commentators a 1865 
C. von AYRENHOFF: X/eopatra und Antonius Bo alc Wien, 1808 
S. BAILEY: Received Text of Shakespeare ab oh ve London, 1862 
C. Batuurst: Differences of Shakespeare's Versification, etc. a 1857 
BATMAN VPPON BARTHOLOME: De Proprietatibus Rerum, etc. S 1582 
T. S. Baynes: Shakespeare Studies .. +0 ae we “ 1896 
BEAUMONT and FLETCHER: The False One (ed. Dyce) ae a 1844 
W. BLAcKSTONE: Shakespeare Society's Papers Aut 6 # 1844 
W. BLADES: Shakespeare and Typography .. a; ait S72 
K. BLuMHOFF: Antony and Cleopatra. Erklért von a Celle, 1868 


F. S. Boas: Shakespeare and his Predecessors. . one oc London, 1896 


602 APPENDIX 
J. B. R. BotstEL: Antoine et Cléopatre 
R. W. Bonn: Works of John Lyly 
A. C. BRADLEY: Shakespearian Tragedy 
£6 Quarterly Review, April 
F. BRADNACK: Medical Record, 1 February . 
J. BRAND: Popular Antiquities | 
E. C. BREWER: Reader's Handbook 
Sir THoMAsS BROWNE: Vulgar Errors 
J. C. BucKNILL: Medical Knowledge of Sie 
J. BuLLocH : Studies of the Text of Shakespeare 
R. Burton: Anatomy of Melancholy 
Joun, Lorp CAMPBELL: Shakespeare's Legal Viger ove: 
T. CAMPBELL: Shakespeare's Dramatic Works 
A. S. G. CANNING: Shakespeare Studies in Eight Plays 
E. CAPELL: Votes, etc. 


se Version for Garr sch 
R. CARTWRIGHT [ANON.] Sonnets of ee Reawvoneed 
se New Readings in Shakespeare 


DANIEL CASPER VON LOHENSTEIN: Cleopatra . . on 
«“ &“ 6 Se (2nd Ed.) 
G. CHALMERS: Supplemental Apology, etc. oe 
W. & R. CHambBers: Book of Days 
DE LA CHAPELLE: Cleopatre aie me at ote 
F. Coun: Sinfundsechzigster Jahresbericht ad. Schlesischen 
Gesellschaft f. vaterlindische Cultur 
HARTLEY COLERIDGE: Lssays and Marginalia 
S. T. COLERIDGE: Lectures and Notes on Shakespeare. . 
J. P. COLLIER: Motes and Emendations, etc. . . 
J. CHURTON COLLINS: LZssays and Studies 
ss Studies in Shakespeare : 
sc Pinner of Wakefield by R. Greene 
G. ConrAD: Cleopatra, Trauerspiel in einem Aufzuge 
H. Corson: Jntroduction to Shakespeare 
W. J. CouURTHOPE: History of English Poetry 
G. L. Craik: Luglish of Shakespeare 
CroFT: Annotations on Shakespeare's Plays 
. CrosBy: Shakespeariana, February OG 
A. DANIEL: LVotes and Conjectural Emendations . . 
. DANIEL: The Tragedie of Cleopatra (ed. Grosart) . 
. Davies: Dramatic Miscellanies 
. DEIGHTON: Old Dramatists. 
. DELFINO; La Cleopatra 
DINGELSTEDT: Axtontus und tee 
- Douce: Llustrations of Shakespeare, etc. 
- DOWDEN: Shakspere: His Mind and Art 
. DRAKE: Shakespeare and His Times 
Dyce: Remarks on Collier's and Knight’s ditions 
aC Few Notes, etc. 
Or Strictures on Collier's New Edition 


Conjectural Reedinss 


PARP TTORA YS 


Paris, 
Oxford, 
London, 

6“ 
New York, 
London, 


Oxford, 
New York, 


London, 
“ 


oe 

“ 

“ 

“ 
Breslau, 

“eé 
London, 
Edinburgh, 
Paris, 


Breslau, 


London, 
“ 


“ec 


“ 


Westminster, 
Oxford, 
Berlin, 
Boston, 
London, 

“ 
York, 
Philadelphia, 


London, 
it9 


6e 


Calcutta, 
Padova, 
Wien, 
London, 

6“ 

6“ 

“ 

“ 


1743 
1902 
1905 
1906 
1879 
1873 
1888 
1672 
1860 
1878 
1651 
1859 
1866 
1903 
1779 
1758 
1859 
1886 
1661 
1680 
1799 
1863 
1682 


1888 
1851 
1897 
1853 
1895 
1904 
1905 
1877 
1889 
1903 
1857 
1810 
1884 
1870 
1594 
1785 
1898 
1733 
1879 
1807 
1875 
1817 
1844 
1853 
1859 


LIST OF BOOKS 


J. EaRLe: Philology of the English Ti ongie 

T. Epwarps: Canons of Criticisms 

H. N. ELLacomBe: Plant Lore of Shakespeare: 

A. J. Evuis: Zarly English Pronunciation : 

C. I. ELTON: Shakespeare: His Family and frends 

K. Evze: Notes on Elizabethan Dramatists 

W. Everett: Six Cleopatras (Atlantic Monthly, F 4 ) 

F. W. FairHoLr: Dramatic Works of John Lyly 

F. G. FLEay: Shakespeare Manual re 

JouN Fiorio: Second Frutes 

A. FRANCE: Vie Littéraire ( Quatriéme Série) . 

W. FRANZ: Shakespeare-Grammatik 

K. FRENZEL: Berliner Dramaturgie 

H. VON FRIESEN: Shakespeare-Studien 4 3 

F, J. FURNIVALL: Jxtroduction to The Leopold SHakspere ane 

R. Garnetr: Luglish Literature 

R. GARNIER: JZ. Antoine. Tragedie . . we 

R. GENEE: Geschichte der ce ee Dramenin Daan 
land 

J. GENEST: The Envticn. ae Agee: 30 o6 

J. GERARDE: The Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes Me 

G. G. GERVINUS: Shakespeare (3te Aufl.) 

H. Gites: Human Life in Shakespeare : 

SAINT-MARC GIRARDIN: Cours de Littérature inane: ag 

Mad. EMILE DE GIRARDIN: Quures Completes 

J. W. von GOETHE: Shakespeare und Kein Ende, 1813 

A. GOLDING: The XV. Booke of P. Ouidius Naso, etc. 

G. GouLD: Corrigenda, etc. 

H. GREEN: Shakespeare and the E milan Writers 

Z. GREY: Critical, Historical, and Explanatory Nabe on 
Shakespeare ae orG oe oan 

Mrs GRIFFITHS: Morality of Shakespeare's Drama 

L. H. Grinpon: Shakespeare Flora : 

M. GuizoT: Guuvres Completes de uae 

H. HALLAM: Literature of Europe 30 

J. O. HALLIWELL: Selected Notes on Antony aad Chopra. ‘ 

W. Harrison: Description of England (Prefixed to Holins- 
hed’s Chronicles) aie : SA 

J. E. Hartine: Ornithology of ‘Shakespeare 

W. Hazuttr: Characters of Shakespeare's Plays 

es Lilizabethan Literature .. é 

B. HEATH: Revisal of Shakespeare's Text 

H. HEINE: Sémmiliche Werke, 5ter Band 

J. A. Heraup: Shakspere: His Inner Life 

P. Heyse: Antonius and Kleopatra (ed. Bodensadt), 

E. A. Hircucock: Remarks on the Sonnets of Shakespeare . . 

P. HoLLtanp: Plinie’s Naturall Historie : 

FRANGOIS-ViIcToR Huco: Guvres Completes de Shagesheare : 

JosePpH HunTER: Mew Mlustrations of Shakespeare 


Oxford, 
London, 
Exeter, 
London, 
“ec 

Halle, 
Boston, 
London, 


“cc 

“ 
Paris, 
Halle, 
Berlin, 
Wien, 
London, 


“ 


Rouen, 


Leipzig, 
Bath, 
London, 
Leipzig, 
Boston, 
Paris, 

“ec 
Stuttgart, 
London, 


6 


Manchester, 
Paris, 


London, 
“ 


“ 

“ 

ty 

“ 

“cc 
Philadelphia, 
London, 
Leipzig, 
New York, 
London, 
Paris, 
London, 


604 APPENDIX 

C. M. INGLEBY: Shakespeare Hermeneutics .. S16 oe 
Gs Shakespeare, the Man S6 oes one 

Z. JACKSON: Shakespeare's Genius Justified .. v° 2° 

Mrs JAMESON: Characteristics of Women a8 a5 

E. JODELLE: Cleopatre Captive .. 3 re 

T. KeIGHTLEY: Shakespeare Expositor e 5 ane 


A, KercKHOoFFs: Casper von Lohenstein’s Trauerspiele 

W. KELLY: Wottces of Leicester, etc. .. 

A. VON KoTzEBUE: Octavia .. : 

F. Kreyssic: Vorlesungen ueber Ship ewe Ec 

W. S. LANDOR: Antony and Octavius . 

F. A. Leo: Antonius und Cleopatra. 
<¢ Four Chapters of North’s Plutarch, etc. 
lithographed from the Edition of 1595 3 

W. W. Luoyp: Critical Essay (ed. Singer, 1856) 

T. R. Lounspury: Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist 

J. R. LOWELL: Among my Books ac 

T. Lupton: Thousand Notable Things, etc. 

H. Lyte: A Mieue Herball or Historie of Plantes by /0), R. 
Dodoens Alc ey 0 5.9 Re 

H. W. MABiE: Shabesporne: Poet, Dramatist, and Man 

D. H. MApDpEN: Diary of Master William Silence 

M. MARMONTEL: Ckéopatre Go 63 

J. Monck Mason : Comments on i veers Pee 
cs Ce aC Beaumont and Hieeher etc. 

G. MAssEY: The Secret Drama of Shakespeare's Sonnets 

T. May: The Tragedte of Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt 

G. H. MoELLER: Auffassung der Kleopatra, etc. 

J. Moyes: Medicine, etc. in Shakespeare's Plays 

S. D. M[orcuEs]: Antoine et Cléopatre oa 3.6 

J. NicHois: Literary Illustrations, etc. (THEOBALD’S aad 
WARBURTON’S Correspondence) 

J. NicHo.s: Votes on Shakespeare 

Nortu’s Plutarch (Photolithographed by F. ae 1). : 

J. G. ORGER : Notes on Shakespeare's Histories and Tragedies 

B. PascaL: Pensées 

C. E. Pascok: Dramatic List bh oa 

F. Peck: Mew Memoirs of Milton oud : 

Sir P. PERRING: Hard Knots in Shabapeans : 

C. Puities: Lokalférbung in aaa Dramen (Jabres. 


Nouba tee von 


Photo- 


bericht der héheren Biirgerschule) . : 
W. PoEL: WMew Shakspere Society, Transactions, 8 Nov: 
J. P. Quincy : Corrections in a Copy of the Fourth Folio 
J. Ritson : Cursory Criticisms, ete. oes 
W. B. Rye: Lngland as Seen by Foreigners .. 56 . 
A. W. SCHLEGEL: Ueber dramatische Kunst und Literatur. . 
A. SCHMIDT: Antonius und Cleopatra (ed. Deutsche Shake- 
speare-Gesellschaft) . sit : one oe sae 
SiR WALTER SCOTT : Works of Deen eine wis Sie 


“cc 
Paris, 
London, 
Paderborn, 
London, 
Leipzig, 
Berlin, 
London, 
Halle, 


London, 

“cc 
New York, 
Boston, 
London, 


“ 


New York, 
London, 
Paris, 
London, 


Glasgow, 
Paris, 


London, 


“ee 
ii3 


it3 


Paris, 
London, 


ce 


iT4 


Kéln, 
London, 
Boston, 
London, 


6c 


Heidelberg, 


Berlin, 
Edinburgh, 


1875 
1881 


1819 
1833 
1583 
1867 
1877 
1865 
1801 
1862 
1856 
1870 


1878 
1856 
I9OI 
1870 
1627 


1578 
1904 
1897 
1750 
1785 
1798 
1888 
1654 
1888 
1896 
1803 


1817 
1862 
1878 
1890 
1846 
1880 
1740 
1886 


1887 
1889 
1854 
1792 
1865 
1811 


1870 
1808 


LIST OF BOOKS 
H. W. SEAGER: Natural History in Shakespeare's Time... London, 
Sir C. SEDLEY: Antony and Cleopatra . ss 
T. SEwarD: Works of Beaumont and Fletcher o 
Mary SIDNEY, Countess of Pembroke : Tragedie of en 
1592 (ed. Alice Luce) : Weimar, 
Sir PHILIP SIDNEY: Zhe Defence of Poesie ae London, 
S. W. SINGER: Zext of Shakespeare Vindicated, etc. . x 
A. SKOTTOWE: Life of Shakespeare : es 
J. SMITH : Accidence for Young Seamen (Achers Repelutyes bs 
JuLius, REICHSGRAF VON SODEN: KZeopatra . . Oo lpeality not given, 
A. SOUMET: C¥éopatre F : Paris, 
R. SPRENGER : Bemerkungen zu Drape Siaeaiares is ec Northeim, 
A. STAHR: Cleopatra Berlin, 
P. STAPFER: Shakespeare and Classival Dalpaiy London, 
A. C. SWINBURNE: A Study of Shakespeare 3 
H. A. TAINE: /istory of English Literature . . Edinburgh, 
B. TEN BRINK: Five Lectures on Shakespeare New York, 
L. THEOBALD: Shakespeare Restored, etc. London, 
A. E, THISELTON: Some Textual Notes on inns and Cheapatra ss 
R. C. TRENCH: Plutarch, etc. .. . Oe < 
T. TYRWHITT: Observations and Chaeuaeeh etc. Oxford, 
J. Ueton: Critical Observations on Shakespeare London, 
G. C. VERPLANCK : Shakespeare's Plays New York, 
F. T. VIscHER: Shakespeare-Vortrége . . Sc a6 Stuttgart, 
W.S. WALKER : Versification London, 
£6 Critical Examination of Shabespeae's Text fe 
A. W. WARD: History of English Dramatic Literature “ 
T. WARTON: /istory of English Poetry ce 
P. WHALLEY: Lnguiry into the Learning NS deare ue 
R. G. WHITE: Shakespeare's Scholar New York, 
ee Studies in Shakespeare . . oe Boston, 
W. WHITER: Specimen of a Commentary on Shabeseore London, 
G. WiLkEs: Shakespeare from an American Point of Viev .. New York, 
W. WINTER: Old Shrines and [vy ss 
C. WorDSWoRTH: Shakespeare's Knowledge Zoe) Use oF the Bible London, 
DICTIONARIES 
Promptorium Parvulorum, etc. (ed. Albert Way, 1865) .. circa, 
JEHAN PALSGRAUE: Lesclarcissement de le langue Francoyse, 
etc. (Reprint, 1852) . a6 : ae Paris, 
T. CoopER: Thesaurus Li ingue Romane et Potahtie, etc. London, 
J. Frorio: His firste Fruites : “ 
J. Barnet: An Alvearie or Quadruple Dia etc. ce 
J. Frorio: Second routes a6 : Me 
Ciaupius HoLtyBAND: A Dictionarie Pench Gia ncish G 
J. Frorio: Worlde of Wordes . . Dic oS 
R. CorcRAveE : Dictionarie of the French and English ve ongues ce 
“ 


J. Fuorio: Queen Anna’s New World of Words .. we 


605 


1896 
1677 
1750 


1897 
1598 
1853 
1824 
1626 
1793 
1825 
1891 
1864 
1880 
1880 
1874 
1895 
1726 
1899 
1873 
1766 
1746 
1847 
1905 
1354 
1860 
1875 
1778 
1748 
1854 
1886 
1794 
1882 
1892 
1864 


1440 


1530 
1573 


1578 


1580 
1591 
1593 
1598 
1611 
1611 


606 APPENDIX 


M. WiTHALS: A Dictionarie of English and Latine, etc. .. 
JoHN MINSHEU: 7he Guide into Tongues 
JoHN BULLOKAR: An English Expositor 


London, 


R. PERCIVALE: A Dictionary in Spanish and Preis (ed. ess ce 


EDWARD PHILLIPS: The New World of English Words, etc. 

STEPHAN SKINNER: Eitymologicon Lingue Anglicane, etc. 

R. NARES: Glossary (ed. Halliwell and Wright, 1867) 

WILLIAM SMITH : Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography 
and Mythology ae a 66 

J. Bouvier: Law Dictionary 

W. H. SMYTH: Sazlor’s Word- Book : 

J. O. HALLIWELL: Dictionary of Archaic Words 

J. Tuomas: Dictionary of Biography, etc. 

A. SCHMIDT : Shakespeare- Lexicon 

F. H. STRATMANN : Dictionary of the Old English Rice 

W. W. SKEAT: £tymological Dictionary : AAG Sit 

J. A. H. Murray: New English Dictionary .. se 5.6 

J. Wricut: Lnglish Dialect Dictionary 5 o oe 


6c 


Philadelphia, 
London, 
Philadelphia, 
Berlin, 
Krefeld, 
Oxford, 


“ 


London, 


1616 
1617 
1621 
1623 
1662 
1671 
1822 


1844 
1858 
1867 
1868 
1870 
1874 
1878 
1882 
1888 
1896 


DN Duk xX 


PAGE 

Abhomination 206 
Ab ilimenitS aur -masy sys cytcbes 198 
Absorption of x 546 6% 173 
se Ole7s.. - 54, 107, 127, 180 
Abstract for the concrete. . . . 20, 94 
Abstract ov obstruct. . . . . 202 
PADSULACtS Sii720l tn. = 59 
PMDSUTAKOFIASSULE Ce Yo ys) je fe 6) 5) 359 
Action grows not in the power 213 
ENCES MCIVISIODNOL | tales asl) no ; 89 
Adjectives used for adverbs. . . . 100 
Admitted ov omitted. . 351 
Adoption by testament. . .... 197 
INGTIPPA/LESEHESLOIY tos) =) ) 6) > 5 
Alarum . . pe ey curs Melrie hers 6 292 
LVRS shy [LEE BOA oe 542 
J\WEEOISIN SS 2G Chap awe Ceeeeo 153 
All-obeying breath . . ... 56 BAS 
Alone =deyond all others. . . 277 
PAMACHVORISNs ois) Keron pi euieh 128 
INO pODIUERUKA OS G8 ba 06 168 
Anon. (Athenzeum) oz actors. . . 585 
Answer other merits. . . .. 5 o BGA 
Anthony, my oblivion is a very . 55 
Anthony ov Autumn. . 344 
Appeal=accuse .. . 194 
ESPPYOVE Tenet a |) tol 7. 23 
Arabian bird. . 175 
Armesaunt steed) 7.002 5 = 2 =: 75 
Art not what thou’rt sure of . . 139 
As=inasmuch as, since . 61, 95 
As she would wish 187 
Aspect, its accent. . 73 
Assemble me or assemble we . . . 68 
Atone Reig. a! tones IOI 
Attraction (him for he) . . .- 173 
Attraction, plural by 49 
PATI CUITTCS M oMAieln irish (ot J) = yaepns) a 292 
Away or awry ..+..+-++-+--s 370 
by Cho 547 


Ayrenhoff, Verston 


Banquet saree. 

Bathurst, on Cleopatr 
Ch Of thee) cleans nee 
ce on the Play . . 

Battaile . .. 

Battery from my heart. ..... 

Beaumont & Fletcher, 7he False One 

Beautious 


ECON Gs yo. ae os 
Beggars Nurses es let eas 
Beggary in love, parallel passages . 
Being = zt being or being so. . . . 
Bends adornings . 
Bequeath 
Best == O-sciovte missy sue ael rete eis 
Best you. . 
Billiards 
Birthday 
Black, with pinches. . .. 
Blood, in ; 
Blown, well . 
Blown=fuffed . . 
Blows my heart . 
Boas, oz Cleopatra 
SOUP OIECLETILAY Se (n= 5) nae) ss 
Bochus, King of Lybia, etc. 
Boggler . . ATS 
Boistel, Vervséon 
Boot, make 
Bourne 
Boy Cesar. . 
Boy my greatness 
IBoyssias) Weyrateu cs a) 6) 
Bradford, 0 Cleopatra. . . 
Bradley, on the Play 
Breathless powre breath forth. . 
Breeze=a gadfly . . 
Brief of money. . . 
Broad-fronted Czesar 
Brooch’d 


Oreo) a) 6o tela te 


Sw els) [Ala eer oe. fe) or 16 


Who: te Lv) om ue 


é vetee), \cawue | Hobo se ase 


Ste SOs CEPI. te 15. 


Sey ale em esice 


608 
PAGE 
Brooke; Versten yes eet soln 547 
Burgone Cie ee ee oe emer aca 72 
Ue ull ead) uae asst auoaal Ss 226 
But=27l Route ee ae 291 
But yet is asa jailor. . 135 
Called into a huge sphere 155 
Callvonghimiyiag man tee romcna ies 62 
Campbell, 07 Dryden . . . 475 
< CEU IMG 3 48 oe LGfE 
Canidius, izs history. . 2... . ; 4 
@antle dss sal Wid bs ten ee eee 217 
Capel Version uta ae cance ete 585 
Carbunclediircmcm.is woe Tremere 283 
Carries beyond belief 213 
Cartwright, on the Play 480 
Casper, Version 527 
CEOBEGMTNE 0.6 & 66 60 oc 176 
Catch at= eager attempt . . 358 
CEG Ennis 6g Bo ees eo 374 
ements accent set sean = et ote 177 
Chance, ashes of my 353 
@hancerofeAnthonyy.1. 2) tenes 221 
Change hishorns. .... . 24 
Chapel esi /crsionsoa cen ete 535 
@haresme Mas een oa elie 323 
Chariots, es use . 172 
Charm 293 
Child o’ th’ time 164 
Cinthiosn)c7stcn ee 514 
@leavenmyssides nn won 5 Sls 
Cleopatra AcractscOry mem aay ene 7 
Clip TD cy ie oe gina 281, 375 
Cloth of gold of tissue 18 fo) 
Cloudvin?sifacelars om ers 180 
Colenidgevcniierr/ay= ee Il 
Coleridge, Hartley, on the Play . 479 
Collins, J. C., on Dryden 476 
Colour in thy cheek 309 
Comparisons oy caparisons . 237 
Competitor. ters)! iene 58, ion 331 
Composeie nn arte Cmne iire fete) 
Composition 3... i. 90 
Conclusions infinite. . ..—. .. 375 
Conclusions: still Sys eau 317 
Condition —arure) nea eat eine 103 
Conditional sentences . . . 274 
Confound = waste . . 22, 63 


INDEX 


Confusion of finald ande .... 
Conlord 
Conrad, Version 

Considerate stone 
Continent 
Contriving = sojourning 
Conversation = mode of life. . 
Convey my shame 


Veey ep ae ms, 
utes’ eo. Whey ek owe, 4 se) wn Laeneh er mie 


ai ver de Vie em 


Corrigible = corrected 
Corson, on the Play 
Could=inclination . . 


@ er te: ten oe aera 


Courser’s hair meh 
Courthope, oz the Play . 

Court of guard 
Crack, a greater 
Crested 
Cup us 


Curious = scrupulous 


Cinco tet Kol ele ee el ae 


CHEER) Om et Bad) 


Curstness 


Damn = doom Nae 
Daniel, G. Costume... 
Daniel, P. A., 02 Duration of Aehion 
Daniel, S., Vesion : 
Darting Parthya 
Date of Composition 
Davies, on Actors. . 
<s on Play wien tel ew eat ee 
Decorum, zz Jtalics. . hac 
Defects in dramatic construction . 
Defects of judgement . . . 
Delfino, Version 


af <6 lee ey me 


40) et ete (6 tae 


Demurely wake the sleepers . . 
Demuring . . 
Denounc’d oy denounce . . 
Determin’d things to destiny . . . 
Determine, 27 /egal sense . 

Detest 

Dido and her ontas, eek 
DimtUnUtives) peer eter nectte 
Dingelstedt, Version 
Dion; Cassius panes 
Disaster the cheeks . . ‘ 
Discandering o7 discandying. . 
Disgested . 
Disguise = disonder by ibe 


2.08 Le elie ie 


INDEX 


PAGE 

Dispatch Enobarbus. . . . . 2. 272 
PS POSIG Meee ee Wit ec. oe aes ee 313 
IONS TRIN | ib GO Gus ecegeo 286 
Disputation ov deputation 244 
WOISPACUONS ees Uke) es Ga vet te 214 
Dolabella, zs history . 2... 6 
WDolpbine like usc sites ale cneie watches 345 
WDOLSTOFIAOIS Wee iciycits pe cree 297 
Double comparative. ...... 204 
Dowden, on the Play ...... 481 
cs on Cleopatra. , . 503 
Drinkstheir vapour =<... -. . . 3 358 
Droven, hapax legemenon . .. . 279 
Drums demurely wake. . . . . . 288 
WMrydeny A yor Love... oss. ot 409 
Dumbrozdumb’ayiais 2% Sh. ss 78 
rin Qwostug wens reat ise ms ts 334 
HD NNW eATeD Emre cette fa tre! se a us 19 
Duration of Action. .... 386 
LOE ay MIG ol Bo Cena aces 66 
Elements, the. . . . 159, 178, 365 
ES PSISMetreg eens) 06) 6 seis 149 
DIN EF SNS 6 (Ge a pi cupeoms 141 
embossed. 92: se aos : 300 
Employ meitojhim =. . 3. . - 342 
Enobarbus, a ¢visyllable?. . . . . 233 
se ERUBGUBTO 3 10 6 6 3 
EnOWaraicmsmie. tits. wp if she ciee ROO 
ENTER my neice elie Sees) a tere 312 
Entertainment Sein ee 276 
laa bes (Co OmCmne EES . 353 
Epicurean, zs Greek accent. . 86 
BSStrId ge yw! cS wireline 257 
Euphrates, z/s accent. . . 1. . 34 
NOM Go AZ 58 BB OO c 542 
“on Mad. de Girardin. . . 569 
PVN CCCTAONC es es) 28 
Evidence ov credence ..... . 53 
xpedienceye 6... : * ° 4! 
Istendediecmis tic ces Ne iene 33 
Ry pespiniamctcs st<- ys Ne Os 166 
likey 60 & 6G eo Gere ca 281 
Fallinotiaitear 7 3 . s. 3s 220, 344 
MANTA LG mmr mitn tee alike se) fol un Gee 363 
FalselOne, The. . 2... «+ 516 
False Soul of Egypt. . .... + 295 


ete, 


RearUSigce sarsyns ys ite ear koe eee ts 
Feature 
Reedersa ee cre nye ae as, LORE. 
Fever, used causatively 
Fie upon ‘but yet’ 
Fishing, as a fault 

Blaw weg nce avoids «5 cones 
Fleet = float 

Flower-soft 

Fly forth of 

Foils o7 soils 
HOON eats lw Wate te ae be 
Hoolastkumpet;s wa savae) oul 
For=in the quality of 
For or ’fore 


Pe i a 
ene sb aes wee: 


On Ol en ve:h ely re) (en xe,. <a Bre 


oye. e.) (6, 6 6) One See vo 


e) 88) 00, ei pmlsne 
Se amie We See ty ch 


Forespoke 
Formall 
Forth the haven 
Wrenzel,omithew-lay. <n io 3 ie 
Freytag, on the banquet scene. . . 
From = away from 
From and of, distinction in their use. 
Fronted 

Frustrate 
ULV la LOZ UST OT ere) er tone 
Furnivall, o the Play 


eee: Cy west eI cared 


eee) Fe rer ca ire ee, 


ot voy r 4p) (01) tome Yee 6 is 6) im to 


elt yee Lene 903 


Garboils 
Garnett, on the Play 
Garnier, Version 
Gaudy night 
Gautier, Criticism 
Girardin 
Generals, needless genitive. . 
Genest, on Brooke's Version . . 
“on Capell’s Version 
Gervinus, 0” the Date 
«s on the Play. 


Oh ey eee etae et be, 


on Mad. de 


stem cel eed fs), ue) ket ve. P re 


Giles, on Cleopatra 
Gipsies lust 
Mad. de Girardin, Version. . . 
Give meitodnnk= 3. eos. 
Go, peculiar signification. . ... 


Oi Wonazet ele: eM ekne 


207 
134 
290 
495 
152 
145 
124 


610 
PAGE 
Go to, go to=monsense, nonsense. 183 
Gole fori soleca use 283 
Godwin, on Costume... .... 595 
Ags oe Shoes Seige yen ited at 596 
Goethe, 07 ee Playin. sine » 491 
Goodlsirsi i. urs te ei neu a me eles 324 
Grand sea ahiscniye era: onsen 230 
Gratesimess jy or iis) ounenn 17 
Greed (the verb) . . 146 
Greek accent. . .-... 86 
Greet together . . 88 
Gricis—=o772evances) -) 2) en Iol 
Grind the other. . ... 195 
(CRESS ARTE ig Go" Guala Bb 616 280 
Guizot, on the Play... 3 495 
H =ache 279 
2s madeian io avs 3 ies 279 
Hallam, on the Play ...... 478 


Halliwell-Phillipps, 0 the Date . 385 


Hard, phonetic spelling . ... . 119 
Elarrieda spa.) tea ctiosaack sete ee 187 
Plart-royal. ear. can lees, te die 373 
da averoriate: ae weeserWrslce wie eu lars 169 
Hazlitt, on the Play. . 477 
He was, monosyllabic 181 
Heart of loss. . 296 
LCAVINESS Haig etek vedo ealstnely one 319 
Heine;07 Cleopatra... . 2... « 501 
Heraud, on the Play .-... . . 480 
Here’s sport indeed: ... . . 318 
Hereditary offosed to purchased . 61 
Blerodyof Newry as-is eee 27, 183 
TCV SC OVE CEC LUCY role) Coles Go ae 492 
Elltofebasaner-my Gaetan 251 
EES = 205: 5) fa, Bats abo a 3. 331 
Hither=ze there .. . 198 
Elowho boy.) < ycoarthen cael eocaes 263 
Holding, thes mmcmey swiss cimcuree 166 
Fionoureis;sacred > nce. s0 ee te 99 
Hoop should hold us staunch. . . 103 
Hope, zts peculiar meaning . . eS, 
PLOW =—/00Me LL olnciie mee ots os 38, 312 
IHow: the news sa) s0 aceesen ce 36 
Hudson, 67 te Play. 2.) 5 en 483 
Hugo, on the Play 496 
Huswife Fortune ..... 320 


INDEX 


PAGE 
Zin zty, dropped in pronunciation. 86 
Idle talk will once be necessary. . 340 
Importuney andes ehceerrie 316 
Impress . . . 211 
Tnvhooptrar.teet rena : 126 
Ingram, on Metrical Tests . . 384 
Innocents);:>.fsc8 «a eee 136 
Intrinsecates (56.) tks ieee eee tia 367 
Inversion = conditional sentence . . 274 
Iron, put thine. . . é 267 
It, referring to plural subctentiees 83 
Dtlowneseatem 159 
JACKE A ce maemo pcb sine 247 
Jaded fou, eecis kapeol oieotee nee 174 
Mrs Jameson, on Cleopatra. . 500 
ss on Dryden 475 
se on Octavia 505 
Jodelle, Version 2 soma 507 

Johnson, on the Play ~. 3... Azz 
jump sur 215 
Juvenal, read by Ghakerpeneel 82 
Kemble, Version of Pye 587 
« Verston sa 5 sae ee 588 
KneworKnow 2) s< su womene 69 
Kinigshts'osc Actors 1. tea eee 583 
“on Capell’s Version 587 
“len theater, 382 
Kotzebue, Version . . 2... 557 
Rajan Joma nen ones 268 
Labour mars . . . 307 
Lackmobilitye (v=) Seecuneane 137 
Lacking = /ackeying . 66 
Lamprius 24 
Bamidor. Bin tn oatnve ge ee care 569 
Tated, sone) souk oses anton 221 
Waunchi=/7a72ce ee tee ea 330 
Laurel victory 57 
TLeeave = 2000) ener es en ee 332 
Length 2 306 
Lepidus, zs histo 2a) soneaa neces I 
IVeprosyaniese onetime 219 
Less noblemind ..... : 308 
Lessons, a verb. . 221 
Vethieddulnessiy ey 5 are eicnes 86 


Libertine in a field of Feasts . . . 


INDEX 


PAGE 

CICH AS Miri tee ta eee as hart 299 
ieutenantry mre. ersk se SS Sk 225 
NLU iewmeresmin Oe or eiiaee on odce ee 62 
Live confounded with lie . 41 
LOTS? 1S Gags AO ean Maa 27 
Lloyd, on the Play... . 479 
HeOOKs Or tOOk ts se eis, e 189 
WVOUEKV Crem des fens ls: ah 120 
Lounsbury, on Dryden. . . 476 
“ on the Play 487 
oye or leave to part... . . 42 
Howelljon Dryden. 3. 5 ss 476 
PE UitCameMe ses ciel va son say o's 219 
UXURIOUS|Y van tous, <i > 250 
Mabie, on the Play . - 489 
Mad Brutus s 225 
Meceenas, hes pssey SOS ecwe 5 
INMadennisswilleitjuer' Oo a0 os 183 
IM Elbe 8G. o0: toe OcRee 43 
INESeRDOOtes rete s tor ied a 2K c 260 
Malone, on the Date. . 381 
Mandracordaen ces ar) se. 2) + fom olde 70 
Mankind. 2si@ccen? 6... 2 +) es 253 
Many other ways to die 259 
ManmonteloVierstot. . (. 5s os. 540 
Massey, o” Cleopatra ...... 503 


Matter whole you have tomake it with 95 


May, Version 521 
Med’ cine A 74 
WMeerediquestion i's...) 2on-cce = = 235 
Melvil, Sir James 141, 184 
IMIEMAS AES ISCOPY ilo eels eek ce 6 
Menecrates, hes history ..... 6 
Mens judgements 238 
WIGS) ty Je So bs Gaon ome 208 
Messenger ov messger . . ...- - 200 
Min olevemimieete ute et =e 79, 284 
Marthspaueetst s ¢)/- C 61 
Missive= messenger . . +. ++ > 98 
Mocks the pauses. . 325 
Modernemsis. - 353 
IModestyaame «isles oo + ee 136 
Moody ° . 128 
M[orgues], Version. . . . += - 558 
Morsel 3 Bi hace 250 
Most=greatest . 2.» - + 2 2 108 
Motion ov notion. .......- 122 


OIL 

PAGE 
Mulitersyae se seu cretio: ey te ce 210 
Music . . . under the Stage 265 
UVIUSS reteset atolls Weiutett ier ene 247 
IN ae ete gs sukcace «Sales seen 341 
Wature:sipiece guess) cit Chen ae 347 
Weedlessi genitive ss r)-) eee 13 
IN CCL = 7 c7- mn ek 5 ee aa ta tee 87 
Negligent danger. ...... 204 
iN extiCscsarionuns mut ee arr 253 
INICC Ure Metad aches syst sect need 255 
Nick t0S 5) toby. sr aah one cerca 234 
INoblerspoken™ a, an Sarna « « 100 
NoIseiofivaisea-ng nites as enas 216 
UNOISESHE TS rt Pl ctenchas | cole sue role 206 
INONG a Pronoun ©. se lees 48 
INoriyouthith ern tesit-nl erro 122 
Nothing of our strife . ..... 99 
Number =o make verses... . . 176 
Oblivion is a very Anthony. . 55 
Occasion —77eed a ee 151 
OCLAVIA eC 1S7OTY meets oats 9 


Octavius, 42s relation to Julius nye I 


OES oe a eG ee Be Ble 126 
Oddsusigone, meen rae eae ota. 322 
O)re-COUN Cea iioi tesa rer ane 145 
Of, separating action from verb. . 23 
Of and from, distinction in thetr 
CE AL ALS BI Mo Of 6." 124, 199 
Of = concerning, about . 68, 333 
Of, after verbal nouns. . . 83 
COREE E nt MBAS Oe MD Aimee tl 107, 124 
Ole sececekt Vout leit Nadie Wook ory ee 242 
Oilyzpal mys cimecy Ps veld iced 30 
Olive, shall bearthe. . . 275 
Omission of prepositions. . .. . 61 
Ce E OLS OsOLtOl) Zi ie vcrciy sae sae 263 
On=causal after verbs of motion 276 
Once=someuness. «6. « 340 
One great ov Our great. . 58 
@monreyed see wcwr mrt es uesne s 263 
Onimy-cuard) came. o/s) le 276 
On or upon, certain usage of . . . 127 
OlosthWearthige or pi, stele 343 
Orbs etter helt cc ects ea oncoy hues 252 
OGINALY sere cat ce elmo irate «> IIg 
Orient, adjective” 1 2 2 ee ss 75 


612 INDEX 


PAGE PAGE 
Ostentation or ostent . ..... 201 | Project = term of perspective .. - 349 
Other ways to die. 4... .' « 4... [2504 Proropue (0° 2) s))-0 ten: ap 86 
Provided@mmn marae? Aron faye aeeaganitts 356 
Packt cards with Cesars . . . . . 303 | Put colour in thy cheeks. . . . . 309 
pageant meses ile tsine al: ais ey eo igO2 | Put thine iron’on’ vais civ erm Or, 
Paintéd‘orie way .°. ~'. « ee e142 libyremid so wereee asay-iae Sees en Vey 
RalesvaiwerG in vey ule lee se. vues 5 om ELON |oPyramisis: <0) pa siiene wee eee 158 
alled catecaucige) scare ee cme ae 162 
Rannellédty, os): 20. Steet ak roca: 293 | Quail=causative verb . . . . 229, 344 
Parcel'the*sum! 2 = o> joke. one ee 253) Quick comedians! fy. e-em 358 
Participle expressing a condition . . 231 | Quick winds oy quick minds . . . 34 
Participles, ¢zflected (5 os 00> & 64 
Parcilar <cii) oh Ns « erate v2 | nace of Meiven”. Gon. salma 
ce thine own. go. «, & 214.200) nack disiinins sy... 45a OB: 
£6 unusual useof.... - BO} Ramo caine: oa ee 132 
IAAUIVANY 6950 ONG Gear: 6 ot 3 TS Gi | an geds mejece eelemies eine A cS) 
IBascals Apher seo aio nal derivate 465) Ranges sy.n) nus) Cecio: oo ce 234 
Pauses, mocksithé= 30. 2. « «1 « B2kal) Rarely base. ami) ries rote Wee aie 352 
Philips, of Local Colour... .. /494.| Kaught’ 9 2 7 5 5 30% dap eos 
Biécelof virtiie tcc m.mrcn ites » 2 X77) |eRedundantiopjects.). -.) tmcneare ies 331 
Photinus ov Pothinus ...... 208 | Reeles=vevéls . . . . . . 59, 163, 358 
Pinch one another by the disposition 154 | Regiment = government ho 2200 
inks CYNE uma. esse eiey oat TO6 | Registey 12 Sot eke eee . 286 
Pitifully disaster the cheeks. . . . 155 Relativepronouns........ 49 
lant ==\/ 00, mane mee tercieces eoili OS Grau dye |PROtr oO eg Getic: + ee Res ee 
Plates —stlver money. = ae BAG INCNCASeSE lo mred  lir-tamre a el GEES 
Pleached gn eisesenis ceases +. 310 leports= reporters 7). rts 94 
Rlebetan. 228 accent. ete. 207. |) Reputation tare nar-) va kenten pee auneeg 
Pledge, French description of Eng- Neg tlireSi= ': yah nit) «ce Ones eee 
lhl GIMME, BS 3 BO eb 8 8 162} Respective construction .... . 176 
PLOYED VET. eicouaetetel ok ote se toes 166 | Revel, as 2 monosyllable . . 59, 163, 358 
Blutavehtcs vey oes even cael sities 38S, (Revels cf wing oc os ome cee 358 
ROMS — 97C0AT 1200S) ooo ohtou iste 253 | Revolution lowring ....... 38 
PolemthéisoldiersS.sm.ce. chun sas B22) Ribaudred naga. cys <a oetep eee 217 
Pompeius, Sextus, Azs history. . . 2 RuggiSh 0 kbc) ki ans cpm roms 120 
Ort eae mots Wee oie is ie so, oa e209 | URISht royal a1." asap nn c amen 242 
PortsvozsPleets©., s.cek «te ehk=eiel ts 64) | Rivality” <5? ices tc ema 
LOSE OGCENS 5 A A ola GC 165.) Riverof Sidnis 225.9. ee 109 
Posture= behaviour ....... 359 | Rome, pronunciation ...... 42 
DrACUSG enisursmrcaresticnt:) (nicl rs Sais QZ: MOY ale. Wi.w insta caer er een 373 
Brayan aid. 20st eeu t ages epoi SOO 
Huis “6 6 one 6 oD & 88 | S final, its omission and interpola- 
FRTGSCTit] Y= 27727202 7QLELY = wou ol es iecicte | LOO) | 22072 ae ren - + + 59, 304, 358 
ON = SHOTILY ea os + acdc) eee LOA Se OStCCHECE a OF SU an mare 52 
pnniabeState antes temiolnentneeraent- OA Sate, nc U7 etealicn tooo ame 50 
IRriSonye7 poison a austin. ils) veut 256 |Salad taystanm.) aus Rie) cos ERIS 
PYOCESScecmep sash te ihecien seem cit: 19) | Salt=2vdntowt 9) tea en ets) Oa: 
Proculeius, his history. . . .. . Go| SalGs fish. ve omveeietet conte: ° 131 


INDEX 


PAGE 

Say not, say Agrippa ..... . 104 
Scale Gig aka a one : 358 
Scanitly aye a cetenis foe eerste ae 188 
Scams, Aes/hestory. 2 +. 5 5 es 4 
Schlegel} cn the Piay . . 5%. . 12 
Scotto Oryden®. (2) 3. 6 6 6 473 
Scrupulous=captious . .. 1...) 49 
Be MeP OE ons aie at bet Yel a aie ani, 292 
SCALE MEE Mts ae Opie Sons 175, 307 
SCaeWiNG ie. Menus te mes, tere 220 
Sedleysal crstust) e...8 sete oie) 51 
ScemitedOn@iiarsicy .) ss) tenes 260 
Seel our eyes ov lips . . . . . 249, 351 
Delicandeecese cuccin cts: cei mee 328 
Sennetuwaeiey atc. pats Ny 156 
Sequence of tenses . .. , 44 
molar awill te .c3. vs we Veo s 81, 273 
SHATC SHERRI ae oh ces \c Ke Gees 177 
SE LGA G ONS so Bee 248 
Shewesitowman 66s. «tee 40 
SSHInGhOL NESSUS %.1..'5 270 ss ss 299 
SHouldmeewete cs Sf ease 118, 228 
Shouldwstistow 10.05 «4 oe 228 
Shower orgold jie 5. fe ne es 134 
SORT W.C Berar sisze cols: 4s) ts Gis tee 285 
SHTOCeNESSE Merete Ges toon es 98 
SHOU Umneet ree rcuicca’s) sp eo uses. uc) 73 244 
Sidney, Mary, Zrans. of Garnier . 513 
Sidney, Sir Philip, Sonmez 176 
SIPS RWEllwomNel rsh iste s))< seen oe 265 
SINCE ==74lETae et. see a 44 
Shih Gzcreiii=5 ge aon Ginn oa BeLL 
SIZENOteSORKOWiewie) is) cfr sole 1 314 
Skottowe, oz the Play. ..... 478 
Gs on Cleopatra .. +. . 500 
Sleep, was never yet for ..... 287 
So = conditional conjunction 236 
vonSoden, 27820"). 2. -  e 552 
Soldiersipolew ses «ee 322 
SOOU-lAa Wain ccteris 6. a gh o 9 8E' 
So tart a favour To trumpet. . . 134 
Sonmetemyc7sc0its hers el 560 
SOUrceMr tneyElOth . «ss 6) os 387 
Spaniel’d BM See ssi eae ret e293 
Speak=~ojicht . 5s. = « - 107, 145 
Sues = 6. €) se peomomonen 155, 315, 344 


Spirit . 37, 97, 123, 179, 228, 243, 270 
321, 330, 354 


613 

PAGE 

Splects —sp/asa se ee 168 
Sport: ndeed >). shee okey 318 
Squalel— 070774), ene 88, 239 
Squares. by-th’ rule). A) 121 
Sqtiares Ofs wart) m5.) stl siete 225 
Squareito hers) Ses ty te een eee 109 
Stainvovistainiy reese oh lee nes 191 
Standsmponges. (aiden anes 89 
Standtups Beer. cet crook beeen 43 
Stapler1on //cet/ay atm n rent mene 496 
$6 ORI OCLAUUS ee) ees et G00 
Stations ecw ess ements ee 185 
Stomaching) sss... - go 
SOO N= AAT 5 G6 o Go BY Gud 189 
Strike the vessels . . . .. 164 
SUrOved ris ssenaet ths, Koo wohl ute wee 227 
Subjunctive used imperatively. . . 105 
Substitution of words ...... 104 
CIWS OOS Oats Oo 6 EK) 
Suits ov smites or shoots . . .. . 347 
SUpPPer seis yas median re steno ccrrens 118 
Swan’s down feather ...... 179 
Swell with the touches. . .... 117 
Swinburne, oz the Play ..... 482 
Swrordybnitipanuncyece meu tee 131 
Swound, pronunciation ae) 207 
LEN Uae Ila? & oo & 6 6 2 495 
Rakerint ne tisisats tone see 18, 200, 246 
WallQe wd ce nae Te 143 
Pee 5 oa, S Butecdwon o - 146 
AIA ES AED SG oie Gea 7 
awny finn’d fishes;.9-9 3... - 130 
shawny frOntescirerrat cas | aos toe 13 
eheeths fromuhis# tae) ett ie ce 189 
Temper= temperament. ..... 13 
Tended her?’ th’ eyes. ..... Il 
Merrenet MOON my aes, veh oe ve 252 
Testamentary adoption. ..... 197 
TUNES SAO a. Ee Got oo Oa 280 
The full oy Thy full..... ... 228 
INNO OAS 6 0 Doo ote 353 
siuhenyo7pthenCey ccs: te) tei : 208 
Mihemeforyoulrs (5) «ile such.) 93 
TNGNEG" 4 Slay Sid Gs OS Go £RY 
Mhinesironion <6 6 «a. «ss 267 
Mhink and dieln—. <6 8 233 
Thither ov hither ...... 315 


614 
PAGE 
Thought = despair. 6... 6 ss 278 
Three-nook’d world. ...... 274 
Tidings, sizgular . 2.2... . 312, 329 
INES TYG BG og SOB 6 269 
ePAMEK CDG) sth tenes ee foe neces 164 
mokened pestiiencer 0 <) vcnlimenne 217 
Pootlarivtye.,ttOO-far a. er ie wee 45 
PROD RID Gein rence oie hae TATE Ok nota 331 
AE GTEURE eu carts, rs, ae ae let oheaer a eee 306 
tad eunilove ss sr sways. 128 
Transposition of adverbs... . . 261 
ne of prepositions . . . 127 
Trench, om Anthony... .... 499 
Tree, Beerbohm, 47s stage perform- 

ANCE err sihe co ieten getbee ft Wes, | alan 591 
fEriplespillan? siccw cia su clea ales 14 
Arip)le-turn’ doy wisn ee) 1 : 293 
TMUMPN == 77s ce ees 303 
Truth shouldbe silent. .... . Iol 
U, past indicative forms in . . . . 131 
Wnarme: Brose ere raved nary tele 305 
Wneurbable taew i, Sirclsiish eh teuer as 97 
LOLNSTTGN Fabel By GaSe coger e II 
Wntoved’ i.) cle) nes rc 201 
Wnpoliciedis a ccwisGc, somrcatoMte nous 367 
WngualitiedGiw. cc. tes es. cere 2ZO 
Up, the poor third i Sc re crate eee 194 
POND a csi ney cles sss Rates| ea teis 47 
Upon = wailing Cit greon.A omnes 36 
Upon oy on, certain use of .. . 127 
Vanish accu sya. > elem oie tomas 296 
Varrius, gu. Varius Cotyla?. . . . 7 
Wola biaeyat fc ai Ge Be 315 
Vassails' ox; wassallS: 5 4° = 8%) « 67 
Wen == VANara LW nani te notes 213 
Ventidius, 22s history . 1... ee 3 
Verbs ending in -¢e, -¢,and-d@. . . 326 
Verplanck, on the Date ..... 383 
VA oieae Ota fino: OO ome : 346 


INDEX 


PAGE 
Vowel interposed between liquid 
EVayal preg AG Gadi: Blan 326 
Waged or weighed ..... + + 329 
Wand lip fiancee eee 84 
Washitheeyesir. sere conan 
Weep or weptin-tuncn te ceme eamerte 181 
Wreete na nt psc eames 20 
Wellisaidi, 5, sac shes nets, peaden eeneame 270 
Wrens sor cocxston tation enya te mee 119 
Wiharisi 6.) sai cles racer ee ae 118 
Wihatestow a. oc enues acm eget 362 
What thou’rt'sureof. .:... . 139 
Wheel} breakyher .). 7.1.) 2 Som 320 
Wihite hand ese nce) ter cmiea ene 251 
Wilderarivile onan tome aie 369 
Will=sitmple futurity ...... 256 
Willvand Shall tiie. 0. eee 273 
Winter, (0707/2 Playin) cat. ae 485 
Widows". 9... ius. os. eteliog, abet 185 
Within) ike Renee se Sie consi eee 29 
Wilthisei 377) att ot outs ice 353 
£6 Mas O98 Uiciiats, 7c) Sassen atm Rea eae 330 
Kc Si KECOY OS trae irate Rees 23 
Wootters irene ee are 261, 321 
Word=wartchword . 3 a 39; 94 
Wordtohiwaric Soi. <0 coment 94 
Workeaovearcstratts . 40 2 eke 278 
Worm of Nilus. . ... Bo ne a RE 
Worthiest;seli ac). in en CO 
Would wested sot, sa pices 106 
Wrackdislimns'.) (2... 303 
Wyndham, on the Play ..... 486 
Vare’ signs by hone ad 211, 251, 364 
Voarel yy. iSeeme er ve cccula ikem cere It7 
Velfor youn. Ge) <0: te 5 149 
Wield yout iit “sik lee 263 
You reconcilletenn wen sine. clhnue 192 
Your, cf/ical terete: a ttemen aan one 158 
Your: proof \awiten: sehr nemo 104 


Zielinski, 0” Charmian’s wish 


tS ok 
Oi ae 
Agee y: 
Sires 


a 


Pinta 


AA 
hs 


x 


‘ 


as 


